A Complete Concordance to the Holy Scriptures (Alexander Cruden, 1737)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/completeconcorda00crud_1): the 1893 edition of Cruden's 1737 original — complete concordance with the publishers' preface and Cruden's life.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================



TO  THE

OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT

AND

THE  APOCRYPHA.


THE  STUDENTS  EDITION


A

COMPLETE  CONCORDANCE

TO  THE

OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT:

OR  A

DICTIONARY  AND  ALPHABETICAL  INDEX  TO  THE  BIBLE.


WITH

A  COMPLETE  TABLE  OF  PROPER  NAMES  WITH  THEIR  MEANINGS  IN  THE  ORIGINAL  LANGUAGES,
A  CONCORDANCE  TO  THE  PROPER  NAMES  OF  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT,

A  CONCORDANCE  TO  THE  APOCRYPHA,  AND  A  COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES,

ETC.,  ETC.


BY  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN,  M.A.


WITH  A  MEMOIR

BY  WILLIAM  YOUNGMAN.


LONDON" :

FREDERICK  WARNE  AND  CO.


AND  NEW  YORK.

1893.


Richard  Clay  &  Sons,  Limited,
London  &  Bungay.


2.J20.  d.
C/fo
/ffj


TO  THE  QUEEN*


K

t  )


l


*


vj

X

\


F

t~

0)


fi

&

e*

F

H

r


d

V*


MADAM,

This  CONCORDANCE,  tne  work  of  several  years,  was  begun  with  a  design  to  promote  the  study  of  the  Holy  Scrip¬
tures;  and,  in  pursuance  thereof,  is  now  published  with  many  improvements  beyond  any  book  of  this  kind  in  the  Eng¬
lish  language.

Long  before  this  Work  was  ready  for  the  press,  I  designed  humbly  to  offer  it  to  your  Majesty,  and  to  beg  leave  to  pub¬
lish  it  under  your  royal  protection.  Your  Majesty’s  illustrious  qualities  and  example  in  the  great  scenes  of  your  valuable
life,  encourage  me  humbly  to  beg  your  countenance  to  a  well-meant  attempt  for  promoting  the  knowledge  of  our  holy
Religion.

The  beauty  of  your  person,  and  the  fine  accomplishments  of  your  mind,  were  so  celebrated  in  your  father’s  court,  that
there  was  no  Prince  in  the  Empire,  who  had  room  for  such  an  alliance,  that  was  not  ambitious  of  gaining  a  Princess  of
such  noble  virtues  into  his  Family,  either  as  a  Daughter,  or  as  a  Consort.

And  though  the  heir  to  all  the  dominions  of  the  house  of  Austria  was  desirous  of  your  alliance,  yet  you  generously  de¬
clined  the  prospect  of  a  Crown  that  was  inconsistent  with  the  enjoyment  of  your  Religion.  Tne  great  Disposer  of  all
things,  however,  kept  in  store  a  reward  for  such  exalted  virtue,  ana  by  the  secret  methods  of  his  wisdom  hath  brought  your
Majesty  to  a  Crown,  as  famous  for  defending  and  supporting  the  Protestant  Religion,  as  it  is  conspicuous  for  its  glory  and
splendour;  which  is  such  a  return  of  Divine  Providence  as  is  to  be  admired  with  great  thankfulness,  though  without  the
least  surprise,  since  He  whose  kingdom  ruleth  over  all  hath  declared,  that  such  as  honour  Him ,  He  will  honour.

It  was  the  fame  of  this  heroic  constancy  that  determined  his  Majesty  to  desire  in  marriage  a  Princess  who  was  now  more
celebrated  for  her  Christian  magnanimity,  than  for  the  beauty  of  her  person,  which  had  been  so  universally  admired.  We
of  the  British  nation  have  reason  to  rejoice  that  such  a  proposal  was  made  and  accepted,  and  that  your  Majesty,  with
regard  to  these  two  successive  treaties,  showed  as  much  prudence  in  your  compliance  with  the  one,  as  piety  in  your  refusal
of  the  other.  You  no  sooner  arrived  at  Hanover  than  you  improved  the  lustre  of  that  court,  which  was  before  reckoned
among  the  politest  in  Europe ,  and  increased  the  happiness  of  a  people,  who  were  before  looked  upon  as  the  happiest  in
the  Empire.  And  you  immediately  became  the  darling  of  the  Princess  Sophia ,  a  Princess,  justly  acknowledged  to  be  one
of  the  most  accomplished  women  of  the  age  in  which  she  lived,  who  was  much  pleased  with  the  conversation  of  one,  in
whom  she  saw  so  lively  an  image  of  her  own  youth.

We  daily  discover  those  admirable  qualities  for  which  your  Majesty  was  famed  in  other  countries,  and  rejoice  to  see
them  exerted  in  our  Island,  where  we  ourselves  are  made  happy  by  their  influence.  We  behold  the  throne  of  these  king¬
doms  surrounded  by  your  Majesty’s  royal  and  numerous  Progeny,  and  hear  with  pleasure  of  the  great  care  your  Majesty
takes  to  instil  early  into  their  minds  the  principles  of  Religion,  Virtue,  and  Honour.

Your  Majesty  is  possessed  of  all  those  talents  which  make  conversation  either  delightful  or  improving.  Your  fine  taste
in  the  elegant  arts,  and  skill  in  several  modern  languages,  is  such,  that  your  discourse  is  not  confined  to  the  ordinary  sub¬
jects  of  conversation,  but  is  adapted,  with  an  uncommon  grace,  to  every  occasion,  and  entertains  the  politest  persons  of
different  nations.  That  agreeable  turn  which  appears  in  your  sentiments  upon  the  most  ordinary  affairs  of  life,  which  is
so  suitable  to  the  delicacy  of  your  sex,  the  politeness  of  your  education,  and  the  splendour  of  your  quality,  is  observed
by  every  one  who  has  the  honour  to  approach  you.

But  the  great  regard  your  Majesty  has  shown  to  religion,  which  diffuses  the  greatest  glory  around  a  human  character,
encourages  me  to  hope  that  this  Work  will  meet  with  your  favourable  acceptance.  May  it  therefore  please  your  Majesty
to  take  into  your  royal  protection  this  Concordance,  the  design  of  which  is  to  render  the  study  of  the  Scriptures  more
easy.  Whatever  may  be  wanting  either  in  the  Work  or  Author,  is  abundantly  supplied  by  the  dignity  of  the  subject;
which  consideration  chiefly  encouraged  me  to  presume  to  offer  it  to  your  Majesty,  whom  God  hath  exalted  to  the  most
eminent  station,  and  blessed  with  extraordinary  endowments  of  mind,  and  with  a  benevolent  and  beneficent  disposition.
To  whom  then  can  I  more  properly  offer  this  Work  than  to  your  Majesty,  who  is  celebrated  both  for  your  inclination
and  capacity  to  do  good  ?

May  the  great  God  continue  to  multiply  his  blessings  upon  the  King,  your  Majesty,  and  every  branch  of  your  Royal
Family :  May  your  life  be  long  continued  to  serve  God  faithfully  on  earth,  and  may  you  reign  for  ever  with  Him  in
heaven,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen.

These  are  the  sincere  prayers  of  him  who  is,  with  the  most  profound  respect,

May  it  please  your  Majesty,

Your  Majesty’s

*  Most  dutiful  and

Most  obed'ent  servant,


7?


London ,  October ,  1737.


ALEXANDER  CRUDEN.


*  The  first  Edition  of  this  Concordance  was  dedicated  to  uueen  Caroline,  and  was  presented.  November  3,  1737,  to  her  Majesty,  who  departed  this  life
4he  CTOth  of  that  very  month.


TO  THE  KING


SIRE,

This  CONCORDANCE  was  begun  with  a  design  to  promote  the  study  and  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  ancf  .
the  method  taken  therein  is  deemed  by  competent  judges  to  be  the  best  towards  a  complete  Concordance  that  hath  hitherto
appeared  in  our  language.  It  is  acknowledged  to  be  a  useful  book  to  private  Christians  who  search  the  Scriptures,  and
to  he  very  necessary  for  all  the  Preachers  of  the  Gospel.  Therefore  to  whom  can  this  new  Edition  be  more  properly  offered
than  to  your  Majesty,  now  in  the  beginning  of  your  reign,  having  already  manifested  a  great  regard  to  religion,  and  an
earnest  concern  for  promoting  it  among  your  subjects  ?

All  other  books  are  of  little  or  no  importance  in  comparison  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  a  revelation  from  God,
and  are  given  as  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  If  the  kings  of  Israel  were  required  not  only  “  to  read  the  law  of
Moses  all  the  days  of  their  life,  but  also  to  write  out  a  copy  of  it  with  their  own  hand,  that  they  might  learn  to  fear  the
Lord  their  God,  and  keep  all  the  words  of  his  law;"  it  may  be  reasonably  expected  that  Christian  Princes  should  make
the  glorious  Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  their  daily  study,  that  it  may  become  their  constant  guide
and  rule  for  the  government  of  their  people,  as  well  as  for  their  own  salvation.

It  hath  been  often  observed,  that  the  most  effectual  way  to  a  general  external  reformation  is  “  to  make  Religion  a  step  to
preferment,  and  Irreligion  a  bar  to  it;"  because  example  has  a  more  powerful  influence  over  the  minds  of  men  than  precept,
or  even  than  punishment.  The  early  declarations  and  strong  resolutions  which  your  Majesty  was  pleased  to  make  at  your
coming  to  the  throne,  “  That  you  would  encourage  those  who  are  religious,  and  discourage  those  that  are  otherwise,"  rejoiced
the  hearts  of  all  who  earnestly  desire  the  revival  of  vital  and  practical  religion,  and  to  see  your  Majesty’s  subjects  a  holy
and  happy  people.

True  piety  has  been  in  all  ages  accounted  the  truest  honour ;  for  religion  diffuses  the  greatest  glory  around  a  human
character,  and  sweetens  and  embalms  the  memory  of  Princes.  A  pious  Prince,  who  hath  shown  a  hearty  concern  for  the
eternal  happiness  of  his  people,  as  well  as  for  their  present  protection,  will  be  remembered  with  great  esteem  and  honour ;
for  the  Scripture  says,  that  “  the  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed."  When  they  are  spoken  of,  it  is  with  praise  and  com¬
mendation  by  all  good  men.  All  other  accomplishments,  without  true  grace  and  real  religion,  cannot  make  the  children
of  men  happy,  who  must  all  die  and  rise  again,  “  and  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  to  receive  according  to>
what  they  have  done  in  the  body,  whether  good  or  bad.

The  memory  of  Hezekiah ,  the  religious  king  of  Judah ,  is  precious  :  he  hath  been  celebrated  in  all  ages  of  the  Church
for  his  pious  zeal  in  the  reformation  of  his  people  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign  ;  for  “  God  honours  those  that  honour  him,
and  they  who  despise  him  shall  be  lightly  esteemed."  It  is  said  of  that  pious  King,  that  “  he  trusted  in  the  Lord  God
of  Israel ,  so  that  after  him  there  was  none  like  him  among  all  the  Kings  of  Judah ,  nor  any  that  were  before  him  :  for  he
clave  to  the  Lord,  and  departed  not  from  following  him,  but  kept  his  commandments,  which  the  Lord  commanded
Moses.v  Hezekiah,  like  your  Majesty,  began  his  reign  in  his  youth,  yet  his  zeal  for  the  worship  of  God,  and  for  promot
ing  religion  among  his  subjects,  carried  him  through  the  great  difficulties  of  reforming  a  people,  who  had  so  much  dege¬
nerated  into  gross  idolatry.  May  the  great  God  be  the  guide  of  your  life,  and  direct  and  prosper  you,  that  it  may  be  said
by  the  present  and  future  ages,  that  King  George  the  Third  hath  been  an  Hezekiah  to  our  British  Israel .

I  doubt  not  but  your  Majesty  will  pardon  my  forbearing  to  enter  upon  your  valuable  personal  accomplishments :  I
shall  only  add  that,  when  it  pleased  God,  the  sovereign  Lord  of  life  and  death,  to  deprive  us  of  the  blessing  of  your  Roval
Grandfather  King  George  the  Second,  the  Protector  of  our  Religion  and  Liberties  for  many  years,  it  was  esteemed  a
national  blessing  that  God  had  favoured  Great  Britain  with  a  Prince  born  and  educated  among  us ;  who  makes  the  hap¬
piness  of  his  People  the  rule  of  his  government;  and  without  Religion  there  can  be  no  real  happiness  for  Prince  or
People.

When  your  Majesty  came  to  the  throne,  the  loyal  and  affectionate  addresses  from  your  subjects  in  all  parts  of  the
British  dominions,  shewed  their  great  hopes  and  strong  expectations  of  being  happy  under  your  Majesty’s  government.
We  of  the  British  nation  have  reason  thankfully  to  remember  the  appearances  of  Divine  Providence  in  the  preservation  ot
our  Religion  and  Liberties,  particularly  in  settling  and  establishing  the  Protestant  Succession,  and  in  disappointing  frorr
time  to  time  all  the  contrivances  and  attempts  of  its  enemies,  whether  secret  or  open ;  and  in  your  Majesty’s  coming  to  the
throne  with  the  hearts  of  all  your  subjects  united  to  you  as  the  heart  of  one  man.

May  it  please  God  to  be3tow  his  choicest  gifts  upon  your  Majesty,  upon  your  Royal  Mother  the  Princess  Dowager  of
Wales ,  and  all  the  Royal  Family,  and  upon  your  numerous  and  powerful  People.  May  you  be  blessed,  and  made  a
real  blessing,  and  may  your  reign  be  long  and  prosperous  ;  and  after  you  have  been  enabled  to  serve  God  faithfully  here
upon  earth,  may  you  reign  for  ever  with  him  in  heaven  through  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  sincere  and  earnest  prayer  of
him  who  is,  with  great  humility  and  profound  respect.

May  it  please  your  Majesty,

Your  Majesty’s  most  dutiful,

And  most  obedient  subject  and  servant,

ALEXANDER  CRUDEN.

fj07idont  June  11,1761


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION


A  CONCORDANCE  is  a  Dictionary,  or  an  Tndex,  to  the  BIBLE,  wherein  all  the  words  used  through  the  inspired
writings  are  arranged  alphabetically,  and  the  various  places  where  they  occur  are  referred  to,  to  assist  us  in  finding  out  pas¬
sages,  and  comparing  the  several  significations  of  the  same  word.  A  work  of  this  kind,  which  tends  so  much  to  render
the  study  of  the  holy  Scriptures  more  easy  to  all  Christians,  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  very  useful ;  for  if  a  good  Index
to  any  other  book  is  to  be  valued,  much  more  ought  one  to  the  Bible,  which  is  a  revelation  from  God,  given  as  the  only
rule  of  our  faith  and  practice,  and  to  discover  to  us  the  way  to  eternal  life  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

1  do  not  here  propose  to  treat  of  the  incomparable  excellences  of  that  divine  book,  which  is  above  all  commendation,
and  will  be  in  the  highest  esteem  by  all  the  true  members  of  the  church  of  God,  whose  faith,  hope,  and  comfort  are  built
upon  these  divine  Oracles.

What  I  shall  further  do  in  this  Preface,  shall  be  to  present  the  Reader  with  a  short  historical  account  of  Con¬
cordances,  which  will  tend  to  display  their  great  usefulness ;  and  then  acquaint  him  with  the  method  I  have  followed
in  this.

Hugo  de  S.  Charo ,  a  preaching  Friar  of  the  Dominican  order,  who  was  afterwards  a  Cardinal,  was  the  first  who  com¬
piled  a  Concordance  to  tne  holy  Scriptures:  he  died  in  the  year  1262.  He  had  studied  the  Bible  very  closely,  and  for
carrying  on  this  great  and  laborious  work  the  more  successfully,  we  are  told  he  employed  five  hundred  Monks  of  his
order  to  assist  him.  He  framed  an  Index  of  all  the  declinable  words,  and  referred  to  the  places  where  they  were  to  be  found.

This  Latin  Concordance  has  been  frequently  printed  with  improvements;  and  since  that  time  works  of  this  sort  have
been  brought  to  much  greater  perfection  than  formerly.  At  first  it  was  thought  sufficient  to  specify  the  chapter  wherein
the  word  occurred,  with  these  letters  a,  b,  c,  d,  as  marks  to  point  out  the  beginning,  the  middle,  or  the  end  of  the  chapter.
But  after  Robert  Stephens,  in  the  year  1545,  had  divided  the  chapters  of  the  Bible  into  verses,  the  verses  likewise  began  to
be  numbered,  and  the  letters  in  the  editions  of  the  Concordances  to  be  suppressed.  And  in  1555  this  eminent  Printer
published  his  fine  Concordance ,  wherein  the  chapters  and  verses  are  exactly  distinguished.

It  could  not  be  thought  that  when  so  useful  a  work  as  Cardinal  Hugo's  came  to  be  known,  men,  who  carefully  studied
the  Scripture?,  would  be  satisfied  that  such  assistance  should  be  confined  only  to  those  who  understood  Latin :  accord¬
ingly  several  have  been  published  in  various  languages,  particularly  Rabbi  Mordecai  Nathan,  otherwise  called  Isaac
Nathan,  composed  an  Hebrew  Concordance  in  imitation  of  Cardinal  Hugo's.  He  began  it  in  the  year  1438,  and  completed
it  in  1448,  being  no  less  than  ten  years  in  finishing  it;  and  besides,  as  he  himself  says,  he  was  obliged  to  employ  a  great
many  writers  in  this  work.  After  printing  was  invented,  it  was  printed  several  times :  first  at  Venice  by  Hamel  Bomberg,
in  the  year  1523,  under  the  title  of  Meir  Netib,  that  is  to  say,  Which  giveth  light  in  the  way  ;  at  Basil  by  Frobenius  in
1581,  and  at  Rome  in  1621.  This  was  the  foundation  of  that  noble  work  published  by  John  Buxtorf,  the  son,  being
assisted  by  his  father’s  papers,  at  Basil ,  in  1632.

As  to  tne  Greek  text  of  the  New  Testament,  a  Concordance  was  published  by  Henry  Stephens  at  Geneva  in  1599,  and
republished  in  1624:  but  a  more  accurate  one  was  compiled  by  Erasmus  Schmidius,  and  published  at  Wittemberg  in  1638,
which  was  republished  more  correctly  at  Leipsic  in  1716,  and  is  reckoned  a  very  complete  performance.

A  Greek  Concordance  to  the  Septuagint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament,  must  be  owned  to  be  very  useful  to  such  as  are
for  comparing  the  expressions  used  in  it  with  those  of  the  New  Testament,  and  to  those  who  read  the  Fathers.  Conrad
Kircher  of  Augsbourg  is  celebrated  for  his  Greek  Concordance  of  the  Old  Testament,  printed  at  Francfort  in  1602.  This
author  has  inserted  the  Hebrew  words  in  an  alphabetical  order,  and  placed  under  them  the  Greek  words  to  which  they
answer.  But  since  that  time,  an  excellent  Concordance  to  the  Old  Testament  has  been  published  at  Amsterdam  in  1718,
by  the  aged  and  worthy  Minister  of  Groningen,  M.  Abraham  Trommius,  who  instead  of  following  the  Hebrew  alphabet
with  Kircher,  has  chosen  rather  to  observe  the  order  of  the  Greek  alphabet.

There  have  been  Concordances  likewise  published  in  various  modem  languages;  in  French  by  M.  G ravelin ;  in  High
Dutch  and  Low  Dutch  by  several ;  the  most  complete  one  in  Low  Dutch  is  that  begun  by  M.  Martinitz,  and  finished  by  M.
Trommius  before  mentioned.  In  English  we  have  had  many.  The  first  was  published  by  Mr.  Marbeck  in  1550,  which
is  dedicated  to  the  pious  King  Edward  VI.  but  this  referred  only  to  chapters,  not  verses.  Then  Mr.  Cotton  published  a
pretty  large  Concordance,  which  has  been  often  printed.  Afterwards  Mr.  Newman  published  one  more  complete ;  and
lastly,  we  have  had  one  published  under  the  title  of  the  Cambridge  Concordance.  There  have  been  several  abstracts  or
small  Concordances  published  :  First  by  Mr.  Downame,  the  next  by  Mr.  Vavasor  Powell,  then  by  Mr.  John  Jackson,  and
afterwards  by  Mr.  Samuel  Clarke.  As  also  other  works  of  this  nature  have  been  written  by  way  of  a  Dictionary  or
Concordance ,  but  in  a  different  method,  as  Mr.  Wilson's  Christian  Dictionary,  Mr.  Knight's  Axiomatical  Concordance,
Mr.  Bernard's  Thesaurus  Biblicus,  and  Mr.  Wicken's  Concordance,  &c.

Thus  it  appears  that  we  have  had  Concordances  to  the  Bible  some  centuries  ago ;  and  the  world  has  been  so  sensible
of  their  usefulness,  that  many  of  them  have  been  composed  and  published  in  different  languages.  But  as  there  are  several
in  our  language,  it  may  be  inquired,  What  occasioned  my  undertaking  this  great  and  laborious  work,  or  what  advantages
it  has  above  any  other  hitherto  published  ?

When  I  first  began  this  work,  I  designed  to  compose  a  useful  Concordance  in  Octavo ;  but  after  I  had  printed  several
specimens,  I  found  it  necessary  to  alter  my  scheme,  and  to  compile  one  to  be  printed  in  this  large  volume,  in  order  tc
make  those  improvements  which  now  render  it  preferable  to  any  other.

The  method  is  easy  and  regular,  and  each  text  of  Scripture  is  generally  contained  in  one  line,  whereby  the  reader  may
readily  find  the  place  he  wants,  if  he  remembers  any  material  word.  When  there  are  two  or  more  texts  of  Scripture  that
are  parallel,  1  have  generally  mentioned  the  first  that  occurs  in  order  in  the  Bible,  and  have  directly  added  the
parallel  texts.  It  is  printed  with  a  good  letter,  though  pretty  small,  which  was  necessary  in  order  to  bring  it  into  this
volume,  and  make  it  contain  multum  in  parvo,  much  in  a  little  compass ;  and  great  care  has  been  taken  that  the  figures


viii  PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.

referring  to  the  chapters  and  verses  of  the  Bible  be  exact  and  correct.  When  a  text  is  marked  with  a  it  denotes  a  mar¬
ginal  reading.

This  Concordance  is  divided  into  three  Alphabets.

The  first  Alphabet  contains  the  appellative  or  common  words,  which  is  the  principal  part.  It  is  very  full  and  large,  and
any  text  may  be  found  by  looking  for  any  material  word,  whether  it  be  substantive,  adjective,  verb ,  &c.

In  this  part,  I  have  given  the  various  Significations  of  the  principal  words,  which,  I  hope,  will  be  esteemed  a  use¬
ful  improvement,  there  not  being  any  thing  of  this  kind  in  the  other  large  Concordances.  By  this  improvement  the  Reader
will  have  many  texts  explained,  and  difficulties  removed  ;  and  the  meaning  of  the  Scripture  may  be  here  known  by  that
which  is  accounted  the  best  rule  of  interpreting  Scripture,  namely,  by  comparing  one  Scripture  with  another.  There  is  so
large  a  collection  of  the  various  Significations  of  many  words  in  Scripture,  as  may,  perhaps,  be  not  only  useful  to  private
Christians,  but  also  to  those  who  preach  the  Gospel ;  for  hereby  many  important  things  may  be  observed  at  one  view,
without  the  trouble  of  turning  over  several  volumes  ;  and  occasion  is  sometimes  taken  to  give  an  account  of  the  Jewish
customs  and  ceremonies,  by  which  the  Reader  is  led  into  the  meaning  of  many  passages  of  Scripture,  as  may  be  seen  in
the  words,  Elder,  Ephod,  Synagogue,  &c.

The  second  Alphabet  contains  the  Proper  Names  in  the  holy  Scriptures,  which  the  Reader  will  receive  with  improvements,
as  in  Abraham,  David,  &c.  The  texts  referred  to  where  those  names  are  mentioned,  give  a  short  historical  account  of  the
remarkable  things  recorded  in  Scripture  concerning  them.  To  this  part  is  prefixed  a  Table,  containing  the  Significations
of  the  words  in  the  original  languages  from  which  they  are  derived.

The  third  and  last  Alphabet  is  a  Concordance  for  those  books  that  are  called  Apocryphal,  which  is  only  added  that  this
work  might  not  be  deficient  in  any  thing  that  is  treated  of  in  any  other  Concordance ;  those  books  not  being  of  divine  In¬
spiration,  nor  any  part  of  the  Canon  of  Scripture,  and  therefore  are  of  no  authority  in  the  church  of  God.

I  conclude  this  Preface,  with  praying  that  God,  who  hath  graciously  enabled  me  to  bring  this  large  Work  to  a  conclu¬
sion,  would  render  it  useful  to  those  who  seriously  and  carefully  search  the  Scriptures;  and  grant  that  the  sacred  writings,
which  are  so  important  and  highly  worthy  of  esteem,  may  meet  with  all  that  affection  and  regard  which  they  deserve.  May
those  who  profess  to  believe  the  Scriptures  to  be  a  Revelation  horn  God,  apply  themselves  to  the  reading  and  study  of
them ;  and  may  they  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  who  indited  the  Scriptures,  be  made  wise  to  salvation  through  faith  which
is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Amen.

A.  C.


London ,  October ,  1737


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.


As  to  what  respects  this  new  Edition,  notwithstanding  the  great  pains  taken  in  the  First,  there  was  room  for  improve¬
ments.  The  filling  up  of  the  lines  to  make  the  text  fuller  could  not  so  well  be  done  in  the  manuscript  copy,  as  in  the
printed.  This  renders  the  sentences  more  complete  in  many  thousands  of  places :  moreover  the  texts  are  more  distinct  in
many  places  by  the  leading  words  being  distinguished  in  Italic  characters.  Some  texts  are  added,  and  some  improve¬
ments  are  made  in  the  Significations  of  words,  and  an  historical  account  is  given  of  some  eminent  persons  under  their
Proper  Names ;  and  other  things  that  need  not  be  particularly  mentioned.

Tne  labours  of  many  persons  to  compile  Concordances  to  the  Bible,  and  their  acceptance  from  time  to  time  by  the
public,  shew  their  great  usefulness.  It  may  be  reckoned  a  good  sign  that  religion  is  revived  in  some  considerable  degree
in  the  present  age,  by  the  great  demand  for  Concordances  and  religious  books.  The  First  Edition  of  several  thousands  in
number  has  been  long  sold  off,  which  shews  this  book’s  favourable  reception  from  the  public  ;  and  a  demand  ha*  been  long
made  for  a  new  Edition.  There  are  few  books  more  necessary  to  those  who  study  their  Bibles  than  a  Concordance,  whe¬
ther  private  Christians,  or  Ministers  of  the  Gospel  who  make  the  Scripture  the  standard  of  their  preaching.  I  was  told  by
an  eminent  Minister,  that  the  Bible  and  this  Concordance  taught  him  to  preach.  This  Dictionary  may  be  a  help,  but  the
Spirit  of  God  is  the  best  Teacher,  who  alone  can  powerfully  and  effectually  teach  and  impress  the  heart  with  the  truths
revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  and  make  those  who  read  and  study  the  sacred  writings  wise  to  salvation.

My  great  aim  and  design  in  this  Work  is,  that  it  may  be  the  means  of  propagating  among  my  countrymen,  and  through
all  the  British  dominions,  the  knowledge  of  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  ourselves,  as  the  same  is  revealed
in  the  Scriptures;  for  whose  good  I  heartily  wish  that  it  were  more  complete  than  it  is.  For  though  it  be  called  in  the
title-page,  A  Complete  Concordance,  poor  sinful  man  can  do  nothing  absolutely  perfect  and  complete,  and  therefore  the
word  complete  is  only  to  be  taken  in  a  comparative  sense  :  yet  competent  judges  are  of  opinion  that  the  method  here  taken
is  the  best  which  has  appeared  in  our  language  towards  a  complete  Concordance.

It  is  hoped  that  the  above-mentioned  improvements  in  this  new  Edition  will  serve  to  recommend  the  work  more  and
more  to  the  favour  of  the  public.  May  it  please  God,  by  the  powerful  operations  of  his  Spirit,  to  make  it  useful  for  the
spiritual  benefit  of  those  who  diligently  and  carefully  use  it.

A.  C.

London ,  June  11,  1761.


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION.


The  First  and  Second  Editions  of  this  Concordance  having  been  well  received  by  the  public,  seems  to  shew  the  great
usefulness  of  such  a  Dictionary  to  the  Bible  ;  for  it  may  be  justly  said,  that  if  Christians  were  convinced  that  Concord¬
ances  tended  so  much  as  they  really  do  to  promote  the  study  and  knowledge  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  they  would  be  more
desirous  of  having  one  :  and  some  Ministers  have  expressed  so  great  an  esteem  for  this  Concordance,  that  they  have  said,
“  If  they  could  not  have  another  copy,  they  would  not  part  with  it  for  many  pounds.”  This  third  Edition  now  ap¬
pears,  with  some  improvements,  which  it  is  hoped  will  engage  the  continuance  of  the  public  approbation  this  work  has
already  been  favoured  with.  May  it  please  God  to  make  it  more  and  more  useful,  and  a  blessing  to  the  Church  of  God
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.

A.  C.


London,  March  24,  1769.


PUBLISHERS’  PREFACE.


The  use  and  great  value  of  a  Concordance  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  acknowledged  by  the  whole  Christian
world,  since  the  best  and  truest  interpretation  of  them  must  be  obtained  by  the  comparison  of  parallel
passages  with  each  other,  and  these  are  most  quickly  found  by  reference  to  a  good  Concordance.

A  profitable  study  of  the  Bible  can  scarcely  be  achieved  without  one.  Bishop  Horsley  says,  “  It  should
be  a  rule  with  every  one  who  would  read  the  Holy  Scriptures  with  advantage  and  improvement,  to  compare
every  text  which  may  seem  important  for  the  doctrine  it  may  contain,  or  remarkable  for  the  turn  of  the
expression,  with  the  parallel  passages  in  other  parts  of  Holy  Writ ;  that  is,  with  the  passages  in  which  the
subject  matter  is  the  same,  the  sense  equivalent,  or  the  turn  of  the  expression  similar.  It  is  incredible  to  any
one  who  has  not  to  some  degree  made  the  experiment,  what  a  proficiency  may  be  made  in  that  knowledge
1  that  maketh  wise  unto  salvation,’  by  studying  the  Scriptures  in  this  manner  without  any  other  commentary
or  exposition  than  what  the  different  parts  of  the  Sacred  Volume  mutually  furnish  for  each  other.  I  will  not
scruple  to  assert  that  the  most  illiterate  Christian,  if  he  can  but  read  his  English  Bible,  and  will  take  the
pains  to  read  it  in  this  manner,  will  not  only  attain  all  that  practical  knowledge  that  is  necessary  to  his
salvation,  but  by  God’s  blessing  he  will  become  learned  in  everything  relating  to  his  religion,  in  such  a  degree
that  he  will  not  be  liable  to  be  misled  either  by  the  refined  arguments  or  the  false  assertions  of  those  who
endeavour  to  engraft  their  own  opinions  on  the  Oracles  of  God.”

Of  the  Concordances  hitherto  published,  Cruden’s  is  allowed  to  be  the  best.  Its  popularity  has  endured
for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  study  of  nearly  every  Minister  of  the  Word.  It
ought  to  be  side  by  side  with  the  Bible  in  every  Christian  home.  Mr.  Spurgeon  says,  “  Be  sure  you  buy  a
genuine  unabridged  Gruden ,  and  none  of  the  modern  substitutes,  good  as  they  may  be  at  the  price.  ...  You
need  only  one  ;  have  none  but  the  best.”

The  text  of  Youngman’s  has  long  been  recognised  as  the  best ;  it  is  that  of  the  present  volume,  which  contains
the  whole  of  the  Concordance,  without  any  abbreviation.  The  admirable  Collection  op  the  Names  and
Titles  given  to  Jesus  Christ, — the  “  Collection  of  the  Appellations  given  to  the  Church  of  God  in  the
Scriptures ,” — the  Compendium  of  the  Holy  Bible,  and  the  Contents  of  each  Chapter,  which  are  omitted  in
most  of  the  cheap  editions  extant,  are  retained,  being  of  great  value  to  the  Bible  student,  and  making  the
work  as  complete  as  possible.

The  full  Concordance  of  the  Apocrypha  is  also  given  ;  an  alphabetical  list  of  the  Proper  Names  in  the  Old
and  New  Testaments,  with  their  signification  in  the  original  languages  ;  a  Concordance  of  the  Proper  Names*
and  a  Summary  of  the  Contents  of  the  Bible,  complete  “  a  genuine  and  unabridged  Cruden.”


CONTENTS.


Dedications  and  Prefaces

Sketch  of  the  Life  and  Character  of  Alexander  Cruden

The  Names  and  Order  of  all  the  Books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  with
the  Number  of  their  Chapters

A  Complete  Concordance  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  ...

A  Collection  of  the  Names  and  Titles  given  to  Jesus  Christ

A  Collection  of  the  Appellations  given  to  the  Church  of  God  in  the  Scriptures

An  Alphabetical  Table  of  the  Proper  Names  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,
together  with  the  Meaning  or  Signification  of  the  Words  in  their  Original

Languages  ...  ...  . . .  •  •  •  * . .  . . .  ...  ...

A  Concordance  to  the  Proper  Names  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament
A  Concordance  to  the  Books  called  Apocrypha  ...  ...  ...  ...

-A  Compendium  of  the  Holy  Bible


Xll-


1


577

587'

619

701


PAGES

T - X

—XV

xvi

-575

576

576

-586

-618

-700

•719


SKETCH


OF

THE  LIFE  AND  CHARACTER


OF

ALEXANDER  CRUDEN.


The  Sacred  Scriptures,  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,
were  written  and  published  in  the  same  manner  and  form
as  other  books  of  the  age  and  country  to  which  they  be¬
long.  The  prose  writings  had  originally  that  unbroken
flow  which  distinguishes  this  species  of  composition,  whilst
the  poetic  parts  of  the  Old  Testament  were  subjected  to
such  arrangements  as  formed  the  peculiar  quality  of  He¬
brew  poesy.  The  divisions  into  chapters  and  verses,  which
now  prevail,  were  the  work  of  industrious  men  in  later  ages,
when,  in  consequence  of  that  strict  investigation  which  the
Scriptures  had  to  undergo,  for  the  support  or  confutation
of  various  disputed  points,  there  arose  an  eager  desire  for
a  verbal  examination  of  their  contents,  and  a  consequent
necessity  for  frequent  references.  It  may  be,  that  neither
religion  nor  the  Scriptures  would  have  made  a  worse  ap¬
pearance  at  the  present  day,  if  these  changes  had  never
taken  place.  The  breaks  made  by  the  chapters  fre¬
quently  occasion  a  misapprehension  of  the  meaning  of  the
sacred  writers,  as  they  sometimes  occur  in  the  midst  of  a
chain  of  reasoning,  separating  the  conclusion  from  the  pre¬
mises,  or  both  from  tneir  application.  And  as  most  per¬
sons.  from  the  force  of  habit,  continue  to  read,  both  in  pub¬
lic  and  private;  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  chapter,  the
errors  which  are  acknowledged  to  ariS§  ffPlb  these  injudi¬
cious  divisions,  fail  of  being  corrected  in  practice.  AmOngSt
innumerable  instances  of  this  kind?  the  fourth  and  fifth
chapters  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  the  fourth  and  fifth
of  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  and  the  first  and
second  of  the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter,  may  be  mentioned
as  illustrations.  The  division  into  verses  has  produced  a
still  more  injurious  effect.  These  break  the  continuity  and
even  surface  of  the  Scriptures  into  an  infinite  number  of
sections,  all  like  electric  points,  glistening  with  the  fires  of
controversy ;  whilst  they  bring  these,  apparently  distinct  and
independent  propositions,  into  a  state  of  unnatural  promi¬
nence.  In  consequence  of  these  arrangements,  all  the  va¬
rieties  of  sects  with  which  Christendom  abounds,  are  en¬
abled  to  bring  “  chapter  and  verse  ”  for  their  conflicting  and
sometimes  contradictory  statements.  Yet,  though  these  dis¬
tinctions  may  not  have  been  of  advantage  to  the  cause  of
truth,  and  to  the  right  understanding  of  the  Scriptures,  they
have  frequently  assisted  the  meditations  of  the  pious  Chris¬
tian,  and  been  found  convenient  to  divines,  in  the  compo¬
sition  of  their  public  discourses.  The  detached  form  in
which  the  most  important  and  interesting  sentiments  ap¬
pear,  gives  the  memory  a  firmer  hold  upon  them,  and  im¬
presses  them  more  strongly  on  the  feelings  of  the  heart.


Whether,  however,  this  condition  of  the  Scripture  has  Deen
for  the  better  or  the  worse,  it  has  now  gained  so  firm  an
establishment,  as  probably  to  be  unalterable  ;  and  it  forms
the  basis  on  which  Concordances  are  constructed,  whilst
it  greatly  increases  their  use  and  necessity.

The  preface  to  the  first  edition  of  Cruden’s  Concord¬
ance,  gives  an  historical  account  of  all  that  had  preceded
his  own ;  and  states  very  clearly  the  advantages  of  the  great
work  on  which  he  exerted  the  energies  of  his  mind,  and
employed  the  most  active  portion  of  his  life.  The  numerous
editions  which  have  been  published,  and  the  innumerable-
copies  which  have  been  sold,  prove  its  excellence,  and  its
perfect  adaptation  to  the  wants  of  the  public.  As,  however,
the  value  of  such  a  work  is  greatly  dependent  on  its  correct¬
ness,  much  labour  has  been  bestowea  in  every  succeeding
edition,  to  obtain  this  result.  With  what  degree  of  success
this  difficult  task  has  been  attended,  may  be  judged  from
the  fact,  that  in  the  first  fifty  pages  of  the  best  quarto  edi¬
tion,  have  been  discovered  nearly  one  hundred  typogra¬
phical  errors.  The  publishers  of  the  present  edition  have-
exhausted  the  resources  of  their  art  in  producing  a  clear
and  legible  page,  and  they  have  adopted  every  precaution
for  the  attainment  of  the  highest  possible  degree  of  accu¬
racy.  If  defects  should  still  be  discovered,  tneir  existence
yyjll  pqt  arise  from  any  deficiency  of  labour  or  expense  in
the  execution  of  the  work.

Few  of  those  who  consult  a  Concordance  will  think  of
seeking  for  entertainment  from  a  life  of  the  author ;  and
fewer  still  would  imagine,  that  a  man,  who  could  confine
himself  for  years  to  such  an  employment,  could  be  the  sub¬
ject  of  that  waywardness  of  mind  which  frequently  attends-
the  higher  powers  of  genius,  and  excites  the  sympathies  of
mankind.  Yet  Alexander  Cruden  was  one  of  those,


u  Or  crazed  by  care,  or  crossed  by  hopeless  love,”

who  trod  the  path  of  life  on  the  verge  of  that  awful
abyss,  where  the  hopes  and  happiness  of  so  many  great
minds  have  been  ingulfed.  Ana  if  madness  was,  in  his
case,  softened  into  eccentricity,  or  directed  to  the  correction
and  amendment  of  the  generation  in  which  he  lived,  he  was
probably  indebted,  for  his  escape,  to  that  absorption  of
mind  which  such  a  work  as  this  must  have  occasioned.
What  would  have  been  to  others  intolerable  drudgery,  was
a  sedative  to  his  agitated  mind ;  and  the  labour,  which
would  have  wasted  the  energies  of  a  happier  man,  was  the
balm  of  his  wounded  spirit.  Who  then  was  Alexander


SKETCH  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  CHARACTER


xin


Cruden  1  and  what  were  those  sorrows  which  sought  relief
in  the  intensity  of  mental  application,  and  in  unwearied,
though  often  visionary,  efforts  for  the  public  good  ?

He  is  recorded  to  liave  been  the  second  son  of  a  worthy
citizen,  a  baillie  or  alderman  of  Aberdeen,  where  he  was
born  in  1701,  and  educated  in  the  grammar-school  of  that
city.  In  this  school  he  was  the  companion  of  some  who
afterwards  became  eminent,  amongst  whom  he  is  said  to
have  frequently  mentioned  George  Earl  Marischal,  and
James  afterwards  the  celebrated  Mareschal  Keith.

At  the  age  of  nineteen,  he  took  the  degree  of  Master  of
Arts,  at  Marischal  College,  and  attended,  probably  with  a
view  to  the  ministry,  the  divinity  lectures  of  the  Rev.  Mr.
Blackwell ;  but  an  incident  occurred,  at  this  period  of  his
life,  which,  operating  on  a  sensitive  and  irritable  constitution,
blasted  his  fondest  hopes,  darkened  his  fairest  prospects,
and  cast  him  upon  the  world  with  a  shattered  and  aistractea
mind.

Whilst  a  student  at  the  university,  he  had  imbibed  an
ardent  affection  for  the  daughter  of  a  minister  at  Aberdeen.
This  attachment  he  prosecuted  with  his  characteristic  ardour,
but  failed  of  obtaining  the  success  which  he  desired.  The
lady  was  determined  against  his  suit,  and  the  eagerness  and
obtrusiveness  of  his  applications  at  last  determined  her
father  to  close  his  doors  against  him.  The  disappointment
overpowered  his  reason,  and  his  friends  were  obliged  to
confine  him  in  a  private  receptacle  for  lunatics.  The  covert
of  this  asylum  sheltered  him  from  a  heavier  calamitv ;  for
it  was  subsequently  discovered  that  this  unhappy  lady  had
been  the  victim  of  a  guilty  attachment  to  one  of  her  bro¬
thers.  But  the  wound  was  incurable,  and  rankled  in  his
bosom  to  the  close  of  his  earthly  career.  Many  years
afterwards,  when  he  was  settled  in  London,  his  friend  Mr.
Chalmers,  wishing  to  serve  him,  offered  to  introduce  him  to
a  merchant  near  the  Royal  Exchange,  who  happened  to  be
a  near  relation  of  the  young  lady.  On  knocking  at  the  door,
Mr.  Cruden  was  astonished  to  see  it  opened  by  the  lady
herself.  He  started  back  with  visible  signs  of  wonder  and
agony,  and  grasping  his  friend's  hand,  exclaimed  wildly,
“  Ah  !  she  has  still  her  fine  black  eyes."  The  door  to  which
he  had  been  accidentally  led,  was  that  of  her  youngest
brother.  No  subsequent  interview  took  place,  but  he
never  mentioned  her  without  the  strongest  manifestations
of  grief  and  compassion.

In  the  year  1737,  from  disappointment  in  the  expected
patronage  to  his  Concordance,  he  was  again  attacked  by
nis  former  malady,  and  was  placed  in  a  private  asylum  at
Bethnal  Green.  On  his  release,  he  published  a  whimsical
and  satirical  pamphlet,  describing  the  hardships  to  which
he  had  been  subjected.  He  also  commenced  an  action  in
Westminster  Hall  against  Dr.  Munro  and  others,  which
was  disposed  of  on  July  7th,  1739,  by  a  verdict  for  the
defendants,  and  exposed  him  to  the  taunt  of  Chief  Justice
Lee.

He  underwent  another  temporary  confinement  at  Chelsea
in  1753,  and  again  endeavoured  to  avenge  himself  by  pub¬
lishing  an  account  of  those  receptacles  for  the  disordered  in
mind.  He  also  entered  into  a  correspondence  with  his  sis¬
ter,  and  some  other  persons,  in  which  he  proposed  to  them,
with  great  simplicity,  a  mode  by  which  they  might  recom¬
pense  him  in  a  slight  degree  for  the  injustice  which  they
had  done  him.  He  would  have  persuaded  his  friends  to
submit  to  imprisonment  in  Newgate,  and  to  his  sister  he
offered,  what  appeared  to  him  very  mild  terms,  that  she
should  pay  him  a  fine  of  £10  to  £15,  and  take  her  choice
of  48  hours’  confinement  in  the  prisons  of  Newgate,  Read¬
ing,  Aylesbury,  or  that  in  Windsor  Castle.

There  is  reason  to  apprehend,  that  the  treatment  of  the
inmates  of  public  and  private  asylums  for  lunatics  was,  at
that  period,  exceedingly  improper,  harsh,  and  often  cruel.
None  of  the  maladies  to  which  our  nature  is  exposed  re¬
quire,  in  a  greater  degree,  the  kindness  and  sympathy  of
our  fellows ;  and  in  none  is  there  so  great  temptation  to  the
exercise  of  arbitrary  and  despotic  authority.  The  unhappy
patients  are,  of  necessity,  abandoned  by  their  friends,  to  tne
sole  care  and  control  of  professional  strangers ;  and  these
are,  likewise,  obliged  to  delegate  their  authority  to  inferior
ministers.  Sad  and  bitter  must  have  been  the  feelings  of
such  as  were  capable  of  appreciating  the  injustice  to  which
they  were  exposed,  and  or  comparing  the  stem  discipline


of  a  mad-house,  with  the  indulgence  and  tenderness  of  do¬
mestic  intercourse.  It  cannot  therefore  be  surprising  that
Mr.  Cruden,  after  his  escape,  should  retain  an  indignant
recollection  of  his  confinement,  and  seek  to  expose  the  evils
of  those  abodes  of  wretchedness.  In  later  times,  the  efforts
of  individuals  and  of  the  legislature  have  been  strenuously
.  exerted  to  redress  these  evils  ;  and  by  these,  together  with  the
progress  of  medical  science,  and  of  humane  and  religious
principles,  the  lot  of  that  unhappy  portion  of  our  race  has,
perhaps,  received  all  the  amelioration  of  which  it  is  capable.
It  is  due,  however,  to  the  memory  of  Smollett  to  remark,
that  the  first  impulse  to  this  course  of  humanity  and  be¬
nevolence  was  given  by  him,  in  that  exquisitely  pathetic
tale,  “  The  Adventures  of  Sir  Launcelot  Greaves?’

Mr.  Cruden,  as  soon  as  he  was  released  from  his  first
confinement  at  Aberdeen,  determined  to  quit  the  place  of
his  birth,  and  try  his  fortune  in  London,  where  he  arrived
in  1722.  In  the  metropolis  and  its  neighbourhood,  he  ob¬
tained  successive  engagements,  as  private  tutor  to  young
men  who  were  preparing  for  the  university.  One  of  these
was  at  Ware  in  Hertfordshire.  Some  unknown  cause  also
led  him  to  the  Isle  of  Man,  where  he  spent  several  years  in
similar  occupations.  He  returned  to  London  in  1732,  and
obtained  employment  as  corrector  of  the  press ;  in  which
engagement  nis  knowledge,  assiduity,  and  integrity,  obtained
him  not  only  the  good  will  of  his  employers,  but  also  the
esteem  and  patronage  of  many  distinguished  persons.  By
the  Lord' Mayor  and  some  of  the  aldermen,  and  other  emi¬
nent  citizens  of  London,  he  was  recommended  to  Sir  Robert
Walpole,  and  after  a  long  period  of  tedious  suspense,  was,
by  his  influence,  appointed,  in  1735,  bookseller  to  Queen
Caroline,  consort  of  George  the  Second.

He  then  began  to  apply  himself  seriously  to  the  great
work,  with  which  he  nad  been  some  time  occupied,  the
composition  of  a  Concordance  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,
and,  through  his  great  diligence,  and  persevering  industry,
the  first  edition  was  published  in  1737.  It  was  dedicated
to  the  Queen,  to  whom  he  presented  a  copy,  which  met
with  very  gracious  acceptance ;  but  all  hopes  of  pecuniary
assistance  were  cut  off,  by  the  Queen’s  death,  which  hap¬
pened  sixteen  days  after  her  majesty’s  declaration,  that  “  sne
would  not  fail  to  remember  the  author.’’  This  was  a  heavy
stroke  upon  a  poor  author,  whose  little  all  was  embarked  in
this  mighty  undertaking ;  and  the  disappointment  had  such
an  unfavourable  effect  both  on  his  mind  and  circumstances,
that  it  brought  on  his  second  access  of  derangement.  He
was  confined,  as  has  been  said,  at  Bethnal  Green,  whence
he  contrived  to  escape,  though  chained  to  his  bedstead,  and,
as  soon  as  he  was  at  liberty,  published  a  history  of  his  suf¬
ferings,  with  this  characteristic  title,  “  The  London  citizen
exceedingly  injured ;  giving  an  account  of  his  severe  and
long  confinement  at  Bethnal  Green,  for  nine  weeks  and  six
days  ;  the  citizen  being  sent  there  in  March  1738,  by  Robert
Wightman,  a  notoriously  conceited  and  whimsical  man ;
where  he  was  chained,  handcuffed,  strait-waistcoated,  and
imprisoned ;  with  a  history  of  Wightman’s  Blind  Bench  ;
a  sort  of  court  that  met  at  Wightman’s  room,  and  unac¬
countably  proceeded  to  pass  decrees  in  relation  to  the  Lon¬
don  citizen,’’  &c.  &c.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  insti¬
tuted  the  suit  against  Wightman  the  proprietor  of  the  mad¬
house,  and  Dr.  Munro  the  physician,  and  by  pleading  his
own  cause  insured  a  verdict  for  the  defendants.

Neither  his  misfortunes,  nor  his  derangement,  however,
prevented  him  from  obtaining  engagements  as  corrector  of
the  press ;  and  during  fifteen  succeeding  years  he  showed
the  acute  state  of  his  mind,  by  superintending  the  publica¬
tion  of  several  editions  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  classics ;
and  manifested  the  most  simple  and  inoffensive  manners,
and  the  most  conscientious  integrity,  in  all  his  under¬
takings.  At  last,  he  unfortunately  happened  to  have  some
dispute,  at  his  lodgings,  with  his  sister,  who  had,  about  a
twelvemonth  before,  married  a  Mr.  Wild ;  and,  through  her
influence,  he  was  again  confined  for  the  space  of  seventeen
days,  the  shortness  of  which  lime  seems  rather  to  indicate,
that  his  disorder  was  not  of  a  very  malignant  nature.  His
release  was  speedily  followed  by  another  narrative  of  ad¬
ventures,  in  which  he  assumed  the  permanent  character  of
Alexander  the  Corrector,  the  title  of  which  was  not
less  curious  than  that  of  his  former  history :  “  The  adventures
of  Alexander  the  Corrector,  wherein  is  given  an  ac-


XIV


OF  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN.


count  of  his  being  sent  to  Chelsea,  and  of  his  bad  usage
during  the  time  of  his  Chelsea  campaign,  which  continued
seventeen  days,  from  the  12th  to  the  29th  of  September
1753.  With  an  account  of  the  Chelsea  academies,  or  the
private  places  for  the  confinement  of  such  as  are  supposed
to  be  deprived  of  the  exercise  of  their  reason.  To  which
is  addea  an  account  of  the  prophecies  of  some  pious
ministers  of  the  gospel,  foretelling  that  Alexander's  afflic¬
tions  are  designed  by  Divine  Providence  to  being  an  in¬
troduction,  and  preparation,  to  his  being  a  Joseph  and  a
prosperous  man.  With  observations  on  the  necessity  of  a
reformation,  by  executing  the  laws  against  swearers,  sab¬
bath-breakers,  and  other  offenders."  In  three  parts.  It
was  after  the  publication  of  this  pamphlet  that  he  made
thepropositions  for  indemnity  before  alluded  to.

Tne  remaining  portion  of  nis  life  was  passed  in  a  kind
of  happy  and  harmless  lunacy,  which  left  him  sufficiently
in  possession  of  his  rational  faculties,  to  perform  the  duties
of  nis  arduous  occupation,  and  to  exercise  himself  in  the
execution  of  the  commission,  with  which  he  fancied  him¬
self  intrusted,  to  correct  the  public  manners  and  morals.
But,  in  fulfilling  this  object,  he  was  not  unfrequently  led
into  a  course  of  conduct,  which  occasioned  trouble  to  his
friends  and  others,  and  cast  a  cloud  over  his  name,  which,
but  for  this  aberration  of  mind,  would  have  been  conspi¬
cuous  amongst  the  benefactors  of  mankind.

Under  the  impression  of  this  divine  commission,  he  pub¬
lished  several  tracts,  asserting  his  claims  to  supernatural
communications,  and  visited  Oxford  and  Cambridge  to  ex¬
hort  the  idlers  of  both  sexes  to  a  strict  observance  of  the
sabbath,  under  the  threat  of  eternal  vengeance.  His  inter¬
ference  was,  as  may  be  supposed,  in  some  cases  rather  un-
courteously  received.

But  it  was  in  London  that  his  principal  attempts  were
made ;  and  to  render  them  efficient,  he  thought  it  desirable
that  his  authority  should  be  recognised  by  the  king  in
council,  and  that  he  should  be  nominated  Corrector  of
the  People,  by  act  of  Parliament.  His  applications  to  the
higher  powers,  for  this  purpose,  were  supported  by  testi¬
monials  from  many  ladies,  at  the  head  of  which  was  the
name  of  the  Lady  Mayoress,  and  those  of  other  ladies  of
rank.  He  also  made  a  formal  application  to  His  Majesty,
for  the  honour  of  knighthood,  not  from  personal  vanity,
but  because  he  thought  it  would  give  weight  to  his  endea¬
vours  in  the  “  good  cause."  He  gives  an  amusing  account
of  his  interviews  with  the  lords  in  waiting,  secretaries  of
state,  and  other  great  men,  for  this  purpose.  Being  well
known  and  respected,  he  was  not  treated  with  rudeness ;
but  he  complains  that  he  was  not  attended  to,  except  by
Earl  Paulett,  who,  he  says,  “  always  spoke  civilly  to
him ;  and  being  goutish  in  nis  feet,  could  not  run  away
from  the  Corrector,  as  others  were  wont  to  do."

From  this  same  delusion,  he  offered  himself  at  the  gene¬
ral  election  in  1754,  to  represent  the  city  of  London  in
Parliament,  and  his  influence  was  sufficient  to  induce  Mr.
Sheriff  Chitty  to  nominate  him  in  the  Common  Hall.  But,
though  several  hands  were  held  up  for  him,  he  declined
standing  a  poll,  comforting  himself  with  the  persuasion
that  he  had  the  hearts,  if  not  the  hands,  of  the  London
citizens.  His  next  project  was  of  a  more  private  and  per¬
sonal  nature,  to  pay  his  addresses  to  Miss  Abney,  daughter
of  Sir  Thomas  Abney  of  Newington.  This  lady  he  ad¬
dressed  under  the  name  of  Elizabeth  of  Silesia;  and  he
made  his  suit  with  such  persevering  ardour,  as  must  have
occasioned  no  small  perplexity  to  that  good  family.  Among
other  freaks,  he  sent  round  “  praying  bills "  to  various  con¬
gregations,  on  her  going  abroad  in  1754,  that  intercession
might  be  made  to  Almighty  God  for  the  safety  of  herself
ana  attendants.  When  she  returned,  he  circulated  similar
forms  of  thanksgiving.  It  cost  Miss  Abney  and  her  at¬
tendants  some  trouble,  to  free  her  from  such  a  persevering:
suitor.

Yet,  amidst  all  these  diversions,  he  still  pursued  his  busi¬
ness  with  unabated  assiduity,  and  especially  the  correction
of  his  Concordance,  and  the  preparing  it  for  a  new  edition;
which  was  published  in  1761,  and  presented  in  person  by
the  author  to  the  King,  who  gave  him  a  donation  of  £100.
He  had  also  the  honour  of  presenting  it  to  Queen  Char¬
lotte,  and  to  the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales.  At  this
time,  Mr.  Cruden  was  corrector  of  the  press  to  Mr.  Wood-


fall,  in  the  publication  of  the  Public  Advertiser,  a  paper
celebrated  by  being  made  the  vehicle  of  the  Letters  of
Junius.  Here  he  had  full  occupation.  At  one  o’clock  in
the  morning  he  finished  the  labours  of  the  office,  and  at
six,  he  was  turning  over  his  Bible,  with  the  most  careful  at  ¬
tention,  for  the  correction  of  his  Concordance.  In  the
evening,  he  again  returned  to  the  printing  office,  near  to
which  he  lodged,  at  “the  Flating  Mill,  over  against  the  Ship,
in  Ivy  Lane."  In  this  round  of  public  and  private  duty
he  passed  his  time  tranquilly  and  happily,  embracing  every
opportunity  of  performing  acts  of  benevolence  to  his  fellow-
creatures;  one  of  which  is  especially  recorded  to  his
honour.  J

In  1762  one  Richard  Potter,  a  poor  ignorant  sailo  ,  was
tried,  and  convicted,  at  the  Old  Bailey,  of  forging,  or  utter¬
ing  knowing  it  to  be  forged,  a  seaman’s  will.  Mr.  Cruden
was  in  the  court,  and  was  so  fully  convinced  of  his  being
merely  the  tool  of  some  designing  villain,  that  he  deter¬
mined  to  interfere  in  his  behalf,  and  endeavour  to  move  the
Royal  clemency.  For  this  purpose,  he  visited  him  in  New¬
gate,  conversed  with  him  on  religious  subjects,  exhorted,
instructed,  and  prayed  with  him.  The  man  was  awakened
to  a  sense  of  his  condition  as  a  sinner,  and  appeared  to  be
truly  converted  to  God.  Encouraged  by  this  success,  Mr.
Cruden  began  to  take  measures  for  saving  his  life.  By  re¬
peated  applications  to  Lord  Hallifax,  Secretary  of  State,  he
obtained  a  change  of  the  sentence,  from  death  to  transport¬
ation.  As  an  acknowledgment  of  his  obligations  to  Lord
Hallifax,  he  presented  him  with  a  copy  of  the  second  edition
of  his  Concordance,  to  which  he  prefixed  an  elegant  manu¬
script  Latin  dedication,  acknowledging  his  Lordship’s  kind
interference  on  behalf  of  Potter.  He  published  an  account
of  this  transaction  also,  in  a  quaint  yet  interesting  work,
entitled  “  The  history  of  Richard  Potter,  &c."

The  knowledge  which  Mr.  Cruden  obtained,  through
these  visits,  of  the  wicked  and  degraded  state  of  the  felons
in  Newgate,  and  the  success  which  had  attended  his  endea¬
vours  in  the  case  of  Potter,  induced  him  to  continue  his
attempts  for  the  reformation  of  that  prison.  He  distributed
New  Testaments  and  catechisms  amongst  its  inmates,  which
were  accompanied  with  personal  instructions,  and  the  oc¬
casional  presentation  of  small  rewards  to  the  most  docile
of  his  pupils.  But  the  state  of  the  prison  at  that  period,
and  the  total  want  of  discipline  which  then  prevailed,  ren  -
dered  his  efforts  abortive.  They  sold  his  books,  and  spem
the  money  in  drinking.  A  philanthropist  of  die  present
day  has  cultivated  this  barren  waste  with  greater  success.
Uniting  female  tenderness  with  the  loftiest  principles  of
Christian  enthusiasm,  assisted  by  the  progress  of  know¬
ledge  and  humanity,  and  increased  facilities  of  religious
instruction,  and  aided  by  the  countenance  of  the  wise  and
good  in  the  higher  classes  of  society,  Mrs.  Fry  has  been
able  to  accomplish  what  was  denied  to  Cruden  and  Howard.
Though  disappointed  in  this  attempt,  he  still  continued  his
benevolent  exertions  in  individual  instances ;  and  though
he  might  in  some  cases  appear  obtrusive,  his  motives  were
always  kind,  and  his  pleasure  was  great  whenever  he  could
promote  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  his  fellow-creatures.
One  Sunday  evening,  returning  from  meeting,  he  met  a  man
who  appeared  to  be  suffering  under  the  extremity  of  misery,
and,  on  inquiring  into  his  circumstances,  learned  that  the
sufferings  of  his  family,  through  poverty,  and  other  causes,
had  determined  him  to  destroy  nimself.  TBy  suitable  admoni¬
tions  and  consolations,  with  some  pecuniary  donation,  and
promises  of  future  attentions,  he  restored  this  unhappy  man,
to  his  own  great  joy,  to  peace  and  comfort.

Another  evening,  he  is  said  to  have  been  accosted  bjr  a
miserable  female,  whom  he  permitted  to  accompany  him
to  his  own  door,  and  then  on  quitting  her,  remonstrated
with  her  on  the  criminal  and  ruinous  course  she  was  pur¬
suing,  and  earnestly  exhort'ed  her  to  repentance  and
amendment.  The  poor  girl  assured  him,  with  tears,  that
she  would  gladly  quit  her  present  course  of  life,  but  knew
not  where  to  go.  “  It  is  too  late,  said  he,  to  talk  of  this
to-night,  but,  if  you  remain  in  the  same  mind,  call  on  me
to-morrow,  and  I  will  befriend  you."  She  came  to  him  on
the  morrow,  and  declared  herself  willing  to  engage  in  the
lowest  and  most  laborious  occupation,  if  she  could  but
disengage  herself  from  that  life  of  infamy.  Not  knowing
where  to  olace  her,  Mr.  Cruden  took  her  to  his  own  house.


LIFE  AND  CHARACTER  OF  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN.


xv


as  assistant  to  his  servant.  There  she  continued  till  his
death,  and,  by  the  propriety  of  her  behaviour,  manifested
the  sincerity  of  her  repentance.

In  the  well  known  contest  which  took  place  between  the
British  government  and  John  Wilkes,  in  consequence  of
the  publication  of  No.  45  of  the  North  Briton,  Mr.  Cruden
took  a  very  decided  part  in  the  defence  of  government.
He  published  a  pamphlet  against  Wilkes,  and  always  ex¬
pressed  the  utmost  abhorrence  of  his  moral  and  religious
character,  declaring  that  such  a  profligate  could  not  be  a
patriot.  To  express,  in  the  most  efficacious  manner,  his
dislike,  he  provided  himself  with  a  sponge,  and  took  many
a  long  ana  tedious  walk  to  efface  the  badge  of  party,
No.  45,  wherever  he  found  it  chalked  on  doors  or  window-
shutters,  as  well  as  all  other  inscriptions  offensive  to  good
manners.

In  the  year  1769,  he  visited  his  native  city  for  the  last
time,  where  he  still  maintained  his  vocation  as  a  public
Corrector.  He  began  with  giving  a  couple  of  lectures,  in
Latin  and  English,  on  the  necessity  of  a  general  reformation.
These  were  followed  by  printing,  as  a  hand-bill,  the  Fourth
Commandment,  which  he  distributed  every  Sunday,  to  all
descriptions  of  persons.  At  a  considerable  expense,  he
stored  his  pockets  with  various  religious  tracts,  which  were
given  to  every  one  who  would  promise  to  read  them.  He
was  particularly  kind  and  attentive  to  children,  and  by  his
earnest  piety,  and  simple,  unaffected -benevolence,  obtained
the  general  esteem  ot  his  townsmen.  His  efforts  to  do
good,  however,  still  partook  of  his  characteristic  eccen¬
tricity.  “  To  a  young  clergyman  whom  he  thought  too
conceited  and  modem ,  he  very  gravely  and  formally  pre¬
sented  a  little  catechism,  used  by  children  in  Scotland,
called,  ‘  The  Mother’s  Catechism/  Dedicated  to  the
Young  and  Ignorant.”

The  end  of  his  career  was  now  at  hand.  After  the  resi¬
dence  of  about  a  year  in  Aberdeen,  he  returned  to  London,
and  took  lodgings  in  Camden  Street,  Islington.  His  death
was  marked  with  something  of  the  peculiarity  of  his  life.
No  illness  or  decay  indicated  his  approaching  dissolution.
He  had  suffered  from  a  slight  attack  of  asthma,  but  re¬
tired  to  rest,  on  his  last  evening,  as  usual.  In  the  morning,
his  maid  rang  the  bell  to  summon  him  to  breakfast.  No
answer  was  returned ;  and  she  entered  his  bed-room,  but
he  was  not  there.  She  proceeded  to  his  closet,  and  found
him  dead,  in  the  attitude  of  prayer,  kneeling  against  a
chair.  Thus  lived  and  thus  died  Alexander  Cruden,  who
might  justly  say  with  Horace ,

“  Exegi  monumentum  aere  perennius.”


He  had,  amidst  the  avocations  of  business,  and  the  dis¬
turbance  of  a  deranged  intellect,  accomplished  a  work
which  will  live  as  long  as  the  English  Language,  and
accompany  the  sacred  Scriptures,  which  are  circulated  in
that  language,  through  all  parts  of  the  habitable  world.
Well  may  it  be  said  of  this  pious,  benevolent,  and  indus¬
trious  man,  “  He  rests  from  his  labours,  and  his  works  do
follow  him.”

Mr.  Cruden  was  a  Calvinistic  dissenter,  and  firmly
maintained  his  religious  opinion.  And  his  religion  was
not  separated  from  morality,  for  his  was  “  the  faith  which
worketh  by  love.”  He  was  a  member  of  the  church
which  assembled  at  Great  St.  Helen’s,  under  the  care
of  Dr.  Guise,  whom  he  used  to  call  “his  beloved  pas¬
tor.”  On  the  retirement  of  Dr.  Guise  in  1762,  he  at¬
tended  the  ministry  of  Dr.  Conder,  in  Moorfields,  and,
afterwards,  that  of  Mr.  Cruikshank,  in  Swallow  Street.
He  still  however  maintained  his  connexion  with  the  church
at  Great  St.  Helen’s,  where  he  received  the  sacrament  of
the  Lord’s  Supper  on  the  first  Sunday  of  each  month.  His
death  took  place  November  1,  1770.

As  Mr.  Cruden  never  married,  he  distributed  his  small
property  amongst  his  relations,  except  a  sum  which  he  gave
to  his  native  city,  to  be  expended  in  religious  books  for  the
poor.  He  also  founded  an  exhibition  of  five  pounds  pei
annum  to  assist  in  educating  a  student  at  Marischal  Col¬
lege.  His  will  specified  the  terms  on  which  this  assistance
should  be  enjoyed,  one  of  which  was,  a  perfect  acquaint¬
ance  with  Vincent’s  Catechism.

Besides  the  works  which  have  been  mentioned  before,  he
wrote  “  An  Account  of  the  History  and  Excellency  of  the
Holy  Scriptures”  prefixed  to  a  Compendium  of  the  Holy
Bible.  He  also  compiled  a  “  Scripture  Dictionary,”  which
was  published  at  Aberdeen  after  his  death,  in  2  vols.  8vo.
He  was  employed  to  compile  the  elaborate  verbal  index  to
Bishop  Newton’s  edition  of  Milton’s  Works;  a  work  of  great
labour  and  talent,  and  which  he  is  said  to  have  undertaken
at  the  request  of  Auditor  Benson.

On  the  enlarging  and  perfecting  of  his  great  work,  the
Concordance,  he  employed  all  the  leisure  hours  of  the
later  periods  of  his  life.  The  second  edition  was  published
in  1761,  and  dedicated  to  his  late  Majesty  George  the  Third.
The  third  appeared  in  1769,  with  the  Author’s  last  correc¬
tions.  The  profit  of  these  compensated  for  the  loss  upon
the  first.  He  received  £500  for  the  second  edition,  and
£300  for  the  third,  with  twenty  copies  printed  on  fine  paper.
These  sums,  with  the  product  of  nis  other  labours,  supplied
his  own  moderate  personal  wants,  and  formed  a  fund  for
those  labours  of  love  in  which  his  heart  delighted.


THE


NAMES  AND  ORDER

OF  ALL  THE

BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT,

4

WITH  THE

NUMBER  OF  THEIR  CHAPTERS.


THE  BOOKS  AND  CHAPTERS  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.


GENESIS  .

CHAPS.

II  CHRONICLES  .

CHAPS.

DANIEL  .  .  .  .

CB  APS.

EXODUS  .  .  .

EZRA  ....

.  10

HOSEA

.  14

LEVITICUS

N  EH  EMI  A II  .

JOEL .

NUMBERS

ESTHER  .

AMOS .

DEUTERONOMY  .

•

•

.  .  34

JOB  ....

. 42

OBADIAII  ....

JOSHUA  .

PSALMS  .

. 150

JONAH

JUDGES  .

PROVERBS  .  .

MIC  All  .  .  .  .

RUTH  ....

ECCLESIASTES  .

NAHUM  .  .  .  .

I  SAMUEL

SOLOMON’S  SONG

IIABAKKUK  .

II  SAMUEL  .  .

ISAIAH

. 66

ZEPHANIAH  .  .

I  KINGS  .  .  .

JEREMIAH

HAGGAI  .

II  KINGS  .  .

LAMENTATIONS  .

ZECHARIAH  .

I  CHRONICLES

EZEKIEL  .  .

MALACIII  .

THE  BOOKS  AND  CHAPTERS  IN  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.


MATTHEW

MARK

LUKE  .  .

JOHN  .  .

ACTS  .  .

ROMANS  .  .

I  CORINTHIANS

II  CORINTHIANS
GALATIANS  .


CHAPS.  ;

.  28  EPHESIANS  .  .

.  16  PHILIPPI  ANS
.  24  COLOSSIANS  .

.  21  I  THESSALONIANS
.  28  II  THESSALONIANS
.  16  I  TIMOTHY
.  16  II  TIMOTHY  .

.  13  TITUS
.  6  PHILEMON


CHAPS.  '
.  .  .  6

.  4

.  .  .  4

«  .  .6

.  .  .  3

.  .  .  6

.  .  .  4

.  .  .  5

.  .  .  1


HEBREWS

JAMES

I  PETER  .

II  PETER  .

I  JOHN

II  JOHN  .

III  JOHN  .

JUDE  .  .

REVELATION


CHAPS.

.  13
.  5

.  5

3

.  5

.  1
.  1
.  1
.  22


THE  BOOKS  AND  CHAPTERS  OF  THE  APOCRYPH


A.


I  ESDRAS  .  .  .

H  ESDRAS  .  .  .

TOBIT  .  .  .  .

JUDITH  .  .  .  .

THE  REST  of  ESTHER


CHAPS.

.  9

.  16
.  14

.  16
.  6


CHAPS.

WISDOM  .  .  19

ECCLESIASTICUS . 51

BARUCH,  with  THE  EPISTLE  of

JEREMIAH . 6

THE  SONG  of  the  THREE  CHILDREN.


THE  STORY  of  SUSANNAH.

THE  IDOL  BEL  and  the  DRAGON.
THE  PRAYER  of  MAN  ASSES.

I  MACCABEES  .  .  .  ,

II  MACCABEES  .  .


A  COMPLETE


C  O  N  C  O  R-D  A  N  C  E

TO  THE

HOLY  SCRIPTURES.


A  B  I

.  ABASE.

JOB  40.  11.  behold  every  one  proud,  and  a.  him
Isa.  31.  4.  as  the  lion  will  not  a.  himself
Ezek.  21.  26.  and  a.  him  that  is  high
Dan.  4.  37.  that  walk  in  pride,  is  able  to  a.
ABASED.

Isa.  32.  +19.  and  the  city  shall  be  utterly  a.

Mat.  23. 12.  and  whosoever  shall  exalt  himself  shall
be  a.  1  Luke  14.  11.  I  18.  14.
Phil.  4. 12.  I  know  how  to  be  a.  and  how  to  abound
ABASING.  [self

2  Cor.  11. 7.  have  I  committed  an  offence  ina.my-
A  BALED.

Gen.  8.  3.  after  150  days  the  waters  were  a.  8. 11.
Lev.  27- 18.  it  shall  he  a.  from  thy  estimation
Deut.  34.  7-  nor  was  Moses’  natural  force  a.

Judg.  8.  3.  then  their  amrer  was  a.  toward  him
ABBA.

Mark  14. 36.  a.  Father,  all  things  are  possible  to  thee
Pom.  8. 15.  the  Spirit,  whereby  we  cry,  a.  Father
Gal.  4.  6.  sent  Spirit  into  your  hearts,  crying,  a.

ABHOR  [Father

Signifies,  [1]  To  lothe,  or  detest,  Deut.  32.  19.
Job  42.  6.  [2]  To  despise,  or  neglect,  Psal.  22.
24.  Amos  6.  8.  [3]  To  reject,  or  cast  off,  Psal.
89.  38.

Lev.  26.  11.  and  my  soul  shall  not  a.  you

15.  or  if  vour  soul  a.  my  judgments
30.  I  will  destroy,  and  my  soul  shall  a.  you
44.  nor  will  I  a.  them,  to  destroy  them  utterly
Deut.  7-  26.  thou  shalt  utterly  a.  it,  a  cursed  thing
23. 7.  shalt  not  a.  an  Edomite,  not  a.  an  Egyptian
1  s dm.  27. 12.  he  hath  made  his  people  to  a.  mm
Job  9.  31.  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  a.  me
30.  10.  they  a.  me,  they  flee  far  from  me
42. 6. 1  a.  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes
Psal.  5.  6.  the  Lord  will  a.  the  bloody  man
119.  163.  1  hate  and  a.  lying,  but  love  thy  law
Prov.  24.  24.  him  people  curse,  nations  shall  a.  him
Jer.  14.  21.  do  not  a.  us  for  thy  name’s  sake
Amos  5. 10.  they  a.  him  that  speaketh  uprightly

6.  8. 1  a.  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  hate  nis  palaces
Mic.  3.  9.  hear, ye  that  a.  judgment,  and  pervert
Prim.  12.  9.  a.  that  which  is  evil,  cleave  to  good
ABHORRED.

Erod.  5.  21.  you  have  made  our  savour  to  be  a.

Lei/.  20. 23.  they  committed,  and  therefore  I  a.  them
E6.  43.  they  despised,  their  soul  a.  my  statutes
Deut.  32. 19.  when  the  Lord  saw  it,  he  a.  them

1  Sam.  2. 17.  for  men  a.  the  offering  of  the  Lord

2  Sam.  16.  21.  shall  hear,  thou  art  a.  of  thy  father
1  A  mgs  11.  25.  1 1  ad  ad  a.  Israel,  and  reigned  over
Job  19. 19-  all  my  inward  friends  a.  me

Psal.  22.  24.  nor  a.  the  affliction  of  the  afflicted
78.  59.  he  was  wroth,  and  greatly  a.  Israel
89.  38.  but  thou  hast  cast  off  and  a.  hast  been  wroth
106.  40.  insomuch  that  he  a.  his  own  inheritance
Prov.  22.  14.  who  is  a.  of  the  Lord  shall  fall  therein
Lam.  2. 7.  the  Lord  hath  a.  his  sanctuary
Etek.  16.  25.  thou  hast  made  thy  beauty  to  be  a.
Zech.  11. 8.  lothed  them,  and  their  soul  also  a.  me
ABHORREST.

Isa.  7.  16.  the  land  that  thou  a.  shall  be  forsaken
Pom.  2.  22.  thou  that  a.  idols,  dost  thou  commit
ABHORRETH.

Job  33.  20.  so  tha'  his  life  a.  bread,  and  his  soul
Psal.  10.  3.  blesseth  the  covetous,  whom  the  Lord  a.

36. 4.  he  deviseth  mischief  on  his  bed,  he  a.  not  evil
107. 18.  their  soul  a.  all  manner  of  meat

Isa.  49-  7-  to  him  whom  the  nation  a.  to  a  servant
ABHORRING.

Isa.  66.  24.  and  they  shall  be  an  a.  to  all  flesh
ABIDE

Signifies,  [1]  To  stay,  or  tarry,  Gen.  22.  5.  [2]
To  dwell  or  live  in  a  place,  Gen.  29.  19.  Psal.
15.  1.  [3]  To  bear  or  endure,  Jer.  10.  10.

Joel  2.  11.  [4]  To  be,  Gen.  44.  33.  [5]  To
continue,  Eccl.  8.  15.  John  14.  16.  [6]  'To

■wait  for,  Acts  20.  23.  [7]  To  rest,  Prov.  19.
23.  [8]  To  live,  Phil.  1.  24.  [9]  To  stand
firm,  Psal.  119-  90.  125.  1.  [10]  To  rule  or

govern,  Psal.  61.  7..

Gen.  19. 2.  but  we  will  a.  in  the  street  all  night

22. 5.  a.  you  here  with  the  ass,  and  1  and  the  lad
24.  55.  jet  the  damsel  a.  with  us  a  few  days

29.  19.  it  is  better  1  give  her  to  thee,  a.  with  me
44.  33.  let  thy  servant  a.  instead  of  the  lad
Exod.  16. 29.  a.  ye  every  man  in  his  place
Lev.  8.  35.  therefore  a.  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle
19. 13.  the  wages  of  him  hired  shall  not  a.  with  thee
Wum.  35.  25.  shall  a.  to  the  death  of  the  high  priest


ABI

Putli  2.  8.  but  a.  here  fast  by  my  maidens

1  Sam.  1. 22.  appear  before  the  Lord,  and  a.  forever

5.  7-  the  ark  of  God  of  Israel  shall  not  a.  with  us
22.  23.  a.  thou  with  me,  fear  not,  for  he  that  seeks
30.  21.  whom  they  had  made  to  a.  at  brook  Besor

2  Sam.  16.  18.  his  will  I  be,  and  with  him  will  I  a.
Job  24.  13.  they  rebel,  nor  a.  in  the  paths  of  the  light

38.  40.  and  a.  in  the  covert  to  lie  in  wait

39.  9-  will  the  unicorn  be  willing  to  a.  by  thy  crib
Psal.  15.  1.  Lord,  who  shall  a.  in  thy  tabernacle?
61.  4.  1  will  a.  in  thy  tabernacle  for  ever

7.  he  shall  a.  before  God  for  ever
91.  1.  shall  a.  underthe  shadow  of  the  Almighty
Prov.  7. 11.  she  is  loud,  her  feet  a.  not  in  her  house

19.  23.  and  he  that  hath  it  shall  a.  satisfied
Eccl.  8. 15.  for  that  shall  a.  with  him  oe  his  labour
Jer.  10.  10.  natipns  not  able  to  a.  his  indignation

42.  10.  if  ye  a.  in  this  land  I  will  build  you
49.  18.  no  man  shall  a.  there,  33.  1 50.  40.

Dos.  3.  3.  thou  shalt  a.  for  me  many  days

11.  6.  and  the  sword  shall  a.  on  his  cities
Joel  2.  11.  the  day  is  terrible,  who  can  a.  it?

Mic.  5.  4.  they  snail  a.  for  now  shall  he  be  great
Nah.  1.  6.  who  can  a.  in  the  fierceness  of  his  anger  ?
Mai.  3.  2.  but  who  may  a.  the  day  of  his  coming  ?
Mat.  10.  11.  there  a.  Mark  6.  10.  Luke  9.  4.

Luke  19.  5.  for  to-day  I  must  a.  at  thy  house

24.  29.  a.  with  us,  for  it  is  towards  evening
John  12.  46.  believes  on  me,  should  not  a.  in  dark.

14.  16.  give  another  Comforter  that  he  may  a.

15.  4.  a.  in  me  and  l  in  you,  except  ye  a.  in  me,  7*

6.  if  a  man  a.  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth

10.  ye  shall  a.  in  my  love,  and  a.  in  his  love
Acts  15.  34.  it  pleased  Silas  to  a.  there  still

16.  15.  come  into  my  house  and  a.  there

20.  23.  saydng,  that  bonds  and  afflictions  a.  me
27.  31.  except  these  a.  in  ship,  ye  cannot  be  saved

1  Cor.  3.  14.  if  any  man’s  work  a.  he  shall  receive

7.  8.  it  is  good  for  them  if  they  a.  even  as  I
20.  let  every  man  a.  in  the  same  calling

4o.  she  is  happier  if  she  so  a.  after  my  judgment
Phil.  1.  24.  to  a.  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  Tor  you
25.  I  know  that  I  shall  a.  with  you  all
1  Tim.  1.  3.  I  besought  thee  to  a.  at  Ephesus

1  John  2.  24.  let  that  a.  in  you  which  ye  have  heard
27.  ye  shall  a.  in  him  ||  28.  children  a.  in  him

ABIDETH.

2  Sam.  16.  3.  Ziba  said,  behold  he  a.  at  Jerusalem
Psal.  49.  12.  man  being  in  honour,  a.  not,  he  is
55. 19.  God  shall  hear,  even  he  that  a.  of  old

119.  90.  thou  hast  established  the  earth,  and  it  a.
125. 1.  shall  be  as  mount  Zion,  which  a.  for  ever
Prov.  15.  31.  heareth  reproof,  a.  among  the  wise
Eccl.  1.  4.  another  cometh,  but  the  earth  a.  forever
Jer.  21.  9.  he  that  a.  in  this  city  shall  die  by  sword
John  3.  36.  but  the  wrath  of  God  a.  on  him

8.  35.  the  servant  a.  not,  but  the  son  a.  for  ever

12.  24.  except  a  corn  of  wheat  die,  it  a.  alone
34.  we  have  heard  that  Christ  a.  tor  ever

15.  5.  he  that  a.  in  me  bringeth  forth  much  fruit

1  Cor.  13.  13.  now  a.  faith,  hope,  charity

2  Tim.  2.  13.  if  we  believe  not,  yet  he  a.  faithful
Deb.  7.  3.  Melchizedec  a.  a  priest  continually

1  Pet.  1.  23.  by  the  word  of  God  which  a.  for  ever

1  John  2.  6.  he  that  saith  he  a.  in  him  ought  to  walk
10.  he  that  loveth  his  brother  a.  in  the  light

14.  ye  are  strong,  and  the  word  of  God  a.  in  you

17.  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  a.  for  ever
27.  the  anointings,  in  you  and  teacheth  you
3. 6.  whosoever  a.  in  him  sinneth  not
3. 14.  that  loveth  not  his  brother  a.  in  death
24.  and  hereby  we  know  that  he  a.  in  us

2  John  9.  whoso  a.  not  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  hath

not  God,  he  that  a.  bath  the  Father  and  the  Son
ABIDING.

Nvm.  24.  2.  Balaam  saw  Israel  a.  in  his  tents
1  Sam.  26.  19.  from  a.  in  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord
1  Chron.  29.  15.  days  as  a  shadow,  there  is  none  a.
Luke  2.  8.  there  were  shepherds  a.  in  the  field
John  5.  38.  and  ye  have  not  his  word  a.  in  you
1  John  3. 15.  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  a.  in  him
ABJECTS.

Psal.  35.  15.  the  a.  gathered  together  against  me
ABILITY.

Lev.  27. 8.  to  his  a.  that  vowed,  priest  shall  value
Ezra  2.  69.  they  gave  after  their  a.  to  the  work
Neh.  5. 8.  we  after  our  a.  redeemed  our  brethren
Dan.  1.  4.  as  had  a.  to  stand  in  the  king’s  palace
Mat.  25.  15.  he  gave  to  each  according  to  h is  a.
Acts  11.  29.  according  to  his  a.  determined’to  send
1  Pet.  4.  11,  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  a.  God  giveth


A  BL

ABLE.

Erod.  18.  21.  provide  out  of  all  the  people  a  men
Lev.  14.  22.  two  pigeons,  such  as  he  is  a.  to  get,  31.
Num.  1.  3.  all  that  are  a.  to  go  to  war,  20,  22,24,
26,  28,  30,  32,  34,  36,  38,  40,  42,  45. 1  26.  2.

13.  30.  go  up,  for  we  are  well  a.  to  overcome  it
Deut.  16.  17-  every  man  shall  give  as  he  is  a.

Josh.  23.  9.  no  man  hath  been®.  to  stand  before  you
1  Sam.  6.  20.  who  is  a.  to  stand  before  this  holy  God  ?

1  Kings  3.  9.  who  is  a.  to  judge  so  great  a  people  ?

2  Chron.  2.  6.  but  who  is  a.  to  build  nim  an  nouse  ?
20.  6.  so  that  none  is  a.  to  withstand  thee

25.  9.  the  Lord  is  a.  to  give  thee  much  more
Job  41.  10.  who  then  is  a.  to  stand  before  me  ?

Prov.  27-  4.  but  who  is  a .  to  stand  before  envy  ?
Ezek.  46.  11 .  the  offering  shall  be  as  he  is  a.  to  give
Dan.  3. 17-  our  God  whom  we  serve  is  a.  to  deliver
6.  20.  thy  God  is  a.  to  deliver  thee  from  the  lions
Mat.  3.  9.  God  is  a.  of  these  stones  to  raise  up
children  to  Abraham,  Luke  3.  8.
9.  28.  believe  y*'  that  I  am  a.  to  do  this )

10.28.  fea,  him  a.  to  destroy  soul  and  body  in  hell

19.  12.  he  that  is  a.  to  teceive  it,  let  hirn  receive

20.  22.  are  yea.  to  drink  of  the  cup  1  shall  drink  of?
22.  46.  no  man  was  a.  to  answer  him  a  word

Mark  4.  33.  spake  he,  as  they  were  a.  to  hear  it
John  10.  29.  no  man  is  a.  to  pluck  them  out  of  my
Acts  15.  10.  a  yoke  our  fathers  nor  we  a.  to  bear
20. 32.  word  of  his  grace,  a.  to  build  you
25.  5.  which  among  you  are  a.  go  down  with  me  ?
Rom.  4.  21.  he  had  promised,  he  was  a.  to  perform
11.  23.  for  God  is  a.  to  graff  them  in  again

14.  4.  for  God  is  a.  to  make  him  stand

15.  14.  ye  are  a.  also  to  admonish  one  another

1  Cor.  3.  2.  ye  were  not  a.  nor  yet  now  are  ye  a.
10. 13.  not  suffer  to  be  tempted  above  that  ye  are  a.

2  Cor.  3.  6.  who  hath  made  us  «.  ministers  of  newt.
9.  8.  God  is  a.  to  make  all  grace  abound  towards

Eph.  3.  20.  to  him  that  is  a.  to  do  abundantly  above
Phil.  3.  21.  he  is  a.  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself
2  Tim.  1.  12.  he  is  a.  to  keep  that  I  have  committed
3.  7-  never  a.  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  truth

15.  holy  scriptures  a.  to  make  wise  to  salvation
Deb.  2. 18.  he  is  a.  to  succour  them  1  hat  are  tempted
5.  7-  to  him  that  was  a.  to  save  him  from  death

7 . 25.  he  is  a.  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  thaf  come
11.  19.  accounting  thatGod  was  a.  to  raise  him  up
Jam.  1.  21.  the  word  which  is  a.  to  save  your  souls

3.  2.  is  a.  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body

4.  12.  there  is  one  lawgiver  a.  to  save  and  to  destroy
Jude  24.  to  him  that  is  a.  to  keep  you  from  falling
Pev.  5.  3.  no  man  was  a.  to  open  the  book  nor  look

13.  4.  who  is  a.  to  make  war  with  the  beast  ?

15.  8.  no  man  was  a.  to  enter  into  the  temple

Be  ABLE.

Lev.  25.  26.  and  himself  be  a.  to  redeem  it
Josh.  1 .  5.  not  any  man  be  a.  to  stand  before  thee
Deut.  7.24.  there  shall  no  man  be  a.  to  stand,  11.25.

14.  12.  if  the  Lord  be  with  me  I  shall  be  a.  to  drive
1  Sam.  17. 9.  if  he  be  a  to  fight  with  me  and  kill  me

1  ChronA®.  14.  that  we  should  be  a  to  offer  willingly

2  Chron.  32. 14.  that  your  God  should  be  a.  to  deliver
Isa.  47.  12.  if  so  be  thou  shalt  be  a.  to  profit
Ezek.  33.  12.  nor  shall  the  righteous  be  a.  to  live
Luke  14.  31.  whether  he  be  a.  with  10,000  to  meet
Rom.  8.  39.  be  a.  to  separate  us  from  love  of  God

1  Cor.  10.  13.  that  ye  may  be  a.  to  bear  it

Eph.  3.  18.  may  be  a.  to  comprehend  with  all  saints
6. 11.  that  ye  may  be  a.  to  stand  against  the  devil

16.  faith,  wherewith  ye  sha.ll  a.  to  quench

2  Tim.  2.  2.  who  shall  be  a.  to  teach  ethers  also
Tit.  1.  9.  may  be  a.  by  sound  doctrine  to  exhort
2  Pet.  1.  15.  that  ye  may  be  a.  after  my  decease
P ev.  6. 17 .  wrath  is  come ,  and  who  shall  be  a.  to  stand

Not  be  ABLE.

2  Kings  18.  29.  not  be  a.  to  deliver  you,  Isa.  36. 14.
Psal.  36.  12.  cast  down,  and  shall  not  be  a.  to  rise
Eccl.  8. 17-  yet  shall  he  not  be  a.  to  find  it
Isa.  47. 11.  thou  shalt  not  be  a.  to  put  it  off
Jer.  11. 11  .not  be  a.  to  escape  |1 49. 10.  not  be  a.  to  hide
Ezek.  7. 19.  gold  shall  not  be  a.  to  deliver  them
Luke  13. 24.  seek,  not  be  a.  I|  21. 15.  not  be  a.  to  gainsay
Not  ABLE.

Lev.  5.  7-  and  if  he  be  not  a.  to  bring  a  lamb
Num.  13.  31.  we  be  not  a.  to  go  up  against  the  people
14.  16.  because  the  Lord  was  not  a.  Deut.  9.  28.

2  Chron.  20.  37-  ships  were  not  a.  to  go  to  Tarshish
Ezra  10.  13.  we  are  not  a.  to  stand  without
Neh.  4.  10.  so  that  we  are  not  a.  to  build  the  wall
Psal.  18.  38.  wounded  that  they  were  not  a.  to  rise

21.  11.  device  which  they  are  not  a.  to  perform

1


A  B  O


ABO


ABO


l


Ps.  40.  12.  hold  on  me,  so  that  I  am  not  a.  to  look  up
Amos  7. 10.  the  land  is  not  a.  to  bear  all  his  words
Luke  12.  26.  if  ye  be  not  a.  to  do  that  thing  is  least

14. 29.  laid  foundation,  and  is  not  a.  to  finish
John  21. 6.  they  were  not  a.  to  draw  it  for  the  fishes
Acts  6. 10.  and  they  were  not  a.  to  resist  the  wisdom

ABOARD.

Acts  21. 2.  a  ship  sailing,  we  went  a.  and  set  forth
AB O  D  K,  Sub st a nti ve.

2  Kings  19.  27-  but  I  know  thy  a.  Isa.  37  -  28.

Lsra  9. 1 8.  to  give  us  a  sure  a.  in  his  holy  place  .
John  14. 23.  we  will  come  and  make  our  a.  with  him
ABODE,  Verb.

Gen.  29. 14.  Jacob  a.  with  him  the  space  of  a  month
49. 24.  but  his  bow  a.  in  strength,  and  the  arms
Exod.  24. 16.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  a.  on  Sinai
Num.  9. 17-  where  cloud  a.  Israel  pitched,  18,20.

20.  they  a.  in  their  tents,  and  journeyed,  22.

11.  35.  the  people  journeyed,  and  a.  at  Hazeroth

20.  1.  the  people  a.  in  Kadesh,  Judg.  11.  17.

22.  8.  the  princes  of  Moab,  a.  with  Balaam
Lent.  1.  46-  so  ye  a.  in  Kadesh  many  days

3. 29.  we  a.  in  the  valley  ||  9. 9.  1  a.  in  the  mount
Josh.  5. 8.  they  a.  in  their  places  till  they  were  whole

8. 9.  they  a.  between  Bethel  and  Ai,  but  Joshua
Judg.  5. 17-  Gilead  a.  beyond  Jordan,  Asher  con¬
tinued  on  the  sea  shore,  and  a.  in  his  breaches

19.4.  the  Levite  a.  with  him  three  days

20.  47-  and  a.  in  the  rock  Rimmon  four  months

1  Sam.  1.  23.  the  woman  a.  and  gave  her  son  suck

7. 2.  while  the  ark  a.  in  Kirjath-jearim.  time  long
13. 16.  Saul  and  Jonathan  a.  in  Gibeah

22. 6.  Saul  a.  ||  23.  14.  David  a.  25.  |  26.  3.

23. 18.  David  a.  in  wood  ||  2  Sam.  1. 1.  a.  at  Ziklag

2  Sam.  11.  12.'  Uriah  a.  in  Jerusalem  that  day

15.  8.  servau1  vowed  while  I  a.  at  Geshur

1  Kings  17.  19.  he  carried  him  to  a  loft  where  he  a.
Jer.  38.  28.  Jeremiah  a.  in  the  court  of  the  prison
Mat.  17.  22.  and  while  they  a.  in  Galilee,  Jesus  said
Luke  1.  56.  Mary  a.  with  her  about  three  months
8. 27.  nor  a.  in  any  house,  but  in  the  tombs
John  1.  32.  I  saw  the  Spirit,  and  it  a.  upon  him
39.  they  came  and  a.  with  him  that  day

7.  9.  when  he  said  these  words  he  a.  in  Galilee

8.  44.  he  was  a  murderer,  and  a.  not  in  the  truth

11.6.  he  a.  two  days  still  in  the  place  where  he  was
Acts  1. 13.  an  upper  room  where  a.  Peter  and  James

14.  3.  long  time  a.  they  speaking  boldly  in  the
18.  3.  Paul  a.  with  them  and  wrought

21.  7-  we  came  and  a.  with  the  brethren  one  day
8.  we  entered  the  house  of  Philip  anil  a.  with  him

Gal.  1. 18.  I  went  and  a.  with  Peter  fifteen  days
ABODE  there ,  or  there  ABODE.

Dent.  1.  46.  according  to  the  days  that  ye  a.  there
Josh.  2.  22.  came  to  mountain,  and  a.  there  3  days
Judg.  21.  2.  the  people  a.  there  till  even  before  God
Esra  8. 15.  and  there  a.  we  in  tents  three  days
32.  we  came  to  Jerusalem  and  a.  there  three  days
John  4.  40.  and  Jesus  a.  there  two  days

10.  40.  where  John  at  first  baptized,  and  there  a.
Acts  VI.  19.  Herod  went  to  Caesarea,  and  there  a.
14.  28.  there  they  a.  long  time  with  the  disciples

17. 14.  Silas  and  1  imotneus  a.  there  still
ABODEST.

Judg.  5. 16.  why  a.  thou  among  the  sheepfolds  ?
ABOLISH


Signifies,  [1]  To  do  away ,  or  make  void,  2  Cor.  3.
13.  Ephes.  2.  15.  [2]  To  destroy,  Isa.  2.  18.

2  Tim.  1.  10.

Isa.  2.  18.  and  the  idols  he  shall  utterly  a.
ABOLISHED.

Isa.  51.  6.  and  my  righteousness  shall  not  be  a.
Ezek.  6.  6.  and  your  works  may  be  a.

2  Cor.  3.  13.  not  look  to  the  end  of  that  which  is  a.
E%h.  2. 15.  having  a.  in  his  tiesh  the  enmity
2  Tim.  1. 10.  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  a.  death
ABOMINABLE.

Lev.  1. 21.  that  shall  touch  any  a.  unclean  thing
11.43.  ye  shall  not  make  yourselves  a.  with  any

18.  30.  commit  not  any  of  these  a.  customs

19.  7-  if  it  be  eaten  on  the  third  day,  it  is  a.

20.  25.  ye  shall  not  make  your  souls  a.  by  beast
Deut.  14.  3.  thou  shalt  not  eat  any  a.  thing

1  Chron.  21.  6.  for  the  king's  word  was  a.  to  Joab
Chron.  15.8.  Asa  put  away  the  a.  idols  from  Judah
Job  15. 16.  how  much  more  a.  and  filthy  is  man
Psal.  14. 1.  are  corrupt,  they  have  done  a.  works
53. 1.  corrupt  are  they ,  and  have  done  a.  iniquity
Isa.  14.  19.  thou  art  cast  out  like  an  a.  branch
65.  4.  and  broth  of  a.  things  is  in  their  vessels
Jer.  16.  18.  filled  with  carcases  of  their  a.  things
44.  4.  O,  do  not  this  a.  thing  that  I  hate
Ezek.  4.  14.  nor  came  a.  flesh  into  my  mouth
8.  10.  1  saw  and  behold  a.  beasts  and  idols
16.  52.  thy  sins  committed  more  a.  than  they
Mic.  6.  10.  and  the  scant  measure  that  is  a.

Nah.  3.  6.  and  l  will  cast  a.  filth  on  thee
Tit.  1.  16.  but  in  works  deny  him,  being  a.

1 Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  a.  idolatries
Lev.  21.  8.  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and  the  a.
ABOMINABLY.

1  Kings  21 . 26.  Ahab  did  very  a.  in  following  idols
ABOMINATION

[1]  A  thing  hateful  and  detestable,  Gen.
Prov.  29.  27.  [2]  Sin  in  general,  Isa.
Ezek.  16.  5  >.  [3]  An  idol,  2  Kings

Isa.  44.  19.  [’4]  The  Homan  army

that  destroyed  the  temple  and  Jewish  polity ,  Mat.
24.15.  [5]  Evil  doctrines  and  practices.  He  '.  17.4.
Gen.  43.  32.  tor  that  is  an  a.  to  the  Egyptians
46.  34.  every  shepherd  is  an  a.  to  the  Egyptians
Exod.  8.  26.  for  we  shall  sacrifice  the  a.  of  Egyptians
Lev.  7. 18.  it  shall  be  an  a.  11.  41,  42.

11. 10.  they  shall  be  an  a.  to  you,  12,  20,  23.

18.  22.  as  with  womankind  it  is  a.  20.  13.

Deut.  7.  25.  it  is  a.  to  the  Lord  thy  God,  17. 1.

26.  nor  shalt  thou  bring  an  a.  into  thy  house

12.  31.  every  a.  they  have  done  to  their  gods

13.  14.  that  such  a.  is  wrought  among  you,  17.  4.
18. 12.  all  that  do  these  things  are  an  a.  22.  5.

23. 18.  both  these  are  an  a.  to  the  Lord  thy  God
24.  4.  for  that  is  an  a.  before  the  I.ord.

2


Signifies,
43.  32.
66.  3.

23.  13.


Deut.  25. 16.  all  that  do  unrighteously  are  a.  to  God

27.  15.  cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  a.  to  Lord
1  Sam.  13.  4.  Israel  was  had  in  a.  with  Philistines

1  Kings  11.  5.  Milcom  the  a.  of  Ammonites,  7.

7.  an  high  place  for  Chemosh  the  a.  of  Moab

2  Kings  23.  13.  Ashtaroth  the  a.  of  the  Zidonians
Psal.  88.  8.  thou  hast  made  me  an  a.  to  them
Prov.  3.  32.  the  froward  is  an  a.  to  the  Lord

6.  16.  yea,  seven  tlyngs  are  an  a.  to  him

8.  7.  speak  truth,  wickedness  is  an  a.  to  my  lips

11.  It  a  false  balance  is  an  a.  to  the  Lord

20.  they  of  a  froward  heart  are  an  a.  to  the  Lord

12.  22.  lying  lips  are  a.  to  the  Lord

13.  19.  it  is  an  a.  to  fools  to  depart  from  evil

15.  8.  the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  a.  21.  27-

9.  the  way  of  the  wicked  is  an  a.  to  the  Lord

26.  thoughts  of  the  wicked  are  an  a.  to  the  Lord

16.  5.  every  one  that  is  proud  in  heart  is  an  a.

12.  it  is  an  a.  to  kings  to  commit  wickedness

17.  15.  they  both  are  an  a.  to  the  Lord

20.  10.  both  of  them  are  alike  a.  to  the  Lord
23.  divers  weights  are  an  a.  to  the  Lord

24.  9.  and  the  scomer  is  an  a.  to  men

28.  9-  even  his  prayer  shall  be  a.

29.  27.  an  unjust  man  is  an  a.  to  the  just,  and  he

that  is  upright  in  the  way,  is  a.  to  the  wicked
Isa.  1.  13.  incense  is  an  a.  to  me,  the  new-moons
41.  24.  an  a.  is  he  that  chooseth  you
44.  19.  shall  I  make  the  residue  thereof  an  a  f
66.  17.  eating  swine’s  flesh,  and  the  a.  and  mouse
Jer.  2-7-  ye  entered,  ye  made  my  heritage  an  a.

6.  15.  ashamed  when  they  committed  a.  8.  12.

32.  35.  that  they  should  do  this  a.  to  cause  Judah
Ezek.  16.  50.  they  were  haughty  and  committed  a.

18.  12.  lift  up  his  eyes  to  idols  and  committed  a.
52. 11.  committed  a.  with  his  neighbour's  wife

33.  26.  ye  stand  on  your  sword  and  ye  work  a.
Dan.  11.  31.  shall  place  the  a.  that  maketh  desolate

12.  11.  and  the  a.  that  maketh  desolate  setup
Mai.  2. 11.  an  a.  is  committed  in  Israel  and  Jerus.
Mat.  24. 15.  ye  see  a.  of  desolation,  Mark  13. 14Y
Luke  16.  15.  esteemed  among  men  is  a.  with  God
Rev.  21.  27.  shall  in  no  wise  enter  that  worketh  a.
ABOMINATIONS.

Deut.  18.  9.  not  learn  to  do  after  the  a.  of  nations

32.  16.  with  a.  provoked  they  him  to  anger

1  Kings  14.  24.  did  according  to  all  a.  of  nations

2  Kings  16.  3.  thro’  fire  according  to  a.  2  Chr.  28.  3.

21.  2.  Manasseh  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

after  the  a.  of  the  heathen,  2  Chron.  33.  2.
23.  24.  a.  spied  did  Josiah  put  away,  2  Chr.  34.  33.
2  Chron.  36.  8.  acts  of  Jehoiakim  and  his  a.  he  did

14.  people  transgressed  after  all  a.  of  the  heathen
Prov.  26.  25.  for  there  are  seven  a.  in  his  heart
Jer.  44.  22.  the  Lord  could  not  bear  for  the  a.
Ezek.  6. 11.  alas  for  all  the  evil  a.  of  house  of  Israel

8.  6.  seest  thou  the  great  a.  of  Israel,  but  turn  thee

yet  again,  ana  thou  shalt  see  greater  a.  13, 15.
9.  beholdThe  wicked  a.  that  they  do  here
17-  is  it  a  light  thing  to  commit  a.  here  ?

9.  4.  that  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  a.  that  be  done
11.  18.  take  away  all  the  a.  thereof  from  thence

14.  6.  turn  away  your  faces  from  all  your  a.

16.  2.  son  of  man,  cause  Jerusalem  to  know  her  a.
18.  24.  when  the  righteous  doth  according  to  all  a.
20.  4.  cause  them  to  know  the  a.  of  their  fathers
7-  cast  ye  away  every  man  the  a.  of  his  eyes

8.  they  did  not  cast  away  the  a.  of  their  eyes

22.  2.  yea,  thou  shalt  shew  her  all  her  a.

36.  31.  and  shall  lothe  yourselves  for  all  your  a.
44.  6.  O  Israel,  let  it  suffice  you  of  all  your  a.

7*  they  have  broken  my  covenant  for  all  your  a.
Dan.  9.  27.  and  for  the  overspreading  of  a.

Zech.  9.  7-  will  take  his  a.  from  between  his  teeth
Rev.  17-  4.  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand  full  of  a.

5.  the  mother  of  harlots  and  a.  of  the  eartn
Their  ABOMINATIONS.

Deut.  20.  18.  teach  you  not  to  do  after  all  their  a.
29.  17-  and  ye  have  seen  their  a.  and  their  idols
Ezra  9..1.  the  people  doing  according  to  their  a.

11.  with  their  a.  which  have  filled  the  land
Isa.  66.  3.  and  their  soul  delighteth  in  their  a.

Jer.  7.30.  have  set  their  a.  in  the  house  called,  32. 34.
Ezek.  6.  9.  for  the  evils  committed  in  all  their  a.

7-  20.  but  they  made  the  images  of  their  a.

11.  21.  whose  heart  walketh  after  their  a.

12.  16.  that  they  may  declare  all  their  a.

16.  47.  yet  hast  thou  not  done  after  their  a.

20.  30.  and  commit  ye  whoredom  after  their  a.

23.  36.  yea,  declare  to  them  their  a.

33.  29.  the  land  desolate  because  of  all  their  a.

43.  8.  they  have  defiled  my  holy  name  by  their  a.

44.  13.  they  shall  hear  their  shame  and  their  a.
Hos.  9. 10.  their  a.  were  according  as  they  loved

These  ABOMINATIONS.

Lev.  18.  26.  ye  shall  not  commit  any  of  these  a.

27.  all  these  a.  have  the  men  of  the  land  done
29.  whosoever  shall  commit  any  of  these  a.

Deut.  18. 12.  because  of  these  a.  the  Lord  hathdriven
2  Kings  21. 11.  Manasseh  hath  done  these  a.

Ezra  9.  14.  join  in  affinity  with  people  of  these  a.
Jer.  7.  10.  we  are  delivered  to  do  all  these  a.

Ezek.  18. 13.  he  hath  done  all  these  a.  shall  surely  die
Thine  or  thy  ABOMINATIONS.

Jer.  4.  1.  if  thou  wilt  put  away  thine  a.  out  of  sight

13.  27.  I  have  seen  thine  a.  on  the  hills

Ezek.  5.  9.  do  what  I  have  not,  because  of  thine  a.
11.  thou  hast  defiled  my  sanctuary  with  thy  a.

7.  3.  I  will  recompense  on  thee  all  thine  a.  4,8,  9.
16.  22.  in  all  thine  a.  thou  hast  not  remembered

36.  with  all  the  idols  of  thine  a.  and  by  the  blood
43.  not  commit  this  lewdness  above  all  thine  a.
51.  hast  multi  plied  t  '<  ine  a.  more  than  they
58.  thou  hast  borne  thine  a.  saith  the  Lord
ABOVE

Signifies,  [1  Aloft,  high,  Gen.  6.  16.  Prov.  8.  28.
[2]  The  dignity  or  excellency  of  a  pe,son  or
thing,  Psal.  113.  4.  Mat.  10.  24.  [3]  Beyond,
2  Cor.  1.  8.  [4]  More  than,  Gen.  3.  14.  |  48.

22.  [5]  Upwards,  Exod.  30.  14.  Lev.  27.  7.
[6]  An  higher  state  or  rank,  Num.  16.  3.  [7]
Chief  in  authority  and  power,  Deut  28.  1.3.  [8]


Heaven,  or  the  highest  place,  Job  3.  4.  Rom.  10.
6.  [9]  Heavenly  and  spiritual.  Gal.  4.  26.  [10]'
Things  that  relate  to  heaven.  Gal.  4. 26.  Col.  3. 1.
[11]  God,  Jam.  1.  17.

Gen.  1.  7.  from  the  waters  a.  the  firmament
20.  and  fowl  that  may  fly  a.  the  earth
3.  14.  the  serpent  cursed  a.  all  cattle, «.  beast

6.  16.  in  a  cubit  shalt  thou  finish  the  arn  a.

7.  17.  and  the  ark  was  lifted  up  a.  the  earth

48.  22.  given  thee  one  portion  a.  thy  brethren

49.  26.  prevailed  a.  the  blessings  of  my  progenitors
Exod.  25.  22. 1  will  commune  from  a.  tne  mercy -seat

28.  27.  a.  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod,28.

30. 14.  are  numbered  from  twenty  years  old  and  a.
Lev.  11.21.  which  have  legs  a.  their  feet  to  leap

27.  7*  and  if  it  be  from  sixty  years  old  and  a.
Num.  16. 3.  lift  up  yourselves  a.  the  congregation
Deut.  17.  20.  heart  be  not  lifted  up  a.  his  brethren

25.  3.  lest  if  he  should  beat  him  a.  these

28. 13.  thou  shalt  be  a.  only,  and  not  be  beneath

30. 5.  do  thee  good  and  multiply  thee  a.  thy  fathers
Josh.  3. 13.  the  waters  that  come  down  from  a.  16.
Judg.  5. 24.  blessed  shall  she  be  a.  women  in  the  tent
2  Sam.  22. 17 .  he  sent  from  a.  Psal.  18.  16.

1  Kings  8. 7-  cherubims  covered  ark  a.  2  Chr.  5.  8.

2  Kings  25.  28.  a.  the  throne  of  kings,  Jer.  52.  32.

1  Chron.  5.  2.  for  Judah  prevailed  a.  his  brethren

23. 27.  for  the  Leviteswere  numbered  from  twenty
years  old  and  a.  Exod.  30.  14.

27. 6.  Benaiah  was  mighty  and  a.  the  thirty
Neh.  7.  2.  Hananiah  feared  God  a.  many

12.  37.  they  went  up  a.  the  house  of  David
Job  3.  4.  let  not  God  regard  it  from  a.

18.  16.  and  a.  shall  his  branch  be  cut  off

28. 18.  for  the  price  of  wisdom  is  a.  rubies

31.  2.  for  what  portion  of  God  is  there  from  a.  ?
28.  for  I  should  have  denied  the  God  that  is  a.
Psal.  10.  5.  thy  judgments  are  a.  out  of  his  sight

18.  48.  thou  liftestme  a.  those  that  rise  up

27.6.  now  shall  rriy  head  be  lifted  up  a.  enemies
45. 7-  the  oil  of  gladness  a.  thy  fellows,  Heb.  1.  9
78.  23.  though  he  commanded  the  clouds  from  a.
119.  127.  I  love  thy  commandments  a.  gold

136.  6.  that  stretched  out  the  earth  a.  the  waters

137. 6.  if  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  a.  my  chief  joy
144.  7.  send  thine  hand  from  a.  rid  me,  deliver  me
148.  13.  his  glory  is  a.  the  earth  and  heaven

Prov.  8.  28.  when  he  established  the  clouds  a.

15.  24.  the  way  of  life  is  a.  to  the  wise
31.  10.  for  her  price  is  far  a.  rubies
Eccl.  3. 19.  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  a.  a  beast
Isa.  2-  2.  mountains  shall  be  exalted  a.  the  hills
6.  2.  a.  it  stood  the  seraphims,  each  had  six  wings
7. 11.  ask  it  either  in  the  depth  or  in  the  height  a.
Jer.  15. 8.  their  widows  increased  a.  sand  of  the  seas
Lam.  1. 13.  from  a.  hath  he  sent  fire  into  my  bones
Ezek.  1.  26.  as  appearance  of  a  man  a.  upon  it

10. 19.  the  glory  of  God  was  over  them  a.  11. 22.

29. 15.  nor  exalt  itself  any  more  a.  the  nations
Dan.  6.  3.  Daniel  was  preferred  a.  the  presidents,

11.  36.  the  king  magnify  himself  a.  every  god
Amos  2.  9.  yet  I  destroyed  his  fruit  from  a.

Nah.  3. 16.  nastmultiplied  thy  merchants  a.  the  stara
Mat.  10.  24  disciple  not  a.  his  master,  Luke  6. 40.
John  3.  +  3.  except  a  man  be  born  from  a.  7.

6.  13.  baskets  which  remained  over  and  a.

8.  23.  I  am  from  a.  ye  are  of  this  world

19.  11.  except  it  were  given  him  from  a.

Acts  4.  22.  for  the  man  was  a.  forty  years  old

26.  13.  1  saw  a  light  a.  the  brightness  of  the  sub
Rom.  10.  6.  that  is  to  bring  Christ  down  from  a.

14. 5.  one  man  esteemeth  one  day  a.  another

1  Cor.  4.  6.  not  to  think  of  men  a.  what  is  written

10.  13.  you  to  be  tempted  a.  that  ye  are  able

15.  6.  he  was  seen  of  a.  500  brethren  at  once

2  Cor.  1. 8.  were  pressed  out  of  measure  a.  strength

11.  23.  I  am  more,  in  stripes  a.  measure

12. 2.  a.  fourteen  years  ago,  whether  in  body  or  out
6.  lest  any  man  should  think  of  me  a.  that

Gal.  4.  26.  but  Jerusalem  which  is  a.  is  free
Phil.  2.  9.  and  given  him  a  name  a.  every  name
Col.  3.  1.  seek  those  things  which  are  a.

2.  set  your  affection  on  things  a.  not  on  earth
Philem.  16.  not  now  as  a  servant,  but  a.  a  servant
Heb.  10.8.  a.  when  he  said,  sacrifice  and  offering:
Jam.  1. 17.  every  good  and  perfect  gift  is  from  a.

3. 15.  this  wisdom  descendeth  not  from  a.

ABOVE  all.

Gen.  3.  14.  the  serpent  is  cursed  a.  all  cattle
Num.  12. 3.  Moses  was  very  meek  a.  all  the  men.
Deut.  7.  14.  thou  shalt  be  blessed  a.  all  peqple

10. 15.  he  chose  you  a.  all  people,  as  it  is  this  day

14. 2.  chosen  thee  a.  all  the  nations,  26. 19. 1 28. 1.

1  Kings  14.  9.  done  evil  a.  all  that  were  before  thee
22.  provoked  a.  all  that  their  fathers  had  done

16.  30.  Ahab  did  evil  a.  all  that  were  before  him

2  Kings  21. 11 .  done  wickedly  a.  a  7  the  Amontes  did’

1  Chron.  29.  3.  over  and  a.  all  I  have  prepared
11.  and  thou  art  exalted  as  head  a.  all

2  Chron.  11.21.  he  loved  Maacah  a.  a// his  wives
Neh.  8.5.  for  Ezra  was  a.  a/l  the  people
Esth.  2.  17-  king  loved  Esther  a.  all  the  women
Psal.  97.  9.  thou,  Lord  art  high  a.  all  the  earth
99.  2.  he  is  high  a.  all  people,  113.  4.

138.  2.  magnified  thy  word  a.  all  thy  name
Prov.  4.  +  23.  keep  thy  heart  a.  all  keeping
Eccl.  2  7 •  a-  all  that  were  in  Jerusalem  before  nae-
Jer.  17.  9.  the  heart  is  deceitful  a.  all  things
Ezek.  16.  43.  not  commit  this  lewdness  a.  all
31.  5.  his  height  was  exalted  a.  all  the  trees
Dan.  11.  37.  for  he  shall  magnify  himself  a.  all
Luke  3.  20.  Herod  added  yetthis  a.  all.

13.  2.  these  sinners  a.  all  the  Galileans,  4.

John  3.  31.  he  that  cometh  from  heaven  is  a.  all
Eph.  1.  21.  far  a.  all  principality  and  power

3.  20.  a.  all  that  we  ask  ||  4.  6.  one  God  a.  all
6.  16.  a.  all  taking  the  shield  of  faith  to  quench
Col.  3.  14.  a.  all  these  things  put  on  charity

2  The'S.  2.  4.  exalteth  a.  all  that  is  called  God
Jam.  5. 12.  a.  all  things,  my  brethren,  swear  n«M
1  Pet.  4.  8.  a.  all  things  have  fervent  charity

3  John  2.  1  wish  a.  all  things  that  thou  pruioel


ABS


ABU


ACC


A  bov  e  all  Gods  ;  see  Gods.  Above  heaven;  see
Heaven.  *S?<WAbove  ;  see  Stood.  Above,
me,  him,  them  ;  see  him,  me,  them.
ABOUND.

Prov.  28. 20.  the  faithful  man  shall  a.  with  blessings
Isa.  2.  t  6.  they  a.  with  the  children  of  strangers
Mat.  24.  12.  because  iniquity  shall  a.  love  or  many
Rom.  5. 20.  the  law  entered  that  the  offence  might  a.
6. 1.  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  a.  ?
15.  13.  that  ye  may  a.  in  hope  through  the  power
2  Cor.  1.  5.  as  sufferings  a.  so  consolation  abounds

8.  7.  as  ye  a.  in  every  thing,  see  that  ye  a.

9. 8.  Goa  is  able  to  make  all  grace  a.  to  you
Phil.  1.  Q.  1  pray  that  your  love  may  a.  more
4. 12.  I  know  how  to  a.  both  to  a.  and  suffer

17.  but  I  desire  fruit  that  may  a.  to  your  account

18.  but  I  have  all  and  a.  I  am  full

1  Thess.  3.  12.  Lord  make  you  to  a.  in  love  one

4.  1.  so  ye  would  a.  more  and  more

2  Pet.  1. 8.  for  if  these  things  be  in  you  and  a.

ABOUNDED,  ETH,  ING.

Prov.  8.  24.  when  no  fountains  a.  with  water
29. 22.  and  a  furious  man  a.  in  transgression
Rom.  3.  7-  for  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  more  a.

5.  15.  grace  by  Jesus  Christ  hath  a.  to  many

20.  but  where  sin  a.  grace  did  much  more  a.

1  Cor.  15.  58.  always  a.  in  the  work  of  the  Lord

2  Cor.  8. 2.  deep  poverty  a.  to  the  riches  of  liberality
Eph.  1.  8.  wherein  he  hath  a.  toward  us  in  wisdom
Col.  2.  7.  a.  therein  with  thanksgiving

2  Thess.  1.  3.  the  charity  towards  each  other  a.

„  ABOUT.

Gen.  38.  24.  a.  three  months  after  was  told  Judah

41.  25.  God  shewed  Pharaoh  what  he  is  a.  to  do

42.  24.  he  turned  himself  a.  from  them  and  wept
46.  34.  thy  servant’s  trade  hath  been  a.  cattle
Ezod.  11.  4.  a.  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  Egypt

13. 18.  God  led  the  people  a.  through  the  way

19.  23.  set  bounds  a.  the  mount,  and  sanctify  it
32.  28.  there  fell  that  day  a.  3000  men

Lev.  6.  5.  all  that  a.  which  he  hath  sworn  falsely
Num.  16.  24.  from  a.  the  tabernacle  of  Korah
Dent.  32.  10.  he  led  him  a.  and  instructed  him
Josh.  10.  13.  sun  hasted  not  to  go  down  a.  a  day
Judg.  17.  2.  the  silver  a.  which  thou  cursedst
Ruth  2.  17.  and  it  was  a.  an  ephah  of  barley

1  1.  20.  when  the  time  was  come  a.  Hannah
5.  8.  let  the  ark  of  God  be  carried  a.  to  Gath

9.  26.  it  came  to  pass,  a.  the  spring  of  the  day

21.  5.  women  have  been  kept  from  us  a.  three  days

2  Sam.  14.  20.  to  fetch  a.  this  form  of  speech

1  Kings  2. 15.  the  kingdom  is  turned  a.  and  become
22  36.  a.  going  down  of  the  sun,  2  Ckron.  18.  34.

2  Kings  4.  16.  a.  this  season  according  to  the  time
2  Chrvn.  2.  9.  the  house  which  I  am  a.  to  build
Ezra  10. 15.  were  employed  a.  this  matter

Job  20.  23.  when  he  is  a.  to  fill  his  belly
Prov.  3.  3.  bind  them  a.  thy  neck, 6. 21.

20. 19.  he  that  goeth  a.  as  a  tale-bearer

Cant.  7.  2.  like  a  heap  of  wheat  set  a.  with  lilies
Isa.  5.  t  2.  built  a  tower,  and  made  a  wall  a.  it
50. 11.  that  compass  yourselves  a.  with  sparks
Jer.  2.  36.  why  gaddest  thou  a.  so  much  to  change
31.  22.  how  long  wilt  thou  go  a.  O  thou
41. 14.  all  the  people  cast  a.  and  returned
Los.  7.  2.  now  their  own  doings  have  beset  them  a.
Mat.  20.  3.  he  went  out  a.  the  third  hour
Mark  2.  2.  no,  not  so  much  as  a.  the  door

12.  1.  set  an  hedge  a.  it,  and  digged  a  place
Luke  2.  49.  I  must  be  a.  my  Father’s  business

3.  23.  Jesus  began  to  be  a.  thirty  years  of  age
12.  35.  let  your  loins  be  girded  a.  and  lights

John  3.  25.  there  arose  a  question,  a.  purifying

7. 19.  why  go  ye  a.  to  kill  me  ?

Acts 4.  4.  the  number  of  the  men  was  a.  5000
18.  14.  and  when  Paul  was  a.  to  open  his  mouth
27.  30.  as  they  were  a.  to  flee  out  of  the  ship
Rom.  4.  19.  wnen  he  was  a.  100  years  old

10.  3.  going  a.  to  establish  their  own  righteousness

1  Cor.  9.  5.  have  we  not  power  to  lead  a.  a  sister

2  Cor.  4. 10.  always  bearing  a.  in  the  body  the  dying
Eph.  6.  14.  having  your  loins  girt  a.  with  truth

1  Tim.  5.  13.  wandering  a.  from  house  to  house
Leb.  8. 5.  when  be  was  a.  to  make  the  tabernacle
Rev.  8.  1.  silence  a.  the  space  ofhalfanhour

10.  4. 1  was  a.  to  write,  and  I  heard  a  voice
See  Gone,  him,  me,  thee,  them,  round,

STOOD,  THIS,  TIME,  WENT.

ABROAD.

Ezod.  12.  46.  shalt  not  carry  ought  of  the  flesh  a
Lev.  13.  12.  and  if  a  leprosy  break  out  a.  in  the  skin
18.  9.  whether  she  be  Dorn  at  home  or  a.

Deut.  23. 10.  then  shall  he  go  a.  out  of  the  camp

13.  when  thou  wilt  ease  tnyselfa.  shalt  dig
Judg.  12.  9.  took  daughters  from  a.  for  his  sons

2  Kings  4.  3.  go,  borrow  thee  vessels  a.  of  neigh¬

bours

€  Chron.  29.  16.  Levites  took  it  to  carry  it  out  a.

31.  5.  as  soon  as  the  commandment  came  a.

Esth.  1.  17.  this  deed  of  the  queen  shall  come  a.
Job  15.  23.  he  wandereth  a.  for  bread,  saying
Psal.  41.  6.  when  he  goeth  a.  he  telleth  it
Prov.  5. 16.  let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  a.

Isa.  44.  24.  that  spreadeth  a.  the  earth  by  myself
Jer.  6.  11.  I  will  pour  it  out  on  the  children  a.
Lam.  1.  20.  a.  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  home  death
Mark  1.  45.  he  began  to  blaze  a.  the  matter.

4.  22.  nor  kept  secret,  but  that  it  should  come  a.
Luke  1.65.  these  sayings  were  noised  a.  through¬
out  all  the  hill-country  of  Judea

2.  17.  made  known  a.  the  saying  about  this  child
Acts 2.  6.  when  this  was  noised  a.  the  multitude
■Rom. 5.  5.  the  love  of  God  is  shed  a.  in  our  hearts

16. 19.  for  your  obedience  is  come  a.  to  all  men
See  Cast,  spread,  stand,  scatter,  went.

ABSENCE.  .

Luke  22.  6.  to  betray  him  in  a.  of  the  multitude
Phil,  2.  12.  but  now  much  more  in  my  a.  work  out
ABSENT.

Gen.  31.  49.  when  we  are  a.  one  from  another
1  Cor.  5.  3.  for  I  verily  as  a.  in  body,  but  present  in
*2  Cor.  5.  6.  at  home  in  body  are  a  from  the  Lord


2  Cor.  5. 8.  willing  rather  to  be  a.  from  the  body,  pre-

9.  whether  present  or  a.  we  may  be  accepted  [sent

10.  1.  but  being  a.  am  bold  toward  you

11.  as  we  are  by  letters  when  we  are  a.  such  will
13.  2.  and  being  a.  now  I  write  to  them,  10.

Phil.  1.  27.  whether  I  come,  or  else  be  a.

Col.  2.5.  for  tho’  I  be  a.  in  the  flesh,  yet  ain  I  with
ABSTAIN.

Acts  15.  20.  that  they  a.  from  pollutions  of  idols
29.  that  ye  a.  from  meats  offered  to  idols
1  Thess.  4.  3.  that  ye  should  a.  from  fornication

5.  22.  a.  from  all  appearance  of  evil
1  Tim.  4.  3.  commanding  to  a.  from  meats
1  Pet.  2. 11.  a.  from  fleshly  lusts  which  war  against
ABSTINENCE.

Acts  27. 21.  after  long  a.  Paul  stood  forth  in  midst
ABUNDANCE.

Deut.  28. 47.  thou  servedst  not  God  for  the  a.  of  all
33.  19.  they  shall  suck  of  the  a.  of  the  seas
1  Sam.  1.  16.  out  of  the  a.  of  my  complaint

1  Kings  10.  10.  came  no  more  such  a.  of  spices
27.  as  the  sycamore-trees  for  a.  2  Chron.  1.  15.

18.  41.  for  there  is  a  sound  of  a.  of  rain

2  Chron.  9.  9.  she  gave  the  king  of  spices  great  a.
Job  22. 11.  and  a.  of  waters  cover  thee,  38.  34.

Psal.  72.  7.  in  his  days  shall  be  a.  of  peace
Eccl.  5. 10.  nor  he  that  loveth  a.  with  increase

12.  the  a.  of  the  rich  will  not  suffer  him  to  sleep
Isa.  7.  22.  for  a.  of  milk  he  shall  eat  butter

15.  7*  therefore  the  a.  they  have  gotten
47.  9.  for  the  great  a.  of  thy  enchantments
60.  5.  the  a.  of  the  sea  shall  be  converted  to  thee
66.  11.  be  delighted  with  the  a.  of  her  glory
Jer.  33.  6.  I  will  reveal  to  them  a.  of  peace
Ezek.  16.  49.  a.  of  idleness  was  in  her  and  daughters
26.  10.  by  reason  of  the  a.  of  his  horses
Zech.  14. 14.  gold,  silver,  and  apparel  in  great  a.
Mat.  12.  34.  out  of  the  a.  of  the  heart,  Luke  6.  45.
13. 12.  and  he  shall  have  more  a.  25.  29.

Mark  12.  44.  they  cast  in  of  their  a.  Luke  21.  4.
Rom.  5.  if.  more  they  which  receive  a.  of  grace
2  Cor.  8.  2.  the  a.  of  their  joy  abounded  to  the  riches

14.  your  a.  a  supply,  their  a.  a  supply  for  want
12.  7.  be  exalted  through  the  a.  of  the  revelations

Rev.  18.  3.  waxed  rich  through  a.  of  her  delicacies
In  ABUNDANCE.

2  Sam.  12.  30.  David  brought  spoil  of  the  city  in  a.
1  Kings  1.  19.  Adonijah  hath  slain  oxen  in  a.  25.

1  Chron.  22.  3.  David  prepared  brass  in  a.  14.

4.  also  cedar-trees  in  a.  marble  in  a.  29-  2.

15.  there  are  workmen  with  thee  in  a.  hewers
29.  21.  they  offered  sacrifices  in  a.  for  all  Israel

2  Chron.  2.  9.  even  to  prepare  me  timber  in  a.

4.  18.  Solomon  made  all  these  vessels  in  great  a.
9.  1.  Queen  of  Sheba  brought  gold  in  a.

11.  23.  Rehoboam  gave  his  sons  victuals  in  a.

14. 15.  Asa  carried  away  sheep  and  camels  in  a.
15.  9.  for  they  fell  to  Asa  out  of  Israel  in  a.

17.  5.  all  Judah  brought  presents  to  Jehoshaphat,

and  he  had  riches  and  honour  in  a.  18.  1.

18.  2.  Ahab  killed  sheep  for  Jehoshaphat  in  a.

20.  25.  Jehoshaphat  found  spoil  in  a.

24.  11.  thus  they  gathered  money  in  a.

29.  35.  and  also  the  burnt-offerings  were  in  a.

31.  5.  children  of  Israel  brought  in  a.  first-fruits

32.  5.  Hezekiah  made  darts  and  shields  in  a.

29.  he  provided  him  cities  and  possessions  in  a.

Neh.  9.  25.  they  took  vineyards  and  fruit-trees  in  a.
Esth.  1.  7.  they  gave  them  royal  wine  in  a.

Job  36.  31.  he  giveth  meat  in  a.

Psal.  37.  11.  delight  themselves  in  a.  of  peace
52.  7.  but  trusted  in  the  a.  of  his  riches
105.  30.  the  land  brought  forth  frogs  in  a.

Luke  12.  15.  man’s  life  consisteth  not  in  a.

2  Cor.  8.  20.  that  no  man  blame  us  in  this  a.
ABUNDANT.

Ezod.  34.  6.  Lord  God  a.  in  goodness  and  truth
Prov.  12. +  26.  the  righteous  more  a.  than  neighbour
Isa.  56.  12.  shall  be  as  this  day  and  much  more  a.
Jer.  51.  13.  O  thou  Babylon,  a.  in  treasures

1  Cor.  12.  23.  on  these  we  bestow  more  a.  honour
24.  having  given  more  a.  honour  to  that  part

2  Cor.  4.  15.  that  the  a.  grace  might  redound

7.  15.  his  inward  affection  is  more  a.  toward  you
9.  12.  for  the  administration  is  a.  by  many

1 1 .  23.  in  labours  more  a.  in  stripes  above  measure
Phil.  1.  26.  that  your  rejoicing  may  be  more  a.

1  Tim.  1. 14.  the  grace  of  our  Lord  was  exceeding  a.
1  Pet.  1.  3.  according  to  his  a.  mercy  hath  begotten
ABUNDANTLY.

Gen.  1.  20.  let  the  waters  bring  forth  a.  21.

8.  17.  that  they  may  breed  a.  in  the  earth

9.  7-  multiply^,  bring  forth  a.  in  the  earth
Ezod.  1.7.  the  children  of  Israel  increased  a.

8.  3.  the  river  shall  bring  forth  frogs  a.

Num.  20. 1 1 .  Moses  smote  and  the  water  came  out  a.

1  Chron.  12.  40.  brought  oil,  oxen,  and  sheep  a.

22.  5.  so  David  prepared  a.  before  his  death

8.  thou  hast  shed  blood  a.  and  made  great  wars

2  Chron.  31.5.  tithe  of  all  things  brought  they  in  a.
Job  12.  6.  into  whose  hand  God  bringeth  a.

36.  28.  the  clouds  drop  and  distil  upon  man  a.
Psal.  36.  8.  they  shall  be  a.  satisfied  with  fatness
65.  10.  thou  waterest  the  ridges  thereof  a.

132.  15.  I  will  a.  bless  her  provision
145.  7.  shall  a.  utter  the  memory  of  thy  goodness
Cant.  5,  1.  O  friends  drink,  yea  drii  k  a.  O  beloved
Isa.  15.  3.  every  one  shall  howl,  weeping  a.

35.  2.  it  shall  blossom  a.  and  rejoice  with  joy

43.  +  24.  nor  hast  thou  a.  moistened  with  the  fat
55.  7-  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  a.  pardon
John  10.  10.  that  they  might  have  life  more  a.

1  Cor.  15.  10.  I  laboured  more  a.  than  they  all

2  Cor.  1.  12.  conversation, and  more  a.  to  you- wards
2.  4.  might  know  the  love  I  have  more  a.  to  you

10.  15.  snail  be  enlarged  according  to  our  rule  a.

12.  15.  though  the  more  a.  1  love  you,  the  less
Eph.  3.  20.  to  him  that  is  able  to  do  exceeding  a.

1  Thess .  2.  17.  endeavoured  more  a.  to  see  your  face
Tit.  3.  6.  which  he  shed  a.  through  Jesus  Christ
Heb.  6.  17.  God  willing  more  a.  to  shew  to  the  heirs

2  Pei.  1. 1 1 .  for  so  an  entrance  be  ministered  to  you  a.


ABUSE,  ED.

Lev.  19.  f  20.  who  lieth  with  a  bond  maid  a.  by  any
Judg.  19.  25.  and  a .  her  all  the  night  till  morning
1  Sam.  31.  4.  lest  uncircumcised  a.  me,  1  Chr.  10.  4.
1  Cor.  9.  18.  that  l  a.  not  my  power  in  the  gospel
ABUSEllS,  ING.

1  Cor.  6.  9.  nor  a.  of  themselves  with  mankind
7.  31.  and  they  that  use  this  world  as  not  a.  it
ACCEPT

Signifies,  [1]  To  receive  favourably ,  Mai.  1. 10, 13.
2  Cor.  11.  4.  [2]  To  take  pleasure  in,  Ezek.  20.

40.  [3]  To  forgive,  Gen.  4.  7.  .Job  42.  9.  [4]
To  respect  partially ,  Job  13.  10.  |  32.  21.  Prov.
18.  5.  [5]  To  be  regarded  or  valued,  2  Cor.  8.  12.

[6]  To  be  beloved  or  highly  esteemed,  Luke  4.  24.

[7]  To  be  received  into  grace  and  favour.  Acts  10.
35.  Eph.  1.  6.

Gen.  32.  20.  peradventure  he  will  a.  of  me
Ezod.  22.  11.  and  the  owner  shall  a.  thereof
Lev.  26.  41.  and  they'  a.  of  the  punishment,  43.
Deut.  33. 11.  bless  and  a.  the  work  of  his  hands

1  Sam.  26.  19.  let  him  a.  an  offering

2  Sam,  24. 23.  Araunah  said.,  the  L.  thy  God  a.  thee
Job  13.  8.  will  ye  a.  his  person  ?  will  ye  contend

10.  will  repr  ove  if  y7e  do  secretly  a.  persons
32.  21.  let  me  not  a.  any  man’s  person
42.8.  Job  shall  pray  for  you,  for  him  will  I  a.
Psal.  20.  3.  and  a.  thy  burnt-sacrifice
82.  2.  and  a.  the  persons  of  the  wicked
119. 108.  a.  I  beseech  thee,  the  free-will-offerings
Prov.  6.  +  35.  not  a.  the  face  of  any  ransom

18.  5.  not  good  to  a.  the  person  of  the  wicked
Jer.  14.  10.  therefore  the  Lord  doth  not  a.  them

12.  when  offer,  I  will  not  a.  them,  Amos  5.  22.
Ezek.  20.  40.  there  will  1  a.  them,  and  require

41.  I  will  a.  you  with  your  sweet  savour
43.  27.  and  1  will  a.  you,  saith  the  Lord

Mai.  1.  8.  will  he  be  pleased  or  a.  thy  person  ?
10.  nor  will  I  a.  an  offering  at  your  hand

13.  should  I  a.  this  of  your  hands  ?

Acts  24.  3.  we  a.  it  always,  and  in  all  places
ACCEP  I  ABLE.

Lev.  22.  20.  for  it  shall  not  be  a.  for  you
Dent.  33.  24.  let  Ashur  be  a.  to  his  brethren
Psal.  19.  14.  let  the  meditation  of  my  heart  be  ♦,
69.  13.  my  prayer  is  to  thee.  O  Lord,  in  an  a.  titru
Prov.  10.  32.  lips  of  the  righteous  know  what  iso.

21.  3.  to  do  justice  and  judgment  is  more  a.

Eccl.  12.  10.  the  preacher  sought  out  a.  words
Isa.  49.  8.  in  an  a.  time  have  1  heard  thee

58.  5.  wilt  thou  call  this  an  a.  day  to  the  Lord  l
61.  2.  to  proclaim  the  a.  yrear  of  the  Lord
Jer.  6.  20.  your  burnt-offerings  are  not  a.

Dan.  4.  27.  O  king,  let  my  counsel  be  a.  to  thee
Luke  4.  19.  to  preach  the  a.  year  of  the  Lord
Rom.  12. 1.  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  hcny ,  a.  to  God
2.  what  is  that  good  and  a.  will  of  God

14.  18.  is  a.  to  God  and  approved  of  men

15.  16.  offering  up  of  the  Gentiles  might  be  a.
Eph.  5. 10.  proving  what  is  a.  unto  the  Lord
Phil.  4. 18.  a  sacrifice  a.  well-pleasing  to  God
1  Tim.  2.  3.  tor  this  is  a.  in  the  sight  of  God

5.  4.  for  that  is  good  and  a.  before  God

1  Pet.  2.  5.  sacrifices  a.  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ
20.  if  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  a.  with  God
ACCEP  1  ABLY.

Heb.  12.  28.  whereby  we  may  serve  God  a.
ACCEPTANCE.

Isa.  60.  7-  they  shall  come  up  with  a.  on  mine  altar
ACCEP  FAT  ION.

1  Tim.  1. 15.  this  is  a  saving  worthy  of  all  <z.  4.  9.
ACCEPTED,

Gen.  4.  7-  if  thou  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  a.

19.  21.  see,  I  have  a.  thee  concerning  this

Ezod.  28.  38.  that  they  may  be  a.  before  the  Lord
Lev.  1.  4.  the  offering  shall*  be  a.  tor  him,  22.  27.

7.  18.  it  shall  not  be  a.  19.  7.  |  22.  23,  25.

10.  19.  should  it  have  been  a.  in  sight  of  the  Lord

22.  21.  an  offering  shall  be  perfect,  to  be  a.

23.  11.  he  shall  wave  the  sheaf  to  be  a.

1  Sam.  18. 5.  he  was  a.  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people
25.  35.  David  said,  see  I  have  a.  thy  person

2  Kings  5.  1 1.  Naaman  was  a.  with  his  master
Esth.  10.  3.  a.  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren
Job  22.  +8.  the  a.  for  countenance  dwelt  in  it

42.  9.  the  Lord  also  a.  Job

Isa.  56.  7-  their  sacrifice  shall  be  a.  on  mine  altar
Jer.  37.  20.  let  my  supplication  be  a.  before  thee
42.  2.  let  our  supplication  be  a.  before  thee
Mai.  2.  f9.  but  ye  have  a.  faces  in  the  law
Luke  1.  +  28.  hail,  thou  that  art  graciously  a.

4.  24.  no  prophet  is«.  in  his  own  country
Acts  10.  35.  he  that  worketh  righteousness  is  a.
Rom.  15.  31.  my  service  may  be  a.  of  the  saints
2  Cor.  5.  9.  labour,  absent  or  present,  we  may  be  *.

6.  2.  heard  thee  in  a  time  a.  now  is  the  a.  time

8.  12.  it  is  a.  according  to  that  a  man  hath
17.  for  indeed  he  a.  the  exhortation

11.  4.  or  another  gospel  which  ye  have  not  a.
Eph.  1.  6.  he  hath  made  us  a.  in  the  beloved

ACCEPT  ESI’.

Luke  20.  21.  neither  a.  thou  the  person  of  any
ACt  EP  I  ETH.

Job  34.  19.  to  him  that  a.  not  persons  of  prin<*>-
Eccl.  9.  7-  eat  with  joy,  for  God  now  a.  tny  wori»-
Hos.  8.  13.  they  sacrifice,  but  the  Lord  a.  them  not
Gal.  2.  6.  God  a.  no  man’s  person

Accepting.  See  Deliverance.
ACCESS.

Rom.  5.  2.  by  whom  also  we  have  a.  by  faith
Eph.  2.  18.  thro’  him  we  both  have  a.  to  the  Father
3. 12.  in  whom  we  have  boldness  and  a.  by  faith
Accompany.  See  Sa  i.vation.
ACCOMPANIED.

Acts  10.  23.  certain  brethren  from  Joppa  a.  hire
11.  12.  moreover  these  six  brethren  a.  me

20.  4.  Sopater  of  Berea  a.  Paul  into  Asia
38.  and  they  a.  hi-m  to  the  ship

Accompanying.  See  Ark  of  God.
ACCOMPLISH

Signifies,  [1]  To  perform,  Jinish,  or  fuljil,  Jer.

25.  Dan.  9.  2.  Luke  2.  6.  Acts  21.  5.  [2]  la

3


ACC


ACC


ADD


yield  or  condescend  to,  1  Kings  5.  9.  [3]  Obtain¬
ed  or  brought  to  pass,  Prov.  13.  19.

Lev.  22.  21.  offereth  a  sacrifice  to  a.  his  vow
1  Kings  5.  9.  shalt  a.  my  desire  in  giving  food
Job  14.  6.  till  he  shall  a.  as  an  hireling  his  day
Psal.  64.  6.  they  a.  a  diligent  search
Isa.  55.  11.  but  it  shall  a.  that  which,  I  please
Jer.  44.  25.  ye  will  surely  a.  your  vows
Lzek.  6.  12.  thus  will  l  a.  my  fury  upon  them

7.  8.  now  will  1  a.  mine  anger  upon  thee

13.  15.  thus  will  1  a.  my  wrath  upon  the  wall

20.  8.  I  will  pour  out  my  fury  to  a.  my  anger,  21.
Van.  9.  2.  that  he  would  a.  seventy  years
Luke  9.  31.  which  he  should  a.  at  Jerusalem
ACCOMPLISHED.

t  Chron.  36.  22.  the  word  by  Jeremiah  might  be  a.
Esth.  2.  12.  days  of  purification  were  a.  Luke  2.  22.
.  ob  15.  32.  it  snail  be  a.  before  his  time
Prov.  13.  19.  the  desire  a.  is  sweet  to  the  soul
Isa.  40.  2.  cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  a.

Jer.  25.  12.  when  seventy  years  are  a.  29.  10.

34.  for  the  days  of  your  dispersions  are  a.

39.  16.  my  words  shall  be  a.  before  thee
Lam.  4.  11.  the  Lord  hath  a.  his  fury
22.  the  punishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  a.

Exek.  4.  6.  when  hast  a.  them,  lie  on  thy  rightside

5.  13.  thus  shall  mine  anger  be  a.

Van.  11.  36.  shall  prosper,  till  the  indignation  be  a.

12.  7.  a.  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people
Luke  1.  23.  the  days  ot  his  ministration  were  a.

2. 6.  the  days  were  a.  that  she  should  be  delivered

21.  when  eight  days  were  a.  for  circumcising
12.  50.  and  how  am  l  straitened  till  it  be  a.

18.  31.  concerning  the  Son  of  man,  shall  be  a.

22.  37.  that  is  written,  must  yet  be  a.  in  me
John  19.  28.  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  a.
Acts  21.  5.  when  we  had  a.  those  days,  we  departed

1  Pet.  5.  9.  same  afflictions  area,  in  your  brethren

Accomplishing.  See  Service.
ACCOMPLISHMENT.

Acts  21.  26.  to  signify  the  a.  of  days  of  purification
ACCORD.

Lev.  25.  5.  groweth  of  its  own  a.  shall  not  reap
Josh.  9.  2.  to  fight  with  Israel  with  one  a.

Acts  1.  14.  these  all  continued  with  one  a.  in  prayer

2.  1.  they  were  all  with  one  a.  in  one  place

46.  they  continuing  daily  with  one  a.  in  temple

24.  they  lift  up  their  voice  to  God  with  one  a.

5.  12.  were  all  with  one  a.  in  Solomon’s  porch

7.  57.  and  ran  upon  Stephen  with  one  a.

8.  6.  people  with  one  a.  gave  heed  to  these  things
12.  10.  the  gate  opened  to  them  of  his  own  a.

20.  but  they  came  with  one  a.  to  him

15.  25.  being  assembled  with  one  a.  to  send

18.  12.  the  Jews  with  one  a.  made  insurrection

19.  29.  they  rushed  with  one  a.  into  the  theatre

2  Cor.  8.  17.  but  being  more  forward  of  his  own  a.
Phil.  2.  2.  being  of  one  a.  of  one  mind

ACCORDING.

Gen.  27.  19.  I  have  done  a.  as  thou  badest  me

41.  54.  dearth  began  to  come  a.  as  Joseph  said
Exod.  12.  25.  the  Lord  will  give  a.  as  he  promised
Num.  14.  17.  be  great,  a.  as  thou  hast  spoken
Veut.  10.  9.  his  inheritance  a.  as  God  promised

16.  10.  a.  as  the  I.ord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee
1  Kings  3.  6.  a.  as  he  walked  before  thee  in  truth
Job  34.  11.  and  cause  every  man  to  find  a.  to  his

ways,  Jer.  17.  10. 1  21.  14. 1  32.  19.

42.  9.  went  and  did  a.  as  the  Lord  commanded
Psal.  7. 8.  judce  me,  O  God.  a.  to  my  righteousness

17.  I  will  praise  the  Lord  a.  to  his  1  ighteousness

25.  7.  a.  to  thy  mercy  remember  thou  me,  51.  1. 1
106.  45. 1  109.  26.  I  119.  124.

28.  4.  give  them  a.  to  their  deeds,  and  a.  to  thee
33.  22.  let  mercy  be  on  us  a  as  we  hope  in  thee
35.  24.  judge  me,  O  God,  a.  to  thy  righteousness
48.  10.  a.  to  thy  name,  so  is  thy  praise
62.  12.  for  thou  renderest  to  every  man  a.  to  his

work,  Prov.  24.  12.  29-
79.  11.  a.  to  the  greatness  of  thy  power
90.  11.  a.  to  thy  fear,  so  is  thy  wrath
103.  10.  nor  rewarded  us  a.  to  our  iniquities
119.  25.  a.  to  thy  word,  28,  41,  58,  65,  76,  107,

116,  154,  169,  170.

159.  quicken  me  a.  to  thy  Kindness,  Isa.  63.  7.
150.  2.  praise  him  a.  to  his  excellent  greatness
Isa.  8.  20.  if  they  speak  not  a.  to  this  word

9.  3.  they  joy  a.  to  the  joy  in  harvest

63.7.  a.  to  all  that  the  I.ord  has  bestowed  on  us
Jer.  50.  29.  recompense  her  a.  to  her  work
Van.  11.  3.  that  snail  rule,  and  do  a.  to  his  will
Hos.  3.  1.  a.  to  the  love  of  the  Lord  toward  Israel
12.  2.  the  Lord  will  punish  Jacob  a.  to  his  ways
Mic.  7. 15.  a.  to  the  days  of  thy  coming  out  of  Egypt
Mat.  9.  29.  a.  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you
16.  27.  he  will  reward  every  man  a.  to  his  works,
Pom.  2.  6.  2  Tim.  4.  14.  Bev  2.  23.
Luke  12.  47.  nor  did  a.  to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten
JohnT.  24.  judge  not  a.  to  the  appearance
Acts  4.  35.  made  to  every  man  a.  as  he  had  need
Rom.  1.  3.  made  of  the  s  ed  of  David  a.  to  the  flesh
8.  28.  who  are  the  called  a.  to  his  purpose
12.  6.  gifts  differing  a.  to  the  grace  given  to  us
15.  5.  to  be  like-minded  a.  to  Christ  lesus

1  Cor.  15.  3.  Christ  died  a.  to  the  scriptures,  4.

t  Cor.  9. 7.  every  man  a.  as  he  purposeth  in  his  heart
11.  15.  whose  end  shall  be  a.  to  their  works
Cal.  1.  4.  who  gave  himself  a.  to  the  will  of  God

3.  29.  Abraham’s  seed,  and  heirs  a.  to  the  promise
Eph.  1.4.  a.  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him,  before

5.  a.  to  good  pleasure  j|  7.  a.  to  riches  of  his  grace
11.  being  predestinated  a.  to  the  purpose  of  him

3.  20.  a.  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us
Phil.  3.  21.  a.  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able

4.  19.  God  shall  supply  our  need  a.  to  his  riches

2  Tim.  1.  9.  who  hath  called  us  not  a.  to  our  works
Tit.  3.  5.  but  a.  to  his  mercy  he  saved  us  by  washing
Heb.  8.  9-  not  a.  to  the  covenant  that  I  made  with

1  Pet.  1.  3.  a.  to  his  mercy  hath  begotten  us  again

4. 6.  but  live  a.  to  God  in  the  Spirit

2  Pet.  1.  3.  a.  as  his  divine  power  hath  given  us
3.  13.  we  a.  to  his  promise  look  for  new  heavens


Rev.  20.  12.  dead  were  judged  a.  to  their  works,  13.
22.  12.  1  come  to  give  a.  as  his  work  shall  be
According  to  all.  See  All.
ACCORDING  to  that.

Gen.  27.8.  obey  my  voice  a.  to  that  l  command
Judg.  11.  36.  do  to  me  a.  to  that  which  proceeded
2  Kings  14.  6.  slew  not  a.  to  that  which  is  written
2  Chron.  35.  26.  a.  to  that  which  was  written
Ezra  6.  13.  Tatnai  did  a.  to  that  Darius  had  sent
Rom.  4. 18.  a.  to  that  which  was  spoken,  thy  seed  be
2  Cor.  5.  10.  a  to  that  he  hath  done,  good  or  bad
8.  12.  a.  to  that  a  man  hath,  not  a.  to  that  he  hath  not
Accordingly.  See  Repay.
ACCOUNT.

Exod.  12.  4.  shall  make  your  a.  for  the  lamb
2  Kings  12.  4.  of  every  one  that  passeth  the  a.

1  Chron.  27. 24.  neither  was  the  number  put  in  the  a.

2  Chron.  26.  11.  according  to  the  number  of  their  a.
Job  33. 13.  for  he  giveth  not  a.  of  his  matters
Psal.  144.  3.  or  the  son  of  man  that  thou  makest  a.
Eccl.  7.  27.  counting  one  by  one  to  find  out  the  a.
Van.  6.  2.  that  the  princes  might  give  a.  to  them
Mat.  12.  36.  give  a.  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment

18.  23.  which  would  take  a.  of  his  servants
Luke  16.  2.  give  an  a.  of  thy  stewardship

Acts  19.  40.  whereby  we  may  give  an  a.  of  this
Rom.  9.  t28.  he  will  finish  the  a.

14.  12.  every  one  shall  give  a.  of  himself  to  God
Phil.  4. 17.  desire  fruit  that  may  abound  to  your  a.
Philem.  18.  if  he  oweth  thee,  put  that  on  mine  a.
Heb.  13.  17.  they  watch  as  they  that  must  give  a.

1  Pet.  4.  5.  who  shall  give  a.  to  him  that  judgeth

ACCOUNT,  ED.

Veut.  2.  11.  which  also  were  a.  giants

20.  that  also  was  a.  a  land  of  giants
1  Kings  l.  21.  I  and  Solomon  snail  be  a.  offenders

10.  21.  silver  was  nothing  a.  of,  2  Chron.  9.  20.
Psal.  22.  30.  be  a.  to  the  l^ord  for  a  generation
Isa.  2.  22.  for  wherein  is  he  to  be  a.  or  >

Mark  10. 42.  they  which  are  a. to  rule  over  Gentiles
Luke  20.  35.  be  a.  worthy  to  obtain  that  world

22.  24.  which  of  them  snould  be  a.  the  grea*est
Rom.  8.  36.  we  are  a.  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter

1  Cor.  4.  1.  let  a  man  so  a.  of  us  as  ministers
Gal.  3.  6.  it  was  a.  to  him  for  righteousness

2  Pet.  3. 15.  a.  that  the  long-suffering  of  the  Lord

ACCOUNTING.

Heb.  11. 19.  a.  that  God  was  able  to  raise  him  up
ACCURSED

Signifies,  [1]  Vevoted  to  destruction.  Josh.  6.  17.
[2]  Separated  from  the  church,  Rom.  9.  3.  13]
Cursed  eternally  from  God,  1  Cor.  16.  22.  Gal.

I.  8,  9.

Dent.  21.  23.  he  that  is  hanged  is  a.  of  God
Josh.  6.  17.  the  city  shall  be  a.  it  and  all  therein
18.  in  any  wise  keep  from  the  a.  thing

7.  1.  trespass  in  the  a.  thing ;  Achan  took  of  a.

II.  for  they  have  even  taken  of  the  a.  thing

12.  turned  their  backs,  because  they  were  a.
except  ye  destroy  the  a.  from  among  you

13.  there  is  an  a.  thing  in  the  midst  of  thee

15.  he  that  is  taken  with  the  a.  thing

22. 20.  did  not  Achan  commit  trespass  in  a.  thing
1  Sam.  3.  1 13.  his  sons  made  themselves  a.

1  Chron.  2.  7.  who  transgressed  in  the  thing  a.

Isa.  65.  20.  the  sinner  an  100  years  old  shall  be  a.
Rom.  9.  3.  for  I  could  wish  myself  a.  from  Christ
1  Cor.  12.  3.  no  man  by  the  Spirit  calleth  Jesus  a.
Gal.  1.  8.  preach  any  other  gospel,  let  him  be  a.  9.
ACCUSATION.

Ezra  4.  6.  wrote  they  to  him  an  a.  against  Judah
Mat.  27.  37.  set  over  his  head  his  a.  Mark  15.  26.
Luke  6.  7.  that  they  might  find  an  a.  against  him

19.  8.  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  by  false  a.

John  18.  29.  what  a.  bring  ye  against  this  man  ?
Acts  25.  18.  they  brought  no  a.  as  I  supposed

1  Tim.  5.  19.  against  an  elder  receive  not  an  a.

2  Pet.  2.  11.  bring  not  a  railing  a.  against  them
Jude  9.  Michael  durst  not  bring  a  railing  a.

ACCUSE.

Prov.  30.  10.  a.  not  a  servant  to  his  master
Mat.  12.  10.  that  they  might  a.  him,  Mar.  3.  2.

Luke  11.  54.

Luke  3.  14.  nor  a.  any  falsely,  and  be  content

23.  2.  and  they  began  to  a.  him,  saying

14.  touching  those  things  whereof  ye  a.  him
JohnS.  45.  that  1  will  a.  you  to  the  Father

8.  6.  that  they  might  have  to  a.  him

Acts  24.  2.  Tertullus  began  to  a.  him,  saying
8.  take  knowledge  of  all  things  whereof  we  a.

13.  nor  can  they  prove  things  whereof  they  a.  me
25.  5.  let  them  go  down  with  me,  and  a.  this  man

11.  if  there  be  none  of  those  whereof  these  a.  me
28.  19.  not  that  1  had  ought  to  a.  my  nation  of

1  Pet.  3.  16.  falsely  a.  your  good  conversation

ACCUSED.

Van.  3. 8.  Chaldeans  came  near  and  a.  the  lews

6.  24.  they  brought  them  which  had  a.  Daniel
Mat.  27. 12.  when  he  was  a.  he  answered  nothing
Mark  15.  3.  priests  a.  him  many  things.  Luke  23. 10.
Luke  16.  1.  was  a.  that  he  had  wasted  his  goods
Acts  22.  30.  the  certainty  wherefore  he  was  a.

23. 28.  have  known  the  cause  whereof  they  a.  him
29-  perceived  to  be  a.  of  questions  of  their  law

25.  16.  before  he  which  is  a.  have  the  accusers

26.  2.  answer,  touching  things  wherepf  I  am  a.

7.  for  which  hope’s  sake  1  am  a.  of  the  Jews

Tit.  1.  6.  faithful  children,  not  a.  of  riot,  or  unruly
Rev.  12.  10.  accuser,  who  a.  them  before  our  God
Accuser.  See  Cast  down.
ACCUSERS.

John  8. 10.  woman,  where  are  those  thine  a.  ?

Acts  23.  30.  I  gave  commandment  to  his  a.  also
35.  I  will  hear  thee  when  thine  a.  are  come

24.  8.  commanding  his  a.  to  come  to  thee

25.  16.  before  he  have  the  a.  face  to  face
18.  against  whom,  when  the  a.  stood  up

2  Tim.  3.  3.  without  natural  affection,  false  a.

Tit.  2.  3.  not  false  a.  not  given  to  much  wine

ACCUSETH,  ING.

John  5.  45.  there  is  one  that  a.  you,  even  Moses
Rom.  2.  15.  their  thoughts  a.  or  excusing


Accustomed;  see  Vo  Evil.  Aceldama;
see  Field.
ACKNOWLEDGE

Signifies,  [1]  To  own ,  or  confess,  Gen.  38.  26.  Psal,
32.  5.  [2]  To  observe,  or  take  notice  of,  Prov
3.  6.  Isa.  33. 13.  [3]  To  esteem  and  respect ,  Isa
61.  9.  1  Cor.  16.  18.  (.41  To  approve  of,  2.  Cor.
1.  13.  Philem.  6.  L5]  To  worship,  or  make  pro¬
fession  of,  Dan.  11.  39.

Veut.  1. 1 17.  ye  shall  not  a.  fares  in  iudgment
21. 17.  he  shall  a.  the  son  of  the  hated
33.  9.  nor  did  he  a.  his  brethren  nor  children
Psal.  32.  5.  1  a.  my  sin  (|  51 . 3.  I  a.  my  transgression
Prov.  3.  6.  in  all  thy  ways  a.  him,  he  shall  direct
l  a.  33.  13.  ye  that  are  near,  a.  my  might
61.  9.  all  that  see  them,  shall  a.  them
63.  16.  thou  art  our  father,  tho’  Israel  a.  us  not
Jer.  3. 13.  only  a.  thine  iniquity  that  thou  hast

14.  20.  we  a.  O  Lord,  our  wickedness
24.  5.  so  will  I  a.  them  that  are  carried  away
Van.  11.  39.  with  a  strange  God  whom  he  shall  a.
Hos.  5.  15.  I  will  go,  till  they  a.  their  offence

1  Cor.  14.  37.  let  him  a.  the  things  that  I  write

16.  18.  therefore  a.  ye  them  that  are  such

2  Cor.  1.  13.  what  you  a.  and  1  trust  shall  a.

ACKNOWLEDGED.

Gen.  38.  26.  Judah  a.  them,  and  said,  she  hath  been
2  Cor.  1.  14.  also  you  have  a.  us  in  part
ACKNOWLEDGETU.

1  John  2.  23.  he  that  a.  the  Son  hath  the  Father

ACKNOWLEDGING.

2  Tim.  2.  25.  repentance  to  the  a.  of  the  truth
Tit.  1. 1.  to  the  a.  the  truth  which  i3  after  godliness
Philem.  6.  by  the  a.  every  good  thing  in  Christ

A  C  K  N  O  W  LEDG  M  ENT.

Col.  2.  2.  to  the  a.  of  the  mystery  of  God
ACQUAINT.  ED,  ING.

Job  22.  21.  a.  thyself  with  nim  and  be  at  peace
Psal.  139. 3.  thou  art  a.  with  all  my  ways
Eccl.  2.  3.  yet  a.  my  heart  with  wisdom
Isa.  53.  3.  a  man  or  sorrows,  and  a.  with  grief
ACQUAINTANCE.

2  Kings  12.  5.  let  priests  take  it,  every  man  of  his  a.

7.  therefore  receive  no  more  money  of  your  a.
Job  19. 13.  mine  a.  are  estranged  from  me
42. 11.  then  came  all  that  had  been  of  his  a.

Psal.  31. 11.  I  was  a  reproach  and  a  fear  to  mine  a.
55.  13.  it  was  thou,  mine  equal,  and  mine  a.

88.  8.  thou  hast  put  away  mine  a.  far  from  me
18.  lover  put  from  me.  and  my  a.  into  darkness
Luke  2.  44.  they  sought  him  among  their  a.

23. 49.  all  his  a.  stood  afar  off,  beholding  things
Acts  24.  23.  he  should  forbid  none  of  his  a.  to  come
ACQUIT.

Job  10. 14.  thou  wilt  not  a.  me  from  mine  iniquity
Nah.  1.  3.  the  Lord  will  not  at  all  a.  the  wicked
ACRE,  S.

1  Sam.  14.  14.  20  men  within  half  an  a.  of  land
Isa.  5. 10.  ten  a.  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath
ACT.

Isa.  28. 21.  and  bring  to  pass  his  a.  his  strange  a.
59.  6.  and  the  a.  of  violence  is  in  their  hands
John  8. 4.  was  taken  in  adultery,  in  the  very  a.
ACTS.

Veut.  11.  3.  and  his  a.  which  he  did  in  Egypt
7.  your  eyes  have  seen  the  great  a.  of  the  Lord
Judg.  5. 11.  rehearse  the  righteous  a.  of  the  Lord

1  Sam.  12.  7.  reason  of  all  righteous  a.  of  the  Lord

2  Sam.  23.  20.  and  Benaian  the  son  of  Jehoiada,

who  had  done  many  a.  1  Chron.  11.  22.

1  Kings  10.  6.  it  was  a  true  report  I  heard  of  thy  a.
11.  41.  die  a.  of  Solomon,  are  they  not  written  in

the  book  of  the  a.  of  Solomon  5  2  Chron.  9.  5.

2  Kings  10.  34.  the  a.  of  Jehu,  and  all  that  he  did
23.  19.  according  to  all  the  a.  he  had  done

28.  the  a.  of  Josiah  and  all  that  he  did  are  written

1  Chron.  29.  29.  the  a.  of  David,  first  and  last

2  Chron.  16. 11.  behold  the  a.  of  Asa,  first  and  last

20.  34.  the  a  of  Jehoshaphat,  first  and  last

32.  32.  the  a.  of  Hezekiah,  2  Kings  20.  20.

Esth.  10.  2.  all  the  a.  of  his  power  and  might
Psal.  103.  7.  his  a.  to  the  children  of  Israel
106.  2.  who  can  utter  the  mighty  a.  of  the  Lord  ?
145.  4.  and  shall  declare  thy  mighty  a.  6.  12.

150.  2.  praise  him  for  his  mighty  a.  praise  him
ACTIONS.

1  Sam.  2.  3.  and  by  the  Lord  a.  are  weighed

ACTIVITY.

Gen.  47.  6.  if  knowest  any  man  of  a.  among  them
ADAMANT.

Ezek.  3.  9.  as  an  a.  have  I  made  thy  forehead
Zech.  7.  12.  they  made  their  hearts  as  an  a.  stone
ADD

Signifies,  [1]  To  join,  or  put  to,  Deut.  4.  2.  Acts  2.
41.  2  Pet.  1.  5.  [2]  To  increase,  Prov.  16.  23.

[3]  To  give,  or  bestow,  Gen.  30.  24.  Mat.  6.  33.

[4]  To  make  wise  by  instruction.  Gal.  2.  6.  [5]  T >
utter,  Deut.  5.  22.

Gen.  30.  24.  the  Lord  shall  a.  to  me  another  son
Lev.  5.  16.  he  shall  a.  a  fifth  part  thereto,  6.  5.  |

.  27.13,  15,  19,27,31.  Num.  5.7
Num.  35.  6.  to  cities  of  refuge  a.  forty-two  cities
Veut.  4.  2.  ye  shall  not  a.  to  the  word,  12.  32.

19.  9-  thou  shalt  a.  three  cities  more  of  refuge

29.  19.  to  a.  drunkenness  to  thirst

2  Sam.  24.  3.  the  Lord  thy  God  a.  to  the  people

1  Kings  12.  11  and  now  Rehoboam  said,  I  will  a.

to  your  yoke,  14.  2  Chron.  10.  14.

2  Kings  20.  6.  I  a.  to  thy  days  15  years,  .Isa.  38. 5.
t  Chron.  22.  14.  and  thou  mayesta.  thereto

2  Ch/on.  28. 13.  ye  intend  to  a.  more  to  our  sins
Psal.  69.  27-  a.  iniquity  to  their  iniquity
Prov.  3.  2.  long  life  and  peace  shall  they  a.  to  thee

30.6.  a.  thou  not  to  his  words,  lest  he  reprove  thee
Isa.  29.  1-  a.  ye  year  to  year,  let  them  kill  sacrifices

30.  1.  that  they  may  a-,  sin  to  sin

Mat.  6. 27  •  can  a.  one  cubit  to  his  stature,  Luke  12.25.
Phil.  1.  16.  supposing  to  a.  affliction  to  my  bonds
2  Pet.  1.  5.  besides  this  a  to  your  faith  virtue
Rev.  22. 18.  if  any  a.  God  shall  a.  to  him  plagues
ADDED.

Veut.  5.  22.  with  a  great  voice,  and  he  a.  no  more


ADO


A  D  V


AFF


1  Sam.  12. 19.  we  have  a.  to  all  our  sins  this  evil
Jer.  36.  32.  there  were  a.  besides  many  like  words
45.  3.  the  Lord  hath  a.  grief  to  my  sorrow
Van.  4. 36.  and  excellent  majesty  was  a.  to  me
Mat.  6. 33.  all  these  shall  be  a.  to  you,  Luke  12. 31.
Luke  3.  20.  Herod  a.  yet  this  above  all,  he  shut  up
19. 11.  as  they  heard,  he  a.  and  spake  a  parable
Acts  2. 41.  the  same  day  there  were  a.  3000  souls
47.  and  the  Lord  a.  to  the  church  daily  such
5. 14.  believers  were  the  more  a.  to  the  Lord

11.  24.  and  much  people  was  a.  to  the  Lord
Gal.  2. 6.  seemed  to  be  somewhat,  a.  nothing  to  me

3. 19.  the  law  was  a.  because  of  transgressions
ADDETH,  ING.

Job  34.  37.  for  he  a.  rebellion  to  his  sin
Prov.  10.  22.  and  he  a.  no  sorrow  with  it
16. 23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  a.  learning  to  his  lips
Gal.  3. 15.  no  man  disannulled  or  a.  thereto.
ADDER.

Gen.  49. 17.  Dan  shall  be  an  a.  in  the  path
Psal.  56.  4.  they  are  like  the  deaf  a.  that  stops
91.  13.  thou  shalt  tread  on  the  lion  and  a.

140.  3.  a.  poison  is  under  their  lips
Prov.  23. 32.  wine  at  last  stingeth  like  an  a.
ADDICTED.

1  Cor.  16. 15.  a.  themselves  to  the  ministry  of  saints
ADDITION,  S.

1  Kings  7. 29.  certain  a.  were  made  of  thin  work
30.  undersetters  molten  at  the  side  of  every  a.

36.  he  graved  cherubims,  and  a.  round  about
ADJURE

Signifies,  [1]  To  bind  under  the  penalty  of  a  fearful
curse ,  Josh.  6.  26.  [2]  To  charge  earnestly  by

word  or  oath ,  1  Kings  22. 16.  Mat.  26.  63.

1  Kings  22. 16.  the  king  said,  how  many  times  shall
I  a.  thee  to  tell  me  nothing,  2  Chron.  18.  15.
Mat.  26.  63.  I  a.  thee  by  the  living  God
Mark  5. 7.  I  a.  thee  by  God,  thou  torment  me  not
Acts  19. 13.  saying, ^we  a^ou_  by  J esus,  whom  Paul

Josh.  6. 26.  Joshua  a.  them  at  that  time
1  Sam.  14.  24.  for  Saul  had  a.  the  people
ADMINISTRATION,  S

1  Cor.  12. 5.  there  are  differences  ot  a.

2  Cor.  9. 12.  for  the  a.  of  this  service  supplied

ADMINISTERED.

2  Cor.  8. 19.  a.  by  us  to  the  glory  of  the  same  Lord
20.  in  this  abundance  which  is  a.  by  us
ADMIRATION.

Jude  16.  having  men’s  persons  in  a.

Rev.  17. 6.  I  saw  her,  1  wondered  with  great  a.
ADMIRED.

2  Thess.  1. 10.  to  be  a.  in  all  them  that  believe
ADMONISH,  ED.

Eccl.  4.  13.  a  foolish  king,  who  will  no  more  be  a.

12.  12.  and  further  by  these,  my  son,  be  a.

Jer.  42. 19.  know  certainly  that  I  have  a.  you
Acts  27.  9-  the  fast  was  now  past,  Paul  a.  them
Rom.  15.  14.  ye  are  able  also  to  a.  one  another
Col.  3.  16.  a.  one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns

1  Thess.  5. 12.  that  are  over  you  in  Lord,  and  a.  you

2  Thess.  3. 15.  not  an  enemy,  but  a.  him  as  a  brother
Heb.  8. 5.  as  Moses  was  a.  of  God,  when  he  was

ADMONITION.

1  Cor.  10.  11.  they  are  written  for  our  a.

Eph.  6.  4.  bring  them  up  in  the  a.  of  the  Lord
Tit.  3. 10,  after  the  first  and  second  a.  reject
ADO.

Mark  5. 39.  he  saith,  why  make  ye  this  a.  and  weep
ADOPTION

Is  an  action  whereby  a  man  takes  a  person  into  his
family,  in  order  to  make  him  part  of  it,  acknow¬
ledges  him  for  his  son,  and  receives  him  into  the
number,  and  gives  him  a  right  to  the  privileges,
of  his  children.  Pharaoh's  daughter  adopted
young  Moses,  and  Mordecai  Esther,  Exod.  2. 10.
Esther  2.  7>  15.  We  are  not  acquainted  how  far
the  privileges  of  adoption  extended  :  but  it  may  be
presumed  that  they  were  much  the  same  with  those
mentioned  in  the  Roman  laws :  The  adopted  chil¬
dren  shared  in  the  estate  with  the  natural  children  ;
they  assumed  the  name  of  the  person  who  adopted
them,  and  beiame  subject  to  his  paternal  power  who
received  them  into  his  family.  And  God  doth  adopt
his  children,  when  he  graciously  admits  strangers
and  enemies,  as  all  the  fallen  race  of  Adam  are  by
nature,  into  the  state  and  relation  of  children  thro'
Jesus  Christ ;  he  becoming  their  Father  in  him,  ac¬
cording  to  the  great  promise  of  the  new  covenant,
Eph.  2.  11,  12, 13.  1  John  3.  1.  Gal.  4.  5.  Eph.
1.  5.  Jer.  31.  33.  2  Cor.  6.  16. 18.  The  adopted
are  true  believers  in  Christ ;  they  relying  upon  his
blood  and  surety-righteousness  for  pardon  and  re¬
conciliation  with  God  ;  for  to  as  many  as  received
him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons
of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  name.
They  are  regenerated  by  the  Spirit,  and  are  justi¬
fied  freely  by  grace,  through  the  redemption  that
is  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  brought  through  the
Spirit's  operation  to  an  affectionate  obediential
frame  of  spirit  towards  God  as  their  reconciled
Father,  John  1.  12,  13.  Rom.  3.  24,  25.  Zech.
12.  10.  Isa.  63.  18.  Gal.  4.  5,  6.  Tit.  3.  5,  6.
1  John  2.  29.  Many  and  great  are  the  privileges
of  God's  adopted  children  ;  some  of  which  aref  his
fatherly  protection  from  temporal  and  spiritual
evils,  and  his  provision  of  all  needful  things  both
for  soul  and  body  ;  his  fatherly  correction  of  them  ;
audience  and  return  to  their  prayers  ;  and  a  sure
title  to  the  heavenly  inheritance  :  for,  if  children,
then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with
Christ,  Rom.  8.  17.  P*al.  34.  10.  and  121.  7-
Heb.  12.  6.  1  John  5.  14,  15.  True  believers
are  said  to  be  put  into  this  state,  [1]  By  election,
Eph.  1.  5.  [2]  By  manifestation  and  assurance,
Rom.  8.  15.  Gal.  4.  5,  6.  [3]  By  perfect  re¬
demption  and  glory,  at  the  general  resurrection,
Rom.  8.  23.

Rom.  8.  15.  but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of  a.
2.3.  waiting  for  the  a.  the  redemption  of  our  body
9.  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  a.  and  the  glory
Gal.  4.  5.  that  we  might  receive  the  a.  of  sous


Eph.  1.  5.  predestinated  us  to  the  a.  of  children
ADORN,  ED,  ETH,  ING.

Tsa.  61.  10.  as  a  bride  a.  herself  with  her  jewels
Jer.  31.  4.  thou  shalt  be  again  a.  with  tabrets
Luke  21.  5.  the  temple  was  a.  with  goodly  stones
1  Tim.  2.  9-  that  women  a.  in  modest  apparel
Tit.  2.  10.  a.  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour
1  Pet.  3.  3.  whose  a.  let  it  not  be  that  outward  a.

5.  women  who  trusted  in  God  a.  themselves
Rev.  21.  2.  prepared  as  a  bride  a.  for  her  husband
ADVANCED.

1  Sam.  12. 6.  it  is  the  Lord  that  a.  Moses  and  Aaron
Esth.  3.  1.  Ahasuerus  a.  Haman  the  Agagite
5.  11.  Haman  told  them  how  he  had  a.  him

10.  2.  the  greatness  whereto  the  king  a.  Mordecai

ADVANTAGE,  ED,  ETII.

Job  35.  3.  thou  saidst,  what  a.  will  it  be  to  thee
Luke  9.  25.  what  is  a  man  a.  if  he  gain  the  world
Rom.  3.  1.  what  a.  then  hath  the  Jew,  or  what

1  Cor.  15.  32.  what  a.  it  me  if  the  dead  rise  not  ?

2  Cor.  2.  11.  lest  Satan  should  get  an  a.  of  us
Jude  16.  men’s  persons  in  admiration,  because  of  a.

ADVENTURE,  ED.

Deut.  28.  56.  not  a.  to  set  the  sole  of  her  foot
Judg.  9.  17.  my  father  sought  and  a.  his  life  far
Acts  19.  31.  that  he  would  not  a.  into  the  theatre
ADVERSARY.

Exod.  23.  22.  I  will  be  an  a.  to  thine  adversaries
Num.  22.  22.  the  angel  stood  for  an  a.  against

Balaam

f  32.  behold,  I  went  out  to  be  an  a.  to  thee
1  Sam.  1.  6.  and  her  a.  also  provoked  her  sore

29.  4.  lest  in  the  battle  he  be  an  a.  to  us
1  Kings  5.  4.  there  is  neither  a.  nor  evil  occurrent

11.  14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  an  a.  to  Solomon,  2.3.
25.  was  an  a.  to  Israel  all  the  days  of  Solomon

Esth.  7.  6.  the  a.  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman
Job  1.  +  6.  and  the  a.  came  also  among  them

31.  35.  and  that  my  a.  had  written  a  book
Psal.  74.  10.  how  long  shall  the  a.  reproach  ?

109.  +  6.  let  an  a.  stand  at  his  right  hand
Isa.  50.  8.  who  is  mine  a.  let  him  conie  near  to  me
Lam.  1.  10.  the  a.  hath  spread  out  his  hand
2.  4.  he  stood  with  his  right  hand  as  an  a.

4.  12.  that  the  a.  should  have  entered  the  gates
Amos  3.  11.  an  a.  shall  be  round  about  the  land
Zech.  3.  t  1.  shewed  me  an  a.  standing  to  be  his  a.
Mat.  5.  25.  agree  with  thine  a.  quickly,  lest  at  any
time  the  a.  deliver  thee  to  the  judge
Luke  12.  58.  when  thou  goest  with  thine  a.

18.  3.  a  widow,  saying,  avenge  me  of  mine  a.

1  Tim.  5.  14.  give  no  occasion  to  the  a.  to  speak
1  Pet.  5.  8.  your  a.  the  devil  as  a  roaring  lion
ADVERSARIES.

Deut.  32.  27.  lest  their  a.  should  behave  strangely
43.  he  will  render  vengeance  to  his  a.

Josh.  5.  13.  art  thou  for  us,  or  for  our  a.  ?

1  Sam.  2.  10.  the  a.  of  the  I.ord  shall  be  broken

2  Sam.  19.  22.  that  ye  should  this  day  be  a.  to  me
Ezra  4.  1.  when  a.  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  heard
Neh.  4.  11.  our  a.  said,  they  shall  not  know
Psal.  38.  20.  that  render  evil  for  good,  are  my  a.
69.  19.  mine  a.  are  all  before  thee

71.  13.  be  confounded  that  are  a.  to  my  soul
81.  14.  have  turned  my  hand  against  their  a.

89.  42.  thou  hast  set  up  the  right  hand  of  his  a.
109.  4.  for  my  love  they  are  my  a.  but  I  prayer

20.  let  this  be  the  reward  of  my  a.  from  Lord
29.  let  my  a.  be  clothed  with  shame
Isa.  1.  24.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  ease  me  of  my  a.

9.  11.  the  Lord  shall  set  up  the  a.  of  Ilezin
11.  13.  and  the  a.  of  Judah  shall  be  cut  off
59.  18.  he  will  repay  fury  to  his  a.

63.  18.  our  a.  have  trodden  down  thy  sanctuary

64.  2.  to  make  thy  name  known  to  thine  a.

Jer.  30.  16.  all  thine  a.  shall  go  into  captivity

46.  10.  that  he  may  avenge  him  of  his  a.

50.  7-  and  their  a.  said,  we  offend  not
Lam.  1.  5.  her  a.  are  the  chief,  her  enemies  prosper
7.  the  a.  saw  her,  and  did  mock  her  sabbaths
17.  that  his  a.  should  be  round  about  him
2.  17-  he  hath  set  up  the  horn  of  thine  a.

Mic.  5.  9.  thy  hand  shall  be  lifted  up  upon  thy  a.
Nah.  1.  2.  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  a.
Luke  13.  17.  all  his  a.  were  ashamed

21.  15.  all  your  a.  shall  not  be  able  to  gainsay
1  Cor.  16.  9.  a  door  is  opened,  and  there  are  many  a.
Phil.  1.  28.  and  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  a.
Heb.  10.  27.  indignation  which  shall  devour  the  a.
ADVERSITY,  IES.

1  Sam.  10.  19.  who  himself  saved  you  out  of  all  a.

2  Sam.  4.  9.  who  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  a.

2  Chron.  15.  6.  for  God  did  vex  them  with  all  a.
Psal.  10. 6.  he  said  in  his  heart,  I  shall  never  be  in  a.
31.  7.  thou  hast  known  my  soul  in  a.

35.  15.  but  in  my  a.  they  rejoiced
94.  13.  mayest  give  him  rest  from  the  days  of  a.
Prov.  17 .  17 .  and  a  brother  is  born  for  a.

24.  10.  if  thou  faint  in  day  of  a.  thy  strength  small
Eccl.  7.  14.  but  in  the  day  of  a.  consider

Isa.  30.  20.  tho’  the  Lord  give  you  the  bread  of  a.
Heb.  13.  3.  remember  them  which  suffer  a.
ADVERTISE.

Num.  24.  14.  I’ll  a.  thee,  what  this  people  shall  do
Ruth  4.  4.  I  thought  to  a.  thee,  saying,  buy  it
ADVICE.

Judg.  19.  30.  take  a.  and  speak  your  minds
20.  7-  give  here  your  a.  and  counsel

1  Sam.  25.  33.  blessed  be  thy  a.  and  blessed  be  thou

2  Sam.  19.  4.3.  that  our  a.  should  not  be  first  had

2  Chron.  10.  9.  what  a.  give  ye,  that  we  may  answer
14.  answered  them  after  the  a.  of  young  men

25.  17.  king  Amaziah  took  a.  anc^sent  to  Joash
Prov.  20.  18.  and  with  good  a.  make  war

2  Cor.  8.  10.  and  herein  I  give  my  a.

ADVISE,  ED.

2  Sam.  24. 1.3.  a.  and  see  what  answer,  1  Chron.  21.12.
1  Kings  12. 6.  how  do  ye  a.  that  I  may  answer  people
Prov.  13.  10.  but  with  the  well  a.  is  wisdom
Acts  27.  12.  the  more  part  a.  to  depart  thence  also
ADVISEMENT.

1  Chron.  12.  19.  the  lords  upon  a.  sent  him  away


ADULTERER.  S.

Lev.  20.  10.  the  a.  shall  surely  be  put  to  death
Job  24.  15.  the  eye  of  the  a.  waitetn  for  twilight
Psal.  50.  18.  thou  hast  been  partaker  with  a.

Isa.  57.  3.  draw  near,  the  seed  of  a.  and  the  whore
Jer.  9. 2.  for  they  be  al,l  a.  an  assembly  of  treacherous
23.  10.  for  the  land  is  full  of  a.  for  swearing
Hos.  7.  4.  they  are  all  a.  as  an  oven  heated
Mai.  3.  5.  1  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  the  a.
Luke  18.  11.  I  am  not  as  others,  extortioners,  a.

1  Cor.  6.  9- be  not  deceived,  neither  a.  shall  inherit
Heb.  13.  4.  whoremongers  and  a.  God  will  judge
Jam.  4.  4.  ye  a.  know  ye  not  that  the  friendship

ADULTERESS,  ES.

Lev.  20.  10.  the  a.  shall  surely  be  put  to  death
Prov.  6.  26.  the  a.  will  hunt  for  the  precious  life
Ezek.  23.  45.  righteous  men  shall  judge  them  as  a.
■Hos.  3.  1.  go  yet,  love  a  woman,  yet  an  a.

Rom.  7.3.  so  that  she  is  no  a.  though  she  be  married
ADULTEROUS.

Prov.  30.  20.  such  is  the  way  of  an  a.  woman
Mat.  12.  .39.  an  a.  generation  seeketh  a  sign,  16.  4.
Mark  8.  38.  whoso  shall  be  ashamed  in  this  a.
ADULTERY,  IES,

Is  twofold ,  [1]  Natural,  Mat.  5.  28.  Mark  10.  11.
[2]  Spiritual,  which  is  idolatry,  ,’er.  3.  9.  Ezek.
23.  37.

Exod.  20. 14.  thou  shalt  not  commit  a.  Deut.  5. 18.

Mat.  5.  27  1  19.  18.  Rom.  13.  9.
Lev.  20.  10.  the  man  that  committeth  a.  even  he
that  committeth  a.  shail  surely  be  put  to  death
Prov.  6. 32.  whoso  commits  a.  lacketh  understanding
Jer.  3.  8.  when  backsliding  Israel  committed  a.

9.  committed  a.  with  stones  and  with  stocks
5.  7.  when  I  fed  them,  then  they  committed  a.

7.  9-  will  ye  steal,  murder,  and  commit  a.?

13.  27.  I  have  seen  thine  a.  and  neighings

2.3.  14.  they  commit  a.  and  walk  in  lies

29.  23.  because  they  have  committed  a.

Ezek.  16.  32.  but  as  a  wife  that  committeth  a.

23.  37-  with  their  idols  have  they  committed  a.

4,3.  then  said  I  to  her  that  was  old  in  a.

Hos.  2.  2.  put  away  her  a.  between  her  breasts
4.  2.  by  lying  and  committing  a.  they  break  out

13.  and  your  spouses  shall  commit  a.

14.  I’ll  not  punish  them  when  they  commit  a.
Mat.  5.  28.  hath  committed  a.  in  his  heart

32.  whosoever  shall  marry  her  that  is  divorced
committeth  a.  19.  9.  Luke  16.  18.
15.  19.  out  of  the  heart  proceed  a.  Mark  7.  21.
Mark  10.  11.  whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife
and  marry  another,  committeth  a.  Luke  16.  18.
19.  do  not  commit  a.  Luke  18.  20.  Jam.  2.  11.
John  8.  3.  brought  unto  him  a  woman  taken  in  a.  4-
Rom.  2.  22.  sayest,  a  man  should  not  commit  a.
Gal.  5.  19.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  a.

2  Pet.  2. 14.  having  eyes  full  of  a.  not  cease  from  sin
Rev.  2.  22.  I  will  cast  them  that  commit  a.  with

ADVOCATE.

1  John  2.  1.  we  have  an  a.  with  the  Father,  Jesus

Christ  the  righteous
AFAR  joined  with  OFF

Signifies,  [1]  The  distance  between  place  and  place,
Gen.  .37.  18.  [2]  To  estrange  one's  self  from

another ,  Psal.  38.  11.  [3]  To  be  absent,  Psal.  10.
1.  [4]  To  be  strangers  or  not  of  the  visible  church,
Eph.  2. 13.  17.

Gen.  22.4.  Abraham  saw  the  place  a.  off
37. 18.  when  his  brethren  saw  Joseph  a.  off
Exod.  24.  1.  come  up,  and  worship  ye  a.  off

33.  7*  pitch  the  tabernacle  a.  off  from  the  camp
Num.  9.  10.  be  unclean,  or  be  in  a  journey  a.  off

2  Kings  4.  25.  when  the  man  of  God  saw  her  a.  off
Ezra  3.  13.  shouted,  and  the  noise  was  heard  a.  off
Neh.  12.  43.  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  a.  off
Job  36.  3.  I  will  fetch  my  knowledge  from  a.

25.  a  man  may  see  it,  a  man  may  behold  it  a.  off
39  29.  seeks  her  prey,  and  her  eyes  behold  a.  off
Psal.  65.  5.  and  of  them  that  are  a.  off  on  the  sea

138.  6.  but  the  proud  he  knoweth  a.  off

139.  2.  thou  unaerstandest  my  thoughts  a.  off
Prov.  31.  14.  she  bringeth  her  food  from  a.

Isa.  23.  7-  her  °wn  feet  shall  carry  her  a.  off

66.  19.  those  that  escape  to  the  isles  a.  off
Jer.  23.  23.  am  I  God  at  hand,  and  not  a  God  a.  off?

30.  10.  I  will  save  thee  from  a.  46.  27.

31.  t  3.  the  Lord  appeared  from  a.  unto  me

10.  and  declare  it  in  the  isles  a.  off
49.  30.  flee,  get  you  a.  off,  dwell  deep

51.  50.  go  away,  remember  the  Lord  a.  off.

Mic.  4.  3.  he  shall  rebuke  strong  nations  a.  off
Mat,  26.  58.  but  Peter  followed  him  a.  off,  and
went  in,  Mark  14.  54.  Luke  22.  54.
27.  55.  women  beholding  a.  off,  Mark  15.  40.

Mark  5.  6.  but  when  he  saw  Jesus  a.  off,  he  ran

11.  13.  and  seeing  a  fig-tree  a.  off  with  leaves
Lu.  16. 2.3.  lift  up  his  eyes,  and  seeth  Abraham  a.  off
Acts  2. 39.  the  promise  is  to  all  that  are  a.  off
Eph.  2.  17.  and  came  and  preached  peace  to  you
which  were  a.  off,  and  to  them  that  were  nigh
Heb.  11. 13.  having  seen  the  promises  a.  off
2  Pet.  1.  9.  is  blind,  and  cannot  see  a.  off
See  Far,  Stand,  Stood,

AFFAIRS.

1  Chron.  26. 32.  pertaining  to  God,  and  a.  of  the  king
Psal.  112.  5.  he  will  guide  his  a.  with  discretion
Dan.  2.  49.  he  set  Shadrach  over  a.  of  the  province

3.  12.  Jews  whom  thou  set  over  a.  of  the  province
Eph.  6.  21.  but  that  ye  also  may  know  my  a.

22.  I  have  sent,  that  ye  might  know  our  a.

Phil.  1.  27.  or  be  absent,  I  may  hear  of  your  a.

2  Tim.  2.  4.  entangleth  himself,  with  the  a.  of  life

AFFECT,  ED,  ETH.

Lam.  3.  51.  mine  eye  a.  my  heart,  because  of  alf
Acts  14.  2.  their  minds  evil  a.  against  the  brethren
Gal.  4.  17.  zealously  a.  you,  that  ye  might  a.  them
18.  it  is  good  to  be  zealously  a.  in  a  good  thing
AFFECTION.

1  Chron.  29.  3.  have  set  my  a.  to  the  house  of  God
Rom.  1.  31.  without  natural  a.  2  Tim.  3.  3.

2  Cor.  7.  15.  his  inward  a.  is  more  abundant  to  you
Col.  3.  2.  set  your  a.  on  things  above,  not  on  things


AFR


AFT


AFF

■Col.  3. 5.  mortify  therefore  fornication,  inordinate  a.
AFFECTIONS.

Rom,  1. 26.  for  this  cause  God  gave  them  up  to  vile  a.

■  Gal.  5.  24.  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  the  a.

AFFECTIONATELY.

■  1  Thess.  2.  8.  so  being  a.  desirous  of  you,  willing

AFFECTION  ED.

Rom.  12.  10.  be  kindly  a.  one  to  another
AFFINITY.

1  Kings  3.  1.  Solomon  made  a.  with  Pharaoh
$  Chron.  18.  1.  Jehoshaphat  joined  a.  with  Ahab
Ezra  9.  14.  should  we  join  in  a.  with  the  people
AFFIRM

Signifies,  [1.]  To  maintain  the  truth  of  a  thing.
Acts  25.  19.  Tit.  3.  8.  [2]  To  teach,  1  Tim.  1.7.
Rom.  3.  8.  and  as  some  a.  that  we  say,  let  us  do  evil

1  Tim.  1.  7.  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  a.
Tit.  3.  8.  these  things  I  will  that  thou  a.  constantly

AFFIRMED.

Luke  22.  59.  about  an  hour  after  another  a.

Acts  12.  15.  but  Rhoda  constantly  a.  that  it  was  so

25.  19.  and  of  Jesus,  whom  Paul  a.  to  be  alive
AFFLICT.

Gen.  15.  13.  and  they  shall  a.  them  400  years

31.  50.  if  thou  shalt  a.  my  daughters,  or  take
Exod.  1.  11.  set  over  them  task  masters  to  a.  them

22.  22.  ye  shall  not  a.  any  widow  or  fatherless
23.  if  thou  a.  them  in  any  wise,  and  they  cry

23.  t  22.  I  will  a.  them  that  a.  thee

■Lev.  16.  29.  ye  shall  a.  your  souls,  31.  |  23.  27,

32.  Num.  29.  7*

Num.  24.  24.  ships  from  Chittim  shall  a.  Ashur

30.  13.  and  every  binding  oath  to  a.  the  soul
Judg.  16.  5.  that  we  bind  him  to  a.  him

6.  wherewith  thou  mightest  be  bound  to  a.  thee
19-  she  began  to  a.  him,  and  his  strength  went

2  Sam.  7.  10.  nor  children  of  wickedness  a.  them

1  Kings  11.  39.  I  will  for  this  a.  the  seed  of  David

2  Chron.  6.  26.  turn  when  thou  dost  a.  1  Kings  8.  35-
Ezra  8.  21.  that  we  might  a.  ourselves  before  God
Job  37.  23.  touching  the  Almighty,  he  will  not  a.
Psal.  44.  2.  how  thou  didst  a.  the  people,  and  cast
55.  19.  God  shall  hear  and  a.  them,  even  he

89.  22.  nor  the  son  of  wickedness  a.  him
94.  5.  O  Lord,  they  a.  thine  heritage

143.  12.  and  destroy  all  them  that  a.  my  soul
Isa.  9.  1.  afterward  did  more  grievously  a.  her
51.  23.  put  it  into  the  hand  of  them  that  a.  thee
58.  5.  a  day  for  a  man  to  a.  his  soul  ?

64.  12.  O  Lord,  wilt  thou  a.  us  very  sore  ?

Jer.  31.  28.  as  I  watched  to  destroy  and  to  a.
Lam.  3.  33.  for  the  Lord  doth  not  a.  willingly
Amos  5.  12.  they  a.  the  just,  they  take  a  bribe

6.  14.  they  shall  a.  you  from  Hemath
Nah.  1.  12.  have  afflicted,  I  will  a.  thee  no  more
Zeph.  3.  19.  behold,  I  will  undo  all  that  a.  thee
AFFLICTED.

Exod.  1.  12.  the  more  they  a.  the  more  they  grew
Lev.  23.  29.  the  soul  that  shall  not  be  a.  that  day
Num.  11.  11.  wherefore  hast  thou  a.  thy  servant?
Deut.  26.  6.  the  Egyptians  a.  us  and  laid  on  us
Ruth  1.  21.  and  the  Almighty  hath  a.  me
2  Sam.  22.  28.  and  the  a.  people  thou  wilt  save

1  Kings  2.  26.  a.  in  all  wherein  my  father  was  a.

2  Kings  17.  20.  the  Lord  rejected  Israel,  and  a.  them
Job  6.  14.  to  him  that  is  a.  pity  should  be  shewed

30.  11.  he  hath  loosed  my  cord,  and  a.  me
34.  28.  and  he  heareth  the  cry  of  the  a.

Psal.  9.  t  12.  he  forgetteth  not  the  a.

10.  t  12.  arise,  O  Lord,  forget  not  the  a.

18.  27.  for  thou  wilt  save  the  a.  people
22.  24.  nor  abhorred  the  affliction  of  the  a.

25.  16.  have  mercy  on  me,  for  I  am  desolate  and  a.
82.  3.  do  justice  to  the  a.  and  needy

88.  7-  thou  hast  a.  me  with  all  thy  waves

15.  I  am  a.  and  ready  to  die  from  my  youth

90.  15.  according  to  days  wherein  thou  hast  a.  us
107.  17-  fools,  because  of  their  iniquities,  are  a.
116.  10.  I  was  greatly  a.  ||  119.  67.  before  I  was  a.
119. 71.  it  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  a.

75.  and  that  thou  in  faithfulness  hast  a.  me
107.  I  am  a.  very  much,  quicken  me,  O  Lord
129.  1.  many  time  have  they  a.  me  from  youth,  2.
140.  12.  Lord  will  maintain  the  cause  of  the  a.
Prov.  15.  15.  all  the  days  of  the  a.  are  evil
22.  22.  neither  oppress  the  a.  in  the  gate

26.  28.  a  lying  tongue  hateth  those  that  are  a.

31.  5.  lest  they  pervert  the  judgment  of  the  a.

Isa.  9- 1-  when  at  first  he  lightly  a.  the  land  of  Zeb.

49.  13.  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  his  a.

51.  21.  hear  now  this,  thou  a.  and  drunken
53.  4.  did  esteem  him  smitten  of  God  and  a.

7.  he  was  oppressed,  and  was  a.  yet  he  opened  not

54. 11.  O  thou  a.  tossed  with  tempest,  not  comforted
58.  3.  wherefore  have  we  a.  oui  souls  ?

10.  and  if  thou  satisfy  the  a.  soul,  thy  light
60.  14.  the  sons  of  them  that  a.  thee  shall  come
63.  9.  in  all  their  affliction  he  was  a.  and  angel
■Lam.  1.  4.  her  priests  sigh,  her  virgins  are  a.

5.  enemies  prosper,  for  the  Lord  hath  a.  her

12.  my  sorrow  wherewith  the  Lord  hath  a.  me
Mic.  4.  6.  and  I  will  gather  her  that  I  have  a.
Nah.  1.  12.  tho’  I  have  a.  I  will  afflict  no  more
Zeph.  3.  12.  I  will  leave  in  thee  an  a.  people
Mat.  24.  9.  they  shall  deliver  you  up  to  be  a.

2  Cor.  1.  6.  whether  we  be  a.  it  is  for  consolation
1  Tim.  5.  10.  if  she  have  relieved  the  a.

Heb.  11.  37.  being  destitute,  a.  and  tormented
Jam.  4.  9.  be  a.  and  mourn,  and  weep
5.  13.  is  any  among  you  a.  ?  let  him  pray
AFFLICTION

Signifies,  [1.]  Adversity,  trouble,  or  distress.  Job
5.  6.  [2]  Outward  oppression,  Exod.  3.  f.  |  4.
31.  [3]  Persecution  for  religion,  Mark  4.  if.
Heb.  10.  32.  [4]  Correction  from  God,  Jonah  2. 2.
■Gen.  16.  11.  because  the  Lord  hath  heard  thy  a.

29.  32.  surely  the  Lord  hath  looked  upon  my  a.

31.  42.  God  hath  seen  mine  a.  and  labour
41.  52.  caused  me  to  be  fruitful  in  the  land  of  a.
.Exod.  3.7.  I  haveseenthe  a.  of  my  people,  Actsf.  34.
I".  I  will  bring  you  out  of  the  a.  of  Egypt
4.  31.  and  that  He  had  looked  on  their  a.

6


Deut.  16.  3.  thou  shalt  eat  even  the  bread  of  a.

1  Kings  22.  27.  2  Chron.  18.  26.
26.  7>  the  Lord  heard  and  looked  on  our  a.

1  Sam.  1.  11.  if  thou  wilt  indeed  look  on  my  a.

2.  t  32.  thou  shalt  see  the  a.  of  the  tabernacle

2  Sam.  16.  12.  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  look  on  my  a.
2  Kings  14.  26.  the  Lord  saw  the  a.  of  Israel

2  Chron.  20.  9.  cry  to  thee  in  our  a.  thou  wilt  hear

33.  12.  Manasseh  was  in  a.  and  sought  the  Lord
Neh.  1.  3.  the  remnant  are  in  great  a.  and  reproach

9.  9.  and  didst  see  the  a.  of  our  fathers  in  Egypt
Job  5.  6.  though  a.  cometh  not  forth  of  the  dust

10. 15.  I  am  Full  of  confusion,  see  thou  mine  a.

30.  16.  the  days  of  a.  have  taken  hold  on  me

27.  the  days  of  a.  prevented  me
36.  8.  and  if  they  be  holden  in  cords  of  a.

15.  he  delivereth  the  poor  in  his  a.

21.  for  this  hast  thou  chosen  rather  than  a.

Psal.  25. 18.  look  upon  my  a.  and  pain,  forgive
44.  24.  and  forgettest  our  a.  and  oppression
66.  11.  thou  laidst  a.  upon  our  loins
78.  t  42.  day  when  he  delivered  them  from  a.

88.  9.  mine  eye  mourneth  by  reason  of  a.

106.  44.  he  regarded  their  a.  when  he  heard

107. 10.  sit  in  dalkness,  being  bound  in  a.  and  iron
39.  they  are  brought  low  through  a.  and  sorrow
41.  yetsetteth  he  the  poor  on  high  from  a.

119.  50.  this  is  my  comfort  in  my  a.  thy  word
92.  I  should  then  have  perished  in  mine  a.

153.  consider  mine  a.  and  deliver  me,  for  I  do  not
Isa.  30.  20.  though  the  Lord  give  you  water  of  a.

48. 10.  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  a.

63. 9.  in  all  their  a.  he  was  afflicted,  and  the  angel

Jer.  4. 15.  publisheth  a.  from  mount  Ephraim

15.  11.  to  intreat  thee  well  in  the  time  of  a.

16.  19.  O  Lord,  my  refuge  in  the  day  of  a.

30.  15.  why  criest  thou  for  thine  a.  ?  thy  sorrow

48. 16.  Moab’s  calamity  is  near,  and  a.  hasteth  fast
Lam.  1.  3.  Judah  is  gone  into  captivity  because  of  a.

7.  Jerusalem  remembered  In  the  days  of  her  a.
9.  had  no  comforter,  O  Lord,  behold  mine  a.

3.  1.  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen  a.  by  the  rod

19.  remembering  my  a.  and  my  misery

IIos.  5.  15.  in  their  a.  they  will  seek  me  early
Amos  6. 6.  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  a.  of  Joseph
Obad.  13.  thou  shouidest  not  have  looked  on  their  a.
Jonah  2.  2.  I  cried  by  reason  of  my  a.  to  the  Lord
Nah.  1.  9.  a.  shall  not  rise  up  the  second  time
Hab.  3.  7.  I  saw  the  tents  of  Cushan  in  a.

Zech.  1.  15.  and  they  helped  forward  the  a.

8.  10.  that  went  out  or  came  in,  because  of  a.

10.  11 .  and  he  shall  pass  through  the  sea  with  a.
Mark  4.  17..when  a.  ariseth  for  the  word’s  sake

13.  19.  for  in  those  days  shall  be  a.  such  as
Acts  7.11.  there  came  a  dearth,  and  great  a.

2  Cor.  2.  4.  for  out  of  much  a.  I  wrote  to  you

4.  17.  our  light  a.  which  is  but  for  a  moment

8.  2.  how  that  in  a  great  trial  of  a.

Phil.  1.  16.  supposing  to  add  a.  to  my  Donds
4.  14.  that  ye  communicate  with  me  in  my  a.

1  Thess.  1.  6.  having  received  the  word  in  much  a.
3.  7-  we  were  comforted  over  you  in  all  our  a.

Heb.  11. 25.  chopsing  rather  to  suffer  a.  with  people
Jam.  1.  27.  to  visit  the  fatherless  in  their  a.

5. 10.  for  an  example  of  suffering  a.  and  of  patience

AFFLICTIONS.

Psal.  34.  19-  many  are  the  a.  of  the  righteous
132.  1.  Lord,  remember  David,  and  all  his  a.

Acts  7.  10.  and  delivered  him  out  of  all  his  a.

20.  23.  saying,  that  bonds  and  a.  abide  me

2  Cor.  6.  4.  approving  in  much  patience,  in  a.

Col.  1. 24.  fill  up  what  is  behind  of  the  a.  of  Christ

1  Thess.  3.  3.  no  man  should  be  moved  by  these  a.

2  Tim.  1.  8.  be  partakers  of  the  a.  of  the  gospel

3.  11.  known  the  a.  which  came  to  me  at  Antioch

4.  5.  but  watch  in  all  things,  endure  a.

Heb.  10.  32.  ye  endured  a  great  fight  of  a.

33.  whilst  ye  were  made  a  gazing-stock  by  a.

1  Pet.  5.  9.  the  same  a.  accomplished  in  brethren

AFFORDING.

Psal.  144. 13.  our  garners  full  a.  all  manner  of  store
AFFRIGHT,  ED.

Deut.  7.  21.  Thou  shalt  not  be  a.  at  them

2  Chron.  32.  18.  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  a.
Job  18. 20.  as  they  that  went  before  were  a.

39.  22.  he  mocketh  at  fear,  and  is  not  a.

Isa.  21.  4.  my  heart  panted,  fearfulness  a.  me
Jer.  51.  32.  reeds  are  burnt,  and  men  of  war  a.
Mark  16.  5.  and  they  were  a.  Luke  24.  37.

6.  he  saith,  be  not  a.  ye  seek  Jesus  crucified
Rev.  11. 13.  and  the  remnant  were  a.  gave  glory
AFOOT.

Mark  6.  33.  many  ran  a.  thither  out  of  all  cities
Acts  20.  13.  Paul  minding  himself  to  go  a.
AFORE.

2  Kings  20.  4.  a.  Isaiah  was  gone  out  into  the  court
Psal.  129.  6.  which  withereth  a.  it  groweth  up
Isa.  18.  5.  a.  the  harvest  when  the  bud  is  perfect
Ezek.  33.  22.  a.  he  that  was  escaped  came
Rom.  1. 2.  which  he  had  promised  a.  by  his  prophets

9.  23.  which  he  had  a.  prepared  unto  glory
Eph.  3.  3.  the  mystery,  as  1  wrote  a.  in  few  words

AFOREHAND.

Mark  14.  8.  she  is  come  a.  to  anoint  my  body
AFORETIME.

Job  17.  6.  me  a  by-word,  and  a.  I  was  as  a  tabret
Isa.  52.  4.  my  people  went  down  a.  into  Egypt
Jer.  30.  20.  their  children  also  shall  be  as  a.

Dan.  6.  10.  he  prayed  before  his  God,  as  he  did  a.
John  9-  13.  they  brought  him  that  a.  was  blind
Rom.  15. 4.  for  whatsoever  things  were  written  a.
AFRAID.

Gen.  42.  35.  saw  bundles  of  money,  they  were  a.
Exod.  34.  30.  and  they  were  a.  to  come  nigh  him
Lev.  26.  6.  and  none  shall  make  you  a.  Job  11.  19.
Num.  12.  8.  why  not  a.  to  speak  against  Moses  ?
Deut.  7-  19.  do  to  all  the  people  of  whom  thou  art  a.
Judy.  7-  3.  proclaim,  whosoever  is  fearful,  and  a.

1  Sam.  4.7.  the  Philistines  were  a.  for  they  said
18.  29.  Saul  was  yet  the  more  a.  of  David

2  Sam.  1.  14.  how  wastthou  not  a.  to  destroy

14.  15.  because  the  people  have  made  me  a.


2  Sam.  17. 2.  I  will  come  on  him,  and  make  him  a.
22.  5.  ungodly  men  made  me  a.  Psal.  18.  4.

Neh.  6. 9.  for  they  all  made  us  a.  saying,  their  hands
Job  9.  28.  I  am  a.  of  all  my  sorrows,  I  know  that
11.  19.  shalt  lie.  down,  and  none  shall  make  thee  a.

13.  11.  shall  not  his  excellency  make  you  a.

21.  and  let  not  thy  dread  make  me  a.

15.  24.  trouble  and  anguish  shall  make  him  a.

18. 11.  terrors  shall  make  him  a.  on  every  side

21. 6.  even  when  1  remember,  I  am  a.  and  tremble

23. 15.  when  I  consider,  I  am  a.  of  him

33.  7.  behold,  my  terror  shall  not  make  thee  a.

39.  20.  canst  thou  make  him  a.  as  a  grasshopper  ?
41.  25.  he  raiseth  up  himself,  the  mighty  are  a.
Psal.  56.  3.  what  time  I  am  a.  I  will  trust  in  thee
65.  8.  they  that  dwell  are  a.  at  thy  tokens
77*  16.  the  waters  saw  thee,  and  they  were  a.

83. 15.  and  make  them  a.  with  thy  storm
119.  120.  and  1  am  a.  of  thy  judgments

Isa.  17.  2.  and  none  shall  make  them  a.  Ezek.  34.

28.  Mic.  4.  4.  Zeph.  3. 13.

33. 14.  the  sinners  in  Zion  aie  a.  fearfulness  hath
41.  5.  the  ends  of  the  earth  were  a.  and  came
57.  11.  and  of  whom  hast  thou  been  a.  or  feared

Jer.  30. 10.  be  quiet,  and  none  shall  make  him  a.
36.  24.  yet  they  were  not  a.  nor  rent  garments
38. 19.  Zedekiah  said,  I  am  a.  of  the  Jews

39. 17.  not  given  to  the  men,  of  whom  thou  arts.
Ezek.  39.  26.  and  none  made  them  a.  Nah.  2.  11.
Dan.  4.  5.  1  saw  a  dream,  which  made  me  a.

Jonah  1.  5.  then  the  mariners  were  a.  10.

Hab.  2.  17.  made  them  a.  because  of  men’s  blood
Mark 5.  15.  in  his  right  mind,  were  a.  Luke8. 35.

9.  32.  they  understood  not,  and  were  a.  to  ask  him

10.  32.  and  as  they  followed,  they  were  a.

16.  8.  nor  said  they  any  thing,  for  they  were  a.
Luke  8.  25.  and  they  being  a.  wondered,  saying
Acts  9.  26.  but  they  were  all  a.  of  Saul

22.  9.  they  with  me  saw  the  light,  and  were  a.
Gal.  4.  11.  lams,  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed
Heb.  11.  23.  not  a.  of  the  king’s  commandment

1  Pet.  3.  6.  and  are  not  a.  with  any  amazement

2  Pet.  2. 10.  they  are  not  a.  to  speak  evil  of  dignities

Be  AFRAID.

Deut.  1.  29.  dread  not,  neither  be  a.  of  them,  31.  6.

1  Sam.  23.  3.  behold  we  be  a.  here  in  Judah

2  Sam.  22. 46.  be  a.  out  of  close  places,  Psal.  18. 45.
Neh.  6.  13.  was  he  hired  that  1  should  be  a.

Job  5. 21.  nor  shalt  thou  be  a.  of  destruction
19.  29.  be  ye  a.  of  the  sword,  for  wrath  bringeth
Psal.  27. 1.  L.  is  my  strength,  of  whom  shall  l  be  a.  ?
Isa.  8. 12.  nor  fear  ye  their  fear,  nor  be  a.  44. 8.

19. 17.  that  maketh  mention,  shall  be  a.  in  himself
51.  12.  thou,  that  thou  shouidest  be  a.  of  a  man
Rom.  13.  4.  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  a.

Not  be  AFRAID.

Deut.  1 . 17.  you  shall  not  be  a.  of  the  face  of  man
7. 18.  thou  shalt  not  be  a.  of  them,  18. 22.

Psal.  3. 6. 1  will  not  be  a.  of  ten  thousands  of  people

56. 11.  I  will  not  be  a.  what  man  can  do  to  me
#91.  5.  thou  shalt  not  be  a.  for  the  terror  by  night

112.  7.  he  shall  not  be  a.  of  evil  tidings,  nis  heart
8.  his  heart  is  established,  he  shall  not  be  a.

Prov.  3.  24.  when  thou  liest  down,  shalt  not  be  a.
Isa.  12.2.  God  my  salvation,  I  will  trust  and  not  be  a.
31. 4.  he  will  not  be  a.  of  their  voice,  nor  abase
Amos  3.  6.  a  trumpet  be  blown,  and  people  not  be  a.
Rom.  13.  3.  wilt  thou  then  not  be  a.  of  the  power  ?
Be  not  AFRAID.

Deut.  20.  1.  be  not  a.  of  them,  Josh.  11.  6.  Neh.  4.

14.  Jer.  10.  5.  Ezek.  2.  6.  Luke  12.  4.

1  Sam.  28. 13.  Saul  said  be  not  a.  what  saweSt  thou

2  Kings  1. 15.  angel  said,  go  down,  be  not  a.  of  him
Psal.  49. 16.  be  not  a.  when  one  is  made  rich
Prov.  3.  25.  be  not  a.  of  sudden  fear  nor  desolation
Isa.  40.  9.  lift  up  thy  voice,  lift  it  up,  be  not  a.

Jer.  l.  8.  be  not  a.  of  their  faces,  for  I  am  with  thee
Ezek.  2.  6.  and  thou  son  of  man,  be  not  a.  of  them
Mat.  14.  27.  it  is  T ,  be  not  a.  Mark  6. 50.  John  6.  20.

17.  7.  Jesus  touched  them  and  said,  arise,  be  not  a.

28. 10.  be  not  a.  go  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go

Mark  5.  36.  saith  to  the  ruler,  be  not  a.  only  believe
Acts  18. 9.  be  not  a.  but  speak,  and  hold  not  thy  peace.
1  Pet.  3. 14.  be  not  a.  of  their  terror,  nor  be  troubled
Sore  AFRAID.

Gen.  20.  8.  told  these  things,  and  men  were  sore  a.
Exod.  14.  10.  Egyptians  marched,  they  wer e  sore  a.
Num.  22.  3.  Moab  was  sore  a.  of  the  people
Josh.  9.  24.  therefore  we  were  sore  a.  of  our  lives
1  Sam.  17.  24.  fled  from  Goliath,  and  were  sore  a.

28.  20.  Saul  fell  along  on  the  earth,  and  was  sore  a.

31.  4.  his  armour-bearer  was  sore  a.  1  Chr.  10.  4.
Neh.  2.  2.  nothing  but  sorrow,  and  was  very  sore  a.
Mark  9. 6.  wist  not  what  to  say,  for  they  were  sore  a.
Luke  2.  9.  shone  about  them,  and  they  were  sore  a.

Was  AFRAID.

Gen.  3.  10.  I  heard  thy  voice,  and  I  was  a.

18. 15.  saying,  I  laughed  not,  for  she  was  a.

32.  7-  then  Jacob  was  greatly  a.  and  distressed
Exod.  3. 6.  Moses  hid  his  face,  was  a.  to  look  on  God
Deut.  9. 19.  I  was  a.  of  the  anger  and  displeasure
Ruth.  3.8.  at  midnight  the  man  was  a.  and  turned

1  Sam.  18. 12.  Saul  was  a.  of  David,  15.

21.  1.  Ahimelech  7cas  a.  at  the  meeting  of  David
28.  5.  Saul  saw  the  host  of  Philistines,  he  was  a.

2  Sam.  6.  9.  David  Was  a.  of  the  Lord,  1  Chr.  13. 12.
1  Chron.  21.  30.  David  could  not  go,  for  he  was  a.
Job  3. 25.  that  which  I  was  a.  of,  is  coine  to  me

32.  6. 1  was  a.  and  durst  not  shew  my  opinion
Jer.  26.  21.  when  Urijah  heard  it,  he  was  a.

Dan.  8. 17.  when  he  came,  was  a.  and  fell  on  my  face
Hab.  3. 2.  O  Lord,  I  heard  thy  speech,  and  was  a.
Mai.  2.  5.  he  feared  me,  and  was  a.  before  rny  name
Mat.  2.  22.  Joseph  was  a.  to  go  thither

14.  30.  when  he  saw  the  wind  boisterous,  was  a.

25.  25.  I  was  a.  and  hid  thy  talent  in  the  earth

John  19.  8.  when  Pilate  heard,  he  was  the  more  a
Acts  10.  4.  when  Cornelius  looked,  he  was  a.
AFRESH.

Heb.  6. 6.  they  crucify'  the  Son  of  God  a.  and  put  hiu
AFTER.

Gen.  18. 12.  saying  a.  I  am  waxed  old,  shall  I


A  G  A


AHA


A  L  1


Gen.  38. 24.  about  three  months  a.  it  was  told  Judah
Hum.  15.  39.  that  ye  seek  not  a.  your  own  heart
Dent.  6.  14.  ye  shall  not  go  a.  other  gods
Josh.  10. 14.  no  day  like  that  before  it, ora.  it
1  Sam.  15.  31.  Samuel  turned  again  a.  Saul
24. 14.  a.  whom  is  the  kina  come  out?  a.  a  dog

1  Kings  17.  13.  and  a.  make  for  thee  and  thy  son
Kelt.  13. 19.  not  be  opened  till  a.  the  sabbath
Job  10. 6.  that  thou  inquiresta.  mine  iniquity

30. 5.  they  cried  a.  them,  as  a.  a  thief
Psal.  28. 4.  .give  them  a.  the  work  of  their  hands
Keel.  1.  11.  with  those  that  shall  come  a.

Isa.  11.  3.  he  shall  not  judge  a.  the  sight  of  eyes
Etek.  46.17.  a.  it  shall  return  to  the  prince
Hos.  11.  10.  they  shall  walk  a.  the  Lord
Mat.  26.  32.  a.  I  ain  risen  again,  1  will  go  before
Mark  16.  14.  which  had  seen  him  a.  he  was  risen
19.  so  then  a.  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  them
j Luke  6.  1.  on  the  second  sabbath  a.  the  first
£2.  58.  and  a.  a  little  while  another  saw  him
59.  about  the  space  of  an  hour  a.  another
£3.  26.  that  he  might  bear  it  a.  Jesus
John  13. 27-  a.  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him
Act s 5. 7-  about  the  space  of  three  hours  a.

Gal.  3.  17.  the  law  which  was  430  years  a.

2  Pet.  2. 6.  to  those  that  a.  should  live  ungodly

AFTER  that.

Exod.  3.  20.  and  a.  that  he  will  let  you  go
JJeut.  24.  4.  shall  not  take  her  a.  that  she  is  defiled
Judff.  15.7.  I  wiH  be  avenged, and  a.  that  1  will  cease
2  Sam.  21. 14.  a.  that  God  was  intreated  for  the  land
Job  21.  3.  a.  that  I  have  spoken,  mock  on
Eccl.  9-  3.  and  a.  that  they  go  to  the  dead
Jer.  31.  19.  a.  that  I  was  turned,  1  repented
lAike  12.  4.  a.  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do

13.  9.  then  a.  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down
15.  4.  a.  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it
Acts  7.7  a.  that  shall  they  come  forth  and  serve  me
1  Cor.  15. 6.  a.  that  he  was  seen  of  above  500  at  once
Re v.  20. 3.  and  a.  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little
AFTER  this.

Gen.  23. 19.  a.  this  Abraham  buried  Sarah  his  wife
£  Sam.  2. 1.  a.  this  David  inquired  of  the  Lord
Acts  15. 16.  a.  this  I  will  return,  and  build  again
AFTERNOON.

Judff.  19.  8.  they  tarried  till  a.  and  did  eat
AFTERWARD,  S.

Exod.  11.  1.  a.  he  will  let  you  go  hence
Hum.  31.2.  a.  shalt  thou  be  gathered  to  thy  people
Judff.  7.  11.  a.  shall  thy  hands  be  strengthened
1  Sam.  9. 13.  he  blessed  the  sacrifice,  a.  they  eat
24.  5.  a.  David’s  heart  smote  him
Job  18.  2.  mark,  and  a.  we  will  speak
Psal.  73.  24.  guide  me,  and  a.  receive  me  to  glory
Prov.  20.  17.  bread  of  deceit  is  sweet,  but  a.

24.  27.  prepare  thy  work,  and  a.  build  thy  house
£8.  23.  a.  snail  find  more  favour  than  he  that

29. 11.  but  a  wise  man  keepeth  it  in  till  a.

Jios.  3.  5.  a.  shall  the  children  of  Israel  return
Joel  2.  28.  a.  1  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all
Mat.  4.  2.  fasted,  he  was  a.  an  hungered,  Luke  4.  2.

£1.  32.  yef  when  ye  had  seen  it,  repented  not  a.
John  5.  14.  a.  Jesus  findeth  him  in  the  temple

13.  36.  but  thou  shalt  follow  me  a.

1  Cor.  15. 23.  a.  they  that  are  Christ’s  at  his  coming
Gal.  3.  23.  the  faith  that  should  a.  be  revealed
Heb.  4. 8.  would  not  a.  have  spoken  of  another  day

12.11.  a.  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteous.
17.  a.  when  he  would  nave  inherited  the  blessing

Jude  5.  a.  destroyed  them  that  believed  not
AGAIN.

Gen.  8.  21.  I  will  not  a.  curse,  nor  a.  smite
15.  16.  but  they  shall  come  hither  a.

30.  31.  1  will  a.  feed  and  keep  thy  flock
38.  26.  Judah  knew  her  a.  no  more
Erod.  10.  29.  said,  I  will  see  a.  thy  face  no  more

14. 13.  ye  shall  see  them  a.  no  more  for  ever
23. 4.  tnou  shalt  surely  bring  it  back  to  him  a.

Hum.  32. 15.  will  yet  a.  leave  them  in  the  wilderness
Josh.  5. 2.  and  circumcise  a.  the  children  of  Israel
£  Sam.  16.  19.  and  a.  whom  should  I  serve

1  Kings  17 . 22.  the  soul  of  the  child  came  into  him  a,

2  Kings  19.  30.  shall  yet  a.  take  root  downward
Ezra  9. 14.  should  we  a.  break  thy  commandments
Neh.  13. 21.  if  ye  do  so  a.  I  will  lay  hands  on  you
Job  14. 14.  if  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  a.  ?

Psal.  85. 6.  wilt  thou  not  revive  us  a.  that  thy
107.  39.  a.  they  are  minished  and  brought  low
140.  10.  into  deep  pits,  that  they  rise  not  up  a.
Prov.  2. 19-  none  that  go  to  her  return  a.

19. 19.  if  thou  deliver  him,  thou  must  do  it  a.

Eccl.  8.  14.  a.  there  be  wicked  men  to  whom
Exek.  26. 21.  yet  shalt  thou  never  be  found  a.

Amos  7.  8.  I  will  not  a.  pass  by  them,  8.  2.

8. 14.  they  shall  fall,  and  never  rise  up  a.

Zech.  2.  12.  the  Lord  shall  choose  Jerusalem  a.
John  4.  13.  drinketh  of  this  water  shall  thirst  a.
Rom.  8. 15.  not  received  spirit  of  bondage  a.  to  fear
9. 1 20.  who  art  thou  that  answerest  a.  ?

Phtl.  4.  4.  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  a.  1  say  rejoice
Heb.  1.  5.  a.  I  will  he  to  him  a  Father,  and  he  shall

2. 13.  and  a.  1  will  put  my  trust  in  him

1  Pet.  1.  3.  hath  begotten  us  a.  to  a  lively  hope
See  Born,  Bring,  Brought,  Come,  Turn,
Turned.

AGAINST.

Gen.  16.  12.  his  hand  will  be  a.  every  man
Exod.  7. 15.  stand  by  the  liver’s  brink  a.  become
Lev.  20. 3.  I  ’ll  set  my  face  a.  that  man.  Dent.  29. 20.
£  Kings  16. 11.  so  Urijah  made  it  a.  king  Ahaz  came
19.  22.  a.  whom  hast  thou  exalted  thy  voice  ?

Isa.  40.  +  10.  the  Lord  will  come  a.  the  strong  hand
Jer.  25.  13.  which  1  have  pronounced  a.  it.

Etek.  13.  20.  behold,  1  am  a.  your  pillows
Mat.  10.  35.  to  set  a  man  a.  his  father,  Luke  12.  53.
12.  30.  he  that  is  not  with  me,  is  a.  me
Luke  2.  34.  for  a  sign  which  shall  be  spoken  a.

14.  31.  that  cometh  a.  him  with  20,000  to
Acts  19.  36.  these  things  cannot  be  spoken  a.

28.  22.  this  sect  is  every  where  spoken  a.
&<Anoth  er.Goh.  ITim,  Jer  usa  lem,  Israel,
Lohlj,  Me, Over, Thee, Them,  Us,  You.


AGATE,  S.

Exod.  28. 19.  third  row,  an  a.  an  amethyst,  39. 12.
Isa.  54. 12.  I  will  make  thy  windows  of  a.

Ezek.  27.  16.  Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  a.
AGE

Signifies,  [1]  The  whole  continuance  of  a  matt's  life,
Gen.  47  -  28.  [2]  Tunes  past,  present,  or  to  come,
Eph.  2.  7*  I  3.  5.  [3]  A  time  apt  for  conception ,
Heb.  11.  11.

Gen.  47.  28.  the  whole  a.  of  Jacob  was  147  years
48.  10.  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim  for  a.

Hum.  8. 25.  from  the  a.  of  50  years  cease  waiting
1  Sam.  2.  33.  shall  die  in  the  flower  of  their  «.

1  Kings  14.  4.  Ahijah’s  eyes  were  set  by  reason  of  a.

1  Chron.  23.  3.  Levites  numbered  from  the  a.  of  30.
24.  from  the  a.  of  twenty  years  and  upward

2  Chron.  36.  17-  or  on  him  that  stooped  for  a.

Job  5.  26.  shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  a  full  a.

8.  8.  inquire,  1  pray  thee,  of  the  former  a.

11. 17.  thy  a.  shall  he  clearer  than  noon-day
Psal.  39. 5.  my  a.  is  as  nothing  before  thee
Isa.  38.  12.  my  a.  is  departed  and  removed
Zech.  8.  4.  every  man  with  his  staff  for  a.

Mark  5. 42.  she  was  of  the  a.  of  12  years,  Luke  8. 42.
Luke  2. 36.  Anna  a  prophetess  was  of  a  great  a.
t  52.  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  a.

3.  23.  Jesus  began  to  be  about  30 years  of  a.

John  9.  21.  he  is  of  a.  ask  him,  23.

Acts  13.  t  36.  David  had  in  his  own  a.  served  God

1  Cor.  7.  36.  if  she  pass  the  flower  of  her  a.

14.  f  20.  in  understanding  be  of  a  ripe  a.

Eph.  4.  t  13.  till  we  come  to  a.  of  fulness  of  Christ
Heb.  5. 14.  strong  meat  belongs  to  them  of  full  a.

11. 11.  Sarah  was  delivered  when  she  was  past  a.
See  Old,  Stricken.

AGES.

Psal.  145.  f  13.  thy  kingdom  a  kingdom  of  all  a.
Isa.  26.  t  4.  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  rock  of  a.
Eph.  2.  7>  that  in  the  a.  to  come  he  might  show
3.  5.  which  in  other  a.  was  not  made  known
21.  to  him  be  glory  in  the  church  through  all  a.
Col.  1.  26.  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from  a.
AGED.

2  Sam.  19.  32.  Barzillai  was  a  veiy  a.  man

Job  12.  20.  he  taketh  away  the  understanding  of  a.

15.  10.  the  grey-headed  and  very  a.  men
29-  8.  and  the  a.  arose  and  stood  up

32.  9.  neither  do  the  a.  understand  judgment
Jer.  6.  11.  the  a.  with  him  that  is  full  of  days
Tit.  2. 2.  that  the  a.  men  be  sober,  grave,  sound
3.  the  a.  women,  that  they  be  in  behaviour
Philem.  9.  being  such  an  one  as  Paul  the  a.

AGO.

1  Sam.  9.  20.  the  asses  that  were  lost  three  days  a.

2  Kings  19.  25.  thou  not  heard  long  a.  Isa.  37.  26.
Ezra  5.  11.  house  that  was  builded  many  years  a.
Isa.  22. 11.  respect  to  him  that  fashioned  it  long  a.
Mat.  11. 21.would  have  repented  long  a.  Luke  10. 13.
Mark  9.  21.  how  long  a.  since  this  came  to  him  ?
Acts  10.  30.  4  days  a.  I  was  fasting  until  this  hour

15.  17.  ye  know  how  that  a  good  while  a.

2  Cor.  8.  10.  but  also  to  be  forward  a  year  a.

9.  2.  that  Achaia  was  ready  a  year  a.

12. 2. 1  knew  a  man  above  fourteen  years  a.
AGONE.

1  Sam.  30.  13.  because  three  days  a.  I  fell  sick
AGONY.

Luke  22. 44.  being  in  an  a.  he  prayed  more  earnestly

agree

Signifies,  [1]  To  bargain  with.  Mat.  20.  2,  13.  [2]
To  approve,  or  give  consent  to.  Acts  5.  40.  [3]  To
be  like,  Mark  14.  70.  [4]  To  conspire,  or  resolve,
John  9.  22.

AGREE,  ED,  ETH.

Amos  3. 3.  can  two  walk  tog-ether  except  they  be  a.  ?
Mat.  5.25.  a.  with  thine  adversary  quickly
18. 19.  if  two  of  you  shall  a.  on  earth,  touching
20.  2.  when  he  had  a.  with  labourers  for  a  penny
13.  didst  thou  not  a.  with  me  for  a  penny  ?

Mark  14.  56.  their  witness  a.  not  together,  59.

70.  art  a  Galilean,  and  thy  speech  a.  thereto
Luke  5.  36.  taken  out  of  the  new,  a.  not  with  old
John  9.  22.  the  Jews  had  a.  already  if  any  man
Acts  5.  9-  how  is  it  that  ye  have  a.  to  tempt
40.  and  to  him  they  a.  and  when  they  had  called

15. 15.  and  to  this  a.  the  words  of  the  prophet
23.  20.  the  Jews  have  a.  to  desire  thee  to  bring
28.  25.  when  they  a.  not  among  themselves

1  John  5.  8.  spirit,  water,  blood,  these  a.  in  one
Rev.  17. 17.  a.  to  give  their  kingdom  to  the  beast

AGREEMENT.

2  Kings  18. 31  .make  an  a.  by  a  present,  Isa.  36.  16.
Isa.  28. 15.  ye  have  said,  with  hell  are  we  at  o.

18.  and  your  a.  with  hell  shall  not  stand
Dan.  11.  6.  to  the  king  of  the  north,  to  make  an  a.

2  Cor.  6. 16.  what  a.  hath  the  temple  of  God  with
AGROUND.

Acts  27.  41.  two  seas  met,  they  ran  the  ship  a.
AGUE.

Lev.  26. 16. 1  will  appoint  terror  and  the  burning  a.
AH.

Psal.  35.  25.  nor  say,  a.  so  would  we  have  it
La. 1.4.  a.  sinful  nation,  a  people  ladenwith  iniquity
24.  a.  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries
Jer.  1.  6.  then  said  1,  a.  Lord  God,  1  cannot  speak
4. 10.  a.  Lord  God,  thou  hast  deceived  this  people

14.13.  a.  Lord  God,  the  prophets  say  to  them
22.  18.  a.  brother,  a.  sister,  a.  Lord ,  a.  his  glory

32. 17.  a.  Lord,  thou  hast  made  the  heaven
34.5.  they  will  lament  thee,  saying,  a.  Lord

Ezek.  4. 14.  a.  Lord,  my  soul  hath  not  been  polluted
9. 8.  a.  Lord,  wilt  thou  destroy  the  residueof  Israel
11.  13.  a.  Lord,  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end  of  the
20.  49.  a.  Lord,  they  say  of  me,  doth  he  not  speak

21. 15.  a.  the  sword  is  made  bright,  it  is  wrapt  up
Mark  15.  29.  a.  thou  that  destroyest  the  temple

AHA.

Psal.  35.  21.  they  said,  a.  our  eye  hath  seen  it
40.  15.  let  them  be  desolate,  that  say  unto  me  a.

70. 3.  let  them  be  turned  back  that  say  a.  a.

Isa.  44. 16.  a.  I  am  warm,  1  have  seen  the  fire
Ezek.  25.  3.  saidst  a.  against  my  sanctuary


Ezek.  26. 2.  because  Tyrus  hath  said,  a.  she  is  broken-.'
36.  2.  a.  the  ancient  places  are  ours
AIDED.

Judg.  9.  £4.  a.  him  in  the  killing  of  his  brethren
AILED,  ETH.

Gen.  21. 17.  what  a.  thee,  Hagar  ?  fear  not
Judg.  18.  23.  they  said  to  Micah,  what  a.  thee  ?

1  Sam.  11. 5.  Saul  said,  what  a.  the  people  to  weep  t

2  Sam.  14. 5.  the  king  said,  what  a.  2  Kings  6.  28.
Psal.  114.  5.  what  a.  thee,  O  sea,  that  thou  fledst  ?
Isa.  22. 1.  what  a.  thee  now,  that  thou  art  gone  up

A 1 R.

2  Sam.  21. 10.  nor  birds  of  the  a.  to  rest  on  them
Job  41. 16.  that  no  a.  can  come  between  them
Prov.  30.  19.  the  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  a.

Eccl.  lo.  20.  a  bird  of  the  a.  shall  carry  the  voice.
Mat.  8. 20.  and  the  birds  of  the  a.  have  nests

13.  32.  the  birds  of  the  a.  come  and  lodge  in  th»

branches  thereof,  Mark  4.  32.  Luke  9.  58,
Acts  22. 23.  and  as  they  threw  dust  into  the  a.

1  Cor.  9.  26.  so  fight  I ,  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  a.

14.  9.  for  ye  shall  speak  into  the  a.

Eph.  2.  2.  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  a.

1  Thess.  4. 17-  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  a.
Rev.  9. 2.  the  sun  and  the  a.  were  darkened

16. 17.  the  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  a.

See  Fowls.

ALARM.

Hum.  10. 5.  when  ye  blow  an  a,  then  the  camps,  6.
7.  you  shall  blow,  but  shall  not  sound  an  a.

9.  and  if  ye  go  to  war,  then  ye  shall  blow  an  a.

2  Chron.  13. 12.  trumpets  to  cry  ana.  against  you
Isa.  16.  1 9.  a.  is  fallen  on  thy  summer  fruits

Jer.  4. 19.  thou  hast  heard,  ( )  my  soul,  the  a.  of  was*'

49.  2.  the  day  is  come,  I  will  cause  an  a.  of  war
Joel  2.  1.  and  sound  an  a.  in  my  hoiy  mountain
Zeph.  1. 16.  a  day  of  a.  against  the  fenced  cities

ALAS.

Hum.  12.  11.  Aaron  said  to  Moses,  a.  my  Lord
24.  23.  a.  who  shall  live  when  od  doth  this  ?

Josh.  7.  7.  Joshua  said,  a.  O  Lord,  why  hast  thou
Judg.  6. 22.  a.  because  1  have  seen  an  angel
11.  35.  a.  daughter,  thou  hast  brought  me  low

1  Kings  13.  30.  mourned  over  him,  a.  my  brother

2  Kings  3.  10.  a.  that  the  Lord  hath  called  these
6.  5.  he  cried,  a.  master,  for  it  was  borrowed

15.  servant  said ,  a.  my  master,  how  shall  we  do  „
Jer.  30. 7-  «•  for  that  day  is  great,  none  is  like  it
Ezek.  6. 11.  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  say  a.

Joel  1. 15.  a.  for  the  day,  for  the  day  of  the  Lord
Amos  5.  16.  they  shall  say  in  the  highways,  a.

Rev.  18. 10.  a.  a.  that  great  city,  Babylon,  16. 19,-,
ALBEIT.

Ezek.  13.  7«  the  Lord  saith,  a.  I  have  not  spoken
Philem.  19  a.  I  say  not,  how  thou  owest  to  me
AL1ANT.

Job  19.  15. 1  am  an  a.  in  their  sight
Psal.  69. 8. 1  am  an  a.  to  my  mother’s  children
ALIEN,  S.

Exod.  18.  3.  I  have  been  an  a.  in  a  strange  land
Deut.  14.  21.  or  thou  mayestsell  it  to  an  a
Isa.  61.  5.  sons  of  the  a.  shall  be  your  plowmen
Lam.  5.  2.  and  our  houses  are  turned  to  a.

Eph.  2. 12.  a.  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel
Heb,  11. 34.  who  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  a.
ALIENATE,  ED.

Isa.  1;  t  4.  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  they  are  a.

Ezek.  23. 17-  her  mind  was  a.  from  them
18.  my  mind  was  a.  from  her  as  from  her  sister

22.  thy  lovers  from  whom  thy  mind  is  a.  28.

48. 14.  they  shall  not  a.  the  first  fruits  of  the  land
Eph.  4. 18.  a.  from  the  life  of  God  thro’  ignorance
Col.  1. 21.  and  you  that  were  sometimes  a.  enemies-

ALIKE

Signifies,  [1]  Without  any  difference,  Rom.  14.5-..

[2]  After  one  and  the  same  manner,  Psal.  33.  15-.

[3]  Equally  troublesome,  Prov.  27.  15.

Deut.  12.  22.  unclean  and  clean  eat  a.  15.  22.

1  Sam.  30.  24.  that  tarrieth,  they  shall  part  a.

Job  21. 26.  they  shall  lie  down  a.  in  the  dust
Psal.  33.  15.  he  fashioneth  their  hearts  a.  considers  ■

139. 12.  darkness  and  light  are  both  a.  to  thee
Prov.  20. 10.  both  are  a.  abomination  to  the  Lord

27. 15.  dropping  and  a  contentious  woman  are  a.
Eccl.  9. 2.  all  things  come  a.  to  all ;  one  event

11 . 6.  whether  they  both  shall  be  a.  good
Rom.  14.  5.  another  esteemeth  every  day  a.

ALIVE

Is  taken  [1]  Naturally,  Gen.  43.  27-  [2]  Super-
natur ally,  being  raised  frofh  the  dead,  Luke  24.

23.  [3]  Spiritually,  when  a  person  is  made  alive

to  God  by  his  special  grace,  and  the  powerful  ope¬
ration  of  his  Spirit,  working  with  the  word  of  God ,
Luke  15.  24,  32.  [4]  Opiniatively,  when  persons

apprehend  themselves  to  be  righteous,  although  in
truth  they  are  not,  Rom.  7-  9-  [5]  Eternally

Rev.  1.  18.

Gen.  7. 23.  Noah  only  remained  a.  and  they  in  ark

12. 12.  they  will  kill  me,  and  save  thee  a.

50.  20.  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much  people  a.

Exod.  1.  17.  but  saved  the  men-children  a.  18.

22.  and  every  daughter  ye  shall  save  a.

22.  4.  if  the  theft  be  found  in  his  hand  a.

Lev.  10. 16.  he  was  angry  with  Aaron’s  sons  left  a.

14.  4.  command  to  take  two  birds  a.  and  clean
16. 10.  the  scape  goat  shall  be  presented  a.

26.  36.  are  left  a.  of  you,  I  will  send  a  faintness-
Hum.  16.  33.  they  went  down  a.  into  the  pit
81.  35.  smote  O g,  till  there  was  none  left  a.

22.  33.  1  had  slain  thee,  and  saved  her  a.

31.  15.  have  ye  saved  ali  the  women  a.?

Deut.  4.  4.  are  a.  every  one  of  you  this  day

5.  3.  who  are  all  of  us  a.  here  this  day  _

6.  24.  that  he  might  preserve  us  a.  at  this  day

20. 16.  shall  save  a.  nothing  that  breatheth

32.  39.  I  kill,  and  I  make  a.  1  Sam.  2.  6.

Josh.  2.  13.  that  ye  will  save  a.  my  father

6.  25.  Joshua  saved  Rahabthe  harlot  a.

8.  23.  and  the  king  of  Ai  they  took  a.

14.  10.  the  Lord  hath  kept  me  a.  as  he  said
Judg.  8.  19.  if  ye  had  saved  them  a.  I  would  not
21.  14.  gave  them  wives  which  they  had  saved  a-


ALL


ALL


ALL


.  Sam.  15.  8.  he  took  Agag  the  king  of  Anialek  a.

27.  9.  David  left  neither  man  nor  woman  a.

1  Kings  18.  5.  to  save  the  horses  and  mules  a.

20.  18.  whether  come  for  peace  or  war  take  them  a.

21.  15.  for  Naboth  is  not  a.  but  dead

2  Kings  5.  7.  am  I  God,  to  kill  and  make  a.  f

7.  4.  if  they  save  us  a.  we  shall  live

12.  when  they  come  out  we  shall  catch  them  a.

10.  14.  he  said,  take  them  a.  and  they  took  them  a.

2  Chron.  25.  12.  and  other  ten  thousand  left  a.
Psal.  30.  3.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  kept  me  a.  that  I
Prov.  1.  12.  let  us  swallow  them  up  a.  as  the  grave
Jer.  49.  11.  the  fatherless  I  will  preserve  a.

Ezek.  13.  18.  will  ye  save  the  souls  a.  that  come
19.  to  save  the  souls  a.  that  should  not  live

18.  27.  doth  what  is  right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  a.
Dm  .  5.  19.  and  whom  he  would,  he  kept  a.

Hub.  3.  t  2.  O  Lord,  preserve  a.  thy  work

Murk  16  11.  when  they  heard  that  he  was  a.

Duke  15.  24.  for  this  my  son  was  dead  and  is  a.  32.

24.  23.  they  had  seen  angels  who  said  he  was  a.
Acts  1.  3.  he  shewed  himself  a.  after  his  passion

9.  41.  had  called  the  widow,  presented  her  a.

20.  12.  and  they  brought  the  young  man  a.

25.  19-  Jesus,  whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be  a.

Horn.  6. 11.  but  a.  to  God  through  Christ  our  Lord

13.  to  God,  as  those  that  are  a.  from  the  dead

7-  9.  for  I  was  a.  without  the  law  once,  but  when
1  Cot.  15.  22.  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  a.

1  Thess.  4.  15.  that  we  which  are  a.  and  remain,  17-

2  Tim.  2.  t  26.  who  are  taken  a.  by  him  at  his  will
Rev.  1. 18.  and  behold  1  am  a.  for  evermore

2.  8.  the  first  and  last,  which  was  dead,  and  is  a.

19.  20.  these  were  both  cast  a.  into  a  lake  of  fire

Keep  Alive;  see  Keep.

Yet  A!\IVE.

Gen.  43.  7-  asked  us,  saying,  is  your  father  yet  a  ?
27.  is  he  yet  a?  I|  28.  he  is  well,  he  is 3^  a.

45.  26.  they  told  him,  saying,  Joseph  is  yet  a.  28.

46.  30.  now  let  me  die,  because  thou  art  yet  a.
Exod.  4. 18.  let  me  go  and  see  whether  they  be  yet  a.
Dent.  31.  27-  while  1  am  yet  a.  withyou  this  day
2  Sam.  12.  18.  while  the  child  was  yet  a.  21,  22.

18.  14.  while  he  was  yet  a.  in  the  midst  of  the  oak
1  Kings  20.  32.  is  he  yet  a  ?  he  is  my  brother
Eccl.  4.  2.  more  than  the  living  which  are  yet  a.
Ezek.  7. 13.  which  is  sold,  altho’  they  were  yet  a.
Mat.  27.  63.  this  deceiver  said,  while  he  was  yet  a.

ALL

Signifies  [1]  Every  creature,  Prov.  16.  4.  Psal.  119.
9L  [2]  Every  man ,  or  person,  2  Cor.  5.  10.
[3]  Plentiful,  or  perfect,  Rom.  15.  13.  1  Cor.
13.  2.  [4.]  Some  of  all  nations,  and  degrees,
1  Tim.  2.  4.  Tit.  2. 11.  [5]  Many,  or  the  greatest
part,  Mat.  3.  5.  Phil.  2.  21.  [6]  Those  that
believe,  John  12.  32.

Gen.  20. 7-  thou  shalt  surely  die,  thou  and  a.  thine
24.  36.  to  him  hath  he  given  a.  that  he  hath
31.  43.  Labai.  said,  a.  that  thou  seest  is  mine
37. 3.  Jacob  loved  Joseph  more  than  a.  his  children

39.  3.  the  Lord  made  a.  he  did  to  prosper

42.  11.  we  are  a.  one  man’s  sons,  we  are  true  men
45. 11.  lest  thou  and  a.  thou  hast  come  to  poverty
48.  15.  the  God  which  fed  me  a.  my  life  long
Exod.  20. 11.  made  heaven,  earth,  sea,  and  a.  in  them

33. 19.  I’ll  make  a.  my  goodness  pass  before  thee
Num.  19. 14.  a.  that  come  into  the  tent  are  unclean

23. 13.  see  the  utmost,  and  shalt  not  see  them  a.
Dent.  5.  3.  who  are  a.  of  us  here  alive  this  day
13.  six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do  a.  thy  work

29. 10.  ye  stand  a.  of  you  before  the  Lord  your  God
Josh.  21.  45.  failed  not,  a.  came  to  pass,  23.  14.

1  Sam.  6. 4.  one  plague  was  on  you  a.  and  your  lords

9. 19.  I  will  tell  thee  a.  that  is  in  thine  heart

16. 11.  Samuel  said,  are  here  a.  thv  children  ?

30.  8.  shalt  overtake,  and  without  fail  recover  a.

2  Sam.  16. 4.  thine  are  a.  that  pertained  to  Mephibo.

1  Kings  14. 10.  taketh  away  dung  till  it  be  a.  gone

16.  25.  Omri  did  worse  than  a.  before  him

20.  4.  my  lord,  I  am  thine,  and  a.  that  I  have
1  Chron.  7.  3.  the  sons  of  Uzzi,  a.  of  them  chief  men
Ezra  8. 22.  wrath  is  against  a.  that  forsake  him
Neh.  9.  6.  Lord,  thou  preservest  them  a.  and  hast
Job  16.  2.  miserable  comforters  are  ye  a.

34.  t  13.  who  hath  disposed  a.  of  it

19.  for  they  a.  are  the  work  of  his  hands
Psal.  14.  3.  are  a.  gone  aside,  a.  become  filthy

22. 17. 1  may  tell  a.  my  bones,  they  stare  upon  me
34.  19.  the  Lord  delivereth  him  out  of  them  a.

38.  9-  Lord,  a.  my*desire  is  before  thee
44. 17.  a.  this  is  come  upon  us,  yet  have  we  not
69.  19.  mine  adversaries  are  a.  before  thee
104. 27-  these  wait  a.  on  thee,  that  thou  mayest  give
119.  91.  they  continue,  for  a.  are  thy  servants
Prov.  1.  14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  a.  have  one  purse

22.  2.  the  Lord  is  the  maker  of  them  a.

Eccl.  3.  20.  a.  are  of  dust,  a.  turn  to  dust  again

12.  1 13.  a.  that  hath  been  heard  is,  fear  God
Isa.  64.  9.  behold,  see,  we  are  a.  thy  people
Jer.  9.  2.  they  be  a.  adulterers,  Hos.  f.  4.

Ezek.  7. 16.  a.  of  them  mourning,  every  one  for

20.  40.  a.  of  them  in  the  land  shall  serve  me
37.  22.  and  one  king  shall  be  king  to  them  a.

40.  4.  son  of  man,  declare  a.  that  thou  seest

43.  11.  shew  them  a.  the  forms,  a.  the  ordinances
Dan.  1. 19.  among  them  a.  none  found  like  Daniel
Hos.  5.  2.  tho'  I  have  been  a  rebuker  of  them  a.
Amos  9.  1.  and  cut  them  in  the  head  a.  of  them
Nah.  3. 1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  it  is  a.  full  of  lies
Mai,  2.  10.  have  we  not  a.  one  Lather,  hath  notone
Mat.  5.  18.  pass  from  the  law,  till  a.  be  fulfilled

13.  56.  and  his  sisters,  are  they  not  a.  with  us  ?

22.  28.  whose  wife  shall  she  be,  for  they  a.  had  her

Mark  12.  33.  is  more  than  a.  burnt  offerings
44  she  cast  in  a.  even  a.  that  she  had,  Luke  21. 4.
Luke  4.  7-  if  thou  worship  me,  a.  shall  be  thine

6. 10.  looking  round  about  on  them  a.  he  said

8.  40.  for  they  were  a.  waiting  for  him
13.  3.  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  a.  likewise  perish
15.  31.  he  said,  son,  c.  that  I  have  is  thine

17.  10.  so  ye,  when  ye  have  done  a.  say,  we  are
-8.  22.  sell  a.  that  thou  hast,  and  distribute  to  poor

8


John  1.  16.  of  his  fulness  have  a.  we  received
4.  39-  woman  said,  he  told  me  a.  that  ever  1  did
13.  10.  Jesus  saith,  ye  are  clean,  but  not  a
17.  21.  that  they  a.  may  be  one,  as  thou  art  in  me
Acts  4.  33.  and  great  grace  was  upon  them  a.

10.  33.  we  are  a.  here  present  before  the  Lord

11.  23.  he  exhorted  them  a.  to  cleave  to  the  Lord
16.  28.  do  thyself  no  harm,  we  are  a.  here

22.  3.  zealous  towards  God,  as  ye  a.  are  this  day

26.  29.  but  also  a.  that  hear  me  this  day,  were  both

27.  35.  Paul  gave  thanks  in  presence  of  them  a.
Rom.  1. 8.  1  thank  God  thro'  Jesus  Christ  for  you  a.
8.  32.  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  a.  how  shall  he

1  Cor.  3.  22.  a.  are  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's

15. 10.  but  I  laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  a.
Gal.  3. 22.  the  scripture  hath  concluded  a.  under  sin
Phil.  4.  18.  but  1  have  a.  and  abound,  I  am  full

2  Thess.  2.  12.  that  they  a.  might  be  damned,  who
2  Tim.  3.  11.  out  of  them  a.  the  Lord  delivered  me
Heb.  1.  14.  are  they  not  a.  ministering  spirits,  sent

12.  8.  chastisement,  whereof  a.  are  partakers

1  Pet.  3.  8.  finally,  be  ye  a.  of  one  mind

2  Pet.  3.  9.  that  a.  should  come  to  repentance

1  John  2.  19.  manifest  that  they  were  not  a.  of  us
Above  All;  see  Above.

According  to  ALL.

Gen.  6. 22.  Noah  did  ac.  to  a.  God  commanded,  7. 5.
Exod.  31. 11.  according  to  a.  the  Lord  commanded,
36.  1. 1  39.  32.  42. 1  40.  16.  Num.  2.  34.

I  8.  20.  1  9-  5.  |  29.  40.  Deut.  1.  3,  41.
Josh.  11.  23.  took  the  land  ac.  to  a.  the  Lord  said

1  Kings  8.  56.  given  rest  ac.  to  a.  that  he  promised

11.  37.  shalt  reign  ac.  to  a.  that  thy  soul  desireth
22.  53.  ac.  to  a.  his  father  had  done,  2  Kings  23.  32.

37.1  24.  9.  19.  2  Chron.  26.  4  |  27.  2.

2  Kings  10.  30.  done  ac.  to  a.  that  was  in  my  heart
18-  3.  ac.  to  a.  David  his  father  did,  2  Chron.  29.  2.

1  Chron.  17.  15.  ac.  to  a.  these  words,  ac.  to  a.  this

2  Chron.  2.  +16.  we  will  cut  wood  ac.  to  a.  thy  need
Neh.  5. 19.  think  on  me  for  good.  ac.  to  a.  1  have  done
Jer.  21.  2.  deal  with  us  ac.  to  a.  his  wondrous  works

42.  20.  ac.  to  a.  that  the  Lord  shall  say,  will  we  do
50. 29.  ac.  to  a.  that  Babylon  hath  done,  do  to  her
Ezek.  24.  24.  ac.  to  a.  that  he  hath  done,  shall  ye  do
Dan.  9. 16.  ac.  to  a.  thv  righteousness,  1  Deseecn  thee
After  ALL.

Deut.  20.  18.  not  to  do  after  a.  their  abominations
2  Chron.  34. 21.  have  not  kept  the  word  to  do  after  a.
Ezra  9.  13.  after  a.  that  is  come  on  us  for  our  deeds
Ezek.  16.  23.  after  a.  thy  wickedness,  wo,  wo  to  thee
Mat.  6.  32.  after  a.  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  seek
Phil.  2. 26.  tor  he  longed  after  you  a.  and  was  full  of
At  ALL.

Exod.  5.  23.  nor  hast  delivered  thy  people  at  a.

22.  23.  if  thou  afflict,  and  they  cry  at  a.  to

I. ev.  27-  13.  but  if  he  will  at  a.  redeem  it

Num.  22.  38_.  have  I  now  any  power  at  a.  to  say  any
Deut.  8. 19.  if  thou  do  at  a.  forget  the  Lord
1  Sam.  20.  6.  if  thy  father  at  a.  miss  me,  then  say
1  Kings  9.  6.  if  ye  shall  at  a.  turn  from  following  me
Jer.  11. 12.  but  they  shall  not  save  them  at  a.

Ezek.  20. 32.  cometh  in  your  mind  shall  not  be  at  a.
Hos.  11. 7.  most  High,  none  at  a.  would  exalt  him
Mic.  1. 10.  weep  ye  not  at  a.  roll  thyself  in  dust
Nah.  1.  3.  Lord  will  not  at  a.  acquit  the  wicked
John  19. 11.  thou  couldst  have  no  power  at  a.

1  Cor.  16.  12.  but  his  will  was  not  at  a.  to  come

1  John  1.  5.  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  a.

Rev.  18.  21.  Babylon  shall  be  found  no  more  at  a.
22.  the  sound  shall  be  heard  no  more  at  a.  in  thee
Before  ALL.

Gen.  23. 18.  before  a.  that  went  in  at  the  gatesof  city
Lev.  10.  3.  before  a.  the  people  1  will  be  glorified

2  Chron.  33. 7.  Jerusalem  which  I  have  chosen  fief.  a.
Jer.  33.  9-  shall  be  to  me  an  honour  before  a.  nations
Mat.  26.  70.  but  he  denied  before  them  a.  saying
Gal.  2. 14.  I  said  to  Peter  before  them  a.

1  Tim.  5.  20.  them  that  sin  rebuke  before  a.  that

For  ALL.

Num.  8. 18.  I  have  taken  Levites  for  a.  first-born
Deut.  22. 5.  for  a.  that  do  so  are  abomination,  25. 16.
31. 18.  hide  my  face  in  that  day  for  a.  the  evils
Psal.  10. 5.  as  for  a.  his  enemies,  he  puffeth  at  them
78.  32.  for  a.  this  they  sinned  still,  believed  not
116.  12.  what  render  to  the  Lord  for  a.  his  benefits
Eccl.  5.  9.  the  profit  of  the  earth  is  for  a.

II.  9.  for  a.  these  God  will  bring  thee  to  judgment
Isa.  40.  2.  she  hath  received  double/or  a.  her  sins
Ezek.  6. 11.  alas  for  a.  the  evil  abominations

20. 43.  and  ve  shall  lothe  yourselves  for  a.  the  evils
Dan.  4.  21.  fruit  was  much,  and  in  it  was  meat/or  a.
Luke  3.  19.  for  a.  the  evils  Herod  had  done
20.  38.  God  of  the  living  for  a.  live  unto  him
Rom.  3.  23.  for  a.  have  sinned  and  come  short  of

2  Cor.  5. 14..  if  one  died  for  a.  then  were  all  dead
Phil.  2. 21.  for  a.  seek  their  own,  not  the  things

1  Tim.  2.  6.  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  a.

Heb.  8. 11.  for  a.  shall  know  me,  from  the  least

10. 10.  offering  of  the  body  of  Christ  once  for  a.
From  ALL.

Gen.  48. 16.  angel  who  redeemed  me  from  a.  evil
Lev.  16.  30.  that  ye  may  be  clean  from  a.  your  sins
Psal.  34.  4.  and  delivered  me  from .  a.  my  fears
Jer.  16. 15.  from  a.  lands  whither  he  had  driven
Dan.  7. 7.  it  was  diverse/rew  a.  the  beasts  before  it
Heb.  4. 4.  God  rested  the  seventh  day  from  a.  works
In  ALL.

Gen.  21.  12.  in  a.  that  Sarah  hath  said,  hearken
22.  God  is  with  thee  in  a.  that  thou  dost
Deut.  29.  9.  that  ye  may  prosper  in  a.  that  ye  do
Josh.  22.  2.  and  have  obeyed  my  voice  in  a.  that

2  Sam.  23.  39.  mighty  men,  thirty  and  seven  in  a.

1  Kings  2.  3.  thou  mayest  prosper  in  a.  thou  dost

26.  afflicted  in  a.  my  father  was  afflicted
1  Chron.  2. 6.  sons  ot  Zerah,  five  of  them  in  a
Neh.  9.  33.  thou  art  just  in  a.  that  is  brought  on  us
Psal.  10.  4.  God  is  not  in  a.  his  thoughts
Prov.  3.  6.  in  a.  thy  ways  acknowledge  him
Isa.  39-  2.  nothing  in  a.  his  dominions  shewed  not
63.  9.  in  a.  their  afflictions  he  was  afflicted
Jer.  38.  9.  have  done  evil  in  a.  they  have  done
Ezek.  21.  24.  in  a.  your  doings  your  sins  appear


Hos.  12.  8.  in  a.  my  labours  shall  find  no  iniquity
Acts  27.  37.  we  were  in  a.  in  the  ship  276  souls
Rom.  8.  37.  in  a.  these  more  than  conquerors

1  Cor.  12.  6.  the  same  God  worketh  all  in  a.

15.  28-  put  all  under,  that  God  may  be  all  in  a.
Eph.  1.  23.  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  a.
Col.  3.  11.  but  Christ  is  all  and  in  a.

2  Thess.  1. 10.  to  be  admired  in  a.  them  that  belie%re
Hefi.  13.  4.  marriage  is  honourable  in  a.

2  Pet.  3.  16.  as  also  in  a.  his  epistles,  speaking
All  Night ;  see  N  ight.

Of  ALL.

Gen.  6.  2.  took  them  wives  of  a.  which  they  chose

14.  20.  he  gave  him  tithes  of  a.  Ileb.  7.  2.

28.  22.  of  a.  thou  shalt  give  me,  I  will  give  tenth
Exod.  9.  4.  nothing  die  of  a.  is  children’s  of  Israel
Josh.  8. 35.  not  a  word  of  a.  which  Moses  command
Judg.  13.  13.  of  a.  I  said  to  the  woman,  beware

2  Sam.  16.  21.  shall  hands  of  a.  with  thee  be  strong
2  Kings  9.  5.  and  Jehu  said,  to  which  of  a  us
Esth.  6. 10.  let  nothing  fail  of  a.  thou  hast  spoken
Job  8.  13.  so  are  the  paths  of  a.  that  forget  God
Eccl.  6.  2.  he  wantetn  nothing  of  a.  he  desireth
Ezek.  43. 11.  if  they  be  ashamed  of  a.  they  have  done
Amos  3.  2.  you  only  have  l  known  of  a.  the  families
Mark  9.  35.  the  same  shall  be  servant  of  a.  10.  44.
John  6.  39.  of  a.  which  hath  given  me,  lose  nothing
Acts  10. 36.  peace  by  Jesus  Christ,  he  is  Lord  of  a.

1  Cor.  14.  24.  he  is  convinced  of  a.  judged  of  a.
Gal.  4.  1 .  now  1  say,  the  heir,  though  he  be  1.  of  a.
Eph.  4.  6.  God  who  is  Father  of  a.  above  all

Heb.  12. 23.  and  to  God  the  J  uage  of  a.  and  tospirits
Jam.  2. 10.  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  qf  a.

On  or  Upon  ALL.

Gen.  39.  5.  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  upon  a.  he  had
Isa.  4. 5.  for  upon  a.  the  glory  shall  be  a  defence
Ezek.  40. 4.  set  thy  heart  upon  a.  that  I  shall  shew
Rom.  3.  2'2.  unto  all,  and  upon  a.  them  that  believe
11.  32.  that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  a.

Jude  15.  to  execute  judgment  upon  a.  and  convince
Rev.  3. 10.  the  hour  of  temptation  shall  come  upon  a.
Over  ALL.

2  Sam.  3.  21.  that  thou  mayest  reign  over  a.

1  Chron.  29. 12.  and  thou  reignest  over  a.  in  thy  hand
Psal.  103. 19-  his  kingdom  ruleth  over  a.

Mat.  24. 47.  make  him  ruler  over  a.  Luke  12. 44.
John  17.  2.  as  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  a.
Rom.  9.  5.  who  is  over  a.  God  blessed  for  ever
10.  12.  the  same  Lord  over  a.  is  rich  to  all
ALL  these.

Gen.  15. 10.  he  took  to  him  a.  these  and  divided
42.  36.  Jacob  said,  a.  these  tilings  are  against  me
49.  28.  a.  these  are  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel
Exod.  20. 1.  God  spake  a.  these  words,  saying
Job  12.  9.  who  knoweth  not  that  in  a.  these
Jer.  9.  26.  for  a.  these  nations  are  uncircumcised
Hab.  2.  6.  shall  not  a.  these  take  up  a  parable
Mat. 6. 33.  a. these  shall  be  added  to  you,  Luke  12. 31.

24.  8.  a.  these  are  the  beginning  of  sorrows
Mark  7.  23.  a.  these  evil  things  come  from  within
Acts  2.  7-  are  not  a.  these  which  speak  Galileans  ?

1  Cor.  12. 11.  a.  these  worketh  that  self-same  Spirit
Col.  3.  8.  but  now  you  put  off  a.  these,  anger,  wrath
Heb.  11.  13.  a.  these  died  in  faith,  not  having  re¬
ceived

ALL  this.

Gen.  41.  39.  as  God  hath  shewed  thee  a.  this
Deut.  32.  27.  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  a.  this
Judg.  6. 13.  why  then  is  a.  this  befallen  us  ?

1  Sam.  22. 15.  thy  servant  knew  nothing  of  a.  tins

2  Sam.  14. 19.  is  not  the  hand  of  Joab  in  a.  this?

1  Chron.  28. 19.  a.  this  the  Lord  made  me  understand

2  Chron.  21.  18.  after  a.  this  the  I.ord  smote  him

29.  28.  a.  this  continued  till  the  burnt  offering
Ezra  8.  35.  a.  this  was  a  burnt  offering  to  the  Cord
Neh.  9.  38.  because  of  a.  this -we  make  a  covenant
Esth.  5. 13.  yet  a.  this  availeth  me  nothing

Job  1.  22.  in  a.  this  Job  sinned  not,  2. 10.

13. 1.  lo,  mine  eye  hath  seen  a.  this
Psal.  44. 17.  a.  this  is  come  upon  us,  yet  not  forgot
78.  32.  for  a.  this  they  sinned  still
Eccl.  7.  23.  a.  this  have  I  proved  by  wisdom

8.  9.  a.  this  have  I  seen,  and  applied  my  heart  to

9.  1.  a.  this  I  considered  in  my  heart,  to  declare

[a.  this

Isa.  5.  25.  fora,  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,

9..  12. 17.21.1  10. 4.
48.  6.  thou  hast  heard,  see  a.  this
Dan.  4.  28.  a.  this  came  upon  N  ebuchadnezzar
5.  22.  hast  not  humbled,  tho’  thou  knewest  a.  this

7. 16.  I  came  and  asked  him  the  truth  of  a.  this
Hos.  7. 10.  do  not  retui  n,  nor  seek  him  for  a.  this
Mic.  1.5.  for  the  transgression  of  Jacob  is  a.  this
Mat.  1.  22.  a.  this  was  done  that  the  prophet  s  might

be  fulfilled,  21. 4.  1  26.  56.
Luke  16.  26.  besides  a.  this  there  is  a  gulf  fixed
24. 21.  besides  a.  this  to-day  is  the  third  day
ALL  that  he  had.

Gen.  12.  20.  Pharaoh  sent  him  and  a.  that  he  had
13. 1.  Abram  went  out  of  Egypt,  and  a.  that  he  had

25.  5.  and  Abraham  gave  a.  that  he  had  to  Isaac
31.  21.  Jacob  tied  with  a.  that  he  had,  and  rose  up
39.  4.  a.  that  he  had  he  put  into  Joseph’s  hand,  6.

5.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  on  a.  that  he  had
Mat.  18.25.  be  sold  a.  that  he  had,  payment  be  made
MarkbSLb.  she  spent  a.  that  she  had,  nothing  bettered
12.44.  of  her  want  cast  in  a.  that  she  had,  Luke  21. 4.
To  or  Unto  ALL.

Psal.  145.  9.  the  I.ord  is  good  to  a.  and  his  mercies
Eccl.  2. 14.  one  event  happeneth  to  a.  them,  9.  3. 11.
9.  2.  all  things  come  alike  to  a.  one  event  to  right.
Isa.  36.  6.  so  is  Pharaoh  to  a.  that  trust  in  him  '
Mark  13.  37-  what  1  say  to  you,  I  say  unto  a.  watch
Luke  12.  41.  speakest  thou  this  to  us,  or  even  to  a.  ?
Acts  2.  39-  the  promise  is  to  a.  that  are  afar  off

4. 16.  manifest  to  a.  that  dwell  in  lerusalein
Rom.  10. 12.  the  I.ord  is  rich  unto  a.  that  call  on  him

13.  7-  render  therefore  to  a.  their  dues
1  Cor.  9. 19.  I  made  myself  a  servant  unto  a.

1  Tim.  4. 15.  that  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  a.
With  ALL.

Num.  16.  30.  with  a.  that  appertain  to  them


ALM


A  LR


ALT


L/eut.  6.  5.  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  with  a.  thy
heart,  with  a.  thy  soul,  11.  13.  Mat.  22.  37-
2  Chron.  23.  7-  with  a.  the  children  of  Ephraim
Prov.  4.  7.  with  a.  thy  getting,  get  understanding
Acts  10.  2.  that  feared  God  with  a.  his  house,  16.  34.
1  Cor.  1. 2.  with  a.  that  in  every  place  call  on  Jesus
Phil.  1.  25. 1  shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  a.
2. 17.  if  offered,  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you  a.
ALL  the  while.

1  Sam.  22.  4.  a.  the  while  David  was  in  the  hold
25. 7 .  nothing  missing  a.  the  while  they  were  in  Car.

27.  11.  so  will  be  his  manner  a.  the  while  he  dwell
Job  27.  3.  a.  the  while  my  breath  is  in  me  [eth
ALL  ye.

Isa.  48.  14.  a.  ye  assemble  yourselves,  and  hear
50.  11.  behold  a. ye  that  kindle  a  fire,  that  compass
66. 10.  be  glad  with  her,  a.  ye  that  love  her
Jer.  29.  20.  near  the  won!,  a.  ye  of  the  captivity
Lam.  1.  12.  is  it  nothing  to  you,  a.  ye  that  pass  by  r
Mat.  11.  28.  come  to  me,  a.  ye  that  labour  and  are

23.  8.  one  is  your  master ;  and  a.  ye  are  brethren
26. 31.  a.  ye  snail  be  offended,  Mark  14. 27.

Acts  2.  14.  a.  ye  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  hear
See  farther  other  usual  Substantives :  Congrega¬
tion,  Day,  Earth,  Israel,  Men,  People,
Things,  &c.

ALLEGING.

Acts  17.  3.  a.  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered
ALLEGORY.

Gal.  4.  24.  which  things  are  an  a.  for  these  are
ALLELUIAII.


Rev.  19.  1. 1  heal'd  a  great  voice,  saying,  a.  3,  4,  6.
ALLIED.


Neh.  13.  4.  Eliashib  the  Driest  was  a.  to  Tobiah
ALLOW.


Luke  11.  48.  that  ye  a.  the  deeds  of  your  fathers
Acts  24. 15.  which  they  themselves  also  a.  that  there
Rom.  7. 15.  for  that  wnich  I  do,  1  a.  not
ALLOWED,  ETH.

Rom.  14.  22.  himself  in  that  thing  which  he  a.

1  Thess .  2. 4.  but  as  we  were  a.  of  God  to  be  put
ALLOWANCE.


2  Kings  25.  30.  his  a.  was  a  continual  a.  given  him
Prov.  30.  f  8.  feed  me  with  food  of  my  a.

Luke  3.  f  14.  be  content  with  your  a.

ALLURE.


Has.  2-  14.  I’ll  a.  and  bring  her  into  the  wilderness
2  Pet.  2.  18.  they  a.  through  the  lusts  of  the  flesh
ALMS.

Mat.  6.  1.  that  ye  do  not  your  a.  before  men

2.  therefore  when  thou  dost  thine  a.  do  not  sound
4.  that  thine  a.  may  be  in  secret,  and  thy  Father

Luke  11. 41  give  a.  or  such  things  as  you  have
12.  33.  sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  a.  provide  bags
Acts  3.2.  they  laid,  to  ask  a.  of  them  that  entered

3.  who  seeing  Peter  and  John,  asked  an  a.

10.  they  knew  that  it  was  he  which  sat  for  a.

10. 2.  Cornelius  gave  much  a.  to  thepeople

4.  thine  a.  are  come  up  for  a  memorial,  31.

24.  17. 1  came  to  bring  a.  to  my  nation  and  offer.
ALMS-DEEDS.


Acts  9.  36.  Dorcas  full  of  a.-deeds  which  she  did
ALMIGHTY.

Gen.  17.  1.  I  am  the  a.  God.  walk  before  me

28.  3.  God  a.  bless  thee,  and  make  thee  fruitful

30.  11. 1  am  God  a.  be  fruitful  and  multiply
43.  14.  God  a.  give  you  mercy  before  the  man

48.  3.  God  a.  appeared  to  me  at  Luz  in  Canaan

49.  25.  by  the  a.  who  shall  bless  thee  with  blessings
Exod.  6. 3. 1  appeared  to  Abram  by  the  name  God  a.
Num.  24.  4.  which  saw  the  vision  of  the  a.  16.

Ruth  1. 20.  for  the  a.  hath  dealt  bitterly  with  me

21.  seeing  the  a.  hath  afflicted  me
Job  5.  17.  despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  a.
6.  4.  for  the  arrows  of  the  a.  are  within  me

14.  but  he  forsaketh  the  fear  of  the  a.

8.  3.  or  doth  the  a.  pervert  justice  ?

5.  and  make  thy  supplication  to  the  a.

11.  7-  canstthou  find  out  the  a.  to  perfection  ?

13.  3.  surely  I  would  speak  to  the  a.  and  desire

15.  25.  he  strengtheneth  himself  against  the  a.

21.  15.  what  is  the  a.  that  we  should  serve  him  ?
20.  and  he  shall  drink  of  the  wrath  of  the  a.
22.3.  is  it  any  pleasure  to  the  a.  thou  art  righteous
17.  which  said,  what  can  the  a.  do  for  them  ?

23.  if  thou  return  to  the  a.  thou  shalt  be  built

25.  yea,  the  a.  shall  be  thy  defence,  thou  shalt

26.  then  shalt  thou  have  thy  delight  in  the  a.

23.  16.  my  heart  soft,  and  the  a.  troubleth  me

24. 1.  why,  seeing  times  are  not  hid  from  the  a.

27.  2.  ana  the  a.  who  hath  vexed  my  soul

10.  will  he  delight  himself  in  the  a.  ?

11.  what  is  with  the  a.  will  I  not  conceal
13.  which  they  shall  receive  of  the  a.

29.  5.  when  the  a.  was  yet  with  me

31.  2.  what  inheritance  of  the  a.  from  on  high  ?

35.  my  desire  is,  that  the  a.  would  answer  me

32.  8.  inspiration  of  the  a.  giveth  understanding
j3.  4.  and  the  breath  of  the  a.  hath  given  me  life
34. 10.  far  be  it  from  the  a.  to  commit  iniquity

12.  neither  will  the  a.  pervert  judgment
35.  13.  surely  the  a.  will  not  regard  vanity
37. 23.  touching  the  a.  we  cannot  find  him  out

40. 2.  shall  he  that  contendeth  with  the  a.  instruct
Psal.  68.  14.  when  the  a.  scattered  kings  in  it

91.  1.  he  shall  abide  under  the  shadow  of  the  a.
Isa.  13.  6.  shall  come  as  destruction  from  the  a.

Es ek.  1.  24.  I  heard  as  the  voice  of  the  a.  10.  5.
Dan.  11.  t  38.  for  the  a.  God  he  shall  honour
Joel  1. 15.  as  destruction  from  the  a.  shall  it  come
2  Cor.  6. 18.  shall  be  my  sons.saith  the  Lord  a.
Rev.  1.  8.  which  is.  was,  and  is  to  come,  the  a.
4.8.  the  Lord  God  a.  which  was,  and  is,  11.  17.

15.  3.  Lord  a.  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  16.  J.

16.  14.  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  a.

19. 15.  treadeth  wine-press  of  wroth  of  the  a.  God
21.  22.  God  a.  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it
ALMOND,  S.

Gen.  43. 11.  carry  spices,  myrrh,  nuts,  and  a.
Exod.  25.  33.  made  like  to  a.  34.  |  37-  19,  20.

Num.  17. 8.  the  rod  of  Aaron  for  Levi  yielded  a.
Eccl.  12.  5.  when  the  a.  tree  shall  flourish


Jer.  1.  11.  and  i  said,  1  see  a  rod  of  an  a.  tree

ALMOST.

Exod.  17-  4.  they  be  a.  ready  to  stone  me
Psal.  73.  2.  as  lor  me,  my  feet  were  a.  gone
94.  17.  my  soul  had  a.  dwelt  in  silence
119.  87.  they  had  a.  consumed  me  upon  earth
Prov.  5. 14.  1  was  a.  in  all  evilinthemidstcfcongre
Acts  13. 44.  came  a.  the  whole  city  together  [cation

19.  26.  only  at  Ephesus,  but  a.  through  all  Asia
21.  27.  and  when  the  seven  days  were  a.  ended
26.  28.  a.  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian
29.  were  both  a.  and  altogether  such  as  1  am
Heb.  9.  22.  a.  all  things  by  the  law  are  purged
ALMUG-TREES.

1  Kings  10. 11.  brought  from  Ophir  plenty  of  a.  trees

12.  made  of  a.-tr.  pillars,  there  came  no  such  a.-tr.

ALOES.

Psal.  45.  8.  thy  garments  smell  of  a.  and  cassia
Prov.  7.  17.  1  nave  perfumed  my  bed  with  a.

Cant.  4. 14.  myrrh,  a.  with  all  the  chief  spices
John  19.  39.  N  icodemus  brought  a  mixture  of  a.
ALOFT.

Prov.  18.  1 10.  the  righteous  runneth  and  is  set  a.
'ALONE

Signifies,  [1]  One  solitary,  or  by  himself,  Lev.  13.
46.  Psal.  102.  7.  [2]  Only,  Dan.  10.  7.  Mat.  4.  4.
[3]  To  cease  from,  Exod.  14. 12.

Gen.  2.  18.  it  is  not  good  that  the  man  should  be  a.
Exod.  18.  18.  art  not  able  to  perform  it  thyself  a.

24.  2.  Moses  a.  shall  come  near  the  Lord
Lev.  13.  46.  the  leper  dwell  a.  without  the  camp
Num.  11. 14.1  am  not  able  to  bear  all  this  people  a.

Deut.  1.  9,  12.

17.  that  thou  bear  it  not  thyself  a.

23.  9.  lo,  the  people  shall  dwell  a.  not  be  reckoned
Deut.  32. 12.  so  the  Lord  a.  did  lead  him

33.  28.  Israel  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  a.

Josh.  22.  20.  Ach  in  perished  not  a.  in  his  iniquity

2  Sam.  18.  24.  behold,  a  man  running  a.  26.

25.  if  he  be  a.  there  is  tidings  in  his  mouth

1  Kings  11.  29.  they  two  were  a.  in  the  field

2  Kings  19.  15.  art  God  a.  Isa.  37.  16.  Psal.  86. 10.

1  Chron.  29. 1.  Solomon,  whom  a.  God  hath  chosen
Esth.  3. 6.  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Mordecai  a.

Job  1.15.  I  only  am  escaped  a.  to  tell,  16, 17,  19.

9. 8.  God  who  a.  spreadeth  out  the  heavens

15. 19.  to  whom  a.  the  earth  was  given

31. 17.  or  have  I  eaten  my  morsel  myself  a.  ?

Psal.  83. 18.  thou  whose  name  a.  is  Jehovah
102.7. 1  watch  and  am  as  a  sparrow  a.  on  housetop
136. 4.  to  him  who  a.  doeth  great  wonders
148. 13.  for  his  name  a.  is  excellent
Eccl.  4.  8.  there  is  one  a.  and  there  is  not  a  second
10.  but  wo  to  him  that  is  a.  when  he  falleth
Isa.  2. 11.  Lord  a.  shall  be  exalted  in  that  day,  17 .
14.  31.  none  shall  be  a.  in  his  appointed  times
51.  2.  for  I  called  him  a.  and  blessed  him
63.  3.  I  have  trodden  the  wine  press  a.

Lam.  3. 28.  he  sitteth  a.  and  keepeth  silence
Dan.  10.  7.  and  1  Daniel  a.  saw  the  visen
Hos.  8.  9.  gone  to  Assyria,  a  wild  ass  a  1  y  himself
Mat.  4. 4.  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  a.  '  uke  4. 4.
14. 23.  evening  was  come,  he  was  a.  I.uke  9.  18.

18.  15.  tell  his  fault  between  thee  and  him  a.

Mark  4.  34.  when  they  were  a.  he  expounded
6. 47.  ship  was  in  miclst  of  sea,  and  he  a.  on  the  land
Luke  5.  21.  who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  a.  ?

6.  4.  not  lawful  to  eat,  but  for  the  priests  a.

9. 18.  it  came  to  pass,  as  Jesus  was  a.  praying
36.  when  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found  a.
10.  40.  that  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve  a.

John  6. 15.  he  departed  into  a  mountain  a.

22.  but  that  his  disciples  were  gone  away  a.

8.  16.  for  I  am  not  a.  but  I  and  the  Father,  16.  32.
17-  20.  neither  pray  I  for  these  a.  but  for  them
Acts  19.  26.  ye  see  and  hear  that  not  a.  at  Ephesus
Rom.  4.  23.  it  was  written  for  his  sake  a.

Gal.  6.  4.  he  shall  have  rejoicing  in  himself  a.

Heb.  9.  7*  went  the  high-priest  a.  once  every  year
Jam.  2. 17.  faith  if  it  hath  not  works  is  dead,  being  a.
Left  ALONE.

Gen.  32.  24.  Jacob  left  a.  and  there  wrestled  a  man
42.  38.  his  brother  is  dead,  and  he  is  left  a.  44.  20.
Isa.  49. 21. 1  was  left  a.  these  where  had  they  been  t
Dan.  10.  8.  I  was  left  a.  and  saw  this  great  vision
John  8.  9.  and  Jesus  was  left  a.  and  the  woman
29.  the  Father  hath  not  left,  me  a.  for  1  do  always
Rom.  11.  3. 1  am  left  a.  and  they  seek  my  life
Let  ALONE.

Exod.  14.  12.  let  us  a.  that  we  may  serve  Egyptians
32.  10.  let  me  a.  that  my  wrath  may  wax  hot
Deut.  9.  14.  let  me  a.  that  I  may  destroy  them
Judg.  11.  37.  let  me  a.  two  months,  that  I  may  go

2  Sam.  16. 11 .  let  him  a.  let  him  curse,  L.  has  bidden
2  Kings  4.  27.  let  her  a.  her  soul  is  vexed  in  her
Ezra  6.  7.  let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  a.

Job  10.  20.  and  let  me  a.  that  T  may  take  comfort

13.  13.  hold  your  peace,  let  me  a.  that  I  may  speak
Hos  A.  17.  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  a.
Mat.  15.  14.  let  them  a.  they  be  blind  leaders
Mark  1.  24.  let  us  a.  what  nave  we  to  do  with  thee,

thou  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ?  Luke  4.  34.

14.  6.  Jesus  said,  let  her  a.  why  trouble  ye  her  ?

15.  36.  let  a.  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come
Luke  13.  8.  Lord,  let  it  a.  this  year  also,  till  I  dig
John  11.  48.  if  we  let  him  a.  all  men  will  believe

12.  7.  let  her  a.  against  the  day  of  my  buying
Acts  5.  38.  refrain  from  these  men,  let  them  a.
ALONG.

Num.  21-  22.  we  will  go  a.  by  the  king’s  highway

1  Sam.  6. 12.  the  kine  went  a.  the  highway,  lowing

28. 20.  then  Saul  fell  all  a.  on  the  earth

2  Sam.  3.  16.  her  husband  went  with  her  a.  weeping

16.  13.  Shimei  went  a.  cursing,  and  threw  stones
Jer.  41. 6.  Ishmael  went,  weeping  all  a.  as  he  went

ALOOF.

Psal.  38. 11.  my  friends  stand  a.  from  my  sore
Aloud:  see  Cry,  Cried,  Sing.
ALPHA.

Rev.  1. 8.  I  am  a.  and  Omega,  11.  |  21. 6. 1  22. 13.
ALREADY.

Exod.  1.  5.  for  Joseph  was  in  Egypt  a.


Eccl.  1.  10.  it  hath  been  a.  of  old  time,  before  us
Mai.  2. 2.  your  blessings,  yea,  I  have  cursed  them  a.
Mat.  17. 12.  1  say  unto  you.  Elias  is  come  a.

John  3.  18.  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  a.

1  Cor.  5.  3.  but  present  in  spirit,  have  judged  a.
Phil.  3.  16.  whereto  we  have  a.  attained
1  Tim.  5.  15.  some  are  a.  turned  aside  after  Satan
Rev.  2.  25.  but  that  which  ye  have  a.  hold  fast
ALSO.

Gen.  6.  3.  strive  with  man,  for  that  he  a.  is  flesh
Num.  16. 10.  and  seek  ye  the  priesthood  a  ?

1  Sam.  14.  44.  Saul  answered,  God  do  so  and

more  a.  2  Sam.  3.  35. 1  19.  13.

2  Kings  7.  4.  and  if  we  sit  still  here,  we  die  a.
Psal.  68. 18.  gifts,  yea,  fer  the  rebellious  a.

Isa.  7-  13.  but  will  ye  weary  my  God  a.  ?

Zech.  8.  21.  to  seek  the  Lord  of  hosts  I  will  go  a.
Mat.  6.  21.  there  will  your  heart  be  a.  Luke  12. 34.

26.  73.  surely  thou  art  a.  one  of  them
Mark  1.  38.  tliat  I  may  preach  there  a.

2.  28.  Son  of  man  is  Lord  a.  of  sabbath,  Luke  6.  5.
Luke  11.  45.  thus  saying,  thou  reproachest  us  a.
John  5.  19-  what  he  doth,  these  a.  doth  the  Son
12.  26.  where  I  am,  there  shall  a.  my  servant  be
14.  3.  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  a.

Acts  12.  3.  he  proceeded  to  take  Peter  a.

Rom.  16.  2.  succourer  of  many,  and  of  myself  a.

1  Cor.  9.  8.  or  saith  not  the  law  the  same  a.

15. 8.  and  last  of  all,  he  was  seen  of  me  a.

2  Tim.  l  5.  I  am  persuaded  that  in  thee  a.

Jam.  2.  26.  faith  without  works  is  dead  a.

1  John  4. 21.  that  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  a.
ALTAR

Signifies,  [1]  A  material  altar,  on  which  sacrifices
were  offered,  1  Rings  13. 1, 2.  |  18.  30.  [2]  Christ ,
who  is  the  only  Christian  altar ,  to  whom  we  bring
all  our  sacrifices  and  services,  Heb.  13.  10.

Gen.  8.  20.  Noah  budded  an  a.  to  the  Lord

12.  7-  there  Abraham  built  an  a.  to  the  Lord,  22. 9.
35.  1.  Jacob,  go  to  Beth  el,  and  make  there  an  a.

3.  up  to  Betn  el,  1  will  make  there  an  a.  to  God
Exod.  17.  15.  Moses  built  an  a.  lehovah-nissi

20.  24.  an  a.  of  earth  shalt  thou  make  to  me

21.  14.  shalt  take  him  from  mine  a.  that  he  die

29.  37.  sanctify  it,  it  shall  be  an  a.  most  holy
44.  I  will  sanctify  the  tabernacle  and  a.

30.  27.  a.  of  incense,  H  40.  10.  a.  of  burnt-offering
Lev.  6.  9.  the  fire  of  the  a.  shall  be  burning  in  it
Num.  7.  84.  this  was  the  dedication  of  the  a.

18.  3.  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  a.

Josh.  22.  34.  the  children  of  Gad  called  the  a.  Ed.
Judg.  6.  25.  throw  down  the  a.  of  Baal,  and  grove

31.  because  one  hath  cast  down  his  a.

1  Sam.  2.  33.  whom  I  shall  not  cutoff  from  mine  a.

2  Sam.  24.  18.  go  up,  rear  an  a.  to  the  Lord

1  Kings  13.  2.  he  cried  against  the  a.  O  a.  a.

18.  30.  Elijah  repaired  the  a.  of  the  Lord

35.  and  the  water  ran  round  about  the  a.

2  Kings  18.  22.  shall  worship  before  this  a.  Isa.  36. 7.
Psal.  26.  6.  so  will  1  compass  thine  a.  O  Lord

43.  4.  then  will  I  go  to  the  a.  of  God,  to  God  my  joy
Isa.  19. 19.  an  a.  to  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  Egypt

27.  9.  the  stones  of  the  a.  as  chalk-stones

56.  7.  their  sacrifices  be  accepted  on  mine  a.

Lam.  2.  7-  the  Lord  hath  cast  off  his  a.

Ezek.  8. 16.  between  the  porch  and  a.  25  men
Joel  1. 13.  lament,  howl,  ye  ministersof  the  a.

2.  17.  the  priests  weep  between  the  porch  and  a.
Amos  2.  8.  upon  clothes  laid  to  pledge  by  every  a.
Mai.  1.  7.  ye  offer  polluted  bread  on  mine  a.

10.  nor  do  kindle  hre  011  mine  a.  for  nought
2.  13.  covering  the  a.  of  the  Lord  with  tears
Mat.  5.  23.  if  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  a.

23.  18.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  a.  it  is  nothing
35.  ye  slew  between  the  temple  and  a.  Luke  11. 51v
Acts  17.  23. 1  found  an  a.  with  this  inscription
1  Cor.  9.  13.  wait  at  the  a.  partakers  with  a.  10. 18.
Heb.  7.  13.  of  which  none  gave  attendance  at  the  a.

13.  10.  we  have  an  a.  whereof  they  have  no  right
Rev.  6.  9.  I  ;  aw  under  the  a.  the  souls  of  them  slain

8.  3.  should  offer  it  with  prayers  on  the  golden  a

9.  13.  heard  a  voice  from  hom3of  the  golden  a.

See  Built.

ALTARS.

Exod.  34. 13.  shall  destroy  their  a.  Deut.  7. 5.  1 12. 3.
Num.  23.  1.  Eaalam  said,  build  here  seven  a.

1  Kings  19. 10.  Israel  have  thrown  down  thine  a.  14.

2  Chron.  34.  5.  burnt  the  bones  of  priests  on  the  a.
Psal.  84.  3.  even  thine  a.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  my  king
Isa.  17.  8.  and  he  shall  not  look  to  the  a.  the  work
Jer.  17.  1.  sin  of  Judah  graven  on  horns  of  the  a.

2.  whilst  their  children  remember  their  a.

Ezek.  6.  4.  and  your  a.  shall  be  desolate,  images  be
Hos.  8.  11.  made  a.  to  sin,  a.  shalf  be  to  him  to  sin

10.  8.  thorn  and  thistle  shall  come  on  their  a.

12.  11.  their  a.  are  as  heaps  in  the  furrows

Amos  3.  14.  I  will  also  visit  the  a.  of  Eeth-el
Rom.  11.  3.  Lord,  they  have  digged  down  thine  a.
ALTER.

Lev.  27.  10.  he  shall  not  a.  it,  a  good  for  a  bad
Ezra  6.  11.  that  whosoever  shall  a.  this  word
12.  destroy  all  that  put  their  hand  to  a.  this
Psal.  89.  34.  not  a.  the  thing  gone  out  of  my  lips
Prov.  31.  1 5.  lest  they  a.  thejudgment  of  afflicted
ALTERED.

Esth.  1.  19.  be  not  a.  that  Vashti  come  no  more
Luke  9.  29.  the  fashion  of  his  countenance  was  a.
ALTERETH.

Dan.  6.  8.  according  to  the  law  which  a.  not,  12.
ALTERING.

Num.  14.  t  34.  ye  shall  know  my  a.  of  purpose
ALTFIOUGFL

Exod.  13.  17.  a.  that  was  near,  for  God  said
2  Sam.  23.  5.  a.  my  house  be  not  so  with  God
Job  2.  3.  a.  thou  movedst  me  against  him
Jer.  31.  32.  a.  I  was  an  husband  unto  them
Ezek.  11.  16.  a.  I  have  cast  them  far  off
Ilab.  3. 17.  a.  the  fig-tree  shall  not  blossom
Mark  14. 29.  a.  all  shall  be  offended,  yet  will  not  l
Gal.  6.  t  1.  a.  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault
ALTOGETHER.

Num.  16.  13.  make  thyself  a.  a  prince  over  us-


AME


A  N  G


A  N  G


/Dent.  16.  20.  which  is  a.  justshalt  thou  follow
Psal.  14.  3.  they  are  a.  become  filthy,  Psal.  53.  3.

19.  9.  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  righteous  a.

39.  5.  every  man  at  his  best  state  is  a.  vanity
50.  21.  that  I  was  a.  such  an  one  as  thyself
139.  4.  but  lo,  O  Lordj  thou  knowest  it  a.

Cant.  5.  16.  his  mouth  is  sweet,  yea,  he  is  a.  lovely
John  9.  34.  thou  wast  a.  born  in  sins,  dost  thou
Acts  26. 29.  were  almost  and  a.  such  as  I  am

1  Cor.  5.  10.  yet  not  a.  with  the  fornicators

9. 10.  or  saitn  he  it  a.  for  our  sakes  <’

2  Cor.  4.  f  8.  perplexed,  but  not  a.  without  help

ALWAY  ALWAYS

Signifies,  [1]  Continually ,  John  8.  29.  [2]  Fre¬
quently,  Acts  10.  2.  [31  To  the  end  of  the  world,
Mat.  28.  20.  [4.]  During  life,  2  Sam.  9.  10.
Deut.  5. 29. 0  that  they  would  keep  my  commands  a.

11.  1.  thou  shalt  keep  his  commandments  a.

14.  23.  thou  mayest  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  a.

Job  7. 16.  I  lothe  it,  i  would  not  live  a.

27.  10.  will  he  a.  call  upon  God  ?

Psal.  16.  8.  I  have  set  the  Lord  a.  before  me
103.  9.  he  will  not  a.  chide,  nor  keep  his  anger
119. 112.  inclined  to  perform  thy  statutes  a.

Prov.  8.  30. 1  was  by  him,  rejoicing  a.  before  him
Isa.  57. 16.  neither  will  1  be  a.  wroth
Mat.  28. 20. 1  am  with  you  a.  to  the  end  of  the  world
Mark  14.  7.  but  me  ye  have  not  a.  John  12.  8.

John  8.  29.  I  do  a.  those  things  that  please  him

11.  42.  I  know  that  thou  hearest  me  a.

Acts  10.  2.  Cornelius  prayed  to  God  a.

2  Cor.  2. 14.  God,  who  a.  causeth  us  to  triumph
Phil.  1.  4.  a.  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you

20.  as  a.  so  now  also,  Christ  shall  be  magnified

2.  12.  as  ye  have  a.  obeyed,  not  in  my  presence

4.  4.  rejoice  in  the  Lord  a.  and  again  rejoice

1  Thess.  2. 16.  to  fill  up  their  sins  a.  for  wrath

2  Pet.  1. 15.  to  ha vp  chese  a.  in  remembrance

I  AM,  r  AM  that  I  AM.

Exod.  3.  14.  I  am  that  I  am  hath  sent  me  to  you
Num.  11.  21.  the  people  amongst  whom  J  am
Neh.  6. 11.  who  is  there  that  being  as  I  am
Job  9.  32.  he  is  not  a  man  as  I  am,  that  I  should
Psal.  35.  3.  say  to  my  soul,  I  am  thy  salvation

39. 4.  that  I  may  know  how  frail  I  am

50. 7.  O  Israel,  I  am  God,  even  thy  God

143.  12.  destroy  them,  for  I  am  thy  servant  [11.
Jra.44. 6.  Iam  the  first,  lam  the  last,  48. 12.  Rev.  1.
47.  8.  I  am,  and  none  else  besides  me,  Zeph.  2. 15.
58.  9.  thou  shalt  cry,  and  he  shall  say,  here  I  am
Mat.  16.  13.  whom  do  men  say  that  I  the  Son  of
man  am  ?  Mark  8.  27.  Luke  9. 18.
Luke  22.  70.  art  the  Son  of  God,  ye  say  that  I  am
John  6.  35.  Jesus  said,  I  am  the  bread  of  life
8. 12.  saying,  I  am  the  light  of  the  world
58.  I  say  to  you,  before  Abraham  was,  I  am

12.  26.  where  I  am  there  shall  my  servants  be
17.  24. 1  will  that  they  may  be  with  me  where  I  am

Acts  26.  29.  almost  and  altogether  such  as  I  am

27.23.  angel  of  God,  whose  lam,  and  whom  I  serve

1  Cor.  15. 10.  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am
Gal.  4. 12.  brethren,  be  as  I  am,  for  I  am  as  you  are
Phil.  4.  11.  for  I  have  learned  in  what  state  I  am
Rev.  1.  18.  I  am  he  that  liveth,  I  am  alive  for  ever

19.  10.  see  thou  do  it  not,  I  am  thy  fellow-servant

AM  I.

Gen.  4.  9.  I  know  not,  am  I  my  brother’s  keeper  ?
30.  2.  am  I  in  God’s  stead,  who  hath  withheld

2  Kings  5. 7-  am  I  God,  to  kill  and  to  make  alive  ?
18. 25.  am  I  come  up  without  the  Lord,  Isa.  36. 10.

Jer.  23.  23.  am  I  a  God  at  hand,  saith  the  Lord
Mat.  18.  20.  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them
John  7.  33.  yet  a  little  while  am  I  with  you

1  Cor.  9.  1.  am  I  not  an  apostle  ?  am  I  not  free  ?

2  Cor.  12.  10.  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong

Here  Am  I,  or  Here  I  Am.  See  Here.
AMAZED.

Judy.  20.  41.  the  men  of  Benjamin  were  a.

Job  32.  15.  they  were  a.  they  answered  no  more
Isa.  13.  8.  they  shall  be  a.  one  at  another
Ezek.  32.  10.  I  will  make  many  people  a.  at  thee
Mat.  19.  25.  the  disciples  were  exceedingly  a.
Mark 2. 12.  were  all  a.  and  glorified  God,  Luke 5. 26.
14.  33.  he  begem  to  be  sore  a.  and  very  heavy
Luke  4. 36.  all  a.  and  spake  among  themselves

9.  43.  were  all  a.  at  the  mighty  power  of  God
Acts  9.  21.  but  all  that  heard  Saul  were  a.
AMAZEMENT.

Acts  3.  10.  filled  with  a.  at  what  had  happened

1  Pet.  3.  6.  and  are  not  afraid  with  any  a.

AMBASSADOR.

Prov.  13.  17.  but  a  faithful  a.  is  health
Jer.  49. 14.  an  a.  sent  to  the  heathen,  Obad.  1.

Eph.  6. 20.  for  Which  I  am  an  a.  in  bonds
AMBASSADORS.

Josh.  9. 4.  went  and  made  as  if  they  had  been  a.

2  Citron.  32.  31 .  the  business  of  the  a.  of  Babylon
35.  21.  he  sent  a.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?

Isa.  18. 2.  that  sendeth  a. .by  the  sea  in  vessels

30. 4.  princes  at  Zoan,  hi's  a.  came  to  Hanes
33. 7-  the  a.  of  peace  shall  weep  bitterly

Ezek.  17. 15.  he  rebelled  in  sending  a.  to  Egypt
2  Cor.  5.  20.  now  then  we  are  a.  for  Christ
AMBASSAGE.

Luke  14.  32.  sendeth  an  a.  and  desireth  conditions
Amber  :  see  Colour.

AMBUSH,  ES.

Josh.  8.  2.  lay  thee  an  a.  for  the  city  behind  it
Jer.  51.  IS.  set  up  the  watchmen,  prepare  the  a.
AMBUSHMENT.  S.

2  Citron.  13.  13.  Jeroboam  caused  an  a.  the  a.  was

20.  22.  the  Lord  set  a.  against  Ammon

AMEN

Signifies,  tn  Hebrew,  true,  faithful,  certain.  It  is
made  use  of  likewise  to  affirm  any  thing,  and  was
an  affirmation  used  often  by  our  Saviour,  which  is
rendered  in  our  translation,  verily,  verily  ;  amen,
amen,  I  say  unto  you,  John  3.  3,  5.  All  the  pro¬
mises  of  God  are  amen  in  Christ ;  that  is,  certain
and  firm,  2  Cor.  1.  20.  Christ  himself  ,  the  faith¬
ful  prophet  and  teacher  of  his  church,  is  called  the
Amen,  Rev.  3. 14.  Jbr  Isa.  65. 16.  shall  bless  him-
10


self  in  the  God  of  truth,  and  swear  by  the  God  of
truth;  which  in  the  Hebrew  is,  the  God  amen.
And  it  is  used  in  the  end  of  prayer  in  testimony
of  an  earnest  wish,  desire,  or  assurance  to  be
heard ;  amen,  so  be  it,  so  shall  it  be.  The  word
amen  is  used  in  many  languages.

Num.  5.  22.  and  the  woman  shall  say  a.  a.

Deut.  27. 15.  all  the  people  shall  say  a.  to  the  end
1  Kings  1.  36.  Benaian  answered  a.  the  Lord  say  so
1  Chron.  16  36.  people  said  a.  and  praised  the  Lord
PsalA\.\3.  from  everlasting  to  everlasting:  «.and  a.
72.  19.  earth  filled  with  his  glory;  a.  and  a.

89.  52.  blessed  be  the  Lord  for  evermore,  a.  and  a.
106.  48.  and  let  all  the  people  say  a.

Jer.  28.  6.  even  the  prophet  Jeremiah  said  a.

Mat.  6.  13.  the  power  and  the  glory  for  ever,  a.

1  Cor.  14. 16.  the  room  of  the  unlearned,  say  a.

2  Cor.  1.  20.  the  promises  in  him  are  yea  and  a.

Rev.  1. 18.  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore,  a.

3. 14.  write  these  things,  saith  the  a.  the  faithful

5.  14.  and  the  four  beasts  said  a.  19.  4.

22. 20.  surely  I  comequickly.a.  even socome,T.ord
AMEND.  [Jesus

Jer.  7.  3.  a.  ways,  and  doings,  5.  I  26. 13. 1  35. 15.
John  4.  52.  the  hour  when  he  began  to  a.

AMENDMENT.

Mat.  3.  +  8.  bring  fruits  answerable  to  a.  of  life
AMENDS.

Lev.  5.  16.  he  shall  make  a.  for  the  harm  done
AMERCE.

Deut.  22. 19.  they  shall  a.  him  in  100  shekels
Amethyst:  see  Agate  and  Jacinth.
AMIABLE.

Psal.  84. 1.  how  a.  are  thy  tabernacles,  O  Lord
AMISS.

2  Chron.  6.  37-  we  have  sinned,  we  have  done  a.
Dan.  3. 29.  speak  any  thing  a.  against  the  God
Luke  23. 41.  but  this  man  hath  done  nothing  a.
Jam.  4.  3.  ask  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask  a.
AMONG.

Num.  14.  14.  heard  that  thou,  Lord,  art  a.  them
Ezra  10.  18.  a.  the  sons  of  the  priests  were  found
Neh.  13.  26.  yet  a.  many  nations  was  no  king
Job  33.  23.  if  an  interpreter,  one  a.  a  thousand

36. 14.  and  their  life  is  a.  the  unclean
Eccl.  6. 1.  there  is  an  evil  common  a.  men

7-  28.  one  a.  1000,  but  a  woman  a.  all  those
Cant.  5.  10.  the  chiefest  a.  ten  thousand
Jer.  5.  26.  a.  my  people  are  found  wicked  men
Mic.  7. 2.  and  there  is  none  upright  a.  men
Luke  1. 28.  blessed  art  thou  a.  women

10.  3.  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  a.  wolves
John  6.  9.  but  what  are  they  a.  so  many  ?

Col.  1.  f  18.  a.  all  he  might  nave  the  pre-eminence
ANATHEMA.

1  Cor.  16. 22.  let  him  be  a.  maran-atha

ANCESTORS.

Lev.  26.  45.  remember  the  covenant  of  their  a.
ANCHOR.

Acts  27.  30.  as  though  they  would  have  cast  a.

Heb.  6.  19.  which  hope  we  have  as  an  a.  of  the  soul
ANCIENT

Signifies,  [1]  Old,  of  former  time,  1  Chron.  4.  22.
[2]  Very  Id  men,  Job  12.  12.  [3]  Men  of  former

times,  1  Sam.  24. 13.  [4]  Governors,  political  and
ecclesiastical,  Isa.  3. 14.  Jer.  19. 1.

Deut.  33. 15.  for  the  chief  things  of  the  a.  mountains
Judg.  5. 21.  that  a.  river,  the  river  Kishon

2  Kings  19.  25.  of  a.  times,  I  formed  it,  Isa.  37. 26.

1  Chron.  4.  22.  and  these  are  a.  things

Ezra  3. 12.  were  a.  men,  and  had  seen  the  first  house
Job  12.  12.  with  the  a.  is  wisdom,  and  in  days
Prov.  22.  28.  remove  not  the  a.  land  mark
Isa.  3.  2.  prudent  and  a.  the  Lord  doth  take  away

9.  15.  the  a.  and  honourable,  he  is  the  head
19. 11.  how  say  ye,  I  am  the  son  of  a.  kings  ?

23.  7.  whose  antiquity  is  of  a.  days
44.  f.  since  I  appointed  the  a.  people
47.6.  upon  the  a.  hast  thou  laid  thy  yoke

51.  9.  awake,  O  arm  of  the  Lord,  as  in  the  a.  days
Jer.  18. 15.  caused  them  to  stumble  from  a.  paths
Ezek.  9.  6.  then  they  began  at  the  a.  men
Dan.  7.  9.  the  a.  ot  days  did  sit,  whose  garment

13.  one  like  the  Son  of  man  came  to  a.  of  days
22.  till  the  a.  of  days  came,  and  judgment  given
ANCIENTS.

1  Sam.  24. 13.  as  saith  the  proverb  of  the  a.

Psal.  119. 100.  I  understand  more  than  the  a.

Isa.  3. 14.  Lord  will  enter  into  judgment  with  the  a.

24.  23.  the  Lord  shall  reign  before  his  a.

Jer.  19. 1.  take  of  a.  of  the  people  and  a.  of  priests
Ezek.  7. 26.  counsel  shall  perish  from  the  a.

8. 12.  son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  what  the  a.  do  ?
27.  9.  the  a.  of  Gebal  were  in  thee  thy  calkers
ANCLE-BONES.

Acts  3.  7.  his  a.-bones  received  strength
ANCLES.

2  Sam.  22. 1 37-  that  my  a.  did  not  slip,  Psal.  18.  t  36.
Ezek.  47.  3.  the  waters  were  to  the  a.

ANGEL

Signifies,  A  messenger,  or  bringer  of  tidings,  and  is
applied,  [1]  To  those  intellectual  and  immaterial
beings,  whom  God  makes  use  of  as  his  ministers
to  execute  the  orders  of  providence.  Rev.  22.  8.
[2]  To  Christ,  who  is  the  Mediator  and  Head  of  the
church,  Zech.  1.  12.  Rev.  10.  1.  [3]  To  mi¬
nisters  of  the  gospel,  who  are  ambassadors  for
Christ,  Rev.  2.  1. 1  3.  1,  7-  [4]  To  such  whom

God  employs  to  execute  his  judgments.  Rev.

15.  8.  I  16.  1.  [5]  To  devils.  Mat.  25.  41.  1

Cor.  6.  3.

Gen.  22. 11.  a.  of  the  Lord  said,  Abraham,  Abraham
24.  7.  he  shall  send  his  a.  before  thee,  40.

48. 16.  the  a.  who  redeemed  me  from  all  evil
Exod.  23. 20.  send  a.  before  thee,  23.  1 32. 34.  |  33.  2.
Num.  20. 16.  sent  an  a.  and  brought  us  outof  Egypt
Judg.  13. 19.  and  the  a.  did  wondrously
2  Sam.  24. 16.  the  a.  stretched  out  his  hand,  the  a.

that  destroyed  the  people,  1  Chron.  21. 15.
17.  David  spake  when  he  saw  the  a.  that  smote
1  Kings  13. 18.  a.  spake  to  me  by  the  word  of  Lord

19. 5.  an  a.  touched  Elijah  and  said  arise  and  eat

¥


1  Chr.  21. 15.  God  sentanff.  to  Jerusalem  todestrty

20.  and  Oman  turned  back,  and  saw  the  a,

27.  the  Lord  commanded  the  a.  and  he  put  up

2  Chron.  32.21.  the  I  ord  sent  an  a.  which  cutoff
Eccl.  5.  6.  nor  say  before  the  a.  it  was  an  error
Isa.  63. 9.  the  a.  of  his  presence  saved  them
Dan.  3.  28.  God  who  hath  sent  a.  and  delivered

6.  22.  my  God  hath  sent  his  a.  and  shut  up
Hos.  12.  4.  yea,  he  had  power  over  the  a.

Zech.  1.  9.  tne  a.  that  talked  with  me  said,  4.  5.

13.  Lord  answered  the  a.  that  talked  with  me

14.  the  a.  that  communed  with  me  said

19.  I  said  to  the  a.  that  talked,  4.  4.  |  5. 10.  1 6.  4.

2.  3.  the  a.  that  talked  went  out,  and  another  a.

3.  3.  with  filthy  garments,  and  stood  before  the  a.
5.  5.  the  a.  that  talked  with  me,  went  forth

6. 5.  the  a.  answered,  these  are  the  four  spirits
Mat.  28.  5.  the  a.  answered  the  woman,  fear  not
Luke  1. 13.  the  a.  said,  fear  not,  Zacharias

19.  the  a.  answered  and  said,  I  am  Gabriel
26.  in  the  sixth  month  the  a.  Gabriel  was  sent

30.  the  a.  said  to  her,  fear  not,  Mary

35.  a.  answered,  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  on  thee

2. 10.  the  a.  said  to  the  shepherds,  fear  not

13.  suddenly  there  was  with  the  a.  a  multitude

21.  so  named  of  the  a.  before  he  was  conceived

22.  43.  there  appeared  an  a.  strengthening  him

John  5. 4.  an  a.  went  down  at  a  cei  tain  season

12.  29.  others  said,  an  a.  spake  to  him
Acts  6. 15.  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an  a.

7-  35.  by  hands  of  the  a.  that  appeared  in  the  bush
38.  in  the  wilderness  with  the  a.  which  spake

10.  7*  when  the  a.  which  spake  to  Cornelius

22.  was  warned  from  God  by  an  holy  a.  to  send

11.  13.  how  he  had  seen  an  a.  in  his  house

12.  8.  the  a.  said  to  Peter,  bind  on  thy  sandals

9.  that  it  was  true  which  was  done  by  the  a.

10.  and  forthwith  the  a.  departed  from  him

11.  the  Lord  hath  sent  his  a.  and  delivered  me

15.  Rhoda  affirmed,  then  said  they,  it  is  his  a.

23. 8.  the  Sadducees  say,  neither  a.  nor  spirit
9.  if  a  spirit  or  an  a.  hath  spoken  to  him

2  Cor.  11.  14.  is  transformed  into  an  a.  of  light
Gal.  1.  8.  though  we  or  an  a.  from  heaven  preach
Rev.  1.  1.  and  he  signified  it  by  his  a.  to  John
2.  1.  unto  the  a.  of  the  church,  8.12, 18.  1 3. 1, 7, 14.
5.  2. 1  saw  a  strong  a.  proclaiming  with  loud  voice

7.  2.  I  saw  another  a.  ascending  from  the  east

8.  3.  and  another  a.  came  and  stood  at  the  altar

4.  ascended  before  God  out  of  the  a.  hand

5.  the  a.  took  the  censer,  and  filled  it  with  fire
7-  the  first  a.  sounded  1  8.  second  a.  I  10.  third  a.

12.  fourth  a.  |  9.  1.  fifth  a.  1 13.  sixth  a.  sounded

8.  13. 1  heard  an  a.  flying  through  midst  of  heaven

9.  11.  which  is  the  a.  of  the  bottomless  pit

14.  saying  to  the  sixth  a.  loose  the  four  angels

10.  1.  I  saw  another  a.  come  down,  18.  1. 1  20. 1.
5.  and  the  a.  which  I  saw  stand  on  the  sea

7.  but  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  seventh  a.

8.  go  and  take  tne  book  in  the  hand  of  the  a.

10. 1  took  the  book  jj  11. 1.  and  the  a.  stood,  saying

11.  15.  seventh  a.  sounded,  and  there  were  voices
14.6. 1  saw  another  a.  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven

8.  another  a.  followed,  saying,  Babylon  is

9.  third  a.  followed  ||  15.  another  a.  came,  17- 18.

19.  and  the  a.  thrust  in  his  sickle  in  the  earth

16.  2.  a.  poured  out  his  vial,  3,  4,  8,  10,  12,  17.

5.  and  I  heard  the  a.  of  the  waters  say

17.  7-  the  a.  said,  wherefore  didst  thou  marvel  ?

18.  21.  and  mighty  a.  took  up  a  stone  like  a  great
19. 17-  and  I  saw  an  a.  standing  in  the  sun

21.  17.  the  measure  of  a  man,  that  is  of  the  a.

22.  8.  fell  down  to  worship  before  the  feet  of  a.

16. 1 J esus  have  sent  mine  a.  to  testify  to  you

ANGEL  of  God.

Exod.  14. 19.  a.  of  God  who  went  before  removed
Judg.  13. 6.  like  the  countenance  of  an  a.  of  God

1  Sam.  29.  9-  art  good  in  my  sight,  as  an  a.  of  God

2  Sam.  14.  17.  as  an  a.  of  God,  so  is  my  lord,  19.  27

20.  wise  according  to  the  wisdom  of  an  a.  of  God
Acts  27. 23.  stood  by  me  this  night  the  a.  of  God
Gal.  4. 14.  but  received  me  as  an  a.  of  God

ANGEL  of  the  Lord.

Gen.  16. 7*  a.  of  the  L.  found  Hagar  by  a  fountain

9.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  said  to  her,  10.  11. 1  22.  11.

Num.  22.  32,  35.  Judg.  13.  18.  2  Kings  1.  3, 15
22.  11.  a.  of  the  L.  called  to  him  out  of  heaven,  15.
Num.  22.  23.  ass  saw  the  a.  of  the  L.  standing,  25. 27.
24.  a.  of  the  L.  stood  in  a  path  of  the  vineyards,  26.

31.  Balaam  saw  a.  of  the  L.  standing  in  the  way

34.  and  Balaam  said  to  a.  of  the  L.  I  have  sinned

35.  a.  of  the  L.  said  to  Balaam,  go  with  the  men
Judg.  2. 1.  a.  of  the  L.  came  up,l  Kings  19.  7-

Acts  12.  7.

4.  when  a.  of  the  L.  spake  these  words  to  Israel

5. 23.  curse  ye  Meroz,  said  the  a.  of  the  Lord

6. 11.  came  an  a.  of  the  L.  and  sat  under  an  oak

12.  a.  of  L.  appeared  to  Gideon,  and  said  to  him

21.  the  a.  of  the  L.  put  forth  the  end  of  the  staff'

22.  when  Gideon  perceived  he  was  an  a.  of  the  L.

13.  3.  a.  of  the  L.  appeared  to  the  woman,  and  said

16.  Manoah  knew  not  he  was  an  a.  of  the  L.,  21.
20.  a.  of  the  L.  ascended  in  the  flame  of  the  altar

2  Sam.  24. 16.  a.  of  L.  was  by  threshing,  1  Ch.  21. 15.
2  Kings  19-  35.  a.  cf  L.  smote  in  camp,  Isa.  37.  36.
1  Chron.  21. 12. a.  of  L.  destroying  throughout  coasts
18.  a.  of  the  L.  commanded  Gad  to  say  to  David
30.  afraid,  because  of  the  sword  of  a.  of  the  lard
Psal.  34. 7.  a.  of  L.  encampeth  round  them  that  fear
35.  5.  let  a.  of  L.  chase  them  H  6.  persecute  them
Zech.  1. 11 .  they  answered  the  a.  of  the  L.  that  stood
12.  a.  of  L.  answered,  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy

3. 5.  a.  of  L.  stood  by  Joshua  ||  6.  a.  of  L.  protested

12. 8.  house  of  David  as  the  a.  of  L.  before  them
Mat.  1. 20.  a.  of  L.  appeared  in  a  dream. 2. 13, 19.

24.  Joseph  did:  as  the  a.  of  the  L.  had  bidden  him

28.  2.  for  the  a.  of  the  L.  descended  from  heaven
Luke  1. 11 .  there  appeared  to  Zacharias  an  a.  of  L.

2.  9.  a.  of  L.  came  upon  them,  and  glory  of  Lord
Acts  5. 19.  a.  of  L.  by  night  opened  tne  prison-doors
8.  26.  a.  of  the  Lord  spake  to  Philip,  saying,  arise

12. 23.  a.  of  L.  smote  Herod,  because  ne  gave  not


AN  G


ANO


A  N  G


ANGELS.

Gen.  .9.  1.  there  came  two  a.  to  Sodom  at  even

15.  when  the  morning  arose,  the  a.  hastened  Lot
P.sal.  8.  5.  a  little  lower  than  the  a.Ileb.  2.  7,  9.

68.  17.  the  chariots  of  God  are  thousands  of  a.

78.  25.  man  did  eat  a.  food,  he  sent  them  meat

49.  and  trouble,  by  sending  evil  a.  among;  them
Mat.  4.  11.  a.  came  and  ministered  to,  Mark  1.  13.

13.  39.  end  of  the  world,  the  reapers  are  the  a.

49.  the  a.  shall  come  forth  and  sever  the  wicked
18.  10.  their  a.  always  behold  the  face  of  God

24.  36.  no  man,  not  the  a.  in  heaven,  Mark  13.  32.

25.  31.  Son  of  man,  and  all  the  holy  a.  with  him
26. 53.  give  me  more  than  twelve  legions  of  a.
Mark  8.  38.  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh  in  the

glory  of  his  Father,  with  the  holy  a.  Luke  9. 26.

12.  25.  nor  marry,  but  are  as  the  a.  in  heaven
Luke  2.  15.  as  the  a.  were  gone  away  from  them
16. 22.  the  beggar  died,  and  was  carried  by  the  a.
20. 36.  nor  die,  for  they  are  equal  unto  the  a.

24.  23.  that  they  had  also  seen  a  vision  of  a.

John  20. 12.  and  seeth  two  a.  in  white,  sitting
Acts  7. 53.  who  received  the  law  by  disposition  of  a.
Rom.  8.  38.  nor  life,  nor  a.  able  to  separate  us  from

1  Cor.  4.  9.  a  spectacle  to  the  world,  to  a.  and  men

6.  3.  know  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  a.  ?

11. 10.  to  have  power  on  her  head,  because  of  the  a.

13. 1.  though  1  speak  with  tongues  of  men  and  a.
Gal.  3.  19.  it  was  retained  by  a.  in  the  hand

Col.  2. 18.  no  man  beguile  you  in  worshipping  of  a.

2  These.  1. 7.  revealed  from  heaven  with  mighty  a.
1  Tim.  3. 16.  seen  of  a.  preached  to  the  Gentiles

5.  21. 1  charge  thee  before  God  and  the  elect  a.
Heb.  1.  4.  being  made  so  much  better  than  the  a.

5.  to  which  of  the  a.  said  he  at  any  time,  13.

7.  of  the  a.  he  saith,  who  maketh  his  a.  spirits

2.  2.  if  the  word  spoken  by  a.  was  stedfast
5.  to  the  a.  hath  he  not  put  in  subjection

16.  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature  of  a.  but  seed

12.  22.  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  a.

13.  2.  for  some  have  entertained  a.  unawares

1  Pet.  1. 12.  which  things  the  a.  desire  to  look  into

3.  22.  a.  and  powers  being  made  subject  to  him

2  Pet.  2.  4.  if  God  spared  not  the  a.  that  sinned

11.  whereas  a.  greater  in  power  and  might
Jude  6.  the  a.  who  kept  not  their  first  estate
Pev.  1.  20.  seven  stars  a.  of  the  seven  churches

5. 11.  the  voice  of  many  a.  about  the  throne
7-  1. 1  saw  four  a.  standing  on  the  four  comers
2.  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice  to  the  four  a.
11.  all  the  a.  stood  round  about  the  throne

8. 13.  trumpet  of  the  three  a.  which  are  yet  to  sound
9.  14.  loose  the  four  a.  which  are  bound  in  the  river

15.  the  a.  were  loosed,  which  were  prepared

14. 10.  be  tormented  in  presence  of  the  holy  a.

21. 12.  twelve  gates,  and  at  the  gates  twelve  a.

A  N  G  ELS  o/  God.

Gen.  28. 12.  a.  of  God  ascend  and  descend,  John  1 . 51.

32. 1.  Jacob  went  his  way,  and  a.  of  God  met  him
Mat.  22.  30.  but  as  a.  of  God  in  heaven,  Mark  12.  25.
Luke  12. 8.  him  shall  the  Son  confess  before  a.  of  God

9.  denieth  me,  shall  be  denied  before  the  a.  of  God

15. 10.  there  is  ioy  in  the  presence  of  the  a.  of  God
Heb.  1.  6.  let  all  the  a.  of  God  worship  him

.  His  ANGELS.

Job  4. 18.  and  his  a.  he  charged  with  folly
Psal.  91. 11.  give  his  a.  charge,  Mat.  A.  6.  Luke  A.  10.
103. 20.  ye  his  a.  which  excel  in  strength
104.  4.  who  maketh  his  a.  spirits,  Heb.  1. 7.

148.  2.  praise  ye  him  all  his  a.  praise  ye  him
Mat.  13.  41.  the  Son  of  man  shall  send  forth  his  a.
16.  27.  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father  with  his  a.

24.  31.  send  his  a.  with  a  great  sound,  Mark  13. 27.

25.  41.  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  a.

Rev.  3. 5.  will  confess  before  my  Father  and  his  a.

12.  7-  Michael  and  his  a.  the  dragon  and  his  a.

9.  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  and  his  a.

ANGER,  Verb.

Rom.  10.  19.  by  a  foolish  nation  I  will  a.  j7ou
ANGER.

Gen.  27.  45.  till  thy  brother’s  a.  turn  away
44. 18.  and  let  not  thine  a  burn  against  me
45.  t  5.  neither  let  there  be  a.  in  your  eyes
49.  7.  cursed  be  their  a.  for  it  was  fierce
Exod.  32. 19.  saw  the  dancing,  Moses’  a.  waxed  hot
22.  Aaron  said,  let  not  the  a.  of  my  lord  wax  hot
Deut.  9. 19. 1  was  afraid  of  the  a.  and  displeasure
13. 17.  Lord  may  turn  from  the  fierceness  of  his  a.

29.  24.  what  meaneth  the  heat  of  this  great  a.  ?
Josh.  7. 26.  Lord  turned  from  the  fierceness  of  his  a.
Judg. 8. 3.  then  their  a.  was  abated  toward  him
Estn.  1. 12.  Ahasuerus  his  a.  burned  in  him
Job  4.  +9.  by  his  a.  are  they  consumed

9. 13.  if  Goa  will  not  withdraw  his  a.  the  proud
Psal.  21.  9.  as  a  fiery7  oven  in  the  time  of  thine  a.

30. 5.  for  his  a.  endureth  but  a  moment

37. 8.  cease  from  a.  and  forsake  wrath,  fret  not

38. 3.  no  soundness  in  my  flesh  because  of  thine  a.

69.  24.  let  thy  wrathful  a.  take  hold  of  them

74. 1.  why  doth  thy  a.  smoke  against  the  sheep
78.  21.  and  a.  also  came  up  against  Israel

38.  many  a  time  turned  he  his  a.  away

49.  he  cast  on  them  the  fierceness  of  his  a.

50.  he  made  a  way  to  his  a.  he  spared  them  not
85.  3.  hast  turned  from  the  fierceness  of  thine  a.

A.  and  cause  thine  a.  towards  us  to  cease
5.  wilt  thou  draw  out  thine  a.  to  all  generations  ?
90.7*  for  we  are  consumed  by  thine  a.

11.  who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  a.  ?

103. 9.  nor  will  he  keep  his  a.  for  ever,  Jer.  3. 5.
Prov.  15. 1.  but  grievous  words  stir  up  a.

19. 11.  the  discretion  of  a  man  deferreth  his  a.

21. 14.  a  gift  in  secret  pacifieth  a.

22.  8.  and  the  rod  of  his  a.  shall  fail

27. 4.  wrath  is  cruel,  and  a.  is  outrageous
Eccl.  7-  9-  a.  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools

11.  +10.  therefore  remove  a.  from  thy  heart
Isa.  5.  25.  for  all  this  his  a.  is  not  turned  away,  9.

12,  17,  21.  |  10.  4.

7.  4.  fear  not  for  the  a.  of  Resin  with  Syria

10.  5.  O  Assyrian,  the  rod  of  mine  a.  and  staff
25.  shall  cease,  and  my  a.  in  their  destruction


Isa.  12. 1.  though  thou  wast  angTy,  thine  a.  is  turned

13. 9.  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh  with  fierce  a.

13.  and  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  a.  Lam.  1. 12.

3  ).  27.  name  of  the  I.ord  cometh  burning  with  a.

30.  the  Lord  shall  show  the  indignation  of  his  a.
42.  25..  therefore  he  poured  on  lnm  fury  of  his  a.

48.  9.  lor  my  name's  sake  will  1  defer  mine  a.

65.  +  5.  these  are  a  smoke  in  mine  a.

66.  15.  Lord  will  come  tc  render  his  a.  with  fury
Jer.  2.  35.  surely  his  a.  shall  turn  from  me

3. 12. 1  will  not  cause  mine  a.  to  fall  on  you,  1  am
merciful,  and  I  will  not  keep  mine  a.  for  ever

4.  26.  all  the  cities  were  broken  down  by  his  a.

7. 20.  mine  a.  shall  be  poured  on  this  place

18.  23.  deal  with  them  in  the  time  of  thine  a.

25. 38.  the  land  is  desolate  because  of  his  a.

32.  31;  city  hath  been  as  a  provocation  of  mine  a.
36. 7.  great  is  the  a.  the  Lord  hath  pronounced

42.  18.  as  mine  a.  hath  been  poured  on  Jerusalem
44.  6.  wherefore  mine  a.  was  poured  forth

49.  37.  1  will  bring  evil  on  them,  my  fierce  a.
Lam.  2. 1.  remembered  not  his  footstool  in  day  of  a.

6.  Lord  hath  despised  in  the  indignation  ot  his  a.

21.  thou  hast  slain  them  in  the  day  of  thine  a.

22.  in  the  day  of  the  Lord’s  a.  none  escaped

3.  43.  thou  hast  covered  with  a.  and  persecuted  us

4. 11.  he  hath  poured  out  his  fierce  a.

Ezek.  5. 13.  thus  shall  mine  a.  be  accomplished

7.  3.  and  I  will  send  mine  a.  upon  thee

8.  and  accomplish  mine  a.  on  thee,  20.  8,  21.

25. 14.  shall  do  in  Edom,  according  to  mine  a.

35.  11. 1  will  even  do  according  to  thine  a.

Dan.  9.  16.  let  thine  a.  be  turned  away
Hos.  11.  9.  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine  a.

14.  4.  for  mine  a.  is  turned  away  from  him
Amos  1.  11.  his  a.  did  tear  perpetually,  and  kept
Jonah  3.  9.  if  God  will  turn  from  his  fierce  a.

Mic.  7. 18.  he  retained  not  his  a.  for  ever
Nah.  1.  6.  who  can  abide  the  fierceness  of  his  a.  ?
Hab.  3. 8.  was  thine  a.  against  the  rivers  ?

Zeph.  3.  8.  to  pour  upon  them  all  my  fierce  a.
Mark  3. 5.  when  he  had  looked  on  them  with  a.
Eph.  A.  31.  let  all  a.  be  put  away,  Col.  3. 8.
ANGER  of  the  Lord.

Num.  25.  4.  fierce  a.  of  the  Lord  may  be  turned

32. 14.  to  augment  the  a.  of  the  Lord  against  Israel

Deut.  29.  20.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  shall  smoke  against
Judg. 2. 14.  a.  against  Isr.  20. 1  3.8.  I  10.7.

2  Kings  24.  20.  thro’  the  a.  of  the  Lord  it  came  to

pass,  Jer.  52.  3.

Jer.  A.  8.  the  fierce  a.  of  the  Lord  is  not  turned  away

12. 13.  because  of  the  fierce  a.  of  the  Lord,  25.  37.
23.  20.  the  a.  of  the  L.ord  shall  not  return,  30.  24.
51. 45.  deliver  his  soul  from  the  fierce  a.  of  the  L.
Lam.  4. 16.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  hath  divided  them
Zeph.  2. 2.  before  the  fierce  a.  of  the  L.  come  on  you
3.  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  a.  of  L.
In  ANGER.

Gen.  49.  6.  for  in  their  a.  they  slew  a  man
Exod.  11.  8.  he  went  out  from  Pharaoh  in  a.

Deut.  29.  23.  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  a.

28.  the  Lord  rooted  them  out  of  the  land  in  a.

1  Sam.  20.  34.  Jonathan  rose  from  the  table  in  a.

2  Chron.  25.  10.  they  returned  home  in  great  a.

Job  9-  5.  which  overturneth  them  in  his  a.

18.  4.  he  tearcth  himself  in  his  a.

21. 17.  God  distributeth  sorrows  in  his  a.

35. 15.  because  it  is  not  so,  he  hath  visited  in  his  a.
Psal.  6. 1.  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thy  a.  Jer.  10. 24.
7-  6.  arise,  O  Lord,  in  thine  a.  lift  up  thyself
27.  9.  put  not  thy  servant  away  in  a.

56.  f.  in  thine  a.  cast  down  the  people,  O  Lord
77.  9.  hath  he  in  a.  shut  up  his  tender  mercies  ?
Isa.  13.  3. 1  have  also  called  my  mighty  ones  in  a.

14.  6.  he  that  ruled  the  nations  in  a.

63.  3.  for  I  will  tread  them  in  mine  a.  6.

Jer.  21.5. 1  will  fight  against  you,  even  in  a.

32.  37.  whither  I  have  driven  them  in  mine  a

33.  5.  whom  1  have  slain  in  mine  a.  and  in  my  fury
Lam.  2. 1.  Lord  covered  Zion  with  a  cloud  in  his  a.

3.  he  hath  cut  off  in  a.  all  the  horn  of  Israel
3.  66.  persecute  and  destroy  them  in  a.

Ezek.  3.  + 14.  and  I  went  in  hot  a.

5.  15.  when  I  shall  execute  judgments  in  thee  in  a.

13.  13.  shall  be  an  overflowing  shower  in  mine  a.
22.  20.  so  will  I  gather  you  in  mine  a.  and  fury

43.  8.  wherefore  I  have  consumed  them  in  mine  a.
Dan.  11. 20.  be  destroyed,  neither  in  a.  nor  in  battle
Hos.  13.  11.  1  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  a.

Mic.  5.  15.  and  1  will  execute  vengeance  in  a.
Hab.  3.  12.  thou  didst  thresh  the  heathen  in  a.
ANGER  kindled.

Gen.  30.  2.  a.  of  Jacob  was  kindled  against  R  ache.
Exod.  A.  14.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  vras  k.  against  Moses
■Num.  11.  1.  a.  of  the  L.  was  k.  10.  1 12.  9. 1  22.  22.
22.  27.  Balaam’s  a.  was  k.  and  he  smote  the  ass

24. 10.  Balak’s  a.  was  kindled  against  Balaam
25.  3.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  a  gainst  Israel
32.  13.  Josh.  7. 1.  2  Sam.  24.  1.  2  Kings  13.  3.

32. 10.  the  Lord’s  a.  was  kindled  the  same  time
Deut.  6. 15.  lest  the  a.  of  the  Lord  be  k.  against  thee
7-4.  so  will  the  a.  of  the  Lord  be  k.  against  you

29.  27.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  was  k.  against  this  land

31.  17.  mine  a.  shall  be  kindled  in  that  day.  Josh.

23.  16.

32.  22.  for  a  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  a.  Jer.  15. 14.
Judg.  9.  30.  Zebul’s  a.  w  as  kindled  against  Gaal

14. 19.  Samson’s  a.  k.  and  he  went  up  to  his  father’s

1  Sam.  11.  6.  when  Saul  heard,  his  a.  was  k.  greatly
17. 28.  Eliab’s  a.  was  k.  against  David,  and  he  said
20.30.  Saul’s  a.  was  kindled  against  Jonathan

2  Sam.  6.  7.  a.  of  L.  k.  against  Uzziah,  1  Chr.  13. 10.
12. 5.  David’s  a.  was  kindled  against  the  man

2  Kings  23.  26.  the  wrath  -wherewith  his  a.  was  k.
2  Chron.  25.  10.  their  a.  was  kindled  against  Judah

15.  a.  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Amaziah
Isa.  5.  25.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  k.  against  his  people
Jer.  17.  4.  for  ye  have  kindled  a  fire  in  mine  a.

Hos.  8.  5.  mine  a.  is  kind/,  against  them,  how  long
Zech.  10.  3.  mine  a.  was  kind l .  against  the  shepherds
Provoke  or  Provoked  to  ANGER.

Deut.  A.  25.  to  provoke  him  to  a.  9. 18. 1  31.  £9.


2  Kings  17. 17- 1  21.  6. 1  23. 19.  2  Chr.  33.  6.

32. 16.  with  abominations  provoked  they  him  to  a.
21.  they  have pr.  me  to  a.  I  will  pr.  them  to  a.
Judp.  2.  12.  they  bowed  to  them,  and  pr.  the  L.  to  ai

1  Kings  14. 9.  made  molten  images  to  pr.  to  a.  15. 30.-
15.  made  their  groves  pr.  the  Lord  to  a.  16. 7, 13*

16.  2.  to  pr.  me  to  a.  with  their  sins,  2  Kings  17.

11.  Jer.  11.  17. 1  32.  29,  32.  Ezek.  16.  26i
33.  Ahab  did  more  to  pr.  the  Lord  to  a.  than  aL

21.  22.  wherewith  thou  hast  provoked  me  to  a.

22.  53.  Ahaz  pr.  to  a.  the  Lord  God  of  Israel

2  Kings  21.  15.  they  have  provoked  me  to  a.  since

the  day

22.  17.  forsaken  me,  that  they  might  provoke  me¬
te  a.  2  Chron.  34.  25.  Jer.  25.  7.
2  Chron.  28.  25.  pr.  to  a.  the  L.  God  of  his  fathers-
Neh.  A.  5.  have  pr.  thee  to  a.  before  the  builders
Psal.  78.  58.  pr.  him  to  a.  with  high  places,  106. 29.
Prov.  20. 2.  whoso  pr.  him  to  a.  sinneth  against
Isa.  1.  4.  they  havepr.  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  a.
65.  3.  a  people  that  provoke  me  to  a.  continually
Jer.  7.  18.  that  they  may  provoke  me  to  a.  [pr.  to  a ^

19.  do  they  pr.  me  to  a.  ||  8.  19.  why  have  they
25. 6.pr.  menpt  toa.\\  32.  30.  Israel  have pr.  me  to  a.
44.  3.  their  wickedness  to  pr.  me  to  a.  Ezek.  8. 17.

Ezek.  32.  f  9-  I  will  provoke  to  a.  the  hearts  of  many
Hos.  12.  14.  Ephraim  provoked  him  to  a.  bitterly
Col.  3.  21.  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  a.
Slow  to  ANGER.

Neh.  9.  17.  art  a  God  ready  to  pardon,  slow  to  a.
Psal.  103.  8.  slow  to  a.  plenteous  in  mercy,  145.  8.
Prov.  15.  18.  lie  that  is  slow  to  a.  appeaseth  strife
16.  32.  he  that  is  slow  to  a.  better  than  the  mighty
Joel  2.  13.  slow  to  a.  of  great  kindness,  Jonah  4.  2.
Nah.  1.  3.  the  Lord  is  slow  to  a.  great  in  power
ANGERED.

1  Sam.  1.  +6.  and  her  adversary  also  a.  her  sore
Psal.  106.  32.  they  a.  him  at  the  waters  of  strife

ANGLE.

Isa.  19.  8.  and  all  they  that  cast  a.  shall  lament
Hab.  1.  15.  they  take  up  all  of  them  with  the  a.
ANGRY.

Gen  18. 30.  let  not  the  Lord  be  a.  I’ll  speak,  32.

45.  5.  be  not  a.  with  yourselves  that  ye  sold  me
Lev.  10.  16.  and  Moses  was  a.  with  Eleazar  and
Deut.  1.  37.  the  Lord  was  a.  with  me  for  you,  4. 21.
9.  8.  Lord  was  a.  with  you  to  have  destroyed  you.

20.  the  Lord  was  very  a.  with  Aaron,  I  prayed
Judg.  18.  25.  lest  a.  fellows  run  upon  thee

2  Sam.  19.  42.  wherefore  be  ye  a.  for  this  matter

1  Kings 8.  46.  and  thou  be  a.  with  them,  2  Ch.  6. 36.
11.  9.  and  the  Lord  was  a.  with  Solomon,  because

2  Kings  17.  18.  therefore  the  L.  was  a.  with  Israel
Ezra  9. 14.  wouldst  thou  not  be  a.  with  us  till  thou
Neh.  5.  6. 1  was  very  a.  when  I  heard  their  cry
Psal.  2. 12.  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  a.  and  ye  perish

7.  11.  God  is  a.  with  the  wicked  every  day
76.  7.  who  may  stand  when  once  thou  art  a.  ?

79.  5.  how  long  wilt  thou  be  a.  ?  80.  4. 1  85. 5.
Prov.  14.  17.  he  that  is  soon  a.  dealeth  foolishly

21.  19.  dwell  in  wilderness,  than  with  an  a.  woman

22.  24.  make  no  friendship  with  an  a.  man

25.  23.  so  doth  an  a.  countenance,  a  backbiting

29.  22.  a.  man  stirreth  up  strife,  and  a  furious  man
Eccl.  5. 6.  wherefore  should  God  be  a.  at  thy  voice  t

7.  9.  be  not  hasty  in  thy  spirit  to  be  a.

Cant.  1.  6.  my  mother’s  children  were  a.  with  me
Isa.  12.  1.  though  thou  wast  a.  with  me,  thine  anger
Ezek.  16.  42. 1  will  be  quiet,  and  will  be  no  more  a.
Dan.  2.  12.  for  this  cause  the  kinc  was  a.

Jonah  A.  1.  it  displeased  Jonah,  and  he  was  very
4.  the  Lord  said,  doest  thou  well  to  be  a.  ?  9.

9.  he  said,  I  do  well  to  be  a.  even  unto  death
Mat.  5.  22.  whosoever  is  a.  with  his  brother
Luke  14.  21.  the  master  of  the  house  being  a.

15.  28.  and  he  was  a.  and  would  not  »o  in
John  7.  23.  are  ye  a.  at  me  because  1  nave  made
Eph.  A.  26.  be  a.  and  sin  not,  let  not  the  sun  go  down-
Tit.  1.  7.  a  bishop  must  be  blameless,  not  soon  a.
Rev  .11.  18.  the  nations  were  a.  thy  wrath  is  come
ANGUISH.

Gen.  42.  21.  guilty,  in  that  we  saw  the  a.  of  his  soul
Exod.  6.  9.  but  they  hearkened  not  to  Moses  for  a. .
Deut.  2.25.  tremble,  and  be  in  a.  because  of  thee
2  Sam.  1.  9.  slay  me,  for  a.  is  come  upon  me
Job  7.  11. 1  will  speak  in  the  a.  of  my  spirit
15.  24.  trouble  and  a.  shall  make  him  afraid
Psal.  119. 143.  trouble  and  a.  have  taken  hold  on  me
Prov.  1.  27.  when  distress  and  a.  come  upon  you
Isa.  8.  22.  look  to  the  earth,  and  behold  dimness  of  a .

30.  6.  into  the  land  of  trouble  and  a.  from  whence
Jer.  A.  31.  the  a.  as  of  her  that  bringeth  forth  child

6.  24.  a.  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  49.  24.  |  50.  43.
John  16. 21.  she  remembereth  no  more  her  a.  for  joy
Rom.  2. 9.  tribulation  and  a.  upon  every  soul  of  mail
2  Cor.  2.  A.  for  out  of  much  a.  of  heart  1  wrote  to  you
ANISE.

Mat.  23. 23.  ye  pay  tithe  of  mint,  a.  and  cummin
ANOINT

Signifies,  [1]  To  pour  oilupon,  Gen.  28. 18.  1  31.  13;.
[2]  To  consecrate  and  set  one  apart  to  an  office
anointing  being  generally  practised  among  the
Jews  on  that  Occasion,  to  denote  the  person's
being  endued  with  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the
Spirit,  Exod.  28.  41.  [3]  To  use  spiritual  means
to  get  saving  knowledge.  Rev.  3.  18.  [4]  To

smear,  or  daub,  John  9-  6,  11.  [5]  One  parti¬
cularly  designed  and  chosen  by  God  to  be  the
King,  Priest,  and  Prophet  of  his  church,  namely,
Christ  Jesus,  who  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  in
an  extraordinary  manner,  and  thereby  consecrated
and  authorised  to  be  the  Messiah,  Psal.  2.  2.  |
45.  7-  Acts  4.  27.  [6]  A  king,  Lam.  4.  20.

Touch  not  mine  anointed,  Psal.  105.  15.  Hurt
not  the  people  consecrated  to  myself  by  the  gifts
and  graces  of  my  Spirit,  nor  those  especially
among  them  to  whom  1  familiarly  reveal  my  mind
and  will,  that  they  may  teach  others.

Thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil,  Psal.  23.  5.  Thou •
bestowest  upon  me  the  consolations  of  thy  Spirit .
The  anointing,  1  John  2.  27-  The  Spirit  of  illu¬
mination  ;  great  knowledge  in  heavenly  things

11


AN  O


ANS


A  P  I


E rod.  28. 41.  shalt  a.  and  consecrate,  30.  30.  |  40. 15.

29.  7.  take  anointing  oil  and  a.  him,  40. 13.

36.  thou  shalt  a.  the  altar  to  sanctity  it,  40. 10.

30.  26.  thou  shalt  a  the  tabernacle,  40.  9.

40. 11.  thou  shalt  a.  the  laver  and  his  foot

Lev.  16.  32.  and  the  priest  whom  he  sha'l  a.

Deut.  28.  40.  but  thou  shalt  not  a.  thyself  with  oil
Judo.  9. .8.  the  trees  went  to  a.  a  king  over  them

15.  if  in  truth  ye  a.  me  king  over  you
Ruth  3.  3.  wash  t’iyse'f  therefore  and  a.  thee

1  Sam.  9. 16.  shalt  a.  him  to  bt  captain  over  Israel

15.  1.  the  Lor  1  sent  me  to  a.  thee  king  over  Israel

16.  3.  thou  shalt  a.  him  whom  I  name  unto  thee

12.  the  Lord  said,  arise,  a.  him,  this  is  he

2  Sam.  14.  2.  a.  not  thvseif  with  oil,  but  be  as

1  Kings  1.  34.  let  Zadok  a.  him  king  over  Israel
19. 15.  a.  Hazael  kins’ll  16.  a.  Jehu,  a.  Elisha
Isa.  21.  5.  arise  ye  princes,  and  a.  the  shield
Dan.  9.  24.  seal  up  the  vision,  and  a.  the  most  Holy
10. 3.  neither  did  1  a.  myself  at  all,  till  weeks
Amos  6.  6.  a.  themselves  with  the  chief  ointments
Mic.  6. 15.  shalt  tread  the  olives,  but  not  a.  thee
Mat.  6.  17.  when  thou  fastest  a.  thine  head
Mark  14. 8.  she  is  come  to  a.  my  body  to  the  burying
16. 1.  had  bought  spices  that  they  might  a.  him
Luke  7.  46.  my  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  a.

Rev.  3.  18.  and  a.  thine  eyes  with  eye-salve
ANOINTED.

Exod.  29.29-  garm.  be  Aaron’s  sons  after  him,  to  a.
Lev.  4.  3.  if  the  priest  that  is  a.  do  sin  according  to

6. 20.  the  offering  of  Aaron,  when  he  is  a.

7. 36.  in  the  day  that  he  a.  them,  by  a  statute

8.  10.  a.  the  tabernacle  ||  11.  a.  the  altar,  Num.  7. 1.
12.  Moses  poured  oil  on  Aaron’s  head,  and  a.  him

Num.  3.  3.  names  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  which  were  a.
7.  10.  the  princes  offered  after  it  was  a.  84, 88.

1  Sam.  10. 1.  the  Lord  a.  thee  captain  ||  15. 17.  a.  Saul
16.  13.  a.  David,  2  Sam.  2.  4,  7. 1  5.  3,  17. 1  12.  7.

2  Kings  9.  3,  6,  12.  1  Chron.  11.  3. 1  14.  8.

2  Sam.  2.  7-  the  house  of  Judah  have  a.  me  king
S.  39. 1  am  this  day  weak,  though  a.  king

12. 20.  David  arose  from  the  earth,  and  a.  himself
23.  1.  David  the  a.  of  the  God  of  Jacob  said

Psal.  2. 1 6.  yet  have  1  a.  my  king  on  Zion
Isa.  61. 1.  the  Lord  hath  a.  me  to  preach,  Luke  4. 18.
Ezek.  28.  14.  thou  art  the  a.  cherub  that  covers
Luke  7.  38.  she  kissed  his  feet  and  a.  them
46.  but  this  woman  hath  a.  my  feet  with  ointment
John  1 .  +  41.  we  found  the  Messiah,  which  is  the  a.

9.  6.  he  a.  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man  with  clay
11.  Jesus  made  clay,  and  a.  mine  eyes

11.  2.  it  was  that  Mary  which  a.  the  Lord

12.  3.  then  took  Mary  ointment  and  a.  feet  of  Jesus
Acts  4.  27.  holy  child  Jesus,  whom  thou  hast  a.

10.  38.  how  God  a.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  holy
2  Cor.  1.  21.  he  which  hath  a.  us  is  God

ANOINTED  Ones.

Zech.  4.  14.  these  are  the  two  a.  ones  which  stand
His  ANOINTED.

1  Sam.  2. 10.  give  strength,  and  exalt  hom  of  his  a.
12.  3.  witness  against  me  before  the  Lord  and  his  a.

5.  the  Lord  and  his  a.  is  witness  this  day

2  Sam.  22.  51.  sheweth  mercy  to  his  a.  Psal.  18. 50.
Psal.  2.  2.  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  a.

20.  6.  now  know  I  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  a,

28.  8.  and  he  is  the  saving  strength  of  his  a.

Isa.  45. 1.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  his  a.  to  Cyrus
Lord's  ANOINTED.

1  Sam.  16.  6.  surely  the  Lord's  a.  is  before  him
24. 6. 1  should  do  this  to  my  master,  the  Lord's  a.

10.  put  my  hand  against  my  lord,  for  he  is  L.  a.

26.  9.  stretch  his  hand  against  L.  a.  and  be  guiltless
16.  to  die,  because  ye  have  not  kept  the  Lord's  a.

2  SamA.  14.  wastthou  not  afraid  to  destroy  the  L.a.?
19.  21.  put  to  death  because  he  cursed  the  I..  a.
Lam.  4.  20.  the  a.  of  Lord  was  taken  in  their  pits

Mine  ANOINTED.

1  Sam.  2.  35.  he  shall  walk  before  mine  a.  for  ever

1  Chron.  16.  22.  touch  not  mine  a.  Psal.  105.  15.
Psal.  132.  17.  I  have  ordained  a  lamp  for  mine  a.

ANOINTED  with  Oil.

Num.  35.  25.  death  of  high  priest  a.  with  holy  oil

2  Sam.  1.  21.  as  though  he  had  not  been  a.  with  oil
Psal.  45. 7- God  a.  thee  with  oil  of  gladness,  Heb.  1.9.
89.  20.  with  my  holy  oil  have  1  a.  him

92.  10.  my  horn  exalt,  I  shall  be  a.  with  fresh  oil
Thine  ANOINTED.

2  Chron.  6.  42.  O  Lord  God,  turn  not  away  the  face
^  of  thine  a.  Psal.  132.  10.

Psal.  84. 9.  behold,  O  God,  look  on  face  of  thine  a.
89.  38.  thou  hast  been  wroth  with  thine  a.

51.  they  have  reproached  the  footsteps  of  thine  a.
Hab.  3. 13.  wentesteven  for  salvation  with  thine  a.
ANOINTEDST.

Cen.  31. 13.  I  am  the  God  of  Beth  el  where  thou  a.
Psal.  23.  5.  a.  my  head  with  oil,  my  cup  runneth
ANOINTING.

Exod.  40.  15.  their  a.  be  an  everlasting  priesthood
Isa.  10.27-  yoke  shall  be  destroyed  because  of  the  a.
1  John  2.  27.  but  the  a.  which  ye  have  received  of
him,  as  the  same  a.  teachetn  you  all  things

ANOINTING  Oil.  [cense

Exod.  37.  29.  he  made  the  holy  a.  oil  and  pure  in-
Lev.  8.  12.  he  poured  of  thea.  ot7  on  Aaron’s  head
10.  7-  for  the  a.  oil  of  the  Lord  is  upon  you

21.  10.  on  whose  head  the  a.  oil  was  poured
Num.  4. 16.  to  the  office  of  Eleazar  pertaineth  a.  oil
Jam.  5. 14.  a.  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord

ANON.

Mat.  13.  20.  heareth,  and  a.  with  joy  receiveth  it
Mark  1.  30.  mother  lay  sick,  and  a.  they  tell  him  of
.ANOTHER.  [her

Gen.  4.  25.  appointed  me  a.  seed  instead  of  Abel
30.  24.  the  Lord  shall  add  to  me  a.  son
43.  7.  the  man  asked  us,  have  ye  a.  brother  ?
Exod.  22.  9-  lost  thing,  which  a.  challengeth  to  be  his
Lev.  18.  +  18.  thou  shalt  not  take  one  wife  to  a.
Num.  14.  24.  Caleb,  because  he  had  a.  spirit
Judg.  2.  10.  a.  generation  that  knew  not  the  Ix)rd
16.  7*  then  shall  1  be  weak,  and  be  as  a.  man
1  Sam.  10.  6.  and  shalt  be  turned  into  a.  man
9.  and  it  was  so,  that  God  gave  him  a.  heart


2  Chron.  20.  +  22.  and  they  smote  one  a.

Esth.  1. 19.  let  the  king  give  her  royal  estate  to  a.
Job  19-  27-  whom  mine  eyes  shall  behold  and  not  a.
Psal.  109-  8.  let  a.  take  his  office,  Acts  1.  20.

Prov.  25.  9.  and  discover  not  a  secret  to  a.

27.  2.  let  a.  praise  thee,  and  not  thy  own  mouth
Isa.  42.  8.  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  a.  48. 11.
44.  5.  a.  shall  call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob
57.  8.  thou  hast  discovered  thyself  to  a.  than  me
65. 15.  and  shall  call  his  servants  by  a.  name
66.  + 17-  and  purify  themselves  one  after  a.

Hus.  3.  3.  and  thou  shalt  not  be  for  a.  man.

4. 4.  yet  let  no  man  strive  nor  reprove  a.

Mat.  11.  3.  art  thou  he,  or  do  we  look  for  a.  ?

Mark  14.  19-  began  to  say,  is  it  I  ?  a.  said,  is  it  1  ?
Luke  16.  7.  then  said  he  to  a.  how  much  owest  thou  ?

12.  if  not  faithful  in  that  which  is  a.  man’s
2  Cor  11.  4.  a.  Jesus,  a.  Spirit,  or  a.  gospel
Gal.  1.7.  which  is  not  a.  but  there  be  some
6.  4.  then  have  rejoicing  in  himself,  and  not  in  a.

1  Tim  .  6. 1 5.  sailings  one  of  a.  destitute  of  the  truth
Heb.  3. 13.  exhort  one  a.  while  called  to  day  10. 25.
4.  8.  he  would  not  have  spoken  of  a.  day
One  Another,  see  Love
One  against  AN OTII ER
1  Sam.  2. 25.  if  one  man  sin  against  a.  the  judge  shall
Jer.  13. 14.  I  will  dash  them  one  against  a.

1  Cor.  4. 6.  no  one  of  you  be  puffed  up  one  against  a.
Jam.  5.  9.  grudge  not  one  against  a.  brethren
One  for  ANOTHER.

1  Cor.  11.  33.  when  ye  come  to  eat,  tarry  one  for  a.
12. 25.  members  should  have  same  care  one  for  a.
Jam.  5. 16.  pray  one  for  a.  that  ye  may  be  healed.
ANSWER


Signifies,  [1]  To  reply  to  a  question,  Prov.  26.  4.
[2]  To  begin  to  speak,  when  no  question  is  asked,
Dan.  2.  26.  Acts  5.  8.  [3]  To  witness,  Gen.  30.
33.  [4]  To  obey,  Isa.  65.  12.  Jer.  7.  13.  [5]  To
grant  what  one  desires  in  prayer,  Psal.  27. 7.  86. 7.
Isa.  65.  24.  [6]  To  give  account.  Job 9.  3.  40.  2.
[7]  To  punish,  Ezek.  14.  7-
Gen.  41. 16.  God  shall  give  Pharaoh  an  a.  of  peace
Dent.  20. 11.  if  the  city  make  thee  an  a.  of  peace
2  Sam.  24. 13.  see  what  a.  I  shall  return  to  him
Esth.  4. 15.  Esther  bade  them  return  Mordecai  this  a.
Job  19.  16.  T  called  my  servant,  and  he  gave  me  no  a.
32.  3.  because  they  had  found  no  a.  and  condemned
35. 12.  there  they  cry,  but  none  giveth  a.

Prov.  15.  1.  a  soft  a.  turneth  away  wrath
23.  a  man  hath  joy  by  the  a.  of  his  mouth
16.  1.  the  a.  of  the  tongue  is  from  the  Lord
24. 26.  shall  kiss  his  lips  that  giveth  a  right  a.
Cant.  5. 6.  I  called  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  a.

Mic.  3.  7.  cover  the  lips,  for  there  is  no  a.  of  God
Luke  20.  26.  and  they  marvelled  at  his  a.

John  1. 22.  that  we  may  give  a.  to  them  that  sent  us
19.  9.  whence  art  thou  ?  Jesus  gave  him  no  a.

Rom.  11.  4.  but  what  saith  the  a.  of  God  to  him  ?

1  Cor.  9.  3.  mine  a.  to  them  that  do  examine  me  is

2  Cor.  1.  +  9.  but  we  had  the  a.  of  death  in  ourselves
2  Tim.  4. 16.  at  my  first  a.  none  stood  with  me

1  Pet.  3. 15.  and  be  ready  to  give  an  a.  to  every
21.  but  the  a.  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God
ANSWERS.


Job  21.  34.  seeing  in  your  a.  remaineth  falsehood
34.  36.  because  of  his  a.  for  wicked  men
Luke  2.  47.  and  all  were  astonished  at  his  a.
ANSWER,  Verb.

Gen.  30.  33.  so  shall  my  righteousness  a.  for  me
Deut.  27. 15.  all  the  people  shall  a.  and  say,  amen

1  Kings  18. 1 26.  they  called,  saying,  O  Baal,  a.  us

29.  there  was  neither  voice,  nor  any  to  a.

Job  13. 22.  call  thou,  and  I  will  a.  and  a.  thou  me
23. 5. 1  would  know  the  words  that  he  would  a.  me

31.  14.  when  he  visiteth,  what  shall  I  a.  him  ?

33. 12.  will  a.  thee,  God  is  greater  than  man,  35. 4.
40.  2.  he  that  reproveth  God,  let  him  a.

Psal.  27.  7.  have  mercy  also  on  me,  and  a.  me
65.  5.  by  terrible  things  in  right,  wilt  thou  a.  us
86. 7.  will  call  on  thee,  for  thou  wilt  a.  me,  38.  + 15.
102.  2.  in  the  day  when  I  call  a.  me  speedily
108.  6.  save  with  thy  right  hand,  and  a.  me
143.  1.  O  Lord,  in  thy  faithfulness  a.  me
Prov.  15. 28.  heart  of  the  righteous  studieth  to  a.

22.  21.  that  thou  mightest  a.  the  words  of  truth
26.  5.  a.  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  he  be
Isa.  14.  32.  what  shall  one  then  a.  tne  messengers
50. 2.  when  I  called  was  there  none  to  a.  ?  66.  4.
58.  9-  then  shalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  will  a.
Dan.  3. 16.  are  not  careful  to  a.  thee  in  this  matter
Joel  2. 19.  yea  the  Lord  will  a.  and  say  to  his  people
Hab.  2.  1.  what  I  shall  a.  when  I  am  reproved
Mat.  22.  46.  no  man  was  able  to  a.  him  a  word
Mark  11.  30.  was  it  from  heaven  or  of  men  ?  a.  me
14.  40.  neither  wist  they  what  to  a.  him.

Luke  11.  7.  and  he  from  within  shall  a.  and  say
12. 11.  how  or  what  thing  ye  shall  a.  or  say

13.  25.  he  shall  a.  I  know  you  not  whence  you  are
21. 14.  not  to  meditate  before  what  ye  shall  a.

2  Cor.  5. 12.  that  ye  may  have  somewhat  to  a.  them
Col.  4.  6.  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  a.  every  man

I  will  ANSWER.

Job  13. 22.  call,  I  will  a.  14. 15.  Ps.  91.15.  Jer.  33. 3.
Isa.  65.  24.  come  to  pass,  before  they  call  I  will  a.
Ezek.  14.  4. 1  the  T.ord  will  a.  him  that  cometh,  7.
Not  ANSWER.

Gen.  45.  3.  Joseph’s  brethren  could  not  a.  him
Exod.  23.  +  2.  shalt  ?mt  a.  in  a  cause  to  decline
2  Sam.  3.  11.  he  could  not  a.  Abner  a  word
2  Kings  18.  36.  king’s  command,  was,  a.  not.  Isa.

[36.  21.

Job  9.  3.  he  cannot  a.  him  one  of  a  thousand
Prov.  1.  28.  they  shall  call,  but  1  will  not  a.

26.  4.  a.  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  thou
29.  19.  for  though  he  understand,  he  will  not  a.
Isa.  65. 12.  because  when  1  called,  ye  did  not  a.
Jer.  7.  27.  thou  shalt  call,  but  they  will  not  a.  thee
Luke  14.  6.  they  could  not  a.  him  again  to  these
22.  68.  if  I  ask  you,  you  will  not  a.  nor  let  me  go
ANSWERABLE.


Exod.  38. 18.  a.  to  the  hangings  of  the  court
Mat.  3.  +8.  bring  forth  fruit  a.  to  amendment


ANSWERED.

Judg.  8. 8.  men  ofPenuel  a.  as  the  men  of  Succoth  «

1  Sam.  3. 4.  the  Lord  called,  and  he  a.  here  am  1. 16.
18.  7-  the  women  a.  one  another  as  they  playea

2  Sam.  19.  42.  the  men  of  Judah  a.  the  men  of  Israel

1  Kings  2.  30.  thus  said  Joab,  and  thus  he  a.  me
12.  13.  the  king  a.  people  roughly,  2  Chron.  10. 13.
18.  26.  but  there  was  no  voice,  nor  any  that  a.

2  Chron.  C15.  9.  the  man  of  God  a.  the  Lord  is  able
Job  11.  2.  s  on  d  not  the  multitude  of  words  be  a.  ?
Ezek.  37.  3.  I  a.  O  Lord  God,  thou  knowest
Dan.  2. 14.  Daniel  a.  with  counsel  and  wisdom
Mic.  6.  5.  what  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  a.  him
Mat.  27.  12.  when  he  was  accused  he  a.  nothing,  14.

Mark  14.  61.  I  15.  3,  5.  Luke  23.  9.
Mark  12.  28.  perceiving  that  he  had  a.  well
34.  when  Jesus  saw  that  he  a.  discreetly
Acts  15.  13.  after  they  held  their  peace,  James  a.

22.  8.  I  a.  who  art  thou,  Lord  ?  and  he  said  to  me
25.  8.  while  he  a.  for  himself,  26.  1.

ANSWERED,  meant  of  God.

Gen.  35.  3.  who  a.  me  in  the  day  of  my  distress
Exod.  19.19.  Moses  spake,  and  God  a.  him  by  a  voice

1  Sam.  7.  +  9.  Samuel  cried,  and  the  Lora  a.  him

2  Sam.  21.  1.  and  the  Lord  a.  it  is  for  Saul

1  Chron.  21.  26.  he  a.  him  from  heaven  by  fire

28.  when  David  saw  that  the  Lord  had  a.  him
Psal.  81.  7.  I  «.  thee  in  the  secret  place  of  thunder
99.  6.  they  called  on  the  Lord,  and  he  a.  them
118. 5.  the  Lord  a.  me,  and  set  me  in  a  large  place
Isa.  6.  11.  he  a.  till  the  cities  be  wasted  without
Jer.  23.  35.  what  hath  the  Lord  a.  and  spoken,  37.
Hab.  2.  2.  the  Lord  a.  me,  write  the  vision
Zech.  1.  13.  the  Lord  a.  the  angel  that  talked
Mat.  20.  13.  he  a.  one  of  them  and  said,  friend
25.  26.  his  lord  a.  and  said,  thou  wicked  servant
ANSWERED  net.

1  Sam.  4.  20.  she  a.  not,  nor  did  she  regard  it

14.  37.  but  he  a.  him  not  that  day,  28.  6.

2  Sam.  22.  42.  looked,  but  a.  them  wot,  Ps.  18.  41

1  Kings  18.  21.  and  the  people  a.  him  not  a  word,

2  Kings  18.  36.  Isa.  36.  21.
Jer.  7.  13.  and  I  called  you,  but  ye  a.  not,  35.  17.
Mat.  15.  23.  but  he  a.  her  not  a  word
ANSWERED  and  said.

Exod.  4.  1.  Moses  a.  and  said,  they  will  not  believe

2  Kings  7.13.  one  of  his  servants  a.  and  said,  let  some
Neh.  2.  20.  then  a.  I  them  and  said  unto  them
Job3A<2.  Joba.  ands.6. 1.  9.1.  I  12.1.  116.1.  119.1.
Isa.  21. 9.  he  a.  and  said,  Babylon  is  fallen,  is  fallen
Jer.  11.  5.  then  a.  I  and  said,  so  be  it,  O  Lord

ANSWEREDST.

Psal.  99.  8.  thou  a.  them,  O  Lord  our  God,  thou
138.  3.  in  the  day  when  1  cried  thou  a.  me
ANSWEREST.

1  Sam.  26.  14.  David  cried,  a.  thou  not,  Abner  5
Job  16.  3.  what  emboldeneth  thee,  that  thou  a.  ?
Mat.  26.  62.  a.  thou  nothing?  Mark  14.60.  |  15.4.
John  18.  22.  a.  thou  the  hign-priest  so  ?

Rom.  9.  +  20.  who  art  thou  that  a.  against  God  ?
ANSW  ERETH.

1  Sam.  28.  15.  God  is  departed  and  a.  me  no  more

1  Kings  18.  24.  let  the  God  that  a.  by  fire,  be  God
Job  12.  4.  who  calleth  on  God,  and  he  a.  nim
Prov.  18.  13.  that  a.  a  matter  before  he  heareth

23.  the  poor  entreat,  but  the  rich  a.  roughly
27.  19.  as  face  a.  to  face,  so  the  heart  of  man
Eccl.  5.  20.  God  a.  him  in  the  joy  of  his  heart
10. 19.  wine  maketh  merry  .but  money  a.  all  things

Mai.  2.  + 12.  Lord  will  cut  off  him  that  waketh  and  a.
Gal.  4.  25.  and  a.  to  J  erusalem  that  now  is
ANSWERING.

Luke  23.  40.  but  the  other  a.  rebuked  him
Tit.  2.  9.  servants  be  obedient,  not  a.  again
ANT,  S.

Prov.  6.  6.  go  to  the  a.  thou  sluggard,  consider

30.  25.  the  a.  are  a  people  not  strong,  yet  prepare
ANTIQUITY.

Isa.  23.  7.  joyous  city,  whose  a.  is  of  ancient  days
ANVIL.

Isa.  41.  7-  encouraged  him  that  smote  the  a.
ANY.

Exod.  11.  7.  against  a.  of  the  children  of  Israel
Lev.  4.  2.  if  aAoul  shall  sin  against  a.  of  the  com¬
mandments,  13,  22,  27.  I  5.  17.
6.  3.  lieth,  in  a.  of  all  these  that  a  man  doth
Deut.  32.  39.  nor  a.  that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand

2  Sam.  7.  7.  spake  I  a  word  with  a.  1  Chron.  17.  6.
9.  1.  is  there  yet  a.  left  of  the  house  of  Saul  t

1  Kings  18.  26.  was  no  voice,  nor  a.  that  answered
Job  33.  27.  he  looketh,  and  if  a.  say,  I  have  sinned
Psal.  4.  6.  many  say,  who  will  show  us  a.  good  ?
5.  +  9.  no  faithfulness  m  the  mouth  of  a.  of  them
Prov.  30.  30.  a  lion  turneth  not  away  for  a.

Isa.  44.  8.  there  is  no  God,  1  know  not  a.

Amos  6.  10.  he  shall  say,  is  there  yet  a.  with  thee  ?
Ma-k  8.  26.  nor  go  nor  tell  it  to  a.  in  the  town

11.  25.  forgive,  if  ye  have  ought  against  a.

Luke  8.  43.  had  spent  all,  nor  could  be  healed  of  a.
Acts  9.  2.  if  he  found  a.  of  this  way,  men  or  women

1  Cor.  6. 12. 1  will  not  be  brought  under  power  of  a.
Jam.  1.  5.  if  a.  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God

2  Pet.  3.  9.  not  willing  that  a.  should  perish

2  John  lo.  if  there  come  a.  and  bring  not  this  doctrine
See  Further,  God,  Man,  More,  Thing,
Time,  Wise.  Any  while,  Dead.
APACE,  see  Flee,  Fled.

APART.

Exod.  13.  12.  shalt  set  a.  all  that  open  the  matrix
Lev.  15.  19.  she  shall  be  put  a.  seven  days
18.  19.  thou  shalt  not  approach,  as  long  as  she  is  a.
Neh.  12.  +  47.  set  a.  holy  things  to  the  Levites
Psal.  4.  3.  the  Lord  hath  set  <7.  him  that  is  godly
Zech.  12.  12.  every  family  a.  their  wives  a.  14.
Mat.  14.  13.  Jesus  departed  into  a  desert  place  a.
23.  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  a.  17  •  1.  Luke  9. 28.

17.  19.  then  came  the  disciples  to  Jesus  a.

Mark  6.  31.  and  he  said,  come  ye  yourselves  a.
Jam.  1.  21.  wherefore  lay  a.  all  filthiness
Apes,  see  Peacocks.

APIECE.

Num.  3.  47.  thou  shalt  take  five  shekels  a.  by  poll


A  P  P


A  P  P


APP


Num. 7  .86.  the  golden  spoons  weighing  ten  shekels  a.
17;  6.  every  one  of  their  princes  gave  him  a  rod  a.

1  Kings  7. 15.  two  pillars  eighteen  cubits  high  a.
Luke  9-  3.  neither  take  money,  nor  have  two  coats  a.
John  2.  6.  containing  two  or  three  firkins  a.
Apollyon,  see  Greek.

APOS  ILF.

Signifies,  A  messenger  sent  upon  any  special  errand ,
Rom.  16.  7.  2  Cor.  8.  23.  It  is  applied,  [1]  To
Christ  Jesus  ;  who  u  as  sent  from  heaven  to  assume
our  nature ,  and  work  out  our  salvation,  with  au¬
thority  to  execute  his  pr< phetical  and  all  his  offices ,
and  to  send  forth  h  is  apostles  to  publish  the  gospel,
Heb.  3.  1.  [2]  To  a  minister  immediately  sent  by
Christ  to  preach  the  gospel.  Mat.  10.  2.  Gal.  1. 1.
Horn.  1. 1.  Paul  called  to  be  an  a.  1  Cor.  1.1.

11.  13.  inasmuch  as  1  am  the  a.  of  the  Gentiles

1  Cor.  9.  1.  am  1  not  an  a.  I  am  I  not  free  ?  2.

15.  9.  that  am  not  meet  to  be  called  an  a.

2  Cor.  1.  1.  Paul  an  a.  of  Jesus  Christ,  Eph.  1. 1.

Col.  1. 1.  1  Tim.  1. 1.  2  Tim.  1.  1.  Gal.  1. 1.
12. 12.  the  signs  of  an  a.  were  wrought  among  you
1  Tim.  2. 7-  whereto  1  am  ordained  an  a.  2  Tim.  1. 11.
Tit.  1.  1.  Paul  a  servant  of  God,  and  a.  of  Christ
lleb.  3. 1.  consider  the  a.  and  high-priestof  our  prof.
APOSTLES.

Mat.  10.  2.  now  the  names  of  the  twelve  a.  are  these
Mark  6.  30.  the  a.  gathered  themselves  together
Luke  6.  13.  he  chose  twelve,  whom  he  named  a.

9. 10.  the  a.  when  they  were  returned  ,  told  him

11.  49.  I  will  send  them  prophets  and  a.

1?.  5.  the  a.  said  to  the  Lord,  increase  our  faith

22.  14.  he  sat  down,  and  the  twelve  a.  with  him

24. 10.  the  women  told  these  things  to  the  a.

Acts  1  26.  he  was  numbered  with  the  eleven  a.

2.  43.  many  signs  were  done  by  the  a.  5. 12.

4.  35.  laid  them  down  at  the  a.  feet,  37.  I  5.  2.

5. 18.  laid  their  hands  on  the  a.  and  put  them
8.  1.  were  all  scattered  abroad,  except  the  a.

Rom.  16. 7-  who  are  of  note  amon®  the  a.

1  Cor.  4. 9.  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  a.  last

12.  28.  God  hath  set  first  a.  ||  29.  are  all  a.

15.  9.  for  1  am  the  least  of  the  a.  that  am  not  meet

2  Cor.  11.  5.  not  a  whit  behind  the  chiefesta.  12. 11.

13.  such  are  false  a.  deceitful  workers

Gal.  1.  17-  nor  went  to  them  that  were  a.  before  me
19.  but  other  of  the  a.  saw  1  none,  save  James
Eph.  3.  5.  as  it  is  now  revealed  to  his  holy  a.

4. 11.  he  gave  some  a.  and  some  prophets

1  Thess.  2.  6.  been  burdensome  as  the  a.  of  Christ

2  Pet.  3. 2.  of  the  commandment  of  us  the  a.  of  Lord
Jude  17.  the  words  spoken  before  of  the  a.

Rev.  2. 2.  them  which  say  they  are  a.  and  are  not

18.  20.  rejoice  over  her,  ve  holy  a.  and  prophets

APOSTLESH  IP

Signifies,  The  office  of  the  apo  ties  ;  which  was,  to
preach  the  gospel,  baptize,  work  miracles, plant  and
confirm  churches,  and  ordain  ministers,  Mat.  10. 1.
I  28. 19.  Acts  14.  23.  1  Cor.  .3.  6.

Acts  1. 25.  that  he  may  take  part  of  this  a.

Rom.  1.  5.  by  whom  we  have  received  grace  and  a.

1  Cor.  9. 2.  the  seal  of  mine  a.  are  ye  in  the  Lord
Gal.  2. 8.  wrought  effectually  in  Peter  to  the  a.

.  APOTHECARY.

Erod.  30. 25.  ointment  compounded  after  art  of  a.

35.  a  confection  after  the  art  of  the  a.  37  .  29.
Eccl.  10.  1.  dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  a.

. APPARENTLY.

yum.  12.  8.  with  him  wil.  1  speak  even  a.  and  not
APPAREL.

Judg.  14.  +  19.  Samson  slew  30  men,  and  took  a.

2  Sam.  12r  20.  David  arose  and  changed  his  a.

1  Kings  10.  5.  queen  of  Sheba  had  seen  the  attend¬
ance  of  his  ministers,  and  their  a.  2  Chron.  9. 4.
Isa.  3.  22.  the  changeable  suits  of  a.  and  mantles

4. 1.  we  will  eat  our  own  bread  and  wear  our  own  a.
63.  1.  who  is  this  that  is  glorious  in  his  a.  ?

Zeph.  1. 8.  and  all  such  as  are  clothed  in  strange  a.
Acts  1.  10.  two  men  stood  63*  them  in  white  a.

20.  33.  I  have  coveted  no  man’s  silver  or  a.

1  Tim. 2. 9. that  women  adorn  themselves  in  modest  a.
Jam.  2.  2.  if  a  man  come  in  goodly  a.  and  a  pool'

1  Pet.  3.  3.  not  of  wearing  gold,  or  putting  on  a.

See  Royal.

APPARELLED.

2  Sam.  13. 18.  the  king’s  daughters,  virgins,  were  a.
Lukel.  25.  behold  they  which  are  gorgeously  a.

APPEAL,  ED.

Acts  25. 11.  noman  deliver  me,  I  a.  unto  Cesar,  21.
26.  32.  been  set  at  liberty,  if  he  had  not  a.  to  Cesar
28. 19.  1  was  constrained  to  a.  to  Cesar
APPEAR

Signifies,  [1]  To  be  in  sight,  Gen.  1.  9.  Ileb.  11.  3.
[2]  To  come  before,  Exod.  34.  23.  Acts  22.  30.
[3  To  be  discovered,  or  laid  open,  Jer.  13.  26.
[4]  To  present  one' s  self  as  an  advocate,  Heb.  9. 24.
Gen.  1.  9.  God  said,  let  the  dry  land  a.  and  it  was  so
Exod.  23.  15.  and  none  shall  a.  before  me  empty,

34.  20.  Deut.  16.  16.

17;  three  times  in  the  year  all  males  shall  a.

34.  24.  desire  thy  land,  when  thou  shalt  go  to  a.
Deut.  31. 11.  when  all  Israel  is  come  to  a.  before  L.
Psal.  42.  2.  when  shall  I  come  and  a.  before  God  ?
90.  16.  let  thy  work  a.  to  th>T  servants,  and  glory
Cant.  2. 12.  the  flowers  a.  on  the  earth,  the  time  of
4.  1.  thy  hair  as  a  flock  of  goats  that  a.  6.  5.

Isa.  1. 12.  when  ye  come  to  a.  before  me
Jer.  13.  26.  will  discover,  that  thy  shame  may  a.
Ezek.  21. 24.  so  that  in  all  your  doings  your  sins  do  a.
Mat.  6.  16.  that  they  may  a.  to  men  to  fast

23.  28.  even  so  ve  outwardly  a.  righteous  to  men

24.  30.  then  shall  a,  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man
I.uke  11 .  44.  for  ye  are  as  graves  which  a.  not

19.  11.  they  thought  the  kingdom  of  God  should  a.
Acts  26. 16.  of  things  in  which  I  will  a.  to  thee
Rom.  7.  13.  butsim  that  it  might  a.  sin,  working

2  Cor.  5.  10.  we  must  all  a.  before  the  judgment-seat
Col.  3.  4.  when  Christ  who  is  our  life  shall  a.  then
1  Tim.  4.  15.  that  thy  profiting  may  a.  to  all
Heb.  9.  24.  now  to  a.  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us
28.  to  them  shall  he  a.  the  second  time  to  salvation
11.  3.  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  a.


1  Pet.  4. 18.  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  sinner  a.  ?
5. 4.  when  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  a.  shall  receive
1  John  2. 28. when  he  shall  a.  we  may  have  confidence

3.  2.  it  doth  not  yet  a.  what  we  shall  be,  but  we

know  that  when  he  shall  a.  we  shall  be  like,  him
Rev.  3.  18.  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  a.

APPEAR,  referred  t>  Got).

Lev.  9.  4.  for  to-day  the  Lord  will  a.  to  you,  6.

16.  2.  I  will  u.  in  the  cloud  on  the  mercy  seat

1  Sam.  2.  27.  did  1  plainly  a.  to  the  house  of  thy

father

2  Chron.  1.  7.  that  night  did  God  a.  to  Solomon
Psal.  102. 16.  build  up  Zion,  he  shall  u.  in  his  glory
Isa.  66.  5.  but  he  shall  a.  to  your  joy,  they  ashamed
Acts  26.  16.  of  those  things  in  the  which  1  will  a.

APPEARANCE.

Num.  9. 15.  was  on  tabernacle  as  the  a.  of  fire,  16.

1  Sam.  16. 7-  for  man  looketh  on  the  outward  a.
Dan.  8. 15.  stood  before  me  as  the  a.  of  a  man,  10. 18.
10.  6-  his  face  as  the  a.  of  lightning,  his  eyes  as

John  7.  24.  judge  not  according  to  the  a.  but  judge

2  Cor.  5.  12.  which  glory  in  a.  and  not  in  heart
10.  +  1.  who  in  outward  a.  am  base  among  you

J.  do  ye  look  on  things  after  the  outward  a.  ?

1  Thess.  5.  22.  abstain  from  all  a.  of  evil

APPEARED.

Gen.  12. 7.  the  L.  a.  to  Abram  and  said,  17. 1.  1 18. 1.
26.  2.  the  Lord  a.  to  Isaac,  and  said,  go  not,  24.

48.  3.  Jacob  said,  God  Almighty  a.  to  me  at  Luz
Exod.  3. 2.  angel  of  the  Lord  a.  in  midst  of  the  bush

4.  1.  they  will  say,  the  Lord  hath  not  a.  to  thee

6.  3.  1  a.  to  Abraham  by  name  of  God  Almighty

14.  27.  the  sea  returned  when  the  morning  a.

2  Sam.  22.  16.  and  the  channels  of  the  sea  a.

1  Kings  11.  9.  which  had  a.  to  Solomon  twice

2  Kings  2.  11.  behold  there  a.  a  chariot  of  fire
Neh.  4.  21.  we  laboured  in  the  work  till  the  stars  a.
Jer.  31.  3.  the  Lord  hath  a.  of  old  to  me,  saying
Mat.  2.  7-  Herod  inquired  what  time  the  star  a.

13.  26.  the  blade  sprung,  then  a.  the  tares  also
17. 3.  there  a.  to  them  Moses  and  Elias,  Mark  9. 4.
27. 53.  and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  a.  to  many
Mark  16.  9-  Jesus  a.  first  to  Mary  Magdalene

12.  after  that  he  a.  in  another  form  to  two  of  them
14.  after  he  a.  to  the  eleven  as  they  sat  at  meat
Luke  1.  11.  there  a.  to  him  an  angel  of  the  Lord
9.  31.  who  a.  in  glory,  and  spake  of  his  decease
22.  43.  there  a.  ah  angel  to  him,  strengthening  him
24.  34.  the  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  a.  to  Simon
Acts  2.  3.  there  a.  to  them  cloven  tongues  like  fire
7-  2.  the  God  of  glory  a.  to  our  father  Abraham
9-  17.  even  Jesus,  that  a.  to  thee  in  the  way
26.  16.  I  have  a.  to  thee  for  this  purpose
27-  20.  and  when  neither  sun  nor  stars  a.

Tit.  2.  11.  the  grace  of  God  hath  a.  to  all  men

3.  4.  after  the  love  of  God  toward  man  a.

Heb.  9-  26.  in  the  end  hath  he  a.  to  put  away  sin
Rev.  12.  1.  there  a.  a  great  wonder  in  heaven,  3.

APPEARETH.

Lev.  13. 43.  as  the  leprosy  a.  in  the  skin  of  the  flesh
Deut.  2.  30.  that  he  might  deliver  him,  as  a.  this
Psal.  46.  t  5.  God  shall  help  her,  when  morning  a.
84.  7.  every  one  of  them  in  Zion  a.  before  God
Prov.  27  -  25.  the  hay  a.  and  the  tender  grass
Jer.  6. 1.  for  evil  a.  out  of  the  north,  and  destruction
Mai.  3.  2.  and  who  shall  stand  when  he  a.  ?

Jam,  4. 14.  your  life  is  even  as  a  vapour  that  a.
APPEARING.

1  Tim.  6.  14.  keep  commandment  till  a.  of  our  L.

2  Tim.  1.  10.  but  is  now  made  manifest  by  the  a.

4.  1.  who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  dead  at  his  a.

8.  but  to  all  them  also  that  love  his  a.

Tit.  2.  13.  looking  for  glorious  a.  of  the  great  God
1  Pet.  1.  7-  be  found  to  praise  at  the  a.  of  Jesus
APPEASE.

Gen.  32.  20.  I  will  a.  him  with  the  present
APPEASED,  ETH.

Esth.  2.  1.  Ahasuerus  a.  he  remembered  Vashti
Prov.  15. 18.  he  that  is  slow  to  anger  a.  strife
Acts  19.  35.  when  the  town-clerk  had  a.  the  people
APPERTAIN.

Num.  16.30.  earth  swallow  them,  with  all  that  a.
Jer.  10. 7.  who  would  not  fear,  for  to  thee  doth  it  a.
See  Pertain.
APPERTAINED.

A Turn.  16.  32.  and  all  the  men  that  a.  to  Korah,  33.

APPERTAINETH,  ING.

Lev.  6.  5.  and  give  it  to  him  to  whom  it  a.

Rom.  4. 1.  Abraham,  our  father,  as  a.  to  the  flesh
APPETITE.

Job  38.  39-  wilt  thou  fill  the  a.  of  the  young  lions  ?
Prov.  23.  2.  to  thy  throat,  if  thou  be  a  rnan  given  to  a.
Eccl.  6.  7-  all  labour  for  mouth,  yet  a.  not  filled
Isa.  29.  8.  but  he  awaketh,  and  his  soul  hath  a.

56.  t  11.  they  are  strong  of  a.  not  satisfied
APPLE  of  the  eye.

Deut.  32.  10.  he  kept  him  as  the  a.  of  his  eye
Psal.  17-  8.  keep  me  as  the  a.  of  the  eye,  hide  me
Prov.  7.  2.  keep  my  law  as  the  a.  of  thine  eye
Lam.  2.  18.  let  not  the  a.  of  thine  eye  cease
Zech.  2.  8.  toucheth  you,  toucheth  the  a.  of  his  eye
APPLE-TREE.

Cant.  2. 3.  as  the  a.-tree  among  the  trees  of  the  wood
8.  5. 1  raised  thee  up  under  the  a.-tree,  thy  mother
Joel  1.  12.  the  palm-tree  and  a.-tree  are  withered
APPLES.

Prov.  25.  11.  like  a.  of  gold  in  pictures  of  silver
Cant.  2.  5.  comfort  me  with  a.  for  1  am  sick  oflove
7.8.  breasts  as  clusters,  and  smell  ofthy  nose  like  a.
APPLY.

Psal.  90.  12.  that  we  may  a.  our  hearts  to  wisdom
Prov.  2.  2.  and  a.  thine  heart  to  understanding
22. 17-  hear  words,  a.  thine  heart  to  my  knowledge
23. 12.  a.  thine  heart  to  instruction,  and  thine  ears
APPLIED.

Eccl.  7. 25. 1  a.  my  heart  to  know  and  seek  wisdom
8.  9.  1  a.  my  heart  to  every  work  that  is  done
16.  when  I  a.  mine  heart  to  know  wisdom
Hos.  7.  t  6.  they  have  a.  their  heart  like  an  oven
APPOINT

Signifies,  [1]  To  constitute  or  ordain.  Josh.  20.  9.
[2]  To  assign  or  allot,  Num.  4.  19.  [3]  To  set


over,  Gen.  41.  34.  Lev.  26.  16.  [4]  To  decree.
Acts  17.  31.  Heb.  9.  27-  [5]  To  purpose  or  re
solve.  Acts  20.  13.  [6]  To  promise,  Luke  22.  29.
[7]  To  nominate  or  prefix.  Acts  28.  23.  [8]  To
command  or  order,  2  Sam.  15.  15.  [9]  To  establish
or  settle,  Prov.  8.  29.  [10]  To  set,  or  place,

2  Kings  10. 24.  Neh. 7.  3.  [11]  To  limit,  1  Sam.

13.  11.  [12]  To  ordain  or  set  apart  for  an  office.
Acts  6.  3.

Gen.  30. 28.  a.  me  thy  waves,  and  I  will  give  it
41.  31.  let  Pharaoh  a.  officers  over  the  land
Lev.  26. 16.  I  will  a.  over  you  terror,  consumption
Num 19.  Aaron  and  his  sons  a.  every  one  to  service
2  Sam.  6.  21.  to  a.  me  ruler  over  the  people  of  Lord
7-  10.  I  will  a.  a  place  for  my  people  Israel,  and
Job  14. 13.  that  thou  wouldest  a.  me  a  set  time
La.26.1  salvation  willGoda.for  walls  and  bulwarks
61.  3.  to  a.  them  that  mourn  in  Zion,  to  give
Jer.  15.  3.  1  will  a.  over  them  four  kinds,  saith  Lord
49.  19.  and  who  is  a  chosen  man  that  1  may  a.

over  her  ?  who  will  a.  me  the  time  ?  50.  44.
51.  27.  will  the  kingdoms  a.  a  captain  against  her
Ezek.  21.  19-  a.  thee  two  ways  II 20.  a.  a  way  that
Hos.  1. 11.  they  shall  a.  themselves  one  head
Mat.  24. 51.  a.  him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites
Luke  12. 46.  a.  him  his  portion  with  unbelievers
22.  29.  I  a.  you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  unto  me
Acts  6.  3.  seven  men  whom  we  a.  over  this  business
APPOINTED.

Gen.  24. 14.  be  she  that  thou  hast  a.  for  thy  servant
Num.  9. 2.  1  srael  keep  the  passover  in  a.  seasons,  3.

7.  may  not  offer  an  offering,  but  at  an  a.  season

13.  because  he  brought  not  offering  in  a.  season
Josh.  20.  9.  these  were  the  cities  a.  tor  refuge
Judg. 20.88.  there  was  an  a.  sign  between  Israel  and

1  Sam.  13. 11.  thou  earnest  not  within  the  days  a.
19.20.  Samuel  standing  as  a.  over  them,  the  Spirit

2  Sam.  17. 14.  the  Lord  had  a.  to  defeat  the  counsel
1  Kings  1.  35.  I  have  a.  him  to  be  ruler  over  Israel

20.  42.  let  go  a  man  whom  I  had  a.  to  destruction
Neh.  6. 7-  thou  hast  a.  prophets  to  preach  of  thee
9. 17-  in  their  rebellion  a.  a  captain  to  return,  but
Job  7 .  3.  and  wearisome  nights  are  a.  to  me

14.  5.  thou  hast  a.  his  bounds,  that  he  cannot  pass
20.  29.  and  the  heritage  a.  to  him  by  God
30. 23.  to  death,  and  to  the  house  a.  for  all  living
PsalAAAl.  thou  hast  given  us  like  sheep  a.  for  meat

78.  5.  a.  a  law  in  Israel,  which  he  commanded

79.  11.  preser  e  thou  those  that  are  a.  to  die
102.  20.  to  loose  those  that  are  a.  to  death
Prov.  7. 20.  he  will  come  home  at  the  day  a.

8.  29.  when  he  a.  the  foundations  of  the  earth
31.  8.  in  cause  of  all  such  as  are  a.  to  destruction
Isa.  1.  14.  new-moonsand  your  a.  feasts  my  soul
44.  7.  and  who,  since  I  a.  the  ancient  people

Jer.  5. 21.  he  reserveth  the  a.  weeks  of  the  harvest
47.  7.  against  the  sea  shore,  there  hath  he  a.  it
Ezek.  4.  6.  1  have  a.  thee  each  day  for  a  year
Mic.  6.  9-  hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  a.  it
Mat.  27.  10.  gave  for  the  potter's  field,  as  the  L.  a.
Luke  3.  13.  exact  no  more  than  what  is  a.  you

10. 1.  after  these  the  Lord  a.  other  seventy
22.  29.  to  you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  a.  me
Acts  1.  23.  they  a.  two,  Joseph  and  Matthias

17.  31.  he  hath  a.  a  day  in  which  he  will  judge
1  Cor.  4. 9.  God  hath  set  us  apostles  last,  a.  to  death

1  Thess.  3.  3.  for  you  know  that  we  are  a.  thereto
5. 9.  God  hath  not  a.  us  to  wrath,  but  to  obtain

2  Tim.  1.11.  whereunto  1  am  a.  a  preacher,  apostle
Tit.  1. 5.  and  ordain  elders  in  every  city,  as  1  a.
Heb.  3.  2.  who  was  faithful  to  him  that  a.  him

9.  27.  and  as  it  is  a.  to  men  once  to  die,  but  after

1  Pet.  2. 8.  disobedient,  whereunto  also  they  were  a.

APPOINTED  time  and  times.

Gen.  18.  14.  at  the  time  a.  will  I  return  to  thee
Exod.  9. 5.  the  Lord  a.  a  set  time,  saying,  to-morrow
23. 15.  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  bread  in  time  a.

1  Sam.  13.  8.  according  to  the  set  time  Samuel  a.

20.  35.  Jonathan  went  into  the  field  at  the  time  a.

2  Sam.  20.  5.  tarried  longer  than  the  set  time  a.  him
Esth.  9.  27-  according  to  their  a.  time  every  year
Job  7.  1.  is  there  not  an  a.  time  to  man  on  earth  ?

14.  14.  all  the  days  of  my  a.  time  will  I  wait  till
Psal.  81.  3.  blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  time  a.

Isa.  14.  31.  and  none  shall  be  alone  in  his  a.  times
40.  +  2.  cry,  that  her  a.  time  is  accomplished

Jer.  8. 7-  the  stork  in  heaven  knoweth  her  a.  times
46.  17.  Pharaoh,  he  hath  passed  the  time  a.

Dan.  8. 19.  for  at  the  time  a.  the  end  shall  be

10. 1.  the  thing  was  true,  but  the  time  a.  was  long
11. 27.  for  yet  the  end  shall  be  at  the  time  a.

29.  at  the  time  a.  shall  return,  and  come  south
35.  time  of  the  end,  because  it  is  yet  for  a  time  a.
Hab.  2.  3.  the  vision  is  yet  for  an  a.  time,  wait  for  it
Acts  17-  26.  God  hath  determined  times  before  a.
Gal.  4. 2.  under  tutors,  until  the  time  a.  of  the  father
APPOINTETH.

Psal.  104. 19.  he  a.  the  moon  for  seasons,  the  sun
Dan.  5.  21.  he  a.  over  it  whomsoever  he  will
APPOINTMENT.

Num.  4  27.  at  the  a.  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  be
Josh.  11  t5.  when  kings  were  assembled  by  a.
Ezra  6.  9.  wheat,  salt,  according  to  a.  of  the  priests
2  Sam.  13. 32.  by  the  a.  of  Absalom  this  determined
Job  2. 11.  they  had  made  an  a.  together  to  come
APPREHEND

Signifies,  To  seize,  or  take  prisoner.  Acts  12.  4.
That  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am
apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus,  Phil.  S.  12.  That
I  may  obtain  that  prize,  for  the  obtaining  whereof
I  was  laid  hold  on  by  Christ,  converted  and  brought
into  the  way  of  salvation,  when  I  was  running  on
to  destruction.

1  Kings  18.  +  40.  a.  the  prophets  of  Baal,  and  let  none

2  Cor.  11.  32.  with  a  garrison  desirous  to  a.  me
Phil.  3. 12.  I  may  a.  that  for  which  also  I  am  appr.

APPREHENDED.

Acts  12. 4.  when  he  a.  Peter,  he  put  him  in  prison
Phil.  3. 12.  for  which  1  am  a.  of  Christ  Jesus
13.  brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to  have  a.  but
APPROACH

Signifies,  [1]  To  draw  nigh,  or  come  near,  2  Sam.  11

13


A  R  1


ARM


CO.  [2]  To  draw  near  to  God  in  the  duties  of  his
worship,  Psal.  65.  4.  Isa.  58.  2.  [31  T\)  contract
marriage  with.  Lev.  18.  6.  [4]  To  hasten,  or

draw  on,  Deut.  31.  14.

Lev.  18.  6.  none  of  you  shall  a.  to  any  near  of  kin

21.  17.  not  a.  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God,  18.
Deut.  20.  3.  ye  a.  this  day  to  battle  against  enemies
31.  14.  behold,  thy  days  a.  that  thou  must  die
Job  40.  19-  can  make  his  sword  to  a.  to  him
Ps.  65. 4.  blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  causest  to  a.
Jer.  30.  21.  he  shall  a.  to  me,  for  who  is  this  that
engaged  his  heart  to  a.  to  me,  saith  the  Lord  ?

1  Tim.  o.  16.  dwelling  in  the  light  no  man  can  a.  unto

APPROACHED.

2  Sam.  11.  20.  wherefore  a.  ye  so  nigh  the  city?

1  Kings  20.  +  13.  there  a.  a  prophet  to  Ahab

2  Kings  16.  12.  the  king  a.  to  the  altar  and  offered
Psal.  27.  t  2.  when  my  enemies  a.  they  stumbled
Isa.  8.  t  3.  1  a.  to  the  prophetess,  she  bare  a  son

APPROACH  ETII,  ING.

Isa.  58.  2.  they  take  delight  in  a.  to  God
Luke  12.  33.  where  no  thief  a.  nor  moth  corrupteth
Heb.  10. 25.  and  so  much  more  as  ye  see  the  day  a.
APPROVE

Signifies,  To  like  or  commend,  Psal.  49.  13.
Approved  of  God,  Acts  2.  22.  Demonstrated,  and
beyond  any  contradiction  proved,  to  be  the  Messiah.
Psal.  49.  13.  yet  their  posterity  a.  their  saying^

1  Cor.  16.  3.  whom  you  shall  a.  by  your  letters
Phil.  1.  10.  that  ye  may  a.  things  that  are  excellent
APPROVED.

Acts  2. 22.  Jesus,  a  man  a.  of  God  among  you
Rom.  14.  18.  is  acceptable  to  God,  and  a.  of  men
16. 10.  salute  Apelles  a.  in  Christ,  salute  Aristob.

1  Cor.  11. 19.  they  that  are  a.  may  be  made  manifest

2  Cor.  7. 11.  in  all  things  you  have  a.  yourselves

10.  18.  not  he  that  commendeth  himself  is  a.

13. 7.  not  that  we  should  appear  a.  but  that  ye

2  Tim.  2.  15.  study  to  show  thyself  a.  unto  God
APPRO  VEST,  ETII.

Lam.  3.  36.  to  subvert  a  man,  the  Lord  a.  not
Rom.  2.  18.  a.  the  things  that  are  more  excellent
APPROVING.

2  Cor.  6.  4.  but  in  all  things  a.  ourselves  as  ministers
APRON,  S.

Gen.  3.7.  they  sewed  fig-leaves  together,  and  made  a.
Ruth  3.  1  15.  bring  the  a.  thou  hast,  and  hold  it
Acts  19. 12.  from  his  body  were  brought  to  the  sick  a.
APT.

2  Kings  24.  16.  a.  for  war,  king  of  Babylon  brought
1  Tim.  3. 2.  a  bishop  must  be  a.  to  teach,  2  Tim.  2.  §4
ARCHANGEL.

1  Thess.  4. 16.  shall  descend  with  the  voice  of  the  a.
Jude  9.  Michael  the  a.  when  contending  with  devil
ARCHER,  S.

Gen.  21.  20.  Ishmael  grew  and  became  an  a
49.  23.  the  a.  have  sorely  grieved  him,  and  shot
1  Sam.  31.  3.  and  the  a.  hit  him,  1  Chron.  10.  3.
Job  16. 13.  his  a.  compass  me  round  about
Isa.  22.  3.  thy  rulers  fled,  they  are  bound  by  the  a.
Jer.  51.  3.  against  him  that  bendeth  let  a.  bend  bow
ARCHES.

Eiek.  40. 16.  there  were  narrow  windows  to  the  a.
ARE

Signifies,  [1]  To  be  of  great  value  and  esteem  among
men,  1  Cor.  1.  28.  [2]  To  have  authority  f~om,
1  John  4. 1.  [3]  Reputed,  judged,  esteemed,  1  Cor.

7.  14.  [4]  Represent,  or  betoken,  Gen.  41.  26,  27.

Rev.  1. 20.  ,

Things  which  are  not,  1  Cor.  1.  28.  Which  are  of
so  small  esteem,  as  if  they  had  no  being.

Gen.  18.  24.  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  a.  therein
31.  15.  a.  we  not  counted  of  him  strangers  ?

42.  36.  Jacob  said,  all  these  things  a.  against  me
Exod.  8.  21.  and  also  the  ground  whereon  they  a.
Num.  15.  15.  as  ye  a.  so  shall  the  stranger  be
Deut.  1. 11.  a  thousand  times  so  many  more  as  ye  a.

1  Kings  8.  8.  and  there  they  a.  to  this  day
Job  24.  t  24.  a.  exalted  for  a  while,  but  a.  not
38. 35.  that  they  may  go  and  say  to  thee,  here  we  a.
Psal.  68. +26.  bless  yeGod.  ye  that  a.  of  the  fountain
107.  27.  they  stagger,  ana  a.  at  their  wit’s  end
Lam.  5.  7.  our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  a.  not
Amos  9.7.  a.  yenot  as  children  of  Ethiopians  to  me
Nah.  3.  17.  the  place  is  not  knowm  where  they  a.
Mat.  2.  18.  not  be  comforted,  because  they  a.  not

6.  26.  fowls  of  air,  a.  ye  not  much  better  than  they

22.  30.  but  a.  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven
Mark  6.  3.  and  a.  not  hfs  sisters  here  with  us  ?

Luke  13.  25.  I  know  not  whence  you  a.  27.

18.  11.  God,  I  thank  thee,  I  am  not  as  other  men  a.
John  17. 11-  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one,  as  we  a.
Rom.  15. 27.  and  their  debtors  they  a.  for  if  Gentiles

1  Cor.  1.  28.  things  which  a.  not,  things  that  a.

2  Cor.  11.  22.  a.  they  Hebrews?  a.  they  Israelites  ?

a.  they  the  seed  of  Abraham  ?  so  am  1
Heb.  4.  15.  tempted  like  as  we  a.  yet  without  sin
Rev.  1.  19.  write  the  things  which  a.  and  shall  be
4. 11.  for  thy  pleasure  they  a.  and  were  created
10.  6.  created  heaven  and  things  which  therein  a.
ARGUING.

Job  6.  25.  but  what  doth  vrnur  a.  reprove  ?
ARGUMENTS.

Job  23.  4. 1  would  fill  my  mouth  with  a.

ARIGHT.

Psal.  50. 23.  to  him  that  ordereth  his  conversation  a.
78.  8.  a  generation  that  set  not  their  heart  a.

Prov.  4.  1 26.  all  thy  ways  shall  be  ordered  a.

15.  2.  the  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  knowledge  a.

23.  31.  the  wine,  when  itunoveth  itself  a.

Jer.  8.  6.  I  hearkened,  but  they  spake  not  a.

ARISE

Signifies,  [1]  To  take  rise,  or  proceed  from,  Acts

20.  30.  [2]  To  repent,  Eph.  5.  14.  [3]  To  be
raised  and  comforted,  Amos  1 .  2.  It  is  likewise
a  word  of  encouragement,  to  excite  one  to  do  a
thing.  Josh.  1.  2.  Acts  22.  16.

Gen.  31. 13.  now  a.  get  thee  out  of  this  land
35. 1.  a.  go  up  to  Beth  el,  and  dwell  there
Deut.  13. 1.  ir  there  a.  among  you  a  prophet
17.  8.  then  shalt  thou  a.  and  get  thee  up  to  the
Josh.  1.  2.  now  therefore  a.  go  over  this  Jordan


A  R  Iv

Judg.  5.  12.  a.  Barak,  lead  thy  captivity  captive
2  Sam.  2. 14.  letthe  young  men  a.  and  play  before  us

3.  21.  1  will  a.  and  gather  all  Israel  to  my  lord

11.  20.  and  if  so  be  that  the  kina's  wrath  a.

1  Kings  3.  12.  nor  after  thee  shall  any  a.  like  thee

2  Kings  9.  2.  make  Jehu  a.  from  among  his  brethren

1  Chron.  22.  16.  a.  be  doing,  the  Lord  be  with  thee
Neh.  2. 20.  therefore  we  hisservants  will  a.  and  build
Esth.  1.  18.  thus  shall  there  a.  too  much  contempt

4.  14.  then  shall  enlargement  a.  to  the  Jews
J6b  7.  4.  when  shall  I  a.  and  night  be  gone?

11.  t  17.  thy  age  shall  a.  above  noon  day

25.  3.  and  upon  whom  doth  not  his  light  a.  ?
Psal.  3. 7-  a.  O  Ix>rd,  save  me,  O  my  God,  for  thou

7-  6.  a.  O  Lord,  in  thine  anger  lift  up  thyself

12.  5.  now  will  I  a.  saith  the  Lord,  1  will  set  him
44. 26.  a.  for  our  help,  and  redeem  us  for  thy  mere}’
68.  1.  let  God  a.  let  his  enemies  be  scattered

88.  10.  shall  the  dead  a.  and  praise  thee  ?

89.  9-  when  the  waves  of  sea  a.  thou  stillest  them
102.  13.  thou  shalt  a.  and  have  mercy  on  Zion

Prov.  6.  9.  when  wilt  thou  a.  out  of  thy  sleep  ?
Cant.  2. 13.  a.  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away
Isa.  21.  5.  a.  ye  princes,  and  anoint  the  shield

26.  19.  together  with  my  dead  body  shall  they  a.
49.  7-  kings  shall  a.  princes  shall  worship

60.  1 .  a.  shine,  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory
2.  but  the  Lord  shall  a.  upon  thee,  and  his  glory
Jer.  2.  27.  in  trouble  they  will  say,  a.  save  us

8.  4.  saith  the  Lord,  shall  they  fall,  and  not  a.?
31.  6.  a.  ye,  let  us  go  up  to  Zion  to  the  Lord

I-am.  2.  19.  a.  cry  out  in  the  night,  pour  out  thy
Dan.  2.  39.  after  thee  shall  a.  another  kingdom
Amos'}. 2. 0  Lord,  bywhoin  shall  Jacoba.  for  he  is, 5.
Mic.  2.  10.  a.  ye  and  depart,  this  is  not  your  rest
4.  13.  a.  a.nd  thresh,  O  daughter  of  Zion,  I  will
7-  8.  O  mine  enemy,  when  I  fall  I  shall  a.

Hab.  2. 19.  wo  to  him  that  saith  to  the  dumb  stone  a.
Mai.  4. 2.  you  that  fear  shall  the  Sun  of  righteousn.  a.
Mat.  9. 5.  is  it  easier  to  say  a.  and  walk  ?  Mark 2.  9.
24. 24.  for  there  shall  a.  false  Christs,  false  prophets
Mark  5.  41.  damsel,  I  say  to  thee,  a.  Luke  8.  54.
Luke  7. 14.  Lord  said,  young  man,  I  say  to  thee,  a.
15. 18.  I  will  a.  and  go  to  my  father,  and  say

24.  38.  and  why  do  thoughts  a.  in  your  hearts  ?
John  14.  31.  even  so  1  do,  a.  let  us  go  hence
Acts  9.  40.  turning  to  the  body  said,  Tabitha,  a.
20. 30.  also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  a.  speaking

22. 16.  why  tarriest  thou  ?  a.  and  be  baptized
Eph.  5.  14.  a.  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give

2  Pet.  1.  19.  till  the  day-star  a.  in  your  hearts

See  Rise.

ARISETH.

1  Kings  18.  44.  behold,  there  a.  a  little  cloud
Psal.  112.  4.  to  the  upright  a.  light  in  darkness
Isa.  2. 19.  when  he  a.  to  shake  terribly  the  earth,  21.
Mat.  13.  21.  when  persecution  a.  Mark  4.  17.

John  7.  52.  search,  tor  out  of  Galilee  a.  no  prophet
Ileb.  7  15.  after  the  similitude  of  Melchizedec  a.
See  Sun.

ARK

Signifies,  [1]  A  chest  or  coffer  to  keep  things  sure
or  secret,  Exod.  2.  3.  [2]  The  great  vessel  in
which  Noah  and  his  family  were  preserved  during
the  flood,  in  length  547  feet,  Gen.  6.  14,  15.  Heb.
11.  7.  [3]  That  chest  wherein  the  two  tables  of
the  law,  Aaron's  rod,  and  the  pot  of  manna  were
kept,  Exod.  37.  1.  Heb.  9.  4.

The  ark  of  thy  strength,  Psal.  132.  8.  The  seat  of
thy  powerful  and  glorious  presence,  from  whence
thou  dost  put  forth  and  manifest  thy  strength  in
behalf  of  thy  people,  when  they  desire  and  need  it.
Was  seen  the  ark  of  his  testament,  Rev.  11.  19.
Christ  the  true  Ark  of  our  covenant,  more  known,
and  the  mysteries  of  religion  made  more  common
and  familiar  than  formerly,  either  under  the  Old-
Testament  dispensation,  or  during  the  reign  of
antichrist.

Gen.  6.  14.  make  thee  an  a.  of  gopher-wood

7.  18.  and  the  a.  went  on  the  face  of  the  waters
Exod.  2.  3.  she  took  for  him  an  a.  of  bulrushes

25. 16.  and  thou  shalt  put  into  the  a.  the  testimony

which  I  snail  give  thee,  21.  |  40.  3,  20.
37.  1.  Bezaleel  made  the  a.  of  shittimwood
Num.  3.  31.  their  charge  shall  be  the  a.  and  tables
Josh  A.  11.  a.  of  L.  6. 12. 1  Sam.  4. 6.  |  6.1. 2  Sam.  6. 9.

1  Sam.  6. 19.  he  smote  because  they  looked  into  a.

2  Sam.  11.  11.  the  a.  and  Israel  abide  in  tents

1  Kings  2.  26.  because  thou  barest  the  a.  of  the  Lord

8.  9.  was  nothing  in  the  a.  save  the  two  tables

1  Chron.  6.  31.  after  that  the  a.  had  rest

13.  3.  let  us  bring  again  the  a.  of  our  God  to  us

9.  Uzza  put  forth  his  hand  to  hold  the  a.

15.  1.  David  prepared  a  place  for  the  a.  of  God

2  Chron.  6. 41.  thou  and  a.  of  thy  strength,  Ps.  132. 8.
8. 11.  places  are  holy  whereunto  the  a.  hath  come

Mat.  24.  38.  till  Noah  entered  the  a.  Luke  17.  27.
Heb.  11. 7.  by  faith  Noah  warned  of  God  prep,  an  a.

1  Pet.  3. 20.  God  waited  while  the  a.  was  preparing
Rev.  11. 19.  and  there  was  seen  in  his  temple  the  a.
Before  the  ARK.

Exod.  40.  5.  thou  shalt  set  altar  of  gold  before  the  a.
Josh.  4.  7  •  waters  of  .1  ordan  were  cut  off  before  the  a.
7-  6.  Joshua  fell  to  the  earth  on  his  face  before  the  a.

1  Sam.  5.  3.  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his  f.  before  the  a.

1  L'hr.  16.  37.  left  before  the  a.  Asaph  and  nis  brethr.

2  Clir.  5. 6.  Solom .  and  congr.  assembled  before  the  a.

ARK  of  the  Covenant.

Num.  10. 33.  a.  of  covenant  of  Lord  went  before  them
Deut.  31. 26.  put  book  of  law  inside  of  a.  of  covenant
Josh.  4.7 .  the  waters  were  cut  off  before  a.  of  covenant
Judg.  20.  27-  a.  of  covenant  of  God  was  there  in

1  Sam.  4.  3.  let  us  fetch  the  a.  of  the  covenant  of

2  Sam. .  15.  24.  Levites  bearing  a.  of  covenant  of  God
1  Chr.  17.1.  a.  of  covenant  remained  under  curtains
Jer.  3. 16.  shall  say  no  more,  the  a.  of  the  covenant
Heb.  9. 4.  tabernacle  which  had  the  a.  of  the  covenant

ARK  of  God.

1  Sam.  3.  3.  in  the  temple  where  the  a.  of  God  was
4.  11.  the  a.  of  God  was  taken,  17.  22.

6. 3.  ifye  send  away  the  a.  of  God,  send  it  not  empty

2  Sam.  6.  7-  there  he  died  before  the  a.  of  God


2  Sam.  7. 2.  but  the  a.  of  Godd  welleth  within  curtains
15.  25.  carry  back  the  a.  of  God  into  the  city
1  Chr.  13.  12.  how  shall  I  bring  the  a.  of  God  home
15.  2.  none  ought  to  carry  the  a.  of  God  but  Levites
ARM

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  so  called,  2  Sam.

I.  10.  [2]  Gutward  strength,  and  all  the  instru¬
ments  of  cruelty  and  mischief  used  by  the  wicked ,
Psal.  10. 15.  [3]  God's  infinite  power  in  creating
the  world,  Jer.  27;  5.  |  32.  17-  [4]  The  mighty
power  of  God  making  the  gospel  effectual  to  the
conversion  of  sinners,  Isa.  53.  1.  John  12.  38.

Exod.  15. 16.  by  greatness  of  thine  a.  they  shall  be
Deut.  33.  20.  he  teareth  the  a.  with  crown  of  head

1  Sam.  2.  31.  behold  the  days  come  when  1  will  cut

off  thy  a.  and  the  a.  of  thy  father’s  house

2  Sam.  1.  10.  1  took  the  bracelet  that  was  on  his  a.
2  Chron.  32.  8.  with  him  is  an  a.  of  flesh,  with  us
E’-ra  4.  +  23.  made  them  to  cease  by  a.  and  power
Job  26.  2.  savest  thou  the  a.  that  hath  no  strength

31.  22.  let  my  a.  fall  from  my  shoulder-blade
35.  9.  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  a.  of  the  mighty

38. 15.  and  the  high  a.  shall  be  broken

40.  9.  hast  thou  an  a.  like  God  ?  or  canst  thunder
Psal.  10. 15.  break  thou  the  a.  of  the  wicked

44. 3,  nor  did  their  own  a.  save  them,  but  thy  a.
71. 1 18.  I  have  showed  thy  a.  to  this  generation
77*  15.  thou  hast  with  thy  a.  redeemed  thy  people
89.  13.  thou  hast  a  mighty  a.  strong  is  thy  hand

21.  mine  a.  also  shall  strengthen  him.

98. 1.  his  holy  a.  hath  gottenhim  the  victory
Cant.  8. 6.  set  me  as  a  seal  on  thine  a
Isa.  9.  20.  they  shall  eat  every  man  the  flesh  of  his  a.

33.  2.  be  thou  their  a.  every  morning,  our  salvation
40. 10.  God  will  come,  and  his  a.  shall  rule  for  him

II.  he  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  a.

51.  5.  mine  a.  shall  judge  the  people,  the  isles  shall

wait  upon  me,  and  on  my  a.  shall  they  trust

9.  put  on  strength,  O  a.  of  the  Lord,  awake

52.  10.  the  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  holy  a.

53.  1.  who  hath  believed  our  report?  and  to  whom
is  the  a.  of  the  Lord  revealed  '  John  12.  38.

59. 16.  therefore  his  a.  brought  salvation,  63.  5.

62.  8.  Lord  hath  sworn  by  tne  a.  of  his  strength

63.  12.  that  led  them  with  his  glorious  a.

Jer,  17. 5.  cursed  be  he  that  maketh  flesh  his  a.

21.  5.  1  will  fight  against  you  with  a  strong  a.
Ezek.  4. 7.  and  thine  a.  shall  be  uncovered

22.  +  6.  were  in  thee  to  their  a.  to  shed  blood

30. 21.  I  have  broken  a.  of  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt

31.  17.  they  went  down  into  hell  that  were  his  a.
Dan.  11.  6.  she  shall  not  retain  the  power  of  the  a.
Zech.  11. 17.  sword  be  on  his  a.  his  a.  be  dried  up
Luke  1.  51.  he  hath  shewed  strength  with  his  a.
Acts  13. 17.  with  an  high  a.  brought  he  them  out

Stretched-out  ARM.

Exod.  6.  6.  I  will  redeem  you  with  a  stretched-out  a
Deut.  4.  34.  assayed  to  take  nation  with  str.-out  a.

5.  15.  the  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  out  thence
with  a  stretched-out  a.  7. 19.  |  26.  8.  Jer.  32.  21.

11.  2.  your  children  have  not  seen  his  str.-out  a.

2  Chr.  6.  32.  stranger  is  come  for  thy  stretched-out  a.
Psal.  136. 12.  with  a  stretched-out  a.  for  his  mercy
Jer.  27. 5. 1  made  earth  by  my  stretched-out  a.  32. 17.
Ezek.  20.  33.  with  a  stretched-out  a.  will  I  rule  over

34.  I  will  gather  you  with  a  str.-out  a.  and  fury

ARM-HOLES.

Jer.  38. 12.  put  these  rotten  rags  under  thy  a. -holes
Ezek.  13.  18.  wo  to  them  that  sew  pillows  to  a.-holes
ARMS.

Gen.  49.  24.  the  a.  of  his  hands  were  made  strong
Deut.  33.  27.  and  underneath  are  the  everlasting  a.
Judg.  16.  12.  he  brake  them  from  his  a.  like  thread
2  Sam.  22.  35.  he  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  so  that
a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  mine  a.  Psal.  18.  34.
2  Kings  9.  24.  Jehu  smote  Jehoram  between  his  a
Job  22.  9.  the  a.  of  the  fatherless  have  been  broken
Psal.  37. 17.  the  a.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  broken
Prov.  31. 17.  shegirdeth,  and  strengthened  her  a.
Isa.  44. 12.  and  worketh  it  with  strength  of  his  a.

49.  22.  they  shall  bring  thy  sons  in  their  a.

51. 5.  and  my  a.  shall  judge  the  people
Ezek.  13.  20.  I  will  tear  them  from  your  a.

30.  22.  behold,  I  will  break  Pharaoh’s  a.  24.

24.  I  will  strengthen  the  a.  of  king  of  Babylon,  25.
Dan.  2.  32.  his  breast  and  his  a.  of  silver,  his  belly

10.  6.  his  a.  and  feet  like  to  polished  brass

11.  15.  the  a.  of  the  south  shall  not  withstand

22.  with  the  a.  of  a  flood  shall  they  be  overflown
31.  and  a.  shall  stand  on  his  part,  and  shall
Hos.  7. 15.  1  have  bound  and  strengthened  their  a.
11.  3.  taught  them  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  a.
Mark  9.  36.  when  he  had  taken  him  in  his  a.  he  said

10. 16.  took  them  up  in  his  a.  put  his  hands  on  them
Luke  2.  28.  Simeon  took  Christ  in  his  a.  and  blessed

ARM,  Verb,

Is  taken,  [1]  Corporally,  to  be  furnished  with  arms
for  war,  Gen.  14.  14.  Num.  31.  5.  [2]  Spiri

tually,  to  get  and  exercise  those  graces  and  spiri
tual  weapons  which  are  appointed  and  bestowed  by
God  to  defend  the  soul,  1  Pet.  4. 1 .

Num.  31.  3.  a.  some  of  yourselves  to  the  war,  and  go

1  Pet.  4. 1.  a.  yourselves  with  the  same  mind

ARMED.

Gen.  14. 14.  Abram  a.  his  trained  servants  born  i»

41.  140.  at  thv  word  shall  all  my  people  be  a.
Num.  31. 5.  or  tribe,  twelve  thousand  a.  for  war

32.  17.  but  we  ourselves  will  go  ready  a.  32.

Deut.  3. 18.  ye  shall  pass  over  a.  Josh.  1. 14.

Josh.  4.  1 13.  about  40, 000  a.  for  war  passed  over

6.  7.  let  him  that  is  a.  pass  on  before  the  ark

2  Chron.  28.  14.  so  the  a. men  left  the  captives
Job  39.  21.  he  goeth  on  to  m’eet  the  a.  men
Psal.  78.  9.  the  children  of  Ephraim  being  a.

Prov.  6. 11.  and  thy  want  as  an  a.  man,  24.  34.

Luke  11.21.  when  a  strong  man  a.  keepeth  the  house

ARMY.

Deut.  11.  4.  what  he  did  to  the  a.  of  the  Egyptians
Judg.  8.  6.  that  we  should  give  bread  to  thine  a
9.  29.  he  said,  increase  thine  a.  and  come  out
1  Sam.  4.  12.  there  ran  a  man  of  Benjamin  out  of  a.
17.  21.  and  the  Philistines  had  put  a.  against  a.


A  R  R


A  RT


ASH


1  Kings  20.  25.  number  thee  an  a.  like  the  a.  lost

2  Chron.  20. 21.  that  they  should  praise  before  the  a.

25.  7.  O  kins,  let  not  the  a.  of  Israel  go  with  thee
Keh.  4.2.  he  spake  before  Ids  brethren,  and  the  a.
Job  29.  25.  Sat  chief,  1  dwelt,  as  a  king  in  the  a.
Psal.  68.  t  11.  great  was  the  a.  that  published  it
Cant.  6.  4.  terrible  as  an  a.  with  banners,  10.

Jer.  37.  11.  was  broken  up  for  fear  of  Pharaoh’s  a.
Ezek.  29.  18.  caused  his  a.  to  serve  a  great  service

37.  10.  there  stood  up  an  exceeding  great  s.

Van.  4.  35.  according  to  his  will  in  the  a.  of  heaven
Joel  2.  11.  Lord  shall  utter  his  voice  before  his  a.

25.  locust,  my  great  a.  which  1  sent  among  you
Zech.  4.  +  6.  saying,  not  by  a.  nor  by  power

9.  8.  will  encamp  about  my  house  because  of  the  a.
Acts  23.  27.  then  came  1  with  an  a.  and  rescued
Rev.  9. 16.  the  number  of  the  a.  of  horsemen

19.  19.  against  him  that  sat  on  horse  and  his  a.

See  Chaldeans.

ARMIES.

Exod.  7. 4.  lay  hand  on  Egypt,  and  bring  forth  my  a.

12.  17.  same  day  I  brought  your  a.  out  of  Egypt
Num.  33. 1.  went  forth  with  their  a.  under  Moses
Deut.  20.9.  they  shall  make  captains  of  the  a.  to  lead
1  Sam.  17.  10.  said,  l  defy  the  a.  of  Israel  this  day

26.  that  he  should  defy  the  a.  of  the  living  God
45.  come  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  the  a.  of  Israel

Job  25.  3.  is  there  any  number  ot  his  a.  ?

Psal.  44.  9.  thcu  goest.  not  forth  with  our  a.

68. 12.  kings  of  a.  did  dee  apace,  she  that  tarried
Cant.  6. 13.  as  it  were  the  company  of  two  a.

Isa.  34.  2.  and  his  fury  upon  all  theii^  a.

Dan.  9.  t27.  with  abominable  a.  make  desolate
Mat.  22.  7.  he  sent  forth  his  a.  and  destroyed
Luke  21. 20.  ye  see  Jerusalem  compassed  with  a.
Heb.  11.  34.  who  turned  to  flight  the  a.  of  the  aliens
Rev.  19.  14.  and  the  a.  in  heaven  followed  him
19.  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  their  a.  gathered
'  ARMOUR.

Signifies,  [1]  Weapons  or  imtruments  of  rear,  1  Sam.
17.54.  [2]  The  strong  and  powerful  lusts  of  sin,
ignorance ,  error,  and  profaneness,  which  are  the
armour,  whereby  the  devil  keeps  up  his  power  and
dominion  in  the  hearts  of  men,  Luke  11.  22.
[3|  Spoil,  2  Sam.  2.  t  21.  [4]  Such  graces  and
spiritual  weapons  as  are  for  the  defence  of  the
soul,  and  whereby  we  may  be  enabled  to  combat
with  our  spiritual  enemies,  Rom.  13.  12.  Eph.  6.
il.  [5]  A  good  conscience,  which  being  always
attended  with  uprightness  of  life,  is  a  defence
against  all  temptations,  either  from  prosperity  or
adversity,  2  Cor.  6.  7-

1  Sam.  17.  51.  David  put  Goliath’s  a.  in  his  tent

2  Sam.  2.  21.  turn  thee  aside  and  take  thee  his  a.

1  Kings  22.  38.  they  washed  his  a.  according  to

2  Kings  3.  21.  they  gathered  all  able  to  put  on  a.

10.  2.  seeing  ye  have  a  fenced  city  also  and  a.

20. 13.  Hezekiah  shewed  his  precious  things,  silver

and  gold,  the  house  of  his  a.  Isa.  39.  2.
Job  39.  t21.  hegoeth  onto  meet  the  a.

Isa.  22.  8.  didst  look  in  that  day  to  a.  of  the  house
Luke  11.  22.  he  taketh  his  a.  wherein  he  trusted
Rom.  13.  12.  and  let  us  put  on  the  a.  of  light
2  Cor.  6.  7.  approving  by  the  a.  of  righteousness
Eph.  6.  11.  put  on  the  a.  of  God  to  stand  ag.  devil

13.  take  to  you  the  whole  a.  of  God  to  withstand
ARMOUR-BEARER.

Judg.  9.  54.  Abimelech  called  his  a.-bearer ,  saying
1  Sam.  14.  7-  n.-b.  said,  do  all  that  is  in  thine  heart

16.  21.  Saul  loved  David,  and  he  became  hisa.-i.
31.  6.  Saul  died,  his  three  sons,  and  his  a.-bearer

ARMOURY.

Cant.  4. 4.  like  the  tower  of  David  builded  for  an  a.
Jer.  50.  25.  the  Lord  hath  opened  his  a.

AROSE.

Gen.  19.  33.  he  perceived  not  when  she  a.  35.

37. 7.  and,  lo,  my  sheaf  a.  and  stood  upright
Exod.  1. 8.  now  there  a.  up  a  new  king  over  Egypt
who  knew  not  Joseph,  Acts  7.  18.
Judg.  2. 10.  a.  a  generation  that  knew  not  the  Lord
5.  7-  till  I  Deborah  a.  till  I  a.  a  mother  in  Israel

20.  8.  all  the  people  a.  as  one  man,  saying

1  Sam.  9.  26.  and  they  a.  early,  Isa.  37.  36.

17.  35.  when  he  a.  against  me,  I  slew  him

2  Kings  23.  25.  neither  after  him  a.  there  any  like
2  Chron.  36. 16.  till  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  a.

Job  29. 8.  young  men  hid,  aged  a.  and  stood  up
Psal.  76.  9-  when  God  a.  to  judgment,  to  save  thee
Eccl.  1.  5.  the  sun  hasteth  to  his  place  where  he  a.
Dan.  6.  19.  the  king  a.  early  and  went  to  the  den
Mat.  2. 14.  he  a.  and  took  the  young  child,  21.

8.  15.  shea,  and  ministered  to  them,  Luke  A.  39.

26.  he  a.  and  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea,  and

there  was  a  great  calm,  Mark  A.  39.  Luke 8.  24.

9.  9.  and  he  a.  and  followed  him,  19.  Mark  2.  14.
25.  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  the  maid  a.

27.  52.  and  many  bodies  of  saints  which  slept  a.
Mark  9.  27.  but  Jesus  lifted  him  up,  and  he  a.
Luke  6. 48.  when  the  flood  a.  the  stream  beat

15.  20.  he  a.  and  came  to  his  father,  he  kissed  him
Acts  11. 19.  the  persecution  which  a.  about  Stephen
19.  23.  there  a.  no  small  stir  about  that  way
23. 7-  when  he  so  said  there  a.  a  dissension,  10.
See  Rose.

AROSE  and  went.  m

1  Sam.  3. 6.  Samuel  a.  and  went  to  Eli,  and  said,  here
23. 16.  Jonathan  a.  and  went  to  David  into  the  wood
25.  1.  David  a.  and  went  to  the  wilderness  of  Paran
1  Kings  19.21.  Elisha  a.  and  went  after  Elijah
Jonah  3.  3.  so  Jonah  a.  and  went  to  JSl  ineven
Acts  9.  39.  then  Peter  a.  and  went  with  them
ARRAY

Signifies,  [H  To  put  on  apparel,  Esth.  6.  9.  Rev.  7.
13.  [2]  To  put  an  army  in  a  Jit  posture  to  fight,
2  Sam.  10.  9.

The  terrors  of  God  set  themselves  in  array  against
me.  Job  6.  4.  His  judgments  are  like  a  numerous
and  well-ordered  army,  under  the  conduct  of  an
irresistible  general,  who  designs  and  directs  them
to  invade  me  on  every  side.

Esth.  6.  9.  that  they  may  a.  the  man  withal
Job  AO.  10.  and  a.  thyself  with  glory  and  beauty


Jer.  43.  12.  shall  a.  himself  with  the  land  of  Egypt
1  Tim.  2.  9.  that  women  adorn,  not  with  costly  a.
ARRAY.

1  Sam.  4.  +  2.  they  slew  of  the  a.  in  the  field

2  Sam.  10. 9.  Joab  put  the  choice  in  a.  against  Syrians
Job  6.  4.  the  terrors  of  God  set  themselves  in  a.

Jer.  50.  14.  put  yourselves  in  a.  against  Babylon

See  Battle.

ARRAYED.

Gen.  41.  42.  Pharaoh  a.  Joseph  in  fine  linen
2  Chron.  28. 15.  took  the  captives,  with  spoil  a.  them
Mat.  6. 29.  was  not  a.  like  one  of  these,  Luke  12.  27.
Luke  ^.3.  11.  Herod  and  his  men  of  war  a.  Christ
Acts  12.  21.  Herod  a.  in  royal  apparel  sat  on  his
Rev.  7. 13.  what  are  these  that  are  a.  in  white  robes  ?

17. 4.  the  woman  was  a.  in  purple  and  scarlet  colour
19.  8.  to  her  was  granted  to  be  a.  in  fine  linen

ARRIVED.

Luke  8.  26.  they  a.  at  the  country  of  the  Gadarenes
Acts  20.  15.  and  the  next  day  we  a.  at  Samos
ARROGANCY.

1  Sam.  2.  3.  let  not  a.  come  out  of  your  mouth
Prov.  8.  13.  pride  and  a.  and  the  evil  way  do  I  hate
Isa.  13. 11. 1  will  cause  the  a.  of  the  proud  to  cease
Jer.  48. 29.  heard  pride  of  Moab,  his  loftiness,  his  a.
ARROW

Signifies,  [1]  A  dart  used  for  pleasure  or  in  war,
1  Sam.  20.  20.  Jer,  51.  1J.  [2]  Inward  terrors
from  God,  Job  6.  4.  Psal.  38.  2.  [3]  Wicked
intentions ,  Psal.  11.  2.  [41  Abusive  or  slanderous
words,  Psal.  64.  3.  [51  The  judgments  of  God,
such  as  thunder,  lightning,  tempests,  famine,
Sfc.  2  Sam.  22.^15.  Ezek.  5.  16.  Dab.  3.  11.  [6]
The  word  of  God,  which  is  sharp  and  powerful  in
piercing  and  turning  the  hearts  of  sinners,  Psal.

45.  5.

1  Sam.  20.  36.  Jonathan  shot  an  a.  beyond  him

2  Kings  9.  24.  and  the  a.  went  out  at  his  heart
13.  17.  a.  of  Lord’s  deliverance  from  Syria

19.  32.  nor  shall  he  shoot  an  a.  there,  Isa.  37.  33.
Job  34  f  6.  my  a.  is  incurable  without  transgression
41.  28.  the  a.  cannot  make  him  flee,  sling-stones
Psal.  11.  2.  they  make  ready  their  a.  on  the  string
64.  7*  with  an  a.  suddenly  shall  they  be  wounded
91.  5.  nor  afraid  for  the  a.  that  flieth  by  day
Prov.  25. 18.  that  beareth  false  witness  is  a  sharp  a.
Jer.  9-  8.  their  tongue  is  as  an  a.  shot  out
Lam.  3.  12.  he  hath  set  me  as  a  mark  for  the  a.
Zech.  9. 14.  and  his  a.  shall  go  forth  as  lightning
ARROWS.

Num.  24.  8.  he  shall  pierce  them  thro’  with  his  a.
Deut.  32.  23.  I  will  spend  mine  a.  upon  them
42. 1  will  make  mine  a.  drunk  with  blood

1  Sam.  20.  20. 1  will  shoot  three  a.  on  the  side

2  Sam.  22.15.  the  Lord  thundered,  and  he  sent  out  a.

and  scattered  them,  Psal.  18.  14.
2  Kings  13.15.  take  bow  and  a.  took  to  him  bow  and  a.

18.  take  the  a.  and  smite  upon  the  ground
Job  6.  4.  the  a.  of  the  Almighty  are  within  me
Psal.  7.  13.  heordaineth  a.  against  the  persecutors

21.  12.  shaltmake  ready  thine  a.  against  them

38.  2.  for  thine  a.  stick  fast  in  me,  and  thy  hand

45. 5.  thine  a.  are  sharp  in  the  heart  of  enemies

57.  4.  sons  of  men,  whose  teeth  are  spears  and  a.

58.  7.  when  he  bend eth  his  bow  to  shoot  his  a.

64.  3.  bows  to  shoot  their  a.  even  bitter  words
76.  3.  there  brake  he  the  a.  of  the  bow,  the  shield
77-  17-  clouds  poured,  thine  a.  also  went  abroad

120.4.  sharp  a.  of  the  mighty,  with  coals  of  juniper
127.  4.  as  a.  are  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty  man
144.  6.  shoot  out  thine  a.  and  destroy  them

Prov.  26. 18.  as  a  mad  man  who  casteth  a.  and  death
Isa.  5.  28.  whose  a.  are  sharp  and  their  bows  bent
7.  24.  with  a.  and  bows  shall  men  come  thither
Jer.  50.  9.  their  a.  shall  be  as  of  an  expert  man

14.  shoot  at  Babylon,  spare  no  a.  she  hath  sinned
51.  11.  make  bright  the  a.  gather  the  shields
Lam.  3. 13.  hath  caused  the  a.  of  his  quiver  to  enter
Ezek.  5.  16.  I  shall  send  the  evil  a.  of  famine

21.  21.  he  made  his  a.  bright,  he  consulted  images

39.  3. 1  will  cause  thy  a.  to  fall  out  of  thy  hand
9.  Israel  shall  go  forth,  and  bum  bows  and  a.

Hab.  3.  11.  at  the  light  of  thine  a.  they  went
ART,  Verb.

Gen.  3. 9.  God  said  to  Adam,  where  a.  thou  ?

13. 14.  Lord  said,  look  from  the  place  where  thou  a.
24.  23.  he  said,,  whose  daughter  a.  thou  ?  47.

27.  24.  and  he  said,  a.  thou  my  very  son  Esau  ?

32. 17.  whose  a.  thou  ?  whither  goest  thou  ?

39. 9.  kept  back  but  thee,  because  thou  a.  his  wife
41. 39.  there  is  none  so  discreet  and  wise  as  thou  a.

46.  30.  now  let  me  die  because  thou  a.  yet  alive
Exod.  4.  26.  she  said,  a  bloody  husband  thou  a.
Josh.  5. 13.  a.  thou  for  us,  or  our  adversaries  ?
Judg.  8. 18.  they  answered,  as  thou  a.  so  were  they

12.  5.  the  men  said  to  him,  a.  thou  an  Ephraimite  ?

13. 11.  a.  thou  the  man-  that  spakest  to  the  woman  ?
1  Sam.  19.  3. 1  will  go  cut  and  stand  by  where  thou  a.

1  Kings  13.18.  he  said ,  I  am  a  prophet  also  as  thou  a.

22.4.  Jehoshaphatsaid, Iain  as  thoua.  2  Kings  3.7.

2  Chron.  20.  J.  a.  not  thou  our  God,  who  didst  drive
Job  35.8.  wickedness  may  hurt  a  man  as  thou  a.
Isa.  14. 10.  a.  thou  also  become  weak  as  we  ?  a.  like
Jer.  14.  22.  a.  not  thou  he,  O  Lord  our  God,  we
Luke  7. 19.  a.  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  look  we
John  i.  49.  Rabbi,  thou  a.  the  Son  of  God,  King  of  Is.
Acts  21. 38.  a.  not  thou  that  Egyptian  made  uproar

22.  27.  the  captain  said,  tell  me,  a.  thou  a  Roman  ?
Rev.  11.  17.  a.  and  wast,  and  a.  to  come,  16. 5.

ART,  S,  Substantive.

Exod.  30. 25.  an  ointm.  after  the  a.  of  the  apothecary
2  Chron.  16. 14.  divers  spices  prepared  by  a.  ofapoth.
Acts  17. 29.  the  Godhead  not  like  stones  graven  by  a.

19.  19.  many  also  of  them  which  used  curious  a.
ARTIFICER.

Gen.  4. 22.  Tubal-cain  an  instructor  of  every  a.
Isa.  3. 3.  take  away  the  captain  and  the  cunning  a.
ARTIFICERS.

1  Chron.  29.  5.  for  all  manner  of  works  made  by  a.

2  Chron.  34. 11.  to  a.  and  builders  gave  they  money

ARTILLERY.

1  Sam.  20. 40.  Jonathan  gave  his  a.  to  the  lad


AS

Signifies.  [1]  Like,  1  Pet.  3.  8.  [2j  While,  Acts  20.

9.  [3]  For,  Mat.  6.  12.  [4]  Becaus.  John  15.  12.

I  17.  2.  [5]  After  the  manner  of,  Jou  31.  33.  It
sheweth,[l]  Likeness  in  quality,  but  not  in  quan¬
tity,  Mat.  5.48.  [2]  Equally,  John  5.  23.  [3]  The
likeness  of  a  thing,  but  not  the  truth  of  that  thing.
Mat.  26.  55.  [4]  'l'he  likeness  and  truth  of  a  thing,
Heb.  12.  7.

Gen.  2.  t  18.  I  will  make  him  an  help  a.  before  him
3.  5.  ye  shall  be  a.  gods  knowing  good  and  evil
22.  behold  the  man  is  become  a.  one  of  us

1  Sam.  16. 7-  the  Lord  seeth  not  a.  man  seeth

2  Kings  8.  27-  he  did  evil  a.  did  the  house  of  Ahab
24. 13.  had  made  in  the  temple,  a.  the  Lord  had  said

Ezra  10.  12.  a.  thou  hast  said,  so  must  we  do
Psal.  125.5.  a.  for  such  a.  turn  aside  to  crooked  ways
Prov.  24.  29.  say  not,  I  will  do  to  him  a.  he  hath  done
Isa.  24.  2.  a.  with  the  people,  a.  with  the  servant
Mat.  10.25.  disciple  a.  his  master  .servant  a.  his  laird
19. 19.  shalt  love  thy  neighb.  a.  thyself,  Rom.  13.  9.
John  1 .  14.  beheld  the  glory  a.  of  the  only-begotten
Acts  7.  f  37.  the  Lord  raise  up  a  prophet  a.  myselt
51.  ye  resist  II .  Ghost,  a.  your  fathers  did, so  do  ye
2  Cor.  2. 17.  but  a.  of  sincerity,  but  a.  of  God,  speak
Gal.  4. 12.  brethren,  be  a.  1  am.  for  I  am  a.  ye  are
Col.  2. 6.  a.  ye  have  received  Christ  Jesus,  so  walk
Even  AS.

1  Cor.  3.  5.  even  a.  the  Lord  gave  to  every'  man
Eph.  5.  33.  every  one  so  lo  ve  his  wife  even  a.  himselr
Col.  3. 13.  even  a.  Christ  forgave  you,  so  do  ye
Rev.  2.  27.  even  a.  I  received  of  my  Father
ASCEND

Signifies,  [1]  To  get  or  climb  up,  Josh.  6.  5.  [2]  To
go  up  to  heaven,  Eph.  4.  9, 10.

W  ho  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  ?  Psal.
24.  3.  Who  shall  be  admitted  and  accounted  a
true  member  of  the  church,  and  enjoy  the  favour
and  blessing  of  God?

No  man  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  John  3.  13.
No  man  hath  attained  the  perfect  knowledge  Oj
heavenly  things,  so  as  to  know  the  secret  will  and
counsels  of  God.

Josh.  6. 5.  the  people  shall  a.  up  every  man  straight
Psal.  24.  3.  who  shall  a.  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord,
and  shall  stand  in  his  holy  place  ?  Rom.  10.  6.

1 35.  7-  he  causeth  vapours  to  a.  Jer.  10. 13. 1  51. 16.
139. 8.  if  I  a.  up  into  heaven,  thou  art  there
Isa,  14.  13.  thou  nast  said,  I  will  a.  to  heaven,  14.
Ezek.  38.  9.  thou  shalt  a.  and  come  like  a  storm
John  6.  62.  if  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  a.  up
20. 17. 1  a.  to  my  Father,  and  your  Father,  my  God
Rev.  17.  8.  beast  shall  a.  out  of  the  bottomless  pit
ASCENDED.

Judg.  13.  20.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  a.  in  the  flame
Psal.  68. 18.  thou  hast  a.  up  on  high,  thou  hast  led
Prov.  30.  4.  who  hath  a .  up  into  heaven,  or  descend.
John  3.  13.  no  man  hath  a.  to  heaven,  but  he  that
20.  17.  touch  me  not,  I  am  not  yet  a.  to  my  Father
Acts  2.  34.  David  is  not  yet  a.  into  the  heavens
Eph.  A.  8.  when  he  a. up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  cap.

9.  now  that  he  a.  ||  10.  is  the  same  also  that  a.
Rev.  8.  4.  the  smoke  of  the  incense  a.  before  God

11. 12.  they  a.  up  to  heaven  in  a  cloud,  and  enemies

ASCENDETH.

Rev.  11.7.  the  beast  that  a.  out  of  the  bottomless  pit
14.  11.  the  smoke  of  their  torment  a.  lor  ever
ASCENDING.

Gen.  28.  12.  the  angels  of  God  a.  and  descending

1  Sam.  28.  13.  said,  I  saw  gods  a.  out  of  the  eartb
Luke  19.  28.  he  went  before,  a.  up  to  Jerusalem
John  1.  51.  angelsofGoda.  and  descendingon  Son
Rev.  7.  2. 1  saw  another  angel  a.  from  tne  east

ASCENT.

2  Sam.  15.  30.  David  went  up  by  the  a.  of  Olivet

1  KingsA0.5.  and  his  a.  by  which  he  went,  2  Chr.  9. 4.
ASCRIBE.

Deut.  32.  3.  a.  ye  greatness  to  our  God,  he  u  the  *
Job  36.  3.  I  will  a.  righteousness  to  my  Maker  t
Psal.  68.  34.  a.  ye  strength  to  God,  his  excellency  <
ASCRIBED.

1  Sam.  18. 8.  a.  to  David  10,000,  to  me  a.  but  1000

ASll.

Isa.  44. 14.  he  planteth  an  a.  the  rain  doth  nourish  it
ASHAMED.

Gen.  2. 25.  naked,  the  man  and  his  wife  were  not  a.
Judg.  3.  25.  and  they  tarried  till  they  were  a.

2  Sam.  10.  5.  the  men  were  greatly  a.  1  Chron.  19. 5.
19.  3.  as  people  being  a.  steal  away  when  they  flee

2  Kings  2.17.  and  when  they  urgedhim  till  he  was  a.
8.  11.  he  settled  his  countenance  till  he  was  a.

2  Chron.  30. 15.  the  priests  and  the  Levites  were  a.
Ezra  8.  22.  I  was  a.  to  require  of  the  king  a  band
9. 6.  I  am  a.  and  blush  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee
Job  6.  20.  they  came  thither,  and  were  a.

11. 3.  when  thou  mockest,  shall  no  man  make  a.  ?

19.3.  ye  are  not  a.  to  make  yourselves  strange  to  me
Psal.  34. 5.  were  lightened,  and  their  faces  not  a.

74.  21.  O  let  not  theioppressed  return  a.  let  poor
Prov.  12.  4.  she  thatymaketh  a.  is  as  rottenness
Isa.  20. 5.  shall  be  a.  of  Ethiopia,  their  expectation
24. 23.  the  sun  shall  be  a.  when  the  Lord  shall  reign

30. 5.  all  a.  of  a  people  that  could  not  profit  them
33.9.  earth  mou/rieth,  Lebanon  is  a.  and  hewn  down

Jer.  2.  26.  as  the  thief  is  a.  when  he  is  found,  so  is
6. 15.  were  they  a.  ?  they  were  not  at  all  a.  8.  12.
8.  9.  the  wig$  men  are  a.  they  are  dismayed
14.  4.  plowfhen  were  a.  they  covered  their  heads

48. 13.  Moahshall  be  a.  of  Chemosh,  as  Israel  was  a.
Ezek.  16. 27.  the  daughters  of  the  Philistines  are  a.

32.  30.  with  terror  they  are  a.  of  their  might
Lu.  13. 17.  all  his  adversaries  were  a.  and  the  people

16. 3.  what  shall  I  do  i  1  cannot  dig,  to  beg  l  am  a.
Rom.  1.  16.  I  am  not  a.  of  the  gospel  of  Christ

5. 5.  hope  maketh  not  a.  because  the  love  of  God  is
6. 21.  what  fruit  in  things  whereof  ye  are  now  a.  ?

2  Cor.  7. 14.  if  I  have  boasted  any  thing,  I  am  not  a.

2  Tim.  1. 12.  I  suffer,  nevertheless  1  am  not  a.

16.  Onesiphorus  was  not  a.  of  my  chain
Heb.  2.  11.  he  is  not  a.  to  call  them  brethren

11.  16.  God  is  not  a.  to  be  called  their  God
Ashamed  and  confounded ;  see  Confounded.


ASK


A  S  L


ASS


Be  ASHAMED.

Gen.  38.  23.  let  her  take  it  to  her,  lest  we  be  a
Psal.  6. 10.  let  all  my  enemies  be  a.  and  sore  vu  ed
25.  3.  yea,  let  none  that  wait  on  thee  be  a.  let  them
he  a.  who  transgress  without  cause
31.  1.  in  thee  do  I  put  my  trust,  let  me  never  be  a.

17.  let  me  not  be  a.  let  the  wicked  be  a.  35. 26.

69.  6.  let  not  them  that  wait  be  a.  for  my  sake

86. 17.  they  which  hate  me,  may  see  it  and  be  a.
109-  28.  when  they  arise,  let  them  be  a.  but  let
119. 78.  let  proud  be  a.  for  they  dealt  perversely

Isa.  1.  29.  for  they  shall  be  a.  of  the  oaks  which  ye

23. 4.  be  thou  a.  O  Zidon.  the  sea.  hath  spoken

26. 11.  they  shall  see  and  be  a.  for  their  envy

42. 17.  they  shall  be  greatly  a.  that  trust  in  images

44.  9.  they  see  not  nor  know,  that  they  may  be  a.

11.  all  his  fellows  shall  be  a.  shall  be  a.  together

45. 24.  all  that  are  incensed  against  him  shall  be  a.

65. 13.  my  servants  rejoice,  but  ye  shall  be  a.

66. 5.  shall  appear  to  your  joy,  and  they  shall  be  a.
Jer.  2.  36.  thou  slialt  be  a.  ot  Egypt,  as  a.  of  Assyria

3. 3.  and  hadst  a  whore’s  forehead  ,refusedst  to  be  a

12. 13.  and  they  shall  be  a.  of  your  revenues
IT.  13.  O  Lord,  all  that  forsake  thee  shall  be  a.

20. 11.  my  persecutors  shall  stumble  and  be  a.

48. 13.  Moan  shall  be  a.  of  Chemosh,  as  Israel  was

50. 12.  your  mother  that  bare  you  shall  be  a.
Euk.  16.  61.  shalt  remember  thy  ways,  and  be  a.

43. 10.  shew  Israel,  they  may  he  a.  of  their  iniquities

11.  and  if  they  be  a.  of  all  that  they  have  done
Hos.  4. 19.  they  shall  be  a.  because  of  their  sacrifices

10.  6.  and  Israel  shall  be  a.  of  his  own  counsel
Joel  1.11.  be  ye  a. O  ye  husbandmen,  howl  for  wheat

2.  26.  and  my  people  shall  never  be  a.  27.

Zech.  9-  5.  for  her  expectation  shall  be  a.

13. 4.  the  prophets  every  one  be  a.  of  his  vision
Mark  8.38.shall  be  a. of  me  and  my  words.  Lv/e9. 26.
2  Cor.  9.  4.  we  (that  we  say  not,  you)  should  be  a.
Phil.  1.  20.  that  in  nothing  I  shall  be  a.  but  with

2  Thess. 3.14.no  company  with  him,thathemay  be  a.
Tit.  2.  8.  he  that  is  on  the  contrary  part  may  be  a.

1  Pet.  3.  16.  may  be  a.  that  falsely  accuse  your  good

Hot  be,  or  Be  not,  ASHAMED.

Num.  12. 14.  should  she  not  be  a.  seven  days  ?
Psal.  25.2.  O  my  God,  I  trust  in  thee,  let  me  net  be  a.

31. 17.  let  me  not  be  a.  O  Lord,  119.  116.

37.  19.  they  shall  not  be  a.  in  the  evil  time

119. 6.  then  shall  I  not  be  a.  when  I  have  respect  to
46.  1  will  speak  of  thy  testimonies,  and  not  be  a.
80.  let  my  heart  be  sound,  that  1  be  not  a.

127-  5.  they  shall  not  be  a.  but  shall  speak  with
Isa.  29.  22.  saith  the  Lord,  Jacob  shall  not  be  a.

45.  if.  ye  shall  not  be  a.  world  without  end
49.23.  they  shall  not  be  a.  that  wait  for  me

50. 7-  my  face  like  a  flint,  I  know  I  shall  not  be  a.

54.4.  fear  not,  for  thou  shalt  not  be  a.

Zeph.  3. 11.  in  that  day  shalt  thou  not  be  a.

Rom. 9.33.  who  believeth  on  him  shaWnot  be  a.  10.11.

2  Cor.  10.  8.  for  though  I  boast,  I  should  not  be  a.

2  Tim.  1.8  .be  not  therefore  a.  of  testimony  of  Lord
2. 15.  to  God,  a  workman  that  needeth  not  be  a.

I  Pet.  4. 16.  suffer  as  a  Christian,  let  him  not  be  a.

1  John  2. 28.  not  be  a.  before  him  at  his  coming

ASHES

Signifies,  The  remains  of  fuel  after  it  has  been
burned,  2  Pet.  2.  6.  They  denote,  [1]  The  frailty
and  extreme  vileness  of  man,  when  compared  with
his  Creator,  Gen.  18.  27.  [2]  Deep  humiliation ,
Esth.  4.  1.  Jonah  3.  6.

Gen.  18.  27.  to  speak,  which  am  but  dust  and  a.
Lev.  6. 10.  and  the  priest  shall  take  up  the  a.

11.  and  carry  forth  the  a.  without  the  camp
Num.  19.  9.  a  man  that  is  clean  shall  gather  the  a.

2  Sam.  13. 19.  Tamar  put  a.  on  her  head,  and  rent
l  Kings  13.3.  altar  shall  be  rent,  and  a.  poured  out
20.38.  the  prophet  disguised  himself  with  a.

.Esth,  4. 1.  Mordecai  put  on  sackcloth  with  a.

<3.  and  many  lay  in  sackcloth  and  a.

Job  2.  8.  Job  sat  down  among  the  a.

13.  12.  your  'emembrances  are  like  to  a.  your
30. 19.  into  mire,  I  am  become  like  dust  and  a.

42.  6.  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  a.
Psal.  20. 1 3.  and  turn  to  a.  thy  burnt- sacrifice
102.  9-  for  I  have  eaten  a.  like  bread,  and  mingled
147.  16.  he  sca.ttereth  the  hoar-frost  like  a.

Isa.  44.  20.  he  feedeth  on  a.  a  deceived  heart  turned
58.  5.  and  to  spread  sackcloth  and  a.  under  him
61.  3.  to  give  them  beauty  for  a.  the  oil  of  joy
Jer.  6.  26.  O  daughter,  wallow  thyself  in  a.

Lam.  3. 16.  he  hath  covered  me  with  a.

Ezek.  28.  18.  I  will  bring  thee  to  a.  on  the  earth
Dan.  9. 3.  I  set  my  face  to  seek  in  sackcloth  and  a.
Jonah  3. 6.  king  covered  with  sackcloth,  and  sat  in  a.
Mai.  4.  3.  the  wicked  shall  be  a.  under  your  feet
Mat.  11. 21.  if  works  were  done,  they  would  have
repented  long  ago  in  sackcloth  and  a.  Luke  10. 13.
Heb.  9. 13.  if  the  a.  of  an  heifer  sanctifieth  to  the
2  Pet.  2.  6.  and  turning  the'Hties  of  Sodom  into  a.
ASIDE!

2 Kings  4.  4.  said,  thou  shalt  set  a.  that  which  is  full
Job  1.  + 19.  came 'a  great  wind  from  a.  wilderness
Mark  7.  33.  he  took  him  a.  from  the  multitude
John  13. 4.  he  riseth  and  laid  a.  his  garment  [doth
Heb.  12.1.  let  us  lay  a.  every  weight,  and  sin  that
See  Go,  Gone.  Turn,  Went,  Lay.
ASK  \

Signifies,  [1]  To  inquire,  Gen.  32. 29‘E  Mark  9- 32.
[2]  To  require,  or  demand,  Gen.  34'.  12.  Dan.  2.
LO.  [3]  To  seek  counsel,  Isa.  30.  2.?  Hag.  2.  11.
[4]  To  pray,  John  15.  7.  Jam.  1.  6.  [5]  To  ex¬
pect,  Luke  12.  48.  [6]  To  salute.  1  Sam.  25. 1 5.
2  Sam.  8. 1 10.  [7]  To  lay  to  one's  charge,  Psal.
35.  +  11.

Gen.  32. 29.  wherefore  dost  thou  a.  after  my  name  ?

34.12.  a.  me  never  so  much  dowry  and  gift,  I  give
Deut.  4. 32.  for  a.  now  of  the  days  that  are  past

13. 14.  shall  a.  diligently,  and  if  it  be  truth
32.  7-  a.  thy  father,  and  he  will  shew  thee
Josh.  4.  6.  when  your  children  a.  their  fathers,  21.
Judy.  18.  5.  a.  counsel,  we  pray  thee,  of  God
'  Sam.  10.  t  4.  and  they  will  a.  thee  of  peace
'2.  19.  we  have  added  this  evil  to  a.  us  a  king


1  Sam  .25.  +  5.  a.  him  in  name  of  peace,  g  Sam.  8.  + 10.
28.  16.  why  dost  thou  a.  of  me,  seeing  the  Lord

2  Sam.  14.  18.  hide  not  from  me  the  thing  I  a.

1  Kings  3.  5.  a.  what  I  shall  give  thee,  2  Chron.  1.  7-

14.  5.  the  wife  of  Jeroboam  cometh  to  a.  thee

2  Kings  2.  9.  Elijah  said,  a.  what  I  shall  do  for  thee
2  Chron.  20.  4.  Judah  gathered  to  a.  help  of  God
Job  12.  7-  a.  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  teach  thee
Psal.  2. 8.  a.  of  me,  and  1  will  give  thee  the  heathen
Isa.  7-  H.  a.  thee  a  sign  of  I  ord,  a.  it  of  the  depth

12.  I  will  not  a.  nor  will  I  tempt  the  Lord
45.  11.  saith  the  Lord,  a.  me  of  things  to  come
58.  2.  they  a.  of  me  the  ordinances  of  justice
Jer.  6.  16.  a.  for  the  old  paths,  and  walk  therein

15.  5.  who  shall- go  aside,  to  a.  what  thou  dost
18.  13.  a.  ye  now  among  the  heathen  who  heard
30.  6.  a.  and  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail

38.  14. 1  will  a.  thee  a  thing,  hide  nothing  from  me
48.  19.  a.  him  that  fleeth,  and  her  that  escapeth
50.  5.  they  shall  a.  the  way  to  Zion  with  their  faces
Lam.  4.  4.  the  young  children  a.  bread,  and  no  man
Dan.  6.  7.  who  shall  a.  a  petition  of  any  God,  12.
Hos.  4.  12.  my  people  a.  counsel  at  their  stocks
Hag.  2.  11.  a.  now  the  priests  concerning  the  law
Zech.  10.  1.  a.  ye  of  the  Lord  rain  in  time  of  latter
Mat.  6.  8.  what  ye  1-ave  need  of,  before  ye  a.  him
7-  7-  a.  and  it  shall  be  given  you,  Luke  11.  9.

9.  whatmanofyou,ifhissona.  bread,  Luke  11.  11 .
11.  shall  give  good  things  to  them  that  a.  him
14. 7.  promised  to  give  her  whatsoever  she  would  a.

'  18.  19.  agree  touching  any  thing  they  shall  a.

20.  22.  ye  know  not  what  ye  a.  Mark  10.  38.
21.22.  whatsoever  ye  a.  in  prayer,  believingye  shall

22.  46.  nor  durst  any  man  a.  him  more  questions,

Mark  12.  34.  Luke  20.  40.
Mark  6.  22.  a.  what  thou  wilt,  I  will  give  thee,  23.
9.  32.  they  were  afraid  to  a.  him,  Luke  9.  45.
Luke  6.  30.  taketh  thy  goods,  a.  them  not  again

11.  13.  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  a.  him

12.  48.  much  committed,  of  him  they  will  a.  more
John  1. 19.  when  the  Jews  sent  priests  to  a.  him

9.  21.  we  know  not,  he  is  of  age,  a.  him,  23.

11.  22.  whatsoever  thou  wilt  a.  of  God,  he  will

13.  24.  Peter  beckoned  to  him  that  he  should  a.

14.  13.  whatsoever  ye  a.  in  my  name,  15.  16.

14.  if  ye  a.  any  thing  in  my  name  I  will  do  it

15.  7.  it  ye  abide  in  me,  a.  what  ye  will,  it  shall  be

16.  19.  Jesus  knew  that  they  were  desirous  to  a.

23.  and  in  that  day  ye  shall  a.  me  nothing  [full

24.  a.  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be
30.  and  needest  not  that  any  man  should  a.  thee

18.  21.  a.  them  which  heard  me  what  I  said
Acts  10.  29.  I  a.  therefore  for  what  intent  ye  sent
1  Cor.  14.  35.  let  them  a.  their  husbands  at  home
Eph.  3.  20.  to  do  above  all  that  we  can  a.  or  think
Jam.  1.  5.  if  any  lack  wisdom,  let  him  a.  of  God

6.  but  let  him  a.  in  faith,  nothing  wavering

4.  2.  yet  ye  have  not,  because  ye  a.  not

3.  ye  a.  and  receive  not,  because  ye  a.  amiss
1  John  3. 22.  whatsoever  we  a.  we  receive  of  him

5.  14.  if  we  a.  any  thing  according  to  his  will

15.  if  we  know  he  heareth  us,  whatsoever  we  a.

16.  sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall  a.

■tee  Counsel.

ASKED.  ,

Gen.  32. 29.  Jacob  a.  him  and  said,  tell  me  thy  name
43.  7.  the  man  a.  us  straitly  of  our  kindred
Josh.  19.  50.  they  gave  him  the  city  which  he  a.
Judg.  5.  25.  he  a.  water,  she  gave  him  milk

13.  6.  but  I  a.  him  not  whence  he  was
18.  f  15.  a.  him  of  peace,  1  Sam.  17.  t  22.  |  30.  +21.
1  Sam.  1.  17.  God  grant  the  petition  thou  hast  a.

+  20.  she  called  his  name  Samuel,  that  is  a.  of  God
27.  the  Lord  hath  given  me  my  petition  I  a.

1  Kings  3. 11.  because  thou  a.  this  thing  and  not  a.

2  Kings  2. 10.  he  said,  thou  hast  a.  a  hard  thing
Ezra  5.  10.  we  a.  their  names  to  certify  thee

Job  21.  29.  have  ye  not  a.  them  that  go  by  the  way  ?
Psal.  21.  4.  he  a.  life  of  thee,  thou  gavest  him
35.  + 11.  they  a.  me  things  that  I  knew  not
105.  40.  the  people  a.  and  he  brought  quails
Isa.  30.  2.  and  have  not  a.  at  my  mouth
41.  28.  when  I  a.  of  them,  could  answer  a  word
65.  1.  I  am  sought  of  them  that  a.  not  for  me
Dan.  2.  10.  there  is  no  king  that  a.  such  things
7-  16.  I  came  and  a.  him  the  truth  of  all  this  [18.
Mat.  16. 13.  he  a.  his  disciples,  Mark 8.  27.  Luke  9.
22. 23.  Sadduceesa.him,35.  Mar. 9. 11.  1 10.2.  I  12.18
Luke  18.  40.  when  come  near  he  a.  what  wilt  thou
John  4.  10.  thou  wouldest  have  a.  of  him

16.  24.  hitherto  have  ye  a.  nothing  in  my  name
Rom.  10.  20.  made  manifest  to  them  that  a.  not
ASKEST.

Judg.  13.  18.  why  a.  thou  thus  after  my  name  ?
John  4.  9.  a.  drink  of  me,  a  woman  of  Samaria
18.  21.  why  a.  thou  me,  ask  them  which  heard
ASKETH.

Exod.  13.  14.  thy  son  a.  thee  in  time,  Deut.  6.  20.
Mic.  7.  3.  prince  a.  and  the  judge  a.  for  a  reward
Mat.  5.  42.  give  to  him  that  a.  thee,  Luke  6.  30.

7.  8.  every  one  that  a.  receiveth,  Luke  11.  10.
John  16.  5.  none  of  you  a.  me,  whither  goest  thou  ?
1  Pet.  3. 15.  to  every  one  that  a.  you  a  reason  of  hope
ASKING.

1  Sam.  12. 17.  may  see  your  wickedness  in  a.  a  king
1  Chron.  10. 13.  Saul  died  for  a.  counsel  of  a  familiar
Psal.  78.  18.  tempted  God  by  a.  meat  for  their  lust
Luke  2.  46.  hearing  them,  and  a.  them  questions
John  8.  7-  they  continued  a.  he  lifted  up  himself
1  Cor.  10.  25.  a.  no  question  for  conscience,  27.
ASLEEP

Signifies,  [1]  To  take  rest  in  sleep,  Jonah  1.  5.

Mat.  26.  40.  [2]  To  die.  Acts  7-  60.  2  Pet.  3.  4.
Judg.  4.  21.  for  Sisera  was  fast  a.  and  weary
Cant.  7.  9.  the  lips  of  those  that  are  a.  to  speak
Jonah  1.  5.  but  Jonah  lay,  and  was  fast  a.

Mat.  8.  24.  arose  a  storm,  but  he  was  a.  Mark  4.  38.
26.  40.  he  findeth  the  disciples  a.  Mark  14.  40.
Acts  7.  60.  when  Stephen  had  said  this,  he  fell  a.

1  Cor.  15.  6.  part  remain,  but  some  are  fallen  a.

18.  then  they  which  are  fallen  a.  in  Christ
1  Thess.  4.  13.  ignorant  concerning  them  that  are  a.


1  Di.  4, 15.  we  alive  shall  not  prevent  them  that  are  a

2  Pet.  3.  4.  for  since  the  fathers  fell  a.  all  things

ASP,  S.

Deut.  32.  33.  their  wine  is  the  cruel  venom  of  a.
Job  20.  14.  his  meat  is  the  gall  of  a.  within  him
16.  he  shall  suck  the  poison  of  a.  the  viper’s  tongue
Isa.  11.  8.  the  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  a.
Rom.  3.  13.  the  poison  of  a.  is  under  their  lips
ASSAULT,  ED.

Esth.  8. 11.  to  cause  to  perish  all  that  would  a.  them
Acts  14.  5.  when  there  was  ana.  made  of  the  Gentiles

17.  5.  they  a.  the  house  of  Jason,  and  sought  to
ASSAY,  ED,  1NG.

Deut.  4.  34.  hath  God  a.  to  go  and  take  a  nation
1  Sam.  17.  39-  David  a.  to  go,  for  he  had  not  proved
Job  4.2.  if  we  a.  to  commune  with  thee,  wilt  thou
Acts  9.  26.  Saul  a.  to  join  himself  to  the  disciples
16.  7.  they  a.  to  go  to  Bithynia,  but  the  Spirit
Heb.  11. 29.  the  Egyptians  a.  to  do,  were  drowned
ASS.  [his  a.

Gen.  22.  3.  Abraham  rose  up  early,  and  saddled
5.  abide  you  here  with  the  a.  and  I  and  the  lad
49.  14.  Issachar  is  a  strong  a.  couching  between
Exod.  13.  13.  every  firstling  of  an  a.  redeem  with
23.  4.  if  thou  meet  thine  enemy’s  a.  going  astray

12.  shalt  rest ;  that  thine  ox  and  thine  a  may  rest
Num.  16.  15. 1  have  not  taken  one  a.  from  them
22.  23.  the  a.  saw  the  angel  standing,  25.  27.

28.  the  Lord  opened  the  mouth  of  the  a  .

30.  the  a.  said  to  Balaam,  am  not  I  thine  a.  ?
Deut.  22.  10.  not  plow  with  an  ox  and  a.  together
Josh.  15. 18.  and  A chsah  lighted  oflfhera.  Caleb  said,
what  wilt  thou  ?  Judg.  1.  14.  1  Sam.  25.  23.
Judg.  15.  16.  with  the  jaw  bone  of  an  a.  heaps

1  Kings  13.  28.  the  lion  had  not  tom  the  a.

2  Kings  6.  25.  until  an  a.  head  sold  for  80  pieces
Job  24. 3.  they  drive  away  the  a.  of  the  fatherless
Prov.  26.  3.  a  bridle  for  the  a.  and  a  rod  for  fool’s
Isa.  1.  3.  ox  his  owner,  and  the  a.  his  master’s  <  rib

32.  20.  that  send  forth  the  feet  of  the  ox  and  a.

Jer.  22.  19.  shall  be  buried  with  the  burial  of  an  a.
Zech.  9.  9.  thy  king  cometh  lowly,  riding  on  an  a
and  on  a  colt  the  foal  of  an  a.  Mat.  21. 5.

14. 15.  and  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  a.

Mat.  21.  2.  ye  shall  find  an  a.  tied,  and  a  colt
Luke  13.  15.  doth  not  each  loose  his  a.  on  sabbath

14.  5.  which  of  you  shall  have  an  a.  fallen  into  pit
John  12. 14.  when  he  had  found  a  young  a.  sat

2  Pet.  2. 16.  the  dumb  a.  speaking  forbad  madness
See  Saddle.

.ASS’S  COLT.

Gen.  49. 11.  binding  his  a.  colt  to  the  choice  vine
Job  11.  12.  though  man  be  bern  like  a  wild  a.  colt
John  12.  15.  thy  king  cometh  sitting  on  an  a.  colt
Wild  ASS

Job  6.  5.  doth  the  wild  a.  bray  when  he  hath  grass  ?

39.  5.  who  hath  sent  out  the  wild  a.  free  ?

Jer.  2.  24.  a  wild  a.  used  to  the  wilderness  snuffeth
Hos.  8.  9.  they  are  gone,  a  wild  a.  alone  by  himself
ASSES.

Gen.  12. 16.  Abram  had  he-a.  and  she  a,  and  camels
30.  43.  Jacob  had  much  cattle,  camels,  and  a.

36.  24.  as  he  fed  the  a.  of  Zibeon  his  father
47. 17-  Joseph  gave  bread  in  exchange  for  a.

Judg.  5.  10.  speak,  ye  that  ride  on  white  a.

1  Sam.  8.  16.  he  will  take  your  a.  to  work
9.  3.  the  a.  of  Kish,  Saul’s  father,  were  lost

20.  thy  a.  that  were  lost,  they  are  found,  10.  2.

2  Sam.  16.  2.  the  a.  be  for  the  king’s  household

1  Chron.  27-  30.  and  over  the  a.  was  Jebdeiah

2  Chron.  28. 15.  carried  the  feeble  of  them  upon  a.
Ezra  2.  67.  a.  that  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  6720.

Neh.  7.  69

Job  42.  12.  for  Job  had  sheep,  and  a  thousand  she-a.
Isa.  21.  7-  he  saw  a  chariot  of  a.  and  of  camels
Ezek.  23.  20.  whose  flesh  is  as  the  flesh  of  a.

Wild  ASSES.

Job  24.  5.  as  wild  a.  in  the  desert  go  they  forth
Psal.  104. 11.  the  wild  a.  quench  their  thirst
Isa.  32. 14.  the  forts  shall  be  a  joy  of  wild  a.

Jer.  14.  6.  wild  a.  snuffed  up  the  wind  like  dragons
Dan.  5.  21.  N ebuchadnezzar’s  dwell,  waswith  w.  a ,
Young  ASSES.

Isa.  30.  6.  they  will  carry  their  riches  on  young  a.
24.  y.  a.  that  ear  the  ground  shall  eat  provender
ASSEMBLE.

Num.  10.  3.  when  they  blow,  the  assembly  shall  a
2  Sam.  20.  4.  a.  me  the  men  of  Judah,  and  be  here
Isa.  11.  12.  he  shall  a.  the  outcasts  of  Israel
45. 20.  a.  yourselves,  and  come,  draw  near  together
48. 14.  all  ye  a.  yourselves  and  hear
Jer.  4.  5.  a.  yourselves,  and  let  us  go  into  the  cities

8.  14.  why  do  we  sit  still  ?  a.  yourselves,  let  us
Ezek.  11.  17. 1  will  a.  you  out  of  the  countries
39.  17*  a.  yourselves,  gather  to  my  sacrifice
Hos.  7.  14.  they  a.  themselves  for  corn  and  wine
Joel  2. 16.  a.  the  elders,  gather  the  children

3.  11.  a.  yourselves  and  come,  all  ye  heathen
Amos  3.  9.  a.  yourselves  on  the  mount  of  Samaria
Mic.  2. 12.  I  will  surely  a.  O  Jacob,  all  of  thee

4.  6.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  a.  her  that  halteth
Zeph.  3.  8.  I’ll  a.  the  kingdoms  to  pour  indignation

ASSEMBLED.

Exod.  38. 8.  women  which  a.  atthe  doorof  the  taber.
1  Sam.  2.  22.  they  lay  with  the  women  that  a.

1  Chron.  15.  4.  David  a.  the  children  of  Aaron

2  Chron.  30.  13.  a.  much  people  to  keep  the  feast
Ezra  9-  4.  then  a.  to  me  every  one  that  trembled

10. 1.  when  Ezra  had  prayed,  there  a.  to  him
Neh.  9.  1.  the  children  of  Israel  a.  with  fasting
Psal.  48.  4.  lo  the  kings  were  a.  they  passed  by
Isa.  43.  9.  let  the  people  be  a.  whq  can  dec  lare  this
Jer.  5. 7-  a.  themselves  by  troops  in  harlots’  houses
Dan.  6. 11.  these  men  a.  and  found  Daniel  praying
Mat.  28. 12.  when  they  a.  they  gave  large  money
John  20. 19.  the  disciples  a.  for  fear  of  the  Jews
Acts  1.  4.  being  a.  commanded  them  not  to  depart
4.  31.  the  place  was  shaken  where  they  were  a.

11.  26.  a  whole  year  they  a.  with  the  church

15.  25.  it  seemed  good  to  us  a.  with  one  accord

ASSEMBLING.

Heb.  10. 25.  forsake  not  the  a.  yourselves  together


AST


ATT


A  U  T


ASSEMBLY.

Gen.  28.  +  3.  that  thou  mayest  be  an  a.  of  people
49.  6.  to  their  a.  m-ine  honour  be  not  thou  united
Exod.  12.  6.  the  whole  a.  shall  kill  it  in  the  even
16.  3.  to  kill  this  whole  a.  with  hunger
Lev.  4.  13.  the  thing  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  the  a.
Num.  10.  2.  and  make  2  trumpets  for  calling  the  a.
20. 6.  Moses  and  Aaron  went  from  presence  of  a.
Deut.  9- 10.  spake  in  the  mount  out  of  the  midst  of
the  fire,  in  the  day  of  your  a.  10.  4. 1  18.  16.
Judg.  21.8.  none  from  Jabesh-Gilead  to  the  a.

1  Sam.  17.47.  all  th  s  a.  shall  know  the  Lordsaveth

2  C/iTon.  30.  23.  the  whole  a.  took  counsel  to  keep
Neh.  5.  7»  1  set  a  great  a.  against  them

Psal.  22. 16.  the  a  of  the  wicked  have  inclosed  me
89.  7-  God  is  to  be  feared  in  the  a.  of  the  saints
107.  32.  praise  him  in  the  a.  of  the  elders
111.  1.  1  w  11  praise  him  in  the  a.  of  the  upright
Prov.  5. 14.  1  was  in  all  evil  in  the  midst  ot  the  a.
Jer. 6.  11.  I  will  pour  it  on  the  a.  of  young  men

19.  2.  for  they  be  an  a.  of  treacherous  men
15. 17.  1  sat  notin  the  a.  of  the  mockers
Lam.  2. 6.  he  hath  destroyed  the  places  ot  the  a.
Ezek.  13.  9.  they  shall  not  be  in  the  a.  of  my  people
23.  24.  shall  come  against  Aholibah  with  an  a.
Acts  19-  32.  the  a.  was  confused,  and  part  knew  not
39.  it  shall  be  determined  in  a  lawful  a.

41.  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  dismissed  the  a.

Heb.  12.  23.  to  the  general  a.  of  the  first  born
Jam.  2. 2.  if  there  come  to  your  a.  a  man
Solemn  ASSEMBLY.

Lev.  23.  36.  on  the  eighth  day  it  is  a  solemn  a.  Num.

29.  35.  Neh.  8.  18.
Dent.  16. 8.  on  the  se  venth  day  a  solentn  a.  to  the  Lord
HKin.  10.20.  Jehu  said,  proclaim  a  solemna.  for  Baal
2  Chr.  7.  9.  in  the  eighth  day  they  made  a  solemn  a.
Joel  1. 14.  sanctify  a  fast,  call  a  solemn  a.  2.  15.
Zevh.  3. 18.  them  that  are  sorrowful  for  the  solemna.
ASSEMBLIES.

Psal.  86. 14.  the  a.  of  violent  men  sought  my  soul
Eccl.  12. 11.  as  nails  fastened  by  the  masters  of  a.
Isa.  1.  13.  the  calling  of  a.  I  cannot  away  with
4.  5.  God  will  create  on  her  a.  a  cloud  and  smoke

14.  1 31.  he  shall  not  be  alone  in  his  a.

Etek.  44. 24.  they  shall  keep  my  laws  in  all  mine  a.
I  Amos  5.  21.  I  will  not  smell  in  your  solemn  a.
ASSENT,  ED.

2  Chron.  18. 12.  declare  good  to  the  king  with  one  a.
I  Luke  23.  t  24.  Pilate  a.  it  should  be  as  they  required
l  Acts  HA.  9.  Jews  also  a.  that  these  things  were  so
ASSIGNED.

Gen.  47.  22.  for  the  priests  had  a  portion  a.  them
'  Josh.  20.  8.  thev  a.  Eezer  a  city  of  refuge
2  Sam.  11.  16.  ne  a.  Uriah  to  a  place  he  knew
ASSIST.

Rom.  16. 2.  that  ye  eu  her  in  whatsoever  business
ASSOCIATE.  [pieces

Isa.  8.  9.  a.  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be  broken  in
Dan.  11.  f  6.  at  the  end  of  years  they  shall  a.

AS  SOON.

Exod.  9.  29.  a.  as  I  am  gone  out  of  the  city
2  Chron.  31. 5.  a.  as  the  commandment  came  abroad
Psal.  18.  44.  a.  as  they  hear  of  me,  shall  obey  me
Isa.  66.  8.  a.  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth
Luke  1. 44.  a.  as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation  sounded
8.  6.  a.  as  it  was  sprung  up,  it  withered  away
John  18. 6.  a.  as  he  said,  I  am  he,  they  went  back
Acts  10.  29.  therefore  came  I  a.  as  I  was  sent  for
12.  18.  a.  as  it  was  day  there  was  no  small  stir
Rev.  10. 10.  a.  as  I  had  eaten  it,  my  belly  was  bitter
12.  4.  for  to  devour  the  child  a.  as  it  was  born
ASSURANCE.

Deut.  28.  66.  thou  shalt  have  none  a.  of  thy  life
Isa.  32.  17-  and  the  effect  of  righteousness,  a.

Acts  17.  31.  whereof  he  hath  given  a.  to  all  men
Col.  2. 2.  to  all  riches  of  the  full  a.  of  understanding
1  Thess.  1.  5.  our  gospel  came  in  much  a.

Heb.  6.  11.  to  the  full  a.  of  hope  to  the  end

10.  22.  let  us  draw  near  in  full  a.  of  faith
ASSURE.

1  John  3.  19.  and  shall  a.  our  hearts  before  him
ASSURED.

Lev.  27. 19.  add  the  fifth,  and  it  shall  be  a.  to  him
Jer.  14. 13. 1  will  give  you  a.  peace  in  this  place
Rom.  14. 1 5.  let  every  one  be  fully  a.  in  his  mind
2  Tim.  3.  14.  continue  in  things  thou  hast  been  a.
ASSUREDLY.

1  Sam.  28.  1,  know  a.  thou  shalt  go  out  with  me
1  Kings  1. 13.  a.  Solomon  thy  son  snail  reign,  17, 30.
Jer.  32.  41. 1  will  plant  them  in  this  land  a.

38.  17.  if  thou  a.  go  forth  to  the  king  of  Babylon
49. 12.  they  have  a.  drunken,  and  shalt  thou  go
Acts  2.  36  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  a.

16. 10.  a.  gathering  that  the  Lord  had  called  us
ASSNVAGE,  ED.

Gen.  8.  1.  over  the  earth,  and  the  waters  were  a.
Job  16.  5.  moving  of  my  lips  should  a.  your  grief

6.  though  I  speak,  yet  my  grief  .s  not  a.

ASTON  I  ED.

Ezra  9.  3.  plucked  off  the  hair,  and  sat  down  a.

Job  17. 8.  upright  men  shall  be  a.  at  this
18.  20.  they  that  come  after  him  shall  be  a.

Ezek.  4.  17.  that  they  may  be  a.  one  with  another
Dan.  3. 24.  N  ebuchadnezzar  was  a.  and  rose  in  haste
4.  19.  then  Daniel  was  a.  for  one  hour
5.  9.  his  countenance  was  changed,  his  lords  a.
ASTONISHED.

Lev.  26.  32.  and  your  enemies  shall  be  a.

1  Kings  9.  8.  every  one  that  passeth  by  shall  be  a.

Jer.  18. 16.  1 19. 8.  1 49. 17-  I  50. 13.
Job  26.  11.  the  pillars  of  heaven  tremble  and  are  a.
Isa.  52. 14.  as  many  were  a.  at  thee,  his  visage
Jer.  2. 12.  be  a.  O  ye  heavens,  at  this
4.  9.  the  heart  of  the  priests  shall  be  a.

14.  9.  why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  man  a.

Ezek.  3.  15.  I  remained  a.  among  them  seven  days
26. 16.  shall  tremble  at  every  moment,  and  be  a.
28.  19.  they  that  know  thee  shall  be  a.  at  thee
8.  27.  I  Daniel  was  a.  at  the  vision
Mat.  7.  28.  the  people  were  a.  at  his  doctrine,  22.  33.

Mark  1.  22.  1  6.  2.  I  11.  18.  I.uke  4.  32.
Mark  5.  42.  they  were  a.  with  great  astonishment


Mark  7. 37.  and  were  beyond  measure  a.  10.  26.

10.  24.  the  disciples  were  a.  at  his  words
Luke  2. 47.  a.  at  nis  understanding  and  answers^

5.  9.  he  was  a.  at  the  draught  of  fishes
8.  56.  her  parents  were  a.  but  he  charged  them
24. 22.  yea,  and  certain  women  also  made  us  a.

Acts  9.  6.  Saul  trembling  and  a.  said,  Lord,  what

10.  45.  of  the  circumcision  which  believed,  were  a.

12. 16.  had  opened  door  and  saw  Peter, they  were  a.

13. 12.  the  deputy  when  he  saw,  belie’,  ed,  being  a.

ASTONISHMENT.

Detit.  28.  28.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  a.

37.  thou  shalt  become  an  a.  and  a  proverb
2  Chr.  7. 21.  this  house  shall  be  an  a.  to  every  one
29.  8.  he  hath  delivered  them  to  a.  and  hissing
Psal.  60.  3.  hast  made  us  to  drink  the  wine  of  a.

Jer.  5. +  30.  a.  is  committed  in  the  land
8.  21.  I  am  black,  a.  hath  taken  hold  on  me

25. 9.  I  will  make  them  an  a.  and  a  hissing,  18.

11.  this  whole  land  shall  be  a  desolation  and  a.

29. 18.  I’ll  deliver  them  to  be  a  curse  and  an  a.

42. 18.  ye  shall  be  an  execration  and  an  a.  44. 12.

44.  22.  therefore  is  your  land  an  a.  and  a  curse
51.  37.  Babylon  shall  become  heaps  and  an  a.

Ezek.  4.  16.  son  of  man,  behold,  they  shall  drink

water  by  measure,  and  with  a.  12.  19.

5. 15.  it  shall  be  an  a.  to  the  nations  about  thee
23.  33.  thou  shalt  be  filled  with  the  cup  of  a.

Zech.  12.  4.  I  will  smite  every  horse  with  a.

Astray;  see  Went,  Go,  Gone.
ASTROLOGERS.

Isa.  47. 13.  let  now  the  a.  the  star-gazers,  stand
Dan.  1. 20.  he  found  them  ten  times  better  than  a.

2.  27.  the  secret  cannot  the  a.  shew  to  the  king
4.  7.  then  came  in  the  magicians  and  the  a.

5. 7  the  king  cried  aloud,  to  bring  in  the  a.

Asunder  ;  see  Cleave,  Cut,  Divide,  Put.

AS  WELL.

Lev.  24. 16.  as  well  the  stranger,  as  he  that  is  born  in
22.  one  law,a.rwe//for  the  stranger, as  for  your
Deut.  20. 8.  lest  his  brethrens’  heart  faint,  as  well  as
2  Sam.  11.  25.  the  sword  devours  one  as  well  as

[another

1  Chr.  25.  8.  they  cast  lots,  as  well  the  small  as  great

2  Chr.  31. 15.  to  give  as  well  to  the  great  as  the  small
Job  ltf.3.  but  I  have  understanding  as  well  as  you
Psal.  87.7.  as  well  the  singers  as  the  players  shall  be
Acts  10. 47.  who  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as

1  Cor.  9. 5.  to  lead  about  a  sister  as  well  as  other  apos.

Heb.  4. 2.  to  us  the  gospel  preached  as  well  as  to  tnem

ATE.

Psal.  106. 28.  they  a.  the  sacrifices  of  the  dead
Dan.  10.  3.  I  a.  no  pleasant  bread  nor  flesh
Rev.  10. 10.  I  took  tne  little  book,  and  a.  it  up
ATHIRST.

Judg.  15. 18.  Samson  was  sore  a.  and  called  on  Lord
Ruth  2.  9.  when  a.  go  to  the  vessels  and  drink
Mat.  25.  44.  when  saw  we  thee  a.  or  a  stranger
Rev.  21. 6.  I’ll  give  to  him  that  is  a.  of  fountain

22. 17.  Spirit  and  bride  say,  let  him  that  is  a.  come

ATONEMENT

Signifies,  [1]  Reconciliation,  or  appeasing  of  anger,

Rom.  5. 1.  [2]  A  ransom.  Job  33. 1  24.

Exod.  29.  33.  eat  things  wherewith  a.  was  made

36.  thou  shalt  offer  a  bullock  every  day  for  a.

37.  seven  days  thou  shalt  make  a.  for  the  altar

30. 10.  Aaron  once  in  year  shall  make  a.  upon  it

15.  to  make  an  a.  for  your  souls.  Lev.  17.  11.

16.  thou  shalt  take  the  a.  money  of  Israel
32. 30.  peradventure  I  shall  make  an  a.  for  sin

Lev.  1.  4.  it  shall  be  accepted  for  him  to  make  a.

4.  20.  the  priest  shall  make  an  a.  for  them,  and
be  forgiven,  26.  31.  35. 1  5. 6. 1  6.  7- 1 12.  8.

I  14.  18.  Num.  15.  25.

8.  34.  so  the  Lord  hath  commanded  to  make  a,

9.7*  make  a.  for  thyself  and  for  them,  16.  24.

10. 17.  God  hath  given  it  you  to  make  a.  for  them
12.  7-  make  an  a.  for  her,  and  she  shall  be  clean
14. 53.  make  an  a.  for  the  house,  it  shall  be  clean

16. 10.  the  scape  goat  shall  be  presented  to  make  a.

11.  Aaron  shall  make  an  a.  for  himself  and  house

16.  he  shall  make  an  a.  for  the  holy  place

17.  shall  be  no  man  there,  when  he  maketh  a.

18.  he  shall  go  and  make  a.  for  the  altar

27.  whose  blood  was  brought  in  to  make  a.

33.  he  shall  make  a.  for  the  holy  sanctuary

34.  everlasting  statute  to  make  a.  once  a  year
23.  27.  tenth  day  of  7th  month  shall  be  a  day  of  a.

28.  do  no  work,  for  it  is  a  day  of  a.  to  make  a.

25.  9.  in  the  day  of  a.  make  the  trumpets  sound

Num.  8. 21.  made  a.  for  the  Levites  to  cleanse  them

19.  given  the  Levites  to  make  a.  for  Israel
16. 46.  go  quickly,  make  a.  for  wrath  is  gone  out

25. 13.  Phinehas  have  it,  because  he  made  an  a.

28.  22.  a  goat  for  a  sin-offering  to  make  a.  30.

29.  5.  a  kid  of  the  goats  to  make  an  a.  for  you
31.  50.  ear-rings  to  make  an  a.  for  our  souls

2  Sam.  21. 3.  wherewith  shall  I  make  the  a.?

1  Chron.  6. 49.  Aaron  and  sons  appointed  to  make  a.

2  Chr.  29. 24.  the  priests  killed  them  to  make  an  a.

Neh.  10.  33.  ordinances  for  offering  to  make  an  a.

Job  33.+  24.  deliver  him,  I  have  found  an  a.

R  m.  5.  11.  by  whom  we  have  now  received  a.

ATTAIN.

Psal.  139.  6.  it  is  high,  I  cannot  a.  unto  it.  _

Prov.  1.  5.  man  of  understanding  shall  a.  to  wisdom  Rom.
Ezek.  46. 7 •  according  as  his  hand  shall  a.  to  it  j  i  Cor:

JIos.  8.  5.  how  long  ere  they  a.  to  innocency  ?  [2  M,

Acts  27. 12.  if  they  might  a.  to  Pbenice  ,4  cs!~k  I
Phil.  3. 11. 1  might  a.  to  the  resurrection  of  "m

ATTAINED.

Gen.  47.  9.  and  have  not  a.  to  the  dai^  of  fiiy  father
Lev.  25.  +  26.  his  hand  hath  a.  ancLlouM'kuffici'

2  Sam.  23. 19.  howbeit  he  a.  ndtMo  *

m

law  0


ess


Rom.  0.  30.  the  Gentile
31.  Israel  hath  null

\Phil.  3. 12.  not  aslliouglvT  had  already  a.  Pluperfect
16.  whereto  Mel  .  MM  r  -

1  Tim.  1.  Ggood  doctrine, ^whereto  thou  i;.,  t

\Esth.  A: 5.  flatacttwjj^n  i,e  appointed  to  a.  her


Psal.  17.  1.  O  Lord,  a.  to  my  cry,  61. 1.  1 142.  6
55.  2.  a.  to  me,  hear  me,  I  mourn  and  make  a  noue
86.  6.  and  a.  to  the  voice  of  my  supplication
Prov.  4.  1.  hear  and  a.  to  know  understanding
20.  my  son,  a.  to  my  words,  incline  thine  ear,  7. 24.
5.  1.  my  son  a.  to  my  wisdom,  and  bow  thine  ear
1  Cor.  7. 35.  may  a.  on  the  Lord  without  distraction
ATTENDANCE.

1  Kings  10. 5.  saw  the  a.  of  his  ministers,  2  Chr.  9. 4.

1  Tim.  4.  13.  till  I  come,  give  a.  to  reading
Heb.  7. 13.  of  which  no  man  gave  a.  at  the  altar

ATTENDED.

Job  32.  12. 1  a.  to  you,  none  of  you  convinced  Job
Psal.  66.  19.  he  hath  a.  to  the  voice  of  my  prayer
Acts  16.  14.  she  a.  to  the  things  spoken  by  Paul
ATTENDING.

Rom.  13.6.  ministers  a.  continually  on  this  very  thing
ATTEND.

2  Chron.  6.  40.  let  thine  ears  be  a.  to  the  prayer

7.  15.  mine  ears  shall  be  a.  to  the  prayer  made

ATTENTIVE.

Neh.  1.  6.  let  thine  ear  now  be  a.  11.  Psal.  130.  2.

8.  3.  the  ears  of  the  people  were  a.  Luke  19.  48.

ATTENTIVELY.

Job  37.  2.  hear  a.  the  noise  of  his  voice  and  sound
ATTIRE,  ED.

Lev.  16.  4.  with  the  linen  mitre  shall  Aaron  be  a.
Prov.  7.  10.  met  him  a  woman  with  a.  of  an  harlot
Jer.  2.  32.  can  a  bride  forget  her  a.?  yet  my  people
Ezek.  23. 15.  exceeding  in  dyed  a.  on  their  heads
AT'l  RIBUTED.

Job  1.  +  22.  Job  sinned  not,  nor  a.  folly  to  God
A  VAILETH.

Esth.  5. 13.  yet  all  this  a.  me  nothing  so  long  as  I  see
Gal.  5.  6.  ill  Christ  circumcision  a.  not,  6.  15.

Jam.  5.  16.  the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  a.  much
AUDIENCE.

Gen.  23. 13.  A  braham  spake  to  Ephron  in  a.  of  people
Exod.  24.  7.  took  book  of  covenant,  and  read  in  a.

1  Sam.  25.  24.  let  thine  handmaid  speak  in  thy  a.

1  Chron.  28.  8.  in  the  a.  of  our  God  keep  and  seek
Neh.  13.  1.  thev  read  in  the  book  of  Moses  in  the  a.
Luke  7-1.  endedall  his  sayings  in  the  a.  of  the  people
20. 45.  in  a.  of  the  people  he  said  to  his  disciples
Acts  13.  16.  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear  God,  give  a.

15.  12.  then  all  the  multitude  gave  a.  to  Barnabas
22.  22.  and  they  gave  him  a.  to  this  word

AVENGE.

Lev.  19.  18.  thou  shalt  not  a.  nor  bear  grudge
26.  25.  that  shall  a.  the  quarrel  of  my  covenant
Num.  31.  2.  a.  Israel  of  tne  Midianites,  3.

Deut.  32.  43.  he  will  a.  the  blood  of  his  servants

1  Sam.  24. 12.  the  Lord  judge  and  a.  me  of  thee

2  Kings  9. 7.  smite  the  house  of  Ahab,  that  I  may  a.
Esth.  8. 13.  Jews  a.  themselves  on  their  enemies
Isa.  1.  24.  I  will  a.  me  of  mine  enemies

Jer.  46.  10.  a  day  of  vengeance  that  he  may  a.

Hos.  1.  4.  I  will  a.  the  blood  of  Jezreel  on  Jehu
Luke  18.  3.  saying,  a.  me  of  mine  adversary

7.  shall  not  Goa  a.  his  own  elect,  who  cry  day

8.  I  tell  you  that  he  will  a.  them  speedily
Rom.  12.  19.  beloved,  a.  not  yourselves,  but  give
Rev.'d.  10.  how  long  dost  thou  not  a.  our  blood

AVENGED.

Gen.  4.  24.  if  Cain  should  be  a.  seven  fold,  Lamech
Exod.  21.  +  20.  and  he  die,  he  shall  be  surely  a.
Josh.  10. 13.  sun  and  moon  stayed  till  people  had  a.
Judg.  15. 7*  though  ye  have  done  this,  yet  1  will  be  a.

16.  28.  may  be  a.  on  Philistines  for  my  two  eyes

1  Sam.  14.  24.  that  eateth  any  food,  that  I  may  be  a.
18.  25.  an  hundred  foreskins,  to  be  a.  of  enemies
25.  31.  or  that  my  Lord  hath  a.  himself

2  Sam.  4.  8.  the  Lord  hath  a.  my  lord  the  king  ,

18.  19.  how  the  Lord  hath  a.  him  of  his  enemies
31.  the  Lord  hath  a.  thee  this  day  of  them

Jer.  5.  9.  my  soul  be  a.  on  such  a  nation,  29.  1  9.

Acts  7.  24.  Moses  a.  him  that  was  oppressed
Rev.  18. 20.  rejoice,  for  God  hath  a.  you  on  h§

19.  2.  hath  a.  blood  of  his  servants  at  her  '

AVENGER.

Num.  35. 12.  cities  for  refuge  from  the  a. .

Deut.  19.  6.  lest  the  a.  of  blood  pursue
12.  the  elders  deliver  him  into  the  har
Josh.  HO.  5.  if  the  a,  of  blood  pursue  af+q

9.  not  die  by  the  hand  of  the  a.  till  1:

Psal.  8.  2.  thou  mightest  still  the  enei]

44 .  16.  by  reason  of  the  enemy  and

1  Thess.  4.  6.  because  the  Lord  is  th:

AVENGETI

2  Sam.  22.  48.  it  is  God  that  a.

AVENG  IN  G*

Judg.  5. 2.  praise  the  Lord  for.

1  Sam.  25.  26.  Lord  hath  1
33.  blessed  be  thou  who

AVERS

Mic.  2. 8.  pass  by  secureh
AUGM

Num.  32.  14.  ye  are  rise


1*  Sam,'
o


Lev.  18. 14.  nor  an


Deut.  26. 1
18.  the

Provk  4. T5.


he  is  thy  a.


to  be  thy  God
people


uot  bi>'it,  turn  from  it


5se  divisions,  and  a.
Ft  every  man  have  his
famed  questions  a.

5  and  genealogies
.  ING.

:  of  his  presence  twice


11.  Davi  _  _ A _

720.  a.  this,  thanio  man  should  blame  us
6. 20.  a.  profane  and  vain  babblings
w  AUSTERE.

r Luke  19.  21.  I  feared,  because  thou  art  an  a.  man
AUTHOR.

Acts  3.  +  15.  and  killed  the  a.  of  life
1  Cor.  14.  33.  God  is  not  the  a.  of  confusion
Heb.  5.  9.  he  became  the  a.  of  eternal  salvation

12.  2.  looking  to  Jesus,  the  a.  and  finisher  of  faith
AUTHORITY

Signifies,  Jl]  Power,  rule,  or  dignity,  Prov.  29.  2.

c  17


AX


BAC


B  AL


Luke  19.  1”.  [2]  A  convincing  efficacy  and  power,
Mat.  7-  29.  [3]  A  warrant,  order,  or  authentic  per
mission.  Mat.  21.  23.  Acts  9.  14.

Esth.  9.  29.  Esther  and  Mordecai  wrote  with  a.
Prov .  29.  2.  when  righteous  are  in  a.  people  rejoice
Mat.  7. 29-  taught  them  as  one  having  a.  Mark  1. 22.
8.  9.  for  I  am  a  man  under  a.  and  saj%  Luke  7.  8.

20. 25.  they  that  are  great  exercise  a.  Mark  10.  42.
21. 23.  by  what  a.  dost  thou  these  ?  Mark  11. 28.

Mark  1.  27.  for  with  a.  commandeth  he  even  the
unclean  spirits,  and  they  obey  him,  Luke  4. 36.
13. 34.  left  his  house,  and  gave  a.  to  his  servants
Luke  9. 1.  he  gave  them  power  and  a.  over  all  devils
19.  it-  been  faithful,  have  thou  a.  over  ten  cities
20. 20.  might  deliver  him  to  a.  of  the  governor

22. 25.  that  exercise  a.  are  called  benefactors
John  5.  27.  hath  given  him  a.  to  execute  judgment
Acts  8. 27.  eunuch  of  great  a.  under  Candace  queen

9. 14.  here  he  hath  a.  to  bind,  26.  10,  12.

1  Cor.  15.  24.  when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  a.

2  Cor.  10. 8.  should  boast  somewhat  more  of  our  a.

1  Thess.  2.  t  6.  when  we  might  have  used  a.

1  Tim.  2.  2.  supplication  for  kings  and  all  in  a.

12. 1  suffer  not  a  woman  to  usurp  a.  over  the  man
Tit.  2.  15.  exhort  and  rebuke  with  all  a.

1  Pet.  3. 22.  angels  and  a.  made  subject  to  him
Rev.  13. 2.  the  dragon  gave  him  power  and  great  a.
AWAKE

Signifies,  [1]  To  come  out  of  natural  sleep,  Luke  9. 32.
[2]  To  rouse  up  out  of  spiritual  sleep,  by  a  vigorous
exercise  of  grace,  by  leaving  off  all  sinful  courses


vr  y  -  ■■  *.V  '■.V  v  _

and  setting  about  the  performance  of  duties  re
-  .  -----  — -  -  ■  —  [3


quired,  Rom.  13.  11.  Eph.  5.  14.  [3]  To  raise
*rom  the  dead,  Job  14.  12.  John  11.  11.  [4]  To
give  present  help  after  it  hath  long  been  kept
from  us,  as  though  God  had  forgotten  us,  Psal.
7.  6.  Isa.  51.  9.

Awake  not  my  love  till  he  please,  Cant.  2. 7.  Give
my  beloved  Saviour  no  occasion  of  offence  or  de¬
parture  ;  neither  interrupt  that  peace  I  enjoy  in
him,  so  long  as  he  is  p’eased  to  continue  it.

Judg.  5. 12.  a.  a.  Deborah,  a.  a.  utter  a  song,  arise
Job  8.  6.  surely  now  he  would  a.  for  thee
14. 12.  till  heavens  be  no  more,  thev  shall  not  a.

19.  1 26.  I  shall  a.  though  this  body  be  destroyed
Psal.  7.  6.  a.  for  me  to  the  judgment,  35.  23.

17. 15.  be  satisfied  when  I  a.  with  thy  likeness
44.  23.  a.  why  sleepest  thou,  O  Lord,  arise
57.  8.  a.  my  glory,  I  myself  will  a.  early,  108.  2.
59.  4.  they  prepare,  a.  to  help  me,  and  behold
5.  O  Lord  God,  a.  to  visit  all  the  heathen
Prov.  23.  35.  when  shall  I  a.  I  will  seek  it  yet  again
Cant.  2. 7-  not  a.  my  love  till  he  please,  3. 5.  1 8.  4.

4. 16.  a.  O  north  wind,  and  co  ne,  thou  south
Isa.  26. 19.  a.  and  sing  ye  that  dwell  in  the  dust
51.  9.  a.  a.  put  on  strength,  O  arm  of  the  Lord,  a.

as  in  the  ancient  days,  52. 1.
17.  a.  a.  stand  up,  O  Jerusalem,  which  hast  drunk
Jer.  51.  57.  sleep  a  perpetual  sleep,  and  not  a.
Dan.  12. 2.  many  that  sleep  in  the  dust  shall  a.
Joel  1.  5.  a.  ye  drunkards,  weep  and  howl  all  ye
Hab.  2.  7-  shall  they  not  a.  that  shall  vex  thee
19.  woe  to  him  that  saith  to  the  wood,  a.  *
Zech.  13. 7-  a.  O  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  smif .
Mark 4.  38.  he  was  asleep,  and  they  a.  him
Luke  9.  32.  when  they  were  a.  they  saw  his  glory
John  11. 11.  I. go  that  I  may  a.  him  out  of  sleep
Rom.  13.  11.  it  is  high  time  to  a.  out  of  sleep
1 Cor.  15.  34.  a.  to  righteousness,  and  sin  not
Eph.  5. 14.  a.  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  dead
2  Tim.  2. 1 26.  may  a.  themselves  out  of  the  snare
„  AWAKED.

*  Yen‘  Jac°b  «•  out  of  his  sleep,  and  said

Judg.  16. 14.  Samson  a.  and  went  away  with  the  pin
l  26. 12.  no  man  saw  it  nor  knew  it,  neither  a.

V Kings  18.  27.  he  sleepeth  and  must  be  a.

&  lyings  4.  31.  Gehazi  told  him,  the  child  is  not  a.

3.  5.  I  a.  for  the  Lord  sustained  me
78. 65.  then  the  Lord  a.  as  one  out  of  sleep
T‘r.  31. 26.  upon  this  I  a.  and  beheld,  and  my  sleet)

'  AWAKEST.  P

[H73.  20.  when  thou  a.  shalt  despise  their  image
^.ov.  6.  £2.  when  thou  a.  it  shall  talk  with  thee
AWAKETH,  ING.

,.-T—  73.  20,  as  a  dream  when  one  a.  so,  O  Lord
Vjja.2tf.8vhe  a.  and  his  soul  is  empty,  a.  and  is  faint
Acts  16.,  27.  the  keeper  of  the  prison  a.  outof  sleep

aware.

Canl.6. 12,-  or  ever  I  was  a.  my  soul  made  me  like


Cattf.fi.  12,-  or  ever  I  was  a.  my  soul  made  me  like
%7<er.50.24.  ai  i  taken,  O  Babylon,  and  thou  wast  not  a .
Luke  11. 44.  ipen  that^valk  over  them,  are  not  a.

Gen.  15. 11.  wheV  fowls  came  Abram  drove  them  a.
Exod.  8.  28.  only  ye  shall  not  go  very  far  a.

19.  24.  the  Lord  said  to  him,  a.  get  thee  down
2  Chron.  35.  23.  have.me  a.  for  I  am  wounded
Isa.  1.  13.  calling  fcqsBlimblies  I  cannot®,  with
Luke  4.  +  34.  a.  vmat'hare  we  to  do  with  thee

23.  18.  a.  with  this 'than,  release  to  us  Barabbas
John  19.  15.  a,'.1  tvith  him,  a.  with  him,  Acts  21.  36.
Acts  22.  22.  a.  with  such  a  fel'ow  from  the  earth
_  ,  .  AWE,  ETH.

Psal.  4.  4.  stand  ip  a.  and  sin  notp  commune  with
33.  8.  inhabitants  ofdhe  world  stand  in  a.  of  him
119.  161.  my  heart  staadeth  in  a.  of  thy  word
Prov.  17.  f  10.  a  reproof  '®),  more  a  wise  man
_  AWL.,

Exod.  21. 6.  his  master  shall  Bore  his  ear  with  an  a.
Deut.  15.  17.  thou  shalt  take  an  d.  hud  thrust  it
„  AWOKE.

Gen.  Q.  24.  Noah  a.  from  his  wine,  and  knew  whaf
41.  4.  eat  up  the  fat  kine,  so  Pharaoh  a.  7.  21.
Judg.  16.  20.  Samson  a.  out  of  his  sleep  and  said
’i  Kings  3. 15.  Solomon  a.  and  behold  it  was  a  dream
Mat.  8. 25.  his  disciples  came  and  a.  him,  Luke 8. 24. 1
AX

Signifies,  [1]  A  carpenter's  tool,  Judg.  9.  48.  [2]  A
human  instrument,  the  king  of  Assyria,  Isa.  10.
15.  [3J  God  s  vengeance  and  judgment  upon  bar¬
ren  and  incorrigible  sinners,  Mat.  3.  10.

Dfut.  19.  5.  his  hand  fetched  a  stroke  with  the  ax

20.  19.  nor  destiny  the  trees  by  foreing  an  ax

18


Judg.  9.  48.  Abimelech  took  an  ax  in  his  hand
1  Sam.  13.  20.  Israel  went  down  to  sharpen  his  ax

1  Kings  6.  7.  neither  hammer  nor  ax  was  heard

2  Kings  6.5.  the  ar-headfell  into  the  water
Isa.  10. 15.  shall  the  ax  boast  itself  against  him
Jer.  10.  3.  for  one  cuts  a  tree  with  the  ax

51.  20.  thou  art  my  battle-®*  and  weapons
Mat.  3. 10.  the  ax  is  laid  to  root  of  trees,  Luke  3.  9.
AXES.

1  Sam.  13.  21.  yet  they  had  a  file  for  the  a.

2  Sam.  12.  31.  he  put  them  under  saws  and  a.  of

iron,  and  made  them  passthrough,  1  Chr.  20.  3
Psal.  74.  5.  a  man  was  famous  as  he  lifted  up  a.

6.  they  break  down  the  carved  work  with  ®.

Jer.  46.  22.  and  come  against  her  with  ®.  as  hewers
Ezek.  26.  9.  with  a.  he  shall  break  down  thy  tower
AXLE-TREES.

1  King  si.  32.  the  a.-tr.  of  the  wheel  join  to  the  base
33.  a.-trees,  naves,  and  felloes,  were  all  molten


B.


BABBLER.

Eccl.  10. 11.  serpent  will  bite,  and  a  b.  is  no  better
Acts  17. 18.  and  some  said,  what  will  this  b.  say  ?
BABBLING,  S.

Prov.  23.  29.  who  hath  contentions  ?  who  hath  b  ?

1  Tim.  6. 20.  avoiding  profane  and  vain  b.

2  Tim.  2. 16.  but  shun  profane  and  vain  b.  they

.  BABE

Signifies,  [1]  An  infant  or  child,  Exod.  2.  6.
Luke  2.  12.  [2]  Such  as  are  weak  in  faith  and
knowledge,  being  ignorant  and  inconstant,  like
infants,  1  Cor.  3.  1.  Heb.  5.  13.  [3]  Foolish,
froward,  and  unteachable  men,  incapable  of  go
vernment,  for  want  of  understanding ,  experience
and  manners,  Isa.  3.  4.

Exod.  2.  6.  saw  the  child,  and  behold  the  b.  wept
Luke  1.  41.  heard  Mary,  the  b.  leaped  in  her  womb
44.  the  b.  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy
2. 12.  ye  shall  find  b.  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes
16.  came  and  found  the  b.  lying  in  a  manger
Heb.  5. 13.  unskilful  in  the  word,  for  lie  is  a  b.
BABES.

Psal.  8.  2.  out  of  the  mouth  of  b.  Mat.  21.  16.

17. 14.  they  leave  rest  of  their  substance  to  their  b.
Isa.  3.  4.  their  princes  and  b.  shall  rule  over  them
Mat.  11. 25.  and  hast  revealed  them  to  b.  Luke  10. 21.
Rom.  2.  20.  instructor  of  foolish,  a  teacher  of  b.

1  Cor.  3. 1.  as  to  carnal,  even  as  unto  b.  in  Christ

1  Pet.  2. 2.  as  new-born  b.  desire  the  sincere  milk  of

BACK.

Exod.  18.  2.  Zipporah,  after  he  had  sent  her  l.

23.  4.  or  ass  going  astray,  thou  shalt  bring  it  b
Num.  22.  34.  if  it  please  thee,  I  will  get  me  b.

24. 11.  the  Lord  hath  kept  thee  b.  from  honour
Josh.  8.  26.  Joshua  drew  not  his  hand  b.  till  hehac
Ruth  2.  6.  the  Moabitish  damsel  that  came  b.

2  Sam.  15.  20.  return,  and  take  b.  thy  brethren
19.  10.  why  speak  ye  not  of  bringing  the  king  b.  ?

1  Kings  13.  22.  but  earnest  b.  and  hast  eaten  bread
22.  26.  and  carry  him  b.  to  Amon  the  governor

2  Chron.  13.  14.  when  Judah  looked  b.  behold
25.  13.  but  the  soldiers  that  Amaziah  sent  b.

Job  26.  9.  he  holdeth  b.  the  face  of  his  throne
Jer.  46.  5.  they  are  fled  apace,  and  look  not  b.

Hos.  4. 16.  Israel  slideth  b.  as  a  backsliding  heifer
Nah.  2. 8.  stand,  shall  they  cry,  none  shall  look  b.
Mat.  24. 18.  nor  let  him  that  is  in  field  return  b.

28.  2.  angel  rolled  b.  the  stone  from  the  door
Luke  8.  37.  went  into  the  ship,  and  returned  b.  again

9.  62.  put  his  hand  to  plough,  and  looking  b.  is

17.  31.  let  him  likewise  not  return  b.

See  Draw,  Go,  Bring,  Keep,  Kept,  Turn,
Went.

BACK,  Substantive.

1  Sam.  10.  9.  he  turned  his  b.  to  go  from  Samuel

1  Kings  14.  9.  hast  cast  me  behind  thy  b.  Ezek.  23.  35.
Psal.  21.  12.  thou  shalt  make  them  turn  their  b

129.  3.  the  plowers  plowed  on  my  b.  made  furrows
Prov.  10.  13.  a  rod  for  the  b.  of  him,  19.  29.  1  26  3
Isa.  38.  17.  thou  hast  cast  my  sins  behind  thy  b.

50.  6.  I  gave  my  b.  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks
Jer.  2.  27.  they  have  turned  their  b.  to  thee

18.  17.  I  will  show  them  the  b.  and  not  the  face
32.  33.  they  have  turned  to  me  the  b.  and  not  face
48.  39.  how  hath  Moab  turned  the  b.  with  shame

Dan.  7.  6.  which  had  on  the  b.  of  it  four  wings
Rom.  11.  10.  not  see,  and  bow  down  their  b.  alwav
BACK-BONE.

Lev.  3.  9.  the  rump  shall  he  take  off  hard  by  the  b  -b
BACK-PARTS.

Exod.  33. 23.  away  my  hand,  thou  shalt  see  my  b.-p.

B  A  C  Iv  S .

Neh.  9.  26.  they  cast  thy  law  behind  their  b.

Ezek.  8.  16.  men  with  their  b.  towards  the  temple

10.  12.  their  whole  body  and  b.  full  of  eyes
See  Turned.

BACKBITERS.

Rom.  1.  30.  b.  haters  of  God,  despiteful,  proud
BACKBITETIL

Psal.  15.  3.  he  that  b.  not  with  his  tongue
BACKBITING.

Prov.  25. 23.  so  an  angry  countenance,  a  b.  tongue

2  Cor.  12.  20.  lest  there  be  debates,  strifes,  b.

BACKSIDE.

Exod.  3. 1.  Moses  led  the  flock  to  the  b.  of  the  desert
26. 12.  the  half-curtain  shall  hang  over  the  b.

Rev.  5. 1.  on  the  b.  sealed  with  seven  seals
•  '  j  •  ••  BACKSLIDER.

Prov.  14.  14.  b.  in  heart  be  filled  with  his  ways
BACKSLIDING,  S.

Jer.  2.  19.  and  thy  6,  shall  reprove  thee
3.  6.  hast  thou  seen  what  b.  Israel  hath  done  >

8.  causes  whereby  b.  Israel  committed  adultery
3. 11.  the  b  Israel  hath  justified  herself  more
12.  return,  thou  b.  Israel,  saith  the  Lord
14.  turn?  O  b.  children,  saith  the;  Lord,  22.

5.  6.  because*  their  transgressions  and  b.  increased
8.  5.  this  people) slidden  bafck  by  a


14.  7.  for  our  b.  are


ddnvbafck  bv  a  perpetual  b.
many,  '.e-siimed  against  thee


Jer.  31. 22.  how  long  go  about,  O  b.  daughter,  49. 4.
Hos.  4.  16.  Israel  slideth  back,  as  a  b.  heifer

11.  7-  niy  people  are  bent  to  b.  from  me

14.  4.  I  will  heal  their  b.  1  will  love  them  freely
Zech.  7.  f  11.  they  gave  a  b.  shoulder  and  stopped

BACKWARD.

Gen.  9.  23.  went  b.  and  their  faces  were  b.

49.  17.  Dan  a  serpent,  so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  b.

1  Sam.  4. 18.  Eli  fell  from  off  the  seat  A  by  the  gate

2  A  mgs  20.  10.  let  the  shadow  return  b.  La.  38.  8.
Job  23.  8.  and  b.  but  I  cannot  perceive  him
Psal.  40.  14.  let  them  be  driven  b.  that  wish  me  evil
70.  2.  let  them  be  turned  b.  that  desire  my  hurt
Isa.  1.  4.  they  provoked,  and  are  gone  away  b.

28.  13.  that  they  might  go  and  fall  b.  be  broken
44.  25.  that  turneth  wise  men  b.  andmaketh  their
59.  14.  judgment  is  turned  away  b.  and  justice

Jer.  7.  24.  but  they  went  b.  and  not  forward

15.  6.  thou  art  gone  b.  therefore  I  will  destroy
Lam.  1.  8.  Jerusalem  sigheth  and  turneth  b.

John  18.  6.  they  went  b.  and  fell  to  the  ground

BAD.

Gen.  24.  50.  we  cannot  speak  to  thee  b.  or  good
31.  24.  speak  not  to  Jacob  good  or  b.  29.

Lev.  27. 10.  a  good  for  a  b.  or  a  b.  for  a  good

12.  the  priest  value  it,  whether  it  be  good  or  b.
14.  estimate  the  house,  whether  it  be  good  or  b.
33.  he  shall  not  search  whether  it  be  good  or  b.

Num.  13. 19.  the  land  they  dwell  in,  if  good  or  b.
24.  13.  to  do  either  good  or  b.  of  my  own  mind
2  Sam.  13. 22.  Absalom  spake  neither  good  nor  b.
14.  17.  so  is  my  lord  the  king  to  discern  good  or  b.

1  Kings  3.  9-  a  heart  that  I  may  discern  good  and  b.
Ezra  4.  12.  building  the  rebellious  and  b.  city
Jer.  24.  2.  the  figs  could  not  be  eaten,  they  were  so  b.
Mat.  13-  48.  gathered  the  good  but  cast  the  b.  away

22.  10.  good  and  b.  and  the  wedding  was  furnished

2  Cor.  5. 10.  that  he  hath  done,  whether  good  or  b.

BADNESS. '

Gen.  41.  19.  never  saw  in  the  land  of  Egypt  for  b.
BADE,  EST.

Gen.  27.  19.  I  have  done  according  as  thou  b.  me
43.  17.  and  the  man  did  as  Joseph  b.  and  brought
Exod.  16.  24.  laid  it  up  till  morning  as  Moses  b.
Num.  14. 10.  all  the  congregation  b.  stone  them
Josh.  11.  9.  Joshua  did  to  them  as  the  Lord  b.  him
Ritth  3.  6.  to  all  that  her  mother-in  law  b.  her

1  Sam.  24.  10.  some  b.  me  kill  thee,  but  I  spared

2  Sam.  1. 18.  David  b.  them  teach  Judah  the  use
14.  19.  for  thy  servant  Joab  he  b.  me,  and  he  put

2  Chron.  10. 12.  came  on  the  third  day  as  the  king  6.
Esth.  4.  15.  Esther  b.  them  return  this  answer
Mat.  16.  12.  how  he  b.  them  not  beware  of  leaven
Luke  14.  9.  and  he  that  b.  thee  and  him,  come,  10.

16.  a  certain  man  made  a  supper,  and  b.  many
Acts  11. 12.  and  the  Spirit  b.  me  go  with  them

18.  21.  but  b.  them  farewell,  saying,  I  must  keep
22.  24.  b.  thathe  should  be  examined  by  scourging
BADGERS’-SKINS.

Exod.  25.  5.  take  of  them  ar.dshittim-wood

26.  14.  and  a  covering  for  the  tent  above  of  b. -skins
35. 7.  rams’-skins  dyed  red,  b.-sk.  and  shittim  wood

23.  with  whom  were  found  skins  of  rams,  and  b.-sk.
36.  19.  and  he  made  a  covering  of  b.-sk.  above  that

Num.  4.  10.  put  it  within  a  covering  of  b. -skins
Ezek.  16.  10.  and  I  shod  thee  with  b. -skins
BAG

Signifies,  A  sack  or  pouch,  Deut.  25. 13. 1  Sam.  17.40.
Bags  which  wax  not  old,  Luke  12.  33.  Heavenly
treasures  which  perish  not,  as  earthly  things  do.
Earneth  wages  to  put  it  into  a  bag  with  holes,  Hag.
1.  6.  What  he  gets  or  labours  for,  does  him  no
manner  of  service,  but  a  secret  curse  consumes  it.
Deut.  25.  13.  not  have  in  thy  b.  divers  weights

1  Sam.  17. 40.  smooth  stones,  and  put  them  in  a  b.
Job  14. 17.  my  transgression  is  sealed  up  in  a  b.
Prov.  7. 20.  he  hath  taken  a  b.  of  money  with  him

16. 11.  all  the  weights  of  the  b.  are  his  work
Isa.  46.  6.  they  lavish  gold  out  of  the  b.  and  weigh
Mic.  6. 11.  and  with  the  b.  of  deceitful  weights
Hag.  1. 6.  he  earneth  wages  to  put  in  a  b.  with  holes
John  12. 6.  because  he  was  a  thief,  and  had  the  b.

13.  29.  some  thought,  because  J  udas  had  the  b.
BAGS.

2  Kings  5. 23.  and  he  bound  two  talents  in  two  b,

12.  10.  they  put  up  in  b.  and  told  the  money

Luke  12. 33.  provide  yourselves  b.  that  wax  not  old
BAKE.

Gen.  19.  3.  Lot  did  b.  unleavened  bread,  they  eat
Exod.  16.  23.  b.  that  which  you  will  b.  to-day
Lev.  24.  5.  take  flour  and  b.  twelve  cakes  thereof
26.  26.  ten  women  shall  b.  your  bread  in  one  oven

1  Sam.  28. 24.  woman  at  Enaor  did  b.  unleav.  bread

2  Sam.  13. 8.  Tamar  took  flour  and  did  b.  cakes
Ezek.  4.  12.  thou  shalt  b.  it  with  man’s  dung

46.  20.  the  place  where  thry^shall  b.  meat-offering

Exod.  12.  39.  they  b.  unleavened  cakes  of  dough
Num.  11.  8.  and  b.  it  in  pans,  and  made  cakes  of  it
1  Chron.  23.  29.  and  for  that  which  is  b.  in  the  pan
BAKE-MEATS.

Gen.  40. 17.  all  manner  of  b. -meats  for  Pharaoh
T  BAKEN.

Lev.  2.  4.  meat-offering  b.  in  the  oven,  5, 7.  |  7.  9.

6.  17.  it  shall  not  be  b.  with  leaven,  it  is  most  holy
28.  17.  two  wave-loaves  shall  be  b.  with  leaven
1  Kings  19.  6.  behold,  a  cake  was  b.  on  the  coals
„  BAKER.

Gen.  40. 1.  the  butler  and  b.  had  offended  the  kin<*
20.  lifted  up  the  head  of  the  chief  butler  and  b.°

22.  he  hanged  the  b.  as  Joseph  interpreted
41.  10.  and  put  in  ward  both  me  and  the  chief  b.
Hos.  7. 4.  they  are  as  an  oven  heated  by  the  b.

6.  their  b.  sleepeth  all  the  night,  it  burneth
BAKERS.

Gen.  40.  2.  was  wroth  against  the  chief  of  the  b.

1  Sam.  8.  13.  will  take  your  daughters  to  be  b.

Jer.  37.  21.  gave  Jeremiah  bread  out  of  6.  street
BA  K  ETII.

Isa.  44. 15.  he  b.  bread,  yea'  he  maketli  a  god
r  .  BALD.

Lev.  13.  40.  he  is  h.  yet  is  he  clean,  41.


RAN


BAP


BAR


2  Kings  2.  23.  go  up  thou  3.  head,  go  up  thou  b.  head
Jer.  16.  6.  nor  make  themselves  h.  for  them
48.  37.  every  head  shall  be  b.  and  beard  dipt
Ezek.  27.  31.  they  shall  make  themselves  utterly  h.

29. 18.  every  head  was  made  b.  and  shoulder  peeled
Mic.  1.  16.  make  thee  b.  and  poll  thee  for  children

BALD-LOCUST.

Lev.  11.  22.  ye  may  eat  the  b.-locust  after  his  kind
BALDNESS

Signifies,  [1]  Want  of  hair  on  the  head ,  Lev.  21.  5.

[2]  A  sign  of  mourning,  Isa.  15.  2.  .ler.  47.  5.
Lev.  21.  5.  they  shall  not  make  b.  on  their  head
Deut.  14. 1.  nor  make  any  b.  between  your  eyes
Isa.  3.  24.  and  instead  ot  well-set  hair,  b.

15.  2.  on  all  their  heads  b.  and  every  beard  cut
22.  12.  the  Lord  did  call  to  weeping  and  to  b.

Jer.  47.  5.  h,  is  come  upon  Gaza,  Ashkelon  cut  off
Ezek.  f.  18.  and  b.  on  all  their  heads,  Amos  8.  10.
Mic.  1. 16.  poll  thee,  enlarge  thy  b.  as  the  eagle
BALANCE.

Job  31. 6.  let  me  be  weighed  in  an  even  b.

Psal.  62.  9.  laid  in  the  b.  are  altogether  vanity
Prov.  11.  1.  a  false  b.  is  abomination,  20.  23.

16.  11.  a  just  weight  and  b.  are  the  Lord’s
Isa.  40.  12.  who  weighed  the  hills  in  a  b.  ?

15.  nations  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  b.

46.  6.  lavish  gold,  and  weigh  silver  in  the  b.
BALANCES.

I.ev.  19.  36.  just  b.  a  just  ephah,  Ezek.  45. 10.

Job  6. 2.  and  my  calamity  laid  in  the  b.  together
Jer.  32. 10.  I  weighed  him  the  money  in  the  b.

Ezek.  5. 1.  take  b.  to  weigh,  and  divide  the  hair
Pan.  5.  27.  thou  art  weighed  in  the  b.  and  wanting
Hos.  12. 7.  the  3.  of  deceit  are  in  his  hand
Amos  8.  5.  and  falsifying  the  b.  by  deceit
Mic.  6. 11.  shall  I  count  them  pure  with  wicked  b.  ?
R»v.  6.  5.  he  that  sat  on  them  had  a  pair  of  b.
BALANCINGS.

Job  37. 16.  dost  thou  know  the  b.  of  the  clouds  ?
BALL,  S.

Isa.  3.  + 19.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  sweet  3.

22. 18.  he  will  surely  turn  and  toss  thee  like  a  3.

BALM.

Gen.  37.  25.  Ishmaelites  bearing  b.  and  myrrh
43.  11.  take  in  your  vessels  a  little  b.  and  honey
Jer.  8.  22.  is  there  no  b.  in  Gilead  ?  is  there  no

physician  ?

46.  11.  go  up  to  Gilead,  and  take  b.  O  virgin

51.  8.  howl  for  her,  take  b.  for  her  pain

Ezek.  27. 17.  J  udah  traded  in  honey,  and  oil,  and  3.
BAND,  S,

Signifies,  [1]  A  company  of  soldiers,  Acts  10.  1.
[2]  Material  chains,  Luke  8.  29.  Acts  16.  26.
[3j  Arguments  or  instances  of  love,  which  might
draw  and  engage  persons  to  their  duty,  Hos.  11.  4.
[4]  Government  and  laws,  which,  like  fetters,  re¬
strain  men  from  wicked  practices,  Psal.  2.  3.
Zech.  11.  7,  14.  [5]  Faith  and  love,  which  at¬
tract  the  soul  to  Christ,  Col.  2.  19.

Exod.  39.  23.  a  b.  round  that  it  should  not  rend
1  Lev.  26.  13.  I  have  broken  the  b.  of  your  yoke
Judg.  15.  14.  and  his  b.  loosed  from 'off  his  hands
2  Kings  23.  33.  Pharaoh  put  Jehoahaz  in  b.

Job  38.  9. 1  made  darkness  a  swaddling  3.  for  it
31.  canst  bind  the  Pleiades,  or  loose  the  b.  of  Orion?
39.  5.  or  who  hath  loosed  the  b.  of  the  wild  ass  ?

10.  canst  thou  bind  the  unicorn  with  his  b.  ?
Psal.2.3.  letus  break  their  b.  asunder,  and  cast  away
73.  4.  for  there  are  no  b.  in  their  death
107.  14.  and  he  brake  their  b.  in  sunder
Eccl.  7. 26.  woman  whose  heart  snares,  hands  as  3.
Isa.  28.  22.  be  not  mockers,  lest  b.  be  made  strong

52.  2.  loose  thyself  from  the  b.  of  thy'  neck

58.  6.  this  the  fast,  to  loose  the  b.  of  wickedness
Jer.  2.  20.  I  have  broken  thy  yoke,  burst  thy  b.
Ezek.  3.  25.  son  of  man,  they  shall  put  b.  on  thee
4.  8.  and  behold  I  will  lay  b.  upon  thee
34.  27.  when  I  have  broken  the  3.  of  their  youth
Pan.  4.  15.  even  with  a  b.  of  iron  and  brass,  23.
Hos.  11.  4. 1  drew  them  with  b.  of  love,  and  I  was
Zech.  11. 7. 1  took  me  two  staves,  beautv  and  b.

14.  then  I  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff,  even  3.
Luke  8.  29.  he  brake  3.  and  was  driven  of  the  devil
Acts  16.  26.  and  every  one’s  3.  were  loosed

22.  30.  the  centurion  loosed  Paul  from  his  3.

Col.  2. 19.  the  head,  from  which  all  the  body  by  3.
See  Bonds.

.BAND,  S.

Gen.  32.  7*  Jacob  divided  the  camels  into  two  3.

10.  I  passed  over,  and  now  I  am  become  two  3.

1  Sam.  10. 26.  and  there  went  with  him  a  3.  of  men

2  Sam.  4. 2.  Saul’s  son  had  two  men,  captains  of  3.

2  Kings  6. 23.  so  the  3.  of  Syria  came  no  more

13.  20.  and  tile  3.  of  the  Moabites  invaded  the  land
21.  as  they  were  burying  a  man,  they  spied  a  3.

24. 2.  the  Lord  sent  againsthim  3.  of  Chaldeans,  3.
1  Chron.  7.  4.  with  them  were  3.  of  soldiers  for  war

12.  18.  David  made  them  captains  of  the  3.

21.  they  helped  David  against  the  3.  of  the  rovers
Ezra  8. 22. 1  was  ashamed  to  require  of  the  kin?  a  3.
Job  1. 17  •  the  Chaldeans  made  out  three  3.  and  fell
Psal.  119.  61.  the  3.  of  the  wicked  have  robbed  me
Prov.  30. 27-  the  locusts  go  forth  all  of  them  by  3.
Ezek.  12. 14. 1  will  scatter  all  his  3.  and  draw  sword

38.  6.  Gomer  and  all  his  3.  Togarmah  his  3.

22. 1  will  rain  upon  him  and  upon  his  3.

39.  4.  fall  on  mountains  of  Israel  thou  and  thy  3.
Mat.  27.  27.  gathered  to  him  whole  3.  Mark  15. 16.
John  18. 3.  Judas  having  received  a  3.  of  men

12.  the  3.  and  captain  and  officers  took  Jesus
Acts  10.  1.  a  centurion  of  the  3.  called  the  Italian  3.
21.  31.  tidings  came  to  the  chief  captain  of  the  3.
27.  1.  to  Julius  a  centurion  of  Augustus’  3.
BANDED.

Acts  23. 12.  certain  of  the  Jews  3.  together
BANK

Signifies,  [1]  The  side,  or  brink,  of  a  river ,  Gen.
41.  17.  [2]  A  mount,  or  heap  of  earth  raised  to
cover  besiegers,  while  they  hatter  the  walls  of  a
city,  or  shoot  at  those  who  defend  them,  2  Sam.  20.

15.  [3]  A  place  where  there  is  a  great  sum  of
money  taken  in,  and  let  out  to  use,  Luke  19.  23.


Gen.  41, 17.  behold  I  stood  on  the  3.  of  the  river
Deut.  4.  48.  from  Aroer  which  is  by  the  3.  of  the
river  Anion,  Josh.  12.  2. 1  13.  9,  16.

2  Sam.  20. 15.  they  cast  up  a  3.  against  the  city
2  Kings  2. 13.  Elisha  stood  by  the  3.  of  Jordan
19-  32.  the  king  of  Assyria  not  cast  a  3.  Isa.  37. 33.
Ezek.  47. 7-  &t  the  3.  of  the  river  were  many  trees
Dan.  12.  5.  one  on  this  side  of  the  3.  ot  the  river
the  other  on  that  side  of  the  3.  of  the  river
Luke  19.  23.  gavest  not  thou  my  money  into  the  3.  ?
BANKS.

Josh.  3.  15.  Jordan  overfloweth  all  his  3.  4.  18.

1  Chron.  12.  15.  Jordan  had  overflowed  his  3.

Isa.  8.  7-  the  king  of  Assyriashall  go  over  all  his  3.
Dan.  8. 16. 1  heard  a  man’s  voice  between  the  3.

BANNER

Signifies,  A  standard,  or  ensign,  Isa.  13.  2.

Thou  hast  given  a  banner  to  them  that  fear  thee,
Psal.  60.  4.  An  army  of  men  united  under  one
banner,  with  ability  to  defend  themselves  and  con¬
quer  their  enemies  ;  a  banner  being  a  sign  of
victory,  as  well  as  of  battle  and  union.

His  banner  over  me  was  love.  Cant.  2.  4.  The
love  of  Christ  displayed,  like  a  banner,  in  the
gospel,  conducted,  encouraged,  and  engaged  me  to
come  to  him.

Exod.  17. 1 15.  called  the  altar,  the  Lord  my  3.

Psal.  60.  4.  hast  given  a  3.  to  them  that  fear  thee
Cane.  2.  4.  to  banquet,  and  his  3.  over  me  was  l«ve
Isa.  13.  2.  lift  ye  up  a  3.  on  the  high  mountain
BANNERS.

Psal.  20. 5.  in  the  name  of  our  God  we  set  up  our  3.
Cant.  6. 4.  thou  art  terrible  as  an  army  with  3.
BANISHED.

2  Sam.  14.  13.  the  king  doth  not  fetch  home  his  3.

14.  he  doth  devise  means  that  his  3.  be  not  expelled

BANISHMENT.

Ezra  7. 26.  whether  it  be  to  death  or  to  3.

Lam.  2. 14.  have  seen  false  burdens  and  causes  of  3.

BANQUET.  [5,8.

Esth.  5.  4.  let  the  king  and  Hainan  come  to  the  3.

6.  the  king  said  to  Esther  at  the  3.  of  wine,  7.  2.
Job  41.  6.  shall  the  companions  make  a  3.  of  him  ?
Amos  6. 7.  the  3.  of  them  that  stretched  themselves
BANQUET-HOUSE.

Dan.  5.  10.  now  the  queen  came  into  the  3.  house
BANQUETING,  S.

Cant.  2.  4.  he  brought  me  into  the  3. -house
1  Pet.  4.  3.  we  walked  in  lusts,  revellings,  3.
BAPTISM

Signifies,  [1]  The  outward  ordinance,  or  sacrament,
wherein  the  washing  with  water  represents  the
cleansing  of  the  soul  from  sin  by  the  blood  of
Christ,  Luke  7-  29.  1  Pet.  3.  21.  [2]  Inward
spiritual  washing,  zohereby  the  gifts  and  graces  of
the  Spirit,  signified  by  the  outward  sign,  are  really
and  actually  bestowed.  Mat.  3.  11.  [3]  The  suffer¬
ings  of  Christ,  whereby  he  was  consecrated  and
prepared  for  his  entrance  upon  his  kingly  office.
Mat.  20.  22.  Luke  12.  50.  [4]  So  much  of  the
gospel  as  John  the  Baptist  taught  his  disciples
when  he  baptized  them.  Acts  18.  95.

Mat.  3. 7-  when  he  saw  the  Pharisees  come  to  his  3.
20. 22.  and  to  be  baptized  with  the  3.  Mark  10.  38.
21.25.  the  3.  of  John,  whence  was  it,  from  heaven
or  of  men  ?  Mark  11. 30.  Luke  20.  4.
Mark  1.  4.  John  did  baptize  in  the  wilderness,  and
preach  the  3.  of  repentance,  Luke  3.  3.
Luke  7.  29.  publicans  baptized  with  the  3.  of  John
12.  50. 1  have  a  3.  to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  am
Acts  1. 22.  beginning  from  the  3.  of  John  to  that  day
10. 37.  that  word  after  the  3.  which  John  preached
13. 24.  John  preached  the  3.  of  repentance  to  Israel
18.  25.  Apollos  knowing  only  tne  3.  of  John
19. 3.  were  ye  baptized  ?  they  said,  unto  John’s  3.
4.  John  baptized  with  the  3.  of  repentance
Rom.  6.  4.  we  are  buried  with  him  by  3.  into  death
Eph.  4.  5.  there  is  one  Lord,  one  faith,  one  3.

Col.  2.12.  buried  with  him  in  3.  ye  are  risen  with
Heb.  6. 2.  of  doctrine  of  3.  and  laying  on  of  hands
1  Pei.  3.  21.  the  like  figure  whereunto,  even  3.  doth
BAPTIST.

Mat.  3. 1.  in  those  daj  s  came  John  3.  preaching

11.  11.  among  them  born  of  women  there  hath  not
risen  a  greater  than  John  the  3.  Luke  7.  28.
1’.  12.  from  the  days  of  John  the  3.  till  now
14. 2.  this  is  John  the  3.  he  is  risen  from  the  dead
8.  said,  give  me  John  the  3.  head  in  a  charger
16.  14.  some  say,  thou  art  J ohn  the  3.  Mark  8. 28.

17. 13.  understood  that  he  spake  of  John  the  3.
Mark  6.  14.  John  the  3.  was  risen  from  the  dead
25.  give  me  in  a  charger  the  head  of  John  the  3.
Luke  7.  20.  John  the  3.  hath  sent  us  to  thee,  saying
33.  John  the  3.  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking
9. 19.  they  answering  said,  John  the  3.

BAPTIZE.

Mat.  3. 11. 1 3.  you  with  water,  he  shall  3.  you  with
the  H.  Ghost,_.Mhr£  1. 8.  Luke  3. 16.  John  1. 26.
Mark  1. 4.  John  did  3.  in  the  wilderness,  and  preach
John  1. 33.  he  that  sent  me  to  3.  said  unto  me
1  Cor .  1. 17.  Christ  sent  me  not  to  3.  but  to  preach
BAPTIZED.

Mat.  3.  6.  were  3.  of  him  in  Jordan,  Mark  1.  5.

13.  then  cometh  Jesus  to  John  to  be  3.  of  him

14.  I  have  need  to  be  3.  of  thee,  and  comest  thou

16.  Jesus,  when  he  was  3.  went  up  out  of  water

Mark  1.  9.  Jesus  was  3.  of  John  in  Jordan
10.  39.  the  baptism  I  am  3.  withal,  shall  ye  be  3.
16.  16.  he  that  believeth  and  is  3.  shall  be  saved
Luke  3.  7.  said  to  the  multitude  that  came  to  be  3.

12.  then  came  the  publicans  to  be  3.  7.  29.

21.  Jesus  being!3.  and  praying,  heaven  was  opened
7-  30.  Pharisees  and  lawyers,  being  not  3.  of  him
John  3.  22.  there  he  tarried  with  them  and  3.

23.  much  water  there,  and  they  came  and  were  3.

4. 1.  Jesus  made  and  3.  more  disciples  than  John

2.  though  Jesus  himself  3.  not,  but  his  disciples
10.  40.  into  the  place  where  John  at  first  3.

Acts  1.  5.  for  John  truly  3.  with  water,  but  ye
shall  be  3.  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  11.  16.
2.  38.  repent,  be  3.  every  one.of  you  in  the  name  of

Jesus


Acts  2.41.  they  that  gladly  received  his  word  werea.
8. 12.  they  were  3.  Doth  men  and  women

13.  Simon  believed  also,  and  when  he  was  3.

16.  only  they  were  3.  in  the  name  of  Jesus

36.  here  is  water,  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  3.  ?
38.  went  down  Philip  and  eunuch,  and  he  3.  him

9. 18.  Saul  received  sight,  and  arose  and  was  3.

10. 47.  can  any  forbid,  that  these  should  not  be  b.T

48.  Peter  commanded  them  to  be  3.

16. 15.  Lydia  when  she  was  3.  and  her  household
33.  jailer  was  3.  and  all  his  straightway

18.8.  many  of  the  Corinth,  believed,  and  were  3
19.  3.  he  said  to  them,  to  what  then  were  ye  3.  ?

5.  when  they  heard  this  they  were  3.

22.  16.  arise,  and  be  3.  and  wash  away  thy  sins
Rom.  6.  3.  were  3.  into  Jesus,  were  3.  into  his  death
1  Cor.  1. 13.  were  ye  3.  in  the  name  of  Paul  ?

14.  thank  God  that  I  3.  none  of  you,  but  Crispus
16.  I  3.  household  of  Stephanas,  not  3.  any  other

10.  2.  and  were  all  3.  to  Moses  in  the  cloud

12. 13.  for  by  one  Spirit  are  we  all  3.  into  one  body
15. 29.  else  what  shall  they  do  who  are  3.  for  the

dead,  why  are  they  3.  for  the  dead  ?
Gal.  3. 27.  as  many  as  have  been  3.  into  Christ
BAPTTZEST.

John  1.  25.  why  3.  thou,  if  thou  be  not  the  Christ  ?
BAPTIZETH.

John  1.  33.  the  same  is  he  who  3.  with  the  H.  Ghost
3. 26.  behold,  the  same  3.  all  men  come  to  him
BAPTIZING.

Mat.  28. 19.  go  ye  and  teach  all  nations,  3.  them
John  1.  28.  done  beyond  Jordan,  where  John  was  b.
31.  therefore  am  I  come  3.  with  water
3. 23.  and  John  was  also  3.  in  Enon,  near  to  Salim
BAR,  RED.

Neh.  7.  3.  let  them  shut  the  doors,  and  3.  them
Cant.  4.t  12.  a  garden  3.  is  my  sister,  my  spouse
BAR,  Substantive.

Exod.  26. 28.  the  middle  3.  in  midst  of  the  boards
36.  33.  he  made  the  middle  3.  to  shoot  through
Num.  4.  10.  and  they  shall  put  it  upon  a  3.  12.
Judg.  16.  3.  took  doors  of  the  city,  posts,  3.  and  "all
Amos  1. 5.  1  will  break  also  the  3.  of  Damascus
BARS

Signify,  [1]  That  by  which  doors  and  gates  are
made  fast,  Neh.  3.  3,  6.  [2]  That  which  is

made  as  a  rafter  to  fasten  boards  unto,  Exod.
26.  26.  [3]  Rocks  in  the  sea,  Jonah  2.  6.

[4]  The  boundary  of  the  waves  of  the  sea,  Job
38.  10.

Exod.  26.  26.  thou  shalt  make  3.  of  shittim-wood
for  the  boards  of  the  tabernacle,  36.  31.
Num.  3.  36.  under  the  charge  of  the  sons  of  Merari,
shall  be  the  boards  and  3.  of  the  tabernacle,  4.  31.
Deut.  3.  5.  all  these  cities  were  fenced  with  gates
and  3.  1  Kings  4. 13.  2  Chron.  8.  5.  1 14.  7
1  Sam.  23.  7.  entering  into  a  town  that  hath  3.

Neh.  3.  3.  set  up  locks  thereof  and  3.  6, 13, 14, 15.
Job  17.  16.  they  shall  go  down  to  the  3.  of  the  pit
18.  t  13.  it  shall  devour  the  3.  of  his  skin
38.  10.  and  set  3.  and  doors  for  the  sea

40. 18.  Behemoth,  his  bones  are  like  3.  of  iron
Psal.  107. 16.  and  cut  3.  of  iron  in  sunder,  Isa.  45. 2

147. 13.  he  hath  strengthened  the  3.  of  thy  gates
Prov.  18. 19.  contentions  are  like  the  3.  of  a  castle
Isa.  43.  +  14.  I  have  brought  down  all  their  3.

Jer.  49.  31.  nation,  w  hich  have  neither  gates  nor  3.

50.  +  36.  a  sword  is  upon  her  3.  shall  be  dismayed

51.  30.  they  have  Babylon,  her  3.  are  broken
Lam.  2.  9.  he  hath  destroyed  and  broken  her  3.
Ezek.  38. 11.  and  having  neither  gates  nor  3.

Jonah  2.  6.  the  earth  with  her  3.  was  about  me
Nah.  3. 13.  gates  open,  the  fire  shall  devour  thy  3.

BARBARIAN.

1  Cor.  14. 11.  shall  be  to  him  a  3.  and  he  a  3.  to  me
Col.  3. 11.  where  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  3.
BARBARIANS.

Acts  28.  4.  when  the  3.  saw  the  venomous  beast
Rom.  1. 14.  I  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and  3.
BARBAROUS.

Acts  28.  2.  the  3.  people  shewed  no  little  kindness
BARBED.

Job  41. 7.  canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with  3.  irons
BARBER.

Ezek.  5. 1.  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  3.  razor
BARE.

Gen.  7. 17.  3.  the  ark,  Deut.  31.  9,  25.  Josh.  3. 15.

4.' 10.  |  8.  3.3.2  Sam.  6. 13.  1  Chron. 15.15, 26, 27
31. 39.  that  torn  by  beasts,  I  3.  the  loss  of  it
Exod.  19.  4.  and  how  I  3.  you  on  eagle’s  wings
Deut.  1. 31.  thy  God  3.  thee  as  a  man  doth  bear
Judg.  3.  18.  sent  the  people  that  3.  the  present
1  Sam.  14. 1.  Jonathan  said  to  the  young  man  tha.

3.  his  armour,  6.  2  Sam.  18.  15.
1  Kings  5. 15.  that  3.  burdens  70,000,  Neh.  4.17.

1  Chron.  12. 24.  of  Judah  that  3.  shield,  2  Chr.  14. 8.
Isa.  53. 12.  he  3.  the  sin  of  many,  made  intercession

63. 9.  he  3.  them  all  the  days  of  old
Ezek.  12. 7.  the  stuff  I  3.  upon  my  shoulder
Mat.  8. 17.  saying,  himself  3.  our  sicknesses
Luke  7. 14.  and  they  that  3.  him  stood  still
John  2. 8.  the  water  made  wdne,  and  they  3.  it

12. 6.  had  the  bag,  and  3.  what  was  put  therein

1  Pet.  2.  24.  his  own  self  3.  our  sins  on  the  tree

BARE.

Gen.  25.  26.  Isaac  was  60  years,  when  she  3.  them
31. 8.  then  all  the  cattle  3.  speckled
38.  5.  and  he  was  at  Chezib  when  she  3.  him
44.  27.  ye  know  that  my  wife  3.  me  two  sons
Exod.  6. 20.  Jochebed  3. to  Amram  Moses  and  Aaron
Judg.  13. 2.  Manoah’s  wife  was  barren  and  3.  not

2  Sam.  12. 15.  struck  the  child  that  U  riah’s  wife  3.

1  Kings  1.  6.  hismother  3.  him  after  Absalom

1  Chron.  4.  9.  Jabez,  because  1 3.  him  with  sorrow
Prov.  17.  25.  and  bitterness  to  her  that  3.  him
23.  25.  and  she  that  3.  thee  shall  rejoice
Cant.  6.  9-  she  is  the  choice  one  of  her  that  3.  her
8.  5.  there  she  brought  thee  forth  that  3.  thee
Isa.  51.  2.  and  look  unto  Sarah  that  3.  you
Jer.  16.  3.  concerning  their  mother  that  3.  them
20. 14.  let  not  the.day  wherein  my  mother  3.  me
22.  26.  cast  thee  out,  and  thy  mother  that  3.  thee

c  2  19


ii  A  R


B  AT


BE


Jer.  50. 12.  she  that  A.  you  shall  be  ashamed
Luke  11.  27.  blessed  is  the  womb  that  b.  thee

23.  29.  blessed  are  the  wombs  that  never  A.

BARE  fruit,

Luke  8. 8.  other  sprang  up,  and  b.f.  an  hundred-fold
Rev.  22. 2.  the  tree  of  life  b.  twelve  manner  of  fruits
BARE  rule,

1  Kings  9. 23.  the  chief  officers  that  b.  rule  over  the
people  that  wrought  in  the  work,  2  Chron.  8. 10.
Neh.  5.  15.  their  servants  b.  rule  over  the  people
BARE  witness,  and  record.

Mark  14. 56.  many  b.  false  witness  against  him,  57.
Luke  4.  22.  all  b.  him  witness,  and  wondered
John  1. 15.  John  b.  witness  of  him,  32,  34.

5.  33.  John  b.  witness  to  the  truth
12.  17.  the  people  that  was  with  him  b.  record
19.  35.  he  that  saw  it  b,  record,  and  his  record  is  true
Acts  15.  8.  knoweth  the  hearts,  b,  them  witness
Rev.  1. 2.  who  b.  record  of  the  word  of  God
BAREST.

1  Kings  2.  26.  because  thou  b.  the  ark  of  the  Lord
Isa.  63.  19.  thou  never  b.  rule  over  them
John  3.  26.  he  to  whom  thou  b.  witness,  baptizeth
BARE,  Adjective,

Signifies,  [1]  Naked,  or  uncovered,  Lev.  13.  45.  Isa.
32.  11.  [2]  Plain,  or  real,  1  Cor.  15.  37.  [3]

Deprived  of  outward  comforts,  Jer.  49.  10.  [4]
Violently  taken  away,  Jer.  13.  +  22.

Made  bare  his  holy  arm,  Isa.  52.  10.  Hath  dis¬
covered  and  put  forth  his  great  power,  which  for  a
long  time  seemed  to  be  hid  and  unemployed.

Lev.  13. 45.  his  clothes  be  rent  and  his  head  b.

55.  whether  it  be  b.  within  or  without
Psal.  137. 1 7.  make  b.  make  b.  to  the  foundation
Isa.  32. 11.  strip  ye,  make  ye  b.  and  gird  sackcloth
47.  2.  make  b.  the  leg,  uncover  the  thigh,  pass
52.  10.  the  Lord  hath  made  b.  his  holy  arm
Ter.  13.  22.  for  thine  iniquity  are  thy  heels  made  b.
49.  10. 1  have  made  Esau  b.  1  have  uncovered  his
Ezek.  16.  7-  whereas  thou  wast  naked  and  b.

22.  when  thou  wast  naked,  and  A.  and  polluted
39.  they  shall  leave  thee  naked  and  b.  23.  29.

Joel  1.  7.  my  fig-tree  he  hath  made  it  clean  b.

1  Cor.  15. 37.  not  that  body  that  shall  be,  but  b.  grain

BAREFOOT.

2  Sam.  15.  30.  he  went  b.  and  the  people  with  him
Isa.  20.  2.  Isaiah  did  so,  walking  naked  and  A.  3.

4.  led  the  Egyptians  prisoners,  naked  and  b.
BARK.

Isa.  56.  10.  they  are  dumb  dogs,  they  cannot  b.
BARKED.

Joel  1.  7.  laid  my  vine  waste,  and  b.  the  fig-tree
BARLEY.

Exod.  9.  31.  the  b.  was  smitten,  for  b.  was  in  the  ear
Lev.  27. 16.  an  homer  of  b.  seed  shall  be  valued
Num.  5.  15.  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  b.  meal
Deut.  8. 8.  a  land  of  wheat,  and  b.  vines,  and  fig-trees
Judg.  7. 13.  lo  a  cake  of  b.  bread  tumbled  into  the
Ruth  1.  22.  came  in  the  beginning  of  b.  harvest

2.  17.  she  had  gleaned  about  an  ephah  of  b.

23.  so  she  kept  fast  to  the  end  of  b.  harvest

3.  2.  behold  Boaz  winnoweth  b.  to-night

15.  he  measured  six  measures  of  b.  and  laid  it
2  Sam.  14.  30.  Joab’s  field  is  near,  he  hath  b.  there

17.  28.  Barzillai  brought  beds,  b.  and  flour
21.  9.  Saul's  sons  were  hanged  in  b.  harvest

1  Kings  4.  28.  b.  also  and  straw  for  the  horses

2  Kings  A.  42.  brought  the  man  of  God  20  loaves  of  A.
7.  1.  two  measures  of  A.  for  a  shekel,  16, 18.

1  Chron.  11. 13.  a  parcel  of  ground  full  of  A.

2  Chron.  2.  10.  I  will  give  20,000  measures  of  A.

15.  wheat,  and  A.  the  oil,  and  wine,  let  him  send
27.  5.  Ammon  gave  10,000  measures  of  A.

Job  31.  40.  and  let  cockle  grow  instead  of  A.

Isa.  28.  25.  the  principal  wheat,  and  appointed  A.
Jer.  41.  8.  we  have  treasures  of  wheat  and  A.

Ezek.  4.  9.  take  to  thee  wheat,  and  A.  and  beans
12.  thou  shalt  eat  it  as  A.  cakes,  and  bake  it
13. 19.  will  ye  pollute  me  for  handfuls  of  A.

45. 13.  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  an  homer  of  A.

Hos.  3.  2.  bought  her  for  an  homer  of  A.  and  half
Joel  1.  11.  O  husbandmen,  howl  for  wheat  and  A.
John  6.  9.  a  lad  here  which  hath  five  A.  loaves

6.  13.  with  the  fragments  of  the  five  A.  loaves
Rev.  6.  6.  a  voice  say,  3  measures  of  A.  for  a  nennv
BARN  v  y

Signifies,  [1]  A  repository  for  any  sort  of  grain,
Luke  12.  24.  [2]  Heaven,  Mat.  13.  30.

2  Kings  6.  27.  shall  I  help  thee  out  of  the  A.  floor?
Job  39.  12.  and  gather  thy  seed  into  the  A.

Hag.  2. 19.  is  seed  yet  in  A.  vine  not  brought  forth
Mat.  13.  30.  but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  A.

Luke  12.  24.  which  have  no  store  house  nor  A
BARNS.

Deut.  28.  f  8.  the  Lord  shall  command  the  blessing
upon  thee  in  thy  A.  and  in  all  thou  dost
Prov.  3.  10.  so  shall  thy  A.  be  filled  with  plenty
J°fl  1.  17.  the  A.  are  broken  down,  and  withered
Mat.  6.  26.  the  fowls  sow  not,  nor  gather  int  >  A.
Luke  12.  18. 1  will  pull  down  my  A.  and  build
T  .  BARREL,  S.

1  Kings  17. 12.  but  a  handful  of  meal  in  a  A.  and  oil
14.  the  A.  of  meal  shall  not  waste,  nor  oil  fail

18.  33.  fill  four  A.  with  water,  and  pour  it  on

„  BARREN.

Gen.  11.  30.  but  Sarai  was  A.  she  had  no  child
25.  21.  Rebekah  was  A.  II  29.  31.  Rachel  was  A.
hxod.  23.  26.  nothing  shall  cast  young  nor  be  A.

Deut.  7.  14.  there  shall  not  be  male  or  female  A.
Judg  13.  2.  Manoah's  wife  was  A.  and  bare  not,  3.

1  Sam.  2.  5.  so  that  the  A.  hath  born  seven

2  kings 2 ’.19.  the  water  is  naught,  and  the  ground  A.
21.  shall  not  be  from  thence  death,  or  A.  land

Job  24.  21.  he  evil  entreateth  the  A.  that  bear  not
39.  6.  I  have  made  the  A.  land  his  dwellings
Psal.  113.  9.  he  maketh  the  A.  woman  to  keep  house
Prov.  30. 16.  the  grave  and  A.  womb  not  satisfied
Cant.  4.  2.  and  none  is  A.  among  them,  6.  6.

Pa.  54.  1.  sing,  O  A.  thou  that  didst  not  bear
[• '•el  2.20.  and  I  will  drive  him  into  a  land  A.

..uke  1.  7.  had  no  child,  because  Elisabeth  was  A.

16.  the  sixth  month  with  her,  who  was  called  A.


Dike  23.  29.  they  shall  say,  blessed  are  the  A.  and
Gal.  4.  27-  for  it  is  written,  rejoice  thou  A.  [wombs
2  Pet.  1.  8.  that  ye  be  neither  A.  nor  unfruitful
BARRENNESS.

Psal.  107. 34.  he  tumeth  a  fruitful  land  into  A.
BASE,  S.

1  Kings  7-  27.  ten  A.  four  cubits  the  length  of  one  A.

2  kings 25. 13.  the  A.  Solomon  made,  brake  they,  16.
Ezra  3.  3.  and  they  set  the  altar  upon  his  A.

Psal.  104.  t5.  founded  the  earth  on  her  A.

Zech.  5.  11.  it  shall  be  set  there  upon  her  own  A.
BASE,  Adjective.

2  Sam.  6.  22.  and  will  he  A.  in  mine  own  sight
Job  30.  8.  yea,  they  were  children  of  A.  men
La.  3.  5.  and  the  A.  against  the  honourable
Ezek.  17.  14.  that  the  kingdom  might  he  A.

29. 14.  and  they  shall  be  there  a  A.  kingdom
Mai.  2.  9.  therefore  I  have  made  you  A.

Acts  17.  + 18.  some  said,  what  will  this  A.  fellow  say

1  Cor.  1.  28.  A.  things  of  this  world  God  hath  chosen

2  Cor.  10. 1. 1,  Paul,  who  in  presence  am  A.  among

BASER.

Acts  17.  5.  Jews  took  lewd  fellows  of  the  A.  sort
BASEST.

Ezek.  29-  15.  Pathros  shall  be  the  A.  of  kingdoms
Dari.  4.  17.  and  setteth  up  over  it  the  A.  ot.men
BASKET.

Gen.  40.  17.  in  the  A.  all  manner  of  bake-meats
Exod.  29.  23.  out  of  the  A.  of  the  unleavened  bread,
Lev.  8.  2,  26.  Num.  6.  l5, 17.
Lev.  8.  31.  the  bread  in  the  A.  of  consecrations
Deut.  26.  4.  priest  shall  take  the  A.  out  of  thy  hand
28.  5.  blessed  shall  be  thy  A.  and  thy  store
17-  cursed  shall  be  thy  A.  and  thy  store
Judg.  6.  19.  and  Gideon  put  the  flesh  in  a  A.

Jer.  24.  2.  one  A.  had  very'  good  ligs,  the  other  A.
Amos  8.  1.  and  behold  a  A.  of  summer  fruit,  2.

Acts  9. 25.  the  disciples  took  Saul,  and  let  him  down
by  the  wall  in  a  A.  2  Cor.  11.  33.
BASKETS.

Gen.  40.  16.  I  had  three  white  A.  on  my  head
18;  Joseph  said,  the  three  A.  are  three  days
2  Kings  10.  7-  slew  70,  and  put  their  heads  in  A.

Jer.  6.  9.  turn  hand  as  a  grape-gatherei  into  the  A
24.  1.  behold,  two  A.  of  figs  before  the  temple
Mat.  14.  20.  and  they  took  up  twelve  A.  full,  Mark
6.  43.  Luke  9.  17-  John6.  13.

15.  37.  they  did  all  eat,  and  took  of  broken  meat

,  ,  seven  A.  full,  Mark  8.  8.

16.  9.  do  ye  not  remember  the  five  loaves,  and  how
many  A.  ye  took  up  ?  10.  Mark  8.  19, 20.

BASON.

Exod.  12.  22.  dip  it  in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  A.

1  Chron.  28. 17-  gave  gold  by  weight  for  every  A.
John  13.  5.  after  that  he  poureth  water  into  a  A

BASONS.

Exod.  24.  6.  Moses  put  half  of  the  blood  in  A.

2  Sam.  17.  28.  Barzillai  brought  beds  and  A.

1  Kings  7.  40.  Hiram  made  the  lavers  and  the
shovels  and  the  A.  45. 1  2  Chron.  4.  8,  11.
Jer.  52.  19.  A.  and  fire  pans  the  captain  took  away

Bastard,  s.

Deut,  23.  2.  a  A.  shall  not  enter  into  the  congregation
Zech.  9.  6.  and  a  A.  shall  dwell  in  Ashdod,  cutoff
Heb.  12.8.  if  ye  he  without  chastisement,  then  are  A
BATH

Was  a  measure  used  among  the  Hebrews,  of  the  same
bigness  with  the  Ephah,  which  contained  60  wine
pints,  and  almost  a  half ;  or  seven  gallons  and  a
half.

Isa.  5.10.  yea,  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  A.
Ezek.  45.  10.  ye  shall  have  a  just  ephah,  a  just  A.

11.  the  ephah  and  A.  shall  be  of  one  measure

14.  jTe  shall  offer  the  tenth  part  of  a  A.

BATHE.

I.ev.  15.  5.  shall  A.  himself  in  water,  8,  11,  13,  21
22,  27.  |16.  26,  28.  |  17.  15.  Num.  19.  7,  8,  19.

17.  16.  but  if  he  wash  them  not,  nor  A.  his  flesh

BATHED.

Isa.  34.  5.  my  sword  shall  be  A.  in  heaven,  behold  it
BATHS.

1  Kings  7.  26.  molten  sea  contained  2000  A.

38.  one  laver  containing  40  A.  every  laver

2  Chron.  2. 10.  give  thy  servants  20,000  A.  of  wine
4.  5.  the  sea  received  and  held  3000  A.

Ezra  7.  22.  to  an  hundred  A.  of  wine,  100  A.  of  oil
Ezek.  45.  14.  an  homer  of  ten  A.  ten  A.  are  an  homer
BAT,  S.

Lev.  11. 19.  lapwing  and  A.  are  unclean,  Deut.  14. 18.
Isa.  2.  20.  shall  cast  his  idols  to  the  moles  and  A
.  .  BATTLE

Signifies,  [1]  A  general  fight,  Deut.  20.  3.  [21

Victory,  Reel.  9.  11.  [3]  War,  1  Sam.  17.  13,

Gen.  14.8.  they  joined  A.  1  Sam  .  4. 2. 1  Kings  20.  29
Num.  32.  27.  will  pass  over  before  the  Lord  to  A.  ’
Deut.  2.  24.  rise  up,  contend  with  Sihon  in  A.

20.  3.  O  Israel,  you  approach  this  day  to  A.

5.  let  him  return,  lest  he  die  in  the  A.  6, 7.

Josh.  11. 19.  of  Gibeon,  all  other  they  took  in  A.

Judg.  20.  28.  shall  I  yet  again  go  out  to  A.  ?

42.  they  turned,  but  the  A.  overtook  them

1  Sam.  14.  22.  followed  hard  after  Philistines  in  A.

17.  20.  he  came,  as  the  host  shouted  for  the  A.

28.  for  thou  art  come  down  to  see  the  A.

47.  for  the  A.  is  the  Lord’s,  2  Chron.  20.  15.

26.  10.  he  shall  descend  into  the  A.  and  perish

28.  1.  know  that  thou  shalt  go  out  with  me  to  A.

29.  4.  lest  in  the  A.  he  be  an  adversary  to  us

2  Sam.  11. 1.  when  kings  go  forth  to  A.  1  Chron.  20. 1.

15.  set  Uriah  in  the  forefront  of  the  hottest  A.

19.  10.  Absalom  whom  we  anointed  is  dead  in  A.

1  Kings8.44.  if  thy  people  go  out  to  A.  against  enemy

20.  39.  thy  servant  went  out  into  midst  of  the  A.

22.  4.  wilt  thou  go  with  me  to  A.  ?  2  Kings  3.  7.

1  Chron.  5.  20.  for  they  cried  to  God  in  the  A.

12.  8.  of  the  Gadites,  men  of  war  fit  for  the  A.

19. 17*  David  came  upon  them,  and  set  A.  in  array

against  the  Syrians,  2  Chron.  13.  3.  1 14.10.

2  Chron.  25.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  it,  be  strong  for  A.
Job  15.  24.  shall  prevail,  as  a  king  ready  to  the  A.

39.  25.  and  he  smelleth  the  A.  afar  off
41.  8.  remember  the  A.  do  no  more


Psal.  18.  39.  thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength  to  b.

24.  8.  the  King  of  glory,  the  Lord  mighty  in  A.

55.  18.  he  hath  delivered  my  soul  from  the  A.

76. 3.  he  brake  the  shield,  the  sword,  and  the  A.

89.  43.  and  hast  not  made  him  to  stand  in  the  A.

Eccl,  9.  11.  race  not  to  the  swift,  nor  A.  to  the  strong
Isa.  9.  5.  every  A.  of  the  warrior  is  with  noise

13. 4.  the  Lord  mustereth  the  host  of  the  A.

22.  2.  thy  slain  men  are  not  dead  in  A.

27.  4.  who  set  briars  and  thorns  against  me  in  A.

28.  6.  strength  to  them  that  turn  the  A.  to  the  gate
42.  25.  he  hath  poured  on  him  the  strength  of  the  A.

Jer.  8.  6.  turned  as  the  horse  rusheth  into  the  A.

18.  21.  let  their  young  men  be  slain  by  sword  in  A.
46.  3.  order  buckler  and  shield,  draw  near  to  A.

49.  14.  come  against  her,  and  rise  up  to  the  A.

50. 22.  a  sound  of  A.  is  in  land,  and  destruction
42.  put  in  array,  like  a  man  to  A.  against  thee
Ezek.  7.  14.  have  blown,  but  none  goeth  to  the  A.

13. 5.  to  slant!  in  the  A.  in  the  day  of  the  Lord
Hos.  1. 7-  I  will  not  save  them  by  bow  nor  by  A.

2.  18.  I  will  break  the  bow  and  A.  out  of  the  earth
10.  9.  A.  in  Gibeah  did  not  overtake  them
Joel  2.  5.  as  a  strong  people  set  in  A.  array
Obad,  1.  let  us  rise  up  against  Edom  in  b~

Zech.  10.  3.  made  them  as  his  goodly  home  in  the  A.

5.  which  tread  down  their  enemies  in  the  A.

14.  2.  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem  to  A.

1  Cor.  14.  8.  who  shall  prepare  himself  to  the  A.  ?
Rev.  9. 7-  shapes  of  locusts  like  horses  prepared  to  A.
9.' sound  of  chariots  of  many  horses  running  to  A.
16.  14.  to  gather  them  to  the  A.  of  the  great  day,

20.  8.

Day  of  BATTLE.

1  Sam.  13.  22.  so  it  came  to  pass  in  the  day  of  A.  that
Job  38.  23.  I  reserved  against  the  day  of  A.  and  war
Psal.  78.  9.  Ephraim  turned  back  in  the  day  ofb.
140.  7-  thou  hast  covered  my  head  in  the  day  ofb.
Pro.  21.31.  the  horse  is  prepared  against  the  day  of  A.
Hos.  10.  14.  Shalman  spoiled  Beth-arbel  in  day  of  b.
Amos  1.  14.  devour  with  shouting  in  the  day  of  A.
Zech.  14.  3.  as  when  he  fought  in  the  day  of  A.
Battlb-Ax,  see  Ax.
BATTLE-BOW.

Zech.  9.  10.  and  the  b.-bow  shall  be  cut  off

10.  4.  out  of  him  came  forth  the  b.-bow

BATTLES.

1  Sam.  8. 20.  may  go  out  before  us  and  fight  onr  b.
18.  17.  only  be  valiant,  and  fight  the  Lord’s  A.

25.  28.  my  lord  fighteth  the  A.  of  the  Lord

1  Chron.  26.  27.  out  of  the  spoils  won  in  A.  dedicate

2  Chron, 32.  8.  but  with  us  is  God,  to  fight  bur  A.
Isa.  30.  32.  and  in  A.  of  shakings  will  he  fight  with

BATTERED.

2  Sam.  20. 15.  the  people  with  Joab  A.  the  wall
BATTERING.

Ezek.  4.  2.  and  set  A.  rams  against  it  round  about
21.  22.  to  appoint  A.  rams  against  the  gates
BA  TTLEMENT,  S.

Deut.  22.  8.  thou  shalt  make  a  A.  for  thy  roof
Jer.  5. 10.  take  away  her  A.  they  are  not  the  Lord’s
BAY.

Zech.  1. 1  8.  behind  him  red  horses,  A.  and  white

6.  3.  in  the  fourth  chariot  grizled  and  A.  horses

7.  and  the  A.  went  forth  and  sought  to  go

RAY-TREE.

Psal.  37.  35.  wicked  spreading  like  a  green  b.-tree
BDELLIUM.

Gen.  2.  12.  in  Havilah  there  is  A.  and  onyx  stone
Num.  11.  7.  the  colour  of  manna  as  the  colour  of  A
BE

Signifies,  [1]  To  exist  or  have  a  being,  Rom.  4.  17.
[2]  To  be  made  or  become,  Jer.  32.  38.  Mat.  19'

5.  [3]  To  be  known  and  apparently  seen,  Rom.
14.  9.  [4]  To  consecrate  and  set  apart  to,  Judg

11.  31.  s

Gen.  2. 18.  it  is  not  good  that  man  should  be  alone

27.  21.  whether  thou  be  my  very  son  Fsau,  or  not
Deut.  10.  5.  there  they  he  as  the  Lord  commanded
Judg.  6. 13.  if  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why  is  all  this
2  Sam.  18.  32.  thineenemies  be  as  that  young  man  is
2  Kings  6.  16.  fear  not,  for  they  that  be  with  us
are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them
2  Chr.  36.  23.  Lord  his  God  be  with  him,  Ezra  1.  3.
Ezra  6.  6.  Aeye  far  from  thence,  let  the  work  alone
Job  10.  15.  if  I  Ae  wicked,  wo  to  me;  if  T  be  righteous
1 9. 4.  and  be  it  indeed  that  I  have  erred,  mine  error
Psal.  139.  24.  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me
Cant.  8.  9-  if  she  be  a  wall,  if  sne  be  a  door
Isa.  8.13.  let  him  be  your  fear,  let  him  be  your  dread
41.  22.  let  them  shew  former  things  what  they  be
Jer.  36.  19.  go  hide,  and  let  none  know  where  you  be
47.  6.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  thou  be  quiet  ?

Dan.  12. 13.  but  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be
Hos.  8. 5.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  to  innoc.  ?
Mat.  4.  3.  if  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  6.  |  27.  40.

7.  13.  and  many  there  be  that  go  in  thereat

16.  23.  for  thou  savourest  not  the  things  that  be  of
.  God,  but  those  that  be  of  men,  Mark  8.  33.

18.  17.  let  him  be  to  thee  as  a  heathen  man  or  a

19.  9.  shall  put  away,  except  it  be  for  fornic.

Luke  10. 6.  and  if  the  son  of  peace  be  there,  your
John 3. 9.  N icodemus  said,  how  can  these  things  be?
Acts  19.  2.  not  heard  whether  there  be  any  H.  Ghost

24.  21.  except  it  be  for  this  one  voice  that  I  cried
Rom.  4.  17.  who  calleth  those  things  which  be  not  as

8.  31.  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?

14.  9.  that  he  might  be  Lord  of  the  dead  and  living

1  Cor.  15.  28.  under  him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all
16.  22.  love  not,  let  him  be  anathema  maran-atha

2  Cor.  5.  1 17.  if  in  Christ  let  him  Ae  a  new  creature

8.  12.  if  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  itis  accepted
Gal.  3.  9.  they  which  be  of  faith  are  blessed  with

4.  12.  I  beseech  you,  Ae  as  1  am,  for  I  am  as  ye  are

5.  10.  shall  bear  his  judgment  whosoever  he  be
Phil.  2.  5.  let  this  mind  be  in  you  that  was  in  Cl  rist
Heb.  12.  8.  but  if  ye  be  without  chastisement

1  Pet.  2.  3.  if  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  L.  is  gracious
3. 17.  for  it  is  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be  so
Rev.  18.  22.  craftsman,  of  whatsoever  craft  he  Ae
22.  11.  he  that  is  unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still
he  who  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  stiff


BE


BE  A


B  E  A


If  it  BE.

Gen.  23.  8.  if  it  be  your  mind  that  I  bury  my  dead

25.  22.  and  she  said,  if  it  be  so,  why  am  1  thus  5
Exod.  1. 16.  if  it  be  a.  son  kill  him,  if  it  be  a  daughter
2  Kings  10. 15.  if  it  be,  give  me  thy  hand,  and  he  gave
Zech.  8. 6.  if  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  remnant
Mat.  14.  28 -  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  on  the  water
Acts  5.  39-  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it

18.  15.  but  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  names
Gmt.  S.  4.  have  ye  suffered  in  vain  *  if  it  be  yet  in  vain

May  Be,  see  May.  Peace  Be,  see  Peace.
Not  BE.  BE  not.

Gen.  21.  12.  let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy  sight
24.  5.  if  the  woman  will  not  be  willing  to  follow,  8.
38.  9.  Onan  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his
44.  30. 1  come  to  my  father,  and  the  lad  be  not  with
Lev.  26.  13.  that  ye  should  not  be  their  bond-men
Num.  12.  12.  let  her  not  be  as  one  dead,  of  whom

16.  40.  that  he  be  not  as  Korah  and  his  company
Josh.  7.  12.  neither  will  I  be  with  you  anv  more
Ruth  3.  18.  the  man  will  not  be  in  rest  till  finished
2  Kings  20. 1 19.  shall  there  not  ie  peace  in  my  days  ?
2  Chron.  30.  7-  be  not  like  your  fathers,  Zech.  1.  4.
Psal.  22. 19.  be  not  thou  far  away,  35. 22. 1  38. 21.  |
Isa.  28.  22.  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  bands  [71.  12.
Zech.  8. 11. 1  will  not  be  to  the  residue  of  this  people
l sake  13.  33.  for  it  can  not  be  that  a  prophet  perish

14.  26.  hate  his  life,  he  can  not  be  my  disciple,  33.

John  1.  25.  if  thou  be  not  that  Christ,  nor  Elias
Rom.  12.  16.  be  not  wise  in  your  own  conceits

1  Cor.  2. 1 5.  your  faith  not  be  in  the  wisdom  of  men

9.  2.  if  I  be  not  an  apostle  unto  others,  yet  to  you

14.  20.  be  not  children  in  understanding,  but  in

2  Cor.  6.  14.  be  not  unequally  yoked  together
Gal.  1.  10.  I  should  not  be  tne  servant  of  Christ
Eph.  5.  7.  be  not  therefore  partakers  with  them

17-  be  ye  not  unwise,  but  understanding  what
Tit.  3. 14.  good  works,  that  they  be  not  unfruitful
Pliilem.  14.  thy  benefit  should  not  be  of  necessity
Iieb.  8.  4.  if  he  were  on  earth,  should  not  he  a  priest
1  Pet.  3. 3.  let  it  not  be  that  outward  adorning  of  hair
Let  there  BE.

Gen.  1. 3.  let  there  be  light  1  6.  let  there  be  a  firmament
13.  8.  let  there  be  no  strife  between  me  and  thee

26.  28.  let  there  be  now  an  oath  betwixt  us  and  thee
Exod.  5.  9.  let  there  be  more  work  laid  on  the  men
Ezra  5.  17.  let  there  be  search  made  in  king’s  treas.
Psal.  69-  t  25.  let  there  be  no  dweller  in  their  tents

Shall  BE,  or  shall  BE.

Gen.  2.  24.  to  his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh
4.  7-  to  thee  shall  be  his  desire,  and  thou  shaltrule

9.  25.  a  servant  shall  he  be  to  his  brethren

26.  God  of  Shem,  and  Canaan  shall  be  his  servant
12.  2.  I  will  bless  thee,  and  thou  shall  be  a  blessing
15. 5.  he  said  to  him,  so  .vAa// thy  seed  be,  Bom.  4. 18.

17.  16.  Sarah  shall  be  a  mother  of  nations

27.  33.  I  have  blessed  him,  and  he  shall  be  blessed

28.  21.  so  I  come  again,  then  shall  L.  be  my  God

35. 10.  but  Israel  shall  be  thy  name,  1  Kings  18. 31.

48.  21.  but  God  shall  be  with  you  and  bring  you

49.  10.  to  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be
Exod.  4. 1 9.  the  water  shall  be  blood  on  the  dry  land

16.  thou  shalt  be  to  him  instead  of  God

19.  5.  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  to  me

21. 36.  pay  ox  for  ox,  and  the  dead  shall  be  his  own
Lev.  13.  46.  without  the  camp  .i/iaf/his  habitation  be

20.  26.  ye  shall  be  holy  to  me,  ye  shall  be  mine
Deut.  28.  44.  he  shall  be  head,  and  thou  shalt  be  tail

32.  20.  hide  my  face,  I  see  what  their  end  shall  be
1  Sam.  17.  36.  this  uncircumcised  Phi.,  shall  be  as

1  Rings  20. 40.  the  king  said,  so  shall  thy  judgment  be

2  Chron.  19;  11.  the  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good
Job  20.  22.  in  fulness  he  shall  be  in  straits

22.  25.  yea,  the  Almighty  shall  be  thy  defence
P sal.  128. 2.  happy  shalt  thou  be,  it  shall  be  well  with
141.  5.  my  prayer  also  shall  be  in  their  calamities
Eccl.  1.  9.  that  hath  been,  is  that  which  shall  be

10.  14.  a  man  cannot  tell  what  shall  be

11.  3.  where  the  tree  falleth,  there  it  shall  be
Isa.  6.  13.  so  the  h  ly  seed  shall  be  the  substance
58.  8.  the  glory  of  tne  Lord  shall  be  thy  rere-ward

Jer .  13. 27.  not  be  made  clean,  when  shall  it  once  be?

15.  19.  thou  shalt  be  as  my  mouth,  let  them  return

32.  5.  and  there  shall  he  oe  till  I  visit  him

33.  9.  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  of  joy,  a  praise
Exek.  16.  16.  like  shall  not  come,  neither  shall  be  so

18.  20.  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  on  him

27 . 36.  thou  shalt  be  a  terror,  and  never  shalt  be  more
Dan.  2.  28.  what  shall  be  in  the  latter  days

8.  19.  at  the  time  appointed  the  end  shall  be,  11. 27.
Hos.  5.  9.  have  I  made  known  that  which  shall  be
Amos  5.  14.  so  the  God  of  hosts  shall  be  with  you
Zech.8. 13.  so  will  I  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  bless.
12. 8.  shall  be  as  David,  house  of  David  shall  be  as
Mnl.  3.  12.  for  ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  land
Mat  .24.21 .  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be,  Markl3.19
Mar k  9. 19.  how  long  shall  I  be  with  you,  Luke  9.41.
John  14.  17.  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in

19.  24.  but  cast  lots  for  it,  whose  it  shall  be
Acts  27-  25.  that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me
1  Cor.  15.  37;  thou  so  west  not  that  body  that  shall  be
1 John  3. ,2.  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be
Rev.  16. 5.  O  Lord,  which  ai  t,  and  wast,  and  shalt  be

22.  12.  to  give  every  man  as  his  work  shall  be
Shall  not,  or  shalt  not  BE.

Gen.  15.  4.  saying,  this  shall  not  be  thine  heir
Exod.  22.  25.  thou  shalt  not  be  to  him  as  an  usurer
Deut.  28. 13.  be  above  only,  thou  shalt  not  be  beneath
£  Kings  2.  10.  if  thou  see  me  not,  it  shall  not  be  so
Job  7. 21.  shalt  seek  me  in  morning,  but  I  shall  not  be
8. 1 22.  the  dwelling  place  of  the  wicked  shall  not  be
Ps.  37. 10.  itfA.  n.  befJer.  48.  30.  Dan.  11.29.  Am.  7.
Hos.  3.  3.  thou  shalt  not  be  for  another  man  [3, 6.
Mat.  16.22.  be  it  far  from  thee,  this  shall  not  be  to  thee
20.26.  sh.n.  be  so  among  you,  Mar.  10.43.  Luke  22.
-  To  BE.  [26.

Gen.  17.  7.  to  be  a  God  to  thee  and  thy  seed  after
39.  10.  he  hearkened  not  to  her  to  be  with  her
Lev.  22.  33.  brought  you  out  to  be  your  God,  25.  38.
Prov.  24.  1.  neither  desire  to  be  with  them
Eccl.  3.  15.  that  which  is  to  he  hath  already  been
Luke  15. 14.  when  he  spent  all,  he  began  to  be  in  want


1  Cor.  7-  26.  I  say  it  is  good  for  a  man  so  to  be

2  Cor.  12. 6.  above  that  which  he  seeth  me  to  be
Phil.  1.  23.  having  a  desire  to  be  with  Christ
Jam.  3.  10.  these  things  ought  not  so  to  be

2  Pet.  3. 11.  what  manner  or  persons  ought  ye  to  be
IVtll  BE.

Gen.  16.12. Ishmael  will  be  a  wild  man,  his  hand  will
be  against  every  man,  and  every  man’s  ag.  him
17. 8.  I  will  be  their  God,  Exod.  29. 45.  Jer.  24. 7.
,  I  32.  38.  2  Cor.  6.  16.

26.  3.  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  will  bless  thee,  31.  3.

Exod.  3.  12.  Judg.  6-  16.  1  Kings  11.  38.
28.  20.  if  God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me
34. 15.  if  ye  will  be  as  we  be,  circumcised
Neh.  4. 12.  from  all  places  they  will  be  upon  you
Psal.  48. 14.  he  will  be  our  guide,  even  unto  death
Jer.  7. 23.  obey  my  voice,  I  will  be  your  God,  30. 22.
Ezek.  11. 16.  1  will  be  to  them  as  a  little  sanctuary

20.  32.  that  ye  say,  we  will  be  as  the  heathen
Hos.  13. 14.  1  will  redeem  them  ;  O  death,  I  will  be
thy  plagues,  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction
14. 5.  1  will  be  as  the  dew  to  Israel,  he  shall  grow
Joel  3. 16.  the  Lord  will  be  the  hope  of  his  people
Zech.  2. 5.  I  the  Lord  will  be  to  her  a  wall  of  fire
round  about,  I  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  her
Mat.  6.  21.  where  treasure,  there  willy  our  heart  be
2  Cor.  6. 18.  I  will  be  a  Father  to  you,  and  ye  my

10. 11.  such  will  we  be  also  indeed,  when  present

1  Tim. 6.9.  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptations
Heb.  1.5.  I  will  be  to  him  a  Father,  he  to  me  a  son

8. 10.  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,  they  to  me  a  people
Jam.  4.  4.  whosoever  will  be  a  friend  of  the  world
Rev.  21.  7.  I  will  be  his  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  son

Been,  see  after  Be.

BEACON.

Isa.  30. 17.  be  left  as  a  b.  on  the  top  of  a  mountain
BEAM.

Judg.  16.  14.  he  went  away  with  the  pin  of  the  b.

1  Sam.  17. 7.  and  the  staff  of  his  spear  was  like  a

weaver’s  b.  1  Chron.  11.  23.  |  20.  5.

2  Kings  6. 2.  let  us  go  to  J  ordan,  and  take  thence  a  b.
5.  as  one  was  felling  a  b.  ax  head  fell  into  water

Hah.  2.  It.  the  b.  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer
Mat.  7.  3.  but  considerest  not  the  b.  Luke  6. 41,  42.

4.  and  behold,  a  b.  is  in  thine  own  eye

5.  thou  hypocrite,  first  cast  out  the  b.  Luke  6.  42.

BEAMS.

2  Chron.  3. 7-  he  overlaid  the  b.  the  posts,  and  walls
Neh.  2.  8.  that  he  may  rive  timber  to  make  b.

Psal.  104.  3.  who  layetn  the  b.  in  the  waters
Cant.  1. 17.  the  b.  of  our  house  axe  cedar  and  rafters
BEANS.

2.  Sam.  17.28.  Barzillai  brought  b.  lentilesto  David
Ezek.  4.  9.  take  unto  thee  wheat,  b.  lentiles,  millet
BEAR

Signifies,  [1]  To  carry,  Jer.  17.  21.  Mat.  27.  32.

[2]  To  suffer,  or  endure,  2  Cor.  11. 1.  Rev.  2.  2.

[3]  To  bring  forth,  Gen.  18.13.  [4]  To  produce,

or  yield.  Jam.  3.  12.  [5]  To  uphold,  or  support,
Psal.  75.  3.  I  91.  12.  [6]  To  be  punished  for,
Num.  14.  33.  [7]  To  undergo  the  care  and

fatigue  of  ruling  a  people,  Deut.  1.  12.  [8]  To
speak  and  utter,  Deut.  5.  20.  [9]  To  tell,  or  re¬
late,  2  Sam.  18.19.  [10]  To  be  answerable  inpay¬
ment  for,  2  Kings  18. 14.  [11]  To  lay  a  thing
sadly  to  heart,  Psal.  89.  50.  [12]  To  give  satisfac¬
tion  for,  Isa.  53. 11.  Heb.  9.  28.  [13]  To  perform,
or  fully  observe,  Acts  15. 10.

To  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  Rom.  15.  1.
To  comply  with  their  weakness  so  far  as  not  to  use
our  liberty  to  their  offence,  and  also  to  bear  with
them  in  their  failings  through  ignorance  or  weak¬
ness,  and  not  to  condemn  or  despise  them.

Gen.  4. 13.  my  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  b.
13.  6.  the  land  was  not  able  to  b.  them,  36.  7.

43.  9.  let  me  b.  the  blame  for  ever,  44.  32.

49.  15.  Issachar  bowed  his  shoulder  to  b.

Exod.  18. 22.  they  shall  b.  the  bur  den  with  thee
25. 27.  to*,  the  ark,  27. 7-  1  30.4.  |  37-5.  Deut.  10.8.
Josh.  3.  3,  8, 13, 14. 1  4.  16.  2  Sam.  15.  24.

28. 12.  Aaron  shall  b.  their  names  before  the  Lord
I*v.  19. 18.  thou  shalt  not  b.  any  grudge  against
Num.  11. 14.  not  able  to*,  all  this  people,  Deut.  1. 9.

14. 27.. how  long  shall  I  *.  with  this  congregation  J
33.  children  shall  b.  your  whoredoms,  Ezek.  23. 35.
Deut.  1.  31.  God  bare  thee  as  a  man  doth  b.  his  son
2  Sam.  18. 19.  let  me  run  and  b.  the  king  tidings
2  Kings  18. 14.  which  thou  puttest  on  me,  I  will  b.
Psal.  75.  3.  I  b.  up  the  pillars  of  the  earth
89.  50.  how  I  do  *.  in  my  bosom  the  reproach

91.12.  they  shall  *.  thee  up,  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4. 11.
144.  + 14.  that  our  oxen  be  able  to  b.  burdens
Prov.  9. 12.  if  thou  scomest,  thou  alone  shalt  b.  it
18. 14.  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  b.  ?

30. 21.  and  for  four  which  it  cannot  *.

Isa.  1. 14.  your  feasts,  I  am  weary  to  b.  them
46.  4.  I  have  made  and  I  will  b.  you,  even  carry
7 .  they  b.  him  upon  the  shoulder,  they  canw  him
52. 11.  be  ye  clean  that  b.  the  vessels  or  the  Lord
Jer.  10. 19.  truly  this  is  a  grief,  and  I  must  b.  it

17. 21.  b.  no  burden  on  the  sabbath-day,  27.

31. 19.  because  I  did  b.  the  reproach  of  my  youth

44. 22.  so  that  the  Lord  could  no  longer  l.

Lam.  3. 27.  it  is  good  to  b.  the  yoke  in  his  youth
Ezek.  12.  6.  in  their  sight  shalt  tnou  h.  on  shoulders

12.  the  prince  shall  *.  upon  his  shoulder  in  twilight

14. 10.  they  shall  *.  punishment  of  their  iniquity

16.  52.  b.  thou  thine  own  shame  for  thy  sins,  5-1.

32. 30.  and  b.  their  shame  with  them,  36. 7. 1  44. 13.

Ezek.  34.  29.  nor  b.  the  shame  of  the  heathen,  36. 15.
Amos  7.  10.  the  land  is  not  able  to  b.  his  words
Mic.  6. 16.  ye  shall  b.  the  reproach  of  my  people
7.  9. 1  will  b.  the  indignation  of  the  Lord,  1  s..^icd
Hag.  2. 12.  if  one  b.  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his
Zech.  5. 10.  whither  do  these  b.  the  ephah  ?

6. 13.  he  shall  b.  glory,  and  shall  rule  on  his  throne
Mat.  3. 11.  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  b.

27.  32.  they  found  Simon,  they  compelled  him  to
b.  his  cross,  Mark  15.  21.  Luke  23. 26.
Luke  14. 27.  and  whosoever  doth  not  b.  his  cross
18. 7-  avenge  his  elect,  tho’  he  b.  long  with  them  ?
John  16. 12.  manyr  things,  but  ye  cannot  b.  them  now


Acts  9.  15.  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  b.  my  name

15. 10.  a  yoke,  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  b.

18. 14.  O  Jews,  reason  would  I  should  b.  with  vou
Rom.  15. 1.  we  ought  to*,  infirmities  of  the  weak

1  Cor.  3.  2.  hitherto  ye  were  not  able  to  b.  it,  nor

10. 13.  a  way  to  escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  *.  it
15.  49.  we  shall  also  b.  the  image  of  the  heavenly

2  Cor.  11.  1.  would  to  God  ye  could  b.  with  me

4.  have  not  accepted,  ye  might  well  b.  with  him
Gal.  6.  2.  b.  one  another’s  burdens,  and  so  fulfil

5.  for  every  man  shall  b.  his  own  burden

17.  1  *.  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Heb.  5. 12.  who  can  reasonably  b.  with  the  ignorant
Jam.  3.  12.  can  the  fig-tree  b.  olive-berries  7
Rev.  2.  2.  thou  canst  not  b.  them  that  are  evil
Bear  fruit,  see  Fruit.

BEAR  iniquity.

Exod.  28. 38.  Aaron  may  b.  iniquity  of  holy  things
43.  Aaron  and  his  sons,  that  they  b.  not  iniquity
Lev.  5. 1.  he  shall  b.  his  iniquity,  17.  1 7. 18. 1  17. 16.

1 19.  8. 1  20.  17.

10. 17 .  hath  given  to  you  to  b.  iniquity  of  the  cong.

16. 22.  the  goat  shall  b.  upon  him  all  their  iniquities
20.  19.  they  shall  b.  their  iniquity,  Num.  18.  23.

Ezek.  44. 10, 12.

22.  16.  or  suffer  them  to  b.  iniquity  of  their  trespass
Num.  5.  31.  this  woman  shall  b.  her  iniquity
14. 34.  ye  shall  b.  your  iniquity  even  forty  years
18. 1.  Aaron  and  his  sons  b.  iniquity  ofsanctuary
30.  15.  after  lie  heard,  then  he  shall  b.  her  iniquity
Isa.  53. 11.  my  right,  servantshall  b.  their  iniquity
Ezek. 4.4.  number  of  days,  thou  shalt  b.  their  in.  5, 6.
18. 19.  why  doth  not  son  b.  iniquity  of  the  father  J
20.  the  son  shall  not  b.  the  iniquity  of  the  father
BEAR  judgment.

Exod.  28.  30.  Aaron  shall  b.  judg .  of  children  of

JsraeJ

Gal.  5.  10.  he  that  troubleth  you  shall  h.  his  judg.
Bear  record,  see  Record.

BEAR  rule.

Esth.  1.  22.  every  man  should  b.  rule  in  his  house
Prov.  12.  24.  the  hand  of  the  diligent  shall  b.  rule
Jer.  5.  31.  the  priests  b.  rule  by  their  means
Ezek.  19. 11.  had  strong  rods  for  them  that  b.  rule
Dan.  2.  39.  a  kingdom  of  brass  which  shall  b.  rule
BEAR  sin.

Lev.  19. 1 17-  rebuke,  that  thou  b.  not  sin  for  him
20.  20.  they  shall  b.  their  sin,  they  shall  die

22.  9.  lest  they  b.  sin  for  it,  and  aie,  therefore

24. 15.  whosoever  curseth  his  God,  shall  b.  his  sin
Aum.  9. 13.  shall  be  cut  off,  that  man  shall  b.  his  sin

18.  22.  not  come  nigh,  lest  they  b.  sin  and  die
32.  ye  shall  b.  no  sin  when  ye  heaved  the  best  of  it
Ezek.  23.  49.  and  ye  shall  b.  the  sin  of  your  idols
Heb.  9.  28.  so  Christ  was  once  offered  to  b.  sin
BEAR  witness.

Exod.  20. 16.  thou  shalt  not  b.  false  witness  against
thy  neighb.  Deut.  5. 20.  Mat.  19.18.  Rom,  13.9.
1  Kings  21. 10.  set  two  men  sons  of  Belial  to  b.  wit.
Mark  10. 19.  do  not  b.  false  witness.  Luke  18.  20.
Luke  11. 48.  truly  ye  b.  wit.  that  ye  allow  the  deeds
John  1.  7.  the  same  came  for  a  witness,  to  b.  witness
8.  he  was  sent  to  b.  witness  of  that  light
3.  28.  ye  yourselves  b.  me  witness  that  I  said
5.  31.  if  I  b.  wit.  of  myself,  my  witness  is  not  true

36.  same  works  that  I  do,  b.  witness  of  me,  10.  25.

8. 18. 1  am  one  that  b.  wit.  of  myself,  and  the  Father
15.  27.  ye  shall  also  b.  wit.  because  ye  have  been
18.  23.  if  1  have  spoken  evil.  b.  witness  of  the  evil

37.  for  this  cause  came  I,  that  I  should  b.  witness
Acts  22.  5.  also  the  high-priest  doth  b.  me  witness

23.  11.  so  must  thou  b.  witness  also  at  Rome

1  John  1.  2.  we  have  seen  it,  and  b.  witness,  and  shew
5.  8.  and  there  are  three  that  b.  witness  in  earth
BEAR.

Gen.  17. 17-  and  shall  Sarah  that  is  90  years  old  b.  ?

18. 13.  shall  I  of  a  surety  *.  a  child,  which  am  old
Lev.  12.  5.  but  if  she  b.  a  maid  child,  then  unclean
Deut.  28. 57 .  and  towards  her  children  she  shall  b.
Judg.  13.  3.  but  thou  shalt  conceive  and  b.  a  son

1  Kings  3.  21.  behold,  it  was  not  my  son  that  l  did  b.
Cant.  4. 2.  sheep,  whereof  every  one  b.  twins,  6. 6.
Isa,  7. 14.  a  virgin  shall  conceive  and  b.  ason,  and
54.  1 .  sing,  O  barren,  thou  that  didst  not  b.

Jer.  29.  6.  that  they  may  b.  sons  and  daughters
Luke  1.  13.  thy  wife  Elisabeth  shall  b.  a  son

1  Tim.  5.  14.  youiger^women_ marry,  b.  children

2  Chron.  2. 18.  he  set  70,000  to  be  b.  of  burdens

34.  13.  also  they  were  over  the  b.  of  burdens

Neh.  4.  10.  the  strength  of  the  *.  is  decayed
BEAREST.

Judg.  13.  3.  behold,  thou  art  barren,  and  b.  not
Psal.  106.  4.  with  the  favour  thou  .1 .  to  thy  people
John  8. 13.  thou  b.  record  of  thyself,  thy  record
Rom.  11.  18.  b.  not  the  root,  but  the  root  thee
Gal.  4.  27.  rejoice  thou  barren  that  b.  note
BEARETH.

Lev.  11.  28.  bs  that  b.  the  carcase  of  them,  wash
15.  10.  and  he  that  b.  any  0*  these  things
Num.  11.  12.  as  a  nursing  lather  l.  the  child
Deut.  25.  6.  the  first-born  she  b.  shall  succeed

29.  18.  lest  there  be  among  you  a  root  that*,  gall
23.  it  is  not  sown,  nor  *.  nor  grass  groweth
32.  11.  as  an  eagle  *.  her  young  on  her  wings
Job  24.  21.  evil  entreateth  the  barren  that  *.  not
Cant.  6.  6.  whereof  everyone  *.  twins,  none  barren
Joel 2.  22.  be  not  afraid,  for  the  tree  *.  her  fruit
Mat.  13. 23.  which  also  *.  fruit,  and  bringeth  forth
John  15.  2.  every  branch  that  *.  not  fruit,  takes
Rom.  13.  4.  for  he  *.  not  the  sword  in  vain
1  Cor.  13. 7.  charity  *.  all  things,  believeth  all  things
Heb.  6.  8.  that  which  *.  thorns  is  rejected
BEARETH  rule.

Prov.  29.  2.  when  the  wicked  *.  rule  people  mourn
BEARETH  witness.

Job  16. 8.  my  leanness  rising  up  *.  witness  to  my  face
Prov.  25. 18.  a  man  that  *.  false  witness  is  amaul
John  5.  32.  there  is  another  that  *.  witness  of  me
8. 18.  and  the  Father  that  sent  me,  *.  witness  of  me
Rom.  8. 16.  the  Spirit  *.  witness  with  our  spirit
1  John  5.  6.  and  it  is  the  Spirit  that  *.  witnes.'

21


I


B  E  A


BE  A


BE  A


BEARING.

Gen.  1.  29.  I  have  given  you  every  herb,  A.  seed

16.  2.  the  Lord  hath  restrained  me  from  b.

29.  35.  she  called  his  name  .ludah,  and  left  b.

37.  25.  Ishmaelites  with  camels  b.  spicerv
Num.  1 J.  17.  set  forward,  b.  the  tabernacle

21.  the  Rohathites  set  forward,  b.  the  sanctuary
Josh.  3.  3.  the  priests  b.  the  ark,  14.  2  Sam.  15.  24.

1  Sam.  17.  7.  one  b.  a  shield  went  before  him
Psal  126.  6.  he  that  goeth  forth  b.  precious  seed
Mark  14. 13.  there  shall  meet  you  a  man  b.  a  pitcher

of  water,  follow  him,  Luke  22.  10.
John  19.  17.  he  b.  his  cross,  went  forth  to  a  place
Rom.  2.  15.  their  conscience  also  b.  witness

9.  1.  I  lie  not,  my  conscience  also  b.  me  witness

2  Cor.  4.10.  b.  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the  L.  Jesus
Heb.  2.  4.  God  also  b.  them  witness  with  signs

13.  13.  let  us  go  forth  to  him,  A.  his  reproach

1  Tim.  2.  15.  she  shall  be  saved  in  child -bearing
BEAR,  S.

1  Sam.  17,  34.  came  a  lion  and  a  b.  took  a  lamb
36.  thy  servant  slew  both  the  lion  and  the  b.

2  Sam,  17.  8.  chafed,  as  a  b.  robbed  of  her  whelps
2  Kings  2,  24.  there  came  forth  two  she-5.  and  tare
Prov.  17. 12.  a  b,  robbed  of  her  whelps  meet  a  man
28.  15.  as  a  roaring  lion,  and  a  ranging  b.

Isa.  11.  7.  the  cow  and  b.  shall  feed  their  young
59.  11.  we  roar  all  like  b.  and  mourn  like  doves
Lam.  3.  10.  he  was  to  me  as  a  b.  lying  in  wait
Dan.  7.  5.  another  beast,  a  second  like  to  a  b.

Hos.  13.  8.  1  will  meet  them  as  a  b.  bereaved
Amos  5. 19.  as  if  a  man  did  flee  from  a  b.

Rev.  13.  2.  his  feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a  b.
BEARD,  S.

Lev.  13.  29.  if  a  man  hath  a  plague  on  head  or  b.
14.9.  shall  shave  all  his  hair  off  his  head  and  b.

19.  27.  nor  shalt  thou  mar  the  comers  of  b.  21.  5.

1  Sam.  17.  35.  I  caught  him  by  his  3.  and  slew  him

21.  13.  David  let  his  spittle  tall  on  his  b.

2  Sam.  10.  5.  tarry  at  Jericho  till  your  b.  be  grown

and  then  return,  1  Chron.  19.  5.

19.  24.  Mephibosheth  trimmed  not  his  b.

20.  9.  Joab  took  Amasa  by  the  b.  to  kiss  him
Ezra  9.  3.  plucked  off  hair  of  my  head,  and  ofmyi.
Psal.  133.  2.  ran  down  on  the  b.  even  Aaron’s  b.
Isa.  7.  20.  and  it  shall  also  consume  the  b.

15.  2.  on  all  heads  baldness,  and  every  b.  cut  off
Jer.  41.  5.  fourscore  men  having  their  b.  shaved
48.  37.  every  head  shall  be  bald,  every  b.  dipt
Ezek.  5.  1.  cause  a  razor  to  pass  on  thy  head  and  b.
BEAST

Signifies,  [1]  A  brute  void  of  reason,  Prov.  12.  10.

[2]  All  kind  of  cattle,  1  Kings  4.  33.  Psal.  8.  7*

[3]  Ministers  of  the  gospel,  who  are  full  of  liveli¬
ness  and  nimbleness,  in  executing  God's  com¬
mands,  Rev.  4.  6,  8.  j  7-  11.  [4]  Cruel  and  un¬
reasonable  men,  who  are  led  merely  by  their  natural
brutish  inclinations,  1  Cor.  15.  32.  2  Pet.  2.  12.
[5]  Kingdoms,  Dan.  7.  11 . 1  8.  4.  [6]  Antichrist,
Rev.  13.  2.  1  20.  4.  [7]  People  of  several  nations,
Dan.  4.  12.  21.

Gen.  1.  24.  God  said ,  let  the  earth  bring  forth  the  b.
25.  God  made  the  b.  of  the  earth  after  his  kind
3.  1.  the  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  any  b.

37.  20.  some  evil  b.  hath  devoured  him,  33.

Exod.  13.  12.  every  firstling  that  cometh  of  a  b.

22.  5.  put  his  b.  and  feed  in  another  man’s  field

10.  deliver  to  his  neighbour  any  b.  to  keep

19.  whoso  lieth  with  a  b.  shall  be  put  to  death,
Lev.  18.  2.3.  |  20.  15,  16.  Deut.  27.  21.

23.  29.  the  b.  of  the  field  multiply  against  thee
Lev.  11.  47.  b.  that  may  be  eaten,  and  b.  that  may

[not

27.  9.  if  it  be  a  b.  whereof  men  bring  an  offering
Deut.  4.  17.  the  likeness  of  any  b.  on  the  earth
Judg.  20.  48.  smote  them,  as  well  the  men  as  the  b.
2  Chron.  25.  +  18.  a  b.  trod  down  the  thistle  ,

Neh.  2.  12.  nor  any  b.  save  the  b.  T  rode  on
Psal.  68.  +  30.  rebuke  the  b.  of  the  reeds
73.  22.  so  ignorant,  I  was  asai.  before  thee
147.  9.  he  giveth  to  the  b.  his  food,  and  to  ravens
Prov.  12.  10.  a  righteous  man  regards  life  of  his  b.
Eccl.  3. 19.  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  above  a  b.
Isa.  43.  20.  the  b.  of  the  field  shall  honourme
63.  14.  as  a  b.  that  goeth  into  the  valley
Ezek.  44.  31.  dead  or  torn,  whether  it  be  fowl  or  b.
Dan.  4. 16.  let  a  b.  heart  be  given  to  him
7*  11.  I  beheld  even  till  the  b.  was  slain

19.  I  would  know  the  truth  of  the  fourth  b.

Hos.  13.  1 8.  the  b.  of  the  field  shall  tear  them
Luke  10.  34.  set  him  on  his  own  b.  and  brought  him
Acts  28.  5.  Paul  shook  off  the  b.  into  the  fire
Heb.  12.  20.  if  so  much  as  a  b.  touch  the  mountain
Rev.  4.  7.  first  b.  like  a  lion,  second  b.  third  b.

6.  3. 1  heard  the  second  b.  say,  come  and  see

11.  7.  b.  that  ascendeth  out  of  the  bottomless  pit
13. 1.  and  I  saw  a  b.  rise  up  out  of  the  sea,  having

11.  I  beheld  a  b.  coming  out  of  the  earth

15.  2.  them  that  had  got  the  victory  over  the  b.

16. 13.  unclean  spirits  came  out  of  mouth  of  the  b.

17.  8.  thou  sawest  the  b.  that  was,  and  is  not,  11.

19.  19.  1  saw  the  b.  and  the  kings  of  the  earth

20.  id.  where  the  b.  and  false  prophet  are

Every  BEAST.

Gen.  1.  30.  to  every  b.  I  have  given  green  herb  for
2. 19.  out  of  the  ground  God  formed  every  b.

20.  Adam  gave  names  to  every  b.  of  the  field
3.  14.  thou  art  cursed  above  every  b.  of  the  field

7.  2.  of  every  clean  b.  take  to  thee  by  sevens,  8.

14.  they  and  every  b.  after  his  kind,  and  cattle

8.  19.  every  b.  after  their  kinds  went  out  of  the  ark
20.  of  every  clean  b.  and  clean  fowl  he  offered

9. 2.  dread  of  you  shall  be  on  every  b.  of  the  earth
5.  your  blood  will  I  require  at  hand  of  every  b.

10.  with  every  b.  of  earth  I  establish  my  covenant
34.  23.  shall  not  every  b.  of  theirs  be  ours  ?

Lev.  11.  26.  the  carcases  of  every  b.  which  divideth
the  hoof,  nor  cheweth  the  cud,  Deut.  14.  6.
Psal.  50.  10.  for  every  b.  of  the  forest  is  mine  ;

104.  11.  they  give  drink  to  every  b.  of  the  field
Ezek.  34.8.  my  flock  became  meat  to  every  b.

39.  17.  son  of  man,  speak  to  every  b.  of  the  field

n


BEAST,  joined  with  Man.

Gen.  6.7-  Lord  said,  1  will  destrov  both  thaw  and  b.
Exod.  8. 17-  smote  dust,  it  becamelice  in  man  and  b.
9.9.  boil  breaking  with  blains  upon  man  and  b.  10.
19.  hail  shall  come  down  on  man  and  b.  22,  25
11.  7.  not  a  dog  move  his  tongue  against  man  or  b.

12. 12.  and  will  smite  all  the  first  born  in  Egypt,

both  of  man  and  b.  13.  15.  Psal.  135.  8.

13.  2.  first-born  of  man  and  b.  is  mine,  Num.  8. 17 .

19. 13.  whether  man  or  b.  it  shall  not  live

Lev.  27.  28.  no  devoted  thing  of  man  or  b.  shall  be
Num.  3. 13. 1  hallowed  to  me  first-born  of  man  and  b.
31.  26.  the  prey  that  was  taken,  both  of  man  and  b.
Psal.  36.  6.  Lord,  thou  preservest  man  and  b.

Jer.  7.  20.  fury  poured  on  man  and  b.  21.  6.  j  36.  29.
Ezek.  14.  13, 17,  19,21.  |  25. 13.  |  29.  8.  Zeph.  1.3.
27. 5. 1  have  made  man  and  b.  that  are  on  ground

31.  27-  I  will  sow  Judah  with  seed  of  man  and  b.

32.  43.  ye  say,  it  is  desolate  without  man  or  b.  33.

10,  12.  |  36.  29.  |  51.  62.
50.  3.  they  shall  depart,  both  man  and  b.

Ezek.  36.  11.  I  will  multiply  upon  you  man  and  b.
Jonah  3.  7*  let  not  man  nor  b.  taste  any  thing
Unclean  BEAST.

Lev.  5.  2.  or  if  a  soul  touch  any  unclean  b.  7.  21.
27. 11.  if  it  be  unci.  b.  of  which  they  do  not  offer,  27.
Wild  BEAST.

2  Kings  14.  9.  there  passed  by  a  wild b.  of  Lebanon,
and  trod  down  the  thistle,  2  Chron.  25.  18.
Job  39.  15.  forgetteth  that  wild  b.  may  break  them
Psal.  80.  13.  the  wild  b.  of  the  field  doth  devour  it
Hos.  13.  8.  the  wild  b.  shall  tear  them
BEASTS.

Gen.  31.  39.  that  which  was  tom  of  b.  Exod.  22.  31.

Lev.  7.  24. 1 17.  15.  |  22.  8.
+  54.  then  Jacob  killed  b.  upon  the  mount
36.  6.  Esau  took  all  his  b.  and  his  substance

45.  17.  lade  your  b.  and  go  to  the  land  of  Canaan
Exod.  8.  t  21.  I  will  send  a  mixture  of  noisome  b.

11. 5.  all  the  first-born  of  b.  shall  die

Lev.  11. 2.  these  b.  ye  shall  eat.  Deut.  14,  4.

3.  and  chew  cud  among  b.  shall  ye  eat,  Deut.  14. 6.

25.  7.  for  b.  shall  the  increase  thereof  be  meat

26.  6.  I  will  rid  evil  b.  out  of  the  land

Num.  20. 8.  give  the  congregation  and  their  b.  drink

31.  30.  of  all  b.  give  a  portion  to  the  Levites
Deut.  32.  24.  I  will  send  the  teeth  of  b.  on  them

1  Kings  4.  1 28.  barley  for  mules,  or  swift  b.

33  Solomon  spake  of  b.  and  of  fowl,  and  fishes

18.  5.  may  find  grass,  that  we  lose  not  all  the  b.

2  Kings  3.  17.  drink  both  ye,  your  cattle  and  b.
Ezra 1.  4.  help  him  with  gold,  goods,  and  with  b.
Job  12.  7.  ask  the  b.  and  they  shall  teach  thee

18.  3.  wherefore  are  we  counted  as  b.  and  vile
37-  8.  then  the  b.  go  into  dens,  and  remain
Psal.  49.  12.  man  is  like  the  b.  that  perish,  20.

78.  t  50.  he  gave  their  b.  to  the  murrain
104.  20.  wherein  all  the  b.  of  the  forest  creep
25.  in  the  sea,  are  both  small  and  great  b.

148.  10.  b.  and  all  cattle,  praise  the  Lord
Prov.  9. 2.  wisdom  hath  killed  her  b.

30.  30.  a  lion,  which  is  strongest  among  b.

Eccl.  3.  18.  they  might  see  that  themselves  are  b.

19.  that  which  befalleth  men,  befalleth  b.

Isa.  3  >.  6.  the  burden  of  the  b.  of  the  south
40. 16.  nor  b.  thereof  for  a  burnt-offering

46.  1.  their  idols  were  on  the  b.  and  cattle
66.  20.  upon  swift  b.  to  my  holy  mountain

Jer.  9. 10.  the  b.  are  fled  ||  12.  4.  the  b.  are  consumed
Ezek.  5.  17.  I  will  send  on  you  famine  and  evil  b.

pestilence,  blood,  and  the  sword,  14.  15.

32.  4. 1  will  fill  the  b.  of  whole  earth  with  thee

13.  I  will  destroy  all  the  b.  thereof,  34.  25,  28.
Dan.  4. 14.  let  the  b.  get  away  from  under  it

15.  let  his  portion  be  with  the  b.  in  the  grass
7-  17-  these  four  great  b.  are  four  kings
8.  4.  so  that  no  b.  might  stand  .before  him
Joel  1.  18.  how  do  the  b.  groan,  herds  perplexed
Amos  5.  22.  nor  regard  the  peace-offerings  of  fat  b.
Hab.  2.  17.  spoil  of  b.  which  made  them  afraid
Zeph.  2.  15.  become  a  place  for  b.  to  lie  down  in
Zech.  14.  15.  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  all  the  b.
Acts  7.  42.  O  Israel,  have  ye  offered  to  me  slain  b.  ?
23.  24.  provide  them  b.  that  ye  may  set  Paul  on
Rom.  1.  23.  changed  into  an  image  made  like  to  b.

1  Cor.  15.  32.  if  I  have  fought  with  b.  at  Ephesus
Jam.  3.  7.  for  every  kind  of  b.  is  tamed,  but  tongue

2  Pet.  2. 12.  but  these  as  natural  brute  b.  speak  evil
Jude  10.  but  what  they  know  naturally  as  brute  b.
Rev.  4.  6.  four  b.  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind

8.  the  four  b.  had  each  six  wings  about  him

9.  when  those  b.  give  glory  and  honour  to  him

5.  6.  in  midst  of  the  throne  and  four  b.  stood  a  Lamb

14.  the  four  b.  said,  Amen,  and  the  24  elders  fell
6. 1.  one  of  the  four  b.  saying,  come  and  see,  15. 7.
7.  11.  angels  stood  about  the  throne  and  the  four  b.

14.  3.  a  new  song  before  the  throne  and  four  b.

19. 4.  the  24  elders  and  four  b.  fell  down  to  worship

BEASTS  of  the  Earth.

Deut.  28. 26.  carcase  shall  be  meat  to  all  b.  of  earth
1  Sam.  17.  46.  carcases  of  Philistines  to  b.  of  earth
Job  5.  22.  nor  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  the  b.  of  earth
35.  11.  who  teacheth  us  more  than  the  b.  of  earth
Psal.  79.  2.  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  to  the  b.  of  earth
Isa.  18.  6.  they  shall  be  left  to  the  b.  of  the  earth
Jer.  7.  33.  the  carcases  of  the  people  meat  for  b.  of
the  earth,  16.  4. 1  19.  7-  I  34.  20.

15.  3. 1  will  appoint  over  them  b.  of  earth  to  devour
Acts  10. 12.  all  manner  of  four-footed  b.  of  earth,

11  6

Rev.  6. 8.  kill  with  hunger,  and  with  the  b.  of  earth
BEASTS  of  the  Field.

Exod.  23. 11.  what  the  poor  leave,  b.  of  field  may  eat
Deut.  7-  22.  lest  the  b.  of  the  field  increase  upon  thee

1  Sam.  17.  44.  come,  I  will  give  thy  flesh  to  b.  of  field

2  Sam.  21 . 10.  birds  by  day,  nor  b.  of  the  field  by  night
Job  5. 23.  b.  of  the  field  shall  be  at  peace  witn  thee

40.  20.  mountains,  where  all  the  b.  of  the  field  play
Psal.  8.  7.  thou  hast  put  b.  of  the  field  under  his  feet
Isa.  56.  9.  all  ye  b.  of  the  field  come  to  devour
Jer.  12.  9.  assemble  all  b.  of  the  field,  come  to  devour

27. 6.  b  of  field  have  1  given  him,  28. 14.  Dan.  2. 38.


Esek.  29.  5.  I  have  given  thee  for  meat  to  the  b.  0/,.

the  field,  and  to  the  fowls,  34.  5.  1  39.  4,  -

31.  6.  under  his  branches  b.  of  the  field  bring  forth
13.  all  the  b.  of  the  field  shall  be  on  his  branches

38.  20.  the  b.  of  the  field  shall  shake  at  my  presence
Dan.  4. 12.  the  b.  of  the  field  had  shadow  under  it

25.  thy  dwelling  shall  be  with  b.  of  the  field,  32.
lies.  2.  18.  make  a  covenant  for  them  with  b.  of  field
4.  3.  therefore  shall  the  land  mourn  with  b.  of  field
Joel  1.  20.  b.  of  field  cry  also  to  thee,  for  the  rivers
2. 22.  be  not  afraid .  ye  b.  of  field,  the  pastures  spring
Wild  BEASTS.

Lev.  26.  22.  T  will  also  send  wild  b.  among  you

1  Sam.  17.  46.  gave  carcases  of  Philistines  to  wild  b.
Psal.  50. 11.  and  the  wild  b.  of  the  field  are  mine
Isa.  13.  21.  but  wild  b.  of  the  desert  shall  lie  there

22.  and  the  wild  b.  of  the  islands  shall  cry
34.  14.  the  wild  b.  of  the  desert  shall  also  meet
with  the  wild  b.  of  the  island,  Jer.  50.  39.
Mark  1.  13.  Christ  was  there  with  the  wild  b.  and
Acts  10. 12.  sheet,  wherein  were  all  wild  b.  11.  6.

.  BEAT

Signifies,  [1]  To  smite,  or  strike,  Deut.  25.  3.  Mat.
21.  35.  [2]  To  bruise,  or  bray,  Exod.  30.  36.

Num.  11.  8.  [3]  To  batter ,  or  demolish ,  Judg.  8.
17*  2  Kings  3.  25.  [4]  To  get  the  better  of,  or
overcome,  2  Kings  13.  25.  [5]  To  thresh,  Ruth  2.
17.  Isa.  28.  27.  [6]  To  turn  or  convert  one  thing

into  another,  Isa.  2. 4.  Joel.  3.  10.

Exod.  30.36.  some  of  the  spices  shait  b.  very  small

39.  3.  they  did  b.  the  gold  into  thin  plates
Num.  11.  8.  the  people  b.  the  manna  in  a  mortar
Deut.  25.  3.  lest  if  he  exceed  and  b.  him  above  these
Judg.  8. 17.  he  b.  down  the  tower  of  Penuel

9. 45.  Abimelech  b.  down  the  city,  and  sowed  it
19.  22.  certain  sons  of  Belial  b.  at  the  door
Ruth  2.  17.  she  b.  out  that  she  had  gleaned

2  Sam.  22.43.  thendid  !  b.  them  small.  P  al.  18. 42.

2  Kings  3.  25.  the  Israelites  b.  down  tne  cities

13.  25.  three  times  did  Joash  b.  Benhadad

23.  12.  the  altars  did  the  king  b.  down,  and  brake
Psal.  52.  +  5.  God  shall  likewise  b.  thee  down

89.  23.  I  will  b.  down  his  foes  before  his  face
Prov.  23. 14.  thou  shalt  b.  him  with  the  rod  and
Isa.  2. 4.  b.  their  swords  into  plow-shares,  \.ic.  4. 3.

3. 15.  what  mean  ye,  that  ye  b.  my  people

27. 12.  the  Lord  snail  b.  off  from  the  channel

41.  15.  thresh  the  mountains,  b.  them  small
Joel 3. 10.  b.  your  plow-shares  into  swords,  and  your
Jonah  4.  8.  the  sun  b.  on  the  head  of  Jonah
Mic.  4. 13.  thou  shalt  b.  in  pieces  many  people
Mat.  7.  25.  and  b.  on  that  house,  27.  Luke  6.  48,  49.

21.  35.  the  husbandmen  took  his  servants,  and  b.

one,  Mark  12.  3.  Luke  20.  10,  11.
Mark  4.  37-  waves  b.  into  the  ship,  it  was  now  full
Luke  12. 45.  and  shall  begin  to  b.  the  men-servants  -
Acts  16.  22.  the  magistrates  commanded  to  b.  them

18.  17.  the  Greeks  took  Sosthenes  and  b.  him

22.  19.  I  imprisoned  and  b.  in  every  synagogue
27. 1 14.  there  b.  a  wind  called  Euroclydon

BEATEN.

Exod.  5.  14.  the  officers  of  Israel  were  b.  16.

25.  18.  cherub  of  b.  work,  37-  17,  22.  Num.  8.  4.

37.  7.  made  two  cherubims  b.  out  of  one  piece
Lev.  2.  14.  shalt  offer  corn  b.  out  of  full  ears
Deut.  25.  2.  if  the  wicked  man  be  worthy  to  be  b.
Josh.  8. 15.  all  Israel  made  as  if  were  b.  before  them
2  Sam.  2.17.  and  Abner  was  b.  and  the  men  of  Israel
2  Chron.  15.  1 6.  nation  was  b.  in  pieces  of  nation
34.  7.  when  he  had  b.  graven  images  to  powder
Job  4.  +20.  they  are  b.  in  pieces  from  morning
Prov.  10.  +  8.  but  a  prating  fool  shall  be  b.

23. 35.  they  have  b.  me,  and  I  felt  it  not
Isa.  28.  27.  fitches  are  b.  out  with  a  staff
30.  31.  thro’  voice  of  Lord  the  Assyrian  shall  be  b.
Jer.  46.  5.  and  their  mighty  ones  are  b.  down
Mic.  1.  7.  the  graven  images  shall  be  b.  to  pieces
Mark  13.  9.  in  the  synagogue  ye  shall  be  b.

Luke  1 2. 47.  servant  who  Knew  and  did  not  shall  be  b.
Acts  5. 40.  when  they  called  the  apostles  and  b.  them
16.37.  they  have  b.  us  openly  uncondemned
2  Cor.  11.  25.  thrice  was  I  b.  with  rods,  once  stoned
BEATEN  Gold.

Num.  8. 4.  this  work  of  the  candlestick  was  of  b.  gold

1  Kings  10. 16.  made  two  hundred  targets  of  b.  gold
17-  made  three  hund.  shields  of  b.gold,  2  Chr.  9. 16.

2  Chron.  9. 15.  six  hundred  shekels  b.  gold  to  a  target

BEATEN  Oil.

Exod.  27.  20.  pure  oil  h.  for  the  light,  Lev.  24.  2.

29. 40.  fourth  part  of  an  bin  of  b.  oil,  Num.  28.  5.
BEATEST.

Deut.  24.  20.  when  thou  b.  thy  olive  tree,  shalt  not
Prov.  23.  13.  for  if  thou  b.  him  with  rod,  shall  not
BEATETH.

1  Cor.  9.  26.  so  fight  I,  not  as  one  that  b.  the  air
BEATING.

1  Sam.  14.  16.  they  went  on  b.  down  one  another
Mark  12. 5.  many  others,  b.  some,  and  killing  some

BEAUTY

Signifies,  [1]  Comeliness,  or  handsomeness,  2  Sam.  14
25.  [21 A  chief  person,  or  city,  2  Sam.  1. 19.  Isa.  13.

19.  Lam.  2.  1.  [3]  Splendour ,  glory,  or  dignity,
Lam.  1. 6.  Zech.  11. 7.  [4]  Joy  and  gladness,  Isa.
61. 3.  [5]  The  excellent  order  of  a  government ,  the
prosperity,  riches,  and  peace  of  a  country,  together
with  the  holiness,  purity ,  and  truth  of  their  religion,
which  were  their  ornament  and  glory,  Ezek.  16.  14.

Exod.  28. 2.  holy  garment  for  Aaron,  for  glory  and  b.

2  Sam.  1. 19.  tne  b.  of  Israel  is  slain  on  high  places

14.  25.  none  so  much  praised  as  Absalom  for  b.

1  Chr.  16.29.  worship  tne  Lord  in  the  b.  of  holiness,

Psal.  29.  2.  I  96.  9,

2  Chro.  20.  21.  that  should  praise  the  b.  of  holiness
Esth.  1. 11.  to  show  the  people  and  princes  her  b.

Job  40. 10.  and  array  thyself  with  glory  and  b.

Psal.  27. 4.  to  behold  the  b.  of  the  Lord,  and  inquire

39.  11.  thou  makest  his  b.  to  consume  away
45.  11.  so  shall  the  king  greatly  desire  thy  b.

49. 14.  their  b.  shall  consume  in  the  grave
50.  2.  out  of  Zion  the  perfection  of  b.  God  shined

90.  17.  let  the  b.  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  on  us
96.  6.  strength  and  b.  are  in  his  sanctuary


BEC


BEE


‘Prov.  6.  25.  lust  not  after  her  b.  in  thy  heart
20.  29.  the  h.  of  old  men  is  the  gray  head
31.  30.  favour  is  deceitful,  and  b.  is  vain
Isa.  3.  24.  there  shall  be  burning  instead  of  b.
4.t2.  branch  of  the  l/)rd  shall  he  b.  and  glory

13.  19.  Babylon  the  A.  of  the  Chaldees’  excellency
28.  1.  whose  glorious  b.  is  a  fading  Howcr,  4.

5.  the  Lord  will  be  for  a  diadem  of  b.  to  residue
33.  17.  thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  his  b.

44.  13.  he  maketh  it  according  to  the  b.  of  a  man
53.  2.  there  is  no  b.  that  we  should  desire  him
61.  3.  to  give  to  them  that  mourn  b.  for  ashes
Lam.  1.  6.  from  Zion  all  her  b.  is  departed
2.  1.  and  cast  down  from  heaven  the  b.  of  Israel
15.  is  this  the  city  men  call  the  perfection  of  b.  ?
Etek.  7.  20.  as  for  the  b.  of  his  ornament  he  set  it
16. 14.  thy  renown  went  among  the  heathen  for  b.
15.  but  thou  didst  trust  in  thine  own  b.

25.  thou  hast  made  thy  b.  to  be  abhorred
27-  3.  thou  hast  said,  I  am  of  perfect  b.  28.  12.

4.  thy  builders  have  perfected  thy  b.  11.

28. 7.  shall  draw  swords  against  the  b.  of  thy  wisdom
17.  thine  heart  was  lifted  up  because  of  thy  b.

31.  8.  no  tree  was  like  the  Assyrian  in  his  b.

32.  19.  Egypt,  whom  dost  thou  pass  in  b.  ?

Has. ,10.  t  11.  I  passed  over  on  the  b.  of  her  neck

14.  0.  Israel’s  b.  shall  be  as  the  olive-tree,  his  smell
•Zech.  9.  17.  how  great  is  his  goodness  and  his  b.

11.  7-  I  took  two  staves,  one  I  called  b.  10.
BEAUTIES.

Psal.  110.  3.  in  the  b.  of  holiness,  from  the  womb  of
„  BEAUTIFY.

Ezra  7.  27.  put  in  the  king’s  heart  to  b .  Lord’s  house
Psal.  149.  4.  he  will  b.  tne  meek  with  salvation
Isa.  60. 13.  to  b.  the  place  of  my  sanctuary
BEAUTIFUL.

Gen.  29.  17.  Rachel  was  b.  and  well-favoured
Dent.  21.  11.  seest  among  the  captives  a  b.  woman

1  Sam.  16.  12.  David  was  of  a  b.  countenance
25.  3.  Abigail  was  of  a  b.  countenance

2  Sam.  11.  2.  Bathsheba  was  very  b.  to  look  upon
14. 1 25.  in  Israel  was  not  a  b.  man  as  Absalom

.Esth.  2.  7.  Esther  was  fair  and  b.  Mordecai  took  for
Psal.  48.  2.  b.  for  situation  is  mount  Zion
Eccl.  3.  11.  hath  made  every  thing  b.  in  his  time
Cant.  6.  4.  thou  art  b.  O  my  love,  as  Tirzah
7.  1.  how  b.  are  thy  feet  with  shoes,  O  princess
Isa.  4.  2.  in  that  day  shall  the  branch  of  Lord  be  b.
52.  1.  O  Zion,  put  on  thy  b.  garments
7.  how  b.  the  feet  of  them  that  bring,  Rom.  10. 15.
64. 11.  our  holy  and  b.  house  is  burnt  up
Jer.  13.  20.  where  is  the  flock,  thy  b.  floclc  ?

48.  17-  how  is  the  staff  broken,  and  the  b.  rod
Etek.  16  12.  I  put  a  b.  crown  upon  thine  head

13.  thou  wast  exceeding  b.  and  didst  prosper
23.  42.  the  Sabeans  put  b.  crowns  on  their  heads
Mat.  23.  27.  whited  sepulchres,  which  appear  b.
Acts  3.  2.  at  the  gate  of  the  temple  called  b.  10.

_  BECAME.

Gen.  2.  7.  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  b.  a  living  soul
19. 26.  Lot’s  wife  looked  back  and  b.  a  pillar  of  salt

49.  15.  Issachar  b.  a  servant  to  tribute

Exod.  4.  3.  it  b.  a  serpent  ||  4.  b.  a  rod  in  his  hand
36.  13.  he  coupled  it,  so  it  b.  one  tabernacle
1  Sam.  25.  37-  Nabal’s  heart  died,  he  b.  as  a  stone
IKmgs  12.  30.  and  this  thing  b.  a  sin.  13.  34.
pan.  2.  35.  the  stone  b.  a  great  mountain,  and  filled
\p°r-  20.  to  the  Jews  I  b.  a  Jew,  to  gain  the  Jews

Heb.  7.  26.  such  an  High-Priest  b.  us,  who  is  holy
10.  33.  whilst  ye  b.  companions  of  them  so  used
Rev.  16.  3.  the  sea  b.  as  the  blood  of  a  dead  man
„  „  BECAMEST.

1  Chron.  17.  22.  and  thou,  Lord,  b.  their  God
Etek.  16.  8.  I  sware  unto  thee,  and  thou  b.  mine
_  BECAUSE.

Gen.  3.  +  1.  b.  God  hath  said,  ye  shall  not  eat
r  14.  said  to  the  serpent,  b.  thou  hast  done  this


- -  IV/  V**V-  VJV/*  u .  Uiv.

Lev.  26.  43.  b.  even  b.  they  des


spised  my  judgments
these  judgments


Pfut.  7. 1 12.  b.  ye  hearken  to  these  judgments
2^ Sam.  12.  6.  b.  he  did  this,  b.  he  had  no  pity
Prop.  1.  24.  b.  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused!
r'J'  +  9‘  do  ye  not  believe,  b.  ye  are  not  stable
-Erjk.  13. 10.  b.  even  b.  they  seduced  mjT  people
36. 1 3.  b.  for  b.  they  have  made  you  desolate
Mat.  25.  31.  all  ye  shall  be  offended  b.  of  me
Mark  9.  41 .  give  you  water,  b.  ye  belong  to  Christ
John  6.  26.  ye  seek  me,  not  b.  ye  saw  the  miracles,
but  b.  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  were  filled
8.  43.  even  b.  ye  cannot  hear  my  word
10.  13.  the  hireling  fleeth,  b.  he  is  an  hireling
14.  19.  but  ye  see  me,  b.  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also
Rom.  8.  10.  the  Spirit  is  life  b.  of  righteousness
til.  quicken  vourtnortal  bodies  b.  of  his  Spirit
Ppb.  5.  6.  b.  of  these  cometh  the  wrath  of  God

not  profit,  b.  not  united  by  faith  to  them
0. 13.  b  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by
\  John  3.  14.  from  death  to  life,  b.  we  love  brethren

4.  19.  we  love  him  b.  he  first  loved  us

BECKONED.

Luke\.  22.  Zecharias  b.  and  remained  speechless

5.  7.  they  b.  to  their  partners  in  the  other  ship
John  13.  24.  Peter  b.  to  him  that  he  should  ask
Acts  19.  33.  Alexander  b.  with  his  hand,  and  would

2L  40.  Pau  stood,  on  stairs,  and  b.  with  the  hand
24.  10.  I  aul,  aftef  the  governor  had  b.  answered
.  BECKONING.

Acts  12.  17.  Peter  b.  unto  them  with  the  hand
13.  16.  Paul  stood  up,  and  b.  with  his  hand,  said
.  BECOME.

Gen.  3.  22.  man  is  b.  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and
II- l16-  1  w!  bless  ber,  and  she  shall  b.  nations
37. 20.  we  will  see  what  will  b.  of  his  dreams
38.  +  23.  let  her  take  it,  lest  we  b.  a  contempt
Exod.  15.  2.  the  Tx>rd  is  my  strength,  and  is  b.  my
salvation,  Psal.  118.  14.  Isa.  12.  2.
32.  1.  for  as  for  this  Moses  that  brought  us  up,  we
„  wot  not  what  is  b.  of  him,  23.  Acts  7.  40.
pent.  27.  9.  O  Israel,  thou  art  b.  the  people  of  God
I  Sam.  28. 16.  seeing  the  Inrd  is  b.  thine  enemy
Jonah  A.  5.  he  might  see  what  would  b.  of  the  city
Mat.  .1.  42.  the  same  is  b.  the  head  of  the  comer,
Mark  12. 10.  Luke  20.  17.  Acts  4.  11.


John  1. 12.  he  gave  power  to  h.  die  sons  of  God
2  Cor.  5. 17  m  Christ,  behold,  all  things  are  b.  new
Kei.  11.  15.  are  o.  the  kingdoms  ot  our  Lord
_  f  BECOMETH.

Psal.  93.  5.  holiness  A.  thy  house,  O  Lord,  for  ever
Irov.  10. 4.  he  b.  poor  that  dealeth  with  a  slack  hand
i7.  7-  excellent  speech  b.  not  a  fool,  much  less  do
18.  a  man  void  of  understanding  b .  surety
nsc!'  o'  If’  JT  ^at  is  born  in  his  kingdom,  b.  poor
PP'Jn  hi;  t  u,is  lt.h  Vs  *°  fulfil  all  righteousness
13.  22.  the  deceitfulness  of  riohes  choketh  the
word,  and  he  b.  unfruitful,  Mark  4. 19
32.  greatest  among  herbs,  and  b.  a  tree,  MarH.  32.
Kom.15.2.  thatye  receive  Phebe  our  sister  as#.  saints
Ep#.5.3.covetousness  not  be  once  named,  as  b.  saints
Pint.  1.  27.  let  your  conversation  be  as  b.  the  gospel
1  Jtw.  2. 10.  as  b.  women  professing  godliness
1  it,  2.  3.  aged  women  be  in  behaviour  as  b.  holiness
BED  '

Signifies,  [1]  That  -whereon  persons  sleep  in  the  night,
1  Sam.  19.  13.  f2]  A  couch  to  rest  on  in  the  day,
ba'o'  5b, ***  L3L **’»,  torment,  or  tribulation,
iter.  x.  22.  pj  I  he  grave f  which  is  as  a  sleeving
house,  for  the  righteous,  Isa.  57-  2.  [5.]  The  law¬
ful  use  oj  wedlock,  Heb.  13.  4.

On  my  bed,  Cant.  3.  1.  while  I  was  in  a  secure  or
slothful frame.

Our  bed  is  green,  Cant.  1.  16.  The  ordinances  and
means  of  grace,  where  I  enjoy  sweet  fellowship  and
communion  with  thee,  are  not  only  pleasant  and
delightful,  but  also  fruitful ;  and,  by  the  Spirit's
accompanying  them,  they  are  made  effectual  for
the  converting  of  many.

Gen.  47.31.  bowed  himself  on  the  b.  1  Kings!. 47
49.  4.  wentest  up  to  thy  father’s  b.  1  Chron.  5.  1.
Exod.  21. 18.  and  he  die  not,  but  keepeth  his  b.

Lev.  15. 4.  every  A.  whereon  he  lieth  is  unclean,  24.

1  Sam.  19. 13.  Michal  took  an  image  and  laid  it  in  b.

2  Sam.  3.  t  31.  king  David  himself  followed  the  b.
4.  5.  lsh-bosheth  who  lay  on  a  b.  at  noon
!E  2.  in  ari  evening-tide  David  arose  from  his  b.

2  Kings  1 . 4.  shall  not  come  down  from  that  b.  6. 16.

4.  10.  let  us  set  there  for  him  a  b.  and  a  table
Job  7.  13.  when  I  say,  my  b.  shall  comfort  me
17-  13.  I  have  made  my  b.  in  the  darkness
33.  15.  God  speaketh  in  slumberings  upon  the  b.
Psal.  4. 4.  commune  with  your  own  heart  on  your  b.
36.  4.  he  deviseth  mischief  on  his  b.

41.  3.  thou  wilt  make  all  his  b.  in  his  sickness
63.  6.  when  I  remember  thee  upon  my  b.  and
132. 3.  nor  go  up  into  my  b.  till  1  find  a  place
139.  8.  if  I  make  my  b.  in  hell,  thou  art  there
Prov.  7 . 16.  I  have  decked  my  b.  with  tapestry,  17.
22.  27.  why  should  he  take  thy  b.  from  under  thee  ?
26. 14.  on  hinges,  so  doth  the  slothful  on  his  b.

Cant.  1.  16.  fair,  yea  pleasant,  also  our  b.  is  green

3. 1.  by  night  on  my  h.  I  sought  him  whom  my  soul
7.  behold,  his  b.  which  is  Solomon’s,  valiant  men
t  9.  Solomon  made  himself  a  b.  wood  of  Lebanon

-“£•  28. 20.  the  b.  is  shorter  than  a  man  can  stretch
57.  7.  on  a  lofty  mountain  hast  thou  set  thy  b.
Amos  3. 12.  Israel  taken  out  in  the  corner  of  a  b.
Mat.  9.  6.  Jesus  saith,  take  up  thy  b.  and  walk,
_  „  Mark  2.  9, 11.  John  5.  11,  12.

Mark  4. 21.  a  candle  to  be  put  under  a  b.  Luke  8. 16.
Luke  11. 7.  my  children  are  with  me  in  b.  I  cannot
17.  34.  two  men  in  one  b.  one  taken,  the  other  left
Rev.  2.  22.  behold  I  will  cast  her  into  a  b.

1  BED  of  love.

Exek.  23.17  •  Babylonians  came  to  her  in  the  b.  of  love
BED  of  spices.

Gant.  5. 13.  his  cheeks  are  as  a  b.  of  spices,  as  flowers

6. 2.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  to  the  b.  of  spices
.  BED  undefiled.

Heb. 13 A.  marriage  is  honourable  and  theb. undefiled
BED-CHAMBER.

Exod.  8.  3.  frogs  come  into  thy  b.-c.  and  on  thy  bed
2  Sam.  4.7.  Ish-bosheth  lay  in  his  b.-c.  they  slew  him
2  Kmgs5.12.  telleth  the  words  thou speakest  in  b.-c.

11.  2.  hid  him  and  nurse  in  the  b.-c.  2  Chron.  22. 11
Eccl.  10. 20.  and  curse  not  the  rich  in  thy  b.-c
7,  ,  ,  BEDS.

Psal.  149. 5.  let  the  saints  sing  aloud  on  their  b.

Isa,  57.  2.  they  shall  rest  in  their  b.  each  one  walking
*ios*  7- 14.  not  cried  when  they  howled  upon  their  b
Amos  6. 4.  lie  on  b.  of  ivory,  and  stretch  themselves
Mic.  2.  1.  wo  to  them  that  work  evil  on  their  b.

Mark  7. 1 4.  washing  of  cups,  and  b.  brazen  vessels
BEDSTEAD.

Ueut.  3. 11.  king  of  Bashan,  his  b.  was  a  b.  of  iron
BEE,  BEES.

Hent.  1. 44.  the  Amorites  chased  you  as  b.  in  Seir
Judg.  14. 8.  a  swarm  of  b.  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion
Esal.  118.  12.  they  compassed  me  about  like  b.

Isa.  7 . 18.  the  Lord  shall  hiss  for  the  b.  in  Assyria
,  _  BEEN.

1  Sam.  10.  +  27.  Saul  was  as  though  he  had  b.  deaf
"  Sam.  1.26.  very  pleasant  hast  thou  b.  tome
12. 8.  if  that  had  b.  too  little,  1  would  have  given
Job  3.  13.  1  should  have  slept,  then  had  I  b.  at  rest
D •  9.  thou  hast  b.  my  help,  leave  me  not,  63. 7
94.  17 .  unless  the  L.  had  b.  my  help,  my  soul  had
Isa.  48. 18.  then  had  thy  peace  b.  as  a  river
49. 21.  I  was  left  alone ;  these,  where  had  they  b.  ?
Mat.  23.  30.  if  we  had  b.  in  the  days  of  our  fathers
28;  +  2.  behold,  there  had  b.  a  great  earthquake
Luke  24.  21.  but  we  trusted  that  it  had  b.  he  which
Acts  4.  13.  took  knowledge  they  had  b.  with  Jesus
9-29.  we  had  b.  as  Sodom,  and  like  Gomorrah

1  Ism.  5. 9.  a  widow,  having  b.  the  wife  of  one  man
*  Tim.  3. 1 10.  thou  hast  b.  a  diligent  follower  of  my

2  Pet.  2.  21.  it  had  b.  better  not  to  have  known  the
1  John  2.  19.  if  they  had  b.  of  us,  no  doubt  they

Hath  BEEN.

Gen.  31.  5.  the  God  of  my  fathers  hath  b.  with  me
Deut.H.  7*  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  b.  with  thee

1  Sam.  14.  38.  see  wherein  this  sin  hath  b.  this  dav

2  Chron.  15.  3.  Israel  hath  b.  without  the  true  God
Eccl.  3.  15.  that  which  hath  b.  is  now,  and  that

which  is  to  be  hath  already  b
Isa.  28.  1 10.  for  precept  hath  b.  upon  precept
Jer.  22, 21.  this  hath  b.  thy  manner  from  thy  youth


BEF

Joel  1.2.  hath  this  h.  in  your  days  or  your  fatners
John  11.  39.  for  he  hath  b.  dead  four  days
Rom.  11.  34.  or  who  hath  h.  his  counsellor?

„  0  Have  BEEN.

1  Sam.  4.  9.  not  servants  to  Hebrews  as  they  have  b

1  GAr.  17.  8 .  have  b.  with  thee  whither  thou  walkedst

s,in<re  the  days  of  our  fathers  have  we  b.
Job  10. 19.  I  should  have  b.  as  if  I  had  not  b.

Psal.  25.  6.  thy  tender  mercies  have  b.  ever  of  old
37.25.  have  b.  young,  and  now  old.  yet  have  not  seen
42.  3.  my  tears  have  b.  my  meat  day  and  night
i.f«.1.9.should  have  b. as  Sodom, have  b. as  Gomorrah
26. 17.  so  have  we  b.  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord
18.  have  b.  with  child,  have  b.  in  pain,  as  it  were
'  66.  2.  all  those  things  have  b.  saith  the  Lord
Jer.  2.  31.  have  I  b.  a  wilderness  to  Israel  ?

28.  8.  the  prophets  that  have  b.  before  me
Hos.  5.  2.  though  I  have  b.  a  rebuker  of  them  all
Mai.  2. 9.  but  have  b.  partial  in  the  law
Mark  8.  2.  they  have  b.  with  me  three  days
Luke  1. 70.  which  have  A.  since  the  world  began
John  14.  9.  have  I  b.  so  long  time  with  you  <

15.  27.  because  ye  have  b.  with  me  from  the  begin.
Acts  20. 18.  after  what  manner  I  have  b.  with  you

2  Cor.  11.  25.  a  night  and  a  day  I  have  b.  in  the  deep
Gal.  3. 21.  righteousness  should  have  b.  by'  the  law

Not  BEEN.

Exod.  9. 18.  to  rain  hail  such  as  hath  not  b.  in  Egypt
1  Rings  3. 1 13.  not  b.  among  the  kings  like  thee
14.  8.  yet  hast  not  b.  as  my  servant  David
Job  3. 16.  as  an  hidden  untimely  birth  1  had  not  b.
10. 19.  I  should  have  been  as  tho’  I  had  not  b.
Psal.  124. 1.  if  it  had  not  b.  the  Lord  on  our  side,  2.
Eccl.  4.  3.  better  than  both  is  he  that  hath  not  b.
Vbad.  16.  they  shall  be  as  though  they  had  not  b
Mat.  26.  24.  good  for  that  man  he  had  not  b.  born
Luke  16. 11.  if  therefore  ye  have  not  b.  faithful,  12
,  BEETLE.

Lev.  11. 22.  these  of  may  ea*>  the  b.

Lev.  22. 19.  offer  atyour  own  will  of  the  b.  of  sheep
21.  whosoever  offers  a  free-will-offering  in  b.
Num.  31. 28.  levy  a  tribute  to  the  Lord  of  the  b.

38.  the  Lord’s  tribute  of  b.  threescore  and  twelve
BEFALL.

Gen.  42. 4.  lest  peradventure  mischief  b.  him
38.  if  mischief  b .  him  by  the  way  then,  44. 29.

49. 1.  that  I  may  tell  you  what  shall  b.  you  in  the
last  days,  Deut.  31.  29.  Dan.  10.  14.
Dent.  31.  17.  many  evils  and  troubles  shall  b.  them
Psal.  91. 10.  there  shall  no  evil  A.  thee,  nor  plague
Acts  20. 22.  not  knowing  things  that  shall  b.  me
_  BEFALLEN.

Lev.  10. 19.  and  such  things  have  b.  me
Num.  20. 14.  thou  knowest  all  travail  that  hath  b.  us
Deut.  31. 21.  when  many  troubles  are  b.  them
Judg.  6. 13.  if  Lord  be  with  us,  why  is  all  this  b.  us  ?

1 Sam.  20. 26.  he  thought  something  had  b.  him
Esth.  6.  13.  Haman  told  every  thing  that  had  b.
Mat.  8. 33.  and  what  was  b.  to  the  possessed  of  devils
„  ,  BEFALLETH.

Eccl.  3.  19.  for  that  which  b.  the  sons  of  men,  b.

beasts,  even  one  thing  b.  them
BEF  ELL.


2  Sam.  I9.  7.  will  be  worse  than  all  that  h.  thee
Mark  5. 16.  told  how  it  b.  to  him  that  was  possessed
Acts  20. 19.  b.  ine  by  the  lying  in  wait  of  the  Jews
.  BEFORE

Signifies,  [1]  In  sight  of,  Gen.  43. 14.  [2]  Rather
than,  2  Sam.  6.  21.  [3]  Free  to  one's  view  and
choice,  Gen.  20.  15.  .[4]  At,  Rev.  3.  9.  [5]  Not
being  sent  or  commissioned  by,  John  10.  8.  [6j
First,  (1)  In  order  of  time,  Isa.  43.  13.  (2)  In
order  of  place.  Josh.  8.  10.  Luke  22.  47.  (3)  In
order  of  dignity,  John  1.  15,  27.

Gen.  20. 15.  behold  my  land  is  b.  thee,  dwell  where
24.  45.  b.  I  had  done  speaking  in  my  heart
31.  2.  his  countenance  was  not  toward  him  as  b.

43. 14.  the  Lord  give  you  mercy  b.  the  man
48.  20.  and  he  set  Ephraim  b.  Manasseh

Exod.  16.  .34.  Aaron  laid  it  up  b.  the  testimony
Num.  6. 12.  but  the  days  that  were  b.  shall  be  lost
Josh.  4. 18.  Jordan  flowed  over  his  banks  as  b.

10. 14.  there  was  no  day  like  that  b.  it,  or  after  it’
Judg.  3.  2.  at  least  such  as  b.  knew  nothing  thereof

16.  20.  said,  I  will  go  as  b.  and  shake  myself
2  Sam.  6. 21.  chose  me  6.  thy  father,  and  h.  his  house
10.  9.  Joab  saw  the  battle  was  against  him  b.  and

behind,  1  Chron.  19. 10.
22.  +  25.  according  to  my  cleanness  b.  his  eyes

1  Kings  13.  6.  the  king’s  hand  became  as  it  was  b.

2  Chron.  13. 14.  the  battle  was  b.  and  behind
33. 19.  Manasseh  his  trespass  b.  he  was  humbled

Job  3.  24.  for  my  sighing  cometh  b.  I  eat
10.  21.  b.  I  go,  whence  I  shall  not  return
42.  10.  Lord  gave  Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had’#.
Psal.  31.  22.  I  am  cut  off  from  h.  thine  eyes

39. 13.  spare  me  b.  I  go  hence  and  be  no  more
80. 9.  thou  preparedst  room  b.  it,  and  didst  cause  it
119.  67.  b  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  now

139. 5.  thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  b.  and  laid
Eccl.  7.  I?,  why  shouldest  thou  die  b.  thy  time  r
Isa.  9. 12.  Syrians  b.  and  the  Philistines  behind

17. 14.  and  behold,  b.  the  morning  he  is  not

43. 13.  b.  the  day  was,  I  am  he,  and  there  is  none

65. 24.  that  b.  they  call  I  will  answer  and  hear
Jer.  1. 5.  b.  1  formed  thee  in  the  belly,  I  knew  thee
Ezek.  44. 12.  they  ministered  to  them  b.  their  idols

22.  they  shall  take  a  widow  that  had  a  priest  b.
Hos.  7.  2.  their  own  doings,  they  are  b.  my  face
Amos  4.  3.  every  cow  at  that  which  is  b.  her
Mai.  2. 5.  he  feared  me,  and  was  afraid  b.  my  name

4. 5.  I  will  send  Elijah  the  prophet  b.  the  coming
Mat.  1. 18.  b.  they  came  together,  she  was  with  child
6. 8.  knoweth  what  things  ye  need  b.  ye  ask

8.  29.  art  thou  come  to  torment  us  b.  the  time

24.25.  behold,  I  have  told  you  b.

Luke  2.  26.  not  see  death  b.  he  had  seen  the  Lord
23. 12.  for  b.  they  were  at  enmity  between  theme.
John  6. 62.  see  the  Son  of  manasce.  where  lie  was  b . ,

7. 51.  doth  our  law  judge  any  man  h.  it  hear  him  ?

13. 19.  now  I  tell  vou  b.  it  come.  14.  29.

23


BEG


BEG


BEH


Acts  2. 31.  he  seeing  this  A .  spake  of  the  resurrection
4.  28.  to  do  thy  counsel  determined  A.  to  be  done
10.  41  but  to  witnesses  chosen  b.  of  God,  to  us
2  Cor.  8. 10.  who  have  begun  b.  not  only  to  do
Gal.  5.  21.  of  which  I  tell  you  A.  as  1  told  you
Eph.  3.  t  3.  as  1  wrote  a  little  A.

Phil.  3.  13.  reaching  forth  to  those  things  that  are  A.
Col.  1.5.  whereof  ye  heard  A.  in  the  word  of  truth
1  Thess.  2.  2.  but  even  after  that  we  had  suffered  A.
3. 4.  when  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  A.

1  Tim.  1. 13.  who  was  A.  a  blasphemer,  a  persecutor
Heb.  f.  18.  disannulling  of  the  command  going  A.

10.  15.  for  after  that  he  had  said  A.  this  is  covenant

2  Pet.  3.  2.  mindful  of  words  spoken  A.  by  prophets

17.  seeing  ye  know  these  things  A.  beware  lest

Rev.  3.  9.  make  them  to  worship  A.  thy  feet
4.  6.  were  four  beasts,  full  of  eyes  A.  and  behind
Come  BEFORE.

Exod.  22.  9.  both  parties  shall  come  A.  the  judge
Psal.  100. 2.  come  A.  his  presence  with  thanksgiving
Mic.  6.  6.  wherewith  shall  1  come  A.  the  Lord?

2  Tim.  4.  21.  do  thy  diligence  to  come  A.  winter
BEFORE  the  people.

Gen.  23. 12.  Abraham  bowed  A.  the peopleoi the  land
Exod.  13.  22.  nor  the  pillar  of  fire  from  A.  the  people
17.  5.  the  Lord  said  to  Moses,  go  on  A.  the  people
34. 10.  A.  all  thypeoi  le  1  will  do  marvels
Josh.  8. 10.  Joshua  and  elders  went  A.  the  people  to  Ai
1  Sam.  18. 13.  he  went  out,  and  came  in  A.  the  people
Mark  8.  6.  gave  disciples  did  set  them  A.  the  people
Luke  20. 26.  not  take  hold  of  his  words  A.  the  people
Rev.  10.  11.  thou  must  prophesy  A.  many  peoples
BEFORE  whom.

Gen.  24. 40.  Lord  A.  whom  I  walk  will  send  his  angel
48.  15.  God  A.  whom  my  fathers  did  walk

1  Kings  17. 1.  Elijah  said  to  Ahab,  as  the  Lord  God

of  Israel  liveth,  A.  whom  I  stand,  18.  15.
2  Kings  3.  14.  |  5.  16.

Esth.  6. 13.  Mordecai  A.  whom  thou  h.ist  begun  to  fall
Dan.  7.  8.  A.  whom  there  were  three  of  the  first  horns

20.  and  A.  whom  three  fell,  even  of  that  hom
Acts  26.  26.  the  king,  A.  whom  also  I  speak  freely
See  further.  All,  Ark,  God,  Him,  Lord,  Me,
M'ount,  Stand,  Stood,  Thee,  Them,  As,
Went,  You.

BEFOREHAND.

Mark  13.  11.  take  no  thought  A.  what  to  speak

2  Cor.  9.  5.  go  and  make  up  A.  your  bounty
1  Tim.  5.  24.  some  men’s  sins  are  open  A.

25.  the  good  works  of  some  are  manifest  A,

1  Pet.  1.  11.  testified  A.  the  sufferings  of  Christ
BEFORETIME.

Josh.  20.  5.  because  he  hated  him  not  A.

1  Sam.  9.  9-  A.  in  Israel,  when  a  man  went ;  he  who

is  called  a  prophet  was  A.  called  a  seer

2  Sam.  7. 10.  nor  afflict  them  any  more  as  A.

2  Kings  13. 5.  Israel  dwelt  in  their  tents  as  A.

Neh.  2.  1.  I  had  not  been  A.  sad  in  his  presence
Isa.  41.  26.  who  hath  declared  A.  that  we  may  say
Acts  8.  9-  called  Simon  which  A.  used  sorcery

BEGAN.

Gen.  4.  26.  then  A.  men  to  call  on  the  name  of  Lord
Num.  25. 1.  the  people  A.  to  commit  whoredom  with
Judg.  20.  31.  they  A.  to  smite  Israel  as  at  other  times

1  Sam.  14.  +  35.  that  altar  he  A.  to  build  to  the  Lord

2  Kings  10.  32.  the  Lord  A.  to  cut  Israel  short

2  Chron.  20.  22.  when  they  A.  to  sing,  the  Lord  set
31.  7-  in  the  third  month  they  A.  to  lay  the  heaps
34.  3.  while  young  Josiah  A.  to  seek  after  God
Ezek.  9-  6.  then  they  A.  at  the  ancient  men
Mat.  4. 17-  from  that  time  Jesus  A.  to  preach  and  say
Mark  14.  t  72.  he  A.  to  weep  when  he  thought
Luke  1.70.  which  have  been  since  the  world  A.

14.  30.  this  man  A.  to  build  and  was  not  able
John  4.  52.  inquired  the  hour  when  he  A.  to  amend
9.  32.  since  the  world  A.  Acts  3.  21.  Rom.  16.  25.
Acts  12. 1 1.  Herod  A.  to  vex  certain  of  the  church
2  Tim.  1.  9.  in  Christ  before  the  world  A.  Tit.  1.  2.
Heb  A.  3.  salvation  at  first  A.  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord
BEGAT.

Prov.  23.  22.  hearken  to  thy  father  that  A.  thee
Jer.  16.  3.  concerning  their  fathers  that  A.  them
Dan.  11.  6.  she  shall  be  given  up,  and  he  that  A.  her
Zech.  13.  3.  his  father  and  mother  that  A.  him
Jam.  1. 18.  of  his  own  will  A.  he  us  with  the  word
1  John  5. 1.  every  one.  that  loveth  him  that  A.  loveth
BEGET.

Gen.  17.  20.  twelve  princes  shall  he  A.  I  will  make
Deut.  4.  25.  when  thou  shalt  A.  children,  children’s
28.  41.  thou  shalt  A.  sons,  but  shalt  not  enjoy  them
r\  Kings  20.  18.  of  thy  sons  which  thou  snalt  A.

shall  they  take  and  make  eunuchs,  Isa.  39. 7.
Eccl.  6.  3.  if  a  man  A.  100  children,  and  live  many
Jer.  29.  6.  take  wives,  and  A.  sons  and  daughters
Ezek.  18.  10.  if  he  A.  a  son  that  is  a  robber
14.  if  he  A.  a  son  that  seeth  all  his  father’s  sins
BEGETTEST.’

Gen.  48. 6.  issue  which  thou  A.  shall  be  thine
Isa.  45.  10.  that  saith  to  his  father,  what  A.  thou  ?
BEGETTETH.

Prov.  17.  21.  he  that  A.  a  fool,  doeth  it  to  his  sorrow
23.  24.  he  that  A.  a  wise  child  shall  have  joy
Eccl.  5. 14.  he  A.  a  son,  and  nothing  in  his  hand
BEG.

Psal.  109. 10.  let  his  children  be  vagabonds  and  A.
Prov.  20. 4.  therefore  shall  the  sluggard  A.  in  harvest
Luke  16.  3.  I  cannot  dig,  to  A.  I  am  ashamed
BEGGED.

Mat.  27-  58.  and  A.  the  body  of  Jesus,  Luke  23. 52.
John  9.  8.  is  not  this  he  that  sat  and  A.  ?

BEGGAR.

1  Sam.  2. 8.  he  lifteth  the  A.  from  the  dunghill
Luke  16. 20.  and  there  was  a  A.  named  Lazarus
22.  the  A.  died,  and  was  carried  by  the  angels
BEGGARLY.

Gal.  4.  9.  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  A.  elements

BEGGING.

Psal.  37.  25.  1  have  not  seen  his  seed  A.  bread
Mark  10.  46.  Bartimeus  sat  A.  Luke  18.  35.
BEGIN.

Gen.  11.  6.  this  they  A.  to  do,  and  now  nothing
Deut.  2.  25.  this  day  I  A.  to  put  the  dread  of  you

24


Josh.  3.  7-  this  day  will  I  A.  to  magnify  thee

1  Sam.  3.  12.  when  1  A.  I  will  also  make  an  end
22.  15.  did  I  then  A.  to  inquire  of  God  for  him  ?

Neh.  11.  17.  Mattaniah  to  A.  the  thanksgiving
Jer.  25.  29.  I  A.  to  bring  evil  on  the  city  called
Ezek: 9. 6.  slay  old  and  young.and  A.  at  my  sanctuary
Hos.  8. 1 10.  they  shall  A.  a  little  for  the  burden
Luke  3.  8.  and  A.  not  to  say  within  yourselves

13.  26.  then  shall  ye  A.  to  say,  we  nave  eaten

14.  29.  all  that  behold  it,  A.  to  mock  him

21.  28.  when  these  things  A.  to  come  to  pass

2  Cor.  3.  1.  do  we  A.  again  to  commend  ourselves  ?
1  Pet.  4.  17.  the  time  is  come,  that  judgment  must

A.  at  the  house  of  God,  and  if  it  first  A.  at  us
BEGINNER.

Heb.  12. 1 2.  Jesus  the  A.  and  finisher  of  our  faith
BEGINNING

Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  the  first,  Exod.  12.  2.
[2]  The  creation,  Gen.  1.  1.  [3]  At  the  first,
Prov.  20.  21.  Isa.  1.  26.  [4]  That  which  is
chief,  or  most  excellent.  Prov.  1.7-19.  10.

1  am  the  beginning  and  ending,  Rev.  1.8.  I  am
the  eternal  God,  who  gave  all  things  a  being  and
beginning .

Gen.  49.  3.  Reuben,  thou  art  the  A.  of  my  strength
Exod.  12.  2.  this  month  shall  be  the  A.  of  months
Deut.  21.  17.  he  is  the  A.  of  his  strength,  the  riglff
Job  8.  7-  tho’  thy  A.  was  small,  yet  thy  end  increase
42.  12.  blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  more  than  A.
Psal.  111.  10.  fear  of  Lord  A.  of  wisdom,  Prov.  9. 10.
Prov.  1.  7-  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  A.  of  knowledge
17.  14.  A.  of  strife,  as  when  one  letteth  out  water
Eccl.  7.  8.  better  is  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the  A.
10.  13.  the  A.  of  words  of  his  mouth  is  foolishness
Isa.  64.  4.  since  A.  of  the  world,  men  have  not  heard
Mic.  1.  13.  is  the  A.  of  sin  to  the  daughter  of  Zion
Mat.  24. 8.  all  these  are  the  A.  of  sorrows,  Mark  13. 8.

21.  tribulation,  such  as  was  not  since  the  A.

Mark  1.  1.  the  A.  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ
John  2.  11.  this  A.  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in  Cana
Col.  1. 18.  who  is  the  A.  the  first  bom  from  the  dead
Heb.  3.  14.  if  we  hold  the  A.  of  our  confidence
6. 1 1.  leaving  the  word  of  the  A.  of  Christ
7-  3.  having  neither  A.  of  days,  nor  end  of  life

2  Pet.  2.  20.  the  latter  end  is  worse  than  the  A.
Rev.  1.  8. 1  am  the  A.  and  the  ending,  21. 6.  ( 22. 13.

3. 14.  these  things  saith  the  A.  of  thecreation  of  God
At  the  BEGINNING.

Ruth  3. 10.  more  kindness  at  latter  end,  than  at  the  A.

1  Chron.  17. 9.  nor  child,  of  wickedness  waste  as  at  A.
Prov.  20.  21.  an  inheritance  gotten  hastily  at  the  A.
Isa.  1.  26.  I  will  restore  thy  cqunsellors  as  at  the  A.
Dan.  9.23.  at  the  A.  of  thy  supplications  the  command
Mat.  19.  4.  which  made  them,  at  A.  made  them  male
John  16.  4.  these  things  1  said  not  to  you  at  the  A.
Acts  11. 15.  H.  Ghost  fell  on  them  as  on  us  at  the  b.

From  the  BEGINNING.

Deut.  11. 12.  eyes  of  L.  are  on  it  from  the  A.  of  year
32.  42 .from  the  b.  of  revenges  on  the  enemy
Psal.  119.  160.  word  is  true  from  the  A.  and  every
Prov.  8. 23. 1  was  set  up  from  A.  or  ever  the  earth  was
Eccl.  3.11.  no  man  can  find  work  God  maketh  from  A.
Isa.  18.  2.  go  to  a  people  terrible  from  the  A.  7.

40.  21.  hath  it  not  been  told  you  from  the  A.  ?

41.  26.  who  hath  declared  from  the  A.  ?

46.  10.  declaring  the  end  from  A.  and  ancient  times
48.  16.  I  have  not  spoken  in  secret  from  the  A.

Jer.  17.  12.  a  glorious  high  throne  from  the  A.

Mat.  19.  8.  but  from  the  A.  it  was  not  so
Luke  1.  2.  unto  us,  which  from  A.  were  eye-witnesses
John  6.  64.  Jesus  knew  from  the  A.  who  believed  not

8.  25.  Jesus  saith,  even  same  I  said  to  you  from  b.
4$.  was  a  murderer  from  A.  and  abode  not  in  truth

15.  27.  because  ye  have  been  with  me  from  the  A.
Eph.  3.  9.  which  from  A.  of  the  world  hath  been  hid

2  Thess.  2. 13.  God  hath  from  A.  chosen  you  to  salv.
2  Pet.  3.  4.  all  continue  as  they  were  from  the  A.

1  John  2. 7-  word  which  ye  have  heard  from  A.  3. 11.
13.  because  ye  have  known  him  that  is  from  A.

3. 8.  is  of  the  devil,  for  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  A.

2  John  5.  but  that  which  we  had  from  the  A.

In  the  BEGINNING.

Gen.  1. 1.  in  the  A.  God  created  the  heaven  and  earth
2  Sam.  20.  + 18.  they  plainly  spake  in  A.  ask  of  Abel
Prov.  8.  22.  the  L.  possessed  me  in  the  A.  of  his  way
John  1.  1.  in  A.  was  the  Word,  Word  was  with  God

2.  the  same  was  in  the  A.  with  God

Phil.  4.  15.  ye  know  that  in  the  A.  of  the  gospel
Heb.  1. 10.  thou  Lord  in  the  A.  hast  laid  foundation
BEGINNING.

Mat.  14.  30.  A.  to  sink,  he  cried,  Lord,  save  me
20.  8.  give  their  hire,  A.  from  the  last  to  the  Arsf
Luke  24.  47.  among  all  nations,  A.  at  Jerusalem
John  8.  9.  went  out,  A.  at  the  eldest  even  to  the  last
Acts  1.  22.  A.  from  the  baptism  of  John  to  that  day
BEGINNINGS.

Num.  10.  10.  also  in  the  A.  of  your  months,  28.  11.
Ezek.  36.  11.  I  will  do  better  than  at  your  A.
BEGINNEST.

Deut.  16.  9.  time  thou  A.  to  put  the  sickle  to  com
BEGOTTEN

Is  taken,  [1]  Properly  and  naturally,  Judg.  8.  30.
[2]  Sup ernatur ally ,  thus  Isaac  was  begotten  of
the  dead  body  and  womb  of  Abraham  and  Sarah,
Heb.  11.  17.  [3]  Spiritually,  thus  Christians
are  said  to  be  begotten  by  such  ministers  as  were
instruments  of  their  conversion,  1  Cor.  4.  15.
[4]  Eternally,  such  only  is  Christ  the  only  be¬
gotten  of  the  Father,  John  1.  14.

Num.  11.  12.  have  I  conceived,  have  I  A.  them  ?
Deut.  23.  8.  the  children  A.  of  them  shall  enter
Judg.  8.  30.  Gideon  had  70  sons  of  his  body  A.

Job  38.  28.  or  who  hath  A.  the  drops  of  dew  ?

Psal.  2.  7.  thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  A.  thee,
Acts  13.  33.  Heb.  1.  5. 1  5.  5.
Isa.  49.  21.  thou  shalt  say,  who  hath  A.  me  these  ?
Jer.  2. 1 27-  saying  to  a  stone,  thou  hast  A.  me
Hos.  5.  7.  for  they  have  A.  strange  children
John  1.  14.  the  glory  as  of  the  only  A.  of  the  Father

18.  the  only  A.  Son,  he  hath  declared  him

3.  16.  God  so  loved,  that  he  gave  his  only  A.  Son
18.  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  A.  Son


1  Cor.  4.  15.  for  I  have  A.  you  through  the  gospel
Philem.  10.  Onesimus,  whom  I  have  A.  in  my  bonds
Heb.  1 1. 17.  Abraham  by  faith  offered  up  only  A.  son
1  Pet.  1.  3.  who  hath  A.  us  again  to  a  lively  hope

1  John  4.  9.  sent  his  only  A.  Son,  that  we  might  live
5. 1.  that  begat,  loveth  him  also  that  is  A.  of  him

18.  he  that  is  A.  of  God  keepeth  himself

FIRST-BEGOTTEN.

Heb.  1.  6.  when  he  bringeth  in  first-b.  into  world
Rev.  1.  5.  from  Jesus,  who  is  the  first  b.  of  the  dead
BEGUILE.

Col.  2.  4.  lest  any  man  A.  you  with  enticing  words

18.  let  no  man  A.  you  of  your  reward

BEGUILED,  ING.

Gen.  3. 13.  woman  said,  serpent  A.  me,  and  I  did  eat
29.  25.  wherefore  then  hast  thou  A.  me  ?

Num.  25.  18.  they  have  A.  you  in  the  matter  of  Peor
Josh .  9.  22.  saying,  wherefore  have  ye  A.  us  ?

2  Cor.  11.  3.  but  1  fear  lest  as  the  serpent  A.  Eve

2  Pet.  2.  14.  cannot  cease  from  sin,  A.  unstable  souls
BEGUN.

Num.  16.  46.  the  plague  is  A.  ||  47.  the  plague  was  A.
Deut.  3.  24.  thou  bast  A.  to  shew  thy  greatness
Esth.  6. 13.  before  whom  thou  hast  A.  to  fall

9.  23.  the  Jews  undertook  to  do  as  they  had  A.
Mat.  18.  24.  and  when  he  had  A.  to  reckon
2  Cor.  8.  6.  as  he  had  A.  so  he  would  also  finish

10.  this  is  expedient  for  you  who  have  A.  before
Gal.  3.  3.  are  ye  so  foolish,  having  A.  in  the  Spirit
Phil.  1.  6.  he  which  hath  A.  a  good  work  in  you

1  Tim.  5.  11.  when  they  have  A.  to  wax  wanton

BEHALF.

Exod.  27.  21.  a  statute  on  A.  of  the  children  of  Israel

2  Sam.  3.  12.  Abner  sent  to  David  on  his  A.

2  Chron.  16.  9.  shew  himself  strong  in  A.  of  them
Job  36. 2.  shew  that  I  have  yet  to  speak  on  God’s  A.
Dan.  11. 18.  but  a  prince  for  his  own  A.  shall  cause
Rom.  16.  19.  I  am  glad  therefore  on  your  A.

1  Cor.  1.  4.  I  thank  my  God  always  on  your  A.

2  Cor.  1 . 11.  thanks  may  be  given  by  many  on  our  A
5.  12.  but  give  you  occasion  to  glory  on  our  A.

Phil.  1. 29.  to  you  it  is  given  in  A.  of  Christ,  not  only
1  Pet.  4.  16.  let  him  glorify  G  od  on  this  A.
BEHAVE.

Deut.  32. 27.  lest  adversaries  A.  themselves  strangely
1  Chron.  19.  13.  let  us  A.  ourselves  valiantly
Job  41.  f  33.  who  A.  themselves  without  fear
Psal.  101.  2. 1  will  A.  wisely  in  a  perfect  way
Isa.  3.  5.  child  shall  A.  himself  proudly  ag.  ancient

42.  t  13.  the  Lord  will  A.  himself  mightily
1  Cor.  13.  5.  charitv  doth  not  A.  itself  unseemly
1  Tim.  3. 15.  how  thou  oughtestto  A.  in  house  of  God
BEHAVED.

1  Sam.  18.  5.  David  A.  himself  wisely,  14,  15,  30.
Psal. 35. 14. 1  A.  as  though  he  had  been  my  friend
131.  2.  I  have  A.  myself  as  a  child  that  is  weaned
Hos.  12.  +  3.  Jacob  A.  himself  princely
Mic.  3. 4.  as  they  have  A.  themselves  ill  in  doings

1  Thess.  2.  10.  how  unblameably  we  A.  ourselves

2  Thess.  3. 7.  A.  not  ourselves  disorderly  among  you

BEHAVETH.

1  Cor.  7.  36.  if  a  man  think  he  A.  uncomely  to  his
BEHAVIOUR.

1  Sam.  21. 13.  David  changed  his  A.  before  them

1  Tim.  3.  2.  a  bishop  must  be  sober,  of  good  A.

Tit.  2. 3.  aged  women  in  A.  as  becometh  holiness

BEHEADED.

Deut.2L6.  elders  shall  wash  hands  over  the  heifer  b.

2  Sam.  4.  7.  they  smote  Ish-bosheth,  and  b.  him
Mat.  14.  10.  b.  John,  Mark  6.  16,  27.  Luke  9.  9.
Rev.  20.  4. 1  saw  the  souls  of  them  that  were  b.

BEHELD.-’

Num.  21. 9.  wnen  he  A.tne  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived
23. 21.  he  hath  not  A.  iniquity  in  Jacob
1  Chron.  21.  15.  as  he  was  destroying,  the  Lord  A.
Job  31.  26.  if  I  A.  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or  moon
Psal.  119. 158.  1  A.  transgressors,  and  was  grieved
142.  4. 1  A.  but  there  was  no  man  would  know  me
Prov.  7. 7.  and  A.  among  the  simple  ones,  I  discerned
Eccl.  8. 17.  then  I  A.  all  the  work  of  God
Isa.  41.  28.  I  A.  and  there  was  no  man,  Jer.  4.  25.
Jer.  4.  23.  I  A.  the  earth,* and  it  was  without  form
Mark  15. 47.  Mary  Magdalen,  and  Mary  the  mother
of  Joses,  A.  where  he  was  laid,  Luke  23.  55.
Luke  10. 18. 1  A.  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven

19.  41.  he  A.  the  city,  and  wept  over  it

John  1.  14.  and  we  A.  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of
Acts  1.  9.  while  they  A.  Jesus  was  taken  up
17.  23.  as  I  passed’by  and  A.  your  devotions
Rev.  5.  6. 1  A.  andlo,  inmidstof  the  throne  a  Lamb
11. 12.  they  ascended,  and  their  enemies  A.  them
BEHEMOTH.

Job  40. 15.  behold  now  A.  which  I  made  with  thee
BEHIND

Signifies,  [1]  Backwards,  Judg.  20.  40.  [2]  Aftei
2  Sam.  3.  16.  [31  Remaining,  Lev.  25.  51.  [4]
Past.  Phil.  3.  13.  [5]  Unexpected,  Isa.  30.  21.
[6]  Disregarded,  Psal.  50.  17 .

Exod.  10.  26.  there  shall  not  an  hoof  be  left  A.

Lei .  25. 51.  if  there  be  yet  many  years  A.  according
Judg.  20. 40.  the  Penjamites  looked  A.  them

1  Sam.  30.  9.  where  those  that  were  left  A.  stayed

2  Sam.  3. 16.  her  husband  went  weeping  A.  her

1  Kings  14. 9.  hastcastme  A.  thy  back,  Ezek.  23.  35
Neh.  4.  16.  the  rulers  were  A.  the  house  of  Judah
9. 26.  they  rebelled  and  cast  thy  law  A.  their  backs
Cant.  2.  9.  behold,  he  standeth  A.  our  wall,  looketh
Isa.  38.  17.  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  A.  thy  back
Amos  7.  1 15.  the  Lord  took  me  from  A.  the  flock
Mark  5.  27.  she  came  in  the  press  A.  and  touched
Luke  2.  43.  the  child  Jesus  tarried  A.  in  Jerusalem

1  Cor.  1. 7.  so  that  ye  come  A.  in  no  gift,  waiting  for

2  Cor.  11. 5. 1  was  not  a  whit  A.  the  chiefest,  12. 11.
Phil.  3.  13.  forgetting  those  things  which  are  A.

Col.  1.  24.  fill  up  what  is  A.  of  afflictions  of  Christ
Seefurther,  Before,  Hem, We, Thee, Them,  Us.

Signifies,  [1]  Admiration,  Isa.  7*  14.  [2]  Joy

and  gladness,  Mat.  21.  5.  [3]  Obedience ,  1  Sam.

22.  t  12.  Tsa.  6.  t  8.  [4]  Asseveration,  Gen.
28.  15.  [5]  Exhortation  to  a  provident  care,

John  19.  27.  [61  Consideration,  or  observation.


B  E  H


BEL


BEL


Luke  24.  39.  John  1.  29.  [7]  Suddenness,  or
unexpectedness,  Rev.  16.  15.  I  22.  7.  [8]  Cer¬
tainty,  Mat.  23.  38.  Luke  1.  20.

Gen.  28.  15.  b.  1  am  with  thee,  and  will  keep  thee
31.  51.  b.  this  heap,  b.  this  pillar  I  have  cast

40.  6.  Joseph  looked  on  them,  and  b.  they  were  sad

48.  1.  b.  thy  father  is  sick  ||  21.  Israel  said,  b.  I  die
Exod.  3.  2.  and  b.  the  bush  burned  with  tire

16.  4.  b.  1  will  rain  bread  from  heaven  for  you

23.  20.  b.  I  send  an  angel  before  thee  to  keep  thee

24.  8.  Moses  sai  1,  b.  the  blood  of  the  covenant
Num.  20.  16.  b.  we  are  in  lxadesh  in  the  utmost

1  Sam.  12.  13.  b.  ihe  kin^  whom  ye  have  chosen

2  Sam .  9.  6.  and  he  answered,  b.  thy  servant

1  Kings  13.2 .b.  child  shall  be  born  to  house  of  Dav.

2  Kings  13.  21.  that  b.  they  spied  a  band  of  men

22. 16.  b.  1  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place,  and  the

inhabitants  thereof,  2  Citron.  34.  24.
2  Chron.  20.  11.  h.  I  say,  how  they  reward  us
Job  1.  12.  b.  all  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  power

28.  28.  b.  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wisdom

33.  12.  b.  in  this  thou  art  not  just,  l  will  answer

36.  5.  b.  God  is  mighty,  and  despiseth  not  any,  26.
40.  4.  b.  I  am  vile,  what  shall  L  answer  thee  i
Psm'.  33. 18.  b.  eye  of  the  Lord  is  on  them  that  fear
5l.  5.  b.  I  was  sliapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did
73.12.  b. these  are  the  ungodly  who  prosper  in  world
78.  20.  b.  he  smote  the  rock,  the  waters  gushed
139.  8.  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  b.  thou  art  there

Cant.  1.  15.  b.  thou  art  fair,  my  love,  b.  16.  1  4.  1.
Isa.  7-  14.  b.  a  virgin  shall  conceive,  Mat.  1.  23.
8.18. b.  I  and  the  children  whom  the  Lord,  Heb. 2.13.

22.  they  shall  look  to  the  earth,  and  b.  trouble

12.  2.  b.  God  is  my  salvation,  I  will  trust,  and  not
29-  8.  a  hungry  man  dreameth,  and  b.  he  eateth

40.  9.  say  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  b.  your  God

41.  27.  the  first  shall  say  to  Zion,  b.  b.  them

42.  1.  b.  my  servant  whom  1  uphold,  mine  elect

43.  19.  b.  1  will  do  a  new  thing,  it  shall  spring
48.  7-  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  b.  I  knew  them
65  1.  1  said,  b.  me.  b.  me,  to  a  nation  not  called  by

Jer.  8. 15.  we  looked  for  peace,  and  b.  trouble  14. 19.
26- 14.  b.  I  am  in  your  hands,  do  with  me  as  seems
lam.  1. 12.  A. and  see  if  any  sorrow  be  like  my  sorrow
E  el:.  36.  9-  b.  I  am  for  you,  and  will  turn  to  you
Zech.  3.  8.  b.  I  will  bring  my  servant  the  Branch

6.  12.  b.  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch

9.  9-  b.  thy  King  cometh,  Mat.  21.  5.  John  12.15.
Mai.  3. 1.  b.  I  will  send  my  messenger,  and  he  shall
prepare  the  way,  4,  5.  Mat.  11.  10.  Mark  1.  2.
Mat.  7.  4.  and  b.  a  beam  is  in  thine  own  eye
24.  26.  b.  he  is  in  the  desert,  b.  he  is  in  the  secret
Mark  16.  6.  is  risen,  b.  the  place  where  they  laid  him
Luke  24.  39.  b.  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I

49.  b.  I  send  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you
John  1.  29.  b.  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh,  36.

47.  b.  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile

19.  5.  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  b.  the  man
Jets  9-  11.  Saul  of  Tarsus,  for  b.  he  prayeth

2  Cor.  6.  9.  as  dying,  and  b.  we  live,  as  chastened
1  John  3.  1.  h.  what  manner  of  love  the  Father
Rev.  3.  20.  b.  1  stand  at  the  door  and  knock

16.  15.  b.  I  come  as  a  thief,  blessed  is  he  that
22.7.  b.  I  come  quickly,  blessed  is  he  that  keeps,  12.

BEHOLD  it  is.

Gen.  16. 14.  b.  it  is  between  Kadesh  and  Bered

34.  21.  for  the  land,  b.  it  is  large  enough  for  them
End.  32.  9.  and  b.  it  is  a  stiff  necked  people
Josh .  9. 12.  but  now  b.  it  is  dry,  it  is  mouldy
Judg.  18. 9. 1  have  seen  the  land,  b.  it  is  very  good
Isa.  52. 6.  know  that  I  am  he  that  doth  speaM .it  is  I
Ezei.  7 . 10.  b.  the  day,  b.  it  is  come,  morning  i&gone

39.  8.  b.  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  saith  the  Lord
Now  BEHOLLi,  or  FEHOLI)  now,

1  Sam.  12.  2.  now  b.  the  kingwalketh  before  you

2 Kings  18. 21.  now  b.  thou  trustest  on  staff  of  rgypt
Job  16.  19.  also  now  b.  my  witness  is  in  heaven
Jer ,  40.  4.  now  b.  1  loose  thee  this  day  from  chains
Mat.  26.  65.  now  b.  ye  have  heard  his  blasphemy
Acts  13.  11.  now  b.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  on  thee

20.  22.  now  b.  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  to  lerusalem

2  Cor.  6.  2.  b.  now  is  the  accepted  time,  b.  now  i-  day
Behold  it  was,  Behold  there  was,  see  Was.

BEHOLD.  Verb,

Signifies,  [1]  To  look  on  a  thing  with  our  eyes,  Gen.
31.  51.  [2]  To  think  over  a  thing  in  our  minds,
Lam.  1.  12.  Rom.  11.  22.

Num.  12.8.  and  the  similitude  ofthe  Lord  shall  he  b.

23.  9.  1  see  him,  and  from  the  hills  1  b.  him

24.17 .see  him.  but  not  now, shall  b.  him,  but  not  nigh
Deut.  3.27.  b.  it  with  thine  eyes,  thou  shaltnotgo
1  Sam.  22.  1  12.  b  me,  Isa.  6.  +  8.

Job  19.  27.  mine  eyes  shall  h.  and  not  another
20.  9.  nor  shall  his  place  any  more  b.  him
23.  9.  where  he  doth  work,  but  1  cannot  b.  him

31.  29.  when  he  hideth  his  face,  who  can  b.  ?

36.  24.  that  thou  magnify  his  work,  v  hioh  men  b.

Psal.  11.  4.  his  eyes  b.  his  eye-lids  try  the  children

7.  his  countenance  doth  b.  the  upright

17.  2.  let  thine  eyes  b.  the  things  that  are  equal
15.  I  will  b.  thy  face  in  righteousness

27.  4.  to  b.  the  beauty  of  the  l  ord  and  inquire
37  .  37.  mark  the  perfect  man,  b.  the  upright
46.  8.  come,  b.  the  works  of  the  Lord
59.  4.  they  prepare,  awake  to  help  me,  and  b.

66.  7 •  he  ruleth  for  ever,  his  eyes  b.  the  nations
80.  14.  look  down  from  heaven,  b.  and  visit
91.  8.  only  with  thine  eyes  shalt  thou  b.  and  see
102.  19.  from  heaven  did  the  Lord  b.  the  earth
113-  6.  he  humbleth  himself  to  b.  the  things
119.  18.  open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  1  may  b
Pjov.  23.  3.3.  thine  eyes  shall  b.  strange  women
Eccl.  11. 7.  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  to  b.  the  sun
Isa.  26.  10.  he  will  not  b.  the  majesty  of  the  I.ord

38.11. 1  said,  1  shall  i.man  no  more  with  theinhab.
41. 23.  do  good  or  evil,  that  we  may  b.  it  together
63. 15.  b.  from  the  habitation  of  thy  oliness
Jer.  20.  4.  and  thine  eyes  shall  b.  thy  terror

29.  32.  nor  b.  the  good  I  will  do  for  my  people

32.  4.  and  his  '  "  '  '  '  ‘ '  -

42.


we  are


s  eyes  shall  b.  his  eyes,  34.  3.
left  but  a  few,  as  thine  eyes  do  b.  us


Lam.  1.  18.  hear  all  people,  and  b.  my  sorrow


La.  3. 50.  till  the  Lord  look  down  and  b.  from  heaven
5. 1.  O  Lord,  consider  and  b.  our  reproach
Ezek.  8. 9.  b.  the  wicked  abominations  they  do

28. 17.  lay  thee  before  kings  that  they  may  b.

18.  bring  thee  to  ashes  in  sight  of  all  that  b.

40.  4.  son  of  man,  b.  with  thine  eyes,  44. 5.

Dan.  9.  18.  open  thine  eyes,  and  b.  our  desolation
Obad.  1 12.  do  not  b.  the  day  of  thy  brother
Mic.  7. 9.  me  to  light,  and  I  shall  b.  his  righteousness

10.  she  that  is  my  enemy,  mine  eyes  shall  b.  her
Hab.  1 .  3.  why  dost  thou  cause  me  to  b.  grievance ?

13.  thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  b.  evil,  canst
Mat.  18. 10.  their  angels  always  b.  face  of  my  Father
Luk  14.  29.  all  that  b.  it  begin  to  mock  him

21.  6.  as  for  these  things  which  ye  b.  the  days  will
John  17.  24.  be  with  me,  that  they  may  b.  my  glory
Acts  7.  31.  as  he  drew  near  to  b.  it  the  voice  came

32.  then  Moses  trembled,  and  durst  not  b.

2  Cor.  3.  7.  Israel  could  not  b.  the  face  of  Moses

1  Pet.  2. 12.  your  good  works  which  they  shall  b.

3.  2.  while  they  b.  your  chaste  conversation
Rev.  17.  8.  when  they  b.  the  beast  that  was,  is  not

BEHOLDERS.

Job  31.  t  26.  God  striketh  them  in  the  place  of  b.
BEHOLD ES  L’.

Psal.  10. 14.  thou  b.  all  mischief  to  requite  it
Mat.  7-  3.  why  b.  thou  the  mote  t  Luke  6.  41.

Luke  6.  42.  b.  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eve
BEHOLDETH.

Job  24.  18.  he  b.  not  the  way  of  the  vineyards
Psal.  33.  13.  the  lord  b.  all  the  sons  of  men
Jam.  1.  24.  for  he  b.  himself  and  goeth  his  wav
BEHOLDING.

Psal.  119.  37  turn  away  mine  eyes  from  b.  vanity
Prov.  15. 3.  Lord  in  every  place,  b.  the  evil  and  good
Peel.  5.  11.  saving  the  b.  of  them  with  their  eyes
Mat.  27.  55.  many  women  were  there,  b.  Lu.  2.3. 49.
Mark  10.  21.  Jesus  b.  him,  loved  him,  and  said
Luke  23.  35.  people  stood  b.  and  rulers  derided  him
48.  b.  things  done,  smote  their  breasts  and  returned
Acts  4.  14.  and  b.  man  which  was  healed  could  say

23.  1.  and  Paul  earnestly  b.  the  council,  said

2  Cor.  3.  18.  with  open  face  b.  as  in  a  glass  the  glory
Col.  2. 5.  with  you  in  spirit,  joying,  ana  b.  your  order
Jam.  1  23.  a  man  b.  his  natural  face  m  a  glass

BEHOVED.

I. uke  24.  46.  and  thus  it  b.  Christ  to  suffer  and  rise
Heb.  2. 17.  b.  him  to  be  made  like  to  his  brethren

BEING.

Gen.  24. 27. 1  b.  in  the  way,  the  Lord  led  me  to  house
E.rod.  22.  14.  the  owner  thereof  not  b.  with  it
Lev.  21.  4.  he  shall  not  defile  himself,  b.  a  chief  man
Num.  30.  3.  vow  a  vow  b.  in  her  father’s  house,  16.
Pent.  .32.  31.  our  enemies  themselves  b.  judges
Josh.  9.  2.3.  none  of  you  be  freed  from  b.  bond-men
1  Sam.  15.  2.3.  hath  rejected  thee  from  b.  king,  26.

1  Kings  15.  13.  Maachah  his  mother,  even  her  he
removed  from  b.  queen,  2  Chron.  15.  16.
I6.7.  in  provoking,  in  b.  likehouse  of  Jeroboam
Neh.  6.  11.  who  is  there  that  b.  as  I  am  would  flee  r1
Psal.  49.  12.  man  b.  in  honour,  abideth  not,  is  like
83. 4.  come,  and  let  us  cut  them  off  from  b.  a  nation
Jer.  34.  9.  b.  an  Hebrew  or  Hebrewess  go  free
Mat.  1. 19.  Joseph  her  husband  b.  a  just  man
Luke  13. 16.  this  woman  b.  a  daughter  of  Abraham
16.  23.  in  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  b.  in  torments

18.  +  9.  trusted  in  themselves  as  b.  righteous

20.  36.  b.  the  children  of  the  resurrection

22.  44.  b.  in  an  agony,  he  prayed  more  earnestly
John  5.13. 1  esus  conveyed— multitude  b .in  that  place

10.  33.  that  thou.  b.  a  man,  makest  thyself  God

1  Cor.  12. 12.  all  the  members  b.  many  are  one  body
Pph.  2.  20.  Jesus  Christ  b.  the  chief  corner-stone

4.  t  15.  b.  sincere  in  love  may  grow  up  into  him
Phil.  2.  6.  who  b.  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not
Heb.  13.  3.  as  b.  yourselves  also  in  the  body

Rev.  12.2.  she  h.  with  child,  cried,  travailing
BEING.

Psal.  104.  .33.  I  will  sing  to  the  I  ord,  I  will  sing
praise  to  my  God  while  I  have  mv  b.  146.  2.
Acts  17.  28.  in  him  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  b.
BELCH,  ETH.

Psal.  59.  7-  behold  they  b.  out  with  their  mouth
Prov.  15.  +2.  the  mouth  of  fools  i.out  foolishness
RELIEF.

2  Thess.  2. 13.  sanctification  of  Spirit,  and  b.  of  truth

BEI/I  EVE

Signifies,  [1]  To  give  credit  to  any  thing,  Gen.  45.
26.  [2]  To  assent  barely  to  gospel  truths.  Acts

8.  13.  [3]  To  receive,  depend,  and  rely  upon
Christ  for  life  and  sabation,  John  1.  12.1  3.
15,  16.  Bom.  9-  3.3. 1  10.  4.  [4]  To  be  fully

persuaded,  John  6.  69-  [5]  To  expect,  or  hope,
Psal  27.  13.  [6]  To  put  confidence  in,  2  Chron.
20.  20.  [71  To  know,  John  17.  21.  Jam.  2.  19.
Exod.  4.  5.  that  they  may  b.  the  Lord  hath  appeared

19.  9.  that  they  may  hear  and  b.  thee  for  ever
Num.  14. 11.  how'  long  wall  it  be  ere  they  b.  me  l
2  C.hr.  20.  20.  b.  in  the  lord  God,  b.  his  prophets
Isa.  43.  10.  that  ye  may  know  and  b.  me

Mat.  9.  28.  b.  ye  that  t  am  able  to  do  this  ?

18.  6.  but  whoso  shall  offend  one  of  these  little
ones  which  b.  in  me,  Mark  9.  42.

21.  .32.  repented  not  afterward  that  ye  mights,  him
27-  42.  let  him  come  down,  and  we  will  b.  him
Mark  1. 15.  repent  ye,  and  b.  the  gospel

5.  36.  he  saith,  be  not  afraid,  only  b.  Luke  8.  50.

9.  23.  if  thou  canst  b.  all  things  are  possible

24.  Lord,  I  b.  help  mine  unbelief,  John  9-  38.

II. 23.  but  shall  b.  those  things  he  saith  shall  come

24.  b.  ye  recei'  e  them,  and  ye  shall  have  them

15.  32.  let  him  descend,  that  we  may  see  and b.

16.  17 •  these  signs  shall  follow  them  which  b.

Luke  8.  12.  devil  taketh  away  the  word,  lest  they  b.

13.  these  have  no  root,  which  fora  while  5.

24.  25.  O  fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  b.  all  that
John  1.  7-  that  all  men  through  him  might  b.

12.  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  b  on  misname
.3.12.  how  shall  yeb.  if  I  tell  you  of  heavenly  things  ?
4. 21.  woman  b.  me,  the  hour  cometh  when  ye  shall
42.  and  said,  now  we  b .  not  because  of  thy  saying
5.  44.  how  can  ye  b.  which  receive  honour  one  of


John  5.47  not  his  writings, how  shallye  i.my  words !
6. 29.  work  of  God,  that  ye  b.  on  him  he  hath  sent

7.  5.  for  neither  did  his  Brethren  b.  in  him

39.  Spirit,  which  they  that  b.  on  him  should  receive

9.  35.  dost  thou  b.  on  the  Son  of  God  ?

36.  he  said,  who  is  he.  Lord,  that  1  mights,  on  him

10. 38.  b.  the  works,  that  ye  may  know  and  b.

11. 15.  I  was  not  there,  to  the  intent  ye  may  b.

27. 1  b.  that  thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God

40.  said  1  not  to  thee,  if  wouldst  b.  thou  shouldst
42.  that  they  may  b.  that  thou  hast  sent  me

48.  if  we  let  him  alone,  all  men  will  b.  on  him

12.  36.  while  ye  have  light,  b.  in  the  light

13.  19.  when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may  b.  I  am  he
14. 1.  not  troubled^  ye  b.  in  God,  b.  also  in  me

11.  b.  I  am  in  the  I  ather,  or  b.  for  the  work's  sake
29.  that  when  it  is  come  to  pass  ye  might  b.

16.  30.  by  this  we  b.  thou  earnest  forth  from  God
31.  Jesus  answered  them,  do  ye  now  b.  ?

17-  20.  I  pray  for  them  also  which  shall  b.  on  me

21.  that  the  world  may  b.  thou  hast  sent  me

19.  35.  he  knows  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  might  b.

20.  31.  these  are  written  that  ye  might  b.

Acts  8.  37.  I  b.  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God

13.39.  by  him  all  thati.  are  justified  from  all  things

41. 1  work  a  work  which  you  shall  in  no  wise  b.

15.  7 •  that  the  Gentiles  by  me  should  hear  and  b.

11.  we  b.  thro’  grace  we  shall  be  saved,  as  they
16.31.  b.  on  the  Lord  J  esus,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved
19. 4.  should  b.  on  him  that  should  come  after  him

21.  20.  thou  seest  how  many  lews  there  are  which  b.

25.  as  touching  the  Gentiles  which  b.  have  writ.

27.  25.  I  b.  God  that  it  shall  be  as  it  was  told  me
Rom.  3. 22.  righteousness  of  God  on  all  them  that  b.
4.  11.  he  might  be  father  of  all  them  that  b.

24.  to  whom  it  shall  be  imputed,  if  we  b.  on  him
6. 8.  if  dead,  we  b.  that  we  shall  also  live  with  him

10.  9.  and  shalt  b.  in  thy  heart  that  God  raised  him

14.  how  shall  they  b.  in  him  of  whom  not  heard  ?

1  Cor.  1. 21.  by  preaching  to  save  them  that  b.

11.  18.  1  hear  there.be  divisions,  and  I  partly  b.  it

14.  22.  tongues  are  for  a  sign,  not  to  them  that  b.

but  prophesying  serveth  for  them  which  b.

2  C7>r.  4. 13.  we  also  b.  and  therefore  speak

Gal.  3.  22.  promise  might  be  given  to  them  that  b.
Eph.  1.  19.  the  greatness  of  his  power  to  us  who  b.
Phil.  1.  29.  to  us  it  is  given  not  only  to  b.  on  him

1  Thess.  1. 7.  ensamples  to  all  that  b.  in  Macedonia

2. 10.  we  behaved  ourselves  among  you  that  b.

13.  word  which  effectually  worketh  in  you  that  b.

4. 14.  if  we  b.  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again

2  Thess.  1. 10.  come  to  be  admired  in  all  those  that  b.

2. 11.  send  delusion  that  they  should  b.  a  lie

1  Tim.  1. 16.  for  a  pattern  to  them  that  should  b.

4.  3.  received  with  thanksgiving  of  them  that  b.

10.  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  those  that  b.

Heb.  10.  39.  but  of  them  that  b.  to  saving  of  soul

11.  6.  he  that  cometh  to  God  must  b.  that  he  is
Jam.  2. 19.  the  devils  also  b.  and  tremble

1  Pet.  1. 21.  who  by  him  do  b.  in  God  that  raised  him
2.  7.  to  you  therefore  which  b.  he  is  precious

1  John  3. 23.  is  his  commandment  that  we  should  b.
5. 13.  I  have  written  to  you  that  b.  that  ye  may  b.

BELIEVE  not,  or  not  BELIEVE.

Exod..  4.  1.  behold,  they  will  not  b.  me,  nor  hearken

8.  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  will  not  b.  thee,  9.
Deut.  1.  32.  yet  in  this  ye  did  not  b.  the  Lord

2  Kings  17. 14.  like  their  fathers  did  not  b.  in  Lord
Job  9. 16.  yet  would  1  not  b.  that  he  had  hearkened
Prov.  26.  25.  when  he  speaketh  fair,  b.  him  not
Isa.  7. 9.  if  ye  will  not  h,  ye  shall  not  be  established
Jer.  12.  6.  b.  not  them,  tho’  they  speak  fair  words
Hab.  1.  5.  which  ye  will  not  b.  though  it  be  told  you
il/ag.21.25.  why  then  did  ye  not  b.  him  ?  Mark  11.31.

24. 23.  lo,  here  is  Christ,  b.  it  not,  26.  Mark  13.  21.
Luke  22. 67  -  he  said,  if  I  tell  you,  you  will  not  b.
John  3. 12.  if  I  told  earthly  things,  and  ye  b.  not
4.48.  except  ye  see  signs  and  wonders  ye  will  not  b.

5.  38.  for  whom  he  hath  sent,  him  ye  b.  not

47  •  if  ye  b.  not  his  writ,  how  shall  ye  b.  my  words  ?

6.  36.  1  said  to  you, ye  also  have  seen  me  and  b.  not
64.  but  there  are  some  of  you  which  b.  not

8.  24.  if  ye  b.  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  sins

45.  because  I  tell  you  the  truth,  ye  b.  me  not

46.  if  I  say  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  b.  me  ?

10.  26.  ye  b.  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep

37.  if  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father,  b.  me  not

38.  if  I  do,  though  ye  b.  not  me,  believe  the  works

12.  39.  they  could  not  b.  because  Isaiah  said  again

47.  if  any  hear  wprds,  and  b.  not,  I  judge  him  not
16. 9.  reprove  of  sin,  because  they  b.  not  on  me
20. 25.  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not  b.

Rom.  3.  3.  what  if  some  did  not  b.  shall  unbelief

15.  31.  1  may  be  delivered  from  them  that  do  not  b.

1  Cor.  10. 27.  if  any  that  b.  not  bid  you  to  a  feast
14.  22.  tongues  are  for  a  sign  to  them  that  b.  not

2  Cor.  4.  4.  hath  blinded  minds  of  them  that  b.  not
2  Tim.  2. 13.  if  we  b.  not,  he  abideth  faithful

1  John  4. 1.  b.  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits
BELIEVED.

Gen.  15. 6.  he  b.  in  the  Lord,  and  he  counted  it  for
righteousness,  Rom.  4.  3.  Gal.  3.  6.  Jam.  2.  23.
Exod.  4.  31.  Aaron  spake,  and  the  people  b.

14.  31.  they  b.  the  Lord  and  his  servant  Moses
1  Sam.  27. 12.  and  Achish  b.  David,  saying,  he  hath
Psal.  27. 13.  1  had  fainted,  unless  I  had  b.  to  see
106. 12.  then  b.  they  his  words,  they  sang  his  praise
116. 10.  T  b.  therefore  have  I  spoken,  2  Cor.  4. 13.
119. 66.  teach  me,  for  I  have  b.  thy  commandments
Isa.  53. 1.  who  hath  b.  our  report,  to  whom  arm  of
the  Lord  revealed  ?  John  12. 38.  Rom.  10. 16.
Dan.  6.  23.  no  hurt  on  him,  because  he  b.  in  his  God
Jonah  3.  5.  so  the  people  of  Nineveh  b.  God
Mat.  8.  13.  as  thou  hast  b.  so  be  it  done  to  thee
21.  32.  but  the  publicans  and  harlots  b.  him
Mark  16. 13.  went  and  told  it.  neither  b.  they  them
Luke  1. 1.  of  those  things  whicn  are  most  surely  b.

45.  blessed  is  she  that  b. for  there  shall  be  a  perform
John  2. 11.  his  glory,  and  his  disciples  b.  on  him

22.  they  b.  the  scripture,  and  the  word  Jesus  said
4.  50.  the  man  b.  the  word  that  Tesus  had  spoken

53.  the  father  himself  b.  and  his  whole  house

25


BEL


BEL


BEN


John  5.  46.  had  ye  b.  Moses,  ye  would  have  h.  me

7.  48.  have  any  ofrulers  or  Pharisees  b.  on  him  ?

8.  31.  then  said  Jesus  to  the  Jews  that  b.  on  him

11. 45.  who  had  seen  the  things  Jesus  did,  b.  on  him

12. 11.  many  of  the  J  ews  went  away  and  b .  on  Jesus

16.  27.  the  Father  loveth  you, because  you  have b.

17.  8.  and  they  have  b.  that  thou  uuist  send  me

20. 8.  then  went  that  other  disciple,  and  saw  and  b.
29.  thou  hast  b.  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  b.

Acts  t.  44.  all  that  A.  were  together,  had  things

4.  4.  many  of  them  which  heard  the  word  b.

32.  multitude  of  them  that  b.  were  of  one  heart
5. 1 36.  as  many  as  b.  l  heudas  were  scattered
8.  12.  but  when  they  b.  Philip  preaching  things
IS.  then  Simon  himself  b.  also,  and  was  baptized

10. 45.  they  of  circumcision  who  A.  were  astonished

11. 17.  Got!  gave  them  like  gift  as  to  us  who  b.

21.  a  great  number  b.  and  turned  to  the  Lord

13.  12.  then  deputy  b.  being  astonished  at  doctrine
48.  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  b.

14. 1.  a  multitude  of  both  Jews  and  Greeks  A.

23.  commended  them  to  the  Lord  on  whom  they  A.

17.  4.  some  of  them  A.  and  consorted  with  Paul
34.  howbeit  certain  men  clave  to  him  and  A.

18. 8.  Crispus  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue  A.  on  L.
27.  helped  them  much  which  had  A.  thro’  grace

19.2.  received  ye  the  I  Ioly  Ghost  since  ye  A.  f
22. 19.  I  beat  in  every  synagogue  them  that  A.

27.  11.  the  centurion  A.  the  master  of  the  ship

28.  24.  some  A.  the  things  spoken,  and  some  A.  not
Rom.  4.  18.  who  against  hope  A.  in  hope,  might

13. 11.  our  salvation  is  nearer  than  when  we  A.

1  Cor.  3. 5.  but  ministers  by  whom  ye  A.  as  the  Lord

15.  2.  ye  are  saved,  unless  ye  have  A.  in  vain
11.  whether  1  or  they,  so  we  preach,  and  so  ye  A.

Gal.  2. 16.  even  we  have  A.  in  J  esus  Christ,  that  we
Eph.  1. 13.  in  whom  after  ye  A.  ye  were  sealed

2  Thess.  1. 10.  our  testimony  among  you  was  A.

1  Tim.  3.16.  A.on  in  the  world,  received  up  into  glory

2  Tim.  1. 12.  for  I  know  whom  I  have  A.  he  is  able
Tit.  3. 8.  they  which  have  A.  in  God,  be  careful  to
Heb.  4.  3.  we  which  have  A  do  enter  into  rest

1  John  4.  16.  we  have  A.  the  love  of  God  to  us
Many  BELIEVED..

John  2.  23.  at  the  passover  many  A.  in  his  name

4.  39.  many  of  the  Samaritans  A.  on  him

11. 45.  many  of  the  Jews  which  came  to  Mary  A.  on
12. 42.  among  the  chief  rulers  also  many  A.  on  him

Acts  18.  8.  many  of  the  Corinthians  hearing  A.

19. 18.  many  that  A.  came  and  confessed  their  deeds
BELIEVED  not.  or  not  BELIEVED.

Gen.  45.  26.  Jacob’s  heart  fainted,  he  A.  them  not
Num.  20.  12.  because  he  A.  me  not,  to  sanctify  me
Deut.  9.  23.  rebelled,  and  A.  him  not,  nor  hearkened
1  Kings  10. 7.  howbeit  1  A.  not  the  words,  2  Ckr.  9.  6.
Job  29.  24.  if  1  laughed  on  them,  they  A.  it  not
Psal.  78.  22.  because  they  A.  not  in  God,  trusted  not
32.  sinned,  and  A.  not  tor  his  wondrous  works
106.  24.  despised  the  land,  they  A.  not  his  word
Jer.  40.  14.  but  Gedaliah  A.  them  not
Lam.  4.  12.  inhabitants  of  world  would  wot  have  A.
Mat.  21.  32.  John  came  unto  you,  and  ye  A.  him  not
Mark  16. 1 1 .  when  they  had  heard  he  was  alive  A.  not

14.  he  upbraided  them  because  they  A.  not
Luke  20.  5.  he  will  say,  why  then  A.  ye  him  not.  ?

24.  41.  while  they  A.  not  for  joy,  and  wondered
John  3.18.  condemned  al ready ,  because  he  hath  not  A.
6.  64.  Jesus  knew  who  they  were  that  A.  not
10. 25.  Jesus  answered,  1  told  you,  and  ye  A.  not
12.  37-  had  done  so  many  miracles,  yet  they  A.  not
Acts  9.  26.  afraid,  and  A.  not  that  he  was  a  disciple
17.  5.  the  Jews  which  A.  not,  moved  with  envy
19.  9.  but  when  divers  were  hardened,  and  A.  not
Rom.  10.  14.  how  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have

not  A.

11.  30.  for  as  ye  in  times  past  have  not  b.  God
31.  even  so  have  these  also  now  not  A.

£  Thess.  2. 12.  they  all  might  be  damned  who  A.  not
Heb.  3. 18.  not  enter  into  his  rest,  that  A.  not
11.  31.  Rahab  perished  not  with  them  that  A.  not
Jude  5.  Lord  afterward  destroyed  them  that  A.  not
BELIEVERS.

Acts  5. 14.  A.  were  the  more  added  to  the  Lord
1  Tim.  4.  12.  be  thou  an  example  of  the  A.
BELIEVEST.

Luke  1.  20.  be  dumb  because  thou  A.  not  my  words
John  1. 50. 1  saw  thee  under  the  fig-tree,  A.  thou  ?

11.  26.  believeth  in  me,  never  die,  A.  thou  this  ?

14. 10.  A.  thou  not  that  1  am  in  the  Father
Acts  8.  37.  if  thou  A.  with  all  thine  heart,  thou
26.  27.  A.  thou  the  prophets  ?  I  know  thou  A.

Jam.  2. 19.  thou  A.  that  there  is  one  God,  thou  dost
BELIEVETH.

Job  15.  22.  he  A.  not  that  he  shall  return  out  of
Prov.  14.  15.  the  simple  A.  every  word,  but  thee
Isa.  28.  16.  he  that  A.  shall  not  make  haste
Mark  9.  23.  all  tilings  are  possible  to  him  that  A.

16.  16.  he  that  A.  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved.

but  he  that  A.  not  sh  .11  be  damned
John  3. 15.  whoso  A.  in  him  should  not  perish,  16.

18.  he  that  A.  on  him  is  not  condemned,  but  he

that  A.  not  is  condemned  already
36.  he  that  A.  hath  everlasting  life,  6.  47.

5.  24.  A.  on  him  that  sent  me  hath  everlasting  life

6.  35.  he  that  A.  on  me  shall  never  thirst

40.  he  that  seeth  the  Son  and  A.  on  him,  hath  life

7.  38.  he  that  A.  on  me,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow

11.  25.  he  that  A.  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  live
26.  whosoever  liveth  and  A.  in  me  shall  never  die

12.  44.  he  that  A.  on  me,  A.  not  on  me,  but  on  him
46.  whoso  A.  on  me,  should  not  abide  in  darkness

14. 12.  he  that  A.  on  me,  the  works  that  I  do
Acts  10.  43.  who  A.  in  him  receive  remission  of  sins
Rom.  1 . 16.  it  is  the.  pow  r  of  God  to  every  one  that  A.

3.  26.  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  A.  on  Jesus

4.  5.  but  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  A.  on  him
9.33.  whosoA.  on  himshall  not  be  ashamed,  10. 11.
10.  4.  Christ  is  the  end  of  law  to  every  one  that  A.

10.  for  with  the  heart  man  A.  to  righteousness
14.  2.  for  one  A.  that  he  may  eat  all  things
1  Cor.  7.  12.  if  any  brother  hath  a  wife  that  A.  not
13.7.  love  A.  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth


1  Cor.  14. 24.  and  there  come  in  one  that  A.  not

2  Cor.  6.  15.  what  part  hath  he  that  A.  with  infidel
1  Tim.  5.  16.  if  any  man  that  A.  have  widows

1  Pet.  2.  6.  he  that  A.  shall  not  be  confounded
1  John  5.1.  whoso  A.  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  of  God
5.  who  is  he  that  overcometh,  but  he  that  A.

10.  he  that  A.  on  the  Son  of  God  ;  he  that  A.  not
God.  because  he  A.  not  the  record
BELIEVING.

Mat.  21.  2  2.  ask  in  prayer,  A.  ye  shall  receive
John  20.  27.  said  to  Thomas,  be  not  faithless,  but  A.

31.  that  A.  ye  might  have  life  through  his  name
Acts  16.  34.  rejoiced,  A.  in  God  with  all  his  house

24.  14.  A.  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  law
Rom.  15.  13.  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  A.

1  Tim.  6.  2.  they  that  have  A.  masters,  not  despise

t  but  rather  do  them  service  because  they  are  A.

1  Pet.  1.  8.  yet  A.  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable
BELL,  S.

Exod.  28.  33.  A.  of  gold  betw.  pomegranates,  39. 25.

34.  a  golden  A.  and  a  pomegranate,  39.  26.

Zech.  14.  20.  upon  the  A.  of  horses,  holiness  to  Lord

Bellow,  see  Bulls.

BELLOWS.

Jer.  6.  29.  the  A.  are  burnt,  the  lead  is  consumed
BELLY

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  which  contains
the  bowels.  Mat.  15.  17.  [2]  The  womb,  Jer.  1.5.
[3]  The  entrails,  Rev.  10.  9,  10.  [4]  The  heart,
John  7-  38.  [5]  The  whole  man ,  Tit.  1.  12.  [6]
Carnal  pleasure,  Rom.  16.  18.

Gen.  3.  14.  on  thy  A.  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust  eat
Lev.  11.  42.  goetn  on  the  A.  be  an  abomination
Num.  5.  21.  thy  thigh  to  rot,  and  thy  A.  to  swell

25.  8.  thrust  man  of  Israel  and  woman  thro’  the  A.
Deut.  28. 1 11.  plenteous  in  the  truit  of  thy  A.

+  53.  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  A.

Judg.  3.  21.  the  dagger,  and  thrust  it  in  his  A.

1  Kings  7.  20.  had  pomegranates  over  against  the  A.
Job  3.  11.  give  up  ghost  when  I.  came  out  of  the  A.

15.  2.  and  fill  his  A.  with  the  east  wind

35.  bring  vanity,  and  their  A.  prepareth  deceit
Job  19.117.  intreated  for  children’s  sake  of  my  A.

20.  15.  God  shall  cast  them  out  of  his  A.

20.  surely  he  shall  not  feel  quietness  in  his  A.

23.  when  about  to  fill  his  A.  God  shall  cast  fury
32.  + 18.  the  spirit  of  my  A.  constraineth  me

19.  behold  my  A.  is  as  wine  which  hath  no  vent
Psal.  17. 14.  whose  A.  thou  fillest  with  thy  hid  treas.
22.  10.  thou  art  my  God  from  my  mother’s  A.

44.  25.  soul  bowed  down,  our  A.  cleaveth  to  earth

58. 1 3.  they  go  astray  from  the  A.

132.  + 11.  of  the  fruit  of  thy  A.  I  will  set  on
Prov.  13.  25.  but  the  A.  of  the  wicked  shall  want
18.  8.  go  into  innermost  parts  of  the  A.  26.  22.

20.  a  man’s  A.  shall  be  satisfied  with  fruit
20.  27.  searching  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  A.

30.  so  do  stripes  the  inward  parts  of  the  A.

22.  f  18.  is  a  pleasant  thing,  it  keep  them  in  thy  A.
Cant.  5.  14.  his  A.  is  as  bright  ivory  overlaid  with
7.  2.  thy  A.  is  like  an  heap  of  wheat  set  about  with
Isa.  46.  3.  which  are  born  by  me  from  the  A.

Jer.  1.  5.  before  I  formed  thee  in  the  A.  I  knew  thee
51.  34.  he  hath  filled  his  A.  with  my  delicates
Ezek.  3.  3.  he  said,  son  of  man,  cause  thy  A.  to  eat
Dan.  2.  32.  this  image's  A.  and  his  thighs  of  brass
Jonah  1. 17.  Jonah  was  in  A.  of  the  fish  ,  Mat.  12.  40.
2.  2.  out  of  the  A.  of  hell  cried  I,  and  thou  heardst
Mic.  6.  +7-  fruit  of  my  A.  for  the  sin  of  my  soul
Dab.  3.  16.  when  1  heard,  my  A.  trembled,  my  lips
■Mat.  15.  17-  whatsoever  entereth  in  at  the  mouth
goeth  into  the  A.  and  is  cast  out,  Mark  7.  19.
Luke  15.  16.  fain  have  filled  his  A.  with  the  husks
John  7.  38.  out  of  his  A.  shall  flow  rivers  of  water
Rom.  16. 18.  they  serve  notour  Lord  but  their  own  A.
1  Cor.  6.  13.  meats  for  the  A.  and  the  A.  for  meats
Phil.  3. 19.  whose  God  is  their  A.  and  glory  in  shame
Rev.  19.  9.  eat  it  up,  and  it  shall  make  thy  A.  bitter

10.  as  soon  as  I  had  eaten  it,  my  A.  was  bitter

BELLIES.

Tit.  1.  12.  the  Cretians  are  alway  liars,  slow  A.
BELONG.

Gen.  40.  8.  do  not  interpretations  A.  to  God  ?

Lev.  Q7.  24.  in  jubilee  return  to  whom  it  did  A.
Deut.  29.  29.  secret  things  A.  to  God,  revealed  A.
Psal.  47.  9.  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  A.  to  God
68.  20.  to  our  God  A.  the  issues  from  death
Prov.  24.  23.  these  things  also  A.  to  the  wise
Ezek.  21.  +  13.  shall  they  not  A.  to  the  despising  rod  r 1
Dan.  9.  9.  to  the  Lord  our  God  A.  mercies
Mark  9-  41.  in  my  name,  because  ye  A.  to  Christ
Luke  19.  42.  the  things  which  A.  to  thy  peace
1  Cor.  7-  32.  careth  for  things  that  A.  to  the  Lord
BELONGED,  EST.

1  Sam.  30. 13.  to  whom  A.  thou,  whence  art  thou  ?

1  Kings  1. 8.  and  the  mighty  men,  which  A.  to  David

2  Kings  7- 1  2.  a  lord  widen  A.  to  the  king  answered
Luke  23.  7*  as  he  knew  he  A.  to  Herod’s  jurisdiction

BELONGETH.

Deut.  32.  35.  to  me  A.  vengeance  and  recompense,
Psal.  94.  1.  Heb.  10.  30.
Judg.  19.  14.  Gibeah  which  A.  to  Benjamin,  20.  4.
Ezra  10.  4.  arise,  for  this  matter  A.  to  thee
Psal.  3.  8.  salvation  A.  unto  the  T.ord
62.  11.  twice  have  I  heard,  power  A.  unto  God
12.  also  unto  thee.  O  Lord,  A.  mercy
Dan.  9.  7-  O  Lord,  righteousness  A.  to  thee

8.  to  us  A.  confusion  of  face,  to  our  kings
Heb.  5.  14.  strong  meat  A.  to  them  of  full  age

BELONGING.

Num.  7.  9.  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  A.  to  them
Ruth  2.  3.  to  light  on  a  part  of  a  field  A.  to  Boaz
Prov.  26.  17-  meddleth  with  strife  A.  not  to  him
Luke  9. 10.  he  went  into  a  desert  A.  to  Bethsaida
BELOVED

Is  applied,  [1]  To  Christ,  Mat.  3.  17.  Mark  1.

11.  1  9.  7-  [2]  To  the  church,  Jer.  11.  15.  Rom.

9.  25.  [3]  To  particular  saints,  Neh.  13.  26.

Dan.  9.  23.  [4]  To  wife  and  children,  Deut.  21.
15.  Hos.  9.  16.  [5]  1 0  trie  New  Jerusalem,

Rev.  20.  9.

Deut.  21.  15.  tw  o  wives,  the  one  A.  tb*  other  hated


Deut.  33. 12.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety
2  Sam.  12.  t  25.  Jedidiah,  that  is  /.  of  the  Lord
Neh.  13.  26.  Solomon,  who  was  A.  of  his  God
Psal.  60.  5.  that  thy  A.  may  be  delivered,  108.  6.

127.  2.  for  so  he  giveth  his  A.  sleep
Prov.  4.  3.  and  only  0.  in  the  sight  of  my  mother
Cant.  5.1.  eat,  O  friends,  drink  abundantly,  O  A.

9.  what  is  thy  A.  more  than  another  A.  I

6.  1.  whither  is  thy  A.  gone,  O  thou  fairest  ?

8.  5.  who  is  this  that  cometh  leaning  on  her  A.  ?
Dan.  9.  23.  for  thou  art  greatly  A.  10.  11,19.

Hos.  3.  1.  go  yet,  love  a  woman  A.  of  her  friend

9.  16.  I  will  slay  the  A.  fruitof  their  w  omb
Acts  15. 25.  chosen  men  with  A.  Barnabas  and  Paul
Rom.  1.  7-  .to  all  that  are  in  Rome,  A.  of  God

9.  25. 1  will  call  her  A.  which  was  not  A.

11. 28.  they  are  A.  for  the  Father’s  sake

16. 12.  salute  A.  Persis  who  laboured  much  in  Lord
Eph.  1.  6.  he  hath  made  us  accepted  in  tire  A.

6.  21.  Tychicusa  A.  brother  and  minister.  Col.  4.  7-
Col.  3.  12.  put  on  as  the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  A.

4.  9.  with  Onesimus,  a  faithful  and  A.  brother

14.  Luke  the  A.  physician  and  Demas  greet  you
1  Thess.  1.  4.  knowing  A.  your  election  of  God

1  Tim.  6.  2.  do  them  service,  because  they  are  A.
Philem.  16.  but  above  a  servant,  a  brother  A.

Heb.  6.  9.  A.  we  are  persuaded  better  things  of  yon

2  Pet.  3.  8.  A.  be  not  ignorant  of  this  one  thing

15.  even  as  our  A.  brother  Paul  hath  written

1  John3.il.  A.  now  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  it  doth
21.  A.  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have
4.  1.  A.  believe  not  every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits

7.  A.  let  us  love  one  another,  for  love  is  of  God
11.  A.  if  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love

3  John  11.  A.  follow  not  that  which  is  evil,  but  gpod
Jude  20.  but  ye  A.  building  up  yourselves  in  faith
Rev.  20.  9.  and  they  compassed  the  A.  city

Dearly  Beloved,  see  Dearly.

My  BELOVED.

Cant.  1.  14.  my  b.  is  to  me  a  cluster  of  camphire

16.  behold  thou  art  fair,  my  A.  yea  pleasant
*2. 3.  as  the  apple-tree,  so  is  my  A.  among  the  sons

9.  myb.  is  like  a  roe  or  a  young  hart

16.  my  A.  is  mine,  and  I  am  his,  he  feedeth.  6.  3.

17.  turn,  my  A.  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  or  a  hart

4.  16.  let  my  A.  come  into  his  garden  and  eat

5.  2.  it  is  the  voice  of  my  A.  that  knocketh,  2.  8.

5.  I  rose  up  to  open  to  my  A.  ||  6. 1  opened  to  my  b.

10.  my  A.  is  white  and  ruddy  ||  16.  this  is  my  b.

6.  2.  my  A.  is  gone  ||  3.  1  am  my  A.  and  myb.  mine,

[7.  10.

7.  13.  which  I  have  laid  up  for  the,  O  my  A.

Isa.  5. 1.  a  song  of  my  A.  touching  his  vineyard
Jer.  11. 15.  what  hath  my  A.  to  do  in  my  house
Mat.  3.  17.  this  is  my  A.  Son,  17.  5.  Mark  1.  11.

I  9.  7-  Luke  3.  22. 1  9.  35.  2  Pet.  1.  17.
12.  18.  behold  my  A.  in  whom  my  soul  is  pleased
Luke  20.  13. 1  will  send  my  A.  son,  it  may  be  they
Rom.  16.  8.  greet  Amplias  my  A.  in  the  Lord
1  Cor.  4.  14.  but  as  my  A.  sons  I  warn  you
17. 1  sent  Timothy  my  A.  son,  2  Tim.  1.  2.

Jam.  1.  16.  do  not  err,  myb.  brethren
BELIE,  BELIED.

Prov.  30.  t  9.  lest  I  be  full  and  A.  thee
Jer.  5. 12.  they  have  A.  the  Lord,  and  said,  it  is  noL
BEMOAN,  ED,  ING.

Job  42.  11.  they  A.  Job,  and  comforted  him
Jer.  15.  5.  who  shall  A.  thee,  O  Jerusalem  ?

16.  5.  neither  go  to  lament,  nor  A.  them
22.  10.  weep  ye  not  for  the  dead,  nor  A.  him

31.  18.  I  have  surely  heard  Ephraim  A.  himself
48. 17.  all  ye  that  are  about  him  A.  him

Nah.  3.  7-  N  ineveh  is  laid  waste,  who  will  A.  her  t
BENCLIES.

Ezek.  27*  6.  the  Ashurites  made  thy  A.  of  ivory
BEND.

Psal.  11.  2.  for  lo,  the  wicked  A.  their  bow
64.  3.  who  A.  their  bows  to  shoot  their  arrows
Jer.  9.  3.  they  A.  their  tongue  like  a  bow  for  lies
46.  9.  the  Lydians,  that  handle  and  A.  the  bow
50. 14.  all  ye  that  A.  the  bow  shoot  at  her,  29.

51.  3.  against  him  that  bendeth,  let  the  archer  A.
Ezek.  17. 7.  behold  this  vine  did  A.  her  roots
BENDETH,  ING.

Psal.  58.  7-  when  he  A.  his  bow  to  shoot  arrows
Isa.  60.  14.  that  afflicted  thee  shall  come  A.  to  the®
Jer.  51.  3.  against  him  that  A.  let  the  archer  bend
BENEATH.

Exod.  20.  4.  or  that  is  in  the  earth  A.  Deut.  5.  8.

32.  19.  he  brake  the  tables  A.  the  mount
Deut.  4.  39.  on  the  earth  A.  there  is  none  else
28.  13.  thou  shalt  be  above  only,  and  not  be  A.

33. 13.  blessed,  for  the  deep  that  coucheth  A.

Ezra  9. +  13.  hast  withheld  A.  our  iniquities
Job  18. 16.  his  roots  shall  be  dried  up  A.

Prov.  15.  24.  that  he  may  depart  from  hell  b.

Isa.  14.  9.  hell  from  A.  is  moved  for  thee

51.  6.  lift  up  your  eyes,  look  on  the  earth  A.

Jer.  31.  37.  it  foundations  can  be  searched  b.

John  8.  23.  ye  are  from  A.  I  am  from  above
BEN  EFACTORS.

Luke  22. 25. they  that  exercise  authority  are  called  Av
BENEFIT.

Jer.  18. 10.  repent  of  good  wherewith  1  A.  them
BENEFIT,  S,

Signifies,  [1]  The  gifts  and  favours  of  God  to  men ,

2  Chron.  32.  25.  Psal.  68.  19.  (21  The  favour
of  God  to  others,  2  Cor.  1.  15.  Pnilem.  14.  [3]
God's  righteous  acts,  1  Sam.  12.  +  7-  [4]  Salva¬
tion,  1  Tim.  6.  2.  [5]  Favour,  grace,  or  .spiritual
blessings.  Psal.  103.  2.  [6]  To  profit,  or  do  good,
Jer.  18. 10.

1  Sam.  12. +  7.  reason  with  you  of  all  the  A.  of  L.

2  Chr.  32.  25.  Ilezekiah  rendered  not  according  to  A.
Psal.  68.  19.  Lord  who  daily  loadeth  us  with  A.

103.  2.  ble'  <e  Lord,  and  forget  not  all  his  A.

116.  12.  what  shall  1  render  to  Lord  for  all  his  A.  ?  ”
2  Cor.  1.  15.  that  you  might  have  a  second  A.

1  Tim.  6.  2.  faithful  and  beloved  partakers  of  the  A*. .
Philem.  14.  that  thy  A.  should  not  be  of  necessity
BENEVOLENCE.

1  Cor.  7.  3.  let  the  husband  render  to  the  wife  due  A  •


BES


BET


BET


BENT.

Psal.  7- 12.  lie  hath  b.  his  bow,  Imih.  2. 4.  |  3.  12.
37.  14.  have  b.  their  bow  to  cast  down  the  poor
J.sa .  5. 28.  whose  arrows  sharp,  and  all  their  bows  b.
21.  15.  for  they  tied  from  tne  swords  and  b.  bow
Hos.  11.  ?•  my  people  are  b.  to  backsliding  from  me
Zech.  9. 13.  when  I  have  b.  Judah  for  me
BEREAVE.

Deut .  32.  +  25.  sword  and  terror  shall  b.  young  men
Eccl.  4. 8.  for  whom  L  labour  and  b.  my  soul  of  good
Jer.  15.  7.  1  will  b.  them  of  children,  18.  21.

Ezek.  5.  17.  send  evil  beasts,  and  they  shall  b.  thee

14.  t  15.  if  L  cause  noisome  beasts  to  b.  the  land
36.  12.  no  more  henceforth  b.  them  of  men,  14.
Dos.  9.  12.  bring  up  children,  yet  will  I  b.  them
BEREAVED.

Gen.  42. 36.  Jacob  said,  me  ye  have  b.  of  my  children
43.  14.  if  1  be  b.  of  my  children,  1  am  b.

Ezek.  36.  13.  thou  land  hast  b.  thy  nations
Dos.  13. 8. 1  will  meet  them  as  a  bear  b.  of  her  whelps
BEREA VETH.

Lam.  1.  20.  abroad  the  sword  b.  at  home  is  as  death
BERRIES.

Isa.  17.  6.  two  or  three  b.  in  the  top  of  the  bough
.  Jam.  3. 12.  can  the  fig-tree  bear  olive  b.  a  vine  figs  ?
BERYL.

Dan.  10.  6.  his  body  also  was  like  the  b.  and  face
Rev.  21.  20.  eighth  foundation  was  b.  ninth  a  topaz
BESEECH.

Exod.  33.  18.  he  said,  I  b.  thee  show  me  thy  glory
Num.  12.  13.  heal  her  now,  O  Lord,  1  b.  thee
Psal.  80. 14.  return,  we  b.  thee,  O  God  of  hosts
116.  4.  O  Lord,  l  b.  thee,  deliver  my  soul
118.  25.  save,  1  b.  O  Lord,  1  b.  thee,  send  prosperity
119. 108.  accept,  I  b.  thee,  free-will  offerings
ffer.  38.  20.  obey.  1  b.  thee,  the  voice  of  the  Ix>rd
Amos  7.  2.  1  saia,  O  Lord  God,  forgive,  I  b.  thee
Jonah  1. 14.  they  said,  we  b.  thee,  O  Lord,  we  b.  thee

4.  3.  O  Lord,  take.  I  b.  thee  my  life  from  me
Mai.  1.  9.  b.  God,  tnat  he  will  be  gracious  to  us
Luke  8.  28.  Jesus,  1  b.  thee,  torment  me  not

9.  38.  saying,  master,  1  A.thee  look  on  my  son
Acts  26.  3.  wherefore  1  b.  thee  to  hear  me  patiently
Rom.  12.  1.  I  b.  you  by  the  mercies  of  God

l  Cor.  4.  16. 1  b.  you,  be  ye  followers  of  me
'-2  Cor.  2.  8.  1  b.y ou,  confirm  your  love  toward  him

5.  20.  as  though  God  did  b.  you  by  us,  we  pray  you

6. 1.  we  b.  you  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain

10.  1.  1  Paul  b.  you  by  the  meekness  of  Christ
Gal.  4.  12. 1  b.  you,  be  as  I  am,  for  1  am  as  ye  are
Eph.  4. 1.  I  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord  b.  you  to  walk
Philem.  9.  yet  for  love’s  sake  1  rather  b.  thee

10.  1  b.  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus,  whom  1  have
Deb.  i3. 19.  but  I  b.  you  the  rather  to  do  this

1  Pet.  2. 11. 1  b.  you  as  strangers  and  pilgrims

2  John  5.  now  I  b.  thee,  lady,  not  as  though  1  wrote

See  Brethren.
BESEECHING.

Mat.  8. 5.  there  came  a  centurion  b.  him,  Luke  7.  3.
Mark  1. 40.  there  came  a  leper  to  him,  b.  him
BESET.


Judg.  19.  22.  sons  of  Belial  b.  the  house  round,  20. 5.
Psal.  22. 12.  strong  bulls  of  Bashan  have  b.  me
139.  5.  thou  hast  b.  me  behind  and  before
Dos.  7.  2.  their  own  doings  have  b.  them  about
Deb.  12.  1.  lay  aside  sin  which  doth  so  easily  b.  us
BESIDE,  BESIDES.

Gen.  19.  12.  hast  thou  here  any  b.  bring  them  out
26.  1.  there  was  a  famine  b.  the  first  famine
Lev.  18.  18.  b.  the  other  in  her  life-time

23.  38.  b.  sabbaths,  b.  your  gifts,  b.  your  vows,  b.
your  free-will  offerings,  which  ye  give  to  Lord

Num.  5.  20.  man  has  lain  with  thee,  b.  thy  husband
6.  21.  law  of  Nazarite,  b.  that  his  hand  shall  get
11.  6.  there  is  nothing  at  all  b.  this  manna
28.  23.  offer  these  b.  the  burnt-offering,  29.  6.
Deut.  29.  1.  b.  the  covenant  he  made  in  Horeb
Josh.  22.  19.  in  building  an  altar,  b.  the  altar,  29.
Judg.  6.  37.  if  it  be  dry  on  all  the  earth  b.

11.  34.  b.  her  Jephthah  had  no  son  nor  daughter
1  Sam.  19.  3. 1  will  go  out  and  stand  b.  my  father

1  King  10.  13.  b.  that  which  Solomon  gave  her
22.  7.  not  a  prophet  of  the  L.  b.  2  Chron.  18.  6.

2  Kings  21. 16.  b.  his  sin,  wherewith  he  made  Judah
Psal.  23.  2.  he  leadeth  me  b.  the  still  waters
Cant.  1.  8.  feed  thy  kids  b.  the  shepherds’  tents
Isa.  32.  20.  blessed  are  ye  that  sow  b.  all  waters

56.  8.  I  will  gather  others  to  him  b.  those  that
Luke  16. 26.  b.  all  this,  between  us  and  you  a  gulf

24.  21.  b.  all  this,  to-day  is  the  third  day  since
Philem.  19.  thou  owest  to  me  thine  ownself  b.

BESIDE.

Marks.  21.  his  friends  said,  he  is  b.  himself
Acts  26.  24.  Paul,  thou  art  b.  thyself,  learning
2  Cor.  5. 13.  whether  we  be  b.  ourselves,  it  is  to  God
„  BESIEGE.

Deut.  28.  52.  he  shall  b.  thee  in  thy  gates

1  Kings  8. 37.  if  their  enemies  b.  them,  2  Chr.  6.  28.
Isa.  21.  2.  go  up,  O  Elam,  b.  O  Media

BESIEGED.

2  Kings  19. 24.  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  I  have  dried

up  all  the  rivers  of  b.  places,  Isa.  37.  25.
Eccl.  9.  14.  came  a  great  king  against  it  and  b.  it
Isa.  l.  8.  the  daughter  of  Zion  is  left  as  a  b.  city
Ezek.  6. 12.  he  that  is  b.  shall  die  by  the  famine
_  .  BESOM.

Isa.  14. 23. 1  will  sweep  it  with  the  b.  of  destruction
BESOUGHT.

Gen.  42.  21.  when  he  b.  us,  and  we  would  not  hear
Exod.  32. 11.  Moses  b.  the  Lord,  Deut.  3.23.

2  Sam.  12.  16.  David  b.  God  for  the  child

1  Kings  13.  6.  and  the  man  of  God  b.  the  Lord

2  Kings  1. 13  third  captain  fell  on  his  knees  and  b.
13.  4.  Jehoahaz  b.  the  Lord,  the  Lord  hearkened

2  Chron  33.  12.  Manasseh  in  affliction  b.  the  Lord
Ezra  8.  23.  so  we  fasted  and  b.  our  God  for  this
Esth.  8. 3.  b.  him  with  tears  to  put  away  the  mischief
Jer  26. 19.  did  not  Hezekiah  fear,  and  b.  the  Lord
Mat.  8.  31.  so  the  devils  b.  him,  Mark  5.  10,  12.

...  Luke  8.  31,  32.

34.  saw  him,  they  b.  him  to  depart,  Luke  8.  37.

8. 1 26.  servant  h.  him.  Lord,  nave  patience


Mark  5.  23.  Jairus  b.  him  greatly,  Luke  8.  41.
John  4.  40.  Samaritans  b.  that  lie  would  tarry
47.  the  nobleman  of  Capernaum  b.  him  to  come

19.  38.  b.  Pilate  that  he  might  take  the  body
Acts  13.42.  Gentiles  b.  that  these  words  be  preached

16.  15.  Lydia  b.  us,  saying,  if  ye  have  judged  me
39.  magistrates  b.  them,  and  brought  them  out

21.  12.  we  b.  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem
2  Cor.  12.  8.  for  this  thing  I  b.  the  Lord  thrice
„  BEST.

Gen.  43.  11.  take  of  the  b.  fruits  in  the  land
47. 6.  in  b.  of  the  land  make  thy  father  dwell,  11.
Exod.  22. 5.  of  b.  of  his  own  field  make  restitution
Num.  18. 29.  every  heave  offering  shall  be  of  the  b.
36.  6.  let  them  marry  to  whom  they  think  b.

Deut.  23.  16.  he  shall  dwell  where  it  likes  him  b.

1  Sam.  8. 14.  he  will  take  the  b.  of  your  vineyards

15.  9.  Saul  and  the  people  spared  the  b.  of  sheep, 15.

2  Sam.  18.  4.  whatseemeth  you  b.  I  will  do

2  Kings  10.  3.  look  out  the  b.  of  your  master’s  sons
Psal.  39.  5.  every  man  at  his  b.  state  is  vanity
Cant.  7.  9.  the  roof  of  thy  mouth  like  the  b.  wine
Mic.  7.  4.  the  b.  of  them  is  as  a  brier,  most  upright
lMke  15.  22.  bring  forth  the  b.  robe  and  put  it  on

1  Cor.  12.  31.  but  covet  earnestly  the  b.  gifts

BESTEAD.

Isa.  8. 21.  they  shall  pass  thro’  it  hardly  b.  hungry
BESTIR.

2  Sam.  5. 24.  when  hearest  the  sound  then  b.  thyself

BES  row.

Exod.  32.  29.  that  he  may  b.  on  you  a  blessing
Deut.  14.  26.  b.  money  for  what  thy  soul  lusts  after
2  Chron.  24.7.  the  things  they  did  b.  on  Baalim
Ezra  7.  20.  which  thou  shalt  have  occasion  to  b.  it
out  of  the  king’s  treasure-house.
Luke  12. 17. 1  have  no  room  where  to  b.  my  fruits
18.  and  there  will  1  b.  all  my  fruits  and  goods

1  Cor.  12. 23.  on  these  we  b.  more  abundant  honour
13.  3.  though  I  b.  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  poor

BES  1 0  WED.

2  Kings  5.  24.  Gehazi  b.  them  in  the  house

1  Chron.  29.  25.  Lord  b.  on  Solomon  royal  majesty
Isa.  63. 7.  according  to  all  the  Lord  hath  b.  on  us
John  4.  38.  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  b.  no  labour
Rom.  16.  6.  greet  Mary,  who  b.  much  labour  on  us

1  Cor.  15. 10.  his  grace  b.  on  me  was  not  in  vain

2  Cor.  1. 11.  for  the  gift  b.  on  us  by  means  of  many

8. 1.  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  b.  on  the  churches

Gal.  4.  11.  lest  I  have  b.  on  you  labour  in  vain
1  John  3.  1.  what  manner  of  love  l  ather  b.  on  us
BETAKE.

Isa.  14.  t  32.  poor  of  his  people  b.  themselves  to  it
BE1II1NK.

1  Kmgs8.  47-  if  they  shall  b.  themselves  in  the  land

whither  were  carried  captives,  2  Chron.  6.  37.
BETIMES

Signifies,  [1]  Early,  Gen.  26.  31.  [2]  Seasonably ,  in
due  and  proper  time,  Pro  v.  1 3 .  24.  [3]  Continually,
and  carefully,  2  Chron.  36.  15.

Gen.  26.  31.  rose  up  b.  and  sware  one  to  another

2  Chron.  36. 15.  God  sent  by  his  messengers,  rising  b.
Job  8.  5.  if  thou  wouldcstseek  unto  God  b.

24.  5.  as  wild  asses  go  they,  rising  b.  for  prey
Prov.  13.  24.  he  thatloveth  him,  chasteneth  him  b.
BEiRAY.

1  Chron.  12. 17-  if  ye  be  come  to  b.  me  to  enemies
Mat.  24.  10.  and  shall  b.  one  another  and  hate

26.  16.  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  toi.

him,  Mark  14. 11.  Luke  22.  6.
21.  I  say  unto  you,  that  one  of  you  shall  b.  me,
Mark  14.  18.  John  13.  21.
46.  behold,  he  is  at  hand  that  doth  b.  me
Mark  13.  12.  brother  shall  b.  brother  to  death
John  6.  64.  Jesus  knew  who  should  b.  him,  13.  11.
13.  2.  the  devil  put  into  the  heart  of J  udas  to  b.  him
BETRAYED.

Mat.  10. 4.  J  udas  Iscariot  who  b.  him,  Marks.  19.

17.  22.  Son  of  man  shall  be  b.  into  the  hands  of

men,  20.  18. 1  26.  2,  45.  Mark  14.  41.
26. 24.  w  0  to  that  man  by  whom  the  Son  of  man  is
b.  Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22.
48.  he  that  b.  gave  them  a  sign,  Mark  14.  44.

27.  4.  I  have  sinned,  in  that  1  b.  innocent  blood
Luke  21.  16.  and  ye  shall  be  b.  both  by  parents  and
John  18.  2.  Judas  which  b.  him  knew  trie  place

1  Cor.  11.  23.  same  night  he  was  b.  he  took  bread
BETRAYERS.

Acts  7.  52.  just  One,  of  whom  ye  have  been  the  b.
BEl'RAY ESI',  ETH.

Mark  14.  42.  let  us  go,  lo,  he  that  b.  me  is  at  hand
Luke  22.  21.  the  hand  of  him  that  b.  me  is  with  me
48.  J  udas,  b.  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss  '
John  21.  20.  Lord,  which  is  he  that  b.  thee  ?

„  BETROTH.

Deut. 28.30.  shalt  b.  a  wife,  another  shall  lie  with  her
Dos.  2.  19.  1  will  b.  thee  to  me  for  ever  in  righteous.

20.  I  will  b.  thee  to  me  in  faithfulness,  shalt  know

BETROTHED.

Exod.  21.  8.  if  she  please  not  her  master  who  b.  her
22.  16.  if  a  man  entice  a  maid  not  b.  Deut.  22.  28.
Leu.  19. 20.  whosoever  lieth  with  a  woman  b.

Deut.  20. 7.  who  hath  b.  a  wife,  and  not  taken  her
22.  23.  it  a  man  find  a  virgin  b.  and  lie  with  her
27.  b.  damsel  cried,  and  there  was  none  to  save
„  ..  BETTER

Signifies,  [1]  More  valuable ,  or  preferable ,  Eccl.  9.
4, 16,  18.  [2]  More  acceptable,  1  Sam.  15.  22.  [3]
More  able,  Dan.  1.  20.  [4]  More  convenient,  1
Cor.  7.  38.  [5]  More  easy.  Mat.  18.  6.  [6]  More
advantageous,  Phil.  1.  23.  [7]  More  holy,  1  Cor.
8.  8.  [8]  More  safe,  Psal.  118.  8.  [9]  More

comfortable,  Prov.  15.  16, 17.  [10]  More  precious,
Prov.  8.  11.

-A  better  hope,  Deb.  7.  19.  The  new  covenant,  or
Christ  and.  his  priesthood,  and  the  promises  of  the
gospel  depending  thereupon  ;  which  give  hope  to  lost
sinners  of  obtaining  reconciliation  with  God,  and
afford  more  clear  and  solid  grounds  to  expect  the
full  pardon  of  their  sins,  and  eternal  life,  than
could  be  discovered  from  the  dark  shadows  under
the  legal  dispensation.

Might  obtain  a  better  resurrection.  Deb.  11.  35.


A  resurrection  to  a  far  better  life  than  they  could
have  enjoyed  on  earth  ;  for  though  they  might  have
been  preserved  for  a  while  from  death  now  threaten¬
ed,  which  was  a  kind  of  resurrection,  yet  was  it  not
to  be  compared  with  the  resurrection  to  eternal  life,
glory,  bliss,  and  pleasure,  to  be  enjoyed  by  them  with
God  m  heaven  which  would  abundantly  recompense
them  for  all  their  sufferings.

Better  sacrifices,  Deb.  9. 23.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ
himself,  which  is  of  more  value,  and  comprises  all
the  virtue ,  benefit,  and  signification  of  the  legal
sacrifices.  It  is  expressed  in  the  plural  number,
both  to  answer  the  opposite  term,  and  to  set  out  its
excellency  ;  being  far  above  all  others,  and  the  very
substance  of  them.

Gen.  29. 19.  b.  I  give  her  to  thee  than  to  another
Exod.  14.  12.  b.  for  us  to  have  served  the  Egyptians
Num.  14.  3.  were  it  not  b.  for  us  to  return  to  Egypt  ?
Judg.  8.  2.  gleanings  of  Ephraim  b.  than  vintage

11.  25.  nor  art  thou  any  thing  b.  than  Balak
1  Sam.  l.  8.  am  not  1  b.  to  thee  than  ten  sons  ?

27;  1.  nothing  b.  than  to  go  to  the  Philistines

1  Kings  1.  47.  God  make  the  name  of  k.  Solomon  b.

2.  32.  who  fell  upon  two  men  b.  than  he,  and  slew
19.  4.  Elijah  said,  1  am  not  b.  than  my  fathers

21.  2.  I  will  give  thee  for  it  a  b.  vineyard  than  it

2  Kings  5. 12.  rivers  of  Damascus  b.  than  Jordan
2  Chron.  21. 13.  hast  slain  brethren  b.  than  thyself
Psal.  69.  31.  this  shall  please  the  Lord  b.  than  an  ox
Eccl.  2. 24.  nothing  b.  foraman  than  to  eat  and  drink

3.  22.  there  is  nothing  b.  than  to  rejoice  in  his  works

4.  3.  b.  is  he  than  both  they,  which  have  not  been
9.  two  are  b.  than  one  ||6. 11.  yhat  is  man  the  b.  ?

7.  lo.  that  the  former  days  were  b.  than  these
til.  wisdom  is  as  good  as  an  inheritance,  yea  b.  too

10.  11 .  the  serpent  will  bite,  and  a  babbler  is  no  b.
Isa.  56.  5.  give  a  name  b.  than  of  sons  and  daughters
Lam.  4.  9.  they  that  be  slain  with  the  sword  are  b.
Ezek.  36. 11.  I  will  settle  you,  and  do  b.  to  you
Dan.  1.  20,  in  all  matters  he  found  them  ten  times  b.
Dos.  2.  7.  then  was  it  b.  with  me  than  now
Amos  6.  2.  be  they  b.  than  these  kingdoms  ?

Nah.  3.  8.  art  thou  b.  than  populous  No?

Mat.  6.  26.  behold  the  fowls  of  the  air,  are  ye  not
much  b.  than  they  ?  Luke  12.  24.
12. 12.  how  much  then  is  a  man  b.  than  a  sheep  ?
18. 6.  it  were  b.  for  him  that  a  millstone  were  hang¬
ed  about  his  neck,  Mark  9.  42.  Luke  17.  2.
Rom.  3.  9.  are  we  b.  than  they  ?  no,  in  no  wise

1  Cor.  7.38.  he  that  giveth  her  not  in  marriage, doth  b.

8.  8.  for  neither  if  we  eat  are  we  the  b.

9. 15.  b.  forme  to  die,  than  make  my  glorying  void
11. 17.  you  come  together  not  for  3. "but  for  worse
Phil.  2.  3.  let  each  esteem  other  b.  than  himself
Deb.  1.  4.  being  made  so  much  b.  than  the  angels

6.  9.  but  beloved,  we  are  persuaded  b.  things  of  you

7.  7.  without  contrad.  the  less  is  blessed  ot  the  b.

19.  nothing  perfect,  but  bringing  in  of  a  b.  hope  did

22.  Jesus  was  made  a  surety  of  a  b.  testament

8.  6.  by  how  much  also  he  is  the  Mediator  of  a  b.

covenant,  established  on  b.  promises

9.  23.  but  heavenly  things  with  b.  sacrifices

10.  34.  in  heaven  a  b.  and  enduring  substance
11. 16.  they  desire  a  b.  country,  anheavenly

35.  that  they  might  obtain  a  b.  resurrection
40.  God  having  provided  some  b.  thing  for  us

12.  24.  that  speaketh  b.  things  than  that  of  Abel

2  Pet.  2.  21.  b.  for  them  not  to  have  known  the  way

BETTER  is.

Prov.  15. 16.  b.  is  little  with  the  fear  of  the  Lord

17.  b.  is  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is,  than  an  ox

16.  8.  b.  is  a  little  with  righteousness  than  revenues

16.  how  much  b.  is  it  to  get  wisdom  than  gold
17-  1.  b.  is  a  dry  morsel  and  quietness  therewith

19. 1.  b.  is  the  poor  that  walks  in  integrity,  28.  6.

27.  10.  for  b.  is  a  neighbour  that  is  near,  than
Eccl.  4.  6.  b.  is  an  handful  with  quietness  than

13.  b.  is  a  poor  wise  child  than  a  foolish  king

6.  9.  b.  is  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the  wandering
7-  8.  b.  is  the  end  of  a  thing  than  the  beginning

Cant.  4. 10.  how  much  b.  is  thy  love  than  wine  i
Is  BETTER,  or  is  it  BETTER.

Judg.  9. 2.  whether  is  b.  for  you  that  all  reign
18. 19.  is  it  b.  to  be  a  priest  to  one,  than  to  a  tribe  ?
Ruth  4. 15.  thy  daughter  is  b.  to  thee  than  seven  son*

1  Sam.  15.  22.  behold,  to  obey  is  b.  than  sacrifice

28.  given  to  a  neighbour  that  is  b.  than  thou

2  Sam.  17. 14.  counsel  of  Hushai  the  Archite  is  b.
Esth.  1.  19.  estate  to  another  that  is  b.  than  she
Psal.  37.  16.  a  little  a  righteous  man  hath  is  b.

6.3.  3.  thy  loving-kindness  is  b.  than  life

84.  10.  a  day  in  thy  courts  is  b.  than  a  thousand
119. 72.  the  law  of  thy  mouth  is  b.  to  me  than  gold
Prov.  3. 14.  for  the  merchandise  of  wisdom  is  b.

8.  11.  wisdom  is  b.  than  rubie-,  and  all  things
19.  my  fruit  is  b.  than  gold,  yea,  than  fine  gold

12.  9.  is  b.  than  lie  that  honoureth  himself
16.  32.  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  b.  than  the  mighty
19.  22.  and  a  poor  man  is  b.  than  a  liar
22. 1 1.  favour  is  b.  than  silver  and  gold
27.  5.  open  rebuke  is  b.  than  secret  love
Eccl.  6.  3.  an  untimely  birth  is  b.  than  he

7.  1.  a  good  name  is  b.  than  precious  ointment

3.  sorrow  is  b.  than  laughter,  for  by  the  sadness  ot
the  countenance  the  heart  is  made  b.

8.  the  patient  in  spirit  is  b.  than  the  proud  in  spirit

9.  4.  a  living  dog  is  b.  than  a  dead  lion

16.  then  said  1,  wisdom  is  b.  than  strength

18.  wisdom  is  b.  than  weapons  of  war.

Cant.  1.  2.  for  thy  love  is  b.  than  wine
Luke  5.  39.  for  he  saith,  the  old  is  b.

Phil.  1.  23.  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  b.

It  is  BETTER,  or  BETTER  it  is.

Gen.  29. 19.  it  is  b.  I  give  her  to  thee  than  another
2  Sam.  18.  3.  it  is  b.  thou  succour  us  out  of  the  city
Psal.  118. 8.  it  *5  b.  to  trust  in  the  Lor.d  than  to  put,  9.
Prov.  1(5. 19.  b.  it  is  to  be  of  an  humble  spirit
21.  9;  it  is  b.  todwellinacornerofthe  house, 25. 24.

19.  it  is  b.  to  dwell  in  the  wilderness  than  with
25. 7-  b.  it  is  that  it  be  said  to  thee,  come  up  hither

Eccl.  5.  5.  b.  it  is  that  thou  shouldest  not  vow
7.  2.  it  is  b.  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  than

27


BID


BIR


BIT


Eccl.  7.  5.  it  is  b.  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the  wise  than
Jonah  4.  3.  it  is  h.  for  me  to  die  than  to  live,  8.
Mat.  18. 8.  it  is  h.  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  halt  or
maimed ,  than  to  be  cast,  9.  Mark  9.  43, 45, 47.
1  Cor.  7.  9.  for  it  is  b.  to  marry  than  to  burn
1  Pet.  3. 17.  it  is  b.  that  ye  suffer  for  well  doing  than
BETTERED.  [worse

Mark  5.  26.  she  was  nothing  b.  but  rather  grew
BETWEEN.

Gen.  1.  +4.  God  divided  b.  light  and  darkness
1 14.  to  divide  b.  light  and  darkness
3. 15.  I  will  put  enmity  b.  thy  seed  and  her  seed
9.  16.  the  covenant  b.  God  and  every  creature
15.  17.  a  burning  lamp  passed  b.  those  places
49. 10.  nor  a  lawgiver  from  b.  his  feet,  till  Shiloh
Exod  8.  23.  I  will  put  a  division  b.  my  people

12.  +  6.  kill  it  b.  the  two  evenings,  Num.  9.  +3.

13.  9.  and  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  to  thee,  and  a  me¬

morial  b.  thine  eyes,  16.  Dent.  6.  8.  1 11. 18.
18.  16.  they  come,  and  1  judge  b.  one  and  another
26.  33.  the  vail  shall  divide  b.  holy  and  most  holy
Num.  11.  33.  w  hile  the  flesh  was  b.  their  teeth

28.  1 4.  the  other  lamb  offer  h.  two  evenings
Deut.  17.  8.  b.  blood  and  blood,  b.  plea,  b.  stroke
33. 12.  and  he  shall  dwell  b.  his  shoulders

Judg.  4.5.  Deborah  dwelt  b.  Hamah  and  Beth  el
1  Sam. 7. 14.  there  was  peace  b.  Israel  and  Amorites
tSam.  19-  35.  discern  b.  good  and  evil,  1  Kings 3. 9.
1  Kings  18.  21.  how  long  halt  ye  b.  two  opinions
Prov.  18.  18.  the  lot  parteth  b.  the  mighty
Jer.  34.  18.  they  passed  b.  parts  of  the  calf,  19.
Ezek.  34. 17.  I  judge  b.  cattle  ami  cattle,  b.  rams
Hos.  2. 2.  and  her  adulteries  from  b.  her  breasts
Joel 2.  17.  the  priests  weep  b.  the  porch  an  I  altar
Zech.  11. 14.  break  the  brotherhood  b.  ludah
Mat.  23.  35.  ye  slew  b.  tne  temple  and  the  altar
John  3.  25.  a  question  b.  John’s  disciples  and  Jews
Acts  13.  t  42.  might  he  preached  the  sabbath  b.
Rom.  10. 12.  no  difference  b.  the  lew  and  Greek
1  Cor.  7. 34.  there  is  difference  b.  a  wife  and  a  virgin

1  Tim.  2.  5.  there  is  one  Mediator  b.  God  and  men

BETWIXT.

Job  36.  32.  not  to  shine  by  the  cloud  that  cometh  b.
Cant.  1.  13.  he  shall  lie  all  night  A.  my  breasts
Phil.  1.  23. 1  am  in  a  strait  b.  two.  having  a  desire
BEWAIL.

Lev.  10.  6.  b.  the  burning  the  Lord  hath  kindled
Deut.  21. 13.  and  b.  her  rather  and  mother  a  month
Judg.  11.  37.  that  I  may  go  and  b.  my  virginity,  38.
Isa.  16.  9.  I  will  b.  with  the  weepina  of  Jazer

2  Cor.  12.  21.  that  I  shall  b.  many  who  have  sinned
Rev.  18.  9.  shall  b.  her,  when  they  see  the  smoke

BEWAILED,  ETH.

Jer.  4.  31.  the  daughter  of  Zion  that  b.  herself
Luke  8.  52.  and  all  wept,  and  b.  her,  but  he  said
23. 27.  of  women  also  who  b.  and  lamented  him
BEWARE

Signifies,  [1]  To  take  care ,  Prov.  19.  25.  [2]  To  have
a  singular  and  special  regard  to,  Exod.  23.  21.

We  must  beware,  [1]  Of  forgetting  God,  Deut.  6.
12.  1 8.  11.  [2]  Of  evil  thi  lights,  Deut.  15.  9.

[3]  Of  things  forbidden,  Judg.  13.  4,  13.  [4]  Of
dangers  foretold,  2  Kings  6.  9.  Job  36.  18.  [5]  Of
God's  wrath,  Acts  13.  40.  [6]  Of  false  teachers.
Mat.  7.  15.  1  16.  6, 11.  [7]  Of  men,  Mat.  10.  17-

[8]  Of  evil  workers,  Phil.  3.  2.  [9]  Of  the  error
of  the  wicked,  2  Pet.  3.  17.  [10]  Of  covetousness,
Luke  12. 15.  |  20.  46.

Gen.  24.6.  b.  that  thou  bring  not  my  son  thither
Exod.  23.  21.  b.  of  him,  and  obey  his  voice
Deut.  6.  12.  then  b.  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,  8.  11.

15.  9.  b.  there  be  not  a  wdcked  thought  in  thy  heart
Judg.  13.  4.  b.  1  pray  thee,  and  drink  no  wine,  13.
2  Sam.  18.  12.  b.  that  none  touch  the  young  man

2  Kings  6.9.  saying  b.  that  thou  pass  not  such  a  place
Job  36.  18.  b.  lest  he  take  thee  away  with  his  stroke
Prov.  19.  25.  smite  a  scorner,  and  the  simple  will  b.
Isa.  36.  18.  b.  lest  Hezekiah  persuade  you,  saying
Mat.  f.  15.  b.  of  false  prophets  1]  10.  17.  b.  of  men

16.  6.  take  heed  and  b.  of  the  leaven  of  the  Phari¬

sees,  11.  Mark  8.  15.  L.nke  12.  1
Mark  12.  38.  b.  of  the  scribes,  Luke  20.  46.

Luke  12.  15.  take  heed  and  b.  of  covetousness
Acts  13.  40.  b.  lest  that  come  which  is  spoken
Phil.  3.2.  b.  of  dogs,  b.  of  evil  workers,  b.  of  concision
Col.  2. 8.  b.  lest  any  man  spoil  ymu  thro’  philosophy
2  Pet.  3.  17.  b.  lest  ye  also,  being  led  away  with
BEWITCHED.  [error

Acts  8.  9.  Simon  b.  the  people  of  Samaria,  11.

Gal.  3.  1.  O  foolish  Galatians,  who  hath  b.  you  ?

BEWRAY.  [dereth

Isa.  16.  3.  hide  the  outcasts,  b.  not  him  that  wan-
BEWRAYETH.

Prov.  27. 16.  the  ointment  of  his  right  hand  b.  itself

29.  24.  he  heareth  cursing,  and  b.  it  not

Mat.  26. 73.  thou  art  one  of  them,  thy  speech  b.  thee
BEYOND.

Num.  22. 18.  Palaam  said,  I  cannot  go  b.  the  word
of  the  Lord  my  God,  to  do  less  of  more,  24. 13.
Deut.  30. 13.  nor  is  it  b.  the  sea,  that  shouldestsay

1  Sam.  20.  22.  the  arrows  are  b.  thee,  36.  37.

2  Sam.  10. 16.  b.  the  river,  1  Kings  14.  15.  1  Chron.

19.  16.  Ezra  4.  17,  20.  |  6.  6,  8.  |7.  21,  25.
Neh.  2.  7,  9.  Isa.  7.  20.  1 18.  1.  Zeph.  .3. 10.
2  Chron.  20.  2.  multitude  from  b.  the  sea,  Jer.  25.  22.
Mark  6.  51.  they  were  amazed  b.  measure,  J-  37.

2  Cor.  8.  3.  and  b.  their  powrer  they  were  willing
10. 14.  for  we  stretch  not  b.  our  measure
Gal.  1.13.  b.  measure  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God
1  Thess.  4.  6.  that  no  man  go  b.  and  defraud  his  bro-
Beyond  Jordan .  See  Jordan.  [ther
Bibber.  See  Wine.

BID

Signifies,  [1]  To  invite,  Mat.  22.  9.  Luke  14.  12.
[2]  To  command,  Mat.  14.  28.  [31  To  wish,  2  John
10.  [4]  To  sanctify,  or  prepare,  Zeph.  1.  +  7.

Josh.  6.  10.  till  the  day  1  b.  you  shout,  then  shout

1  Sam.  9.  27.  said,  b.  the  servant  pass  on  before  us

2  Sam.  2.  26.  how  long  ere  b.  the  people  return  from
2  Kings  4. 24.  slack  not  riding  for  me  except  I  b.  thee

5. 1.3.  if  the  prophet  had  b.  thee  do  a  great  thing
U\  5.  we  will  do  all  that  thou  shalt  b.  us
28


Jonah  3.  2.  preach  to  it  the  preaching  that  I  b.  thee
Zeph.  1.  7.  tor  the  Lord  hath  b.  his  guests
Mat.  14.  28.  b.  me  come  to  thee  on  the  water

22.  9.  as  many  as  ye  shall  find  b.  to  the  marriage

23.  3.  what  they  b.  you  observe,  that  observe  and  do
Luke  9.  61.  let  me  first  b.  them  farewell  at  home

10.  40.  b.  her  therefore  that  she  help  me

14. 12.  lest  they  also  b.  thee  again,  and  a  recompence

1  Cor.  10. 27.  if  any  that  believe  not  b.  you  to  a  feast

2  John  10.  receive  him  not,  nor  b.  him  God  speed

BIDDEN.

1  Sam.  9.  13.  and  afterwards  they  eat  that  be  b.

2  Sam.  16.  11.  let  him  curse,  for  the  Lord  hath  b.
Mat.  1.  24.  then  Joseph  did  as  the  angel  had  b.  him

22. 3.  and  sent  to  call  them  that  were  b.  to  wedding
4.  tell  them  who  are  b.  I  have  prepared  my  dinner
8.  but  they  who  were  b.  were  not  worthy

Luke  7.  39.  when  the  Pharisee  who  had  b.  him  saw  it
14.  7 .  he  put  forth  a  parable  to  those  who  were  b.

8. when  thou  art  b.  lesf  a  more  honourable  man  be  b.
10.  when  thou  art  b.  go  and  sit  in  the  lowest  room

24.  none  of  those  men  b.  shall  taste  of  my  supper
B1DDEITI,  BIDDING.

1  Sam..  22.  14.  goeth  at  thy  b.  and  is  honourable

2  John  11.  he  that  b.  him  God  speed,  is  partaker

BIDE.

Pom .  11 . 23.  if  they  b.  not  still  in  unbelief,  be  grafted
BIER.

2  Sam,  3.  31 .  king  David  himself  followed  the  b.
Luke  7. 14.  he  came  and  touched  the  b.  and  said
BILL.

Luke  16.  6.  take  thy  b.  and  write,  50.  |t  7.  take  thy  b.
See  Divorce.

BILLOWS.

Psal.  42. 7.  all  thy  b.  are  gone  over  me,  Jonah  2.  3.
BIND

Signifies,  [1]  To  tie  up,  or  fasten  together,  Gen.
37.  7.  Deut.  14.  25.  [2]  I'o  bind  with  chains,
Mark  5.  3.  Acts  12.  6.  [3]  To  keep  fast,  or
sure,  Prov.  3.  3.  1  6.  21.  [4]  To  engage  by  vow,
or  promise,  Num.  .30.  2,  9,  13.  [5]  To  confirm,
or  ratify ,  Mat.  16.  19.  [6]  Judicially  to  de¬
clare  or  pronounce  a  person's  sins  unpardoned,
according  to  the  directions  of  God's  word,  and  to
inflict  any  church  censure  upon  him  for  the  same,
Mat.  16.  19-  l  18.  18.  [7]  To  distress,  or  trouble,
Luke  1.3.  16.  [8]  To  restrain,  Job  28.  11.  [9]
To  be  under  a  marriage  tie,  or  obligation  to
perform  the  duties  incumbent  on  a  person  in  that
relation,  Rom.  7.  2.  1  Cor.  7.  39.  [10]  Power¬
fully  to  persuade,  influence,  or  constrain,  Acts
20.  22.

They  bind  heavy  burdens  on  men,  Mat.  23.  4.
They  impose  many  strict  injunctions,  over  and
above  what  the  law  requires,  and  severely  exact
obedience  thereto  from  others.

Exod.  28.  28.  they  shall  b.  the  breast-plate  by  rings
Num.  30.  2.  if  a  man  swear  an  oath  to  b.  his  soul
Deut.  6.  8.  thou  shalt  b.  them  for  a  sign  on  thy  hand
14.  25.  shalt  b.  up  the  money,  and  go  to  the  place
Josh.  2.  18.  thou  slialt  b.  this  line  in  the  window
Ju  g.  15.  10.  to  b.  Samson  are  we  come  up

12.  they  said,  we  are  come  down  to  b.  thee

13.  no.  but  we  will  b.  thee  fast,  and  deliver  thee
16.  5.  that  we  may  b.  Samson  to  afflict  him

Job  31.  36.  I  will  b.  it  as  a  crown  to  me
.34.  +  17.  shall  even  he  that  hateth  right  b.  ?

38.  31.  canst  b.  the  sweet  intiuences  of  Pleiades  ?
.39.  10.  canst  thou  b.  the  unicorn  with  his  band  ?

40.  13.  hide  them,  and  b.  their  faces  in  secret

41.  5.  wilt  thou  b.  Leviathan  for  thy  maidens  ?
Psal.  105.  22.  to  b.  his  princes  at  his  pleasure
118.  27.  b.  the  sacrifice  with  cords  to  the  altar
149.  8.  to  b.  their  kings  with  chains,  and  nobles
Prov.  3.  3.  b.  them  about  thy  neck,  write  them

6.  21.  b.  them  continually  upon  thine  heart

7.  3.  b.  them  on  thy  lingers,  write  them  on  thy  heart
Isa.  8.  16.  b.  up  the  testimony,  seal  the  law

49.  18.  and  b.  them  on  thee  as  a  bride  doth
61.  1.  he  hath  sent  me  to  b.  up  the  broken-hearted
F.zek.  .34.  16.  I  will  b.  up  what  was  broken
Dan.  .3.  20.  he  commanded  most  mighty  men  to  b.
IIos.  6.  1.  he  hath  smitten  us,  and  will  b.  us  up
10.  10.  when  they  b.  themselves  in  two  furrows
Mic.  1.  13.  b.  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast
Mat.  12.  29.  except  he  first  b.  the  strongman,  and
then  he  will  spoil  his  house,  Mark  3.  27.

1.3.  30.  b.  the  tares  in  bundles  to  burn  them

16.  19.  whatsoever  thou  shalt  b.  on  earth,  18.  18.

22.  13.  b.  him  hand  and  foot,  take  and  cast  him

23.  4.  b.  heayv  burdens  grievous  to  be  borne

Mark  5.  3.  '  "an  could  b.  him  with  chains

Acts  9.  1  1  city  to  b.  all  that  call  on  thy  name

12.  8.  ange  ,  ,  gird  thyself,  b.  on  thy  sandals

21. 11.  so  shall  the  Jews  b.  the  man  that  owneth

BIND  ETH.

Job  5.  18.  he  maketh  sore  and  b.  up,  he  woundeth
26.  8.  he  b.  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  clouds
28.  11.  he  b.  the  floods  from  overflowing
30.  18.  it  b.  me  about  as  the  collar  of  my  coat

36. 1.3.  hypocrites,  they  cry  not  when  he  b.  them
Psal.  129.  7-  nor  he  that  b.  sheaves,  his  bosom
147.  3.  he  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  b.  up

Prov.  26.  8.  as  he  that  b.  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so  is  ne
Isa.  30.  26.  in  day  Lord  L  up  breach  of  his  people
BINDING.

Gen.  37 .7.  we  were  b.  sheaves  in  field,  my  sheaf  arose

49. 11.  b.  his  foal  to  the  vine,  and  his  ass’s  colt
Num.  30.  13.  every  b.  oath  to  afflict  the  soul
Acts  22.  4.  b.  and  delivering  into  prisons  men

BIRD

Signifies,  [1]  A  fowl,  small  or  large,  Jam.  3.  7-
[2]  Cyrus,  who  came  swiftly  from  Persia  to  de¬
stroy  Babylon,  Isa.  46.  11.  [3]  The  Chaldeans,
or  other  neighbours  that  persecuted  and  afflicted
the  Jews,  Jer.  12.  9.  [4]  The  polluted  and  cor¬
rupt  inhabitants  of  Babylon,  Rev.  18.  2.

Gen.  7. 14.  every  b.  of  every  sort  went  into  the  ark
Lev,  14.  52.  shall  cleanse  the  house  with  the  living  b.
Job  41.  5.  wilt  thou  play  with  him  as  With  a  b.  ?
Psal,  11. 1.  to  my  soul,  nee  as  a  b.  to  your  mountain
124.  7.  our  soul  is  escaped  as  a  b.  out  of  the  snare


Prov.l.  17.  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  sight  of  any  b.

6.  5.  and  as  a  b.  from  the  hand  of  the  towler

7.  2.3.  as  a  b.  hasteth  to  the  snare,  knows  not

26.  2.  as  the  b.  by  wandering,  so  tne  curse  causeless
27. 8.  as  a  b.  that  wandcreth  from  her  nest,  so  a  man
Eccl.  10. 20.  the  b.  of  the  air  shall  tell  the  matter
12.  4.  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  voice  of  the  b.

Isa.  16.  2.  as  a  wandering  b.  cast  out  of  her  nest
46.  11  calling  a  ravenous  b,  from  the  east
Jer.  12.  9.  my  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  speckled  b.
Lam.  3.  52.  mine  enemies  chased  me  like  a  b.

Hos.  9.  11.  their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a  b.

11. 11.  they  shall  tremble  as  a  b.  out  of  Egypt
Amos  .3. 5.  can  a  b.  fall  where  no  gin  is  for  him  ?
Rev.  18. 2.  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  b.
BIRDS.

Gen,  15.  10.  but  the  b.  divided  he  not
40.  17.  the  b.  did  eat  them  out  of  the  basket
19.  the  b.  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  thee
Lev.  14. 4.  priest  shall  command  to  take  two  b.  alive
Deut.  14. 11.  of  all  clean  b.  ye  shall  eat
2  Sam.  21.  10.  suffered  not  the  b.  to  rest  by  day
Psal.  104.  17-  where  the  b.  make  their  nests
148.  +  10.  praise  the  Lord,  ye  b.  of  wing
Eccl.  9.  12.  as  b.  that  are  caught  in  the  snare
Cant.  2. 12.  the  time  of  the  singing  of  b.  is  come
Isa.  31.  5.  as  b.  flying,  so  will  L.  defend  Jerusalem
Jer.  4.  25.  and  all  the  b.  of  the  heaven  were  fled
5.  27.  as  a  cage  full  of  b.  so  are  their  houses

12.  4.  the  beasts  are  consumed  and  the  b.

9.  the  b.  round  about  are  against  her,  come  ye
Ezek.  39-  4.  I  will  give  thee  to  the  ravenous  b.
Dan.  4.  33.  his  nails  were  grown  like  l>.  claw's
Mat.  8.  20.  holes,  and  the  b.  of  the  air  have  nests

Luke  9.  58.

13.  32.  the  b.  lodge  in  the  branches  thereof
Rom.  1.  23.  into  an  image  like  to  b.  and  beasts

1  Cor.  15.  39.  another  of  fishes,  another  of  b.

Jam.  3.  7.  every  kind  of  beasts  and  b.  is  tamed

BIRTH

Is,  [1]  Natural,  Exod.  28.  10.  [2]  Abortive,  or  un¬
timely,  Job  .3.  16.  Psal.  58.  8.  Eccl.  6.  3.  [3]
Supernatural,  as  was  the  birth  of  Christ,  Mat.  1.
18,  Luke  1.  14.  [4]  Figurative,  for  heavy  anguish
and  distress,  2  Kings  19-  3.  Isa.  37.  3.  [5]  For
deliierance  at  hand,  Isa.  66.  9.  [6]  For  a  natural
state  in  sin,  Ezek.  16.  3.  [7]  For  regeneration,
Tit.  3.  5.  [8]  For  earnest  desire  for  the  good  of
souls.  Gal.  4.  19.

The  children  are  come  to  the  birth,  2  Kings  19.  3.
JVe  have  begun  a  happy  reformation,  but  art
hindered  by  this  insolent  Assyrian,  from  bringing
it  to  perfection.

Thy  birth  is  of  the  land  of  Canaan;  Ezek.  16.  3.
Thy  root  whence  thou  did  spring,  the  rock  whence
thou  wast  cut,  the  place  where  thou  grewest  up,  the
company  and  commerce  thou  didst  use,  all  were  of
the  land  of  Canaan  ;  thy  original  is  no  better  than
the  worst  of  nations,  thou  hast  their  vicious  nature,
manners ,  and  practices,  and  art  as  vile  and  ob-
noxicus  to  my  cv.rse  as  they  are.

2  Kings  19.  3.  children  are  come  to  the  b.  Isa.  37. 3.
Job  3.  16.  as  an  hidden  untimely  b.  I  had  not  been
Psal.  58.  8.  let  them  pass  like  tne  untimely  b.

Eccl.  6.  3.  an  untimely  b.  is  better  than  he

7-  1.  day  of  death  is  better  than  day  of  one’s  b.
Isa.  66.  9.  shall  I  bring  to  the  b.  not  cause  to  bring
Ezek.  16.  3.  thy  b.  and  nativity  is  of  Canaan
Hos.  9. 11.  glory  of  Ephraim  snail  fly  from  the  b.
Mat.  1.  18.  the  b.  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  wise
I.uke  1.  14.  and  many  shall  rejoice  at  his  b.

John  9.  1.  he  saw  a  man  who  was  blind  from  his  b.
Gal.  4.  19.  my  children,  of  whom  I  travail  in  b.
Rev.  12.  2.  and  she  cried,  travailing  in  b.  and  passed
BIRTHDAY.

Gen.  40. 20.  the  third  day,  which  was  Pharaoh’s  b.-d.
Mat.  14. 6.  when  Herod’s  b.-d.  was  kept,  MarkO.  21.
BIRTH-RIGHT.

Gen.  25.  31.  Jacob  said,  sell  me  this  day  thy  b. -right

33.  and  he  sware,  and  sold  his  b. -right  to  Jacob

34.  thus  Esau  despised  his  b.-right

27-36.  took  away  my  b.-right,  and  now  my  blessing
43.  33.  sat,  the  first-born  according  to  his  b.-right
1  Chron.  5. 1.  Reuben’s  b.-r.  given  to  sons  of  Joseph
Heb.  12.  16.  Esau  for  one  morsel  sold  his  b.-right
BISHOP,  S,

Signifies,  [1]  Spiritual  overseers  that  have  the  charge
of  souls,  to  instruct  and  rule  them  by  the  word,
1  Tim.  3.  1,  2.  Acts  20.  28.  [2]  Christ  himself,
1  Pet.  2.  25.

Phil.\.\.\o  all  saints  at  Philippi, with  i.and  deacont
1  Tim.  3.  1.  if  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  b.

2.  a  b.  then  must  be  blameless,  Tit.  1.  7.

1  Pet.  2.  25.  now  returned  to  the  b.  of  your  souls
BISHOPRIC.

Acts  1.  20.  and  his  b.  let  another  take
BIT,  S.

Psal.  .32.  9.  whose  mouth  must  be  held  in  with  b.
Jam.  3.  3.  behold  wre  put  b.  in  the  horses’  mouths
BIT.

Num.  21. 6.  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents,  they  b.  people
Amos  5. 19.  leaned  on  a  wall,  and  a  serpent  b.  him
BITE.

Eccl.  10. 8.  breaketh  an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  b.  him

11.  the  serpent  will  b.  without  enchantment
Jer.  8. 17. 1  will  send  serpents,  and  they  shall  b.  you
Amos  9.  3.  1  will  command  serpent,  and  he  shall  b,
Mic.  3.  5.  tne  prophets  that  b.  with  the  teeth
Hah.  2.  7-  shall  they  not  rise  up  that  shall  b.  thee  ?
Gal.  5. 15.  but  if  ye  b.  and  devour  one  another
BIT  ETTI.

Gen.  49.  17-  Dan  an  adder,  that  b.  the  horse-heels
Prov.  23.  32.  at  the  last  it  b.  like  a  serpent
BITTEN.

Num.  21.  8.  every  one  that  is  b.  when  he  looks  on
9.  came  to  pass,  that  if  a  serpent  had  b.  any  man
BITTER.

Gen.  27.  34.  Esau  cried  with  an  exceeding  b.  cry
Exod.  1.  14.  the  Egyptians  made  their  lives  b.

12.  8.  with  b.  herbs  shall  ye  eat  it,  Num.  9.  H.

15.  23.  not  drink  of  the  wraters,  for  they  wrere  b.
Deut.  32. 24.  shall  be  devoured  with  b.  destruction


B  L  A


B  L  A


BLE


Dent.  32. ^2.  are  grapes  of  gall,  their  clusters  are  A
Judg.  18.  t  25.  lest  fellows  6.  of  soul  run  on  thee
Ruth  1. 1  20.  call  me  not  Naomi,  but  b.

1  Sam.  1. t  10.  Hannah  was  b.  of  soul  and  prayed

22.  t2.  every  one  b.  of  soul  gathered  to  him

30. 1 6.  spake  of  stoning,  the  peoples’  soul  was  b.

2  Sam.  17.  +  8.  fa  her’smen  be  mighty,  and  b.  of  soul
2  Kings  4.  t  27.  let  her  alone,  her  soul  is  b.  in  her

14.  26.  Lord  saw  affliction  of  Israel  that  it  was  b.
Esth.  4. 1.  Mordecai  cried  with  loud  voice  and  b.  cry
Job  3.  +  5.  terrify  it.  as  those  who  have  a  b.  day

20.  and  why  is  life  given  to  the  b.  in  soul  ?

13.26.  Ihou  writest  5.  things  against  me

23.  2.  even  to-day  is  my  complaint  b.

27..  +  2.  the  Almighty  who  hath  made  my  soul  b.
Psal.  64.  3.  to  shoot  their  arrows,  even  b.  words
Prov.  5.  4.  but  her  end  is  b.  as  wormwood

27.  7.  to  the  hungry  soul  every  b.  thing  is  sweet
31.  +  6.  give  wine  to  those  that  are  A.  of  soul
Eccl.  7.  26.  I  find  more  b.  than  death  the  woman
Isa.  5. 20.  that  put  b.  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  A.
22.  1 4.  look  from  me,  I  will  be  b.  in  weeping

24.  9.  strong  drink  shall  be  b.  to  them  that  drink
Jer.  2.  19.  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  b.  that  thou

4. 18.  this  is  thy  wickedness,  because  it  is  b.

6. 26.  make  most  b.  lamentation  as  for  a  son
31.  15.  a  voice  was  heard  in  Hamah,  A.  weeping
Ezek.  3. t 14.  Spirit  took  me  away,  and  I  went  A.
27.  31.  shall  weep  for  thee  with  A.  wailing
AmosQ.  10.  and  the  end  thereof,  as  a  A.  day
Hab.  1.  6.  Chaldeans,  that  A.  and  hasty  nation.
Col.  3.  19.  love  your  wives,  be  not  A.  against  them
Jam.  3.  14.  if  ye  have  A.  envying  and  strife

Rev.  8.  11.  men  died  of  waters  because  made  A.

10.  9-  eat  it  up,  and  it  shall  make  thy  belly  A.

10.  as  soon  as  I  had  eaten  it,  my  belly  was  A.
BITTER- WATER.

Num.  5. 18.  the  b. -router  that  causeth  the  curse
Jam.  3.  11.  doth  a  fountain  send  sweet  w.  and  A.  ?
BITTERLY.

Judg.  5. 23.  curse  ye  A.  the  inhabitants  thereof
Ruth  1.  20.  the  Almighty  hath  dealt  A.  with  me
Isa.  22.  4.  look  away  from  me,  I  will  weep  A.

33. 7.  the  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  A.
Ezek.  27.  30.  the  pilots  of  Tyre  shall  cry  A.

Hos.  12.  14.  Ephraim  provoked  him  most  A.

Zeph.  1. 14.  the  mighty  man  shall  cry  A.

Mat.  26.75.  Peter  went  out,  wept  A.  Luke  22.  62.
BITTERN.

Isa.  14.23.  make  it  a  possession  for  the  A.  34.  11.
Zeph.  2.  14.  the  A.  shall  lodge  in  the  upper  lintels
BITTERNESS

Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  opposed  to  sweetness ,
Exod.  15.  23.  [2]  Deep  sorrow  and  heaviness  of
spirit,  Job  7.11.  Prov.  14.  10.  [3]  A  thing  most
pernicious,  or  that  produces  dreadful  effects,  2  Sam.

2.  26.  [41  Violent  inward  displeasure  against

others,  Eph.  4.  31.  [5]  Great  impiety.  Acts  8.  23.
1  hegall  of  bitterness,  Acts  8.  23.  In  a  state  most
offensive  and  distasteful  to  God  ;  under  the  power
of  corruption,  hypocrisy,  and  ambition.

A  root  of  bitterness,  Heb.  12. 15.  Any  scandalous
sm,  dangerous  error,  or  schism,  tending  to  draw
persons  to  apostasy,  the  end  whereof  will  be  bitter.
Gen.  26.  t  35.  which  were  A.  of  spirit  to  Isaac
Exod.  15.  1 23.  the  name  of  it  was  called  A.

Ruth  1.  f  13. 1  have  much  A.  foryour  sake

1  Sam.  1.  10.  Hannah  was  in  A.  of  soul  and  praved
15.  32.  surely  the  A.  of  death  is  past

2  Sam.  2.  26.  the  sword  will  be  A.  in  the  latter  end
Job  7.  11.  I  will  complain  in  the  A.  of  my  soul

9.  18.  to  take  my  breath,  but  filleth  me  with  A.

10.  1.  I  will  speak  in  the  A.  of  my  soul

21.  25.  another  dieth  in  the  A.  of  his  soul
Prov.  14.  10.  the  heart  knoweth  his  own  A.

17.  25.  a  foolish  son  is  A.  to  her  that  bare  him
Isa.  38.  15.  go  softly  all  my  life  in  A.  of  my  soul

17.  behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  A.

..am.  1.  4.  her  virgins  are  afflicted,  and  she  is  in  A.

3.  15.  he  hath  filled  me  with  A.  he  hath  made
Ezek.  3. 14.  Spirit  took  me  away,  and  I  went  in  A.
21.  6.  and  with  A.  sigh  before  their  eyes
27.  31.  they  shall  weep  for  thee  with  A.

Hos.  12.  f  14.  t  phraim  provoked  him  with  A.

Zech.  12. 10.  be  m  A.  for  him  as  one  that  is  in  A.  for
Acts  8.  23.  I  perceive  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  A.

Rom.  3.  14.  whose  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and  A.
Eph.  4.  31.  let  all  A.  be  put  away  from  you
Heb.  12. 15.  lest  any  root  of  A.  springing  up
.  BLACK

Signifies,  The  colour  so  call  d,  which  is  opposite  to
white.  Mat.  5. 36.

It  is  applied,  [1]  To  the  church,  whose  outward
beauty  is  often  eclipsed  by  reason  of  infirmities,
scandals,  reproaches,  and.  persecutions.  Cant.  1.
5.  [2]  To  the  Jews,  whose  countenance  changed
and  turned  black,  like  persons  ready  to  be
strangled,  being  struck  with  terror  at  the  ap¬
proach  of  God's  judgments,  Joel  2.  6.  Nah.  2.
10.  [3]  To  hell,  the  place  of  extreme  darkness,
horror,  and  misery,  J  ude  13.

Lev.  13.  31.  and.  that  there  is  no  A.  hair  in  it

?.  and  there  is  A.  hair  grown  up  therein
inos  18.  45.  the  heaven  was  A.  with  clouds
Job  30. 30.  my  skin  is  A.  upon  me,  my  bones  burnt
Prov.  7.  9.  in  the  evening,  in  the  A.  and  dark  night
C ant.  1. 5. 1  am  A.  but  comely,  O  daughters  of  Jerus.
6.  look  not  upon  me,  because  I  am  A.

5.  11.  his  locks  are  bushy  and  A.  as  a  raven
Jer.  4.  28.  for  this  the  heavens  shall  be  A.

8.  21.  for  the  hurt  of  my  people  1  am  hurt,  I  am  A.
14. 2.  the  gates  thereof  languish,  they  are  A.

Lam.  5. 10.  our  skin  was  A.  like  an  oven
Ezek.  31. +  15.  1  caused  Lebanon  to  be  A.  for  him
Zech.  6.  2.  in  the  second  chariot  A.  horses
6.  A.  horses  go  forth  into  the  north  country
Mfil.  3.  +  14.  what  profit  that  we  walked  in  A.  t
Mat.  5.  36.  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  A.

Rev.  6.  5.  and  I  beheld,  and  lo  a  A.  horse
12.  the  sun  became  A.  as  sackcloth  of  hair
_  BLACKER.

Lam.  4.  8.  their  visage  is  A.  than  a  coal


BLACKISH.

Job  6. 16.  which  are  A.  by  reason  of  the  ice
BLACKNESS.

Job  3.  5.  let  the  A.  of  the  day  terrify  it
Isa.  50.  3.  I  clothe  the  heavens  with  A.

Lam.  4.  +  8.  their  visage  is  darker  than  A.

Joel  2.  6.  all  faces  shall  gather  A.  Nah.  2.  10.

Heb.  12. 18.  ye  are  not  come  to  A.  and  darkness
Jude  13.  to  whom  is  reserved  A.  of  darkness
BLADE.

Judg.  3.  22.  the  haft  also  went  in  after  the  A.

Job  31. 22.  then  let  my  arm  fall  from  my  shoulder-A.
Mat.  13.  26.  when  the  A.  was  sprung  up,  Mark  4.  28.
B  LA  INS.

Exod.  9.  9.  a  boil  breaking  forth  with  A.  10.
BLAME.

Gen.  43.  9.  then  let  me  bear  the  A.  for  ever,  44.  32.

2  Cor.  8.  20.  avoiding  that  no  man  should  A.  us
Eph.  1.  4.  holy  and  without  A.  before  him  in  love
BLAMED.

2  Cor.  6.  3.  no  offence,  that  the  ministry  be  not  A.
Gal.  2. 11.  withstood  him,  because  he  was  to  be  A.
BLAMELESS.

Gen.  44. 10.  he  shall  be  my  servant,  ye  shall  be  A.
Josh.  2.  17.  we  will  be  A.  of  this  thine  oath
Judg.  15.  3.  now  shall  I  be  more  A.  than  Philistines
Mat.  12. 5.  the  priests  profane  sabbath,  and  are  A.
Luke  1.  6.  walking  in  ordinances  of  the  Lord  A.

1  Cor.  1.  8.  that  ye  may  be  A.  in  the  day  of  the  Lord
Phil.  2. 15.  that  ye  may  be  A.  and  harmless
3.  6.  touching  the  righteousness  in  the  law  A.

1  Thess.  5. 23.  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  be  preserved  A.

1  Tim.  3. 2.  a  bishop  then  must  be  A.  Tit.  1.  7.

10.  use  the  office  of  a  deacon,  being  found  A.

5.  7.  give  in  charge,  that  they  may  be  A.

Tit.  1.  6.  if  any  be  A.  the  husband  of  one  wife

2  Pet.  3. 14.  ye  may  be  found  without  spot  and  A.
BLASPHEME


12.  31

2  Sam.  12.14.  occasion  to  enemies  of  the  Lord  to  A.

1  Kings  21. 10.  thou  didst  A.  God  and  the  king,  13.
Psal.  74. 10.  shall  the  enemy  A.  thy  name  for  ever  ?
Mark  3.  28.  wherewith  soever  they  shall  A.

29.  but  he  that  shall  A.  against  the  Holy  Ghost
Acts  26. 11.  and  I  compelled  them  to  A.

1  Tim.  1. 20.  that  they  may  learn  not  to  A.

Jam.  2. 7.  do  not  they  A.  that  worthy  name
Rev.  13.  6.  to  A.  his  name  and  his  tabernacle

BLASPHEMED.

Lev.  24.  11.  the  Israelitish  woman’s  son  A.

2  Kings  19.  6.  with  which  the  servants  of  the  king  of

Assyria  have  A.  me,  22.  Isa.  37.  6, 23.
Psal.  74. 18.  the  foolish  people  have  A.  thy  name
Isa.  52.  5.  my  name  continually  every  day  is  A.

65.  7-  have  burnt  incense,  and  A.  me  on  the  hills
Ezek.  20.  27.  in  this  your  fathers  have  A.  me
Acts  18.  6.  when  they  opposed  themselves  and  A.
Rom.  2.  24.  for  the  name  of  God  is  A.  through  you
1  Tim.  6. 1.  name  of  God  and  his  doctrine  be  not  A.
Tit.  2.  5.  that  the  word  of  God  be  not  A.

Rev.  16.  9.  men  were  scorched  with  heat,  and  A.

11.  A.  the  God  of  heaven  because  of  their  pains
21.  men  A.  God  because  of  the  plague  of  hail
BLASPLIEMEST,  Ell I.

Lev.  24.  16.  whoso  A.  the  Lord,  be  put  to  death
Psal.  44. 16.  for  the  voice  of  him  that  A.

Mat.  9.  3.  certain  of  the  scribes  said,  this  man  A.
John  10.  36.  whom  the  Father  sanctified,  thou  A.
BLASPHEMING.

Acts  13. 45.  spoken  of  Paul,  contradicting  and  A.
BLASPHEMER,  S.

Acts  19.  37.  which  are  not  A.  of  your  goddess

1  Tim.  1. 13.  who  was  before  a  A.  and  a  persecutor

2  Tim.  3.  2.  in  the  last  days  men  shall  be  A.

BLASPHEMY.

2  Kings  19.  3.  this  day  is  a  day  of  A.  Isa.  37.  3.

Mat.  12.  31.  all  manner  of  A.  shall  be  forgiven,  but
b.  against  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  not  be  forgiven
26.  65.  he  hath  spoken  A.  behold,  now  ye  have
heard  his  A.  Mark  14.  64.
Mark  7. 22.  out  of  the  heart  of  men  proceed  A.

John  10.  33.  we  stone  thee  not,  but  for  A.

Col.  3.  8.  but  now  you  also  put  off  malice,  A.

Rev.  2.  9.  I  know  A.  of  them  that  say  they  are  Jews

13. 1.  and  upon  his  heads  is  the  name  of  A.

6.  and  he  opened  his  mouth  in  A.  against  God
BLASPHEMIES.

Ezek.  35. 12.  know  that  I  have  heard  all  thy  A.

Mat.  15. 19.  out  of  the  heart  proceed  thefts,  A.

Mark  2. 7.  why  doth  this  man  thus  speak  A.  ?

3. 28.  and  A.  wherewith  they  shall  blaspheme
Luke  5.  21.  who  is  this  which  speaketh  A.  ?

Rev.  13.  5.  was  a  mouth  given  him  speaking  A.
BLASPHEMOUS.

Acts  6. 11.  we  have  heard  him  speak  A.  words
13.  this  man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  A.  words
BLASPHEMOUSLY.

Luke  22. 65.  many  other  things  A.  spake  they
B LAS  I

Signifies,  [1]  Wind  and  frosts  that  immediately  fol¬
low  ram,  and  are  very  destructive  to  fruits,  Gen.
41.6.  1  Kings  8.  37.  [2]  A  blowing  in  horns,  Josh.
6.  5.  [3]  God's  anger  and  power,  Exod.  15.  8.
2  Sam.  22.  16.  Job  4.  9.  [4]  A  violent,  sudden,
and  terrible  stroke  sent  by  God  upon  the  wicked,
2  Kings  19.  7.  [5]  The  furious  temptations  of  men
and  the  devil,  Isa.  25.  4.

Exod.  15.  8.  with  A.  of  thy  nostrils  the  waters  were
Josh.  6.  5.  when  they  make  a  long  A.  with  horns
2 [Sam.  22.  16.  at  rebuke  of  the  Lord,  at  the  A.  of
the  breath  of  his  nostrils,  Psal.  18.  15.
2  Kings  19. 7.  I’ll  send  a  A.  on  Sennacherib, Isa. 37 .7.
lob  4.  9.  by  the  A.  of  God  they  perish
Isa.  25.  4.  when  the  A.  of  the  terrible  is  as  a  storm
BLASTED.

Gen.  41. 6.  thin  ears  A.  with  the  east  wind,  23.  27.

2  Kings  19. 26.  as  corn  A.  before  grown,  Isa.  37. 27.
BLASTING.

Dent.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  A.


1  A  ings  8.  37 •  if  there  be  A.  mildew,  2  Chron.  6.  28.
Amos  4.  9.  1  have  smitten  you  with  A.  and  mildew
Hag.  2.  17.  I  smote  you  witli  A.  and  mildew
,  BLAZE.

Mark  1.  45.  he  began  to  A.  abroad  the  matter
BLEATING,  S.

Judg.  5. 16.  abodest  in  sheepfolds  to  hear  A.  of  flocks

1  Sam.  15.  14.  what  meaneth  this  A.  of  the  sheep?

BLEMISH.

Exod.  12.  5.  lamb  shall  be  without  A.  a  male  of  first
year,  Lev.  9.  3.  |  14. 10.  I  23. 12.  Num.  6.  14.
29.  1.  take  a  young  bullock  and  two  rams  without
A.  Lev.  5. 15,  18.  |  6.  6.  |  9.  2.  Ezek.  46.  4.
Lev.  1. 3.  offer  a  male  without  A.  10. 1  4. 23.  |  22.  19.

3.  1.  whether  male  or  female  without  A.  6.

4.  3.  a  bullock  without  A.  Deut.  17. 1.  Ezek.  45. 18.

28.  he  shall  brin^  a  kid,  a  female  without  A.

21.  17.  he  that  hath  A.  shall  not  approach.  21.  23.

22.  20.  but  whatsoever  hath  a  A.  that  shall  ye  not
offer,  it  shall  not  be  acceptable,  Deut.  15.  21.

21.  in  peace  offering  and  free-will  offering  no  A.
24.  19.  if  a  man  cause  a  A.  in  his  neighbour
20.  as  he  hath  caused  a  A.  in  a  man,  so  shall  it  be
Num.  19.  2.  they  bring  a  red  heifer  without  A.

29. 2.  one  bullock,  one  ram,  seven  lambs  without  A.

2  Sam.  14.  25.  there  was  no  A.  in  Absalom
Dan.  1.  4.  children  in  whom  was  no  A.

Eph.  5.  27-  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  A.

1  Pet.  1. 19.  as  of  a  lamb  without  A.  and  spot

r  BLEMISHES.

Lev.  22.  25.  A.  in  them,  they  shall  not  be  accepted

2  Pet.  2.  13.  spots  they  are  and  A.  sporting

BLESS

Is  referred,  I.  To  God;  and  signifies,  [1]  To
bestow  plenty  of  temporal  good  things  upon  a  per¬
son,  and  make  his  affairs  prosperous  and  success¬
ful,  Gen.  30.  27. 1  39.  5.  [2]  To  bestow  both  tem¬
poral  and  spiritual  blessings  upon  a  person,  Gen.

12.  2. 1  24.  35.  Eph.  1.  3.  [3]  To  make  one

perfectly  happy  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  himself
in  heaven.  Rev.  14. 13.  [4]  To  consecrate  and  set
apart  any  thing  for  an  holy  and  sacred  use,  Gen.
2.  3.  Exod.  20.  11.  [5]  To  give  power  of  pro¬
creation  and  fruitfulness,  so  as  the  creatures  might
multiply  their  kind,  Gen.  1.  22.  [6]  To  endue

one  with  an  heroic  spirit,  singular  valour,  miracu¬
lous  strength  of  body,  and  all  other  gifts  and
graces  necessary  to  his  calling,  Judg.  13.  24.  II.
To  Christ  ■  and  signifies,  [1]  To  give  thanks  to
God  the  lather  in  a  special  manner,  and  pray  for
his  blessing,  thereby  paying  the  homage  of  his
human  nature  to  his  Father,  Mat.  14.  19.  Mark
6.  41.  [2]  To  commend  others  to  God  in  prayer,
as  he  was  man,  Mark  10.  16.  [3]  Powerfully  and
effectually  to  work  on  men  for  their  conversion,
so  as  to  save  them  from  their  sins,  Acts  3.  26.
III.  To  men;  and  signifies,  [1]  To  extol  and
praise  God  for  the  infinite  excellencies  and
perfections  of  his  n-jmre,  Psal.  104.  1.  |  148. 1,
2.  [2]  To  give  thanls  to  God  for  his  mercies  and
benefits  to  us,  Psal.  16.  7.  !  103.  1,  2.  [3]  To
pronounce  a  solemn,  extraordinary ,  and  pro¬
phetical  benediction  upon  a  person,  whereby  the
holy  patriarchs,  by  God's  appointment ,  and  with
his  concurrence,  did  declare  and  constitute  one
of  their  sons  as  heir,  not  only  of  their  inherit¬
ance,  but  of  the  promises  and  blessings  of  the
covenant  which  God  made  with  them  and  their
fathers  ;  both  praying  for,  and  foretelling,  those
blessings  which  God  would  confer  upon  them,  Gen.
27-  4,  25,  30.  [4]  To  salute  persons,  to  wish  them
peace  and  prosperity,  Gen.  47.  7.  1  Sam.  13.  +
10.  Psal.  129.  8.  [5]  To  pray  to  God  in  behalf

of  others,  that  he  may  bestow  his  blessing  upon
them,  Num.  6.  23,  24.  2  Sam.  6.  18.  Luke  6.

28.  [6]  To  account  and  reckon  oneself  happy  in
having  God  for  his  God,  Isa.  65.  16.  Jer.  4.  2.
[7]  To  applaud  oneself  as  a  wise  and  happy
person,  taking  outward  prosperity  for  an  argu¬
ment  of  God's  love  and  favour,  Psal.  49.  18.  [8]
To  flatter  oneself  with  the  hopes  of  impunity,
as  if  God  did  not  take  notice  of  sin,  and  either
could  not,  or  would  not.  punish  sinners,  Deut.

29.  19.

God  hath  promised  to  bless,  [1]  Such  as  put  theii
trust  in  him,  Psal.  2.  12.  [2]  Such  as  fear  him,
and  walk  in  his  ways,  Psal.  128.  1.  [3]  Such  as
God  chooses  and  causes  to  draw  nigh  to  him  in  the
duties  of  his  worship,  Psal.  65.  4.  [4]  Such  as
have  the  saving  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  wrought
in  them  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  Mat.  16.  17.  [5]
Such  as  mourn  for  their  sins  and  spiritual  wants,
Mat.  5.  4.  [6]  Such  as  are  humble  and  lowly  in
mind,  affection,  and  conversation,  who  are  sensible
of  their  lost  and  undone  condition  in  themselves,
and  of  their  own  inability  to  help  themselves,
Mat.  5.  3.  [7]  Such  as  are  gentle,  patient,  and
quiet-spirited  ;  who  murmur  not  against  God,  but
submit  to  all  his  corrections  ;  and  who  quarrel  not
with,  nor  revenge  themselves  of,  those  that  wrong
them.  Mat.  5.  5.  [8]  Such  as  hunger  and  thirst
after  Christ  and  his  benefits  ;  after  freedom  from
sin,  and  holiness  of  life.  Mat.  5.  6.  [9]  Such  who,
being  inwardly  affected  with  the  miseries  of
others,  do  relieve  them  according  to  their  ability.
Mat.  5.  7-  [10]  Such  as  love  and  labour  for

peace  among  all  that  are  at  odds,  whether  with
God,  with  themselves,  or  one  with  another,  Mat.  5.
9.  [11]  Such  as  are  sincere,  whose  hearts  and
course  of  life  agree  with  their  profession,  Psal.
119. 1.  [12]  Such  as  d  not  associate  themselves
with  the  wicked,  nor  follow  their  evil  instigations
or  examples,  Psal.  1.  1  [13]  Such  whose  trans-

f cessions  are  forgiven,  whose  sin  is  pardoned ,
’sal.  32.  1.  [14]  Such  as  do  not  censure  or  con¬
demn  a  person  under  sickness  or  affliction,  as  if  he
was  wicked  or  hated  of  God,  but  pity  and  relieve
him ,  Psal.  41.  1.

BLESS,  God  being  agent.

Gen.  12.  2.  the  Lerd  said,  I  will  A.  thee,  26.  3, 24.

3.  I  will  A.  them  that  bless  thee,  and  curse  him
17. 16.  I  will  A.  her,  and  give  thee  a  son  of  her

19


B  LE


BLE


BLE


Gen.  22. 17.  in  blessing  I  will  A.  thee.  Heb.  6.  14.

28.  3.  God  almighty  b.  thee,  and  multiply  thee

32.  26.  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  b.  me
48.  16.  b.  the  lads,  and  let  my  name  be  named

49. 25.  by  the  Almighty  who  shall  b.  thee

Exod.  20.  24.  I  will  come  to  thee,  and  I  will  b.  thee

23. 25.  he  shall  h.  thy  bread  and  thy  water
Hum.  6.  24.  the  Lord  b.  thee  and  keep  thee

27.  put  my  name  on  Israel,  and  I  will  b.  them

24. 1.  saw  that  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  b.  Israel
Deut.  1. 11.  and  b.  you  as  he  hath  promised  you
7.  13.  he  will  b.  thee,  b.  the  fruit  of  thy  womb
14.  29.  that  the  Lord  may  b.  thee,  23.  20.  |  24.  19.

15.4.  shall  be  no  poor,  for  the  Lord  shall  b.  thee
10.  for  this  thing  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  b.  thee

18.  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  b.  thee  in  all,  30.  16.

16. 15.  because  the  Lord  shall  b.  thee  in  all

26.  15.  look  down  and  b.  thy  people  Israel
28.  8.  he  shall  b.  thee  in  the  land  he  giveth

12.  and  to  b.  all  the  work  of  thine  hand

33.  11.  b.  Lord,  his  substance,  and  accept
Ruth  2.  4.  saying,  the  Lord  b.  thee,  Jer.  31.  23.

2  Sam.  7.  29.  therefore  now  let  it  please  thee  to  b.

the  house  of  thy  servant,  1  Chron.  17.  27.
Chron.  4. 10.  O  that  thou  wouldest  b.  me  indeed
Psal.  5.  12.  thou,  Lord,  wilt  b.  the  righteous
28.  9.  save  thy  people,  b.  thine  inheritance

29. 11.  the  Lora  will  b.  his  people  with  peace

67. 1.  God,  even  our  own  God,  shall  b.  us,  6,  7-

115. 12.  the  Lord  will  b.  us,  he  will  b.  the  house

of  Israel,  he  will  b.  the  house  of  Aaron

13.  he  will  A.  them  that  fear  the  Lord
128.  5.  the  Lord  shall  b.  thee  out  of  Zion

132. 15.  I  will  abundantly  b.  her  provision
134.  3.  the  Lord  b.  thee  out  of  Zion

Isa.  19.  25.  whom  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  b.

Hag.  2. 19.  from  this  day  will  I  b.  you
Acts  3.  26.  sent  him  to  b.  you  in  turning  you
BLESS,  God  being  the  object.

Deut. 8.  10.  art  full,  then  thou  shalt  b.  the  Lord
Judg.  5.  9.  b.  ye  the  Lord,  Psal.  103.  21. 1  134. 1.

1  Chron.  29.  20.  David  said,  now  b.  Lord  your  God
Neh.  9.  5.  stand  up  and  b.  Lord  for  ever  and  ever
Psal.  16.7. 1  will  b.  Lord  who  hath  siven  me  counsel

26.  12.  in  the  congregations  will  I  b.  the  Lord

34. 1. 1  will  b.  the  Lord  at  all  times

63. 4.  thus  will  I  b.  thee  while  I  live

66.  8.  O  b.  our  God,  make  his  praise  to  be  heard
68.  26.  b.  ye  God  in  the  congregations,  even
96.  2.  sing  to  the  Lord,  b.  his  name,  shew  forth
100.  4.  be" thankful  to  him,  b.  his  name,  103. 1.

103.  1.  b.  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,  2.  22. 1 104. 1,  35.

20.  b.  the  Lord,  ye  his  angels  l|21.  b.  ye  his  hosts

22.  b.  the  Lord  all  his  works  in  all  places
115. 18.  we  will  b.  the  Lord  from  this  time

134.  2.  lift  up  your  hands,  and  b.  the  Lord

135.  19.  A.  the  Lord,  O  house  of  Israel,  b.  the

Lord,  O  house  or  Aaron

20.  O  Levi,  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  b.  the  Lord
145.  1. 1  will  b.  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever

2.  every  day  will  I  b.  thee,  and  praise  thy  name
10.  O  Lord,  thy  saints  shall  b.  thee

21.  let  all  flesh  b.  his  holy  name  for  ever
Jam.  3.  9.  therewith  b.  we  God,  even  the  Father

BLESS,  man  agent  and  object.

Gen.  27-  4.  my  soul  may  A.  thee  before  I  die,  25.

34.  b.  me,  even  me  also,  O  my  father,  38.

48.  9.  bring  them  to  me,  and  1  will  h.  them

20.  in  thee  shall  Israel  b.  saying,  God  make  thee
Exod.  12.  32.  take  flocks  and  begone,  and  b.  me  also
Hum.  6.  23.  on  this  wise  ye  shall  b.  Israel

23.  20.  1  have  received  commandment  to  b.

25.  neither  curse  them  nor  b.  them  at  all

Deut.  10. 8.  the  Lord  separated  Levi  to  b.  21. 5.

24.  13.  sleep  in  his  own  raiment,  and  b.  thee

27. 12.  these  shall  stand  on  mount  Gerizim,  to  b.

29. 19.  heareth  words  of  this  curse,  he  b.  himself
Josh.  8.  33.  as  Moses  commanded  they  should  A.

1  Sam.  9.  13.  because  he  doth  b.  the  sacrifice

13.  + 10.  Saul  went  to  meet  Samuel  to  b.  him
SSam.  6.  20.  then  David  returned  to  b.  his  house¬
hold,  1  Chron.  16.  43.

8. 10.  Toi  sent  Joram  his  son  to  b.  David

21.  3.  that  ye  may  b.  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord

J  Kings  1.47.  servants  came  to  h.  our  Lord  k.  David
1  Chron.  23. 13.  and  to  b.  in  his  name  for  ever
Psal.  62.  4.  they  b.  with  their  mouths,  but  curse
109.  28.  let  them  curse,  but  b.  thou
129. 8.  wg  b.  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
Prov.  30. 11.  there  is  a  generation  that  curseth  their
father,  and  doth  not  b.  their  mother
Isa.  65. 16.  shall  b.  himself  in  the  God  of  truth
Jer.  4.  2.  the  nations  shall  b.  themselves  in  him
Mat.  5.  44.  b.  them  that  curse  you,  Luke 6.  28.
Rom.  12. 14.  b.  those  persecute  you,  b.  and  curse  not
1  Cor.  4. 12.  being  reviled  we  b.  being  persecuted

14.  16.  else  when  thou  shalt  b.  with  the  spirit

BLESS.

1  Cor.  10. 16.  the  cup  of  blessing  which  we  b.

BLESSED,  man  agent  and  object.

Gen.  14. 19.  Melchisedek  b.  Abram,  and  said,  b.  be
24.  60.  they  b.  Rebekah,  and  said  unto  her

27.  23.  so  Isaac  b.  Jacob,  and  said,  27.

29.  and  b.  be  he  that  blesseth  thee

33.  I  have  A.  him,  yea,  and  he  shall  be  b.

41.  the  blessing  wherewith  his  father  b.  him

28.  1.  Isaac  called  Jacob,  b.  him,  and  charged  him
6.  as  he  b.  him  he  gave  him  a  charge,  Heb.  11. 20.

30.13.  for  the  daughters  will  call  me  b.

31. 55.  kissed  his  sons  and  daughters,  and  b.  them
47. 7.  Jacob  b.  Pharaoh,  10.  I|  48. 15.  he  b.  Joseph

48. 20.  Jacobi.  Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  Heb.  11.21.

49.  28.  Jacob  b.  his  sons,  every  one  he  A.

Exod.  39.  43.  and  Moses  b.  them,  Devt.  33.  1.

Lev.  9. 22.  Aaron  lift  up  his  hands  and  A.  them

23.  Moses  and  Aaron  b.  the  people

Hum.  22.  6.  I  wot  that  he  whom  thou  blessest  is  b.
23. 11.  thou  hast  b.  them  altogether,  24. 10.

Deut.  33.  20.  b.  be  he  that  enlargeth  Gad

24.  let  Asher  be  b.  with  children

Josh.  14.  13.  Joshua  b.  Caleb,  and  gave  him  Hebron

22.  6.  Joshua  b.  them,  and  sent  them  away,  7.


Josh.  24.  10.  therefore  Balaam  b.  you  still
Judg.  5.  24.  b.  above  women  shall  Jael  be
Ruth  2.  19.  b.  he  he  that  took  knowledge  of  thee

1  Sam.  2.  20.  Eli  b.  Elkanah  and  his  wife  Hannah

25.  33.  b.  be  thy  advice,  and  b.  be  thou  who  kept

26.  25.  Saul  said,  b.  be  thou,  my  son  David

2  Sam.  6.  18.  David  b.  the  people,  1  Chron.  16.  2.

13.  25.  howbeit  he  would  not  go,  but  b.  him

19.  39.  the  king  kissed  Barzillai,  and  b.  him

1  Kings  2.  45.  and  king  Solomon  shall  be  b.

8. 14.  king  Solomon  b.  all  the  congregation,  55.

66.  congregation  b.  Solomon,  2  Chron.  6.  3.

2  Chron.  30.27.  priests  and  Levites  b.  the  people
Neh.  11.  2.  people  b.  all  that  willingly  offered
Job  29. 11.  when  the  ear  heard  me,  it  b.  me

31.  20.  if  his  loins  have  not  b.  me
Psal.  49. 18.  while  he  lived  he  b.  his  soul
72.  17.  men  shall  be  b.  in  him,  nations  call  him  b.

118.  26.  A.  be  he  that  cometh  in  name  of  the  Lord,

we  have  b.  you  out  of  house  of  the  Lord
Prov.  31.  28.  her  children  arise,  and  call  her  b.
Eccl.  10. 17.  b.  art  thou,  O  land,  when  thy  king
Cant.  6.  9.  the  daughters  saw  her,  and  b.  her
Isa.  66.  3.  that  burneth  incense,  as  if  he  b.  an  idol
Jer.  20.  14.  let  not  the  day  my  mother  bare  me  be  b.
Mai.  3. 12.  and  all  nations  shall  call  you  b.

Mark  11. 10.  b.  be  the  kingdom  of  our  father
Lukel.  48.  all  generations  shall  call  me  b.

2.  34.  Simeon  A.  them,  and  said  to  Mary
Acts  20.  35.  it  is  more  A.  to  give  than  to  receive
Tit.  2. 13.  looking  for  that  b.  hope  and  appearing
Heb.  7- 1.  Melchisedek  met  Abraham  and  A.  him,  6.
7.  without  contradiction  the  less  is  b.  of  the  better
BLESSED,  God  the  agent.

Gen.  1.  22.  God  b.  them,  sajdng,  be  fruitful,  28.  |  5.2.

2.  3.  and  God  b.  the  seventh  day,  Exod.  20.  11.

9. 1.  and  God  b.  Noah  and  his  sons,  and  said  to  them

12.  3.  in  thee  shall  all  families  be  b.  18.  18.  |  22.

18. 1  26.  4. 1  28.  14.  Acts  3.  25.  Gal.  3.  8.
17.  20.1  have  b.  Ishmael  l|  24. 1.  Lord  b.  Abraham
24.  31.  and  he  said,  come  in  thou  b.  of  the  Lord
25. 11.  after  death  of  Abr’am,God  b.  Isaac,  26.  12.

26.  29.  thou  art  now  the  b.  of  the  Lord

27.  27.  the  smell  of  afield  which  the  Lord  hath  b.

30.  27.  that  the  Lord  hath  b.  me  for  thy  sake

30.  the  Lord  hath  b.  thee  since  my  coming
32.29-  and  he  b.  Jacob  there,  35.  9. 1  48.  3"

39.  5.  that  the  lord  b.  the  Egyptian’s  house
Hum.  22.  12.  shalt  not  curse,  for  the  people  are  b.

23.  20.  he  hath  b.  and  I  cannot  reverse  it

Deut.  2. 7.  thy  God  hath  b.  thee,  12. 7- 1  15. 14.  1 16.
7.  14.thousnalt  be  b.  above  all  people  [10.

14.  24.  if  place  be  too  far,  when  the  Lord  hath  b.

28.  3.  b.  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city,  b.  in  the  field
4.  A.  shall  be  fruit  of  thy  body  ||  5.  b.  thy  basket

33.  13.  of  Joseph  he  said,  b.  of  the  Lord  be  his
Josh.  17.  14.  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  b.  me
Judg.  13.  24.  Samson  grew,  and  the  Lord  b.  him
17.2.  b.  be  thou  of  Lord,  Ruth  3. 10.  1  Sam.  15. 13.
Ruth  2.  20.  b.  be  he  of  the  Lord  who  hath  not

3.  10.  b.  be  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  daughter

1  Sam.  23.  21.  b.  be  ye  of  the  Lord,  2  Sam.  2.  5.

2  Sam.  6.  11.  the  Lord  b.  Obed-edom,  and  all  his

household,  12. 1  Chron.  13. 14.  j  26.  5.
7-  29-  the  house  of  thy  servant  be  b.  for  ever

1  Chron.  17.  2“.  blessest,  O  I  ord,  and  it  shall  be  b.

2  Chron.  31.  10.  the  Lord  hath  b.  his  people
Job  1.  10.  thou  hast  b.  the  work  ofhis  hands

42.  12.  the  Lord  b.  the  latter  end  of  Job
Psal.  21.  6.  for  thou  hast  made  him  most  b.

33.  12.  A.  is  the  nation  whose  God  is  the  Lord
37-  22.  for  such  as  be  b.  of  him  shall  inherit
26.  he  is  merciful  and  lendeth,  and  his  seed  is  b.
41.  2.  the  Lord  will  keep  him,  and  he  shall  be  A.
45.  2.  therefore  God  hath  b.  thee  for  ever
89.  15.  b.  is  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound
112.  2.  the  generation  of  the  upright  shall  be  b.

115. 15.  you  are  b.  of  the  Lord  who  made  heaven

119.  1.  b.  are  the  undefiled  in  the  way
128.  1.  A.  is  every  one  that  feareth  the  T.ord

4.  thus  shall  the  man  be  b.  that  feareth  the  Lord
147.  13.  he  hath  b.  thy  children  within  thee
Prov.  5.  18.  let  thy  fountain  be  b.  and  rejoice
10.7.  the  memory  of  the  just  is  b.

20-  7*  the  just  man’s  children  are  b.  after  him

21.  but  the  end  thereof  shall  not  be  b.

22.  9-  he  that  hath  a  bountiful  eye  shall  be
Isa.  19.  25.  saying,  b  be  Egypt  my  peop.e

51.  2.  for  I  called  him  alone  and  A.  nirr
61.  9.  they  are  the  seea  the  Lord  hath  b.  65.  23.
Mat.  5.  3.  b.  are  the  poor  in  spirits  5.  b.  are  themsex
7.  b.  are  the  merciful  J  8.  b.  are  the  pure  in  heart
9.  A.  are  the  peace-matters  ||  10.  b.  are  persecuted

13.  16.  b.  are  your  eyes,  for  they  see,  Luke  10.  23.

14.  19.  he  b.  and  brake,  and  gave  the  loaves,  26. 26.

Mark  6.  41.  |  14.  22.  Luke  9 .  16.  I  24.  30.
16. 17.  Jesus  said,  b.  art  thou.  Simon  Bar-jona

24.  46.  b.  is  that  servant,  Luke  12.  43.

25.  34.  come,  ye  b.  of  my  Father,  inherit  kingaom
Mark  10.  16.  took  them  up  in  his  arms,  and  A.  them

14.  61.  thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  b.

Luke  1 . 28.  b.  art  thou  among  women.  42.

45.  b.  is  she  that  believed  l|  6.  20.  b.  be  ye  poor
11. 27.  b.  is  the  womb  that  bare  thee,  and  paps
12. 37.  b.  are  those  servants  whom  the  Lord  when
he  cometh  shall  find  watching,  38.

14. 14.  thou  shalt  be  b.  they  cannot  recompense
19.  38.  b.  be  the  King  that  cometh  in  name  of  Lord

23.  29.  b.  are  the  barren  that  never  bare

24.  50.  he  b.  them  ||  51.  while  he  b.  them
Gal.  3.  9.  they  are  b.  with  faithful  Abraham
Eph.  1.  3.  who  hath  b.  us  with  spiritual  blessings
Jam.  1.25.  this  man  shall  be  b.  in  his  deed
Rev.  14.  13.  b.  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord

BLESSED,  God  the  object.

Gen.  9.  26.  he  said,  b.  be  the  Lord,  24.  27-  Exod.
18.  10.  Ruth  4.  14.  1  Sam.  25.  32.  39.  2  Sam.
18.  28.  1  Kings  1.  48.  |  5.  7-1  8.  15,  56.  1 10.  9.
1  Chron.  16.  36.  2  Chron.  2.  12. 16.  4.  |  9.  8.
Ezra  7.  27.  Psal.  28.  6.  |  31.  21. 1  41.  13.  |  68.

19. 1  72.  18. 1  89.  52. !  106.  48. 1  124.  6.  |  135.

21.  1144.  1.  Zech.  11.  5.  Luke  1.  68.


Gen.  14.  20.  b.  be  most  high  God  who  delivered
Josh.  22.  33.  and  the  children  of  Israel  b.  God
2  Sam.  22.  47.  and  b.  be  my  rock,  Psal.  18.  46.

1  Chr.  29.  10.  David  b.  the  Lord,  b.  thou,  O  Lord

20.  all  the  congregation  b.  the  Lord  God

2  Chron.  20.  26.  for  there  they  A.  the  Lord

31.  8.  when  they  saw  the  heaps,  they  b.  the  Lord
Neh.  8.  6.  and  Ezra  b.  the  Lord,  the  great  God

9 .  5.  b.  be  thy  glorious  name,  Psal.  72.  19.

Job  1.  21.  b.  be  the  name  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  113.  2.
Psal.  66.  20.  b.  be  God,  68.  35.  2  Cor.  1.  3.

119. 12.  b.  art  thou,  O  Lord,  teach  me  thy  statutes
Ezek.  3.  12.  sayinv,  b.  be  the  glory  of  the  Lord
Dan.  2.  19.  Daniel  b.  the  Goa  of  heaven,  20.

4.  34.  Nebuchadnezzar  b.  the  most  High
Luke  2.  28.  took  him  in  his  arms  and  b.  God
John  12.  13.  b.  is  the  King  of  Israel  that  cometh
Rom.  1.  25.  than  the  Creator,  who  is  b.  for  ever
9.  5.  Christ,  who  is  over  all,  God  b.  for  ever
2  Cor.  11.  31.  is  b.  for  evermore,  knoweth  T  lie  not
Eph.  1.  3.  b.  be  the  Father  of  our  Lord,  1  Pet.  1.  3.
1  Tim.  1.  11.  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  b.  God
6.  15.  who  is  the  b.  and  only  Potentate
BLESSED  are  they.

Psal.  2.  12.  b.  are  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him
84.  4.  A.  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house

106.  3.  b.  are  they  that  keep  judgment  at  all  times
119.  2.  b.  are  they  that  keep  his  testimonies

Prov.  8.  32.  for  b.  are  they  that  keep  my  ways
Isa.  30.  18.  b.  are  they  that  wait  for  him
Mat.  5.  4.  b.  are  they  that  mourn,  shall  be  comforted
6.  A.  are  they  who  hunger  ||  10.  who  are  persecuted
Luke  11.28.  yea,  rather  A.  are  they  that  hear  the  woid
John  20.  29.  A.  are  they  that  have  not  seen,  believed
Rom.  4. 7.  A.  are  they  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven
Rev.  19.  9.  A.  are  they  who  are  called  to  the  marriage

supper

22.  14.  A.  are  they  that  do  his  commandments
BLESSED  are  ye.

Isa.  32.  20.  A.  are  ye  that  sow  beside  all  waters
Mat.  5.  11.  A.  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you
Luke  6.  21.  A.  are  ye  that  hunger  now,  ye  shall  be
filled ;  A.  are  ye  that  weep  now,  for  ye  shall  laugh
22.  A.  are  ye  when  men  shall  hate  you
BLESSED  is  he.

Num.  24.  9.  A.  is  he  that  blesseth  thee,  and  cursed
Psal.  32.  1.  A.  is  he  whose  transgression  is  forgiven
41.  1.  A.  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor
Dan.  12.  12.  A.  is  he  that  waiteth,  cometh  to  days
Mat.  11.  6.  and  A.  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be
offended  in  me,  Luke  7.  23.

21.  9.  A.  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,

23.  39.  Mark  11.  9.  Luke  13.  35.
Luke  14. 15.  A.  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  kingdom
Rev.  1.  3.  A.  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  that  hear
16.  15.  A.  is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth
20.  6.  A.  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection

22.  7-  A.  is  he  that  keepeth  sayings  of  the  prophecy

BLESSED  is  the  man.

Psal.  1  1.  A.  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  counsel

32.  2.  b.  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  imputeth

not  iniquity,  Rom.  4.  8.
34. 8.  A.  is  man  that  trusteth  in  him ,  84. 12.  Jer.  17. 7.
40.  4.  A.  is  the  man  that  maketh  the  Lord  his  trust

65. 4.  A.  is  the  man  whom  thou  choosest,  and  causest
84.  5.  A.  is  the  man  whose  strength  is  in  thee

94. 12.  A.  is  the  man  whom  thou  chastenest,  O  Lord

112. 1.  A.  is  the  man  that  feareth  Lord,  that  delights
Prov.  8.  34.  A.  is  the  man  that  heareth  me,  watching
Isa.  56. 2.  A.  is  the  man  that  doth  this,  and  son  of  man
Jam.  1.  12.  A.  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation

BLESSEDNESS.

Rom.  4.  6.  even  as  David  describeth  the  A.

9.  cometh  this  A.  on  the  circumcision  only  f
Gal.  4  15.  where  is  then  the  A.  ye  spake  or  ?
BLESSEST.

Num.  22.  6. 1  wot  that  he  whom  thou  A.  is  blessed
1  Chr.  17.  27.  thou  A.  O  Lord,  and  it  shall  be  blessed
Psal.  65.  10.  thou  A.  the  springing  thereof
BLESSETH.

Gen.  27  .  29.  blessed  is  he  that  A.  thee,  Hum.  24.  9.
Deut.  15.  6.  thy  God  A.  thee  as  he  promised
Psal.  10.  3.  A.  covetous  whom  the  Lord  abhorreth

107.  38.  he  A.  them  so  that  they  are  multiplied
Prov.  3.  33.  but  he  A.  the  habitation  of  the  just

,  27.  14.  he  that  A.  his  friend  with  aloud  voice
l  Isa.  65.  16.  he  who  A.  himself  in  the  earth
BLESSING

Signifies,  [1]  The  favour,  kindness,  and  goodness  of
God,  making  what  his  people  do  to  succeed  and
prosper.  Psal.  3.  8.  [2]  All  good  things ,  gifts,
graces,  and  privileges,  which  God  bestows  upon  his
peopie,  whether  spiritual  or  temporal ,  whether  they
respect  the  soul,  or  the  body,  this  present  life,  or
that  which  is  to  come,  Deut.  28. 2.  Psal.  24. 5.  Isa.
44.  3.  Eph.  1.  3.  [3]  The  means  of  conveying  a
blessing  to  others,  Isa.  19.  24.  Thus  the  Jews  are
called  a  Blessing,  because  Christ  was  to  be  born  of
them,  and  the  gospel-church  and  ordinances  were
first  established  among  them,  and  by  them  conveyed
to  the  Gentiles.  [4]  Wishing,  praying  for,  and
endeavouring  the  good  of  our  enemies,  1  Pet.  3.  9.
[5]  Alms,  bounty,  or  liberality,  2  Cor.  9.  t5.  [6]
A  gift,  or  present,  Gen.  33.  11.  2  Kings  5.  15.
Thou  shalt  be  a  blessing,  Gen.  12.  2.  Thou  shalt
be  a  means  of  conveying  blessedness,  [1]  To  thy
posterity,  who  shall  be  blessed  for  thy  sake.  [2]
To  thy  friends  and  servants,  wfio  shall  be  blessed
by  thy  instruction  and  example.  [3]  To  all  the
world,  by  being  the  progenitor  of  Christ,  and  an
eminent  pattern  of  faith  and  holiness  to  all.

Leave  a  blessing  behind  him,  Joel  2.  14.  Reserve
some  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  from  the  common  de¬
struction,  for  their  support,  and  his  own  worship.
The  blessing  of  Abraham,  Gal.  3.  14.  The  bless¬
ing  conferred  on  Abraham,  namely,  justification
and  reconciliation  with  God,  through  faith  in  the
blood  of  Christ.

Gen.  12. 2. 1  will  bless  thee,  thou  shalt  be  a  A.

22.  17.  that  in  A.  1  will  bless  thee,  Heb.  6. 14.

27.  12.  I  shall  bring  a  curse  on  me,  and  not  a  b.

35.  thy  brother  hath  taken  away  thy  A.


BLI


BLO


BLO


GenAJ  -38.  Esau  said,  hast  thou  but  one  b.my  father:1

28.  4.  God  give  tliee  the  b.  of  Abraham
3:5.  11.  take,  I  pray  thee,  my  b.  that  is  brought
39.  5.  the  b.  of  the  Lord  was  on  al  1  that  he  had
49.  28.  every  one  according  to  his  b.  he  blessed
Exod.  32.  29-  then  he  may  bestow  on  you  a  b.

Lev.  25.  21.  then  will  I  command  my  b.  on  you
Deut.  11.26.  behold,  I  set  before  you  a  b.  30.  19.
27-  a  b.  ii'ye  obey  the  commandments  of  the  Lord

29.  thou  shalt  put  the  b.  on  mount  Gerizim

12.  15.  according  to  the  b.  of  the  Lord,  16.  17>

£3.  5.  the  I.ord  turned  the  curse  into  a  b.

28.  8.  Lord  shall  command  a  b.  on  store  house

33.  1.  this  is  the  b.  wherewith  Moses  blessed,  7>

16.  let  the  b  come  upon  the  head  of  J oseph
23.  Napl.tali  full  with  the  b.  of  the  Lord
Josh.  15.  19.  answered,  give  me  a  b.  Judg.  1.  15.

1  Sam.  25.  27.  this  b.  thy  handmaid  hath  brought

30.  t  26.  behold  a  b.  for  you  from  the  spoil

2  Sam."!.  29.  with  thy  b.  let  my  house  be  blessed
2  Kings  5. 15.  I  pray  thee  take  a  b.  of  thy  servant

18.  +  31.  make  with  me  a  b.  and  come  out  to  me,
and  eat  of  his  own  vine,  Isa.  36.  16.
Nek.  9.  5.  which  is  exalted  above  all  b.  and  praise

13.  2.  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  b.

Job  29.  13.  the  b.  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish
Psal.  3.  8.  thy  b.  is  upon  thy  people
24.  5.  he  shall  receive  the  b.  from  the  Lord
109- 17.  as  he  delighted  not  in  b.  let  it  be  far
129.  8.  the  b.  of  the  Lord  be  upon  you
133.  3.  there  Lord  commanded  the  A.  even  life
Prov.  10.  22.  the  b.  of  the  Lord  maketli  rich

11.  11.  by  the  b.  of  the  upright  the  city  is  exalted
i  25.  the  soul  of  b.  shall  be  made  fat
26.  but  a  b.  on  the  head  of  him  that  selleth  it
24. 25.  a  good  b.  shall  come  on  them  that  rebuke
Isa.  19.  24.  even  a  b.  in  the  midst  of  the  land
44.  3.  and  I  will  pour  my  b.  on  thy  offspring
65.  8.  destroy  it  not.  for  a  b.  is  in  it
Ezek.  34.  26.  I  will  make  them  and  the  places
about  my  hill  a  b.  there  shall  be  showers  of  b.
44  .  30.  he  may  cause  the  b.  to  rest  in  thy  house
Joel  2.  14.  if  he  will  leave  a  b.  behind  him
Zech.  8.  13.  I  will  save  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  b.
Mai.  3.  10.  open  heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a  b.
Luke  24.53.  in  the  temple  praising  and  b.  God
Rom,  15.  29.  in  ,  the  fulness  of  the  b.  of  the  gospel

1  Cor.  10.  16.  the  cup  of  b.  which  we  bless
Gal.  3.  14.  that  the  b.  of  Abraham  might  come

2  Cor.  9.  5.  make  up  beforehand  your  b.

Heb.  6.  7.  for  the  earth  receiveth  b.  from  God

12. 17.  when  he  would  have  inherited  the  b.

Jam. 3.10.  of  the  same  mouth  proceed  b.  and  cursing
1  Pet.  3.  9-  but  contrariwise  b.  knowing  that  ye  are
thereunto  called,  that  ye  should  inherit  a  b.
Rev.  5. 12.  worthy  to  receive  honour,  glory,  b.

13.  b.  to  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne

7. 12.  b.  and  glory  to  our  God  for  ever  and  ever
BLESSINGS.

Gen.  49. 25.  Almighty  who  shall  bless  thee  with  b.
of  heaven  above,  b.  of  the  deep,  b.  of  the  breasts
26.  b.  of  thy  father  prevailed  above  the  b.  of  my
Deut.  28.  2.  all  these  b.  shall  come  on  thee,  if

[hearken

Josh.  8. 34.  afterwards  he  read  the  b.  and  cursings
Psal.  21.  3.  for  thou  preventest  him  with  the  b.

+  6.  thou  hast  set  him  to  be  b.  for  e  er
Prov  10.  6.  b.  are  upon  the  head  of  the  just
28.  20.  a  faithful  man  shall  abound  with  b.

Mai.  2. 2. 1  will  send  a  curse,  and  will  curse  your  b.
Eph.  1.  3.  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  b.
BLEW,  Verb.

Josh.  6.8.  priests  passed  on  before  the  Lord  and  b.
Judg.  3.  27.  Ehud  b.  a  trumpet  in  the  mount

6.  34.  Spirit  come  on  Gideon,  and  he  b.  a  trumpet

7. 19.  they  b.  the  trumpets  and  brake,  20,  22.

1  Sam.  13.3.  Saul  b.  saying,  let  the  Hebrews  hear

2  Sam.  2.  28.  Joab  b.  a  trumpet,  18.  16.  1  20.  22.

20.  1.  Sheba  a  Benjamite  b.  a  trumpet  and  said

1  Kings  1. 39.  they  b.  the  trumpet,  people  said,  God

save  king  Solomon,  2  Kings  9.  13. 1 11. 14.
Mat.  7-  25.  winds  b.  and  beat  on  that  house,  27.
John  6. 18.  the  sea  arose  by  a  great  wind  that  b.
Acts  27. 13.  when  the  south-wind  b.  28. 13.
BLIND

Signifies,  [1]  Such  as  are  deprived  of  natural  sight,
John  9-  1.  Acts  13.  11.  [2]  Such  whose  judg¬
ments  are  so  corrupted  by  taking  of  gifts,  that
they  cannot  or  will  not  discern  between  right  and
wrong,  Exod.  23.  8.  Deut.  16.  19.  [3]  Such  as
are  wilfully  and  obstinately  ignorant,  in  matters
that  concern  salvation.  Mat.  15.  14.  [4]  Such

as  through  simplicity  and  ignorance  are  easily
misled  and  seduced  by  the  pernicious  counsel  if
others,  Deut.  27.  18.  Mat.  15.  14.

It  is  applied,  [1]  To  ignorant  ministers,  Isa.
56,  10.  [2]  To  deceitful  teachers ,  who  are

blinded  by  their  own  interest  against  any  con¬
viction,  Isa.  42.  19.  Mat.  23.  16.  [3]  To  an
ignorant  people ,  Mat.  15.  14.  Rom.  2.  19.
[41  To  such  as  reject  the  knowledge  and  faith  of
Christ,  notwithstanding  the  clear  discoveries  of
the  way  of  salvation  m  the  gospel,  2  Cor.  4.  4.
[5]  To  such  as  live  in  hatred,  1  John  2.  11.  [6]
To  such  as  are  self-conceited,  being  puffed  up  with
an  high  opinion  of  their  qualifications  and  attain¬
ments,  Rev.  3.  if.

Exod.  4.  11.  who  maketh  the  seeing  or  the  b.  ?

Lev.  19.  14.  not  put  a  stumbling-block  before  b.

21.  18.  a  b.  or  lame  man  shall  not  offer

22.  22.  not  offer  the  b.  to  the  Lord,  Deut.  15.  21.
Deut.  llj.  18.  cursed  that  maketh  the  b.  to  wander
28. 29.  grope  at  noon  day ,  as  b.  gropeth  in  darkness

2  Sam.  5.  6.  except  thou  take  away  the  b.  and  lame

8.  smiteth  the  lame  and  b.  hated  of  David,  the

b.  and  the  lame  shall  not  come  into  house
Job  29.  15.  I  was  eyes  to  the  b.  feet  to  the  lame
Psal.  146.  8.  the  Lord  openeth  the  eyes  of  the  b.
Isa.  29.  18.  the  eyes  of  the  b.  shall  see,  35.  5.

42.  7-  give  thee  for  a  light  to  open  the  b.  eyes

16.  I  will  bring  the  b.  by  a  way  they  knew  not
18.  hear,  ye  deaf,  look,  ye  b.  that  ye  may  see


Isa.  42. 19..  who  is  b.  but  my  servant  ?  who  is  b.  as  he
that  is  perfect,  and  b.  as  the  Lord’s  servant  ?

43.8.  bring  forth  the  b.  people  that  have  eyes
56. 10.  his  watchmen  are  b.  they  are  all  ignorant
59.  10.  we  grope  for  the  wall  like  the  b.

Jer.  31. 8.  I  will  gather  with  them  the  b.  and  lame
Lam.  4. 14.  they  wandered  as  b.  men  in  the  streets
Zeph.  1.  17.  that  they  shall  walk  like  b.  men
Mai.  1. 8.  if  ye  offer  the  b.  for  sacrifice  i*  it  not  evil ?
Mat.  9. 27.  two  b.  men  followed  him,  cryinsr,  20. 30.
11. 5.  the  b.  receive  their  sight,  12. 22.  Luke"!.  22.

15.  14.  they  be  b.  leaders  ot  the  b.  if  the  b.  lead  the
b.  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch,  Luke  6. 39.

23.16.  wo  to  you,  ye  b.  guides,  which  say

17.  ye  fools  and  b.  whether  is  greater,  19.

26.  thou  b.  Pharisee,  cleanse  first  within

Mark  8.  23.  and  he  took  the  b.  man  by  the  hand

10.  46.  b.  Bartimeus  sat  by  the  way  side  begging
Luke  4. 18.  to  preach  recovery  of  sight  to  the  b.

7.  21.  to  many  that  were  b.  he  gave  sight
14. 13.  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  b.

John  5.  3.  in  these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  b.

9.  1.  he  saw  a  man  that  was  b.  from  his  birth

39.  that  they  which  see  might  be  made  b.

40.  are  we  b.  also  ?  ||  41.  if  ye  were  b.

10.  21.  can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  b.  ?

Acts  13. 11.  thou  shalt  be  b.  not  seeing  the  sun
Rom.  2. 19.  art  confident  thou  art  a  guide  to  the  b.

2  Pet.  1.  9.  he  that  lacketh  these  things  is  b.

Rev.  3. 17.  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  b.

BLIND,  Verb.

Deut.  16. 19.  a  gift  doth  b.  the  eyes  of  the  wise

1  Sam.  12. 3.  of  whom  received  I  a  bribe  to  b.

BLINDED,  ETH.

Exod.  23.  8.  take  no  gift,  for  a  gift  b.  the  wise
Jer.  52.  1 11.  then  he  b.  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah
John  12.  40.  he  hath  h.  their  eyes,  and  hardened
Rom.  11.  7.  election  hath  obtained,  the  rest  are  b.

2  Cor.  3. 14.  but  their  minds  were  b.

4.  4.  in  whom  god  of  this  world  hath  b.  the  minds

1  John  2. 11.  because  darkness  hath  b.  his  eyes

BLINDFOLDED.

LukeHH.  64.  when  they  had  b.  him,  they  struck
BLINDNESS.

Gen.  19.  11.  smote  the  men  at  the  door  with  b.

Deut.  28. 28.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  b.

2  Kings  6.  18.  Elisha  prayed,  smite  this  people,  1

pray  thee,  with  b.  and  he  smote  them  with  b.
Zech.  12.  4.  I  will  smite  every  horse  with  b.

Mark  3.  t  5.  being  grieved  for  their  b.  of  heart
Rom.  11.  25.  b.  in  part  has  happened  to  Israel
Eph.  4.  18.  because  of  the  b.  of  their  hea’  t
Block.  See  Stumbling.

BLOOD

Signifies,  [1]  A  warm  red  liquor  or  humour  circu¬
lating  through  the  whole  ody,  Exod.  29.  12.
[2]  Death,  slaughter,  or  murder,  together  with
the  guilt  following  upon  it,  Gen.  4.  10.  Mat.  27.
24.  [3]  The  punishment  or  vengeance  due  for
the  shedding  of  blood,  Mat.  27-  25.  [4]  That

which  was  bought  or  purchased  with  the  price  of
blood,  Acts  1.  19.  [5]  Wealth,  goods,  or  money
got  by  taking  away  the  lives  of  the  innocent,  and
then  seizing  upon  their  estates,  Nah.  3.  10.  flab.

2.  12.  [6]  The  guilt  and  punishment  of  sin,

Acts  18.  6.  [7]  Fallen  nature,  Ezek.  16.  6.

John  1.  13.  [8]  The  first  man  Adam,  who  was
the  root  or  stock  from  which  all  mankind  de¬
scended,  Acts  17.  26.  [9]  Human  reason  or  wis¬
dom,  Mat.  16.  17.  [10]  The  juice  of  grapes,  Gen.
49.  11.  [11]  A  sacramental  symbol  and  repre¬

sentation  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  Mat.  26.  28.  [12]
The  death  and  sufferings  of  Christ,  Rom.  3.  25.

15.9.  Eph.  1.7.

The  blood  of  the  covenant,  Heb.  10.  29.  The  blood
of  Christ,  whereby  the  new  covenant  or  testament
was  confirmed  and.  ratified.

Where  mar  Ed  with  +  it  is  in  the  Original  BLOODS.
Gen.  4.  1 10.  the  voice  of  thy  brother's  b.  crieth
9. 4.  the  life  which  is  the  b.  shall  you  not  eat

5.  surely  your  b.  of  your  lives  will  1  require
37.  31.  they  killed  a  kid  and  dipped  the  coat  in  b.
Exod.  4.  9.  water  shall  become  b.  on  the  dry  land
7.  17.  and  the  waters  shall  be  turned  into  b.

12.  13.  the  b.  shall  be  fora  token,  when  I  see  b.

23.  18.  shalt  not  offer  the  b.  with  leaven,  34.  25.

29. 21.  thou  shalt  take  of  the  b.  upon  the  altar
Lev.  10.  18.  the  b.  of  it  was  not  brought  in

15.  19.  and  if  the  issue  in  her  flesh  shall  be  b.

17.  4.  b.  shall  be  imputed  unto  that  man

11.  for  it  is  the  b.  that  maketh  an  atonement

19. 16.  not  stand  against  the  b.  of  thy  neighbour
Num.  23.  24.  and  drink  the  b.  of  the  slain

35.  33.  not  cleansed  but  by  the  b.  of  him  that  shed  it
Deut.  17. 8.  matter  between  b.  and  b.  2  Chron.  19. 10.

21.  8.  and  the  b.  shall  be  forgiven  them

22.  8.  make  a  battlement,  that  thou  bring  not  b.

33.  43.  he  will  avenge  the  b.  of  his  servants

Judg.  9.  24.  and  their  b.  be  laid  upon  Abimelech

1  Sam.  26.  20.  let  not  my  b.  fall  to  the  earth

2  Sam.  1.  16.  David  said,  thy  b.  be  upon  thy  head

22.  from  the  b.  of  the  slain,  from  the  fat

3.  t  28.  I  and  my  kingdom  guiltless  from  the  b.

16.  +  7.  come  out,  come  out,  thou  man  of  b.

8.  the  Lord  hath  returned  upon  thee  all  the  b.

20. 12.  Amasa  wallowed  in  b.  in  the  highway

23. 17.  is  not  this  the  b.  of  the  men  ?  1  Chr.  11. 19.

1  Kings  2. 5.  and  put  the  b.  of  war  on  his  girdle
37.  thy  b.  shall  be  on  thy  head,  Ezek.  33.  4.

18.  28.  till  the  b.  gushed  out  upon  them

2  Kings  3.22.  the  Moabites  saw  the  waters  red  as  b.

23.  they  said,  this  is  b.  the  kings  are  surely  slain

9.  t  26.  1  have  seen  the  b.  of  N  aboth,  b.  of  his  sons

Job  16.  18.  O  earth,  cover  not  thou  my  b.

39.  30.  the  eagles’  young  ones  also  suck  up  b.

Psal.  30.  9.  what  profit  is  there  in  my  b.  ?

50. 13.  or  will  I  drink  the  b.  of  goats  ?

58.  10.  righteous  wash  his  feet  in  the  b.  of  wicked
68. 23.  foot  may  be  dipped  in  the  b.  of  thy  enemy
72.  14.  precious  shall  their  b.  be  in  his  sight
Prov.  28. 17.  that  doth  violence  to  the  b.  of  any
Isa.  1. 1  15.  your  hands  are  full  of  b.


Isa.  4.  4.  the  Lord  shall  purge  the  b.  of  Jerusalem
9.  5.  with  noise,  and  garments  rolled  in  b.  wash  ye

15.  9.  the  waters  of  Dimon  shall  be  full  of  b.

26.  t  21.  the  earth  shall  disclose  her  b.

33.  t  15.  that  stoppeth  his  ear  from  hearing  b.

34.  3.  the  nmuntams  shall  be  melted  with  their  b.
Jer.  2.  34.  is  found  the  b.  of  the  poor  innocents

18. 21.  pour  out  their  b.  by  the  force  of  the  sword

48. 10.  cursed  be  he  that  keepeth  his  sword  from  b,
51.  35.  my  b.  be  on  the  inhabitants  of  Chaldea

Lam,  4. 14.  they  have  polluted  themselves  with  b.
Ezek.  5. 17.  pestilence  and  b.  pass  through  thee
9.  9.  the  land  is  full  of  b.  and  the  city  is  full  of

14. 19.  or  if  I  pour  out  my  fury  upon  it  in  b.

16.  6.  1  said  to  thee  when  thou  wast  in  thy  b.  live

1 9.  I  thoroughly  washed  away  thy  b.  from  thee
38.  1  will  give  thee  b.  in  fury  and  jealousy

18. 10.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  is  a  shedder  ot  b.
tl3.  he  shall  die,  his  b.  shall  be.  upon  him

19. 10.  thy  mother  is  like  a  vine  in  thy  b.

21.32.  thy  b.  shall  be  in  themidstof  the  land,  22.  13.

22. 3.  the  city  sheddeth  b.  in  the  midst  of  it
23.  37.  and  b.  is  in  their  hands,  45.

24. 8.  1  have  set  her  b.  on  the  top  of  a  rock
28.  23.  for  I  will  send  b.  into  her  streets

32.  6.  I  will  also  water  with  thy  b.  the  land

35.  6.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  prepare  thee  to  b,  thou

hast  not  hated  b.  even  b.  shall  pursue  thee

44. 7.  when  ye  offer  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the  b.  15.
Has.  1.  4.  for  yet  I  will  avenge  the  b.  of  Jezreel

4.  +  2.  they  break  out,  and  b.  toucheth  b.

Joel  2. 30.  b.  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke,  Acts  2. 19.

31.  the  moon  shall  be  turned  into  b.  Acts  2.  20.

3. 21. 1  will  cleanse  their  b.  that  I  have  not  cleansed
Zeph.  1. 17.  their  b.  shall  be  poured  out  as  dust
Mat.  9.  20.  behold  a  woman  diseased  with  an  issue
of  b.  twelve  years,  Mark  5. 25.  Luke  8.  43.

16. 17.  flesh  and  b.  hath  not  revealed  it  to  thee
23.  30.  not  partakers  in  the  b.  of  the  pi  ophets
35.  from  the  b.  of  righteous  Abel,  Luke  11.  51.
26.  28.  my  b.  of  the  new  testament,  Mark  14. 24.

27. 6.  not  to  put  into  treasury  .because  it  is  price  of  b.
8.  was  called  the  field  of  b.  to  this  day,  Acts  1. 19.

24.  I  am  innocent  of  the  b.  of  this  just  person
Lu.  13. 1 .  whose  b.  Pilate  had  mingled  with  sacrifices

22. 20.  the  new  testament  in  my  b.  1  Cor.  11. 25.
44  his  sweat  was  as  great  drops  of  b.  falling

John 1. 13.  which  wereborn  not  of  b.  nor  flesh

6.  54.  who  eateth  my  flesh  and  drinketh  my  b.  56.
55.  my  flesh  is  meat,  and  my  b.  is  drink‘indeed

19.  34.  forthwith  came  thereout  b.  and  water
Acts  5. 28.  ye  intend  to  bring  this  man’s  b.  on  us

15.  20.  that  they  abstain  from  b.  29. 1  21.  25.

17.  26.  and  hath  made  of  one:5.  all  nations

18.  6.  your  b.  be  on  your  own  heads,  I  am  clean

20.  26.  I  am  pure  from  the  b.  of  all  men

1  Cor.  11.  27.  guilty  of  the  body  and  b.  of  the  Lord

15.  50.  flesh  and  b.  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom
Eph.  6.  12.  we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  ana  b.

Col.  1 . 20.  having  made  peace  thro’  b.  of  his  cross
Heb.  2. 14.  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  b.

9. 7.  not  without  b.  which  he  offered  for  himself

12.  nor  by  the  b.  of  goats,  but  by  his  own  b.

13.  if  the  b.  of  bulls  and  goats  sanctifieth

20.  this  is  the  b.  of  the  testament  God  enjoined
22.  without  shedding  of  b.  there  is  no  remission

10. 19.  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  b.  of  Jesus

11.  28.  he  kept  the  passover,  and  sprinkling  of  b.

12. 4.  ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  b.  striving

24.  to  the  b.  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh  better

13. 11.  whose  b.  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary

1  Pet.  1.  2.  and  sprinkling  of  the  b.  of  Jesus  Christ
1  John  1.7.  the  b.  of  J esus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from

5.  6.  this  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  b.

8.  three  in  earth,  the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  b.
Rev.  5. 9.  thou  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  b .
6. 10.  how  long  dost  thou  not  avenge  our  b.  ?

12.  the  sun  was  black,  and  the  moon  became  as  b.
7. 14.  made  them  white  in  the  b.  of  the  Lamb

8.  8.  the  third  part  of  the  sea  became  b.  16.  3.

11.  6.  have  power  to  turn  the  waters  into  b.

12.  11.  they  overcame  him  by  the  b.  of  the  Lamb

14.  20.  and  b.  came  out  of  the  wine-press

16.  6.  and  thou  hast  given  them  b.  to  drink

18.  24  in  her  was  found  the  b.  of  the  prophets

19.  2.  he  hath  avenged  the  b.  of  his  servants

13.  he  was  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  b.

See  Avenger,  Revenger.

BLOOD  be  upon.

Lev.  20. 9.  that  curseth  his  father,  his  b.  be  upon  him
11.  incest  |[  13.  sodomy,  their  b.  be  upon  them
16.  bestiality  ||  27.  wizard,  their  b.  be  upon  them
Deut.  19. 10.  innocent  b.  shed,  and  so  be  upon  thee
Ezek.  18. 13.  done  abominations,  his  b.  be  upon  him

33.  5.  took  not  warning,  his  b.  shall  be  upon  him

BLOOD,  with  bullock.

Exod.  29. 12.  take  b.  ot  bullock.  Lev.  4. 5. 1  16. 14,  18.
Lev.  4. 7.  pour  b.  of  bullock  at  bottom  of  the  altar
16. 15.  do  with  that  as  he  did  with  b.  of  the  bullock
Isa.  1. 11. 1  delight  not  in  b.  of  bullocks  or  of  lambs
BLOOD  of  Christ.

1  Cor.  10. 16.  is  it  not  communion  of  the  b.  of  Christ  ?
Eph.  2. 13.  were  far  off,  are  made  nigh  by  b.  of  Christ
Heb.  9. 14.  how  much  more  shall  b.  of  Christ  purge  i
1  Pet.  1. 19.  but  with  precious  b.  of  Christ  as  of  a  lamb
1  John  1.7.  the  b.  of  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  ail  sin
BLOC)  D  of  the  Covenant.

Exod.  24.8.  Moses  said,  behold  the  b.  of  the  covenant
Zech.  9. 11.  as  for  thee  also  by  the  b.  of  covenant
Heb.  10. 29.  hath  counted  b.  of  cov.  an  unholy  thing

13. 20.  through  the  b.  of  the  everlasting  covenant

BLOOD,  with  eat.

Lev.  3. 17.  a  statute  that  ye  eat  neither  fat  nor  b.

7. 26.  ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  b.  of  fowl  or  beast,
27. 1  17. 14.  Deut.  12.  16,  23.  |  15.  23.
27  .  that  eateth  b.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off,  17.  10.

1  Sam.  14.  32.  the  people  did  eat  them  with  the  b.
Ezek.  33. 25  ye  eat  with  b.  and  lift  up  your  eyes

For  BLOOD.

Num.  35. 33.  not  pollute  land,  for  b.  it  defileth  land

2  Sam.  3. 27.  he  died  for  the  b.  of  Asahel  his  brother
2  Chron.  24.  25.  for  the  b.  of  the  sons  of  Jehoiada


JB  LO


Psal.  9.  i2.  when  he  rnaketh  inquisition  for  b
Prov.  1.  11,  thev  say,  come  let  us  lay  wait  for  b.  18.
12.  6.  the  words  of  wicked  are  to  lie  in  wait  for  b.
Mic.  7.  2.  they  all  lie  in  wait /or  b.  they  hunt
.  Hit  BLOOD.

iJ1'™  'Cwe  *lay  ?ur  brother  and  conceal  his  b,
4..  22.  therefore  behold  his  b.  is  required
Josh.  2. 19.  his  S  shall  be  upon  his  head
2  Kam.  4. 11.  shall  1  not  require  his  b.  of  your  hand  ?
r  v  ,',OI!d  s.ball  return  his  b.  on  his  head

Ezek.  3. 18.  shall  die  in  his  iniquity,  but  his  b.  will
rr  10  I  require  at  thy  hand,  20.  |  33.  4,  6,  8.
fjos;  1^-  14.  therefore  shall  he  leave  his  b.  on  him
Zec«.  9. 1 7.  take  away  his  b.  out  of  his  mouth
Mat.  27.25.  his  b.  be  on  us  and  our  children
Acts  20.  28.  church  he  hath  purchased  with  his  b.
Mom.  3.  25.  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  b

5.  9.  much  more  being  now  justified  by  his  b
Eph.  1.  7.  we  have  redemption  thro’  his  b.  Col.  1. 14
Heb.  9.  12.  but  by  his  own  b.  he  entered  in  once

13.  12.  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his  b.
Mev.  1.  5.  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  b.
Innocent  BLOOD.

Deut.19. 10.  that  innocent  b.  be  not  shed  in  the  land
13.  thou  shalt  put  away  guilt  of  innocent  b.  21.  9.
21.  8.  lay  not  innocent  b.  to  thy  people's  charge
1  Kam.  19.  5.  wilt  thou  sin  against  innocent  b.  to  slay

1  Kings  2.  31  take  away  innocent  b.  that  .Toab  shed

2  Kings  fix.  16.  Manasseh  shed  innocent  b.  24.  4.

21.  they  gather  and  condomn  innocent  b.
106.  38.  shed  innocent  b.  even  b.  of  sons  and  daugh.
Prov.  6. 17.  Lord  hateth  hands  that  shed  innocent  b.
Pa.  59.  7-  and  they  make  haste  to  shed  innocent  b.

L°-J-ye  °PPrcSs  not,  shed  not  innocent  b.  22.  3.
nc  4  llne  SX®®  and  heart  are  to  shed  innocent  b.
r  /Q  sur.e'y  bring  innoc.  b.  on  yourselves

Joel 3.1 9.  because  they  have  shed  innocent  b.  in  land

Ma,  oV1t‘l t  r-ord’,we  ^seech,  lay  noton  us  innoc. b.
Mat.  27.  4. 1  sinned  in  that  I  have  betrayed  innoc.  b
Shed  BLOOD.

G**.9.6.whosheddeth  man’s  b.  by  man  his  b.  be  shed
37.  22.  Reuben  said  to  them,  shed  no  b.

Lxod.qq.  2.  there  shall  no  b.  be  shed  for  him
3.  if  the  sun  be  risen  upon  him,  b.  be  .(  Serf  for  him
Lev.  17. 4.  he  hath  shed  b  that  man  shall  be  cut  off
Mum.  35.  33.  land  not  cleansed  of  b.  shed  but  by  b
neut.  21.  7.  our  hands  have  not  shed  this  b.  ’

1  Sam.  25.  26.  withholden  from  coming  to  shed  b
1  Kings  2.5.  whom  he  slew  and  shed  b.  of  war  in  peace
\Chron  22.8.  because  thou  hast  shed  b.  much  b.  28  3
PW.  79. 3.  their  b.  shed  like  water  round  Jerusalem
10.  known  by  revenging  b.  of  thy  servants  shed
Prov .1.16.  they  make  haste  to  shed  b.  Rom.  3  15

P.roPhe!? that  have  the  b.  of  the  just
Ezek.  16.  38.  jucfge  thee  as  women  that  shed  b.  23.  45
"S'  o'.  af^  •beC0,r?e  fmlty  *n  thy  b.  thou  hast  shed  *

6.  the  Pnnces  in  thee  to  their  power  to  shed  b.

~3.  45.  after  the  manner  of  women  that  shed  b.

33.  25.  ye  shed  b.  and  shall  ye  possess  the  land  *

35. 5.  because  thou  hast  shed  6.  of  children  of  Israel

on  them  for  the  b.  they  shed
Mat.  23.  35.  on  you  come  all  the  righteous  b  shed
MarfcU.  24.  this  is  my  i.  which  is  shed,  Luke  22.  20.
J-ffhe  11.  50.  b.  of  all  the  prophets  which  was  shed
Acts  22.  20  when  the  b.  oV  Stephen  was  S
Mev.  16.  6.  tor  they  have  shed  the  b.  of  the  saints
r  ,  nn  .  Sprinkle  BLOOD.

take  the  ram’s  b  and  sprinkle  it  on  altar
20.  shalt  sprinkle  b.  on  altar  round  about,  Lev

18  VL  3'  2’  8’  13*  1  7’  2’  1 17’  6’  Nu m'

Lev.  4.  6.  priest  sp.  b.  seven  times,  17. 1  16. 14  iq
7  k'  s'n. offering  on  side  of  the  ’altar

7. 14.  it  shall  be  the  priest’s  that  sprinkle  the  b
Nvm.  19.  4.  sprinkle  of  the  6.  before  the  tabernacle
2  Kings  16.  15.  sprinkle  on  it  the  b.  of  burnt  off  ering
Ezek.  43. 18.  when  make  an  altar  to  spr.  b.  thereon
rSLAJOI)  sprinkled .

o0<a?4'®’  half,°f M oses  SP.  on  altar,  Lev.  8  19  24
8.  Moses  took  the  b.  and sprinkled  on  the  people
6.  27.  when  there  is  sprinkled  b.  on  any  garment
8.  30.  Moses  took  of  the  b.  and  sprinkled  on  Aaron
nr}**  A&coti  ssons  presented  him  b.  he  sprinkled  18
2ft  mgs  9.33.  some  of  Athaliah’s  b.  sprinkled  on  wall
16.  13.  Ahaz  sprinkled  the  h.  of  his  peace  offering
2*s^iiW\-k9‘  22,  sPTink{ed  the  b.  of  bullocks,  30. 16
fiV  ffepneste  -Winkled the  b  from  their  hands
tbeir  b’  ?hall  be  sprinkled  on  my  garment
Heb.  9.  21.  he  sprinkled  with  b.  the  tabernacle
-,  With  FLOOD.

Axorf.  3°  10  Aaron  shall  make  atonement  with  b.

in  di’  52’  ^leAnse  the  h°nse  with  b.  of  the  bird
Iff  26.  ye  shall  not  eat  any  thing  with  b.

VSTnfi  3RhlaSnH°  fky  |eau  bring  th,?U  d0wn  with  b-

Psat  105.  38.  and  the  land  was  polluted  with  b.

*7'  an'  Hh"'0ri'  rnfiJ  ed  with  b-  made  fat  with  b

ao‘  a?dtbeir  laI?d  shall  be  soaked  with  b.

0%  they  shall  be  drunken  with  their  own  b
t9'  ??iUr, hands  are  defiled  with  b.

46  in  ft  ckl?idkthlS  placS  witb  the  b-  of  innocents
46.  10.  it  shall  be  made  drunk  with  their  b.

Ezek  38  or,  ^eyi,iaV,e  P.ollut?d  themselves  with  b.
TTnffia  r'n  1  •  plead  a£amst  him  with  b.

3'  i8o  ?k  eak  M  ?  Clty  poUnted  with  b.

Tf  i  0  \°o they  huilH  up  7ion  with  b.  and  Jerusalem

Gal  t  tfi'  im°rnt0  r11?  if  bulldeth  a  town  with  b.

Heb  o  00  '  n  m  dlate  y  !  conferred  not  with  b.

Vv  '  o  o2'?  11  tb]n,S®  are  by  the  law  purged  with  b
717  fi8'Jw?k  °Wed  hail  and  fire,  mingled  with  b.

17. 6.  saw  fj^yoman  drunken  with  b.  of  the  saints

Psal.  51.  14. O  God

Prov.  29.  10.  the  b. 'thirsty^  hate  the  upright

fw4^MSUSvly  *  husband  art  thou  to  me,  26.

2iT'flp'7whimeirSa,c  ’  c,ome  out' thou  h-  man
rjf'/’jhc  famme  is  for  Saul  and  his  b.  house

ofi  o5«P»'kthe  L?rd  T1!1  ab.hor  the  b-  man
kk  no.^  With  b .  men

rn’  f3Hfi:,rFenshairn?t  live  out  half  their  days
o9.  2.  dem  er  me,  and  save  me  from  b.  men
o2


JtiLO

pCaf'  i3  depart  from  me  therefore,  ye  b.  men
oo^c?'  23 ’  fot'the  land  is  full  of  b.  crimes
22.  2.  son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  the  b.  city  ?

P:  6-  w«  to  the  6.  city,  9.  Nah.  3.  1.

Arts  28.  8.  father  of  Publius  lay  sick  of  a  h.  flux

AT  .  bloomed.

Num.  17. 8.  Aaron's  rod  b.  blossoms  and  almonds

Slmlfiroi  m  A  ■flower  of  a  tree  or  plant,  Gen.  40.

I  X1, , mi-/0  JWt,  /°/tb  tnto  flowers  or  blossoms,
Hab-  T3-  17-  C3]  To  increase

ftounsh,  and  prosper,  Isa.  27.  6.  |  35. 1,  2.

=klrnr00t  sha11  be  ,as  rottenness,  and  their  blossom
shall  go  up  as  dust,  Isa.  5.  24.  that  is,  Utter
destruction  shall  seize  upon  them  ;  they  shall  be
destroyed  both  root  and  branch.

mel°,d,bh?r  b]0SS.?,med-  Ezek-  7-  10.  The  instru-
ment  that  God  will  make  use  of  for  your  correction
is  ready  made  and  prepared.

A10'  ’•Sh?t  and  the  clusters
Pa.  5.  ~4.  and  their  b.  shall  go  up  as  dust
,r  BLOSSOM,  ED.

rltPcPl:  p-  the  man’s  rod  whom  I  choose  shall  b.
?7vf-  Ifael  shalU.  and  bud,  and  fill  the  world
p*  -  *  J LieTi  fser^  shall  rejoice  and  b.  as  the  rose
fVo  mi!  abundantly  and  rejoice  with  joy

fZM  (Vhe  [kd  huath  pride  hath  budded
llos.  14.  t  5.  and  he  shall  b.  as  the  lily

Hab.  3.  17.  altho’  the  fig^ffee  shall  not  5.  nor  fruit

Censure,  scorn,  or  reproach,  Prov.  9.  7.
LJ  Unjust  gam,  which  is  a  blemish,  scandal,  and
I  disgrace  to  a  person,  Job  31.  7.

°J  Cybook,  Exod.  32.  32.  Blot  me
■f  e  book  of  life,  out  of  the  cat  a  ’ague  or
mt  c/tf  l0Se  t  ,at  S<alf  saved;  let  me  die
veonle  T/P  'f  evtl  tbat.  sb^  come  to  this
Modes’  lJ  l0U/0  not  f°r<nve  them.  Wherein
be  not  express  what  he  thought  might

tlJtr'J  Tdther  Wlsheth,  if  it  were  possible,
that  God  would  accept  of  him  as  a  sacrifice  in

Mtniki?6?*’  Und  hy  ,ns  utter  destruction  and
annihilation  prevent  so  great  a  mischief  to  them.  ■
In  which  he  was  a  type  of  Christ,  w So  laid

Gal*  3*  13  and  WaS  made  a  curse  f°T  m'

ThDeimQy  ibl0t  °7vtbeijr name  from  under  heaven,

*  •  1  hat  I  may  utterly  destroy  and

consume  them,  and  make  their  name  to  be  for¬
gotten  among  men.  J

Blot  out  my  transgressions,  Psal.  51  l  Sint
are  compared  to  debts,  Mat.  6.  12.  which  are

tle  CreudUor’s  book'  and  cr<>ssed  or
blotted  out  when  they  are  paid.  Men's  sins  are
written  in  the  book  of  God's  remembrance  or  ac-
counts,  out  of  which  all  men  shall  be  judged
hereafter  Rev.  20.  12.  and  when  sin  is  pardoned
it  is  said  to  be  blotted  out,  Isa.  44.  22  and  not

for,  J^lo.  2a  m°re'  th0U3h  U  should’be  sought
I)e\


13  0  D


r!S%  j3i’+4’  ff’ir  h  isnot  of  his  children
d  31k7»ff,any  b-  hath  cleaved  to  my  hands
pi°v.  9.  7.  that  rebuketh  the  wicked,  getteth  a  b.
r,  ~  .  BLOT  out.

Pr^  730  4ooeVer7-iVlng  thing  Will  I  b.  OUt

32>  anf[  ff  not,  b.  me  out  of  thy  book
33.  whosoever  hath  sinned,  him  will  1  b.  out

nUZ- o'  ,2a3'iS  ,al1  b\ then? out  with  bitter  water

°5  19  shalf^™6^  m  6tlatI  rFay  b-  0711  their  name
oooo'fk  I  6jnu(  nh?  remembrance  ofAmalek
o9rJ2'  *14  T02rd  sball  h-  out  his  name  from  under  h
%fSl%  1t'  k7;.Sa,d  n0t’  h?  w°uld  b.  out  Israel
o  kid  *  e  »  O  God,  b.  out  transgress
T?r  iRdo?iy smf’  'An"b-put  all  mine  iniqumes
Jer.  18.  23.  nor  b.  out  their  sin  from  thy  si°ht
Rev.  3. 5. 1  will  n°t  ^-  his  name  out  of  book  of  life
at  t  a  _  ,  tr  1,0 1  i  ED.

Keh.  4.  5.  let  not  their  sin  be  b.  out  from  before  thee
Sm'A9-  28’*et  them  be  b-  out  of  book  of  the  livin'
14 'I13/  P?!t,nty  cuk°ff-  let  their  name  be  b  out
sin  °fhis  mother  be  b.  out
1  have  b  out  as  a  thick  cloud
Acts  3.  19.  repent  that  your  sins  may  be  b.  out
7  At,  a,  e  t  B  LOT  EL  I H,  IRTG.

Cfi  t3'iZ5'h  b"  thy  transgressions

^01.  2.  14.  b.  out  the  hand-writing  of  ordinances
n*  G  GO  W

-lgmnes,  A  stroke,  calamity,  or  judgment,  such  as

f™°rA’  or  famine,  which  God  inflicts  upon  a  people
for  their  sms,  Jer.  14.  17.  peupic

A  wake,  O  north-wind,  and  blow  upon  my  garden
&-c.  Cant.  4..  16.  Let  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his
SZjra}  °Perations,  both  convincing  and  mortifying
and  aho  comforting,  stu  up  and  quicken  my  heart
nl,f  i°Uj  thai  t,e  &  races  that  are  in  me  may  be

quickened  and  exercised.  y

1  he  bloweth  where  it  listeth  ;  so  is  every

1S  horn  of  the  Spirit,  John  3.  8.  Xs

HfnZ  OTei.  ™rny  thm°i 171  nature,  particularly  the
wind,  which  are  evident  m  their  effects,  yet  no
man,  can  give  a  clear  and  full  account  of  them,
man  s  reason  cannot  reach  to  know  from  whence
the  wind  rises,  from  how  great  a  distance  it  comes

wrnuZfr  Ui  9°eSi  S°  V  ^spiritual  change
wrought  freely,  where,  in  whom,  when,  and  in

fitly  msoaatteo  1  iefpirit  Phases  ;  and  also  power-
thfnh  tio  make  an  evident,  sensible  change  ;

'■ g-  1  dii  l,-‘  "•

blown>  Job  20-  26.  Some  heavy  judg¬
ment  that  comes  no  man  knows  how,

Ter\ a  it °* 1  arF  consumed  by  the  b.  of  thy  hand
Jer.  14.  17.  people  is  broken  with  a  grievous  b.
zp  j  e  -  .  BIvOW,  Verb,

jtfod*  10.  thou  didst  b.  with  thy  wind

askin' WkeF  b-  an,  alarm,  camps  shall  go,  6.

9.  then  ye  shall  b.  an  alarm  with  trumpets

pH,'  7sld«'Vkhen  1  ^•jWlth  a  trumpet,  then  b.  ye
U7i«';,6'r*uCau'Sed.aiJ  east-wind  to  b.  in  heaven
Ilf.  18.  causeth  his  wind  to  b.  and  waters  flow


9ant:J‘  Fomu’,t.ho1u  s°uth,  b.  upon  my  garuen
Frcfo j  2<? j  h.e  shall  also  b.  upon  them,  shall  wither
Ezek.  21.  31. 1  will  b.  against  thee,  22.  21.

Hos.  5.  8.  b.  ve  the  cornet  in  Gibeah,  cry  aloud

r?L  id  9^W  tn  ye  br°ught  it,  1  did  b.  upon  it
Luke  12.  55.  when  ye  see  the  south- wind  b.

Mev.  7.  1.  that  wind  should  not  b.  on  the  earth
See  Trumpet

_  bloweth  ’

5?'  i4^'  ?'kbecause  the  Spirit  pf  the  Lord  b.  on  it
54.  16.  I  have  created  the  smith  that  b.  the  coals
John  3.  8.  the  wind  £  where  it  listeth,  thou  hearest

Io6  20  26  a  fire  not  b.  shall  consume  him
Mai.  1.  + 13.  whereas  ^e  "jj^ht  have  b.  it  away

Erod.  25.  4.  b.  purple,  scarlet,  26. 1,  31,  36  I  27  16
28.  31.  make  the  robe  of  the  ephod  of  b.  39  qp

TVhJ'  is%CUt  f°ld  wires  t0  w°rk  it  in  tlie'  b.
Hum.  15.  38.  put  on  the  fringes  a  ribband  of  b.

2  CA/W1  2.  j7.  send  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  b.  14.
Msth  16.  b  hangings,  a  pavement  of  b.  marble

t'JvZ °/di<Tcai „went. 1,1  royal  apparel  of  b.

Ezek.  23.  6.  the  Assyrians  were  clothed  with  i.

-See  Purple,  Cloth,  Lace,  Loops.
BLUEIslESS.

‘‘Ov.  20.  30.  b.  of  a  wound^  cl eanseth  away’  evil

Eccl.  10.  10.  it  iron  be  b.  and  he  do  not  whet  it
BLUSPI.

fZac?'h  1  V°  Lift  uP,my  face  to  thee,  my  God
Jer.  0.  15.  not  ashamed,  nor  could  they  b.  8.  12.
r,  .  BOAR,

Rsal.  80.  13.  b.  out  of  the  wood  doth  waste  it
j-,  ,  BOARD,  S.

27°  r  2kAiT9’  Sha!k  Fverlaiy  b-  with  gold,  36.  34.

27.  8.  hollow  with  b  shalt  thou  make  it,  36.  34.

■>6.  30.  under  every  b.  were  two  sockets
rZ/i'  o6’  und?n  custody  of  Merari  shall  be  b.

9aZZ  Wl11  indose  her  with  b.  of  cedar
Acts  2,.  44.  the  rest,  some  on  b.  came  to  land
1  01  „  BOAST,  Substantive.

Iff;  34-2-  m.y  soul  shall  make  her  b.  in  the  Lord
oo\k’  t'lu't  a  lew-  and  makest  thy  b.  of  God
23.  thou  that  makest  thy  b.  of  the  law
1  tt-  ,  BOAST’,  Verb.

l  Kings  20.  11.  not  b.  as  he  that  putteth  it  off

P?i/r°4 i  2o  •  9>thlPe  heart  lifteth  thee  up  to  b
Ar?  k 44.  8.  in  God  we  b.  all  the  day  long
4ff  6-  and  b.  themselves  in  their  riches
94.  4.  the  workers  of  iniquity  b.  themselves
d?7’  7- c°pfounded  be  they  that  b.  of  idols
Pr°o.  27.  1 .  b.  not  thyself  of  to-morrow

a!5  b;,  itself  against  him  that
61.  6.  in  their  glory  shall  you  b.  yourselves
Mom.  11.  18.  b.  not  against  branches,  if  thou  b.

io^r  l2’of0r  WkH,d'J  J0  them  of  Macedonia
10.  8.  for  though  l  should  b.  somewhat  more
13.  we  will  not  b.  of  things  witliout  our  measure
•  and  not  to  b.  in  another  man’s  line
1L  16.  receive  me  that  I  may  h.  myself  a  little
Eph.  2.  9.  not  of  works,  Rst^any  man  should  b.

Ezek.  35.  13.  with  mouth  ye  have  h.  against  me
~  Gor.  t .  14.  if  I  have  b.  any  thing  to  him
D  BOASTERS.

Mom.  1.  30.  proud,  h.  inventors  of  evil  things

~  1,m'  3’  2-  C0Beo0ASTESTUF’lTiaSPbemerS
Psal  10.  3.  the  wicked  b  of  his  heart’s  desire
52. 1.  why  i.  thou  thyself  m  mischief?

oT'X0'  J4’  when  he  is  gone  his  way,  then  he  b.

25.  14  whoso  b.  himself  of  a  false  gift
Jam.  3. 5.  loneue  a  little  member,  and  b.  great  things
.  _  BOAS!  ING,  Participle.

9  rL5'™'  i^°Se  lhrffb-  himself  to  be  somebody
-  tor.  10.  /jot  A  ot  things  without  our  measure
_  __  BOAS  I  ITs  G,  Substantive.

where  is  b.  then  ?  it  is  excluded
on/7,14' even 'so  our  b.  before  Titus  is  found  truth
8.  24.  shew  ye  to  them  the  proof  of  our  b.

9.3.  lest  our  i.  of  you  should  be  in  vain  in  this  behalf
4.  we  should  be  ashamed  in  this  same  confidents.

*,  •  4ff  no  man  shall  stop  me  of  this  b.  in  Achaia
I7.  but  hs  it  were  foolishly  in  this  confidence  of  b.
Jam.  4.  16.  but  now  ye  rejoice  in  your  6.

T  ,  ,  „  ,  BOAT,  S.

John  6.  22.  the  people  saw  there  was  no  other  b.
there,  and  that  Jesus  went  not  into  the  b
23.  there  came  other  b.  from  Tiberias
Acts  27.  16.  had  much  work  to  come  by  the  b.

30.  when  hey  had  let  down  the  b.  into  the  sea
32.  the  soldiers  cut  off  the  ropes  of  the  b
c.  .c  BODY

^  i g n  1  fi es ,  [ i ]  Th e  material  part  of  man,  1  Cor.  15.

(A1  7®  T/ie  whole  man,  Rom.  6.  12.  1 12.  1.
rv,l  o  suhstance  of  a  shadow,  or  ceremony,

,~\  17  •.  .W  The  church  of  God  firmly
united  to  Christ  and  among  themselves,  by  the

fttuh'jilV'JZ6'  *?-cr aments,  word,  and  ministry,
which,  like  the  veins  and  arteries  in  the  body
serve  to  join  them  with  Christ,  and  among  them¬
selves,  and  also  to  convey  influence  and  nourish¬
ment  from  the  head  to  every  particular  member
of  this  mystical  body,  1  Cor.  10.  17.  Eph.

pzlp.A  tM;  Vn  ®  rTbe  human  nature  of
Christy  Ileh.  10.  5.  [6]  The  unrenewed  part  of
man,  such  as  the  sensitive  powers ,  carnal  affec-
turns,  and  sinful  inclinations,  1  Cor.  9.  27
1  h'S  1S  my  body,  Mat.  26.  26.  This  bread  is  a
sign  or  representation,  and  is  hereafter  to  be  a
also  of  my  body,  and  of  my  sufferings
71  j  >  and  also  a  seal  mid  pledge.  hereby  1

ThfreblZofrf  tbe,  benefiH  7  have  purchased
tnereoy-  Or,  1  his  taking  and  eating  is  a  holy

ofmXXTZZfl^  my-  death'  and  a  ™“ns

ienefttluhefof. Worthy  receivers  partakers  of  the
The  body  of  this  death,  Rom.  7.  24.  The  corrup

tendPLZfu  Tln9  Chtefiy  hy  the  body'  wh'cb

tends  to,  and  binds  me  over  to,  death.

Exod.  24. 10.  as  the  b.  of  heaven  in  its  <  learness


B  O  1)


BON


BON


1  Sam.  31.  12.  took  the  A.  ot"  Saul,  1  Chron.  10.  12.
Job  19.  17-  for  the  Childrens’  sake  of  my  own  b.

26.  though  after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  b.

JO  25.  it  is  drawn  and  cometh  out  of  the  b.

Psal.  139.  + 15.  my  b.  was  not  hid  from  thee
Prov.  5.  11.  when  thy  flesh  and  b.  are  consumed
Isa.  10.  18.  and  shall  consume  both  soul  and  b.

51.  23.  and  thou  hast  laid  thy  b.  as  the  ground
£  zek.  10.  12.  their  whole  b.  was  full  of  eyes
.  Dan.1. 15.  1  was  grieved  in  spirit  in  midst  of  my  b.

\  Mat.  5.  29.  that  thy  whole  b.  he  cast  into  hell,  30.

\  6.  22.  the  light  of  the  b.  is  the  eye,  Luke  11. 34.

thy  b.  shall  be  full  of  lieht-  Luke  11.  34,  36.

23.  thy  whole  b.  shall  be  full  of  darkness

25.  take  no  thought  for  your  b.  Luke  12.  22.

and  the  b.  more  than  raiment,  Luke  12.  23.

10.  28.  fear  not  them  that  kill  the  b.  Luke  12.  4.

14.  12.  John’s  disciples  came  and  took  up  the  b.

26.  12.  she  hath  poured  this  ointment  on  my  b.

26  Jesus  took  bread  and  said,  take,  eat,  this  is  my
b.  Mark  14.  22.  L  uke  22.  19.  1  Cor.  11.  24.
27  .  58.  Joseph  of  Arimathea  went  to  Pilate,  and
begged  the  A.  of  Jesus,  Mark  15.  43.  L.uke  23.  52.
Mark  5.  29.  she  felt  in  her  b.  that  she  was  healed

14.  8.  she  is  come  afoi  ehand  to  anoint  my  b.

51.  having  a  linen  cloth  c  ast  about  his  h.

15.45.  Pilate  gave  the  b.  to  Joseph,  Mat.  27  .  58.
Luke  17.  37.  where  the  b.  is,  thither  the  eagles

24.  3.  they  found  not  the  b.  of  the  Lord  Jesus
John  20. 12.  where  the  b.  of  Jesus  had  lain
Bom.  6.  6.  that  the  b.  of  sin  may  be  destroyed

7.  4.  become  dead  to  the  law  by  the  b.  of  Christ

24.  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  b.  of  this  death

8.  10.  Christ  in  you,  the  b.  is  dead  because  of  sin
13.  if  ye  thro’  the  Spirit  mortify  deeds  of  the  b.

23  for  the  adoption,  the  redemption  pf  our  b.

1  Cor.  6.  13.  now7  the  b.  is  not  for  fornication,  but  for

the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  for  the  b.

18.  every  sin  a  man  doth  is  without  the  b.

6. 19.  your  A.  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost
7. 4.  the  wife  hath  no  power  of  her  own  b.

9. 27.  but  I  keep  under  my  b.  and  bring  ittosubjec.
10. 16.  the  communion  of  the  b.  of  Christ

11. 27.  be  guilty  of  the  b.  and  blood  of  the  Lord
29.  eats  damnation,  not  discerning :  tie  Lord’s  b.

12.  14.  for  the  b.  is  not  one  member,  but  many

15.  is  it  therefore  not  of  the  b.?  16.

17.  if  whole  b.  were  an  eve,  where  were  hearing  >

19.  where  were  the  b.  ?  f|  20.  yet  but  one  A.

27.  now  ye  are  the  b.  of  Christ,  and  members

13.  3.  thor  1  give  my  b.  to  be  burned,  and  have  not

15.  35.  and  with  what  b.  do  the  dead  come  ?

37.  thou  sowest  not  that  b.  that  shall  be

38.  but  God  giveth  it  a  b.  as  it  hath  pleased  him
44.  it  is  sown  a  natural  b.  raised  a  spiritual  b.

2  Cor.  5.  8.  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  b.
Eph.  3. 6.  Gentiles  be  fellow-heirs  of  the  same  b.

4.  12.  for  the  edifying  of  the  b.  of  Christ

16.  from  whom  the  wrhole  b.  fitly  joined  together

5.  23.  and  he  is  the  Saviour  of  the  b.

Phil.  3. 21.  who  shall  change  our  vile  b.  that  it  may
Col.  1.  18.  he  is  the  head  of  the  b.  the  church

2.  11.  in  putting  off  the  b.  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh

17.  whicn  are  a  shadow,  but  the  b.  is  of  Christ

19.  from  which  the  b.  by  joints  and  bands

23.  a  shew  of  wisdom  in  neglecting  of  the  b.

1  Thess.  5.  23. 1  pray  your  soul  and  A.  be  preserved
Heb.  10.  5.  but  a  b.  hast  thou  prepared  me

10.  through  the  offering  oftne  A.  of  Jesus
Jam.  2.  16.  give  not  things  are  needful  to  the  b.

26.  as  the  A.  without  the  Spirit  is  dead, so  faith

3.  2.  and  is  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  A.

3.  and  we  turn  about  their  who!e  b.

6.  the  tongue  defileth  the  whole  b.  and  sets  on  fire
Jude  9.  Michael  disputed  about  the  b.  of  Moses
Dead  BODY.

Lev.  21.11.  nor  shall  ye  go  in  to  any deadb.  Num. 6.6.
Num.  9. 6.  certain  men  were  defiled  by  a  dead  b.  7.

10.  any  of  you  be  unclean  by  a  deadb.  Hag.  2. 13.
19. 11.  ne  tnat  toucheth  dead  b.  be  unclean,  16.

2  Kings  8.5.  how  he  had  restored  a  dead  b.  to  life
Isa.  26.  19.  with  my  dead  b.  shall  they  arise

Jer.  26.  23.  and  cast  his  dead  b.  into  the  graves
36.  30.  his  dead  b.  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  day
Fruit  of  the  BODY.

Deut.  28.  4.  blessed  snail  be  the  fruit  of  thy  b.

11.  make  thee  plenteous  in  the  fruit  of  thy  b.  30.  9.

18.  cursed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  Land  of  thy  land
53.  thou  shalt  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  b.  in  the  siege

Psal.  132. 11  .fruit  of  tny  b.  will  1  set  on  thy  throne
Mic.  6. 7.  shall  I  give  fruit  of  my  b.  for  sin  of  my  soul
Llis  BODY.

Exod.  21.  t  3.  if  he  came  in  with  his  b.  he  shall  go
Deut.  21.  23.  his  b.  not  remain  all  night  on  the  tree
Judg.  8.  30.  Gideon  had  70  sons  of  his  b.  begotten

1  Sam.  31.  10.  fastened  his  b.  to  wall  of  Bethshan
Dan.  4.  S3,  his b.  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven,  5. 21.

7.  H.  till  beast  was  slain,  and  his  b.  destroyed
10.  6.  his  b.  also  was  like  the  beryl
Luke  23.  55.  the  women  beheld  how  his  b.  was  laid

24.  23.  when  they  found  not  his  b.  they  came
John  2.  21.  but  he  spake  of  the  temple  of  his  b.
Acts  ly.  12.  from  his  b.  were  brought  to  the  sick
Bom.  4.  19.  he  considered  not  his  A.  now  dead
lCcr.6.18.  commits  fornication  sinneth  against  hisb.

7-  4.  the  husband  hath  not  power  of  his  own  A.

2  Cor.  5.  10.  may  receive  the  things  done  in  his  b.
Evh.  1.  23.  which  is  his  A.  fulness  of  him  that  fills
Phil.  3.  21.  may  be  fashioned  like  to  Zii.r glorious  L
Col.  1.  24.  for  his  b.  sake,  which  is  the  church

1  Pet.  2. 24.  who  bare  our  sins  in  his  b.  on  the  tree
In  BODY.

Lam.  4.  7.  they  were  more  ruddy  tn  b.  than  rubies
Bum.  6. 12.  let  not  sin  reign  in  your  mortal  b.

1  Cor.  5.  3.  I  verily  as  absent  in  0.  have  judged

6.  20.  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  b.  and  spirit

7.  34.  that  she  may  be  noly  in  b.  and  in  spirit

12.  18.  ( 4od  hath  set  members  every  one  in  the  b.

25.  that  there  should  be  no  schism  wthe  A.

2  Cor.  4. 10.  bearing  about  in  the  b.  the  dying  of  our

Ld.  that  life  of  .1  esus  might  be  manifest  in  our  b
5. 6.  knowing  that  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  b.


2  Cor.  12. 2.  whether  in  b.  or  whether  out  of  the  b.

Gal.  6. 17.  I  bear  in  A.  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Phil.  1.  20.  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my  b.

Col.  1 . 22.  reconciled  in  b.  of  his  flesh  thro’  death
Heb.  13.  3.  as  being  yourselves  also  in  the  b.

Cue  BODY.

Bom.  12.  4.  as  we  have  many  members  in  one  b.

5.  we  being  many  are  one  b.  in  Christ,  1  Cor.  10. 17.

1  Cor.  6.  16.  he  that  is  joined  to  an  harlot,  is  one  b.

12. 12.  as  the  b.  is  one,  and  hath  many  members

13.  we  are  baptized  into  one  b.  whether  Jews

20.  noware  they  many  members,  yet  but  one  b.
Eph.  2. 16.  he  might  reconcile  both  to  God  in  one  b.

4.  4.  there  is  one  b.  and  one  Spirit,  as  ye  are  called
Col.  3. 15.  to  which  ye  are  also  called  in  one  b.
BODIES.

Gen.  47.  18.  not  ought  left,  but  our  b.  and  lands
1  Sam.  31. 12.  took  A.  of  Saul's  sons,  1  Chr.  10. 12.
Neh.  9.  37.  they  have  dominion  over  our  b. and  cattle
Job  13.  12.  your  b.  are  like  unto  b.  of  clay
Ezek.  1.  11.  two  wings  co\ered  their  b.  23.

Dan.  3.  27.  on  whose  A.  the  fire  had  no  power

28.  yielded  their  b.  that  they  might  not  serve
Mat.  27.  52.  many  b.  of  saints  which  slept,  arose
John  19. 31.  the  b.  should  not  remain  on  the  cross
Bom.  1. 24.  gave  them  up  to  dishonour  their  own  b.

8. 11.  shalf quicken  your  mortal  b.  by  his  Spirit
12. 1.  that  ye  present  your  b.  a  living  sacrifice

1  Cor.  6. 15.  your  b.  are  members  of  (_  hrist
15.  40.  there  are  celestial  b.  and  b.  terrestiial

Eph.  5.  28.  to  love  their  wives  as  their  own  b.

Heb.  10.  22.  and  our  b.  washed  with  pure  water

13.  11.  the  b.  of  beasts,  whose  blood  is  brought
Rev.  18. 1 13.  the  merchandise  of  b.  and  souls

Dead  BODIES.

2  Chron.  20.  24.  behold  they  were  dead  b.  fallen

25.  they  found  dead  b.  precious  jewels

Psal.  79. 2.  dead  b.  of  thy  servants  given  to  be  meat
110.  6.  he  shall  fill  the  places  with  the  dead  b.

Jer.  31.  40.  whole  valley  of  dead  b.  shall  be  holy

33.  5.  but  it  is  to  fill  them  with  dead  b.  of  men’

34.  20.  their  dead  b.  shall  be  for  meat  to  the  fowls
41.  9.  the  pit  wherein  Ishmael  castrfearf  b.  of  men
Amos  8.  3.  shall  be  many  dead  b.  in  every  place
Rev.  11 . 8.  their  dead  b.  shall  lie  in  the  street  of  city

9.  nations  see  their  deadb.  three  days  and  an  half,
nor  suffer  their  dead  b.  to  be  put  in  graves
BODILY.

Luke  3.  22.  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  />.  shape

2  Cor.  10. 10.  but  his  b.  presence  is  weak

Col.  2. 9.  in  him  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  b.

1  Tim.  4.  8.  for  b.  exercise  profiteth  little
BOIL.

Lev.  8.  31.  b.  the  flesh  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle
Job  41.  31.  he  maketh  the  deep  to  b.  like  a  pot
Isa.  64.  2.  the  fire  causeth  the  waters  to  b.

Esek.  24.  5.  burn  the  bones,  and  make  it  b.  well
46.  20.  the  place  where  the  priests  shall  b.  24.
BOILED.

1  Kings  19.  21.  he  took  a  yoke  of  oxen  and  b.  them

2  Kings  6. 29.  so  we  b.  my  son  and  did  eat  him
Job  30.  27.  my  bowels  b.  and  rested  not

BOILETIJ,  UN  G.

Psal.  45.  +  1.  my  heart  b.  up  a  good  matter
Esek.  46.  23.  made  with  b.  places  under  the  rows
BOISTEROUS.

Mat.  14.  30.  when  he  saw  the  wind  b.  he  was  afraid
BOI.D.

Prov.  28. 1.  but  the  righteous  are  b.  as  a  lion
Acts  13.  46.  Paul  and  Barnabas  waxed  b.

Bom.  10.20.  Esaias  is  very  b.  and  saith,  I  was  found
2  Cor.  10. 1.  but  being  absent,  am  b.  towards  you

2.  I  may  not  be  b.  wherewith  1  think  to  be  A.

11.  21.  howbeit,  wherein  any  is  b.  I  am  b.  also
Phil.  1. 14.  by  my  bonds,  are  much  more  b.  to  speak

1  Thess.  2. 2.  we  were  b.  in  our  God  to  speak  to  you
Philem.  8.  though  I  might  be  much  b.  in  Christ*

BOLDLY.

Gen.  34. 25.  Simeon  and  Levi  came  on  the  city  b.
Mark  15. 43.  Joseph  came,  and  went  in  b.  to  Pilate
John  7.  26.  he  speaketh  b.  and  they  say  nothing
Acts  9.  27.  how  he  preached  b.  at  Damascus

29.  he  spake  b.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  lesus

14.  3.  long  time  abode  they,  speaking  b.  in  the  Lord
18.  26.  A  polios  began  to  speak  b.  in  the  synagogue
19. 8.  spake  b.  for  the  space  of  three  months

Rom.  15. 15.  I  have  written  the  more  b.  to  you
Eph.  6. 19.  given  me,  that  I  may  open  my  mouth  b.

20.  that  I  may  speak  b.  as  I  ought  to  speak
Heb.  4. 16.  let  us  come  b.  to  the  throne  of  grace
13.  6.  that  we  may  b.  say ,  the  Lord  is  my  helper
BOLDNESS.

Eccl.  8. 1.  and  the  b.  of  his  face  shall  be  changed
Acts  4. 13.  when  they  saw  the  b.  of  Peter  and  John
29.  that  with  all  b.  they  may  speak  thy  word
31.  and  they  spake  the  word  of  God  vdth  b.

2  Cor.  3.  + 12.  we  use  great  b.  of  speech

7. 4.  great  is  my  b.  of  speech  toward  you
Eph.  3. 12.  in  whom  we  nave  b.  and  access  by  faith
Phil.  1.  20.  but  that  with  all  b.  as  always,  so  now
1  Tim.  3. 13.  they  purchase  great  b.  in  the  faith
Heb.  10.  19.  having  A.  to  enter  into  the  holiest
1  John  4. 17.  that  we  may  have  b.  in  judgment
ROT  LI  D.

Exod.  9. 31.  barley  was  in  the  ear,  and  the  flax  b.
BOLSTER .

1  Sam.  19. 13.  a  pillow  of  gnats’  hair  for  his  b.  16.

26. 7-  spear  at  nis  b.  11. 12.  II  16.  water  at  his  b.

BOLT,  ED.

2  Sam,  13. 17.  b.  the  door  ||  18.  he  h  the  door

BON  D

Signifies,  [1]  An  obligation,  or  von',  N lira.  30.  5, 14.

[2]  Sufferings  for  Christ  and  his  gospel,  Heb.  13.  3.
Thou  hast  loosed  my  bonds,  Psal.  116.  16.  Thou
hast  rescued  me  from  mine  enemies,  whose  captive
and  vassal  I  was,  and  therefore  hast  a  just  right
and  title  to  me  and  to  my  service.

He  looseth  the  bonds  of  kings.  Job  12.  18.  He  de¬
prives  them  of  that  majesty,  power,  and  authority
which  should  keep  their  subjects  in  awe,  and  where
with  they  bind  them  to  obedience.

Charity  is  the  bond  of  perfectness.  Col.  3.  14


Love  to  our  neighbour,  flowing  from  love  to  God,  1
the  chief  means  to  a  perfect  union  among  all  the
members  of  the  church,  and  to  make  their  gifts  and
graces  subservient  to  the  good  of  one  another.

Num.  30.  2.  or  swear  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  b.

3.  if  a  woman  vow  and  bind  herself  by  a  A.

4.  and  her  father  hear  her  vow  and  her  b.

Ezek.  20.  37.  I  will  bring  you  into  b.  of  covenant
Luke  13.  16.  be  loosed  from  his  b.  on  the  sabbath
Acts  8.  23.  thou  art  in  the  b.  of  iniquity

Eph.  4.  3.  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  in  the  b.  of  peace
Col.  3.  14.  put  on  charity,  the  b.  of  perfectness
BOND.

1  Cor.  12.  13.  baptized  into  one  body,  b.  or  free

See  Free.

BONDS.

Num.  30.  5.  not  any  of  her  vows  or  b.  shall  stand

7.  b.  wherewith  she  bound  her  soul  shall  stand
14.  he  establisheth  all  her  b.  which  are  on  her

Job  12.  18.  he  looseth  the  b.  of  kings

Psal.  116.  16.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  loosed  my  b.

Jer.  5.  5.  have  broken  the  yoke,  and  burst  the  b.

27.  2.  make  thee  b.  and  yokes,  and  put  on  thy  neck

30.  8.  I  will  break  his  yoke,  and  burst  thy  b.

Nah.  1.  13.  and  1  will  hurst  thy  h.  in  sunder
Acts  20.  23.  that  b.  and  afflictions  abide  me
23.  29.  done  nothing  worthy  of  death  or  b.  26.  31.

25.  14.  there  is  a  certain  man  left  in  b.  by  Felix

26.  29.  altogether  such  as  I  am,  except  these  b.
Eph.  6.  20.  for  which  1  am  an  ambassador  in  6.
Phil.  1.  7.  in  h.  ye  are  all  partakers  of  my  grace

13.  so  that  my  b.  in  Christ  are  manifest

14.  the  brethren  waxing  confident  by  my  b.

16.  supposing  to  add  affliction  to  my  b.

Col.  4.  3.  for  which  I  am  in  b.  ||  18.  remember  my  b.

2  Tim.  2.  9.  w  herein  I  suffer  trouble  even  to  A.
Philem.  10.  whom  I  have  begotten  in  my  A.

13.  have  ministered  to  me  in  the  b.  of  the  gospel
Heb.  10.  34.  ye  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  b.

11.  36.  others  had  trial  of  b.  and  imprisonment
13.  3.  remember  them  that  are  in  b.  as  bound
BONDAGE

Signifies,  fl]  Outward  slavery  and  oppressions,  Exod.

6.  5.  Ezra  9.  8,  9.  [2]  Spiritual  subjection  to
sin  and  Satan,  Heb.  2.  15.  [3]  Subjection  to  the
yoke  of  the  ceremonial  law,  Gal.  2.  4.  |4.  9.  [4]
Senile  fear,  Rom,  8.  15.  [5]  Corruption  and
death,  Rom.  8.  21.

The  one  gendereth  to  bondage,  Gal.  4.  24.  Begets
children  to  bondage  ;  that  is,  They  who  adhered  to
the  old  covenant,  or  legal  dispensation,  by  Moses,
were  not  thereby  freed  from  their  bondage  to  sin,
Satan,  and  God's  wrath,  Gal.  3.  10.  and  were  of  a
senile,  mercenary  disposition,  doing  what  they  didin
God's  service,  not  from  love,  but  slavish  fear,  Rom.

8.  15.  and  thinking  to  merit  heaven  by  their  works.
Exod.  1.  14.  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard  b.

2.  23.  and  Israel  sighed  by  reason  of  the  b.  and
they  cried  to  God  by  reason  of  the  b.
6.  6.  and  I  will  rid  ycu  out  of  their  b.

9.  but  they  hearkened  not  to  Moses  for  cruel  b.

13.  3.  day  in  which  ye  came  out  of  the  house  of  b.

14.  Lord  brought  us  out  of  the  house  of  b.  20.  2.

Deut.  5.  6.  1 6.  12.  1  8.  14. 1  13.  5,  10.
Josh.  24.  17.  Judg.  6.  8.

Deut.  26.  6.  the  Egyptians  laid  upon  us  hard  b.
Neh.  5.  5.  we  bring  into  h.  our  sons  and  daughters,
some  of  our  daughters  are  brought  unto  b.
18.  because  the  b.  was  heavy  on  this  people
9. 17.  they  appointed  a  captain  to  return  to  b.

Isa.  14.  3.  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy  hard  b.
Rom.  8.  15.  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  b.

21.  shall  be  delivered  from  the  b.  of  corruption
Gal.  4.  24.  from  mount  Sinai,  which  gendereth  to  b

5.  1 .  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  b.
Heb.  2.  15.  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  b.

In,  into,  or  under  BONDAGE.

Excd.  6.  5.  Israel,  whom  the  Egyptians  keep  in  b.
Ezra  9.  8.  and  give  us  a  little  reviving  in  our  A.

9.  our  God  hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our  b.

John  8.  33.  we  were  never  in  b.  to  any  man  .

Acts  7.  6.  and  that  they  should  bring  them  into  b.

7.  and  the  nation  to  whom  they  shall  be  in  b.

1  Cor.  7.  15.  a  brother  or  sister  is  not  under  b.

2  Cor.  11.  20.  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  bring  you  into  b.
Gal.  2.  4.  that  they  might  bring  us  into  b.

4.  3.  were  in  b.  under  the  elements  of  the  world
9.  whereunto  ye  desire  again  to  be  in  A.

25.  answereth  to  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  h.

2  Pet.  2.  19.  of  the  same  is  he  brought  into  h.
BOND-MAN.

Gen.  44.  33.  let  me  abide  instead  of  the  lad  a  b.
Deut.  15  15.  remember  thou  wast  a  b.  in  Egypt,
and  the  Lord  redeemed  thee,  16. 12. 1  24. 18, 22.
Rev.  6.  15.  every  b.  hid  themselves  in  the  dens
BOND-MAID,  8.

Lev.  19.  20.  whoso  lieth  with  a  b.  betrothed

25.  44.  thy  b.  shall  be  of  the  heathen,  buy  ye  b.
Gal.  4.  22.  one  by  a  b.  the  other  by  a  free-woman

BOND-MEN.

Gen.  43.  18.  he  may  take  us  for  b.  and  our  asses
44.  9-  let  him  die,  and  we  will  be  my  lord’s  b.

Lev.  25.  42.  they  shall  not  he  sold  as  b.

44.  b.  shall  be  of  the  heathen,  of  them  buy  b.

46.  they  shall  be  your  b.  for  ever

26.  13.  that  ye  should  not  be  their  A.

Deut.  6.  +  12.  beware,  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,
who  brought  thee  out  of  the  house  of  b.  13.  + 10.

21 .  then  say  to  thy  son,  we  were  Pharaoh’s  b.

7-  8.  and  redeemed  you  out  of  the  house  of  b.

28-  68.  there  ye  shall  be  sol  1  for  b.  and  bond-women
Josh.  9.  23.  none  of  you  be  freed  from  being  b.

1  Kings  9.  22.  but  of  Israel  olomon  made  no  b.

2  Kings  4.  1.  is  come  to  take  my  two  sons  to  be  b.
2  Cliron.  28.  10.  to  keep  the  children  of  ludah  for  b.
Ezra  9-  9.  we  were  b.  yet  God  hath  not  forsaken
Esth.  7. 4.  if  we  had  been  sold  for  A.  and  bond-women
Jer.  34. 13.  I  brought  them  out  of  the  house  of  A.

BOND-SERVANT.


Lev.  25.  39.  shalt  not  compel  him  to  serve  as  a  A.
BOND-SERVICE.


BON


BOO


BOR


BOND-WOMAN.

Gen.  21.  10.  cast  out  this  A.  and  her  son,  for  the  son
of  the  A.  shall  not  be  heir.  Gal.  4.  30,
.,2.  let  it  not  grieve  thee  because  of  the  A.

13.  ot  the  son  of  the  A.  will  I  make  a  nation
Gal.  4. 23.  son  of  the  A.  was  born  after  the  flesh
31.  we  are  not  children  of  the  A.  but  the  free
Bond-Women,  See  Bond-Men.
o-  ^  BONE

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  white  and
hard,  affording  support  to  the  whole  fabric,  Job
10.  11.  [2]  The  dead  body,  1  Kings  13.  31.  [3]
The  whole  man,  Job  20.  11.  Psal.  35.  10.

The  bones  which  thou  hast  broken,  Psal.  51.  8.
My  heart,  which  hath  been  sorely  wounded  and
terrified  by  the  dreadful  message  sent  by  Nathan,
and  by  the  dismal  sentence  of  thy  law,  denounced
against  such  sinners  as  1  am.

This  is  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh,
Gen.  2.  23.  God  hath  provided  me  a  meet  help
and  wife,  not  out  of  the  brute  creatures,  but  of
mine  own  body,  and  of  the  same  nature  with
myself.

We  are  members  of  his  flesh  and  bones,  Eph.  5.  30.
All  that  grace  and  glory  which  the  church  hath
is  from  Christ,  1  Cor.  1.  30.  Eph.  2.  10.  (as
the  woman  was  taken  out  of  the  man,  Gen.  2.  23.)
and  she  has  the  same  graces  and  glo/y  that  Christ
hath ,  John  1.  16.  |  17.  22.

Gen.  2.23.  this  is  b.  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh

29. 14.  surely  thou  art  my  b.  and  my  flesh
Exod.  12.  46.  neither  shall  ye  break  a  b.  Num.  9. 12
Num.  19.  16.  toucheth  a  b.  of  a  man,  be  unclean
Judy.  9.  2.  remember  that  I  am  your  b.  and  flesh
2  Sam.  5.  1.  behold  we  are  thy  A.  1  Chron.  11.  1.

19.  13.  art  thou  not  of  my  b.  and  of  my  flesh  ?

Job  2. 5.  touch  his  A.  and  flesh,  and  he  will  curse

19.  20.  my  b.  cleaveth  to  my  skin,  and  to  my  flesh
31.  22.  let  my  arm  be  broken  from  the  A.

Pfov.  25.  15.  a  soft  tongue  breaketh  the  b.

Ezek.  37.  7.  the  bones  came  together,  A.  to  his  b.

,39. 15.  when  any  seeth  a  man's  b.  then  set  up
John  19.  36.  a  b.  ofhim  shall  not  be  broken
^  BON  ES.

Exod.  13. 19.  Moses  took  the  b.  of  Joseph  with
Josh.  24.  32.  the  b.  of  Joseph  buried  in  Shechem
Judg.  19.  29.  divided  his  concubine  with  her  A.

2  Sam.  21. 12.  took  the  A.  of  Saul,  A.  of  Jonathan
„  14;  b.  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  buried  in  Zelah
-  Kings  13.2.  men’s  b.  shall  be  burnt  upon  thee
*  Kings  13.  21.  touched  the  b.  of  Elisha,  he  revived

23. 14.  he  filled  the  places  with  the  b.  of  men
16.  and  took  the  A.  out  of  the  sepulchres

20.  and  he  burnt  men’s  b.  upon  the  altars
2  Chron.  34.  5.  he  burnt  the  b.  of  the  priests
Job  10. 11.  thou  hast  fenced  me  with  A.  and  sinews
Psal.  51.8.  the  A.  thou  hast  broken  may  rejoice

53.  5.  God  scattereth  the  A.  ofhim  that  encampeth
141.  7.  our  A.  are  scattered  at  the  grave's  mouth
Prov.  3.  8.  fear  Lord,  it  shall  be  marrow  to  thy  A

14.  30.  but  envy  the  rottenness  of  the  A.

15.  30.  a  good  report  maketh  the  A.  fat

16.  24.  pleasant  words  are  health  to  the  A.

17.22.  but  a  broken  spirit  drieth  the  A.

Eccl.  11.  5.  nor  how  tne  A.  do  grow  in  the  womb
It  a.  58.  11.  the  Lord  shall  make  fat  thy  A.

66.  14.  your  A.  shall  flourish  like  an  nerb
Jer.  8.  1.  bring  the  b.  of  the  kings,  and  b.  of  the
priests,  A.  of  prophets,  and  b.  of  inhabitants
Ezek.  6.  5.  I  will  scatter  your  b.  about  your  altars
24.  4.  fill  it  with  the  choice  b.  ||  5.  burn  A.  10
37. 1.  valley  full  of  A.  ||  3.  can  these  A.  live  ?  ’

4.  prophesy  upon  these L  and  say,  O  ye  dry  A
11.  these  b.  are  house  of  Israel,  our  A.  are  dried

Amos  2. 1.  because  he  burnt  A.  of  the  king  of  Edom

6.  10.  that  burneth  him,  to  bring  out  the  b.

Zeph.  3.  3.  they  gnaw  not  the  A.  till  the  morrow
Mat.  23.  27.  but  are  within  full  of  dead  men’s  A
Luke  24.  39.  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  A.

His  BONES.

1  Kings  13.31.  when  I  am  dead  lay  myL  beside  his  A.

1  Kings23. 18.1et  no  man  move  Ins  b.so  they  let  his  A.
Job  20. 11.  his  A.  are  full  of  the  sin  of  his  youth

21.  24.  his  b.  are  moistened  with  marrow

33.  19.  thernultitude  of  his  b.  with  strong  pain
21.  and  his  b.  that  were  not  seen,  stick  out
40.  18.  his  b.  as  pieces  of  brass,  his  A.  as  iron
Psal.  34.  20.  he  keepeth  all  his  b.  not  one  is  broken
109. 18.  so  let  it  come  like  oil  into  his  A.

Prov.  12. 4.  makes  ashamed  is  as  rottenness  in  his  A.
Jer.  50.  17.  N  ebuchadnezzar  hath  broken  his  A.

Eph.  5.  30.  we  are  members  of  his  flesh  and  of  his  A.
He  A.  11. 22.  and  gave  command  concerning  hit  A
„  My  BON  ES.

Gen.  50.  25.  ye  shall  carry  up  my  A.  Exod.  13.  19.

2  Sam.  19.  12.  ye  are  my  b.  and  my  flesh
Kings  13.  31.  when  I  am  dead,  my  A.  beside  his  b.

Job  4.  14.  trembling  made  all  my  b.  to  shake

7.  t  15.  my  soul  chooseth  death  rather  than  my  b.

30.  17.  my  A.  are  pierced  in  me  in  the  night

30.  my  skin  is  black,  and  my  A.  burnt  with  heat
Psal.  6.  2.  O  Lord,  heal  me,  for  my  A.  are  vexed

22. 14.  all  my  A.  are  outof  joint  ||  17. 1  may  tell  my  b
31. 10.  my  A.  are  consumedjl  32.  3.  my  A.  waxed  old
35.  10.  all  my  A.  shall  say,  Lord,  who  is  like  to  thee
38.  3.  neither  is  there  any  rest  in  my  A.

a  sword  in  my  A.  enemies  reproach
10..  3.  days  consumed,  my  b.  are  burnt  as  an  hearth

5.  by  reason  of  groaning  my  A.  cleave  to  my  skin
Isa.  38.  13.  as  a  lion  so  will  he  break  all  my  b
Jer.  20.  9.  as  a  burning  fire  shut  up  in  my  b.

23.  9.  my  heart  is  broken,  all  my  b.  shake
Lam.  1.  13.  he  hath  sent  tire  into  my  A.

3.  4.  my  flesh  he  made  old,  he  hath  broken  my  A.
Hab.  3. 16.  rottenness  entered  into  my  A.

AT  Their  BONES.

Hum.  24.8.  Israel  shall  break  their  A.  and  pierce
1  Sam.  31. 13. took  their  A.  and  buried  them  at  Jabesh
1  Car .10. 12.  buried  their  b.  under  an  oak  at  J  abesh
Lam  A.  8.  their  skin  cleaveth  to  their  A.

Ezek.  32.  27.  their  iniquity  shall  be  on  their  A.

Pan.  6.  24.  the  lions  brake  all  their  A.  in  pieces

34


Mic.  3. 2.  pluck  off  their  skin  and  flesh  from  their  A.
3.  they  break  their  A.  and  chop  them  in  pieces
BONN  El  S.

Exod.  28. 40.  for  Aaron’s  sons  thou  shalt  make  b.
29.  9.  thou  shalt  put  the  b.  on  them.  Lev.  8.  13.
39.  28.  they  made  goodly  A.  of  fine  linen
Isa.  3.  20.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  A.

Ezek.  44. 18.  they  shall  have  linen  A.  on  their  heads
BOOK

Signifies,  [1]  A  register  wherein  things  are  written,
Gen.  5.  1.  Esth.  6.  1.  [2]  The  holy  scriptures,
Psal.  40.  7-  Rev.  22.  19.  [3]  The  consciences  of
men,  Dan.  7 •  10.  Rev.  20.  12.  [4]  God's  counsel
and  purpose,  Psal.  139.  16.  [5]  His  omniscience ,
or  careful  remembrance  of  the  services  and  afflic¬
tions  of  his  people,  Psal.  56.  8.  Mai.  3.  16.  [6'
Ills  election  to  life  eternal.  Rev.  21.  27.

Exod.  17. 14.  write  this  for  a  memorial  in  a  b.

32.  32.  if  wilt  not  forgive,  blot  me  out  of  thy  b.

33.  who  hath  sinned,  him  will  I  blot  out  of  my  A.
Num.  5.  23.  the  priest  shall  write  these  curses  in  a  b.
21.  14.  it  is  said  in  the  A.  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord
Deut.  17. 18.  shall  write  him  a  copy  of  this  law  in  a  A.
31.  24.  made  an  end  of  writing  this  law  in  a  A.

Josh.  10.  13.  written  in  tire  A.  of  Jasher,  2  Sam.  1. 18.
18.  9.  the  men  described  it  into  seven  parts  in  a  b.
1  Sam.  10.  25.  Samuel  told,  and  wrote  it  in  a  A.

1  Kings  11.  41.  written  in  the  A.  of  acts  of  Solomon

2  Kings  22.  8.  Hilkiah  gave  the  A.  to  Shaphan
10.  Hilkiah  delivered  me  a  A.  2  Chron.  34.  15, 18.
16.  I’ll  bring  evil,  even  all  the  words  of  the  A.

23.  24.  might  perform  the  words  written  in  the  A.

1  Chron.  9. 1.  were  written  in  the  b.  of  the  kings
29.  29.  are  written  in  the  A.  of  Samuel  the  seer

2  Chron.  9.  29.  acts  of  Solomon  in  the  A.  of  N  athan
12.  15.  acts  of  Rehoboam  in  the  A.  of  Shemaiah
20.  34.  the  acts  of  Jehoshaphat  in  the  A.  of  Jehu
34.  16.  Shaphan  carried  the  A.  to  the  king

21.  concerning  the  words  of  the  A.  that  Is  found

24.  all  the  curses  that  are  written  in  the  A.

Ezra  4. 15.  search  may  be  made  in  A.  of  records
Neh.  8.  5.  Ezra  opened  the  A.  in  the  sight  of  all
Esth.  9.  32.  ot  Purim,  and  it  was  written  in  the  A.
Job  19. 23.  oh  that  they  were  printed  in  a  A.

31.  35.  that  mine  adversary  had  written  a  A.

Psal.  40.  7.  in  the  volume  of  thy  b.  Heb.  10.  7.

56.  8.  put  thou  my  tears,  are  they  not  in  thy  A.  ?

69.  28.  let  them  be  blotted  out  of  b.  of  the  living
139.  16.  in  thy  b.  all  my  members  were  written

Isa.  29.. 11.  as  the  words  of  a  b.  that  is  sealed
12.  A.  is  delivered  to  him  that  is  not  learned
18.  the  deaf  shall  hear  the  words  of  the  A.

30. 8.  now  go  and  note  it  in  a  A.  that  it  may  be
34. 16.  seek  ye  out  of  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  and  read
Jer.  30.  2.  write  the  words  1  have  spoken  in  a  A

32.  1 10.  I  wrote  in  the  A.  the  evidence
12.  witnesses  that  subscribed  the  £.of  the  purchase

36.  2.  take  a  roll  of  a  A.  ||  10.  read  in  the  A.

45.  1.  written  the  words  in  a  A.  from  Jeremiah
51. 60.  so  Jeremiah  wrote  in  a  A.  all  the  evil
Ezek.  2.  9.  and  lo.  a  roll  of  a  A.  was  therein
Dan. 12. 1.  every  one  found  written  in  the  A.

4.  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  b.
Nah.  1.  1.  the  A.  of  the  vision  of  Nahum
Mai.  3.  16.  a  A.  ot  remembrance  was  written
Mat.  1.  l.  the  A.  of  the  generation  of  Jesus
Luke  3. 4.  as  it  is  written  in  the  A.  of  Esaias

4.  17.  there  was  delivered  to  Jesus  the  A.  of  the
prophet  Esaias,  and  when  he  had  opened  the  A.

20.  he  closed  the  A.  and  gave  it  to  the  minister
20.  42.  in  the  A.  of  the  Psalms,  Acts  1.  20.

Acts  7.  42.  it  is  written  in  the  A.  of  the  pr-  phets
Heb.  9. 19.  he  sprinkled  the  A.  and  the  people
l‘rev-  L  11-  what  thou  seest,  write  in  a  A.

5.  1.  a  A.  written  within,  on  the  backside  sealed

2.  who  is  worthy  to  open  the  A.  and  to  loose  seals  ?

3.  and  no  man  was  able  to  open  the  A.

10.  2.  and  he  had  in  his  hand  a  little  A.  open

8.  go  and  take  the  little  b.  which  is  open

9.  give  me  the  little  A.  ||  10.  1  took  the  little  A.

20.  12.  another  A.  was  opened,  the  A.  of  life
22.  19.  it  any  take  away  from  the  words  of  the  A.

See  Covenant.

BOOK  0/  the  Law.

Deut.  28.  61.  every  plague  not  written  in  b.  of  the  law

29.  21.  according  to  the  curses  in  this  b.  of  the  law

30.  10.  to  keep  his  statutes  written  in  this  b.  of  law

31.  26.  take  this  A.  of  the  law  and  put  it  in  the  ark
Josh.  1.  8.  this  A.  of  the  law  shall  not  depart  out  of

8.  31.  written  in  A.  of  law  of  Moses,  2  Kings  14.  6.

2  Kings  22. 8.  1  have  found  A.  of  the  law  in  the  house
Keh.  8.8.  so  they  read  in  the  A.  of  the  law  distinctly
Gal.  3. 10.  that  are  written  in  A.  of  law  to  do  them

BOOK  of  Life.

Phil.  4.  3.  whose  names  are  written  in  the  A.  of  life
Rev.  3.  5.  I  will  not  blot  his  name  out  of  A.  of  life
13.  8.  names  are  not  written  in  the  A.  of  life,  17.  8.

20. 12.  another  A.  opened,  which  is  the  A.  of  life
15.  was  not  found  written  in  the  A.  of  life  was  cast

21.  27.  which  are  written  in  the  Lamb’s  A.  of  life
22. 19.  shall  take  away  his  part  out  of  the  A.  of  life

BOOK  of  Moses.

2  Chron.  25.  4.  but  did  as  it  is  written  in  A.  of  Moses

35. 12.  to  offer  as  it  is  written  in  the  b.  of  Moses
Ezra  6. 18.  set  priests,  as  it  is  written  in  A.  of  Moses
Neh.  13.  1.  on  that  day  they  read  in  the  A.  of  Moses
Mark  12. 26.  have  ye  not  read  in  the  A.  of  Moses  ?

This  BOOK.

Gen.  5.  1.  this  is  the  A.  of  the  generation  of  Adam
Deut.  28.  58.  do  all  written  in  this  A.  2  Chron.  34.  21.

29.  20.  the  curses  that  are  written  in  this  A.  27.

2  Kings  22. 13.  inquire  concerning  the  words  of  this  b.
fathers  have  not  hearkened  to  the  words  of  this  A.

23.  3.  to  perform  the  words  written  in  this  A.

Jer.  25. 13.  I’ll  bring  all  that  is  written  in  this  A.

51.  63.  when  hast  made  an  end  of  reading  this  A.

John  20.  30.  signs  which  are  not  written  in  this  A.

Rev.  22.  7.  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  A.

9.  of  them  which  keep  the  sayings  of  this  b.

10.  seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  b.

18.  heareth  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  b.  if

any  add,  add  to  him  plagues  written  in  this  A.


Rev.  22  i9.  his  part  from  the  things  written  i»
P  -  .  ,  BOOKS.  [this  A.

Ezra  6. 1  1.  search  was  made  in  the  house  of  the  A
Eccl.  12.  12.  of  making  many  A.  there  is  no  end
Dan.  7.10.  and  the  b.  were  opened,  Rev.  20. 12.

9.  2. 1  understood  by  A.  the  number  of  years
John  21.  25.  the  world  could  not  contain  the  A.

Acts  19.  19.  many  brought  their  A.  and  burned  them
4  13.  bring  the  b .  especially  the  parchment*
Rev.  20.  12.  dead  judged^out  ot  things  written  in  A.

Job  27.  18.  as  a  A.  that  the  keeper  maketh
Jonah  4.  5.  Jonah  went  and  made  him  a  A
BOOTHS.

Gen.  33.  17.  and  Jacob  made  A.  for  his  cattle
t  therefore  the  name  of  the  place  is  called  A.

Lev.  23.  42.  ye  shall  dwell  in  A.  seven  days
43.  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  dwell  in  A.

Neh.  8.  14.  Israel  should  dwell  in  A.  II 16.  made  A
BOOTY,  IES.

Num.  31.  32.  A.  the  rest  of  the  prey,  675,000  sheep
Jer.  49.  32.  and  their  camels  shall  be  a  A.

Hab.  2.  7.  thou  shalt  t  e  for  b.  unto  them
Zeph.  1.  13.  therefore  their  goods  shall  become  a  &
BORDER.

Gen.  49. 13.  Zebulun  his  A.  shall  he  to  Zidon
Exod.  19.  12.  or  touch  the  A.  of  the  mount
Num.  21.  23.  not  suffer  Israel  to  pass  thro’  his  A.

34.  8.  from  I  lor  ye  shall  point  out  your  A.

35.  26.  if  the  slayer  shall  come  without  the  A.

Deut.  12.  20.  when  the  I.ord  shall  enlarge  thy  b.
Josh.  22.  25.  the  Lord  hath  made  Jordan  a  A.

24.  30.  and  they  buried  Joshua  in  the  A.  of  his  in¬
heritance  in  mount  Ephraim,  Judg.  2.  9.

2  Sam.  8.  3.  smote  him  as  he  went  to  recover  his  A.

1  Kings  4.  £1.  and  Solomon  reigned  over  all  kiug-
doms  unto  the  b.  of  Egypt,  2  Chron.  9.  £6.

2  h  mgs  3.  21.  all  that  were  able  stood  in  the  b.

Psal.  78. 51.  brought  them  to  the  b.  of  his  sanctuary
Prov.  15.  25.  he  will  establish  the  b.  of  the  widow
Isa.  28.  J  25.  cast  in  wheat  and  rye  in  their  A.

37.  24.  I  will  enter  into  the  height  of  his  b.

Jer.  31.  17.  thy  children  come  again  to  their  A.

Ezek.  11. 10.  1  will  judge  you  in  the  A.  of  Israel,  11,
47. 13.  this  shall  be  the  A.  whereby  ye  inherit
Joel  3.  6.  might  remove  them  from  their  A.

Amos  L.  13.  that  they  might  enlarge  thetr  A.

6.  2.  or  their  A.  greater  than  your  A.

Obad.  7  the  men  have  brought  thee  even  to  the  b.
Zeph. 2  8.  and  magnified  themselves  against  their  A.
Mai.  1  4.  they  shall  call  them  the  b.  of  wickedness
5.  Lord  will  be  magnified  from  the  A.  of  Israel
See  East,  South.

BORDER.

Exod.  25.  25.  make  to  it  a  A.  of  an  hand-breadth
make  a  golden  crown  to  the  A.  round  about
Mark.  6.  56.  touch,  if  it  were  but  the  A.  of  his  garm.
Luke  8. 44.  came  behind,  and  touched  b.  of  his  garm
BORDER,  Verb.

Zech.  9.  2.  and  Hamath  also  shall  b.  thereby
BORDERS.

Gen.  23.  17.  the  trees  in  all  the  A.  were  made  sure-
Exod.  16.  35.  till  they  come  to  the  b.  of  Canaan
34.  24.  I  will  cast  out  nations,  and  enlarge  thy  A.
Num.  20. 17.  until  we  have  passed  thy  b.  21.  22.

2  Kings  19.  23. 1  will  enter  the  lodgings  of  his  b.
Psal.  74.  17.  thou  hast  set  the  b.  ot  the  earth

147. 14.  he  maketh  peace  in  thy  A.  filleth  thee
Isa.  15.  t  5.  my  heart  shall  cry  out  to  the  A.

54. 12. 1  will  make  thy  A.  of  pleasant  stones
Jer.  15.  13.  that  for  all  thy  sins,  even  in  all  thy  b.
Ezek.  45. 1.  this  shall  be  holy  in  all  the  A.

Mic.  5.  6.  when  he  treadeth  within  our  A.

Mat.  4.  13.  in  the  A.  of  Zabulon  and  Nephthalim
BORDERS.

Num.  15.  38.  fringes  in  A.  on  fringe  of  A.  a  ribband

1  Kings';.  28.  they  had  A.  and  A.  were  between  ledges

2  Kings  16. 17-  Ahaz  cut  off’ the  A.  of  the  bases
Cant.  1. 11.  we  will  make  the  A.  vi  gold  with  studs
Mat.  23.  5.  and  enlarge  the  A.  of  their  garments

BORE.

Exod.  21.  6.  his  master  shall  A.  his  ear  through
Num.  16. 1 14.  wilt  thou  A.  out  eyes  of  these  men  l
Job  40.  1 24.  will  any  A.  his  nose  with  a  gin  ?

41.  2.  canst  thou  A.  his  jaw  through  with  a  thorn  ?
BORED.

Judg.  16.  +21.  the  Philistines  A.  out  his  e3res
2  Kings  12.  9.  Jehoiada  took  a  chest  and  A.  a  hole
BORN

Is  taken,  [1]  Naturally,  for  being  brought  into
the  world,  Gen.  30.  22.  Job  1.  2.  [2]  Super¬

natural  ly,  thus  the  mighty  and  miraculous  power
of  God  was  seen  in  the  production  of  Isaac,  en¬
abling  Abraham  to  beget,  and  Sarah  to  conceive-
and  bear  him,  when  both  their  bodies  were  at
dead,  Gen.  17.  17.  Rom.  4.  19.  Heb.  11.  11
[3]  Carnally,  so  was  Ishmael  born,  according  to
the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  and  not  by  promise,
as  Isaac  was,  Gal.  4.  23,  29.  [4]  Spiritually,.
such  as  are  regenerated  and  renewed  Ay  the  power
and  grace  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  the  ministry
of  the  word,  and  so  are  made  like  God,  by  partak¬
ing  of  a  divine  nature,  John  1.  13. 1  3. 5,  6.  2  Pet.

1.  4.  1  John  3.  9.

BORN  again.  [be  b.  a.

John  3.  3.  except  a  man  be  b.  a.  5.  II  7.  ye  mu3t
1  Pet.  1.  23.  being  A.  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed
See  First-Born,  Witness.

BORN,  for  brought  forth.

Gen.  17. 17.  a  child  A.  to  him  100  years  old,  21.  5.

21.  7-  I  have  A.  him  a  son  in  his  old  age
24. 15.  Rebekah  came,  who  was  A.  to  Bethuel

29.  34.  because  I  have  A.  him  three  sons

30.  20.  because  I  have  A.  him  six  sons

31.  43.  what  do  to  the  children  which  they  have  b.  t
Exod.  1.  22.  every  son  A.  ye  shall  cast  into  the  river!
Lev.  12.  7.  this  is  the  law  of  her  that  hath  A.  a  male

19.  34.  the  stranger  shall  be  as  one  A.  among  you
23.42.  all  that  are  Israelites  A.  shall  dwell  in  booths
Num.  15.  29.  one  law  for  him  that  is  b.  and  stranger
Josh.  5.  5.  A.  in  the  wilderness  had  not  circumcised’

8.  33.  as  well  the  stranger,  as  he  that  was  A.


BOR


B  O  T


BO  U


Judg.  13.  R.  what  do  to  the  child  that  shall  be  A.

1R.  29.  called  city  after  the  name  of  Dan  A.  to  Isr.
.Ruth  4.  15.  for  thy  daughter-in-law  hath  b.  him

1  s am.  2.  5.  so  that  the  barren  hath  b.  seven

4.  20.  the  women  said,  fear  not,  thou  hast  b.  a  son

2  Sam.  12. 14.  the  child  b.  to  thee  shall  surely  die

1  Kings  13.  2.  a  child  shall  be  b.  to  the  house  of

[David

1  Chron.  7.  21.  the  men  of  Gath  b.  in  that  land  slew
20.  t  6.  he  also  was  b.  to  the  giant

22.  9.  behold  a  son  shall  be  A.  to  thee
Job  3.  3.  let  the  day  perish  wherein  1  was  b.

5. 7.  yet  man  is  b.  to  trouble,  as  sparks  fly  upward
11. 12.  though  man  be  b.  like  a  wild  ass’s  colt

15.  7.  art  thou  the  first  man  that  was  b.?

38. 21.  knowest  thou  it,  because  thou  wast  then  b.  ?
FW.  22. 31.  shall  declare  to  a  people  that  shall  be  b.
58.  3.  they  go  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  b.

78.  6.  even  the  children  that  should  be  h.

87.  4.  this  man  was  b.  there,  6.  ||  5.  that  man  b.
Prov.  17.  17.  a  brother  is  b.  for  adversity
Eccl  3.  2.  a  time  to  be  b.  ||  4. 14.  b.  in  his  kingdom
Isa.  9.  6.  for  unto  us  a  child  is  b.  to  us  a  son  is  given
66  8.  or  shall  a  nation  be  b.  at  once  ?

Jer.  15.  9.  she  that  hath  b.  seven  languished!

10.  wo  is  me,  that  thou  hast  b.  me  a  man  of  strife

16.  3.  concerning  sons  and  daughters  b.  in  this  place
20. 14.  cursed  be  the  day  wherein  1  was  b.

22. 26.  where  ye  were  not  b.  there  shall  ye  die
Ezek.  16.  4.  in  the  day  thou  wast  b.  thy  navel  not.  cut

5.  to  the  lothing  of  thy  person  in  day  thou  wast  b.
20.  hast  taken  thy  sons  whom  thou  hast  b.  to  me
.  Hos.  2.  3.  lest  1  set  her  as  in  the  day  that  she  was  b.
Mat.  2. 2.  where  is  he  that  is  b.  king  of  the  .1  ews  t
4.  Derod  demanded  where  Christ  should  be  b.
19.  12.  there  are  some  eunuchs  which  were  so  b.
26.  24.  good  if  he  had  not  been  b,  Mark  14.  21.
.Luke  1.  35.  that  holy  thing  that  shall  be  b.  of  thee
2. 11.  to  you  is  b.  this  day  in  the  city  of  David

T.  7. ...  O  ,4  hnn,  n  mon  Ko  A  wVlfln  1 1 0  1C  f\  1  rl  ?


John  3.  4.  how  can  a  man  be  b.  when  he  is  old  ?

5.  except  a  man  be  b.  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit

6.  that  A.  of  flesh  is  flesh,  that  b.  of  Spirit  is  spirit
8.  so  is  every  one  that  is  b.  of  the  Spirit

8.  41.  they  said  to  him,  we  be  not  b.  of  fornication

9. 2.  master,  who  did  sin,  that  he  was  b.  blind  ?

34.  wast  altogether  b.  in  sins,  and  dost  teach  us  ?

16.  21.  for  joy  that  a  man  is  b.  into  the  world
18.  37.  to  this  end  was  1  b.  and  for  this  cause
.Acts 2.8.  hear  in  our  own  tongue  wherein  we  were  b
7. 20.  in  which  time  Moses  was  b.  and  was  fair

18.2.  Paul  found  aJew  named  AquilaA.  inPontus
24.  a  Jew  named  A  polios  b.  at  Alexandria

22. 3. 1  am  a  Jew  b.  in  Tarsus  |j  28.  1  was  free  b.
Pom.  9. 11.  for  the  children  being  not  yet  b.

1  Cor.  15. 8.  seen  of  me,  as  of  one  A.  out  of  due  time
■  Gal.  4.23.  of  bond-woman,  vTas  b.  after  the  flesh,  29.
Heb.  11.  23.  by  faith  Moses  when*,  was  hid
1  P<;/. 2. 2.  as  new  b.  babes  desire  sincere  milk  of  word
1  John  2. 29.  that  doth  righteousness,  is  b.  of  him
Rev.  12.  4.  to  devour  the  child  as  soon  as  it  wTas  b.
BORN  of  God.

John  1. 13.  which  were  b.  not  of  blood,  but  of  God
1  John  3.9.  b.  of  God  doth  not  commit  sin ,  because  b.

4. 7.  every  one  that  loveth  is  b.of  God,  and  knoweth
5. 1 .  who  believeth  that  J  esus  is  Christ  is  b.  of  God

4.  whatsoever  is  b.  of  God  overcometh  the  world
18.  whosoever  is  b.of  God sinneth  not

BORN  in  the  house.

Gen.  14. 14.  armed  his  trained  servants  b.  in  his  house
15.  3.  to  me  no  seed,  one*,  itimy  house  is  my  heir

17. 12.  A.  in  the  house  shall  be  circumcised,  1.3,23,27.
Lev.  22. 11.  A.  in  the  priest’s  house  eat  of  his  meat
Eccl.  2. 7.  I  had  servants  A.  in  my  house

BORN  in  the  land.

Exod.  12. 19.  no  leaven,  whether  stranger  or  b. in  land
48.  the  stranger  shall  be  as  one  A.  in  the  land
I.e v.  24. 16.  A.  in  land  that  blasphemeth  put  to  death
Num.  9. 14.  one  ordinance  for  stranger  and  A.  in  land
15.  30.  doth  ought  presumptuously ,  whether  A.  in  l.
BORN  of  a  woman,  or  women.

Job  14. 1.  man  that  is  A.  of  a  woman  is  of  few  days
15. 14.  that  is  A.  of  a  w.  that  he  should  be  righteous  ?

25. 4.  how  can  he  be  clean  that  is  A.  of  a  woman  ?
Mat.  11. 11.  among  them  that  are  A.  of  a  w.l.ukel  .28.

BORN.

Gen.  50. 1 23.  children  of  Macliir  A.  on  Joseph’s  knees
Exod.  25. 14.  that  the  ark  may  be  A.  with  them
28.  that  the  table  may  be  A.  with  them
Judg.  16. 29.  the  pillars  on  which  the  house  wras  *.up
Isa.  46. 3.  which  are  A.  by  me  from  the  belly

66. 12.  ye  shall  be  A.  upon  her  sides  and  be  dandled
Jer.  10.  5.  they  must  be  A.  because  they  cannot  go
Amos 5. 26.  ye  have  A.  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch
Mark  2. 3.  bringing  one  sick  of  palsy,  was  *.  of  four
John  20. 15.  if  thou  hast  A.  him  hence  tell  me
Acts  21.  35.  so  it  was  that  he  was  A.  of  the  soldiers

•1  Cor.  15. 49.  as  we  have  *.  the  image  of  the  earthly
BORNE.

.  Job  34. 31 .  to  be  said  to  God,  I  have  A.  chastisement
Psal.  55.12.  it  was  not  an  enemy,  then  I  could  have  A.
69. 7.  because  for  thy  sake  1  have  A.  reproach
Jsa.  53.  4.  surely  he  hath  A.  griefs,  carried  sorrows
Lam.  3.  28.  because  he  hath  A.  it  upon  him

5.  7.  fathers  sinned,  and  we  have  A.  their  iniquities
Ezek.  16.  58.  thou  hast  A.  thy  lewdness  and  abomin.

32.  24.  they  have  A.  their  shame,  36.  6.  1  39.  26.

Mat.  20. 12.  which  have  A.  burden  and  heat  of  day

23. 4.  heavy  burdens,  grievous  to  be  A.  Luke  11 . 46.
Rev.  2. 3.  bast  A.  and  hast  patience,  and  not  fainted

BORROW.

Exod.  3. 22.  every  woman  shall  A.  of  neighbour, 11.2.
22. 14.  if  a  man  A.  ought,  and  it  be  hurt  or  die
Devt.  15. 6.  thou  shalt  lend,  but  shaltnot  *.  28.  12.

2  Kings  4. 3.  Elisha  said, go  *.vessels  abro.,  A.  not  few
Mat.  5  42.  him  that  would  A.  of  thee,  turn  not  away
BORROWED.

Exod.  12. 35.  they  A.  of  Egyptians  jewels  of  silver
.2  Kings 6.  5.  he  cried,  alas,  master,  for  it  was  A.
Neh.  5. 4.  we  have  A.  money  for  the  king’s  tribute
BORROWER.

tProv.  22. 7.  and  the  A.  is  servant  to  the  lender
Isa.  24. 2.  as  with  the  lender,  so  with  the  A.


BORROWETH.

Psal.  37-  21.  the  wicked  A.  and  payeth  not  again
BOSOM

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  which  in¬
closes  the  heart,  Exod.  4.  6.  [2]  The  arms,  Psal.

129. 7-

The  son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  John
1.  18.  who  is  one  with  the  Father,  entirely  beloved
by  him,  and  intimately  acquainted  with  all  his
counsels  and  will.

Render  into  their  bosom,  Psal.  79.  12.  Punish
them  sensibly,  so  as  it  may  come  home  to  them,
and  fall  heavily  upon  them  in  their  own  persons.

He  shall  carry  them  in  his  bosom,  Isa.  40.  11.

He  shall  perform  all  the  offices  of  a  tender  and
faithful  shepherd  toward  his  people,  carrying  him¬
self  with  great  wisdom,  condescension,  and  com¬
passion  to  every  one  of  them,  according  to  their
several  capacities  and  infirmities.

Abraham's  bosom,  Luke  16.  23.  Lazarus  was  in
a  place  of  rest,  where  he  had  communion  with
the  saints,  and  enjoyed  the  same  felicity  with
Abraham,  the  friend  of  God;  and  this  place  was
heaven.  .  .

Gen.  16.  5.  Sarai  said,  I  have  given  my  maid  into
Exod.  4.  6.  put  now  thy  hand  into  thy  A.  7  •  [thy  A.
Num.  11.  12.  that shouldst  say, carry  them  in  thy  A.
Deut.  13.  6.  if  the  wife  of  thy  A.  entice  thee  secretly
28.  54.  his  eye  evil  toward  the  wife  of  his  A.

56.  her  eye  evil  toward  the  husband  of  her  A.

Ruth  4. 16.  N  aomi  took  the  child  and  laid  it  in  her  A.

2  Sam.  12.  3.  drank  of  his  cup,  and  lay  in  his  A.

8.  1  gave  thee  thy  master’s  wives  into  thy  A.

1  Kings  1.  2.  a  young  virgin,  let  her  lie  in  thy  A.

3.  20.  she  arose  and  took  my  son,  and  laid  it  in
her  A.  and  laid  her  dead  child  in  my  A.

17.  19.  Elijah  took  him  out  of  her  A.

22.  t  35.  the  blood  ran  into  the  A.  of  the  chariot
Job  19.  1 27.  though  my  reins  be  consumed  in  my  A.

31.  33.  by  hiding  mine  iniquity  in  my  A.

Psal.  35.  13.  my  prayer  returned  into  my  own  A.

74.  11.  pluck  thy  right  hand  out  of  thy  A.

79.  12.  and  render  seven  fold  into  their  A.

89.  50.  how  1  do  bear  in  my  A.  the  reproach  of  all
129.  7.  nor  he  that  bindeth  sheaves,  his  A.

Prov.  5.  20.  wilt  thou  embrace  the  A.  of  a  stranger?

6.  27.  can  a  man  take  fire  in  his  A.  ?

17.  23.  a  wicked  man  taketh  a  gift  out  of  the  A.

19.  24.  a  slothful  man  hideth  his  hand  in*.  26.  15.

21. 14.  a  reward  in  the  A.  pacifieth  wrath
Eccl.  7.  9.  for  anger  resteth  in  the  A.  of  fools
Isa.  40.  11.  he  shall  carry  the  lambs  in  his  A.

49.  +  22.  they  shall  bring  thy  sons  in  their  A.

65.  6.  will  recompense,  even  recomp,  into  their  A.

7. 1  will  measure  their  former  work  into  their  A.
Jer.  32.  18.  iniquity  of  fathers  into  the  A.ofchildr.
Lam.  2.  12.  their  soul  was  poured  into  mother’s  A.
Ezek.  43. 1 13.  A.  of  the  altar  shall  be  a  cubit
Mic.  7.  5.  keep  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy  A.

Luke  6.  38.  good  measure  men  give  into  your  A.

16. 22.  wras  carried  by  the  angels  into  A  braham’s  A.

23.  seeth  Abraham,  and  Lazarus  in  his  A.

John  1.  18.  which  is  in  the  A.  of  the  Father

13  23.  now  there  was  leaning  on  Jesus’  A.  a  disciple
BOSSES.

Job  15.  26.  upon  the  thick  A.  of  his  bucklers
BOTCH.

Deut.  28.  27.  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  A.  35.
BOTH.

Gen. 2.  25.  were  A.  naked  11  3.7-  the  eyes  of  A.  opened

19.  36.  thus  were  A.  the  daughters  of  Lot  with  child
21. 27.  and  A.  of  them  made  a.  covenant

22.  8.  so  they  went  A.  of  them  together

27.45.  whyshould  I  be  deprived  of  you  A. in  one  day  ?

31.  37.  that  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  A.

Exod.  22.  9.  cause  of  A.  shall  come  before  judges

11.  then  shall  an  oath  of  the  Lord  be  between  A.
Lev.  20. 11.  A.  of  them  surely  be  put  to  death,  their
blood  shall  be  upon  them,  12.  Deut.  22.  22.
Num.  12. 5.  called  Aaron  and  M  iriam,  they  A.  came
25.8.  Phinehas  went  after  and  thrust  A.  through
Deut.  19.  17 .  A.  the  men  shall  stand  before  the  Lord
Sam.  2.  34.  in  one  day  they  shall  die  A.  of  them
9.26.  went  out  A.  of  them,  he  and  Samuel,  abroad

20.  42.  forasmuch  as  we  have  sworn  A.  of  us

Job  9. 33.  any  days-man  that  might  lay  his  hand  on  A.
Prov.  if.  15.  A.  are  abomination  to  the  Imrd,  20. 10.
20. 12.  the  Lord  hath  made  even  A.  of  them

24.  22.  and  who  knoweth  the  ruin  of  them  A.  ?

Eccl.  4.  3.  better  than  A.  is  he  that  hath  not  been
Isa.  1.  31.  they  shall  A.  bum  together,  none  quench

7.  16.  the  land  shall  be  forsaken  of  A.  her  kings
Jer.  46.  12.  and  they  are  fallen  A.  together
Ezek.  21.  19.  A.  twain  shall  come  forth  of  one  land
23.  13.  then  1  saw  that  they  A.  took  one  way
Mic.  7-  3.  that  they  may  do  evil  with  A.  hands
Zech.  6.  13.  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between

9.  tl5.  they  shall  fill  A.  the  bowls  [them  A.

Mat.  15. 14.  A.  shall  fall  into  the  ditch,  I.uke  6.  39.
Luke  7.  42.  nothing  to  pay,  frankly  forgave  them  A.
Acts 23.8.  nor  angel  norspirit,  butPharis.  confess  A.
Eph.  2.  14.  he  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  A.  one
16.  he  might  reconcile  A.  unto  God  by  the  cross
2  Pet.  3. 1.  in  A.  1  stir  up  your  pure  minds
Rev.  19.  20.  A.  were  cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire
BOTTLE

Signifies,  [1]  A  vessel  to  contain  liquids,  Gen.  21.

14.  Josh.  9.  4.  [2]  The  inhabitants  0/ Jerusalem,
whom  God  threatened  to  fill  with  the  wine  of
terror  and  astonishment  for  their  sins,  Jer.  13

12.  [3]  The  clouds  in  which  the  rain  is
in  bottles,  out  of  which  God  poureth  it
sees  fit,  Job  38.  37-

Put  my  tears  in  thy  bottle,  Psal.  56.  8.
and  consider  all  my  troubles,  which  have  caused
so  much  grief  to  me,  and  deliver  me  from  them.
Gen.  21.14.  took  a  A.  of  water  and  gave  it  Ilagar

15.  water  was  spent  in  the  A.  |l  19.  she  filled  the  A.
Judg.  4.  19.  she  opened  a  A.  of  milk  and  covered  him
1  Sam.  1. 24.  Hannah  took  a  A.  ofwine,  brought  him

10.  3.  shall  meet  another  carrying  a  A.  ot  wine

16.  20.  Jesse  took  a  A.  of  wine  and  sent  to  Saul


kept,  as
when  he

Regard


2  Sam.  16.  1.  Ziba  brought  to  David  a  t>.  or  wine
Psal.  56. 8.  put  thou  my  tears  into  thy  A.  are  they  not
119.83.  1  am  become  like  a  A.  in  the  smoke
Isa.  30.  +  14.  he  shall  break  it  as  the  A.  of  potters
Jer.  13.  12.  every  A.  shall  be  filled  with  wine

19.  1.  get  a  potter’s  earthen  A.  ||  10.  break  the  A.

Hab.  2. 15.  puttestthy  A.  to  him  andmakest  drunken

BOTTLES.

Josh.  9.  4.  the  Gibeonites  took  wine  A.  and  rent
13.  these  A.  of  wine  which  we  filled  were  new
1  Sam.  25. 18.  Abigail  took  two  A.  of  wine,  five  sheep
Job  32.  19.  my  belly  ready  to  burst  like  new  A.

38.  37.  or  who  can  stay  the  A.  of  heaven  ?

Jer.  48.  12.  shall  empty  his  vessels,  and  break  A.

Hos.  7.  5.  the  prince  made  him  sick  with  A.  of  wine
Mat.  9.  17.  neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  old
A.  else  the  A.  break,  Mark  2.  22.  Luke  5.  37,38.
BOTTOM.

Exod.  15.  5.  they  sank  into  the  A.  as  a  stone
29.  12.  thou  shalt  pour  blood  beside  the  A.  of  the
altar,  Lev.  4.  7,  18,  25,  30.  I  5.  9.  I  8.  15.  |  9.  9.

Job  36.  30.  behold,  God  covereth  the  A.  of  the  sea
Cant.  3.  10.  he  made  the  A.  thereof  of  gold
Ezek.  36.  +  4.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  hills  and  A.

Dan.  6.  24.  or  ever  they  came  at  the  A.  of  the  den
Amos  9.  3.  tho’  they  be  hid  from  my  sight  in  the  A.
Jonah  2.  6.  1  went  down  to  the  A.  of  the  mountains
Zech.  1.  8.  he  stood  among  myrtle-trees  in  the  A.

Mat.  27.  51.  vail  rent  from  top  to  A.  Mark  15.  38,
BOTTOMLESS.

Rev.  9.  1.  to  him  was  given  the  key  of  the  A.  pit

2.  he  opened  the  A.  pit,  and  there  arose  smoke
11.  had  a  king,  which  is  the  angel  of  the  A.  pit

11.  7.  the  beast  that  ascendeth  out  of  the  A.  pit
17.  8.  the  beast  shall  ascend  out  of  the  A.  pit

20.  1.  an  angel  having  the  key  of  the  A.  pit

3.  and  casthim  into  the  A.  pit,  and  shut  him  up

BOUGH.

Gen.  49.  22.  Joseph  is  a  fruitful  A.  even  a  fruitful
A.  by  a  well,  whose  branches  run  over  the  wall
Judg.  9.  48.  Abimelech  cut  down  a  A.  from  the  trees
49.  the  people  cut  down  every  man  his  A.

Isa.  10.  33.  the  Lord  shall  lop  the  A.  with  tenor
17.  6.  two  or  three  berries  in  top  of  uppermost  A.

9  in  that  day  his  strong  cities  be  as  a  forsaken  A.
BOUGHS.

Lev.  23.  40.  A.  of  goodly  trees,  A.  of  thick  trees
Deut.  24.  20.  thou  shalt  not  go  over  the  A.  again
2  Sam..  18.  9.  the  mule  went  under  the  A.  of  an  oak
Job  14.  9.  and  brought  forth  A.  like  a  plant
Psal.  80.  10.  the  A.  were  like  the  goodly  cedar-trees
11.  she  sent  out  her  A.  to  the  sea,  branches  to  rivet
Cant.  7.  8.  I  will  take  hold  of  the  A.  thereof
Isa.  27.  11.  when  the  A.  thereof  are  withered

30.  + 17.  till  ye  be  left  as  a  tree  bereft  of  A.  _
Ezek.  17.  23.  it  shall  bring  forth  A.  and  bear  fruit

31.  3.  his  top  was  among  the  thick  A.  14.

6.  the  fowls  made  their  nests  in  his  A.  Dan.  4. 12.
BOUGHT.

1  Sam.  25. 1 29.  in  the  midst  of  the  A.  of  a  sung

BOUGHT.

Gen.  17.  12.  circumcised  every  man-child  born  m
house  A.  with  his  money ,  13, 23, 27 .  Exod.  12.  44.

33.  19.  Jacob  A.  a  parcel  of  a  field,  Josh.  24.  32.

39.  1.  Potiphar  A.  Joseph  of  the  Ishmaehtes
47  14.  Joseph  gathered  money  for  the  corn  they  A.
20.  Joseph  A.  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  23.

49.  30.  which  Abraham  A.  50.  13.  Acts  7.  16.

Lev  25.  28.  shall  remain  in  the  hand  ot  him  that  A.  it
30.  shall  be  established  for  ever  to  him  that  A.  it
50.  he  shall  reckon  with  him  that  A.  him
25.  51.  give  out  of  the  money  that  he  was  A.  for
27.  22’.  sanctify  to  the  Lord  a  field  that  he  A.

04  in  jubilee  return  to  him  of  whom  it  was  A.
Deut.  32.  6.  is  not  he  thy  father  that  A.  thee  ?

Ruth  4.9.  I  have  A.  all  that  was  Tlimelechs

2  Sam.  12.  3.  one  little  ewe-lamb  which  he  had  A.

~24  24.  so  David  A.  the  threshing-floor  and  oxen

1  Kings  16.24.  Omri  A.  the  hill  Samaria  of  Shemer  .
Neh.  5. 16.  I  continued  in  work,  nor  A.  we  any  land
Jer.  32. 9.  I  A.  the  field  of  llanameel  my  uncle  s  son
43.  and  fields  shall  be  A.  in  this  land
Hos.  3.  2.  so  1  A.  her  to  me  for  15  pieces  of  silver
Mat.  13.  46.  he  sold  all  that  he  had,  and  A.  that  field
21  12.  Jesus  cast  out  all  them  that  sold  and  A.  m
the  temple,  Mark  11.  15.  Luke  19.  45.
27.  7.  took  counsel  and  A.  with  them  potters  field
+  9.  whom  they  A.  of  the  children  of  Israel
Markl5  46.  Joseph  A.  fine  linen  and  took  him  down
16  1.  had  A.  sweet  spices  to  come  and  anoint  hint
Luke  14. 18.  I  have  A.  a  pieceof  ground,  and  go  see  it
19. 1  have  A.  five  yoke  of  oxen,  I  go  to  prove  them
17.  28.  they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  A.  and  sold

1  Cor.  6.  20.  for  ye  are  A.  with  a  price,  7-.  23.

2  Pet.  2.  1 .  even  denying  the  Lord  that  0.  them
Rev.  14. 1 4.  these  were  A.  from  among  men

BOUND,  actively.

Gen.  22.  9.  A.  Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the  altar
38.  28.  the  midwife  A.  on  his  hand  a  scarlet  thread
42.  24.  took  Simeon  and  A.  him  before  them
Lev.  8.  7.  he  A.  the  ephod  with  the  curious  girdle
1 13.  he  A.  bonnets  on  Aaron’s  sons
Num.  30.  4.  she  had  A.  her  soul,  5,  6, 7,  8,  9,  r0, 11.
Josh.  2.  21.  she  A.  a  scarlet  line  in  the  windowj
Judg  15. 13.  they  A.  Samson  with  two  new  cords

16.  8.  A.  with  withs  ||  12.  ropes  ||  21.  fetters
2  Kings  5.  23.  he  A.  two  talents  of  silver  in  two  bags

17.  4.  he  shut  up  Uos’nea  and  A.  him  in  prison
25.  7.  they  A.  Zedekiah  with  fetters  ot  brass.  .

2  Chron.  33.  11.  A.  Manasseh  |1  36.  6.  A.  Jehoiakim
Prov.  30.  4.  who  hath  A.  the  waters  in  a  garment
Ho.v.7.l5.tho’  I  have  A.  and  strengthened  their  arms
Mat.  14.  3.  Herod  A.  John  and  put  in  pris.MrtrA6.17  ■
27.  2.  they  had  b.  Jesus,  Mark  15. 1.  John  IB.  12.
Luke  13.  16.  this  daughter  whom  Satan  hath  A.
Acts  21.  11.  Agabus  A.  his  own  hands  and  feet

22.  25.  as  they  A.  Paul  with  thongs  he  said,  29.

23.  12.  A.  themselves  under  a  curse,  14,  21.

Rev.  20.  2.  he  A.  Satan  a  thousand  years

BOUN  D,  passively.

Gen.  39. 2 '.  a  place  where  the  king's  prisoners  are  A.
40.  3.  into  the  prison  where  Joseph  was  A.

35


n  o  w


no  w


B  R  A


GenAO.b.  the  butler  and  t  aker  which  were  3.  in  pris.
42. 1 16.  ye  shall  be  b.  in  prison  to  proveyour  words

19.  let  one  of  your  brethren  be  3.  in  prison
Num.  19. 15.  vessel  which  hath  no  cover  b.  on  it
Judg.  16.  6.  wherewith  thou  mightest  be  b.  10, 13.

1  Sam.  23.  29.  the  soul  of  my  lord  shall  be  b.

2  Sam.  3. 34.  thy  hands  were  not  b.  ncr  feet
Job  36. 8.  and  it  they  be  b.  in  fetters  and  holden
Psal.  107.  10.  being  b.  in  affliction  and  iron
Prov.  22. 15.  foolishness  is  b.  in  the  heart  of  a  child
Isa.  22.  3.  are  h.  by  the  archers,  all  are  b.  together

61.  1.  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  b.
Lam.  1.  14.  the  yoke  of  my  transgressions  is  b.
Dan.  3.  21.  b.  in  their  coats  ||  23.  fell  down  3.

24.  did  not  we  cast  three  men  b.  into  the  furnace  ?
Mat.  16. 19.  bind  on  earth,  be  b.  in  heaven,  18. 18.
23.  f  18.  he  that  sweareth  by  the  gift,  he  is  b.
Mark  15. 7-  lay  b.  with  them  that  made  insurrection
John  11.  44.  b.  hand  and  foot,  his  face  was  b.

18.24.  Annas  had  sent  him  b.  to  Caiaphas,  + 13.
Acts  9.  2.  that  he  might  bring  them  A.  21.  |  22. 5.

12.  6.  Peter  b.  with  chains  ||24.27.  left  Paul  b.

20.  22.  behold  1  go  b.  in  the  Spirit  to  Jerusalem

21.  13.  I  am  ready  not  to  be  b.  only,  but  to  die
Rom.7.2.  is3.  by  me  law  to  her  husband,  1  Cor.  7.39.

1  Cor.  7. 27.  art  thou  b.  unto  a  wife,  seek  not  to  be

2  Thess.  1.  3.  we.  are  b.  to  thank  God  always,  2.  13.

2  Tim.  2.  9-  but  the  word  of  God  is  not  b.

Heb.  13. 3.  them  that  are  in  bonds,  as  b.  with  them
Rev.  9- 14.  loose  the  annels3.  in  the  river  Euphrates

ROUND  with  chains.

2  Chr.  33.  t  11.  Manasseh  b.- 1|  36. +  6.  Jehoiakim3.-
Psal.  68. 6.  God  brinseth  out  those  which  are  3.  w.  c.
Jer.  39.  7-  b.  7edekiah  52. 11.  ||  40. 1.  Jeremiah  3.-
Nah.  3. 10.  all  her  great  men  were  b.  with  chains
Mark 5. 4.  because  he  had  been  often  b.  with  chains
LukeU.klQ.  he  was  kept  b.  with  chains,  in  fetters
Actm.M.  commanded  Paul  to  be  b.  with  two  chains

28.  20.  for  hope  of  !  srael  I  am  b.  with  this  chain

POUND  up.

Gen.  44.  30.  his  life  is  b.  up  in  tne  lad’s  life
2  Sam.  20.  +  3.  they  were  b.  vp  living  in  widowhood
2  Kings  12.  +  10.  which  b.  up  silver  in  bags
Isa.  1.  6.  they  have  not  been  closed  neither  b.  up
Jer.  30. 13.  none  to  plead,  that  thou  mayest  be  b.np
Ezek.  30.  21.  it  shall  not  be  b.  up  to  be  healed
34.  4.  nor  have  ye  b.  up  that  which  was  broken
Hos.  4.  19.  the  wind  hath  b.  h erup  in  her  wings

13. 12.  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim  is  b.  up

Luke  10.  34.  he  b.  up  his  wounds,  pouring  in  oil
BO U  N  D,  Substantive.

Gen.  49.  26.  to  the  utmost  b.  of  the  evelasting  hills
Job  38.  20.  thou  shouldest  take  it  to  the  b.  thereof
Psal.  104. 9.  to  waters  set  a  b.  that  they  may  not  pass
Prov.  22.  +28.  remove  not  the  ancient  b.  23.  t  10.
Jer.  5. 22.  have  placed  the  sand  for  the  b.  of  the  sea
Etek.  40.  +  12.  the  b.  before  the  little  chambers
Hos.  5. 10.  the  princes  like  them  that  remove  the  b.
BOUNDS.

Exod.  19.  12.  thou  shalt  set  b.  to  the  people  round
23.  set  b.  about  the  mount,  and  sanctity  it
23.  31. 1  will  set  thy  b.  from  the  Red  sea  to  sea  of
Deut.  32.  8.  he  set  the  b.  of  the  people  by  number
Job  14.  5.  hast  appointed  his  b.  that  he  cannot  pass

26.  10.  he  hath  compassed  the  waters  with  b.

Isa.  10.  13.  1  have  removed  the  3.  of  the  people
Acts  17. 26.  hast  determined  the  b.  of  their  habitation

BOUNTY.

1  Kings  3.  +  6.  thou  hast  shewed  to  David  great  b.

10. 13.  which  Solomon  gave  her  of  his  royal  b.
Prov.  20.  +  6.  most  men  will  proclaim  their  own  b.

2  Cor.  9.  5.  and  make  up  beforehand  your  b.  that

the  same  might  be  ready  as  a  matter  of  b.
BOUNTIFUL.

Psal.  145  1 17-  the  Lord  is  b.  in  all  his  works
Prov.  22. 9.  he  that  hath  a  b.  eye  shall  be  blessed
Isa.  32.  5.  nor  shall  the  churl  be  said  to  be  b.
ROUN  I  I FULNESS.

2  Cor.  9.  11.  being  enriched  in  every  thing  to  all  b.
BOUNTIFULLY.

Psal.  13.  6.  because  he  hath  dealt  b.  with  me
116.  7-  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  b.  with  thee
119. 17-  deal  b.  with  thy  servant  that  I  may  live
142.  7.  for  thou  shalt  deal  b.  with  me
2  Cor.  9.  6.  he  which  soweth  b.  shall  reap  b.

BOW

Signifies,  [1]  An  instrument  for  shooting  arrows,
Gen.  27.  3.  2  Kings  9.  24.  [2]  The  whole  fur¬
niture  for  war,  Psal.  44.  6.  [3]  Strength,  Job

29.  20.  [4]  The  rain  bow,  the  sign  of  God's

covenant  in  the  cloud,  which,  though  naturally  a
sign  of  rain,  yet  by  God's  appointment  was  turned
into  an  assurance,  that  there  should  be  no  more
such  overflowing  rain  as  then  had  been,  Gen.  9.

13.  14.  [5]  His  promise  and  help,  Hab.  3.  9.
[6]  Faith  and  patience,  Gen.  49.  24.

It  he  turn  not,  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  Psal.  7.  12.
If  he  leave  not  his  wicked  course,  then  God  hath
prepared,  and  will  speedily  execute  his  judgments
cm  him.

His  bow  abode  in  strength,  Gen.  49.  24.  His  in¬
nocence,  patience,  temperance,  his  faith  and  hope
m  God,  continued  firm,  whereby  he  resisted  and
vanquished  all  the  temptations  and  difficulties  he
met  with,  so  that  his  enemies  could  neither  defile
nor  destroy  him.

Gen.  9.  13.  I  do  set  my  b.  in  the  cloud  for  a  token

14.  that  the  b.  shall  be  seen  in  the  cloud,  16.

27.  3.  take,  1  pray  thee,  thy  quiver  and  thy  b.

48.  22.  Itook  of  the  Amorite  with  my  sword  and  b.

49.  24.  his  b.  abode  in  strength,  and  arms  of  hands
Josh.  24.  12.  but  not  with  thy  sword  nor  thy  b.

1  Sam.  18.  4.  Jonathan  gave  David  his  sword,  b.

2  Sam.  1. 18.  bade  them  teach  Judah  the  use  of  the  b.

22.  the  b.  of  Jonathan  turned  not  back

1  Kings  22.  34.  a  certain  man  drew  a  b,  at  a  venture

and  smote  the  king  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  18.  33.

2  Kings  6.  22.  smite  those  taken  with  sword  and  3.

9.  24.  Jehu  drew  a  b.  with  his  full  strength

13.  15.  take  b.  and  arrow's,  he  took  b.  and  arrows

16.  put  thy  hand  upon  the  b.  he  put  his  hand
1  Chron.  5.  18.  valiant  men,  able  to  shoot  with  b.

36


1  Chr.  12. 2.  armed  with  b.  and  shooting  arr.  out  of  b.
Job  29. 20.  my  b.  was  renew'ed  in  my  Hand
Psal.  44.  6.  I  will  not  trust  in  my  b.  nor  sword
46.  9.  he  brcaketh  the  b.  and  cuiteth  the  spear
76.  3.  there  brake  he  the  arrows  of  the  b.

78.  57.  they  were  turned  aside  like  a  de  eitful  b.
Isa.  41.  2.  he  gave  them  as  stubble  to  his  b.

66. 19.  that  escape  to  the  nations  that  draw  the  b.
Jer.  6.  23.  they  shall  lay  hold  on  b.  and  spear

49.  35.  behold,  !  will  break  the  b.  of  Elam

50.  42.  they  shall  hold  the  b.  and  the  lance
Lam.  2.  4.  he  hath  bent  his  b.  like  an  enemy
Ezek.  1. 28.  as  the  appearance  of  the  b.  in  the  cloud
39.  3.  I  will  smite  thy  3.  out  of  thy  left  hand

Hos.  1. 5. 1  will  break  3.  of  Israel  in  valley  of  Jezreel
7.  I  will  not  save  them  by  b.  nor  by  sword

2. 18.  1  will  break  the  b.  and  the  sword

7. 16.  not  to  most  High,  they  are  like  a  deceitful  b.
Amos  2. 15.  he  thathandleth  b.  not  deliver  himself
Hab.  3.  9-  thy  b.  wras  made  quite  naked,  thy  word
Zech.  9. 13.  when  1  tilled  the  b.  with  J’phraim
Rev.  6. 2.  he  that  sat  on  the  white  horse  had  a  b.
See  Bend,  Bent,  Battle-Bow.
BOW-SHOT.

Gen.  21. 16.  sat  over-against  him  as  it  were  a  b.
BOWS.

1  Sam.  2. 4.  the  b.  of  the  mighty  are  broken
31.  +  3.  and  men  with  b.  hit  him,  1  Chron.  10.  3.

1  Chron.  12. 2.  they  were  armed  with  b.  and  could  use

2  Chron.  14.8.  army  out  of  Benjamin  that  drew  b.

26. 14.  Uzziah  prepared  for  them  b.  and  slings
Neh.  4. 13.  I  even  set  the  people  with  their  b.

16.  the  other  half  of  them  held  both  spears  and  b.
Psal.  37. 15.  and  their  b.  shall  be  broken

Isa.  7. 24.  with  arrows  and  b.  shall  men  come

13. 18.  their  b.  shall  dash  young  men  to  pieces
21.  +  17.  the  number  of  b.  shall  be  diminished
Jer.  51.  56.  every  one  of  their  b.  is  broken
Ezek.  39.  9.  they  shall  burn  the  b.  and  the  arrows
BOW.

Josh.  23.  7.  neither  make  mention,  nor  serve,  nor  b.

yourselves  to  their  gods,  2  Kings  17.  35.
2  Kings  5.  18.  I  b.  myself  in  the  house  of  Kimmon
Job  39.  3.  they  b.  themselves,  they  firing  forth
Psal.  22.  29.  all  that  go  down  to  the  dust,  shall  b.

72.  9.  that  dwell  in  wilderness  shall  b.  before  him
78.  +  31.  wrath  of  G.  made  to  b.  down  chosen  men
144.  5.  b.  thy  heavens,  O  T.ord,  and  come  down
Prov.  5. 1.  and  b.  thine  ear  to  my  understanding

14. 19.  evil  b.  before  the  good,  wicked  at  gates  of
Eccl.  12.  3.  the  strong  men  shall  b.  themselves
Mic.  6.  6.  and  b.  myself  before  the  high  God  ?

Hab. 3.6.  the  perpetual  hills  did  b.  his  wayseverlast.
Eph.  3. 14.  for  this  cause  I  b.  my  knees  to  the  Father

BOW  down.

Gen.  27.  29.  nations  b.  dozen,  mother’s  sons  b.  down
*37.  10.  shall  I,  thy  mother,  and  brethren  b.  down
49.  8.  father’s  children  shall  b.  dozen  before  me
Erod.  11. 8.  these  thy  servants  shall  b.  down  to  me

20. 5.  shalt  not  b.  down  thyself  to  them,  Deut.  5. 9.

23.  24.  thou  shalt  not  b.  down  to  their  gods

Lev.  26. 1.  neither  set  up  any  image  to  3.  down  to  it
Judg.  2. 19.  in  following  other  gods  to  b.  down
2  Kings  5. 18.  when  1  b.  down  in  house  of  Rimmon

19.  16.  I..  b.  dozen  thine  ear,  and  hear,  Psal.  86. 1.
Job  31. 10.  and  let  others  h.  down  upon  her
Psal.  31.  2.  b.  dozen  thine  ear  to  me,  Prov.  22.  17.

95.6.  O  come,  let  us  worship  and  b.down,\et  us  kneel
Isa.  10.  4.  without  me  they  b.  down  under  prisoners

46.  2.  they  stoop,  they  b.  dozen  together,  they  could
49.  23.  kings  and  queens  shall  3.  dozen  to  thee

51 . 2.3.  have  said,  b.  dozen  that  we  may  go  over
58.  5.  is  it  to  b.  dozen  his  head  as  a  bulrush  ?

60. 14.  they  that  despised  thee  shall  b.  down
65. 12.  ye  shall  all  b.  down  to  the  slaughter

Rom.  11.10.  eyesdarkened,  b.  dozen  their  back  alway
BOW  knee.

Gen.  41. 43.  and  they  cried  before  him,  b.  the  knee
Isa.  45.  23.  to  me  every  knee  shall  b.  Rom.  14. 11.
Eph.  3. 14.  1  b.  my  knee  to  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Phil.  2. 10.  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  3.
BOWED.

Gen.  33.  6.  the  handmaidens  and  their  children  b.

7.  Leah  also  with  her  children  b.  Rachel  3.

43.  26.  Joseph’s  brethren  b.  themselves  to  him

49. 15.  lssachar  b.  his  shoulder  to  bear,  became  a
Josh.  23. 16.  transgressed  the  covenant,  served  other

gods,  and  b.  yourselves  to  them,  Judg.  2. 12, 17.
Judg.  5.  27.  at  her  feet  he  b.  where  he  b.  he  fell
Ruth  2.  10.  she  fell  on  her  face  and  b.  herself

1  Sam.  4.  19.  Phinehas’  wife  b.  herself  and  travailed

20.  41.  David  b.  himself  |!  25.  23.  Abigail  3.  41.

2  Sam.  19. 14.  David  b.  the  heart  of  the  men  of  Judah
22. 10.  he  b.  hea  ens  and  came  down,  Psal.  18.  9.

1  Kings  1. 16.  Bath  sheba  h.  and  did  obeisance,  31.

19. 18.  knees  which  have  not  b.  to  Baal,  Rom.  11.  4.

2  Kings  1.  +  13.  the  third  captain  3.  before  Elijah

2. 15.  the  sons  of  the  prophets  b.  before  Flisha
4.  37.  b.  herself  to  ground,  and  took  up  her  son

2  Chron.  7 .  3.  b.  themselves  upon  the  pavement
29.  29.  the  king  and  all  present  b.  themselves
Esth.  3.  2.  b.  to  Hainan  ||  5.  Mordecai  b.  not

I.am.  3.  +  20.  and  my  soul  is  b.  in  me
Mat.  27.  29.  b.  the  knee  before  him,  and  mocked
Luke  13.  11.  a  spirit  of  infirmity,  and  was  b.
BOWED  down.

Gen.  23. 12.  Abraham  b.  dozen  before  the  people

42. 6.  Joseph’s  brethren  came  and  3.  down,  43.  28.
Num.  25.  2.  people  did  eat.  and  b.  down  to  their  gods
Judg.  7.  6.  rest  of  the  people  b.  don  n  on  their  knees
2  Kings  9. 1 24.  Joram  b.  dozen  in  his  chariot

2  Chr.  25. 14.  set  them  up  to  be  his  gods,  and  b.  down
Psal.  35.  14.  1  b.  down  heav  ily  as  one  that  mourneth
38.  6.  I  am  b.  dozen  greatly,  I  go  mourning  all  day
42.+  5.  why  art  thou  b. dozen,  O  my  soul  hope  in  God
44. 25.  our  soul  is  b.  down  to  the  dust,  our  belly
57.  6.  my  soul  is  b.  down,  they  have  digged  a  pit
145. 14.  raiseth  up  all  those  that  be  b.  down,  146.  8.
Isa ,  2. 11.  the  haughtiness  of  men  shall  be  b.  down

17.  and  the  loftiness  of  man  shall  be  d.  down

21 . 3.  I  was  b.  dozen  at  the  hearing  of  it

Luke  24. 5.  they  wei  e  afraid  and  3.  dozen  their  faces


BOWED  head.

Gen.  24.  26.  man  3.  his  head  and  worshipped,  48.
43.  28.  they  b.  their  heads  and  made  obeisance
Exod.  4. 31.  then  they  b.  their  heads  and  worshipped,

12.27.  Neh.  8.  6.

34.  8.  Moses  made  haste  and  b.  his  head  to  earth
Num.  22. 31.  Balaam  b.  his  head  and  fell  flat  on  face
+  Balaam  b.  down  his  head,  and  b.  himself

1  Chron.  29.  20.  b.  down  their  heads  and  worshipped

2  Chr.  20. 18.  Jehoshaphat  b.  his  head  to  the  ground
29.  30.  they  sang  praises  and  b.  their  heads

John  19. 30.  Jesus  b.  his  head  and  gave  up  the  ghosf
HOW  ED  himself.

Gen.  18.  2.  Abraham  b.  h.  23. 7, 12.  ||  19.  1.  Lot  b.  L
33.  3.  Jacob  b.  himself,  47.  31.  H  48. 12.  Joseph  b.  /.
Judg.  16.  30.  Samscn  b.  himself  with  all  his  might

1  Sam.  24.  8.  David  stooped  to  Saul  and  b.  himself

28. 14.  Saul  perceived  it  v'as  Samuel  and  b.  himself

2  Sam.  9. 8.  MepJdbosheth  b.  himself  to  David

14.  22.  Joab  b.  fains,  to  David  ||  33.  Absalom  b.  hims
18,21.  and  Cushi  b.  himself  to  Joab,  and  ran

24. 20.  Araunah  b.  h.  before  the  king,  1  Chr.  21.  21.

1  Kings  1.  23.  N  athan  b.  h.  |!  47-  the  king  b.  h.  on  bed
53.  Adonijah  came  and  b.  himself  t oking  Solomon

2.  19.  Solomon  rose  and  b.  himself  to  his  mother

BOWE1H.

Judg.  7.  5.  every  one  that  b.  on  his  knees  to  drink
Isa.  2.  9.  the  mean  man  b.  ||  46.  1.  Bel  3.  down
BOWING.

Gen.  24.  52.  Eliezer  h.  himself  to  the  earth
Job  4.  +  4.  thou  hast  strengthened  the  b.  knees
Psal.  17.  11.  set  their  eyes.  b.  down  to  the  earth

62.  3.  as  a  b.  wall  shall  ye  be,  and  a  tottering  fence
Mark  15.  19.  they  did  spit  upon  him,  b.  their  Knees
BOWMEN.

Jer.  4. 29.  the  city  shall  flee  from  the  noise  of  tlie  b.
BOWELS

Signifies,  [1]  The  entrails,  Job  20.  14.  Acts  1.  18.
[2]  The  heart,  2  Cor.  6.  12.  Philem.  7.  [3]  The
womb,  Gen.  25.  23.  [4]  Pity,  or  compassion,  Isa.

63.  15.  Jer.  31.  20.  [5]  One  greatly  e  loved,

whom  a  person  loves  as  his  own  soul,  Philem.  12.
[6]  Tender  mercies,  PsaL  25.  +  6.  Prov.  12.  +  10.
Gen.  15.  4.  out  of  thine  own  3.  shall  be  thy  heir
25.  23.  two  manner  of  people  shall  be  from  thy  b.
43.  30.  for  his  b.  did  yearn  upon  his  brother
Num.  5.  22.  this  water  shall  go  into  thy  b.

2  Sam.  7.  12.  thy  seed  which  proceed  out  of  thy  b.
16.  11.  behold  my  son  which  came  forth  of  my  b.
20.  10.  Joab  shed  out  Amasa’s  b.  to  the  ground

1  Kings  3.  26.  for  her  b.  yearned  upon  her  son

2  Chron.  21. 15.  great  sickness  by  disease  of  thy  b.

18.  Lord  smote  him  in  his  b.  |T  19.  his  b.  fell  out

32.  21.  they  that  came  forth  of  his  own  b.  slew  him
Job  20. 14.  yet  his  meat  in  his  b.  is  turned

30.  27.  my  b.  boiled,  and  rested  not

Psal.  22.  14.  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my  b.

25.  +  6.  remember,  O  Lord,  thy  b.  and  kindnesses
40.  +  8. thy  law  is  in  the  midst  of  my  b.

71.  6.  art  he  that  took  me  out  of  my  mother’s  b.

109.  18.  let  it  come  into  his  b.  like  water
Prov.  12.  +  10.  the  b.  of  the  wicked  are  cruel
Cant.  5.  4.  and  my  b.  were  moved  for  him
Isa.  16.  11.  my  b.  shall  sound  like  an  harp

48. 19.  the  offspring  of  thy  3  like  the  gravel

49.  1.  from  the  b.  of  my  mother  he  made  mention

63. 15.  where  is  the  sounding  of  thy  b.  and  mercies  ?
Jer.  4.  19.  my  b.  my  b.  I  am  pained  at  my  heart

31.  20.  therefore  my  b.  are  troubled  for  him
Lam.  1  20.  behold,  O  Lord,  my  b.  are  troubled,  2. 11.
Ezek.  3.  3.  fill  thy  b.  with  this  roll  I  give  thee

7. 19.  not  satisfy  their  souls,  nor  fill  their  b.

Jonah  1.  +  17.  Jonah  w’as  in  the  b.  of  the  fish
Luke  1.  +78.  through  the  b.  of  the  mercy  of  our  God
Acts  1.  18.  Judas  burst,  and  all  his  b.  gushed  out
2  Cor.  6.  12.  ye  are  straitened  in  your  own  b.

7-  +  15.  Titus,  his  b.  are  more  abundant
Phil.  1.8.  1  long  after  you  in  the  b.  of  Christ
2. 1.  if  consol,  in  Chr.  if  there  be  any  3.  and  mercies
Co/.  : 3. 12.  put  on  3.  of  mercies,  kindness,  meekness,
Philem.  7.  the  b.  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by  thie
12.  therefore  receive  him  that  is  my  ow'n  b
20.  yea,  brother,  refresh  my  3.  in  tne  Lorn
1  John  3.  17.  and  shutteth  up  his  b.  of  compassion
BOWL.

Num.  7.  85.  each  b.  weighing  seventy  shekels
Judg.  6.  38.  and  w  ringed  the  dew,  a  b.  full  of  w'ater
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  ever  the  golden  b.  be  broken
Zech.  4.  2.  a  candlestick  of  gold  with  a  b.  on  it

3.  two  olive  trees,  one  on  the  right  side  of  the  b.

BOWLS.

Exod.  25.  29.  thou  shalt  make  b.  to  cover,  37. 16.
Num.  4.  7-  spread  a  cloth  of  blue,  dishes  and  b.  +  14.

1  Kings  7. 50.  b.  and  snuffers  of  pure  gold,  IChr.  28.17.’

2  Chron.  4.  +  8.  Solomon  made  an  100  b.  of  gold
Amos  6.  6.  that  drink  wine  in  b.  but  not  grieved  for
Zech.  9. 15.  shall  be  filled  like  b.  as  corners  of  altar

14.20.  the  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  b.
BOX.

2  Kings  9.  1.  take  this  b.  of  oil  in  thine  hand,  3.
Mat.  26.7.  having  an  alabaster  b.  Mark  14.  3.

Mark  14.  3.  she  brake  the  b.  and  poured,  Luke  7.  37.
BOX-TREE.

Isa.  41. 19. 1  will  set  in  the  desert  the  pine  and  b.

60.  13.  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  come,  the  b.
BOY,  S.

Gen.  25.  27.  the  b.  grew,  and  Esau  was  a  hunter
Joel  3.  3.  they  have  given  a  b.  for  a  harlot
Zech.  8. 5.  streets  shall  be  full  of  b.  and  girls  playing
BOYT,,  or  BOIL,  S.

Exod.  9.  9.  it  shall  be  a  b.  with  blains  on  man

10.  it  became  a  b.  breaking  forth  with  blains

11.  the  magicians  could  not  stand,  because  of  the  3.
Lev.  13.  18.  the  flesh  also  in  whicn  was  a  b.

2  Kings  20.  7.  took  figs  and  laid  on  the  3.  Isa.  38.  21.
Job  2.  7.  so  Satan  smote  Job  w.th  sore  3.

BRACELET,  S.

Gen.  24.  30.  when  he  saw  3.  on  his  sister's  hands
38.  18.  thy  signet,  thy  3.  and  thy  staff,  25.

Exod.  35.  22.  were  willing,  brought  3.  Num.  31.  50.

2  Sam.  l.  10.  the  3.  on  his  arm  1  have  brought
Isa.  3. 19.  1  will  tase  away  the  chains,  3.


B  R  A


BRA


BRE


Ezek  16. 11.  and  I  put  h.  upon  thine  hands
BRAKE.

Exod.  9 ■  23.  the  hail  b.  every  tree  of  the  field
3‘2.  3.  the  people  b.  off  the  golden  ear-rings
19.  he  cast  the  tables  and  b.  them,  Deut.  9- 17.

Judg.  7. 19.  they  b.  pitchers  in  their  hands,  20.

9.  53.  cast  a  piece  of  millstonh  to  b.  his  scull
16.9.  b.  the  withs  as  a  thread  ||  12.  b.  new  ropes

1  Sam.  4. 18.  Eli  fell  backward  and  his  neck  b.

2  Sam.  <23. 16.  three  mighty  men  iMhro’,1  Chr.  11. 18.

1  Kings  19. 11.  a  strong  wind  b.  in  pieces  the  rocks

2  Kings  11.  18.  Baal’s  images  b.  they  in  pieces
18. 4.  b.  images,  b.  brazen  serpent  Moses  had  made
23.  14.  Josiah  b.  the  images,  2  Chron.  34.  4.

2  Chron.  21.  17.  Arabians  came  and  b.  into  Judah
31.  1 5.  as  soon  as  the  commandment  b.  forth
Job  29.  + 17.  I  b.  the  jaws  of  the  wicked
38. 8.  who  shut  up  the  sea  when  it  b.  forth  ?

10  and  b.  up  for  it  my  decreed  place,  and  set  bars
Psal.  76.  3.  there  b.  he  the  arrows  of  the  bow
105. 16.  moreover,  he  b.  the  whole  staff  of  bread

33.  he  smote  their  vines,  b.  trees  of  their  coast
106.  29.  and  the  plague  b.  in  upon  them  _

107. 14.  out  of  darkness  he  b.  their  bands  in  sunder

Isa.  59.  +  5.  as  if  there  b.  out  a  viper
Jer.  28.  10.  took  the  yoke  from  Jeremiah  and  b.  it
31 .  32.  my  covenant  they  b.  tho’  1  was  a  husband
Ezek.  17. 16.  whose  oath  he  despised,  and  cov.  he  b.
Van.  2. 1.  spirit  troubled  and  sleep  b.  from  him

34.  smote  the  image  on  his  feet,  and  b.  them,  45.

6.  24.  the  lions  b.  all  their  bones  in  pieces

7. 7.  the  fourth  beast  devoured  and  b.  in  pieces

8.  7.  goat  smote  the  ram,  and  b.  his  two  horns
Mat.  14. 19.  he  blessed  and  b.  and  gave  the  loaves
15  36.  I  26.  26.  Mark  6.  41.  1  8.  6.  1  14.  22.  Luke

9.  16.  |  22.  19-  1  24.  .30.  1  Cor.  11.  24.

Mark  8.  19.  when  1  b.  the  five  loaves  among  5000

14  3.  she  b.  the  box,  and  poured  It  on  his  head
Luke  5.  6.  their  net  b.  ||  8.  29.  he  b.  the  bands
John  19.  32.  the  soldiers  b.  the  legs  of  the  first
33.  and  saw  that  he  was  dead,  they  b.  not  his  legs
BRAKE  down.

2  Kings  10.  27.  b.  down  image  of  Baal,  2  Chr.  23. 17.

11.18.  people  went  and  b.  down  the  house  of  Baal
14  13.  king  of  Israel  b.  down  wall  of  Jerusalem

2  Chron.  25.  23.  1  36.  19.  Jer.  39.  8.  |  52. 14.

23. 7.  he  b.  down  the  houses  of  the  Sodomites
8.  he  b.  down  high  places  |l  12.  b.  down  altars,  15.

2  Chron.  14.  3.  Asa  b.  down  images,  cut  down  groves
26.  6.  Uzziah  b.  down  the  wall  of  Gath
34.  4.  they  b.  down  the  altars  of  Baalim

B  RAREST.  [10.2

Exod.  34.  1.  words  in  the  first  table  thou  h.  Deut.
Psal.  74. 13.  thou  b.  the  heads  of  the  dragons,  14.
Isa.  9.  +  4.  when  thou  b.  the  yoke  of  his  burden
Ezek.  29.  7.  when  they  leaned  on  thee,  thou  b.
BRAMBLE,  S.

Judg.  9.  14.  then  said  all  the  tre  s  to  the  b.

15.  the  b.  said,  let  fire  come  out  of  the  b.

Isa.  34. 13.  nettles  and  b.  shall  come  up  in  fortresses
Luke  6.44.  nor  of  a  b.  bush  gather  they  grapes
BRANCH

Signifies,  The  bough  of  a  tree ,  Psal.  104.  12.

To  which  are  compared,  [1]  Jesus  Christ  the
Messiah ,  who  was  born  of  the  royal  house  of
David,  at  that  time  when  it  was  in  an  afflicted
and  contemptible  condition,  like  a  tree  cut  down,
and  whereof  nothing  is  left  but  a  stump  or  root
under  ground,  Isa.  11.  1.  Jer.  23.  5.  Zech.  3.
8.  |  6.  12.  [21  True  believers  who  are  in¬

grafted  into  Christ  the  true  vine  ;  who  is  the
root,  fountain,  and  head  of  influence,  whence  his
people  and  members  derive  life,  grace,  fruitful¬
ness,  and  all  good ;  as  fruitful  branches  derive
continual  influence  from  the  vine,  John  15.  5.  [3]
Earthly  kings  descended  of  royal  ancestors,  as
branches  spring  from  the  root,  Ezek.  17-  3.  Dan.
11.  7-  [4]  Children  or  posterity.  Job  8.  16.

1 15.  32.

Exod.  25.  33.  a  knop  and  a  flower  in  one  b.  37. 19.
Num.  13. 23.  cutdown  a  b.  with  one  cluster  of  grapes
Job  8.  16.  his  b.  shooteth  forth  in  his  garden

14.7.  and  the  tender  b.  thereof  will  not  cease
15. 32.  and  his  b.  shall  not  be  green

18.  16.  and  above  shall  his  b.  be  cut  off

29. 19.  and  the  dew  lay  all  night  upon  my  b.

Psal.  80. 15.  the  b.  thou  mades't  strong  for  thyself
Prov.  11.  28.  the  righteous  shall  flourish  as  a  b.

Isa.  4. 2.  in  that  day  shall  b.  of  the  Lord  be  beautiful
9. 14.  the  Lord  will  cut  off  b.  and  root  in  one  day
11.  1.  and  a  b.  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots

14. 19.  thou  art  cast  out  like  an  abominable  b.

17.  9.  strong  cities  shall  be  as  an  uppermost  b.  left

19.  15.  nor  any  work  which  b.  or  rush  may  do
25.  5.  the  b.  or  terrible  ones  shall  be  brought  low
60.  21.  the  b.  of  my  planting,  the  work  of  my  hands

Jer.  23.  5.  I  will  raise  to  David  a  righteous  b,

33.  15.  I  will  cause  the  b.  of  righteousness  grow
Ezek.  8. 17.  and  lo,  they  put  the  b.  to  their  nose
15.  2.  what  is  the  vine  tree  more  than  the  b  ?

17.  3.  an  eagle  came,  and  took  the  highest  b.  22.
Dan.  11.  7.  out  of  a  b.  of  her  roots  shall  one  stand
Zech.  3.  8.  I  will  bring  forth  my  servant  the  b.

6.  12.  behold  the  man  whose  name  is  the  b.

Mai.  4. 1.  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor  b.
Mat.  24.  32.  w'hen  his  b.  is  yet  tender,  Mark  13. 28.
Luke  1. 178.  the  b.  from  on  high  hath  visited
John  15.  2.  every  b.  that  beareth  not,  b.  that  bearcth
4.  as  the  b.  cannot  bear  fruit  itself,  except  it  abide
6.  if  he  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  b.
BRANCHES.

Gen.  40.  10.  and  in  the  vine  were  three  b.

12.  Joseph  said,  the  three  b.  are  three  days
49.  22.  a  bough,  whose  b.  run  oyer  the  wall
Exod.  25.  32.  six  b.  come  out  of  the  sides  of  the
candlestick,  three  b.  out  of  one  side,  37. 18,  21.
Lev.  23.  40.  shall  take  h.  of  palm  trees,  Neh.  8. 15.
Job  15.  30.  the  flame  shall  dry  up  his  h.

Psal.  80. 11.  she  sent  out  her  b.  to  the  river
104. 12.  the  fowls  which  sing  among  the  b.

Isa.  16.  8.  Moab’s  b.  are  stretched  out
17. 6.  four  or  five  in  the  outmost  fruitful  b.  thereof


Isa.  18.  5.  he  shall  take  away  and  cut  down  the  b.

27. 10.  there  shall  he  lie  and  consume  the  b.

30.  +  17.  till  ye  be  left  as  a  tree  bereft  of  b.

Jer.  11.  16.  and  the  b.  of  it  are  broken
Ezek.  17.6.  became  a  spreading  vine  whose  //.turned

19.  10.  she  was  fruitful  and  full  of b.

14.  fire  is  gone  out  of  a  rod  of  her  b.

31.  8.  thechesnut  trees  not  like  the  Assyrian’s  b.

36. 8.  O  mountains  of  Israel,  ye  shall  shoot  b.

Dan.  4.  14.  hew  down  the  tree,  cut  off  his  b.

IIos.  11.  6.  the  sword  shall  consume  Ephraim’s  b.

14.  6.  his  b.  shall  spread,  and  his  beauty  as  olive
Joel  1.  7.  my  vine  waste,  b.  thereof  are  made  white
Neh.  2.  2.  the  emptiershave  marred  their  vine  b.
Zech.  4.  12.  I  said,  what  be  these  two  olive  b.  ?

Mat.  13.  32.  the  birds  lodge  in  the  b.  Luke  13.  19.

21.  8.  others  cut  down  b.  Mark  11.  8.  John  12.  13.
Mark  4.  32.  greater  than  all  herbs,  shooteth  out  b.
John  15.  5.  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  b.

Rom.  11.  16.  if  the  root  be  huly,  so  are  the  b.

17.  if  some  of  the  b.  be  broken  off,  19.

18.  boast  not  against  the  b.  but  if  thou  boast

21.  for  if  God  spared  not  the  natural  b.  take  heed
BRAND,  S.

Judg.  15.  5.  and  when  he  had  set  the  b.  on  fire^

Zech.  3.  2.  is  not  this  a  b.  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?
BRANDISH.

Ezek.  32. 10.  when  I  shall  b.  my  sword  before  them  r
BRASS

Is  a  sort  of  metal,  Exod.  31.  4.  and  denotes,  [1]  A
people  impudent  in  sin,  Isa.  48.  4.  Jer.  6.  28.  Ezek.
22. 18.  [2]  The  infinite  power  of  Christ,  Rev.  1. 15.

A  kingdom  of  brass,  Dan.  2.  39.  The  Grecian
monarchy  under  Alexander  the  Great,  said  to  be
of  brass,  because  of  their  many  wars,  and  frequent
use  of  arms,  whicliwere  generally  made  of  brass
I  will  make  thy  hoofs  brass,  Mir.  4.  13.  I  will
give  thee  strength  to  tread  under  foot,  and  break
the  power  of  thine  enemies  into  pieces,  that  it  shall
never  be  repaired.  It  is  a  metaphor,  taken  from
their  manner  of  threshing  corn,  which  was  by  the
treading  of  oxen,  whose  hoofs  were  shod  with  iron
or  brass,  Deut.  25.  4.  ITos.  10.  11.

Mountains  of  brass,  Zech.  6.  1.  denote  the  immove¬
able  decrees  of  God,  his  steady  execution  of  his
counsels,  and  the  insuperable  restraints  that  are
upon  all  empires  and  counsels,  which  God  keeps
within  the  barriers  of  such  impregnable  mountains,
that  not  one  can  start  till  he  open  the  way.

Exod.  25.  3.  the  offering,  take  gold,  silver,  b.  35.  5.

26.  11.  make  taches  of  b.  36. 18. 1  30.  18.  laver  of  b.
37.  thou  shalt  cast  five  sockets  of  b.  for  them,  27.

10,  17,  18.  1  36.  38.1  38.11,  17,19.

27.  2.  shall  overlay  the  altar  with  b.  6. 1  38.  2.

4.  net-work  of  b.  1  19.  pins  of  the  court  of  b.

31.  4.  to  work  in  gold,  silver,  and  b.  35.  32.

38.  5.  rings  of  b.  ]|  6.  overlaid  the  staves  with  b.

29.  the  b.  of  the  offering  was  seventy  talents

39.  39.  the  brasen  altar  and  his  grate  of  b.

Num.  21.  9.  made  a  serpent  of  b.  and  put  it  on  a

pole,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  b.  he  lived
Deut.  8.  9.  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig  b.

28.  23.  the  heaven  over  thy  head  shall  be  b.

Judg.  16.  21.  Samson  bound  with  fetters  of  b.

1  Sam.  17.  5.  Goliath  had  an  helmet  of  b.  38.

6.  and  he  had  greaves  of  b.  on  his  legs
Sam.  8.  8.  king  David  took  much  b.  1  Chr.  18. 8.
Kings  7. 14.  Hiram  was  a  worker  in  b.

15.  for  he  cast  two  pillars  of  b.  2  Kings  25.  13.

16.  chapiters  of  b.  2  Kings  25.  17-  Jer.  52.22.

27.  bases  of  b.  H  30.  plates  \\  38.  lavers,  2  Chr.  4.  16.
45.  the  pots  and  shovels  were  of  bright  b.

47.  weight  of  the  b.  was  not  found,  2  Chron.  4. 18.
Kings  25.  7.  bound  Zedekiah  with  fetters  of  b.

13.  carried  the  b.  to  Babylon,  Jer.  52.  17.

1  Chron.  15.  19.  to  sound  with  cymbals  of  b.

22.  3.  David  prepared  b.  in  abundance,  29.  7.

29.  2.  I  have  prepared  the  b.  for  things  of  b.

2  Chron.  12.  10.  Rehoboam  made  shields  of  b.

Job  6.  12.  the  strength  of  stones,  or  is  my  flesh  b.  ?

40.  18.  his  bones  are  as  strong  pieces  of  b.

41.  27.  Leviathan  esteemeth  b.  as  rotten  wood
Psal.  107.  16.  he  hath  broken  the  gates  of  b.

Isa.  45.  2.  1  will  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  b.

60.  17.  for  wood  I  will  bring  b.  for  b.  gold

Ezek.  24.  11.  that  the  b.  of  it  may  be  hot  and  burn
Dan.  2.  32.  his  belly  and  his  thighs  were  of  b.

39.  shall  arise  another  third  kingdom  of  b.

7.  19.  the  fourth  beast,  whose  nails  were  of  b.

10.  6.  his  feet  like  in  colour  to  polished  b.

Mic.  4.  13.  will  make  thine  horn  iron,  and  hoofs  b.
Z.ech.  6.  1.  the  mountains  were  mountains  of  b.
Mat.  10.  9.  provide  neither  gold  nor  silver,  nor  b
1  Cor.  13.1.  I  am  become  as  sounding  b.  or  cymbal
Rev.  1.  15.  and  his  feet  like  to  fine  b.  2. 18.

9.  20.  that  they  should  not  worship  idols  of  b.

Iron  and  BRASS.

Gen.  4.  22.  Tubal-cain,  instructor  in  b.  and  iron
Lev. 26.19.  I’ll  make  your  heaven  iron,  your  earth  b.
Num.  31. 22.  b.  and  iron  which  may  abide  the  fire
Deut.  33.  25.thy  shoes  shall  be  iron  and  b. as  thy  days
Josh.  22. 8. return  with  b.and  iron,  and  much  raiment

1  Chron.  22. 14.  prep.  b.  and  iron  without  weight,  16.

2  Chron.  2.  7.  a  cunning  man  to  work  in  h.  and  iron
14.  sent  a  cunning  man  to  work  in  b.  and  iron

24. 12.  hired  such  as  wrought  in  iron  and b.  to  mend
Job  28.  2.  iron  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and  b.

Isa.  48.  4.  and  thy  neck  is  an  iron  sinew,  and  brow  b
60.  17.  for  b.  I  will  bring  gold,  for  iron  silver
Jer.  6.  28.  they  are  b.  and  iron,  Ezek.  22.  18.

Ezek.  22.  20.  as  they  gather  iron  and  b.  into  furnaces
Dan.  2.  35.  then  was  iro»,clay,  b.  hrok.  to  pieces, 45
4. 15.  with  a  band  of  iron  andb.  in  tender  grass,  23
5  4.  they  praised  gods  of  silver,  b.  and  iron,  wood
J  Vessels  of  BRASS.

Exod.  27.  3.  make  all  vessels  of  b.  ||  38.  S.made  v.  ofb
Josh.  6. 19.  all  vessels  ofb.  are  consecrated  to  the  I
24.  vessels  ofb.  and  iron  they  put  into  the  treasury
2  Sam.  8. 10.  Joram  brought  vessels  ofb.  1  Ch.  18. 10,
2  Kings  25. 14.i vessels  of  //.took  they  away,  Jer.  52.18
16.  which  Solomon  had  ma  e,  the  b.  of  all  these
1  vessels  was  without  weight,  Jer.  52.  20


Ezra  8. 1 27.  two  vessels  of  yellow  or  shining  b.

Ezek.  27.  13.  they  traded  in  vessels  of  b.  Rev.  18. 12.
BRAZEN.

Exod.  27.  4.  make.  b.  rings  ||  35. 16.  b.  grate,  38.  4.

38.  +  8.  b.  glasses  ||  10.  their  //.  sockets  twenty
Lev.  6.  28.  the  sin-offering  sodden  in  a  b.  pot
Num.  16.  39.  b.  censers  ||  1  Kings  4.  13.  b.  bars

1  Kings  7.  30.  b.  wheels  ||  14.  27.  made  b.  shields

2  Kings  16.  17-  b.  oxen  l|  18.  4.  brake  the  b.  serpent
25. 13.  the  b.  sea  did  Chaldees  break,  Jer.  52. 17.

2  Chron.  6.  13.  Solomon  had  made  a  b.  scaffold
Job  6.  +  12.  strength  of  stones,  or  is  my  flesh  b.  ?

Jer.  1. 18.  1  have  made  thee  this  day  b.  walls
15.  20.  I  will  make  thee  a  fenced  b.  wall
52.  20.  the  b.  bulls  ||  Mark  7.  4.  b.  vessels
See  Altar.

BRAVERY.

Isa.  3.  18.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  b.
BRAWLER,  S.

1  Tim.  3.  3.  a  bishop  must  be  no  b.  H  Tit.  3. 2.  to  be
BRAWLING,  S.  [do  b.

Prov.  25.  24.  with  b.  woman  in  wide  house,  21. 19.
Jam.  4.  tl.  from  whence  come  wars  and  b.  ?
BRAY,  ED,  ETII.

Job  6.  5.  doth  the  wild  ass  b.  when  he  hath  grass  ?

30. 7.  among  the  bushes  they  b.  they  were  gathered
Psal.  42. 1 1.  as  the  hart  b.  after  the  water-brooks
Prov.  27 •  22.  tho’  thou  shouldest  b.  a  fool  in  a  mortar
BREACH

Signifies,  [1]  The  ruin  of  a  wall  made  by  warlike
engines,  Ezek.  26.  10.  [2]  The  altering,  or  not
performing,  of  one's  promise,  N  um.  14.  34.  [3]  A
fracture,  or  bruise,  Lev.  24.  20.  [4]  Decayed  or
ruined  places,  Isa.  58.  12.  [5]  Judgment,  or
punishment,  2  Sam.  6.  8.  [6]  Confusions  and  ani¬
mosities,  Psal.  60.  2.

Had  not  Moses  stood  in  the  breach,  Psal.  106.  23.
God  had  made  an  hedge,  or  wall,  about  them  j  but
they  had  made  a  gap  or  breach  in  it,  by  their  sins,
at  which  God,  who  was  now  justly  become  their
enemy ,  might  enter  to  destroy  them  ;  which  he
would  hare  done,  had  not  Moses  interceded  for  them.
Gen.  38.  29.  the  midwife  said,  this  b.  be  upon  thee
t  therefore  his  name  was  called  a  b.

I.ev.  24.  20.  //.  for  b.  eye  for  eye,  tooth  for  tooth
Num.  14.  34.  ye  shall  know  my  b.  of  promise
Judg.  21.  15.  the  Lord  had  made  a  b.  in  the  tribes
Sam.  5.  20.  broken  forth  as  the  b.  of  waters
6.  8.  Lord  made  a  h.  on  Uzzah,  1  Chron .  13.  11.
Kings  12.  5.  wheresoever  any  b.  shall  be  found
Chron.  15.  13.  the  Lord  our  God  made  a  b.  on  us
Neh.  6.  1.  budded  the  wall,  and  there  was  no  b
Job  16.  14.  he  breaketh  me  with  b.  upon  b.

Psal.  106.  23.  had  not  Moses  stood  in  the  b.

Prov.  15.  4.  but  perverseness  is  a  b.  in  the  spirit
Isa.  7. 6.  let  us  make  a  b.  therein  for  us,  and  set  a  king
30.  13.  this  iniquity  shall  be  to  you  as  a  b.

26.  in  the  day  that  the  Lord  bindeth  up  the  b.

58. 12.  thou  shalt  be  called  the  repairer  of  the  b.

Jer.  6. 1 14.  they  have  healed  the  b.  slightly
14.  17.  daughter  of  my  people  is  broken  with  a  b.
17. 1 18.  break  them  with  a  double  b.  [thee  r
Lam.  2.  13.  thy  b.  is  great  like  sea,  who  can  heal
Ezek.  26.  10.  enter  into  a  city  wherein  is  made  a  b,
Dan.  9,125.  the  b.  built  in  troublous  times
Arnos  6.  +  6.  not  grieved  for  the  b.  of  Joseph
BREACHES.

Judg.  5.  17.  Asher  continued  and  abode  in  his  b.

2  Sam.  5. 120.  called  place,  plain  of  b.  1  Chr.  14. 11.
Kings  11.  27.  repaired  the  b.  of  the  city  of  David
Kings  12.  5.  let  them  repair  the  b.  of  the  nouse
6.  the  priests  had  not  repaired  the  b.  of  the  house
12.  to  masons  to  repair  b.  of  house  of  Lord,  22.  5.
Neh.  4.7.  that  the  b.  began  to  be  stopped,  were  wroth
Psal.  60.  2.  heal  the  b.  thereof  for  it  shaketh
Isa.  22.  9.  ye  have  seen  the  b .  of  the  city  ot  David
Ezek.  13.  t  5.  ye  have  not  gone  up  to  the  b.

Amos  4.  3.  and  ye  shall  go  out  at  the  b.

6.  11.  Lord  will  smite  the  great  house  with  b.

9.  11.  and  1  will  close  up  the  b.  thereof
BREAD  ,

Signifies,  [1]  Natural  food,  or  that  eatable  made  of
corn,  Gen.  3.  19.  i  49.  20.  [2]  All  things  neces¬
sary  for  this  life,  M at.  6.  11.  [3]  Manna  where¬
with  God  fed  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilder¬
ness,  Neh.  9.  15.  John  6.  31.  .

To  bread  are  compared,  Cl)  Jesus  Christ,  who  is
the  true  food  for  the  soul,  and  both  the  author  arid
matter  of  spiritual  life,  John  6.  41,  51.  (2)  1  he
gospel,  and  ordinances  and  privileges  thereoj,
Prov.  9.  5.  (3)  The  Canaanites,  who  were  destroy
ed  by  the  Israelites  as  easily  as  men  eat  up  their
bread,  or  common  food,  Num.  14.  9.  .  .

7e  are  one  bread,  1  Cor.  10.  17.  We  are  joined


together  into  one  mystical  body,  and  declare  our¬
selves  to  be  so,  by  our  fellowship  together  m  the
ordinance  of  the  lord  s  supper  /  for  the  bread  we
there  eat  is  one  bread,  and  the  wine  we  dunk  is
one  wine ;  though  the  one  be  composed  of  many
grains  of  corn,  and  the  other  made  up  of  many
particular  grapes.  .

Children’s  bread,  Mat.  15.  26.  The  publication  of
the  gospel,  and  working  miracles,  which  belonged
to  the  Jews,  who  were  God's  peculiar  people.

Shew  bread,  1  Sam.  21.  6.  I  he  Hebrew  signifies
Bread  of  faces,  or  of  the  face.  They  thus  called
the  loaves  of  bread,  that  the  priest  of  the  week  put
every  sabbath  day  upon  the  golden  table  which  uas
in  the  Sanctum  before  the  Lord.  They  weretwehe
in  number,  and  represented  the  twelve  tribes  of
Israel.  Every  loaf  must  have  been  of  a  consider¬
able  bigness,  since  they  used  two  tenth  deals  of  flour
for  each,  which  are  about  six  pints.  Lev.  24. 5,  6,  J .
They  served  them  up  hot  on  the  sabbath-day  in  the
presence  of  the  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time  took
away  the  stale  ones,  which  had  been  exposed  for  the
whole  week,  and  which  could  not  be  eaten  but  by
the  priests  alone.  If,  in  an  extraordinary  case,
David  thought  he  might  eat  of  them,  nothing  nut
urgent  necessity  could  exempt  him  from  sin,  1  Sam.
21.  4,  5.  Mat.  12.  4.  ,  .  ..  .

Gen.  14  18-  the  king  of  Salem  brought  forth  b

37


HRE


BRE


13  RE


Gen.  18.  5.  and  I  will  fetch  amorsel  of  h.

21.  14.  Abraham  took  b.  and  gave  to  Ilagar

25.  34  then  .lacob  gave  Esau  b.  and  pottage
27-  17-  she  gave  savoury  meat  and  b.  to  Jacob

41.  54.  in  the  land  of  Egypt  there  was  b.

55.  the  people  cried  to  Pharaoh  for  b.

43.  31.  set  on  b.  ||45.  23.  b.  for  his  father

47.  12.  Joseph  nourished  his  father’s  house  with  b.

15.  give  us  b.  ||  17.  gave  them  b.  for  horses

19.  buy  us  and  our  land  for  b.  that  we  may  live
40*  20.  out  of  Asher  his  b.  shall  be  fat
■Exod.  16.  4.  I  will  rain  b.  from  heaven  for  you

8.  and  in  the  morning  b.  to  the  full,  12.

29.  he  giveth  on  the  sixth  day  the  b.  of  two  days

32.  they  may  see  the  b.  wherewith  I  fed  you
23.  25.  he  shall  bless  thy  b.  and  thy  water
29.  32.  and  the  b.  in  the  basket  by  the  door

34.  if  ought  of  the  h.  remain  unto  the  morning

40.  23.  he  set  the  b.  in  order  upon  the  table

Lev.  8.  26.  he  took  a  cake  of  oiled  b.  and  a  wafer

32.  what  remaineth  of  the  b.  ye  shall  burn

21.  6.  the  b.  of  their  God  they  do  offer,  8, 17.  21,22.

22. 25.  nor  from  a  stranger  shall  ye  offer  b.

23.  18.  ye  shall  offer  with  the  b.  seven  lambs

26. 26.  ten  women  shall  bake  your  b.  in  one  oven
Hum.  4.  7.  and  the  continual  b.  shall  be  thereon

14.  9.  the  people  of  the  land,  they  are  b.  for  11s

21.  5.  no  b.  nor  water,  our  soul  lotheth  this  light  b.

28.  2.  my  b.  for  my  sacrifices  shall  ye  observe
Deut.  8.  3.  that  he  might  make  thee  know  that  man

doth  not  live  by  b.  only,  Mat.  4.  4.  Luke  4.  4.

23.4.  they  met  you  not  with  b.  and  water

29.  6.  ye  have  not  eaten  b.  nor  drunk  water
Josh. 9.5.all  b.oi  their  provision  was  dry  and  mouldy

12.  this  our  b.  we  took  hot  tor  our  provision
Judg.'i.  13.  a  cake  of  barley  b.  tumbled  into  the  host

8.  6.  that  we  should  give  b.  to  thy  army,  15.

19.  5.  comfort  thy  heart  with  a  morsel  of  b.

ij.  and  there  is  b.  and  wine  also  for  me
Ruth  1. 6.  Eord  visited  his  people  in  giving  them  b.

•1  Sam.  2. 5.  they  hired  out  themselves  for  b.

36.  shall  come  and  crouch  to  him  for  a  morsel  of  b.
9. 7.  for  the  b.  is  spent  in  our  vessels,  not  a  present

16.  20.  Jesse  took  an  ass  laden  with  b.  and  bottle

21.4.  but  there  is  hallowed  b.  ||  5.  b.  is  common

6.  priest  gave  him  hallowed  b.  to  put  hot  b.  in  day

22.  13.  thou  hast  given  him  b.  and  a  sword

25. 11.  shall  I  take  my  b.  and  my  water  to  give
28.  22.  let  me  seta  morsel  of  b.  before  thee

30. 11.  they  found  an  Egyptian  and  gave  him  b.

2  Sam.  3.  29.  let  not  fail  from  J  oab  one  that  lacketh  b.

35.  if  I  taste  b.  or  ought  else  till  the  sun  be  down
6. 19.  he  dealt  to  every  one  a  cake  of  b.  and  piece  of

1  Kings  4.  +  22.  Solomon’s  b.  for  one  day  was  thirty
13.  22.  but  earnest  back  and  hast  eaten  b.  and  drunk

23.  after  he  had  eaten  b.  and  after  he  had  drunk

17.  6.  ravens  brought  b.  and  flesh  in  evening

11.  bringme,  1  pray  thee,  a  morsel  of  b.

18.  4.  and  fed  them  with  b.  and  water,  13.

2  Kings  4.  42.  and  brought  the  man  of  God  b.

18.32.  till  I  take  you  to  a  land  of  b.  Isa.  36.  17.

Chr.  12. 40.  they  of  Zabulon  brought  h.  on  asses
Neh.  5.  14.  have  not  eaten  the  b.  of  the  governor

9.  15.  and  gavest  them  h.  from  heaven  for  hunger
13.  2.  because  they  met  not  1  srael  with  b.  and  water

Job  15.23.  wandereth  abroad  fori,  saying,  where  is  it

22.  7-  thou  hast  withholden  b.  from  the  hungry
27-  14.  his  offspring  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  b.
28.  5.  as  for  the  earth,  out  of  it  cometh  b.

33.  20.  his  lifeabhorreth  b.  and  soul  dainty  meat
Psal.  37.25.  nor  have  1  seen  his  seed  begging  b.

78.  20.  can  he  give  h.  ?  ||  1Q2.  9.  eaten  ashes  like  b.

80.  5.  thou  feedest  them  with  the  b.  of  tears

104.  15.  and  b.  which  strengthened!  man’s  heart

105.  40.  and  satisfied  them  with  the  b.  of  heaven
109. 10.  let  them  seek  their  b.  out  of  desolate  places
132.  15.  I  will  satisfy  her  poor  with  b.

Erov.9. 17-  stolen  waters  sweet,  b.  eat.  secret  is  pleas.
12. 9-  he  that  is  despised  and  hath  a  servant  is  better
than  he  that  nonoureth  himself  and  lacketh  b.
11.  tilleth  land  shall  be  satisfied  with  b.  28.  19.
20.13.open  thine  eyes,  thou  shalt  be  satisfied  with  b.

Yi.b.  of  deceit  is  sweet  to  a  man,  but  afterward

22.  9.  for  he  giveth  of  his  b.  to  the  poor
31.27-  she  eateth  not  the  b.  of  idleness
Eccl.  9. 11  I  saw  race  is  not  to  swift,  nor  b.  to  wise

11. 1.  cast  thy  b.  upon  the  waters,  for  shalt  find  it
Isa.  3. 1.  Lord  doth  take  away  the  whole  stay  of  b.

7.  for  in  my  house  is  neither  b.  nor  clothing

21. 14.  they  prevented  with  their  b.  him  that  fled

30.  20.  though  the  Lord  give  you  the  b.  of  adversity

33. 16.  his  b.  shall  be  given  lnm,  his  waters  be  sure

44.  15.  he  baketh  b.  on  the  coals  thereof,  19.

51. 14.  should  not  die,  nor  that  his  b.  should  fail
55.  2.  why  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  b.  ?

10.  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  b.  to  eater
58.  7-  is  it  not  to  deal  thy  b.  to  the  hungry  ?

Jer.  11.  +  19.  let  us  destroy  the  stalk  w'ith  his  b.

42.  14.  we  shall  see  no  war,  nor  have  hunger  of  b.
44. 1 17.  for  then  had  we  plenty  of  b.

Lam.  1. 11.  all  her  people  sigh,  they  seek  b.

4. 4.  young  children  ask  b.  no  man  breaks  it  them
5. 6.  given  hand  to  Egyptians  to  be  satisfied  with  b.

9.  we  gat  our  b.  with  the  peril  of  our  lives
Ezek.  4. 15.  thou  shalt  prepare  thy  b.  therewith

17.  that  they  may  want  b.  and  water  and  consume
16.49. pride,  fulness  of  b.  and  abundance  of  idleness

18.  7.  but  hath  given  his  b.  to  the  hungry,  16.

44.  7-  brought  strangers  when  ye  offer  my  b.

Hos.  2. 5.  1  will  go  after  my  lovers  that  give  me  b.
9.  4.  their  sacrifices  shall  be  as  the  b.  of  mourners
Amos  4.6.  given  you  want  of  b.  in  all  your  places

8. 11.  not  a  famine  of  b.  but  of  hearing  the  word
Hag.  2. 12.  if  one  with  his  skirt  do  touch  b.  or  wine
Mai.  1.  7.  ye  offer  polluted  h.  upon  mine  altar
MatA.3.  command  these  stones  De  made  b.Luke  4.3.

6. 11.  give  us  this  day  our  daily  b.  Luke  11. 11.

7.  9.  if  his  son  ask  b.  will  he  give  him  a  stone  ?

15.26.  not  meet  to  take  the  children’s  b.  Mark  7.27.

33.  whence  should  we  have  so  much  b.?  Mark 8. 4.
16. 5.  they  had  forgotten  to  take  b.  Mark  8. 14.

11.  that  I  spake  it  not  to  you  concerning  b.


Mat.  16. 12.  he  bade  them  not  beware  of  leaven  of  b.

26.  26.  Jesus  took  b.  and  blessed  it,  Mark  14.  22.
Luke  7.  33.  John  Baptist  came  neither  eating  b.

9.  3.  take  nothing  tor  your  journey,  neither  b.

15.  17.  servants  of  my  father's  have  b.  enough

22.  19.  took  b.  gave  thanks  and  brake  it,  24.  30.

24!  35.  how  he  was  known  of  them  in  breaking  b.

John  6.  5.  two  hundred  penny-worth  of  b.  is  not  suff.

32.  Moses  gave  you  not  that  b.  from  heaven,  my

Father  giveth  you  the  true  b.  from  heaven

33.  the  b.  of  God  is  he  ||  34.  Lord,  give  us  this  b.
35.  Jesus  said  to  them,  l  am  the  b.  of  life,  48.

41.  I  am  the  b.  which  came  down,  50, 58.

58.  he  that  eateth  of  this  b.  shall  live  for  ever
13. 18.  he  that  eateth  b.  with  me  hath  lift  his  heel
21.  9.  they  saw  a  fire  and  fish  laid  thereon  and  b.

13.  Jesus  then  taketh  b.  and  giveth  them
Acts  2.  42.  they  continued  in  breaking  of  b.

46.  and  breaking  b.  from  house  to  house

20.  7.  when  the  disciples  came  to  break  b.

11.  when  he  had  broken  b.  and  eaten,  and  talked

27.  35.  he  took  b.  and  gave  thanks  to  God

1  Cor.  10.  16.  b.  we  break,  is  it  not  the  communion
17.  for  we  being  many  are  one  b.  and  one  body

11.  23.  have  received  of  Lord,  that  the  Imrd  Jesus,
the  same  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed,  took  b.

2  Cor.  9. 10.  both  minister  b.  to  your  food

See  Affliction.
BREAD-CORN.

Isa.  28.  28.  b.-corn  is  bruised,  because  he  will  not  b.
BREAD,  with  eat.

Gen.  3. 19.  in  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  b.

28.  20.  if  Lord  will  give  me  b.  to  eat  and  raiment
31. 54.  Jacob  called  his  brethren  to  eat  b.

37.  25.  Joseph’s  brethren  sat  down  to  eat  b.

39. 6.  knew  not  ought  he  had,  save  the  b.  he  did  eat

43.  25.  they  heard  that  they  should  eat  h.  there
32.  Egyptians  might  not  eat  b.  with  the  Hebrews

Exod.  2.  20.  where  is  he  ?  call  him  that  he  may  eat  b.

16.  3.  and  when  we  did  eat  b.  to  the  full

15.  this  is  the  b.  the  Lord  hath  given  you  to  eat
18.  12.  came  to  eat  b.  with  Moses’  father-in-law

34.  28.  he  did  not  eat  b.  forty  days,  Deut.  9.  9, 18.
Lev.  8.  31.  there  eat  it,  with  the  b.  in  the  basket

21.  22.  he  shall  eat  the  b.  of  his  God,  both  of  holy

23. 14.  ye  shall  neither  eat  b.  nor  parched  corn
26. 5.  and  ye  shall  eat  your  b.  to  the  full  and  dwell
Num.  15. 19.  when  3'e  eat  the  b.  of  the  land

Deut.  8.  9.  thou  shalt  eat  b.  without  scarceness
Judg.  13. 16.  tho’  thou  detain  me,  1  will  not  eat  thy  b.
Ruth  2.  14.  at  meal-time  come  thou,  and  eat  b.

2  Sam.  9. 7.  thou  shalt  eat  b.  at  my  table,  10.

12. 17.  neither  did  he  eat  b.  with  them

20.  set  b.  and  he  did  eat  ||  21.  didst  rise  and  eat  b.

16.  2.  b.  and  summer  fruit  for  young  men  to  eat

1  Kings  13.  8.  nor  will  l  eat  b.  nor  drink  water,  16.
9.  chanted  me  by  the  Lord,  saying,  eat  no  b.

15.  then  said  he,  come  home  with  me  and  eat  b.

21.  7.  arise,  eat  b.  let  thy  heart  be  merry

2  Kings  4.  8.  Shunamite  constrained  Elisha  to  eat  b.
6. 22.  set  b.  and  water,  they  may  eat  and  drink

23.  9,  but  they  did  eat  of  the  unleavened  b.

25.  29.  did  eat  b.  continually  before  him.  Jer  52.  33.
Job  42. 11.  and  did  eat  b.  with  Job  in  his  house
Psal.  14.  4.  who  eat  up  my  people,  as  they  cat  b.  53. 4.
41.  9.  who  did  eat  of  my  b.  hath  lifted  up  his  heel
78.  +  25.  every  one  did'eat  the  b.  of  the  mighty

102. 4 .  my  heart  smitten,  so  that  1  forget  to  eat  my  b .
127.  2.  vain  to  sit  up  late,  to  eat  the  b.  of  sorrows
Prov.  4.  17.  for  they  eat  the  b.  of  wickedness
9.  5.  come,  eat  of  my  b.  and  drink  of  the  wine

23.  6.  eat  not  the  b.  of  him  that  hath  an  evil  eye
25. 21.  if  thy  enemy  hunger,  give  him  b.  to  eat
Eccl.  9.  7.  go  thy  way,  eat  thy  b.  with  joy
Isa.  4. 1.  we  will  cat  our  b.  and  wear  our  apparel
Jer.  5. 17.  they  shall  eat  up  thy  harvest  and  thy  b.

41. 1.  there  they  did  eat  b.  together  in  Mizpah
Ezek.  4. 13.  thus  shall  they  eat  their  defiled  b.

16.  they  shall  eat  b.  by  weight  and  with  care

12.  18.  eat  b.  with  quaking  ||  19.  eat  b.  with  care

24. 17.  cover  not  thy  lips,  and  eat  not  b.  of  men,  22.

44.  3.  prince  sit  in  it  to  eat  b.  before  the  Lord
Amos  7. 12.  flee  into  J  udah,  there  eat  b.  and  prophesy
Obad.  7.  they  that  eat  thy  b.  have  laid  a  wound
Mat.  15.  2.  wash  not  their  hands  when  they  eat  b.
Mark  3.  20.  that  they  could  not  so  much  as  eatb.

6.  36.  and  buy  b.  for  they  have  nothing  to  eat

7.  2.  saw  disciples  eat  b.  with  defiled  hands,  5.
Luke  14. 1.  to  Pharisee’s  house  to  eat  b.  on  sabbath

15.  blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  b.  in  kingd.  of  God
John  6. 5.  whence  shall  we  buy  b .  that  these  may  eat  ?
23.  nigh  to  the  place  where  they  did  eat  b.

31.  he  gave  them  b.  from  heaven  to  eat

51.  if  any  man  eat  of  this  b.  he  shall  live  for  ever

1  Cor.  11.  26.  for  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  h.  and  drink
27.  whosoever  shall  eat  this  b.  and  drink  this  cup

2  Thess.  3.  8.  did  we  eat  any  man’s  b.  for  nought?

12.  that  with  quietness  they  work  and  eat  b.

Leavened  BREAD.

Exod.  12. 15.  who  eateth  leav.  b.  that  soul  be  cut  off

13.  3.  there  shall  no  leavened  b.  be  eaten

7.  there  shall  no  leav.  b.  be  seen,  Deut.  16.  3,  4.
Exod.  23. 18.  not  offer  blood  of  my  sacr.  with  leav.  b.
Lev.  7 . 13.  he  shall  offer  for  his  offering  leavened  b.

Loaf  or  Loaves  of  BREAD.

Exod.  29. 23.  one  loaf  of  b.  with  ram  of  consecration
Judg.  8.  5.  give  loaf  of  b.  to  people  that  follow  me

1  Sam.  10.  3.  another  carrying  three  loaves  of  b.

4.  they  will  salute,  and  give  thee  two  loaves  of  b.

21.  3.  give  me  five  loaves  of  b.  in  my  hand

2  Sam.  16.1.  and  upon  asses  two  hundred  loaves  of  b.
1  Chr.  16. 3.  he  dealt  to  every  one  of  Israel  a  loaf  of  b.

No  BREAD.

Gen.  47.  13.  there  was  no  b.  in  all  the  land
Num.  21.  5.  there  is  no  b.  and  our  soul  loatheth
1  Sam..  21.  4.  there  is  no  common  b.  under  my  hand
6.  for  there  was  no  b.  there,  but  shew-bread
28.20.  Saul  had  eaten  no  b.  all  the  day  nor  night

30. 12.  the  Egyptian  had  eaten  no  b.  three  days
1  Kings  13. 9.  eat  no  b.  nor  drink  water,  17 . 22.

21.  4.  turned  away  his  face,  and  would  eat  no  b.

5.  why  is  thy  spirit  so  sad,  that  thou  eatest  no  b.  ?


2  Kings  25. 3.  there  was  no  b.  for  the  people,  Jer. 51.6.
Ezra  10.  6.  when  he  came  thither,  he  did  eat  no  b.

Jer.  38.  9.  for  there  is  no  more  b.  in  the  city
Dan.  10.  3.  1  ate  no  pleasant  b.  nor  came  flesh
Mat.  16.  7.  reasoned  among  themselves,  saying,  it  is
because  we  have  taken  no  b. 8.  Marks.  16, 17-
Mark  6. 8.  take  no  scrip,  no  b.  no  money  in  purse
Piece  or  Pieces  of  BREAD.
lSawi.2.36.  put  me,  l  pray , that  l  may  eat  apiece  of  b.
Prov.  6.  26.  for  by  means  of  a  whorish  woman  a
man  is  brought  to  a  piece  of  b

28.  21.  for  apiece  of  b.  that  man  will  transgress
Jer.  37.  21  to  give  Jeremiah  daily  a  piece  of  b.  .
Ezek.  13. 19.  and  will  ye  pollute  me  tor  pieces  of  b.  ?

Shew-Bread;  see  Shew.

Staff  of  BREAD.

Lev.  26. 26.  when  I  have  broken  staff  of  your  b.
Psal.  105. 16.  moreover,  he  brake  whole  staff  of  b.
Ezek.  4. 16. 1  will  break  staff  of  b.  5. 16.  1 14. 13.
Unleavened  BREAD.

Gen.  19.  3.  Lot  did  bake  unleavened  b.  they  did  eat
Exod.  12. 18.  eat  passover  with unleav.  b.  Num.  9. 11.

15.  seven  days  eat  unleavened  b.  13.  6, 7-  I  23. 15. 1

34. 18.  Lev.  23.  6.  Num.  28. 17-  Deut.  16.  3.

18.  on  fourteenth  day  of  month  eat  unleavened  b.
20.  in  all  your  habitations  shall  ye  eat  unleav.  b.

29.  2.  take  unleavened  b.  to  hallow  the  priests
Lev.  6. 16.  meatoffering  ye  shall  eat  with  unleav.  b.
Num.  6. 15.  wafers  of  unleavened  b.  anointed  with  oil
Deut.  16.  8.  six  days  thou  shalt  eat  unleavened  b.

1  Sam.  28.  24.  witch  of  I'.ndor  did  bake  unleav.  b.

2  1< ings  23. 9.  did  eat  unleav.  b.  among  their  brethren
Ezek.  45.  21.  on  14th  day  passover  of  uni.  b.  be  eaten
Mark  14. 12.  first  day  of  uni.  b.  when  they  killed
Luke  22. 7.  then  came  the  days  of  uni.  b.  Acts  12. 3.
Acts  20.  6.  after  the  days  of  unleavened  b.  we  sailed
1  Cor.  5. 8.  but  with  the  unleavened  b.  of  sincerity

See  Basket,  Feast.

BREADTH.

Gen.  6. 15.  the  fashion  of  the  ark,  the  b.  fifty  cubits

13. 17.  arise,  walk  thro’  the  land  in  the  b.  of  it
Exod.  27. 18.  b.  of  the  court  fifty  cubits  every  where

28. 16.  breast  plate,  a  span  the  b.  thereof,  39.  9.

38. 1.  he  made  the  altar,  five  cubits  the  b.  thereof
Deut.  2.  5.  not  give  of  their  land,  so  much  as  afoot  b.
Judg.  20. 16.  could  sling  stones  at  an  hair’s  b.

1  Kings  6.  2.  the  b.  of  the  Lord’s  house  was  twenty

cubits,  the  length  threescore  cubits,  2  Chron.  3.  3.
7.  6.  the  b.  of  the  porch  was  thirty  cubits

2  Chron.  4. 1.  the  b.  of  the  altar  was  twenty  cubits
Ezra  6. 3.  the  b.  of  the  Lord’s  house  sixty  cubits
Job  37. 10.  and  the  b.  of  the  waters  is  straitened

38. 18.  hast  thou  perceived  the  b.  of  the  earth  ?

Isa.  8.  8.  his  wings  shall  fill  the  b.  of  thy  land
Ezek.  40. 5.  the  b .  of  the  building  ||  11.  b.  of  the  entry

13.  the  b.  of  the  gate,  20, 48.  ||  49.  b.  ot  the  porch

41. 1.  the  b.  of  the  tabernacle  !|  2.  b.oi  the  door,  3.

5.  b.  of  side  chambers  ||  7.  b.  of  house  was  upward
11.  the  b.  of  place  left  ||  14.  b.  of  face  of  the  house

45. 1.  the  b.  of  the  holy  portion  of  the  land
Dan.  3. 1.  the  b.  of  the  image  was  six  cubits
Hab.  1. 6.  which  shall  march  thro’  the  b.  of  the  land
Zech.  2. 2.  to  measure  Jerusalem,  to  see  the  b.

5.  2.  1  see  a  flying  roll,  the  b.  thereof  ten  cubits
Eph.  3. 18.  what  is  the  b.  and  length  and  depth
Rev.  20.  9.  they  went  up  on  the  b.  of  the  earth

21. 16.  the  lenatli  of  the  city  is  as  large  as  the  b.

BREAK.

2  Sam.  2.  32.  Joab  came  to  Hebron  at  b.  of  day
Acts  20. 11.  he  talked  a  long  while  till  b.  of  day
BREAK

Signifies,  [1]  To  dash  to  pieces,  Exod.  34.  13.
[2]  To  make  void,  or  of  none  effect,  1  Kings  15.

19.  [3]  To  punish,  or  afflict,  Job  13.  25.  [4]

To  disunite  and  sever,  Zech.  11.  14.  [5]  To

pant,  or  faint,  Psal.  119.  20.  [6]  To  take  away,
Psal.  105.  16.  [7]  To  weaken,  Psal.  10.  15.

[8]  To  plough,  Jer.  4.  3.  [9]  To  cause  great

sorrow  of  heart,  Acts  21.  13.  [10]  To  shine t

or  appear,  Cant.  2.  17-  [11]  To  profane,  Psal,

89. +  31.  ,  ,

Gen.  19.  9.  they  came  near  to  b.  the  door

27.  40.  thou  shalt  b.  his  yoke  from  oflF  thy  neck
Exod.  12.  46.  nor  shall  ye  b.  a  bone,  Num.  9.  12.

13. 13.  then  thou  shalt  b.  his  neck,  34.  20.

34. 13.  but  ye  shall  b.  their  images,  and  cut  down
Lev.  11. 33.  ever£  earthen  vessel  unclean  ye  shall  b.

26. 19.  I  will  b.  the  pride  of  your  power

Num.  24.  8.  Israel  shall  b.  their  bones,  pierce  them

30. 2.  if  a  man  vow,  he  shall  not  b.  his  word

32.  +  7.  wherefore  b.  ye  the  heart  of  Israel J
Deut.  12. 3.  ye  shall  b.  their  pillars,  and  burn  groves
1  Sam.  25. 10.  b.  away  every  man  from  his  master

1  Kings  15. 19.  b.  thy  league  with  Baasha,2  Chr. 16. 3.
Ezra  9. 14.  should  we  again  b.  thy  commandments
Job  13.  25.  wilt  thou  b.  a  leaf  driven  to  and  tro  ?

39. 15.  forgetteth  that  the  wild  beast  may  b.  them
Psal.  2.  3.  let  us  b.  their  bands  asunder
9.  thou  shalt  b.  them  with  a  rod  of  iron

10.  15.  b.  thou  the  arm  of  the  wicked
58.  6.  b.  their  teeth,  O  God,  in  their  mouth
74.  +  8.  they  said  in  their  hearts,  let  us  b.  them
89. 31.  if  they  b.  my  statutes  and  keep  not  my  com.
104.  +  11.  the  wild  asses  b.  their  thirst
141.  5.  shall  be  an  oil  which  shall  not  b.  my  head
Cant.  2. 17.  until  day  b.  and  shadows  flee  away,4. 6
Isa.  14. 25.  1  will  b.  the  Assyrian  in  my  land

28.  24.  b.  the  clods  ||  28.  not  o.  it  with  a  wheel

30.  14.  b.  it  as  the  breaking  ot  a  potter  s  vessel

38. 13.  as  a  lion  so  will  he  b.  all  my  bones

42.  3.  a  bruised  reed  will  he  not  b.  Mat.  12.  20.

58.  6.  is  not  this  the  fast,  that  ye  b.  every  yoke  ?

Jer.  15. 12.  shall  iron  b.  the  northern  iron  and  steel  ?

16.  +  7.  neither  shall  men  b.  bread  tor  them

17.  + 18.  b.  them  with  a  double  breach

19.  10.  b.  the  bottle,  so  will  1  b.  this  people,  11.

28. 4.  I  will  b.  yoke  of  king  of  Babylon,  11. 1  30.8.

43.  13.  he  shall  b.  the  images  of  Beth-shemesh

48. 12. 1  will  send  wanderers  and  b.  Moab’s  bottles
49.  35.  saith  the  Lord,  1  will  b.  the  bow  of  Elam
Ezek.  4. 16. 1  will  b.  the  staff  of  bread,  5. 16. 1 14. 13.
16. 38.  judge  thee  as  women  that  b.  wedlock


B  RE


B  R  E


B  RE


Etek.  23-  34.  thou  shalt  5.  the  sherds  thereof

29.  7.  when  they  took  hold  of  thee  thou  didst  b.

30.  18.  when  I  shall  b.  the  yokes  of  Egypt

22.  and  I  will  b.  Pharaoh  s  arms,  24.

Hos.  1.  5.  1  will  h.  the  bow  of  Israel  in  Jezreel
£.  18.  I  will  b.  the  bow,  the  sword  and  battle

10.11.  Judah  shall  plow,  and  .lacob  shall  5.  his  clods
Joel  2.  7-  they  shall  march  and  not  b.  their  ranks
Amos  1.  5.  I  will  b.  the  bar  of  Damascus

Mie.  3.  3.  who  flay  their  skin,  and  b.  their  bones
Nah.  1.  13.  now  w  ill  1  b.  his  yoke  from  off  thee
Zee h.  11. 14.  that  l  might  b.  the  brotherhood
Mat.  5. 19.  b.  one  of  these  least  commandments

9.  17.  else  the  bottles  b.  and  the  wine  runneth
Acts  20.  7.  the  disciples  came  together  to  b.  bread

21.  IS.  what  mean  ye  to  weep  and  to  5.  my  heart  t

1  Cor.  10.  16.  the  bread  which  we  b.  is  it  not

PREAK  covenant.

Ltv£.6A5.  but  that  ye  b.  my  c.  ||  44. 1  will  not  i.  my  c.
Dent  31.  16.  this  people  will  b.  my  cov.  1  made,  20.
Judo.  2.  1.  1  said,  I  will  never  b.  my  cov.  with  you
Psetl.  89.  34.  my  c.  will  I  not  b.  nor  alter  the  thing
Jer.  14.  21.  remember,  b.  not  thy  covenant  with  us
33.  20.  if  ye  can  b.  my  cov.  of  the  day  and  night
Etek.  17.  15.  shall  he  5.  covenant  and  be  delivered
Ztch.  11.  10.  that  1  might  b.  my  cov.  which  I  made
BREAK  down.

Exod.  23.  24.  quite  b.  down  their  images,  Deut.  7.5.
Lev.  14.  45.  and  he  shall  b.  dozen  house,  the  stones
Deut.  12.  +  3.  ye  shall  b.  dozen  their  altars
Judo.  8.  9.  when  I  come  again,  1  will  b.  dozen  tower
Neh.  4.  3.  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  b.  dozen  stone  wall
Psal.  74.  6.  now  they  0.  down  the  carved  work
Eccl  3  3.  a  time  to  b.  down  and  a  time  to  build
Isa.  5.  5.  I  will  b.  down  the  wall  of  the  vineyard
Jer.  31.  28.  as  I  have  watched  over  them  to  b.  down
45.’  4.  that  which  i  have  built  will  I  b.  down
Etek.  13. 14.  so  will  l  b.  dozen  wall  ye  have  daubed
16.  39.  they  shall  b.  down  thy  high  places
£6.  4.  they  shall  b.  dozen  the  towers  of  lyrus
12.  and  they  shall  b.  down  thy  walls
Hos.  10.  2.  he  shall  b.  dozen  their  altars,  and  spoil
BREAK  forth.

Exod.  19.  22.  lest  the  Lord  b.  forth  upon  them,  24.
Da.  14. 7.  they  b.f.  into  sing.  44.  23.  I  49. 13.  1  54. 1.
52. 9.  b.  forth  into  joy ,  sing  together,  ye  waste  places
54  3.  for  thou  shalt  b.  forth  on  the  right  hand

55. 12.  hills  shall  b.  forth  before  you  into  singing
58.  8.  then  shall  thy  light  b.  forth  as  the  morning

Jer.  1.  14.  out  of  the  north  an  evil  shall  b.  forth
Gal.  4  27.  b.  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travailest  not
BREAK  off.

Gen.  27. 40.  thou  shalt  b.  his  yoke  off  thy  neck
Exod.  32.  2.  b.  off  the  golden  ear  rings,  24.

Dan.  4.  27.  O  king-,  b.  off  thy  sins  by  righteousness
BREAK  out.

Exod.  22. 6.  if  fire  b.  out  ||  Lev.  13. 12.  if  leprosy  b.  out
Lev.  14.  43.  if  the  plague  come  again  and  b.  out
Psal.  58.  6.  b.  out  the  great  teeth  of  the  young  lion
Isa.  35.  6.  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  b.  out
Lius.  4.  2.  they  b.  out,  and  blood  toucheth  blood
Amos  5. 6.  lest  he  b.  owdike  fire  in  the  house  of  Joseph
B  R  KA  K  in  pieces.

t  Kings  25. 13.  Chaldeans  b.  in  pieces  pillars  of  brass
Job  19.2.  how  long  will  ye  b.  me  inpieces  with  words?
34. 24.  shall  b.  in  pieces  mighty  men  without  number
Psal.  72.  4.  he  shall  b.  in  pieces  the  oppressor
94.  5.  they  b.  in  pieces  thy  people,  O  Lord
Isa.  45.  2.  I  will  b.  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass
Jer.  1.  +  17.  lest  I  b.  thee  inpieces  before  them
51.  20.  with  thee  will  I  b.  in  pieces  the  nations

21.  with  thee  b.  in  pieces  horse  and  rider,  chariot

22.  with  thee  b.  in  p.  man,  woman,  old  and  young
Dan.  2.  40.  shall  it  b.  inp.  and  bruise  kingdoms,  44.

7.  23.  the  fourth  beast  shall  b.  in  pieces  whole  earth
BREAK  through.

Exod.  19.  21.  lest  they  b.  thro'  to  the  Lord  to  gaze
24.  let  not  the  priests  and  people  b.  through

2  Kings  3.  26.  to  b.  through  to  the  king  of  Edom
Mat.  6.  19.  thieves  b.  thro ’  [|  20.  thieves  b.  not  thro'

BREAK  up.

2  Chron.  32. 1 1.  Sennacherib  thought  to  b.  them  up
Jer.  4.  3.  b.  up  your  fallow  ground,  Hos.  10.  12.
BREAKER.

Etek.  18. 1 10.  if  he  beget  a  son,  a  b.  up  of  a  house
Mic.  2. 13.  b.  is  come  up  ||  Bom.  2.  25.  if  a  b.  of  law
BREAKERS.

Rom.  1.  31.  without  understanding,  covenant  5.
BREAKEST.

Psal.  48. 7.  thou  b.  ships  of  Tarshish  with  east-wind
BREAKETH.

Gen.  32.  26.  he  said,  let  me  go,  for  the  day  b.

Job  9.  17.  for  he  b.  me  with  tempest  and  multiplies
12.  14.  he  b.  down,  and  it  cannot  be  built  again
16.  14.  he  5.  me  with  breach  upon  breach

28.  4.  the  flood  b.  out  from  the  inhabitants
Psal.  10.  +  10.  he  b.  himself,  that  the  poor  may  fall

29.  5.  b.  the  cedars  II  46.  9.  he  5.  the  bow
119.  20.  my  soul  b.  for  the  longing  that  it  hath

Prov.  25.  15.  and  a  soft  tongue  b.  the  bone
Eccl.  10.  8.  whoso  b.  an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  bite
Isa.  59.  5.  which  is  crushed  b.  out  into  a  viper
Jer.  19. 11  .as  one  b.  a  potter’s  vessel,  not  made  whole

23.  29.  is  not  my  word  like  a  hammer  that  b.  rock  ?
Lam.  4.4.  children  ask  bread,  and  no  man  b.  it
Dan.  2.  40.  forasmuch  as  iron  b.  in  pieces  all  these

BREAKING.

Gen.  32.  24.  there  wrestled  a  man  till  the  b.  of  day
Exod.  9.  9.  shall  be  a  boyl  b.  forth  w.th  blains,  10.

22.  2.  if  a  thief  be  found  b.  up,  and  be  smitten
Judg.  7.+  15.  Gideon  heard  the  dream,  and  b.  thereof
2  Kings  11.  t6.  keep  the  watch  of  the  house  from  b. up
1  Chron.  14.  11.  on  enemies,  like  b.  forth  of  waters
Job  30. 14.  came  upon  me  as  a  wide  b.  in  of  waters
41.  25.  by  reason  of  b.  they  purify  themselves
Psal.  144. 14.  that  there  be  no  b.  in  nor  going  out
Isa.  22.  5.  b.  down  walls,  and  of  crying  to  mount.

30.  13.  whose  b.  cometh  suddenly  at  an  instant
14.  shall  break  it  as  the  b.  of  the  potter's  vessel

Etek.  16. 59.  despised  the  oath  in  b.  covenant,  17. 18
21.  6.  sigh,  son  of  man,  with  b.  of  thy  loins
Hos.  13. 13.  not  stav  long  in  place  of  b.  forth  ol  chil.


L.uke  24.  35.  he  was  known  of  them  in  b.  of  bread
John  7.  +  23.  without  5.  the  law  of  Moses
Acts  2. 42.  they  continued  in  b.  of  bread  and  prayeis
46.  in  the  temple,  b.  bread  from  house  to  house
Rom.  2. 23.  through  b.  the  law,  dishonourest  God
BREAST.

Exod.  29-  26.  take  the  b.  of  the  ram  ot  consecration

27.  shall  sanctify  the  b.  of  the  wave  offering
Lev.  7.  30.  b.  may  be  waved,  the  fat  with  the  b.

31.  but  the  b.  snail  be  Aaron’s  and  his  sons’

34.  the  wave-/;,  and  heave  shoulder  have  1  taken
8. 29.  Moses  took  the  b.  and  waved  it  tor  an  offering
10.  14.  the  wave-5,  shall  ye  eat  in  a  clean  place
Num.  6.  20.  is  holy  to  the  priest,  with  the  wave-5.

18. 18.  as  wave-5,  and  right  shoulder  are  thine
Job  24.  9.  they  pluck  the  fatherless  from  the  5.

Isa.  60. 16.  thou  shalt  suck  the  5.  of  kings
Lam.  4. 3.  even  the  sea  monsters  draw  out  the  5.
Dan.  2. 32.  head  of  gold,  his  5.  and  his  arms  of
Luke  18. 13.  the  publican  smote  upon  his  5.  saying
John  13.  25.  he  then  lying  on  Jesus’  5.  saith,  21. 20.
BREASTS.

Gen.  49.  25.  bless  with  blessings  of  the  5.  and  womb
Lev.  9.  20.  put  fat  on  the  5.  |!  21.  5.  Aaron  waved
Job  3. 12.  or  why  the  5.  that  1  should  suck
21.  24.  his  5.  full  of  milk,  and  his  bones  moistened
Psal.  22.  9.  make  me  hope  when  I  was  on  mother’s  5.
Prov.  5.  19.  let  her  5.  satisfy  thee  at  all  times
Cant.  1. 13.  he  shall  lie  all  night  betwixt  my  5.

4.  5.  thy  two  5.  are  like  two  young  roes,  7*  3.

7.  7.  thy  5.  are  like  to  clusters  of  grapes
8.  thy  5.  sh  dl  be  as  clusters  of  the  vine

8.  1.  my  brother  that  sucked  the  5.  of  my  mother
8.  we  have  a  little  sister,  and  she  hath  no  5.

10.  I  aura  wall,  and  my  5.  like  towers
Isa.  28.  9.  are  weaned  from  the  milk  drawn  from  5.

66. 11.  he  satisfied  with  the  5.  of  her  consolations
Etek.  16.  7.  thy  5.  are  fashioned,  and  hair  grown
23. 3.  there  were  their  5.  pressed,  there  they  bruised
8.  and  they  bruised  the  5.  of  her  virginity
34.  and  thou  shalt  pluck  off  thine  own  5.

Hos.  2.  2.  put  away  her  adulteries  from  betw.  her  5.

9.  14.  give  them  a  miscarrying  womb  and  dry  5.
Joel  2.  16.  and  gather  those  that  suck  the  5.

Nah.  2. 7.  as  with  voice  of  doves  tabring  on  their  5.
Luke  23.  48.  the  people  smote  their  5.  and  returned
Rev.  15. 6.  having  their  5.  girded  with  golden  girdles
BREAST-PLATE

Was  a  piece  of  embroidery  of  about  ten  inches
square,  of  very  rich  work,  which  the  high-priest
of  the  Jews  wore  upon  his  breast,  and  which  was
set  with  four  rows  of  precious  stones,  upon  every
one  of  which  was  engraven  the  name  of  one  of
the  tribes  of  Israel  :  It  was  double,  or  made  of
two  pieces  folded  one  upon  the  other ,  like  a  kind
of  purse,  or  bag,  that  it  might  the  better  support
the  precious  stones,  and  that  it  might  receive  the
Urim  and  Thummim,  Lev.  8.  8.  It  was  called
the  Breast-plate  of  judgment,  Exod.  28.  15.  be¬
cause  frem  thence  the  Israelites  were  to  expect
and  receive  their  judgment,  and  the  mind  of  God
in  all  those  weighty  and  momentous  matters  of
war  and  peace,  wherein  they  consulted  God  for
direction.  ,  .

Breast-plate  is  likewise  a  piece  of  defensive  ar¬
mour,  Rev.  9.  9.  In  which  sense,  faith  and  love
are  called  Breast-plates  ;  1  These.  5.  8.  Faith
is  a  defensive  grace  ;  not  only  as  it  assents  to  the
doctrine  of  the  gospel  as  true,  but  also  as  it  doth
depend  upon  God's  faithfulness  and  all-suffi¬
ciency  to  perform  his  promises,  and  apply  them
to  out  souls  for  our  support  and  comfort.  Love,
zc hen  it  worketh,  will  defend  against  the  perse¬
cutions,  afflictions,  and  temptations  of  the  world.
Cant.  8.  7.  Slavish  fear  will _  overcome  us,  if
we  want  love  to  defend  against  it,  when  true  re¬
ligion  is  under  disgrace,  and  persecuted  in  the
world,  1  John  4.  18.  Love  will  defend  against
apostacy,  arid  so  help  us  to  persevere  to  the  com¬
ing  of  Christ ;  and  love,  being  seated  in  the  heart,
is  fitly  compared  to  a  Breast-plate  that  encom-
passeth  the  heart.

Exod.  25.  7 .  and  stones  to  be  set  in  the  5.  35.  9.

28.  4.  shall  make  a  5.  and  ephod,  15.  |  39.  8.

22.  thou  shalt  make  upon  the  5.  chains  at  the  end

23.  put  rings  on  two  ends  of  the  5.  26.  |  39.  16.

28.  they  shall  hind  the  5.  by  the  rings,  39.  21.

29.  Aaron  shall  bear  the  names  of  Israel  in  5.

30.  put  in  5.  of  judgment  the  Urim,  Lev.  8.  8.

1  Kings  22.  +34.  smote  Ahab  between  joints  and  5.
Isa.  59.  17.  he  put  on  righteousness  as  a  5.

Eph.  6. 14.  having  on  the  5.  of  righteousness

1  Thess.  5.  8.  putting  on  the  5.  of  faith  and  love
Rev.  9.  9.  they  had  5,  as  it  were  5.  of  iron

17.  having  5.  of  fire,  of  jacinth,  and  brimstone
BREATH

Signifies,  [1]  The  air  received  and  discharged  by
our  bodies,  by  the  dilatation  and  compression  of
the  lungs.  Job  9.  18.  [2]  The  life,  Psal.  146.  4.

Dan.  5.  23.  [3]  God's  powerjul  word,  Psal.

33.  6.  Isa.  11.  4.  [4]  His  anger,  Job  4.  9.  Isa.
30.  33.

Gen‘.  2.7.  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  5.  of  life
6.  17.  to  destroy  all  flesh  wherein  is  the  5.  of  life
7. 15.  entered  two  and  two  wherein  is  the  5.  of  life
22.  all  in  whose  nostrils  was  5.  of  life  died
Josh.  11.  +  11.  he  destroyed,  there  was  not  any  5.

2  Sam.  22.  16.  foundations  of  the  world  discovered

at  the  blast  of  the  5.  of  his  nostrils,  Rva/.  18. 15
1  Kings  17.  17 .  and  there  was  no  5.  left  in  him
Job  4.  9.  by  the  5.  of  his  nostrils  are  they  consumed
9. 18.  he  will  not  suffer  me  to  take  my  5.

11.  +  20.  their  hope  shall  be  as  a  puff  of  5.

12.  10.  in  whose  hand  is  the  5.  ot  all  mankind
15.  30.  by  the  5.  of  his  mouth  shall  he  go  away
17. 1.  my  5.  is  corrupt,  my  days  are  extinct

19. 17.  my  5.  is  strange  to  my  wife,  tho’  I  entreated
27  3.  all  the  while  my  5.  is  in  me,  and  Sp.  of  God
33.  4.  the  5.  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  life
34. 14.  if  he  gather  to  himself  his  Spirit  and  5.

37.  10.  by  the  5.  of  God  frost  is  given

41 . 21.  his  5.  kindleth  coals,  and  a  flame  goetb


Psal.  33. 6.  all  of  them  made  by  the  5.  ot  his  moutb
104.  29.  thou  takest  away  their  5.  they  die
135.  17-  nor  is  there  any  5.  in  their  mouths
146.  4.  his  5.  goeth  forth,  he  returneth  to  earth
150.  6.  let  every  thing  that  hath  5.  praise  the  Lord
Eccl.  3.  19.  yea,  they  have  all  one  5.  all  is  vanity
Isa.  2.  22.  cease  from  man,  w hose  5.  is  in  his  nostrils*

11.  4.  with  5.  of  his  lips  will  he  slay  the  wicked
30. 28.  and  his  5.  as  an  overflowing  stream  reach

33.  5.  of  the  Lord  like  a  stream  of  brimstone
33.  11.  your  5.  as  fire  shall  devour  you

42.  5.  he  that  eiveth  5.  to  the  people  upon  it
Jer.  10.  14.  and  there  is  no  5.  in  them,  51. 17.

Lam.  4. 20.  the  5.  of  our  nostrils,  the  anointed  of  L.
Ezek.  37.5. 1  will  cause  5.to enter  into  you, shall  live-
6.  I  will  cover  yrou  with  skin,  and  put  5.  in  you
8.  there  was  no  5.  in  them  l|  9.  and  say,  come,  O  5.

10.  and  the  5.  came  into  them  and  they  lived
Dan.  5.  23.  the  God  in  whose  hand  thy  5.  is
10.  17.  no  strength,  neither  is  there  5.  left  in  me
Hab.  2.  19.  there  is  no  5.  at  all  in  midst  of  the  image
Acts  17.  25.  seeing  he  givetli  to  all  life  and  5.

Jam.  2.  +  26.  the  body  without  5.  is  dead
Rev.  13.  + 15.  he  had  power  to  give  5.  to  the  image
BREA  11IE

Signifies,  [1]  To  draw  breath  naturally,  as  man
and  beast  do,  Josh.  10.  40.  [2]  To  infuse  the  soul
into  the  body,  Gen.  2.  7-.  [3]  To  live,  breathing
or  respiration  being  a  sign  of  life.  Josh.  11.  11.

[4]  To  inspire  with  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  John  20.  22.

Josh.  11. 11.  there  was  not  any  left  to  5.  14.

Job  31.  +  39.  caused  soul  of  the  owners  to  5.  out
Ps.  27.12.  witnesses  risen,  and  such  as  5.  out  cruelty
Cant.  4.  +  6.  till  the  day  5.  and  shadows  flee  away
Ezek.  37.  9.  come,  O  breath,  and  5.  on  these  slain
BREATHED.

Gen.  2.  7.  God  5.  into  man’s  nostrils  the  5.  of  life
Josh.  10.  40.  but  utterly  destroyed  all  that  5.

1  Kings  15.  29.  he  left  not  to  Jeroboam  any  that  b.
John  20.  22.  he  5.  on  them,  and  saith,  receive  ye
BREATH ETH,  ING.

Deut.  20.  16.  thou  shalt  save  alive  nothing  that  5.
Lam.  3.  56.  hide  not  thine  ear  at  my  5.  at  my  cry
Acts  9. 1.  Saul  yet  5.  out  threatenings  and  slaughter
BRED.

Exod.  16. 20.  some  left,  and  it  5.  worms  and  stank
BREECHES.

Exod.  28. 42.  thou  shalt  make  them  linen  5.  39.  28.
Lev.  6.  10.  the  priest  shall  put  on  his  linen  5.

16.  4.  he  shall  have  the  linen  5.  on  his  flesh
Ezek.  44. 18.  they  shall  have  linen  5.  on  their  loins
BREED.

Gen.  8. 17.  that  they  may  5.  abundantly  on  the  earth
BREED.

Deut.  32. 14.  rams  of  the  5.  of  Eashan  and  goat3
BREEDING.

Zevh.  2. 9.  as  Sodom,  even  5.  of  nettles  and  salt-pits
BRETHREN.

Men  are  so  called,  [1]  By  being  the  sons  of  one
father  and  mother,  or  of  either  of  them,  Gen.  42.
13.  [2]  By  community  of  nature,  or  habitation,
Gen.  19.7.  [3]  By  natural  affinity,  or  by  being
kinsmen,  Gen.  13.  8.  [4]  .By  regeneration,  and  „
profession  of  the  same  faith  and  religion.  Col.  1,

2.  [5]  By  adaption,  John  20.  17*  [6]  By  office,

1  Chron.  25.  9.  2  Cor.  8.  23.  „

Gen.  13.  8.  let  there  be  no  strife,  for  we  be  5.

19.  7.  Lot  said,  1  pray  you,  5.  do  not  so  wickedly

24.  27.  I.ord  led  me  to  the  house  of  my  master’s  5.

34.  11.  Shechem  said  to  her  father  and  to  her  5.

25.  Dinah’s  5.  took  each  man  his  sword  and  slew

42.  3.  Joseph’s  ten  5.  went  down  to  buy  corn

6.  5.  came  and  bowed  ||  13.  we  are  twelve  5. 32.

45. 16.  Joseph’s  5.  are  come  H  49.  5.  are  5.  of  cruelty
50. 15.  Joseph’s  5.  saw  their  father  was  dead

Num.  27.  4.  give  us  a  possession  among  the  5.

7.  give  us  a  possession  among  our  father’s  5.

10.  if  he  have  no  5.  give  it  to  his  lather’s  5.

11.  if  his  father  have  no  5.  ye  shall  give  to  kinsmen
Deut.  25. 5.  if  5.  dwell  together  and  one  of  them  die
Josh.  6.  23.  Rahab  brought  out  her  father  and  5.

17.  4.  he  gave  them  an  inheritance  among  the  5.
Judg.  9.  1.  Abimelech  went  to  his  mother's  5.

3.  his  mother’s  5.  spake  of  him  to  men  of  Shechem
2  Kings  10. 13.  they  answered,  we  are  5.  of  Ahaziah

1  Chron.  12.  2.  there  came  to  David  ot  Saul’s  5.

26. 7.  sons  of  Shemaiah,  whose  5.  were  strong  men
27. 18.  of  Judah,  Elihu,  one  of  the  5.  of  David

2  Chron.  21.  2.  he  had  5.  the  sons  of  Jehoshaphat

22.8.  when  Jehu  found  the  5.  of  Ahaziah

Psal.  133.1.  pleasant  for  5.to  dwell  together  in  unity
Prov.  6. 19.  and  him  that  soweth  discord  among  5.
17.  2.  shall  have  part  of  the  inheritance  among  5.
19.  7.  all  the  5.  of  the  poor  do  hate  him
Amos  1.  +  9.  remembered  not  the  covenant  of  5.
Mat.  4.  18.  Jesus  saw  two  5.  ||  21.  saw  other  two  5 .

19.  29.  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  houses,  5.

20.  24.  were  moved  with  indignation  against  two  5.

22.  25.  there  were  with  us  seven  b.  Mark  12.  20.

23.  8.  one  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  all  ye  are  5
Mark  10.  29.  no  man  hath  left  house  or  5.  father,
mother,  wife,  or  children,  for  my  sake,  Luke  18.  29.

30.  shall  receive  an  hundred-fold,  houses,  5.

Luke  14.  26.  if  any  come,  and  hate  not  children  5.
16.  28.  for  I  have  five  5.that  he  may  testify  to  them

21.  16.  ye  shall  be  betrayed  by  parents  and  5.

John  21.  23.  this  saying  went  abroad  among  the  5.
Acts  3.  17.  5.1  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  itr
*6.  3.  wherefore  5.  look  out  among  you  seven  men

7!  26.  sirs,  ye  are  5.  ||  9.  30.  which  when  the  5.  knew

10.  23.  certain  5.  from  Joppa  accompanied  him

11.  12.  moreover  these  six  5.  accompanied  me
29.  they  determined  to  send  relief  to  the  5.

12.  if.  go  shew  these  things  to  James  and  to  the  5.
14. 2.  made  their  minds  evil  affected  against  the  5.
15.  1.  certain  men  from  Judea  taught  the  5.

3.  and  they  caused  great  joy  to  all  the  5.

15.  22.  Barsabas  and  Silas  chief  among  the  5.

23.  apostles  and  elders  and  5.  send  greeting  to  the
5.  which  are  of  the  Gentiles  in  Antioch,
32.  exhorted  the  5.  with  many  words,  1  Thess.  5. 14.

1  Ois


BRE


B  R  E


B  R  I


.<4cr.fl5.33.were  let  go  in  peace  from  the  A. to  aposties
40.  being  recommended  bv  the  b.  to  grace  of  God

16.  2.  Timotheus  was  well  reported  of  by  the  h.
40.  when  they  had  seen  the  b.  they  comforted

17.  6.  they  drew  Jason  and  certain  b.  to  the  rulers
10.  the  b.  immediately  sent  away  Paul,  14.

18.  18.  Paul  then  took  his  leave  of  the  b.

27-  the  b.  wrote  exhorting  to  receive  A  polios
20. 32.  now  b.  1  commend  you  to  God  and  his  grace

21.  7.  we  came  to  Ptolemais  and  saluted  the  b.

17-  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  b.  received  us  gladly

22.  5.  from  whom  also  l  received  letters  to  the  b.

23.  5.  I  wist  not,  b.  that  he  was  the  high-priest

28. 14.  where  we  found  b.  and  were  desired  to  tarry

15.  when  the  b.  heard  of  us,  they  cametomeetus
21.  nor  any  of  the<L  that  came  spake  harm  of  thee

Rom.  1. 13.  now  I  would  not  have  you  ismorant,  b.
11.  25.  1  Cor.  10. 1.  1  12. 1.  1  Thess.  4.  13.

7.  1.  know  ye  not,  b.  that  the  law  hath  dominion

8.  12.  b.  we  are  debtors,  not  to  the  tlesh,  to  live

29.  that  he  might  be  the  first-born  among  many  b.

10. 1.  b.  my  prayer  to  God  for  Isr.  is,  may  be  saved

12. 1.  I  beseecli  you  therefore,  b.  by  the  mercies  of

God,  15.  30. 1  16.  17.  1  Cor.  1.  10. 1  16.  15.
Gal.  4.  12.  Tleb.  13.  22.

+  10.  be  kindly  affectioned  in  love  of  the  b.

16. 14.  salute  the  b.  which  are  with  them,  Col.  4. 15.
±  Cor.  1. 26.  for  ye  see  your  calling,  b.  how  that

2.  1.  and  1,  b.  when  I  came  to  you,  came  not  with

3.  1.  I,  b.  could  not  speak  to  you  as  to  spiritual

4.  6.  these  things,  b.  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred
7.  29-  but  this  l  say,  b.  the  time  is  short,  15.  50.
8.12.  when  ye  sin  so  against  the  b.  ye  sin  against  Ch.

9.  5.  and  as  the  b.  ot  the  Lord  and  Cephas

11.  2.  now  I  praise  you,  b.  that  ye  remember  me

14.  26.  how  is  it,  b.  when  ye  come  together

15.  6.  after  he  was  seen  or  above  500  b.  at  once
58.  therefore  my  beloved,  b.  be  stedfast,  Jam.  2. 5.

16.  11.  for  1  look  for  him  with  the  b.

12.  1  desired  him  to  come  to  you  with  the  b.

20.  all  the  b.  greet  you,  Phil.  4.  21.

2  Cor.  9.  3.  yet  nave  I  sent  the  b.  lest  our  boasting
5.  I  thought  it  necessary  to  exhort  the  b.

11.  9.  the  b.  which  came  from  Macedonia  supplied
26.  I  have  been  in  perils  among  false  b.

13. 11.  finally  b.  farewell, be  perfect,  of  good  comfort
Gal.  1.  2.  all  b.  that  are  with  me  to  the  churches

2.  4.  because  of  false  b.  unawares  brought  in
Eph,  6.  23.  peace  be  to  the  b.  and  love  with  faith
Phil.  1.  14.  many  of  the  b.  waxing  confident.

Col.  1.  2.  to  the  saints  and  faithful  b.  in  Christ
1  Thess A.l.  we  beseech  you  iL10.|!5. 12.  2  Thess.  2.1.
10.  indeed  ye  do  it  towards  all  b.  in  Macedonia

5.  25.  b.  prav  for  us,  2  Thess.  3.  1 .

26.  greet  all  the  b.  with  an  holy  kiss

27.  that  this  epistle,  be  read  to  all  the  holy  b.

1  Tim.  A.  6.  put  the  b.  in  remembrance  of  these  things

5.  1.  intreat  him  as  a  father,  and  younger  men  as  b.

6.  2.  let  them  not  despise  them  because  they  are  b.
Tleb.  2.  11.  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  b.

3. 1.  holy  b.  partakers,  consider  the  Apostle
1  Pet.  1.  22.  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  b.

3.8.  be  of  one  mind,  love  asi.be  pitiful, be  courteous
1  John  3.  14.  from  death  to  life,  because  we  love  b.

16.  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  b.

3  JohnS.  rejoiced  greatly  when  b.  testified  of  truth
5  whatsoever  thou  doest  to  the  b.  and  to  strangers

10.  neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the  b.

His  BRETHREN.

Gen.  9.  22.  and  IJam  told  his  two  b.  without

25.  Canaan,  a  servant  of  servants  shall  be  to  his  b.
16.  12.  he  shall  dwell  in  presence  of  his  b.  25.  18.
27.  37.  his  b.  have!  given  to  him  for  servants
37-  2.  Joseph  was  feeding  the  flock  with  his  b.

5.  Joseph  dreamed  a  dream  and  told  it  his  b.

11.  his  b. envied  him,  his  father  observed  the  saying

30.  Reuben  returned  to  his  b.  and  said,  child  is  not;
38.  11.  for  he  said,  lest  he  die  also  as  hit  b.  did
44.  33.  and  let  the  lad  go  up  with  his  b.

47.  12.  Joseph  nourished  his  father  and  his  b.

49.  26.  that  was  separate  from  his  b.  Dent.  33. 16.
Exod.  1.  6.  losephdied,  his  b.  and  all  that  generation

2. 11.  Moses  went  out  to  his  b.  and  looked  on  their
burdens,  and  spied  an  Egypt,  smiting  one  of  his  b.

Lev.  21.  10.  and  he  that  is  nigh-priest  among  his  b.
25. 48.  after  he  is  sold ,  one  of  his  b.  may  redeem  him
Hum.  25.  6.  brought  to  his  b.  a  Midianitish  woman
27-  9.  then  shall  Ve  give  his  inheritance  to  his  b.
Dent.  10.  9.  Levi  hath  no  partwith  his  b.

17-  20.  that  his  heart  be  not  lifted  up  above  his  b.
18.7-  he  shall  minister  as  all  his  b.  the  Levites  do
£0.  8.  lest  his  b.  heart  faint  as  well  as  his  heart

24.  7-  if  a  man  be  found  stealing  any  of  his  b.

33.  9.  nor  did  he  acknowledge  his  b.  nor  knew

24.  let  Asher  be  blessed  and  acceptable  to  his  b.
Judg.  9.  5.  Abimelech  slew  his  h.  being  70  persons

26.  Gaal  came  with  his  b.  and  went  to  Shechem
56.  which  he  did  to  his  father  in  slaying  his  70  b.

11.  3.  Jephthah  fled  from  his  b.  and  dwelt  in  Tob
Ruth  4. 10.  name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  off  from  his  h.

1  Sam.  16. 13.  Samuel  anointed  him  in  midst  of  his  b.
22.  1.  when  his  b.  and  father's  house  heard  it

2  Kings  9.  2.  make  him  rise  up  from  among  his  b.

1  Cliron.  4.  9.  labez  more  honourable  than  his  b.

5.  2.  for  Judah  prevailed  above  his  b.

7-22.  Ephraim  mourned,  his  b.  came  to  comfort  him

25.  9.  with  his  b.  and  sons  were  twelve

[■S’o  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  ]

2  Chr.  21. 4.  Jehoram  slew  all  his  b.  with  the  sword
Esth.  10.  3.  Mordecai  the  Jew  was  accepted  of  his  b.
Hos.  13.  15.  though  he  be  fruitful  among  his  b.
Mic.  5. 3.  the  remnant  of  his  b.  shall  return  to  Israel
Mat.  12.  46.  his  mother  and  hisb.  stood  without,  de¬
siring  to  speak  with  him,  Mark  3.  31.  Luke  8. 19.

John  7-  5.  for  neither  did  his  h.  believe  in  him
Acts  7-  13.  Joseph  was  made  known  to  his  b.

23.  it  came  into  Moses’  heart  to  visit  his  b.

25.  for  he  supposed  his  b.  would  have  understood
1  Cor.  6.  5.  not  one  able  to  judge  between  his  b.
Tleb.  2.  17.  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  like  to  hisb.

Men  and  BRETHREN.

Acts  1. 16.  men  and  b.  this  scripture  must  be  fulfilled

40


Acts  2.  29  m.  and  b.  let  me  freely  speak  to  you  of  D.
37-  Peter  and  rest,  men  and  b.  what  shall  we  do  ?

7-  2.  and  he  said,  men,  b.  and  fathers,  hearken

13. 1  b.menandb.  if  ye  have  any  word  of  exhortation
26.  men  andb.  children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham

38.  be  it  known  to  you,  men  and  b.  thro’  this  man
15.  7.  men  and  b.  ye  know  G.made  choice  among  us

13.  James  answered,  men  and  b.  hearken  unto  me
22.  1.  men  b.  and  fathers,  hear  my  defence

23. 1.  men  andb.  1  ha  e  lived  in  all  good  conscience
6.  men  andb.  I  am  a  Pharisee,  the  son  of  a  Pharisee
28. 17  men  and  b.  tho’  l  have  committed  nothing
My  BRETHREN.

Gen.  29. 4.  Jacob  said  to  them,  my  b.  whence  be  ye  ?

31.  37.  set  it  here  before  my  b.  and  thy  brethren
37. 16.  I  seek  my  b.  tell  me  where  they  feed  flocks

46. 31.  my  b.  and  father’s  house  are  come  to  me,  47.1.
Exod.  4. 18.  let  me  go  and  return  to  my  b.  in  Egypt
Josh.  2. 13.  they  will  save  alive  my  father  and  my  b.

14.  8.  my  b.  made  the  heart  of  the  people  melt
Judg.  8.  19.  Gideon  said,  they  were  my  b.

19.  23.  my  b.  1  pray  you,  do  not  so  wickedly

1  Sam.  20.  29.  let  me  get  away,  I  pray,  and  see  my  b.

30.  23.  then  David  said,  ye  shall  not  do  so,  my  b.

2  Sam.  19. 12.  ye  are  my  b.  my  bones,  and  my  flesh

1  Chr.  28. 2.  David-said,  hear  me,  my  b.  and  people
Neh.  1.  2.  Hanani,  one  of  my  b.  came  and  men

4.  23.  1  nor  my  b.  nor  guard  put  oft'  our  clothes

5. 10.  I  and  my  b.  might  exact  of  them  money

14.  I  and  my  b.  have  not  eaten  bread  of  governor
Job  6.  15.  my  b.  have  dealt  deceitfully

19. 13.  he  hath  put  my  b.  far  from  me,  and  acquaint.
P-fa.22.22.  1  will  declare  thy  name  to /wy  b.JIeb.2.12.
69.  8.  I  am  become  a  stranger  to  my  b.  an  alien

122.8.  for  my  b.  and  companions’  sake,  I  will  say
Mat.  12 .48.  he  said  to  him,  who  are  my  b.  Mark  3.  33.

49.  behold  my  mother  and  my  b.  Mark  3.  34.

25.  40.  ye  have  done  it  to  the  least  of  these  my  b.

28. 10.  go  tell  my  b.  that  they  go  into  Galilee
Luke  8.  21.  my  b.  are  these  which  hear  word  of  God
John  20. 17.  go  to  my  b.  and  say  to  them,  I  ascend
i?0?n.9.3.myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  b.
Jam.  5. 10.  take  my  b.  the  pi  ophets  who  have  spoken

12.  but  above  all  things,  my  b.  swear  not

Our  BRETHREN.

Gen.  31.  32.  before  our  b.  discern  what  is  thine,  take
Num.  20.  3.  when  our  b.  died  before  the  Lord
Dent.  1.  28.  our  b.  have  discouraged  our  hearts

2  Sam.  19.  41.  why  ha'  e  our  b.  stolen  thee  away  ?

1  Chr.  13.  2.  let  us  send  abroad  to  our  b.  every  where
Neh.  5.  5.  yet  now  our  flesh  is  as  the  flesh  ot  our  b.

8.  after  our  ability  have  redeemed  our  b.  the  Jews
Acts  15.  36.  let  us  go  again  visit  our  b.  in  every  city

2  Cor.  8. 23.  or  our  b.  be  inquired  of,  are  messengers
Rev.  12. 10.  for  the  accuser  of  our  b.  is  cast  down

Their  BRETHREN.

Num.  8.  26.  but  shall  minister  with  their  b.  in  taber.
Deut.  18.  2.  Levites  have  no  inherit,  among  their  b.

18.  I  will  raise  a  prophet  from  among  their  b.
Judg.  20.  13.  not  hearken  to  the  voice  ot  their  b.

21.  22.  when  their  b.  come  to  us  to  complain

2  -Saw? .2. 26. bid  people  return  from  following  their  b.
2  Kings 23.  9.  did  eat  unleav.  bread  among  their  b.

1  Chr.  8.  32.  these  dwelt  with  their  b.  in  Jerus.  9.  38.

12. 32.  all  their  b.  were  at  their  commandment

39.  drinking,  for  their  b.  had  prepared  for  them

2  Chr.  28. 15.  brought  them  to  their  b.  to  Jericho
Neh.  5. 1.  was  a  great  cry  against  their  b.  the  Jews

13.  13.  their  office  was  to  distribute  to  their  b.

Job  42. 15.  father  gave  them  inherit,  among  their  b.
Jer.  41.  8.  for  he  slew  them  not  among  their  b.
Heb.  7.  5.  to  take  tithes  of  people,  that  is  of  their  b.
Rev.  6. 11.  till  their  b.  should  be  killed  as  they  were
Thy  BRETHREN.

Gen.  27-  29-  be  lord  over  thy  h.  let  mother’s  sons  bow

31.  37.  set  it  before  thy  b.  that  they  may  judge

37. 10.  1  and  thy  b.  come  to  bow  ourselves  to  thee

13.  do  not  thy  b.  feed  the  flock  in  Shechem  ?

14.  whether  it  be  well  with  thy  b.  and  the  flocks
48. 22.  I  have  given  to  thee  one  portion  above  thy  b.
49.  8.  thou  art  he  whom  thy  b.  shall  praise
Deut.  15.  7.  if  a  poor  man  ot  thy  b.  be  within  gates

17. 15.  from  among  thy  b.  shaltthou  set  king  over

18. 15. 1  will  raise  up  a  prophet  of  thy  b.  like  to  me

24. 14.  not  oppress  the  poor  of  thy  h.  or  stranger
Josh.  2. 18.  thou  slialt  bring  thy  b.  home  unto  thee
Judg.  14.  3.  no  woman  among  daughters  of  thy  b.

1  Sam.  17.  17.  take  tor  thy  b.  run  to  camp  to  thy  b.
18.  look  how  thy  b.  fare,  and  take  their  pledge

2  Sam.  15.  20.  return,  take  back  thy  b.  with  thee

2  Chron.  21.  13.  hast  slain  thy  b.  better  than  thyself
Jer.  12.  6.  thy  b.  have  dealt  treacherously  with  thee
Ezek.  11. 15.  thy  b.  even  thy  b.  men  of  tny  kindred
Mat,  12.  47.  behold,  thy  mother  and  thy  b.  stand
without,  Mark  3.  32.  I.uke  8.  20.
Luke  14. 12.  call  not  thy  b.  lest  they  bid  thee  again

22.  32.  when  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  b.
Rev.  19. 10.  see  thou  do  it  not,  J  am  of  thy  b.  22.  9.

Your  BRETHREN.

Gen.  42. 19.  let  one  of  your  b.  be  bound  in  prison
33.  leave  one  of  your  b.  here  with  me
Lev.  10. 4.  carry  your  b.  from  before  the  sanctuary
6.  let  your  b.  bewail  the  burning  the  Lord  kindled
25.  46.  over  your  b.  ye  shall  not  rule  with  rigour
Num.  18.  6.  behold  1  have  taken  your  b.  the  Levites

32.  6.  shall  your  b.  go  to  war  and  shall  ye  sit  here  ?
Deut.  1.  16.  hear  the  causes  between  your  b.

3. 18.  pass  over  armed  before  your  b.  Josh.  1. 14.

20.  till  Lord  hath  given  rest  to  your  b.  Josh.  1.  15.
Josh.  22. 3.  ye  have  not  left  your  b.  these  many  days
4.  and  now  the  Lord  hath  given  rest  to  your  b.

8.  divide  the  spoil  of  your  enemies  with  your  b.

1  Kings  12.  24.  not  fight  against  your  b.  2  Chr.  11.  4.

2  Chron.  19.  10.  what  cause  shall  come  to  you  of

your  b.  and  so  wrath  come  upon  you  and  your  b.

28. 11.  deliver  capti'  es  ye  have  taken  of  your  b.

30. 7.  be  not  ye  like  your  b.  which  trespassed

9.  if  ye  turn,  your  b.  shall  find  compassion

Neh .  4. 14.  and  fight  for  your  b.  your  sons  and  wives

5.8.  will  you  even  sell  yojir  b.  or  shall  they  be  sold  ?
Isa.  66. 5.  your  b.  that  hated  you,  that  cast  you  out

20.  they  shall  bring  your  b.  for  an  offering  to  Lord


Jer.  7.15.  cast  you  out  as  I  have  cast  out  al  t  your  b.
Hos.  2. 1.  say  to  your  b.  Ammi,  to  sisters,  Ruhamab
Mat. 5. 47.  ifye  salute  your  b.  only  .what  do  you  more
Acts  3. 22.  a  prophet  shall  Lord  raise  of  your  b.  7. 37 .

1  Cor.  6.  8.  ye  do  wrong  and  defraud  and  Xh&tyour  b.

1  Pet.  5.  9.  same  afflictions  accomplished  in  your  b

BRIBE,  S.

l&z>n.8.3.  Samuel’s  sons  took  b.  and  perverted  judg
12.  3.  of  whose  hand  have  L  received  any  b.  ?

Psal.  26.  10.  and  their  right  hand  is  full  of  b.

Isa.  33.  15.  that  shaketh  bis  hands  from  holding  b.
Amos  5.  12.  they  take  a  b.  and  turn  aside  the  poor
BRIBERY.

Job  15.  34.  fire  shall  consume  the  tabernacles  of  b.
BRICK.

Gen.  11.  3.  let  us  make  b.  they  had  b.  for  stone
Exod.  1.  14.  they  ma  le  their  fives  bitter  in  b.

5.  7.  no  more  give  the  people  straw  to  make  b.  16.
Isa.  65.  3.  and  burneth  incense  on  altars  of  b.
BRICKS.

Exod.  5.  8.  the  tale  of  b.  you  shall  lay  upon  them
18.  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the  tale  of  b  19.

Isa.  9.  10.  the  b.  are  fallen  down,  but  we  will  build
BRICK-KILN.

2  Sam.  12.  31.  and  made  them  pass  through  the  b.
Jer.  43.  9.  hide  great  stones  in  the  clay  in  the  b.
Nah.  3.  14.  tread  the  mortar,  make  strong  the  b.

BRIDE.

Isa.  49.  18.  and  bind  them  on  thee,  as  a  b.  doth

61.  10.  as  a  b.  adorneth  herself  with  jewels

62.  5.  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  b.

Jer.  2.  32.  or  can  a  b.  forget  her  attire  5

7.  34.  cause  to  cease  the  voice  of  the  b.  16.9. 1  25. 10.

33.  11.  shall  be  heard  in  this  place  voice  of  the  b.
Joel  2.  16.  and  let  the  b.  go  out  of  her  closet
John  3.  29.  he  that  hath  tbe  b.  is  the  bridegroom
Rev.  18.  23.  voice  of  the  b.  heard  no  more  in  thee

21.  2.  prepared  as  a  b.  adorned  for  her  husband
9.  I  will  shew  thee  the  b.  the  Lamb’s  wife

22.  17.  and  the  Spirit  and  the  b.  say,  Come

BRIDE-CHAMBER.

Mat.  9.  15.  can  the  children  of  the  b.  mourn  ?

Mark  2.  19.  can  the  children  of  b.  fast  ?  Luke  5. 34.
BRIDEGROOM.

Psal.  19.  5.  as  a  b.  coming  out  of  his  chamber
Isa.  61.  10.  as  a  b.  decketb  himself  with  ornaments
62.  5.  as  b.  rejoiceth  over  bride,  so  God  over  thee,
Mat.  9.  15.  can  children  of  bride-chamber  mourn
while  b.  is  with  them  ?  Mark  2. 19.  Luke  5.  34.
25.  1.  ten  virgins  went  forth  to  meet  the  b.

5.  while  the  b.  tarried  ||  6.  cry  made,  b.  corneth,  10.
John  2.  9.  the  governor  of  the  feast  called  the  b.

3  29-  he  that  hath  the  bride  is  the  b.  but  the  friend
of  the  b.  rejoiceth  greatly  because  of  the  b.  voice
See  Bride.

BRIDLE

Is  taken,  [1]  Properly,  for  the  reins  or  bit  whereby
horses,  mules,  fc.  are  kept  in,  and  made  to  go
which  pace  and  which  way  their  riders  please,
Psal.  32.  9.  [2]  Figuratively,  (1)  For  those  re¬
straints  of  law,  humanity,  or  modesty,  whereby
people  are  kept  in  awe.  Job  30.  11.  ana  (2)  For
the  restraining  power  and  providence  of  God,
2  Kings  19.  28.  Isa.  30.  28.

2  Kings  19.28. 1  will  put  my  h.  in  thy  lips,  Isa.  37  29.
Job  30.  11.  they  have  let  foose  the  b.  before  me
41.  1.3.  who  can  come  to  him  with  his  double  b.  ?
Psal.  32. 9.  whose  mouth  must  be  held  in  with  a  b.f
39.  1.  I  will  keep  my  mouth  with  a  b.

Prov.  26.  3.  a  b.  for  the  ass,  a  rod  for  the  fool's  back
Isa.  30.  28.  there  shall  be  a  b.  in  jaws  of  the  people
Zech.  14.  +20.  on  the  b.  holiness  to  the  Lord
Jam.  1. 26. if  any  seem  religious  and  b.  not  his  tongue
3.  2.  and  able  also  to  b.  the  whole  body
Rev.  14. 20.  blood  came  out  of  wine  press  to  horse  b.
BRIEFLY.

Rom.  13.  9.  it  is  b.  comprehended  in  this  saying
1  Pet.  5. 12.  by  Sylvanus  a  brother  1  have  written  b.
BRIER

Is  a  prickly  hurtful  sort  of  plant,  Isa.  5.  6.  To
which  are  compared,  [1]  An  enemy,  the  Assy¬
rian  army,  that  molested  the  children  of  Israel,
Isa.  10.  17-  [2]  Mischievous  and  hurtful  persons,
Ezek.  28.  24.  [3]  Sins,  lusts,  and  corruptions,
which  spring  from  a  stony  and  unregenerated
heart,  Heb.  6.  8.

Isa.  55. 13.  instead  of  the  b.  come  up  the  myrt'e  tree
Ezek,  28.  24.  shall  be  no  more  a  pricking  b.  to  Israel
Mic.  7.  4.  the  best  of  them  is  as  a  b.

BRIERS.

Judg.  8.  7.  then  I  will  tear  your  flesh  with  b.

16.  he  took  the  elders  of  the  city  and  b.

Isa.  5.  6.  there  shall  come  up  b.  and  thorns
7.  23.  it  shall  even  be  for  b.  and  thorns

24.  because  all  land  shall  become  b.  and  thorns

25.  not  come  thither  the  fear  of  b.  and  thorns
9.  18.  wickedness  shall  devour  the  b.  and  thorns
10. 17.  it  shall  devour  his  b.  and  thorns  in  one  day
27.  4.  would  set  b.  and  thorns  against  me  in  battle

32.  13.  on  the  land  shall  come  up  b.  and  thorns

Ezek.  2.6.  son  of  man,  tho’  b.  and  thorns  be  with  thee
Heb.  6. 8.  that  which  beareth  b.  and  thorns  is  rejected
BRIG  AN  DINE.

Jer.  46.  4.  furbish  the  spears  and  put  on  the  b.

51.  3.  against  him  that  lifteth  up  himself  in  his  b.
BR1GH  I  .

Lev.  13.  2.  when  a  man  shall  have  a  b.  spot,  24,  38.
4.  if  the  b.  spot  be  white  in  the  skin  of  his  flesh
23.  if  b.  spot  stay  in  his  place  and  spread  not,  28.
14.  56.  this  is  the  law  for  a  scab  and  for  a  b.  spot
1  Kings  7.  45.  all  the  vessels  Hiram  made  for  the
house  of  the  Lord  were  of  b.  brass.  2  Chron.  4. 16.
Job  37.  11.  he  scattereth  his  b.  cloud
21.  now  men  see  not  the  b.  light  in  the  clouds
Cant.5.\\.  belly  is  as  b.  ivory  overlaid  with  sapphires
Jer.  51.  11.  make  b.  the  arrows,  gather  the  shields
Ezek.  1.  13.  the  fire  was  b.  and  out  of  fire  lightning
21.  15.  the  sword  is  made  b.  it  is  wrapt  up
21.  for  the  king  of  Babylon  made  his  arrows  b.
27.  19.  b.  iron  and  cassia  were  in  thy  market
32.  8.  b.  lights  1  will  make  dark  over  thee
Nah.  3.  3.  the  horseman  lifteth  up  the  b.  sword


BRI


Zeeh  10.  1.  so  the  Lord  shah  make  h.  clouds
Mat.  17.  5.  behold  a  b.  cloud  overshadowed  them
Luke  11.  36.  as  when  the  b.  shining  of  a  candle
ids  10.  30.  a  man  stood  before  me  in  b.  clothing
Rev.  22. 16.  1  am  the  b.  and  morning  star
BRIGHTNESS

Signifies,  [1]  Light  or  lucidness ,  Isa.  59.  9-  Amos
20.  [2]  Natural  form  or  becruty ,  Dan.  4.

36.  [3]  Royal  dignity,  glory,  and  splendour,

F.zek.  28.7.  „  L.  ,

£  Sam.  22.  13.  Borough  the  b.  before  him  were  coals
of  fire  kindled,  Psal.  18.  12.

Job  31.  26.  or  beheld  the  moon  walking  in  b.

Psal.  89.  t  44.  thou  madest  his  b.  to  cease
Isa.  59.  9.  we  wait  for  h.  but  we  walk  in  darkness
60.  3.  and  kings  shall  come  to  the  i.  of  thy  rising

19.  nor  for  b.  shall  the  moon  give  light  to  thee
62.  1.  till  the  righteousness  thereof  go  torth  as  b.

66.  t  11.  be  delighted  with  the  b.  of  her  glory
Ezek.  1.  4.  and  a  fire  and  a  b.  was  about,  it,  27-
28.  so  was  the  appearance  of  b.  round  about
8. 2.  as  the  appearance  of  h.  as  the  colour  of  amber

10.  4.  the  coui  t  was  full  of  b.  of  the  Lord  s  glory
28.  7.  behold,  strangers  shall  defile  thy  b.

17.  thou  hast  corrupted  by  reason  of  thy  b.

Dan.  2. 31.  this  great  image,  whose  b.  was  excellent

4.  36.  my  honour  and  b.  returned  unto  me

5.  +  6.  then  the  king’s  b.  was  changed,  +  9.

12.  3.  the  wise  shall  shine  as  the  b.  of  the  firmament

Amos  5. 20.  day  of  Lord  shall  be  very  dark  and  no  b.
Hab.  3.  4.  his  b.  was  as  the  light,  he  had  horns
Acts  26.  13.  light  from  heaven  above  b.  of  the  sun
2  Thess.  2. 8.  snail  destroy  with  the  b.  of  his  coming
Heb.  1.  3.  who  being  the  b.  of  his  glory  and  image
BRIM.

Josh.  3.  15.  feet  of  the  priest  dipped  in  b.  of  water

1  Kings!.  26.  b.  wrought  like  b.  of  acup,  2  C/ir.4.5.

2  C/tron.  4.  2.  he  made  a  molten  sea  from  b.  to  b.
John  2. 7.  and  they  filled  them  up  to  the  b.

BRIMSTONE.

Gen.  19. 24.  rained  on  Gom.  b.  and  fire,  Luke  17-29.
Deut.  29.  23.  the  whole  land  thereof  is  b.  and  salt
Job  18.  15.  b.  shall  be  scattered  on  his  habitation
Psal.  11.  6.  upon  wicked  he  shall  rain  snares,  fire
and  b.  and  an  horrible  tempest,  Ezek.  38. 22.
Isa.  30.  33.  breath  of  the  Lord  like  a  stream  of  b.

34.  9.  and  the  dust  thereof  turned  into  b.

Rev.  9.  17.  out  of  their  mouths  issued  fire  and  b.

18.  the  third  part  of  men  was  killed  by  the  b.

14. 10.  he  shall  be  tormented  with  fire  and  b.

19. 20.  cast  into  a  lake  of  fire,  burning  with  b.  20. 10.

Rev.  21.  8.  whoremongers,  and  all  liars,  shall  have
their  part  in  lake  which  bnmeth  with  fire  and  b
BRING.

Gen.  6.  17.  I  do  b.  a  flood  of  waters  on  the  earth

19.  two  of  every  sortshalt  thou  b.  into  the  ark
9.  14.  when  li.a  cloud  over  earth,  the  bow  seen

18.  16.  Abraham  did  b.  them  on  their  way

19.  Lord  may  b.  on  Abraham  what  he  hath  spoken
27.  4.  and  b.  it  to  me  that  I  may  eat,  25.

5.  b.  me  venison  ||  12.  I  shall  b.  a  curse  on  me

42.  20.  b.  your  youngest  brother  to  me,  34.

37.  if  I  b.  him  not  to  thee,  43.  9.  I  44. 32.

43.  16.  b.  these  men  home,  slay  and  make  ready
45.  19.  take  waggons  and  A.  your  father,  and  come
48.  9.  b.  them,  1  pray,  to  me,  and  I  will  bless  them

Exod.  10.  4.  else  to  morrow  I  will  b.  the  locusts

11.  1.  yet  will  I  b.  one  plague  more  on  Pharaoh

13.  5.  it  shall  be  when  the  Lord  shall  b.  thee.  11

18.  19.  that  thou  mayest  b.  the  causes  to  God

21.  6.  his  master  shall  b.  him  to  the  judges
22. 13.  if  it  be  torn  in  pieces,  b.  it  for  witness

23.  4.  thou  shalt  surely  b.  it  back  to  him  again

19.  first  of  first-fruits  of  thy  land  shalt  b.  34.  26.

20. 1  will  send  an  Angel  to  b.  thee  into  the  place

35.  5.  whoso  is  of  a  willing  heart,  let  him  b.

36.  5.  the  people  b.  much  more  than  enough
Lev.  5.  7-  if  he  be  not  able  to  b.  a  lamb,  11. 1  12. 8.

8.  and  he  shall  b.  them  to  the  priest,  12.

16  12.  shall  b.  fire  and  incense  within  the  vail

17.  5.  that  Israel  may  b.  their  sacrifices  to  the  L.
Num.  8.  9.  and  thou  shalt  b.  the  Levites,  10.

14.  8.  if  the  Lord  delight  in  us,  then  he  will  b.  us

16.  because  the  L.  was  not  able  to  b.  Deut.  9.  28.

24.  my  servant  Caleb,  him  will  I  b.  into  the  land

16. 17.  h.  before  the  Lord  every  man  his  censer
20. 12.  ye  shall  not  b.  this  congregation  into  land
32.  5.  give  this  land,  and  b.  us  not  over  Jordan
Deut.  1. 17.  the  cause  too  hard  for  you  b.  it  to  me

7.  1.  when  the  Lord  shall  b.  thee  into  the  land

21.  12.  then  thou  shalt  h.  her  home  to  thy  house

22.  2.  then  thou  shalt  b.  it  unto  thine  own  house
30.  12.  b.  it  to  us,  that  we  may  hear  and  do,  13.

33.7.  hear.  Lord,  and  b.  Judah  to  his  people

1  Sam.  1. 22.  till  child  be  weaned,  then  I  will  b.  him

9.  7.  then  said  Saul,  what  shall  we  b.  the  man  ?

23.  b.  the  portion  I  gave  thee,  of  which  I  said

11.  12.  b.  the  men,  that  we  may  put  them  to  death

20.  8.  for  why  shouldest  thou  b.  me  to  thy  father  '

2  Sam.  3. 12.  my  hand  with  thee,  to  b.  Israel  to  thee
13  except  thou  b.  Michal  when  thou  comest

14.  10.  whosoever  saith  aught  to  thee,  b.  him  to  me

19.  11.  why  are  ye  last  to  b.  the  king  back  ?

1  Kings  3.  24.  and  the  king  said,  b.  me  a  sword

8.  32.  the  wicked,  to  b.  his  way  on  his  head

t  47.  if  b.  back  to  their  heart,  2  Chron.  6.  t  3".

13.  18.  b.  him  back  with  thee  to  thine  house

17.  11.  b.  me  a  morsel  of  bread  in  thine  hand

20.  33.  then  he  said,  go  ye  b.  him

2  Kings  2.  20.  b.  me  a  new  cruse,  and  put  salt
4.  6.  b.  yet  a  vessel  ||  41.  b.  meal  and  cast  it

6. 19.  I  will  b.  you  to  the  man  whom  ye  seek

1  Chron.  13.  +  3.  let  us  b.  about  the  ark  of  our  God
16. 29.  b.  an  offering  and  come  before  him

21.  2.  b.  the  number  of  them  tome,  that  I  may

2  Chron.  31.  lO.since  the  people  began  to  b.  offerings
Neh.  13.  18.  did  not  our  God  b.  this  evil  on  us  ?
Job  6.  22.  did  I  say  b.  unto  me,  or  give  a  reward

10. 9.  wilt  thou  b.  me  into  the  dust  again  ?

14. 4.  who  can  b.  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  '.

18.  14.  it  shall  b.  him  to  the  king  of  terrors
30. 23.  for  I  know  thou  wilt  b.  me  to  death


BRI

Job  33.  30.  to  b.  back  his  soul  from  the  pit
Psal.  43.  3.  let  them  b.  me  to  thy  holy  hill
60.  9.  who  will  b.  me  into  strong  city  ?  108.  10.

72.  3.  the  mountains  shall  b.  peace  to  the  people
94.  23.  he  shall  b.  on  them  their  own  iniquity
Prov.  29.8.  scornful  men  b.  a  city  into  a  snare
Eccl.  3.  22.  who  shall  b.  him  to  see  what  shall  be  ?

11.  9.  know  that  God  will  b.  thee  into  judgment

12.  14.  God  shall  b.  every  work  into  judgment
Cant.  8.  2.  I  would  b.  thee  into  my  mother's  house
Isa.  7.  17.  Lord  shall  b.  on  thee  and  my  people

14.  2.  the  people  shall  b.  them  to  their  place
15. 9.  for  I  will  b.  more  upon  Dimon,  lions  on  him

16.  +  3.  b.  counsel,  execute  judgment,  make  thy
25.  12.  shall  he  b.  to  the  ground,  even  to  the

45.  21.  tell  ye  and  b.  them  near,  let  them  take

46.  13.  1  b.  near  my  righteousness,  it  not  be  far  off
56.  7.  even  them  will  I  b.  to  my  holy  mountain
58.  7.  and  that  thou  b.  the  poor  to  thy  house
60.  17.  for  brass  I  will  b.  gold,  for  iron  b.  silver
66.  4. 1  will  b.  their  fears  upon  them

Jer.  3. 14.  1  will  take  you  and  b.  you  to  Zion

10.  24.  not  in  anger,  lest  thou  b.  me  to  nothing

11.  8. 1  will  b.  on  them  all  the  words  of  this  cov.

17.  18.  b.  upon  them,  day  of  evil  and  destroy  them

31.  8.  I  will  b.  them  from  the  north  country

32.  42.  so  I  will  b.  on  them  all  the  good  promised

33.  6.  behold  I  will  b.  it  health  and  cure
11.  them  that  shall  b.  sacrifice  of  praise  into  house

49.  5.  behold,  1  will  b.  a  fear  upon  thee  .

Lam.  1.  t  16.  that  should  b.  back  my  soul  is  far
Ezek.  6.  3.  T,  even  I,  will  b.  a  sword  upon  you

11.  9.  I  will  b.  you  out  of  the  midst  thereof
20.  15.  that  1  would  not  b.  them  into  the  land  .
21.29.  I  will  b.  011  the  necks  of  them  that  are  slain
23.  22.  I  will  b.  them  against  thee  on  every  side
34. 13.  I  will  b.  them  to  their  land,  36.  24. 1  37.  21.

38. 17.  that  I  would  b.  thee  against  them
Hos.  2.  14.  1  will  allure  and  b.  her  to  wilderness
Am-os  4.  1 .  b.  and  let  us  drink  ||4.  b.  your  sacrifices
Mic.  1. 15.  yet  will  1  b.  an  heir  to  thee
Zech.  8.8.  Iwill  b.  them,  and  they  shall  dwell
Mai  1. 1 7.  ye  b.  polluted  bread  to  mine  altar

3.  10.  b.  all  the  tithes  into  the  store-house
Mat.<l.  13.  be  thou  there  till  I  b.  thee  word
5.  23.  therefore  if  thou  b.  thy  gift  to  the  altar

17.  17.  b.  him  hither  to  me,  Mark  9.  19.

21. 2.  ye  shall  find  an  ass  and  a  colt,  loose  them  and

b.  them  to  me,  Mark  11.  2.  Luke  19.  30.
Mark  7. 32.  and  they  b.  to  him  one  that  was  deaf
Luke  2.  10.  for  I  b.  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy
8. 14.  choked  with  cares,  and  b.  no  fruit  to  perfect.

12.  11.  when  they  b.  you  unto  the  synagogues
John  10.  16.  other  sheep,  them  also  I  must  b.

14. 26.  and  b.  all  tilings  to  your  remembrance

18.  29.  Pi-late  said,  what  accusation  b.  you  ?

21.  10.  b.  of  the  fish  which  ye  have  now  caught
Acts  5.  28.  ye  intend  to  b.  this  man’s  blood  on  us

7.  6.  that  they  should  b.  them  into  bondage

9. 2.  he  might  b.  them  bound  to  Jerusalem,  21.

22.  5. 1  went  to  Damascus  to  b.  them  bound

23.  10.  commanded  to  b.  Paul  into  the  castle
17.  b.  this  young  man  to  the  chief  captain

1  Cor.  1. 19. 1  will  b.  to  nothing  the  understand  ng
28.  things  that  are  not,  b.  to  nought  things  that  are

4. 17.  shall  b.  you  into  remembrance  of  my  ways
9. 27.  keep  under  my  body,  I  b.  it  into  subjection
16.  6.  that  ye  may  b.  me  on  my  journey  whither  I  go

2  Cor.  11.  20.  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  b.  you  into  bondage
Gal.  3.  24.  our  schoolmaster  to  b.  us  to  Christ

1  Thess.  4.  14.  them  that  sleep  will  God  b.  with  him

2  Tim  A.  11.  take  Mark  and  b.  him  with  thee

1  Pet.  3. 18.  suffered  that  he  might  b.  us  to  God

2  John  10.  if  any  come  and  b.  not  this  doctrine

3  John  6.  whom  if  thou  b.  forward  on  their  journey
Rev.  21.  24.  and  kings  do  b.  their  glory  to  it

26.  they  shall  b.  the  glory  of  nations  into  it
See  Home,  Hither.

BRING  again.

Gen.  24.  5.  must  I  b.  thy  son  again  to  the  land
6  beware  thou,  that  thou  b.  not  my  son  again,  8.
28. 15.  I  will  b.  thee  again  into  this  land,  48.  21.

37. 14.  if  well  with  brethren,  and  b.  word  again
42.  37.  deliver  him,  and  I’ll  b.  him  to  thee  again
Exod.  23.  4.  shalt  surely  b.  it  back  to  him  again
Num.  17. 10.  b.  Aaron's  rod  again  before  testimony
22.8.  lodge  this  night,  and  I'll  5.  you  word  again
Deut.  1.  22.  b.  us  word  again  what  way  we  must  go
22. 1.  in  any  case  b.  them  again  to  thy  brother
28.  68.  the  T.ord  shall  b.  thee  into  Egypt  again
Judg.  11.  9.  if  ye  b.  me  home  again  to  fight
19.  3.  her  husband  arose,  and  went  to  b.  her  again
2  Sam.  12.  23.  can  1  b.  him  again,  I  shall  go  to  him

14.  21.  b.  the  young  man  Absalom  again

15.  8.  if  the  Lord  shall  b.  me  again  to  Jerusalem

25.  he  will  b.  me  again  and  shew  me  it  [6.  25.

1  Kings  8.  34.  forgive  and  b.  them  again,  2  Chron.

12.  21.  he  assembled  Judah  against  Isr.  to  h.  king¬
dom  again  to  R  ehoboarn,  2  Chron.  11.  1.

1  Chron  13.  3.  let  us  b.  again  the  ark  of  our  God
21.  12.  advise  what  word  I  shall  b.  again  to  him

2  Chron.  24. 19.  he  sent  prophets  to  b.  them  again
Neh.  9.  29.  that  mightest  b.  them  again  to  thy  law
Psal.  68. 22.  Lord  said,  I  will  b.  again  from  Bashan,

I  will  b.  again  my  people  from  the  depths  of  sea
Prov.  19. 24.  not  so  much  as  b.  it  to  his  mouth  again

26.  15.  grieveth  him  to  b.  it  again  to  his  mouth
Isa.  38.  8.  I  will  b .  again  the  shadow  of  the  degrees

46.  8.  b.  it  again  to  mind,  O  ye  transgi  essors
49.  5.  saitli  the  Lord,  to  b.  Jacob  again  to  him
52. 8.  shall  see  when  the  Lord  shall  b.  again  Zion
Jer.  12.  15. 1  will  return  and  b.  them  again,  50. 19.
15. 19.  if  thou  wilt  return,  then  will  I  b.  thee  again

16. 15. 1  will  b.  them  ag.  to  their  land,  24. 6.  1  32.  37.
23.  3.  I  will  b.  them  again  into  their  folds
28.  3.  in  two  years  I  will  b.  again  the  vessels

4.  I  will  b.  again  to  this  place  Jeconiah,  6.

30. 3. 1  will  b.  again  captivity  of  my  people  Isr.  and
Judah,  18.  181.  23  Ezek.  39.  25.  Amos  9- 14.

48.  47.  yet  will  1  b.  again  the  captivity  of  Moab
49. 6.  b.  again  the  captivity  of  Ammon  f|  39.  of  Elam
Ezek.  16.53.  when  I  b.  ag.  their  captivity,  I  will  b.  a.


BRI

Ezek.  29. 14.  I  will  b.  again  the  captivity  of  Egypt
34. 16.  I  will  b.  again  that  which  was  driven
Zeph.  3.  20.  at  that  time  l  will  b.  you  again
Zech.  10. 6.  1  will  b.  them  again  to  place  them

10. 1  will  b.  them  again  out  of  land  of  Egypt
Mat.  2.  8.  b.  me  word  again  that  1  may  worship
See  Captivity.

BRING  down.

Gen.  42.  38.  b.  down  my  grey  hairs,  44.  29,  31.

43.  7.  he  would  say,  b.  your  brother  down,  44. 21.

45. 13.  ye  shall  haste  and  b.  down  my  father
Deut.  9.  3.  he  shall  b.  them  down  before  thy  face
Judg.  7. 4.  b.  them  down  to  the  water,  and!  will  try

1  Sam.  30.  15.  canst  b.  me  down,  I  will  b.  thee  down

2  Sam.  22.  28.  eyes  on  the  haughty  to  b.  them  down
1  Kings  1.  33.  Solomon  b.  him  down  to  Gihon

2.  9.  his  hoary  head  b.  thou  down  with  blood
Psal.  18.  27.  wilt  save  afflicted,  b.  down  high  looks
55.  23.  shalt  b.  them  down  to  pit  of  destruction
Isa.  25.  5.  thou  shalt  b.  down  the  noise  of  strangers

11.  he  shall  b.  down  their  pride  together  with  spoils

12.  the  high  fort  of  thy  walls  shall  he  b.  down
63. 6.  I  will  b.  down  their  strength  to  the  earth

Jer. 49. 16.  I  will  b.  thee  down  from  thence,  Obad.  4.

51.  40.  I  will  b.  them  down  like  lambs  to  slaughter
Ezek.  26. 20.  when  l  shall  b.  thee  down  with  them
28.  8.  they  shall  b.  thee  down  to  pit,  and  shalt  die
Hos,  7.  12.  1  will  b.  them  down  as  fowls  of  heaven
Joel  3. 2.  b.  them  down  to  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat
t  11.  the  Lord  shall  b.  down  thy  mighty  ones
Amos  3.  11.  he  shall  b.  down  thy  strength  from  thee
9. 2.  tho’  climb  to  heaven,  thence  will  b.  them  down
Obad.  3.  saith  in  his  heart,  who  shall  b.  me  down  ?
Acts  23.  15.  that  he  b.  him  down  to  you  to-morrow

20.  the  Jews  desire  thou  wouldest  b.  down  Paul
Rom.  10.  6.  that  is,  to  b.  Christ  down  from  above
See  Evil.

BRING  forth.

Gen.  1. 11.  let  earth  b.  forth,  24.  ||  20.  waters  b.  forth
3. 16.  in  sorrow  thou  shalt  b.  forth  children

18.  thorns  and  thistles  shall  it  b.  forth  to  thee

8.  17.  b.  forth  every  living  thing  that  is  with  thee

9.  7.  b.  forth  abundantly  in  the  earth  and  multiply
38. 24.  Judah  said,  b.  her  forth,  and  let  her  be  burnt

Exod.  3.  10.  that  thou  mayest  b.  forth  my  people

Israel

11.  who  am  I,  that  I  should  b.  forth  Israel  ?

7.  4.  that  I  may  b.  forth  my  armies  and  people

8.  3.  the  river  shall  b.  forth  frogs  abundantly

18.  magicians  did  so  to  b.  forth  lice,  but  could  not
Lev.  24. 14.  b. forth  him  that  hath  cursed,  23.

25.  21.  it  shall  b.  forth  fruit  for  three  years

26. 10.  ye  shall  eat  and  b.  forth  old,  because  of  new
Num.  20. 8  shalt  b.  forth  to  them  water  out  of  rock
Deut.  14.  28.  thou  shalt  b. forth  all  tithe  of  increase
17. 5.  then  shalt  thou  b.  forth  that  man  or  woman
22. 15.  b.  forth  the  tokens  of  the  damsel’s  virginity
Josh.  2.  3.  b.  forth  the  men  that  are  come  to  thee
Judg.  6.  18.  till  I  come  and  b.  forth  my  present
19. 22.  b.  forth  the  man  that  came  to  thy  house
2  Kings  10. 22.  5. /or<A  vestments  for  the  worshippers

19. 3.  and  there  is  no  strength  to  b.  forth,  Isa.  37.  3.

23. 4.  to  b.  forth  all  the  vessels  were  made  for  Baal
Ezra  1. 8.  those  did  Cyrus  b.  forth  by  Mithredath

10.  +  3.  make  a  covenant  to  b.  forth  our  wives
Job  14.  9.  it  will  bud  and  b.  forth  boughs  like  a  plant

15.  35.  they  conceive  mischief,  and  b.  forth  vanity
38.  32.  canst  thou  b.  forth  Mazzaroth  in  his  season  ?
39. 1.  knowest  thou  when  wild  goats  b.  forth  ?  2,  3.
40.  20.  surely  the  mountains  b.  him  forth  food
Psal.  25. 1 15.  he  shall  b.  forth  my  feet  out  of  the  net
37  6.  he  shall  b.  forth  thy  righteousness  as  light
92.  14.  they  shall  still  b.  forth  fruit  in  old  age
104.  14.  that  he  may  b.  forth  food  out  ot  the  earth
144.  13.  that  our  sheep  may  b.  forth  thousands
Prov.  8.  +  35.  whoso  findeth  me  shall  b.  forth  favour
27.  1.  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  b.  forth
Isa.  5.  2.  he  looked  that  it  should  b.  forth  grapes,  4.
23.  4.  saying,  l  travail  not,  nor  b.  forth  children

33. 11.  ye  shall  conceive  chaff,  ana  b.  forth  stubble
41. 21.  b.  forth  your  strong  reasons,  saith  the  King

22.  let  them  b.  forth  and  show  what  shall  happen
42.  1.  he  shall  b.  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles

3.  he  shall  b.  forth  judgment  unto  truth

43. 8.  b.  forth  blind  people  that  have  eyes,  and  deaf
9.  let  them  b.  fo/th  their  witnesses,  that  they  may

45. 8.  let  earth  open,  and  let  them  b.  forth  salvation
55. 10.  watereth  the  earth,  and  maketh  it  b.  forth
59.  4.  they  conceive  mischief,  and  b.  forth  iniquity
65.  9.  and  I  will  b.  forth  a  seed  out  of  Jacob

23.  not  labour  in  vain,  nor  b.  forth  for  trouble

66. 8.  shall  the  earth  be  made  to  b.  forth  in  one  day  i1

9.  shall  l  bring  to  birth,  and  not  cause  to  b.  forth  ?

Jer.  12.  2.  they  grow,  yea,  they  b.  forth  fruit
51.  44  I’ll  b.  forth  out  of  mouth  what  he  swallowed
Ezek.  12.  4.  thou  shalt  b.  forth  thy  stuff  by  day
17.  23.  and  it  shall  b.  forth  boughs  and  bear  truit

20.  6.  to  h .  them  forth  of  the  land  ot  Egypt

38. 1  will  b.  them  forth  out  of  the  country

28. 18.  therefore  will  I  b.  forth  a  fire  in  the  midst  of
38.  4.  I  will  b.  th ee  forth,  thy  army  and  horsemen
47.  12.  shall  b.  forth  new  fruit  according  to  months
Hos.  9. 13.  but  Ephraim  shall  b.  forth  his  children.

16.  tho’  they  b.  forth,  yet  will  I  slay  beloved  fruit
Mic  4. 10.  be  in  pain  and  labour  to  b.  forth,  O  Zion
7.  9.  he  will  b.  me  forth  to  the  light
Zeph.  2.  2.  before  the  decree  b.  forth,  the  day  pass
Zech  3.  8.  T  will  b.  forth  my  servant  the  Branch

4.  7.  shall  b.  forth  the  head-stone  with  shoutings

5.  4.  b.  forth  a  curse,  and  it  shall  enter  the  house
Mat.  1.  23.  behold,  a  virgin  shall  b.  forth  a  son,  21.

3. 8.  b.  forth  fruit  meet  for  repentance.,  Luke  3. 8.

7. 18.  good  tree  cannot  b.  forth  evil  fruit,  Luke  6. 43.
Mark  4. 20.  b.  forth  fruit,  some  30  fold,  some  sixty
Luke  1. 31.  b.f.  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus

8. 15.  having  heard  word,  keep  it,  and  b.  forth .fruit

15.  22.  b.  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him
John  15.  2.  purgeth,  that  it  may  b.  forth  more  truit

16.  1  ordained  you,  that  you  should  b.  forth  truit

19.  4. 1  b.  him  forth  to  you  that  ye  may  know
Acts  12. 4.  after  Easter  to  b.  W\m  forth  to  the.  people
Rom  7  4.  that  we  should  b.  forth  fruit  unto  God

41


BRI


B  RO


BRO


Mom.  7.  5.  motions  of  sin  to  b. forth  fruit  unto  death
BRING  in.

Exod.  6.  8. 1  will  b.  you  in  unto  the  land  I  did  swear

15. 17.  shall  b.  in  and  plant  them  in  the  mountain

16. 5.  on  the  sixth  day  prepare  that  they  b.  in

23.  23.  my  Angel  shall  go  before  and  b.  thee  in
Num.  14.  31.  your  little  ones,  them  will  I  b.  in

'2  Chron.  24.  9.  they  made  proclamation  to  b.  in  to
the  Lord  the*  collection  Moses  laid  on  Israel

28.  13.  ye  shall  not  b.  in  the  captives  hither
Jer.  17. 24.  b.  in  no  burden  on  the  sabbath-day
Dan.  2. 24.  b.  me  in  before  the  king,  and  1  will  shew

5.  7.  the  king  cried  to  b.  in  the  astrologers

9. 24.  to  b.  in  everlasting  righteousness
Hag.  1.  6.  ye  have  sown  much  and  b.  in  little
Luke  5. 18.  sought  means  to  b.  him  in  and  lay  him

14.  21.  b.  in  hither  the  poor,  the  maimed  and  halt
2  Pet.  2.  1.  who  privily  b.  in  damnable  heresies
BRING  out.

Gen.  19.  5.  b.  them  out  to  us  that  wemay  know,  8.12.
40. 14.  make  mention,  and  b.  me  out  ot  this  house

50. 24.  God  will  visit  and  b.  you  out  of  this  land
Exod.  6.  6. 1  will  b.  you  out  from  under  the  burden

13.  gave  them  a  charge  to  b.  the  children  of  Israel
out  of  Egypt,  26. 27 .  17-5.1  12.51.  Jer.  31.32.
32. 12.  for  mischief  did  he  b.  them  out  to  slay  them
Deut.  21. 19.  lay  hold  and  b.  himow/  to  the  elders

22.  21.  b.  out  the  damsel  ||  24.  b.  both  out  to  the  gate

24.  11.  shall  b .  out  the  pledge  abroad  unto  thee
Josh.  6.  22.  b.  out  thence  Rahab  and  all  she  hath

10.  22.  b.  out  those  five  kings  out  of  the  cave
Judg.  6.  30.  b.  out  thy  son  that  he  may  die

19.  24.  them  I  will  b.  out,  and  humble  ye  them
Psal.  25. 17.  O  b.  thou  me  out  of  my  distresses

142. 7-  b.  my  soul  out  of  prison,  that  I  may  praise
143.  11.  O  Lord,  b.  my  soul  out  of  trouble

Isa.  42. 7-  to  b.  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison
Jer.  8.1.  shall  b.  out  the  bones  of  the  kings  of  Judah
38.23.  b.  out  all  thy  wives  and  children  toChaldeans
Etek.  11.  7.  but  I  will  b.  you  forth  out  of  midst  of  it

20.  34. 1  will  b.  you  out  from  the  people,  34.  13.
41.  accept  you,  when  I  b.  you  out  from  the  people

24.  6.  b.  it  out  piece  by  piece,  let  no  lot  fall
Amos  6. 10.  that  burneth  him  to  b.  out  the  bones
Acts  17.  5.  sought  to  b.  them  out  to  the  people
BRING  to  pass.

Gen.  41.  32.  the  dream,  God  will  shortly  b.  it  to  pass
50.20.  to  b.  to  pass  as  at  this  day,  to  save  people  alive
Psal.  37.  5.  trust  in  him,  and  he  shall  b.  it  to  pass
Isa.  28.  21.  and  b.  to  pass  his  act,  his  strange  act
46.  11.  I  have  spoken,  I  will  also  b.  it  to  pass
BRING  up.

Gen.  46.  4.  and  I  will  also  surely  b.  thee  up  again
Exod.  3.  8.  and  to  b.  them  up  out  of  that  land

17.  I  have  said,  I  will  b.  you  up  out  of  affliction
33.  12.  see,  thou  sayesttome.  b.  up  this  people
Hum.  14.  37.  men  that  b.  up  evil  report  on  the  land

20.  25.  b.  up  Aaron  and  his  son  to  mount  Hor
Deut.  22. 14.  b.  up  an  evil  name  on  her,  and  say
Judg.  6. 13.  did  not  the  Lord  b.  us  up  from  Egypt

1  Sam.  19. 15.  b.  him  up  in  the  bed,  that  I  may  slay
28. 11.  whom  shall  I  £.  up,he  said,  i.mewp  Samuel

2  Sam.  2.  3.  his  men  did  David  b.  up  every  man

6.  2.  to  b.  up  from  thence  the  ark  of  God,  1  Kings

8.  1,  4.  1  Chron.  13.  6.  1 15.  3,  12,  14,  25.
2  Chron.  5.  2,  5.

1  Chron.  17.  5.  since  I  did  b.  up  Israel  to  this  day
Ezra  1.  11.  did  Sheshbazzar  b.  up  with  them
Neh.  10.  38.  shall  b.  up  tithes  to  the  house  of  God
Isa.  23. 4.  1  travail  not,  nor  b.  forth  children,  nor

do  I  nourish  up  young  men,  nor  b.  up  virgins
Ter.  27.  22.  then  will  I  b.  them  up  and  restore
Etek.  16.  40.  shall  b.  up  a  company  against  thee

23.  46.  I  will  b.  up  a  company  upon  them
26.  19.  when  1  shall  b.  up  the  deep  upon  thee
29. 4.  will  b.  thee  up  out  of  the  midst  of  thy  rivers

32.  3.  a  company  shall  b.  thee  up  in  my  net
37.  6.  I  will  b.  up  flesh  on  you,  and  cover  you

Hos.  0. 12.  though  they  b.up  children,  I  will  bereave
Amos  8. 10. 1  will  b.  up  sackcloth  upon  all  loins
Mom.  10.  7.  to  b.  up  Christ  again  from  the  dead
Eph.  6. 4.  b.  them  up  in  the  nurture  of  the  Lord
BRINGERS.

2  Kings  10.  5.  the  b.  up  of  children  sent  to  Jehu

BRINGEST.

Job  14.  3.  and  b.  me  into  judgment  with  thee
Isa.  40.  9.  O  Jerus.  that  b.  good  tidings,  lift  up  voice
Acts  17. 20.  for  thou  b.  strange  things  to  our  ears
BRIN  GET  II.

Exod.  6. 7-  who  b.  you  out  from  under  the  burden
Lev.  11.  45.  I  am  the  Lord  that  b.  you  out  of  Egypt

17.  4.  b.  it  not  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  9.
Deut.  8.7-  the  Lord  b.  thee  into  a  good  land

1  Sam.  2.  6.  he  b.  down  to  the  grave,  and  b.  up
7-  Lord  maketh  poor,  hei.  low,  and  liftethup

2  Sam.  22.  48.  that  b.  down  the  people  under  me
49.  and  that  b.  me  forth  from  mine  enemies

Job  12.  6.  into  whose  hand  God  b.  abundantly
22.  he  b.  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  death

19.  29.  wrath  b.  tne  punishments  of  the  sword

28.  11.  the  thing  that  is  hid  b.  he  forth  to  light
Psal.  1.  3.  that  b.  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season

14.  7-  when  the  Lord  J.back  the  captivity,  53.  6.

33.  10.  Ld.  b.  the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought
37.  7.  the  man  who  b.  wicked  devices  to  pass

68.  6.  he  b.  out  them  that  are  bound  with  chains
107.  28.  and  b.  them  out  of  their  distresses

30.  so  he  b.  them  to  their  desired  haven

135.7-  b.  wind  out  of  treasuries,  Jer.  10.13.  1 51. 16.
Prov.  10.  31.  the  mouth  of  the  just  b.  forth  wisdom

16.  30.  moving  his  lips  he  b.  evil  to  pass

18.  16.  a  man’s  gift  b.  him  before  great  men

19. 26.  is  a  son  thatcauseth  shame,  and  b.  reproach

20.  26.  a  wise  king  b.  the  wheel  ovei  them

21. 27.  much  more  when  he  b.  it  with  a  wicked

29.  15.  but  a  child  left,  b.  his  mother  to  shame

21.  he  that  delicately  b.  up  his  servant  from  a  child

25.  the  fear  of  man  b.  a  snare,  but  whoso  trusts

30.  33.  b.  forth  butter,  b.  blood,/;,  forth  strife

31.  14.  like  ships,  she  b.  her  food  from  afar
Eccl.  2.  6.  to  water  the  wood  that  b.  forth  trees
Isa.  8. 7-  Lord  b.  on  them  the  waters  of  the  river

42


Isa.  26. 5  b.  down  them  thatdwell  on  high,  b.  todust
40.  23.  that  b.  the  princes  to  nothing,  he  makes

26.  that  b.  out  their  host  by  number

43. 17.  which  b.  forth  the  chariot  and  horse
54.  16.  the  smith  that  b.  forth  an  instrument
61.  11.  for  as  the  earth  b.  forth  her  bud

Jer.  4. 31.  anguish  of  her  that  b.  forth  her  first  child
Etek.  29.  16.  which  b.  iniquity  to  remembrance
Hos.  10. 1.  Israel  b.  forth  fruit  to  himself
Hag.  1. 11.  drought  on  that  which  ground  b.  forth
Mat.  3. 10.  every  tree  that  b.  not  forth  good  fruit  is
hewn  down,  and  cast  into  fire,  7- 19.  Luke  3.  9.

7. 17.  even  so  every  good  tree  b.  forth  good  fruit
12. 35.  a  good  man  out  of  heart  b.  forth  good  things,

and  an  evil  man  b.  forth  evil  things,  Luke  6. 45.
13. 23.  b.  forth  some  an  hundred  fold,  some  sixty
52.  who  b.  out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and  old
17.  1.  Jesus  b.  them  up  into  an  high  mountain
Mark  4.  28.  the  earth  b.  forth  fruit  of  herself
Luke  6. 43.  a  good  tree  b.  not  forth  corrupt  fruit
Jotm  12. 24.  if  it  die,  it  b.  forth  much  fruit,  15.  5.

Col.  1.  6.  gospel  b.  forth  fruit,  as  it  doth  also  in  you
Tit.  2.  11.  the  grace  of  God  that  b.  salvation
Heb.  1.6.  b.  in  the  first-begotten  into  the  world

6. 7.  the  earth  b.  forth  herbs  meet  for  them
Jam.  1. 15.  lust  b.  forth  sin,  and  sin  b.  forth  death

See  Tidings.

BRINGING.

Exod.  12. 42.  to  be  much  observed  for  b.  them  out
36.  6.  so  the  people  were  restrained  from  b.

Num.  5. 15.  an  offering  b.  iniquity  to  remembrance

14.  36.  by  b.  up  a  slander  upon  the  land

2  Sam.  19. 10.  speak  ye  not  ot  b.  the  king  back,  43.

1  Kings  10. 22.  navy  b.  gold  and  silver,  2  Chro.  9. 21.

2  Kings'll .  12.  1  am  b.  such  evil  on  Jerusalem
Neh.  13. 15.  some  on  the  sabbath  b.  in  sheaves
Psal.  126. 6.  rejoicing,  b.  his  sheaves  with  him
Jer.  17. 26.  b.  burnt  offerings,  b.  sacrifices  of  praise
Etek.  20.  9.  I  made  myself  known  in  b.  them  out
Dan.  9. 12.  his  word  by  b.  upon  us  great  evil
Mat.  21. 43.  to  a  nation  b.  forth  the  fruit  thereof
Mark  2. 3.  b.  one  sick  of  the  palsy  borne  of  four
Luke  24.  1.  b.  the  spices  which  they  prepared
Acts  5.  16.  a  multitude  b.  sick  folks

Rom.  7.  23.  b.  me  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin
2  Cor.  10.  5.  and  b.  into  captivity  every  thought
Heb.  2. 10.  in  b.  many  sons  unto  glory  to  make  capt.
7. 19.  but  the  b.  in  of  a  better  hope  did
2  Pet.  1.5.b.  in  the  flood  on  the  world  of  ungodly
BRINK.

Gen.  41. 3.  stood  by  the  other  kine  on  the  b.  of  river
Exod.  2. 3.  laid  the  ark  in  flags  by  the  river’s  b.

7. 15.  shalt  stand  by  the  river’s  b.  when  he  comes
Deut.  2.  36.  from  Aroer  by  the  b.  of  the  river
Josh.  3. 8.  when  ye  are  come  to  the  b.  of  Jordan
Etek.  47. 6.  he  caused  me  return  to  the  b.  of  the  river
BROAD.

Num.  16. 38.  make  censers,  b.  plates  for  covering
39.  make  b.  plates  for  the  covering  of  the  altar
Neh.  3.  8.  Uzziel  and  llananiah  repaired,  and  they
fortified  Jerusalem  to  the  b.  wall,  12.  38.

7.  +  4.  the  city  was  b.  in  spaces,  the  people  few
Job  36. 16.  removed  out  of  the  strait  into  a  b.  place
Psal.  119.  96.  thy  commandment  is  exceeding  b.
Cant.  3. 2.  and  in  the  b.  ways  1  will  seek  him
Isa.  33. 21.  the  Lord  will  be  a  place  of  b.  rivers
Jer.  5. 1.  know  and  seek  in  the  b.  places  thereof
51. 58.  the  b.  walls  of  Babylon  shall  be  broken
Nah.  2. 4.  the  chariots  shall  justle  in  the  b.  ways
Mat.  7. 13.  b.  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  destruction

23. 5.  they  make  b.  their  phylacteries  and  enlarge
BROADER.

Job  11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  b.  than  the  sea
BROIDERED.

Exod.  28. 4.  make  a  robe,  a  b.  coat,  a  mitre,  a  girdle
Etek.  16. 10.  I  clothed  thee  also  with  b.  work
13.  and  thy  raiment  was  of  silk  and  b.  work

18.  tookest  thy  b.  garments  and  coveredst  them
26. 16.  the  princes  shall  put  off  their  b.  garments

27. 7.  linen  with  b.  work  from  Egypt  to  be  thy  sail

16.  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  b.  work

24.  thy  merchants  in  blue  clothes  and  b.  work

1  Tim.  2.  9.  that  women  adorn,  not  with  b ■  hair
BROILED.

Luke  24. 42.  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  a  b.  fish
BROKEN.

Gen.  17.  14.  he  hath  b.  my  covenant,  Psal.  55.  20.

Isa.  24.  5. 1  33.  8.  Jer.  11.  10.
Lev.  6. 28.  earthen  vessel  wherein  sodden,  shall  be  b.

15.  12.  the  vessel  that  he  touched  shall  be  b.

21.  19.  or  a  man  that  is  b.  footed,  or  b.  handed
20.  that  hath  his  stones  b.  let  him  not  offer

22.  22.  blind,  b.  or  maimed,  ye  shall  not  offer,  24.
26. 13.  and  I  have  b.  the  bands  of  your  yoke

26.  when  I  have  b.  the  staff  of  your  bread
Num.  15.  31.  because  he  hath  b.  his  commandment
Judg.  5. 22.  then  were  the  horse-hoofs  b.  by  prancings
16. 9.  he  brake  the  withs,  as  a  thread  of  tow  is  b.

1  Sam.  2. 4.  the  bows  of  the  mighty  men  are  b.

2  Sam.  22.  35.  that  a  bow  of  steel  is  b.  Psal.  18. 34.

1  Kings  22. 48.  the  ships  were  b.  at  Ezion  geber

1  Chron.  14. 11.  God  hath  b.  in  upon  mine  enemies

2  Chron.  20.  37-  Lord  hath  b.  thy  works,  ships  b.

32.  5.  also  he  built  up  all  the  wall  that  was  b.

Job  4.  10.  the  teeth  of  the  youpg  lions  are  b.

7.  5.  my  skin  is  b.  and  become  loathsome
16. 12.  I  was  at  ease,  but  he  hath  b.  me  asunder

22.  9.  the  arms  of  the  fatherless  have  been  b.

24. 20.  and  wickedness  shall  be  b.  as  a  tree

31.  22.  and  let  mine  arm  be  b.  from  the  bone
38.  15.  and  the  high  arm  shall  be  b.

Psal.  3.  7-  thou  hast  b.  the  teeth  of  the  ungodly
31.  12.  I  am  forgotten,  I  am  like  a  b.  vessel
34.  18.  the  Lord  is  nigh  them  of  a  b.  heart,  51. 17.

20.  he  keepeth  his  bones,  not  one  of  them  is  b.

37- 15.  their  bows  shall  be  b.  ||  17.  arms  shall  be  b.

38.8.  I  am  feeble  and  sore  b.  I  have  roared

44.  19.  tho’  thou  hast  b.  us  in  the  place  of  dragons

51. 8.  that  the  bones  thou  hast  b.  may  rejoice

17.  the  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  b.  spirit,  a  contrite
60.  + 1.  thou  hast  cast  us  off,  thou  hast  b.  us

2.  hast  made  the  earth  to  tremble,  thou  hast  b.  it


Psal.  69.20.  reproach  hath  b.  my  heart,  and  I  am  full
107.  16.  for  he  hath  b.  the  gates  of  brass  and  bars
109. 16.  that  he  might  even  slay  the  b.  in  htart
124.  7.  the  snare  is  b.  and  we  are  escaped
147.  3.  hehealeththe  b.  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up
Prov.  6. 15.  suddenly  shall  he  be  b.  without  remedy
11. 1 15.  that  is  surety  for  astrangei ,  shall  be  sore  b.
13. 1 20.  a  companion  of  fools  snail  be  b .

15.  13.  but  by  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  spirit  is  b.
17.  22.  but  a  b.  spirit  drieth  the  bones

25.  19.  is  like  a  b.  tooth  and  a  foot  out  of  joint
Eccl.  4.  12.  and  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  b.
12.  6.  or  the  golden  bowl  I  t  b.  or  pitcher  be  b.

Isa.  5.  27.  nor  the  latchet  of  their  shoes  be  b.

7.  8.  within  sixty-five  years  shall  Ephraim  be  b.

8.  15.  many  among  them  shall  fall  and  be  b.

9.  4.  for  thou  hast  b.  the  yoke  of  his  burden

14.5.  the  Lord  hath  b.  the  staff  of  the  wicked

29-  because  the  rod  of  him  that  smote  thee  is  b.

19.  10.  they  shall  be  b.  in  the  purposes  thereof

21.  9.  all  graven  images  he  hath  b.  to  the  ground
28.  13.  that  they  might  fall  backward  and  be  b.

33. 8.  he  hath  b.  the  covenant,  he  regardeth  no  man

20.  nor  shall  any  of  the  cords  thereof  be  b.

36.  6.  lo,  thou  trustest  in  the  staff  of  this  b.  reed
42.  +  4.  he  shall  not  fail  nor  be  b.  till  he  have  set
Jer.  2.  13.  hewed  out  b.  cisterns  that  hold  no  water

16.  the  children  have  b.  the  crown  of  thy  head
20.  of  old  I  have  b.  thy  yoke,  and  burst  bands
5.  5.  these  have  b.  thy  yoke,  and  burst  thy  bonds

10.  20.  all  my  cords  are  b.  iny  children  gone

11.  16.  kindled  a  fire,  and  the  branches  of  it  are  b
14.  17.  for  the  virgin  daughter  of  my  people  is  b

22.  28.  is  this  man  Coniah  a  despised  h.  idol  ?

23.  9.  mine  heart  is  b.  because  or  the  prophets
28.  2.  I  have  b.  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  Babylon

13.  Hananiah,  thou  hast  b.  the  yokes  of  wood

33.  21.  thenmav  also  my  covenant  be  b.  with  David
48.  17.  how  is  the  strong  staff  b.  and  beautiful  rod  ?

25.  the  arm  of  Moab  is  b.  saith  the  Lord
38.  for  I  have  b.  Moab  like  a  vessel,  wherein  is  no

50. 17.  tins  Nebuchadnezzar  hath  b.  Israel’s  bones

23.  the  hammer  of  whole  earth  cut  asunder  and  b.
51.  56.  Babylon,  every  one  of  their  bows  is  b.

58.  the  broad  walls  of  Babylon  shall  be  utterly  b.
Lam.  2.  9.  he  hath  destroyed  and  b.  her  bars
3.  4.  hath  b.  my  bones  ||  16.  he  hath  b.  my  teeth
Etek.  6. 4.  your  altars,  and  your  images  shall  beb.6.
9.  because  I  am  b.  with  their  whorish  heart

17.  19.  and  my  covenant  that  he  hath  b.

19.  12.  her  strong  rods  were  b.  and  withered
26. 2.  aha,  she  is  b.  that  was  the  gates  of  the  people

27.  26.  the  east-wind  hath  b.  thee  in  the  seas

34.  the  time  when  thou  shalt  be  b.  by  the  seas
30. 21. 1  have  b.  the  arm  of  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt
22. 1  will  break  the  strong  and  that  which  was  0.

31.  12.  his  boughs  are  b.  by  all  the  riveis  of  land

32.  28.  be  b.  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircumcised

34.  4.  nor  have  ye  bound  up  that  which  was  b.

16.  and  I  will  bind  up  that  which  was  b.

27.  when  I  have  b.  the  bands  of  their  yoke
44.  7-  and  they  have  b.  my  covenant
Dan.  2.  42.  so  kingdom  partly  strong,  and  partly  b.
8.  8.  when  he  was  strong,  the  great  horn  was  b.

22.  now  that  being  b.  whereas  four  stood  up  for  it
25.  but  he  shall  be  b.  without  hand
11.  4.  his  kingdom  shall  be  b.  and  shall  be  divided
22.  with  the  arms  of  a  flood  be  overflown  and  b.
Hos.  5. 11.  Ephraim  is  oppressed  and  b.  in  judgment
Jonah  1.  4.  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to  be  b.

Zech.  11.  11.  and  it  was  b.  in  that  day,  and  so  poor
16.  a  shepherd  shall  not  heal  that  which  is  b
Mat.  15.  3f.  took  up  of  the  b.  meat,  Mark  8.  8.

21.  44.  fall  on  this  stone,  shall  be  b.  Luke  20.  18.
Duke  12.  39.  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  b.
John  5.  18.  because  he  had  not  only  b.  the  sabbath

7.  23.  that  the  law  of  Moses  should  not  be  b.

10. 35.  word  of  God  came,  and  scripture  cannot  be  b.
19.  31.  Jews  besought  Pilate  their  legs  might  be  b.
36.  scripture  fulfilled,  a  bone  of  him  shall  not  be  b.
21. 11.  for  all  so  many,  yet  was  not  the  net  b.

Acts  20. 11.  had  b.  bread  and  talked  a  long  while
27.  35.  gave  thanks,  when  he  had  b.  it  he  began  to
41.  but  the  hinder  part  was  b.  with  the  waves
1  Cor.  11. 24.  this  is  my  body  which  is  b.  for  you
Rev.  2.  27.  as  vessels  of  a  potter  shall  they  be  b.
BROKEN  down.

Lev.  11. 35.  oven  or  ranges  b.  d.  for  they  are  unclean

1  Kings  18.  30.  repaired  altar  of  Lord  that  was  b.  d.

2  Kings  11.  6.  keep  the  watch,  that  it  be  not  b.  down
2  Chron.  33.  3.  built  high  places  Ilezekiah  had  b.  d.

34.  7.  Josiah  had  b.  down  the  altars  and  groves
Neh.  1.  3.  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  is  b.  d.  gates  burnt
2.  13.  and  I  viewed  the  walls  which  were  b.  ioten
Psal.  80. 12.  why  hast  thou  then  b.  dorm  her  hedges  /
89.  40.  thou  hast  b.  down  all  his  hedges
Prov.  24.  31.  the  stone  wall  thereof  was  b.  down
25.  28.  hath  no  rule  over  his  spirit,  like  a  city  b.  d.
La.  16. 8.  have  b.  dorm  the  principal  plants  thereof

22.  10.  the  houses  have  ye  b.  d.  to  fortify  the  wall

24.  10.  city  of  confusion  is  b.  d.  every  nouse  shut

19.  the  earfli  is  utterly  b.  down ,  it  is  dissolved
Jer.  4.  26.  cities  were  b.  d.  ||  48.  20.  Moab  b.  d.  39.
Etek.  30.  4.  and  her  foundations  shall  be  b.  down
Joel  1.  17,  the  barns  are  b.  down,  the  com  withered
Eph.  2. 14.  Christ  hath  b.  d.  middle  wall  between  us

BROKEN  forth.

Gen.  30.  +  30.  and  it  is  now  b.  forth  to  a  multitude
38.  29-  how  hast  thou  b.  forth?  breach  be  on  thee
2  Sam.  5.  20.  the  Lord  hath  b.  forth  on  mine  enemies
BROKEN  in.

1  Chron.  14.  11.  God  hath  b.  in  on  mine  enemies
BROKEN  off.

Job  17.  11.  my  days  are  past,  my  purposes  are  b.  off
Da.  27.  11.  when  boughs  withered,  snall  .be  b.  off
Rom.  11.  17.  and  if  some  of  the  branches  be  b.  off

20.  because  of  unbelief  they  were  b.  off,  19.

BROKEN  out.

Lev.  13.  20.  plague  of  leprosy  b.  out  of  the  boyl,  25.
BROKEN  in,  or  to,  pieces.

1  Sam.  2. 10.  adversaries  of  Lord  shall  be  b.  to  pieces

2  Chron.  25. 12.  cast  them  from  rock,  were  b.  in  pieces


B  RO


BRO


BRO


Psal.  89.10.  thou  hast  3.  Rahab  in  pieces  as  one  Aain
Isa.  8.  9.  associate  ye  people,  ye  shall  he  b.  in  pieces

30. 14.  break  it  as  a  potter's  vessel  that  is  b.  in  pieces
Jer.  50.2.  Merodach  is  b.in  pieces,  her  images  b.  inp.
Van.  2.  35.  brass,  silver,  gold,  b,  to  pieces  together
lies.  8. 6.  but  the  calf  of  Samaria  shall  be*3.»»  pieces
Mark  5.  4.  had  been  bound,  and  fetters  been  b.  inp.
BROKEN  up.

Gen.7.  11.  all  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  b.  vp
2  Kings  25. 4.  city  .1  erusalem  b.  up  Jer.  39. 2.  j  52. 7  •
2  Chr.  24. 7.  sons  of  Athaliah  had  b.  up  house  of  God
Prov.  3.  20.  by  his  knowledge  the  depths  are  b.  up
Jer.  37.  11.  when  the  army  of  Chaldeans  was  b.  up
Mic.  2.  13.  they  have  b.  vp  and  passed  the  gate
Mat.  24.  43.  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  b.  up
Mark  2.  4.  when  they  had  b.  roof  up  they  letdown
Acts  13.  43.  when  the  congregation  was  b.  up
BROKEN-HEARTED.

Isa.  61.  1.  Lord  sent  me  to  bind  up  the  b.-hearted
Luke  4. 18.  to  heal  b.-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance
BROOD.

Luke  13.  34.  as  a  hen  erathers  her  b.  under  her  wings
BROOK.


\  Gen.  32.  23.  he  took  them  and  sent  them  over  the  b.

Lev.  23.40.  take  willows  of  the  b.  and  rejoice
I  Num.  13.  23.  came  to  b.  Eshcol  and  cut  a  branch
24.  called,  b.  Eshcol  because  of  cluster  of  grapes
Deut.  2.  13.  getover  the  b.  Zered,  went  over  b.  14.

9.  21.  and  I  cast  the  dust  thereof  into  the  b.

1  Sam.  17.  40.  chose  live  smooth  stones  out  of  the  b.

30.  9.  David  and  600  men  came  to  the  b.  Besor

2  Sam.  15.  23.  the  king  passed  over  the  b.  Kidron
j  17.  20.  they  be  gone  over  the  b.  of  water

1  Kings  2. 37.  be  on  the  day  thou  passest  over  the  b.

15.  13.  idoi  burnt  by  the  b.  Kidron,  2  Chr.  15.  16.

17.  3.  get  hence,  hide  thyself  by  the  b.  Cherith,  5.

6.  the  ravens  brought  bread,  he  drank  of  the  b.

18.  40.  Elijah  brought  them  to  the  b.  Kishon

2  Kings  23.  6.  he  burnt  the  grove  at  the  b.  Kidron
12.  cast  dust  into  the  b.  Kidron,  2  Chron.  30.  14.

2  Chron.  20. 16.  ye  shall  find  them  at  end  of  the  b.

'  29.  16.  the  Levites  carried  it  to  the  b.  Kidron
i  32.  4.  much  people  gathered  and  stopt  the  b.
j  Neh,  2.  15.  went  up  by  the  b.  and  viewed  the  wall
Job  6. 15.  my  brethren  dealt  deceitfully  as  a  b.

40.  22.  the  willows  of  the  b.  compass  him  about
Psal.  83.  9.  do  to  them  as  to  Jabin  at  the  b.  Kison

110. 7-  he  shall  drink  of  the  b.  in  the  way,  therefore
Prov.  18. 4.  well-spring  of  wisdom  as  a  flowing  b.

30. 1 17-  the  ravens  of  the  b.  shall  pick  it  out
Isa. T5. 7*  shall  carry  away  to  the  b.  of  the  willows
Jer.  31. 40.  all  fields  to  b.  Kidron  be  holy  to  Lord
,  John  18.  1.  went  with  his  disciples  over  b.  Cedron
BROOKS.

Num.  21. 14.  whathe  did  in  Redsea  and  b.  of  Amon
15.  and  at  the  stream  of  the  b.  that  goeth  to  Ar
:  Deut.  8.  7.  to  a  land  of  b.  of  water  and  fountains
2  Sam.  23.  30.  of  the  b.  of  Gaash,  1  Chron.  11.  32.

1  Kings  18.  5.  Ahab  said,  go  unto  all  b.  of  water
1  Job  6.  15.  and  as  the  stream  of  b.  they  pass  away
!  20. 17.  he  shall  not  see  the  b.  of  honey  and  butter
!  22.  24.  then  shalt  lay  up  gold  as  stones  of  the  3.

:  Psal.  42.  1.  as  the  hartpanteth  after  the  water-3.
Isa.  19.6.3.  of  defence  shall  be  emptied  and  dried  up

7.  the  paper-reeds  by  the  3.  by  the  mouth  of  the  3.

and  every  thing  sown  by  the  3.  shall  wither

8.  all  they  that  cast  angle  into  the  3.  shall  lament

BROTH.


Judg.  6. 19.  Gideon  put  the  3.  in  a  pot,  brought  it

20.  the  angel  said,  pour  out  the  3.  and  he  did  so
Isa.  65.  4.  3.  of  abominable  things  is  in  their  vessels
BROTHER.

See  Signijication  on  Brethren.

Gen. 9.5.  at  hand  of  every  man’s  3.  will  I  require  life

24.  29.  Rebekah  had  a  3.  whose  name  was  Laban
53. gave  also  to  her  3.  and  mother  precious  things

29.  12.  Jacob  told  Rachel  he  was  her  father’s  3.

43.  6,7-  why  dealt  you  so  ill  with  me,  as  to  tell  ye

had  a  3.  the  man  ashed,  have  ye  another  3.  ?44. 19.
Deut.  25.  5.  her  husband’s  3.  shall  go  in  to  her
Judg.  9.24.  their  blood  laid  on  Abimelech  their  3.

21.  6.  Israel  repented  them  for  Benjamin  their  3.
Job  1. 13.  were  eating  in  their  elder  3.  house,  18.

30.  29.  I  am  a  3.  to  dragons,  a  companion  to  owls
Prov.  17. 17-  and  a  3.  is  born  for  adversity

18. 9.  he  that  is  slothful  is  3.  to  him  that  is  a  waster

19.  a  3.  offended  is  harder  to  be  won  than  a  city

24.  there  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  3.

27. 10.  better  a  neighbour  near  than  a  3.  far  off
Eccl.  4.  8.  yea,  he  hath  neither  child  nor  3.
Jer.9.4.  trust  not  in  any  3.  for  every  3.  wall  supplant
Ezek.  44.  25.  for  3.  they  may  defile  themselves
Mai.  1.  2.  was  not  Esau  Jacob’s  3.  ?  saith  the  Lord
Mat.  10.  21.  3.  shall  deliver  up  the  3.  Mark  13.  12.
Mark  12. 19.  if  a  man’s  3.  die  and  leave, Luke  20. 28.
John  11.  2.  Mary,  whose  3.  Lazarus  was  sick

19.  Jews  came  to  comfort  them  concern,  their  3.
Acts  9.  17..  A.  Saul,  receive  thy  sight,  22.  13.

12.  2.  he  killed  James  the  3.  of  John  with  the  sword
21.20.  thou  seest,  3.  how  many  thousands  believe
Rom.  16.  23.  and  Quartus  a  3.  saluteth  you

1  Cor.  5. 11.  if  any  man  called  a  3.  be  a  fornicator

6,  6.  3.  goeth  to  law  with  3.  before  unbelievers

7.  12.  if  any  3.  hath  a  wife  that  believeth  not

I  15.  a  3.  or  sister  is  not  under  bondage  in  such  cases

8. 11.  thro’  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weak  3.  perish

2  Cor.  8. 18.  and  we  have  sent  with  him  the  3.

2  Thess.  3.  6.  that  ye  withdraw  from  every  3.

15.  count  not  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  3.
Philem.  7.  bowels  of  saints  are  refreshed  by  thee,  3.

16.  but  above  a  servant,  a  3.  beloved  to  me

His  BROTHER.

Gen.  25.  26.  and  after  that  came  Am  3.  out
38.  9.  lest  that  he  should  give  seed  to  his  b.

42.38.  his  3.  E  uead,  and  he  is  left  alone,  44.  20.
h.xod.  32.  27.  slay  tverv  man  his  3.  and  companion
Lev.  21 .  2.  for  his  father  or  his  3.  he  may  be  defiled
Eum.  6.7.  shall  not  make  himself  unclean  for  his  3.
Deut.  15.  2.  not  exact  it  of  his  neighbour  or  his  b.
19.  19.  as  he  had  thought  to  have  done  to  his  3.

25.  6.  the  first-boni  shall  succeed  in  name  of  his  3.
28. 54.  his  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  his  b.


Judg.  9. 21.  Jotham  fled  for  fear  of  Abimelech  his  b.
2  Sam,  3.  27.  smote  him  for  blood  of  Asahel  his  b.

1  Kings  1.  10.  but  Solomon  his  3.  he  called  not
Neh.  5.  7.  y°u  exact  usury  every  one  of  his  3.
Psal.  49. 7.  none  can  by  any  means  redeem  his  3.
Isa.  3.  6.  when  a  man  shall  take  hold  of  his  b.

9.  19.  people  be  as  fuel,  no  man  shall  spare  his  b.

19.  2.  they  shall  fight  every  one  against  his  b.

41.  6.  every  one  said  to  his  3.  be  ot  good  courage
Jer.  13.  1 14.  I  will  dash  a  man  against  his  3.

31. 34.  teach  no  more  every  man  his  3.  Ileb.  8.  11.
34.  9.  that  none  serve  himsqlf  of  a  Jew  his  3.

14.  let  ye  go  every  man  his  3.  an  Hebrew

17.  in  proclaiming  liberty  every  one  to  his  3.
Ezek.  18. 18.  because  he  spoiled  his  3.  by  violence

33.  30.  speak  every  one  to  his  3.  saying,  come
IIos.  12. 3.  J  acob  took  his  3.  by  the  heel  in  the  womb
Amos  1. 11.  because  he  did  pursue  his  3.  with  sword
Mic.  7.  2.  they  hunt  every  man  his  3.  with  a  net
Hag.  2.  22.  every  one  by  the  sword  of  his  3.

Zech.  7.  9.  and  shew  mercy  every  man  to  his  3.

10.  let  none  imagine  evil  against  his  b.  in  heart
Mai.  2.  10.  why  deal  treacherously  against  his  3  ?
Mat.  5. 22.  whoso  is  angry  and  sayeth  Raca  to  his  3.

18.  35.  my  Father  do  also  to  you  if  ye  from  your
hearts  forgive  not  every  one  his  3.  their  trespasses

22.  24.  raise  seed  to  his  3.  Mark  12. 19.  Luke  20. 28.
25.  having  no  issue,  left  his  wife  to  his  3.

John  1.  41.  he  findeth  his  b.  Simon,  and  saith  to  him
Rom.  14.  13.  or  an  occasion  to  fall  in  his  3.  way
1  Thess.  4. 6.  that  no  man  defraud  his  3.  in  anymatter
Jam.  4. 11.  speaketh  evil  of  his  3.  and  judgeth  his  b.
1  John. 2.  9.  in  the  light,  and  hateth  his  3.  11.

10.  he  that  loveth  his  3.  abideth  in  the  light
3.  10.  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  b.  14.

12.  not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked  one,  and
slew  his  3.  because  his  3.  works  were  righteous

15.  whoso  hateth  his  3.  is  a  murderer,  4.  20.

1  John  4.  21.  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  3.  also
5. 16.  if  any  see  his  3.  sin  a  sin  not  to  death

My  BROTHER.

Gen.  4. 9.  Cain  said,  1  know  not,  am  I  my  3.  keeper  ?

20.  5.  herself  said,  he  is  my  3. 13.  1  Kings  20.  32.
27.  41.  Esau  said,  then  will  I  slay  my  3.  Jacob
29.  15.  Laban  said  to  Jacob,  because  thou  art  my  3.

Judg.  20.  23.  to  battle  against  Benjamin  my  3.  28.

2  Sam.  1.  26.  distressed  for  thee,  my  3.  Jonathan

13.  12.  nay  my  3.  do  not  force  me,  do  not  this

1  Kings  13.  30.  they  mourned,  saying,  alas  my  3.
Psal.  35. 14. 1  behaved  as  though  he  had  been  my  3.
Cant.  8. 1.  O  that  thou  wert  as  my  3.  that  sucked
Jer.  22.  18.  they  shall  not  lament,  saying,  ah  my  3.
Mat.  12.  50.  same  is  my  3.  and  sister,  Mark  3.  35.
18.  21.  Lord,  how  oft  shall  my  3.  sin  against  me  ?
Luke  12. 13.  speak  to  my  3.  that  he  divide  inherit.
John  11.  21.  if  hadst  been  here,  my  b.  had  not  died

1  Cor.  8. 13.  if  meat  make  my  3.  to  offend,  eat  no  flesh

2  Cor.  2.  13.  because  I  found  not  Titus  my  3.

Our  BROTHER.

Gen.  37.  26.  what  profit  is  it  if  we  slay  our  3.  ?

27.  for  he  is  our  3.  and  our  flesh,  Judg.  9.  3.

42.  21.  we  are  verily  guilty  concerning  our  3.

43.  4.  if  thou  wilt  send  our  3.  with  us,  we  will  go
2  Cor.  8.  22.  and  we  have  sent  with  them  our  3.
Philem.  1.  and  Timothy  our  3.  to  Philemon

Thy  BROTHER.

Gen.  4.  9.  Lord  said  to  Cain,  where  is  Abel  thy  3  ?
10.  the  voice  of  thy  3.  blood  crieth  unto  me

27.  40.  live  by  thy  sword,  and  shalt  serve  thy  3.
38. 8.  go  in  to  thy  b.  wife  and  raise  up  seed  to  thy  b.

Exod.  4.  14.  is  not  Aaron  the  Levite  thy  3.  ?

28.  1.  take  to  thee  Aaron  thy  3.  and  his  sons
Lev.  19.  17.  thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  3.  in  thine  heart

25.  36.  fear  thy  God  that  thy  3.  may  live  with  thee
Num.  27.13.  Aaron  thy  3.  was  gathered,  Deut.  32. 50.
Deut.  13.  6.  if  thy  3.  entice  thee  secretly,  saying

15.  11.  open  thy  hand  wide  to  thy  b.  to  thy  poor

12.  if  thy  b.  an  Hebrew  be  sold  to  thee  and  serve
22. 1.  in  any  case  bring  them  again  to  thy  3.

3.  in  like  manner  with  all  lost  things  of  thy  b.

23.  7.  not  abhor  an  Edomite,  for  he  is  thy  3.

19.  thou  shalt  not  lend  upon  usury  to  thy  3.

2  Sam.  2.  22.  how  hold  up  my  face  to  Joab  thy  b.  ?

13.  20.  hold  thy  peace,  my  sister,  he  is  thy  3.

1  Kings  20.  33.  and  they  said,  thy  3.  Benhadad
Job  22.  6.  hast  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  3.  for  nought
Psal.  50.  20.  thou  sittest  and  speakest  against  thy  b.
Prov.  27.  10.  nor  go  into  thy  b.  house  in  calamity
Obad.  10.  for  thy  violence  against  thy  3.  Jacob

12.  shouldest  not  have  looked  on  the  day  of  thy  3.
Mat .  5. 23.rememberest  that  thy  3. hath  ought  against

24.  first  be  reconciled  to  thy  3.  then  offer  thy  gift

7.3.  beholdestmote  in  thy  b. eye., 5.  Luke6.  41,42.

18. 15.  if  thy  3.  trespass,  hast  gained  thy  b.Luke  17. 3.

John  11.23.  Jesus  saith,  thy  3.  shall  rise  again
Rom.  14. 10.  but  why  dost  thou  judge  thy  3.  ?  or  why
dost  thou  set  at  nought  thy  b.  ?
Your  BROTHER.

Gen.  42.  34.  bring  your  3.  so  will  I  deliver  you  3c  3.

43. 3.  not  see  my  face,  except  your  b.  be  with  you

13.  take  your  0.  arise,  and  go  again  unto  the  man
45.  4. 1  am  Joseph  your  3.  whom  ye  sold  into  Egypt

Judg.  9. 18.  Abimelech  king,  because  he  is, your  b.
Rev.  1. 9.  John,  who  also  am  your  b.  and  companion
BROTHERHOOD.

Zech.  11.  14.  might  break  3.  between  Judah  and  Is.
1  Pet.  2-  IF.  love  the  3.  fear  God.  honour  the  king
BROTHERLY.

Amos  1.  9.  they  remembered  not  the  3.  covenant
Rom.  12.  10.  be  kindly  affectioned,  with  3.  love

1  Thess.  4. 9.  as  touching  3.  love,  ye  need  not  that  I
Heb.  13. 1.  let  3.  love  continue

2  Pet.  1. 7.  to  godliness  3.  kindness,  and  to  3.  kindn.

BROUGHT.

Gen.  20. 9.  hast  3.  on  me  and  my  kingdom  a  great  sin
27.  20.  because  the  Lord  thy  God  3.  it  to  me

31.  39.  that  torn  of  beasts  I  3.  not  to  thee
43.  26.  they  3.  him  the  present  in  their  hand
Exod.  9. 19.  every  beast  in  field  not  3.  home  shall  die
10. 13.  Lord  3.  east-wind,  the  east-wind  3.  locusts

18.  26.  the  hard  causes  they  3.  to  Moses

19.  4.  how  I  bare  you  and  3.  you  to  myself


Exod.  32.  1.  the  rnan  that  3.  us  up  out  ot  Egypt,  23*

21.  that  thou  hast  3.  so  great  a  sin  on  them

35.  23.  they  that  had  purple  and  scarlet  3.  them
Lev.  13.  2.  he  shall  be  3.  to  Aaron  the  priest,  9.

23.  14.  till  ye  have  3.  an  offering  to  your  God

24. 11.  they  3.  the  blasphemer  to  Moses

Num.  6. 13.  he  shall  be  3.  to  the  door  of  tabernacle?

9.  13.  because  3.  not  the  offering  in  his  season

14.  3.  wherefore  hath  the  Lord  3.  us  to  this  land  ?

16.  10.  and  he  hath  3.  thee  near  to  him

27.  5.  Moses  3.  their  cause  before  the  Lord

31.  50.  we  have  therefore  3.  an  oblation  for  Lord

32.  17.  till  we  have  3.  them  to  their-  place
Deut.  5.  15.  the  Lord  thy  God  3.  thee  out  tin.  nee

26.  10.  1  have  3.  the  first-fruits  of  the  land

13.  I  have  3.  away  the  hallowed  things
Josh.  7. 14.  in  the  morning  ye  shall  he  3.

23.  they  took  and  3.  them  to  Joshua

24.  they  3.  them  to  the  valley  of  Achor

24.  7.  Lord  3.  the  sea  upon  them  and  covered  them
Judg.  2.  1.  I  have  3.  you  unto  the  land  I  sware

16.  18.  the  Philistines  3.  money  in  their  hand
18.  3.  who  3.  thee  hither  ?  and  what  makest  thou

1  Sam.  1.  24.  she  3.  Samuel  to  the  house  of  the  Lord

25.  they  slew  a  bullock,  and  3.  the  child  to  Eli

10.  27.  they  despised  him,  and  3.  him  no  presents
21. 14.  wherefore  then  have  ye  3.  him  to  me  ?

25.  35.  David  received  what  Abigail  had  3.  him
30.  11.  they  found  and  3.  an  Egyptian  to  David

2  Sam.  1. 10.  crown  and  bracelet,  3.  them  to  my  lord

7.  18.  who  am  1,  O  Lord  God  ?  what  is  my  house,.

that  thou  hast  3.  me  hitherto  ?  1  Chron.  17.  16.

1  Kings  9.  9.  Lord  3.  on  them  this  evil,  2  Chro.  7. 22.
10.  25.  they  3.  each  his  present,  2  Chron.  9.  24.

17.  20.  hast  thou  also  3.  evil  upon  the  widow  ?

22.  37.  so  the  king  died,  and  was  3.  to  Samaria

2  Kings  5.  20.  spared  Naaman,  in  not  receiv.  what

he  3.

17.  4.  Hoshea  3.  no  presents  to  the  king  of  Assyria*

27.  carry  thither  the  priest  ye  3.  from  thence

20.  11.  he  3.  the  shadow  ten  degrees  backward

24.  16.  craftsmen  the  king  3.  captive  to  Babylon

1  Chron.  11.  19.  with  jeopardy  of  lives  they  3.  it

14.  17.  the  Lord  3.  fear  of  him  on  all  nations

2  Chr.  13.  18.  the  children  of  Israel  were  3.  under

17.5.  all  Judah  3.  to  Jehoshaphat  presents
22.  9.  3.  Ahaziah  to  Jehu,  and  when  had  slain

28.  5.  the  king  of  Syria  3.  Israel  to  Damascus

15.  3.  captives  to  Jericho  to  their  brethren

32. 23.  many  3.  gifts  to  the  Lord  to  Jerusalem
Ezra  8.  18.  they  3.  us  a  man  of  understanding

10.  1 10.  ye  have  3.  back  strange  wives
Neh.  4. 15.  God  had  3.  their  counsel  to  nought

8.  16.  the  people  3.  them  and  made  them  booths

9.  33.  thou  art  just  in  all  that  is  3.  upon  us

13. 12.  Judah  3.  tithe  of  corn  and  new  wine
Esth.  6. 8.  let  the  royal  apparel  be  3.  the  king  usetf

9.  11.  number  of  slain  in  Shushan  3.  to  the  king
Job  4. 12.  now  a  thing  was  secretly  3.  to  me

21.  32.  yet  shall  he  be  3.  to  the  grave  and  tomb
Psal.  35.  4.  let  them  be  3.  to  confusion,  26.

45.  15.  with  gladness  and  rejoic.  shall  they  be  b
71.  24.  they  are  3.  to  shame  that  seek  my  hurt
Prov.  6. 26.  a  man  is  3.  to  a  piece  of  bread
Cant.  2. 4.  he  3.  me  to  the  banqueting-house
Isa.  15. 1.  Ar.  3.  Kir  of  Moab  is  3.  to  silence

23. 13.  3.  the  land  of  the  Chaldaeans  to  ruin

29.  20.  for  the  terrible  one  is  3.  to  nought
43.  23.  thou  hast  not  3.  small  cattle  to  me,  24.

48.  15-  yea,  I  have  called  him,  I  have  3.  him

53. 7.  he  is  3.  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter

59. 16.  therefore  his  arm  3.  salvation,  63.  5.

60. 11.  and  that  their  kings  may  be  3.

62. 9.  they  that  3.  it  shall  drink  it  in  the  courts
Jer.  11. 19.  as  an  ox  that  is  3.  to  the  slaughter

15.  8.  1  have  3.  on  them  a  spoiler  at  noon  day
32.  42.  as  1  have  3.  all  this  evil  on  this  people
40.  3.  now  Lord  hath  3.  it  and  done  as  he  said

Ezek.  14.  22.  be  comforted  concerning  the  evil  I  3.

23. 8.  nor  left  she  her  whoredoms  3.  from  Egypt

29. 5.  thou  shalt  not  be  3.  together  nor  gathered
40.  4.  that  I  might  shew  them,  art  thou  3.  hither
47.  3.  he  3.  me  through  the  waters  to  the  ancles,  4.
Dan.  6.  18.  nor  instruments  of  music  3.  before  him

7. 13.  3.  him  near  before  the  ancient  of  days

9.  14.  Lord  watched  on  the  evil,  and  3.  it  on  us

11.  6.  she  be  given  up,  and  they  that  3.  her
Hag.  1.  9.  when  ye  3.  it  home  1  did  blow  on  It
Mai.  1 . 13.  ye  3.  what  was  torn,  and  lame,  and  sick
Mat.  10.  18.  ye  shall  be  3.  before  kings  for  my  sake,

for  a  test,  against  them,  Mark  13.  9-  Luke  21.  12.

12.  25.  kingdom  is  3.  to  desolation,  Luke  11.  17.

14.  11.  she  3.  John  Baptist’s  head  to  her  mother

17. 16.  I  3.  him  to  thy  disciples,  could  not  cure  him

18.  24.  one  was  3.  that  owed  him  10,000  talents

19. 13.  were  3.  to  him  little  children,  Mark  10. 13.
Mark-1.  21.  a  candle  3.  to  be  put  under  a  bushel

6.  27.  the  king  commanded  his  head  to  be  3.

10. 13.  the  disciples  rebuked  those  that  3.  them
Luke  2. 22.  3.  him  to  Jerusalem  to  present  him

7.  37.  a  woman  3.  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment

10.  34.  3.  him  to  an  inn  and  took  care  of  him
John  7.  45.  they  said,  why  have  ye  not  3.  him  ?
Acts  5.  21.  and  sent  to  the  prison  to  have  them  3.

9.  27.  Barnabas  3.  him  to  the  apostles,  and  declared

15.  3.  and  being  3.  on  their  way  by  the  church

16. 16.  who  3.  her  masters  gain  by  soothsaying

20.  3.  them  to  the  magistrates,  saying,  those  men

19.  12.  from  his  body  were  3.  to  the  sick,  aprons

19. 3.  their  books,  and  burned  them  before  all  men
24.  Demetrius  3.  no  small  gain  to  the  craftsmen
37.  ye  3.  hither  these  men,  no  robbers  of  churches

20.  12.  and  thej'  3.  the  young  man  alive

21.  5.  they  all  3.  us  on  our  way,  with  wives

25.  6.  the  next  day  commanded  Paul  to  be  3.

27. 24.  fearnot,  Paul,  thou  must  be  3.  before  Cesar
Rom.  15. 24.  to  be  3.  on  my  way  thither  by  you

1  Cor.  6. 12. 1  will  not  be  3.  under  the  power  of  any-

2  Cor.  1. 16.  of  you  to  be  3.  on  my  way  to  Judea
2  Tim.  1. 10.  hath  3.  life  and  immortality  to  light

1  Pet.  1.  13.  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  3.  to  you

2  Pet.  2. 19.  ot  the  same  is  he  3.  in  bondage


BRO


BRO


BUD


BROUGHT  again.

Ge».14.l6.  Abram  *.  again  his  brother  Lot  and  goods

43. 12.  and  the  money  that  was  b.  again  in  sacks
Exod.  10.  8.  Moses  and  Aaron  b.  again  to  Pharaoh
15. 19.  Lord  b.  again  the  waters  of  the  sea  on  them
Vent.  1. 25.  b.  us  word  ag.  and  said,  it  is  a  good  land
Josh  14. 7. 1  b.  him  word  ag.  as  it  was  in  my  heart
linth  1.21.  the  Lord  hath  h.  me  home  ag.  empty

1  Sam.  6. 21.  the  Philistines  b.  ag.  ark  of  the  Lord

2  Sam.  3. 26.  b.  ag.  Abner  from  the  well  of  Sirah

2  Kings  22.  9.  Shaphan  the  scribe  came  and  h.  the
king  word  ag.  20. 1  ft  iugs 20.  9.  2  Chron.  34.28.

2  Ckr  33. 13.  Lord  b.  M^nasseh  again  to  Jerusalem
Neh.  13. 9.  thither  b.  1  ag.  the  vessels  of  the  house
Jer.  27. 16.  the  vessels  shall  shortly  be  h.  again
Ezek.  34.  4.  ye  have  not  b.  again  what  was  driven
39.  27.  when  I  have  b.  them  ag.  from  the  pepple
Mat.  27.  3.  repented  and  b.  ag.  30  pieces  of  silver
Heb.  13. 20.  God  of  peace  that  b.  ag.  from  the  dead
BROUGHT  back.

Gen.  14.  16.  Abram  b.  back  all  the  goods  and  Lot
Nnm.  13. 26.  b.  back  word  to  them  and  congregation

1  Kings  13. 23.  for  the  prophet  whom  he  had  b.  back

2  Chr.  19. 4.  lehoshaphat  *.  them  back  to  the  Lord
Psal.  85.1.  thou  hast  b.  back  the  captivity  of  Jacob
Ezek.  38.8.  come  into  land  b.  back  from  the  sword

BROUGH  T  down.

Gen.  39.  1.  and  Joseph  was  b.  down  into  Egypt
Judg.  7.  5.  he  b.  down  the  people  to  the  waters

16.  21.  the  Philistines  b.  down  Samson  to  Gaza

1  Sam. 30. 16.  when  he  had  b.  him  d.  they  were  spread
1  Kings  1.  53.  they  b.  Adonijah  down  from  the  altar

17.  23.  Elijah  b.  the  child  d.  out  of  the  chamber
18. 40.  b.  them  d.  to  brook  Kishon  and  slew  them

Psal.  20.8.  they  are  b.  d.  and  fallen,  but  we  are  risen

107. 12.  he  b.  down  their  heart  with  labour
Isa.  5.  15.  and  the  mean  man  shall  be  b.  down

14.  11.  thy  pomp  is  b.  down  to  the  grave

15.  thou  shalt  be  b.  down  to  hell,  to  sides  of  pit
29.  4.  thou  shalt  be  b.  d.  and  speak  out  of  ground
43. 14.  for  your  sake  1  have  b.  d.  all  the  nobles
Lanu  2.  2.  he  hath  b.  them  down  to  the  ground
Ezek.  17.  24.  1  the  Lord  have  b.  d.  the  high  tree

31.  18.  shall  be  b.  down  with  the  trees  of  Eden
Zech.  10.  11.  the  pride  of  Assyria  shall  be  b.  down
Mat.  11.  23.  thou  Capernaum  be  b.  down  to  hell
Acts  9.  30.  the  brethren  *.  him  down  to  Cesarea
BROUGHT  forth.

Gen.  1.  12.  the  earth  b.  forth  grass  and  herbs  _

21.  waters  h.  forth  abundantly  after  their  kind
14.  18.  the  king  of  Salem  b.  forth  bread  and  wine
15. 5.  the  Lord  b.  forth  Abram  abroad,  and  said
19. 16.  angels  h.  Lot forth,  and  set  him  without  city
24. 53.  the  servant  b.  forth  jewels  of  silver  and  gold
38.  25.  when  b.  forth,  she  sent  to  her  father  in-law
41.  47.  in  plenteous  years  earth  b.  forth  by  handfuls
Exod.  3.  12.  when  thou  hast  b.  forth  the  people

16.  3.  for  ye  have  b.  us  forth  into  the  wilderness
29. 46.  shall  know  I  am  the  Lord  who  b.  them  forth
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  Lev.  25.  38.  I  26.  13,  45.
Num.  17. 8.  Aaron’s  rod  b.  forth  buds,  and  bloomed

20.  16.  sent  an  angel,  and  b.  us  forth  out  of  Egypt

24.  8.  God  b.  him  forth  out  of  Egypt,  he  hath

strength

Vent.  6. 12.  lest  forget  Lord  who  b.  thee  forth,  8. 14.

8.  15.  who  b.  forth  water  out  of  the  rock  of  flint

9.  12.  thy  people  thou  b.  f.  have  corrupted  thems.
26.  8.  the  Lord  b.  us  forth  with  a  mighty  hand
29. 25.  the  covenant  hemade  when  he  b.  them  forth
33.  14.  for  precious  fruits  b.  forth  by  the  sun

Josh.  10.  23.  b.  forth  those  five  kings  out  of  the  cave
Judg.  5.  25.  she  b.  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  dish
6.  8.  1  b.  you  forth  out  of  the  house  of  bondage

1  Sam.  12. 8.  sent  Moses,  who  b.  forth  your  fathers

2  Sam.  22.  20.  b.  me /.  into  large  place,  Psal.  18.  19.

1  Kings  9.  9.  they  forsook  the  Lord  who  b.f.  their

fathers  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  2  Chr.  7. 22.

2  Kings  10.  22.  b.  forth  vestments  for  worshippers

11. 12.  b.  forth  the  king’s  son,  and  put  the  crown  on
Job  10. 18.  wherefore  hast  b.  me  forth  out  of  womb

21.  30.  the  wicked  shall  be  b.  forth  to  day  of  wrath
Psal.  7-  14.  conceived  mischief,  and  b.f.  falsehood

90.  2.  before  the  mountains  were  *. forth,  art  God
105.  30.  their  land  b.  forth  frogs  in  abundance
43.  he  b.  forth  his  people  with  joy  and  gladness
Prov.  8. 24.  when  there  were  no  depths,  I  was  b.  f.

25.  before  the  hills  was  I  b.  forth
Cant.  8. 5.  there  thy  mother  b.  th ee  forth,  she  b.  forth
Isa.  5.2.  he  looked  for  grapes,  and  it  b.f.  wild  grapes

26. 18.  b.  forth  wind  ||  45. 10.  what  hast  thou  b.f.  ?

51. 18.  to  guide  her  among  sons,  she  hathi./erM_

66. 7.  before  she  travailed,  she  b.f.  before  her  pain
8.  for  as  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  b.f.  children

Jer.  2.  27.  saying  to  a  stone,  thou  hast  b.  me  forth

11.  4.  I  commanded  in  the  day  I  b.  them/.  34. 13.
17-  t  H.  gathereth  young  which  he  hath  not  b. forth
20.  .3.  Pashur  b.  forth  Jeremiah  out  of  the  stocks

32.  21.  hast  b.  forth  thy  people  Israel  with  signs
50.  25.  Lord  *.  f.  the  weapons  of  his  indignation
51. 10.  the  Lord  hath  b.  forth  our  righteousness

Ezek.  12.  7.  I  h.  forth  my  stuff  by  day  in  their  sight
14.  22.  a  remnant  b. forth,  both  sons  and  daughters
20.  22.  the  heathen  in  whose  sight  I  h.  them  forth
Mic.  5.  3.  till  time  she  which  travaileth  hath  *. forth
Hag.  2.  19.  and  the  olive-tree  hath  not  b.  forth
Mat.  1.  25.  till  she  had  b.  forth  her  first-born  son

13.8.  fell  in  good  ground,  and  b.f.  fruit,  Mark  4. 8.
Luke  1. 57.  now  Elisabeth's  time  came,  she  b.  f.  a  son

2.7.  she  b.f.  her  first-born  son  and  wrapped  him
12. 16.  the  ground  of  a  rich  man  b.  forth  plentifully
John  19.13.  when  Pilate  heard  that,  he  b.f.  Jesus
Acts  5. 19.  opened  the  prison  doors  and  b.  them  forth

12.  6.  when  Herod  would  have  b.  him  forth
25.  17.  I  commanded  the  ma  t  to  be  b.  forth

Jam.  5. 18.  he  prayed,  and  the  earth  b.  forth  her  fruit
Pev.  12. 5.  she  b.  forth  a  man-child,  who  was  to  rule

13.  the  dragon  persecuted  the  woman  which  b.  f.
BROUGHT  in.

Gen.  3Q.  14.  he  hath  b.  in  an  Hebrew  to  mock  us
47.  7-  Joseph  b.  in  Jacob  his  father,  Jacob  blessed
Lev.  10. 18.  blood  was  not  b.  in  within  holy  place
16. 27-  the  bullock  and  goat,  whose  blood  was  *,

44  *


7Vmot.12.15.  they  journeyed  not  till  Miriam  was  b.in
Vent.  9. 4.  for  my  righteousness  the  Lord  b.  me  in
11. 29.  when  the  Lord  hath  b.  thee  in  to  the  land
2  Sam.  3.  22.  Joab  b.  in  a  great  spoil  with  him
6. 17.  they  b.  in  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  l  Kings  8.  6.
Neh.  13. 19.  no  burden  b.  in  on  the  sabbath-day
Psal.  78.  26.  by  his  power  he  b.  in  the  south  wind
Van.  5. 13.  then  was  Daniel  b.  in  before  the  king
Mat.  14. 11.  John's  head  was  b.  in  in  a  charger
Acts  7  .Ab.b.in  with  Jesus  into  possession  of  Gentiles
Gal.  2.4.  false  brethren  h.  in  to  spy  our  liberty
Heb.  9. 1 16.  must  be  *-m  the  death  of  the  testator
BROUGHT  into.

Num.  16. 14.  not  b.  us  into  a  land  that  tloweth
Vent.  6. 10.  when  the  Lord  hath  b.  thee  into,  31.  20.

1  Sam.  5.  2.  b.  the  ark  into  Dagon’s  house  and  set  it
9.  22.  b.  them  into  the  parlour,  and  made  them  sit

20.  8.  *.  thy  servant  into  a  covenant  with  thee

2  Kings  12. 16.  sin-money  not  b.  into  house  of  Lord
Psal.  22. 15.  hast*,  me  into  the  dust  of  death
Cant.  1.  4.  the  king  hath  b.  me  into  his  chambers
Jer.  2.  7.  1  *.  you  into  a  plentiful  country  to  eat
Lam.  3.  2.  hath  b.  me  into  darkness,  but  not  light
Ezek.  27.  26.  thy  rowers  have  b.  thee  into  waters

44.  7.  ye  have  b.  into  my  sanctuary  strangers
Acts  9. 8.  they  led  him  and  b.  him  into  Damascus

21.  28.  b.  Greeks  into  the  temple,  and  polluted  it

1  Tim.  6.  7.  for  we  b.  nothing  into  this  world
Heb.  13. 11.  whose  blood  is  b.  into  the  sanctuary

BROUGH  T  low.

Judg.  11.  35.  daughter,  thou  hast  b.  me  very  low

2  Chron.  28. 19.  l.ord  b.  J udah  low,  because  of  Ahaz
Job  14. 21.  they  are  b.  low,  but  he  perceiveth  it  not

24. 24.  wicked  are  gone  and  b.  low,  they  are  taken
Psal.  79. 8.  let  mercies  prevent  us,  for  we  are  b.  low

106.  43.  and  were  b.  low  for  their  iniquity

107 . 39.  they  are  b.  low,  thro’  oppression  and  sorrow
116. 6.  I  was  b.  low,  and  he  helped  me
142.  6.  attend  to  my  cry,  for  1  am  b.  very  low
Eccl.  12. 4.  all  daughters  of  music  shall  be  b.  low
Isa.  2. 12.  upon  every  one  lifted  up,  he  shall  be  b.  low
25.  5.  the  branch  or  the  terrible  ones  shall  be  b.  low
Luke  3. 5.  every  mountain  and  hill  b.  low,  Isa.  40. 4.
BROUGHT  out.

Gen.  15. 7.  that  b.  thee  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees
41.  14.  they  b.  him  hastily  out  of  the  dungeoq
43.  23.  and.  he  *.  Simeon  out  unto  them
Exod.  13.  3.  for  by  strength  of  hand  the  Lord  b.  you
out  from  this  place,  9, 14, 16.  Vent.  6.  21.
20.  2.  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  b.  thee  out,
Lev.  19.36.  Num.  15.  41.  Veut.  5.6.  Psal.  81.10.
LtfM.23.43.when  I  *.  themoMfof  Egypt, 1  Kings  SSI.
Veut.  5. 15.  remember  that  Lord  b.  thee  out  thence
9.  28.  b.  them  out  to  slay  them  in  the  wilderness
Josh.  6. 23.  young  men  b.  out  Rahab  and  all  she  had
24. 5.  plagued  Egypt,  and  afterward  I  b.  you  out
2  Sam.  13.  18.  servant  b.  her  out,  and  bolted  the  door
2  Kings  2.3.  6.  he  b.  out  the  grove  from  house  of  Lord

1  Chron.  20. 3.  he  b.  out  the  people  that  were  in  it

2  Chron.  23. 11.  then  they  b.  out  the  king’s  son

29. 16.  priests*. out  all  uncleanness  they  found
Psal.  78.  16.  he  *.  streams  also  out  of  the  rock
80.  8.  thou  hast  *.  a  vine  out  of  Egypt

107. '  14.  he  *.  them  out  of  darkness,  and  brake
1.36.  11.  and  *.  out  Israel  from  among  them

Jer.  7. 22.  in  the  day  1  *.  them  out  of  Egypt
Van.  5. 13.  whom  the  king  my  father  *.  out  of  Jewry
Hos.  12. 13.  by  a  prophet  the  Lord  *.  Israel  out
Acts 7.  40.  this  Moses,  which  *.  us  out  of  Egypt

12. 17.  declared  how  the  Lord  *.  him  out  of  prison

13. 17.  with  an  high  arm  *.  them  out  of  Egypt

16.  30.  *.  out,  and  said,  whatmust  I  do  to  be  saved  ?

39.  they  came  and  besought  them ,  and  *.  them  out

BROUGH  T  to  pass.

2  Kings  19.  25.  now  ha'  e  I  *.  it  to  pass,  Isa.  .37.  26.
Ezek.  21.  7.  it  cometh,  and  shall  be  *.  to  pass
1  Cor.  15. 54.  then  shall  be  *.  to  pass  the  saying
BROUGHT  up

Exod.  17. 3.  wherefore  hast  thou  b.  us  up  ?  Num. 21.5.
32. 1.  as  for  Moses,  the  man  that  *.  us  up,  23.

4.  these  thy  gods  which  *.  thee  up,  8. 1  Kings  12.28.
.3.3.  1.  thou  and  the  people  which  thou  hast  *.  up
Num.  1.3. 32.  they  *.  up  an  evil  report  of  the  land

16. 13.  is  it  a  small  thing  that  thou  hast  *.  us  up  ?

20. 4.  why  have  ye  *.  up  the  congregation  of  Lord  ?
Veut.  20. 1.  the  Lord  is  with  thee,  which  *.  thee  up

22. 19.  because  he  *.  up  an  evil  name  on  a  virgin
Josh.  24. 17.  he  it  is  that  *.  us  up  and  our  fathers
32.  bones  of  Joseph  *.  up,  they  buried  in  Shechem
Judg.  6. 8.  I  *.  you  up  from  Egypt,  1  Sam.  JO.  18.

15. 13.  *.  Samson  up  ||  16.  31.  *.  him  up  and  buried
16.  8.  the  lords  *.  up  to  her  seven  green  withs

1  Sam.  2. 14.  all  the  flesh-hook  *.  up  the  priest  took
8.  8.  since  the  day  I  *.  them  up,  2  Sam.  7.  6.

1  Chron.  17.  5.

12.  6.  Lord  that  *.  your  fathers  up  out  of  Egypt

2  Sam.  6.  12.  David  went  and  *.  up  the  ark  of  God,

15.  1  Kings  8.  4.  1  Chr.  15. 28.  2  Chr.  1. 4.
21 . 8.  *.  up.  for  Adriel  1|  13.  *.  up  the  bones  of  Saul
2  Kings  10. 1.  to  them  that  *.  up  Ahab’s  children,  6.
17. 7.  Israel  sinned  against  Lord  who  *.  them  up
.36.  the  Lord  who  *.  you  up,  him  fear  and  worship
25.  6.  *.  up  Zedekiah  to  king  of  Babylon,  Jer.  .39.  5.
2  Chr.  8. 11.  Solomon  *.  up  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh
10.  8.  counsel  with  young  men  *.  up  with  him,  10.
Ezra  1. 11.  all  these  vessels  *.  up  from  Babylon
4. 2.  Esar-haddon  king  of  Assur  *.  us  up  hither
Neh.  9.18.  this  is  thy  God  that  *.  theeMp  out  of  Egypt
Esth.  2.7.  Mordecai  b.up  Esther  his  uncle’s  daughter
20.  like  as  when  she  was  *.  up  with  him _

Job  31.  18.  from  my  youth  he  was  *.  up  with  me
Psal.  30.  3.  thou  hast  *.  up  my  soul  from  the  grave

40.  2.  he  *.  me  up  out  of  an  horrible  pit

Prov.  8. 30.  then  I  was  hy  him,  as  one  *.  up  with  him
Isa.  1.  2.  I  have  nourished  and  *.  up  children
49. 21.  who  hath  b.up  these  ?  where  had  they  been-’
51.  18.  none  to  guide  her  of  all  the  sons  she  *.  up
63. 11.  where  is  he  that  *.  them  up?  Jer.  2.  6.

Jer.  11.  7.  I  protested  in  the  day  1  *.  them  up

16. 14.  the  Lord  that  *.  up  Israel  out  of  Egypt.23. 7.
15.  the  Lord  that  *.  up  Israel  from  the  north,  23. 8.

Lam,,  2.  22.  those  I  *.  up  hath  my  enemy  consumed


Lam.  4. 5.  that  were  b.up  in  scarlet  embrace  dungh
Ezek.  1 9. 3.  she  *.  up  one  of  her  whelps,  a  young  lion
31. 1 4.  the  deep  *.  him  up  on  high  with  her  rivers  ,
37.  13.  when  1  have  *.  you  up  out  of  your  graves
Amos  2.  10.  I  *.  you  up,  3.  1.  1  9.  7.  Mic.  6.  4.
Jonah  2.  6.  yet  hast  *.  up  rny  life  from  corruption
Nah.  2.  7.  she  shall  be  *.  up,  and  her  maids  lead  her
Luke  4.  16.  to  Nazareth,  where  she  had  been  *.  up
Acts  13.  1.  had  been  *.  up  with  Herod  the  tetrarch

22.  3.  yet  *.  up  in  this  city  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel

1  Tim.  5.  10.  a  widow,  if  she  have  *.  up  children

broughtest.

Exod.  32.  7-  thy  people  thou  *.  out  have  corrupted
Num.  14.  13.  thou  *.  up  this  people  in  thy  might
Veut.  9.  28.  lest  the  land  whence  thou  *.  us  out  say

29.  thy  inheritance  thou  *.  out,  1  Kings  8-  51.

2  Sam.  5. 2.  wast  he  that  *.  in  Israel,  1  Chron.  11.  2.

1  Kings  8. 53.  when  thou  *.  our  fathers  out  of  Egypt
Neh.  9.  7.  *.  him  forth  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees

15.  thou  *.  forth  water  for  them  out  of  the  rock

23.  *.  them  into  the  land  thou  hadst  promised
Psal.  66.  11.  thou  *.  us  into  the  net,  thou  laid’st
12.  but  thou  *.  us  out  into  a  wealthy  place
BROW.

Isa.  48. 4.  thy  neck  is  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy  *.  brass
Luke  4.  29.  they  led  him  to  the  *.  of  the  hill
BROWN.

Gen.  30.  32.  all  *.  cattle  among  the  sheep,  35.  40.

33.  every  one  that  is  not  *.  shall  be  accounted  stolen
BRUISE,  Substantive.

Isa.  53. 1 5.  and  with  his  *.  we  are  healed
Jer.  6. 1 14.  they  healed  the  *.  of  my  people  slightly
.30.  12.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  thy  *.  is  incurable
Nah.  3.19.  there  is  no  healing ot  thy  *.  wound  griev.
BRUISES.

Isa.  1. 6.  no  soundness,  but  wounds,  and  *.  and  sores
Ezek.  47.  112.  the  leaf  thereof  for  *.  and  sores
BRUISE

Signifies,  [1]  To  crush,  injure,  or  oppress,  Gen.  3.

15.  Dan.  2.  40.  [2]  To  punish,  chastise,  or  cor¬
rect,  Isa.  53.  10.  It  is  spoken,  (1)  Corporally,
of  the  body,  Luke  9.  39.  (2)  Spiritually,  of  doubts
and  troubles.  Mat.  12.  20.  (3)  Morally,  of  cor¬
ruptions,  Isa.  1.  6.  ,(4)  Politically,  of  a  weak
decaying  nation,  2  Kings  18.  21.

A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break,  Isa.  42.  3.
Christ  will  not  deal  roughly  and  rigorously  with
those  that  come  to  him,  but  will  use  all  gentle¬
ness  and  tenderness  to  them ;  passing  by  theij
greatest  sins ,  bearing  with  their  present  infirmi
ties,  cherishing  and  encouraging  the  smallest  be
ginnings  of  grace,  and  comforting  and  healing
wounded  consciences.

To  bruise  the  teats,  Ezek.  23.  3,  21.  To  comm
bodily  whoredom ;  or  idolatry,  which  is  spiritual
whoredom.

Gen.  3.  15.  it  shall  *.  thy  head,  thou  shalt  *.  his  heel
Isa.  28.  28.  nor  will  he  *.  it  with  his  horsemen
53.  10.  yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  *.  him
Van.  2.  40.  as  iron  shall  it  break  in  pieces  and  *.
Rom.  16.  20.  the  God  of  peace  shall  *.  Satan  shortly
BRUISED.

Lev.  22.  24.  ye  shall  not  offer  to  the  Lord  what  is  b.

2  Kings  18.  21.  trustest  on  the  staff  of  this  *.  reed
Isa.  42.  3.  a  b.  reed  shall  he  not  break,  Mat.  12. 20.

53.  5.  he  was  *.  for  our  iniquities,  the  chastisement
Ezek.  23.  3.  there  they  *.  the  teats  of  their  virginity
8.  and  they  *.  the  breasts  of  her  virginity
Luke  4.  18.  sent  me  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  b.
BRUISING.

Ezek.  23.  21.  in  *.  thy  teats  by  the  Egyptians
Luke  9. 39.  the  spirit  *.  him,  hardly  departeth  from
BRUIT.

Jer.  10.  22.  behold,  the  noise  of  the  *.  is  come
Nah.  3.  19.  all  that  hear  the  *.  of  thee,  shall  clap
Brute  ;  see  Beasts.

BRUTISH.

Psal.  49.  10.  the  fool  and  the  *.  person  perish
92.  6.  a  *.  man  knoweth  not,  nor  a  fool  understand
94.  8.  understand,  ye  *.  among  the  people
Prov.  12.  1.  but  he  that  hateth  reproof  is  *.

30.  2.  surely  I  am  more  *.  than  any  man

Isa.  19. 11 .  the  princes  of  Zoan  are  fools,  the  counsel
of  the  wise  counsellors  of  Pharaoh  is  become  b.
Jer.  10.  8.  they  are  altogether  *.  and  foolish

14.  every  man  is  *.  51.  17-  II  21.  pastors  are  *.
Ezek.  21  31.  deliver  thee  into  the  hand  of  *.  men
BUCKET,  S.

Num.  24.  7.  he  shall  pour  the  water  out  of  his  b.
Isa.  40. 15.  the  nations  are  as  a  drop  of  a  *.  and  dust
BUCKLER

Is  a  piece  of  defensive  armour,  1  Chron.  5. 18.  God
is  often  called  the  Buckler,  or  Shield,  of  his  people,
Psal.  18.  2.  Prov.  2.  7-  He  will  protect  and  save
them  from  that  mischief  and  ruin  which  will  befal
all  wicked  men.  And  in  Cant.  4.  4.  the  faith  of
the  church,  or  of  believers,  whereby  they  are  united
to  Christ,  is  compared  rathe  tower  of  Vavid,  where¬
on  hang  a  thousand  bucklers  ;  noting,  how  strong
and  invincible  faith  is,  which  furnishes  with  wea¬
pons  out  of  Christ's  fulness ,  and  abundantly  defends
from  all  spiritual  enemies,  Eph.  6.  16.

2  Sam.  22.  31.  a  *.  to  all  that  trust  in  him,  Ps.  18.  30.

1  Chron.  5.  18.  men  able  to  bear  *.  and  sword
12.  8.  Gadites  that  could  handle  shield  and  *.

Psal.  18.  2.  Lord  is  my  God,  my  *.  my  high  towel
35.  2.  take  hold  of  shield  and  *.  stand  up  for  help
91.  4.  his  truth  shall  be  thy  shield  and  *.

Prov.  2.  7.  he  is  a  *.  to  them  that  walk  uprightly
Jer.  46. 3.  order  ye  the  *.  and  shield,  and  draw  near
Ezek.  2.3.  24.  shall  set  against  the  *.  shield,  and

26.  8.  he  shall  lift  up  the  *.  against  thee  [helmet
BUCKLERS.

2C*r.23. 9.  Jehoiada  delivered  spears,  *.  and  shields
Job  15.  26.  runneth  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  his  *.
Cant.  4.  4.  whereon  there  hanged  a  thousand  *.
Ezek.  38.  4.  a  great  company  with  *.  and  shields
39.  9.  they  shall  set  on  fire  shields,  *.  and  bows
BUD,  Substantive.

Job  38.  27.  cause  the  *.  of  the  tender  herb  to  spring
Isa.  18.  5.  afore  the  harvest,  when  the  *.  is  perfect
61.  11  for  as  the  earth  bringeth  forth  her  *.


B  U  I

Ezek.  16.  7-  caused  thee  to  multiply  as  b.  of  the  field
Hos.  8. 7-  b.  shall  yield  no  meal,  stranger  swallow  it
BUD,  Verb.

Gen.  3.  +  18.  thistles  shall  it  cause  to  b.  to  thee
Job  14.  9.  yet  through  the  scent  of  water  it  will  b.
Psal.  132.  17.  I  will  make  the  horti  of  David  to  b.
Cant.  7-  12.  let  us  see  if  the  pomegranates  b.  forth
Is a. 27 .6. Israel  shallblossom  and  A. and  fill  theworld

55. 10.  maketh  the  earth  to  bring  forth  and  b.
Ezek.  29.21.  cause  the  horn  of  Israel  to  b.  forth
BUDS.

Hum.  17.8.  Aaron’s  rod  brought  forth  Land  bloomed
.BUDDED.  .  [forth
I  Gen.  40.  10.  the  vine  was  as  though  it  b.  and  shot
Kum.  17.  8.  Aaron's  rod  for  the  house  of  Levi  b.

E  Cant.  6. 11.  to  see  whether  the  pomegranates  b.

1  Ezek.  7.  10.  the  rod  hath  blossomed,  pride  hath  h.

•  lleb.  9.  4.  the  ark  wherein  was  Aaron's  rod  that  b.
BUFFET.

2  Cor.  12. 7.  the  messenger  of  Satan  to  b.  me
BUFFETED.

Mat.  26.  67.  spit  in  his  face  and  b.  him,  Mark  14.65.
1  Cor.  4.  11.  even  to  this  present  hour  we  are  b.

!  1  Pet.  2.  20.  if  when  ye  be  b.  for  your  faults
BUILD

j  Signifies,  [1]  To  erect,  or  make  houses,  &c.  Deut.

28.  30.  [2]  To  strengthen  and  increase  knov-
ledge,  faith,  love,  and  all  other  graces ,  Acts  20.
32.  [3J  To  cement  and  knit  together  spiritually  ;
thus  believers  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith,  and
among  themselves  by  love,  Eph.  2.  22.  [4]  To
preserve,  bless,  and  prosper.  Psal.  127.  1.  Ter.  24.
6.  [5]  To  settle  and  establish,  1  Sam .  2.  35.

Who  did  build  the  house  of  Israel,  Ruth  4.  11.
Who  did  increase  his  family  by  a  numerous
progeny.

1  will  build  up  thy  throne,  Psal.  89.  4.  I  will
perpetuate  the  kingdom  to  thy  posterity.

Shall  build  the  old  wastes,  Isa.  61.  4.  The
Gentiles,  who  have  been  long  destitute  of  the
true  knowledge  of  God,  and  like  a  wilderness
overgrown  with  briers  and  thorns,  shall  be  brought,
by  the  ministry  of  the  word,  to  know  and  serve  the
true  God.

BUILD,  referred  to  God.

5  i  Sam.  2.  35. 1  will  raise  up  a  priest,  and  will  b.  him
a  sure  house,  2  Sam.  7.  27.  1  Kings  11.  38.

!  Chron.  17.  10.  that  the  Lord  will  b.  thee  an  house

25.  hast  told  that  thou  wilt  b.  him  an  house
1 sal .  28.  5.  he  shall  destroy,  and  not  b.  them  up
51.  18.  do  good  to  Sion,  b.  the  walls  of  Jerusalem
69.  35.  for  God  will  b.  the  cities  of  Judah
89.  4.  and  b.  up  thy  throne  to  all  generations
102. 16.  when  Lord  shall  b.  up  Zion,  will  appear
127. 1.  except  Lord  b.  house,  they  labour  in  vain
■  147.  2.  Lora  doth  b.  ujj  Jerusalem, gathers  outcasts

;  Ter.  18.  9.  I  speak  concerning  a  nation  to  b.  it

24.  6.  I  will  b.  and  not  pull  them  down,  31.  28.
31.  4.  again  I  will  b.  thee,  O  virgin  of  Israel
33.  7. 1  will  b.  ludah  and  Israel  as  at  the  first
42.  10.  if  ye  will  abide  in  this  land  l  will  b.  you
;  Ezek.  36.  36.  that  I  the  Lord  b.  the  ruined  places
.  Amos  9.  11.  I  will  b.  it  as  in  the  days  of  old
Mat.  16. 18.  on  this  rock  will  1  b.  my  church
26. 61.  I  am  able  to  b.  it  in  three  days  Mark  14.  58.
Acts  15. 16. 1  wi"  b.  again  the  tabernacle  of  David
'  BUILD  altars.

Exod.  20.  S5.  shalt  not  b.  an  altar  of  hewn  stone
.  Num.  23. 1.  Balaam  said,  b. me  here  seven  altars,  29.
Deut.  27. 5.  there  thou  shalt  b.  an  altar  to  the  Lord

6.  thou  shalt  b.  altar  of  the  Lord  of  whole  stones
Josh.  22.  29.  God  forbid,  we  rebel  and  b.  an  altar

See  Began.

jj  BUILD,  joined  with  house.

Detit.  25.  9.  man  that  will  not  b.  his  brother’s  house
;  28.  30.  shalt  b.  an  house,  not  dwell  in  it,  Zeph.  1. 13.
Ruth  4.  11.  which  two  did  b.  the  house  of  Israel

2  Sam.  7.  5.  shalt  thou  b.  me  an  house  to  dwell  in  ?

7.  spake  I  .saying,  why  b.  ye  not  me  an  h.of  cedar  ?

13.  thy  seed  shall  b.  an  house  for  my  name,

1  Kings  5.  5. 1  8.  19.  1  Chr.  17.  12.  |  22.  10.

1  Kings 2.  36.  b.  thee  an  h.  in  Jerusalem,  and  dwell
5.  3.  David  could  not  b.  an  h,  for  wars  about  him
5.  I  purpose  to  b.  an  h.  to  the  Lord,  2  Chr.  2.  1.

8.  16.  I  chose  no  city  to  b.  an  house,  2  Chron.  6.  5.
17.  it  was  in  heart  of  David  my  father  to  b.  an  h.
for  God  of  Israel,  1  Chr.  28.  2.  2  Chr.  6.  7.

1  Chr.  17.  12.  he  shall  b.  me  an  house,  2  Chr.  6.  9.
22.  8.  shalt  not  b.  an  h.  because  thou  shed  blood

11.  my  son,  h.  the  h.  of  Lord,  as  he  said  of  thee

28.  6.  Solomon  shall  b.  my  house  and  my  courts

2  Chr.  2. 4.  behold,  I  b.  an  house  to  the  Lord  my  God

5.  the  house  I  b.  is  great,  for  great  is  our  God

6.  who  is  able  to  b.  him  an  house  ?  that  I  should

b.  an  house

36. 23.  he  hath  charged  me  to  b.  him  an  h.  Ezra  1.  2.
Ezra  1.  3.  go  to  Jerusalem  and  b.  the  house  of  Lord

5.  3.  who  hath  commanded  you  to  b.  this  house  ?  9.

6.  7.  let  the  governor  of  the  Jews  b.  this  house
Psal.  127.  1.  they  labour  in  vain  that  b.  the  house

[  Prov.  24.  27-  prepare,  and  afterwards  b.  thy  house
Isa.  65.  21.  they  shall  b.  houses  and  inhabit  them
66.  1.  where  is  the  house  that  ye  b.  unto  me?

.Ter.  22. 14.  1  will  b.  me.  a  wide  h.  and  large  chambers

29.  5.  b.  houses  and  dwell  in  them,  and  plant,  28.

I  35.  7-  neither  shall  ye  b.  house  nor  sow  seed

Ezek.  11.  3.  which  say,  itis  not  near,  let  us  b.  houses
28.  26.  they  shall  dwell  safely,  and  shall  b.  houses
flag.  1 . 8.  go  to  the  mountain,  bring  wood ,  b.  house
Zech.  5.  11.  to  b.  it  an  house  in  the  land  of  Shinar
-  Acts’!.  49.  what  house  will  ye  b.  me,  saith  the  Lord  ?
BUILD.

Gen.  11.4.  go  to,  let  us  b.  us  a  city  and  a  tower

8.  and  they  left  off  to  b.  the  city

I  Sum.  32.  16.  we  will  b.  sheep  folds  for  our  cattle
,  24.  b.  cities  for  your  little  ones,  and  folds  for  sheep

■  20.  20.  thou  shalt  Lbu.warks  against  the  city

|  l  kings  9. 19.  all  the  cities  of  store,  and  that  which
Solomon  desired  to  b.  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chr.  8.  6.

haraoh's daughter 'came  up,  then  did  b.  Millo
(•  Solomon  did  b.  an  high  place  for  Chemosh
16.  34.  in  Ahab'sdaysIIiel  the  BetheliteL  Jericho


BU  J

1  Chr .  22. 19.  b.  ye  the  sanctuary  of  the  Tnrd  God
29. 19.  give  to  Solomon  an  heart  to  b.  the  palace

2  Chron.  14.  7 •  let  us  b.  these  cities  and  make  walls
Ezra  4.  2.  let  us  b.  with  you,  we  seek  your  God

5. 1 4.  what  are  the  men  that  b.  this  building  ?

Neh.  2. 17.  let  us  b.  the  wall  ||  lib  let  us  rise  and  b.

20.  therefore  we  his  servants  will  rise  and  b.

4. 3.  which  they  b.  if  a  fox  go  up  he  shall  break  down

10.  so  that  we  are  not  able  to  b.  the  wall

Eccl.  3.  3.  a  time  to  break  down,  and  a  time  to  b.  up
Cant.  8.  9.  if  she  be  a  wall,  we  will  b.  upon  her
Isa.  9. 10.  the  bricks  are  fallen,  but  we  will  b.

45. 13.  I  have  raised  him  up,  he  shall  b.  my  city
58. 12.  they  shall  b.  the  old  waste  ifiaces,  61. 4.

60.  10.  the  sons  of  strangers  shall  b.  up  thy  walls
65.  22.  they  shall  not  b.  and  another  inhabit
Jer.  1. 10.  have  set  thee  over  nations  to  b.  and  plant
Ezek.  4.  2.  lay  siege,  b.  a  fort  against  it,  21. 22.

39. 1 15.  then  shall  ye  b.  up  a  sign  by  the  bone
Dan.  9.  25.  to  restore  and  b.  Jerusalem  to  Messiah
Amos  9.  11.  I  will  b.  it  as  in  the  days  of  old

14.  Israel  shall  b.  the  waste  cities  and  inhabit  them
Mic.  3. 10.  they  b.  up  Zion  with  blood  and  Jerus.
Zech.  (S.  12.  he  shall  b.  the  temple  of  the  ford,  13.

15.  that  are  far  off  shall  b.  in  the  temple  of  Lord

9.3. Tyrusdid  b  herself  a  strong  hold,  neaped  siL  er
Mai.  1.  4.  they  snail  b.  but  I  will  throw  down
Mat.  23. 29.  ye  b.  tombs  of  prophets,  Luke  11. 47,48.
Luke  12. 18. 1  will  pull  down  my  barns  and  b. greater

14.  28.  which  of  you  intending  to  b.  a  tower  ?

30.  this  man  began  to  b.  and  not  able  to  finish

Acts  20. 32.  to  the  word  of  his  grace,able  tob.  you  up
Rom.  15.  20.  lest  1  b.  011  another  man’s  foundation
1  Cor.  3. 12.  if  any  b.  on  this  foundation,  gold,  silver
Gal.  2. 18.  if  I  b.  again  the  things  which  1  destroyed
BUILDED.

Gen.  2.  +  22.  of  the  rib  the  Lord  b.  a  woman
4. 17.  Cain  b.  a  city,  and  called  it  Enoch
8.  20.  N oah  b.  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  and  offered

10. 11.  Asher  b.  Nineveh,  Rehoboth,  and  Caleb

11.  5.  Ld.  came  to  see  the  tower  children  of  men  b.

12.  7.  Abram  b.  an  altar  to  the  I.ord,  13.  18.

16.  +  2.  it  may  be  I  may  be  b.  by  her,  30.  +  3.

26.  25.  Isaac  b.  an  altar  ||  Exod.  24.  4.  Moses  b.

Josh.  22.  16.  in  that  ye  ha  e  b.  you  an  altar

1  Kings 8.  27-  how  much  less  this  house  I  have  b.  43.

15.  22.  the  stones  wherewith  Baasha  had  b

2  Kings  23. 13.  Solomon  had  b.  for  Ashtoreth

1  Chron.  22.  5.  the  house  to  be  b.  must  be  magnifical
Ezra  4.  1.  when  the  adversaries  heard  that  they  b.

13.  be  it  known,  that  if  this  city  be  b.  16.

21.  give  commandment  that  this  city  be  not  b.

5.  8.  we  went  to  the  house  of  great  God  which  is  b.

11.  we  build  the  house  that  was  b.  many  years  ago
15.  let  the  house  of  God  be  b.  in  his  place,  6.  3.

6. 14.  elders  of  the  Jews  b.  and  they  prospered
Neh.  4. 18.  every  one  had  his  sword  girded,  and  so  b.
Job  20. 19.  he  hath  taken  away  an  house  he  b.  not
Psal.  122.  3.  Jerusalem  is  b.  a  city  that  is  compact
Prov.  9. 1.  Wisdom  hath  b.  her  ho'use,  hewn  out  pill.
24.  3.  through  wisdom  is  an  house  b.  and  established
Eccl.  2. 4.  T  b.  me  houses,  I  planted  vineyards
Cant.  4.  4.  thy  neck  like  tower  of  D.  b.  for  armoury
Jer.  30.  18.  the  city  shall  be  b.  on  her  own  heap
Lam.  3.  5.  he  hath  b.  against  me,  and  compassed  me
Ezek.  36. 10.  and  the  wastes  shall  be  b.  33.

Luke  17.  28.  they  bought,  they  sold,  they  planted,

.  [they  b.

Eph.  2.  22.  in  whom  ye  are  b.  together  for  habitat.
Iieb.  3.  3.  he  who  b.  the  house  hath  more  honour
4.  every  house  is  b.  by  some  man,  he  that  built
BUI  LDEDST.

Deut.  6. 10.  to  give  thee  goodly  cities  thou  b.  not
BUILDER,  S,

Is  spoken,  [1]  Of  such  as  erect  houses,  4‘c.  2  Kings

22.  6.  [2]  Of  God,  the  great  Architect,  who

created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  all  things
in  them,  Lleb.  11.  10.  [3]  Of  faithful  ministers
of  the  gospel,  who  like  wise  master-builders  ought
first  to  lay  the  foundation,  and  then  build  upon
it ;  first  to  acquaint  such  as  they  have  the  charge
of,  with  the  fundamentals  of  religion,  showing
them  that  Christ  is  the  only  way  to  salvation,  and
then  to  make  their  superstructure  upon  this  founda¬
tion,  1  Cor.  3.  10.

1  Kings  5. 18.  Solomon’s  and  Hiram’s  b.  did  hew

2  Kings  12. 11 .  laid  money  out  to  the  b.  that  wrought
22.  6.  give  it  to  carpenters  and  b.  2  Chr.  34. 11.

Ezra  3. 10.  when  b.  laid  foundation  of  the  temple
Neh.  4.  5.  have  provoked  thee  to  anger  before  the  b.
Psal.  118.22.  stone  which  Lrefus. become  head-stone.
Mat.  21 . 42.  Mark  12.10.  Luke 20.17.  Acts  4.11.

127. 1 1.  they  labour  in  vain  that  are  b.  in  it
Ezek.  27.  4.  thy  b.  have  perfected  thy  beauty

1  CVr.3.10.  as  a  wise  master-L  I  have  laid  foundation
Heb.ll . lO.looked  for  a  city  whose  b.  and  maker  is  G.
1  Pet.  2.7-  the  stone  which  the  b.  disallowed
BUILD  EST.

Deut.  22.8.  when  thou  b. a  new  house,  make  battlem.
Neh.  6.  6.  for  which  cause  thou  b.  the  wall
Ezek.  16.  31.  in  that  thou  b.  thine  eminent  place
Mat.  27.  40.  thou  that  destroy est  the  temple  and  b.
it  in  three  days,  save  thyself,  Mark  15.  29.
BUILDETH.

Josh.  6.  26.  cursed  be  the  man  that  b.  this  city
Job  27.  18.  he  b.  his  house  as  a  moth,  as  a  booth
Prov.  14. 1.  every  wise  woman  b.  her  house,  but  fool.
Jer.  22. 13.  woe  to  him  that  b.  by  unrighteousness
Hos.  8. 14.  Israel  hath  forgotten  Maker,  b.  temples
Amos  9.  6.  it  is  he  that  b.  his  stories  in  the  heavens
Hab.  2.  12.  woe  to  him  that  b.  a  town  with  blood
1  Cor.  3. 10. 1  laid  the  foundation,  another  b.  thereon
BUILDING.

Josh.  22. 19.  but  rebel  not  against  L.  in  b.  an  altar

1  Kings  3.  1.  till  he  made  an  end  of  b.  his  own  house
6. 7-  no  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house  while  b.

38.  so  was  Solomon  seven  years  in  b.  it
7. 1.  Solomon  was  b.  his  own  house  thirteen  years

2  Chron.  16.  6.  the  stones  wherewith  Baasha  was  b.
Ezra  4.  12.  b.  the  rebellious  and  the  bad  city
Ezek.  17. 17.  by  b.  forts  to  cut  off  many  persons
John2.  20.  this  temple  was  forty-six  years  in  b.


B  (J  L

Jude  20.  b.  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith
BUI LD1 N G,  Substantive.

1  Kings  9. 1.  when  Solomon  fimshed  b.  house  of  L.
15.  21.  he  left  off  b.  of  Hamah,  2  Chron.  16.  5.

1  Chron.  28.  2.  and  had  made  ready  for  the  b.

2  Chron.  3.  3.  Solomon  was  instructed  for  the  b.
Ezra  5.  4.  the  names  of  the  men  that  make  this  b.
6. 8.  what  ye  shall  do  for  the  b.  of  this  house  of  God
Eccl.  10.  18.  by  much  slothfulness  the  h.  decayeth
Ezek.  40. 5.  he  rneasurea  the  breadth  of  the  />.  41. 15.

46.  23.  there  was  a  row  of  b.  round  about  in  them

1  Cor.  3.  9.  ye  are  God’s  husbandry ,  ye  are  God’s  b.

2  Cor.  5.  1.  we  have  a  b.  of  God,  an  house  not  made
Eph.  2.  21.  in  whom  all  the  b.  fitly  framed  together
IIeb.9.11 .  an  high-priest  by  a  tabernacle  not  of  this  b.
Rev.  21. 18.  b.  of  wall  was  of  jasper,  city  pure  gold

BUILDINGS.

Mat.  24.  1.  disciples  came  to  shew  him  b.  of  temple
Mark  13.  1.  Master,  see  what  b.  are  here,  2.
BUILT.

Deut.  13. 16.  it  shall  be  an  heap  and  not  be  b.  again

1  Kings  22.  39.  the  cities  that  Ahab  b.  are  written

2  Chr.  14.  7.  rest  on  every  side,  so  they  b.  and  pros.

20.  8.  they  have  b.  thee  a  sanctuary  therein

26.  9.  Uzziah  b.  towers  in  Jerusalem,  10.

27.  4.  Jothavn  b.  in  the  forests  castles  and  towers
Job  3. 14.  who  b.  desolate  places  for  themselves

12. 14.  he  hreaketh  down,  and  it  cannot  be  b.  again
22.  23.  if  thou  return  to  Almighty,  shalt  be  b.  up
Psal.  78.  69.  he  b.  his  sanctuary  like  high  palaces
89.  2.  I  have  said,  mercy  shall  be  b.  up  tor  ever
Isa.  5.  2.  he  b.  a  tower  in  the  midst  of  his  vineyard

44.  26.  saith  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  ye  shall  be  b.

28.  saying  to  terusalem,  thou  shalt  be  b.

Jer.  12.  16.  shall  they  be  b.  in  midst  of  my  people

31.  4.  thou  shalt  be  b.  O  virgin  of  Israel

32.  31.  as  a  provocation  from  the  day  they  b.  it

45.  4.  that  which  1  have  b.  will  I  break  down
Ezek.  16.  24.  thou  hast  b.  to  thee  an  eminent  place

25.  hast  b.  thy  high  place  at  every'  head  of  way

26.  14.  thou  shalt  be  b.  no  more,  saith  the  Lord  G.
Dan.  4.  30.  is  not  this. great  Babylon  I  have  b.?

9.  25.  the  street  shall  be  b.  again  and  the  wall

Zech.  8.  9.  let  hands  be  strong,  that  temple  be  b.
Mat.  21. 33.  dig.  a  winepress,  b.  a  tower,  MarkVZ.l.
Luke  7.  5.  the  centurion  hath  b.  us  a  synagogue
1  Cor.  3. 14.  if  work  abide  which  he  hath  L  thereon
Eph.  2.  20.  are  b.  on  the  foundation  of  the  apostles
Col.  2.  7.  rooted  and  b.  in  him,  established  in  faith
Heb  3.  4.  but  be  that  b.  all  things  is  God
BUILT  altar.

Gen.  33.120.  Jacob  b.  an  altar,  El  elohe-Israel
Exod.  17.  15.  Moses  b.  a.  24.  4.  ||  32.  5.  Aaron  b.  a.
Josh.  8.  30.  Joshua  b.  an  a.  H  22.  10.  half  tribe  b.  a.
Judg.  6.  24.  Gideon  b.  an  a.  ||  21.  4.  people  b.  an  a.

1  ■''am.  7. 17.  Samuel  b.  altar  H  14.  35.  Saul  b.  altar

2  Sam.  24.  25.  David  b.  an  altar  to  the  Lord

1  Kings  9.  25.  Solomon  offered  on  the  altar  he  b.
18. 32.  with  stones  Elisha  b.  altar  in  name  of  Lord

2  Kings  16.  11.  Urijah  the  priest  b.  an  altar

BUILf  altars.

Num.  23.  14.  Balak  b.  seven  altars,  and  offered
2  Kings  21.  4.  he  b.  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord

5.  b.  a.  for  all  the  host  of  heaven,  2  Chron.  33.  5.

2  Chron.  33.  15.  took  away  a.  he  had  b.  in  the  mount

BUILT  city.

Num.  21.  27.  let  the  city  of  Sihon  be  b.  and  prepared
Josh.  19.  50.  Joshua  b.  the  city  and  dwelt  therein
Judg.  18.  28.  Danites  b.  c.  ||  1  Kings  16. 24.  Omri  b.  c.
1  Chron.  11. 8.  David  b.  c.  round  about  from  Millo
Isa.  25.  2.  a  palace  to  be  no  c.  it  shall  never  be  b.
Jer.  31.  38.  days  come,  the  c.  shall  be  b.  to  the  Lord
Luke  4.  29.  to  brow  of  the  hill  whereon  city  was  b
BUILT  cities.

Exod.  1.  11.  they  b.  for  Pharaoh  treasure-miej-.
Josh.  24. 13.  I  have  given  you  cities  which  ye  b.  not

1  Kings  15.  23.  the  cities  which  Asa  b.  are  written

2  Chron.  8.  2.  cities  Hurain  had  restored,  Solomon  b.

11.  5.  Rehoboam  b.  cities  for  defence  in  Judah

14.  6.  Asa  b.  fenced  c.  in  Judah,  the  land  had  rest

17.  12.  Jehoshaphat  b.  castles  and  cities  of  store

26.  6.  Uzziah  b.  cities  about  Ashdod,  and  among

27.  4.  Jotham  b.  cities  in  the  mountains  of  Judah
Isa.  44.  26.  saith  to  the  cities  of  J  udah,  ye  shall  be  b.

BUILT  house,  or  houses.

Dent.  8.  12.  when  thou  hast  b.  goodly  h.  and  dwelt
20. 5.  what  man  is  there  that  hath  b.  a  new  house  ?
1  Kings  3.  2.  there  was  no  h.  b.  to  the  name  of  Lord

6.  9-  Solomon  b.  h.  14.  H  8.  13. 1  have  b.  thee  an  h.
8.  20.  and  have  b.  an  h.  for  the  name  of  the  Lord

44.  toward  house  I  have  b.  48.  2  Chron.  6.  34,  38.
11.  38.  build  thee  a  sure  house,  as  I  b.  for  David

1  Chr.  17.  6.  saying,  why  have  ye  not  b.  me  an  h.  ?

2  Chr.  6.  18.  how  much  less  this  house  I  have  b.  ?
Amos  5.  11.  ye  have  b.  houses  of  hewn  stone
Hag.  1.  2.  the  time  that  the  Lord’s  h.  should  be  b.
Zech.  1. 16.  my  h.  shall  be  b.  in  it,  saith  the  Lord
Mat.  7-  24.  wise  man  b.  his  h.  on  a  rock,  Luke  6.  48.

26.  foolish  man  which  b.  his  h.  on  sand,  Luke  6.  49.
Acts  7.  47.  but  Solomon  b.  him  an  house

1  Pet.  2.  5.  ye  also  are  b.  up  a  spiritual  h.  an  holy
BUILT  high  places.

1  Kings  14.  23.  Judah  b.  high  p.  images,  and  groves

2  Kings  17.  9.  children  of  Israel  b.  high  p.  in  cities

21.  3.  Manasseh  b.  up  again  high p.  2  Chron.  33.  3.
Jer.  7.  31.  b.  highp.  of  Tophet  ||  19-  5.  of  Baal,  32. 35.

BLTILT  wall,  or  walls.

1  Kings  6. 15.  Solomon  b.  the  walls  of  house  within

2  Chr.  27-  3.  and  on  the  walls  of  Ophel  he  b.  much

32.  5.  Hezekiah  b.  up  the  wall  that  was  broken

33.  14.  Manasseh  b.  a  wall  without  city  of  David
Neh.  4.  6.  so  b.  we  the  wall  |1 7.  1.  when  wall  was  b.
Ezek.  13.  10.  one  b.  up  the  wall,  another  daubed  it
Dan.  9.  25.  the  street  shall  be  b.  again  and  the  wall
Mic.  7-  U.  in  the  day  that  thy  walls  are  to  be  b.

BULL

Signifies,  [1]  The  beast  so  called,  Job  21.  10.  [2]
Pillars  in  the  shape  of  bulls,  Jer.  52.  20.  [3]
Wicked,  violent ,  and  furious  enemies,  Psal.  22.

12.  [4]  The  eighth  month  of  the  year,  which
answers  to  our  October,  1  Kings  6.  38.

Job  21.  10.  their  b.  gendereth  and  faileth  not

45


BUR


BUR


Isa.  51.  20.  thy  sons  lieas  a wild  A.  in  a  net

Gen  32. 15.  Jacob  took  ten  b.  as  a  present  to  Esau
dJ  oo  I?,  niany  b.  have  compassed  me,  strong  *•

50  13.  will  1  eat  "flesh  of  b.  or  drink  blood  of  goats

68  30.  rebuke  the  multitude  of  the .  b.

Isa  34  7.  bullocks  with  the  b.  shall  come  down
Jer  50  11.  because  ye  bellow  as  b.  O  destroyers

52. 20.'  twelve  brasen  b.  under  the  bases  with  calves
Heb  9. 13.  if  the  blood  of  A.  and  goats  sanctifieth
10  4  it  is  not  possible  blood  of  b.  take  away  sins

A  v  bullock.

Exod.  29. 3.  shalt  bring  them  in  the  basket  with  the  b.

11.  shalt  kill  the  A.  before  Lord,  Lev.  1. 5. 1  9. 1H.
r  fin  4  4  brinff  the  b,  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle
Nnm  15. 9  bnng  w.th  the  A.  a  meat  offering  29-  37.
Deut.  17.1.  not  sacrifice  to  Lord  any  b.  with  blemish
33.  17.  his  glory  is  like  the  firstling  of  a  A.

Judo.  6.  25.  take  the  young  b.  the  second  A. 26.

1  Kings  18.  23.  and  let  them  choose  one  b.  25.

33  Elijah  cut  b.  in  pieces,  and  laid  him  on  wood

Psa'l.  50.  9.  I  will  take  no  A.  out  of  thine  house

69  31  better  than  a  A.  that  hath  horns  and  hoofs
Isa.  65.  25.  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  A.

Jer  31  18.  as  a  b.  unaccustomed  to  the  yoke

*  BULLOCK,  with  sin  ofiering.  .
Exod.  29.  36.  offer  every  day  a  h.  for  a  sm  offering
Lev.  16.  6.  shall  offer  his  b.  of  the  sm  offering
Ezek.  45.  22.  shall  prepare  a  b.  tor  a  sin  offering
See  Blood.

Young  BULLOCK.

Lev.  4. 3.  if  priest  sin,  bring  -a  young  b.  Ezek. 43. 19.

14.  congregation  shall  offer  a y.  b.  Rum.  15.  ~4.

16.3.  Aaron  come  into  holy  place  with  a  young  b
Num.  7. 15.  one  young  b.  one  ram,  one  lamb,  21,

27,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57,  63.  69,  75,  81.

2  Chron.  13. 9.  to  consecrate  himself  with  a  young  b.
Ezek.  45. 18.  take  a  young  b.  and  cleanse  the  sane.

46.  6.  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon  a  young  b.

BULLOCKS.

Num.  29.  23.  on  the  fourth  day  ten  b.  two  rams

1  Chron.  29. 21.  they  offered  a  thousand  A.  tor  Israel
Ezra  6.  17.  they  offered  at  the  dedication  100*.

Psal.  51.  19.  then  shall  they  offer  A.  on  thy  altar

66. 15.  I  will  offer  unto  thee  A.  with  goats
Isa.  1. 11.  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  A.  or  lambs
34.'  7.  the  b.  with  the  bulls  shall  come  down
Jer.  46.  21.  her  hired  men  are  like  fatted  A.

50. 27.  slay  all  her  b.  let  them  go  down  to  slaughter
Ezek.  39. 18.  ye  shall  drink  theblood  of  goats,  or*.
Hos.  12. 11.  are  vanity,  they  sacrifice  b.  in  Gilgal
See  Seven.

BULKUSH,  ES.  j

Exod.  2. 3.  she  took  for  him  an  ark  of  A.  and  daubed
Isa.  18.2.  send  ambassadors  by  the  sea  in  vessels  of  A.

58  5.  is  it  to  bow  down  his  head  like  a  A.  i
BULWARKS.

Deut.  20.  20.  thou  shalt  build  b.  against  the  city

2  Chron.  26.  15.  Uzziah  made  engines  on  the  A.

Psal  48.  13.  mark  well  her  b.  consider  her  palaces
Eccl.  9. 14.  a  great  king  came  and  built  b.  against  it
Isa.  26. 1.  salvation  will  G.  appoint  tor  walls  and  b.

BUNCH,  ES.  .  .

Exod.  12.  22.  take  a  b.  of  hyssop  and  dip  it  in  blood
2  Sam.  16. 1.  Ziba  met  him  with  100  A.  of  raisins
1  Chr.  12.40.  Zebulun  brought  b.  of  raisins  and  wine
ira.30.6.  will  carry  their  treasures  upon  b.  of  camels
BUNDLE,  S.

Gen.  42.  35.  every  man’s  b.  of  money  in  his  sack
1  Sam.  25. 29.  the  soul  of  my  lord  bound  in  A.  of  life
Cant.  1. 13.  a  b.  of  myrrh  is  my  well-beloved  to  me
Isa.  58.  +  6.  this  is  the  fast,  to  undo  b.  of  the  yoke
Amos  9.  +  6.  hath  founded  his  b.  in  the  earth
Mat.  13.  30.  bind  the  tares  in  b.  to  bum  them
Acts  28.  3.  when  Paul  had  gathered  a  b.  of  sticks
BURDEN

Signifies,  tl]  -A  load ,  or  weight  of  any  thing,  as
much  as  a  man,  horse ,  $c.  can  well  carry,

2  Kings  5.  17-  Jer.  17.  27-  [2]  Labour  and

servitude ,  Exod.  2.  11.  Psal.  81.  6.  [3]  A

burdensome  prophecy ,’ a  heavy  doom,  or  a  prophecy
delivered  in  heavy  and  threatening  words,  Isa.
13.  1.  Nah.  1.  1.  [4]  Afflictions ,  crosses,  cares,
or  fears,  Psal.  55.  22.  [5]  Imperfections,  fail¬

ings,  and  infirmities,  with  which  persons  are
loaded  or  grieved.  Gal.  6.  2.  [6]  Toil  and  fatigue.
Mat.  20.  12.  [7]  Tribute,  or  taxes,  Hos.  8.  10
[8]  The  office  of  a  magistrate,  Exod.  18.  22.
[9J  Human  traditions,  or  strict  injunctions  over
and  above  what  the  law  requires.  Mat.  23.  4.
[10]  Sm,  which  is  the  greatest  slavery  and  burden,
Psal.  38.  4.  Heb.  12.  1.  [11]  The  lading,  or
cargo  of  a  ship.  Acts  21.  3.

The  doctrine,  or  commands  of  Christ  are  called  a
burden,  Mat.  11.  30.  Nothing  makes  them  so,
but  our  corruption,  which  flows  from  the  depra¬
vity  of  our  nature  ;  to  the  unrenewed  person  they
are  a  grievous  burden  :  yet  this  burden  is  light,
Cl)  In  comparison  of  the  service  of  sin,  the  cove¬
nant  of  works,  and  the  ceremonial  law.  (2)  To
them  that  love  God,  1  John  5.  .3.  (3)  To  such
as  are  regenerated,  so  far  as  they  are  renewed,
Rom.  7.  22.  It  is  light  to  such,  because,  (1)  The
law  is  written  in  their  hearts,  Psal.  37.  31.

(2)  They  are  endued  with  faith.  Mark  9.  23.

(3)  They  are  strengthened,  and  enabled  by  Christ,
Phil.  4.  13.

Exod.  18. 22.  shall  bear  the  b.  with  thee,  Nurn.il.  17.
23. 5.  the  ass  of  him  that  hateth  thee  lying  under  b.
Num.  4.  19.  Aaron  shall  appoint  each  to  his  b.

11.  11.  thou  layest  the  b.  of  all  this  people  on  me
Deut.  1.  12.  how  can  I  myself  alone  bear  your  b.  ?
2  Sam.  15.  33.  then  thou  shalt  be  a  b.  to  me
19. 35.  why  should  thy  servant  be  a  b.  to  my  lord  ?

1  Kings  11.  +  28.  .1  eroboam  ruler  over  b.  of  Joseph

2  Kings  5. 17.  to  thy  servant  two  mules’  b.  of  earth
8.  9.  Hazael  brought  forty  camels’  b.  to  Elisha

2  Chr.  35. 3.  it  shall  not  be  a  b.  on  your  shoulders
Neh.  13. 19.  no  b.  be  brought  in  on  the  sabbath
jfrzA  7.  20.  as  a  mark,  so  that  I  am  a  b.  to  myself
Psal.  38. 4.  iniquit.  as  a  b.  they  are  too  heavy  for  m?!
56.  22.  cast  thy  b.  on  the  Lord,  he  will  sustain  thee
4 6


Psal.  81.  6.  I  removed  his  shoulder  from  the  A.

Eccl.  12.  5.  and  the  grasshopper  shall  be  a  A.

Isa  9.  4.  for  thou  hast  broken  the  yoke  of  his  A.

10.  27.  his  b.  shall  be  taken  from  off  thy  shoulder
14.  25.  his  b.  depart  from  off  their  shoulders
30.  27.  name  of  the  Lord,  the  b.  thereof  is  heavy
46.  1.  your  carriages  are  a  b.  to  the  weary  beast
Jer.  17. 21.  bear  no  b.  on  the  sabbath -day,  22,  27.

Zeph.  3. 18.  to  whom  the  reproach  of  it  was  a  A.

Mat.  11.  30.  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  b.  is  light
20. 12.  which  nave  borne  the  b.  and  heat  of  the  day
Acts  15.  28.  seemed  good  to  lay  on  you  no  greater  b.

21.  3.  for  there  the  ship  was  to  unlade  her  A.

Rev  0  24  I  will  put  upon  you  none  other  b.

BURDEN.

2  Kings  9.  25.  the  Lord  laid  this  b.  uppn  him
Isa.  13. 1.  the  b.  of  Babylon  which  Isaiah  uid  see

14.  28.  the  year  king  Ahaz  died,  was  this  A.

15.  1.  the  b.  of  Moab  ||  17- 1.  the  b.  of  Damascus

19. 1.  the  b.  of  Egypt  ||  23.  1 .  the  b.  of  I  yre  .

21. 1.  the  b.  of  the  desert  of  the  sea,  as  whirlwinds

11.  the  b.  of  Dumah  II  13.  the  b.  upon  Arabia

22.  1.  the  b.  of  the  valley  of  vision,  what  aiieth
25.  the  b.  that  was  upon  it  shall  be  cut  off

30.  6.  the  b.  of  the  beasts  of  the  south  .

46.  2.  they  could  not  deliver  the  b.  are  gone  into
Jer.  23.  33.  what  is  the  b.  of  the  Lord/  what  b.  ?

36.  the  b.  of  the  Lord  shall  ye  mention  no  more
38.  but  sith  ye  say,  the  b.  of  the  Lord  .

Ezek.  12.  10.  this  b.  concerneth  the  prince  m  Jerus.
Hos.  8. 10.  sorrow  a  little  for  the  b.  or  the  king  of  pr.
Nah.  1. 1.  the  b.  of  Nineveh,  the  book  of  the  vision
Hab.  1.  1.  A.  which  Habakkuk  the  prophet  did  see
Zech.  9. 1.  the  b.  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  Hadrach

12.  1.  the  b.  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  for  Israel
Mai.  1. 1.  the  b.  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Israel
Gal.  6.  5.  for  every  man  shall  bear  his  own  b.

BURDEN,  ED.  .  .

Zech.  12.  3.  all  that  b.  themselves  be  cut  in  pieces
2  Cor.  5.  4.  in  this  tabernacle  we  groan  being  A.

8. 13. 1  mean  not  that  others  be  eased,  and  you  A.

12. 16.  but  be  it  so.  I  did  not  b.  you,  caught  with

Eurdens.

Gen.  49. 14.  Issachar  couching  down  between  two  A.
Exod.  1.  11.  task-masters  to  afflict  them  with  their  b
2. 11.  Moses  went  out  and  looked  on  their  b.

5.  4.  the  king  of  Egypt  said,  get  you  to  your  b.

5.  you  make  them  rest  from  their  A.

6.  6.  I  will  bring  you  from  the  b.  of  Egyptians,  7.
Num.  4.  27.  ye  shall  appoint  to  them  all  then  *.

Neh.  4.  10.  the  strength  of  the  bearers  of  A.  decayed

17.  they  that  bare  b.  with  other  hand  held  a  weap
13. 15.  all  manner  of*,  brought  m  on  the  sabbath
Isa.  58.  6.  this  is  the  fast,  to  undo  the  heavy  A
Lam.  2.  14.  the  prophets  have  seen  for  thee  false  *
Amos  5. 11.  ye  take  from  the  poor  A.  of  wheat
Mat.  23.  4.  they  bind  heavy  A.  Luke  11.46.

Gal.  6. 2.  bear  ye  one  another  s  A.  and  so  fulfil
BURDENSOME.

Zech.  12.  3.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  *,  stone
2  Cor.  11. 9. 1  have  keptmyself  from  being  A.  to  you
12. 13.  except  it  be  that  1  myself  was  not  A.  to  you
14.  the  third  time  I  come,  I  will  not  be  A.  to  you
1  Thess.  2  6.  when  we  might  have  been*,  as  apostles
BURIAL.

Eccl.  6.  3.  and  also  that  he  have  no  A.  .

Isa.  14.  20.  thou  shalt  not  be  joined  with  them  m  A
Jer.  22. 19.  he  shall  be  buried  with  the  *.  of  an  ass
Mat.  26. 12.  poured  ointment,  she  did  it  for  my  A.
Acts  8. 2.  devout  men  carried  Stephen  to  his  A.
BURY

Signifies,  To  inter  a  dead  body,  Gen.  23.  4.

To  be  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,  . R om.  6.  4.
To  have  communion  with  him  tn  his  death  and
burial.  Baptism  doth  not  only  represent  our
mortification  and  dearth  to  sin,  by  which  we  have
communion  with  Christ  in  his  death  j  but  also  our
progress  and  perseverance  in  mortification ,  by
which  we  have  communion  with  him  tn  his  burial
also;  burial  implies  a  continuing  under  death,
so  is  mortification  a  continual  dying  to  sm.

Gen.  23.  4.  that  I  may  A.  my  dead  out  of  my  sight
6.  in  choice  of  our  sepulchres  A.  thy  dead,  11,  lo.
47.  29.  b.  me  not,  I  pray  thee,  in  Egypt,  49. 29.  .

50.  5.  let  me  go  and  A.  my  father,  I  will  come  again
6  go  up  and  A.  thy  father,  as  he  made  thee  swear
Deut.  21. 23.  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  A.  him  that  day

1  Kings  2.  31.  go  and  fall  upon  Joab  and  A.  him

11. 15.  when  Joab  was  gone  up  to  A.  the  slain
13  29  the  old  prophet  came  to  mourn  and  A.  him

31.  when  I  am  dead,  A.  me  in  the  sepulchre
14.  13.  Israel  shall  mourn  for  him  and  A.  him

2  Kings  9.  10.  and  there  shall  be  none  to  A.  Jezebel

34.  go  see  now  this  cursed  woman,  and  A.  her

35.  they  went  to  A.  her,  but  found  only  the  scull
Psal.  79. 3.  and  there  was  none  to  A.  them
Jer.  7.  32.  for  they  shall*,  in  Tophet,  19. 11.

14. 16.  and  they  shall  have  none  to  A.  them  .
E2ezl.39.il. there  shall  they  *.Gog  and  his  multitude

13.  yea,  all  the  people  of  the  land  shall  A.  them
Hos.  9. 6.  Egypt  gather  up,  Memphis  shall  A.  them
Mat.  8.  21.  suffer  me  to  go  A.  my  father,  Luke  9. 59
22.  and  let  the  dead  A.  their  dead,  Luke  9.  60.

27. 7.  bought  the  potter’s  field  to  A.  strangers  in
John  19. 40.  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  is  to  A.

BURIED.  [wife

Gen  25.  10.  there  was  Abraham  A.  and  Sarah  his
49  jl  there  they  A.  Abraham  and  Sarah  his  wife,
Isaac  and  Rebekah  his  wife,  and  there  I  *.  Leah
Num.  11.  34.  there  they  *.  the  people  that  lusted

20.  1.  Miriam  died  there,  and  was  A.  there
33  4.  for  the  Egyptians  A.  all  their  first-born

Deut.  10.  6.  there  Aaron  died,  and  there  he  was  A.
Josh.  24. 32.  the  bones  of  Joseph  A.  they  m  Shechem
Ruth  1. 17  where  diest  will  I  die,and  there  will  be  A.
2  Sam.  4. 12.  they  took  head  of  Ish-bosheth  and  A.  it

21.  14.  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  they  A.  in  Zelah
1  Kings  13.  31.  bury  me  where  the  man  of  God  is  A.
Eesl.  8-  10.  and  so  I  saw  the  wicked  A.

Jer.  8.  2.  not  be  gathered  nor  A.  16.  6. 1  20.  6. 1  25.
’  16.  4.  they  shall  not  be  lamented  nor  A.  [33.

22. 19.  lie  shall  be  A.  with  the  burial  of  an  ass


BUR

Ezek.  39.  15.  setup  a  sign,  till  buriers  have  A.  it
Mat.  14. 12.  his  disciples  took  the  body  and  A.  it
Luke  16.  22.  the  rich  man  also  died  and  was  A.

Acts  2.  29.  the  patriarch  David  is  both  dead  and  *.

5.  9.  the  feet  of  them  which  A.  thy  husband
io.  carrying  her  forth,  A.  her  by  her  husband
Rom.  6.  4.  we  are  A.  with  him  by  baptism  into  death

1  Cor.  15.  4.  that  he  was  A.  and  rose  again  third  day
Col.  2. 12.  b.  with  him  in  baptism,  wherein  are  risen

BURIED  him.

Deut.  34. 6.  he  A.  him  in  a  valley ,  in  the  land  of  Moab

2  Sam.  2. 5.  blessed  be  ye  that  have  b.  Saul

1  Kings  14. 18.  they  A.  him,  all  Israel  mourned  him

2  Chron.  21.  20.  they  A.  Jehoram  in  the  city  of  David

24. 16.  A.  J  ehoiada  in  city  of  David,  among  kings

25.  they  A.  him  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings
Acts  5. 6.  the  young  men  carried  him  out  and  b.  him

BURIED  in.

Gen.  15.  15.  and  thou  shalt  be  b.  in  a  good  old  age

1  Kings  2. 10.  David  was  A.  in  city  of  David
34.  Joab  A.  in  his  own  house  in  the  wilderness

2  Kings  21.18.  Manasseh  was  b.in .garden  of  ms  house

26.  Amonwas*.  m sepulchre,  in  garden  of  Uzzafr
Job  27.  15.  those  that  remain  shall  be  A.  tn  death

BURIED  with  his  fathers.

1  Kings  14. 31.  Rehoboam  ||  15.  24.  Asa  A.  with  hisf.

22.  50.  J  ehoshaphat  ||  2  Kings  8. 24.  J  pram  A.  withf.

12.  21.  Joash  A.  with  f.  ||  14. 20.  Amaziah  A.  withf.

15. 7.  Azariah  ||  38.  Jotham  ||  16. 20.  Ahaz  *.  withf.

BURIERS.  >

Ezek.  39.  15.  shall  set  up  a  sign  till  *.  have  buried
B  U  R  Y I N  G .

Gen.  23. 4.  a  possess,  of  a  *.  place,  9. 1  49. 30. 1  50. 13.
Judg.  16.  31.  buried  Samson  in  *.  place  of  Manoah

2  _Km.13.21.  as  they  were*,  a  man, they  spied  a  band
Ezek.  39. 12.  seven  months  shall  Israel  be  *.  of  them
Mark  14. 8.  she  is  come  to  anoint  my  body  to  the  *.

John  12.  7.  against  day  eff  my  *.  hath  she  kept  tins

Signifies,  [1]  To  consume,  or  destroy  with  fire,  Josh.

11.  13.  [2]  To  be  inflamed  with  just  anger  and
indignation,  Lam.  2.  3.  [3]  To  be  perpetually

haunted  with  violent,  lustful  desires ,  1  Cor.  7.  9.

[4]  To  be  filled  with  a  holy  zeal  for  the  glory  of
God,  and  the  good  of  others,  2  Cor.  11. 29.

The  bush  burned,  and  was  not  cpnsumed,  Exod.  3.

2.  This  represented  the  condition  of  the  church
and  people  of  Israel,  who  were  then  in  the  fire  of
affliction  ;  yet  so  as  that  God  was  present  with  them ,
and.  that  they  should  not  be  consumed  in  it,  whereof
this  vision  was  a  pledge.  TT  ,  „  •

The  spirit  of  burning,  Isa.  4.  4.  The  Holy  Spirit
of  God,  who  is  compared  to  fire.  Mat.  3.  11.  be¬
cause  he  doth  burn  up  and  consume  the  dross  which
is  in  the  church ,  and  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of
men,  and  inflames  the  souls  of  believers  with  love

to  God,  and  zeal  for  his  glory.

Gen.  44. 18.  Judah  said,  let  not  thine  anger  *.  .

Exod.  27  .  20.  command  that  they  bring  pure  olive
oil  to  cause  the  lamp  to  *.  alway,  Lev.  v4. 2.
29. 13.  shalt  take  caul,  liver,  and  kidneys,  and  b.
upon  the  altar,  18.  25.  Lev.  1.  9,  15. 1  2.  2,  9,  16.

1  3.  5,  11, 16. 1 5.  12.  I  6.  15. 1  9.  17-  Num.  5. 26.
Lev.  1.19.  priest  shall  take  fat,  and*,  upon  the  altar,.

26.  31. 1  7.  31. 1 16. 25.  J 17-  6.  Num.  IB.  17 .
Num.  19.  5.  one  shall  A.  the  heifer  in  his  sight
Josh.  11. 13.  save  Hazor  only,  that  did  Joshua  *.

1  Sam.  2. 16.  let  them  not  fail  to  *.  the  fat  presently

2  Chron.  2.  6.  save  only  to  *.  sacrifice  betore  them

13.  11.  and  they  *.  to  the  Lord  every  morning

Isa.  1.  31.  they  shall  both  *.  together,  none  quench

10. 17.  it  shall  *.  and  devour  his  thorns  and  briers.
27.4. 1  would  go  through  then'  -  and  b .  thern  together
40!  16.  Lebanon  is  not  sufficient  to  A.  nor  the  beasts
44. 15.  then  shall  it  be  for  a  man  to  A.  he  will  take
Jer  7  20.  my  fury  shall  *.  and  not  be  quenched
34!  5.  so  shall  they  *.  odours  for  thee,  and  lament
36.  25.  that  the  king  would  not  *.  the  roll
Ezek.  24.  5.  *.  also  the  bones  under  it,  make  it  boilt
11.  that  the  brass  of  it  may  be  hot,  and  may  *.

39  9  they  shall  set  on  fire  and  *.  the  weapons
43.' 21.  he  shall  *.  bullock  in  the  appointed  plac«
Nah.  2. 13.  I  will  *.  her  chariots  in  the  smoke
Mai.  4.  1.  the  day  cometh  that  shall*,  as  an  oven
Mat.  13.  30.  bind  the  tares  in  bundles  to  *.  them
Luke  3.17.  but  chaff  he  will  *.  with  fire  unquenchable
24.  32.  they  said,  did  not  our  heart  b.  within  us  .
l~C'or.  7. 9.  for  it  is  better  to  marry  than  to  A.

2  Cor.  11.  29.  who  is  offended,  and  1  A.  not  r
BURN,  joined  with  fire.

Exod.  12.  10.  that  which  remameth  of  it  till  morn¬
ing  ye  shall  A.  with  fire,  29.  34.  Lev.  8. 32.
Lev.  13.  57.  *.  that  wherein  the  plague  is  with  fire
16  27.  A.  with  j6r«  their  skins,  flesh,  and  dung
Deut.  5.  23.  for  the  mountain  did  A.  with  Are
7.  5.  A.  their  images  with  fire,  25.  II ,12.  3.  A.  groves
30  22.  a  fire  shall  A.  to  the  lowest  hell,  Jer.  17.4.
Josh.  11.  6.  thou  shalt  A.  their  charipts  with  Are
Judo.  9.  52.  went  to  the  tower  to  A.  it  with  fire
12. 1.  will  A.  thine  house  with/.  II 14. 15.  A.  thee/.
Psal.  79. 5.  how  long  shall  thy  jealousy  A.  likeAre  T
89. 46.  how  long,  Lord,  shall  thy  wrath  A.  \^f~Lrt
Isa.  47. 14.  shall  be  as  stubble,  the  Are  shall  A.  them
Jer.  4.  4.  my  fury  come  forth  like  Are  and  A. -1. 12.
7.  31.  to  A.  sons  and  daughters  in  the  Are,  19-  0.

21.  10.  Nebuchadnezzar  shall  A.  this  city  with

32.  29. 1  34.  2,  22.  1  3J.  8, 10. 1  38.. 18.
Ezek.  5.  2.  A.  with  fire  a  third  part  in  midst  of  city
16. 41.  they  A.  thine  houses  with  Are,  23.  47.

Mat.  3. 12.  he  will  gather  his  wheat,  but  he  will  A..

up  the  chaff  with  unquenchable  fire,  Luke '3.17.
Rev.  17. 16.  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  A.  her  with  Are
^  j  ^  ^  incense  *

Exod  30. 1.  thou  shalt  make  an  altar  to  A.  incense  on
7.  Aaron  shall  A.  thereon  sweet  me.  every  morn.  8.

1  Kings  13. 1.  J  eroboam  stood  by  the  altar  to  b.  mc.

2  Kings  18.  4.  the  children  of  Israel  did  A.  me.  to  it

1  Chron.  23. 13.  he  and  his  sons  for  ever  to  A.  me.

2  Chron.  2. 4. 1  build  an  house  to  A.  sweet  incense
13  11.  A.  every  morning  sweet  incense  to  trie  1.0 rv
26. 16.  Uzziah  went  into  temple  to  A.  incense,  to.
28. 25.  in  Judah  Ahaz  made  high  places  to  A.  me.


BUR


BUR


BUT


■2  Chr.  20. 11.  my  sons,  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  b.  in.
3C.  12.  worship  before  one  altar,  and  inc.  on  it.
Jer. 7.  9.  will  ye  steal  and  b.  incense  to  Baal  ?  11. 13.

44.  17-  we  will  b.  incense  to  the  queen  of  heaven
Jlos.  4.  13.  they  b.  incense  upon  the  hills  under  oaks
Hah.  1.  1G.  therefore  they  b.  incense  to  their  drag
I.uke  1.  9.  Zacharias  his  lot  was  to  b.  me.  in  temple
BURNED.

Exod.  3.  2.  bush  b.  with  fire,  and  was  not  consumed
3.  1  will  turn  and  see  why  the  bush  is  not  b.
Dent.  9. 15.  I  came  down,  and  mount  b.  with  fire

32.  t  22.  a  fire  kindled  and  hath  b.  to  lowest  hell
Josh.  7. 25.  b.  them  with  fire,  after  they  stoned  them
2  Chron.  25. 14.  Amaziah  b.  incense  to  the  gods
34.  25.  have  forsaken  roe,  and  b.  incense  to  gods
:  Esth.  1.  12.  the  kins  wffs  wroth,  and  anger  6.  in  him
Psal.  39.  3.  while  f  was  musing  the  fire  b.

Isa.  24.  6.  therefore  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  b.
42.  25.  it  b.  him,  yet  he  laid  it  not  to  heart
Eam.  2.  3.  he  b.  a'sainst  Jacob  like  a  flaming  fire
John  15.  6.  withered  branches  are  gathered  and  b.
Acts  19.  19.  many  brought  their  books  and  b.  them
Rom.  1.  27.  b.  in  their  lust  one  towards  another
l  Cor.  13.  3.  and  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  b.
Heb.  6.  8.  is  rejected,  whose  end  is  to  be  b.

■  12. 18.  for  ye’  are  not  come  to  the  mount  that  b.

■  Rev.  1. 15.  his  feet  like  brass,  as  if  b.  in  a  furnace

16.  t  9.  and  men  were  b.  with  great  heat
BURNETH.

Lev.  16.  28.  he  that  b.  them  shall  wash  his  clothes
and  bathe  his  flesh  in  water,  Num.  19.  8.
Psal.  46.  9.  he  breaketh  the  bow  and  b.  chariot  in  fire
j:  83.  14.  as  the  fire  b.  wood,  and  as  the  flame  setteth
97.  3.  a  fire  b.  up  his  enemies  round  about
Jsa.  9. 18.  for  wickedness  b.  as  the  fire

44. 16.  he  b.  part  thereof  in  fire,  he  warms  himself
62.  1.  the  salvation  thereof  as  a  lamp  that  b.

64.  2.  as  when  the  melting  fire  b.  the  fire  causeth

65.  5.  these  are  a  smoke  and  fire  that  b.  all  the  day

66.  3.  he  that  b.  incense,  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol
Jer.  48.  35.  cause  to  cease  that  b.  incense  to  his  gods

H  Joel  2.  3.  a  fire  before  them,  behind  them  a  flame  b.

I  Rev.  21.  8.  shall  have  part  in  lake  which  b.  with  fire
BURNING.

i  Gen.  15.  17.  a  b.  lamp  passed  between  the  pieces
1!  Lev.  6.  9.  the  fire  of  the  altar  shall  be  b.  in  it,  12, 13.

26. 16.  I  will  appoint  over  you  the  b.  ague
Dent.  28. 22.  Lora  shall  smite  thee  with  extreme  b.

32.  24.  they  shall  be  devoured  with  b.  heat
Job  5.  t  7.  as  sons  of  the  b.  coal  lift  up  to  fly
41. 19.  of  his  mouth  go  b.  lamps,  sparks  of  fire
Psal.  11.  +6.  on  wicked  he  shall  reign  a  b.  tempest
140.  10.  let  b.  coals  fall  upon  them,  cast  into  fire
Prov.  16.  27.  in  his  lips  there  is  as  a  b.  fire
26. 21.  as  coals  are  to  b.  coals,  and  wood  to  fire
23.  b.  lips  and  a  wicked  heart  are  like  a  potsherd
1  Isa.  30.  27.  name  of  Lord  cometh  far,  b.  with  anger

34. 9.  the  land  thereof  shall  become  b.  pitch

*1  Jer.  20.  9.  his  word  was  in  my  heart  as  a  b.  fire
m  Etek.  1.  13.  their  appearance  was  like  b.  coals

21.  t31.  I  will  deliver  into  the  hand  of  b.  men
Dan.  3.  6.  shall  be  cast  into  midst  of  a  b.  furnace,  11.

17.  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the  b.  furnace

20.  to  cast  them  into  the  b.  fiery  furnace,  21,  23.
26.  Nebuchadnezzar  came  near  the  b.  furnace

7. 9.  his  throne  like  flame,  his  wheels  were  as  b.  fire
:  Hob.  3.  5.  and  b.  coals  went  forth  at  his  feet

I  Luke  12.  35.  let  your  loins  be  girded,  and  lights  b.

\  John  5.  35.  John  was  a  b.  and  a  shining  light
!  Rev.  4. 5.  there  were  seven  lamps  b.  before  throne

8.  8.  and  as  it  were  a  great  mountain  b.  with  fire
10.  there  fell  a  great  star  b.  as  it  were  a  Lamp

19.  20.  they  both  were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  b.
BURNING.

|  Gen.  11. 1 3.  and  let  us  bum  the  bricks  to  a  b.

Exod.  21. 25.  b.  for  b.  wound  for  wound,  stripe  for
l!  Lev.  10.  6.  bewail  the  b.  which  the  Lord  kindled
13.  28.  if  the  spot  stay,  it  is  a  rising  of  the  b.

I  Num.  11  +  3.  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  a  b.

Dent.  29. 23.  the  wole  land  is  brimstone,  salt,  and  b.
j  2  Chron.  16.  14.  they  made  a  very  great  b.  for  him
I  21. 19.  people  made  no  b.  like  the  b.  of  his  fathers
|  Isa.  3.  24.  there  shall  be  b.  instead  of  beauty

4.  4.  purged  blood  of  Jerusalem  by  the  spirit  of  b.

9.  5.  but  this  shall  be  with  b.  and  tuel  of  fire

10. 16.  under  his  glory,  kindle  b.  like  b.  of  fire

32.  +  13.  b.  shall  come  upon  all  houses  of  joy

33.  12.  the  people  shall  be  as  the  b.  of  lime

i  Amos  4. 11.  even  as  a  firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  b.

\  Rev.  18.  9.  when  they  shall  see  the  smoke  of  her  b.
BURNINGS.

Josh.  11.  +  8.  they  chased  them  to  the  b.  of  waters
j  Isa.  33. 14.  who  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  b.  ?

\  Jer.  34.  5.  with  b.  of  thy  fathers  the  former  Icings
;  BURNISHED.

!  Etek.  1. 7.  they  sparkled  like  the  colour  of  b.  brass
BURNT.

Gen.  38. 24.  Judah  said,  bring  her  forth,  let  her  be  b.
Lev.  2.  12.  but  they  shall  not  be  b.  on  the  altar

6.  22.  meat  offering  shall  be  wholly  b.  23. 1  8.  21.

|  10.  16.  Moses  sought  the  goat,  and  it  was  b.

Num.  16.  39.  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the  brazen
censers,  wherewith  they  that  were  b.  had  offered
Dent.  32.  24.  shall  be  b.  with  hunger,  and  devoured
1  Sam.  2. 15.  before  they  l.  fat,  priest  s  servant  came
i  2  Sam.  5.  21.  David  and  his  men  b.  their  images
1  Kings  13. 2.  mens’  bones  shall  be  b.  upon  thee

15. 13.  Asa  b.  her  idol  by  the  brook,  2  Chr.  15.  16.
€  Kings  23. 6.  he  b.  the  grove  at  the  brook  Kidron
15.  she  b.  the  high  place,  and  stampt  it  small
j  16.  he  took  bones  out  of  sepulchres  and  b.  them
25.  9.  b.  the  house  of  L.  2  Chr.  36.  19.  Jer.  52.  13.
Job  30.  30.  and  my  bones  are  b.  with  heat
Psal.  102. 3.  my  skin  black,  bones  are  b.  as  an  hearth
Prov.  6.  27.  take  fire,  and  his  clothes  not  be  b.

28.  can  one  go  on  coals  and  his  feet  not  be  b.

Jer.  2.  15.  his  cities  are  b.  ||  6.  29.  the  bellows  are  b.
36.  28.  in  the  roll  which  Jehoiakim  hath  b.

51.  25.  and  I  will  make  thee  a  b.  mountain

■  Etek.  20.  47.  and  all  faces  shall  be  b.  therein

•A.  10.  kindle  the  fire,  and  let  the  bones  be  b.
j  Joel  1. 19.  the  flame  hath  b.  all  the  trees  of  the  field


Amos  2. 1.  because  he  b.  the  bones  of  king  of  Edom
Nah.  1.  5.  and  the  earth  is  b.  at  his  presence
l  Cor.  3. 15.  if  any  man’s  work  be  b.  shall  suffer  loss
Ileb.  13.  11.  those  beasts  are  b.  without  the  camp
BURNT,  joined  with  fire.

Exod.  32.20.  he  b.  the  calf  in  th efire,  Dent.  9.  21.
Lev.  6.  30.  the  sin  offering  shall  be  b.  in  the  fire
7. 17-  but  the  remainder  of  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice
on  the  third  day  shall  be  h.  with  fire,  19-  6.

20. 14.  if  a  man  take  a  wife  and  her  mother,  they
shall  be  b.  with  fire ,  both  he  and  they

21.  9.  if  the  daughter  of  any  priest  profane  herself
by  playing  the  whore,  she  shall  be  b.  withAre

Num.  11.  1.  th  efire  of  the  Lord  b.  among  them,  3.
Deut.  4. 11.  ye  came  near,  the  mountain  b.  with  ./ire
12. 31 .  their  sons  and  daughters  they  b.  in  the  fire
Josh.  6.  24.  they  b.  Jericho 1  with  fire  and  all  therein
7. 15.  it  shall  be,  he  that  is  taken  with  the  accursed
thing  shall  be  b.  with  Arc,  he  and  all  he  hath
11.  9.  Joshua  b.  their  chariots  with  A/ e
11.  and  he  took  Hazor  and  b.  it  with  fire
Judg.  15.  6.  they  b.  her  and  her  father  with  fire
14.  the  cords  became  as  flax  that  was  b.  with  fire

18.  27.  they  came  to  Laish  and  b.  it  with  fire

1  Sam.  30.  1.  the  Amalekites  b.  Ziklag  with  Arc

2  Sam.  23.  7-  they  shall  be  utterly  b.  with  fire

1  Kings  9.  16.  for  Pharaoh  had  b.  Gezer  with  fire
16.18.  Zimri  b.  the  king’s  house  with  fire

2  Kings  1.14.  fire  from  heaven  h.  up  the  two  captains
17-  31.  the  Sepharvites  b.  their  cliildren  with  fire
23.  11.  and  b.  the  chariots  of  the  sun  with  fire

25.  9.  every  great  man’s  house  b.  he  with  Arc

1  Chron.  14.  12.  their  gods  were  b.  with  fire

2  Chron.  28.  3.  Ahaz  b.  his  children  in  the  fire
Neh.  1.  3.  the  gates  thereof  are  b.  with  fire ,  2.  17.
Psal.  80.  16.  it  is  b.  with  fire,  it  is  cut  down
Isa.  1.  7.  your  cities  are  b.  with  fire

43.2.  when  walkestthro’  fire  thou  shalt  not  be  b.

64. 11.  our  holy  and  beautiful  house  is  b.  with  fire

Jer.  38.  17.  this  city  shall  not  be  b.  with  fire
23.  thou  shalt  cause  this  city  to  be  b.  with  fire
49.  2.  and  her  daughters  shall  be  b.  with  fire
51.  32.  and  the  reeds  they  have  b.  with  fire
58.  Babylon’s  high  gates  shall  be  b.  with  fire
Mic.  1.7.  the  hires  thereof  shall  be  b.  with  the  fire
Rev.  18.  8.  she  shall  be  utterly  b.  with  fire
BURNT  incense.

Exod.  40.  27.  b.  sweet  inc.  thereon,  as  commanded

1  Kings  3.  3.  only  Solomon  b.  inc.  in  high  places
9.  25.  Solomon  b.  inc.  upon  the  altar  before  Lord
12. 33.  Jeroboam  offered  on  the  altar  and  b.  inc.

22.  43.  people  b.  inc.  2  Kings  12.  3.  1 14.4.  1 15.4,35.

2  Kings  16.4.  Ahaz  b.  inc.  in  high  places, 2C/«r.28.3, 4.
2  Chron.  29.  7.  put  out  lamps  and  have  not  b.  inc.
Isa.  65.  7 •  which  have  b.  inc.  on  the  mountains
Jer.  18.  15.  my  peopie  have  b.  inc.  to  vanity

44.  15.  men  which  knew  that  their  wives  had  b.  inc.
Hos.  2.  13.  the  days  wherein  she  b.  inc.  to  them

11.  2.  they  sacrificed  and  b.  inc.  to  graven  images
BURNT  OFFERING.

Gen.  22.7-  hut  where  is  the  lamb  for  a  b.  offering?
8.  my  son,  God  will  provide  a  lamb  for  a  b.  off.
13.  he  offered  him  for  a  b. -offering  instead  of  Isaac
Exod.  18. 12.  and  Jethro  took  a  b.  offering  for  God
29.  18.  the  ram  is  a  b.  offering  unto  the  Lord
Lev.  1.4.  he  shall  put  his  hand  on  head  of  b.  offering
4. 29.  he  shall  slay  the  sin-offering  in  the  place  of
the  b.  offering,  33. 1  6.  25. 1  7.  2.  1  14. 13.

6.  9.  saying,  this  is  the  law  of  the  b.  offering,  7.  37.
7.8.  the  priestshall  have  the  skin  ofthe’A.  offering

9. 2.  take  thee  a  ram  for  a  b.  off.  16. 3, 5. 1  23. 18.

I.  take  a  calf  and  a  lamb  for  b.  off.  12. 6.  |  23. 12.
Num.  7.  15.  one  lamb  of  the  first  year  for  a  b.  off.

21,  27,  33,  39,  51,  57,  63,  69,  75,  81.
Etek  45.  15.

23.  3.  stand  by  thy  b.  offering  and  I  will  go,  15.
28.  10.  this  is  the  b.  offering  of  every  sabbath

13.  for  a  b.-off.  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord

14.  this  is  the  b. -offering  of  every  month

29.6.  beside  the  meat-offering  and  the  daily  b.  off.
Josh.  22.  26.  to  build  us  an  altar  not  for  a  b.  offering
Judg.  1.3.  23.  not  have  received  a  b.  off.  at  our  hands

1  Sam.  7. 10.  as  Samuel  was  offering  up  a  b.  o  ffering
13.  12.  I  forced  myself  and  offered  a  b.  offering

2  Kings  3.  27-  offered  him  for  a  b.  off.  on  the  wall
2  Chr.  7.1.  fire  came  down  and  consumed  the  b.  off.

29. 24.  the  b.  offering  should  be  made  for  all  Israel
Psal.  40.  6.  b.  offerings  hast  thou  not  required
51.  16.  for  thou  delightest  not  in  b.  offering

19.  shalt  be  pleased  with  b.-off.  and  whole  b.  off.
Isa.  40.  16.  nor  the  beasts  thereof  for  a  b.  offering
61.  8.  for  I  the  Lord  hate  robbery  for  b.  offering
Etek.  44.  11.  they  shall  slay  the  b.  off.  and  sacrifice

45.  17.  prince  shall  prepare  the  b.  off.  for  Israel

46.  2.  the  priest  shall  prepare  the  prince’s  b.  off.
13.  thou  shalt  daily  prepare  a  b.  off.  to  the  Lord

Continual  B URN L  OFFERING.

Exod.  29.  42.  a  continual  b.  offering,  Num.  28.  3.
6,  10,  15,  24,  .31. 1  29.  11,  16,  19,  22.  Ezra
3.  5.  Neh.  10.  33.  Etek.  46.  15.

Offer  BURNT  OFFERING.

Gen.  22. 2.  take  Isaac  and  offer  him  there  for  a  b.  off.
Lev.  9. 7.  go  to  the  altar  and  offer  thy  b.  offering
Num.  28. 11.  in  beginnings  of  months  offer  a  b.  off.

23.  ye  shall  offer  these  besides  the  b.  offering
Judg.  11.  31. 1  will  offer  it  up  for  a  b.  offering

13. 16.  if  thou  offer  a  b.-off.  offer  it  to  the  Lord

1  Sam.  6.  14.  and  offered  the  kine  fora  b.  offering

7.  9.  Samuel  offered  a  sucking  lamb  for  a  6.  offering

2  Kings  5.17 •  will  henceforth  offer  neither  b.  offering
2  Chron.  29. 27.  Hezekiah  commanded  to  offer  b.  off.
Job  42. 8.  and  offer  up  for  yourselves  a  b.  offering
Etek.  46. 4.  b.  offering  the  prince  shall  offer  in  sab.

BURNT  OFFERINGS.

Gen.  8.  20.  Noah  offered  b.  offerings  on  the  altar
Exod.  10.  25.  also  give  us  sacrifices  and  b.  offerings

20.  24.  and  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  b.  offerings
Num.  10.  10.  blow  with  trumpets  over  your  b.  off.
Deut.  12.  6.  thither  bring  your  b.  offerings,  11,1L27.
Josh.  22. 27.  do  the  service  of  the  Lord  with  b.  off.

1  Sam.  15.  22.  hath  Lord  as  great  delight  in  b.  off.

1  Kings  3. 15.  Solomon  stood  and  offered  b.  offerings


1  Kings  8.64.  middle  of  court,  there  he  offered  b.  off.

1  Chron.  29.  21.  they  offered  b.  offerings  to  the  Lord

2  Chron.  2.  4.  behold,  I  build  an  house  for  b.  off.

7.  7 •  brazen  altar  was  not  able  to  receive  b.  off.

29.  7-  have  not  offered  b.-off.  in  the  holy  place

34.  the  priests  could  not  slay  all  the  b.  offerings

30. 15.  Levites  were  ashamed,  brought  b.  off.

35.  14.  sons  of  Aaron  busied  in  offering  b.  off.
Ezra  3.  4.  offered  the  daily  b.  offeringsby  number

6.  9.  that  which  they  have  need  of  for  b.  offerings
Job  1. 5.  offered  b.  offerings  according  to  the  number
Psal.  50.  8. 1  will  not  reprove  thee  forthy  b.  off.

66.  13.  I  will  go  into  thy  house  with  h.  offerings
Isa.  1.  11.  1  am  full  of  the  b.  offerings  of  rams
43.  23.  nor  brought  me  small  cattle  of  thy  b.  off.
56.  7- their  b.  off.  shall  be  accepted  on  mine  altar
Jer.  6.  20.  your  b.  offerings  are  not  acceptable

7.  21.  put  your  b.  offerings  to.  your  sacrifices

22.  spake  not  to  your  fathers  concerning  b.  off.

17.  26.  shall  come  from  the  south  bringing  b.  off.

19.  5.  to  burn  their  sons  for  b.  offerings  to  Baal
Etek.  45.  17.  be  the  prince’s  part  to  give  b.  offerings
Hos.  6.  6.  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  b.  off.
Mic.  6. 6.  shall  I  come  before  him  with  b.  offerings?
Mark  12.  33.  to  love  neighbour  is  more  than  b.  off.
Heb.  10. 6.  in  b.  off.  for  sin  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure

Offer  BURNT  OFFERINGS.

1  Sam.  10. 8. 1  will  come  down  to  thee  to  offer  b.  off

2  Sam.  24.  24.  nor  will  I  offer  b.  offerings  of  that

which  doth  cost  me  nothing,  1  Chron.  21  24

1  Kings  3.  4.  a  thousand  b.  off.  did  Solomon  offer
9.  25.  three  times  a  year  did  Solomon  offer  6.  off.

Ezra  3.  2.  Jeshua  budded  the  altar  to  offer  b.  off.
Jer.  33.  18.  Levites  not  want  a  man  to  offer  b.  off
Ezek.  43.  18.  in  the  day  they  make  it  to  offer  b  off
Amos  5.22. though  ye  off er  me  b.  off.I  will  notacceDt
BURNT  SACRIFICE.  P

Exod.  30.9.  offer  no  strange  incense,  nor  b.  s.  thereon
Lev.  1.  9.  the  priestshall  burn  all  to  be  a  b.  s.  3  5
Num.  23. 6.  lo,  he  stood  by  his  b.  s.  and  the  princes  ’
Deut.  33. 10.  shall  put  whole  b.  j.  on  thine  dtar

2  Sam.  24.  22.  behold,  here  be  oxen  for  b.  sacrifice

1  Kings  18.  38.  fire  fell  and  consumed  the  h.  sacrifice

2  Kings  16.15.  on  the  great  altar  burn  the  king’s  b.  s
Psal.  20.  3.  remember  thy  offerings,  accept  thy  b  s

BURNT  SACRIFICES.

1  Chron.  23.  31.  to  offer  all  b.  s.  in  the  sabbaths

2  Chron.  13.  11.  burn  morning  and  evening  b.  s.
Psal.  66.  15.  I  will  offer  to  thee  b.  s.  of  fatlin°s

BURNT  up.

Judg.  15.  5.  the  foxes  b.  up  the  shocks  and  corn
2  Kings 1. 14.  fire  came  down,  and  b.up  the  two  capt
Job  1.  16.  the  fire  of  God  hath  b.  up  the  sheep
Psal.  74.  8.  they  have  b.  up  all  the  synagogues
106.  18.  fire  was  kindled,  flame  b.up  the  wicked
Isa.  3.  + 14.  for  ye  have  h.  up  the  vineyard
64. 11.  our  holy  and  beautiful  house  is  b.up
Jer.  9. 10.  b.  up  that  none  can  pass  thro’  them,  12.
Mat.  22.  7-  the  king  sent  and  b.  up  their  city
2  Pet.  3.  10.  earth  and  works  therein  shall  be  b.  up
Rev.  8.  7-  they  were  cast  on  the  earth,  and  the  third
part  of  trees  was  b.up  and  all  green  grass  was  b.  up
BURST.

Job  32. 19.  it  is  ready  to  b.  like  new  bottles
Prov.  3.  10.  thy  presses  shall  b.  with  new  wine
Jer.  2. 20. 1  have  b.  thy  bands, 5.  5. 1  30.8. Nah.  1. 13.
Mark  2. 22.  else  new  wine  doth  b.  bottles ,Luke  5.  37.
Acts  1. 18.  he  b.  asunder  in  midst,  bowels  gushed  out
BURSTING.

Isa.  30.  14.  not  be  found  in  the  b.  of  it  a  sherd
BUSH,  ES.

Exod.  3.  2.  in  a  flame  of  fire  in  the  b.  Acts  7.  30.

4.  God  called  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  b.
Deut.  33.  16.  the  good-will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  b.
Job  30.  4.  who  cut  up  mallows  by  the  b.  for  meat

7.  among  the  b.  they  brayed,  under  the  nettles
Isa.  7.  19.  they  shall  come  and  rest  upon  all  b.
Mark  12.  26.  how  in  the  b.  God  spake  to  him
Luke  6.  44.  nor  of  a  bramble  b.  gather  they  grapes

20.  37.  that  dead  are  raised,  Moses  shewed  at  the  b.
Acts  7.  35.  the  angel  which  appeared  in  the  b.

BUSHEL.

Mat .5. 15.nor  do  men  light  a  candle  and  put  it  under
a  b.  but  on  a  candlestick,  Mark  4. 21.  Luke  11.  33.
BUSHY.

Cant.  5. 11.  his  locks  are  b.  and  black  as  a  raven
BUSY-BODY,  I  ES.

2  Thess.  3. 11.  but  some  of  you  are  b.-b.  1  Tim.  5.  13.
1  Pet.  4. 15.  but  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  b.-body
BUSY,  I  ED.

1  Kings  20.  40.  as  thy  servant  was  b.  here  and  there

2  Chron.  35  14.  the  sons  of  Aaron  b.  in  offering

BUSINESS.

Gen.  39.  11.  Joseph  went  into  house  to  do  his  b.
Deut.  24.  5.  nor  shall  he  be  charged  with  any  b.
Josh.  2.  14.  our  life  for  yours,  if  ye  utter  not  our  b.

20.  if  thou  utter  this  our  b.  we  will  be  quit
Judg.  18.  7.  they  had  no  b.  with  any  man,  28.

1  Sam.  10.  +  2.  thy  father  hath  left  the  h.  of  the  asses
20.  19-  didst  hide  thyself  when  the  b.  was  in  hand

21. 2.  let  no  man  know  any  thing  of  the  b.

8.  because  the  king’s  b.  required  haste

25.  +2.  there  was  a  man  whose  b.  was  in  Carmel

2  Chron.  13. 10.  and  the  Levites  wait  on  their  b.

29.  +  15.  gathered  their  brethren  in  b.  of  the  Lord
32.  31.  in  the  b.  of  the  ambassadors  God  left  him

Neh.  13.  30.  I  appointed  every  man  in  his  b.

Esth.  3.  9.  to  them  that  have  the  charge  of  the  b.

9.  +  3.  those  that  did  the  king’s  b.  helped  the  Jews
Psal.  107  .  23.  they  that  do  b.  in  great  waters
Prov.  18.  +  1.  he  that  intermeddleth  in  ever}"  b
22.  29.  seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  b.  ?

Eccl.  5.  3.  a  dream  cometh  through  multitude  of  b.
Dan.  8.  27.  afterwards  1  rose,  and  did  the  king's  b.
Luke  2.  49-  wist  ye  not  I  must  be  about  Father’ s  b  7
Acts  6.  3.  whom  we  may  appoint  over  this  b.

Rom.  12.  11.  not  slothful  in  b.  fervent  in  spirit
16.  2.  assist  her  in  what  b.  she  hath  need  of  you
1  Thess.  4. 11.  that  ye  study  to  do  your  own  b.

BUT.

1  Sam.  20.  3.  there  is  b.  a  step  between  me  and  death

2  Kings 7.  4.  and  if  they  kill  us,  we  shall  b.  die

47


CAL


CAL


C  AK

Psal.  115.  5.  mouths  b.  speak  not ;  eyes  b.  see  not

6  have  ears  b.  hear  not ;  noses  b.  smell  not

7  1  ave  hands  b.  handle  not ;  feet  b.  walk  not
Mat.  24.  36.  b.  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man

37.  b.  as  the  days  of  N  oe  were,  so  shall  the  corning
Mark  5.  28.  she  said,  if  1  may  touch  A.  his  clothes

1  Cor.  4. 19-  I  will  know  not  the  speech,  A.  the  power
6. 11.  A.  ye  are  washed  ||  7. 10.  yet  not  1 ,  A.  the  Lord

12.  4.  A.  the  same  Spirit  ||  5.  A.  the  same  Lord

6.  A.  it  is  the  same  God  which  worketh  all  in  all

2  Cor.  2.  5.  he  hath  not  grieved  me  A.  in  part

4.  17.  our  light  affliction,  which  i3  A.  tor  a  mpment
Gal.  1. 12.  A.  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ
But  the  end.  See  End.

BUTTER

Gen.  18.  8.  Abraham  took  A.  and  milk,  and  the  call
Dent.  32. 14.  A.  of  kine,  milk  of  sheep,  fat  ot  lambs
Judo.  5.  25.  she  brought  forth  A.  in  a  lordly  dish
2  Sam.  17. 29.  Barzillai  brought  honey  and  A.  for  Da.
Job  20  17.  shall  not  see  the  brooks  of  honey  and  A
29.  6.  when  1  washed  my  steps  with  A.  rock  poured
Psal.  55.  21.  words  of  his  mouth  smoother  than  A.
Prov.  30.  33.  churning  of  milk  bringeth  forth  A.

Isa.  7.  15.  A.  and  honey  shall  he  eat,  22.

BUTLER,  S.  ,  ,

Gen.  40. 1.  the  A.  of  the  king  of  Egypt  offended

9.  the  chief  A.  told  his  dream  tp  Joseph

21.  he  restored  his  chief  A.  to  his  butlership

41.  9.  the  chief  A.  said,  I  remember  my  faults

BUTTOCKS.  .

2  Sam.  10.4.  cutoff  garments  to  their  A.  1  C  hr  on. 19. 4.
Isa.  20. 4.  with  A.  uncovered  to  the  shame  of  Egypt
BUY

Simiifies,  [1]  To  procure  any  commodity  by  price,

2  Sam  24.  21.  [2]  To  receive,  by  such  ways  and
means  as  God  has  directed,  those  spiritual  blessings
which  are  freely  offered  in  the  gospel,  even  Christ
and  all  his  benefits,  Isa.  55.  1.  Rev.  3.  18.

Gen.  42.  2.  get  you  down  to  Egypt  and  A.  tor  us

7.  said,  from  land  of  Canaan  to  A.  food,  43.  20.

47. 19.  A.  us  and  our  land  for  bread,  we  be  servants

Exod.  21.  2.  if  thou  A.  an  Hebrew  servant
Lev.  22.  11.  if  the  priests  A.  any  soul  with  money
25.  15.  after  the  iubilee  A.  of  thy  neighbour
44.  of  them  shall  ye  b .  bondmen  and  maids,  45.
Deut.  2.  6.  ye  shall  A.  meat  of  them  for  money
28.  68.  ye  shall  be  sold,  and  no  man  shall  A.  you
Ruth  4.  4.  A.  it  before  the  inhabitants,  before  elders

5.  thou  must  A.  it  also  of  Ruth  the  Moabitess

2  Sam.  24. 21.  David  said,  to  A.  the  threshing-floor,
and  build  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  24.  \  Chr.  21.  24.

2  Kings  12. 12.  gave  it  to  masons  to  A.  timber,  22.  6.
Neh.  10.  31.  we  would  not  A.  it  on  the  sabbath
Isa.  55.  1.  come,  A.  and  eat,  A.  wine  and  milk
Jer  32.  7.  A.  thee  my  field  that  is  in  Anathoth
44.  men  shall  A.  fields  for  money  and  subscribe
Mat.  14. 15.  may  A.  themselves  victuals,  Mark  6. 36.
25.  9.  go  to  them  that  sell,  and  A.  for  yourselves

10.  while  they  went  to  A.  the  bridegroom  came
Mark  6.  37.  shall  we  go  and  A.  200  pennyworth  ?
Luke  9.  13.  except  we  A.  meat  for  all  this  people

22.  36.  let  him  sell  his  garment  and  A.  one
John  4.  8.  his  disciples  were  gone  to  A.  meat

6.  5.  whence  shall  we  A.  bread  that  these  may  eat  ?

13.  29.  A.  those  things  that  we  have  need  ot

1  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  A.  as  tho’  they  possessed  not
Jam.  4.  13.  and  we  will  A.  and  sell,  and  get  gain
Rev.  3. 18. 1  counsel  thee  to  A.  of  me  gold  tried  m  fire

13. 17.  no  man  A.  or  sell,  save  he  that  had  the  mark
BUY  corn.

Gen.  41.  57.  all  countries  came  to  Joseph  to  A.  corn

42.  3.  Joseph’s  brethren  went  down  to  A.  corn
Neh.  5.  3.  we  have  mortgaged  our  lands  to  A.  corn
BUY  poor.

Amos  8.  6.  that  we  may  A.  the  poor  for  silver
BUY  truth.

Prov.  23.  23.  A.  the  truth  and  sell  it  not,  also  wisdom
BUYER.

Prov.  20.  14.  it  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  A
Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  the  A.  so  with  the  seller
Ezek.  7. 12.  let  not  the  A.  rejoice,  nor  seller  mourn
BUYEST.

Lev.  25.  14.  and  if  thou  sell  ought,  or  A.  ought
Ruth  4. 5.  what  day  thou  A.  the  field  of  Naomi
BUYETH.

Prov.  31.  16.  she  considereth  a  field,  and  A.  it
Mat.  13.  44.  he  selleth  all  he  hath,  and  A.  that  field
Rev.  18.  11.  no  man  A.  her  merchandise  any  more
BY  and  BY.

Mat.  13.  21.  when  persecution,  A.  and  A.  is  offended
Mark  6.  25.  give  me  A.  and  A.  in  a  charger  the  head
Luke  17. 7.  will  say  to  him  A.  andb.  sit  down  to  meat
21.  9.  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  A.  and  A.
BY-WAYS.

Judg.  5.  6.  and  the  travellers  walked  through  A.

BY-WORD.  [tions

Pent.  28.  37.  thou  shalt  become  a  A.  among  all  na

1  Kings  9. 7.  Israel  shall  be  a  A.  among  all  the  people

2  Chron.  7.  20.  make  this  house  a  proverb  and  a  A.
Job  17.  6.  he  hath  made  me  a  A.  of  the  people  .

30.  9.  and  now  am  I  their  song,  yea,  1  am  their  A
Psal.  44. 14.  thou  makest  us  a  A.  among  the  heathen
Joel 2.  Ml.  why  heath,  should  use  a  A.  against  them  ?


1


CABINS.

Jer.  37-  16.  when  Jeremiah  was  entered  into  the  c.
CAGE.

Jer.  5.  27.  as  a  c.  is  full  of  birds,  so  are  their  houses
full  of  deceit,  therefore  they  are  become  great
Rev.  18.  2.  Babylon  is  a  c.  of  every  unclean  bird
CAKE,  S.

Exod.  12.  39.  they  baked  unleavened  c.  of  the  dough
Lev.  7. 12.  with  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  unleav.  c.
24.  5.  take  fine  flour,  and  bake  twelve  c.  thereof
Num.  15.  20.  offer  up  a  c.  of  the  first  of  your  dough
Judg.  7.  13.  and  lo,  a  c.  tumbled  into  host  of  Midian
2  Sam,  6.  19.  David  dealt  to  every  one  a  c.  of  bread
13.  6.  make  me  a  couple  of  c.  in  my  sight  to  eat
1  Kings  17.  12.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  I  have  not  a  c
48


1  Kings  17. 13.  make  me  a  little  c.  first,  and  bring  it
19. 6.  there  was  a  c.  baken  on  coals,  a  cruse  ot  water

Jer.  7. 18.  to  make  c.  to  the  queen  ot  heaven,  44. 19.
Ezek.  4.  12.  and  thou  shalt  eat  it  as  barley  c.

Hos.  7.  8.  Ephraim  is  a  c.  not  turned
See  Figs,  Unleavened.
CALAMITY,  IES.

Deut.  32.  35.  for  the  day  of  their  c.  is  at  hand

2  Sam.  22. 19.  prevented  me  in  day  of  c.  Ps.  18. 18.
Job  6.  2.  and  my  c.  laid  in  the  balances  together

30. 13.  they  set  forward  my  c.  they  have  no  helper
Psal.  57.  1.  my  refuge  until  these  c.  be  overpast
141.  5.  for  yet  my  prayer  also  shall  be  in  their  c.
Prov.  1.  26.  1  will  laugh  at  your  c.  I  will  mock
6.  15.  therefore  his  c.  shall  come  suddenly  _

17.  5.  he  that  is  glad  at  c.  shall  not  be  unpunished
19.  13.  a  foolish  son  is  the  c.  of  his  father
24.  22.  for  their  c.  shall  rise  suddenly
27.  10.  nor  go  into  thy  brother’s  house  in  dajr  of  c.
Jer.  18. 17.  Twill  shew  them  the  back  in  day  of  c.

46.  21.  the  day  of  their  c.  was  come  upon  them
48  16.  the  c.  of  Moab  is  near  to  come,  hasteth
49.  8.  for  I  will  bring  the  c.  of  Esau  upon  him
32.  and  I  will  bring  their  c.  from  all  sides  thereof
Ezek.  35.  5.  hast  shed  blood  of  lsr.  in  day  of  their  c.
Obad.  13.  on  their  substance  in  the  day  ot  their  c.
CALAMUS.

Exod.  30.  23.  take  of  sweet  c.  250  shekels
Cant.  4.  14.  spikenard,  saffron,  c.  and  cinnamon
Ezek.  27.  19.  c.  was  in  the  market  of  Tyrus
CALDRON.

1  Sam.  2.  14.  he  struck  it  into  the  pan,  c.  or  pot
Job  41.  20.  goeth  smoke,  as  outot  a  seething  c.

Ezek.  11.3.  this  city  is  the  c.  and  we  the  flesh  7

11.  this  city  shall  not  be  your  c.  nor  ye  the  flesh
Mic.  3.  3.  they  chop  them  as  flesh  within  the  c.
CALDRONS.

2  Chron.  35. 13.  holy  offerings  sold  they  in  pots  and  c .
Jer.  52. 18.  c.  also  and  spoons  took  they  away,  19.

CALF.

Gen.  18. 7.  Abraham  fetched  a  c.  tender  and  good
Exod.  32.  4.  after  he  had  made  it  a  molten  c.

20.  Moses  burnt  c.  and  strawed  it  on  the  water
Lev.  9.  2.  take  thee  a  young  c.  for  a  sin-offering

3.  take  a  c.  and  a  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering
Deut.  9. 16.  ye  had  sinned  against  the  Lord,  and  had
made  you  a  molten  c.  Neh.  9.  18.  Psal.  106. 19.
Job  21.  10.  their  cow  calveth  and  casteth  not  her  c.
Psal.  29.  6.  he  maketh  them  also  to  skip  like  a  c.

Isa.  11.  6.  the  c .  and  the  young  lion  together
27.  10.  there  shall  the  c.  feed,  and  there  lie  down
Jer.  34. 18.  when  they  cut  the  c.  in  twain  and  passed
Ezek.  1.  7.  their  feet  were  like  the  sole  of  a  c.  foot
Hos.  8.  5.  thy  c.  O  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off
6.  the  c.  of  Samaria  shall  be  broken  in  pieces
Luke  15.23.  and  bring  hither  the  fatted  c.  and  kill  it
27.  thy  father  hath  killed  the  fatted  c.  30.

Acts 7.  41.  and  they  made  a  c.  in  those  days
Rev.  4.  7.  and  the  second  beast  was  like  a  c.
CALKERS.

Ezek.  27.  9.  ancients  of  Gebal  were  in  thee  thy  c.

27.  thy  c.  shall  fall  into  the  midst  of  the  seas
CALL

Signifies,  [1]  To  name,  Gen.  1.  5. 1  5.  2.  [2]  To

appoint  and  qualify  a  person  for  some  work  and
service,  Exod.  31.  2.  Isa.  22.  20.  [3]  To  came,
by  a  powerful  word,  those  things  to  exist,  which  had
no  being  before,  Rom.  4. 17*  [4]  To  invite,  warn,
and  exhort,  by  the  dispensations  of  Providence,
Isa.  22.  12.  [5]  To  cause  to  grow,  Ezek.  36.  29.
[6]  To  invite  sinners  to  repentance,  either  by  the
ministry  of  the  word,  by  awful  dispensations  of
Providonce9  by  the  motions  of  the  Holy  Spirit ,  or
by  their  own  consciences ,  Prov,  1.  24.  Mat.  22.

14.  [7]  To  bring  persons ,  by  the  preaching  of
the  word  and  effectual  operation  of  the  Spirit,  to
know,  believe,  and  obey,  the  gospel,  Rom.  8. 28,  30.
[8]  To  own  and  acknowledge,  Heb.  2.  11.  [9]  lo
worship,  Gen.  4.  26.  Acts  9. 14.  [10]  To  pray  to,
Psal.  50.  15.  Jonah  1.  6.  [11]  To  appeal  to,

2  Cor.  1.  23.  [12]  To  proclaim ,  Joel  1.  14.  i  2.

15.  [13]  To  reckon,  or  account,  Mai.  3.  15.

Acts  10.  15.  [14]  To  be,  Luke  1.  32.  where  it  is
said  of  Christ,  Thou  shalt  be  called  the  Son  of  the
Highest ;  that  is,  Thou  shalt  really  be,  and  be
acknowledged,  the  true,  eternal,  and  essential  Son
of  God.  ,

Gen.  2. 19.  to  Adam,  to  see  what  he  would  c.  them
Exod.  2.  7.  c.  to  thee  a  nurse  of  the  Hebrew  women
20.  where  is  he  ?  c.  him  that  he  may  eat  bread
Num.  16.  12.  Moses  sent  to  c.  Dathan  and  Abiram
22.  20.  if  the  men  c.  thee,  rise  up  and  go  with  them
Deut.  4.  7.  as  God  is  in  all  things  we  c.  on  him  tor
26.  I  c.  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against  you
this  day ,  shall  not  pro.  your  days,  30. 19. 1  31. 28.
Judg.  16. 25.  c.  for  Samson  that  he  may  make  us  sport

21.  13.  they  sent  to  c.  peaceably  unto  them

1  Sam.  3.  6.  here  am  I,  for  thou  didst  c. ,  me,  8.

16.  3.  c.  Jesse  to  the  sacrifice,  and  I  will  shew  thee

22.  11.  then  king  sent  to  c.  Ahimelech  the  priest

2  Sam.  17.  5.  then  said  Absalom,  c.  now  Hushai

1  Kings  1 . 28.  c.  Bathsheba  H  32.  c.  Zadok  and  N  atlian
8.  52.  hearken  to  them  in  all  they  c.  for  unto  thee

17. 18.  art  come  to  me  to  c.  my  sin  to  remembrance  ?
18.  24.  and  c.  ye  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  25.

2  Kings  4.  12.  Elisha  said,  c.  this  Shunammite

10. 19.  c.  unto  me  all  the  prophets  of  Baal
Job  5. 1.  c.  now  if  there  be  any  that  will  answer

13.  22.  then  c.  thou,  and  I  will  answer,  14. 15.
Psal.  4. 1.  hear  when  1  r.  O  God  of  my  righteousness
3.  the  Lord  will  hear  when  I  c.  unto  him
14. 4.  who  eat  up  my  people,  and  c.  not  upon  Lord
20.  9.  save,  Lord,  let  the  king  hear  us  when  we  c,
49.  11.  they  c.  their  lands  after  their  own  names
77.  6.  I  r.  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the  night
86.  5.  and  plenteous  in  mercy  to  all  that  c.  on  thee
99. 6.  Samuel  among  them  that  r.  on  his  name
102.  2.  in  the  day  when  I  c.  answer  me  speeds
145. 18.  the  Lord  is  nigh  all  them  that  c.  on  him
Prov.  8.4.  to  you,  O  men,  I  c.  my  voice  to  sons  ot  men
9. 15.  to  c.  passengers  who  go  right  on  their  ways
31.  28.  her  children  arise,  and  c.  her  blessed


Isa.  3. 1 12.  O  my  people,  they  who  c.  thee  blessed
cause  thee  to  err,  and  destroy  thy  paths,  9.  + 16.

5.  20.  woe  to  themthat  c.  evil  good,  and  good  evil
22.  12.  in  that  day  did  the  Lord  c.  to  weeping
45.  3.  I  the  Lord  which  c.  thee  by  thy  name
48.  2.  for  they  c.  themselves  of  the  holy  city
13.  when  1  c.  to  them  they  stand  up  together
55.  6.  c .  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near
58.  5.  wilt  thou  c.  this  a  fast  to  the  Lord  ?

13.  c.  the  sabbath  a  delight,  holy  of  the  Lord
65.  15.  and  c.  his  servants  by  another  name

24.  it  shall  come,  that  before  they  c.  I  will  answer
Jer.  9. 17.  consider  and  c.  for  the  mourning  women
33.  3.  c.  unto  me,  and  1  will  answer  thee
I. am.  2. 15.  is  this  city  men  c.  perfection  of  beauty  ?
Hos.  1.  4.  the  Lord  said,  c.  his  name  Jezreel

6.  God  said  unto  him,  c.  her  name  Lo-ruhamah

9.  c.  his  name  Lo-arnmi,  for  ye  are  not  my  people

7.  H.  they  c.  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  Assyria

Joel  1.  14.  sanctify  a  fast  c.  solemn  assembly,  2. 15.
Jonah  1. 6.  O  sleeper,  arise,  c.  upon  thy  God
Zech.  3.  10.  ye  shall  c.  every  man  his  neighbour
Mai.  3. 15.  now  we  c.  proud  happy,  they  that  work
Mat.  9.  13.  I  am  not  come  to  c.  the  righteous,  but
sinners  to  repentance,  Mark  2.  17-  Luke  5.  32.
20.  8.  c.  the  labourers  and  give  them  their  hire

22.  3.  sent  his  servants  to  c.  them  that  were  bidden

43.  how  then  doth  David  in  spirit  c.  him  Lord  ?

23.  9.  c.  no  man  your  father  upon  the  earth
Luke  6. 46.  why  c.  ye  me  L.  and  do  not  things  I  say  ?

14.  13.  when  thou  makest  a  least  c.  the  poor
John  4. 16.  go  c.  thy  husband,  and  comehither

13. 13.  ye  c.  me  Master  and  Lord,  and  ye  say  well
Acts  9. 14.  to  bind  all  that  c.  on  thy  name

19. 13.  to  c.  over  them  which  had  evil  spirits

24. 14.  that  after  the  way  which  they  c.  heresy
Rom.  10.  12.  same  Lord  is  rich  to  all  that  c.  on  him
2  Cor.  1.  23.  I  c.  God  for  a  record  upon  my  soul

2  Tim.  1. 5.  when  I  c.  to  remembrance  the  faith
2.  22.  follow  peace  with  them  that  c.  on  the  Lord
Heb.  2.  11.  he  is  not  ashamed  toe.  them  brethren

10.  32.  but  c.  to  remembrance  the  former  days
Jam.  5. 14.  let  him  c.  the  elders  of  the  church

1  Pet.  1.  17.  if  ye  c.  on  the  Father  who  judgeth
CALL  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.

Gen.  4.  26.  then  began  men  to  c.  upon  name  of  the  L.

1  Kings  18.  24. 1  will  c.  on  name  of  L.  Psal.  116.  17.

2  Kings  5. 11.  he  will  come  out  and  c.  on  name  of  L.

1  Chr.  16.  8.  c.  upon  his  name,  Psal.  105.1.  Jsa.12.4.
Joel  2.  32.  whosoever  shall  c.  on  the  name  of  the  L.

shall  be  delivered,  Acts  2.21.  Rom.  10.  13.
Zevh.  3. 9.  that  they  may  all  c.  upon  name  of  the  L.

1  Cor.  1.  2.  that  in  every  place  c.  on  the  name  of  L.
Not  CALL.

Gen.  17. 15.  shall  not  c.  her  name  Sarai,  but  Sarah
Judg.  12. 1.  and  didst  not  c.  us  to  go  with  thee
Ruth  1.  20.  she  said,  c.  me  not  Naomi,  c.  me  Mara
Psal.  14.  4.  and  they  c.  not  upon  the  Lord
Isa.  31.  2.  vet  he  will  not  c.  back  his  words
Jer.  10.  25,'upon  families  that  c.  not  upon  thy  name
Luke  14. 12.  c.  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  brethren
John  15. 15.  henceforth  I  c.  you  not  servants
Acts  10.  15.  that  c.  wet  thou  common,  11.  9.

28.  God  hath  shewed  me  w.  to  c.  any  man  common
Shall,  or  shalt  CALL.

Gen.  17. 19.  and  thou  shalt  c.  his  name  Isaac
Deut.  25. 8.  then  the  elders  of  his  city  shall  c.  him
30. 1.  thou  shalt  c.  them  to  mind  among  the  nations
33. 19.  they  shall  c.  the  people  to  the  mountain
Job  14. 15.  thou  shalt  c.  and  I  will  answer  thee
Psal.  50.  4.  he  shall  c.  to  the  heavens  from  above

72. 17 .  blessed  in  him, all  nations  shall c.  him  blessed
Isa.  7.  14.  shall  c.  his  name  Emmanuel,  Mat.  1. 23.

34. 12.  they  shall  c.  the  nobles  to  the  kingdom
41.  25.  from  rising  of  sun  shall  he  c.  on  my  name

44.5.  another  shall  c.  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob

7.  and  who,  as  I,  shall  c.  and  shall  declare  it  t

55.  5.  thou  shalt  c.  a  nation  that  thou  knowest  not
58.  9.  then  shall  thou  c.  and  the  Lord  shall  answei
60.  14.  they  shall  c.  thee  the  city  of  the  Lord

18.  shalt  c.  thy  walls  salvation,  and  gates  praise

61. 6.  men  shall  c.  you  the  ministers  of  our  God

62. 12.  they  shall  c.  them  the  holy  people,  redeemed
Jer  3. 17.  they  shall  c.  Jerusalem  the  throne  of  L.

19.  shalt  c.  me,  my  father,  shalt  not  turn  away
6.  30.  reprobate  silver  shall  men  c.  them

7. 27.  shalt  c.  to  them,  but  they  will  not  answer  thee
Hos.  2. 16.  and  thou  shalt  c.  me  no  more  Baah
Joel  2.  32.  in  the  remnant  whom  the  Lord  shall  c.
Amos  5. 16.  they  shall  c.  husbandman  to  mourning
Zech.  13. 9.  shall  c.  on  my  name  and  I  will  hear  them
Mai.  1. 4.  they  shall  c.  them  the  border  of  wickedness

3. 12.  and  all  nations  shall  c.  you  blessed

Mat.  1. 21.  thou  shalt  c.  his  name  Jesus,  shall  save
10  25.  how  much  more  shall  c.  them  of  household  ?
Luke  1. 13.  and  thou  shalt  c.  his  name  .1  ohn
48.  behold,  all  generations  shall  c.  me  blessed
Acts  2.  39.  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  c.
Rom.  10. 14.  how  then  shall  they  c.  on  him  in  whom
Will  CALL.

Gen.  24. 57-  we  will  c.  the  damsel  and  inquire  at  her
30  13.  for  the  daughters  willc.  me  blessed

1  Sam.  12. 17.  I  will  c.  unto  Lord,  and  he  shall  send

2  Sam.  22. 4.  I  will  c.  on  the  Lord,  Psal.  18.3.

Job  27.  10.  will  the  hypocrite  always  c.  on  God  ?
Psal.  55. 16.  as  for  me,  I  will  c.  upon  God,  86. 7

80. 18.  quicken  us,  and  we  will  c.  on  thy  name
116.  2.  therefore  will  I  c.  on  him  as  long  as  l
Isa.  22.  20.  that  I  will  c.  my  servant, Eliakim
Jer.  1. 15. 1  will  c.  all  the  families  ot  the  north
25.  29.  for  I  will  c.  for  a  sword,  Ezek.  38.  21.
Ezek.  21. 23.  he  will  c.  to  remembrance  the  iniquity
36.  29.  1  will  c.  for  the  corn,  and  will  increase  it
Acts  24.  25.  a  convenient  season  I  will  c.  for  thee
Rom.  9.  25. 1  willc.  them  my  people  which  were  not
CALL  upon  me.  [Over

Psal.  50.15.  c.  upon  me.  in  day  of  trouble,  I  wnlde-
91.  15.  he  shall  c.  upon  me,  and  1  will  answer  him
Prov.  1.  28.  shall  c.  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer
Ter  °Q  12  shall  ye  c.  upon  me,  and  1  will  hearken
‘  CALLED.  T  u  ,

Gen.  11. 9.  therefore  is  the  name  of  it  c.  Babel


CAL


C  A  L


Gen.  21.  17  •  the  angel  of  God  c.  to  ITagar  out  of  hea.

22.  11.  the  angel  c.  to  Abraham  out  of  heaven
35-  10.  thy  name  shall  not  be  c.  any  more  Jacob

18.  c.  him  Ben  oni,  but  his  father  c.  him  Benjamin
38.  14.  she  c.  to  the  men  of  her  house,  and  spake
Exod.  1.  18.  the  king  of  Egypt  c.  for  the  mid  wives

8.  8.  Phar.  c.  tor  M.  25.  1  9.  27.  |  10. 16,  24.  1 12.  31.
Rum.  13. 16.  Moses  c.  Osheason  of  N  un,  Jehoshua
Dent.  5. 1 .  Moses  c.  all  Israel  and  said  to  them,  29. 2.

15.  2.  not  exact  it,  because  it  is  c.  the  Lord’s  release
28.  10.  shall  see  thou  art  c.  by  name  of  the  Lord
Josh.  21.  t9.  gave  these  cities  here  c.  by  name
Judg.  12.  1 1.  the  men  of  Ephraim  were  c.  together

14.  15.  have  ye  c.  us  to  take  what  we  have  ?

15.  17-  he  cast  away  the  jaw-bone,  and  c.  the  place

18.  Samson  was  sore  athirst,  and  e.  on  the  Lord

+  19.  he  c.  it  the  well  of  him  that  c.  or  cried

16.  28.  Samson  c.  to  the  Lord  and  said,  O  Lord

1  Sam.  9.  9.  that  is  now  c.  a  prophet,  was  c.  a  seer

2  Sam.  6. 2.  whose  name  is  c.  by  the  name  of  the  Ld.

12.  28.  lest  I  take  city,  and  it  be  c.  after  my  name

18.  26.  the  watchman  c.  to  the  porter,  and 'said

1  21.  2.  the  king  c.  the  Gibeonites,  and  said  to  them
1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  c.  all  his  brethren,  19.  25.
18.  3.  Ahab  c.  Obadiah,  who  was  the  governor
f  26.  they  c.  on  the  name  of  Baal  from  morning
(2  Kings  A.  22.  she  c.  to  her  husband  and  said,  send  me
7-10.  they  came  and  c.  to  the  porter  of'  the  city
|l  Chron.  4.  10.  and  Jabez  c.  on  the  God  of  Israel

13.  6.  bring  the  ark  of  God,  whose  name  is  c.  on  it
21.  26.  David  c.  on  the  Lord,  he  answered  him

Esth.  2.14.  came  no  more,  exceptshe  were  c.  byname

4.  11.  who  is  not  c.  I  have  not  been  c.  to  come
Job  17.  + 14.  I  have  c.  to  corruption,  my  father
Ps.  53. 4.  eat  up  my  people,  they  have  not  c.  upon  G.
79.  6.  the  kingdoms  that  have  not  c.  on  thy  name
Isa.  31 . 4.  a  mult,  of  shepherds  is  c.  forth  against  him
43.  22.  but  thou  hast  not  c.  on  me,  O  Jacob
48.  1.  O  Jacob,  ye  that  are  c.  by  the  name  of  Israel
12.  hearken  unto  me,  O  Jacob,  and  Israel  my  c.

61.  3.  that  they  might  be  c.  trees  of  righteousness
Ter.  7.  32.  that  it  shall  no  more  be  c.  Tophet
Lam.  1.  21.  thou  wilt  bring  day  that  thou  hast  c.

'  2.  22.  thou  hast  c.  as  a  solemn  day,my  terrors
Ezek.  20.  29.  and  the  name  thereof  is  e.  Bamah
i Van.  5. 12.  now  let  Daniel  be  c.  and  he  will  shew
Mat.  1. 16.  of  whom  was  bom  Jesus,  who  is  c.  Christ

10.  2.  the  first  Simon,  who  is  c,.  Peter

13.  55.  they  said,  is  not  his  mother  c.  Mary?

18.  2.  and  Jesus  c.  a  little  child  unto  him

20.  16.  for  many  be  e.  but  few  chosen,  22.  14.

32.  and  Jesus  stood  still,  and  c.  them,  and  said

23.  8.  be  not  ye  c.  Rabbi,  one  is  your  Master,  10.

26.  14.  one  of  the  twelve  c.  Judas  Iscariot

27.  17-  or  shall  I  release  Jesus,  c.  Christ?  22.
Mark  10.  49.  Jesus  commanded  him  to  be  c.

14.  72.  Peter  c.  to  mind  the  word  that  Jesus  said
! Luke  1.  61.  none  of  thy  kindred  is  c.  by  this  name

62.  they  made  signs  how  he  would  have  him  c.

15.  19.  I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  c.  thy  son,  21.

19.  15.  he  commanded  the  servants  to  be  c.

23.  33.  when  come  to  the  place  that  is  c.  Calvary
Tohn  1.  48.  before  that  Philip  c.  thee  1  saw  thee

4.  25. 1  know  Messiah  cometh,  who  is  c.  Christ

9. 11.  aman  r.  Jesus  made  clay  and  anoint.  my  eyes
lets  9.11 .  go  into  the  street  c.  Straight,  for  one  c.  Saul
11. 26.  disciples  were  c.  Christians  first  at  Antioch
13.  ?.  who  e.  for  Pamabas  and  Saul,  desired  to  hear

9.  then  Saul,  c.  Paul,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost
15. 17.  all  the  Gentiles  on  whom  my  name  is  c.

19.  40.  to  be  c.  in  question  for  this  clay’s  uproar

23.  6.  I  am  c.  in  question  by  you  this  day,  24.  21.
18.  Paul  the  prisoner  c.  and  prayed  me  to  bring

Rom.  l.  1.  Paul  c.  to  be  an  apostle,  1  Cor.  1.  1.

6.  among  whom  are  ye  also  the  c.  of  J  esus
7-  to  them  that  are  c.  to  be  saints,  1  Cor.  1.  2.

2.  17.  thou  arte,  a  Jew,  and  restest  in  the  law
8.  28.  who  are  the  c.  according  to  his  purpose

i  Cor.  1.  9.  by  whom  ye  were  c.  to  the  fellowship
|  24.  to  them  which  are  c.  both  Jews  and  Greeks
26.  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  c.

5.  11.  if  any  man  c.  a  brother  be  a  fornicator

7-  18.  is  any  man  c.  being  circumcised  ?  is'any  c.

21.  art  thou  c.  being  a  servant  ?  care  not  for  it

24.  let  every  man  wherein  he  is  c.  therein  abide
>al.  1.  6.  so  soon  removed  from  him  that  c.  you
5.  13.  for,  brethren,  ye  have  been  c.  to  liberty
*ph.  2. 11.  who  are  c.  uncircumcision  by  that  c.

4.  1.  walk  worthy  of  vocation  wherewith  ye  are  c.
4.  even  as  ye  are  c.  in  one  hope  of  your  calling
■01.  3.  15.  to  the  which  ye  are  c.  in  one  body
4.  11.  Jesus,  which  isc.  Justus,  saluteth  you
loess.  2.  4.  who  exalteth  above  all  that  is  c.  God
!  Tim.  6.  12.  eternal  life,  whereto  thou  art  c.

20.  avoiding  oppositions  of  science,  falsely  so  c.
deb.  3.  13.  but  exhort  daily  while  it  is  c.  to-day

I  p.  2.  the  tabernacle  which  is  c.  the  sanctuary
f  15.  they  that  are  e.  might  receive  the  promise

11.  16.  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  c.  their  God

24.  Moses  refused  to  be  c.  son  of  Pharaoh’s  daugh.
am.  2.  7.  blaspheme  that  name  by  which  ye  are  c.
Pet.  2.  9.  of  him  who  hath  c.  you  out  of  darkness

21.  for  hereunto  were  ye  c.  because  Christ  suffered

3.  9.  knowing  that  ye  are  thereunto  c.  to  inherit
Pet.  1.  3.  that  hath  c.  us  to  glory  and  virtue

1  John  3. 1.  that  we  should  be  c.  the  sons  of  God
udel.  to  sanctified, preserved  in  Jesus  Christ,  andc.
lev.  8. 11.  the  name  of  the  star  is  c.  wormwot  J

11. 8.  city  which  spiritually  is  c.  Sodom  and  Egypt
[12. 9.  that  old  serpent  c.  the  Devil,  and  Satan
47 •  14.  they  that  are  with  him,  are  c.  and  chosen

19.  9.  blessed  that  arc  c.  to  the  marriage  supper
L  CALLED,  joined  with  God,  or  Lord.

>en.  1.  5.  God  c.  light  day,  darkness  he  c.  night
8.  and  God  c.  the  firmament,  heaven

10.  God  c.  dry  land  earth,  the  waters  c.  he  seas
'?•  2.  God  blessed  them,  and  c.  their  name  Adam

■ fed.  3. 4.  God  c.  to  him  out  of  the  midstof  the  bush
‘9.  3.  the  I.ord  e.  to  him  out  of  the  mountain

20.  the  Lord  c.  Moses  up  to  the  top  of  the  mount
+5.  30.  see,  the  Lord  hath  c.  my  name  Bezaleel
'urn.  12.  5.  and  the  Lord  c  Aaron  and  Miriam


CAL

1  Sam.  3.  4.  the  Lord  c.  Samuel,  6,  8,  10.

2  Kings 3.10.  alas,  Lord  hath  c.  these  three  kings,  13.

8. 1.  for  the  Lord  hath  c.  for  a  famine  on  tbe  land
Psal.  50. 1.  Lord  hath  c.  the  earth  from  rising  of  sun
Isa.  41.  2.  the  Lord  raised,  and  c.  him  to  his  foot
42.  6.  I  the  Lord  have  c.  thee  in  righteousness

49. 1.  the  Lord  hath  c.  me  from  the  womb

54. 6.  the  Lord  hath  c.  thee  as  a  woman  forsaken
Jer.  11. 16.  Lord  c.  thy  name  a  green  olive  tree
20.3.  the  Lord  hath  not  c.  thy  name  Pashur
Amos  7. 4.  the  I.ord  God  c.  to  contend  by  fire
Acts  16.  10.  gathering  that  the  I.ord  had  c.  us
1  Cor.  7. 15.  but  God  hath  c.  us  to  peace
17.  as  the  I.ord  hath  c.  everyone,  so  let  him  walk
Gal.  1.  15.  it  pleased  God,  who  e.  me  by  his  race

1  These.  2. 12.  who  c.  you  to  his  kingdom  and  glory
4.  J .  for  God  hath  not  c.  us  to  uncleanness

2  These.  2.  14.  whereunto  God  c.  you  by  our  gospel
2  Tim.  1.  9.  who  hath  c.  uswitli  a  holy  calling
Heb.  5.  4.  but  he  that  is  c.  of  God,  as  was  .Aaron

10.  c.  of  God  an  high-priest  after  order  of  Melchis.

1  Pet.  5.  10.  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  e.  us

„  He  CALLED.

Gen.  21. 31.  wherefore  he  c.  that  place  Beer-sheba
26.  18.  he  c.  their  names  as  his  father  called  them
35.  10.  thy  name  is  Jacob,  he  c.  his  name  Israel
Exod.  24.  16.  the  Lord  c.  to  Moses  out  of  the  cloud
Judg.  6. 32.  on  that  day  he  c.  him  Jerubbaal

2  Sam.  1.  7.  when  he  looked  he  saw  me  and  c.  to  me
13.  17.  then  he  c.  his  servant  that  ministered  to  him

1  Kings  1.  10.  but  Solom.  his  brother  he  c. not,  19, 26.
9. 13.  he  c.  them  land  of  Cabul  to  this  day

2  Kings  A.  36.  and  he  c.  to  Gehazi,  so  he  c.  her

18.  4.  he  brake  brazen  serpent,  he  c.  it  Nehushtan
Psal.  105. 16.  he  c.  for  a  famine  on  the  land

Jer.  42. 8.  then  c.  he  Johanan  and  all  the  captains
Lam.  1.  15.  he  hath  c.  an  assembly  against  me
Ezek.  9.  3.  he  c.  to  the  man  clothed  with  linen
Mat.  10. 1.  he  c.  the  twelve  ||  15.  10.  he  c.  multitude
Mark  1.  20.  straightway  he  c.  them  and  they  left
Luke  13.  12.  when  Jesus  saw  her,  he  c.  her  to  him
John  10.  35.  if  he  e.  them  gods,  to  whom  the  word
Acts  9.  41.  when  he  had  cT  the  saints  and  widows
10. 23.  then  c.  lie  them  in,  and  lodged  them
16.  29.  then  lie  c.  for  a  light,  and  sprang  in

19.  25.  whom  he  c.  together  with  the  workmen
23.  23.  he  c.  unto  him  two  centurions,  saying
Rom.  8.  30.  them  he  also  c.  whom  lie  c.  he  justified
9.  24.  even  us  whom  lie  hath  c.  not  of  Jews  only

1  Pet.  1.  15.  but  as  he  which  hath  c.  you  is  holy
See  Called  the  name.

I  CALLED,  or,  I  liace  CALLED.

Hum.  24. 10.  I  c.  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies
Judg.  12.  2.  when  I  c.  you,  ye  delivered  me  not

1  Sam.  3.  5.  Eli  said,  1  c.  not,  lie  down  again,  6.
28.15.7 have  c.thee,  thou  mayest  make  known  to  me

2  Sam.  22.  7 •  in  my  distress  7c.  Psal.  18.6.1  118.  5.
Neh.  5.  12.  7  c.  the  priests,  and  took  an  oath  of  them
Job  9. 16.  if  7  had  c.  and  he  had  answered  me

19.  16.  7c.  my  servant,  and  he  gave  me  no  answer
Psal.  17.  6.  I  have  c.  on  thee,  for  thou  wilt  hear
31. 17.  letme  not  be  ashamed, for  I  have  c.  upon  thee
88.  9.  Lord,  7  have  c.  daily  upon  thee
116.  4.  then  c.  I  upon  the  name  of  the  I.ord
Prov.  1.  24.  because  7  have  c.  and  ye  refused
Cant.  5.  6.  7  c.  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer
Isa.  13.  3.  7  have  c.  my  mighty  ones  for  mine  anger
41.  9.  7 have  c.  thee  from  the  chief  men  thereof
43.  1.  7  c.  thee  by  thy  name,  thou  art  mine,  45.  4.
48. 15.  yea,  7 have  c.  him,  I  have  brought  him

50.  2.  when  7  c.  was  there  none  to  answer  ?

51.  2.  for  7c.  him  alone,  and  blessed  him

65. 12.  when  7  c.  ye  did  not  answer,  Jer.  7. 13.

66.  4.  because  when  7  c.  none  did  answer
Jer.  35.  17.  because  I  have  c.  to  them,  but  they  not
Lam.  1. 19.  7 c.  for  my  lovers,  but  they  deceived  me
3.  55.  7  c.  on  thy  name  out  of  the  low  dungeon
57.  thou  drewest  near  in  the  day  7  c.  upon  thee
Hos.  11. 1.  then  7  c.  my  Son  out  of  Egypt,  Mat. 2. 15.

7 lag.  1. 11.  and  7c.  for  adrought  upon  the  land
Zecli.  11.  7.  one  7c.  Beauty,  the  other  7  c.  Bands
John  15.  15.  not  servants,  but  7  have  c.  you  friends
Acts  13.  2.  for  the  work  whereto  7  have  c.  them
28.  20.  for  this  cause  have  Ic.  for  you  to  see
CALLED  by  my  name.

2  Cliron.  7- 14.  my  people  who  are  c.  by  my  n .  humble
Isa.  43.  7*  bring,  even  every  one  that  is  c.  by  my  n.
65.  1.  behol  I,  to  a  nation  that  was  not  c.  by  my  n.
Jer.  7. 10.  house  c.by  myn.  11,14,30. 1  32.34. )  34. 15.
25.  29.  to  bring  evil  on  the  city  which  is  c.  by  myn.
Amos  9. 12.  remnant  of  heathen  which  are  c.  by  my  n.
CALLED  by  thy  name.

1  Kings  8.43.house  I  builded  is  c.by  thy  n. 2  Ch.6. 33.
7' a. 4.1.  let  us  be  c.by  thynAo  take  away  our  reproach
43.  1.  I  have  c.  thee  by  thy  n.  thou  art  mine,  45.  4.
63. 19.  we  are  thine,  they  were  not  c.  by  thy  n.

Jer.  14.  9. 0  Lord,  we  are  c.  by  thy  n.  leave  us  not
15.  16.  for  I  am  c.  by  thy  n.  O  Lord  God  of  hosts
Dan.  9.  18.  and  behold  the  city  which  is  c.  by  thy  n.
19.defer  not, for  thy  city  and  people  are  c.  by  thy  n.
CALLED  his  name,

Gen.  35. 10.  thy  name  is  Jacob,  he  c.  his  n.  Israel
18.  she  c.  his  n.  Benoni,  but  his  father  Benjamin

1  Chron.  4.  9.  his  mother  c.  his  n.  Jabez,  saying

7- 16.  she  c.  hisn.  Peresh  H  23.  andhec./ff.rw.Beriah
Mat.  1.  25.  her  first  born  son,  and  he  c.  hisn.  Jesus
Rev.  19. 13.  and  his  name  is  c.  the  Word  of  God
CALLED  the  name.

Gen.  28. 19.  c.  the  n.  of  the  place  Beth-el,  35.  15.
Exod.  16.  31.  and  Israel  c.  the  n.  thereof  Manna
17. 7.  he  c.  the  n.  of  the  place  Massah  and  Meribah
15.  Moses  c.  then,  of  the  altar  .lEHOvAH-nissi
Judg.  15.  19.  Samson  c.  the  n.  thereof  Fn-hakkore

2  Sam.  5.  20.  c.  the  n.  of  that  place  Baal merazim

1  Kings  7.  21.  c.  the  n.  thereof  Jachin,  2  Chr.  3.  17.
Job  42.  14.  and  he  c.  the  n.  of  the  first  Jemima
Sent  and  CALLED.

Gen.  27. 42.  she  sent  and  c.  Jacob  her  younger  son
31. 4.  Jacob  sent  and  c.  Rachel  and  Leah  to  the  field
41.  14.  then  Pharaoh  sent  and  c.  Joseph
Josh.  24.  9-  Balak  sent  and  c.  Balaam  to  curse  you
Judg.  4.  6.  she  sent  and  c.  Barak  out  of  Kadesh


Judg.  16.  18.  she  sent  and c.  the  lords  of  Philistines
2  Sam.  12. 25.  he  sent  and  c.  his  name  Jedidiab
1  Kings  2.  36.  the  king  sent  and  c.  for  Shimei,  42.

12.  3.  they  sent  and  c.  Jeroboam,  2  Chron.  10.  3.
Esth.  5. 10.  1  laman  sent  and  c.  for  his  friends
Acts  20. 17 .  he  sent  to  Ephesus,  and c.  the  elders
Shall  be  CALLED.

Gen.2.2l\.shall  be  c. woman,  because  taken  out  of  man
17-5.  thy  name  shall  be  c.  Abraham,  for  a  father

21. 12.  hearken  to  Sarah’s  voice,  for  in  Isaac  shall

thy  seed  be  c.  Rom.  9.7.  Heb.  11. 18
32. 28.  name  shall  he  c.  no  more  Jacob,  but  Israel
48.  6.  thy  issue  shall  be  c.  after  their  brethren
Deut.  25. 10.  his  name  shall  be  c.  in  Israel,  house  of
Prov.  16.  21.  the  wise  in  heart  shall  be  c.  prudent

24. 8.  deviseth  evil,  shall  bee.  a  mischievous  person
Isa.  A.  3.  that  remaineth  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  c.  holy
9. 6.  and  his  name  shall  be  c.  Wonderful,  Counsellor
19.  18.  one  shall  be  c.  the  city  of  destruction
32.  5.  the  vile  person  shall  no  more  be  c.  liberal
35.  8.  and  a  way,  and  it  shall  be  c.  way  of  holiness
54. 5.  the  God  ot  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  c.
56.7  .hous e  shall  be  c.  house  of  prayer,  Mat.  21. 13.
Jer.  7.  .32.  it  shall  no  more  be  c.  Tophet,  19.  6.

23.  6.  he  shall  bee  Lord  our  Righteousness,  33. 16.
Zech.  8.  3.  Jerusalem  shall  be  c.  a  city  of  truth
Mat.  1.  +  23.  and  his  name  shall  be  c.  Emmanuel

f.  23.  it  might  be  fulfilled,  shall  be  c.  a  N  azarene
5.  9.  peace  makers  shall  be  c.  the  children  of  God
19.  he  shall  be  e.  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven
L.uke  1. 32.  and  he  shall  bee.  the  Son  of  the  Highest
35.  also  that  holy  thing  shall  be  c.  the  Son  ot  God
60.  his  mother  said,  not  so;  but  he  shall  be  c.  John
2.  23.  every  male  shall  be  c.  holy  to  the  I.ord
RnumnT‘*.  it  she  be  married,  shall  be  c.  an  adulteress
9.  26.  they  shall  be  c.  the  children  of  God
Kha/t  be  CALLED.

Isa.  1. 26.  thou  shalt  be  c.  the  city  of  righteousness

47. 1.  thou  shalt  be  c.  no  more  tender  and  delicate
5.  thou  shalt  no  more  be  c.  lady  of  kingdoms

58. 12.  thou  shalt  be  c.  the  repairer  of  the  breach

62. 2.  shall  be  c.  by  a  new  name,  Lord  shall  name

4.  thou  shalt  be  c.  Hephzi-bah,  thy  land  Beulah
12.  thou  shalt  be  c.  sought  for,  a  city  not  forsaken

Luke  1.  76.  thou  shalt  be  c.  Prophetof  the  Highest
John  1. 42.  thou  shalt  bee.  Cephas,  which  is,  a  stone
They  CALLED.

Gen.  19.  5.  theyc.  Lot,  and  said,  where  are  the  men  ?
Rum.  25. 2.  they  c.  the  people  to  the  sacrifices
Judg.  16.  25.  they  c.  for  Samson  out  of  the  prison
Tsth.  9. 26.  they  c.  these  days  Purim,  after  Pur
Psal.  99. 6.  they  c.  upon  the  Lord,  and  he  answered
Jer.  12.  6.  they  have  c.  a  multitude  after  thee
30. 17.  because  they  c.  thee  an  outcast,  saying
Hos.  11.  2.  as  they  c.  to  them,  so  they  went  from  them
7-  though  they  c.  them  to  the  most  High
Mat.  10.  25.  if  they  have  c.  the  master  Beelzebub
Luke  1.  59.  they  c.  him  Zacharias,  after  his  father
John  9. 18.  they  c.  parents  of  him  that  received  sight

24.  then  again  they  c.  the  man  that  was  blind
Acts  A.  18.  theyc.  them, and  commanded  not  to  speak

5.  40.  when  they  had  c.  the  apostles,  and  beaten

14. 12.  they  c.  Barnabas,  Jupiter ;  Paul,  Mercurius

_  Was  CALLED.

Deut.  3.  13.  which  was  c.  the  land  of  giants
Judg.  6.  +  34.  and  Abiezer  was  c.  after  him
2  Chron.  20. 26.  place  was  c.  the  valley  of  Berachah
Ezra  2.  61.  and  was  c.  after  their  name,  Kelt.  7. 63.
Da.  48.  8.  wast  c.  a  transgressor  from  the  womb
Dan.  10. 1.  whose  name  was  c.  Belteshazzar
Mat.  26.  3.  the  high  priest,  who  was  c.  C’aiaphas

27. 8.  was  c.  the  field  of  blood,  unto  this  day
Luke  1.  36.  sixth  month  with  her  who  wasc.  barren
2.  21.  his  name  wasc.  Jesus,  sc  named  of  the  angel
John  2. 2.  Jesus  was  c.  and  his  d  sci pies  to  marriage
Acts  13. 1.  in  the  church  Simec  n,  that  was  c.  A  iger
24.  2.  and  when  he  was  c.  forth,  Tertullus  began
28. 1.  they  knew  that  the  island  was  c.  Melita
1  Cor.  7.  20.  abide  in  the  calling  wherein  he  teas  c
Heb.  11.  8.  Abraham  when  he  was  c.  obeyed
Jam.  2.  23.  and  he  was  c.  the  friend  of  God
Rev.  19. 11.  he  that  sat  on  him  was  c.  Faithful
CALLEDST,  CALLEST.

Judg.  8. 1.  that  thou  c.  us  not  when  thou  wentest
1  Sam.  3. 5.  and  he  said,  here  am  I,  for  thou  c.  me
Psal.  81.  7.  thou  c.  in  trouble,  and  I  delivered  thee
Ezek.  23. 21.  c.  to  remembrance  lewdness  of  youth
Mat.  19. 17.  why  c.  thou  me  good  ?  there  is  none  good
but  God,  Mark  10.  18.  Luke  18.  19.
CALLETH.

1  Kings  8. 43.  hear  thou  in  heaven,  do  according  to
all  that  the  stranger  c .  to  thee  for,  2  Chr.  6.  33
Job  12. 4.  who  c.  on  God,  and  he  answered  him
Psal.  42. 7.  deep  c.  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of  thy
147. 4.  he  c.  them  all  by  their  names,  Isa.  40.  26.
Prov.  18.  6.  a  fool’s  mouth  c.  for  strokes
Isa.  21. 11.  he  c.  to  me  out  of  Seir,  watchman
59.  4.  none  c.  for  justice,  nor  any  pleadeth
64.  7-  and  there  is  none  that  c.  on  thy  name
Hos.  7. 7.  there  is  none  among  them  that  c.  to  me
Amos  5.  8.  that  c.  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  9.  6.

Mat.  27.  47.  this  man  c.  for  Elias,  Mark  15.  35.
Mark  3. 13.  c.  to  him  whom  he  would,  they  came

6.  7.  c.  to  him  the  twelve,  and  began  to  send  them
8. 1.  Jesus  c.  his  disciples,  and  saith  to  them
10. 49.  be  of  good  comfort,  arise,  he  c.  thee
12.  37.  if  David  therefore  c.  him  Lord,  Luke  20.  44.
Luke  15.  6.  he  c.  together  his  friends,  saying
9.  she  c.  her  friends  and  her  neighbours

20.  37.  when  he  c.  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Abraham
John  10.  3.  and  he  c.  his  own  sheep  by  name
11. 28.  the  master  is  come  and  c.  for  thee
Rom.  4. 17.  c.  things  which  be  not,  astho’  they  were
9.11.  purpose  of  election  might  stand  of  him  that  c.

1  Cor.  12. 3.  no  man  by  the  Spirit  c.  Jesus  accursed
Gal.  5. 8.  persuasion  cpmeth  not  of  him  that  c.  you
1  Thess.  5. 24.  faithful  is  he  that  c.  you, who  wilfido  it
Rev.  2.  20.  Jezebel,  that  c.  herself  a  prophetess
CALLING

Signifies,  [1]  Any  lawful  employment ,  or  way  of
living ,  1  Cor.  7.  20.  [2]  That  effectual  calling,
whereby  sinners  savingly  believe,  and  obey  the

d  49


CAM


CAM


CAM


1


cosvel  Phil.  3.  14.  Heb.  3.  1.  \.K\  The  state  of
glory,’ and  blessedness  in  heaven,  to  which  believers

Num  Ao.  2.  use  trumpets  for  the  c.  of  the  assembly
Isa.  1*.  13.  the  c.  of  assemblies  I  cannot  away  with
F~'pi  23. 19.  in  c.  to  remembrance  heryoutn
Rom.  11.  29.  the  c.  of  God  without  repentance

1  Cor.  1.  26.  for  ye  see  your  c.  brethren  not  many
7. 20.  let  every  man  abide  in  same  c.  wherein  called

Eph.  1.18.  may  know  what  is  the  hope  ot  his  c.

4.  4.  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  ot  your  c.

Phil.  3. 14.  for  the  prize  of  the  high  c.  ot  God

2  Thess.  1.  11.  that  God  count  you  worthy  of  this  <?.

2  Jim.  1.  9.  who  hath  called  us  with  any  holy  c.

Heb  3  1.  partakers  of  the  heavenly  c.  consider

o  p'f '  i  io.  to  make  your  c.  and  election  sure
“  ‘  CALLING,  Participle.  .  .

Isa,  41.  4.  c .  the  generations  from  the  beginning
40. 11.  c.  a  ravenous  bird  from  the  east
lat  11.  16.  and  c.  to  their  fellows,  Luke  <  •  3~.
Mark  11.  21.  Peter,  c.  to  remembrance,  saith
Acts  7.  59.  they  stoned  Stephen  c.  upon  God
22.  16.  wash  away  thy  sins,  c.  on  name  of  tlmLord
1  Pet.  3.  6.  Sarah  obeyed  Abraham,  c.  him  Lord
CALM.

Psal  107.  29.  he  maketh  the  storm  a  c.

Jonah  1. 11.  that  the  sea  may  be  r.  unto  us

12.  cast  me  forth,  so  shall  the  sea  be  c.  to  you
Mat.  8. 26.  there  was  a  great  c,  Mark\. 39.  Luke  8-4.

CALVE,  ED,  ETH.

Job  21.  10.  their  cow  c.  and  casteth  not  her  calf
39.  1.  canst  thou  mark  when  the  hinds  do  c. .

Psal.  CO.  9.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  maketh  hinds  to  c.
Jer.  14. 5.'  the  hind  c.  in  the  field,  and  forsook  it
CALVES.

1  Sam.  6.  7.  and  bring  their  c.  home  from  them

1  Kings  12.  28.  the  king  made  two  c.  of  gold
32.  sacrificing  to  the  c.  that  he  had  made

2  Kings  1C.  29/Jehu  departed  not  from  the,  golden  c
2  Chron.  11.  15.  he  ordained  him  priests,  for  the  c

13.  8.  and  there  are  with  you  golden  c.

Psal.  68.  30.  rebuke  the  bulls  with  the  c.  of  people
Has  10.5.  shall  fear,  because  of  the  c.  of  Beth-aven

13.  2.  let  the  men  that  sacrifice  kiss  the  c.

14.  2.  so  will  we  render  the  c.  of  our  lips
Amos  6.  4.  and  eate.  outot  the  midst  of  the  stall
Mic.  6.  6.  shall  I  come  with  c.  of  a  year  old?

Mai.  4.  2.  ye  shall  grow  up  as  c.  of  the  stall
Heb.  9.12.  nor  by  blood  of  goats  and  c.  but  own  blood

-iq  took  blood  of  c.  and  sprinkled  book  and  people
CAME.

Gen.  10. 14.  outofwhom  c.  Philistim,  1  Chron.  1. 12.
19  1  two  angels  c.  to  Sodom  at  even,  Lot  sat  m  gate

20.  3.  God  c.  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by  night
07  35.  brother  c.  with  subtilty  and  taken  blessing
31.24. God  c.  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  dream  by  night

32  6  c.  to  thy  brother  Esau,  he  cometh  to  meet  thee
39.16.  she  laid  up  his  garment  until  his  lord  c.  home

Hum.  13.  27.  c.  to  the  land  whither  thou  sentest  us
*19  2.  a  red  heifer,  upon  which  never  c.  yoke
22.  9.  God  c.  to  Balaam  at  night,  and  said,  20.

24.  2.  Sp.  of  God  c.  onhim.jMrfg.  3. 10. 1  6’aw.lO.lO
Vent.  1. 19.  and  we  c.  to  Ivadesh-barnea

33  2.  the  Lord  c.  from  Sinai,  and  rose  up  from  Seir
Josh~  15.  18.  as  she  c.  to  him  she  moved,  Judg.  1. 14.


JUOU.  X*J,  Jl).  cco  oil'-/  1/  •  ****** - “ - - -  C  S'

Judg.  5.  19.  kings  c.  and  fought,  kings  of  Canaan


j  uug .  a.  13.  r.11150  1.  a— -

7  13.  the  cake  ot  bread  c.  to  a  tent  and  smote  it

9. 25.  they  robbed  all  that  c.  along  that  way  by  them
57.  upon  them  c.  curse  ot  .lotham  son  ot  Jerubb.

11.  18.  but  c.  not  within  the  border  of  Moab

13. 10.  the  man  that  c.  to  me  the  other  day

11.  Manoah  arose  and  c.  to  the  man,  and  said

19.  22.  bring  forth  the  man  that  c.  into  thy  house

20.  48.  Israel  smote  Benjamin,  all  that  c.  to  hand
Ruth  2.  6.  it  is  the  Moabitish  damsel  that  c.  back

1  Sam.  2.  13.  custom  was,  the  priest’s  servant,  c.  15

14.  so  they  did  to  all  Israelites  that  c.  thither
27.  there  c.  a  man  of  God  to  Eli,  and  said  to  him

4.  1.  and  the  word  of  Samuel  c.  to  all  Israel
7.  13.  they  c.  no  more  into  the  coast  of  Israel

9.  15.  Lord  told  Samuel  in  his  ear  before  Saul  c

10.  14.  when  we  saw  asses  no  where,  c.  to  Samuel
13.  8.  but  Samuel  c.  not  to  Gilgal,  people  scattered
17.  34.  there  c.  a  lion  and  a  bear,  and  took  a  lamb

2  Sam.QA.  men  of  J udah  c.  and  anointed  David  king

3. 25.  thou  knowest  Abner,  that  c.  to  deceive  thee
»3.  30.  while  in  the  way  the  tidings  c.  to  David

36.  behold,  king’s  sons  c.  and  wept,  the  king  wept

15.  2.  when  any  c.  to  king  for  judgment,  Absalom

16.  15.  Absalom  and  Ahithophel  c.  to  Jerusalem
20.  12.  saw  everv  one  that  c.  by  him  stood  still

1  Kings  1 . 42.  while  he  spake,  Jonat.  son  of  Abiath.  c.

4.  31.  c.  of  all  people  to  hear  wisdom  of  Solomon
10.  10.  there  c.  no  more  such  spices  as  these

12.  there  c.  no  such  alniug-trees  to  this  day
12. 12.  Jerob.  and  all  the  people  c.  2  Chron.  10. 12.

13. 10.  he  returned  not  by  the  way  he  c.  to  Bethel

19.  9.  he  c.  thither  to  a  cave  and  lodged  there

20.  43.  the  king  of  Israel  c.  heavy  to  Samaria

2  Kings  4. 11.  it  fell  on  a  day  that  he  c.  thither
27.  when  she  c.  to  the  man  of  God  to  the  hill

5.  15.  N  aaman  c.  and  stood  before  Elisha

6.  23.  the  bands  of  Syria  c.  no  more  into  Israel
32.  but  ere  messenger  c.tohim,  he  said  to  elders

8. 14.  Hazael  departed  from  Elisha,  c.  to  his  master

9.  11.  wherefore  c.  this  mad  fellow  to  thee  ?

10.  12.  Jehu  arose,  departed,  and  c.  to  Samaria

21.  all  worshippers  of  Baal  c.  house  of  Baal  full

17.  28.  one  of  the  priests  c.  and  dwelt  in  Beth-el
19  33.  by  the  way  that  he  c.  shall  he  return

24.  3.  at  the  command  of  the  Lord  c.  this  on  J  udah

1  Chron.  4.  41.  these  c.  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah
5.  2.  Judah  prevailed,  of  him  c.  the  chief  ruler

7.  22.  Ephraim’s  brethren  c.  to  comfort  him

12. 1.  now  these  are  they  that  c.  to  Dav.  day  by  day

22.  there  c.  to  David  to  help  him  a  great  host

2  Chron.  11. 14.  the  Levites  left  all  and  c.  to  J  udah
12.  11.  the  guard  c.  and  fetched  the  shields

14.  14.  for  the  fear  of  the  Lord  c.  upon  them

22. 1.  the  band  of  men  that  c.  with  the  Arabians
24.18.wrath  c.  on  Judah  and  Jerusalem  for  trespass

25.  20.  Amaziah  would  not  hear,  for  it  c.  of  God

50


2  Chr.  30. 11.  divers  humbled  thems.  and  c.  to  Jerus.

~31.  5.  and  as  soon  as  commandment  c.  abroad
Ezra  2.  2.  which  c.  with  Zerubbabel,  Mordecai_

5.  5.  not  cause  to  cease  till  the  matter  c.  to  Darius
Neh.  7.73.  when  seventh  month  c.  were  in  their  cities
Esth.  i.  17.  Vashti  to  be  brought  in,  but  she  c.  not
2.  13.  then  thus  c.  every  maiden  to  the  king
4  2  Mordecai  c.  even  before  the  king’s  gate
8.  17.  whither  the  king’s  decree  c.  Jews  had  joy
Job  3.  +25.  I  feared  a  fear,  and  it  c.  upon  me
26.  I  was  not  in  safety,  nor  had  rest,  yet  trouble  c.

29  13.  the  blessing  of  him  ready  to  perish  c.  on  him

30  26.  I  looked  for  good,  evil  c.  darkness  c.

Psal.  18.  6.  my  cry  c.  before  me,  even  to  his  ears

07  o  when  my  foes  c.  upon  me  they  stumbled
78  31.  wrath  of  God  c.  upon  them,  and  slew  them
105  19.  until  time  that  his  word  c.  word  tried  them
3l'  he  spake,  and  there  c.  divers  sorts  of  Hies
34  he  spake,  and  locusts  c.  and  caterpillars
Eccl.  5.  15.  to  go  as  he  c.  and  take  nothing,  16.

Isa.  20.  1.  in  the  year  that  Tartan  c.  to  Ashdod
30.'  4.  and  his  ambassadors  c.  to  Hanes
41.  5.  ends  of  earth  were  afraid,  drew  near  and  c.
Jer.  7.  31.  nor  c.  it  into  my  mind,  19.  5. 1  32.  35.

8.  15.  we  looked  for  peace,  but  no  good  c.

44.  21.  incense  you  burnt,  c.  it  not  into  his  mind  ?
Ezek.  4.  14.  nor  c.  there  abominable  flesh  into  mouth
17.  3.  c.  to  Lebanon,  and  took  the  highest  branch
33!  22.  afore  he  that  was  escaped  c.  opened  mouth
37’  7.  the  bones  c.  together,  bone  to  his  bone
10.  breath  c.  into  them,  they  lived  and  stood  up
43.  2.  the  glory  of  God  of  Israel  c.  from  the  east
Han.  2.  +  29.  thoughts  c.  up  into  thy  mind  on  thy  bed
4.  28.  all  this  c.  on  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar
7  13.  one  like  Son  of  Man  c.  with  clouds  of  heaven
22.  till  the  ancient  of  days  c.  and  judgment  given
Amos  6.  1.  to  whom  the  house  of  Israel  c.

Jonah  3.  6.  for  word  c.  to  the  king  of  Nineveh
Hab.  3.  3.  God  c.  from  l’eman,  and  the  Holy  One
Hag.  1.  9-  ye  looked  for  much,  and  lo  it  c.  to  little
2  16.  when  one  c.  to  the  press-fat  to  draw  out
Zech.  7. 12.  c.  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord  of  hosts
14.  16.  of  all  the  nations  that  c.  against  Jerusalem
Mat.  2.  1.  there  c.  wise  men  from  the  east  to  Jerus.

9  till  it  c.  and  stood  over  where  the  child  was
3.  1.  in  those  days  c.  John  the  Baptist  preaching
7. 25.  and  the  rains  descended,  and  the  floods  c.  27.

9.  1.  he  passed  over  and  c.  into  his  own  city
20.  a  woman  c.  behind,  touched  hem  of  his  garm.
28.  come  into  the  house,  the  blind  men  c.  to  Jesus

20.  28.  Son  of  man  c.  not  to  be  ministered  to

21. '  28.  c.  to  the  first  and  said,  son,  go  work  to-day
*30  he  c.  to  the  second,  and  said  likewise

32.  lolin  c.  to  you  in  the  way  of  righteousness
25.  10.  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  c.

36.  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  c.  to  me
°6.  49.  forthwith  he  c.  to  Jesus  and  kissed  him
60.  though  false  witnesses  c.  yet  found  they  none
28. 13.  his  disciples  c.  by  night,  and  stole  him  away
Mark  3.  8.  heard  what  great  things  he  did,  c.  to  him

9.  21.  how  long  is  it  ago  since  this  c.  to  him  ?

12.  28.  one  of  the  scribes  c.  and  asked  him

40  c.  a  certain  poor  widow  threw  two  mites
Luke  1.  57.  now  Elisabeth’s  full  time  c.  to  be.  deliv.

9  34  there  c.  a  cloud  and  overshadowed  them
35.  and  there  c.  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  saying,
15.  17.  when  he  c.  to  himself,  he  said,  how  many

20.  and  he  arose  and  c.  to  his  father
John  1.  7.  the  same  c.  to  bear  witness  of  the  light

11.  he  c.  to  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not
17.  but  grace  and  truth  c.  by  Jesus  Christ

3.  2.  the  same  c.  to  Jesus  by  night,  7.  50. 1 19.  39.
23.  and  they  c.  and  were  baptized
4  27.  upon  this  c.  his  disciples,  and  marvelled  that

10.  35.  if  he  called  gods  to  whom  word  ot  God  c.

12.  30.  the  voice  c.  not  because  of  me,  but  for  you
20.  19.  at  even  c.  Jesus,  and  stood  in  the  midst
Acts  8.  40.  preached  in  al1  cities,  till  he  c.  to  Cesarea

9.  21.  c.  hither  for  that  intent,  to  bring  them  bound

10.  45.  as  many  as  c.  with  Peter  were  astonished
11.5.  the  vessel  descended,  and  it  c.  even  to  me

23.  when  he  c.  and  had  seen  the  grace  of  God
19.  18.  and  many  that  believed  c.  and  confessed
28.  21.  nor  brethren  that  c.  spake  any  harm  ot  thee
Rom.  5.  18.  judgment  c.  the  free  gift  c.  on  all  men
7.  9.  when  the  commandment  c.  sin  revived
9.  5-  of  whom,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  c.

1  Cor.  15.  21.  since  by  man  c.  death,  by  man  c.  also
Gal.  2.  12.  for  before  that  certain  c.  from  James
3.  23.  before  faith  c.  we  were  kept  under  the  law
Eph.  2. 17.  and  c.  and  preached  peace  toyou  afar  oflf
1  Thess.  1.  5.  our  gospel  c.  not  in  word  only  but  in

1  Tim.  1.  15.  that  Christ  c.  to  save  sinners  [power

2  Tim.  3. 11.  persecutions  which  c.  tome  at  Antioch

2  Pet.  1. 17.  when  there  c.  such  a  voice  to  him

18.  this  voice  which  c.  from  heaven  we  heard
21.  prophecy  c.  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man

1  John  5.  6.  this  is  he  that  c.  by  water  and  blood

3  John  3.  when  brethren  c.  and  testified  of  the  truth
Rev.  16.  19.  and  great  Babylon  c.  in  remembrance

See  Spirit  of  the  Lord.

CAME  again.

Judg.  13.  9.  angel  c.  again  to  the  woman  as  she  sat
15.  19.  his  spirit  c.  again  to  him,  1  Sam.  30.  12.

21.  14.  and  Benjamin  c.  again  at  that  time

1  Kings  17.  22.  the  soul  of  the  child c.  into  him  again

19.  7 .  the  angel  of  the  Lord  c.  again  the  second  time

2  Kings  5. 14.  his  flesh  c.  again  like  the  flesh  of  a  child
7.8.  lepers  c.  again,  and  entered  into  another  tent

Ezra  2. 1.  these  c.  again  to  Judah  and  Jerus.  Neh. 7. 6.
Esth.  6. 12.  Mordecai  c.  again  to  the  king’s  gate
Han.  10. 18.  c.  again  and  touched  me  one  like  a  man
Zech.  4.  1.  the  angel  c.  again  and  waked  me
Luke  8.  55.  her  spirit  c.ag.  and  she  arose  straightway
John  8.  2.  and  early  he  c.  again  into  the  temple
CAME  down.

Gen.  11.  5.  Lord  c.  down  to  see  the  city  and  tower
15.  11.  when  the  fowls  c.  down  on  the  carcases
43. 20.  O  Sir,  we  c.  down  at  first  to  buy  food
Exod.  19.  20.  the  Lord  c.  down  upon  mount  Sinai
34.  29.  when  Moses  c.  down  from  mount  Sinai
Lev.  9.  22.  and  Aaron  c.  down  from  offering


Num.  11. 25.  the  Lord  c.  down  in  a  cloud,  12.  b.

14.  45.  then  Amalekites  c.  down  and  smote  them
Judg.  5.  14.  out  of  Macbir  c.  down  the  governors
q  Sam  22.10.  bowed  heavens  and  c.  down,  Psal.  18. 9
2  Kings  1. 10.  there  c.  down  fire  from  heaven,  12,  14.

1  Chron.  7 .  21.  men  of  Gath  c.  d.  to  take  their  cattle

2  Chron.  7.  1.  made  an  end  of  praying,  fire  c.  d.  3.
Lam.  1.  9.  therefore  she  c.  down  wonderfully
Han.  4.  i3.  an  holy  one  c.  down  from  heaven
Mic.  1. 12.  evil  c.  down  from  the  Lord  to  the  gate
Mat.  17.  9*.  as  they  c.  d.  from  mountain,  Mark  9.  9.
Luke  10.  31.  there  c.  down  a  certain  priest  that  way

19  6  lie  made  haste  and  c.  down  and  received  him
John  3. 13.  he  that  c.  down  from  heaven,  Son  of  Man
6  38  I  c.d.  from  heaven,  not  to  do  mine  own  wil .

41  the  bread  which  c.  down  from  heaven,  51,  58.
Acts  15.  1 .  men  which  c.  down  from  Judea  taught
°1  10  there  c.  down  from  Judea  a  certain  prophet
Rev.  20.  9.  lire  c.  d.  from  God  and  devoured  them
CAME  forth.

Exod.  13.8.  Lord  did  to  me  when  I  c.f.  out  of  Egy  pt
Num.  11.  20.  wept,  saying,  why  c.  f.  out  of  Egypt  l
12.  5.  Aaron  and  Miriam,  they  both  c.  forth
Heut.  23.  4.  met  you  not  with  water  when  ye  c.  /.
Josh.  9. 12.  our  bread  hot  on  day  we  c.  forth  to  you
Judg.  14.  14.  he  said  to  them,  out  of  the  eater  c.f.

meat,  and  out  of  the  strong  c.  j.  sweetness
2  Sam.  16.  5.  Shimei  c.f.  and  cursed  as  he  came

11.  son  which  c.  f.  of  my  bowels  seeketh  my  life

1  Kings  22.  21.  c.f.  a  spirit,  and  stood  before  Lord

2  Kings  2.  23.  c.f.  little  children  and  mocked  him
24.  c.  forth  two  she-bears  and  tare  42  children

21.  15.  their  fathers  c.f.  out  of  Egypt,  Jer  7.  25.

2  Chron.  32. 21.  that  c.  forth  of  his  bowels  slew  him
Prov.  7.  15.  therefore  c.  I  forth  to  meet  thee
Eccl.  5.  15.  as  he  c.  forth  naked,  shall  he  return
Jer.  20. 18.  wherefore c.  1  forth  out  of  the  womb  ?
Han.  3.  26.  they  c.  forth  of  the  midst  of  the  fire
5.  5.  c.  forth  fingers  and  wrote  on  plaster  of  wall

7.  10.  a  fiery  stream  c.  forth  from  before  him

8.  9.  out  of  one  of  them  c.  forth  a  little  horn

9.  23.  the  command  c.f.  and  I  am  come  to  shew
Zech.  10.  4.  out  of  him  c.  forth  the  corner,  the  nail
Mark  1.  38.  that  1  may  preach,  for  therefore  c.  If.
John  11.  44.  and  lie  that  was  dead  c.  forth  bound

16.  28.  I  c.  forth  from  the  Father  into  the -world

19.  5.  Jesus  c.  forth  wearing  the  crown  of  thorns

I  CAME.

Gen.  24.  42.  and  Ic.  this  day  to  the  well,  and  said
30.  30.  for  it  was  little  thou  hadst  before  Ic.

48.  5.  which  wrere  born  before  1  c.  into  Egypt
7.  when  Ic.  from  Padan,  Bachel  died  by  me
Exod.  5.  23.  since  Jc. to  speak  to  Pharaoh  in  thy  name
Heut.  22.  14.  when  J c.  to  her  found  her  not  a  maid
Judg.  20.  4.  Levite  said,  I  c.  into  Gibeahot  Benj.

1  Kings  10. 7. 1  believed  not  till  Ic.  2  Chron.  9.  6.
Neh.  6. 10.  afterwards  I c.  to  the  house  of  Shemaiah

13.  6.  I  c.  to  the  king  and  obtained  leave
7.  I  c.  to  Jerusalem  and  understood  of  the  evil
Isa  50.  2.  wherefore,  when  1  c.  was  there  no  man
Ezek.  3. 15.  then  J  c.  to  them  of  the  captivity
43.  3.  when  I  c.  to  destroy  the  city
Mat.  10.  34.  J c.  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword
Mark  2.17. 1  c.  not  to  call  the  righteous,  Luke  5.  32.
John  8.  14. 1  know  whence  J  c.  and  whither  1  go
42.  Ic.  from  God,  nor  c.  I  of  myself,  he  sent  me

12.  27.  but  for  this  cause  I  c.  to  this  hour
47.  for  J  c.  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save

18.  37.  for  this  cause  c.  1  into  the  world,  that  I  bear
Acts  10.29.  therefore  c.  I  as  soon  as  I  was  sent  for

20.  18.  ye  know  from  the  first  day  J  c.  into  Asia

22. 11.  being  led  by  the  hand,  1  c.  into  Damascus
23!  27.  then  c.  I  with  an  army7  and  rescued  him
24  17.  Ic.  to  bring  alms  to  m  v  nation,  and  offerings

1  Cor,  2. 1 .  when  Ic.  to  you  lc.  not  with  excellency

2  Cor.  1. 23.  that  to  spare  youlc.  notasy-etto  Corinth
2. 3.  lest  when  Ic.  I  should  have  sorrow  from  them

12.  when  J  c.  to  Troas  to  preach  Christ’s  gospel
Gal.  1.  21.  afterwards  I  c.  into  the  regions  ot  Syria
CAME  in.

Gen,  6.  4.  the  sons  of  God  c.  m  to  daughters  of  men

19.  5.  where  are  the  men  that  c.  in  to  thee  this  night  •*
38. 18.  Judah  c.  in  unto  her,  and  she  conceived
39.  14.  he  c.  in  to  lie  with  me,  and  1  cried  loud

:  Exod.  21.  3.  if  he  c.  in  by  himself,  he  shall  go  out
Josh,  6. 1.  none  went  out,  and  none  c.  into  Jericho

1  Saw.  18. 13.  went  out  and  c.  in  before  the  people, 16.

2  Sam,  11.  4.  she  c.  in  to  him,  and  he  lay  with  her

1  Kings  14.  6.  as  she  c.  in  at  the  door,  Alnjah  said

2  Chron.  15. 5.  no  peace  to  him  that  c.  in,  Zech.  8. 10.
Esth.  2.  14.  she  c.  in  to  the  king  no  more  except
Jer.  32.  23.  and  they  c.  in  and  possessed  it

37.4.  now  Jeremiah  c.  in  and  went  out  among  people
Ezek.  46.  9.  not  return  by  way  of  the  gate  he  c.  in
Han. 4.7.  then  c.  in  the  magicians,  the  Chaldeans, 5 .8.

8.  but  at  the  last  Daniel  c.  in  before  me
Jonah  2,  7.  my  prayer  c.  in  to  thy  holy  temple
Mat.  22. 11.  when  the  king  c.  in  to  see  the  guests
Luke  1.  28.  the  angel  c.  in  to  Mary,  and  said,  hail
7.  45.  but  this  woman  since  1  c.  m  kissed  nvy  feet
Acts  5.  7.  his  wife  not  knowing  what  was  done  c.  m
\  10.  the  young  men  c.  in  and  found  her  dead

Gal.  2.  4.  who  c.  in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty
CAME  near.

Gen.  19. 9.  theyr  pressed,  and  c.nearto  break  the  door
Exod.  14.  20.  the  one  c.  not  near  the  other  all  night
40.  32.  when  they  c.  n.  to  the  altar,  they  washed
Num,  31. 48.  officers  and  captains  c.  near  to  Moses
36.  1.  the  chief  of  Joseph  c.  near  before  Moses
Heut,  1. 22.  ye  c.  near  to  me  every  one  of  you,  5. 23.
Josh.  10.  24.  c.  near  and  put  your  feet  on  the  necks
17.  4.  they  c.  near  before  Eleazar  the  priest,  21. 1.

1  Kings  18.  36.  at  the  time  of  the  offering  of  the
evening  sacrifice,  Elijah  c.  near  and  said

2  Kings  4.  27.  Geliazi  c.  near  to  thrust  her  away
2  Chron  18.  23.  Zedekiah  c.  n.  and  smote  Micaiah
Jer.  42. 1.  from  the  least  even  to  the  greatest  c.  neat
Han.  3.  8.  Chaldeans  c.  near  and  accused  the  Jews

26.  N  ebuchadnezzar  c.  near  to  the  furnace
Acts  9.  3.  he  c.  near  to  Damascus,  there  shined  light
CAME  nigh.

Exod.  32. 19.  as  soon  as  lie  c.  nigh  he  saw  the  calf


CAM


CAM


CAN


Exod.  34.  32.  afterward  all  children  of  Israel  c.  nigh
C  Sam.  15.  d.  when  any  c.  nigh  to  do  him  obeisance
Mat.  15.  29.  Jesus  c.  nigh  to  the  sea  of  Galilee
Mark  11.  1.  when  they  c.  nigh  to  Jerusalem
Luke  7.  12.  when  he  c.  nigh  to  the  gate  of  the  city
CAM  E  over.

Jonh.  4. 22.  Israel  c.  over  this  Jordan  on  dry  land
Judg.  19.  10.  the  Levite  c.  over  against  Jebus
Mark  5. 1.  they  c.  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea
CAM E  out.

Gen.  24.  15.  behold  Rebekah  c.  nut  with  her  pitcher
25.  25.  first  c.  out  red,  all  over  like  a  hairy  garment
38.  28.  the  midwife  said,  this  c.out  first
46.  26.  all  the  souls  which  c.  out  of  his  loins
Exod.  13.  3.  remember  the  day  in  which  ye  c.  out,  4.
Lev.  9. 24.  a  fife  c.  out  from  the  Lord,  Num.  16.  35.
Num.  12.  4.  the  L.  spake  suddenly,  they  three  c.  out
16. 27.  Dathan  and  A  biram  c.  out  and  stood
20. 11.  he  smote  rock,  and  water  c.  out  abundantly
Lent.  11.  10.  not  as  land  of  Egypt  whence  ye  c.  out
Josh.  5.  4.  all  that  c.  out  were  circumcised,  5.

6.  till  all  that  c.  out  of  Egypt  were  consumed
Judg  A.  22.  Jael  c.  out  to  meet  him,  and  said,  come

1  Sam.  4.  16.  the  man  said  to  Eli,  I  am  he  that  c.  out

of  the  army,  I  fled  to-day  out  of  the  army

21. 5.  about  these  three  days  since  I  c.  out

2  Sam.  2.  23.  the  spear  c.  out  behind  him,  and  he  fell
6.  20.  Michael  c.  out  to  meet  David,  and  said

11.  23.  the  men  prevailed  against  us,  and  c.  out

18.  4.  and  all  the  people  c.  out  by  hundreds  and  by

1  Kings  8.  9.  when  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with
Israel,  when  they  c.  out  of  Egypt,  2  Chron.  5.  10.

20. 19.  these  young  men  princes  of  provinces  c.  out

2  Chron.  20. 10.  not  Israel  invade,  when  they  c.  out
Job  1. 21.  naked  c.  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb

3.  11.  why  died  I  not  from  the  womb  ?  why  did  1
not  give  up  the  ghost  when  I  c.  out  of  the'  belly?
Jer.  17. 16.  that  which  c.  out  of  my  lips  was  right
Ezek.  1. 4.  a  whirlwind  c.  out  of  the  north,  a  cloud
Hah.  3.14.  they  c.  out  as  a  whirlwind  to  scatter  me
Zech.  5. 9.  e.  out  two  women,  and  wind  in  their  wings
Mat.  8.  34.  the  whole  city  c.  out  to  meet  Jesus
12. 44.  return  to  house  whence  1  c.  out,  Luke  11.  24.
27.  32.  as  they  c.  out  they  found  Simon  of  Cyrene
53.  and  c.  out  of  the  graves  after  his  resurrection
Mark  1.  26.  unclean  spirit  had  cried,  he  c.  out,  9. 26.
6.  34.  when  he  c.  out,  he  saw  much  people

9.  7-  a  voice  c.  out  of  the  cloud,  saying,  this  is  my
Luke  1.22.  when  he  c.  out  he  could  not  speak  to  them

4.35.  and  he  c.  out  of  him,  and  hurt  him  not

15.  28.  therefore  c.  out  his  father,  and  entreated
John  16.  27.  because  ye  believed  I  c.  out  from  God

17. 8.  they  have  known  that  I  c.  out  from  thee

19.  34.  his  side,  forthwith  c.  out  blood  and  water
Acts  8.7-  for  unclean  spirits  c.out  of  many  possessed

16.  18.  and  the  spirit  c.  out  the  same  hour

1  Cor.  14.  36.  c.  word  of  God  out  from  you,  or  to  you
Lleb.  3. 16.  not  all  that  c.  out  of  Egypt  by  Moses
Rev.  7 .14.  these  c.  out  of  great  tribulation  and  washed

14.  15.  another  angel  c.  out  of  the  temple,  17.

18.  another  angel  c.  out  from  the  altar

15.  6.  the  seven  angels  c.  out  of  the  temple

19.  5.  a  voice  c.  out  of  the  throne,  praise  our  God

B  CAME  to  pass.

Exod.  12.  41 .  and  it  c.  to  pass  at  the  end  of  430
years,  even  the  self-same  day  it  c.  to  pass,  51.
Deut.  2.  16.  so  it  c.  to  pass,  1  Sam.  13.  22.  2  Kings
15.  12.  Esth.  2.  8.  Acts  27.  44.
Josh.  17. 13.  it  c.  to  pass  when  Israel  grew  strong

21.  45.  there  failed  not  any  thing  ;  all  c.  to  pass
Judg.  13.  20.  for  it  c.  to  pass,  1  Kings  11.  4, 15.

15.  1.  it  c.  to  pass, 2  Kings  3.  5.  Neh.  2. 1.  1  4. 1,  7.

0  .  6.  1  |7. 1.  Jer.  35. 11.

1  Sam.  1.  20.  it  c.  to  pass  when  the  time  was  come

10.  9.  and  all  those  signs  c.  to  pass  that  clay

16.  23.  it  c.  to  pass  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God

2  Sam.  2.  1.  it  c.  to  pass  after  tins,  8.  1.  1 10.  1.

.  2  Kings  6.  24.  2  Cliron.  20. 1.
2  Kings  8.  15.  and  it  c.  to  pass  on  the  morrow,
.1  Chron.  10.  8.  Jer.  20.  3.  Acts  4.  5.
Isa.  48.3.  I  did  them  suddenly,  and  they  c.  to  pass
5.  before  it  c.  to  pass  1  shewed  it  thee
1  Thess.  3. 4.  even  as  it  c.  to  pass  and  ye  know
Then  CAME.

Exod.  17. 8.  then  c.  Amalek  and  fought  with  Israel
Num.  27.  1.  thenc.  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad

1  Sam.  21. 1.  then  c.  David  to  Ahimelech  the  priest

2  Sam.  5. 1.  thenc.  all  the  tribes  to  David  to  Hebron

24. 6.  then  they  c.  to  Gilead,  and  numbered  people
2  A  in.  18. 37.  then  c.  Eliakim  and  Shebna, Isa.  36. 22.
2  Chron.  1. 13.  then  c.  Solomon  from  his  journey

12.  then  c.  Shemaiah  the  prophet  to  Rehoboam
Ezra  5. 16.  tnen  c.  Sheshbazzar,  and  laid  foundation
Nc-h.  1. 2.  then  Hanani  one  of  my  brethren  c.

2.  9.  then  I  c.  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river
Job  30. 26.  when  I  looked  for  good,  then  evil  c.

Jer.  19. 14.  then  c.  Jeremiah  from  Tophet,  whither
38.  27.  then  c.  all  the  princes  to  Jeremiah
Ezek.  14.  1.  then  c.  certain  of  the  elders  of  Israel
23.  39.  then  they  c.  the  same  day  into  my  sanctuary
.  Mat.  9. 14.  thenc.  to  him  the  disciples  of  John

15. 1.  then  c.  to  Jesus  scribes  and  Pharisees,  saying
12.  thenc.  his  disciples,  and  said  to  him,  17.  19.

25.  then  c.  she,  and  worshipped  him,  Mark  7.  25.
18.  21.  then  c.  Peter  to  him,  and  said,  Lord,  how  oft

20.  20.  then  c.  the  mother  of  Zebedee’s  children

26.  50.  then  c.  they,  and  laid  hands  on  Jesus
Luke  3. 12.  then  c.  also  publicans  to  be  baptized

22.  7-  thenc.  the  day  of  unleavened  bread
John  7.  45.  then  c.  the  officers  to  the  chief  priests

12.  28.  then  there  c.  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying
20. 26.  then  c.  Jesus,  the  doors  being  shut,  and  stood

They  CAME,  or  CAME  they.

Gen.  11.  31.  they  c.  to  Haran  and  dwelt  there
12. 5.  and  into  the  land  of  Canaan  they  c.

22.  9.  they  c.  to  the  place  which  God  told  them  of
Exod.  16.  35.  till  they  c.  to  a  land  inhabited

19. 1.  same  day  c.  they  into  the  wilderness  of  Sinai
2  Sam  A.  7.  when  they  c.  he  lay  on  bed,  they  slew  him
1  A  ings  1 .32.  Zadok  and  N  athan ,  they  c.  before  king

2. 7-  so  they  c.  to  jj:e,  when  I  fled  from  Absalom

13.  25.  they  c.  and  lold  it  in  city,  where  old  prophet


2  Kings  2.  4.  I  will  not  leave,  so  they  c.  to  Jericho
6.  4.  when  they  c.  to  Jordan,  they  cut  down  wood

20. 14.  these  men  whence  c.  they  to  thee,  Isa.  39-  3.
2  Chron.  20.  4.  out  of  all  Juda  they  c.  to  seek  Lord
29- 17-  on  eighth  day  c.  they  to  the  porch  of  Lord
Ezra  2.  68.  some  when  they  c.  offered  freely
Neh.  13.  21.  from  that  time  forth  c.  they  no  more
Job  6.  20.  they  c.  thither  and  were  ashamed

30.  14.  they  c.  upon  me  iis  a  wide  breaking  in
Psal.  88.  17-  they  c.  round  about  me  like  wrater
Jer.  14.  3.  they  c.  to  the  pits  and  found  no  water
43.  7.  thus  c.  they  even  to  Tahpanhes
Ezek.  23.  40.  a  messenger  was  sent,  lo  they  c.

Dan.  2.  2.  they  c.  and  stood  before  the  king
6.  24.  or  ever  they  c.  at  the  bottom  of  the  den
Mat.  1.  18.  before  they  c.  together  she  was  found

14.  34.  they  c.  into  the  land  of  Gennesaret

18.  31.  they  c.  and  told  their  Lord  all,  L.uke  14. 21.

26.  73.  after  a  while  c.  they  that  stood  by
Mark  1.  45.  they  c.  to  him  from  every  quarter

3. 13.  he  called  whom  he  would,  and  they  c.  to  him

1. uke  2.  16.  they  c.  with  haste  and  found  Mary
24.  23.  they  c.  saying,  that  they  had  seen  a  vision

John  12-  9.  and  they  c.  not  for  Jesus’  sake  only
Acts  8.36.  theyc.  unto  a  certain  water,  eunuch  said

12.  10.  they  c.  to  the  iron  gate  which  opened

20.  they  c.  with  one  accord  and  desired  peace
17- 13.  they  c.  thither  also  and  stirred  up  the  people
23.  14.  they  c.  to  the  chief  priests  and  elders
33.  who  when  they  c.  to  Cesarea,  presented  Paul
Rev.  7.  13.  what  are  these,  and  whence  c.  they?

Word  of  the  Lord  CAME.

Gen.  15. 1.  word  <f  Lord c.  to  Abraham  in  a  vision,  4.

1  Sam.  15.  10.  word  of  I  And  c.  to  Samuel,  saying

2  Sam.  24.  11.  c.  the  word  of  Lord  to  Gad,  David’s

1  Kings  6.  11.  word  of  Lord  c.  to  Solomon,  saying

16. 1.  word  of  L.  c.  to  Jehu  against  Eaasha,sayingj7.
17.  2.  the  word  of  Lord  c.  unto  Elijah,  8. 1  18.  1.

I  19.  9.  I  21.  17,  28.
18;31.  whom  word  of  I,,  c.  saying,  Israel  thy  name

2  Kings  20. 4.  the  word  of  L.  c.  to  Isaiah,  Isa.  38.  4.

1  Chr.  17. 3.  word  of  L.  c.  to  IS'  athan  ||  22.  8.  to  David

2  C/z. 11. 2. Jtf.o/L.citoShemaiah, 12. 7.  I  1  Kings  12.22.
Jer.  1.  2.  word  of  the  Lord  c.  to  Jeremiah,  4.1  2.  1.

1 14. 1.  1  29.  30. 1  33.  1. 19,  Dan.  9.  2.
Ezek.  1.  3.  word  of  L.  c.  expressly  to  Ezekiel,  3. 16.
Hos.  1.1.  word  of  L.  c.  to  Llosea  ||  Joe/1.  1.  c.  to  Joel
Jonah  1. 1.  w.  of  L.  c.  to  Jonah,  3. 1.

Mic.  1. 1.  w.  of  L.  c.to  Micah
Zepli.  1.1.  w.of  L,.c.  to  Zeph.  ||  Hag.  l.l.c.by  ITaggai
Zech.  1. 1.  to  Zechariah  ]|  7.  4.  c.  of  hosts  to  me,  8. 1.
CAMEL.

Gen.  24. 64.  Rebekah  saw  Isaac,  lighted  off  the  c.
Lev.  11. 14.  these  ye  shall  not  eat,  the  c.  Deut.  14.7.
1  Sam.  15.  3.  but  slay  infant,  ox,  and  c.  and  ass
Zech.  14.15.  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  c.  and  ass
Mat,  19.  24.  it  is  easier  for  a  c.  to  go  thro’  the  eye
of  a  needle,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25.

23.  24.  which  strain  at  a  gnat  and  swallow  a  c.

CAMELEON.

Lev.  11.  30.  these  shall  be  unclean,  the  c.  the  lizard
CAMELS.

Gen.  12. 16.  Abram  had  sheep,  oxen, she-asses,  and  c.
24. 19.  I  will  draw  water  for  thy  c.  also,  44.

30.  43.  Jacob  had  much  cattle,  asses,  and  c.

31.  34.  Rachel  put  them  in  the  c.  furniture
37.  25.  Ishmaelites  came  with  their  c.  bearing

Exod.  9.  3.  hand  of  the  Lord  on  the  c.  and  the  oxen
Judg.  6.  5.  they  and  their  c.  without  number,  7.  12.
8.21.  took  away  ornaments  on  their  c.  necks,  26.
1  Sam.  27.9.  David  took  awayc.  and  the  apparel
30. 17.  save  400  young  men  who  rode  on  c.  and  fled

1  Kings  10.  2.  came  to  Jerusalem  with  c.  2  Chr.  9.  1.

2  Kings  8.  9.  ITazael  took  a  present  forty  c.  burden
1  Chron.  5.  21.  the  Reubenites  took  away  ofc.  50,000

12.40.  thej’  ofZebulun  brought  bread  on  c.

27.  30.  over  the  c.  also  was  Obil  the  Ishmaelite
Ezra  2.  67-  their  c.  were  435.  Neh.  7.  69.

Esth.  8. 10.  he  sent  letters  by  post  on  mules,  c.  14.
Job  1.  3.  his  substance  also  was  three  thousand  c.

17.  the  Chaldeans  fell  on  the  c.  and  carried  them
Isa.  21. 7-  he  saw  a  chariot  of  asses  and  of  c.

30. 6.  will  carry  their  treasures  on  the  bunches  of  c.
60.  6.  the  multitude  of  c.  shall  cover  thee
Jer.  49.  29.  they  shall  take  to  themselves  their  c.

32.  their  c.  shall  be  a  booty,  and  their  cattle
Ezek.  25.  5.  1  will  make  Rabbah  a  stable  for  c.
Mat.  3.  4.  John  had  raiment  of  c.  hair,  Markl.  6.
CAM  ESI’.

Gen.  16.  8.  Hagar,  Sarai’s  maid,  whence  c.  thou  ?

24.  5.  bring  again  to  the  land  from  whence  thou  c.
27.  33.  and  I  have  eaten  of  all  before  thou  c.

Exod.  23. 15.  for  in  it  thou  c.  out  from  Egypt,  34. 18.
Num.  22.  37.  wherefore  c.  thou  not  unto  me?
Deut.  2.  37.  to  the  land  of  Ammon  thou  c.  not

16.  3.  remember  the  day  thou  c.  thou  c.  in  haste

1  Sam.  13. 11.  thou  c.  not  within  the  days  appointed

17.  28.  Eliab  said,  why  c.  thou  down  hither  ?

2  Sam.  11. 10.  c.  thou  not  from  thy  journey  ?

15.  20.  whereas  thou  c.  but  yesterday,  should  I

1  Kings  13.  9.  not  return  by  the  way  thou  c.  17.

14.  art  thou  the  man  of  God  that  c.  from  Judah  ?

2  Kings  19. 28. 1  will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by

which  thou  c.  Isa.  37  -  29.
Neh.  9.  13.  thou  c.  down  also  on  mount  Sinai
Isa.  64.  3.  thou  c.  down  the  mountains  flowed
Jer.  1. 5.  before  thou  c.  forth,  I  sanctified  thee
Ezek.  32.  2.  and  thou  c.  forth  with  thy  rivers
Mat.  22. 12.  friend,  how  c.  thou  in  hither  not  having
John  6.  25.  they  said,  Rabbi,  when  c.  thou  hither  ?

16.  30.  we  believe  that  thou  c.  forth  from  God
Acts  9. 17-  Jesus  appeared  to  thee  in  way,  as  thoue.

CAMP.

Exod.  14. 19.  the  angel  of  Lord  wrent  before  the  c.

16. 13.  at  even  the  quails  came  up  and  covered  c.

32.  17.  there  is  a  noise  of  war  in  the  c.

27.  go  thro’  the  c.  and  slay  every  man  his  brother
36.  6.  they  caused  it  to  be  proclaimed  thro’  the  c.
Lev.  17-  3.whatmankilleth  any  goat  in  the  c.  ?

24. 10.  they  strove  together  in  the  c.

Num.  1. 52.1srael  shallpitch  every  one  by  his  own  c.

2.  3.  on  the  east  side  snail  the  c.  of  Judah  pitch


Num  A. 5.  when  r.setteth  forward,  Aaron  shall  come
15.  as  the  c.  is  to  set  forward,  after  that  the  sons

11. 1.  consumed  them  in  the  utmost  parts  of  the  c.

26.  Eldad  and  Medad  prophesied  in  the  c.

Dent.  23.  10.  he  shall  not  come  within  the  c.

14.  the  Lord  walked  in  the  midst  of  thy  c.

Josh.  6.  18.  and  make  the  c.  of  Israel  a  curse
Judg.  7.  17..  when  I  come  to  the  outside  of  the  c.

13.  25.  Spirit  of  God  began  to  move  him  in  the  c.

21.  8.  there  came  none  to  the  c.  from  Jabesh

12.  young  virgins,  they  brought  them  to  the  c.

1  Sam.  4.  6.  the  noise  of  this  great  shout  in  the  c.

13.  +23.  the  standing  c.  of  the  Philistines  went

17.  17-  and  run  to  the  c.  to  thy  brethren

1  Kings  16. 16.  all  Israel  made  Omri  king  in  the  c.

2  Kings  6.  8.  in  such  and  such  a  place  shall  be  my  c.

7. 7-  they  left  the  c.  as  it  was,  and  fled  for  life

8.  and  when  these  lepers  came  to  the  c.

19.  35.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  in  the  c.  or
Assyrians,  185,000,  Isa.  37.  36.

2  Chron.  22. 1.  the  band  came  with  the  Arabians  to  c.

Psal.  78.  28.  let  it  fall  in  the  midst  of  their  c.

106. 16.  they  envied  Moses  also  in  the  c.

Ezek.  4.  2.  lay  siege,  set  the  c.  also  against  it
Joel  2.  11.  for  his  c.  is  very  great,  for  he  is  strong
Rev.  20.  9.  compassed  the  c.  of  the  saints  about
Into  the  CAMP.

Lev.  14.  8.  after  that  he  shall  come  into  c.  16.  26,  28.

Num.  11.  30.  Moses  gat  him  into  c.  he  and  elders
Deut.  23.1 1.  sun  is  down,  he  shall  come  into  c.  again
1  Sam.  4.  7.  the  Philistines  said,  God  is  come  into  c.

Cut  (f  the  CAMP.

Exod.  19. 17-  Moses  brought  forth  people  out  of  the  c.

Lev.  10. 4.  come  near,  carry  your  brethren  out  ofc.

14.  3.  the  priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  c.  anti  look
17.  3.  what  man  soever  killeth  a  goat  out  of  the  c.

24.  23.  should  bring  him  that  had  cursed  out  of  c.

Num.  5.  2.  command  they  put  every  leper  out  of  c.

12. 14.  let  Miriam  be  shut  out  of  the  c.  seven  days

14.  44.  the  ark  and  Moses  departed  not  out  of  c.

Deut. 23. 10.  unclean  person  shall  go  abroad  out  ofc.

1  Sam.  13. 17-  spoilers  came  out  of  c.  of  Philistines

2  Sam.  1.  2.  behold,  a  man  came  out  of  c.  from  Saul

3.  he  said  to  him,  out  of  c.  of  Israel  am  1  escaped

Rtmnd  about  the  CAMP.

Num.  11.  31.  quails  fell,  spread  them  round  ah.  c.  32.

Judg.  I.  21.  stood  every  man  in  place  round  ah.  c.

Without  the  CAMP.

Exod.  29. 14.  the  flesh  of  the  bullock  shalt  thou  burn
without  the  c.  Lev.  8.  17. 1  9.  11. !  16.  27.

3.3. 7-  pitched  tabern.  sought  Lord,  went  without  c.

Lev.  6.  11.  and  shall  carry  forth  ashes  without  the  c.

13.  46.  that  hath  the  plague  shall  dwell  without  c.

Num  .  5. 3.  every  leper  shall  be  put  out  without  the  c.

15. 35.  gatherer  of  sticks  shall  be  stoned  without  c.

19.  3.  bring  the  red  heifer  without  c.  and  slay  her
31.  19.  and  do  ye  abide  without  thee,  seven  days

Deut.  23.12.  thou  shalt  have  a  place  also  without  c.

Josh.  6. 23.  Rahab  left  her  kindred  without  the  c.

Heb.  13.11.  bodies  of  those  beasts  are  burnt  without  c.

13.  let  us  go  forth  to  him  without  c.  bearing  his

CAMP.

Isa.  29.  3.  I  will  c.  against  thee  round  about
Jer.  50.  29.  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow  c.  against  it
Nah.  3.  17.  which  c.  in  the  hedges  in  the  cold  day
CAMPED.

Exod.  19.  2.  and  there  Israel  c.  before  the  mount
CAMPS.

Gen.  32.  +  2.  he  called  the  name  of  that  place  two  c.

Num.  5.  3.  leper  put  out,  that  they  defile  not  their  c.

10.  2.  make  two  trumpets  for  journeying  of  the  c.

Amos  4. 10.  I  have  made  stink  of  your  c.  to  come  up
CAMPFlIRE.

Cant.  1. 14.  my  beloved  is  to  me  as  a  cluster  of  c.

4. 13.  thy  plants  are  an  orchard  of  c. with  spikenard
.  CAN.

Gen.  41.38.  Phara.  said,  c.  we  find  such  a  one  as  this?

Deut.  31.  2. 1  c.  no  more  go  out  and  come  in
2  Sam.  12.  23.  he  is  dead,  c.  I  bring  him  back  again  ?

19.  35.  c.  I  discern,  c.  I  hear  voice  of  singing-men  ?

Job  6.  6.  c.  that  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten  ?

8.  11.  c.  the  rush  grow  without  mire  ?  c.  the  flag?

22.  2.  c.  a  man  be  profitable  to  God  ?

13.  c.  he  judge  through  the  dark  cloud  ?

36.  29.  c.  any  Understand  the  spreading  of  clouds  ?

Psal.  78.  19..  they  said,  c.  God  furnish  a  table  ?

20.  c.  he  give  bread  also  ?  c.  he  provide  flesh  ?

89.  6.  whoc.  be  compared  ?  c.  be  likened  to  Lord  ?

Prov.  6.  27.  c.  a  man  take  fire  in  his  bosom  ?

28.  c.  one  go  on  hot  coals  and  not  be  burnt  ?

Isa.  46.  7-  one  shall  cry,  yet  c.  he  not  answer

49. 15.  c.  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child  ?

Jer.  2.  32.  c.  a  maid  forget  her  ornaments,  or  a  bride

23.  24.  c.  any  hide  himself  in  secret  places  that  I
Amos3. 3. c. two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed?

5.  c.  a  bird  fall  in  asnare  where  no  gin  is  for  him  ?

8.  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who  c.  but  prophesy  ?

Mat.  19.25.  who  c.  be  saved?  Markl0.26.  Luke  18.26.

27.  65.  go  your  way.  make  it  as  sure  as  you  c.

Mark  2. 19.  c.  the  children  of  bride-chamber  fast  ?

9.  29.  this  kind  c.  come  forth  but  by  prayer

10.  38.  c.  ye  drink  of  the  cup  that  I  drink  of  ?

Luke  6.  39.  spake  a  parable,  c.  the  blind  lead  blind  ?

John  1.  46.  c.  any  good  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?

6.  60.  this  is  an  hard  saying,  who  c.  hear  it
10.  21.  c.  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ?

15.  4.  no  more  c.  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me
Acts  10.  47.  c.  any  man  forbid  water,  that  these
Rom. 8. 7-  mind  is  not  subject  to  law,  nor  indeed  c.be
Jam.  2.  14.  and  have  not  works,  c.  faith  save  him  ?

3.  12.  c.  the  fig-tree  bearolive-berries  ?  a  vine  tigs  ?

How  CAN.

Deut.  1.  12.  howc.  I  alone  bear  your  cumbrance  ?

1  Sam.  16.  2.  how  c.  I  go,  if  Saul  hear,  he  will  kill  me
Esth.  8.  6.  how  c.  I  endure  to  see  evil  or  destruction
Job  25.  4.  howc.  a  man  be  justified  with  God  ?

Prov.  20.  24.  how  c.  a  man  understand  his  way  ?

Eccl.  4.  11.  but  how  c.  one  be  warm  alone  ?

Jer.  47. 7-  how  c.  it  be  quiet  seeing  Lord  given  charge
+  how  const  thou  be  quiet  seeing  Lord  given  charge
Mat.  12. 34.  howc.  ye  being  evil  speak  good  things.11
John  3.  4.  how  c  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old  ?

D  2  31

U.  OF  ILL  UE


C  A  P


CAP


CAP


John  3.  9.  "N  icodemus  said,  h.  can  these  dungs  be
6  52  h>wc.  this  man  give  us  his  nesh  to  eat.

14  5  Thomas  said,  Lord,  how  c.  we  know  the  way

Acts  8  31  haw  c.  1,  except  some  man  guide  me
stciso.o  CANNOT..

Isa.  1 . 13.  the  calling  of  assemblies  l  e.  away  with

29.  11.  read  this ;  he  saith,  l  c.  for  it  is  sealed
Jer  5. 22.  yet  the  waves  c.  prevail,  c.  pass  over
18.  6.  c.  1  do  with  you  as  tliis  potter,  saith  Lord .
DanSLSCl .  secret  king  demanded,  c.^trologers  shew
Mat.  16.  3.  c.  ye  discern  the  signs  or  the  times  .

Luke  13.33.  it  c .  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  J  er us.

16. 26.  which  would  pass  from  hence  to  you  c.

1  Cor.  11.  +  20.  ye  c.  eat  the  Lord  s  supper
Heb  9  5.  of  which  we  c.  now  speak  particularly
CAN  ST.

Exod.  33.  20.  thou  c.  not  see  my  face  and  live
Detit.  28. 27.  with  itch,  whereot  thou  c.  not  be  healed

Job  33. 5.  if  thou  c.  answer  me,  set  thy  words  in  order

Mat  8  2.  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  c.  make  me  clean
Mark  9. 22.  if  thou  c.  do  any  thing,  have  compassion
Acts  21  37.  chief  captain  said,  c.thou  speak  Greek

I  candle  .

Is  a  Iona  roll  or  cylinder  made  of  tallow,  wax,  otc.

for  airing  light,  Jer.  25. 10.  Luke  15.  8.

To  which  are  compared,  [1]  The  reasonable  soul,
which  is  as  a  light  set  up  tn  man  by  Cod,  and
as  his  deputy  to  observe  and  judge  our  actions^  and
to  inform  and  direct  us,  Prov.  20  27.  [2 J  Minis

ters,  or  the  gifts  and  graces  which  God  bestows
on  men,  which  are  not  given  them  only  for  then  own
sakes,  but  for  the  good  of  others  also  ;  as  when
men  light  a  candle,  they  are  not  to  hide  it  under
a  bushel,  but  to  put  it  on  a  candlestick  that  it
may  communicate  its  light  to  all  in  the  house.
Mat.  5.  15.  [3]  The  favour  and  blessing  of

God,  which  both  direct  and  comfort  the  soul,

They  need' no  candle,  Rev.  22.  5.  Light,  in  its
metaphm  ical notion,  signifies,  knowledge,  or  com¬
fort :  The  saints  in  heaven  shall  hare  no  need  oj
any  created  beings  to  help  them  to  either  of  these  :
God  and  Christ  shall  there  fill  their  souls  with
knowledge  and  joy  not  to  be  expressed.

Job  18.  6.  his  r.  shall  be  put  out  with  him

21. 17.  how  oft  is  the  c.  ot  the  wicked  put  out  •

29.  3.  when  his  c.  shined  upon  my  head

Psal.  18. 28.  for  thou  wiltlightmy  c.  the  Lord  my  G.
Prov.  20. 27.  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  c.  ot  the  Lord
24.  20.  the  c.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out

31. 18.  her  c.  goeth  not  out  by  night

Jer.  25. 10.  and  from  them  the  light  of  the  c.

Mat.  5. 15.  nor  do  men  light  a  c.  and  put  it  under  a
bushel,  Mark 4.  21.  Luke  8. 16.  1  11.  33.
Luke  11.  36.  when  bright  shining  of  a  c.  giveth  light
15. 8.  doth  not  she  light  a  c.  and  sweep  the  house
Rev.  18. 23.  light  of  a  c.  shine  no  more  in  thee
22  5  and  they  need  no  c.  nor  light  ot  the  sun
CANDLES.

Zevh  1. 12.  I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  c.

P  CANDLESTICK.  „

In  Exod.  25.  31,  32,  &c.  we  read  of  the  candle
stick  of  gold  with  six  branches,  which  Moses
made  by  the  command  of  God  to  be  put  into  the
tabernacle :  It  was  of  hammered  gold ,  a  talent  m
weight :  It  had  one  foot  of  the  same  metal ,  and
a  stock  with  the  branches  adorned  at  equal  ais-
tances  with  six  flowers  like  lilies,  with  as  many
bowls  and  knops  placed  alternately .'  Upon  the
stock  and  six  branches  of  the  candlestick  were  the
golden  lamps  which  were  immoveable,  wherein  there
was  put  oil  and  cotton.  •  It  was  placed  on  the  south
side  in  the  holy  place,  and  served  to  illuminate  the
altar  of  perfume,  and  the  table  of  shew-bread
which  were  in  the  same  place.

The  seven  golden  candlesticks  represent  the  church
Rev.  1.  20.  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God  with
his  sevenfold,  or  various  operations,  Rev  1.  4.
And  a  candlestick  may  be  an  emblem  of  the  church,
which  has  not  the  light  it  shews  from  itself,  but

only  holds  it  forth  from  Christ.

Exod.  25.  31.  make  c.  of  pure  gold,  37-17.  J J.  4.

33.  six  branches  that  came  out  ot  the  c.  37- 19.

34!  in  the  c.  shall  be  four  bowls,  37.  20.

°6  35  thou  shalt  set  the  c.  over  against  the  table
40’.  24.  put  the  c.  in  the  tent  of  the  congregation
lev.  24.  4.  he  shall  order  the  lamps  on  the  c.

Num.  3.  31.  their  charge,  shall  be  the  ark  and  c.

4.  9.  shall  take  a  cloth  and  cover  the  c.  ot  the  light
8. 2.  the  lamps  shall  give  light  over  against  trie  c.

2  Kings  4.10.1et  us  set  for  him  there  a  bed ,  a  table,  a  c.
1  Chr.  28. 15.  lamps  of  gold,  by  weight  for  every  c.
■2  Chr.  13. 11.  also  set  they  in  order  the  c.  ot  gold
"Dan.  5.  5.  and  wrote  over  against  the  c.  on  plaister
Zech.  4.2.  I  looked,  and  behold  a c.  all  of  gold

11.  two  olive-trees  on  the  right  side  or  the  c.


II.  two  Uiivcu  cca  vu  ,  i*  .7  1  n  •

Mat.  5. 15.  but  on  a  c.  and  it  giveth  light  to  all  in


the  house,  Luke  8. 16.  1  11.  33.
Mark  4. 21.  is  a  candle  brought  not  to  be  set  on  a  c.  ?
Heb  9  2.  the  first,  wherein  was  the  c.  and  the  table
Rev  2.  5.  repent,  else  I  will  come  and  remove  thy  c
CANDLES  PICKS.

1  King  si .  49.  made  the  c.  of  pure  gold,  2  Citron  4. 7

1  Chn  n.  28. 15.  even  the  weight  for  the  c.  ot  gold
Jer.  52. 19.  he  took  away  the  c.  spoons,  and  cups
Rev.  11.  4.  the  two  c.  standing  before  the  Lord

See  Sevkn.

CANE.

Isa  43. 24.  hast  bought  me  no  sweet  c.  with  money
Jer  6. 20.  and  the  sweet  c.  from  a  far  country
CANKER,  ED.

2  Tim.  2. 17.  and  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  c.

. Jam  5  3  your  gold  and  silver  is  c.  and  the  rust

CANKER-WORM.

Joel  1.4.  hath  c.  eaten,  and  what  c.  left,  2.  25.

Nah.  3. 15.  shall  eat  thee  like  c.  make  tliyselt  as  c.
16.  the  c.  spoil eth^and  fi«:  th^  a  w ay

Is  a  name  applied,  [1]  To  the  king,  or  prince  of  a
people.  1  Sam.  9-  16.  [2]  To  a  chief  marshal,
Gen.  37- +  36.  [3]  To  a  general,  or  commander
in  an  army.  Gf*n.  2d.  2d  2  ^aTn.  5.  8  [4]  lo

52


the  head  of  a  family,  or  tribe,  Num.  2.  3.  [5]

To  the  governor  of  a  province.  Hag.  1.  t  l.  LOJ
To  such  as  have  the  command  of  a  company,  con¬
sisting  sometimes  of  more,  sometimes  of  Jewer,

Christ  Jesus  is  called  the  Captain  of  salvation,

Heb  0  10  He  is  the  author  and  guide,  or  leader
to  salvation.  He  by  his  sufferings  and  death
merited  salvation  for  his  people  ;  by  his  wold  and
Spirit  fits  them  for  it ;  he  vanquishes  all  opposers
of  it ;  and  puts  them  finally  into  the  actual  pos¬
session  of  it  in  heaven.  .

Gen  37.  36.  sol  i  Joseph  to  Potiphar,  c.  of  the  guard
40.  4.  c.  of  the  guard  charged  Joseph  with  them
Num.  2.  3.  Nahshon,  e.  of  the  children  ot  Israel
5.  Nethaneel,  c.  of  the  children  of  Issachar
14  4  let  us  make  a  c.  and  return,  Neh.  9.  17  •

Josh.  5. 14.  but  as  c.  of  the  host  of  the  Lord  I  come
15.  the  c.  of  the  Lord's  host  said  to  Joshua
Judg.  4  2.  c.  of  I  abin’s  host  was  Sisera,  7  1--9  •

11.  6.  they  said  to  Jephthah,  come  and  be  our  c.

11.  the  people  made  him  head  and  c.  over  them
lSam.9.  lo. shalt  anoint  him  c.  over  my  people,  10. 1
13.  1 1.  Lord  command,  him  to  be  c.  over  nis  people
17 . 18.  carry  these  ten  cheeses  to  the  c.  ot  thousand
22!  2.  and  David  became  a  c.  over  them
2  Sam.  5.2.  thou  shalt  feed,  and  be  a  r.  overlsrae.

8.  he  shall  be  chief  and  c.  1  Chron.  11.  6.

19.  13.  if  thou  be  not  c.  of  host  in  room  ot  Joab
23.  19.  Abishai  was  therefore  their  c.

1  Kings  16. 16.  Israel  made  Omri,  c  ot  the  host,  king

2  Kings  1.  9.  the  king  sent  a  c.  with  his  fifty

11.  he  sent  to  him  another  c.  with  his  titty,  13
4. 13.  wouldest  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  c.  ot  host  i
5. 1.  Naaman,  c.  of  the  host  ot  the  king  ot  Syria

9.  5  he  said,  l  have  an  errand  to  thee,  U  c.

15.  25.  but  Pekah,  a  c.  of  his,  conspired  against  him
18  24  will  turn  away  the  face  of  one  c.  Isa.  .36.  9
20l  5.  and  tell  Hezekiah  the  c  .of  my  People
25.  8.  came  N  ebuzar-adan,  c.  of  guard,  Jer.  .52.  12

+  19.  took  away  scribe  of  c.  of  host,  Jer.  52.  t  .5

1  Chron.  11. 21.  more  honourable,  for  he !  was  then  c.

19. 18.  killed  Shophach  c.  ot  the  host,  2  Sam.  10. 18
27.  5.  the  third  c.  Benaiah  H  7-  fourth  c.  Asahel

8.  the  fifth  c.  Shamhuth  ||  9.  the  sixth  c.  Ira

2  Chron.  13.  12.  God  himselt  is  with  us  for  our  c
Isa.  3.  3.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  c.  of  fifty
Jer.  37.  1.3.  a  c.  of  the  ward  Irijah  took  Jeremiah

40.  2.  the  c.  of  the  guard  took  Jeremiah,  and  said
5.  c.  gave  victuals  and  a  reward,  and  let  him  go
51.  27.  call  together,  appoint  ac.  against  her
Hag  1.  +1.  word  came  to  Zerubbabel,  c.  or  Judah
John  18.  12.  then  the  band  and  the  c.  took  Jesus
Acts  5. 26.  then  the  c.  with  officers  went  and  brought
Heb.  2. 10.  to  make  c.  of  their  salvation  perfect  thro
CAPTAINS.  _  .

Exod.  15. 4.  his  chosen  c .  also  are  drowned  in  Red  sea
Num.  31. 14.  Moses  was  wroth  with  c.  of  thousands
Deut.  1.  15.  I  made  wise  men  c.  over  thousands
20.  9.  shall  make  r.  of  the  army  to  lead  the  people

1  Sam.  8.  12.  he  will  appoint  him  c.  over  thousands
22. 7. will  son  of  Jesse  makeyou  all  r.or  thousands  .

2  Sam.  18.  5.  when  the  king  gave  all  the  c .  charge
23.  8.  that  sat  in  the  seat  chief  among  the  c.

t  13.  the  three  c.  came  to  the  cave  of  Adullam

1  Kings  2.  5.  thou  knowest  what  Joab  did  to  the  c.

9.  22.  they  were  his  princes,  and  c.  and  rulers
20.  24.  take  kings  away,  and  put  c.  in  their  rooms
2°  33  when  the  c.  perceived  that  he  was  not  the

king  of  Israel,  they  turned  back,  2  Chron.  18.  32.

2  Kings  11. 15.  Jehoiada  commanded  c.  of. hundreds

1  Chron.  4.  42.  having  for  c.  Pelatiah  and  N  eariah
11. 15.  now  three  of  the  30  c.  went  down  to  I  avid

12.  34.  of  N aphtali  a  thousand  c.and  with  them

2  Chron.  21.  9.  Jehoram  smote  the  Edomites  and  c.

33.  11.  Lord  brought  on  them  the  c.  ot  the  host
Neh  2.  9.  the  king  had  sent  c.  of  the  army  with  me
Job  39.  25.  the  thunder  of  the  c.  and  the  shouting
Jer.  13.  21.  for  thou  hast  taught  them  to  be  c.

51.  23.  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  c.  and  rulers
57.  I  will  make  drunk  her  c.  and  her  rulers
Ezek  21  °2.  c.  to  open  the  month  in  the  slaughter
23i  6.  c.  and  rulers  all  desirable  young  men,  12,  2.3.
Dan.  3.  27.  the  c.  saw  these  men  on  whose  bodies
6  7.  the  c.  have  consulted  to  establish  a  statute
Nah.  3- 17-  and  thy  c.  as  the  great  grasshoppers
Mark  6. 21 .  Herod  on  birth  day  made  supper  to  his  c.
Luke  22.  4.  Judas  went  and  communed  with  the  c .
Rev  19.  18.  may  eat  the  flesh  of  c.  and  mighty  men
CAPTIVE.

Gen.  14.  14.  beard  that  his  brother  was  taken  c.

34.  29.  their  wives  took  they  c.  and  spoiled  all

Exod.  12.  29.  unto  the  first  born  of  the  c.  in  dungeon
Deut.  21.  10.  and  thou  hast  taken  them  c.  .

2  Kings  5.  2.  and  had  brought  away  c.  a  little  maid

6.  22  smite  those  thou  hast  taken  c.  with  thy
Isa.  49.21. 1  am  desolate,  a  c.  and  removing  to  and  fro
24.  or  shall  the  lawful  c.  be  delivered  t
51. 14.  the  c.  exile  hasteneth,  that  he  may  be  loosed
52.  2.  loose  thyself,  O  c.  daughter  of  Z1011
Amos  6.  7*  they  shall  go  c.  with  the  first  that  go  r.

2  Tim.  2.  26.  who  are  taken  r.  by  him  at  Ins will
Carry  or  carried  CAP  1 1\  E,  or  CAP  l  IVES.
Gen.  31.  26.  carried  away  my  daughters  as  c.  taken
Num.  24.  22.  until  Ashur  shall  carry  thee  away  c.

1  Kings  8.  46.  that  they  carry  them  away  c .  2  CA.6.36.
47.  if  they  bethink  themselves  111  the  land  whither

they  were  carried  c.  2  Chron.  6.37.

2  Kings  15.29.  Tiglath  pileser  carried  them  c.  to
16.  9.  he  carried  the  people  of  Damascus  c.  to  Kir

1  Chron.  5.  6.  whom  the  king  of  Assyria  carried  c.

2  Chron.  25.  12.  other  10,000  did  Judah  carry  c.
~28.  5.  they  carried  away  a  great  multitude  r.

8  Israel  carried  c.  ot  their  brethren  200, 000
Psal.  106.  46.  be  pitied  of  those  that  carried  them  c.
137.  3.  they  that  carried  us  c.  required  ot  us  a  son"
Jer.  13.  17.  because  the  Lord’s  Hock  is  carried  c.

19.  Judah  shall  be  wholly  carried  away  c.

20.  4.  he  shall  carry  them  c.  to  Babylon,  and  slay
24.5.  I  will  acknowledge  them  that  are  carried  c.
27. 20.  took  not  when  he  carried  c.  Jeconiah
29.  4.  saith  the  Lord  to  all  that  are  carried  c.


Jer  29  14.  1  will  bring  you  again  into  the  place
whence  I  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  c.

40.  1.  Judah  which  were  carried  away  c.  52.  27.

7.  of  them  that  were  not  earned  c.  to  Baby  lon

41.  10.  Ishmael  carried  away  c.  all  the  residue
43.12.shall  carry  the  Egyptians  c.  and  array  himsell
52*  29.  N eb.  carried c.  from  Jerusalem  832  persons

30.  carried  away  C.  of  the  Jews  7.45  persons
Lam.  4.  +22.  he  will  carry  theec.  tor  thy  sins
Ezek.  6.  9-  nations,  whither  they  shall  be  carried  c.
Dan.  11.8.  and  shall  also  carry  c.  into  Egypt
Amos  1.  6.  because  they  carried  c.  the  captivity
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  strangers  carried  c.  his
Carrying  CAPTIVE.

Jer.  1.  3.  to  the  carrying  away  of  Jerusalem  c.

Lead,  or  led,  CAP1IVL.

Judg.  5. 12.  lead  thy  captivity  c.  thou  son  of  Abinoam

1  KingsQAQ.  in  land  ot  their  enemies  who  led  them  c.

2  Chron.  30.  9.  compassion  before  them  that  lead c.
Psal.  68.  18.  thou  hast  led  captivity  c.  Eph.  4.  8.

Jer.  22.  12.  die  in  place  whither  they  led  him  c.

Amos  7.  11.  Israel  shall  be  led  c.  out  of  their  land
Nah.  2.7.  Huzzab  shall  be  ledc. her  maidsshall  lead
Luke  21.  24.  shall  be  led  away  c.  into  all  nations

2  Tim.  3.  6.  lead  c.  silly  women  laden  with  sins
CAPTIVES.

Num.  31.  9.  Israel  took  all  the  women  of  Midian  c.

12.  they  brought  the  c.  |!  19.  purity  your  c.

Deut.  21.  11.  seest  among  the  c.  a  beautiful  woman

32.  42.  mine  arrows  drunk  with  the  blood  ot  the  c.

1  Sam.  30.  5.  David’s  two  wives  were  taken  c.

2  Kings  21. 14.  he  carried  from  Jerusalem  10,000  c.

2  Chron.  28.  11.  hear  me,  and  deliver  the  c.  again

13.  and  said,  ye  shall  not  bring  in  the  c.  hither
Isa.  14.  2.  shall  take  them  c.  whose  c.  they  were

20.  4.  lead  away  the  Ethiopians  c.  young  and  old
45. 1.3.  he  shall  let  go  my  c.  not  for  price  nor  reward
49. 25.  the  c.  of  the  mighty  shall  be  taken  away
61.  1.  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  c.  I.uke  4.  18.

Jer.  48.  46.  t+iy  sons  and  daughters  are  taken  c.

50.  33.  and  aU  that  took  them  c.  held  them  fast
Ezek.  1. 1.  as  I  was  among  the  c.  by  the  river  Chebar
16.  53.  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  ot  thy  c.
Dan.  2. 25.  I  have  found  a  man  of  the  c.  ol  J  udah
CAPTIVITY.  .  .

God  generally  punished  the  vices  and  infidelities  of  his
people  by  different  captivities  or  servitudes  where-
into  he  permitted  them  to  fall.  After  the  deliver¬
ance  of  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt,  there  are  reckon¬
ed  six  bondages  or  car‘;vities  during  the  government
of  Judges :  The  firs,  tnder  Chushan  nshathaim,
king  of  Mesopotamia,  which  continued  about  eight
years,  Judg.  3. 8.  The  second  under  Eglon ,  king
of  Moab,  from  which  they  were  delivered  by  Thud,
Judg.  3. 14,  15.  The  third  under  the  Philistines,
out  of  which  they  were  rescued  by  Sham  gar ,  Judg.  3.

31 .  The  fourth  under  J  abin ,  king  of  1 1  azor ,  from
which  they  were  delivered  by  Deborah  and 'Barak,
Judg.  4.  22,  23.  The  fifth  under  the  Midianites,
from  which  G  ideon  J reed  them ,  J  udg.  6.  2, 12.  J  he
'  sixth  under  the  Ammonites  and  Philistines,  during
the  judica  ture's  of . Tephth&h,  Ibzan,  Blon,  Abdon,
Eli,  Samson,  Samuel.  ...

The  greatest  and  most  remarkable  captivities  oj  the
Hebrews,  were  those  of  Judah  and  Israel,  which
happened  under  the  kings  oj  each  of  these  king¬
doms.  .  ,

Tiglath-pileser,  king  of  Assyria,  in  the  year  of  the
world  3264,  took  several  cities  belonging  to  the
kingdom  of  1  srael ,  and  carried  away  a  greatimmber
of  captives,  principally  from  the  tribes  of  Reuben,
Gad,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  2  h  mgs  15.
09  Next  t"  him  Shalmaneser  took  and  destroyed
Samaria,  after  a  siege  of  three  years,  in  3283,  and
transplanted  the  tribes  which  had  been  spared  by
\  ialath  pileser,  to  the  provinces  beyond  the  Eu¬
phrates,  2  Kings  18.  9, 10,  11.  And  it  is  generally
believed  that  there  was  no  return  from  this  captivity,
and  that  the  ten  tribes  never  came  back  again  after
their  dis/ersion.  .

As  to  the  captivities  of  Judah;  in  the  fifth  year
of  Behoboam,  son  of  Solomon,  Shishak,  king  of
E°y PC  came  up  against  Jerusalem  with  a  nu-
merous  anny}  and  sacked  the  city ,  took  away  the


treasures  out  oj  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  out  of
of  the  king,  2  Chron.  12.  2.


the  house  of  me  iw«y,  V  P'  ,

Afterwards,  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  Sennacherib,
king  of  Assyria,  sent  a  great  army  and  laid  close
siege  to  it.  Upon  this  Hezekiah  fortified  and
repaired  it,  2  Chron.  32.  5.  and  the  hand  of  the
Lord  being  with  him,  for  he  was  a  pious  good
king,  the  Assyrians,  after  a  time,  were  forced
to  raise  the  siege,  not  being  able  to  take  the  city,
yet  after  this,  it  was  taken  and  plundered  three
several  times  by  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Baby¬
lon  ;  first,  in  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim  ;  again,  in
that  of  lehoiachin,  his  son  ;  and  a  third  time,  in
that  of  Zedekiah,  his  brother  ;  when  he  burnt  the
whole  city,  and  carried  away  all  the  people  to
Babylon,  where  they  remained  seventy  years,  Jer.
05  12

Upon  their  being  permitted  to  return  by  Cyrus,  king
of  Persia,  after  they  had  remained  in  captivity
seventy  years,  Zerubbabel  reb.iilt  the  temple,  and
N  ehemiah  the  city  ;  and  Ezra  the  priest  and  scribe
restored  the  law.  And  thus  they  stood,  till  the  time
of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  who  plundered  the  city,
burned  the  law,  and  profaned  the  temple.

But  all  was  soon  after  set  right  again  by  the  va¬
lorous  conduct  of  Judas  Maccabeus;  and  they
continued  in  a  flourishing  condition  for  many
years ;  till  ITyrcanus  and  Anstobulus,  two  bro¬
thers,  contending  about  the  crown,  Pompey,  who
at  that  time  was  at  the  head  of  the  Roman  army
in  Syria,  took  advantage  of  this  dissension,  and
seized  the  city  ;  which  Antigonus,  the  son  of  Ans¬
tobulus,  by  the  assistance  of  the  Parthians,  soon

after  recovered.  ,  ,  ^

From  him  it  was  presently  after  taken  by  the  first
Herod,  who,  by  the  favour  of  the  Romans,  and
the  assistance  of  their  Proconsul  of  Syria,  was
tner  1


declared  king  thereof.


CAP


CAR


CAR


Thenceforward  it  continued  in  subjection  sometimes
to  the  Ilerotls,  but  mostly  to  governors  sent  from
Home,  till  about  forty  years  after  the  Jews  had
crucified  Christ,  because  of  the  rebellious  dispo¬
sition  of  its  inhabitants,  it  was,  together  with
the  temple,  utterly  destroyed  and  levelled  with  the
ground,  by  Titus,  the  son  of  Vespasian  Caesar.
After  which,  the  Jews  never  attempted  more  to
r  turn  to  it.

It  is  said,  Job  42.  10.  that  the  Lord  turned  the
captivity  of  Job,  that  is,  he  brought  him  out  of
that  state  of  bondage  in  which  he  had  been  so  long
held  by  Satan  and  his  own  spirit,  and  out  of  all
his  distresses  and  miseries.

In  Eph.  4.  8.  He  led  captivity  captive.  He  led
them  captive  who  had  led  others  into  captivity ,
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  head  of  the  church
by  his  ascension  and  victory  over  death,  Satan
and  sin,  conquered  and  triumphed  over  them  and
all  our  spiritual  enemies.

Num.  21.  29.  he  hath  given  his  daughters  into  c.
Dent.  21. 13.  she  shall  putthe  raimentof  c.  from  her

30.  3.  Lord  will  tarn  thy  c.  and  have  compassion
Judy.  18.  30.  till  the  day  of  the  c.  of  the  land

2  Kings  24.  15.  those  carried  he  into  c.  to  Babylon
25.  2?.  in  thirty-seventh  year  of  the  c.  Jer.  52.  31.

1  Chr.  5.  22.  they  dwelt  in  their  steads  until  the  c.
6. 15.  Jehozadak  went  into  c.  when  the  Lord  carried

2  Citron.  6.37.  if  they  pray  to  thee  in  the  land  of  c.

38.  if  they  return  to  thee  in  the  land  of  their  c.

29.  9.  our  sons  and  our  wives  are  in  c.  for  this
Ezra  9-  7-  have  been  delivered  to  c.  and  to  a  spoil
Neh.  l.  2.  the  Jews  which  were  left  of  the  c,

4.  4.  give  them  for  a  prey  in  the  land  of  their  c.
Esth.  2.  6.  Mordecai  carried  away  with  the  c.

Job  42.  10.  and  the  Lord  turned  tne  c.  of  Job
Psa '.  14. 7-  when  the  Lord  bringeth  back  the  c.  85. 1.
78.  61.  and  delivered  his  strength  into  c.

126. 1.  when  the  Lord  turned  again  thee. of  Zion

4.  turn  again  our  c.  O  Lord,  as  streams  in  south
Isa.  5.  13.  therefore  my  people  are  gone  into  c.

20.  t  4.  so  Assyria  shall  lead  away  the  c.  of  Egypt

22. 17.  l  ord  will  carry  thee  away  with  a  mighty  c.
46. 2.  but  themselves  are  gone  into  c.

49.  t25.  c.  of  the  mighty  shall  be  taken  away
Jer.  15. 2.  such  as  are  for  the  c.  to  the  c.  43.  11.

24.  f  5.  as  good  figs,  so  will  1  acknowledge  the  c.

29.  14.1  will  turn  away  yotirc.  saith  the  Lord,  30.

,  „  3.  |  32.  44.  f  33.  7,  11,26.

20.  hear  ye,  all  ye  of  the  c.  ||  28.  this  c.  is  long
22.  shall  be  taken  up  a  curse  by  all  the  c.  of  Judah

31. sendtoall  them  of  thee. saying,  thus  saith  Lord

30.  10.  and  thy  seed  from  the  land  of  their  c.46.  27.
48.  11.  Moab  is  at  ease,  nor  hath  he  gone  into  c.

t  46. woe  to  thee.O  Moab, thy  sons  are  taken  into  c.
Lam.  1. 3.  Judah  is  gone  into  c.  because  of  affliction

5.  her  children  are  gone  into  c.  before  the  enemy

2.  14.  they  have  not  discovered, to  turn  away  thy  c.
4.  22.  he  will  no  more  carry  thee  away  into  c.

Ezek.  1.  2.  was  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoiachin’s  c.

3.  11.  get  to  them  of  the  c.  and  speak  to  them

15.  then  I  came  to  them  of  the  c.  11.  24.

11. 25.  I  spake  to  them  of  the  c.  all  things

12.  7.  I  brought  forth  my  stuff,  as  stuff  for  c.

16.  53.  when  1  shall  bring  again  their  c.  the  c.  of
Sodom,  and  the  c.  of  Samaria,  and  her  daugh.

25.  3.  when  they  went  into  c.  thou  saidst,  Aha
33.  21.  in  the  twelfth  year  of  the  c.  one  escaped

39.  23.  that  the  house  of  Israel  went  into  c.

40.  1.  in  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  our  c.
Dan.  6.  13.  Daniel  which  is  of  the  c.  of  Judah

11.  33.  shall  fall  by  c.  and  by  spoil  many  days
Hos.  6.  11.  when  I  returned  the  c.  of  my  people
Amos  4. 1 10.  slain  young  men  with  c.  of  your  horses
Obad.  20.  thee,  of  this  host,  the  c.  of  Jerusalem
Mic.  1. 16.  for  they  are  gone  into  c.  from  thee
fiah.3.  10.  iso  went  into  c.  her  children  dashed
Ilab.  1. 1  7.  from  them  shall  proceed  the  c.  ofthese

9.  and  they  shall  gather  the  c.  as  the  sand
Zeph.  2.7.  the  Lord  shall  turn  away  their  c.  3.  20.
Zech.  6.  10.  take  of  them  of  the  c.  even  of  Heldai
Rom.  7.  23.  and  bringing  me  into  c.  to  the  law  of  sin
2  Cor.  10.  5.  bringing  into  c.  every  thought  to  obed.
See  Captive.

Bring  CAPTIVITY.

Ezra  1. 11.  he  did  bring  up  with  them  of  the  c.
Psal.  53. 6.  when  God  bringeth  back  c.  of  his  people
Jer.  30. 18. 1  will  bring  again  the  c.  of  Jacob’s  tents

31.  23.  when  I  shall  bring  again  their  c.

48.  47.  yet  will  I  bring  again  the  c.  of  Moab

49.  6.  I  will  bring  again  tne  c.  of  Ammon

39.  I  will  bring  again  the  c.  of  Elam, saith  the  L.
Ezek.  29.  14.  I  will  bring  again  the  c.  of  Egypt
39.  25.  now  will  1  bring  again  thee,  of  Jacob

Joel  3.  1.  when  I  bring  agam  the  c.  of  Judah
Amos  9.  14.  I  will  bring  again  the  c.  ofmv  people
Children  of  CAPTIVITY.  "

Ezra  4. 1.  heard  that  childr.  of  c.  builded  the  temple

6.  16.  the  rest  of  children  of  c .  kept  the  dedication
fbe  child,  of  c.  kept  passover  on  the  14th  day
20.  killed  passover  for  children  of  c.  and  brethren

10.  7.  they  made  proclamation  to  the  children  of  c.

16. the  children  of  c.  did  so,  and  all  were  separated
Dan.  5. 13.  Daniel  which  art  of  childr.  of  c.  ot  J  udah

Co  into  CAPTIVITY.

Dent.  28. 41.  thy  sons  and  daughters  shall  go  into  c.
Jer.  20.  6.  thou  and  all  in  thine  house  shall  go  in.  c.
22.  22.  eat  thy  pastors  and  thy  lovers  shall  go  in.  c.

30. 16.  adversaries,  every  one  of  them  shall  go  in.  c.
46.  19.  O  daughter,  furnish  thyself  to  go  into  c.

48. 7-  Chemosh  go  into  c.  ||  49. 3.  their  kingSfiwmroc.
Ezek.  12.  4.  shalt  go  forth,  as  they  that  go  into  c.

30.  17.  and  these  cities  shall  go  into  c.

18.  as  for  Egypt  her  daughters  shall  go  into  c.
Amos  1.5.the  people  of  Syria  shall  go  into  c.unto  Kir
15.  their  kina  snail  go  into  c.  he  and  his  princes
tor  Gilgal  shall  surely  go  into  c.  and  Bethel
27.  therefore  will  1  cause  you  to  go  into  c.  beyond
o' } * '  sruael  s'iaH  surely  go  into  c.  forth  of  his  land
J.4.and  though  they  go  into  c.  before  their  enemies
Z(ch  i4.  2.  and  half  of  the  city  shall  go  into  c.

Rev.  13.  10.  he  that  leadeth  into  c.  sltaU  go  into  c.


Out  of  CAPTIVITY.

Ezra  2.  1.  now  these  went  up  out  of  c.  Neh.  7. 6.

3.  8.  all  that  were  come  up  out  of  c.  Neh.  8.  17.

6. 21.  the  children  of  Israel  which  were  come  again
out  of  c.  kept  the  feast  with  joy

8.  35.  were  come  out  of  c.  offered  to  God  of  Israel
CARBUNCLE,  S.

F.xod.  28.  17.  the  first  row  shall  be  a  c.  39. 10.

Isa.  54. 12.  and  I  will  make  thy  gates  of  c.

Ezek.  28.  13.  the  topaz  and  c.  were  thy  covering
CARCASE.

J.ev.  5.  2.  touch  c.  of  unclean  thing,  is  unclean

7.  t  24.  fat  of  the  c.  may  be  used,  but  not  eaten
11.8.  their  c.  ye  shall  not  touch,  Deut.  14.  8.

17-  + 15.  every  soul  that  eateth  a  c.  shall  wash

Deut.  28.  26.  thy  c.  shall  be  meat  unto  fowls  of  air
Josh.  8.  29.  that  the}'  should  take  his  c.  down
Judo.  14. 8.  to  see  the  c.  of  the  lion,  honey  in  the  c.

1  Kings  13.22.  thy  c.  shall  not  come  to  the  sepulchre
24.  his  c.  cast  in  the  way,  a  lion  stood  by  tne  c.

2  Kings  9.  37.  the  c.  of  Jezebel  shall  be  as  dung
Isa.  14.  19.  cast  out  as  a  c.  trodden  under  feet
Mat.  24. 28.  where  the  c.  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be

CARCASES.

Gen.  15. 11.  when  the  fowls'  came  down  on  the  c.
Lev.  11.  ll.yeshall  have  their  c.  in  abomination, 26.
26.  30. 1  will  cast  your  c.  on  the  c.  of  your  idols
Num.  14.  29.  your  c.  shall  fall  in  the  wilderness
1  Sam.  17.  46.1  will  give  the  c.  of  the  Philistines
Isa.  5.  25.  their  c.  were  torn  in  midst  of  the  streets
34.  3.  their  stink  shall  come  up  out  of  their  c.

66.  24.  look  on  c.  of  them  that  nave  transgressed
Jer.  7.  33.  and  the  c.  of  this  people  shall  be  meat  for
the  fowls  of  heaven,  16.  4. 1  19.  7.

16. 18.  they  have  filled  mine  inheritance  with  the  c.
Ezek.  6. 5.  I  will  lay  the  c.  of  Israel  before  idols

43.  7.  my  name  no  more  defile  by  c.  of  their  kings

9.  let  them  put  the  c.  of  their  kings  far  from  me
Nah.  3.  3.  and  there  is  a  great  number  of  c.

Heb.  3. 17.  grieved  with  them  whose  c.  fell  in  wild.
CARE

Is  applied,  [I]  To  God,  (1)  In  general,  in  respect
of  his  care  for  all  his  creatures.  Mat.  6.  26,  30.

1  Cor.  9.  9.  (2)  In  particular,  in  respect  of  the
godly,  1  Pet.  5.  7*  [H]  To  men,  and  is  either
lawful,  (1)  When  they  endeavour  to  please  God,
to  mourn  for  their  sins,  and  amend  what  has
been  amiss  in  their  csnduct,  2  Cor.  7.  11.  (2)
When  they  are  concerned  and  solicitous  about  the
welfare  of  others,  and  the  salvation  of  their  souls,

2  Cor.  7*  12.  Phil.  2.  20.  (3)  When  they  mo¬

derately  take  thought  for  the  things  of  this  pre¬
sent  life,  resigning  themselves  at  the  same  time
to  the  will  and  providence  of  God,  1  Pet.  5.  7.
Or  unlawful,  (1)  When  they  are  careful  about
things  that  are  not  in  any  case  warrantable,  at
to  make  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lusts
thereof,  Rom.  13.  14.  (2)  When  they  have  a

perplexing,  distrustful  care  about  things  which  in
their  own  nature  are  lawful  and  warrantable,  as
for  one  to  be  so  diligent  in  his  particular  calling
as  to  be  careless  of  the  worship  of  God,  or  to  dis¬
trust  his  providence.  Mat.  13.  22.  Luke  10.  41.

We  are  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  matter,
Dan.  3.  16.  The  case  is  so  plain,  that  it  admits
no  dispute,  or  deliberation  ;  it  requirds  no  answer
at  all,  at  least  in  words,  but  rather  in  deeds  of  con¬
stancy  and  courage  on  our  parts.

1  Sam.  10.  2.  thy  father  hath  left  the  c.  of  the  asses

2  Kings  4. 13.  hast  been  careful  for  us  with  all  this  c.
Jer.  49.  31.  the  nation  that  dwelleth  without  c.
Ezek.  4. 16.  shall  eat  bread  by  weight  and  with  c.
Mat.  13.  22.  the  c.  of  this  world  chokes  the  word
Luke  10.  34.  he  took  c.  of  him  |1 35.  take  c.  of  him

1  Cor.  9.  9.  doth  God  take  c.  for  oxen  ?

12. 25.  should  have  the  same  c.  one  for  another

2  Cor.  7. 12.  but  that  our  c.  for  you  might  appear

8.  16.  putthe  same  earnest  c.  in  1  itus  for  you

11.  28.  besides  the  c.  of  all  the  churches

1  Tim.  3.  5.  how  shall  he  take  c.  of  the  church  of  God

1  Pet.  5. 7-  casting  your  c.  on  him,  for  he  careth  for

.  CARE,  ED.

2  Sam.  18.  3.  for  if  we  flee,  they  will  not  c.  for  us
Psal.  142. 4.  refuge  failed,  no  man  c.  for  my  soul
Luke  10.  40.  dost  thou  not  c.  that  my  sister  left  me  ?
John  12.  6.  this  he  said,  not  that  he  c.  for  the  poor
Acts  18. 17.  and  Gallio  c.  for  none  of  those  things

1  Cor.  7.  21.  art  called  being  a  servant,  c.  not  for  it
Phil.  2.  20.  who  will  naturally  c.  for  your  state

CAREFUL.

2  Kings 4. 13.  behold  thou  hast  been  c.  for  us  with
Jer.  17.  8.  and  shall  not  be  c.  in  the  year  of  drought
Dan.  3. 16.  O  N  ebuch.  we  are  not  c.  to  answer  thee
Luke  10.  41.  Martha,  thou  art  c.  about  many  things

12.  +  29.  live  not  in  c.  suspense

Phil.  4.  6.  c.  for  nothing,  but  by  prayer  let  requests

10.  wherein  ye  were  c.  but  lacked  opportunity
Tit.  3.  8.  they  might  be  c.  to  maintain  good  works

CAREFULLY.

Dent.  15.  5.  if  thou  c.  hearken  unto  the  Lord
2  Chron.  36.  tl5.  sending  his  messengers  c.

Mic.  1. 12.  for  the  inhabitant  of  Maroth  waiteth  c.
Phil.  2.  28. 1  sent  him  therefore  the  more  c.

Ileb.  12.  17.  though  he  sought  it  c.  with  tears
CAREFULN  ESS.

Ezek.  12. 18.  drink  thy  water  with  trembling  and  c.

19.  they  shall  eat  their  bread  with  c.  and  drink

1  Cor.  7.  32.  but  1  would  have  you  without  c.

2  Cor. 7-11.  what  c.  it  wrought  in  you,  what  clearing

CARELESS.

Judy.  18.  7-  the  five  men  saw  how  they  dwelt  c.
Isa.  32.  9.  hear  my  voice,  ye  c.  daughters,  give  ear
10.  shall  be  troubled,  ye  c.  women  ||  11. ye  c.  ones
Ezek.  30.  9.  to  make  the  c.  Ethiopians  afraid
CARELESSLY.

Isa.  47. 8.  hear  now  this,  thou  that  dwellest  c.

Ezek.  39. 6.  send  a  fire  among  them  that  dwell  c.
Zeph.  2.  15.  this  is  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt  c.
CARES.

Mark  4. 19.  the  c.  of  this  world  choke  the  word
Luke  8. 14.  and  they  are  choked  with  c.  and  riches

21.  34.  lest  be  overcharged  with  the  c.  of  this  life


CAREST,  ETH,  IMG.

Deut.  11.  12.  a  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  c.  for
1  Sam.  9.  5.  lest  my  father  leave  c.  for  the  asses
Mat,  22.  16.  thou  art  true,  nor  c.  thou  for  any  rran
Mark 4.  38.  Master,  c.  thou  not  that  we  perish?

12. 14.  know  thou  art  true,  and  c.  for  no  man
John  10.  13.  because  an  hireling  c.  not  lor  the  sheep
1  Cor.  7.  32.  that  is  unman  ie  1  c.  for  the  things.  34.

33.  that  is  married,  c.  for  tilings  of  the  world,  34.
1  Pet. 0.7.  casting  your  care  on  him,  for  he  c.  for  you
CARNAL

Signifies,  Belonging  to  the  fiesh,  fleshly ,  or  sensual.
This  word  is  applied,  [1]  To  such  as  are  in  a  na¬
tural  unregenerated  state,  who  are  enemies  to  God
and  given  to  sensual  p'easures,  John  3.  6.  Rom.  8,
7-  [2]  To  one  who  is  in  part  renewed  by  the  grace
of  God,  yet  so  as  that  there  are  remainders  of  sin
and  corruption,  which  oppose  and  war  against  this
gracious  principle,  Rom.  7-  14.  Such  a  one  is
carnal,  in  part,  in  regard  of  the  remainders  of
corruption  ;  and  comparatively,  in  respect  of  the
purity  of  the  law  of  God.  [3]  J'o  the  ceremonia.
law,  which  consisted  of  such  ri  tes,  ceremonies,  and
ordinances,  as  only  related  to  the  body  and  the
purifying  of  the  fiesh,  but  did  not  reach  the  soul,
Heb.  9-  10.  [4]  To  worldly  things,  such  as  sihe'
and  gold,  and  other  things  needful  for  the  sustenta-
tion  of  the  body,  Rom.  15.  27.  1  Cor.  9.  11.

Rom.  7.  14.  law  is  spiritual,  but  I  am  c.  sold  unde;

8.  7.  because  the  c.  mind  is  enmity  against  God
15.  27.  duty  is  to  minister  to  them  in  c.  things

1  Cor.  3.  1.  but  as  unto  c.  even  to  babes  in  Christ
3.  for  ye  are  yet  c.  ||  4.  are  ye  not  c.  ?

9.  1 1 .  is  it  a  great  thing  if  we  reap  your  c.  things  r

2  Cor.  10.  4.  the  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  c.
Ileb.  7.  16.  made  not  after  the  law  of  a  c.  command
9. 10.  which  stood  in  c.  ordinances  imposed  on  then

CARNALLY.

Lev.  18. 20.  shalt  not  lie  c.  with  thy  neighbour’s  wife

19.  20.  whosoever  lieth  c.  with  a  bond-maid
Num.  5. 13.  and  a  man  lie  with  here,  and  it  be  hie
Rom.  8.  6.  for  to  be  c.  minded  is  death,  but  to  be  sp

CARPENTER,  S.

2  Sam.  5. 11.  Hiram  sent  c.  to  David,  1  Chron.  14.

2  Kings  12.  11.  they  laid  it  out  to  c.  and  builden
2  Chron.  24.  12.  they  hired  c.  to  repair,  Ezra  3.  7.
Isa.  41.  7.  so  the  c.  encouraged  tbe  goldsmith
4-4.  13.  the  c.  stretcheth  out  his  rule,  he  marketh
Jer.  24. 1.  the  c.  and  smiths  he  carried  away,  29.  i
Zech.  1.  20.  and  the  Lord  shewed  me  four  c.

Mat.  13.  55.  they  said,  is  not  this  the  c.  son  ?

Mark  6.  3.  is  not  this  the  c.  the  son  of  Mary  ?
CARRIAGE,  S.

Num.  4.  +  24.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  Gershonites
Judg.  18.  21.  the  Danites,  and  the  c.  before  them
1  Sam.  17.  t  20.  David  came  to  the  place  of  the  c

22.  David  left  his  c.  with  the  keeper  of  the  c.

Isa.  10. 28.  at  Michmash  he  hath  laid  up  his  c.

46.  1.  your  c.  were  heavy  laden,  they  are  a  burd
Acts  21.  15.  we  took  up  our  c.  went  up  to  Jerusalem
CARRY

Signifies,  [1]  To  bear,  or  remove.  2  Sam.  15.  29.
[2]  To  protect  and  keep  safely,  Isa.  46.  3,  4.  [3-1
To  lead,  or  drive,  Gen.  31.  18.  [4]  To  make  to

ride,  1  Chron.  13.17.

Gen.  37. 25.  Ishmaelites  going  to  c.  spicery  to  Egypt

42. 19.  go  ye,  c.  corn  for  the  famine  of  your  houses

43.  11.  c.  the  man  a  present,  a  little  balm,  honey

12.  the  money  brought,  c.  it  again  in  your  hand

44.  1.  fill  the  sacks  with  as  much  as  they  can  c.

45.  27.  he  saw  waggons  Joseph  sentto  c.  him,  46.  5
50.  25.  ye  shall  c.  up  my  bones,  Exod.  13.  19.

Exod.  3.3. 15.  thy  presence  go  not,  c.  us  not  up  hence
Lev.  10.  4.  c .  your  brethren  out  of  the  camp
Num.  11. 12.  should  say,  c.  them  in  thy  bosom
Deut.  14.  24.  so  that  thou  art  not  able  to  c.  it
Josh.  4.  3.  c.  the  twelve  stones  over  with  you

1  Sam.  17.  18.  c.  these  ten  cheeses  to  the  captain

20.  40.  Jonathan  said,  go,  c.  them  to  the  city

2  Sam.  19- 18.  a  ferry-boat  to  c.  over  king’s  house.

1  Kings  18.  12.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  c.  thee

2  Kings  4.  19.  his  father  said,  c.  him  to  his  mother
9.  2.  and  c.  Jehu  to  an  inner  chamber

17.  27.  saying,  c.  thither  one  of  the  priests

1  Chron.  10.  9.  sent  to  the  Philistines  to  c.  tidings
15.  2.  none  ought  to  c.  the  ark  but  the  Levites

23.  26.  the  I.evites  shall  no  more  c.  the  tabernacle

2  Chr.  2. 16.  thou  shalt  c.  the  wood  up  to  Jerusalem
36.  6.  bound  him  tor.  him  to  Babylon.  Jer.  39.  7.

Ezra  5.  15.  c.  these  vessels  into  the  temple  at  Jerus.
7. 15.  c.  the  silver  and  gold  freely  offered  to  God  of
lie  cl.  10.  20.  a  bird  of  the  air  shall  c.  the  voice
Isa.  23.7.  her  own  feetshall  c.  her  afar  off  to  sojourn
30. 6.  they  will  c.  their  riches  on  young  asses
40.  11.  he  shall  c.  the  lambs  in  his  bosom

46.  4.  and  even  to  hoary  hairs  will  I  c.  you
7.  they  c.  him  and  set  him  in  his  place

Jer.  20.  5.  will  I  take  them  and  c.tnem  to  Babylon
39.  14.  that  Gedaliah  should  c.  Jeremiah  home
Ezek.  22.  9.  in  thee  are  men  c.  tales  to  shed  blood
Mark  6.  55.  and  began  to  c.  about  in  beds  the  sick

11. 16.  not  suffer  any  to  c.  a  vessel  thro’  the  temple
Luke  10.  4.  c.  neither  purse,  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes
John  5.  10.  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  c.  thy  bed

21.  18.  and  c.  thee  whither  thou  wouldest  not

CAR  RY  away.

2  Kings  18. 11.  king  of  Assyria  did  c.  away  Israel
25.  11.  the  fugitives  did  Nebuzar  adan  c.  away
2  Chron.  20. 25.  found  more  than  they  could  c.  awaj,
Job  15. 12.  why  doth  thine  heart  c.  thee  away  ?

Psal.  49- 17-  when  he  dieth  he  shall  e.  nothing  away
Fed.  5.  15.  nothing  left  which  he  may  c.  a.  in  hand
Isa.  5.  29-  they  shall  c.  the  prey  away  safe
15. 7-  which  they  have  laid  up,  shall  they  c.  away

22.  17.  behold  the  Lord  will  c.  thee  away

41.16.  fan  them,  and  wind  shall  c.  them  away ,57-13
Lam.  4.  22.  he  will  no  morec.  thee  away,  O  Zion
Ezek.  38.  13.  art  thou  come  toe.  away  silver  ?

Acts  7.  43.  and  I  will  c. you  away  beyond  Babylon

See  Captive.

CARRY  back.

2  Sam.  15. 25.  c.  back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  city

53


CAR


CAS


CAS


1  Kinas  22. 26.  c.  M  icaiah  b.  to  Amon,  2  Chr.  18. 25.

CARRY  forth.

Exod.  12. 46.  shalt  not  c.  forth  aught  of  the  passover

14. 11.  dealt  thus  with  us  to  c.  us/,  out  of  Egypt
Lev.  4. 12.  even  the  whole  bullock  shall  he  c.f.  21.

6. 11.  c.f.  ashes  without  the  camp,  14.  45.  ||  16.  27.

2  Chr .  29. 5.  c.  forth  the  filthiness  out  of  holy  place
Jer.  17. 22.  nor  c.  forth  a  burden  on  the  sabbath-day
Ezek.  12. 6.  in  their  sight,  c.  it  forth  in  the  twilight

CARRY  out.

Gera. 47.30.  Jacob  said,  thou  shalt  c.  me  out  of  Egypt
Dent.  28.  38.  shall  c.  much  seed  out,  gather  little  in

1  Kings  21.  10.  then  e.  him  out  and  stone  him

22.  34.  he  said,  c.  me  out  of  the  host,  2  Chr.  18.  33.

2  Chr  on.  29. 16.  c.  it  out  abroad  into  brook  Kidron
Ezek.  12.  5.  diir  through  the  wall,  and  c.  out  thereby
Acts  5.  Q.  the  feet  at  the  door,  and  shall  c.  thee  out

1  Tim.  6. 7.  it  is  certain  we  can  c.  nothing  out
CARRIED.

Gera.  46.  5.  the  sons  of  Israel  c.  Jacob,  50. 13.

Lev.  10.  5.  f.  them  in  their  coats  out  ot  the  camp
Josh.  4.  8.  they  c.  the  stones  over  with  them
Judg.  16.  3.  he  c.  them  up  to  the  top  ot  an  hill

1  S am.  5. 8.  let  the  ark  ot  God  be  c .  unto  Gath

2  Sam.  6. 10.  David  c.  the  ark  aside,  1  Chr.  13.  13.

15.  29.  Abiathar  c.  the  ark  of  God  to  Jerusalem

1  Kings  17. 19.  he  c.  him  into  a  loft  and  laid  him

21 . 13.  they  c.  Naboth  forth  and  stoned  him

2  Kings  7. 8.  and  c.  thence  silver  and  gold  and  hid  it
0.  28.  his  servants  c.  him  in  a  chariot,  23.  30.

20. 17.  that  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store
shall  be  c.  to  Babylon,  Isa.  39.  6.

23.  4.  c.  the  ashes  of  the  vessels  to  Beth  el

24. 13.  he  c.  out  thence  all  the  treasures

25.  7.  they  bound  Zedekiah  and  c.  him  to  Babylon
2  Chron.  24.11.  c.  the  chest  to  his  place  again

28. 15.  and  c.  all  the  feeble  of  them  upon  asses

33. 11.  who  took  and  c.  Manasseh  to  Babylon

34. 16.  Shaphan  c.  the  book  to  the  king

36.  4.  Necho  took  and  c.  Jehoahaz  to  Egypt
Job  5. 13.  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  c.  headlong
10. 19.  I  should  have  been  c.  from  the  womb
Psal.  46.  2.  tho’  the  mountains  be  c.  into  the  sea
Isa.  46. 3.  remnant  of  Israel  which  are  c.  from  womb

49. 22.  thy  daughters  shall  be  c.  on  thy  shoulders
53. 4.  surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  c.  our  sorrows
63.  9.  he  bare  and  c.  them  all  the  days  of  old

Jer.  27.  22.  be  c.  into  Babylon,  28. 3.  f  52. 11, 17.
Ezek.  17. 4.  he  c.  twigs  into  a  land  of  traffic

37. 1.  and  c.  me  out  in  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord
Dan.  1. 2.  which  he  c.  into  the  land  of  Sliinar
Hos.  10. 6. it  shall  be  also  c.into  Assyria  for  a  present

12. 1.  make  a  covenant,  and  oil  is  c.  into  Egypt
Joel  3.  5.  and  ye  have  c.  into  your  temples
Luke  7. 12.  behold,  there  was  a  dead  man  c.  out

16. 22.  and  the  beggar  was  c.  by  the  angels
24. 51 .  was  parted  from  them ,  and  c.  up  into  heaven

Acts  3. 2.one  lame  from  his  mother’s  womb  was  c.

5. 6.  young  men  c.  Ananias  out  and  buried  him

7.16.  our  fathers  were  c.  over  into  Sychem

8.  2.  devout  men  c.  Stephen  to  his  burial

21.  34.  commanded  him  to  be  c.  into  the  castle

Eph.  4. 14.  and  c.  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine
Ileb.  13. 9.  be  not  c.  about  with  divers  doctrines
2  Pet.  2. 17".  clouds  that  are  c.  with  a  tempest
Jude  12.  clouds  without  water,  c.  about  of  winds
See  Captive.

CARRIED  away.

Gen.  31. 18.  Jacob  c.  away  all  his  cattle  and  goods

26.  hath  c.  away  my  daughters  as  captives

1  Sam.  30. 2.  slew  not  any,  but  c.  them  away,  18.

2  Kings  17. 6.  c.  Israel  away  into  Assyria,  23.

1 1.  heathen  whom  the  I.ord  c.  away  before  them

28.  then  one  of  the  priests,  whom  they  had  c.  away

24. 14.  c.  away  all  Jerusalem  and  a.l  the  princes
15.  c.  away  Jehoiachin  to  Babylon  and  his  wives
25.  21.  so  .1  udah  was  c.  away  out  of  their  land

1  Chron.  5.  26.  Tiigath-pilneserc.  away  Reubenites
6. 15.  when  the  Lord  c.  away  J udah  and  Jerusalem

9. 1.  who  were  c.  away  for  their  transgression

2  Chron.  12.  9.  Shishak  c.  away  the  shields  of  gold
14. 13.  Asa  and  the  people  c.  a.  much  spoil,  21. 17.

15.  they  c.  away  sheep  and  camels  in  abundance
Ezra  2. 1.  these  that  had  been  a.  array,  Neh.  7.  6.

9.  4.  transgression  of  those  that  had  been  c.  a.  10.  6

10.  8.  separated  from  congregation  of  those  c.  away
Job  1. 17.  fell  upon  the  camels,  and  c.  them  away
Jer.  29. 4.  whom  1  have  caused  to  be  c.  away  captive
Dan.  2.  35.  iron,  gold  broken,  and  winds  c.  them  a.
Nah.  3. 10.  No  was  c.  away  into  captivity

Mat.  1. 11.  about  time  they  were  c.  array  to  Babylon
Mark  15. 1 .  c.  Jesus  a.  and  delivered  him  to  Pilate
1  Cor.  12. 2.  were  Gentiles  c.  a.  to  those  dumb  idols
Gal.  2. 13.  Barnabas  was  c.  away  with  dissimulation
Rev.  12. 15.  might  cause  her  to  be  c.  away  of  the  flood

17.  3.  so  he  c.  me  away  in  the  Spirit,  21. 10.

CARRIEST,  ETII,  ING.

Gen.  45.  +  23.  ten  asses  c.  the  good  things  of  Egypt
1  Sam.  10.3.  one  c.  three  kids,  c.  three  loaves  ot  bread
Job  21. 18.  are  as  chaff  that  the  storm  c.  away

27.  21.  the  east  wind  c.  the  rich  man  away
Psal.  78.  9.  Ephraim  c.  bows,  turned  back  in  battle

90.  5.  thou  c .  them  away  as  with  a  flood
Mat.  1. 17.  till  the  c.  into  Babylon,  from  the  c.
Acts  5.10.  they  c.  her  and  buried  her  by  her  husband
Rev.  17.7.  the  mystery  of  the  beast  that  c.  her
CART.

1  Sam.  6. 7.  make  a  new  c.  and  tie  the  kine  to  the  c.

2  Sam.  6.  3.  they  set  the  ark  on  a  new  c.  and  brought
1  Chron.  13.7.  and  Uzza  and  Ahio  drave  the  c.

Jsa.  28.  28.  nor  break  corn  with  the  wheel  of  the  c.
Amos  2. 13.  as  a  c.  is  pressed  that  is  full  of  sheaves

CART-ROPE.

Isa.  5. 18.  woe  to  them  that  draw  sin  as  with  a  c.-rope
CART-WHEEL.

Isa.  28. 27.  nor  is  c. -wheel  turned  about  on  cummin
CARVED,  ING,  INGS.

Exod.  31.  5.  Bezaleel  in  c.  of  timber,  35.  33.

Judg.  18. 18.  men  went  and  fetched  the  c.  image

1  Kings  6. 18.  the  cedar  of  the  house  within  was  c,

29.  he  c.  all  the  walls  of  house  round  about,  32.

2  Chron.  .33. 7.  he  set  a  c.  image  in  the  house  of  God

54


2  Chron.  33. 22.  Amon  sacrificed  to  all  the  c.  images
34.  3.  Josiah  purged  Judah  from  the  c.  images

4.  he  cut  down  the  c.  images,  and  brake  in  pieces
Psal.  74.  6.  they  break  down  the  c.  work  at  once
Prov.  7.  16.  I  have  decked  my  bed  with  c.  work

CASE,  S.

Exod.  5. 19.  officers  did  see  that  they  were  in  evil  c.
Dent.  19.  4.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  slayer  who  shall  flee
22. 1.  thou  shalt  in  any  c.  bring  them  again
24.  13.  in  any  c.  thou  shalt  deliver  the  pledge
Psal.  144.  15.  happy  that  people  that  is  in  such  a  c.
Jer.  2.  +  25.  but  thou  saidst,  is  the  c.  desperate  .'

12.  1 1.  yet  let  me  reason  the  c.  with  thee
Mat.  5.  20.  ye  shall  in  no  c.  enter  the  kingdom
19.  10.  if  the  c.  of  the  man  be  so  with  his  wife
John  5.  6.  and  had  been  now  long  time  in  that  c.

1  Cor.  7.  15.  is  not  under  bondage  in  such  c.
CASEMENT.

Prov.  7.  6.  at  the  window  l  looked  through  my  c.
CASSIA

Is  a  sweet  spice  mentioned  by  Moses  as  an  ingredient
in  the  composition  of  the  holy  oil,  which  was  to  be
made  use  of  for  anointing  the  sacred  vessels  of  the
tabernacle.  Ex.  30.  24.  The  Hebrew  calls  it
Ividda  ;  and  the  Septuagint  Iris.  This  aromatic
is  said  to  be  the  bark  of  a  tree  very  like  cinnamon,
and  grows  in  the  Indies  without  cultivation.

Exod.  30.  24.  take  of  c.  500  shekels  for  the  oil
Psal.  45.  8.  all  thy  garm  nts  smell  of  aloes  and  c.
Ezek.  27.  19.  c.  and  calamus  were  in  thy  market
CAST.

LukeQ.2.  41.  he  was  withdrawn  about  a  stone’s  c.
CAST

Signifies,  [1]  To  fling,  or  throw,  Dan.  3.  6.  [2]  To
miscarry,  or  bring  forth  before  the  time,  Gen.  31.
38.  Exod.  23.  26.  [3]  To  melt,  make,  or  frame,
Exod.  25. 12.

They  cast  him  out,  John  9.  34.  They  put  him  out
of  the  synagogue,  or  excommunicated  him.

Thou  hast  cast  me  behind  thy  back,  1  Kings  14.  9.
Thou  hast  despised,  disregarded,  and  forsaken  me,
and  my  commands  and  worship,  as  men  do  things
which  they  cast  behind  their  backs.

Exod.  38.  27.  of  talents  of  the  silver  were  c.  sockets
Job  18.  8.  for  he  is  c.  into  a  net  by  his  own  feet
Psal.  22. 10.  1  was  c.  upon  thee  from  the  womb
76.  6.  chariot  and  horse  are  c.  into  a  dead  sleep

140. 10.  let  him  be  c.  into  the  fire,  into  pits
Prov.  16.  33.  the  lot  is  c.  into  the  lap,  but  the
Isa.  25. 7.  the  face  of  the  covering  c.  over  all  people
Jer.  22.  28.  are  r.  into  a  land  which  they  know  not

38.  11.  and  took  thence  old  c.  clouts  and  rags
12.  put  now  these  old  c.  clouts  under  thy  arm

Ezek.  15.  4.  the  vine-tree  is  c.  into  the  fire  for  fuel
Dan.  3.  6.  be  c.  into  the  midst  of  a  fiery  furnace
21.  these  were  c.  into  the  midst  of  the  furnace
6. 7.  he  shall  be  c.  into  the  den  of  lions,  16.

Jonah  2.  4.  then  I  said,  I  am  c.  out  of  thy  sight
Mat.  4.  12.  Jesus  heard  that  John  was  c.  into  prison

5.  25.  deliver  thee  to  judge,  and  be  c.  into  prison
29.  not  that  thy  whole  body  be  c.  into  hell,  30.

6.  30.  and  to-morrow  is  c.  into  the  oven,  Luke  12. 28.
21.  21.  say  to  mountain,  be  thou  c.  into  the  sea

Mark  9.  42.  better  he  were  c.  into  the  sea,  Luke  17. 2.

45.  having  two  eyes,  feet,  to  be  c.  into  hell,  47-
Luke  3.  9.  hewn  down,  c.  into  the  fire,  Mat.  3.  10.

17.  19.

23.  19.  and  for  murder  was  c.  into  prison,  25.

John  3.  24.  for  Jqhn  was  not  yet  c.  into  prison
Acts  27.26.howbeit,  we  must  be  c.  on  a  certain  island
Rev.  8.  7.  hail  and  fire  werec.  on  the  earth
8.  a  mountain  burning  was  c.  into  the  sea
12.  13.  dragon  saw  that  he  was  c.  unto  the  earth
19.20.  these  both  were  c.  alive  into  the  lake

20. 10.  the  devil  was  c.  into  the  Jake  of  fire

14.  death  and  hell  were  c.  into  the  V  ke  of  fire

15.  not  found  in  the  book  of  life,  c.  into  the  lake
CAST.

Gen.  21.  15.  ITagarc.  the  child  under  a  shrub

31.  38.  thy  she-goats  have  note,  their  young
37.  20.  let  us  slay  him,  and  c.  him  into  some  pit

39.  7.  his  master’s  wife  c.  her  eyes  upon  Joseph
Exod.  1.  22.  every  son  ye  shall  c.  into  the  river

4.  3.  said,  c.  it,  and  he  c.  the  rod  on  the  ground
25.  Zipporah  c.  the  foreskin  at  his  feet
10. 19.  took  locusts  and  c.  them  into  the  Red  sea
15.  4.  Pharaoh’s  chariots  he  c.  into  the  sea
25.  when  he  had  c.  the  tree  into  the  waters
22.  31 .  not  eat  flesh  torn  of  beasts,  c.  it  to  the  dogs
23.26.  there  shall  nothing  c.  their  young,  nor  be
25.  12.  shall  c.  four  rings  of  gold,  37.  3,  13. 1  38.  5.

32.  19.  Moses  c.  tables  out  of  his  hand,  and  brake
24.  I  c.  into  the  fire,  there  came  out  this  calf

Num.  19.6.  priest  c.  cedar  wood  into  midst  of  burning


35.  22.  c.  any  thing  on  him  without  laying  wait


23.  seeing  him  not,  and  c.  it  on  him  that  he  die
Deut.  29.  28.  the  Lord  c.  them  into  another  land
Josh.  8.  29.  c.  king  of  Ai  at  the  gate  of  the  city
10.  27.  c.  them  into  the  cave  whei  ein  had  been  hid
Judg.  8.  25.  c.  every  one  the  ear-rings  of  his  prey
9.  +17.  for  my  father  c.  his  life  far
53.  a  woman  c.  a  piece  of  millstone,  2  Sam.  11. 21.

1  Sam.  18.  11.  Saul  c.  the  javelin,  20.  33.

2  Sam.  16. 6.  Shimei  c.  stones  at  David  and  his  serv.
13.  Shimei  cursed,  and  threw  stones  and  c.  dust

18. 17.  they  c.  Absalom  into  a  great  pit  in  the  wood
20.  12.  Joab’s  man  c.  a  cloth  upon  Amasa

1  Kings  7. 46.  in  plain  of  Jordan  c.  them ,  2  Chr.  4. 17-
14.  9.  and  thou  hast  c.  me  behind  thy  back

19.  19.  Eliiah  c.  his  mantle  upon  Elisha

2  Kings  2. 16.  lest  ffie  Spirit  c.  him  on  some  mountain
21.  lie  went  to  spring  and  c.  the  salt  in  there

3.  25.  on  every  good  piece  of  land  c.  each  his  stone

4.  41.  then  bring  meal,  and  he  c.  it  into  the  pot
6.  6.  he  c.  in  the  stick,  and  the  iron  swam

9.  25.  c.  him  in  the  portion  of  field  of  N  aboth,  26.
13.  21.  c.  the  man  into  the  sepulchre  of  Elisha
23.  neither  c.  he  them  from  nis  presence  as  yet
19.  18.  have  c.  their  gods  into  the  fire,  Isa.  37. 19.
32.  nor  c.  a  bank  against  it,  Isa.  37  -  33.

Neh.  9.26.  and  c.  thy  law  behind  their  backs
Esth.  3, 7.  they  c.  Pur,  that  is,  the  lot,  before  llaman


Esth.  9.  24.  Hainan  had  c.  Pur,  that  is,  the  lot
Job  20.  23.  God  shall  c.  the  fury  of  Ins  wrath  on  him-
27  .  22.  God  shall  c.  upon  him  and  not  spare
29.  t  17. 1  c.  the  spoil  out  of  his  teeth
30. 19.  he  hath  c.  me  into  the  mire  and  am  becomo

40.  11.  c.  abroad  the  rage  of  thy  wrath

Psal.  55.  3.  they  c.  iniquity  on  me,  and  hate  me

22.  c.  thy  burden  on  the  Lord, he  shall  sustain  thee
74.  7.  they  have  c.  fire  into  thy  sanctuary

78.  49.  he  c.  on  them  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath
Prov.  1. 14.  c.  in  thy  lot  among  us,  let  us  all  have
Eccl.  11.  1.  c.  thy  bread  on  the  waters,  for  shalt  find
Isa.  2.  20.  a  man  shall  c.  his  idols  to  the  bats
38.  17-  thou  hast  c.  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back
Jer.  26. 23.  c.  Urijah's  body  into  the  graves  ot  people
36.  23.  c.  it  into  the  fire  that  was  on  the  hearth

38. 6.  they  c.  Jeremiah  into  the  dungeon,  9.

41.  7.  Isnmael  slew,  and  c.  them  into  the  pit
Lam.  3.  53.  cut  ofif  my  life,  and  c.  a  stone  upon  me
Ezek.  7.  19.  they  shall  c.  their  silver  in  the  streets

11.  16.  altho’  1  have  c.  them  far  off  among  heathen

23.  35.  because  thou  hast  c.  me  behind  thy  back

28.  17. 1  will  c.  thee  to  the  ground.  I  will  lay  thee

Dan.  3.  20  and  to  c.  them  into  the  fiery  furnace

24.  did  not  we  c.  three  men  bound  into  the  tire  '

6.  24.  c.  them  into  the  den  of  lions,  their  children
Jonah  2.  3.  for  thou  hadst  c.  me  into  the  deep
Mic.  4.  7.  I  will  make  her  c.  off  a  strong  nation

7.  19.  thou  wilt  c.  all  their  sins  into  the  sea
Nah.  3.  6.  I  will  c.  abominable  filth  on  thee
Zech.  5.  8.  c.  it  into  the  ephah,  c.  the  weight

11.  13.  c.  it  to  the  potter,  c.  them  to  the  potter
Mai.  3. 11.  nor  vine  c.  her  fruit  before  time  in  field*
Mat.  3.  10.  is  hewn  down  and  c.  into  the  fire,  7*  19t

5. 29.  pluck  it  outand  c.  it  from  thee,  30.  1 18.  8, 9-
7.  6.  nor  c.  your  pearls  before  swine,  lest  they
15.26.  children’s  bread,  and  c.  it  to  dogs,  Mark 7.27.

17.  27.  c.  an  hook,  and  take  up  fish  first cometh  up

18.  30.  c.  him  into  prison,  till  he  pay  the  debt
22. 13.  c.  him  into  outer  darkness,  25.  30.

27.  14.  the  thieves  c.  the  same  in  his  teeth

Mark  9.  22.  oft-times  it  hath  c.  him  into  the  fire

11.7.  c.  their  garments  on  him,  Luke  19.  .35.

12.  4.  another  servant,  and  at  him  they  c.  stones
41.  c.  money  into  the  treasury,  Luke  21. 4.

43.  this  poor  widow  hath  c.  more  in  than  all,  44.
Luke  12.  5.  who  hath  power  to  c.  into  hell,  fear  him*

19.  43.  thy  enemies  shall  c.  a  trench  about  thee
John  8.  7.  let  him  first  c.  a  stone  at  her

21.  7.  Peter  did  c.  himself  into  the  sea
Acts  12.  8.  c.  thy  garment  about  thee,  follow  me
16.  23.  they  c.  Paul  and  Silas  into  prison  _

27.  43.  who  could  swim  c.  themselves  first  into  sea r

1  Cor.  7.  35.  not  that  I  may  c.  a  snare  upon  you
Rev.  2.  10.  devil  should  c.  some  of  you  into  prison

14.  who  taught  Balak  to  c.  a  stumbling-block
22.  I  will  c.  her  into  a  bed ,  and  them  that  commits
4.  10.  tlie  elders  c.  their  crowns  before  the  throne

18.  21.  like  a  mill-stone,  and  c.  it  into  the  sea
CAST  azoay.

Lev.  26.  44.  I  will  not  c.them  away  nor  abhor  them,
Judg.  15.  17.  c.  away  the  jaw-bone  out  ot  his  hand

2  Sam.  1.  21.  the  shield  of  the  mighty  is  c.  away

2  Kings  7. 15. vessels  the  Syrians  had  c.away  in  haste
2  Chron.  29. 19.  vessels  Ahaz  in  his  reign  did  c.away
Job  8.  4.  have  c.  them  away  for  their  transgression

20.  behold  God  will  not  c.  away  a  perfect  man
Psal.  2.  3.  let  us  c.  away  their  cords  from  us
51.  11.  me  not  away  from  thy  presence
Eccl.  3.  5.  a  time  toe.  away  stones,  and  gather,  6-
Isa.  5.  24.  because  they  have  c.  away  the  law

30.  22.  shall  c.  them  away  as  a  menstruous  cloth

31.  7.  every  man  shall  c.  away  his  idols  of  silver
41.  9. 1  have  chosen  thee,  and  not  c.  thee  away

Jer.  7.  29.  cut  thy  hair,  and  c.  itaway,  O  Jerusalem-
3.3.  26.  then  will  I  c.  away  the  seed  of  Jacob
Ezek.  18. 31. c.away  from  you  all  your  transgressions-
20.  7.  c.  array  every  man  abominations  of  his  eyes-

8.  they  did  not  c.  away  the  abominations  of  eyes
Hos.  9.  17.  my  God  will  c.  them  away,  because
Mat.  13.  48.  gathered  the  good,  but  c.  the  bad  away.
Luke  9.  25.  if  a  man  lose  himself,  or  be  c.  away  _
Rom  11.  l.hath  Godc.  away  his  people,  God  forbid*
2.  God  hath  not  c.  away  his  people,  he  foreknew-
Heb.  10.  35.  c.not  away  your  confidence  which  hatlr
CAST-AWAY.

1  Cor.  9. 27.  lest  that  I  myself  should  be  a  cast-away.
CAST  down.

Exod.  7.  10.  Aaron  c.  down  his  rod  H 12.  they  c.  down-
josh.  lo.  11.  I.ord  c.  down  great  stones  upon  them
Judg.  6.  28.  altar  of  Baal  wasc.  down  and  the  grove

1  Kings  IQ.  42.  Elijah  c.  himself  down  on  the  earth  :

2  Chron.  25.  8.  God  hath  power  to  help  and  c.  down-
12.  and  c.  them  dozen  from  the  top  of  the  rock

Neh.  6.  16.  they  were  c.  dozen  in  their  own  eyes
Job  18. 7.  his  own  counsel  shall  c.  him  down
22.  29.  when  men  are  c.  down,  then  say,  liftingup-

29.  24.  light  of  my  countenance  they  c.  not  dozen
4i.  9.  shall  not  one  be  c.  down  at  the  sight  of  him  1
Psal.  17.  13.  O  Lord,  disappoint  him,  c.  him  dozen

36.  12.  they  are  c.  dozen  and  shall  not  be  able  to  rise

37.  14.  bent  their  bow  to  c.  d.  poor  and  needy

24.  though  he  fall,  he  shall  not  be  utterly  c.  dozen
42. 5.  why  art  thou  c.  down,  O  my  soul,  11. 1  43.  5»

6.  O  my  God,  my  soul  is  c.  down  within  me

56. 7.  in  thine  anger  c.  down  the  people,  O  Lord
62.  4.  consult  to  c.  him  down  from  his  excellency
89.  44.  thou  hast  c.  his  throne  down  to  the  ground
102. 10.  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and  c.  me  down
Prov.  7.  26.  for  she  hath  c.  down  many  wounded'
Isa.  28.  2.  the  Lord  shall  c.  down  with  his  hand
Jer.  6.  15.  time  I  visit,  they  shall  be  c.  dozen,  8. 12..
Lam.  2. 1.  c.  dozen  to  the  earth  the  beauty  of  Israel
Ezek.  6.  4. 1  will  c. dozen  your  slain  before  your  idols

19.  12.  thy  mother  was  c.  down  to  the  ground

31. 16.  when  I  c.  the  Assyrian  down  to  hell

32.  18.  wail  for  Egypt,  and  c.  her  d.  and  daughters
Dan.  7.  9.  I  behelcl  till  the  thrones  werec.  dozen
8.  7.  the  he-goat  c.  dozen  the  ram  to  the  ground
10.  it  c.  dozen  some  of  the  host,  and  of  the  stars
11  sanctuary  was  c.  d.  1)12.  c.  d.  truth  to  ground

11. 12.  he  shall  c.  down  many  ten  thousands-


CAS


CAT


C  AU


C Mat.  4.  6.  if  the  Son  of  Go<l,  c.  thyself  d.  Luke  A.  9.

15.  30.  c.  them  down  at  .1  esus’  feet,  and  he  healed

27.  5.  he  c.  down  the  pieces  of  silver  in  the  temple
Luke  4.  29.  they  might  c.  Jesus  down  headlong
•2  Cor.  4.  9.  we  are  c.  down ,  but  not  destroyed

17.  6.  God  that  comforteth  those  that  arec.  down
■2  Pet.  2.  4.  but  c.  the  angels  down  to  hell
l  Rev.  12.  10.  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is  c.  down
Cast  forth.

Neh.  13. 8. 1  c.  f.  all  the  household  stuff  of  Tobias
Psal.  144.  6.  c.  forth  lightning,  and  scatter  them
Jer.  22.  19.  Jehoiakim  c.  forth  beyond  the  gates
Ezek.  32.  4. 1  will  c.  thee  forth  upon  the  open  held
llos.  14.  5.  he  shall  c.  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon
Jonah  1.  +  4.  the  Lord  will  c.  forth  a  great  wind
5.  mariners  c.f.  the  wares  in  ship  into  the  sea
12.  c.  me /.  into  the  sea,  so  shall  the  sea  be  calm

15.  they  took  Jonah  and  c.  him  forth  inio  the  sea
Mark  7.  26.  would  c.  forth  devil  out  of  her  daughter
.  John  15.  6.  he  is  c.  forth  as  a  branch  and  withered
CAST  lots.

Lev.  16.  8.  Aaron  shall  c.  lots  on  the  two  goats
Josh.  18.  10.  Joshua  c.  lots  for  them  in  Shiloh
1  Sam.  14.  42/  c.  lots  between  me  and  Jonathan
1  Chron.  26.  13.  they  c.  lots  as  well  small  as  great
Psal.  22. 18.  they  part  my  garments  and  c.  lots  upon
my  vesture,  Mat.  27-  35.  John  19.  24.
Isa.  34.  17-  he  hath  c.  the  lot  for  them
..Joel  3.  3.  and  they  have  c.  lots  for  my  people

I  Chad.  11.  in  the  day  foreigners  c.  lots  upon  Jerus.
Jonah  1. 7.  come  and  let  us  c.  lots  that  we  may  know
'Nah.  3. 10.  and  they  c.  lots  for  her  honourable  men
CAST  off.

2  Kings  23.  27.  I  will  c.  off  this  city  Jerusalem
1  Chron.  28.  9.  if  forsake,  he  will  c.  thee  off  for  ever
2  Chr.  11.  14.  for  Jeroboam  and  sons  had  c.  them  off
.  Job  15.  33.  and  shall  c.  off  his  flower  as  the  olive  ‘
Psal.  43.  2.  why  dost  thou  c.  me  off?  why  go  1  ?
44.  9.  thou  hast  c.  off.  60. 1, 10.  I  89.  38. 1  108. 1 1 .

23.  awake,  O  Lord,  arise,  c.  us  not  off  for  ever
71.  9.  c.  me  not  off  in  the  time  of  old  age

74. 1.  O  God,  why  hast  thou  c.  us  off  for  ever  ?

77-  7-  will  the  Lord  c.  off  for  ever

94.  14.  Lord  will  note,  off  his  people,  Lam.  3.  31.

.  Jer.  28.  1 6.  I  will  c.  Llananiah  off  from  the  earth
31.  37. 1  will  c.  off  the  seed  of  Israel,  33.  24.

I. am.  2.  7-  the  Lord  hath  c.  off  his  altar,  abhorred
Eos.  8.  3.  Israel  hath  c.  off  the  thing  that  is  good
5.  thy  calf,  O  Samaria,  hath  c.  thee  off
Amos  1.11.  because  Edom  did  c.  o.^'all  pity
Zech.  10. 6.  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  c.  them  off
Acts  22.  23.  as  they  cried  and  c.  of  their  clothes
Rom.  13.  12.  let  us  c.  off  the  works  of  darkness
■  1  Tim.  5.  12.  because  they  have  c.  off  their  first  faith
CAST  out.

<  Gen.  21 . 10.  c.  out  this  bondwoman  and  her  son
Exod.  34.  24.  I  will  c.  out  the  nations  before  thee
Lev.  18. 24.  nations  are  defiled  which  I  c.  out  before

you,  20.  23.  Deut.  7.  1.
Dent.  9.  17.  I  c.  the  tWQ  tables  out  of  mv  two  hands
i'  .  Josh.  13.  12.  these  did  Moses  smite,  and  c.  them  out
;!  2  Sam.  20.  22.  they  c.  out  Sheba’s  head  to  Joab

1  Kings  9.  7-  this  house  will  I  c.  out,  2  Chron.  7.  20.

21.  26.  as  did  the  Amorites,  whom  the  Lord  c.  out
before  the  children  of  Israel,  2  Kings  16.  3.
2  Kings  10.  25.  the  captains  c.  them  out  and  went
17.  20.  till  he  had  c.  them  out  of  his  sight,  24.  20.

2  Chron.  13. 9.  have  ye  not  c.  out  priests  of  the  Lord
20.  11.  to  come  to  c.  us  out  of  thy  possession
Neh.  1.  9.  if  ye  turn,  though  they  were  of  you  c.  ou
Job  20.  15.  God  shall  c.  them  out  of  his  belly
39.  3.  they  bow  themselves,  they  c.  out  theirsorrovs
Psal.  5. 10.  c.  them  out  in  their  transgressions

18.  42. 1  did  c.  them  out  as  the  dirt  in  the  streets
44.  2.  how  thou  didst  afflict  people  and  c.  them  out
60.  8.  over  Edom  will  I  c.  out  my  shoe,  108.  9.

78.  55.  he  c.  out  the  heathen  before  them,  80.  8.
Prov.  22.10.  c.  out  the  scorner,and  contention  20  out
Isa.  14. 19.  but  thou  art  c.  out  of  thy  grave,  like  an

16.  2.  as  a  wandering  bird  c.  out  of  the  nest

26.  19.  and  the  earth  shall  c.  out  the  dead

34.  3.  their  slain  also  shall  be  c.  out  and  stink  come
58.  7.  that  thou  bring  the  poor  that  are  c.  out
66.  5.  brethren  that  c.  you  out  for  my  name’s  sake
I  .Jer. 7.15. 1  will  c.  you  out  of  my  sight,  as  I  have  c.out

9.  19.  because  our  dwellings  have  c.  us  out

15.  1.  c.  them  out  of  my  sight,  23. 39. !  52.  3.

16.  13.  therefore  will  1  c.  you  out  of  this  land
22. 26.  I  will  c.  thee  out,  and  thy  mother  that  bare
36.  30.  his  dead  body  shall  be  c.  out  in  the  day
51.  34.  "Nebuchadnezzar  hath  c.  me  out
■  Ezek.  16.  5.  but  thou  w’ast  c.  out  in  the  open  field

28.  16.  will  c.  thee  as  profane  out  of  mount,  of  God
Amos  8.  8.  the  land  shall  be  c.  out  and  drowned
Mic.  2.  9._the  women  of  my  people  have  ye  c.  out
■Eeph.  3.  15.  the  Lord  hath  c.  out  thine  enemy
Etch.  1. 21.  to  c.out  the  horns  of  the  Gentiles
9. 4.  the  Lord  will  c.  her  out,  and  smite  her  power
Mat.  5. 13.  salt  unsavoury  to  be  c.  out,  Luke  14.  35.
7-  5.  hypocrite,  first  c.  out  the  beam,  Luke  6. 42.

22.  Lord,  have  we  notin  thy  name  c.  out  devils?
8.  12.  tlie  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  c.  out

16.  and  he  c.  out  the  spirits  with  his  word
31 .  if  thou  c.  us  out,  suffer  us  to  go  into  swine
<).  33.  when  the  devil  was  c.  out  the  dumb  spake

10. 1 .  gave  them  power  against  spirits  to  c.  them  out
8.  heal  the  sick,  raise  the  dead,  c.  out  devils
12.  24.  not  c.  out  devils  but  by  Beelzeb.  Luke  11. 18.
26.  it  Satan  c.  out  Satan,  divided  against  himself
28.  but  if  I  by  the  Spirit  of  God  c.  out  devils

15. 17.  goeth  into  belly,  and  is  c.  out  into  draught
17 •  19.  why  could  not  we  c.  him  out  ?  Mark  9.  28.

■21. 12.  c.  out  all  that  sold,  Mark  11 . 15.  Luke  19. 45.

39.  c.  him  out  of  vineyard,  Mark  12. 8.  Luke  20. 15.
Mark 4.34.  healed  and  c.out  many  devils,  39.  |  6.13.
3.  15.  and  have  power  to  heal  and  c.  out  devils

23.  he  said  to  them,  how  can  Satan  c.  out  Satan  ?

16.  9-.  Magdalene, of  whom  he  had  c.  seven  devils

17.  in  my  name  shall  they  c.  out  devils
*Ltike  6.  22.  c.  out  your  name  as  evil,  for  Son  of  man
4L  20.  if  I  with  the  finger  of  God  c.  out  devils
23.  32.  I  c.  out  devils,  and  do  cures  to-day  and


Luke  20.  12.  they  wounded  him  also,  and  c.  him  out
John  6.  37.  him  that  eometh  1  will  in  no  wise  c.  out
9.  34.  dost  thou  teach  us  ?  and  they  c.  him  out
12.  31.  now  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be  c.  out
Acts  7.  19.  so  that  they  c.  out  their  young  children
21.  when  Moses  wasc.  cat  Pharaoh’s  daughter  took
58.  they  c.  Stephen  out  of  the  city  and  stoned  him
27. 19.  third  day  we  c.  out  the  tackling  of  the  ship

29.  c.  four  anchors  out  |l  38.  c.  out  wheat  into  sea
Gal.  4.  30.  c.  out  the  bondwoman  and  her  son
Rev.  12.  9.  and  the  great  dragon  was  c.  out,  the  devil
15.  the  serpent  c.  out  of  his  mouth  waters,  16.
Lord  CAST  out.

1  Kings  14.  24.  which  the  Lordc.  out  before  children

of  Israel,  2  Kings  16.  3.  2  Chron.  28.  3.  |  33.  2.

2  Kings  17.  8.  the  Lord c.  out  before  Israel,  21.  2.
Zech.  9. 4.  behold,  the  Lord  will  c.  her  out  and  smite

CAST  up.

2  Sam.  20.  15.  they  c.  up  a  bank  against  the  city
Isa.  57.  14.  c.  ye  up,  prepare  the  way,  62.  10.

20.  troubled  sea,  whose  waters  c.  up  mire  and  dirt
Jer.  18.  15.  to  walk  in  paths,  in  a  way  not  c.  up
50.  26.  c.  her  up  as  heaps,  and  destroy  her  utterly
Lam.  2.  10.  c.  up  dust  on  their  heads,  Ezek.  27.  30.
Van.  11. 15.  king  of  the  north  shall  c.  up  amount
CASTEST,  ETH.  [prayer

Job  15.  4.  yea,  thou  c.  off  fear  and  restrainest
21.  10.  their  cow  ealveth  and  c.  not  her  calf
Psal.  50. 17.  seeing  thou  c.  my  words  behind  thee
73.  18.  thou  c .  them  dtfwn  into  destruction
88^  14.  why  c.  thou  off  my  soul  ?  why  hidest  face  ?
147.  6.  the  Lord  c.  the  wicked  down  to  the  ground

17.  he  c.  forth  his  ice  like  morsels,  who  can  stand
Prov.  10.  3.  he  c.  away  the  substance  of  the  wicked

19. 15.  slothfulness  c.  into  a  deep  sleep,  an  idlesoul
21.  22.  c .  down  the  strength  of  the  confidence

26.18.  as  amadman  c.  fire-brands,  arrows, and  death

Jer.  6.  7.  as  a  fountain  so  she  c.  out  her  wickedness
Vos.  9.  +  14.  give  them  a  womb  that  c.  the  fruit
Mat.  9.  34.  he  c.  out  devils,  Marks.  22.  Luke  11. 15.

1  John  4. 18.  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfect  love  c.  fear

3  John  10.  and  c.  them  out  of  the  church

Rev.  6.  13.  even  as  a  fig-tree  c.  her  untimely  figs
CASTING.  “

2  Sam.  8.  2.  he  smote  Moab,  c.  them  down  to  ground

1  Kings  7.  37.  the  bases,  all  of  them  had  one  c.
Ezra  10.1.  weeping  and  c.  himself  down  before  house
Job  6. 21.  ye  see  my  c.  down,  and  are  afraid
Psal.  74.  7-  bye.  down  dwelling-place  of  thy  name

89.  39.  and  profaned  his  crown  by  c.  it  to  the  ground
Mic.  6. 14.  and  thy  c.  down  shall  be  in  midst  of  thee
Mat.  4. 18.  Peter  and  Andrew  c.  a  net  into  the  sea

27.  35.  parted  his  garments,  c.  lots,  Mark  15.  24.
Mark  9.  38.  we  saw  one  c.  out  devils,  Luke  9.  49.
Luke  21.  1.  he  saw  the  rich  men  c.  their  gifts  into

2.  he  saw  also  a  poor  widow  c.  in  two  mites
Rom.  11.  15.  if  c.  away  of  them  be  the  reconciling

2  Cor.  10.  5.  c,  down  imaginations  and  every  thing
1  Pet.  5. 7.  c.  all  your  care  on  him,  for  he  careth  for

CASTLE.

1  Chron.  11.  5.  David  took  c.  of  Zion,  city  of  David
7.  David  dwelt  in  the  c.  the  city  of  David
Prov.  18.  19.  their  contentions  are  like  bars  of  a  c.
Acts  21.  34.  the  chief  captain  commanded  Paul  to
be  carried  into  the  c.  37.  |  22.  24.  |  23.  10.

23. 16.  he  went  and  entered  into  the  c.  and  told  Paul

CASTLES.

Gen.  25.  16.  names  of  Ishmael’s  sons  by  their  c.
Num.  31.  10.  they  burnt  their  goodly  c.  with  fire

1  Chron.  6.  54.  these  the  priests’  c.  in  their  coasts
27.  25.  over  treasures,  and  in  c.  Jehonathan

2  Chron.  17.  12.  Jehoshaphat  built  in  Judah  c.

27.  4.  Jotham  in  the  forest  built  c.  and  towers

Castor  ;  see  Sign.

CATCH.

Exod.  22.  6.  if  fire  break  out  and  c.  in  thorns
Judg.  21.  21.  and  c.  you  every  man  his  wife

1  Kings  20.  33.  now  the  men  did  hastily  c.  it

2  Kings  7. 12.  we  shall  c.  them  alive,  and  get  into  city
Psal.  10.  9.  in  wait  to  c.  the  poor,  he  doth"/,  the  poor

35.  8.  let  his  net  that  he  hath  hid  c.  himself
109. 11.  let  the  extortioner  c.  all  he  hath
Jer.  5. 26.  they  lay  wait,  they  set  a  trap,  they  c.  men
Ezek.  19.  3.  and  it  learned  to  c.  the  prey,  6.

Hab.  1.  15.  they  c.  them  in  their  net  and  gather
Mark  12.  13.  send  Kerodiansto  c.  him  in  his  words
Luke  5.  10.  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  see  men
11.  54.  seeking  to  c.  something  out  of  his  mouth
CATCHETII,  1NG.

Lev.  17.  13.  who  c.  any  beast  or  fowl  may  be  eaten
Ezek.  1.  t  4.  a  fire  c.  itself,  and  brightness
Mat.  13. 19.  the  devil  c.  away  what  was  sown
John  10.  12.  the  wolf  c.  and  scattereth  the  sheep
CATERPILLER,  S.

1  Kings  8.  37.  if  there  be  any  c.  2  Chron.  6.  28.
Psal.  78.  46.  he  gave  their  increase  to  the  c.

105.  34.  he  spake,  and  c.  came  without  number
Isa.  3.3.  4.  your  spoil  like  the  gathering  of  the  c.

Jer -.  51.  14. 1  will  fill  thee  with  men  as  with  c.

27.  cause  the  horses  come  up  as  the  rough  c.

Joel  1.4.  what  canker-worm  left  hath  the  c.  eaten

2.  25.  I  will  restore  the  ears  the  c.  hath  eaten

CATTLE.

Gen.  1. 25.  God  made  the  c.  after  their  kind

3.  14.  Lord  God  said,  thou  art  cursed  above  allc.
7.  21.  all  flesh  died,  both  of  fowl  and  c.  and  beast

8. 1.  God  remembered  N  oah,  and  c.  with  him  in  ark
9.  10. 1  establish  my  covenant  with  fowls,  c.

13.  2.  Abram  was  very  rich  in  c.  silver,  and  gold
30. 40.  Jacob  put  them  not  to  Laban’s  c.

31 . 9.  God  hath  taken  away  the  c.  of  our  father
43.  these  c.  are  my  c.  all  thou  seest  is  mine
34.  5.  his  sons  were  with  the  c.  in  the  field
46.  32.  for  their  trade  hath  been  to  feed  c.

47 -  6.  then  make  them  rulers  over  my  c.

17.  Joseph  gave  bread  in  exchange  for  c.

Exod.  9.4.  shall  sever  betw.c.of  Isr.  and  c.  of  Egypt
20.  made  his’servants  and  c.  flee  into  the  houses
12.  29.  Lord  smote  all  the  first-born  of  the  c.

Lev.  1.  2.  ye  shall  bring  your  offering  of  the  c.
Num.  3.  41.  take  c.  of  the  Levites  instead  of  all

20. 19.  if  I  and  my  c.  drink,  I  will  pay  for  it


Num.  32.  4.  is  a  land  for  c.  and  thy  servants  havec
Deut.  2.  35.  the  c.  we  took  for  a  prey,  3.  7.

Josh.  8.  2.  only  the  c.  shall  ye  take  for  a  prey
27ronly  thee.  Israel  took  for  a  prey,  11. 14.

1  Kings 1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  oxen  and  c.  19,  25.

1  Chron.  28. 1 1.  David  assembled  stewards  over  c.
Job  1. 1 3.  his  c.  also  was  seven  thousand  sheep

1 10.  his  c.  was  increased  in  the  land

36.  33.  the  c.  also  concerning  the  vanpur
Psal.  50.  10.  the  c.  upon  a  thousand  liills  is  mine
104.  14.  he  causetli  the  grass  to  grow  lor  the  c.

148.  10.  beasts  and  all  c.  praise  the  Lord
Eccl.  2. 7-  had  great  possessions  of  great  and  small  c.
Isa.  7.  26.  and  for  the  treading  of  lesser  c.

43.  23.  thou  hast  not  brought  me  the  small  c .

46.  1.  their  idols  were  upon  the  beasts  and  the  c.
Jer.  9.  10.  nor  can  men  hear  the  voice  of  the  c.
Ezek.  34.  17.  I  judge  between  c.  and  c.  20,  22.
Hag.  1. 11.  I  called  for  a  drought  upon  land  and  c
Zech._  2.  4.  for  the  multitude  of  men  and  c.  therein
13.  5.  men  taught  me  to  keep  c.  from  my  youth
Luke  17.  7.  having  servant  feeding  c.  will  say  to  him
John  A.  12.  Jacob,  his  children  drank,  and  his  c.
Much  CATTLE.

Gen.  30.  43.  Jacob  increased  and  had  much  c.

Exod.  12.  38.  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt  with  much  c
Deut.  3. 19.  for  I  know  that  ye  have  much  c.

Josh.  22.  8.  return  to  your  tents  with  very  much  c

2  Chron.  26.  10.  Uzziali  had  much  c.  in  tne  plains
Jonah  4. 11.  spare  Nineveh,  wherein  is  much  c.

Our  CATTLE.

Exod.  10.  26.  our  c.  also  shall  go  with  us

17.  3.  to  kill  us,  our  children,  and  our  c.  with  thirst
Num.  20.  4.  that  we  and  our  c.  should  die  there

32.  16.  we  will  build  sheepfolds  here  for  ourc.

26.  all  our  c.  shall  be  there  in  the  cities  of  Gilead
Josh.  21.  2.  give  us  cities  with  suburbs  for  our  c.
Neh.  9.  37-  have  dominion  over  our  bodies  and  our  c.

10.  36.  to  bring  also  first-born  of  our  sons  and  our  c.

Their  CATTLE.

Gen.  34. 23.  shall  not  their  c.  and  substance  be  ours
Num.  31. 9.  slew  Midianites,  and  tookspoil  of  their  c.
35.  3.  the  suburbs  shall  be  for  their  c.  Josh.  14.  4.
Judg.  6.  5.  the  Midianites  came  up  with  their  c.

1  Sam.. 23. 5.  David  fought,  and  brought  away  their  c.

1  Chron.  5.  9.  because  their  c.  were  multiplied

7. 21.  because  they  came  down  to  take  away  their  c.
Psal.  78.  48.  he  gave  up  their  c.  also  to  the  hail
107.  38.  he  suffered  not  their  c.  to  decrease
Jer.  49.  32.  their  camels  a  booty,  their  c.  a  spoil
Thy  CATTLE.

Gen.  30.  29.  thou  knowest  how  thy  c.  was  with  me
31.  41.  I  served  thee  six  years  for  thy  c.

Exod.  9.  3.  hand  of  the  Lord  is  on  thy  c.  in  the  field

19.  send  therefore  now  and  gather  thy  c.

20.  10.  servant  nor  thy  c.  do  any  work,  Deut.  5. 14.
34.  19.  every  firstling  among  thy  c.  is  mine

Lev.  19. 19.  let  not  thy  c.  gender  with  a  diverse  kind

25.  7.  sabbath  of  the  land  shall  be  meat  for  thy  c.
Deut.  11.  15.  I  will  send  grass  in  fields  for  thy  c.

28.  4.  blessed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  c.  11.  |  30.  9.
51.  he  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  c.  and  thy  land
Isa.  30.23.  that  day  shall  thy  c.  feed  in  large  pastures
Your  CATTLE.

Gen.  47.  16.  give  your  c.  give  you  for  your  c.

Lev.  26. 22.  if  ye  will  not  hearken,  will  destroy  y.  c.
Deut.  3. 19.  your  c.  shall  abide  in  cities,  Jo.sh.~l.  14.

7.  14.  male  nor  female  shall  be  barren  among^.  c.

2  Kings  3.  17.  that  ye  may  drink,  both  ye  and  y. .

CAUGHT.

Gen.  22.  13.  behold,  behind  him  a  ram  c.  by  horns
39.  12.  she  c.  him  by  garment,  saying,  lie  with  me
Exod.  4.  4.  put  forth  his  hand,  and  c.  the  serpent
Num.  31.  32.  rest  of  the  prey  the  men  of  war  had  c.
Judg.  1.  6.  c.  Adoni-bezek,  and  cut  off  his  thumbs
8.14.  c.  a  young  man  of  themenofSuccoth,  and  said

15.  4.  Samson  went  and  c.  three  hundred  foxes

21.  23.  took  wives  of  them  danced,  whom  they  c.

1  Sam.  17.  35.  I  c.  him  by  his  beard  and  slew  him

2  Sam.  2.  16.  and  they  c.  every  one  his  fellow

18.  9.  A  bsalom’s  head  c.  hole!  of  the  oak

1  Kings  1.  50.  and  Adonijah  c.  hold  on  tne  altar

2.  28.  Joab  c.  hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar

11.  30.  Ahijah  c.  the  new  garment  and  rent  it

2  Kings  4.  27.  the  Shunammite  c.  Elisha  by  the  feet
2  Chron.  22.  9.  they  c.  Ahaziah  and  brought  him
Prov.  7.  13.  so  she  c.  him,  and  kissed  him,  and  said
Jer.  50.  24.  O  Babylon,  thou  art  found  and  also  c.
Mat.  14.  31.  Jesus  c.  Peter,  and  said  unto  him

21.  39.  the  husbandmen  c.  him  and  cast  him  out
Mark  12.  3.  they  c.  the  servant  and  beat  him
Luke  8.  29.  oftentimes  it  c.  him,  and  he  was  bound
John  21.  3.  they  went,  and  that  night  c.  nothing
Acts  6.  12.  they  came  upon  Stephen  and  c.  him

8.  39.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  c.  away  Philip

16.  19.  they  c.  Paul  and  Silas,  and  drew  them

26.  21.  for  these  causes  the  Jews  c.  me  in  the  temple

27.  15.  when  the  ship  was  c.  we  let  her  drive

2  Cor.  12.  2.  I  knew  a  man  c.  up  to  the  third  heaven

4.  how  he  was  c.  up  into  paradise,  and  heard  words
16.  being  crafty,  I  c.  vou  with  guile
1  Thess.  4.  17.  we  shall  "be  c.  up  together  with  them
Rev.  12. 5.  her  child  was  c.  up  to  God,  to  his  throne
CAUL,  S.

Exod.  29.  13.  the  c.  that  is  above  the  liver,  22.  Lev.

3.  4, 10,  15. 1  4.  9.  I  7-  4. 1 8. 16,  25. 1  9.  10,  19.
Isa.  3.  18.  the  Lord  will  take  awaj7  their  c.  and  tires
llos.  13. 8.  will  rend  the  c.  of  their  heart  and  devour
CAUSE

Signifies,  [’ll  A  ground,  reason,  or  motive,  1  Sam.
17-  29.  [2]  A  suit,  action,  or  controversy,  Exod.

22.  9.  Isa.  1.  23.  [3]  Sake,  or  account,  2  Cor.

7.  12.

Exod.  22.  9.  the  c.  of  both  shall  come  before  judges
23.  2.  nor  speak  in  a  c.  to  decline  after  many

3.  nor  shalt  thou  countenance  a  poor  man  in  his  c.
6.  nor  wrest  the  judgment  of  the  poor  in  his  c.

Num.  16. 11.  for  which  c.  thou  and  all  thy  company
are  gathered  together  against  the  Lore!
27. 5.  Moses  brought  their  c.  before  the  Lord
Deut.  1.  17.  the  c.  that  is  too  hard  for  you,  bring
Josh.  20.  4.  the  manslayer  shall  declare  his  c.

55


C  A  U


GAU


C  £  A


1  Sam.  17. 29.  and  David  said,  is  there  not  a  c.  ?

25.  39.  Lord  hath  pleaded  the  c.  of  my  reproach

2  Sam.  13. 16.  there  is  no  c.  this  evil  is  greater  than

15. 4.  that  hath  any  suit  ore.  might  come  to  me

1  Kings 8. 45. maintain  their c. 49, 59.  2  C/1.6.  35,  39.

11. 27.  this  was  the  c.  that  he  lift  up  his  hand

12. 15.  for  the  c.  was  from  the  Lord,  2  Chr.  10. 15
L  Chr.  21.  3.  why  will  he  be  a  c.  of  trespass  to  Igrael

2  Chon.  19. 10.  what  c.  shall  come  ot  your  brethren
Ezra  4. 15.  for  which  c.  this  city  was  destroyed
Neh.  6.  6.  for  which  c.  thou  buxldest  the  wall
Job  5. 8.  and  unto  God  will  I  commit  my  c.

13.  18.  behold  now,  1  have  ordered  r..y  c.

23.4.  I  would  order  im  c.  before  him,  and  fill
29. 16  the  c.  which  I  n'.ew  not,  1  searched  out
31  13!  if  I  did  despise  the  c.  of  my  man-servant

Psal.  9.  4.  for  thou  hast  maintained  my  c.

35.  23.  awake  to  my  c.  my  God  and  my  Lord
27.  let  them  be  glad  that  favour  my  righteous  c.

140. 12.  1  know  that  the  1  .ord  will  maintain  the  c.
Prov.  18. 17 .  he  that  is  first  in  his  own  c.  seems  iust

25.  9.  debate  thy  c.  with  thy  neighbour  himself
29. 7.  the  righteous  considered!  the  c.  of  the  poor
31.  8.  open  thy  mouth  for  the  dumb  in  the  c.

Eccl.  7. 10.  say  not  thou,  what  is  the  c.  that
Isa.  1.  23.  nor  doth  c.  of  the  widow  come  to  them
41.  21.  produce  yourc.  saith  the  I .ord,  bring

50.  +  8.  who  is  the  master  of  my  c.  let  him  come

51.  22.  God  that  pleadeth  the  c.  of  his  people
Jer.  5. 28.  they  judge  not  the  c.  of  the  fatherless

11. 20.  for  to  thee  have  1  revealed  my  c.

20. 12.  Lord,  unto  thee  have  1  opened  my  c.

22. 16.  he  judged  the  c.  of  the  poor  and  needy
Lam.  3. 36.  to  subvert  in  a  c.  the  Ld.  appro veth  not

59.  Lord,  thou  hast  seen  my  wrong,  judge  my  c.
Jonah  1.7.  that  he  may  know  for  whose  c.  8.

Mat.  5.  32.  his  wife,  saving  for  the  c.  of  fornication

19.  3.  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife  foi  every  c.
Luke  8.  47.  declared  for  what  c.  she  touched  him
23. 22.  I  have  found  no  c.  of  death  in  him
Acts  10.  21.  what  is  the  c.  wherefore  ye  are  come  ?

13. 28.  though  they  found  no  c.  of  death  in  him
25. 14.  Festus  declared  Paul’s  c.  to  the  king
28. 18.  because  there  was  no  c.  of  death  in  me

2  Cor.  4. 16.  for  which  c.  we  faint  not,  but  though
5. 13.  or  whether  we  be  sober,  it  is  for  your  c.

?.  12.  I  did  it  not  for  his  c.  that  had  done  wrong
Phil.  2. 18.  for  the  same  c.  also  do  ye  joy  with  me
2  Tim.  1. 12.  for  which  c.  I  suffer  these  things
Heb.  2. 11.  for  which  c.  he  is  not  ashamed  to  call
1  Pet.  2. 1 23.  committed  his  c.  to  him  that  judgeth
Plead  CAUSE.

1  Sam.  24. 15.  the  Lord  be  judge,  and  plead  my  c.

Psal.  35. 1. 1  43.  1.  1119.  154.
Psal.  74. 22.  arise,  O  God,  plead  thine  own  c.

Prov.  22.  23.  for  the  Lord  will  plead  their  c.

23. 11.  he  shall  plead  their  c.  with  thee
31.  9.  open  thy  mouth,  plead  the  c.  of  poor,  needy
Jer.  30.  13.  there  is  none  to  plead  thy  c.

50.  34.  the  Lord  shall  thoroughly  plead  their  c.

51.  36.  behold.  I  will  plead  thy  c.  and  take  veng.
Mic.  7.  9.  until  he  plead  my  c.  and  execute

For  this  CAUSE.

Erod.  9. 1 6.  for  this  c.  have  1  raised  up  Pharaoh

2  Chr  on. 32. 26.  for  this  c.  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah  pray.
Dan.  2. 12.  for  this  c.  the  king  was  angry  and  furious
Mat. 19. 5.  for  thisc.  shall  a  man  leave  father  and

mother,  and  cleave  to  wife,  Mark  10. 7 .  Eph.  5.31 .
John  12. 27.  but  for  this  c.  came  1  unto  this  hour
18,  37.  and  for  this  c.  came  I  into  the  world
Rom.  1. 2 6.  for  this  c.  G.  gave  them  up  to  vile  affect.
13.  6.  for  this  c.  pay  ye  tribute  also
15. 9  .for  this  c.  I  will  conf.  to  thee  among  the  gent.

1  Cor.  11.  30.  for  this  c.  many  are  weak  and  sickly
Eph.  3. 14.  for  this  c.  I  bow  my  knees  to  the  I  ather

1  Thess.  2. 13  .for  thisc.  thank  God  without  ceasing

2  Thess. 2.11.  for  this  c.  G.  shall  send  strong  delusion
1  Tim.  1. 16.  howbeit,  for  this  c.  I  obtained  mercy
Heb.  9. 15  .for  this  c.  he  is  the  mediator  ol  new  testa.

1  Pet.  4. 6.  for  this  c.  was  the  gospel  preach,  to  them

Without  CAUSE.

1  Sam.19.5.  wilt  thou  sin,  to  slay  David  without  a  c.  ?
Jab  2.3.  thoumovedstmeto  destroy  him  -without  a  c.
9. 17.  he  multiplieth  my  wounds  without  c.

Psal.  7. 4.  I  delivered  him  that  w.  c.  is  my  enemy
25.  3.  let  them  be  ashamed  that  transgress  w.  c.

35. 7.  to.  c.  they  hid  for  me  a  net,  digged  a  pit  w.  c.
19.  that  hate  me  without  c.  69. 4.  John  15.  25.

109.  3.  and  they  fought  against  me  without  a  c.
119. 78.  the  proud  dealt  perversely  with  me  w.  a  c
161.  princes  have  persecuted  me  without  c.

Prov.  1.  11.  let  us  lurk  for  the  innocent  without  c.
3.  30.  strive  not  with  a  man  to.  c.  if  he  have  done

23.  29.  who  hath  sorrow,  who  hath  wounds

24.  28.  be  not  witness  against  neighbour  wit -

Isa.  52.  4.  the  Assyrian  oppressed  them  without  c.
Lam.  3. 52.  mine  enemies  chased  me  sore  without  c.
Ezek.  14.  23.  have  not  done  w.  c.  all  I  have  done
Mat.  5. 22.  whoso  is  angry  with  his  brother  w.  c.

CAUSE.

Gen.  7. 4. 1  will  c.  it  rain  on  the  earth  forty  days
45. 1.  he  cried,  c.  every  man  to  go  out  from  me
Erod.  8. 5.  c.  frogs  to  come  up  on  the  land  of  Egypt
21. 19.  and  shall  c.  him  to  be  thoroughly  healed
Lev.  19. 29.  thy  daughter,  to  c.  her  to  be  a  whore

26. 16.  consume  the  eyes,  and  c.  sorrow  of  heart
Num.  8.t  7.  c.  a  razor  to  pass  over  the  Levites

16. 5.  who  is  holy,  the  Lord  will  c.  him  to  come
Devt.  1. 38.  encourage  him,  for  he  shall  c.  Israel  to

inherit  it,  3.  28.  ]  31. 7-  Josh.  1.  +  6.

12. 11.  God  shall  choose  to  c.  his  name  to  dwell
24. 4.  and  thou  shalt  not  c.  the  land  to  sin  which
28.  +61.  them  will  I.ord  c.  to  ascend  till  destroyed
Judg.  6.  + 11.  Gideon  threshed  wheat  to  c.  itfiee
2  Sam  13. 13.  whither  shall  I  c.  my  shame  to  go  J

1  Kings  8.  31.  an  oath  laid  on  him  to  c.  him  swear

2  Kings  19.7.  will  c.  him  to  fall  by  sword,  Isa.  37. 7
A 'eh.  13.  26.  him  did  outlandish  women  c.  to  sin
Esth.  3. 13.  c.  to  perish  all  the  .Tews,  7.  +  4.  1  8. 11.

5. 5.  c.  Ilaman  make  haste  to  do  as  Esther  said
6.  +  9.  c.  him  to  ride  on  horseback  through  the  city

Job  6. 24.  c.  me  to  understand  wherein  1  have  erred

56


Job  6.  +  27.  yea,  ye  c.  to  fall  upon  the  fatherless

34. 11.  c.  to  every  man  to  find  according  to  his  ways
38  +  37  .who  can  c.  to  lie  down  the  bottles  of  heaven
Psal.  10.  17.  thou  wilt  c.  thine  ear  to  hear

67.1.  ande.  his  face  to  shine  upon  us,  80.  3,7,19.
76.  8.  thou  didst  c.  judgm.  to  be  heard  from  heav.
90.  +  12.  we  may  c.  our  hearts  to  come  to  wisdom
143.  8.  c.  me  to  hear,  c.  me  to  know  the  way
Prov.  4.  16.  sleep  taken  away,  unless  c .  some  to  fall
19.  +  18.  let  not  thy  soul  spare  to  c.  him  to  die
23.  +  5.  wilt  c .  thine  eyes  to  flee  on  what  is  not
Eccl.  5.  6.  suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  c.  thy  flesh  to  sin
Cant.  8.  13.  hearken  to  thy  voice,  c.  me  to  hear  it
Isa.  3.  12.  they  who  lead  thee  c.  thee  to  err,  9.  16.

27.  6.  he  shall  c.  them  of  Jacob  to  take  root
28  12.  this  is  the  rest  ye  may  c.  the  weary  to  rest
30. 30.  the  Lord  c.  his  glorious  voice  to  be  h  ard
42.  2.  norc.  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets
58.14.  I  will  c.  thee  to  ride  upon  the  high  places
61  11.  so  Lord  will  c.  righteousness  to  spring  forth
66.  9.  shall  1  bring  to  birth,  and  not  c.  bring  forth  r
Jer.  3.  12.  1  will  not  c.  mine  anger  to  fall  on  you
7  3  I  will  c.  you  to  dwell  in  this  place,  7-
1°.  t  Q.  c.  beasts  of  the  field  to  come  and  devour
13  16.  give  glory  to  the  Lord  before  her.  darkness

15. 11.  1  will  c.  the  enemy  to  entreat  thee  well

23.  27.  who  think  to  c.  my  people  forget  thy  na.

25.  +  10.  I  will  c.  to  perish  the  voice  of  mirth

31  2.  even  Israel,  when  I  went  to  c.  him  to  rest
9  I  will  c.  them  to  walk  by  the  rivers  of  waters
32’.  44. 1  will  c.  their  captivity  to  return,  33.  26.
Lam.  3.  32.  though  he  c.  grief,  yet  will  have  com.
Ezek.  20.  37.  I  will  c.  you  to  pass  under  the  rod

24.  8.  that  it  might  c.  fury  to  come  to  vengeance
34  15.  I  will  c.  them  to  he  down,  saith  the  Lord

36. 12.  1  will  c.  men  to  walk  on  you,  even  Israel
Dan.  8.  25.  he  shall  c.  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand
9. 17.  O  our  God,c.  thy  face  to  shine  on  sanctuary

+  18.  we  do  not  c.  to  fall  our  supplication
11.  +  32.  shall  he  c.  to  dissemble  by  flatteries
Hos.  4.  +  9.  I  will  c.  to  return  for  their  ways
Joel  3. 11.  thither  c.  thy  mighty  one3  come  down
Amos  6.  3.  and  c.  the  seat  of  violence  to  come  near

8.  9.  I  will  c.  sun  to  go  down  at  noon  and  darken

9.  +  9.  c.  to  move  Israel  among  all  nations
A Tah.  2.  t  8.  stand,  but  none  shall  c.  them  to  turn
Hab  1.  .3.  why  dost  thou  c.  me  to  behold  grievance  ?
Mat.  5.  +29.  if  thy  right  eye  c.  thee  to  offend

6.  +  2.  c.  not  a  trumpet  to  be  sounded

10.  21.  children  rise  up  against  parents  and  c.  them
to  be  put  to  death,  Mark  13.  12.  Luke  21.  16.

i?0w.l6.17.mark  them  who  c.  divisions  and  offences
Col.  4. 16.  c.  that  it  be  read  in  church  of  Laodiceans
Cause  to  cease.  See  Cease.

CAUSED.

Gen.  2.  21.  God  c.  a  deep  sleep  to  fall  on  Adam
20.  13.  God  c.  me  to  wander  from  my  fathers
Erod.  14.  21.  the  Lord  c..  the  sea  to^o  back
Num.  31  16.  these  c.  Israel  to  commit  whoredom
Deut.  34. 4.  this  is  the  land,  1  have  c.  thee  to  see  it
2  Sam.  7.  11.  c.  thee  to  rest  from  thine  enemies
22.  +  40.  hast  thou  c.  to  bow,  Psal.  18.  +  39.

1  Kings  2. 19.  c.  a  seat  to  be  set  for  the  king  s  mother

2  Chr.  34.  32.  he  c.  all  present  in  Jems,  to  stand  it
Ezra  1.  + 1. Cyrus  c.  a  voice  to  pass  thro’  his  kingdom

6.  12.  the  God  that  hath  c.  his  name  to  dwe  1
Neh.  8. 7. Levites  c. people  to  understand  the  law,  8.
Esth.  5.  + 10.  Ilaman  sent  and  c.  his  friends  to  come
14.  Ilaman  c.  the  gallows  to  be  made
Job  .31.  16.  if  I  have  c.  eyes  of  the  widow  to  fail
Psal.  66. 12.  thou  hast  c.men  to  ride  over  our  heads
78.  13.  he  divided  the  sea,  and  c.  them  to  pass  thro
26.  he  c.  an  east  wind  to  blow  in  the  heaven
119.  49.  word  on  which  thou  hast  c.  me  to  hope
Prov.  7.  21.  with  fair  speech  she  c.  him  to  yield
Isa.  6.  +  7.  c.  it  to  touch  my  mouth,  and  said  to
19.  14.  they  have  c.  Egypt  to  err  in  every  work
4.3.  23. 1  have  not  c.  thee  to  serve  with  an  ottering

47.  +  10.  thy  wisdom  c.  thee  to  turn  away
63.  14.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  c.  him  to  rest

Jer.  3.  +  18.  to  the  land  I  c.  your  fathers  possess  _

12.  14.  which  I  have  c.  my  people  Israel  to  inherit

13.  11.  I  have  c.  to  cleave  to  me  house  of  Israel
29.  31.  Shemaiah  c.  you  to  trust  in  a  lie
.32.  23.  therefore  thou  hast  c.  all  this  evil  to  come
34.  11.  after  they  c.  the  sen-ants  to  return,  16.

48.  4.  her  little  ones  have  c.  a  cry  to  be  heard
Ezek.  16.  7. 1  have  c.  thee  to  multiply  as  the  bud
24.  1.3.  till  I  have  c.  my  fury  to  rest  on  thee
29.  18.  FI  ebuch.  c.  his  army  to  sen-e  against  I yrus
.32.  23.  which  c.  terror  in  the  land,  24,  25,  26.

Dan.  9.  21.  Gabriel  being  c.  to  fly  swiftly,  touched
Hos.  4.  12.  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  c .  them  to  err
Amos  2.  4.  and  their  lies  c.  them  to  err,  after  which

4. 7. 1  c.  to  rain  on  one  city,  I  c.  not  to  rain  on
Zech.  3.4.  I  havec.  thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee
Mai.  2.  8.  ye  have  c.  many  to  stumble  at  the  law
John  11.  37.  have  c.  this  man  should  not  have  died
Acts  15.  3.  they  c.  great  joy  to  all  the  brethren
2  Cor.  2. 5.  but  if  any  havec.  grief,  hath  grieved  part
Rev.  13. lfi.c.all  to  receive  amark  in  their  right-hand
CAUSES.

Erod.  18. 19.  that  thou  mayest  bring  c.  to  God
26.  the  hard  c.  they  brought  to  Moses
Deut.  1.  16.  hear  the  c.  between  your  brethren
Jer.  3.  8.  all  the  c.  whereby  backsliding  Israel
Lam.  2. 14.  but  have  seen  for  thee  c .  of  banishment
3.  58.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  pleaded  the  c.  of  my  soul
Acts  26.21. for  these  c.  the  Jews  caught  me  in  temple
CAUSEST.

Job  30.  22.  thou  c.  me  to  ride  on  the  wind
Psal.  65. 4.  blessed  is  man  thou  c.  approach  to  thee
CAUSETII.

Num.  5. 18.  the  water  that  c.  the  curse,  19, 22, 24,27 •
Job  12.  24.  he  c.  them  to  wander  in  a  wilderness
where  there  is  no  way,  Psal.  107  -  40.
20.  3.  the  spirit  of  understanding  c.  me  to  answer
.37. 13.  he  c.  it  to  come  hither  for  correction
Psal.  104.  14.  he  c.  the  grass  to  grow  for  the  cattle
1.35.  7.  he  c.  vapours  to  ascend,  Jer.  10. 13.  I  51.  lo.
147.  18.  c.  his  wind  to  blow,  and  the  waters  flow
Prov.  10.  5.  is  a  son  that  c.  shame,  17-2.1 19.  26.


Prov.  10.  + 17.  he  that  refuseth  reproof  c.  to  err
17. 2.  a  wise  servant  shall  rule  over  a  son  c.  sham*
19.  27.  cease  to  hear  the  instruction  that  c.  to  err
28.  10.  whoso  c.  righteous  to  go  astray  in  evil  way
Isa.  64.  2.  the  fire  c.  the  waters  to  boil,  to  make
Ezek.  44.  18.  not  gird  with  any  thing  that  c.  sweat
Dan.  11 .  +  20.  one  that  c.  an  exacter  of  the  kingdom
Mat,  5. 32.  put  away  wife  c.  her  to  commit  adultery
2  CVr.  2.  14.  thanks  be  to  God,  who  c.  us  to  triumph
9.  11.  which  c.  through  us  thanksgiving  to  God
Rev.  13.  12.  c.  the  earth  to  worship  the  first  beast
CA L  SEW  A1  .

1  Citron.  26.  16.  lot  came  forth  by  the  c.  of  going  up
18  at  Parbar  westw-ard  four  at  the  c.  and  two

Prov.  15.  +  19.  way  of  righteous  raised  up  as  a  c
Isa.  7.  +  3.  go  up  in  the  c.  of  the  fuller  s  field
CAUSING.

2  Kings  2.  +  19.  the  ground  c.  to  miscarry
Cant.  7.  9.  c.  the  lips  of  those  asleep  to  speak
Isa.  30.  28.  a  bridle  in  the  jaws  c.  them  to  err
Jer.  29.  10.  in  c.  you  to  return  to  this  place

33.  12.  shepherds  c.  their  flock3  to  lie  down
Ezek  39.  +  28.  know  I  am  the  Lord  c.  them  to  be  led
CAUSELESS.

1  Sam.  25.  31.  either  that  thou  hast  shed  blood  c.
Prov.  26.  2.  so  the  curse  c.  shall  not  come
CAVE,  S.

Gen.  19.  30.  Lot  dwelt  in  a  c.  he  and  his  daughters
2.3  17.  field  and  c.  made  sure  to  Abraham,  20.

19.  Abraham  buried  Sarah  in  the  c.  of  the.  field
49.  29.  bury  me  with  my  father  in  c.  of  Ephron
Josh.  10.  16.  these  five  kings  fled  and  hid  in  a  c.  17.
Judg  6  2.  because  of  the  Midianites  Israel  made  c.

1  Sam.  13. 6.  Israel  did  hide  themselves  in  c.  in  rocks

22.  1.  David  escaped  to  the  c.  of  Adullam

24.  10.  Lord  delivered  thee  into  my  hand  in  the  c.

2  Sam.  23.  13.  came  to  David  to  the  c.  of  Adullam
1  Kings  18.  4.  the  prophets  hid  by  fifty  in  a  c.  13.

19.  9.  Elijah  came  to  a  c.  and  lodged  there
ha  2  19.  they  shall  go  into  c.  for  fear  ot  the  Lord
Ezek.  33.  27.  they  shall  die  that  be  in  the  c.

John  11 . 38.  the  grave,  it  was  a  c.  a  stone  lay  upon  it
Heb.  11.  38.  they  wandered  in  dens  and  c.  ot  earth
C  E  A  SE

Signifies,  [1]  To  leave  off,  or  give  over,  1  Sam.  7.
8.  Isa.  33.  1.  [2]  To  be  utterly  forgotten,  Deut.
32.  26.  [3]  To  be  quiet,  Judg.  15.  7-  [4]  lo  be
wanting,  Deut.  15.  11.  [5]  To  be  removed  by
death,  or  otherwise,  Lam.  5.  14.  [6]  Not  to  lean
to ,  or  depend  on9  Prov.  23.  4.  [?]  abstain
from,  Psal.  37.  8.  Isa.  1.  16.

Gen.  8.  22.  and  day  and  night  shall  not  c.

Erod.  9.  29.  as  I  am  gone  the  thunder  shall  c.

23.  +  5.  would  c.  to  leave  thy  business  tor  him
Num.  8.  25.  from  the  age  of  fifty  years  shall  c.

11.  25.  seventy  elders  prophesied,  and  did  not  c.
17.  5.  I  will  make  to  c.  the  murmurmgs
Deut.  15. 11.  the  poor  shall  never  c.  out  of  the  land
32  26.  I  would  make  remembrance  of  them  to  c
Josh.  22. 25.  so  make  our  children  c.  from  tearing  L.


Jos/i.  22.  go.  so  mane  oui  uuiuicu  t.  uum  .ca.

Judg.  15.  7.  yet  will  I  be  avenged,  alter  1  will  c.

20.  28.  shall  I  yet  again  go  to  battle,  or  shall  1  c.  ?

1  Sam.  7.  8.  c.  not  to  cry  to  Lord  our  God  for  us

2  Kings  23.  +  5.  caused  to  c.  the  idolatrous  priests
2  Chron.  16. 5.  when  Baasha-heard  it,  let  his  work  c.
Ezra  4.  23.  made  them  to  c.  by  force  and  power

6.  +  8.  that  they  be  not  made  to  c.

Neh  6.  3.  why  should  the  work  c.  while  1  comer
Job  .3.  17.  there  the  wicked  c.  from  troubling
10.  20.  my  days  few,  c.  then,  let  me  alone
14.  7.  that  the' tender  branch  thereof  will  not  c.
Psal.  .37.  8.  c.  from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath
46.  9.  he  maketh  wars  to  c.  to  the  end  of  the  earth
89.  44.  thou  hast  made  his  glory  to  c.  and  cast
119.  +  119.  thou  causest  the  wicked  to  c.

Prov.  19. 27.  c.  to  hear  instruction  thatcauseth  to  err

20.  3.  it  is  an  honour  for  a  man  to  c.  from  strife
22. 10.  cast  scorner,  yea  strife  and  reproach  shall  c.
23.  4.  labour  to  be  rich,  c.  from  thy  wisdom
Eccl.  12.  3.  the  grinders  c.  because  they  are  few
Isa.  1. 16.  c.  to  do  evil  |l  2.  22.  c.  ye  from  man

10  25  yet  a  little  while  and  indignation  shall  c.

16.  10. 1  have  made  their  vintage  shouting  to  c.

17.  3.  the  fortress  also  shall  c.  from  Ephraim

21.  2.  all  the  sighing  thereof  have  I  made  to  c.

33.  1.  when  thou  shalt  c.  to  spoil,  shalt  be  spoiled

Jer  14  17  let  tears  run  down  and  let  them  not  c.
17."  8.  leaf  green,  nor  shall  c.  from  yielding  fruit
31.  36.  then  the  seed  of  Israel  shall  c.

Lam.  2.  18.  let  not  the  apple  of  thme  eye  c.

Ezek.  6.  6.  that  your  idols  may  be  !  roken  and  c.

7.  24.  I  will  make  the  pomp  of  the  strong  to  c.

12.  2.3.  said1  the  Lord.,  I  will  make  this  proverb  c.
2.3.  27.  thus  will  I  make  thy  lewdness  to  c.

30*  10.  1  will  make  the  multitude  of  Egypt  to  c.

18.  the  pomp  of  her  strength  shall  c.  33.  28.

Hos.  7.  +  4.  raiser  will  c.  from  raising  .

Amos7.5.  O  Lord  God,  c.  by  whom  shall  Jacob  arise
lets  13.  10.  will  not  c.  to  pervert  the  right  ways

1  Cor.  13.  8.  whether  they  be  tongues,  they  shall  c.
Eph.  1.  16.  I  c.  not  to  give  thanks  for  you

Col.  1.  9.  we  do  not  c.  to  pray  for  you  to  be  filled

2  Pet.  2.  14.  having  eyes  that  cannot  c.  from  sin

Cause  to  CEASE.

Lev.  26. +  6. 1  will  cause  to  c.  evil  beasts,  Ezek.  34.25.
Ruth  4.  + 14.  not  earned  to  c.  to  thee  a  kinsman
2  Kings  2.3. +  5.  cause  to  c.the  idolatrous  priests
Ezra  4.  21.  cause  these  men  to  c.  city  be  not  built
5  5.  the  eye  of  their  God  on  them,  they  could  not
cause  them  to  c.  till  matter  came  to  Darius
Neh.  4.  11.  slay  them  and  cause  the  work  to  c.
Psal.  85.  4.  cause  thine  anger  toward  us  to  c.

Prov.  18.  18.  the  lot  causeth  contentions  to  c.

Isa  13.  11. 1  will  cause  the  arrogancy  of  proud  to  c-

30. 11.  caus-e  the  holy  One  of  Israel  to  e.  before  us
Jer.  7.  .34.  cause  mirth  to  c.  from  the  cities  of  Judah
36.  29.  cause  to  c.  man  and  beast,  IIos.  2.  1L
48  35  I  will  cause  to  c.  in  Moab  him  that  offeretli
Ezek.  16.  41.  cause  thee  to  c.  from  playing  harlot
2.3  48.  thus  will  I  cause  lewdness  to  c.

26.  13.  I  will  cause  the  noise  of  thy  songs  toe.

3o!  13.  1  will  cause  their  images  to  c.  out  of  rsoph


C  E  V


C  E  K


C  HA


Lick-  34. 10.  came  them  toe.  from  feeding  the  dock
Pan.  9.  27-  he  shall  cause  the  oblation  to  c.

11.  18.  cause  the  reproach  offered  by  him  to  c.
lies.  1. 4.  will  cau  e  to  c.  kingdom  of  house  of  Israel
CEASED.

Gen.  18. 11.  it  c.  to  be  with  Sarai  after  manner  of
lx  d.  9-  33.  thunders  and  hail  c.  and  rain  was  not
34.  wh<  n  Pharaoh  saw  that  the  thunders  c.

Jo.y/i.  5.  12.  the  manna  c.  cn  the  morrow  after
Judg.  2. 19.  they  c.  not  fre  m  their  own  doings
5.  7-  the  inhabitants  of  villages  c.  they  c.  in  Israel
1  Sun.  2. 5.  and  they  that  were  hungry  c.

25.  9.  they  spake  in  the  name  of  David  and  c.
Ezra  4.  24.  then  c.  the  work  of  the  house  of  God
Job  32. 1.  so  these  thiee  men  c.  to  answer  Job
Psal.  35.  15.  they  did  tear  me  and  c.  net
77-2.  my  sore  ran  in  the  night  and  c.  not
Isa.  14.  4.  how  hath  the  oppressor  c.  golden  city  c.
Lam.  5.  14.  the  elders  have  c.  from  tire  gate

15.  the  joy  of  our  heart  is  c.  our  dance  is  turned
Jonah  1. 15.  they  took  up  Jonah,  sear,  from  raging
Mat.  14.  32.  the  wind  c.  Mark  4.  39.  1  6.  51.

Luke  7.  45.  this  woman  hath  note,  to  kiss  my  feet

11. 1.  as  he  was  praying  in  a  place,  when  he  c.

•  Acts  5. 42.  they  c.  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus

20.  1.  after  the  uproar  was  c.  Paul  called  disciples
31.  by  space  of  three  years  I  c.  not  to  warn  every

21.  14.  when  he  would  not  be  persuaded  we  c.
Gal.  5.  11.  then  is  the  offence  or  the  cross  c.

Heb.  4.  10.  he  also  hath  c.  from  his  own  works

10. 2.  for  then  they  would  not  have  c.  to  be  offer.

1  Pet.  4. 1.  who  suffered  in  flesh,  hath  c.  from  sin

CEASETH.

Psal.  12.  1.  help,  Lord,  for  the  godly  man  c.

49.  8.  redempt.  of  soul  precious,  and  it  c.  for  ever
Prov.  26. 20.  so  where  there  is  no  tale-bearer  strife  c.
La.  16.  4.  the  extortioner  is  at  an  end,  the  spoiler  c.
24.  8.  the  mirth  of  tabretsc.  joy  of  the  harp  c.

33.  8.  high  ways  lie  waste,  the  way -faring man  c.
Lam.  3.  49.  mine  eye  trickleth  down  andc.  not
Hot.  7.  4.  c.  from  raising  after  he  kneaded  dough
Acts  6. 13.  this  man  c.  not  speak  blasphemous  words
CEASING.

Exod.  21.  1 19.  he  shall  pay  for  the  c.  of  his  time
1  Sam.  12.  23. 1  should  sin  in  c.  to  pray  for  you
Isa.  6.  +  9.  hear  ye  without  c.  but  understand  not
Acts  12. 5.  but  prayer  was  made  without  c.  for  him
Rom.  1.  9.  without  c.  I  make  mention,  1  These.  1.3.

1  Thess.  2. 13.  for  this  we  thank  God  without  c.

5. 17.  pray  without  c.  in  every  thing  give  thanks

2  Tim.  1.  3.  without  c.  I  have  remembrance  of  thee

CEDAR.

This  tree  is  much  celebrated  in  the  scriptures :  It
shoots  out  its  branches  at  ten  or  twelve  feet  from
the  ground  :  Its  branches  are  large ,  and  at  a
distance  from  one  another ;  its  leaves  are  some¬
thing  like  those  of  rosemary  ;  it  is  always  green ,
and.  distils  a  kind  of  gum ,  to  which  different
effects  are  attributed :  The  wood  of  it  is  incor-
1  ruptible,  beautiful,  solid,  and  inclining  to  a  brown
colour ;  it  bears  a  small  apple,  like  that  of  the
pine.  They  made  use  of  this  wood  not  only  for
the  beams  and  planks  which  covered  edifices,  and
served  for  ceilings  to  apartments,  but  they  plated
them  likewise  in  the  substance  of  their  walls,  and
so  disposed  them  and  the  stone  together,  that  there
were '  three  rows  of  stone  and  one  of  cedar  wood,
1  Kings  6.  36.  By  the  cedar  of  Lebanon,  the
king  of  Israel  may  be  understood,  2  Kings  14.  9.
Hereunto  also  the  felicity  and  growth  of  the  faith¬
ful  is  a  mpared,  Psal.  92.  12.

2  Sam.  "7.2.  king  said,  I  dwell  in  an  house  of  c.

7.  saying,  why  build  ye  not  me  an  house  of  c.?

1  Kings  4.  33.  he  spake  from  the  c.  to  the  hyssop

5. 8.  I  will  do  all  thy  desire  concerning  c.

2  Kings  14. 9.  the  thistle  sent  to  the  c.  2  Chr.  25. 18.
Job  40.  17.  Behemoth  moveth  his  tail  like  a  c.

'  Psal.  92. 12.  the  righteous  shall  grow  like  a  c.

1  Cant.  1.  17.  the  beams  of  our  house  are  c.

8.  9.  we  will  inclose  her  with  boards  of  c.

Isa.  41.  19.  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  c.
Jer.  22. 14.  it  is  ceiled  with  c.  painted  with  vermil.

15.  because  thou  closest  thyself  in  c.

Ezek.  17. 3.  a  great  eagle  took  Highest  branch  of  c.

22.  I  will  take  of  the  highest  branch  of  the  c .

23.  it  shall  bear  fruit  and  be  a  goodly  c.

27. 24.  chests  made  of  c.  among  the  merchandise
31.  3.  the  Assyrian  was  a  c.  in  Lebanon
Zeph.  2.  14.  for  he  shall  uncover  the  c.  work
Zech.  11.2.  howl,  fir-tree,  for  the  c.  is  fallen
CEDAR-TREES.

Num.  24.  6.  Israel’s  tabernacles  are  c.  beside  waters
2  Sam. 5. 11.  Hiram  sent  c.  to  David  and  carpenters

1  Kings  5. 6.  that  they  hew  me  c.  out  of  Lebanon
10.  so  Hiram  gave  Solomon  c.  and  fir  trees.  9. 11.

2  Kings  19.  23.  I  will  cut  down  the  tall  c.  thereof
1  Chron.  22.  4.  David  prepared  c.  in  abundance

I  2  Chron.  1.  15.  c.  made  he  as  the  sycamore,  9.  27.

2. 8.  send  me  c.  and  fir-trees  out  of  Lebanon
Ezra  3. 7-  gave  money  to  bring  c.  from  Lebanon

CEDAR-WOOD.

Lev.  14.  4.  take  c.  and  hyssop,  6,  49,  51,  52.

;  A  urn.  19. 6.  the  priest  shall  take  c.  and  hyssop
l  Ci.ron.  22.  4.  they  brought  much  c.  to  David
CEDARS.

1  Kings  10.  27.  c.  made  he  to  be  as  sycamore-trees

1  Chr.  17. 1.  David  said,  l  dwell  in  an  house  of  c.

2  Chr.  2.  3.  didst  send  David  c.  to  build  an  house
Peal.  29.  5.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  breaketh  the  c.

80.  10.  the  boughs  thereof  were  like  goodly  c.

148.  9.  praise  him  also  c.  and  fruitful  trees

Cant.  5.  15.  his  countenance  excellent  as  the  c.

Isa.  9. 10.  we  will  change  the  sycamores  into  c.

37  .  24.  I  will  cut  down  the  tall  c.  thereof

44. 14.  lie  heweth  him  down  c.  and  taketh  oak
Jer.  22.7.  they  shall  cut  down  thy  choice  c.

I  23.0  Lebanpn.that  makestthy  nest  in  thee.

Ezek  31.8.  c.  in  garden  of  God  could  not  hide  him
!  Amos  2.  9-  Amorites  height  as  the  height  of  c.

Zech.  11. 1.  O  Lebanon,  that  fire  may  devour  thy  c.
CEDARS  of  Lebanon.

Judg.  9. 15-  fire  out  of  the  bramble  devour  c.  of  Leb.


Psal.  104. 16.  the  c.  cf  Leb.  which  he  hath  planted
Isa.  2.  13.  day  of  the  Lord  upbn  all  the  c.  of  Leb.
14.  8.  c.  of  Leb.  rejoice  at  thee,  saying,  since  thou
Ezek,  27.  5.  c.  from  Leb.  to  make  masts  for  thee
CELEBRATE.

Lev.  23.  32.  from  even  to  even  shall  c.  your  sabbath
41.  a  statute,  ye  shall  c.  it  in  the  seventh  month
Isa.  38. 18.  for  the  grave  cannot,  death  cannot  c.  thee
CELESIIAL.

1  Cor.  15.  40.  are  c.  bodies,  glory  of  the  c.  is  one
CELLARS.

1  Chron.  27.  28.  and  over  the  c.  of  oil  wras  Joash
CENSER,  S.

Lev.  10.  1.  sons  of  Aaron  took  either  of  them  c.

16. 12.  he  shall  take  a  c.  full  of  burning  coals
Num.  4.  14.  they  shall  put  upon  it  vessels,  even  c.

16.  6.  this  do,  take  ye  c.  ||  17.  every  man  his  c.

39.  Eleazar  the  priest  took  the  brasen  c.

1  Kings  7.  50.  made  c.  of  pure  gold,  2  Chr.  4.  22.

2  Chron.  26.  19.  Uzziah  had  a  c.  in  his  hand  to  burn
Ezek.  8.  11.  with  every  man  his  c.  in  his  hand

l leb.  9.  4.  the  holiest  had  the  golden  c.  and  the  ark
Rev.  8.  3.  the  angel  came,  having  a  golden  c.

5.  the  angel  took  the  c.  and  filled  it  with  fire
CENSURE.

2  Cor.  2. 1 6.  sufficient  to  such  a  man  is  this  c.
CENTURION,  8.

Mat.  8.  5.  there  unto  him  a  c.  beseeching  him

8.  c.  said,  Lord,  l  am  not  worthy  thou  shouldest
27.  51.  when  the  c.  saw  the  earthquake  [come

Luke  7. 2.  c.  servant,  who  was  dear  to  him,  was  sick

23.  47.  now  when  the  c.  saw  what  ivas  done
Acts  10.  1.  Cornelius  was  a  c.  of  the  Italian  band

22.  Cornelius  the  c.  a  just  man  thatfeareth  God

21.  32.  who  immediately  took  c.  and  ran  down

22.  26.  when  the  c.  heard  that,  he  went  and  told

23.  17.  then  Paul  called  one  of  the  c.  to  him

23.  he  called  to  him  two  c.  saying,  make  ready

24.  23.  and  he  commanded  a  c.  tokeep  Paul  [band

27.  1.  delivered  Paul  to  Julius  a  c.  of  Augustus’
11.  the  c.  believed  the  master  more  than  Paul
43.  c.  willing  to  save  Paul,  kept  them  from  purp.

28.  16.  the  c.  delivered  the  prisoners  to  the  captain

CEREMONIES.

Num.  9.  3.  3hall  keep  passover  according  to  all  thee.
Heb.  9.  1 1.  the  first  covenant  had  also  c.

A  Certain  Man.  See  Man.

CERTAIN.

Exod.  16.  4.  ye  shall  gather  a  c.  rate  every  day
Num.  16.  2.  Korah  rose  with  c.  of  children  of  Isr.
Deut.  13. 13.  c.  men  the  children  of  Belial  are  gone

25.  2.  the  wicked  man  be  beaten  by  a  c.  number
2  Chron.  8.  13.  after  a  c.  rate  every  day  offering
Nek.  1.  2.  Hanani  came,  he  and  c.  men  of  Judah

4.  I  mourned  c.  days,  and  fasted,  and  prayed
11. 23.  a  c.  portion  should  be  for  singers  every  day

13.  25.  I  smote  c.  of  them,  and  plucked  off  hair
Jer.  41. 5.  there  came  c.  from  Shechem,  from  Shiloh

52. 15.  the  captain  carried  away  c.  of  poor  people
Pan.  8.  27.  I  Daniel  fainted  and  was  sick  c.  days
11.  13.  the  king  of  north  shall  come  after  c.  years
Mat.  18.23.  kingd.  of  heav.  likened  to  c.  king,  22. 2.
20.20.  she  and  her  sons  desiring  ac.  thing  of  him
Mark  12.  42.  there  came  a  c.  poor  widow,  Luke  21. 2.

14.  57.  arose  c.  and  bare  false  witness  against  him
Luke  5. 12.  it  came  to  pass  when  he  was  in  a  c.  city
8.  20.  told  him  by  c.  thy  mother  stands  to  see  thee

10.  38.  as  he  went  into  ac.  village,  17.  12.

11.  27.  a  c.  woman  lifted  up  her  voice  and  said
37.  a  e.  Pharisee  besought  nim  to  dine  with  him

18.  9.  this  parable  to  c.  who  trusted  in  themselves

23.  19.  who  for  a  c.  sedition  and  for  murder
24.22.  c.  women  also  made  us  astonished,  who  were

24.  c.  of  them  with  us  went  to  the  sepulchre
John  5.  4.  an  angel  went  down  at  a  c.  season
Acts  9.  19.  Saul  was  c.  days  with  the  disciples

10.  48.  they  prayed  Peter  to  tarry  c.  days
12. 1.  Llerod  the  king  to  vex  c.  of  the  church

15.  24.  c.  which  went  from  us  have  troubled  us

17.  28.  as  c.  of  your  own  poets  have  said,  for  we
Rom.  15.  26.  to  make  a  c.  contribution  for  saints  at
Gal.  2. 12.  for  before  that  c.  came  from  James
Heb.  2.  6.  but  one  in  a  c.  place  testified,  what  is  man
4.  4.  he  spake  in  a  c.  place  of  7th  day  on  this  wise

7.  he  limiteth  a  c.  day,  saying  in  David,  to  day
10.  27.  but  a  c.  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment
Jude  4.  for  there  are  c.  men  crept  in  unawares
CERTAIN.

Deut.  13. 14.  if  it  be  truth,  and  the  thing  c.  17.  4.

1  Kings  2.  37.  know  for  c.  thou  shalt  surely  die,  42.
Jer.  26. 15.  know  for  c.  if  ye  put  me  to  death
Dan.  2.  45.  the  dream  is  c.  and  interpretation  sure
Acts  25.  26.  I  have  no  c.  thing  to  write  to  my  lord
1  Cor.  4. 11.  we  have  no  c.  dwelling-place
1  Tim.  6.  7.  it  is  c.  we  can  carry  nothing  out
CERTAINLY.

Gen.  18.  10.  he  said,  1  will  c.  return  to  thee

26.  28.  we  saw  c.  the  Lord  was  with  thee

43.  7-  could  we  c.  know,  he  would  say,  bring  your

44.  15.  wot  ye  not  such  a  man  as  I  can  c.  divine
50.  15.  will  c.  requite  us  all  the  evil  we  did  to  him

Exod.  3. 12.  c.  I  will  be  with  thee,  this  be  a  token

22.  4.  if  theft  be  c.  found  in  his  haqd  alive
Lev.  5.  19.  he  hath  c.  trespassed  against  the  Lord

24.  16.  all  the  congregation  shall  c.  stone  him
Josh.  9.  24.  because  it  was  c.  told  thy  servants
Judg.  14.  12.  if  ye  can  c.  declare  the  riddle  to  me
1  Sam.  20.  3.  thy  father  c.  knoweth  I  have  found

9.  if  I  knew  c.  evil  were  determined  by  my  father

23.  10.  c.  heard  that  Saul  will  come  to  Kedah

25.  28.  Lord  will  c.  make  my  lord  a  sure  house

1  Kings  1.  30.  even  so  will  1  c.  do  this  day

2  Kings  8. 10.  go,  say  to  him,  thou  mayest  c.  recover
2  Chr.  18. 27.  Micaiah  said,  if  thou  c.  return  in  peace
Prov.  23.  5.  for  riches  c.  make  themselves  wings
Jer.  8.  8.  we  are  wise,  lo,  c.  in  vain  made  he  it

13. 12.  do  we  not  c.  know  every  bottle  be  filled

25.  28.  thus  saith  the  Lora,  ye  shall  c.  drink
36.  29-  king  of  Babylon  shall  c.  destroy  this  land
40.  14.  dost  thou  c.  know  that  Baal  is  sent
42. 19.  know  c.  1  have  admonished  you  this  day
22.  c.  ye  shall  die  by  the  sword  and  by  famine


Jer.  44. 17.  c.  do  what  thing  goetli  out  of  our  mouth
Lam.  2. 16.  c.  this  is  the  day  that  we  looked  for
Dan.  11. 10.  one  shall  c.  come  and  overflow.  13.
Zech.  11.  t 11.  poor  c.  knew  it  was  word  ot  the  Lord
Luke  23.  47  •  say  inc,  c.  this  was  a  righteous  man
CERTAINTY.

Josh.  23. 13.  know  for  c.  Lord  will  no  more  drive

1  Sam.  23.  23.  come  ye  again  to  me  with  the  c.
Prov.  22. 21.  make  known  the  c.  of  words  of  truth
Dan.  2. 8.  1  know  of  c.  ye  would  gain  the  time
Luke  1 . 4.  thou  mightest  know  the  c.  of  those  things
Acts  21. 34.  he  could  not  know  the  c.  for  tumult

22.  30.  because  he  would  have  known  the  c.  why
CERTIFY,  1ED.

2  Sam.  15. 28.  till  there  come  word  from  you  to  c.  me
Ezra  4. 14.  therefore  have  we  sent  and  c.  the  king

16.  we  c.  the  king,  that  if  this  city  be  built  again
5.  10.  we  asked  their  names  also  to  c.  thee
7. 24.  we  c.  you  to  impose  no  toll  on  the  Levites
Esth.  2.22.  Esther  c.  king  thereof  in  Mordecai’sname
Gal.  1. 11. 1  c.  you  gospel  [preached,  not  after  man
CHAFED.

2  Sam.  17. 18.  they  be  c.  in  their  minds  as  bear  robbed
CHAFF

Is  the  refuse  of  winnowed  corn,  which  is  barren,
light,  and  apt  to  be  driven  to  and  fro  with  the
wind,  Psal.  1.  4.  To  which  are  compared,  (1)
f  alse  doctrine,  or  men's  dreams  and  inventions,
Jer.  23.  28.  (2)  fruitless  plots  and  designs,

Isa.  33.  11.  (3)  Hypocrites  and  ungodly  persons,
who  are  vile,  barren,  and  inco?istaut,  like  chaff.
Mat.  3. 12.

Job  21. 18.  wicked  as  c.  that  storm  carrieth  away
Psal.  1.  4.  like  the  c.  which  the  wind  driveth  away

35. 5.  let  them  be  as  c.  before  the  wind

Isa.  5. 24.  as  flame  consumeth  the  c.  so  their  root
17-  13.  the  nations  shall  be  chased  as  the  c.

29. 5.  terrible  ones  shall  be  as  c.  that  passeth  awav

33. 11.  ye  shall  conceive  c.  and  bring  forth  stubble

41. 15.  thresh  mountains,  and  make  the  hills  as  c.
Jer.  23.  28.  what  is  the  c.  to  the  wheat  ?  saith  I  ord
Dan.  2.  35.  became  like  the  c.  of  the  threshing  floor
Hos.  13.  3.  as  the  c.  which  is  driven  with  whirlwind
Zeph.  2. 2.  before  the  decree,  before  day  pass  as  c.
Mat.  3. 12.  will  burn  up  the  c.  with  fire,  Luke  .3. 17.

CHAIN

Signifies,  [I]  Links  of  iron,  gold,  or  silver,  one
within  another,  which  were,  Cl)  Sacred,  those  made
by  the  command  of  God,  for  the  breastplate  -torn
by  the  high-priest,  Exod.  39.  15, 17,  18.  (2)  Idol¬
atrous,  such  as  were  made  for  idols,  or  images ,  Isa.
40.  19.  (3)  Common ,  wherewith  prisoners  were

chained.  Acts  12.  7-  [II]  Bondage,  or  affliction ,
Lam.  3.7-  [111]  Severe  laics  fur  the  curbing  of
all  open  impiety.  Rev.  20.  1.

Gen.  41. 42.  gold  c.  about  his  neck,  Dan.  5. 7, 16, 29.
Psal.  73.  6.  pride  compasseth  them  about  as  a  c.
Cant.  4.  9.  have  ravished  me  with  one  c.  of  thy  neck
Lam.  3. 7-  hedged  me  about,  hath  made  my  c.  heavy
Ezek.  7. 23.  make  ac.  land  is  full  of  bloody  crimes

16. 11.  I  put  bracelets,  and  a  c.  on  thy  neck
Acts  28. 20.  for  hope  of  Israel  I  am  bound  with  thisc.
Eph.  6. 1 20.  for  which  I  am  ambassador  in  a  c.

2  Tim.  1. 16.  Onesiphorus  was  not  ashamed  of  my  c.
Rev.  20. 1.  an  angel  and  a  great  c.  in  his  hand
CHAIN-WORK.

1  Kings7- 17*  wreathsof  c.  for  chapiters  of  pillars
CHAINS.

Exod.  28. 14.  fasten  the  wreathen  c.  to  ouches,  24.

39. 15.  they  made  on  breast-plate  c.  at  the  ends
Num.  31 . 50.  for  atonement,  c.  and  bracelets,  rings
Judg.  8. 26.  besides  the  c.  about  their  camels’  necks

1  Kings  6.  21.  by  the  c.  of  gold  before  the  oracle
Psal.  149.  8.  to  bind  their  kings  with  c.  and  nobles
Prov.  1.  9.  instruction  shall  be  c.  about  thy  neck
Cant.  1.  10.  thy  neck  comely  with  c.  of  gold
Isa.  3.  19.  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  c.

40. 19.  goldsmith  with  gold,  and  casteth  silver  c.

45. 14.  they  shall  come  after  thee  in  c.  come  over
Jer.  40.4.  1  loose  thee  this  day  from  thy.  c.

Ezek.  19. 4.  they  brought  him  with  c.  into  Egypt
9.  they  put  him  in  ward  in  c.  and  brought  him
Mark  5. 3.  no  man  could  bind  him,  no  not  with  c.

4.  the  c.  had  been  oft  plucked  asunder  by  him
Aces  12.7.  Peter’s  c.  fell  off  from  his  hands

2  Pet.  2.  4.  to  hell,  delivered  them  into  c.  of  darkn.
Jude  6.  he  hath  reserved  in  everlasting  c.  under  dark.

See  Bound.

CHALCEDONY.

Rev.  21.  19.  the  third  foundation  was  ac.
CHALK-STONES.

Isa.  27.  9.  he  maketh  all  the  stones  of  the  altar  c.

CD  ALLEN  GF.TH.

Exod.  22.  9.  any  lost  thing  another  c.  to  be  his
CHAMBER

Signifies,  [1]  An  apartment,  or  room  in  a  house,
Gen.  43.  30.  Dan.  6.  10.  [2]  The  clouds,  Psal
104.  13.  [3]  An  upper  room,  or  an  apartment

wherein  people  generally  eat,  where  the  disciples
did  eat  the  passover,  and  did  partake  of  the  Lord's
supper,  and  where  afterwards  they  assembled  for  di¬
vine  worship.  Acts  1.  13.  |  20.  8.

The  chambers  of  the  south,  Job  9.  9.  Those  stars
and  constellations  which  aie  towards  the  sour  hern
pole ;  so  called,  because  they  are  for  the  most
part  hid  and  shut  up,  as  chambers  commonly  are,
from  these  parts  of  the  world,  and  do  not  rise  or
appear  to  us  till  the  beginning  if  summer,  alien
they  raise  winds  and  tempests,  as  astronomers
observe.

The  king  hath  brought  me  into  his  chambers.  ( 'ant.
1.4.  Christ  the  King  of  his  church  has  vouch¬
safed  unto  me  most  intimate  and  familiar  fellow¬
ship  with  himself  in  his  ordinances.

Enter  thou  into  thy  chambers,  Isa.  26.  20.  i/y
to  God  by  faith,  prayer,  and  repentance,  for
protection,  depend  up  n  his  providence,  lay  bold
upon  his  promises,  and  make  use  of  his  attributes.
He  alludes  to  the  common  practice  of  men,  who,
when  there  are  storms  or  dangers  abroad,  betake
themselves  to  their  oten  chambers  or  houses  for
safety ;  or,  as  some  think,  to  that  history,  Exod.

57


CH  A


C  H  A


0  10.  20.  or  to  that  command ,  of  not  going  out
of  their  houses,  Exod.  12.  22.  or  to  the  like
charge  given  to  Rahab,  Josh.  2.  19.

Gen.  43.  30.  Joseph  entered  into  his  c.  and  wept
Judg.  15  1. 1  will  go  in  to  my  wife  intp  the  c.

16.  9.  there  were  Hers  in  wait  abiding  in  the  c.  1~.

S  Sam.  13. 10.  bring  meat  into  the  c.  that  1  may  eat
2  Kings  4. 11.  Elisha  turned  into  the  c.  and  lay  there
Neh.  13.  5.  he  prepared  for  Tobiah  a  great  c.

8.  cast  forth  all  the  household  stuff  out  of  the  c.

Job  37.  +  9.  out  of  the  c.  cometh  the  whirlwind
Psal.  19. 5.  as  a  bridegroom  cometh  out  of  his  c.

Cant.  3.  4.  into  the  c.  of  her  that  conceived  me
Jer.  30.  10.  read  the  book  in  the  c.  ot  Gemariah
20.  laid  up  the  roll  in  c.  of  Elishama  the  sci  ibe
Ezek  40.  45.  c.  whose  prospect  toward  the  south
46  c  whose  prospect  toward  the  north  for  priests
Dan.  6. 10.  his  windows  being  open  in  his  c.to  Jerus.
Joel  2.  16.  let  the  bridegroom  go  forth  of  his  c.
Bed-Chamber;  See  Bed.  Guard-Chamber;

See  Guard.  Gm^.chamber.

»•  “•  say/j;rceHAMSf-  **• u-

1  Kinos  20.30.  Benhadad  fled,  and  came  into  inner  c.

22.  25.  shalt  go  into  inner  c.  to  hide,  2  Chr,  18.  24.

e>  kina s  9  2. carry  Jehu  into  inner  c.  and  take  the  box
J  Little  CHAM  BER.

a  Kings  4. 10.  let  us  make  a  little  c.  on  the  wall
'Ezek.  40.1  .little  c.  was  one  reed  long  and  one  broad
13  measured  the  gate  from  the  roof  ot  one  lit.  c.

Side  CHAMBER,  S.

Ezek  41. 5.  the  breadth  of  every  side-c.  four  cubits
6.  the  side  c.  were  three,  one  over  another
9  thickness  of  wall  for  side-c.  without,  five  cubits
Upper  CHAMBER.

2  Kings  1.  2.  Ahaz  fell  thro’  a  lattice  in  his  upper  c.

°3  12  altars  in  top  of  the  upper  c.  Josiah  beat  down

Ac'tf9  37.  washed,  and  laid  Dorcas  in  an  upper  c.

39  brought  Peter,  when  come  into  the  upper  c.

«0  8  many  lights  in  upper  e.  where  were  gathered
CHAMBERS.

Dent  32.  +  25.  sword  without,  terror  from  the  c.

1  Kings  6.  5  against  wall  of  the  house  he  built  c.

1  Chron.  9.  26.  chief  porters  were  over  the  c.  23.  28.

2  Chron  31.  11.  Hezekiah  commanded  to  prepare  c.
Ezra  8.'  29.  keep  them  till  ye  weigh  them  in  the  c.
Neh.  13.  9. 1  commanded,  and  they  cleansed  thee.
Joh  9  9.  which  maketh  the  c.  of  the  south
Psal  104.  3.  who  layeth  beams  of  his  c.  in  the  waters

13  he  watereth  the  hills  from  his  c.  earth  satisfied
105!  30.  land  brought  forth  frogs  in  c.  of  their  king
Prov.  7  27.  way  to  hell  going  down  to  c.  of  death
04  4.  by  knowledge  c.  shall  be  filled  with  riches
Cant.  1.  4.  the  king  hath  brought  me  into  his  c.

Isa  "6  00.  enter  thou  into  thy  c.  and  shut  thy  doors
Jer'  22. 13.  woe  to  him  that  buildeth  his  c.  by  wrong
14.  I  will  build  me  a  wide  house,  and  large  c.

Jer.  35.  2.  bring  the  Rechabites  into  one  of  the  c.
Ezek  8.  12.  every  man  in  the  c.  of  his  ima  ery
21  14  the  sword  which  entereth  into  their  privy  c.
42’  13  they  be  holy  c.  where  priests  shall  eat
Mat  24. 26.  behold,  he  is  in  the  secret  c.  believe  not
Upper -C  H  A  M  BERS.

2  Chr  3.  9.  and  he  overlaid  the  upper  c.  with  gold
"Ezek  *42.  5.  the  upper  c.  were  shorter  for  galleries
CLIAMBER1NG.

Rom  13.  13.  walk  not  in  c.  and  wantonness
CHAMBERLAIN,  S.

2  Kings  9.  +  32.  looked  out  to  Jehu  two  or  three  c
23  11.  by  the  chamber  of  N  athan-melech  the  c.
Esth.  1.  10.  the  seven  c.  that  served  the  king
2.  15.  but  what  Hegai  the  king’s  c.  appointed
21  two  of  king’s  c.  were  wroth,  and  soughtto  lay
Acts  12.  20.  Blastus  the  king’s  c.  their  friend
Rom.  16.  23.  Erastus,  c.  of  the  city,  saluteth  you
CHAMOIS.

Dent.  14.  5.  these  ye  shall  eat,  wild  ox  and  the  c
CHAMPAIGN.

Duet.  11.  30.  who  dwell  in  the  c.  over  against  Gilgal
Ezek.  37.  +  2.  many  bones  in  the  open  c.

CHAMPION.

1  Sam.  17.  4.  there  went  out  a  c.  out  of  the  camp
51  when  the  Philistines  saw  their  c.  was  dead
CHANCE.

Dent.  22. 6.  if  a  bird’s  nest  c.  to  be  before  thee
1  Cor.  15.  37.  it  may  c.  of  -wheat  or  other  gram
CHANCE.

1  Sam.  6.  9.  it  was  a  c.  that  happened  to  us

2  Sam.  1.  6.  as  I  happened  by  c.  on  mount  Gilboa
Eccl.  9. 11.  but  time  and  c.  happeneth  to  them  all
Luke  io.  31.  by  c.  a  priest  came  down  that  -way

CLEAN  CETH.

Deut.  23.  10.  uncleanness  that  c.  him  by  night
CHANCELLOR.

Ezra  4. 8.  Rehum  c.  wrote  a  letter  to  Artaxerxes,  9.

17.  then  the  king  sent  answer  to  Rehum  the  c.
CHANGEABLE..

Isa.  3.  22.  Lord  take  away  the  c .  suits  of  apparel
CHANGE,  S.  „  ,  ,

Lev.  27.  33.  both  it  and  the  c.  thereof  shall  be  holy
Judg.  14.  12.  1  will  give  you  thirty  c.  of  raiment
13.  you  shall  give  me  thirty  c.  of  raiment
Job  11.  +  10.  if  he  make  a  c.  who  can  hinder  ?

14.  14.  all  my  days  will  1  wait  till  my  c.  come
Prov.  24.  21.  meddle  not  with  them  given  to  c.

Zech.  3.  4.  1  will  clothe  thee  with  c.  of  raiment
Heb.  7. 12.  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  c.  ot  the  law
CHANGE,  Verb.

Gen.  35.  2.  be  clean  and  c.  your  garments
Lev.  27.  10.  he  shall  not  c.  it||  33.  norc.  it,  if  he  c.
job  17.  12.  they  c.the  night  into  day,  light  is  short
Psal  102.  26.  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  c.  them
Isa.  9. 10.  but  we  will  r.  them  into  cedars
40.  +  31.  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  c.  strength
Jer.  2.  36.  why  gaddestthou  so  much  to  c.  thy  way  ?
13.  23.  can  Ethiopian  c.  his  skin,  or  leopard  spots  ?
Dan.  j.  25.  he  shall  think  to  c.  times  and  laws
Dos.  4.  7.  I  will  c.  their  glory  into  shame
Dab.  1.  11.  then  shall  his  mind  c.  and  pass  oyer
Mai.  3.  6.  for  I  am  the  Lord,  I  c.  not,  therefore
Acts  6. 14.  and  shall  c.  the  customs  delivered

58


Rom.  1.  26.  their  women  did  c.  the  natural  use  _

Gal  4.  20.  I  desire  to  be  present,  and  c.  my  voice
Phil.  3.  21.  Christ,  who  shall  c.  our  vile  body
Heb  12.  t  17.  be  found  no  way  to  c.  his  mind
CHANGED,  ETII.

Gen.  31.  7.  your  father  c.  my  wages  ten  times,  41.
41. 14.  Joseph  c.  his  raimentand  came  in  to  1  haraob
Lev.  13.  16.  if  raw  flesh  turn  and  be  c.  to  white
55.  if  the  plague  have  not  c.  his  colour

1  Sam.  21.  13.  he  c.  his  behaviour  before  them

<2,  Sam. 10. 10.  Dav.c.  his  apparel,  came  to  house  of  L.

2  Kings  24. 17.  k.  of  Babylon  c.  his  name  to  Zedek.
25.  29.  c.  his  prison-garments,  Jer.  52.  33.

Esth.  2.  +9.  he  c.  her  and  maids  to  the  best  place
Job  29. 1 20.  my  bow  was  c.  in  my  hand
30  18.  great  lorce  of  my  disease  is  my  garment  c.
Psal.  15.  4.  he  sweareth  to  his  hurt,  and  c.  not
102  26.  as  a  vesture  they  shall  be  c.  Heb.  1.  12.
106.  20.  thus  they  c.  their  glory  into  an  ox
Eccl.  8.  1.  the  boldness  of  his  face  shall  be  c.

Isa.  24.  5.  c.  the  ordinance,  broken  the  covenant
Jer.  2. 11.  c.  their  gods,  my  people  have  c.  their  glory
48.  11.  his  taste  remained,  and  his  scent  is  not  c.

I. am.  4. 1.  gold  dim,  how  is  the  most  fine  gold  c.J
Ezek.  5.  6.  she  hath  c.  my  judgments  into  wickedn.
Dan.  2.  9.  prepar.  lying  to  speak,  till  the  time  be  c.
21.  he  c.  the  times  and  seasons,  re.moveth  kings
3?  19.  form  of  his  visage  was  c.  against  Shadrach
27  nor  were  their  coats  c .  nor  smel'.  ot  tire  passed
4. 16.  let  his  heart  be  c.  from  man’s,  and  let  a  beast  s
6.  8.  sign  writing  that  it  be  not  c.  according  to  law
15.  that  no  decree  the  king  established  maybe  c.
17.  that  the  purpose  might  not  be  c.  about  Daniel
Mic.  2  4.  he  hath  c.  the  portion  of  my  people
Acts  28.  6.  the  barbarians  c.  their  minds,  and  said
Rom  1.  23.  c.  the  glory  ot  the  uncorruptible  God
25."  who  c.  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie

1  Cor.  15.  51.  not  all  sleep,,  but  we  shall  all  be  c.  52.

2  Cor  3.  18.  c.  into  same  image  from  glory  to  glory
Heb  7.  12.  for  priesthood  being  c.  a  change  of  law

CHANGES!',  ED,  countenance.

Job  14. 20.  thou  c.  his  countenance, sendest  rum  away
Van  5  6.  the  king’s  countenance  was  c.  in  him,  9.
10.  nor  let  thy  count,  be  c.  ||  7  -  28.  my  count,  c.  in  me
CHANGERS.

Prov  °4  +21.  fear  Lord  and  king,  meddle  not  with  c.
Mat  'll.  12.  Jesus  went  to  temple  and  overthrew
tables  of  money-c.  Mark  11.  15.  John  2.  14,  15.
CHANGES.

Gen.  45.  22.  to  each  he  gave  c.  to  Benjamin  five  c.
2  Kings  5.  5.  he  took  with  him  ten  c.  ot  raiment
~  22.  give  them,  I  pray  thee,  two  c.  of  garments
23*.  bound  two  c.  of  garments,  and  laid  them
Job  10.  17.  c.  and  war  are  against  me
Psal.  55.  19.  because  they  have  no  c.  they  fear  not
CHANGING.

Ruth  4  7.  this  was  manner  in  Israel  concerning  c.
CHANNEL,  S.

2  Sam.  22.  16.  c.  of  the  sea  appeared,  Psal.  18. 15.
Job  31.  +22.  let  my  arm  be  broken  from  c.  bone
Isa  8  7.  he  shall  come  up  over  all  his  c.  and  banks
07 '  l".  the  Lord  shall  beat  off  from  c.  of  the  river
CHAPITER,  S.

Exod.  36.  38.  he  overlaid  their  c.  with  gold,  38.  28.
38.  17.  the  overlaying  of  their  c.  were  silver,  19.


OO •  1|  •  LUC  D  '  Cl  1CIJ  1113  - - f  *  *

1  Kings  7. 16.  made  two  c.  of  brass,  2  Chron.  4. 12, 13.

2  Kings  25. 17-  the  c.  upon  it  was  brass,  Jer.  51.  22.
Amos  9.  +  1.  smite  the  c.  of  the  door  that  posts  shake
Zevh.  1.  +  14.  the  bittern  shall  lodge  in  the  c.

*  CHAPMEN.

a  chr  9  14.  besides  what  c.  and  merchants  brought
CHAPEL.

Amos  7.  13.  it  is  the  king’s  c.  and  the  king’s  court
CIIAPT.

Ter  14  4.  because  ground  is  c.  there  was  no  rain
CHARASHIM.

1  Chron.  4.  14.  Joab  the  father  of  the  valley  of  c.
CHARGE

Signifies,  [1]  To  command ,  Exod.  1.  22.  [2]  To
prohibit,  or  interdict,  Gen.  28.  1.  [3]  To  adjure,
or  bind  by  a  solemn  oath,  1  Sam.  14.  27.  [4]  7 o
load,  or  burden.  Dent.  24.  5.  1  Tim.  5.  16.  [5]
To  exhort,  1  Thess.  2.  11.  [6]  An  office,  or  em¬
ploy,  Num.8. 26.  .

To  lay  any  thing  to  one  s  charge,  is  to  accuse  him
of  it,  and  prosecute  and  punish  him  for  it,  Psal.
35  11

To  have  the  charge  of  any  thing,  to  be  intrusted
with  it,  or  to  have  the  oversight  and  management
of  it,  Acts  8.  27-  ,

Gen.  2-6.  5.  Abraham  kept  my  c.  and  my  statutes
28. 6.  Isaac  gave  Jacob  a  c.  saying,  not  take  a  wife
Exod  6  13  the  Lord  gave  Moses  and  Aaron  a  c.
Num  4  31  this  is  the  c.  of  their  burden  in  tabern.

8.  26.  thus  shalt  do  to  the  Levites,  touching  their  c.

9.  19.  then  Israel  kept  the  c.  ot  the  Lord,  23.

27.  23.  Moses  gave  Joshua  a  c.  Deut.  31.  23.,

De'ut.  21.  8.  lay  not  innocent  blood  to  people’s  c.
Tosh  22  3.  Reubenites  have  kept  c.  ot  the  Lord
o  ga',n  17  +  23.  Ahithophel  gave  c.  concerning

“  18.  5.  the  king  gave  c.  concerning  Absalom

1  Kings  11.  28.  Jeroboam  made  ruler  over  all  the  c.

2  Kings  7.  17.  the  lord  to  have  the  c.  of  the  gate
1  Chron.  9.  27.  because  the  c.  was  upon  them

°6  +  30.  of  Hebronites  1700  over  the  c.

1  Chr.  30.  17.  Levites  had  the  c.  of  killing  passovers
Neh  7  2  1  gave  Hanani  c.  over  Jerusalem
Esth.  3.  9.  of  those  that  had  c.  of  the  business
Tob  34. 13.  who  hath  given  him  a  c.  over  the  earth  ?
Psal  35.  11.  they  laid  to  my  c.  things  I  knew  not
109.  +  8.  let  another  take  his  c.  Acts  1.  +  20.

Jer  39  11.  kingof  Bab.  gave  c.  concerning  Jeremiah
47’  7.  Lord  hath  given  it  a  c.  against  Ashkelon
Ezek  9  1.  cause  them  that  have  c.  over  the  city
44.  8.  ye  have  not.  kept  the  c.  of  my  holy  things

15.  the  priests  that  kept  the  c.  of  my  sanctuary
48  11.  priests  kept  my  c.  who  went  not  astray

Acts  7.  60.  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  c.

8.  27.  an  eunuch,  who  had  c .  of  all  her  treasure
\k  +25.  when  Barnabas  and  Saul  fulfilled  their  c.

16.  24.  received  such  a  c.  thrust  them  into  prison
23.  29.  nothing  laid  to  his  c.  worthy  of  death


C  H  A

Row. 8.33. who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  e.of  God’s  clecl'

1  Cor.  9. 18.  make  the  gospel  of  Christ  without  c

1  Tim.  1.  18.  this  c.  I  commit  to  thee,  son  1  imothy-

2  Tim.  4. 16. 1  pray  it  may  not  be  laid  to  their  c.

See  1\  erf.

Give  CHARGE.

Num  27  19.  and  give  Joshua  ae.  in  their  sight
Deut.  31.  14.  call  Joshua  that  1  may  give  him  a  c.

1  Sam.  14.  8.  go,  and  I  will  give  c.  concerning  thee  -

2  Kings  20.  +  1.  give  c.  concerning  house,  Isa.  38. i  1

1  Chron  ~1°  12.  only  the  L.  give  thee  wisdom  and  c.
Psal  91. Tl.  give  Ins  angels  c.  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4. 10.

Isa.  io.  6.  will  I  give  him  a  c.  to  take  the  spoil
1  Tim.  5. 7.  these  things  give  in  c.  that  they  be

6. 13. 1  give  thee  c.  in  sight  of  God,  who  quickenetff

CHARGE.

Exod.  19. 21.  the  Lord  said,  go  down,  c.  the  people
Num.  5.  19.  the  priest  shall  c.  her  by  an  oath
Deut.  3. 28.  but  c.  Joshua  and  encourage  him
Neh  10.  32.  to  c.  ourselves  yearly  with  third  part
Esth.  4.  8.  c.  Esther  that  she  go  m  to  the  king
Cant.  1.  7. 1  c.  you,  ()  ye  daughters,  3.  5. 1  5.8.  |  8.4-
5.  9.  what  is  thy  beloved,  that  thou  dost  so  c.  us  .
Mark  9.  25.  I  c.  thee  come  out  and  enter  no  more-
1  Thess.  5.  27.  I  c.  you  that  this  epistle  be  read

1  Tim.  1.  3.  c.  that  they  teach  no  other  doctrine

5.21 . 1  c.  thee  before  God  and  .1  es.  Christ ,  2  7  imA.li-
6  17.  c.  them  that  are  rich  in  this  world,  that  they

CHARGEABLE.

2  Sam.  13.  25.  let  us  not  all  go,  lest  we  be  c.  to  thee
Neh.  5.  15.  the  former  governors  were  c.  to  people-
2  Cor.  11.  9.  when  with  you,  I  was  c.  to  no  man

L  Thess  2.9.  because  we  would  not  be  c.  to  any  of  you,

2  Thess.  3.  8.  that  we  might  not  be  c.  to  any  of  you
CHARGED.

Gen.  26. 11.  Abimelech  c.  his  people,  saying
28.  1.  Isaac  called  Jacob,  and  c.  him,  and  said
40.  4.  captain  of  the  guard,  c.  Joseph  with  them

49.  29.  Jacob  c.  his  sons,  and  said  to  them,  1  am

50.  + 16.  thev  c.  a  messenger  to  Joseph
Exod.  1.  22.  Pharaoh  c.  all  his  people,  saying
Deut.  1.  16.  I  c.  your  judges  at  that  time,  saying-

24.  5.  nor  shall  he  be  c.  with  any  business,  but  free
27. 11.  Moses  c.  the  people  the  same  day,  saying

1  Sam.14.17.  Jonathan  heard  not  when  Paul  c.  peop.-

2  Sam.  18. 12.  for  in  our  hearing  the  king  c.  thee

1  Kings 2. 1.  David  c.  Solomon  his  son,  saying,  I  go
43.  the  commandment  that  I  have  c.  thee  with

13.  9.  so  was  it  c.  me  by  the  word  of  the  Lord

2  Chron.  36.  23.  Lord  c.  me  to  build  house,  Ezra  1 . 2.
Neh.  13. 19.  c.  they  not  be  opened  till  after  sabbath*
Esth. 1.19.  not  shewed  people,  as  Mordecai  c .  her ,20.
Job  1.  22.  Job  sinned  not,  nor  c.  God  foolishly

4. 18.  and  his  angels  he  c.  with  folly
Jer.  32.  13.  1  c.  Baruch  before  them,  saying
35  8  have  obeyed  Jonadab  in  all  that  he  hath  c.  us
Mat.  9.  30.  Jesus  straitly  c.  them,  saying,  see  tha^
no  man  know  it,  Mark  5.  43.  Luke  9.  21.

1°  16.  Jesus  c.  not  to  make  him  known,  Mark3. 12.
Mark  7 . 36. r. not  to  tell ,  8  30.  1  9.9.  Luke  5.14.  I  8.5&

10  48  many  c.  him  that  he  should  hold  his  peace
Rom.  3.  +  9.  we  have  c.  Jews  and  Gentiles  under  sm.

1  Thess.  1.  11.  we  c.  every  one  of  you  as  a  father

1  Tim  5.  16.  and  let  not  church  be  c.  that  it  may

CHARGEDST.

Exod  19.  23.  thou  c.  us,  saying,  set  bounds  about
CHARGER,  S.

Num  7.  13.  his  offering  was  one  silver  c.  19,  15,.

‘  31,  37,  43,  49,  61,  67,73,  79-

84.  this  was  the  dedication  of  the  altar,  twelve  c.

85.  each  c.  of  silver  weighing  130  shekels

Ezra  1.  9.  this  is  number  of  them,  one  thousand  c.
Mat  14.8.  give  John  Bapt.  head  in  ac.  Mark 5. 25.
CHARGES.

2  Chron.  8. 14.  he  appointed  the  Levites  to  their  c-
31  17,  from  20  years  in  their  c.  by  courses

35.  2.  he  set  priests  in  their  c.  and  encouraged  then>.
Acts  11.  24.  them  take,  and  be  ate.  with  them

1  Cor'd  7  who  goetli  a  warfare  at  hisown  c.  ?
C1IARGEST.

2  Sam.  3.  8.  thou  c.  me  to-day  with  a  fault
CHARGING.

Acts  16.  23.  c.the  jailor  to  keep  them  safely
o  Tim  °.  14.  c.  that  they  strive  not  about  words
CHARIOT

Signifies,  fl]  A  sort  of  light  coach,  Gen.  46.  19z
[2]  Chariots  of  war,  out  of  which  some  of  the'
ancients  fought ;  they  were  armed  with  javelins
and  scythes  in  several  places,  which  tore  every >,
thing  they  met  with  to  pieces,  Exod  14.  7.  Josh.
11.  4.  [3]  Hosts,  or  armies,  Psal.  68.  17.  [4J

Human  or  worldly  things,  wherein  men  repose >
their  confidence,  Psal.  20.  7-  ,

Elijah  is  called  the  chariot  ot  Israel  and  horse¬
men  thereof,  2  Kings  1.  12.  that  is,  By  his  ex¬
ample,  his  counsels,  his  prayers,  and  power  with-
God,  he  did  more  for  the  defence  and  preservation
of  Israel,  than  all  their  chariots  and  horses,  and'
other  warlike  provisions.

Solomon  made  a  chariot  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon,.
Cant.  3.  9.  Christ,  of  whom  Solomon  was  a  type, .
established  for  the  glory  of  his  grace  the  new-,
covenant ,  or  the  gospel,  whereby  believers  are  c al¬
lied  to  heaven  ;  which  is  of  an  everlasting  nature,.
Heb.  13.  20.  Rev.  14.  6.

Gen  41.  43.  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  second  c.
Exod.  14.  25.  the  Lord  took  off  their  c.  wheels

1  Kings 7.  33.  the  wheels  like  the  work  ot  a  c.  wheel

18.  44.  prepare  thy  c.  and  get  thee  down
20.  25.  number  thee  c.  fore,  and  we  will  fight

33.  he  caused  him  to  come  up  into  the  c.

22.  35.  the  blood  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  c._

38.  one  washed  the  c.  in  the  pool  or  Samaria

2  Kinos  2. 11.  there  appeared  a  e.  ot  tire  and  hor3C>
12.  cried,  my  father,  the  c.  ot  Israel,  13, 14.

5  °1.  he  lighted  from  the  c.  to  meet  Gehazi
9.  16.  Jelni  rode  in  a  c.  ||  27- smite  lnm  in  the  c.

I  28.  servants  carried  him  in  a  c.  to  J erus.  23.  30.

1  Chron.  28. 18.  gave  gold  for  the  patternot  the  r..

2  Chron'.  35.  24.  his  servants  took  lnm  out  of  the  c.
Psal.  46.  9.  he  burnetii  the  c.  in  the  fire
7b.  6.  c.  and  horse  are  cast  into  a  dead  sleep


C  H  A


CHE


CHI


Cant.  3.  9-  made  a  c.  of  the  wood  of  Lebanon
Jsa.  21. 7.  he  saw  ac.  with  horsemen,  a  c.  of  asses

9.  here  cotneth  a  c.  of  men  with  horsemen

43. 17.  who  bringeth  forth  the  c.  and  horse

Jcr.  51. 21.  will  1  break  in  pieces  the  c.  and  rider
Mic.  1. 13.  bind  the  c.  to  the  swift  beast
Zech.  6. 2.  first  c.  red  horses,  second  c.  black  horses

9.  10.  1  will  cut  off  the  c.  from  Ephraim
Acts  8. 29.  said,  go  near  and  join  thyself  to  this  c.
38.  he  commanded  the  c.  to  stand  still
Ihs  CHARIOT..

Gen.  46.  29.  Joseph  made  ready  his  c.  and  went
Exod.  14.  6.  Pharaoh  made  ready  his  c.  and  took
Judg.  4.  15.  Sisera  lighted  off  his  c.  and  fled  away
5. 28.  why  is  his  c.  so  long  in  coming  ?  why  tarry

1  Kings  12. 18.  king  made  speed  to  his  c.  2  GVir.10.18.
22.  34.  he  said  to  the  driver  of  his  c.  turn  thy  hand

35.  Ahab  was  stayed  up  in  his  c.  and  died  at  even
£  Kings  5. 9.  N aaman  came  with  his  c.  and  stood

26.  when  the  man  turned  again  from  his  c.

9.21 .  his  c.  was  made  ready,  went  out  each  in  his  c.

24.  smote  Jehoram,  and  he  sunk  down  in  his  c.

10. 16.  so  they  made  him  to  ride  in  his  c.

Psal.  104.  3.  who  maketh  the  clouds  his  c.

Jer.  4.  13.  his  c.  shall  be  as  a  whirlwind
Acts  8.  28.  sitting  in  his  c.  read  Esaias  the  prophet
CHARIOT-CITIES.

■2  Chron.  1. 14.  horsemen  which  he  placed  in  c.-cities

8. 6.  Solomon  built  c.-cities,  and  store  cities

9.  25.  bestowed  in  the  c.-cities  and  with  the  king

CHARIOT -HORSES.

■2  Sam.  8. 4.  David  houghed  all c. -hones,  1  Chr.  18.4.

2  Kings 7. 14.  they  took'  therefore  two  c. -horses

CHARIOT-MAN.

-2  Chr.  18. 33.  he  said  to  the  c.-man,  turn  thy  hand
CHARIOTS.

-Gen.  50. 9.  there  went  up  with  Joseph  c.  and  horse.
Exod.  14. 7.  Pharaoh  took  600  c.  and  all  the  c.

17.  I  will  get  honour  upon  his  c.  and  horsemen
28.  the  waters  covered  all  the  c.  and  all  the  host

15.  4.  Pharaoh’s  c.  and  host  hath  he  cast  into  sea
19.  for  the  horse  of  Pharaoh  went  in  with  his  c.

Josh.  17. 16.  have  c.  of  iron,  18.  Judg.  1. 19.  1  4.  3.
Judg.  4. 15.  Lord  discomfited  Sisera  and  all  his  c.

5. 28.  she  cried,  why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his  c.  ?

1  Sam.  8. 11.  the  king  will  appoint  them  for  his  c.

13.  5.  Philistines,  to  fight  against  Israel,  30,000  c.
■2  Sam.  1.  6.  the  c.  and  horsemen  followed  after  Saul

10.  18.  David  slew  the  men  of  700  c.  of  Syrians

1  Kings  10. 26.  Solomon  had  1400  c.  12,000  horsemen

16.  9.  Zimri  captain  of  half  his  c.  conspired

22.  32  when  the  captains  of  the  c.  saw  .lehoshaphat
£  Kings  13. 7-  left  but  ten  c.  and  fifty  horsemen
18. 24.  how  putthy  trust  on  Egypt  for  c.  Isa.  36. 9.
Psal.  68. 17.  the  c.  of  God  are  twenty  thousand
Gant.  6. 12.  my  soul  like  the  c.  of  Ammi-nadib
Isa.  2. 7.  full  of  horses,  nor  is  any  end  of  their  c.

22. 18.  c.  of  thy  glory  be  the  shame  of  thy  lord

31. 1.  woe  to  them  that  trust  in  c.  because  many
37.  24.  by  the  multitude  of  my  c.  am  l  come  up
"66.  15.  behold  the  Lord  will  come  with  fire  and  c.

like  a  whirlwind,  Jer.  4. 13.  Dan.  11.  40.
Jer.  47.  3.  at  rushing  of  his  c.  fathers  not  look  back
Ezek.  23.  24.  they  shall  come  against  thee  with  c.

26. 10.  thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  noise  of  the  c.
Joel  2.  5.  like  the  noise  of  the  c.  shall  they  leap
Mic.  5. 10.  I  will  cut  off  horses,  and  destroy  thy  c.
Nah.  2.  3.  the  c.  shall  be  with  flaming  torches
4.  thee,  shall  rage  in  streets  and  justle  one  another
13. 1  am  against,  and  I  will  burn  her  c.  in  smoke
Mag.  2. 22.  1  will  overthrow  the  c.  and  those  ride
-Rev.  9. 9.  the  sound  of  their  wings  as  the  sound  of  c.

CHARIOTS,  with  horses.

Prod.  14. 9.  all  the  horses  and  c.  of  Pharaoh,  23.
Dent.  11. 4.  what  he  did  to  their  horses  and  c.

20. 1.  when  thou  seest  horses  and  c.  fear  not
Josh.  11.  6.  thou  shalt  hough  their  horses,  burn  c.  1

9.  Joshua  houghed  horses,  burnt  their  c.  with  fire
£  Sam.  15. 1.  Absalom  prepared  horses  and  c.

1  Kings  20. 1.  against  Samaria  with  c.  and  horses
£  Kings  6. 17-  the  mountain  was  full  of  c.  and  horses

7. 6.  the  Syrians  to  hear  a  noise  of  horses  and  c.

10.  2.  are  with  you  c.  and  horses,  a  fenced  city

Psal.  20. 7.  some  trust  in  c.  and  some  in  horses
Gant.  1. 9.  compared  thee  to  horses  in  Pharaoh’s  c.
Isa.  66.  20.  bring  your  hrethren  on  horses  and  in  c.
Jer.  17. 25.  shall  enter  princes  riding  in  c.  22. 4.

46.  9.  come  up,  ye  horses,  and  rage,  ye  c.

50.  37.  a  sword  is  upon  their  horses  and  their  c.
Ezek.  26. 7-  upon  Tyrus  N  ebuchad.  with  h.  and  c.
39. 20.  shall  be  fi  lied  at  my  table  with  horses  and  c.
Nah.  3. 2.  noise  of  prancing  horses  and  jumping  c.
Hah.  3. 8.  didst  ride  on  thy  horses  and  c.  of  salvation
Rev.  18. 13.  no  man  buys  their  horses  and  c.
CHARITABLY.

Rom.  14.  15.  brother  grieved,  now  walkest  not  c.
CHARITY

Is  a  principle  of  prevailing  love  to  God  and  good
will  to  men,  which  effectually  inclines  one  endued
with  it  to  glorify  God,  and  to  do  good  to  others  ;  to
he  patient,  slow  to  anger,  and  ready  to  put  up  with
wrongs  ;  to  show  kindness  to  all,  and  seek  the  good
of  others,  though  with  prejudice  to  himself.  A  per¬
son  endued  therewith  does  not  interpret  doubtful
things  to  the  worst  sense,  hut  the  best ;  is  sorry
for  the  sins  of  others,  but  rejoices  when  any  one
does  well,  and  is  apt  to  hear  with  their  failings
and  infirmities  ;  and  lastly,  this  grace  is  never
lost,  but  goes  with  ns  into  another  world,  and  is
exercised  there,  1  Cor.  13.  1,  4,  &c.

Rom.  14.  + 15.  now  walkest  thou  not  according  to  c.

1  Cor.ih.  1.  knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  c.  edifietli

13.  1.  speak  with  tongues,  and  have  not,  c.  2,  3.

4.  c.  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind,  c.  envieth  not
13.  faith,  hope,  c.  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  c.

14.  l.  follow  after  c.  and  desire  spiritual  gifts
46. 14.  let  all  your  things  be  done  with  c.

Got.  3. 14.  above  all  these  things  put  on  c.

4  Thess. 3.6.  brought  good  tidings  of  your  faith  and  c.
A  f  hfss.  1.  3.  c.  towards  each  other  aboundeth
tl  1  im.  1. 5.  now  the  end  of  the  commandment  is  c.
v2. 15.  be  saved  if  they  continue  in  faith  and  c.


1  Tim.  4.  12.  be  an  example  in  c.  inspirit,  in  faith

2  Tim.  2.  22.  follow  righteousness,  faith,  c.  peace
3. 10.  hast  fully  known  my  doctrine,  life,  faith,  c.
Tit.  2. 2.  aged  men  be  sober,  sound  in  faith,  in  c.

1  Pet.  4.  8.  have  fervent  c.  for  c.  shall  cover  sins
5.  14.  greet  ye  one  another  with  a  kiss  of  c.

2  Pet.  1.  7.  and  to  brotherly  kindness  c.

3  John  6.  strangers  who  have  borne  witness  of  thy  c.
Jude  12.  these  are  spots  in  your  feasts  of  c.

Rev.  2.  19.  I  know  thy  works,  and  c.  and  service
CHARMED.

Jer.  8.  17.  I  will  send  serpents  which  will  not  be  c.
CHARMER,  S.

Deut.  18. 11.  there  shall  not  be  found  among  you  a  c.
Psal.  58.  5.  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  c.  charming
t  not  hearken  to  c.  be  the  c.  never  so  cunning
CHASE.

Lev.  26. 7-  ye  shall  c.  your  enemies,  and  they  fall
8.  and  five  of  you  shall  c.  an  hundred

36.  and  the  sound  of  a  shaking  leaf  shall  c .  them
Deut.  32.  30.  how  should  one  c.  1000.  Josh  23.  10.
Psal.  35.  5.  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  c.  them
CHASED,  ETH,  1NG.

Deut.  1.  44.  and  the  Amorites  c.  you  as  bees  do
Judg.  9.  40.  Abimelech  c.  him,  he  fled  before  him
20.  43.  they  inclosed  Benjamites  and  c.  them
1  Sam.  17. 53.  Israel  returned  from  c.the  Philistines
Neh.  13.  28.  therefore  I  c.  him  from  me
Job  18.  18.  he  shall  be  c.  out  of  the  world
20.  8.  he  shall  be  c.  away  as  a  vision  of  the  night
Prov.  19.  26.  and  he  that  c.  away  his  mother
Isa.  13. 14.  it  shall  be  as  the  c.  roe,  as  a  sheep  that

17.  13.  they  shall  be  c.  as  the  chaff  before  the  wind
Lam.  3.  52.  mine  enemies  c.  me  sore  like  a  bird

1  Thess.  2. 1 15.  killed  their  prophets,  and  c.  us  out

CHASTE.

2  Cor.  11.  2.  that  I  may  present  you  as  a  c.  virgin
Tit.  2.  5.  that  the  young  women  be  c.  obedient

1  Pet.  3.  2.  while  they  behold  your  c.  conversation

CHASTEN

Signifies,  [1]  To  correct  in  love,  Psal.  118.  18.  Heb.
12.  5,  6.  [2]  To  punish  in  justice.  Lev.  26.  28.
[3]  To  humble  oneself  before  God  by  fasting  and
prayer,  Dan.  10. 12.

The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  Isa.
53.  5.  That  punishment  by  which  our  peace,  that
is,  our  reconciliation  to  God,  and  salvation  or  hap¬
piness,  were  to  be  purchased,  was  laid  upon  Christ,
by  God's  justice,  with  his  own  consent.

2  Sam.  7.  14.  I  will  c.  him  with  the  rod  of  men
Psal.  6. 1.  nor  c.  me  in  thy  hot  displeasure,  38.  1.
Prov.  19.  18.  c.  thy  son  while  there  is  hope,  spare
Dan.  10.  12.  thou  didst  c.  thyself  before  thy  God
Rev.  3. 19.  as  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  c.

CHASTENED.

Deut.  21. 18.  they  have  c.  him,  he  will  not  hearken
Job  33.  19.  he  is  c.  also  with  pain  on  his  bed
Psal.  69. 10.  I  wept,  and  c.  my  soul  with  fasting
73. 14.  all  day  been  plagued,  and  c.  every  morning
118.  18.  Lore!  hath  c.  me  sore,  he  hath  not  given
Hos.  7.  f  15.  though  I  have  c.  they  imagine  mischief

1  Cor.  11. 32.  we  are  c.  that  we  be  not  condemned

2  Cor.  6.  9.  as  dying,  yet  live,  as  c.  and  not  killed
Heb.  12.  10.  for' they  verily  for  a  few  days  c.  us

CHASTENEST,  ETII,  1NG.

Deut.  8.  5.  as  a  man  c.  his  son,  so  the  Lord  c.  thee
Job  5. 17.  happy  whom  God  correcteth  ;  despise  not
thou  c.  of  Almighty,  Prov.  3. 11.  Heb.  12.  5.
Psal.  94.  12.  blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  c.

Prov.  13.  24.  but  he  that  loveth  him  c.  betimes
Isa.  26. 16.  poured  out  a  prayer  when  c.  was  on  them
Heb.  12.  6.  for  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  c.

7.  if  ye  endure  c.  what  son  whom  father  c.  not  ?

11.  no  c.  for  present  seems  to  be  joyous,  but  griev.
CHASTISE.

Lev.  26.  28. 1  will  c.  you  seven  times  for  your  sins
Deut.  22.  18.  elders  shall  take  the  man  and  c.  him
1  Kings  12.  11.  1  will  add  to  your  yoke,  1  will  c.

you  with  scorpions,  14.  2  Chron.  10.  11, 14.
Hos.  7. 12. 1  will  c.  them  as  their  congregation  heard
10.  10.  it  is  my  desire  that  I  should  c.  them
Luke  23. 16.  I  will  c.  him,  and  release  him,  22.
CHASTISED,  ETII.

1  Kings  12.  11.  did  lade  with  heavy  yoke  ;  father
hath  c.  you  with  whips,  14.  2  Chron.  10. 11, 14.
Ps.  94.  10.  he  that  c.  heathen,  shall  not  he  correct  ?
Jer.  31.  18.  hast  c.  me,  and  I  was  c.  turn  thou  me
CHASTISEMENT.

Deut.  11. 2.  your  children  who  have  not  seen  the  c.
Job  34.  31.  1  have  borne  c.  I  will  not  offend  more
Psal.  73. 1 14.  my  c.  was  every  morning
Isa.  53. 5.  the  c.  of  our  peace  was  upon  him
Jer.  30. 14.  have  wounded  with  the  c.  of  a  cruel  one
Heb.  12. 8.  if  without  c.  then  are  ye  bastards,  not  sons
CHANT.

Amos  6. 5.  they  c.  to  the  sound  of  the  viol,  and  invent
CHATTER.

Isa.  38.  14.  like  a  crane  or  swallow,  so  did  I  c.
CHAWS.

Ezek.  29.  4.  but  I  will  put  hooks  in  thy  c.  38.  4.
Chearkdl;  .tee  Cheerful.

CHECK.

Job  20.  3.  I  have  heard  the  c.  of  mv  reproach
CHECKER-WORK.

1  Kings  7. 17-  Hiram  made  nets  of  c.-w.  and  wreaths
CHEEK.

1  Kings  22.  24.  Zedekiah  smote  Micaiah  on  the  c.

said,  which  way  Spirit  of  Lord,  2  Chron.  18.  23.
Job  16.  10.  have  smitten  me  on  the  e.  reproachfully
Lam.  3.  30.  he  giveth  his  c.  to  him  that  smiteth  him
Mic.  5.  1.  shall  smite  the  judge  with  a  rod  on  the  c.
Luke  6. 29.  to  him  smiteth  one  c.  offer  also  the  other
Right  CHEEK.

Mat.  5. 39.  smite  thee  on  thv  right  c.  turn  the  other
CHEEK-BONE.

Psal.  3.  7 •  hast  smitten  all  mine  enemies  on  c.-bone
CHEEKS.

Deut.  18.  3.  shall  give  to  priestthe  two  c.  and  maw
Cant.  1. 10.  thy  c.  are  comely  with  rows  of  jewels
5. 13.  his  c.  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet  flowers
Isa.  50. 6. 1  gave  my  c.  to  them  that  plucked  off  hair
Lam.  1.  2.  she  weepeth,  and  her  tears  are  on  her  c.


CHEEK-TEETH.

Joel  1. 6.  nation  come  up  hath  c. -teeth  of  a  great  lion
CHEER.

Dent.  24.  5.  and  shall  c.  up  his  wife  he  hath  taken
Eccl.  11.9.  let  thy  heart  c.  thee  in  days  of  thy  youth
CHEER.

Prov.  17.  + 1.  than  a  house  full  of  good  c.  with  strife
Mat.  9.  2.  son,  be  of  good  c.  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee
14.  27.  be  of  good  c.  it  is  I,  be  not  afraid,  Mark  6. 50.
John  16.  33.  be  of  good  c.  1  have  overcome  world.
Acts  23.  11.  stood  by  him  and  said,  be  of  good  c.

27.  22.  and  now  I  exhort  you  to  be  of  good  c.

25.  wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  c.  for  I  believe  God

36.  then  were  they  all  of  good  c.  and  took  meat

CHEERETH.

Judg.  9.  13.  leave  my  wine,  which  c.  God  and  man
CHEERFUL.

Prov.  15.  13.  merry  heart  maketh  a  c.  countenance
Zech.  8. 19.  shall  be  to  house  of  Judah  joy  and  c.  f.

9.  17.  corn  shall  make  young  men  c.  and  new  wine
2  Cor.  9.  7-  or  of  necessity,  tor  G.  loveth  a  c.  giver

CHEERFULNESS.

Rom.  12.  8.  he  that  sheweth  mercy  with  c.
CHEERFULLY.

Acts  24.  10.  I  do  the  more  c.  answer  for  myself
CHEESE,  S.

1  Sam..  17.  18.  carry  these  ten  c.  to  the  captain

2  Sam.  17.  29.  Barzillai  brought  sheep  and  c.  to  R
Job  10.  10.  hast  thou  not  curdled  me  like  c.  ?

CHERISH.

1  Kings  1.  2.  let  her  c.  him,  and  lie  in  thy  bosom
CHERISHED.

1  Kings  1.  4.  the  damsel  was  fair,  and  c.  the  king
CHER ISH ETH.

Eph.  5.  29.  c.  Ins  own  flesh,  as  the  Lord  the  church

1  Thess.  2. 7.  were  gentle,  even  as  a  nurse  c.  children

CHERUB.

This  word  in  the  Hebrew  signifies  fulness  of  know¬
ledge  ;  and  angels  are  so  called  from  their  exqui¬
site  knowledge ,  and  were  therefore  used  for  the
punishment  of  man,  who  sinned  by  affecting  divine
knowledge,  Gen.  3.  24.  There  is  but  an  obscure
description  given  us  in  scripture  of  these  cherubims,
which  Moses  placed  upon  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
Exod.  25.  18.  as  well  as  of  those  which  God  posted
at  the  entrance  of  that  delightful  garden  out  of
which  he  had  driven  Adam  and  Eve.  But  it  is
probable  that  both  one  and  the  other  had  a  human
figure,  since  it  is  said  of  those  which  were  placed
at  the  entrance  of  Paradise,  that  they  had  their
station  there  assigned  them,  to  guard  the  entrance
to  it,  and  held  a  flaming  sword  in  their  hands.  And
Ezekiel  compares  the  king  of  Tyre  to  the  cherub
that  covered  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  Ezek.  28.  14.
that  is,  he  was  like  to  this  cherub,  glittering  all
over  with  gold  and  glory.  Moses  says,  that  two
cherubims  covered  the  mercy-seat  with  their  icings
extended  on  both  sides,  and  looked  one  to  another,
having  their  faces  turned  toward  the  mercy-seat
which  covered  the  ark.  God  is  supposed  to  sit
on  the  mercy-seat,  whose  face  the  angels  in  hea¬
ven  always  behold,  and  upon  whom  • their  eyes
are  fixed  to  observe  and  receive  his  commands,
and  towards  Christ,  the  true  Propitiatory,  which
mystery  they  desire  to  look  into,  1  Pet.  1.

12.  not  envying  mankind  their  near  and  happy
relation  to  him,  but  taking  pleasure  in  the  con¬
templation  of  it.  Moses  likewise  calls  those  re¬
presentations  which  were  made  in  embroideries
upon  the  veils  of  the  tabernacle,  cherubims  of
cunning  work,  Exod.  26.  1.

Exod.  25.  19.  make  one  c.  on  one  end,  and  the
other  c.  on  the  other  end,  37.  8.

2  Sam.  22.  11.  he  rode  upon  a  c.  Psal.  18.  10.

1  Kings  6.  25.  and  the  other  c.  was  ten  cubits

26.  the  height  of  one  c.  ten  cubits,  so  of  the  other
Ezek.  9.  3.  the  glory  of  God  was  gone  up  from  the

c.  to  the  threshold  of  the  house,  10.  4.

10.  7-  and  one  c.  stretched  forth  his  hand  from  the
14.  first  face  was  the  face  of  a  c.  second  of  a  man

28.  14.  thou  art  the  anointed  c.  that  covereth
16.  and  l  will  destroy  thee,  O  covering  c.

41.  18.  between  a  c.  and  a  c.  every  c.  had  two  faces
CHERUBIMS.

Gen.  3.  24.  he  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  c.
Exod.  25.  18.  thou  shalt  make  two  c.  of  gold
26.  1.  the  tabernacle  of  c.  of  cunning  work,  31.

37.  7-  he  made  two  c.  of  beaten  gold  of  one  piece

1  Kings  6.  23.  within  the  oracle  he  made  two  c.

25.  both  the  c.  were  of  one  measure  and  one  size
28.  and  he  overlaid  the  c.  with  gold

8.  7.  the  c.  covered  the  ark,  2  Chr.  5.  8.  Heb.  9.  5.

2  Chr.  3.  10.  in  the  most  holy  place  he  made  two  c.
Ezek.  10.  5.  the  sound  of  the  c.  wings  was  heard

16.  when  the  c.  went,  the  wheels  went  by  them
19.  c.  lift  up  their  wings  and  mounted,  11.  22.
Between  the  CHERUBIMS.

Exod.  25.  22.  will  meet  thee  from  between  the  two  e.
Num.  7.  89.  from  between  the  two  c.  he  spake  to  him

1  Bam.  4.  4.  the  ark  of  Lord  which  dwelleth  between

the  c.  2  Sam.  6.  2.  2  Kings  19.  15.  Isa.  37. 16.
Psal.  80. 1.  that  dwelleth  between  the  c.  shine  forth
99.  1.  he  sitteth  between  the  c.  let  earth  be  moved
Ezek.  10.  2.  fill  with  coals  of  fire  from  between  the  c.
7.  hand  from  between  c.  to  fire  that  was  between  c.
CHESNUT-TREE,  S.

Gen.  30.  37.  and  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  e.-tree
Ezek.  31.  8.  the  c. -trees  were  not  like  his  branches
CHEST,  S.

2  Kings  12.  9.  .Tehoiadatook  c.  and  bored  hole  in  lid
2  Chr.  24.  8.  at  king’s  commandment  they  made  c.

11.  high-priest’s  officer  came,  and  emptied  the  c.
Ezek.  27.  24.  thy  mere!  ants  in  c.  of  rich  apparel
CHEW.

Lev.  11. 4.  not  eat  of  them  that  c.the  cud,  Deut.  14.7-
CHEWED.

Num.  11. 33.  ere  the  flesh  was  c.  wrath  was  kindled
CHEW  ETII.

Lev.  11.  4.  because  he  c.  the  «  ud,  5,  6.  Deut.  14.  6.
7.  yet  the  swine  c.  not  the  cud,  Deut.  14.  8.
CHICKENS.

Mat,  23.  37.  gathered  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  c


C  H  1


C  H  I


CHI


3.  30.  Deut.
[2]  The  best,
'  The  high-
Vie  dearest,  or
The  greatest.


CHIDE.

Tied.  17.  2.  the  people  did  e.  why  e.  you  with  me  .
Judg.  8.  1.  ths  men  of  Ephraim  did  c.  with  Gideon
Psal  103.  9.  he  will  n<  t  always  c.  nor  keep  anger
CHIDING.

Exod.  17.  7-  called  Meribah,  because  of  c.  of  Israel
CHIEF

Signifies.  [1]  The  prim  ipal  person  of  a  family  con
gr  eg  at  ton,  tribe,  army,  &c.  Num.  °  Qri  n“,,f

I.  15. 1  Sam.  14.  33.  2  Sam.  5.  8.
or  most  valuable,  1  Sam.  15.  21.
est,  or  uppermost.  Mat.  23.  6.  [4]
most  familiar,  Prov.  16.  28.  [5]

Psal  137.  6.  [6]  Most  in  esteem  and  reputation,
Luke  14.  1.  2  Cor.  12.  11.  [7]  Most  forward

and  active,  Ezra  9-  2.  [8]  Most  remarkable  and
wonderful,  Job  40.  19.

Gen.  37.  t  36.  they  sold  Joseph  to  a  c.  marshal

40.  9.  the  c.  butler  told  his  dream  to  Joseph

21 .  he  restored  the  c. butler  to  his  butlership  again

22.  but  hanged  the  c.  baker  as  Joseph  interpreted
Num  3.32.  I  leazar  shall  be  c.  over  c.  of  Levites
Deut.  1.  15.  1  took  the  c.  of  your  tribes,  wise  men
1  Sam.  15.  21 .  the  people  took  the  c.  of  the  things

2 -Sam. 23. 18.  Abishai  brother  of  Joabc.  among  three
1  Kings  9. 23.  these  were  thee,  of  the  officers
1  Chron.  5.  2.  for  of  Judah  came  the  c.  ruler

II.  6.  whosoever  smiteth  the  Jebusites  first  shall

be  r.  and  captain,  Joab  went  first  and  was  c.
18.  17.  the  sons  of  David  were  0.  about  the  king
26.  10.  tho'  not  first  born  his  father  made  him  c.
Ezra  9.  2.  the  rulers  have  beenc.  in  this  trespass
Neh.  11. 3.  these  are  c.  of  the  province  that  dwelt
Job  12.  24.  hetakethaway  heart  ofc.  of  people
29.  25.  I  chose  out  their  way,  and  sat  c.  dwelt  as
40.  19.  behemoth  is  the  c.  of  the  ways  of  God
Psal  78.  51.  he  smote  c.  of  their  strength,  105.  36.
137.  6.  if  l  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  c.  joy
Prov.  1. 21.  Wisdom  erieth  in  c.  place  of  concourse
8. 1 26  nor  had  made  c.  part  of  the  dustof  the  world

16.  28.  a  whisperer  separateth  c.  friends
Cant.  4. 14.  an  orchard  with  all  the  c.  spices
Isa.  14.  9.  he  stirreth  up  the  c.  ones  of  the  earth
Jer.  13.  21.  thou  hast  taught  them  as  c.  over  thee

31.  7.  sing  and  shout  among  the  c.  of  the  nations

50.  +  36.  a  sword  is  upon  their  c.  stays,  shall  dote

51.  +  59.  this  Seraiah  was  a  c.  chamberlain
Lam.  1.5.  her  adversaries  are  the  c.  enemies  prosper
Ezek.  4.  t  2.  set  c.  leaders  against  Jerusalem  round

20.  t  40.  there  will  I  require  c.  of  your  oblations
44.  +  30.  c.  of  the  first  fruits  shall  be  the  priest’s
Dan.  2.  t  14.  Daniel  answer.  Arioch  the  c.  marshal
11.  41.  the  c.  of  children  of  Ammon  shall  escape
Amos  6.  1.  which  are  named  c.  of  the  nations

6.  drunk  and  anoint  themselves  with  c.  ointments
Mat.  20. 27.  whosoever  will  be  c.  among  you,  let

23.  6.  they  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts  and

c.  seats  in  the  synagogues,  Mark  12.  39.
Mark  6.  21.  Herod  made  a  supper  to  his  c.  estates
Luke  11. 15.  casteth  out  devils  thro’  c.  of  the  devils

14.  1.  he  went  into  house  of  one  of  the  c.  Pharisees

7.  he  marked  how  they  chose  the  c.  rooms,  20.  46.
22.  26.  and  he  that  is  c.  as  he  that  doth  serve

John  12.  42.  among  c.  rulers  many  believed  on  him
Acts  14.  12.  because  Paul  was  the  c.  speaker

17.  4.  some  believed,  and  of  c.  women  not  a  few
Eph. 2. 2o. Jesus  Christ  the  c.  corner-stone,  1  Pet. 2.6.

1  Tim.  1.1 5.  Jesus  came  to  save  sinners  of  whom  I  c.

1  Pet.  5.  4.  when  c.  Shepherd  shall  appear,  shall

rpcpivp

CHIEF  captain.

2  Sam.  5.  8.  who  smiteth  he  shall  be  c.  and  captain
Acts  21.  31.  tidings  came  to  the  c.  captain  of  band

32.  when  they  saw  the  c.  captain  they  left  beating
23. 17.  Paul  said  .bring  this  young  man  toe.  captain
24.7.  c.  captain  Lysias  came  upon  us,  took  him
22.  c.  captain  shall  come,  I  will  know  uttermost
CHIEF  captains.

£ <S«m. 23.8. Adino the Taclnnonite sat  c.  among  capt.

1  Chron.  27.  3.  c.  of  all  the  captains  for  first  month

2  Chron.  8.  9.  but  Israel  were  c.  of  Solomon’s  capt.
Acts  25. 23.  when  Agrippa  was  entered  with  c.  capt.
Rev.  6. 15.  rich  men  and  c .  captains  hid  themselves

CHIEF  fathers.

Num.  31. 26.  thou  and  the  c.  fathers  of  congregation

1  Chron.  9.  34.  these  c.  fathers  of  Levites  were  chief

24.  31.  the  c.  fathers  of  the  priests  and  Levites
26.  32.  were  2700  c.' fathers  David  made  rulers

2  Chron.  26. 12.  whole  number  of  c.fathersof  mighty
Ezra  1 . 5.  then  rose  u  p  the  c.  of  the  fathers  of  J  udah
Neh.  7.  70.  the  c.  of  the  fathers  gave  to  the  work,  71.

CHIEF  house.

Num.  3. 24.  the  c.  of  house  of  G ershonites,  F.liasaph
30.  the  c.  of  house  of  the  Kohathites,  E.lizaphan
35.  c.  of  the  house  of  the  Merarites,  was  Zuriel

25. 14.  Zimri  was  of  a  c.  house  among  Simeonites

15.  name  of  woman  was  Cozbi,  of  aci.  in  Midian
Josh.  22.  14.  out  of  each  c.  house  a  prince  was  sent
CHIEF  man,  or  men.

Lev.  21.  4.  not  defile  himself,  being  a  c.  man

1  Chron.  7.  3.  the  sons  of  LTzzi,  all  of  them  c.  men
24.  4.  more  c.  men  of  Eleazar  than  of  Ithamar

Ezra  5.  10.  the  names  of  the  men  that  were  c.

7-  28.  I  gathered  together  c.  men  to  go  up  with  me
Isa.  41.  9.  1  called  thee  from  the  c.  men  thereof
Acts  13.  50.  but  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  c.  men
15.  22.  Judas  and  Silas,  c.  men  among  brethren

28.  7*  were  possessions  of  the  c.  man  of  the  island

CHIEF  priest.

2  Kings  25.  18.  the  capt.  took  Seraiah  the  c.  priest

1  Chron.  27.  5.  Renaian  a  c.  priest  was  third  capt.

29.  22.  and  anointed  Zadok  to  be  c.  priest

2  Chron.  19.  11.  Amariah  c.p.  is  over  you  in  matters
26.  20.  and  A2ariah  the  c.  priest  looked  on  him

CHIEF  priests,

Ezra  8.  24.  then  I  separated  twelve  of  r.  of  priests
10.5.  made  the  c. priests  and  all  Israel  to  swear
Neh.  12.  7.  these  were  c. priests  in  days  of  Joshua
Mat.  16.  21.  and  suff  er  many  things  of  the  c.  priests
26  .  47.  a  multitude  with  staves  from  the  c.  priests
27. 12. when  he  was  accused  of  c. priests, Mark  15.  3.

41.  c.  priests  mocking  with  scribes,  Mark  15.  31

60


Mark  14.1  .c.  priests  sought  to  take  him  and  put  him
to  death,  55.  Mat.  26.  59.  Luke  9.  22.  1  22.  2.
Luke  23. 23.  voices  of  them  and  c.  priests  prevailed
John  7.  32.  c.  priests  sent  officers  to  take  him,  18.  3.
19.15.C.  priests  answered, we  have  no  king  but  Cesar
Acts  9. 14.  he  hath  authority  from  c. priests,  26. 10.
22.  30.  commanded  the  c.p.  and  council  to  appear
CHIEF  prince,  cr  princes.

1  Chron.  5.  +  2.  and  of  J  udah  came  the  c .  prince
7.40.  were  children  of  Asher,  c.  of  princes
Ezek.  38. 2.  Gogc.  prince  of  Mei-hech,  3.  1  39.  1.
Dan.  10. 13.  Michael  one  of  the  c. princes  came


CHIEF  singer ,  or  singers.

Neh.  12.46.  in  days  of  David  were.  c.  of  the  singers
Hab.  3. 19.  to  the  c.  singer  on  my  instruments
CHIEFEST.

1  Sam.  2. 29.  to  mak  yourselves  fat  with  c.  offerings
9. 22.  Samuel  made  them  sit  in  the  c.  place

21 . 7.  Doeg  an  Edomite,  c.  of  the  herd-men  to  Saul

2  Chr.  32.33.  I  lezekiah  buried  in  c.  of  sepulchres
Cant.  5. 10.  my  beloved  is  the  c.  among  10,000
Mark  10.44.  who  will  be  c.  shall  be  servant  of  all

2  Cor.  11. 5.  not  a  whit  behind  c.  of  apostle3, 12. 11.
CHIEFLY.

Rom.  3. 2.  c.  because  to  them  were  commit,  oracles
Phil.  4. 22.  c.  they  that  are  of  Cesar’s  household
2  Pet.  2. 10.  but  c.  them  that  walk  after  the  flesh
CHILD

Signifies,  [1]  One  young  in  years,  1  Sam.  1.  22.
[2]  Cue  weak  in  knowledge,  Isa.  10.  19-  1  Cor.
13.  11.  [3]  Such  as  are  young  in  grace,  1  John

2.  13.  [4]  Such  as  are  humble  and  docile.  Mat.
18.  3,  4.  [5]  Whatsoever  is  dear  to  a  person,

Jer.  15.7.

Child,  Children,  or  Sons,  are  taken  differ
ent  ways  in  Scripture.  The  descendants  of  a
mem,  how  remote  soever  they  may  be,  are  called
sons,  or  children.  For  example  :  the  children  of
Edom,  the  children  of  Moat),  the  children  of
Israel,  'lhese  expressions,  the  children  of  light,
the  children  of  darkness,  are  used  to  signify
those  who  follow  light,  and  tluse  who  remain  in
darkness:  the  children  of  the  kingdom,  those
who  belong  to  the  kingdom.  Persons  who  are
almost  of  age,  are  often  called  children,  l  or
example :  Joseph  is  called  a  child  though  he
Was  at  least  sixteen  years  old,  Gen.  37  .  30.  and
Benjamin  of  the  age  of  above  thirty,  is  still  call¬
ed  a  little  child,  Gen.  44.  20.  likewise  men  of
full  age  have  often  the  name  of  children  given
them,  Isa.  65.  20.  '1  he  child  shall  die  an  hun
dred  years  old  ;  that  is,  men  shall  die  at  the
age  of  an  hundred  years  ;  there  shall  be  no  more
untimely  deaths  seen.

Children,  or  Sons  of  God.  By  this  name  angels
are  sometimes  described,  as,  Job  1. 6.  |  2. 1.  J  here
was  a  day  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present
themselves  before  the  Lord.  Good  men,  in  op¬
position  to  the  wicked,  are  likewise  called  by  this
name  ;  the  children  of  Seth’s  family  in  opposition
to  the  race  of  Cain,  Gen.  6.  2.  '1  he  sons  of  God
saw  the  daughters  of  men.  Judges  and  magis¬
trates  are  likewise  termed  children  of  God,  Psal.
82.  6.  I  have  said,  ye  are  gods  ;  and  all  of
you  are  the  children  of  the  Most  High.

In  the  New  Testament,  be/ieveis  are  commonly
called  the  children  of  God,  by  virtue  of  their
adoption,  and  the  prerogatives  which  Christ  pur¬
chased  for  them  by  the  merits  of  his  death  and
sufferings.  John  1.  12.  He  hath  given  us  power
to  become  the  sons  of  God:  and  elsewhere ;  see
Rom.  8.  14.  Gal.  3.  26.

Children,  or  Sons  of  men.  This  name  is  given
to  the  men  of  Cain’s  family,  who  lived  before  the
deluge ;  and  in  particular  to  the  giants,  those
violent  and  corrupt  men,  who  before  the  deluge  had
corrupted  their  ways,  and  drew  down  the  most  ter¬
rible  effects  of  God's  anger  upon  the  earth.  After¬
wards  the  impious,  the  wicked  Israelites  were  called
the  sons  of  men,  Psal.  4.  2.  O  ye  sons  of  men,
how  long  will  ye  love  vanity  ?  See  Psal.  12.  1.
157.4.  But  very  often,  by  sons  of  men,  mankind
are  to  be  understood  .without  any  odious  notion,  as,
Psal.  8.  4.  What  is  the  son  of  man,  that  thou
visitest  him  ?  Psal.  11.  4.  |  145.  12.

Gen.  21.15.  Hagar  cast  thee,  under  one  of  the  shrubs

16.  she  said,  let  me  not  see  the  death  of  the  c.

37.  30.  the  c.  is  not,  and  1 ,  whither  shall  I  go  ?

42.  22.  spake  I  not,  do  not  sin  against  the  c.  ?

Exod.  2.  8.  the  maid  went,  and  called  the  c.  mother
22.  22.  ye  shall  not  afflict  any  fatherless  c.

Judg.  11.  34.  Jephthah’s  daughter  was  his  only  c.
13.  8.  and  teach  us  what  we  shall  do  to  the  c.

1  Sam.  1.  25.  and  they  brought  the  c.  to  Eli

3.  8.  Eli  perceived  the  Lord  had  called  the  c.

2  Sam.  12.  14.  the  c.  that  is  born  to  thee  shall  die

15.  Lord  struck  the  c.  that  Uriah’s  wife  bare

16.  David  therefore  besought  God  for  the  c.

19.  David  perceived  that  the  c.  was  dead

1  Kings  3.  25.  he  said,  divide  the  living  c.  in  two
14. 3.  he  shall  tell  thee,  what  shall  become  of  the  c.

17.  22.  the  soul  of  the  c.  came  into  him  again

2  Kings  4.  31.  he  told  him,  the  c.  is  not  awaked
35.  the  c.  sneezed,  and  the  c.  opened  his  eyes

Prov.  23.  13.  withhold  not  correction  from  the  c.
Eccl.  4.  8.  yea,  he  hath  neither  c.  nor  brother
15.  with  second  c.  that  shall  stand  up  in  his  stead
Isa.  3.  5.  the  c.  shall  behave  himself  proudly

7.  16.  for  before  the  c.  shall  know  to  refuse  the  evil

8.  4.  before  the  c.  shall  know  to  cry,  my  father
11.  8.  the  weaned  c.  put  his  hand  on  cockatrice  den
65.  20.  the  c.  shall  die  an  hundred  years  old

Jer.  4.  31.  as  of  her  that  bringeth  forth  her  first  c.

31.  20.  is  Ephraim  my  son  ?  is  he  a  pleasant  c.  ?
44.7.  to  cutoff  from  you  man,  woman,  and  c.
Mat.  10.  21.  the  father  shall  deliver  the  c.  to  death

17.  18.  the  c.  was  cured  from  that  very  hour
23. 15.  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  c.  of  hell


Luke  1. 59.  on  eighth  day  they  came  to  circumcise  c.
66.  saying,  what  manner  of  c.  shall  this  be  ?

76.  thou  c.  shaltbe  called  Prophet  of  the  Highest


80.  the  c.  grew,  and  w'axed  strong  in  spirit,  2.40.


Luke  2. 27.  when  the  parents  brought  in  the  c.  J  esus
9.  38.  Master,  look  on  my  son,  he  is  my  only  c.

42.  Jest  s  healed  c.  and  delivered  him  to  his  father
John  4.  49.  sir,  come  dowm  ere  my  c.  die

16.  21.  but  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  c.

Acts  4.  27.  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  c.  Jesus

30.  that  signs  may  be  done  by  name  of  thy  c.  Jesus
13. 10.  Saul  said,  thou  c.  of  the  devil,  thou  enemy
Rev.  12.  4.  to  devour  her  c.  as  soon  as  it  was  born
5.  her  c.  was  caught  up  to  God  and  to  his  throne
A  CHILD.

Gen.  18. 13.  shall  I  of  a  surety  bear  a  c.  who  am  old?
44.20.  a  father,  and  a  c.  of  his  old  age,  a  little  one
Exod.  2.  2.  she  saw  he  was  a  goodly  c.  lleb.  11.  23.

1  Sam.  2. 18.  Samuel,  a  c.  girded  with  a  linen  ephod
1  Kings  3. 17.  wast  delivered  of  a  c.  with  her  in  house
13. 2.  a  c.  shall  be  born  to  house  of  David ,  J  osiah
Job  33. 25.  his  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  a  c.

Psal.  131. 2.  I  quieted  myself  as  a  c .  as  a  weaned  c .
Prov.  20. 11.  even  a  c.  is  known  by  his  doings
22. 6.  train  up  a  c.  in  the  way  he  should  go
15.  foolishness  is  bound  in  the  heart  ot  a  c.

29. 15.  but  a  c.  left  to  himself  bringeth  to  shame
21.  he  that  bringeth  up  his  servant  from  a  c.

Eccl.  4. 13.  better  is  a  wise  c.  than  a  foolish  king

10. 16.  woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  is  a  c.

Isa.  9.  6.  for  to  us  a  c.  is  born,  to  us  a  son  is  given

10. 19.  trees  shall  be  few,  that  a  c.  may  write  them
Jer.  1.6.  behold  1  cannot  speak,  for  1  am  a  c.  7.

20. 15.  tidings,  saying,  a  man  c.  is  born  to  thee
Hos.  11.  1.  when  Israel  was  a  c.  then  l  loved  him
Mark  9. 21.  how  long  since  this  came  ?  he  said  of  a  c.

36.  tcok  a  c.  and  set  him  in  the  midst,  Luke  9. 47 .

1  Cor.  13. 11.  when  I  was  a  c.  I  spake  as  a  c.  1  un¬

derstood  as  a  c.  I  thought  as  a  c.
Gal.  4. 1. 1  say,  the  heir  as  long  as  he  is  a  c.  differs  not

2  Tim.  3. 15.  from  a  c.  hast  known  holy  scriptures
Heb.  11. 11.  Sarah  delivered  of  a  c.  when  past  age
Rev.  12.  5.  she  brought  forth  a  man  c.  who  was  to

rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron
Little  CHILI).

Gen.  47.  + 12.  nourish,  his  father’s  house  as  a  little  c.

1  Kings  3. 7.  am  a  little  c.  I  know  not  how  to  go  out
11.  17.  Hadad  fled  into  Egypt,  being  yet  a  little  c.

2  Kings  5. 14.  came  again  like  the  flesh  of  a  little  c.
Isa.  11.6.  and  a  little  c.  shall  lead  them

Mat.  18.  2.  Jesus  called  zlittlec.  to  him,  and  set  him
5.  w'ho  shall  receive  one  such  little  c.  in  my  name
Mark  10. 15.  whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom
of  God  nsulittle  c.  shall  notenter  it,  Luke  18. 17 .
No  CHILD.

Gen.  11.  30.  hut  Sarai  was  barren,  she  had  no  c.

Lev.  22. 13.  but  if  the  priest’s  daughter  have  no  c.
Deut.  25.  5.  if  one  brother  die,  and  have  no  c.

2  Sam.  6.  23.  Michal  had  no  c.  to  the  day  of  death
2  Kings  4. 14.  G  ehazi  answered,  verily  she  hath  no  e.
Luke  1.  7.  they  had  no  c.  because  Elisabeth  was

[barren

Acts’!.  5.  promised  to  him  when  as  yet  he  had  no  c.
Sucking  CHILD.

Num.  11. 12.  as  a  nursing  father  beareth  sucking  c.
Isa.  11.8.  sucking  c.  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp

49. 15.  can  a  woman  forget  herr.c.  ?  yea,  they  may
Lam.  4.  4.  tongue  of  the  suck.  c.  cleaveth  to  the  roof

This  CHILD.

Exod.  2.  9.  take  this  c.  and  nurse  him  for  me
Luke  2. 17.  saying,  which  was  told  concerning  this  c.
34.  this  c.  is  set  for  fall  and  rising  of  many  in  I  srael
9. 48.  whoso  shall  receive  this  c.  my  name,  receives
With  CHILD.

Gen.  16. 11,  the  angel  said,  Hagar,  thou  art  with  c.

19. 36.  daught.  of  l.ot  were  with  e,  by  their  father
38. 24.  Tarriar  thy  daughter  is  with  c.  by  whoredom

25.  by  the  man  whose  these  are  am  I  with  c.

Exod.  21. 22.  if  men  strive  and  hurt  a  woman  with  c.

1  6’aw.4.19.his  daughter,  Phinehas’  wife,  w  as  with  c.

2  Sam.  11. 5.  Bath  sheba  sent  and  said,  I  am  with  c.

2  Kings  8. 12.  wilt  rip  up  their  women  with  c.  15. 16.
Eccl.  11.5.  bones  grow  in  womb  of  her  that  is  with  c.
Isa.  26. 17.  like  a  woman  with  c.  thatdraweth  near

18.  wre  have  been  with  c.  w'e  have  been  in  pain
51.  l.  sing,  O  barren,  that  didst  not  travail  with  c.
Jer.  30. 6.  see  whether  a  man  doth  travail  with  c.

31. 8. 1  wdll  bring  forth  from  north  woman  with  c.
Hos.  13. 16.  their  women  with  c.  shall  be  ripped  up
Amos  1.13.  because  they  ripped  up  the  worn .  with  c.
Mat.  1. 18.  she  was  found  with  c.  ot  the  Holy  G  host
23.  a  virgin  shall  be  with  c.  and  bring  forth  a  son
24. 19.  woe  to  them  that  are  with  c.  and  to  them  give
suck  in  those  days,  Mark  13. 17.  Luke  21.  23.
Luke  2.  5.  to  be  taxed  with  Mary,  being  great  with  c.
1  Thess.  5.  3.  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  c.

Rev.  12.2.  and  she  being  withe,  cried,  travailing
Young  CHILD.

1  Sam.  1. 24.  she  brought  him,  and  the  c.  was  young
Mat.  2.  8.  go  and  search  diligently  for  the  young  c.

13.  take  the  young  c.  and  his  mother,  and  flee

14.  he  took  the  young  c.  and  his  mother  by  night

CHILD-BEARING.

1  Tim.  2. 15.  notwithstand  .she  shall  be  saved  in  c.-b.
CHILDHOOD.

1  Sam.  12. 2.  I  have  walked  before  you  from  my  c.
Job  33.  t  25.  his  flesh  shall  be  fresher  than  c.

Eccl.  11. 10.  fore,  and  youth  arevanity
CHILDISH.

1  Cor.  13. 11.  when  a  man,  I  put  away  c.  things
CHILDLESS.

Gen.  15.  2.  what  wdlt  thou  give  me,  seeing  I  go  c .  ?
Lev.  20.  20.  they  shall  bear  their  sin,  they  shall  die  c.
1  Sam.  15. 33.  Samuel  said,  as  thy  sword  hath  made
women  c.  so  shall  thy  mother  be  c.  among  women
Jer.  22. 30.  saith  the  Lord,  write  you  this  man  c.
Luke  20. 30.  the  second  took  her  to  wife,  and  died  c.
CHILDREN.

Gen.  3. 16.  in  sorrow'  shalt  thou  bring  forth  c.

16.  2.  it  mav  be  that  1  may  obtain  c.  by  her
25.  22.  the  c.  struggled  together  within  her

29.  +  1.  Jacob  came  into  the  land  of  the  c.  of  the  east

30.  1.  Rachael  said  to  Jacob,  give  me  c.  or  I  die

33.  5.  the  c.  w  hich  God  hath  given  thy  servant
49.8.  thy  father’s  c.  shall  bow  dowm  before  thee

Exod.  12.37.  journeyed  about  600, OOOmen,  besides  c


C  II  I


C  H  I


C  H  I


Exod.  20.5.  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the
fathers  upon  the  r.  34. 7-  Num.  14. 18.  Deut.  5.  9-
21.  4.  the  wife  and  her  c.  shall  be  her  master’s
Num.  13.  28.  and  we  saw  the  c.  of  Anak  there
17.  +  10.  for  a  token  against  the  c.  of  rebellion
26. 11.  notwithstanding  the  c.  of  Korah  died  not
Deut.  2.  9.  1  have  given  Ar  to  the  c.  of  Lot,  19.

9.  2.  who  can  stand  before  the  r.  of  Anak  ;

13.  13.  the  c.  of  Belial  are  gone  out  from  you

14.  1.  ye  are  the  r.  of  the  Lord  your  God

21.  15.  have  born  him  r.  both  beloved  and  hated
23. 8.  the  c.  begotten  of  them  shall  enter  into  cong.
24. 16.  the  fathers  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for  the
c.  nor  the  c.  for  the  fathers,  2  ('hum.  25.  4.

32.  20.  they  are  c.  in  whom  there  is  no  faith
33.24.  of  Asher  he  said,  let  Asher  be  blessed  c.
Josh.  22.  9.  c .  of  Reuben  and  Gad,  half  tribe  of  Ma-
nasseh,  returned  and  built  there  an  altar ,  10, 11.

.  Judo.  4.  6.  take  10,000  men  of  the  c.  of  N  aphtali

8.  18.  each  one  resembled  the  c.  of  a  king

14.  16.  thou  hast  put  forth  a  riddle  to  c.  of  people

20.  13.  now  deliver  us  the  men,  the  c.  of  Belial

1  Sam.  2.  5.  she  that  hath  many  c.  is  waxed  feeble
10. 27.  c.  of  Belial  said, -how  shall  this  man  save  us  -

2  Sam.  3.  +  34.  as  a  man  falleth  before  c.  of  iniquity

7. 10.  neither  shall  the  c.  of  wickedness  afflict  them

any  more  as  before-time,  1  Chron.  17.  9.

1  Kings  21. 13.  there  came  in  two  men,  c.  of  Belial

2  Kings  2.  24.  two  she  bears  came  and  tare  42  c.

9.  1.  Elisha  called  one  of  the  c.  of  the  prophets

10.  13.  to  salute  the  c.  of  the  king,  c.  of  thd  queen
14.  6.  but  the  c.  of  murderers  he  slew  not,  as  is

written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  2  Chron.  25.  4.
17.  31.  nor  do  as  1  ord  commanded  the  c.  of  Jacob

19.  3.  for  the  c.  are  come  to  the  birth,  Isa.  37-  3.

1  Chron.  2.  30.  but  Seled  died  without  c.

35.  and  Tether  died  without  c.

4.  27.  but  Shimei’s  brethren  had  not  many  c.

16.  13.  t)  ye  c.  of  Jacob  his  chosen,  Psal.  105.  6.

2  Chron.  13.  7.  gathered  to  Jeroboam  c.  of  Belial

25.  7.  the  Lord  is  not  with  all  the  c.  of  Ephraim

11.  Amaziah  smote  of  the  c.  of  Seir  10,000
Ezra  2.  1.  these  are  c.  of  the  province,  Neh.  7.  6.

10.  44.  some  had  wives  by  whom  they  had  c.

Neh.  9.  23.  the  c.  multipliedst  thou  as  stars  of  heav.
Job  19.  17.  1  intreated  for  the  c.  sake  of  my  body

30.  8.  they  were  c.  of  fools,  yea,  c.  of  base  men
41.  34.  he  is  a  king  over  all  the  c.  of  pride
Psal.  17.  14.  they  are  full  of  c.  and  leave  the  rest
34.  11.  come  ye  c.  hearken  to  me,  I  will  teach  you
69.  8.  1  am  become  an  alien  to  my  mother’s  c.

72.  4.  he  shall  save  the  c.  of  the  needy

78.  6.  the  e.  which  should  be  born  might  know
82.  6.  and  all  of  you  are  c.  of  the  most  High
83.  8.  they  have  holpen  the  c.  of  Lot.  Selah
102.  28.  the  c.  of  thy  servants  shall  continue
113.  9.  makes  the  barren  to  be  a  joyful  mother  of  c.
t27.  3.  !o  c.  are  an  heritage  of  the  Lord

4.  as  arrows  in  the  hand,  so  are  the  c.  of  youth
137.  7.  remember,  O  Lord,  the  e,  of  Edom

148.  12.  let  old  men  and  c.  praise  the  Lord

149.  2.  let  the  c.  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  king
Prov.  4. 1.  hear,  ye  c.  instruction^.  7-.  I  7  -  24. 1 8.  32.

17.  6.  and  the  glory  of  c.  are  their  fathers

31.  28.  her  e.  arise  up  and  call  her  blessed
Eccl.  6.  3.  if  a  man  beget  100  c.  and  live  years
Cant.  1.  6.  my  mother's  c.  were  angry  with  me
Isa.  1.  2.  I  have  brought  up  c.  and  they  rebelled

4.  ah  sinful  nation,  c.  that  are  corrupters

2.  6.  they  please  themselves  in  the  c.  of  strangers

3. 4.  and  I  will  give  c.  to  be  their  princes,  and  babes

12.  as  for  my  people,  c.  are  their  oppressors

8. 18.  I  and  c.  whom  I.ord  hath  given  me,  Heb.2.13.

13. 18.  shall  have  no  pity,  their  eye  not  spare  c.

21.  17.  mighty  men  of  c.  of  Kedar  be  diminished
23.  4.  saying,  l  travail  not,  nor  bring  forth  c.

30.  1.  woe  to  the  rebellious  c.  saith  the  I.ord

9.  lying  c.  c.  that  will  not  hear  the  law  of  the  L.
38.  19.  father  to  the  c.  make  knoum  thy  truth

47.  8.  neither  shall  I  know  the  loss  of  c.

9.  come  in  one  day  the  loss  of  c.  and  widowhood
49.  20.  the  c.  which  thou  shalt  have,  shall  say
54.  1.  sing,  O  barren,  for  more  are.  c.  of  the  deso
late  than  c.  of  the  married  wife,  Cal.  4.  27.

57. 4.  are  ye  not  c.  of  transgression,  a  seed  of  falseh.

5.  slaying  the  c.  in  the  valleys  under  (  lifts  of  rocks
63. 8.  they  are  my  people,  c.  that  will  not  lie

66.  8.  as  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought  forth  c.
Jer.  3.  14.  turn,  O  backsliding  c.  saith  the  Lord,  22.

19.  I  said,  how  shall  I  put  thee  among  the  c.  ?

4.  22.  for  my  people  is  foolish,  they  are  sottish  c.

6.  11.  1  will  pour  it  out  upon  the  c.  abroad

7.  18.  the  c.  gather  wood,  the  fathers  kindle  the  fire

9.  21.  for  death  entered  to  cut  off  c.  from  without

15.  7.  I  will  fan  them,  I  will  bereave  them  of  c.

31. 15.  Rachel  weeping  for  her  c.  Mat.  2.  18.

29.  the  c.  teeth  are  set  on  edge,  Ezek.  18.  2.  •

48.  +  45.  shall  devour  the  crown  of  the  c .  of  n  use

l.am.  2.  20.  shall  the  women  eat  c.  of  a  span  long  ?

5.  13.  young  men  to  grind,  c.  fell  under  the  wood
Esek.  2.  4.  for  they  are  impudent  r.  and  stiff  hearted

20.  21.  the  c.  rebelled  against  me,  they  walked
23.  + 17.  c.  of  Babel  came  to  her  into  bed  of  love

33.  30.  the  c.  still  are  talking  against  thee  by  walls
44.4  7.  brought  into  my  sanctuary  c.  of  a  stranger
47.  22.  to  strangers  that  shall  beget  r.  among  you
Dari.  1.  4.  c.  in  whom  was  no  blemish,  but  skilful
15.  their  countenances  fairer  and  fatter  than  all  c.
17.  as  for  these  four  c.  God  gave  them  knowledge

2.  +  25.  found  a  man  of  the  c.  of  the  captivity
12.  1.  Michael  shall  stand  for  the  r.  of  thy  people
I  his.  1.  2.  take  unto  thee  c.  of  whoredoms
2.  4.  1  will  not  have  mercy  on  her  c.  tor  they  be  c.

10.  9-  the  battle  against  thee,  of  iniquity  did  not
14.  the  mother  was  dashed  in  pie -es  upon  here.

11. 10.  then  the  c.  shall  tremble  from  the  west
13. 13.  not  stay  long  in  placeof  breaking  forth  of  e.
Joel 2. 16.  gather  c.  and  those  that  suck  the  breasts
23.  be  glad  then  ye  c.  of  Zion,  and  rejoice  in  Imrd
Amos  9-  7*  are  ye  not  as  c.  of  the  1  thiopians  to  me  '
Mir.  1 . 16.  make  bald,  anil  poll  thee  for  delicate  c.
Zegh.  I  8. 1  will  punish  the  princes  and  king’s  c.


Mat.  4.  6.  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  fathers  to  the  r.

and  the  heart  of  c.  to  their  fathers,  Luke  1 .  17 -
Mat.  2.  16.  Herod  slew  all  the  c.  in  Bethlehem

3.  9.  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  r.  Luke  3. 8.

5.  45.  that  ye  may  be  thee,  of  your  Father  in  heav.

8.  12.  but  the  c.  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  cast  out

9. 15.  Jesus  said,  can  c.of  bride-cham.  mourn  while
bridegroom  with  them  '  Mark  2.  19-  Luke  5.  34.

10.  21.  c.  shall  rise  against  parents,  Mark  13.  12.

11.  19.  but  Wisdom  is  justified  of  her  c.  Luke 7.  35.

13.  .‘38.  the  good  seed  are  the  c.  of  the  kingdom,

but  the  tares  are  the  c.  of  the  wicked  one

15.  26.  not  meet  to  take  the  c.  bread,  Mark 7.  27-
17.  26.  Testis  saith  to  him,  then  are  the  c.  free

1 9. 29.  forsaken  wife  or  c.  for  my  sake,  Mark  10.  29.

20.  20.  then  came  the  mother  of  Zebedee’s  c.

21. 15.  priests  and  scribes  saw  thee,  crying  in  temp.
Mat.  23.  31.  ye  aree.  of  them  that  killed  prophets
Mark  7.  27 .  Jesus  said  to  her,  let  the  c.  first  be  filled

28.  the  dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the  c.  crumbs

9.  37.  shall  receive  one  of  such  c.  in  my  name,  41.
Luke  6.  35.  be  great,  ye  shall  be  thee,  of  the  High.

16.  8.  for  e.  of  this  world  are  wiser  than  e.  of  light

20.  29.  the  first  took  a  wife  and  died*  without  e.

34.  the  e.  of  this  world  marry,  and  are  given  in

John 8. 39-  ifye  were  Abraham’s  c.  would  do  works

21.  5.  Jesus  saith  to  them,  c.  have  ye  any  meat  ?
Acts  3.  25.  ye  are  the  e.  of  the  prophets  and  covenant
Rom.  8.  17.  ife.  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  joint  heirs

9.7.  because  the  seed  of  Abraham  are  they  all  c.

11.  for  c.  toing  not  yet  born ,  nor  done  good  or  evil

1  Cor.  14.20.  be  not  c.  in  understanding,  in  malice  c.

2  Cor.  12.  14.  for  the  c.  ought  not  to  lay  up  for  the

parents,  but  the  parents  tor  the  c.
Gal.  3.  7.  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  c.  of  Abraham

4.  3.  so  we,  when  we  were  c.  were  in  bondage

25.  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  bondage  with  her  c.

31.  we  are  not  c.  of  bond-woman,  but  of  the  free
J p'i.  1.  5.  having  predestinated  11s  to  adoption  ofc.
2.  2.  the  spirit  that  worketh  in  c.  of  disobedience

3,  were  by  nature  c.  of  wrath,  even  as  others

4.  14.  we  be  henceforth  no  more  r.  tossed  to  and  fro

5.  1.  be  ye  therefore  followers  of  God  as  dear  c.

6.  wrath  cometh  on  c.  of  disobedience,  Col.  3.  6.

6. 1.  c.  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord,  Col.  3.  20.

1  Tim.  5.  4.  but  if  any  widow  have  c.  or  nephews

10.  if  she  hath  brought  up  r.  if  she  hath  lodged

14.  I  will  that  the  younger  women  marry,  bear  c.
Ileh.  2. 14.  as  the  c.  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood

12. 5.  exhortation  which  speaketh  to  you  as  to  c.

1  Pet.  1.  14.  as  obedient  c.  not  fashioning  by  lusts

2  Pet.  2.  14.  having  eyes  full  of  adultery,  cursed  c.

1  John  3. 10.  c.  of  God  manifest,  aude.  of  the  devil

2  John  1.  the  elder  to  the  elect  lady  and  her  c.

13.  the  c.  of  thy  elect  sister  gree-t  thee

Rev.  2.23.  I  will  kill  her  c.  with  death,  churches
See  Ammon,  Captivity.
CHILDREN  of  Benjamin.

Nvm.  1. 36.  of  the  c.  of  B.  by  their  genealogy  35,400
Jvdg.  1.  21.  c.  if  B.  did  not  drive  out  the  lebusites
20.  13.  the  c.  of  B.  would  not  hearken  to  brethren
2  Sam.  2.  25.  c.  of  B.  gathered  together  after  Abner

1  Chr.  9.  3.  in  Jerusalem  dwelt  ofc.  <f  B.  Neh.  11. 4.
12. 16.  there  came  of  c.  of  B.  to  the  hold  to  David

Jer.  6. 1.  O  yec.  of  Benj.  gather  yourselves  to  flee
Children's  CII ILD R  EN .

Gen.  45.  10.  shalt  be  near  to  me,  thou  and  thy  ch.  c.
Exod.  .34.  7.  visiting  iniquity  of  fathers  on  childr.  c.
Deut.  4.  25.  when  thou  shaft  beget  c.  and  childr.  c.

2  Kings  17 .  41.  served  images  both  their  c.  and  ch.  c.
Psal.  103.  17.  and  his  righteousness  unto  childr.  c.
128.6.  shalt  see  thy  childr.  c.  and  peace  on  Israel
Prov.  13.22.  leaveth  an  inheritance  to  his  childr.  c.

17.  6.  childr.  c.  are  crown  pf  old  men,  glory  ofc.

Jer.  2.  9.  and  with  your  children's  c.  will  I  plead
Ezek.  37.25.  shall  dwell,  and  their  childr.  c.  forever
Fatherless  CHILDREN .

Psal.  109. 12.  nor  let  there  be  any  to  favour  father,  c.
Jer.  49. 11.  leave  thy  father,  c.  I  will  preserve  them
CHI  LDREN  'f  God.

Mat.  5.  9.  peace-makers  shalfbe  called  thee,  of  G.
I.uke  20.  36.  are  the  c.  of  G.  being  c.  of  resurrection
John  11.  52.  should  gather  together  in  one  c.  of  God
Rom.  8.  16.  beareth  witness  that  we  are  the  c.  i  fG.

21.  delivered  into  the  glorious  liberty  ofc.  of  God
9.  8.  the  c.  of  the  flesh,  these  are  not  the  c.  of  God

26.  there  shall  they  be  called  c.  of  the  living  God
Gal.  3.  26.  ye  are  all  c.  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ

1  John  3. 10.  c.  of  Gcd  manifest,  and  c.  of  the  devil
5.  2.  by  this  we  know  that  we  love  the  c.  of  God
His  CHILDREN

Gen.  18.  19. 1  know  Abraham  will  command  hisc.
37.  3.  Israel  loved  Joseph  more  than  all  hisc.
Deut.  17.  20.  may  prolong  his  days,  he  and  his  c.

32.  5.  corrupted,  their  spot  is  not  the  spot  of  his  c.
+  they  are  not  his  c.  that  is  their  blot

33.  9.  neither  acknowledge,  nor  knew  his  own  c.

1  Sam.  30.22.  save  to  every  man  his  wife  and  his  c.

2  Sam.  12. 3.  a  little  ewe-lamb,  it  grew  up  with  his  c.
2  Kings  8. 19-to  give  him  always  a  light,  and  to  his  c.
2  Chr.  28.  3.  burnt  his  c.  in  fire  after  the  heathen

33.  6.  he  caused  his  c.  to  pass  thro’  the  fire
Job  5.  4.  his  c.  are  far  from  safely,  and  are  crushed
17.  5.  even  the  eyes  of  his  c.  shall  fail

20. 10.  his  c.  shall  seek  to  please  the  poor

21. 19.  God  layeth  up  ois  iniquity  for  his  c.

27.  14.  if  his  c.  be  multiplied,  it  is  for  the  sword
Psal.  89.  .30.  if  hisc.  forsake  my  law,  and  walk  not
103.  13.  like  as  a  father  pitiath  his  c.  so  Lord  pities
109.  9.  let  his  c.  be  fatherless,  his  wife  a  widow
10.  let  hisc.  be  vagabonds,  and  beg  bread
Prov.  14.  26.  his  c.  shall  have  a  place  of  refuge
20.  7.  the  just  man,  his  c.  are  blessed  after  him
Isa.  14.21.  prepare  slaughter  for  hisc.  for  iniquity  of

29.  23.  when  he  seeth  his  c.  in  the  midst  of  him
Hos.9.  13.  but  Ephraim  shall  bringforth  his  c.
John  4.  12.  hisc.  and  cattle  drank  thereof

1  Thess.  2. 11.  we  charged  you  as  a  father  doth  his  c.
1  Tim.  3.  4.  having  htsc.  in  subjection  with  gravity*
CHILDREN  of  Israel.

Gen.  50.25.  Joseph  took  an  oath  of  the  c.  of  Israel
Exod  1. 7. the  c.  ot  Israel  were  fruitful  and  increased


Exod.  1. 12.  they  were  grieved  because  of  c.  of  Isr.

2.  23.  c.  of  Is.  sighed  25.  God  looked  on  c.  of  Isr.

4.  .31.  when  they  heard  l  ord  had  visited  c.  of  Isr.

6.  5.  I  have  also  heard  the  groaning  of  the  c.  of  Is.

13.  to  bring  c.  of  Isr.  out  of  Egypt,  26, 27-  1 12.  51.

9.  4.  shall  nothing  die  of  all  that  is  the  c.  of  Israel
12.  37.  c.  of  Isr.  journeyed  about  600,000  on  foot
29.  43.  and  there  I  will  meet  with  the  c.  of  Israel
31 .  17.  it  is  a  sign  between  me  and  c.  of  Is.  for  ever

Lev.  17.  13.  whosoever  he  be,  c.  of  Isr.  or  stranger
25.  55.  for  to  me  the  c.  of  Isra  l  are  servants
Num.  14. 10.  glory  of  Lord  appeared  before  c.  of  Is.
Josh.  7. 12.  c.  1  f  Isr.  could  not  stand  before  enemies-

1  Sam.  11.8.  when  numbered  c.  of  Isr.  were  300, (XX)

2  Sam.  21.  2.  the  Gibeonites  were  not  of  c.  of  Isr.

2  Kings  17.  24.  and  placed  them  instead  of  c.  of  Is.
Neh.  8. 17.  to  that  day  had  not  the  c.  of  Is.  done  so-
Psal.  103.  7.  he  made’  known  his  acts  to  c.  of  Isr.
148. 14.  even  of  the  c.  of  Isr.  a  people  near  to  him
Isa.  27.12.  shall  be  gathered  one  by  one,  O  ye  c.  of  Is.
Ezek.  44. 15.  when  c.  of  Israel  went  astray,  48.  11.
Amos  2.  11.  is  it  not  even  thus,  O  ye  c.  of  Israel?

4.  5.  this  liketh  you,  O  ye  c.  of  Isr.  saith  the  Lord
Luke  1. 16.  many  of  the  c.  of  Isr.  shall  turn  to  Lord
Acts  7.  23.  to  visit  his  brethren  the  c.  of  Israel
37.  this  is  that  Moses  which  said  to  the  c.  of  Israel'
9. 15.  chosen  to  bear  my  name  before  the  c.  of  Isr.

10.  36.  word  God  sent  to  c.  of  Isr.  preaching  peace
Rom.  9. 27.  though  number  of  c.  of  Is.  be  as  the  sand
2  Cor.  3. 7.  c.  of  Isr.  could  not  behold  face  of  Moses-
Heb.  11.  22.  made  mention  of  departing  of  c.  of  Is.
Rev.  2.  14.  to  cast  a  stumbling- block  before  c.  of  Is.

7.  4.  sealed  144,000  of  all  the  tribes  of  the  c.  of  Is.

21. 12.  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  c.  of  Is.

CHILDREN  of  Judah.

Num.  1.  26.  of  the  c.  of  Judah  by  their  generations
Josh.  14.  6.  c.  of  Judah  came  to  Joshua  to  Gilgal
2  Sam.  1.  18.  bade  teach  c.  of  Jud.  the  use  of  the  bow
2  Chr.  13. 18.  c.  of  J.  prevailed,  because  they  relied

25. 12.  other  10,000  did  c .  of  J.  carry  away  captive
28. 10.  now  ye  purpose  to  keep  under  the  c.of  Jud .

Jer.  32.  32.  because  of  all  the  evil  of  the  c.  of  Jud.
50.  4.  they  and  the  e.  of  Judah  going  and  weeping

33.  Israel  and  c.  of  Jud.  were  oppressed  together
Joel  3. 19.  for  the  violence  against  the  c.  of  Judah

CHILDREN  of  light.

Luke  16.  8.  c.  of  this  world  arfe  wiser  than  c.  of  light
John  12.  36.  believe,  that  ye  may  be  the  c.  of  light
Eph.  5.  8.  but  now  are  light  in  I.ord,  walk  as  c.  of  l.

1  Thess.  5.  5.  ye  are  all  c.  of  light,  and  child,  of  day

Little  CHILDREN.

Num.  16.  27.  little  c.  stood  in  the  door  of  their  tents

2  Kings  2.  23.  came  forth  little  c.  and  mocked  him
Esth.  3. 13.  in  one  day  to  destroy  little  c.  and  women
Ezek.  9.  6.  slay  utterly  maids,  little  c.  and  women
Mat.  18.  3.  except  converted,  and  become  as  little  c.

19.  13.  then  were  there  brought  to  him  little  c.

14.  sqfifer  little  c.  to  come,  Mark  10. 14.  Luke  18.16.
John  13. 33.  little  c.  yet  a  little  while  I  am  with  you
Gal.  4. 19.  my  little  c.  of  whom  I  travail  in  birth
1  John  2.  1.  my  little  c.  I  write  to  you,  12,  13.

4.  4.  are  of  God,  little  c.  and  have  overcome  world-

5.  21.  little  c.  keep  yourselves  from  idols

CHILDREN  of  men.

Gen.  11.  5.  to  see  the  tower  which  c.  of  men  built

1  Sam.  26. 19.  if  they  be  c.  of  men,  cursed  be  they

2  Sam.  7.  14.  I’ll  chastise  him  with  stripesof  c.  of  m.
1  Kings  8.  39.  knowest  hearts  of  c.  of  m.  2  Chr.  6.  30.
Psal.  11. 4.  eyes  behold,  his  eyelids  try  the  c.  ofm.
12. 1.  for  the  faithful  fail  from  among  c.  of  men

14.  2.  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  c.  of  m.  53. 2.
36.7.  the  c.  o/wewput  their  trust  under  shadow
45!  2.  thou  art  fairer  than  c.  of  m.  grace  is  poured
90.  3.  turnest  man,  anti  sayest,  return  ye  c.  of  m.
107.  8.  his  wonderful  works  to  c.  of  m.  15,  21,  31.
115. 16.  the  earth  hath  he  given  to  the  c.  of  men
Prov.  15.  11.  how  much  more  then  hearts  of  c.  ofm.
Lam.  3.  33.  he  doth  not  afflict,  nor  grieve  c.  of  m.
Dan.  2.  38.  wherever  c.  of  men  dwell  hath  he  given

M en-CA  1 1 LD  R  EN .

Exod.  1. 17.  the  midwives  saved  th emen-c.  alive,  18.

34.  23.  all  the  men-c.  shall  appear  before  the  Lord
Josh.  17.  2.  these  were  the  male  c.  of  Manasseh

Men,  Women,  and  CHILDREN.

Deut.  3.  6.  in  Bashan  we  destroyed  m.  women,  andc.
31.  12.  gather  m.  women,  and  c.  to  hear  and  learn
1  Sam.  22. 19.  smote  N  ob,  m.  w.  andc.  and  sucklings
Ezra  10.  1.  a  great  congregat.  of  men,  w  <men,  and c.
Jer  40  7.  had  committed  to  Gedaliah  m.w.  andc.
Mat.  14.  21.  and  they  that  had  eaten  were  about
5000  men,  beside  women  and  c.  15.  38.
My  CHILDREN.

Gen.  30.  26.  give  me  my  wives  and  my  c.  for  whom
31.  43.  these  c.  are  my  c.  these  cattle  my  cattle
42.  36.  Jacob  said,  me  ye  have  bereaved  of  my  c.
43. 14.  if  I  be  bereaved  of  my  c.  I  am  bereaved
Ei od.  13.  15.  but  the  first-born  of  my  c.  1  redeem
21.  5. 1  love  my  master,  wife,  and  my  c.  1  11  not  go
1  Kings  20. 7.  he  sent  to  me  for  my  wives  and  my  c.
Job  29.  5.  that  1  were  as  when  my  c.  were  about  me

1  a.  49.  21.  seeing  I  have  lost  my  c.  and  am  desol.
Jer.  10.  20.  my  c.  are  gone  forth  of  me,  and  are  not
Lam.  1. 16.  my  c.  are  desolate,  the  enemy  prevailed
Ezek.  16.  21.  is  it  small  that  thou  hast  slain  my  c.?
Luke  11.7.  trouble  me  not,  my  c.  are  with  me  in  bed

2  Cor.  6.  13.  I  speak  as  to  my  c.  be  ye  enlarged

3  John  4.  joy  to  near  that  my  c.  walk  in  the  truth

No  CHILDREN.

Ge«.l6.1.  now  Barai  Abram’s  wife  bare  him  noc.
.30.  1.  when  Rachel  saw  that,  she  bare  Jacob  no  c.
Num.  .3.  4.  Nadab  and  Abihu  died,  and  had  no  c.

1  Sam.  1. 2.  Reninnahhad,  but  Hannah  had  no  c.
Mat.  22. 24.  if  any  man  die  having  noc.  Mark  12. 19
Luke  20.  .31.  the  seven  took  her,  and  left  noc.

Our  CH  1 LDR EN .

Gen.  31. 16.  all  the  riches  are  ours  and  our  c.

Exod.  17.  3.  to  kill  us,  and  our  c.  and  our  cattle
Num.  14.  .3.  that  our  wives  and  our  c.  be  a  prey
Deut.  29.  29-  belong  to  us  and  to  our  c.  for  ever
Josh  22.  24.  your  c.  might  speak  to  our  c.  saying
25.  your  c.  make  our  c.  cease  from  fearing  T.ord
Neh.  5.  5.  as  the  flesh  of  brethren,  our  r.  as  their  c


CHO


CHO


CHR


Mat. 27.  25.  and  said,  his  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  c.

CHILDREN  of  promise.

Horn.  9. 8.  but  the  c.  of  prom,  are  counted  for  the  seed
Gal.  4.  28.  we.  brethren,  as  Isaac  was,  are  c.  of  p.
Strange  CHILDREN.

Ne/i.  9.  +2.  Israel  separated  themselves  from  str.  c.
Psal.  144.  7.  rid  and  deliver  me  from  strange  c.  11.
If  os.  5.  7.  tor  they  have  begotten  strange  c.

Their  CHILDREN.

Gen.  31.  43.  what  can  I  do  to  daughters  or  their  c.
Deut.  4.  10.  and  that  they  may  teach  their  c.

5.  29.  that  it  might  be  well  with  their  c.  for  ever

31.  13.  that  their  c.  may  learn  to  fear  the  Lord
Josh.  5.  7.  and  their  c.  them  Joshua  circumcised

1  Kings  9.  21 .  of  their  c.  did  Solomon  levy  a  tribute

2  Kings  8. 12.  thou  wilt  dash  their  c.  and  rip  women

17.  31.  burnt  their  c.  in  the  tire  to  the  gods
41.  their  c.  served  images  as  did  their  fathers

£  Chron.  20. 13.  before  Lord  with  wives  and  their  c.

25.  4.  he  slew  not  their  c.  but  did  as  it  is  written
Neh.  9. 23.  their  c.  thou  multipliedst  as  stars  ot  heav,

13.  24.  their  c.  spake  half  in  the  speech  of  Ashdod
Job  21.  11.  send  their  little  ones,  their  c.  dance
24.  5.  the  wilderness  yieldeth  food  for  their  c.

Psal.  78.  4.  we  will  not  hide  them  from  their  c.

6.  should  arise  and  declare  them  to  their  c.

90.  16.  and  let  thy  glory  appear  to  their  c.

132.  12.  their  c.  shall  sit  on  ihy  throne  forever
Isa.  13.  16.  their  c.  shall  be  dashed  to  pieces  before
Jer.  17.  2.  whilst  their  c.  remember  their  altars

18.  21.  therefore  deliver  up  their  c.  to  the  famine

30.  20.  their  c.  also  shall  be  as  aforetime

32.  18.  the  iniquity  of  fathers  into  bosom  of  their  c.
39.  for  good  of  them  and  of  their  c.  after  them

47.  3.  the  fathers  shall  not  look  back  to  their  c.
Lam.  4. 10.  the  hands  of  women  have  sodden  their  c.
Ezek.  20. 18.  I  said  to  their  c.  in  the  wilderness
23.  39.  when  they  had  slain  their  c.  to  idols

37.  25.  they  and  their  c.  shall  dwell  therein
Pan.  6.  24.  cast  them  and  their  c.  into  den  of  lions
Hos.  9.  12.  tho’  bring  up  their  c.  yet  I  will  bereave
Joel  1.  3.  let  your  c.  tell  their  c.  and  their  c.  another
Mie. 2.9.  from  their  c.  have  ye  taken  away  my  glory
Zech.  10.  7.  yea,  their  c.  shall  see  it  and  be  glad

9.  they  shall  live  with  their  c.  and  turn  again
Acts  13. 33.  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  to  us  their  c.

1  Tim.  3. 12.  the  deacons  rule  their  c.  and  houses  well
Tit.  2. 4.  young  women  to  love  husbands  and  their  c.

~  Thy  CHILDREN.

Exod.  13.  13.  the  first-born  among  thy  c.  redeem
Deut.  A.  40.  go  well  with  tliyc.  after  thee,  12.  25,28.

6.  7-  thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  to  thy  c.

30.  2.  thou  and  thyc.  shall  obey  with  all  thine  heart
Josh.  14.  9.  the  land  be  thine  and  thy  c.  for  ever

1  Sam.  16.  11.  Samuel  said,  are  here  all  thy  c.  ?

1  Kings  2.  4.  if  thy  c.  take  heed  to  their  v'ay  to  walk
8.  25.  so  that  thy  c.  take  heed,  2  Chron.  6.  16.

20.  3.  saith,  thy  wives  also  and  thy  c.  are  mine

2  Kings  4.  7.  live  thou  and  thy  c.  of  the  rest

10. 30.  thy  c.  of  fourth  generation  shall  sit  on  throne
2  Chron.  21.  14.  Lord  will  smite  thy  people  and  c.
Job  8.  4.  if  thy  c.  have  sinned  against  him,  he  cast
Psal.  45.  16.  instead  of  thy  fathers  shall  be  thy  c.
73.  15.  should  offend  against  generation  of  thy  c.
128.  3.  thy  c.  like  olive-plants  round  about  thy  table
132.  12.  if  thy  c.  will  keep  my  covenant  and  test.
147.  13.  he  hath  blessed  thy  c.  within  thee
Isa.  49. 17.  thy  c.  shall  make  haste,  thy  destroyers
25.  I  will  contend,  and  1  will  save  thy  c.

54.  13.  and  all  thy  c.  shall  be  taught  of  the  Lord,
and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  c.
Jer.  5.7.  thy  c.  have  forsaken  me,  and  sworn  by  them

31.  17.  there  is  hope  that  thy  c.  shall  come  again

38.  23.  they  shall  bring  out  thy  c.  to  the  Chaldeans
Ezek.  16.  36.  by  blood  of  thy  c.  thou  didst  give  them
Hos.  4.  6.  forgotten  the  law,  I  will  also  forget  thy  c.
Mat.  23. 37.  now  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  c.

as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  !  Luke  13.  34.
Luke  19.44.  they  shall  lay  th%  c.  within  thee
2  John  4.  that  I  found  of  thy  c.  walking  in  truth
Your  CHILDREN.

Exod.  12. 26.  when  you?  c.  shall  say  unto  you
22.  24.  wives  be  widows,  and  your  c.  be  fatherless
Lev.  25.  46.  take  them  as  inheritance  for  your  c.

26.  22.  said,  wild  beasts  shall  rob  you  of  your  c.
Hum.  14.  33 .your  c.  shall  wander  in  the  wilderness
Deut.  1.  39.  your  c.  shall  go  in  thither  and  possess

11. 2.  I  speak  not  with  your  c.  who  have  not  known

19.  these  my  words,  ye  shall  teach  them  your  c.

21.  that  days  of  your  c.  be  multiplied  in  the  land
29. 22.  the  generation  to  come  of  your  c.  shall  say

32.  46.  which  ye  shall  command  your  c.  to  observe
Josh.  4.  6.  when  your  c.  ask  their  fathers,  21.

22.  thenyeshall  \ztyour  c.  know,  saying,  Israel
1  Kings  9.  6.  if  your  c.  turn  from  following  me

1  Chron.  28.8.  for  an  inherit,  to  your  c.  Ezra  9- 12.

2  Chron.  30.  9.  your  c.  shall  find  compassion  before
Psal.  115. 14.  the  Lord  shall  increase  you  and  your  c.
Jer.  2.  30.  in  vain  have  I  smitten  your  c.

Mat.  7. 11.  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  c.  Luke  11. 13.
12.  27-  by  whom  do  your  c.  cast  them  out  ?

Luke  23.  28.  but  weep  for  yourselves  and  your  c.
Acts  2.  39.  for  the  promise  is  to  you  and  your  c.

1  Cor.  7. 14.  else  were  your  c.  unclean,  but  now  holy
Eph.  6.  4.  provoke  not  your  c.  to  wrath,  Col.  3.  21.
Young  CHILDREN.

Job  19.  18.  yea,  young  c.  despised  me,  they  spake
Lam.  4.  4.  the  young  c.  ask  bread,  no  man  breaketh
Hah.  3.  10.  her  young  c.  were  dashed  in  pieces
Mark  10. 13.  brought  young  c.  to  him  to  touch  them
Acts  7-  19.  so  that  they  cast  out  their  young  c.
CHIMNEY.

Hos.  13.  3.  they  shall  be  as  smoke  out  of  the  c.
CIIODE.

Gen.  31.  36.  Jacob  was  wroth,  and  c.  with  Laban
Hum.  20.  3.  the  people  c.  with  Moses  and  spake
CHOICE.

Gen.  23.  6.  in  c.  of  our  sepulchres  bury  thy  dead
49.  11.  binding  his  ass’s  colt  to  the  c.  vine
Deut.  12. 11.  thither  shall  bring  all  your  c.  vows

1  Sam.  9.  2.  Saul  a  c.  young  man  and  a  goodly

2  Sam.  10. 9.  he  chose  of  c.  of  Israel,  1  Chr.  19. 10.

62


2  Kings  19.  23.  cut  down  the  c.  fir-trees,  Isa.  37-  24.

2  Chron.  25.  5.  he  found  them  300,000  c.  men
Heh.  5. 18.  now  prepared  for  me  daily  six  c.  sheep
Prcv.  8. 10.  and  knowledge  rather  than  c.  gold

19.  and  my  revenue  is  better  than  c.  silver
10.  20.  the  tongue  of  the  just  is  as  c.  silver

Cant.  6.  9.  she  is  the  c.  one  of  her  that  bare  her
Jer.  22. 7.  they  shall  cut  down  thy  c.  cedars

48.  + 15.  the  c.  of  Moab  are  gone  down  to  slaughter
Ezek.  23.  +  7.  committed  whored .  with  c.  of  Asher

24.  4.  set  on  a  pot,  fill  it  with  the  c.  bones
5.  take  the  c.  of  the  flock  and  bum  the  bones
Acts  15.  7.  God  made  c.  among  us,  that  the  Gentiles
CHOICEST.

Isa.  5. 2.  and  planted  the  vineyard  with  the  c.  vine
22. 7.  thy  c.  vallev  shall  be  full  of  chariots
"  CHOKE.

Mat.  13.  22.  the  care  of  this  world  and  the  deceit¬
fulness  of  riches  c.  the  word,  Mark  4. 19.
CHOKED.

Mat.  13. 7.  thorns  c.  them,  Mark  4.  7.  Luke  8.  7-
Mark  5. 13.  and  were  c.  in  the  sea,  Luke  8.  33.

Luke  8. 14.  go  forth  and  are  c.  with  cares  and  riches
CHOLER.

Dan.  8. 7.  an  he-goat  moved  with  c.  smote  the  ram

11. 11.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  moved  with  c.

CHOP.

Mie.  3.  3.  break  their  bones  and  c.  them  in  pieces
CHOOSE

Signifies,  [1]  To  select ,  or  make  choice  of,  Exod.  17-  9-
Psal.  25. 12.  [2]  To  renew  a  choice,  or  to  choose
again ,  Isa.  14.  1. 1  48.  10.  [3]  To  follow,  imitate,
or  practise,  Prov.  3.  31.

It  is  spoken,  (I)  Of  persons,  as,  [1]  Of  Christ,  ?oho
was  chosen  and  set  apart  from  eternity  by  God
the  Lather  for  the  office  of  Mediator,  Isa.  42.  1.

[2]  Of  such  whom  God  from  all  eternity  elected
and  separated  from  among  the  children  of  men,
to  deliver  them  from  sin  and  hell,  and  by  his'
Spirit  working  in  them  to  unite  them  by  faith  to
Christ,  the  Head  of  the  church,  and  to  sanctify
and  save  them  by  him,  Mark  13.  20.  Eph.  1.  4.

[3]  Of  the  Jews,  who  were  set  apart  as  God' s pecu¬
liar  people,  Deut.  7.  6.  Psal.  105.  6.  [41  Of  per¬
sons  chosen  to  office,  John  6.  70.  (II)  Of  things,
Isa.  58. 6.  (Ill)  Of  places,  2  Chr.  6.  38.

CHOOSE,  as  an  act  of  God.

Hum.  16. 7-  the  man  the  Lord  doth  c.  shall  be  holy
17.  5.  the  man’s  rod  whom  I  shall  c.  shall  blossom
Deut.  7. 7.  the  Lord  did  not  c.  you  because  more
12.  5.  the  place  which  Lord  shall  c.  11, 14,  18,  26.

1 14.  23,  24,  25.  1  15.  20.  1 16.  2,  6,  7,  15,  16.

1  17. 8, 10.  |  18.  6.  |  26.  2.  |  31. 11.  Josh.  9.  27.
17. 15.  shall  set  him  king,  whom  the  Lord  shall  c.

1  Sam.  2.  28.  did  I  c.  him  out  of  all  tribes  of  Israel

2  Sam.  16. 18.  whom  the  I.ord  and  his  people  c.

21.  6.  will  hang  them  in  Gibeah  whom  Lord  did  c.

1  Kings  14.21.  the  city  which  the  Lord  did  c.

Heh.  9.  7.  thou  art  the  God  who  didst  c.  Abram
Psal.  ‘25. 12.  him  shall  he  teach  in  way  he  shall  c.
47.  4.  he  shall  c.  our  inheritance  for  us
Isa.  14.  1.  for  the  Lord  will  yet  c.  Israel

49.  7-  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  he  shall  c.  thee
66. 4. 1  also  will  c.  their  delusions,  and  bring  fears

Zech.  1. 17.  the  Lord  will  yet  c.  Jerusalem,  2. 12.
CHOOSE.

Exod.  17.  9.  c.  us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with
Deut.  23. 16.  he  shall  dwell  in  that  place  he  shall  c
30. 19.  therefore  c.  life,  that  thou  and  seed  may  live
Josh.  24.  15.  c.  this  day  whom  you  will  serve

1  Sam.  17.  8.  c.  you  a  man  for  you,  let  him  come

2  Sam.  17. 1.  let  me  c.  12,000  men,  and  1  will  pursue
19.  +  38.  what  thou  shalt  c.  that  will  I  do  for  thee
24.  12.  I  offer  thee  c.  one  of  them,  1  Chr.  21.  10.

1  Kings  18.  23.  let  them  c.  one  bullock,  25.

Job  9.  14.  c.  out  my  words  to  reason  with  him

34.  4.  let  us  c.  to  us  judgment,  let  us  know
33.  whether  thou  refuse,  or  whether  thou  c.

Ps.  84.  +  10. 1  would  c.  rather  to  sit  at  the  threshold
Prov.  1. 29.  and  did  not  c.  the  fear  of  the  Lord
3.  31.  the  oppressor,  and  c.  none,  of  his  ways
Isa.  7. 15.  may  know  to  refuse  evil,  and  c.  good,  16.
56.  4.  to  the  eunuchs  that  c.  things  that  please  me

65. 12.  and  did  c.  that  wherein  Ldelighted  not
Ezek.  21. 19.  c.  a  place,  c.  it  at  the  head  of  the  way
Phil.  1.  22.  yet  what  1  shall  c.  I  wot  not

CHOOSEST,  ETH,  1NG.

Job  7. 15.  so  that  my  soul  c.  strangling  and  death
15.  5.  and  thou  c.  the  tongue  of  the  crafty
Psal.  65.  4.  blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  c.

Isa.  40.  20.  he  c.  a  tree  that  will  not  rot
41.  24.  an  abomination  is  he  that  c.  you
Ileb.  11. 25.  c.  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with  people
CHOSE.

Gen.  6. 2.  they  took  them  wives  of  all  which  they  c.
13. 11.  then  Lot  c.  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan
Exod.  18.  25.  Moses  c.  able  men,  and  made  heads
Deut.  4.  37.  he  c.  their  seed  after  them,  10.  15.

Josh.  8.  3.  Joshua  c.  30,000  mighty  men  of  valour
Judg.  5. 8.  they  c.  new  gods,  then  was  war  in  gates

2  Sam.  6. 21.  the  Lord  who  c.  me  before  thy  fattier

1  Kings  8. 16.  I  c.  no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  1  sr.

to  build  an  house  for  my  name,  2  Chr.  6.  5.
1  Chr.  28.  4.  the  Lord  c.  me  before  all  the  house  of
Job  29.  25.  I  c.  out  their  way  and  sat  chief
Psal  78.  67-  and  c.  not  the  tribe  of  Ephraim
68.  butr.  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  mount  Zion
70.  he  c.  David  also  his  servant,  and  took  him
La.  66.  4.  and  c.  that  in  which  1  delighted  not
Ezek.  20.  5.  say  to  them,  in  the  day  when  I  c.  1  srael
Luke  6. 13.  of  his  disciples  he  c.  twelve  apostles
14.  7-  when  he  marked  how  they  c.  chief  rooms
Acts  6.  5.  c.  Stephen  a  man  full  of  faith  and  H. Ghost
13. 17.  God  of  this  people  Israel  c.  our  fathers
15.40. Paul  c. Silas  and  departed, being  recommend.
CHOSEN.

Exod.  15.  4.  his  c.  captains  art-  drowned  in  the  sea
Hum.  16.  5.  him  whom  he  hath  c.  cause  to  come
Josh.  24.  22.  ye  have  c.  you  the  Lord  to  serve  him
Judg.  10. 14.  go  and  cry  to  the  gods  ye  have  c.

1  Sam.  8. 18.  because  of  the  king  ye  have  c.  12. 13.

20.  30.  I  know  that  thou  hast  c.  the  son  of  Jesse


1  R7wg.v  3.8. haste,  a  great  people,  cannot  be  number.

8.  44.  the  city  thou  haste.  48.  2  Chron.  6.  34,  38.

1  Chron.  16.  13.  ye  children  of  Jacob  his  e.  ones
Job  36.  21 .  this  hast  thou  e.  rather  than  affliction
Psal.  33. 12.  people  he  hath  c.  for  his  inheritance
89.  3.  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  my  c.

i9.  I  have  exalted  one  c.  out  of  the  people

105.  6.  seed  of  Abraham,  ye  child,  of  Jacob  his.
43.  he  brought  forth  his  e.  with  gladness

106.  5.  that  1  may  see  the  good  of  thy  c

23.  had  not  Moses  his  c.  stood  before  him

Prov.  16.  16.  understand,  rather  to  be  c.  thansiivei

22. 1.  a  good  name  is  rather  to  be  c.  than  riches
Isa.  43.  20.  to  give  drink  to  my  people,  my  c.

65.  15.  shall  leave  your  name  a  curse  to  my  c.

66.  3.  yea,  they  have  c.  their  own  way3
Jer.  8.  3.  and  death  shall  be  c.  rather  than  Inc

49.  19.  who  is  a  c.  man  that  1  may  appoint,  50.  44.
Mat.  20.  16.  many  be  called,  but  few  c.  22.  14.
Mark  13.  20.  for  his  elect’s  sake  whom  he  hath  c.
Luke  10.  42.  and  Mary  hath  c.  that  good  part
Acts  1.  24.  shew  whether  of  these  two  thou  hast  c .

9.  15.  go  thy  way,  for  he  is  a  c.  vessel  to  me
Rom.  16. 13.  salute  Rufus,  c.  in  the  Lord

2  Cor.  8.  19.  who  was  c.  of  the  churches  to  travel

1  'J  im.  5. 1 9.  let  not  a  widow  be  c.  into  the  number

2  J  im.  2. 4.  please  him  who  hath  c.  him  to  be  a  soldier
1  Pet.  2.  9.  ye  are  a  c.  generation,  a  royal  priesth.
Rev.  17.  14.  they  are  called,  c.  and  faithful

CHOSEN  of  God.

Luke  23.  35.  if  he  be  the  Christ,  the  c.  of  God
Acts  10.  41.  but  to  witnesses  c.  before  of  God
1  Pet.  2.  4.  a  living  stone,  c.  of  God  and  precious
God  hath  CHOSEN.

Deut.  12.  21.  God  hath  c.  to  put  name  there,  16. 11.
21.  5.  them  God  hath  c.  to  minister  unto  him
1  Chron.  29. 1.  Solomon  whom  God  hath  c.  is  young
Acts  22.  14.  the  God  of  our  fathers  hath  c.  thee

1  Cor.  1.  27.  God  hath  c.  foolish  things,  God  hath  c.

weak  things

28.  things  despised  God  hath  c.  and  things  that  are

2  Thess.  2.  13.  God  from  the  beginning  hath  c.  you
Jam.  2.  5.  hath  not  God  c.  the  poor  of  this  world

I  have  CHOSEN.

1  Kings  11.  13.  for  David’s  sake  and  Jerusalem’s
sake  I  have  c.  2  Kings 21. 7.  1  23.  27.  ‘2  Chr.  6.  6.
32.  the  city  which  I  have  c.  out  of  all  the  tribes
Heh.  1.  9.  bring  them  to  place  I  have  c.  to  set  name
Psal.  119.  30.  I  have  c.  the  way  of  truth,  173.

Isa.  41. 8.  Jacob  whom  I  have  c.  the  seed  of  Abrah.

9.  I  have  c.  thee,  and  not  cast  thee  away

43.  10.  my  servant  whom  I  have  c.  Mat.  12.  18.

44. 1.  Israel  whom  I  have  c.  |l  2.  Jesurun  I  have  c.
48.  10.  I  have  c.  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction
58.  5.  is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have  c.  ?  6.

Hag.  2.  23.  1  have  c.  thee,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts
John  13. 18.  speak  not  of  all,  I  know  whom  I  have  c.

15.  16.  ye  have  not  c.  me,  but  I  have  c.  you

19.  but  I  have  c.  vou  out  of  the  world,  therefore
Lord' hath  CHOSEN.

Deut.  7.  6.  Lord  hath  c.  thee  a  special  people,  14. 2.
18.  5.  the  Lord  hath  c.  him  out  of  all  the  tribes
1  Sam.  10.  24.  see  him  whom  I.ord  hath  c.  none  like

16.  8.  and  he  said,  neither  hath  the  Lord  c.  this

10.  Samuel  said,  the  Lord  hath  note,  these

1  Chron.  15.  2.  for  them  the  Lord  hath  c.  to  carry  ark
28.  4.  Lord  hath  c.  .1  udah  ruler,  and  house  ot  fath.

5.  Lord  hath  c.  Solomon  to  sit  to  build  an  house,  10.

2  Chron.  29. 11.  Lord  hath  c.  you  to  stand  to  serve  him
Psal.  105.  26.  he  sent  Aaron  whom  he  had  c.

132. 13.  Lordhatlic.  Zion  H 135. 4.  Lord  hath  c.  Jacob
Jer.  33.  24.  the  two  families  which  the  Lord  hath  c.
Zech.  3.  2.  Lord  that  hath  c.  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee
Eph.  1.  4.  according  as  he  hath  c.  us  in  him
CHOSEN  men.

Judg.  20.  16.  seven  hundred  c.  men  left-handed

1  Kings  12.  21.  of  Judah  180,000  c.  men,  2  Chr.  11.1.

2  Chron.  13.  3.  Abijah  set  the  battle  in  array  with

400,000  c.  men,  Jeroboam  with  800,000  c.  men
Psal.  78.  31.  wrath  smote  down  the  c.  men  of  Israel
Acts  15.  22.  to  send  c.  men  of  their  company,  25.
CHRIST.

The  anointed  of  God ;  the  same  with  the  Hebrew
Messiah,  Psal.  45.  7.  Isa.  61.  1.  The  eternal
Son  of  God,  the  second  Person  of  the  glorious
Trinity,  Mat.  28.  19.  1  John  5,  8.  In  his
divine  nature  he  is  equal  with  the  Lather,  and
over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever  ;  but  in  his  human
nature,  subordinate  and  inferior  to  the  Lather,
being  like  to  men  in  all  things,  sin  excepted.
Both  riatures  are  united  in  the  person  of  Christ,
that  he  might  be  our  prophet,  priest,  and  king,
and  the  author  of  a  complete,  perfect,  all-suffi¬
cient,  and  eternal  salvation.  He  ever  lives  to
intercede  for  all  that  come  to  him,  Ileb.  7-  25.

In  Christ  all  the  types,  prophecies,  and  promises
centre.  He  is  the  most  suitable  object  for  the  sin¬
ner  to  look  to,  trust  in,  and  expect  all  his  hopes,
joys,  arid  consolations  from,  as  by  him  alone  life
and  salvation  are  procured.  He  is  the  head  of
principalities  and  powers,  the  brightness  of  his
Lather's  glory ;  and  the  express  image  of  his
person,  Heb.  1.  3.  the  glory  of  all  worlds,  and  the
refulgent  luminary  of  the  universe,  John  1.  9.
the  inexhaustible  fountain  of  all  the  treasures  of
nature,  grace,  and  glory,  Jer.  2.  13.  and  the
matchless ,  incomparable  Redeemer  of  all  that
come  to  him..  John  6.  37-  Christ  was  the  grand
subject  of  all  the  apostles'  ministry,  Acts  8.  5.
and,  indeed,  a  sermon  without  Christ  is  like  a
cloud  without  water,  or  a.  shadow  without  substance.
One  moment's  communion  with  Christ  is  of  more
worth  than  ten  thousand  worlds ;  his  person  most
glorious,  and  he  is  altogether  lovely,  Cant.  5.  16.
The  ancient  Hebrews,  being  instructed  by  the  pro¬
phets,  had  very  clear  notions  of  the  Messiah :
but  they  were  changed  by  little  and  little,  so  that
when  Christ  appeared  m  Judea,  they  had  enter¬
tained  a  very  wrong  tuition  of  the  Messias,  ex¬
pecting  a  temporal  monarch  and  conqueror,  that
should  bring  the  whole  world  under  subjection,
from  whence  it  came  to  pass ,  that  they  were


C  l-I  R


C  H  R


C  II  R


wvch  scandalize  l  at  the  outward  appearance ,  the
hr  mil  ty  ant  seeming  weakness,  of  our  Saviour,
which  hindered  them  from  acknowledging  him  as
the  Christ  whom  they  expected.

3*  ■  ancient  prophets  had  foretold ,  that  the  Messias  I
should  he  God  and  Man,  exalted  and  abased,
Master  and  Servant,  Priest  and  Victim,  King  and
Subject,  mortal,  and  a  Conqueror  of  death,  rich
and  poor,  a  King,  a  Conqueror,  glorious,  yet  a  man
of  griefs,  involved  in  our  infirmities,  in  a  state
of  great  humiliation.  All  these  seeming  contra¬
rieties  were  to  he  reconciled  in  the  person  of  the
Messiah,  as  they  did  realty  meet  in  the  person  oj
Christ.  It  was  known  that  the  Messiah  was  to
be  born  of  a  virgin,  of  the  tribe  oj  Judah,  of  the
race  of  David,  in  the  village  of  Beth  lehem  :  that
he  was  to  continue  for  ever,  that  his  name  should
be  continued  as  long  as  the  sun,  that  he  was  the
great  Prophet  promised  in  the  law,  that  he  was
both  the  Son  and  Lord  of  David,  that  he  was  to
perform  great  miracles,  that  he  should  restore  all
things,  that  he  should  die  and  rise  again,  that
Elias  should  be  the  forerunner  of  his  appearance,
that  a  proof  of  his  coming  should  be,  the  cure  of
the  lepers,  life  restored  to  the  dead,  and  the  gospel
preached  to  the  poor  :  that  he  should  not  destroy
the  law,  but  should  perfect  and  fulfil  it ;  that  he
should  be  a  stone  of  offence,  and  a  stumbling-block,
against  which  many  should  bruise  themselves ;
that  he  should  suffer  oppositions  avid  contradic¬
tions,  and  that  a  strange  people  should  come  and
submit  themselves  to  his  discipline.

When  Christ  appeared,  these  notions  of  him  were
still  common  among  the  Jews.  Our  Saviour
herein  appeals  even  to  themselves,  and  asks  them
if  these  were  not  the  characters  of  the  Messiah,
and  if  they  do  not  see  the  completion  of  them
in  himself.  The  evangelists  take  care  to  put
them  in  'mind  of  them,  to  prove  thereby,  that
Jesus  is  the  Christ  whom  they  expected.  The
Evangelist  Luke  says,  that  our  Saviour  enter¬
ing  into  a  synagogue  at  ^Nazareth,  there  opened
the  book  of  the  prophet  Isaiah  where  he  read,
The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because  he
hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the
poor,  Luke  4.  18.  After  which  he  shewed  them
that  this  prophecy  was  accomplished  in  his  person.
And  St.  Peter  and  the  other  believers  being  as¬
sembled  together.  Acts  4.  24,  25,  say  to  God,
from  Psal.  2.  1,  2,  Why  did  the  heathen  rage,
4r.  and  apply  this  prophecy  to  Christ,  verse  27.
And  in  Acts  10.  38.  Peter,  speaking  to  Corne¬
lius  the  centurion,  and  to  those  that  were  with
him,  tells  them  that  the  Lord  had  sent  peace  to
men,  by  Jesus  Christ  whom  God  had  anointed
with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power.  So  that
when  Christ,  or  his  disciples,  are  said  to  he
anointed,  it  is  to  be  understood  of  the  spiritual
and  internal  unction  of  grace  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  of  which  the  outward  and  sensible  unction,
with  which  they  anciently  anointed  kings,  priests,
and  prophets,  was  but  the  figure  and  symbol.  See
Messiah.

Christ  is  taken  for  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,
both  himself  the  Head,  and  the  church  as  his
members,  which  make  but  one  body,  1  Cor.  12.  12.
Likewise  for  the  doctrine  of  Chri  st,  or  the  rule  of
life  prescribed  by  him,  Eph.  4.  20.  Avid  for  the
Spirit,  avid  spiritual  gifts  and  graces  of  Christ,
Rom.  8. 10.

Mat.  2. 4.  he  demanded  where  C.  should  be  born
16.  16.  thou  art  C.  the  Son  of  the  living  God
23.  8.  for  one  is  your  Master,  even  C.  10.

24.5.  many  shall  come,  saying,  1  am  C.  and  shall
deceive  many,  Mark  13.  6.  Luke  21.  8.
26.  68.  prophesy  to  us,  thou  C.  who  smote  thee  ?
Mark  9.  41.  in  my  name  because  ye  belong  to  C.

15.  32.  let  C.  descend  now  from  trie  cross
Luke  2.  26.  should  not  die,  before  he  had  seen  C.

4.  41.  the  devils,  they  knew  that  he  was  C.

23.  35.  save  himself,  if  he  be  C.  the  chosen  of  God
39.  saying,  if  thou  be  C.  save  thyself  and  us

24.  26.  ought  not  C.  to  have  suffered  these

46.  thus  it  behoved  C.  to  suffer  and  rise  from  dead
John  4.25.  the  Messias  cometh,  which  is  called  C.

7.  27.  when  C.  cometh  no  man  knoweth

31.  when  C.  cometh,  will  he  do  more  miracles  ?

41.  but  some  said,  shall  C.  come  out  of  Galilee  ?

42.  said,  that  C.  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David
9.  22.  that  if  any  man  did  confess  that  he  was  C.
12.  34.  we  have  heard  that  C.  abideth  for  ever

Acts  2.30.  he  would  raise  upC.  to  sit  on  his  throne
36.  God  hath  made  that  Jesus  both  Lord  and  C.

3.  18.  God  had  before  shewed  that  C.  should  suffer

8.  5.  Philip  went  and  preached  C.  to  them

9-  20.  and  straightway  he  preached  C.  in  synago.

17. 3.  alleging  that  C.  must  needs  have  suffered
26.  23.  that  C.  should  suffer,  and  rise  first  from  d.

Rom.  5.  6.  in  due  time  C.  died  for  the  ungodly

8.  in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners  C.  died  for  us

6.  4.  like  as  C.  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by

9.  knowing  that  C.  being  raised,  dieth  no  more

7.  4.  ye  are  become  dead  to  law  by  the  body’  of  C.

8.  9.  if  any  have  not  Spirit  of  C.  he  is  none  of  his

10.  ifC.  be  in  you,  the  body  isdead  becauseofsin

11.  he  that  raised  up  C.  from  dead  shall  quicken

9.  3.  I  could  wish  myself  were  accursed  from  C.

5.  of  whom  C.  came,  wboisover  all,  God  blessed

10. 4.  C.  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness

6.  that  is,  to  bring  up  C.  down  from  above

7.  that  is,  to  bring  C.  again  from  the  dead

14.  9.  for  to  this  end  C.  died,  and  rose,  and  revived

15.  destroy  not  him  with  meat  for  whom  C.  died

18.  for  he  that  in  these  things  serveth  C.  is  accept.

15.  3.  for  even  C.  pleased  not  himself,  but  reproach.
7-  as  C  also  received  us,  to  the  glory  of  God

18.  of  things  which  C.  hath  not  wrought  by  me

20.  1  strived  to  preach,  not  where  C.  was  named

16.  5.  Epenetus  the  first-fruits  of  Achaiato  C.

1  Cor.  1.23.  but  we  preach  C.  crucified,  to  the  Jews
24.  C.  the  power  of  God,  ami  the  wisdom  of  God
3.23.  and  ye  are  C.  and  C.  is  God’s


1  Cor.  5. 7.  even  C.  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us
8. 11.  the  weak  brother  perish,  for  whom  C.  died

9.  21.  but  under  the  law  to  C.  that  I  might  gain

10.  4.  all  drank  of  that  iock,  and  that  rock  was  C.

9.  nor  let  us  tempt  C’.  as  some  of  them  also  tempted

15.  3.  I  delivered  to  you,  how  C.  died  for  our  sins
12.  if  C.  be  preached  that  he  rose  from  the  dead

16.  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  C.  raised

17.  and  if  C.  be  not  raised,  your  faith  is  vain

23.  every  man  in  his  own  order,  C.  the  first-fruits

2  Cor.  3.  4.  such  trust  have  we  thro’  C.  to  God-ward
5. 16.  yea,  tho’  we  have  known  C.  after  the  flesh
6.  15.  ‘and  what  concord  hath  C.  with  Belial  ?

11.  2. 1  may  present  you  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  C.
Gal.  2.  20.  1  live,  yet  not  1,  but  C.  liveth  in  me

21.  if  right,  come  by  law,  then  C.  died  in  vain

3.  13.  C.  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law

24.  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster,  to  bring  us  to  C.
29.  if  ye  be  C.  then  are  Abraham’s  seed,  and  heirs

4.  7.  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  C.

19.  of  whom  I  travail,  till  C.  be  formed  in  you

5.  1.  the  liberty  wherewith  C.  hath  made  us  free

2.  if  ye  be  circumcised,  C.  shall  profit  you  nothing
4.  C.  is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you,  if  justified

by  law

24.  that  are  C.  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  affect.
Eph.  2. 12.  at  that  time  ye  were  without  C.

3.  17.  that  C.  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith

4.  15.  may  grow  in  him  which  is  the  head,  even  C.

20.  but  ye  have  not  so  learned  C.

5.  2.  as  C.  also  loved  us,  and  hath  given  himself  for
14.  arise  from  the  dead,  and  C.  shall  give  thee  light

23.  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  as  C.  is  the

head  of  the  church

24.  as  the  church  is  subject  to  C.  so  let  wives  be

25.  love  your  wives,  as  C.  also  loved  the  church
32.  but  1  speak  concerning  C.  and  the  church

6.  5.  obedient,  in  singleness  of  your  heart  as  to  C.
Phil.  1. 15.  some  indeed  preacli  C.  of  envy  and  strife

16.  the  one  preach  C.  of  contention,  not  sincerely

18.  C.  is  preached,  and  1  therein  do  rejoice
20.  so  now  C.  shall  be  magnified  in  my  body

3.  8.  I  count  them  but  dung,  that  1  may  win  C.

4. 13.  I  can  do  all  through  C.  who  strengthenetli  me

Col.  2.  8.  after  rudiments  of  world,  and  not  after  C.
3.  1.  where  C.  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God
4.  when  C.  who  is  our  life  shall  appear,  then  shall

11.  bond  nor  free,  but  C.  is  all  and  in  all
13.  even  as  C.  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye

24.  receive  the  reward,  for  ye  serve  the  Lord  C.
Heb.  3.  6.  but  C.  as  a  son  over  his  own  house
5. 5.  so  also  C.  glorified  not  himself  to  be  an  high  pr.
9. 11.  but  C.  being  come  an  high  priest  of  good
24.C.not  entered  into  holy  places  made  with  hands
28.  C.  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many
1  Pet.  2. 21.  because  C.  also  suffered  for  us,  an  exam.

3.  18.  C.  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  just  for  unjust
4. 1.  as  C.  suffered  for  us  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves

Rev.  11.  15.  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  his  C.

12.  10.  now  is  come  kingd.  of  G.  power  of  his  C.

Against  CHRIST.

Acts  4.  26.  kings  and  rulers  gathered  against  his  C.

1  Cor.  8.  12.  when  ye  sin  against  the  brethren  ye

sin  against  C.

1  Tim.  5. 11.  wax  wanton  against  C.  they  will  marry

By  CHRIST.

2  Cor.  1.  5.  so  our  consolation  aboundeth  by  C.

Gal.  2. 17.  hut  if  while  we  seek  to  be  justified  by  C.
Eph.  3.  21.  to  him  be  glory  in  church  by  C.  Jesus

For  CHRIST.

1  Cor.  1.  17.  for  C.  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to

4.  10.  we  are  fools  for  C.  sake,  but  ye  are  wise  in  C.

2  Cor.  5. 20.  now  we  are  ambassadors  for  C.  we  pray

12.  10.  1  take  pleasure  in  distresses  for  C.  sake
Eph.  4.  32.  as  God  for  C.  sake  hath  forgiven  you
Phil.  3.  7  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  Jor  C.
2  Thess.  3.  5.  L.  direct  to  the  patient  waiting  for  C
Heb.  11. 1 26.  esteeming  reproach/or  C.  greater  rich.

Jesus  with  CHRIST.

Mat.  1. 16.  was  born  Jesus,  who  is  called  C.  27. 17>22.
John  1.  17.  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  C.

17.  3.  know  thee,  and  Jesus  C.  whom  thou  sent
Acts  2.  38.  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus  C.

3.  6.  in  the  name  of  Jesus  C.  rise  up  and  walk
20.  shall  send  Jesus  C.  who  was  preached  to  you

4.  10.  by  the  name  of  Jesus  C.  doth  this  man  stand

5.  42.  and  daily  they  ceased  not  to  preach  Jesus  C.

8.  12.  when  they  be'lieved  Philip  preaching  things
concerning  name  of  Jesus  C.  they  were  baptized
37.  I  believe  that  Jesus  C.  is  the  Son  of  God

9.  34.  Eneas,  Jesus  C.  makeththee  whole,  arise
10. 36.  preaching  peace  by  Jesus  C.  he  is  Lord  of  all
16.18.1  command  thee  in  the  name  of  J.  C.  cqme  out
if.  3.  and  that  this  Jesus  I  preach  to  you  is  C.

18.  5.  Paul  testified  to  the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  C.
28.  shewing  by  the  scriptures  that  Jesus  was  C.

19.  4.  that  they  should  believe  on  C.  Jesus
Rom.  1.  1.  Paul  a  servant  of  Jesus  C.  Phil.  1.  1.

3.  concerning  his  Son  Jesus  C.  our  Lord,  of  seed
6.  among  whom  are  ye  the  called  of  Jesus  C.

8.  I  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  C.  for  you  all

2.  16.  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  C.

3.  22.  righteousness,  which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  C.
24.  justified  through  the  redemption  in  Jesus  C.

5.  15.  gift  by  grace,  which  is  by  one  man  Jesus  C.
17.  shall  much  more  reign  in  life  by  one  Jesus  C.

6.  3.  so  many  as  were  baptized  into  Jems  C.

8.  1.  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  C.  Jesus
2.  the  Spirit  of  life  in  C.  Jesus  hath  made  me  free
16.  3.  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  my  helpers  in  C.  Jesus
1  C’or.l.  1.  Paul  apostle  of  J.  C.  2  Cor.  1. 1.  Eph.  1.1.
2.  with  all  that  call  on  the  name  of  Jems  C.


4.  for  the  grace  of  God
30.  but  of  him  are  ye  in


riven  you  by  Jesus  C,
Jesus,  who  is  made  to


2.  not  to  know  any  thing,  save  Jesus  C.  crucified

4.  15.  for  in  C.  J.  have  I  begotten  you  thro’  gospel
2  Cor.  4.  6.  the  knowledge  of  God  in  face  of  J.  C.

5.  18.  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  Jesus  C.
13.  5.  know  ye  not,  how  that  Jesus  C.  is  in  you

Gal.  2. 16.  a  man  is  justified  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  C,
3.  14.  blessing  come  on  the  Gentiles  thro’  Jesus  C.
28.  male  nor  female ,  for  ye  are  al  1  one  in  C  Jesus


Gal.  4.14.  ye  received  me  as  an  angel,  even  as  C.  J.
Eph.  2. 6.  made  us  sit  in  heavenly  places  in  C.  Jesus

20.  Jesus  C.  being  the  chief  corner-stone

Phil.  1. 8. 1  long  after  you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  C.

5.  mind  he  in  you,  which  was  also  in  C.  Jesus

11.  Jesus  C.  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  F.

21.  all  seek  not  the  things  which  are  Jesus  C.

3.  8.  I  count  all  loss  for  the  excellency  of  C.  Jems

12.  for  which  also  1  am  apprehended  of  C.  Jesus
4. 19.  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  C.  Jesus

Col.  2.  6.  as  ye  have  received  C.  J.  so  walk  ye  in  him

1  Tim.  1.  15.  that  C.  Jesus  came  to  save  sinners

2. 5.  mediator  between  God  and  men,  man  C.  Jesus

6. 13.  before  C.  J.  who  witnessed  a  good  confession

2  Tim.  1 .  9.  according  to  his  grace  given  us  in  C.  J

13.  in  faith  and  love,  which  is  in  C.  Jesus
Philem.  1.  Paul  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  C.  9.  23.

Heb.  13.  8.  J.  C.  the  same  yesterday,  and  for  ever
1  John  1.7.  blood  of  Jesus  0.  cleanseth  from  all  sin

2. 1 .  we  have  an  advocate,  Jesus  C.  the  righteous

5.  6.  this  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood,  J.  C
20.  we  are  in  him,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  C.

Lord  Jesus  CHRIST.

Acts  11. 17.  as  to  us  who  believed  on  the  L.  J.  C.

15. 11.  thro’  the  grace  of  L.  J.  C.  we  shall  be  saved

16.  31.  believe  on  the  L.  J.  C.  thou  shalt  be  saved
20.  21.  testifying  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jems  C.
Bom.  5.  1.  we  have  peace  with  God,  thro’  J.  C

11.  we  also  joy  in  God,  thro’  our  l.ord  Jesus  C.

6.  23.  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  thro’  our  L.  J.  C.

8.  39.  separate  from  love  of  God  in  C.  Jesus  our  L.
13.  14.  put  ye  011L.  J.  C.  and  make  not  provision
16.  20.  grace  of  L.  J.  C.  be  with  you,  24.  2  Cor.

13. 14.  Gal.  6.  18.  2  Thess.  3.  18.  Rev.  22.  21.

1  Cor.  1. 7.  waiting  for  the  comingof  Lord  Jesus  C.

8.  6.  but  to  us  one  L.  J.  C.  by  whom  are  all  things
15. 57.  God  giveth  us  the  victory  thro’  our  L.  J.  C.

16.  22.  if  any  man  love  not  the  l.ord  Jesus  C.
o  Cor.  1. 2.  grace  and  peace  from  God,  and  from  the
L.  J.  C.  Gal.  1.  3.  Eph.  1.  2.  Col.  1.  2.

8.  9.  for  ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C.
Gal.  6.  14.  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  L.  J.  C.
Eph.  1.  3.  blessed  be  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  C.
17.  God  of  our  L.  J.  C.  give  you  spirit  of  wisdom

1  Thess.  1.  3.  your  patience  of  hope  in  our  L.J.  C.

2. 19.  ye  are  our  joy  in  presence  ot  our  LordJ.  C.

3. 13.  may  establish  you  at  comingof  qur  X.  J.  C.

5.  23.  be  preserved  unto  coming  of  our  L.  J.  C.

2  Thess. 2. 1.  we  beseech  you  by  comingof  L.  J.  C.

16.  now  our  L.  J.  C.  hath  given  us  consolation

1  7  im.  5.  21 .  I  charge  thee  bef.  L.  J.  C.  2  Tim.  4. 1.

!  Tim.  4.  22.  the  L.  J.  C.  be  with  thy  spirit,  amen
!  Pet.  1.  11.  an  entrance  into  kingdom  of  L.  J.  C.
3.  18.  grow  in  grace  and  in  knowledge  of  L.  J.  C.
In  CHRIST.

Acts  24.  24.  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  in  C.
Bom.  9.  1.  I  say  the  truth  in  C.  1  lie  not,  my  cons.

12.  5.  so  we  being  many  are  one  body  in  C.

16.  7.  are  of  note,  who  also  were  in  C.  before  me

9.  salute  Urbane,  our  helper  in  C.  and  Stachys

10.  salute  Apelles  approved  in  C.  salute  Aristo,

1  Cor.  3.  1.1  speak  to  you,  even  as  unto  babes  in  C.

4. 10.  we  are  fools,  but  ye  are  wise  in  C.

15.  tho’  ye  have  10,000  instruct,  in  C.  not  many
15.  18.  they  that  are  fallen  asleep  in  C.  are  perish.

19.  if  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  C.

22.  even  so  in  C.  shall  all  be  made  alive

2  Cor.  1.21.  he  which  stablisheth  us  with  you  in  C.

2.  14.  God  who  causeth  us  to  triumph  in  C.

17.  asof  God,  in  the  sight  of  God  speak  we  in  C.

3. 14.  vail  untaken  away,  vail  is  done  away  in  C.

5.  17.  if  any  man  be  in  C.  he  is  a  new  creature

19.  that  God  was  in  C.  reconciling  the  world

20.  we  pray  you  in  C.  stead,  he  reconciled  to  G.
12.  2. 1  knew  a  man  in  C.  above  fourteen  years  ago

19.  we  speak  before  God,  in  C.  we  do  all  things
Gal.  1.  22.  unknown  to  the  churches  of  Judea  in  C.

3. 17.  the  covenant  confirmed  before  of  God  in  C.
27.  as  many  as  have  been  baptized  into  C.

Eph.  1.3.  blessed  us  with  spiritual  blessings  m  C.

10.  he  might  gather  in  one  all  things  in  C.

12.  should  be  to  his  glory,  who  first  trusted  in  C.

20.  which  he  wrought  in  C.  when  he  raised  him

3.  6.  partakers  of  his  promise  in  C.  by  the  gospel
Phil.  1. 13.  so  that  my  fionds  in  C.  are  manifest  in

2.  1.  if  there  be  any  consolation  in  C.  if  comfort
Col.  2.  5.  beholding  stedfastness  of  your  faith  in  C.
1  Thess.  4.  16.  and  the  dead  in  C.  shall  rise  first

1  Tim.  2.  7.  1  speak  the  truth  in  C.  and  lie  not
1  Pet.  3. 16.  accuse  your  good  conversation  in  C.
Is  CHRIST.

Mat.  24.  23.  if  any  say,  lo,  here  is  C.  Mark  13.  21.
Mark  V2. 35.  that  C.is  the  son  of  David,  Luke  20.41.
I, uke  2.  11.  is  born  a  Saviour  which  is  C.  the  Lord

23.  2.  saying,  that  he  himself  is  C.  a  king
John  7. 41.  others  said,  this  is  the  C.  some  said
Acts9.  22.  Saul  increased,  proving  this  is  very  C.

17.  3.  that  this  Jesus  whom  I  preach  to  you  is  C.
Bom.  8. 34.  it  is  C.  that  died,  yea  rather  risen  again

1  Cor.  1.  13.  is  C.  divided  ?  was  Paul  crucified  for

7.  22.  he  that  is  called,  being  free,  is  C.  servant

11.  3.  know  that  the  head  of  every  man  is  C,

12. 12.  members  being  many  are  one  body ,  so  is  C.
15.  13.  if  dead  rise  not,  then  is  C.  notrisen,  16.

20.  but  now  is  C.  risen  from  the  dead,  and  first

2  Cor.  10. 7-  if  any  man  trust  that  he  is  C.

Gal.  2. 17.  is  therefore  C.  the  minister  of  sin  ?

3.  16.  but  as  of  one,  and  to  thy  seed,  which  is  C.
Phil.  1.21.  for  to  me  to  live  is  C.  but  to  die  is  gale
Col.  1.  27.  which  is  C.  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory

Of  CHRIST.

Mat.  11. 2.  John  heard  in  prison  the  works  of  C.
22.  42.  what  think  you  of  C.  ?  whose  son  is  he  ?
Bom.  8.  9.  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  C.

35.  who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  C.  ?
14.10.  we  shall  allstand  before  judgmentsento/C.
1  Cor.  1.  17.  lest  cross  of  C.  be  made  of  none  effect
2.  16.  but  we  have  the  mind  of  C.

6. 15.  know  ye  not  your  bodies  are  members  of  C.
10. 16.  cup,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  blood  of  C.

the  bread,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  body  of  C.
11.1.  be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  C.

03


CHU


CIR


CIT


1  Cor.  11.  3.  head  of  woman  is  man,  head  o/C.  is  God

12.  27.  now  ye  are  the  body  of  0.  and  members

2  Cor.  1.5.  as  the  sufferings  of  C.  abound  in  us

2. 10.  for  you  forgave  I  it  in  the  person  of  C.

15.  for  we  are  to  ( iod  a  sweet  savour  of  C.

3.  3.  ye  are  the  epistle  cf  C.  ministered  by  us

4.  4.  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  o/C.  shine

5.  14.  for  tlie  love  of  C  constrained!  us,  because

8.  23.  or  our  brethren,  they  are  the  glory  of  C.

10.  1.  beseech  by  the  meekness  and  gentleness  of  C.

5.  bringing  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  C.

11.  10.  as  the  truth  of  C.  is  in  me,  none  shall  stop

12.  9.  power  of  C.  may  rest  on  me,  Rev.  12.  10.
13. 3.  since  ye  seek  a  proof  of  C.  speaking  in  me

Gal.  1.  10.  if  pleased  men,  should  not  he  serv.  of  C.

2.  16.  that  we  might  be  justified  by  the  faith  ofC.

6.  12.  lest  suffer  persecution  for  the  cross  of  C.
Eph.  2. 13.  ye  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  C.

3.  4.  understand  my  knowled.  in  the  mystery  of  C.
8.  should  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of  C.

19.  know  the  love  of  C.  which  passeth  knowledge

4.  7.  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  C.

5.  5.  hath  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  C.

6.  6.  as  servants  of  C.  doing  the  will  of  God
Phil.  1.  10.  be  without  offence  till  the  day  of  C.

29.  for  to  you  it  is  given  in  behalf  0/  C.  to  believe

2.  16.  that  1  may  rejoice  in  the  day  cf  C.

30.  for  the  work  of  C.  he  was  nign  to  death

3. 18.  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  C.

Col.  1.  24.  fill  up  what  is  behind  of  afflictions  of  C.

2.  2.  mystery  or  God,  and  of  the  Father,  and  of  C.

17.  are  a  shadow  of  things,  but  the  body  is  of  C.

3.  16.  let  the  word  of  C.  dwell  in  you  richly

4.  3.  open  to  us  a  door,  to  speak  the  mystery  of  C.
2  Thess.  3. 1 5.  Lord  direct  you  into  the  patience  of  C.
2  Tim.  2. 19.  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  C.
Heh. 3.14.  for  we  are  made  partakers  of  C.  if  we  hold

9. 14.  how  much  more  blood  i  f  C.  purge  conscien.
11.  26.  reproach  of  C.  greater  riches  than  treasur.
1  Pet.  1.  11.  what  time  the  Spirit  of  C.  did  signify
19.  ye  are  redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of  C.
4.13. as  ye  are  partakers  <  f  C.  sufferings,  that  when

14.  if  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  C.

Rev.  20.  6.  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  C.
That  CHRIST.

John  1.  25.  if  be  not  that  C.  nor  Elias,  nor  prophet

6.  69.  we  are  sure  thou  art  that  C.  the  Son  of  God
The  CHRIST.

Mat.  16.  20.  saying,  tell  no  man  that  he  was  the  C.

26.  63.  I  adjure  thee,  tell  whether  thou  be  the  C.
Mark  8.  29.  Peter  saith  unto  him,  thou  art  the  C.

14.  61.  art  thou  the  C.  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  ?
Luke  3. 15.  mused  of  John,  whether  he  were  the  C.

9.  20.  Peter  said,  thou  art  the  C.  of  God

22.  67.  scribes,  saying,  art  thou  the  C.  ?  tell  us
John  1.  20.  but  he  confessed,  1  am  not  the  C.

41.  we  have  found  the  Messias,  which  is  the  C.

3.  28. 1  said,  I  am  not  the  C.  but  sent  before  him
4. 29.  see  a  man  who  told  me  all,  is  not  this  the  C.  ?

42.  we  know  that  this  is  indeed  the  C.  7.  26.

7-  41.  others  said,  this  is  the  C.  but  some  said

10.  24.  if  thou  be  the  C.  tell  us  plainly

11.  27.  I  believe  thou  art  the  C.  the  Son  of  God

20.  31.  that  ye  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  C.

1  John  2.  22.  out  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  C.

5.  1.  whoso  believeth  Jesus  is  the  C.  is  born  of  God

With  CHRIST.

Rom.  6.  8.  if  we  be  dead  with  C.  we  shall  also  live
8. 17.  if  children,  then  joint-heirs  with  C.

Gal.  2.  20. 1  am  crucified  with  C.  I  live,  C.  liveth
Eph.  2.  5.  God  hath  quickened  us  together  with  C.
Phil.  1.  23.  haring  a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  C.
Col.  2.  20.  if  ye  be  dead  with  C.  from  the  world

3. 1.  if  ye  be  risen  with  C.  seek  the  things  above

3.  ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  C.  in  G.
Rev.  20.  4.  and  they  reigned  with  C.  1000  years
CHRISTIAN,  S.

Acts  11. 26.  disciples  were  first  called  c.  at  Antioch
26.  28.  almost  tnou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  c .

1  Pet.  4. 16.  yet  if  any  man  suffer  as  a  c.  not  be  asha.
CHRISTS.

Mat.  24.  24.  there  shall  arise  false  c.  Mark  1 3.  22.
CHRONICLES.

Kings  14. 19.  rest  of  acts  of  J  eroboam  are  in  the  c.
1  Chron.  27.  24.  nor  number  put  in  the  account  of  c.
Esth.  6. 1.  to  bring  the  book  of  the  records  of  c.

See  Book,.

CHRYSOLITE.

Rev.  21.  20.  seventh  foundation  of  the  city  was  a  c.
CHRYSOPRASUS.

Rev.  21.  20.  tenth  foundation  of  the  city  was  a  c.
CHURCH

Signifies,  [1]  A  religious  assembly  selected  and  called
out  of  the  world  by  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  to
worship  the  true  God  in  Christ,  according  to  his
word,  1  Cor.  1.  2.  Rev.  2.  7-  [2]  All  the  elect
of  God,  of  what  nation  soever,  from  the  begin¬
ning  to  the  end  of  the  world,  who  make  but  one
body,  whereof  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Head ,  Col.  1.

18.  [3]  The  faithful  of  some  one  family,  to¬
gether  with  such  Christians  as  were  wont  to  as¬
semble  with  them  for  solemn  worship,  Rom.  16.
5.  Col.  4.  15.  Philem.  2.  [4]  The  faithful  of
some  one  province,  2  Thess.  1.  1.  [5]  The  go¬
vernors,  or  representatives  of  the  church,  Mat.
18.  17.  Tell  it  to  the  church  ;  that  is,  to  such
rulers,  to  whom,  the  censures  of  the  church  do  of
right  belong,  that  by  them  it  may  be  communi¬
cated  to  the  whole  society.  [6]  A  multitude  of
people  assembled  together,  whether  good  or  bad.
Acts  19-  37-  t7]  The  congregation  of  the  Jews,
which  was  formerly  the  church  and  people  of  God,
Acts  7-  38.

Mat.  16. 18.  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  c.
18.  17.  tell  it  to  the  c.  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  c.
Acts  2.  47.  Lord  added  to  c.  daily  suchsh.  be  saved

5.11.  and  great  fear  came  on  all  the  r.  and  as  many

8. 1.  was  a  great  persecution  against  the  c.  at  Jeru.
11.  26.  they  assembled  themselves  with  the  c.

14.  23.  w.henthey  had  ordained  elders  in  every  c.
27-  when  they  nad  gathered  the  c.  together
’5.  3.  being  brought  on  their  way  by  the  c.

Gi


Acts  15.22.  it  pleased  elders  with  the  whole  c.  to  send

18.  22.  when  he  had  gone  up  and  saluted  the  c.
Rom.  16.  5.  greet  the  c.  that  is  in  their  house

1  Cor.  4.  17.  as  1  teach  every  where,  in  every  c.

14.  4.  but  he  that  prophesieth  edifieth  the  c.

5.  except  interpret  that  the  c.  may  receive  edify.

23.  if  the  c.  be  come  together  into  one  place
16.  19.  salute  you,  with  c.  that  is  in  their  house

Eph.  1. 22.  gave  him  to  he  head  over  all  to  the  c.

3.  10.  might  be  known  by  the  c.  the  wisdom  of  God
5.  24.  as  the  c.  is  subject  to  Christ,  so  let  wives

25.  as  C  hrist  loved  the  c.  and  gave  himself  for  it

27.  that  he  might  present  to  himself  a  glorious  c.

29.  but  cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the  c.

32.  but  1  speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  c.

Phil.  3.  6.  concerning  zeal,  persecuting  the  c.

4.  15.  no  c.  communicated  with  me,  but  ye  only
Col.  1. 18.  and  he  is  the  head  of  the  body  the  c.

24.  for  his  body’s  sake,  which  is  the  c.

4.  15.  salute  thee,  which  is  in  Nymphas’  house
1  Tim.  5.  16.  and  let  not  the  c.  be  charged
Philem.  2.  Paul  a  prisoner,  to  the  c.  in  thy  house
Heh.  12.  23.  to  the  c.  of  the  first-born  in  heaven
1  Pet.  5. 13.  thee,  at  Babylon  elected  salutethyou
3  John  6.  borne  witness  of  thy  charity  before  the  c.

9. 1  wrote  unto  c.  but  Diotrephes  receiveth  us  not

In  the  CHURCH.

Acts’) .  38.  this  is  he  that  was  in  the  c.  in  wilderness

13.  1.  there  were  prophets  in  the  c.  at  Antioch

1  Cor.  6.  4.  to  judge  who  are  least  esteemed  in  the  c.

11.18.  first  of  all  when  ye  come  together  in  the  c.

12.  28.  God  hath  set  some  in  the  c.  first  apostles

14. 19.  yet  in  the  c.  I  had  rather  speak  five  words

28.  let  him  keep  silence  in  the  c.  and  speak  to  God
35.  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  speak  in  the  c.

Eph.  3.  21.  to  him  be  glory  in  thee. by  Christ  Jesus
Col.  4.  16.  cause  it  to  be  read  in  the  c.  of  Laodicea
07  the  CHURCH.

Acts  8.  3.  as  for  Saul,  he  made  havock  of  the  c.

11.  22.  tidings  from  Antioch  came  to  earso/  the  c.

12.  1.  at  that  time  Herod  vexed  certain  of  the  c.

5.  prayer  was  made//  the  c.  unto  God  for  Peter

15.  4.  they  were  received  of  the  c.  and  elders
20.  17.  Paul  sent  and  called  the  elders  of  thee.

Rom.  16.  1.  Phebe  our  sister,  a  servant  of  the  c.

23.  Gaius  mine  host  and  of  the  wrhole  c.  saluteth
1  Cor.  14.  12.  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  c.
Eph.  5.  23.  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  c.

Ileb.  2. 12.  in  midst  of  thee.  1  will  sing  praise
Jam.  5.  14.  let  him  call  for  the  elders  of  the  c.

3  John  10.  Diotrephes  casteth  them  out  of  the  c.

Rev.  2. 1.  to  the  angel  of  the  c.  of  Ephesus,  write
8.  c.  in  Smyrna  1!  12.  P(  rgamus  II  18.  Thyatira

3. 1.  c.  of  Sardis  l|7.  Philadelphia  ||  14.  Laodicea

CHURCH  of  God.

Acts  20.  28.  feed  the  c.  of  God  which  he  purchased
1  Cor.  1. 2.  to  the  c.  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth

10.  32.  give  none  offence  to  the  c.  of  God

11.  22.  or  despise  ye  the  c.  of  God  and  shame  them
15. 9.  because  1  persecuted  c.  of  Gcd,  Gal.  1 .  13.

1  Tim. 3  5.howshall  he  take  care  of  the  c.  of  God ?
CHURCHES.

Acts  9.31.  then  had  the  c.  rest  through  all  Judea

15.  41.  Paul  went  through  Syria  confirming  thee.

16.  5.  so  were  the  c.  established  in  the  faith

19.  37.  these  men  who  are  neither  robbers  of  c.
Rom.  16.  4.  to  whom  all  c.  of  Gentiles  give  thanks

16.  salute  one  another,  the  c.  of  Christ  salute  you

1  Cor.  7.  17.  so  let  him  walk,  so  ordain  I  in  all  c.

11 . 16.  we  have  no  such  custom,  neither  c.  of  Christ

14.  33.  but  author  of  peace  as  in  all  c.  of  the  saints
34.  let  your  women  keep  silence  in  the  c.

16. 1.  as  L  have  given  order  to  c.  of  G  alatia  so  do  ye
19.  c.  of  Asia  salute  you  ;  Aquila  and  Priscilla

2  Cor.  8. 1.  of  the  grace  bestowed  on  c.  of  Macedonia

19.  but  who  was  chosen  of  the  c.  to  travel  with  us
23.  brethren,  they  are  the  messengers  of  thee.

11.  8.  I  robbed  other  c.  taking  wages  of  them
28.  cometh  upon  me  daily  the  cafe  of  all  the  c.

12.  13.  what  is  it  wherein  ye  were  inferior  to  c.  ?
Gal.  1.22.  were  unknown  by  face  to  c.  of  Judea

1  Thess.  2. 14.  ye  became  followers  of  the  c.  of  God

2  Thess.  1. 4.  so  that  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  c.
Rev.  1.  4.  John  to  the  seven  c.  in  Asia,  grace  to  you

11.  send  it  to  the  seven  c.  which  are  in  Asia

20.  the  seven  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  seven  c.

and  the  seven  candlesticks  are  the  seven  c.
2.7.  he  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  Spirit
saith  unto  the  c.  11, 17,  29.  I  3.  6,  13,  22.
23.  c.  know  I  am  he  which  scarcheth  the  reins

22. 16. 1  J  esus  sent  to  testify  these  things  in  the  c.

CHURL.

Isa.  32.  5.  nor  shall  the  c.  be  said  to  be  bountiful

7.  the  instruments  also  of  the  c.  are  evil
CHURLISH.

1  Sam.  25. 3.  man  Nabal  was  c. and  evil  in  his  doings

CHURNING.

Prov.  30.  33.  surely  the  r.  of  milk  bringeth  butter
CIELED.

2  Chron.  3.  5.  he  c.  the  greater  house  with  fir-tree
Jer.  22.  14.  itisc.  with  cedar  and  painted  with  ver.
Hag  A  A. is  it  time  for  you  to  dwell  in  your  c.  houses^

C1ELING.

1  Kings  6.  15.  he  built  walls  of  the  house  With  c.
Ezek.  41.  t  16.  over  against  the  door  c.  witt.  wood
CINNAMON.

Exod.  30.  2.3.  take  of  sweet  c.  half  so  much
Prov.7 .17  A  have  perfumed  my  bed  with  aloes  andc.
Cant.  4. 14.  thy  plants  are  an  orch.  of  calamus  and  c.
Rev.  18. 13.  no  man  buyeth  her  merchandise  of  <7
CIRCLE.

Prov.  8.  +27.  when  beset  a  c.  on  face  of  the  depth
Isa.  40.  22.  it  is  he  that  sitteth  on  the  c.  of  the  earth
CIRCUIT,  S.

1  Sam.  7. 16.  he  went  from  year  to  year  in  c.  to  Bethel
Job  22.  14.  and  he  w'alketn  in  the  c.  of  heaven
Psal.  19-6.  and  his  c.  from  the  ends  of  the  earth
Eccl.  1.  6.  wind  retumeth  again  according  to  hisc.
CIRCUMCISE.

Gen.  17. 11.  ye  shall  c.  the  flesh  of  your  foreskins
Deut.  10. 16.  c.  therefore  the  foreskin  of  vour  heart

30.  6.  the  Lord  thy  God  will  c.  thine  heart


Josh.  5. 2.  and  c.  again  children  of  Israel  second  time

4.  and  this  is  the  cause  why  Joshua  did  c.

Jer.  4. 4.  c.  yourselves  to  the  Lord,  and  take  away
Luke  1.  59‘on  eighth  day  they  came  to  c.  the  child
John  7.  22.  and  ye  qn  tne  saDbath  day  c.  a  man
Acts  15.  5.  saying,  it  was  needful  to  c.  them

21.  21.  that  they  ought  not  to  c.  their  children
CIRCUMCISED.

Gen.  17. 10.  every  man  child  among  you  shall  be  c.
14.  whose  flesh  is  note,  that  soul  shall  be  cutoff

23.  and  Abiaham  c.  the  flesh  of  their  foreskin
26.  in  that  day  Abrah.  was  c.  and  Ishmael  Ids  son

34. 15.  if  as  we  be,  that  every  male  of  you  be  c.

24.  and  every  male  was  c.  Exod.  12.  48.

Josh.  5.  3.  Joshua  c.  children  of  Israel  at  the  hill

7.  because  they  had  not  c.  them  by  the  way

1 8.  when  the  people  had  made  an  end  to  be  c.
Jer.  9.  25.  will  punish  all  c.  with  the  uncircumcised
Acts  15. 1.  except  ye  be  c.  ye  cannot  be  saved,  24.
16.3.  Paulc.  Timothy  because  of  the  Jews
Rom.  4. 11.  be  father  of  all  that  believe,  though  note
1  Cor.  7. 18.  is  any  man  called  being c.  let  him  not
become  uncircum.  in  uncircum.  not  become  c.
Gal.  2.  3.  neither  was  1  itus  compelled  to  be  c.

5.  2.  if  ye  be  c.  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing

6. 12.  they  constrain  you  to  be  c.  lest  they  suff  er

13.  for  they  that  are  c.  kept  not  the  law
Phil.  3.  5.  c.  the  eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel
Col.  2. 11.  in  whom  also  ye  are  c.  with  circumcision
CIRCUMCISING.

Josh.  5.  8.  when  they  had  done  c.  all  the  people
Luke  2. 21.  when  eight  d ays  accomplished  tor  c.  child
CIRCUMCISION.

This  term  is  taken  from  the  Latin,  circumcidere,
which  signifies  to  cut  all  round,  because  the  Jews,
who  circumcised  their  children,  cut  off  the  little
skin  or  prepuce  after  that  manner,  which  covers
the  nut  cf  the  penis,  or  natural  part.  God  en¬
joined  Abraham  to  use  circumcision,  as  a  sign  of
that  covenant  which  he  had  entered  into  with  him,
Gen.  17.  10,  11,  Sc.  This  was  a  sign,  evidence,
and  assurance,  both  of  the  blessing  promised  by
that  God  who  appointed  this  ordinance,  pa)  ticu-
larly  that  he  would  give  them  Christ,  the  promised
seed,  out  of  the  lofks  of  Abraham,  and  in  him
accept  of  them  for  his  peculiar  people,  pardon
their  sins,  and  cleanse  them  from  their  natural
corruption,  signified  by  the  cutting  off  of  their
foreskins:  and  also  of  mens  obligation  to  the
duties  required ;  namely,  to  believe  in  this  Mes¬
siah,  to  put  off  the  old  man,  and  serve  him  as  new
creatures  ;  which  is  signified  by  his  acceptance  of,
and  submission  to,  the  ordinance.

Circumcision  is  likeioise  put  for  the  Jews,  who  were
circumcised,  as  uncircumcision  is  put  for  the
uncircumcised  Gentiles,  Gal.  2.  7>  8,  9.  And
for  such  as  are  spiritually  circumcised,  who  are
the  true  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham,  who  have  the
thing  signified  by  that  sign,  or  ceremony,  and  per¬
form  that  which  circumcision  was  designed  to  en¬
gage  unto,  Phil.  3.  3.

John  7.  22.  Moses  therefore  gave  unto  you  c.

23.  if  a  man  on  the  sabbath-day  receive  c .  are  ye
Rom.  2. 25.  for  c.  profiteth,  if  thou  keep  the  law  ;  if
thou  break  the  law,  thy  c.  is  made  uncircumcision

28.  nor  is  that  c.  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh

29.  and  c.  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit

3.  30.  one  God,  who  shall  justify  the  c.  by  faith

4.  9.  cometh  this  blessedness  then  on  the  c.  only  ?

10.  how  was  it  reckoned, when  he  was  in  c .?  not  in  e,

1  Cor.  7- 19.  c.  is  the  keeping  of  the  commandments
Gal.  2.  9.  and  that  they  should  go  unto  the  c.

5.  6.  for  in  Jesus  Christ  neither  c.  availeth,  6. 15.

11.  and  I ,  brethren,  if  I  yet  preach  c.  why  do  I  yet
Eph.  2, 11.  by  that  which  is  called  the  c.  in  the  flesh
Phil.  3.  3.  we  are  the  c.  which  worship  G.  in  spirit
Col.  2. 11.  with  c.  w  ithout  hands,  by  c.  of  Christ

3. 11.  there  is  neither  c.  nor  uncircum.  but  Chr.  is

Of  CIRCUMCISION.

Exod.  4. 26.  a  bloody  husband  art  thou,  because  ofc.
Acts  7  ■  8.  he  gave  Abraham  the  covenant  of  c.

10.  45.  they  of  c.  which  believed  were  astonished

11.2.  they  that  were  of  the  c.  contended  with  Peter
Rom.  3. 1.  whatprofitis  thereof  c.l  much  every  way

4. 11.  be  received  the  sign  of  c.  aseal  of  righteousn.

12.  a  father  of  c.  to  them  who  are  not  of  the  c.

15.8.  Jesus  Chr.  was  a  minister  of  c.  for  truth  of  G.

Gal.  2.  7 .  as  the  gospel  of  c.  was  committed  to  Peter

8.  he  that  wrought  in  Peter  to  apostleship  of  the  c
Col.  4. 11 .  Marcus  and  J  ustus,  who  are  of  c.  sal .  you
Tff.l.lO.for  there  many  unruly,  especially  they  of  c.

CIRCUMSPECT.

Exod.  23.13.  in  all  things  that  I  havesaidtoyou.be  c.
CIRCUMSPECTLY.

Eph.  5. 15.  see  that  ye  walk  c.  not  as  fools  but  as  wise
CISTERN

Signifies,  [1]  A  vessel  of  lead  to  hold  water  for  house
hold  uses,  2  Kings  18.  31.  [2]  Any  thing  that
persons  put  their  tru.  t  in  besides  God,  whether
in  idols,  powerful  neighbours  and  allies,  friends,
traditions,  merits,  tyc.  which  are  but  broken  cis¬
terns,  Jer.  2.  13.  [3]  The  left  ventricle  of  the

heart,  Eccl.  12  6.

2  Kings  18.  31.  drink  ye  every  one  waters  of  his  c.
Prov.  5.  15.  drink  waters  out  of  thine  ownc.

Eccl.  12. 6.  or  the  wheel  broken  at  the  c.

Isa.  36. 16.  drink  every  one  the  waters  of  his  own  e.
CISTERNS.

2  Chron.  26. 1 10.  Uzziah  cut  out  many  c.

Neh.  9. 1 25.  possessed  houses  full  of  goods  and  c.
Jer.  2. 13.  my  people  have  hewed  out  c.  broken  c.
CITY

Signifies.  [1]  A  walled  town  for  people  to  dwell  in,
Josh.  6  3.  [2]  The  inhabitants  cf  cities,  Gen.
35.  5.  Isa.  14.  31.  Jer.  26.  2.  [3]  The  church
of  God  upon  earth,  Cant.  3.  2,  3.  Rev.  11.  2.
[4]  The  church  triumphant  all  united  in  glory.
Rev.  21.  2.122.  19.  [5]  Heaven,  the  eternal

inheritance  of  all  believers,  Heb.  11.  10,  16.  [6]
That  wherein  a  man  puts  his  trust  and  confidence,
Prov.  10.  15.

Gen  4. 17.  Cain  builded  a  c.  and  called  it  Enoch


C  IT


C  I  T


C  IT


Gen.  11.4.  let  us  build  us  a  c.  and  a  tower,  whose  top
5.  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  c.  and  the  tower
8.  Ld.  scattered  them,  and  they  left  off  to  build  c.
18. 26.  if  l  find  in  Sod.  fifty  righteous  within  the  c.
28.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  c.  for  lack  of  five  ?

24. 13.  the  daughters  of  the  c.  come  to  draw  water
34.  24.  hearkened  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate  of  c.
25.  carr.e  upon  the  c.  bol  tly,  and  slew  the  males
i  Num.  21.  28.  a  flame  is  gone  out  from  c.  of  Sihon
22.  t  39.  Balaam  came  to  a  c.  of  streets
Dent.  2.  36.  there  was  not  one  c.  too  strong  for  us
3.  4.  there  was  not  a  c.  we  took  not  from  them
13.  15.  shalt  surely  smite  the  inhabitants  of  that  c.
21.  3.  c.  next  to  slain  man  shall  take  a  heifer,  6.
Josh.  3.  16.  on  an  heap  very  far  from  the  c.  Adam
6. 3.  ye  shall  compass  c.  and  go  round  six  days,  7-
24.  they  burnt  the  c.  with  tire,  and  all  therein,
Dent.  13.  16.  Josh.  8.  8,  19.  Judg.  1.  8.  I  18.  27.
8. 2.  lay  thee  an  ambush  for  the  c.  behind  it
17.  they  left  the  c.  open,  and  pursued  after  Tsr.

20.  the  smoke  of  the  c.  ascended  up  to  heaven
11.  19.  was  not  a  c.  made  peace,  save  the  Hivites
Josh.  15. 13.  to  Caleb  the  c.  of  Arba,  which  c.  is  Heb.

19.  50.  they  gave  Joshua  thee,  which  he  asked

20.  4.  he  shall  stand  at  the  entry  of  the  gate  of  c.
Judg.  6.  27.  because  he  feared  the  men  of  the  c.

8.  if.  anil  Gideon  slew  the  men  of  the  c.

9.  45.  and  beat  down  the  c.  and  sowed  it  with  salt
51.  all  they  of  the  c.  tied,  and  shut  it  to  them

20.  40.  the  name  of  the  c.  ascended  up  to  heaven

[Ruth  1. 19.  that  all  the  c.  was  moved  about  them
3. 11.  for  all  the  c.  of  my  people  know  that  thou
■  1  Sam.  1.  3.  this  man  went  out  of  c.  yearly  to  wors.
4. 13.  when  the  man  told  it,  all  the  c.  cried  out
5. 11.  there  was  a  deadly  destruction  thro’  all  the  c.
8. 22.  Samuel  said  to  Israel,  go  ye  every  man  to  his
c.  1  Kings  22.  36.  Ezra  2.  1.  Neh.  7.  6.
28.  3.  Israel  buried  him  in  Ramah,  his  own  c.

2  Sam.  12. 1.  two  men  in  one  c.  one  rich,  other  poor
15. 2.  then  Absalom  called,  of  what  c.  art  thou  ?

19.  37.  1  may  die  in  mine  own  c.  and  be  buried
20.  19.  seekest  to  destroy  a  c.  and  mother  in  Israel
l  Kings  1.  45.  rejoicing,  so  that  the  c.  rang  again
11.32.  for  Jerusalem’s  sake,  c.  1  have  chosen,  36.

2  Kings  6. 19.  neither  is  this  the  c.  follow  me
11 .  20.  the  people  reioiced ,  and  the  c.  was  in  quiet
24.  10.  the  c.  Jerusalem  was  besieged,  25.  2.

2  Chr.  15.  6.  was  destroyed  of  c.  for  G.  did  vex  them
19.  5.  and  he  set  judges  in  the  land  c.  by  c.

30. 10.  so  the  posts  passed  from  c.  to  c.

32.  18.  to  trouble  them  that  they  might  take  the  c.
Ezra  4. 12.  the  Jews  are  building  the  rebellious  c.
Neh.  2.  3.  why  not  sad,  when  the  c.  lieth  waste,  5.
11.  9.  Judah  son  of  Senuah  was  second  over  the  c.

,  Esth.  3.  15.  but  thee.  Shushanwas  perplexed
8.  15.  the  c.  of  Sbushan  rejoiced  and  was  glad
Psal.  48.  2.  the  c.  of  the  great  king,  Mat.  5. 35.

59.  6.  and  they  go  round  about  the  c.  14.

72. 16.  they  of  c.  shall  flourish  like  grass  of  earth
107.  4.  they  wandered,  they  found  no  c.  to  dwell  in
122.  3.  Jerusalem  is  builded  as  ac.  compact
127.  1.  except  Lord  keep  the  c.  watchmen  in  vain
Prov.  8.  3.  W  isdom  crieth  at  the  entry  of  the  c.

10.  15.  rich  man’s  wealth  is  his  strong  c.  18.  11.

11. 10.  when  it  goeth  well  with  the  righteous,  the
c.  rejoiceth,  and  shouting  when  wicked  perish
11.  by  blessing  of  the  upright  the  c.  is  exalted
16.  32.  ruleth  his  spirit,  than  he  that  taketh  a  c.

25. 28.  is  like  a  c.  broken  down  without  walls
29.  8.  scornful  men  bring  a  c.  into  a  snare
Eccl.  9. 14.  there  was  a  little  c.  and  few  men  in  it
15.  and  the  poor  wise  man  delivered  the  c.

Isa.  1. 26.  called  c.  of  righteousness,  faithful  c.  21.
14.  31.  howl,  O  gate,  cry,  O  c.  whole  Palestina
17. 1.  Damascus  is  taken  away  from  being  a  c.

19.  2.  shall  fight  c.  against  c.  kingd.  against  kingd.
24. 10.  the  c.  of  confusion  is  broken  down
25.  2.  thou  hast  made  of  a  c.  an  heap,  to  be  no  c.
33.  20.  look  on  Zion,  the  c.  of  our  solemnities
60.  14.  they  shall  call  thee  the  c.  of  the  Lord
62. 12.  thou  shalt  be  called  a  c.  not  forsaken
Jer.  3. 14.  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  e.  tw  o  of  a  tribe
4. 29.  whole  c.  shall  nee  from  noise  of  horsemen
19. 12.  thus  will  I  do,  even  make  this  c.  as  Tophet
25. 29.  to  bring  evil  on  the  c.  called  by  my  name
32.  24.  they  are  come  to  the  c.  and  the  c.  is  given
39.  2.  the  c.  was  broken  up,  men  of  war  fledj  52.  7.
46.  8.  1  will  destroy  the  c.  and  the  inhabitants
49. 25.  how  is  the  c.  of  praise  not  left,  the  c.  of  joy
Lam.  1.  1.  how  doth  c.sit  solitary,  full  of  people?
2. 15.  is  thisc.  that  men  called  perfection  of  beauty  ?
Ezek.  4.  1.  pourtray  on  it  the  c.  even  Jerusalem
7.  23.  make  a  chain,  for  the  c.  is  full  of  violence
9. 1.  cause  them  that  have  charge  over  the  c.

4.  go  thro’  the  midst  of  c.  Jerusalem,  set  a  mark
9.  land  full  of  blood,  the  c.  is  full  of  perverseness
10.  2.  and  scatter  the  coals  of  fire  over  the  c.

27.  32.  what  c.  is  like  Tyrus  in  midst  of  the  sea?
33.  21.  one  came  to  me,  saying,  the  c.  is  smitten
48.  35.  name  of  the  c.  shall  be.  the  Ixmd  is  there
Dan.  9.  18.  behold  the  c.  called  by  thy  name,  19.
Hos.  6. 8.  Gilead  a  c.  of  them  that  work  iniquity
Amos  4.7.1  caused  to  ram  on  one  c.  not  on  another
5.  3.  the  c.  that  went  out  by  a  thousand  shall  leave
Mic.  6. 9.  Lord’s  voice  crieth  to  the  c.  hear  the  rod
Hah. 2. 12.  wroe  to  him  that stablisheth  ac.  by  iniq.
Zeph.  3. 1.  woe  to  filthy  and  polluted,  oppressing  c.
Zech.  8.  3.  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  ac.  of  truth
5.  sh  eets  of  the  c.  shall  be  full  of  boys  and  girls
14. 2.  the  c.  shall  be  taken  and  the  houses  rifled ,  the
residue  of  people  shall  not  be  cutoff  from  the  c.
Mat.  5.  14.  a  c.  that  is  set  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid
35.  nor  by  Jerusalem,  for  it  is  the  c.  of  great  king
8.  34.  behold,  the  whole  c.  came  out  to  meet  Jesus
10.  11.  into  whatsoever  c.  ye  shall  enter,  inquire
15.  than  for  that  c.  Mark  6.  11.  Lvke  10.  12.

21.  10.  all  the  c.  was  moved,  saying,  who  is  this?
22.  7-  the  king  sent  and  burnt  up  their  c.

23.  34.  and  persecute  them  from  c.  to  c.

Mark  1.  3.3.  all  the  c.  was  gathered  together  at  door
5. 1 1.  they  that  fed  swine  told  it  in  c.  Luke  8.  34.
Luke  2. 3.  went  to  be  taxed,  every  one  to  his  own  c.


Luke  7. 12.  and  much  people  of  the  c.  was  with  her

19.  41.  he  beheld  the  c.  and  wept  over  it

23.  51.  Joseph  was  of  Arimathea,  a  c.  of  the  Jews
John  4.  39.  many  of  that  c.  believed  on  him

Acts  8.  8.  and  there  was  great  joy  in  that  c.

13.  44.  came  together  almost  the  whole  c.  to  hear
16. 12.  we  were  abiding  »n  that  c.  certain  days

17.  5.  and  set  all  the  c.  in  an  uproar  and  assaulted

19.  29.  the  whole  c.  was  filled  with  confusion
21.  30.  all  thee,  was  moved,  and  the  people  ran
Heb.  11. 10.  he  looked  for  a  c.  that  hath  foundations

16.  for  he  hath  prepared  for  them  a  c.

12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  the  c.  of  the  living  God

13.  14.  for  here  we  have  no  continuing  c.  but  seek
Jam.  4.  13.  we  will  go  into  such  a  c.  buy  and  sell
Rev.  20.  9.  they  went  and  compassed  the  beloved  c.

21.  14.  the  wall  of  the  c.  had  twelve  foundations

18.  the  c.  was  pure  gold,  like' to  clear  glass

23.  the  c.  had  no  need  of  the  sun  nor  moon
Bloody  Cl  EY.

Ezek.  22. 2.  son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  th&bloody  c.?

24.  6.  woe  to  the  bloody  c.  to  the  pot,  9.  Nah.  3.  1.

Defenced  CITY.

Isa.  25.  2.  thou  hast  made  of  a  defenced  c.  a  ruin

27.  10.  yet  the  defenced  c.  shall  be  desolate
Jer.  1. 18.  I  have  made  thee  this  day  a  defenced  c.

CITY  of  David.

2  Sam.  5.  9.  called  it  the  c.  of  David,  1  Chr.  11.  7.
6.  10.  would  not  remove  the  ark  into  c.  of  David
12.  brought  up  the  ark  into  the  c.  of  David,  16.

1  Kings  2.  10.  David  was  buried  in  the  c.  of  David
3.  1.  Solomon  brought  her  into  the  c.  of  David

8.  1.  bring  the  ark  out  of  c.  of  David,  2  Chr.  5.  2.

11.  4.3.  Solomon  buried  in  c.  of  D.  2  Chr.  9.  .31.

14.  31.  Rehoboam  buried  in  c.  of  D.  2  Chr.  12. 16.

15.  8.  they  buried  Abijam  in  c.  of  D.  2  Chr.  14. 1.

22.  50.  Jehoshaphat  buried  in  c.  of  D.  2  Chr.  21. 1.

2  Kings  8. 24.  Joram  buried  in  c.  if  D.  2  Chr.  21 . 20.

9.  28.  Ahaziah  was  buried  in  tne  c.  of  David

12.  21.  Jehoash  buried  in  c.  of  D.  2  Chron.  24.  25.

14.  20.  Amaziah  ||  15. 7-  Azariah  buried  in  c.  of  D.

15.  38.  Jothan  was  buried  in  c.  of  D.  2  Chr.  27-  9.

16.  20.  Ahaz  was  buried  in  the  c.  of  David

2  Chron.  24. 16.  they  buried  Jehoiada  in  the  c.  of  D.
Isa.  22.  9.  seen  the  breaches  of  the  c.  of  David
29.  1.  woe  to  Ariel,  the  c.  where  David  dwelt
Luke  2.  4.  Joseph  also  went  into  the  c.  of  David
11.  to  you  is  born  in  the  c.  of  David  a  Saviour
Elders  with  CITY.

Deut.  19.  12.  the  elders  of  his  c.  shall  fetch  him

21.  6.  the  elders  of  that  c.  next  to  the  slain  man

20.  say  to  tbe  elders  of  his  c.  our  son  is  stubborn

22.  17.  spread  the  cloth  before  the  elders  of  the  c.

25.  8.  then  the  elders  of  his  c.  shall  call  him
Josh.  20.  4.  declare  his  cause  to  the  elders  of  that  c.
Judg.  8.  16.  Gideon  took  the  elders  of  the  c.

Ruth  4.  2.  Boaz  took  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  c.
Ezra  10.  14.  and  with  them  the  elders  of  every  c.

Every  CITY.

Judg.  20.  48.  smote  as  well  the  men  of  every  c.

2  Kings  3.  19.  ye  shall  smite  every  fenced  c.

2  Chron.  11.  12.  in  every  c.  Rehoboam  put  shields

28.  25.  in  every  c.  of  Judah  he  made  high  places
31.  19.  of  sons  of  Aaron  which  were  in  every  c.

Jer.  4. 29.  every  c.  shall  be  forsaken,  not  a  man  dwell
48.  8.  and  the  spoiler  shall  come  upon  every  c.
Mat.  12.  25.  and  every  c.  divided  against  itself
Duke  10.  1.  sent  them  two  and  two  into  every  c.
Acts  15.  21.  hath  in  every  c.  them  that  preach  him
36.  let  us  go  and  visit  our  brethren  in  every  c.

20.  23.  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth  n  every  c.  that
Tit.  1.  5.  that  thou  shouldst  ordain  elders  in  every  c.

Fenced  CITY.

2  Kings  10.  2.  with  you  a  fenced  c.  also  and  armour

17.  9.  from  the  tower  of  watchmen  to  the  fenced  c.

2  Chron.  11.  23.  he  dispersed  of  all  his  children  thro’

Judah  and  Benjamin  unto  every  fenced  c.
CITY  of  God.

Psal.  46.  4.  the  streams  shall  make  glad  the  c.  of  G.
48.  1.  Lord  greatly  to  be  praised  in  c.  of  our  God
8.  the  c.  of  God,  God  will  establish  it  for  ever
87.  3.  glorious  things  spoken  of  thee,  O  c.  of  God
Heb.  12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  the  c.  of  the  living  God
Rev.  3.  12.  write  on  him  the  name  of  c.  of  my  God
Great  CITY.

Gen.  10. 12.  Ashur  builded  Resen,  same  is  a  great  c.
Josh.  10.  2.  feared,  because  Gibeon  was  a  great  c.
Neh.  7.  4.  now  the  c.  was  large  and  great,  but  people
Jer.  22. 8.  why  hath  Lord  done  thus  to  this  great  c.  ?
Jonah  1.  2.  arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  c.  3.  2.

3.  3.  now  N  ineveh  was  an  exceeding  great  c.

4.  11.  should  I  not  spare  Nineveh,  that  great  c.f
Rev.  11 . 8.  dead  bodies  lie  in  the  street  of  the  great  c.

14.8.  Babylon  fallen,  that  great  c.  18. 10, 16, 19,  21.

16.  19.  the  great  c.  was  divided  into  three  parts

17.  18.  the  woman  thou  sawest,  is  that  great  c.

21.  10.  he  shewed  me  that  great  c.  holy  Jerusalem

Holy  CITY.

Neh.  11. 1.  cast  lots  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem  the  holyc.

18.  all  the  Levites  of  the  holy  c.  were  284
Isa.  48.  2.  they  call  themselves  of  th e-holy  c.

52.  1.  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O  holy  c.
Dan.  9. 24.  seventy  weeks  determined  on  thy  holyc.
Mat.  4. 5.  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  holy  c.

27.  53.  went  into  the  holy  c.  and  appeared  to  many
Rev.  11.  2.  the  holy  c.  shall  they  tread  under  foot

21.2. 1  John  saw  the  holy  c.  coming  down  from  God

22.  19.  God  shall  take  his  part  out  of  the  holy  c.

In,  or  Into,  the  CITY.

Gen.  19.  12.  whatsoever  thou  hast  in  the  c.  bring
Deut.  20.  14.  all  that  is  in  the  c.  take  to  thyself

28.  3.  blessed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  c.  and  in  the  field
16.  cursed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  c.  and  in  the  field

Josh.  6.  20.  so  that  the  people  went  into  the  c.

21.  they  utterly  destroyed  all  that  was  in  the  c.
8.  19.  they  entered  into  the  c.  and  set  it  on  fire

Judg.  1.  24.  skew  us  the  entrance  into  the  c.

8.  27.  Gideon  put  the  ephod  in  his  c.  in  Ophrah

1  Sam.  4. 13.  when  the  man  came  into  the  c.  and  told

2  Sam.  15.  25.  carry  back  the  ark  of  God  into  the  c.
27.  return  into  the  c.  and  your  sons  with  you

1  Kings  13.  25.  and  they  came  and  told  it  tn  thee.


1  Kin.  14. 11.  that  dieth  of  Jeroboam  in  the  c.  dogs  eat
12.  arise,  and  when  thy  feet  enter  into  the  c.

16.  4.  that  dieth  of  Baasha  in  the  c.  shall  dogs  eat

20.  30.  came  into  the  c.  into  an  inner  chamber

21.  24.  that  dieth  of  Ahab,  in  the  c.  dogs  eat

2  Kings  7.  4.  if  we  say,  we  will  enter  into  the  c.

12.  we  shall  catch  them,  and  get  into  thee.

20.  20.  how  Hezekiah  brought  water  into  the  c.

25.  3.  famine  prevailed  in  the  c.  there  was  no  bread
Psal.  31.  21.  blessed  be  the  I.nrd,  for  he  hath  shewed

me  his  marvellous  kindness  in  a  strong  c.
55.  9.  I  have  seen  violence  and  strife  in  the  c.
Prov.  1.  21.  in  the  c.  'A  isdom  uttoreth  her  words
Eccl.  7. 19.  than  ten  mighty  men  which  are  in  the  c.

8.  10.  and  the  wicked  were  forgotten  in  the  c.

Isa.  24. 12.  in  the  c.  is  left  desolation  and  gate  smitten
Jer.  14.  18.  if  I  enter  into  the  c.  then  behold  sick

.38.  9-  like  to  die,  for  there  is  no  more  bread  in  the  c.
52.  6.  famine  was  sore  in  the  c.  there  was  no  bread
Lam.  1.  19.  my  elders  gave  up  the  ghost  in  the  c.
Ezek.  7.  15.  in  the  c.  famine  shall  devour  him

9.  7.  and  they  went  forth  and  slew  in  the  c.

Hos.  11.  9.  and  I  will  not  enter  into  the  c.

Joel  2. 9. they  shall  run  to  and  fro  in  the  c.  on  the  wall
Amos  3.  6.  shall  a  trumpet  be  blown  in  the  c.  shall
(here  be  evil  in  a  c.  and  Inrd  hath  not  done  it  ?
7. 17.  thy  wife  shall  be  an  harlot  in  the  c.  thy  sons
Jonah  3.  4.  and  Jonah  began  to  enter  into  the  c.
Mat.  9. 1.  he  passed  over  and  came  into  his  own  c.

10.  5.  into  any  c.  of  the  Samaritans  enter  not
10. 11.  and  into  whatsoever  c.  ye  shall  enter

26.  18.  go  into  thee,  to  such  a  man,  and  say  to  him
28.  11.  behold,  some  of  the  watch  came  into  thee.

Mark  14.  13.  he  saith,  go  into  the  c.  Acts  9.  6.

Luke  2.  3.  all  went  to  be  taxed,  every  one  into  his  c.
7.  .37.  a  woman  in  the  c.  which  was  a  sinner

18.  2.  there  was  in  a  c.  a  judge,  who  feared  not  G.
3.  there  was  a  widow  in  that  c.  and  she  came
22. 10.  behold,  when  ye  are  entered  into  the  c.

24.  49.  but  tarry  ye  in  the  c.  of  Jerusalem
John  4.  8.  his  disciples  were  gone  into  the  c.

Acts  11.  5.  I  was  in  the  c.  of  Joppa,  praying
14.  20.  howbeit,  he  rose  up  and  came  into  the  c.

21.  29.  had  seen  Trophimus  with  him  in  the  c.

24.  12.  neither  in  the  synagogues  nor  in  the  c.

2  Cor.  11.  26. 1  have  been  in  perils  in  the  c.  in  the  sea
Rev.  22. 14.  and  may  enter  thro’  the  gates  into  the  c.
CUT  of  the  Lord.

Psal.  101.  8.  I  will  destroy  the  wicked,  that  I  may
cut  off  ail  the  wicked  doers  from  the  c.  of  the  L.ord
Isa.  60. 14.  they  shall  call  thee  the  c.  of  the  Lord
Cut  of  the  CITY.

Gen.  44.  4.  when  they  were  gone  out  of  the  c.
Ezod.  9. 29.  Moses  said, as  soon  as  I  am  gon eout  of  c.

33.  and  Moses  went  out  of  the  c.  from  Pharaoh
Lev.  14.  45.  he  shall  carry  them  forth  out  of  the  c.
Josh.  8.  22.  the  other  side  issued  out  of  the  c.  against
Judg.  1.  24.  the  spies  saw  a  man  come  out  of  thee.

2  Sam.  18.  3.  better  thou  succour  us  out  of  the  c.
20.  16.  then  cried  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  c.

1  Kings  21. 13.  they  carried  N  aboth  out  of  the  c.

2  Kings  7.  12.  when  they  come  cut  of  thee,  we  shall
9- 15.  Jehu  said,  let  none  escape  out  of  the  c.

1  Chron.  20. 2.  he  brought  much  spoil  out  of  the  c.

2  Chron.  33.  15.  Josiah  cast  the  idols  out  of  the  c.
Job  24. 12.  men  groan  from  out  of  the  c.  the  soul
Jer.  39.4.  Zedekiah  went  out  of  the  c.  52.  7.

Ezek.  48.  30.  these  are  the  goings  out  of  the  c.

Mic.  4.  10.  now  shalt  thou  go  forth  out  of  the  c.
Mat.  21. 17.  he  left  them,  and  went  out  of  the  c.
Mark  11.19.  when  even  was  come,  went  out  of  the  c.
Luke  4.  29.  they  rose  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  c.

9.  5.  when  ye  go  out  e/that  c.  shake  off  the  dust
John  A.  30.  then  they  went  out  of  thee,  and  came
Acts  7.  58.  cast  Stephen  out  of  thee,  and  stoned  him
14.  19.  having  stoned  Paul,  drew  him  out  of  the  c.

16.  13.  and  on  the  sabbath  we  went  out  of  the  c.
21.  5.  they  brought  us,  till  we  were  out  of  the  c.

CITY"  of  refuge.

Num.  .35.  25.  shall  restore  him  to  the  c.  of  refuge
26.  if  come  without  border  of  the  c.  of  refuge,  27
28.  be  should  have  remained  in  the  c.  of  refuge
32.  tor  him  that  is  fled  to  the  c.  of  refuge
Josh.  21.  13.  they  gave  Hebron  to  be  a  c.  of  refuge
21.Shechem  ||27-  Golan  ||  32.  Kedesh ||  38.  Ramoth
1  Chron.  6. 57.  to  sons  of  Aaron,  Hebron  a  c.of  refuge
This  CITY.

Gen.  19. 14.  Lot  said,  up,  for  Ld.  will  destroy  thisc.

20.  behold  now,  this  c.  is  near  to  flee  unto

21.  and  he  said,  I  will  not  overthrow  this  c.

Josh.  6.  26.  cursed  be  he  that  buildeth  this  c.  Jericho
Judg.  19. 11.  come,  and  let  us  turn  in  unto  this  c.

1  Sam.  9.  6.  there  is  in  this  c.  a  man  of  God

2  Kings'll.  19.  the  situation  of  this  c.  is  pleasant

18.  30.  this  c.  shall  not  be  delivered,  Isa.  .36.  15.

19.  32.  shall  not  come  into  this  c.  33.  Isa.  37.  34.

34. 1  will  defend  this  c.  20.  6.  Isa.  37.  35. 1  38.  6.

23.27.I  will  cast  off  this  c.  Jerusalem  I  have  chosen

2  Chr  n.  6.  34.  they  pray  to  thee  toward  this  c.
Ezra  A.  13.  thatifr/nf  c.  be  builded  again,  16.

15.  know  that  this  c.  is  a  rebellious  city.

Neh.  13.  18.  did  not  God  bring  evil  upon  this  c.  ?
Jer.  6.6.  this  is  the  c.  to  be  visited,  isoppression

17.  25.  Jerusalem, and  thisc.  shall  remain  forever

19.  8.  1  will  make  rf/nV  c.  desolate,  and  an  hissing

11.  even  so  will  1  break  this  people  and  this  c.

15.  1  will  bring  upon  this  c.  and  towns  all  the  evil

20.  5.  1  will  deliver  all  the  strength  of  thisc.

21.  9. he  that  abideth  in  this  c.  shall  die  by  the  sword

10. 1  set  my  face  against  this  c.for  evil  and  not  good

22.  8.  why  hath  the  l  ord  done  thus  unto  this  c.?

26.  6.  I  will  make  this  c.  a  curse  to  nations  of  earth
15.  ye  shall  bring  innocent  blood  on  this  c.

27.  17-  wherefore  should  this  c.  be  laid  waste  ?

32.  3.  1  will  give  this  c.  to  Chaldeans,  28. 1  34.2.

31.  this  c.  hath  been  to  me  as  a  provocation
33.5.  for  wickedness  I  have  hid  my  face  from  this  c.
34.22.  command  and  cause  them  to  return  to  thisc.
38.  17-  this  c.  shall  not  be  burnt  with  fire
2.3.  thou  shalt  cause  this  c.  to  be  burnt  with  fire
39- 16.  I  will  bring  my  words  on  this  c.  for  evil
Ezek.  11.  2.  these  men  give  wicked  counsel  in  this  c.


C  I  T


C  LE


CLE


Ezek.\\.3.  this r.is  the  caldron, and  we  be  the  flesh, 7.

11  .this  c.  shall  not  be  your  caldron,  norye  the  flesh
Mat.  10.  23.  when  they  persecute  you  in  this  c.  tiee
A cts  18.  10.  for  1  have  much  people  in  this  c.

22.  3. 1  was  brought  up  in  this  c.  at  feet  of  Gamaliel
Without  CITY.

Gen.  19. 16.  and  the  inen  set  him  without  the  c.

L-ev.  14.  40.  into  an  unclean  place  without  the  c.  41.
Num.  35.  5.  ye  shall  measure  from  without  the  c.

2  Chron.  32.  3.  to  stop  the  fountains  without  the  c.
Rev.  14.20.  the  wine-press  was  trodden  without  the  c.

cm  ks.

Gen.  19.  29.  when  God  destroyed  thee,  of  the  plain
35. 5.  terror  of  God  was  upon  the  c.  round  about
41.  48.  Joseph  laid  up  the  food  in  the  c.

47. 21.  as  for  the  people,  he  removed  them  to  the  c.
Lev.  25.  32.  the  c.  of  the  l.evites  may  be  redeemed
Num.  13.  19.  what  c.  they  be  that  they  dwell  in

35.  8.  every  one  shall  give  of  his  r .  to  the  Levites
Lieut.  2.  37.  nor  earnest  thou  to  r.  in  the  mountains
3. 12.  c.  thereof  gave  I  to  Keubenites  and  Gadites

19.  abide  in  your  c.  which  1  have  given  you

6. 10.  into  the  land  to  give  thee  great  and  goodly  c.

19.  5.  he  shall  flee  to  one  of  these  c.  and  live
Josh.  9.  17.  Israel  came  to  theirc.cn  the  third  day
*10.  19.  suffer  them  not  to  enter  into  their  c.

11. 13.  as  for  the  c.  that  stood  still  in  their  strength
18.  9.  described  it  bye.  into  seven  parts  in  a  book

Judg.  12.  7.  Jephthah  was  buried  in  one  of  the  c.
20.48.men  of  Israel  set  fire  on  all  the  c.  they  came  to
21.  23.  they  repaired  the  c.  and  dwelt  in  them

1  Sam.  31.  7.  the  Israelites  forsook  the  c.  and  fled

2  Sam.  10. 12.  for  the  c.  of  our  God,  1  Chron.  19. 13.
1  Kings  9. 12.  Hiram  came  from  lyre  to  see  thee.

13.  what  c.  are  these  that  thou  hast  given  me  ?

20.  34.  the  c.  my  father  took  1  will  restore

1  Chron.  2.  22.  Jair  had  23  r.  in  the  land  of  Gilead
4.  31.  these  were  their  c.  to  the  reign  of  David

2  Chron.  34.  6.  and  so  did  he  in  the  c.  of  Manasseh
Ezra  3.  1.  when  the  seventh  month  was  come,  and

the  Israelites  were  i'n  their  c.  Neh.'[."!3.
Neh.  11. 1.  and  nine  parts  to  dwell  in  other  c.

Job  15. 28.  dwelleth  in  desolate  c.  and  houses  no  man
Psal.  9.  6.  O  enemy,  thou  hast  destroyed  c.

Isa.  6. 11-  he  answered,  till  c.  be  wasted,  and  houses

14.21.  nor  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  c.

19. 18.  in  that  day  shall  fivec.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
33. 8.  he  hath  despised  the  c.  he  regardeth  no  man

64. 10.  thy  holy  c.  are  a  wildern.  Zion  is  a  wildern.
Jer.  2. 15.  they  made  his  land  waste,  his  c.  are  burnt

28.  according  to  the  number  of  thy  c.  11.  13.

13.  19.  c.  of  south  be  shut  up,  and  none  shall  open
£0. 16.  that  man  be  as  the  c.  which  Lord  overthrew

31.  21.  turn  again,  O  virginof  Israel,  to  these  thyc.

49.13.  all  the  c.  thereof" shall  be  perpetual  wastes
50.32.  I  will  kindle  tire  in  hisc.  it  shall  devour

Ezek.  26. 19.  like  the  c.  that  are  not  inhabited
30. 17.  and  these  c.  shall  go  into  captivity
35.  9.  thy  c.  shall  not  return,  know  that  L  am  Lord
Nos.  8.14. 1  will  send  tire  upon  his  c.  it  shall  devour

11.  6.  the  sword  shall  abide  on  his  c.  and  consume
Amos  4. 8.  two  or  three  c.  wand,  unto  one  for  water
Mic.  5.  11.  and  I  will  cut  off  the  c.  of  thy  land

14.  pluck  up  groves,  so  will  I  destroy  thy  c.

Zeph.  3.  6.  their  c.  are  destroyed,  there  is  no  man
Zech.  1.17.  myc.  by  prosper,  sfiall  yet  spread  a.broad
Mat.  10.  23.  shall  not  have  gone  over  the  c.  of  I  srael

11.  1.  he  departed  to  teach  and  preach  in  their  c.
Acts  26.  11.  I  persecuted  them  even  to  strange  c.

2  Pet.  2. 6.  turning  c.  of  Sodom  and  Gomor.  to  ashes
Jude  7. and  c.  about  them  in  like  manner  an  example
R.ev.  16.19.  and  the  c.  of  the  nations  fell  and  Babylon
All  CITIES.

Num.  21. 25.  and  Israel  took  all  these  c.  and  dweltin
c.  of  Amorites,  Pent.  2.34.  |  3.  4.  Josh.  10.  39.
31.  10.  they  burnt  all  their  c.  Judg.  20.  48.

Num.  35.  7.  all  the  c.  of  the  Levites  shall  be  48  c.
Dent.  20.  15.  thus  do  to  all  c.  afar  off  from  thee
Josh.  11.  12.  all  the  c.  of  the  kings  utterly  destroy.

21.  19.  all  the  c.  of  the  children  of  Aaron  were  13  c.

33.  all  the  c.  of  the  Gershonites  were  13  c.

40.  all  the  c.  of  children  of  Merari  by  lot  12  c.

41.  all  the  c.  of  the  Levites  were  48  c.

1  Sam.  18.  6.  the  women  came  out  of  all  c.  of  Israel

2  Sam. .  12.  31.  thus  did  he  to  all  c.  of  the  Ammon.
24.  7-  they  came  to  all  the  c.  of  the  Hivites

1  Kings  22.  39.  all  c.  Ahab  built  are  written  in  book

2  Chron.  14.  14.  Asa  smote  all  the.  c.  about  Gerar
Neh.  10.  37.  have  tithes  in  all  the  c.  of  our  tillage
Jer.  4.  £6.  all  the  c.  thereof  were  broken  down

33.  12.  in  all  c.  thereof  an  habitation  of  shepherds
Nos.  13.  10.  any  that  may  save  thee  in  all  thy  c.
Acts 8. 40.  preached  in  all  c.  till  he  came  to  Cesarea

Defenced  CITIES.

Isa.  36.1 .  Sennacherib  cometh  against  the  de fenced c.

37.  26.  that  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste  the  defencedc.
Jer.  4.  5.  assemble,  let  us  go  into  the  defenced  c.  8.14.

34.  7.  for  these  defenced  c.  .emained  of  Judah

Fenced  CITIES.

Num.  32.  17.  little  ones  shall  dwell  in  the  fenced c.
Deut.  3.  5.  all  these  c.  were  fenced  with  high  walls
9. 1.  to  possess  c.  fenced  up  to  heaven.  Josh.  14. 12.
Josh.  10.  20.  the  rest  of  them  entered  into  fenced  c.

2  Sant  .  20.  6.  lest  he  get  him  fenced  c.  and  escape  us
2  Chr.  12.  4.  Shishak  took  the  fenced  c.  of  Judah

14.  6.  Asa  built  fenced c.  in  Judah,  land  had  rest

17.  2.  Jehoshaphat  placed  forces  in  the  fenced  c.
19.  5.  set  judges  through  all  the  fenced c.  of  Judah
21.  3.  Jeho  haphat  gave  hissons  fencedc.  in  Judah

Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  impoverish  thy  fenced  c.

Dan.  11.  15.  k.  of  the  north  take  the  most  fenced  c.
Nos.  8. 14.  and  Judah  hath  multiplied  fencedc.
Zeph.  1. 16.  a  day  of  an  alarm  against  the  fenced  c.
CITIES  of  Judah.

2  Sam.  2. 1.  shall  I  go  up  to  any  of  the  c.  of  Judah  ?
2  Kings  23.  5.  that  burnt  incense  in  the  c.  of  Judah
1  Chr'.  6.  57.  to  sons  of  Aaron  they  gave  the  c.  of  J.
2C/ir.l7.7 .  to  teach  in  c.  of  J.  ||  13.  business  in  c.  of  J.
19.  5.  set  judges  in  the  c.  of  Judah,  city  by  city
23.  2.  gather  the  Levites  out  of  all  the  c.  of  Judah
31.  6.  Israel  in  the  c.  of  Judah  brought  tithes
33.  14.  and  put  captains  of  war  in  the  c.  of  Judah
66


Neh.  11.  3.  in  c.  of  Jud.  each  dwelt  in  his  possession
Psal.  69. 35.  God  will  save  Zion,  and  b.  c.  of  Judah
Isa.  40.  9.  say  to  the  c.  of  Judah,  behold  your  God
44. 26.  and  that  saith  to  c.  of  Judah,  ye  shall  be  built
Jer.  1 . 15.  the  families  of  the  north  against  c.  of  Jud.
4.  16.  give  out  their  voice  against  the  c.  of  Judah
7.  17.  seest  thou  not  what  they  do  in  the  c.  of  Jud.

9  11.  1  will  make  c.  of  J.  desolate,  10.  22. 1  34.  22.
11.  12.  then  shall  c.  of  Jud.  go  and  cry  to  the  gods

32.  44.  buy  fields,  and  take  witness  in  the  c.  if  J.

33. 10.  without  man  and  beast,  even  in  the  c.of  J.

13.  in  c.  of  Judah  shall  flocks  pass  under  the  hands
44.  6.  my  fury  and  anger  was  kindled  in  c.  of  Jud.
21.  the  'incense  that  he  burnt  in  the  c.  of  Judah
Lam.  5. 11.  they  ravished  the  maids  in  the  c.  of  Jud.
Zech.  1. 12.  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  on  the  c.  of  J.
CITIES  of  refuge.

Num.  35.  6.  there  shall  be  six  c.  for  refuge,  13, 14.

11 .  ye  shall  appoint  for  you  c.  of  refuge,  Josh.  20. 2.

1  Chr  (j  67.  they  gave  to  sonsof  ho  hath  ot  c.  of  ref.
Six  CITIES.

Num.  35.  6.  six  c.  shall  ye  have  for  refuge,  13, 15.
Josh.  15.  59.  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  six  c.
CITIES  with  Suburbs.

Lev.  25.  34.  the  suburbs  of  their  c.  may  not  be  sold
Num.  35.  2.  shall  give  to  Levites  suburbs  for  the  c.
Josh.  21.  3.  Israel  gave  to  Levites  c.  and  suburbs
41.  the  c.  of  Levites  forty-eight  with  their  suburbs
CITIES  with  Villages.

1  Sam.  6. 18.  of  fenced  c.  and  of  country  villages

1  Chron.  27.  25.  over  store-houses  in  c.  and  villages
Mat.  9. 35.  Jesus  went  about  all  the  c.  and  villages

teaching  and  preaching  the  gospel,  Luke  13.  22.
Mark  6. 56.  whithers.  he  entered  into  villages  or  c.
CITIES  with  waste.

Lev.  26.  31.  and  I  will  make  your  c.  waste,  33.

Isa.  61.  4.  they  shall  repair  the  waste  c.  desolations
Jer.  4.7.  thy  c.  shall  be  laid  zcaste  without  inhabitants
Ezek.  6. 6.  in  all  your  dwellings  your  c.  shall  be  w.
19.  7.  laid  w.  their  c.  ||  35.  4. 1  will  lay  thy  c.  w.

36.  35.  waste  c.  are  become  fenced  and  inhabited

38.  so  shall  the  waste  c.  be  filled  with  Hocks  of  men
Amos  9. 14.  and  they  shall  build  thy  waste  c.

Your  CITIES.

Isa.  1.7.  your  c.  are  burnt  with  fire,  land  desolate
Jer.  40. 10.  and  dwell  in  your  c.  that  ye  have  taken
Amos  4. 6.  have  given  cleanness  of  teeth  in  all  your  c.
CITlZlvN,  S.

Luke  15.  15.  the  prodigal  joined  himself  to  a  c.

19.  14.  his  c.  hated  him,  and  sent  after  him
Acts  21.  39.  I  am  of  Tarsus,  a  c.  of  no  mean  city
Evh.  2. 19.  but  fellow-c.  with  saints  and  household
CLAD.

1'  Kings  11. 29.  J eroboam  c.himself  with  a  new  garm.
Isa.  59. 17.  for  clothing  was  c.  with  zeal  as  a  cloke
CLAMOROUS.

Prov.  9.  19.  a  foolish  woman  is  c.  she  is  simple
CLAMOUR.

Eph.  4.  31.  all  anger  and  c.  be  put  away  from  you
CLAP.

Job  27.  23.  men  shall  c.  hands  at  him,  and  hiss  him
Psal.  47. 1.  c.  your  hands,  all  ye  people,  shout  to  G.
98.  8.  let  floods  c.  their  hands,  let  hills  be  joyful
Isa.  55. 12.  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  c.  their  hands
Lam.  2. 15.  all  that  pass  by  c.  their  hands  at  thee
Nah.  3. 19.  that  bear  fruit  of  thee  shall  c.  their  hands
CLAPPED.

Ezek.  25.  6.  because  thou  hast  c .  thine  hands
CLAPPETH.

Job  34.  37.  he  c.  his  hands  among  us,  multip.  words
CLAPT.

2  Kings  11. 12.  c.  their  hands,  and  said,  God  save

CLAVE.  [king

Gen.  22. 3.  Abraham  c.  the  wood  for  burnt-offering*
Num..  16. 31.  the  ground  c.  asunder  under  them
Judg.  15. 19.  God  c.  an  hollow  place  in  the  jaw

1  Sam.  6. 14.  they  c.  wood  of  the  cart  and  offered
Ps.  78. 15.  he  c.  the  rocks  in  wilderness,  Isa.  48. 21.

CLAVE.

Gen.  34.3.  Shechem  his  soul  c.  to  Dinah,  Jac.  daugh.
Ruth  1. 14.  but  Ruth  c.  to  her  mother-in-law

2  Sam.  20.  2.  the  men  of  Judah  c.  to  their  kins*

23.  10.  he  smote  till  his  hand  c.  to  the  sword

1  Kings  11. 2.  Solomon  c.  to  these  in  love

2  Kings  18. 6.  for  Ilezekiah  c.  to  Lord,  departed  not
Neh.  10.  29.  they  c.  to  their  brethren,  their  nobles
Acts  17. 34.  certain  men  c.  to  Paul  and  believed

CLAWS.

Dent.  14.  6.  beast  thatcleaveth  the  cleft  into  two  c.
Dan.  4.  33.  his  nails  were  grown  like  birds’  c.
Zech.  11. 16.  he  shall  tear  their  c.  in  pieces
CLAY.

Job  4. 19.  much  less  them  that  dwell  in  houses  of  c.
10.  9.  remember  thou  hast  made  me  as  the  c.
13.12.  your  bodies  are  like  to  bodies  of  c.

27.  16.  though  he  prepare  raiment  as  the  c.

33.  6.  I  also  am  formed  out  of  the  c.

38. 14.  it  is  turned  as  c.  to  the  seal,  they  stand
Psal.  40.  2.  he  brought  me  up  out  of  the  miry  c.
Isa.  29. 16.  shall  be  esteemed  as  the  potter's  c.

41. 25.  on  princes,  as  the  potter  treadeth  the  c.

45.  9.  shall  the  c.  say  to  him  that  fashioneth  it  ?

64. 8.  we  are  c.  thou  our  potter,  work  of  thy  hand
Jer.  18.  4.  the  vessel  that  he  made  of  c.  was  marred
6.  as  c .  is  in  the  potter’s  hand,  so  are  ye  in  mine
43.  9.  take  great  stones,  hide  them  in  the  c.

Dan.  2.  33.  his  feet  part  of  iron,  part  of  c.  34,  42.

35.  then  was  the  c.  broken  in  pieces,  45.

41 .  thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes  part  of  potter's  c.
Nah.  3. 14.  go  into  c.  and  tread  the  mortar
I  Jab.  2.  6.  woe  to  him  that  ladeth  himself  with  o.
John  9.  6.  he  spat  on  the  ground,  made  c.  of  spittle,
and  anointed  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man  with  .

15.  he  put  c.  on  mine  eyes,  I  washed,  and  do  see
Rom.  9. 21.  hath  not  the  potter  power  over  the  c.  ?
CLAY-GROUND.

1  Kings'!.  46.  Cast  vessels  in  c.-g.  2  Chron.  4. 17.
CLEAN.

I.ev.  23. 22.  thou  shalt  not  make  c.  riddance  in  field
Josh.  3. 17.  the  peoplepassed  c.  over  Jordan, 4. 1,11.
Psal.  77. 8.  is  his  mercy  c.  gone  for  ever  ?  his  promise
Isa.  24. 19.  the  earth  is  c.  dissolved,  is  moved


Joel  1.7.  he  hath  made  it  c.  bare,  and  cast  it  away
Zech.  11.17.  his  arm  shall  be  c.  dried  up, and  right  eye
2  Pet.  2.  18.  were  c.  escaped  them  that  live  in  error
CLEAN,  Adjective,

Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  free  from  filth,  or
ceremonially  pure,  Lev.  10.  14.  [2]  One  who  is
free  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  by  the  blood  of  Christ,
Psal.  51.  7.  [3]  One  who  is  delivered  from  the

power  of  sin,  by  sanctifying  grace,  John  13.  10.
[4]  That  which  may  be  lawfully  used,  Luke  11.
41.  :[5]  Guiltless,  or  innocent,  Acts  18.  6.  [6}

Cured,  2  Kings  5.  12.  [7]  Empty,  Prov.  14.  4
The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  Psal.  19.  9-  The
holy  law  of  God,  which  works  a  due  fear  of  God,
and  teaches  men  how  to  worship  him,  is  sincere,
not  adulterated  with  any  mixture  of  vanity ,  false¬
hood,  or  vice  ;  not  requiring  or  allowing  any  wicked¬
ness,  but  cleansing  from  it.

Gen.  7. 2.  of  every  c.  beast  thou  shalt  take  by  sevens
8.  20.  Noah  took  of  every  c.  beast  and  c.  fowl

35. 2.  Jacob  said,  be  c.  and  change  your  garments
Lev.  4.  12.  carry  the  bullock  unto  a  c.  place,  6. 11.

7.  19.  the  flesh,  all  that  be  c.  shall  eat  thereof

10. 10.  that  ye  may  put  difference  between  c.  andi
unclean,  11.  47-  1  20.  25.  Ezek.  22.  26.  1  44.  23.

14.  the  wave-breast  eat  in  a  c.  place,  Num.  19.  9.

16.  30.  that  ye  may  be  c.  from  vour  sins  before  L.

22.  4.  he  shall  not  eat  of  holy  things  till  he  be  c.
Num.  19.  12.  purify,  on  seventh  day  he  shall  be  c.

18.  a  c.  person  shall  take  hyssop  and  dip  in  water
Deut.  12. 15.  unclean  and  c.  may  eat  thereof,  15.  22.

1  Sam.  20.  26.  he  is  not  c.  surely  he  is  not  c.

2  Kings  5. 10.  thy  flesh  come  again ,  and  thou  be  c.  14.

12.  may  not  I  wash  in  them  and  be  c.  ?

13.  when  he  saith  to  thee,  wash  and  be  c.

Job  11.  4.  for  thou  hast  said,  1  am  c.  in  thine  eyes
14. 4.  who  can  bring  a  c.  thing  out  of  an  unclean

15.  14.  what  is  man  that  he  should  be  c.?

15.  yea,  the  heavens  are  not  c.  in  his  sight

25.  4.  how  can  he  be  c.  that  is  born  of  a  woman  ?
33.  9. 1  am  c.  without  transgres.  nor  iniquity  in  me
Prov.  16.2.  the  ways  of  a  man  are  c.  in  Ins  own  eyes
Eccl.  9.2.  all  things  come  alike  to  the  c  and  unclean
Isa.  1.  16.  wash  ye,  make  you  c.  put  away  evil
28.  8.  all  tables  full,  so  that  there  is  no  place  c.

30.  24.  oxen  and  young  asses  shall  eat  c.  provender

52. 11.  be  ye  c.  that  bare  the  vessels  of  the  Lord
66. 20.  bring  an  offering  in  a  c.  vessel  to  house  of  L.

Jer.  13.27.  O  Jerusalem,  wilt  thou  not  be  made  c.  ?
Ezek.  36.  25.  then  will  I  sprinkle  c.  water  on  you
Mat.  8.  2.  a  leper  came,  saying,  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,
thou  canst  make  me  c  Mark  1.  40.  Luke  5.  12.
3.  I  will,  be  thou  c.  Mark!.  41.  Luke  5. 13.

23.  25.  for  ye  make  c.  the  outside,  Luke  11.  39.
Luke  11.  41.  behold,  all  things  are  c.  unto  you
John  13.  11.  therefore  said  he,  ye  are  not  all  c.

15. 3.  now  ye  are  c.  thro’  word  I  have  spoken  to  you
Acts  18. 6.  your  blood  be  on  your  own  heads,  1  am  c.
Rev.  19. 8.  she  be  arrayed  in  fine  linen,  c.  white,  14.

CLEAN  hands.

Job  9.  30.  if  I  make  my  hands  ever  so  c.

17.  9.  he  that  hath  c.  hands  shall  be  stronger
Psal.  24.  4.  he  that  hath  c.  hands  and  a  pure  heart

CLEAN  heart.

Psal.  51. 10.  create  in  me  a  c.  heart,  O  God,  renew
73.  1.  God  is  good  to  Isr.  and  such  as  are  of  a  c.  h.
Prov.  20.  9.  who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  c.  7
Is  CLEAN.

Lev.  13.  13.  he  is  c,  17,  37,  39.  ||  40.  yet  is  he  c.  41.
15.  8.  that  hath  the  issue  spit  on  him  that  is  c.

Num,  9.  13.  a  man  that  is  c.  not  on  a  journey,  19. 9
Psal.  19.  9.  fear  of  the  Lord  is  c.  enduring  for  ever
Prov.  14.  4.  where  no  oxen  are,  the  crib  is  c.

John  13.  10.  to  wash  his  feet,  but  is  c.  every  whit
P renounce  CLEAN.

Lev.  13.  C.  the  priest  shall  pronounce  him  c.  14.  7.
Shall  be  CLEAN .

Lev.  11.  36.  a  fountain  wherein  is  water  shall  be  c.
12.  8.  she  c .  15. 28.  |1 13.  58.  it  c.  14.  53.  Num.  31.  23.

14.  9.  he  shall  wash  his  flesh  in  water,  he  shall  be  c.

20. 1  15.  13. 1  17. 15.  I  22.  7-  Num,  19. 12, 19.
Num,  31.  24.  and  ye  shall  be  c.  Ezek.  36.  25.

Psal.  51.  7.  purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  bee.
CLEANNESS.

2  Sam.  22.  21.  according  to  the  c.  of  my  hands  hath
the  Lord  recompensed  me,  Psal.  18.  20.
25.  accordimrto  myc.  in  his  eye  sight,  Psal.  18.  24.
Amos  4.  6.  1  also  have  given  you  c.  of  teeth  in  cities
CLEANSE.

Exod.  29.  36.  thou  shalt  c.  the  altar,  Lev.  16.  19.
Lev.  14.  49.  shalt  take  to  c.  the  house,  two  birds,  52.
Num.  8.  6.  take  the  Levites  and  c.  them
2  Chron.  29. 15.  to  c.  the  house  of  the  Lord,  16.
Neh.  13.  22.  that  the  Levites  should  c.  themselves
Psal.  19.  12.  c.  thou  me  from  secret  faults
51.  2.  wash  me  thoroughly,  and  c.  me  from  my  sin
119.  9.  wherewith  shall  a  young  man  c.  his  way?
Jer.  4.  11.  a  dry  wind  not  to  fan  nor  toe.

33.  8.  1  will  r.  them  from  iniquity,  Ezek.  37.23.
Ezek.  36.  25.  from  all  your  idols  will  I  c.  you

39.  12.  burying,  that  they  may  c.  the  land,  16.

43.  20.  thus  shalt  thou  c.  and  purge  it
45. 18.  take  a  young  bullock,  and* c.  the  sanctuary
Joel  3.  21.  I  will  c.  their  blood  I  have  not  cleansed
Mat.  10.  8.  heal  the  sick,  c.  lepers,  raise  the  dead
23.  26.  c.  first  that  which  is  within  the  cup
2  C’cr.7.1.  let  use.  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh-
Eph.  5.  26.  might  c.  it  with  the  washing  of  water
Jam.  4.  8.  c.  your  hands,  ye  sinners,  purify  hearts-

1  John  1.  9.  to  c.  11s  from  all  unrighteousness

CLEANSED.

Lev.  11.  32.  be  unclean  until  even,  so  shall  it  be  c.
12.  7.  she  shall  be  c.  from  the  issue  of  her  blood
14.  4.  to  take  for  him  that  is  to  be  c.  19,  31.

14.  the  ear  of  him  that  is  to  be  c.  17,  18,  25,  28.
Num.  35.  33.  the  land  cannot  be  c.  ot  the  blood
Josh.  22. 17.  from  which  we  are  not  c.  till  this  day

2  Chron.  29. 18.  we  have  c.  all  the  house  of  the  L.
30.  18.  for  many  had  not  c.  themselves,  yet  did  eat

19.  that  prepareth  his  heart,  though  he  be  not  c.

34.  5.  Josiah  c.  Judah  and  Jerusalem

Neh.  13.  9. 1  commanded,  and  they  c.  the  chambers


CLI


C  LO


CLO


Neb.  13.  30.  thus  I  r .  them  from  all  strangers
Job  35.  3.  what  profit,  if  I  be  c.  from  my  sin  ?
iPsal.  73.  13.  verily  l  have  r.  my  heart  in  vain
Jsa.  3.  +26.  she  being  c.  shall  sit  on  the.  ground
i  Ezek.  22.  24.  thou  art  the  land  that  is  not  c.

44.  26.  after  he  is  c.  reckon  to  him  seven  days
Dan.  8.  14.  then  shall  the  sanctuary  be  c.

Joel  3. 21.  cleanse  their  blood  l  have  not  c.

Mat.  8.  3.  immediately  his  leprosy  was  c.

11.  5.  the  lepers  are  c.  the  deaf  hear,  Luke  7-22.

1  Mark  1.  42.  the  leprosy  departed,  and  he  was  c.

I  JLuke  4.  27-  none  was  c.  save  Naaman  the  Syrian

7.  22.  the  lepers  c.  the  deaf  hear,  the  dead  raised

17.  14.  that  as  the  lepers  went  they  were  c.

17.  were  not  ten  c .  but  where  are  the  nine  ?

Acts  10. 15.  the  voice  spake,  what  G.  hath  c.  11.  9.

GLEAM SETH.

Job  37.  21.  but  the  wind  passeth  and  c.  them
Prov.  20.  30.  blueness  of  a  wound  c.  away  evil
■1  John  1.  7.  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  c.  us  from  all  sin
CLEA  N  SIM  G.

JLev.  13.  7.  hath  been  seen  of  the  priest  for  his  c.
Num.  6.  9.  shave  his  head  in  the  day  of  his  c.

Mark  1.  44.  go  and  offer  for  thy  c.  Luke  5.  14.
CLEAR.

•Gen.  24.  8.  thou  shalt  be  c.  from  this  my  oath,  41.
44.  16.  or  how  shall  we  c.  ourselves  ?

Exod.  34.7.  and  that  will  by  no  means  c.  the  guilty
-.2  Sam.  23. 4.  as  tender  grass,  by  c.  shining  after  rain
Psal.  51.  4.  mightest  be  e.  when  thou  judgest
Eccl.  3.  +  18.  tliat  they  might  c.  God,  and  see
Cant.  6. 10.  fair  as  moon,  c.  as  the  sun,  as  an  army
/fa .18.4.in  my  dwelling-place  like  a  c.  heat  on  herbs
Amos  8.  9.  1  will  darken  the  earth  in  a  c.  day
.Zech.  14.  6.  the  light  shall  not  be  c.  nor  dark
•2  Cor.  7.  11.  ye  have  approved  yourselves  to  be  c.
Rev.  21. 11.  her  light  was  c.  as  crystal,  22. 1.

18.  the  city  was  pure  gold  like  to  c.  glass

CLEARER.

Job  11. 17.  thine  age  shall  be  c.  than  the  noon  day
CLEARING.

iVum.  14.  18.  and  by  no  means  c.  the  guilty
£  Cor.  7.  11.  what  c.  of  yourselves  it  wrought
CLEAR LY.

Job  33.  3.  my  lips  shall  utter  knowledge  c.

Mat.  7.  5.  see  c.  to  pull  out  the  mote,  Luke  6.  42.
Mark  8.  25.  was  restored,  and  saw  every  man  c.
Rom.  1.  20.  things  from  creation  are  c.  seen
CLEARNESS.

•Exod.  24. 10.  and  as  the  body  of  heaven  in  his  c.
CLEAVE.

Dev.  1.  17-  he  shall  c.  it  with  the  wings  thereof
Psal.  74. 15.  thou  didst  c.  the  fountain  and  the  Hood
.Jlab.  3.  9.  thou  didst  c.  the  earth  with  rivers
.Zech.  14.  4.  the  mount  shall  c.  in  the  midst  thereof
CLEAVE,  Verb.

•  Gen.  2. 24.  aman  shall  leave  father  and  mother,  and

shall  c.  to  his  wife,  Mat.  19.  5.  Mark  10.  7.
JDeut.  4.  4.  ye  that  did  c.  to  the  Lord  your  God
10. 20.  him  serve,  to  him  shaltthou  c.  and  swear  by
his  name,  11.22.  1 13.  4.  1  30.  20.  Josh.  22.  5.
13.  17.  shall  c.  nought  of  cursed  thing  to  thy  hand
Josh.  23.  8.  but  c.  to  tire  Lord  your  God
+  if  you  will  c.  to  the  Lord  your  God
2  Kings 5. 27.  the  leprosy  of  N  aaman  shall  c.  to  thee
Job  38.  38.  and  the  clods  c.  fast  together
Psal.  101.  3.  I  hate  the  work,  it  shall  not  c.  to  me
102. 5.  by  my  groaning  my  bones  c.  to  my  skin
137.  6.  let  my  tongue  c.  to  the  roof  of  my 'mouth
Jsa.  14. 1.  they  shall  c.  to  the  house  of  J^ccb
.  Jer.  13. 11.  so  have  I  caused  to  c.  to  me  Israel
42.  + 16.  the  famine  whereof  ye  were  afraid  shall  c.
after  you  in  Egypt,  and  there  ye  shall  die
.Ezek.  3.  26.  1  will  make  thy  tongue  c.  to  the  roof
Dan.  2.  43.  but  they  shall  not  c.  one  to  another
11.  34.  many  shall  c.  to  them  with  flatteries
Acts  11.  23.  with  purpose  of  heart  c.  to  the  Lord

•  Rom.  12.  9.  abhor  evil,  c.  to  that  which  is  good

CLEAVED.

•2  Kings  3.  3.  Jeboram  c.  to  Jeroboam’s  sins
Job  29. 10.  their  tongue  c.  to  the  roof  of  their  mouth
31.  7.  and  if  any  blot  have  c.  to  my  hands
CLEAVEl'H.

Job  19.  20.  my  bone  c.  to  my  skin  and  to  my  flesh
Psal.22.15.  strength  dried  up,  my  tongue  c.  to  jaws
41.  8.  an  evil  disease,  say  they,  c.  fast  to  him
44.  25.  our  soul  bowed  down,  our  belly  c.  to  earth
119.25.  my  soulc.  to  the  dust,  quicken  me
Jer.  13. 11.  as  the  girdle  c.  to  the  loins  of  a  man
Earn.  4.  4.  the  tongue  of  sucking  child  e.  to  the  roof

8.  their  skin  c.  to  their  bones,  it  is  withered
Luke  10. 11.  the  dust  of  your  city  which  c.  on  us

CLEAVEl’H..

•Deui  14.  6.  beast  that  e.  the  cleft  into  two  claws
Job  16. 13.  he  c.  my  reins  asunder,  and  spareth  not
Psal.  141.  7-  when  one  cutteth  and  c.  wood  on  earth
Eccl.  10. 9. that  c.  wood  shall  be  endangered  thereby
CLEFT.

Deut.  14.  6.  thatcleaveth  thee,  into  two  claws
Mic.  1.4.  the  valley  shall  be  c.  as  wax  before  the  fire
CLEFTS.  .

■  Cant.  2.  14.  O  my  dove,  that  art  in  e.  of  the  rocks
Isa.  2.  21 .  to  go  into  the  c.  of  the  rocks  for  fear

■  Jer.  49-  16.  O  thou  thatdwellest  in  the  c.  Chad.  3.
Amos.  6. 11.  he  will  smite  the  little  house  with  c.

CLEMENCY.

Acts  24.  4.  that  thou  hear  us  of  thy  c.  a  few  words

CLERK.

Acts  19.  35.  when  town  c.  had  appeased  the  people
CLIFT,  S.

Exod.  33.  22.  I  will  put  thee  in  a  c.  of  the  rock
'  2  Chron.  20.  16.  they  come  up  by  the  c.  of  Ziz
Job  30.  6.  to  dwell  in  the  c.  of  the  valleys
Jsa.  57.5.  slaying  child,  in  valleys  under  c.  of  rocks
CEIMB,  ED,  ETH.

1  Sam.  14.  13.  Jonathan  c.  up  upon  his  hands
.Jer.  4.  29.  they  shall  c.  up  upon  the  rocks
Joel  2.  7-  they  shall  c.  the  wall  like  men  of  war

9.  they  shall  c.  up  upon  the  houses,  shall  enter
Amos  y.  2.  they  c.  up  to  heaven,  thence  bring  them
jMke  19.  4.  Zaccheus  c.  up  into  a  sycamore  tree
■John  10.  1.  but  c.  up  some  other  way,  is  a  thief


CLIPT.

Jer.  48.  37-  every  head  be  bald,  every  beard  bee.
CLODS.

Job  7.  5.  my  flesh  is  clothed  with  c.  of  dust
21.  33.  the  c.  of  the  valley  shall  be  sweet  to  him
38.  38.  and  the  c.  cleave  fast  together
Jsa.  28.  24.  doth  plowman  break  c.  of  his  ground  ?
Hos.  10.11.  Judah  shall  plow,  Jacob  shall  break  his  c.
Joel  1. 17.  seed  is  rotten  under  their  c.  the  gamers
CLOKE.

Isa.  59. 17.  he  was  clad  with  zeal  as  a  c.

Mat.  5.  40.  if  take  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy  c.  also
Luke  6.  29.  him  that  taketh  thy  c.  forbid  not  to  take
John  15.  22.  now  they  have  no  c.  for  their  sin

1  7 hess.  2.  5.  nor  used  we  a  c.  of  covetousness

2  Tim.  4.  13.  the  c.  I  left  at  Troas  bring  with  thee

1  Pet.  2. 16.  not  using  liberty  for  a  c.  of  malicious.

CLOSE.

Num.  5.  13.  and  it  be  kept  c.  from  her  husband

2  Sam.  22. 46.  be  afraid  out  of  c.  places,  Psal.  18.  45.

1  Chron.  12.  1.  while  David  yet  kept  himself  c.

Job  28.  21.  and  kept  c.  from  the  fowls  of  the  air

41.  15.  his  scales  shut  up  together  as  with  ac.  seal
Jer.  42.  16.  famine  follow  c.  after  you  into  Egypt
Dan.  8. 7.  and  I  saw  him  come  c.  to  the  ram
Amos  9. 11.  and  c.  up  the  breaches  thereof
Luke  9.  36.  they  kept  it  c.  and  told  no  man  in  those
Acts  27.  13.  loosing  thence,  they  sailed  c.  by  Crete
CLOSED.

Gen.  2.  21.  Lord  c.  up  the  flesh  instead  thereof

20.  18.  the  Lord  had  fast  c.  up  all  the  wombs
Num.  16.  33.  the  earth  c.  upon  them,  they  perished
Judg.  3.  22.  and  the  fat  c.  upon  the  blade,  so  that  he
Jsa.  1.  6.  they  have  not  been  c.  nor  bound  up

29.  10.  for  the  Lord  hath  c.  your  eyes
Dan.  12.  9.  for  the  words  are  c.  up  and  sealed
Jonah  2. 5.  the  depth  c.  me  round  about,  weeds  wrapt
Mat.  13.  15.  their  eyes  they  have  c.  Acts  28.  27.
Luke  4.  20.  he  c.  book,  and  gave  it  to  the  minister
CLOSER.  [a  brother

Prov.  18.  24.  there  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  c.  than
CLOSEST.

Jer.  22.  15.  thou  reign,  because  c.  thyself  in  cedar
CLOSET,  S.

Joel  2.  16.  let  the  bride  go  out  of  her  c.

Mae.  6.  6.  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  c.
Luke  12.  3.  what  ye  have  spoken  in  the  ear  in  c.
CLOTH.

Num.  4.  8.  they  shall  spread  on  them  a  c.  ot  scarlet

12.  take  instruments  and  put  them  in  a  c.  of  blue
Deut.  22.  17.  shall  spread  the  c.  before  the  elders

1  Sam.  19.  13.  Michal  covered  the  image  with  a  c.

21.  9.  the  sword  of  Goliath,  it  is  wrapt  in  a  c.

2  Sam.  20. 12.  removed  Amasa,  and  cast  a  c.  on  him
2  Kings  8.  15.  Hazael  took  a  thick  c.  and  dipt  it
Jsa.  30.  22.  shall  cast  them  away  as  a  menstruous  c.
Mat.  9.  16.  putteth  a  piece  of  new  c.  Mark  2.  21.

27.  59.  taken  the  body,  he  wrapped  it  in  a  linen  c.
Mark  14.  51.  having  a  linen  c.  about  his  body

CLO  I  TIE.

Exod.  40.  14.  shalt  bring  his  sons  and  c.  with  coats
Esth.  4.  4.  she  sent  raiment  to  c.  Mordecai
Psal.  132.  16.  I  will  c.  her  priests  with  salvation

18.  his  enemies  will  I  c.  with  shame,  but  on  hims.
Prov.  23.  21.  drowsiness  shall  c.  a  man  with  rags
Jsa.  22.  21.  1  will  c.  him  with  thy  robe  and  strength.

49.  18.  thou  shalt  surely  c.  thee  with  them  all

50.  3.  I  c.  the  heavens  with  blackness,  and  make
Ezek.  26.  16.  shall  c.  themselves  with  trembling

34.  3.  ye  eat  the  fat,  and  c.  you  with  the  wool
Hag.  1.  6.  ye  c.  you,  but  there  is  none  warm
Zech.  3.  4.  I  wilt  c.  thee  with  change  of  raiment
Mat.  6.30.  if  God  so  c.  grass  of  field ,  shall  he  not  much
more  c.  you,  O  ye  of  little  faith?  Luke  12.  28.
CLOTHED.

Gen.  3.  21.  L.  God  made  coats  of  skins  and  c.  them
Lev.  8.  7.  Moses  c.  Aaron  with  robe,  and  put  ephod
Judg.  6.  +  34.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  c.  Gideon

1  Sam.  17.  +  5.  Goliath  was  c.  with  a  coat  of  mail  •
+  38.  Saul  c.  David  with  his  clothes

2  Sam.  1.  24.  weep  over  Saul  who  c.  you  with  scar.

1  Chron.  12.  +  18.  then  the  Spirit  c.  Amasai

21.  16.  David  and  Isr.  who  were  c.  with  sackcloth

2  Chron.  6.  41.  let  thy  priests  be  c.  with  salvation

18.  9.  the  king  of  Isr.  and  Judah  c.  in  robes  sat

24.  +20.  the  Spirit  of  God  c.  Zachariah

28.  15.  spoil  c.  all  that  were  naked  among  them
Esth.  4.  2.  none  enter  king’s  gate  c.  with  sackcloth
Job  7.  5.  my  flesh  is  c.  with  worms  and  clods

10.  11.  thou  haste,  me  with  skin  and  flesh

29.  14.  I  put  on  righteousness  and  it  c.  me
39.  19-  hast  thou  his  neck  with  thunder  ?

Psal.  35.  26.  let  them  be  c.  with  shame,  109.  29.

65.  13.  the  pastures  are  c.  with  flocks,  the  valleys
93.  1.  Lord  is  c.  with  majesty,  Lord  is  c.  with
104.  1.  thou  art  c.  with  honour  and  majesty
109.  18.  as  he  c.  hims.  with  cursing  as  with  garm.
132.  9.  let  thy  priests  be  c.  with  righteousness
Prov.  31.  21.  for  all  her  househ.  are  c.  with  scarlet
Isa.  61. 10.  he  hath  c.  me  with  garments  of  salvation
Ezek-  16.  10.  I  c.  thee  also  with  broidered  work
Dan.  5.  29.  they  c.  Daniel  with  scarlet  and  a  chain
Zeph.  1 . 8.  all  such  as  are  c.  with  strange  apparel
Zech.  3.  3.  Joshua  was  c.  with  filthy  garments
Mat.  11.  8.  a  man  c.  in  soft  raiment,  Luke  7 •  25.

25.  36.  nak.  and  ye  c.  me  ||  43.  nak.  and  ye  c.  me  not
Mark  1.  6.  John  was  c.  with,  camel’s  hair  and  girdle

5.  15.  they  see  him  sitting,  and  c.  J.uke  8.  35.

15.  17.  and  they  c.  Jesus  with  purple,  and  platted
Luke  16. 19.  a  certain  rich  man  c.  in  purple  and  linen
2  Cor.  5.  2.  desiring  to  be  c.  upon  with  our  house
3.  if  so  be  that  being  c.  we  shall  not  be  found  naked
1  Pet.  5.  5.  and  be  c.  with  humility,  G.  resists  proud
Rev.  3.  18.  white  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  c.
10.  1.  I  saw  another  mighty  angel  c.  with  a  cloud
11. 3.  the  two  witnesses  shall  prophesy  c.  in  sacked.
12.  1.  there  appeared  a  woman  c.  with  the  sun

19.  13.  he  was  c.  with  a  vesture  dipt  in  blood

CLOTHED,  with  linen.

Ezek.  9.  2.  one  man  among  them  was  c.  with  linen
44.  17.  they  shall  be  c.  with  linen  garments
Dan.  10.  5.  behold  a  certain  man  c.  with  linen


Dan.  12. 6.  one  said  to  the  man  c.  in  linen,  how  long
Rev.  15. 6.  c.  in  pure  and  white  linen,  18. 16. 1  19.14.

Shall  be  CLOTHED.

Job  8.  22.  they  that  hate  thee  shall  be  c.  with  shame
Ezek.  7.  27.  the  prince  shall  be  c.  with  desolation
Dan.  5. 7.  read  this  writing,  shall  be  c.  with  scarlet
Mat.  6.  31.  or  wherewithal  shall  we  be  c.  ?

Rev.  3. 5.  he  that  overcometh  shall  be  c.  4.  4.
CLOTHES.

Gen.  49.  11.  he  wrashed  hisc.  in  the  blood  of  grapes
Exod.  12.  34.  their  troughs  bound  up  in  their  c.

35. 19.  the  c.  of  service  to  do  service,  39. 1,  41.

JZv.  10.  6.  nor  rend  your  c.  lest  ye  die,  21.  10,

Deut.  29.  5.  your  c.  are  not  waxen  old,  Neh.  9. 21.
Ruth  3.  +  4.  lift  up  the  c.  that  are  at  his  feet

1  Sam.  19.24.  Saul  stript  off  his  c.  and  prophesied

1  Kings  1.1.  covered  k.  David  with  c.  but  no  heat

2  Kings  2.  12.  he  took  hold  of  his  own  c.  and  rent
2  Chron.  34.  27-  thou  didst  rend  thy  c.  and  weep
Neh.  4.  23.  1  nor  brethren,  none  ot  us  put  off  our  c
Job  9.  31.  and  my  own  c.  shall  abhor  me

22.  +  6.  thou  hast  stripped  the  c.  off  the  naked
Prov.  6.27.  take  fire,  and  his  c.  not  be  burnt  ?

Ezek.  16.  39.  shall  strip  thee  also  of  thy  c.  23.  26.
Mat.  24.  18.  nor  let  him  return  back  to  take  his  c.
Markb.  28.  if  I  touch  but  his  c.  I  shall  be  whole

15. 20.  took  off  purple,  and  put  his  own  c.  on  him
Luke  2.  7-  and  wrapped  him  m  swaddling  c.  12.

8.  27.  a  man  that  ware  no  c.  nor  abode  in  any  house

19.  36.  as  he  went  they  spread  their  c.  in  the  way

24. 12.  he  beheld  the  linen  c.  laid,  John  20.  5.

John  11.  44.  came  bound  hand  and  foot  with  grave  c

19. 40.  took  body  of  Jesus,  and  wound  it  in  linen  c.

20.  7.  the  napkin  not  lying  with  the  linen  c.

Acts  7. 58.  witnesses  laid  down  their  c.  at  Saul’s  feet

22. 23.  as  they  cried  out  and  cast  off  their  c.

Rent  CLOTHES.

Gen.  37.  29.  Reuben  ||  34.  Jacob  rent  his  c.

44. 13.  Joseph’s  brethren  rent  their  c.  and  returned
Num.  14.  6.  Joshua  and  Caleb  rent  their  c.

Josh.  7. 6.  Joshua  H  Judg.  11. 35.  Jephthah  rent  his  c.

2  Sam.  3.  31.  rent  your  c.  gird  you  with  sackcloth

1  Kings  21. 27.  Ahab  ||  2  Kings  5.  8.  king;  of  Israel

rent  his  c.  6.  30.

2  Kings  11.  14.  Athaliah  rent  here.  2  Chr.  23.  13.
19. 1.  when  Hezekiah  heard  he  rent  his  c.  Jsa.  37.  1.

Esth.  4. 1.  when  Mordecai  perceived,  he  rent  hisc.
Mat.  26.  65.  high  priest  rent  his  c.  Mark  14.  63.
Acts  14.  14.  apost.  Barnabas  and  Paul  rent  their  c.
16.  22.  and  the  magistrates  rent  off  their  c.

CLOT TIES  rent.

Lev.  13. 45.  the  leper’s  c.  shall  be  rent,  his  head  bare

1  Sam.  4. 12.  a  man  came  to  Shiloh  with  his  c.  rent

2  Sam.  1.  2.  came  a  man  from  Saul  with  his  c.  rent

13.  31.  all  his  servants  stood  with  their  c.  rent

2  Kings  18. 37.  to  Hezekiah  with  c.  rent,  Isa.  36.  22.
Jer.  41.  5.  men  came  to  Mizpeh  with  their  c.  rent
Wash  CLOT  HES.

Exod.  19.  10.  let  them  wash  their  c.  Num.  8.  7.

Lev.  11. 25.  shall  wash  his  c.  40. 1  13. 6.  1  14. 8,  9, 47.

1 15.  5,  8,  11,  22. 1  16.  26,  28.  Num.  19.  10,  19.
Num.  19.  7.  then  the  priest  shall  wash  his  c.  8,  19.
31.  24.  ye  shall  wash  your  c.  on  the  seventh  day
Washed  CLOTHES.

Exod.  19. 14.  and  the  people  washed  their  c.

Num.  8.21.  Levites  purified  and  washed  their  c.

2  Sam.  19.  24.  Mephibosheth  washed  not  his  c.
CLOTH  EST.

Jer.  4.  30.  though  thou  c.  thyself  with  crimson
CLOTHING.

Job  22.  6.  thou  hast  stripped  the  naked  of  their  c.
24.  7.  they  cause  the  naked  to  lodge  without  c.

10.  they  cause  him  to  go  naked  without  c.

31.  19.  if  1  have  seen  any  perish  for  want  of  c.
Psal.  35. 13.  but  as  forme,  my  c.  was  sackcloth
45.  13.  king’s  daughter,  her  c.  is  of  wrought  gold
Prov.  27.  26.  the  lambs  are  for  thy  c.  and  goats
31.  22.  the  virtuous  woman’s  c.  is  silk  and  purple
25.  strength  and  honour  are  her  c.  she  shall  rejoice
Jsa.  3.  6.  saying,  thou  hast  c.  be  thou  our  ruler
7.  for  in  my  house  is  neither  bread  nor  c.

23. 18.  her  merchandise  shall  be  for  durable  c.

59.  17.  he  put  on  the  garments  of  vengeance  fore,
Jer.  10.  9.  blue  and  purple  is  their  c.  are  the  work
Mat.  7.  15.  in  sheep’s  c.  ||  11.8.  that  wear  soft  c.
Mark  12.  38.  the  scribes  that  love  to  go  in  long  c.
Acts  10.  30,  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright  c
James,  2.  3.  respect  to  him  that  weareth  the  gay  c.

CLOUD .

Signifies,  [1]  A  congeries  chiefly  of  watery  par¬
ticles ,  drawn  or  sent  out  of  the  earth  in  vapours,
into  the  middle  region  of  the  air,  2  Sam.  22.  12.
[2]  The  heavens,  Psal.  36.  5.  1 68.  34.  [3]  A
great  number,  Heb.  12.  1.  [4]  A  fog,  or  mist,

Hos.  6.  4.

The  scripture  represents  the  clouds  as  conservato¬
ries  of  water,  or  rain,  which  are  scattered  upon
the  earth  at  God's  command,  Job  26.  8.  He
bindeth  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  clouds.  God
confines  the  waters  in  the  clouds,  as  in  a  bottle  ;
he  scatteis  them  afterwards  upon  the  earth,  as  it
were  through  a  watering-pot.  Job  speaking  of
the  matter  of  the  Chaos,  which  covered  the  whole
earth  at  the  beginning  of  the  world,  says,  that
God  had  hemmed  in  the  sea,  or  the  waters,  as  it
were  with  a  cloud,  and  covered  it  with  darkness,
as  a  child  is  wrapped  up  in  swaddling-clothes.
Job  38.  9.  When  the  sacred  writers  speak  of
the  second  coming  of  Christ,  they  describe  him
to  us  as  descending  upon  the  clouds,  encompassed
with  all  his  majesty.  Mat.  24.  30.  Rev.  1.  7.
’The  prophet  Isaiah,  speaking  of  the  conversion  oj
the  Gentiles,  compares  their  flocking  into  the
church  to  the  flight  or  quick  motion  of  a  cloud  ;
noting  that  they  should  come  in  great  multitudes,
and  with  great  speed  and  eagerness,  Isa.  60.  8.
St.  Peter  compares  seducers  to  clouds  that  are
carried  with  a  tempest,  2  Pet.  2.  17.  By
which  comparison  he  sets  forth  both  the  incon¬
stancy  of  these  seducers,  that,  like  clouds  driven
with  the  wind,  they  are  tossed  to  and  fro  from
one  doctrine  to  another ;  and  likewise  their  de-

67


CLO


C  O  A


COL


ceitfulness,  that  they  make  a  shew  of  what  they
have  not,  as  clouds  do  of  rain,  and  yet  are  scat¬
tered  without  yielding  any.  And  Solomon  com¬
pares  the  infirmities  of  old  age,  whii  h  arise  suc¬
cessively  one  after  another ,  to  clouds  returning
after  rain,  Eccl.  12.  2.  n

When  the  Israelites  departed  cut  of  Egypt,  God
gave  them  a  pillar  of  cloud  to  direct  them  in  their
march.  This  pillar  was  commonly  in  the  front  oj
the  Israelitish  army ;  hut  when  they  were  come
to  the  Red  sea,  and  the  Egyptian  army  appeared
to  them,  the  pillar  of  cloud  which  stood  before  the
camp  of  Israel,  placed  itself  between  that  and
the  camp  of  the  Egyptians ,  so  that  the  Egyptians
could  net  come  near  the  Israelites  all  night,  Exod.

14.  19,  20.  But  in  the  morning  about  break  of
day,  seeing  the  cloud  moving  on  toward  the  sea,
and  following  the  Israelites  who  had  passed
through  its  channel,  which  zcas  left  dry  for  them
in  the  night  time,  the  Egyptians  resolved  upon
pursuing  them,  and  were  all  covered  with  the
waters  of  the  Red  sea,  which  returned  upon  them
and  destroyed  them.  This  cloud  continued  always
from  that  time  to  attend  the  Israelites  in  the  wil¬
derness.  It  was  clear  and  bright  during  the  night,
in  order  to  give  them  light  when  it  grezo  dark ;
and  in  the  day-time  it  Was  thick  and  gloomy,  the
better  to  defend  them  from  the  excessive  heats  of
the  Arabian  deserts,  through  which  they  performed
their  journey.

The  same  cloud  by  its  motions  gave  likewise  the
signal  to  the  Israelites,  either  to  encamp  or  to  de¬
camp  ;  so  that  where  that  stayed,  the  people  stayed
till  it  rose  again  ;  then  they  broke  up  their  camp,
and  followed  it  till  it  stopped.  It  Was  called  a
Pillar,  by  reason  of  its  form,  which  was  high  and
elevated,  as  it  were  a  pile  and  heap  of  fogs.  This
cloud  not  only  enlightened  the  Israelites,  but  also
protected  them,  and  was  a  continual  pledge  of
God's  presence,  power,  and  protection.  To  this  the
prophet  Isaiah  alludes,  when  he  says,  I'he  Lord
will  create  upon  every  dwelling-place  of  mount
Zion,  and  upon  her  assemblies,  a  cloud  and
smoke  by  day,  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire
by  night,  Isa.  4.  5.  that  is,  That  God  would  be  the
director ,  protector ,  and  glory,  of  his  church.

Gen.  9. 13.  I  do  set  my  bow  in  the  c.  for  a  token
14.  that  the  bow  shall  be  seen  in  the  c.  16.

Exod.  14.  20.  it  was  a  c.  and  darkness  to  them
16.  10.  behold,  the  glory  of  the  L.  appeared  in  the  c.
19.  9.  Lord  said,  id,  I  come  unto  thee  in  a  thick  c.
24. 15.  Moses  went  up,  and  a  c.  covered  the  mount
16.  and  the  c.  covered  it  six  days,  and  seventh  day
God  called  to  Moses  out  of  the  midst  of  the  c.
18.  Moses  went  into  the  midst  of  the  c.

34.  5.  the  Lord  descended  in  the  c.  Num.  11.  25.
40.  34.  a  c.  covered  the  tent  of  the  congregation
38.  the  c.  of  Lord  was  on  the  tabernacle  by  day
Lev.  16.  2.  1  will  appear  in  the  c,  on  mercy-seat
Num  9. 19.  when  the  c.  tarried  long  on  tabernacle

10.  34.  the  c.  of  the  Lord  was  upon  them  by  day

1  Kings  8. 10.  priests  came  out  of  holy  place,  the  c.

filled  house  of  Lord,  2  Chron.  5. 13.  Ezek.  10.  4.
18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  little  c.  like  a  man’s. hand
Job  3.  5.  that  day  be  darkness,  let  a  c.  dwell  upon  it
22.  13.  how  Goa  know  ?  can  he  judge  thro’  dark  c.  ?
30.  15.  and  my  welfare  passeth  away  as  a  c.

38.  9.  when  l  made  the  c.  the  garment  thereof
Psal.  78.  14.  in  the  day-time  he  led  them  with  a  c.
105.  39.  he  spread  a  c.  for  a  covering,  and  fire  to
Prov.  16. 15.  his  favour  is  as  a  c.  of  the  latter  rain
Isa.  4.  5.  Lord  will  create  on  her  assemblies  a  c.

18.  4.  like  a  sea  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  harvest

19.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  rideth  upon  a  swift  c.

44. 22.  I  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  c.  thy  transgres¬
sions, and  asac.  thysins,  return,  I  haveredeem.thee
60.  8.  who  are  these  that  flee  as  a  c.  as  the  doves  t
Lam.  2.  1.  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion  with  a  c.

3.  44.  thou  hast  covered  thyself  with  a  c.

Ezek.  1,4.  a  great  c.  and  afire  infolding  itself
28.  as  the  appearance  of  the  bow  that  is  in  the  c.

8.  11.  and  a  thick  c.  of  incense  went  up
10  4.  and  the  house  was  filled  with  the  c.

30. 18.  as  for  her,  a  c.  shall  cover  her,  her  daughters
32.  7.  I  will  cover  the  sun  with  a  c.  and  the  moon
38.  9.  thou  shalt  be  like  a  c.  to  cover  the  land,  16.
Mat.  17.  5.  c.  overshadowed,  Mark  9:  7-  Luke  9. 34.

behold,  a  voice  out  of  the  c.  said,  Luke  9.  35.
Luke  12.  54.  when  ye  see  a  c.  rise  out  of  the  west
21.  27.  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in  a  c.
Acts  1.  9.  a  c.  received  him  out  of  their  sight

1  Cor.  10.  1.  all  our  fathers  were  under  the  c.

2.  and  were  all  baptized  to  Moses  in  the  c.

Rev.  10.  1.  a  mighty  angel  came  clothed  with  a  c.

11.  12.  they  ascended  up  to  heaven  in  a  c.

14.  14.  white  c.  and  upon  the  c.  one  sat,  15, 16.
CLOUD  abode.

Exod.  40.  35.  because  the  c.  abode  thereon
Num.  9. 17.  where  r.  abode  there  pitched  their  tents
18.  as  long  as  c.  abode  they  rested  in  the  tents
Morning  CLOUD.

Hos.  6.  4.  for  your  goodness  is  as  a  morning  c.

13.  3.  they  shall  be  as  the  morning  c.  and  early  dew

Pillar  of  C  LOUD.

Exod.  13. 21.  went  before  them  by  day  in  a  p.  of  c.
22.  he  took  not  away  the  p.  of  c.  by  day,  nor  fire

14.  24.  Lord  looked  on  Egyptians  thro’  pillar  of  c.
Num.  12. 5.  L.  came  down  in  pillar  if  c.  and  stood
Dent.  31 .  15.  L.  appeared  in p.  of  c.  and  p.  of  c.  stood
Neh.  9. 19.  the  pillar  1  f  c.  departed  not  from  them

CLOUD  taken  up.

Exod.  40.  36.  when  the  c.  was  taken  up,  Num.  9. 17.
3  .  if  the  c.  w>ere  not  taken  up,  they  journeyed  not
Num.  9.  17*  c-  was  taken  up  from  tabernacle,  10. 11 .
White  CLOUD.

Rev.  14.  14.  behold  a  white  c.  and  on  the  c.  one  sat
CLOUD  of  witnesses.

Neb.  12. 1.  we  are  compassed  with  so  great  a  c.  of  w.
CLOUDS.

Deut.  4.  11.  with  darkness,  c.  and  thick  darkness
.lvdg.  5.  4.  heavens  dropped,  c.  also  dropped  water

2  Sam.  22. 12.  about  him  thick  c.  of  the  skies

68


2  Sam.  23.  4.  he  shall  be  as  a  morning  without  c.

1  Kings  18.  45.  the  heaven  was  black  with  c.

Job  20.  6.  though  his  head  reach  to  the  c.

22.  14.  thick  c.  are  a  covering  that  he  seeth  not
26.  8.  he  bindeth  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  c.

36.  29.  can  any  understand  the  spreadings  of  the  c.  ?

37.  16.  knowestthou  the  balancings  of  the  c.  t

38.  37.  who  can  number  thee,  in  wisdom?

Psal.  36.  5.  thy  faithfulness  reacheth  to  the  c.

57.  10.  and  thy  truth  reacheth  to  the  c.  108.  4.

68.  31.  and  his  strength  is  in  the  c.

77.  17.  c.  poured  out  water,  skies  sent  out  a  sound

78.  23.  tho'  he  had  commanded  the  c.  frpm  above
97.  2.  c.  and  darkness  are  round  about  him

104.  3.  c.  his  chariot  ||  147-8.  covers  heaven  with  c.
Prov.  3.  20.  and  the  c.  dropped  down  the  dew
8.  28.  when  he  established  the  c.  above

25.  14.  is  like  c.  and  wind  without  rain
Eccl.  11.  4.  he  that  regardeth  the  c.  shall  not  reap

12.  2.  nor  the  c.  return  after  the  rain
Isa.  5.  6.  1  will  command  the  c.  that  they  rain  not
14.  14.  I  will  ascend  above  the  height  ot  the  c.  _
Jer.  4. 13.  behold  he  shall  come  up  as  c.  and  chariots
Dan.  7.  13.  Son  of  Man  come  with  the  c.  of  heaven
Joel  2.  2.  a  day  of  c.  and  darkness,  Zeph.  1. 15.

Nah.  1.  3.  and  the  c.  are  the  dust  of  his  feet
Zech.  10.  1.  so  the  Lord  shall  make  bright  c.

Mat.  24. 30.  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in
the  c.  with  power,  26.  6-1.  Mark  13.  26.  I  14.  62.

1  Thess.  4. 17.  shall  be  caught  up  with  them  in  c.

2  Pet.  2. 17.  they  are  c.  carried  with  a  tempest
Jude  12.  c.  they  are  without  water,  carried  about
RevA.I.  behold  he  comcth  with  c.every  eye  shall  see

CLOUDY.

Exod.  33.9.  the  c. pillar  descended,  and  stood  atdoor
10.  all  the  people  saw  the  c.  pillar  stand  at  door
Neh.  9.  12.  tnou  leddest  them  in  the  day  by  c.  pillar
Psal.  99.  7.  he  spake  to  them  in  the  c.  pillar
Ezek.  30.  3.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  a  c.  day
34.  12.  they  have  been  scattered  in  the  c.  day
CLOVEN.

Lev.  11.  3.  whatsoever  is  c.-footed  that  shall  ye  eat
7.  tho’  the  swine  be  c.-footed  he  is  unclean

26.  notc.-footed  are  unclean  to  you,  Deut.  14.  7-
Acts  2.  3.  there  appeared  to  them  c.  tongues

CLOUTED.

Josh.  9. 5.  they  took  old  shoes  and  c.  on  their  feet
CLOUTS.

Jer.  38. 11.  Ebed-melech  took  old  cast  c.  and  rags
12.  put  these  old  cast  c.  under  thine  arm-holes
CLUSTER.

Num.  13.  23.  cut  from  Eshcol  a  branch  with  one  c.
Cant.  1.  14.  my  beloved  is  as  a  c.  of  camphire
Isa.  65. 8.  as  new  wine  is  found  in  the  c.  so  will  I  do
Mic.  7. 1.  woe  is  me,  there  is  no  c.  to  eat
CLUSTERS.

Gen.  40.  10.  the  c.  thereof  brought  forth  ripe  grapes
Deut.  32. 32.  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall,  their  c.  bitter

1  Sam.  25. 18.  Abigail  brought  100  c.  of  raisins
30. 12.  they  gave  the  Egyptian  two  c.  of  raisins

Cant.  7.  7.  thy  breasts  like  two  c.  of  grapes,  8.

Rev.  14.  18.  gather  the  c.  of  the  vine  of  the  earth
COAL.

2  Sam.  14. 7.  so  shall  quench  my  c.  which  is  left
Isa.  6.  6.  seraphim  having  a  live  c .  in  his  hand

47.  14.  there  shall  not  be  a  c.  to  warm  at
Lam.  4.  8.  their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  c.
t:OALS.

Lev.  16.  12.  he  shall  take  a  censer  full  of  burning  c.
Deut.  32.  +  24.  shall  be  devoured  with  burning  c.

1  Kings  19.  6.  a  cake  baken  on  the  c.  and  a  cruse
Job  41.  21.  his  breath  kindleth  c.  and  a  flame  goeth
Psal.  18.8.  there  went  fire,  c.  were  kindled  by  it
12.  thick  clouds  passed,  hail  stones  and  r.  of  fire
120.  4.  sharp  arrows  of  mighty  with  c.  of  juniper
140.  10.  let  burning  c.  fall  on  them,  let  them  *
Prov.  6.  28.  can  one  goon  hot  c.  and  not  be  burnt  ?
25.  22.  thou  shalt  heap  r.  of  fire,  Rom.  12.  20.

•  26.  21.  as  c.  are  to  burning  c.  and  wood  to  fire
Cant.  8.6.  the  c.  thereof  are  c.  of  fire,  which  hath
Isa.  44.  12.  the  smith  with  tongs  worketh  in  the  c.
19.  I  have  baked  bread  upon  the  c.  thereof
54.  16.  1  created  the  smith  that  bloweth  the  c.
Ezek.  1.  13.  their  appearance  was  like  burning  c.

10.  2.  go  in  and  fill  thine  hand  with  c.  of  fire
24. 11.  then  set  it  empty  on  the  c.  thereof
Hab.  3.  5.  burning  c.  went  forth  at  his  feet
John  18.  18.  the  servants  who  had  made  a  fire  of  c.
21.  9.  they  saw  a  fire  of  c.  and  fish  laid  thereon
COAST.

Exod.  10.  4.  I  will  bring  the  locusts  into  thy  c.
Num.  24.  24.  ships  shall  come  from  c.  of  Chittim
Deut.  11.24.  to  the  uttermost  sea  shall  your  c.  be
19.  8.  if  the  T.ord  thy  God  enlarge  thy  c.

Josh.  1.  4.  going  down  of  the  sun  shall  be  your  c.

18.  5.  Judah  shall  abide  in  their  c.  on  the  south
Judg.  11.  20.  Sihon  trusted  not  Israel  to  pass  his  c.

1  Sam.  6.  9.  if  it  go  up  by  the  way  of  his  own  c.

7.  13.  they  came  no  more  into  the  c.  of  Israel
17.  + 1.  the  Philistines  pitched  in  c.  of  Dammim

27.  1.  to  seek  me  any  more  in  anyc.  of  Israel
30. 14.  we  made  an  invasion  on  the  c.  of  Judah

2  Kings  14.25.  Jeroboam  restored  the  c.  of  Israel

1  Chron.  4. 10.  wouldest  bless  me,  and  enlarge  my  c.
Zeph.  2.  7.  the  c.  shall  be  forthe  remnant  of  Judah
Sea  COAST.

Ezek.  25. 16. 1  will  destroy  the  remnant  of  the  sea  c.
Zeph.  2.  5.  woe  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea  c.

6.  the  sea  c.  shall  be  dwellings  for  the  shepherds
Mat .4. 13.  J esus  dwelt  in  Capernaum  u  pon  the  sea  c.
Luke  6.  17.  multitude  from  sea  c.  came  to  hear
South  COAST.

Josh.  15.  1.  Zin  the  uttermost  part  of  the  south  c.

4.  were  at  the  sea,  this  shall  he  your  south  c.

18. 19.  at  south  end  of  Jordan  ;  this  was  the  south  c.
COASTS.

Exod.  10. 14.  the  locusts  rested  in  all  the  c.  of  Egypt
19.  remained  not  one  locust  in  all  the  c.  of  Egypt
Dent.  2.  4.  to  pass  through  the  c.  of  your  brethren
16.  4.  no  leavened  bread  be  seen  in  all  thy  c.

19.  3.  thou  shalt  divide  the  c.  of  thy  land

Josh.  18.  5.  Joseph  shall  abide  in  their  c.  on  north


Judy.  18.  2.  Dan  sent  five  men  from  their  c.

19.  29.  sent  his  concubine  into  all  the  c.  of  Israel

1  Sam.  7. 14.  the  c.  thereof  did  Israel  deliver  out  of
11.  3.  may  send  messengers  into  all  c.  of  Israel,  7.

2  Sam.  21.  5.  be  destroyed  from  the  c.  of  Israel

1  Chron.  21. 12.  angel  or  Lord  destroying  thro’  all  c.

2  Chron.  11.  13.  resorted  to  him  out  of  all  their  c.
Psal.  105.  31.  there  came  lice  in  all  their  c.

33.  he  smote  their  vines,  and  brake  trees  of  their  c .
Jer.  25.  32.  a  great  whirlwind  be  raised  from  the  c.
Ezek.  33.  2.  it  the  people  take  a  man  of  their  c.

Joel  3.  4.  what  to  do  with  me,  all  c.  of  Palestine  ?
Mat.  2. 16.  Herod  sent  and  slew  children  in  all  the  c.
8.  34.  he  would  depart  out  of  their  c.  Mark  5. 17.

15.  21.  then  Jesus  depart,  into  c.  of  Tyre  and  Sidon
Mark 7.  31.  departing  from  thee,  of  lyre  and  Sidon
Acts  13.  50.  expelled  Paul  and  Barnabas  out  of  c.

COAT.

Gen.  37.  3.  Jacob  made  Joseph  a  c.  of  many  colours
32.  they  sent  the  c.  of  many  colours,  and  said,ttii3
have  we  found,  know  whether  it  be  thy  son’s  c.
£rorf.28.4.make  for  Aaron  a  robe  and  broidered  c.

29.  5.  and  thou  shalt  put  upon  Aaron  the  c.

Lev.  8. 7.  he  put  upon  him  the  c.  and  girded  him

16.  4.  he  shall  put  on  the  holy  linen  c.

1  Sam.  2. 19.  his  mother  made  Samuel  a  little  c.

17.  5.  Goliath  was  armed  with  a  c.  of  mail,  38.

2  Sam.  15.  32.  Ilushai  met  David  with  his  c.  rent
Job  30. 18.  it  bindeth  me  about  as  collar  of  my  c.
Cant.  5.3.1  have  put  off  my  c.  how  shall  1  put  it  on3
Mat.  5. 40.  if  any  sue  thee,  and  take  away  thy  c.
Luke  6.  29.  thy  cloke,  forbid  not  to  take  thy  c.  also
John  19. 23.  now  the  c.  was  without  seam,  woven

21. 7.  Peter  girt  his  fisher’s  c.  unto  him,  cast  hims.
COATS.

Gen.  3. 21.  God  made  c.  of  skins,  and  clothed  them
Exod.  28. 40.  for  Aaron’s  sons  thou  shalt  make  c.

29.  8.  bring  his  sons,  and  put  c.  on  them,  40. 14,
Lev,  8.  13.  Moses  put  c.  upon  Aaron’s  sons
10.  5.  they  carried  them,-in  their  c.  out  of  the  camp
Dan.  3.  21.  then  these  men  were  bound  in  their  c.

27.  nor  were  their  c.  changed,  nor  smell  of  fire
Mat.  10. 10.  neither  provide  two  c.  nor  shoes,  nor
Mark  6.  9.  shod  with  sandals,  and  put  not  on  two  c.
Luke  3. 11.  he  that  hath  two  c.  let  him  impart  to  him
Acts  9. 39.  shewing  the  c.  which  Dorcas  made
COCKLE.

Job  31.  40.  and  let  c.  grow  instead  of  barley
COCKATRICE,  S.

Prov.  23. +  32.  at  last  itstingeth  like  a  c.

Isa.  11. 8.  weaned  child  put  his  hand  on  the  c.  den
14. 29.  out  of  serpent’s  root  shall  come  forth  a  c.

59. 5.  they  hatch  c.  eggs,  weave  the  spider’s  web
Jer.  8. 17.  I  will  send  serpents,  c.  among  you
COCK.

Mat.  26.  34.  this  night  before  c.  crow,  thou  shalt
deny  me  thrice,  75.  Mark  14.  30,  72.  Luke  22.
34,  61.

74.  immediately  c.  crew,  Luke  22. 60.  John  18. 2“.
Mark  13.  35.  if  the  master  cometh  ate.  crowing
14. 68.  he  went  out  into  porch,  and  the  c.  crew,  72.
John  13. 38.  verily,  verily,  I  say  to  thee,  the  c.  shall
not  crow  till  thou  hast  denied  me  thrice
COFFER.

1  Sam.  6. 8.  and  put  the  jewels  of  gold  in  a  c.

11.  they  laid  ark  and  c.  with  mice  of  gold  on  cart
15.  the  Levites  took  down  the  c.  with  the  ark
Ezra  6. 1 2.  there  was  found  in  a  c.  a  roll
COFFIN.

Gen.  50. 26.  Joseph  was  put  in  a  c.  in  Egypt
Luke  7.  + 14.  he  came  and  touched  the  c.  and  said
COGITATIONS.

Dan.  7.  28.  as  for  me^yny  c.  much  troubled  me

Gen.  8.  22.  c.  and  heat,  day  and  night  shall  not  ceas«
Job  24. 7.  the  naked  have  no  covering  in  the  c.

37.  9.  and  c.  cometh  out  of  the  north
Psal.  147. 17.  who  can  stand  before  his  c.  ?

Prov.  20.4.  the  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reason  of  c.
25. 13.  as  the  c.  of  snow  in  the  time  of  harvest,  so  is
20.  that  taketh  away  a  garment  in  c.  weather
25.  as  c.  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  news
Jer.  18. 14.  shall  the  c.  flowing  waters  be  forsaken  3
Nah.  3. 17.  which  camp  in  the  hedges  in  the  c.  day
Mat.  10.  42.  give  to  little  ones  a  cup  of  c.  water
24. 12.  iniquity  abound,  love  of  many  shall  wax  e.
John  18. 18.  servants  had  made  a  fire,  For  it  was  c.
Acts  28.  2.  they  received  us,  because  of  the  c.

2  Cor.  11.  27.  in  fastings  often,  in  c.  and  nakedne  s
Rev.  3. 15.  that  thou  art  neither  c.  nor  hot,  16.

COLLAR,  S.

Judg.  8.  26.  golden  ear-rings  from  Midian,  beside  c.
Job  30. 18.  my  disease  bindeth  me  as  c.  of  my  coat
COLLECTION.

2  Chron.  24. 6.  to  bring  in  out  of  Judah  the  c.  9.

1  Cor.  16. 1.  now  concerning  the  c.  for  the  saints

COLLEGE.

2  Kings  22. 14.  Huldah  dwelt  in  c.  2  Chron.  34. 22.

COLLOPS.

Job  15.  27.  because  he  maketh  c.  of  fat  on  his  flanks
COLONY.

Acts  16. 12.  Philippi,  chief  city  of  Macedonia,  and  c.
COLOUR.

Lev.  13.  55.  it  the  plague  have  not  changed  his  c.
Num.  11.  7.  the  c.  thereof  as  the  c.  of  bdellium
Esth.  1.  +  6.  alabaster  and  stone  of  blue  c.

Prov.  23.  31.  when  the  wine  giveth  his  c.  in  the  cup
Ezek.  1.4.  out  of  the  midst  thereof  as  the  c.  of  amber
7 .  sparkled  like  c.  of  burnished  brass,  Dan.  10.6.

1. 16.  the  wheels  like  untoc.  of  a  beryl,  10. 9.

22.  the  firmament  was  as  the  e.  of  the  crystal
Rev.  17.  4.  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and  scar-
CO  LOURED.  [letc.

Rev.  17. 3.  1  saw  a  woman  sit  on  a  scarlet  c.  beast
COLOURS.

Gen.  37  .3.  Jacob  made  a  coat  of  many  c.  for  Joseph
Judg.  5.  30.  to  Sisera  a  prey  of  divers  c.  meet  for
2  Sam.  13. 18.  Tamar  had  a  garment  of  divers  c
1  Chron.  29. 2. 1  have  prepared  stones  of  divers  c.
Isa.  54. 11.  1  will  lav  thy  stones  with  fair  c.

Ezek.  16. 16.  deckedst  thy  high  places  with  divers  e.
17.  3.  an  eagle  with  divers  c.  came  to  Lebanon


COM


COM


COM


COLOUR.

Acts  27  TO  under  c.  as  tho'  they  would  cast  anchor
COLT,  S.

Gen.  32.  15.  thirty  milch  camels  with  their  c,  forty
49.  11.  binding  his  ass’s  c.  to  the  choice  vine
Judg.  10.  4.  lair  had  30  sons  that  rode  on  30  ass’s  c.
12. 14.  Abdon'ssons  and  nephews  rode  on  70  ass’s  c.
Job  11.  12.  though  man  be  born  like  a  wild  ass's  c.
Zech.  9.  9.  riding  upon  a  c.  Mat.  21.  5.  J>-hn  12. 15.
Mat. 21. 2.. lesus  sent  two  disciples, say  ing.go.yeshall
find  ass  tied,  c.  with  her,  Mark\\.2.  Luke  19.30.
7.  brought  ass  and  c.  and  set  thereon,  Maik  11. 7.
Mark  11.5.  wrhat  do  you  loosing  the  c.  ?  Luke  19. 33.
Luke  19.  35.  cast  garm.  on  c.  and  set  Jesus  thereon
COME


Signifies,  [1]  To  draw  nigh,  or  approach,  Exod.
34.  3.  [2]  To  proceed  from,  1  Chron.  29.  14.
[3]  To  befall,  Ezra  9-  13.  Job  4.  5.  [4]  To
believe ,  John  5.  40.  |  0.  37.  [5]  To  attain  to.
Acts  26.  7.  [6]  To  join  with.  Proverbs  1.  11.

117]  To  touch,  Ezek.  44.  25.  LB]  To  be  married
to,  Dan.  11.  6.  [9]  To  lie  carnally  icith,  Gen.
38.  16.  [10]  To  invade,  Gen.  34.  25.  [11]  To
arise,  Num.  24.  7-

Gen.  6.  20.  two  of  every  sort  shall  c.  to  keep  alive

17.  1.  c.  thou,  and  all  thy  house  into  the  ark
8.  +  9.  he  caused  her  to  c.  to  him  into  the  ark

19.  32.  c.  let  us  make  our  father  drink  wine

26.  27.  wherefore  c.  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate  me  ?

31. 44.  c.  let  us  make  a  covenant,  I  and  thou

37. 10.  c.  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast  into  some  pit
41.  +  21.  when  they  had  c.  to  inward  parts  of  them
42.  7.  he  said  to  them,  whence  c.  ye  ?  Josh.  9.  8.

145.  19.  take  waggons,  bring  your  father  and  c.

49. 10.  sceptre  not  depart  from  Judah  till  Shiloh  c.
Exod.  19.  9-  lo,  I  c.  to  thee  in  a  thick  cloud

1  20.  24.  where  1  record  my  name  I  will  c.  and  bless

23.  27.  destroy  all  peoplt  to  whom  thou  shalt  c.
Num.  10.  29.  c.  thou  with  us,  we  will  do  thee  good
22.  6.  c.  I  pray  thee,  curse  me  this  people,  11.

24. 19.  out  of  Jacob  shall  c.  he  that  shall  have  domi
nion,  and  shall  destroy  him  that  remaineth  of  city
Deut.  18.  6.  if  a  T.evite  c.  and  c.  with  desire  of  mind
28.  2.  all  these  blessings  shall  c.  on  thee,  overtake

l5.  all  these  curses  c.  on  thee,  overtake  thee,  45.
Judg.  1.3.  5.  no  razor  c.  on  his  head,  1  Ham.  1. 11.

1  Sam.  2.  34.  that  shall  r.  on  thy  two  sons  in  one  da3r
9-  13.  for  the  people  will  not  eat  till  he  c.  because
10.  8.  seven  days  thou  shalt  tarry,  till  I  c.  to  thee
17.  45.  but  I  c.  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord

20.  21.  then  c.  thou,  for  there  is  peace  to  thee
2  Sam.  6.  9.  how  shall  the  ark  of  the  Lord  c.  to  me  ?
15. 1 2.  when  any  c.  to  the  kins'  for  judgment
17.2.  I  will  c.  on  him  while  he  is  weary  and  weak

(19.  33.  c.  thou  over  with  me  and  1  wifi  feed  thee
1  Kings  8.  31.  and  the  oath  c.  before  thine  altar
20.  33.  observe,  if  any  thing  would  c.  from  him
22.  27.  feed  this  fellow  until  1  c.  in  peace
2  Kings  5.  8.  let  him  c.  now  to  me,  he  shall  know
6.  + 19.  this  is  not  the  way,  c.  ye  after  me

18.  32.  till  1  c.  and  take  you  away,  Isa.  36.  17.

1  Chron.  29.  12.  both  riches  and  honour  c.  of  thee

14.  all  things  c.  of  thee,  and  of  thine  have  we
2  Chron.  8.  11.  holy,  whereto  the  ark  of  Lord  hath  c.
Esth.  1. 12.  queen  Vashti  refused  to  c.  at  king’s  com.
5.  +  10.  Daman  caused  his  friends  to  c.

8.  6.  how  endure  to  see  evil  c.  to  my  people  ?

Job  3.  7-  let  no  joyful  voice  c.  therein

13.  13.  that  I  may  speak,  let  c.  on  me  what  will

14.  14.  all  my  time  will  1  wait  till  my  change  c.

21.  his  sons  c.  to  honour,  and  he  knoweth  it  not
37.  13.  he  caused  it  to  c.  for  correction  on  land
38.  11.  hitherto  shalt  thou  c.  but  no  further
Psal.  40.  7.  then  said  T,  lo,  I  c.  Heb.  10.  7,  9.

42.  2.  when  shall  1  c.  and  appear  before  God?

50.  3.  our  God  shall  c.  and  not  keep  silence
65.  2.  that  hearest  prayer,  uirto  thee  shall  all  flesh  c.
80.  2.  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  c .  and  save  us
86.  9.  all  nations  shall  c.  and  worship  thee
90.  + 12.  we  may  cause  our  heart  to  c.  to  wisdom
101. 2.  O  when  wilt  thou  c.  unto  me,  I  will  walk
109.  17.  as  he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  c.  unto  him
119.  41.  let  thy  mercies  c.  unto  me,  O  Lord,  77.
Prop.  6.  11.  so  shall  thy  poverty  c.  as  one,  24.  34.
10.  24.  the  fear  of  the  wicked  shall  c.  upon  him
26.  2.  so  the  curse  causeless  shall  not  c.

Eccl.  9.  2.  all  things  c.  alike  to  all,  there  is  one  event
Cant.  2.  10.  rise  up,  my  love,  and  c.  away,  13.

4. 8.  c.  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my  spouse,  with  me

16.  and  c.  thou  south,  blow  upon  my  garden
Isa.  5. 19.  let  the  counsel  of  the  holy-  One  of  Israel  c.
13.  5.  they  c.  from  a  far  country,  even  the  Lord
6.  the  day  of  the  Lord,  it  shall  c.  as  destruction
21.  12.  if  ye  will  inquire,  inquire  ye  ;  return,  c.
26.  20.  c.  my  people,  enter  into  thy  chambers

27.  6.  cause  them  that*-,  of  Jacob  to  take  root
35.  4.  your  God  will  c.  with  vengeance,  he  will  c.
40.  10.  the  Lord  will  c.  with  a  strong  hand
41.  25.  I  have  raised  up  one,  and  he  shall  c.

44.  7*  I  appointed  things  coming,  and  shall  c.

45.  20.  assemble  yourselves,  and  c.  draw  near
24.  even  to  him  shall  men  c.  and  all  that  are
51.  11.  the  redeemed  shall  c.  with  singing  to  Zion
55.  1.  c.  ye  to  the  wraters,  c.  ye,  buy,  r.  buy  wine
3.  c.  unto  me,  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live
59.  20.  and  the  Redeemer  shall  c.  to  Zion
60.  3.  and  the  Gentiles  shall  c.  to  thy  light,  5.

66.  15.  behold,  Lord  will  c.  with  fire  and  chariots
Jer.  2.  31.  why,  say  they,  we  will  c.  no  more  to  thee
3.  22.  behold,  we  c.  to  thee,  for  thou  art  our  God
9.  if.  call  the  mourning  women,  that  they  may  c.
13.  22.  wherefore  c.  these  things  upon  me  ?

17.  15.  where  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  ?  let  it  c.

27.  7.  shall  serve  him  till  the  very  time  of  his  land  c.

31. 9.  they  shall  c.  with  weeping  and  with  supplic.
38.  25.  if  the  princes  hear,  and  c.  to  thee,  and  say
40.  4.  if  it  seem  good  to  c.  if  it  seem  ill  to  c.  forbeai

46.  18.  and  as  Carmel  by  the  sea,  so  shall  he  c.

49.  4.  that  trusted,  saying,  who  shall  c.  unto  me  ;
Lam.  1.  4.  ways  of  Zion  mourn,  none  c.  to  solerr...

22.  let  all  their  wickedness  c.  before  thee  [feasts
Ezek.  12.  16.  declare  abonv  tions  whither  they  c.


Ezek.  13. 18.  will  ye  save  souls  alive  thatc.  to  you  <

21.  19.  two  ways  that  the  sword  mayc,  20.  |  32.  11.

27.  shall  be  no  more,  till  he  c.  whose  right  it  is
33.  3.  when  heseeth  the  sword  c.  on  the  land,  6.

31.  they  c.  to  thee  as  the  people  cometh
33.  lo  it  will  c.  then  shall  know  that  a  prophet
36.  8.  to  my  people  Israel,  they  are  at  hand  to  c.
Hos.  6. 1.  c.  let  us  return  to  the  Ld  .  for  he  hath  torn
3.  and  he  shall  c.  to  us,  as  the  rain  to  the  earth
10. 12.  it  is  time  to  seek  the  I>ord  till  he  c.  and  rain
Joel  1. 15.  day  of  the  I-ord,  as  a  destruction  shall  it c.

2. 31.  before  the  terrible  day  of  the  I,ord  c.

Jonah  1.  7-  c.  let  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may  know
Mic.  4.  8.  to  thee  shall  it  c.  the  kingdom  shall  c.

Hah.  2.  3.  because  it  will  surely  c.  and  not  tarry
Zeph.  2.  2.  before  the  fierce  anger  of  Lord  c.  on  you
Zech.  1.  21.  then  said  I,  what  c.  these  to  do  ?

14.  5.  God  shall  c.  and  all  the  saints  with  thee
Mai.  3.  1.  the  Lord  ye  seek  shall  c.  to  his  temple

4.  6.  lest  1  c.  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse
Mat.  2.  6.  for  out  of  thee  shall  c.  a  Governor

5.  24.  first  be  reconciled,  then  c.  and  offer  thy  gift
6. 10.  thy  kingdom  c.  thy  will  be  done,  Luke  11.  2.

7.  15.  false  prophets  c.  to  you  in  sheep’s  clothing

8.  7.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  1  will  c.  anclheal  him

8. 1  am  not  worthy  thou  shouldestc.  under  my  roof
9.  and  to  another,  c.  and  he  cometh,  Luke  7.  8.

11.  many  shall  c.  from  east  and  west,  and  sit  down
11.3.  art  thou  he  that  should  c.  ?  Luke  7.19,20.

28.  c.  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  jad  n

16.  24.  if  any  man  will  c.  after  me,  let  him  deny

17.  10.  why  say  the  scribes,  Elias  mustfirst  c.  ?  11.

19.  21.  go,  self  that  thou  hast,  and  c.  Luke  18.  22.

Mat.  22.  4.  all  things  are  ready  c.  unto  the  marriage
24.  14.  gospel  shall  be  preached,  then  shall  end  c.
42.  ye  know  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  c.

25. 34.  c.  ye  blessed  of  my  father,  inherit  kingdom
Mark8.3\.  if  any  willc.afterme,Z.?rt-e9. 23.  1  14.27.
10. 14.  suffer  little  children  toe.  to  me,  Luke  18. 16.

21.  and  c.  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  me

12.  7-  this  is  the  heir,  c.  let  us  kill  him,  Luke  20. 14.
Luke  10. 1.  every  place  whither  he  himself  would  c.

13.  7.  three  years  I  c.  seeking  fruit  on  this  fig-tree
14.  there  are  six  days,  in  them  c.  and  be  healed

17.  20.  when  the,  kingdom  of  God  should  c.

19.  13.  he  said  unto  them,  occupy  till  1  c.

20.  16.  he  shall  c.  and  destroy  these  husbandmen

22.  18.  fruit  of  vine,  till  kingdom  of  God  shall  c.
John  1.  39.  he  saith  unto  them,  c.  and  see

3.  26.  the  same  baptizeth,  and  all  men  c.  to  him

5.  14.  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  c.  to  thee
40.  ye  will  not  c.  to  me,  that  ye  might  have  life

6.  37.  all  that  the  I’ather  giveth  me  shall  c.  to  me
44.  no  man  can  c.  to  me  except  F.  draw  him,  65.

7.  34.  and  where  I  am,  thither  ye  cannot  c.

37.  if  any  man  thirst,  let  him  c.  to  me  and  drink

8.  14.  ye  cannot  tell  whence  I  c.  and  whither  I  go

13.  19.  now  1  tell  you  before  it  c.  that  when  it  is  c.

14.  18.  I  wdll  not  leave  you  comfortless,  I  will  c.

23.  and  we  will  c.  untohim,  and  make  our  abode
17. 11.  hut  these  are  in  the  world,  1  c.  to  thee,  13.

21.  22.  if  I  will  he  tarry  till  I  c.  what  to  thee  ?  23.
Acts  1. 11.  this  .1.  shall  so  c.  as  ye  have  seen  him  go

2.  20.  before  that  great  and  notable  day  of  Lord  c.

3.  19.  sins  blotted  out,  when  times  of  refreshing  c.

7.  34.  and  now  c.  T  will  send  thee  into  Egypt

8.  24.  pray  that  none  of  these  things  c.  upon  me

9.  38.  that  he  would  not  delay  to  c.  to  them

13.  40.  lest  thatc.  on  you  that  is  spoken  in  proph.
16.  9.  sayinc,  c.  over  into  Macedonia,  and  help  us
19.  4.  believe  on  him  that  should  c.  after  him

24.  23.  should  forbid  no  acquaintance  to  c.  to  him
26. 7.  to  which  promise  our  twelve  tribes  hope  toe.

22.  no  other  than  proph.  and  Moses  say  should  c.
Rom.  3.  8.  that  we  say,  let  us  do  evil,  that  good  c.

9.  9.  the  word  of  promise,  at  this  time  will  I  c.

1  Cor.  4.  5.  judge  nothing  till  the  Lord  c.  who  will
11.  26.  ye  do  shew  the  Lord’s  death  till  he  c.

34.  the  rest  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  c.

15.  35.  the  dead,  and  with  what  body  do  they  c.  ?

16.  2.  that  there  be  no  gatherings  when  I  c.

10.  if  Timothy  c.  see  he  be  with  you  without  fear

12.  as  to  A  polios,  1  desired  him  to  c.  to  you

2  Cor.  1.  15. 1  was  minded  to  c.  to  you  before
12. 20.  for  I  fear,  lest  when  1  c.  I  shall  not  find  you

such  as  1  would,  and  be  to  you  as  you  would  not
Gal.  2.  21.  if  righteousness  c.  by  the  law,  then  is
3. 14.  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  c.  on  Gentiles
19.  it  was  added,  till  the  seed  should  c.  to  whom
2  Thess.  1 . 10.  when  he  shall  c.  to  he  glorified  in  saints

2.  3.  not  c.  except  there  c.  a  falling  away  first

1  Tim.  4.  8.  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  to  c

13.  till  1  c.  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  doctrine

2  Tim.  3. 1.  in  last  days  perilous  times  shall  c.

4.  3.  time  will  c.  wilfnot  endure  sound  doctrine
Tit.  3.12.  be  diligent  toe.  to  me  to  Micopolis
Heb.  4.  16.  let  use.  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace
7.  25.  he  is  able  to  save  them  that  e.  to  God  by  him

10.  37.  he  that  shall  c.  will  e.  and  not  tarry

Jam  A.  1.  whence  e.  wars,  c.  they  not  of  your  lusts  J

5.  1.  weep  for  your  miseries  that  shall  c.  on  you

2  Pet.  3.  9.  but  that  all  should  e.  to  repentance
10.  day  of  L.  will  e.  as  a  thief.  Rev.  3.  3. 1  16. 15.

1  John  2. 18.  as  ye  have  heard,  antichrist  shall  e.

3  John  10.  if  I  e.  I  will  remember  his  deeds
Rev.  2.  5.  repent,  or  else  I  will  c.  to  thee  quickly

25.  that  which  ye  have  already,,  hold  fast  till  1  c.

3.  11.  behold,  I  c.  quickly,  hold  that  fast,  22. 7,  20.
6.1.  one  of  the  four  beasts,  saying,  c.  and  see,  3, 5, 7
18.  10.  for  in  one  hour  is  thy  judgment  c.

22. 17.  and  let  him  that  is  athirst  c.  wf  sever  will

COME  again.

Gen.  28.  21.  so  that  I  c.  again  to  my  father’s  house
Exod.  14.  26.  that  waters  may  c.  again  on  Egyptians
L(r.  14.  43.  if  the  plague  c.  again  and  break  out
Judg.  8.9.  when  1  c.  again  in  peace  1  will  break  down
13.  8.  let  man  of  God  c.  again  to  us,  and  teach  us
1  Kings 2.  41.  Shimei  had  gone  to  Gath,  and  wasc.  a.
12.  5.  depart  for  3  days,  and  then  c.  a.  2  Chr.  10.  5.
17.21.  O  Lord,  l  pray,  let  this  child’s  soul  c.  again
Ezra  6.  21.  children  of  Israel  c.  again,  Neh.  8. 17>
Psal.  126.  6.  he  shall  c.  again  with  rejoicing


Prov.  3.  28.  say  not  to  thy  neighbour,  go  and  c. again
Jer.  37.8.  the  Chaldeans  shall  c.  again  and  fight
Lam.  1. 1 11.  given  for  meat  to  make  their  soul  c.  a.
Luke  10.  35.  when  I  c.  again  I  will  repay  thee
John  14.3. 1  will  c.  again  and  receive  you  to  myself

28.  ye  have,  heard  how  1  said,  1  go  away  and  c.  a.

2  Cor.  2.  1.  that  I  would  note,  again  in  heaviness

12.  21.  lest,  when  1  c.  again,  God  will  humble  me

13.  2.  1  write,  that  if  1  c.  again  1  will  not  spare
COME  down.

Gen.  45.  9.  thus  saith  Joseph,  c.  d.  to  me,  tarry  not
Erod.  3.  8.  I  am  c.  d.  to  defiver  and  bring  them  up

19. 11.  the  Lord  will  c.  down  on  mount  Sinai
Num.  11.  17.  1  will  c.d.  and  talk  with  thee  there
Deut.  28.  24.  from  heaven  it  shall  c.  down  on  thee
Judg.  7.  24.  saying,  c.  down  against  the  Midianites

15.  12.  they  said,  we  are  c.  down  to  bind  thee

1  Sam.  6.  21.  c.  down  and  fetch  the  ark  up  to  you

23.  11.  will  Saul  c.  d.  ?  the  Lord  said,  he  will  c.  d

20.  c.  down,  according  to  the  desire  of  thy  soul

2  Kings  1.  4.  thou  shaltnotc.  d.  from  that  bed, 6, 16.
9.  thou  man  of  God,  c.  d.  ||  10.  let  fire  c.  d.  11, 12.

Neh.  6.  3.  I  am  doing  a  great  work,  I  cannot  c.  down
Psal.  1. 16.  his  dealing  shall  c.  downon  his  own  pate
72.  6.  he  shall  c.  down  like  rain  on  mown  grass
144.  5.  bow  the  heavens,  O  Lord,  and  c.  down
Isa.  34.  5.  my  sword,  it  shall  c.  down  on  Idumea
47. 1.  c.  down,  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin  daughter
64.  l.oh,  that  thou  wouldest  c.  downthett  mount.
Jer,  13.  18.  your  principalities  shall  c.  down
21.  13.  which  sav,  who  shall  c.  down  against  us  <

48. 18.  c.  down  from  thy  glory,  and  sit  in  thirst
Ezek.  26.  16.  the  princes  of  the  sea  shall  c.  down
27  .  29.  all  pilots  shall  c.  down  from  their  ships
30.  6.  the  pride  of  her  power  shall  c.  down
Dan.  5. 1 20.  hardened  in  pride,  he  was  made  to  c.d.
Joel  3.  11.  cause  thy  mignty  ones  to  c.  down
Mat.  24.  17.  not  c.  d.  to  take  any  thing  out  of  house
27.40.  c.  down  from  the  cross,  42.  Mark  15.  30.
Luke  9. 54.  wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to  c.d.  ?

19.  5.  Jesus  said,  Zaccheus,  make  haste  and  c.  d.
John  4.  49.  saith,  Sir,  c.  down  ere  my  child  die

lets  14.  11.  the  gods  are  c.  down  to  us  like  men
Rev.  12.  12.  devil  is  c.  down  to  you,  having  wrath
13.  13.  maketh  fire  c.  down  from  heaven  on  earth

20.  1.  angel  c.  d.  having  the  key  of  bottomless  pit
COME  forth.

Gen.  15. 4.  he  that  shall  c.  forth  out  of  thy  bowels
1  Sam.  14.  11.  Hebrews  c.  forth  out  of  their^holes

1  Kings  2.  30.  Benaiah  said,  thus  saith  the  k.  c.f.

2  Kings  10. 25.  go  in  and  slay  them,  let  none  c.  f.
Job  23.  10.  when  tried,  I  shafl  c.  forth  as  gold
Psal.  17.  2.  let  my  sentence  c.f.  from  thy  presence
88.  8.  I  am  shut  up,  and  I  cannot  c.  forth

F.ccl.  7. 18.  that  feareth  God  shall  c.f.  of  them  all
Isa.  11.  1.  shall  c.f.  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse
48.  1.  and  art  c.  forth  out  of  the  waters  of  Judah
Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  fury  c.  forth  like  fire  and  burn
37. 5.  Pharaoh’s  army  was  c.  forth  out  of  Egypt,  7.

46. 9.  let  mighty  men  c.  forth,  the  Ethiopians
48.  45.  a  fire  shall  c.  forth  out  of  Heshbon
Ezek.  21. 19.  both  twain  shall  c.  f.  out  of  one  land
Dan.  3.  26.  ye  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  c.f.
9.  22.  O  Daniel,  I  am  c.  forth  to  give  thee  skill
Joel  3. 18.  a  fountain  shall  c.  forth  of  house  of  Lord
Mic.  5.  2.  out  of  thee  shall  c.  f.  that  is  to  be  ruler
Zech.  2.  6.  c.f.  and  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north
Mat.  13.  49.  angels  shall  c.  forth  and  sever  wicked
15. 18.  c.  forth  from  the  heart,  and  defile  the  man
Mark  9.  29.  this  kind  c.  forth  by  nothing  but  prayer
Luke  12.  37.  and  will  c.  forth  and  serve  them
John  5. 29.  shall  c.  forth,  they  that  have  done  good

11. 43.  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  c.  forth
Acts  7. 7.  after  that  they  shall  c.  forth  and  serve  me

COME  hither. ,

Gen.  15.  16.  in  the  fourth  generation  shall  c.  hithei
Judg.  16.  2.  it  was  told  Gazites,  Samson  is  c.  hither
Ruth  2. 14.  at  meal-time  c.  thou  hither  and  eat

1  Sam.  10.  22.  they  inquired  if  the  man  should  c.  h.

16. 11.  we  will  not  sit  down  till  he  c.  hither

2  Sam.  14. 32.  c.  h.  that  I  may  send  thee  to  the  king
20. 16.  say  to  Joab,  c.  h.  that  I  may  speak  with  thee

2  Kings  8.7.  told  Ben-hadad,  the  man  of  G.  isc.  h.
Prov.  25.  7.  better  it  be  said  to  thee,  c.  up  hither
Dan.  3.  26.  ye  servants  of  G.  c.  forth  and  c.  hither
Mat.  8.29.  art  thou  c.  h.  to  torment  us  before  time  ’
John  4.  15.  that  I  thirst  not,  neither  c.  h.  to  draw

16.  Jesus  saith,  call  thy  husband  and  c.  hither
Acts  17.  6.  that  have  turned  the  world  are  c.  hither
Rev.  4.  1.  voice  said,r.  up  h.  11. 12. 1  17-  1. 1  21.  9.
COME  in,  or  into.

Gen.  6. 18.  thou  shalt  c.  into  the  ai  k,  and  thy  sons
19.  31.  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  earth  to  c.  in  to  us

24.  31.  and  he  said,  c.  frcthou  blessed  of  the  I.ord
Exod.  12. 23.  I  ord  will  not  suffer  destroyer  to  c.  in

28.43.  when  they  c.  munto  the  tabernacle

Lev.  16.  26.  he  shall  bathe  his  flesh,  and  afterward
shall  c.  into  the  camp,  28.  Num.  19.7.  1 31. 24.
Num.  27.21.  and  at  his  word  they  shall  c.  in
Deut.  31.  2.  I  can  no  more  go  out  nor  c.  in
Josh.  14. 11.  so  is  my  strength  to  go  out  and  c.  in
23.  -t  1.  Joshua  waxed  old,  and  c.  into  days

1  Kings  1.  14.  I  will  c.  in  after  thee  and  confirm
3.  7. 1  am  a  child,  1  know  not  how  to  go  outor  c.  in

14.  6.  he  said  c.  in  thou  wife  of  Jeroboam

15.  17.  he  might  not  suffer  any  to  go  out  or  c.  in

2  Kings  4.  4.  when  c.  in  shut  the  door  upon  thee

11.9.  they  took  each  his  men  to  c.  in  and  go  out

2  Chron.  1.  10.  go  out  and  c.  in  before  this  people

16.  1.  that  he  might  let  none  go  out  or  c.  in  to  Asa
23.  6.  none  c.  into  the  house  of  the  I,,  save  priests
Neh.  2.  7.  convey  me  over,  till  1  c.  tw/o  Judah.
Esth.  5.  12.  Esther  let  no  man  c.  in  with  the  king

6.  5.  and  the  king  said,  let  ITaman  c.  in
Psal.  24.  7.  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  c.  in,  0
69. 1.  for  the  waters  are  c.  in  unto  my  soul
96.  8.  bring  an  offering  and  c.  into  his  courts
109.  18.  so  let  it  c.  into  his  bowels  like  water
Cant.  4.  16.  let  my  beloved  c.  into  his  garden
Isa.  19. 1.  behold,  the  Lord  shall  c.  into  Egypt
23.  the  Assyrian  shall  c.  into  Egypt,  Egyptiar
24  10.  every  house  shut  up,  thatno  man  c.  in

69


COM


COM


COM


Qsa.  59.  19.  when  the  enemy  shall  c.  in  like  a  flood
Jer.  17.  19.  gate,  whereby  the  kings  of  Judah  c.  in
51.  50.  and  let  Jerusalem  c.  into  your  mind
51.  for  strangers  are  c.  into  the  sanctuaries
Ezek.  11.  5.  I  know  things  that  c.  into  your  mind
38. 10.  at  the  same  time  shall  things  c.  into  thy  mind
Mic.  5.  5.  when  the  Assyrian  shall  c.  into  our  land
Mat.  10.  12.  when  ye  c.  into  an  house,  salute  it
1C.  27.  Son  of  man  shall  c.  in  glory  of  his  Father

24.  5.  for  many  shall  c.  in  my  name,  saying,  I  am
Christ,  and  deceive  many,  Murk  13.  6.  Luke  21. 8.

25.  31.  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  c.  in  his  glory
Xnke  11.  33.  they  which  c.  in  may  see  the  light

12.  38.  r.  in  the  second  watch,  or  c.  in  the  third
46.  will  c.  in  a  day  when  he  looketh  not  for  him

14.  23.  go  out,  and  compel  them  to  c.  in,  that  my
16.  28.  lest  they  c.  into  this  place  of  torment

John  5. 43. 1  am  c.  in  my  Father's  name,  ye  receive
me  not,  if  another  c.  in  hisow-  name  ye  receive

6.14.  prophet  that  should  c.  into  the  world,  11.  27.
Acts  16. 15.  Lydia,  saying,  c.  into  house,  abide  there
Mom.  11.  25.  till  the  fulness  of  Gentiles  be  c.  in

1  Cor.  14.  23.  there  c.  in  those  that  are  unlearned

24.  if  there  c.  in  one  that  believethnot

Jam.  2. 2.  there  c.  in  also  a  poor  man  in  vile  raiment
Rev.  3.  20. 1  will  c.  in  to  him,  and  sup  with  him
COME  near.

Gen.  12.  11.  Abram  was  c.  near  to  enter  into  Egypt

20.  4.  K«t  Abimelech  had  not  c.  near  her
Exod.  12.  48.  then  let  him  c.  near  and  keep  it

16. 9.  say  unto  Israel,  c.  near  before  the  Lord
28. 43.  or  when  they  c.  near  to  the  altar,  30.  20.

Num.  16. 5.  and  will  cause  him  to  c.  near  to  him
40.  that  no  stranger  c.  near  to  offer  incense
Josh.  10.  24.  c.  near,  put  your  feet  on  the  necks
rl  Sam.  10.  20.  had  caused  all  the  tribes  to  c.  near
Psal.  32.  9.  be  held  in,  lest  they  c.  near  unto  thee
119.  169.  let  my  cry  c.  near  before  thee
Isa.  41. 1.  let  us  c.  near  together  to  judgment
t  21.  cause  to  c.  near  your  cause,  saith  the  L.

48. 16.  c.  ye  near  unto  me,  hear  ye  this

50. 8.  who  is  mine  adversary  ?  let  him  c.  near  me
Ezek.  18. 6.  nor  hath  c.  near  to  a  menstruous  woman
40. 46.  which  c.  near  to  the  Lord  to  minister  to  him
44.  15.  they  shall  c.  near  to  me  to  minister  to  me
16.  theyshallc.wcrtrtomy  table  to  minister  to  me
Amos  6. 3.  which  cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  c.  near
.Mai.  3.  5.  and  I  will  c.  near  to  you  to  judgment
Luke  19. 41.  when  he  was  c.  near  he  beheld  the  city
Acts  23. 15. and  we, or  he  c. near, are  ready  to  kill  him
COME  nigh.

Exod.  34.  30.  but  they  were  afraid  to  c.  nigh  him
Lev.  10.  3.  I  will  be  sanctified  in  all  that  c.  nigh  me

21.  21.  no  man  that  hath  blemish  shall  c.  nigh,  23.
Num.  18.  4.  a  stranger  shall  not  c.  nigh  to  you
Leut.  20.2.  when  ye  are  c.  nigh, to  battle,  the  priest
Luke  10.  9.  kingdom  of  God  is  c.  nigh  unto  you,  11.

COME  not.

Exod.  19-  15.  be  ready,  c.  not  at  your  wives
24.  2.  but  they  shall  not  c.  nigh,  nor  the  people
Num.  14.  30.  ye  shall  not  c.  into  the  land  I  sware
16. 12.Dathanand  Abiramsaid,we  will  wci!c. up, 14.
Deut.  23. 10.  unclean  shall  not  c.  within  the  camp
.Josh.  3.  4.  c.  not  near  unto  the  ark,  that  ye  may

23. 7.  that  ye  c.  not  among  these  nations

Judg.  16. 17-  there  hath  not  c.  a  razor  on  mine  head
■2  Sam.  14.  29.  Absalom  sent  for  Joab,  buthe  would
not  c.  he  sent  the  second  time,  he  would  not  c.

1  Kings  13.  22.  carcase  not  c.  to  sepulchre  of  fathers

2  Kings  19-  32.  king  of  Assyria  shall  note,  into  this

city,  r:or  shoot  arrow  there,  33.  Isa.  37.  33,  34.
•2  Chron.  35.  21.  I  c.  not  against  thee  this  day
..Ezra  10. 8.  whosoever  would  not  c.  within  three  days
Neh.  13. 1.  Moabite  not  c.  into  congregation  forever
.Job  3.  6.  let  it  not  c.  into  the  number  of  the  months

13. 16.  for  an  hypocrite  shall  not  c.  before  him
Psal.  32.  6.  in  floods  they  shall  not  c.  nigh  to  him

69.  27.  let  them  note,  into  thy  righteousness

91 . 7 . thousands  shall  fall, but  it  shall  not  c.nigh  thee
132.  3.  I  will  not  c. into  the  tabernacle  of  my  house

L’rov.  5.8.  c.  not  nigh  the  door  of  her  house
Isa.  7-  IT.  Lord  shall  bring  flays  that  have  not  c.

25.  there  shall  not  c.  the  fear  of  briars  and  thorns
28. 15.  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  not  c.  to  me

32. 10.  vintage  shall  fail,  the  gathering  shall  note.

54. 14.  far  from  terror,  for  it  shall  not  c.  near  thee
65.  5.  which  say,  stand  by  thyself,  c.  not  near  me

Jer.  37. 19.  saying, the  king  of  Babylon  shall  note.
■Ezek.  16. 16.  like  things  shall  not  c.  nor  shall  it  be  so
44.  13.  they  shall  no}  c.  near  to  me  to  do  office
Ilos.  4. 15.  c.  not  ye  untoGilgal,  nor  go  to  Beth-.

9.  4.  their  soul  shall  not  c.  into  housed)!' the  Lord
.Lech.  14. 18.  and  if  the  family  of  Egypt  c.  not
Mat.  22.  3.  sent  to  call,  and  they  would  not  c.
Mark  2. 4.  they  could  note  .nigh  tor  press, Luke  8.19.
Luke  14.  20. 1  have  married  a  wife,  1  cannot  c.
John  5.  24.  and  shall  not  c.  into  condemnation
40.  ye  will  not  c.  to  me  that  ye  might  have  life
7.  34.  where  I  am,  thither  ye  cannot  c.  36.

11.  56.  think  ye  that  he  will  not  c.  to  the  feast  ?

15.  22.  if  I  had  not  c.  they  had  not  had  sin

16.  7.  if  I  go  not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  c.

1  Cor.  4. 18.  as  though  1  would  not  c.  to  you

COME  out.  m  [stance
-Gen.  15.  14.  afterward  shall  c.  out  with  great  sub-
17-  6.  and  kings  shall-e.  out  of  thee,  35. 11.

24.  13.  the  daughters  of  city  c.  out  to  draw  water
Ley.  16.  17-  till  lie  c.  out  ana  have  made  atonement
Num.  11.  20.  shall  eat  till  it  c.  out  at  your  nostrils

12.  4.  c.  out  ye  three  unto  tabernacle  ofcongregat.
20. 18.  lest  1  c.  out  against  thee  with  the  sword

22.  5.  there  is  a  people  c.  out  of  Egypt,  11.

33.  38.  Aaron  died  fortieth  year  after  Israel  c.  out
Leut.  28,  7-  c.  out  one  way,  and  flee  seven  ways
Judg.  9.  15.  if  not,  let  fire  c.  out  of  the  bramble
29.  he  said,  increase  thine  army  and  c.  out
'1  Sum.  2.  3.  letnotarrogancy  c.  out  of  your  mouth
11.  3.  to-morrow  we  will  c.  out  unto  thee,  10.

24. 14.  after  whom  is  the  king  of  Israel  c.  out  ?

*2  Sam.  16. 7.  c.  out,  c.  out,  thou  bloody  man

1  Kings 6. 1.  in  the  480th  year  after  Isr.  were  c.  out
20  17.  saying,  there,  are  men  c.  out  of  Samaria


2  Kings 5. 11.  he  will  c.  out  to  me,  and  lay  his  hand

18.  31.  make  an  agreement  and  c.  out,  Isa.  36. 16.

19.  9.  behold,  he  is  c.  out  to  fight  against  thee
Psal.  14.  7-  O  that  salvation  were  r.  out  of  Zion  !

68.  31.  princes  shall  c.  out  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia
Prov.  12. 13.  but  the  just  shall  c. ' out  of  trouble
Isa.  34.  3.  their  stink  shall  c.  out  of  their  carcases
Nah.  1.  11.  there  is  one  c.  out  that  imagineth  evil
Mat.  5.  26.  by  no  means  c.  out  till  thou  hast  paid
26.  55.  are  ye  c.  out  as  against  a  thief  with  swords
and  staves  to  take  me  ■  Mark  14.  48.  Luke  22.  52.
Mark  1.  25.  hold  thy  peace,  c.  out  of  him,  Luke  4.  35.

5.8.  said,  c.out,  thou  unclean  spirit,  Luke  8.  29.
John  1.  46.  can  any  good  thing  c.  out  of  Fi  azareth  ?

7.  41.  some  said,  shall  Christ  c.  out  of  Galilee  ?
Acts  16.  18.  in  the  name  of  Jesus  to  c.  out  of  her
Rom.  11.26.  there  shall  c.owr  of  Zion  the  Deliverer
2  Cor.  6.  17.  wherefore  c.  out  from  among  them
Heb.  7.  5.  though  they  c.  out  of  the  loins  of  Abraham
Rev.  16. 13.  saw  spirits  c.  out  of  the  mouth  of  dragon

18.  4.  a  voice  saying,  c.  out  of  her,  my  people

COME  to  pass.

Exod.  4. 8.  it  shall  c.  topass  if  they  will  not  believe,  9.
Num.  11. 23.  whether  my  word  shall  c.  to  pass  or  not

17. 5.  c.  topas  the  man's  rod  1  choose  shall  blossom
Leut.  7. 12.  shall  c.  topass  if  ye  heark.  11. 13. 1  28. 1.

13.  2.  and  the.  sign  or  the  wonder  c.  to  pass
Josh.  23.  14.  all  are  c.  to  pass,  no  good  thing  failed
Judg.  13.  12.  Manoah  said,  let  thy  words  c.  to  pass

17.  when  thy  sayings  c.  topass  we  may  do  honour
21.  3.  O  Lord,  why  is  this  c.  topass  in  Israel,  that

1  Kings  13.  32.  the  saying  shall  surely  c.  topass
Isa.  7.7.  it  shall  not  stand,  nor  shall  itc.  to  pass

14.  24.  as  I  have  thought,  so  shall  itc.  topass
42.  9.  behold,  the  former  things  are  c.  to  pass

Jer  17.  24.  it  shall  c.  topass  if  ye  diligently  hearken

32.  24.  what  thou  hast  spoken  is  c .  to  pass

Ezek.  12.  25.  the  word  that  T  speak  shall  c.  topass
24.  14.  I  have  spoken,  it  shall  c.  topass,  I  will  do  it
Lan.  2.  29.  maketh  known  to  thee  what  shall  c.  to  p.
Ilos.  1.  5.  c.  topass  that  I  will  break  the  bow  of  Isr.
Joel 2.  32.  c.  topass  that  whosoever  shall  call  on  L.
Amos  8. 9.  c.  top.  I  will  cause  sun  to  go  down  atnoon
Zech.  6.  15.  this  shall  c.  to  p.  if  ye  diligently  obey

7.  13.  therefore  it  is  c.  to  pass,  that  as  he  cried
Mat.  24. 6.  all  these  things  mustc.  tit  pass,  end  notyet
Mark  11.  23.  things  which  he  saith  shall  c.  to  pass

13.  29.  when  ye  shall  see  these  c.  to  p.  Luke  21.  31.
Luke  2.  15.  and  see  this  thing  which  isr.  to  pass

21.  7.  what  sign  when  these  things  shall  c.  top.  28.

24. 12.  wondering  in  himself  at  what  was  c.  topass

18.  hast  not  known  the  things  which  are  c.  topass
John  13. 19.  when  it  is  c.  top.  ye  may  believe,  14.29.
Acts  3. 23.  c.  top.  that  every  soul  that  will  not  hear
Rev.  1.  1.  to  shew  things  must  shortly  c.  top.  22.6.

COME  short.

Rom.  3.23.  all  have  sinned  and  c.  of  glory  ofG.

Heb.  4. 1.  lest  any  of  you  should  seem  to  c.  short  of  it
COME  together.

Job  9.  32.  and  we  should  c.  together  in  judgment

19. 12.  his  troops  c.  together  against  me  and  encamp
Jer.  3.  18.  shall  c.  together  out  of  land  of  the  north

50.4.  Isr.  and  .1  ud.  shall  c.  together,  going  and  weep.
Acts  1.  6.  when  they  were  c.  together,  28.  17.

10.27.  he  found  many  that  were  c.  together

19.  32.  knew  not  wherefore  they  were  c.  together
21.  22.  the  multitude  must  needs  c.  together

1  Cor.  7.  5.  c.  together  again,  that  Sat.  tempt  you  not

11.  1“.  you  c.  together,  not dor  better  but  for  worse
18.  when  ye  c.  together  in  church,  20. 33.  I  14. 26.
34.  that  ye  c.  not  together  to  condemnation

14.  23.  if  whole  church  be  c.  together  to  one  place

COME  up.

Exod.  19. 13.  trumpet  sound  they  shall  c.  up  to  mount
24.  thou  shalt  c.  up,  thou  and  Aaron  with  thee

24. 12.  c.  up  to  me  into  the  mount,  and  be  there

33.  5.  I  will  c.  up  into  midst  of  thee  in  a  moment

34.  2.  and  c.  up  in  the  morning  to  mount  Sinai

3.  no  man  shall  c.  up  with  thee  nor  be  seen

Num.  20.  5.  why  have  ye  made  us  c.up  out  Egypt  ?
Josh.  4. 16.  that  the  priests  c.up  out  of  Jordan,  17, 18.
10.  4.  c.  up  to  me,  and  help  me  to  smite  Gibeon
6.  c.  up  to  us  quickly,  save  us,  and  help  us
Judg.  1.  3.  J  udari  said,  c.  up  with  me  into  my  lot

15. 10.  Judah  said,  why  are  ye  c.  up  against  us  ?

16. 18.  Delilah  sent,  saying,  c.  up  this  once
1  Sam.  14. 10.  if  they  say,  c.  up  to  us,  we  will  go  up

17.  25.  said,  have  ye  seen  this  man  that  is  c.  up?

1  Kings  1.  35.  then  ye  shall  c.  up  after  him,  that  he

20.  22.  the  king  of  Syria  will  c.  up  against  thee

2  Kings  16. 7.  c.  up  and  save  me  from  king  of  Syria

18.  25.  am  I  now  c.  up  without  L.  Isa.  36.  10.

2  Chr.  20.  16.  behold,  they  c.  up  by  the  cliff  of  Ziz
Job  7.  9.  that  goeth  to  the  grave,  shall  c.  up  no  more
Prov.  25.  7.  better  that  it  be  said,  c.  up  hither
Isa.  5.  6.  but  there  shall  c.  up  briers  and  thorns

8.  7-  and  he  shall  c.  up  over  all  his  channels

14.  8.  since  laid  down  no  fellow  is  c.  up  against  us
60.  7.  they  shall  c.  up  with  accept,  on  mine  altar
Jer.  9.  21.  for  death  is  c.  up  into  our  windows
49.  19.  behold,  he  shall  c.  up  like  a  lion,  50.  44.

22.  behold,  he  shall  c.  up  and  fly  as  the  eagle
51.  27.  cause  the  horses  to  c.  up  as  caterpillars
42.  the  sea  is  c.  up  upon  Babylon,  she  is  covered
Lam.  1. 14.  are  wreathed,  and  c.  up  upon  my  neck
Ezek.  24.  8.  that  it  might  cause  fury  to  c.  up  to  take

37.  12.  and  cauSe  you  to  c.  up  out  of  your  graves

38.  16.  thou  shalt  c.  up  against  my  people  Israel
47.  f  12.  on  the  bank  shall  c.  up  all  trees

Ilos.  1. 11.  and  they  shall  c.  up  out  of  the  land
10.  8.  the  thistle  shall  c.  up  on  their  altars
13.  15.  the  wind  of  Lord  shall  c.  up  from  wildern.
Joel  2.  20.  his  stink  and  ill  savour  shall  c.  up

3.  9.  let  all  men  of  war  draw  near,  let  them  c.  up

12.  let  heathen  c.  up  to  the  val  ley  of  J  ehoshaphat

Amos  4. 10.  I  made  the  stink  of  your  camps  to  c.  up
Obad.  21 .  saviours  shall  c.  upon  mount  Zion  to  judge
Jonah  1.  2.  their  wickedness  is  c.  up  before  me

4.  6.  the  Lord  made  a  gourd  to  c.  up  over  Jonah
Mic.  2. 13.  the  breaker  is  c.  up  before  them
Nah.  2.  1.  he  that  dasheth  in  pieces  is  c.  up
Zech.  14.  17.  it  shall  be,  that  whoso  will  not  c.  up


Zech.  14. 18.  if  the  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up,  c.  not
Acts 8.  31.  he  desired  Phil,  to  c.  up  and  sit  with  him

39.  when  they  were  c.  up  out  of  the  water

10.  4.  Cornelius,  thy  alms  are  c.  up  before  God
Rev.  4. 1.  c.  up  hither,  and  1  will  shew  thee,  11. 12.

COME,  Passive.

Gen.  6. 13.  the  end  of  all  flesh  is  c.  before  me

18. 5.  for  therefore  are  ye  c.  to  your  servant

21.  according  to  the  ory  which  is  c.  to  me

42.  21 .  therefore  is  this  distress  c.  upon  us
Exod.  3.  9.  cry  of  the  children  of  Israel  is  c .  to  me

20.  20.  fear  not,  for  God  is  c.  to  prove  you
Num.  22. 11.  there  is  a  people  c.  out  of  Egypt
Leut.  31. 11.  when  all  Isr.  is  c.  to  appear  before  L.
Josh.  5.  14.  as  captain  of  the  host  of  Lord  am  1  c.
Judg.  16.  2.  it  was  told,  Samson  is  c.  hither

1  Sam.  4.  7.  for  they  said,  God  is  c.  into  the  camp
9.16.1ooked  onmy  peop. because  their  cry  isc.  tome

2  Sam.  1.  9.  slay  me,  for  anguish  is  c.  upon  me

19. 11.  the  speech  of  all  Israel  is  c.  to  the  king
2  Kings  4. 1.  the  creditor  is  c.  to  take  my  sons

5.  6.  when  this  letter  is  c.  to  thee,  l  sent  Fiaaman

8.  7.  told  him,  saying,  the  man  of  God  is  c.  hithei
Ezra  9. 13.  and  after  all  that  is  c.  upon  us

Job  3. 25.  the  thing  1  greatly  feared  is  c.  4.  5.

Psal.  44. 17.  all  this  is  c.  upon  us,  yet  we  have  not
53.  6.  O  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  were  c.

55.5.  fearfulness  and  trembling  are  c.  upon  me
69.  2. 1  am  c.  into  deep  waters,  floods  overflow  me

102. 13.  time  to  favour  Zion,  yea  the  set  time  is  c.
Isa.  10.  28.  he  is  c.  to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  to  Migron

56. 1.  for  my  sal  vat.  is  near  to  c.  and  my  righteous.

60. 1.  arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  c.  and  glory  of  L.
63.  4.  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  c.

Jer.  40. 3.  have  sinned,  therefore  this  is  c.  upon  you
47.  5.  baldness  is  c.  on  Gaza,  Ashkelon  is  cut  off
50.  27.  woe  to  them,  for  their  day  is  c.  the  time  of

31.  thy  day  is  c.  the  time  that  1  will  visit  thee

51 . 13.  "that  dwellest  on  many  waters,  thy  end  is  c.
I, am.  4. 18.  our  days  are  fulfilled,  our  end  is  c.

5. 1.  remember,  O  Lord,  what  isc.  upon  us
Ezek.  7. 2.  an  end,  the  end  is  c.  upon  the  land,  6.

5.  thus  saith  L.  an  evil,  an  only  evil,  behold  is  c.

7-  the  morn,  is  c.  upon  thee,  O  thou  that  dwellest
10.  behold  the  day,  behold,  it  is  c.  39.  8.

17. 12.  the  king  of  Babylon  is  c.  to  Jerusalem

21.  25.  thou  wicked  prince  whose  day  is  c.  29.
Lan.  9. 13.  as  it  is  written,  all  this  evil  is  c.  on  us
Amos  8.  2.  the  end  is  c.  on  my  people  of  Israel
Mic.  1. 9.  he  is  c.  to  gate  of  my  people,  to  Jerusalem
Mat.  3. 7.  who  warned  you  to  nee  from  wrath  to  c.  ?

12.  28.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  c.  unto  you
44.  when  he  is  c.  he  findeth  it  empty,  swept
18.11.  Son  of  man  is  c.  to  save  that  which  was  lost
Mark  1.  24.  art  thou  c.  to  destroy  us  ?  Luke  4.  34.

4. 29.  he  puts  in  the  sickle,  because  the  harvest  is  c.
14.  8.  she  is  c.  aforehand  to  anoint  my  body-
41.  sleep  on  now,  it  is  enough,  the  hour  is  c.

Luke  7. 34.  the  Son  of  man  is  c.  eating  and  drink.
15. 27.  thy  brotheris  c.  father  hath  killed  fatted  call

19.  9.  this  day  is  salvation  c.  to  this  house
10.  the  Son  of  man  is  c.  to  seek  and  to  save  lost
John  3. 19.  that  light  is  c.  into  the  world,  men  loved
4.  25.  when  he  is  c.  he  will  tell  us  all  things

11.  28.  the  Master  is  c.  and  calleth  for  thee

12. 23.  the  hour  isc.  Son  of  man  be  glorified,  17. 1.
15. 26.  when  the  Comforter  is  c.  whom  I  will  send

16. 8.  when  he  is  c.  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin

13.  when  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  c.  he  will  guide
21.  a  woman  hath  sorrow  because  her  hour  is  c.
Rom.  11. 11.  salvation  is  c.  unto  the  Gentiles

16. 19.  for  your  obedience  is  c.  abroad  among  all
1  Cor.  13. 10.  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  c.  then
Gal.  3.  25.  but  after  that  faith  is  c.  we  art  no  longer
Col.  1.6.  which  gospel  isc.  to  you,  as  it  is  in  all  world
1  John  4.  2.  that  Jesus  Christ  is  c.  in  the  flesh
3.  every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ
is  c.  in  the  flesh  is  not  of  God,  2  John  7.

5. 20.  we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  is  c.  and  given
Rev.  6. 17.  for  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  c.

11. 18.  and  thy  wrath  is  c.  and  time  of  the  dead
12. 10.  now  is  c.  salvat.and  strength,  and  king,  of  G.

14. 7.  fear  God,  for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  c.

18. 17.  in  one  hour,  so  great  riches  is  c.  to  nought
19.  7.  for  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  c.  and  his  wife

I  am  COME,  or  am  1  COME.

Exod.  18.  6.  I  thy  father-in-law  am  c.  to  thee
Num.  22.  .‘58.  Balaam  said,  lo  I  am  c.  to  thee
Leut.  26.  3. 1  am  c.  into  the  country  the  Lord  swan?

1  Sam.  16. 2.  I  am  c.  to  sacrifice  to  the  Lord.  5.

2  Sam  .  14. 15.  now  that  I  am  c.  to  speak  of  this  thing

32.  to  say,  wherefore  am  I  c.  from  Geshur  ?

19. 20.  I  am  c.  first  to  meet  my  lord  the  king
Ps.  69. 2.  Iam  c.  into  deep  waters  where  the  floods
Eccl.  1. 16. 1  communed,  lo,  I  am  c.  to  great  estate
Cant.  5. 1.  Iam  c.  intomygar.  my  sister,  my  spouse
Lan.  9.  23.  and  I  am  c.  to  shew  thee,  10. 14.

10.  12.  thy  words  were  heard,  I  am  c.  for  thy  w.
Mat.  5. 17.  think  not  I  am  c.  to  destroy  the  law

9. 13.  J  am  not  c.  to  call  the  righteous  but  sinners
10.  34.  think  not  that  1  am  c.  to  send  peace  on  earth

35.  I  am  c.  to  set  a  man  at  variance  against  father
Luke  12.  51.  suppose  ye  that  I  am  c.  to  give  peace
John  1.  31.  therefore  am  I  c.  baptizing  with  water

5. 43. 1  am  c.in  my  Father’s  name, ye  receive  me  not
7.  28.  Iam  not  c.  of  myself,  he  that  sent  me  is  true

9.  39.  Jesus  said,  for  judgm.  I  am  c.  into  this  world

10.  io.  T am  c.  thatthey  mishthave  life,  and  abund.

12. 46. 1  am  c.  a  light  into  the  world,  whoso  believes
16.  28.  1  am  c.  into  the  world,  again  1  leave  world

COME,  joined  with  time.

Gen.  30.  33.  shall  my  righteous,  answer  m  time  to  c.
Exod.  13.  14.  when  thy  son  asketli  thee  in  time  to  c.

saying,  what  is  this  t  Dent.  6.  20.  Josh.  4.  6,  21.
Josh.  22. 24.  in  time  to  c.  your  chi  ldr. might  speak,  28.
1  Sam.  1. 20.  time  was  c.  after  Hannah  conceived
Psal.  102. 13.  time  to  favour  Zion,  the  set  time  is  c.
Prov.  31 . 25.  she  shall  rejoice  in  time  to  c.

Cant.  2.12.  time  of  singing  cf  birds  is  c.voice  of  turtle
Isa.  13. 22.  her  time  is  near  to  c.  her  days  shall  not

30. 8.  note  in  a  book  that  it  may  be  for  time  to  c.

42. 23.  who  will  hearken  and  hear  for  time  to  c.


C  O  M


C  O  M


F.zek.  7.  7.  Hie  time  is  c.  the  day  of  trouble  is  near
Ihw.  1 .  2.  the  time  is  not  c.  the  Lord's  house  be  built
l.uke  9.  Si .  the  time  was  c.  he  should  be  received  up
4.  4.  but  when  the  fulness  of  time  was  r.

1  Tim  6  19.  laying  up  good  foundation  against

time  to  c.

l  Pet  4.  17.  the  time  is  c.  that  judgm.  must  begin
Yet  COME.  .

Pent.  1C.  9.  for  ye  are  not  as  yet  c.  to  rest  L.  giveth
John  C.  4.  Jesus  saith,  woman,  my  hour  is  not  yet  c.

*7  6.  Jesus  said  to  them,  my  time  is  not  yet  c.  8.

30.  because  his  hour  was  not  yet  c.  8.  20.

11.  30.  Jesus  was  not  yet  c.  into  the  town
Rev.  17.  10.  five  are  fallen,  the  other  is  not  yet  c.

COMELY.

1  Sam.  16.  18.  David,  a  son  of  Jesse,  a  c.  person
Job  41.  12.  1  will  not  conceal  his  c.  proportion
Psal.  33.  1.  praise,  is  c.  for  the  upright,  147.  1.

Prov.  30.  29.  vea,  four  are  c.  in  going
Eccl  5  18.  it”is  c.  for  one  to  eat,  drink,  and  enjoy
Cant.  1.  5.  I  am  black  but  c.  O  daughters  ot  Jerus.

10.  thy  cheeks  are  c.  with  rows  of  jewels
2. 14.  thy  voice  is  sweet,  and  thy  countenance  is  c.

4’  3.  thy  lips  are  like  scarlet,  thy  speech  is  c.

6.4.  thou  arte.  O  my  love,  as  Jerusalem,  terrible  as

Js'a.  4  2.  fruit  of  the  earth  shall  be  excellent  and  c.
Jer.  6.  2.  1  likened  daughter  of  Zion  to  a  c.  woman
1  Cor.  7.  35.  but  1  speak  for  that  which  is  c.

1 1. 13.  is  it  c.  that  a  woman  pray  to  God  uncovered  ?

12.  24.  for  our  c.  parts  have  no  need,  but  God

COMELINESS.

Jsa.  53.  2.  he  hath  no  form  nor  c.  nor  beauty,  that
Ezek.  16. 14.  for  it  was  perfect  through  my  c.

27.  10.  they  of  Persia  and  Lud  set  forth  thy  c.

Pan.  10.  8.  my  c.  was  turned  in  me  into  corruption
1  Cor.  12.23.  our  uncomely  parts  have  moreabund.c.

COMERS.

Heb.  10.  1.  can  never  make  the  c.  thereunto  perfect
COMEST.

Gen.  10.  19-  was  from  Sidon  as  thou  c.  to  Gerar

13.  10.  like  the  land  of  Egypt,  as  thou  c.  to  Zoar

24.  41.  when  thou  e.  to  my  kindred,  it  they  give  not

Pent.  2.  19.  thou  c.  nigh  the  children  of  Ammon
20.  10.  when  thou  c .  nigh  to  city  to  tight  against  it

28.  6.  blessed  shalt  thou  be  when  thou  e.  in

19.  cursed  shalt  thou  be  when  thou  c.  in

Judy.  17.  9.  Micah  said  to  Levite,  whence  c.  thou  ?
19. 17.  the  old  man  said  to  Levite,  whence  c.  thou  ?

1  Sam.  16.4.  and  said,  c.  thou  peaceably:  1  Kin.  2.13.
17.  43.  am  l  a  dog,  that  thou  c.  to  me  with  staves  i

45.  thou  c.  to  me  with  a  sword  and  with  a  spear

2  Sam.  3.  13.  bring  Michal  when  thou  c.  to  see  me

1  Kings  19. 15.  when  thou  c.  anoint  Hazael  to  be  king

2  Kings 5.  25.  Elisha  said,  whence  c.  thou,  Gehazit
Job  1.7.  whence  c.  thou  ?  Satan  answered,  2.  2.

Jer.  51.  61.  when  thou  c.  to  Babylon  and  shalt  see
Jonah  1.  8.  what  thy  occupation  :  whence  e.  thou  ?
Mat.  3. 14.  to  be  baptized  of  thee,  and  c.  thou  to  me  ?
Luke  23. 42.  rememb.  me  when  c.  into  thy  kingdom

COMETH.

Gen.  37.  19.  they  said,  behold  this  dreamer  c.

I.ev.  11.  34.  on  which  such  water  e.  is  unclean
Pent.  18.  8.  beside  what  c.  of  sale  of  his  patrimony

23. 13.  turn  backward  cover  that  which  c.  from  thee
1  Sam.  4.  3.  when  ark  c.  among  us,  it  may  save  us

9. 6.  all  that  the  man  of  God  saith  c.  surely  to  pass

20.  27.  wherefore  c.  not  the  son  of  Jesse  to  meat  ?

29.  therefore  he  c.  not  to  the  king’s  table

1  Kings  14.  5.  for  when  she  c.  in  will  feign  herself

2  Kings  9. 18.  came  to  them,  but  he  c.  not  again,  20.

11.  8'.  be  ye  with  the  king  as  he  c.  in,  2  Chr.  23.  7-
Job  3.  21.  which  long  for  death,  and  it  c.  not

28.  20.  whence  c.  wisdom,  where  understanding  ?
Psal.  30.  5.  weeping  for  night,  but  joy  c.  in  morning
62. 1 .  my  soul  waiteth  on  God,  from  him  c.  my  sal  v.
75.  6.  promotion  c.  not  from  the  east  nor  west
96.  13.  before  Lord,  for  he  c.  to  judge  the  earth
118.  26.  blessed  is  he  that  c.  in  name  ot  the  Lord
121.  1.  mv  eyes  to  hills,  from  whence  c.  my  help
2.  my  help  c.  from  the  Lord  who  made  heaven
Prov.  1.  26.  I  will  mock  when  your  tear  c.

27.  when  your  destruction  c.  as  a  whirlwind
41,  2.  when  pride  c.  then  c.  shame,  but  with  lowly
18.  3.  when  the  wicked  c.  then  c.  contempt
Eccl.  6.  4.  her.  in  with  vanity, departeth  in  darkness
11. 8.  if  a  man  live  many  years,  all  that  c.  is  vanity
Cant.  2.  8.  he  c.  leaping  upon  the  mountains
Jsa.  13.  9.  the  day  of  the  Lord  c.  with  wrath

30.  13.  whose  breaking  c.  suddenly  at  an  instant
27.  the  name  of  the  Lord  c.  from  far,  burning

44. 1 19.  fall  down  to  that  which  c.  on  a  tree

62.  11.  say  ye  to  Zion,  behold,  thy  salvation  c.

63.  1.  who  is  this  that  c.  from  Edom,  from  Bozra  !
Jer.  17.6.  like  heathen,  he  shall  not  see  when  good  c

8.  and  shall  not  see  when  heat  c.  but  her  leaf
43. 11.  when  he  c.  he  shall  smite  the  land  of  Egypt
J.am.  3.  37.  who  is  he  that  saith,  and  it  c.  to  pass
5.  +  4.  our  water  for  money,  our  wood  c.  for  price
Ezek.  14.  4.  and  c.  to  a  prophet  to  inquire,  7.

20.  32.  that  which  c.  in  your  mind  shall  not  be

21.  7-  for  the  tidings,  because  it  c.  behold  it  c.

24.  24.  when  this  c.  you  shall  know  I  am  the  Lord
33.  31.  they  come  to  thee  as  the  people  c.  and  sit

33.  when  this  c.  to  pass,  then  shall  they  know
47.  9.  every  thing  shall  live  whither  the  rivers  c.
Pan.  11.  16.  that  c.  against  him  shall  do  exploits

12.  12.  blessed  is  he  that  c.  to  the  1335  days
Has.  7.  1.  the  thief  c.  in,  and  the  troop  of  robbers
Joel 2. 1.  day  of  the  L.  c.  Zech.  14.  1.  1  Thess.  5.  2.
Mic.  5.  6.  deliver  us  from  the  Assyrian  when  he  c.
Alai.  4.  1.  the  day  c.  that  shall  burn,  day  that  c.
Mat.  3. 11.  he  that  c.  after  me  is  might,  than  1,  whose

shoes  not  worthy  to  bear.  Alark  1 . 7  •  Inike  3.  16.
5.  37.  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  c.  of  evil
8.  9.  I  say  to  another,  come,  and  he  c.  Luke  7.  8.

13.  19.  then  c.  the  wicked  one,  and  catcheth  away
21. 5.  behold,  thy  king  c.  unto  thee,  John  12.  15.

9.  blessed  is  he  that  c.  in  name  ot  Lord,  hosanna
in  the  highest,  Alark  11.9.  Luke  13.  35.  I  19.  31!.

25.  19.  after  a  long  time  lord  of  those  servants  c.
Alark  6.  48.  he  c.  to  them  walking  on  the  sea

8.  38.  bt  ashamed  when  he  c.  in  glory  of  his  Father


Mark  9.  12.  Elias  c.  first,  and  restoreth  all  things
14. 43.  while  he  spake  c.  Judas  one  of  the  twelve
Luke 6. 47.  whoso  c.  to  me,  and  heareth  my  sayings
12.  37.  the  Lord  when  he  c.  shall  find  watching
40.  Son  of  man  c.  at  an  hour  when  ye  think  not
43.  his  lord,  when  he  c.  shall  find  so  doing
55.  ye  say,  there  will  be  heat,  and  it  c.  to  pass
17.  20.  kingdom  of  God  c.  not  with  observation
18. 8.  Son  of  man  c.  shall  he  find  faith  on  earth  ?

John  . 3.8.  but  thou  canst  not  tell  whence  it  c.

20.  nor  c.  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  be  reproved

21.  he  that  doth  the  truth,  c.  to  Ihe  light
4.  21.  woman,  believe  me,  the  hour  c.  23. 1  16.  32.

6.  35.  he  that  c.  to  me  shall  never  hunger,  37.

45.  man  that  hath  learned  of  the  Father  c.  to  me

7.  27.  when  Christ  c.  no  man  knoweth,  31.

42.  said,  that  Christ  c.  of  the  seed  of  David

9.  4.  the  night  c.  when  no  man  can  work
i4.  6.  no  man  c.  to  the  Father  but  by  me

16.  2.  the  time  c.  that,  whosoever  killeth  you
25.  the  time  c.  1  shall  no  more  speak  in  proverbs
32.  the  hour  c.  that  ye  shall  be  scattered

Acts  10.  32.  who  when  he  c.  shall  speak  to  thee
.Wow. 4. 9. r. this  blessedness  on  the  circumcision  only
10. 17.  so  then,  faith  c.  by  hearing,  hearing  by  word

1  Cor.  15.  24.  then  c.  the  end,  when  he  shall  have

2  Cor.  11.  28.  besides  that  which  c.  on  me  daily
Eph.  5.  6.  for  these  tilings  c.  the  wrath  of  God  u pon

the  children  of  disobedience.  Col.  3.  6.

1  Thess.  5.  2.  day  of  the  Lord  so  c.  as  a  thief  in  night
Heb.  11.  6.  he  that  c.  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is
Jude  14.  the  Lord  c.  with  10,000  of  his  saints
Rev.  1.7.  he  c.  with  clouds,  every  eye  shall  see  him

17.  10.  when  her.  he  must  continue  a  short  space

COMETH  down.

Jsa.  55.  10.  as  the  rain  c.  down  from  heaven
John  6.  33.  bread  of  God  is  he  which  c.  down,  50.
James  1.  17 .  every  good  and  perfect  gift  r.  down
Rev.  3. 12.  new  Jerusalem  which  c.  down  from  God
COMETH  forth.

Gen.  24.  43.  when  the  virgin  c.  forth  to  draw  water
Exod.  4.  14.  also  behold  he  c.  forth  to  meet  thee

8.  20.  before  Pharaoh,  lo,  he  c.  forth  to  the  water
Judg.  11.  31.  whatsoever  c.  forth  of  the  doors
1  Sam.  11.7.  whosoever  c.  not  forth  after  Saul
Job  5.  6.  though  affliction  c.  not  forth  of  the  dust

14.  2.  he  c.  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  cut  down
Isa.  28.  29.  this  also  c.  forth  from  the  Lord
Ezek.  33.  30.  hear  what  words  c.  forth  from  Lord
Mic.  1.  3.  behold  the  Lord  c.  forth  out  of  his  place
COMETH  nigh.

Hum.  1.51.  Levites setup  tabernacle,  the  stranger
that  c.  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death,  3. 10,  38.  118.  7*
COMETH  out.

Exod.  28. 35.  be  heard  when  he  c.  out  that  he  die  not
Alum.  12. 12.  flesh  is  half  consumed  when  he  c.  out
Pent.  28.  57.  her  eye  evil  toward  young  that  c.  out
1  Kings  8.  41 .  a  stranger  that  c.  out  of  a  far  country
Job  20.  25.  it  is  drawn,  and  c.  out  of  the  body
37. 22.  fair  weather  c.  out  of  the  north,  with  God  is
Cant.  3.  6.  who  is  this  that  c.  out  of  the  wilderness  ?
Isa.  26.  21.  the  Lord  c.  out  of  his  place  to  punish
42.  5.  spread  forth  earth,  and  that  which  c.  out  of  it
Jer.  46.  20.  destruction  cometh,  it  c.  out  of  the  north
Ezek. 4. 12. shall  bake  it  with  dung  that  c.  out  of  man
Alat.  15. 11.  but  that  which  c.  out  of  the  mouth,  this
defileth  a  man,  Alark  7.  20.
24.  27.  for  as  the  lightning  c .  out  of  the  east
COMETH  up.

1  Sam.  28. 14.  and  she  said,  an  old  man  c.  up  covered
Cant.  8.  5.  who  is  this  that  c.  up  from  wdlderness  ?
Isa.  24.  18.  and  he  that  c.  up  out  of  midst  of  the  pit
Jer.  46.  7.  wfflo  is  this  that  c.  up  as  a  flood  i
50.  3.  out  of  north  there  c.  up  a  nation  against,  her
Jlab.  3.16.  when  hec.iyito  people,  will  invade  them
Alat.  17.  27.  cast  an  hook,  take  up  the  fish  first  c.  up
COM FO  RT,  Substantive.

Job  6.  10.  then  should  1  yet  have  c.  yea,  T  would
10.  20.  let  me  alone,  that  l  may  take  c.  a  little
Psal.  119.  50.  this  is  my  c.  in  my  affliction,  thy  word
76.  let  thy  merciful  kindness  be  for  my  c.

Isa.  57.  6.  should  1  receive  c.  in  these  r
Ezek.  16.  54.  in  that  thou  art  a  c.  to  them
Alat.  9.  22.  daughter,  be  of  good  c.  Luke  8.48.
Alark  10.  49.  be  of  good  c.  rise,  he  calleth  thee
Acts  9.  31.  walking  in  the  c.  of  the  Holy  Ghost
Rom.  15.  4.  through  patience  and  c.  of  the  scriptures

1  Cor.  14.  3.  speaketh  to  men  to  exhortation  and  c.

2  Cor.  1.  3.  blessed  be  God,  even  the  God  of  all  c.

4.  by  the  c.  wherewith  we  are  comforted  of  God

7.  4.  great  is  my  glorying  of  you,  I  am  tilled  withe.
13.  therefore  we  were  comforted  in  yourc.

13. 11.  brethren,  be  perfect,  be  of  good  c.

Phil.  2. 1.  if  there  be  therefore  any  c.  of  love
19.  that  1  also  may  be  of  good  c.  when  1  know
Col.  4. 11 .  these  only ,  which  have  been  a  c.  to  me
COMFORT,  Verb.

Gen.  5. 29.  this  same  shall  c.  us  concerning  our  work
18.  5.  c.  ye  your  hearts,  after  that  you  shall  pass  on
27.42.  Esau  as  touching  thee  doth  c.  himself
37.  35.  ail  his  sons  and  daughters  rose  up  to  c.  him
Judg.  19.  5.  c.  thy  heart  with  a  morsel  ot  bread, 8.

2  Sam.  10.  2.  David  sent  to  c.  him,  1  Chron.  19.  2.

1  Chron.  7.22.  and  his  brethren  <-ame  toe.  him

19.2.  servants  of  David  came  to  Hanun  to  c.  him
Job  2. 11.  his  friends  came  to  mourn  with  and  e.him

7. 13.  when  I  say,  my  bed  shall  c.  me,  my  couch
9.  27.  if  l  say,  1  will  forget,  l  will  c.  myself
21.  34.  how  then  c.  ye  in  vain,  seeing  in  answers
Psal.  23.  4.  thy  rod’and  thy  staff,  they  c.  me
71. 21.  thou  shaltincrease  and  c.  me  on  every  side
119.  f  76.  let  thy  merciful  kindness  c.  me

82.  my  eyes  fail,  saying,  when  wilt  thou  c.  me  ?
Cant.  2.  5  c.  me  with  apples,  tor  1  am  sick  of  love
Isa.  22.4.  look  away  from  me,  labour  not  to  c.  me
40.  1.  c.  ye,  c.  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God
51.  3.  T.ofd  shall  c.  Zion,  he  will  c.  her  waste  places
19.  two  things  are  come,  by  whom  shall  1  c.  thee  ?

61. 2.  he  hath  sent  me  to  c.  all  that  mourn

66. 13.  so  will  1  c.  you,  ye  shall  be  in  Jerusalem
Jer. 8. 18.  when  I  would  e.myself, heart  is  faint  in  me

16.  7.  nor  shall  men  tear  to  c.  them  for  the  dead


COM

Jer.  31. 13. 1  will  c.  them,  make  rejoice  from  sorrow
Lam.  1.  2.  among  lovers  she  hath  none  to  c.  her,  17  .

21.  they  heard  that  I  sigh,  there  is  none  to  c.  me

2. 13.  wnatshall  1  equal  to  thee,  that  I  may  c.  thee  }
Ezek.  14.23.  they  shall  c.  you  when  ye  see  their  ways
Zech.  1. 17.  Lord  shall  Veto.  Zion, and  choose  Jerus.

10.  2.  diviners  told  false  dreams,  they  c.  in  vain
John  11.  19.  to  c.  them  concerning  their  brother
2  Cor.  1.  4.  that  ye  may  be  able  to  c.  them  who
2.  7.  ye  ought  rather  to  forgive  and  c.  him
Eph.  6.  22.  and  that  he  might  c.  your  hearts
Col.  4. 8.  he  might  know  your  estates,  c.  vour  hearts-
Thess.  3.  2.  to  c.  you  concerning  your  faith

4.  18.  wherefore  c.  one  another  with  these  words

5.  11.  wherefore  c.  yourselves  together  and  edify

14.  c.  the  feeble-minded,  support  the  weak

!  Thess.  2.  17.  now  our  Lord  Jesus  c.  your  hearts
COMFORTABLE.

2  Sam.  14.  17.  the  word  of  my  Lord  shall  now  be  c.
Zech.  1.  13.  Lord  answered  the  angel  with  c.  words
COMFORTABLY.

2  Sam.  19.  7-  go  forth  and  speak  c.  to  thy  servants
\  Chron.  30.  22.  he  spake  c.  to  all  the  Levites
32. 6.  he  set  captains  over  the  people,  and  spake  c-
Isa.  40.  2.  speak  ye  c.  to  Jerusalem,  cry  to  ner
Llos.  2. 14.  1  will  allure  her,  and  speak  c.  to  her
COMFO  RTED.

Gen.  24.  67.  Isaac  was  c.  after  his  mother’s  death

37.  35.  Jac.  refus.  to  be  c.  for  he  said,  I  go  to  grave

38.  12.  Jud.  was  c.  and  went  up  to  his  sheep-shear.
50.  21.  Joseph  c.  his  brethren,  and  spake  kindly

lluth  2. 13.  let  me  find  fav.  for  that  thou  hast  c.  me
2  Sam. 11..  24.  David  c.  Bath-sheba  his  wife

13.  39.  for  he  was  c.  concerning  Amnon

Job  42. 11.  all  his  brethren  c.  him  over  all  the  evil
Psal.  77. 2.  my  sore  ran,  my  soul  refused  to  be  c.

86. 17 .  because  thou,  Lord ,  hast  holpen  me  and  c.  me-
119. 52. 1  remembered  thy  judgments,  have  c.  mys.
Isa.  49.  13.  for  God  hath  c.  his  people,  52.  9.

54. 11.  oh,  thou  afflicted,  tossed,  and  note.

66. 13.  and  ye  shall  be  c.  in  Jerusalem

Jer.  31. 15.  H  achel  weeping,  refus.  to  be  c.  for  child.
Ezek.  5. 13.  I  will  cause  fury  to  rest,  I  will  be  c.

14.  22.  ye  shall  be  c.  concerning  all  the  evil

31 .  16.  all  that  drink  water  be  c.  in  parts  of  earth

32.  31.  Pharaoh  shall  see  them,  and  shall  be  c.

Mat.  2.  18.  would  not  be  c.  because  they  were  not7

5.  4.  bless,  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  c.
Luke  16.  25.  now  lie  is  c.  and  thou  art  tormented
John  11.  31.  the  Jews  which  c.  her,  saw  Mary  rise
Acts  16.  40.  when  they  had  seen  brethren,  c.  them
20.  12.  brought  young  man  alive,  were  not  a  lit.  c.
Rom.  1.  12.  that  I  may  be  c.  together  with  you

1  Cor.  14.  31.  that  all  may  learn,  and  all  may  be  c.

2  Cor.  1.  4.  the  comfort  wherewith  we  are  c.  of  G.

7.  6.  God  c.  us  by  the  coming  of  Titus

7.  the  consolation  wherewith  he  was  c.  in  you
13.  therefore  we  were  c.  in  your  comfort
Col.  2.  2.  that  their  hearts  might  be  c.  being  knit

1  Thess.  2.  11.  ye  know  how  he  exhorted  and  c.  you
3  7  we  were  c.  over  you  in  all  our  affliction

COMFORTEDST.

Isa.  12. 1.  thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou  c.  me
COMFORTER,  S.

2  Sam.  10.  3.  thathe  hath  sent  c.  to  thee,  1  Chr.  19.  3
Job  16.  2.  heard  many  things,  miserable  c.  are  ye  alt
Psal.  69.  20.  I  looked  fore,  but  found  none

Eccl.  4. 1.  tears  of  the  oppressed,  and  they  had  no  c.
Lam.  1.9.  she  came  down  wonderfully,  she  had  no  c .

16.  c.  that  should  relieve  my  soul  is  far  from  me
Nah.  3. 7.  whence  shall  I  seek  c.  for  thee  r
John  14.  16.  he  shall  give  you  another  C.  to  abide

26.  but  the  C.  which  is  Holy  Ghost,  shall  teach
15  26.  when  the  C.  is  come  ||  16.  7-  G.  will  notcome-
COMFORTETH.

Job  29.  25. 1  dwelt,  as  one  that  c.  the  mourners
Isa. 5 4.12. 1, even  I ,  am  he  that  c.  you,  who  art  thou.
66.  13.  as  one  whom  mother  c.  will  I  comfort  you
2  Cor.  1.  4.  whoc.  us  in  all  our  tribulations
*7  fi.  God  that  c.  those  that  are  cast  down
COMFORTLESS.

John  14.  18. 1  will  not  leave  you  c.  will  come  to  yon.
COMFORTS.

Psal.  94.  19.  of  my  thoughts,  thy  c.  delight  my  soul
Isa  57. 18. 1  will  lead  him  also,  and  restore  c.  to  him
COMING.

Gen.  30.  30.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  thee  since  my  c.

43.  +  20.  O  sir,  c.  down  we  came  to  buy  food
Lev.  14.  +48.  if  the  priest  c.  in  shall  come  and  look
Alum.  22. 16.  let  nothing  hinder  thee  from  c.

Judg.  5.  28.  whv  is  his  chariot  so  long  in  c.  ?

1  Sam.  16.  4.  elders  of  the  town  tremble  at  his  c.

29.  6.  thy  ffoin?  and  c.  in  with  me  since  day  of  c»
[Sam.  3.  25.  to  know  thy  going  out  and  thy  c.  in

2  Kings  13.  20.  invaded  the  land  at  c.  in  ot  thejrear
19.27.  1  know  thy  going  out  and  c.  in,  Isa.  37-28.

P  saith.  13.  for  he  seeth  that  his  day  isc.

1°1  8  T,ord  shall  preserve  thy  going  out  and  c.  m.
jsa  14  9  bell  is  moved  for  thee  to  meet  thee  at  c.

44.  7.  the  things  that  are  c.  let  them  shew  to  them
Jer.  8.  7-  and  swallow  observe  the  time  ot  their  c.
l)an.  4.  23.  saw  an  holy  one  c .  down  from  heaven
Mic.  7. 15.  accord,  to  the  days  of  the  c.out  of  Egypt-

H  I  7  o  rt  ,..L~  ohdln  fit  hlS  P.  ?


Alai.  3.  2.  who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  c.

4.  5.  before  the  c.  of  the  great  day  ot  the  Lord
Alat  16  °8.  till  they  see  Son  of  man  c.  m  his  kmgd
04  3  tell  us  what  shall  be  the  sign  ot  thy  c.  ?

~or  so  shall  the  c.  of  the  Son  ot  man  be,  37 , 39.

30  when  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  c.  m-
clouds,  26.  64.  Mark  13.26.  1 14  62.  Luke  21.  27.
48.  shall  say,  my  Lord  delayeth  his  c.  Luke  12.  45.
05 57.  at  my  c.  have  received  my  own,  ljUke  19.
Mark  6.  31.  for  there  were  many  c.  and  going
Luke  9.  42.  as  he  was  yet  c.  the  devil  tare  him
18. 5.  lest  by  her  continual  c.  she  weary  me
John  5.  7.  while  1  am  r.  another  steppeth  before  rote
25.  the  hour  is  c.  28. 11 10. 12.  seeth  the  wol  c.
Acts  \  A  8.  receive  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  c-
7.  52.  shewed  before  of  thee,  of  the  just  one

9.  245.  he  was  with  them  c.  in  and  going  out

10.  25.  as  Peter  was  c.  in  Cornelius  met  him
13.  24.  when  John  had  preached  betore  his  c.


C  O  M


C  O  M


COM


1  Cor.  1  7.  waiting  for  the  c.  of  our  Lord  .lesus

15.  23.  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  c.

16. 17.  1  am  glad  of  c.of  Stephanusand  Fortunatus

2  Cor.  7-  6.  God  comforted  us  by  the  c.  of  Titus

7.  not  by  his  c.  only,  but  by  trie  consolation
Phil.  1. 26.  be  more  abundant  by  my  c.  to  you  again

1  Thess.  2. 19.  are  not  ye  our  rejoicing  at  our  Ld’s  c.

3.  13.  hearts  unblameable  at  the  c.  of  our  Lord

4.  15.  we  who  remain  to  the  c.  of  our  Lord

5.  23.  preserved  blameless  to  the  c.  of  our  lord

2  Thess.  2.  1.  we  beseech  you  by  the  c.  of  our  lord

8.  and  shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  his  c.

9.  even  him  whosec.  is  after  the  working  of  Satan
Jam.  5.  7 .  be  patient  ,  brethren,  to  the  c.  of  the  Lord

8.  for  the  c.  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh

1  Pet.  2.  4.  to  whom  c.  as  unto  a  living  stone

2  Pee.  1.16.  make  known  power  and  c.  of  our  Lord  J.

3.  4.  saying,  where  is  the  promise  of  his  c.  ?

12.  looking  and  hasting  to  the  c.  of  the  day  of  God

1  John  2.  28.  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  c.
Rev.  13.  11. 'beheld  another  beast  c.  up  out  of  earth

21. 2.  new  Jerusalem  c.  dow  n  from  God  out  of  hea-

COMINGS.  [ven

Ezek.  43. 11.  shew  them  the  goings  out  and  c.  in
CO  MM  AN  D.

2  Sam.  23.  t  23.  David  set  Benaiah  at  his  c.

Job  39.  27.  doth  the  eagle  mount  up  at.  thy  c .?

COMMAND

Is  referred,  (I)  To  God,  whose  command  extendeth
to  the  earth ,  Psal.  33.  9.  To  the  heavens,  Psal.
148.  5.  To  his  people,  Exod.  34.  11.  To  the
adversaries  of  the  church,  Lam.  1.  17.  To  the
clouds,  Isaiah  5.  6.  To  serpents,  Amos  9.  3.
To  unclean  spirits,  Mark  1.  27-  It  signifies,  [1]
His  authority  and  power  over  his  creatures,  Psal.
148.  5.  [2]  His  will  and  readiness  to  help  his
own  children  in  their  distress,  Psal.  42.  8.  [3]
To  require  due  obedience  to  his  laws,  Deut.  11.

22.  f4]  To  procure,  or  work,  Psal.  44.  4.  [5]
To  enable  and  incline,  Job  36.  10.  [6]  To  re

strain,  Isa.  5.  6.  [7]  To  appoint,  or  establish
firmly.  Psalm.  111.  9.  [8]  To  stirup  by  his  pro¬
vidence,  Isa.  13.  3.  [9]  To  give,  or  bestow,  Lev.
25.  21. _  This  word  comprehendeth  instruction,
prediction,  exhortation,  and  consolation,  Mat.

11.  1.  compared  with  Mat.  10.  6,  17,  26,  40.

(II)  To  man,  as  parents  commanding  their  chil¬
dren,  Gen.  18.  19.  I  50.  16.  Governors  their
officers,  Joshua  1.  10.  Kings  their  subjects,
2  Chron.  14,  4.  Pastors  their  people,  2  1  hess.

3.  4,  6.

Gen.  18. 19.  Abrah.  will  c.  his  child,  and  household
Exod.  8.  27.  we  will  sacrifice  as  God  shall  c.  us
18.  23.  if  thou  do  this  thing,  and  God  c.  thee  so
Num.  9.  8.  7  will  hear  what  the  Lord  will  c.

36.  6.  this  is  the  thing  which  the  Lord  doth  c.
Deut.  28.8.  the  Lord  shall  c.  the  blessing  on  thee

32.  46.  ye  shall  c.  your  children  to  observe  to  do
Josh.  11.  15.  so  did  Moses  c.  Joshua,  and  so  he  did
Psal.  42.  8.  the  Lord  will  c.  his  loving-kindness
44.  4.  art  my  king,  O  God,  c.  deliverance  for  Jacob
Isa.  45. 11.  concerning  the  work  of  my  hands,  c.me
Jer.  27.  4.  c.  them  to  say  to  their  masters
Lam.  1.  10.  heathen  didst  c.  they  should  not  enter
Mat  A.  3.  c.  these  stones  be  made  bread,  Luke  4.3.
19. 7-  why  did  Moses  c.  to  give  writing  of  divorcem.
27  .  64.  c.  therefore  that  sepulchre  be  made  sure
Mark  10.  3.  he  said  to  them,  what  did  Moses  c.  you
Luke  8.  31.  that  he  wrnuld  note,  them  to  go  into  deep
9.54.  wilt  thou  wee.  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven
Arts  5.28.  saying,  did  not  we  straitly  e.  you

15.  5.  and  to  c.  them  to  keep  the  law  of  Moses

2  Thess.  3.  4.ye  both  do  and  w  ill  do  things  we  e.  you

6.  wre  e.  you,  brethren,  in  name  of  our  lord  Jesus

12.  that  are  such  w-e  e.  and  exhort  by  our  Ld.  Jesus
1  Tim.  4.  11.  these  things  c.  and  teach

l  COMMAND.

Exod.  7.  2.  shall  speak  all  that  I c.  thee,  Jer.  1.7, 17.
34.  11.  observe  thou  what  I  c.  thee,  Deut.  12.  28.
Lev.  25.  21.  then  I  will  c.  my  blessing  upon  you
Deut.  4.  2.  ye  shall  not  add  to  the  word  I  c.  you

7.  11.  shalt  keep  command.  7c.  thee  this  day,  to
do  them,  8.  11.  |  10.  13. 1  11.8,  27-1  13.  18.  |  30.8.

24. 18.  therefore  I c.  thee  to  do  this  thing,  22.

30. 16.  1  c.  thee  this  day  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God
Isa.  5.  6.  7  will  c.  the  clouds  that  they  rain  not
Jer.  11.  4.  obey  my  voice,  and  do  all  which  7  c.  you
34.  22.  behold,  7  will  c.  saiththe  Lord,  and  cause
Amos  9. 3.  thence  will  7c.  serpent,  he  shall  bite  them

4.  thence  7  c.  the  sword,  and  it  shall  slay  them

9.  7will  c.  and  I  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel
John  15. 14.  ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  what  7  c.  you

17.  these  things  7  c.  you,  that  ye  love  one  another
Acts  16.  18.  7  c.  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ
1  Cor.  7. 10.  to  the  married  7  c.  yet  not  I,  but  Lord
COMMANDED.

Gen.  45. 19- now  thou  art  c.  this  do  ye,  take  waggons
50.  12.  Joseph’s  sons  did  to  him  as  he  c.  them
Exod.  1. 17.  midwives  did  not  as  kingof  Egypt  c.
Lev.  10.  13.  eat  it  in  the  holy  place,  for  so  I  am  c.
Deut.  1. 18. 1  c.  you  at  that  time  all  things,  3. 18,21.
Josh.  4.  8.  the  children  of  Israel  did  as  Joshua  c.

8.  8.  set  the  city  on  fire,  see  I  have  c.  you

22. 2.  ye  have  obeyed  my  voice  in  all  I  c.  you
Judg.  13.  14.  all  that  I  c.  her,  let  her  observe

1  Sam.  20.  29.  my  brother,  he  hatlic.  me  to  be  there

21.  2.  David  said,  the  kingc.  me  a  business, and  said

2  Sam.  13.  28.  then  kill  Amnon,  have  not  I  c.  you
21. 14.  they  performed  all  that  the  king  c.

2  Kings  11.  9.  according  to  all  that  lehoiada  priesfe.

16.  16.  thus  did  according  to  all  that  king  A  haz  e.

1  Chron.  21.  17.  is  it  not  I  c.  peopleto  be  numbered

2  Chron.  8.  14.  for  so  had  David  the  man  of  God  c.
14.  4.  Asa  c.  J  udah  to  seek  L.  God  of  their  fathers
32.  12.  Ilezekiah  ||  33.  16.  Manasseh  c.  Judah

Neh.  13. 19.  I  c.  that  the  gates  should  he  shut

22.  I  c.  I.evites  to  cleanse  themselves,  keep  gates
Esth.  3.  2.  for  the  king  had  so  c.  concerning  Haman
12.  w'as  written  according  to  all  that  Daman  c.

4.  17.  Mordecai  did  according  as  Fsther  c.  him
8.  9-  written  according  to  all  that  Mordecai  c.

J°b  38. 12Diast  thou  c.  the  morning  since  thy  days  ?


Isa.  48.  5.  say ,  my  molten  image  hath  c.  them
Jer.  35. 6.  Jonadab  our  father  c.  us,  10, 14, 16, 18.
Ezek.  12. 7.  and  1  did  so  as  I  was  c.  37.  7-
Dan.  3.  4.  cried,  to  you  it  is  c.  O  people,  nations
19.  he  c.  that  they  should  heat  the  furnace

6. 16.  then  the  king  c.  and  they  brought  Daniel
24.  the  king  c.  and  they  brought  those  men

Amos  2. 12.  c.  the  prophets,  saying,  prophesy  not
Mat.  14.  9.  he  c.  it  to  be  given  her,  Mark  6. 27.

19-  he  c.  multitude  to  sit  down,  15. 35.  Mark  6.  39.
18.25.  his  lord  c.  him  to  be  sold,  and  all  he  had

21.  6.  the  disciples  went  and  did  as  Jesus  c.  them

28. 20.  teaching  to  observe  all  things  I  have  c.  you
I  uhe  9.21.  he  c.  them  to  tell  no  man  that  thing
Acts  10.  48.  he  c.  them  to  be  baptized  in  the  name

25.  6.  the  next  day  Festusc.  Paul  to  be  brought
1  Cor.  14.  34.  but  are  c.  to  be  under  obedience

1  'Thess.  4. 11.  work  with  your  hands  as  we  c.  you

2  Thess.  3.  10.  we  c.  you  that  if  any  would  not  work
Heb.  12.20.  they  could  notendure  thatwhich  was  c.
Rev.  9. 4.  it  w'as  c.  them  not  to  hurt  the  grass

God  COMMANDED.

Gen.  2. 16.  Gfi  c.  man  to  eat  freely  of  e  ery  tree
6. 22.  according  to  all  that  God  c.  him,  so  did  he

7.  9.  there  went  into  the  ark  as  God  had  c.  Noah,

16.  1  21.  4.  Deut.  20. 17.  Josh.  10.  40.
Deut.  5.  15.  God  c.  thee  to  keep  the  sabbath-day

5.  32.  observe  to  do  as  the  Lord  your  God  c.  you

33.  walk  in  all  the  ways  the  L.  your  God  c.  you

6.1.  which  L.  your  Godc.  to  teach  you,  20.  I  13.  5.

26. 16.  this  day  the  Lord  thy  God  c.  thee  to  keep
Judg.  4.  6.  hath  not  Lord  G.  c.  to  go  toward  Taoor  ?

1  Chron.  14. 16.  David  therefore  did  as  God  c.  him

2  Chr.  35.  21.  God  c.  me,  make  haste,  forbear  thou
Ezra  7. 23.  whatsoever  is  c.  by  the  God  of  heaven
Psal.  68.  28.  thy  G.  hath  c.  thy  strength,  strengthen
Mat.  15.  4.  for  God  c.  saying,  honour  thy  father
Acts  10.  33.  to  heal'  all  things  that  are  c.  thee  of  G.

2  Cor.  4. 6.  G.  who  c.  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness

Lord  COMMANDED.

Gen.  7  5.  Noah  did  according  to  all  the  Lord  c.
Exod.  7.  6.  Moses  and  Aaron  did  as  the  Lord  c.

them,  10,  20.  1  12.  28,  50.  Num.  17.  11.

16.16. thisis  the  thing  7,7.  c.  32.  I  35.4.  Num.  30. 1.

34.  as  the  Lord  c.  Moses,  34.  4.  |  39.  1,  5,  7,  &c.

40. 19,  &c.  Lev.  8.  9.  I  9. 10.
Lcr.8.4.  Mosesdid  as  L.  c. him,  Num. 20.27.  |  27.11.
Num.  36.  2.  Ixord  c.  my  lord  to  give  land  to  Israel
Deut.  6.  24.  the  Lord  c.  us  to  do  all  these  statutes

9.  16.  had  turned  aside  out  of  the  way  Lordc.  you
10. 5.  the  tables,  there  they  be  as  the  Lordc.  me

1  *am.  13. 14.  L.  c.  him  to  be  captain  over  people

2  Sam.  17-  +  14.  L.  c.  to  defeat  counsel  of  Ahithophel
24. 19-  and  David  went  up,  as  the  Lord  c.

1  Chr.  21 . 27-  L.  c.  the  angel,  he  put  up  his  sword
24.  19.  the  orderings  as  L.  God  of  Israel  c.  him
Psal.  106.  34.  concerning  whom  the  End  e.  them
133.  3.  for  there  the  Lord  c.  the  blessing,  even  life

Jer.  13.  5. 1  hid  it  by  Euphrates,  as  the  Lord c.  me
Lam.  1. 17.  the  Lord  hath  c.  concerning  Jacob
Acts  13. 46, 47.  wre  turn  to  Gentiles,  so  hath  the  L.  c.

Ijord  or  God  COMMANDED,  implicitly.
Gen.  3. 11.  eaten  of  the  tree  I  c.  not  to  eat,  17.
Exod.  23.  15.  as  I  c.  thee  in  the  time  appointed
Leu.  7.  38.  in  the  day  he  c.  the  children  of  Israel

10. 1.  offered  strange  fire  which  he  c.  them  not
Deut.  17.  3.  hath  served  other  gods,  which  I  have

not  c.  18.  20.  Jer.  19.  5. 1  23.  32.  |  29.  23.
Josh.  1.  9.  have  not  I  c.  thee  ?  be  strong  and  ofcour.
7. 11.  transgressed  my  covenant  1  c.  Judg.  2. 20.

13.  6.  divide  thou  it  by  lot.  as  1  have  c.  thee

2  Sam.  7.7.  whom  1  c.  to  feed  my  people,  1  Chr.17.6.

11.  since  the  time  that  I  c.  judges,  1  Chr.  17. 10.

1  Kings  11. 10.  had  c.  him  concerning  this  thing

17.  4.  I  have  c.  the  ravens  to  feed  thee  there
9.  I  have  c.  a  widow  woman  there  to  sustain  thee
1  Ch.  16. 15.  be  mindful  of  his  covenant,  the  word
which  he  c .  to  a  thousand  generations,  Ps.  105,  8.
40.  that  it  is  written  in  the  law,  which  he  c.  Israel
Psal.  7  ■  6.  awake  to  the  judgment  that  thou  hast  c.

33. 9.  he  spake  and  it  was  done, he  c.  and  it  stood  fast

111.9.  hath  c.  his  covenant  for  ever,  holy  is  his  name
119.  4. thou  hast  r.us  to  keep  thy  precepts  diligently

138.  thy  testimonies  thou  hast  c.  are  righteous
148.  5.  tor  the  Lord  c.  and  they  were  created
Isa.  13. 3.  I  have  c.  my  sanctifier!  ones,  1  have  called
34.  16.  for  my  mouth  it  hath  c.  and  his  spirit

45. 12.  the  heavens  and  all  their  host  have  I  c.
Jer.  7.  23.  but  this  thing  c.  I  them,  obey  my  voice

31.  which  1  c.  them  not,  19.  5.  I  32.  35.

11. 8.  all  words  of  covenant  which  1  c.  them  to  do

17.  22.  but  hallow  the  sabbath,  as  I  c.  your  fathers

50. 21.  do  according  to  all  that  I  have  c.  thee
Lam.  2. 17.  his  word  that  he  had  c.  in  days  of  old
Ezek.  9. 11.  1  have  done  as  thou  hast  c.  me

24.  18.  I  did  in  the  morning  as  I  was  c.  37.  10.
Zech.  1.  6.  my  words  which  I  c.  did  they  not  take
Mai.  A.  4.  remember  the  law  which  I  c.  in  Doreb
Luke  14. 22. I -ord.it  is  done  as  thou  hast  c.  and  room
Acts  10.42.  he  c.  us  to  ureach  to  the  people
Moses  COMMANDED.

Num.  16.  47.  Aaron  took  as  Moses  had  c.  and  ran
Deut. 31 .29. turn  aside  from  the  way  1  have  c.  you
33.  4.  Moses  c.  us  a  law,  even  the  inheritance
Josh.  1.7.  observe  to  do  according  to  all  Moses  c.

22.  2.  ye  have  kept  all  that  Moses  c.  you

1  Chr.  15. 15.  Moses  c.  according  to  word  of  the  L.
Mat.  8.  4.  offer  the  gift  that  Moses  c.  for  a  testimony
Mark  1. 44.  offer  for  thy  cleans,  those  things  which
Moses  c.  for  a  testimony  to  them,  Luke  5.  14.
John  8.  5.  Moses  in  law  c .  that  such  should  be  stoned
.  COMMANDED.ST.

Neh.  1.7.  which  thou  c.  thy  servant  Moses,  8.

9- 14.  thou  c.  them  precepts,  statutes,  and  laws
Jer,  32.  23.  they  have  done  nothing  that  thou  c.
COMMANDER.

Isa.  55.  A.  given  him  for  a  leader  and  c.  to  people
COMMAND  EST.

Josh.  1. 16.  all  that  thou  c.  us  we  will  do

18.  whoso  will  not  hearken  in  all  that  thou  c.

Jer.  32.  23.  have  done  nothing  of  all  thou  c.  them
Acts  23. 3.  c.  me  to  be  smitten  contrary  to  the  law


COMMANDETH.

Num.  32.  25.  thy  servants  will  do  as  my  lord  c.

Job  9.  7.  God,  who  c.  the  sun,  and  it  riseth  not
36.  10.  he  c.  that  they  return  from  iniquity

32.  he  covereth  the  light,  and  c.  it  not  to  shine

37. 12.  that  they  may  do  whatever  he  c.  them
Psal.  107. 25.  he  c.  and  raiseth  the  stormy  wind
Lam.  3. 37.  whosaith,  it  cometh,  when  Ld.  c.  it  not .'
Amos  6. 11.  l  ord  c.  and  he  will  smite  great  horse
Mark  1.  27-  he  c.  the  unclean  spirits,  Luke  A.  36.
L.uke  8.  25.  he  c.  the  winds,  and  they  obey  him
Acts  17.  30.  now  c.  all  men  every  where  to  repent

COMMANDING.

Gen.  49.  33.  Jacob  made  an  end  of  c.  his  sons
Mat.  11. 1.  Jesus  made  an  end  of  c.  his  disciples
Acts  24. 8.  c.  his  accusers  to  come  to  thee
1  Tim.  A.  3.  c.  to  abstain  from  meats  God  created
COMMANDMENT.

Exod.  34. 32.  he  gave  them  in  c.  all  Lord  had  spoken
Num.  15.  31.  broken  hisc.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off

23.  20.  behold,  1  have  received  c.  to  bless
27. 14.  ye  rebelled  against  my  c.  in  the  desert
Deut.  30. 11.  this  c.  I  command  thee  this  day

1  Kings  2. 43.why  hast  thou  not  kept  the  c.  I  charged

2  Kings  18.  36.  king's  c.  was,  ans.  not,  Isa.  36.  21.

1  Chron.  12.  32.  all  their  brethren  were  at  their  c.
28.  21.  all  the  people  will  be  wholly  at  thy  c.

2  Chron.  8. 13.  offering  according  to  the  c.  or  Moses
+  14.  so  was  the  c.  of  David  the  man  of  God

19.  10.  what  cause  shall  come  between  law  and  c.

30.  12.  one  heart  to  do  the  c.  of  king  and  princes

31.  5.  and  as  soon  as  the  c.  came  abroad,  Israel
Ezra  8. 17.  I  sent  them  with  c.  to  Iddo  the  chief

10.  3.  of  those  that  tremble  at  the  c.  of  God
Neh.  11.  23.  it  was  the  king’s  c.  concerning  them

13.  +  5.  wine  and  oil,  which  was  the  c.  of  Levites
Esth.  1.  12.  Vashti  refused  to  come  at  the  king’s  c.

2.  20.  Esther  did  the  c.  of  Mordecai,  like  as  when
3. 3.  why  transgressest  thou  the  king’s  c.  ?

9. 1.  when  king’s  c.  drew  nigh  to  be  put  in  execution
Job  23.  12.  nor  gone  back  from  the  c.  of  his  lips
Psal.  119.  96.  but  thy  c.  is  exceeding  broad
147.  15.  he  sendeth  forth  his  c.  upon  earth
Prov.  6.  23.  the  c.  is  a  lamp,  and  the  law  is  light

8.  29.  that  the  waters  should  not  pass  his  c.

13. 13.  he  that  feareth  the  c.  shall  be  rewarded

19. 16.  he  thatkeepeth  the  c.  keepeth  his  soul

Eccl.  8.  5.  whoso  keepeth  c.  shall  feel  no  evil  thing
Jer.  35.  14.  but  they  obey  their  father  Jonadab’s  c.
Dan.  3.  22.  because  the  king’s  c.  w'as  urgent

9.  23.  the  c.  came  forth,  and  I  am  come  to  shew
Has.  5. 11.  because  he  willingly  walked  after  the  c.
Mai.  2.  1.  now,  O  ye  priests,  this  c.  is  for  you

4.  ye  shall  know  that  I  have  sent  this  c.  to  you
Mat.  15.  3.  why  do  ye  transgress  the  c.  of  God  ?

6.  thus  have  ye  made  the  c.  of  God  of  no  effect

22.  36.-  Master,  which  is  the  great  c.  in  the  law  ?
38.  this  is  the  first  and  great  c.  Mark  12.  30.

Mark  7. 8.  for  laying  aside  the  c.  of  God,  ye  hold
9.  he  said,  full  wTell  ye  reject  the  c.  or  God

12.  31.  there  is  no  other  c.  greater  than  these
Luke  15. 29.  nor  tr  ansgressed  I  at  any  time  thy  c.
23.56.  rested  the  sabbath  day  according  to  thee.
John  10.  18.  this  c.  have  I  received  of  my  Father

12.  49.  he  gave  me  a  c.  what  I  should  say
50. 1  know  that  his  c.  is  life  everlasting

14.  31.  as  the  Father  gave  mec.  even  so  I  do

15. 12.  my  c.  that  ye  love  one  another,  1  John  3. 23.
Acts  15.  24.  to  whom  we  gave  no  such  c.

17.  15.  receiving  a  c.  to  Silas  to  come  to  him

23.  30.  and  gave  c.  to  his  accusers  also  to  say
25.  23.  at  Festus’  c.  Paul  was  brought  forth

Rom.  7.  8.  but  sin  taking  occasion  by  the  c.  11.

9.  w  hen  the  c.  came,  sin  revived,  and  I  died

10.  c.  w  hich  w'as  ordained  to  life,  l  found  to  death

12.  and  the  c.  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good

13.  that  sin  by  c.  might  become  exceeding  sinful

13.  9.  if  there  be  any  other  c.  it  is  briefly  in  this
16.  26.  according  to  the  c.of  the  everlasting  God

1  Cor.  7 ■  6.  I  speak  this  by  permission,  not  of  c.

2  Cor.  8.  8.  I  speak  not  by  c.  but  by  occasion  of
Eph.  6.  2.  which  is  the  first  c.  with  promise

1  Tim.  A.  1.  by  the  c.of  God  our  Saviour,  Tit.  1.  2,

5.  the  end  of  thee,  is  charity,  out  of  a  pure  heart
ILeb.  7.  16.  who  is  made  not  after  law  of  a  carnal  c.

18.  there  is  a  disannulling  of  the  c.  going  before

11.22.  Joseph  gavec.  concerning  his  bones

23.  Moses  nid,  they  wrere  not  afraid  of  the  king’s  c.

2  Pet.  2.  21.  to  turn  from  holy  c.  delivered  to  them

3.  2.  mindful  of  c.  of  us  the  apostles  of  the  Lord

1  John  2.  7.  but  an  old  c.  which  ye  have  heard
3.  +  11.  this  is  the  c.  ye  heard  from  the  beginning

23.  this  is  his  c.  that  weshould  believe  on  the  name
4. 21.  this  c.  have  we  from  him,  he  who  ioveth  God

2  John  A.  as  we  have  received  ac.  from  the  Father

6.  this  is  the  c.  that  as  ye  have  heard  from  beginn.

Give  or  given  COMMANDMENT.

Exod.  25.  22.  things  which  I  will  give  thee  in  c.
Deut.  1.  3.  the  Lord  had  given  him  in  c.  unto  them
Ezra  4.  21.  give  c.  to  cease  till  another  c.  be  given
Psal,  71.  3.  given  c.  to  save  me,  thou  my  rock
Isa.  23.  11.  the  I-ord  hath  given  c.  against  the  city
Nah.  1.  14.  the  Lord  hath  given  c.  concerning  thee
John  11. 57.  given  c.  if  any  knew  where  he  were
Keep  Commandment,  see  Keep.
COMMANDMENT  of  the  Lord.

Exod.  17. 1.  journ.  c.  of  L.  Num.  9.  18,  20.  |  10.  13.
Num,  3.  39.  Moses  and  Aaron  numbered  ate.  of  L.

24.  13.  1  cannot  go  beyond  the  c.  of  L.  to  do  good

33.  38.  A  aron  went  up  to  Dor  at  c.  of  Lord  and  died

Josh.  22. 3.  ye  have  kept  charge  of  c.  of  L.  your  God

1  Sam.  12. 14.  and  not  rebel  against  the  c.  of  Lord

15.  if  ye  will  not  obey,  but  rebel  against  c.  </  L.
13.  13.  thou  hast  not  kept  the  c.  of  Lord  thy  God

15. 13.  Saul  said,  I  have  performed  the  c.  of  Lord

24.  I  have  transgressed  the  c.  of  L.  and  thy  word

2  Sam.  12.  9.  wherefore  hast  thou  despised  c.  of  L.
2  Kings  24.  3.  at  the  c.  of  Lord  came  this  on  Judkh
2  Chron.  29.  25.  for  so  was  c.  of  L.  by  his  prophets
Psal.  19.  8.  the  c.  of  L.  is  pure,  enlightening  the

„  eyes

1  Cor.  7.  25.  concerning  virgins  I  have  no  c.  of  L.


COM


COM


COM


New  COMMANDMENT.

John  13.  34.  a  new  c.  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  love

1  John  2.  7.  brethren,  1  write  no  new  c.  unto  you

8.  a  new  c.  I  write  unto  you,  which  is  true  in  him

2  John  5.  not  as  though  I  wrote  a  new  c.  unto  thee

Rebelled  against  the  COM  MA  N  DM  EN  T.
j  Num.  27-  14.  ye  rebelled  ag.  my  e.  in  the  des.  of  Zin
•  Dent.  1. 26.  but  ye  rebel,  ag.  c.  of  L.  your  God,  43.

9.  23.  then  ye  rebel,  ag.  c.  of  I.,  and  believed  not
s  Lam.  1. 18.  L.  is  riehteous.  1  have  rebelled  ag.  his  c.

COMM  AN  DM  EN  IS.

Gen.  26.  5.  because  that  Abraham  kept  my  c.

Exod.  15.  26.  and  if  thou  wilt  give  ear  to  his  c.

34. 28.  wrote  on  tables  the  ten  c.  Dent.  4. 13.  |  10. 4.
Lev.  4. 13.  have  done  somewhat  ag.  any  of  the  c.  27.
5.  17.  commit  sin  forbidden  by  the  c.  of  the  !  ord
27  .  34.  these  are  the  c.  the  Lord  commanded
Num.  15.  39.  remember  all  the  c.  of  the  Lord
Deut.  8. 11 .  in  not  keeping  c.  which  l  command  thee

11.  13.  if  you  shall  hearken  to  c.  28. 13.  Jndg.  3.  4.

27.  if  ye  will  obey  the  c.  of  the  T.ord  your  God

28.  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  c.  of  the  Lord  your  G.

1  Sam.  15.  11.  Saul  hath  not  performed  my  c.

1  Kings  11.  34.  because  he  hath  kept  my  c.  and  stat.

14.  8.  David  who  kept  my  c.  and  followed  me

18.  18.  in  that  ye  have  forsaken  the  c.  of  the  I.ord

2  Kings  17-  16.  and  they  left  all  the  c.  of  the  Lord

19.  Judah  kept  not  the  c.  of  the  Lord  their  God

18.  6.  but  kept  his  c.  which  he  commanded  Moses
2  Chron.  7.19.  if  ye  forsake  my  c.  I  set  before  you
24.  20.  why  transgress  ye  the  c.  of  the  Lord  ?

Ezra  9. 10.  O  our  God,  for  we  have  forsaken  thy  c.

14.  should  we  again  break  thy  c.  and  join  in  affin.
Psal.  89. 31 .  if  they  keep  not  my  c.  then  will  I  visit

111.  7.  his  works  are  verity,  all  his  c.  are  sure

112.  i:  blessed  is  he  that  delight,  greatly  in  his  c.
119.  10.  O  let  me  not  wander  from  thy  c.

19.  1  am  a  stranger,  hide  not  thy  e.  from  me
35.  make  me  to  go  in  the  path  of  thy  c.

47.  1  will  delight  in  thy  c.  which  1  have  loved
66.  teach  me,  for  I  have  believed  thy  c.

73.  give  understanding,  that  I  may  learn  thy  e.
86.  all  thy  c.  are  faith.  ||  151.  all  thy  c.  are  truth
'98.  thou  through  thy  c.  hast  made  me  wiser  than
127.  I  love  thy  c.  ||  131.  1  longed  for  thy  c.

143.  thy  c.  are  my  delights  ||  172.  e.  righteous.
166.  I  nave  done  thy  c.  1|  176.  not  forget  thy  c.
Prov.  2.  1.  if  thou  wilt  hide  myc.  with  thee
7.  1.  keep  my  words  and  lay  up  my  c.  with  thee

10.  8.  the  wise  in  heart  will  receive  c.

Isa.  48.  18.  O  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  my  c.
Mat.  5.  19.  whoso  shall  break  one  of  these  least  c.

15.  9.  teach,  for  doctrines  the  e .  of  men,  Mark  7.  7.

22.  40.  on  these  two  c.  hang  all  the  law  and  proph.

Mark  10.  19-  thou  knowest  the  c.  Luke  18.  20.

12.  29.  the  first  of  all  the  c.  is,  hear  O  Isr.  the  L.
Luke  1.  6.  walking  in  all  the  c.  of  the  L.  blameless
John  14.  21.  he  that  hath  my  c.  and  keepeth  them

15. 10.  if  keep  my  c.  as  I  have  kept  my  Father’s  c.

I  Cor.  7.  19.  is  nothing,  but  keeping  the  c.  of  God
14.  37.  things  I  write  you,  are  the  c.  of  the  Lord
!  Col.  2.  22.  after  the  c.  and  doctrines  of  men
1  Thess.  4. 2.  for  ye  know  what  c.  we  gave  you  by  L.
1  John  2.  4.  he  that  keepeth  not  his  c.  is  a  liar

3.  24.  he  that  keepeth  his  c.  dwelleth  in  him
t  John  6.  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his  c.

Do  COMMANDMENTS,
j  Num.  15.  40.  do  all  my  e.  and  be  holy  to  your  God
Deut.  6.  25.  obs.  to  do  all  c.  15.  5.  |  28. 1, 15.  |  30.  8.

1  Chron.  28.  7-  if  he  be  constant  to  do  my  e.

Psal.  103. 18.  those  that  remember  his  c.  to  do  them

111.  10.  understanding  have  they  that  do  his  c.

1  Rev.  22.  14.  blessed  are  they  that  do  his  c.

Not  do  COMMANDMENTS.

,  Lev.  26.  14.  but  if  ye  will  not  do  all  these  c.

15.  so  that  ye  will  not  do  all  my  c.  but  break  coven.

Keep  Commandments,  see  Keep.
COMMEND

I  Signifies,  [1]  To  extol,  or  praise,  2  Cor.  3. 1.  I  5.  12.
[2]  To  commit,  or  give  in  charge,  Luke  23.  46.
[3J  To  render  more  illustrious  and  commendable ,
Rom.  3.  5.  [4]  To  make  or  render  one  more
acceptable,  1  Cor.  8.  8.

,  Luke  23.  46.  Father,  into  thy  hands  I  c.  my  spirit
t  Acts  20.  32.  and  now,  brethren,  1  c.  you  to  God
;  i?0w.3.5.ifourunrigliteousnessr.  righteous,  of  God
16. 1. 1  c.  unto  you  Phebe  pur  sister,  a  servant

2  Cor.  3. 1.  do  we  begin  again  to  c.  ourselves  ?

5.  12.  for  we  c.  not  ourselves  again  to  you

10.  12.  or  compare  ourselves  with  some  that  c.
COMMENDATION.

2  Cor.  3. 1.  or  need  we,  as  some  others,  epistles  of  c.?
COMMENDED.

I  Gen.  12. 15.  the  princes  c.  Sarai  before  Pharaoh
Prov.  12. 8.  a  man  shall  be  c.  accord,  to  his  wisdom
I  Eccl.  8. 15.  then  I  c.  mirth,  because  a  man  hath
I  Luke  16. 8.  the  Lord  c.  the  unjust  steward,  because
R  Acts  14. 23.  c.  them  to  the  L.  on  whom  they  believed
2  Cor.  12.  11.  I  ought  to  have  been  c.  of  you
|  COMMENDETII.

Rom.  5.  8.  but  God  c.  his  love  towards  us,  in  that

1  Cor.  8.  8.  but  meat  c.  us  not  to  God

2  Cor.  10. 18.  not  he  that  c.  is  approved,  but  whom  L.

COMMENDING.

2  Cor.  4;  2.  c.  ourselves  to  every  man’s  conscience
6. 1 4.  in  all  c.  ourselves  as  tne  ministers  of  God
COMMISSION,  S.

Ezra  8.  36.  and  they  delivered  the  king’s  c.

Acts  26. 12.  as  I  went  with  c.  from  the  chief  priest
COMMIT.

Exod.  20. 14.  thou  shalt  not  c.  adultery,  Deut.  5. 18.

Mat.  5.  27.  |  19.  18.  Rom.  13.  9.
Lev.  5. 17.  if  sin,  and  c.  any  of  these  things  forbidden
18.  26.  not  c.  any  of  these  abominations,  30.

29.  who  shall  c.  any  of  these  abominations
Num.  5.  6.  if  a  man  or  woman  c.  any  sin  that  men  c.
Deut.  19.  20.  c.  no  more  any  such  evil  among  you
Jndg.  13.  t  1.  added  to  c.  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Ixird
2  Chron.  21.  11.  caused  I erusalem  to  c.  fornication
Job  5.  8.  unto  God  would  1  c.  my  cause
Psal.  31.  5.  into  thine  hand  I  c.  my  spirit
37-  5.  c.  thy  way  to  the  Lord,  trust  also  in  him


Prov.  16.  3.  c.  thy  works  unto  the  T.ord,  thy  thoughts

12.  an  abomination  to  kings  to  c.  wickedness
Isa.  22.  21.  I  will  c.  thy  government  into  his  hand
Jer.  37.  21.  c.  Jeremiah  to  the  court  of  prison

44.  7.  why  c.  ye  this  great  evil  against  your  souls  ?
Ezek.  8.  17.  c.  abominations  which  they  c.  here

16.  43.  and  thou  shalt  not  c.  this  lewdness
22.  9.  in  the  midst  of  thee  they  c.  lewdness
Has.  6.  9.  the  priests  murder,  they  c.  lewdness
7.1.  for  they  c.  falsehood,  and  the  thief  cometh
Luke  12.  48.  and  did  c.  things  worthy  of  stripes

16.  11.  who  will  c.  to  your  trust  the  true  riches  ?
John  2.  24.  JesuS  did  not  c.  himseif  to  them
Rom.  1.32.  whoc.  such  things  are  worthy  of  death
2.  2.  is  against  them  which  c.  such  things

22.  that  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou  c.  sacrilege  ?

1  Cor.  10.  8.  neither  let  us  c.  fornication

1  Tim.  1.  18.  this  charge  I  c.  to  thee,  son  Timothy

2  Tim.  2.  2.  the  same  c.  thou  to  faithful  men
Jam.  2.  9.  if  ye  have  respect  to  persons  ye  c .  sin
1  Pet.  4.  19.  c.  the  keeping  of  their  souls  to  him

1  John  3.  9.  whoso  is  born  of  God  doth  not  c.  sin
Rev.  2.  14.  who  taught  Israel  to  c.  fornication

20.  to  teach  and  seduce  my  servants  to  c.  forni-
See  Adultery.  [cation

COMMIT  iniquity.

2  Sam.  7- 14.  if  he  c.  iniquity  1  will  chasten  him
Job  34.  10.  Almighty,  that  he  should  c.  iniquity
Jer.  9.  5.  they  weary  themselves  to  c.  iniquity
Ezek.  3.  20.  turn  from  .  ighteousn.  and  c.  in.  33. 13.

COMMIT  trespass.

Lev.  5. 15.  if  a  soul  c.  a  trespass  through  ignorance
Num.  5.  12.  if  a  man’s  wife  go  aside  and  c.  trespass

31. 16.  caused  Israel  toe.  trespass  against  the  Lord
Josh.  22. 20.  Achan  c.  a  trespass  in  the  accurs.  thing

COMMiT  whoredom,  or  whoredoms.

I_,ev.  20.  5. 1  will  cut  off  that  c.  whor.  w  ith  Molech
Num.  25. 1.  to  c.  whor.  with  the  daughters  of  Moab
Ezek.  16. 17.  and  thou  didst  c.  wher.  with  images
34.  whereas  none  followeth  thee  to  c.  whoredom

20.  30.  c.  ye  whoredom  after  their  abominations  ?

23.  43.  will  they  c.  w.  with  her,  and  she  with  them
IIos.  4. 10.  they  shall  c.  whoredoms  and  not  increase

13.  therefore  your  daughters  shall  c.  whor.  14.

COMMITTED.

Gen.  39.  8.  he  hath  c.  all  that  he  hath  to  my  hand
22.  the  keeper  c.  to  Joseph  all  the  prisoners
Lev.  4,  35.  priest  make  atonement  for  sin  he  hath  c.
18.  30.  these  abominable  customs  which  were  c.

20.  23.  they  c.  these  things,  and  I  abhorred  them
Num.  15.  24.  if  aught  be  c.  by  ignorance

Deut.  17.  5.  bring  forth  that  man  or  woman  that  c.

21.  22.  if  a  man  have  c.  a  sin  worthy  of  death
Judg.  20. 6.  they  have  c.  folly  and  lewdness  in  Israel
1  KingsSAJ .  we  have  sinned,  we  have  c.  wickedn.

14.  22.  they  provoked  him  with  sins,  they  c.

27.  brasen  shields  c.  he  to  the  guard,  2  Chr.  12. 10.

1  Chr.  10. 13.  Saul  died  for  his  transgression  he  c.
Jer,  2.  13.  for  my  people  have  c.  two  evils
5.  30.  a  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  is  c.  in  land
16. 10.  what  is  our  sin  that  we  have  c.  against  Lord
44.  3.  which  they  have  c.  to  provoke  to  anger,  9.
Ezek.  16.  26.  thou  hast  c.  fornication  with  Egypt
51.  nor  hath  Samaria  c.  half  of  thy  sins
18.  21.  turn  from  all  his  sins  he  hath  c.  22,  28.

20.  43.  shall  lothe  yourselves  for  evils  ye  have  c.
23.  3.  they  c.  whoredoms  in  Egypt  in  their  youth

7.  thus  she  c.  whoredoms  with  them

33.  16.  none  of  the  sins  he  c.  shall  be  mentioned
Hos.  1.  2.  for  the  land  hath  c.  great  whoredom

4.  18.  they  have  c.  whoredom  continually
Mark  15. 7.  who  had  c.  murder  in  the  insurrection
Luke  12.  48.  and  to  whom  men  have  c.  much,  of  him
John  5. 22.  Father  hath  c.  all  judgment  to  the  Son
Acts  8. 3.  haling  men  and  women,  c.  them  to  prison

25.  11.  if  I  have  c.  any  thing  worthy  of  death
25.  had  found  he  had  c.  nothing  worthy  of  death
27.  40.  they  c.  themselves  to  the  sea  and  loosed

28. 17.  though  1  have  c.  nothing  against  the  people
Rom. 3. 2.  because  to  them  were  c.  the  oracles  of  God

1  Cor.  9.17.  dispensation  of  gospel  is  c.tome,  Tit. 1.3.
10.  8.  nor  let  us  commit  fornic.  as  some  of  them  c.

2  Cor.  5. 19.  hath  c.  to  us  the  word  of  reconciliation
12.  21.  and  lasciviousness  which  they  have  c.

Gal.  2.  7*  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision  was  c.  to  me
as  gospel  of  circumcision  to  Peter,  1  Tim.  1.11.

1  Tim.  6.  20.  O  Timothy,  keep  what  is  c.  to  thee

2  Tim.  1. 12.  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  c.  to  him
Jam.  5. 15.  if  he  have  c.  sins,  they  shall  be  forgiven

1  Pet. 2  A3,  c.  himself  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously
Judelb.  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they  have  c.
Rev.  17 . 2.  with  whom  kings  have  c.  fornic.  18.  3, 9.
See  Abominations.
COMMITTED  iniquity.

Psal.  106.6.  we  have  c.  iniq.  we  have  done  wickedly
Ezek.  33.  13.  for  his  iniq.  he  hath  r.  he  shall  die,  18.’
Dan.  9.5.  we  have  c.  iniquity  and  done  foolishly
COMMITTED  trespass.

Lev.  5. 7.  bring  for  his  trespass  he  c.  two  turtle-doves
Josh.  7. 1.  Israel  c.  a  trespass  in  the  accursed  thing
22. 16.  what  trespass  is  this  ye  have  c.  against  God  i
31.  because  ye  have  not  c.  this  trespass  against  L.
Ezek.  15.  8.  because  they  have  c.  a  trespass,  1  will
20.  27.  in  that  they  c.  a.  trespass  against  me
COMMUTES!’,  ETII,  ING.

Psal.  10. 14.  the  poor  c.  himself  to  thee,  thou  helper
Ezek.  8. 6.  the  great  abominations  that  Israel  c.  here
33. 15.  walk  in  statutes  of  life  without  c.  iniauity
IIos.  4. 2.  by  lying,  killing,  stealing,  and  c.  adultery

5.  3.  for  now,  O  Ephraim,  thou  c.  whoredom
John  8.  34.  whosoever  c.  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin

1  Cor.  6.  18.  but  he  that  c.  fornic.  sinneth  against
1  Jo/m  3.  4.  whoso  c.  sin  transgresseth  also  the  law

8.  he  that  c.  sin  is  of  the  devil,  for  the  devil  sinneth

COMMODIOUS.

Acts  27.  12.  the  haven  was  not  c.  to  winter  in
COMMON.

By  common,  is  meant  that  which  is  ordinary,  or
usual ;  as  a  common  death,  Num.  16.  29.  a  com¬
mon  evil,  Eccl.  6.  1.  Sometimes  that  which  is
ceremonially  unclean,  Acts  11.  9-  To  eat  with
common  hands,  that  is,  without  washing  one's


hands,  Mark  7.  2.  Common  bread,  that  is,
unhallowed  bread,  \  Sam.  21.  4.  It  is  said.
Acts  2.  44.  That  such  as  believed  had  all  things
common ;  that  is,  as  to  use,  but  not  as  to  title.
Moses  calls  a  vineyard  common,  or  profane
What  man  is  he  that  hath  planted  a  vineyard,
and  hath  not  yet  made  it  common  t  Deut.  20.

+  6.  If  there  be  such  an  one,  he  may  return  to
his  house  ;  because  the  first  fruits  of  trees  and
vines  were  reckoned  unclean,  or  rather  were  con¬
secrated  to  the  Lord,  and  the  owner  was  not  al
lowed  to  touch  them,  till  after  the  fourth  year,  Lev,
19.  24,  25.

See  Profane.

Num.  16. 29.  if  these  men  die  the  c.  death  of  all  men
Deut.  20. 1 6.  planted  a  vineyard,  and  not  made  it  r.
28.  +  30.  shall  plant,  and  not  use  it  as  c.  meat
1  Sam.  21. 4.  there  is  no  c.  bread  under  my  hand
5.  the  vessels  holy,  and  the  bread  is  in  manner  c.
Eccl.  6.  1.  there  is  an  evil,  and  it  isr.  among  men
Jer.  31.  5.  the  planters  shall  eat  them  asc.  things
Ezek.  23.  42.  men  of  c.  sort  were  brought  Sabeans
Mat.  27.  27.  the  soldiers  took  Jesus  into  the  c.  hall
Mark  7.  +2.  the  disciples  eat  bread  with  c.  hands
Acts  2.  44.  believers  had  all  things  c.  4.  32.

5. 18.  and  put  the  apostles  in  the  c.  prison
10.  14.  I  have  never  eaten  anything  that  is  c.  11. 8.

15.  what  God  hath  cleansed  call  not  thou  c.  11.  9.
28.  that  I  should  not  call  any  thing  c.  or  unclean
Rom.  14.  t  14.  there  is  nothing  c.  of  itself;  but  to
him  that  esteemeth  any  thing  to  be  c.

1  Cor.  10.  13.  no  temptation  takenyou  butc.  to  men
Tit.  1.  4.  to  Titus  my  own  son,  after  the  c.  faith
Jude  3.  diligence  to  write  to  you  of  the  c.  salvation

COMMON  people.

Lev.  4. 27.  if  any  of  the  c.  people  sin  thro’  ignorance
Jer.  26. 23.  cast  his  dead  body  into  the  graves  of  c.  p.
Mark  12. 37-  and  the  c.  people  heard  him  gladly
COMMON-WEALTH.

Eph.  2.  12.  being  aliens  from  the  c. -wealth  of  Israel
Commonly;  see  Reported.
COMMOTION,  S.

2  Chron.  29.  +8.  Lord  hath  delivered  them  to  great  c.
Jer.  10.  22.  a  great  c.  out  of  the  north  country
Luke  21. 9.  when  ye  hear  of  c.  be  not  terrified

COMMUNE.

Exod.  25.  22.  and  there  I  will  meet  and  c.  with  thee
1  Sam.  18. 22.  c.  with  David  secretly, and  say, behold
19.  3.  and  I  will  c.  with  my  father  of  thee
Job  4. 2.  if  we  essay  to  c.  with  thee,  wilt  be  grieved  1
Psal.  4. 4.  c.with  your  own  heart  on  your  bed, be  still
64.  5.  they  c.  of  laying  snares  privily,  they  say
77. 6.  in  tne  night  I  c.  with  mine  own  heart
COMMUNED.

Gen.  23.  8.  Abraham  c.  ||  34. 6.Hamor  c.with  Jac. 8.
42. 24.  Joseph  c.  ||  Judg  9- 1-  Abimelecfi  c.

1  Sam.  9.25. Samuel  c.  ||  25. 39.  David  c.with  Abigail

1  Kings  10. 2.  the  queen  of  Sheba  c.  with  Solomon  of

all  that  was  in  her  heart,  2  Chron.  9.  1.

2  Kings  22. 14.  they  c.  with  Huldah  the  prophetess
Eecl.  1.  16.  I  c.  with  mine  own  heart,  saying,  lo
Dan.  1. 19.  and  king  c.  with  them,  none  like  Daniel
Zech.  1.  14.  the  angel  that  c.  with  me  said  unto  me
Luke  6.  11.  they  c.  what  they  might  do  to  Jesus

22.  4.  Judas  c.  to  betray  Jesus  unto  them

24.  15.  that  while  they  c.  Jesus  himself  drew  near
Acts  24. 26.  Felix  sent  and  c.  the  oftener  with  Paul
COMMUNICATE.

Gal.  6.  6.  let  him  that  is  taught  c.to  him  that  teacheth
Phil.  4.  14.  that  ye  did  c.  with  my  affliction

1  Tim.  6.  18.  that  they  do  good,  be  willing  to  c.
Heb.  13. 16.  but  to  do  good  and  to  c.  forget  not

COMMUNICATED.

Gal.  2.  2.  I  c.  to  them  that  gospel  which  T  preach
Phil.  4.  15.  no  church  c.  with  me  but  ye  only
COMMUN ICA'i  ION,  S.

2  Sam.  3. 17.  Abner  had  c.  with  the  elders  of  Israel
2  Kings  9. 11.  he  said,  ye  know  the  man  and  his  c.
Mat.  5.  37.  but  let  your  c.  be  yea,  yea,  nay,  nay
Luke  24.  17.  what  manner  of  c.  are  these  ye  have  ;

1  Cor.  15.  33.  evil  c.  corrupt  goo.d  manners

Eph.  4. 29.  no  corrupt  c.  proceed  out  of  your  mouth,

Col.  3.  8.

Philem.  6.  that  c.  of  thy  faith  mav  become  effectual
COMMUNING.

Gen.  18.  33.  the  Lord  left  c.  with  Abraham
Exod.  31. 18.  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  c.  on  Sinai
COMMUNION.

This  word  signifies  fellowship,  concord,  or  agree
ment,  2  Cor.  6. 14.  What  communion  hath  light
with  darkness  ?  Such  as  are  enlightened  by  the
word  and  spirit  of  God  can  have  no  profitable,
agreeable,  or  comfortable  converse  with  such  as
are  in  darkness  or  ignorance.  Communion  is
likewise  taken  for  a  sacrament,  or  sacred  sign
of  our  spiritual  fellowship  with  Christ,  1  Cor.
10.  16.  The  cup  of  blessing,  is  it  not  the  com#
munion  of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  Our  drinking  of
the  wine  in  the  cup,  is  a  religious  action,  whereby
and  wherein  Christ  communicates  himself  and
his  grace  to  us,  and  we  communicate  pur  souls  to
him ;  so  that  Christ,  and  believers  in  that  ac¬
tion,  have  a  mutual  communion  one  with  another .
Believers  have  communion  with  Christ  by  election
in  him ;  by  their  kindred  with  his  humanity;
and  by  a  participation  of  his  Spirit.  They  have
communion  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  1
John  1.  3.  They  partake  of  all  those  blessings
that  God  the  Father  has  promised  to  those  tha
are  in  covenant  with  him  ;  and  also  of  all  those
privileges  which  Christ  has  purchased  for  his
members ;  such  as,  pardon,  reconciliation,  adop¬
tion,  sanctification,  <$c.

The  Communion  of  saints  :  That  fellowship  which
the  saints  have  with  Christ,  ana  all  his  benefits
by  faith,  and  among  themselves  by  love,  1  John
1 .  3.  This  Communion  is  both  active  and  passive  ;
that  is,  it  consists  both  in  doing  good  to,  and  re¬
ceiving  good  from,  one  another.  There  be  divers
sorts  of  it,  as,  Cl)  Fellowship  in  doctrine,  or  be¬
lief,  Acts  2.  42.  Gal.  2.  9.  (2)  In  exhortation,
Heb.  10.  24  25.  (3)  In  consolation,  Eph.  5.  19.

73


0


COM

1  Thess.  4.  18.  (4)  In  humility,  or  submission,

Horn.  12.  10.  Eph.  5.  21.  (5)  In  love,  Rom.  12.
10.  (6)  In  pity,  Rom.  12.  16.  (7)  In  prayer,
Eph.  6.  18,  19.  (8)  In  helping  and  relieving

one  another,  Acts  4.  32,  34,  35.

S  Cor.  10. 16.  c.  ol  the  blood  of  Christ,  c.  of  the  body

ot  Christ

■Q  Cur.  6. 14.  what  c.  hath  light  with  darkness  ?

13. 14.  the  c.  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  you  all

COMPACT.

Psal.  122. 3.  Jerusalem  is  a  city  c.  together

COMPACTED.  .  .  j
£.ph.  4. 16.  from  whom  whole  body  fitlyjoined  and  c.
COMPANY.

den.  30.  + 11.  Leah  called  his  name  Gad,  a  c.

32.  8.  if  Esau  come  to  the  one  c.  and  smite  it

21.  and  himself  lodged  that  night  in  the  c.

35.  ll.  a  c.  of  nations  shall  be  of  thee,  kings  come
Num.  16.  6.  take  ye  censers,  Korah  and  all  his  c.

16.  be  thou  and  all  thy  c.  before  the  Lord

40.  no  stranger  otfer,  that  he  be  not  as  Korah  and  c.

22.  4.  now  shall  this  c.  lick  up  all  that  are  round
26.  9.  who  strove  in  the  c.  of  Korah,  27. 3.

Judg.  9.  37.  another  c.  come  along  by  the  plain

18.  23.  what  ails  thee,  thou  comest  with  such  a  c.  ?
S  ■Sam.  10.  5.  thou  shait  meet  a  c.  of  prophets

19.  20.  they  saw  the  c.  of  prophets  prophesying

30. 15.  canst  thou  bring  me  down  to  this  c.  ?

•C  Kings  5. 15.  he  and  all  his  c.  came  to  Elisha

9.  17.  he  spied  the  c.  of  Jehu,  and  said,  1  see  ac.

=2  Chron.  24. 24.  the  Syrians  came  with  a  small  c.

Job  16.  7.  thou  hast  made  desolate  all  my  c.

34.  8.  goeth  in  c.  with  the  workers  of  iniquity
Psal.  55. 14.  we  walked  to  the  house  of  God  in  c.
68.  f  27.  the  princes  of  Judah  with  their  c.

30.  rebuke  the  c.  of  spearmen,  the  bulls,  the  calves
;84.  t  7.  they  go  from  c.  to  c.  every  one  in  Zion

106. 17.  the  earth  covered  the  c.  of  Abiram
18.  and  a  fire  was  kindled  in  their  c.

prov.  24.  +  19.  keep  not  c.  with  the  wicked
29.  3.  that  keepeth  c.  with  harlots,  spendeth
Cant.  1.  9.  to  a  c.  of  horses  in  Pharaoh's  chariots

6. 13.  as  it  were  the  c.  of  two  armies

Peek.  16.  40.  they  shall  bring  up  a  c.  against  thee
23. 46.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  bring  up  a  c.  on  them
32.  22.  Ashur  is  there  and  all  her  c.  his  graves

38.7.  prepare  for  thyself,  thou  and  all  thy  c.

Mos.  6.  9.  so  the  c.  of  priests  murder  in  the  way
Puke  2. 44.  supposing  him  to  have  been  in  c.

6. 17.  he  came  down  and  the  c.  of  his  disciples

22.  when  they  separate  you  from  their  c.

9. 14.  make  them  sit  down  by  fifties  in  a  c.

38.  a  man  of  the  c.  cried  out,  saying.  Master

24.  22.  a  woman  of  our  c.  made  us  astonished
Acts  4. 23.  being  let  go,  they  went  to  their  own  c.

10.  28.  unlawful  for  a  man  that  is  a  J  ew  to  keep  c.

15.  22.  to  send  chosen  men  of  their  c.  to  Antioch

17.  5.  Jews  gathered  a  c.  and  set  citv  on  an  uproar
21.  8.  next  day  we  that  were  of  Paul’s  c.  departed

Pom.  15.  24.  if  first  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  your  c.
1  Cor.  5. 11.  not  to  keep  c.  with  a  fornicator,  adrunk.
•2  Thess.  3. 14.  note  that  man,  and  have  no  c.  with  him
lleb.  12.  22.  are  come  to  an  innumerable  c.  of  angels
Rev.  18. 17.  all  c.  in  ships  and  sailors  stood  afar  off
Great  COMPANY.

Gen.  50.  9.  there  went  up  with  Joseph  a  great  c.

2.  Chron.  9. 1-  the  queen  of  Sheba  camewitha^reaic.

20. 12.  we  have  no  might  against  this  great  c.

Psal.  68. 11.  great  was  the  c.  of  those  that  published
.Jer.  31.  8.  a  great  c.  shall  return  thither
Ezek.  17. 17-  nor  shall  Pharaoh  with  his^re/?*  c.
John  6.  5.  saw  a  great  c.  come  to  him,  he  saith
Acts  6. 7.  a  great  c.  of  priests  obedient  to  the  faith
COMPANY.

1  Cor.  5.  9.  I  wrote  not  to  c.  with  fornicators
COMPANIED.

Acts  1.  21.  of  these  men  which  have  c.  with  us
COMPANIES.

Judg.  7- 16.  he  divided  the  300  men  into  three  c.

20.  arid  the  three  c.  blew  the  trumpets
9.  34.  they  laid  wait  against  Shechem  in  four  c.

43.  the  people  he  divided  them  into  three  c.

1  Sam.  11.  11.  Saul  put  the  people  in  three  c.

13. 17.  the  spoilers  came  out  of  camp  in  three  c.

2  Kings  5.  2.  the  Syrians  had  gone  out  by  c.

11.  +7.  two  c.  of  you  shall  keep  the  watch

Neh.  12.  31.  two  great  c.  of  them  gave  thanks,  40.
Job  6.  19-  the  c.  of  Sheba  waited  for  them
Isa.  21. 13.  O  ye  travelling  c.  of  Dedanim
57.  13.  when  thou  criest,  let  thy  c.  deliver  thee
Mark  6. 39.  to  make  all  sit  down  by  c.  on  green  grass
COMPANION.

Exod.' 32. 27.  go  thro’  camp  and  slay  every  man  his  c.
Judg.  14.  20.  Samson’s  wife  was  given  to  his  c.  15. 6.
1  Chron.  27.  33.  Hushai  the  Archite  was  king’s  c.
Job  30. 29.  I  am  a  brother  to  dragons,  a  c.  to  owls
Psal.  119.  63.  I  am  a  c.  to  all  them  that  fear  thee
Prov.  13.  20.  but  a  c.  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed
28. 7-  but  a  c.  of  riotous  men  shameth  his  father
24.  the  same  is  the  c.  of  a  destroyer
Cant.  1.  +  15.  thou  art  fair,  my  c.  thou  art  fair
Mai.  2. 14.  yet  she  is  thy  c.  wife  of  thy  covenant
Phil.  2.25.  Epaphroditus  my  brother  and  c.in  labour
Rev.  1.9.  I  John,  your  brother  and  c.  in  tribulation
COMPANIONS.

Judg.  11.  .38.  with  her  c.  and  bewailed  her  virginity

14.  11.  they  brought  thirty  c.  to  be  wdth  him
Job  35.  4.  1  will  answer  thee  and  thy  c.  with  thee

41.  6.  shall  the  c.  make  a  banquet  of  him
Psal.  45. 14.  her  c.  shall  be  brought  unto  thee

122.  8.  for  my  c.  sake  T  will  say,  peace  be  in  thee
Cant.  1.  7-  that  turneth  aside  by  the  flocks  of  thy  c.
8. 13.  the  c.  hearken  to  thy  voice,  cause  me  to  hear
Isa.  1.  23.  thy  princes  are  rebellious  and  c.  of  thieves
Ezek.  37.  16.  write  in  it  for  Judah  and  Israel  his  c.
Dan.  2. 17-  he  made  the  thing  known  to  his  c.

Acts  19.  29.  having  caught  Paul’s  c.  in  travel
lleb.  10. 33.  ye  became  c.  of  them  that  were  so  used
COMPARABLE.

Lam.  4.  2.  the  precious  sons  of  Zion  c.  to  fine  gold
COMPARE,  ED,  1NG.

Psal.  89.  6.  who  in  heaven  can  be  c.  to  the  Lord  ?

74


COM

Prov.  3.  15.  are  not  to  be  c.  to  wisdom,  8.  11.

Cant.  1.  9. 1  have  c.  thee,  O  my  love,  to  a  company
Isa.  40. 18.  or  what  likeness  will  ye  c.  to  him  ?

46.  5.  to  whom  will  ye  c.  me,  that  we  may  be  like  ?
Rom.  8. 18.  are  not  worthy  to  be  c.  with  tiie  glory

1  Cor.  2.  1.3.  c.  spiritual  things  with  spiritual

2  Cor.  10.  12.  c.  ourselves  with  some  tnatcommend,
and  c.  themselves  amongst  themselves,  are  not  wise

COMPARISON.

Judg.?,.  2.  what  have  I  done  now  in  c.  of  you  ?_3.
Hag.  2.  3.  is  it  not  in  your  eyes  in  c.  of  it  as  nothing  ?
Mark  4.  30.  or  with  what  c.  shall  we  compare  it !

COMPASS,  Substantive.

Exod.  27. 5.  shall  put  the  net  under  the  c.  of  altar
38. 4.  he  made  a  grate  of  net  work  under  the  c.

2  Sam.  5.  23.  but  fetch  a  c.  behind  them  and  come
2  Kings  3. 9.  they  fetched  a  c.  of  seven  days’  journey
Prov.  8. 27.  when  he  set  a  c.  on  the  face  of  the  earth
Isa.  44.  13.  he  marketh  the  image  out  with  the  c.
Acts  28. 13.  from  thence  we  fetched  a  c.  to  Rhegium
COMPASS,  Verb.

Num.  21.  4.  they  journeyed  to  c.  the  land  of  Edom
Josh.  6.  3.  ye  shall  c.  the  city,  all  ye  men  of  war
4.  and  the  seventh  day  c.  the  city  seven  times
2  Sam.  24.  t  2.  c.  the  tribes  of  Israel  and  number
2  Kings  11.  8.  c.  the  king  round  about,  2  Chr.  23.  7.
Job  16.  13.  his  archers  c.  me  round  about,  he  cleav.
40.  22.  the  willows  of  the  brook  c.  him  about
Psal.  5. 12.  with  favour  wilt  thou  c.  him  as  a  shield
7. 7-  the  congregation  of  the  people  c.  thee  about

17.  9.  from  my  deadly  enemies  who  c.  me  about
26. 6.  wash  my  hands,  so  will  I  c.  thine  altar,  O  L.
32.  7.  shait  c.  me  about  with  songs  of  deliverance

10.  trusteth  in  the  I.ord,  mercy  shall  c.  him  about
49.  5.  the  iniquity  of  my  heels  shall  c.  me  about
140.  9.  as  for  the  head  of  those  that  c.  me  about

142.7.  the  righteous  shall  c.  me  about,  for  shait  deal
Prov.  4.  t  9.  she  shall  c.  thee  with  a  crown  of  glory
Isa.  50.  11.  that  c.  yourselves  about  with  sparks
Jer.  31. 22.  a  new  thing,  a  woman  shall  c.  a  man
Hab.  1.  4.  for  the  wicked  doth  c.  about  the  righteous
Mat.  23.  15.  woe  to  you,  for  ye  c.  sea  and  land
Luke  19.43.  thine  enemies  shall  c.  thee  round
COMPASSED.

Gen.  19.  4.  the  men  of  Sodom  c.  the  house  round
Dent.  2. 1.  and  we  c.  mount  Seir  many  days
Josh.  6.  11.  so  the  ark  of  the  Lord  c.  the  city
Judg.  11.  18.  then  they  c.  land  ot  Edom  and  Moab

16.  2.  they  c.  Samson  in,  and  laid  wait  all  night

1  Sam.  23. 26.  Saul  and  his  men  c.  D.  and  his  men

2  Sam.  22. 5.  waves  of  death  c.  me.  Ps.  18.  4.  |  116. 3.
2  Kings  6. 15.  beheld  an  host  c.  the  city  with  horses
2  Chron.  21. 9.  smote  the  Edomites  which  c.  him  in
Job  19.  6.  know  that  God  hath  c.  me  with  his  net

26. 10.  he  hath  c.  the  waters  with  bounds
Psal.  17.  11.  they  have  now  r.  us  in  our  steps  '

22. 12.  many  bulls  c.  me  ||  16.  for  dogs  have  c.  me
Eccl.  7.  +  25.  I  and  my  heart  c.  to  know  wisdom
Lam.  3.  5.  he  hath  c.  me  with  gall  and  travail
Zech.  14.  t  10.  all  the  land  shall  be  c.  as  a  plain
Luke  21. 20.  when  ye  shall  see  Jerus.  c.  with  armies
lleb.  5. 2.  for  that  he  himself  also  is  c.  with  infirmity
COMPASSED  about.

Dent.  32. + 10.  in  howling  wilderness  he  c.  them  about
2  Sam.  18.  15.  ten  young  men  c.  Absalom  about
22.  6.  the  sorrows  of  hell  c.  me  about,  Psal.  18.  5.
2  Kings  6. 14.  Syrians  came  by  night  and  c.  city  a.

8.  21.  Joram  smote  Edomites  which  c.  him  about
2  Chron.  18.  31.  they  c.  about  Jehoshaphat  to  fight
Psal.  40.12.  innumerable  evils  have  c.  me  about
88. 17-  they  c.  me  a.  together,  109.  3. 1  118.  11, 12.
118.  10.  all  nations  c.  me  about ,  but  in  the  name

Jonah  2.  3.  floods  c.  me  a.  thy  billows  passed  over  me
lleb.  11.  30.  walls  of  Jericho  fell,  after  c.  a.  7  days

12.  1.  c.  about  with  such  a  cloud  of  witnesses
Rev.  20.  9.  they  went  up  and  c.  camp  of  saints  ab.
COMPASSES!’,  ETH.

Gen.  2.  11.  c.  Havilah  ||  13.  c.  the  land  of  Ethiopia
Psal.  73.  6.  therefore  pride  c.  them  about  as  a  chain
1.39. 3.  thou  c.  my  path  and  my  lying  down
Ilos.  11. 12.  Ephraim  c.  me  about  with  lies,  and  Isr.
COMPASSION.

1  Kings  8.  50.  give  them  c.  before  them  who  carry

2  Chr.  30.  9.  your  children  shall  find  c. before  them
Mat.  9.  36.  Jesus  moved  with  c.  14.  14.  Mark 6.  .34.

18. 27.  the  lord  of  that  servant  was  moved  with  c.
Markl.  41.  Jesus  moved  with  c.  putforth  his  hand
1  Pet.  3.  8.  be  of  one  mind,  having  c.  one  of  another
1  John  3. 17.  shutteth  up  his  bowels  of  c.  from  him
Full  of  COMPASSION.

P.w/.78.38.he  being/?/// of  c.  forgave  their  iniquitv
86.  15.  thou  artaG./.o/e.  111.4.  I  112.4.1145.8.

Have  or  had  COMPASSION.

Exod.  2.  6.  the  babe  wept,  and  she  had  c.  on  him
Deut.  13- 17-  the  Lord  may  turn  and  have  c.  ou  thee
30.  3.  then  the  Lord  thy  God  will  have  c.  on  thee
1  Sam.  23. 21.  blessed  be  ye  of  L.  for  ye  havec.  on  me

1  Kings  8.  50.  that  they  may  have  c.  on  them

2  Kings  13.  23.  Lord  was  gracious  and  hade,  on  them
2  Chron.  36.  15.  because  he  had  c.  on  his  people

17.  Chaldees  had  no  c.  on  young  man  or  maiden
Isa.  49. 15.  that  she  should  not  have  c.on  son  of  womb
Jer.  12.  15. 1  will  return  and  have  c.  on  them
Lam.  .3.  32.  yet  will  he  have  c.  Mic.  7.  19.

Mat.  15.  32.  I  have  c.  on  the  multitude,  Mark  8.2.

18.  .33.  also  have  had  c.on  thy  fellow-servant

20.  34.  so  Jes.  had  c.  on  them  and  touched  their  eyes
Mark  5.  19.  how  the  Lord  hath  had  c.on  thee

9.  22.  if  thou  canst,  have  c.  on  us,  and  help  us
Puke  7. 13.  when  the  Lord  saw  her,  he  had  c.  on  her

10.  33.  the  Samaritan  saw  him,  he  had  c.  on  him

15.  20.  father  had  c.  and  ran  and  fell  on  his  neck

Rom.  9.  15.  I  will  have  c.  on  whom  1  will  have  c.
Heb.  5. 2.  who  can  have  c.  on  the  ignorant,  and  them
10.  .34.  for  ye  had  c.  of  me  in  my  bonds
Jude  22.  of  some  have  c.  making  a  difference
COMPASSIONS.

Lam.  .3. 22.  are  notconsumed,  becausehis  c.  fail  not
Zech.  7. 9.  shew  mercy  and  c.  every  man  to  brother
COMPEL.

Lev.  25.  39.  not  c.  him  to  serve  as  a  bond-servant
Mat.  5.  41.  c.  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him  twain


CON

Mark  15. 21.  they  c.  one  Simon  to  bear  his  cross
Luke  14.  23.  go  into  highways,  c.  them  to  come  in
COMPELLED,  EST.

1  Sam.  28.  23.  his  servants  with  the  woman  c.  Saul

2  Chron.  21. 11.  moreover . I ehoram  c.  Judah  thereto
Mat.  27.  32.  Simon,  him  thev  c.  to  bear  his  cross
Acts  26. 11.  and  I  c.  them  to  blaspheme  and  persecut.

2  Cor.  12. 11. 1  am  a  fool  in  glorying,  ye  have  c.  me
Gal.  2. 3.  nor  Titus  a  Greek  was  c.  to  be  circumcised

14.  why  c.  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  the  J  ews  (
COMPLAIN,  ED,  ING.

Num..  11. 1.  the  people  c.  it  displeased  the  Lord
Judg.  21.  22.  or  their  brethren  came  to  us  to  c.

Job  7.  11.  I  will  c.  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul
31.  38.  that  the  furrows  likewise  thereof  c.

Psal.  77. 3.  I  c.  and  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed
144.  14.  that  there  be  no  c.  in  our  streets
Lam.  3. 39.  wherefore  doth  a  living  mane..5’  a  man
COMPLAIN  ERS.

Num.  11.  +1.  when  people  were  c.  it  displeased  Lord
Jude  16.  these  are  murmurers,  c.  walking  after  lusts
COMPLAINT,  S.

1  Sam.  1. 16.  out  of  abundance  of  my  e.have  I  spoken
Job  7. 13.  when  I  say,  my  couch  shall  ease  my  c.

9. 27.  if  I  say,  I  will  forget  my  c.  I  will  leave  off
10. 1.  I  will  leave  my  c.  on  myself,  I  will  speak
21. 4.  as  for  me,  is  my  c.  to  man  ?  and  if  it  were  so

23.  2.  even  to-day  is  my  c.  bitter,  my  stroke  heavier
Psal.  55.  2.  I  mourn  in  my  c.  and  make  a  noise
142.  2. 1  poured  out  my  c.  before  him,  and  trouble
Acts  25. 7-  laid  c. against  Paul,  they  could  not  prove
Col.  3.  tl3.  if  any  man  have  a  c.  against  any
COMPLETE.

Lev.  23. 15.  ye  shall  count,  seven  sabbaths  shall  be  c.
Col.  2. 10.  ye  are  c.  in  him  who  is  the  head  of  all

4. 12.  that  ye  may  stand  c.  in  all  the  will  of  God

COMPOSITION.

Exod.  30. 32.  nor  make  any  like  it  after  the  c.  37.
COMPOUND,  ETH.

Exod.  30. 25.  an  ointment  c.  after  art  of  apothecary
33.  whosoever  c.  any  thing  like  it,  or  putteth  any
COMPREHEND.

Job  37. 5.  great  things  doth  he  which  we  cannot  c.
Eph.  3. 18.  may  be  able  to  c.  with  saints  the  breadth
COMPREHENDED.

Isa.  40. 12.  hath  c.the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure
John  1. 5.  light  shined,  and  the  darkness  c.  it  not
Rom.  13. 9-  is  briefly  c.  in  this  saying,  thou  shait  love
CONCEAL,  ED,  ETH.

Gen.  37.  26.  if  we  slay  our  brother  and  c.  his  blood
Deut.  13. 8.  not  spare,  neither  shait  thou  c.  him
Job  6. 10.  I  have  not  c.  the  words  of  the  holy  One

27. 11.  what  is  with  the  Almighty  will  I  not  c.

41. 12.  1  will  not  c.  his  parts  nor  his  proportion
Psal.  40. 10. 1  have  not  c.  thy  loving-kind,  and  truth
Prov.  11.13.  he  that  is  of  a  faithful  spirit  c.  the  matter

12. 23.  a  prudent  mane,  knowledge,  heart  of  fools

25.  2.  it  is  the  glory  of  God  to  c.  a  thing
Jer.  50.  2.  declare  ye,  publish  and  c.  not

CONCEIT,  S.

Prov.  18. 11.  rich  man’s  wealth  as  an  high  wall  in  c.

26.  5.  answer  a  fool,  lest  he  be  wise  in  his  own  c.
12.  seestthou  aman  wise  in hisown  c.?  more  hope

16.  sluggard  is  wiser  in  his  own  c.  than  seven  men

28.  11.  the  rich  man  is  wise  in  his  own  c.

Rom.  11.  25.  lest  ye  should  oe  wise  in  your  own  c.

12. 16.  be  not  wise  in  your  own  c.

CONCEIVE,  ING.

Gen.  30. 38.  they  should  c.  when  they  came  to  drink
Num.  5.  28.  then  she  shall  be  free,  and  shall  c.  seed
Judg.  13.  3.  shait  c.  and  bear  ason,  5, 7-  Luke  1.  31.
Job  15.  35.  they  c.  mischief,  bring  vanity,  Isa.  59.  4.
Psal.  51 .  5.  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  c.  me
Isa.  7. 14.  a  virgin  shall  c.  and  bear  a  son

33. 11.  shall  c.  chaff  l|  59. 13.  c.  words  of  falsehood
Ezek.  38.  +  10.  thou  shait  c.  a  mischievous  purpose
Heb.  11. 11.  Sarah  received  strength  to  c.  seed

conceived:

Gen.  4. 1.  Eve  c.  and  bare  Cain  ||  17.  Cain’s  wife  c.
16.  4.  Ilagar  c.  ||  21.  2.  Sarah  c.  and  bare  Isaac
25.  21.  Rebekah  his  wife  c.  ||  29.  32.  Leah  c.  33.

30.  5.  Bilhah  c.  ||  23.  Rachael  c.  and  bare  a  soil
39.  the  flocks  c.  31. 10.  j|  38.  3.  Shuah  c.  4,  5.

38. 18.  Tamar  c.  ||  Exod.  2.  2.  Jochebed  c.  and  bare
Lev.  12.  2.  have  c.  seed,  and  born  a  man  child
Num.  11. 12.  Moses  said,  have  1  c.  all  this  people/

1  Sam.  1.20. Hannah  c.  and  bareason,  Samuel, 2.21.

2  Sam.  11.  5.  Bathsheba  c.  sent  and  told  Davia

2  Kings  4. 17-  Shunamite  c.  ||  Isa.  8. 3.  prophetess  c.
Job  3.  3.  it  was  said,  there  is  a  man  child  c.

Psal.  7-  14.  c.  mischief,  brought  forth  falsehood
Cant.  3. 4.  into  the  chamber  of  her  that  c.  me
Jer.  49. 30.  and  hath  c.  a  purpose  against  you
Ilos.  1.  3.  Gomer  which  c.  and  bare  him
2.  5.  she  that  c.  them  hath  done  shamefully
Mat.  1. 20.  that  which  is  c.  in  her  is  of  the  II.  Ghost
Luke  1.  36.  Elisabeth  hath  c.  a  son  in  her  old  age
2.  21.  was  so  named  before  he  was  c.  in  womb
Acts  5.  4.  why  hast  thou  c.  this  thing  in  thine  heart  ?
Rom.  9-  10.  when  Rebekah  had  c.

Jam.  1.15.  when  lust  hath  c.  it  brings  forth  sin
.  CONCEPTION.

Gen.  3.16. 1  will  greatly  multiply  thy  sorrow  and  c.
Ruth  4. 13.  the  Lord  gave  her  c.  and  she  bare  a  son
Hos.  9. 11.  their  glory  shall  flee  from  the  birth  and  c.
CONCERN,  ETH.

Ezek.  12. 10.  say  to  them,  this  burden  c.  the  prince
Acts  28.  31.  teaching  things  which  c.  the  L.  J.  C.

2  Cor.  11.  30.  glory  in  things  which  c.  my  infirmities
CONCERNING.

Gen.  19. 21.  I  have  accepted  thee  c.  this  thing
Exod.  6. 8.  c.  which  I  did  swear  to  give,  Num.  14. 30.
Lev.  4. 26.  priest  make  atonem.  for  hirn  c.  sin,  5.  6.
6.  3.  hath  found  what  was  lost,  and  lieth  c.  it
Num.  10. 29.  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good  c.  Israel

1  Kings  11. 10.  had  commanded  him  c.  this  thing

2  Kings  20.  + 1.  give  charge  c.  thy  house,  Isa.  38. 1 1.
Neh.  1.  2.  I  asked  them  c.  the  Jews  that  escaped
Psal.  90. 13.  repent  thee  c.  thy  servants,  135. 14.
Eccl.  7. 10.  for  thou  dost  not  inquire  wisely  c.  this
Isa.  5.  +  20.  woe  to  them  that  say  c.  evil,  it  is  good

30. 7.  shall  help  in  vain,  theref.  have  J  cried  c.  this


CON


CON


CON


7


Jtn  *5.  il.  ask  me  c.  my  sons,  and  c.  work  ofliands
Jer.  16.  3.  thus  saith  the  I.ord  r.sons,  c.  daughters
horn  in  this  place,  c.  their  mothers,  c.  their  fathers
0".  It),  c.  the  pillars, c.  the  sea.  c.  bases,  c.  vessels
r.-.ek.  14.  22.  shall  be  comforted  c.  evil,  even  c.  all
21.  28.  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  c.  the  Ammonites
47.  14.  c.  which  I  have  lifted  up  my  hand  to  give
J)an.  2.  18.  would  desire  mercies  of  G.  c.  this  secret
6.  17.  that  purpose  might  not  be  changed  c.  Daniel
Mat.  16.  11.  that  I  spake  it  not  to  you  c.  bread
Mark  5.  16.  they  that  saw,  told  also  c.  the  swine
Jjuke  24.  27.  he  expounded  the  things  c.  himself
Acts  13.  34.  as  c.  that  he  raised  him  up  from  dead
28.  22.  as  c.  this  sect,  we  know  it  is  spoken  against
Rom.  9. 5.  of  whom  as  c.  flesh  Christ  came,  who  is  G.
11.  28.  as  c.  the  gospel,  are  enemies  for  your  sake
16.  19.  you  wise  to  what  is  good,  and  simple  c.  evil
2  Cor.  11. 21. 1  speak  as  c.  reproach,  as  though  weak
Eph.  5.  32.  but  1  speak  c.  Christ  and  the  church
Phil.  4.  15.  as  c.  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only

1  Tim.  6. 21.  some  professing  have  erred  c.  the  faith

2  Tim.  2.  18.  who  c.  the  truth  have  erred,  saying
3.  8.  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobates  c.  the  faith
l  Pet.  4.  12.  think  it  not  strange  c.  the  fiery  trial

See  Him,  Me,  Thee,  Them,  Us,  You.
CONCISION.

Beware  of  the  concision,  Phil.  3.  2.  that  is,snch
who  under  pretence  of  maintaining  circumcision,
which  is  now  no  longer  a  seal  of  God's  covenant,
and  so  is  no  letter  than  a  mere  cutting  or  slash¬
ing  of  the  flesh,  do  prove  destroyers  and  renders
of  the  c lurch.

Joel  3.  1 14.  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  c.

Phil.  3.  2.  beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  the  c.

CONCLUD  E.

SRom.  3.  28.  we  c.  a  man  is  justified  by  faith  without
CONCLUDED.

Acts  21.  25.  as  touching  the  Gentiles,  we  have  c.
Rom.  11.  32.  for  God  hath  c.  them  all  in  unbelief
.  Gal.  3.  22.  but  the  scripture  hath  c.  all  under  sin
CONCLUSION.

Reel.  12.  13.  let  us  hear  the  c.  of  the  whole  matter
CONCORD.

2  Cor.  6.  15.  and  what  c.  hath  Christ  with  Belial  ?
CONCOURSE.

Prov.  1.  21.  she  crieth  in  the  chief  place  of  c.

Acts  19. 40.  whereby  we  may  give  account  of  this  c.
CONCUBINE.

This  term  hi  scripture  signifies  a  wife  of  the  se¬
cond  rank,  who  was  inferior  to  the  matron,  or
mistress  of  the  house.  The  chief  wives  differed
from  the  concubines,  ( 1)  In  that  they  were  taken
into  fellowship  with  their  husbands  by  solemn  sti¬
pulation,  and  with  consent  and  solemn  rejoicing
of  friends.  (2)  They  brought  with  them  dowries  to
their  husbands.  (3)  They  had  the  government  of
their  families  under  and  with  their  husbands.  (4)
The  inheritance  belonged  to  the  children  brought
forth  by  them.  Though  the  children  of  concubines
did  not  inherit  their  father's  estate,  yet  the  father
in  his  life-time  might  provide  for  them,  and  make
presents  to  them:  Thus  Sarah  was  Abraham’s
wife,  of  whom  he  had  Isaac,  the  heir  of  all  his
wealth:  But  he  had  besides  two  concubines,
namely,  Hagar  and  Keturah ;  of  these  he  hail
other  children,  whom  he  distinguished  from  Isaac,
and  made  presents  to  them.  As  polygamy  was
sometimes  practised  by  the  patriarchs  and  among
the  Jews  .either  by  God's  permission,  who  could ,
rightly  dispense  with  his  own  laws  when  and
where  he  pleased ;  or  by  their  mistake  about  the
lawfulness  of  it ;  as  this  was  their  practice,  it
teas  a  common  thing  to  see  one,  two,  or  many
wives,  in  a  family ;  and  besides  these  several
concubines.  David  had  seven  wives,  and  ten
concubines,  2  Sam.  3.  2,  3,  4,  5.  1  20.  3.  So¬
lomon  had  seven  hundred  wives,  who  all  lived
in  the  quality  of  queens,  and  three  hundred  con¬
cubines  ;  and  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart,
1  Kings  11.  3.  Rehoboam  his  son  had  eighteen
wives ,  and  sixty  concubines,  2  Chron.  11.  21.
But  ever  since  the  abrogation  of  polygamy  by  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  reduction  of  marriage
to  its  primitive  institution,  the  abuse  of  concu¬
bines  has  been  condemned  and  forbidden  among
Christians.

Judg.  19.  2.  his  c.  played  the  whore  against  him
29.  he  laid  hold  on  his  c.  and  divided  her
20.  4.  1  came  into  Gibeah,  1  and  my  c.  to  lodge
2  Sam.  3.7.  why  hast  thou  gone  in  to  my  father's  c.  ?
21.  11.  what  Rizpah  the  c.  of  Saul  had  done
CONCUBINES.

Gen.  25.  6.  to  sons  of  the  c.  Abraham  gave  gifts
2  Sam.  5.  13.  David  took  him  more  c.  and  wives
16. 22.  Absalom  went  in  to  father’s  c.  in  sight  of  Isr.

19.  5.  have  saved  thy  life,  and  the  lives  of  thy  c.

20.  3.  the  king  put  his  c.  in  ward  and  fed  them
1  Kings  11.  3.  and  Solomon  had  three  hundred  c.

2  Chron.  11.  21.  for  Rehoboam  took  threescore  c.
Esth.  2. 14.  to  custody  of  Shaashgaz  who  kept  the  c.
Cant.  6. 8.  there  are  60  queens  and  80  c.  and  virgins
9.  yea,  the  queens  and  the  c.  and  they  praised  her
Dan.  5.  3.  the  king  and  his  c.  drank  in  them,  23.
CONCUPISCENCE

Signifies,  [1  ]  Sinful  lusts,  the  depravity  of  our  nature,
or  that  original  concupiscence  which  is  the  foun¬
tain  from  whence  all  particular  lusts  do  flow,  the
furnace  from  which  all  sinful  motions,  as  so
many  sparks,  do  continually  arise,  Rom.  7-  t  7-
Jam.  1.  14.  [2]  Actual  motions  and  inclinations
to  sin,  springing  from  this  natural  concupiscence,
Rom.  7. 8.

Rom.  I.  1 7. 1  had  not  known  c.  except  law  had  said

8.  sin  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of  c.

Col.  3.  5.  mortify  members,  evil  c.  and  covetousness
1  Thess.  4.  5.  not  in  the  lust  of  c.  as  the  Gentiles
CONDEMNATION

Signifies,  [1]  A  declaring  guilty,  or  pronouncing
the  sentence  of  punishment  upon  any  malefactor
by  some  judge,  John  8.  10.  [2]  That  which

aggravate!  one's  sin  avid  punishment,  or  that
which  is  the  reason,  the  evidence,  and  great  cause


of  condemnation,  John  3.  19.  [3]  The  punish¬

ment  itself,  whereunto  one  is  adjudged  and  con¬
demned,  1  Cor.  11.  32.  [4]  A  censuring  other
men's  persons,  purposes,  words,  or  actions,  either
rashly,  unjustly,  or  uncharitably,  Luke  6.  37-
[5]  A  witnessing  against  and  convicting  persons
of  their  wickedness  and  faults  by  the  good  example
and  conduct  of  others  ;  thus  the  N  inevites  shall
condemn  the  obstinate  Jews,  Mat.  12.  41.  because
the  former  repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonas,
but  the  others  shewed  no  signs  of  repentance,  not¬
withstanding  our  Saviour  preached  and  did  many
mighty  works  among  them.

God  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  Rom.  8.  3.  lie
adjudged  it  to  destruction,  passed  sentence  upon
it,  and  accordingly  punished  it  by  the  sufferings
of  his  Son  in  the  flesh  ;  and  thereby  declared
openly  before  all  the  world ,  by  these  sufferings  of
his  Son,  how  abominable  sm  was  to  him,  and  how
contrary  to  his  nature.

Christ,  being  no  civil  judge  or  magistrate,  did  not
condemn  the  woman  taken  in  adultery  to  a  civil
punishment:  Neither  did  he  acquit  her,  for  that
would  have  been  making  void  the  law  of  God:
He  only  performs  the  office  of  a  minister,  and
speaks  to  her  as  the  Mediator  and  Saviour  of  men,
in  calling  her  to  repentance  and  reformation,
John  8.  10,  11.

The  manner  of  passing  sentence  upon  persons,  varied
in  most  countries.  The  Jews,  by  a  simple  pro¬
nunciation  of  the  sentence,  as  Thou  N.  art  just;
Thou  N.  art  guilty ;  both  absolved  and  condemn¬
ed  them.  The  Romans  gave  sentence,  by  casting
in  tables  into  a  certain  box  or  urn  prepared  for
the  purpose.  If  they  absolved  any,  they  wrote
the  letter  A  in  the  table,  it  being  the  first  letter
of  A  bsolvo  ;  if  they  condemned  any,  they  wrote
the  letter  C,  the  first  of  Condemno.  Among  the
Grecians,  condemnation  was  signified  by  giving
a  black  stone  ;  Absolution  by  giving  a  white
stone :  To  this  last  there  seemetli  to  be  an  allu¬
sion,  Rev.  2. 17.  To  him  that  overcometh  I  will
give  a  white  stone  :  that  is,  I  will  absolve  and  ac¬
quit  him  in  the  day  of  judgment.

Luke  23.  40.  seeing  thou  art  in  the  same  c.

John  3.  19.  this  is  the  c.  that  light  is  come  into  world
5.  24.  he  that  believeth  shall  not  come  into  c.

Rom.  5.  16.  for  the  judgment  was  by  one  to  c.

18.  as  by  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men  toe.
8.  1.  there  is  no  c.  to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus

1  Cor.  11.  34.  that  ye  come  not  together  to  c.

2  Cor.  3.  9.  if  the  ministration  of  c.  be  glorious

1  Tim.  3.  6.  lest  he  fall  into  the  c.  of  the  devil
Jam.  3. 1.  knowing  we  shall  receive  the  greater  c.

5.  12.  let  your  nay  be  nay.  lest  ye  falLinto  c.

Jude  4.  who  were  of  old  ordained  to  this  c.
CONDEMN.

Exod.  22.  9.  whom  the  judges  shall  c.  he  shall  pay
Dent.  25.  l.judgesmayjudgethem,  and  c.  the  wick.
Job  9.  20.  if  1  justify  myself,  my  mouth  shall  c.  me
10.  2. 1  will  say  to  G.  do  not  c.  me,  shew  me  why
34.  17.  and  wilt  thou  c.  him  that  is  most  just  ?

40. 8.  wilt  thou  c.  me,  that  thou  mayest  be  righte.
Psal.  37.  33.  not  leave  him,  nor  c.  him  when  judged
94.  21.  and  they  c.  the  innocent  blood
109.  31.  to  save  him  from  those  that  c.  his  soul
Prov.  12.  2.  a  man  of  wicked  devices  will  he  c.

Isa.  50.9.  L.  will  help  me, who  is  he  that  shall  c.  me?
54.  17-  every  tongue  that  shall  rise  ag.  thee  shall  c.
Mat.  12.  41.  and  shall  c.  it  because,  Luke  11.  32.
42.  queen  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  judgment

and  c.  it,  Luke  11.  31.

20. 18.  they  shall  c.  him  to  death,  Mark  10.  33.
Luke  6.  37.  c.  not,  and  ye  shall  not  be  condemned
John  3.  17.  God  sent  not  his  Son  to  c.  the  world
8. 11.  neither  do  I  c.  thee,  go  and  sin  no  more

2  Cor.  7.  3. 1  speak  not  this  to  c.  you,  for  I  said

1  John  3. 20.  if  our  heart  c.  us,  God  is  greater  than

21.  if  our  heart  c.  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence

CONDEMNED.

2  Chron.  36.  3.  and  c.  the  land  in  100  talents  of  silver
Job  32.3.  they  found  no  answer,  yet  had  c.  Job
Psal.  109. 7.  when  he  shall  be  judged,  let  him  be  c.
Amos  2. 8.  drink  the  wine  of  c.  in  house  of  their  god
Mat.  12.  7.  ye  would  not  have  c.  the  guiltless

37.  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  c.

27.  3.  Judas,  when  he  saw  that  he  was  c.  repented
Mark  14.  64.  they  all  c.  him  to  be  guilty  of  death
Luke  24. 20.  how  the  rulers  delivered  him  to  be  c.
John  3. 18.  he  that  believeth  on'  him  is  not  c.  but  he
that  believeth  not  is  c.  already  .because  not  believed
8. 10.  Jesus  said,  woman,  hath  no  man  c.  thee  ?
Rom.  8.  3.  sending  his  Son,  for  sin  c.  sin  in  flesh

1  Cor.  11.  32.  we  should  not  bee.  with  the  world
Tit.  2.  8.  sincerity,  sound  speech  that  cannot  be  c.
3.  11.  sinneth,  being  c.  of  himself  is  subverted

Heb.  11. 7.  and  ark,  Dy  the  which  he  c.  the  world
Jam.  5.  6.  ye  have  c.  and  killed  just,  not  resist  you

9.  judge  not  one  another,  brethren,  lest  ye  be  c.

2  Pet.  2.  6.  God  c.  them  with  an  overthrow

CONDEMNEST,  ETH,  1NG.

1  Kings 8.  32.  and  judge  thy  servants,  c.  the  wicked
Job  15.  6.  thine  own  mouth  c.  thee,  and  not  I
Prov.  17.15.  he  that  c.  the  just,  is  abomination  to  Ld.
Acts  13.  27.  they  have  fulfilled  them  in  c.  him
Rom.  2. 1.  wherein  judgest  another  thou  c.  thyself
8.  34.  it  is  God  that  justifieth,  who  is  he  that  c.  1
14. 22.  that  c.  not  himself  in  that  thing  he  alloweth
CONDESCEND.

Rom,  12.  16.  not  high  things,  but  c.  to  men  of  low
CONDITION,  S.

1  .Saw.  11.2.  on  this  c.  I  will  make  a  coven,  with  you
Dan.  11.  +  17.  set  his  face  to  enter  with  equal  c.
Luke  14. 32.  he  sendeth  and  desireth  c.  of  peace

CONDUCT,  ED.

2  Sam.  19- 15.  Judah  came  toe.  king  over  Jordan  ,31.
40.  all  the  people  of  Judah  c.  the  king  and  Israel

Acts  17. 15.  they  that  c.  Paul  brought  him  to  Athens

1  Cor.  16. 11.  but  c.  him  forth  in  peace  to  come  to  me

CONDUIT.

2  Kings  18. 17.  they  came  and  stood  by  c.  Isa.  36.2.
20.  20.  Hezekiah,  how  he  made  a  pool  and  a  c.


Isa.  7-  3.  go  forth  to  meet  Ahaz  at  the  end  cf  the  c-
Ezek.  31.  t4.  sent  out  her  c.  to  the  trees  of  the  field5
CONFECTION.

Exod.  30. 35.  shalt  make  a  c.  after  art  of  apothecary-
CON  LECTION  ARIES.

1  Sam.  8. 13.  he  will  take  your  daughters  to  be  c.

CONFEDERACY.

Isa.  8. 12.  say  ye  not,  a  c.  to  whom  people  say,  a  c.
Obad.  7.  all  men  of  thy  c.  brought  thee  to  the  border
CONFEDERATE.

Gen.  14.  13.  and  these  were  c.  with  Abram
Psal.Q3. 5.  have  consulted,  they  are  c.  against  thee*
Isa.  7.  2.  it  was  told,  Syria  is  c.  with  Ephraim
CONFERENCE.

Gal.  2.  6.  for  they  in  c.  added  nothing  to  me
CONFERRED.

1  Kings  1.  7-  Adonijah  c.  with  Joab  and  Abiathar
Acts 4.15.  they  c.  among  thems.  what  do  to  these  men  <

25.  12.  Festus,  when  he  had  c.  with  the  council
Gal.  1. 16.  immediately  I  c.  not  with  flesh  and  blood

CONFESS

Signifies,  [1  ]  Publicly  to  own  and  acknowledge  as
his  own  :  Thus  Christ  will  confess  the  faithful  in
the  day  of  judgment,  Luke  12.  8.  [2]  To  own.

and  profess  the  truths  of  Christ,  and  to  obey  his
commandments ,  and  that  in  spite  of  all  opposition
and  danger  from  enemies.  Mat.  10.  32.  Whoso¬
ever  shall  confess  me  before  men.  [3]  To  utter ,
or  speak  forth  the  praises  of  God,  or  to  give  him
thanks,  Heb.  13.  t  15.  Offer  to  God  the  fruit  of
your  lips,  confessing  his  name;  that  is,  acknow¬
ledge  his  benefits,  and  give  him  thanks  for  them,
[4]  To  own,  and  lay  open  our  sins  and  offences,
either  unto  God,  in  private,  or  public  confessions  p
or  to  our  neighbour  whom  we  have  wronged:  or  to  ■
some  godly  persons,  at  whose  hands  we  look  to  receive
comfort  and  spiritual  instruction ;  or  to  the  whole
congregation,  when  our  fault  is  public,  Psal.  32.
5.  Mat.  3.  6.  Jam.  5.  16.  1  John  1.  9.  [5]  To
acknowledge  a  crime  before  a  judge.  Josh.  7.  19.  [6]
To  own  and  profess  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  pay
obedience  to  it,  Luke  12.  8.  We  are  to  make
confession,  (1)  To  God,  whom  we  have  offended,
who  knows  our  sins,  can  par  den  us,  or  else  will'
punish  us  if  we  refuse  to  confess,  Psal.  32.  5.  Prov.
28.  13.  (2)  To  our  neighbour  hurt  by  us, .  who ■
otherwise  complaining  to  God,  shall  have  him  to
revenge  his  quarrel ;  and  thus  man  can  and  ought •
to  forgive  so  much  of  the  offence  as  is  done  against
him,  if  his  adversary  repent  and  confess,  and’
seek  pardon,  Mat.  5.  23,  24.  Luke  17.  4.  (3)
To  the  minister  of  God,  or  to  some  godly  person,
that,  pitying  the  sinner's  case,  can  and  will  givej
him  spiritual  advice  against  his  sin,  and  pray  for
him,  Job  33.  23.

Confession  to  God  is  made  by  a  man  for  himself ,
Psal.  32.  5.  A  father  for  his  children.  Job  1.
5.  A  magistrate  for  those  under  his  authority ,
Nell.  1.  6.  And  must  be  with  knowledge  of  sin,
Jer.  2.  23.  Consideration  of  that  which  is  done
Jer.  8.  6.  Humiliation,  2  Chron.  7.  14.  Ac
cepting  of  punishment  J'or  sin,  Lev.  26.  41.  A  ’
particularizing  of  sins,  Lev.  5.  5.  1  Sam.  12. 19.
Prayer,  Exod.  32.  32.  And  forsaking  of  sin,.
Prov.  28.  13.

Lev.  5.  5.  he  shall  c .  that  he  hath  sinned  in  that  thing
16.  21.  Aaron  shall  c.  over  live  goat  all  the  iniquit.

26.  40.  if  they  shall  c.  their  iniquity  and  fathers’
Num.  5.  7-  they  shall  c.  their  sins  they  have  done

1  Kings 8.  33.  Isr.  c.thy  name  and  pray,  2  Chr.  6.24.

35.  c.  thy  name  and  turn  from  sin,  2  Chron.  6.  26.
Neh.  1.  6.  and  c.  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel
Job  40. 14.  1  will  c.  that  thy  hand  can  save  thee
Psal.  18.  t  49.  I  will  c.  to  thee  among  the  heathen
32.  5. 1  said,  I  will  c.  my  transgressions  to  the  Lord
Mat.  10.  32.  whosoever  shall  c.  me  before  men,  him
will  1  c.  before  my  Father  in  heaven,  Luke  12. 8.
John  9.  22.  if  any  man  did  c.  that  he  was  Christ
12. 42.  rulers  did  not  c. him, lest  be  put  out  of  synag.
Acts  23. 8.  say  no  resurrection, but;Pharisees  c.  both
24.  14.  this  1  c.  that  after  the  way  they  call  heresy
Rom.  10.  9.  shalt  c.  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus

14.  11.  every  knee  bow,  every  tongue  shall  c.  to  G.

15.  9.  I  will  c.  to  thee  among  the  Gentiles  and  sing
Phil.  2.  11.  that  every  tongue  shall  c.  Jesus  is  Lord
Jam.  5.  16.  c.  your  faults  one  to  another  and  pray

1  John  1 .  9.  if  we  c.  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  to  forgive
4. 15.  whoso  shall  c.  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God

2  John  7-  who  c.  not  that  Jesus  Chr.  is  come  in  flesh
Rev.  3.  5.  but  I  will  c.  his  name  before  my  Father

CONFESSED,  ETH,  ING.

Ezra  10.  1.  when  Ezra  had  c.  weeping  and  casting
Neh.  9.  2.  Isr.  stood  and  c.  their  sins,  a  fourth  part  c.
Prov.  28. 13.  but  whoso  c.  and  forsaketh  them  shall
Dan.  9.  20.  while  c.  my  sin  and  the  sin  of  my  people
Mat.  3. 6.  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan, c. their  sms
John  1.  20.  John  c.  that  I  am  not  the  Christ
Acts  19.18.many  came  and  c.and  shewed  their  deeds-
Heb.  11. 13.  these  c.  that  they  were  strangers  on  earth
13.  1 15.  the  fruit  of  our  lips,  c.  to  his  name

1  John  4. 2.  every  spirit  that  c. Christ  is  come  in  flesh
3.  every  spirit  that  c.  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come

CONFESSION.

Josh.  7*  19.  give  glory  to  God  and  make  c.  to  him

2  Chr.  30.  22.  offering  peace-offerings  and  making  c.
Ezra  10.  11.  now  therefore  make  c.  to  the  Ld.  God
Dan.  9.  4.  I  prayed  to  the  Ld.  my  God  and  made  c.
Rom.  10. 10.  with  the  mouth  c.  is  made  to  salvation

1  Tim.  6.  13.  who  before  Pilate  witnessed  a  good  c,

CONFIDENCE

Signifies,  [1]  Assurance,  2  Cor.  8.  22.  [2]  Bold¬
ness,  or  courageousness,  Acts  28.  31.  [3]  Trust ,
or  hope.  Job  4.  6.  [4]  That  wherein  one  trust-
eth,  Jer.  48.  13.  [5]  Succour,  or  help,  2  Kings*
18.  19.  [6]  Safety,  or  security,  Ezek.  28.  26.
[7]  A  due  resolution,  2  Cor.  10.  2.  f8]  A  free
and  bold  profession  of  Christ  and  the  gospel ,  H eb.

10.  35.  [9]  A  well-grounded  persuasion  of  audi¬
ence  and  acceptance,  Eph.  3.  12.

Judg.  9.  26.  men  of  Shecnem  put  their  c.  in  Gaal

2  Kings  18.  19.  thus  saith  the  great  king  of  Assyria.

what  c.  is  this  wherein  thou  trustest  ?  Isa.  36. 4.

75


*


CUN


CON


CON

lob  4.  6.  is  not  this  thy  fear,  thy  c.  thy  hope 3

18.  14.  hisc.  shall  be  rooted  out  ot  Ins  tabernacle
31.  24.  if  I  have  said  to  fine  gold,  thou  art  my  c.
Psal.  65.  5.  who  art  the  c.  of  all  ends  of  the  earth
118. 8.  better  to  trust  in  Ld.  than  to  put  c.  m  man
9.  better  to  trust  in  Lord  than  to  put  c.  in  princes
Prov.  3. 26.  for  Ld.  shall  be  thy  c.  and  keep  thy  toot
14. 26.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  c.

21. 22.  casteth  down  the  strength  of  the  c.  thereof
25. 19.  c.  in  an  unfaithful  man  is  like  a  broken  tooth
Isa.  30. 15.  in  quietn.  and  c.  shall  be  your  strength
Jer.  48. 13.  as  lsr.  was  ashamed  of  Beth  el  their  c.
Ezek.  28.  26.  plant  viney.  they  shall  dwell  with  c.

29. 16.  Egypt  shall  be  no  more  the  c.  of  h.  ot  lsr.
Mic.  7. 5.  trust  not  a  friend,  put  ve  not  c.  in  a  guide
Acts  28. 31.  preaching  the  kingd.  of  God  with  all  c.

2  Cor.  1. 15.  in  this  c.  1  was  minded  to  come  before

2.  3.  having  c.  in  you  all,  that  my  joy  is  joy  of  you

7. 16.  1  rejoice  that  l  haver.  in  you  m  all  things
8.  22.  diligent  on  the  great  c.  which  1  have  in  you
10.2.  with  that  c.  wherewith  l  think  to  be  bold
11.  17.  but  as  it  were  foolishly  in  this  c.  of  boast.

Gal.  5.  10.  1  have  c.  in  you  through  the  Lord
Eph  3. 12.  in  whom  access  with  c.  by  faith  in  him
Phil.  1.  25.  having  this  c.  1  shall  abide  with  you  all

3.  3.  we  rejoice  in  Chr.  Jes.  and  have  no  c.  in  flesh

4.  though  I  might  also  have  c.  in  flesh,  if  any  other

2  Thess.  3.  4.  we  have  c.  in  the  Lord  touching  you
PhilemAl.  having  c.  in  thy  obedience,  1  wrote  to  you
Heb.  3.  6.  if  we  hold  fast  the  c.  and  hope  to  the  end
14.  if  we  hold  beginning  of  our  c.  stedfast  to  end
10. 35.  cast  not  away  therefore  your  c.  which  hath
11.  +  1.  faith  is  the  c.  of  things  hoped  for

1  John  2.  28.  when  he  shall  appear,  we  may  have  c.

3. 21.  if  heart  condemn  not,  then  have  c.  toward  G.

5.  14.  and  this  is  the  c.  that  we  have  in  him

CONFIDENCES.

Jer.  2.  37.  the  Lord  hath  rejected  thy  c.  not  prosper
CONFIDENT.  .

Psal.  27.3.  though  war  should  rise,  in  this  will  1  be  c.
Prov.  14. 16.  but  the  fool  rageth  and  is  c.

Porn.  2. 19.  arte,  thou  thyself  art  a  guide  of  the  blind

2  Cor.  5.  6.  therefore  we  are  always  c.  knowing
8  we  are  c.  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  body
9’  4  we  should  be^ashamed  in  this  same  c.  boasting
Phil.  1.6.  being  c.  of  this  very  thing,  who  hath  begun

14.  many  of  the  brethren  waxing  c.  by  my  bonds
CONFIDENTLY.

1  Kings  4. 1 25.  J udah  and  lsr.  dwelt  c.  under  vine
Psal.  16.  f  9.  my  flesh  shall  dwell  c.  in  hope
Ezek.  38. 1 11.  I  will  go  to  them  that  dwell  c.

39.  +  6.  1  will  send  a  fire  among  them  that  dwell  c
Luke 22. 59.  another  c.  affirmed ,  this  fellow  was  with
CONFIRMATION.

Phil.  1. 7.  in  defence  and  c.  of  the  gospel  partakers
Heb.  6.16.  an  oath  of  c.  is  to  them  an  end  ot  all  strife
CONFIRM

Signifies,  [1]  To  strengthen,  settle,  or  establish,

1  Chron.  14.  2.  Acts  14.  22.  .[2]  To  give  new
assurance  of  the  truth  and.  certainty  of  any  thing,

1  Kings  1.  14.  2  Cor.  2.  8.  [3]  To  ratify,  or

make  sure,  Ruth  4.  7.  [4]  To  refresh,  Psalm

68.  9.  [5]  To  continue  to  perform,  Deut.  27.  26.
[6]  To  fulfil,  accomplish,  or  make  good,  Rom.  15.  8.
To  confirm  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers.
To  make  it  evidently  appear  unto  men,  that  God
who  promised  to  send  his  Son  unto  the  Jews,  was
faithful  and  true,  because  in  the  fulness  of  time
he  did  send  him.  The  promises  of  God  are  in
themselves  most  firm  and  stable,  as  heaven  and
earth,  so  they  are  immoveable  and  constant :  they
are  said  to  be  confirmed  in  respect  of  men,  whose
faith,  being  weak  and  full  of  doubts,  had  need  to  be
helped  and  strengthened ;  not  God's  promises,  but
men' s  belief  is  feeble.  .  .

Confirmation  is  a  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,
strengthening  faint  ami  weak  minds  in  faith  and
obedience  unto  the  end,  1  Pet.  5.  10.  The  God
of  all  grace  confirm  and  strengthen  you.  God
confirmeth  as  the  author  or  efficient  cause  of
strength ;  the  word,  sacraments,  and  ministers,
confirm  as  instruments  or  helps,  Luke  22.  32.
When  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren.  And
a  man  confirms  himself  when  he  takes  heart  and
courage  to  himself  in  a  good  cause,  upon  hope  and
confidence  of  God's  help,  1  Cor.  16.  13.  But
David  encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord  his  God,

1  Sam.  30.  6.

Ruth  4. 7.  this  was  the  manner  for  to  c.  all  things

1  Kings  1. 14.  I  will  come  in  after  and  c.  thy  words

2  Kings  15.  19.  tor.  the  kingdom  in  his  hand
Esth.  9. 29.  Esth.  wrote  to  c.  second  letter  of  Purim

31.  to  c.  these  days  of  Purim  in  their  times
Psal.  68. 9.  didst  c.  thine  inheritance  when  weary
Isa.  35.  3  strengthen  weak  hands  and  c.  feeble  knees
Ezek.  13. 6.  to  hope  that  they  would  c.  the  word
Van.  9. 27.  he  shall  c.  the  covenant  for  one  week
11. 1.  even  I  stood  to  c.  and  to  strengthen  him
Rom.  15. 8.  to  c.  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers

1  Cor.  1.8.  who  shall  also  c.  you  to  the  end

2  Cor.  2. 8.  that  ye  would  c.  your  love  toward  him

CONFIRMED.

2  Sam.  7.  24.  thou  hast  c.  to  thyself  thy  people  lsr
2  Kings  14.  5.  as  soon  as  the  kingdom  was  c.  he  slew

1  Chron  14. 2.  Lord  had  c.  him  king  over  Israel

16. 17.  and  hath  c.  the  same  to  Jacob,  Ps.  105. 10.

2  Chron.  25.  +  3.  when  the  kingdom  was  c.  he  slew
Esth.  9. 32.  Esther  r.  these  matters  of  Purim
Dan.  9. 12.  hath  c.  his  words  which  he  spake  ag.  us
Acts  15.  32.  exhorted  the  brethren  and  c.  them

1  Cor.  1.  6.  the  testimony  of  Christ  was  c.  in  you
Gal.  3. 15.  yet  if  it  be  c.  no  man  disannul leth  it
17.  the  covenant  that  was  c.  before  of  God
Heb.  2.  3.  was  c.  to  us  by  them  that  heard  him

6. 17.  immutability  of  counsel,  he  c.  it  by  an  oath

CONFIRMETH,  ING.

Num.  30. 14.  bonds  which  are  on  her,  he  c.  them
Deut.  27. 26.  cursed  be  he  that  c.  not  all  the  words
Isa.  44.  26.  that  c.  the  word  of  his  servant
.Mark  16. 20.  preached,  c.  word  with  signs  following
Acts  14. 22.  c.  souls  of  the  disciples,  exhorting  them
15. 41.  wentthro’  Syria  and  Ciliciac.  the  churches
76


CONFISCATION.

Ezra  7.26.  let  judem.  be  executed  to  c.  or  imprison.
CONFLICT.

Psal.  39.  +  10.  1  am  consumed  by  the  c.  of  thine  hand
Phil.  1.  30.  having  the  same  c.  which  ye  saw  in  me
Col.  2.  1.  that  ye  knew  what  great  c.  I  have  for  you
CONFORMABLE.

Phil. 3. 10.  may  know  him,  being  made  c.  to  his  death
CON  FORMED.

Rom.  8.  29.  predestinate  to  be  c.  to  image  of  his  Son
12. 2.  be  note,  to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transformed
CONFOUND

Signifies,  [1]  To  disorder,  mingle,  or  jumble  toge¬
ther,  Gen.  11.  7.  [2]  To  baffile,  or  confute,  Acts

9.  22.  [3]  To  be  ashamed  by  reason  of  some  dis¬
appointment,  Job  6.  20.  [4]  To  destroy,  or  break
in  pieces,  Jer.  1.  17*  Zech.  10.  5.  [5]  lo  be
amazed,  astonished,  or  troubled  in  mind,  Acts  2.  6.

It  is  said,  1  Pet.  2.  6.  lie  that  believeth  shall  not
be  confounded  ;  that  is,  he  shall  not  be  disap¬
pointed  of  his  expectation  of  salvation  ;  the  scrip¬
ture  referred  to  by  the  apostle  is,  Isa.  28.  16.  He
that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste  :  that  is,  he
shall  not  hastily  and  greedily  catch  at  any  way
of  escaping  his  danger,  whether  it  be  right  or
wrong :  but  shall  patiently  wait  upon  God  for  de¬
liverance  and  salvation  in  his  way.

Gen.  11.7.  let  us  go  down  and  c.  their  language,  9.
Jer.  1. 17.  be  not  dismayed,  lest  I  c.  thee  before  them

1  Cor.  1.  27.  toe.  the  wise,  toe.  things  that  are  mighty
CON  FOUNDED.

2  Kings  19-  26.  the  inhabitants  were  c.  Isa.  37-  27.
Job  6.  20.  they  were  e.  because  they  had  hoped
Psal.  35.  4.  let  them  be  c.  that  seek  after  my  soul
69.  6.  let  not  those  that  seek  thee  be  e.  for  my  sake
71. 13.  let  them  be  c.  that  are  adversaries  to  my  soul

24.  for  they  are  c.  that  seek  my  hurt
83.  17.  let  them  be  c.  and  troubled  for  ever
97.  7.  c.  be  all  they  that  serve  graven  images
129.  5.  let  them  all  be  c.  turned  back  that  hate  Zion
Isa.  1. 29.  shall  be  c.  for  gardens  that  ye  have  chosen
19.  9.  they  that  weave  net- works  shall  be  c.

.37.27.  their  inhabitants  were  dismayed  and  c.

Jer.  9. 19.  greatly  c.  because  we  have  forsaken  land

10.  14.  every  founder  is  c.  by  graven  image,  51. 17-
17.  18.  let  them  be  c.  that  persecute  me,  let  not  me
46.  24.  daughter  of  Egypt  c.  J|  48.  20.  Moab  is  c.

49.  23.  Hamath  is  c.  ||  50.  2.  Babylon  taken,  Bel  c.

50.  12.  your  mother  shall  be  sore  c.  be  ashamed

51.  47.  Babylon,  her  whole  land  shall  be  c.

51.  we  are  c.  because  we  have  heard  reproach

Ezek.  16.52.  be  thou  c.  and  bear  thy  shame,  54, 63.
Mic.  7. 16.  nations  shall  see  and  be  c.  at  their  might
Zech.  10.  5.  and  the  riders  on  horses  shall  be  c.

Acts  2.  6.  the  multitude  came  together  and  were  c
9.  22.  Saul  c.  the  Jews  who  dwelt  at  Damascus
Ashamed  and  CONFOUNDED.

Psal.  40. 14.  as.  and  c.  that  seek  after  my  soul,  70. 2.
Isa.  24.  23.  the  moon  shall  be  c.  and  the  sun  ashamed

41. 11.  incensed  against  thee  shall  be  ashamed  and  c
45.  16.  idol-makers  shall  be  ash.  and  c.  all  of  them
54.  4.  thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed,  neither  be  thou  c.

Jer.  14.  3.  nobles  and  little  ones  were  ashamed  and  c
15.  9.  that  hath  born  seven  hath  been  ashamed  and  c.
22.  22.  surely  then  shalt  thou  be  ashamed  and  c.

31. 19.  I  was  ashamed,  yea  and  c.  because  I  did  bear
Ezek.  36.  32.  be  ashamed  and  c.  for  your  own  ways
Mic.  3. 7.  then  shall  seers  be  ashamed  and  diviners  c.

Not  CONFOUNDED.

Psal.  22.  5.  our  fathers  trusted,  and  were  not  c.
Isa.  45.  17.  not  ashamed  nor  c.  world  without  end
50.  7.  God  will  help,  therefore  shall  I  not  be  c.

1  Pet.  2.  6.  he  that  believeth  on  him  shall  not  be  c.
CONFUSED.

Isa.  9.  5.  for  every  battle  of  warrior  is  with  c.  noise
Acts  19.  32.  some  cried,  for  the  assembly  was  c.
CONFUSION.

Gen.  11.  +  9.  therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  c.
Lev.  18.  23.  a  beast  to  lie  down  thereto,  it  is  c.

20. 12.  surely  be  put  to  death,  they  have  wrought  c.
1  Sam.  20.  30.  hast  chosen  David  to  thy  c.  and  to  c.
Ezra  9. 7 .  been  delivered  to  c .  of  face,  as  at  this  day
Job  10.  15.  I  am  full  of  c.  therefore  see  mine  afflict.
Psal.  35. 4.  let  them  be  brought  to  c.  devise  my  hurt

44.  15.  my  c.  is  continually  before  me  and  shame

70.  2.  let  them  be  put  to  c.  that  desire  my  hurt

71.  1.  O  Lord,  let  me  never  be  put  to  c.

109. 29.  let  them  cover  themselves  with  their  own  c.

Isa.  24.  10.  the  city  of  c.  is  broken  down
30.  3.  and  the  trust  in  the  shadow  of  Egypt  your  c.

34.  11.  he  shall  stretch  out  upon  it  the  line  of  c
41.  29.  their  molten  images  are  wind  and  c.

45.  16.  makers  of  idols  shall  go  to  c.  together
61.  7.  for  c .  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  portion

Jer.  3.  25.  we  lie  in  shame  and  our  c.  covereth  us

7. 19.  do  they  not  provoke  thems.  to  c .  of  their  faces
20. 11.  their  everlasting  c.  shall  never  be  forgotten
Dan.  9.  7.  but  to  us  belongeth  c.  of  faces,  8.

Acts  19.  29.  the  whole  city  was  filled  with  c.  -
l  Cor.  14.  3.3.  for  God  is  not  author  of  c.  but  peace
Jam.  3. 16.  for  where  envying  and  strife  is,  there  is  c.

CONGEALED.

Exod.  15.  8.  the  depths  were  c.  in  heart  of  the  sea
CONGRATULATE.

1  Chron.  18. 10.  to  inquire  of  his  welfare  and  c.  him
CONGREGATION.

Lev.  4.  21 .  it  is  a  sin  offering  for  the  c.  .

10.  17.  God  hath  given  it  you  to  bear  iniquity  of  c.
16.  33.  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  all  the  c.
Num.  1.  16.  these  were  the  renowned  of  the .  c.

10.  7.  but  when  c.  is  to  be  gathered  you  shall  blow

14.  27.  how  long  shall  I  bear  with  this  evil  c.  ?

15.  15.  one  ordinance  shall  be  for  c.  and  stranger

16.  21.  separate  yourselves  fromc.  that  l  may  cons
45.  get  you  up  from  among  this  c.  that  I  may  cons
47.  Aaron  took  and  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  c.

19.  20.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  the  c
27.  16.  let  the  Lord  set  a  man  over  the  c.

35.  12.  cities  of  refuge  that  manslayer  die  not,  till
he  stand  before  the  c.  for  judgment,  Josh.  20.  6.

Josh.  9.  27.  made  them  drawers  of  water  for  the  c.
Judg.  20.  l.ther.  was  gathered  as  one  man  from  Dan


Judg.  21.  5.  that  came  not  up  with  the  c.  ti>  the  Lord

1  Kings  12.  20.  they  sent  and  called  Jerob.  to  the  c

2  Chr.  30.  24.  Hezekiah  did  give  to  c.  1000  bullock.
Ezra  10. 8.  and  himself  separated  from  the  c.

Neh.  13.  1.  the  Moabite  should  not  c  ome  into  the  c.
Job  15.  34.  for  the  c.  of  hypocrites  shall  be  desolate

30.  28.  I  stood  up  and  1  t  ried  in  the  c.

Psal.  1.  5.  nor  sinners  in  the  c.  of  the  righteous
22.  22.  in  the  midst  of  the  c.  will  I  praise  thee
26.  5.  1  have  hated  thee,  of  evil  doers
58.  1.  do  ve  indeed  speak  righteousness,  O  c.  ?

74.  2.  remember  thy  r.  thou  hast  purchased  of  old

19.  forget  not  the  c.  of  thy  poor  tor  ever  .

75.  2.  when  1  receive  the  c.  1  will  judge  uprightly
82.  1.  God  standeth  in  the  c.  ot  the  mighty

89.  5.  thy  faithfulness  also  in  the  c.  of  the  saints
107.  .32.  let  them  exalt  him  also  in  c.  of  the  people
111.  1.  I  will  praise  the  I,,  in  the  assembly  and  c.
Prov.  5.  14.  I  was  almost  in  all  evil  in  midst  of  c.

21.  16.  the  men  shall  remain  in  thee,  of  the  dead
Isa.  14. 1.3.  I  will  sit  upon  the  mount  of  the  c.

Jer.  6. 18.  and  know,  O  c.  what  is  among  them

30.  20.  their  c.  shall  be  established  before  me
Lam.  1.  10.  that  they  should  not  enter  into  thy  c.
Hos.  7.  12.  I  will  chastise  them  as  their  c.  hath  heard
Joel  2.  16.  gather  the  people,  sanctify  the  c.

Acts  13.  43.  now  when  the  c.  was  broken  up
All  the  CO N G  LEGATION .

Lev.  8.  3.  gather  all  the  c.  together  to  door  of  tabern.
16.  if.  make  atonement  for  all  the  c.  of  Israel

24.  14.  let  all  the  c.  stone  him,  16.  Num.  15.  35.
Num.  14.  10.  all  the  c.  bade  stone  them  with  stones
16,  3.  seeing  all  the  c.  are  holy,  every  one  of  them
22.  shall  one  sin,  wilt  thou  be  wroth  with  all  c.  ?

20.  27.  they  went  up  insight  of  all  the  c.  25.  6.

27. 19.  set  him  before  Eleazar  and  all  the  c.  22.

Josh.  8.  35.  which  Joshua  read  not  before  all  the  c
9.  18.  all  thee,  murmured  against  the  princes

22.  20.  wrath  fell  on  all  the  c.  of  Israel

1  Kings  8. 14.  the  king  blessed  all  the  c.  of  lsr.  55.

1  Chron.  29.  20.  all  the  c.  blessed  the  Lord  God

2  Chron.  2.3.  .3.  all  the  c.  made  a  covenant  with  the  k.
29.  28.  all  the  c.  worshipped  and  the  singers  sang
Neh.  5.  13.  all  the  c.  said,  amen,  and  praised  the  L.
8.  17.  all  the  c.  that  were  come  again  made  booths

Elders  of  the  CONGREGATION.

Lev.  4. 15.  elders  of  the  c.  shall  lay  their  hands
Judg.  21.  16.  eld.  of  c.  said,  how  shall  we  dp  for
Great  CONGREGATION.  [wives?

1  Kings  8.  65.  at  that  time  Solomon  held  a  feast,  all
Israel  with  him,  a  great  c.  2  Chron.  7 .  8.  1  30.  13.

Ezra  10. 1.  assembled  to  him  out  of  Israel  a  great  c.
Psal.  22.  25.  my  praise  shall  be  of  thee  in  the  great  c.
35.  18.  I  will  give  thee  thanks  in  the  great  c.

40.  9.  I  have  preached  righteousness  in  the  great  c.
10. 1  have  not  concealed  thy  truth  from  great  c.
CONGREGATION  of  Israel.

Exod.  12.  6.  c.  of  Israel  shall  kill  it  in  the  evening
19.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  c.  of  Israel
47.  all  the  c.  of  Israel  shall  keep  the  passover
Lev.  4. 13.  if  whole  c.  of  lsr.  sin  through  ignorance
Num.  16.  9.  Lord  hath  separated  you  from  c.  of  lsr.

2  Chron.  5.  6.  Solom.  and  c.  of  lsr.  sacrificed  sheep

24.  6.  according  to  the  commandment  of  c.  of  lsr.

CONGREGATION  of  the  Lord.  [L.l
Num.  16.  3.  why  lift  you  yourselves  above  c.  of  the

27. 17.  c.  of  L.  not  as  sheep  that  have  no  shepherd

31. 16.  was  a  plague  among  c.  of  the  L.  Josh.  22. 17 •
Deut.  23. 1.  shall  not  enter  into  the  c.  of  the  L.  2.  3.
1  Chron.  28.  8.  in  sight  of  c.of  L.  keepcommandm.
Mic.  2.  5.  that  shall  cast  a  cord  by  lot  in  the  c.  of  L.

Tabernacle  of  the  CONGREGATION.

Exod.  29.  10.  bullock  brought  before  the  tab.  of  c.

44.  I  will  sanctify  t.  of  c.  11  30.  26.  anoint  t.  of  c.
.3.3.  7.  called  it  the  t.  of  c.  went  out  to  the  t.  of  c.
Lev.  .3.8.  kill  it  bef.  f.  ofc.  13.  H  4. 5.  bring  it  to  t.  ofc.
10.  7.  ye  shall  not  go  out  from  the  door  of  t.  of  c.

9.  drink  no  wine  when  ye  go  into  the  tab.  of  c.

16. 16.  so  do  for  t.  ofc.  \\  3.3.  atonement  for  t.  ofc.
Num.  4.  3.  work  of  the  t.  of  c.  2.3,  25,  30,  35,  39, 43.
8.  9.  thou  shalt  bring  the  Levites  before  tab.  of  c.
12.  4.  Lord  spake,  come  out  ye  three  to  tab.  of  c.

14.  10.  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  in  the  tab.  of  c.
17.  4.  lay  up  in  t.  ofc.  ||  18. 4.  keep  charge  of  t.of  c.

25.  6.  Israel  weeping  before  the  door  or  tab.  of  c.
Deut.  31. 14.  present  yourselves  in  tabern.  of  the  c.
Josh.  18. 1.  at  Shiloh,  and  set  up  the  tab.  of  c.  there

1  Kings  8.  4.  they  brought  up  tab.  of  c.  2  Chr.  5. 5.

2  Chron.  1.  3.  for  there  was  the  tab.  of  c.  of  God

See  Door.

Tent  of  the  CONGREGATION.

Exod.  .39.  32.  /.  ofc.  finished  ||40.  2.  set  up  t.  oj  c.
40.  22.  table  in  t.  ofc.  II  24.  candlestick  in  t.  of  c.

26.  and  he  put  the  golden  altar  in  the  tent  of  the  c

34.  then  a  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the  c.

35.  Moses  was  not  able  to  enter  into  the  tent  of  c

Whole  CONOR  EG  ATION.

Exod.  16. 2.  the  whole  c.  of  Israel  murmured
Num.  3.  7.  they  shall  keep  the  .charge  of  the  w.c.
Josh.  22.  18.  to-morrow  he  will  be  wroth  with  w.c.
Judg.  21. 13.  the  whole  c.  sent  to  speak  to  Benjamin
2  Chr.  6.3.  the  king  blessed  the  whole  c.  of  Israel
Ezra  2.  64.  the  whole  c.  was  42,360.  Neh.  7.  66.
Prov.  26.  26.  wickedness  be  shewed  before  whole  c.

CONGREGATIONS.

Psal.  26. 12.  in  the  c.  will  I  bless  the  Lord
68.  26.  bless  ye  God  in  the  c.  even  the  Lord
74.  4.  thine  enemies  roar  in  the  midst  ot  thy  c.
CONQUER..

Rev.  6.  2.  he  went  forth  conquering  and  to  c.
CONQUERORS.

Rom.  8.  37.  in  all  these  things  we  are  more  than  c.
CONSCIENCE

Ts  the  testimony  and  secret  judgment  of  the  soul,
which  gives  its  approbation  to  actions  that  it
thinks  good,  or  reproaches  itself  with  those  which
it  believes  to  he  evil:  Or,  it  is  a  particular  knozo-
ledge  which  we  have  with  us  of  our  own  deeds,
good  or  evil,  arising  out  of  the  general  know¬
ledge  of  the  mind,  which  shows  us  what  is  good,
or  evil ;  and  Conscience  tells  us  when  we  have
done  the  one  or  the  other,  Rom.  2.  15.  It  ts


CON


CON


CON


ttther  (I)  Good,l  Tim.  1.  5.  And  this  is  called ,
11]  A  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  God
and  men  ;  which  does  not  accuse  a  person  for  any
wilful  offence,  either  against  God  or  men.  Acts
•24.  16.  [2]  A  conscience  bearing  a  person  wit¬
ness  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is',  by  the  conduct
an  '  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost .  who  cannot  he,
Rom.  Q.  1.  [3]  Pure  and  good,  being  purified
by  the  blood  of  Christ,  Ileb.  9.  14.  1  litn.  3.  9.
[4]  Purged  from  dead  w<rks;  that  is,  freed  from
that  sentence  of  death  which  it  receives  by  reason
if  sin,  Ileb.  9.  14.  [5]  A  conscience  not  troubled
with  a  sense  of  guilt,  Ileb.  10.  2.  [6J  A  con¬
science  checking  and  condemning  perrons;  when
they  have  gone  against  their  light,  and  approving
and  Justifying  them,  when  they  hate  conformed
to  it,  Rom.  2.  15.  Or,  (II)  Evil,  Ileb.  10.  22.
■when  it  is  defiled  with  vicious  habit*,  so  that  it
does  not  perform  its  (ffi.ee  aright.  It  is  called,  [1]
A  conscience  searel  with  a  hot  iron;  that  is,
quite  extinct  and  cut  off,  or  utterly  hardened,
which  has  lost  all  sense  and  feeling,  1  d  im.  4.  2.
[2J  A  defiled  conscience ;  when  it  is  blinded  and
perverted,  so  that  it  cannot  judge  of  its  own
acti  <ns.  Tit.  1.  15.  This  evil  conscience  is  some¬
times  quiet,  sometimes  stirring  and  tioubled :  It
aciuseth  when  it  should  excuse,  and  excuse th
when  it  should  accuse.  The  conscience  also  even
of  the  best,  is  now  and  then  erroneous  and
doubtful.

The.  apostle  Paul  permits  the  faithful  to  go  and  eat
at  the  houses  of  the  Gentiles,  if  thiy  were  invited
thither,  and  to  partake  of  every  thing  which  Mas
served  up  at  their  tables,  without  making  parti¬
cular  inquiries  out  of  any  scrupulosity  of  con¬
science  ;  asking  no  question  for  conscience’  sake,

1  Cor.  10.  27,  &c.  But  if  any  one  says  to  them,
this  has  been  sacrificed  to  idols ;  do  not  eat  of  it,
says  he,  f  r  his  sake  who  gave  you  this  informa¬
tion  ;  and  likewise  lest  ye  wound  not  your  own,
but  another's,  conscience:  Conscience,  1  say,  not
thine  own,  but  of  the  other.  If  hs  who  gives
you  this  notice  is  a  Christian,  and  notwithstand¬
ing  the  information  so  given  you  forbear  not  to
eat :  he  will  condemn  you  in  his  heart,  or  will  eat
of  it  after  your  example  against  his  own  con¬
science,  and  so  the  guilt  of  his  sin  will  be  im¬
puted  to  you.  If  he  is  an  Heathen,  who  thus
advertises  you,  and  he  sees  you  eat  of  it ,  he  will
conceive  a  contempt  for  you  and  your  religion.  In
another  place  the  same  Apostle  requires  Christians
to  be  submissive  to  secular  power,  not  only  for
wrath,  but  also  for  conscience’  sake,  Bom.  13.

5.  that  is,  not  only  for  fear  of  punishment  from
the  magistrate,  but  more  especially  out  of  con-
scieni  e  of  duty,  both  to  God,  who  is  the  ordainer
of  him  to  that  special  ministry,  under  himself;
and  to  the  magistrate,  whose  due  it  is,  in  respect
of  h/s  office.

i  Eccl.  10. t 20.  curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in  thy  c.
JohnQ.  9.  being  convicted  by  their  own  c.  went  out
Acts  23.  1.  Paul  said,  1  have  lived  in  all  good  c.

24. 16.  to  have  a  c.  void  of  offence  toward  God  and

toward  men

Bom.  2.l5.their  c.  also  bearing  wi  ness,  and  thoughts

9. 1.  my  c.  bearing  me  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost

13.  5.  ye  must  be  subject  also  for  c.  sake

1  Cor.  8. 7.  for  some  with  c.  of  ihe  idol  to  this  hour

eat  it,  and  their  c.  being  weak  is  defiled
10.  shall  not  the  weak  c.  be  emboldened  to  eat  ?

12.  but  when  ye  wound  their  weak  c.  ye  sin

against  Christ

10. 25.  that  eat,  asking  no  question  for  c.  sake,  27.

28.  eat  not,  for  his  sake  that  shewed  it,  for  c.  sake

29.  c.  I  say,  not  thine  own,  but  of  the  other

2  Cor.  1. 12.  our  rejoicing  is  this,  testimony  of  our  c.

4.  2.  commending  yourselves  to  every  man's  c.

1  Tim.  1. 5.  out  or  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a  good  c.

19.  war  a  warfare,  holding  faith  and  a  good  c.

3.  9.  holding  the  mystery  of  faith  in  a  pure  c.

4. 2.  having  their  c.  seared  with  a  hot  iron

2  Tim.  1.  3.  1  thank  God,  whom  1  serve  with  c.

Tit.  1.  15.  but  even  their  mind  and  c.  is  defiled
Heb.  9. 9.  make  perfect,  as  pertaining  to  the  c.

14.  purge  c.  from  dead  works  to  serve  living  God

10.2.  worshippers  should  have  had  no  more  c.  of  sins

22.  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  c.

13. 18.  we  trust  we  have  a  good  c.  in  all  things

1  Pet.  2. 19.  if  a  man  fore,  toward  God  endure  grief
3.  16.  having  a  good  c.  as  they  speak  evil  of  you

21.  but  the  answer  of  a  good  c.  towards  God
CONSCIENCES.

2  Cor.  5. 11. 1  trust  also  are  made  manifest  in  your  c.

CONSECRATE.

To  consecrate,  is  to  offer  or  devote  any  thing  to
God's  worship  and.  service.  In  the  Old  Testament,
God  ordained  that  all  the  first-born,  both  of  man
and  beast,  should  be  consecrated,  Exod.  13.  2,  12,

15.  He  consecrated  the  whole  race  of  Israel  par¬
ticularly  to  his  worship,  Exod.  19.  6.  And  like¬
wise  he  devoted  the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  the  family  of
Aaron,  in  a  more  especial  manner  to  his  service,
Num.  1.  49.  1  3.  12.  Besides  these  consecrations,
which  God  thus  ordained  by  his  own  absolute  and
sovereign  authority,  there  were  others  which  de¬
pended  on  the  good  will  of  men,  who  consecrated
themselves,  or  the  things  belonging  to  them,  nr  the
persons  depending  on  them,  to  the  service  of  God,
for  ever,  or  for  a  time  only.  Hannah,  Samuel's
mother,  offered  her  son  to  the  Lord,  to  serve  all
his  life  time  in  the  tabernacle,  1  Sam.  1.  11,  22.
Some  of  the  N  azarites  consecrated  themselves
to  the  Lord  only  for  a  certain  time,  Num.  6.  13.
And  the  Hebrews  sometimes  devoted  their  fields,
or  cattle,  to  the  Lord ;  after  which  they  were  no
longer  in  their  power,  Lev.  27.  28.  In  the  New
Testament  all  the  faithful  are  consecrated  to  the
Lord ;  they  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal
priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people,
,1  Pet.  2.  9.

Lxod. 28. 3.  c.  Aaron  ||  41.  anoint  and  c.  Aaron's  sons
•<■9.  9.  thou  shalt  c.  Aaron  and  bis  sons,  30.  30.


Exod.  29.35.  seven  days  shalt  thou  c.them  ,Le  -'.8.33.
32. 29.  Moses  said,  c.  yourselves  this  day  to  the  L.
Num.  6. 12.  shall  c.  to  L.  the  days  of  his  separation

1  Chron.  29.  5.  toe.  his  service  this  day  to  the  Lord

2  Chron.  13.  9.  to  c.  himself  with  a  young  bullock
E2ek.43.26.  purge  altar,  and  they  shall  c.  themselves
Mic.  4. 13. 1  will  c.  their  gain  to  Lord  and  substance

CONSECRATED.

Num.  3.  3.  the  sons  of  Aaron,  whom  he  c.  to  minister
Josh.  6.  19.  vessels  of  brass  and  iron,  are  c.  to  the  L.
Judg.  17.  5.  Micah  c.  one  of  his  sons  for  his  priest, 12.

1  Kings  13.  33.  whosoever  would,  Jeroboam  c.  him

2  Chr.  29.  31.  now  ye  have  c.  yourselves  to  the  L.
31.6.  the  tithe  of  holy  things  which  werec.  to  L.

/  zra  3.  5.  of  all  the  set  feasts  of  Lord  that  were  c.
Heb.  7. 28.  maketh  the  Son,  who  is  c.  for  evermore

10.  20.  by  a  new  and  living  way  which  he  hath  c.
CONSECRATED.

2  Chr.  29.  33.  c.  things  were  600  oxen,  3000  sheep
CONSECRATION,  S.

Exod.  29.  22.  shalt  take  of  ram,  for  it  is  a  ram  of  c.

31.  if  ought  of  the  flesh  of  the  c.  remain
Lev. 7.  37.  this  is  the  law  of  the  c.  and  sacrifice
8. 28.  they  werec.  for  a  sweet  savour  to  the  Lord

31.  eat  it  with  the  bread  that  is  in  the  basket  of  c.

33.  till  the  days  of  your  c.  be  at  an  end

Num.  6.  7.  because  the  c.  of  his  G.  is  upon  his  head

9.  and  he  hath  defiled  the  head  of  his  c.

CONSENT,  ED,  ING.

Gen.  34.  15.  but  in  this  will  we  c.  unto  you

23.  only  let  us  c.  to  them,  they  will  dwell  with  us
Gent.  13. 8.  shalt  not  c.  to  him,  nor  hearken  to  him
Judg.  11. 17.  sent  to  king  of  Moab,  but  would  not  c.

1  A  ings  20. 8.  elders  said,  hearken  not  to  hirr  nor  c.

2  Kings  12. 8.  the  priests  c.  to  receive  no  more  mon.
Psal.  5 0.18.  when  sawest  a  thief,  thou  c.  with  him
Prov.  1. 10.  if  sinners  entice  thee,  c.  thou  not
Han.  1.14.  so  he  c.  to  them, and  proved  them  ten  days
Luke  23. 51.  the  same  had  note,  to  the  deed  of  them
Acts  8.  1 .  and  Saul  was  c.  to  Stephen’s  death,  22. 20.

18. 20.  desired  to  tarry  longer  with  them,  he  c.  not
Bom.  1.  +32.  not  only'  do  the  same,  but  c.  with  them

7. 16.  what  I  would  not,  I  c.  to  law  that  it  is  good
1  Tim.  6. 3.  if  any  man  c.  not  to  wholesome  words
CONSENT.

1  Sam.  11.  7.  and  they  came  out  with  one  c.

Psal.  83. 5.  they  have  consulted  together  with  one  c.
llos.  6.9.  so  the  company  of  the  priests  murder  by  c.
Zeph.  3.  9.  may  all  call  on  L.  toserve  with  one  c.
Luke  14.  18.  all  with  one  c.  began  to  make  excuse
1  Cor. 7.5.  one  another,  except  it  be  with  c.  for  a  time
CONSIDER

Signifies,  [1]  To  think  of,  or  meditate  upon ,  2  Tim.
2.  7-  [2.]  To  view,  mark,  or  observe,  Lev.  13.  13.
[3]  To  resolve,  or  determine,  Judg.  18.  14.  [4]
To  wonder  and  admire  at,  Job  37.  14.  [5]  To

pity,  comfort,  or  relieve,  Psal.  41.  1.  [6]  To  re¬
member,  or  call  to  mind,  1  Sam.  12.  24.
lev.  13.  13.  then  the  priest  shall  c.  the  leprosy
Deut.  4.  39.  know  this  day  and  c.  it  in  thine  heart

32.  29.  O  that  they  were  wise  to  c.  their  latter  end
Judg.  18. 14.  now  therefore  c.  what  ye  have  to  do

1  Sam.  12.  24.  c.  how  great  things  hath  done  for  you

25. 17.  therefore  know  and  c.  what  thou  wilt  do
Job  11.  11.  he  seeth  also,  will  he  not  then  c.  it?

23.  15.  when  l  c.  I  am  afraid  of  him

34.  27.  turned  back  and  would  not  c.  of  his  ways
37. 14.  stand  still  and  c.  the  wondrous  works  of  God
Psal.  5.  1.  c.  my  meditation  ||  9- 13.  c.  my  trouble

8.  3.  when  I  c.  the  heavens,  the  work  of  thy  fingers

13.  3.  c.  and  hear,  45. 10.  II 25. 19.  c.  my  enemies
37. 10.  shalt  diligently  c.  his  place,  it  shall  not  be

48. 13.  c.  her  palaces,  that  ye  may  tell  it  togener.
50.  22.  now  c.  this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I  tear
64.  9.  for  they  shall  wisely  c.  of  his  doing

119.  95.  but  l  will  c.  thy  testinionies
153. c.  mine  affliction,  and  deliver  me,  I  forget  not
159-c.  how  1  love  thy  precepts,  quicken  me,0  Lord
Prov.  6. 6.  go  to  the  ant,  c.  ner  way^,  and  be  wise
23. 1.  with  a  ruler  c.  diligently  what  is  before  thee
24. 12.  doth  not  he  that  pondereth  the  heart  c.  it  ?
Eccl.  5.  1.  for  they  c.  not  that  they  do  evil

7. 13.  c.  the  work  of  God ,  who  can  make  straight

14.  in  prosperity  be  joyful,  but  in  day  of  adver.  c.

Isa.1.3.  Israel  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth  note.

5.  12.  neither  c.  the  operation  of  his  hands

14.  16.  shall  narrowly  look  upon  thee  andc.  thee
18.  4.  and  I  will  c.  in  my  dwelling-place

41.  20.  that  they  may  see,  and  know,  and  c.

43. 18.  remember  ye  not,  nor  c.  the  things  of  old
52.  15.  what  they  had  not  heard  shall  they  c.

Jer.  2.  10.  c.  and  see  if  there  be  such  a  thing
23.  20.  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  c.  it,  30.  24.
Lam.  2. 20.  O  Lord,  c.  to  whom  thou  hast  done  this
5.  1.  O  Lord,  c.  and  behold  our  reproach
Ezek.  12.  3.  it  may  be  they  will  c.  though  they  be

a  rebellious  house
Dan.  9.  23.  understand  the  matter,  and  c.  the  vision
Hos.  7. 2.  they  c.  not  in  their  hearts  that  I  remember
Hag.  1.5.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  c.  your  ways,  7.

2.  15. 1  pray  you,  c.  from  this  dav  and  upward,  18.
Mat.  6.  28.  c.  the  lilies  of  the  field,  Luke  12.  27.
L.uke  12. 24.  c.  the  ravens,  they  neither  sow  nor  reap
John  11. 50.  nor  c.  it  is  expedient  for  us  that  one  die
Acts  15.  6.  the  elders  came  to  c.  of  this  matter

2  Tim.  2.7.  c.  and  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding
Heb.  3.1.  brethren,  c.  the  Apostle  and  High-priest
7.  4.  now  c.  how  great  this  man  was,  unto  whom

10.  24.  let  us  c.  one  another  to  provoke  to  love
12.  3.  c.  him  that  endured  contradiction  of  sinners

CONSIDERED,  EST.

1  Kings3.2\.  when  I  c.  in  morning,  it  was  not  my  son
5.  8.  I  have  c.  things  which  thousentest  to  me  for
Job  1.  8.  hast  thou  c.  my  servant  Job  ?  2.  3.

Psal.  31 .7.  I  will  be  glad,  for  thou  hast  c.  my  trouble
Prov.  24.  32.  then  1  saw  and  c.  it  well
Eccl.  4.  1.  I  c.  all  the  oppressions  that  are  done

4.  again  T  c.  all  travail  and  every  right  work

9.  1.  for  all  this  I  c.  in  my  heart  to  declare  this
Jer.  33.  24.  c.  not  what  this  people  have  spoken
Dan.  7-  8.  I  c.  the  horns,  and  behold  there  came  up
Mat.  7.3.  c.  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye


Mark  6.  52.  they  c.  not  the  miracle  of  the  loaves
Acts  12.  12.  when  Peter  had  c.  the  thing,  he  came
Rom.  4.  19.  he  c.  not  his  own  body  now  dead
CON  SI  D  ERE  I’ll,  ING.

Ps.  33. 15.  fashion,  hearts  alike,  he  c.  all  their  works
41. 1.  blessed  is  he  that  c.  the  poor, Lord  will  deliver
Pr.  v.  21.  12.  righteous  man  c.  house  of  the  wicked
+  29.  but  as  for  the  upright,  he  c.  his  way
28.  22.  and  c.  not  that  poverty  shall  come  on  him
29. 7.  the  righteous  c.  the  cause  of  the  poor

31. 16.  she  c.  a  field,  and  buyeth  it, plants  vineyards
Isa.  44.  19.  none  c.  in  his  heart  to  say,  l  have  burnt
57.  1.  none  c.  that  the  righteous  is  taken  away
Ezek.  18.  14.  and  c.  and  doth  not  such  like,  28.

Dan.  8.  5.  as  1  was  c.  behold  an  he  goat  came
Gal.  6.1.  c.  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted
Ileb.  13.  7.  c.  the  end  of  their  conversation
CONSIST,  ETH.

Luke  12.  15.  a  man’s  life  c.  not  in  the  abundance
Col.  1. 17.  he  is  before  all  things,  by  him  all  things  c.
CON  SOLA 1  ION

Is  that  inward  spiritual  refreshing  and  strengthening
of  the  heart,  by  the  consideration  and  experience  of
God's  gracious  promises  in  Christ,  2  Cor.  1.  5.
The  Ilo/y  Ghost  is  the  worker  of  comfort,  and  is
therefore  called  the  Comforter,  John  16.  7.  The
promises  of  the  word  are  the  grounds  of  comfort,  1
1  hess.  4.  18.  ;  and  godly  ministers  and  the  faith¬
ful,  are  the  helpers  of  our  comfort  and  consola¬
tion,  2  Cor.  7. 6,  7.

Waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,  Luke  2.  25.
He  waited  for  Christ  to  comfort  them  against
their  troubles  both  spiritual  and  outward.  The
p-ophets  used  to  comfort  the  people  of  God  among
the  Jews,  against  all  their  sad  tidings  they
brought  them,  with  the  prophecies  of  the  coming
and  kingdom  of  Christ,  Isa.  66.  12,  13.  Herein
Simeon  shewed  the  truth  of  his  piety  and  devo¬
tion,  that  he  believed,  and  waited  for  the  coming
of  Christ.

Jer.  16.  7.  nor  shall  men  give  them  the  cup  of  c.
Luke  2.  25.  Simeon,  waiting  for  the  c.  of  Israel

6.  24.  woe  to  you  rich,  for  ye  have  received  your  c.
Acts  4.  36.  which  is,  being  interpreted,  the  son  of  c.

15.  31.  which  when  read,  they  rejoiced  tor  the  c.
Bom.  15. 5.the  God  of  c.  grant  you  to  be  like-minded
2  Cor.  1.  5.  so  our  c.  also  aboundeth  by  Christ

6.  afflicted,  for  your  c.  and  sal.  comf.  for  your  c.
7  of  sufferings,  so  shall  ye  be  partakers  of  the  c.

7.  7.  but  by  the  c.  wherewith  he  was  comforted
Phil.  2.1.if  there  be  any  c.  in  Christ, fulfil  ye  my  joy
2  Thess.  2.  16.  who  hath  given  us  everlasting  c.
Philem.7.  we  have  great  joy  ana  c.  in  tny  love
Heb.  6.  18.  we  might  have  a  strong  c.  who  have  fled

CON  SOLA  1TONS.

Job  15.  11.  are  the  c.  of  God  small  with  thee  ?

21.  2.  hear  my  speech,  and  let  this  be  your  c.

Isa.  66.  11.  and  be  satisfied  with  the  breasts  of  her  c.
CONSORTED.

Acts  17.  4.  some  of  them  c.  with  Paul  and  Silas
CONSPIRACY.

2  Sam.  15.  12.  and  Absalom’s  c.  was  strong
2  Kings  12.  20.  his  serv.  made  a  c.  and  slew  Joash

14.  19.  they  made  a  c.  ag.  Amaziah,  2  Chr.  25.  27.

15.  15.  acts  of  Shallum  and  his  c.  which  he  made

30.  Hoshea  made  a  c.  against  Pekah

17.  4.  the  king  of  Assyria  found  c.  in  Hoshea
Jer.  11.  9.  a  c.  is  found  among  the  men  of  Judah
Ezek.  22.  25.  is  a  c.  of  her  prophets  in  midst  thereof
Acts  23. 13.  more  than  forty  who  had  made  this  c.
CONSPIRATORS.

2  Sam.  15.  31.  Ahithophel  is  among  c.  with  Absalom
CONSPIRED.

Gen.  37.  18.  they  c.  against  Joseph  to  slay  him
1  Sam.  22.  8.  that  all  of  you  have  c.  against  me
13.  why  have  ye  c.  ag.  me,  thou  and  son  of  Jesse

1  Kings  15.  27.  Baasha  son  of  Ahijah  c.  ag.  Nadab

16.  9.  Zimri  c.  against  Elah  and  slew  him,  16.

2  Kings  9.  14.  Jehu  son  of  N  imshi  c.  against  Joram

10.  9.  1  c.  against  my  master  and  slew  him

15. 10.  Shallum  c.agamst  Zachariah,and  smote  him
25.  Pekah  c.  against  Pekahiah,  and  smote  him
21.  23.  the  servants  of  Amon  c.  against  him

24.  slew  all  that  c.  against  Amon,  2  Chr.  33.  25.
2  Chron.  24.  21.  and  they  c.  against  Jehoiada

25.  the  servants  of  Joash  c.  against  him,  26.

Neh.  4. 8.  c.  all  of  them  together?  and  come  and  fight
Amos  7.  10.  Amos  hath  c.  against  thee  in  Israel

CONSTANT,  LY.

1  Chron.  28. 7.  if  he  be  c.  to  do  my  commandments
Ezra  9.  +  8.  to  give  us  a  c.  abode  in  his  holy  place
Psal.  51.  t  10.  and  renew  a  c.  spirit  within  me
Prov.  21.  28.  but  the  man  that  heareth,  speaketh  c.
Acts  12.  15.  Rhoda  c.  affirmed  that  it  was  even  so
Tit.  3.  8.  these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  c.

CONSTELLATIONS.

2  Kings  23. +5.  put  down  those  that  burnt  incense  to  c.
Isa.  13.  10.  the  c.  thereof  shall  not  give  their  light

CONSTRAIN.

Gal.  6. 12.  they  c.  you  to  be  circumcised,  only  lest
CONSTRAINED,  ETH.

2  A7w£r?4.8.the  woman  of  Shunem  c.him  to  eat  bread
Job  32.  18.  full  of  matter,  the  spirit  within  me  c.  me
Mat.  14.  22.  Jesus  c.  his  disciples,  Mark 6.  45.
Luke  24.  29.  but  they  c.  him,  saying,  abide  with  us
Acts  16.  15.  Lydia  c.  us  to  come  into  her  house
28.  19.  1  was  c.  to  appeal  to  Ceesur
2  Cor.  5. 14.  for  love  of  Chr.  c.  us,  because  we  judge
CONSTRAINT.

1  Pet.  5. 2.  taking  oversight,  not  by  c.  but  willingly
CONSULT.

Psal.  62. 4.  only  c .to  cast  him  down  from  excellency
CONSULTATION.

Mark\5.  1.  the  chief  priests  held  ac.  with  the  elders
CONSULTED.

1  Kings  12.  6.  Rehoboam  c.  with  the  old  men,  8.

1  Chr.  13.  1.  Dav.  c.  with  the  captains  of  thousands

2  Chron.  20.  21.  Jehoshaphat  c.  with  the  people
Neh.  5.  7-  I  c.  with  myself,  and  rebuked  the  nobles
Psal.  83.  3.  they  have  c.  against  thy  hidden  ones

5.  for  they  have  c.  together  with  one  consent
Ezek.  21.  21.  the  king  of  Rabylon  c.  with  images

77


CON


CON


CON


Dan.  6. 7.  all  the  presidents  and  captains  c.  together
Mic.5.5.  lemember  what  Balak  king  of  Moab  c.

Hah.  2. 10.  hast  c.  shame  to  thy  house,  by  cutting  oft
Mat.  26.  4.  c.  that  they  might  take  Jesus  and  kiLl
John  12. 10.  chief  priests  c.  to  put  Lazarus  to  death
CONSULTER.

Deut  18. 11.  not  found  among  you  a  c.  with  spirits
C  O  N  S  U  LT  ETH .

Lake  14. 31.  c.  whether  he  be  able  with  10,0C0tomeet
COlS' SUM  E

blgnihes,  [1]  To  least  e,  destroy .  and  bring  to  utter
Tv  in ,  and  desolation,  E.xod.  32.  10.  [2]  To  spend,
or  squander  auay,  Jam.  4.  3.  [3]  Jo  vanish
away,  Job  7-  9.  [4]  To  make  or  dause  to  pass

away,  Psal.  78.  33.  [5]  To  burn  up  Luke  9.  54.
£6]  To  melt  away,  Jer.  6.  29.  [7]  Jo  crush,  Esth.

9.  t  24.

Gen  41.  30.'  and  the  famine  shall  c.  the  land
Exo'd.  33.  3.  lest  I  c.  thee  in  the  way,  5.

Lev  26  16.  the  burning  ague  that  shall  c.  the  eyes
Deut.  5.  25.  for  this  great  tire  will  c.  us
7  16.  thou  shalt  c.  all  people  which  l  ord  God  shall
28.  38.  gather  but  little,  for  locust  shall  c.  it,  42.

32  22.  a  fire  kindled  in  mine  anger  shall  c.  earth
Josh'.  21.  20.  will  c.  you  after  he  hath  done  you  good

1  Sam.  2.  33.  the  man  of  thine  shall  be  to  c.  thine  eyes

2  Kings  1. 10.  let  fire  c.  thee  and  thy  fifty,  12.

Job  15.  34.  fire  shall  c.  the  tabernacles  of  bribery

20  26.  a  fire  not  blown  shall  c.  him

24. 19.  drought  and  heat  c.  the  snow-waters
Psal.  37. 20.  shall  c.  into  smoke  shall  they  c.  away

39. 11.  makest  his  beauty  to  c.  away  like  a  moth
49.  14.  their  beauty  shall  c.  in  the  grave

78.  33.  therefore  tfieiv  days  did  he  c.  in  vanity
Isa.  7. 20.  and  it  shall  also  c.  the  beard

10. 18.  and  shall  c.  the  glory  of  his  forest  and  field
27.  10.  there  shall  the  calf  c.  the  branches
Jer.  49. 27.  fire  shall  c.  the  palaces  of  Ben-hadad
Ezek.  4.  17.  and  c.  away  for  their  iniquity

13.  13.  and  great  hail  stones  in  my  fury  to  c.  it
21.  28.  the  sword  is  drawn,  it  is  furbished  to  c.

22!  15.  I  will  c.  thy  filthiness  out  of  thee

24. 10.  kindle  the  fire,  c.  the  flesh,  and  spice  it  well

35. 12.  they  are  desolate,  they  are  given  us  to  c.
Dan.  2. 44.  it  shall  c.  all  these  kingdoms  and  stand
[Jos.  11. 6.  and  the  sword  shall  c.  his  branches
Zeph.  1.  2.  1  will  c.  all  things  from  off  the  land

3.  I  will  c.  man  and  beast,  I  will  c.  fowls  of  heaven
Zech.  5. 4.  it  shall  remain  in  his  house  and  c.  it

14.  12.  their  flesh,  eyes,  tongue  shall  c.  away

0  Thess.  2.8.  that  wicked  one,  whom  the  Lord  shall  c.
Jam.  4.  3.  ye  ask  that  ye  may  c.  it  on  your  lusts
CONSUME  them.

Exod.  32. 10.  wrath  wax  hot,  that  I  may  c.  them,  12.
Num.  16.  21.  that  I  may  c.  them  in  a  moment,  45.
Deut.  7.  22.  thou  mayest  not  c.  them .  at  once

1  Sam.  15.  +  18.  destroy  Amalekites  till  thou  c.  them

2  Chron.  18. 1 10.  push  Syria  till  thou  c.  them
Kelt.  0.  31.  thou  didst  not  utterly  c.  them
Esth.  9. +  24.  Haman  had  cast  the  lot  to  c.  them
Psal. 59. 13.  c.  th.  in  wrath,  c.  f/i.that  they  may  not  be
Jer.  8. 13.  I  will  surely  c.  them,  saith  the  Lord

14. 12.  but  I  will  c.  them  by  the  sword  and  famine
Ezek.  20. 13.  1  would  pour  fury  on  them  to  c.  them
Luke  9. 54.  lire  to  come  and  c.  them,  as  Elias  did

CONSUMED.

Gen.  19. 15.  lest  thou  be  c.  in  the  iniquity  of  the  city
17.  escape  to  the  mountain,  lest  thou  be  c.

31.  40.  thus  I  was,  in  the  day  the  drought  c.  me
Exod.  3. 2.  behold  the  bush  burned,  and  was  not  c.
15. 7.  sentestthy  wrath,  which  c.  them  as  stubble
22.  6.  if  the  corn  or  the  field  be  c.  therewith
Lev.  9.  24.  and  c.  upon  the  altar  the  burnt-offering
Num.  11. 1.  c.  them  in  uttermost  parts  of  the  camp

12. 12.  let  her  not  be  as  one  of  whom  flesh  is  half  c.
16.  26.  depart  lest  ye  be  c.  in  all  their  sins

35.  there  came  out  fire  and  c.  the  250  men
21.  28.  a  firS  is  gone  out,  it  hath  c.  Ar  of  Moab
25. 11.  that  I  c.  not  the  children  of  Israel

32. 13.  till  the  generation  that  had  done  evil  was  c.
Deut.  2. 16.  when  the  men  of  war  were  c.  and  dead
Judy.  6.  21.  there  rose  fire  out  of  rock  and  c.  flesh

1  Sam.  27.  +  1.  I  shall  one  day  be  c.  by  hand  of  Saul

2  Sam.  13.  +  39.  the  soul  of  David  was  c.  to  go  forth
21. 5.  the  man  that  c.  us,  and  devised  against  us

L  Kings  18.  38.  then  the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell  and  c.

the  sacrifice,  and  licked  up  the  water,  2  Chr.  7. 1.
2  Kings  1. 10.  and  fire  c.  him  and  his  fifty,  12.

2  Chron.  8.  8.  whom  the  children  of  Israel  c.  not
Neh.  2.  3.  the  gates  thereof  are  c.  with  fire,  13.

.  r«b  1. 16.  the  fire  of  God  hath  c.  sheep  and  servants

4.  9.  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  are  they  c.

6. 17.  the  snow  and  the  ice  are  c  out  of  their  place
7.  9.  as  the  cloud  is  c.  and  vanisheth  away

19.  27.  my  reins  c.  H  33. 21.  his  flesh  is  c.  away
Psal.  6. 7.  mine  eyes  c.  31. 9. 1!  10.  my  bonesc.  102. 3,
39. 10.  1  am  c.  by  the  blow  of  thine  hand

64.  t6.  we  are  c.  by  that  which  they  searched
71.  13.  let  them  be  confounded  and  c.  that  are

73. 19.  they  are  utterly  c.  with  terrors

78. 63.  fire  c.  their  young  men,  maidens  not  given
90, 7.  for  we  are  c.  by  thine  anger  and  thy  wrath
104.  35.  let  the  sinners  be  c.  out  of  the  earth
119.  87.  they  had  almost  c.  me  upon  the  earth
139.  my  zeal  hath  c.  me,  because  mine  enemies
Prov.  5. 11.  when  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are  c.

22. 1 8.  with  the  rod  of  his  anger  he  shall  be  c.
Jsa.  16. 4.  the  oppressors  are  c.  out  of  the  land

29. 20.  scorner  is  c.  and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity
64. 7-  thou  hast  c.  us,  because  of  qur  iniquities

Jer.  5. 3.  hast  c.  them,  but  thev  refused  correction
6.  29.  the  lead  is  c.  ||  12.  4.  the  beasts  are  c.

20.  18.  that  my  days  should  be  c.  with  shame
36.23.  till  all  the  roll  was  c.  in  the  fire  on  hearth

44. 18.  we  have  been  c.  by  sword  and  famine
Cam.  2. 22.  those  I  swaddled  hath  mine  enemy  c.
3. 22.  it  is  of  the  Lord’s  mercies  we  are  not  c.

Ezek.  19. 12.  her  rods  broken,  fire  c.  them,  22.  31.
24.  11.  on  the  coals,  that  the  scum  of  it  may  be  c.
43.  8.  wherefore  I  have  c.  them  in  mine  anger
J\lal.  3. 6.  therefore  the  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  c.
Gal.  5. 15.  take  heed  ye  be  not  c.  one  of  another

78


Shall  be  CONSUMED.

Num.  14.  35.  in  this  wilderness  shall  they  be  c.

17.  13.  shall  die,  shall  we  be  c.  with  dying  t
1  Sam.  12.  25.  ye  shall  be  c.  both  ye  and  your  kin
Jsa.  1 .  28.  they  that  forsake  the  I.ord  shall  be  c.

66. 17 .  eating  swine’s  flesh,  shall  be  c.  together  :  they
that  eat  swine’s  flesh  shall  be  c.
Jer.  14.  15.  by  famine  shall  those  prophets  be  c.

16.  4.  they  shall  be  c.  by  the  sword,  44.  12,  27-
Ezek.  5. 12.  with  famine  shall  they  be  c.  in  the  midst
13. 14.  it  shall  fall,  ye  shall  be  c.  in  the  midst  thereof
34.  29.  they  shall  be  no  more  c.  with  hunger
47. 12.  leaf  not  fade,  nor  shall  the  fruit  thereof  be  c.
Dan.  11.  16.  land  which  by  his  hand  shall  be  c.

CONSUMED,  with  nil,  or  until.

Deut.  2. 15.  to  destroy,  until  they  were  c.Josh.  5.  0.
28. 21.  pestilence  cleave  to  thee,  until [lie  have  c.  thee
Josh.  10. 20.  an  end  of  slaying  them  till  they  were  c.

1  Sam.  15. 18.  and  fight  against  them  until  they  be  c.

2  Sam.  22.  38.  1  have  pursued  my  enemies,  and  1
turned  not  again  until  I  had  c.  them,  Psal.  18.  37-

1  Kinas  22.  11.  shalt  push  the  Syrians  until  thou
have  c.  them,  2  Kings  13.  17.  19.  2  Chr.  18.  10.
Ezra  9.  14.  be  angry  witli  us  till  thou  hadst  c.  us
Jer.  9'.  16.  and  1  will  send  a  sword  after  them  till
1  have  c.  them,  24.  10. 1  27-  8. 1  49.  37.
CON  SUM  ETH,  ING.

Deut.  4. 24.  the  Lord  thy  G .  is  a  c.  fire,  Heb.  12. 29.
9.  3.  the  Lord  goeth  over  before  thee  as  a  c.  fire
Job  13.  28.  he  c.  as  a  garment  that  is  moth  eaten
22.  20.  but  the  remnant  of  them  the  fire  c.

31.  12.  for  it  is  a  fire  that  c.  to  destruction
Isa.  5.24.  as  fire  the  stubble,  and  as  the  flame  c.  chaff
CONSUMMATION.

Dan.  9.  27.  shall  make  it  desolate,  even  until  the  c.
CONSUMPTION.

Lev.  26.  16.  I  will  appoint  over  you  terror,  c.
Deut.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  a  c.
Judg.  20.  +  40.  the  whole  c.  of  the  city  ascended  up
Isa.  10.  22.  the  e.  decreed  shall  overflow  with  right.
23.  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  shall  make  a  c.

28  °2  for  I  have  heard  from  the  L.  G.  of  hosts  a  c.
CONTAIN.

1  Kinas  8.  27.  behold  the  heaven  and  heaven  of
heavens  cannot  c.  thee,  2  Chron.  2.  6.  1  6.  18.
Ezek.  45. 11.  bath  may  c.  tenth  part  of  an  homer
John  21.25.  the  world  could  not  c.  the  books  written
1  Cor  7.  9.  but  if  they  cannot  c.  let  them  marry
CONTAIN  ED,  ETII,  ING.

Ezek.  23.  32.  drink  of  thy  sister’s  cup,  it  c.  much
John  2.  6.  six  water-pots  c.  2  or  3  firkins  a  piece
Rom.  2.  14.  do  by  nature  the  things  c.  in  the  law
Eph.  2. 15.  having  abolished  the  law  c.  in  ordinances
1  Pet.  2.  6.  where!’,  it  is  c.  in  scriptuie,  behold  I  lay
CONTEMN,  ED,  ETH.

Psal.  10.  13.  wherefore  do  the  wicked  c.  God  ?

15.  4.  in  whose  eyes  a  vile  person  is  c.  but  honours
107  11.  they  c.  the  counsel  of  the  most  High
Cant. 8.7.  if  give  his  substance  for  love,  it  would  be  c.
Isa.  16. 14.  glory  of  Moab  shall  bee.  with  great  mult.
Ezek.  21.  10.  it  c.  the  rod  of  my  son,  as  every  tree
13.  and  what  if  the  sword  t.  even  the  rod  t
CONTEMPT.

Gen.  38.  +  23.  let  her  take  it  lest  we  become  a  c.
Esth.  1.  18.  thus  shall  there  arise  too  much  c.

Job  12.  21.  he  poureth  c.  on  princes,  Psal.  107.  40.
31.  34.  or  did  the  c.  of  families  terrify  me  ?


Ol  .  O**.  ^  •  vi  - ^  --  -

Psal.  119.  22.  remove  from  me  reproach  and  c.

123  3.  for  we  are  exceedingly  filled  with  c.

%  our  soul  is  filled  with  the  c.  of  the  proud
Prov.  18.  3.  when  the  wicked  cometh,  then  cometh  c.
Isa.  23.  9.  to  bring  into  c.  all  the  honourable  of  earth
Dan.  12.  2.  some  shall  awake  to  everlasting  c.
CONTEMPTIBLE.

Mai.  1. 7.  in  that  ye  say,  the  table  of  the  Lord  is  c.

12.  even  his  meat  is  c.  ||  2.  9.  I  also  made  you  c.
0  Cor.  10.  10.  his  presence  is  weak,  his  speech  c.

CONTEMPTUOUSLY.  .

Psal.  31.  18.  which  speak  c.  against  the  righteaus
CONTEND

Signifies,  [1]  To  strive,  Jer.  18.  19.  [2]  To  dispute.
Acts  11.  2.  [3]  To  debate,  or  plead.  Job  9.  3.  1
40.  2.  [4]  To  fight,  Deut.  2.  9.  [5]  Jo  reprove
sharply,  Neh.  13.  11.  [6]  To  endeavour  to  con¬
vince  a  person  of,  and  reclaim  him  from  his  evil
way,  Prov.  29.  9.  [7]  To  punish,  Amos  7-  4.
Earnestly  to  contend  for  the  taith,  Jude  3.  s^re'
nuously  to  maintain  and  defend  the  apostolical
doctrine,  by  constancy  in  the  faith,  zeal  for  the
truth,  holiness  of  life,  mutual  exhortation,  prayer,
suffering  for  the  gospel,  4'C-  withstanding  all  such
heretics  as  would  impugn  and  corrupt  the  doc¬
trines  revealed  in  the  gospel.  .  .

Deut.  2.  9.  neither  c.  with  Moabites  in  battle,  24.
Job  9. 3.  if  c.  he  cannot  answer  him  one  of  a  thousand

13.  8.  will  ye  accept  his  person,  and  c.  tor  God  r
Prov.  28.  4.  such  as  keep  the  law  c.  with  them
Eccl.  6. 10.  nor  may  he  c .  with  him  that  is  mightier
Isa.  49.  25.  I  will  c.  with  them  that  c.  with  thee

50.  8.  he  is  near  that  justifieth,  who  will  c.  with  me  .

57.  16.  I  will  note,  forever,  nor  will  I  be  wroth
Jer.  12.  5.  then  how  canst  thou  c.  with  horses  .

18.'  19.  hearken  to  voice  of  them  that  c.  with  me
Amos  7. 4.  behold  the  Lord  God  called  to  c.  by  tire
Mic.  6. 1.  hear  ye,  arise,  c.  thou  before  the  mount
Jude  3.  should  earnestly  c.  for  faith  deliv.  to  saints
CONTENDED.

Neh.  13.  11.  then  c.  I  with  the  rulers  and  said,  17-
25.  I  c.  with  them,  and  cursed  them,  and  smote
Job  31.  13.  if  I  despised  my  servants  when  they  c.
Isa.  41. 12.  thou  shalt  not  find  them  that  c.  with  thee
Acts  11.  2.  they  of  the  circumcision  c.  with  him
CONTENDEST.

Job  10.  2.  shew  me  wherefore  thou  c.  with  me
CONTENDETH.

Job  40.  2.  shall  he  that  c.  with  Almighty  instruct
Prov.  29.  9.  Lr  a  wise  man  c.  with  a  foolish  man
CONTENDING.

Jude  9.c.with  devil ,  he  disputed  about  body  ot  Moses
CONTENT.  _

Gen.  37.  27.  let  us  sell  him,  and  his  brethren  were  c.
Exod.  2.  21.  Moses  was  c.  to  dwell  with  the  man


Lev.  10.  20.  when  Moses  heard  that  he  was  c.

Josh.  7.7.  would  to  G.  we  had  been  c .  dwelt  on  othei*
Judg.  17.  11.  Levite  was  c.  to  dwell  with  Micah
19.  6.  be  c .  I  pray  thee,  and  tarry  all  night

2  Kings  5.  23.  N  aaman  said,  be  c.  take  two  talents
6.  3.  one  said,  bee.  and  go  with  thy  servants

Job  6.28.  now  therefore  bee.  look  upon  me
Prov.  6. 35.  nor  will  he  restc.  though  thou  givest  gifts-
Mark  15. 15.  Pilate  willing  to  e.  people  released  Bar..
Luke  3. 14.  nor  accuse  falsely,  be  e.  with  your  wages
Phil.  4.  11.  1  have  learned  in  every  state  to  be  c.

1  Tim.  6.  8.  having  food  and  raiment,  let  us  be  e.
Heb.  13.  5.  and  be  e.  with  such  things  as  ye  have

3  John  10.  and  not  e.  with  prating  against  us

CONTEN  HON.

Gen.  26.  +  20.  he  called  the  name  of  the  well  c.

Psal.  95.  +  8.  harden  not  your  heart,  as  in  the  c.

Prov  13  10  only  by  pridecometh  c.  but  wisdomwith

17.  14.  leave  off  c.  before  it  be  meddled  with

18.  6.  a  fool’s  lips  enter  into  c.  and  his  mouth  calls
22. 10.  cast  out  the  scorner,  and  c.  shall  go  out

Isa.  41.  t  12.  thou  shalt  not  find  the  men  of  thy  c.
Jer.  15. 10.  woe  is  me,  thou  hast  borne  me  amanof  <7
Hab.  1.  3.  and  there  are  that  raise  up  strife  and  c.
Acts  15.  39.  the  c.  was  so  sharp  between  them
Phil.  1. 16.  the  one  preach  Christ  ot  c.  not  sincerely
1  Thess.  2. 2.  to  speak  the  gospel  ot  God  with  much  v.
CONTENTIONS.

Prov.  18. 18.  the  lot  causeth  c.  to  cease,  and  parteth
19.  and  their  c.  are  like  the  bars  of  a  castle
19. 13.  c.  of  a  wife  are  a  continual  dropping,  27 •  15k
21,  t  9.  than  with  a  woman  of  c.  in  a  wide  house
23.  29.  who  hath  woe  ?  who  hath  c. '!  hath  babbling  ?

1  Cor.  1.  11.  1  hear  that  there  are  c.  among  you
Tit.  3.  9.  avoid  c.  and  strivings  about  the  law
CONTENTIOUS.

Prov.  21.  19.  than  with  a  c.  and  angry  woman
26.21.  as  wood  to  fire,  so  is  a  c.  man  to  kindle  strife
27.  15.  a  continual  dropping  and  a  c.  woman  alike
Rom.  2.  8.  but  to  them  that  are  c.  and  do  not  obey
1  Cor  11. 16.  but  if  any  man  seem  to  be  c.  no  custom
CONTENTMENT.

1  Tim.  6. 6.  but  godliness  with  c.  is  great  gain

CONTINUAL.

Exod.  29.  42.  this  shall  be  a  c.  burnt-offering
Num.  4.  7.  and  the  c.  bread  shall  be  thereon

2  Chron.  2.  4. 1  build  an  house  tor  the  c.  shew-bread
Prov.  15. 15.  that  is  of  a  merry  heart  hath  a  c.  feast
Isa.  14.  6.  he  who  smote  the  people  with  a  c.  stroke
Jer.  48. 5.  for  in  the  aoingup  c.  weeping  shall  go  up

52.  34.  there  was  a  c.  diet  given  him,  2  h  mgs  25.  30.
Ezek.  39.  14.  shall  sever  out  men  of  c.  employment
Luke  18.  5.  lest  by  her  c.  coming  she  weary  me
Rom.  9.  2.  that  I  have  c.  sorrow  in  my  heart
See  Burnt-offerings.
CONTINUALLY.

Gen.  6. 5.  every  imagination  of  his  heart  was  evil  <?.
Exod.  28.  30.  upon  his  heart  before  the  I.ord  c.

29.  38.  two  lambs  of  the  first  year,  day  by  day  c.
Lev  24  2.  bring  oil  olive  to  cause  lamps  to  burn  c.

1  Sam.  18.  29.  and  Saul  became  David  s  enemy  c.

2  Sam.  0. 7.  thou  shalt  eat  bread  at  my  table  c.

2  Kings? 5. 29.  Jehoiachin  eat  bread, c.  Jer.  52.  33.

1  Chron.  16. 11.  seek  the  Lord,  seek  his  face  c.

2  Chron.  12.  15.  was  between  Jerob.  and  Rehob.  c.
36. 1 15.  sent  to  them,  rising  up  c.  and  sending  them

Job  1.5.  sent  and  sanctified  his  sons,  thus  did  Job  c.
Psal.  34. 1.  his  praise  shall  be  c.  in  my  mouth,  71. 6.
35. 27.  say  c.  the  Lord  be  magnified,  40. 16. 170.  4.
38. 17.  ready  to  halt  and  my  sorrow  is  c.  before  me

40. 11.  let  thy  loving-kindness  and  truth  c.  preserve
42!  3.  while  they  c.  s-ay  to  me,  where  is  thy  God  i
44. 15.  my  contusion  is  c.  before  me,  and  shame
5o'.  8.  thy  burnt-offerings  to  have  been  c.  before  me
52.  1.  O  mighty  man,  goodness  of  God  endureth  c.
71.  3.  my  habitation,  whereunto  I  may  c.  resort

6  1  have  been  holden  up,  my  praise  shall  be  c.
14. 1  will  hope  c.  and  praise  thee  more  and  more
73  23  1  amr.  with  thee,  thou  hast  holden  me
74.  23.  the  tumult  of  those  that  rise  up  increaseth  c.
109.  15.  let  them  be  before  the  Lord  c.  to  cut  off
119. 44.  so  shall  I  keep  thy  law  c.  for  ever  and  ever
109.  my  soul  is  c.  in  my  hand,  yet  do  I  not  forget
117.  and  I  will  have  respect  to  thy  statutes  c.

140.  2.  c.  are  they  gathered  together  for  war
Prov.  6. 14.  he  deviseth  mischief  c.  he  soweth  discord
21.  bind  them  c.  on  thy  heart,  and  tie  them
Isa. 21. 8. 1  stand  c.  upon  the  watch-tower  in  day-time
49.  16.  I  have  graven  thee,  walls  are  c.  before  me

51.  13.  and  hast  feared  c.  every  day,  because  ot  f.

52.  5.  my  name  c.  every  day  is  blasphemed
58.  11.  and  the  Lord  shall  guide  thee  c.  and  satisfy

60. 11.  therefore  thy  gates  shall  be  open  c.

65.  3.  a  people  that  provoketh  me  to  anger  c.

Jer.  6.  7.  before  me  c.  is  grief  and  wounds
Ezek.  46.  14.  a  meat-offering  c.  to  the  Lord
Dan.  6. 16.  thy  God  whom  thou  servest  c.  20.

Hos.  4.  18.  they  have  committed  whoredom  c.

12. 6.  keep  mercy,  and  wait  on  thy  God  c.

Obad.  16.  so  shall  all  the  heathen  drink  c.

Nah.  3. 19.  for  hath  not  thy  wickedness  passed  c.  ?
IJab  1.17.  shall  they  not  spare  c.  to  slay  the  nations  ?
Zech.  8.  t  21.  let  us  go  c.  and  pray  before  the  Lord
Luke  24.  53.  were  c.  in  the  temple,  praising  God
Acts  6. 4.  we  will  give  ourselves  c.  to  prayer

10. 7.  a  soldier  of  them  that  waited  on  Cornelius  c.


Rom.  13.  6.  attending  c.  upon  this  very  thing
Heb.  7.  3.  like  the  Son  of  God,  abideth  a  priest  c.
10. 1.  with  those  sacrifices  offered  year  by  year  c.
13.  15.  by  him  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  ot  praise  c.
CONTINUANCE.

Dent.  28. 59.  even  great  plagues  and  of  long  c.

Ps.  139. 16.  my  members  which  in  r.  were  fashion.

Isa.  64.  5.  in  those  is  c.  and  we  shall  be  saved

Ezek.  39.  +  14.  they  shall  sever  out  men  of  c.

Dan.  1.  +  10.  faces  worse  liking  than  children  of  c.

Jlom.  2. 7.  by  patient  c.  in  well  doing  seek  tor  glory
y  F  C0NXINUE.

Exod  °1.  21 .  if  he  c.  a  day  or  two,  not  be  punished
Lev.  12.  *4*  c.  in  the  blood  of  her  purifying,  5.

1  Sam.  12.  14.  c.  following  the  Lord  your  God
13.  l-i.  but  now  thy  kingdom  shall  not  c.


CON


COP


COR


2  Sam.  7.  29.  that  it  may  c.  for  ever  before  thee
]  Kings  2.  4.  the  Lord  may  c.  his  word  that  he  spake
j„h  15.29.  not  be  rich,  nor  shall  his  substance  c.

17.  2.  doth  not  mine  eye  c.  in  their  provocation  5
Psal.  36.  10.  O  c.  thy  loving-kindness  unto  them
49.  11.  thought  that  their  houses  shall  c.  for  ever
72.  1 17.  shall  be  as  a  son  to  c.  his  father  s  name
102.  28.  the  children  of  thy  servants  shall  c.

119.  91.  they  c.  according  to  thine  ordinances
Isa.  5.  11.  that  c.  till  night,  till  wine  inflame  them
65.  t  22.  and  mine  elect  shall  make  them  c.  long
Jer.  32.  14.  that  the  evidences  may  c.  many  days
Dan.  11.  8.  c.  more  vears  than  the  king  of  the  north
Mat.  15.  32.  because  they  c.  with  me  three  days
John  8.31.  ifyec.  inmv  word,  then  are  ye  disciples

15.  9.  so  have  1  loved  you,  c.  ye  in  myr  love
Acts  13.  43.  persuaded  to  c.  in  the  grace  ot  God
14.  22.  confirming  and  exhorting  them  to  c.  in  faith
26. 22.  having  obtained  help  of  God,  1  c.  untoday
Rom.  6. 1.  shall  we  c.  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound

11.  22.  towards  thee  goodness,  if  thou  c.  in  goodness
Oal.  2. 5.  that  the  truth  of  gospel  might  c.  with  you
Phil.  1.  25.  1  know  that  I  shall  c.  with  you  all
Col.  1.  23.  if  ye  c.  in  the  faith,  and  be  not  moved
4.  2.  c.  in  prayer,  and  watch  with  thanksgiving

1  Tim.  2. 15.  if  they  c.  in  faith,  charity,  andnoliness
4.  16.  take  heed  to  thy  doctrine,  c.  in  them

2  Tim.  3. 14.  c.  in  the  tilings  which  thou  hast  learned
Heb.7.93.  priests  not  suffered  to  c.  by  reason  of  death

13. 1.  let  brotherly  love  c.  entertain  strangers
Jam.  4.  13.  and  c.  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell
2  Pet.  3. 4.  since  the  fathers  all  things  c.  as  they  were
1  John  2. 24.  ye  shall  c.  in  the  Son  and  Father
Rev.  13.  5.  power  was  given  him  to  c.  42  months
17.  10.  when  he  cometh,  he  must  c.  a  short  space
CONTINUED.

Cen.  40.  4.  he  served  them,  and  c._a  season  inward

1  Sam.  1.  12.  as  she  c.  praying  before  the  Lord

2  Chrm.  29.  28.  c.  till  burnt  offering  was  finished
Neh.  5.  16.  yea,  also  I  c.  in  the  work  of  this  wall
Psal.  72. 17 .'his  name  shall  be  c.  as  long  as  the  sun
Jer.  31 .  t  32.  should  L  have  c.  an  husband  to  them
Dan.  1.  21.  Daniel  c.  to  first  year  of  king  Cyrus
Mat.  20.  1 12.  these  last  have  c.  one  hour  only
Luke  6.  12.  he  c.  all  night  in  prayer  to  God

22.  28.  ye  are  they  that  c.  with  me  in  temptation
Acts  1. 14.  these  all  c.  with  one  accord  in  prayer
■2.  42.  they  c.  stedfastlyin  the  apostles’  doctrine

8. 13.  Simon  himself  c.  with  Philip,  and  wondered

12.16.  but  Peter  c.  knocking,  when  they  had  opened
20.7.  Paul  preached  and  c.  his  speech  till  midnight
Jleb.  8.9.  because  they  c.  not  in  my  covenant

1  John  2.  19-  they  would  no  doubt  have  c.  with  us
CONTI  NUETH,  ING.

Job  14.  2.  he  fieeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  c.  not
Jer.  30.  23.  a  c.  whirlwind,  it  shall  fall  on  wicked
Acts  2.  46.  they  c.  daily  with  one  accord  in  temple
Rom.  12. 12.  rejoicing  in  hope,  c.  instant  in  prayer
Gal.  3. 10.  cursed  that  c.  not  in  all  things,  in  the  law
1  Tim.  5.  5.  she  that  is  a  widow  c.  in  supplications
Heb.  7. 24.  but  this  man,  because  he  c.  ever,  hath  an
13.  14.  for  here  we  have  no  c.  city,  but  we  seek
Jam.  1. 25.  looketh  into  the  perfect  law,  and  c.  in  it
CONTRADICTING.

Acts  13.  45.  filled  with  envy,  c.  and  blaspheming
CONTRADICTION.

Heb.  7. 7-  without  c.  the  less  is  blessed  of  the  better

12. 3.  consider  him  that  endured  such  c.  of  sinners

CONTRARY.

Lev.  26.  21.  and  if  ye  walk  c.  to  me,  23,  27,  40.

24.  then  will  I  also  walk  c.  to  you,  28,  41.

Esth. 9.1. though  it  was  turned  to  the  c.  Jews  had  rule
Ezek.  16.  34.  the  c.  is  in  thee,  therefore  thou  art  c.
Mat.  14.  24.  the  ship  was  tossed,  for  the  wind  was  c.
Acts  17.7-  these  all  doc.  to  the  decrees  of  Cassar

18. 13.  persuaded  men  to  worship  God  c.  to  the  law

23.3.  commandestme  to  be  smittenc.  to  the  law
26.  9.  to  do  many  things  c.  to  the  name  of  Jesus

jR0OT.ll.24.  grafted  c.to  nature  into  a  good  olive-tree

16.  17.  c.  to  the  doctrine  which  ye  have  learned
Gal.  5.  17-  and  these  are  c.  the  one  to  the  other
Col.  2. 14.  the  hand-writing  which  was  c.  to  us
1  Thess.  2.  15.  please  not  God,  and  are  c.  to  all  men

1  Tim.  1. 10.  it  any  thing  that  is  c.  to  sound  doctrine
Tit.  2.8.  that  he  of  thee,  partmav  be  ashamed

CONTRARIWISE.

2  Cor.  2.  7-  c.  ye  ought  rather  to  forgive  him

Gal. 2.7.  c.  when  they  saw  the  gospel  was  committed

1  Pet.  3.  9.  not  rendering  railing,  butc.  blessing

CONTE  1  BUTTON.

Ri  ot.  15. 26.  to  make  c.  for  the  poor  saints  at  Jerus.
CONTRITE.

They  are  of  a  contrite  spirit,  whose  hearts  are
truly  and  deeply  humbled  under  a  sense  of  their
sin  and  guilt ,  and  God's  displeasure  following
upon  it ;  whose  proud  and  self-willed  hearts  are
subdued,  and  made  obedient  to  God's  will,  and
submissive  to  his  providence,  being  willing  to  ac¬
cept  of  reconciliation  with  God  upon  any  terms,
Psal.  34.  18. 1  51.  17.  Isa.  66.  2.  This  is  op¬
posed  to  the  stony  heart,  that  is  insensible  of  the
burden  of  sin,  stubborn  ana  rebellious  against  God,
impenitent  and  incorrigible.

Psal.  34.  18.  he  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  c.  spirit

51. 17.  a  c.  heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise
Isa.  57.  15.  with  him  also  that  is  of  a  c.  and  humble
spirit,  to  revive  the  heart  of  the  c.  ones
66.  2.  that  is  of  a  c.  spirit  and  trembleth  at  my  word
CONTROVERSY.

Dent.  17-  8.  being  matters  of  c.  within  thy  gates]
19.  17.  men  between  whom  the  c.  is  shall  stand
21.  5.  by  their  word  shall  every  c.  be  tried

25. 1.  if  there  be  ac.  between  men,  and  they  come

2  Sam.  15.  2.  when  any  man  that  had  a  c.  came
2  Chron.  19.  8.  Jehoshaphat  set  the  Levites  for  c.
Isa.  .34.  8.  the  year  of  recompences  for  the  c.  of  Zion
Jer.  25.  31.  the  Lord  hath  a  c.  with  the  nations
Ezek.  44.  24.  in  c.  they  shall  stand  in  judgment
JIos.  4. 1 .  the  Lord  hath  a  c.  with  inhabitants  ofland

12.  2.  the  Lord  hath  also  a  c.  with  .1  udah
Mic.  6.  2.  the  Lord  hath  ac.  with  his  people
1  7 im.  3. 16.  without  c.  great  is  the  mystery  of  godl.


«


CONVENIENT.

Prov.  30.  8.  feed  me  with  food  c.  for  me
Jer.  40.  4.  it  seemeth  good  and  c.  for  thee  to  go,  5.
Mark  6.2i.and  when  a  c.  day  was  come  Herod  made
Acts  24. 25. when  I  have  a  c.. season  will  call  for  thee
Rom.  1.  28.  to  do  those  things  which  are  not  c.

1  Cor.  16.  12.  will  come  when  he  shall  have  c.  time
Eph.  5.  4.  talking,  nor  jesting,  which  are  not  c.
Philem.  8.  might  be  bold  to  enjoin  that  which  is  c.
CONVENIENTLY.

Mark  14.  11.  Judas  sought  how  he  might  c.  betray
CONVERSANT.

Josh.  8.  35.  and  strangers  were  c.  among  them

1  Sam.  25.  15.  as  lone  as  we  were  c.  with  them

CONVERSATION.

Psal.  37. 14.  to  slay  such  as  be  of  upright  c.

50.  23.  to  him  that  ordereth  his  c.  aright  shew  salv.

2  Cor.  1. 12.  in  godly  sincerity  we  have  had  our  c.
Gal.  1.  13.  ye  have  heard  of  my  c.  in  time  past
Eph.  2.  3.  among  whom  we  had  ourc.  in  times  past

4.  22.  that  ye  put  off  concerning  the  former  c.

Phil.  1.  27.  only  let  your  c.  be  as  becometh  gospel
3.  20.  for  our  c.  is  in  heaven,  whence  we  look
1  Tim.  4.12.be  an  example  of  believers  in  c. in  purity
Heb.  13.  5.  let  your  c.  be  without  covetousness

7.  whose  faith  follow,  considering  end  of  their  c.
Jam.  3.  13.  let  him  shew  out  of  a  good  c.  his  works

1  Pet.  1.  15.  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  c.

18.  not  redeemed  with  corrup.  things  from  vain  c.
2.  12.  having  your  c.  honest  among  the  Gentiles

3. 1.  they  also  may  be  won  by  the  c.  of  the  wives
2.  while  they  behold  your  chaste  c.  with  fear
16.  be  ashamed  that  falsely  accuse  your  good  c.

2  Pet.  2. 7.  Lot  vexed  with  the  filthy  c.  of  wicked
3. 11.  ought  ye  to  be,  in  all  holy  c.  and  godliness

CONVERSION

Is  the  turning,  or  total  change  of  a  sinner  from,  his
sins  to  God,  Psal.  51.  13.  And  sinners  shall  be
converted  unto  thee.  God  is  the  author  of  this
change,  who  by  his  Spirit  puts  repentance,  faith,
love,  and  every  grace,  into  the  soul,  Jer.  31.  18.
Turn  thou  me.  John  6.  44.  No  man  can  come
unto  me  except  the  Father  draw  him.  The  word
of  God  is  a  means  or  instrument  of  conversion,
Psal.  19.  7.  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  con¬
verting  the  soul.  Ministers,  by  the  preaching  of
the  gospel,  are  also  instrumental  in  this  change.

1  Cor.  4. 15.  In  Christ  Jesus  1  have  begotten  you
through  the  gospel.  And  particular  Christians,
by  private  admonitions  and  exhortations,  are  some¬
times  a  means  of  this  change,  Jam.  5.  19,  20.
Regeneration  is  the  infusion  of  grace  into  the
soul ;  conversion  is  the  exercise  of  grace.  Draw
me,  I  will  run,  Cant.  1.  4.  Converts  are  new
creatures,  2  Cor.  5. 17-  ;  being  formed  in  the  image
of  Christ,  Rom.  8.  29.  and  made  holy  in  part
here,  and  shall  have  a  perfection  of  it  after  death,
1  John  3.  2.  Rev.  21.  27.

Acts  15. 3.  declaring  the  r.of  the  Gentiles  caused  joy
CONVERT,  ED.

Psal.  51.  13.  and  sinners  shall  be  c.  unto  thee
Isa.  6. 10.  lest  they  understand ,  and  c.  and  be  healed
60.  5.  the  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  c.  to  thee
Mat.  13. 15.  be  c.  and  I  should  heal  them,M«>T4.12.
18.  3.  except  ye  be  c.  and  become  as  children
Luke  22.  32.  when  c.  strengthen  thy  brethren
John  12.  40.  be  c.  and  1  heal  them,  Acts  28.  27.
Acts  3.  19.  repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  c.  that  sins
Jam.  5. 19.  do  err  from  the  truth,  and  one  c.  him
CONVERTED!!,  ING.

Psal.  19. 7.  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  c.  the  soul
Jam  5.  20.  that  he  who  c.  a  sinner  from  the  error
CONVERTS.

Isa.  1.  27.  her  c.  shall  be  redeemed  with  righteous.
CONVEY,  ED.

1  Kings  5.  9.  and  I  will  c.  them  by  sea  in  floats
Nch.  2.  7.  that  they  may  c.  me  over  till  I  come
John  5.  13.  for  Jesus  had  c.  himself  away
CONVICTED.

John  8.  9.  being  c.  by  their  own  conscience  went  out
CONVINCE,  ED,  ET1I.

Job  32. 12.  there  is  none  of  you  that  c.  Job
John  8.  46.  which  of  you  c.  me  of  sin  ?

16. +  8.  when  he  is  come  he  will  c.  the  world  of  sin
Acts  18.  28.  for  he  mightily  c.  the  Jews,  shewing
1  Cor.  14.  24.  he  is  c.  of  all,  he  is  judged  of  all
Tit.  1.  9.  that  he  may  be  able  to  c.  gainsay  ers
Jam.  2.  9.  and  are  c.  of  the  law  as  transgressors
Jude  15.  to  c.  all  that  are  ungodly  among  them
CONVOCATION,  S.

Exod.  12.  16.  in  the  first  day  there  shall  be  an  holy
c.  Lev.  23.  7,  24,  35.  Num.  28.  18. 1  29.  1.
Lev.  23.  2.  ye  shall  proclaim  to  be  holy  c.  4.  2L  37.
3.  the  seventh  day  as  an  holy  c.  8.  Num.  28.  25.

27.  tenth  day  7th  month  an  holy  c.  Num.  29.  7-
36.  on  the  eighth  day  shall  be  an  holy  c.  to  you
Num.  28. 26.  the  day  of  first-fruits  shall  have  holy  c.
29. 12.  on  fifteenth  day  of  seventh  month  an  holy  c.
CONEY,  1ES.

Lev.  11.  5.  and  the  c.  because  he  cheweth  cud,  but
divideth  not  hoof,  is  unclean  to  you,  Deut.  14. 7-
Psal.  104.  18.  the  rocks  are  a  refuge  for  the  c.
Prov.  30.  26.  c.  are  but  a  feeble  folk,  make  houses
COOK,  S.

Gen A0.  + 17.  in  uppermost  basket  was  work  of  a  c.
1  Sam.  8. 13.  he  will  take  your  daughters  to  be  c.

9.  23.  Samuel  said  to  c.  bring  portion  I  gave  thee
24.  c.  took  up  the  shoulder  and  set  it  before  Saul
COOL,  Substantive.

Gen.  3. 8.  walking  in  the  garden  in  the  c.  of  the  day
COOL,  Adjective.

Prov.  17. 1 27. a  man  of  understanding  is  of  a  c.  spirit
COOL,  Verb.

Luke  1 6.  24.  dip  tip  of  his  finger  and  c.  my  tongue
COPIED.

Prov.  25. 1.  men  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah  c.  out
COPING.

1  Kings  7.  9.  costly  stones  from  the  foundation  to  c.

COPPER.

Ezra  8.  27.  two  vessels  of  fine  c.  precious  as  gold
COPPER-SMITH.

2  Tim.  4.  14.  Alexander  the  c.-s.  did  me  much  evil


COPULATION.

Lev.  15.  16.  if  any  man’s  seed  of  c.  go  out

17.  skin  whereon  is  seed  of  c.  shall  be  washed

18.  with  whom  man  shall  lie  with  seed  of  c.

COPY.

Deut.  17. 18.  write  him  a  c.  of  this  law  in  a  book
Josh.  8.  32.  he  wrote  on  stones  a  c.  of  law  of  Masts
Ezra  4.  11.  this  is  c.  of  a  letter  sent  to  him,  5.  6.

23.  c.of  Artaxerxes’  letter  was  read  before  Helium
7.  11.  this  is  c.  of  the  letter  Artaxerxes  gave  Ezra
Esth.  3. 14.  r.of  a  writing  tor  a  commandment,  8.  13.
4.  8.  Mordecai  gave  Ilatach  a  c.  of  the  writing
COR.

Ezek.  45. 14.  offer  a  tenth  part  of  a  bath  out  of  the  c.
CORAL.

Job  28. 18.  no  mention  shall  be  made  of  c.  or  pearls
Ezek.  27. 16.  Syria  was  thy  merchant  in  c.  and  agate
COR BAN.

Mark  7.  11.  it  is  c.  that  is  to  say ,  a  gift,  shall  be  free
.  CORD.

The  cords  of  the  wicked  are  the  snares  with  which
they  catch  weak  and  unwary  people,  Psal.  129.  4.
'I  he  cords  of  sin,  Prov.  5.  22.  are  the  conse¬
quences  of  crimes  and  bad  habits.  Sin  never  goes
unpunished  ;  and  the  bad  habits  which  are  con¬
tracted,  are,  as  it  were,  indissoluble  bands,  from
which  it  is  almost  impossible  to  get  free.  Let  us
cast  away  their  cords  from  us,  Psal.  2.  3.  Let
us  cast  off  their  government,  and  free  ourselves
from  subjection  to  their  laws,  which  like  fetters
restrain  us  from  our  purposes.  To  draw  iniquity
with  cords  of  vanity,  Isa.  5.  18.  that  is,  to  spare
no  cost  nor  pains  in  the  pursuit  of  sin.  These
cords  of  vanity  may  signify  worldly  vanities  and
pleasures,  profit  or  preferment,  by  which,  as  by
cords,  the  devil  withdraws  persons  from  God  and
his  laws,  and  the  way  to  heaven,  and  -leads  them
down  to  the  bottomless  pit :  Ur,  those  vain  and  de¬
ceitful  arguments  and  pretences,  whereby  sinners
generally  draw  themselves  to  sin,  as  hope  of  im¬
punity  and  the  like.  I  drew  them  with  the  cords
of  a  man,  J 1  os.  11.  4.  I  used  all  fair  and  gentle
means,  such  as  are  fitted  to  man's  temper,  as  he
is  a  reasonable  creature,  to  allure  them  to  obe¬
dience  :  I  found  them  backward  and  unapt  to  lead,
I  therefore  in  my  pity  laid  my  hand  on  them,
and  as  a  father  or  friend  drew  them  gently  to  me.
To  stretch  a  line  or  cord  about  a  city,  Lam.  2.

8.  signifies  to  ruin,  to  destroy  it  utterly,  to  level

it  with  the  ground.  The  cords  extended  in  setting
up  tents,  do  likewise  furnish  several  metaphors ,
denoting  either  the  stability  or  ruin  of  a  place  or
people,  according  as  they  are  said  to  be  extended
or  loose,  Isa.  33.  20.  Jer.  10.  20.  [dow

Josh.  2. 15.  Rahab  let  spies  down  by  a  c.  thro’  Win¬
Jet  30.  11.  he  hath  loosed  my  c.  and  afflicted  me
1 41.  1.  canst  draw  out  leviathan’s  tongue  with  a  c.  ?
Eccl.  4. 12.  a  threefold  c.  is  not  quickly  broken
12.  6.  or  ever  the  silver  c.  be  loosed,  or  golden  bowl
Isa.  54.  2.  spare  not,  lengthen  c.  strengthen  stakes
Mic.  2.  5.  a  c.  by  lot  in  congregation  of  the  Lord
CORDS.

Exod.  35.  18.  the  pins  of  the  court  and  their  c.
Judg.  15.  13.  they  bound  Samson  with  new  c.

Job  36.  8.  if  they' be  holden  in  c.  of  affliction
Psal.  2.  3.  let  us  cast  away  their  c.  from  us
118.  27.  bind  the  sacr.  with  c.  to  horns  of  altar
129.  4.  he  hath  cut  asunder  the  c.  of  the  wicked
140. 5.  the  proud  have  hid  a  snare  and  c.  for  me
Prov.  5.  22.  he  shall  be  holden  with  the  c.  of  his  sins
Isa.  5. 18.  woe  to  them  that  draw  iniquity  with  c.
33.  20.  nor  shall  any  of  the  c.  thereof  be  broken
Jer.  10.  20.  tabernacle  is  spoiled,  all  my  c.  broken

38.  6.  and  they  let  down  Jeremiah  with  c.

13.  so  they  drew  up  Jeremiah  with  c.  took  him
Ezek.  27. 24.  in  chests  of  rich  apparel  bound  with  c
IIos.  11.  4.  1  drew  them  with  the  c.  of  a  man
John  2.  15.  when  he  had  made  a  scourge  of  small  c.

CORIANDER.

Exod.  16.  31.  manna  was  like  c.  seed,  Num.  11.  J.
CORMORANT.

Lev.  11 .  17.  ye  shall  have  in  abomination  the  little
owl,  and  the  c.  and  the  great  owl,  Deut.  14.
Isa.  34.  11.  but  the  c.  shall  possess  it,  Zeph.  2.  1*.
CORN.

Gen.  41.  57.  all  countries  came  to  Joseph  to  buy  c.
42. 2.  J  acob  heard  there  was  c.  in  Egypt,  Acts  7. 12.

19.  go  ye,  carry  c.  for  the  famine  of  your  houses
Exod.  22.  6.  so  that  the  stacks  of  c.  be  consumed
Lev.  2. 16.  priest  shall  burn  part  of  beaten  c.  thereof

23.  14.  ye  shall  eat  neither  bread  nor  parched  c.
Num.  18. 27.  as  tiro’  it  were  the  c.  of  threshing  floor
Deut.  16.  9.  as  thou  beginnest  to  put  the  sickle  to  c.

25. 4.  thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he  tread-
eth  out  the  c.  1  Cor.  9.  9.  1  Tim.  5.  18.
Josh.  5. 11.  they  did  eat  of  the  old  c.  of  the  land,  12.
Ruth  2. 14.  he  reached  her  parched  c.  and  she  did  eat
3. 7.  Boaz  went  to  lie  down  at  end  of  the  heap  of  c.

1  Sam.  17. 17.  take  for  breth.  an  ephah  of  parched  c.

25. 18.  Abigail  took  five  measures  of  parched  c.

2  Sam.  17.  28.  they  brought  parched  c.  and  beans
2  Kings  19.  26.  they  were  as  blasted  c.  Isa.  37.  27.
Neh.  5. 2.  we  take  up  c.  for  them,  that  we  may  eat
Job  5.  26.  as  a  shock  of  c.  cometh  in  in  his  season

24.  6.  they  reap  every  one  his  c.  in  the  field

39.  4.  their  young  ones  they  grow  up  with  c.

Psal.  65.  9.  preparest  them  c.  when  thou  providest

13.  the  valleys  also  are  covered  over  with  c.

72. 16.  there  snail  be  a  handful  of  c.  in  the  earth
78.  24.  and  had  given  them  of  the  c.  of  heaven
Prov.  11.  26.  that'withholdeth  c.  people  shall  curse
Isa.  17.  5.  when  the  harvest-man  gathered)  the  c.
62. 8.  I  will  no  more  give  thy  c.  to  thine  enemies
Ezek.  36. 29.  1  will  call  for  the  c.  and  will  increase
Hos:2.  9. 1  will  take  away  my  c.  in  the  time  thereof
10. 11.  Ephraim  loveth  to  tread  out  the  c.

14.  7.  they  shall  revive  as  thee,  and  grow  as  the  vine
Joel  1 . 10.  for  the  c.  is  wasted,  new  wine  is  dried  up

1.  17.  barns  are  broken  down,  for  c.  is  withered
Amos  8. 5.  the  new  moon  begone  that  we  may  sell  c

9.  9. 1  will  sift  Israel  like  as  c.  is  sifted  in  a  sieve
Mark  4.  28.  after  that  the  full  c.  in  the  ear

79


COR


COR


CO  V


John  12.  24.  except  a  c.  of  wheat  fall  into  ground
Ears  of  COHN.

Gen.  41 .  5.  seven  ears  of  c.  came  up  upon  one  stalk
Lev.  2. 14.  shalt  offer  green  ears  of  c.  dried  by  the  fire
Ruth  2.  2.  let  me  go  and  glean  ears  of  c.  after  him
2  Kings  4. 42.  brought  full  ears  of  c.  in  husk  thereof
Job  24. 24.  they  are  cut  off  as  the  tops  of  the  ears  of  c.
Mat.  12. 1.  to  pluck  ears  of  c.  Marten.  23.  Luke  6. 1.
CORN-FIELDS.

Mark  2.  23.  came  to  pass,  that  he  went  through
c. -fields  on  the  sabbath-day,  Mat.  12. 1.  Luke  6. 1.
CORN-FLOOR.

Isa.  21.  10.  O  my  threshing,  and  the  c.  of  my  floor
Hos.  9. 1.  thou  hast  loved  a  reward  on  every  c.fioor
Standing  CORN.

E rod.  22.  6.  so  that  the  standing  c.  be  consumed
Dent.  23.  25.  come  into  standing  c.  of  thy  neighbour
Judg.  15. 5.  let  foxes  go  into  standing  c.  burn  up  st.  c.

CORN  and  wine.

Gen.  27  .  28.  God  give  thee  plenty  of  c.  and  wine
37.  with  c.  and  wine  have  1  sustained  him
Deut.  7.  13.  he  will  also  bless  thy  c.  and  wine
11. 14.  that  mayest  gather  in  thy  c.  and  wine  and  oil

12.  17.  mayest  not  eat  tithe  of  thy  c.  and  w.  14.  23.
16.  13.  after  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  c.  and  wine
18.  4.  give  him  first-fruit  of  thy  c.  and  to.  and  oil
28.  51.  which  shall  not  leave  tnee  c.  and  w.  or  oil
33.  28.  J  acob  shall  be  upon  a  land  of  c.  and  wine
2  Kings  18.  32.  to  a  land  of  c.  and  wine,  Isa.  36.  17-
2  Chron.  31.  5.  Isr.  brought  first  fruits  of  c.  and  w.
32.  28.  store-houses  for  increase  of  c.  wine,  and  oil
Neh.  5.  11.  restore  the  100th  part  of  c.  wine,  and  oil
10.  39.  bring  offering  of  c.  of  new  wine,  13.  5,  12.
Psal.  4.  7*  than  in  time  their  c.  and  wine  increased
Lam.  2.12.  say  to  their  mothers, where  is  c.  and  wine  ?
Hos.  2.  8.  she  knew  not  that  l  gave  her  c.  w.  and  oil

22.  the  earth  shall  hear  the  c.  and  wine  and  the  oil
7.  14.  they  assemble  themselves  for  c.  and  wine
Joel  2. 19.  Dehold,  I  will  send  you  c.  and  to.  and  oil
Hag.  1.  11.  I  called  for  drought  on  c.  and  new  wine
Zech.  9. 17.  c.  make  men  cheerful,  and  w.  the  maids
CORNER.

Lev.  21.  5.  shall  they  shave  off  the  c.  of  their  beard
2  Chron.  28. 24.  he  made  altars  in  every  c.  of  Jerus.
Prov.  7.  8.  passing  through  the  street  near  her  c.

12.  she  is  without,  and  lietli  in  wait  at  every  c.

21.  9.  better  to  dwell  in  c.  of  the  house-top,  25. 24.
Isa.  30.  20.  yet  thy  teachers  not  be  removed  ihto  a  c.
Jer.  48.  45.  a  flame  shall  devour  the  c.  of  Moab
51.  26.  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  a  stone  for  a  c.
Ezek.  46.  21.  in  every  c.  of  court  there  was  a  court
Amos  3. 12.  that  dwell  in  Samaria  in  the  c.  of  a  bed
Zech.  10.  4.  out  of  him  came  forth  the  c.  and  nail
Mat.  21.  42.  the  stone  the  builders  rejected,  the  same
is  become  the  head  of  the  c.  Psal.  118.  22.
Mark  12. 10.  Luke  20. 17.  Acts 4. 11.1  Pet.  2. 7.
Acts  26.  26.  for  this  thing  was  not  done  in  a  c.
CORNER  GATE.

2  Kings  14.  13.  from  gate  of  Ephraim  to  the  c.  gate
2  Chron.  26. _9.  built  towers  at  Jerusalem  at  c.  gate
Jer.  31. 38.  city  shall  be  built  from  tower  to  gate  of  c.
Zech.  14. 10.  land  shall  be  inhabited  to  the  c.  gate
CORNER  STONE.

Job  38.  6.  or  who  laid  the  c. -stone  thereof?

Psal.  118.  22.  is  become  the  head  stone  of  the  c.

144.  12.  that  our  daughters  may  be  as  c.  stones
Isa.  28.  16.  in  Zion  a  precious  c.  stone ,  1  Pet.  2. 6.
Eph.  2.  20.  Christ  himself  being  the  chief  c.  stone
CORNERS.

Exod.  25.  12.  put  rings  in  four  c.  of  ark,  two  on  one
side,  and  two  on  the  other,  26.  1  27  .  4.  |  37.  13.
27.  2.  make  the  horns  upon  the  fourc.  38.  2.

Lev.  19.  9.  shalt  not  reap  the  c.  of  your  field,  23. 22.

27.  ye  shall  not  round  c.  of  your  heads  nor  beard
Num.  24.  17.  a  sceptre  shall  smite  the  c.  of  Moab
Deut.  32.  26.  I  said,  I  will  scatter  them  into  c.

1  Sam.  14. 1 38.  draw  near,  ye  c.  of  the  people
Neh.  9-  22.  moreover  thou  didst  divide  them  into  c.
Job  1. 19.  a  great  wind  smote  the  four  c.  of  the  house
Isa.  11. 12.  gather  dispersed  of  Judah  from  four  c.
ler.  9-  25,  26. 1  will  punish  circumcised  with  uncir¬
cumcised,  all  that  are  in  utterm.  c.  25.  23.  |  49.  32.
Ezek.  7.  2.  the  end  is  come  upon  four  c.  of  the  land
1.  19.  put  blood  upon  the  four  c.  of  settle  of  altar
Zeph.  3. +  6.  their  c.  are  desolate,  their  streets  waste
Zech.  9. 1 15.  shall  be  filled  as  the  c.  of  the  altars
Mat.  6.  5.  they  love  to  pray  in  the  c.  of  the  streets
Acts  10.  11.  a  great  sheet  knit  at  four  c.  11.  5.

Rev. 1. 1.  four  angels  standing  on  fourc.  of  the  earth
CORN  FT.

Exod.  19. 1 13.  when  the  c.  soundeth  long,  come  up

1  Chron.  15.  28.  brought  up  the  ark  with  sound  of  c.
Psal.  98. 6.  with  sound  of  the  c.  make  a  .joyful  noise

150. 1 3.  praise  him  with  the  sound  of  the  c.

Van.  3.  5.  at  what  time  ye  hear  the  sound  of  c.  15.

10.  made  decree,  even  man  shall  hear  sound  of  c.
Hos.  5.  8.  blow  ye  the  c.  in  Gibeah,  and  the  trumpet
Joel  2.tl.  blow  ye  the  c.  in  Zion,  and  sound  alarm
CORNETS.

2  Sam.  6.  5.  David  played  before  the  Lord  on  c.

2  Chron.  15.  14.  sware  to  the  Lord  shouting  with  c.
CORPSE,  S.

2  Kings  19.35.  behold  they  were  all  dead  c.Isa. 37.36.
Nah.  3.  3.  there  is  no  end  of  c.  they  stumble  on  c.
Mark  6. 29.  disciples  took  J ohn’s  c.  and  laid  in  tomb
CORPULENT.

Jer.  50. 1 11.  because  ye  are  grown  c.  as  a  heifer
CORRECT.

Psal.  39.  11.  when  thou  dost  c.  man  for  iniquity

94. 10.  he  that  chastiseth  heathen,  shall  not  he  c.  ?
Prov.  29.  17.  c.  thy  son,  and  he  shall  give  thee  rest
Jer.  2.  19.  thine  own  wickedness  shall  c.  thee
10.  24.  O  L.  c.  me,  but  with  judgment,  not  in  anger

30.  11.  but  I  will  c.  thee  in  measure,  46.  28.
CORRECTED,  ETH.

Job  5.  17-  behold,  happy  is  the  man  whom  God  c.
Prov.  3.  12.  for  whom  the  Ixird  loveth,  he  c.

29.  19-  a  servant  will  not  be  c.  by  words
Ileb.  12.  9.  we  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which  c.
CORRECTION.

Job  37.  13.  rain  to  come,  whether  for  c.  or  mercy
Prov.  3. 11.  my  son,  despise  not  nor  be  weary  of  his  c.
80


Prov.  7.  22.  he  goeth  as  a  fool  to  the  c.  of  the  stocks

15. 10.  c.  is  grievous  to  him  that  forsaketh  the  way
f  32.  he  that  refuseth  c.  despiseth  his  own  soul

22. 15.  but  the  rod  of  c.  shall  drive  it  from  him
23. 13.  withhold  not  c.  from  the  child
Jer.  2. 30.  your  chili  Iren  they  received  no  c.

5.  3.  but  tney  have  refused  to  receive  c.

7.  28.  this  is  a  nation  that  receiveth  not  c.

Hos.  5.  +  2.  thcmgh  1  have  been  a  c.  of  them  all
Ilab.  1. 12.  O  God,  thou  hast  established  them  for  c.
Zevh.  3.  2.  she  obeyed  not,  she  received  not  c.

2  Tim.  3.  16.  the  scripture  is  profitable  for  c.
CORRUPT

Signifies,  [1]  To  consume ,  Mat.  6.  19.  [2]  To  de¬
file,  or  pollute,  Exod.  32.  7-  [31  To  mar,  spoil,
or  infect,  1  Cor.  15.  33.  [4]  To  entice,  or  al¬
lure,  2  Cor.  11.  3.  [5]  To  break,  or  make  void,

Mai.  2.  8.  [6]  To  cause  to  dissemble,  Dan.

11. 1 32.  [7]  Vicious  and  unsound ,  wholly  biassed
by  carnal  interest  and  corrupt  affections,  1  Tim.

6.  5.  2  Tim.  3.  8.  [81  Filthy  and  unsavoury,

corrupt  communication,  I'.ph.  4.  29.  ;  that  is,
such  communication  as  proceeds  from  corruption
in  the  speaker,  and  tends  to  infect  and  corrupt  the
minds  or  manners  of  the  hearers.  [9]  Deceitful,
Dan.  2.  9.

Coiruption  sometimes  signifies  rottenness  or  putre¬
faction,  such  as  our  bodies  are  subject  to  in  the
grave ,  Psal.  16.  10.  Thou  wilt  not  suffer  thine
holy  One  to  see  corruption  ;  1  Cor.  15.  42.  It  is
sown  in  corruption:  Like  seed  it  is  laid  in  the
earth,  subject  to  rottenness.  It  likewise  signifies
the  infectious  and  poisonous  nature  of  sin,  which
spiritually  wastes  the  soul,  being  contrary  to  that
integrity  and  soundness  in  which  we  were  created.
Eph.  4. 22.  Put  off  the  old  man  which  is  corrupt ;
that  is,  labour  to  mortify  and  subdue  that  cor¬
ruption  of  nature  which  has  infected  the  whole
man,  both  soul  and  body,  and  which  daily  grows
worse  and  more  corrupt  by  the  fulfilling  of  its
lusts.  The  apostle  Peter,  speaking  of  seducers,
says,  that  they  are  the  servants  of  corruption,

2  Pet.  2.  19.  They  are  slaves  to  their  lusts,  and
under  the  power  and  dominion  of  sin.  The  mount
of  Olives  is  called  the  mount  of  corruption,  2
Kings  23.  13.  because  Solomon  built  thereon  tem¬
ples  to  the  gods  of  the  Ammonites,  and  of  the
Moabites,  to  gratify  his  wives,  who  were  natives  of
these  nations.

Gen.  6. 11.  the  earth  also  was  c.  before  God,  12.
Judg.  2. 1 19.  when  the  judge  was  dead  they  were  c.
Job  17. 1.  my  breath  is  c.  my  days  are  extinct
Ps.  14. 1.  they  are  c.  none  doth  good,  53. 1. 1  73. 8.

38. 5.  my  wounds  stink,  and  are  c.  because  of  folly
Prov.  25. 26.  as  a  troubled  fountain  and  c.  spring
Ezek. 20.44:  not  according  to  your  c.  doings,  O  Israel

23. 11.  she  was  more  c.  in  her  inordinate  love  than
Dan.  2.  9.  ye  have  prepared  lying  and  c.  words
Mai.  1. 14.  cursed  that  sacrificeth  to  Lord  a  c.  thing
Mat.  7. 17.  a  c.  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit

18.  nor  can  a  c.  tree  bring  good  fruit,  Luke  6.  43.

12.  33.  or  else  make  the  tree  c.  and  his  fruit  c.

Eph.  4.  22.  put  off  the  old  man  which  is  c.

29.  let  no  c.  communication  proceed  out  of  mouth

1  Tim.  6. 5.  perverse  disputings  of  men  of  c.  minds

2  Tim.  3. 8.  these  resist  the  truth,  men  of  c.  minds

CORRUPT.

Deut.  4. 16.  take  heed  lest  ye  c.  yourselves,  25.

31.  29.  after  my  death  ye  will  c.  yourselves
Dan.  11.  + 17.  give  him  the  daughter  of  women  to  c.

32.  such  as  do  wickedly  shall  ne  c.  by  flatteries
Mai.  2.  3.  behold  I  will  c.  your  seed,  spread  dung
Mat.  6. 19.  on  earth,  where  moth  and  rust  doth  c.

20.  treasures,  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  c.

1  Cor.  15.  33!  evil  communications  c.  good  manners

2  Cor.  2. 17.  we  a"e  not  as  many  that  c.  the  word
Jude  10.  in  those  things  they  c.  themselves
Rev.  11. 1 18.  shouldest  destroy  them  that  c.  earth

19.  2.  great  whore  did  c.  earth  with  her  fornications
CORRUPTED,  ETH.

Gen.  6. 12.  for  all  flesh  had  c.  his  way  upon  the  earth
Exod.  8. 24.  the  land  was  c.  by  reason  of  the  flies
32.7.  Lord  said  to  Moses,  get  thee  down,  for  thy
people  have  c.  themselves.  Dent.  9. 12.  |  32. 5.
Judg.  2. 19.  c.  themselves  more  than  their  fathers
Ezek.  16.  47.  thou  wast  c.  more  than  they  in  ways
28. 17.  thou  hast  c.  thy  wisdom  by  thy  brightness
Hos.  9.  9.  have  deeply  c.  thems.  as  in  days  of  Gibeah
Amos  1  All.  pursued  broth,  and  c.  his  compassions
Zeph.  3. 7.  they  rose  early  and  c.  all  their  doings
Mai. 2.8.  ye  have  c.  the  covenant  of  Levi,  saith  Xord
Luke  12. 33.  where  no  thief  approacheth,  nor  moth  c.
2  Cor.  7.  2.  we  have  wronged  no  man,  have  c.  no  man
11.3.  lestyourminds  bee.  from  simplicity  in  Christ
Jam.  5. 1,  2.  go  to  ye  rich  men,  your  riches  are  c.
CORRUPTERS.

Isa.  1.  4.  ah  sinful  nation,  children  that  are  c.

Jer.  6.  28.  they  are  brass  and  iron,  they  are  all  c.
CORRUPTIBLE.

Rom.  1. 23.  changed  to  an  image  made  like  to  c.  man
1  Cor.  9. 25.  now  they  do  it  to  obtain  a  c.  crown
15.  53.  for  this  c.  must  put  on  incomiption

1  Pet.  1. 18.  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  c.  things

23.  being  born  again,  not  of  c.  seed  but  incorrupt.

3. 4.  but  let  it  be  in  that  which  is  not  c.  meek  spirit
CORRUPTING.

Dan.  11. 17.  give  him  the  daughter  of  women  c.  her
CORRUPTION.

Lev.  22. 25.  because  their  c.  is  in  them ,  and  blemishes

2  Kings  23. 13.  on  the  right  hand  of  the  mount  of  c.
Job  17. 14.  I  have  said  to  c.  thou  art  my  father
Psal.  16. 10.  not  leave  my  soul,  nor  wilt  thou  suffer

thine  holy  One  to  see  c.  Acts  2. 27  1 13.  35.
49.  9.  that  he  should  live  for  ever,  and  not  see  c.
La.  38.  17.  thou  hast  delivered  it  from  the  pit  of  c.
Dan.  10. 8.  for  my  comeliness  was  turned  in  me  to  c.
Jonah  2. 6.  yet  hast  thou  brought  up  my  life  from  c.
Acts  2.31.  soul  not  left  in  hell ,  nor  his  flesh  did  see  c.

13.  34.  he  raised  him  up,  no  more  to  return  to  c.

36.  David  was  laid  to  his  fathers  and  saw  c.

37.  but  he  whom  God  raised  again  saw  no  c.
Rom.  8. 21.  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  c .


1  Cor.  15.  42.  it  is  sown  in  c.  raised  in  incorruption
5 '.  neither  doth  c.  inherit  incomiption

Gal.  6. 8.  that  sowetli  to  the  flesh,  shall  of  flesh  reap  c.

2.  Pet.  1.  4.  escaped  the  c.  that  is  in  world  thro'  lust
2. 12.  and  shall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  c.

19.  they  themselves  are  the  servants  of  c.
CORRUPTLY.

2  Chron.  27.  2.  and  the  people  did  yet  c.

Neh.  1.  7.  we  have  dealt  very  c.  against  thee

COST.

2  Sam.  19. 42.  have  we  eaten  at  all  of  the  king’s  c  ?

24.  24.  nor  offer  to  G.  of  that  which  c.  me  nothing
1  Chr.  21.  24.  nor  offer  burnt-offerings  without  c.
Luke  14.  28.  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  counteth  c.
COSTLINESS.

Rev.  18. 19.  all  that  had  ships  made  rich  by  her  c.

COSTLY.

1  Kings  5. 17.  they  brought  c.  stones,  hewed  stones

7.  9.  all  these  were  of  c.  stones  by  the  measures

10.  foundation  was  of  c.  stones,  even  great  stones

11.  and  above  were  c.  stones  and  cedars

John  12. 3.  Mary  took  a  pound  of  spikenard,  very  c.

1  Tim.  2. 9.that  women  adorn  thems.  not  with  c.  array

COTES.

2  Chron.  32.  28.  Ilezekiah  made  c.  for  flocks

COTTAGE,  S.

Isa.  1.  8.  daugh.  of  Zion  is  left  as  a  c.  in  a  vineyard
24.  20.  the  earth  shall  be  removed  like  a  c.

Zeph.  2. 6.  the  sea-coast  shall  be  c.  for  shepherds
COUCH,  ES.

Gen.  49. 4.  Reuben  defiled  it  and  went  up  to  my  c.
Job  7. 13.  I  say,  my  c.  shall  ease  my  complaint
Psal.  6.  6.  all  night  I  water  my  c.  with  my  tears
Amos  3.  12.  Israel  be  taken  out  in  Damascus  in  a  c.
6.  4.  that  stretch  themselves  upon  their  c.

Luke  5. 19.  let  him  down  through  tiling  with  his  c.

24.  arise,  take  up  thy  c .  and  go  to  thy  house
Acts  5. 15.  they  laid  sick  folk  on  beds  and  c.

COUCH.

Job  38.  40.  when  they  c.  in  dens,  and  abide  in  covert
COUCHED.

Gen.  49.  9.  Judah  c.  as  a  lion,  and  as  an  old  lion
Num.  24.  9.  he  c  he  lay  down  as  a  lion,  as  great  lion
COUCH ETH.

Deut.  33. 13.  for  dew,  and  for  deep  that  c.  beneath
COUCHING.

Gen.  49.  14.  Tssachar  c.  down  between  two  burdens
Ezek. 25. 5. will  make  Ammonites  a  c.  place  for  flocks
COVENANT

Is  a  mutual  agreement  between  two  or  more  parties,
Gen.  21.  32.  There  is,  [1]  A  covenant  of  works,
the  terms  whereof  are,  Do  and  live  ;  sin  and  die,
Gen.  2.  17.  Isa.  1.  19,  20.  which  covenant  was
broken  by  our  first  parents  sinning  against  God,
in  eating  the  f 01  bidden  fruit ,  and  the  covenant
being  made  with  Adam  as  a  public  person,  not
only  for  himself  but  for  his  posterity ,  all  mankind,
descending  from  him  by  ordinary  generation,  sinned
in  him,  and  fell  with  him  in  their  first  trans¬
gression,  Rom.  5.  12—20.  [2]  The  covenant  of
redemption,  and  salvation  by  grace,  entered  into
by  the  sacred  Three,  in  behalf  of  elect  sinners,  on
whom  grace  and  glory  were  settled  for  ever,  in
Christ,  their  covenant-head ?  Psal.  89.  3,  28.  Eph.
1.  3,  4.  2  Tim.  1.  9.  This  covenant  is,  (1)  The
fruit  of  the  sovereign  love  and  good  will  of  God,
John  3.  16.  Col.  1.  19.  (2)  Sure,  Isa.  55.  3.  (3)
It  is  everlasting.  Isa.  61.  8.  (4)  Absolute,  Jer.
32.  38,  40.  (5)  A  covenant  filled  with  all  spiritual
blessings  to  true  believers  in  Christ,  Eph.  1.  5.
(6)  Called  new,  Ileb.  8.  6,  8.  not  in  respect  of  its
date,  it  being  made  from  everlasting,  but  in  the
manner  of  its  dispensation  and  manifestation :
Not  that  it  differed  in  substance  from  the  old,  for
therein  Christ  was  promised,  his  death  and  suffer¬
ings  shadowed  forth  by  the  legal  sacrifices  ;  and
such  as  were  saved  under  the  Old  Testament,  were
so  only  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  the  Messiah  that
was  to  come ;  Gal.  4.  3.  Abraham  believed  God,
and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness  ;  he
believed  in  a  special  manner  the  promise  of  the
covenant  concerning  Christ,  in  whom  believers  of
all  nations  should  be  blessed,  Gen.  12.  3.  But  this
testament  or  covenant  is  called  new,  in  regard
of  the  manner  of  its  dispensation  ;  being  ratified
afresh  by  the  blood  and  actual  sufferings  of  Christ;
being  freed  from  those  rites  or  ceremonies  where¬
with  it  was  formerly  administered  ;  _  as  it  con¬
tains  a  more  full  and  clear  revelation  of  the
mysteries  of  religion  ;  as  it  is  attended  with  a
larger  measure  of  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the
Spirit ;  and  as  it  is  never  to  wax  old  or  be  abo¬
lished.  (2)  For  circumcision,  which  was  the  sign
or  seal  of  the  old  covenant,  Gen.  17.  9,  13.  (3)
For  the  duties  of  the  covenant;  Psal.  25.  14.  He
will  shew  them  his  covenant :  He  will  reveal  to
them,  and  make  them  understand  the  duties,  and
bestow  upon  them  the  blessings  of  the  covenant.  (4)
For  the  laws  or  conditions  required  of  men  by  the
covenant ;  or  the  precepts  of  God,  which  are  the
testimonies  or  witnesses  of  God's  will  and  of  man's
duty,  Psal.  25.  10.  (5)  For  the  decalogue,  or  ten
commandments,  which  contain  the  articles  of  the
covenant,  Dent.  4.  13.  (6)  For  the  law,  religion,
and  people,  of  the  Jews,  who  were  in  covenant
with  God,  Dan.  11.  28.  (7)  For  the  vow,  promise,
or  engagement ,  whereby  a  man  and  woman  mu¬
tually  bind  themselves  to  each  other  in  marriage  ;
and  this  is  called  the  covenant  of  God.  Prov.  2.
17.  because  God  is  the  insti tutor  of  that  society
and  mutual  obligation  ;  and  because  God  is  called
to  be  the  witness  and  judge  of  that  solemn  pro¬
mise  and  covenant,  and  the  avenger  of  the  trans¬
gression  of  it.

Gen.  9. 12.  this  is  the  token  of  thee.  13,17.  1 17*  11.
17.  4.  as  for  me,  behold,  my  c.  is  with  thee

13.  my  c.  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an  everlasting  c.

14.  that  soul  be  cut  off,  he  hath  broken  my  c.
Exod.  31.  16.  keep  the  sabbath  for  a  perpetual  c.

34.  28.  he  wrote  upon  the  tables  the  words  of  the  c.
Lev.  26.  15.  ye  do  not  my  comm,  but  ye  break  my  c
Num.  25. 12.  behold,  I  give  to  him  my  c.  of  peace


V


c  0\


c  0\


c  o  \?


A ’tint.  25. 13.  even  the  c.  of  an  everlasting  priesthood
Dfiii  4.  13.  and  he  declared  unto  you  his  c.
go.  lest  ye  forget  the  c.  of  the  Lord  your  God
31.  Lord  will  not  forget  the  c.  of  thy  fathers
9.  9-  when  1  was  gone  to  receive  the  tables  of  thee.
11.  the  Lord  gave  me  the  tables  of  the  c.

15.  the  two  tables  of  the  c.  were  in  my  two  hands
29.  1.  these  are  the  words  of  the  c.  which  L.  connn.
1C.  thou  shouldest  enter  into  c.  with  the  Lord
Cl .  according  to  all  the  curses  of  the  c.  in  this  book
Co.  because  ye  have  forsaken  the  c.  of  the  Lord
31.  CO.  they  will  provoke  me.  and  break  ray  c.

!Jndg.  C.  1.  I  said,  1  will  never  break  my  c.  with  you
1  Sam.  CO.  8.  hast  brought  thy  servant  into  c.  of  Lord
1  Kings  19.  10.  for  Israel  have  forsaken  thy  c.  14.
CO.  .31.  Allah  said,  l  will  send  thee  away  with  this  c.
C  King:;  13.  23.  because  of  his  c.  with  Abraham
.  23.  3.  to  perform  words  of  the  c.  written  in  book
and  all  the  people  stood  to  the  c.  C  Chron.  34.  31.
1  Chron.  16.  15.  be  ye  mindful  always  of  his  c.

2  Chron.  15.  1C.  they  entered  into  c.  to  seek  Ld.  God
Neh.  13.  29.  they  have  defiled  the  c.  of  priesthood
PsaL  C5.  14.  that  fear  him,  he  will  shew  them  his  c.
44.  17-  neither  have  we  dealt  falsely  in  thy  c.

50.  16.  that  thou  shouldest  take  my  c.  in  thy  mouth
,  55.  20.  lie  put  forth  his  hands,  he  hath  broken  c.

,  74. 20.  have  respect  to  the  c.  for  dark  places  of  earth
78.  37.  heart  not  right,  nor  were  they  stedfast  in  c.
89.  28.  mercy  keep  and  c.  shall  stand  fast  witli  him
34.  my  c.  will  l  not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  gone
39.  thou  hast  made  void  the  c.  of  thy  servant
111.  5.  he  will  ever  be  mindful  of  his  c.

9.  commanded  his  c .  for  ever,  holy  is  his  name
Prov.  2.  17-  and  forgetteth  the  c.  of  her  God
Isa.  28.  18.  your  c.  with  death  shall  be  disannulled
33.  8.  he  hath  broken  the  c.  he  hath  despised  cities
42.  6.  and  give  thee  for  a  c.  of  the  people,  49.  8.
54.  10.  nor  shall  the  c.  of  my  peace  be  removed
56.  4.  the  eunuchs  that  take  hold  of  my  c.  6.

59.  21.  as  for  me,  this  is  my  c.  with  them
Jer.  1 1 .  C.  hear  ye  the  words  of  this  c.  6.

3.  cursed  be  the  man  that  obeyeth  not  words  of  c.
14.  Cl.  remember,  break  not  thy  c.  with  us
22.  9.  because  they  have  forsaken  thee,  of  the  Ld.
31.  32.  which  my  c.  they  brake,  saith  the  Lord
33. 20.  if  you  can  break  my  c.  of  day  and  c.  of  night
21.  then  may  c.  be  broken  with  David  my  servant
,  25.  if  my  c.  be  not  with  day  and  night

34.  10.  the  people  which  had  entered  into  c.  heard
18.  who  have  not  performed  the  words  of  this  c.
50.  5.  let  us  join  to  the  Lord  in  a  perpetual  c.
Ezek.  16.  8.  I  sware  and  entered  into  a  c.  with  thee
59.  hast  despised  oath  in  breaking  the  c.  17.  18.
61.  jive  them  to  thee  for  daughters,  not  by  thy  c.
17. 15.  oi-  shall  he  break  the  c.  and  be  delivered  ?
16.  whose  oath  he  despised,  whose  c.  he  brake
19.  my  c.  he  hath  broken,  it  will  I  lecoinpense
!  20.  37.  1  will  bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the  c.

\  44.  7-  the}'  have  broken  my  c.  because  of  abominat.

.  Dan.  9.  27- shall  confirm  c.  with  many  for  one  week
'  11.22.  shall  be  broken  yea  also  the  prince  of  the  c.
28.  and  his  heart  shall  he  against  the  holy  c.

30.  he  shall  have  indignation  against  the' holy  c.
32.  such  asdo  wickedly  against  c.  shall  be  corrupt
J/o.v.  10. 4. spoken  words, swearing  falsely  in  making*?.
Zech.  11.10.  that  I  might  break  my  c.  I  had  made
Mai.  2.4.  that  my  c.  might  be  with  Levi,  saith  Ld.  5.
8.  ye  have  corrupted  c.  of  Levi,  saith  Ld.  of  hosts
10.  by  profaning  the  c.  of  our  fathers
14.  yet  she  is  thy  companion, and  the  wife  of  thy  c.
.3.  1.  even  messenger  of  the  c.  whom  ye  delight  in
islets  3. 25.  ye  are  children  of  the  c.  God  made  with
7.  8.  and  he  gave  him  the  c.  of  circumcision
Pom.  1. 31.  without  understanding,  c.  breakers
11.  27.  this  is  my  c.  when  1  take  away  their  sins
On/.  3.  15.  though  it  be  man’s  c.  yet  if  confirmed
17.  that  the  c.  was  confirmed  before  of  God
Ileh.  8.  6.  he  is  Mediator  of  a  better  c.  established
7-  if  that  first  c..had  been  faultless,  then  no  place
9. they  contmued  in  my  <?.and  I  regarded  them  not
9.  1.  then  verily  the  first  c.  had  also  ordinances
4.  Aaron’s  rod  that  budded,  and  tables  of  the  c.
See  Ark,  Bi.ood,  Break.

;  Book  of  the  GOV  EN  ANT.

F.xod.  24.7*  Moses  took  the.  hook  of  the  c.  and  read
2  Kings  23.  2.  .losiah  read  in  their  ears  all  the  words
of  the  book  of  the  c.  found,  2  Chron.  34.  30.
21.  keep  the  passover,  as  it  is  written  in  book  of  c.
Establish  COVEN  AN  T.

Gen.  6. 18. with  thee  will  1  estab.  my  c.and  sons, 9. 9.
17-7-  1  w’ill  estab.  my  c.  between  me  and  Abraham
19.  estab.  c.  with  Isaac  and  his  seed  after  him,  21.
F.xod.  6.4. 1  have  estab.  my  e.  with  them  to  give  land
l  ev.  26.9.  T  will  multiply  and  estab.  my  c.  with  you
Dent.  8. 18.  that  he  may  estab.  his  c.  which  he  sware
Ezek.  16.  60.  I  will  estab.  to  thee  an  everlasting  c.
62.  1  will  estab.  my  c.  with  thee,  thou  shalt  know
Everlasting  COVENANT.

Gen.  9.  16.  that  I  may  remember  the  everlast.  c.

17 •  13.  it  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an  everlast.  c.
19. 1  w  ill  establish  my  c.  with  Isaac  for  an  ever l .  c.
Lev.  24. 8.  being  taken  from  Israel  by  an  everlast.  c.
2  Sam.  23.  5.  yet  he  hath  made  with  me  an  everl.  c.

1  Cln.  16.  17.  confirmed  the  same  to  Jacob  for  a
law,  and  to  Israel  for  tin  everlast.  c.  Psal.  105. 10.
Isa.  24.  5.  because  they  have  broken  the  everlast.  c.
55.3.  I  will  make  ever.  c.  with  you,  61.8.  Jer.  32.40.
F.zek.  37.  26.  it  shall  be  an  everlast.  c.  with  them
Ileh.  13.  20.  through  the  blood  of  the  everlast.  e.

Keep ,  keepest,  keepeth,  or  kept  COVEN  ANT.
Gen.  17.  9.  thou  shalt  keep  my  c.  thou  and  thy  seed
10.  this  is  mv  c.  which  ye  shall  keep  between  me
F.xod.  19.  5.  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice  and  keep  my  c.
‘-•eu:.  7.  9.  he  is  G.  faithful  God,  who  keepeth  c.  12.

1  Rings 8.  -23. 2  Ch'on.  6. 14.  Neh.  1.  5.  |  9.  32.
29. 9.  keep  therefore  the  words  of  this  c.  and  do  them
33;  9.  they  have  observed  thy  word,  kept  thy  c.

Y'g-lll.  U.  thou  hastnot  kept  my  c.  Psal.  78. 10.
'  sal.  25. 10.  mer.  and  truth  to  such  as  keep  c.  103.18.
132.  12.  if  thy  children  will  keep  my  c.  and  testnn.
,fe*-  17.  14.  by  keeping  of  his  c.  if  might  stand
Gan  9.4.  keeping  c.and  mercy  to  them  that  love  him


Made  COVENANT.

Gen.  15.  18.  same  day  the  L.tnade  ac.  with  Abram
21.  27-  Abraham  and  Abimelech  made  a  c.  32.
Exod.  34.  27.  1  have  made  a  c.  with  thee  and  Israel
Dent.  5.  2.  L.  our  G  made  a  c.  with  us  in  Iloreb
.3.  L.  made  not  this  c.  with  our  fathers,  Ileh.  8.  9.

29.  1 .  beside  the  c.  he  made  with  them  in  I  Ioreb

31. 16.  will  break  my  c.  1  have  made  with  them
Josh.  24. 25.  Joshua  made  a  c.  with  people  that  day
1  Sam.  18.  3.  Jonathan  and  David  made  a  c.  23. 18.

20. 16.  Jonathan  made  a  c.  with  the  house  of  David

1  Kings  8.  9.  L.  made  Ac.  with  Israel,  2  Chr.  6. 11.
21.  ark  wherein  is  c.  of  the  L.  which  he  made

20.  34.  Ahab  made  a  c.  with  Ben-hadad

2  Kings  11.  4.  Jehoiada  made  a  c.  with  the  rulers

17.  made  a  c.  between  the  Lord  and  the  king
17-  15.  Israel  rejected  his  c.  he  made  with  fathers

35.  with  whom  the  I,,  had  made  ac.  and  charged
38.  the  c.  made  with  you  ye  shall  not  forget

23.  3.  Josiah  made  a  c.  before  Lord,  2  Chr.  34.  31.

1  Chr.  11 . 3.  David  made  a  c.  with  elders  in  Ilebron

16. 16.  be  ye  mindful  even  of  the  c.  which  lie

with  Abraham,  Neh.  9.  8.  Psal.  105.  9.

2  Chron.  21.  7.  because  of  c.  he  had  made  with  David
23.  3.  all  the  congregation  made  a  c. with  king  Joash

Job  31.  1.  I  made  a  c.  with  mine  eyes,  why  tnen
Psal.  50.  5.  that  have  made  a  c.  with  me  by  sacrifice
89. 3.  have  made  a  c.  with  my  chosen,  I  have  sworn
Isa.  28.  15.  ye  said,  ye  have  made  a  c.  with  death

57.  8.  enlarged  thy  bed,  and  made  a  c.  with  them
Jer.  11.  10.  broke  thee.  I  made  with  their  fathers
31.  32.  not  according  to  the  c.  I  made  with  fathers
34. 8.  after  Zedekiah  had  made  a  c.  with  people,  15.

13.  saith  the  Lord,  I  made  ac.  with  your  fathers
15.  ye  had  made  a  c.  before  me  in  house  called

18.  performed  not  the  words  of  the  c.  ye  had  made
Ezek.  17. 13.  and  made  a  c.  with  him,  and  taken  oath

Make  COVENANT.

Gen.  17. 2. 1  will  make  my  c.  between  me  and  thee
26. 28.  let  us  make  a  c.  with  thee,  31.  44.  Ezra  10.  3.
Exod.  23.  32.  thou  shalt  make  noc.  Dent.  7 .  2.

34.  10.  behold  1  make  a  c.  before  all  thy  people
12.  lest  thou  make  a  c.  with  the  inhabitants,  15.
Dent.  29.  14.  nor  with  you  only  do  I  make  this  c.

1  Sam.  11.  1.  make  a  c.  with  us,  and  we  will  serve

2.  on  this  condition  will  I  make  a  c.  with  you

2  Chron.  29.  10.  now  it  is  in  my  heart  to  make  a  c.
Neh.  9.  38.  and  we  make  a  sure  c.  and  write  it
Job  41.  4.  will  he  make  ac.  with  thee  ?

Jer.  31.  33.  this  is  c.  I  will  make,  Heb.  8. 10.  |  10. 16.
Ezek.  34.  25. 1  will  m.  with  them  ac.  of  peace,  37.  26.
Ilos.  2. 18. 1  will  make  a  c.  for  them  with  the  beasts
12.  1.  and  they  do  make  a  c.  with  the  Assyrians
New  COVENANT.

Jer.  31.  31. 1  will  make  a  new  c.  with  Isr.  Heb.  8. 8.
Ileh.  8. 13.  Anew  c.  he  hath  made  the  first  old
12.  24.  and  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  c.

Remember  COVENANT.

Gen.  9. 15. 1  will  rem.  my  c.  Lev.  26. 42.  Ezek.  16.60.
Exod.  6.  5,  6.  1  have  rememb.  my  c.  wherefore  say
Lev.  26.45.  for  their  sakesre/w.  c.  of  their  ancestors
Psal.  105.8.  he  hath  rem.  his  c.  for  ever,  106.  45.
Amos  1.  9.  because  they  rem.  not  the  brotherly  c.
Luke  1. 72.  mercy  promised,  and  to  rem.  his  holy  c.
COVENANT  of  Salt.

Lev.  2. 13.  the  salt  of  c.  of  thy  God  to  be  lacking
Num.  18. 19.  it  is  a  c.  of  salt  for  ever  before  Lord
2  Chron.  13.  5.  to  David  and  his  sons  by  a  c.  of  salt
Transgressed  CO V EN ANT.

Dent.  17.  2.  hath  wrought  wickedness  in  trails,  his  c.
Josh.  7. 11.  they  have  also  transgressed  my  c.

15.  because  he  t.  c.  of  L.  Judg.  2.20.  2  Kings  18.12.
23.  16.  when  ve  have  transgressed  c.  of  the  Lord
Jer.  .34. 18.  and  I  wil  I  give  the  men  that  trans.  my  c.
Dos.  6.  7-  but  they  like  men  have  transgressed  the  c.
8. 1 .  because  they  have  trans.  my  c.  and  trespassed
COVENANTED.

2  Chron.  7.  18.  according  as  I  have  c.  with  David
Hag.  2.  5.  according  to  the  word  that  I  c.  with  you
Mat.  26.15.  they  c. with  him  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver
Luke  22.  5  were  glad,  and  c.  to  give  him  money
COVENANTS.

Rom.  9.  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  glory  and  the  c.
Gal.  4.24.  these  are  the  two  c.  one  from  mount  Sinai
Eph.  2.  12.  and  strangers  from  the  c.  of  promise
COVER

Signifies,  [1]  To  hide,  Prov.  12.  16.  [2]  To  clothe,

1  Sam.  28.  14.  [3]  To  protect  and  defend,  Psal.
91.  4.  [4]  To  pardon,  or  forgive,  Psal.  32.  1.

Rom.  4.  7-  [5]  To  vail,  1  Cor.  11.  6.  [6]

To  inclose,  Exod.  29.  13.  [7]  Not  to  confess,

Prov.  28.  13.

Violence  covereth  the  mouth  of  the  wicked,  Prov.
10.  6.  Their  violent  unjust  courses  shall  bring
dozen  God's  judgments  upon  them  whereby  they
shall  be  so  convinced  of  their  former  injurious
practices,  that  they  shall  have  nothing  to  say  for
themselves ,  their  mouths  shall  be  stopped.

To  cover  the  feet,  Judg.  3.  24.  and  1  Sam.  24.

3.  This  phrase  is  commonly  understood  in  both
these  places,  of  easing  nature  ;  because  the  men
not  wearing  breeches  as  we  do,  but  long  coats,
they  did  in  that  act  cover  their  feet.  But  others
expound  it,  of  composing  one's  self  to  take  a
little  sleep  or  rest,  as  was  very  usual  to  do  in  the
day-time  in  those  hot  countries,  2  Sam.  4.  5.
and  when  they  did  so  in  a  cool  place,  they  used
to  cover  their  feet,  as  appears  from  Ruth  3.  7-
And  this  exposition  seems  best  to  agree  with  the
history  in  both  places  where  this  phrase  is  found.
For  the  servants  of  Ehud  staying  so  long  for
their  lord,  seems  to  imply,  that  they  judged  him
gone  to  sleep,  which  might  take  up  a  consider¬
able  time,  rather  than  to  that  other  zoork,  which
takes  zip  but  a  little  time.  And  if  Saul  was
asleep  in  the  cave,  then  it  is  not  strange  that
he  neither  heard  David  and  his  men  talking  of
him,  nor  perceived  when  David  cut  off  the  skirt
of  his  robe.

Exod.  1C.  5.  the  locusts  shall  c.  the  face  of  the  earth

21.  33.  if  a  man  shall  dig  a  pit  and  not  c.  it
28.  42.  make  linen  breeches  to  c.  nakedness


Exod.  33. 22.  T  will  c.  thee  with  my  hand  while  1  pass
40.  3.  thou  shall  c.  the  ark  with  the  vail
Lev.  16.  1.3.  cloud  of  incense  may  c..the  meicy-seat
17. 13.  pour  out  the  blood,  and  c.  it  with  dust
Num.  22.  5.  behold  they  c.  the  face  of  the  earth
Deut.  2.3.  13.  and  c.  that  which  cometh  from  thee
33. 12.  the  Lord  shall  c.  him  all  the  day  long
1  Sam.  24.  3.  and  Saul  went  in  to  c.  his  feet
Neh.  4.  5.  c .  not  their  iniquity,  let  not  their  sin
Job  16. 18.  O  earth,  c.  not  thou  my  blood,  let  my  cry
21. 26.  shall  lie  down  in  dust,  worms  shall  c.  them

22. 11.  the  abundance  of  waters  c.  thee,  38.  34.

40.  22.  the  shady  trees  c.  him  with  their  shadow
Psal.  91.  4.  he  shall  c.  thee  with  his  feathers
104.  9.  that  they  turn  not  again  to  c.  the  earth
109.  29.  c.  themselves  with  their  own  confusion

139. 11.  if  1  say,  surely  the  darkness  shall  c.  m»
140.  9.  let  the  mischief  of  their  lips  c.  them

Isa.  11.  9.  as  the  waters  c.  the  sea,  Ilab.2.  14.

14.  11.  is  spread  under  thee,  the  worms  c.  thee
22.  17.  behold,  the  Lord  will  surely  c.  thee
26.21.  the  earth  shall  no  more  c.  her  slain

30.  1.  that  c.  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my  Spirit

58.  7-  when  thou  seestthe  naked,  that  thou  c.  him

59.  6.  neither  c.  themselves  with  their  works

60.  2.  for  behold  the  darkness  shall  c.  the  earth
6.  the  multitude  of  camels  shall  c.  thee

Jer.  46.  8.  I  will  go  up,  and  will  c.  the  earth
Ezek.  7. 18.  horror  shall  r.them,  shame  on  all  faces
12.  6.  thou  shalt  c.  thy  face  that  thou  see  not
12.  lie  shall  c.  his  face  that  he  see  not  the  ground

24.  7.  poured  it  not  on  ground  to  c.  it  with  dust
17.  c.  not  thy  lips,  and  eat  not  the  bread  of  men
22.  ye  shall  not  c.  your  lips,  nor  eat  bread  of  men

26. 10.  abund.  of  his  horses,  their  dust  shall  c.  thee

19.  and  when  great  "waters  shall  c.  thee

30. 18.  as  for  her,  a  cloud  shall  c.  her  and  daught.
32.  7-  I  will  c.  the  heaven,  l  will  c.  the  sun
37.6.  I  will  c.  you  with  skin,  and  put  breath  in  you
38.  9.  thou  shalt  be  like  a  cloud  to  c.  the  land,  16.
Ilos.  2.  9-  recover  my  flax  given  to  c.  her  nakedness
10.  8.  shall  say  to  the  mountains,  c.  us,  Luke  23.  30.
Chad.  10.  for  thy  violence  shame  shall  c.  thee
Mic.  3.  7-  yea,  they  shall  all  c.  their  lips,  no  answer
7-  10.  and  shame  shall  c.  her  that  said  to  me
Dab.  2.  17.  the  violence  of  I.ebanon  shall  c.  thee
Mark  14.65.  some  began  to  spit  on  him  and  c.  his  face
1  Cor.  11.  7.  a  man  ought  not  to  c.  his  head
1  Pet.  4.  8.  for  charity  shall  c.  the  multitude  of  sins
COVERED.

Gen.  7. 19.  the  mountains  were  c.  with  waters,  20.
9.  23.  they  c.  the  nakedness  of  their  father

24.  65.  Rebekah  took  a  vail  and  c.  herself

38.  14.  Tamar  c.  her  with  avail,  satin  open  place
Exod.  8.  6.  the  frogs  came  up  and  c.  land  of  Egypt

14.  28.  the  waters  c.  the  chariots  and  horsemen

15.  5.  the  depths  c.  them,  they  sank  as  a  stone

10.  the  sea  c.  them,  they  sank  as  lead.  Josh.  24.  7.

16.  13.  at  even  the  quails  came  up  and  c.  the  camp

24. 15.  Moses  went  up,  a  cloud  c.  the  mount,  16.
37.  9.  c.  with  their  wings  over  the  mercy-seat
40.  21.  the  vail  c.  the  ark  of  the  testimony

34.  a  cloud  c.  the  tent  of  the  congregation
Lev.  13. 13.  behold,  if  the  leprosy  have*?,  all  his  flesh
Num.  4.  20.  to  see  when  the  holy  things  are  c.

9.  15.  the  cloud  c.  the  tabernacle,  16.  I  16.  42.
Deut.  32.  15.  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art  c.  with  fatness
Judg.  4.  18.  Jael  c.  him  with  a  mantle,  19.

1  Sam.  19.  13.  Michal  c.  the  pillow  with  a  cloth
28.  14.  an  old  man  cometh  up  c.  with  a  mantle

1  Kin.  1.  1 .  c.  king  David  with  clothes,  but  no  heat
8.7;  cherubims  c.  ark,  1  Chron.  28. 18.  2  Chr.  5.  8.

2  Kings  19.1.  king  Hezekiah  heard  it,  he  rent  his
clothes,  and  c.  himself  with  sackcloth,  Isa.  .37.  1.

2  Chr.  3.  +  6.  Solomon  c.  house  with  precious  stone3
Job  23.  17.  nor  c.  he  the  darkness  from  my  face

31.  33.  if  1  c.  my  transgressions  as  Adam
Psal  44.  15.  the  shame  of  my  face  hath  c.  me

19.  tho’  thou  hast  c.  us  with  the  shadow  of  death
55.  +  5.  are  come  upon  me,  and  horror  hath  c.  me
65.  13.  the  valleys  also  are  r.over  with  corn
68.  13.  shal  I  be  as  the  wings  of  a  dove  c.  with  silver
71.  13.  let  them  be  c.  with  reproach  that  seek
78.  t  53.  but  the  sea  c.  flrir  enemies,  106.  +  11.

89.  45.  glory  to  cease,  file) —  hast  c.  nim  with  shame
106.  17.  the  earth  c.  the  company  or  Abiram
139.  13.  thou  hast  c.  me  in  my  mother’s  womb
Prov.  26.  23.  like  a  potsherd  c.  with  silver  dross
26.  whose  hatred  is  c.  by  deceit,  his  wickedness
Ecc/.6.  4.  his  name,  shall  he  c.  with  darkness
Isa.  6.  2  with  twain  he  c.  his  face,  he  c.  his  feet

22.  +  17-  the  Lord  who  c.  with  excellent  covering

25.  +7.  will  destroy  the  covering  c.  over  all  people

29. 10.  and  your  rulers  the  seers  hath  he  c.

51.  16.  1  have  c.  thee  in  the  shadow  of  my  hand

61.  10.  he  c.  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness
Jer.  51.  42.  she  is  c.  with  the  multitude  of  waves
Lam.  2. 1.  c.  the  daughter  of  Zion  with  a  cloud

3. 16.  broken  my  teeth,  he  hath  c.  me  with  ashes

43.  thou  hast  c.  with  anger,  and  persecuted  us

44.  thou  hast  c.  thyself  with  a  cloud,  that  prayer
Ezek.  1.  11.  anti  two  wings  c.  their  bodies,  23.

16.  8.  I  spread  my  skirt,  and  c.  thy  nakedness
10.  I  girded  thee  with  linen,  1  c.  thee  with  silk
18.  7-  and  hafh  c.  the  naked  with  a  garment,  16.
24.  8.  top  of  a  rock,  that  her  blood  should  not  be  c.
27.  7-  blue  and  purple  was  that  which  c.  thee

31. 15.  1  c.  the  deep  lor  him,  and  1  restrained
37-  8.  the  flesh  came  up,  and  skin  c.  them  above

Jonah  3.  6.  the  king  of  Nineveh  c.  with  sackcloth
8.  let  man  and  beast  be  c.  with  sackcloth
Dab.  3.  3.  God  came,  his  glory  c.  the  heavens
Mat.  8.  24.  the  ship  was  c.  with  the  waves

10.  26.  there  is  nothing  c.  that  shall  not  be  revealed,.

and  hid  that  shall  not  be  known,  Luke  12.  2.

1  Cor.  11.6.  if  the  woman  be  not  c.  let  her  be  shorn

COVERED  face.

Gen.  38.  15.  because  Tamar  had  c.  her  face
Exod.  10. 15.  the  locusts  c.  the  face  of  whole  earth

2  Sam.  19.4.  but  David  c.  his  face,  and  cried
Esth.  7. 8.  as  the  word  went  they  c.  Hainan  s  face

I  Psal.  69.  7-  because  shame  hath  c.  my  face

E  81


CO  V


cou


Prov.  24.  31.  nettles  had  c.  the  face  theieof
Isa.  6.  2.  with  twain  he  c.  his  face,  and  with  twain
Jer.  51.  51.  heard  reproach,  shame  hath  c.  our  faces
Head,  COVERED.

2  Sam.  15.  30.  David  and  every  man  had  his  head  c.
Esth.  6.  12.  Hainan  went  mourning,  his  head  c.
Psal.  140.  7-  hast  c.  my  head  in  the  day  of  battle
Jer.  14.  3.  were  confounded,  and  c.  their  heads,  4.

1  Cor.  11.  4.  every  man  praying,  having  his  head  c.

COVERED  sin,  or  sins.

Psal.  32.  1.  blessed  is  lie  whose  sin  is  c.  Rom.  4.  7-
85.  2.  thou  hast  c.  all  their  sins,  Selah
COVEREDST.

Psal.  104.  6.  thou  c.  it  with  the  deep  as  a  garment
Ezek.  16. 18.  tookest  broidered  garments  and  c.  them
COVERER.

Nah.  2.t5.  shall  make  haste,  and  c.  shall  be  prepared
COVEREST.

Dent.  22.  12.  vesture,  wherewith  thou  c.  thyself
Psal.  5.  +  11.  shout  for  joy,  because  thou  c.  them
104  °  who  c.  thyself  with  light  as  with  a  garment
'  '  COVERETH.

Exod.  29.  13.  thou  shalt  take  all  the  fat  that  c.  the
inwards, 22.  Lev.  3. 3,  9, 14.  |  4. 8.  17-3.  19. 19.
Num.  22. 11.  a  people  which  c.  the  face  of  the  earth
Judg.  3.  24.  surely  he  c.  his  feet  in  his  chamber
Job  9.  24.  he  c.  the  faces  of  the  judges  thereof

15.  27.  because  he  c.  his  face  with  his  fatness
36.  30.  behold,  he  c.  the  bottom  6f  the  sea
32.  with  clouds  he  c.  light,  commands  not  to  shine
Ps.  73.  6.  pride  as  a  chain,  violence  c.  them  as  a  gar.
84.  +  6. through  valley  of  Baca,  rain  also  c.  the  pools
109.  19.  be  to  him  as  the  garment  which  c.  him
147. 8.  who  c.  the  heavens  with  clouds,  prep,  rain
Prov.  10. 6.  violence  c.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked,  11.
12.  love  c.  all  sins  ||  12. 16.  a  prudent  man  c.  shame

17.  9.  he  that  c.  a  transgression  seeketh  love

28.  13.  he  that  c.  his  sins  shall  not  prosper
Jer.  3.  25.  we  lie  down  in  shame,  our  confusion  c.  us
Ezek.  28.  14.  thou  art  the  anointed  cherub  that  c.
Mai.  2.  16.  for  one  e.  violence  with  his  garment
Luke  8. 16.  when  he  lighted  candle  c.  it  with  a  vessel
COVERING.

Gen.  8. 13.  Noah  removed  the  c.  of  the  ark
20.  16.  behold,  he  is  to  thee  a  c.  of  the  eyes
Exod.  22.  27.  for  that  is  his  c.  raiment  for  his  skin
Lev.  13.  45.  the  leper  shall  put  a  c.  on  his  upper  lip
Num.  19. 15.  every  vessel  which  hath  no  c.  bound  on

2  Sam.  17. 19.  woman  spread  a  c.  over  well’s  mouth
Job  22. 14.  thick  clouds  are  ac.  to  him,  he  seeth  not

24.  7.  that  the  naked  have  no  c.  in  the  cokl

26.  6.  naked  before  him,  destruction  hath  no  c.

31.  19.  if  I  have  seen  any  poor  without  c.

Psal.  105.  39.  he  spread  a  cloud  for  c.  and  fire
Cant.  3.  10.  he  made  the  c.  of  it  of  purple
Isa.  4.  +5.  for  upon  all  the  glory  shall  be  a  c.

22.  8.  and  he  discovered  the  c.  of  Judah
+  17.  who  covered  thee  with  an  excellent  c.

25. 7.  destroy  the  face  of  the  c.  cast  over  all  people
28.  20.  the  c.  narrower  than  he  can  wrap  hims.  in

30.  1.  that  cover  with  a  c.  but  not  of  my  Spirit
22.  ye  shall  defile  the  c.  of  thy  graven  images

50.  3.  I  c.othe  heavens,  and  make  sackc.  their  c.
Ezek.  28. 13.  every  precious  stone  was  thy  c.  sardius
1  Cor.  11.  1 10.  a  woman  ought  to  have  a  c.

15.  glory  to  her,  for  her  hair  is  given  her  for  a  c.

See  Badgers  skins.

COVERING.

Exod.  25.  20.  c.  the  mercy-seat  with  their  wings
.\Tum.  4.  5.  Aaron  shall  take  down  the  c.  vail
Ezek.  28.  16.  I  will  destroy  thee,  O  c.  cherub
Mai.  2. 13. 1  have  done  c.  altar  of  the  Lord  with  tears
COVERINGS.

Prov.  7. 16.  decked  my  bed  with  c.  of  tapestry

31.  22.  she  maketh  herself  c.  of  tapestry

COVERS.

Exod.  25.  29.  make  c.  ||  37. 16.  he  made  his  c
Num.  4.  7.  put  thereon  c.  to  cover  withal
COVERT

Signifies,  [1]  An  umbrage,  or  shady  place,  1  Sam.
25.  20.  [2]  A  thicket  for  wild  beasts.  Job  38.
40.  [3]  Something  made  to  shelter  the  people

from  the  weather  on  the  sabbath  ;  or  some  costly
chair  of  state,  wherein  the  kings  of  Judah  used
to  hear  the  priests  expound  the  law  on  the  sab¬
bath,  2  Kings  16.  18.  [4]  Christ  Jesus,  the

saints'  shelter,  defence,  or  refuge,  Isa.  32.  2.

1  Sam.  25.  20.  Abigail  came  down  by  c.  of  the  hill

2  Kings  16. 18.  the  c.  for  the  sabbath  Ahaz  took  down
Job  38.  40.  when  lions  abide  in  the  c.  to  lie  in  wait

40.  21.  behemoth  lieth  in  the  c.  of  the  reed
Psal.  61.  4.  I  will  trust  in  the  c.  of  thy  wings
Isa.  4.  6.  a  tabernacle  for  a  c.  from  storm  and  rain

16.  4.  be  thou  a  c.  to  them  from  the  face  of  spoiler

32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  a  c.  from  the  tempest
Ter.  25.  38.  he  hath  forsaken  his  c.  as  a  lion

_  COVET.

This  word  is  sometimes  taken  in  a  good  sense,  as
in  1  Cor.  12.  31.  Covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts.
This  covetousness  is  good  and  commendable,  when
spiritual  blessings  are  earnestly  desired  and  sought
after.  But  most  commonly  it  is  taken  in  a  bad
sense,  for  an  eager  and  immoderate  desire  after
earthly  things,  Josh.  7-  21.  Prov.  21.  26.  Co¬
vetousness  is  called  idolatry,  Col.  3.  5.  because
the  covetous  man  places  that  love,  delight,  and
confidence  in  riches,  which  are  due  to  God  alone.
This  sin  is  condemned  in  all  sorts  of  persons,
and  is  expressly  forbidden  by  the  tenth  command¬
ment,  Thou  shaft  not  covet,  Exod.  20.  17 .  Such
as  are  addicted  to  this  sin,  are  hated  of  God,
Psal.  10.  3.  They  are  cruel  and  oppressive,
Mic.  2.  2.  The  riches  they  are  so  eager  in  the
vursuit  of,  prove  but  poison  to  kill  them,  and
hus  they  are  miserable.  Job  20.  15, 16,  17.  Prov.
1.  19.  The  inordinate  love  of  wealth  does  like-
oise  betray  men  to  manifold  sins,  and  exposes
them  to  manifold  sufferings ;  both  from  them¬
selves,  in  deny  big  themselves  the  comfort  of  their
estates  ;  and  from  others,  as  extortioners,  thieves,
and  the  like,  Deut.  16.  19.  Eccl.  4.  8.  Mar.
26,  15.  1  Tim.  6.  10.

82


Exod.  20. 17.  thou  shalt  not  c.  thy  neighbour's  house,
wife,  nor  servant,  Deut.  5.  21.  Rom.  7. 7-  I  13.  9.
Mic.  2. 2.  they  c.  fields  and  take  them  by  violence
1  Cor.  12.  31.  but  c.  earnestly  the  best  gifts
14  39.  c.  to  prophesy ,  and  forbid  not  to  speak
COVETED.

Josh.  7. 21.  Achan  said,  then  I  c.  them,  took  them
Acts  20.  33.  I  have  c.  no  man’s  silver  or  gold
1  Tim.  6. 10.  which  while  some  c.  after  they  erred
COVETETH.

Prov.  21.  26.  he  c.  greedily  all  the  day  long
llab.  2.  9.  woe  to  him  that  c.  an  evil  covetousness
COVETOUS.

Psal.  10.  3.  the  wicked  blesseth  c.  whom  Ld.  abhors
Luke  16. 14.  Pharisees  who  were  c.  heard  these  things
1  Cor.  5.  10.  yet  not  altogether  with  the  c.

11.  if  any  brother  be  c.  with  such  not  to  eat

6. 10.  nor  c.  shall  inherit  king,  of  God,  Eph.  5.  5.

1  Tim.  3.  3.  a  bishop  then  must  not  be  c.

2  Tim.  3. 2.  in  the  last  times  men  shall  be  c.  boasters
2  Pet.  2. 14.  an  heart  exercised  with  c.  practices

COVETOUSNESS.

Exod.  18.  21.  provide  able  men,  men  hating  c.

Psal.  119.  36.  incline  not  my  heart  to  c.

Prov.  28. 16.  he  that  hatethc.  shall  prolong  his  days
Isa.  57. 17.  for  the  iniquity  of  his  c.  was  I  wroth
Jer.  6. 13.  every  one  is  given  to  c.  8. 10.

22. 17.  thy  eyes  and  heart  are  not  but  for  thy  c.
51.13.  thine  end  is  come,  and  the  measure  of  thy  c.
Ezek.  33. 31.  but  their  heart  goeth  after  their  c.

Hab.  2.  9.  woe  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  c.

Mark.  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  proceedeth  c.

Luke  12. 15.  he  said,  take  heed,  and  beware  of  c.
Rom.  1.  29.  being  filled  with  all  c.  fornication
2  Cor.  9.  5.  as  a  matter  of  bounty,  and  not  of  c.

Eph.  5. 3.  but  c.  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  you
Col.  3.5.  mortify  yourmemb.  and  c.  which  is  idolatry

1  Thess.  2.  5.  nor  at  any  time  used  we  a  cloke  of  c.
Heb.  13.  5.  let  your  conversation  be  without  c.

2  Pet.  2. 3.  thro’  c.  shall  they  make  merchand.  of  you

COULD.

Gen.  27. 1.  when  Isaac  was  old,  so  that  he  c.  not  see
Exod.  8.  18.  did  so  to  bring  forth  lice,  but  c.  not
1  Sam.  ?  2.  Eli's  eyes  began  to  wax  dim,  he  c.  not  see

1  Kbiff  A.  4.  Alnjah  c.  not  see  his  eyes  were  set

2  Kings  3. 26.  to  break  to  king  of  Edom,  but  c.  not

1  Chron.  21.  30.  but  David  c.  not  go  before  it

2  Chron.  13.  7.  Rehoboam  c.  not  withstand  them
Psal.  37.  36.  yea,  1  sought  him,  but  he  c.  not  be  found
Isa.  5. 4.  whatc.  have  been  done  more  to  vineyard  ?
Jer.  15. 1.  my  mind  c.  not  be  toward  this  people
Jonah  1. 13.  men  rowed  to  bring  it  to  land,  but  c.  not
Mark  6. 19.  therefore  Herodias  had  a  quarrel  against

John,  and  would  have  killed  him,  but  she  c.  not
9. 18.  cast  him  out,  and  they  c.  not,  Luke  9.  40.

14. 8.  she  hath  done  what  she  c.  she  is  come
John  21.  25.  the  world  c.  not  contain  the  books
Acts  13. 39.  from  which  ye  c.  not  be  justified  by  law
COULD  EST.

Jer.  3.  5.  and  hast  done  evil  things  as  thou  c.

Ezek.  16. 28.  and  yet  thou  c.  not  be  satisfied
COULTER,  S.

1  Sam.  13.  20.  Israel  went  to  sharpen  each  his  c.

21.  they  had  a  file  for  their  c.  and  the  forks

COUNCIL.

2  Sam .  23. t 23.  David  set  Benaiah  over  his  c.

Mat.  5. 22.  shall  say,  Raca,  shall  be  in  danger  of  c.

26.  59.  the  c.  sought  false  witness,  Mark  14.  55.
Mar/i;  15.1. whole  c.bound  Jes. and  carried  him  away
Luke  22. 66.  the  elders  led  Jesus  into  their  c.

John  11.  47.  the  chief  priests  gathered  a  c.  Acts  5.  21.
Acts  4. 15.  had  commanded  them  to  go  out  of  the  c.
5.  27.  they  brought  and  set  them  before  the  c.

34.  then  stood  there  up  one  in  the  c.  a  Pharisee
41.  and  they  departed  from  the  c.  rejoicing
6. 12.  caught  Stephen,  and  brought  him  to  the  c.
15.  all  in  the  c.  looking  on  him,  saw  his  face

22.  30.  he  commanded  all  their  c.  to  appear

23. 15.  ye  with  the  c.  signify  to  the  chief  captain

24. 20.  any  evil  in  me,  while  I  stood  before  the  c.

COUNCILS.

Mat.  10. 17.  they  will  deliver  you  up  toe.  Mark  13.9.
COUNSEL

Signifies,  [1]  Advice,  Prov.  20.  18.  Dan.  4.  27-
[21  God's  piirpose  and  decree,  Acts  4.  28.  [3]

The  directions  of  his  word ,  the  motions  of  his
Spirit,  and  the  kindness  of  his  providence,  Psal.
73.  24.  [4]  His  will  or  doctrine  concerning  the

way  of  salvation,  Luke  7-  30.  Acts  20.  27.  [5]
The  designs,  thoughts,  and  most  secret  resolutions,
1  Cor.  4.  5.

Christ  Jesus  is  called  Counsellor,  Isa.  9.  6.  [1]  On
account  of  his  infinite  wisdom.,  Col.  2,  3.  [2]  On
account  ff  his  willingness  to  instruct  and  give
counsel  to  men  j  as  also,  to  plead  their  cause  be¬
fore  his  throne.  Rev.  3.  18.  1  John  2.  1.

Exod.  18. 19.  hearken  to  me,  I  will  give  thee  c.
Num.  27-  21 .  before  Eleazar,  who  shall  ask  c.  for  him

31. 16.  these  caused  1  srael  thro’  the  c.  of  Balaam,  to
commit  trespass  against  L.  in  the  matter  of  Peor

Deut.  32.28.  are  a  nation  void  of  c.  nor  is  understand.
Josh.  9. 14.  asked  not  c.  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord
Judg.  20.  7.  behold,  give  here  your  advice  and  c.

2  Sam.  15.  31.  turn  c.4>f  Ahithophel  into  foolishness
16. 23.  so  was  all  the  c.  of  Ahithophel  with  David
17. 14.  the  Lord  defeated  the  good  c.  of  Ahithophel
20.  18.  saying,  they  shall  surely  ask  c.  at  Abel

1  Kings  1. 12.  let  me,  I  pray  thee,  give  thee  c.

12.  8.  forsook  the  c.  of  old  men,  13.  2  Chr.  10. 8, 13.

2  Kings  b.  8.  king  of  Syria  took  c.  with  his  servants

18. 20.  I  have  c.  and  strength  for  war,  Isa.  36. 5.

1  Chron.  10.  13.  so  Saul  died  for  asking  c.  of  one

2  Chron.  22.  5.  Ahaziah  walked  after  their  c.

25. 16.  king  said,  art  thou  made  of  the  king’s  c.  ?
30. 2.  the  king  had  taken  c.  to  keep  the  passover

23.  the  assembly  took  c.  to  keep  other  seven  days
Ezra  10.  3.  according  to  the  c.  of  my  lord,  and  those
8.  according  to  the  c.  of  the  princes  and  elders
Neh.  4. 15.  God  had  brought  their  c.  to  nought
Job  5. 13.  the  c.  of  the  froward  is  carried  headlong
1'0.  3.  and  should  shine  upon  tiie  c.  of  the  wicked
12. 13.  wisdom  and  strength  he  hath  c.  and  underst.


COU

Job  21.  16.  the  c.  of  the  wicked  is  far  troin  me

[22.  18.

38.  2.  who  is  this  that  darkeneth  c.  by  words  ?

42.  3.  who  is  he  that  hideth  c.  without  knowledge  ?
Psal.  1. 1.  that  walketh  not  in  the  c.  of  the  ungodly

14.  6.  you  have  shamed  the  c.  of  the  poor

16.  7.  I  will  bless  the  Lord,  who  hath  given  me  c.
20.  4.  the  Lord  grant  thee,  and  fulfil  all  thy  c.

31.  13.  while  they  took  c.  together  against  me
33.  10.  Lord  brings  the  c.  of  the  heath,  to  nought
55.  14.  we  took  sweet  c.  together,  and  walked
64.  2.  hide  me  from  the  secret  c.  of  the  wicked
68.  27.  the  princes  of  Judah  and  their  c.

73.  24.  thou  shalt  guide  me  with  thy  c.  afterward
83.  3.  they  have  taken  crafty  c.  against  thy  peop.e

106.  13.  they  waited  not  for  his  c.  but  lusted
43.  but  they  provoked  him  with  their  c.

107.  11.  they  contemned  the  c.  of  the  Most  High
Prov.  8. 14.  c.  is  mine,  sound  wisdom,  I  am  underst.

11.  14.  where  no  c.  is,  the  people  fall,  but  in  multit.

12.  15.  but  he  that  hearkeneth  unto  c.  is  wise

15.  22.  without  c.  purposes  are  disappointed

19.  20.  hear  c.  and  receive  instruction,  that  thou

20.  5.  c.  in  the  heart  of  man  is  like  deep  water

18.  every  purpose  is  established  by  c.  and  with
21. 30.  there  is  no  wisdom  nor  c.  against  the  L.

24.  6.  for  by  wise  c.  thou  shalt  make  thy  war

27.  9.  so  doth  the  sweetness  of  a  friend  by  hearty  c.
Isa.  5. 19.  let  the  c.  of  the  Holy  One  draw  nigh

7.5.  they  have  taken  evil  c.  against  thee,  saying
11.  2.  spirit  of  c.  and  might  shall  rest  upon  him

19.  3.  and  I  will  destroy  the  c.  of  Egypt
11.  the  c.  of  counsellors  of  Phar.  is  become  brutish
23.  8.  who  hath  taken  this  c.  against  Tyre  l

28.  29.  from  the  Lord,  who  is  wonderful  in  c.

29.  15.  that  seek  deep  to  hide  c.  from  the  Lord
40. 1 13.  who  being  of  his  c.  hath  taught  him  ?

14.  with  whom  took  he  c.  ?  who  instructed  him  ?

44. 26.  and  performeth  the  c.  of  his  messengers
Jer.  18.  18.  nor  shall  c.  perish  from  the  wise

23.  thou  knowest  all  their  c.  against  me  to  slay  me

19.  7.  Twill  make  void  c.  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem

32.  19. mighty  God,  great  in  c.  mighty  in  work
38. 15.  if  I  give  thee  c.  wilt  not  thou  hearken  tome
49.7.is  c.  perished  from  prudent  ?  is  wisd.  vanished  ?

30.  the  king  of  Babylon  hath  taken  c.  against  you
Ezek.  7.  26.  and  c.  shall  perish  from  the  ancients
11.  2.  and  that  give  wicked  c.  in  this  city
13.  t  9.  they  shall  not  be  in  the  c.  of  my  people
Dan.  2.  14.  David  answered  with  c.  and  wisdom
Hos.  4. 12.  my  people  ask  c.  at  their  stocks  and  staff
Mic.  4. 12.  neither  understand  they  his  c.

Zecli.h.  13.  the  c.  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both
Mat.  12. 14.  the  Pharisees  held  a  c.  against  him

27.  7.  they  took  c.  and  bought  the  potter's  field

28.  12.  when  they  had  taken  c.  they  gave  money
Mark  3.  6.  they  took  c.  against  Jesus,  John  11.  53.
Luke  23.  51.  he  had  not  consented  to  the  c.  of  them
John  18. 14.  now  Caiaphas  was  he  who  gave  c.

Acts  4. 28.  what  thy  c.  determined  before  to  be  done

5. 33.  when  they  heard,  they  took  c.  to  slay  them
38.  if  this  c.  be  of  men,  it  will  come  to  nought
9.  23.  after  that  the  Jews  took  c.  to  kill  him
27.  42.  the  soldiers’  c.  was  to  kill  the  prisoners
Eph.  1.  11.  who  worketh  after  the  c.  of  his  own  will
Heb.  6.  17.  to  shew  the  immutability  of  his  c.

COUNSEL  of  God  or  Lord.

Judg.  18.  5.  they  said,  ask  c.  we  pray  thee,  of  God
20. 18.  the  children  of  Israel  asked  c.  of  God,  23.

1  Sam.  14. 37.  Saul  asked  c.  of  God,  shall  I  go  down  ?
Psal.  33. 11.  the  c.  o/the  Lord  standeth,  Prov.  19.  21.
Isa.  19. 17.  because  of  the  c.  of  the  Lord  of  hosts
Jer.  23. 18.  who  hath  stood  in  the  c.  of  the  Lord  ’

49.  20.  therefore  hear  the  c.  of  the  Lord,  50.  45.
Luke  7.  30.  the  lawyers  rejected  the  c.  of  God
Acts  2. 2.3.  him  delivered  by  the  determinate  c.  of  G.

20. 27.  not  ashamed  to  declare  to  you  all  c.  of  God

My  COUNSEL.

2  Chron.  25.  16.  and  hast  not  hearkened  to  my  c.
Job  29.  21.  men  waited  and  kept  silence  at  my  c.
Psal.  119.  t  24.  thy  testimonies  are  the  men  of  my  c.
Prov.  1.  25.  but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  c.

30.  they  would  none  or  my  c.  they  despised  my
Isa.  46.  10.  my  c.  shall  stand,  and  1  will  do  all
11.  man  that  executeth  my  c.  from  a  far  country
Jer.  23.  22.  but  if  they  had  stood  in  my  c.

Dan.  4.  27.  O  king,  let  my  c.  be  acceptable  to  thee
Own  COUNSEL.

Job  18.  7.  and  his  own  c.  shall  cast  him  down
Hos.  10.  6.  Israel  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own  c.
Take  COUNSEL.

Neh.  6. 7.  come  now,  and  let  us  take  c.  together
Psal.  2.  2.  rulers  takec.  against  Lord  and  Anointed

13.  2.  how  long  shall  I  take  c.  in  my  soul  ?

71. 10.  that  wait  for  my  soul,  take  c.  together
Isa.  8.  10.  take  c.  and  it  shall  come  to  nought

16.  3.  takec.  execute  judgment,  make  thy  shadow
30. 1.  woe  to  children  that  take  c.  but  not  of  me
45.  21.  tell  ye,  jrea  let  them  take  c.  together

COUNSEL,  ED.

2  Sam.  16. 23.  which  Ahithophel  c.  in  those  days

17.  +7.  that  Ahithophel  hath  c.  is  not  good
11.  1  c.  that  all  Israel  be  gathered  unto  thee
15.  thus  and  thus  Ahithophel  c.  and  thus  I  c.  21.

2  Chron.  25. 1 16.  God  hath  c.  to  destroy  thee
Job  26.  3.  how  hast  thou  c.  him  that  hath  no  wisdom  t
Psal.  .32. 1 8. 1  will  c.  thee,  mine  eyes  shall  be  on  thee
Eccl.  8. 2. 1  c.  thee  to  keep  the  king’s  commandment
Rev.  3. 18. 1  c.  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  fire
COUNSELLOR.

2  Sam.  15. 12.  Ahithophel,  David’s  c.  1  Chr.  27.  33.

1  Chron.  26. 14.  for  Zechariah  his  son,  a  wise  c.

27.  32.  Jonathan,  David’s  uncle,  was  ac.  a  scribe

2  Chron.  22.  3.  Athaliah  was  his  c.  to  do  wickedly
Isa.  3.  3.  Lordtaketh  away  thee,  and  artificer

9. 6.  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  C.

40. 13.  or  who  being  his  c.  hath  taught  him

41.28.  for  I  beheld,  and  there  was  no  man,  no  c.
Mic.  4. 9.  is  there  no  king  in  thee  r1  is  thy  c.  perished
Nah.  1.  11.  there  is  come  out  of  thee  a  wicked  c.
Mark  15.43.  Joseph  an  honourable  c.  Luke  23.  50.
Rom.  11. 34.  who  known  mind  of  L.  who  been  his  c.  1


CO  u


cue


c  o  u


COUNSELLORS.

2  Chr.  22.  4.  they  were  his  c.  after  his  father’s  death
Ezra  4.  5.  they  hired  c.  against  them,  to  frustrate
*.  14.  as  thou  art  sent  of  the  king,  and  his  seven  c.
28.  extended  mercy  to  me  before  the  king  and  c.

8.  25.  gold,  which  the  king  and  his  c.  had  offered
Job  3.  14.  been  at  rest  with  kings  and  c.  of  the  earth
12.  17.  leadeth  c.  away  spoiled,  makes  judges  fools
Pin/.  119. 24.  thy  testimonies  are  my  delight  and  c.
Prov.  11.  14.  in  the  multitude  of  c.  is  safety,  24.6.
12.  20.  deceit  in  heart,  but  to  the  c.  of  peace  is  joy

15.  22.  in  the  multitude  of  c.  they  are  established
Isa .  1.  26. 1  will  restore  thy  r.  as  at  the  beginning

19.  11.  counsel  of  wise  c.  of  Pharaoh  is  brutish
l)an.  3.  24.  said  to  his  c .  did  we  not  cast  three  men  ?

27.  the  king’s  c.  being  gathered,  saw  these  men
4  36.  my  c.  and  my  lords  sought  unto  me
6.  7.  all  the  c.  and  the  captains  have  consulted
COUNSELS.

Job  37.  12.  and  it  is  turned  round  about  by  his  c.
Psal.  5.  10.  O  God,  let  them  fall  by  their  own  c.
81.  12.  and  they  walked  in  their  own  c.

Prov.  1.  5.  man  of  understand,  shall  attain  to  wise  c.
12.  5.  but  the  c.  of  the  wicked  are  deceit
22.  20.  have  not  l  written  excellent  things  m  c.  ?
Jsa.  25.  1.  thy  c.  of  old  are  faithfulness  and  truth
47.  13.  are  wearied  in  the  multitude  of  thy  c.

Jer.  7-  24.  walked  in  the  c.  of  their  evil  heart
Hot.  11.  6.  devour  them,  becauseof  their  own  c.
Mic.  6.  16.  ye  walk  in  the  c.  of  the  house  of  Ahab
1  Cor.  4.  5.  will  make  manifest  the  c.  of  the  heart
COUNT.

Exod.  12.  4.  shall  make  your  c.  for  the  lamb
COUNT,  Verb.

Lev.  23. 15.  c.  from  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath
25.  27.  let  him  c.  the  years  of  the  sale,  52.
Num.03.  10.  who  can  c.  the  dust  of  Jacob  ?

1  Sam.  1.  16.  c.  not  me  for  a  daughter  of  Belial
Job  19.  15.  and  my  maids  c.  me  for  a  stranger

31.  4.  doth  not  he  see  my  ways,  c.  all  my  steps  ?
Psal.  87.  6.  the  Lord  shall  c.  when  he  writeth
139.  18.  if  I  c.  them,  they  are  more  than  the  sand
22.  1  hate  them,  1  c.  them  mine  enemies
Mic.  6. 11.  shall  1  c.  them  pure  with  wicked  balances
Acts  20.  24.  neither  c.  I  my  life  dear  to  myself
Phil.  3.8. 1  c.  all  things  loss,  and  do  c.them  but  dung
13. 1  c.  not  myself  to  have  apprehended,  but  this

2  ThessA.  11.  God  would  c.you  worthy  of  this  calling

3.  15.  c.  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him

1  Tim .  6. 1.  c.  their  masters  worthy  of  all  honour
Philem.  17.  if  thou  c.  me  a  partner,  receive  him
Jam.  1.  2.  c.  it  joy  when  ye  fall  into  temptations

5. 11.  behold,  we  c.  them  happy  which  endure

2  Pet.  2.  13.  as  they  that  c.  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  day

3.  9.  Lord  is  not  slack,  as  some  men  c.  slackness
Rev.  13.  18.  let  him  c.  the  number  of  the  beast

COUNTED.

Gen.  15.  6.  Abram  believed,  and  he  c.  it  to  him  for
righteousness,  Ps.  106.  31.  Horn.  4.  3.  Gal.  3.  6.
30-  33.  the  sheep  that  shall  be  c.  stolen  with  me

31.  15.  are  we  not  c.  of  him  strangers  ?  sold  us

1  Kings  3. 8.  that  cannot  be  numbered  or  c.  for  mult.

1  Chron.  21.  6.  but  Levi  and  Benjamin  c.  he  not
Neh.  13.  13.  for  they  were  c.  faithful,  office  was
Job  18.  3.  wherefore  we  are  c.  as  beasts  and  vile

41.  29.  darts  are  c.  as  stubble,  laugheth  at  shaking
Psal.  44.  22.  we  are  c.  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter

88.  4. 1  am  c.  with  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit
Prov.  17  .  28.  even  a  fool,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace
is  c.  wise,  and  he  thatshutteth  his  lips  is  a  man

27.  14.  rising  early,  it  shall  be  c.  a  curse  to  him
Isa.  5.  28.  their  horses’  hoofs  shall  be  c.  like  flint

32.  15.  and  the  fruitful  held  be  c.  for  a  forest

33.  18.  where  is  he  that  c.  the  towers  ?

40. 15.  the  nations  are  c.  as  small  dust  of  balance
17.  all  nations  are  c.  to  him  less  than  nothing
Hos.  8.  12.  but  they  were  c.  as  a  strange  thing
Mat.  14.  5.  they  c.  him  as  a  prophet,  Mark  11.  32.
Luke  21 . 36.  be  c.  worthy  to  escape  these  things
Acts  5.  41.  rejoicing  that  they  were  c.  worthy
19.  19.  they  burned  their  books,  and  c.  the  price
Rom.  2.  26.  uncircumcision  be  c.  for  circumcision

4.  5.  to  him  believeth,  his  faith  is  c.  for  righteous.
9. 8.  but  the  children  of  promise  are  c.  for  the  seed

Phil.  3. 7-  what  were  gain,  those  I  c.  loss  for  Christ

2  Thess.  1.  5.  be  c.  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God

1  Tim.  1.  12.  enabled  me,  for  that  he  c.  me  faithful

5. 17.  let  elders  be  c.  worthy  of  double  honour
Heh.  3.  3.  this  man  was  c.  worthy  of  more  glory

7 . 6.  he  whose  descent  is  not  c.  from  them

10.  29.  hath  c.  blood  of  the  covenant  unholy  thing
See  Accounted.

COUNTETH,  1NG.

Job  19.  11.  hec.  me  as  one  of  his  enemies,  33.  10.
Eccl.  7-  27.  c.  one  by  one,  to  find  out  the  account
Lake  14.  28.  sitteth  not  down  first,  and  c.  the  cost
COUNTENANCE

Signifies,  [1]  The  face,  or  visage ,  1  Sam.  16.  7-
12]  Love,  favour,  and  affection,  Gen.  31.  5.  [3]
Brightness ,  festivity,  or  alacrity,  Dan.  5.  6.  [4]
God’s  love  and  favour,  manifested  by  the  graces
and  benefits  which  he  bestows  upon  his  people,
Psal.  4.  6.  Because  men  by  their  countenance
discover  their  anger,  or  love ;  hence  it  is  that
when  it  is  attributed  to  God,  who  is  said  some¬
times  to  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance  upon
his  people,  at  other  times  to  hide  his  face,  or
countenance,  it  signifies  either  his  grace  and
favour,  or  his  anger ,  or  displeasure.

Gen.  4.  5.  Cain  was  very  wroth,  and  his  c.  fell

24.  t  16.  the  damsel  was  good  of  c.  a  virgin
31.  2.  Jacob  beheld  the  c.  of  Laban,  and  behold

5.  1  see  your  father’s  c.  that  it  is  not  toward  me
Nnm.  6.  26.  the  Lord  lift  up  hist,  upon  thee
Dent.  28.  50.  Lord  will  bring  a  nation  of  fierce  c.
Judg.  13.  0.  his  c.  was  like  the  c.  of  an  angel

3  ISam.  1. 18.  Hannah,  her  c.  was  no  more  sad

16.  7.  look  not  on  his  c.  or  the  heightof  his  stature
12.  now  David  was  ofa  beautiful  c.  17-  42.

25.  3.  Abigail  H  2 Sam.  14.  27.  Tamar  of  a  fair  c.

2  Sam.  23.  t21.  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  man  of  c.

2  Kings  5.  t  1.  N’aaman  was  a  man  lifted  up  in  c.


2  Kings  8.  11.  lie  settled  his  c.  stedfastly  on  ITazael
Neh.  2.  2.  why  is  thy  c.  sad,  seeing  thou  art  not  sick  ?

3.  why  should  not  my  c.  be  sad,  when  the  city
Job  14.  20.  thou changest  his  c.  andsendest  him  away
29.  24.  and  the  light  of  my  c.  they  cast  not  down
Psal.  4.  6.  Lord,  lift  up  the  light  of  thy  c.  upon  us

10.  4.  the  wicked,  thro’  pride  of  c.  will  not  seek  G.

11.  7.  righteous  Ld.  his  c.  doth  behold  the  upright

21.  6.  thou  hast  made  him  glad  with  thy  c.

42.  5.  I  shall  yet  praise  him  for  the  help  of  his  c.
11.  who  is  the  healtli  of  my  c.  and  my  God,  43.  5.
44.  3.  but  the  light  of  thy  c.  did  save  them
80.  16.  they  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  c.

89.  15.  shall  walk,  O  Lord,  in  the  light  of  thy  c.

90.  8.  hast  set  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  thy  e.
Prov.  15.  13.  a  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  c.

16.  15.  in  the  light  of  the  king’s  c.  is  life

25.  23.  so  doth  the  angry  c.  a  backbiting  tongue

27. 17.  so  a  man  sharpeneth  the  c.  of  his  friend
Keel.  7-  3.  by  sadness  of  c.  the  heart  is  made  better
Cant.  2.  14.  let  me  see  thy  c.  thy  c.  is  comely

5.  15.  his  c.  is  as  Lebanon,  excellent  as  cedars
Isa.  3.  t  3.  Lord  doth  take  away  man  eminent  in  c.

9.  the  shew  of  their  c.  doth  witness  against  them
Ezek.  27.  35.  they  shall  be  troubled  in  their  c.
Dan.  5.  6.  then  king’s  c.  was  changed,  and  thoughts
8.  23.  a  king  of  fierce  c.  shall  stand  up
Mat.  6.  16.  be  not  as  the  hypocrites,  or  a  sad  c.

28.  3.  his  c.  was  like  lightning,  Luke  9.  29.

Acts  2.  28.  shalt  make  me  full  of  joy  with  thy  c.

2  Cor.  3. 7.  could  not  behold  Moses  for  glory  of  his  c.
Rev.  1.  16.  and  his  c.  was  as  the  sun  shineth
See  Changed.
COUNTENANCE.

Exod.  23.  3.  nor  shalt  thou  c.  a  poor  man  in  his  cause
COUNTENANCES.

Dan.  1.13.  then  let  our  c.  be  looked  u  pon  before  thee
15.  their  c.  appeared  fairer  and  fatter  in  flesh
COUNTERVAIL.

Esth.  7. 4.  though  enemy  could  not  c.  king’s  damage
COUNTRY.

Gen.  19.  28.  and  lo,  the  smoke  of  the  c.  went  up

24.  4.  but  thou  shalt  go  to  my  c.  and  my  kindred

29.  26.  Laban  said,  it  must  not  be  so  done  in  our  c.
.30.  25.  send  me  away,  that  I  may  go  to  my  c.

.34.  2.  Shechem  the  prince  of  the  c.  saw  her

42.  .33.  the  man,  the  Lord  of  the  c.  said  unto  us
Nnm.  15. 13.  all  born  in  the  c.  shall  do  these  things
32.4.  the  c.  which  the  Lord  smoto  before  Israel
Deut.  26.  .3.  I  am  come  into  the  c.  L.  sware  to  give
Josh.  2.  2.  there  came  men  to  search  out  the  c.  .3.

7-  2.  Joshua  sent,  saying,  go  up  and  view  the  c.
Judg.  11.  21.  Israel  possessed  the  land  of  that  c.

16.  24.  our  enemy  and  the  destroyer  of  our  c.
Ruth  1.  2.  and  they  came  into  the  c.  of  Moab
22.  who  returned  out  of  the  c.  of  Moab
2  Sum.  15.  2.3.  all  thy  c.  wept  with  aloud  voice

21. 14.  bones  of  Saul  buried  they  in  c.  of  Benjamin

1  Kings  20.  27.  but  the  Syrians  filled  the  c.

2  Kings  3.  20.  and  the  c.  was  filled  with  water
Isa.l .7.your  c.  is  desolate,  your  cities  burnt  with  fire

20.  16.  the  inhabitants  of  this  c.  shall  say

22. 18.  he  will  toss  thee  like  a  ball  in  a  large  c.

Jer.  22. 10.  he  shall  not  return,  nor  see  his  native  c.

31. 8.  behold  I  will  bring  them  from  the  north  c.
48.  21.  and  judgment  is  come  upon  the  plain  c.

50.  9.  cause  an  assembly  to  come  from  the  north  c.

51.  t  49.  at  Babylon  fall  the  slain  of  all  the  c
Ezek.  20.  38.  I  will  brine  them  forth  out  of  the  c.

25.  9.  glory  of  the  c.  Bethjeshi-moth,  Baal-meon
47.  22.  they  shall  be  to  you  as  bom  in  the  c.

Jonah  4.  2.  my  saving,  when  1  was  yet  in  my  c.
Mic.  1.  +  11.  the  inhabitant  of  c.  of  flocks  came  not
Mat.  9.  31.  they  spread  abroad  his  tame  in  all  that  c.
Mark  5. 10.  that  he  would  not  send  them  out  of  c.

14.  told  it  in  the  city,  and  in  the  c.  Luke  8.  .34.
Luke  15.  15.  he  joined  himself  to  a  citizen  of  that  c.
Acts  12.  20.  because  their  c.  was  nourished  byr  k.’s  c.

27.  27.  shipmen  deemed  they  drew  near  to  some  c.
Heb.  11.9.  sojourned  in  land  of  prom,  as  in  strange  c.

14.  they  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a  c.

15.  and  truly  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that  c.

16.  now  they  desire  a  better  c.  that  is  an  heavenly

Far  COUNTRY.

Josh.  9.  6.  they  said,  we  be  come  from  a  far  c.  9.

1  Kings  8.  41.  out  ofa  far  c.  for  thy  sake,  2  Chr.  6.  32.

2  Kings  20. 14.  Ilezekiah  said,  they  are  come  from

a  far  c.  even  from  Babylon,  Isa.  39.  3.
Prov.  25.  25.  so  is  good  news  from  a  far  c.

Isa.  13.  5.  from  a  far  c.  to  destroy  the  whole  land

46. 11.  man  that  executeth  my  counsel  from  far  c.
Jer.  4. 16.  publish,  that  watchers  come  from  a  far  c.
8.  19.  because  of  them  that  dwell  in  a  far  c.
Mat.H.  33.  househd.  went  into  'Afar  c.  Markli.l.

25. 14.  kingd.  of  heaven  is  as  a  mantrav.  into  far  c.
Luke  15. 13.  younger  son  took  his  iourney  into  fare.

Own  COUNTRY.

Lev.  16. 29.  whether  one  of  your  0.  c.  17- 15.  \  24. 22.
1  Kings  10. 13.  she  turned  and  went  to  her  own  c.
11.  21.  let  me  depart,  that  I  may  go  to  my  own  c.

22.  .36.  a  proclamation  every  man  to  his  own  c.
Jer.  51.  9.  let  us  go  every  one  into  hisoww  c.

Mat.  2.  12.  they  departed  into  their  own  c.

13.  57-  save  in  his  own  c.  Mark  6.  4.  Luke  4.  24.
Mark  6. 1.  he  went  thence  and  came  into  his  own  c.
John  4.  44.  a  prophet  hath  no  honour  in  his  own  c.
Thy  COUNTRY.

Gen.  12.  1.  Abram,  get  thee  out  of  thy  c.  Acts  I.  3.
.32.  9.  return  to  thy  c.  and  to  thy  kind.  I  will  deal
Nvm.  20.  17.  let  us  pass,  I  pray  thee,  thro’  thy  c.
.Kmah  1. 8.  what  is  thy  c.  1  of  what  people  art  thou  ?
Luke  4. 23.  heard  done  in  Capern.  do  here  in  thy  c.
COUNTRY  VILLAGES.

1  Sam.  6.  18.  both  of  fenced  cities  and  c.  villages

COUNTRYMEN.

2  Cor.  11. 26.  in  journeying,  in  perils  by  mine  own  c.

1  Thess.  2. 14.  ye  have  suffered  like  things  of  your  c.

COUNTRIES.

Gen.  26.  3.  to  thee  and  thy  seed  will  I  give  these  c.  4.
41.  57.  all  c.  came  into  Egypt  to  Joseph  to  buy  corn

2  Kings  18.  35.  who  among  all  c.  that  have  delivered
1  Chr.  22. 5.  house  of  tame  and  glory-  throughout  c.


2  Chron.  20.  29.  the  fear  of  God  was  on  all  those  r.
Ezra  3.3.  tearon  them,  because  of  people  of  those  c.
4.  20.  mighty  kings  who  have  ruled  over  all  c.
Psal.  1 10.  6.  he  shall  wound  the  heads  over  many  c.
Isa.  8.9.  and  give  ear  all  ye  of  far  c.  gird  yourselves
Jer,  23.  3.  I  will  gather  the  remnant  of  my  flock  out
of  all  c.  and  bring  them  again,  8.  I  .32.  37.

28.  8.  the  prophets  prophesied  against  many  c.
Ezek.  5.  5.  I  have  set  Jerusalem  in  midst  of  the  c.

6.  she  hath  changed  my  statutes  more  than  the  c.
6.  8.  when  ye  shall  be  scattered  through  the  c.

11. 16.  tho’  1  have  scattered  them  among  the  c.  yet
1  will  be  to  them  as  a  little  sanctuary  in  the  c.

17.  I  will  assemble  you  out  of  the  c.  20.  34,  41.
22.  4.  1  have  made  thee  a  mocking  to  all  c.

25.  7. 1  will  cause  thee  to  perish  out  of  the  c.

29.  12.  I  will  disperse  them  through  the  c.  .36.  19.
35.  10.  thou  hast  said,  these  two  c.  shall  be  mine

Dan.  11.  40.  he  shall  enter  into  the  c.  and  overflow

41.  many  c.  shall  beoverthrown,  butthese  escape

42.  he  shall  stretch  forth  his  hand  upon  the  c.
Zech.  10. 9.  and  they-  shall  remember  me  in  tar  c.
Luke  21.  21.  let  not  them  that  are  m  the  c.  enter

COUPLE.

2  Sam.  13.  6.  let  Tamar  make  me  ac.  of  cakes
16.  1.  Ziba  met  David  with  a  c.  of  asses  saddled
Isa.  21. 7-  he  saw  achariot  with  a  c.  of  horsemen,  9.
COUPLE,  Kerb.

Exod.  26.  6.  thou  shalt  c.  the  curtains  with  taches,  9.

11.  shalt  make  taches  to  c.  tent  together.  36.  18.
39.  4.  made  shoulder-pieces  to  c.  ephod  together

COUPLED,  ETI1.

Exod.  26.  3.  the  five  curtains  be  c.  .36.  10,  1.3,  16.

10.  in  the  edge  of  the  curtain  which  c.  the  second
24.  the  two  boards  shall  be  c.  together,  36.  29.

39.  4.  by-  the  two  edges  was  it  c.  together

1  Pet.  3.  2.  your  chaste  conversation  c.  with  fear

COUPLING.

Exod.  26.  4.  make  loops  from  selvedge  in  c.  36.  11.
4.  likewise  make  in  c.  of  the  second,  36.  11,  12.
10.  one  curtain  that  is  outmost  in  the  c.  36.  17.

28.  27-  over-against  the  other  c.  thereof,  39.  20.

COUPLINGS.

2  Chr.  34. 11.  to  buy  hewn  stone  and  timber  for  c.

COURAGE.

Josh.  2. 11.  nor  did  there  remain  any  more  c.  in  any
2  Chron.  15.8.  he  took  c.  and  put  away  the  idols

19.  til.  take  c.  and  do,  and  Lord  be  with  the  good
Isa.  44.  1 14.  which  he  taketh  c.  for  himself
Dan.  11.  25.  shall  stir  up  his  c.  ag.  king  of  south
Acts  28. 15.  when  Paul  saw  thanked  God,  took  c.

Good  COURAGE.  .

Num.  13. 20.  be  ye  of  good  c.  and  bring  the  fruit
Deut.  31.  6.  be  strong,  and  of  good  c.  fear  not,  7. 2.3.

Josh.  1. 6,  9, 18.  I  10.  25. 1  Chron.  22. 13.  |  28.  20.
2  Sam.  10.  12.  be  of  good  c.  let  us  play  the  men,
1  Chron.  19. 13.  Ezra  10.  4.  Isa.  41.  6.
Psal.  27. 14.  wait  on  Lord,  be  of  good  c.  and  he  shall
strengthen  thine  heart,  wait  on  Lord,  31.  24.
COURAGEOUS.

Josh.  1.  7-  be  thou  strong  and  c.  23.  6.  2  Chr.  32.  7.
2  Sam.  13.  28.  fear  not,  bee.  and  be  valiant
Amos  2. 16.  he  that  is  c.  among  migh.  shall  flee  away
COURAGEOUSLY.

2  Chr.  19. 11.  deal  c.  and  I,,  shall  be  with  the  good
COURSE

Signifies,  [1]  That  race  which  is  prescribed  vs  tu
run  and  follow,  2  Tim.  4.  7-  [2]  Order  or  turn,
2  Chron.  5.  11.  [3]  Manner  or  way,  Eph.  2.  2.
[4]  Progress  and  success,  2  Thess.  3.  1 .  [5]  A

voyage,  Acts 21.  7.  [6]  The  gospel-ministry,  Acts

1.3.  25.

1  Chron.  27.  1.  the  chief  fathers  of  every  c.  24,000.

2  Chron.  5.  11.  the  priests  did  not  then  wait  by  c.
Ezra  3.  11.  they  sung  together  by  c.  in  praising
Psal.  82.  5.  all  the  foundations  of  earth  are  out  of  c.
Jer.  8.  6.  every  one  turned  to  his  c.  as  the  horse

2.3.  10.  their  c.  is  evil,  and  their  force  is  not  right
Luke  1.  5.  Zacharias  was  of  the  c.  of  Abiah
8-  while  he  executed  in  the  order, of  hisc.

Acts  13.  25.  and  as  John  fulfilled  his  c.  he  said

16, 11.  came  with  straight  c.  to  Sainothracia,  21. 1.

20.  24.  that  1  might  finish  my  c.  with  joy^

21.  7-  when  we  had  finished  our  c.  from  Tyre

1  Cor.  14.  27.  or  at  most  by-  three,  and  that  by;  c.

2  Thess.  3.  1.  that  word  of  the  Lord  may  have  free  c.
2  Tim.  4.  7- 1  have  finished  my  c.  kept  the  faith
Jam.  3.  6.  the  tongue  setteth  on  fire  thee,  of  nature

Water-Course.  See  Water.
COURSES.

Judg.  5.20.  the  stars  in  their  c.  fought  against  Sisera

1  Chron.  23.  6.  David  divided  the  Levites  into  c.

2  Chron. 8.14.  Solomon  appointed  the  c.  of  the  priests

2.3.  8.  for  Jehoiada  the  priest  dismissed  not  the  c.
31. 2.  Ilezekiah  appointed  the  c.  of  thepriests

35.  10.  and  the  Levites  stood  in  their  c.

Ezra  6. 18.  they  set  the  Levites  in  their  c.  for  service
COURT,

In  Hebrew  Chazer,  is  an  entrance  into  a  palace  or
house ,  Esth.  6.  4,  5.  The  great  courts  belonging
to  the  temple  were  three  ;  the  first  called  the  court
of  the  Gentiles,  because  the  Gentiles  were  allow¬
ed  to  enter  so  far,  and  no  farther.  The  second
called  the  court  of  Israel,  because  all  the  Israel¬
ites,  if  purified,  had  a  right  of  admission.  The
third  court  teas  that  of  the  Priests,  where  the
altar  of  burnt  offerings  stood,  and  where  the
Priests  and  Levites  exercised  their  ministry.  It
signifies  the  church  of  Christ,  Zech.  3.  7-  Also
the  false  church.  Rev.  11.  2.

Exod.  27. 9.  thou  shalt  make  the  c.  of  the  tabern.
shall  be  hangings  for  the  c.  .35. 17- 1  38.  9.  1  39.  40.

12.  breadth  of  the  c.  13.  ||  18.  length  of  the  c.

19.  all  the  pins  of  the  c.  35. 18.  ||  38.  20,  31.

40.  8.  and  thou  shalt  set  up  the  c.  round  about
Lev.  6. 16.  in  the  c.  of  the  tabernacle  shall  eat  it,  26
2  Sapi.  17-  18.  a  man  which  had  a  well  in  his  c

2  Kings 20.  4.  afore  Isaiah  was  gone  into  middle  c.

2  Chron.  20.  5.  Jehoshaphat  stood  before  the  new  c.
24.21.  they  stoned  Zechariah  in  c.  of  Lord’s  house

29.  16.  brought  out  the  uncleanness  into  the  c.
Esth.  5. 1.  Esther  stood  in  the  inner  c.  of  king’s  house

e  2  83


C  RE


ORE


Esth.  0.  4.  and  the  king  said,  who  is  in  the  c.  ?

5.  servants  said,  behold  llaman  standeth  in  the  c.
Isa.  34.  13.  habitation  of  dragons,  and  a  c.  tor  owls
35.  t  7.  shall  be  a  c.  for  reeds  and  rushes
Jer.  19. 14.  Jeremiah  stood  in  the  c.  of  Lord’s  house
26.  2.  stand  in  the  c.  of  the  Lord's  house  and  speak
32!  2.  and  Jeremiah  the  prophet  was  shut  up  in  the
c.  of  the  prison,  33. 1.  I  39. 15.

38. 6.  they  cast  Jeremiah  into  the  dungeon  in  the  c.
Ezek.  8.  7.  he  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  c.  16.

10.  3.  the  man  went  in,  the  cloud  tilled  the  inner  c.

40.  if.  he  brought  me  into  outward  c.  42. 1. 1  46.  21.
28.  he  brought  me  to  the  inner  c.  and  measured
43.  5.  the  Spirit  brought  me  into  the  inner  c .

45. 19.  put  blood  upon  the  gate  of  the  inner  c.

46.  21.  in  evei'v  corner  of  the  c.  there  was  a  c.

Amos  7.  13.  king’s  chapel,  and  it  is  the  kings  c.

Acts  16  t  19.  they  drew  Paul  and  Silas  into  the  c.

17.  f  22.  Paul  stood  in  midst  of  c .  of  the  Areopagites
19.  t  38.  the  c.  days  are  kept,  there  are  deputies
Phil.  1.  + 13.  my  bonds  are  manifest  in  Caesar’s  c.
Ren  'll  2.  the  c.  without  the  temple,  leave  out
CO U  Ill’S.

2  Kings  21. 5.  Manasseh  built  altars  tor  all  the  host
of  heaven  in  the  two  c.  2  Chron.  33. 5.
23.  12.  altars  ir.  the  two  c.  Josiah  brake  down
L  Chron.  23.  28.  their  office  was  to  wait  in  the  c.

28.6.  Solomon  shall  build  my  house  and  my  c.

12.  David  gave  Solomon  the  pattern  of  the  c.

2  Chron.  23.  5.  all  the  people  shall  be  in  the  c.

Psal.  65.4.  approach  to  thee,  that  he  dwell  in  thy  c.

84.  2.  mv  soul  fainteth  for  the  c.  of  the  Lord
92. 13.  they  shall  flourish  in  the  c.  of  our  God
96.  8.  bring  an  offering  and  come  into  his  c.

100.  4.  enter  into  his  c.  with  praise,  be  thankful  to
116.  19.  pay  my  vows  in  the  c.  of  the  Lord’s  house
135.  2.  ye  that  stand  in  the  r.  of  the  house  ot  God
Isa.  1.  12.  who  hath  required  this  to  tread  my  c.  ?

62.  9.  they  shall  drink  it  in  the  c.  of  my  holiness
Ezek.  9.  7.  and  till  the  c.  with  the  slain,  go  ye  forth
Zech.  3.7.  thou  shalt  judge  my  house,  and  keep  my  c
Luket.  25.  they  that  live  delicately  are  in  king  s  c.
COURTEOUS.

1  Pet.  3.8.  love  as  brethren,  be  pitiful,  be  c.
COURTEOUSLY.

Acts  27.  3.  Julius  c.  entreated  Paul  and  gave  liberty
n8  7.  Publius  received  us  and  lodged  us  3  days  c.
COURTIER.

John  4.  +  46.  there  was  a  certain  c.  whose  son  was
COUSIN.

Luke  1.  36.  thy  c.  Elisabeth  hath  conceived  a  son
COUSINS.

Luke  1 .  58.  her  neighbours  and  c.  heard  how  L.
COW.

Lev.  22. 28.  whether  c.  or  ewe,  ye  shall  not  kill  it
Hum.  18.  17.  fi.'stling  of  a  c.  thou  shalt  not  redeem
Job  21.  10.  ffieir  c.  calveth,  and  casteth  not  her  calf
Isa.  7. 21 .  a  man  nourish  a  young  c.  and  two  sheep

11. 7.  and  the  c.  and  the  bear  shall  teed,  lioneat
Ezek.  4.  15.  I  have  given  thee  c.  dung  for  man’s
Amos  4.  3.  every  c.  at  that  which  is  before  her
CRACKLING.

Eccl.  7.  6.  as  c.  of  thorns  under  a  pot,  so  is  laughter
CRACKNELS.

1  Kings  14.  3.  take  with  thee  ten  loaves  and  c.

CRAFT.

Dan.  8.  25.  thro’  his  policy  shall  cause  c.  to  prosper
Mark  14.  1.  take  him  by  c.  and  put  him  to  death
Acts  18.  3.  because  he  was  of  the  same  c.  abode  with
19.  25.  ye  know  that  by  this  c.  we  have  wealth
27.  so  that  not  only  this  our  c.  is  in  danger
Rev  18.  22.  no  craftsman,  of  whatsoever  c.  he  be
CRAFTILY.

ntdg.  9.  t  31.  he  sent  messengers  to  Abimelech  c.
CRAFTINESS.

Job  5. 13.  he  taketh  the  wise  in  their  c.  1  Cor.  3. 19.
Luke  20.  23.  but  he  perceived  their  c.  and  said
'2  Cor.  4.  2.  not  walking  in  c.  nor  handling  the  word
Evh.  4.  14.  we  be  no  more  carried  by  cunning  c.
CRAFTY.

Job  5.  12.  he  disappointed!  the  devices  of  the  c.

15.  5.  and  thou  choosestthe  tongue  of  the  c.

Psal.  83.  3.  have  taken  c.  counsel  against  thy  people
Cor.  12.  16.  being  c.  I  caught  you  with  guile
CRAFTSMAN.

Lent.  27. 15.  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  c.

Pei.  18.  22.  no  c.  shall  be  found  any  more  in  thee
CRAFTSMEN.

2  Kings  24. 14.  carried  away  all  the  c.  and  smiths,  16.

1  Chron.  4.  14.  of  Charashim,  for  they  were  c.

'Neh.  11. 35.  Lod  and  Ono,  the  valley  of  c.

Hos.  13.  2.  molten  images,  all  of  it  the  work  of  c.
Acts  19.24.  Demetrius  brought  no  small  gain  toe.
38.  if  the  c.  have  a  matter  against  any'  man
CRAG.

Job  39.  28.  the  eagle  abideth  on  the  c.  of  the  rock
CRANE.

Isa.  38.  14.  like  a  c.  or  swallow  so  did  I  chatter
Jer.  8.  7.  c.  and  swallow  observe  the  time  of  coming
CRASHING.

Zevh.  1.  10.  there  shall  be  a  great  c.  from  the  hills
CRAVED.

Mark  15. 43.  Joseph  went  in,  and  c.  the  body  of  Jesus
CRAVETH.

Prov.  16.  26.  labours  for  himself,  his  mouth  c.  it
CREATE

Signifies,  [1]  To  make  out  of  nothing,  to  bring  being
out  of  non- entity ,  Gen.  1.1.  [2]  To  change  the
form,  state,  and  situation  of  matter,  which  is
wholly  indisposed  for  such  a  change,  and  requires
as  great  power  as  to  make  out  of  nothing,  Gen.
1.  21.  1  2.  19.  [3]  To  give  and  work  grace  where
it  is  not,  Eph.  2.  10.  [4]  To  cleanse  the  heart

more  and  more  from  its  natural  corruption  by  the
power  of  sanctifying  grace,  Psal.  51.  10.

Num.  16.  +30. but  if  the  Lord  c.  a  creature
Psal.  51. 10  c.  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God,  renew
Isa.  4.  5.  c.  on  every  dwelling  place  of  Zion  a  cloud
45.  7.  I  form  the  lisht  and  c.  darkness,  I  c.  evil
57.  19.  I  c.  the  fruit  of  the  lips,  peace  to  him
65.  17.  behold,  I  c.  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth
18.  be  glad  and  rejoice  for  ever  in  that  which  I  c.

84


CREATED.

Gen.  1. 1.  in  the  beginning  God  c.  heaven  and  earth
21.  God  c.  great  whales  and  every  living  creature

27.  so  God  c.  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the  image

of  God,  male  and  female  c.  he  them,  5. 2.

2.  3.  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all  he  c.  and  made
6.  7.  Lord  said,  I  will  destroy  man  whom  I  have  c.
Dent.  4.  32.  since  the  day  God  c.  man  on  the  earth
Psal.  89. 12.  the  north  and  south  thou  hast  c.  them
102. 18.  people  which  shall  be  c.  shall  praise  Lord
104.  30.  thou  sendest  forth  thy  Spirit,  they  are  c.

148.  5.  for  he  commanded,  and  they  were  c.

Isa.  40.  26.  behold  who  hath  c.  these  things

41.  20.  and  the  holy  One  of  Israel  hath  c.  it

42.  5.  saith  the  T/)rd,  he  that  c.  the  heavens

43. 1.  the  L.  that  c.  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  formed  thee

7.  have  c.  him  for  my  glory,  yea,  1  have  made  him
45.  8.  let  the  earth  open,  1  the  Lord  ha\  e  c.  it

12.  I  have  made  the  earth,  and  c.  man  upon  it
18.  he  hath  established  it,  he  c.  it  not  in  vain
48.  7.  they  are  c.  now,  and  not  from  the  beginning
54. 16.  I  have  r.  the  smith,  l  have  c.  the  waster
Jer.  31. 22.  for  the  Lord  hath  c.  a  new  thing  in  earth
Ezek.  21.  30. 1  will  judge  thee  where  thou  wast  c.

28.  13.  prepared  in  the  dav  that  thou  wast  c.

15.  wast  perfect  from  the  day  that  thou  wast  c.

Mai.  2. 10.  ha 'e  one  father,  hath  not  one  God  c.  us  ?
Mark  13. 19.  from  beginning  of  creat.  which  God  c.

1  Cor.  11.9.  neither  was  the  man  c.  for  the  woman
Eph  2. 10.  we  are  his  workmanship  c.  in  Christ  Jesus

3.  9.  hid  in  God,  who  c.  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ

4.  24.  the  new  man,  after  God  c.  in  rightepusness
Col.  1. 16.  for  by  him  were  all  things  c.  in  heaven

all  things  were  c.  by  him,  and  for  him
3  10.  new  man  after  the  image  of  him  that  c.  him

1  Tim.  4.  3.  from  meats,  which  God  c.  to  be  received
Rev.  4.  11.  thou  art  worthy,  for  thou  hast  c.  all

things,  and  for  thy  pleasure  they  are,  and  were  c.
10  6  whoc.  heaven  and  the  things  that  therein  are
CREATETH.
dmos  4. 13.  he  that  c.  the  wind,  the  Lord  is  his  name
CREATION.

Mark.  10. 6.  from  the  c.  God  made  male  and  female

13. 19.  as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the  c.
Rom.  1 .  20.  things  of  him  from  the  c.  are  clearly  seen

8.  22.  for  we  know  that  the  whole  c.  groaneth

2  Pet.  3.  4.  things  continue  as  they  were  Irom  the  c
Rev.  3. 14.  the  Amen,  the  beginning  of  the  c.  of  God

•  CREATOR.

Eccl.  12. 1.  remember  thy  c.  in  the  days  of  thy  youth
Isa.  40.  28.  the  Lord,  the  c.  of  the  ends  of  the  earth

43. 15.  I  am  the  Lord,  the  c.  of  Israel,  your  king
Rom.  1 . 25.  who  served  the  creature  more  than  the  c.

1  Pet.  4  19.  to  him  in  well-doing  as  to  a  faithful  c.

CREATURE.

Gen.  1.  20.  let  waters  bring  forth  the  moving  c.
Lev.  11.  46.  this  is  the  law  of  every  c.  that  moveth
Num.  16.  t  30.  if  the  Lord  create  a  new  c.

Mark  16. 15.  preach  the  gospel  to  every  c.  Col.  1.  23
Rom  .  8. 19.  the  earnest  expectation  of  the  c.  waiteth

20.  for  the  c.  was  made  subject  to  vanity

21.  the  c.  shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage

+  22.  that  every  c.  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain
39.  nor  any  c.  shall  be  able  to  separate  us

2  Cor.  5. 17.  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  c.
Gal.  6. 15.  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  c.

Col.  1. 15.  who  is  the  first-born  of  every  c.

1  Tim.  4.  4.  for  every  c.  of  God  is  good,  if  it  be
Heb.  4. 13.  nor  is  there  any  c.  that  is  not  manifest
Rev. 5. 13.  every  c.in  heaven  heard  T,  saying, blessing
Living  CREATURE.

Gen.  1.  21.  and  God  created  every  living  c.  _

24.  God  said,  letthe  earth  bring  forth  the  living  c.

2. 19.  whatsoever  Adam  called  every  living  c.

9. 10.  establish  my  covenant  with  every  living  c.

12.  the  token  between  me  and  every  living  c.  15.
Lev.  11.  46.  the  law  of  every  living  c.  that  moveth
Ezek.  1. 20.  ,V'iritof//»t»0'  c.  was  within,  21.  I  10. 17-

10. 15.  the  living  c.  that  I  saw  by  river  Chebar,  20.

CREATURES.

Isa.  13.  21.  their  houses  shall  be  full  of  doleful  c.
Jam.  1. 18.  should  be  a  kind  of  first-fruits  of  his  c
Rev.  8.  9.  a  third  part  of  the  c.  in  the  sea  died
Living  CREATURES.

Ezek.  1.  5.  came  the  likeness  of  four  living  c.

13.  it  went  up  and  down  among  the  living  c.

14.  living  c.  ran,  and  returned  as  lightning

15.  as  I  beheld  living  c.  one  wheel  by  living  c.
19.  when  the  living  c.  went,  the  wheels  went

3. 13.  I  heard  noise  of  the  wings  of  the  living  c.
CREDITOR.

Deut.  15.  2.  every  c.  that  lendeth  shall  release  it

1  Sam.  22.  +  2.  every  one  that  had  a  c.  went  to  David

2  Kings  4. 1.  c.  is  come  to  take  my  two  sons  bond
4.  +7.  he  said,  go,  sell  the  oil,  and  pay  the  c.

Luke!  AY.  there  was  a  certain  c.  who  had  two  debtors
CREDITORS.

Isa.  50.  1.  to  which  of  my  c.  have  I  sold  you
CREEK,  S.

Judg.  5.  +  17.  Asher  continued  on  the  c.  and  abode
Acts  27.  39.  they  discovered  a  certain  c.  with  a  shore
CREEP.

Lev.  11.  31.  these  are  unci,  to  you  among  all  that  c
Psal.  104.  20.  all  the  beasts  of  the  forest  do  c.  forth
2  Tim.  3.  6.  of  this  sort  are  they  who  c.  into  houses
CREEP  ETH.

Gen.  1 . 25.  G .  made  every  thing  that  c.  on  earth ,  26.

+  28.  have  dominion  over  every  liv.  thing  that  c.
30.  have  given  to  every  thing  that  c.  herb  for

7.  8.  every  thing  that  c.  went  in  two  and  two,  14.

21 .  all  flesh  died  of  every  tiling  that  c.  on  earth

8.  17.  bring  forth  with  thee  everything  that  c.

19.  whatsoever  c.  on  the  earth  went  out  of  ark

Lev.  11. 41.  every  creeping  thing  that  c.  on  the  earth
shall  be  an  abomination,  43,44.  1  20.  25
Deut.  4. 18.  likeness  of  any  thing  that  c.  911  ground
Psal.  69.  +34.  let  every  thing  that  c.  praise  him
CREEPING.

Gen.  1.  +  20.  let  waters  bring  forth  c.  creature
26.  let  them  have  dominion  over  every  r.  thing
7. 14.  e'  ery  c.  thing  after  his  kind  went  into  ark
Lev.  5.2.  touch  the  carcase  of  unclean  c.  things


CRO

Lev.  11. 21.  yet  these  may  ye  eat.  of  every  c.  thing
Gen.  22.  5.  or  whosoever  toucheth  any  c.  thing
Deut.  14. 19.  every  c.  thing  that  flieth  is  unclean
1  Kings  4.  33.  spake  of  beasts,  c.  things,  and  fishes
Psal.  104.  25.  in  the  sea  are  c.  things  innumerable
148.  10.  all  cattle,  c.  things  praise  the  Lord
Ezek.  8.  10.  form  of  c.  things  pourtrayed  on  wall
38.  20.  all  c.  things  shall  shake  at  my  presence
Hos.  2. 18. 1  will  make  a  covenant  with  the  c.  things
Mic.  7.  +  17.  move  out  of  their  holes  like  c.  things
Hab.  1. 14.  and  maketh  men  as  the  c.  things
Acts  10.  12.  Peter  saw  c.  things  and  fowls,  11.  6.
Rom.  1.  23.  into  an  image  made  like  to  c.  things
CREPT.

Jude  4.  for  there  are  certain  men  c.  in  unawares
CREW.

Mat  °6. 74. 1  know  not  the  man,  and  immediately
the  cock  c.  Mark  14.  68.  Luke  22.  60.
Mark  14.  72.  the  second  time  the  cock  c.  John  18.  27.
CR1 B .

Job  39.  9.  will  the  unicorn  abide  by  thy  c.  ?

Prov.  14.  4.  where  no  oxen  are  the  c.  is  clean
Isa.  1.  3.  and  the  ass  knoweth  his  master’s  c.

Cried,  See  after  Cry.

CRIME,  S. .

Job  31. 11.  this  is  an  heinous  c.  yea  it  is  an  iniquity
Ezek.  7.  23.forthe  land  is  full  of  bloody  c.  and  the
Acts  25. 16.  to  answer  concerning  c.  laid  against  him
27.  and  not  to  signify  the  c.  laid  against  him
CRIMSON.  _

Some  think  that  it  is  the  same  with  scarlet ;  others
that  it  is  of  a  deeper  dye. .  In  the  Hebrew  it  is
called  Tolahat  Shani ;  that  is,  the  double  worm,
or  the  worm  Shani ;  as  if  Shani  were  the  proper
name  of  this  worm:  In  the  Arabic  it  is  called,
Kermes,  or  Karmes;  whence  comes  the  word
crimson,  because  they  made  use  of  these  little
worms  to  dye  this  colour.  The  Kermes  is  a  small
round  shell,  membranous,  thin,  smooth,  and
shining ;  of  a  reddish  brown  colour,  mixed  with  a
whitish  ash  colour,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch
diameter ,  generally  divided  into  two  equal  cavities,
the  greatest  of  which  is  full  of  a  vast  number  of
little  oval  eggs,  very  red,  or  vermilion ;  and.  the
smaller  cavity  is  full  of  a  k  nd  of  liquor,  which  is
red  likewise,  and  not  much  different  from  blood.
This  cod,  or  shell,  grows  upon  a  kind  of  green
oak,  that  grows  only  to  the  height  of  a  shrub.
These  shrubs  are  found  in  Palestine,  in  Provence,
in  Languedoc,  in  Spain,  and  elsewhere.  'They
loosen  these  cods,  or  shells,  from  the  leaves  t  o  which
they  are  fastened,  and  the  worms  of  which  they
are  full  come  out  of  the  hole  made  by  taking  them
from  the  leaf ;  they  separate  these  little  animals
from  the  shells  with  a  sieve,  and  put  them  together
by  pressing  them  lightly,  and  make  them  into
balls  of  the  bigness  of  a  pullet's  egg.

2  Chron.  2.  7.  send  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  c.  14.
3.  14.  he  made  the  vail  of  blue,  c.  and  fine  linen
Isa.  1. 18. though  your  sins  be  red  like  c.  they  shall  be
Jer.  4.  30.  though  thou  clothest  thyself  with  c.
CRIPPLE.

Acts  14.  8.  being  a  c.  from  his  mother’s  womb
CRISPING-PINS.

Isa.  3.  22.  Lord  will  take  away  the  mantles  and  c.

CROOK-BACKED.

Lev.  21. 20.  a  man  that  is  c.  shall  not  approach
CROOKED.

Deut.  32. 5.  they  are  a  perverse  and  c.  generation
Juda.  5.  +  6.  the  travellers  walked  through  c.  ways
Job  26. 13.  his  hand  hath  formed  the  c.  serpent
Ps.  125.  5.  as  for  such  as  turn  aside  to  their  c.  ways
Prov.  2. 15.  whose  ways  are  c.  and  they  froward
Eccl.  1. 15.  what  is  c.  cannot  be  made  straight,  7-  13.
Isa.  27. 1.  shall  punish  Leviathan,  thatr.  serpent
40.  4.  c.  shall  be  made  straight,  42. 16.  Luke  3.  5.
45.  2. 1  will  go  and  make  the  c.  places  straight
59.  8.  no  judgment,  they  have  made  them  c.  paths
Lam.  3.  Q.  he  inclosed  ,  he  hath  made  my  paths  c.-
Phil.  2. 15.  the  sons  of  God,  in  midst  ot  a  c.  nation
CROP.

Lev.  1. 16.  shall  pluck  away  his  c.  with  his  feathers
CROP,  Verb.

Ezek.  17.  22.  I  will  c.  off  from  the  top  of  his  twigs
CROPPED.

Ezek.  17.  4.  he  c.  off  the  top  of  his  young  twigs
CROSS.

By  the  word  cross  is  understood  a  gibbet  made  of
two  pieces  of  wood  put  across  ;  whether  they  cross
with  right  angles  at  the  top  as  a  ,  or  in  the  mid¬

dle  of' their  length  like  an  X.  The  cross  was  the
punishment  of  the  vilest  slaves ,  and  was  called  a
servile  punishment:  This  punishment  our  Saviour
underwent,  Mat.  27- 35.  Phil.  2.8.  This  penalty
was  so  common  among  the  Romans,  that  pains,
afflictions,  troubles,  and  unprosperous  affairs  were
called  crosses  ;  and  the  verb  cruciare  was  used
for  all  sorts  of  chastisements,  and  pains  of  body
and  mind.  See  Punishment.

Our  Saviour  says  often  in  his  gospel,  that,  he  who
would  be  his  disciple,  must  take  up  his  cross
and  follow  him,  Mat.  16.  24.  He  must  submit
readily  to  whatsoever  afflictions  God  lays  upon
him,  or  any  suffering  that  befalls  him  in  the
service  of  God,  even  to  death  itself.  Cross  is
taken  for  the  whole  of  Christ's  sufferings,  from
his  birth  to  his  death,  but  especially  those  upon
the  tree,  Eph.  2.  16. 1  leb.  12.  2.  And  for  the  doc-
trine  of  the  (/ospcl ,  that  is,  oj  snlvcztjon  t/nough
Christ  crucified,  1  Cor.  1.  18.  False  teachers,
who  pressed  the  observation  of  the  lau'  of  Moses,
as  necessary  to  salvation,  besides  faith  in  Christ,
are  called  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  Phil.
3.  18.  because  by  such  doctrine  they  did  really  op¬
pose  and  undermine  the  power  and  merit  of  Christ's
passion,  and  sought  to  avoid  persecution,  which
they  would  have  been  exposed  to,  had  they  preached
salvation  only  by_  Christ  crucified,  as  the  apostle
Paul  was.  Gal.  5.  11.

To  crucify,  is  not  on'y  taken  for  putting  to
death  on  a  cross.  Mat.  27.  35.  but  also  ft r
subduing  and  mortifying  sin ;  for  breaking  the


CRO


CRY


strength  and  suppressing  the  motions  and
breakings  out  of  corrupt  nature,  Gal.  5.  24.
1  hey  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh.
Christ's  death  on  the  cross  has  not  only  merited
reconciliation  with  God,  but  is  also  made  ef¬
fectual  to  mortify  and  subdue  the  lusts  of  the
flesh.  Gal.  2. 20.  I  am  crucified  with  Christ.  It
is  said  of  them,  who  for  some  time  have  made
profession  of  religion,  and  afterwards  turn  apos¬
tates,  that  they  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of
God  afresh,  Heb.  6.  6.  that  is,  They  shew  them¬
selves  to  be  of  the  same  opinion  with  those  that
did  crucify  Christ,  and  would  do  it  again,  were
it  in  their  power.

The  apostle  tells  the  Galatians,  that  Jesus  Christ
had  been  evidently  set  forth  crucified  amongr/zcw,
Gal.  3.  1.  They  had  been  as  Jul/y  and  clearly  in¬
formed  of  the  nature  and  design  of  Christ's  suffer¬
ings,  as  if  all  had  been  transacted  in  their  sight.
Mat.  10.  38.  he  that  taketh  not  his  c.  Luke  14.  27-

16.  24.  let  him  deny  himself,  take  up  his  c.  and
follow  me,  Mark  8.  34.  |  10. 21.  Luke  9.  23.
27.  32.  they  found  Simon,  him  they  compelled  to
bear  his  c.  Markl5.  21.  Luke  23.  26.
40.  saying,  if  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down
from  the  c.  42.  Mark  15.  30,  32.
John  19.  17- he  bearing  his  c.  went  forth  to  a  place
19.  Pilate  wrote  a  title,  and  put  it  on  the  c.

25.  there  stood  by  the  c.  of  Jesus  his  mother
31.  bodies  should  not  remain  on  the  c.  on  sabbath
1  Cor.  1.  17.  lest  c.  of  Christ  be  made  of  none  effect
18.  preaching  of  the  c.  is  to  them  foolishness
Gal.  5.  11.  then  is  the  olfence  of  the  c.  ceased
6. 12.  lest  they  suffer  persecution  for  the  c.  of  Chr.
14.  God  forbid  that  l  should  glory,  save  in  the  c.
Eph.  2.  16.  reconcile  both  in  one  body  by  the  c.
Phil.  2.  8.  he  became  obedient  to  the  death  of  the  c.

3. 18.  that  they  are  enemies  of  the  c.  of  Christ
Col.  1.  20.  having  made  peace  thro’  the  blood  of  c.

2. 14.  and  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  c.

Heb.  12. 2.  for  the  joy  set  before  him,  endured  the  c.
CROSS-WAY.

Ob  ad.  14.  nor  should  est  thou  have  stood  in  the  c.
CROUCH.

1  Sam.  2.  36.  shall  come  and  c.  to  him  for  a  piece

CROUCHETH.

Psal.  10.  10.  he  c.  and  humbleth  himself,  that  poor
Crow,  Crowing.  See  Cock.
CROWN

Is  properly  taken  for  a  cap  of  state  worn  on  the  heads
of  sovereign  princes,  1  Chron.  20.  2.  But  in  a
figurative  sense  it  signifies  honour,  splendour,  or
dignity,  Lam.  5.  16.  The  crown  is  fallen  from
our  head.  And  the  apostle  says  of  the  Philip-
pians,  that  they  were  his  joy  and  crown,  Phil.

4.  1.  They  were  his  honour  and  glory,  the  great
ornament  of  his  ministry,  by  means  whereof  they
had  been  converted  to  Christ.  It  is  used  likewise
for  reward,  because  conquerors  in  the  public  games
were  crowned,  1  Cor.  9.  25.  They  do  it  to  obtain
a  corruptible  crown,  but  we  an  incorruptible :
that  is,  the  wrestlers  in  those  games  which  are
practised  among  you,  contend  in  order  to  obtain  a
wreath,  or  garland,  of  flowers,  herbs,  or  leaves,  of
laurel,  olive,  and  the  like;  but  we  Christians  strive
for  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and
that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  us.
St.  John,  speaking  of  Christ  governing  the  affairs
of  his  church,  says,  that  on  his  head  were  many
crowns,  Rev.  19.  12.  noting  his  absolute  sove¬
reignty,  and  many  triumphs.  A  crown  is  a  sign
of  victory,  Rev.  4.  4.

The  high-priest  among  the  Jews  wore  a  crown,  which
girt  about  his  mitre,  or  the  lower  part  of  his  bonnet,
and  was  tied  behind  his  head.  On  the  forepart  was  a
plate  of  gold,  with  these  words  engraven  on  it.  Ho¬
liness  to  the  Lord,  Exod.  28.  36.  I  29.  6.  New
married  men  and  women  wore  crowns  upon  their
wedding-day ,  Cant.  3.  11.  The  spouse  invites  her
companions  to  see  king  Solomon  with  the  crown
wherewith  his  mother  crowned  him  in  the  day  of
his  espousals  ;  and  alluding  to  this  custom,  it  is
said,  Ezek.  16.  12,  that  when  God  entered  into
covenant  with  the  Jewish  nation,  he  put  a  beauti¬
ful  crown  upon  their  head.

Exod.  25.  25.  shalt  make  a  golden  c.  to  the  border

29.  6.  and  put  the  holy  c.  upon  the  mitre

30.  4.  make  golden  rings  to  it  under  the  c.’37.  27-
39.  30.  made  the  plate  of  the  c.  of  pure  gold

Lev.  8.  9.  upon  his  forefront  he  put  the  holy  c.

21.  12.  the  c.  of  the  anointing  oil  is  upon  him

2  Kings  11. 12.  put  the  c.  upon  Joash,  2  Chr.  23.  11.
Esth.  1. 11.  to  bring  Vashti  with  the  c.  royal

Job  31.36.  surely  i  would  bind  it  as  ac.  tome
Psal.  89.  39.  thou  hast  profaned  his  c.  by  casting  it

132. 18.  but  upon  himself  shall  his  c.  flourish
Prov.  4.  9.  a  c.  of  glory  shall  she  deliver  to  thee

12. 4.  a  virtuous  woman  is  a  c.  to  her  husband
14.  24.  the  c.  of  the  wise  is  their  riches

16.  31.  the  hoary  head  is  a  c.  of  glory  if  found  in

17.  6.  children’s  children  are  the  c.  of  old  men
27.  24.  doth  the  c.  endure  to  every  generation  i

Cant.  3.  11.  go  forth,  behold  king  Solomon  with  c.
Isa.  28. 1.  woe  to  the  c.  of  pride,  to  the  drunkards

5.  that  day  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  for  a  c.  of  glory
62. 3.  thou  shalt  also  be  a  c.  of  glory  in  the  hand  of

Jer.  13.  18.  the  c.  of  your  glory  shall  come  down
Ezek.  21.  26.  remove  the  diadem,  take  off  the  c.
Zech.  9. 16.  they  shall  be  as  the  stones  of  a  c.  lifted
John  19.  5.  Jesus  wearing  a  c.  of  thorns,  and  purple
1  Cor.  9.  25.  they  do  it  to  obtain  a  corruptible  c.
Phil.  4.1. dearly  belov.  and  longed  for,  my  joy  and  c.

1  Thess.  2. 19.  for  what  is  our  hope,  or  c.  of  rejoicing

2  Tim.  4.  8.  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  c.  of  righteous.
Jam.  1.  12.  he  shall  receive  c.  of  life  Lord  promised
1  Pet.  5.  4.  ye  shall  receive  a  c.  of  glory  fadeth  not
Rev.  2.  10.  faithful  to  death,  I  will  give  a  c.  of  life
3. 11.  hold  that  fast,  that  no  man  take  thy  c.

6.  2.  a  c.  given  to  him,  and  went  forth  conquering

CROWN  of  gold.

Exod.  25.  11.  thou  shalt  make  upon  it  a  c.  of  gold
round  about,  24. 1  30.  3.  |  37.2, 11,  12,  26.


C  RU

Esth.  8.  15.  Mordecai  went  out  with  a  great  c.

[of  gold

Psal.  21.  3.  thou  settest  ac.  o/pure  gold  on  his  head
CROWN,  with  head.

Gen.  49. 26.  they  shall  be  on  the  c.  of  Joseph’s  head
Deut.  33. 20.  teareth  the  arm  with  the  c.  or  the  head
2  Sam.  1.  10.  I  took  the  c.  that  was  upon  his  head

12.  30.  took  king’s  c.  from  his  head,  1  Chr.  20.  2.
14.  25.  from  the  sole  even  to  c.  of  his  head,  Job  2.  7.
Esth.  2. 17.  the  king  set  the  royal  c.  on  her  head
6.  8.  the  c.  royal  which  is  set  upon  his  head
Job  19.  9.  he  hath  taken  the  c.  from  my  head
Isa.  3. 17.  Lord  will  smite  with  a  scab  the  c.  of  head
Jer.  2.  16.  have  broken  the  c.  of  thy  head

48.  45.  the  c.  of  the  head  of  the  tumultuous  ones
Lam.  5. 16.  the  c.  is  fallen  from  our  head,  woe  to  us
Ezek.  16.  12.  1  put  a  beautiful  c.  on  thine  head
Mat.  27  .  29.  they  platted  a  c.  of  thorns,  and  put  it
on  his  head,  Mark  15.  17.  John  19.  2.
Rev.  12.1.  and  upon  her  head  a  c.  of  twelve  stars

14. 14.  having  on  his  head  a  golden  c.  and  a  sickle

CROWN,  Verb.

Psal.  5.  t  12.  with  favour  wilt  thou  c.  him,  as  with
CROWNED.

Psal.  8.  5.  thou  hast  c.  him  with  glory  and  honour
Prov.  14. 18.  the  prudent  are  c.  witli  knowledge
Cant.  3. 11.  the  crown  wherewith  his  mother  c.  him
Nah.  3.  17.  thy  c.  are  as  locusts,  and  thy  captains
2  Tim.  2.  5.  he  is  not  c.  except  he  strive  lawfully
Heb.  2.  9.  we  see  Jesus  c.  with  glory  and  honour
CROWNEDST.

Ileb.  2.  7.  thou  c.  him  with  glory  and  honour
CROWN  ES  I  .

Psal.  65.  11.  thou  c.  the  year  with  thy  goodness
CROWN  ETH.

Psal.  103.  4.  who  c.  thee  with  loving-kindness
CROWNING.

Isa.  23. 8.  taken  counsel  against  Tyre  the  c.  city
CROWNS.

1  Chron.  2.  f  54.  the  c.  of  the  house  of  Joab
Ezek.  23.  42.  which  put  beautiful  c.  on  their  heads
Zech.  6. 11.  make  c.  ||  14.  the  c.  shall  be  to  Helem
Rev.  4.  4.  the  elders  had  on  their  heads  c .  of  gold

10.  and  they  cast  their  c.  before  the  throne,  saying
9.  7-  on  the  locusts’  heads  were  c.  like  gold

12.  3.  a  red  dragon  having  seven  c.  on  his  heads

13.  1.  a  beast  rise  up,  having  upon  his  horns  ten  c.
19. 12.  and  on  his  head  were  many  c.

CRUCIFY.

Mat.  20.  19.  shall  deliver  him  to  Gentiles  to  c.  him
23.34.  some  of  them  ye  shall  kill,  and  c.and  scourge

27.  31.  they  led  him  away  to  c.  him,  Mark  15. 20.
Mark  15. 13.  and  they  cried  out  again,  c.  him,  14.

27.  and  with  him  they  c.  two  thieves,  the  one
Luke  23.  21.  they  cried,  c.  him,  c.  him,  John  19.  6,15.
Heb.  6.6.  they  c.  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh
CRUCIFIED.

Mat.  26.2.  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be  c.  Luke  24.7.
27-  22.  they  all  said  unto  him,  let  him  be  c.  23.

26.  Pilate  delivered  him  to  be  c.  John  19.  16.

35.  c .  him  and  parted  his  garments,  John  19.  23.
38.  then  were  there  two  thieves  c.  with  him,  44.

Mark  15.  32.  Luke  23.  33.  John  19.  18.

28.  5.  I  know  ye  seek  Jesus  who  was  c.  Mark  IQ.  Q.
John  19.  20.  for  the  place  where  Jesus  was  c.  41.
Acts  2.  23.  by  wicked  hands  ye  have  c.  and  slain

36.  made  Jesus,  whom  ye  c.  Lord  and  C.  4.  10.
Rom.  6.  6.  knowing  that  our  old  man  is  c.  with  him

1  Cor.  1. 13.  is  Christ  divided  ?  was  Paul  c.  for  you  i
23.  we  preach  C.  c.  unto  the  Jews  a  stumbling

2.  2.  know  any  thing,  save  Jesus  C.  and  him  c.

8.  they  would  not  have  c.  the  Lord  of  glory

2  Cor.  13.  4.  for  tho’  he  was  c.  through  weakness, yet
Gal.  2. 20. 1  am  c.  with  Christ,  nevertheless,  I  live

3.  1.  Christ  hath  been  set  forth,  c.  among  you

5.  24.  they  that  are  Christ’s  have  c.  the  flesh  with

6. 14.  by  whom  the  world  is  c.  to  me,  I  to  world
Rev.  11. 8.  and  Egypt,  where  also  our  Lord  wasc.

CRUEL.

Gen.  49.  7 •  cursed  be  their  wrath,  for  it  was  c.
Exod.  6.  9.  but  they  hearkened  not  for  c.  bondage
Deut.  32.  33.  their  wine  is  the  c.  venom  of  asps
Job  30.  21.  thou  art  become  c.  to  me,  thou  opposest
Psal.  25.  19.  mine  enemies  hate  me  with  c.  hatred
71.  4.  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  c.  man
Prov.  5. 9.  lest  thou  give  thy  years  to  the  c.

11.  17.  but  he  that  is  c.  troubleth  his  own  flesh
12. 10.  but  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  c.
17-  11.  a  c.  messenger  shall  be  sent  against  him

27.  4.  wrath  is  c.  ||  Cant.  8.  6.  jealousy  is  c.

Isa.  13.  9.  behold,  the  day  of  the  Lora  cometh,  c.
19.  4.  the  Egyptians  will  I  give  over  to  a  c.  lord
Jer.  6.  23.  they  are  c.  and  have  no  mercy,  50.  42.

30. 14.  wounded  with  chastisement  of  ac.  one
Lam.  4.  3.  the  daughter  of  my  people  is  become  c.
Heb.  11.  36.  others  had  trial  of  c.  mockings

CRUELLY.

Ezek.  18. 18.  because  he  c.  oppressed,  he  shall  die
CRUELTY.

Gen.  49. 5.  instruments  of  c.  are  in  their  habitations
Judg.  9.  24.  the  c.  done  to  the  sons  of  Jerubbaal
Psal.  27.  12.  such  as  breathe  out  c.  are  risen  up
74. 20.  dark  places  are  full  of  the  habitations  of  c.
Prov.  27.  +  4.  wrath  is  c.  anger  is  outrageous
Ezek.  34. 4.  with  force  and  c.  have  ye  ruled  them
CRUMBS.

Mat.  15.  27-  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  c.  which  fall
from  their  master’s  table,  Mark  7.  28.
Luke  16.  21.  to  be  fed  with  c.  which  fell  from  rich
CRUSE.

1  Sam.  26. 11.  take  spear  and  c.  of  water  let  us  go

12.  so  David  took  the  spear  and  the  c.  16.

1  Kings  14.  3.  take  with  thee  a  c.  of  honey  and  go

17.  12.  she  said,  I  have  but  a  little  oil  in  a  c.

14.  nor  c.  of  oil  fail,  till  the  Lord  send  rain,  16.
19.  6.  Elijah  had  a  c.  of  water  at  his  head

2  Kings  2. 20.  bring  me  a  new  c.  and  put  salt  therein

CRUSH.

Job  39. 15.  ostrich  forgetteth  her  foot  may  c.  them
Lam.  1.15.  assembly  against  me  to  c.  my  young  men
3.  34.  to  c.  under  his  feet  all  the  prisoners  of  earth
Amos  4.  1.  ye  kineof  Bashan  which  c.  the  needy


CRUSHED,  CRUSHT.

Lev.  22.  24.  ye  shall  not  offer  to  the  Lord  what  is  c.
Num.  22.  25.  the  ass  c.  Balaam’s  foot  against  wall
Deut.  28.  33.  shalt  be  only  oppressed  and  c.  alway
Judg.  10. +8.  the  Philistines  c.  the  children  of  Isr.
2  Chr.  16. 1 10.  Asa  c.  some  of  the  people  same  time
Job  4.  19.  in  the  dust,  which  are  c.  before  the  moth
5.  4.  his  children  far  from  safety  are  c.  in  the  gate
20.  +  19.  because  he  hath  c.  and  forsaken  the  poor

34.  t  25.  he  overturneth  them,  so  that  they  are  c.
Isa.  59.  5.  that  which  is  c.  breaketh  out  into  a  viper
Jer.  51.  34.  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  hath  c.  me
CRY

Is  taken  for  a  loud  extending  of  the  voice,  Eccl.  9.
17-  Mat.  21.  15.  Also  for  weeping,  mourning,
and  lamentation,  Exod.  11.  6.1  12.  30.  In  the
Psalms,  and  elsewhere,  it  is  often  put  for  fervent
and  earnest  prayer,  either  with  the  voice,  or  in  the
heart  only,  Psal.  17.  1.  Attend  unto  my  cry.
Exod.  14.  15.  God  says  to  Moses,  Wherefore
criest  thou  unto  me  ?  Though  as  yet  Moses  had
said  nothing.  To  cry,  likewise  signifies,  to  call
to  God  for  vengeance,  Gen.  4. 10.  Sins  are  said  to
cry,  when  they  are  gross,  manifest,  and  impudent,
and  such  as  highly  provoke  God  to  anger  ;  thus  the
cry  of  the  sins  and  irregularities  of  Sodom  as¬
cended  up  to  heaven ,  and  called  for  vengeance
Gen.  18. 20.  I  looked  for  righteousness,  but  behold
a  cry,  Isa.  5.7.  The  cry  of  the  oppressed,  pray¬
ing  for  help  from  men,  and  vengeance  from  God
upon  their  oppressors.  The  prophets ,  by  prosopo-
peias,  frequently  make  beasts,  trees,  mountains,
lands,  and  cities,  to  speak.  The  young  ravens  cry,
and  speak  their  wants  to  God  after  their  manner.
Psal.  147.  9.  See  Isa.  15.  4.  1  34.  14.  Joel  1.  20.
Gen.  18.  21.  according  to  the  c.  which  is  come  up
Exod.  2.  23.  and  their  c.  came  up  unto  God,  3.  9.
3.  7.  I  have  heard  their  c.  1  know  their  sorrows
Num.  16.  34.  and  all  Israel  fled  at  the  c.  of  them
Judg.  4. 1 13.  Sisera  gathered  by  c.  all  his  chariots

1  Sam.  5.  12.  the  c.  of  the  city  went  up  to  heaven
9.  16.  because  their  c.  is  come  up  unto  me

2  Sam.  22.  7-  and  my  c.  did  enter  into  his  ears

1  Kings  8.  28.  to  hearken  to  the  c.  and  to  the  prayer

which  thy  servant  prayeth,  2  Chron.  6.  19
Neh.  5.  6.  1  was  angry  when  1  heard  their  c.

9.  9.  thou  heardest  their  c.  by  the  Red  sea
Esth.  4.  1.  Mordecai  cried  with  aloud  and  bitter  c
9.  31.  the  matters  of  their  fastings  and  their  c.

Job  16. 18.  O  earth,  let  my  c.  have  no  place
34.  28.  so  that  they  cause  the  c.  of  the  poor  to  come
to  him,  he  heareth  the  c.  of  the  afflicted
Psal.  5. 2.  hearken  to  voice  of  my  c.  my  King,  my  G.
9.  12.  he  forgetteth  not  the  c.  of  the  numble

17. 1.  hear  the  right,  O  Lord,  attend  unto  my  c.

18.  6.  my  c.  came  before  him,  even  into  his  ears

34.  15.  and  his  ears  are  open  to  their  c.

39.  12.  hear  my  prayer,  O  Lord,  give  ear  to  my  c.

40.  1.  he  inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  c.

88.  2.  God  of  my  salv.  incline  thine  ear  unto  my  c.
102.  1.  hear,  O  Lord,  and  let  my  c.  come  unto  thee
106.  44.  he  regarded,  when  he  heard  their  c.

119.  169.  let  my  c.  come  near  before  thee,  O  Lord
142.  6.  attend  to  my  c.  1  am  brought  very  low
Prov.  21.  13.  who  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  c.  of  poor
Eccl.  9-  17-  more  than  the  c.  of  him  that  ruleth
Isa.  5.  7.  he  looked  for  righteousness,  behold  a  c.
15.  5.  they  shall  raise  up  a  c.  of  destruction
8.  the  c.  is  gone  round  about  the  borders  of  Moab
30.  19.  he  will  be  gracious  at  the  voice  of  thy  c.
43.  14.  the  Chaldeans,  whose  c.  is  in  the  ships
Jer.  7- 16.  nor  lift  up  c.  nor  prayer  for  them,  11. 14
8.  19.  behold  the  voice  of  the  c.  of  my  people
14.  2.  and  the  c.  of  Jerusalem  is  gone  up

18.  22.  let  a  c.  be  heard  from  their  houses
25.  36.  the  c.  of  the  shepherds  shall  be  heard
46.  12.  and  thy  c.  hath  filled  the  land

48.  4.  her  little  ones  have  caused  a  c.  to  be  heard
5.  the  enemies  have  heard  a  c.  of  destruction

49.  21.  the  earth  is  moved  at  the  c.  of  Edom

50.  46.  the  c.  is  heard  at  the  taking  of  Babylon

51.  54.  a  sound  of  a  c.  cometh  from  Babylon
Lam.  3.  56.  hast  heard,  hide  not  thine  ear  at  my  c.
Ezek.  27.  28.  the  suburbs  shake  at  the  c.  of  pilots
Zeph.  1.  10.  there  shall  be  a  c.  from  the  fish  gate
Mat.  25.  6.  at  midnight  there  was  a  c.  made,  behold

Great  CRY.

Gen.  18.  20.  because  the  c.  of  Sodom  is  great,  19. 13.
27.  34.  Esau  cried  with  a  great  and  bitter  c.

Exod.  11.  6.  there  shall  be  a  great  c.  through  Egypt
12.  30.  Pharaoh  rose,  there  was  a. great  c.  in  Egypt
Neh.  5.  1.  was  great  c.  of  the  people  and  their  wives
Acts  23.  9.  when  he  so  said,  there  arose  a  great  c.
Hear  CRY.

Exod.  22.  23.  if  they  c.  I  will  surely  hear  their  c.
Job  27.  9.  will  Goa  hear  his  c.  when  trouble  comes
Psal.  61.  1.  hear  my  c.  O  God,  attend  to  my  prayer
145.  19.  he  also  will  hear  their  c.  and  save  them
Jer.  20.  16.  let  him  hear  the  c.  in  the  morning
Not  hear  CRY.

Jer.  14.  12.  when  they  fast,  1  will  not  hear  their  c.

CRIES.

Jam.  5.  4.  the  c.  of  them  that  reaped  are  entered
CRY,  Verb.

Exod.  5.8.  for  they  are  idle,  therefore  they  c.

22.  23.  if  thou  afflict  them,  and  they  c.  unto  me
32.  18.  neither  is  it  the  voice  of  them  that  c.

Lev.  13.  45.  shall  cover  his  upper  lip,  and  c.  unclean
Judg.  10.  14.  go  c.  to  the  goefs  ye  have  chosen

2  Sam.  19.  28.  what  right  have  1  yet  to  c.  to  the  king
2  Kings  8.  3.  she  went  to  c.  for  her  house  and  land
2  Chron.  20.  9.  and  c.  in  our  affliction,  thou  wil  t  hear
Job  30.  20.  1  c.  unto  thee,  and  thou  dost  not  hear

24.  though  they  c.  in  his  destruction

35.  9.  they  make  the  oppressed  to  c.  they  c.  out
12.  there  they  c.  but  none  giveth  answer,  because

36.  13.  they  c.  not  when  he  bindeth  them

38. 41.  when  his  young  ones  c.  to  God,  they  wander
Psal.  22.  2.  I  c.  in  the  day  time,  thou  hearest  not
27-7.  hear,  O  Lord,  when  I  c.  with  my  voice,  28.  2.

28. 1.  to  thee  will  I  c.  O  Lord,  my  rock,  2.

34. 17.  the  righteous  c.  and  the  Lord  heareth

85


C  R1


C  R  Y


CLP


Psa  56. 9,  when  I  <\ then  shall  tfline  enemies  turn  back
r>7  2.  1  will  c.  to  Clod  most  high,  that  pertorineth
61 . 2*.  from  the  end  of  the  earth  will  t  c.  unto  thee
86.  3!  be  merciful  to  me,  O  Lord,  for  1  c.  to  thee
89!  26.  he  shall  c.  unto  me.  thou  art  my  rather
141.  1.  Lord,  1  c.  unto  thee,  make  haste  unto  me
1 47*  9 ’he  giveth  food  to  young  ravens  which  e.

I'rov  8.  1.  doth  not  wisdom  c.  and  understanding

21.  13.  he  also  shall  c.  but  shall  not  be  heard
].\a.  8.  4.  before  the  child  shall  know  tar.  my  father

10  +  30.  c.  shrill  with  thy  voice,  O  dan  in.  or  Oral  Inn

13.  22.  the  wild  beasts  of  the  island  snail  r.

14  31  c.  O  city,  thou  Palestina,  art  dissolved
15!  4.  and  lleshbon  shall  c.  and  Elealeh

33.  7.  behold  their  valiant  ones  shall  r.  without

34.  14.  and  the  satyr  shall  c.  to  his  tellow
-10.  2.  c.  to  Jerusalem,  her  warfare  accomp  ished

6  the  voice  said,  c.  and  he  said,  what  shall  If.  .

40  2.  he  shall  not  c.  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard
13~’he  shall  c.  yea,  prevail  against  his  enemies
14*  now  will  l  c.  like  a  travailing  woman
46.  7.  one  shall  c.  to  him,  yet  can  he  not  answer
58.  9.  thou  slialt  c.  and  he  shall  say ,  here  1  am
65. 14.  but  ye  shall  c.  for  sorrow  ot  heart,  and  how  1
Jer  2.  2.  go  and  c.  in  the  ears  of  Jerusalem

3.  4.  wilt  thou  not  from  this  time  c.  unto  me

4.  5.  blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  the  land,  c.  gather
11. 11.  though  they  c.  to  me,  1  will  not  hearken

12.  c.  to  the  gods  to  whom  they  offer  incelrse

14.  for  1  will  not  hear  when  they  c.  Ezek.  8. 18.

22.  20.  go  up  to  Lebanon,  and  c.  from  the  passages

25. ’  34.  howl  ye  shepherds  and  c.  48. 20.  Ezek.  21 . 12.
31.  6.  the  watchmen  on  mount  Ephraim  shall  c.

Lam  3.  8.  when  1  c .  and  shout,  he  shutteth  out  my
Ezek.  9.  4.  that  c.  for  all  the  abominations  done  in
24. 17.  forbear  to  c.  make  no  mourning  for  dead

26.  15.  the  isles  shake,  when  the  wounded  c.

27.  30.  and  they  shall  c.  bitterly  for  Tyrus

I {as.  8.  2.  Israel  shall  c.  unto  me,  we  know  thee
Joel  1.  19-  O  Lord,  to  thee  wil1  l  c.  for  the  fire
20.  the  beasts  of  the  field  c.  also  unto  thee
Jonah  3.  8.  let  man  and  beast  c.  mightily  unto  God
Mic.  3.  5.  prophets  bite  with  their  teeth,  and  c.  peace
Nah.  2.  8.  stand,  shall  they  c.  but  none  look  back
Zeph.  1. 14.  the  mighty  men  shall  c.  bitterly
Zecli.  1.  14.  the  angel  said  unto  me,  c.  thou,  saying
Mat.  12. 19.  he  shall  not  strive,  nor  c.  nor  shal  I  any
Luke  18. 7 .  shall  not  God  avenge  his  elect,  who  c.  d ay
Rom.  8. 15.  the  Spirit,  whereby  we  c.  Abba,  Father
Gal.  4.  27.  break  forth  and  c.  thou  that  travailest  not
CRY  against.

Dent.  15. 9.  and  he  c.  to  the  Lord  against  thee,  24. 15.

2  Citron.  13. 12.  his  priests  to  c.  alarm  against  you
Job  31.  38.  if  my  land  c.  against  me,  or  the  furrows
Jonah  1.  2.  arise,  go  to  IS  ineveh,  and  c.  against  it
CRY  aloud.

1  Kings  18.  27.  Elijah  said,  c.  aloud,  for  he  is  a  god
Job  19.7.  1  c.  aloud ,  but  there  is  no  judgment
Psal.  55. 17.  at  noon  will  1  pray  and  c.  aloud
Isa.  24. 14.  they  shall  c.  aloud  from  the  sea

54. 1.  sing,  break  forth  into  singing,  and  c.  aloud

58. 1 .  c.  aloud,  spare  not,  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a
Jios.  5.  8.  trumpet  in  Ramah,  c.  aloud  at  Beth-aven
Mic.  4.  9.  why  dost  thou  c.  aloud  ?  is  there  no  king

CRY  to  the  Lord.

1  Sam.  7.  8.  cease  not  to  e .  unto  the  Lord  for  us
Psal.  107. 19.  they  c.  to  the  Lord  in  trouble,  28.

Isa.  19. 20.  they  shall  c.  to  Ld.  because  of  oppressors
Joel  1. 14.  sanctify  ye  a  fast,  and  c.  to  the  Lord
Mic.  3.  4.  shall  c~ to  the  Lord,  but  he  will  not  hear
CRY  out.

1  Sam.  2.  +  24.  ye  make  the  Lord’s  people  to  c.  out
4. 1 19.  Phinehas’  wife  was  with  child,  near  to  c.  out
8. 18.  ye  shall  c.  out  that  day,  because  of  your  k.
Job  19. 7. 1  c.  out  of  wrong,  but  I  am  not  heard

35.  9.  they  c.  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  ot  mighty
Isa.  12.  6.  c.  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion
15.4.  the  armed  soldiers  of  Moab  shall  c.  out

5.  my  heart  shall  c.  out  for  Moab,  his  fugitives

29.  9.  stay  yourselves  and  wonder,  c.  out  and  cry

Jer.  48.  31.  I  will  howl  and  c.  out  for  all  Moab
Lam.  2.  19.  arise,  c.  out  in  the  night,  in  the  watches
Amos  3.  4.  will  a  young  lionc.  out  of  his  den  ?
liab.  1. 2.  I  c.  out  to  thee,  but  thou  wilt  not  save

2.  11.  for  the  stone  shall  c.  out  of  the  wall
Mark  10.  47.  he  began  to  c.  out  and  say,  have  mercy
Luke  19.  40.  the  stones  would  immediately  c.  out

CRIED.

Gen.  27.  34.  Esau  c.  with  a  great  and  bitter  cry
39.  15.  he  heard  that  1  lifted  up  my  voice  and  c.
41.  43.  and  they  c.  before  him,  bow  the  knee
55.  people  c.  to  Pharaoh  for  bread,  go  to  Joseph
45.  1.  he  c.  cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me
Exod.  5.  15.  the  officers  came  and  c.  to  Pharaoh
Num.  11.  2.  the  people  c.  to  Moses,  and  he  prayed
Deut.  22.  24.  stone  them,  the  damsel,  bee.  she  c.  not
27.  the  damsel  c.  and  there  was  none  to  save  her
Judg.  5.  28.  Sisera’s  mother  c.  through  the  lattice

7.  21.  and  all  the  host  ran  and  c.  and  tied

10.  12.  and  ye  c.  tome,  and  I  delivered  you

15.  t  19.  called  the  name  the  well  of  him  that  c.

1  Sam.  14. 1 20.  Saul  and  the  people  were  e.  together

17.  8.  he  stood  and  c.  to  the  armies  of  Israel
20.  37.  Jonathan  c.  after  the  lad,  and  said,  38.

2  Sam.  20. 16.  then  c.  a  wise  woman  out  of  the  city
22.  7.  I  c.  to  my  God,  and  he  did  hear  my  voice

1  Kings  13.  2.  he  c.  ag.  the  altar  in  Beth-el,  4.  32.

18.  28.  and  they  c.  aloud,  and  cut  themselves

2  Kings'll.  12.  Elisha  saw  it,  and  c.  my  father,  my

3.  t  21.  all  the  Moabites  were  c.  together

6.  5.  he  c.  alas,  master,  for  it  was  borrowed

8.  5.  the  woman  c.  to  the  king  for  her  house

11.  14.  and  Athaliah  c.  treason,  treason


Psal.  22.  24.  but  when  he  c.  unto  him  he  heard
30. 2.  O  Lord  my  God,  1  c.  to  thee,  and  hast  healed
8.  1  c-  to  thee,  O  Lord,  and  made  supplication
31 . 22.  heardest  my  supplications  when  I  c.  to  thee
34.  6.  this  poor  man  c.  and  the  Lord  heard  him
66!  17.  1  c.  unto  him  with  my  mouth,  77.  L
88  1  O  Lord,  l  have  c.  day  and  night  before  thee
13.  unto  thee  have  1  c.  O  Lord,  in  the  morning
119.  145.  I  c.  with  my  whole  heart,  hear  me
130. 1.  out  of  the  depths  have  I  c.  to  thee,  O  Lord
138.  3.  in  the  day  when  1  c.  thou  answeredst  me
Isa.  6.  4.  the  posts  moved  at  the  voice  of  him  that  c.

30. 7.  therefore  1  c.  concerning  this,  their  strength
Jer.  4.  20.  destruction  upon  destruction  is  c.  tor  land
12. 1 6.  thy  brethren  c.  after  thee  fully
Ezek.  9. 8.  that  1  fell  on  my  face  and  c.  and  said
'10. 13.  it  was  c.  to  them  in  my  hearing,  O  wheel
I) an  6  20.  he  c.  with  a  lamentable  voice,  O  ban.
Bos'. 7. 14.  they  have  not  c.  to  me  with  then;  heart
Jonah  1.5.  the  mariners  c.  every  man  to  Ins  god
o  a  1  c  by  reason  of  mine  affliction,  to  the  I  ord,
and  he  heard  me  ;  out  of  the  belly  of  hell  c.  1
Zecli.  7. 13.  that  as  he  c.  and  they  would  not  hear,  so
they  c.  and  I  would  not  hear,  saith  L.  ot  hosts
Mat.  14.  30.  Peter  c.  saying,  Lord,  save  me
on  31  but  they  c.  the  more,  saying,  have  mercy  on
us,  O  Lord,  Mark  10.  48.  Luke  18.  39.
Mark  9.  26.  the  spirit  c.  and  rent  him  sore
John  7.  37.  Jesus  c.  if  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come
Acts  19.  32.  some  c.  one  thing,  some  another,  21 . 34.
°2  24  might  know  wheref.  they  c.  so  against  him
ll7v  10  3.  when  he  c.  seven  thunders  uttered  voices
12.  2.  and  she  being  with  child,  c.  travailing  in
14  18.  c.  with  a  loud  cry  to  him  that  had  sickle
18  2.  he  c.  mightily  with  a  strong  voice,  saying

18.  v.  when  they  saw  the  smoke  of  her  burning

19.  they  c.  weeping  and  wailing  saying,  alas,  alas

CRI  ED  ro  the  Lord.

Ex.  8.  12.  Moses  c.  to  L.  15. 25. 1  17  4.  Num.  12. 13.
14. 10.  lsr.  c.  to  L.  Judy.  3.9, 15.  |  4.  3.  1  6-7-  1 10.10.
Num.  20. 1 6.  when  we  c.  to  L.  he  heard ,  Deut.  26.7.
Josh  24  7.  when  they  c.  to  the  L.  he  put  darkness

1  Sam. 7.  9.  Sam.  c.  to  L.  15.  11.  ||  1  Kings  17.  20.

Elijah,  21.

2  Kings 20. 11.  Tsa.  c.  to  L.  2  Chr.  14. 11 .  Asac.  to  L.
2  Chr.  13. 14.  they  c.  to  L.  Ps.  107-  6, 13.  Jon.  1. 14.
Psal.  3.  4. 1  c.  to  L.  with  my  voice,  120. 1.  1  142. 1.
Lam.  2. 18.  their  heart  c.  to  L.  O  daughter  ot  Zion

CRIED  with  a  loud  voice.

1  Sam.  28. 12.  woman  at  En-dor  c.  with  a  loud  voice

2  Sam.  19. 4.  David  c.with  loudvoice.O  Absalom, my
2  Kings  18.28.  Rabshakehc.  with  l.  v.  Isa.  36. 13.
Neh.  9. 4.  Lev.  c.  with  l.  v.  ||  Ezek.  11. 13.  Ezek.  c.
Mat.21.A6.  about  ninth  hour  Jesus  c.with  a/,  voice,

50.  Mark  15.  34,  37-  Luke 23.  46.  Join,  11.  43.
Mark  1.  26.  evil  spir.  c.  with  l.  v.  ||  Acts  16.28.Paul  c.
Acts! .57.  Steph.  enemies  c.  with  l .  v.  II 60.  Steph.  c.
Rev.  6. 10.  they  c.  with  loud  v.  saying,  how  long,  O


1C.


1  Chron.  5.  20.  they  c.  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  he


2  Cliron.  32.20.  Isaiah  prayed  and  c.  to  heaven
Neh.  9.  27.  when  they  c.  to  thee  thou  heardest,  28.
Joo  17  +  14.  I  have  c.  to  corruption,  my  father
29. 12.  because  !  delivered  the  poorthatc.

30.  5.  they  c.  after  them,  as  after  a  thief
Psal.  18.  6.  in  my  distress  1  e.  unto  my  God


41.  they  c.  but  there  was  none  to  save  them
22.  5.  thev  c.  to  thee  and  were  delivered
86


the  angel  c.  with  a  loud  voice,  10.  3.  1 19.  If .
mult,  stood  before  Lamb  c.  with  a  loud  voice
CRIED  out.

1  Sam.  4. 13.  all  the  city  c.  out  ||  5. 10.  Ekronites  c.ont

1  Kings  22.  32.  Jehoshaphat  c.  out,  2  Chron.  18.  31.

2  Kings  4. 40.  they  c.  out ,  there  is  death  in  the  pot
Jer.  20.  8.  I  c.  out,  1  cried,  violence  and  spoil
Mat.  8.  29.  behold,  the  spirits  c.  out,  Luke  4.  33.

14.  26.  the  disciples  c.  out  for  fear,  Mark  6.  49.

20.  30.  the  blind  men  c.  out,  have  mercy  upon  us
Mark  1.  23.  the  man  with  an  unclean  spirit  c.  out
9.  24.  the  father  of  the  child  c.  out,  Luke  9.  38.

15. 13.  and  they  c.  out  again,  crucify  him,  Mat.  27.

23.  Luke  23.  18.  John  19.  6.
Acts  19.  28.  they  c.  out,  saying,  great  is  Diana,  34.

22.  23.  as  they  c.  out,  and  threw  dust  in  the  air

23.  6.  Paul  c.  out  in  the  council,  1  am  a  Pharisee

CRI  EST,  ETH.

Gen.  4. 10.  the  voice  of  thy  brother’s  blood  c.  to  me
Exod.  14. 15.  wherefore  c.  thou  to  me  ?  speak  to
22.  27.  when  he  c.  unto  me,  that  1  will  hear
1  Sam.  26. 14.  who  art  thou  that  c.  to  the  king  ?

Job  24. 12.  and  the  soul  of  the  wounded  c.  out
Psal.  72. 12.  he  shall  deliver  the  needy  when  he  c.

84.  2.  my  heart  and  flesh  c.  out  for  the  living  God
Prov.  1.  20.  wisdom  c.  without,  8.  3.  I  9.  3.

2.  3.  yea,  if  thou  c.  after  knowledge,  and  liftest
Isa.  26.  17.  like  as  a  woman  thatr.  out  in  her  pangs
40.  3.  the  voice  0”  him  that  c.  in  the  wilderness

57. 13.  when  thou  c.  let  companies  deliver  thee
Jer.  12. 8.  my  heritage  c.  out  against  me

30. 15.  why  c.  thou  for  thine  affliction  ?

Mic.  6.  9.  Lord’s  voice  c.  to  the  city,  hear  the  rod
Mat.  15.  23.  send  her  away,  for  she  c.  after  us
Luke  9.  39.  he  suddenly  c.  out,  and  it  teareth  him
Rom.  9.  27.  Esaias  also  c.  concerning  Israel,  though
Jam.  5. 4.  behold,  the  hire  of  the  labourers  c.

CRY  ENG.

1  Sam.  4.  14.  when  Eli  heard  the  noise  of  the  c.

2  Sam.  13.  19.  Tamar  put  ashes,  and  went  on  c.
Job  39.  7.  nor  regardeth  lie  the  c.  of  the  driver
Prov.  19. 18.  and  let  not  thy  soul  spare  for  his  c.

30. 15.  the  horse-leech  hath  two  daughters  c.  give
Isa.  22.  5.  it  is  a  day  of  c.  to  the  mountains

24. 11.  there  is  a  c.  for  wine  in  the  streets
65. 19.  voice  of  c.  shall  be  no  more  heard  in  her
Jer.  48.  3.  a  voice  of  c.  shall  be  from  IIoronaim_
Lech.  4.  7.  shall  bring  forth  the  head-stone  with'c.
Mai.  2. 13.  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  c.
Mat.  3.  3.  voice  of  one  c.  in  the  wilderness,  prepare,
Mark 1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  23.

21. 15.  and  saw  the  children  c.  in  the  temple
Luke  4.  41.  devils  c.  thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  God
Acts  8. 7-  for  unclean  spirits  c.  came  out  of  many

14.  14.  they  ran  in  among  the  people,  c.  out
21 .  28.  laid  hands  on  him ,  c.  out,  men  ot  1  srael
36.  the  multitude  followed,  c.  away  with  him
Gal.  4. 6.  Spirit  into  your  hearts,  c.  Abba  Father
lieb.  5.  7.  he  offered  up  prayers  with  strong  c.
Rev.  21. 4.  there  will  be  no  more  death  nor  c.
CRYSTAL.

Job  28. 17.  the  gold  and  the  c.  cannot  equal  it
Ezek.  1.  22.  firmament  was  as  colour  of  terrible
Rev.  4.  6.  there  was  a  sea  of  glass  like  unto  c.


c.


Rev.  21. 11.  the  light  of  the  great  city  was  clear  asr.

2°.  1.  a  pure  river  of  water  ot  life,  clear  as  c.

CUBIT

Is  the  distance  from  the  elbow _  bending  inwards  to
the  extremity  of  the  middle  finger :  this  is  called
a  common  cubit,  the  cubit  of  a  man,  containing  a
foot  and  a  half,  or  half  a  yard,  Deut.  3. 11.  1  here
is  likewise  the  sacred  cubit,  which  is  a  full  yard,
and  contains  two  common  cubits.  There  is  men¬
tion  made  of  both  these  sorts  of  cubits,  in  1  K  mgs
».  15.  and  2  Chron.  3.  15.  In  the  former  the
two  columns  of  brass  which  were  in  Solomon's
temple,  are  said  to  be  eighteen  cubits  high;  and
in  the  Chronicles,  thirty-five  cubits ;  which  is
double  the  other.  Some  are  of  opinion,  that  the
cubit  which  Noah  made  use  of  when  he  built  the
ark,  was  equal  to  six  common  cubits;  they  call
this  a  geometrical  cubit.

Gen.  6.  16.  in  a  c.  shalt  thou  finish  the  ark  above
Deut.  3.  11.  the  breadth  of  it,  after  the  c.  ot  a  man

1  Kings  7.  24.  the  knops  compassing  it,  ten  in  ar.

2  Chron.  4.  3.  ten  in  a  c.  compassing  the  sea  about
Ezek.  43.  13.  the  c.  is  a  c .  and  an  hand-breadth
Mat.  6.  27.  can  add  one  r.  to  his  stature,  Luke  12.  25.

CUBITS.

Gen.  6. 15.  length  of  the  ark  300  c.  breadth  50  c.

°0  fifteen  c.  upward  did  the  waters  prevail
Exod.  25. 10.  two  c.  and  a  half  tire  length  of  the  ark
Sam.  17.  4.  Goliath’s  height  six  c.  and  a  span
Kings  6.  2.  length  of  the  house  60  c.  breadth  20.

23.  each  of  the  cherubims  was  ten  c.  high

7.  38.  and  every  laver  was  four  c.  high
Kings  14. 13.  Jehoash  brake  down  the  wall  of  Je¬
rusalem,  400  c.  2  Chron.  25.  23.
Ezra  6.  3.  the  height  60  c.  the  breadth  60  c.

Ksth.  5. 14.  let  a  gallows  be  made  fifty  c.  high, 7. 9.

E-> ek  40.  23.  he  measured  from  gate  to  gate  100  c.

47.  the  court  100  c.  ||  43.  17-  the  settle  14  c.

41 . 2.  and  the  breadth  of  the  door  was  ten  c.

9.  the  thickness  of  the  wall  was  five  c.

43.  16.  and  the  altar  shall  be  twelve  c.  long
Dan.  3.  1 .  the  height  of  the  image  was  60  c.

Zecli.  5.  2.  the  length  of  the  fiymg  roll  is  20  c.

John  21.  8.  they  were  from  land  as  it  were  200  c.

Rev.  21. 17.  II‘e  measured  the  wall  of  the  city  144  e.
CUCKOW.

Lev.  11. 16.  c.  have  in  abomination,  Deut.  14.  15.
CUCUMBERS.

Num.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  c.  and  the  melons
Isa.  1. 8.  Zion  is  left  as  a  lodge  in  a  garden  ot  c.

Cud;  see  C  h  e  w  and  Cheweth.
CUMBERED.

Luke  10.  40.  Martha  was  c.  about  much  serving
CUMBERETH.

Luke  13.  7.  cut  it  down,  why  c.  it  the  ground  ?

CUM  BRAIN  CE.

Deut.  1.  12.  how  can  I  myself  alone  bear  your  ?
CUMMLN.

Isa.  28.  25.  doth  he  not  scatter  the  c.  and  cast  in
27.  nor  is  a  cart-wheel  turned  about  upon  the  c.

but  the  c.  is  beaten  out  with  a  rod
Mat.  23.  23.  woe  to  you  scribes,  ye  pay  tithe  of  c.
CURBING.

Gen.  25. 27.  the  boys  grew,  and  Esau  was  a  c.  hunter
Exod.  26.  1.  with  cherubims  of  c.  work,  36.  8.

28.  15.  thou  shalt  make  the  breastplate  of  c.  work

31.  4.  to  devise  c.  works  in  gold  and  silver

38.  23.  Aholiab  a  c.  workman  and  embroiderer

39.  8.  he  made  the  breast-plate  of  c.  work

1  Sam.  16. 16.  a  man  who  is  a  c.  player  on  an  harp
18.  I  have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse  that  is  c.  in  playing

1  Chron.  25.7.  all  that  were  c.  in  songs,  were  288

2  Chron.  2.1.  send  me  a  man  c.  to  work  in  gold
13.  1  have  sent  a  c.  man  of  1  luram  my  father's

Psal.  58. 15.  nothearken,  be  the  charmer  never  so  c.
137. 5.  if  I  forget,  let  my  right  hand  torget  her  c.
Prov.  19. 1  25.  and  the  simple  will  be  c.

Cant.  7.  1.  thy  joints,  the  work  of  a  c.  workman
Isa.  3.  3.  I  will  take  away  the  c.  artificer

40.  20.  he  seeketh  to  him  a  c.  workman  to  prepare
Jer.  9.  17.  send  for  c.  women  that  they  may  come

10.  9.  they  are  all  the  work  of  c.  men
Dan.  1.  4.  children  well  favoured,  c.  in  knowledge
Bos.  6.  +  8.  Gilead  is  a  city  c.  for  blood
Evh  4. 14. and  carried  about  by  0.  craftiness,  whereby
CUNNINGLY.

0  Pet.  1. 16.  we  have  not  followed  c.  devised  fables
CUP.  .  1

This  word  is  taken  in  Scripture  in  a  proper  and  in
a  figurative  sense.  In  a  proper  sense  it  signifies  a
material  cup,  which  people  drink  out  of  at  meals,
Gen.  40.13.  In  the  figurative  sense  it  is  taken.
Cl)  For  the  wine  in  the  cup,  1  Cor.  11.  27.  (2)
For  those  sufferings  and  afflictions  which  God
sends  upon  a  person  or  people  :  To  drink  of  this  cup,
signifies  to  undergo  and  endure  those  sufferings  :
Isa.  51.  17.  Stand  up,  O  Jerusalem,  which  hast
drunk  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord  the  cup  of  his  fury.
Psal.  15.  8.  In  the  hand  of  the  Lord  there  is  a
cup,  the  dregs  thereof  all  the  wicked  of  the  earth
shall  wring  them  out,  and  drink  them.  In  these
and  the  like  passages  God  is  compared  to  the  mas¬
ter  of  a  feast,  who  then  used  to  distribute  portions
of  meats  or  drinks  to  the  several  guests,  as  he
thought  fit.  Gv.r  Saviour  prays.  Mat.  26.  39.  Let
this  cup  pass  from  me.  Let  me  be  freed  from
these  sufferings  both  in  my  soul  and  body  :  And
he  tells  his  disciples,  Mat.  20.  23.  1  hat  they

should  indeed  drink  of  his  cup ;  that  is.  They-
should  taste  of  inward  afflictions  and  desertions,
and  have  their  share  of  outward  sufferings  for  the-
gospel,  as  well  as  himself.  (3)  For  God's  blessings
and  favours,  Psal.  23.  5.

Babylon  is  called  a  golden  cup,  Jer.  51.  7.  because
of  her  great  riches  and  plenty.  And  it  is  said
of  the  woman  arrayed  in  purple,  or  of  the  anti-
christian  church,  that  she  had  a  golden  cup  in
her  hand.  Rev.  17-  4.  which  may  denote  the  en¬
ticing  means,  and  specious  pretences,  which  she
uses  to  allure  people  to  idolatry,  particularly  bg
sensuality,  luxury,  and  affluence.
will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  Psal.  116.  13.  r


T


CUR


CUR


CUT


vill  offer  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  unto  God.
It  denotes  jog  and  thanksgiving,  and  is  a  phrase
aken  from  the  common  practice  of  the  Jews  in
their  thank  offerings,  in  which  a  feast  was  made
of  the  rematnaer  of  their  sacrifices,  and  the  offer¬
ers,  together  with  the  priest,  did  eat  and  drink
before  the  Lord  :  and,  among  other  rites,  the  master
oj  the  feast  took  a  cup  of  wine  into  his  hand,  and
solemnly  blessed  God  for  it,  and  for  the  mercy
which  was  then  acknowledged ;  and  then  gave  it
to  all  the  guests,  of  which  every  one  did  drink  in
his  turn,  1  Chron.  16.  2,  3.  To  which  custom  it
is  siipposed  that  our  blessed  Lord  alludes  in  the
institution  of  the  cup,  which  also  is  called  the  cup
of  blessing,  1  Cor.  10. 16.

Gen.  40. 11.  and  Pharaoh’s  c.  was  in  mine  hand
44.  2.  put  my  c.  the  silver  c.  in  the  sack’s  mouth
2  Sam.  12.  3.  it  drank  ofhisown  c.  and  lay  in  bosom
1  Kings’!.  26.  wrought  like  brim  of  a  c.  2  Chr.  4.  5.
Psal.  11.  6.  this  shall  be  the  portion  of  their  c.

16.  5.  the  Lord  is  the  portion  of  my  c.  thou

!  23. 5.  thou  anointest  my  head,  my  c.  runneth  over
7-3.  10.  waters  of  a  full  c.  are  wrung  out  to  them
75.  8.  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  c.

116. 13. 1  will  take  the  c.  of  salvation  and  call  on
•Prov.  23.  31.  when  it  giveth  its  colour  in  the  c.

Isa.  51.  17-  which  hast  drunk  at  the  hand  of  the
Lord  the  c.  the  dregs  of  the  c.  of  trembling
:  22.  taken  out  of  thy  hand  the  c.  of  trembling
Jer.  16. 7-  nor  shall  men  give  them  c.  of  consolation

25.  15.  take  the  wine-c.  of  his  fury  at  my  hand
17-  then  took  I  the  c.  at  the  Lord’s  hand

28.  if  they  refuse  to  take  thee,  at  thine  hand
49. 12.  whose  judgment  was  not  to  drink  the  c.

51.  7.  Babylon  hath  been  a  golden  c.  in  the  hand
,  Lam.  4.  21.  the  c.  also  shall  pass  through  to  thee
Ezek.  23.  31.  I  will  give  her  c.  into  thine  hand
32.  thoushalt  drink  of  thy  sister’s  c.  deep  and  large
Hah.  2. 16.  c.  ofthe  Lord’sright  hand  shall  be  turned
Zech.  12.  2. 1  will  make  Jerusalem  a  c.  of  trembling
Mat.  10. 42.  give  a  c.  of  cold  water  only,  Mark  9. 41.

20.  22.  are  ye  able  to  drink  of  c.  ?  Mark  10.  38.
23.  ye  shall  drink  indeed  of  my  c.  Mark  10.  39.

23. 25.  for  you  make  clean  the  outside  of  the  c.

26.  cleanse  first  what  is  within  the  c.  and  platter
26.  27.  and  he  took  the  c.  and  gave  thanks,  Mark

14.  23.  Luke  22.  17,  20.  1  Cor.  11.  25.
39.  O  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  c.  pass
from  me,  Mark  14.  36.  Luke  22. 42.
42.  if  this  c.  may  not  pass  away  from  me
Luke  22.  20.  this  c.  is  the  new  testament  in  my

blood,  1  Cor.  11.  25.
John  18. 11.  the  c.  which  my  Father  hath  given  me
1  Cor.  10. 16.  the  c.  of  blessing  we  bless,  is  it  not  the
21.  ye  cannot  drink  the  c.  of  Lord  and  c.  of  devils
11.  26.  as  often  as  ye  drink  of  this  c.  ye  do  shew

27.  and  drink  this  c.  of  the  Lord  unworthily
Lev.  14.  10.  poured  without  mixture  into  the  c.

16. 19.  to  give  unto  her  the  c.  of  his  wrath

17.  4.  the  woman  having  a  golden  c.  in  her  hand

18.  6.  in  the  c.  she  filled,  fill  to  her  double

CUP-BEARER.

Neh.  1.  11.  fori  was  the  king’s  cup-bearer
CUP-BEARERS.

1  Kings  10.  5.  queen  of  Sheba  saw  c.-b.  2  Chr.  9.  4.

CUPS.

2  Sam.  17.  1 28.  Barzillai  brought  beds  and  c.

1  Chron.  28.  17-  David  gave  pure  gold  for  the  c.

Isa.  22.  24.  shall  hang  on  Eliakim  the  vessels  of  c.
Jer.  35.  5.  and  1  set  pots  full  of  wine  and  c.

52. 19.  the  Chaldeans  took  away  spoons  and  c.
Mark  7.  4.  as  the  washing  of  c.  and  pots,  8.

CURDLED.

Job  10. 10.  hast  not  thou  c.  me  like  cheese  ?

CURE.

Jer.  33.  6.  behold  I  will  bring  it  health  and  c.

46.  til.  daughter  of  Egypt,  no  c.  shall  be  to  thee
CURE,  ED.

Jer.  33.  6.  I  will  c.  them  and  will  reveal  peace
46.  11.  O  daughter  of  Egypt,  thou  s'nalt  not  be  c.
Has.  5. 13.  yet  could  he  note,  you  of  your  wound
Mat,  17.  16.  thy  disciples,  they  could  not  c.  him
18.  the  child  was  c.  from  that  very  hour
J.uke  7-  21.  in  that  same  hour  he  c.  many
9.  1.  he  gave  them  power  to  c.  diseases
John  5. 10.  the  Jews  said  to  him  that  was  c.
CURES.

Luke  13.  32.  I  cast  out  devils,  I  do  c.  to-day  and
CURIOUS.

F.rod.  28. 8.  r.  girdle,  27, 28. 1  29.  5.  |  39.  5.  Lev.  8.  7.
35.  32.  and  to  devise  c.  works,  to  work  in  gold
| Acts  19. 19.  many  ofthem  that  used  c.  arts  brought
CURIOUSLY.

Psal.  139. 15.  and  c.  wrought  in  the  lowest  parts
CURLED.

! Cant.  5.  +  11.  his  locks  are  c.  and  black  as  a  raven
CURRENT.

Gen.  23. 16.  c.  money  with  the  merchant

3  .  .  CURSE.

To  curse,  signifies  to  imprecate,  to  call  down  mis¬
chief  upon,  or  to  wish  evil  to:  Noah  cursed  his
grandson  Canaan,  Gen.  9.  25.  Cursed  be  Ca¬
naan ;  may  he  be  hateful  to  God,  abhorred  by
men,  and  miserable  in  his  person  and  posterity.
Jacob  cursed  the  fury  of  his  two  sons  Simeon
and  Levi,  who  massacred  the  Shechemites,  and
plundered  their  city,  Gen.  49.  7.  Moses  enjoins
the  people  of  Israel  to  denounce  curses  against
the  violators  of  the  law,  Deut.  27-  15,  16,  4'e-
And  Joshua  cursed  him  who  should  undertake  to
build  Jericho,  Josh.  6.  26.  These  curses  were
either  ordained  by  God  himself,  or  pronounced
by  men  abounding  with  the  Spirit ;  or  were  pre¬
dictions  of  what  evil  should  happen  to  a  person,
or  people,  uttered  in  the  terms  of  imprecations,
which  had  their  accomplishment :  They  were  not
the  effects  of  passion,  impatience,  or  revenge,
and  therefore  were  not  such  as  God  condemns  in
his  law,  and  in  his  word.  For  example  :  he  or¬
dains  that  no  one  shall  presume  to  curse  his
father  or  his  mother  upon  pain  of  death,  Exod.

21.  17.  He  shall  not  wish  any  mischief  to  be¬


fall  them,  nor  use  any  kind  of  malicious  reviling
speeches,  which  argue  a  contempt  of  his  parents,
lie  ordains  that  no  one  curse  the  prince  of  his
people,  Exod.  22.  28.  or  one  that  is  deaf,  Lev.
19.  14.  In  the  gospel,  our  Saviour  pronounces
those  of  his  disciples  to  be  blessed,  who  are
loaded  with  curses,  and  requires  them  to  bless
those  that  curse  them,  to  render  blessing  for
cursing,  Mat.  5.  11.  Luke  6.  28.  Rom.  12.  14.
God  denounced  his  curse  against  the  serpent  which
seduced  Eve,  and  against  the  earth,  which  thence¬
forth  was  to  produce  briers  and  thorns :  it  should
produce  both  fewer  and  worse  fruits,  and  that
with  more  trouble  of  men’s  minds  and  labour  of
their  bodies,  Gen.  3.  14,  17 .  He  cursed  Cain
also,  who  had  imbrued  his  hands  in  his  brother
Abel’s  blood,  Gen.  4.  11.  He  was  devoted  to
destruction,  cast  out  from  God's  presence  and  the
communion  of  the  church,  and  the  society  of  his
kindred  and  acquaintance,  and  wandered  from
one  country  to  another  by  reason  of  the  trouble  and
perplexity  of  his  conscience.  The  divine  male¬
dictions  are  not  merely  imprecations,  impotent
and  fruitless  desires ;  they  carry  their  effects
with  them,  and  are  attended  with  all  the  miseries
denounced  by  God.

Gen.  27. 12. 1  shall  bring  a  c.  on  me,  not  a  blessing
13.  his  mother  said,  upon  me  be  thyc.  my  son
Num.  5.  18.  and  the  priest  have  in  his  hand  the
bitter  water  thatcauseth  the  c.  19,  22,  24,  27.

27.  the  woman  shall  be  a  c.  among  her  people
Deut.  11.  26.  I  set  before  you  a  blessingand  c.  30.1.

28.  a  c.  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  commandments

29.  and  shalt  put  the  c.  upon  mount  Ebal
21.  +  23.  he  that  is  hanged  is  the  c.  of  God

23.  5.  God  turned  the  c.  into  a  blessing,  Neh.  13. 2.
29.  19.  when  he  heareth  the  words  of  this  c.

Josh.  6.  18.  and  make  the  camp  of  Israel  a  c.

Judg.  9.  57.  on  them  came  the  c.  of  Jotham

1  Kings  2.  8.  who  cursed  me  with  a  grievous  c.

2  Kings  22.  19.  that  they  should  become  a  c.

Neh.  10.  29.  they  entered  into  a  c.  and  into  an  oath
Job  31.  30.  nor  to  sin  by  wishing  a  c.  to  his  soul
Prov.  3.  33.  the  c.  of  Lord  is  in  the  house  of  wicked

26.  2.  so  the  c.  causeless  shall  not  come

27. 14.  rising  early  it  shall  be  counted  a  r.  to  him
28.  27-  that  hideth  his  eyes  shall  have  many  a  c.

Isa.  24.  6.  therefore  hath  the  c.  devoured  the  earth
34.  5.  it  shall  come  down  on  the  people  of  my  c.

43.  28.  therefore  I  have  given  Jacob  to  the  c.

65. 15.  shall  leave  yourname  for  a  c.  to  my  chosen
Jer.  24.  9.  1  will  deliver  them  to  be  a  taunt  and  a  c.

25.  18. 1  29.  18.  i  42.  18.  |  44.  8, 12.
26.  6. 1  will  make  this  city  a  c.  to  all  nations

44.  22.  therefore  is  your  land  ac.  at  this  day

49. 13. 1  have  sworn  that  Bozrah  shall  become  a  c.
Lam.  3.  65.  give  them  sorrow,  they  c.  unto  them
Dan.  9.  11.  therefore  the  c.  is  poured  upon  us
Zech.  5.  3.  this  is  the  c.  that  goeth  forth  over  earth

8.  13.  that  as  we  were  a  c.  among  the  heathen
Mai.  2. 2.  if  ye  will  not  hear,  1  will  send  a  c.  on  you

3.  9.  ye  are  cursed  with  a  c.  for  ye  have  robbed  me

4.  6.  lest  I  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  c.

Acts  23.  12.  and  bound  themselves  under  a  c.  14.
Gal.  3. 10.  as  are  of  the  works  of  law,  are  under  c.

13.  Chr.  redeemed  us  from  the  c.  being  made  a  c.
Rev.  22.  3.  shall  be  no  more  c.  but  throne  of  God
CURSE,  Verb.

Gen.  8.  21.  the  Lord  said,  I  will  not  c.  the  ground
12.  3.  and  I  will  c.  him  that  curseth  thee
Exod.  22.  28.  thou  shalt  not  c.  the  ruler  of  thy  peo.
Lev.  19.  14.  thou  shalt  not  c.  the  deaf,  nor  put  a
Num.  22.  6.  come,  I  praj-  thee,  c.  me  this  peo.  17.

11.  Balak  said,  come  now,  c.  me  them,  23.  7,  13.

12.  God  said  to  Balaam,  thou  shalt  not  c.  people

23.  8.  how  shall  I  c.  whom  God  hath  not  cursed  <

11.1  took  thee  to  c.  mine  enemies,  24.  10.

25.  neither  c.  them  at  all,  nor  bless  them  at  all

Deut.  23.  4.  they  hired  Balaam  to  c.  thee,  Neh.  13.2.
27. 13.  and  these  shall  stand  on  mount  Ebal  to  c.
Josh.  24. 9.  Balak  kingof  Moab  called  Balaam  to  c.
Judg.  5.  23.  c.  Meroz,  said  the  angel,  c.  ye  bitterly
2  Sam.  16.  9.  why  should  this  dead  dog  c.  the  king  ?

10.  let  him  c.  because  L.  hath  said,  c.  David,  11.

Job  1.  11.  and  he  will  c.  thee  to  thy  face,  2.  5.

2.  9.  then  said  his  wife  to  him,  c.  God  and  die

3.  8.  let  them  c.  it  that  c.  the  day,  who  are  ready
Psal.  62.  4.  they  bless  with  mouth  but  c.  inwardly
109.  28.  let  them  c.  but  bless  thou,  when  they

Prov.  11.  26.  withholdeth  corn,  people  shall  c.  him

24.  24.  him  shall  the  people  c.  nations  abhor  hirn
30.  10.  accuse  not  a  servant  to  master,  lest  he  c.

Eccl.  7.  21.  lest  thou  hear  thy  servant  c.  thee
10.  20.  c.  not  the  king  in  thought,  c.  not  the  rich
Isa.  8.  21.  c.  their  king  and  God,  and  look  upward
Jer.  15.  10.  yet  every  one  of  them  doth  c.  me
Mai.  2.  2.  1  will  c.  your  blessings,  1  have  cursed
Mat.  5.  44.  bless  them  thatc.  you,  Luke  6.  28.

26.  74.  he  began  to  c.  and  to  swear,  Mark  14.  71.
Rom.  12. 14.  which  persecute  you  ;  bless  and  c.  not
Jam.  3.  9.  therewith  c.  we  men,  which  are  made
CURSED.

Gen.  3.  14.  the  serpent  c.  ||  17.  c.  is  the  ground
4. 11.  Cain  c.  ||  9.  25.  Noah  said,  c.  be  Canaan
5.  29.  because  of  ground  which  the  Lord  hath  c.

27-  29.  c.  be  every  one  that  curseth,  Num.  24.  9.

49.  7-  c.  be  their  anger,  for  it  was  fierce  and  cruel
Lev.  20.  9.  he  hath  c.  his  father  or  his  mother
24.  11.  blasphemed  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  c.

14.  saying,  bring  forth  him  that  hath  c.  23.

Num.  22.  6.  1  wot  that  he  whom  thou  cursest  is  c.
Deut.  27. 15.  c.  be  he,  16, 17,  18,  19,  20,  21, 22,  23,

24,25,26.

28. 16.  c.  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city,  c.  in  the  field

17.  c.  shall  be  thy  basket  and  thy  store

18.  c.  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  body  and  land

19.  c.  when  thou  comest  in,  when  thou  goest  out
Josh.  6.  26.  c.  be  the  man  that  buildeth  Jericho

9.  23.  now  therefore  ye  Gibeonites  are  c.  none  of
Judg.  9.27.  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  c.  Abimelech
21. 18.  c.  be  he  that  giveth  a  wife  to  Benjamin
1  Sam.  14.  24.  c.  that  eateth  food  till  evening,  28.


1  Sam.  17. 43.  and  the  Philistine  c.  David  by  his  gods
26.  19.  but  if  men,  c.  be  they  before  the  Lord

2  Sam.  16.  5.  Shimei  came  forth,  and  c.  still,  7. 13.

19.  21.  for  this,  because  he  c.  the  Lord’s  anointed

1  Kings  2. 8.  Shimei  who  c.  me  with  a  grievous  curse

2  Kings  2.  24.  and  c.  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
9.  34.  go  see  now  thisc.  woman,  and  bury  her

Neh.  13.  25.  I  contended  with  them,  and  c.  them
Job  1.  5.  it  may  be  my  sons  have  sinned  and  c.  God
3.  1.  then  Job  opened  his  mouth  and  c.  his  dav
5. 3.  foolish  taking  root, suddenly  I  c.  his  habitation
24.  18.  their  portion  is  c.  in  the  earth
Psal.  37.  22.  they  that  be  c.  of  him  shall  be  cut  off
119.  21.  thou  hast  rebuked  the  proud  that  are  c.
Eccl.  7.  22.  knoweth  th3Tself  likewise  hast  c.  othert,
Jer.  11.  3.  c.  be  the  man  obeyeth  not  this  covenant

17.  5.  c.  be  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man

20.  14.  c.  be  the  day  wherein  1  was  born

15.  c.  be  the  man  who  brought  tidings  to  my  father

48.  10.  c.  be  he  that  doeth  the  Lord's  work  deceit¬
fully,  c.  that  keepeth  back  his  sword  from  blood

Mai.  1.  14.  but  c.  be  the  deceiver,  who  hath  a  male
2. 2.  yea,  I  have  c.  your  blessings  already,  because
3.  9.  ye  are  c.  with  a  curse,  for  ye  have  robbed  me
Mat.  25.  41.  he  shall  say,  depart  from  me,  ye  c.
John  7.  49.  people  who  knoweth  not  the  law”  are  c.
Gal.  3.  10.  c.  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all
13.  c.  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree
2  Pet.  2. 14.  c.  children,  who  have  forsaken  the  wav
CURSED  thing.

Deut.  7. 26.  lest  thou  be  a  c.  thing,  for  it  is  a  c.  thing

13.  17.  shall  cleave  nought  of  the  c.  t.  to  thv  hand

CURSEDST.

Judg.  17.  2.  silver  taken  from  thee,  which  thou  c.
Mark  11.  21.  the  fig-tree  thou  c.  is  withered  away
CURSES.

Num.  5. 23.  the  priest  shall  write  these  c.  in  a  book
Deut.  28. 15.  that  all  these  c.  shall  come  on  thee,  45.
29.  20.  all  the  c.  that  are  written  in  this  book  shall
lie  upon  him,  27.  2  Chron.  34.  24.

21.  according  to  all  the  c.  of  the  covenant  in  book
30. 7-  Lord  thy  God  will  put  these  c.  on  thy  enemies
CURSETH.

Exod.  21. 17.  he  that  c.  his  father  or  his  mother  shall
surely  be  put  to  death,  Lev.  20.  9.  Prov.  20.  20.
Lev.  24.  15.  whosoever  c.  his  God  shall  bear  his  sin
Prov.  30.  11.  a  generation  that  c.  their  father
Mat.  15.  4.  honour  father  and  mother,  he  that  c.
father  or  mother,  let  him  die  death,  Mark!.  10
CURSING.

Num.  5. 21.  priest  charge  woman  with  an  oath  of  c.
Deut.  27.  t  13.  tlwse  shall  stand  for  a  c.  on  Eba!

28. 20.  the  Lord  shall  send  upon  thee  c.  in  all  thou
Deut.  30.  19.  1  have  set  before  you  blessing  and  c.
2  Sam.  16.  12.  Lord  will  requite  me  good  for  his  c.
Psal.  10.  7-  his  mouth  is  full  of  c.  Rom.  3.  14.

59.  12.  and  for  c.  and  lying  which  they  speak
109.  17.  as  he  loved  c.  so  let  it  come  unto  him

18.  as  he  clothed  himself  with  c.  as  a  garment
Prov.  29.  24.  he  heareth  c.  and  bewrayeth  it  not
Jer.  23. 1 10.  for  because  of  c.  the  land  mournetb
llcb.  6.  8.  earth  which  beareth  thorns  is  nigh  to  c.
Jam.  3.  10.  out  of  the  same  mouth  blessing  and  c.

CURSINGS.

Josh.  8.  34.  he  read  all  the  blessings  and  c.
CURTAIN.

Psal.  104.  2.  who  coverest  thyself  with  light,  who
stretchiest  out  the  heavens  like  a  c.  Isa.  40.  22.
CURTAINS.

Exod.  26.  1.  make  tabernacle  with  ten  c.  2.  |  36.  9.
Num.  4. 25.  the  Gershonites  shall  bear  the  c.  of  tab.
2  SamJ.  2.  ark  of  God  dwelleth  within  c.  1  Chr.  17.1.
Cant.  1.  5.  but  I  am  comely  as  the  c.  of  Solomon
Isa.  54.  2.  let  them  stretch  forth  c.  of  thy  habitation
Jer.  4.  20.  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  c.  in  a  moment
10.  20.  none  to  stretch  my  tent,  and  set  up  my  c.

49.  29.  they  shall  take  to  themselves  their  c.  and
Hab.  3.  7*  the  c.  of  the  land  of  Midian  did  tremble

CUSTODY.

Num.  3.  36.  under  c.  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  boards
Esth.  2.  3.  gather  fair  virgins  to  the  c.  of  Hege,  8.

14.  to  the  c.  of  Shaashgaz  the  king’s  chambei  lain

CUSTOM

Signifies,  [1]  Manner,  or  way,  Luke  4. 16.  [2]  That
which  has  been  established  by  long  use,  and  the  con¬
sent  of  ancestors,  Judg.  11. 39.  John  18.  39.  [3]  A
duty  paid  to  the  king  or  prince  upon  the  importation
or  exportation  of  commodities,  Rom.  13.  7.  [4]

The  way  of  women,  namely,  the  natural  disease
for  which  they  used  to  be  put  apart,  Gen.  31.  35.
Gen.  31.  35.  for  the  c.  of  women  is  upon  me
Judg.  11.  39.  and  it  was  a  c.  in  Israel
1  Sam.  2.  13.  the  priests’  c.  with  the  people  was
Ezra  3.  4.  according  to  the  c.  Jer.  32.  11.

4.  13.  then  will  they  not  pay  toll,  tribute,  and  c.
20.  been  mighty  kings,  and  c.  was  paid  to  them
7.  24.  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  c.  on  priests
Psal.  119.  +  132.  be  merciful  according  to  the  c.
Mat.  9.  9.  Jesus  passed  forth,  and  saw  Matthew  sit-
tingat  the  receipt  of  c.  Mark  2.  14.  Luke  5.  27.
17.  25.  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  c.  ?
Luke  1.  9.  according  to  the  c.  of  the  priest’s  office
2.  27.  to  do  for  him  after  the  c.  of  the.  law
42.  went  to  Jerusalem  after  the  c.  of  the  feast
4.  16.  as  Jesus’  c.  was,  he  went  into  the  synagogue
John  18.  39.  ye  have  a  c.  that  I  should  release  one
Rom.  13.  7.  render  therefore  c.  to  whom  c.  is  due
1  Cor.  11.  16.  we  have  no  such  c.  nor  the  churches
CUSTOMS.

Lev.  18.  30.  commit  none  of  these  abominable  c.
Jer.  10.  3.  for  the  c.  of  the  people  are  vain
Acts  6. 14.  shall  change  the  c.  Moses  delivered  11s

16.  21.  teach  c.  which  are  not  lawful  to  receive

21. 21.  that  they  ought  not  to  walk  after  the  c.

26.  3.  I  know  thee  to  be  expert  in  all  c.  and  quest.

28.  17.  tho’  I  committed  nothing  against  the  c.
CUT.

Lev.  22.  24.  ye  shall  not  offer  to  the  Lord  what  is  c.
Ezek.  16.  4.  when  born  thy  navel  was  not  c.

Acts  5. 33.  when  they  heard  that,  they  were  c.  !.  54.
.CUT.

Exod.  39.  3.  and  c.  it  in  wires  to  work  it  in  the  blue

87


CUT


CUT

Lev.  1  6.  shall  c.  the  burnt-offering  into  pieces,  1C.

8  oo  he  c.  the  ram  into  pieces,  Exod.  29. 17-
Dent  14. 1.  ye  shall  not  c.  yourselves  nor  make
Judg.  CO.  6.  1  took  my  concubine  and  c.  ^>er^m

1  Kings  18.  23.  and  c.  the  bullock  in  pieces,  33.

28.  they  c.  themselves  after  their  manner  with

2  Kings  24. 13.  he  c.  in  pieces  all  the  vessels  ot  gold

Solomon  had  made  in  temple,  2  Citron.  28.  ~4.

1  Citron.  20.  3.  the  people,  he  c.  them  with  saws

2  Citron  2.  8.  thy  servants  can  skill  to  c.  timber,  10.
Psal.  58.  7  •  he  bendeth,  let  them  be  as  c.  in  pieces

107  16.  c.  tlie  bars  ol  iron  in  sunder,  Isa.  45.  ~.

Isa.  9. 1  20.  he  shall  c.  on  the  right  and  be  hungry
51.  9.  art  thou  not  it  that  hath  c .  Rahab  '

Jer  16  6.  nor  lament,  nor  c.  themselves  r or  them
34’  18  when  they  c.  the  calf  in  twain,  and  passed
36.  23!  lie  c.  the  roll  with  the  penknife,  and  cast
4l!  5.  their  clothes  rent,  and  having  c.  themselves
47  5  how  long  wilt  thou  c.  thyself .

Dan  0  5.  if- ye  will  not,  ye  shall  be  c.  in  pieces
3.  29.' who  speak  against  God  shall  be  c.  in  pieces
Amos' 9 .  1.  and  c.  them  in  the  head,  all  of  them
Bait.  3.  + 16.  he  will  c.  them  with  his  troops
Zech.  12. 3.  that  burden  themsel  es  with  it  shall  be  c.
Arts'0!  +40.  and  when  they  had  c.  the  anchors
CUT  asvnder.

Psal.  129. 4.  he  hath  c.  asunder  cords  of  the  wicked
Jer.  50.  23.  hammer  of  the  whole  earth  c.  asunder
Zech.  11. 10.  I  took  staff  Beauty,  and  c.  it  asunder

14.  then  1  e.  asunder  my  other  staff,  even  Bands
Mat.  24.  51 .  and  shall  c.  him  asunder,  Luke  12. 46.
CUT  down.

Exod.  34.  13.  but  ye  shall  c.  dozen  their  groves
Lev.  26.  30.  I  will  c.  down  your  images,  and  cast
Bum.  13.  23.  and  c.  down  from  thence  a,  branch,  24.
Dent  !  5.  ye  shall  break  down  their  images,  and
c.  dozen  their  groves,  2  Kings  18.  4. 1  23. 14.
20. 19.  trees  for  meat' thou  shalt  not  c.  down
op.  the  trees  not  for  meat  thou  shalt  c.  down
Judg.  6.  25.  and  c.  dozen  the  grove  that  is  by  it
2  Kings  19.  23.  Twill  c.  dozen  cedars,  Isa.  37-  24.

2  Chr.  15. 16.  and  Asa  c.  d.  her  idol,  and  stamped  it
34.  7.  .1  osiah  c.  dozen  all  the  idols  in  the  land
Job  8.  VI.  while  in  his  greenness,  and  not  c.  down
14  2.  cometh  forth  like  a  flower,  and  is  c.  down
7.’  for  there  is  hope  of  a  tree  if  it  be  c.  dozen
22*.  16.  the  wicked  were  c.  dozen  out  of  time

20.  whereas  our  substance  is  not  c.  down
Psal.  37.  2.  they  shall  soon  be  c.  dozen  like  grass
80. 16.  branch  is  burnt,  it  is  c.  down,  they  perish
90.  6.  in  the  evening  it  is  c.  dozen,  and  withereth
Isa.  9. 10.  sycamores'are  c.  down,  but  we  will  build
14."  12.  how  art  thou  c.  down  to  the  ground
22!  25.  the  nail  shall  be  removed  and  c.  dozen
Jer'.  22. 7.  theyr  shall  c.  dozen  thy  choice  cedars
25!  37'.  the  peaceable  habitations  are  c.'down
48.  2.  also  thou  shalt  be  c.  dozen,  O  madmen
Ezek.  6.  6.  that  vour  images  may  be  c.  down
Bait.  1. 12.  though  many,  yet  thus  shall  they  be  c.  d.
Zeph.  1. 11.  for  all  the  merchant-people  are  c.  down
Mat.  21. 8.  others  c.  down  branches,  Mirk  11.  8.

Luke  13.  7-  c.  it  d.  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground  ?

9  then  after  that  thou  shalt  c.  it  down
CUT  off.

Gen.  9. 11.  neither  shall  all  flesh  be  c.  off

17.  14.  the  uncircumcised  child  shall  be  c.  off
4l! +  36.  that  the  land  be  not  c.  off  through  famine
Exod.  4.  25.  and  c.  off  the  fore-skin  of  her  son
8+9.  to  c.  of  the  frogs  from  thee,  and  thy  houses
12.  15.  that  soul  shall  be  c.  off  from  Israel,  19.

1  31.  14.  Bum.  15.  30,  31.  1 19.  13.
23.  23.  Angel  go  before,  and  1  will  c.  them  off
30.  33.  shall  be  c.  off  from  his  people,  38.  Lev.  7
20,  21,  25,  27. 1  17.  4  ,  9.  I  19.  8.  1  23.  29.
Bum.  9- 13.

Lev.  17. 10.  1  will  c.  him  off  from  among  his  people,

18.  29.  I  20.  3,  6,  18.  Bum.  19.  20.
14.  whosoever  eateth  blood  shall  be  c.  off
20. 17.  shall  be  c.  of  in  the  sight  of  their  people
22.  3.  that  soul  shall  be  c.  off  from  my  presence
25. +  23.  land  shall  not  be  sold  to  be  quite  c.  off
Bum.  4. 18.  c.  ye  not  of  the  tribe  of  Kohathites

15.  31.  that  soul  shall  utterly  bee.  off,  his  iniquity
Deut.  12.  29.  when  thy  God  shall  c.  off  nations

19. 1.  when  God  hath  c.  off  the  nations,  Josh.  23. 4.

23. 1.  or  hath  his  privy  member  c.  oft  shall  not
25. 12.  then  thou  shalt  t.  off  her  hand,  pity  not

Josh.  3. 13.  that  the  waters  of  Jordan  shall  be  c.  off
from  the  waters  that  come  down,  16. 1  4. 7.
7. 9.  and  shall  c.  off  our  name  from  the  earth
9.  +  23.  not  be  c.  of  from  you  from  being  bondmen
11.  21.  at  that  time  Joshua  c.  off  the  Anakims
Judg.  1.  6.  and  c.  off  his  thumbs,  and  his  great  toes

21.  6.  there  is  one  tribe  c.  off  from  Israel  this  day
liuth  4. 10.  that  the  name  of  the  dead  be  not  c.  off
1  Sam.  2.  31.  days  come  that  1  will  e.  off  thine  arm
33.  man  whom  I  shall  not  c.  off  from  mine  altar
0.4.  the  palms  of  Dagon’s  hands  were  c.  off
17.  51.  David  ran  and  c.  off  Goliath's  head


1  {  .  UJL.  JVCIV1LI  l  VJUUCHIIO  1JVCVVA

20. 15.  thou  shalt  not  c.  off  thy  kindness  from  my
house,  24.  21 .  no,  not  when  the  iLord  hath  c.  off  the
enemies  of  David  from  the  face  of  the  earth

24. 4.  David  c.  off  the  skirt  of  Saul’s  robe,  5.

+  7.  so  David  c.  off  his  servants  with  these  words
11.  for  in  that  I  c.  off  the  skirt  of  thy  robe

28.  9.  knowest  how  Saul  hath  c.  off  the  wizards
31.  9.  and  they  c.  off  Saul’s  head,  and  stripper!  off
2  Sam.  4. 12.  they  siew  them  and  c.  off  their  hands
10.  4.  Hanun  took  David’s  servants,  and  c.  off
their  garments  in  the  middle,  1  Chr.  19. 4.

20.  22.  and  they  c.  off  the  head  of  Sheba

21 .  +5.  the  man  that  consumed  us  and  c.  us  off

1  Kings  8.  +  25.  notbe  c.  0#  to  thee  a  man  in  my  sight
9.  7.  then  will  1  c.  off  Israel  out  of  the  land

11. 16.  till  he  had  c.  off  every  male  in  Edom
13.  34.  even  to  c.  off  .1  eroboam’s  house,  14.  14.

14. 10. 1  will  c.  off  from  Jeroboam  him  that  pisseth

18. 4.  when  Jezebel  c.  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord
21.  21.  behold,  1  will  c.  off  from  Ahab  him  that

pisseth  against  the  wall,  2  Kings  9.  8.

2  Kings  16. 17.  Ahaz  c.  off  the  borders  of  the  bases

88


a  Kings  18.16.  Ilezekiah  r.ojf  the  gold  from  the  doors

1  Chr.  17. 8.  have  c.  off  thine  enemies  before  thee

2  Chr.  22.  7.  Lord  anointed  toe.  oft  house  ot  Ahab
32.  21.  the  angel  to  c.  off  all  mighty  men  of  valour

Job  4.  7-  or  where  were  the  righteous  c.  oft  ?

6.  9-  that  he  would  let  loose  his  hand,  and  c  .me  oft
8.  14.  whose  hope  shall  be  c.  oft,  and  whose  trust

10.  +  l.my  soul  is  c.  off  while  I  live,  I  will  leave  my

11.  10.  it  he  c.  off,  then  who  can  hinder  him.

14.  1  10.  man  clieth ,  and  is  c.  off,  and  where  is  he  .

18.  16.  and  above  shall  his  branch  be  c.oft
21.  21.  when  number  of  his  months  is  c.  oft  in  midst

23.  17.  because  1  was  note,  oft  before  the  darkness

24.  24.  they  are  c.  off  as  the  tops  ot  ears  of  corn

36.  20.  when  people  are  r.  oft  m  their  place
Psal.  12.  3.  the  Lord  shall  c.  oft’  all  flattering  lips
31.  +  17.  let  the  wicked  be  c.  off  tor  the  graves

22. 1  said,  1  am  c.  off  from  before  thine  eyes
34. 16.  loc.  of  remembrance  of  them  from  earth

37.  9.  for  evil  doers  shall  be  c .  off ,  but  those  who

22.  they  that  be  cursed  of  him  shall  be  c.  off

28.  but  the  seed  of  the  wicked  shall  be  c.  oft
34.  when  the  wicked  are  c.  off,  thou  shalt  see  it
38.  the  end  of  the  wicked  shall  be  c.  oft

54.5.  he  shall  reward,  c.  them  oft  m  thy  truth
75.  10.  all  the  horns  of  the  wicked  will  1  c.  oft
76. 12.  he  shall  c.  off  the  spirit  of  princes
83  4.  they  said,  come,  and  let  us  c.  them  off
88.  5.  and  they  are  c.  off  from  thy  hand

16.  wrath  goeth  over  me,  terrors  have  c  me  oft
94.  23.  he  shall  c.  them  off  in  their  wickedness
101.  5.  that  slandereth  his  neighbour  will  1  c.  off

8.  that  1  may  c.  of  all  wicked  doers  from  the  city

of  the  Lord

109. 13.  let  his  posterity  be  c.  off  and  blotted  out
15.  that  the  Lord  may  c.  off  the  memory  of  them

118.  +  10.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  I  will  c.them  off

119.  +  139.  my  zeal  hath  c.  me  off,  because
143.  12.  and  of  thy  mercy  c.  off  mine  enemies
Prov. 2.  22.  but  the  wicked  shal  1  be  c.  off  from  earth

23.  18.  thy  expectation  shall  not  be  c.  off,  24.  14.

Isa.  6.  +  5.  then  said  l,  woe  is  me,  for  1  am  c.  off

9.  14.  the  Lord  will  c.  off  from  Israel  head  and

tail

10.  7.  to  destroy  and  c.  off  nations  not  a  few

11. 13.  the  adversaries  of  Judah  shall  be  c.  off
14.  22.  I  will  c.  of  from  Babylon  the  name
lo!  +  1.  Moab  is  c.  off  ||  2.  and  every  beard  c.  off
22.  25.  burden  that  was  upon  it  shall  be  c.  off

29.  20.  all  that  watch  for  iniquity  are  c.  oft
38. 12.  he  will  c.  me  ojfwith  pining  sickness
48.  9.  my  praise  will  refrain,  that  I  c.  thee  not  off

19.  his  name  should  not  have  been  c.  off
53.  8.  he  was  c.  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living
55.  13.  shall  be  for  a  sign  that  shall  not  be  c.  off
66.  3.  that  sacrificeth,  as  if  he  c.  off  a  dog’s  neck
Jer.  7.  28.  truth  is  perished  and  c.  ojffrom  mouth
29.  c.  off  thine  hair,  O  Jerusalem,  cast  it  away
9.21.  to  c.  o#the  children  without,  and  young  men

11.  19.  let  us  c.  him  off  from  the  land  ot  the  living
44. 7.  to  c.  off  from  you  man  and  woman  outof  Jud.

8.  that  ye  might  c.  yourselves  off  and  be  a  curse
44. 11.  set  my  face  against  you  to  c.  off  Judah

46.  +  28.  yet  will  1  not  utterly  c.  thee  off

47.  4.  to  c.  of  from  Tyrus|l  5.  Ashkelon  isc.  off

48.  2.  come,"  let  us  c.  it  off  from  being  a  nation
25.  the  horn  of  Moab  is  c.  off ,  his  arm  is  broken

49.  26.  all  the  men  of  war  shall  be  c.  off,  50.  30.

50.  16.  c.  off  the  sower  from  Babylon,  and  him  that

51.  6.  flee  out,  and  be  not  c.  off  in  her  iniquity
62.  thou  hast  spoken  against  this  place  to  c.  it  off

Lam  .  2.  3.  c.  off  in  his  anger  the  horn  of  Israel
3.  53.  they  have  c.  off  my  life  in  the  dungeon
Ezek.  14.  8.  and  I  will  c.  him  off  from  my  people
13.  c.  off  man  and  beast,  17, 19, 21.  I  25. 13.  |  29.  8.

17.  9.  shall  he  not  c.  off  fruit  thereof,  that  it  wither  ?
17.  and  building  forts  to  c.  off  many  persons

21.  3.  I  will  c.  off  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  4.
25.  7.  behold,  1  will  c.  thee  off  from  the  people
16.  I  will  c.  off  the  Cherethims,  and  destroy  the
remnant  of  the  sea-coasts
30. 15.  and  I  will  c.  off  the  multitude  of  Mo
31.  12.  terrible  of  the  nations  have  c.  him  off
35.  7.  I  will  c.  off  from  Seir  him  that  passeth  out
37.  11.  our  hope  is  lost,  we  are  c.  off  for  our

parts

Dan.  4. 14.  hew  down  the  tree,  c.  o#  his  branches

9.  26.  Messiah  shall  bee.  off,  but  not  for  himself
Hos.  4.  +  5.  c.  off  thy  mother  1  t  6.  people  are  c.  off

8.  4.  they  have  made  idols,  that  they  may  be  c.  off

10.  7.  Samaria,  her  king  is  c.  off  ns  the  foam,  15.
Joel  1.  5.  the  new  wine  is  c.  off  from  your  mouth,  9.

16.  is  not  the  meat  c.  off  before  our  eyes  ?

Amos  1.  5.  I  will  c.  off  the  inhabitant  from  Aven

8.  I  will  c.  off  the  inhabitant  from  Ashdod
2.  3.  I  will  c.  of  the  judge  from  the  midst  thereof
3!  14.  the  horns  of  tlie  altar  shall  be  c.  off

Ohad.  5.  if  robbers  by  night,  how  art  thou  c.  off

9.  every  one  of  Esau  may  be  c.  off  by  slaughter

10.  ana  thou  shalt  be  e.  off  tor  ever
14.  nor  stand  to  c.  off  those  ot  his  that  did  escape

Mic.  5.  9.  and  all  thine  enemies  shall  be  c.  off

10.  horses  ||  11.  cities  ||  12.  witchcrafts  c.  off
13.  thy  graven  images  will  1  c.  off,  Bah.  1.  14.

Bah.  1.  15.  for  the  wicked  is  utterly  c.  off

2.  13.  and  I  will  c.  off  thy  prey  from  the  earth

3.  15.  the  sword  shall  c.  thee  off,  it  shall  eat
Hah.  3.  17.tho’  the  flock  shall  be  c.off  from  the  fold
Zeph.  1.  3.  I  will  c.  off  man  from  off  the  land

4.  c.  off  reran,  of  Baal  ||  11.  that  bear  silver  c.  off
3.  6.  I  have  c.  off  the  nations,  towers  are  desolate

7.  so  their  dwelling  should  not  be  c.  off
Zech.  5.  3.  for  every  one  that  stealeth  as  on  this  side,

and  every  one  that  sweareth,  shall  be  c.  off
9.  6.  I  will  c.  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines
10.  and  I  will  c.  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim

11.  8.  three  shepherds  also  I  c.  oft  in  one  month
9.  and  that,  that  is  to  be  c.  off,  let  it  be  c.  off

13.  2.  I  will  c.  off  the  names  of  idols  out  ot  land

8.  two  parts  in  the  land  shall  be  c.  off  and  die

14.  2.  the  residue  of  the  people  shall  not  be  c.  off
Mai.  2.  12.  Lord  will  c.  off  the  man  that  doeth  this


D  A  M

Mat.  5.  30.  if  thy  right  hand  offend  thee.  c.  it  off,

x8.  8.  Mark  9-  43,  45.
Mark  14. 47.  c.  off  ear,  Luke  22. 50.  John  18. 10,  26.
Arts  27-  32.  the  soldiers  c.  oft  the  ropes  ot  the  boat
Rom.  11.  22.  otherwise  thou  shalt  also  be  c.  off
2  Cor.  11.  12.  that  1  may  c.  off  occasion  from  them
*Gal.  5.  12.  I  would  they  were  c.  off  that  trouble  you
CUT  out.

2  Citron.  26.  +  10.  Uzziah  c.  out  many  cisterns
Job  33.  +  6.  I  also  am  c.  out  of  the  clay
Prov.  10.  31.  the  froward  tongue  shall  bee.  out
Dan.  2.  34.  a  stone  was  c.  out  without  hands,  45.
Rom.  11.  24.  for  if  thou  wert  c.  out  of  the  olive-tree
CUT  short.

2  Kings  10.  32.  the  T.ord  began  to  c.  Israel  short
Rom  9  28.  will  finish  and  c.  it  short  in  righteousness
CUT  up.

Job  30.  4.  who  c.  up  mallows  by  the  bushes
Isa.  33.  12.  as  thorns  c.  uv  shall  they  be  burnt
CUTTEST,  ETH.

Dent.  24.  19.  when  thou  c.  down  thine  harvest
Job  28. 10.  he  c.  out  rivers  among  the  rocks
Psal.  29.  +7.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  c.  flames  of  fire
46.  9.  he  breaketh  bow,  and  c.  the  spear  111  sunder
141.  7.  as  when  one  c.  andcleaveth  wood  on  earth
Prov.  26. 6.  sendeth  message  by  fool,  c.  off  tin-  feet
Jer.  10.  3.  for  one  c.  a  tree  out  ot  the  forest  with  axe
22  14  build  chambers  and  c.  him  out  windows
CUTTING.

Exod.  31.5.  and  in  c.  of  stones  to  set  them,  35.  33.
Lev.  25.  +  23.  the  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  c.  of
Deut  24.  +  1.  let  him  write  her  a  bill  of  c.  off
Isa.  38. 10.  1  said  in  the  c.  of  my  days  1  shall  go
Jer.  30.  +  23.  a  c.  whirlwind,  it  shall  fall  with  pain
Ezek. 7.  +  25.  c.  off  cometh,  they  shall  seek  peace

16.  +  3.  thy  c.  out  is  of  the  land  of  Canaan
Hah.  2.  10.  consulted  shame  by  c.off  many  people
Mark.  5.  5.  tombs,  crying  and  c.  himself  with  stones
CU1  TIN  GS.

Lev.  19.28.  yeshall  not  make  any  c.  for  dead,  21.5.
Jer.  48.  37-  upon  all  the  hands  shall  be  c.  and  on
Jonah  2+6.1  went  down  to  the  c.  of  the  mount
CYMBAL.

1  Cor  13.  1.  I  am  become  as  sounding  brass,  or  a

CYMBALS.  [tinkling  c.

2  Sam.  6.  5.  played  on  cornets  and  c.  1  Chr.  13.  8.

1  Citron.  15. 16.  harps  and  c.  sounding,  16.  42.

16.  5.  but  Asaph  made  a  sound  with  c.  _

25.  6.  these  were  under  the  hands  of  their  father

for  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  withe.

2  Chron.  5. 13.  they  lift  up  their  voice  with  c.

29.  25.  he  set  Levites  in  house  of  the  Lord  with  c.

Ezra  3.  10.  the  sons  of  Asaph  with  c.  Beit.  12.  27.
Psal.  150.  5.  praise  him  upon  loud-sounding  c.
CYPRESS.

Cant.  1.  +  14.  my  beloved  is  to  me  as  a  cluster  of  c.
4.  +  13.  with  pleasant  fruits,  c.  with  spikenard
Isa.  44.  14.  he  taketh  the  c.  and  the  oak


D.

DAGGER.

Judg.  3.  16.  Ehudmade  him  a  d.  with  two  edges

21.  he  took  the  d.  from  his  right  thigh

22.  that  he  could  not  draw  the  d.  outof  his  belly

Daily;  see  after  Days.

DAINTY,  TIES.

Gen.  49. 20.  Asher  shall  yield  royal  d.

Job  33.  20.  and  his  soul  abhorreth  d.  meat
Psal.  141.  4.  and  let  me  not  eat  of  their  d.

Prov.  23.  3.  be  not  desirous  of  his  d.  for  they  are

6.  an  evil  eye,  neither  desire  thou  his  d.  meats
Hah.  1.  +  16.' their  portion  is  fat,  their  meatrf.

Rev.  18.  14.  all  things  which  were  d.  are  departed

DALE.

Gen.  14. 17-  valley  of  Shaveh,  which  is  theking’srf.

0  Sam  18. 18.  a  pillar  which  is  in  the  king’s  d.
DAMAGE.

Ezra  4. 22.  why  should  d.  grow  to  the  hurt  of  kings
Esth.  7.4.  enemy  could  not  countervail  the  king’s  d.
Prov.  26.  6.  cutteth  off  the  feet,  and  drinketh  d.
Dan.  6.  2.  and  the  king  should  have  no  d.

Acts  27.  10.  voyage  will  be  with  hurt  and  much  d.

2  Cor.  7.  9.  that  ye  might  receive  d.  byT  us  in  nothing
DAM.

Exod.  22.  30.  seven  days  it  shall  be  with  his  d.  on
the  eighth  shall  give  it  me,  Lev.  22.  27.
Deut.  22.  6.  thou  shalt  not  take  the  d.  with  young

7.  but  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  let  the  d.  go

DAMNABLE.

2  Pet.  2.  1.  who  privily  shall  bring  in  d.  heresies
DAMNATION.

Mat.  23. 14.  therefore  ye  shall  receive  the  greater  d

Mark  12.  40.  Luke  20.  47 .

33.  ye  serpents,  how  can  ye  escape  the  d.  of  hell  ?

Mark  3.  29.  but  is  in  danger  of  eternal  d.  j

John  5. 29.  have  done  evil  to  the  resurrection  of  d.
Rom.  3.  8.  evil,  that  good  may  come  whose  d.  is  just

13.  2.  they  shall  receive  to  tnemselves  d.

1  Cor.  11.  29.  lie  eateth  and  drinketh  d.  to  himself

1  Tim. 5. 12.  having  d.  because  have  cast  off  first  faith
o  Pet.  2. 3.  lingereth  not,  and  their  d.  slumbereth  not

DAMNED.

Mark  16.16.  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  d.
Rom.  14.  23.  and  he  that  doubteth  is  d.  if  he  cat

2  I 'hess.  2. 12.  that  all  might  bed.  who  believed  not

DAMSEL.

Gen.  24. 55.  her  mother  said, let  the  d.  abide  few  days

34.  3.  and  he  loved  the  d.  and  spake  kindly  to  d.
12.  ask  never  so  much,  but  give  me  therf.  to  wife

Deut.  22.  15.  bring  forth  tokens  of  the  d.  virginity

20.  but  if  the  tokens  be  not  found  for  the  d.

21.  they  shall  bring  out  the  d.  and  stone  her

24.  the  d.  because  she  cried  not,  bciimin  the  city
26.  there  is  in  the  d.  no  sin  worthy  of  death
29.  shall  give  therf.  father  fifty  shekels  of  silver
Judg.  5.  30.  divided  to  every  man  a  d.  or  two

19.  4.  the</.  father  retained  him,  and  he  abode
Ruth  2.  5.  then  Boaz  said,  whose  d.  is  this  i
6.  it  is  Moabitish  d.  that  came  back  with  N  aomi
1  Kings  1.  +2.  he  sought  for  the  king  a  young  d.


I)  A  R


DA  R


D  A  U


1  Kings  1  A.  and  rf.  was  very  fair,  and  cherished  him
Mat.  14.  11.  John  Baptist  s  head  was  brought  in  a
charger,  and  given  to  the  d.  Mark  6. 28.
26.  69.  a  d.  came  to  Peter,  saying,  John  18.  17-
Mark  5.  39.  the  d.  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth
40.  he  taketh  the  father  and  mother  of  the  d.  and
entereth  in  where  the  d.  was  lying
Acts  12. 13.  a  d.  came  to  hearken,  named  Rhoda

16.  16.  a  certain  d.  possessed  with  a  spirit,  met  us
DAMSELS.

Gen.  24.  61.  Rebekah  arose  and  her  d.  and  rode

1  .Sam.  25.  42.  Abigail  rode  with  five  d.  of  hers
Psal.  68.  25.  amongst  them  were  the  d.  playing

DANCE.

Psal.  149.  3.  let  them  praise  him  in  the  d.  150.  4.
Jer.  31. 13.  the  virgins  shall  rejoice  in  the  d.

>  Jam.  5. 15.  our  d.  is  turned  into  mourning
DANCE.

Judg.  21.  21.  if  the  daughters  of  Shiloh  come  to  d.
Job  21. 11.  send  forth  little  ones,  their  children  d.

\  Eccl.  3.  4.  a  time  to  mourn,  and  a  time  to  d.

Isa.  13.  21.  owls  dwell  there,  satyrs  shall  d.  there
DANCED.

Judg.  21.  23.  according  to  their  number  that  d.

2  ■Sam.  6. 14.  and  David  d.  before  the  Lord

Mat.  11 .17.  have  piped ,  and  ye  have  not  d.  Luke 7-32.
14.  6.  the  daughter  of  Herodias  d.  Mark  6.  22.
DANCES.

1  Exod.  15.  20.  the  women  went  after  her  with  d.

Judg.  11.  34.  daughter  came  to  meet  him  with  d.

1  Sam. 21.  11.  did  they  notsingofhim  in  d.  29.5.
Jer.  31.  4.  thou  shalt  go  forth  in  the  d.  of  them
DANCING.

Exod.  32.  19.  he  came  nigh,  he  saw  the  calf  and  d.

1  Sam.  18.  6.  the  women  came  out  singing  and  d.

30.  16.  were  spread  on  all  the  earth,  eating  and  d.

2  Sam.  6. 16.  sne  saw  king  David  d.  1  Chr.  15.  29.
Psal.  30.  11.  thou  hast  turned  my  mourning  into  d.
Luke  15.  25.  as  he  came  he  heard  music  and  d.

DANDLED.

Isa.  66. 12.  and  ye  shall  be  d.  upon  her  knees
DANGER.

:  Mat.  5.  21.  shall  be  in  d.  of  the  judgment
I  22.  shall  be  in  d.  of  council,  in  d.  of  hell-fire
Mark  .3.  29.  but  is  in  d.  of  eternal  damnation
Acts  19.27.  not  only  this  our  craft  is  in  d.  but  temple
40.  in  d.  to  be  called  in  question  for  this  uproar
DANGEROUS.

Acts  27.  9.  and  when  sailing  was  now  d.  because
DARE.

Job  41.  10.  none  is  so  fierce  that  d.  stir  him  up
Rom.  5. 7.  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  d.  to  die
15. 18.  for  I  will  not*/,  to  speak  of  any  thing

1  Cor.  6. 1.  d.  any  of  you  go  to  law  before  the  unjust  ?

!  2  Cor.  10. 12.  we  d.  not  make  ourselves  of  the  number

DARK.

j  Gen.  15.  17.  when  the  sun  w'ent  down,  and  it  wras  d.

I  Exod.  9.  +  32.  for  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  d.

\  Lev.  13. 6.  if  the  plague  be  d.  21,  26,  28,  56.
i  Num.  12. 8.  speak  appai  ently,  and  not  in  d.  speeches
f  Josh.  2.  5.  when  it  was  rf.  the  men  went  out
r  2  Sam.  22. 12.  about  him  d.  waters,  Psal.  18.  11.

^  Nek.  13. 19.  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  began  to  be  d.

Job  3. 9.  let  the  stars  of  the  twilight  thereof  be  d.

12.  25.  they  grope  in  the  d.  without  light

18.  6.  the  light  shall  be  d.  in  his  tabernacle

22.  13.  can  he  judge  through  the  d.  cloud  ?

24. 16.  in  the  d.  they  dig  thro’  houses,  which  they
30. 1 3.  %vant  and  famine  they  were  rf.  as  night
Psal.  35. 6.  let  their  way  be  rf.  and  slippery
49.  4.  I  will  open  my  d.  saying  on  the  harp
74.  20.  d.  places  of  the  earth  are  full  of  cruelty
78. 2.  in  parables,  I  will  utter  d.  sayings  of  old
88. 12.  shall  thy  wonders  be  known  in  the  d.  ?

105. 28.  he  sent  darkness  and  made  it  d.

Prov.  1.  6.  the  words  of  the  wise  and  their  d.  sayings

7.  9.  in  the  twilight,  in  the  black  and  d.  night
Isa.  5.  +  30.  it  shall  be  d.  in  the  destruction  thereof
29. 15.  and  their  works  are  in  the  d.  and  they  say
45. 19. 1  have  not  spoken  in  a  d.  place  of  the  earth
Jer.  13. 16.  your  feet  stumble  on  the  d.  mountains
Lam.  3.  6.  he  hath  set  me  in  d.  places,  as  they  that
Ezek.  8.  12.  what  the  house  of  Israel  do  in  the  d.
32.  7.  and  I  will  make  the  stars  thereof  d.

8.  the  bright  lights  of  heaven  will  1  make  d.

.34. 12.  have  been  scattered  in  the  cloudy  and  d.  day
Dan.  8. 23.  a  king  understanding  d.  sentences  shall
Joel  2.  10.  the  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  d.

Amos  5.  8.  seek  him  that  maketh  the  day  d.  20.
Mic.  3.  6.  it  shall  bed.  to  you,  the  day  shall  be  d.
Zech.  14.  6.  the  light  shall  not  be  clear,  nor  d.

Luke  11. 36.  it  thy  body  be  light,  having  no  part  d.
John  6. 17.  went  over  the  sea,  and  it  was  now  d.

20.  1.  Mary  came  early,  when  it  was  yet  d.

2  Pet.  1. 19.  as  to  a  light  that  shineth  in  a  d.  place

DARKEN.

Amos  8. 9.  and  I  will  d.  the  earth  in  the  clear  day
DARKLY.

1  Cor.  13. 12.  for  now  we  see  through  a  glass  d.
DARKENED.

Exod. 10.15.  for  they  covered,  so  that  the  land  was  d.
Psal.  69. 23.  let  their  eyes  be  d.  Rom.  11. 10.

Eccl.  12.  2.  while  sun,  moon,  or  the  stars  be  not  d.

3.  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  be  d.

Isa.  5. 30.  light  is  d.  in  the  heavens  thereof

9.  19.  the  land  is  d.  II  1.3. 10.  the  sun  d.  Joel  3. 15.

24.  11.  all  joy  is  d.  the  mirth  of  the  land  gone

Ezek.  .30. 18.  at  Tehaphnehes  the  day  shall  be  d.
Zech.  11. 17.  his  right  eye  shall  be  utterly  d.

Mat.  24. 29.  then  shall  the  sun  be  rf.  Marie  1.3.  24.
fMke  23. 45.  and  the  sun  was  d.  and  vail  was  rent
Rom.  1.  21.  and  their  foolish  heart  was  d.

Eph.  4.  18.  having  the  understanding  d.  alienated
Rev.  8. 12.  so  as  the  third  part  of  them  was  d.

9.  2.  and  the  sun  and  the  air  w'ere  d.

DARKEN  ETH.

Job  38. 2.  who  is  this  that  d.  counsel  by  w'ords ?
Psal.  139.  + 12.  yea,  the  darkness  d.  not  from  thee
DARKISH.

Lev.  13. 39.  it  the  bright  spots  in  skin  be  d.  w'hite
DARKNESS

Signifies.  [1]  The  privation  or  want  of  natural  light,


Mat.  27-  45.  [2]  Hell,  the  place  of  eternal

misery,  confusion ,  and  horror,  called  outer  dark¬
ness,  Mat.  22.  13.  [3]  Ignorance  and  unbelief,

which  is  the  want  of  spiritual  light,  John  .3.  19.
[4]  The  minds  of  men,  which,  since  the  fall,  are
full  of  ignorance  and  error,  John  1.  5.  [5]  A

private  or  secret  place,  where  but  few  persons  are
present.  Mat.  10.  27.  What  1  tell  you  in  dark¬
ness  ;  that  is,  in  parables,  and  in  private  between
ourselves.  [6]  Great  distress,  perplexity,  and
calamity,  Isa.  8.  22.  Joel  2.  2.  [7]  Sin,  or

impurity,  1  John  1.  5.

The  land  of  darkness  is  the  grave.  Job  10.  21,  22.
Such  as  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of
death,  Psal.  107 .  10.  such  as  are  in  a  disconso¬
late  and  forlorn  condition,  shut  up  in  prisons,  or
dungeons.  The  children  of  light,  set  in  opposition
to  the  children  of  darkness,  means  the  righteous
in  opposition  to  the  wicked ;  the  faithful  in  oppo¬
sition  to  the  incredulous  and  infidels,  2  Cor.  6.
14.  Our  Saviour  calls  the  exercise  of  Satan's
power,  the  power  of  darkness,  Luke  22.  5.3.
But  this  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  dark¬
ness  ;  this  is  the  time  wherein  power  is  given  to
the  devil,  and  his  instruments,  to  execute  their
designs  against  me.  The  power  of  darkness,  is
likewise  taken  for  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  slavery
lb  the  devil,  under  which  all  unregenerated  persons
are,  Col.  1.  1.3.

Gen.  1.  2.  and  d.  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep

5.  the  light  day,  and  the  d.  he  called  night

18.  God  set  them  to  divide  the  light  from  the  d.
15. 12.  an  horror  of  great  d.  fell  upon  Abram
Exod.  10.  21.  that  there  may  be  d.  over  Egypt
22.  there  was  a  thick  d.  in  all  Egypt  three  days

14.  20.  it  was  a  cloud  and  d.  to  them,  but  light
20.  21.  and  Moses  drew  near  unto  the  thick"*/.
Dent.  si.  11.  the  mountain  burnt  with  thick  rf.

5.  22.  these  words  the  Lord  spake  out  of  thick  rf.
Josh.  24. 7.  he  put*/,  between  you  and  the  Egyptians
2  Sam.  22.  10.  d.  was  under  his  feet,  Psal.  18.  9.

12.  he  made  rf.  his  pavilions  round  about  him
29-  the  Lord  will  enlighten  my  d.  Psal.  18.  28.
Job  3.  5.  let  d.  and  the  shadow  of  death  stain  it

6.  as  for  that  night,  let  </.  seize  upon  it

5.  14.  thev  meet  with  </.  in  the  day  time

10.  22.  a  land  of  d.  as  d.  itself,  without  any  order

19.  8.  and  he  hath  set  d.  in  my  paths

20.  26.  all  d.  shall  be  hid  in  Ins  secret  places

22.  11.  or  d.  that  thou  canstnot  see

23.  17.  because  1  was  not  cut  off  before  the  d.

neither  hath  he  covered  the  </.  from  my  face

28.  .3.  he  setteth  an  end  to  d.  the  stones  of  d.

34.  22.  no  rf.  where  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide
37. 19.  w'e  cannot  order  our  speech  by  reason  of  d.
38.  9.  when  I  made  thick  rf.  a  swaddling-band
19-  and  as  for  </.  where  is  the  place  thereof?

Psal.  18.  11.  he  made  </.  his  secret  place
.35.  t  6.  let  their  way  be  </.  and  slipperiness
88.  18.  and  hast  put  mine  acquaintance  into  d.

97-  2.  clouds  and  d.  are  round  about  him

104.  20.  thou  makest  d.  and  it  is  night

105.  28.  he  sent*/,  and  made  it  dark

139.  11-  if  1  say,  surely  the  </.  shall  cover  me

12.  yea,  the  d.  bideth  "not  from  thee

Prov.  2.  13.  leave  paths  to  w'alk  in  the  w'ays  of  d.

4.  19.  the  way  of  the  wicked  is  as  rf.  they  know  not
Eccl.  6.  4.  his  name  shall  be  covered  with  d.

Isa.  5.  .30.  and  if  one  look  to  the  land,  behold  </.

8.  22.  they  shall  look,  and  behold  trouble  and  d.
45.  3.  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  </.

47.  5.  get  thee  into  d.  O  daughter  of  Chaldeans
60.  2.  for  behold,  the  d.  shall  cover  the  earth,  and
gross  rf.  the  people,  but  Lord  shall  arise  ot,  thee
Jer.  1.3.  16.  before  he  cause  d.  and  make  gross  d.
Ezek.  32.  8.  I  will  set  d.  upon  thy  land,  saith  Lord
Joel  2.  2.  a  day  of  d.  of  clouds  and  of  thick  </.

31.  the  sun  snail  be  turned  into  d.  Acts  2. 20.
Amos  4.  1.3.  he  that  maketh  the  morning  rf.

Nah.  1.  8.  and  d.  shall  pursue  his  enemies
Mat.  6.  23.  thy  whole  body  full  of  d.  Luke  11.  34.

8.  12.  be  cast  out  into  outer*/.  22.  13.  |  25.  30.

27.  45.  from  sixth  hour  there  was  </.  Mark  15.  3.3.
Luke  22.  53.  this  is  your  hour  and  the  power  of  d.
23.  44.  and  there  was  d.  over  all  the  earth
Acts  13. 11.  there  fell  on  him  a  mist  and  a  rf.

Eph.  5.  11.  have  no  fellowship  with  the  works  of  rf.

6.  12.  against  the  rulers  of  the  d.  of  this  world
Col.  1.  1.3.  who  hath  delivered  us  from  power  of  d.

1  Thess.  5.  5.  we  are  not  of  the  night  nor  of  rf.

Ileb.  12.  18.  ye  are  not  come  to  blackness  and  d.

2  Pet.  2.  4.  and  delivered  them  into  chains  of  d.

17.  to  whom  the  mist  of  d.  is  reserved  for  ever

1  John  2.11.  because  that  d.  hath  blinded  his  eyes
Jude  6.  hath  reserved  in  everlasting  chains  under  d.

13.  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackn.  of*/,  for  ever
Rev.  16.  10.  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of*/.

DARKNESS,  with  day.

Job  3.  4.  let  that  day  be  d.  let  not  God  regard  it

15.  2.3.  he  knoweth  that  the  day  of  d.  is  at  hand
Eccl.  11.  8.  yet  let  him  remember  the  days  of  d.
Isa.  58.  10.  then  shall  thy  </.  be  as  the  noon -day
Joel  2.  2.  a  day  of  d.  and  gloominess,  Zeph.  1.  15.
Amos  5.  20.  shall  not  th e  day  of  the  Lord  be  d.  ?

In  DARKNESS.

Dent.  28.  29.  thou  shalt  grope  as  the  blind  in  d.

1  Sam.  2.  9.  and  the  wicked  shall  be  silent  in  d.

1  Kings  8.  12.  Solomon  spake,  the  Lord  said  that
he  would  dwell  in  the  thick  d.  2  Chr.  6. 1.
Job  17.  13.  I  have  made  my  bed  in  the  d.

Psal.  11.  +  2.  they  may  in  d.  shoot  at  the  upright
82.  5.  they  know  not,  they  walk  on  in  d.

88.  6.  thou  hast  laid  me  in  d.  in  the  deeps
91.  6.  nor  for  the  pestilence  that  walketh  in  d.

107.  10.  such  as  sit  m  d.  and  the  shadow  of  death
143.  3.  the  enemy  hath  made  me  to  dwell  in  d.
Prov.  20. 20.  his  lamp  shall  be  put  out  in  obscure  d.
Eccl.  2.  14.  but  the  fool  walketh  in  d.

5. 17.  he  eateth  in  d.  ||  6. 4.  he  departeth  in  rf.

Isa.  42.7.  bring  them  that  sit  in  d.  out  of  prison  h.
49.  9.  to  them  that  are  in  d.  shew  yourselves
59.  9.  we  wait  for  light,  but  we  walk  in  d.


Jer.  23. 12.  their  ways  shall  be  as  slipper}'  ways  in  d.
Dan.  2.  22.  he  knoweth  what  is  in  the  d.  and  light
JohnS.  12.  lie  that  followeth  me  shall  not  walk  771  d.
12.  35.  for  he  that  walketh  in  d.  knoweth  not
46.  whosoever  believeth  me,  should  not  abide  in  d.
1  Thess.  5.  4.  but  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  d.

I  John  1.  6.  and  walk  in  d.  we  lie  and  do  not  truth

2.  9.  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  d.  even  till  now
1?  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  d.  walketh  in  d.

Land  of  DARK  N  ESS.

Job  10.  21.  before  1  go  even  to  the  land  rf  rf.

22.  a  land  of  d.  as  </.  itself,  and  shadow'  of  death
Jer.  2.  31.  have  I  been  to  Israel  a  land  of  d.?

DARKN  ESS,  with  light.

Gen.  1.  4.  and  God  divided  the  light  from  the  d.

18.  two  great  lights  to  divide  the  light  from  d
Job  10.  22.  a  land  v’here  the  light  is  as  d.

17.  12.  the  light  is  short  because  of  rf.

18.  18.  he  shall  be  driven  from  light  into  d.

26.  + 10.  until  the  end  of  light  with  </.

29.  3.  when  by  his  light  I  walked  through  d.

30.  26.  w’hen  I  waited  for  light,  there  came  d.
Psal.  112.  4.  to  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  d.

139.  12.  the  rf.  and  light  are  both  alike  to  thee

Eccl.  2. 13.  wisdom  excels  as  far  as  light  excelleth  </.
Isa.  5.  20.  that  put  d.  for  light,  and  light  for  d.

9.  2.  the  people  that  walked  in  rf.  have  seen  a  great
light,  upon  them  hath  light  shined,  Mat.  4.  16.

42.  16.  I  will  make  d.  light  before  them
45.  7-  I  form  light  and  create  d.  I  make  peace
50.  10.  that  walketh  in  d.  and  hath  no  light
Jer.  13. 16.  while  ye  look  for  light,  he  make  it  gross  </.
Lam.  3.  2.  he  brought  me  into  </.  but  not  into  light
Amos  5.  18.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  rf.  and  not  light
Mic.  7-  8.  when  1  sit  in*/,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light
Mat.  6.  23.  light  in  thee  be  </.  how  great  is  that  rf.  /

10.  27.  what  I  tell  in  rf.  speak  in  light,  Luke  12.  .3.
Luke  1.  79.  light  to  them  that  sit  in  rf.  Rom.  2.  19.

11.  35.  that  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  not  rf.

John  1.  5.  light  shineth  in  rf.  rf.  comprehended  it  not

3.  19.  and  men  loved  rf.  rather  than  light

12.  .35.  walk  while  ye  have  light,  lest  rf.  come
Acts  26.  18.  and  to  turn  them  from  rf.  to  light
Rom.  13.  12.  cast  off  the  v'orks  of  rf.  put  on  light

1  Cor.  4.  5.  to  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  rf.

2  Cor.  4.  6.  who  commanded  light  to  shine  out  of  rf.
6.  14.  what  communion  hath  light  with  rf.  ?

1  Pet.  2.  9.  called  you  out  of*/,  into  marvellous  light

1  John  1.  5.  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  rf.  at  all
2. 8.  rf.  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth

Cut  of  DARKNESS.

Dent.  5.  22.  when  ye  heard  the  voice  out  of  the  rf.
Job  12.  22.  he  discovered!  deep  things  out  of  rf.

15.  22.  believeth  not  that  he  shall  return  out  of  rf.
30.  he  shall  not  depart  out  of  rf.  the  flame  dry  up
Psal.  107. 14.  he  brought  them  out  of  rf.  and  shadow
Isa.  29.  18.  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  rf.
DARLING.

Psal.  22.  20.  deliver  my  rf.  from  power  of  the  dog

35.  17.  Lord,  rescue  my  rf.  from  the  lions

da’r  t,  s.

2  Sam.  18.  14.  Joab  took  three  rf.  in  his  hand
2  Chron.  32.  5.  Ilezekiah  made  rf.  and  shields
Job  41.  26.  the  spear  nor  the  rf.  cannot  hold

29.  rf.  are  counted  as  stubble,  he  laugheth  at
Prov.  7.  23.  till  a  rf.  strike  through  his  liver
Joel  2.  +  8.  when  they  fall  on  rf.  not  be  v'ounded
Eph.  6.  16.  to  quench  the  fiery  rf.  of  the  wicked
Ileb.  12.  20.  it  shall  be  thrust  through  with  a  rf.
DASH.

2  Kings  8. 12.  and  thou  wilt  rf.  their  children
Psal.  2.  9-  lest*/,  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter’s  vessel
91.  12.  they  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  thou  rf.  thy
foot  against  a  stone,  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4.  11.
Isa.  13. 18.  their  bows  shall  rf.  the  young  men
Jer.  13.  14.  I  will  rf.  them  one  against  another
DASHED.

Exod.  15.  6.  thy  right  hand,  O  Lord,  hath  rf.  in  pieces
Isa.  1.3.  16.  their  children  also  shall  be  rf.  in  pieces
before  their  eyes,  Has.  1.3.  16.  Nah.  3.  10.
Ilos.  10. 14.  the  mother  was  rf.  upon  her  children
DASHETH.

Psal.  1.37.  9.  that  rf.  thy  little  ones  against  the  stones
DATES.

2  Citron.  31. 1 5.  the  children  of  Israel  brought  rf.
DAUB,  ED,  ING.

Exod.  2.  3.  she  rf.  the  ark  with  slime  and  pitch
Ezek.  1.3.  10.  others  rf.  it  with  untempered  mortar

11.  say  to  them  which  rf.  it,  that  it  shall  fall

12.  where  is  the  rf.  wherewith  ye  have  rf.  it?

14.  so  will  I  break  down  the  wall  ye  have  rf.

22.  28.  her  prophets  have  rf.  them  with  mortar
DAUGHTER

Signifies,  [1]  A  female  child,  Gen.  34.  1.  [2]  A
sister,  Gen.  34.  17.  [3]  A  niece,  or  brother's
daughter,  Exod.  2.  21.  [4]  A  daughter-in-law ,
or  son's  wife,  Ruth  3.  18.  [5]  The  women  that
dwell  in  a  country,  Gen.  34.  1.  [6]  The  in¬

habitants  of  a  city  or  country,  both  men  and
women,  Isa.  16.  2.  Mat.  21.  5.  [71  Posterity,
lineage,  or  offspring,  Luke  1.  5.  [8]  The  lungs,
and  other  organs  of  singing,  called  the  daughters
of  music,  Eccl.  12.  4.  [9]  The  branches  of  trees,
Gen.  49.  +  22.  [10]  The  church  of  God,  Psal.

45.  9,  10.  Cant.  5.  8.

Gen.  20. 12.  is  rf.  of  my  father,  not  rf.  of  my  mother

24.  23.  whose  rf.  art  thou  ?  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  47.
48.  to  take  my  master’s  brother’s  rf.  to  his  son
34. 7.  he  had  wrought  folly  in  lying  with  Jacob’s  rf.
8.  soul  of  my  son  Shechem  longeth  for  your  rf.
17.  then  will  we  take  our  rf.  and  we  will  be  gone

19.  because  he  had  delight  in  Jacob’s*/.

Exod.  1.  16.  but  if  it  be  a  rf.  then  she  shall  live

21.  31.  whether  he  have  gored  a  son  or  a  rf.

Lev.  12.  6.  when  the  days  are  fulfilled  for  a  rf.

14. 1 10.  to  take  an  ewe  lamb,  the  rf.  of  her  year
18.  17-  nor  shalt  thou  take  her  daughter’s  rf.

21.  9.  the  rf.  of  any  priest,  if  she  profane  herself

22.  12.  if  the  pi  iest’s  rf.  be  married  to  a  stranger
1.3.  if  the  priest’s  rf.  be  a  widow  or  divorced

Num.  27.  9-  if  he  have  no  rf.  give  his  inheritance

36.  8.  every  rf.  that  possessed)  an  inheritance


D  AU


D  AU


I)  AU


Dent.  27.22.  cursed  be  he  that  lieth  with  his  sister,
the  d.  of  his  father  or  the  d.  of  his  mother
23. 56.  her  eye  shall  be  evil  towards  her  d.

Judg.  11.  34.  Jephthah’s  d.  came  out  to  meet  him
40.  to  lament  Jephthah’s  d.  four  days  in  a  year

1  1. 16.  count  not  thy  handmaid  a  d.  of  Belial

13.  19.  when  >aul’s  d.  should  have  been  given

2  Sam.  12.  3.  little  ewe-lamb  was  unto  him  as  a  d.

1  Kings  3.  1.  Solomon  took  Pharaoh’s  d.

11.1.  loved  many  women  with  the  d.  ot  Pharaoh

2  Kings  8.  18.  the  d.  of  Ahab  was  Jehoram’s  wife

9.  31.  go  bury  Jezebel,  for  she  is  a  king’s  d.

1  Chron.  2.  49.  and  the  d.  of  Caleb  was  Achsah
Esth.  2.  7.  he  took  his  uncle’s  d.  for  his  own  d.
Psal.  45. 10.  heal  ken,  O  d.  and  consider,  and  incline

13.  the  king's  d.  is  all  glorious  within
Cant.  7. 1.  how  beautiful  with  shoes,  O  prince's  d.
Jer.  31 . 22.  how  lone  go  about,  backsliding  d.  49. 4.
46.  19.  O  d.  dwelling  in  Egypt,  furnish  thyself

48. 18.  thou  d.  that  dost  inhabit  Dibon,  comedown
Ezek.  14.  16.  neither  deliver  son  nor  d.  18,  20.

16.  44.  saying,  as  is  the  mother,  so  is  her  d.

45.  thou  art  thy  mother’s  d.  that  loatheth

27. 1 6.  the  d.  of  the  Ashurites  made  thy  benches
44.  25.  for  son  or  d.  they  may  detile  themselves

Dan.  11.  6.  the  king’s  d.  of  the  south  shall  come

17.  shall  give  him  the  d.  of  women  corrupting
Dos.  1.6.  and  she  conceived  again,  and  bare  a  d.
Mic.  5. 1.  gather  thyself  in  troops,  O  d.  of  troops

7.  6.  d.  riseth  up  against  her  mother,  daughter-in-
law  against  her  mother,  Mat.  10.  35.  Luke  12.  53.
Zeph.  3.  10.  the  d.  of  my  dispersed  shall  bring
Mai.  2. 11.  hath  married  the  d.  of  a  strange  god
Mat.  9-  22.  Jesus  said,  d.  be  of  good  comf.  thy  faith
hath  made  thee  whole,  Mark  5.  34.  Luke  8.  48.

10.  37.  he  that  loveth  son  or  d.  more  than  me

14.  6.  the  d .  of  Herodias  danced  before  them

15.  28.  her  d.  was  made  whole  from  that  hour
Mark  7.  26.  he  would  cast  forth  devil  out  of  her  d.
LukeS.  42.  he  had  one  only  d.  about  12  years  of  age

13. 16.  ought  not  this  woman,  being  d.  of  Abraham
Acts  7. 21.  Pharaoh’s  d.  took  him  up  and  nourished
Deb.  11. 24.  Moses  refused  to  be  son  of  Pharaoh’s  d.

DA  UGH  1  ETt  of  Babylon.

Psal.  137. 8. 0  d.  of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be  destroyed
Isa.  47.  1.  O  d.  of  Babylon,  sit  on  the  ground
Jer.  50.  42.  to  battle  against  thee,  O  d.  of  Babylon

51.  33.  d.  of  Babylon  is  like  a  threshing  floor
Zech.  2.7.  O  Zion,  that  dwellest  with  d.  of  Babylon
DAUGHTER  of  the  Chaldeans.

Isa.  47. 1.  there  is  no  throne,  O  d.  of  the  Chaldeans

5.  get  thee  into  darkness,  O  d.  of  the  Chaldeans
DAUGHTER  of  Edom.

Lam.  4.  21.  rejoice  and  be  glad,  O  d.  of  Edom

22.  he  will  visit  thine  iniquity,  0  d.  of  Edom
DAUGHTER  of  Egypt.

Jer.  46.  11.  go  into  Gilead,  O  virgin,  d.  of  Egypt
24.  the  d.  of  Egypt  shall  be  confounded
DAUGHTER  of  Galhm.

Isa  10.  30.  lift  up  thy  voice.  O  d.  ofGaliim
His  DAUGHTER.


Gen.  29.  6.  Rachael  his  d.  cometh  with  the  sheep
Exod.  21.  7-  if  a  man  sell  his  d.  to  be  a  servant
Lev.  21 . 2.  for  his  son  or  his  d.  he  may  be  defiled
Hum.  27-  8.  shall  cause  inheritance  to  pass  to  his  d.
i  30. 16.  the  statutes  between  the  father  and  his  d.
Deut.  7.  3.  nor  his  d.  shalt  thou  take  to  thy  son
18.  10.  there  shall  not  be  found  one  that  maketh
his  d.  to  pass  through  the  fire,  2  Kings  23. 10.
Judg.  21 . 1.  not  any  of  us  give  his  d.  to  Benjamin

1  Sam.  17.  25.  king  wil  1  enrich  and  give  him  his  d.

DAUGHTER  of  Jerusalem.

2  Kings  19.  21.  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the  d.  of

Jerus.  hath  shaken  her  head  at  thee,  Isa.  37.22.
Lam.  2.  13.  what  thing  shall  I  liken  to  thee,  O  d.
of  Jerusalem,  O  daughter  of  Zion,  to  comfort  thee  ?
15.  they  wag  their  head  at  the  d.  of  Jerusalem
Mic.  4.  8.  the  Kingdom  shall  come  to  d.  of  Jerusalem
Zeph.  3. 14.  rejoice  with  all  the  heart,  O  d.  of  Jerus.
Zech.  9. 9.  shout,  O  d.  of  Jems,  thy  K  ing  cometh
DAUGHTER  of  Judah.

Lam.  1. 15.  the  Lord  hath  trodden  the  d.  of  Judah
2. 2.  he  hath  thrown  down  strong  holds  of  d.of  Judah
5.  he  hath  increased  in  d.  of  Judah  mourning
DAUGHTER-IN-LAW.

Gen.  38. 16.  he  knew  not  that  she  was  his  d. -in-law
24,  Tamar  thy  d. -in-law  hath  played  the  harlot
Lev.  18. 15.  not  uncover  nakedness  of  thy  d. -in-law
20. 12.  if  aman  lie  with  his  d.-in  law  both  shall  die


Euth  1. 22.  N  aomi  returned ,  and  Ruth  her  d.-in-law
4. 15.  d.-in-laui  which  loveth  thee,  hath  born  him
1  Sam.  4. 19.  d.-in-law  Phinehas’  wife  was  with  child
Ezek.  22. 11.  another  lew  dly  defileth  his  d.-in-law
Mic.  7.  6.  for  the  d.-in-law  riseth  up  against  the
mother-in-law,  Mat.  10. 35.  Duke  12.  53.
My  DAUGHTER.

Deut.  22. 16.  I  gave  my  d.  to  this  man  to  wife

17.  these  are  the  tokens  of  my  d.  virginity
Josh.  15.  16.  to  him  will  I  give  my  d.  Judg.  1. 12.
Judg.  11.  35.  alas,  my  d.  thou  hast  brought  me  low

19.  24.  behold,  here  is  my  d.  a  maiden
Euth  2.  2.  and  she  said  unto  her,  go,  my  d.

3. 10.  he  said,  blessed  be  thou  of  the  Lord,  my  d.

16.  her  mother  said,  who  art  thou,  my  d.  ?

18.  sit  still,  my  d.  till  thou  know  the  matter
Mat.  9. 18.  a  ruler,  saying,  my  d.  is  even  now  dead

15. 22.  my  d.  is  grievously  vexed  with  a  devil
Mark  5.  23.  my  little  d.  lieth  at  the  point  of  death
DAUGHTER  of  my  people.

Isa.  22.  4.  because  of  the  spoiling  of  the  d.  of  myp.
Jer .  4. 11.  a  dry  wind  toward  d.  of  my  p.  not  to  fan
6. 14.  healed  the  heart  of  d.  of  myp.  slightly,  8. 11.

26.  O  d.  of  my  people,  gird  thee  with  sackcloth
8. 19. ’behold,  the  voice  of  the  cry  of  the  d.  of  myp.

21.  for  hurt  of  d.  of  myp.  am  1  hurt,  I  am  black

22.  why  is  not  health  of  the  d.  of  myp.  recovered

9. 1.  that  1  might  weep  for  slain  of  the  d.  of  myp.

7. 1  wil  1  try  them ,  for  how  shall  I  do  for  d.  of  my p.

14. 17.  virgin  d.  of  myp.  is  broken  with  a  breach
Ir~n.  2. 11.  for  the  destruction  of  d.  ofmyp.  3.48.

*.  3.  the  rf.  ofmyp. is  become  cruel,  like  ostriches

6.  the  iniquity  of  the  d.  of  my  p.  is  greater  than


LamA.IO.'were  their  meat  in  destruction  of  d.of  myp.  1
DAUGHTER  of  Tarshish.

Isa.  23. 10.  pass  through  as  a  river,  O  d.  of  Tarshish  1
Thy  DAUGHTER.

Gen.  29. 18.  I  will  serve  7  years  for  thy  younger  d.
Exod.  20. 10.  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  d.  Deut.  5. 14.
Lev.  18. 10.  the  nakedness  of  thy  daughter’s  d.

19.  29.  do  not  prostitute  thy  d.  to  be  a  whore
Deut.  7.  3.  thy  d.  shalt  thou  not  give  to  his  son

12. 18.  thou  shalt  rejoice  and  thy  d.  16.  11, 14.

13.  6.  if  thy  son  or  thy  d.  entice  thee,  saying
22.  17.  saying,  I  found  not  thy  d.  a  maid
2  Kings  14.  9.  give  thy  d.  to  my  son,  2  Chron.  ‘25. 18.
Mark  5.35.  certain  who  said,  thy  d.\s  dead,LwPe8.49.

7.  29.  go  thy  way ,  the  devil  is  gone  out  of  thy  d.
DAUGHTER  of  Tyre.

Psal.  45.  12.  d.  of  Tyre  shall  be  there  with  a  gift
DA  UGHTER  of  Zidon.

Isa.  23.  12.  O  thou  oppressed  virgin,  d.  of  Zidon
DAUGHTER  of  Zion.

2  Kings  19. 21.  d.  ofZ.  hath  despised  thee, Isa.  37. 22.
Psal.  9. 14.  thy  praise  in  the  gates  of  the  d.  of  Zion
Isa.  1.8 .  d.  of  Zion  left  as  a  cottage  in  vineyard

4.  4.  have  washed  away  the  filth  of  the  d.  of  Zion
10.  32.  shake  against  mount  of  d.  of  Zion,  16.  1.

52.  2.  loose  thyself,  O  captive  d.  of  Zion
62. 11.  say  to  the  d.  of  Zion,  thy  salvation  cometh
Jer.  4.  31.  I  have  heard  the  voice  of  the  d.  of  Zfyn
6.  2.  I  have  likened  d.  of  Zion  to  a  comely  woman

23.  as  men  of  war  against  thee,  O  d.  of  Zion
Lam.  1.  6.  from  the  d.  of  Zion  beauty  is  departed

2. 1.  Lord  covereth  the  d.  of  Zion  with  a  cloud

4.  and  slew  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  d.  of  Zion

8.  Lord  purposed  to  destroy  the  wall  of  d.  of  Zion
10.  the  elders  of  d.  of  Zion  sit  on  the  ground

13.  what  shall  1  equal  to  thee,  O  d.  of  Zion?

18.  O  wall  of  the  d.  of  Zion,  let  tears  run  down
4.  22.  punishment  is  accomplished,  O  d.  of  Zion
Mic.  1. 13.  the  beginning  of  sin  to  therf.  of  Zion

4.  8.  O  tower,  the  strong  hold  of  the  d.  of  Zion

10.  be  in  pain,  labour  to  bring  forth,  O  d.  if  Zion
13.  arise  and  thresh,  O  d.  of  Zion,  1  will  make
Zeph.  3.  14.  sing,  O  d.  of  Zion,  shout  O  Israel
Zech.  2. 10.  sing  and  rejoice,  O  d.  of  Zion,  9.  9.

Mat.  21.  5.  tell  ye  the  d.  of  Zion,  thy  king  cometh
John  12. 15.  fear  not,  d.  of  Zion,  thy  king  cometh
DAUGHTER  of  Zur.

Num.  25. 15.  the  woman  was  Cozbi  the  d.  of  Zur
DAUGHTERS.

Gen.  6.  1.  and  when  d.  were  born  to  them

2.  the  sons  of  God  saw  the  d.  of  men,  and  took

6.  4.  the  sons  of  God  came  in  unto  the  d.  of  men

19.  14.  Lot  spake  to  them  which  married  his  d.

36.  botli  the  d.  of  Lot  with  child  by  their  father

24.  3.  take  not  a  wife  of  d.  of  Canaan,  37.  I  28. 1,  6.
13.  the  d.  of  the  city  came  out  to  draw  water

27.  46.  weary  of  my  life  because  of  the  d.  of  l  ieth

30.  13.  happy  am  1 ,  for  the  d.  will  call  me  blessed

31.  26.  thou  hast  carried  away  my  d.  as  captives
43.  these  d.  are  my  d.  ||  50.  if  thou  afflict  my  d.

34. 1 .  Dinah  went  out  to  see  the  d.  of  the  land

9.  give  your  d.  to  us,  and  take  our  d.  unto  you
16.  then  will  we  give  our  d.  to  you,  and  take  d.

49.  t  22.  Joseph  is  a  bough  whose  d.  run  over
Exod.  2.  16.  the  priest  of  Midian  had  seven  d.

21.  9.  he  shall  deal  with  her  after  the  manner  of  d.
34.  16.  their  d.  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods
Lev.  26.  29.  the  flesh  of  your  d.  shall  ye  eat
Num.  21.  t  25.  dwelt  in  Ueshhon  and  d.  thereof

26.  33.  names  of  d.  of  Zelophehad,  27-  1.  Josh.  17. 3.

27.  7-  the  d.  of  Zelophehad  speak  right
36.  10.  even  so  did  the  d.  of  Zelophehad

Deut.  23.  17-  shall  be  no  whore  of  the  d.  of  Israel
Judg.  3.  6.  they  took  their  d.  to  be  their  wives
21.  7-  we  will  not  give  them  of  our  d.  to  wives
18.  howbeit,  we  may  not  give  them  wives  of  our  d.
Euth  1 . 11.  turn  again,  my  d.  why  will  ye  go  ?  12.

13.  nay,  my  d.  it  grieveth  me  for  your  sakes

1  Sam.  8.  13.  take  your  d.  to  be  confectionaries

2  Sam.  13.  18.  were  king’s  d.  virgins  apparelled
Neh.  3.  12.  next  repaired  Shallum,  he  and  his  d.

5.  5.  our  d.  are  brought  into  bondage  already

7.  63.  took  one  oft?,  of  Barzillai  to  wife,  Ezra  2. 61.

10.  30.  not  give  our  d.  to  the  people  of  the  land

Job  42. 15.  no  women  were  so  fair  as  the  d.  of  Job
Psal.  45.  9.  king’s  d.  among  thy  honourable  women
144.  12.  that  our  d.  may  be  as  corner  stones
Prov.  31.  29.  many  d.  have  done  virtuously,  but  thou
Cant.  2.  2.  as  the  lily,  so  is  my  love  among  the  d.

6.  9.  the  d.  saw  her  and  blessed  her,  yea  the  queens
Isa.  13.  +  21.  d.  of  the  owl  dwell  there,  34.  +  13.

32.  9.  heai-  my  voice,  ye  careless  d.  give  ear
43.  t20.  the  d.  of  the  owl  shall  honour  me
60.  4.  and  thy  d.  shall  be  nursed  at  thy  side

Jer.  9.  20.  O  ye  women,  teach  your  d.  wailing

29.  6.  give  your  d.  to  husbands,  that  they  may  bear
49.  2.  and  her  d.  shall  be  burnt  with  fire

3.  cry,  ye  d.  of  Rabbah,  gird  ye  with  sackcloth
Lam.  3.  51.  because  of  all  the  d.  of  my  city
Ezek.  13.  17.  set  thy  face  against  the  d.  of  thy  peo.

16.  t  31 .  in  thy  d.  is  thine  eminent  place
46.  sister  Samaria,  and  her  d.  Sodom,  and  her  d.
49.  abundance  of  idleness  was  in  her  and  in  her  d.

53.  when  I  bring  back  the  captivity  of  her  d.

55.  when  thy  sister  Sodom  and  d.  shall  return
61.  and  I  will  give  them  unto  thee  for  d.

23.  2.  there  were  two  women,  the  d.  of  one  mother
26.  6.  her  d.  shall  be  slain  in  the  field,  8.

30.  18.  and  her  d.  shall  go  into  captivity

32.  16.  the  d.  of  the  nations  shall  lament  her
Dos.  4. 13.  therefore  your  d.  shall  commit  whoredom

14.  1  will  not  punish  your  d.  when  they  commit
Mic.  1.  +  8.  make  a  mourning  as  the  d.  of  the  owl
I.uke  1.  5.  and  his  wife  w'as  of  the  d.  of  Aaron
Acts  21.  9.  the  same  man  had  four  d.  virgins

1  Pet.  3.  6.  whose  it.  ye  are  as  long  as  ye  do  well
DAUGHTERS  of  Jerusalem.

Cant.  1. 5.  I  am  black,  but  comely,  O  d.  of  Jerus.
2. 7-  I  charge  you,  O  d.  of  Jerus.  3.  5.  1  5.  8.  1  8.  4.
3.  10.  paved  with  love  for  the  d.  of  .Jerusalem

5.  16.  this  is  my  beloved,  O  d.  of  Jerusalem
Luke  23.  28.  d.  of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me


DAUGHTERS  of  Israel.

Emit.  23. 17.  there  shall  be  no  whore  of  d.  of  lsraoi.
Judg.  11. 40.  d.  of  Israel  went  yearly  to  lament
2  Sam.  1.  24.  ye  d.  of  Israel,  weep  over  Saul,  who
DAUGHTERS  of  Judah.

Psal.  48. 11.  let  the  d.  of  Judah  be  glad,  because
97-  8.  Zion  heard,  and  the  d.  of  Judah  rejoiced
DAUGHTERS- IN-LAW.

Euth  1. 6.  then  she  arose  with  her  d.-m-law, ".

8.  N  aomi  said  to  her  two  d.-in-law,  go  return
DAUGHTERS  of  Moab.

Num.  25. 1.  Isr.  committed  whoredom  with  d.  of  M:.
Isa.  16.  2.  so  the  d.  of  M.  shall  be  at  fords  of  Arhon
DAUGHTERS  of  music.

Eccl.  12.  4.  the  d.  of  music  shall  be  brought  lovr
DAUGHTERS  of  the  Philistines.

Judg.  14. 1.  Samson  saw  a  woman  of  the  d.  of  Phil.

2. 1  have  seen  a  woman  of  d.  of  Phil,  get  her  for  mV
2  Sam.  1.  20.  publish  it  not  lest  the  d.  of  the  Plu-

[listines  rejoice

Ezek.  16. 27. 1  have  delivered  thee  to  the  d.  of  Phil.
57.  the  d.  of  Phil,  which  despise  thee  round  about
DAUGHTERS  of  Shiloh.

Judg.  21.  21.  if  the  d.  of  Shiloh  come  out  to  dance,
catch  ye  every  man  a  wife  of  the  d.  of  Shiloh
DAUGHTERS,  joined  with  Sons.

Gen.  5. 4.  he  begat  sons  and  d.  7, 10, 13, 16.  1 11. 11.
19. 12.  thy  sons  and  d.  bring  out  of  this  place

31.  28.  not  suffered  me  to  kiss  my  sons  and  d.

55.  he  kissed  his  sons  and  d.  and  blessed  them

37.  35.  all  his  sons  and  d.  rose  to  comfort  him

Exod.  3.  22.  ye  shall  put  them  on  your  sons  and  d.

10.  9.  with  our  sons  and  with  our  d.  will  we  go
21.  4.  and  she  have  born  him  sons  or  d.

32.  2.  ear-lings  of  your  sons  and  d.  bring  to  me
34. 16.  and  thou  take  of  their  d.  to  thy  sons

Lev.  10. 14.  thou,  thy  sons  and  d.  with  thee,  shall  eat
in  the  holy  place,  Num.  18. 11, 19.
Num..  21.  29.  given  his  sons  and  d.  into  captivity
26.  33.  Zelophehad  had  no  sons,  but  d.  Josh.  17.  3.
Deut.  12. 12.  ye  and  your  sons  and  d.  rejoice
31.  their  sons  and  d.  they  have  burnt  in  the  fire,
2  Kings  17. 17.  Jer.  7.  31.  |  32.  35-.

28.  32.  thy  sons  and  d.  given  to  another  people
41.  beget  sons  and  d.  but  shalt  not  enjoy  them
53.  thou  shalt  eat  the  flesh  of  thy  sons  and  d.

32. 19.  because  of  provoking  of  his  sons  and  d.

Josh.  7.  24.  they  brought  Achan,  his  sons  and  d.

17-6.  d.  of  Manasseh  had  inheritance  among  sons
Judg.  3.  6.  they  gave  their  d.  to  their  sons
12.  9.  Ibzan  took  in  thirty  d.  for  his  sons

1  Saw. 1.4. he  gave  Peninnah,  herjwi.f  and  ^.portions-

2. 21.  so  Hannah  bare  three  sons  and  two  d.

30.  3.  their  sons  and  d.  were  taken  captives

6.  grieved,  every  man  for  his  sons  and  for  his  d.

19.  there  was  nothing  lacking,  neither  sons  nor  d.

2  Sam.  5. 13.  and  there  were  yet  sons  and  d.  born  to

David,  1  Chron.  14.  3,
19.  5.  which  saved  the  lives  of  thy  sons  and  of  thy  d.

1  Chr.  2.  34.  now  Sheshan  had  no  sons  but  d.

4.  27.  Shimei  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  d.

23.  22.  Eleazar  died,  and  had  no  sons  but  d.

25.  5.  God  gave  Pieman  fourteen  sons  and  three  d.

2  Chron.  11. 21.  Rehoboam  had  28  sons  and  60  d.

13. 21.  Abijah  begat  22  sons  and  16  d.

24.  3.  Jehoiadatook  wives  and  begat  sons  and  d.

28.  8.  carried  captive  200,000  women,  sons  and  d.
29. 9.  our  sons  d.  and  wives  are  in  captivity  for  this

31. 18.  to  the  genealogy  of  their  sons  and  d.

Ezra  9.  2.  have  taken  of  their  d.  for  their  sons

12.  give  not  your  d.  to  their  sons,  Neh.  13.  25.
Neh.  4. 14.  and  fightforyour  sons,  d.  and  your  wives
5. 2.  that  said,  we,  our  sons  and  our  d.  are  many

5.  we  bring  into  bondage  our  sons  and  our  d.

10.  28.  their  sms  and  d.  clave  to  their  brethren
Job  1. 2.  there  were  born  to  Job  7  s.  and  3  d.  42. 13.

13.  a  day  when  his  sons  and  d.  were  eating,  18.
Psal.  106.  37.  they  sac.  their  sons  and  d.  to  devils

38.  and  shed  even  the  blood  of  their  sons  and  d.
Isa.  43.  6.  bring  my  s.  from  far,  and  my  d.  from  the
49.  22.  bring  thy  sons  in  their  arms,  and  thy  d.

56.  5.  will  1  give  a  name  better  than  of  s.  and  d.
Jer.  3. 24.  shame  hath  devoured  their  sons  and  d.

5. 17.  eat  that  which  thy  . vow.?  and  d.  should  eat

11.22.  their  sons  and  their  d.  shall  die  by  famine

14.  16.  they  shall  have  none  to  bury  their  r  and  d.
16.  2.  neither  shalt  thou  have  j.  nor  d.  in  this  place

3.  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  sons  and  d.

19.  9.  I  will  cause  them  eat  the  flesh  of  r.  and  d

29.  6.  take  ye  wives  and  beget  sons  and  d.

35.  8.  vre,  our  sons  and  our  d.  drink  no  wine
48.  46.  thy  sons  and  thy  d.  are  taken  captives

Ezek.  14. 16.  they  shall  deliver  neither  sons  wot  d.  ISi

22.  left  a  remnant  brought  forth,  both  sons  and  d.

16. 20.  taken  thy  sons  and  d.  and  sacrificed  them

23.  4.  and  they  were  mine,  and  bare  sons  and  d.

10.  they  took  her  sons  and  d.  and  slew  her,  25.

47.  they  shall  slay  their  sons  and  d.  and  burn  up

24.21.  your  sons  and  d.  fal  1  by  the  sword, Amos  7 .17.
25.  when  I  take  from  them  their  sons  and  d.

Joel  2.  28.  your  sons  and  d.  prophesy,  Acts  2.  1”.

3.  8.  I  will  sell  your  sms  and  d.  to  Judah

2  Cor.  6. 18.  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  d.  saith  the  Lord
DAUGHTERS  of  Syria.

Ezek.  16. 57.  time  of  thy  reproach  of  the  d.  of  Syria
Two  DAUGHTERS.

Gew.19.8.1  have  two  rf.letme  bring  them  outto  you

15.  take  thy  wife  and  thy  two  d.  which  are  here

30.  Lot  dwelt  in  a  cave,  he  and  his  two  d.

29.  16.  Laban  had  two  d.  Leah  and  Rachel
31.41.  I  served  thee  fourteen  years  for  thy  two  d.
Euth  1.  7-  Naomi  went  out  with  her  two  d.

1  Sam.  2.  21.  Hannah  conceived  and  bare  two  d.

14.  49.  Saul’s  two  d.  were  Merab  and  Michal

Prov.  30.  15.  the  horseleech  hath  two  d.  crying
DAUGHTERS  of  the  uncircumcised.

2  Sam.  1.  20.  publish  it  not,  lest  d.  of  the  ?<wc.triumpS

DAUGHTERS  of  Zion.

Cant.  3.  11.  go  forth,  ()  ye  d.  of  Zion,  and  behold
Isa.  3. 16.  because  the  d.  of  Zion  are  haughty

17.  smite  with  a  scab  the  head  of  the  d.  cf  Zion

4.  4.  have  washed  away  the  filth  of  the  d.  of  Zion


I)  A  1


I)  A  Y


Jj  A  Y


DAWN,  ING

fos’lu  6.  15.  they  rose  about  the  d.  of  the  day
Judg.  19.  26.  then  came  the  woman  in  the  d.  of  day
Job  9.  neither  let  it  see  thed.  of  the  day

7.4.  1  am  full  of  tossings  to  the  d.  of  the  day
Psal.  119.  147..  1  prevented  the  d.  of  the  morning
Mat.  28.  1.  as  it  began  to  d.  towards  the  first  dayr
C  Pet.  1. 19.  till  the  day  d.  and  the  day-star  arise  in
DAY.

I  Che  day  is  distinguished  into  natural,  civil,  and
artificial.  The  natural  or  solar  day,  is  the  du¬
ration  of  four  and  twenty  hours.  Hie  artificial
day,  is  the  time  of  the  sun's  continuance  above

I  the  horizon,  which  is  unequal,  according  to  dif¬
ferent  times  and  seasons,  by  reason  of  the  ob¬
liquity  of  the  sphere.  God  called  the  light  day,

•  that  is,  the  artificial  day.  The  evening  and  the
morning  were  the  first  day,  namely,  natural,
Gen.  1.  5.  The  civil  day,  is  that,  the  beginning
■and  end  whereof  is  determined  by  the  common
■custom  of  any  nation.  The  Hebrews  began  their
civil  and  ecclesiastical  day  from  one  evening  to
another.  From  even  unto  even  shall  ye  cele¬
brate  your  sabbath.  Lev.  23.  32.  The  Baby-

Ilonians  reckoned  their  days  from  one  sun-rising
to  another ;  the  Italians  from  one  sun-set  to
another :  some  from  noon  to  noon ;  and  others
from  midnight  to  midnight.

Tnis  day,  or  to-day,  does  not  only  signify  the  par¬
ticular  day  on  which  one  is  speaking,  hut  like¬
wise  any  indefinite  time.  Thou  art  to  pass  over
Jordan  this  day,  Deut.  9.  1.  that  is,  in  a  short
time  after  this,  the  word  day  being  often  put  for
time,  as  in  Gen.  2.4, 17.  In  the  day  when  God
made  the  earth  and  the  heavens :  in  the  day
thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die,  that
is,  at  the  time  when  thou  eatest  thereof.  To-day,
if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  Heb.  3.  15. ;  that  is,
in  this  present  season  of  grace,  while  you  enjoy
the  means  of  grace.  The  night  is  far  spent,  the
day  is  at  hand,  Rom.  13.  12.  The  time  of
heathenish  ignorance  and  profaneness  is  in  a
great  measure  over  ;  and  the  time  of  gospel-light
■and  saving  knowledge  is  begun  among  us.  The
day  of  Jerusalem,  is  the  time  of  its  calamity
■and  destruction,  Psal.  137.  7-  Abraham  de¬
sired  to  see  my  day,  says  our  Saviour,  John  8.
56.  He  desired  to  have  a  prospect  of  the  time
of  my  coming  in  the  flesh.  One  man  esteemeth
one  day  above  another,  Rom.  14.  5.  He  thinks
that  the  Jewish  festivals  are  holier  than  other
days,  and  still  to  be  observed.  He  seeth  that
his  day  is  coming,  Psal.  37.  13.  The  time  ap¬
pointed  hy  God  for  his  punishment ,  or  destruc¬
tion.  This  day  have  I  begotten  thee,  Psal.  2.
7.  that  is,  from  all  eternity,  in  which  there  is
oio  succession,  no  yesterday,  no  to-morrow,  but
it  is  all  as  one  continued  day  or  moment,  without
change  or  flux.  Or,  this  day,  may  refer  to  the
manifestation  of  Christ’s  eternal  sonshipin  time  ;
cither  in  his  birth  and  life,  when  his  being  the
Son  of  God  was  demonstrated  by  the  testimony  of
the  angel,  Luke  1.  32.  And  of  God  the  lather.
Mat.  3.  17-  I  17.  5.  But  chiefly  at  his  resur¬
rection.  hy  which  he  was  declared  to  be  the  Son
of  God  with  power,  Rom.  1.  4.  In  one  day,
that  is,  suddenly  and  unexpectedly ,  Rev.  18.  8.
The  Christian  sabbath  is  called  the  Lord’s  day,
Rev.  1.  10.  as  the  sacrament  is  called  the  Lord’s
supper,  1  Cor.  11.  20.  because  Christ  instituted
■it,  or,  because  the  end  of  its  institution  was  the
remembrance  of  Christ’s  resurrection,  at  the  end
of  the  Lord's  supper  was  the  commemoration  of  his
death  ;  or,  because  it  is  employed  in  his  worship
and  service.  The  day  of  judgment  is  likewise
culled  the  Lord’s  day,  1  Thess.  5.  2.  It  is  his  hy
destination,  because  thereon  he  has  appointed  to
judge  the  world ;  but  the  sabbath  is  his  by  con¬
secration,  choice,  and  institution.

Gen.  1. 5.  Cod  called  the  light  d.  and  darkness  night

32.  26.  he  said,  let  me  go,  for  the  d.  breaketh
f  Erod.  21.  21.  if  he  continue  a  d.  or  two,  he  shall
40.  37.  journeyed  not,  till  the  d.  it  was  taken  up
Lev.  23.  37.  feasts  of  Lord,  every  thing  upon  his  d.
Num.  3.  13.  onthe  d.  I  smote  the  first-born  in  Egypt
7.  11.  each  prince  shall  offer  his  offering  on  his  d.

14. 34.  each  d.  for  a  year  shall  bear  your  iniquities
30.  8.  if  her  husband  disallow  her  on  the  d.  12.
Dent.  4.  10.  the  d.  thou  stoodest  before  L.  in  Horeb

15.  ye  saw  no  manner  of  similitude  on  the  d.

9.  7.  from  the  d.  thou  didst  depart  out  of  Egypt
24.  have  been  rebellious  from  the  d.  I  knew  you
24. 15.  at  his  d.  thou  shalt  give  him  his  hire
t  Josh.  6.  10.  till  the  d.  I  bid  you  shout,  then  shout
9.  12.  on  the  d.  we  came  forth  to  go  to  you
10.  13.  the  sun  hasted  not  down  about  a  whole  d.

14.  was  no  d.  like  that  before  or  after  it
Judg,  16. 2.  when  it  is  d.  we  shall  kill  Samson
1  19.  t  8.  and  they  tarried  till  the  d.  declined
30.  from  the  d.  that  Israel  came  out  of  Egypt
l\uth  4.  5.  what  d.  thou  buyest  the  field  of  Naomi
1  ■Sam.  9.  15.  the  Lord  told  Samuel  a  d.  before

24.4.  behold  the  d.  of  which  the  Lord  said

26.  10.  smite  him,  or  his  d.  shall  come  to  die
2  Sam.  3.  35.  while  it  was  yet  d.  Jer.  15.  9.

13. 32.  from  the  d.  he  forced  his  sister  Tamar
19.  24.  from  the  d.  the  king  departed,  till  the  d.

1  Kings 2.  3J.  that  onthe  d.  thou  goestout,  42.

8.  t  59.  maintain  the  thing  of  a  d.  in  his  d.

17:,14.  till  the  d.  that  the  Lord  sendeth  rain
2  Kings  A.  8.  it  fell  on  a  d.  that  Elisha  passed,  1 1 , 18.
Kelt.  4.  2.  he  said,  will  they  make  an  end  in  a  d.  ?

22.  in  the  night  a  guard,  and  labour  on  the  d.
F.sth.  9. 17.  and  made  it  a  d.  of  feasting,  18,  19.

Job  \.  4.  feasted  in  their  houses,  every  one  iiis  d.

6.  there  was  a  d.  when  the  sons  of  ( lod,  13.  |  2.  1.

3.  3.  let  the  d.  perish  wherein  I  was  born
14.  6.  he  may  rest,  till  he  shall  accomplish  hisrf.

18. 2ii.  they  shall  be  astonied  athis</.

19.  25.  he  sha  ll  stand  at  latter  d.  upon  the  earth
-.1 .  30.  the  wicked  is  reserved  to  d.  of  destruction
'Psal.  19.  2.  d,  unto  d.  uttereth  speech,  and  night


Psal.  37.  13.  for  he  seeth  that  his  d.  is  coming
78.  42.  nor  remembered  d.  when  he  delivered  them

84. 10.  Ad.  in  thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand
119.  164.  seven  times  a  d.  do  1  praise  thee

Prov.  4. 18.  thatshineth  more  and  more  to  perfect  d.

7.  20.  he  will  come  home  at  the  d.  appointed

27-  1.  thou  knowest  not  what  a  d.  may  bring  forth
Cant.  2.17.  till  d.  break,  and  shadows  fiee  away ,  4,  6.
Isa.  7.  17.  from  the  d.  that  Ephraim  departed
30.  +  8.  that  it  may  be  for  the  latter  d.  tor  ever
43. 13.  yea,  before  the  d.  was,  1  am  lie
58.  5.  a  d.  for  a  man  to  afflict  his  soul  ?  wilt  thou
call  this  a  fast,  an  acceptable  d.  to  the  Lord  r

61.  2.  and  the  d.  of  vengeance  of  our  Cod,  63.  4.
Jer.  12.  3.  prepare  them  for  the  d.  of  slaughter

27.  22.  there  shall  they  be  till  the  d.  1  visit  them

32.  31.  from  the  d.  they  built  it,  even  to  this  d.

36.  2.  from  the  d.  I  spake  to  thee,  even  to  this  d.
38.28.  till  the  d.  that  Jerusalem  was  taken

47.  4.  because  of  the  d.  that  cometh  to  spoil
50.  27.  woe  unto  them,  for  their  d.  is  come
Ezek.  4.  6. 1  have  appointed  thee  ea  h  d.  for  a  year

7. 10.  behold  the  d.  behold  it  is  come,  the  morning

21.  25.  thou  wicked  prince,  whose  d.  is  come,  29.

28.  15.  from  the  d.  that  thou  wast  created
30.  2.  woe  worth  the  d.  ||  3.  for  the  d.  is  near

18.  at  'Tehaphnehes  also  the  d.  shall  be  darkened
Dan.  6.  10.  maketh  petition  three  times  a  d.  13.
Hos.  9.  5.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  d.  ?

Joel  2.  2.  a  d.  of  darkness  and  of  gloominess
Amos  5.  8.  seek  him  that  maketh  the  d.  dark

8.  10.  I  will  make  the  end  thereof  as  a  bitter  d.
Mic.  3.  6.  and  the  d.  shall  be  dark  over  them

7.  4.  the  d.  of  thy  watchmen,  and  thy  visitation
Zeph.  2.  2.  before  the  decree,  the  d.  pass  as  the  chaff

3.  8.  till  the  d.  that  I  rise  up  to  the  prey

Zech.  4. 10.  for  who  hath  despised  d.  of  small  things  ?
Mai.  3.  2.  but  who  may  abide  the  d.  of  his  coming  ?

4.  1.  the  d.  cometh  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven
Mai;.  24.38.  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage, till  the

d.  that  N oe  entered  into  the  ark,  Luke  17. 27.
50.  the  Lord  of  that  servant  shall  come  in  a  d.

when  he  lookethnot  for  him,  Luke  12.  46.
25.  13.  ye  neither  know  the  d.  nor  the  hour
Mark  1.35.  rising  up  a  great  while  before  d.  went  out
Luke  1.20.  dumb  till  the  d.  these  things  be  performed
80.  child  grew  fill  the  d.  of  his  shewingunto  Israel

17. 4.  trespass  seven  times  in  a  d.  and  turn  again
24.  so  shall  also  the  Son  of  man  be  in  his  d.

John  6.  39.  but  should  raise  it  again  at  the  last  d.
40.  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  d.  44,  54.

8. 56.  your  father  A  braham  rejoiced  to  see  my  d.

9. 4.  I  must  work  the  work  of  him  while  it  is  d.
Acts  1.  2.  until  the  d.  in  which  he  was  taken  up

12.  21.  on  a  set  d.  Herod  sat  upon  his  throne

16.  35.  and  when  it  was  d.  23.  12. 1  27.  39.

17.  31.  because  he  hath  appointed  a  d.  in  which
27.  29.  they  cast  four  anchors,  and  -wished  for  d.

Rom  . 2.5.  buttreasureot  wrath  against  the  d.  of  wrath

13.  12.  d.  is  at  hand,  let  us  therefore  castoff  works
14. 6.  he  that  regardeth  a  d.  regardeth  it  to  the  Lord

1  Cor.  3.13.  for  the  d.  shall  declare  it, because  it  shall
4.  1 3.  should  be  judged  of  you  or  of  man’s  d.

2  Cor.  6.  2.  behold,  now  is  the  d.  of  salvation
Eph.  4.  30.  ye  are  sealed  to  the  d.  of  redemption
Phil.  1. 6.  will  perform  it  until  the  d.  of  Jesus  Christ

1  Thess.  5.  5.  ye  are  all  the  children  of  the  d.

8.  but  let  us  who  are  of  the  d.  he  sober,  putting  on
HebA.j.  again  he  limiteth  a  certain  (/.saying,  to-d.

8.  would  he  not  afterward  spoken  of  another  d.  ?
it).  25.  the  more  as  ye  see  the  d.  approaching

2  Pet.  1. 19.  till  the  d.  dawn,  and  the  day-star  arise
3.  12.  hasting  to  the  coming  of  the  d.  of  God

Rev.  9. 15.  which  were  prepared  for  an  hour  and  a  d.
See  Atonement,  Battle,  Calamity,  Dark¬
ness,  Evil,  Holy,  Last.

All  the  DAY.

Psal.  25.  5.  teach  me,  for  on  thee  do  I  wait  all  the  d.
71. 15.  my  mouth  shew  forth  thy  salvation  all  the  d.
89.  16.  in  thy  name  shall  thev  rejoice  all  the  d.
102.  8.  mine  enemies  reproach  me  all  the  d.

119.  97.  thy  law  is  my  meditation  all  the  d.

Isa. 28.24. doth  the  ploughman  ploughs//  the  d.  to  sow
65.  2.  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  the  d.

5.  these  are  a  smoke,  a  fire  that  burneth  all  the  d.
Lam.  1.13.  hath  made  me  desolate  andfaint  all  the  d.

3.  3.  he  turneth  his  hand  against  me  all  the  d.

14.  1  was  a  derision  to  my  people  all  the  d.

62.  thou  hast  heard  their  device  aga.  me  all  thed.
Mat.  20.  6.  why  stand  ye  here  all  the  d.  idle  ?

All  the  DAY  long.

Deut.  28. 32.  fail  with  longing  for  them  all  the  d.  long

33.  12.  the  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  d.  long
Psal.  32.  3.  through  my  roaring  all  the  d.  long
35.  28.  shall  speak  of  thy  praise  all  the  d.  long
38.  6.  I  am  troubled,  1  go  mourning  all  the  d.  long

12.  they  imagine  deceits  all  the  d.  long
44.  8.  in  Cod  we  boast  all  the  d.  long,  and  praise

22.  for  thy  sake  we  are  killed  all  the  d.  lont,

71.  24.  shall  talk  of  thy  righteousness  all  the  d.  long
73.  14.  for  all  the  d.  long  have  I  been  plagued
Prov.  21.  26.  he  coveteth  greedily  all  the  d.  long
23.  17.  he  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  d.  long
Rom.  10.21.  all  the  d.  long  I  stretched  forth  my  haacb
DAY  of  death.

Gen.  27-  2. 1  am  old,  I  know  not  the  of  my  death
Judg.  13. 7-  child  be  a  Nazarite  to  d.  o/liis  death

1  Sam.  15.35.  Sam.  came  not  to  see  Saul  till  d.of  death

2  Sam.  6.  23.  Miohal  had  no  child  till  d.  of  death
20.  3.  concubines  were  shut  up  to  d.  c/their  death

2  Kings  15.  5.  Uzziah  the  king  was  a  leper  to  the  d.

of  his  death,  2  Chron.  26.  21.
Feel.  7. 1  •  the  d.  of  death  better  than  d.  of  one’s  birth
8.  8.  neither  hath  he  power  in  the  d.  of  death
Jer.  52. 11.  put  him  in  prison  till  the  d.  o/his  death

34.  every  day  a  portion,  till  the  d.  e/his  death

By  DAY,  and  Day  by  day.

Gen.  39-  10.  as  she  spake  to  Joseph  d.  by  d.

Exod.  13.  21.  the  Lord  went  before  them  by  d.

22.  lie  took  notavvav  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  by  d.

29.  38.  thou  shalt  offer  two  lambs  of  the  first  year

d.  by  d.  continually’,  Num.  23  +  3.


Exod.  40.  38.  for  the  cloud  of  the  Ixird  was  upon  the
tabernacle  by  d.  and  fire  by  night,  Num.  9. 16.
Bum.  10.  34.  the  cloud  of  tire  Lord  was  on  them  by
d.  14. 14.  Deut.  1.  33.  Neh.  9. 19.
Judg.  0.  27-  because  he  could  not  do  it  by  d.

2  Sam.  21. 10.  nor  birds  of  air  to  rest  on  them  by  d.

1  Chron.  12.  22.  d.  by  d.  there  came  to  help  David

2  Chron.  21. 15.  by  reason  of  the  sickness  d.  by  d.
24.  11.  thus  they  did  d,  by  d.  and  gathered  money
30.  21 .  the  priests  praised  the  Lord  d.  by  d.

Ezra  6.  9.  let  it  be  given  d.  by  d.  without  fail.

Neh.  8. 18.  d.  by  d.  he  read  in  the  law  of  God
Psal.  91.  5.  nor  the  arrow  that  fiieth  bp  d.

121.  6.  the  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by  d.

136.  8.  the  sun  to  rule  by  d. for  his  mercy  endureth
Isa.  60. 1 9.  the  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  d.
Jer.  31.  35.  who  giveth  the  sun  for  a  light  by  d.
Ezek.  12.  3.  and  remove  by  d.  in  their  sight
7.  I  did  so,  l  brought  forth  my  stuff  by  d.

Luke  11.  3.  give  us  d.  by  d.  our  daily  bread
2  Cor.  4. 16.  the  inward  man  is  renewed  d.  hy  d.
Rev.  21. 25.  the  gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  by  d.
Every  DAY.

Gen.  6.  t  5.  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  evil  every  d.
Exod.  16.  4.  go  out  and  gather  a  certain  rate  every  d.
29.  36.  thou  shalt  offer  a  bullock  every  d.

1  Sam.  23.  14.  and  Saul  sought  David  every  d.

2  Sam.  13.  37 .  David  mourned  for  his  son  every  d.

2  A  mgs  25.  30.  given  him  a  daily  rate  for  every  d.

1  Chron.  16. 37.  minister,  as  every  d.  work  required

2  Chron.  8. 13.  even  after  a  certain  rate  every  d.

14.  as  the  duty  of  every  d.  required,  Ezra  3.  4.

Neh.  11. 23.  a  portion  for  singers,  due  for  every  d.
12.  47.  and  the  porters  every  d.  his  portion
Estli.  2. 11.  Moraecai  walked  every  d.  before  court
Psal.  7. 11.  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  d.

50  A.  every  d.  they  wrest  my  words,  their  thoughts
145.  2.  every  d.  will  I  bless  thee  and  praise  thy  name
Isa.  51.  13.  and  hast  feared  continually  every  d.
52.  5.  and  my  name  every  d.  is  blasphemed
Ezek.  43.  25.  seven  days  prepare  every  d.  a  goat
Luke  16.  19.  rich  man  fared  sumptuously  every  d.
Rom.  14,  5.  another  esteemeth  every  d.  alike
Feast  DAY.

Psal.  81.  3.  blow  trumpet  on  our  solemn  feast  d.
Mat.  26.  5.  they  said ,  not  on  the  feast  d.  Mark  14. 2.
John  2.  23.  in  feast  d.  many  believed  in  his  name
First  DAY.

Gen.  1.  5.  the  evening  and  morning  -were  first  d.

8. 5.  on  the  first  d.  of  the  month  the  mountains  were
seen,  13.  Exod.  40.  2,  17.  Lev.  23.  24.
Exod.  12.  15.  the  first  d.  ye  shall  put  away  leaven,
whoso  eateth  from  first  d.  to  seventh

16.  in  the  first  d.  shall  be  an  holy  convocation,

Lev.  23.  7,  35.  Num.  28.  18.  |  29. 1.
Lev.  23.  39.  on  the  first  d.  shall  be  a  sabbath
40.  shall  take  on  first  d.  boughs  of  goodly  trees
Num.  1. 1.  the  T.ord  spake  to  Moses  on  the  first  d.
18.  they  assembled  the  congregation  on  the  first  d.

33.  38.  on  the  first  d.  Aaron  went  up  to  mount  ITor
Deut.  16. 4.  the  flesh  sacrificed  first  d.  not  remain

2  Chron.  29. 17-  they  began  on  first  d.  to  sanctify
Ezra  3.  6.  from  the  first  d.  began  they  to  offer
7*  9.  on  the  first  d.  began  he  to  go  up  from  Babylon,
and  on  the  first  d.  came  he  to  Jerusalem
10.  16.  sat  down  on  first  d.  of  the  tenth  month

17.  b y  first  d.  of  first  month  they  made  an  end
Neh.  8. 2.  Ezra  brought  the  law  on  first  d.  of  month

18.  from  first  unto  last  d.  he  read  in  the  law  of  God
Ezek.  26. 1.  in  the  first  d.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came,

29.  17.131.1.  132.1.  Hag.  1.  l.
45.  18.  in  first  d.  of  the  month  shalt  offer  a  bullock
Dan.  10. 12.  from  the  first  d.  thou  didst  set  thy  heart
Mat.  26.17.  first  d.  of  unleavened  bread,  Mark  14.12.
Acts  20. 18.  ye  know  from  first  d.  I  came  into  Asia
Phil.  1.  5.  for  your  fellowship  from  first  d.  till  now
See  Week.

Second  DAY.

Gen.  1. 8.  the  evening  and  morning  were  second  d.
Exod.  2.  13.  and  when  he  went  out  the  second  d.
Nim.  7. 18.  on  the  second  d.  Nethaneel  did  offer
29. 17.  on  the  second  d.  offer  twelve  young  bullocks
Josh.  6. 14.  the  second  d.  they  compassed  city  once
10.  32.  took  Lachish  on  the  second  d.  and  smote  it
Judg.  20. 24.  Israel  came  against  Benjamin  second d.

1  Sam.  20.  34.  Jonathan  did  eat  no  meat  second  d.

2  Chron.  3.  2.  he  began  to  build  second  d.  of  the  month
Neh.  8. 13.  on  the  second  d.  were  gathered  together
F.sth.  7.  2.  the  king  said  to  Esther  the  second  d.

Jer.  41.  4.  the  second  d.  after  he  had  slain  Gedaliah
Ezek.  43.  22.  on  the  second  d.  thou  shalt  offer  a  kid

Third  DAY.

Gen.  1. 13.  evening  and  morning  were  the  third  d.
22.  4.  on  third  d.  Abraham  saw  the  place  afar  off
31. 22.  it  was  told  Laban  on  thirdd.  Jacob  was  fled

34.  25.  on  third  d.  when  they  were  sore,  two  sons
Exod.  4. 1 10.  nor  since  the  third  d.  Josh.  3. 1 4.

19. 11.  be  ready  against  the  thirdd.  for  the  third d.

Lord  will  come  down  on  mount  Sinai,  15.
Lev.  7. 17-  the  remainder  of  the  flesh  of  sacrifice  on
the  third  d.  shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  19. 6.
Num.  19. 12.  shall  purify  himself  on  third  d.  31. 19.

19.  the  clean  person  sprinkle  unclean  on  third  d.
29.  20.  on  the  third  d.  eleven  bullocks,  two  rams
Deut.  19.  +  4.  hated  not  from  yesterday  third  d.  6.
Josh.  9. 17.  Israel  came  to  their  cities  on  the  thirdd.
Judg.  20. 30.  Israel  went  against  Benj.  the  third  d.

1  Sam .  4.  +  7.  not  such  a  thing  yesterday  or  third  d.

19.  +7.  was  in  his  presence  as  yesterday  or  third  d.

2  Sam.  3.  + 17-  ye  sought  Dav.  yesterday  and  thirdd.

1  Kings  12.12.  came  to  R  ehob.  third  d.  2  Chr.  10.12.

2  Kings  13.  +  5.  Isr.  dwelt  as  yesterday  and  third d.

20.  5.  on  the  third d.  go  up  to  the  house  of  Lord,  8.

1  Chron.  1 1.  +  2.  on  third  d.  wast  he  that  leddestout
Ezra  6. 15.  the  house  was  finished  on  the  third  d.
F.sth.  5. 1.  on  the  third d.  Esther  put  on  royal  apparel
Hos. 6. 2.  in  the  third  d.  he  will  raise  us  up  and  live
Mat.  16.  21.  suffer,  and  he  killed,  and  be  raised

again  the  third  d.  17-  23.  Luke  9.  22
GO.  19.  and  the  third  d.  he  shall  rise  again,  Mark  9.

31.  |  10.  34.  Luke  18.  33.  |  24.7.  46.
27. 64.  the  sepulchre  be  made  sure  till  the  thirdd.

91


DAY


DAY


DAY


X.uke  13.  32.  and  the  third  d.  I  shall  be  perfected

24.  21.  to-day  is  the  third  d.  since  all  these  things
John  2. 1 .  on  the  third  d.  there  was  a  marriage  in  Cana
Acts  27.  19.  the  third  d.  we  cast  out  tackling  of  ship

1  Cor.  15. 4.  and  that  he  rose  again  the  third  d.

Fourth  DAY  .

Gen.  1.  19.  evening  and  morning  were  {he  fourth  d.
Num.  29-  23.  on  the  fourth  d.  ten  bullocks,  two  rams

2  Chron.  20.  26.  on  the  fourth  d.  they  assembled
Ftr  a  8.  33.  on  fourth  d.  was  silver  and  gold  weighed
Zech.  7.  1.  word  came  to  Zechariah  on  the  fourth  d.

Fifth  DAY.  ^  i

Gen.  1.  23.  the  evening  and  morning  were  the  fifth  d.
Hum.  29. 26.  on  the  fifth  d.  nine  bullocks,  two  rams
Ezek.  1. 1.  in  the  fifth  d.  of  the  month,  2.  1 8. 1.

33.  21.  in  the  fifth  d.  one  came  unto  me,  saying

Sixth  DA  Y .

Gen.  1.  31.  evening  and  morning  were  the  sixth  d.
Exod.  16.  5.  on  the  sixth  d.  gather  twice  as  much,  22.

29.  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  d.  the  bread  of  two  days
Num?  7.  42.  on  the  sixth  d.  Eliasaph  offered
29  29.  on  the  sixth  d.  eight  bullocks,  two  rams
Seventh  DAY.

Gen.  2.  2.  on  the  seventh  d.  God  ended  his  work
3.  and  God  blessed  the  seventh  d.  Exod.  20.  11.
Exod.  12.  15.  eateth  leaven  from  first  d.  to  seventh  d.

16.  on  the  seventh d.  shall  be  an  holy  convocation,

Lev.  23.  8.  Num.  28.  25.

13.  6.  and  in  the  seventh  d.  shall  be  a  feast

16.  26.  six  days  gather  it,  but  the  seventh  d.  is  the
sabbath,  20. 10.  Lev.  23.  3.  Deut.  5.  14.
27.  there  went  out  some  on  the  seventh  d.

29.  let  no  man  go  out  of  his  place  on  the  seventh  d.

24.  16.  on  the  seventh  d.  he  called  unto  Moses
31.  17.  on  the  seventh  d.  God  rested,  Heb.  4.  4.

34.  21.  on  seventh  d.  thou  shalt  rest,  in  earing-time

35.  2.  on  seventh  d.  there  shall  be  a  holy  d.  to  you
Lev.  13.  5.  the  priest  shall  look  on  him  the  seventh

d.  6,  27  ,  32,  34,  51.  114.  39.

14.  9.  the  seventh  d.  he  shall  shave  it.  Num.  6.  9.
Num.  19. 12.  on  the  seventh  d.  he  shall  be  clean

19.  on  the  seventh  d.  purify  himself,  31. 19.

31 . 24.  ye  shall  wash  your  clothes  on  the  seventh  d.
Deut.  16.  8.  on  the  seventh  d.  a  solemn  assembly
Josh.  6. 4.  on  seventh  d.  compass  city  seven  times, 15.
Judg.  14. 15.  on  seventh  d.  they  said  to  Samson’s  wife

17.  on  the  seventh  d.  he  told  her,  because  she
2  Sam.  12. 18.  on  the  seventh  d.  the  child  died

1  Kings  20.  29.  on  the  seventh  d.  battle  was  joined

2  Kings  25.  8.  on  the  seventh  d.  came  Nebuzar-adan
Esth.  1. 10.  on  seventh  d.  when  Ahasuerus  wasmerry
Ezek.  30.  20.  in  the  seventh  d.  the  word  came

45.  20.  and  so  do  the  seventh  d.  of  the  month
Heb.  4.  4.  he  spake  of  the  seventh  d.  on  this  wise,
God  did  rest  the  seventh  d.  from  all  his  works
Eighth  DAY.

Exod.  22.  30.  on  the  eighth  d.  thou  shalt  give  it  me
Lev.  9.  1.  on  the  eighth  d.  Moses  called  Aaron

12.  3.  on  eighth  d.  flesh  of  foreskin  be  circumcised
14.  10.  on  the  eighth  d.  he  shall  take  two  he-lambs
23.  bring  two  turtles  on  eighth  d.  15. 14.  Num.  6. 10.
£2.  27.  from  the  eighth  d.  it  shall  be  accepted
£3.  36.  on  the  eighth  d.  shall  be  an  holy  convoca.
39.  and  on  the  eighth  d.  shall  be  a  sabbath
Num.  29.  35.  on  the  eighth  d.  ye  shall  have  a  solemn
assembly,  2  Chron.  7.  9.  Neh.  8.  18.
Ezek.  43.27.  °n  eighth  d.  priests  make  burnt  offerings
Luke  1.  59.  that  on  the  eighth  d.  they  came  to  cir¬
cumcise  the  child,  Acts  7.  8.  Phil.  3.  5.
Ninth  DAY’.

Lev.  23.  32.  shall  afflict  your  souls  in  the  ninth  d.

2  Kings  25.  3.  on  ninth  d.  famine  was  sore,  Jer.  52. 6.
Jer.  39.  2.  the  ninth  d.  the  city  was  broken  up
Tenth  DAY’.

Exod.  12.  3.  the  tenth  d.  of  this  month  take  a  lamb
Lev.  16.  29.  on  the  tenth  d.  of  the  month  ye  shall
afflict  youi  souls,  23.  27.  Num.  29.  7.

25.  9.  on  tenth  d.  the  trumpet  of  jubilee  shall  sound
Josh.  A.  19.  people  came  out  of  .Iordan  on  tenth  d.

2  Kings  25. 1 .  on  the  tenth  d.  "N ebuchadnezzar  came
against  Jerusalem,  Jer.  5 2.  4.  Ezek.  24.  1.
Jer.  52. 12.  on  the  tenth  d.  Neb.  burnt  house  of  Ld.
Ezek.  20.  1.  on  tenth  d.  the  elders  came  to  inquire
40.  1.  on  tenth  d.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon
Eleventh  DAY.

Num.7  ■  72.  on  the  eleventh  d.  Pagiel  of  Asher  offered
Twelfth  DAY9.

Num.  7-78.  on  twelfthd.  Ahira  of  Naphtali  offered
Ezra  8.  31.  departed  on  twelfth  d.  to  goto  Jerusalem
Ezek.  29. 1.  on  twelfth  d.  the  word  came  to  Ezekiel
Thirteenth  DAY’.

Esth.  3. 12.  king’s  scribes  were  called  on  thirteenth  d.

13.  to  destroy  all  Jews  on  thirteenth  d.  8. 12.  1  9. 1.
9. 17-  on  the  thirteenth  d.  of  month  Adar  they  rested

18.  the  Jews  at  Shushan  assemb.  on  thirteenth  d.

Fourteenth  DAY’.

Exod.  12.  6.  ye  shall  keep  the  lamb  till  fourteenth  d.
18.  on  fourteenth  d.  ye  shall  eat  unleavened  bread
Lev.  23. 5.  in  the  fourteenth  d.  is  the  Lord’s  passover
Num.  9.  3,  5.  I  28.  16.  Josh.  5.  10.  2  Chr.

30.  15.  |  35.  1.  Ezra  6.  19.  Ezek.  45.  21.
Num.  9. 11.  on  fourteenth  d.  at  even  they  shall  eat  it
Esth.  9.  15.  Jews  gathered  together  on  fourteenth  d.

17.  and  on  the. fourteenth  d.  of  the  same  rested  they
Acts  27.  33.  this  is  fourteenth  d.  ye  continued  fasting
Fifteenth  DA  Y.

Exod.  16. 1.  came  to  wildern.  of  Sinai  on  fifteenth  d.
Lev.  23.  6.  and  on  fifteenth  d.  is  feast,  Num.  28. 17.
34.  the  fifteenth  d.  of  the  seventh  month,  39.  Num.

29.  12.  Ezek.  45.  25.
Num  .  33.  3.  departed  from  It  ameses  on  fifteenth  d.
1  Kings  12.  32.  he  ordained  a  feast  on  fifteenth  d.  33.
Esth.  9. 18.  the  .1  e  ws  on  fifteenth  d.  rested  yearly ,  21.
Ezek.  32. 17.  on  fifteenth  d.  word  of  L.  came  to  Ezek.
Sixteenth  DAY.

I  Chr.  29.  17.  and  in  sixteenth  d.  they  made  an  end
Seventeenth  DAY’.

Gen.  7.  11.  on  seventeenth  d,  were  fount,  broken  up

8.  4.  ark  rested  on  seventeenth  d.  on  mount  Ararat
Twentieth  DAY’.

Num.  10. 11.  on  twentieth  d.  the  cloud  was  taken  up
Ezra  10.  9.  on  twentieth  d.  people  sat  in  the  streets

92


Twenty-first  DAY.

Exod.  12.  18.  eat  unleaven,  bread  till  twenty-first  d.
Hag.  2.11.  in  twenty -first  d.  came  the  word  to  Haggai
Twenty-third  DAY,

2  Chron.  7.  10.  t.-t.  d.  Solomon  sent  people  to  tents
Esth.  8. 9.  on  t.-t.  (/.written  as  Mordecai  commanded
Twenty-fourth  DAY’.

Neh.  9.  1.  on  t.-fourth  d.  Isr.  assembled  with  fast.
Dan.  10.  4.  on  t.-fourth  d.  1  was  by  river  Hiddekel
Hag.  1. 15.  in  t  -fourth  d.  Ld.  stirred  up  Zerubbabel

2. 10.  in  the  t.-fourth  d.  word  came  to  Haggai,  20.

18.  consider  from  the  t.-fourth  d.  of  nine  month
Zech.'J.  7.  on  the  t.-fourth  d.  came  word  to  Zechariah
Twenty-fifth  DAY.

Neh.  6. 15.  the  wall  was  finish,  in  the  twenty-fifth  d.
Jer.  52.  31.  out. -fifth  d.  Evil-merodach  lifted  head
Twenty-seventh  DAY’ .

Gen.  8.  14.  on  the  t. -seventh  d.  was  the  earth  dried
2  Kings  25.  27.  on  t.-s.  d.  Evil-merodach  lifted  head
Good  DAY.

1  Sam.  25.  8.  we  come  in  a  good  d.  give  to  David
Esth.  8.  17.  Jews  had  gladness  and  a  good  d.  9.  19.
9. 22.  was  turned  from  mourning  into -a  good  d.
Great  DAY’.

Jer.  30.  7.  alas,  that*/.  is  great ,  none  is  like  it
Hos.  1.  11.  for  great  shall  be  the  d.  of  Jezreel
Joel  2.  11.  the  d.  of  the  Lord  is  great  and  terrible

31.  sun  to  darkness,  moon  to  blood,  before  the  g.
and  terrible- d.  of  the  Lord  come,  Acts  2.  20.
Zeph.  1.  14.  the  great  d.  of  the  Lord  is  near
Mai.  4.  5.  before  the  coming  of  great  (/.of  the  Lord
John  7.  37.  that  great  d.  of  the  feast,  Jesus  cried
Jude  6.  reserved  unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  d.
Rev.  6.  17.  for  the  great  d.  of  his  wrath  is  come
16. 14.  to  gather  to  the  battle  of  the  great  d.

In  the  DAY’.

Gen.  2.  4.  in  the  d.  that  the  Lord  made  the  earth

17.  in  the  d.  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  die
3.  5.  in  the  d.  ye  eat,  your  eyes  shall  be  opened

31.  40.  thus  I  was,  in  the  d.  drought  consumed  me

35.  3.  who  answered  me  in  the  d.  of  my  distress
Exod.  32.  34.  nevertheless  in  the  d.  when  1  visit
Lev.  6.  5.  in  the  d.  of  his  trespass-pffering

20.  offer  in  the  d.  when  he  is  anointed,  7.  36.

7-  35.  in  the  d.  he  presented  them  to  minister
14. 2.  law  of  leper  m  the  d.  of  his  cleans.  Num.  6.  9.
f  57.  in  the  d.  of  the  clean  and  unclean
Num.  28.  26.  also  in  the  d.  of  the  first-fruits

30.  5.  if  her  father  disallow  in  the  d.  he  heareth

7.  husband  held  his  peace  in  the  d.  he  heard  it
Josh.  10.  12.  in  the  d.  L.  delivered  up  the  Amorites

14.  11.  as  strong  as  I  was  in  the  d.  Moses  sent  me

1  Sam.  20.  1  19.  where  thou  didst  hide  in  the  d.

21.  6.  put  hot  bread  in  the  d.  it  was  taken  away

2  Sam.  22.  1.  in  the d.  the  Lord  had  delivered  him
1  Kmgs2.8.  who  cursed  me  mthed.  that  1  fled
Neh.  13. 15.  in  thed.  wherein  they  sold  victuals
Esth.  9.  1.  in  the  d.  the  enemies  pf  the  Jews  hoped
Job  20.  28.  his  goods  flow  away  in  thed.  of  wrath
Psal.  95.  8.  as  in  the  d.  of  temptation,  Heb.  3.  8.

102.  2.  hide  not  thy  face  in  the  d.  of  trouble,  in
the  d.  when  l  call,  answer  me  speedily
110.  3.  thy  people  be  willing  in  the  d.  of  thy  power
5.  shall  strike  through  kings  in  the  d.  of  his  wrath

137.  7-  remember  Edom  in  the  d.  of  Jerusalem

138.  3.  in  the  d.  when  1  cried,  thou  answeredstme
Prov.  6.  34.  he  will  not  spare  in  the  d.  of  vengeance

11.  4.  riches  profit  not  in  the  d.  of  wrath
24.  10.  if  thou  faint  in  the  d.  of  adversity

Eccl.  7-  14.  in  the  d.  of  prosperity  be  joyful,  but  in
the  d.  of  adversity  consider
8. 8.  neither  hath  he  power  in  the  d.  of  death

12.  3.  in  the  d.  when  the  keepers  shall  tremble
Cant.  3.  11.  crowned  him  in  the  d.  of  his  espousals,

and  in  the  d.  of  the  gladness  of  his  heart
8.  8.  in  the  d.  when  she  shall  he  spoken  for
Isa.  9.  4.  broken  the  yoke  as  in  the  d.  of  Midian
10.  3.  what  will  ye  do  mthed.  of  visitation  ?

11. 16.  in  the  d.  he  came  out  of  Egypt,  Hos.  2. 15.
13. 13.  shall  remove  in  the  d.  of  his  fierce  anger

17.  11-  in  the  d.  shalt  thou  make  thy  plant  grow

in  the  d.  of  grief  and  desperate  sorrow

30.  25.  in  thed.  of  great  slaughter,  when  the  hewers

26.  in  the  d.  that  the  T.orcl  bindeth  up  the  breach
58.  3.  in  thed.  of  your  fast  you  find  pleasure
Jer.  16.  19.  O  Lord,  my  refuge  in  the  d.  of  affliction
17-  17.  thou  art  my  hope  in  thed.  of  evil

18.  if.  shew  back  and  not  face  in  thed.  of  calamity

36.  30.  his  dead  body  shall  be  cast  out  in  thed.
Lam.  1 .  12.  afflicted  me  in  the  d.  of  his  fierce  anger

2.  1.  remembered  not  his  footstool  in  the  d.  of  anger

3.  57.  thou  drewest  near  in  thed.  that  I  called
Ezek.  7.  19.  gold  not  deliver  them  in  the  d.  of  wrath

16.  4.  thy  nativity  in  the  d.  thou  wast  born,  5.

56.  Sodom  not  mentioned  in  the  d.  of  thy  pride

27.  27-  they  shall  fall  inthe  d.  of  thy  ruin
30.  9.  great  pain  came  on  them  as  in  the  d.  of  Egypt

32.  10.  every  man  for  his  life  in  the  d.  of  thy  fall

33.  12.  in  the  d.  he  turneth  from  his  wickedness,

not  able  to  live  in  the  d.  that  he  sinneth
Hos.  2.  3.  lest  l  set  her  as  in  the  d.  she  was  born
4.5.  therefore  shalt  thou  fall  inthe  d.  and  prophet
Amos  1. 14.  with  a  tempest  in  the  d.  ofa  whirlwind

8.  9.  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the  clear  d.
Obad.ll.  inthe  d.  thou  stoodest  on  the  other  side

12.  nor  rejoiced  in  the  d.  of  their  destruction
14.  those  of  hi§  that  did  remain  in  the  d.  of  dist.
Mai.  A.  3.  in  the  d.  that  1  shall  do  this,  saith  Lord
Luke  17. 30.  in  the  d.  when  the  Son  is  revealed
John  11.  9.  if  any  walk  inthe d.  he  stumbleth  not
Rom.  2.  16.  ind.  when  G.  shall  judge  secrets  of  men

13.  13.  let  us  walk  honestly  as  in  the  d.

1  Cor.  1 . 8.  may  be  blameless  in  the  d.  of  our  Lord

2  Cor.  6.  2.  in  the  d.  of  salvation  I  succoured  thee
Phil.  2. 16.  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  d.  of  Christ
Heb.  8.  9.  in  the  d.  when  I  took  them  by  the  hand

1  Pet.  2.  12.  may  glorify  God  in  the  d.  of  visitation
DAY’  of  Judgment.

Mat.  10.  15.  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom
in  the  d.  of  judgment,  11.  24.  Mark  6.  11.
11. 22.  more  tolerable  for 'Lyre  and  Sidon  at  d.  of  j.

12.  36.  shall  give  account  thereof  in  d.  of  judgment


2  Pet.  2.  9.  and  to  reserve  the  unjust  to  d.  of  judg.

3.  7-  are  reserved  unto  fire  against  the  d.  of  judg.

1  John  A.  17.  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  d.of  j.
DAY  of  the  Lord.

Isa.  2.  12.  d.of  the  L.  shall  be  on  every  one  pro  ad

13.  6.  d.  of  the  L.  is  at  hand,  Joel  1. 15.  Zeph.  1.  7.

9.  the  d.of  the  L.  cometh,  Joel  2.  1.  Zech.  14.  1.

34.  8.  for  it  is  the  d.  of  the  Lord's  vengeance

Jer.  46.  10.  this  is  the  d.  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts
Lam.  2. 22-  in  the  d.  of  the  Lord's  anger  none  escaped
Ezek.  13.  5.  to  stand  in  battle  in  the  d.  of  the  Lord

30.  3.  the  d.  of  the  L.  is  near,  Joel  3. 14.  (Jbad.  15.
Amos  5.  18.  woe  to  you  that  desire  the  d.  of  the  L.
Zeph.  1.8.  in  d.of  the  L.'s  sacrifice  I  will  pui  ish

18.  shall  deliver  them  inthe  d.  of  the  L.'s  w/ath
2.  2.  before  the  d.  of  the  L.'s  anger  come  on  you
3.  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  d.  of  the  Lord' s  anger
Mai.  A.  5.  before  the  coming  of  the  d.  of  the  Lord

1  Cor.  5.  5.  spirit  may  be  saved  in  d.  of  the  Lord

2  Cor.  1. 14.  as  ye  are  ours  in  the  d.  of  the  Lord

1  Thess.  5.  2.  d.  of  L.  cometh  as  a  thief,  2  Pet.  3. 10.
Rev.  1.  10.  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  d.

See  Great  Day.

One  DAY’.

Gen.  27.  45.  why  deprived  of  you  both  in  one  d.  ?
Lev.  22.  28.  not  kill  it  and  her  young  in  one  d.
Num.  11.  19.  ye  shall  not  eat  one  d.  or  two  days
1  Sam.  2.  34.  in  one  d.  they  shall  die  both  of  them

27.  1-  1  shall  one  d.  perisn  by  the  hand  of  Saul

1  Kings  A.  22.  Solomon’s  provision  for  one  d.  was
20.  29.  Israel  slew  of  Syrians  100,000  in  one  d.

2  Chr.  28.  6.  Pekah  slew  in  Judah  120,000  in  one  d.
Ezra  10.  13.  neither  is  this  the  work  of  one  d.

Esth.  3. 13.  kill  children  and  women  in  one  d.  8. 12
Isa.  9.  14.  Lord  cut  off  branch  and  rush  in  one  d.

10.  17.  shall  devour  his  thorns  and  briers  in  one  d.
47.  9.  two  things  shall  come  to  thee  in  ime  d.

66.  8.  shall  earth  be  made  to  bring  forth  in  one  d.  ?
Zech.  3.  9.  remove  the  iniouity  of  land  in  one  d.

14.  7.  it  shall  be  one  d.  which  shall  be  known
Acts  21.  7.  we  abode  with  the  brethren  one  d

28.  13.  and  after  one  d.  the  south  wind  blew
Rom.  14.  5.  one  esteemeth  one  d.  above  another

1  Cor.  10.  8.  fell  in  one  d.  twenty-three  thousand

2  Pet.  3. 8.  one  d.  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years
Rev.  18. 8.  therefore  her  plagues  come  in  one  d.

DAY,  joined  with  night.

Gen.  1.  14.  lights  to  divide  d.  from  the  night
18.  to  rule  over  the  d.  and  over  the  night
8.  22.  cold  and  heat,  d.  and  night,  shall  not  cease

31.  39.  I  bare  loss,  whether  stolen  by  d.  or  night
Exod.  10. 13.  Lord  brought  an  east  wind  d.  and  night

13.  21.  to  give  them  light  to  go  by  d.  and  night
Lev.  8.  35.  abide  at  door  of  tabernacle  d.  and  night
Num.  11.  32.  people  stood  up  that  d.  and  all  night
Deut.  28.  66.  and  thou  shalt  fear  d.  and  night
Josh.  1.  8.  this  book  of  the  law  not  depart, "but  thou

shalt  meditate  therein  d.  and  night,  Psal.  1.  2.
1  Sam.  19.  24.  lay  naked  all  that*/,  and  that  night

1  Kings  8.  29-  that  thine  eyes  might  be  opened

toward  this  house  night  and  d.  2  Chr.  6.  20.
Neh.  1.  6.  which  I  pray  before  thee  d.  and  night
A.  9.  and  seta  watch  against  them  d.  and  night
Esth.  A.  16.  neither  eat  nor  drink  night  or  d.

Job  17.  12.  they  chanse  the  night  into  d.

26.  10.  till  the  d.  and  night  come  to  an  end
Psal.  32.  4.  d.  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  on  me
42.  3.  my  tears  have  been  my  meat  d.  and  night

55. 10.  .7.  and  night  they  go  about  it  on  the  walls
74.  16.  the  d.  is  thine,  the  night  also  is  thine

88. 1.  O  T.ord,  I  have  cried  d.  and  night  before  thee

139.  12.  but  the  night  shineth  as  the  d.

Eccl.  8. 16.  that  neither  d.  nor  night  seeth  sleep
Isa.  A.  5.  smoke  by  d.  and  flaming  fire  by  night

27.  3.  I  the  T.ord  will  keep  it  d.  and  night

34.  10  it  shall  not  be  quenched  d.  nor  night
38. 12  with  pining  sickness  from  d.  to  night

I. 3  from  d.  to  night  wilt  thou  make  an  end  of  me
60.  11.  gates,  they  shall  not  be  shut  d.  nor  night
62.  6.  watchmen  never  hold  their  peace  d.  nor  night

Jer.  9.  1.  that  I  might  weep  d.  and  night  for  slain
14. 17-  eyes  run  down  tears*/,  and  night,  Lam.  2. 18.
16.  13.  and  there  serve  other  gods  d.  and  night
33.  20.  that  there  should  not  be  */.  nor  night
Zech.  14.  7.  day  known  to  the  Tx>rd,not</.  nor  night
Mark  4.  27.  and  should  sleep  and  rise  night  and  d.
5.  5.  d.  and  night  he  was  in  the  mountains

14.  30.  this  d.  even  this  night,  before  the  cock  crow
Luke  2.  .37.  with  fastings  and  prayers  night  and  d.

18.  7-  his  elect,  which  cry  d.  and  night  to  him
Acts  9.  24.  watched  gates  night  and  d.  to  kill  h.m
20.  31.  cease  not  to  warn  every  one  night  and  d.
26.  7.  our  tribes  instantly  serving  God  d.  and  night

2  Cor.  11.  25.  thrice  I  suffered  shipwreck,  a  d.  and  n.

1  Thess.  2.  9.  labouring  d.  and  n.  because  would  not

3. 10.  night  and*/,  praying  exceedingly,  1  Tim.r.  5.

2  Thess.  .3.  8.  but  wrought  with  labour  night  and  d,
2  Tim.  1.  3.  without  ceasing  T  have  remembrance

of  thee  in  my  prayers  night  and  d.
Rev.  4.  8.  and  they  rest  not  */.  and  night,  saying

7.  15.  and  serve  him  d.  and  night  in  his  temple

8.  12.  d.  shone  not  for  a  third  part,  and  the  night
12.  10.  who  accused  them  before  God  d.  and  night

14.  11 .  they  have  no  rest  d.  nor  night,  who  worship

20. 10.  be  tormented  */.  and  night  for  ever  and  ever

Sabbath-  DAY.

Exod.  16.  26.  the  seventh  */.  is  the  sabbath,  20.  10.
20.  8.  remember  the  sabbath-d.  to  keep  it  holy,

Deut.  5.  12.

II.  T.ord  blessed  the  sabbath  d.  and  hallowed  it

31.  15.  whosoever  doth  any  work  on  sabbath-d.

35.  3.  ye  shall  kindle  no  fire  on  the  sabbath  d.
Num.  15. 32.  a  man  that  gathered  sticks  on  sabbath-d.

28.  9.  offer  on  the  sabbath-d.  two  lambs  of  first  year
Deut.  5.  15.  God  commanded  to  keep  the  sabbath-d.
Neh.  10.  31.  if  the  people  sell  victuals  on  sabbath-d.

1.3.  15.  burdens  brought  to  Jerusalem  on  sabbath-d.
17.  evil  that  ye  do,  and  profane  the  sabbath-d.

19.  should  no  burden  be  brought  in  on  sabbath-d

22.  Levites  keep  the  gates  to  sanctify  sabbath-d.
Jer.  17.  21,  and  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath-d.
22.  nor  carry  forth  a  burden  on  the  sabbath-d.


DAY


DAY


D  A  Y


Ezek.  46.  4.  the  prince  shall  otter  in  the  sabbath-d.
Mat. Ac.  1.  .lestis  went  on  the  sabbath-d.  through  the
corn,  and  disciples  were  an  hungered,  Mark 2.  23.

8.  tor  the  8on  of  man  is  Lord  of  the  sabbath  d.

11 .  it  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  sabbath-d.  Luke  14.5.

24.  20.  pray  that  your  flight  be  not  on  sabbath-d.
Mark  2.  24.  why  do  they  on  s.-d.  that  is  not  lawful  ?

3.  2.  whether  he  would  heal  on  sab.-d.  Luke  6.  7*
6*  2.  he  went  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath-d.

Luke  4.  16.  Acts  13.  14.
Luke  13.  16.  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  sabbath-d.

14.  1.  as  he  went  to  eat  bread  on  the  sabbath  d.

23. 56.  prepared  spices,  and  rested  the  sabbath-d.

John  5. 10.  it  is  sabbath-d.  it  is  not  jawful  to  carry

16.  because  he  had  done  these  things  on  sabbath-d.

7.  22.  and  ye  on  the  sabbath-d.  circumcise  a  man

9.  14.  it  was  the  sabbath-d.  when  Jesus  made  clay
19.  31 .  bodies  not  remain  on  the  cross  on  sabbath-d.
Acts  13. 27.  which  are  read  every  sabbath  d.  15.  21.
44  next  sabbath-d.  came  almost  the  whole  city
Same  DAY.

Gen.  7.  11.  the  same  d.  were  the  fountains  broken  up

13.  the  self-.vawe  d.  entered  Noah  into  the  ark

15.  18.  in  that  same  d.  the  Lord  made  a  covenant
Exod.  12. 17 .  the  same  d.  1  brought  your  armies.  51 .
Lev.  7. 15.  flesh  eaten  the  same  d.  16.  1 19. 6.  |  22.  30.

23.  14.  ye  shall  eat  no  parched  corn  till  same  d.

28.  and  ye  shall  do  no  work  in  that  same  d.

29.  that  shall  not  be  afflicted  in  that  same  d.

Jfum.  6. 11.  priestshall  hallow  his  head  that  samed.
Deut.  32.  48.  the  Lord  spake  to  Moses  that  same  d.
1  Kings  8.  64.  same  d.  king  hallowed  middle  court

13.  3.  and  he  gave  a  sign  the  same  d.  saying
Exek.  23.  38.  have  defiled  my  sanctuary ,  sa me  d.  39-

24.  2.  write  thee  the.  name  of  this  same  d.  king  of
Babylon  set  himself  against  Jerusalem  this  same  d.

Zeph.  1.  9.  the  same  d.  also  will  I  punish  those
Zech.  6.  10.  take  of  them,  and  come  the  same  d.
Luke  17.  29.  but  the  same  d.  Lot  went  out  of  Sodom
23.  12.  the  same  d.  Pilate  and  Herod  made  friends
John  5.  9.  and  on  the  same  d.  was  the  sabbath
20  19.  same  d.  at  evening  Jesus  stood  in  midst
Acts  1.  22.  unto  the  same  d.  that  he  was  taken  up
2. 41.  the  s.  d.  were  added  to  church  3,000  souls
Since  the  DAY.

Exod.  10.  6.  since  the  d.  they  were  on  the  earth
Deut.  4.  32.  since  the  d.  that  God  created  man

1  Sam.  8.8.  since  thed.  that  I  brought  them  up  outot

Egypt  to  this  day,  1  Kings  8. 16.  1  Chron.  17.  5.

2  Kings  8.  6.  since  the  d.  that  she  left  the  land
Jer.  7.  25.  since  the  d.  your  fathers  came  forth
Co i.  1. 6.  as  in  you,  since  the  d.  ye  heard  of  it

9.  since  the  d.  we  heard  it,  do  not  cease  to  pray

That  DA  Y.

Exod.  8.  22.  I  will  sever  in  that  d.  land  of  Goshen
10. 13.  Lord  brought  east  wind  on  land  all  that  d.

28.  that  d.  thou  seest  my  face,  thou  shalt  die

13.  8.  thou  shalt  shew  thy  son  in  that  d.  saying

14.  30.  thus  the  L.  saved  Israel  that  d.  out  of  hand

32.  28.  there  fell  of  the  people  that  d.  3,000

Lev.  16.  30.  that  d.  shall  the  priest  make  atonement
Num.  9.  6.  they  could  not  keep  the  passover  that  d.

30.  14.  because  he  held  his  peace  in  that  d.

Deut.  1.39.  your  children  in  that  d.  had  no  knowledge
21.  23.  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him  that  d.

31. 18.  I  will  surely  hide  my  face  in  that  d.

Josh.  6.  15.  only  that  d.  they  compassed  the  city

14. 12.  heardest  in  that  d.  how  Anakims  were  there
Judg.  20.  26.  Israel  fasted  that  d.  1  Sam.  7.  6.

1  Sam.  8. 18.  and  Ve  shall  cry  out  in  that  d.  and  the

Lord  will  not  hear  you  in  that  d.

9.  24.  so  Saul  did  eat  with  Samuel  that  d.

10.  9.  and  all  those  signs  came  to  pass  that  d.

12.  18.  the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  rain  that  d.

14.  23.  so  the  Lord  saved  Israel  that  d.

37.  Saul  asked,  but  he  answered  him  not  that  d.

16.  13.  Spirit,  of  Lord  came  on  David  from  that  d.
18. 9.  Saul  eyed  David  from  that  d.  and  forward

2  Sam.  6.  9.  David  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  d.

11. 12.  so  Uriah  abode  in  Jerusalem  that  d.

1  Kings  14. 14.  cutoff  the  house  of  Jeroboam  that  d.

2  Chron.  15.  + 11.  offered  that  d.  of  spoil  700  oxen
18. 24.  behold,  thou  shalt  see  on  that  d.

Keli.  8. 17.  to  that  d.  Israel  had  not  done  so
Esth.  3.14.  they  should  be  ready  against  that  d.  8. 13.
Job  3. 4.  let  that  d.  be  darkness,  let  not  G.  regard  it
Psal.  146.  4.  in  that  very  d.  his  thoughts  perish
Prov.  12.  + 16.  a  fool’s  wrath  is  in  that  d.  known
ha,  2.  11.  Lord  alone  shall  be  exalted  in  that  d.  17.
10. 32.  as  yet  shall  he  remain  at  Nob  that  d.

19.21.  Egyptians  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that  d.

24. 21.  in  that  d.  the  Lord  shall  punish  the  host

26. 1.  in  that  d.  shall  this  song  be  sung  in  Judah

29.  18.  in  that  d.  shall  the  deaf  hear  the  words
52. 6.  they  shall  know  in  that  d.  that  1  am  he

Jer.  39.  +  10.  N  ebuz.  gave  them  vineyards  in  that  d.

16.  they  shall  be  accomplished  in  that  d.

17.  but  1  will  deliver  thee  in  that  d.  saith  the  L.
Ezek.  29.  21.  in  that  d.  Israel  shall  be  exalted

38.  19.  in  that  d.  there  shall  be  a  great  shaking

39.  22.  know  I  am  the  Lord  from  that  d.  forward
48.  35.  the  name  of  the  city  from  that  d.  shall  be
Hot.  2.  18.  and  in  that  d.  will  1  make  a  covenant
Joel  3. 18.  in  that  d.  mountains  shall  drop  new  wine
Amos  2.  16.  he  shall  flee  away  naked  in  that  d.

8.  3.  the  songs  of  the  temple  be  bowlings  in  thatd.
Obad.  8.  shall  !  not  in  that  d.  destroy  the  wise  men  ?
Zeph.  1. 15.  that  d.  is  a  day  of  wrath  of  trouble
Zech.  2. 11.  nations  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that  d.

9.  16.  Lord  their  God  shall  save  them  in  that  d.
11.11.  my  covenant  it  was  broken  in  that  d.

12. 8.  the  feeble  at  that  d.  shall  be  as  David

11.  in  that  d.  shall  there  be  a  great  mourning

13. 1.  in  that  d.  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened
14.  4.  his  feet  shall  stand  that  d.  on  the  mount

'  9.  in  that  d.  shall  there  be  one  Lord,  his  name  one
Mai.  3. 17.  in  that  d.  when  1  make  up  my  jewels
Mat.  7. 22.  many  will  say  to  me  in  that  d.  Lord
24.  36.  but  of  that  d.  knoweth  no  man,  Mark  13.  32.
26.  29.  till  that  d.  I  drink  it  new,  Mark  14.  25.
Luke  6.  23.  rejoice  ye  in  that  d.  and  leap  for  joy

10.  12.  be  more  tolerable  in  that  d.  for  Sodom


I.uke  21.34.  and  so  that  d.  come  on  you  unawares

23.  54.  and  that  d.  was  the  preparation  and  sabbath
John  1.39.  they  came  and  abode  with  him  that  d.

11.  53.  from  that  d.  they  took  counsel  together

14.  20.  at  that  d.  ye  shall  know  1  am  in  the  Father

16.  2.3.  and  in  that  d.  ye  shall  ask  me  nothing
26.  at  that  d.  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name

1  Thess.  5.  4.  that  d.  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief

2  Thess.  1.  10.  our  testimony  was  believed  in  that  d.
2.  3.  that  d.  shall  not  come,  except  there  come

2  Tim.  1. 12.  1  have  committed  to  him  against  that  d.

18.  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  d.

4. 8.  the  crown  the  Lord  shall  give  me  at  that  d.

This  DAY.

Gen.  4. 14.  thou  hast  driven  me  out  this  d.  from  earth

24.  12.  I  pray  thee  send  me  good  speed  this  d.

25.  31.  he  said,  sell  me  this  d.  thy  birth  right

33.  swear  to  me  this  d.  and  he  sware  unto  him

41.  9.  1  do  remember  my  faults  this  d.

48.  15.  God  who  fed  me  all  my  life  long  to  this  d.
Exod.  12.  14.  this  d.  shall  be  fora  memorial

17.  therefore  observe  this  d.  in  your  generations

13.  3.  remember  this  d.  in  which  ye  came  out,  4.
Deut.  1. 10.  you  are  thisd.  as  the  stars  of  heaven

2.  25.  this  d.  will  1  begin  to  put  the  dread  of  thee

4.  4.  are  alive  every  oneot  you  this  d.  5.  3.

5.  24.  seen  this  d.  that  God  dotli  talk  with  man

6.  24.  as  it  is  at  this  d.  8.  18.  Ezra  9.  7-

7. 11.  the  statutes  which  I  commanded  thee  this  d.

4.40.1  0.  6.  18.1,11.1  10.1.3.  I  30.  2,8.

8. 19. 1  testify  against  you  this  d.  ye  shall  perish

11.8.  commandments  which  1  command  you  this  d.

13, 27,  28.  I  13. 18.  |  15.  5. 1  19.  9. 1  27.  1, 4.

32.  statutes  which  l  set  before  you  this  d.

12.  8.  not  do  after  all  things  ye  do  here  this  d.

26.  17.  avouched  this  d.  the  Lord  to  be  thy  God

27.  9.  this  d.  thou  art  become  the  people  of  the  L.

29.  4.  hath  not  given  you  ears  to  hear  to  this  d.

10.  ye  stand  this  d.  all  of  you  before  the  Lord

18.  whose  heart  turneth  away  this  d.  from  the  L.

30.  15.  1  set  before  thee  this  d.  life  and  death,  19,

16.  1  command  thee  this  d.  to  love  the  Lord

31.  27.  while  1  am  yet  alive  with  you  this  d.

34.  6.  no  man  knoweth  his  sepulchre  to  this  d.

Josh.  3.7.  this  d.  will  1  begin  to  magnify  thee

4.  9.  the  twelve  stones  are  there  unto  thisd.

7.  25.  the  Lord  shall  trouble  thee  this  d.

14. 10.  and  now  1  am  this  d.  eighty -five  years  old

11. 1  am  as  strong  this  d.  as  when  Moses  sent  me
22. 16.  to  turn  away  thisd.  from  following  Lord

17.  from  which  we  are  not  cleansed  till  this  d.

22.  if  it  be  in  rebellion,  save  us  not  thisd.

23. 8.  cleave  to  the  Ld.  as  ye  have  done  unto  this  d.

24.  15.  choose  you  this  d.  whom  ye  will  serve
Judg.  1.  26.  Luz  is  the  name  thereof  unto  thisd.

10.  15.  deliver  us  only,  we  pray  thee,  this  d.

19.  30.  since  Israel  came  up  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt  to  this  d.  1  Sam.  8.  8.  2  Sam.  7.  6.
2  Kings  21.  15.  1  Chron.  17 .  5.  Jer.  7.  25.
Ruth  4.  9.  Boaz  said,  ye  are  witnesses  this  d.  10.

1  Sam.  10. 19.  ye  have  this  d.  rejected  your  God
11, 13.  there  shall  not  a  man  be  put  to  death  this  d.
14. 45.  Jonathan  hath  wrought  with  God  this  d.

15.  28.  Lord  hath  rent  kingdom  from  thee  thisd.

17.  10.  I  defy  the  armies  of  Israel  this  d.

18.  21.  thou  shalt  Mm  d.  be  my  son-in-law

21.  5.  though  it  were  sanctified  this  d.  in  the  vessel

22.  8.  my  servant  to  lie  in  wait  as  at  this  d.  13.

25.  32.  the  Ld.  which  sent  thee  this  d.  to  meet  me

33.  who  kept  me  this  d.  from  coming  to  shed  blood

26.  21.  my  soul  was  precious  in  thine  eyes  this  d.
24.  as  thy  life  was  much  set  by  this  d.  in  my  eyes

30.  25.  made  it  an  ordinance  for  Israel  to  this  d.

2  Sam.  3.  39.  1  am  this  d.  weak,  though  anoint,  king
4.  3.  Beerothites  w;ere  sojourners  unto  thisd.

1  Kings  8.  61.  to  keep  his  commands  as  at  this  d.

2  Kings  7.  9.  this  d.  is  a  day  of  good  tidings

17-  34.  unto  this  d.  do  after  former  manners,  41.

2  Chron.  5.  9.  and  there  it  is  unto  Mm  d.

35.  21 . 1  come  not  against  thee  this  d.  but  against
Neh.  9.  36.  behold,  we  are  servants  this  d.

Psal.  2.  7.  the  Lord  said,  thou  art  my  Son,  this  d.

have  I  begotten  thee,  Acts  13.  33.  lleb.  1. 5.
118. 24.  this  is  the  rf.  which  the  Lord  hath  made
119. 91.  they  continue  thisd.  according  to  thy
Prov.  7.  14.  this  d.  have  1  paid  my  vows
22.  19.  I  have  made  known  to  thee  this  d.

Isa.  38.  19.  the  living  praise  thee,  as  1  do  this  d.

56. 12.  and  to  -morrow  shall  be  as  this  d.  and  much
Jer.  25.18.  hissing  and  a  curse,  as  at  this  d.  44. 22.

35.  14.  for  to  thisd.  they  drink  none,  but  obey

36.  2.  from  the  days  of  Josiah  even  to  this  d.

44.  10.  they  are  not  humbled  even  unto  this  d.

Lam.  2. 16.  certainly  this  is  the  d.  that  we  looked  for
Ezek.  39.  8.  this  is  the  d.  whereof  I  have  spoken
Dan.  9.  7-  to  us  confusion  of  faces,  as  at  this  d.
Hag.  2.  15.  consider  from  this  d  and  forward,  18.

19.  from  this  d.  will  1  bless  you

Mat.  6.  11.  give  us  this  d.  our  daily  bread

11.  23.  Sodom  would  have  remained  to  this  d.

27.  8.  was  called  the  field  of  blood  to  this  d.

19.  I  have  suffered  many  things  this  d.  in  a  dream

28.  15.  is  reported  among  the  Jews  to  this  d.

I.uke  1.  11.  for  to  you  is  born  this  d.  a  Saviour

4.  21.  this  d.  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears

19.  9-  this  d.  is  salvation  come  to  this  hquse
42.  if  thou  hadst  known,  at  least  in  this  thy  d.

22.  34.  cock  not  crow  this  d.  before  thou  deny  me
Acts  2.  29.  his  sepulchre  is  with  us  to  this  d.

22.  3.  zealous  toward  Gon,  as  ye  are  all  this  d.

23. 1 .  in  good  conscience  before  God  till  this  d.

24.  21.  1  am  called  in  question  by  you  thisd.

26.22.  1  continue  unto  this  d.  witnessing  to  small

29.  1  would  all  that  hear  me  this  d.  were  as  I  am
Rom.  11 .8.  that  they  should  not  hear  unto  this  d.

2  Cor.  3.  14.  till  this  d.  remaineth  the  vail,  15.

To  DAY.

Gen.  21. 26.  neither  yet  heard  1  of  it  but  to  d.

30.  32.  I  will  pass  through  all  thy  flock  to  d.

40.  7-  wherefore  look  ye  so  sadly  tod.?

Exod.  2. 18.  how  is  it  that  ye  are  come  so  soon  to  d  ?

14.  13.  salvation  which  ne  will  shew  you  to  d.


Exod.  16.  23.  bake  that  which  you  will  bake  to  d.

32.  29.  consecrate  yourselves*  to  d.  to  the  Lord
Lev.  9.  4.  forte  d.  the  I.ord  will  appear  to  you
Deut.  15.  15.  1  command  thee  this  thing  to  d.

29. 13.  that  he  may  establish  thee  to  d.  for  a  people*

1  Sam.  4.  3.  wherefore  hath  Lord  smitten  us  to  d.  1

9.  tl3.  get  you  up,  for  to  d.  ye  shall  find  him
+  27.  stand  still  to  d.  that  1  may  shew  thee

11.  13.  to  d.  I.ord  wrought  salvation  in  Israel

24.  10.  behold,  how  that  the  Lord  had  delivered
thee  to  d.  into  mine  hand  in  the  cave,  26.  23.*

2  Sam.  6. 20.  how  glorious  was  the  king  to  d. !

13.  4.  why  art  thou  lean  from  day  to  a.?

16. 3.  to  d.  shall  the  house  of  Israel  restore  me

1  Kings  18. 15.  1  will  shew  myself  to  him  to  d.

22. 5.  inquire  at  word  of  Lord  to  d.  2  C 'hr.  18.  4.

2  Kings  4 .  23.  wherefore  wilt  thou  go  to  him  to  d.  ?

6.  28.  give  thy  son  that  we  may  eat  him  to  d.

1  Chron.  16.  2.3.  sing  to  Lord  all  the  earth,  shew

forth  from  day  to  d.  his  salvation,  Psal.  96.2.
Esth.  3.7.  they  cast  the  lot  from  day  to  d.

Job  23.  2.  even  to  d.  is  my  complaint  bitter
Psal.  95.  7.  lie  is  our  God,  we  his  pasture,  to  d.

if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  lleb.  3.  7,  15.  |  4.  7.
Jer.  34.  + 15.  ye  were  to  d.  turned,  and  had  done  right
Zech.  9. 12.  to  d.  do  I  declare,  that  I  will  render
Mat.  6.  30.  the  grass  of  the  field,  which  to  d.  is,  and
to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  Luke  XI.  28.
21.  28.  said,  son,  go  work  to  d.  in  my  vineyard
Luke  5.  26.  we  have  seen  strange  things  to  d.

13.  32.  behold,  1  do  cures  to  d.  and  to-morrow
3.3.  1  must  walk  to  d.  and  the  day  following
19.  5.  forte  d.  I  must  abide  at  thy  house

23.  43.  to  d.  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise

24.  21.  besides  all  this,  to  d.  is  the  third  day
Hefi.  3.  13.  exhort  daily,  while  it  is  called  to  d.

5.  5.  thou  art  my  Son,  to  d.  have  I  begotten  thee

13.  8.  Jesus  Christ,  same  yesterd.  to  d.  and  for  ever
Jam.  4.  13.  ye  that  say,  to  d.  or  morrow,  we  will  go

2  Pet.  2.8.  Lot  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day  tod)

DAY  of  trouble.

2  Kings  19.  3.  this  day  is  a  d.  of  trouble ,  Isa.  .37 .  3.
Psal.  20.  1 .  Lord  hear  thee  in  the  d.  of  trouble
50.  15.  and  call  upon  me  in  the  d.  of  trouble
59.  16.  hast  been  my  refuge  in  the  d.  of  trouble
17  .  2.  in  the  d.  of  trouble  1  sought  the  Lord
86.  7.  in  the  d.  of  trouble  I  will  call  on  thee
Isa.  22.  5.  it  is  a  d.  of  trouble,  and  of  treading  down
Jer.  51.  2.  in  the  d.  of  trouble  they  shall  be  ag.  her
Ezek.  7.  7.  the  time  is  come,  d.  of  trtuble  is  nean*'
Nah.  1.  7.  Lord  is  a  strong  hold  m  d.  of  trouble

1  lab.  3.  16.  that  I  might  rest  in  the  d.  of  trouble’
Zeph.  1. 15.  that  day  is  a  d.  of  trouble  and  distress  -

DAY-TIME.

Job  5.  14.  they  meet  with  darkness  in  the  d.-time
24.  16.  dig  thro’  houses  thej’  marked  in  the  d.-time
Psal.  22.  2.  I  cry  in  the  d.-time ,  but  thou  hearest  not
42. 8.  Lord  command  his  loving-kindness  in  d.-time

78. 14.  in  th e,  d.-time  also  he  led  them  with  acloud
Isa.  4. 6.  shall  be  a  tabernacle  for  a  shadow  in  d.-time

21.  8.  1  stand  on  the  watch-tower  in  the  d.-time
Luke  21.  37.  in  d.-time  he  was  teaching  in  temple

2  Pet.  2.  13.  that  count  it  pleasure  to  riot  in  d.-time

DAYS.

Gen.  4.  +  3.  at  end  of  d.  Cain  brought  an  offering

8.  3.  after  150  d.  the  waters  were  abated

24.  +  1.  and  Abraham  was  old  and  gone  into  d.

27.  41.  d.  of  mourning  for  my  father  are  at  hand
29.  +  14.  and  Jacob  abode  with  him  a  month  of  d.
4f.  9.  the  d.  of  my  pilgrimage  are  130  years
1 28.  the  d.  of  the  years  of  his  life  were  147  years
50.  4.  when  the  d.  of  his  mourning  were  past
Num.  11.  +  20.  ye  shall  eat  of  it  a  month  of  d.J

14.  34.  after  the  number  of  d.  ye  searched  the  land
Deut.  4.  32.  for  ask  now  of  th*e  d.  that  are  past

10.  10.  and  1  stayed  in  the  mount  forty  d.

Josh.  23.  +  1.  Joshua  waxed  old  and  come  into  d.
Judg.  11.  +  4.  after  d.  children  of  Ammon  made  war
1  Sam.  13.  11.  Samuel  came  not  within  d.  appointed

18.  26.  and  the  d.  were  not  expired,  wherefore
27.  +7-  David  dwelt  with  Philistines  a  year  of  d.\
29.  3.  which  hath  been  with  me  these  d.

1  Kings  2.  11.  the  d.  David  reigned  over  Israel
3.  2.  no  house  was  built  to  the  Lord  till  those  d.

14.  20.  d.  that  Jeroboam  reigned  were  22  years
30.  war  between  Behoboarh  and  Jerob.  all  their  d.

15.  16.  between  Asa  and  Baasha  alltheir  d.  32.

2  Kings  10.  +  36.  d.  that  Jehu  reigned  were  28  years-
13.  3.  into  the  hand  of  Benhadad  all  their  d.

15.  +  13.  and  Shallum  reigned  a  month  of  d.

18.  4.  to  those  d.  Israel  did  burn  incense  to  it
23.  22.  from  d.  of  the  judges,  not  such  a  passover

1  Chron.  23.  1.  when  David  was  old  and  full  of  d. '

29.  15.  our  d.  are  on  earth  as  a  shadow,  Job  8.  9.

28.  he  died  full  of  d.  riches  and  honour

2  Chron.  24.  15.  Jehoiada  was  old  and  full  of  d.

Ezra  4.  2.  since  the  d.  Esar  haddon  brought  us  up  •

9.  7.  since  d.  of  our  fathers  have  we  been  in  trespass-.
Neh.  1.  4.  I  wept  and  mourned  certain  d.

8. 17.  since  d.  of  Jeshua,  son  of  N  un,  unto  that  day
Esth.  9.  22.  as  the  d.  whereon  the  Jews  rested

26.  they  called  these  d.  Purim,  after  Pur

28.  and  that  these  d.  should  be  rememb.  and  kept
Job  3. 6.  let  it  not  be  joined  to  the  d.  of  the  year

7. 1.  are  not  his  d.  also  like  the  d.  of  an  hirelihg  ?

12.  12.  and  in  length  of  d.  understanding

21.  13.  they  spend  theirs,  in  wealth,  and  go  down

30.  + 1 .  but  now  they  that  are  of  fewer  d.  than  I
16.  the  d.  of  affliction  have  taken  hold  on  me

27.  the  a.  of  affliction  prevented  me

32. 1 4.  Elihu  waited,  for  they  were  elder  for  d.

7.  I  said,  d.  should  speak,  and  years  teach  wisdom

33.  25.  he  shall  return  to  the  d.  of  his  youth
36.  11.  they  shall  spend  their  d.  in  prosperity

42. 17.  so  Job  died,  being  old  and  full  of  d.

Psal.  21.  4.  thou  gavest  him  length  ofrf.  for  ever
23.  1  6.  dwell  in  the  Lord’s  house  to  length  of  d.

37. 18.  the  Lord  knoweth  the  d.  of  the  upright

44. 1.  told  us  what  work  thou  didst  in  their  d.

55.  23.  deceitful  men  not  live  out  half  their  d.

61.  t  6.  thou  shalt  add  d.  to  the  d.  of  the  king
77.  5.  I  have  considered  the  d.  of  old,  the  years


D  A  X


DAY


DAY


Psal.  78.  33.  therefore  their  d.  did  he  consume  in

89.  29.  and  his  throne  as  the  d.  of  heaven
‘15.  the  d.  of  his  youth  hast  thou  shortened

90.  9.  all  our  d.  are  passed  away  in  thy  wrath

10.  the  d.  of  our  years  are  threescore  and  ten

12.  so  teach  us  tonumberour  d.  that  we  may  apply

14.  that  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all  our  d.

91.  +  16.  with  length  of  d.  will  I  satisfy  him

93.  t  5.  holiness  becometh  thy  house  to  length  of  d.

94.13.  mayest  give  him  rest  from  the  d.  of  adversity
1 19.  84.  how  many  are  the  d.  of  thy  servant  ?

139.  t  16.  written,  what  d.  they  should  be  fash.

143.  5.  I  remember  the  d.  of  old,  1  meditate
Prov.  3.  2.  for  lerurth  of  d.  shall  they  add  to  thee
16.  length  of  d.  is  in  her  right  hand
Eccl.  5.  20.  not  much  remember  the  d.  of  his  life

7.  10.  the  cause  that  the  former  d.  were  better
8. 15.  that  shall  abide  with  him  the  d.  of  his  life
11.8.  let  him  remember  the  d.  of  darkness
12.  1 .  while  the  evil  d.  come  not,  nor  the  years
Zsa.  23.  7.  whose  antiquity  is  of  ancient  d.

15.  seventy  years,  according  to  the  d.  of  one  king
60.  20.  the  d.  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended
65.  20.  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  d.

22.  as  the  d.  of  a  tree  are  the  d.  of  my  people
Jer.  2.  32.  have  forgotten  me  d.  without  number

6.  11.  the  aged,  with  him  that  is  full  of  d.

28.  t  3.  in  two  years  of  d.  will  I  bring  again

31.  33.  after  those  d.  1  will  put  my  law  in  their

32.  t  39.  one  heart,  that  they  may  fear  me  all  d.

36. 2.  from  the  d.  of  Josiah  even  to  this  day

l.am .  4. 18.  our  d.  are  fulfilled,  our  end  is  come
Ezek.  4.  4.  according  to  the  number  of  the  d.  5,  9.

12.  23.  the  d.  are  at  hand,  and  effect  of  every  vision

16.  22.  not  remembered  the  d.  of  thy  youth,  43.
Dan.  8. 14.  unto  2300  d.  sanctuary'  be  cleansed

10.  +  2. 1  was  mourning  three  weeks  of  d.

12. 11 .  abomination  set  up,  there  shall  be  1290  d.

12.  blessed  is  he  that  waiteth  to  the  1335  d.

JIos.  2.  13.  I  will  visit  on  her  the  d.  of  Baalim
9. 7.  d.  of  visitation,  d.  of  recompence  are  come

10.  9.  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  d.  of'Gibeah
Amos  4.  +4.  bring  tithes  after  three  years  of  d.

5.  t  21.  and  I  will  not  smell  your  holy  d.

Mic.  5.  t2.  have  been  from  the  d.  of  eternity

7.  15.  according  to  the  d.  of  thy  coming  out
llag.  2. 16.  since  those  d.  were,  when  one  came  to
Zech.  8.  +  4.  with  his  staff  for  multitude  of  d.

9.  ye  that  hear  in  these  d.  these  words

10.  before  these  d.  there  was  no  hire  for  man

11.  I  will  not  be  as  in  former  d.  saith  the  Lord

15.  so  have  I  thought  in  these  d.  to  do  well

Mai.  3.  7.  from  d.  of  our  fathers  ye  are  gone  away
Mat.  11.  12.  from  d.  of  John  the  Baptist  till  now
24.  22.  and  except  those  d.  should  be  shortened,  no
flesh  should  be  saved,  Maik  13.  20.
37-  as  d.  of  Noe,  so  shall  the  coming  of  the  Son  be
Luke  1.  24.  after  those  d.  Elisabeth  conceived

21.  22.  for  these  be  the  d.  of  vengeance
Acts  3.  24.  have  likewise  foretold  of  these  d.

5.  36.  for  before  these  d.  rose  up  Theudas

11.  27.  in  these  d.  came  prophets  to  Antioch

12.  3.  then  were  the  d.  of  unleavened  bread

19.  t  38.  if  matter  against  any  court  d.  are  kept

20.  6.  we  sailed  after  the  d.  of  unleavened  bread

21.  38.  which  before  these  d.  madest  an  uproar
Gal.  4. 10.  ye  observed  d.  and  months  and  times
Eph.  5.  16.  redeeming  time,  because  the  d.  are  evil
lleb.  7.  3.  neither  beginning  of  d.  nor  end  of  life

10.  32.  but  call  to  remembrance  the  former  d.

r  Pet.  3.  10.  he  that  would  see  good  d.  let  him  ref.
Lev.  11.  3.  shall  prophesy  1260  d.  in  sackcloth

12.  6.  that  they  should  feed  her  there  1260  d.

See  David,  Last,  Old,  Journey.

All  the  DAYS.

Gen.  3.  14.  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  d.  of  thy  life
5.  5.  all  the  d.  Adam  lived  were  930  years

8.  all  d.  of  Seth  912  years  ||  11.  of  Enos  905  years

14.  d.  of  Cainan  910  years  ||  23.  Enoch  365  years
27.  all  the  d.  of  Methusaleh  were  969  years

9.  29.  all  the  d.  of  Noah  were  950  years
Lev.  13.  46.  all  the  d.  wherein  the  plague  shall  be

15.  25.  all  the  d.  of  her  issue  shall  be  unclean,  26.
Num.  6.  4.  all  the  d.  of  his  separation,  5,  6,  8.
Deut.  4.  9.  lest  they  depart  from  thy  heart  all  the  d.

10.  to  fear  me  all  the  d.  they  live,  1  Kings  8.  40.
12. 1.  to  possess  it  all  the  d.  ye  live  on  the  earth
Josh  4.  t  24.  that  you  might  fear  the  Lord  all  the  d.
24.  31.  and  Israel  served  the  Lord  all  the  d.  of
Joshua  and  all  the  d.  of  the  elders,  Judg.  2.  7-
Jndg.  2.  18.  delivered  them  all  the  d.  of  the  judge
1  Sam.  1. 11.  I  will  give  him  to  Lord  all  d.  of  his  life

7.  13.  against  Philistines  all  the  d.  of  Samuel

15.  Samuel  judged  Israel  all  the  d.  of  his  life

1  Kings  4.  25.  dwelt  safely  all  the  d.  of  Solomon

11.  25.  Rezon  was  advers.  all  the  d.  of  Solomon

2  Kings  13.  22.  Ilazael  oppressed  Israel  all  the  d.  of

23.  22.  nor  in  all  the  d.  of  the  kings  of  Israel

2  Chron.  24.  2.  all  thed.  of  Jehoiada  the  priest,  14.
Ezra  4.  5.  to  frustrate  their  purposes  all  d.  of  Cyrus
Job  1. 1  5.  thus  did  Job  all  the  d.

14.  14.  all  the  d.  of  my  appointed  time  will  1  wait
Psal.  23.  6.  mercy  shall  follow  me  all  d.  of  my  life
27.  4.  dwell  in  house  of  Lord  all  the  d.  of  my  life
Prov.  15. 15.  all  the  d.  of  tire  afflicted  are  evil

31. 12.  do  him  good,  not  evil,  all  the  d.  of  her  life
Luke  1.75.  in  holiness  before  him  all  the  d.  of  our  life

See  His  Life,  Thy  Life.

DAYS  come.

Isa.  7.  17-  shall  bring  on  thee  d.  that  have  not  come
Jer.  23.  5.  behold  the  d.  come ,  7.  |  30. 3. 1  31. 27,31 ,38.
Amos  4.  2.  the  d.  come  that  he  will  take  you  away
Mat.  9.  15.  the  d.  shall  come  when  the  bridegroom
shall  be  taken  from  them,  Mark  2.  20.  Luke  5.  35.
J.uke  17-  22.  the  d.  come  when  ye  shall  desire  to  see

19.  43.  the  d.  come  thy  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench
21.  6.  the  d.  come  in  which  there  shall  not  be  left
lleb.  8.  8.  d.  come  when  I  will  make  a  new  covenant
Few  DAYS.

Gen.  24.  55.  let  the  damsel  abide  with  us  a  few  d.
27-  44.  tarry  a  few  d.  till  thy  brother's  fury  turn

29.  20.  and  they  seemed  to  him  butajew  d.

94


Gen.  47.  9.  few  and  evil  are  the  d.  of  my  pilgrimage
JShtm.  9.  20.  when  the  cloud  was  -a  few  d.  on  tabern.
Job  14. 1 .  man  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few  d.

32. 1 6.  Elihu  said,  I  am  of  few  d.  and  ye  are  old
Psal.  109.  8.  let  his  rf.  be  few,  and  let  another
Dan.  11.  20.  within  few  d.  he  shall  be  destroyed
Heb.  12. 10.  they  verily  for  a  few  d.  chastened  us
His  DAYS.

Gen.  6.  3.  yet  his  d.  shall  be  120  years

10.  25.  in  his  d.  was  the  earth  divided,  1  Chr.  1. 19.
Deut.  22.  19.  may  not  put  her  away  all  his  d.  29.

1  Kings  1. 1  6.  had  not  displeased  him  from  his  d.

15.  14.  Asa  was  perfect  all  his  d.  2  Chron.  15.  17.

16.  34.  in  his  d.  did  Hiel  build  Jericho

21.  29.  1  will  not  bring  the  evil  in  his  d.

2  Kings  8.  20.  in  hisd. ’Edom  revolted,  2  Chr.  21.  8.

12.  2.  Jehoash  did  what  was  right  all  his  d.

15.  18.  he  departed  not  all  hisd.  from  the  sins

1  Chron.  22.  9.  and  quietness  to  Israel  in  his  d.

2  Chron.  34.  33.  all  hisd.  they  departed  not  from
Job  14.  5.  seeing  hisd.  are  determined,  his  months

15.20.  wicked  man  travaileth  with  pain  all  his  d.

24.  1.  why  do  they  that  know  him  not  see  his  d.  ?
Psal.  72.  7.  in  hisd.  shall  the  righteous  flourish
103.  15.  as  for  man,  his  d.  are  as  grass,  as  flower
144.  4.  hisd.  are  as  a  shadow  that  passeth  away
Prov.  28. 16.  that  hateth  covetousness  prolong  his  d.
Eccl.  2.  23.  for  all  his  d.  are  sorrows,  his  travail
5. 17.  all  Am  d.  also  he  eateth  in  darkness

8.  12.  and  though  hisd.  be  prolonged,  yeti  know

13.  the  wicked  shall  not  prolong  his  d.

Isa.  65.  20.  nor  old  man  that  hath  not  filled  his  d.
Jer.  17. 11.  shall  leave  them  in  the  midst  of  his  d.

22.  30.  write  a  man  that  shall  not  prosper  in  his  d.

23.  6.  in  his  d.  Judah  shall  be  saved,  Israel  dwell

In  the  DAYS.

Gen.  30. 14.  Reuben  went  in  the  d.  of  wheat-harvest
Judg.  5.  6.  in  the  d.  of  Shamgar,  in  the  d.  of  Jael

8.  28.  wras  in  quietness  40  years  in  the  d.  of  Gideon

1  Sam.  17. 12.  went  for  an  old  man  in  the  d.  of  Saul

2  Sam.  21.  1.  there  was  a  famine  in  the  d.  of  David

9.  they  wrere  put  to  death  in  the  d.  of  harvest,  in

the  first  d.  in  beginning  of  barley-harvest
1  Kings  10.  21.  silver  was  nothing  accounted  of  in
the  d.  of  Solomon,  2  Chron.  9.  20.

22.  46.  Sodomites  which  remained  in  the  d.  of  Asa

1  Chron.  4.  41.  these  came  in  the  d.  of  ITezekiah

13.  3.  we  inquired  not  at  it  in  the  d.  of  Saul

2  Chron.  26.  5.  he  sought  God  in  the  d.  of  Zechariah
32.  26.  came  not  on  them  in  the  d.  of  Hezekiah

Job  29.  2.  as  in  the  d.  when  God  preserved  me
4.  as  I  was  in  the  d.  of  my  youth,  when  the  secret
Psal.  37. 19.  in  the  d.  of  famine  shall  be  satisfied

49.  5.  wherefore  should  I  fear  in  thed.  of  evil  ?

Eccl.  2. 16.  in  the  d.  to  come  shall  be  forgotten

11.  9.  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  inthed.  ofvonth

12.  1.  remefnber  thy  Creator  in  the  d.  of  youth
Jer.  26. 18.  Micah  prophesied  in  the  d.  of  Hezekiah
I. am:  1.7.  Jerus.  remembered  in  thed.  of  her  afflict.
Ezek.  16.  60. 1  will  remember  my  covenant  inthed.

22. 14.  or  hands  be  strong  in  the  d.  I  shall  deal
Dan.  2.  44.  in  the  d.  of  these  kings  shall  God  set  up

5.  11.  in  the  d.  of  thy  father,  light  was  found  in  him
Hos.  2. 15.  she  shall  sing  as  in  thed.  of  her  youth

9.  9.  have  deeply  corrupted  as  in  the  d.  of  Gibeah
12.  9.  to  dwell,  as  in  the  d.  of  the  solemn  feast

Joel  1.  2.  hath  this  been  in  the  d.  of  your  fathers  t
Mat.  2. 1.  when  Jesus  was  born  in  thed.  of  Herod

23.  30.  if  we  had  been  in  the  d.  of  our  fathers

24.  38.  for  as  in  the  d.  that  were  before  the  flood
Mark  2. 26.  into  the  house  of  God  in  d.  of  A  biathar
Luke  1.  25.  thus  hath  Lord  dealt  with  me  in  the  d.

4. 25.  many  wddows  were  in  the  d.  of  Elias

17.  26.  as  in  the  d.  of  Noe  ||  28.  in  the  d.  of  Lot
Acts  5.  37.  rose  up  Judas  in  the  d.  of  the  taxing

11.  28.  came  to  pass  in  the  d.  of  Claudius  Cassar
Heb.  5.  7.  who  in  the  d.  of  his  flesh,  when  he  offered
1  Pet.  3.  20.  long-suffer.  G.  waited  in  thed.  of  N oah
Itev.  10.  7.  in  the  d.  of  the  voice  of  seventh  angel
11.  6.  that  it  rain  not  in  the  d.  of  their  prophecy
In  those  DAYS.

Gen.  6.  4.  there  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  those  d.
Deut.  17.  9.  come  to  the  judge  in  those  d.  19.  17.

26.  3.  goto  the  priest  that  shall  be  in  those  d.

Judg.  if.  6.  in  those  d.  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,

18.  1.  1  21.  25.

20.  27.  for  the  ark  of  God  was  there  in  those  d.

1  Sam.  3.  1.  the  word  of  L.  was  precious  in  those  d.

2  Sam.  16.  23.  which  he  counselled  in  those  d.

2  Kings  20.  1.  in  those  d.  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto
death,  2  Chron.  32. 24.  Isa.  38. 1.
Jer.  33. 16.  in  those  d.  shall  Judah  be  saved

50.  4.  in  those  d.  Israel  shall  go  and  seek  God

20.  in  those  d.  iniq.  shall  be  sought  for,  and  none
Joel  2.  29.  in  those  d.  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  on  the
servants  and  on  the  handmaids,  Acts  2.  18.
Mat.  24.  19.  woe  to  them  that  give  suck  in  those  d.

Mark  13. 17 .  Luke  21.  23.
Luke  1.  39.  and  Mary  arose  in  those  d.  and  went
20. 1.  on  one  of  those  d.  as  lie  taught  the  people
Acts  7 .  41.  they  made  a  calf  in  those  d.  and  offered
Pev.  2. 13.  hast  not  denied  my  faith  in  those  d.

9.  6.  in  those  d.  shall  men  seek  death  and  not  find  it
Latter  DAYS.

Hum.  24. 14.  people  do  to  thy  people  in  the  latter  d.
Deut.  4.  30.  in  latter  d.  if  thou  turn  to  the  Lord
31.  29.  and  evil  will  befall  you  in  the  latter  d.

Jer.  23.  20.  in  latter  d.  consider  it  perfectly,  30.  24.

48.  47.  yet  will  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Moab

in  the  latter  d.  saith  the  Lord

49.  39.  the  captivity  of  Elam  in  the  latter  d.

Ezek.  38. 16.  come  against  my  people  in  the  latter  d.
Dan.  2.  28.  maketh  known  what  shall  be  in  latter  d.

10. 14.  what  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter  d.
Hos.  3.  5.  and  shall  fear  the  Lord  in  the  latter  d.

Many  DAYS.

Gen.  37.  34.  Israel  mourned  for  his  son  many  d.

47.  t  8.  how  many  are  the  d.  of  thy  life  ?

Josh.  22.  3.  nor  left  your  brethren  these  many  d.

2  Sam.  19.  +  34.  Barzillai  said  to  the  king,  how  many
d.  are  the  years  of  my  life  i
1  Kings  2.  38.  Shirmei  dwelt  at  Jerusalem  many  d.


1  Kings  3. 1 11.  and  hast  not  asked  for  thyself  many  J.

17.  15. she,  and  he,  and  her  house,  did  eat  many  d.

1  Chron.  7.  22.  and  Ephraim  mourned  many  d.

Psal.  34.  12.  what  man  is  he  that  loveth  many  d.  ?

119.  84.  how  many  are  the  d.  of  thy  servant  r
Eccl.  6.  3.  so  that  the  d.  of  his  years  be  many
11.  1.  for  thou  shalt  find  it  after  many  d.

Isa. 24. 22.  after  m.  d.  shall  they  be  visited,  Ezek. 38.8.

32.  10.  many  d.  and  years  shall  ye  be  troubled
Jer.  32.  14.  they  may  continue  many  d.  35.  7  ■

37.  16.  Jeremiah  had  remained  there  many  d.

Ezek.  12.  27-  the  vision  that  he  seeth  is  for  many  d.

Dan.  8.  26. 1  10.  14.
Dan.  1 1. 33.  shall  fall  by  captivity  and  spoil  many  d.

Hos.  3.  3.  thou  shalt  abide  for  me  many  d.

4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  d.  without  a  king
Luke  15.  13.  not  many  d.  after,  younger  son  gather.
John  2.  12.  they  continued  there  not  many  d.

Acts  1.  5.  ye  shall  be  baptized  not  many  d.  hence

13.  31.  he  was  seen  many  d.  of  them  which  came

16.  18.  this  did  she  many  d.  Paul  being  grieved
27.  20.  nor  sun  nor  stars  in  many  d.  appeared

My  DAYS.

Gen.  29.  21.  give  me  my  wife,  tor  my  d.  are  fulfilled

2  Kings  20. 19.  good  if  peace  and  truth  be  in  my  d.

Job  7.  6.  my  d.  are  swifter  than  a  weaver’s  shuttle

16.  let  me  alone,  for  my  d.  are  vanity

9.  25.  now  my  d.  are  swifter  than  a  post,  they  flee

10.  20.  are  not  my  d.  few,  cease  then,  and  let  alone

17.  1.  my  d.  are  extinct,  graves  are  ready  for  me

11.  my  d.  are  past,  my  purposes  are  broken

27.  +6.  my  heart  .shall  not  reproach  me  for  my  d.

29.  18.  I  shall  multiply  my  a.  as  the  sand

Psal.  39. 4.  know  mine  end,  and  the  measure  of  my  d.

5.  thou  hast  made  my  d.  as  an  hand-breadth
102.  3.  for  my  d.  are  consumed  like  smoke

11.  my  d.  are  like  a  shadow  that  declineth

23.  he  weakened  my  strength,  he  shortened  my  d.

24.  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  d.

116.  +  2.  therefore  wifi  I  call  upon  him  in  my  d.

Isa.  38.  10.  I  said,  in  the  cutting  off  of  my  d.

39.  8.  there  shall  be  peace  and  truth  in  my  d.

Jer.  20.  18.  my  d.  shall  be  consumed  with  shame
Now-a-D  AY  S.

1  Sam.  25. 10.  be  many  servants  now-a-d.  break  away
Prolong,  ed,  eth,  DAYS.

Deut.  4.  26.  shall  not  prolong  your  d.  on  it,  30. 18.

40.  and  that  thou  mayest  prolong  thy  d.  22.  7.

5.  16.  and  that  thy  d.  may  be  prolonged,  6.  2.

3.3.  that  ye  may  prolong  your  d.  in  the  land,  11.  9.

17.  20.  to  the  end  that  he  may  prolong  his  d.

32.  47.  ye  shall  prolong  your  d.  in  the  land
Prov.  10.  27-  the  fear  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  d.

28. 16.  hateth  covetousness,  shall  prolong  his  d.

Eccl.  8. 12.  though  a  sinner’s  d.  be.  prolonged,  yet

13.  neither  shall  the  wicked  prolong  his  J.

Isa.  13.  22.  and  her  d.  shall  not  be  prolonged

53.  10.  see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  d.

Ezek.  12.  22.  the  d.  are  prolonged,  vision  faileth
Sabbath-DA  YS.

Mat.  12.  5.  how  on  the  sabbath-d.  the  priests  profane

10.  is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath-d.?

12.  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  the  sabbath-d.  ?

Mark  3.  4.  lawful  to  do  good  on  sabbath-d.  Luke  6. 9.
Luke  4.  31.  he  came  and  taught  them  on  sabbath-d.

6.  2.  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath-d.

Acts  17.  2.  three  sabbath-d.  reasoned  with  them
Col.  2.  16.  judge  you  in  respect  of  sabbath-d.

Thy  DAYS.

Exod.  20. 12.  honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that
thy  d.  may  be  long  on  land  L.  thy  G.  giveth  thee
23.  26.  the  number  of  thy  d.  I  will  fulfil
Deut.  12.  t  19.  forsake  not  the  Levite  all  thy  d.

23.  6.  shall  not  seek  their  prosperity  all  thy  d.

25.  15.  that  thy  d.  may  be  lengthened  in  land  God

30.  20.  he  is  thy  life,  and  the  length  of  thy  d.

31.  14.  thy  d.  approach  that  thou  must  die

33.  25.  and  as  thy  d.  so  sliall  thy  strength  be

1  Sam.  25.  28.  evil  not  found  with  thee  all  thy  d.

2  Sam.  7.  12.  and  when  thy  d.  be  fulfilled

1  Kings?,.  13.  shall  not  be  any  like  thee  all  thy  d.

14.  walk  in  my  ways,  then  1  will  lengthen  thy  d.

11.  12.  in  thy  d.  I  will  not  do  it,  for  David’s  sake

2  Kings  20. 6.  I  will  add  to  thy  d.  15  years,  Isa.  38.  5.  1

1  Chron.  17. 11.  when  thy  d.  be  expired,  that  thou  go
Job  10. 5.  are  thy  d.  as  the  days  of  man,  are  thy  years

38. 12.  hast  thou  commanded  morning  since  thy  d.

21.  because  the  number  of  thy  d.  is  great  _

Prov.  9-  11.  for  bv  me  thy  d.  sliall  be  multiplied
Ezek.  22.  4.  thou  Last  caused  thy  d.  to  draw  near
Two  DAYS.

Exod.  16.  29.  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread  of  two  d.

Num.  9.  22.  w’hether  it  were  two  d.  or  a  month
11.  19.  ye  shall  not  eat  one,  nor  two  d.  nqr  five

2  Sam.  1.  1.  and  David  had  abode  two  d.  in  Ziklag
Ezra  10.  13.  nor  is  this  a  work  of  one  day  or  two  d.
Esth.  9.  27.  that  they  would  keep  these  two  d.

IIos.  6.  2.  after  two  d.  will  he  revive  us,  third  day
Mat.  26.  2.  after  two  d.  is  the  feast,  Mark  14.  1.

Joint  4.  40.  and  he  abode  there  two  d.

43.  now  after  two  d.  he  departed  thence

11.  6.  he  abode  two  d.  still  in  the  same  place

Three  DAYS.

Gen.  40. 12.  Joseph  said,  three  branches  are  three  d

13.  within  three  d.  shall  Phar.  lift  up  thy  head,  19

18.  Joseph  said,  the  three  baskets  are  three  d.

42.  17-  he  put  them  altogether  into  ward  three  d.

Exod.  3. 18.  let  us  go  three  d.  journey  into  wilderness
to  sacrifice  to  Lord  our  God,  5.  3.  1  8.  27-  I  15.  22.

10.  22.  there  was  a  thick  darkness  in  Egypt  three  d.

23.  nor  rose  any  from  his  place  for  three  d.

Josh.  1. 11.  within  three  d.  ye  shall  pass  over  Jordan
2.  16.  and  hide  yourselves  there  three  d.  2G.

Judg.  19.  4.  and  ne  abode  with  him  three  d.

1  Sam.  9.  20.  thy  asses  that  were  lost  three  d.  ago
21 . 5.  women  have  been  kept  from  us  these  three  d.

30. 12.  he  had  eaten  no  bread  three  d.  and  nights
13.  master  leftme,  because  three  d.  agone  I  fell  sick

2  Sam.  20.  4.  assemble  the  men  of  Judah  in  three  d.

24.  13.  there  be  three  d.  pestilence,  1  Chr.  21.  12.

1  Kings  12.  5.  depart  for  three  d.  2  Chron.  10.  5.

2  Kings  2. 17.  sought  him  three  d.  but  found  him  not


I)  A  Y


D  E  A


l>  E  A


2  Chrtm.  CO.  25.  were  three  d.  gathering  the  spoil
Ezra  8.  15.  there  we  abode  in  tents  three  d.

10.  8.  whosoever  would  not  come  in  three  d.  9.
Esth.  4. 16.  and  neither  eat  nor  drink  three  d.

Jonah  1. 17.  Lord  prepared  a  fish,. lonah  was  in  belly
of  tlie  list)  three  d.  and  three  nights,  Mat.  12.  40.
Mat.  15.32.  1  have  compassion  on  multitude  because
they  continue  with  me  now  three  d.  Mark  8.  2.
°6.  61.  to  destroy  temple  of  God.  and  to  build  it  in
three  d.  27.  40.  Mark  14.  58.  I  15.  29.  John  2.  19.

27.  63.  after  three  d.  1  will  rise  again,  Mark  8.  31.
Lake  2.  46.  after  three  d.  found  him  in  the  temple
/lets  9.9.  Saul  was  three  (/.without .sight,  cat  nor  drink

28. 7.  Publius  lodged  us  three  d.  courteously
liev.  11 . 9.  see  their  dead  bodies  three  d.  and  an  half

11.  after  three  d.  and  an  half,  spirit  of  life  entered
Four  DAYS.

Judg.  11.  40.  lament  daughter  of  .Tephtliah  four  d.
John  11.  17.  Lazarus  had  lain  in  the  grave  four  d.

39.  he  stinketh,  for  he  hath  been  dead  four  d.

Acts  10.  30.  four  d.  ago  1  was  fasting  to  this  hour
Five  DAYS.

Num.  11.  19.  nor  five  d.  nor  ten  d.  nor  twenty  d.
Acts  20.  6.  we  came  to  them  to  f  roas  in  five  d.

24. 1.  after  Jive  d.  Ananias  the  high  priest  descend.
Six  DAYS.

Exod.  16.  26.  six  d.  ye  shall  gather  it,  but  on  sabbath

20.  9.  keep  sabbath  holy,  six  d.  shalt  thou  labour
and  do  all  thy  work,  23. 12. 1  34.  21.  Deut.  5. 13.

11.  in  six  d.  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,  31. 17-
24. 16.  the  cloud  covered  mount  Sinai  six  d.

31. 15.  six  d.  may  work  be  done,  35.  2.  Lev.  23.  3.
Deut.  16.  8.  six  d.  shalt  thou  eat  unleavened  bread
Josh.  6.  3.  go  round  city,  thus  shalt  thou  do  six  d.

14.  they  compassed  city  once,  so  they  did  six  d.
I'.zek.  46.  1.  gate  shall  be  shut  the  six  working  d.
J.uke  13.  14.  six  d.  in  which  men  ought  to  work
Jo/m  12. 1.  J esus  six  d.  before  passover  came  to  Beth .

Seven  DAYS.

‘Jen.  7.  4.  vet  seven  d.  1  will  cause  it  to  rain  on  earth

8. 10.  and  Noah  stayed  yet  other  seven  d.  12.

50.  10.  Joseph  mourned  for  his  father  seven  d.

Exod.  12. 15.  seven  d.  ye  shall  eat  unleavened  bread ,
13.  6, 7.  I  23.  15.  1  34.  18.  Lev.  23.  6.
Num.  28.  17.  Deut.  16.  3.

19.  seven  d.  shall  no  leaven  be  found,  Deut.  16. 4.
22. 30.  seven  d.  it  shall  be  with  the  dam,  Lev.  22.  27.

29.  30.  the  priest  shall  put  them  on  seven  d.

35.  seven  d.  shalt  thou  consecrate  them,  Lev. 8.  33.
37-  seven  d.  shalt  make  an  atonement  for  the  altar
Lev.  12.  2.  a  man  child,  she  shall  be  unclean  seven  d.

13.  5.  if  the  plague  be  at  a  stay,  then  the  priest  shall
shut  him  up  seven  d.  more,  21.  26,  33,  50,  54.

14.  8.  he  shall  tarry  abroad  out  of  his  tent  seven  d.

15. 19.  have  an  issue,  she  shall  be  put  apart  seven  d.

23.  8.  shall  offer  an  offering  by  fire  to  Ld.  seven  d.

39.  also  when  fruit  gathered  in,  ye  shall  keep  a
feast  to  the  Lord  seven  d.  40,  41.  Num.  29.  12.
Num.  12. 14.  should  Miriam  not  be  ashamed  sev .  d.  ?
19.  14.  all  in  the  tent  shall  be  unclean  seven  d.
Deut.  16. 13.  observe  the  feast  of  tabernacles  seven  d.
Judg.  14. 12.  if  ye  can  declare  it  to  me  within  seven  d.

17.  and  she  wept  before  him  the  seven  d.

1  Sam.  10.  8.  seveti  d.  shalt  thou  tarry  till  T  come

11. 3.  the  elders  said,  give  us  seveti  d.  respite

13. 8.  he  tarried  seven  d.  according  to  the  time
31.  13.  and  they  fasted  seven  d.  1  Chron.  10. 12.

1  Kings 8.  65.  Solom.  held  a  feast  before  L.  seven  d.

16. 15.  Zimri  did  reign  seven  d.  in  Tirzah

2  Chron.  7.  9.  they  kept  dedication  of  altar  seven  d.

30.  21.  the  children  of  Israel  kept  the  feast  of  un¬

leavened  bread  seven  d.  35.  17-  Ezra  6.  22.
23.  assembly  took  counsel  to  keep  other  seven  d.
Esth.  1.  5.  a  feast  both  to  great  and  small  seven  d.
Isa.  30.  26.  light  of  the  sun,  as  the  light  of  seven  d.
Ezek.  3. 15.  1  remained  there  astonished  seven  d.

43.  26.  seven  d.  shall  they  purge  the  altar,  purify
Deb.  11. 30.  fell,  after  they  were  compassed  seven  d.
Eight  DAYS.

Gen.  17. 12.  eight  d.  old  shall  be  circumcised,  21.  4.

2  Chron.  29.  17-  sanctify  house  of  the  Ld.  in  eight  d.
Luke  2. 21.  when  eight  d.  were  accomplished  for  the
John  20.  26.  after  eight  d.  J  esus  came  and  stood  in
Ten  DAY'S.  [midst

Num.  11. 19.  ye  shall  not  eat  ten  d.  nor  twenty  d.

1  Sam.  25.  38.  ten  d.  after  the  Lord  smote  Nabal
Nah.  5.  18.  once  in  ten  d.  store  of  all  sorts  of  wine
Jer.  42.  7.  after  ten  d.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came
Dan.  1.  12.  prove  thy  servants,  1  pray  thee,  ten  d.

15.  at  the  end  of  ten  d.  their  countenances  fairer
Acts  25.  6.  when  he  had  tarried  more  than  ten  d.
liev.  2.  10.  but  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ten  d.

Eleven  DAYS.

Deut. 1.2.  eleven  d-  ioumey  betw.  HorebandKadesh
Twelve  DAYS.

Acts  24. 11.  there  are  but  twelve  d.  since  I  went  up
Fourteen  DAY'S.

1  Kings  8. 65.  Solomon  held  a  feast  fourteen  d.
m  Fifteen  DAYS.

Gal.  1. 18.  I  went  and  abode  with  Peter  fifteen  d.
Twenty  DAY'S.

Num.  11.  19.  ye  shall  not  eat  flesh  twenty  d.

I  ..  Twenty-one  DAY'S.

Dan.  10. 13.  prince  of  Pers.  withstood  me  twenty-one
Thirty  DAY'S.  [d,

Sum.  20.  29.  they  mourned  for  Aaron  thirty  d.
Dent.  34.  8.  Israel  wept  for  Moses  thirty  d.

Esth.  4. 11.  not  been  called  to  the  king  these  thirty  d.
Dan.  6.7.  whosoever  shall  ask  petition  for  thirty  d.

Thirty-three  DAYS.  [12.

Lev.  12.  4.  in  the  blood  of  her  purify,  thirty-three  d.
Forty  DAYS.

Gen.  7. 4. 1  will  cause  it  to  rain  on  the  earth  forty  d.
50.  3.  forty  d.  were  fulfilled  for  embalming  him
Exod.  24.  18.  Moses  was  in  the  mount  forty  d.  and
forty  nights,  34.  28.  Deut.  9.  9.  1 10.  10.
Sum.  13.  25.  they  returned  after  forty  d.  14.  34.
Dent.  9.  25. 1  fell  down  before  the  Lord  forty  d.

8*  went  in  strength  of  that  meat  forty  d.
F~ek.  4.  6.  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  Judah  forty  d.
''“ah  3. 4.  yet  forty  d.  and  N  ineveh  be  overthrown
Mat.  4  2.  when  he  had  fasted  forty  d.nn<\  forty  nights


Mark  1.  13.  Jesus  was  forty  d.  in  the  wilderness
tempted  of  Satan,  was  with  wild  beasts,  Luke  4. 2.
Acts  1.  3.  being  seen  of  them  forty  d.  and  speaking
Fifty- two  DAYS.

Neh.  6. 15.  so  the  wall  was  finished  in  fifty-two  d.
Your  DAYS.

Deut.  11.  21.  that  your  d.  may  be  multiplied
Jer.  16.  9.  1  will  cause  to  cease  in  your  d.  mirth
35.  7-  but  all  your  d.  ye  shall  dwell  in  tents
Ezek.  12.  25.  in  y.  d.  will  I  say  word,  and  perform  it
Joel  1. 2.  hath  this  been  in  your  d.  or  d.  of  fathers  ?
Ilab.  1.  5. 1  will  work  a  work  in  your  d.  Acts  13.  41.
DAILY".

Exod.  16.  5.  twice  as  much  as  they  gathered  d.
Num.  4.  16.  the  d.  meat-offering,  Ezek.  46.  13.

28.  24.  after  this  manner  ye  shall  offer  d.

29.  6.  beside  the  d.  burnt  offering,  Ezra  .3.  4.

Judg.  16. 16.  when  she  pressed  him  d.  with  her  words
2  Kings  25.  30.  al  lowance  was  a  d.rate  for  every  day
Neh.  5.  18.  now  that  which  was  prepared  for  me  d.
Esth.  3.  4.  when  they  spake  d.  hearkened  not  to  them
Psal.  13.  2.  having  sorrow  in  my  heart  d.  how  long

42. 10.  while  they  say  d.  to  me,  where  is  thy  God  i

56. 1 .  be  merciful,  he  fighting  d.  oppresseth  me

2.  mine  enemies  would  d.  swallow  me  up

61.  8.  I  will  sin",  that  I  ma}'  d.  perform  my  vows

68. 19.  blessed  be  the  Lord  who  d.  loadeth  us

72. 15.  he. shall  live  and  d.  shall  he  be  praised
74.  22.  how  the  foolish  man  reproacheth  thee  d.

86.  3.  I  cry  to  thee  d.  ||  88.  9. 1  called  d.  upon  thee
88. 17.  they  came  round  about  me  d.  like  water
Prov.  8.  30.  and  I  was  d.  his  delight,  rejoicing  in
34.  that  heareth  me,  watching  d.  at  my  gates
Isa.  58.  2.  yet  they  seek  me  d.  and  delight  to  know
Jer.  7.  25.  d.  rising  up  early  and  sending  them

20.7.  I  am  in  derision  d.  every  one  mocketh,8.
Ezek.  30. 16.  and  Noph  shall  have  distresses  d.
Dan.  1.  5.  the  king  appointed  them  a  d.  provision

8. 11.  he  magnified  himself,  and  by  him  the  d.  sa¬

crifice  was  taken  away,  11.  31. 1  12. 11.
Hos.  12.1.  Ephraim  d.  increaseth  lies  and  desolation
Mat.  6. 11.  give  us  this  day  our  d.  bread,  Luke  11.3.
26. 55.  I  sat  d.  with  you  teaching  in  the  temple,
Mark  14.  49.  Luke  19.  47.  I  22.  53.
Luke  9. 23.  let  him  take  up  his  cross  d.  and  follow  me
Acts  2.  46.  continuing  d.  with  one  accord  in  temple
47.  Lord  added  to  the  church  d.  such  to  be  saved

6. 1.  widows  were  neglected  in  the  d.  ministration

16.  5.  the  churches  increased  in  number  d.

17. 11.  the  noble  Bereans  searched  the  scriptures d.

1  Cor.  15.  31.  I  die  d.  |i  Heb.  3. 13.  but  exhort  d.

Heb.  7.27.  who  needeth  not  d.  to  offer  sacrifice
Jam. 2.15.  if  a  sister  be  naked, and  destitute  of  d.  food

DAYS-MAN.

Job  9.  33.  neither  is  there  any  d.  betwixt  us
DAY -spring.

Job  38. 12.  caused  the  d.-spring  to  know  his  place
Luke  1.78.  whereby  d.-spring  from  on  high  visited  us
DAY-gar.

2  Pet.  1. 19.  and  the  d.-star  arise  in  your  hearts

DEACON,  S.

Phil.  1.  1.  to  the  saints  with  the  bishops  and  d.

1  Tim.  3. 8.  the  rf.must  be  grave,  not  double-tongued

10.  then  let  them  use  the  office  of  a  d.  1.3.

12.  let  the  d.  be  the  husbands  of  one  wife
DEAD

Signifies,  [1]  One  whose  soul  is  separated  from .  his
body,  either  by  a  natural  or  violent  death,  Ruth
1.  8.  Job  1.  19-  [2]  Such  as  are  in  a  state  of

spiritual  death,  being  void  of  grace,  lying  under
the  power  of  sin,  and  as  unable  to  do  any  thing
that  is  spiritually  good,  or  to  convert  and  raise
themselves,  as  a  dead  body  is  to  quicken  itself,
F;ph.  2.  1.  1  Tim.  5.  6.  [31  Such  as  have  no

being  at  all,  but  are  extinct,  both  body  and  soul ;
Mat.  22.  32.  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,
that  is,  of  such  as  are  finally  and  irrecoverably
perished ,  without  any  possibility  of  living  again,
as  the  Sadduces  thought ;  but  he  is  the  God  of
the  living ;  that  is,  of  such  whose  souls  do  live
and  are  in  being,  and  whose  bodies,  though  now
dead,  shall  be  made  alive  again.  [4]  Such  as
7cere  like  dead  persons,  as  the  Jews,  who  seemed
to  be  lost  in  Babylon,  of  whom  there  was  no
more  hope  that  they  should  return  and  live  in
their  own  land,  than  that  a  dead  man  should  rise
to  life.  Isa.  26.  19.  Thy  dead  men  shall  live.
[5]  One  very  near  to  death,  as  good  as  dead,
Gen.  20.  3.  Thou  art  but  a  dead  man,  says
God  to  Abimelech  :  Thou  deservest  a  present  and
untimely  death  ;  and  if  thou  proceedest  in  thy
intended  wickedness,  it  shall  be  inflicted  upon
thee.  [6]  Dead  idols  or  images,  Isa.  8.  19.  [7]
Impotent  or  unable  for  generation,  according  to
the  course  of  nature,  Rom.  4.  19.  [8]  Such  as

are  decayed  tn  grace ,  Rev.  3.  1.  [9]  Free  from
sin,  and  the  law,  as  to  expectation  of  eternal  life
thereby.  Gal.  2.  19.  [10]  The  state  of  the  dead.
Rom.  8.  11.  [11]  The  resurrection  of  the  dead,

1  Cor.  15.  29.

Gen.  20.  3.  God  said  to  Abim.  thou  art  but  a  d.  man

23.3.  and  Abraham  stood  up  from  before  his  d.
Exod.  4. 19.  the  men  are  d.  which  sought  thy  life

9. 7.  there  was  not  one  of  the  Israelites’  cattle  d.

12.  30.  was  not  a  house  where  there  was  not  one  d.

33.  the  Egyptians  said,  we  be  all  d.  men
14.  30.  Israel  saw  the  Egyptians  d.  on  the  shore

21.  34.  and  the  d.  beast  shall  be  his,  36.

35.  and  the  d.  ox  also  they  shall  divide
Lev.  22.  4.  toucheth  any  thing  unclean  by  the  d.
Num,  5.  2.  and  whosoever  is  defiled  by  the  d.

12. 12.  let  her  not  be  as  one  d.  of  whom  the  flesh  is
16.  48.  he  stood  between  the  d.  and  the  living

Dent.  25.  5.  the  wife  of  the  d.  not  marry  a  stranger
Judg.  3.  25.  behold,  their  lord  was  fallen  down  d.

4.  22.  when  he  came  in,  behold,  Sisera  lay  d.

16.  30.  d.  Samson  slew  at  his  death  were  more  than
Ruth  1.8.  as  ye  have  dealt  with  d.  and  with  me

4.  5.  to  raise  up  name  of  the  d.  on  Ins  inheritance
1  Sam.  4.  17.  thy  sons  llophni  and  Phinehas  are  d.

19.  that  her  father-in-law  and  husband  were  d.
24. 14.  dost  thou  pursue  '  after  ad.  dog,  after  a  flea  .


1  Sam.  .31.  7-  Saul  and  his  sons  were  d.  1  Chr.  in.  7

2  Sam,  9. 8.  shouldest  look  on  such  a  d.  dog  as  1  am

1.3.  33.  to  think  that  all  the  king’s  sons  are  d.

16. 9.  why  should  this  d.  dog  curse  my  lord  the  king
19.  28.  all  of  my  father’s  house  were  but  d.  men

1  Kings  3.  22.  living  mine,  and  the  d.  is  thy  son,  23.

13.  31.  when  I  am  d.  bury  me  in  the  sepulchre

21. 15.  arise,  for  Naboth  is  not  alive  butd.

Job  1.  19.  bouse  fell  on  young  men,  and  they  are  d.
26.  5.  d.  things  are  formed  from  under  the  waters
Psal.  31. 12.  1  am  forgotten  as  a  d.  man  out  of  mind
76.  6.  the  chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into  d.  sleep
88.  5.  free  among  the  d.  like  slain  that  lie  in  grave

10.  wilt  thou  show  wonders  to  the  d.?

106.  28.  and  they  ate  the  sacrifices  of  the  d.

115.  17.  the  d.  praise  not  the  Lord,  neither  any
143.  3.  in  darkness,  as  those  that  have  been  longrf

Prov.  2. 18.  house  inclineth,  and  her  paths  unto  the  d

9.  18.  but  be  knoweth  not  that  the  d.  are  there

21.  16.  shall  remain  in  the  congregation  of  the  d.
Eccl.  4.  2.  I  praised  the  d.  which  are  already  d.

9.  3.  and  after  that  they  go  to  the  d.

4.  for  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  d.  lion

5.  the  d.  know  not  any  thing,  neither  have  they

10. 1.  d.  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the  apothecary

Isa.  8. 19.  seek  to  their  God,  for  the  living  to  the  d.

14.  9.  it  stirreth  up  the  d.  for  thee,  the  chief  ones

22.  2.  not  slain  with  the  sword,  nor  d.  in  battle
26.  14.  they  are  d.  shall  not  live,  they  are  deceased

19.  thy  d.  men  shall  live,  with  my  d.  body

59. 10.  we  are  in  desolate  places  as  d.  men
Lam.  3.  6.  in  dark  places,  as  they  that  be  d.  of  old
Ezek.  44.  25.  they  shall  come  at  no  d.  person  to  defi  le
Mat.  2.  20.  are  d.  that  sought  the  young  child’s  life

8.22.  follow  me,  and  let  the  d.  bury  their  d.

9.  24.  he  said  to  them,  give  place,  for  the  maid  is

not  d,  but  sleepeth,  Mark  5.  39.  Luke  8.  52.

10.  8.  heal  the  sick,  raise  the  d.  cast  out  devils

11.  5.  the  deaf  hear,  d.  are  raised  up,  Luke  7.  22.
22.31.  touching  the  resurr.  of  the  d.  Mark  12.  26.

32.  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  d.  but  of  the  living,
Mark  12.  27.  Luke  20.  38.

2.3.  27.  but  are  wdthin  full  of  d.  men’s  bones
28.  4.  for  fear  the  keepers  became  as  d.  men

Mark  9.  26.  lie  was  as  one  d.  many'  said,  he  is  d.

15. 44.  Pilate  marvelled  if  he  were  already  d.

Luke  7.  12.  behold,  there  was  a  d.  man  carried  out

10.  30.  and  departed,  leaving  him  half  d.

24.  5.  said,  why  seek  ye  the  living  among  the  d.  ?
John  5.  21.  for  as  the  Lather  raiseth  up  the  d.

25.  when  the  d.  shall  hear  voice  of  the  Son  of  God

6.  49.  your  fathers  did  eat  manna,  and  are  d.  58.

1 1 . 25.  that  believeth,  tho’  he  were  d.  shall  he  live

Acts  2. 29.  the  patriarch  David  is  both  d.  and  buried

5.  10.  the  young  men  came  in  and  found  her  d.

10. 42.  testify  ihat  it  is  he  who  was  ordained  of  God
to  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  d.  2  Tim.  4. 1.

14. 19.  drew  him  out,  supposing  he  had  been  d.

20.  9.  Eutyclius  fell  down,  and  was  taken  up  d.

26.  8.  why  incredible  that  God  should  raise  the  d.  ?
28.  6.  have  swollen  or  fallen  down  d,  suddenly
Rom.  4.  17.  even  God  who  quickeneth  the  d.

19.  he  considered  not  his  own  body  now  d,

5.  15.  for  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  be  d.
6. 2.  we  that  are  d.  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  ?
8.  if  we  be  d.  with  Christ,  we  believe  that  we

11.  reckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  d.  to  sin,  but  alive

7.  2.  but  if  the  husband  be  d.  3.  1  Cor.  7.  39.

4.  ye  also  are  become  d.  to  the  law,  Gal.  2. 19.

14. 9.  that  he  might  be  lord  both  of  d.  and  living

1  Cor.  15.  15.  if  so"  be  that  the  d.  rise  not

35.  but  some  man  will  say,  bow  are  the  d.  raised  ?
52.  and  the  d.  shall  be  raised  incorruptible

2  Cor.  1.  9.  but  trust  in  God  who  raiseth  the  d.

5.  14.  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  d.

Eph.  2. 1 .  were  d.  in  trespasses  and  sins,  5.  Col.  2. 13.
Col.  2.  20.  if  ye  bed.  witli  Christ,  2  Tim.  2.  1  i.

3.  3.  yrn  are  d.  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  iu  G.

1  Thess.  4. 16.  and  the  d.  in  Christ  shall  rise  first
Heb.  6. 1.  the  foundation  of  repentance  from  d.  works
®9. 14.  blood  of  Chr.  purge  conscience  from  d.  works

17.  a  testament  is  of  force  after  men  are  d.

11.  4.  and  by  it  he  being  d.  yet  spea,keth

12.  sprang  there  even  of  one,  and  him  as  good  as  d
35.  women  received  their  d.  raised  to  life  swain

1  Pet.  2.  24.  we  being  d.  to  sin  should  live  to

righteousness

4.  5.  who  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  d.

6.  the  gospel  was  preached  to  them  that  are  d.

Jude  12.  twice  d.  plucked  up  byT  the  roots
Rev.  1.  5.  Jesus,  who  is  the  first-begotten  of  the  d.
17.  when  l  saw  him,  1  fell  at  his  feet  as  d.

3.  1.  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  d.
14,  13.  blessed  are  the  d.  who  die  in  the  Lord
16.  3.  the  sea  became  as  the  blood  of  a  d.  man

20.  5.  but  the  rest  of  the  d.  lived  not  again

12.  saw  the  d.  stand  before  G. ;  the  d.  were
judged  out  of  those  things  written  iu  the  books

13.  sea  gave  up  d.  which  were  in  it,  death  and  hell
See  Body,  Bury,  Caroa.se,  Corpse,  Res-uk

RKCTION.

For  the  DEAD.

Lev.  19.  28.  ye  shall  not  make  cuttings/or  the  d.

21.  1.  there  shall  none  be  defi  led  for  the  d.

Deut.  14.  1 .  ye  shall  not  make  any  baldness  for  the  d.

26.  14.  I  have  not  given  ought  thereof  for  the  d.

2  Sam.  14.  2.  as  a  woman  that  had  mourned  for  the  d.
Jer.  16.  7.  not  tear  to  comfort  them  for  the  d.

22.  10.  weep  ye  not  for  the  d.  nor  bemoan  him
Ezek.  24. 17 .  forbear,  make  no  mourning  for  thei.

1  Cor.  15.  29.  what  shall  they  do  who  are  baptized
for  the  d.  why  are  thev  also  baptized  for  the  d.  ?
From  the  DEAD.

Mat.  14.  2.  John  Baptist,  be  is  risen  from  the  d.
Mark  9. 10.  what  the  rising  from  thed.  should  mean  *
Luke  16.  30.  nay,  but  if  one  went  to  them  from  the  d.

31.  not  be  persuaded,  though  one  rose  from  the  d.
24.  46.  to  rise  from  the  d.  the  third  day,  John  20.  9.
Acts  10.  41.  drink  with  him  after  he  ros efrnm  the  d.
26.  23.  be  the  first  that  should  rise  from  the  d.
Rom.  6.  13.  as  those  that  are  alive  from  the  d.

10.  7.  that  is.  to  bring  up  Christ  again  from  the  d.


DEA


DEA


D  E  A


Rom.  11.  15.  receiving  of  them  be  but  life  from  the  d.

!  1  Cur.  15. 12  if  Chr.  be  preached  that  rose  from  the  d.
Eph.  5.  14.  arise  from  the  d.  Christ  shall  give  thee
Col.  1. 18.  who  is  the  first-born  from  the  d.  [light
Heh.  11.  19.  Cod  was  able  to  raise  him  from  the  d.

13.  20.  brought  again  from  the  d.  our  Lord  Jesus
See  Raised,  Risen.

Is  DEAD.

Gen.  42.  38.  for  his  brother  is  d.  and  he  left,  44.  20.
Deut.  25.  G.  in  the  name  of  his  brother  that  is  d.
Josh.  1.  2.  Moses  my  servant  is  d.  arise,  go  over
Judg .  20. 5.  my  concubine  they  forced  that  she  is  d.

2  Sam.  2.  7.  Saul  is  d.  4.  10.  |j  11.21.  Uriah  is  d.  24.

12. 18.  the  child  is  d.  19.  II 13. 32.  Amnon  only  is  d.
14. 5. 1  am  a  widow  and  my  Inisb.  is  d.  2  Kings  4. 1 .

18.  20.  no  tidings  because  the  king’s  son  is  d.

19. 10.  Absalom  is  d.  ||  1  Kings  21.  14.  N  aboth  is  d.
Ezek.  44.  31.  priests  shall  not  eat  that  isd.  of  itself
Mat.  9. 18.  my  tn.  ughter  is  d.  Mark  5.  35.  Luke  8. 49.
Mark  9.  26.  insomuch  that  many  said,  he  is  d.

John  8.  52.  Abraham  is  d.  and  the  prophets,  53.

11. 14.  then  said  Jesus  plainly,  Lazarus  is  d.

Rom.  6.  7.  for  he  th.  t  is  d.  is  freed  from  sin

8.  10.  if  Christ  be  in  you,  body  is  d.  because  of  sin
Gal.  2.  21.  if  righteous,  by  law,  Christ  is  d.  in  vain

1  Tim.  5.  6.  liveth  in  pleasure,  isd.  while  she  liveth
Jam.  2.  17.  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works  is  d.  20.

26.  for  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  d.  so  faith
Was  DEAD.

Judg.  2.  19-  when  the  judge  was  d.  they  returned

9.  55.  when  men  of  Israel  saw  Abimelech  was  d.
c  1  Sam.  17.  51.  Philistines  saw  their  champion  was  d.

25.  39.  when  David  heard  that  Nabal  was  d.

31.  5.  armour-bearer  saw  Saul  was  d.  1  Chr.  10.  5.

2  Sam.  4.  1.  Saul’s  son  heard  that  Abner  was  d.

11.  26.  Bathsheba  heard  her  husband  was  d.

12.  19.  David  perceived  that  the  child  was  d.

13.  39.  comforted  for  Amnon,  seeing  he  was  d.

1  Kings  3. 21.  to  give  my  child  suck,  behold,  it  was  ti¬
ll.  21.  when  Hadad  heard  that  Joab  was  d.

21.  15.  when  Jezebel  heard  that  JSi  aboth  was  d.

2  Kings  3.5.  when  Ahab  was  d.  Moab  rebelled

4.  32.  behold,  the  child  was  d.  and  laid  on  his  bed
11.  1.  Athaliah  saw  her  son  was  d.  2  Chr  on.  22.  10.

Mat.  2.  19.  but  when  Herod  was  d.  behold  an  angel
Luke  7-  15.  he  that  was  d.  sat  up  and  began  to  speak

8.  53.  laughed  to  scorn,  knowing  that  she  was  d.

15.  24.  this  my  son  was  d.  and  is  alive  again

32.  for  this  thy  brother  was  d.  and  is  alive  again
John  11.  39.  Martha,  the  sister  of  him  that  was  d.
44.  and  he  that  was  d.  came  forth  bound

19.  33.  saw  that  Jesus  was  d.  brake  not  his  legs
Acts  25.  19..  questions  of  one  Jesus  who  was  d.

Rom.  7.  8.  for  without  the  law  sin  was  d.

Rev.  1.18.  1  am  he  that  liveth,  and  was  d.  behold
DEADLY.

1  Sam.  5.  11.  was  a  d.  destruction  throughout  city
Psal.  17.  9.  deliver  me  from  d.  enemies  who  compass
Ezek.  30.  24.  with  groanings  of  a  d.  wounded  man
Mark  16.  18.  if  drink  d.  thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them
Jam.  3.  8.  tongue  is  an  unruly  evil,  full  of  d.  poison
Rev.  13.  3.  and  his  d.  wound  was  healed,  12.
DEADNESS.

Rom.  4.19.  neither  yet  the  d.  of  Sarah’s  womb
DEAF.

Exod.  4.  11.  or  who  maketh  the  d.  or  the  seeing  ?
Lev.  19.  14.  thou  shalt  not  curse  the  d.  nor  put
1  Sam.  10.  t  27.  Saul  was  as  though  he  had  been*/.
Psal.  38. 13.  but  I  as  a  d.  man  heard  not,  I  was  dumb
58.  4.  they  are  like  the  d.  adder  that  stoppeth
Isa.  29.  18.  in  that  day  shall  the  d.  hear  the  words
35.  5.  and  the  ears  of  the  d.  shall  be  unstopped

42. 18.  hear,  ye  d.  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see

19.  who  is  d.  as  my  messenger  that  I  sent  ?

43.  8.  bring  forth  blind,  and  the d.  that  have  ears
Mic.  7.  16.  their  ears  shall  be  d.  shall  lick  th  ■  dust
Mat.  11.  5.  the  d.  hear,  dead  are  raised,  Luke  7.  22.
Mark  7.  32.  they  brought  to  him  one  that  was  d.

37.  he  maketh  the  d.  to  hear,  the  dumb  to  speak

9.  25.  thou  dumb  and  d.  spirit,  come  out  of  him

DEAL.

Gen.  19.  9.  now  will  we  d.  worse  with  thee  than
24.49.  now  if  you  will  d.  truly  with  my  master

32.  9-  Lord  said,  return,  and  l  will  d.  well  with  thee
34.  31.  should  he  d.  with  our  sister  as  an  harlot  r

Exod.  1.  10.  come  on,  let  us  d.  wisely  with  them
21.  9.  d.  with  her  after  the  manner  of  daughters

23. 11.  in  like  manner  d.  with  thy  vineyard
Lev.  19.  H.  ye  shall  not  steal,  nor  d.  falsely,  nor  he
Num.  11.  15.  if  thou  d.  thus  with  me,  kill  me
Dent.  7.  5.  but  thus  shall  yed.  with  them,  ye  shall
flChron.fi.  3.  Solornon  sent  to  1 1  ui  am,  as  thou  didst

d.  with  David  my  father,  even  so  d.  with  me
rjob  42.  8.  lest  I  d.  with  you  after  your  folly
Psal.  75.  4.  1  said  to  the  fools,  d.  not  foolishly
119.  17.  d.  bountifully  with  thy  servant,  142.  7.
124.  d.  with  thy  servant  according  to  thy  mercy
1  Prov.  12.  22.  but  they  that  d.  truly  are  his  delight
Isa.  26. 10.  in  land  of  uprightness  he  will  d.  unjustly
52.  13.  behold,  my  servant  shall  d.  prudently
58.  7-  is  it  not  to  d.  thy  bread  to  the  hungry  ?
hr.  18.  23.  d.  thus  with  them  in  time  of  thine  anger

21.  2.  if  so  be  that  the  Lord  d.  with  us  according
E*fk.  8.  18.  therefore  will  1  also  d.  in  fury,  my  eye

16.  59.  I  will  d.  with  thee  as  thou  hast  done

22.  14.  or  hands  be  strong  in  days  1  d.  with  thee
2S.  25.  and  they  shall  d.  furiously  with  thee

31.  11.  he  shall  surely  d.  with  him,  l  have  driven
Dan.  1.  13.  and  as  thou  seestrf.  with  thy  servants

5.  t  20.  his  mind  was  hardened  to  d.  proudly
11.  7.  and  shall  d.  against  them  and  shall  prevail

■'  2  Cor.  2.  1 17-  d.  deceitfully  with  the  word  of  God
See  Treacherously.

DEAL.

Exod.  29.40,  a  tenth  d.  of  flour  mingled  with  oil,
Lev.  14.  21.  AW  15.  4.  |  29.  4.
Num.  28. 13.  a  several  tenth  d.  21.  29.  |  29.  10.  15.
sMark  7.  36.  so  much  more  a  great  d.  they  published
10. 48.  he  cried  the  more  a  great  d.  Son  ot  David
DEALS.

Lev,  14.  10.  the  priest  shall  take  three  tenth  d.  of
fine  flour  for  a  meat  ottering,  Num.  15.  9.

06


Iasv.  23. 13.  two  tenth  d.  fora  meat  offer.  Num.  28.  9.

17.  shall  bring  two  wave  loaves  of  two  tenth  d.

24.  5.  two  tenth  d.  shall  be  in  one  cake
Num.  15.  6.  for  a  ram  for  a  meat  offering,  two
tenth  d.  of  flour,  28.  20,  28.  I  29.  3,  9, 14.

28.  20.  three  tenth  d.  to  a  bullock,  28. 1  29.  3,  9, 14.
DEALER.

Isa.  21.  2.  the  treacherous  d.  dealeth  treacherously
DEALERS.

Isa.  24. 16.  treacherous  d.  have  dealt  treacherously
DEALEST.

Exod.  5. 15.  wherefore  d.  thus  with  thy  servants  ?
Isa.  33.  1.  woe  to  thee  that  spoilest  and  d.  treach.
DEALETH.

Judg.  18.  4.  thus  and  thus  d.  Micah  with  me
1  Sam.  23.  22.  it  was  told  me  that  he  //,  subtilly
Prov.  10.  4.  he  becoineth  poor  that//,  with  slack  hand
13. 16.  every  prudent  man  d.  with  knowledge

14.  17.  he  that  is  soon  angry  d.  foolishly
21.  24.  scorner  is  his  name,  who  d.  in  proud  wrath
Isa .  21.  2.  the  treacherous  dealer  d.  treacherously
Jer.  6. 13.  is  given  to  covetousness,  from  the  prophet
even  to  the  priest  e\  ery  one  d.  falsely,  8.  10.
Heh.  12.  7.  God  d.  with  you  as  sons,  for  what  son
DEALING,  S.

Le?;.  6.  +  2.  if  a  soul  sin,  and  lie  to  his  neighbour  iiirf.

1  Sam.  2.23.  I  hear  of  your  evil  d.  by  all  this  people
Ps.  7.  16.  his  violent^,  shall  come  down  on  his  pate
John  4.  9.  the  Jews  have  no  d.  with  the  Samaritans
DEALT.

Gen.  16.  6.  when  Sarai  d.  hardly  with  her,  she  fled

33. 11.  because  God  hath  d.  graciously  with  me

43.  6.  wherefore  d.  ye  so  ill  with  me,  as  to  tell
Exod.  1.  20.  therefore  God  d.  well  with  midwives

14. 11.  wherefore  hast  thou  d.  thus  with  us,  to  carry

18. 11.  for  in  the  thing  wherein  they  d.  proudly
21.  8.  seeing  he  hath  d.  deceitfully  with  her

Judg.  9.  16.  if  ye  have  d.  well  with  .Terubbaal

19.  if  ye  have  d.  truly,  rejoice  in  Abimelech
Ruth  1.8.  as  ye  have  d.  with  the  dead,  and  with  me

20.  the  Almighty  hath  d.  bitterly  with  me

1  Sam.  14.t  33.  Saul  said,  ye  have  d.  treacherously

24.  18.  how  that  thou  hast  d.  well  with  me

25.  31.  when  the  Lord  shall  have  d.  well  with  thee

2  Sam.  6. 19.  lie  d.  among  the  people,  1  Chr.  16.  3.

2  Kings  12.  15.  for  they  d.  faithfully,  22.  7-

21.  6.  Manasseh  </.with  familiar  spirits  and  wizards

1  Chr.  20.  3.  so  d.  David  with  the  cities  of  Ammon

2  Chr.  6.  37.  we  have  done  amiss,  and  d.  wickedly
11.  23.  Rehob.  d.  wisely,  and  dispersed  children

33.  6.  Manas,  d.  with  a  familiar  spirit  and  wizards

Neh.  1.  7.  we  have  d.  very  corruptly  against  thee
9. 10.  thou  knewest  that  they  d.  proudly,  16,  29.

Job  6. 15.  my  breth.  have  d.  deceitfully,  as  a  brook
Psal.  13.  6.  the  Lord  hath  d.  bountifully  with  me

44.  17.  nor  have  we  d.  falsely  in  thy  covenant
78.  57-  and  d.  unfaithfully  like  their  fathers
103.  10.  he  hath  not  d.  witli  11s  after  our  sins
116.  7.  the  I.ord  hath  d.  bountifully  with  thee
119.  65.  thou  hastrf.  well  with  servant,  according

78.  they  d.  perversely  with  me  without  a  cause
147.  20.  he  hath  not  d.  so  with  any  nation
Isa.  24. 16.  the  treacherous  dealers  have  d.  very  trea¬
cherously,  Jer.  3.  20.  1  5. 11.  [  12.  6.  Lam.  1.  2.
Ezek.  22. 7.  i,;  thee  have  they  d.  by  oppression

25.  12.  because  that  Edom  hath  d.  against  Judah

15.  because  the  Philistines  have  d.  by  revenge
IIos.  5.  7-  they  haver/,  treacherously  against  the  L.

6.  7-  there  have  they  d.  treacherously  against  me
Joel  ft.  26.  name  of  your  G.  that  hath  d.  wondrously
Zech.  1 . 6.  as  the  L.  thought,  so  hath  he  d.  with  us
Mai.  2.11.  J  ud.  hath  d.  treacherously  and  abominat.

14.  against  whom  thou  hast  d.  treacherously
Luke  1.25.  thus  hath  the  i.ord  d.  with  me  in  days
2.  48.  son,  why  hast  thou  thus  d.  with  us  ?

Acts  7-  19.  the  same  d.  subtilly  with  our  kindred
25. 24.  the  multitude  of  the  Jews  have  d.  with  me
Rom.  12.  3.  according  as  God  hath  d.  to  every  man
DEAR.

Jer.  15.  +  7-1  will  bereave  them  of  what  is  d.

31.  20.  is  Eph.  my  d.  son,  is  he  a  pleasant  child  ?
Luke  7. 2.  a  centurion’s  servant,  who  was  d.  to  him
Acts  20.  24.  neither  count  l  my  life  d.  to  myself
Eph.  5.  1.  be  ye  followers  of  God  as  d.  children
Phil.  2.  +  20.  f  have  no  man  so  d.  to  me
Col.  1. 7.  ye  learned  of  Epaphras,  our  d.  fellow-serv.

13.  hath  translated  us  into  kingdom  of  his  d.  Son
1  Thess.  2. 8.  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  d.  to  us
DEARLY  beloved.

Jer.  12. 7.  1  have  given  d.  b.  of  my  soul  to  enemies
Rom.  12. 19.</.  beloved ,  avenge  not  yourselves

1  Cor.  10. 14.  my  d.  beloved,  Phil.  4. 1.  2  Tim.  1.  2.

2  Cor.  7.  1.  d.  beloved,  12. 19.  Phil.  4. 1.  1  Pet.  2. 11.
Philem.  1.  Paul,  unto  Philemon,  our  d.  beloved.

DEARTH.

Gen.  41.54.  d.  began  to  come,  d.  was  in  all  the  lands
2  Kings  4.  38.  and  there  was  a  d.  in  the  land
2  Chron.  6.  28.  if  there  be  a  d.  in  the  land,  or  mildew
Neh.  5.3.  we  might  bu3’  corn  because  of  the  d.

Jer.  14. 1 .  woril  came  to  Jeremiah  concerning  the  d.
Acts  7.  11.  there  came  a  d.  over  all  the  land  of

[Egypt

11. 28.  Agabus  signified,  there  should  be  a  great  d.
DEATH

Signifies,  [1]  'The  separation  of  the  soul  from  the
body,  Gen.  25.  11.  This  is  temporal  death.  [2]
A  separation  of  soul  and  body  from  God's  fa¬
vour  m  this  life,  which  is  the  state  of  all  unre¬
generated  and  nn.enewed  versons,  who  are  with¬
out  the  light  of  knowledge,  and  the  quickening
power  of  grace,  Luae  1.  79.  This  is  spiritual
death.  [3]  The  perpetual  separation  of  the  whole
man  from  God's  heavenly  presence  and  glory,  to
be  tormented  for  ever  with  the  devil  and  his  an¬
gels,  Rev.  2.  11.  This  is  the  second  death,  or
eternal  death.  To  all  these  kinds  of  death,  Adam
made  himself  and  his  posterity  liable,  by  trans¬
gressing  the  commandment  of  God  in  eating  the
forbidden  fruit,  Gen.  2.  17 .  [4]  Some  poisonous
deadly  thing,  2  Kings  4.40.  [5]  Imminent  dan¬
gers  of  death,  2  Cor.  11.  23.  [6]  The  pestilence
of  contagious  diseases .  Jer.  15.  2.


By  the  gates  of  death,  the  grave  is  signified,  and
the  state  of  the  dead  after  this  life.  Job  38.  17.
Have  the  gates  of  death  been  opened  unto  thee/
Hast  thou  seen,  or  dost  thou  perfectly  know,  the
place  and  state  of  the  dead ,  the  depths  and
bowels  of  that  earth,  in  which  the  generality  of
dead  men  are  buried ;  or  the  several  ways  and
methods  of  death  ;  or  the  states  and  conditions  of
men  after  death?  And  the  Psalmist  says,  Thou
liftest  me  up  from  the  gates  of  death,  Psal.  0.
13.  Thou  didst  bring  me  back  from  the  brink  or
mouth  of  the  grave,  into  which  I  was  ready  to
drop,  being  as  near  death  as  a  man  is  to  the  city,
that  is  come  to  the  very  gates  of  it.  By  the  in¬
struments  of  death,  dangerous  and  deadly  wea¬
pons  are  meant,  l’sal.  7.  13.  Love  is  strong  as
death,  Cant.  8.  6.  I  he  spiritual  love  of  the  J
church  to  Christ  is  strung  as  death,  which  over¬
comes  the  strongest  man,  Psal.  89.  48.

Gen.  21.  16.  let  ine  not  see  the  d.  of  the  child

24.  67.  Isaac  was  comforted  after  his  mother’s  d.

25.  11.  after  the  d.  of  Abraham  God  blessed  Isaac  •

27.  7.  that  1  may  eat,  and  bless  thee  before  my  d.

10.  that  he  may  bless  thee  before  his  d.

Exod.  10.  17.  that  he  may  take  from  me  this  d.  only
Num.  16.  29.  if  these  men  die  common  </.  of  all  men

23.  10.  let  me  die  d.  ot  righteous,  and  my  last  eim  i
35.  25.  the  slayer  shall  abide  in  it  unto  the  d.  of

the  high  priest,  28.  32.  Josh.  20.  6.
31.  no  satisfaction  for  life  of  murderer  guilty  of  d.
Deut.  30.  15.  •  1  have  set  before  you  this  day  life
and  good,  d.  and  evil,  Jer.  21.  8.

31.  27.  how  much  more  will  ye  rebel  after  my  d.  !  ■

29.  1  know  after  my  d.  ye  will  corrupt  yourselves
33.  1.  Moses  blessed  Isr.  before  his  d.  the  man  of  G.

Judg.  5.  18.  that  jeoparded  their  lives  to  the  d.

16.  16.  she  urged  him  that  his  soul  was  vexed  to  d.

30.  dead  which  he  slew  at  his  d.  were  more  than
Ruthl.  17.  Ruth  said,  if  ought  but  d.  part  thee  and  me  :
2.  11.  all  thou  hast  done  since  d.  of  thy  husband

1  Sam.  4.  20.  about  time  of  her  d.  the  women  said

15.  32.  A  gag  said,  surely  the  bitterness  of  d.  is  past

20.  3.  there  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  d.

22.  22.  I  have  occasioned  d.  of  thy  father’s  house

26.  +  16.  ye  are  sons  of  d.  ye  kept  not  your  master  .

2  Sam.  1.  23.  ami  in  their  d.  they  were  not  divided

15.  21.  in  d.  or  life,  there  will  thy  servant  be

19.  +  28.  all  my  father’s  house  were  but  men  of  d.
22.  5.  when  the  waves  of  d.  compassed  me,  floods  of

ungodly  made  me  afraid,  Psal.  18.  4.  1 116.  3.
6.  the  snares  of  d.  prevented  me,  Psal.  18.  5.

1  Kings  11.  40.  Jeroboam  was  in  Egypt  till  d.  of  Sol.

2  Kings  2. 21 .  shall  not  be  any  more  d.  or  barren  iand

4.  40.  O  thou  man  of  God,  d.  is  in  the  pot

1  Chron.  22.  5.  so  David  prepared  before  his  d.

2  Chron.  22.  4.  his  counsellors  after  d.  of  his  father

32.  33.  all  J udah  did  Ilezekiah  honour  at  his  d.

Ezra  7.  26.  whether  it  be  to  d.  or  to  banishment
Job  3.  21.  which  long  for  d.  but  it  cometh  not

7.  15.  so  that  my  soul  chooseth  d.  rather  than  life
18. 13  the  first-born  of  d.  shall  devour  his  strength

27. 15.  that  remain  of  him  shall  be  buried  in  d.

28.  22.  destruction  and  d.  say,  eve  have  heard  fame

30.  23.  I  know  that  thou  wilt  bring  me  to  d.

Psal.  6.  5.  in  d.  there  is  no  remembrance  of  thee
7-  13.  hath  prepared  for  him  the  instruments  of  d.
13.  3.  lighten  mine  eyes,  lest  1  sleep  the  sleep  of  d.
22.  15.  thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  dust  of  d.

48.  14.  God  will  be  our  guide,  even  unto  d.

49.  14.  and  laid  in  the  grave,  d.  shall  feed  on  them
55.  4.  and  the  terrors  of  d.  are  fallen  upon  me

15.  let  d.  seize  on  them,  and  let  them  go  down
73.  4.  for  there  are  no  bands  in  their  d.  strength
79.  +  11.  reserve  the  children  of  d.

89-  48.  whatman  that  liveth,  and  shall  not  see  d.  ?
102.  20.  to  loose  those  that  are  appointed  to  d.

116. 15.  precious  in  sight  of  Lord  is  d.  of  his  saints
118.  18.  but  he  hath  not  given  me  over  unto  d.
Prov.  2.  18.  her  house  inclineth  to  d.  paths  to  dead

5.  5.  her  feet  go  down  to  d.  steps  take  hold  on  hel.

7.  27.  to  hell  going  down  to  the  chambers  of  d.

8.  36.  all  they  that  hate  me  love  d.

11 .  19.  that  pursueth  evil,  pursueth  it  to  his  own  d.

12.  28.  in  the  path-ways  thereof  there  is  no  d.

13.  14.  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  d.  14.  27-

14.  32.  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  d.

16.  14.  the  wrath  of  a  king  is  as  messengers  of  d.

18.  21.  d.  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue

21.  6.  vanity  tossed  to  gnd  fro  of  them  that  seek  d.

24.  11.  forbear  to  deliver  them  that  are  drawn  to  d.
26.  18.  as  a  mad  man  who  casteth  arrows  and  d.
Eccl.  7-  26.  I  find  more  bitter  than  d.  the  woman
Cant.  8.  6.  for  love  is  strong  as  d.  jealousy  cruel  as
Isa.  25.  8.  he  will  swallow  up  d.  in  victory

38.  18.  for  d.  cannot  celebrate  thee
53.  9.  and  with  the  rich  in  his  d.  because  he
12.  because  he  poured  out  his  soul  unto  d.

Jer.  8.  3.  and  d.  shall  be  chosen  rattier  than  life

9.  21.  for  d.  is  come  up  to  our  windows

15.  2.  tell  them  such  as  are  for  d.  to  d.  43.  11.

18.  1 23.  thou  knowest  all  their  counsel  for  d.

26.  +  11.  the  judgment  of  d.  is  for  this  man

Lam.  1.  20.  abroad  the  sword,  at  home  there  is  as  d.
Ezek.  18.  32.  saith  the  L.  God,  I  have  no  pleasure
in  the  d.  of  the  wicked,  33.  11.

31.  14.  for  they  are  all  delivered  unto  d.

Hos.  13. 14.  O  d.  1  will  be  thy  plagues,  O  grave
Jonah  4.  9.  I  do  well  to  be  angr/T  even  unto  d.

Hah.  2.  5.  who  is  as  d.  and  cannot  be  satisfied
Mat.  2.  15.  and  was  there  till  the  d.  of  Herod

10.  21.  brother  deliver  brother  to  d.  Mark  13. 12.

15.  4.  honour  father  and  mother,  he.  that  curseth
father  or  mother,  let  him  die  the  d.  Mark  7.  10.

16.  28.  some  here  shall  not  taste  of  d.  till  they  see
the  Son  of  Man  coming,  Mark 9. 1.  Luke  9.27.

20.  18.  they  shall  condemn  him  to  d.  Mark  10.  33

26.  38.  my  soul  is  sorrowful  to  d.  Mark  14.  34.

66.  they  said,  he  is  guilty  of  d.  Mark  14.  64.
Mark  5.  23.  my  daughter  lieth  at  the  point  of  d.
Luke  2.  26.  should  not  see  d.  before  he  had  seen  C.

22.  .3.3.  1  will  go  with  thee  both  to  prison  and  d.

23.  22.  I  have  found  no  cause  of  d  in  him


.1)  E  A


DEC


DEC


John 4. 4".  heal  his  son  for  he  was  at  the  point  of  d.

8. 61.  if  a  man  keep  my  saving,  shall  never  see  d.  52.

11.4.  .lesus  said,  this  sickness  is  not  unto  d.

13.  howbeit,  Jesus  spake  of  his  d.

]2.  33.  he  said,  signifying  what  d.  should  die,  18.32.
21. 19.  signifying  by  what  d.  heshould  glorify  God
Arts 2.24'  raised  up,  having  loosed  t  he  pains  of  d.

8. 1.  Saul  was  consenting  to  his  d.  22.  20.

13. 28.  though  they  found  no  cause  of  d.  in  him
22.  4.  and  1  persecuted  this  way  unto  the  d.

28. 18.  because  there  was  no  cause  ofd.  in  me
Rom.  5. 10.  we  were  reconciled  to  G.  by  the  d.  of  his
Son,  much  more  be  saved  by  his  life,  Col.  1.  22.

12.  and  d.  by  sin,  and  so  d.  passed  upon  all  men

14.  d.  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses  over  them,  17.
21.  as  sin  hath  reigned  to  d.  even  so  might  grace

6.  3.  know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  bap¬
tized  into  .1  esus  Christ,  were  baptized  into  his  d.  ?

4.  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  d.

5.  for  if  we  have  been  planted  in  likeness  of  his  d.

9.  dieth  no  more,  d.  hath  no  dominion  over  him
16.  his  servants  ye  are,  whether  of  sin  unto  d.

21.  now  ashamed,  for  end  of  those  things  is  d.

23.  for  the  wages  of  sin  is  d.  but  the  gift  of  God

7.  5.  motions  of  sin  did  work  to  bring  fruit  to  d.

10.  the  commandment  of  life  1  found  to  be  to  d.

13.  was  then  that  which  is  good  made  d.  to  me  ?

24.  who  shall  deliver  me.  from  the  body  of  this  d.  ?

8.  2.  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  d.

6.  to  be  carnal,  mind,  is  d.  but  spirit,  life  and  peace
38.  nor  d.  nor  life  shall  separate  us  from  love  of  G.

1  Cor.  3.  22.  whether  world,  life,  or  d.  all  are  yours

4. 9.  G.  set  forth  apostles,  as  it  were  appointed  to  d.
11. 26.  ye  do  show  the  Lord’s  d.  till  he  come

15.  21.  for  since  by  man  came  d.  by  man  came  also

26.  the  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  d.

54.  saying  written,  d.  is  swallowed  up  in  victory

55.  0  d.  where  is  thy  sting !  ||  56.  sting  of  d.  is  sin

2  Cor.  1,  9.  but  we  had  the  sentence  of  d.  in  ourselves

10.  who  delivered  us  from  so  great  a  (/.doth  deliver

2. 16.  to  the  one  we  are  the  savour  of  d.  unto  d.

3. 7.  if  the  ministration  of  d.  was  glorious

4.  11.  we  are  always  delivered  to  d.  for  Jesus’  sake

12.  so  then  d.  worketh  in  us,  but  life  in  you
7.  10.  but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  d.

Phil.  1.  20.  Chr.  magnified,  whether  by  life  or  by  d.

2. 8.  he  became  obedient  unto  d.  even  d.  of  the  cross

27.  F.paphroditus  was  nigh  to  d.  but  G.  bad  mercy
30.  because  for  work  of  Christ  he  was  nigh  to  d.

3.  10.  know  him,  being  made  conformable  to  his  d.
2  Tim.  1.  10.  our  Lord,  who  hath  abolished  d.

Heb.  2.  9.  but  we  see  Jesus,  for  the  suffering  of  d.
crowned,  that  he  should  taste  d.  for  every  man

14.  thro’ d.  might  destroy  him  that  had  power  of  d.

15.  and  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  (/.  were
7.  23.  were  not  suffered  to  continue,  by  reason  of  d.

9.  15.  that  by  means  of  d.  for  the  redemption  of

16.  there  must  of  necessity  be  the  d.  of  the  testator

11. 5.  Enoch  was  translated,  that  he  should  not  see  d.
Jam.  1.  15.  sin  when  finished  bringeth  forth  d.

1  John  3.  14._that  loveth  not  his  brother  abideth  in  d.

5. 16.  there  is  asin  unto  d.  ||  17.  a  sin  not  unto  d.

Rev.  1.  18.  and  I  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  d.

2. 10.  be  faithful  unto  d.  I  will  give  thee  a  crown

11.  that  overcomes  shall  not  be  hurt  of  second  d.

6. 8.  and  his  name  that  sat  on  him  was  d.  and  hell
9. 6.  men  shall  seek  d.  and  d.  shall  flee  from  them
12. 11.  and  they  loved  not  their  lives  to  the  d.

13.  3.  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  were  wounded  to  d.

18. 8.  her  plagues  shall  come  one  day,  d.  mourning
20.  6.  on  such  the  second  d.  hath  no  power

13.  and  d.  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  in  them

14.  d.  and  hell  cast  into  lake,  this  is  the  second  d.
21. 4.  and  there  shall  be  no  more  d.  nor  sorrow

See  Day.

From  DEATH.

Josh.  2. 13.  Rahab’s  sisters,  deliver  our  lives  from  d.
Job  5.  20.  in  famine  he  shall  redeem  thee  from  d.
Psal.  33. 19.  to  deliver  their  soul  from  d.  keep  alive
56.  13.  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  d.  116.  8.
68.  20.  to  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  d.

78.  50.  he  spared  not  their  soul  from  d.  but  gave
Prov.  10.  2.  righteousness  delivereth  from  (/.’ll.  4.
Hos.  13.  14.  1  will  redeem  thee  from  d.  O  death
John  5.  24.  but  is  passed  from  d.  to  life,  1  John  3. 14.
neb.  5. 7.  to  him  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  d.
Jam.  5.  20.  know  that  he  shall  save  a  soul  from  d.
Gates  of  D  EATH.

Job  38. 17.  have  the  gates  of  d.  been  opened  to  thee  ?
Psal.  9. 13.  thou  that  liftest  me  up  from  gates  of  d.
107.  18.  and  they  draw  near  to  the  gates  of  d.

_  Put  to  DEATH.

Gen.  26. 11.  that  toucheth  this  man  shall  be  put  to  d.
Rffd.  21.  29.  ox  stoned,  his  owner  also  be  put  to  d.
35.  2.  whosoever  work  on  sabbath,  shall  he  put  to  d.
on'  sha.H  n°t  be  Put  tn  d.  because  not  free

20.  11.  both  of  them  shall  surely  be  put  to  d.

24. 21.  that  killeth  shall  be  put  to  d.  Num.  35.  30.
JSnin.  1.51.  Levites  shall  set  up  tabernacles,  stranger
that  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  d.  3. 10,  38.  1 18.  7.

*^at  creamer  of  dreams  shall  be  pvt  to  d.
9.  thy  hand  shall  be  first  on  him  to  put  to  d.  17.  7.

17.  6.  at  the  mouth  of  one  witness  not  be  put  to  d.

oL  t,e  Pui  tp  d-  and  thou  hang  him  on  a  tree

<-4. 16.  fathers  shall  not  b eput  to  d.  for  children,  nor
r  ,  children  put  to  d.  for  fathers,  2  Kings  14.  6.
Josh,  l  18.  rebel  against  thy  commandm .  be  put  to  d.
”^•6.  -31.  he  that  pleadeth  for  Baal  be  put  to  d.

a>.  13.  that  we  may  put  them  to  d.  1  Sam.  11. 12.

1  S am.  11. 13.  not  a  man  be  put  to  d.  2  Sam.  19.  22.

with  two  lines  measured  he  to  put  to  d.
01  s  lan  not  Shiinei  be  put  to  d.  for  this  ?

-E  9-  were  put  to  d.  in  the  days  of  barley-harvest
1  a!n9?P  1  sware  saying,  1  will  not  put  thee  to  d.
Aoonijah  shall  be  put  to  d.  this  day
;0.  but  I  will  not  at  this  time  put  thee  to  d.
w”'  EE  not  seek  the  Lord  should  be  put  tod.
P  cometh  into  the  house,  shall  be  pur  to d.
itr  io  *,]•  "?re  is  one  law  of  his  to  put  him  to  d.
ofi  s'  1  wives  be  widows,  their  men  be  put  to  d.
in  i:j  1  ■ w  ‘°r  certain,  that  it  ye  put  me  to  d.

19.  did  king  and  all  Judah  put  him  at  all  to  d.  ?


Jer.  26. 21  king  Jehoiakim  sought  to  put  Urijah  to  d.
38.  4.  we  beseech  tuee,  let  this  man  be  put  to  d.

15.  Jer.  said,  wilt  thou  not  surely  put  me  to  d.  ?

16.  the  king  sware,  1  will  not/wr  thee  to  d.  25.

43.  3.  hands  of  Chald.  that  they  might  put  us  tod.
52.  27.  smote  them  and  put  themro  rf.  in  Riblah

Mat.  10.  21.  childr.  shall  rise  up  ag.  parents,  cause
them  to  be  put  tod.  Mark  13. 12.  Luke  21.  16.

14.  5.  when  he  would  put  him  to  d.  he  fear.  mult.
26. 59.  the  chief  priests  sought  false  witness  against

Jesus  to  pul  him  to  d.  27.  1.  Mark  14.  55.
Mark  14.  1.  how  to  take  him  by  craft  and  put  to  d.
Luke  18.  33.  they  shall  scourge  and  put  him  to  d.

23.  32.  there  were  two  maletact.  led  to  b eput  to  d.
John  11.  53.  they  took  counsel  to  put  him  to  d.

12.  10.  that  they  might  put  Lazarus  also  to  d.

18.  31.  it  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  man  to  d.
Acts  12.  19.  Herod  command,  keepers  to  be  put  to  d.

26. 10.  when  they  were  put  to  d.  1  gave  voice  ag.  them
1  Pet.  3. 18  .put  to  d.  in  flesh, but  quickened  by  Spirit
See  Surely.

Shadow  of  DEATH.

Job  3.  5.  let  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  d.  stain  it
10.  21.  to  land  of  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  d.  22.

12.  22.  and  bringeth  out  to  light  the  shadow  of  d.
16.  16.  and  on  m3'  eye  lids  is  the  shadow  of  d.

24.  17.  morning  is  to  them  even  as  shadow  of  d.

28.  3.  he  searcheth  out  darkness  and  shadow  of  d.
34.  22.  is  no  shadow  of  d.  where  sinners  may  hide
38.  17.  or  hast  thou  seen  doors  of  the  shadow  of  d.  ?
Psal.  23.  4.  tho’  1  walk  thro’  valley  of  shadow  of  d.

44.  19.  tho’  thou  hast  covered  us  witn  shadow  of  d.
107.  10.  such  as  sit  in  darkness,  and  shadow  of  d.

14.  brought  them  out  of  darkn.  and  shadow  of  d.
Isa.  9.  2.  that  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  shadow  ofd.
Jer.  2.  6.  that  brought  us  thro’  land  of  shadow  of  d.
13. 16.  ye  look  for  light,  he  turn  it  into  shadow  of  d.
Amos  5.  8.  turneth  shadow  of  d.  into  the  morning
Mat.  4.  16.  peo.  that  sat  in  region  and  shadow  of  d.
Luke  1.79.  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  shadow  of  d.
Ways  of  DEATH.

Prov.  14.  12.  the  end  thereof  are  ways  of  d.  16. 25.
With  DEATH.

Isa.  28.  15.  we  have  made  a  covenant  with  d.

18.  your  covenant  with  d.  shall  be  disannulled
Rev.  2.  23.  and  1  will  kill  her  children  with  a.

6.  8.  and  power  was  given  to  them  to  kill  with  d.
Worthy  of  DEATH.

Deut.  17.  6.  that  is  worthy  of  d.  shall  be  put  to  d.

19.  6.  slay  him,  whereas  he  was  not  worthy  of  d.

21.  22.  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of  d.

22.  26.  there  is  in  the  damsel  no  sin  worthy  of  d.

1  Kings  2.  26.  said  to  Abiathar,  thou  art  worthy  of  d.
Luke  23.  15.  lo,  nothing  worthy  of  d.  is  done  to  him
Acts  23.  29.  nothing  laid  to  his  charge  worthy  of  d.

25.  11.  if  1  have  committed  any  thing  worthy  of  d.

25.  found  he  had  committed  nothing  worthy  of  d.

26.  31.  this  man  doth  nothing  worthy  ofd.

Rom.  1. 32.  who  commit  such  things  are  worthy  ofd.
DEATHS.

Jer.  16.  4.  they  shall  die  of  grievous  d.  not  be  buried
Ezek.  28. 8.  shalt  dierf.  of  them  that  are  slain  in  seas
10.  thou  shalt  die  the  d.  of  the  uncircumcised

2  Cor.  11.  23.  in  prisons  more  frequent,  in  d.  oft

DEBASE.

Isa.  57.  9-  and  didst  d.  thyself  even  unto  hell
DEBATE,  Verb.

Prov.  25.  9.  d.  thy  cause  with  thy  neighbour  himself
Isa.  27. 8.  in  measure,  thou  \v ilt  d.  with  it,hestayeth
DEBATE,  S.

Isa.58A.  behold,  ye  fast  for  strife  and  (/.and  tosmite
Rom.  1.29.  full  of  envy,  murder,  d.  deceit,  malignity
2  Cor.  12.  20.  1  fear  lest  there  be  d.  wraths,  strifes
DEBT

Is  what  is  due  by  one  man  to  another,  1ST eh.  10.  31.
Sins  are  by  resemblance  called  debts,  Mat.  6.  12.
As  a  debt  obliges  the  debtor  to  payment,  so  sin
doth  the  sinner  to  punishment.  And  as  the  cre¬
ditor  hath  a  right  to  exact  the  payment  from  the
debtor,  so  God  hath  a  1  iglit  to  inflict  punishment
on  the  guilty.  Thus  men  are  debtors  to  God,  by
trespassing  against  him  ;  and  to  their  neighbours,
when  they  wrong,  injure,  or  offend  them.  Mat.
6.  12.  The  apostle  Paul  says,  Rom.  1.  14.  I
am  a  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and  barbarians.
I  am  bound  by  my  office  to  preach  the  gospel  to
all  nations,  whether  more  civilized,  or  more  rude.
And  speaking  of  such  as  looked  apon  circumci¬
sion  as  necessary  to  their  justification  and  salva
tion,  he  says,  I  testify  to  every  man  that  is  cir¬
cumcised,  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law,
Gal.  5.  3.  He  obliges  himself  to  keep  the  whole
law,  as  the  condition  of  life,  and  so  virtually  dis¬
claims  all  pardon  by  Christ.

1  Sam.  22.  2.  ever3’  one  that  was  in  d.  went  to  David

2  Kingsifl.  he  said, go, sell  the  oil, pay  thyrf.and  live
Nek.  10.  31.  we  would  leave  the  exaction  of  every  d.
Mat.  18.  27.  loosed  him,  and  forgave  him  the  d.

30.  went  and  cast  into  prison  till  he  should  pay  d.
32.  his  lord  said,  1  forgave  thee  all  that  d.

Rom.  4. 4.  reward  is  not  reckoned  of  grace  but  d.
DEBTOR.

Ezek.  18.  7-  but  hath  restored  to  the  d.  his  pledge
Mat.  23. 16.  shall  swear  by  gold  of  the  temple  is  a  d.

\  18.  whoso  sweareth  by  the  gift,  he  is  the  d.

Rom.  1.  14.  1  am  d.  to  the  Greeks  and  barbarians
Gal.  5.  3.  that  he  is  a  d.  to  do  the  whole  law
DEBTORS.

Mat.  6. 12.  forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  d.
Luke  7.  41.  a  certain  creditor  had  two  d.

13.  +  4.  think  ye  that  they  were  d.  above  all  men  ?
16.  5.  he  called  every  one  of  his  lord’s  d.

Rom.  8. 12.  therefore,  brethren,  we  are  d.  not  to  flesh

15.  27.  it  pleased  them  verily,  and  their  d.  they  are

DEBTS.

Prov.  22. 26.  be  not  of  them  that  are  sureties  for  d.
Mat. 6. 12. forgive  us  our  d.  as  we  forgive  our  debtors
DECAY.

I xv.  25.  35.  if  thy  brother  be  poor  and  fallen  in  d.
Rom.  11. 1 12.  d.  of  them  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles
DECAYED.

Neh.  4. 10.  the  strength  of  the  bearers  of  burdens  d.


Isa.  44.  26. 1  will  raise  up  the  d.  places  thereof
DECAYETH.

Job  14. 11.  and  as  the  flood  d.  and  drieth  up
Eccl.  10.  18.  by  much  slothfulness  the  building]/.
Heb.  8.  13.  that  which  d.  is  ready  to  vanish  away
DECEASE.

Luke  9.  31.  and  spake  of  hisrf.  at  Jerusalem
2  Pet.  1. 15.  after  my  d.  to  have  in  remembrance
DECEASED.

Isa.  26.  14.  they  are  d.  they  shall  not  rise
Mat.  22.  25.  first,  when  lie  had  married  a  wife,  d.
DECEIT

Signifies,  [1]  Guile  or  fraud,  Psal.  10.  7.  |  36.  3.
[2]  Deceitful  persons,  Jer.  9.  6.  [31  Deluding

messages,  dreams,  and  lies,  of  false  teachers, where¬
by  they  please  the  humours,  and  comply  with  the
lusts,  of  sinful  persons,  Isa.  30.  10.  Jer.  8.  5.  [4]
Goods  gotten  by  oppression,  false  accusation,  and
deceit,  Jer.  5.  27.  Zeph.l.  9.  L5]  Devices  or  fair
pretences  to  deceive,  Psal.  38.  12.

They  handle  the  word  of  God  deceitfully,  2  Cor.  4. 2.
who  mingle  it  with  their  own  inventions,  or  passions
of  pride,  covetousness,  %c.  or  wrest  it  according  to
men' s  pleasures.

Job  15.  35.  and  their  belly  prepareth  d.

27.  4.  my  lips  not  speak,  nor  my  tongue  utter  (/,
31.  5.  or  if  my  foot  hath  hasted  to  d.

Psal.  5.  t  6.  the  Lord  will  abhor  the  man  of  d.

10.  7.  his  mouth  is  full  of  cursing,  d.  and  fraud
36.  3.  the  words  of  his  mouth  are  iniquity  and  d.
43.  t  1.  O  deliver  me  from  the  man  of  d.

50.  19.  thy  mouth  to  evil,  thy  tongue  frameth  d.
55. 11.  d.  and  guile  depart  not  from  her  streets
f  23.  men  of  d.  shall  not  live  half  their  days
72. 14.  he  shall  redeem  their  soul  from  d.  and.  viol.
101.  7.  he  that  worketh  d.  not  dwell  in  my  house
109.  t  2.  the  mouth  of  d.  is  opened  against  me

119.  118.  trodden  them  that  err,  their  d.  is  falseh.
Prov.  11. 1 1.  balances  of  d.  are  abomination  to  Lord

12. 5.  but  the  counsels  of  the  wicked  are  d.

17.  but  a  false  witness  sheweth  forth  d.

20.  d.  is  in  the  heart  of  them  that  imagine  evil
14. 8.  but  the  folly  of  fools  is  d.

20. 17.  bread  of  d.  is  sweet  to  a  man,  but  afterwards
1 23.  and  balances  of  d.  are  not  good

26.  24.  he  that  liateth,  layeth  up  d.  within  him
26.  whose  hatred  is  covered  by  d.  his  wickedness

Isa.  53.  9.  neither  was  any  d.  in  his  mouth
Jer.  5. 27.  cage  full  of  birds,  so  are  houses  full  of  d.

8.  5.  they  hold  fast  d.  they  refuse  to  return

9.  6.  thro’ d.  they  refuse  to  know  me,  saitli  the  L.

8.  tongue  is  as  an  arrow  shot  out,  it  speaketh  d.

14.  14.  they  prophesy  the  d.  of  their  heart

23.  26.  they  are  prophets  of  d.  of  their  own  heart

42.  f20.  you  have  used  d.  against  your  souls
Ezek.  22.  t  7.  in  thee  have  they  dealt  by  d.

f  29.  the  people  of  the  land  nave  used  d.

Hos.  11. 12.  the  house  of  Isr.  compasseth  me  with  d.
12.  7.  the  balances  of]/,  are  in  his  hands
Amos  8.  5.  and  falsifying  the  balances  by  d.

Zeph.  1.  9.  who  fill  their  masters’  houses  with  d.
Mark  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  of  men  proceed  d.
Rom.  1.  29.  full  of  murder,  debate,  d.  malignity
3.  13.  with  their  tongues  they  have  used  d.

Col.  2.8.  lest  any  man  spoil  you  thro’  vain  philos.  d.

1  Thess.  2.  3.  for  our  exhortation  was  not  of  d.

DECEITFUL.

Ps.  5. 6.  the  Lord  will  abhor  the  bloody  and  d.  man
35. 20.  they  devise  d.  matters  ag.  them  quiet  in  land

43.  1.  O  deliver  me  from  thed.  and  unjust  man
52. 4.  lovest  devouring  words,  O  thou  d.  tongue
55. 23.  bloody  and  d.  men  shall  not  live  half  their  d.
78.  57.  they  were  turned  aside  like  a  d.  bow
109.  2.  the  mouth  of  the  d.  are  opened  against  me

120.  2.  deliver  my  soul  from  a  d.  tongue
Prov.  11.  18.  the  wicked  worketh  a  d.  work

12.  t  24.  but  the  d.  shall  be  under  tribute
14.  25.  but  a  d.  witness  speaketh  lies

23.  3.  not  desirous  of  dainties  for  they  are  d.  meat

27.  6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are  d.

29. 13.  the  poor  and  the  d.  man  meet  together
31.  30.  favour  is  d.  and  beauty  is  vain,  but  a  woman
Jer.  17.  9.  the  heart  is  d.  above  all  things  and  wicked
Hos.  7. 16.  return  not  to  most  High,  are  like  arf.  bow
Mic.  6. 11.  and  with  the  bag  of' d.  weights
12.  and  their  tongue  is  d.  in  their  mouth
Zeph.  3.  13.  nor  shall  a  d.  tongue  be  found  in  mouth

2  Cor.  11. 13.  such  are  false  apostles,  d.  workers
Eph.  4.  22.  old  man  corrupt  according  to  the  d.  lusts

DECEITFULLY.

Gen.  34. 13.  sons  answered  llamorand  Shechem  d.
Exod.  8.  29.  let  not  Pharaoh  deal  d.  any  more

21.  8.  seeing  he  hath  dealt  d.  with  her
Lev.  6.  4.  or  the  thing  which  he  hath  d.  gotten
Job  6.  15.  my  brethren  have  dealt  d.  as  a  brook

13.  7.  will  ye  talk  wickedly  or  d.  for  God  ?

Psal.  24.  4.  hath  not  lift  upTiis  soul  nor  sworn  d.

52.  2.  thy  tongue  like  a  sharp  razor,  working  d.

Jer.  48.  10.  cursed  that  doth  work  of  the  Lord  d.
Dan.  11. 23.  after  the  league  made,  he  shall  work  d.

2  Cor.  2.  1 17.  not  as  many  that  deal  d.  with  word
4. 2.  not  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  word  of  God  d.
DEC  ELI  FULNESS.

Mat.  13.  22.  the  care  of  this  world,  and  the  d.  of
riches  choke  the  word,  Mark  4. 19.
Heb.  3.  13.  lest  any  be  hardened  thro’  the  d.  of  sin
DECEITS.

Psal.  38.  12.  seek  my  hurt,  and  imagine  d.  all  day
Isa.  30. 10.  speak  to  us  smooth  things,  prophesy  d.
33.  t  15.  he  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  y.

DECEIVE

Signifies,  [1]  To  beguile,  cheat,  or  cozen,  Gen.  31.  7*
Lev.  6.  2.  [2]  To  mislead,  subdue,  or  corrupt,
Deut.  11.  16.  Isa.  44.  20.  [3]  To  allure,  delude,
or  entice.  Job  31.  9.

I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet,  Ezek.  14.  9.
I  have  given  him  up  to  the  delusions  of  his  own
heart,  and  justly  left  him  in  his  blindness,  that  he
shall  not  discern  his  own  self  deceiving s  :  Or,  when
such  a  prophet  promiseth  good,  and  thinks  that  'he
concurrence  of  all  second  causes  tend  to  it,  I  will
disappoint  arid  frustrate.


97


DEC


DEC


DEE


O  Lord,  thou  hast  deceived  me,  and  I  was  deceived,
Jer.  20. 7-  that  is.  Thou  hast  persuaded  me  to  un¬
dertake  this  office,  contrary  to  my  own  inclina-
tions,  and  hast  disappointed  me  of  that  comfort
and  satisfaction  therein  that  I  expected.

2  Sam.  3.  25.  thou  knowest  Abner  came  to  d.  thee
1  Kings  22.  t  20.  the  Lord  said,  who  shall  d.  Ahab  r1
£  Kings 4.  28.  she  said,  did  not  I  say,  do  not  d.  me  '

18.  29.  saith  king,  letnot  Hezekiahrf.  you,  not  able

to  deliver  you,  2  Chron.  32.  15.  Isa.  36.  14.

19.  10.  let  not  thy  God  d.  thee,  saying,  Isa.  37.  10.
Prov.  24.  28.  be  not  a  witness,  and  d.  not  with  lips
Isa.  58.  t  11.  like  a  spring  whose  waters  d.  not
Jer.  9.  5.  they  will  d.  every  one  his  neighbour

29.  8.  your  diviners  that  be  in  midst  ot  you  d.  you
37.  9.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  d.  not  yourselves
Hot.  12.  t  7.  he  is  a  merchant,  he  loveth  to  d.

Zech.  13.  4.  neither  wear  a  rough  garment  to  d.
Mat.  24. 4.  take  heed  that  no  man  d.  you,  Mark  13.5.
5.  saying,  lam  Christ,  d.  many,  11.  Markin.  6.

24.  that,  if  possible,  they  shall  d.  the  very  elect
Acts  5.  t  3.  why  hath  Satan  filled  thy  heart  to  d.  ?
Rom.  16.  18.  by  fair  speeches  d.  the  hearts  of  simple
1  Cor.  3. 18.  let  no  man  d.  himself,  if  any  man  seems
Eph.  4.  14.  craftiness  whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to  d.
5.  6.  let  no  man  d.  you,  2  Thess.  2.  3.  1  John  3. 7.

1  John  1. 8.  if  we  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  d.  oui  selves
Rev.  20.  3.  that  he  should  d.  the  nations  no  more

8.  go  to  d.  nations  in  four  quarters  of  the  earth
DECEIVA  BLEN  ESS.

2  Thess.  2. 10.  and  with  all  d.  of  unrighteousness

DECEIVED.

Gen.  31. 7.  father  hath  d.  me  and  changed  my  wages
Lev.  6.  2.  or  if  a  so  1  sin,  or  hath  d.  his  neighbour
Deut.  11. 16.  take  heed  that  your  heart  be  not  d.

1  Sam.  19. 17.  why  hast  thou  d.  me  so  ?  28.  12.

2  Sam.  19.  26.  my  lord,  O  king,  mv  servants,  me
Job  12. 16.  the  d.  and  the  deceiver  are  his

15.  31.  let  not  him  that  is  d.  trust  in  vanity
31.  9.  if  mine  heart  have  been  d.  by  a  woman
Isa.  19. 13.  the  princes  of  N oph  are  .seduced  Egypt
44. 20.  a  d.  heart  hath  turned  him  aside  that  cannot
Jer.  4.  10.  surely  thou  hast  greatly  d.  this  people

20.  7.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  d.  me,  and  I  was  d.

49. 16.  thy  terriblen.  hath  d.  thee  and  pride  of  heart
Lam.  1.19.  1  called  formy  lovers,  butthey  d.  me
Ezek.  14.  9.  if  the  prophet  be  d.  1  have  d.  him
Ohad.  3.  the  pride  of  tnine  heart  hath  d.  thee
7.  men  that  were  at  peace  with  thee  have  d.  thee
Luke  21.  8.  he  said,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  d.

Joint  7.  47.  the  Pharisees  answered,  are  ye  also  d.  ?
Rom.  7.  11.  for  sin  taking  occasion  by  comm.  d.  me
1  Cor.  6.  9.  be  not  d.  15. 33.  Gal.  6.  7.

1  Tim.  2. 14.  Adam  was  not  d.  but  woman  being  d.

2  Tim. 3.13.  wax  worse  and  worse, deceiv.and being  a1.
Tit.  3.  3.  we  were  foolish  d.  serving  divers  lusts
Rev.  18.  23.  by  thy  sorceries  all  nations  were  d.

19.  20.  he  d.  them  that  had  received  mark  of  beast
20. 10.  devil  that  d.  them  was  cast  into  lake  of  fire
DE<  EIVER.

Gen.  27. 12.  and  I  shall  seem  to  my  father  as  a  d.
Job  12. 16.  the  deceived  and  the  d.  a re  his
Mai.  1. 14.  cursed  be  d.  who  hath  in  his  flock  a  male
Mat.  27.  63.  rememb.  that  that  d.  said,  after  3  days
2  John  7.  confess  not  Jes.  this  is  a  d.  and  an  antichrist
DECEIVERS.

2  Cor.  6. 8.  by  evil  and  good  report, as  rf.and  yet  true
Tit.  1.  10.  many  d.  especially  of  the  circumcision
2  John  7.  for  many  d.  are  entered  into  the  world
DECE1VETH.

2  Kings  18.  +  32.  hearken  not  to  Hezekiah  when  he  d.
Prov.  26. 19.  so  is  the  man  that  d.  his  neighbour
John  7.  12.  others  said,  nay,  but  he  d.  the  people
Gal.  6. 3.  to  be  something  when  nothing,  he  d.  hims.
Jam.  1. 26.  d.  his  own  heart,  this  man’s  relig.  is  vain
Rev.  12.9. that  old  serpent,  called  the  devil,  which  d.

13.  14.  and  d.  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth
DECEIVING.

Isa.  3.  +  16.  daughters  of  Zion  d.  with  their  eyes
2'TimA. 13.  evil  men  wax  worse, rf.and  being  deceiv.
Jam.  1. 22.  and  not  hearers  only  d.  your  own  selves
DECEIVINGS.

2  Pet.  2.  13.  sporting  themselves  with  their  own  d.
DECENTLY.

Ro?n.  13.  +13.  let  us  walk  d.  as  in  day ,  not  in  rioting
1  Cor.  14.  40.  let  all  things  be  done  d.  and  in  order
DECIDED.

1  Kings  20.  40.  the  king  said,  thyself  hast  d.  it
DECISION.

Joel  3. 14.  multitudes  in  valley  of  d.  for  day  of  Lord
DECK.

Job  40. 10.  d.  thyself  now  with  majesty  and  excell.
Jei .  10.  4.  they  d.  it  with  silver  and  with  gold
DECKED.

Prov.  7. 16. 1  have  d.  my  bed  with  cover,  ot  tapestry
Isa.  63.  +  1.  w  ho  is  this  that  is  d.  in  his  apparel  ?
Ezek.  16.  11.  Id.  thee  also  with  ornaments
13.  thou  wast  thus  d.  with  gold  and  silver
Hos.  2.  13.  and  she  d.  herself  with  her  ear-rings
Rev.  17.  4.  the  woman  was  arrayed  and  d.  with  gold
18. 16.  alas,  alas,  that  great  city  that  was  d.
DECKEDST.

Ezek.  16.  16.  didst  take  garm.  and  d.  high-places
23. 40.  didst  wash  and  d.  thyself  with  ornaments
DECKEST,  ETH.

Isa.  61.  10.  as  a  bridegroom  d.  himself  with  ornam,
Jer.  4.  30.  tho’  thou  d.  thee  with  ornaments  of  gold
DECLARE.

Gen.  41.  24.  there  was  none  that  could  d.  it  to  me
Dent.  1.5.  in  land  of  Moab  began  Moses  to  rf.this  law
Josh.  20. 4.  shall  d.  his  cause  in  ears  of  elders  of  city
Judg.  14.  12.  if  ye  can  d.  it  me  within  the  seven  days
1  Kings22. 13.  prophets  d. good  to  king,  2  Ch.  18. 12.
1  Chron.  16.  24.  d.  his  glory  among  the  heathen,  his
marvellous  works  among  all  nations,  Psal.  96. 3.
Esth.  4.  8.  to  shew  the  copy  and  d.  it  to  Esther
Job  12.8.  the  fishes  of  the  sea  shallr/.  unto  thee

21.  31.  who  shall  d.  his  way  to  his  face  ?

28.  27.  then  did  he  see  it,  and  d.  it,  he  prepared  it
31.  37.  1  would  d.  to  him  the  number  of  my  steps
38.4.  found,  of  earth,  d.  if  thou  hast  understanding
18.  the  breadth  of  earth,  d.  if  thou  knowest  it  all

98


Job  40. 7. 1  will  demand  of  thee,  d.  thou  to  me,  42.  4.
Psal.  9-  11-  d.  among  the  people  his  doings
19.  1.  the  heavens  d.  the  glory  of  God
22. 31.  shall  come  and  d.  his  righteous.  50. 6.  I  97-  6.

30.  9.  shall  dust  pr;  ise  thee,  shall  it  d.  thy  truth  ?
40. 5.  if  1  would  d.  and  speak  of  them,  they  are  more
50.  16.  what  hast  thou  to  do  to  d.  my  statutes  ?

64.  9.  all  men  shall  fear  and  d.  the  work  of  God
73.  28.  my  trust  in  L.  that  I  may  d.  all  thy  works
75.  1.  thy  name  is  near  thy  wondrous  works  d.

78.  6.  should  arise  and  d.  them  to  their  children
102.  21.  to  d.  the  name  of  the  Lord  in  Zion

107.  22.  and  d.  his  works  with  rejoicing
118.  17.  but  live  and  d.  the  works  of  the  Lord
145.  4.  one  generation  shall  d.  thy  mighty  acts
Eccl.  9.1.  I  considered  in  my  heart  even  to  d.  all  this
Isa.  3.  9.  they  d.  their  sin  as  Sodom,  they  hide  not
12.  4.  shall  ye  say,  d.  his  doings  among  the  people

21.  6.  set  a  watchman,  let  him  d.  what  he  seeth

41.  22.  or  let  them  d.  to  us  things  for  to  come

42.  9.  and  new  things  do  I  d.  before  they  spring
12.  and  let  them  d.  his  praise  in  the  islands

43.  9.  who  among  them  can  d.  this,  and  shew  us?
26.  d.  thou  that  thou  mayest  be  justified

44.  7.  and  who,  as  1 ,  shall  call,  and  shall  d.  it  ?

45.  19.  I  the  Lord  d.  tilings  that  are  right
48.  6.  see  all  this,  and  will  not  ye  d.  it?

53.  8.  who  shall  d.  his  generation  ?  Acts  8.  33.

66.  19-  they  shall  d.  my  glory  amone  the  Gentiles
Jer.  5.  20.  d.  this  in  house  of  Jacob,  publish  in  Judah

9.  12.  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  that  he  may  d.  it

31.  10.  and  d.  it  in  the  isles  afar  off,  and  say

38.  15.  if  I  d.  it  to  thee,  wilt  thou  not  put  to  death  ?

25.  d.  unto  us  what  thou  hast  said  to  the  king

42.  20.  what  G.  shall  say,  d.  to  us,  and  we  will  do  it

50.  28.  d.  in  Zion  the  vengeance  of  the  L.  our  G.

51.  10.  let  us  d.  in  Zion  the  work  of  the  L.  our  G.
Ezek.  12.  16.  may  d.  all  their  abominations,  23.  36.

40.  4.  d.  all  that  thou  seestto  the  house  of  Israel
Dan.  4.  18.  O  Belteshazzar,  d.  the  interpretation
Mic.  3.  8.  to  d.  to  Jacob  his  transgression,  and  Israel
Zech.  9.  12.  even  to-day  do  1  d.  that  I  will  render
Mat.  13.  36.  d.  unto  us  the  parable  of  tares  of  field
15.  15.  then  said  Peter,  d.  unto  us  this  parable

Acts  13.  32.  and  we  d.  unto  you  glad  tidings

41.  shall  in  no  wise  believe,  tho’  a  man  d.  it  to  you
17.  23.  whom  ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  d.  I  to  you
20727.  not  shunned  to  d.  to  you  the  counsel  of  God
Rom.  3.  25.  set  forth  to  d.  his  righteousness,  26.

1  Cor.  3.  13.  work  be  manifest,  the  day  shall  d.  it

11.  17.  in  this  that  I  d.  to  you,  I  praise  you  not
15.  1.  I  d.  unto  you  the  gospel  which  I  preached

Col.  4.  7.  all  my  state  shall  Tychicus  d.  to  you
Heb.  11. 14.  they  that  say  such  things  d.  plainly  that

1  John  1.  3.  that  which  we  have  seen  d.  we  to  you
5.  this  then  is  the  message  which  we  d.  unto  you

I  will  DECLARE.

Job  15.  17.  and  that  which  I  have  seen  I  will  d.
Psal.  2.  7.  I  will  d.  the  decree,  the  Lord  hath  said

22.  22.  I  will  d.  thy  name  to  brethren,  Heb.  2.  12.
38. 18.  Twill  d.  mine  iniquity,  I  will  be  sorry  for  sin
66.  16.  I  will  d.  what  he  hath  done  for  my  soul
75. 9.  but  I  will  d.  for  ever,  I  will  sing  praises  to  G.
145.  6.  speak  of  thy  acts,  J  will  d.  thy  greatness

Isa.  57. 12.  I  will  d.  thy  righteousness  and  thy  works
Jer.  42.  4.  I  will  d.  it,  I  will  keep  nothing  back
John  17.  26.  have  declared  thy  name,  and  willd.  it
DECLARE  ye.

Isa.  48.  20.  with  a  voice  of  singing  d.  ye,  tell  this
Jer.  4.  5.  d.  ye  in  Judah,  and  publish  in  Jerusalem

46.  14.  d.  ye  in  Egypt,  and  publish  in  Migdol
50. 2.  d.  ye  among  the  nations,  publish,  conceal  not

Mic.  1.  10.  d.  ye  it  not  at  Gath,  weep  ye  not  at  all
DECLARATION.

Esth.  10.  2.  the  d.  of  the  greatness  of  Mordecai
Job  13.  17.  and  hear  my  d.  with  your  ears
Luke  1.  1.  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  in  order  a  d.

2  Cor.  8.  19.  and  to  the  d.  of  your  ready  mind

DECLARED.

Exod.  9.  16. 1  raised  thee,  that  my  name  may  be  d.
Lev.  23.  44.  Moses  d.  to  the  children  of  Israel
Num.  1.  18.  they  d.  their  pedigrees  by  their  poll
15.  34.  put  him  in  ward,  because  it  was  not  d.
Deut.  4. 13.  and  he  d.  to  you  his  covenant
2  Sam.  19.  6.  for  thou  hast  d.  this  day  that  thou
Neh.  8.  12.  understood  words  that  were  d.  to  them
Job  26.  3.  how  hast  thou  plentifully  d.  thing  as  it  is
Psal.  40. 10.  I  have  d.  thy  faithfulness  and  salvation
71.  17.  hitherto  have  I  d.  thy  wondrous  works

77. 14.  thou  hast  d.  thy  strength  among  the  people
88.  11.  shall  thy  loving-kindness  be  d.  in  the  grave
119.  13.  with  my  lips  have  I  d.  all  the  judgments

26.  I  have  d.  my  waj's,  and  thou  heardest  me
Isa.  21.  2.  a  grievous  vision  is  d.  unto  me

10.  that  which  I  heard  of  God  have  I  d.  unto  you

41.  26.  who  hath  d.  from  the  beginning,  45.  21.

43.  12.  I  have  d.  and  have  saved,  44.  8.  I  48.  5.

48.  3.  I  have  d.  former  things  from  the  beginning

14.  which  among  them  hatli  d.  these  things  ?

Jer.  36.  13.  Micaiah  d.  all  the  words  he  heard

42.  21.  and  now  I  have  this  day  tl.  it  to  you
Luke  8.  47.  she  d.  to  him  before  all  the  people
John  1. 18.  no  man  hath  seen  God,  the  Son  d.  him

17. 26.  1  have  d.  to  them  thy  name  and  will  declare
Acts  9.  27.  he  d.  to  them  how  he  had  seen  the  Lord
10.  8.  when  he  had  d.  all  these  things  to  them

12.  17.  he  d.  how  L.  had  brought  him  out  of  prison

15.  4.  d.  all  things  that  God  had  done  with  them

14.  Simeon  hath  d.  how  God  at  first  did  visit

25. 14.  Festus  d.  Paul’s  cause  to  the  king,  saying
Rom.  1.  4.  and  d.  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power

9.  17.  that  my  name  might  be  d.  through  the  earth

1  Cor.  1.  11.  for  it  hath  been  d.  to  me  of  you

2  Cor.  3.  3.  ye  are  manifestly  d.  to  be  the  epistle  of  C.
Col.  1.  8.  who  also  d.  to  us  your  love  in  the  Spirit
Rev.  10.  7.  the  mystery  of  God  be  finished  as  he  d.

DECLARETH,  TNG.

Isa.  41.  26.  yea,  there  is  none  that  d.  that  heareth
46.  10.  d.  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  from
Jer.  4. 15.  a  voice  d.  from  Dan,  published)  affliction
Hos.  4. 12.  my  people,  their  staffV.  unto  them
Amos  4. 13.  lo,  ne  that  d.  to  man  what  is  his  thought


Acts  15.  3.  d.  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles

12.  d.  what  miracles  God  had  wrought  by  them

1  Cor.  2. 1.  d.  to  you  the  testimony  ot  God

DECLINE.

Exod.  23.  2.  nor  speak  in  a  cause,  to  d.  after  many
Deut.  17. 11.  thou  shalt  notch  from  the  sentence
Psal.  119. 157-  yet  do  l  not  d.  from  thy  testimonies
Prov.  4.  5.  neither  d.  from  the  words  of  my  mouth
7. 25.  letmot  thine  heart  d.  to  her  ways,  go  not  astray
DECLINED,  ETH.

Judg.  19. 1 8.  they  tarried  till  the  day  d.

2  Chr.  34.  2.  d.  neither  to  the  l  ight  hand  nor  left
Job  23.  11 .  his  way  have  I  kept  and  not  d.

Psal.  44. 18.  nor  have  our  steps  d.  from  thy  way

102. 11.  my  days  are  like  a  shad  >w  that  d.

109.  23.  I  am  gone  like  the  shadow  when  itcf.

119.  51.  yet  have  I  not  d.  from  thy  law
DECREASE.

Ps.  107.  38.  blesseth  them  and  suffer  not  cattle  to  d.
John  3.  30.  he  must  increase,  but  I  must  d.
DECREASED,  ING.

Gen.  8.  5.  the  waters  d.  continually  till  tenth  month
+  the  waters  were  in  going  and  d.  till  tenth  month
DECREE.

2  Chron.  30.  5.  so  they  established  a  d.  to  make  procl.
Ezra  4.  t  21.  make  a  d.  to  cause  these  men  to  cease
5. 13.  king  Cyrus  made  a  d.  to  build  this  house,  17.  '
6. 1.  Darius  made  a  d.  12.  II 7. 21.  Artaxerxes  a  d.
Esth.  3.  15.  the  d.  was  given  in  Shushan,  9.  14.

9.  32.  d.  of  Esther  confirmed  these  matters  of  Purim  1
Job  20.  +  29.  and  the  heritage  of  his  d.  from  God
28.  26.  when  he  made  a  d.  Tor  the  rain,  and  a  way  1
38.  +  10.  and  established  my’r  d.  upon  it,  and  set  bars
Psal.  2. 7.  I  will  declare  the  d.  the  Lord  hath  said
148.  6.  he,  hath  made  a  d.  which  shall  not  pass
Prov.  8. 29-  when  he  gave  to  sea  his  d.  waters  not  pass  .
Jer.  5. 22.  for  the  bound  of  the  sea  by  a  perpetual  d.
Dan.  2.  9.  if  ye  will  not,  there  is  but  one  d.  for  you
4. 17.  this  matter  is  by  the  d.  of  the  watchers
24.  and  this  is  the  d.  of  the  most  High
6.  8.  now,  O  king,  establish  the  d.  and  sign  writing

13.  Daniel  regardeth  not  thee,  nor  <1.  hast  signed
26.  I  make  a  d.  that  in  every  dominion  men  tear

Jonah  3. 7 .  proclaimed  by  the  d.  of  king  and  nobles
Mic.  7. 11.  in  that  day  shall  the  d.  be  far  removed
Zeph.  2. 2.  before  the  d.  bring  forth,  before  day  pass
Luke  2. 1.  there  went  out  a  d.  from  Caesar  Augustus
DECREE.

Job  22. 28.  thou  shalt  also  d.  a  thing,  and  it  shall  be
Prov.  8. 15.  by  me  kings  reign,  ana  princes  d.  justice  1
Isa.  10.  1.  woe  to  them  that  d.  unrighteous  decrees
DECREED.  I

Esth.  2.  1.  he  remembered  what  wa sd.  ag.  Vashti
9. 31.  as  they  had  d.  for  themselves  and  their  seed
Job  38. 10.  and  brake  up  for  it  my  d,  place,  set  bars  ;
Isa.  10. 22.  consumption  d.  shall  overflow  with  right.

1  Cor.  7.  37.  hath  so  d.  in  his  heart,  that  he  will  keep

DECREES.

Isa.  10. 1.  woe  to  them  that  decree  unrighteous  d.
Acts  16.  4.  they  delivered  them  the  d.  to  keep
17. 7.  these  do  contrary  to  the  d.  of  Cassar,  saying
DEDICATE.

Deut.  20.  5.  lest  he  die  and  another  man  d.  it

2  Sam.  8. 11.  which  also  David  did  d.  to  the  Lord

1  Chron.  26.  27.  out  of  spoils  they  did  d.  to  maintain

2  Chr.  2. 4.  behold  I  build  an  house  to  d.  it  to  God

DEDICATED.

Deut.  20. 5.  hath  built  a  new  house  and  hath  not  d.  it
Judg.  17.  3.  1  had  wholly  d.  the  silver  to  the  Lord

1  Kings'!.  51.  Solom.  brought  in  things  which  David

his  father  had  d.  1  Chron.  18.  II.  2  Chron.  5. 1,
8.  63.  the  king  and  Israel  d.  the  house,  2  Chr.  7.  5.

15. 15.  Asa  brought  in  the  things  his  fathers  had  d.
and  things  which  himself  had  d.  2  Chr.  15. 18.

2  Kings  12. 4.  all  the  money  of  the  d.  things  brought
18.  the  things  the  kings  or  J  udah  had  d.

1  Chron.  26.  20.  over  the  treasures  0 id.  things,  26.

26.  what  the  captains  of  the  hosts  had  d.

28.  and  all  that  Samuel,  Saul,  and  Joab  had  d.

28. 12.  the  pattern  of  the  treasures  of  d.  things
2Chr.  24.  7.  the  d.  tilings  did  bestow  uppn  Baalim
31.  12.  and  brought  in  the  d.  things  faithfully  _
Ezek.  44.  29.  every  d.  thing  in  Israel  shall  be  theirs
Heb.  9. 18.  nor  the  first  testament  d.  without  blood
DEDICATING.

Num.  7. 10.  the  princes  offered  for  d.  of  the  altar

11.  each  prince  on  his  day  for  d.  of  the  altar
DEDICATION.

Num.  7.  84.  this  was  the  d.  of  the  altar,  88.

2  Chron.  7.  9.  for  they  kept  the  d.  of  the  altar
Ezra  6. 16.  childr.  ot  captivity  kept  the  d.  with  joy

17.  and  offered  at  the  d.  of  this  house  of  God
Neh.  12.  27.  at  the  d.  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem
Dan.  3. 2.  come  to  d.  of  the  image  the  king  set  up,  3.
John  10. 22.  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the  feast  of  therf.
DEED.

Gen.  44.15.  Joseph  said,  what*?,  is  this  ye  have  done .
Exod.  9. 16.  in  very  d.  for  this  cause  I  raised  thee  up
Judg.  19. 30.  all  said,  there  was  no  such  d.  done

1  Sam.  25.  34.  in  very  d.  except  thou  lradst  hasted
26. 4.  David  understood  Saul  was  come  in  very  &.

2  Sam.  12. 14.  by  this  d.  hast  given  great  occasion
Esth.  1.  17.  for  this  d.  of  queen  shall  come  abroad  ,
Ps.  137.  +  8.  happy  that  recompenseth  thy  d.  to  us
Prov.  19.  +17.  bis  d.  will  he  pay  him  again

Luke  23.  51.  Joseph  had  not  consented  to  d.  of  them
24.  19.  Jesus  who  was  a  prophet  mighty  in  d.

Acts  4.  9.  if  we  this  day  be  examined  of  the  good  d.
Rom.  15. 18.  to  make  Gent,  obedient  by  word  and  d:

1  Cor.  5.  2.  that  hath  done  this  d.  be  taken  away
3.  concerning  him  that  hath  so  done  this  d.

Col.  3.17.  whatever  ye  do  in  word  or  d.  do  all  in  name
Jam.  1.  25.  this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  d.

1  John  3. 18.  let  us  not  love  in  word,  but  in  a.
DEEDS.

Gen.  20.  9.  hast  done  d.  that  ougkt  not  to  be  done

1  Chron.  11.  +22.  son  of  a  man  of  Kabzeel,  great  of  <?.
16.  8.  make  known  his  d.  am.  people,  Psal.  105. 1.

2  Chron.  35.  27.  his  d.  first  and  last,  are  written
Ezra  9.  13.  after  all  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  d.
Neh.  6. 19.  also  they  reported  his  good  d.  before  rce

13.14.  wipe  not  out  my  good  d.  that  I  have  done


DEE


I)  E  F


DEG


Psal.  28.  4.  gave  them  according  to  their  </.

Isa.  59.  18-  according  to  their  d.  he  will  repay
jer.  5.  28.  they  overpass  the  d.  of  the  wicked
25. 14-  "'ill  recompense  them  according  to  their  d.
Luke  11.  48.  that  ye  allow  the  d.  of  your  fathers

23.  41.  we  receive  the  due  reward  of  our  d.

John  3.19-  loved  darkness,  because  their  rf.were  evil

20.  to  the  light,  lest  his  d.  should  be  reproved

21.  that  his  d.  may  be  made  manifest,  that  they
8.  41.  Jesus  saith,  ye  do  the  d.  of  your  father

Acts  7-  22.  Moses  was  mighty  in  word  and  in  d.

‘ g .  3<j.  Dorcas  was  full  of  aims-*/,  which  she  did
19. 18.  many  confessed,  and  shewed  their  d.

24.  2.  seeing  by  thy  providence  worthy  d.  are  done
Horn.  2.  <3.  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  d.

3.  20.  by  the  d.  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified
28.  is  justified  by  faith  without  the  d.  of  the  law
8.  13-  if  ye  mortify  the  d.  of  the  body  ye  shall  live
2  Cot.  12.  12.  were  wrought  in  signs  and  mighty  d.
Col.  3.  9.  ye  have  put  oft  the  old  man  with  fiis  d.

2  Pet.  2.8.  Lot  vexed  his  soul  with  their  unlawful  d.

2  John  11.  for  he  is  partaker  of  his  evil  d.

3  John  10.  1  will  remember  his  d.  which  he  doth
Jude  15.  to  convince  them  of  their  ungodly  d.

Lev.  2.  6.  thou  hatest  the  d.  of  the  Nicolaitans

22.  great  tribulation,  except  they  repent  of  their  d.
16  11.  and  they  repented  not  of  their  d.

DEEMED.


Acts  27.  27.  the  shipmen  d.  that  they  drew  near
DEEP


Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  a  great  way  from  the
surface  to  the  bottom ,  Ezek.  32.  24.  _  [2]  The
sea.  Job  41.  31.  [3]  Any  great  and  imminent

danger,  Psal.  69.  15.  [4]  Strange,  or  unbiown,

Isa.  33.  19.  [5]  Hidden,  or  secret,  Job  12.  22.

Dan.  2.  22.  [6]  Inconceivable ,  or  incomprehen¬

sible,  Psal.  92.  5.  [7]  Hell,  Luke  8.  31.  Rev.
20.  3.  [8]  The  Chaldean,  or  Nebuchadnezzar’s,
army,  Ezek.  26.  19.

A  wise  man's  words  erre  compared  to  deep  waters,
Prov.  18.  4.  They  are  full  of  deep  wisdom  and
prudent  counsels.  And  the  apostle  says,  Rom.  8.
39.  that  neither  height  nor  depth  shall  be  able
to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God.  Neither
the  most  exalted  height ,  a  prospect  of  advance¬
ment  in  the  highest  station,  nor  the  lowest  degree
of  adversity  and  distress.

To  revolt,  or  sin  deeply,  denotes  a  long  habit  of
crimes,  and  obstinate  course  of  idolatry  ;  or  else
a  profound  and  very  great  iniquity,  a  crime  that
has  taken  deep  root  in  the  soul  by  long  and  in¬
veterate  custom ;  they  have  deeply  corrupted
themselves  as  in  the  days  of  Gibeah,  11  os.  9.  9.
They  have  carried  on  their  wickedness  to  such  a
pitch,  as  to  imitate  the  ancient  crimes  of  the  in¬
habitants  of  Gibeah,  which  are  recorded  in  Judg.
19.  22,  &c.  And  Isaiah  says,  Turn  ye  unto  him
from  whom  the  children  of  Israel  have  deeply
revolted,  namely,  by  neglecting  and  forsaking  him,
and  seeking  to  Egypt  for  help,  Isa.  31.  6.

Gen.  1.  2.  and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  d.

7.  11.  the  fountains  of  the  d.  were  broken  up

8.  2.  the  fountains  also  of  the  d.  were  stopped
49.25.  who  shall  bless  thee  with  blessings  of  the  d.
Pent.  33. 13.  and  for  the  d.  that  coucheth  beneath
Job  38.  30.  and  the  face  of  the  d.  is  frozen

41.  31.  he  maketh  the  d.  to  boil  like  a  pot
32.  one  would  think  the  d.  to  be  hoary

Psal.  36.  6.  thy  judgments  are  a  great  d.

42.  7.  d.  calleth  to  d.  at  noise  of  thy  water-spouts
69. 15.  neither  let  the  d.  swallow  me  up

104.  6.  thou  coveredst  it  with  the  d.  as  with  garm.
107.  24.  and  these  see  his  wonders  in  the  d.

Prov.  8. 28.  he  strengthens  the  fountains  of  the  d.
Isu.  44.  27.  that  saith  to  the  d.  be  dry,  I  will  dry
51.  10.  thou  not  it  which  dried  waters  of  great  it.  ?
63.  13.  that  led  them  through  the  d.  as  an  horse
Ezek.  26.  19.  when  I  shall  bring  up  the  d.  on  thee
31.  4.  the  </.  set  him  on  high  with  her  rivers

15.  I  covered  the  d.  for  him,  1  restrained  floods
Amos  7.  4.  it  devoured  great  d.  and  did  eat  up  a  part
Jonah  2.  3.  for  thou  hadst  cast  me  into  the  d.

Hah.  3. 10.  the  d.  uttered  his  voice,  and  lift  up  hands
Luke  5. 4.  launch  out  in  the  </.and  let  down  your  nets
8.  31.  would  not  command  them  to  go  into  the  d.
Pom.  10.  7.  or  who  shall  descend  into  the*/.  ?

2  Cor.  11. 25.  a  night  and  day  I  have  been  in  the  </.
DEEP,  Adjective.

Job  12.  22.  he  discovereth  d.  things  out  of  darkness
Psal.  64.  6.  the  inward  thought  and  the  heart  is  d.
69.  2.  I  sink  in  </.  mire,  where  is  no  standing,  I  am
come  into  </.  waters,  where  floods  overflow  me

14.  let  me  be  delivered  out  of  the  d.  waters
80.  9.  and  thou  didst  cause  it  to  take  d.  root


92.  5.  O  Lord,  thy  thoughts  are  very  d.

95.4.  in  his  hand  are  the  d.  places  of  the  earth
135.  6.  that  did  he  in  the  seas  and  all  d.  places
140. 10.  them  be  cast  into  d.  pits  that  they  rise  not
Prov.  18. 4.  words  of  a  man’s  mouth  are  as  */.  waters
20.  5.  counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  is  like  d.  waters
£2.  14.  the  mouth  of  strange  women  is  a  d.  pit
23.  27.  for  a  whore  is  a  d.  ditch,  and  a  narrow  pit
Peel.  7.  24.  and  exceeding  d.  who  can  find  it  out  ?
Isa.  7*  +  11.  ask  thee  a  sign,  make  thy  petition  </.

29. 15.  woe  to  them  that  seek  d.  to  hide  their  couns.
30. 33.  he  hath  made  Tophet  */.  and  large
Jer.  49.  8.  turnback,  dwell  </.  O  inhabit.  of  Dedan
Ezek.  3. 1 5.  not  sent  to  a  people  d.  of  lips,  f  6.

23.  32.  shalt  drink  of  thy  sister’s  cup*/,  and  large
32.  14.  then  will  I  make  their  waters  d.

34.  18.  and  to  have  drunk  of  the  d.  waters
Han.  2.  22.  he  revealeth  the  */.  and  secret  things
Luke  6.  48.  digged  */.  and  laid  foundation  on  a  rock
John  A.  11.  hast  nothing  to  draw,  and  the  well  is  d.

1  Cor.  2.  lo.  the  Spirit  searched*  the  d.  things  of  God
£  C or.  8. 2.  how  their  d.  poverty  abounded  to  riches
D EEP  sleep.

Gent.  2.  21.  God  caused  a  d.  sleep  to  fall  on  Adam
15.  12.  a  d.  sleep  fell  on  Abram,  and  great  darkness
*  Sam.  26. 12.  because  a*/,  sleep  was  fallen  on  them
Job  4.  13.  when  d.  sleep  falleth  on  men,  33.  15.
trrov.  19.  15.  slothfulness  casteth  into  d.  sleep


Isa.  29.  10.  L.  poured  out  omyou  spirit  of  d.  sleep
Han.  8. 18.  I  was  in  a  */.  sleep  on  my  face,  10.  9.
Acts  20.  9.  Eutychus  being  fallen  into  d.  sleep
DEEPER.

Lev.  13.  3.  the  plague  in  sight  be  d.  than  skin,  25. 30.

4.  if  the  bright  spot  in  sight  be  not  d.  31,  32,  34.
Job  11.  8.  it  is  d.  than  heli,  what  canst  thou  know?
Isa.  33. 19.  a  people  of  d.  speech  than  canst  perceive
DEEPLY.

Isa.  31.  6.  the  children  of  Israel  have  */.  revolted
Has,  9. 9.  they  have  d.  corrupt,  themselves  as  in  da3's
Mark  8.  12.  Jesus  sighed  d.  in  his  spirit,  and  saith
DEEPNESS.

Mat.  13. 5.  sprung  up,  because  they  had  no  d.  of  earth
DEEPS.

Neh.  9. 11.  their  persecutors  thou  threwest  into  the  */.
Psal.  88.  6.  thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  pit,  in  the  d.
148.  7-  praise  the  Lord,  ye  dragons  and  all  d.

Zech.  10.  11.  all  the  */.  of  the  river  shall  dry  up
DEER.

Dent.  14.  5.  ye  shall  eat  the  fallow  </.  and  wild  goat
1  Kings  4.  23.  Solom.  had  fallow*/,  and  fatted  fowl
DEFAMED.

1  Cor.  4. 13.  being*/,  we  intreat,  are  made  offscouring

DEFAMING.

Jer.  20. 10.  for  I  heard  d.  of  many,  fear  on  every  side
DEFEAT.

2  Sam.  15.  34.  d.  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel,  17.  14.

DEFENCE.

Num.  14. 9.  their  </.  is  depart,  from  them,  L.  with  us
2  Chron.  11.  5.  Rehoboam  built  cities  for  d.  of  Jud.
Job  22. 25.  yea,  the  Almighty  shall  be  thy  d.

Psal.  7.  10.  my  d.  is  of  G.  which  saveth  the  upright
31.  2.  be  thou  for  an  house  of  d.  to  save  me
59.  9.  I  will  wait  upon  thee,  for  G.  is  my  d.  17.

16.  thou  hast  been  my  d.  and  refuge  in  trouble

62. 2.  God  is  my  d.  I  shall  not  be  greatly  moved,  6.
89. 18.  for  Lord,  is  our  d.  hob’  One  of  Israel  our  king
94.  22.  Lord  is  my  d.  and  God  rock  of  my  refuge

Eccl.  7.  12.  for  wisdom  is  a  d.  and  money  is  a  d.
Isa.  4.  5.  for  upon  all  the  glory  shall  be  a  d.

19.  6.  the  brooks  of  */.  shall  be  emptied  and  dried
33. 16.  his  place  of  */.  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks

Nali.  2.  5.  and  the  d.  shall  be  prepared

Acts  19.  33.  would  have  made  his  d.  to  the  people

22.  1.  hear  my  d.  which  I  make  now  unto  you
Phil.  1.  7.  in  my  bonds  and  in  the  d.  of  the  gospel

17.  knowing  that  1  am  set  for  the  d.  of  the  gospel

DEFEN CED.

Zech.  11.  f  2.  for  the  d.  forest  is  come  down
See  City,  Cities.

DEFEND.

Judg.  10.  1.  Tola  son  of  Puah  arose  to  d.  Israel
2  Kings  19.  34. 1  will  d.  city,  20.  6.  Isa.  37-  35.  1  38. 6.
Psal.  20. 1.  the  name  of  the  God  of  Jacob  d.  thee
59.  1.  d.  me  from  them  that  rise  up  against  me

82. 3.  </.  the  poor  and  fatherless,  do  justice  to  needy
Isa.  31.5.  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  d.  Jerusalem
Zech.  9.  15.  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  </.  them

12.  8.  in  that  day  shall  Lord  d.  inhabitants  of  Jerus.
DEFENDED.

2  Sam.  23.  12.  Shammah  stood  and  d.  the  ground
Acts  7.  24.  he  d.  him  and  avenged  the  oppressed
DEFENDEST.

Psal.  5. 11 .  ever  shout  for  joy,  because  thou  */.  them
DEFENDING.

Isa.  31.  5.  <Z.  Jerus.  he  will  deliver  and  preserve  it
DEFER,

Eccl.  5. 4.  when  thou  vowest  a  vow,  d.  not  to  pay  it
Isa.  48.  9.  for  my  name’s  sake  will  I  d.  mine  anger
Dan.  9. 19.  d.  not  for  thine  own  sake,  O  my  God
DEFERRED.

Gen.  34.  19.  the  young  man  </.  not  to  do  the  thing
Prov.  13. 12.  hope  d.  maketh  the  heart  sick
Acts  24.  22.  when  Felix  heard  these  he  d.  them
DEFERRETH.

Prov.  19. 11 .  the  discretion  of  a  man  d.  his  anger
DEFY.

Num.  23.  7.  come,  curse  me  Jacob,  and  d.  Israel
8.  how  shall  I  d.  whom  the  Lord  hath  not  defied  ?
1  Sam.  17.  10. 1  d.  the  armies  of  Israel  this  day

25.  is  come  up,  surely  to*/.  Israel  is  he  come  up

26.  that  he  should  */.  the  armies  of  the  living  God

DEFIED.

Num. 23. 8.  how  shall  1  defy  whom  Lord  hath  not  */.  ?

1  Sam.  17.  36.  he  hath  d.  the  armies  of  the  living  God
45.  the  God  of  Israel  whom  thou  hast  d.

2  Sam.  21.  21.  when  lie  d.  Israel,  Jpnathan,  son  of
Shimeah,  brother  of  David,  slew  him,  1  Chr.  20. 7.

23.  9.  when  they  d.  Philistines  gathered  to  battle

DEFILE.

Man  is  defiled,  or  polluted,  either  inwardly,  by  sin,
1  Cor.  8.  7.  Tit.  1.  15.  Heb.  12.  15.  or  outwardly
and  ceremonially,  as  by  the  plague  of  leprosy,  Lev.

13.  46.  or  by  touching  a  dead  body,  N  urn.  5.  2.
Both  inwardly  and  outwardly,  by  following  the
abominations  of  the  heathen.  Lev.  18.  24.  By
seeking  after  wizards,  Lev.  19.31.  By  idols,  Ezek.
20.  7>  By  unnatural  uncleanness ,  1  Tim.  1.  10.
By  the  unruliness  of  the  tongue,  which  involves
men  in  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  Jills  the  world  with
contentions  and  combustions,  when  it  is  not  kept
under  government.  Jam.  3.6.

Man  is  also  said  to  defile  others.  Shechem  defiled
Dinah,  the  daughter  of  Jacob  ;  he  humbled,  he
debauched  her,  or  lay  carnally  with  her,  Gen.  34.
13.  And  such  as  commit  adultery,  defile  their
neighbours’ wives,  Ezek.  18.  11.  Those  that  gave
their  seed  to  Molech,  are  said  to  defile  God’s  sanc¬
tuary,  Lev.  20.  3. ;  because  such  persons ,  to  screen
their  idolatry,  came  into  his  sanctuary  as  others
did ;  or,  because  by  these  actions  they  did  pro¬
nounce  and  declare  to  all  men,  that  they  esteemed
the  sanctuary  and  service  of  God  abominable  and
vile,  by  preferring  such  odious  and  pernicious  ido¬
latry  before  it.

Lev.  11.  44.  nor  shall  ye  </.  yourselves,  18.  24.

15. 31 .  when  they  d.  my  tabernacle  among  them

18.  20.  to  d.  thyself  with  thy  neighbour’s  wife
23.  neither  lie  with  any  beast  to  */.  thyself

28.  that  the  land  spue  not  you  out  when  ye  d.  it

20.  3.  given  his  seed  to  Molech,  to  </.  my  sanctuary


Lev.  21.  4.  he  shall  not  */.  himself,  being  a  chief  man

11.  nor  </.  himself  for  his  father  or  his  mother
22.  8.  he  shall  not  eat  to  d.  himself  therewith

Num.  5.  3.  put  out,  that  they  d.  not  their  camps

35.  34.  d.  not  the  land  which  ye  shall  inhabit
2  Kings  23.  13.  the  high  places  did  the  king  d.

Cant.  5.3.  have  washed  my  feet,  how  shall  1  d.  them  3
Isa.  30.22.  shall  d.  the  covering  of  thy  graven  images
Jer.  32.  34.  in  the  house  called  by  my  name  to  </.  it
Ezek.  7.  22.  for  robbers  shall  enter  into  it  and  d.  it

9.  7-  d.  the  house,  fill  the  courts  with  the  slain
20.  7-  </•  not  yourselves  with  idols  of  Egypt,  18.
22.  3.  maketh  idols  against  herself  to  d.  herself
28.  7-  and  they  shall  */,  thy  brightness
33.  26.  ye  </.  every  man  his  neighbour’s  wife
37.  23.  nor  shall  they  d.  themselves  any  more
43. 7.  and  my  name  shall  Israel  no  more  d.

44.25.  shall  come  at  no  dead  person  to  d.  themselves
Dan.  1.8.  would  not  d.  himself  with  the  king’s  meat
Mat.  15.  18.  and  they  d.  the  man,  Mark  7.  15,  23.

1  Cor.  3.  17.  if  any  man  <Z.  the  temple  of  God

1  Tim.  1 .10.  the  law  is  for  them  that  d.  themselves
Jude  8.  likewise  these  filthy  dreamers  d.  the  flesh

DEFILED.

Gen.  34.  2.  Shechem  lay  with  Dinah,  and  d.  her

5.  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  */.  Dinah  his  daughter
13.  because  he  had  d.  Dinah  their  sister,  27.

Lev.  5.  3.  what  uncleanness  a  man  shall  be  d.  with
11.  43.  unclean,  that  ye  should  be  d.  thereby

13.  46.  while  the  plague  is  in  him  he  shall  be  */.

15.  32.  this  is  the  law  of  him  that  is  d.  by  his  seed

18.  24.  in  all  these  things  the  nations  are  d.

25.  the  land  is  </.  1  do  visit  iniquity  on  it,  27-

19.  31.  nor  seek  after  wizards  to  be  d.  by  them
21. 1.  there  shall  none  he  d.  for  the  dead

3.  for  his  sister  a  virgin,  for  her  may  he  be  d.
Num.  5.  2.  put  out  whosoever  is  d  by  the  dead

13.  and  if  she  be  d.  27.  ||  14.  if  she  be  not  <Z.  28.

6.  9.  and  he  hath  d.  the  head  of  his  consecration

12.  days  be  lost,  because  his  separation  was  d.

9. 6.  men  who  were  d.  by  the  dead  body  of  a  man,  7.
19. 20.  because  he  hath  d.  the  sanctuary  of  Lord
Deut.  21.  23.  bury  him,  that  thy  land  be  not  d.

22.  9.  lest  the  fruit  of  thy  vineyard  be  d.

24.  4.  former  husband  may  not  take  her  after  d.

2  Kings  23.8.  Josiah  d.  high  places  ||  10.  </. Topheth
1  Chron.  5.  1.  forasmuch  as  he  d.  his  father’s  bed
Neh.  13.  29.  because  they  have  d.  the  priesthood
Job  16. 15.  1  have  d.  my  horn  in  the  dust

Psal.  74.  7.  d.  the  dwelling-place  of  thy  name,  79.  1.
106.  39.  thus  were  they  </.  with  their  own  works
Isa.  24.  5.  the  earth  is  d.  under  inhabitants  thereof
59.  3.  for  your  hands  are  */.  with  blood,  and  lingers
Jer.  2.  7*  but  when  ye  entered,  ye  d.  my  land
3.  9.  through  lightness  of  her  whoredom  she  */.  land

16.  18.  because  they  have  */.  my  land,  they  filled
19. 13.  the  houses  of  the  kings  of  .1  udah  shall  be  */.

Ezek.  4.  13.  thus  shall  Israel  eat  their  d.  bread
5.  11.  surely  because  thou  hast  */.  mjr  sanctuary

7.  24.  I  will  make,  their  holy  places  shall  be  </.

18.  6.  neither  hath  </.  his  neighbour’s  wife,  15.

11.  and  hath  even  d.  his  neighbour’s  wife
20.43.  all  your  doings  wherein  ye  have  been*/.

22.  4.  and  hast*/,  thyself  in  thy  idols, 23.  7-

11.  another  hath  lewdly  </.  his  daughter-in-law

23.  13.  1  saw  that  she  was  */.  both  took  one  way

17.  the  Babylonians  d.  her  with  their  whoredom
38.  they  have  d.  my  sanctuary  in  the  same  day

28.  18.  thou  hast  d.  thy  sanctuaries  by  thy  iniqui.

36.  17.  they  d.  it  by  their  own  way  and  doings

43.  8.  they  have  d.  iny  holy  name  by  abominations
Ilos.  5. 3.  whoredom  of  Ephraim,  and  Isr.  is  d.  6. 10.
Mic.  4. 11.  many  nations  that  say,  let  her  he  d.
Mark  7.  2.  the  disciples  eat  bread  with'*/,  hands
John  18.  28.  they  went  not  in,  lest  they  should  he*/.
1  Cor.  8.  7.  and  their  conscience  being  weak  is  */.
Tit.  1 .  15.  but  to  them  that  are  d.  and  unbelieving
is  nothing  pure,  even  their  mind  and  conscience  d.
Heb.  12.  15.  trouble  you,  and  thereby  many  be  d.
Rev.  3.  4.  a  few  who' have  not  d.  their  garments

14.  4.  these  are  they  who  are  not  <Z.  with  women

DEFILEDST.

Gen.  49.  4.  wentest  up  to  father’s  bed,  then  d.  thou  it
DEFILETH.

Exod.  31. 14.  that  d.  sabbath,  surely  be  put  to  death
Num.  19. 1'3.  purifieth  not  himself,  d.  the  tabernacle
35.  33.  shalt  not  pollute  the  land,  blood  d.  the  land
Mat.  15. 11.  not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth  d.

20.  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  */.  not  a  man
Mark  7.  20.  what  comae th  out  of  man  that  </.  man
Jam.  3.  6.  so  is  the  tongue,  that  it  */.  the  whole  body
Rev.  21.  27.  in  no  wise  enter  any  thing  that  d.
DEFRAUD.

Lev.  19.  13.  thou  shalt  not  d.  thy  neighbour
Mic.  2.  t  2.  so  they  d.  a  man  and  his  house
Mai.  3.  +  5.  against  those  that  d.  the  hireling
Mark  10.  19.  do  not  bear  false  witness,  d.  not
1  Cor.  6.  8.  nay  you  do  wrong,  and  d.  your  brethren
7.  5.  d.  not,  except  it  be  with  consent  for  a  time
1  Thess.  4.  6.  that  no  man  d.  his  brother  in  any  mat.
DEFRAUDED.

1  Sam.  12.  3.  whom  have  1  d.  ?  whom  have  I  oppress.

4.  they  said,  thou  hast  not  d.  nor  oppressed  us

1  Cor.  6.  7.  why  donot  rather  suffer  yours,  to  be  d.

2  Cor.  7. 2.  we  have  wrong,  no  man,  have  d.  no  man

(DEGENERATE.

Jer.  2.  21.  flow  art  thou  turned  into  the  d.  plant !
DEGREE,  S.

Psalms,  or  Songs  of  degrees  :  This  title  is  given  10
fifteen  Psalms,  which  are  the  120 th,  and  all  that
follow  to  the  134 th.  inclusive.  The  Hebrew  text
calls  them,  A  seng  of  ascents.  Junius  and  Tre-
mellius  translate  the  Hebrew  by,  A  song  of  excel¬
lences,  or  An  excellent  song  ;  because  of  the  excel¬
lent  matter  of  them,  as  eminent  persons  are  called
men  of  high  degree,  1  Chron.  17-  17-  Some  call
them  Psalms  of  elevation  ;  because,  say  they,  they
were  sung  with  an  exalted  voice,  or  because  at
every  Psalm  the  voice  was  raised.  But  the  com¬
mon  translation,  or.  Psalms  of  degrees,  has
more  generally  obtained.  Some  interpreters  think
that  they  were  so  called  because  they  were  sung


DEL


D  t  L


DEL


upon  the  fifteen  steps  of  the  temple  ;  but  they  are
not  agreed  about  the  place  where  these  fifteen  steps
were.  Others  think  they  were  so  called,  because
they  were  sung  in  a  gallery,  which  they  say,  was
in  the  court  of  Israel,  where  sometimes  the  J.e-
vites  read  the  law.  But  others  are  of  opinion  that
the  most  probable  reason  why  they  are  called
songs  of  degrees,  or  of  ascent,  is,  because  they
were  composed  and  sung  by  the  Jews  on  the  occa¬
sion  of  their  deliverance  from  the  captivity  oj
Babylon,  whether  it  were  to  implore  this  deliver¬
ance  from  God,  or  to  return  thanks  for  it  after  it
had  happened.  Jill  these  Psalms  have  some  rela¬
tion  to  this  great  event.  And  the  scripture  com¬
monly  applies  the  phrase,  to  ascend,  or  go  up,
to  express  this  return,  Ezra  1.  3,  5, 11. 1  7-  6,  7,  9.
because  Babylon  was  situated  in  a  plain  and
Jerusalem  in  a  mountainous  country.  And  al¬
though  one  of  the  Psalms  is  ascribed  to  David,
and  another  to  Solomon,  yet  they  also,  as  well  as
the  rest,  might  have  been  used  on  this  occasion,
though  they  were  composed  by  David  and  Solo
mon  upon  other  occasions.

The  apostle  Paul  says.  That  such  as  have  used  the
office  of  a  deacon  well,  purchase  to  themselves
a  good  degree,  1  Tim.  3.  13.  They  gain  great
honour,  respect,  and  reputation.

2  Kings  20.  9.  or  backward  ten  d.  10,  1 1 .  Isa.  38.  8.

+  1 1.  by  which  it  had  gone  down  in  d.  of  A haz
1  Chron.  15.  18.  brethren  of  second  d.  with  them

17.  17.  according  to  the  state  of  a  man  of  high  d.
Psal.  82.  9.  men  of  low  d.  vanity,  men  of  high  d.  a  lie
lAike  1. 52.  he  hath  exalted  them  of  low  d.

1  Tim.  3. 13.  they  purchase  to  themselves  a  good  d.
Jam.  1.  9.  let  brother  of  low  d.  rejoice  he  is  exalted

DELAY,  ED,  ETH.

Exod.  22.  29.  thou  shalt  not  d.  to  offer  the  first-fruits
32.  1.  the  people  saw  that  Moses  d.  tocomedowm
Psal.  119.  60.  d.  not  to  keep  thy  commandments
Mat.  24.  48.  my  lord  d.  his  coming,  Luke  12.  45.
Acts  9.  38.  that  he  would  not  d.  tp  come  to  them
DELAY,  Substantive.

ActsQ5.17.  without  any  d.  I  sat  on  the  judgment-seat
DELECTABLE.

Isa.  44.  9.  and  their  d.  things  shall  not  profit
DELICACIES.

Rev.  18.  3.  the  merchants  are  rich  through  her  d.
DELICATE.

Deut.  28.  54.  the  d.  manor  woman  amongyou,56.
Isa.  47. 1 .  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  tender  and  d.
Jer.  6.  2.  likened  Zion  to  a  comely  and  </.  woman
Mic.  1.  16.  make  thee  bald  for  thy  d.  children
DEL1CATES.

Jer.  51.  34.  he  hath  filled  his  belly  with  my  d.

DELICATELY.

1  Sam.  15.32.  bring  A  gag,  and  A  gag  came  to  him  d.
Prov.  29.  21.  he  that  d.  bringeth  up  his  servant
Lam.  4.  5.  they  that  did  feed  rf.are  desolate  in  streets
Luke  7.  25.  they  that  live  d.  are  in  kings’  courts
1  Tim.  5. 1 6.  she  that  liveth  d  is  dead  w  hile  she  liv.
DELICATE1S  ESS.

Deut.  28.  56.  to  set  her  foot  on  the  ground  for  d.

DELICIOUSLY.

Rev.  18.  7.  how  she  glorified  herself  and  lived  d.  9.

D E L I G 1 1 T ,  Substantive.

Gen.  34.  19.  Shechem  had  d.  in  Jacob's  daughter
Dent.  10.  15.  L.  had  a  d.  in  thy  fathers  to  love  them
21.  14.  and  it  shall  be  if  thou  have  no  d.  in  her

1  Sam.  15.  22.  hath  the  L.  as  great  d.  in  offerings  ?

18.  22.  and  say,  behold,  the  king  hath  d.  in  thee

2  Sam.  15.26.  if  he  thus  say,  1  have  no  d.  in  thee
Job  22.  26.  then  shalt  thou  have  d.  in  the  Almighty
Psal.  1.  2.  but  his  d.  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord

16.  3.  and  to  the  excellent,  in  whom  is  all  my  d.

£7.  t  4.  to  behold  the  d.  of  the  Lord  and  inquire
119.  24.  thy  testimonies  also  are  my  d.  and  counsel
77.  that  1  may  live,  for  thy  law  is  my  d.  174.
Prov.  8. 30.1  was  daily  his  d.  rejoicing  always  in  the

11.  1.  but  a  just  weight  is  the  Lord's  d.

20.  such  as  are  upright  in  their  way  are  his  d.

12.  22.  but  they  that  deal  truly  are  his  d.

15.  8.  but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his  d.

16.  13.  righteous  lips  are  the  d.  of  kings
18.  2.  a  fool  hath  no  d.  in  understanding
19-  10.  d.  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool,  much  less  for
24.25.  but  to  them  that  rebuke  him  shall  be  d.

29.  17-  yea,  he  shall  give  d.  unto  thy  soul

Eccl.  12. 1 10.  preacher  sought  to  find  out  words  of  d.
Cant.  2.  3.  1  sat  under  his  shadow  with  great  d.

Isa.  58. 2.  they  take  d.  in  approaching  to  God

13.  if  thou  cal!  the  sabbath  ad.  the  holy  of  Lord
62.  t  4.  thou  shalt  be  called,  my  d.  is  in  her

Jer.  6. 10.  they  have  no  d.  in  the  word  of  the  Lord
Dan.  11.  +  41.  he  shall  enter  into  the  land  of  d.

+  45.  shall  plant  tabernacle  in  the  mount  of  d.
DELIGHT,  Verb.

Num.  14.  8.  if  L.  d.  in  us.  will  bring  us  into  this  land
2  Sam.  24.  3.  why  should  the  king  d.  in  this  thinj
Job<2J,  10.  will  he  d.  himself  in  the  Almighty  ?
34.9.  that  he  should  d.  himself  with  God
Psal.  22.  f  8.  let  him  deliver  him,  if  he  d.  in  him

37.  4.  d.  thyself  also  in  the  Lord,  he  shall  give
11.  themeekshall  d.  in  the  abundance  of  peace
40. 8.  I  d.  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God,  thy  law  is
49 1  13.  yet  their  posterity  d.  in  their  mouth
62. 4. they  d.  in  lies  ||  68.  30.  the  people  that  </.in  war
94. 19.  in  mult,  of  thoughts  thy  comforts  </.  soul
1 19.  16.  1  will  d.  myself  in  thy  statutes,  35.

47.  d.  in  thy  commandments  1170. 1  d.  in  thy  law
Prov.  1.  22.  now  long  will  scorners  d.  in  scorning?

2.  14.  and  d.  in  the  frowardness  of  the  wicked
Eccl.  2.  +  24.  than  that  he  d.  his  senses  in  good
Isa.  1. 11.  1  d.  not  in  the  blood  of  bullocks
13.  A.  and  as  for  gold,  they  shall  not  d.  in  it
55. 2.  and  let  your  soul  d.  itself  in  fatness
58.  2.  yet  they  seek  me,  and  d.  to  know  my  ways

14.  then  shaft  thou  d.  thyself  in  the  Lord
Jer.  9.  24.  in  these  things  I  d.  saith  the  Lord
Mai.  3.  1.  messenger  of  the  covenant  whom  ye  d.  in
Rom.  7. 22. 1  d.  in  the  law  of  God  after  inward  man

DELIGHTED.

Sam.  19.  2.  Jonathan  d.  much  in  David

100


2  Sam.  22.  20.  because  lie.  d.  in  me,  Psal.  18. 19.

1  Kings  10.  9.  the  L.  who  d.  in  thee,  2  Chr.  9.  8.

Neh.  9.  25.  and  d.  themselves  in  thy  great  goodness
Esth.  2. 14.  she  came  no  more,  except  king  d.  in  her
Psal.  22.  8.  let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he  d.  in  him

109. 17.  as  lie  d.  not  in  blessing,  let  it  be  far  from
Cant.  2.  t  3.  1  d.  and  sat  down  under  his  shadow
Isa.  65. 12.  did  choose  that  wherein  1  d.  not,  66.  4.

66. 11.  be  d.  with  the  abundance  of  her  glory
DEL1GHTEST.

Psal.  51. 16.  not  sacrifice,  thou  d.  not  in  burnt-offer.

DELIGHTETH.

Esth.  6.  6.  whom  the  khn>  d.  to  honour,  7,9,11.

Psal.  37.  23.  are  ordered  by  L.  and  he  d.  in  his  way
112.  1.  that  d.  greatly  in  his  commandments
147.  10.  lie  d.  not  in  the  strength  of  the  horse
Prov.  3.  12.  as  a  father  the  son  in  whom  he  d.

Isa.  42. 1.  behold  mine  elect,  in  whom  my  soul  d.

62.  4.  called  llephzi-bah,  for  the  Lord  d.  in  thee
66.  3.  and  their  soul  d.  in  their  abominations
Mic.  7. 18.  retaineth  not  anger,  because  d.  in  mercy
Mai.  2.  17.  when  ye  say,  G.  d.  in  them  that  do  evil
DELIGHTS.

2  Sam.  1.  24.  who  clothed  you  in  scarlet  with  other*/.
Psal.  119.  92.  unless  thy  law  had  been  my  d.

143.  yet  thy  commandments  are  my  d.

Prov.  8.  31.  my  d.  were  with  the  sons  of  men
Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gat  me  men-singers,  and  the  d.  of  men
Cant.  7.  6.  how  pleasant  art  thou,  O  love,  for  d.
DELIGHTSOME.  .

Mai.  3.  12.  ye  shall  be  a  d.  land,  saith  the  Lord
DELIVER.

Gen.  40. 13.  thou  shalt  d.  Pharaoh’s  cup  into  his  hand
Exod.  5.  18.  yet  shall  he  d.  the  tale  of  bricks

22.  7.  if  a  man  shall  d.  unto  his  neighbour,  10.

26.  thou  shalt  d.  it  by  that  the  sun  goeth  down

23.  31.  I  will  d.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land
Num.  21.  2.  if  thou  wilt  indeed  d.  this  people

35. 25.  the  congregation  shall  d.  the  slayer  out  of
Deut.  7.  24.  he  shall  d.  their  kings  into  thy  hand
23. 15.  thou  shalt  not  d.  to  his  master  the  servant
25.  11.  to  d.  her  husband  out  of  the  hand  of  him
32.  39.  any  that  can  d.  out  of  my  hand,  Isa.  43. 13.
Josh .  2. 13.  that  ye  will  d.  our  lives  from  death
8.  7.  for  your  God  will  d.  it  into  your  hand
20.  5.  they  shall  not  d.  the  slayer  into  his  hand
Judg.  7.7.  and  d.  the  Midianites  into  thine  hand

10. 1 1.  after  Abimelech  arose  Tola  to  d.  Israel
11. 30.  if  thou  shalt  without  fail  d.  the  Ammonites
13. 5.  Samson  shall  begin  to  d.  Israel  from  Philist.

1  Sam.  7. 14.  the  coasts’ thereof  did  Israel  d.

12.  21.  after  things  which  cannot  profit  nor  d.

23.  4.  I  will  d.  the  Philistines,  2  Sam.  5.  19.

24.4.  1  will  d.  thine  enemy  into  thine  hand
28. 19.  the  Lord  will  d.  Israel  to  the  Philistines
!  Sam.  14. 16.  the  king  will  hear  to  d.  his  handmaid
20.  +6.  lest  Sheba  d.  himself  from  our  eyes

1  Kings  18.  9.  thou  wouldest  d.  thy  servant  to  Ahab

20. 13.  1  will  d.  this  multitude  into  thy  hand,  28.
22.  6.  they  said,  go  up,  for  the  Lord  shall  d.  it  into

the  king’s  hand,  12.  15.  2  Chron.  18.  5,  11.

2  Kings  3. 18.  he  will*/,  the  Moabites  into  your  hand
12.  7-  but  d.  it  for  the  breaches  of  the  house
18.  35.  that  Lord  should  d.  Jerusalem,  Isa.  36.  20.

22. 5.  let  them  d.  it  into  the  hand  of  the  workmen
2  Chron.  25. 15.  who  could  not  d.  their  own  people

28. 11.  now  hear  me  and  d.  the  captives  again

32. 13.  were  gods  of  nations  able  to  d.  their  lands  ?
14.  that  your  God  should  be  able  to  d.  you,  17-

Ezra  7.19.  those  d.  thou  before  the  God  of  Jerusalem
Job  10.  7.  there  is  none  can  d.  out  of  thy  hand
22.  30.  he  shall  d.  the  island  of  the  innocent
33. 28.  he  wdll  d.  his  soul  from  going  into  the  pit
Ps.  6.  A.d.  my  soul,  17- 13.  122.20.  1116.4.1  120.2.

7.  2.  rending  it  while  there  is  none  to  d.  50. 22.

33. 17-  nor  snail  he  d.  any  by  his  great  strength

19.  to  d.  their  soul  from  death,  and  to  keep  alive

56. 13.  wilt  not  thou  d.  my  feet  from  falling  ?

72. 12.  for  he  shall  d.  the  needy  when  he  crieth
74.  19.  O  d.  not  the  soul  of  thy  turtle-dove
82.  4.  d.  the  poor  and  needy  out  of  hand  of  wicked
89. 48.  shall  lie  d.  his  soul  from  hand  of  the  grave  ?
Prov.  4.  9.  a  crown  of  glory  shall  she  d.  to  thee
6.  3.  do  this  now,  my  son,  and  d.  thyself

23. 14.  beat  him,  thou  shalt*/.  his  soul  from  hell
Eccl.  8. 8.  nor  shall  wickedness  </.  those  given  to  it
Isa. 5.29. shall  carry  itaway  safe,  and  none  shall  */.  it

29. 11.  which  men  */.  to  one  that  is  learned
31.  5.  defending  also  he  will  d.  it,  and  passing  ove1
44.  20.  he  cannot  d.  his  soul,  nor  say,  is  there  not
46.  2.  they  stoop,  they  could  not  d.  the  burden

47. 14.  they  shall  not  d.  themselves  from  the  flame

50. 2.  is  my  hand  shortened  ?  have  1  no  power  to  d  ?
Jer.  15. 9.  the  residue  of  them  will  1  */.  to  the  sword

18.21.  therefore  </.  up  their  children  to  the  famine

20.  5.  moreover  l  will  d.  all  strength  of  this  city
21. 7.  afterwards  I  will  </.  Zedekiah  from  the  sword

22. 3.  d.  the  spoiled  out  of  the  hand  of  the  oppressor

43. 11.  he  shall  </.  such  as  are  for  death  to  death
51.  6.  flee  out  of  Bab.  */.  every  man  iiis  soul,  45.

Ezek.  13.  21.  I  will  </.  my  people  out  of  your

[hand,  23.

14. 14.  they  should  </.  but  their  own  souls,  20.

16.  shall  d.  neither  sons  nor  daughters,  18.  20.

33.  5.  he  that  taketh  warning  shall  d.  his  soul
34.10.  for  1  will  d.  my  flock  from  their  mouth
Dan.  3.  29.  there  is  no  other  god  can  d.  after  this  sort

8.  4.  nor  was  there  any  that  could  </.  from  the  ram
7.  none  that  could  d.  the  ram  out  of  his  hand

Ilos.  2. 10.  none  shall  d.  her  out  of  mine  hand
Amos  2. 14.  neither  shall  the  mighty  d.  himself
15.  he  that  is  swift  of  foot  shall  not  d.  himself

6. 8. 1  will  d.  the  city  with  all  that  is  therein
Mic.  5. 8.  who  tearetn  in  pieces  and  none  can  d.

6. 14.  and  thou  shalt  take  bold,  but  shalt  not*/.
Zech.  2. 7.  d.  thyself,  O  Zion,  that  dwellest  with

11.6. 1  will  </.  every  one  into  his  Neighbour’s  hand
Mat.  10.  21.  the  brother  shall  d.  me  brother  to  death
Jlcts  25. 16.  not  manner  of  Romans  to  d.  man  to  die

1  Cor.  5.  5.  d.  such  one  to  Sat.  for  destruct.  of  flesh

2  Cor.  1.10.  who  delivered  us  from  death,  and  doth  d.
2  Pet.  2. 9.  the  Loid  knoweth  how  to.*/,  the  godly


DELIVER  him.

Gen.  37.  22.  rid  him,  to  d.  him  to  his  father  again
42.  37.  d.  him  into  my  hand,  I  will  bring  him  to  thee
Exod.  21.  13.  but  God  will  d.  him  into  his  hand
Deut.  2.  30.  that  he  might  d.  him  into  thy  hand

3.  2.  I  will  */.  him  and  his  people  into  thy  hand

19. 12.  d.  him  into  the  hand  of  tbe  avenger  of  blood

24. 13.  in  any  case  thou  shalt  </.  him  the  pledge
Judg.  4.7. 1  will  draw  Siseraand  d.  him  into  thy  hand

1  Sam.  23. 20.  our  part  shall  be  to  d.  him  into  thy  hand

2  Sam.  14.  7.  said,  d.  him  that  smote  his  brother
20.  21.  d.  him  and  I  will  depart  from  the  city

Job  33.  24.  </.  him  from  going  down  to  the  pit  #

Psal.  22.  8.  that  he  would  </.  him,  let  him  d.  him
41.  1.  the  Lord  will  d.  him  in  time  of  trouble
2.  thou  wilt  not  d.  him  to  the  will  of  his  enemies
71.  11.  and  take  him,  for  there  is  none  to  d.  him

91. 14.  hath  set  his  love  on  me,  theref.  will  1  d.  him

15. 1  will  be  with  him,  will  </.  him,  and  honour  him

Prov.  IQ.  19.  if  thou  d.  him,  thou  must  do  it  again
Jer.  21 .  12.  d.  him  that  is  spoiled  from  the  oppress.
Ezek.  33.  12.  righteous,  of  righteous  shall  not*/,  him
Dan.  6. 14.  the  king  set  his  heart  on  Dan.  to  d.  him
Jonah  4.  6.  might  be  a  shadow  to  d.  him  from  grief
Mat.  20.  19.  and  shall  d.  him  to  Gentiles  to  crucify
him,  Mark  10.  33.  Luke  20.  20.  Acts  21.  11.

26.  15.  what  will  ye  give,  and  1  will  d.  him  to  you

27.  43.  let  him  </.  him  now,  if  he  will  have  him

DELIVER  me.

Gen.  32. 11.  d.  me  I  pray  thee  from  the  hand  of  Esau

1  Sam.  17.  37.  he  will  d.  me  out  of  hand  of  Goliath
23.  11.  will  the  men  of  Keilah  d.  me  up  ?  12.

24. 15.  the  Ld.  be  judge,  and  */.  me  out  of  thy  hand

26.  24.  and  let  him  d.  me  out  of  all  tribulation

30.  15.  nor  </.  me  into  the  hands  of  my  master

2  Sam.  3. 14.  Da.  sent,  saying,  d.memy  wife  Michal

1  Kings  20.  5.  thou  shalt  d.  me.  thy  silver  and  gold
Job  6.  23.  d.  me  from  enemies,  Ps.  31. 15.  1  59.  1.
Psal.  7.1.0  Lord,  save  me  from  them  and  d.  me
25.  20.  keep  my  soul,  and  */.  me,  for  I  trust  in  thee

27.  12.  d.  me  not  over  to  the  will  of  mine  enemies

31.  2.  bow  down  thine  ear  tome,  d.  me  speedily
39,  8.  d.  me  from  my  transgressions,  make  me  not

40. 13.  be  pleased  to  d.  me  H  70. 1 .  make  haste  to  d.  me
43. 1.0  d.  me  from  the  deceitful  and  unjust  man
51.  14.  */.  me  from  blood-guiltiness,  O  God

59.  2.  </.  me  from  the  workers  of  iniquity,  save  me
69.  14.  d.  me  out  of  the  mire,  and  let  me  not  sink
18.  draw  nigh  to  my  soul,  and  redeem  it,  </.  me
71.  2.  i.  me  in  thv  righteousness,  cause  me,  31.  1.

4.  d.  me,  O  my  God,  out  of  hand  of  the  wicked
109.  21.  because  thy  mercy  is  good  d.  thou  me
119. 134.  </.  me  from  the  oppression  of  man

153.  consider  mine  affliction,  and  d.  me.

154.  plead  my  cause,  and  d.  me,  quicken  me
170.  </.  me  according  to  thy  word

140.  \.d.me<d  Ld.  from  the  evil  man,  preserve  me

142.  6.  </.  me  from  my  persecutors,  for  they  are

143.  9.  d.  me  from  mine  enemies,  I  flee  unto  thee

144.  7.  rid  me,  and  */.  me  out  of  great  waters

11.  d.  me  from  the  hand  of  strange  children
Isa.  44.  17.  he  saith,  </.  me,  for  thou  art  my  God
Jer.  38.  19.  I  am  afraid  of  the  Jews,  lest  they  </.  me
Acts  25.  11.  no  man  may  d.  me  to  them,  I  appeal
Rom.  7.  24.  who  shall  d.  me  from  the  body  of  death  ?

2  Tim  A.  18.  the  Ld.  shall  d.  me  from  every  evil  work

DELIVER  thee.

Deut.  7-  16.  the  people  which  the  Lord  shall  d.  thee

23. 14.  Ld.  walketh  in  midst  of  thy  camp  to  d.  thee
Judg.  15.  12.  to  bind  thee,  that  we  may  d.  thee,  13.

1  Safn.  17.  46.  the  Lord  will  d.  thee  into  mine  hand
23.  12.  and  the  Lord  said,  they  will  d.  thee  up

2  Kings  18.  23.  I  will  d.  thee  two  thousand  horses
20.  6.  and  I  will  d.  thee  and  this  city,  Isa.  38.  6.

Job  5.  19.  he  shall  d.  thee  in  six  troubles,  in  seven

36.  18.  beware,  then  a  great  ransom  cannot*/,  thee
Ps.  50.  15.  I  will  </.  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me

91.  3.  he  shall  d.  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler
Prov.  2.  12.  to  */.  thee  from  the  way  of  the  evil  man
16.  to  d.  thee  from  the  strange  woman,  the  stranger
Isa.37. 13.  when  thou  criest,  letthy  companies*/,  thee
Jer.  1 . 8. 1  am  with  thee  to  d.  thee,  19-  I  15.  20,  21.

38.  20.  but  Jeremiah  said,  they  shall  not  </.  thee

39.  17.  I  will  d.  thee  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord

18. 1  will  surely  </.  thee,  thou  shaltnot  fall  by  sword

Ezek.  21.  31.  d.  thee  into  the  hand  ot  brutish  men

23.  28.  I  will  d.  thee  to  them  whom  thou  hatest

25.4. 1  will*/,  thee  to  men  of  the  east  for  a  possession

7.  I  will  d.  thee  for  a  spoil  to  the  heathen
Dan.  6. 16.  thy  God  w  hom  thou  servestwill  */.  thee
20.  is  thy  God  able  to  </.  thee  from  the  lions  ?

Ilos.  11.  8.  how'  shall  I  d.  thee,  Israel,  how  shall  I
Mat.  5.  25.  judge  d.  thee  to  the  officer,  Luke  12. 58.
DELIVER  them.

Exod.  3.  8.  I  am  come  down  to  d.  them.  Acts  7-  34.
Deut.  7. 2.  w  hen  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  d.  them,  23.
Josh.  11.  6.  to-morrow  will  I  */.  them  up  all  slain
Judg.  11.  9.  and  if  the  Lord  d.  them  before  me
20.  28.  to-morrow  I  will  d.  them  into  thine  hand
1  Sam.  14.  37.  wilt  thou  *Z.  t.ZSam.  5.19. 1  C/*r.l4.10.

1  Kings  8.  46.  and  </.  t.  to  the  enemy,  2  Kings  21. 14.

2  Kings  3. 10.  to  d.  them  into  the  hand  of  Moab,  13.

1  Chron.  14. 10.  L.  said,  I  will  d.  them  into  thy  hand

2  Chron.  6.  36.  and  d.  th.  over  before  their  enemies
25.  20.  for  it  came  of  God,  that  he  might  </.  them

Neh.  9.  28.  and  many  times  didst  thou  d.  them
Job  5.  4.  crushed,  neither  is  there  any  to  </.  them
Psal.  22.  4.  they  trusted,  and  thou  didst  </.  them

37.  40.  the  Lord  shall  help  them,  and  d.  them
106.  43.  many  times  did  he  </.  them  they  provoked

Prov.  11.6.  the  righteousness  of  upright  shall*/,  them

12.  6.  the  mouth  of  the  upright  shall  d.  them

24.  11.  forbear  to  d.  them  that  are  drawn  to  death
Isa.  19.  20.  he  shall  send  a  Saviour  and  d.  them
Jer.  24.  9.  I  will  d.  them  to  be  removed,  29.  18.

29.  21.  d.  th.  into  hand  of  Rebuchadrezzar,  46. 26.
Ezek.  7. 19.  their  gold  shall  not  </.  them,  Zeph.  1. 18.
34. 12.  so  will  I  seek  and  d.  them  out  of  all  places
Amos  1.  6.  they  carried  away  to  </.  them  up  to  Edom
Zech.  11.  6.  out  of  their  hand  I  w  ill  not  d.  them
Acts  7.  25.  that  God  by  his  hand  would  d.  them
IJeb.  2.  15.  and  d.  them  who  through  feat  ot  death


DEL


DEL


D  EP


DELIVER  us.

Dent.  1.27.  to  d.  wj  into  hand  of  Amorites,  Josh.  7-7.
Jvdg.  10.  15.  d.  vs  only,  we  pray  thee,  this  day
CO.  13.  d.  us  the  men,  the  children  of  Belial
1  Sam.  4.  8.  woe  to  us,  who  shall  d.  vs  out  of  hand

12. 10.  but  now  d.  us  out  of  hand  of  our  enemies
C  Kings  18.  30.  the  L.  will  d.  us,  32.  Isa.  36. 15, 18.

1  C '/iron.  16.  .‘15.  save  and  d.  us  from  the  heathen
C  Chron.  32.  11.  saying,  the  L.  our  God  shall  d.us
Psal.  79-  9.  and  d.  us,  and  puree  away  our  sins
Jer.  43.  3.  to  d.  us  into  the  hand  of  the  Chaldeans
Lam.  5.  8.  none  that  doth  d.  ns  out  of  their  hand
Dan.  3.  17-  our  God  is  able  to  d.  ns  and  will  d.  us
Mic.5.  6.  thus  shall  he  d.  us  from  the  Assyrians
Mat.  6.  13.  but  d.  us  from  evil,  Luke  11.  4.

C  Cor.  1. 10.  in  whom  we  trust  that  he  will  vet  d.  ns
Gal.  1.  4.  that  he  might*/,  ns  from  this  evil  world
DELIVER  you.

Gen.  42. 34.  so  will  I  d.  y.  3’our  brother,  shall  traffic
Lev.  26.  26.  they  shall  d.  you  your  bread  by  weight
Judg.  10. 11.  did  not  I  d.  you  from  the  Egyptians?

13.  ye  have  forsaken  me,  I  will  d.  you  no  more

14.  let  them  d.  you  in  the  time  of  tribulation

1  Sam. 7-  3.  he  will  d.  you  from  the  Philistines

C  Kings  17.  39.  he  shall  d.y.  from  all  your  enemies

18.  29.  shall  not  be  able  to  d.  you  out  of  his  hand

2  Chron.  32. 14.  be  able  to  d.  you  out  of  mine  hand
Isa.  36.  14.  Hezekiah  shall  not  be  able  to  d.  you
46.  4. 1  will  bear,  I  will  carry,  and  will  d.  you
Ezek.  11.  9.  I  will  d.  you  into  hands  of  strangers
Dan.  3.  15.  who  is  that  God  that  shall  d.  you  ?
Mat.  10.  17.  for  they  will  d.you  up,  Mark  13.  9.

19.  but  when  they  d.you  up,  24.  9.  Mark  13.  11.

DELIVERANCE.

Gen.  45.7.  O.sent  me  to  save  your  lives  by  a  great  d.
Judg.  15.  18.  thou  hast  given  this  great  d.

1  Sam.  11.  t  9.  to-morrow  ye  shall  have  d.

2  Sam.  19.  +  2.  the  d.  was  turned  into  mourning

2  Kings  5. 1.  by  him  the  l-ord  had  given  d.  to  Syria

13.  17.  the  arrow  of  the  Lord’s  d.  of  d.  from  Syria

1  Chron.  11.  14.  the  Lord  saved  them  by  a  great*/.

Z  Chron,  12.  7-  but  I  will  grant  them  some  d.

Kora  9.  13.  and  hast  given  us  such  d.  as  this
I'sth.  4.  14.  then  shall  there  </.  arise  to  the  Jews
Psal.  18. 50.  great*/,  giveth  he  to  his  king,  to  David
32. 7  .  thou  shalt  com  pass  me  about  with' songs  of  d.
Pa.  26.  18.  we  have  not^ wrought  any  </.  in  the  earth
Joel  2.  32.  in  Zion  and  fn  Jerusalem  shall  be*/.
Chad.  17.  but  upon  mount  Zion  shall  be  */.

Luke  4.  18.  he  sent  me  to  preach  d.  to  the  captives
Deb.  11.35.  others  were  tortured,  not  accepting*/.
DELIVERANCES.

Psal.  44.4.  thou  art  my  King,  command  d.  for  Jacob
DELIVERED.

( -en.  9. 2.  on  every  beast,  into  your  hand  are  they  d.

14.  20.  God  who  </.  thine  enemies  into  thy  hand
25. 24.  when  her  days  to  be  */.  were  fulfilled
Kxod.  1. 19.  are  */.  ere  the  midwives  come  to  them
5.  23.  neither  hast  thou  </.  thy  people  at  all
12.27.  he  smote  the  Egyptians,  and  d.  our  houses
18.  10.  who  hath  d.  people  from  under  Egypt

Dent.  2.  36.  the  Lord  our  God  d.  all  unto  us
3.  3.  God  */.  into  our  hands  the  king  of  Bashan

9.  10.  the  Lord  </.  unto  me  two  tables  of  stone

31.  9-  and  Moses  d.  the  law  unto  the  priests
Josh.  21.  44.  the  Ld.  d.  their  enemies  into  their  hand
Judg.  1.  4.  he  </.  the  Canaanites  into  their  hand
3.  31.  after  him  was  Shamgar,  he  also  </.  Israel
5.  11.  they  that  are  d.  from  the  noise  of  archers
8.7.  when  L.  hath  d.  Zebah  and  Zalmunna
11. 21.  the  Lord  d.  Sihon  into  the  hand  of  Israel

16.  23.  our  god  hath  d.  Samson  our  enemy,  24.

1  Sam.  4.  19.  Phinehas’  wife  was  near  to  be  d.

17.  35.  1  smote  him  and  d.  it  out  of  his  mouth
30.  23.  who  </.  the  company  that  came  against  us

2  Sam.  21. 6.  let  seven  of  Saul’s  sons  he  d.  to  us

1  Kings  3.  17.  and  I  was  d.  of  a  child  with  her

18.  third  day  after  I  was  d.  this  woman  was  d.

2  Kings  19.  ll.  and  shalt  thou  be  d.?  Isa.  37. 11.

1  Chr.  11.  14.  */.  that  parcel  and  slew  Philistines

16.  7.  then  on  that  day  David  </.  this  psalm

2  Chr.  23.9.  Jehoiada*/.  to  the  captains  shields

3b  9.  they  </.  money  was  brought  into  house  of  G.

15.  and  Hilkiah  */.  the  book  to  Shaphan
Ezra  5.  14.  the  vessels  were  d.  to  Sheshbazzar
8.  36.  and  they  d.  the  king’s  commissions

o‘  b  22.  30.  it  is  d.  by  the  pureness  of  thine  hands
23.  7.  so  should  I  be  d.  forever  from  my  judge

29.12.  because  I  </.the  poor  that  cried, and  fatherless
/  sat.  22. 5.  they  cried  to  thee,  and  were  d.

33. 16.  a  mighty  man  is  not  */,  by  much  strength
55.  18.  he  hath  </.  my  soul  in  peace  from  battle

56. 13.  hast*/,  my  soul  from  death,  86. 13  1  116.  8.

60.  5.  that  thy  beloved  may  be  d.  108.  6.

69.  14.  let  me  be  d.  from  them  that  hate  me
78.  61.  and  d.  his  strength  into  captivity
/  rov  11.8.  the  righteous  is  d.  out  of  trouble
9.  but  through  knowledge  shall  the  just  be  d.

/I.  but  the  seed  of  the  righteous  shall  be  d.

28.  26.  but  whoso  walketh  wisely  shall  be  d.

I  cel.  9. 15.  poor  wise  man  by  wisdom  he  d.  the  city
nn'  ^or  help  to  he  d.  from  (lie  king  of  Assyria

29.  12.  the  book  is  d.  to  him  that  is  not  learned
56. 19.  and  have  they  */.  Samaria  out  of  my  hand  ?
38.  17 .  thou  hast  */.  it  from  the  pit  of  corruption
49.  24.  or  shall  the  lawful  captive  be  </.  ?

25.  and  the  prey  of  the  teirible  shall  be  d.

06.  7.  before  pain  came,  she  was  d.  of  a  man-child
J%T-  <•  10-  we  are  */.  to  do  all  these  abominations
~9.  13.  tor  he  hath  d.  the  soul  of  the  poor
3-.  16.  now  when  1  had  d.  the  evidence  to  Baruch

II  .-S’  I®,  but  thou  hast  d.  thy  soul,  21.  |  33.  9.

14.16.  as  I  live,  they  only  shall  be  </.  18.

qi  , ,  r>r  s*,a^  l16  break  the  covenant  and  be  d.  ?
•”•14.  tor  they  are  all  */.  unto  death  to  the  eartli
n'"  s"e ’s  to  the  sword,  draw  her  multitudes
^  "i/5-  28.  and  */.  his  servants  that  trusted  in  him
”•  •  who*/.  Daniel  from  the  power  of  the  lions

r  <  A"  S:  ,  t .time  thy  people  shall  be  d.

Joel  2.  32.  shall  call  on  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  d.
rlmus  J.  1.  and  he  that  escapeth  shall  not  be  d.
itltc.  4.  lo.  go  to  Babylon,  tnere  shalt  thou  be  d.


llab.  2.  9.  that  he  may  be  d.  from  the  power  of  evn
1  a/.  3. 15.  yea,  they  that  tempt  God  are  even  d.
Mat.  11. 27.  all  things  are  d.  to  me  of  my  Father,  no
man  knoweth  Son  but  the  Father,  Luke  10.  22.

27.  58.  Pilate  commanded  the  body  to  be  d.

Mark  7. 13.  thro’ your  tradition  which  ye  have*/.

10. 33.  the  Sonot  man  shall  be  */.  to  the  chief  priests
15.15.  released  Barabbas,  and  d.  Jesus,  l.uke  23.  25.
Luke  1.  57.  time  came  that  she  should  be  </.  2.  6.

4.  6.  that  is  d.  to  me,  and  to  whom  1  will,  1  give  it
17-  there  was*/,  to  him  the  book  of  Esaias
9.  44.  Son  of  man  shall  be  */.  into  hands  of  men

12.  58.  give  diligence  that  thou  mayest  be  */.

18.  32.  for  he  shall  be  </.  unto  the  G entiles
John  16.  21.  but  as  soon  as  she  is  */.  of  the  child
18.  36.  that  1  should  not  be  */.  to  the  Jews
Acts  2.  23.  him  being  </.  by  the  counsel  of  God

15.  30.  Judas  and  Silas  came  to  Ant.  and  d.  epistle

23.  33.  and  they  </.  the  epistle  to  the  governor
27- 1.  they  </.  Paul  to  one  Julius,  a  centurion

28.  17.  yet  was  1  </.  prisoner  from  Jerusalem
Rom.  4. 25.  was  */.  for  our  offences  and  raised  again

7.  6.  now  we  are  d.  from  the  law,  that  being  dead

8.  21.  the  creature  itself  shall  be  </.  from  corruption
15.  31.  1  may  be  */.  from  them  that  do  not  believe

2  Cor.  4.  11.  are  alway  d.  to  death  for  Jesus’  sake
2  Thess.  3.  2.  we  may  be  */.  from  unreasonable  men

1  Tim.  1.20.  whom  1  have*/,  to  Satan,  that  they  learn

2  Tim.  4. 17.  I  was  */.  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion
Heb.  11.  11.  by  faith  Sarah  was  </.  of  a  child

2  Pet.  2.7.  and  d.  j ust  Lot,  vexed  with  the  filthy

21.  to  turn  from  the  commandment  d.  to  them
Jude  3.  for  the  faith  which  was  once  */.  to  the  saints
Rev.  12.  2.  travailing  in  birth,  and  pained  to  be  d.

4.  before  the  woman  which  was  ready  to  be  d.

See  Hand,  Hands.
DELIVERED  him.

Gen.  37.21.  Reuben  d.  Am  out  of  their  hands
Lev.  6.  2.  in  that  which  was  </.  him  to  keep,  4.
Deut.  2.  33.  the  Lord  our  God  d.  him  before  us
1  Kings  13.  26.  therefore  the  Lord  d.  him  to  the  lion

17.  23.  and  Elijah  d.  him  unto  his  mother
Psal.  7.  4.  yea,  1  have  d.  him  that  is  mine  enemy
Mat.  18.  34.  his  Lord  </.  him  to  the  tormentors
27-  2.  and  */.  him  to  Pontius  Pilate,  Mark  15.  1.

18.  that  for  envy  they  had  d.  him,  Mark  15. 10.

26.  he  d.  him  to  be  crucified,  John  19.  16.
l.uke  7 •  15.  and  Jesus  */.  him  to  his  mother
9. 42.  Jesus  healed  the  child ,  and  d.  him  to  his  father

24.  20.  how  our  rulers  d.  him  to  be  condemned
John  18.  30.  we  would  not  have  */.  him  to  thee
Acts  7.  10.  God  */.  him  out  of  all  his  afflictions

12.  4.  Herod  d.  him  to  four  quaternions  of  soldiers
DELIVERED  me.

Exud.  18.  4.  God  </.  me  from  the  sword  of  Pharaoh
Judg.  12.  3.  and  when  I  saw  that  ye  */.  me  not

1  Sam.  17.  37.  the  Lord  that  d.  me  from  the  lion

2  Sam.  22.  18.  he  </.  me  from  my  strong  enemy

20.  he*/,  me  because  delighted  in  me,  Psal.  18. 19.
49.  thou  hast  </.  me  from  violent  man,  Psal.  18.  48.
2  Kings  22.  10.  Hilkiah  the  priest  hath  */.  me  a  book
Job  16. 11.  God  hath  */.  me  to  the  ungodly
Psal.  18. 17-  he  </.  me  from  my  strong  enemies
43.  hast  d.  me  from  the  strivings  of  the  people
34.  4.  the  Lord  heard,  and  d.  me,  from  all  my  fears
54.  7-  for  he  hath  d.  me  out  of  all  trouble
John  19.  11.  he  that*/,  me  to  thee  hath  greatersin
2  Tim.  3.  11.  but  out  of  them  all  the  Lord  d.  me
DELIVERED  thee.

1  Sam.  24.  10.  the  Lord  d.  thee  to-day  into  my  hand

2  Sam.  12.  7-  and  I  </.  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  Saul
Psal.  81.  7.  thou  calledst  in  trouble,  and  1  d.  thee
Ezek.  16.  27.  I  d.  thee  to  will  of  them  that  hate  thee
John  18.  35.  the  chief  priests  </.  thee  unto  me

DELIVERED  them.

Exod.  18.  8.  Moses  told  how  the  I ,ord  </.  them
Deut  5.  22.  in  tables  of  stone,  and  */.  them  to  me
Judg.  3.  9.  Lord  raised  up  a  deliverer,  who  d.  them
2  Kings  19.  12.  gods  of  nations  d.  them,  Isa.  37.  ]2.
2  Chr.  29.  8.  hath  d.  them  to  trouble,  to  astonishment
Psal.  78.  42.  when  he  </.  them  from  the  enemy
107.  6.  and  he  d.  them  out  of  their  distresses
20.  and  he  d.  them  from  their  destructions
Isa.  34.  2.  he  hath  d.  them  to  the  slaughter
Ezek.  16.  21.  d.  them,  to  cause  them  to  pass  thro’  fil  e
Mat.  25. 14.  called  servants,  and  */.  to  them  his  goods
Luke  1.  2.  even  as  they  </.  them  to  us  eye-witnesses

19. 13.  he*/,  them  ten  pounds,  and  said,  occupy  till
Acts  16.  4.  they  </.  them  the  decrees  for  to  keep

1  Cor.  11.  2.  keep  ordinances,  as  I  d.  them  to  you

2  Pet.  2.  4.  and  d.  them  into  chains  of  darkness

DELIVERED  up.

Num,  21.  3.  and  the  Lord  d.  up  the  Canaanites
Josh.  10. 12.  when  the  Ld.  d.  up  Amorites  before  Tsr.
2  Sam.  18.  28.  d.  up  the  men  that  lift  up  their  hand
Amos  1.  9.  because  they  d.  up  the  captivity  to  Edom
Obad.  14.  nor  shouldest  have  </.  up  those  that  remain
Mat.  4.  +  12.  heard  that  John  was  d.  up  into  prison
Acts  3.  13.  hath  glorified  his  Son  whom  ye  d.  up
Rom.  8.  32.  spared  not  his  Son,  but  */.  him  up  for  us

1  Cor.  15.  24.  when  he  shall  have  d.  up  the  kingdom
Rev.  20. 13.  death  and  hell  d.  up  the  dead  in  them

DELIVERED  us.

Exod.  2.  19.  an  Egyptian  d.  us  from  the  shepherds
Acts  6.  14.  change  the  customs  which  Moses  d.  71s

2  Cor.  1 .  10.  who  d.  us  from  so  great  a  death
Col.  1 .  13.  hath  */.  us  from  the  power  of  darkness

1  Thess.  1.  10.  Jesus,  who  d.  us  from  wrath  to  come
DELIVERED  you.

Pom .  6. 17.  ye  obeyed  the  doctrine  which  was  d.  you

1  Cor.  11.  28.  I  received  that  which  1  d.  you,  15.  3.

DELI  VEREDST,  ESI'.

Neh.  9-  27.  thou  d.  them  to  enemies  who  vexed
Psal.  35.  10.  who  </.  poor  from  him  that  spoileth  him
Mic.  6.  14.  what  thou  d.  will  I  give  up  to  the  sword
Mat.  25.  20.  Lord,  thou  </.  unto  me  five  talents

22.  and  said,  Lord,  thou  </.  unto  me  two  talents

DELIVERER.

Jvdg.  3.  9.  the  Lord  raised  up  a  d.  to  Israel,  15.

18.  28.  there  was  no  d.  2  Sam.  14.  +  6.  Psal.  7.  +  2.

2  Sam.  22.  2.  the  Lord  is  my  rock  and  d.  Psal.  18. 2.
Psal.  40.  17.  thou  art  my  help  and  my  d.  70.  5.


Psai.  ±44.  2.  my  fortress,  m3’  high  tower, and  m3’ d.
Acts  7. 35.  the  same  did  God  send  to  be  a  </.

Rom.  11. 26.  there  shall  come  out  of  Sion  the  */.
DELIVERETH.

Job  36. 15.  he  */.  the  poor  in  his  affliction,  opens  ears
Psal.  18. 48.  he  </.  me  from  mine  enemies
34.  7.  about  them  that  fear  him,  and  </.  them
17.  the  Lord  d.  them  out  of  all  their  troubles,  19.
97.  10.  he  */.  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  wicked
144.  10.  who  */.  David  from  the  hurtful  sword
Prov.  10.  2.  righteousness  </.  from  death,  11.  4.

14.  25.  a  true  witness  */.  souls,  but  a  deceitful

31.  24.  and  she  d.  girdles  unto  the  merchant
Isa.  42.22.  they  are  for  a  prey,  and  none  </.

Dan.  6.  27.  God  d.  and  rescueth,  and  worketh  signs
Amos  3.  f  12.  as  shepherd  d.  out  of  mouth  of  lion

DELIVERING.

Exod.  5.  +  23.  </.  thou  hast  not  delivered  thy  people
Luke  21. 12.  d.  you  up  to  S3’nagogues  and  into  prisons
Acts  22.  4.  */.  into  prisons  both  men  and  women
26.  17.  d.  thee  from  the  people  and  the  Gentiles
DELIVERY.

Isa.  26. 17.  that  draweth  near  the  time  of  her  d
DELUSION.

2  Thess.  2.  11.  God  shall  send  them  strong  d.
DELUSIONS.

Isa.  66.  4.  I  also  will  choose  their  d.  and  bring  fears-
DEMAND.

Dan.  4. 17.  the  </.  by  the  word  of  the  holy  ones
DEMAND,  ED.

Exod.  5.  14.*/.  why  have  3’e  not  fulfilled  your  task  *

2  Sam.  11.  7.  David  </.  of  Uriah  how  Joab  did
Job  38.3.  I  will  */.  of  thee,  answer  thou,  40.  7-  142.4.
Dan.  2.  27.  the  secret  which  the  kin^  hath  </.

Mat.  2.  4.  he  d.  where  Christ  should  be  born
l.uke  3.  14.  the  soldiers  d.  of  him,  what  shall  we  do
17.  20.  and  when  he  was*/,  of  the  Pharisees
Acts.  21.  33.  the  chief  captain  d.  who  he  was
DEMONSTRATION.

1  Cor.  2.  4.  but  in  </.  of  the  Spirit,  and  of  power
DEN,  S.

Judg.  6.  2.  the  children  of  Israel  made  them  d.

Job  37-  8.  then  the  beasts  go  into  d.  and  remain
38.  40.  when  they  couch  in  their  </.  and  abide
Psal.  10.  9.  he  lieth  in  wait  as  a  lion  in  his  d.

104.  22.  they  la3’  themselves  down  in  their  d.

Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  Shenir,  from  the  lions’  d.

Isa.  11. 8.  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice’ d.

32.  14.  the  towers  shall  be  for*/,  forever

Jer.  7.  11-  is  this  house  become  a  d.  of  robbers  ?

9.  11.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  d.  of  dragons

10.  22.  to  make  *he  cities  of  Judah  a  d.  of  dragons
Dan.  6.  7.  he  shall  be  cast  into  the  */.  of  lions,  12.

16.  and  the3r  cast  him  into  the  d.  of  lions
19.  the  king  arose  and  went  in  haste  to  the  d.

23.  they  should  take  Daniel  up  out  of  the  d.

24.  and  they  cast  them  into  the  */.  of  lions
Amos  3.  4.  will  a  3'oung  lion  cry  out  of  his  d.  ?

Nah.  2.  12.  the  lion  filled  his  d.  with  ravin

Mat.  21.  13.  my  house  be  called  house  of  prayer,
but  ye  have  made  it  a  </.  of  thieves,  Mark  11.  17.
Ileh.  11 . 38.  they  wandered  in  deserts  and  in  d.

Rev.  6. 15.  bondman  and  freeman  hid  themsel.  in  d.
DENY.

Josh.  24.  27-  be  a  witness,  lest  ye  d.  3’our  God

1  Kings  2.  16.  I  ask  of  thee,  d.  me  not,  Prov.  30.  7*
Job  8.  18.  if  he  destroy  him,  then  it  shall  */.  him
Prov.  30.  9.  lest  I  be  full  and  d.  thee,  and  say
Mat.  10.  33.  whosoever  shall  d.  me,  him  will  l  d.

16.  24.  let  him  */.  himself,  Mark  8.34.  Luke  9.23.
26.  31.  Jesus  said  to  him,  before  the  cock  crow  thou
shalt  */.  me  thrice,  75.  Mark  14.  30,72.
.35.  die  with  thee,  yet  will  1  not*/.thee,A/«;T  14. 31.
Luke  20.  27.  which  d.  there  is  any  resurrection

2  Tim.  2. 12.  if  we  </.  him,  he  also  will  */.  us

13.  yet  he  abideth. faithful,  he  cannot  d.  himself
Tit.  1.  16.  that  know  God,  hut  in  works  they  d.  him

DENIED.

Gen.  18.  15.  ^arah  */.  saying,  1  laughed  not
1  Kings  20.  7.  he  sent  to  me,  and  1  </.  him  not
Job  31.  28.  for  I  should  have  d.  God  that  is  above
Mat.  26.  70.  Peter  */.  before  them  all,  saying,  I  know
not,  72.  Mark  14. 70.  Luke  22.  57.  John  18. 25,  27- #
Luke  8.  45.  when  all  d.  that  they  touched  him

12.  9.  who  denies  shall  be  </.  before  the  angels  of  G.
John  1. 20.  John  confessed ,  and  </.  not,  1  am  not  Chr,

13.  38.  shall  not  crow,  till  thou  hast  */.  me  thrice
Acts  3.  13.  whom  ye  </.  in  the  presence  of  Pilate

14.  but  ye*/,  the  holy  One  and  the  just

1  Tim.  5.  8.  he  hath  d.  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than
Rev.  2. 13.  holdest  fast  my  name,  and  not  </.  my  faith

3.  8.  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  d.  my  name

DENIETH,  ING.

Luke  12.  9.  but  he  that  </.  me  before  men,  be  denied

2  Tim.  3. 5.  having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  d.  power
Tit.  2. 12.  teaching  us,  that  </.  ungodliness  and  lusts
2  Pet.  2.  1.  even  d.  the  Lord  that  bought  them

1  John  2.  22.  is  a  liar,  that  d.  Jesus  is  the  Christ
23.  who  d.  the  Son,  the  same  hath  not  the  F’ather
Jude  4.  */.  the  only  Lord  God,  and  our  Lord  Jesus
DENOUNCE.

Deut.  30.18. 1  d.  thisdav,  that  ye  shall  surely  perish
DEPART.

Gen.  13.  9.  if  thou  </.  to  the  right  hand,  I  will  go
Exod.  18.  27.  Moses  let  his  father-in-law  </.

33.  1.*/.  thou  and  the  people  thou  hast  brought  up
Num.  10.  30.  1  will*/,  to  mine  own  land  and  kindred
Deut.  9.7.  from  the  day  thou  didst  d.  out  of  Egypt
Josh.  24. 28.  so  Joshua  let  the  people  </.  to  inheritance
Judg.  19.  5.  the  Levite  rose  up  to  </. 7,  8,  9.

1  Sam.  22. 5.  and  God  said,  abide  not  in  the  hold,  </.

29. 10.  as  soon  as  ye  be  up  and  have  light,  d.

11.  David  and  his  men  rose  up  to  */.  in  the  morn.

30.  22.  that  they  may  lead  them  away  and  d.
i  Sam.  11.  12.  and  to-morrow  I  will  let  thee  </.

15.  14.  make  speed  to  */.  lest  he  overtake  us

1  Kings  12.  5.  d.  for  three  days,  then  come  ag.  to  me
Job  20.  28.  the  increase  of  his  house  shall  */.

_fta.il.  13.  the  envy  also  of  Ephraim  shall  d.

52. 11.  d.  ye,  d.  ye,  go  out  from  thence,  Lam.  4. 15.
54.  10.  for  the  mountains  shall  d.  and  the  hills

Jer.  50.  3.  they  shall  d.  both  man  and  beast

101


I)  E  P


1)  E  P


I)  E  S


Mic.  2.  10.  anse  ye,  and  d.  this  is  not  vour  rest
Zech.lO.  11.  the  sceptre  of  Egypt  shall  d.  away^
Mat.  8. 34.  would  d.  out  of  their  coasts,  Mark  5.  17-
10.  14.  when  ye  about  of  that  house  or  city,  shake
off  the  dust  of  your  feet,  Mark  6.  11.  Lake  9.  4.
Lvkel.  29.  now  lettestthou  thy  servant  d.  in  peace
13.  31.  d.  hence,  for  Heiod  will  kill  thee
Cl.  Cl.  let  them  which  are  in  the  midst c/.  outot  it
John  7.  3.  they  said,  d.  hence  and  go  into  Judea
13.  1.  when  Jesus  knew  he  should  d.  out  ot  world
1C.  7.  but  if  1  d.  I  will  send  him  unto  you
Acts  16.  36.  now  therefore  d.  and  go  in  peace
39.  and  desired  them  to  d.  out  ot  the  city
£0. 7.  Paul  preach,  to  them  ready  to  d.  on  morrow
2C.  Cl.  d.  for  1  will  send  thee  to  the  Gentiles
C5'.  4.  that  he  himself  would  d.  shortly  thither
£7. 12.  the  more  part  advised  to  d.  thence  also.

1  Cor.  7. 11.  but  if  she  d.  let  her  remain  unmarried

15.  "but  if" the  unbelieving  d.  let  him  d.  .

Phil  1  23.  a  desire  to  d.  and  to  be  with  Christ
Jam' <2,.  16.  say  to  them,  d.  in  peace,  be  ye  clothed
D  EPA  KT  from.

Exod.  8. 11.  and  the  frogs  shall  d.  from  thee
£9.  that  the  swarms  of  flies  may  d.  from  Pharaoh
21.22.  hurt  a  woman,  so  that  her  truit  d.  from  her
Le v~Q5.  41.  and  then  shall  he  d.  from  thee
Num.  16. 26.  d.  from  the  tents  of  these  wicked  men
I)eut.  4.  9.  take  heed,  lest  they  d.  from  thy  heart
Judg.  7.  3.  who  is  fearful,  let  him  d.  from  Gilead
1  Ham.  15.  6.  d.from  the  Amalekites,  lest  I  destroy
£  Sam.  12.10.  the  sword  shall  never  d.from  thy  house

20.21.  deliver  Sheba,  and  1  will  d.from  the  city
1  Kings  15. 19-  that  he  may  d.  from  me,  2  G 'hr.  16.3.
il  Chr.  18.  31.  and  God  moved  them  to  d.from  him
Job  21.  14.  they  say  to  God,  d.from  us,  22.  17.

°8.  28.  and  to  d.  from  evil  is  understanding
psal.  6.  8.  d.from  me,  all  ye  workers  ot  iniquity,
y  Mat.  7.  23.  Luke  13.27.

34.  14.  d.from  evil,  and  do  good,  37  -  27.

101.  4.  a  froward  heart  shall  d.  from  me
119.  115.  d.from  me,  ye  evil  doers,  for  1  will  keep
139. 19-  d .  fiom  me  therefore,  ye  bloody  men
Prov.  3.  7.  tear  the  Lord,  and  d.from  evil

13.  14.  to  d.from  the  snares  of  death,  14.  27-
19.  but  it  is  abomination  to  fools  to  d.  from  evil

15.  24.  that  he  may  d.  from  hell  beneath

16.  6.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  d.from  evil

17.  the  highway  of  the  upright  is  to  d.from  evil
Isa.  14.  25.  his  burden  d.from  off  their  shoulders
Jer.  6.  8.  be  instructed,  lest  my  soul  d.from  thee

17. 13.  that  d.from  me  shall  be  written  in  the  earth
31.  36.  if  those  ordinances  d.  from  before  me
37.  9.  the  Chaldeans  shall  surely  d.  from  us
Ezek.  16.  42.  my  jealousy  shall  d.from  thee
Hos.  9.  12.  woe  also  to  them  when  I  d.  from  them
Mat.  25. 41.  d.from  me  ye  cursed,  into  everlast.  tire
Mark  6. 10.  there  abide,  till  ye  d.  from  that  place
Luke  5. 8.  d.from  me,  for  1  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord

8.  37.  Gadarenes  besought  him  to  d.  from  them
Acts  1.  4.  that  they  should  not  d.  from  Jerusalem

18.  2.  commanded  all  the  Jews  to  d.from  Rome
1  Cor.  7.  10.  let  notthe  wife  d.  from  her  husband
£  Cor.  12. 8.  I  besought  Lord  that  it  might  d.from  me

1  TimA.l.  in  latter  times  some  shall  d.  from  the  faith
£  Tun.  2.  19.  that  nameth  Christ  d.from  iniquity

Not  DEPART.

Gen.  49.10.  the  sceptre  shall  not  d.  from  Judah
Josh.  1 . 8.  this  book  of  the  law  shall  not  d.  meditate
Judg.  6. 18.  d.  not  hence,  1  pray  thee,  till  1  come
£  Sam.  7.  15.  but  my  mercy  shall  not  d.  from  him
22.  23.  as  for  his  statutes,  1  did  not  d.  from  them

2  Chron.  35. 15.  they  might  not  d.  from  their  service
Job  7.  19.  how  long  wilt  thou  not  d.  from  me  ?

15.  30.  he  shall  not  d.  out  of  darkness,  the  flame
Psal.  55. 11.  deceit  and  guile  d.  not  fr«nn  her  streets
Prov.  3.  21.  let  them  not  d.  from  thine  eyes,  4.  21.
5.  7.  hear  me,  and  d.  not  from  words  of  my  mouth

17. 13.  evil  for  good,  evil  shall  not  d.  from  his  house
22.  6.  when  he  is  old  he  will  not  d.  from  it
27.  22.  yet  will  not  his  foolishness  d.  front  him
Isa.  54. 10.  but  my  kindness  shall  not  d.  from  thee

59.21.  mycov.  my  Spirit,  and  words,  shall  not  d.
Jer.SZAO.  put  my  tear, that  they  shall  not  d.  from  me

37.9.  the  Chaldeans,  for  they  shall  not  d.

Mat.  14. 16.  they  need  not  d.  give  ye  them  to  eat
Luke  A.  42.  stayed  him,  thatshoujd  not  d.  from  them

12.59.  thou  shalt  not  d.  thence,  till  thou  hast  paid
DEPARTED.

Gen.  12.  4.  so  Abraham  d.  as  the  Lord  had  spoken

14.  12.  they  took  Lot  and  d.  ||  21.  14.  Ilagar  d.

24.10.  Eliezer  y.  II26.17.  Isaac  d.  ||  31.55.  Laban d.
37.  17.  and  the  man  said,  they  are  d.  hence

42.  £6.  they  laded  their  asses  with  corn,  and  d.

45.  24.  he  sent  his  brethren  away,  and  they  d.
Num.  12.  9-  anger  of  the  L.  was  kindled,  and  he  d.
22.7.  and  the  elders  of  Moab  and  Midian  d.

Josh.  2.  21.  she  sent  the  spies  away,  and  they  d.
Judg.  9.  55.  d.  every  man  to  his  place,  2  Sam.  6.  19.

18.  7-  then  the  five  men  d.  and  came  to  Laish,  21.

19.  10.  the  Levite  d.  ||  21.  24.  Israeli,  thence

1  Sam.  6. 6.  did  they  not  let  Israel  go,  and  they  d.  ?
20. 42.  David  d.  22. 1.5.  I|  2  Sam.  12. 15.  so  Ik  ath.  d.

£  Sam.  19-  24.  nor  washed  from  the  day  the  king  d.
3  Kings  12. 5.  and  the  people  d.  2  Chron.  10.  5.

14.  17.  and  Jeroboam’s  wife  arose  and  y. to  Tirza
19.  19.  Elijah  d.  and  found  Elisha,  2  Rings  1.  4.
£0.  9  the  messengers  d.  and  brought  word  again
38.  so  the  prophet  d.  and  waited  tor  the  king

2  Kings 5.  5.  N  aam.  d.  H  10. 12.  Jehu  arose  and  d.  15.
19.  36.  so  Sennacherib  d.  and  went,  Isa.  37  .  37-

3  Chr.  16.  43.  all  people  d.  every  man  to  his  house
21.  4.  wherefore  Joab  d.  and  went  through  Israel

£  Chr.  21.  20.  Jehoram  d.  without  being  desired
Psal.  105.  38.  Egypt  was  glad  when  they  d.

Isa.  38. 12.  mine  age  is  <5  and  removed  from  me
Jer.  41.10.  lshmaely.  to  go  over  to  the  Ammonites
Lam.  1 . 6.  from  daughter  of  Zion  all  her  beauty  is  d.
Mat.  2.  9.  when  had  heard  the  king,  wise  men  d.  12.
14.  Joseph  and  Mary  arose,  and  d.  into  Egypt
4. 12.  Jesus  d.  9.27.  1 11.1  I  12.  9-  1 13.  53.  |14.  13.

I  15.  21,29.  I  16.  4.  J  19.  15.
27.5.J udas  d.  ||  Luke  1. 23.  Zacharias  d.  to  his  house
102


Mark  1.  35.  Jesus  d.  6.  46.  I  8.  13.  Luke  4.  42.

John  4.3,43.  |  6.  15. 1  12.  36.
Luke  5. 25.  he  d.  to  his  own  house,  glorifying  God

7.  24.  when  the  messengers  of  John  were  d.

8.  35.  the  man  out  of  whom  the  devils  were  d.

10.  30.  the  thieves  wounded  him  and  d.

35.  on  the  morrow  when  the  Samaritan  d.

John  5. 15.  the  man  d.  and  told  the  Jews  it  was  Jesus
Acts  10.  7.  when  the  angel  d.  I)  11.25.  Barnabas  d.

12.  17.  Peter  d.  ||  13.  4.  they  d.  to  Seleucia
14.20.Paul  d.  ||  15. .39. Paul  and  Barnabas  rf.asunder
16.40.  Paul  and  Silas |j  18.7-Paul  d. 23.  I  20. 1, 11.
21.  5.  we  d.  and  went  our  way,  8. 1  28.  10, 11.

28.  29.  when  he  said  these  words,  the  Jew's  d.

QTim.  4.10.Demas  forsaken  me, is  d.  to  Thessalonica
Philsm.  15.  for  perhaps  he  therefore  d.  for  a  season
Re v.  6.  14.  and  the  heaven  d.  as  a  scroll  rolled
DEPARTED  from.

Gen.  26.  31.  they  arose  and  d.  from  Isaac  in  peace
31.  40.  thus  w'as  1,  my  sleep  d.from  mine  eyes
Exod.  19.  2.  they  were  d.f.  kephidim,  Num.  33. 15.
35.  20.  all  Israel  d.  froth  the  presence  ofIMoses
Lev.  13.  58.  if  the  plague  be  d.from  them,  then
Num.  10.  33.  they  d.  from  the  mount  of  the  Lord

12.  10.  the  cloud  d.  from  off  the  tabernacle

14.  9.  their  defence  is  d.from  them,  fear  not

33.  3.  they  d.from  Kameses  I  6.  d.from  Succoth

8.  d.from  Pi-hahiroth  ||  13.  d.from  Dophkah

All  their  departures  set  down  to  verse  49.
Dent.  1.  19.  and  when  we  d.from  Iloreb,  we  went
Judg.  16.20.  he  wist  not  that  Lord  was  d.  f.  him
1  Sam.  4.  21.  saying,  the  glory  is  d.from  Israel, 22.
10.  2.  when  thou  art  d.  from  me,  thou  shalt  find
15.6.  Kenites  d.  from  among  the  Amalekites
16.  14.  tlie  Spirit  of  the  Lord  d.fnm  Saul,  18.  12.
£3.  was  refreshed,  and  the  evil  Spirits,  from  him
£8.  15.  God  is  d.  from  me,  and  answereth  me  not

16.  ask  of  me,  seeing  the  Lord  is  d.  from  thee

1  Kings  20.  36.  as  soon  as  thou  ai  t  d.  from  me

2  Kings  3.  27.  they  d.from  him  to  their  own  land
5.  19.  so  he  d.  from  Elisha  a  little  way,  8.  14.

19.  8.  Sennacherib  d.from  Lachish,  Isa.  37.  8.

2  Chron.  24.  25.  and  wlien  they  were  d.  from  him
Ezra  8.31-  then  we  d.from  the  river  of  Ahava
Psal.  18.  21.  and  have  not  wickedly d.from  my  G.
Isa.  7.  17.  from  the  day  that  Ephraim  d.from  Jud.
Jer.  29.2.  and  the  smiths  were  d.from  Jerusalem
37.  5.  the  Chaldeans  heard  they  d.from  Jerusalem
Ezek.  6.9.  their  svhorish  heart  which  hath  d.from  me
10. 18.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  d.from  the  threshold
Dan.  4. 31.  O  king,  the  kingdom  is  d.from  thee
Nos.  10.  5.  for  the  glory  of  Samaria  is  d.  from  it
Mat.  15.  29.  and  Jesus  d.  from  thence,  and  came
19. 1.  had  finished  these  sayings,  he  d.from  Galilee
20.29.  as  they  y./rewi  Jericho,  a  multitude  followed
£4.  1.  Jesus  w7ent  out  and  d.  from  the  temple
£8.  8.  they  d.  quickly  from  the  sepulchre
Mark  1.  42.  the  leprosy  d.from  him,  Luke  5.  13.
Luke  1.  38.  and  the  angel  d.from  Mary
4.  13.  the  devil  d.from  him  for  aseason

9.  33.  as  they  d.from  him,  Peter  said  to  Jesus
Acts  5.  41 .  they  d.from  the  presence  of  the  council

12. 10.  and  forthwith  the  angel  d.from  him

13.  1 4.  they  came  when  they  had  d.from  Perga

15.  38.  John  d.from  them  from  Pamphvlia

17.  33.  Paul  d.from.  them,  18. 1. 1  19.  9.  Phil.  4. 15.
19. 12.  diseases  d.  from  them,  and  evil  spirits  w’ent

out

Rev.  18.  14.  and  the  fruits  that  thy  soul  lusted  after
are  d.from  thee,  and  all  things  dainty  are  d.
DEPARTED  not  from.

2  Sam.  22.  22.  1  have  not  d.from  my  G.  Psal.  18. 21.

2  Kings  3.  3.  he  d.  not  therefrom ,  13.2.

10.  29.  Jehu  d.  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam,  who
made  Israel  to  sin,  to  wit,  golden  calves,  31.

1  13.  6, 11. 1  14.  24.  |  15.  9,  18.  1  17.22.

18.  6.  Hezekiah  d.  not  from  following  the  Lord
2  Chr.  8. 15.  d.  not  from  commandment  of  the  kin;

£0.  32.  Jehoshaphat  d.  not  from  the  way  of  Asa
34.  33.  they  d.  not  from  following  the  Lord
Neh.  9.  19.  the  cloud  d.  not  from  them  by  day
Psal.  119.  102.  I  have  not  d.  from  thy  judgments
Luke  2.37. Anna  d.notfrom  the  temp.but  served  God
DEPARTED  out.

Gen.  12.4.  was  75  years  old  when  he  d.  out  of  Ilaran
Dent.  24.  2.  and  when  she  is  d.  out  of  liis  house
Judg .  6.  21.  angel  of  the  Lord  d.  out  of  his  sight
17.  8.  the  Levite  d.  out  of  Beth-lehem-judah

1  Sam.  23.  13.  David  and  his  tnen  d.  out  of  Keilah

2  Sam.  11.  8.  and  Uriah  d.  out  of  the  king’s  house
Mai.  2.  8.  ye  are  d.  out  of  the  way, ye  have  corrupt.
Mat.  17. 18.  rebuked  the  devil,  and  he  d.  out  of  him

DEPARTED  not  out.

Exod.  33.  11.  Joshua  d.  not  out  of  the  tabernacle
Num.  14.  44.  the  ark  and  Mos.  d.  not  out  of  the  camp
DEPARTETH.

Job  27.  21.  the  wind  carrieth  him  away,  and  he  d.
Prov.  11.  t  22.  so  is  a  fair  worn.  whoa!,  from  discret.
14.  16.  a  wise  man  feareth,  and  d.  from  evil
Eccl.  6.4.  he  cometh  in  with  vanity,  and  d.  in  dark.
Isa.  59.  15.  he  thaty.  from  evil  maketh  hims.  a  prey
Jer.  3. 20.  as  a  wife  treacherously  d.  from  her  husb.
17.  5.  cursed  be  the  man  whose  hearty,  from  L.
Nah.  3.  1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  the  prey  d.  not
Luke  9.  39.  and  bruising  him,  hardly  d.  from  him
DEPARTING.

Gen.  35. 18.  as  her  soul  was  in  d.  she  called  his  name
Exod.  16.  1.  after  their  d.  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt
Isa.  59.  13.  in  lying  and  d.  away  from  our  God
Daw. 9. 5. we  have  sinned, by  y.from  thy  precepts.il.
Hos.  1.  2.  have  committed  whoredom  d.  from  Lord
Mark 6.  33.  the  people  saw  them  d.  and  knew  him
7.  31.  and  y.  from  the  coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon
Acts  13.  13.  Johny.  from  them,  returned  to  Jerus.
20.  29. 1  know  after  my  d.  shall  wolves  enter  in
Heb.  3. 12.  an  evil  heart,  in  d.  from  the  living  God
11.  22.  Joseph  made  mention  of  they,  of  Israel
DEPARTURE.

Ezek.  26.  18.  the  isles  shall  be  troubled  at  thy  d.

£  Tim.  4.  6.  and  the  time  of  my  d.  is  at  hand
DEPEND.

Job  22.  +  2.  doth  his  good  si  d.  thereon


DEPOSED.

Dan.  5.  20.  he  was  d.  from  his  kingly  throne

DEPRIVED.

Gen.  27.  45.  why  should  I  be</.  of  both  in  one  day  i
Job.  39. 17.  because  God  hath  d.  her  of  wisdom
Isa.  38. 10.  I  am  d.  of  the  residue  of  my  years
DEPRIVING.

Psal.  35. 1 12.  me  evil  for  good,  to  the  d.  of  my  soul

DEPTH.

Job  28. 14.  the  d.  saith,  it  is  not  in  me,  and  sea  saith

38. 16.  oi-  hast  thou  walked  in  search  of  the  d.  ?

Psal.  33.  7.  he  layeth  up  the  d.  in  store  houses

69.  +  2.  1  sink  in  the  mire  of  d.  where  there  is  no
Prov.  8-  27.  when  he  set  a  compass  on  face  of  the  d.

25.  3.  heaven  for  height,  and  the  earth  for  d.

Isa.  7.  11.  ask  it  either  in  the  d.  or  in  the  height
Jonah  2.5.  the  y.closed  me  round  about, weeds  wrapt
Mat.  18.6.  better  he  were  drowned  in  they,  of  the  sea
Mark  4. 5.  because  it  had  no  d.  of  earth,  it  withered
Rom.  8.  39.  nor  d.  separate  us  from  the  loveot  God
11.  33.  O  the  y.of  the  riches  both  ot  the  wisdom
Eph.  3. 18.  what  is  breadth  and  d.  of  love  of  Christ
DEPTHS.

Exod.  15.  5.  the  d.  have  covered  them,  they  sank
8.  they,  were  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  sea
Dent.  8. 7.  they,  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills
Psal.  68. 22.  bring  my  people  from  the  d.  of  the  sea
71.  20.  shall  bring  me  up  from  the  d.  of  the  earth

77. 16.  the  waters  were  afraid,  the  d.  were  troubled
78.  15.  he  gave  them  drink  as  out  of  the  great  d.

106.  9.  he  led  them  thro’  they,  as  thro’  wilderness

107.  26.  they  mount  up,  they  go  down  again  to  d.
130.  1.  out  of  they,  have  1  cried  to  thee,  O  Lord

Prov.  3.  20.  by  his  knowledge  the  d.  are  broken  11  p

8.  24.  when  there  were  no  d.  1  was  brought  forth

9.  18.  and  that  her  guests  are  in  the  d.  of  hell
Isa.  51 .  10.  that  hath  made  the  d.  of  the  sea  a  way
Ezek.  27.  34.  thou  shalt  be  broken  in  y.of  waters
Mic.  7. 19.  will  cast  their  sins  into  the  d.  of  the  sea
liev.  2.  24.  which  have  not  known  the  d.  of  Satan

DEPUTED.

2  Sam.  15.  3.  but  there  is  no  man  d.  of  the  king
DEPUTY.

1  Kings  22. 47.  was  no  king  in  Edom,  a  J.  was  king
Acts  13.  7.  a  sorcerer  Barjesus  who  was  with  the  d.

8.  seeking  to  turn  away  the  d.  from  the  faith
18.  12.  and  when  Gallio  was  the  d.  of  Achaia
DEPUTIES.

Drt/i.8.9.  it  was  written  to  d.  and  rulers  of  provinces
9.3.  and  the  d.  and  officers  helped  the  Jews
Acts  19. 38.  there  are  d.  letthem  implead  one  another
DERIDE.

Ilab.  1. 10.  they'  shall  d.  every  strong  hold,  heap  dust
DERIDED.

Luke  16. 14.  Pharisees  heard  these  things,  and  y.him
23.35.  the  rulers  also  with  the  people  d.  him
DERISION.

Job  30.  1.  that  are  younger  than  I,  have  me  in  d.
Psal.  2.  4.  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  d.

44. 13.  a  y.  to  them  that  are  round  about  us,  79.  4.

59.  8.  thou  shalt  have  all  the  heathen  in  d.

119.  51.  the  proud  have  had  me  greatly’  in  d.

Jer.  20. 7.  I  am  in  d.  daily  ||  8.  was  made  a  d.  daily
48.  26.  and  Moab  also  shall  be  in  d.  39.

27.  for  was  not  Israel  a  d.  unto  thee  ?

I, am.  3. 14.  I  was  ay.  to  my  people  and  song  all  day
Ezek.  £3.  32.  thou  shalt  drink,  and  be  had  in  d.

36.  4.  to  cities  which  became  a  d.  to  the  heathen
Hos.  7.  16.  this  shall  be  their  d.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
DESCEND.

Num.  34.  11.  the  border  shall  d.  and  reach  to  sea
1  Sam.  26. 10.  he  shall  d.  into  battle  and  perish
Psal.  49.  17.  his  glory  shall  not  d.  after  him
65.  + 10.  thou  causest  rain  d.  into  the  furrows
104. 1 8.  the  mountains  to  ascend,  the  valleys  d.  10.
Ezek.  £6.20.  with  them  that  d.  into  the  pit,  31. 16.
Mark  15.  32.  let  Christ  d.  now  from  the  cross
Acts  11. 5.  1  saw  vision,  certain  vessel  d.  great  sheet
Rom.  10.7.  or  who  shall  d.  into  the  deep  ?

1  Thess. 4. 16.  Ld.  shall  d.  from  heaven  with  a  shou
DESCEN  D  ED.

Exod.  19. 18.  because  the  Lord  d.  on  Sinai  in  fire
33.  9.  the  cloudy  pillar  d.  ||  34. 5.  d.  in  a  cloud
Dent.  9.  21.  the  brook  that  d.  out  of  the  mount
Josh.  2.  23.  so  the  two  men  d.  from  the  mountain
Psal.  133.  3.  as  dew  that  d.  on  mountains  of  Zion
Prov.  30. 4.  w'ho  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  or  y.
Mat.  7.  25.  the  rain  d.  and  the  floods  came,  27.

28.  2.  for  the  angel  of  the  Lord  d.  from  heaven
Luke  3.  22.  the  Holy  Ghost  d.  in  a  bodily  shape
Acts  24. 1.  Ananias  the  high-priest  d.  with  the  elders
Eph.  4. 10.  he  that  d.  is  the  same  that  ascended

DESCEN  DETTL

Jam.  3. 15.  this  wisdom  d. not  from  above  butsensual
DESCENDING.

Gen.  28. 12.  ton  of  ladder  reached  to  heaven,  and  the
angels  of  God  ascending  and  d.  John  1 . 51.
Isa.  15.  +  3.  every  one  shall  howl  d.  into  weeping
Mat.  3.11).  he  saw  the  Spirit  of  God  d.  Mark  1.  10.
John  1.  32.  1  saw  Spirit  d.  from  heaven  like  a  dove
33.  on  whom  thou  shalt  see  Spirit  d.  and  remaining
Acts  10. 11.  a  vessel  d.  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet
Rev.  21. 10.  that  great  city  d.  out  of  hea\  en  from  G .
DESCENT.

Mic.  1.  +  4.  as  waters  that  are  poured  down  a  d.
Luke  19.  37.  when  come  nigh  at  d.  of  mount  Olives
Heb. 7.3.  Melchisedec  without  father,  mother,  ami  it
6.  but  he  whose  d.  is  not  counted  from  them
DESCRIBE,  ED,  ETH.

Josh.  18.  4.  they  shall  go  through  land  and  d.  it,  6, 8
8.  Joshua  charged  them  that  went  to  d.  the  land
9-  and  they’ d.  if  by  cities  into  seven  parts  in  a  book
Judg.  8.  14.  he  d.  to  him  the  princc6  of  Succoth
Rom.  4. 6.  even  as  David  also  d.  blessedn.  of  the  man

10.  5.  tor  Moses  d.  the  righteousness  of  the  law
DESCRIPTION.

Josh.  18.  6.  and  ye  shall  bring  the  d.  hither  tome
DESCRY.

Judg.  1.  £3.  the  house  of  Joseph  sent  to  d.  Bethel.
DESERT.

Exod.  3. 1.  he.  led  his  flock  to  the  backside  of  the  d
5.  3.  let  us  go  three  days’  journey  into  the  d.


DES


I)  E  S


DES


J'.xfld.  19.  2.  and  they  were  come  tc  the  d.  of  Sinai
0.5.  3i.  1  will  set  thy  hounds  from  d.  to  the  river
Kum.  SO.  1.  tlien  Israel  came  into  the  d.  of  Zin
C7. 14.  for  ye  rebelled  against  me  in  the  d.  of  Zin

33.  16.  and  they  Temoved  from  the  d.  of  Sinai
o  Chron.  26.  10.  Uzziah  built  towers  in  the  d.

Job  24.  5.  as  wild  asses  in  the  d.  go  they  forth
Paul.  75.  +  6.  promotion  cometh  not  from  the  d.

78.  40.  how  ott  did  they  grieve  him  in  the  d.  ?

10*2.  6.  I  am  like  a  pelican,  an  owl  o£  the  d.

106.  14.  but  lusted  and  tempted  God  in  the  d.

La.  13  21.  but  \vild  beasts  of  d.  shall  lie  there,  their
houses  full  of  doleful  creatures,  34. 14.  Jer.  50. 39.

21.  1.  as  whirlwinds,  so  it  cometh  from  the  d.

35.  1.  the  d.  shall  rejoice  ||  6.  streams  in  the  d.

40. 3.  make  straight  in  d.  a  high-way  foriour  God
41.  19.  I  will  set  in  d.  the  fir-tree  and  the  pine

43.  19-  I  will  even  make  rivers  in  the  d.  20.

51.  3.  will  make  her  d.  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord
Jer.  17.  6.  for  he  shall  be  like  the  heath  in  the  d.

25. 24.  people  that  dwell  in  d.  shall  drink  after  them
50.  12.  Chaldea  shall  be  a  dry  land  and  a  d.

Ezek.  47. 8.  these  waters  go  down  into  the  d.

Mat.  24.  26.  if  they  say,  behold,  he  is  in  the  d.
John  6.  31.  our  fathers  did  eat  manna  in  the  d.
ActsQ.  26.  from  Jerusalem  to  Gaza,  which  is  d.
DESERT  land.

Deut.  32. 10.  he  found  him  in  a  d.  land,  he  led  him
Prov.  21.  +  19.  better  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  d.
DESERT  place.

Mark  6.  31.  come  ye  yourselves  into  a  d.  place

32.  depart,  into  a  d.  place ,  Mat.  14. 13.  Luke  4. 42.

35.  this  is  a  d.  place.  Mat.  14.  15.  Luke  9-  12.
Luke  9.  10.  he  went  aside  privately  into  a  d.  place

DESERTS.

Isa.  48. 21.  thirsted  not  when  he  led  them  through  d.
Jer.  2.  6.  the  Lord  that  led  us  through  a  land  of  d.

5.  +  6.  a  wolf  of  the  d.  shall  spoil  them
Ezek.  13.  4.  thy  prophets  are  like  foxes  in  the  d.
Luke  1. 80.  John  was  in  the  d.  till  his  shewing  to  Isr.
Heb.  11. 38.  they  wandered  in  d.  and  in  mountains
DESERT.

Psal.  28. 4.  after  work  of  hands,  render  them  their  d.
DESERTS.

Ezek.  7. 27.  according  to  their  d.  will  I  judge  them
DESERVE.

Ezra  9. 13.  hast  punished  less  than  our  iniquities  d.
DESERVETH.

Job  11.  6.  God  exacteth  less  than  thy  iniquity  d.
DESERVING.

Judo.  9. 16.  done  to  him  according  to  d.  of  his  hands
DESIRE

Signifies,  [1]  Longing,  or  wishing,  1  Sam.  23.  20.
[2]  The  prayer ,  request,  or  longing  of  the  soul,
for  some  spiritual  or  bodily  good  things,  whereof
it  feels  a  want,  Psal.  145.  19-  [3]  Love,  or  af¬
fection,  Cant.  7-  10.  Dan.  11.  3f.  [4]  Hope,
or  expectation,  1  Sam.  9.  20.  [5]  An  inclina¬
tion  to,  or  delight  in,  the  pleasures  of  life,  Eccl.

12.  5.  [6]  A  wife,  called  the  desire  of  the

eyes,  Ezek.  24.  16.  [7]  Sinful  lusts  and  affec¬
tions,  Eph.  2.  3.

Thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall
rule  over  thee,  Gen.  3.  16.  Thy  desires  or  re¬
quests  shall  be  referred,  or  submitted,  to  thy  hus¬
band's  will  and  pleasure,  to  grant  or  deny  them,
as  he  sees  jit.  Thou  shalt  be  obliged  to  such  a
subjection,  as  shall  be  many  times  against  thy
will,  and  be  uneasy  to  thee.

Gen.  3.  t  6.  saw  that  the  tree  was  a  d.  to  the  eyes

16.  thy  d.  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  he  shall  rule
4.  7.  to  thee  shall  be  his  d.  thou  shalt  rule  over  him

Deut.  18.  6.  and  come  with  all  the  d.  of  his  mind
21.  11.  and  hast  a  d.  to  her,  to  have  her  to  wife

1  Sam.  9.  20.  and  on  whom  is  all  the  d.  of  Israel  ?

23.  20.  come  down  accord,  to  all  the  d.  of  thy  soul

2  Sam.  23.  5.  this  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  d.

1  Kings  5.  8.  I  will  do  all  thy  d.  concerning  timber

9.  thou  shalt  accomplish  my  d.  in  giving  food

10.  according  to  all  Solomon’s  d.  9.  11.

9. 1.  Solomon  had  finished  building,  and  all  his  d.
+  19.  the  d.  of  Solomon  which  he  desired
10. 13.  king  Solomon  gave  to  the  queen  of  Sheba  all
her  d.  whatsoever  she  asked,  2  Chron.  9- 12.

2  Chron.  15.  15.  and  sought  him  with  their  whole  d.
21.  +  20.  Jehoram  departed  without  d.

32.  t  27.  he  made  treasures  for  instruments  of  d.

36.  t  10.  he  took  the  vessels  of  d.  to  Babylon

Job  9.  t  26.  my  days  are  passed  away  as  ships  of  d.
14. 15.  thou  wilt  have  a  d.  to  work  of  thine  hands

31.  16.  if  I  have  withheld  the  poor  from  their  d.
35.  my  d.  is  that  the  Almighty  would  answer  me

33.  +  20.  so  that  his  soul  abhorreth  meat  of  d.

34.  36.  myd.  is  that  Job  may  be  tried  to  the  end
Psal.  10.  3.  the  wicked  boasteth  of  his  heart's  d.

17.  Lord,  thou  hast  heard  the  d.  of  the  humble
21.  2.  thou  hast  given  his  heart’s  d.  not  withheld
38.  9.  l  ord,  all  my  d.  is  before  thee,  my  groan.
54.  7.  eye  hath  seen  his  d.  on  mine  enemies,  92. 11.
59.  10.  God  shall  let  me  see  my  d.  on  mine  enemies
78.  29.  were  filled,  for  he  gave  them  their  own  d.
92.  11.  mine  ears  shall  hear  my  d.  of  the  wdeked
106.  +  24.  yea,  they  despised  a  land  of  d.

112.  8.  not  afraid,  till  he  see  his  d.  on  his  enemies

10.  the  d.  of  the  wicked  shall  perish
118. 7.  therefore  shall  1  see  my  d.  on  them  hate  me
145.  16.  thou  satisficst  the  d.  of  every  living  thing

19.  he  will  fulfil  the  d.  of  them  that  fear  him
Prov.  10.  £4.  the  d.  of  righteous  shall  be  granted

11.  23.  the  d.  of  the  righteous  is  only  good

13.  12.  but  w'hen  d.  cometh,  it  is  a  tree  of  life

19.  the  d.  accomplished  is  sweet  to  the  soul

19.  22.  the  d.  of  a  man  is  his  kindness
21.  25.  the  d.  of  the  slothful  killeth  him
Eccl.  6.  9.  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  wandering  of  d.
^12. 5.  d.  shall  fail,  because  man  goeth  to  long  home
Cant.  7.  10.  rny  beloved’s,  and  his  d.  is  toward  me
l  a.  2.  +  16.  the’  day  of  the  Lord  on  all  pictures  of  d.

26.  8.  the  d.  of  our  soul  is  to  thy  name,  and  to

32.  1 12.  they  shall  lament  for  the  fields  of  d.

Jer .  2.  24.  snuffeth  up  wind  at  the  d.  of  her  heart

3  1 19.  how  shall  1  give  thee  a  land  of  d.  ?


Jer.  12. 1 10.  they  made  my  portion  of  d.  a  wildern.

25.  +  34.  you  shall  sail  like  a  vessel  of  d.

44.  14.  the  land  to  which  you  have  a  d.  to  return
Ezek.  24. 16. 1  will  take  from  thee  the  d.  of  thy  eyes

21.  I  will  profane  the.  d.  of  your  eyes,  25.

26. 1 12.  they  shall  destroy  houses  or  thy  d.

Han.  11.  t  8.  carry  into  Egypt  vessels  of  their  d.

37.  neither  shall  he  regard  the  d.  of  women
Hos.  10»  10.  it  is  my  d.  I  should  chastise  them
13.  1 15.  shall  spoil  the  treasure  of  vessels  of  d.
Amos  5.  t  11.  ye  have  planted  vineyards  of  d.

Mic.  7. 3.  the  great  man  uttereth  his  mischievous  d.
Nah.  2.  t  9.  none  end  of  all  the  vessels  of  d.

Hab.  2. 5.  who  enlargeth  his  d.  as  hell,  is  as  death
Hag.  2.  7-  and  the  d.  of  all  nations  shall  come
Zech.  7.  1 14.  they  laid  the  land  of  d.  desolate
Luke  22. 15.  he  said,  with  d.  I  have  desired  to  eat
Pom.  10.1.  my  heart’s  d.  to  G.  for  Isr.  is  to  be  saved
15.  23.  having  a  great  d.  these  many  years  to  come
2  Cor.  7. 7.  when  he  told  us  your  earnest  d.  towards

11.  what  fear,  what  vehement  d.  yea  what  zeal
Phil.  1.  23.  1  am  in  a  strait,  having  a  d.  to  depart
1  Thess.  2.  17.  to  see  your  face  with  great  d.
DESIRE,  Verb.

Exod.  10.  11.  serve  the  Lord,  for  that  ye  did  d.

34.  24.  neither  shall  any  man  d.  thy  land
Heut.  5.  21.  nor  shalt  thou  d.  thy  neighbour’s  wife
7.  25.  thou  shalt  not  d.  the  silver  or  gold  on  them
Judy.  8. 24.  Gideon  said,  1  would  d.  a  request  of  you

1  Kings  2.  20.  1  d.  one  small  petition  of  thee

2  Kings  4.  28.  she  said,  did  1  d.  a  son  of  my  lord  ?
Neh.  1.  11.  thy  servants  who  d.  to  fear  thy  name
Job  13.  3.  surely  I  d.  to  reason  with  God

21.  14.  for  we  d.  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways

33.  32.  speak,  for  1  d.  to  justify  thee
36.  20.  d.  not  the  night  when  people  are  cut  off
Psal.  40. 6.  sacrifice  and  offering  thou  didst  not  d.

45.  11.  so  shall  the  king  greatly  d.  thy  beauty
65. 1 9.  after  thou  hadst  made  it  to  d.  rain

70. 2.  let  them  oe  put  to  confusion  that  d.  my  hurt
73.  25.  there  is  none  on  earth  I  d.  besides  thee
Prov.  3.  15.  all  thou  canst  d.  are  not  to  be  compared
23. 6.  neither  d.  thou  his  dainty  meats

24.  1 .  against  evil  men,  nor  d.  to  be  with  them
Isa.  53. 2.  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  d.  him
Jer.  22.  27-  the  land  whereunto  they  d.  to  return
42.  22.  ye  shall  die  in  the  place  whitherye  d.  to  go
Dan.  2. 18. 1  would  d.  mercies  of  the  G.  of  heaven
Amos 5. 18.  woe  to  you  that  d.  the  day  of  the  Lord
Mark  9.  35.  lie  saitn,  if  any  man  d.  to  be  first

10.  35.  shouldest  do  for  us  whatsoever  we  shall  d.

11.  24.  what  things  soever  ye  d.  when  ye  pray
15.  8.  began  to  d.  him  to  do  as  he  had  ever  done

Luke  17.  22.  when  ye  shall  d.  to  see  one  of  the  days
20. 46.  the  scribes  which  d.  to  walk  in  long  robes
Acts 23. 20.  the  Jews  have  agreed  to  d.  thee  to  bring
28. 22.  we  d.  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  thinkest

1  Cor.  14. 1.  follow  after  charity,  and  d.  spirit,  gifts

2  Cor.  11.  12.  cutoff  from  them  which  d.  occasion

12.  6.  tho’  I  would  d.  to  glory,  I  shall  not  be  a  fool
Gal.  4.  9.  whereunto  ye  d.  again  to  be  in  bondage

20. 1  d.  to  be  present  with  you  now,  and  to  change
21.  tell  me,  ye  that  d.  to  be  under  the  law
6. 12.  as  many  as  d.  to  make  a  fair  shew  in  the  flesh

13.  butd.  to  have  you  circumcised,  that  they  may
Eph.  3. 13.  wherefore  I  d.  that  ye  faint  not
Phil.  4. 17.  not  because  I  d.  a  gift,  but  I  d.  fruit
Col.  1.  9.  to  d.  ye  may  be  filled  with  knowledge

1  Tim.  2. 1 1.  I  d.  supplications  be  made  for  all  men

3. 1.  if  a  man  d.  the  office  of  a  bishop,  a  good  work
Heb.  6. 11.  we  d.  every  one  of  you  tc  shew  diligence
11. 16.  but  now  they  d.  a  better  country,  that  is
Jam.  4.  2.  ye  kill, ye  d.  to  have,  and  cannot  obtain
1  Pet.  1.  12.  which  things  the  angels  d.  to  look  into

2.  2.  as  new-fiprn  babes  d.  the  sincere  milk  of  word
Pev.  9.  6.  men  shall  d.  to  die,  and  death  shall  flee
DESIRABLE.

Gen.  27. 1 15.  Rebekah  took  d.  raiment  of  son  Esau
1  Kings  20.  t  6.  d.  in  thy  eyes,  they  shall  take  away
Ezra  8.  t  27.  two  vessels  of  copper  d.  as  gold
Isa.  44.  +  9.  and  their  d.  things  shall  not  profit
Lam.  I.t7.  Jerusalem  remembered  all  herd,  things
f  10.  hath  spread  his  hand  upon  herd,  things

2.  t  4.  he  stood  and  slew  all  the  d.  of  the  eye
Ezek.  23.  6.  all  of  them  d.  young  men,  12.  23.

Joel  3.  t  5.  carried  into  your  temples  my  d.  things
DESIRED.

Gen.  3.  6.  and  a  tree  to  be  d.  to  make  one  wise
1  Sam.  12.  13.  and  behold  the  king  whom  ye  d.

1  Kings  9.19.  the  desire  which  Solomon  d.  2CV/r.8.6.

2  Chron.  11.  23.  and  Rehoboam  d.  many  wives
Esth.  2. 13.  whatsoever  she  d.  was  given  her
Job  20.  20.  he  shall  not  save  of  that  which  he  d.
Psal.  19. 10.  more  to  be  d.  are  they  than  gold

27.  4.  one  thing  I  d.  of  the  L.  that  1  may  dwell
39. 1 11.  that  which  is  to  be  d.  in  him  to  melt  away
107.  30.  so  he  bringeth  them  to  their  d.  haven
132.  13.  he  hath  d.  Zion  for  his  habitation

14.  my  rest,  here  will  1  dwell,  for  1  have  d.
Prov.  8. 11.  all  thatmay  be  d.  notto  be  compared

21.  20.  there  is  a  treasure  to  be  d.  and  oil  in  dwell.
Eccl.  2.  10.  what  my  eyes  d.  I  kept  not  from  them
Isa.  1.29.  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  paksye  have  d.

26.  9.  with  my  soul  have  I  d.  thee  in  the  night
Jer.  17.  16.  nor  have  I  d.  woeful  day,  thou  knowest
Dan.  2.  16.  Daniel  went  and  d.  of  the  king  time

23.  hast  made  known  unto  me  what  we  d.  of  thee

11.  t  38.  he  shall  honour  God  with  things  d.

Hos.  6.  6.  for  1  d.  mercy  and  not  sacrifice

Mic.  7.  1.  no  cluster,  my  soul  d.  the  first-ripe  fruit

Zeph.  2.  1.  gather  together,  O  nation  not  d.

Mat.  13.17.  many  righteous  men  have  d.  to  see  those
10.  1.  the  Pharisees  d.  he  would  shew  a  sign
Mark  15. 6.  one  prisoner  whom  they  d.  Luke  23. 25.
Luke  7.  36.  one  of  the  Pharisees  d.  Jesus  to  eat

9.  9.  but  who  is  this,  and  he  d.  to  see  him

10.  24.  many  kings  have  d.  to  see  those  tilings

22.  15.  1  have  d.  to  eat  this  passover  with  you
31.  Satan  hath  d.  to  have  you  to  sift  you  as  wheat

23.  25.  and  he  released  to  them  him  whom  they  d.
Acts  3. 14.  and  d.  a  murderer  to  be  granted  unto  you

7.  46.  and  d.  to  find  atabern.  for  the  G.  of  Jacob


ActsQ.  31.  the  eunuch  d.  Philip  to  come  into  chariot

9.  2.  Paul  d.  of  the  high-priest  letters  to  Damascus

12.  20.  having  made  Blastus  their  friend,  d.  peac

13.  7.  Sergius  Paulus  d.  to  hear  the  worclof  God
21.  afterward  they  d.  a  king,  God  gave  them  Saul

28.  yet  d.  they  Pilate  that  ne  should  be  slain

16.  39.  and  d.  them  to  depart  out  of  the  city

25.  3.  d.  favour  against  Paul  that  he  would  send

1  Cor.  16.  12. 1  greatly  d.  him  to  come  to  you

2  Cor.  8. 6.  insomuch  that  we  d.  Titus  to  finish  inyou.

12.  18.  I  d.  Titus,  and  with  him  I  sent  a  brother

1  John  5.  15.  we  know  we  have  the  petitions  we  d.
DESIREDST.

Deut.  18. 16.  according  to  all  that  thou  d.  of  God
Mat.  18. 32. 1  forgave  thee,  because  thou  d.  me
DESIRES.

Gen.  6.  +5.  all  the  d.  of  his  heart  are  only  evil
Psal.  37.  4.  he  shall  give  thee  thed.  of  thy  heart
140.  8.  grant  not,  O  Lord,  the  d.  of  the  wicked
Dan.  9.  t  23.  for  thou  art  a  man  of  d.  10. 1 11.

10.  t  3.  1  ate  no  bread  of  d.  neither  came  flesh
Hos.  9.  t  J6.  yet  will  I  slay  the  d.  of  their  womb
Eph.  2.  3.  fulfilhng  the  d.  of  the  flesh  and  mind

DES  I  REST.

Psal.  51.  6.  thou  d.  truth  in  the  inward  parts
16.  thou  d.  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I  give  it
DESIRETH.

Deut.  14.  26.  bestow  it  for  whatsoever  thy  soul  d.

1  Sam.  2.  16.  then  take  as  much  as  thy  soul  d.

18.  25.  say  to  David,  the  king  d.  not  any  dowry’

20.  4.  what  thy  soul  d.  I  will  do,  1  Kings  11.  37.

2  Sam,  3.  21.  mayest  reign  over  all  that  thy  heart  d.
Job  7.  2.  as  a  servant  earnestly  d.  the  shadow

23.  13.  what  his  soul  d.  even  that  he  doth
Psal.  17.  +  12.  is  as  a  lion  that  d.  to  ravin

34.  12.  whatman  is  he  that  d.  life  and  loveth  days

68.  16.  this  is  the  hill  which  God  d.  to  dwell  in
Prov.  12.  12.  the  wicked  d.  the  net  of  evil  men

13.  4.  the  soul  of  the  sluggard  d.  and  hath  not

21.  10.  the  soul  of  the  wicked  d.  evil

Eccl.  6.  2.  he  wanteth  nothing  of  all  that  he  d.
L?//e5. 39. having  drunk  old  wine  straightway  d.new

14.  32.  he  sendeth  and  d.  conditions  of  peace

1  Tim.  3.  1.  the  office  of  a  bishop,  he  d.  a  good  work

DESIRING.

Mat.  12,  46.  his  brethren  d.  to  speak  with  him,  4".

20.  20.  worshipping  and  d.  a  certain  thing  of  him
Luke  8.  20.  thy  bretn.  stand  without  d.  to  see  thee
16.  21.  d.  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  which  fell
Acts  25.  15.  d.  to  have  judgment  against  him

2  Cor.  5.  2.  d.  to  be  clothed  upon  with  our  house
1  Thess.  3.  6.  d.  greatly  to  see  us  as  we  to  see  you

1  Tim.  1.  7.  d.  to  be  teachers  of  the  law

2  Tim.  1.  4.  greatly  d.  to  see  thee,  being  mindful

DESIROUS.

Prov.  23.  3.  be  not  d.  of  his  dainties,  for  they  are
Zeph.  2. 1 1.  gather  together,  O  nation  not  d.

Luke  23. 8.  Herod  was  d.  to  see  him  of  a  long  season
John  16.  19.  Jesus  knew  they  were  d.  to  ask  him
2  Cor.  11.  32.  with  a  garrison  d.  to  apprehend  me
Gal.  5.  26.  let  us  not  be  d.  of  vain  glory’,  envying

1  Thess.  2. 8.  so  being  affectionately  d.  of  you

DESOLATE.

2  Sam.  13. 20.  Tamar  remain,  d.  in  Absalom’s  house
Job  15.  28.  he  dwelleth  in  d.  cities  and  in  houses

16.  7.  thou  hast  made  d.  all  my  company
30.  3.  the  wilderness  in  former  time  d.  and  waste

38.  27.  to  satisfy  the  d.  and  waste  ground
Psal.  25. 16.  turn  and  have  mercy  on  me,  for  I  am  d.
40.  15.  let  them  be  d.  for  a  reward  of  their  shame

69.  25.  let  their  habitation  be  d.  let  none  dwell
143.  4.  therefore  my  heart  within  me  is  d.

Isa.  1.  7.  your  country  is  d.  your  cities  burnt

3.  26.  she  being  d.  shall  sit  upon  the  ground
7.  19.  they  shall  rest  all  of  them  in  d.  valley’s
13.  22.  the  beast  shall  cry  in  their  d.  houses

24.  6.  and  they  that  dwell  therein  are  d.

49.  8.  to  cause  to  inherit  the  d.  heritages

21.  seeing  1  have  lost  my  children,  and  am  d.

54. 1.  more  are  the  children  of  the  d.  Gal.  4.  27.

3.  and  make  the  d.  cities  to  be  inhabited
Jer.  2.  12.  be  ye  very  d.  saith  the  Lord

6.  8.  lest  I  make  thee  d.  a  land  not  inhabited
9. 1 10.  the  habitations  of  the  wilderness  are  d.

11. 1  will  make  the  cities  of  Judah  d.  without  an
inhabitant,  10.  .22. 1  33.  10.  |  44.  6.

10.  25.  they  have  made  his  habitation  d.

12.  11.  they  made  it  d.  and  being  d.  it  mourneth

19.  8.  I  will  make  this  city  d.  and  an  hissing
32.43.  it  isd.  without  man  or  beast,  33.  12.

49.  20.  he  shall  make  their  habitations  d.  50.  45.
Lam.  1.  4.  all  her  gates  are  d.  her  priests  sigh

13.  he  hath  made  me  d.  and  faint  all  day,  3.  11.
16.  my  children  are  d.  the  enemy  prevailed

4.  5.  they  that  did  feed  delicately  are  d.in  the  street
5. 18.  because  of  the  mountain  of  Zion  which  is  d.

Ezek.  6.  6.  that  your  altars  may  be  made  d.

19.  7.  he  knew  their  d.  palaces,  and  he  laid  waste

20.  26.  that  I  might  make  them  d.  to  the  end

25.  13.  I  will  make  Edom  d.  from  Teman
26. 19.  when  I  shall  make  thee  a  d.  city

29.  12.  in  the  midst  of  the  countries  that  are  d.

30. 14,  1  will  make  Pathros  d.  and  will  set  fire

35.  3.  O  mount  Seir,  1  will  make  thee  most  d.  7.
12.  they  are  d.  they  are  given  us  to  consume

35.  14.  when  earth  rejoiceth,  l  will  make  thee  d.

15.  as  thou  didst  rejoice,  because  it  was  d.

36. 3. because  they  have  made  you  d.and  swallowed

4.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  hills  and  d.  wastes

35.  the  d.  cities  are  become  fenced  and  inhabited

36.  know  that  l  the  Lord  plant  that  that  was  d.
Dan.  9.  17.  to  shine  on  thy  sanctuary  that  isd.

27.  for  the  abominations  he  shall  make  itd.

11.  31.  the  abomination  that  maketh  d.  12.  11.

Hos.  2.  t  12.  1  will  make  d.  her  vines  and  fig-trees

13.  16.  Samaria  shall  become  d.  for  she  rebelled
Joel  1.  17.  the  garners  are  laid  d.  barns  are  broken

18.  yea  the  flocks  of  sheep  are  made  d.

Mic.  1.  7-  and  all  the  idols  thereof  will  I  lay  d.

6.  13.  in  making  thee  d.  because  of  thy  sins
Zeph.  3.  6.  their  towers  are  d.  their  streets  waste
Mat.  23.  38.  your  house  is  left  to  you  d.  Luke  13. 35.

103


DES


DES


DES


Acts  1.  CO.  it  is  written,  let  his  habitation  he  d.

1  Tim.  5.  5.  now  she  that  is  a  widow  indeed  and  d.

Rev.  17.  16.  these  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  maked.

18.  19.  for  in  one  hour  is  she  made  d.

Land  DESOLATE.

Gen.  47.  19.  give  us  seed  that  the  land  be  not  a.

Exod.  23.  29.  lest  the  land  become  d.  beast  multiply
Lev.  26.  34.  then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  sabbaths
as  long  as  it  lieth  d.  35,  43.  2  Chron.  36.  21.
Isa.  6.  11.  he  said,  until  the  land  be  utterly  a.

13.  9.  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh  to  lay  the  land  d.
62.  4.  nor  shall  thy  land  any  more  be  termed  d.

Jer.  4.  7.  he  is  gone  forth  to  make  thy  land  d.

27.  the  Lord  said,  the  whole  land  shall  be  d.

7. 34.  to  cease  voice  of  mirth,  for  the  land  shall  be  d.

12. 11.  they  made  it  d.  the  whole  land  is  made  d.

18.  16.  to  make  their  landd.  and  a  perpetual  hissing

25.  38.  for  their  land  is  d.  because  of  his  anger

32.  43.  in  this  land  whereof  ye  say  it  is  d.

50.  3.  a  nation  which  shall  make  her  land  d.

Ezek.  6. 14.  and  make  the  land  d.  yea  more  d.

12.  19.  her  land  may  be  d.  from  all  that  is  therein
20.  the  cities  laid  waste,  and  the  land  shall  be  d.

14.  16.  but  the  land  shall  be  d.  Mic.f.  13.

15.  8.  and  I  will  make  the  land  d.  saith  the  Lord

19.  7.  the  land  was  d.  and  the  fulness  thereof
29.  9.  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  d.  they  shall  know

that  I  am  the  Lord,  10.  12. 1  30.  7-  1  32.  15.

33.  28.  for  I  will  lay  the  /almost  d.  pomp  cease
29.  that  I  am  L.  when  I  have  laid  the  land  most  d.

36.  34.  the  d.  land  shall  be  tilled,  whereas  it  lay  d.

35.  the  land  that  was  d.  is  like  the  garden  of  Eden
Joel  2.  20.  1  will  drive  him  to  a  land  barren  and  d.
Zech.  7. 14.  land  was  d.  for  they  laid  pleasant  landd.
DESOLATE  places.

Job  3.  14.  which  built  d.  places  for  themselves
Psal.  109. 10.  let  them  seek  bread  also  out  of  d.  places
Zra.49.19.  thy  waste  and  d.  places  shall  be  too  narrow
59.  10.  we  stumble,  we  are  in  d.  places  as  dead  men
Ezek. 6. 6.  cities  laid  waste,  and  high  places  shall  be  d.

26.  20.  when  I  shall  set  thee  in  places  d.  of  old
38.  12.  to  turn  thine  hand  upon  the  d.  places

Amos  7.  9.  the  high  places  of  Isaac  shall  be  d.

Mai.  1.  4.  we  will  return,  and  build  the  d.  places
Shall  be,  or  shall  be  DESOLATE.

Lev.  26. 22.  wild  beasts,  and  your  highways  shall  be  d.

33.  your  land  shall  be  d.  and  your  cities  waste
Job  15. 34.  for  congregation  of  hypocrites  shall  be  d.
Psal.  34.  21.  they  that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  d.

22.  none  of  them  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  d.

Isa.  5.  9.  of  a  truth  many  houses  shall  be  d.

15.  6.  for  waters  of  Nimrim  shall  be  d.  Jer.  48. 34.
27. 10.  yet  the  defenced  city  shall  be  d.  and  forsaken
Jer.  26.  9.  this  city  shall  be  d.  without  inhabitant
33.  10.  in  this  place  which  ye  say  shall  be  d.

46.  19.  Noph  shall  bed.  without  an  inhabitant

48.  9.  Moab,  for  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  d.

49.  2.  Kabbah  of  Ammonites  shall  be  a  d.  heap

50.  13.  but  Babylon  shall  be  wholly  d.

51.  26.  thou  shalt  be  d.  for  ever,  saith  the  Lord
Ezek.  6. 4.  your  altars  shall  be  d.  your  images  broken

29. 12.  the  cities  of  Egypt  shall  be  d.  forty  years
33.  28.  and  the  mountains  of  Israel  shall  be  d.

35.  4.  behold,  O  mount  Seir,  thou  shalt  be  d.  15.
Hos.  5.  9.  Ephraim  shall  be  d.  in  the  day  of  rebuke

DESOLATE  wilderness.

Jer.  12. 10.  made  my  pleasant  portion  a  d.  wilderness
Joel  2.  3.  and  behind  them  it  is  a  d.  wilderness
3.  19.  Egypt  and  Edom  shall  be  a  d.  wilderness
DESOLATION.

Lev.  26.  31.  1  will  bring  your  sanctuaries  to  d.

32.  and  1  will  bring  the  land  into  d.  and  your  ene¬

mies  which  dwell  therein  shall  be  astonished
Josh.  8.  28.  Joshua  made  Ai  a  d.  unto  this  day
2  Kings  22. 19.  that  they  should  become  a  d.  and  curse
2  Chron.  30.  7-  who  gave  them  to  d.  as  ye  see
Job  30. 14.  in  the  d.  they  rolled  themselves  upon  me
Psal.  73.  19.  are  they  brought  to  d.  in  a  moment
Prov.  1.27.  when  your  fear  cometh  as  d.  and  destruc.
3.  25.  be  not  afraid  of  the  d.  of  the  wicked
Isa.  6.  t  11.  till  the  land  be  desolate  with  d.

17.  9.  in  that  day  there  shall  be  d.

24. 12.  in  the  city  is  left  d.  the  gate  is  smitten
47.  11.  and  d.  shall  come  upon  thee  suddenly

51.  19.  these  two  things  are  come  unto  thee,  d.

64. 10.  Zion  is  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  d.

Jer.  9.  +  11.  1  will  make  cities  of  .1  udah  a  d.  34. 22.

22.  5.  I  swear  that  this  house  shall  become  a  d.

25.  11.  and  this  whole  land  shall  be  a  d.  and  aston.

18.  to  make  Jerusalem  and  Judah  a  d.  and  aston.
t  38.  forsaken  his  covert,  for  their  land  is  d.

44.  2.  and  behold,  this  day  they  are  d.  none  dwells
22.  therefore  is  your  land  a  d.  and  a  curse

49.  13.  Bozraa  d.  ||  17.  Edom  a  d.  ||  33.  Ilazor  a  d.

50.  23.  how  is  Bab.  become  a  d.  among  nations !
51. 29.  to  make  the  land  of  Babylon  a  d.

43.  her  cities  are  a  d.  a  dry  land,  and  a  wilderness
Lam.  3.  47.  fear  and  a  snare  is  come  on  ns,  d.

Ezek.  7.  27.  the  prince  shall  be  clothed  with  d.

23.  33.  thou  shalt  be  tilled  with  the  cup  of  d.

33.  +  28.  for  I  will  lay  the  land  d.  and  d.

35. 1 7.  thus  will  I  make  mount  Seir  d.  and  d.

Dan.  8.  13.  concerning  the  transgression  of  d.

Hos.  12.  1.  Ephraim  daily  increaseth  lies  and  d.
Joel  3.  19-  Egypt  and  Edom  shall  be  a  d.  for  viol.
Mic.  6.  16.  that  1  should  make  thee  a  d.  and  hissing
Zeph.  1 . 13.  goods  a  booty,  housesshall  become  a  d.
15.  that  day  is  a  day  of  wrath,  wasteness,  and  d.
2. 4.  Ashkelon  shall  be  a  d.  ||  9.  Moab  a  perpetual  d.

13.  and  he  will  make  N  ineveh  a  d.  and  wilderness

14.  d.  shall  be  in  thresholds,  uncover  cedar- work

15.  how  is  N  ineveh  become  a  d.  for  beasts !

Mat.  12.  25.  Jesus  knowing  thoughts,  saith,  every

king,  divided  ag.  itself  is  brought  to  d.  Luke  11. 17.

24.  15.  see  the  abomination  of  d.  Mark  13. 14.
Luke  21.  20.  then  know  that  the  d.  thereof  is  nigh

DESOLATIONS.

Ezra  9.9.  give  a  reviving,  and  to  repair  d.  thereof
Psal.  46. 8.  what  d.  he  hath  made  in  the  earth
74.  3.  lift  up  thy  feet  to  the  perpetual  d.

Isa.  15.  t  6.  for  the  waters  or  Nimrim  shall  be  d.

the  hay  is  withered  away,  Jer.  48.  t  34.

104


Isa.  49. 1  6.  be  my  servant  to  restore  the  d.  of  Israel
61.  4.  shall  build  the  old  wastes,  they  shall  raise
up  the  former  d.  the  d.  of  many  generations
Jer.  25. 9.  1  will  make  these  nations  perpetual  d.

12.  make  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  perpetual  d.

51.  +  26.  Babylon  shall  be  everlasting  d.  \  62.

Ezek.  35.  9.  1  will  make  mount  Seir  perpetual  d.
Dan.  9. 2.  accomplish  seventy  years  in  d.  of  Jerus.

18.  O  my  God,  open  thine  eyes,  and  behold  our  d.
26.  to  the  end  of  the  war  d.  are  determined
DESPAIR.

2  Cor.  4. 8.  we  are  perplexed ,  but  not  in  d.

DESPAIR.

1  Sam.  27. 1.  and  Saul  shall  d.  of  me,  to  seek  me
Eccl.  2. 20. 1  went  about  to  cause  my  heart  to  d.

DESPAIRED.

2  Cor.  1. 8.  insomuch  that  we  d.  even  of  life

DESPERATE.

Job  6.  26.  reprove  the  speeches  of  one  that  is  d.

Isa.  17.  11.  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of  d.  sorrow
Jer.  2. 1 25.  but  thou  saidst,  is  the  case  d.  ?
DESPERATELY.

Jer  17.  9.  heart  of  man  is  deceitful,  and  d.  wicked
DESPISE.

Lev.  26.  15.  and  if  ye  shall  d.  my  statutes

1  Sam.  2. 30.  that  d.  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed

2  Sam.  19.  43.  Israel  said,  why  then  did  ye  d.  us  ?
Esth.  1. 17.  so  that  they  shall  d.  their  husbands
Job  5. 17.  happy  whom  God  corrected),  d.  not  thou

chastening  of  the  Almighty,  Prov.  3.  11.
Heb.  12.  5.

9. 21 .  though  1  were  perfect,  I  would  d.  my  life
10.  3.  that  thou  shouldest  d.  the  work  of  tlnne  hands
31.  13.  if  I  did  d.  the  cause  of  my  man-servant
Psal.  51. 17.  a  contrite  heart,  O  G.  thou  wilt  not  d.

73. 20.  thou  awakest,  thou  shalt  d.  their  image
102.  17.  and  he  will  not  d.  their  prayer
Prov.  1. 7.  but  fools  d.  wisdom  and  instruction
3. 11 .  my  son,  d.  not  chastening  of  L.  Heb.  12.  5.

6.  30.  men  do  not  d.  a  thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy
23.  9.  a  fool  will  d.  the  wisdom  of  thy  words
22.  and  d.  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old
Isa.  18.  +  2.  whose  land  the  rivers  d.

30.12.  because  ye  d.  this  word,  and  trust  in  oppres.
Jer.  4.  30.  thy  lovers  will  d.  thee,  they  will  seek
23.  17.  they  say  still  to  them  that  d.  me
Lam.  1.  8.  all  that  honoured  her,  d.  her,  because
Ezek.  16.  57.  daughters  of  Philistines  which  d.  thee
28.  26.  executed  judgm.  on  all  those  that  d.  them
Amos  5.21. 1  hate,  1  d.  your  feast-days, will  notsmell
Mai.  1.  6.  unto  you,  O  priests,  that  d.  my  name
Mat.  6. 24.  hold  to  one,  and  d.  the  other,  Luke  16. 13.

18. 10.  that  ye  d.  not  one  of  these  little  ones
Rom.  14. 3.  let  not  him  that  eateth,  d.  him  eateth  not
1  Cor.  11. 22.  or  d.  ye  the  church  of  God  and  shame

16. 11 .  let  no  man  therefore  d.  him,  conduct  him

1  Thess.  5.  20.  d.  not  prophesyings,  prove  all  things

1  Tim.  4. 12.  let  none  d.  thy  youth,  be  an  example
6.  2.  let  them  not  d.  them,  because  they  are  brethr.
Tit.  2. 15.  speak  and  exhort,  let  no  man  d.  thee

2  Pet.  2.  10.  chiefly  them  that  d.  gpvernment
Jude  8.  d.  dominion,  and  speak  evil  ot  dignities

DESPISED.

Gen.  16. 4.  Ilagar’s  mistress  was  d.  in  her  eyes
5.  saw  she  had  conceived,  I  was  d.  in  her  eyes
25.  34.  thus  Esau  d.  his  birth  right
Lev.  26.  43.  because  they  d.  my  judgments
Num.  11. 20.  because  that  ye  have  d.  the  Lord
14. 31.  they  shall  know  the  land  that  ye  have  d.

15.  31.  because  he  d.  the  word  of  the  Lord
Dent.  32.  + 19.  and  when  the  Lord  saw  it,  he  d.  them
Judg.  9.  38.  is  not  this  the  people  thou  hast  d.  ?

1  Sam.  10.  27.  they  d.  him  and  brought  no  presents

2  Sam.  6. 16.  she  d.  him  in  her  heart,  1  Chr.  15.  29.

12. 9.  why  hast  thou  d.  the  commandment  of  Lord  ?

10.  because  thou  hast  d.  me,  taken  wife  of  Uriah
2  Kings  19.  21.  the  virgin  the  daughter  of  Zion  hath
' d .  thee,  and  laugtied  thee  to  scorn,  Isa.  37.  22.
2  Chron.  36. 16.  but  they  mocked  and  d.  his  words
Neh.  2.  19.  they  laughed  us  to  scorn  and  d.  us
4.  4.  hear,  O  our  God,  for  we  are  d.  and  turn
Job  12.  5.  he  is  as  a  lamp  d.  of  him  that  is  at  ease
19- 18.  yea,  young  children  d.  me,  1  arose
Psal.  22.  6.  but  l  am  d.  of  the  people,  Isa.  53.  3.

24.  he  hath  not  d.  the  affliction  of  the  afflicted
53.  5.  put  them  to  shame,  because  G.  hath  d.  them
106.  24.  yea,  they  d.  the  pleasant  land,  believ.  not
119.  141.  I  am  small  and  d.  yet  do  not  1  forget
Prov.  1.  30.  they  d.  all  my  reproof,  therefore
5. 12.  and  thou  say,  how  hath  my  heart  d.  reproof  ?
12.  8.  he  that  is  of  a  perverse  heart  shall  be  d.

9.  he  that  is  d.  and  hath  a  servant,  is  better
Eccl.  9.  16.  yet  the  poor  man’s  wisdom  is  d.

Cant.  8. 1.  I  would  kiss  thee,  yea  1  should  not  be  d.
Isa.  5. 24.  and  d.  the  word  of  the  holy  One  of  Israel
33.  8.  he  hath  d.  the  cities,  he  regardeth  no  man
53.  3.  he  is  d.  and  rejected  of  men,  and  acquainted
with  grief,  he  was  d.  and  we  esteemed  him  not
60.  14.  all  they  that  d.  thee  shall  bow  down
Jer.  22. 28.  is  this  man  Coniah  a  d.  broken  idol
33.  24.  thus  they  have  d.  my  people,  to  be  no  more
49. 15.  I  will  make  thee  small  and  d.  among  men
Lam.  2.  6.  he  hath  d.  in  the  indignation  of  his  anger
Ezek.  16.  59.  which  hast  d.  the  oath,  17. 16, 18, 19.

20. 13.  they  d.  my  judgments,  which  if  a  man  do
16.  because  they  d.  my  judgments,  and  walked
24.  but  had  d.  my  statutes,  and  had  polluted
22. 8.  thou  hast  d.  mine  holy  things,  and  profaned
Amos  2.  4.  because  they  d.  the  law  of  the  Lord
Obad.  2. 1  made  thee  small,  thou  art  greatly  d.
Zech.  4. 10.  for  who  hath  d.  the  day  of  small  things  ?
Mai.  1.6.  ye  say,  wherein  have  we  d.  thy  name  ?
Luke  18.  9.  they  were  righteous,  and  d.  others
Acts  19. 27.  that  the  temple  of  Diana  should  be  d.

1  Cor.  1. 28.  the  things  which  are  d.  hath  God  chosen
4. 10.  ye  are  honourable,  but  we  are  d.

Gal.  4.  14.  my  temptation  in  my  flesh  ye  d.  not
Heb.  10. 28.  that  d.  Moses’  law,  died  without  mercy
Jam.  2. 6.  but  ye  have  d.  the  poor,  do  not  rich  men
DESPISERS.

Acts  13.  41.  behold,  ye  d.  and  wonder,  and  perish

2  Tim.  3.  3.  incontinent,  fierce,  d.  of  those  are  good


DESPISEST.

Rom.  2.  4.  or  d.  thou  the  riches  ot  his  goodness  P
DESPISETH.

Job  36.  5.  behold,  God  is  mighty,  and  d.  not  any
Psal.  69.  33.  for  the  Lord  d.  not  his  prisoners
Prov.  11.12.  that  is  void  of  wisdom  d.  his  neighbour

13. 13.  whoso  d.  the  word  shall  be  destroyed
li!  2.  but  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  ways  d.  him
21.  he  thatrf.  his  neighbour  sinneth,  but  he  that
15.  5.  a  fool  d.  his  father’s  instruction,  but  lie  that

20.  a  wise  son,  but  a  foolish  man  d.  his  mother
32.  he  that  refuseth  instruction  d.  his  own  soul
19.  16.  but  he  that  d.  his  ways  shall  die
30  17.  the  eye  that  d.  to  obey  his  mother,  ravens
Isa.  3.3. 15.  he  that  d.  the  gain  of  oppressions
49  7  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  him  whom  manrf.

Ezek.  21.  + 10.  it  is  the  rod  of  my  son,  it  d.  every  tree
Luke  10.  16.  d.  you,  o'. me ;  d.me,d.  him  thatsentme
Thess.  4. 8.  he  therefore  that  d.  d.  not  man  but  God
DESPISING.

Ezek.  21. 1 13.  shall  not  they  belong  to  the  d.  rod  ?
Heb  12.  2.  who  endured  the  cross,  d.  the  shame
DESPITE.

Neh.  4. +  4.  hear,  O  our  God,  for  we  are  a  d.

Ezek.  25.  6.  with  thy  d.  against  the  land  ot  Judah
Heb  10.  29.  and  hath  done  d.  to  the  Spirit  ot  grace
DESPITEFUL.

Ezek.  25. 15.  have  taken  vengeance  with  a  d.  heart
36.  5.  with  d.  minds  to  cast  it  out  for  a  prey
Rom.  1.  30.  haters  of  God,  d.  proud,  boasters
DESPITEFULLY.

Mat.  5.44.  pray  for  them  that  d.  use  you ,  Luke  6. 28.
Acts  14.  5.  an  assault  was  made  to  use  them  d.
DESTITUTE.

Gen  24.  27 .  who  hath  not  left  d.  my  master  of  mercy
Psal.  102. 17.  he  will  regard  the  prayer  of  the  d.

141.  8.  in  thee  is  my  trust,  leave  not  my  soul  d.
Prov.  11. 1 12.  d.  of  heart,  despiseth  his  neighbour
15.  21.  folly  is  joy  to  him  that  is  d.  of  wisdom
Ezek.  32.  15.  shall  be  d.  of  that  whereof  it  was  full
1  Tim.  6.5.  men  of  corrupt  minds,  d.  ot  the  truth
Heb.  11 . 37.  wandered,  being  d.  afflicted,  tormented
Jam.  2.  15.  if  a  brother  or  sister  be  naked  and  d.
DESTROY.

To  destroy,  signifies  to  pull  down,  or  ruin  a  city,
or  building,  levelling  it  with  the  ground,  Gen.  19.
14.  The  Lord  will  destroy  this  city,  Exod.  34.
13.  Ye  shall  destroy  their  altars  ;  that  is,  ye
shall  not  leave  one  stone  upon  another,  as  our  Sa¬
viour  speaks  in  Luke  21.  6.  Also  it  signifies,  to
take  away  a  thing  quite,  so  as  it  be  no  more  ;  in
this  sense  Christ  is  said  to  destroy  sin,  Rom.  6.
6.  That  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed  ;
that  is,  that  it  might  be  weakened  and  subdued
more  and  more ,  until  it  be  quite  taken  out  of  our
nature.  Sometimes  it  signifies  to  bring  persons
into  irrecoverable  and  utter  ruin  and  misery  ;  thus
God  destroys  the  wicked,  Psal.  37  -  38.  The  trans¬
gressors  shall  be  destroyed  together  :  and  Job

21.  30.  The  wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  de¬
struction.  God  preserves  the  wicked  from  the  com¬
mon  calamities  of  this  life,  only  to  destroy  them.,
and  display  liis  vengeance  against  them.  It  is
taken  for  punishing  transgressors  by  death,  as  ma¬
gistrates  do,  Psal.  101.  8.  I  will  early  destroy
all  the  wicked  of  the  land,  says  David.  I  will
set  about  this  work  upon  the  first  opportunity ,  as
soon  as  I  am  seated  on  the  throne,  that  so  I  may
both  prevent  all  that  mischief  which  otherwise  they
might  do  ;  and  hinder  the  infection  of  others  by
their  evil  example  ;  and  discourage  and  deter  all
my  subjects  from  the  like  practices.  The  apostle
Paul  says,  Rom.  14.  15.  Destroy  not  him  with
thy  meat,  for  whom  Christ  died.  To  edify,
signifies  to  build  up,  strengthen,  and  encourage
believers  in  their  faith  and  profession,  by  endea¬
vouring  to  make  them  more  wise,  holy,  and  hum¬
ble,  and  to  live  more  to  the  glory  of  God.  On
the  contrary,  to  destroy,  implies  a  doing  of  that
which  may  tend  to  the  destruction  of  a  weak  be¬
liever,  by  drawing  him  to  act  against  his  con¬
science  in  the  use  of  things  indifferent,  or  by
giving  him  so  great  an  offence  as  may  alienate
his  mind  from  the  Christian  profession.  The
evil  spirits  say  to  our  Saviour,  Mark  1.  24.  Art
thou  come  to  destroy  us  ?  that  is,  either,  art
thou  come  to  dispossess  us  :  or,  art  thou  come
to  execute  the  final  judgment  upon  us,  and  to
command  us  to  our  chains,  before  the  day  of
judgment  ?  And  Christ  by  his  death  is  said  to
destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that
is,  the  devil,  Heb.  2.  14.  The  devil  is  said  to
have  the  power  of  death,  because  he  induces  men
to  commit  sin  that  meritoriously  renders  them
liable  to  death  ;  because  he  inspires  them  with
furious  thoughts,  and  inflames  their  passions,  from
whence  proceed  strifes  and  wars,  that  efficiently
cause  death  ;  because  he  is  many  times  the  execu¬
tioner  of  God's  wrath,  and  inflicts  death  upon  re¬
bellious  and  incorrigible  sinners  ;  hence  says  the
Psalmist,  That  God  cast  upon  the  Egyptians  the
fierceness  of  his  anger,  w'rath.  indignation,  and
trouble,  by  sending  evil  angels  among  them,  Psal.
78.  49.  lie  is  likewise  so  called,  because  he  makes
death  more  formidable  to  sinners,  by  heightening
their  guilty  fears  of  God's  tribunal ;  and  this  title
may  also  signify  his  tormenting  sinners  with  un¬
relenting  cruelty  in  hell,  which  is  the  second  death.
These  penal  evils  which  Sat  an  brings  upon  mankind,
are  upon  the  account  of  our  disobedience  ;  and  ins
mighty  powet  in  temptation  is  from  our  inward
corruption.  The  Lord  Jesus  by  his  death  hath
taken  auay  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin:  the  guilt,
in  enduring  the  curse  of  the  law,  thereby  satis¬
fying  the  injured  justice  of  God  ;  and  the  power
of  it,  bv  crucifying  our  old  man  with  him,  that
the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed,  Rom.  6.  6.
And  thus  our  Saviour  by  his  death  destroys  the
cruel  tyranny  of  the  devil.

Destruction  is  taken  for  a  temporal  death,  Psal.
90.  3.  Thou  turnest  man  to  destruction,  tor
mortification,  1  Cor.  5.  5.  To  deliver  such  an


I)  E  S


I)  ES


T)  E  S


ono  to  Satan,  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh.
for  damnation,  C  Pet.  G.  1.  And  bring  upon
themselves  swift  destruction.  Also  for  hell,  the
place  where  the  wicked  are  eternally  tormented,
i\lat.  7.  13.  Broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to
destruction.  For  extirpation,  or  utter  rooting  out,
Esth.  8.  6.  How  can  l  endure  to  see  th°  destruc¬
tion  of  my  kindred  ?  For  a  consuming  plague,
Psal.  91.  0.  The  destruction  that  wasteth  at  noon¬
day.  And  for  a  corrupting ,  painful,  and  deadly
disease,  1  Sain.  5.  9.  Destroy  signifies  to  afflict,
Job  G.  3.  to  destroy  him  without  cause.

Gen.  18.  G3.  wilt  thou  d.  the  righteous  with  wicked  ?
G4.  wilt  thou  d.  and  not  spare  the  place  ?

G8.  wilt  thou  d.  all  the  city  for  lack  of  five?

19.  13.  we  will  d.  this  place  ||  14.  d.  this  city
Exod.  15. 9-  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall  d.  them

34.  13.  but  ye  shall  d.  their  altars,  Dent.  7-  5.

Lev.  G6.  GG.  I  will  send  beasts  to  d.  your  cattle
Nunt.  G4.  17-  and  shall  d.  all  the  children  of  Sheth
3G.  15.  and  ye  shall  d.  all  this  people
33.  52.  shall  d.  their  pictures  and  molten  images
Dei it.  6. 15.  lest  the  anger  of  the  Lord  thy  G.  d.  thee
7.  23.  L.  shall  d.  them  with  a  mighty  destruction
G4.  thou  shalt  d.  their  name  from  under  heaven

9.  3.  he  shall  d.  them,  and  bring  them  down

14.  let  me  alone,  that  I  may  d.  them  and  blot
25.  because  the  Lord  had  said  he  would  d.  you

20.  20.  the  trees  that  are  not  for  meat  thou  shalt  d.

31.  3.  the  Lord  thy  God  he  will  d.  these  nations

32.  25.  shall  d.  both  the  young  man  and  virgin

33.  27.  shall  thrust  out  enemy,  and  says  d.  them
Josh.  7.  12.  except  ye  rf.  accursed  from  among  you

1  Sam.  15.  6.  depart,  lest  I  d.  you  with  them

2  Sam.  14.  7-  and  we  will  d.  the  heir  also

11.  she  said,  that  thou  wouldest  not  suffer  the
revengers  to  d.  any  more,  lest  they  d.  my  son
16.  that  would  d.  me  and  my  son  together
20.20.  far  be  it  from  me  I  should  swallow  or  d.

22.  41.  I  might  d.  them  that  hate  me,  Psal.  18.  40.

1  Kings  16. 12.  thus  did  Zimri  d.  the  house  of  Baasha

2  Kings  10. 19.  he  might  d.  the  worshippers  of  Baal

18.  G5.  go  against  this  land,  and  d.  it,  Isa.  36. 10.
Ezra  6.  12.  d.  kings  that  shall  put  to  their  hand
Esth.  7. +  4.  for  we  are  sold,  that  they  should  d.

Job  8.  18.  if  he  d.  him  from  his  place,  it  shall  deny

10.  8.  thine  hands  made  me,  yet  thou  dost  d.  me

19.  26.  though  after  my  skin,  worms  d.  this  body
Psal.  5.  6.  thou  shalt  d.  them  that  speak  leasing

10.  d.  them,  O  God,  let  them  fall  by  their  counsels

21.  10.  their  fruit  shalt  thou  d.  from  the  earth
28.  5.  he  shall  d.  them,  and  not  build  them  up
52.  5.  God  shall  likewise  d.  thee  for  ever

55.  9-  d.  O  Lord,  and  divide  their  tongues
69.  4.  they  that  would  d.  me  are  mighty
74.  8.  they  said,  let  us  d.  them  together
12?.  t  5.  they  shall  d.  the  enemies  in  the  gate
143. 12.  and  d.  all  them  that  afflict  my  soul

144.  6.  shoot  out  thine  arrows  and  d.  them

145.  20.  but  all  the  wicked  will  he  d.

Prov.  1.  32.  the  prosperity  of  fools  shall  d.  them
11.3.  the  perverseness  of  transgressors  shall  d.  them

15.  25.  the  Lord  will  d.  the  house  of  the  proud
21.  7-  the  robberies  of  the  wicked  shall  d.  them

Eccl.  5.  6.  why  should  G.  d.  the  work  of  thine  hands  ?

7. 16.  nor  over-wise,  why  shouldest  thou  d.  thyself?
Isa.  3.  12.  and  they  d.  the  way  of  thy  paths

11.9.  nor  d.  in  all  my  holy  mountain,  65.  25.

13. 9.  and  he  shall  d.  the  sinners  thereof  out  of  it
25.  7.  he  will  d.  in  this  mountain  the  face

Jer.  5.  10.  go  ye  up  upon  her  walls  and  d.

6.  5.  let  us  go  by  night  and  d.  her  palaces

11.  19.  let  us  d.  the  tree  with  the  fruit  thereof

12.  17. 1  will  pluck  up  and  d.  that  nation

13.  14. 1  will  not  spare  nor  have  mercy,  but  d.  them
15.  6.  will  stretch  my  hand  against  thee  and  d.  thee
17. 18.  and  d.  them  with  double  destruction

2.3. 1.  woe  to  pastors  that  d.  the  sheep  of  my  pasture
36.  29.  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  d.  this  land

48.  18.  and  he  "shall  d.  thy  strong  holds

49.  9.  if  thieves  by  night  they  will  d.  till  have
51.  3.  spare  ye  not,  d.  ye  utterly  all  her  host
Lam.  3.  66.  persecute  and  d.  them  in  anger
Ezek.  9.  8.  wilt  thou  d.  all  the  residue  of  Israel  ?

25. 16.  and  d.  the  remnant  of  the  sea-coast
£6.  4.  and  they  shall  d.  the  walls  of  lyrus

12.  and  they  shall  d.  thy  pleasant  houses
Dan.  2.  +  18.  that  they  should  not  d.  Daniel

4.  23.  saying,  hew  the  tree  down  and  d.  it
8.24.  he  shall  d.  wonderfully,  and  d.  the  mighty
25.  and  by  peace  shall  he  d.  many
9. 26.  the  people  shall  d.  the  city  and  the  sanctuary

11.  26.  they  that  feed  on  his  meat  shall  d.  him
Obad.  8.  shall  1  not  d.  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom  ?
Mic.  2. 10.  because  it  is  polluted,  it  shall  d.  you
Zeph.  2. 13.  stretch  hand  against  north,  and  d.  Assy.
Mat.  12.  14.  they  might  d.  him,  Mark  3.  6. 1  11.  18.
21.41.  be  will  miserably  d.  those  wicked  men
27. 20.  that  they  should  ask  Barabbas,  and  d.  Jesus
Mark  12.  9.  he  will  d.  the  husbandmen,  Luke  20.  16.
John  2.  19.  Jesus  said  to  them,  d.  this  temple
Acts  6.  14.  this  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  d.  this  place

1  C or.  3.  +  17.  if  any  man  d.  the  temple  of  God,  him

shall  God  <7.  for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy
6.  13.  but  God  shall  d.  both  it  and  them

2  Thess.  2.  8.  shall  d.  with  brightness  of  his  coming
Deb.  2. 14.  might  d.  him  that  had  the  power  of  death
1  John  3.  8.  that  he  might  d.  the  works  of  the  devil
Dev.  11.  18.  shouldest  .  them  which  d.  the  eartli

I  will,  or  will  1  DESTROY.

Gen.  6-7-  I  will  d.  man  whom  T  have  created
_13.  and  behold,  1  will  d.  them  with  the  earth
<■  4. -and  every  living  substance  will  1  d.

Fxod.  23.  27.  and  I  will  d.  all  the  people  to  whom
Jf’f.  23.  30.  the  same  soul  will  I  d.  from  his  people
-<>.  30.  and  I  will  d.  your  high  places,  Ezek.  6.  .3.
'sal.  101.  8.  I  -will  early  d.  all  the  wicked  of  land
118.  10.  in  the  name  of  the  L.  will  Id.  them,  11,12.

19.  3.  and  I  will  d.  the  counsel  thereof
t'  Uk  I  w*M.cr>’>  J  ,L'i/l  d.  and  devour  at  once
yfc‘  „  J*  ‘f  J villa,  my  people,  since  they  return  not
4u  a.  /  will  d-  the  citv.and  the  inhabitants  thereof


Jer. 49.  38. 1 will  d.  from  thence  the  king  aim  princes
51.  20.  my  battle-axe,  with  thee  an//  Id.  kingdoms
Ezek.  14.  9.  1  the  I  .ord  will  d.  that  prophet

25.  7-  behold,  1  will  d.  thee,  and  thou  shalt  know

that  I  am  the  Lord,  28.  16.  Zeph.  2.  5.

30.  13.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  I.  will  d.  the  idols
32.  13.  I  will  d.  also  all  the  beasts  thereof
34.  16.  but  I  will  d.  the  fat  and  ttie  strong
Hos.  2.  12.  I  will  d.  her  vines  and  her  fig-trees
4.5.  thou  shalt  fall,  and  I  will  d.  thy  mother
Amos  9.  8.  and  I  will  d.  the  sinful  kingdom
Mic.  5.  1C.  I  will  d.  thy  chariots  ||  14.  d.  thy  cities
Hag.  2.  22.  I  will  d.  the  strength  of  the  kingdoms
Mark  14. 58.  we  heard  him  say,  I  willd.  this  temple
1  Cor.  1.  19.  I  will  d.  the  wisdom  of  the  wise
Not  DESTROY.

Gen.  18.  28.  if  I  find  forty-five  I  will  not  d.  it

31.  he  said,  I  will  not  d.  it  for  twenty’s  sake

32.  he  said,  I  will  not  d.  Sodom  for  ten’s  sake
Dent.  4.  31.  lie  will  not  forsake  thee,  not  d.  thee

9.  26.  d.  not  thy  people  and  thine  inheritance

10.  10.  and  the  Lord  would  not  d.  thee

20.  19.  thou  shalt  not  d.  the  trees  thereof

1  Sam.  24.  21.  swear  that  thou  wilt  not  d.  my  name

26.  9.  and  David  said  to  Abishai,  d.  him  not

2  Kings  8. 19.  would  not  d.  Judah  for  David’s  sake

13.  23.  would  not  d.  them,  nor  cast  them  out
2  Chron.  12.  7-  therefore  I  will  not  d.  them

12.  that  the  Lord  would  not  d.  him  altogether
21.7-  the  Lord  would  notd.  the  house  of  David
.35.  21.  forbear  from  God  that  he  d.  thee  not
Psal.  106.  34.  they  did  not  d.  the  nations  of  whom
Isa.  65.8.  d.  it  not  for  a  blessing  is  in  it ;  so  will  I  do
for  my  servant’s  sake,  that  1  may  not  d.  them  all
Esek.  22.  30.  stand  in  the  gap,  that  1  should  not  d.  it
Dan.  2. 24.  d.  not  the  wise  men  of  Babylon,  bring  me
Mai.  3.  11.  he  shall  not  d.  fruits  of  your  ground
Horn.  14.  15.  d.  not  him  with  thy  meat  for  whom
20.  for  meat  d.  not  the  work  of  God
To  DESTROY.

Gen.  6. 17-  I  do  bring  a  flood  of  waters  to  d.  all  flesh

9.  11.  nor  shall  there  be  any  more  a  flood  to  d.  15.

19.  13.  and  the  Lord  hath  sent  us  to  d.  it

Exod.  8.  9.  intreat  for  thee  to  d.  the  frogs  from  thee

12.  13.  the  plague  shall  not  be  on  you  to  d.  you
Dent.  1.  27.  brought  us  out  of  Egypt  todeliver  us  in¬
to  the  hand  of  the  Amorites  to  d.  us,  Josh.  7.  7.

2. 15.  hand  of  Ld.  to  d.  them  from  among  the  host
7.  10.  repayeth  them  that  hate  him  to  d.  them
9- 19.  the  Lord  was  wroth  against  you  to  d.  you
28.  63.  so  the  Lord  will  rejoice  over  you  to  d.  you
Josh.  9.  24.  and  to  d.  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land

22.  33.  to  d.  the  land  where  Reubenites  dwelt
Judg.  6.  5.  the  Midianites  entered  to  d.  the  land

1  Sam.  23. 10.  Saul  seeketh  to  d.  the  city  for  my  sake
26.  15.  came  in  one  of  the  people  to  d.  the  king

2  Sam.  1.  14.  not  afraid  to  d.  the  I.ord’s  anointed

14.  11.  not  suffer  the  revengers  of  blood  to  d.

20.  19.  thou  seekest  to  d.  acity  and  a  mother

24. 16.  stretched  out  his  hand  on  Jerusalem  tod.  it

1  Kings  13.  34.  sin  to  the  house  of  Jeroboam  tod.  it

2  Kings  24.  2.  and  sent  them  against  Judah  to  d.  it

1  Chr.  21. 15.  God  sent  an  angel  to  Jerusalem  tod.

2  Chron.  25.  16.  God  hath  determined  to  d.  thee
£.vt/(.3.6.11amansoughttC(/.Jews,  13. 1  4.7,8.  |  9.24

+  9.  let  it  be  written  to  d.  them,  and  1  will  pay
Job  2.  3.  thou  movedst  me  to  d.  him  without  cause

6.  9-  even  that  it  would  please  God  to  d.  me
Psal.  40. 14.  that  seek  after  my  soul  to  d.  it,  6.3.  9.

119.  95.  the  wicked  have  waited  for  me  to  d.  me
Isa.  10.  7-  but  it  is  in  his  heart  to  d.  and  cut  off

13.  5.  they  come  from  far  to  d.  the  whole  land

23. 11.  the  Lord  hath  given  a  commandment  to  d.
32.  7.  he  deviseth  wicked  devices  to  d.  the  poor
51.  13.  as  if  the  oppressor  were  ready  to  d.

54. 16.  behold,  I  have  created  the  waster  to  d.

Jer.  1.  10.  1  have  set  thee  to  d.  18.  7.  |  31.  28.

15.  3.  I  will  appoint  the  beasts  of  the  earth  to  d.
51.  11.  his  device  is  against  Babylon  to  d.  it

I. am.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  purposed  to  d.  the  wall
Ezek.  5.  16.  famine,  which  1  will  send  to  d.  you
22.  27.  and  to  d.  souls,  to  get  dishonest  gain

25.  15.  with  a  despiteful  heart  to  d.  it  for  old  hatred

30. 11.  the  nations  shall  be  brought  to  d.  the  land
43.  3.  the  vision  I  saw  when  I  came  to  d.  the  city
Dan.  2.12.  to  d.  all  the  wise  men  of  Babylon,  24.

7.  26.  and  to  d.  his  dominion  unto  the  end

11.  44.  he  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury  to  d.

IIos.  11.  9.  I  will  not  return  to  d.  Ephraim,!  amG.
Zech.  12.  9.  that  I  will  seek  tod.  all  the  nations
Mat.  2.  13.  Herod  will  seek  young  child  to  d.  him

5.  17.  think  not  that  I  am  come  to  d.  the  law  or
the  prophets,  I  am  not  come  to  d.  but  to  fulfil

10.  28.  rather  fear  him  who  is  able  to  d.  both

26.  61.  this  fellow  said,  I  am  able  to  d.  the  temple
Mark  1.  24.  art  thou  come  to  d.  us  ?  Luke  4.  34.
Luke  6. 9.  is  it  lawful  on  sab.  days  to  save  life  or  to  d.

9.  56.  the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  d.  men's  lives
19.  47.  the  chief  of  the  people  sought  to  d.  him

John  10.  10.  the  thief  cometh  not  but  to  d.

Jam.  4. 12.  there  is  one  law-giv.  able  to  save  and  to  d.
DESTROYED.

Gen.  1.3. 10.  before  the  Ld.  d.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah

19.  29.  when  God  d.  the  cities  of  the  plain
Exod.  8.  +  24.  the  land  was  d.  by  the  swarm  of  flies

10.  7.  knowest  thou  not  yet  that  Egypt  is  d.  ?
Deut.  2.  21.  but  the  Lord  d.  them  before  them,  4.  3.

|  11.  4.  2  Kings  21.  9:  2  Chron.  .33.  9.
7.  23.  with  amighty  destruction,  till  they  be  d.

24.  no  man  be  able  to  stand  till  thou  have  d.

9.  8.  the  Lord  was  angry  with  you  to  have  d.  you

12.  .30.  after  that  they  be  d.  from  before  thee
28.  20.  until  thou  be  d.  24,  45,51,  61.

48.  shall  put  a  yoke  on  thy  neck  till  he  have  d.
Josh.  24.  8.  and  l  d.  them  from  before  you
Judg.  5.  +  27.  where  he  bowed,  there  he  fell  down  d.

20.  21.  Benjamin  d.  of  Isr.  22, 000  men  that  day,  25.
35.  children  of  Israel  d.  25,100  of  Benjamin.  42.

2  Sam.  21.  5.  man  that  devised  that  we  should  be  d.
24.  16.  he  said  to  the  angel  that  d.  1  Chron.  21. 15.

1  Kings  15.  1.3.  Asa  d.  her  idol  and  burnt  it

2  Kings  3.  t  23.  this  is  blood  the  kings  are  surely  d.


2  Kings  28.  thus  Jehu  d.  Baal  out  of  Israel
11. 1.  Athaliah  arose  and  d.  all  the  seed  royal
19.  18.  therefore  they  have  d.  them,  Isa.  37.  19.

1  Chron.  5. 25.  the  people  whom  God  d.  befoi  e  them

2  Chron.  14.  13.  for  they  were  d.  before  the  Lord
15. 6.  nation  was  d.  of  nation,  city  of  city

34. 11.  the  houses  which  the  kings  of  .1  udali  had  d.
Ezra  4.  15.  for  which  cause  was  this  city  d.

6.  +  11.  whoso  alters  this  word  let  him  be  d.

Esth.  3.  9.  let  it  be  written,  that  they  may  be  d.

Job  19. 10.  he  hath  d.  me  on  every  side,  and  I  am  gone
+  26.  though  this  body  be  d.  yet  shall  I  see  God
Psal.  9. 5.  thou  hast  d.  the  wicked  ||  6.  hast  d.  cities
73.  27.  thou  hast  d.  all  them  that  go  a  whoring
78.  45.  he  sent  frogs  among  them,  which  d.  them
47.  he  d.  their  vines  with  hail,  and  sycamore-trees
137.  8.  O  daughter  of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be  d.
Prov.  13. 23.  there  is  that  is  d.  for  want  of  judgment
Isa.  14. 20.  because  thou  hast  d.  land,  ana  slain  peo
26. 14.  therefore  hast  thou  visited  and  d.  them
Jer.  12.  10.  many  pastors  have  d.  my  vineyard
48.  4.  Moab  is  d.  ||  51.  8.  Babylon  is  suddenly  </.
51. 55.  Lord  hath  d.  out  of  Babylon  the  great  voice
Lam.  2.  5.  the  Lord  hath  d.  his  strong  holds
6.  he  hath  d.  his  places  of  the  assembly

9.  he  hath  d.  and  broken  her  bars,  her  king
Ezek.  27-  32.  Tyrus,  like  the  d.  in  the  midst  of  sea

43.  t  3.  to  prophesy  that  the  city  should  be  d.

Dan.  7.  11-  the  beast  was  slain,  and  his  body  d.
IIos.  13.  9.  O  Isr.  thou  hast  d.  thyself,  but  in  me  help
Amos  2.  9.  yet d.  I  the  Amorite,  I  d.  his  fruit
Mat.  22. 7-  he  sent  his  armies  and  d.  those  murderers
Luke  17.  27-  and  the  flood  came,  and  d.  them  all
29.  it  rained  tire  from  heaven  and  d.  them  all
Acts  9.  21.  is  not  this  he  that  d.  them  that  called

13.  19.  when  he  had  d.  seven  nations  in  Chanaan
19.  27.  and  her  magnificence  should  be  d.

Rom.  6.  6.  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  d.

1  Cor.  10.  9.  d.  of  serpents  ||  10.  d.  of  the  destroyer
Gal.  1. 23.  now  preacheth  the  faith  which  once  be  d.
2.  18.  if  I  build  again  the  things  which  I  d.

Heb.  11.28.  lest  he  that  d.  the  first  born  touch  them

2  Pet.  2.  12.  as  natural  brute  beasts  made  to  berf.
Jude  5.  the  L.  afterward  d.  them  that  believed  not
Rev.  8.  9.  and  the  third  part  of  the  ships  were  d.

Are  DESTROYED.

Judg.  21.  16.  the  women  are  d.  out  of  Benjamin
Job  4. 20.  they  are  d.  from  morning  to  night

34.  25.  he  overturneth  them  so  that  they  are  d.

Isa.  9.  16.  and  they  that  are  led  of  them  are  d.

Jer.  22. 20.  and  cry,  tor  all  thy  lovers  are  d.

Hos.  4.  6.  my  people  are  d.  for  lack  of  knowledge
Zeph.  3.  6.  their  cities  are  d.  there  is  no  inhabitant
Not  DESTROYED.

2  Chron.  20.  10.  but  they  d.  them  ?iot,  Psal.  78.  38.
Dan.  7.  14.  his  kingdom  which  shall  not  be  d.

2  Cor.  4.  9.  but  not  forsaken  ;  cast  down,  but  not  d .

Shall  be  DESTROYED.

Gen.  34.  30.  and  I  shall  bed.  1  and  my  house
Esth.  4. 14.  thou  and  thy  father’s  house  shall  be  d.
Psal.  37.  38.  but  the  transgressors  shall  bed.  together
92.  7-  it  is  that  they  shall  be  d.  for  ever
Prov.  13.  13.  whoso  despiseth  the  word  shall  be  d.
20.  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  d.

29.  1.  he  that  hardeneth  his  neck  shall  bed.

Isa.  10.27.  the  yoke  shall  be  d.  because  of  anointing
Jer.  48. 8.  the  valley  shal  1  perish,  the  plain  shall  bed.
Ezek.  .30.  8.  and  when  all  her  helpers  shall  be  d.
Dan.  2.  44.  a  kingdom  which  shall  never  be  d.  6.  26.

11.  20.  but  within  few  days  he  shall  be  d.

Hos.  10.  8.  places  of  Aven,  the  sin  of \sr.  shall  be  d.
Acts  3.  23.  lie  that  will  not  hear  shall  be  d.

1  Cor.  15.  26.  the  last  enemy  that  shall  be  d.  is  death
Utterly  DESTROYED.

Exod.  22.  20.  he  that  sacrificed!  to  any  god,  save
unto  the  Lord  only,  he  shall  be  utterly  d.
Nnm.  21.  .3.  they  utterly  d.  the  Canaanites
Dent.  2.34.  we  utterly  d.  Sihon  and  his  people
.3.  6.  we  utterly  d.  the  cities  of  Og,  Josh.  2.  10.

4.26.  if  ye  corrupt  youi  selves,  ye  shal  I  be  utterly  d.
Josh.  6.  21.  Jericho  ||8.  26.  Ai  utterly  d.  10.  1.

10.  28.  Makkedah  ||  .35.  Eglon  11  37-  Hebron  nt.  d
.39.  Debir  ||  40.  he  utterly  d.  all  that  breathed

11. 12.  Joshua  utterly  d.  them  with  cities,  21.

Judg.  1.  17.  Judah  and  Simeon  utterly  d.  Zephalh
1  Sam.  15.  8.  Saul  utterly  d.  all  the  people

9.  he  would  not  utterly  d.  the  best  of  the  sheep
15.  to  sacrifice,  and  the  rest  we  have  utterly  d.

20.  he  said,  1  have  utterly  d.  the  Amalekites

21.  things  which  should  have  been  utterly  d.

1  Chroji.  4.  41.  the  inhabitants  of  Gedor  utterly  d.

2  Chron.  .31.  1.  Hezekiah  utterly  d.  the  images
.32.  14.  gods  those  nations  my  father  utterly  d.

Isa.  .34.2.  the  Lord  hath  utterly  d.  all  nations

DESTB  OYER.

Exod.  12.  23.  will  not  suffer  d.  to  come  into  houses
Judg.  16.  24.  hath  delivered  the  d.  of  our  country
Job  15.  21.  in  prosperity  the  d.  shall  come
Psal.  17.  4.  I  have  kept  me  from  paths  of  the  d.
Prov.  28.  24.  the  same  is  the  companion  of  a  d.

Jer.  4.  7-  the  d.  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  his  way

50.  +  9.  their  arrows  shall  be  as  of  a  mighty  i.

1  Cor.  10.  10.  and  were  destroyed  of  the  d.

Rev.  9.  +  11.  king-  over  them  hath  his  name  a  d.
DESTROYERS.

Job  .3.3.  22.  and  his  life  draweth  near  to  the  d.

Isa.  49.  17.  thy  d.  shall  go  forth  of  thee
Jer.  22.  j.  anti  l  will  prepare  d.  against  thee
SO.  11.  because  ye  rejoiced,  O  d.  of  my  heritage
DESTROY EST,  ETH.

Dent.  8.  20.  as  the  nations  which  the  J.ord  d.

Job  9. 22.  he  d.  the  perfect  and  the  wicked

12.  2.3.  he  increaseth  the  nations,  and  d.  them

14.  19.  and  thou  d.  the  hope  of  man

Psal.  18.  +  47.  it  is  God  that  d.  people  under  me
Prov.  6.32.  he  that  doth  it,  d.  his  own  soul

11.9.  an  hypocrite  with  his  mouth  d.  his  neighbour
31.  3.  give  not  thy  ways  to  that  which  d.  kings
Z.’cc/.  7. 7- oppress,  maketh  mad,  and  a  gift  if.  heart
9.  18.  wisd.  better  than  war,  sinner  d.  much  good
Jer.  51.  25.  O  mountain,  which  d.  all  the  earth
Mat.  27.  40.  thou  that  d.  the  temple,  Mark  15.29


DET


DEV


DESTROYING.

1  Chron.  21. 12.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  d.  thro’  Israel
15.  and  as  he  was  rf.  the  Lord  repented  him
Prov.  28. 1 24.  the  same  is  the  companion  of  man  d.
Isa.  28.  2.  the  Lord  hath  a  strong  one,  as  a  d.  storm
Jer.  2.  30.  your  sword  devoured  like  a  d.  lion

13.  +  14.  1  will  not  have  mercy  from  d.  them
51.  1.  I  will  raise  against  Babylon  a  d.  wind

25.  I  am  against  thee,  O  d.  mountain,  said  Lord
Lam.  2.  8.  he  hath  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  d.
Ezek.  9. 1.  every  man  with  his  d.  weapon  in  his  hand

20. 17.  mine  eye  spared  them  from  d.  them
See  Utterly.
DESTRUCTION.

Exod.  12. 1 13.  plague  shall  not  be  on  you  for  a  d.
Num.  21.  3.  and  he  called  that  place,  utter  d.

24.  i  20.  but  his  latter  end  shall  be  even  to  d.
Deut.  7.  23.  L.  shall  destroy  them  with  a  mighty  d.
32.  24.  they  shall  be  devoured  with  bitter  d.

1  Sam.  5.  9.  L.  was  against  the  city  with  a  great  d.

11.  for  there  was  a  deadly  d.  through  the  city

1  Kings  20.  42.  a  man  whom  1  appointed  to  utter  d.

2  Chron.  20.  t  23.  one  helped  for  the  d.  of  another

22.  4.  for  they  were  his  counsellors  to  his  d.

7.  d.  of  Ahaziah  was  of  God,  by  coming  to  Joram

26. 16.  when  strong,  his  heart  was  lifted  up  to  his  d.
Est/i.  8.  6.  how  endure  to  see  the  d.  of  my  kindred  ?

,  9.  5.  the  Jews  smote  their  enemies  with  d.

Job  5.  21.  neither  shalt  thou  be  afraid  of  d.

22.  at  d.  and  famine  thou  shalt  laugh

18. 12.  and  d.  shall  be  ready  at  his  side

21. 17.  and  how  oft  cometh  their  d.  upon  them  ?

20.  his  eyes  shall  see  his  d.  and  he  snail  drink

30.  the  wicked  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  d.

26. 6.  hell  naked  before  him,  d.  hath  no  covering
28.  22.  d.  and  death  say,  we  have  heard  the  fame

30.  12.  they  raise  against  me  the  ways  of  their  d.

\  24.  not  stretch  out  his  hand,  tho’  they  cry  in  his  d.

31.  3.  is  not  d.  to  the  wicked  ?  and  punishment  to

12.  for  it  is  a  fire  that  consumeth  to  d.

23.  for  d.  from  God  was  a  terror  to  me

29.  if  I  rejoiced  at  the  d.  of  him  that  hated  me
Psal.  35. 8.  let  d.  come  upon  him  unawares,  and  his
net  catch  himself,  into  that  very  d.  let  him  fall
55. 23.  thou  shalt  bring  them  down  to  the  pit  of  d.

73. 18.  surely  thou  castedst  them  down  into  d.

88.  11.  or  thy  faithfulness  be  declared  in  d.  ?

90.  3.  thou  turnest  man  to  d.  and  sayest,  return  ye
61.  6.  nor  for  the  d.  that  wasteth  at  noon-day
103.  4.  who  redeemeth  thy  life  from  d.  who  crowns
Prov.  1.  27.  when  your  d.  cometh  as  a  whirlwind

10.  14.  but  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  near  d.

15.  the  d.  of  the  poor  is  their  poverty

29.  d.  shall  be.  to  the  workers  of  iniquity,  21. 15.
13. 3.  but  he  thatopeneth  wide  his  lips  shall  haverf.

14.  28.  the  want  of  people  is  the  d.  of  the  prince

15. 11.  hell  and  d.  are  before  the  Lord

16. 18.  pride  goeth  before  d.  and  a  haughty  spirit

17. 19.  and  he  that  exalteth  his  gate  seeketh  d.

18.  7-  a  fool’s  mouth  is  his  d.  and  his  lips  a  snare
12.  before  d.  the  heart  of  man  is  haughty

19.  1 18.  and  let  not  thy  soul  spare  to  his  d.

24.  2.  for  their  heart  studieth  d.  and  lips  talk

27.20. _hell  and  d.  are  never  full,  so  the  eyes  of  man

31.  8.  in  the  cause  of  such  as  are  appointed  to  d.
Isa.  1 . 28.  d.  of  transgressors  and  sinners  together

10.  25.  and  mine  anger  shall  cease  in  their  d.

13.  6.  it  shall  come  as  a  d.  from  the  Almighty

14.  23.  I  will  sweep  Babylon  with  the  besom  of  d.

15.  5.  in  the  way  they  shall  raise  up  a  cry  of  d.

19.  18.  one  shall  be  called  the  city  of  d.

24. 12.  and  the  gate  is  smitten  with  d.

49.  19.  the  land  of  thy  d.  shall  be  too  narrow
51. 19.  desolation  and  d.  are  come  unto  thee

59.  7.  wasting  and  d.  are  in  their  paths

60.  18.  d.  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  borders
Jer.  4.  6.  I  will  bring  from  the  north  a  great  d.  6. 1.

20.  d.  upon  d.  is  cried,  for  the  land  is  spoiled
17.  18.  and  destroy  them  with  double  d.

46.  20.  d.  cometh,  it  cometh  out  of  the  north
48.  3.  a  voice  from  Uoronaim,  spoiling  and  d.

5.  the  enemies  have  heard  a  cry  of  d.

50.  22.  a  sound  of  great  d.  is  in  the  land

51.  54.  great  d.  from  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans
Lam.  2. 11.  ford,  of  the  daughter  of  my  people, 3. 48.

3.  47.  desolation  and  d.  is  come  upon  us

4.  10.  in  the  d.  of  the  daughter  of  my  people
Ezek.  5.  16.  when  I  will  send  famine  for  their  d.

7.  25.  d.  cometh,  and  they  shall  seek  peace

9. 1 6.  slay  to  d.  old  and  young,  maids  and  children

32.  9.  when  I  bring  thy  d.  among  the  nations
lios.  7.1 3.  d.  to  them,  because  they  nave  transgressed

9.  6.  for  lo,  they  are  gone,  because  of  d.

13.  14.  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  d.  repentance  hid
Joel  1.  15.  as  a  d.  from  the  Almighty  it  shall  come
Chad.  12.  neither  rejoiced  in  the  day  of  their  d.
Mic.  2.  10.  it  shall  destroy  you  with  a  sore  d.
Zech.  14. 11.  and  there  shall  be  no  more  utter  d.
Mat.  7. 13.  broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  d.
Rom.  3. 16.  d.  and  misery  are  in  their  ways
9.  22.  endured  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  d.

1  Cor.  5.  5.  to  deliver  fo  Satan  for  d.  of  the  flesh

2  Cor.  10. 8.  hath  given  us  not  for  your  d.  13. 10.
Phil.  3. 19.  for  many  walk  whose  end  is  d.

1  Thess.  5.  3.  then  sudden  d.  cometh  upon  them

2  Thess.  1.  9.  who  shall  be  punished  with  everlast.  d.

1  Tim.  6.  9.  into  many  lusts  which  drown  men  in  d.

2  Pet.  2.  1.  and  bring  on  themselves  swift  d.

3. 16.  which  the  unstable  wrest  to  their  own  d.

DESTRUCTIONS.

Psal.  9. 6.  O  enemy,  d.  are  come  to  a  perpetual  end
35.  17-  Lord,  rescue  my  soul  from  their  d.

107.  20.  he  delivereth  them  from  their  d.

Isa.  5.  t  30.  when  light,  it  shall  be  dark  in  the  d.
DETAIN,  ED.

Judg.  13. 15.  let  us  d.  thee  till  we  have  made  ready

16.  though  thou  d.  me,  I  will  not  eat  of  thy  bread
1  Sam.  21.  7.  Doeg  was  that  day  d.  before  the  Lord

DETERMINATE.

Acts  2.  23.  him  delivered  by  the  J.  counsel  of  God
DETERMINATION.

Zeph.  3.  8.  for  my  d.  is  to  gather  the  nations
106


D  E  V

DETERMINE.

Exod.  21.  22.  and  he  shall  pay  as  the  judges  d.
DETERMINED.

1  Sam.  20.7.  then  be  sure  that  evil  is  d.  by  him
9.  if  I  knew  that  evil  were  d.  by  my  father
33.  Jonathan  knew  that  it  was  d.  of  his  father

25.  17.  for  evil  is  d.  ag.  our  master  and  household

2  Sam.  13. 32.  for  by  Absalom  this  hath  been  d.

2  Chr.  2.  1.  Solomon  d.  to  build  a  house  for  Lord
25. 16. 1  know  that  God  hath  d.  to  destroy  thee
Esth.  7. 7.  he  saw  that  there  was  evil  d.  against  him
Job  14.  5.  seeing  his  days  are  d.  number  of  months
Isa.  10.  23.  a  consumption  d.  in  all  the  land,  28.  22.
19.  if.  counsel  of  Lord  which  hath  d.  against  it
Dan.  9. 24.  seventy  weeks  are  d.  on  thy  people

26.  and  to  the  end  of  the  war  desolations  are  d.

27.  and  that  d.  shall  be  poured  upon  the  desolate
11.  36.  for  that,  that  is  d.  shall  be  done

Luke  22.  22.  the  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  was  d.

Acts  3. 13.  when  Pilate  was  d.  to  let  him  go
4. 28.  to  do  what  thy  counsel  d.  before  to  be  done
11.  29.  the  disciples  d.  to  send  relief  to  brethren
15.  2.  d.  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  go  to  Jerusalem
37.  and  Barnabas  d.  to  take  with  them  John

17.  26.  and  hath  d.  the  times  before  appointed

19.  39.  it  shall  be  d.  in  a  lawful  assembly

20.  16.  for  Paul  had  d.  to  sail  by  Ephesus
25.  25.  I  have  d.  to  send  Paul  to  Augustus

27.  1.  when  it  was  d.  that  we  should  sail  into  Italy
Rom.  1.  f4.  and  d.  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power

1  Cor.  2.  2.  1  d.  not  to  know  any  thing  save  Jesus
5.  t  3.  but  present  in  spirit  I  have  d.  already

2  Cor.  2.  1.  but  1  d.  this  with  myself,  that  I  would
Tit.  3. 12.  to  N  icopolis,  for  I  have  d.  there  to  winter

DETEST.

Deut.  7.  26.  but  thou  shalt  utterly  d.  and  abhor  it
DETESTABLE.

Jer.  16.  18.  they  defiled  my  land  with  d.  things
Ezek.  5.  11.  hastdefiled  sanctuary  with  thy  d.  things
7.  26.  they  made  images  of  their  d.  things  therein
11.  18.  they  shall  take  away  all  the  d.  things
21.  whose  heart  walketh  after  their  d.  things
37. 23.  nor  shall  any  more  defile  with  their  d.  things
DEVICE.

2  Chr.  2. 14.  to  find  out  every  d.  shall  be  put  to  him
Esth.  8.  3.  to  put  away  his  d.  that  he  had  devised
t5.  let  it  be  written  to  reverse  the  d.  by  Haman
9. 25.  his  wicked  d.  should  return  upon  his  own  head
Psal.  21.  11.  they  imagined  a  mischievous  d.

140.  8.  O  Lord,  further  not  his  wicked  d.

Eccl.  9.  10.  there  is  no  work  nor  d.  in  the  grave
Jer.  18.  11.  behold,  1  devise  a  d.  against  you
51.  11.  for  his  d.  is  against  Babylon  to  destroy  it
Lam.  3.  62.  and  their  d.  against  rne  all  the  day
Acts  17.  29.  is  like  to  stone  graven  by  man’s  d
DEVICES.

Job  5.  12.  he  disappointed!  the  d.  of  the  crafty

11.  t  3.  should  thy  d.  make  men  hold  their  peace  ?

21.  27.  d.  which  ye  wrongfully  imagine  against  me
Ps.  10.  2.  let  them  be  taken  in  the  d.  they  imagined

33. 10.  he  maketh  the  d.  of  the  people  of  none  effect
37.  7.  for  the  man  who  bringeth  wicked  d.  to  pass
Prov.  1.  31.  and  be  filled  with  their  own  d.

12.  2.  but  a  man  of  wicked  d.  will  he  condemn
19.  21.  there  are  many  d.  in  a  man’s  heart

Isa,  32. 7.  he  deviseth  wicked  d.  to  destroy  the  poor
66.  +4.  I  also  will  choose  their  d.  and  bring  fears
Jer.  11.  19.  that  they  had  devised  d.  against  me

18.  12.  no  hope,  but  we  will  walk  after  our  own  d.
18.  come  and  let  us  devise  d.  against  Jeremiah

Dan.  11. 24.  yea,  and  he  shall  forecast  his  d.  for  a  time
25.  for  they  shall  forecast  d.  against  him
2  Cor.  2.  11.  for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  d.

DEVIL.

A  most  wicked  angel ,  the  implacable  enemy  and
tempter  of  the  human  race,  especially  believers,
whom  he  desires  to  devour,  1  Pet.  5.  8.  He  is
called  Abaddon  in  Hebrew,  Apollyon  in  Greek,
that  is,  destroyer. — Rev.  9.  11.  Angel  of  the
bottomless  pit.— Prince  of  the  world,  John  12.
31.— Prince  of  darkness,  Eph.  6.  12. — A  roar¬
ing  Lion,  and  an  Adversary,  1  Pet.  5.  8 .—A
sinner  from  the  beginning,  1  John  3.  8. — Beel¬
zebub,  Mat.  12.  24.— Accuser,  Rev.  12.  10.—
Belial,  2  Cor.  6.  15.— Deceiver,  Rev.  20.  10.
—Dragon,  Rev.  12.  I.— Liar,  John  8.  44.— Le¬
viathan,  Isa.  27-  1.— Lucifer,  Isa.  14.  12.— Mur¬
derer,  John  8.  44.-- Serpent,  Isa.  27.  1  .—Satan,
Job  2.  6. —  Tormenter,  Mat.  18.  34. —  The  god  of
this  world,  2  Cor.  4.  4.

He  is  compared  to  a  Dog,  Psal.  22.  16 .—Fowls,
Mat.  13.  4 .—A  Fowler,  Psal.  91.  3. — Lightning ,
Luke  10.  18. — Locusts,  Rev.  9.  3. — A  Wolf,
John  10.  12. — An  Adder,  Psal.  91.  13.

These  names  are  given  to  the  prince  of  the  Devils,
who,  perhaps,  was  the  first  and  leader  in  that
grand  rebellion  against  God,  whereby  they  all  fell
into  a  rooted  enmity  against  holiness,  and  tnto
endless  horror,  blackness,  and  despair,  J  ude  6.
Devil  is  put  for,  [1]  Idols,  Psal.  106.  37.  2  Chron.
11.15.  [2]  A  wicked  man,  John  6.70.  [3]  Per¬
secutors,  Rev.  2.  10.

This  word  comes  from,  the  Greek,  Diabolos,  which
signifies  a  Calumniator,  or  Accuser,  who  accuseth
us  before  God  day  and  night,  Rev.  12.  9,  10.
Hence  he  is  called.  The  accuser  of  the  brethren,
Rev.  12.  10.  He  hath  cast  off  all  obedience  to
God ;  and  likewise  called  Belial,  which  is  an  He¬
brew  word,  and  signifies  one  who  is  good  for  no¬
thing,  a  libertine,  one  that  is  extremely  wicked.
2  Cor.  6.  15.  What  concord  hath  Christ  with
Belial ?  Also  Satan,  which  signifies  an  Adver¬
sary,  or  an  Accuser,  in  a  court  of  justice.  Job
2.  1.  Satan  came  also  among  them.  He  is  like¬
wise  called  the  Old  Serpent,  Rev.  12.  9.  Because
he  conveyed  himself  into  the  serpent,  when  he
tempted  Eve  ;  and  in  respect  of  his  serpentine  dis¬
position  ;  his  poison  is  always  ready  ,  as  in  a  foun¬
tain  ;  and  runneth  continually  as  in  full  streams,
both  against  Christ  and  against  all  his  members  for
his  sake  :  He  is  also  crafty,  wise,  and  subtle,  as  a
serpent ;  concerning  whose  subtilty ,  see  Serpent.


The  most  subtle  of  these  spirits  contrived  a  tempta¬
tion,  which  might  be  most  taking  and  dangerous  to
man  in  his  exalted  and  happy  state :  He  attempts
him  with  art,  by  propounding  the  lure  of  knowledge
and  pleasure,  to  inveigle  the  spiritual  and  sensi¬
tive  appetites  at  once.  And  that  he  might  the  bet¬
ter  succeed ,  he  addressed  the  woman,  the  weakest
and  most  liable  to  seduction.  He  hides  himself  in
the  body  of  a  serpent,  which  before  sin  was  not  ter-
rible  unto  her,  and  by  this  instrument  insinuates
his  temptation.  He  first  allured  with  the  hopes  oj
impunity,  Ye  shall  not  die  ;  then  he  promised  an
universal  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  By  these
pretences  he  ruined  innocence  itself.  For  the  wo¬
man,  deceived  by  these  specious  allectives,  swal-
lowed  the  poison  of  the  serpent ;  and,  having  tasted
death,  she  persuaded  her  husband,  by  the  same  mo¬
tives,  to  despise  the  law  of  their  Creator.  Thus  sin
entered,  and  brought  confusion  into  the  world.
Man,  since  his  fall,  is  under  the  tyranny  and  slavery
of  Satan,  who  is  called  the  god  of  this  world,  2
Cor.  4.  4.  because  he  rules  in  wicked  men.  His  old
enmity  and  hatred  against  the  souls  of  men  con¬
tinues  :  It  is  another  hell  to  him  to  see  them  re¬
stored  to  the  favour  of  God,  and  his  glorious  image
re-engraven  on  them.  He  is  a  jealous  jailer ,  mid,
if  possible,  will  not  lose  any  of  his  captives.  The
Scripture  represents  him  as  a  strong  and  subtle  ad
versary  ;  a  roaring  lion  that  goes  about  seeking
whom  he  may  devour,  1  Pet.  5.  8.  His  title,  the
Tempter,  Mat.  4.  3.  implies  his  constant  practice.
He  bribes  some  with  profit,  and  allures  others  with
pleasure.  He  is  surprisingly  subtle  ;  his  strength
is  superior  to  ours  :  his  malice  is  deadly  ;  his  ac¬
tivity  and  diligence  are  equal  to  his  malice  ;  and  he
has  a  mighty  number  of  principalities  and  powers
under  his  command.

Sometimes  devil  is  taken  for  a  wicked  man,  a  liber¬
tine,  a  treacherous  person,  John  6.  70.  Have  not
I  chosen  you  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ?
It  is  taken  also  for  idols,  2  Chron.  11.  15.  so
called ,  because  the  devil  is  eminently  served  in  the
worship  of  them  ;  and  the  spirits  which  were  sup¬
posed  to  inhabit  them,  were  evil  spirits  or  devils  :
and  because  in  and  by  them  the  devil  oftentimes
manifested  himself  to  men ,  and  gave  them  answers ,
and  received  their  worship.  Their  worship  is  an
invention  of  the  devil ;  for  what  other  deity  besides
the  devil  could  require  human  victims,  like  those
that  were  sacrificed  to  Moloch  ?  Devil  is  likewise
taken  for  persecutors,  those  instruments  which  he
makes  use  of  in  executing  his  wicked  designs
against  the  godly,  Rev.  2.  10.

Lest  he  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil,
1  Tim.  3.  6.  Lest  he  become  guilty  of  the  sin  for
which  the  devil  was  condemned,  and  so  receive  the
same  punishment  which  was  inflicted  upon  him.
Mat.  4. 1.  Jesus  was  led  to  be  tempted  of  the  d.

5.  d.  taketh  him  up  to  holy  city  [|  11.  d.  leaveth  him

8.  the  d.  taketh  him  up  to  an  high  mountain
9-  32.  a  dumb  man  possessed  with  a  d.  12.  22.

11.  18.  and  they  say  he  hath  a  d.  Duke  7.  33.

13.  39.  the  enemy  that  sowed  them  is  the  d.

15. 22.  my  daughter  is  grievously  vexed  with  a  d.
17- 18.  Jesus  rebuked  d.  he  departed  out  of  him
25.41.  fire,  prepared  for  the  d.  and  his  angels
Mark  5. 15.  him  that  was  possessed  with  the  d.  16,18.
7. 29.  the  d.  is  gone  out  of  thy  daughter,  30.

Luke  4. 2.  Jesus  being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  d.
3.  the  d.  said  to  him,  6.  |l  5.  the  d.  taking  him  up
13.  when  the  d.  had  ended  all  the  temptation
33.  a  man  which  had  a  spirit  of  an  unclean  d.

35.  and  when  the  d.  had  thrown  him  in  the  midst

8. 12.  then  cometh  the  d.  and  taketh  away  the  word

29.  was  driven  of  the  d.  into  the  wilderness

9.  42.  as  he  was  coming  the  d.  threw  him  down
11. 14.  casting  out  a  d.  when  the  d.  was  gone  out
John  6.  70.  chosen  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  d.

7.  20.  the  people  said,  thou  hast  a  d.  8.  48.

8. 44.  ye  are  ot  your  father  d.  and  his  lusts  will  do
49. 1  have  not  ad.  ||  52.  we  know  that  thou  hast  a  d.

10. 20.  many  of  them  said,  he  hath  a  d.

21 .  these  are  not  the  wrords  of  him  that  hath  a  d.

13.  2.  the  d.  having  put  into  the  heart  of  Judas
Acts  10.  38.  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  d.
13. 10.  O  full  of  all  mischief,  thou  child  of  the  d.
Eph.  4.  27.  neither  give  place  to  the  d.

6.11.  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  d.

1  Tim.  3.  6.  he  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  d.

7.  lest  he  fall  into  reproach,  and  snare  of  the  d.

2  Tim.  2.26.  may  recov.  themselves  out  of  snare  of  d.
Heb.  2. 14.  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  d.
Jam.  4.  7-  resist  the  d.  and  he  will  flee  from  you

1  Pet.  5.  8.  watch,  because  your  adversary  the  J.

1  John  3.  8.  he  that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  d.  that

he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  d.

10.  in  this  the  children  of  the  d.  are  manifest
Jude  9.  Michael,  when  contending  with  the  d.

Rev.  2.  10.  the  d.  shall  cast  some  into  prison

12.  9.  the  old  serpent  called  the  d.  ana  Satan
12.  for  the  d.  is  come  down  to  you  having  power

20.  2.  that  old  serpent,  which  is  the  d.  and  Satan
10.  d.  that  deceived  them  was  cast  into  lake  of  fire
DEVILISH.

Jam.  3.  15.  this  wisdom  is  earthly,  sensual,  d.
DEVILS.

Lev.  17.  7-  shall  no  more  offer  their  sacrifices  to  d.
Deut.  32.  17.  they  sacrificed  to  d.  not  to  God

2  Chron.  11. 15.  he  ordained  hirn  priest  for  the  d.

Ps.  106.  37.  sacrificed  their  sons  and  daughters  to  d.
Mat.  4. 24.  brought  him  those  which  were  possessed

with  d.  8. 16, 28,  33.  Mark  1.  32.  Luke  8.  36.

8.  31.  so  the  d.  besought  him  saying,  Mark  5. 12.
Mark  9. 38.  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  d.  in

thy  name,  and  he  followeth  not  us,  Luke  9. 49.

16. 17.  in  my  name  shall  they  cast  outrf.

Luke  4.  41.  and  d.  also  came  out  of  many,  saying
8. 2.  Mary  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  went  seven  d.

36.  by  what  means  he  that  was  possessed  ot  A.

9. 1.  he  gave  them  power  and  authority  over  all  d.

10. 17.  Lord,  even  the  d.  are  subject  to  us

13.  32.  go  and  tell  that  fox,  behold,  I  cast  out  d.


DEV


D  E  W


D  I  D


l  Cor.  10.  CO.  Gentiles  sacrificed  ted.  and  not  to  G.
1  would  not  ye  should  have  fellowship  with  d.
Cl.  ye  cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord  and  cup
of  d.  of  the  Lord's  table  and  of  the  table  of  d.
]  Tim.  4.  1.  some  giving  heed  to  doctrines  of  d.
Jinn.  C.  19.  the  d.  also  believe  and  tremble
llev.  9-  20.  that  they  should  not  worship  d.  and  idols
16.  14.  for  they  are  spirits  of  d.  working  miracles
18.  2.  Babylon  is  become  the  habitation  of  d.

See  Cast.

DEVISE.

Exod.  31. 4.  d.  cunning  works  in  gold  silver,  35.  35.
35.  32.  to  d.  curious  works  in  gold,  silver,  and  brass
C  Sam.  14. 14.  yet  doth  he  d.  means  that  his  banished
Psal.  35.  4.  be  brought  to  confusion,  that  d.  my  hurt
CO.  but  they  d.  deceitful  matters  against  them
41.  7*  against  me  do  they  d.  my  hurt
Prov.  3.  29.  d.  not  evil  against  thy  neighbour

14.  22.  do  they  not  err  that  d.  evil  '  but  mercy
and  truth  shall  be  to  them  thatd.  good
16.  30.  he  shutteth  his  eyes  to  d.  froward  things
Jer.  18.  11.  behold,  1  d.  a  device  against  you
18.  come  and  let  us  d.  devices  against  Jeremiah
Ezek.  11.  j2.  these  are  the  men  that  d.  mischief
Mic.  C.  1.  woe  to  them  that  d.  iniquity  and  work  evil

3.  behold,  against  this  family  do  1  d.  an  evil
DEVISED.

C  Sum.  Cl.  5.  man  that  consumed  us  d.  against  us

1  Kings  12.  33.  month  which  he  d.  of  his  own  heart
Esth.  8.  3.  his  devise  that  he  had  d.  against  the  Jews

5.  let  it  be  written  to  reverse  letters  d.  by  Daman
Psal.  31.  13.  they  d.  to  takeaway  my  life
Jer.  11. 19.  knew'not  that  they  had  d.  devices  against
-18.  2.  in  Heshhon  they  have  d.  evil  against  it

51. 12.  the  L.  hath  both  d.  and  done,\L«w.  C.  17.

C  Pet.  1.16.  we  have  not  followed  cunningly  d.  fables

DEVlSETDt.

Psal.  36. 4.  he  d.  mischief  on  his  bed,  abhors  not  evil
52.2.  thy  tongue  d.  mischiefs  like  a  sharp  razor
P/vc.6.14.he  d.mischief  continually,  soweth  discord
18.  an  heart  that  d.  wicked  imaginations
16.  9.  man’s  heart  d.  his  way,  L.  directeth  steps

24. 8.  d.  to  do  evil  shall  be  called  mischievous
Isa.  32.7-  he  d.  wicked  devices  to  destroy  the  poor

8.  but  the  liberal  d.  liberal  things,  and  shall  stand
DEVOTE.

Lev.  27.  28.  thing  that  a  man  shall  d.  to  the  Lord
DEVOTED.

Lev.  27. 21.  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord,  as  a  field  d.

28.  no  d.  thing  sold,  every' d.  thingismost  holy
Num.  18. 14.  every  thing  d.  in  Israel  shall  be  thine
Veut.  13. 1 17.  there  shall  cleave  nothing  of  o',  thing
Josh.  6. 1 17.  the  city  shall  be  d.  even  it  and  all  in  it
Ezra  10.  +  8.  all  his  substance  shall  be  d.

Psal.  119.  38.  word  to  thy  servant,  who  is  d.  thy  fear
Ezek.  44.  f  29.  every  d.  thing  shall  be  theirs
DEVOTIONS.

Acts  17.  23.  for  as  I  passed  by  and  beheld  y’our  d.
DEVOUR

Signifies,  [1]  To  eat  up,  or  swallow  down  greedily,
Gen.  37.  20.  [2]  To  waste,  or  spend  riotously,
Luke  15.  30.  [3]  By  cunning  pretences  to  de¬
fraud  others  of  that  which  is  theirs.  Mat.  23.  14.
[4]  With  cruel  fierceness  to  tear,  and  spoil
spiritually  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men,  as  a  lion
devours  his  prey,  1  Pet.  5.  8.  The  devil  walketh
about,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  [5]  To
kill,  or  destroy,  2  Sam.  18.  8.  [6]  To  convert  to
one's  own  private  use  that  which  is  dedicated  unto
God,  Prov.  20.  25.

Gen.  49.  27.  in  themorninghe  shall  d.  the  prey
Deut.  32.  42.  arrows  with  blood,  and  sword  d.  flesh
2 -Scot.  2. 26.  Abner  said,  shall  the  sword  d.  for  ever?
18. +8.  and  the  wood  multiplied  to  d.  the  people

2  Chron.  7. 13.  if  I  command  the  locusts  to  d.

Job  18.  13.  first-born  of  death  shall  d.  his  strength
Psal.  80. 13.  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  doth  d.  it
Prov.  30.  14.  and  their  jaw  teeth  as  knives  to  d.

Jsa.  1. 7.  your  land  strangers  d.  it  in  your  presence

9. 12.  they  shall  d.  Israel  with  open  mouth

18.  for  wickedness  shall  d.  the  briers  and  thorns

31.  8.  the  sword,  not  of  a  mean  man,  shall  d.  him
42.  14.  I  will  cry,  I  will  destroy  and  d.  at  once
56.  9.  all  ye  beasts  of  the  field  come  to  d.  yea,  all
ye  beasts  in  the  forest,  Jer,  12.  9- 1  15.  3.
Jer. 2.3.that  d.  Israel  shall  offend,  evil  come  on  them

12. 12.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  shall  d.  46. 10,  14.
30.  16.  and  all  that  d.  thee  shall  be  devoured
48.  45.  a  flame  shall  d.  the  corner  of  Moab
Ezek.  7.  15.  famine  and  pestilence  shall  d.  him
34.  28.  neither  shall  the  beasts  of  the  land  d.

35. 1 12.  the  mountains,  they  are  given  us  to  d.

.36. 14.  therefore  shalt  thou  d.  men  no  more
l)an.  7. 5.  arise  d.  much  flesh,  H  23.  d.  whole  earth
Hos.  5.  7.  now  shall  a  month  d.  them  with  portions

11. 6.  and  the  sword  shall  d.  his  branches

13.8.  tljere  will  I  d.  them  like  a  lion,  shall  tear  them
Amos  1.  4.  fire  shall  d.  the  palaces,  7.  10,  12.

Chad.  18.  they  shall  kindle  in  them,  and  d.  them
-VaA.  2.  13.  the  sword  shall  d.  the  young  lions
llab.  3. 14.  their  rejoicing  was  as  to  d.  poor  secretly
Zech.  9.  15.  they  shall  d.  and  subdue  with  stones

12.  6.  they  shall  d.  all  the  people  round  about
Mat.  23.  14.  woe  unto  you,  hypocrites,  for  ye  d.

widows’  houses,  Mark 12.  40.  Luke  20.  47.
2  Cor.  11.  20.  for  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  d.  you
Gal.  5.  15.  but  if  ye  bite  and  d.  one  another
Deb.  10. 27.  indignat,  which  shall  d.  the  adversaries
1  Pet.5. 8.  walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may  d.
Lev.  12.4.  to  d.  her  child  as  soon  as  it  was  born
Fire  DEVOUR.

Judg.  9.  15.  let  fire  d.  the  cedars  of  Lebanon

20.  let  fire  d.  the  men  of  Sheehem,  and  Abimelech
Hsal.  21.  9-  shall  swallow'  up,  and  fire  shall  d.  them
50.  3.  God  shall  come,  a  Arc  shall  d.  before  him
Jsa.  26. 11.  yea,  the  Arc  of  thine  enem.  shall  d.  them
33.  11.  stubble,  your  breath  ns  fire  shall  d.  you
.  .-15.  ~  •  and  another  Are  shall  d.  them

23.  37 .  to  pass  for  them  through  the  Are  tod.  them
AmosH>.  6.  lest  he  break  out  like  fire  and  d.  it
Eah.  3.13.  the  uates  open,  the  fire  shall  d.  thy  bars

15.  there  shall  the  fire  d.  thee,  sword  cut  thee  off


Zech.  11.  1.  O  Lebanon,  (hat  fire  may  d.  thy  cedars
It  shall  DEVOUR.

Job  18. 13.  it  shall  d.  the  strength  of  his  skin
Jsa.  10.  17  it  shall  burn  and  d.  his  thorns  and  briers
Jer.  5. 14.  1  will  make  my  words  lire,  it  shall  o'. them
17.  27.  1  will  kindle  a  fire  and  it  shall  d.  the  palaces
of  Jerusalem,  and  not  be  quenched,  Amos  2.  5.

21.  14.  it  shall  d.  all  things  round  about,  50.  32.
Ezek.  20.  47.  and  it  shall  d.  every  green  tree

28.  18.  it  shall  d.  and  l  will  bring  thee  to  ashes
Dos.  8.  14.  and  it  shall  d.  the  palaces  of  Judah
Amos  1. 14.  it  shall  d.  the  palaces  of  Rahbah

2.  2.  sent!  a  fire,  it  shall  d.  the  palaces  of  Kirioth

DEVOURED.

Ge?i.  31. 15.  he  hath  sold  us,  and  quite  d.  our  money
37.  20.  will  say,  some  evil  beast  hath  d.  him,  33.

41. 7.  the  seven  thin  ears  d.  the  seven  rank,  24.

Lev.  10.  2.  there  went  fire  from  the  L.  and  d.  them
Nnm.  26. 10.  what  time  the  fire  d.  250  men
JJevt.  31. 17.  1  will  hide  my  face,  they  shall  be  d.

32.  24.  they  shall  be  d.  with  burning  heat

2  Sam.  18.  8.  the  wood  d.  more  than  the  sword  d.

22.  9.  and  fire  out  of  his  mouth  d.  Psal.  18.  8.
Psal. lit. 45.  be  sent  divers  sorts  offlies  which  d.  them

79.7.  for  they  have  d.  Jacob,  and  laid  waste  his
105.  35.  the  locusts  d.  the  fruit  of  their  ground

Isa.  1.  20.  if  rebel,  ye  shall  be  d.  with  the  sw'ord

24.  6.  therefore  hath  the  curse  d.  the  earth
Jer.  2.  30.  your  sword  hath  d.  the  prophets

3.  24.  for  shame  hath  d.  the  labour  of  our  fathers
8. 16.  for  they  are  come,  and  have  d.  the  land
10.  25.  for  they  have  eaten  up  Jacob,  and  d.  him
30.  16.  all  they  that  devour  thee  shall  be  d.

50.  7.  all  that  found  them  have  d.  them
17-  first,  the  kina  of  Assyria  hath  d.  him

51.  34.  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon  d.  me
Lam.  4. 11.  it  hath  d.  the  foundations  thereof
Ezek.  15.  5.  how  much  less  when  the  tire  hath  d.  it

16.  20.  hast  sacrificed  thy  sons  to  them  to  be  d.

19.  3.  it  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  it  d.  men,  6.

14.  fire  is  gone  out,  which  hath  d.  her  fruit

22.  25.  like  a  roaring  lion,  they  have  d.  souls

23.  25.  and  thy  residue  shall  be  d.  by  the  fire

33.  27.  I  will  give  to  the  beasts  to  be  d.  39.  4.

Van. 7.7.  it d.  and  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped,  19.
LI  os.  7.  7.  they  are  hot,  and  have  d.  their  judges

9.  s  trail  gem  have  d.  his  strength,  he  knoweth  it  not
Joel  1. 19.'for  fire  hath  d.  the  pastures,  20.

Amos  4.  9.  your  fig-trees,  the  palmer- worm  d.  them
7-  4.  to  contend  by  fire,  and  it  d.  the  great  deep
Nah.  1. 10.  they  shall  be  d.  as  stubble  fully  dry
ZepliA.  18.  land  shall  bed.  by  the  fire  of  his  jealousy
3.  8.  all  the  earth  shall  be  d.  with  fire  of  my  jealousy
Zech.  9.  4.  and  Tyrus  shall  be  d.  with  hre
Mat.  13.  4.  fowls  came  and  d.  them,  Mark  4.  4.

Luke  8.  5.

Luke  15.  30.  this  thy  son  who  hath  d.  thy  living
llev.  20.  9.  tire  came  down  from  God  and  d.  them
DEVOURER.

Mai.  3.  11.  I  will  rebuke  the  d.  for  your  sakes
DEVOUREST.

Ezek.  36. 13.  because  they  say ,  thou  land  d.  up  men
DEVOURETH.

2  Sam.  11.  25.  the  sword  d.  one  as  well  as  another
Prov.  19.  28.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  d.  iniquity
20. 25.  a  snare  to  the  man  who  d.  that  which  is  holy
Isa.  5. 24.  as  fire  d.  stubble,  and  flame  chafif,  Joel  2.5.
Lam.  2.  3.  like  a  flaming  fire  which  d.  round  about
Ezek.  15.  4.  behold,  the  fire  d.  both  the  ends  of  it
Joel  2.  3.  a  fire  d.  before  them,  behind  them  a  flame
Llab.  1. 13.  the  wicked  d.  man  that  is  more  righteous
llev.  11.  5.  if  any  hurt  them,  fire  d.  their  enemies
DEVOURING.

Exod.  24.17.  his  appearance  was  liked,  fire  on  mount
Psal.  52. 4.  thou  lovest  all  d.  words,  O  tongue
Isa.  29.  6.  thou  shalt  be  visited  with  d.  fire,  30.  30.
30.  27.  and  his  tongue  is  as  a  d.  fire.

33. 14.  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  d.  fire  ?
DEVOUT.

Imkel.  25.  Simeon  wasjustand  d.waiting  forconsol.
Acts  2. 5.  there  were  at  Jerusalem  Jews,  d.  men
8. 2.  d.  men  carried  Stephen  to  his  burial  lament.

10.  2.  Cornelius  was  a  d.  man  ||  7.  a  d.  soldier

13.  50.  but  the  .Tews  stirred  up  the  d.  women
17. 4.  of  the  d.  Greeks  a  great  multitude  believed

17.  Paul  disputed  with  the  Jews  and  d.  persons

22. 12.  Ananias  a  d.  man,  according  to  the  law
DEW

Is  a  small  rain,  which  falling  on  the  ground  in
the  morning,  doth  keep  it  moist,  and  make  it
fruitful.  In  warm  countries ,  and  in  places  where
it  rains  hut  seldom,  the  night-dews  supply  in
some  sort  the  want  of  rain.  And  therefore  the
bestowing  of  it  is  a  blessing  from  God.  Veut.
33.  13.  Blessed  of  the  Lord  be  Joseph’s  land
for  the  dew  ;  and  the  withholding  of  it  is  a  curse :
2  Sam.  1.  21.  Ye  mountains  of  Gilboa,  let
there  be  no  dew  on  you.  Ilushai  compares  an
army  sallying  upon  the  enemy  to  the  dew  de¬
scending  on  the  ground,  2  Sam.  17.  12.  God
promises  to  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel,  Hos.  14.
5.  Though  they  were  as  withered  and  dying  grass,
yet  he  would  refresh  and  strengthen  them  :  By
bestowing  upon  them  his  grace  and  Spirit,  he
would  make  them  fruitful  and  flourishing .  This
comparison  of  God's  visitation  of  his  people  to
dew,  is  remarkable  in  several  places  of  Scrip¬
ture.  Isa.  26.  19.  Thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of
herbs ;  Or,  thy  dew  is  a  bright  dew,  a  dew  of
light  and  dawn.  The  prophet  there  speaks  of  the
captivity  of  Babylon,  as  of  a  state  of  death  :  Thy
dead  men  shall  live  ;  but  God's  visitation  of  his
people,  his  favour  and  blessing,  would  recover
them  in  some  sort  to  life  and  light,  would  make
them  revive  and  flourish  again.  Heavenly  doc¬
trine,  or  the  word  of  God,  is  likewise  compared
to  dew,  Veut.  32.  2.  My  speech  shall  distil  as
the  dew  :  My  doctrine  shall  have  the  same  effect
upon  your  hearts,  as  the  dew  has  upon  the  earth  •
it  shall  make  them  soft,  pliable,  and  fruitful.
The  prophet  Uosea,  speaking  of  the  goodness  of
hypocrites,  compares  it  to  the  early  dew  that


soon  goetli  away,  that  is  soon  exhaled  by  the  hem
of  the  sun,  Dos.  6.  4.  Brotherly  love,  or  the
communion  of  saints,  is  compared  to  the  dew  which
falls  upon  the  hill  of  llermon,  and  refreshes  and
makes  it  fruitful,  Psal.  13.3.3.  As  the  drops  oj
dew  are  innumerable ,  and  as  they  fall  suddenly
and  secretly  without  being  perceived:  In  allusion
to  these  qualities  of  the  dew,  such  as  were  converted
to  Christ  in  the  earliest  gospel  times  are  compared
to  it,  Psal.  110.  3.  Thou  hast  the dew  of  thy  youth.
It  is  said.  Cant.  5.  2.  My  head  is  filled  with  dew,
and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  night.  Christ
here  alludes  to  the  custom  of  lovers,  who  often
and  willingly  suffer  such  inconveniences  for  their
hopes  and  desires  oj'  enjoying  their  beloved,  and
signifies  his  sufferings  for  the  church's  good:
elsewhere,  for  a  man  to  be  wet  with  the  dew  of
heaven  is  a  sign  of  misery,  Dan.  4.  25.  So
drops,  or  droppings,  signify  troubles,  Amos  6.
t  U.  But  dew  and  rain  upon  the  land  make  it
fruitful ;  so  is  Christ  by  his  doctrine  to  his  church,
Deut.  32.  2.

Gen.  27.  28.  God  give  thee  of  the  d.  of  heaven,  39.
Exod.  16.  f3.  in  the  morning  d.  lay  round  the  host

14.  and  when  the  d.  that  lay  was  gone  up
Nnm.  ll.  9.  when  tl  <1  d.  fell  on  the  camp  in  night
Veut.  32.  2.  my  speech  shall  distil  as  d.  assmall  rain
33. 13  blessed  is  Joseph’s  land  for  d.  and  for  deep
213.  also  his  heaven  shall  drop  down  d.

Judg.  6.  3*.  Gideon  said,  if  d.  be  on  the  fleece  only
39.  on  ground  let  there  be  d.  ||  40.  there  was  d.

2  Sam.  1.  21.  let  there  be  no  d.  nor  rain  upon  you
17:. 12.  we  will  light  on  him  as  the  d.  falleth

1  Kings  17.1. there  shall  not  bed.  nor  rain  these  years
Job  29. 19.  the  d.  lay  all  night  on  my  branch

38.  28.  or  who  hath  begotten  the  drops  of  d.  ?

Psal.  110.  3.  thou  hast  the  d.  of  thy  youth
133.  3.  as  the  d.  of  Hermon,  and  as  the  d.  that
Prov.  3.  20.  and  the  clouds  drop  down  the  d.

19.  12.  but  his  favour  is  as  d.  upon  the  crass
Cant.  5.  2.  open  to  me,  for  my  head  is  filled  with  d.
Isa.  18.  4.  like  a  cloud  of  d.  in  the  heat  of  harvest
26. 19.  for  thy  d.  is  as  the  d.  of  herbs,  earth  cast  out
Van.  4.  15.  let  it  be  wet  with  the  d.  of  heaven,  23.

25.  they  shall  wet  thee  with  the  d.  of  heaven
33.  and  his  body  was  wet  with  the  d.  5.  21.

Hos.  6. 4.  goodness  is  as  early  d.  it  goeth  away,  13.  3,

14.  5.  1  will  be  as  d.  to  Israel,  he  shall  grow  as  lily
Mic.  5.  7-  Jacob  shall  be  as  the  d.  from  the  Lord
Hag.  1.  10.  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed  from  d.
Zech.  8.  12.  and  the  heavens  shall  give  their  d.

DIADEM.

Job  29.  14.  my  judgment  was  as  a  robe  and  a  d.

Isa.  28.5.  and  for  a  d.of  beauty  to  residue  of  his  peo,
62.  3.  and  a  ro\al  d.  in  the  hand  of  thy  God
Ezek.  21.  26.  remove  the  d.  take  off  the  crown
DIAL.

2  Kings  20. 11.  gone  down  in  the  d.of  Ahaz, Isa. 3V,.  8.

DIAMOND.

Exod.  28. 18.  and  the  second  row  a  d.  39.  11.

Jer.  17.  1.  sin  of.)  udah  is  written  with  point  of  a  d.
Ezek.  28. 13.  tiled,  the  beryl,  was  covering  of  Tyrus-
DID.

1  Sam.  30.  t  21.  David  asked  them  how  they  d.

1  Kings  11.25.  besides  the  mischief  that  Iladad  d.

2  Kings  18. 3.  d.  right  according  to  al  l  that  David  d.
Neh.  2. 16.  knew  not  whither  1  went  or  what  I  d.
Esth.  2. 11.  Mordecai  walked  to  know  how  Esther  d.
Mat.  12.  3.  have  ye  notread  what  David  d.  ?

21.  15.  when  they  saw  wonderful  things  that  he  d .
Marks.  8.  they  heard  what  great  things  he  d.

John  2.  23.  they  saw  miracles  which  he  d.  6.  2, 14.

4.  29.  who  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  d.  39.

9.  26.  then  said  they,  what  d.  he  to  thee  ?

15. 24.  done  the  works  which  none  other  man  d.
Acts  3. 17.  thro’  ignorance  ye  d.  it,  as  d.  your  rulers

26.  10.  which  thing  I  also  d.  in  Jerusalem
2  Cor.  8.  5.  and  this  they  d.  not  as  we  hoped

1  Pet.  2.  22.  who  d.  no  sin,  nor  was  guile  found

DID  joined  with  as.

Gen.  21.  1.  the  Lord  d.  to  Sarah  as  he  had  spoken
43. 17-  the  man  d.  as  Joseph  hade,  and  brought  men
50.  12.  his  sons  d.  to  him  as  he  commanded  them
Exod.  7-  6.  d.  as  the  Lord  commanded,  10,  20.  |  12.
28,  50.  1  39.  32.  Lev.  8.  4.  1  16.  34.  |  24.  23.
Num.  1.  54.  |  2.  34.  1  20.  27.  27.  22.  I  31.  31.
Lev.  4.  20.  as  he  d.  with  the  bullock,  16. 15.

Num.  23.  2.  Balak  d.  as  Balaam  bad  spoken,  30.
Veut.  2. 12.  as  Israel  d.  to  the  land  of  his  possession

22.  as  he  d.  to  children  of  Esau  ||  3.  6.  as  d.  to  Sihon
Josh.  4. 18.  waters  flowed  over  banks, a.?  they  d. before

23.  as  the  Lord  your  God  d.  to  the  Red  sea
10.28.  d.  to  king  of  Makkedah,  as  he  d.  to  Jericho

11.  9.  Joshua  d.  to  them  as  the  Lord  bade  him

Judg.  6.27.  Gideon  d.  as  the  Lordsaid  to  him

15.  11.  as  they  d.  to  me,  so  I  have  done  to  them

2  Sam.  3.  36.  as  what  the  kinc  d.  pleased  the  people

5.  25.  and  David  d.  so  as  the  Lord  commanded  him

1  Kings  21.  11.  elders  d.  as  Jezebel  had  sent  to  them

26.  Ahab  d.  according  as  d.  the  Amorites

2  Kings  8. 18.  Jehoram,  as  d.  the  house  of  Ahab
17.  11.  as  d.  the  heathen  which  the  Lord  carried

41 .  as  d.  their  fathers,  so  do  they  to  this  day

1  Chron.  14.  16.  David  d.  as  God  commanded  him

2  Chr.  25.  4.  d.  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses
Jsa.  58.  2.  seek  me  as  a  nation  that  d.  righteousness
Van.  6.  10.  Daniel  gave  thanks  as  he  d.  aforetime
Mat.  1.  24.  Josephs,  as  the  angel  had  bidden  him

21.6.  and  d.  as  Jesus  commanded  them,  £6.  19.

28. 15.  took  money,  so  watch  d.  as  they  were  taught
Luke  9. 54.  and  consume  them  even  as  Elias  d.

Acts  3.  17.  thro’  ignorance  ye  did  it, aw  rf.your  rulers
7. 51 .  ye  resist  II.  Ghost,  as  your  fathers  d.  so  do  ye
11.  17.  God  gave  them  the  like  gift,  as  he  d.  to  us
Lleb.  4. 10.  ceased  from  his  works,  as  God  d.  from  his
DID  joined  with  evil.

Gen.  50.  15.  he  will  requite  us  the  evil  we  d.  him
17.  forgive  thy  brethren,  for  they  d.  to  thee  evil
Judg.  2.  11.  d.  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  3.  7,  12.

|  4.  1.  1  6.  1. 1  10.  6.  1  13. 1.  1  Kings  14.  22.  |  15.
26,  34. 1  16.  7,  30.  2  Kings 8. 27.  I  13.  2, 11.  |  14.

24.  |  15.  9, 18, 24, 28. 1  17. 2.  2  Chron.  22.  4.


n  i  e


DIE


0  IE


1  Kings  11. 6.  Solomon  d.evil  in  sight  vii  the  Lord

2  Kings  21 .  2.  Manasseh  d.  evil,  2  Chron.  33. 2.

23.  32.  Jehoahaz  d.  evil  |i  37-  Jehoiakim  d.  evil

24.  9.  .lehoiachim  d.  evil  ||  19-  Zedekiah  d.  evil
2  Chr.  12. 14.  Rehoboam  d.  e.  ||  33. 22.  Amon  rf.  e.

Neh.  9.  2B.  but  after  they  had  rest,  they  rf.  evil  .

13. 7.  understood  the  e.  that  Eliashibrf.  for  Tobiah
Isa.  65. 12.  not  hear,  butrf.  e.  before  mine  eyes,  66. 4.

2  Tim.  4.  14.  Alexander  copper-smith  d.  me  much  e.

D 1 D  not .

Exnd.  1.  17.  midwives  d.  not  as  king  commanded
2  Kings  16. 2.  Ahaz  d.n.  what  was  right,  2.  C//r.  28.1.
Neh.  13. 18.  d.  not  your  fathers  thus,  and  d.  not  our  G.

bring  all  this  evil  upon  us  and  upon  this  city  t
Jer.  11.  8.  commanded  to  do,  but  they  d.  them  not
Jonah  3.  10.  God  repented  of  the  evil,  and  d.  it  not
Mat.  13. 58.  he  d.  not  many  mighty  works  there

25.  45.  d.  it  not  to  one  of  these,  ye  d.  it  not  to  me
John  8.  40.  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  this  rf.  tint  Abraham
2  C'or.  7. 12.  1  d.  it  not  for  his  cause  had  done  wrong

D 1 D  so.

Gen.  6.  22.  thus  did  L'oah,  as  G.  command,  so  d.  he
29.  28.  .Jacob  d.  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week
42. 20.  bring  your  youngest  brother,  and  they  d.  so
Ekl d.  7.  6.  as  the  Lord  commanded  so  d.  they,  10.

1 12.  28,  50.  1  39,  32.  1  40.  16.  Num.  1.  54.
22.  magicians  d.  so,  8.  7.  18.  II  24.  T/)rd  d.  so
17.6.  Moses  d.  so,  ||  10.  Josh.  ||  Num.  8. 3.  Aaronrf.  so
Num.  36.  10.  so  d.  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad
Josh.  6.  14.  they  compassed  the  city,  so  they  d.  six  d.

11. 15.  so  d.  Moses  command,  and  so  d.  Joshua
Judg.  2.  17.  they  d.  not  so  ||  6. 40.  G.  d.  so  that  night
1  Sam.  1.  7.  as  he  d.  so  year  by  year,  when  she  went

2. 14.  so  they  d.  in  SI11I0I1  to  all  the  Israelites
27.  11.  so  d.  David,  and  so  will  be  his  manner

1  Kings  12.32.  so  d.  he  in  Beth  el,  sacrificing
14.  4.  Jeroboam’s  wife  d.  so,  and  went  to  Shiloh

Ezra  6.  13.  so  they  d.  ||  Neh.  5.  15.  but  so  d.  not  1
Isa.  20.  2.  Isaiah  rf.  so,  walking  naked  and  barefoot
Jer.  SB.  12.  Jeremiah  d.  so  ||  Ezek.  12.  7-  and  I  d.  so
Mat.  9.  19.  Jesus  arose,  and  so  d.  his  disciples
Luke  6.  10.  stretch  forth  thy  hand,  and  he  d.  so

26.  so  d.  their  fathers  to  the  false  prophets
John  18. 15.  followed  Jesus,  and  so  rf.  another  discip.
Acts  19. 14.  there  were  seven  sons  of  Sceva  who  d.  so
Thus  DID.

Gen.  42.  25.  to  fill  their  sacks,  thus  d.  he  unto  them
Exod.  36.  29.  thus  d.  he  to  both  of  them  in  corners

40. 16.  thus  d.  Moses,  according  as  Ld.  commanded
Num.  32.  8.  thus  d.  your  fathers  when  I  sent  them

2  Sam.  12.  31.  thus  d.  he  to  all  the  cities  of  Ammon
2  Kings  16.  16.  thus  d.  Urijah  the  priest,  according
2  Chr.  24.  11.  thus  they  d.  day  by  day,  and  gathered

31.  20.  thus  d.  Ilezekiah  throughout  all  Judah
Neh.  13. 18.  d.  not  your  fathers  thus,  and  did  not  G.
Job  l.  5.  sanctified  them,  thus  d.  Job  continually
DIDST.

Gen.  20. 6.  thou  d.  this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  heart
Num.  21.  34.  shaltdo  as  thou  d.  to  Sihon,  Dent.  3. 2.
Josh.  8.  2.  shaltdo  as  thou  d.  to  Jericho  and  her  king
2  Sam.  12.  12.  for  thou  d.  it  secretly,  but  I  will  do

13. 16.  is  greater  than  the  other  that  thou  d.  to  me
1  Kings  2.  44.  that  thou  d.  to  David  my  father

8. 18.  d.  well  that  it  was  in  thy  heart,  2  Chron.  6.  8.
Neh.  9.  17.  thy  wonders  that  thou  d.  among  them
Psal.  39.  9.  I  was  dumb,  because  thou  d.  it  _

44. 1.  fathers  told  us  what  wrork  thou  d.  in  their  days
137.  +  8.  recompenseth  the  deed  which  thou  d.  to  us
Isa.  64.  3.  when  d.  terrible  things  not  looked  for
Acts  7.  28.  wilt  thou  kill  me  as  thou  d.  Egyptian  ?

DIDRACHMA
Is  a  Greek  word  .signifying  a  piece  of  money  of  two
drachms  in  value.  A  Didrachm  was  worth  about
fourteen  pence  English  ;  two  Didrachms,  two  shil¬
lings  and  fourpence,  which  made  an  Hebrew  she
ket.  The  Jews  were  by  the  law  obliged  to  pay
every  one  a  half  shekel  to  the  temple.  It  is  said  in
Mat.  17.  24.  that  they  that  received  the  tribute  or
capitation  of  two  drachms  or  half  a  shekel,  came
and  demanded  it  of  our  Saviour  ;  and  that  he,
having  sent  Peter  to  fish  in  the  lake,  told  him,
that  the  first  fish  he  should  take,  would  have  a
piece  of  money  in  its  mouth,  of  four  drachms  in
value  ;  that  he  should  take  it,  and  give  it  to  the  re¬
ceivers  of  this  tribute  for  both  of  them .

DIE.

See  on  Dead  and  Death.

Gen.  6.  17.  every  thing  that  is  in  the  earth  shall  d.
33. 13.  if  men  over-drive  them,  all  the  flock  will  d.
44.  9.  let  him  rf.  ||  22.  his  father  wrould  d.

46.  30.  now  let  me  rf.  ||  4J.  29.  that  Israel  must  d.
Exod.  7-  18.  the  fish  that  is  in  the  river  shall  d.

9.  4.  nothing  shall  d.  that  is  the  children's  of  Israel

10.  28.  the  day  thou  seest  my  face  thou  shalt  d.

11. 5.  all  the  first-born  in  land  of  Egypt  shall  d.
28.  43.  when  they  come  to  the  altar  to  minister,

that  they'  bear  not  iniquity,  and  d.  I.ev.  22.  9.
Lev.  11.  39.  if  any  beast  of  which  ye  may  eat  d.

20.  20.  they  shall  bear  sin,  they  shall  d.  childless
Num.  4.  15.  shall  not  touch  holy  thing,  lest  they’ d.
20.  when  holy  things  are  covered,  lest  they  d.

6.  9.  if  any  man  d.  very  suddenly  by  him
14.  35.  in  this  wilderness,  and  there  they  shall  d.
16.  29.  if  these  d.  the  common  death  of  all  men
17-  13.  who  cometh  near  tabernacle  shall  d.  18.  22.
18.  3.  not  come  near,  neither  they,  nor  you  also  d.
20.  26.  strip  Aaron,  and  he  shall  d.  on  mount  Hor

23. 10.  let  me  d.  the  death  of  the  righteous

27.  8.  speak,  saying,  if  a  man  d.  and  have  no  son
Deut.  17.  5.  shalt  stone  them  that  they  d.  22. 21,  24.
12.  that  man  shall  d.  \\  18.  20.  prophet  shall  d.

22.  22.  both  shall  d.  ||  25.  the  man  only  shall  d.

24.  3.  if  the  latter  husband  d.  |l7.  that  thief  shall  d.

25.  5.  if  one  d.  and  have  no  children,  Mark  12. 19.

31.  14.  to  Moses,  thy  days  approach  that  thou  d.

32.  50.  behold  land  of  Canaan,  and  rf.  in  the  mount
Judg.  16.  30.  Samson  said  letmerf.  with  Philistines

1  Sam.  2.  33.  all  the  increase  of  thy  house  shall  d.

34.  thy  two  sons,  in  one  day  they  shall  d.  both

14.  45.  the  people  said  to  Saul,  shall  Jonathan  d.

2  Sam.  18.  3.  nor  if  half  of  usd.  will  they  care

1  Kings  11. 12.  when  thy  leetenter  city7,  child  shall  d.

108


Kings  20.  1.  thou  shalt  d.  and  not  live,  Isa.  38. 1.
Chron.  25.  4.  fathers  not  d.  for  the  children,  but
every  man  shall  d.  for  his  own  sin,  Jer.  31.  30.
Job  2.  9  then  his  wife  said  to  him,  curse  God  and  d.

4. 21.  excellency  goeth  away ,  they  d.  without  wisd.
12.  2.  ye  are  the  people,  wisdom  shall  d.  with  you
14.  8.  though  the  stock  thereof  d.  in  the  ground
14.  a  man  d.  shall  he  live  again  ?  all  my  days  wait
34. 20.  in  a  moment  shall  they  d.  people  be  troubled
36. 12.  if  obey  not,  they  shall  d.  without  knowledge
14.  they  d.  In  youth,  their  life  is  among  unclean
Ps.  49. 10.  for  he  seeth  that  wise  men  d.  also  the  fool
104.  29.  thou  takest  away  their  breath,  they  d.

Vrov.  io.  21.  but  fools  d.  for  want  of  wisdom
Eccl  7.  17.  why  shouldest  thou  d.  before  time  ?

9.  5.  living  know7  they  shall  d.  but  dead  know  not
Isa.  22.18.  a  ball  in  large  country,  there  thou  shalt  d.

51  6.  they  that  dwell  therein  shall  d.  in  like  manner

12.  that  shouldest  be  afraid  of  a  mar.  that  shal  1  d.

65.  20.  for  the  child  shall  d.  a  hundred  years  old

Jer.  11.22.  I  will  punish  them,  young  men  shall  d.
by  sv'ord,  their  sons  and  daught.  shall  d.  by  tarn.
16.  4.  they  shall  d.  of  grievous  deaths,  not  lamented
6.  both  the  great  and  the  small  shall  d.  in  this  land
28.  16.  thus  saith  Lord,  this  year  thou  shalt  d.

34.  5.  but  thou  shalt  d.  in  peace,  and  with  burnings
Ezek.  18.  4.  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  d.  20.

28.  8.  thou  shalt  d.  deaths  of  them  that  are  slain

10.  thou  shalt  d.  the  deaths  of  the  uncircumcised
33.  8.  that  wicked  man  shall  d.  in  his  iniquity

07.  they  in  the  caves  shall  d.  of  the  pestilence
Amos  2.  2.  Moab  shall  d.  with  tumult,  with  shouting
6.  9.  if  there  be  ten  men  in  one  house  they  shall  d.
7.11.  Amos  saith,  Jeroboam  shall  d.  by  the  sw-ord
17.  saith  the  Lord,  thou  shalt  d.  in  a  polluted  land
9.10.  the  sinners  of  my  people  shall  d.  by  the  sword
Zech.  11.  9.  then  said  1,  that  that  dieth,  let  it  d.

13.  8.  saith  Lord,  two  parts  shall  be  cut  off  and  d.
Mat.  15.4.  honour  father  and  mother,  he  thatcurseth

father  or  mother,  let  him  d.  the  death,  Mark  7. 10.
22.  24.  if  a  man  d.  having  no  seed,  Luke  20.  28.
J.uke 20.36.  nor  can  they  d.  any  more, equal  to  angels
John  4. 49.  he  saith,  sir,  come  down  ere  my  child  d.

11.  50.  that  one  man  d.  for  the  people,  18.  14.  _

51.  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  d.  for  that  nation

12. 24.  except  a  corn  of  wheat  d.  but  if  it  d.  it  brings
Rom.  5. 7.  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  d.

1  Cor.  15.  22.  for  as  in  Adam  all  d.  so  in  Christ  shall
36.  what  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it  d.

Heb.  7.  8.  and  here  men  that  d.  receive  tithes
Rev.  14. 13.  blessed  are  the  dead  that  d.  in  the  Lord
He  DIE.

Gen.  38. 11. for  he  said,  lestAerf.  as  his  brethren  did
44.31.  when  he  seeth  the  lad  is  not  with  us,  he  will  d.
Exod.  21.  12.  he  that  smiteth  a  man,  so  that  he  d.

14.  shall  take  him  from  mine  altar,  that  he  may  d.
20.  smite  his  servant,  and  he  d.  under  his  hand

22.  2.  if  a  thief  be  found  and  smitten  that  he  d.
Num.  35. 16.  if  he  smite  him  so  that //erf.  20,21,  23
Dent.  13.  10.  I  19.  5,  11. 1  21.  21
17-  wherewith  he  may  rf.  18.  23.  Deut.  19.  12.
Deut.  20.  5.  let  him  return,  lest  he  rf.  in  battle,  6.  7-
Judg .  6.  30.  bring  out  thy  son  that  he  may  rf.

2  Sam.  11.  15.  retire  from  him  that  he  may  rf.

1  Kings  1 .  52.  if  w'ickedness be  inhirn,  he  shall  rf.

2. 1.  the  days  of  David  drew  nigh  that  he  should  rf.
19. 4.  Elijah  requested  forhimself  that  he  might  rf.

2i.  10.  carry7  out  and  stone  him  that  he  may  rf.
Psal.  41.  5.  when  shall  he  rf.  and  his  name  perish  ?
Prov.  5.  23.  he  shall  rf.  without  instruction,  go  astray

15. 10.  and  he  that  hateth  reproof  shall  rf.

19.  16.  but//e  that  despiseth  his  ways  shall  rf.

Jer.  22. 12.  he  shall  rf.  whither  they  led  him  captive

38. 10.  take  up  Jerem.  out  of  dungeon  before  he  rf.
Ezek.  3.19.  if  thou  warn  the  wicked,  he  shal  I  rf.  in  his

iniquity,  20. 1  18.  18,  24,  26. 1  33.  9,  13,  18.
12. 13.  he  shall  not  see  it,  though  he  shall  rf.  there
17.  16.  in  the  midst  of  Babylon  he  shall  rf.

John  12.33.  signifying  what  death  he  should  rf.  18.32.
I  DIE.

Gen.  19.  19.  lest  some  evil  take  me,  and  Id.

26.  9.  Isaac  said,  because  1  said,  lest  I  rf.  tor  her

27.  4.  that  my  soul  may  bless  thee  before  I  rf.

30.  1.  Rachel  said,  give  me  children,  or  else  I  rf.
45.  28.  I  will  go  and  see  him  before  I  rf.

48.  21.  Israel  said  to  Joseph,  behold,  Id.

50.  5.  lo,  Id.  |l  24.  Joseph  said  to  his  brethren  Id.
Deut.  4.  22.  but  I  must  rf.  in  this  land,  I  must  not  go
Judg.  15.  18.  now  shall  Id.  for  thirst,  and  fall  into
Ruth  1. 17.  where  thou  diest  will  I  rf.  and  be  buried

1  Sam.  14.  43.  I  did  but  taste,  and  lo,  I  must  rf.

2  Sam.  19.  37.  that  I  may  rf.  in  mine  ow-n  city
1  Kings  2.  30.  he  said,  nay,  but  I  will  rf.  here
Job  2f.  5.  that  I  sh.  justify  you  ;  till  1  rf.  not  remove

29.18.  then  I  said,  Jsliall  rf.  in  my  nest  and  multiply7
Prov. 30.7.  two  things,  deny  me  them  not  before  I  rf.
Jer.  37.  20.  cause  me  not  to  return,  lest  I  rf.  there
Mat.  26.  35.  tho’  1  should  rf.  w'ith  thee,  Mark  14.  31.

1  Cor.  15.  31. 1  protest  by  your  rejoicing,  I  rf.  daily
Not  DIE.

Gen.  42. 2.  that  we  may  live  and  not  rf.  43. 8. 1  47.19.

20.  so  shall  your  words  be  verified,  ye  shall  not  rf.
Exod.  21.  18.  and  he  rf.  not,  but  keepeth  his  bed

28.  35.  his  sound  shall  be  heard,  that  he  rf.  not
30.  20.  shall  wash  with  water,  that  they  rf.  not,  21.

Lev.  8. 35.  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  that  ye  rf.  not

15.  31.  that  they  rf.  not,  Num.  4.  19. 1  17.  10.

16.  2.  that  he  come  not  at  all  times,  that  he  rf.  not
13.  the  cloud  cover  the  mercy-seat,  that  he  rf.  not

Num.  35. 12.  that  the  manslayer,  rf.  not,  Josh.  20.  9.
Deut.  18.  16.  nor  let  me  see  this  fire,  that  I  rf.  not
33.6.  let  Reuben  live  and  n.d.  let  not  hismenbefew
Judg.  6.  23.  peace  be  to  thee,  fear  not,  thou  shalt  not
rf.  1  Sam.  20. 2.  2  Sam.  12. 13.  |  19.  23.  Jer.  38.  24.

1  Sam.  12.  19.  pray  to  the  L.  for  us,  that  we  rf.  not
20. 14.  shew  me  the  kindness  of  the  L.  that  I  rf.  not

2  Kingsltt.  32.  take  you,  that  ye  may  live  and  not  rf.
2  Chron.  25.  4.  fathers  shall  not  rf.  for  the  children
Psal.  118.  17.  I  shall  not  rf.  but  live,  and  declare
Prov.  23.  13.  if  thou  beatest  him  with  rod,  he  shall

not  rf.  Ezek.  18. 17,21, 28.  I  33. 15.  John 21. 23.
Isa.  51.  14.  and  that  he  should  not  rf.  in  the  pit


Isa.  66. 24.  their  worm  shall  not  rf.  noi  lit  e  quenched
Jer.  11.  21.  that  thou  rf.  not  by  our  hand
34.  4.  Zedekiah,  thou  shalt  not  rf.  by  the  sword
Ezek.  13. 19.  to  slay  the  souls  that  should  not  rf.
Hah.  1.  12.  w7e  shall  not  rf.  L.  thou  hast  ordained
John  6.  50.  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof,  and" not  rf.
21.  23.  saying  that  that  disciple  should  not  rf.

Surely  DIE.

Gen.  2.  17.  thou  shalt  surely  rf.  20.  7.  1  Sam.  14.44.

1  22  16.  1  Kings  2.  37  ,  42.  Jer.  26.  8.  J  zek.  3.
18.  133.8,  14.  .  „  .  ,  .

3.  4.  the  serpent  said,  ye  shall  not  surely  rf.

Num.  26.  65.  the  L.  had  said,  they  shall  surely  rf.
Judg .  13.  22.  we  shall  surely  rf.  because  we  have  seen  .

1  Sam.  14. 39.  tho’  in  Jonath.  my  son,  he  shall  surety  I
rf.  20.  31.  2  Sam.  12. 5.  2  Kings  8. 10.  Ezek.  18.  13.

2  Sam.  12. 14.  the  child  born  to  thee  shall  surety  rf.  [
2  Kings  1. 4.  not  come  down,  but  shall  surely  rf.  6, 16. 1

To  DIE.

Gen.  25. 32.  Esau  said,  behold,  I  am  at  the  point  to  a.
Exod.  14.  11.  to  rf.  in  the  wilderness,  Num.  21.  6.
Num.  18.  +  22.  come  nigh,  lest  they  bear  sin  to  rf.

35. 30.  not  testify  against  any,  to  cause  him  to  rf.  j
t  31.  no  satisfaction  for  him  who  is  faulty  to  rf.
Josh.  2.  +14.  our  life  instead  of  you  to  rf.

1  Sam.  26. 10.  L.  smite  him,  or  his  day  shall  come  to  rf.

16.  ye  are  w'orthy  to  rf.  because  ye  kept  not  ■

28.  9.  layesta  snare  for  my  life,  to  cause  me  to  d.

2  Chron.  32. 11.  to  give  yourselves  to  rf.  by  famine
Psal.  79.  11.  preserve  those  that  are  appointed  to  rf.
88.  15.  1  am  afflicted  and  ready  to  rf.  from  youth
Prov.  19.  1 18.  soul  not  spare,  to  cause  him  to  rf.
Eccl.  3.  2.  a  time  to  be  born,  and  a  time  to  rf.

Jer.  26.  11.  is  worthy  to  rf.  ||  16.  not  worthy  to  rf.

38.  9.  he  is  like  to  rf.  for  hunger  in  the  place

26.  to  return  to  Jonathan’s  house  to  rf.  there
Jonah  4.  3.  for  it  is  better  for  me  to  rf.  than  to  live,  8.)

8.  Jonah  fainted,  and  wished  in  himself  tod.
Ijuke  7. 2.  the  centurion’s  servant  was  ready  to  rf.  1
John  19. 7.  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought  to  rf.
Acts  21.  13.  I  am  ready  also  to  rf.  at  Jerusalem

25. 11.  if  worthy  of  death  I  refuse  not  to  rf.

16.  not  the  manner  of  Romans  to  deliver  any  to  d
Rom.  5. 7.  for  a  good  man  some  would  even  dare  to  d\

1  Cor.  9.  15.  for  it  were  better  for  me  to  rf.  than

2  Cor.  7.  3.  you  are  in  our  hearts  to  rf.  and  live
Phil.  1.  21.  for  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  rf.  is  gaii
Heb.  9.  27.  as  it  is  appointed  to  men  once  to  rf.  but
Rev.  3.  2.  things  that  remain,  that  are  ready  to  rf.

9.  6.  men  shall  desire  to  rf.  and  death  shall  flee  j

We  DIE.

Gen.  47. 15.  why  should  zee  rf.  in  thy  presence,  ?  19
Exod.  14. 12.  than  that  we  should  rf.  in  the  wilderness
20.  19.  let  not  God  speak,  lest  zee  rf.  Deut.  5.  25.
Num.  17. 12.  behold,  we  rf.  we  perish,  we  all  peris!
20.4.  that  zee  and  our  cattle  should  rf.  there

1  Sam.  12. 19.  pray  for  thy  servants,  that  we  rf.  no

2  Sam.  14. 14.  for  we  must  needs  rf.  and  are  as  wate

1  Kings  17. 12.  I  dress  it,  that  we  may  eat  it  and  rf.

2  Kings  7.  3.  they  said,  why  sit  vve  here  till  tve  rf.  ?  4

4.  and  if  they  kill  us,  we  shall  but  rf.

Isa.  22. 13.  for  to-morrow  we  shall  rf.  1  Cor.  15.  32.
John  11.  16.  let  us  go  that  we  may  rf.  with  him
Rom.  14.  8.  and  whether  we  rf.  we  rf.  unto  the  Lord
Ye  DIE.

Gen.  3.  3.  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  rf.

Lev.  10.  6.  neither  rend  your  clothes,  lest  ye  rf.

7.  ye  shall  not  go  out  from  the  door,  lest  ye  rf.
Num.  18.  32.  noLpollute  holy  things,  lest  ye  rf.
Psal.  82. 7.  but^c  shall  rf.  like  men,  and  falllikeon
Isa.  22. 14.  surely  this  iniqui.  not  be  purged  till  ye  ci:
Jer.  22.  26.anoth.  country,  there  shall  ye  rf.  42.  16.

27.  13.  for  why  will  ye  d?  Ezek.  18.  31.  I  33.  11.
42.  22.  know  that  ye  shall  rf.  by  the  sword

John  8. 21.  shall  seek  me,  and  ye  shall  rf.  in  sins,  24,
Rom.  8.  13.  if  ye  live  after  the  flesh  ye  shall  rf.
DIED.

Gen.  7.  21.  all  flesh  rf.  22.  ||  11.28.  and  Haran  rf.

11.  32.  Terah  rf.  ||  23. 2.  Sarah  rf.  ||  25. 8.  Abraham  4

25.  17.  lshmael  rf.  ||  35.  8.  Deborah  the  nurse  rf.

35.  18.  Rachel  rf.  19.  I  48.  7-  II  35.  29.  Isaac  rf.

36.  33.  Belah  rf.  ||  34.  Jobab  rf.  II  35.  Husham  rf.

36.  Hadad  rf.  ||  1  Chr.  1. 51.  ||  36.  37.  Samlah  rf.
38.  Saul  rf.  ||  39.  Baal-hanan  son  of  Achbor  rf.  ?

38. 12.  Judah’s  wife  rf.  ||  46. 12.  Er,  Onan  rf.  Canaa;
50.  16.  Jacob  rf.  ||  26.  Joseph  rf.  Exod.  1.  6.

Exod.  2.  23.  the  king  of  Egypt  rf.  ||  7 •  21.  the  fish  a

8.  13.  the  frogs  rf.  ||  9.  6.  the  cattle  of  Egypt  rf.

16.  3.  would  to  God  we  had  rf.  by  the  hand  of  tl

Lord  in  Egypt,  Num.  14.  2. 1  20.  3.  |  26.  If
Lev.  10. 2.  LT adab  and  Abihu  rf.  before  the  Lord,  It:

1.  Num.  3.  4.  |  26.  61.  1  Chron.  24. 1
Num.  14.  37.  the  searchers  of  the  land  rf.  by  plagut

20. 28.  Aaron  rf.  33,  38,  39.  Deut.  10.  6.  |  32.  50.

16.  49.  now7  they  that  rf.  beside  them  that  rf.

20.  1.  Miriam  rf.  ||  21.  6.  much  people  of  Israel  0

25.  9.  those  that  rf.  in  the  plague  were  24,000

26.  11.  notwithstand.  the  children  of  Korah  rf.  nc

27.  3.  daughters  of  Zelophehad  said,  our  father  rf.  i
wilderness,  butrf.  in  his  own  sin,  and  had  no  sot

Deut.  34.  5.  Moses  rf.  ||  7  -  he  was  120  years  when  he  <
Josh.  5.  4.  even  all  the  men  of  war  rf.  by  the  way

10.  11.  they  were  more  which  rf.  with  hailstones

24. 29.  Joshua  the  son  of  ISIun  rf.  Judg.  2.  8.

33.  Eleazar  the  son  of  Aaron  rf.  1  Chron.  23.  22

Judg.  1.  7.  Adonibezek  rf.  II  3.  11.  Othniel  rf.

8.  32.  Gibeon  rf.  ||  10.  2.  Tola  rf.  II  5.  Jair  rf

9.  49.  all  the  men  of  the  tower  of  Shechem  a.

12.  7.  Jephthah  judged  Israel  six  years,  tt  enrf.

10.  Ibzan  rf.  ||  12.  Ellon  rf.  ||  15.  Abdon  rf.

Ruth  1.  3.  Elimelech  rf.  ||  5.  Mahlon,  Clnlion  rf.

1  Sam.  4.  f  11.  Eli  s  sons,  Ilophniand  Phinehas.

5.  12.  that  rf.  not  were  smitten  with  the  emerods
25.  1.  Samuel  rf.  U  37-  Nabal’s  heart  rf.  within  hn
31. 5.  Saul  was  dead,  his  armour-bearer  fell  on  If.

sword  and  rf.  with  him,  6. 1  Chron.  10.  5.  i

2  Sam.  2.  23.  Asahel  rf.  |!  3.  33.  rf.  Abner  as  a  too!

6.  7.  there  he  rf.  before  the  Lord,  1  Chron.  13.  10
10. l.kingof  child,  of  Ammon  rf.  1  C/zr.19.1.

18.  Shobach  rf.  ]|  11.  17-  Uriah  the  Hittite  rf.

12. 18.  on  seventh  day  child  rf.  feared  to  tell  Davi

17.  23.  Ahithophel  hanged  himself  and  rf.


DIF


I)  I  L


D  IS


2  Sam.  18.  33.  would  to  God  1  nail,  for  thee,  0  Abs.
10. 6.  and  all  we  had  d.  this  day,  it  had  pleased  thee
24. 15.  there  d.  of  people,  even  from  Dan  to  Beersli.

1  Kings  3.  19.  this  woman’s  child  d.  in  the  night

14.  if.  when  she  came  to  the  threshold  the  child  d.
16.  18.  Zimri  d.  ||  22.  Tibni  d.  ||  22. 35.  Ahab  d.  37.

2  Kings  4. 20.  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  noon  and  then  if.
9.  27.  Ahaziah  tied  to  Megiddo  and  d.  there

13.  14.  Elisha  d.  20.  ||  24.  Ilazael  king  of  Syria  d.
23.  34.  Jehoahaz  came  to  Egypt  and  d.  there

1  Chron.  2.  30.  but  Seled  d.  without  children
32.  and  .lether  d.  |[  2  Chron.  16.  13.  Asa  d.
iChron.  24. 15.  Jehoiada  was  full  of  days  when  he  d.

22.  when  he  d.  he  said,  the  Lord  look  on  it
Job  3.  11.  why  d.  1  not  from  the  womb  ?  -
42. 17-  so  .lob  d.  being  old  and  full  of  days
Isa.  6. 1.  in  the  year  that  king  Uzziah  d.  I  saw  Lord
14. 28.  in  the  year  that  king  Ahaz  d.  was  this  burd.
Jer.  28.  17*  Hananiah  d.  ||  Ezek.  11. 13.  Pelatiahrf.
Ezek.  24. 18. 1  spake  in  morn,  and  at  even  my  wife  d.
Hos.  13.  1.  but  when  he  offended  in  Baal,  he  d.
Mat.  22.  27.  seven  brethren  deceased,  and  last  of
all  the  worn.  d.  also,  Mark  12.  22.  Luke  20.  32.
Luke  16.  22.  the  beggar  d.  the  rich  man  also  d.
John  11.  21.  if  had  been  here,  my  brother  not  d.  32.

37.  caused  that  even  this  man  should  not  have  d.
Acts  9.  37.  in  those  days  Dorcas  was  sick  and  d.
Horn.  5.  6.  in  due  time  Christ  d.  for  the  ungodly,  8.
7.  9.  sin  revived  and  I.  d.  ||  8.  34.  it  is  Christ  that  d.

14.  9.  for  to  this  end  Christ  both  d.  rose  and  revived

15.  but  if  thy  brother  be  grieved,  destroy  not  him
with  thy  meat  for  whom  Christ  d.  1  C or.  8.  11.

1  Cor.  15.  3.  how  that  Christ  d.  for  our  sins

2  Cor.  5.  14.  if  one  d.  for  all,  then  were  all  dead
15.  should  live  to  him  who  d.  for  them  and  rose  ag.

t  Thess.  4. 14.  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  d.  and  rose  ag.
5.  10.  who  d.  for  us  that  we  should  live  with  him
Heb.  10.  28.  he  that  despised  Moses1  law  d.  without
11.  13.  these  d.  in  faith,  not  having  received  prom.
22.  by  faith  Joseph  when  he  d.  made  mention  of
Rev.  8.  9.  third  part  of  creatures  which  had  life  d.
11.  many  men  d.  of  waters  that  were  made  bitter
16.  3.  and  every  living  soul  d.  in  the  sea
And  he.  So  he.  That  he  DIED.

Gen.  5.  5.  the  days  of  Adam  were  930  years  andhed.
9.  29.  Noah’s  clays  were  950  years,  and  he  d.

Judg.  4. 21.  Jael  smote  nail  into  his  temple,  so  he  d.

1  Sam.  4.18.  Eli’s  neck  brake  and  he  d.  for  he  was  old
14. 45.  so  the  people  rescued  Jonathan  that  he  d.  not
25.  38.  that  the  Lord  smote  N  abal  that  he  d.

2  Sam.  11. 21.  smote  Abimelech  that  he  d.  in  Thebez
iKingslZ.  18.  stoned  Adoram  that  he  d.2  C7cr.10.18.
2  Kings  1. 17.  so  he  d.  according  to  the  word  of  Lord

7.  17.  people  trod  on  him  in  the  gate  and  he  d.  20.

8.  15.  he  spread  a  cloth  on  his  face,  so  that  he  d.

2  Chr.  13.  20.  the  Lord  struck  J  eroboam  and  he  d.

21.  19.  Jehoram’s  bowels  fell  out,  so  he  d.

Luke  20.  29.  and  he  d.  without  children,  30.

Acts  7.  15.  Jacob  d.  in  Egypt,  he  and  our  fathers
Rom.  6.  10.  for  in  that  he  d.  he  d.  unto  sin  once

2  Cor.  5.  15.  that  he  d.  for  all,  that  they  who  live
DIES'!'.

Ruth  1. 17.  where  thou  d.  will  I  die  and  there  be  bur.
DIET.

Jer.  52.  34.  for  d,  there  v-as  a  continual  d.  given  him
DIET  II

Lev.  7.  24.  fat  of  beast  that  d.  of  itself  shall  not  eat

22.  8.  what  d.  of  itself  shall  not  eat,  Deul.  14.  21.
Sum.  16.  t  29.  if  these  men  die  as  every  man  d.

19. 14.  w’hen  a  man  d.  in  a  tent  all  shall  be  unclean

2  Sam.  3.  33.  the  king  said,  died  A  bner  as  a  fool  d.  ?

1  Kings  14.  11.  him  that  d.  in  the  city  shall  dogs  eat
16.  4.  d.  in  the  field  fowls  of  the  air  eat,  21.  24.

Job  14. 10.  man  d.  and  wasteth  away,  gives  up  ghost
2L  23.  one  d.  in  his  full  strength,  being  at  ease
25.  another  d.  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul
36. 1 14.  their  soul  d.  in  youth,  life  among  unclean
Psal.  49. 17.  w'hen  he  d.  he  shall  carry  nothing  away
Prov.  11.  7.  when  a  wicked  man  d.  his  expectation

perish

fleet.  2.  16.  and  how  d.  the  wise  man  5  as  the  fool  ?
3.  19.  as  the  one  d.  so  d.  the  other,  all  one  breath
Isa.  50.  2.  their  fish  stinketh  and  d.  for  thirst
59.  5.  he  that  eateth  of  their  eggs  d.  what  is  crushed
Ezek.  4.  14.  nor  eaten  that  which  d.  of  itself
18.26.  committeth  iniquity,  and  d.  in  them
32.  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  d.
Zech.  It.  9.  then  said  I,  that  that  d.  let  it  die
Mark  9.  44.  where  their  worm  d.  not,  46,  48.

Rom.  6.  9.  Christ  being  raised  from  dead  d.  no  more
14.  7.  none  of  us  liveth  and  no  man  d.  to  himself
DYED.

Exod.  25.  5.  take  of  them  rams’-skins  d.  red,  and
shittim-wood,  26.  14.  1  35.  7-  I  36.  19.  139.  34.
Isa.  63.  1.  cometh  with  d.  garments  from  Bozrah
Ezek.  23. 15.  exceeding  in  d.  attire  upon  their  heads
Rah.  2.  t  3.  the  valiant  men  are  d.  in  scarlet
_  DYING.

■’S71-  2.  +  17.  when  thou  eatest,  d.  thou  shalt  die
Auw.  17.  13.  shall  w'e  be  consumed  with  d.  ?

"lark  12.  20.  and  the  first  d.  left  no  seed
Luke  8.  42.  Jairus’s  only  daughter  lay  a  d.

2  Cor .  4. 10.  bearing  in  the  body  the  d.  of  Lord  Jesus

0.  9.  as  d.  and  behold  we  live,  as  chastened  and  not
zieb.  11.  21.  by  faith,  Jacob  when  d.  blessed  sons  of
„  DIFFEE.

Pam.  2.  t  18.  and  thou  triest  the  things  that  d.
\Cor.  4.  7.  who  maketh  thee  to  d.  from  another  ?
zhtl.  1.  +  10.  that  ye  may  try  the  things  that  d.
r  J  DiFFEREN  CE.

ffXod.  11.7.  Lord  put  a  d.  between  Egyptians  and  Is.
t-tev- 10. 10.  may  put  a  d.  betw'een  holy  and  unholy
00  t0  ma*(e  a  J-  between  unclean  and  clean
-0.  25.  put  a  d.  between  clean  beasts  and  unclean
hiey  have  put  no  d.  they  shewed  no  d.
44.  .3.  they  shall  teach  my  people  the  d.  betw.  holy
frets  15.  9.  and  put  no  d.  between  us  and  them

3-  22.  on  them  that  believe,  for  there  is  no  d.
10. 12.  there  is  norf.  between  the  Jew  and  Greek
14.  f  23.  he  that  putteth  a  d.  between  meats
tjT‘„  jl -  ‘  t*lere  is  d-  between  a  wife  and  a  virgin

June  J2.  or  some  have  compassion  making  a  d.


DIFFERENCES.

1  Cor.  12. 5.  there  are  d.  of  administrations
DIFFERETH.

1  Cor.  15. 41.  one  star  d.  from  another  in  glory
Gal.  4. 1.  heir  when  a  child  d.  nothing  from  a  servant

DIFFERING.

Rom.  12. 6.  gifts  d.  according  to  the  grace  given
DIFFICULT.

Zech.  8. 1 6.  if  it  be  d.  in  the  eyes  of  this  people
DIG.

Exod.  21.  33.  if  a  man  d.  a  pit,  and  not  cover  it
Deut.  8.  9.  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  d.  brass

23. 13.  thou  shalt  have  a  paddle,  and  d.  therewith
Job  3.  21.  d.  for  it  more  than  for  hid  treasures

6.  27.  and  ye  d.  a  pit  for  your  friend

11.  18.  thou  shalt  d.  about  thee,  take  rest  in  safety
24. 16.  in  the  dark  they  d.  through  houses  marked

39.  t  21.  his  feet  d.  in  the  valley

Ezek.  8. 8.  he  said,  son  of  man,  d.  now  in  the  wall

12.  5.  d.  thou  through  the  wall  in  their  sight,  12.
Amos 9.  2.  though  they  d.  into  hell,  tho’  they  climb
Luke  13.8.  Lord,  let  it  alone,  till  I  shall  d.  about  it

16.  3.  1  cannot  d.  to  beg  I  am  ashamed
DIGGED.

Gen.  21. 30.  may  be  a  witness  that  I  have  d.  this  well
26.  15.  the  wells  his  father’s  servants  had  d.  18.

19.  J saac’s  servants  d.  in  the  valley,  21,  22,  25.
32.  and  told  Isaac  of  the  well  that  they  had  d.

49.  6.  for  in  their  self-will  they  d.  down  a  wall

50.  5.  in  my  grave  which  I  had  d.  for  me  bury  me
Exod.  7-  24.  all  the  Egyptians  d.  for  water  to  drink
Num.  21.  18.  the  princes  d.  the  well,  the  nobles  d.
Dent.  6. 11.  wells  d.  thou  diggedst  not,  Neh.  9.  25.

2  Kings  19.  24.  I  have  d.  and  drunk  strange  waters,

and  dried  up  all  the  rivers  of  places,  Isa.  37.  25.
2  Chron.  16.  +  14.  sepulchres  he  had  d.  for  himself
26. 10.  Uzziah  d.  many  wells  for  his  cattle
Psal.  7. 15.  made  a  pit  and  d.  it,  and  is  fallen,  57. 6.
35. 7-  without  cause  they  d.  a  pit  for  my  soul

40.  + 6.  mine  ears  hast  thou  d.  offering  not  required

94. 13.  till  the  pit  be  d.  for  the  wicked

119.  85.  proud  have  d.  pits  for  me  not  after  thy  law
Isa.  5. 6.  it  shall  not  be  pruned  nor  d.  come  up  briers
7.25.  and  on  all  hills  that  be  d.  with  the  mattock

51. 1.  look  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  are  d.
Jer.  13.7.  then  I  went  to  Euphrates  and  d.

18.  20.  they  have  d.  a  pit  for  my  soul,  22.

Ezek.  8.  8.  and  when  I  nad  d.  in  the  wall
Jonah  1.  +  13.  the  men  d.  hard  to  bring  it  to  land
Mat.  21.  33.  hedged  it,  and  d.  a  wine-press  in  it

25.  18.  d.  in  the  earth,  and  hid  his  lord’s  money
Luke  6.  48.  who  d.  and  laid  the  foundation  on  a  rock
Rom.  11.  3.  Lord  they  have  d.  down  thine  altars

DIGGEDST.

Deul.  6. 11.  and  wrells  digged  which  thou  d.  not
DIGGETH.

Prov.  16.  27.  an  ungodly  man  d.  up  evil,  fire  in  lips

26.  27-  whoso  d.  a  pit  shall  fall  therein,  Eccl.  10. 8.

diGgin  g.

Jer.  2.  +  34. 1  have  not  found  it  by  d.  but  on  all  these
DIGNITY.

Gen.  49.3.  Reuben,  thou  art  the  excellency  of  d.
Esth.  6.  3.  what  d.  hath  been  done  to  Mordecai  ?
Eccl.  10.  6.  tollv  is  set  in  great  d.  and  the  rich  sit  in
Ilab.  1.  7.  their  d.  shall  proceed  of  themselves
DIGNITIES.

2  Pet.  2. 10.  are  not  afraid  to  speak  evil  of  d.  Jude  8.
DILIGENCE.

Prov  A.  23.  keep  thy  heart  with  all  d.  for  issues  of  life
Luke  12.  58.  as  thou  art  in  the  way,  give  d.  to  be
Rom.  12.8.  that  ruleth  with  d.  mercy  with  cheerfuln.
2  Cor.  8.  7-  therefore  as  ye  abound  in  faith  and  all  d.
2  Tim.  4.  9.  do  thy  d.  to  come  shortly  to  me,  21.

Ileb.  6. 11.  that  every  one  of  you  shew  the  same  d.

2  Pet.  1.  5.  giving  all  d.  to  add  to  your  faith  virtue

10.  brethren,  give  d.  to  make  your  calling  sure
Jude  3.  when  1  gave  all  d.  to  write  to  you  of  salva.

DILIGENT.

Deut.  19.  18.  the  judges  shall  make  d.  inquisition
Josh.  22. 5.  taker?.  heed  to  do  the  commandment
Psal.  64.  6.  search  iniquity,  accomplish  a  d.  search
77-  6.  with  my  heart  and  my  spirit  made  d.  search
Prov.  10.  4.  but  the  hand  of  the  d.  maketh  rich
12.24.  the  hand  of  the  d.  shall  bear  rule
27.  but  the  substance  of  a  d.  man  is  precious

13.  4.  but  the  soul  of  the  d.  shall  be  made  fat
21. 5.  thoughts  old.  tend  only  to  plenty

22.  29.  seest  thou  a  man  d.  in  his  business  ?

27.  23.  be  thou  d.  to  know  the  state  of  thy  flock

2  Cor.  8. 22.  whom  we  have  oftentimes  proved  d.  but
now  much  more  d.  upon  the  confidence  in  you
2  Tim.  3.  +  10.  but  thou  hast  been  a  d.  follower
Tit.  3. 12.  be  d.  to  come  unto  me  to  N  icopolis
2  Pet.  3. 14.  be  d.  that  ye  be  found  of  him  in  peace
DILIGENTLY.

Exod.\5. 26.  if  thou  wilt  d.  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the
Lord  thy  God,  Deut.  11. 13.  |  28.  1.  Jer.  17.  24.
Lev.  10. 16.  Moses  d.  sought  the  goat  of  sin-offering
Deut.  4. 9.  only  take  heed  and  keep  thy  soul  d.

6.  7-  thou  shalt  teach  them  d.  to  thy  children
17-  you  shall  d.  keep  the  commandments,  11.  22.

13. 14.  make  search,  and  ask  d.  and  if  it  be  truth
24.  8.  take  heed  that  thou  observe  d.  and  do

1  Sam.  20.  +  19.  then  thou  shalt  go  down  d.  and  come
1  Kings  20.  .3.3.  now  the  men  did  d.  observe  whether
Ezra  7-  23.  let  it  be  d.  done  for  the  house  of  God
Job  13. 17.  hear  d.  my  speech  and  declaration,  21. 2.
Psal  AT.  10.  shalt  d.  consider  his  place,  itshall  not  be
119.  4.  hast  commanded  us  to  keep  thy  precepts  d.
Prov.T.  15.  I  came  forth  d.  to  seek  thy  face

11.  27.  he  that  d.  seeketh  good,  procureth  favour

23.  1.  consider  d.  what  is  before  thee

Isa.  21. 7-  he  hearkened  d.  with  much  heed

55. 2.  hearken  d.  to  me,  and  eat  that  which  is  good
Jer.  2. 10.  consider  d.  see  if  there  be  such  a  thing

12.  16.  if  they  w  ill  d.  learn  the  ways  of  my  people
Zech.  6. 15.  it  ye  will  d.  obey  the  voice  of  the  I.ord
Mat.  2. 7-  he  inquired  d.  when  the  star  appeared


8.  Herod  said,  go  and  search  d.  for  the  young  child
16.  which  he  had  d.  inquired  of  the  wise  men
Mark  7.  +  3.  except  they  wash  hands  d.  they  eat  not
Luke  15.  8.  sweep  house  and  seek  d.  till  she  find  it


Acts  18.  25.  he  taught  d.  the  things  of  the  Lord

1  Tim.  5.10.  ifshe  have  d.  followed  every  good  work

2  Tim.  1. 17.  in  Rome  lie  soughtme  d.  and  found  me
Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Zenas  the  lawyer  and  A  polios  on

their  journey  d.  that  nothing  be  wantin.  to  them
Heb.  11.  6.  a  rewarder  of  them  that  d.  seek  him

12. 15.  looking  d.  lest  any  man  fail  of  grace  of  God
1  Pet.  1. 10.  ot  which  the  prophets  searched  d.
DIMINISH,  ED.

Exod.  5. 8.  you  shall  not  rf.ought  thereof,  they  be  idle
11.  not  ought  of  your  work  shall  be  d.  19.

21.  10.  her  duty  of  marriage  shall  he  not  r/.

30. +  15.  the  rich  shall  not  multiply,  the  poor  not  <i
Lev.  25.  16.  according  to  the  years  thou  shalt  d.
Num.  26.  +  54.  to  few  d.  his  inheritance,  33.  +  54.
Deut.  4.  2.  nor  shall  you  d.  ought  from  if,  12.  32.
Prov.  13.  11.  wealth  gotten  by  vanity  shall  be  d.
Isa.  21.  17.  the  mighty  men  of  Kedar  shall  be  d.
Jer.  10.  +  24.  correct  notin  anger,  lest  thou  d.  me
26.  2.  speak  what  1  command  thee,  d.  not  a  word
29.  6.  that  ye  may  be  increased  and  not  d.

48.  +37.  every  head  bald,  and  every  beard  d.

Ezek.  5.  11.  hast  defiled,  therefore  will  1  also  d.  tliee
16.  27-  behold,  1  have  d.  thine  ordinary  food
29. 15. 1  will  d.  them,  they  shall  no  more  rule
DIMINISHING.

Rom.  11.  12.  d.  of  them  be  the  richesof  the  Gentile'
DIM.

Gen.  27.  1.  when  Isaac  was  old  and  his  eyes  d.

48. 10.  now  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  d.  forage
Deut.  34.  7.  Moses’  eye  was  not  d.  nor  force  abated

1  Sam,  3.  2.  Eli’s  eyes  began  to  wax  d.  4.  15.

Job  17.  7.  mine  eye  also  is  d.  by  reason  of  sorrow
Isa.  32.  3.  the  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  d.
Lam.  4. 1.  how'  is  gold  become  d.  !  fine  gold  changed

5. 17.  for  these  things  our  eyes  are  d.  our  heart  faint
DIMNESS.

Isa.  8.  22.  and  behold  trouble  darkness  d.  of  anguish
9.  1.  d.  shall  not  be  such  asw'as  in  her  vexation
DINE,  D.

Gen.  43.  16.  for  thesemen  shall  d.  with  me  at  noon
I.uke  11.  37.  a  Pharisee  besought  him  to  d.  with  him
John 21. 12.  Jesus  saith  to  them,  come  and  d.

15.  so  when  they  had  d.  Jesus  saith  to  Simon
DINNER.

Prov.  15.  17.  better  is  a  d.  of  nerbs  where  love  is
Mat.  22.  4.  behold,  1  have  prepared  my  d.  my  oxen
Luke  11.  38.  that  he  had  not  first  washed  before  d.
14. 12.  when  makest  a  d.  or  supper,  call  not  friends
DIP.

Exod.  12.  22.  d.  it  in  the  blood  that  is  in  the  basin
Lev  A.  6.  the  priest  shall  d.  his  finger,  17.  14,  36.

14.  6.  d.  the  cedar  wood  and  the  living  bird,  51.
Num.  19. 18.  clean  person  should  d.  hyssop  in  water
Deut.  33.  24.  Moses  said,  let  Asher  d.  his  foot  in  oil
Ruth  2.  14.  Boaz  said  to  Ruth,  d.  morsel  in  vinegar
Luke  16.  24.  send  Lazarus  that  he  may  d.  his  finger
DIPPED,  ETH.

Gen.  37.  31.  and  they  d.  the  coat  in  the  blood
Josh.  3.  15.  the  priests’  feet  were  d.  in  brim  of  water

2  Kings  5.  14.  Naaman  d.  in  Jordan  seven  times
Psal.  68.  23.  that  thy  foot  may  be  d.  in  blood
Mat.  26. 23.  he  that  d.  his  hand  with  me  in  the  dish,

the  same  shall  betray  me,  Mark  14.  20.
John  13.  26.  to  whom  1  give  a  sop,  when  1  haver/,
it :  when  he  had d.  the  sop,  he  gave  it  to  Judas
DIPT.

Lev.  9.  9.  Aaron  d.  his  finger  in  the  blood

1  Sam.  14. 27.  he  d.  the  end  of  rod  in  an  honey  comb

2  Kings  8. 15.  Ilazaei  took  a  cloth  and  d.  it  in  water
Rev.  19. 13.  was  clothed  with  a  vesture  d.  in  blocd

DIRECT.

Gen.  46.  28.  he  sent  Judah  tor/.  his  face  to  Goshen
Psal.  5.  3.  in  the  morning  will  1  d.  my  prayer
Prov.  3.  6.  acknowledgehim,  he  shall  d.  thy  paths
11.  5.  the  righteousness  of  the  perfect  shall  d.

Eccl.  10.  10.  but  wisdom  is  profitable  to  d.

Isa.  45. 13.  have  raised  him  up,  1  will  d.  all  his  ways
61.  8.  I  will  d.  their  work  in  truth  and  make
Jer.  10.  23.  it  is  not  in  man  that  v'alketh  to  r/.bis  steps

1  Thess.  3.  11.  our  L.  J  esus  Christ  d.  our  vray  to  you

2  Thess.  3.  5.  Lord  d.  your  hearts  into  the  love  of  G .

DIRECTED.

Job  32. 14.  he  hath  not  d.  his  words  against  me
Psal.  119.  5.  O  that  my  ways  were  d.  to  keep  stat.
141.  +  2.  let  my  prayer  be  d.  as  incense,  and  lifting
Isa.  40. 13.  who  hath  d.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?
DIRECTETIL

Job  37-  3.  he  d.  it  under  the  whole  heaven
Prov.  16.  9.  Ids  ways,  but  the  Lord  d.  his  steps
21.  29.  as  for  the  upright  he  d.  his  W'ay
DIRECTION.

Num.  21.18.  princes  judged  it  by  d.  of  thelawgivei
Psal.  19.  +  4.  their  d.  is  gone  out  through  the  earth
DIRECTLY.

Num.  19.  4.  sprinkle  blood  d.  before  the  tabernacle
Ezek.  42.  12.  even  the  way  d.  before  the  wall
DIRT.

Judg  A.  22.  the  fat  closed,  and  the  d.  came  out
Psal.  18.  42.  1  did  cast  them  out  as  d.  in  the  streets
Isa.  57.  20.  W'hose  waters  cast  up  mire  and  d.

DISALLOW,  ED.

Num.  30.  5.  because  her  father  d.  her
8.  but  if  her  husband  d.  her  ||  11.  he  d.  her  not
1  Pet.  2.  4.  d.  indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of  God
7.  the  stone  which  the  builders  d.  is  made  hesm
DISANNUL.  W

Job  40.  8.  wilt  thou  also  d.  my  judgment?

Isa.  14.  27.  Lord  hath  purposed  who  shall  d.  it?

Gal.  3.  17.  this  covenant  the  law  cannot  d.
DISANNULLED.

Isa.  28.  18.  your  covenant  with  death  shall  be  d.
DISANNULLETH.

Gal.  3. 15.  covenant  no  man  d.  or  addeth  thereto
DISANNULLING.

Heb.  7.  18.  there  is  a  d.  of  the  commandment
DISAPPOINT.

Psal.  17.  13.  arise,  O  l  ord,  d.  him,  cast  him  down
DISAPPOINTED.

Prov.  15.  22.  without  counsel  purposes  are  d.

DISAPP01NTETH.

Job  5.  12.  he  d.  the  devices  of  the  crafty

109


D  1  S


JL>  1  S


DIS


DISCERN.  .

Discerning  of  spirit  is  one  of  the  gifts  of  God,  men-
nonedby  the  apostle  Paul,  1  Cor.  12.  10.  It con¬
sists  in  discerning  among  those  who  say  they  are
inspired  by  God,  whether  they  are  animated  or  in¬
spired  by  a  good  or  evil  spirit,  whether  they  are  true
or  false  prophets.  This  gift  was  oj  very  great  im¬
portance,  both  in  the  Old  Testament,  wherein  it  is
found  that  false  prophets  often  rose  up,  and  se¬
ducers  who  deceived  the  people  ;  and  also  in  the
New,  in  the  primitive  ages  of  the  church,  when
supernatural  gifts  were  common;  when  the  mes¬
senger  of  Satan  was  sometimes  transjormed  into  an
angel  of  light,  and  false  apostles,  under  the  out¬
ward  appearance  of  sheep,  concealed  the  sentiments
of  ravening  wolves.  Wherefore  the  evangelist  cau¬
tioned  believers,  saying.  Believe  not  every  spn  it,
but  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  be  ot  God,  1
John  4. 1.  See  in  Deut.  18.  20,  21,  22.  the  marks
which  cltc  given  by  God  to  distinguish  true  JTOQTh

d/thou  what  is  thine  with  me,  and  take  it
38. 25.  she  said,  d.  I  pray  thee,  whose  are  these
°  Jam  14. 17.  so  is  my  lord  the  king  to  d.  good  and  bad
~ig  35.  and  can  1  d.  between  good  and  evil  ?

1  Kings  3.  9.  that  l  may  d.  between  good  and  bad
11.  thou  hast  asked  understanding  to  d.  judgment)
Ezra  3.  13.  the  people  could  not  d.  the  noise  ot  joy
fob  4.  16.  but  l  could  not  d  the  form  thereof
~6.  30.  cannot  my  taste  d.  perverse  things .

Ezek.  44. 23.  cause  them  d.  betw.  unclean.and  clean
Jonah  4. 11.  cannot  d.  between  right  hand  and  left

Mai  3.  18.  d.  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked

Mat.  16.  3.  ye  can  d.  the  face  of  the  sky,  Luke  12. 56.
Ileb  5  14.  their  senses  exercised  to  d.  good  and  evil
DISCERNED,  ETH.  .

Gen.  27.  23.  he  d.  him  not,  his  hands  were  hairy
1  Kings  20.  41 .  and  the  king  of  Israel  d.  him
Neh.  13.  +  24.  they  d.  not  to  speak  in  .1  ews  language
Prov.  7. 7.  1  d.  among  the  youth  a  young  man
Eccl.  8.  5.  a  wise  man  d.  time  and  judgment
Rom.  14.  +  23. that  d.  between  meats  is  damned,  it  eat
1  Cor.  2.14.  nor  know,  because  they  are  spiritually  d.

1 15.  he  that  is  spiritual  d.  all  things,  vet  lie  him¬
self  is  d.  of  no  man,  for  who  hath  known
DISCERNING.

1  Cor.  11.  29.  eateth  unworthily,  not d.  Lord  sbody
12. 10.  to  another  is  given  d.  ot  spirits,  to  another
DISCERN  ER.

Ileb.  4.  12.  word  is  a  d.  of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart
DISCHARGE,  D.

1  Kings  5.  9.  and  will  cause  them  to  be  d.  there
Eccl.  8. 8.  day  of  death,  there  is  no  d.  in  that  war
DISCIPLE.

The  word  disciple,  absolutely  taken,  signifies  in  the
New  Testament ,  a  believer,  a  Christian,  a  scholar ,
a  follower  of  Christ,  or  his  apostles  ;  as  in  Acts
6. 1.  When  the  number  of  the  disciples  was  mul¬
tiplied,  there  arose  a  murmuring  ot  the  Grecians
against  the  Hebrews,  because  their  widows  were
neglected  in  the  daily  ministration.  And  in  Acts
9.  1.  Saul  yet  breathing  out  threatening^  and
slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord,  that
is,  against  the  followers  of  Christ.

The  name  of  disciple  is  often  set  down  for  that
of  apostle  ;  particularly  in  the  Gospel,  Mat.  5.

1.  ]  8.  23.  1 10.  1.  but  in  other  places  the  apostles
are  distinguished  from  disciples.  The  apostles
-were  chosen  particularly  by  Christ  out  of  the
•number  of  his  disciples,  to  be  the  stewards  of  his
most  secret  mysteries,  and  the  principal  minis¬
ters  for  propagating  and  establishing  the  Christian
religion.  They  were  twelve  in  number,  Mat.  10.

2.  Luke  6.  13.  .

But  the  disciples  who  followed  our  Saviour  from  the
beginning,  and  are  called  simply  disciples,  awe
seventy  in  number.  The  precepts  and  admonitions
which  our  Saviour  gave  them,  when  he  sent  them
to  preach  in  the  cities  of  Judea,  a>'e  recorded  in
Luke  10.  from  the  beginning  to  verse  17*

Mat.  10.  24.  d.  is  not  above  his  master,  Luke  6.  40.

25.  enough  for  the  d.  that  he  be  as  his  master
42.  whoso  shall  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  a  d.

27.  57.  Joseph  of  Arimathea  himself  was  Jesus’  d.
John  9.  28.  thou  art  his  d.  we  are  Moses’  disciples

18.  15.  and  so  did  another  d.  that  d.  was  known

16.  then  went  out  that  other  d.  that  was  known

19.  26.  the  d.  standing  by,  whom  Jesus  loved

27.  then  saith  he  to  that  d.  behold  thy  mother,  and
from  that  hour  that  d.  took  her  to  his  own  home
38.  being  a  d.  but  secretly,  for  fear  of  the  Jews

20.  2.  the  other  d.  whom  Jesus  loved,  21. 7,  20.

3.  Peter  went  forth,  and  that  other  d.  and  came

4.  the  other  d.  did  outrun  Peter,  and  came  lirst
8.  then  went  in  also  that  other  d.  and  he  saw

21.  23.  this  saying,  that  that  d.  should  not  die
24.  this  is  the  d.  which  testitieth  these  things

Acts  9. 10.  there  was  a  certain  d.  at  Damascus

26.  but  they  believed  not  that  he  was  a  d.

36.  now  there  was  at  Joppa  a  d.  named  Tabitha

16.  1.  a  certain  d.  was  there,  named  Timotheus
21.  16.  an  old  d.  with  whom  we  should  lodge

My  DISCIPLE.

Luke  14.  26.  if  he  hate  not  his  life,  cannot  be  my  d.

27.  whoso  doth  not  bear  his  cross,  cannot  be  my  d.
<23.  that  forsaketh  not  all,  he  cannot  be  my  d.

*  DISCIPLES.

Mat.  9. 14.  then  came  to  him  the  d.  ot  John,  saying
10. 1.  when  he  had  called  unto  him  his  twelve  d.
11.  1.  he  had  made  an  end  of  commanding  his  rf.
14.  26.  when  the  d.  saw  him  walking  on  the  sea

17.  6.  when  the  d.  heard  it,  they  fell  bn  their  face

19. 13.  and  the  d.  rebuked  them,  Mark  10. 13.

20. 17.  Jesus  took  the  twelve  d.  apart  in  the  way
21.  1.  Jesus  sent  two  d.  saying,  go  into  the  village
22. 16.  the  Pharisees  sent  unto  him  their  d.

26.  26.  Jesus  took  bread,  and  gave  it  to  the  d.

35. 1  will  not  deny  thee,  likewise  also  said  the  d.
56.  then  all  the  d.  forsook  him,  and  fled
IMark  2.  18.  why  do  the  d.  of  John  and  of  the  Pha¬
risees  Fast,  but  thy  d.  fast  not  ?  I.uke  5.  33.
8.  14.  now  the  d.  had  forgotten  to  take  bread
110


Luke  19.  37.  the  d.  began  to  rejoice  and  praise  G.
John  3.  25.  between  some  of  John’s  d.  and  the  Jews
4.  1.  that  Jesus  baptized  more  d.  than  John  ,

9'.  28.  thou  art  his  disciple,  but  we  are  Moses  d
13. 5.  he  began  to  wash  the  d.  feet,  and  to  wipe  them
is!  17.  art  not  thou  also  one  of  this  man  s  d.  /

20;  18.  Mary  told  the  d.  that  she  had  seen  the  Lord
4cts  9. 1.  Saul  breathing  out  slaughter  against  the  d
"  26.  Saul  essayed  to  join  himself  tc 1  the  d.

11. 26.  the  d.  were  called  Christians  first  in  Antioch
19. 1.  Paul  came  to  Ephesus,  and  finding  certain  d.

30.  Paul  would  have  entered,  d.  suffered  him  not
20. 7.  first  day  of  week  d.  came  together  break  bread
30.  men  speaking,  to  draw  away  d.  alter  them
His  DISCIPLES.  .

Mat.  8.  25.  his  d.  came  and  awoke  him,  saying
9.  19.  Jesus  arose  and  followed,  and  so  did  his  d.

28.  7.  £0,  and  tell  his  d.  he  is  risen  from  the  deaa
13.  say  ye,  his  d.  came  by  night  and  stole  him
Mark  10.  10.  in  the  house  his  d.  asked  him  again
Luke  5.  30.  the  Pharisees  murmured  against  his  d
6.  20.  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  on  his  d.  and  said
11.  1.  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  taught  his  d.

John  2.  11.  his  glory,  and  his  d.  believed  on  him
4.  2.  though  Jesus  himself  baptized  not,  but  hisd.

27.  upon  this  came  his  d.  and  marvelled  that  he
6  3  up  to  a  mountain,  and  there  he  sat  with  to  d.

22.  but  that  his  d.  were  gone  away  a  one  .

9.  27.  why  would  ye  hear  it  again  ?  will  ye  be  his  d.

11.  12.  then  said  hisd.  L.  it  lie  sleep  shall  do  well
18  1  he  went  with  his  d.  over  the  brook  Cedron
2.’  for  Jesus  often  resorted  thither  with  hisd.
on  26  ao'ain,  his  d.  were  within,  Thomas  with  thean
0  Of  his  DISCIPLES.

Mat.  11.  2.  when  John  had  heard  works  of  Christ,  he
sent  two  of  his  d.  Mark  11. 1.  1 14. 13.  Luke  19.  29.
Mark  I.  2.  some  of  his  d.  eat  with  unwashen  hands
John  6.  66.  from  that  time  many  of  his  d.  went  back
18.  19.  the  high  priest  asked  Jesus  of  his  d.

25.  art  not  thou  also  one  of  his  d.  ?  he  denied
01  p  none  of  his  d .  durst  nsk  him,  who  art  thou  .

'  '  To  his  DISCIPLES.

Mat.  14. 19.  blessed,  and  gave  the  loaves  to  his  d.
Mark  A.  34.  lie  expounded  all  things  to  his  d.

Luke  10.  23.  he  turned  himself  to  his  d.  and  said
John  °1  14  third  time  Jesus  shewed  himself  to  his  d.
My  DISCIPLES.

Isa.  8. 16.  bind  up  testimony,  seal  law  among  my  d.
Mat.  26. 18.  master  saith.  I  will  keep  the  passover  at
thy  house  with  my  d.  Mar/c  14.  14.  Luke~~~,  11.
John  8.  31.  then  are  ye  my  d.  indeed,  13.  35.

15  8  that  ye  bear  much  truit,  so  shall  ye  be  my  d.
Thy  DISCIPLES.

Mat.O.lA.  why  do  we  fast,  thy  d.  fast  not,  Mark  2.18.
12.  2.  thy  d.  do  that  which  is  not  lawful  on  sabbath
15  o'  why  do  thy  d.  transgress  the  tradition
17'  ft;,.  I  brought  him  to  thy  d.  they  could  not  cure
Mark  7.  5.  why  walk  not  thy  d.  according  to  tradit.

9  18. 1  spake  to  thy  d.  to  cast  him  out,  Luke  9.  40.
Luke  19  39.  the  Pharisees  said,  Master,  rebuke  thy  d
John  7.  3.  that  thy  d.  may  see  the  works  thou  doest
DISCIPLINE.

Job  36. 10.  he  openeth  also  their  ears  to  d.  and  com.
DISCLOSE.

Isa  °6  21.  behold,  the  earth  also  shall  d.  her  blood
'  ’  DISCOMFITED.

Lxod.  17.  13.  Joshua  d.  Amalek  and  his  people
Num.  14.  45.  smote  and  d.  them,  even  to  Hormah
Josh.  10. 10.  Lord  d.  them  before  Isr.  and  slew  them
Jndg.  4.  15.  the  Lord  d.  Sisera  and  his  chariots
8  12.  Gideon  pursued  them,  and  d.  all  the  host
\Sam.~.  10.  thundered  on  the  Philistines,  and  d.  them
°  Sam.  22.  15.  lightning,  and  d.  them,  Psal.  18.  14.
~Isa.  3i.  8.’  shall  flee,  and  his  young  men  shall  be  d
DISCOMFITURE.

1  Sam.  14.  20.  and  there  was  a  very  great  d.
DISCONTENTED.

1  Sam.  22. 2.  every  one  that  was  d.  gathered  to  Dav.
DISCONTINUE.

Jer.  17.  4.  and  thou  shalt  d.  from  mine  heritage
DISCORD.

Prov.  6.  14.  he  deviseth  mischief,  he  soweth  d.

19.  and  him  that  soweth  d.  among  brethren
DISCOVER.

Deut.  22.  30.  a  man  shall  not  d.  his  father’s  skirt
1  Sam.  14.  8.  and  we  will  d.  ourselves  to  them
Job  41.  13.  who  can  d.  the  face  of  his  garment  ?
Prov.  18.  2.  but  that  his  heart  may  d.  itself
25.  9.  thy  cause,  and  d.  not  a  secret  to  another
Isa.  3.  17.  the  Ford  will  d.  their  secret  parts
Jer.  13.  26. 1  will  d.  thy  skirts  on  thy  face,  Nah.  3.  5.
Lam.  4.  22.  O  daughter  of  Edom,  he  will  d.  thy  sins
Ezek.  16.  37.  I  will  d.  thy  nakedness  to  them
Hos.  2.  10.  I  will  d.  her  lewdness  in  sight  ot  lovers
Mic.  1. 6.  the  stones,  I  will  d.  the  foundation  thereof
DISCOVERED.

Lxod.  20.  26.  that  thy  nakedness  be  not  d.  thereon
Lev.  20.  18.  he  hath  d.  her  fountain,  she  uncovered

1  Sam.  14,  11.  both  d.  themselves  to  the  garrison

22.  6.  when  Saul  heard  that  David  was  d.  and  men

2  Sam.  22.  16.  the  foundations  of  the  world  were
d.  at  the  rebuking  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  18.  15

Isa.  22.  8.  and  he  d.  the  covering  of  Judah
57.  8.  for  thou  hast  d.  thyself  to  another  than  me
Jer.  13.  22.  for  thine  iniquity  are  thy  skirts  d.
Lam.  '2.  14.  and  they  have  not  d.  thine  iniquity
Ezek.  13.  14.  so  that  foundation  thereof  shall  be  d.
16.  36.  thv  nakedness  d.  through  thy  whoredoms
57.  before  thy  wickedness  was  d.  as  at  the  time
21. 24.  saith  Lord,  in  that  your  transgressions  are  d.
22. 10.  in  thee  have  they  d.  their  father’s  nakedness

23.  10.  these  d.  nakedness,  they  took  her  sons
18.  she  d.  her  whoredoms,  and  d.  her  nakedness
29,  the  nakedness  of  thy  whoredoms  shall  be  d.

Ilos.  7.1.  then  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim  was  d.
Acts  21.  3.  now  when  we  had  d.  Cyprus,  we  left
27.  39.  but  they  d.  a  certain  creek  with  a  shore
D1SCOVERETH.

Job  12.  22.  he  d.  deep  things  out  of  darkness
Psal.  29.  9.  the  voice  of  the  T.ord  d.  the  forest
DISCOVERING.

Hab.  3.  13.  by  d.  the  foundation  to  the  neck


Num.  32.


DISCOURAGE,
why  d.  ye  the  hearts  of  the  people J
DISCOURAGED.

Num..  21.  4.  the  soul  of  the  people  was  much  d
32.  9.  they  d.  the  heart  of  the  children  ot  Israel
Deut.  1. 21.  go  and  possess  it,  fear  not,  nor  be  d.
28.  our  brethren  have  d.  our  heart,  sav  ing


•  vl  LA  A  M  A  V  1/AAA  ' — 1  *  ^  *  .  .  e  I  w  .

Isa.  42.  4.  he  shall  not  fail  nor  be  d.  till  he  set
Col.  3. 21.  provoke  notygur  children,  lest  they  be  d

Gen.  41. 33.  letPharaoh  look  out  a  man  d.  and  wise
39.  there  is  none  so  d.  and  wise  as  thou  art
Tit.  2. 5.  that  the  aged  teach  young  women  to  be  d
1 6.  young  men  likewise  exnort  to  be  d.

J  DISCREETLY.

Mark  12.  34.  when  Jesus  saw  that  he  answered  i.
DISCRETION.

Psal.  1 12.  5.  he  will  guide  his  affairs  with  d.

Prov.  1.  4.  to  the  young  man  knowledge  and  d.

2. 11.  d.  shall  preserve  thee,  understand,  keep  thee
3.  21.  my  son,  keep  sound  wisdom  and  d.

5.  2.  thou  mayest  regard  d.  and  keep  knowledge
11.  22.  so  is  a  fair  woman  who  is  without  d.

19  11.  the  d.  of  a  man  deferreth  his  anger
Isa.  28.  26.  for  his  God  doth  instruct  him  to  d.

Jer  10  12.  he  stretched  out  the  heavens  by  Ins  d.

DISDAINED.  •:

1  Sam.  17.  42.  when  Goliath  saw  David,  tie  d,  him
Job  30.  1.  whose  fathers  I  would  d.  to  set  with  dogs
DISEASE.

Diseases  and  death  are  the  consequences  and  effect- ,
of  sin ;  this  is  the  idea  which  we  have  of  them
from  Scripture.  The  ancient  Hebrews,  who  were
very  little  versed  in  the  study  of  natural  philosophy ,!
and  not  much  accustomed  to  recur  to  physical
causes,  and  consult  physicians,  when  they  were
sick,  imputed  their  diseases  generally  to  evil  spi¬
rits,  the  executioners  of  divine  vengeance.  1J
their  infirmities  appeared  to  be  beyond  what  was
usual,  and  the  causes  ot  them  were  not  known  tc
them,  they  did  not  fail  to  say,  that  it  was  a  blow
from  the  avenging  hand  of  God ;  to  him  the  wisest
and  most  religious  had  recourse  for  cure  ;  and  king
Asa  is  blamed  for  placing  his  confidence  in  phy¬
sicians,  when  he  had  a  very  painful  fit  of  the  you,
in  his  feet,  and  for  not  applying  himself  to  tht
Lord,  2  Chron.  16.  12.  In  his  disease  he  sought
not  to  the  Lord,  but  to  the  physicians.  Jobs
friends  immediately  ascribed  all  the  distemper,
with  which  that  holy  man  was  afflicted,  to  God.
justice,  Job  4.  7,  8.  Leprosies,  which  were  so  com
mon  among  the  Jews,  were  treated  as  diseases  sen >
by  God ;  the  priests  were  the  persons  who  judget
of  the  nature  and  qualities  oj  this  evil,  shut  u\
the  diseased,  and  declared  that  they  were  healed,  0
had  their  leprosy  upon  them  ;  and  after  their  re
covery  they  offered  sacrifices,  as  it  were  to  expiat
for  their  faults.  Miriam,  Gehazi,  and  king  Uz
ziah,  were  smitten  suddenly  with  a  leprosy ;  th
first  as  a  punishment  for  her  detracting  discourses
the  second  for  his  avarice  ;  and  the  third  f>r  ht
presumption.  Num.  12. 10.  2  Kings  5. 27 •  2  Chron
26.21.

In  the  New  Testament,  the  cause  of  many  disease
is  attributed  to  the  devil.  It  is  said  there ,  that  th
devil  had  bound  the  woman,  who  had  been  bowe
down  for  eighteen  years,  Luke  13.  16.  Ought  nc
this  woman,  being  a  daughter  of  Abraham,  whor
Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen  years,  to  b.
loosed  from  this  bond  on  the  sabbath  day  r  1
verse  11.  the  same  person  is  mentioned,  as  havin
a  spirit  of  infirmity,  that  is,  a  sore  disease  inflicte
by  the  devil.  We  are  told  of  a  dumb  devil,  and  <
another  that  could  scarce  speak,  Mark  9.17.  Luk

11. 14.  that  is  to  say,  which  caused  these  infirmitn
in  those  who  were  possessed  by  them :  and  whet
ever  Christ  or  his  apostles  had.  a  mind  to  restoi
these  indisposed  persons  to  their  health,  they  bega
with  casting  out  the  devils  ;  for  the  cure  immed
ately  followed.

The  apostle  Paul  attributes  the  death  and  disease
of  many  to  their  communicating  unworthily ,
Cor.  11.  30.  For  this  cause  many  are  weak  an
sickly  among  you,  and  many  sleep.  _  The  saw
apostle  ascribes  the  infirmities  wherewith  he  w,
afflicted,  to  an  evil  angel,  2  Cor.  12. 7 •  1  here  w;
given  me  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  the  messenger  \
Satan  to  buffet  me.  It  was  the  destroying  ang
that  made  such  havoc  of  Sennacherib  3  army,
Kings  19.  35.  It  was  the  avenging  angel  that  dn
his  1 sword  against  the  people,  and  smote  the
with  the  vestilence,  as  a  punishment  for  Pavia
sin,  1  Chron.  21.  15,  16.  No  sooner  had  A  him
lech,  king  of  Gerar,  taken  Sarah,  the  wife
Abraham,  forcibly  away,  but  he  was  threaten
with  death,  Gen.  20.  3, 4.  Er  and  Onan,  the  so
of  Judah,  were  carried  off  by  unknown  diseast
for  having  committed  actions  of  an  infamous  a
detestable  nature,  Gen.  38.  7 ,10.  And  the  PI
listines  were  smitten  with  an  ignominious  disea.
for  not  treating  the  ark  with  that  respect  th
it  deserved,  1  Sam.  5.  12.  There  are  a  gve
number  of  diseases  recorded  in  Scripts  ire,  whi
sere  sent  by  God  in  the  way  oj  punishment  j
sins.  .

The  diseases  of  Egypt,  from  which  God  promised
defend  his  people,  Exod.  15.  26  and  which
threatens,  in  case  of  their  disobedience ,  to  infl
upon  them,  Deut.  28.  60.  These  diseases  f
either  the  plagues  with  which  God  afflicted  Eg)
before  the  departure  of  the  Israelites,  or  the  0.
eases  which  were  most  common  in  the  country,  si
as  blindness,  ulcers  in  the  legs,  consumptions ,  a
the  leprosy,  called  Elephantiasis,  which  was
culiar  to  this  country,  as  Pliny  observes,  iEgy
peculiare  hoc  malum  Elephantiasis .

2  Kings  1.  2.  inquire,  whether  if  I  shall  recov.  ol
8.  8.  saying,  shall  1  recover  of  this  d.  ?  9.

2  Chr.  16.  12.  Asa  diseased  till  his  d.  was  exceed
great,  yet  in  his  d.  he  sought  not  to  the  L<

21. 15.  shall  have  great  sickness  by  d.  of  thy  how

18.  the  Lord  smote  him  with  an  incurable  d.


DIS

I  I  h  30. 18.  by  force  of  my  d.  is  my  garment  changed
sat.  38. 7.  my  loins  are  filled  with  a  loathsome  d.
1.8.  an  evil  d.  say  they,  cleaveth  fast  to  him
erf.  6.  2.  this  is  vanity,  and  it  is  an  evil  d.
lat.  4. 23.  healing  all  manner  of  d.  9. 35.  |  10. 1.

, dm  5.  4.  was  made  whole  of  whatsoever  d.  he  had
DISEASES.

]xod.  15. 26.  put  none  of  these  d.  on  you,  Deut.  7. 15.
)etu.  28. 60.  ne  will  bring  on  thee  all  the  d.  of  Egypt
Chr.  21. 19-  his  bowels  tell  out,  he  died  of  sore  d.
14.25.  for  they  left  him  in  great  d.  his  servants
‘sal.  103.3.  bless  the  Lord,  who  healeth  all  thy  d.
lab.  3.  t5.  anil  burning  d.  went  forth  at  his  feet
'at.  4. 24.  brought  to  him  all  sick  people  that  were
taken  with  divers  d.  Mark  1.34.  Luke  4.  40.
.nke  9. 1.  gave  them  power  over  devils,  and  cure  d.
lets  19.  12.  and  the  d.  departed  from  them
18. 9.  others  which  had  d.  in  the  island,  came
DISEASED.

Kings  15. 23.  Asa  was  d.  in  his  feet,  2  Chr.  16. 12.
.zek. 34.  4.  d.  have  ye  notstrengthened  nor  healed

21.  because  ye  have  push,  the  d.  with  your  horns
lat.  9. 20.  a  woman  d.  with  an  issue  of  blood
14.  35.  they  brought  all  that  were  d.  Mark  1.  32.
ohn  6. 2.  saw  miracles  he  did  on  them  that  were  d.
DISFIGURE.

lat. 6. 16.  be  not  as  hypocrites,  for  they  d.  their  faces
DISGRACE.

er.  14.  21.  do  not  d.  the  throne  of  thy  glory
DISGUISE,  ED.

Sam.  28.  8.  and  Saul  d.  himself,  and  he  went
Kings  14. 2.  Jeroboam  said,  arise,  and  d.  thyself
10. 38.  one  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  d.  himself
,22.  30.  Ahab  the  king  of  Israel  said,  l  will  d.  my¬
self,  and  he  d.  himself,  2  Chron.  18.  29.
Chron.  35. 22.  Josiah  d.  himself  to  fight  with  him
D1SGUISETII.

ob  24. 15.  the  adulterer  also  waiteth  and  d.  his  face
DISH,  ES.

'.rod,  25. 29.  thou  shalt  make  the  d.  thereof,  37. 16.
Turn.  4.  7-  and  put  thereon  the  d.  and  the  spoons
udg.  5.  25.  she  brought  forth  butter  in  a  lordly  d.
Kings  21.  13.  as  a  man  wipeth  a  d.  turning  it
lat.  26.23.  dippeth  with  me  in  the  d.  Mark  14. 20.
Dishonest  ;  see  Gain.
DISHONESTY.

Cor.  4. 2.  have  renounced  the  hidden  things  of  d.
DISHONOUR.

zra  4. 14.  was  not  meet  for  us  to  see  the  king’s  d.
'sal.  35. 26.  be  clothed  with  shame  and  if.  71.  13.

>9.  19.  thou  hast  known  my  shame  and  my  d.

'rov.  6.  33.  a  wound  and  d.  shall  he  get
om.  9. 21.  make  one  vessel  to  honour,  another  to  d.
Cor.  15.  43.  it  is  sown  in  d.  it  is  raised  in  glory
;  Cor.  6. 8.  by  honour  and  d.  by  evil  and  good  report
Tim.  2. 20.  are  vessels,  some  to  honour,  some  to  d.

DISHONOUR,  EST,  ETH.
lie.  7. 6.  for  the  son  d.  father,  daughter  ag.  mother
ohn  8.  49.  I  honour  my  Father,  and  ye  d.  me
'om.  1. 24. to  d.  their  own  bodies  between  themselves

23.  through  breaking  of  the  law,  d.  thou  God  ?
Cor.  11. 4.  man  d.  his  headjl  5.  woman  d.  her  head
.  DISINHERIT.

aw.14.12.1  will  d.  them, and  make  of  thee  a  greater
DISJOINTED.

sr.  6.  +  8.  be  instructed,  lest  my  soul  be  d.  from  thee
zek.  23. 1 17.  and  her  mind  was  d.  from  them
.  DISMAYED.

deut.  31.8.  he  will  not  fail  nor  forsake  thee,  fear  not,
nor  be  d.  Josh.  1.  9. !  8. 1.  |  10.  25.  1  Chr.  22.
13.  1  28.  20.  2  Chron.  20. 15, 17.  I  32.  7.

Sam.  i7.ll.  they  were  d.  2  Kings  19.  26.  Isa.  37.27.
•a.  21. 3.  I  was  bowed  down,  d.  at  the  seeing  of  it
4. 10.  fear  not,  be  not  d.  Jer.  1.  17.  |  10.  2.  |  23.  4.

I  30. 10.  |  46.  27.  Ezek.  2.  6.  |  3.  9.
23.  that  we  may  be  d.  and  behold  it  together
?r.  8.  9.  the  wise  men  are  d.  and  taken,  10.  2.

7.  18.  let  them  be  d.  but  let  not  me  be  d.

!6. 5.  wherefore  have  I  seen  them  d.  turned  back  ?

8. 1.  Misgab  is  d.  ||  49.  37-  cause  Elam  to  be  d.

>0.36.  the  mighty  men  of  Babylon  shall  be  d.
bad.  9.  thy  mighty  men,  O  Teman,  shall  be  d.
DISMAYING.

,-r.  48.  39.  Moab  shall  be  a  d.  to  all  about  him
zek.  32. +  23.  caused  d.  in  the  land  of  the  living
„  .DISMISSED.

Chr.  23.  8.  .Tehoiada  the  priest  d.  not  the  courses
,  cts  15. 30.  when  they  were  d.  they’came  to  Antioch
9.41.  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  d.  assembly
!  DISOBEDIENCE.

'om.  5.19.  by  one  man’s  d.  many  were  made  sinners
Cor .  10. 6.  having  in  readiness  to  revenge  all  d.

,  ph.  2.  2.  the  spirit  that  worketh  in  children  of  d.

’•  6.  wrath  of  God  on  the  children  of  d.  Col.  3.  6.
eb.  2.2.  every  (/.received  a  just  recompence  of  rew.

!*  HI.  lest  any  fall  by  the  same  example  of  d.

|_.  DISOBEDIENT.

Kings  13. 26.  man  of  God,  who  was  d.  to  the  word
ch  9.26.  they  were  d.  and  rebelled  against  me
use  1.  17.  turn  the  d.  to  the  wisdom  of  the  just
cts  26. 19.  1  was  not  d.  to  the  heavenly  vision
L  30.  boasters,  d.  to  parents,  2  Tim.  3.  2.

0.  21 .  I  stretched  forth  my  hands  to  a  d.  people
ljk.t31.  that  I  may  be  delivered  from  d.  in  Judea
■  ln.1'  1  •  9-  the  law  was  made  for  the  lawless  and  d.
iM.  16.  deny  him,  being  abominable  and  d.

V  4-  tor  we  ourselves  also  were  sometimes  d.
leo.  11.  +  31.  Rahab  perished  not  with  the  d.

e[-  2.  7.  hut  to  them  which  be  d.  the  stone  which
i  on ,  enJ  who  stumble  at  the  word,  being  d.

■  to  spirits  in  prison,  which  sometime  were  d.
DISOBEYED.

Kings  13. 21.  as  thou  hast  d.  the  mouth  of  the  L.

■r,  „  ,  .  DISORDERLY.

loess. 5. 14.  brethren,  warn  them  that  are  d.

L  p-  withdraw  from  a  brother  who  walks  d.

‘  •  "je  behaved  not  ourselves  d.  among  you
■it.  there  are  some  who  walk  among  you  d.

.  00  .  DISPATCH.

-ca.  .3. 47 .  they  shall  d.  them  with  their  swords
.  j  ,  DISPATCHED.

-ra  10. 1 14.  let  them  come,  till  the  matter  be  d.


D  I  S

DISPENSATION.

1  Cor.  9. 17;  a/,  of  the  gospel  is  committed  to  me
Eph.  1. 10.  in  the  d.  of  the  fulness  of  times
3. 2.  ye  have  heard  of  the  d.  of  the  grace  of  God
Col.  1.  25.  a  minister  according  to  tiie  d.  of  God
DISPERSE.

1  Sam.  14. 34.  Saul  said,  (/.yourselves  amongpeople
Prov.  15.  7.  the  lips  of  the  wise  d.  knowledge
Ezek.  12.  15.  when  1  shall  scatter  them  and  d.  them

in  the  countries,  20.  23.  |  29.  12.  1  30.  23,26.

22.  15.  and  I  will  d.  thee  in  the  countries
DISPERSED.

2  Chron.  11.  23.  Rehoboam  d.  of  all  his  children
Esth.  3.  8.  there  is  a  certain  people  d.  among  people
Psal.  112.  9.  he  hath  d.  he  hath  given,  2  Cor.  9.  9.
Prov.  5. 16.  let  thy  fountains  be  d.  abroad

Isa.  11. 12.  he  shall  gather  together  the  d.  of  Judah
Ezek.  36.  19.  they  were  d.  through  the  countries,
Zeph.  3.  10.  tlie  daughter  of  my  d.  shall  bring
John  7.  35.  will  he  go  to  the  d.  among  the  Gentiles  ?
Acts  5.  37.  and  as  many  as  obeyed  him  were  d.
DISPERSER.

Nah.  2. 1 1.  the  d.  is  come  before  thy  face
DISPERSIONS.

Jer.  25.  34.  the  days  of  your  d.  are  accomplished
DISPLAYED.

Ps.  60. 4.  thou  hast  given  a  banner  that  it  may  be  d.

,  DISPLEASE.

Gen.  31.  35.  let  it  not  d.  my  lord  that  I  cannot  rise
Num.  22.  34.  it  it  d.  thee,  1  will  get  me  back  again

1  Sam.  29.  7-  return,  that  thou  d.  not  the  lords

2  Sam.  11.  25.  say  to  Joab,  let  not  this  d.  thee
Prov.  24.  18.  lest  the  Lord  see  it,  and  it  d.  him

DISPLEASED.

Gen.  38.  10.  the  thing  which  he  did  d.  the  Lord
48. 17-  laid  right  hand  on  head  of  Ephraim,  it  d.
Hum.  11.  1.  the  people  complained,  it  d.  the  Lord

10.  anger  of  the  L.  was  kindled,  Moses  also  was  d.

1  Sam.  8.  6.  but  the  thing  d.  Samuel,  when  they  said

18.  8.  then  Saul  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  d.

2  Sam.  6.  8.  and  David  was  d.  because  the  Lord  had

made  a  breach  upon  Uzzah,l  Chron.  13.  11.

11.  27.  the  thing  David  had  done  d.  the  Lord
1  Kings  1,  6.  his  father  had  not  d.  him  at  any  time
20.  43.  the  king  of  Israel  went  to  his  house  d.  21. 4.
1  Chron.  21.  7.  and  God  was  d.  with  this  thing
Psal.  60.  1.  thou  hast  been  d.  O  turn  tnyseif  to  us
Isa.  59. 15.  it  d.  him  that  there  was  no  judgment
Dan.  6.  14.  the  king  was  sore  d.  with  himself
Jonah  4.  1.  but  it  d.  Jonah  exceedingly,  was  angry
I  lab.  3.  8.  was  the  Lord  d.  against  "the  rivers?
Zech.  1.  2.  the  Lord  hath  been  sore  d.  with  fathers
15.  I  am  very  sore  d.  with  heathen  at  ease  ;  for  I
was  but  a  little  d.  they  helped  forward  affliction
Mat.  21.  15.  when  the  scribes  saw,  they  wererf.
Mark  10. 14.  when  Jesus  saw  it,  he  was  much  d.

41.  they  began  to  be  much  d.  with  James  and  John
Acts  12. 20.  Herod  was  highly  d.  with  them  of  Tyre
DISPLEASING.

1  Kings  9.  +  13.  he  called  them  land  of  d.  to  this  day
DISPLEASURE.

Deut.  9.  19.  for  I  was  afraid  of  the  hot  d.  of  the  Ld.
Judg.  15.  3.  be  more  blameless,  though  I  do  them  a  d.
Psal.  2.  5.  then  shall  he  vex  them  m  his  sore  d.

6.  1.  neither  chasten  me  in  thy  hot  d.  38.  1.

Zech.  1.  f  2.  Lord  hath  been  with  d.  displeased
DISPOSED.

Job  34. 13.  or  who  hath  d.  the  whole  world  ?

37. 15.  dost  thou  know  when  God  d.  them  ?

Acts  18.  27.  when  he  was  d.  to  pass  into  Achaia
1  Cor.  10.  27.  bid  you  to  a  least  and  ye  be  d.  to  go
DISPOSETH.

Psal  50. 1  23.  to  him  that  d.  his  way  aright
DISPOSING.

Prov.  16.  33.  the  whole  d.  thereof  is  of  the  Lord
DISPOSINGS.

Prov.  16. 1 1.  the  d.  of  the  heart  in  man  is  of  the  L.
DISPOSITION.

Acts  7.  53.  who  received  the  law  by  the  d.  of  angels
DISPOSSESS,  ED.

Num.  32.  39-  the  children  of  Machir  d.  the  Amorite
33.  53.  ye  shall  d.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land
Deut. 7.  17.  if  thou  shalt  say,  how  can  1  d.  them?
Judg.  11. 23.  Ld.  God  of  lsr.  hath  d.  the  Amorites
DISPUTATION.

Acts  15.  2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  d.

.  DISPUTATIONS.

Horn.  14.  1.  him  receive,  but  not  to  doubtful  d.
DISPUTE.

Job  23. 7.  there  the  righteous  might  d.  with  him
DISPUTED.

Mark  9.  33.  what  was  it  that  ye  d.  by  the  way  ?

34.  for  they  had  d.  who  should  be  the  greatest
Acts  9. 29.  Saul  d.  against  the  Grecians,  went  to  slay
17. 17.  Paul  d.  in  the  synagogue  with  the  Jews
Jude  9.  Michael  d.  about  the  body  of  Moses,  durst
DISPUTED.

1  Cor.  1.  20.  where  is  the  d.  of  this  world  ?
DISPUTES!’.

Rom.  9-  t  20.  who  art  thou  that  d.  with  God  ?
DISPUTING.

Acts  6.  9.  and  them  of  Asia  d.  with  Stephen
15.  7-  when  there  hail  been  much  d.  Peter  rose  up

19.  8-  d.  and  persuading  the  things  of  God,  9.

24.  12.  they  neither  found  me  d.  with  any  man

D1SPUTINGS.

Phil.  2. 14.  do  all  things  without  murmurings  and  d.

1  Tim.  6.  5.  perverse  d.  of  men  of  corrupt  minds
DISQUIET.

Jer.  50.  34.  and  d.  the  inhabitants  of  Babylon
DISQUIETED.

1  Sam.  28.  15.  why  hast  thou  d.  me  to  bring  me  up  ?
Psal.  39. 6.  surely  they  are  d.  in  vain, heaps  up  riches
42.  5.  why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul  ?  why
art  thou  d.  within  me  ?  11.  |  43. 5.
Prov.  30.  21.  for  three  things  the  earth  is  d.
DISQUIETNESS.

Psal.  38.  8. 1  have  roared  by  reason  of  d.  of  my  heart
DISSEMBLED.

Josh.  7. 11.  they  have,  also  stolen  and  d.  also
Jer.  42.  20.  for  ye  d.  in  your  hearts,  when  ve  sent
Gat.  2. 13.  the  other  Jews  d.  likewise  with  him


Dll

DISSEMBLERS.

PsalAbA.  with  vain  persons,  norwill  Lgoin  witlirf
Hi  SSEMBLETH.

Prov.  26.  24.  e  tdat  hatetli  d.  with  his  lips
DISSENSION.

Acts  15.  2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  small  d.

23.  7.  there  arose  a  d.  between  the  Pharisees  ann

the  Sadducees

10.  when  there  arose  a  great  d.  the  chief  captain
DISSIMULATION.

Rom.  12.  9.  let  love  be  without  d.  abhor  evil
Gal.  2. 13.  Barnabas  was  carried  away  with  their  d.
DISSOLVE.

Dan.  5. 16.  I  have  heard  that  thou  canst  d.  doubts
DISSOLVED.

Psal.  75. 3.  earth  and  all  inhabitants  thereof  are  d.
Isa.  14.  31.  cry,  O  city,  thou  whole  Palestina  art  d.

24.  19.  the  earth  is  clean  d.  the  earth  is  moved
34.  4.  and  all  the  host  of  heaven  shall  be  d.

Nah.  2.  6.  gates  opened,  and  the  palace  shall  be  d.
2  Cor.5.'.1.  it  our  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  d.

2  Pet.  3. 11.  seeing  thatall  these  things  shall  be  d.

12.  wherein  the  heavens  being  on  tire  shall  be  d.

,  DISSOLVES T.

Job  30.  22.  and  thou  d.  my  substance
Psal.  65. 1 10.  thou  d.  the  earth  with  showers
DISSOLVING.

Dan.  5.  12.  and  d.  of  doubts  was  found  in  Daniel
„  DISTAFF.

Prov.  31.19.  to  the  spindle,  and  her  hands  hold  the  d.
T  DISTANCES.

Isa.  33.  1 17.  they  shall  behold  the  land  of  far  d.
DISTANT.

Exod.  36.  22.  one  board  had  two  tenons  equally  d.
DISTIL.

Deut.  32. 2.  my  speech  shall  d.  as  dew,  as  small  rain
Job  36.  28.  the  clouds  d.  on  man  abundantly
DISTINCTION..

1  Cor.  14.  7.  except  they  give  a  d.  in  the  sounds
DISTINGUISHETH.

1  Cor.  4.  f  7.  for  who  d.  thee  from  another  ?
DISTINCTLY.

Neh.  8. 8.  they  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God  d.

_  DISTRACTED.

Psal.  88.  15.  while  I  suffer  thy  terrors,  I  am  d.

n  DISTRACTION.

1  Cor.  7. 35.  you  may  attend  on  the  Lord  without  d.

Distress.

Gen.  33.  3.  God  who  answered  me  in  day  of  my  d.
42.  21.  therefore  is  this  d.  come  upon  us
Judg.  11.  7.  ye  come  to  me  now,  when  ye  are  in  d.

1  Sam.  22.  2.  everyone  that  was  in  d.  came  to  David

2  Sam.  22.  7-  in  my  d.  I  called  on  the  Lord,  and

.  cried  to  my  God,  Psal.  18.  6.  1 118.  5.  |  120. 1.

1  Kings  1.  29.  that  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  d.

2  Chron.  28.  22.  in  his  d.  Ahaz  trespassed  more
Neh.  2.  17.  I  said,  ye  see  the  d.  that  we  are  in

9.  37.  they  have  dominion  and  we  are  in  great  d.
Psal.  4.  1.  thou  hast  enlarged  me  when  1  was  d.
Prov.  1.  27.  I  will  mock  wnend.  cometh  upon  you
Isa.  5.  t  30.  if  one  look  to  the  land,  behold  d.

25.  4.  thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the  needy  in  d
53.  t  8.  he  was  taken  away  by  d.  and  judgment

Lam.  1.  20.  behold,  O  Lord,  for  I  am  in  d.

Ubad.  12.  nor  shonldest  spoken  proudly  in  day  of  d.

14.  nor  shouldest  delivered  up  those  in  day  of  d.
Zeph.  1.  15.  that  day  is  a  day  of  trouble  and  d.

17.  I  will  bring  d.  upon  men,  they  shall  walk
Luke  21.  23.  there  shall  be  great  d.  in  the  land

25.  on  the  earth  d.  of  nations,  with  perplexity
Rom.  8.  35.  shall  d.  separate  us  from  love  of  Christ?
1  Cor.  7.  26.  that  this  is  good  for  the  present  d.

1  Thess.  3. 7.  we  w  ere  comforted  over  you  in  our  d.
DISTRESS,  ED.

Gen.  32.  7.  then  Jacob  was  greatly  afraid  and  d.
Num.  22. 3.  Moab  was  d.  ||  Judg.  2. 15.  Isr.  d.  10.  9.
Deut.  2.  9.  d.  not  the  Moabites  l|  19-  Ammonites
28.  53.  wherewith  enemies  shall  d.  thee,  55,  57.

1  Sam.  13.  6.  for  people  were  d.  did  hide  themselves
14.  24.  men  of  Israel  were  d.  ||  28.  15.  Saul  was  d.
30.  6.  David  was  greatly  d.  for  the  people  spake

2  Sam.  1. 26.  I  am  d.  for  thee,  my  brother  Jonathan
2  Chr.  28.  20.  king  of  Assyria  came  and  d.  Ahaz
Isa.  29. 2.  yet  I  will  d.  Ariel,  there  shall  be  sorrow

7.  that  d.  her  shall  be  as  a  dream  of  night  vision
Jer.  10. 18.  I  will  d.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land
2  Cor.  4.8.  we  are  troubled  on  every  side,  yet  not  d.
DISTRESSES.

Psal.  25.  17.  O  bring  thou  me  out  of  my  d.

107. 6.  and  he  delivered  them  out  of  their  d.

13.  and  he  saved  them  out  of  their  d.  19.

28.  and  he  bringeth  them  out  of  their  d.

Ezek.  30. 16.  and  Noph  shall  have  d.  daily
2  Cor.  6. 4.  approving  ourselves  in  necessities,  in  d.
12.  10.  I  take  pleasure  in  d.  for  Christ’s  sake
DISTRIBUTE.

Josh.  13. 32.  which  Moses  did  d.  for  inherit,  in  Moab
2  Chr.  31. 14.  Kore  to  d.  the  oblations  of  the  Lord
Neh.  13. 13.  their  office  was  to  d.  to  their  brethren
Luke  18.  22.  sell  all  thou  hast,  and  d.  to  the  poor
Eph.  4. 1 28.  he  may  have  to  d.  to  him  that  needeth
1  Tim.  6.  18.  charge  the  rich  to  be  ready  to  d.
DISTRIBUTED.

Josh.  14. 1.  Eleazar  and  Joshua  d.  for  inheritance
1  Chr.  24.  3.  David  d.  them,  both  Zadok  and  Ahi-
melech  according  to  their  offices,  2  Chr.  23.  18.
John  6. 11.  Jesus  gave  thanks  and  d.  to  the  disciples

1  Cor.  7.  17.  but  as  God  hath  d.  to  every  man

2  Cor.  10. 13.  according  to  the  rule  G.  hath  d.  to  us

distribute™,  ING.

Job  21.  17.  God  d.  sorrows  in  his  anger
Rom.  12. 13.  d.  to  the  necessity  of  the  saints,  given
DISTRIBUTION.  '

Acts  4.  35.  d.  was  made  to  every  one  as  he  had  need
2  Cor.  9. 13.  for  your  liberal  d.  to  them  and  all  men
Ileb.  2.  f  4.  God  bearing  witness,  with  d.  of  II.  Ghost
DITCH.

1  Kings  21. 1 23.  the  dogs  eat  Jezebel  by  d.  of  Jezreel
Job  9.  31.  yet  shalt  thou  plunge  me  in  the  d.

Psal.  7.  15.  he  is  fallen  into  the  d.  which  he  made
Prov.  23.27.  a  whore  is  a  deep  d.  and  strange  woman
Isa.  22.  11 .  ye  made  a  d.  between  the  two  w'alls

111


I)  1  \


D  1  V


J)  1  V


Dan.  9.  t  25.  and  the  d.  even  in  troublous  times
Mat  15.  14.  both  shall  fall  into  the  d.  Luke  6. 39.

DITCHES.  .  r  „

2  Kinas  3. 16.  thussaith  L.  make  this  valley  lull  otd.

DIVERS.  .  L  ,

Lev.  19. 19.  nor  let  thy  cattle  gender  with  d.  kinds
Deut.  22.  9.  not  sow  thy  vineyard  with  d.  kinds
11.  thou  shall  not  wear  a  garment  ot  d.  sorts
25.  13.  thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag  a.  weights
25.  14.  in  thy  house  d.  measures,  great  and  small
Judo .  5.  30.  to  Sisera  a  prey  of  d.  colours,  a  prey
of  d.  colours  of  needle  work,  on  both  sides
2  Sam.  13. 18.  Tamarhad  a  garm.  ot  d.  colours,  19.

1  Chr  29  2  prepared  glistering  stones  ot  a.  colours

2  C/iron.  16. 14.  they  laid  Asa  in  the  bed  which  was

tilled  with  odours  and  d.  kinds  ot  spices

21.  4.  Jehoram  slew  d.  of  the  princes  ot  Israel
30.  11.  d.  of  Asher  humbled  themselves
Esth.  1.7.  the  vessels  being  d.  one  from  another
3.  8.  their  laws  are  d.  from  all  people
Psal.  78.  45.  he  sent  d.  sorts  of  Hies  among  them
105.  31.  he  spake,  there  came  d.  sorts  of  Hies  _
Prov.  20. 10.  d.  weights  and  d.  measures  abomination
03.  j.  weights  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord
Eccl.  5.7.  there  are  also</.  vanities  ;  but  fear  thouG.
Ezek.  16. 16.  thou  deckest  high  places  with  d.  colours
17  3.  great  eagle  had  d.  colours,  came  to  Lebanon
Van.  7.  3.  great  beasts  came  up,  d.  one  from  another
7.  a  fourth  beast  d.  from  all  the  beasts,  19..

23.  d.  from  all  kingdoms  ||  24.  d.  from  the  first
Mat.  4.  24.  they  brought  to  .lesussick  people  taken
with  d.  diseases,  Mark  1.  34.  Luke  4.  40.
24.  7.  there  shall  be  famines,  pestilences,  and  earth¬
quakes  in  d.  places,  Mark  13.  8.  Luke  21. 11.
Mark  8.  3.  for  d.  of  them  came  from  tar
Acts  19.  9.  for  when  d.  were  hardened,  believed  not

1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  d.  kinds  of  tongues

2  Tmi.3.6.  captive  silly  women  led  away  with  rf. lusts
Tit.  3.  3.  deceived,  serving  d.  lusts  and  pleasures
He/>.  1.  1.  who  in  d.  manners  spake  in  time  past

2.  4.  G.  bearing  witness  with  signs  and  d.  miracles
9.  10.  stood  in  d.  washings  |j  13.  9.  d.  doctrines
Jam.  1.  2.  countit  joy  when  fall  intocf.  temptations
DIVERSITIES.

1  Cor.  12.  4.  d.  of  gifts  1]  6.  d.  of  operations
28.  God  hath  set  in  the  church  d.  ot  tongues

DIVIDE.

Gen.  1.  6.  and  let  the  firmament  d.  the  waters
14.  be  lights,  to  d.  the  day  from  the  night,  18.

49.  27.  and  at  night  he  shall  d.  the  spoil
Exod.  14.  16.  stretch  thy  hand  over  the  sea,  and  d.  it
21. 35.  d.  the  money  of  it,  d.  the  dead  ox
26.  33.  vail  shall  d.  between  holy  and  most  holy
Lev.  1.  17.  cleave  it,  but  not  d.  it  asunder,  5.  8.

11.  4.  not  eat  of  them  thatrf.  the  hoof,  7.  Dent.  14.7
Num.  31.  27.  and  d.  the  prey  into  two  parts
33.  54.  ye  shall  d.  the  land  by  lot,  .34. 17, 18,  29.
Vent.  19.  3.  d.  the  coasts  of  thy  land  into  three  parts
Josh.  1.  6.  d.  for  an  inheritance,  13.  6,  7- 1  18.  5.

22.  8.  d.  the  spoil  of  your  enemies  with  brethren

2  Sam.  19.  29.  I  said,  thou  and  Ziba  d.  the  land
1  Kings  3.  25.  d.  the  living  child  in  two,  26.

Neh.  9.  1 1 .  and  thou  didst  d.  the  sea,  Psal.  74. 13.

22.  and  thou  didst  d.  them  into  corners
Job  27.  17.  the  innocent  shall  d.  the  silver
Psal.  55.  9.  destroy,  O  Lord,  and  d.  their  tongues
Prov.  16. 19.  than  to  d.  the  spoil  with  the  proud
Isa.  9.  3.  as  men  rejoice  when  they  d.  the  spoil
53.  12.  he  shall  d.  the  spoil  with  the  strong
Ezek.  5. 1.  take  the  balances  and  d.  the  hair
45. 1.  ye  shall  d.  the  land  by  lot,  47.  21, 22.

48.  29.  this  is  the  land  which  ye  shall  d.

Dan.  11.  39.  and  he  shall  d.  the  land  for  gain
Luke  12. 13.  that  he  d.  the  inheritance  with  me
22. 17.  take  this,  and  d.  it  among  yourselves
Iwill  DIVIDE.


Gen.  49. 7.  I  willd.  them  in  Jacob  and  scatter  in  lsr.
Exod.  15.  9.  the  enemy  said,  I  will  d.  the  spoil
Psal.  60.  6.  I  will  d.  Shechem,  and  mete  out,  108.  7-
Isa.  53. 12.  therefore  will  I  d.  him  a  portion
DIVIDED.

Gen.  1.  4.  God  d.  the  light  ||  7.  God  d.  the  waters
10.  5.  by  these  were  the  isles  of  the  Gentiles  d.

25.  in  his  days  was  the  earth  d.  1  Chron.  1.  19.

32.  by  these  were  the  nations  d.  after  the  flood
14.  15.  and  Abram  d.  himself  against  them
15. 10.  Abram  d.  them  in  midst,  the  birds  d.  he  not
32.  7.  Jacob  d.  the  people  that  was  with  him
33. 1.  he  d.  the  children  to  Leah  and  Rachel
Exod.  14.  21.  the  sea  dry  land,  and  waters  were  d.
Num.  26.  53.  to  these  the  land  shall  be  d.  for  inherit.
56.  by  lot  shall  the  possession  of  the  land  be  d.

31.  42.  which  Moses  d.  from  men  that  warred
Deut.  4. 19.  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  d.

29.  +  26.  gods  who  had  not  d.  to  them  any  portion

32.  8.  when  the  most  High  d.  to  the  nations
Josh.  14.  5 .  they  d.  the  land,  18. 10.  1 19-  51.  1  23. 4.
Judg.  5.  30.  have  they  not  d.  the  prey,  to  every  man

7.  16.  he  d.  the  300  men  into  three  companies
9.  43.  Abimelech  d.  them  into  three  companies
19.  29.  Levite  d.  her  with  her  bones  into  12  pieces
2  Sam.  1.  23.  and  in  their  death  they  were  not  d.

1  Kings  16.  21.  then  were  the  people  of  Israel  d.

18.  6.  Ahab  and  Obadiah  d.  the  land  between  them

2  Kings  2. 8.  the  waters  were  d.  hither  and  thither

1  Chr.  23.  6.  L>av.  d.  them  into  courses  among  Lev
24.  4.  chief  men,  thus  were  they  d.  by  lot,  5.

2  Chron.  35. 13.  they  d.  other  offerings  speedily
Job  38.  25.  who  hath  d.  a  water-course  for  waters  ?
Psal.  68.  12.  she  that  tarried  at  home  d.  the  spoil

78. 13.  he  d.  the  sea,  and  caused  them  to  pass
55.  d.  them  an  inheritance  by  line,  Acts  13. 19.

136. 13.  to  him  which  d.  the  red  Sea  into  parts
Isa.  33.  23.  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil  d.

34. 17.  his  hand  hath  d.  it  to  them  by  line
51.  15.  1  am  the  Lord  thy  God  that  d.  the  sea
Lam.  4. 16.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  hath  d.  them
Ezek.  1.  +  11.  their  wings  were  d.  above
37.  22.  nor  shall  they  be  d.  into  two  kingdoms
Dan.  2.  41.  kingdom  shall  be  d.  but  strength  of  iron
5.  28.  thy  kingdom  is  d.  and  given  to  the  Medes
11.  4.  his  kingdom  shall  be  d.  toward  the  four  winds
112


IIos.  10.  2.  their  heart  isrf.  now  shall  be  found  faulty
Amos  1.  +  13.  because  they  d.  the  mountains
7. 17.  thy  land  shall  be  d.  by  line  shalt  die
Mic.  2.  4.  turning  away,  he  hath  d.  our  fields
Zech.  14.  1.  thy  spoil  shall  he  d.  in  the  midst
Mat.  12.  25.  every  kingdom  or  house  d.  against
itself  shall  not  stand,  Mark  3. 24, 25.  Luke  11. 17 •

26.  he  is  d.  ag.  himself,  Mark  3.26.  Luke  11.  18.
Mark  6.  41.  the  two  fishes  d.  he  among  them
Luke  12.  52.  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house  d.

53.  the  father  shall  be  d.  against  the  son,  and  son
15. 12.  and  he  d.  unto  them  his  living
Acts  14.  4.  the  multitude  of  the  city  was  d.  23.  7 •  .

1  C,-r.  1 . 13.  is  Christ  d. !  was  Paul  crucified  for  you  t
Rev.  16.  19.  the  great  city  was  d.  into  three  parts
DIVIDER.  [you?

Luke  12. 14.  he  said,  man,  who  made  me  a  d.  over
DIVIDETH.

Lev.  11.4.  cheweth  the  cud,  but  d.  not  the  hoof,  5, 6.

26.  the  carcases  of  every  beast  which  d.  the  hoot
Deut.  14.  8.  the  swine,  because,  it  d.  the  hoof
Job  26.  12.  he  d.  the  sea  with  his  power
Psal  29.  7.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  d.  the  flames
Jer.  31.  35.  which  d.  the  sea  when  the  waves  roar
Mat.  25.  32.  as  a  shepherd  d.  his  sheep  from  the  goats
Luke  11.  22.  taketh  his  armour,  and  d.  his  spoils
DIVIDING.  ,

Josh .  19.  49.  they  had  made  an  end  of  d.  the  land
51.  so  they  made  an  end  of  d.  the  country
Isa.  63.  12.  led  them  d.  the  water  before  them
Dan.  7.  25.  until  a  time,  and  times,  and  a  d.  of  time

1  Cor.  12. 11.  d.  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will

2  Tint.  2. 15.  a  workman  rightly  d.  the  word  ot  truth
Ileb.  4. 12.  piercing  to  the  d.  asunder  ot  the  joints

DIVINATION.

The  eastern  people ,  and  particularly  the  Israelites,
were  always  very  fond  of  divinations,  magic ,  and
the  curious  arts  of  interpreting  dreams,  and  in¬
quiring  by  unlawful  methods  into  the  knowledge
of  what  was  to  come  :  this  was  a  consequence  oj  their
timorous  and  superstitious  genius.  When  Moses
published  the  law  cf  God,  this  evil  was  and  had
been  for  some  time  very  common  in  Egypt,  and  the
neighbouring  countries  ;  and  to  cure  the  Israelites
of  their  inclination  to  consult  diviners,  fortune¬
tellers,  augurs,  and  interpreters  of  dreams,  Ar.  he
promised  them  frojn  God  that  the  Spirit  of  prophecy
should  not  depart  from  among  them  ;  and  forbade
them,  under  very  severe  penalties,  to  consult  di-
vinei'Sy  astrologers ,  and  other  persojis  of  this  kind,
lie  commanded  them  to  be  stoned,  who  pretended
to  have  a  familiar  spirit,  or  the  spirit  oj  divina¬
tion,  Lev.  20.  27-  And  in  Deut.  18.  9,  10,  11,
15.  he  says.  When  thou  art  come  into  the  land
which  the  Lord  thy  God  givetli  thee,  thou  shalt
not  learn  to  do  after  the  abominations  ot  those
nations,  't  here  shall  not  be  found  among  you
any  one  that  maketh  his  son  or  his  daughter  to
pass  through  the  tire,  or  that  useth  divination,
oi‘  an  observer  of  times,  or  an  enchanter,  or  a
witch  :  Or  a  charmei'j  or  a  consulter  with  fa
miliar  spirits,  or  a  wizard,  or  a  necromancer.
God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Prophet,  trom  the
midst  of  thee,  ot  thy  brethren,  like  unto  me  ;
unto  him  ye  shall  hearken.  The  writings  tj  the
prophets  are  full  of  invectives  against  the  Israel¬
ites,  who  consulted  diviners,  and  against  the  false
prophets,  who  set  up  to  foretell  things  future,  and
by  this  means  seduced  the  people,  Jer.  14.  14.
Ezek.  13.  6, 7.  .  .  .

There  were  several  sorts  of  divinations,  namely,  by
water,  fire,  earth,  air  ;  by  the  flight  oj  birds,  and
their  singing  ;  by  lots,  by  dreams,  by  the  staff,
or  wand,  by  the  entrails  of  victims,  and  by  cups.
The  heathens  used  many  divination 0,  being  excited
thereto  by  distrust  of  God,  and  the  temptations  of
the  devil,  who  had  a  great  hand  in  many  of  their
answers.  Acts  16. 16.

Joseph’s  cup,  mentioned  in  Gen.  44. 5.  which  was  con¬
cealed  in  Benjamin’s  sack,  the  younger  brother  of
this  patriarch,  is  the  subject  of  many  diff  erent  con¬
jectures,  founded  on  the  words  of  J  oseph  s  officer,
Is  not  this  the  cup  in  which  my  lord  drmketh,
and  whereby  he  divineth  ?  Some  question  whether
Joseph  did  indeed  make  use  of  this  cup  in  foretelling
what  was  to  come  :  whether  his  people  believed  so,
or  whether  this  was  said  by  them,  according  to  the
common  opinion  of  the  Egyptians,  who  held  Joseph
for  a  great  magician  ;  or  whether  they  said  so  to
intimidate  Joseph’s  brethren,  making  them  be
lieve,  that  Joseph,  whom  as  yet  they  knew  not  to
be  their  brother,  was  a  man  very  expert  in  the  art  of
divining ,  and  had  discovered  the  theft  zvhich  they

had  committed,  by  virtue  of  this  art.

All  these  several  opinions  have  their  defenders.  It
is  certain,  that  the  ancients  had  a  sort  of  divt
nation  by  cups.  The  eastern  people  say,  that  old
king  Giamschid,  who  is  the  Solomon  of  the  Per¬
sians,  and  Alexander  the  Great,  had  cups,  by
means  whereof  they  knew  things  natural,  and  some¬
times  even  supernatural.  The  ancients  speak  of
certain  divining  cups  full  of  wine,  or  other
liquors,  which  were  poured  out  with  ceremony  from
the  side  where  the  handle  was,  and  that  from
thence  they  drew  presages  of  what  was  to  come.
Pliny  speaks  of  divinations  with  water  and  basins,
in  lib.  xxx.  cap.  2.  The  manner  of  divining  by
the  goblet  was  this  :  Little  plates  of  gold,  or  sil¬
ver,  or  some  precious  stones,  with  certain  charac¬
ters  engraved  upon  them,  were  thrown  into  it ;  and
after  some  invocations,  and  superstitious  ceremo¬
nies,  the  demon  was  consulted.  He  answered  in
several  ways  ;  sometimes  by  articulate  sounds  ;
sometimes  he  made  the  characters  in  the  goblet
appear  upon  the  superficies  of  the  water,  and
formed  his  answer  by  the  order  in  which  they
stood.  Sometimes  he  traced  the  images  of  the  per¬
son  on  whose  account  he  was  interrogated.  At
other  times  a  ring  was  fastened  to  a  thread,  and
held  suspended  over  the  water  in  the  cup:  the  ring,
by  its  different  percussions,  showed  the  several
things  which  were  inquired  after.


But  as  to  Joseph,  it  is  not  to  be  behoved  that  he
used  his  cup  in  divinations:  he  was  too  wise  and
religious  to  practise  any  thing  so  vain,  and  so  con¬
trary  to  religion,  as  divinations,  of  what  nature
soever  they  might  be.  He  was  certainly  very  skil¬
ful  in  the  science  of  foretelling  things  to  come  ;  but
this  knowledge  was  not  acquired  ;  it  was  no  curious
and  diabolical  art,  but  some  supernatural  faculty  1
which  God  had  communicated  to  him,  whereby  he
procured  that  high  consideration  he  was  in  through-  ;
out  Egypt.  It  is  not  incredible  that  the  Egyptians,
and  perhaps  some  of  his  own  people,  might  think
him  to  be  truly  a  magician,  and  might  have  spoken  I
of  him  according  to  this  prejudice  ;  but  it  does  not
follow,  that  he  used  a  cup  in  divining.  The  He¬
brew  text  of  Genesis  will  bear  another  construc¬
tion.  Is  not  this  the  cup  wherein  my  lord
drinks,  and  searches  for  so  carefully?  Or,  Is
not  this  the  cup  wherein  my  lord  drinks,  and
by  which  he  has  tried  you  ?  He  will  try  whether
you  are  as  acknowledging  as  you  ought  to  be,  for
the  particular  favours  he  has  shewn  you.  This
cup  will  serve  to  give  a  proof  of  your  ingratitude
and  infidelity.

Divination  by  the  wand  is  taken  notice  of  in  Ezek.
21.  21,  22.  and  in  IIos.  4.  12.  The  king  of
Babylon  stood  at  the  parting  of  the  way,  to  use
divination  ;  he  made  his  arrows  bright.  Either
writing  on  these  arrows  the  names  of  cities  and
countries,  then  putting  them  into  a  quiver,  and
mixing  them,  arid  thence  drawing  them  out,  and
concluding  according  as  the  names  were,  which  were
on  the  arrows:  Or,  by  shooting  the  arrow's,  and
judging  by  their  flight ;  or  casting  them  up  in  the
air,  and  divining  by  their  fall.  In  the  same  pas¬
sage,  divination  by  the  entrails  of  victims  is  taken
notice  of;  He  consulted  with  images,  he  looked  •
into  the  liver.  From  the  position  and  colour  of
the  liver,  they  used  to  judge  of  future  prosperous  ,
or  unpr osper ou s  events .

Num.  22.  7.  with  the  rewards  of  d.  in  their  band

23.  23.  neither  is  there-any  d.  against  Israel
Deut.  18.  10.  or  that  useth  d.  2  Kings  17.  17.

1  Sam .  15.  f  23.  rebellion  is  as  the  sin  ot  d.

Prov.  16.  t  10.  d.  is  in  the  lips  of  the  king
Jer.  14. 14.  they  prophesy  unto  you  visions  and  d
Ezek.  12.  24.  nor  flattering rf.  in  Israel
13.  6.  they  have  seen  vanity,  and  lying  d.

7.  and  have  ye  not  spoken  a  lying  d.  /

21.21.  the  king  of  kabylon  stood  to  use  d.

22.  at  his  right  hand  was  the  d.  for  Jerusalem

•  23.  it  shall  be  to  them  as  a  false  d.  in  their  sight
Acts  16. 16.  a  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  d.
DIVINATIONS.

Ezek.  13.  23.  ye  shall  see  no  more  divine  d.
DIVINE.

Gen.  44.  15.  wot  ye  not  that  such  a  man  as  1  can  d.r

1  Sam.  28.  8.  d.  to  me  by  the  familiar  spirit
Ezek.  13.  9.  my  hand  on  the  prophets  that  d.  lies

23.  ye  shall  see  no  more  vanity,  or  d.  divination;
21.  29.  whiles  they  d.  a  lie  unto  thee  to  bring  thee

Mic.  3.  6.  it  shall  be  dark  to  you,  that  ye  shall  not  d
11.  and  the  prophets  thereof  d.  for  money
DIVINE,  Adjective.

Prov.  16.  10.  a  d.  sentence  is  in  the  lips  of  the  kin:
Ileb.  9. 1 .  first  covenant  had  ordinances  of  d.  service

2  Pet.  1 . 3.  as  his  d.  power  hath  given  to  us  all  things
4.  that  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the  d.  nature

DIVINER,  S.

Deut.  18.  14.  for  these  nations  hearkened  to  d.
Josh.  13.  t  22.  Balaam  the  d.  did  Israel  slay
1  Sam.  6.2.  the  Philistines  called  for  the  d.

Isa.  44.  25.  thatturneth,  that  maketh  d.  mad
Jer.  27.  9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  your  d.

29.  8.  let  not  your  prophets  and  d.  deceive  you
Mic.  3.  7.  seers  be  ashamed,  and  the  d.  contoundei
Zech.  10.  2.  the  d.  have  seen  a  lie,  told  false  dream
DIVINETH.

Gen.  44.  5.  is  not  this  it  whereby  indeed  he  d.  ?
DIVINING.

Ezek.  22.  28.  seeing  vanity,  and  d.  lies  to  them
Mic.  3.  t  6.  it  shall  be  dark  unto  you  from  d.
DIVISION.

Exod.  8.  23. 1  will  put  a  d.  between  my  people

1  Chron.  1.  f  19.  the  name  of  Eber’s  son  was  Pe  i  eg,  r

2  Chron.  35.  5.  according  to  the  d.  ot  the  Levites
Cant.  2.  1 17.  as  a  hart  on  the  mountains  ot  d.
Luke  12.  51.  1  tell  you,  nay,  but  rather  d.

John  7.  43.  so  there  was  a  d.  among  the  peoph
because  ot  him,  9. 16. 1  10.  T
1  Cor.  12.  +  25.  there  should  be  no  d.  in  the  body
DIVISIONS.

Josh.  U.  23.  gave  the  land  to  Israel,  according  1
their  d.  12.  7.  1 18.  10.  2  Chron.  35.  5, 1'
Judg.  5.  15.  for  the  d.  of  Reuben,  there  were  gre:

thoughts  of  heart,  l<

1  Sam.  23.  +  28.  called  the  place  the  rock  of  d.

1  Chron.  23.  +  6.  David  divided  them  into  d.

24.  1.  these  are  the  d.  of  the  sons  of  Aaron
26.  1.  concerning  the  d.  of  the  port*rs,  12,  19.

Ezra  6. 18.  they  set  the  priests  in  their  d.  Neh.  11.3*
Rom.  16. 17.  mark  them  which  cause  d.  and  ofleno
1  Cor.  1. 10.  that  there  be  no  d.  among  you
3.  3.  whereas  there  is  among  you  strife  and  d.  ■
11.  18.  I  hear  that  there  be  d.  among  you
DIVORCE

Is  the  dissolution  of  marriage,  or  a  separation
husband  and  wife.  Moses  tolera ted  <11  voices  :  1  i.
words  on  this  subject  are  in  Deut.  24.  1,  2,  3.
When  a  man  hath  taken  a  wife  and  married  fit
anil  it  come  to  pass  that  she  find  no  favour  in  I
eyes,  because  he  hath  found  some  uncleanness
her  ;  then  let  him  write  her  a  bill  of  divon
ment,  &c.  Commentators  are  much  divided  c«
cerning  the  sense  oj  these  words,  because  lie.  ha
found  some  uncleanness,  or,  as  the  Hebrew  h
it,  matter  of  nakedness,  in  her.  .  ..

The  school  of  Shammah,  who  lived  a  little  hefi
our  Saviour,  taught,  that  a  man  could  not  la
fully  be  divorced  from  his  wife,  unless  he  «
found  her  guilty  of  some  action  which  uas  rea
infamous,  and  contraiy  to  the  rules  of  art.


I)  o


D  O


But  tne  school  of  Ili! lei,  who  was  Shaminah’s
disciple,  taught,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  least
reasons  were  sufficient  to  authorize  a  man  to  put
away  his  wife  ;  for  example,  if  she  did  not  dress  his
meat  well,  or  if  he  Jound  any  other  woman  whom  he
liked  better.  He  translated  Moses’  text  thus  :
If  he  hath  found  any  thine  in  her,  or  an  unclean¬
ness.  Akiba,  he  affirmed,  that  it  was  sufficient
cause  for  a  man  to  put  away  /its  wife,  if  she  were
not  agreeable  to  her  husband.  After  this  manner
he  explained  the  text  of  Moses :  If  she  find  no
favour  in  his  eyes  :  this  was  the  first  reason  ;  the
second  was,  If  he  find  any  uncleanness  in  her.
Josephus  and  Philo  shew  sufficiently ,  that  in  their
time  the  Jews  believed  divorce  to  be  lawful  upon
very  trivial  causes.  But  nothing  can  justify  such
a  procedure  but  adultery,  whereby  the  marriage  re¬
lation  is  radically  dissolved.  Mat.  5.  32.

Vhat  the  Pharisees  explained  this  toleration  of
Moses  in  the  like  extensive  manner,  may  be
gathered  from  the  question  they  put  to  our  Sa¬
viour,  Mat.  19.  3.  Is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to  put
away  his  wife  for  every  cause  ?  This  they  pro¬
posed  to  our  Saviour,  trying  if  they  could  get  any
thing  from  him  to  his  pi ejudice.  Had  he  answer¬
ed  in  the  affirmative,  he  had  contradicted  what  he
formerly  delivered  on  this  head.  Mat.  5.  32.  Had
he  denied,  they  would  have  accused  him  for  contra¬
dicting  the  law  of  Moses,  Dent.  24.  1.  Our  Sa¬
viour  answered  neither  yea  nor  nay,  but  gave  them
a  fair  occasion  to  answer  themselves ,  and  tacitly
charged  them  with  ignorance  and  corruption  of  the
law  of  God.  He  referred  them  to  the  first  institu¬
tion  of  marriage,  in  Gen.  1.  27. 1  2.  24.  Have  ye
not  read,  that  he  who  made  them  at  the  begin¬
ning:,  made  them  male  and  female?  and  said.
For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  father  ana
mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they
twain  shall  be  one  flesh.  Wherefore  they  are  no
more  twain,  but  one  flesh.  What  therefore  God
hath  joined  together,  let  no  man  put  asunder.
From  hence  he  leaves  them  to  conclude,  whether  it
was  probable  that  Moses,  whom  they  so  reverenced,
and  who  was  so  faithful  in  the  house  of  God  as  a
servant,  did  give  them  a  liberty  to  put  asunder
those  whom  God  had  joined  together.  Or  whether
they  had  not  put  an  interpretation  upon  the  law  of
Moses,  which  it  could  not  bear,  in  consistency  with
the  law  of  God.  Our  Saviour  adds,  that  Moses,
because  of  the  hardness  of  your  hearts,  suffer¬
ed  you  to  put  away  your  wives ;  but  from  the
beginning  it  was  not  so ;  that  is,  Moses  gave
you  no  positive  command  in  the  case  :  he  could
not  make  a  law  directly  opposite  to  the  law  of
God.  But  seeing  your  wicked  and  malicious  dis¬
position,  that  you  would  turn  away  your  wives
without  any  just  and  warrantable  cause,  and  to
restrain  your  extravagances  of  cruelty  to  your
wives,  or  disorderly  turning  them  off  upon  any
occasion,  he  made  a  judicial,  political,  or  civil
law,  whereby,  upon  reason  of  state,  namely,  to
prevent  a  greater  civil  mischief,  he  did  so  far
allow  of  it,  as  to  exempt  them  that  did  it  from
any  civil  punishment ;  but  still  it  was  a  trans¬
gression  of  the  moral  law,  and  so  a  sin  against
God.  After  which  our  Saviour  determines  on
this  question,  according  to  the  original  law  of
God,  and  limits  the  permission  of  divorce  to  the
single  case  of  adultery:  And  1  say  unto  you,
Whosoever  shall  put  away  his  wife,  except  it
be  for  fornication,  and  shall  marry  another,  com¬
mitted!  adultery,  and  whoso  marrieth  her  that
is  put  away,  doth  commit  adultery.  In  the  case
of  adultery,  the  marriage  covenant  being  broken,
the  marriage  bond  is  fundamentally  dissolved,  and
it  lies  in  the  power  of  the  party  wronged  to  pro¬
secute  it  to  a  formal  dissolution,  by  divorce  ;  and
then  the  wronged  party  is  at  liberty  to  marry
again.

fer.  3.  8.  I  had  put  her  away,  and  given  a  bill  of  d.
DIVORCED.

Lev.  21 . 14.  high-priest  shall  not  take  a  d.  woman

22. 13.  but  if  the  priest’s  daughter  be  a  widow  or  d.
rsvnt.  30.  9.  every  vow  of  her  that  is  d.  shall  stand
Mat.  5.  32.  whosoever  shall  marry  her  that  is  if.

_  DIVORCEMENT.

I  hut.  24.  1.  then  let  him  write  her  a  bill  of  d.  3.

50.  1.  where  is  the  bill  of  your  mother’s  d.  ?
Mark  10. 4.  Moses  suffered  to  write  a  bill  of  d.

See  Writing.

_  .  DO.

'xen.  16. 6.  Abram  said,  do  to  her  as  it  pleaseth  thee

18. 25.  shall  not  the  .1  udge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?
31.16.  now  then  what  God  hath  said  to  thee,  do

32. 12.  thou  saidst,  I  will  surely  do  thee  good

41. 25.  G.  hath  shewed  what  he  is  about  to  do,  28.
Erod.  4.  15.  and  I  will  teach  you  what  ye  shall  do
*•  + +7. u all  the  congregation  shall  do  it

15. 26.  if  thou  wilt  do  that  which  is  right,  and  keep

10  statutes,  Deut.  6. 18. 1  12.  25. 1  13. 18. 1  21. 9.
in’  „  n  shew  tt>em  the  work  that  they  must  do

19.  8.  all  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do
00  o! CS1X, 1 days  do  a11  thy  work, 23. 12.  Deut.  5. 13.
~9.  3o.  thusshalt  thou  do  to  Aaron  and  his  sons

■L ev •  4.  ye  shall  do  my  judgments,  and  keep  my

ordinances,  19.  37. 1  20.  22.  Ezek.  36.  27.

5.  which  if  man  do,  Neh.  9. 29.  Ezek.  20. 11 , 13, 21.

18.  ye  shall  do  my  statutes  and  keep  my  judg-
\r  ™ents>  20-  8- 1  22.  31 .  Deut.  17. 19. 1  26. 16.
oa  G22'  ?°-  w9rd  I  say  to  thee,  that  shalt  thou  do
30  os  u  at  this  people  shall  do  to  thy  people
n  ' ,  «  y  servant^  will  do  as  my  lord  commandeth
7111  + that  ye  may  leam,  and  keep  to  do  them
17  1 A  iPi the  commandments  to  do  them,  11. 22.

11  JR’  sha't  do  according  to  the  sentence,  11.
on  ,y  then  shall  ye  do  to  him  as  he  thought  to  do

•  ty*  thus  shalt  thou  do  to  all  the  cities


7  o’  the  words  of  this  law  to  do  them
2V '  ,  that  we  may  hear  it  and  do  it,  13.
so  1'  j  t-°rd  shall  do  to  them  as  he  did  to  Sihon
T,ti  k  a  ye  thus  requite  the  L.  O  foolish  people
5  1. 0. 3.  round  the  city,  thus  shalt  thou  do  six  days


Josh.  7. 9.  and  what  wilt  thou  do  to  thy  great  name  ?

10.  25.  thus  shall  the  Lord  do  to  your  enemies

22.  24.  what  have  ye  to  do  with  the  God  of  Israel  ?

23. 6.  tp  do  all  that  Is  written  in  the  book  of  the  law
of  Moses,  that  ye  turn  not  aside  therefrom,
1  Citron.  16.  40.  2  Citron.  34.  21.

Judg.  7. 17.  it  shall  be,  that  as  1  do  so  shall  ye  do

8.  3.  what  was  1  able  to  do  in  comparison  of  you  ?
10. 15.  do  to  us  whatsoever  seemeth  good  to  thee

18.  14.  consider  therefore  what  ye  have  to  do
18.  then  said  the  priest  unto  them,  what  do  ye  ?

Ruth  3.  4.  he  will  tell  thee  what  thou  shalt  do

1  Sam.  16.  3.  I  will  shew  thee  what  thou  shait  do

22.  3.  till  I  know  what  God  will  do  for  me

26.  25.  thou  shalt  do  great  things,  and  still  prevail

2  Sam.  3. 18.  now  then  do  it,  the  Lord  hath  spoken

15.  4.  oh  that  I  were  judge,  1  would  do  him  justice

26.  here  1  am,  let  him  do  to  me  as  seemeth  good

21. 1 4.  it  is  not  silver,  we  have  to  do  with  Saul

24. 12.  that  I  may  do  it  to  thee,  1  Citron.  21. 10.

3  Kings  2.  6.  do  therefore  according  to  thy  wisdom

31.  do  as  he  hath  said,  and  fall  upon  him

8.  32.  then  hear,  and  do,  and  judge  thy  servants

39.  hear  in  heaven,  forgive,  and  do,  2  Chr.  6.  23.

11. 33.  do  that  is  right  in  mine  eyes,  38.  I  14.  8.

18. 34.  do  it  the  second  time,  do  it  the  third  time
2  Kings  9. 18.  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace  ?  19.

17. 34.  to  this  day  they  do  after  the  former  manners

20.  9.  the  Lord  will  do  as  he  hath  spoken

1  Chr  on.  4. 1 10.  that  thou  wouldst  do  me  from  evil

17.  2.  Nathan  said,  do  all  that  is  in  thine  heart

23.  let  thing  be  established  and  do  as  thou  hast  said

21. 8.  do  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant

2  Chron.  9.  8.  thee  king,  to  do  judgment  and  justice

19.  6.  said  to  the  judges,  take  heed  what  ye  do
7-  wherefore  now  take  heed  and  do  it

9.  thus  shall  ye  do  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord

20. 12.  we  have  no  might,  nor  know  we  what  to  do
25.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  it,  be  strong  for  battle

Ezra  4. 2.  for  we  seek  your  God,  as  ye  do
7- 10.  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  do  it
18.  that  do  after  the  will  of  your  God
Neh.  2. 12.  what  God  hath  put  in  my  heart  to  do

5. 12.  they  should  do  according  to  this  promise

9.  24.  that  they  might  do  with  them  as  they  would
Job  7.  20.  I  have  sinned,  what  shall  1  do  to  thee  ?

11. 8.  it  is  high  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do?

13.  20.  only  do  not  two  things  unto  me

Psal.  40.  8.  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  O  my  God
50.  16.  what  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  statutes
83.  9.  do  unto  them  as  unto  the  Midianites
109.  21.  but  do  thou  for  me,  O  God  the  Lord
119. +  112.  I  have  inclined  my  heart  to  do
132.  as  thou  usestto  do  to  those  that  love  thy  name

143. 10.  teach  me  to  do  thy  will,  thou  art  my  God
Prov.  3.  27.  it  is  in  the  power  of  thy  hand  to  do  it
Eccl.  9. 10.  do  it  with  thy  might,  there  is  no  work
Isa.  10.  3.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  visitation  ?

28.  21.  that  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  work
45.  f.  I  the  Lord  do  all  these  things
Jer.  2. 18.  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  Egypt  ?
what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  Assyria  ?

4.  30.  when  thou  art  spoiled,  what  wilt  thou  do  ?

5.  31.  and  what  will  ye  do  in  the  end  thereof?

7. 17.  seestthou  not  what  they  do  in  cities  of  Jud.

11.  4.  saying,  obey  my  voice,  and  do  them

15.  what  hath  my  beloved  to  do  in  mine  house  ?

12.  5.  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  Jordan  ?

14.7.  O  Lord,  do  thou  it  for  thy  name’s  sake
39.  12.  do  to  him,  even  as  he  shall  say  to  thee
42.  3.  and  may  shew  the  thing  that  we  may  do

50. 15.  as  she  hath  done,  do  unto  her.  29.

Lam.  1 .  22.  do  unto  them  as  thou  hast  done  unto  me
Ezek.  8. 6.  son  of  man,  seest  thou  what  they  do  ?

16. 5.  no  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these  to  thee

18.  5.  but  if  a  man  be  just,  and  do  that  which  is

lawful  and  right,  21. 1  33.  14,  19.

24.  22.  and  ye  shall  do  as  1  have  done,  24.

31. +  11.  in  doing  he  shall  do  unto  him
36.  37.  I  will  be  inquired  of  to  do  it  for  them
Dan.  9-  19.  O  Lord,  hearken  and  do,  defer  not

11.  3.  he  shall  do  according  to  his  will,  16,  36.

39.  thus  shall  he  do  in  the  most  strong  holds
Hos.  9.  5.  what  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day  ?

10.  3.  what  then  should  a  king  do  to  us  ?

Joel  3.  4.  what  have  ye  to  do  with  me,  O  Tyre  ?
Amos  3.  +  6.  and  shall  not  the  I.ord  do  somewhat

7.  the  Ixird  will  do  nothing,  but  he  revealeth
Jonah  4. 9. 1  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  unto  death
Mic.  6.  8.  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy
Zech.  1 . 21.  then  said  I,  what  come  these  to  do?
8.16.  these  are  the  things  that  ye  shall  do
Mat.  5. 19.  but  whosoever  shall  do  and  teach  them
47-  brethren  only,  what  do  ye  more  than  others  ?
8. 29-  behold,  they  cried  out,  saying,  what  have  we
to  do  with  thee  ?  Mark  1. 24.  Luke  4.  34.
12. 50.  for  whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father
who  is  in  heaven,  Mark  3.  35.

20. 15.  lawful  to  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own

32.  what  will  ye  that  I  shall  do  to  you  J  Mark  10.  36.
21. 24.  I  will  ask,  if  ye  tell  me,  1  will  tell  you  by

what  authority  I  do  these  things,  Mark  11.29.

27.  he  said,  neither  tell  I  you  by  what  authority  I

do  these  things,  Mark  11.  33.  Lule  20.  8.

40.  when  lord  of  vineyard  cometh,  what  will  he  do
to  those  husbandmen  ?  Mark  12.  9.  Luke  20. 15.

23. 5.  all  their  works  they  do  to  be  seen  of  men
27. 19.  have  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man

Mark’/.  8.  many  other  such  like  thimrs,  ye  do,  13.

12.  ye  suffer  him  no  more  to  do  for  father  or  mother

11.  28.  who  gave  thee  authority  to  do  these  things  ?
Luke  4.  23.  what  have  heard  done,  do  in  thy  country

6.  2.  why  do  ye  that  which  is  not  lawful  to  do?
11.  they  communed  what  they  might  do  to  Jesus
31.  as  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye

8. 21.  these  who  hear  the  word  of  God  and  do  it
16. 4. 1  am  resolved  what  to  do  when  I  am  put  out

17. 10.  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  to  do
19. 48.  and  could  not  find  what  they  might  do

23.  31.  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  green  tree
34.  forgive  them,  they  know  not  what  they  do

John  2. 5.  whatsoever  he  saith  to  you,  do  it '


D  O

John  4. 34.  my  meat  is  to  do  will  of  him  that  sent  me

5.  30.  I  can  of  mine  own  self  do  nothing
36.  the  works  that  l  do  bear  witness  of  me

6.  6.  for  he  himself  knew  what  he  would  do

28.  what  shall  we  do  ?  Acts  2.  37- 1  16.  30.

7-4.  if  thou  do  these  things  shew  thyself  to  world
17.  if  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know

8.  29.  1  do  always  those  things  that  please  him
39.  ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham

9. 33.  if  he  were  not  of  God,  he  could  do  nothing

10.  25.  the  works  that  1  do  in  my  Father’s  name
11. 47.  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  said,  what  do  we?

13.  7.  what  1  do  thou  knowest  not  now

15.  that  ye  should  do  as  1  have  done  to  you

17.  if  ye  know  these,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them

14. 12.  the  works  that  1  do  shall  he  do  also

14.  if  ye  ask  any  thing  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it

15.14. my  friendspfye  do  whatever  I  command  you

21.  these  things  will  they  do  unto  you,  16.  3.

17.  4.  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do
21.21.  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do?

Acts  1.  1.  of  all  that  Jesus  began  to  do  and  teach

4.  28.  to  do  whatsoever  thy  counsel  determined

9.  6.  he  said.  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?

10.  6.  he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do

14.  15.  saying,  sirs,  why  do  ye  these  things  ?

15.  36.  visit  our  brethren,  ana  see  how  they  do

16.  28.  do  thyself  no  harm,  for  we  are  all  here

17. 7.  these  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  Cesar

Rom.  1.  32.  not  only  do  the  same  but  have  pleasure

2. 14.  do  by  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law

7.  15.  for  that  which  1  do  I  allow  not,  what  1  would

that  do  I  not,  but  what  I  hate  that  do  I

16.  if  I  do  that  which  I  would  not,  1  consent  not

17.  then  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin,  20.

12.  8.  that  givetli,  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity

1  Cor.  7-  36.  let  him  do  what  he  will,  he  sinneth  not
10.31.  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  ofG.

16. 10.  he  worketh  the  work  of  the  Ld.  as  1  also  do

2  Cor.  8.  10.  not  only  to  do,  but  also  to  be  forward

13.  7.  that  ye  should  do  that  which  is  honest
Gal.  2. 10.  tne  same  which  I  also  was  forward  to  do

14.  not  as  do  the  Jews,  to  live  as  do  the  Jews

3.  10.  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them

5.  21.  they  which  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit
Eph.  6.  9.  masters,  do  the  same  things  to  servants

21.  that  ye  may  know  my  affairs,  and  how  1  do
Phil.  2. 13.  God  worketh  both  to  will  and  to  do

4.  9.  the  things  ye  have  heard  and  seen  in  me,  do
Col,  3.  17.  whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all

in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving  thanks

23.  whatsoever  ye  do,  do  it  heartily,  as  to  the  L.

1  Thess,  3.  12.  in  love,  even  as  we  do  towards  you

4. 10.  indeed  ye  do  it  towards  all  the  brethren

5.  6.  therefore  let  us  not  sleep  as  do  others

11.  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do

24.  faithful  is  he  thatcalleth,  who  also  will  doit

2  Thess.  3.  4.  that  ye  both  do  and  will  do  the  things
2  Tim.  4. 5.  do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  make  proof

9.  do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  to  me,  21.
Philem.  21.  knowing  thou  wilt  do  more  than  I  sayr
Ileb.  4.  13.  to  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do
10.  7.  then  said  I ,  lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  G.  9.

13.  6.  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  to  me
21.  make  you  perfect  in  every  work,  to  do  his  will

1  Pet.  4. 11 'let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability  God  giveth

2  Pet.  1.  10.  if  ye  do  these,  ye  shall  never  fall
3.  16.  wrest,  as  they  do  also  other  scriptures

1  John  1.  6.  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth
3.  22.  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight
Rev.  2.  5.  and  repent,  and  do  tne  first  works
Can  or  canst  DO.

Gen.  31.  43.  what  can  I  do  to  these  my  daughters
Deut.  3.  24.  none  can  do  according  to  thy  works

1  Sam.  28.  2.  shalt  know  what  thy  servant  can  do
Job  15.  3.  speeches  wherewith  he  can  do  no  good

22.  17.  ana  what  can  the  Almighty  do  for  them  ?
42.  2. 1  know  that  thou  canst  do  every  thing
Psal.  11 . 3.  found,  destroyed,  what  can  righteous  do  ?
56.  4.  I  will  not  fear  what  flesh  can  do  to  me,  11.
118.6.  I  will  not  fear  whatman  can  do  to  me
Eccl.  2. 12.  what  can  man  do  that  cometh  after  king  ?
Jer.  38.  5.  that  can  do  any  thing  against  you
Mark  9.  22.  if  canst  do  any  thing,  have  comp,  on  us
Luke  12.  4.  after  that  have  no  more  they  can  do
John  3.  2.  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  thou  dost
5.  19.  the  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  30.

15. 5.  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing

2  Cor.  13.  8.  we  can  do  nothing  against  the  truth
PhilA.13.  1  can  do  all  things  thro’Lh. strengthen. me

See  Do  Commandments.

DO  with  evil.

Exod.  23.  2. thou  shalt  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  e.
l.ev.  5.4.  if  a  sou  1  swear  to  do  evil  or  good,  or  do  good
Deut.  4.  25.  shall  do  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord
31.  29.  because  ye  will  do  evil  in  sight  of  the  I.ord

1  Sam.  20.  13.  if  it  please  my  father  to  do  thee  evil

2  Sam.  12.  9.  why  despised  L.  to  do  evil  in  his  sight
2  Kings  8.  12.  because  I  know  the  evil .thou  wilt  do

17.  17.  sold  themselves  to  do  evil  in  sight  of  Lord
21.  9-  Manasseh  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil

Neh.  9.  +28.  they  returned  to  do  evil  before  thee
Psal.  34.  16.  the  face  of  L.  against  them  that  do  evil
37.  8.  fret  not  thyself  in  any  wise  to  do  evil
Prov.  2.  14.  who  rejoice  to  do  evil,  and  delisht  in
24.  8.  he  thatdeviseth  to  do  evil  shall  be  called
Eccl.  5.  1.  for  they  consider  not  that  they  do  evil

8.  11.  the  heart  of  men  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil

12.  though  a  sinner  do  evil  an  hundred  times
Isa.  1.  16.  wash  ye,  make  you  clean,  cease  to  do  evil

41.  23.  do  good  or  evil,  that  we  may  be  dismayed
Jer.  4. 22.  my  peo.  are  wise  to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good

10. 5.  be  not  afraid,  for  they  cannot  do  evil

13.  23.  then  may  ye  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil

18.  10.  if  it  do  evil  in  my  sight,  that  it  obey  not
Ezek.  6.  10.  that  I  would  do  this  evil  unto  them
Mic. I.  3.  that  they  may  do  evil  with  both  hands
Zeph.  1.  12.  say,  Ld.  not  do  good,  nor  will  he  do  ez>
Mark  3. 4. is  it  lawful  to  do  good  or  do  evil?  I/uke  6.9
Rom.  3. 8.  that  we  say,  let  us  do  evil  that  good  may

13.  4.  but  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  be  afraid
2  Cor.  13. now  I  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evit

F  113


DO


DOS


D  O


1  Pet.  3. 12.  face  of  Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil
DO  joined  with  good.

Gen.  19.  8.  do  ye  to  them  as  is  good  in  your  eyes
°7  46.  Rebekah  said,  what^.  shall  my  life  do  me  .
Lev.  5.  4.  if  a  soul  swear,  pronouncing  to  do  good
Num.  10.  29.  come  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good
24  13.  to  do  either  good  or  bad  of  my  own  mind
Deut.  1.  14.  thing  thou  hast  spoken  is  g.  for  us  to  do
8. 16.  prove  thee,  to  do  thee  good  at  the  latter  end

28.  63.  the  Lord  rejoiced  over  you  to  do  you  good
30.  5.  and  he  will  do  thee  good,  and  multiply  thee

Judg.  17.  13.  now  know  I  the  Lord  will  do  me  good
19  24.  do  with  them  what  seemeth  good  to  you

1  Sam.  1. 23.  Elkanah  said  to  Hannah,  do  what  seem¬

eth  thee  good,  14.  36,  40.  2  Sam.  19.  ~7 ,  3* .

3  18.  Eli  said,  it  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what
seemeth  him  good,  2  Sam.  10.  12.

2  Kings  10.  5.  do  tbut  which  is  good  in  thine  eyes

1  Chron.  19.  13.  let  tl  e  L.  do  what  \sgood  in  his  sight

21.  23.  lest  the  kina  do  that  which  is  good  in  his  eyes
Neh~ 5.  9.  also  I  said,  it  is  not  good  that  ye  do
Psal.  34.  14.  do  good,  37  3,  27  1  51.  18.  1125  4.

Mat.  5.  44.  Luke  6.  9,  35.
36.  3.  he  hath  left  off  to  be  wise  and  to  do  good
Prov." 31.  12.  she  will  do  him  good  and  not  evil
Reel'.  3.  12.  but  for  a  man  to  do  good  in  his  life
Jsa.  41.  23.  yea  do  good  or  do  evil,  that  we  may  be
Jer.  4.  22.  but  to  do  good  they  have  no  knowledge
10.  5.  cannot  do  evil,  nor  is  it  in  them  to  do  good

13.  23.  then  may  ye  do  good  that  are  accustomed
26.  14.  do  with  me  as  seemeth  good  and  meet  to  you

29.  32.  nor  behold  the  good  I  will  do  lor  my  people

32. 40. 1  will  not  turn  away  from  them  to  do  them  g.

41.  I  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good

33.  9.  which  shall  hear  all  the  good  1  do  to  them

Mic.  2.  7.  do  not  my  words  do  good  to  the  upright
Zeph.  1.  12.  that  say,  the  Lord  will  not  do  good
Mark  3.  4.  Jesus  saith  to  them,  is  it  lawful  to  do  good
on  the  sabbath-days,  or  to  do  evil  ?  Luke  6. 9.
14. 7.  the  poor,  when  ye  will,  ye  may  do  them  good
Luke  6.  33.  if  ye  do  good  to  them  that  do  good  to  you
Rom.  7.  19.  for  the  good  that  I  would,  I  do  not

21.  when  I  would  do  good  evil  is  present  with  me
13.  3.  do  what  is  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise

Gal.  6.10.  let  us  do  goodto  all  men,  especially  to  them
1  Tim.  6.  18.  charge  the  rich,  that  they  do  good
He/>.  13. 16.  to  do  good  and  communicate,  forget  not
Jam.  4.  17.  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doth  it  not

1  Pet.  3.  11.  let  him  eschew  evil,  and  do  good

Have  I  to  DO.

2  Sam.  16.  10.  what  have  I  to  do  with  you  ?  19.  22.

1  Kings  17. 18.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  2  Kings

3.  13.  2  Chron.  35.  21.  Mark  5.  7.  Luke

8.  28.  John  2.  4.

Hos.  14.  8.  what  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?

1  Cor.  5. 12.  what  have  I  to  do  to  judge  them  without
I  shall,  or  I  will  DO  ;  or  will  I,  shall  I  DO.
Gen.  27.  37.  what  shall  I  do  now  to  thee,  my  son  ?

47.  30.  and  he  said,  I  will  do  as  thou  hast  said
Exod.  3.  20.  which  I  will  do  in  the  midst  thereof

6.  1.  thou  shalt  see  what  I  will  do  to  Pharaoh

17.  4.  Moses  cried,  what  shall  I  do  to  this  people  ?

34. 10. 1  will  do  marvels,  shall  see  work  of  the  Lord,
for  it  is  a  terrible  thing  that  I  will  do  with  thee

Hum.  14.  35. 1  will  surely  do  it  to  this  congregation

22.  17.  I  will  do  whatsoever  thou  sayest  to  me

33.  56.  I  shall  do  to  you  as  I  thought  to  do  to  them
Puth  3.  5.  she  said,  all  thou  sayest  to  me  I  will  do

11.  I  will  do  to  thee  all  that  thou  requirest
13.  then  will  I  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman  to  thee

1  Sam.  3.  11.  behold,  I  will  do  a  thing  in  Israel
10.  2.  sorroweth,  saj'ing,  what  shall  Ldo  for  my  son

20.  4.  thy  soul  desiretli,  I  will  do  it  for  thee

28.  15.  mayest  make  known  to  me  what  I  shall  do

2  Sam.  12.  12.  but  I  will  do  this  thing  before  Israel

18.  4.  what  seemeth  you  best  I  will  do,  19.  38.

21.  3.  said  to  Gibeomtes,  what  shall  L  do  for  you  ?
4.  what  you  shall  say,  that  will  I  do  for  you

1  Kings  5.  8.  I  will  do  all  thy  desire  for  timber  of
20.  9.  all  thou  didst  send  for  at  first,  I  will  do

2  Kings  2.  9.  Elijah  said,  ask  what  I  shall  do  for  thee
4.  2.  Elisha  said  to  her,  what  shall  I  do  for  thee  ?

Esth.  5.  8. 1  will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king  hath  said
Job  7. 20.  what  shall  I  do  to  thee,  O  thou  preserver
31.  14.  what  then  shall  I  do  when  God' rise th  up

34.  32.  if  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more
Prov.  24.  29.  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done
Isa,  5.  5.  I  will  tell  what  I  will  do  to  my  vineyard

42.  16.  these  things  will  I  do,  and  not  forsake  them

43.  19.  1  will  do  a  new  thing,  now  it  shall  spring

46. 10.  my  counsel  stand,  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure
11.  1  have  purposed  it,  I  will  also  do  it

48.  11.  even  for  mine  own  sake  will  I  do  it
Jer.  7.  14.  therefore  will  Ido  unto  this  house  called

9.  7.  how  shall  I  do  for  daughter  of  my  people  ?
19. 12.  thus  will  I  do  to  this  place,  saith  the  Lord
25.  6.  provoke  me  not,  and  I  will  do  you  no  hurt

29.  32.  the  good  that  I  will  do  for  my  people
51.  47.  I  will  do  judgment  on  the  graven  images

Ezek.  5.  9.  I  will  do  in  thee  what  I  have  not  done

7.  27.  I  will  do  unto  them  after  their  way

22. 14. 1  have  spoken,  and  will  do  it,  24. 14. 1  36.  36

35.  11.  I  will  even  do  according  to  thine  anger

36. 11.  I  will  do  better  to  you  than  at  the  beginning
Hos.  6.  4.  O  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?
Amos  4.  12.  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  O  Israel
Mat.  19.  16.  Master,  what  good  thing  shall  I  do  ?

27.  22.  Pilate  saith,  what  shall  I  do  with  Jesus  ?
Luke  12.17.  what  shall  I  do,  because  I  have  no  room
16.  3.  what^/;a77  Ido?  20.  13.  Acts  22.  10.

John  14.  13.  whatever  ye  shall  ask,  that  will  I  do

14.  if  ye  shall  ask  any  thing  in  my  name  I  w.  do  it
2  Cor.  11.  12.  but  what  I  do,  that  I  will  do
Philem,  14.  without  thy  mind  would  I  do  nothing
See  Judgment.

Must  DO.

Exod.  18.  20.  shalt  shew  the  work  that  they  must  do
Num.  23.  26.  all  the  Lord  speaketh,  that  1  must  do
Prov.  19. 19.  if  thou  deliver,  thou  must  do  it  again
Acts  16.  30.  jailer  said,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  11
DO  joined  with  no,  or  not.

Gen,  18.  29.  he  said,  I  will  not  do  it  for  forty’s  sake

114


Gen.  18.  30.  he  said ,  1  will  not  do  if  I  find  thirty  there
19. 22. 1  cannot  do  any  thing  till  thou  come  thither
34.  19.  the  young  man  deferred  ?wt  to  do  the  thing
Exod.  20.  10.  is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God,
in  it  thou  shalt  not  do  any  work,  Lev.  23.  31.

21.  11.  and  if  he  do  not  these  three  unto  her
23.  24.  thou  shalt  not  do  after  their  works

Lev.  16.  29.  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls  and  do  no
work,  23.  3,  28.  Deut.  15.  19.  Jer.  17.  24.

18.  3.  and  after  their  doings  ye  shall  not  do

19.  15.  do  no  unrighteousness  in  judgment,  35.

23. 7.  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  therein,  8,  21 , 25,

35,  36.  Num.  28.  18,  25,  26.
26. 14.  but  if  ye  will  not  do  my  commandments,  15.
Num.  8. 26.  from  age  of  fifty  years  shall  do  no  service
23.  19.  hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?

29.  7.  ye  shall  not  do  any  work,  Deut.  5.14.1  16. 8.
Deut.  12.  8.  shall  not  do  after  all  the  things  we  do  here
13  11.  shall  do  no  more  any  such  wickedness  as  this
17.  13.  shall  fear  and  do  no  more  presumptuously
Judg.  6.  27.  feared,  that  he  could  not  do  it  by  day
19.  23.  my  brethren,  I  pray  you,  do  not  this  folly
24.  but  to  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  thing
Ruth  3.  13.  if  he  will  not  do  the  part  of  a  kinsman
1  Sam.  26.  21.  return,  I  will  no  more  do  thee  harm

1  Kings  11. 12.  in  thy  days  I  will  not  do  it  for  David

2  Kings  7.9.  lepers  said  one  to  anoth.  we  do  not  well

17.  15.  Lord  cnaraed  they  should  not  do  like  them

18.  12.  and  would  not  hear  them,  nor  do  them
Ezra  7.  26.  whoso  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy  God
Job  13.  20.  only  do  not  two  things  unto  me

34.  12.  yea,  surely  God  will  not  do  wickedly
41.  8.  remember  the  battle,  do  no  more
Psal.  119.  3.  they  do  no  iniqui.  they  walk  in  his  ways
Jer.  18. 6.  O  Isr.  cannot  I  do  with  you  as  this  potter  ?

22.  3.  do  no  wrong,  do  no  violence  to  the  stranger
42. 5.  the  L.  be  a  true  witness,  if  we  do  not

Ezek.  5.  9.  I  will  not  do  any  more  the  like
23. 48.  may  be  taught  not  to  do  after  your  lewdness
33.  31.  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do  them
32.  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do  them  not
Zeph.  3.  5.  the  just  Lord,  he  will  not  do  iniquity

13.  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity
Mat.  5.  46.  do  not  even  the  publicans  the  same  ?  47.

6.  1.  take  heed  ye  do  not  your  alms  before  men
2.  when  dost  alms  sound  not  a  trumpet  before  thee
12. 2.  do  that  which  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  sabbath

19.  18.  Jesus  said,  thou  shalt  da  no  murder

20.  13.  he  said,  friend,  1  do  thee  wo  wrong

23.  3.  do  not  after  their  works,  they  say  and  do  not
Mark  6.  5.  and  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  work
L.uke  6.  46.  and  do  not  the  things  which  I  say
John  6.  38.  I  came  down  not  to  do  mine  own  will

10.  37.  if  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father
Rom.  7.  15.  for  what  I  would,  that  do  I  not,  19.

8.  3.  for  what  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  weak
Gal.  5.  17.  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would

1  John  1.  6.  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth

Rev.  19.  10.  he  said  to  me,  see  thou  do  it  not,  22. 9.
Observe  with  DO.

Deut.  5.  32.  ye  shall  observe  to  do  as  L.  commanded
you,  8. 1. 1  11.  32. 1  12. 1.  I  24. 8.2  Kings  17.  37.
6.  3.  observe  to  do,  12.  32. 1  28.  13,  15,  58.  |  31.  12.

1  32. 46.

25.  if  we  observe  to  do  these  commandments
15.  5.  to  observe  to  do  all  these  commandments
16. 12.  and  thou  shalt  observe  and  do  these  statutes
17.  10.  shalt  observe  to  do  as  they  inform  thee
Josh.  1.  7.  tliatthou  mayest  observe  to  do  all  the  law

2  Kings  21 . 8.  if  they  will  observe  to  do  according  to
Neh.  10.  29.  entered  into  an  oath  to  observe  and  do
Ezek.  37.  24.  they  shall  observe  and  do  them

Mat.  23.  3.  what  they  bid  you,  that  observe  and  do
Will  we  DO.  We  will  DO.

Exod.  19.  8.  all  the  L.  hath  said  we  will  do,  24.  3,  7-
Num.  10.  32.  the  same  goodness  will  we_  do  to  thee,
Deut.  5.  27.  and  we  will  hear  it  and  do  it
Josh.  1. 16.  all  that  thou  commandest  us  we  will  do
Judg.  20.  9.  the  thing  which  we  will  do  to  Gibeah
2  Kings  10.  5.  we  will  do  all  that  thou  shalt  bid  us
Jer.  18. 12.  we  will  every  one  do  the  imagination
42.  20.  so  declare  unto  us,  and  we  will  do  it
44. 17.  we  will  certainly  do  whatever  proceedeth
Shall  we  DO.  We  shall  DO.

Judg.  13.  8.  teach  us  what  we  shall  do  to  the  child
12.  how  shall  order,  how  shall  we  do  unto  him  ?

21.  7.  how  shall  we  do  for  wives  for  them  ?  16.

1  Sam.  5.  8.  what  shall  we  do  with  the  ark  of  God  ?
6.  2.  what  shall  we  do  to  the  ark  of  the  Lord  ?

2 Sam.  16. 20.  give  couns.  among  you  what7re  shall  do
17.  6.  shall  we  do  after  his  saying  ?  speak  thou

2  Kings  6. 15.  said,  alas  my  master,  how  shall  we  do  ?
2  Chr.  25.  9.  what  shall  we  do  for  the  100  talents  ?
Esth.  1. 15.  what  shall  we  do  to  the  queen  Vashti  ?
Psal.  60. 12.  thro’  God  we  shall  do  valiantly,  108. 13
Cant.  8.  8.  what  shall  we  do  for  our  sister  in  the  day  ?
Jonah  1. 11.  they  said,  what  shall  we  do  to  thee  ?
Luke  3. 10.  people  asked,  what  shall  we  do  ?  12.  14.
John  6.  28.  what  shall  we  do  that  we  might  work  ?
Acts 2.  37.  men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?

4.  16.  saying,  what  shall  we  do  to  these  men?

DO  joined  with  so.

Gen.  18.  5.  they  said,  so  do  as  thou  hast  said
19. 7. 1  pray  you;  do  not  so  wickedly,  Judg.  19. 23.
44.  if.  Joseph  said,  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  so
Exod.  8.  26.  Moses  said,  it  is  not  meet  so  to  do
Lev.  4. 20.  so  shall  he  do,  16. 16.  Num.  9. 14. 1  15. 14
8.  34.  so  the  Lord  hath  commanded  to  do
jVMWJ.14.28.  so  will  I  do,  32. 31.  Isa.  65. 8.  Ezek.  35.15
15. 12.  so  shall  he  do  to  every  one  accord .  to  number

22.  30.  was  I  ever  wont  to  do  so  unto  thee  ?

32.  23.  if  ye  will  not  do  so  ye  have  sinned  ag.  L.

Deut.  3.  21.  so  shall  the  Lord  do  to  all  the  kings
12.  4.  ye  shall  not  do  so  to  the  Lord  your  God,  31
30.  how  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods  ?  so  I  do
18. 14.  Lord  thy  G.  hath  not  suffered  thee  so  to  do
22.  3.  and  so  shalt  thou  do  with  his  raiment
5.  all  that  do  so  are  abomination  to  Lord  thy  God
Judg.  7.  17.  it  shall  be,  that  as  I  do,  so  shall  ye  do
11. 10.  if  we  do  not  so  according  to  thy  words

14.  10.  for  so  used  the  young  men  to  do

19.  24.  but  to  this  man  do  not  so  vile  v  tiling


Ruth  1. 17.  the  Lord  do  so  to  me,  1  Sam.  14.  14.

1  &/«.  3.  17.  God  do  so  to  thee  and  more  also

8.  8.  have  served  other  gods,  so  do  they  also  to  ihee
20.  13.  Lord  do  so  and  much  more  to  Jonathan
25.  22.  so  and  more  also  do  G.  to  enemies  of  David

30.  23.  David  said,  ye  shall  not  do  so,  my  brethren

2  Sam.  3.  9.  so  do  God  to  Abner,  even  so  I  do  to  him

35.  God  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also,  19.  13.

1  Kings  2.  23.  |  20. 10.  2  Kings  6.  31

9. 11.  then  said  Ziba,  so  shall  thy  servant  do

1  Kings  1. 30.  even  so  will  I  certainly  do  this  day
2.  38.  as  the  king  hath  said,  so  will  thy  servant  do

19.  2.  so  let  the  gods  do  to  me,  and  more  also

22.  22.  he  said,  go  forth,  and  do  so,  2  Chron.  18. 21

2  Kings  17. 41.  as  did  their  fathers,  so  do  they  to-day
1  Chr.  13. 4.  all  congregation  said  they  would  do  je
Ezra  10.  12.  as  thou  hast  said,  so  must  we  do
Neh.  5.  12.  they  said,  so  will  we  do  as  thou  sayest

6.  13.  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so,  and  sin
13. 21.  if  ye  do  so  again,  1  will  lay  ands  on  you

Esth.  6.  10.  and  do  even  so  to  Mordccai  the  Jew

7.  5.  who  and  where  is  he  durst  presume  to  do  so?
Job  13.  9.  as  one  man  mocketh,  do  ye  so  mock  him  ?
Prov.  20.  30.  so  do  stripes  the  inward  parts  of  belly

24. 29.  say  not,  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done
Isa.  10. 11.  shall  I  so  do  to  Jerusalem  and  her  idols  ?
Jer.  28.  6.  the  Lord  do  so,  the  Lord  perform  words
Ezek.  45. 20.  so  thou  shalt  do  seventh  day  of  month
Dan.  11.  30.  so  shall  he  do,  he  shall  even  return
Hos.  10. 15.  so  shall  Beth-el  do  to  you,  because  of  your
Mat.  5.  47.  do  not  even  the  publicans  so  ?

7.  12.  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them

18.  35.  so  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  unto  you
John  14.  31.  as  Father  gave  commandment,  so  I  do
Acts  7. 51.  as  your  fathers  did,  so  do  ye
1  Cor.  16.  1.  as  I  have  given  order,  even  so  do  ye
Col.  3.  13.  even  as  Christ  forgave  you,  so  do  ye

1  Tim.  1.  4.  than  edifying,  which  is  :n  faith,  so  do
Jam.  2.  12.  so  do  ye,  as  they  that  shall  be  judged

DO  joined  with  this.

Gen.  11.  6.  people  is  one,  and  this  they  begin  to  do
39.  9.  can  1  do  this  great  wicked,  and  sin  ag.  God
41. 34.  let  Pharaoh  do  this,  let  him  appoint  officers

42. 18.  Joseph  said,  this  do  and  live,  I  fear  God
43.  11.  if  it  must  be  so  now,  do  this,  45. 17, 19.

Lev.  26.46. 1  will  do  this  to  you,  I  will  appointterrer
Num.  16.  6.  this  do,  take  you  censers,  Korah  and  all
Josh.  9.  20.  this  we  will  do  to  the  Gibeonites
Judg.  19. 23.  my  brethren,  I  pray,  do  not  this  folly

2  Sam.  13.  12.  my  brother,  do  not  thou  this  folly

23.  17.  be  it  far  from  me  that  I  should  do  this

2  Kings  19. 31.  the  zeal  of  L.  shall  do  this,  Isa.  37. 32.
2  Chron.  19.  10.  this  do,  and  ye  shall  not  trespass
Ezra  4.  22.  take  heed  that  ye  fail  not  to  do  this
Prov.  6. 3.  do  this  now,  my  son,  deliver  thyself
Isa.  38. 19.  the  living  praise  thee,  as  I  do  tins  day
Jer.  32.  35.  that  they  should  do  this  abomination
Ezek.  6. 10.  that  I  would  do  this  evil  to  them

36.  22.  I  do  not  this  for  your  sake3,  O  Israel,  32.
Amos  4. 12.  and  because  I  will  do  this  to  thee
Mai.  4. 3.  in  day  that  I  shall  do  this,  saith  the  Lord
Mat.  8. 9.  to  my  servant,  do  th.  he  doeth  it,  Luke7 .8.

9.  28.  believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?

21.  21.  if  ye  have  faith,  ye  shall  not  only  do  this
Mark  11.  3.  if  any  say  to  you,  why  do  ye  this  ?
Luke  7. 4.  he  was  worthy  tor  whom  he  should  do  this

10.  28.  he  said  to  him,  this  do,  and  thou  shalt  live

12. 18.  he  said,  this  will  I  do,  I  will  pull  down

22. 19.  this  do  in  remembr.  of  me,  1  Cor.  11.  24,  25.
Acts  21.  23.  do  therefore  this  that  we  say  to  thee

1  Cor.  9. 17.  for  if  I  d.  t.  tiling  willingly,  nave  reward

23.  and  this  1  do  for  the  gospel’s  sake
Heb.  6.  3.  and  this  will  we  do  if  God  permit
13.  19.  but  I  beseech  you  the  rather  to  do  this
Jam.  4. 15.  if  the  Lord  will,  we  will  do  this  01  that
See  This,  Thing.

DO  well.

Isa.  1.  17.  learn  to  do  well,  seek  judgment
Jonah  4.  9.  I  do  well  to  be  angry ,  even  to  death
Zech.  8. 15.  to  do  well  to  Jerusalem  and  Judah
Mat.  12.  12.  it  is  lawful  to  do  well  on  sabbath-days
John  11. 12.  Lord,  if  he  sleep,  he  shall  do  well
Acts  15.  29.  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  shall  do  well
Jam.  2. 8.  if  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law,  ye  do  well

1  Pet.  2.  14.  for  the  praise  ol  them  that  do  well

20.  but  if  when  ye  do  well  and  suffer  for  it

3.  6.  whose  daughters  ye  are  as  long  as  ye  do  well

2  Pet.  1. 19.  whereto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed

3  John  6.  whom  if  thou  bring,  thou  shalt  do  well

DOER.

Gen.  39. 22.  what  they  did  there,  he  was  the  d.  of  it
2  Sam.  3.  39.  the  Lord  shall  reward  the  d.  of  evil
Psal.  31.  23.  Ld.  plentifully  rewardeth  the  proud  d.
Prov.  17. 4.  a  wicked  d.  giveth  heed  to  false  lips
Isa.  9. 17.  for  every  one  is  an  hypocrite  and  evil  </.

2  Tim.  2. 9.  wherein  I  suffer  trouble  as  an  evil  d.
Jam.  1.  23.  if  any  be  a  hearer,  and  not  a  d.  of  word
25.  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  d.

4. 11.  thou  art  not  a  d.  of  the  law,  but  a  judge

1  Pet.  4.  15.  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  an  evil  d.

DOERS.

2  Kings  22.  5.  let  them  give  it  to  the  d.  of  the  work
Psal.  101.  8.  that  I  may  cutoff  all  wicked  d.

Rom.  2. 13.  but  the  d.  of  the  law  shall  be  justified
Jam.  1. 22.  be  ye  d.  of  the  word,  not  hearers  only

Evil-doer,  doers;  see  Evil.

DOST.

Gen.  4. 7-  if  thou  d.  well,  and  if  thou  d.  not  well

21.  22.  God  is  with  thee  in  all  that  thou  d.

Exod.  18.  17.  the  thing  that  thou  d.  is  not  good
Deut.  12.  28.  when  thou  d.  which  is  good  and  right

15.  18.  God  shall  bless  thee  in  all  that  thou  d.

2  Sam.  3.  25.  Abner  came  to  know  all  that  thou  d.
1  Kings  2. 3.  that  thou  mayest  prospertn  all  thou  d.

19.  9.  he  said,  what  d.  thou  here,  Elijah  ?  13.

20.  22.  go,  and  mark,  and  see  what  thou  d.

Job  9. 12.  who  will  say  to  him,  what  <2.  thou  ?

;  35.  6.  if  thou  sinnest,  what  d.  thou  against  him  ?
Psal.  49. 18.  praise  thee,  when  thou  d.  well  to  thy  sen
77. 14.  thou  art  the  God  that  d.  wonders
86.  10.  for  thou  art  great,  and  d.  wondrous  things
119.  68.  thou  art  good,  and  d.  good,  teach  me


DOC


l)OG


DOM


f  ed.  8. 4.  or  say  to  him,  -what  d.  thou  ?  Dan.  4.  35.
jer.  11.  15.  when  thou  d.  evil,  llien  thou  rejoicest

15.  5.  who  shall  fro  aside  to  ask  how  thou  d.  ?
Ezek.  12.  9.  the  rebellious  house  said,  what  d.  thou

16.  30.  weak  heart,  seeinjr  thou  d.  all  these  things
24.  19.  tell  what  these  are  to  us,  that  thou  d.  so
Jonah  4.  4.  Lord  said,  d.  thou  well  to  be  angry  ?  9.
Mat.  6.  2.  therefore  when  thou  d.  thine  alms,  3.
21.23.  the  priests  and  elders  said,  by  what  authority

d.  thou  these  things  ?  Mark  1 1 . 28.  Luke  20. 2.
John  2. 18.  what  sign  seeing  that  thou  d.  these  things.’'

3.  2.  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou  d.

7.  3.  that  thy  disciples  may  see  the  works  thou  d.

13.  27-  Jesus  said  to  him,  that  thou  d.  do  quickly
Acts  22.  26.  saying,  take  heed  what  thou  d.

Rom.  2. 1.  thou  that  judgest,  d.  the  same  things,  3.
Jam.  2.  19.  thou  believest  on  God,  thou  d.  well

3  John  5.  thou  d.  faithfully  what  thou  d.  to  brethren
DOTH.

Gen.  31. 12.  I  have  seen  all  that  Laban  d.  to  thee
Eiod.  31.  14.  for  whosoever  d.  any  work  therein
that  soul  shall  be  cut  off,  15.  Lev.  23.  30.
J,e v.  6.  3.  in  any  of  all  these  that  a  man  d.  sinning
Vhwi.15.'*  29.  one  law  for  him  that  d.  thro’  ignorance
24.  23.  alas,  who  shall  live  when  God  d.  this  !

Joo  5.  9.  to  God  who  d.  great  things  and  unsearch¬
able,  9,  10.  |  37.  5.  Psal.  72.  18. 1  136.  4.
23.  13.  what  his  soul  desireth,  even  that  he  d.
Psal.  1.  3.  leaf  not  wither,  whatsoever  he  d.  prosper

14.  1 .  there  is  none  d.  good,  3.  I  53. 1,  3.  Rom.  3. 12.
15. 5.  he  that  d.  these  things,  shall  never  be  moved
106.  3.  blessed  is  he  that  d.  righteous,  at  all  times
118. 15.  right  hand  of  the  Lord  d.  valiantly,  16.
Prov.  6.  32”  he  that  d.  it,  destroyeth  his  own  soul
11.  17.  the  merciful  man  d.  good  to  his  own  soul

17.  22.  a  merry  heart  d.  good  like  a  medicine
Eccl.  2.  2.  and  I  said  of  mirth,  what  d.  it  ?

3. 14.  whatsoever  God  d.  it  shall  be  for  ever,  and

God  d.  it  that  men  should  fear  before  him

7.  20.  there  is  not  a  man  d.  good  and  sinneth  not

8.  3.  for  he  d.  whatsoever  pleaseth  him

Jsa.  56.  2.  blessed  is  the  man  d.  this,  and  son  of  man
Ezek.  17.  15.  shall  he  escape  that  d.  such  things  ?

18.  10.  that  d.  the  like  to  any  one  of  these  things
11.  and  that  d.  not  any  of  those  duties

27.  and  d.  that  which  is  lawful  and  right
han.  4.  35.  d.  accord,  to  will  in  heaven  and  earth

9. 14.  for  the  Lord  our  God  is  righteous  in  all  he  d.
Amos  9.  12.  are  called,  saith  the  Lord  that  d.  this
Mai.  2. 12.  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  that  d.  this
Mat.  6.  3.  let  not  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  <f.

7.  21.  but  he  that  d.  will  of  my  Father  in  heaven
24.  whoso  heareth  these  sayings,  and  d.  them
26.  every  one  that  heareth  and  d.  not,  Luke  6.  49.

8.  9.  to  my  servant,  do  this,  and  he  d.  it,  Luke  7-  8.
John  3.  20.  every  one  that  d.  evil,  hateth  the  light

21.  but  he  that  d.  truth  cometh  to  the  light
5.  19.  what  things  soever  he  d.  these  d.  the  Son
7.  51.  before  it  hear  him  and  know'  what  he  d.

9.  31.  but  if  any  man  d.  his  will,  him  he  heareth

15.  15.  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  d.

16.  2.  killeth.you,  will  think  he  d.  God  service
Rom. 2.9.  anguish  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  d.  evil

10.  5.  righteousness  of  law,  that  the  man  that  d.

these  things  shall  live  by  them,  Gal.  3.  12.
13.  4.  to  execute  wrath  upon  him  that  d.  evil
1  Cor.  6. 18.  every  sin  a  man  d.  is  w  ithout  the  body
7.  37.  decreed  that  he  will  keep  his  virgin,  d.  well
38.  so  then  he  that  giveth  her  in  marriage  d.  w’ell
Gal.  3. 5.  d.  he  it  by  works  of  the  law,  or  by  faith  ?
Eph.  6.  8.  whatsoever  good  thing  any  man  d.

Col.  1.  6.  bringeth  forth  fruit,  as  it  d.  also  in  you
3. 25.  but  he  that  d.  vTong,  shall  receive  for  w'rong
1  Thess.  2.  11.  exhorted  as  a  father  d.  his  children
Jam.  4.  17.  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  d.  it  not
1  John  2. 17.  he  that  d.  w  ill  of  God  abideth  for  ever
29.  that  d.  righteousness  is  born  of  him,  3.  7.

3  John  10.  I  will  remember  his  deeds  which  lie  d.

11.  but  he  that  d.  evil  hath  not  seen  God
Rev.  13. 13.  and  he  d.  great  wonders,  he  maiketh  fire
DOCTOR. _

Acts 5. 34.  then  stood  up  Gamaliel,  a  d.  of  the  law
DOCTORS.

Luke  2. 46.  they  found  .1  esus  sitting  in  midst  of  the  d.

5. 17.  there  were  Pharisees  and  d.  of  law  sitting  by
DOCTRINE

Signifies,  [1]  Knowledge,  or  learning,  Isa.  28.  9.
[2]  A  tenet ,  or  opinion,  Mat.  16.  12.  [3]  The
truths  of  the  gospel  in  general.  Tit.  2.  10.  [4]
Instruction,  information,  and  confirmation,  in
the  truths  of  the  gospel,  2  Tim.  3.  16.  [5]  The
manner  of  teaching,  with  the  matter  also,  Mat.
7.  28.  [6]  The  act  of  teaching,  Mark  4.  2.  [7]
Divine  institutions,  Mat.  15.  9.

The  doctrine  of  Balaam,  Rev.  2.  14.  The  history
of  Balaam  is  recorded  in  Numbers,  chapters  22,
23,  24.  He  was  sent  for  by  Baiak,  king  of
Moab,  to  come  and  curse  Israel ;  and  finding
that  God  restrained  him,  and  turned  him  from
cursing  to  pronouncing  blessings  upon  them,  he  in¬
structed  Baiak  at  last,  how  to  lay  a  stumbling-
block  before  them,  to  make  them  to  fall :  He  told
Baiak  and  the  Midianites,  that  if  they  would
secure  themselves  from  the  attempts  that  the
Hebrews  might  make  against  them,  and  obtain
some  advantage  over  them,  they  should  engage
them  in  idolatry  and  whoredom  ;  that  then  they
would  be  forsaken  by  their  God,  and  would  be¬
come  a  prey  to  their  enemies :  the  young  women
of  Moab  invited  the  Israelites  to  the  feasts  of
Baal-peor ;  .  and  after  they  had  persuaded  them
to  embrace  idolatry,  they  seduced  them  to  impuri¬
ty.  This  doctrine  is  the  same  with  what  is
called  the  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitans,  Rev.  2.

15.  This  sect  took  their  name  from  Nicolas,
one  of  the  seven  first  deacons,  of  whom  mention
is  made  111  Acts  6.  5.  He  plunged  himself  into
irregularities,  as  it  is  said,  and  gave  beginning
not  only  to  this  sect,  but  also  to  that  of  the
gnostics,  and  to  several  others,  who,  following
tae  bent  oj  their  passions,  invented  many  dif-
Jerent  sorts  of  crimes  and  wickednesses.  Among


these  Nicolaitans,  adulteries,  and  the  use  of
meats  off  ered  to  idols,  were  held  as  indifferent
things.  St.  Austin  says,  II acres,  5.  that  they
have  their  women  in  common,  and  make  iu>  scru¬
ple  to  conform  to  all  the  pagan  superstitions.

Psal.  19-  t  7-  tlie  d.  of  the  Lord  is  perfect
Isa.  28.  9.  whom  shall  lie  make  to  understand  d.
t  19.  it  shall  he  a  vexation  to  understand  d.

29.  24.  and  they  that  murmured  shall  learn  d.

53.  +1.  w’ho  hath  believed  our  d.  or  to  whom  ami
Jer.  10.  8.  brutish,  the  stock  is  a  d.  of  vanities
Mat.  7.  28.  the  people  were  astonished  at  his  d.  22.

33.  Mark  1.  22.  1 11.  18.  Luke  4.  32.

16. 12.  beware  of  the  d.  of  the  Pharisees
Mark  1.  27.  people  amazed,  saying,  what  new  d.

4.  2.  he  taught  and  said  to  them  in  his  d.  12.  38.
John  7*  17-  if  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  d.

18.  19.  the  high  priest  then  asked  Jesus  of  hisd.
Acts  2.  42.  they  continued  in  the  apostles’  d.

5.  28.  ye  have  fdled  Jerusalem  with  your  d.

13.  12.  being  astonished  at  the  d.  of  tlie  Lord

17.  19.  saying,  may  we  know  what  this  new  d.  is  ?
Horn.  6.  17.  but  ye  have  obeyed  that  form  of  d.

16. 17.  contrary  to  therf.  which  ye  have  learned
1  Cor.  14.  6.  except  I  shall  speak  to  you  by  d.

26.  every  one  of  you  hath  a  d.  a  tongue
Eph.  4.  14.  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  d.

1  Tim.  1 . 3.  charge  that  they  teach  no  other  d.

4.  13.  till  I  come,  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  d.

16.  take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  thy  d.

5. 17.  especially  they  who  labour  in  the  word  and  d.

6.  1.  the  name  of  G.  and  his  d.  be  net  blasphemed

3.  and  to  the  d.  which  is  according  to  godliness

2  Tim.  3. 16.  all  scripture  is  profitable  for  d.

4.  2.  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long  suffering  andrf.
Tit.  2.  7.  in  d.  shewing  incorruptness,  gravity

10.  that  they  may  adorn  the  d.  of  G.  our  Saviour
Heb.  6. 1.  leaving  the  principles  of  the  d.  of  Christ

2.  of  the  d.  of  baptisms,  and  of  laying  on  of  hands
2  John  9.  whoso  abideth  not  in  the  d.  of  Christ;  he
that  abideth  in  d.  of  Christ  hath  Father  and  Son
Rev.  2. 14.  thou  hast  them  that  hold  d.  of  Balaam
15.  that  hold  d.  of  the  N  icolaitans,  which  1  hate

Good  DOCTRINE.

Prov.  4.  2. 1  give  you  good  d.  forsake  not  my  law

1  Tim.  4.  6.  nourished  up  in  the  words  of  good  d.

My  DOCTRINE.

Dent.  32.  2.  my  d.  shall  drop  as  the  rain,  my  speech
Job  11.  4  .myd.  is  pure,  and  I  am  clean  in  thine  eyes
John  7.  16.  my  d.  is  not  mine,  but  his  that  sent  me

2  Tim.  3.  10.  but  thou  hast  fully  known  my  d.

Sound  DOCTRINE.

1  Tim.  1. 10.  any  thing  that  is  contrary  to  sound  d.

2  Tim.  4.  3.  when  they  will  not  endure  sound  d.
Tit.  1.9.  by  sound  d.  to  exhort  and  convince

2.  1.  but  speak  things  which  become  sound  d.

This  DOCTR1N  E.

2  John  10.  if  there  come  any  and  bring  not  this  d.
Rev.  2.  24.  and  to  as  many  as  have  not  this  d.

DOCTRINES.

Mat.  15. 9.  forrf.  the  commandm.  of  men,  MarkJ.  7.
Col.  2.  22.  after  the  commandments  and  d.  of  men
1  Tim.  4. 1.  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  d.  of  devils
Heb.  13.  9.  be  not  carried  about  with  strange  d.

DOG

Is  a  domestic  animal  well  known.  By  the  law  it
was  declared  unclean,  and  was  very  much  despised
among  the  Jews:  the  most  offensive  expression
they  could  use,  was  to  compare  a  man  to  a  dead
dog.  David  in  order  to  make  Saul  sensible,  that
the  unjust  persecution  which  he  carried  on  against
him,  did  himself  no  honour,  said  to  him.  After
whom  is  the  king  of  Israel  come  out?  after
whom  dost  thou  pursue  ?  after  a  deaddog,  1  Sam.
24.  14.

The  name  of  dog  is  sometimes  put  for  one  who  has
lost  all  modesty  ;  for  one  who  prostitutes  himself
by  committing  any  abominable  action,  such  as
sodomy.  In  this  manner  several  understand  the
injunction  delivered  by  Moses,  of  not  offering  in
the  tabernacle  of  the  I.ord  the  hire  of  a  whore  or
the  price  of  a  dog,  Deut.  23.  18.  And  Christ
excludes  dogs,  sorcerers,  whoremongers,  murder¬
ers,  and  idolaters,  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
Rev.  22.  15.  The  apostle  Paul  calls  the  false  apos¬
tles  dogs,  by  reason  of  their  impudence  and  greedy
love  of  sordid  gain,  Phil.  3.  2.  Solomon  and  the
apostle  Peter  compare  sinners  who  continually  re¬
lapse  into  their  sins,  to  dogs  returning  to  their
vomit,  Prov.  26.  11.  2  Pet.  2.  22.  Dog  or  dogs,
is  put  for,  [1]  The  devil,  Psal.  22.  20.  [2]  Per¬
secutors,  Psal.  22. 16.  [3]  False  teachers,  Isa.  56.

11.  Phil.  3.  2.  [4]  Unholy  men,  Mat.  7.  6.  [5]
The  Gentiles,  Mat.  15.  27-

Exod.  11.  7.  but  against  Israel  shall  not  a  d.  move
Deut.  23. 18.  not  bring  price  of  a  d.  into  house  ofL.
Judg.  7.  5.  every  one  that  lappeth  as  a  d.  lappeth

1  Sam.  17.  43.  Philistine  said  to  David,  am  1  a  d.?
24.  14.  after  whom  dost  thou  Dursue  ?  after  a  d.  ?

2  Sam.  3.  8.  then  Abner  said,  «m  I  a  dog's  head  ?

9.  8.thou  shouldest  look  upon  such  a  dead  d. as  I  am
16.  9.  why  should  this  dead  d.  curse  my  lord  ?

2  Kings  8. 13.  Hazael  said,  but  what  is  thy  serv.  a  d.
Psal.  22.  20.  my  darling  from  the  power  of  the  d.
59.  6.  at  evening  they  make  a  noise  like  a  d.  14.
Prov.  26.  11.  as  a  d.  returneth  to  his  vomit,  so  a
fool  returneth  to  his  folly,  2  Pet  2.  22.

17.  is  like  one  that  taketh  a  d.  by  the  ears
Eccl.  9.  4.  a  living  d.  is  better  than  a  dead  lion
Isa.  66.  3.  sacrificeth,  as  ifhe  cut  off  a  dog's  neck

DOGS.

Exod.  22.  31.  nor  eat  ffesh  torn  of  beasts,  ye  shall
cast  it  to  the  d.  Mat.  15.  26.  Mark  7.  27*
1  Kings  14.  11.  shall  the  d.  eat,  16.  4.  1  21.  24.

21.  19.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  in  the  place  where  d.
licked  the  blood  of  Naboth,  shall  d.  lick  thy  blood
23.  the  d.  shall  eat  Jezebel,  2  Kings  9.  10,  36.

22.  38.  and  the  d.  licked  up  Ahab’s  blood

Job  30. 1.  disdained  to  have  set  with  d.  of  m3'  flock
Psal  22. 16.  for  d.  liave  compassed  me,  they  pierced
68.  23.  and  the  tongue  of  thy  d.  in  the  same
Isa.  56. 10.  they  are  all  dumb  d.  1)  11.  greedy  d.


Jer.  1.5.  3.  the  sword  to  slay,  and  the  d.  to  tear
Mat.  7.  6.  give  not  that  which  is  holy  unto  d.

15.  27.  yet  the  d.  eat  of  the  crumbs,  Mark  7.  28.
Luke  16.  21.  the  d.  came  and  licked  bis  sores
Phil.  3.2.  beware  of  d.  beware  of  evil  workers
Rev.  22.  15.  for  without  are  d.  and  sorcerers
DOING.

Gen.  31.  28.  thou  hast  done  foolishly  in  so  d.

44.  5.  is  not  this  it?  ye  have  done  evil  in  so  d.
F.xod.  15. 11.  like  thee,  fearful  in  praises,  d.  wonders
Num.  20. 19.  1  'will  only ,  without  d.  any  thing  else
Dent.  9. 18.  because  ye  sinned  in  d.  wickedly
1  KingslO.  19.  be  sinned  in  d.  evil,  2  Kings 21 . 16.

22.  43.  d.  that  which  was  right,  2  Chron.  20.  32.

1  Chron.  22. 16.  arise,  and  be  d.  Lord  be  with  thee
Neh.  6. 3. 1  am  d.  a  great  work,  1  cannot  come  down
Job  32. 22.  in  so  d.  my  Maker  would  take  me  away
Psal.  64.  9.  they  shall  wisely  consider  of  his  d.

66. 5.  he  is  terrible  in  d.  toward  children  of  men
118. 23.  this  is  the  Lord’s  d.  it  is  marvellous  in  our
eyes,  Mat.  21.  42.  Mark  12. 11.
Isa.  50.  2.  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  d.  any  evil
58.  13.  from  d.  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day,  and
Jer.  32. 1 19.  great  in  counsel,  and  mighty  in  d.
Ezek.  31.  t  11.  in  d.  he  shall  do  unto  him
Mat.  24.  46.  his  Lord  shall  find  so  d.  Luke  12.  43.
Acts  10.  38.  Jesus,  who  went  about  d.  good
24.  20.  if  they  have  found  any  ev  il  d.  in  me
Rom.  12.  20.  for  in  so  d.  thoushalt  heap  coals  of  fire

2  Cor.  8. 11.  now  therefore  perform  the  d.  of  it
Eph.  6.  6.  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  d.  the  will  01

God  from  the  heart
1  Tim. 4.1 6. in  d.  this  thou  shalt  save  thyself  and  them
5.  21.  observe  these  things,  d.  nothing  by  partiality
Heb.  13.  +  21.  d.  in  you  what  is  well  pleasing  in  sight
Jam.  1.  +  25.  this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  d.
Well-  DOING.

Rom.  2. 7.  by  patient  continuance  in  well-d.

Gal.  6.  9.  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well-d.  2  T/ieji.3.13.
1  Pet.  2. 15.  with  well-d.  ye  may  put  to  silence

3.  17.  for  it  is  better  that  ye  suffer  for  well-d.

4.  19.  commit  their  souls  unto  him  in  well-d.  as  to

DOINGS.

Lev.  18.  3.  after  the  d.  of  Egypt,  and  after  the  d.  o.

Canaan,  whither  I  bring  you,  shall  ye  Dot  do
Deut.  28. 20.  because  of  the  wickedness  of  thy  d.
Judg.  2.  19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  own  d.

1  Sam.  25.  3.  Nabal  was  churlish  and  evil  in  his  d.

2  Chron.  17.  4.  and  walked  not  after  the  d.  of  Israel
Ps.  9. 11.  declare  among  the  people  his  d.  Isa.  12. 4.

77- 12.  1  will  meditate  of  thy  works,  talk  of  thy  d.
Prov.  20.  11.  even  a  child  is  known  by  his  d.

Isa.  1. 16.  wash  ye,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  d.

3.  8.  because  their  tongue  and  d.  are  against  the  L.

10.  for  they  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  d.

Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  fury  come  and  burn,  because  of
the  evil  of  your  d.  21.  12.  1  26.  3.  |  44. 22.

18.  thy  d.  have  procured  these  things  to  thee

7.  3.  amend  your  ways  and  d.  5. 1, 26.  13.  j  35. 15.

11.18.  then  thou  shewedst  me  their  d.

17. 10.  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  d.  21. 14.

18. 11.  return,  and  make  your  ways  and  d.  good

23.  2.  I  will  visit  upon  you  the  evil  of  your  d.

22.  and  from  the  evil  ot  their  d.  25. 5.  Zech.  1. 4.

32. 19.  to  give  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  d.
Ezek.  14.  22.  ye  shall  see  their  way  and  their  d.

20.  43.  there  shall  ye  remember  your  d.  and  your
44.  nor  accord,  to  your  wicked  ways,  corrupt  d.

21.  24.  so  that  in  all  3'our  d.  your  sins  do  appeal

24. 14.  according  to  thy  d.  shall  they  judge

36.  17.  they  defiled  it  by  their  own  way  and  d.

19.  and  according  to  their  d.  I  judged  them
31.  shall  remember  your  d.  that  were  not  good

Hos.  4.  9.  I  will  punish  and  reward  them  their  d.

5.  4.  they  will  not  frame  their  d.  to  turn  to  their  G,
7.  2.  now  their  own  d.  have  set  them  about

9. 15.  for  the  wickedness  of  their  d.  I  will  drive

12.  2.  according  to  his  d.  will  he  recompense
Mic.  2.  7.  O  house  of  Jacob,  are  these  his  d.  ?

3. 4.  as  they  have  behaved  themselves  ill  in  their  d.

7. 13.  land  shall  be  desolate  for  the  fruit  of  their  d.
Zeph.  3. 7-  but  they  rose  early  .corrupted  all  their  d.

11.  shalt  thou  not  be  ashamed  for  all  thy  d.  ?
Zech.  1. 6.  according  to  our  d.  so  hath  dealt  with  us

Doleful.

Isa.  13. 21.  their  houses  full  of  d.  creatures
Mic.  2.4.  in  that  day  shall  lament  with  a  d.  lamentat.
DOMINION

Signifies,  [1]  Power,  Neh.  9.  28.  Rom.  6.  9.  [2]
Persons  ruled  over,  Psal.  114.  2.  [3]  Kings  and.
kingdoms,  Dan.  6.  26.  1 7-  27-  [4]  Angels,  Eph.  1.
21.  Col.  1.  16.  [5]  Magistrates,  2  Pet.  2.  t  10.
Jude  8.  [6]  The  universal  and  unlimited  autho¬
rity  and  government  of  God,  Psal.  72. 8.  1 145. 13.
Dan.  4.  3,  22,  34. 1  7- 14.

Gen.  1.  26.  have  d.  over  the  fi6h  of  the  sea,  28.

27. 40.  and  when  thou  shalt  have  the  d.  shalt  hi  eak

37.  8.  or  shalt  thou  indeed  have  d.  over  us  ?

Num.  24. 19-  out  of  Jacob  come  he  that  shall  have  d.
Judg.  5. 13.  he  made  him  have  d.  over  the  nobles

14. 4.  at  that  time  the  Philistines  had  d.  over  Israel

1  Kings  4. 24.  Solomon  had  d.  over  all  the  region

9. 19.  to  build  in  the  land  of  his  d.  2  Chron.  8.  6.

2  Kings  20. 13.  there  was  nothing  in  his  house  or  in

all  his  d.  that  Hezekiah  shewed  not,  Isa.  39. 2.

1  Chron.  4. 22.  men  of  Chozeba  who  had  d.  in  Moab

18.  3.  as  he  went  to  stablish  his  d.  by  the  river

2  Chron.  21. 8.  the  Edomites  from  under  Judah’s  d.
32.  +9.  Sennacherib  and  all  his  d.  with  him

Neh.  9. 28.  so  that  they  had  the  d.  over  them
37.  also  they  have  d.  over  our  bodies  and  cattle
Job  25.  2.  d.  and  fear  are  with  him,  he  maketh  peace

38.  33.  canst  thou  set  the  d.  thereof  in  the  earth  ?
Psal.  8.  6.  to  have  d.  over  the  works  of  thy  hands

19. 13.  from  sms,  let  them  not  have  d.  over  me

49. 14.  the  upright  shall  have  d.  over  them
72.8.  le  shall  have  d.  also  from  sea  to  sea
103. 22.  bless  the  Lord  in  all  places  ot  his  d.

114. 2.  Judah  was  his  sanctuary,  and  Israel  his  d
119.  133.  let  not  any  iniquity  nave  d.  over  me

145. 13.  thy  d.  endureth  through  all  generations

Isa.  26. 13.  other  lords  besides  thee  had  d.  over  us
f  2  115


1)  O  N


D  O  N


D


Tsr.  2.  +  31.  wherefore  say  my  people,  we  have  d.  ?
Dan.  4.  3.  his  d.  is  from  generation  to  generation
22.  thy  d.  feacheth  to  the  end  of  the  earth
34.  most  High,  whose  d.  is  an  everlasting  d.  7-  I  t.

6.  26.  that  in  every  d.  of  my  kingdom  men  tremble

and  fear  before  the  God  of  Daniel,  and  his
d.  shall  be  even  unto  the  end  .

7. 6.  the  beast  had  four  heads,  and  d.  was  given  to  it
12.  the  rest  of  the  beasts  had  their  d.  taken  away
14.  there  was  given  him  d.  and  glory,  a  kingdom

26.  they  shall  take  away  his  d.  to  consume  it

27.  the  d.  shall  be  given  to  the  saints  of  most  High
11.  3.  a  mighty  king  that  shall  rule  with  great  d.  5.

4.  not  according  to  his  d.  which  he  ruled
Mic.  4.  8.  to  thee  shall  it  come  even  the  first  d.
Zech.  9.  10.  his  d.  shall  be  from  sea  to  sea
Mat.  20.  25.  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles  exercise  d.
Rom.  6.  9.  raised,  death  hath  no  more  d.  over  him
14.  for  sin  shall  not  have  d.  over  you,  under  grace

7.  1.  law  hath  d.  over  a  man  as  long  as  he  liveth
2  Cor.  1.  24  not  that  we  have  d.  over  your  faith
Eph.  1.21.  above  all  power,  might,  and  d.  everv  name
1  Pet.  4. 11.  that  God  may  be  glorified,  to  whom  be


6.


praise  and  d.  for  ever  and  ever,  5. 11.  Rev.  1
2  Pet.  2.  t  10.  but  them  that  despise  d.  Jude  8.

Jude  25.  to  the  only  wise  God  be  d.  and  power
DOMINIONS.

Dan.  7.  27.  and  all  d.  shall  serve  and  obey  him
Col.  1.  16.  whether  they  be  thrones,  or  d.  or  powers
DONE.

Gen.  9.  24.  Noah  knew  what  his  younger  son  had  d.

18.  21.  they  have  d.  according  to  the  cry  ot  it

24.  66.  the  servant  told  Isaac  all  that  he  had  d.

26.  29.  as  we  have  d.  to  thee  nothing  but  good

29.  26.  Laban  said,  it  must  not  be  d.  in  our  country
34.  7.  wrought  folly,  which  ought  not  to  be  d.

44.  5.  ye  have  d.  evil  in  so  doing_

15.  Joseph  said,  what  deed  is  this  ye  have  d.  ?
Exod.  1.  18.  he  said,  why  have  ye  d.  this  thing  ?.

2. 4.  his  sister  stood  to  wit.  what  would  be  d.  to  him

12.  16.  no  manner  of  work  shall  be  d.  in  them,
save  what  must  be  eat,  that  only  may  be  d.  of  you
13. 8.  this  is  d.  because  of  that  the  Lord  did  to  me
18. 1.  Jethro  heard  of  all  that  God  had  d.  for  Moses

9.  the  goodness  which  the  Lord  had  d.  to  Israel

21.  31.  according  to  this  judgment  shall  it  be  d.

31.  15.  six  days  may  work  be  d.  35.  2.  Lev.  23.  3.
39.  43.  they  had  d.  it  as  the  Lord  had  commanded,

even  so  had  they  d.  it,  and  Moses  blessed  them
Lev.  5.  17-  and  commit  things  forbidden  to  be  d.

8.  5.  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  d.  Dent.  26.  14.

11.  32.  what  vessel  it  be,  wherein  any  work  is  d.

18.  27.  these  abominations  have  the  men  of  land  d,

24.  20.  eye  for  eye,  so  shall  it  be  d.  to  him  again
Num.  5.  7-  they  snail  confess  their  sin  they  have  d.

12.  11.  wherein  we  have  d.  foolishly  and  sinned
15.  34.  it  was  not  declared  what  should  be  d.  to  him

22.  2.  Balak  saw  all  that  Israel  had  d.  to  Amorites

27.  4.  why  should  name  of  our  father  be  d.  away  ?

32. 13.  all  that  had  <1.  evil  in  sight  of  L.  were  cons.

Deut.  10.  21.  he  is  thy  God  that  hatli  d.  for  thee

25.  9.  so  shall  it  be  d.  to  that  man  will  not  build  up
29.  24.  nations  say,  wherefore  hath  the  Ld.  d.  thus

to  this  land  ?  1  Kings  9.  8.  2  Chron.  7.  21
Josh.  10.  32.  as  he  had  d.  also  to  Libnah,  39.

35.  he  had  d.  to  Lachish  ||  37-  he  had  d.  to  F.glon
22.  24.  if  we  have  not  rather  d.  it  for  fear  of  this
24.  31.  had  known  all  that  he  had  d.  for  Israel
Jvdg.  2. 10.  who  knew  not  works  he  had  d.  for  Israel
3.  12.  because  they  had  d.  evil  in  sight  of  the  Lord

9.  16.  if  ye  have  d.  truly  and  sincerely,  and  have  d.
to  Jerubbaal  according  to  deserving  of  his  hands

24.  cruelty  d.  to  the  seventy  sons  of  Jerubbaal

19.  30.  there  was  no  such  deed  d.  nor  seen
Ruth  3.  16.  told  her  all  that  the  man  had  d.  to  her

1  Sam.  4.  16.  and  he  said,  what  is  there  d.  my  son  ?

11.  7-  cometh  not  forth,  so  shall  it  be  d.  to  his  oxen
17.  26.  what  shall  be  d.  to  the  man  that  killeth  him  ‘

27.  so  shall  it  be  d.  to  the  man  that  killeth  him

25.  30.  when  the  Lord  shall  have  d.  to  my  lord
28fl7-  the  Lord  hath  d.  as  he  spake,  Ezek.  12.  28.

2  Sam.  11.  27.  thing  David  had  d.  displeased  the  L.

13.  12.  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  d.  in  Israel
24.  17.  what  have  they  d.  ?  1  Chron.  21.  17.

1  Kings  8.  66.  goodness  the  Lord  hath  d.  for  David

14.  22.  above  all  that  their  fathers  had  d.

19.  1.  Ahab  told  Jezebel  all  that  Elijah  had  d.

22.  53.  provoked  the  Lord  according  to  all  that  his

father  had  d.  2  Kings  15.  3,  9,  34.  |  23.  32

2  Kings  4.  13.  he  said,  what  is  to  be  d.  for  thee  ?

8.  4.  tell  me  all  the  great  things  Elisha  hath  d.

10.  10.  for  the  Lord  hath  d.  that  which  he  spake

by  his  servant  Elijah,  Isa.  38.  15.  Jer.  40.  3.
19.  11.  thou  ha3t  heard  what  the  kings  of  Assyria
have  d.  to  all  lands,  2  Chron.  32.  13.  Isa.  37.  11.

21.  15.  because  they  have  d.  evil,  2  Chron.  29.  6.

23.  19-  all  the  acts  that  he  had  d.  in  Bethel
2  Chron  24.  16.  because  he  had  d.  good  in  Israel

29.  36.  rejoiced,  for  the  thing  was  d.  suddenly  _

32. 25.  rendered  not  according  to  benefit  d.  to  him(
31.  who  3ent  to  inquire  of  the  wonder  that  was  rf.j
Ezra  6.  12.  made  a  decree,  let  it  be  d.  with  speed

9,  1.  when  these  things  wer e  d.  the  princes  came
Neh.  6.  8.  there  are  no  such  things  d.  as  thou  sayest
9. 33.  we  haverf.  wickedly,  Ps.  106. 6.  Dan.  9. 5, 15.
Estli.  2. 1.  he  rememb.  Vashti,  and  what  she  had  d.
4. 1.  Mordecai  perceived  all  was  d.  rent  his  clothes
6. 6.  the  king  said,  what  shall  be  d.  to  the  man  ?

9.  thus  shall  it  be  d.  to  the  man  the  king  honours
Job  21.  31.  who  shall  repay  him  what  he  hath  d.  ?
34.  29.  whether  it  be  d.  ag.  a  nation  or  a  man  only
Psal.  33.  9.  he  spake  and  it  was  d.  he  commanded
71.  19.  he  hath  d.  great  things,  106.  21. 1  126.  2,  3.
120.  3.  what  shall  be  d.  to  thee,  false  tongue  ?
Prov.  3.  30.  strive  not  if  he  have  d.  thee  no  harm
4.  16.  they  sleep  not,  except  they  have  d.  mischief
E ccl.  1.  9.  that  which  is  d.  is  that  which  shall  be  d.
14.  have  seen  the  works  are  d.  under  sun,  4.  1,  3
2.  12.  even  that  which  hath  been  already  d.

Isa.  3.  +  11.  the  reward  of  his  hands  shall  be  d.  to  him
41.  4.  who  hath  wrought  and  d.  it  ?  I  the  Lord
44.  23.  sing,  O  heavens,  for  the  Lord  hath  d.  it
116


Isa.  48.  5.  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  my  idol  hath  d.

them

Jer.  3.  6.  hast  seen  what  backsliding  Israel  hath  d.

5.  13.  prophets  wind,  thus  shall  it  be  d.  untpthem

7. 13.  because  ye  have  d.  all  these  works,  saith  L.

30.  for  children  of  Judah  have  d.  evil  in  my  sight
34. 15.  were  turned,  and  had  d.  right  in  my  sight
35.  10.  have  d.  all  that  Jonadab  commanded,  18.

38.  9.  these  men  have  d.  evil  to  Jeremiah  prophet
44. 17.'  as  we  have  d.  we  and  our  fathers,  kings
48. 19.  ask  him  that  fleeth,  and  say,  what  is  d.

50.  15.  vengeance  as  she  hath  d.  do  unto  her,  29.

51 . 35.  the  violence  d.  to  me  and  to  my  flesh
Lam.  2. 17.  Lord  hath  d.  that  which  he  had  devised
Ezek.  23.  39.  thus  have  they  d.  in  midst  of  my  house

39.  8.  it  is  come,  it  is  d.  saith  the  Lord  God
43. 11.  if  they  be  ashamed  of  all  that  they  have  d.

44. 14.  ami  tor  all  that  shall  be  d.  therein

Dan.  11.  36.  for  that  that  is  determined  shall  be  d.
Zeph.  3.  4.  the  priests  have  d.  violence  to  the  law
Mat.  6. 10.  thy  will  be  d.  26.  -<2.  Luke  11.2.  122.  42.

8. 13.  as  thou  hast  believed,  so  be  it  d.  to  thee
11.  21.  if  the  mighty  works  wlr  h  were  d.  in  you

had  been  d.  in  Tyre  and  sidon,  Luke  10.  13.

18  19.  any  thing  they  ask,  it  shall  b erf.  for  them

31.  when  his  fellow-servants  saw  what  was  d.

21.  21.  be  thou  cast  into  the  sea,  it  shall  be  d.

23.  23.  these  ought  ye  to  have/.  Luke  11.  42.

25.  21.  well  d.  good  and  faithful  servant.  23.

40.  inasmuch  as  ye  have  d.  it  to  one  of  the  least  of
these  my  brethren,  ye  have  d.  it  to  me
27.  54.  saw  those  things  that  were  d.  28.  11.

Mark 5.  14.  went  out  to  see  what  was  d.  Luke?,.  35.
19.  go  home  to  thy  friends,  tell  what  great  things
the  Lord  hath  d.  for  thee,  20.  Luke  8.  39.
33.  the  woman  knowing  what  was  d.  in  her

6.  30.  they  told  him  what  they  had  d.  and  taught
9.  13.  they  have  d.  to  him  whatsoever  they  listed

13.  30.  shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  he  d.

15.  8.  desire  him  to  do,  as  he  had  ever  d.  to  them

Luke  1.  49.  he  that  is  mighty  hath  d.  great  things
3  19  being  reproved  for  the  evils  Herod  had  d.

8  56.  he  charged  them  to  tell  no  man  what  was  d.

9  10.  the  apostles  told  him  all  that  they  had/.

14.  22.  Lord,  it  is  d.  as  thou  hast  commanded
17  10.  ye,  when  ye  shall  have  d.  all  those  things,

we  have  d.  that  which  was  our  duty  to  do

23.  31.  if  in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  d.  in  dry  ?
47.  now  when  the  centurion  saw  what  was  d.

24.  21.  the  third  day  since  these  things  were  d.

John  5.  29.  they  that  have  d.  good  to  resurrection  of

life  ;  they  that  have  d.  evil,  to  damnation

15.  7.  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it  shall  be  d.  unto  you
19.  36.  these  things  were  d.  that  the  Scripture  be

Acts  2.  43.  many  signs  were  d.  by  the  apostles

4.  9.  of  the  good  deed  d.  to  the  impotent  man

16.  a  notable  miracle  hath  been  d.  by  them
21.  all  men  glorified  God  for  that  which  was  d.

28.  what  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  d.

5.  7.  his  wife,  not  knowing  what  was  d.  came  in
12.  9.  he  wist  not  that  it  was  true  which  was  d.

14. 27.  they  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  d.  15.  4.

21.  14.  saying,  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  d.

33.  the  chief  captain  demanded  what  he  had  d.

Rom.  9.  H.  neither  having  d.  any  good  or  evil

1  Cor.  9. 15.  nor  that  it  should  berf.  unto  me
13. 10.  that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  d.  away
14.  26.  let  all  things  be  d.  to  edifying

40.  be  d.  decently  ||  16. 14.  be  d.  with  charity

2  Cor.  3. 7.  which  glory  was  to  be  d.  away
14.  Old  Testament,  which  vail  is  d.  away  in  Christ

5.  10.  may  receive  the  things  d.  in  his  body,  ac¬
cording  to  that  he  hath  d.  whether  good  or  bad
Eph.  5.  12.  things  which  are  d.  of  them  in  secret
6. 13.  able  to  withstand,  and  having  d.  all  to  stand
Phil.  2. 3.  let  nothing  be  d.  thro’  strife  or  vain-glory
4.  14.  ye  have  well  d.  that  ye  did  communicate
Col,  4.  9.  will  make  known  all  things  that  are  d.

Tit.  3.  5.  not  by  works  of  righteousness  we  have  d.
Heb.  10. 29.  and  hath  d.  despite  to  the  Spiritof  grace
Rev.  16.  17.  came  a  voice,  saying,  it  is  d.  21.  6.

22.  6.  to  shew  the  things  which  must  shortly  be  d.
Have  I  DONE.

Gen.  20.  5.  in  innocency  of  my  hands  have  1  d.  this
40. 15.  and  here  also  have  1  d.  nothing  to  put  me
Num.  22.  28.  what  have  Ia?\  Kings  19.  20.  Mic.  6. 3
Josh.  7.  20.  I  have  sinned,  thus  and  thus  have  Id.
Judg.  8. 2.  he  said,  what  h.  1  now  d.  ?  1  Sam.  17.  29.

1  Sam.  20. 1.  what  have  1  d.  ?  26. 18.  1  29. 8.  Jer.  8.  6.
Ezek.  39. 24.  accord,  to  their  transgress,  h.  1.  d.  them
Acts  25. 10.  to  the  Jews  have  1  d.  no  wrong
He  hath  DONE,  or,  hath  he  DON  E.

Exod.  5.  23.  he  hath  d.  evil  to  this  people
Lev.  5.  16.  make  amends  for  the  harm  he  hath  d.

8.  34.  as  he  hath  d.  so  the  Lord  commanded  to  do

19.  21.  atonement  for  his  sin  which  he  hath  d.

24. 19.  as  he  hath  d.  so  shall  it  be  done  to  him

Josh.  24.20.  consume  you,  after  he  hath  d.  you  good
Judg.  15.  10.  to  do  to  him  as  he  hath  d.  to  us
1  Sam.  6.  9.  then  he  hath  d.  us  this  great  evil
12. 24.  consider  how  great  things  he  hath  d.  for  you

20.  32.  whj'  shall  he  be  slain  ?  what  hath  he  d.  ?

1  Chron.  16.  12.  remember  his  marvellous  works
that  he  hath  d.  Psal.  78.  4.  1  98.  1.  1 105.  5.

Psal.  66. 16.  I  will  declare  what  he  hath  d.  for  soul
115.  3.  our  God  hath  d.  whatsoever  he  pleased
Prov.  24.  29.  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  d.  to  me
Isa.  12. 5.  sing  to  L.  for  he  hath  d.  excellent  things
Ezek.  3.  20.  righteousness  which  he  hath  d.  18. 24.

17.  18.  he  hath  d.  these  things,  he  shall  not  escape

18.  13.  he  hath  d.  all  these  abominations
14.  that  seeth  his  father’s  sins  which  he  hath  d.

22.  in  righteousness  that  he  hath  d.  he  shall  live

24.  24.  according  to  all  that  he  hath  d.  shall  ye  do
33.  16.  he  hath  d.  that  which  is  lawful  and  right
Joel  2.  20.  because  he  hath  d.  great  things
Mat.  27. 23.  and  the  governor  said,  why,  what  evil
hath  lied.?  Mark  15.  14.  Luke  23.  22.
Mark  7.  37.  saying,  he  hath  d.  all  things  well
Acts  9. 13.  much  evil  hath  he  d.  to  thy  saints

2  Cor.  5. 10.  may  receive  according  to  that  he  hath  d.
Col.  3.  25.  receive  for  the  wrong  which  he  hath  d.


I  have  DON  E.

Gen.  8. 21.  nor  will  I  smite  every  thing  as  1  have  ».
21.  23.  according  to  the  kindness  1  have  d.  thee

27.  19.  I  am  Esau,  1  have  d.  as  thou  badest  me

28.  15.  till  I  have  d.  that  which  1  have  spoken

30.  26.  thou  knowest  my  service  /  have  d.  thee

Exod.  10.  2.  my  signs  which  I  have  d.  among  them
Josh.  24.  7.  your  eyes  have  seen  what  1  have  it.
Judg.  1.  7.  as  I  have  d.  so  God  hath  requited  me
9. 1 48.  what  I  have  d.  make  haste,  do  as  1  have  d.

15.  11.  as  they  did  to  me,  so  have  1  d.  to  them
2  Sam.  14.  21.  behold  now  I  have  d.  this  thing

24.  10.  David  said,  I  have  sinned  greatly  in  that
I  have  d.  1  have  d.  very  foolishly,  1  Chr.  21. 8.  ,
17.  1  have  sinned,  and  I  have  d.  wickedly

1  Kings  3. 12.  behold,  I  have  d.  accord,  to  thy  word

2  Kings  19. 25.  hast  thou  not  heard,  how  1  have  d.  it'
Neh.  13. 14.  that  I  have  d.  for  the  house  of  my  God
Job  34. 32.  if  1  have  d.  iniquity,  I  w  ill  do  no  more
Psal.  7.  3.  O  Lord,  my  God,  if  1  have  d.  this

1 19. 121. 1  have  d.  judgment  and  justice,  leave  not
Prov.  30.  20.  and  saith,  1  have  d.  no  wickedness
Isa.  10. 11.  shall  I  not,  as  1  have  d.  to  Samaria,  so  do

13.  by  the  strength  of  my  hand  1  hare  d.  it
33.  13.  hear  ye  that  are  far  off  what  I  have  d.

37  .  26.  hast  thou  not  heard  how  I  have  d.  it?

Jer.  42.  10.  I  repent  of  the  evil  1  have  d.  to  you
Ezek.  9.  11.  I  have  d.  as  thou  hast  commanded  me

12.  11.  as  I  have  d.  so  shall  it  be  done  to  them

14.  23.  ye  shall  know  that  I  have  not  d.  without

cause,  all  that  I  have  d.  in  it,  saith  the  Lord
24.  22.  ye  shall  do  as  I  have  d.  ye  shall  not  cover
Dan.  6. 22.  before  thee,  O  king,  have  I  d.  no  hurt
Zech.  7.  3.  weep,  as  I  have  d.  these  so  many  years
John  7.  21.  I  have  d.  one  work,  and  ye  all  marvel

13.  12.  so  after  he  had  washed  their  feet,  he  said
to  them,  know  ye  what  1  have  d.  to  you  '

15.  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  d.  to  you
Hast  thou  DONE.

Gen.  4. 10.  he  said,  what  hast  thou  d.  ?  31.  26.  Nvm.

23.  11.1  Sam.  13. 11.  2  Sam.  3.  24.  John  18.  35.

20.  9.  what  hast  thou  d.  to  us  ?  Judg.  15.  11.

2  Sam.  7.  21.  according  to  thy  heart  hast  thou  d.

16.  10.  who  shall  say,  wherefore  hast  thou  d.  so  '

1  Kings  1.  6.  in  saying,  why  hast  thou  d.  so  ?

1  Chr.  17. 19.  O  Lord,  hast  tJoud.  all  this  greatness
Psal.  50.  21.  these  things  hast  thou  d.  1  kept  silence
Jonah  1.  10.  the  men  said,  why  hast  thou  d.  this  r
Thou  hast  DON  E.

Gen.  3.  13.  what  is  this  that  thou  hast  d.?  12.

18. 1  26.  10. 1  29.  25.  Judg.  8.  t  1.  I  15.!

11.  2  Sam.  12.  21.

14.  because  thou  liastd.  this,  22. 16.  2  Chr.  25. 16.

20.  9.  thou  hast  d.  deeds  which  ought  not  to  be  done
27  .  45.  he  forget  that  which  thou  hast  d.  to  him

31.  28.  thou  hast  now  d.  foolishly  in  so  doing,

1  Sam  13.  13.  2  Chron.  16.  9.
Josh.  7. 19-  tell  me  what  thou  hast  d.  1  Sam.  14.  43.
Ruth  2. 11.  it  hath  been  shewed  me  all  thou  hast  d.
1  Sam.  24.  19.  for  that  thou  hast  d.  to  me  this  day

26.  16.  the  thing  is  not  good  that  thou  hast  d.

1  Kings  14. 9.  but  thou  hast  d.  evil  above  all  bef.thee

2  Kings  2.  +  10.  he  said,  thou  hast  d.  hard  in  asking

10.  30.  because  thou  hast  d.  well  in  executing
23.  17.  thou  hast  d.  against  the  altar  of  Beth-el

Neh.  9.  33.  for  thou  hast  d.  right,  but  we  wickedly
Psal.  40.  5.  thy  wonderful  works  which  thou  hastd
52.  9.  1  will  praise  thee,  because  thou  hast  d.  it
109.  27.  that  they  may  know  that  thou  hast  d.  it
Prov.  30.  32.  if  thou  hast  d.  foolishly  in  lifting  up
Isa.  25. 1.  exalt  thee,  for  thou  hast  d.  wonder,  works
Jer.  2.  23.  see  thy  way,  know  what  thou  hast  d.

3.  5.  behold,  thou  hast  spoken  and  d.  evil  things
Lam.  1.  21.  they  are  glad  that  thou  hast  d.  it

22.  do  unto  them  as  thou  hast  d.  unto  me
2.  20.  O  Lord,  consider  to  whom  thou  hast  d.  this

Ezek.  16.  48.  Sodom  hath  not  done  as  thou  hast  d.
51.  in  all  thy  abominations  which  thou  hast  d.

59. 1  will  even  deal  with  thee  as  thou  hast  d.

63.  when  1  am  pacified  for  all  that  thou  hast  d.
Obad.  15.  as  thou  hast  d.  it  shall  be  done  to  thee
Jonah  1. 14.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  d.  as  it  pleaseth  thee
Acts  10.  33.  thou  hast  d.  well  that  thou  art  come
Not  DONE.

Gen.  20.  9.  hast  done  deeds  that  ought  not  to  be  d.
34.  7  •  which  thing  ought  not  to  be  d.

Exod.  34.  10.  marvels,  such  as  have  not  been  d.
Lev.  4. 2.  concern,  things  which  ought  not  to  be  rf.13
Num.  16.  28. 1  have  not  d.  them  of  mine  own  mind
Deut.  32. 27.  lest  they  say,  Lord  hath  wer  d.  all  this
Judg.  16.  +  11.  ropes  wherewith  work  not  been  d.

2  Sam.  17. 1 23.  Anithophel  saw  his  counsel  not  d.

2  Kings  5. 13.  if  proph.  wouldest  thou  not  have  d it
2  Chron.  30.  5.  they  had  not  d.  it  of  a  long  time
Neh.  6. 9.  weakened  from  the  work,  that  it  be  not  d.
8.  17.  from  the  days  of  Joshua,  Isr.  had  not  d.  sc
Esth.  1.16.  Vashti  had  not  d.  wrong  to  the  king  onb
Isa.  5. 4.  what  could  been  done,  that  I  have  not  d
46.  10.  declaring  the  things  that  are  not  yet  d.
Jer.  3.  16.  neither  shall  that  be  d.  any  more
Ezek.  5.  9.  I  will  do  in  thee  that  I  have  not  d.
Dan.  9.  12.  for  under  the  whole  heaven  hath  n<
been  d.  as  hath  been  done  upon  Jerusalei
11. 24.  do  that  which  his  fathers  have  not  d.

Amos  3.6.  shall  evil  be  in  city,  and  L.  hath  not  d.  it
John  15.  24.  if  I  had  not  d.  among  them  the  works
Acts  14. 18.  scarce  restrained  they  had  n.  d.  sacrific

26.  26.  for  this  thing  was  not  d.  in  a  corner
DONE  with  this.

Gen.  21.26.  I  wot  not  who  hath  d.  this  thing
42.  28.  what  is  this  that  God  hath  d.  to  us  ?

44.  15.  what  deed  is  this  that  ye  have  d.  ?

Exod.  1.  18.  why  have  ye  d.  this  thing,  and  saver
13. 8.  this  is  d.  because  of  that  which  the  Lord  did

14.  5.  and  they  said,  why  have  we  d.  this  ?

Josh.  9.  24.  we  were  sore  afraid,  and  have  d.this

23.  8.  but  cleave  to  Lord,  as  ye  have  d.  to  this  day
Judg.  2. 2.  ve  have  not  obeyed,  why  have  ye  d.  this

6.  29.  they  said,  who  hath  d.  this  thing.'  15.  6.

11.  37.  she  said,  let  this  thing  be  d.  for  me

15.  7 .  though  ye  have  d.  this, yet  will  I  be  avenge
20. 12.  what  wickedness  is  this  that  is  d.  among  yd


DOO


JJOO


I)  O  V


1  Sam.  1C.  CO.  ye  have  d.  all  this  wickedness
C8.  18.  therefore  hath  the  Lord  d.  this  thing

2  Sam.  2.  6.  because  ye  have  d.  this  thing
1C.  5.  the  man  that  hath  d.  this  thing  shall  die

14.  20.  hath  thy  servant  .Joab  d.  this  thing?

21.  king  said,  behold  now,  1  have  d.  this  thing

1  Kings  1.  27.  is  this  thing  d.  by  my  lord  the  king  ?

11.  11.  Lord  said,  forasmuch  as  this  is  d.  of  thee

2  Chron.  11.  4.  return,  for  this  thing  is  d.  of  men
Psal.  7 •  3.  O  Lord,  my  God,  if  I  have  d.  this
CC.  31.  they  shall  declare  that  he  hath  d.  this
51.  4. 1  have  sinned,  and  d.  this  evil  in  thy  sight
Isa.  41.  20.  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  d.  this
fLzek.  C3.  38.  moreover,  this  they  have  </.  unto  me
Mai.  2.  1.3.  this  have  ye  d.  again,  covering  the  altar
Mat.  1. 22.  now  all  this  was  d.  21.  4.  |  CO.  56.

13.  28.  he  said  to  them,  an  enemy  hath  d.  this
21.  21.  not  only  do  this  which  is  d.  to  the  fig-tree
'  26.  13.  this  that  this  woman  hath  d.  Mark- 14.  9.
Mark  5.  32.  to  see  her  that  had  d.  this  thing
Luke  5.  6.  when  they  had  d.  this  they  inclosed
23.41.  butMtd  man  hath  d.  nothing  amiss
John  7.  31.  miracles  than  these  this  man  hath  d.  ?

12.  18.  for  they  heard  he  had  d.  this  miracle
Acts  4. 7.  by  what  power  or  name  have  ye  d.  this  ?

10.  16.  this  was  (/.  thrice,  vessel  received,  11.  10.
28.  9.  so  when  this  was  d.  others  also  came
1  Cor.  5.  2.  not  mourned  that  he  hath  d.  this  deed,  3.

.  DOOR

Properly  signifies  the  entrance  into  a  house ,  Gen.
19-  9.  It  is  likewise  taken  in  a  metaphorical
sense :  Our  Saviour  sags,  John  10.  9.  I  am  the
door ;  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in  he  shall  be
saved.  1  am  the  only  way  whereby  lost  sinners
may  come  to  God,  and  obtain  salvation :  The
only  way  of  entrance  arid  admission  both  into  the
church  militant  and  triumphant  is  by  me;  for
none,  but  such  as  have  a  true  and  a  lively  faith
in  me,  wrought  in  their  soul  by  my  Spirit,  can  be
true  members  of  my  church  here,  much  less  mem¬
bers  of  the  glorious  church  in  heaven.  It  i  said,
in  Rev.  3.  20.  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,  and
knock.  I  stand  at  the  door  of  sinners'  hearts,  in
the  gospel  dispensation,  inviting  them  to  repent,
and  turn  from  their  evil  ways.  There  is  likewise
mention  made  of  the  door  of  mercy,  or  the  time
or  season  of  grace.  Mat.  25.  10.  Ihey  that  were
ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage,  and  the
door  was  shut,  Luke  13.  25.  When  once  the  master
ofthe  house  is  risen  up,  and  hath  shuttothe  door,
SfC.  By  these  parabolical  expressions  our  Saviour
intimates,  that  there  is  a  determinate  time,
wherein  sinners  must,  if  ever,  accept  of  the  offers
of  grace  and  salvation ,  which  if  they  slip ,  they
will  not  be  able  to  obtain  of  God  an  entrance  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  the  door  of  mercy  and
grace,  the  door  of  heaven  and  glory,  will  be  shut
against  them.  In  Acts  14.  27.  we  read  of  the
door  of  faith;  God  had  opened  the  door  of  faith
to  the  Gentiles  ;  He  had  caused  the  gospel  to  be
preached  unto  them,  whereby  they  were  brought  to
believe  in  Christ,  and  to  become  members  of  his
church.

The  apostle  Paul  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  and
telling  them  of  the  special  opportunity  which
God  had  given  him  of  doing  much  good  by  the
gospel,  uses  this  expression.  A  door  is  opened
unto  me,  1  Cor.  16.  9.  2  Cor.  2.  12.  And  the
same  apostle  speaks  of  a  door  of  utterance;
That  God  would  open  unto  us  a  door  of  utter¬
ance,  that  is,  would  afford  us  an  opportunity,
and  vouchsafe  ability  and  courage,  to  preach  the
gospel,  Col.  4.  3.  To  lie  at  the  door;  To  be
at  the  door ?  To  stand  before  the  door;  are
phrases  denoting  that  a  person  or  thing  is  near
at  hand,  Gen.  4.  7.  Mat.  24.  33.  Jam.  5.  9.
txod  promises  to  give  Ins  people,  upon  their  re¬
pentance,  The  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of
hope,  Hos.  2.  15.  Achor  was  a  valley  in  the
territory  of  Jericho,  and  in  the  tribe  of  Benja¬
min,  on  the  very  entrance  into  the  land  of  Ca¬
naan:  The  Israelites,  fatigued  and  discouraged
with  marching  and  encamping  for  forty  years  in
the  wilderness,  and  coming  to  this  valley,  began
to  entertain  hopes  of  enjoying  the  promised  land  ;
rn  allusion  to  this,  God  promises  his  people,  by
.Hosea,  that  he  would  give  them  some  beginnings
of  mercy  and  favour,  as  the  earnests  and  pledges  of
future  blessings.

inn‘n'l’  *t  thou  dost  not  well,  sin  lieth  at  the  d.

19.  9.  they  pressed,  and  came  near  to  break  the  d.

v.*  die  Lord  also  will  pass  over  the  d.

JJ-  6.  his  master  shall  bring  him  to  the  d.

15.  17.  shall  thrust  it  through  his  ear  to  therf.

1  13.  17.  put  her  from  me,  bolt  the  d.  after  her

18.  brought  her  out,  and  he  bolted  the  d.  after  her
4'  wheQ  he  called,  she  stood  in  the  d.

9.  3.  then  open  the  d.  and  flee,  and  tarry  not
ysth.  2.  21.  of  those  which  kept  the  d.  6.  2.

9.  it  l  have  laid  wait  at  my  neighbour’s  d.

34.  did  1  fear,  that  I  went  not  out  of  the  d.  /
pa /•  141.  3.  O  Lord,  keep  the  d.  of  my  lips
£  >ov.  »6.  14.  as  the  d.  turneth  upon  his  hinges

?..•  L  lie  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole  of  the  d.
v  i  o  s,ieLbeH  d-  we  will  inclose  her  with  boards
x.zek.  8.  3  brought  me  to  the  d.  ofthe  inner  gate,  7.
»•  when  I  had  digged  in  the  wall,  behold  a  d.
i9-.  eyeR  one  stood  at  the  d.  ofthe  east-gate
„  I’ehold,  at  the  (/.  of  the  gate,  twenty  -five  men
V  breadth  of  the  d.  was  ten  cubits

People  shall  worship  at  tiled,  ofthis  ga
7.“ + _2t,.Nebuchad.  came  to  the  d.  ofthe  furna<


--,r- ■  ^-^ebuchad.  came  to  the  d.  ofthe  furnac
yvllt  ?1,ve  valle>’  of  Achor  for  a  (/.of  hop
he  SHld>  smite  the  lintel  ofthe  d.

'  ot.  27.  60.  he  rolled  a  great  stone  to  the  d.  of  th
•«  o  sepulchre,  and  departed,  Mark  15.  4(
ul'rii  Lan?n  rolled  the  stone  from  the  d.
eg  33-  ad  the  city  was  gathered  at  the  d.
Tfi'A  wasno  room,  no  not  so  much  as  about  the  a
ir>  1 0  l  rod  us  the  stone  from  the  d.  ?

0  ,12;  L  ,he  that  entereth  not  by  the  d.  is  a  thie
2.  that  entered,  m  by  the  d.  ||  7.  I  am  the  d.  9.


John  18.  16.  but  Peter  stood  at  the  d.  without
17.  then  saith  the  damsel  that  kept  the  d.  to  Peter
Acts  5. 9.  feet  of  them  are  at  the  d.  to  carry  thee  out
12. 13.  as  Peter  knocked  at  the  d.  of  the  gate
J6.  when  they  had  opened  the  d.  and  saw  him
14. 27.  how  he  had  opened  therf.  of  faith  to  Gentiles

1  Cor.  16.  9.  a  great  d.  and  effectual  is  opened

2  Cor.  2. 12.  a  d.  was  opened  to  me  of  the  Lord
Col.  4.  3.  that  God  would  open  a  d.  of  utterance
Jam.  5.  9.  the  judge  standeth  before  the  d.

Rev.  3.  8.  I  set  before  thee  an  open  d.  none  can  shut
20. 1  stand  atd.  and  knock,  if  any  man  open  the  d.

4.  1.  1  looked,  and  behold  a  d.  was  open  in  heaven

DOOR,  with  house.

Gen.  19. 11.  smote  them  that  were  at  d.  of  the  house
43. 19.  they  communed  at  the  d.  of  the  house
Exod.  12. 22.  none  of  you  goout  at  the  d.  of  his  house
Lev.  14.  38.  the  priest  shall  go  to  the  d.  of  the  house
Deut.  22.  21 .  bring  damsel  to  d.  of  her  father’s  house
Judg.  19. 26.  fell  down  at  d.  of  the  man’s  house,  27.

2  Sam.  11.  9.  Uriah  slept  at  d.  of  the  king’s  house
2  h  ings  5. 9.  N  aaman  stood  at  d.  of  house  of  Elisha
Neh.  3.  20.  unto  the  d.  ofthe  house  of  Eliashib
21.  Merimoth  repaired  from  thee/,  of  the  house
Prov.  5.  8.  and  come  not  nigh  the  d.  of  her  house
9. 14.  for  she  sitteth  at  the  d.  of  her  house  on  a  seat
Jer.  26. 1 10.  the  princes  sat  at  d.  of  the  lord’s  house
36.  +  10.  Baruch  read  at  the  d.  of  the  Lord’s  house
Etek.  8. 14.  he  1  rought  me  to  d.  of  Lord’s  It.  47.1.
DOOR,  with  shut.

Gen.  19.  6.  Lot  shut  the  d.  ||  10.  angels  shut  the  d.

2  Kings  4.  4.  when  come  in  shalt  shut  d.  upon  thee

5.  she  shut  d.  upon  her  ||  21.  she  shut  d.  on  him
33.  lie  went  in,  and  shut  the  d.  on  them  twain

6.  32.  shut  thee/,  and  hold  him  fast  at  the  d.

Mat.  6. 6.  and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  d.  pray  to

25. 10.  the  d.  was  shut  ||  Luke  11. 7 .  the  d.  is  now  shut
Luke  13.  25.  master  risen,  and  hath  shut  to  the  d.
Rev.  3.  8.  set  before  thee  an  open  d.  no  man  can  shut

DOOR,  with  tabernacle.

Exod.  29.  4.  thou  shalt  bring  to  d.  of  the  tabernacle,
40. 12.  Lev.  4.  4.  |  8.  3,  4.  |  12.  6.  Hum.  6.  10.
11.  shalt  kill  bullock  by  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,
32.  140.29.  Lev.  1.5.  Num.  27.2.
42.  burnt-o  ering  at  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  33.
9,10.1  8.  |'40.28.  Lev.  1.  3.  1  3.  2.  |  4.7, 18.

40.  6.  before  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  Num.  <25.  6.
Lev.  8.  31.  at  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  35.  |  14.  11.

1  16.  7- 1  17-  6.  Num.  6.  18. 1  10.  3.  Josh.  19.  51.

33.  ye  shal  I  not  go  out  of  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle

10.  7.  ye  shall  not  go  out  from  the  d.  of  the  tabern.

14.  23.  unto  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  15.  14,  29.

I  19.  21 .  Num.  16.  18,  19,  50.  |  20. 6.
17.  4.  bringeth  it  not  to  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  9.
Num.  12  5.  stood  in  the  d.  of  the  tabernacle,  16. 18.
Deut  31. 15.  a  lllar  of  cloud  stood  over  d.  of  taber-

nude.

1  Chron.  9.  21.  Zechariah  was  porter  of  d.  of  tabern.

DOOR,  joined  with  tent.

Gen.  18.  1.  Abraham  sat  in  the  tent  d.  in  heat  of  d.
2.  he  ran  to  meet  them  from  the  tent  d.  and  bowed
10.  Sarah  heard  it  in  the  tent  d.  behind  him
Exod.  33. 8.  the  people  stood  every  man  at  his  tent  d.

10.  the  people  worshipped,  every  man  in  his  tent  d.
Num.  11.10.  weeping,  every  man  in  the  (/.of  his  tent

16.  27.  Dathan  and  A  biram  stood  in  d.  of  their  tents
Judg.  4.  20.  he  said,  stand  in  the  d.  of  the  tent

DOOR-KEEPER.

Ps.  84. 10.  I  had  rather  be  a  d.  keeper  in  house  of  G.
Jer.  35. 4.  the  chamber  of  Maaseiah,  keeper  of  the  d.
DOOR-KEEPERS.

2  Kings  22.  4.  which  keepers  ofthe  d.  have  gathered

23.  4.  the  keepers  ofthe  d.  to  bring  the  vessels

25. 18.  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  the  chief  priest
and  the  three  keepers  of  the  d.  Jer.  52.  24.

1  Chr.  15. 23.  Berechiah,  Elkanah,  were  d.-keepers

24.  Obed-edom  and  Jehiah  d.-keepers  for  the  ark
Esth.  6.  2.  the  keepers  of  the  d.  sought  to  lay  hand

DOOR-POST.

Exod.  21.  6.  his  master  shall  bring  him  to  the  d.-post
Ezek.  41.  3.  he  measured  the  post  of  the  d.  two  cubits
DOOR-POSTS.

Exod.  12. 7-  strike  blood  on  upper  d.-posts  of  houses
Deut.  11. 20.  shall  write  them  on  d.-posts  of  thy  house
Isa.  6. 4.  the  posts  of  the  d.  moved  at  the  voice
Ezek.  41. 16.  he  measured  the  d.-posts  and  windows
DOORS.

Josh.  2.  19.  w  hosoever  shall  go  out  of  the  d.

Judg.  3.  24.  the  d.  of  the  parlour  wrere  locked

25.  he  opened  not  the  (/.ofthe  parlour

11.  31.  what  cometh  forth  of  the  d.  1  will  offer  it
16.  3.  Samson  took  the  d.  of  the  gate  of  the  city
19.  27.  her  lord  rose  up,  and  opened  the  d.

1  Jam.  3. 15.  Samuel  opened  the  d.  of  the  house
21.  13.  David  scrabbled  on  the  d.  of  the  gate

2  Kings  18. 16.  I  lezekiah  cutoff  the  gold  from  the  d.

2  Chron.  23.  4.  of  the  Levites  be  porters  of  the  d.

29.  3.  Hezekiah  opened  the  d.  of  the  house
Neh.  3.  1.  and  they  set  up  the  d.  of  it,  3. 1  7. 1.

Job  31.  32.  but  I  opened  my  d.  to  the  traveller

38. 10.  when  1  set  bars  and  d.  to  the  sea

17.  hast  thou  seen  the  d.  of  the  shadow  of  death  ?

41.  14.  who  can  open  the  d.  of  his  face  ?

Psal.  24.  7-  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  d.  9.

78.  23.  though  he  had  opened  the  d.  of  heaven
Prov.  8. 3.  W  isdom  crieth  at  the  coming  in  at  the  d.

34.  heareth  me,  waiting  at  the  posts  ot  my  d.

Isa.  57.8.  behind  d.  hast  thou  set  up  remembrance
Ezek.  .33.  30.  still  talking  in  the  d.  of  the  houses
Mic.  7.  5.  keep  the  d.  of  thy  mouth  from  her
Zech.  11. 1.  open  thy  d.  O  Lebanon,  that  the  fire
Mat.  24.  33.  know  it  is  near,  at  the  d.  Mark  13. 29.
Acts  5. 19.  the  angel  by  night  opened  the  prison  d.

23.  and  the  keepers  standing  before  the  d.

16.  26.  immediately  all  the  d.  were  opened
27.  keeper  awaking,  and  seeing  the  prison  d.  open
Shut  DOORS.

Judg.  3.  23.  Ehud  shut  the  d.  of  the  parlour
2  Chron.  28.  24.  A  haz  shut  up  the  d.  of  Lord’s  house
29.  7.  our  fathers  have  shut  the  d.  of  the  porch
Neh.  6. 10.  and  let  us  shut  the  d.  of  the  temp.e

7.  3.  let  them  shut  the  d.  and  bar  them


Job  3. 10.  because  shut  not  up  d.  of  mother’s  womb
38.  8.  or  who  shut  up  the  sea  with  d.  ?

Eccl.  12.  4.  tiie  d.  shall  be  shut  in  the  streets
Isa.  26.  20.  enter,  and  shut  thy  d.  about  thee
Mai.  1. 10.  who  that  would  shut  the  d.  for  nought J
John  20.  19.  when  the  d.  were  shut  Jesus  came,  26.
Acts  21.  30.  and  forthwith  the  d.  were  shut
DOTE.

Jer.  50.  36.  a  sword  is  on  liars,  and  they  shall  d.

DOTED.

Ezek.  23.  5.  Aholah  d.  on  her  lovers  the  Assyrians,
7-  committed  whoredoms  with  all  on  whom  she  d
9.  into  hand  of  Assyrians,  on  whom  she  d.  12.

16.  as  soon  as  she  saw  them,  she  d.  upon  them

20.  for  she  d.  upon  their  paramours,  whose  flesh
DOTING.

1  Tim.  6. 4.  d.  about  questions  and  strifes  of  word
DOUBLE.  _

Double  commonly  signifies  twice  as  much,  Gen.
43.  12.  Take  double  money,  that  is,  twice  as
much  money.  A  double  garment  may  mean  a
lined  habit,  such  as  the  high-priest' s  breast-plate
was,  Exod.  39.  9.  or  a  complete  habit  or  suit  of
clothes,  a  cloke  and  tunic,  Judg.  17.  +  10.  Dwell
with  me,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  double  suit  of
apparel,  or  an  order  of  garments.  Double
sometimes  signifies  abundance,  as  much  as  an¬
swers  one's  design,  Isa.  40.  2.  She  hath  re¬
ceived  of  the  Lord’s  hand  double  for  all  her
sms.  They  have  received  punishment,  though
not  so  much  as  their  sins  deserved,  yet  abun¬
dantly  sufficient  to  answer  God's  design,  which
was  to  humble  and  reform  them,  and  to  warn
others  by  their  example.  See  Jer.  16.  18.  I  17 .

18.  1  Tim.  5.  17.  A  double  heart,  a  double
tongue,  double  mind,  are  opposite  to  a  simple,
honest,  sincere  heart ;  a  true  tongue ;  a  just,
faithful,  sincere  mind,  Psal.  12.  2.  1  Tim.  3.  8
Jam.  1.  8.

Gen.  43. 12.  and  take  d.  money  in  your  hand

15.  and  they  took  d.  money  in  their  hand
Exod.  22. 4.  if  theft  be  found,  he  shall  restore  d

7-  if  found,  let  him  pay  d.  ||  9.  he  shall  pay  d
39. 9.  they  made  the  breast  plate  d.  a  span  was
Deut.  15. 18.  been  worth  a  d.  hired  servant  to  thee

21. 17.  by  giving  him  a  d.  portion  of  all  he  hath
Judg.  17.  f  10.  1  will  give  thee  a  d.  suit  of  appare

1  Sam.  1. 1 5.  to  Hannah  he  gave  d.  portion

2  Kings  2.  9.  let  a  d.  portion  of  thy  spirit  be  on  me
1  Chron.  12.  33.  they  were  not  of  a  d.  heart

Job  11.6.  that  they  are  d.  to  that  which  is

41.  13.  who  can  come  to  him  with  his  d.  bridle  ?

42.  410.  also  the  Lord  added  to  Job  unto  the  d.
Psal.  12.  2.  and  with  a  d.  heart  do  they  speak
Prov.  31.  f  21.  her  household  clothed  with  d.  garm.
Isa.  40.  2.  she  hath  received  d.  for  all  her  sins

61. 7.  for  your  shame  you  shall  have  d.  therefore
in  their  land  they  shall  possess  the  d.
Jer.  16.  18.  I  will  recompense  their  sin  d.

17. 18.  and  destroy  them  with  d.  destruction
Zech.  9. 12.  I  declare,  that  I  will  render  d.  to  thee

1  Tim.  3. 8.  deacons  must  be  grave,  not  (/.-tongued

5. 17.  rule  well,  be  counted  worthy  of  d.  honour
Rev.  18. 6.  d.  unto  her,  d.  according  to  her  works,  in

the  cup  which  she  hath  filled,  fill  to  her  d.

DOUBLE,  Verb.

Exod.  26.  9.  thou  shalt  d.  sixth  curtain  of  tabernacle
Rev.  18. 6.  reward  her,  and  d.  unto  her  d.
DOUBLE-MINDED.

Jam.  1.  8.  a.  d. -minded man  is  unstable  in  his  ways
4.  8.  and  purify  your  hearts,  ye  d.-minded
DOUBLED.

Gen.  41.  32.  the  dream  was  d.  to  Pharaoh  twice
Exod.  28. 16.  four  square  it  shall  be,  being  d.

39.  9-  a  span  was  the  breadth  thereof,  being  d.

2  Sam.  20. 1 10.  Joab  d.  not  his  stroke  to  Amasa
Ezek.  21.  14.  let  the  sword  be  d.  the  third  time

DOUBT.

Gen.  37.  33.  Joseph  is  without  d.  rent  in  pieces
Deut.  28.  66.  thy  life  shall  hang  in  d.  before  thee
Job  12.  2.  no  d.  but  ye  are  the  people,  wisd.  shall  die
Luke  11. 20.  no  d.  the  kingdom  ot  G.  is  come  on  you
Acts 2. 12.  were  in  d.  saying,  what  meaneth  this  ?
28. 4.  they  said,  no  d.  this  man  is  a  murderer
1  Cor.  9. 10.  for  our  sakes,  no  d.  this  is  written
Gal.  4. 20.  to  change  my  voice  for  1  stand  in  d.  of  you
1  John  2. 19.  would  no  d.  have  continued  with  us
DOUBTS.

Dan.  5.  12.  dissolving  of  d.  was  found  in  Daniel

16.  1  have  heard  that  thou  canst  dissolve  d.

DOUBT.

Mat.  14.  31.  Jesus  said,  wherefore  didst  thou  d.  ?

21.  21. 1  say  unto  you,  if  ye  have  faith,  and  d.  not
Mark  11.  23.  shall  not  d.  in  his  heart,  but  believe
John  10.  24.  how  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  d.  ?
DOUBTED.

Mat.  28.  17.  they  worshipped  him,  but  some  d.

Acts  5.  24.  they  d.  whereunto  this  would  grow

10. 17.  now  while  Peter  d.  in  himself  of  the  vision
25.  20.  because  I  d.  of  such  manner  of  questions

DOUBTETH.

Rom.  14.  23.  he  that  d.  is  damned  if  he  eat
DOUBTFUL.

Luke  12.  29.  neither  be  ye  of  a  d.  mind
Acts  25.  t  20.  because  I  was  d.  how  to  inquire
Rom.  14. 1.  receive  you,  but  not  to  d.  disputations
DOUBTING.

John  13.22.  they  looked,  d.  of  whom  he  spake
Acts  10.  20.  ao  with  them,  nothing  d.  11.  12.

1  Tim.  2.  8.  that  men  pray  without  wrath  and  d.

DOUBTLESS.

Num.  14. 30.  d.  ye  shall  not  come  into  the  land

2  Sam.  5. 19.  1  will  d.  deliver  the  Philistines
Psal.  126.  6.  he  shall  d.  come  again,  rejoicing
Isa.  63. 16.  d.  thou  art  our  Father,  thou,  O  Lord

1  Cor.  9. 2.  if  not  to  others. yet  d.  I  am  to  you

2  Cor.  12. 1.  it  is  not  expedient  for  me  d.  to  glory
Phil.  3. 8.  yeatf.  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  Christ

DOVE

Is  a  tame  bird,  which  by  the  law  of  Moses  was  de¬
clared  to  be  pure.  The  law  ordained  that  when
any  woman  went  to  the  temple  after  lying-in.  she

117


DRA


DRA


DO  Y


should  offer  ts  the  Lord,  a  lamb,  a  dove,  or  turtle,
or  else  a  pigeon,  or  a  young  turtle,  Lev.  12.  6,  8.
The  lamb  was  offered  as  a  burnt-offering ,  the
pigeon  for  a  sin-offering.  Or  if  the  person  could
not  afford  a  lamb,  then  instead  of  it  she  of  e red
two  pigeons,  or  two  turtles.  The  Virgin  wary,
to  comply  with  this  law,  offered  two  pigeons,  or
two  turtles,  because  she  was  poor,  Luke  2.  24.
And  as  it  was  difficult  for  all  those  who  came  from
remote  places,  to  bring  doves  with  them,  the  pi  tests
gave  permission  for  the  selling  oj  these  birds  in
the  courts  of  that  holy  place,  which  our  {saviour
could  7iot  endure;  and  having  entered  into  the
temple,  he  made  a  scourge,  and  drove  out  those
who  traded  there  in  pigeons,  Mark  11.  In.

The  dove  is  the  symbol  of  simplicity  and  mno-
cency.  The  Holy  Spirit  appeared  at  the  baptism
of  our  Saviour  in  the  form  of  a  dove,  Hat.  3.

16  to  signify  what  Christ  is,  Cl)  In  his  own
nature  to  them  that  come  to  him,  namely,  meek,
harmless,  loving.  (2)  In  the  execution  of  Ins
office,  even  He  by  whom  the  lather  is  pacified,
and  who  brings  the  good  tidings  of  the  assuaging
the  deluge  of  wrath,  as  the  dove  did  of  the  retiring
of  the  waters  to  Noah.  (3)  What  lie  is  in  the
operations  of  his  Spirit  upon  his  people,  that
they  are  made  meek,  harmless,  and  lowly  as
doves.  Christ  recommends  to  his  disciples  the
wisdom  of  the  serpent,  and  the  harmlessness  of
the  dove,  Mat.  10.  16.  The  prophet  Hosea  com¬
pares  the  Israelites  to  a  silly  dove  without  heart ,
or  understanding,  Hos.  7 •  1L  'I  he  dove  is  a  de¬
fenceless  creature,  without  gall,  or  cunning ,  ex¬
posed  to  the  pursuit  of  men  and  beasts;  which  is
able  neither  to  protect  itself  nor  its  young,  nor  to
take  precaution  against  those  who  have  designs
upon  its  life  and  liberty.  Thus  the  Israelites,
notwithstanding  the  chastisements  with  which
God  afflicted  them,  and  the  captivities  to  which
he  had  reduced  them,  still  relapsed  into  then  ir¬
regularities,  and  exposed  themselves  again  to  the
same  calamities.  The  dove,  when  absent  from
its  mate,  sits  solitary,  and  coos,  or  mourns ;  in
allusion  to  which  are  these  expressions,  Isa.  38.

14.  1  did  mourn  as  a  dove.  And  chap.  59.
11.  We  mourn  sore  like  doves.  Nah.  2.  7.  Her
maids  shall  lead  her  as  with  the  voice  of  doves.
The  spouse,  or  church,  in  the  Canticles  is  com¬
pared  often  to  a  dove,  by  reason  of  her  dove-like
temper  and  disposition,  because  she  is  chaste,
mild,  harmless,  and  faithful:  also  by  reason  of
her  dove-like  condition,  she  being  weak,  and  ex¬
posed  to  persecution,  and  given  to  mourning ,  and
subject  to  many  fears,  as  doves  are,  Cant.  2.  14.

1 5  °

It  is  further  observed  of  the  dove;  that  the  male
and  female  love  each  other ,  and  keep  faithful
one  towards  the  other ;  and,  if  any  breach  happen
between  them,  they  are  presently  reconciled,  ma¬
nifesting  the  same  by  their  embracing  each  other.
They  love  men's  dwelling-houses,  and  to  be  in
their  company ;  and ,  being  carried  from  home,
will  return  many  miles  to  their  own  houses ;  for
which  reason  some  make  use  of  them  to  carry
letters,  by  tying  them  about  their  necks,  which
their  friends  at  home  untie  and  read,  and  are
thereby  acquainted  with  their  mind.  The  dove  is
an  enemy  to  carrion  or  ordure,  and  feedeth  upon
the  purest  seed  or  grain,  and  loveth  neatness  and
pure  waters.  It  quickly  forgets  injuries,  as  the
spoiling  its  nest,  taking  away  its  young.  Sic.  It
is  very  fruitful ,  having  young  ones  almost  every
month.  Its  feathers  are  of  divers  colours,  which,
according  to  the  variety  of  its  postures,  and  of
the  light  shining  upon  it,  look  like  silver  or  gold,
as  the  Psalmist  observes,  Psal.  68.  13.

It  is  said  in  2  Kings  6.  25.  that  during  the  siege
of  Samaria,  in  the  reign  of  Ahab,  king  of  Israel,
the  famine  was  so  great,  that  the  fourth  part  of
a  cab  of  doves’  dung  -was  sold  for  five  shekels.
A  cab  held  two  pints  and  something  over.  Five
shekels  made  about  twelve  shillings  sterling.
Some  think  that  it  is  not  incredible  that  they
did  really  eat  doves'  dung,  seeing  a  famine  hath
constrained  people  to  eat  things  as  improper  and
unfit  for  nourishment  as  this,  as  is  implied,  Isa.
36.  12.  Josephus  and  Theodoret  were  of  opinion,
that  this  doves'  dung  was  bought  instead  of  salt.
The  Rabbins  affirm,  that  it  was  not  the  dung  of
pigeons,  but  the  corn  in  their  crops,  which  they
brought  back  well  filled  out  of  the  fields,  whither,
during  the  siege,  they  went  to  feed.  Others  sup¬
pose  the  dove's  belly,  her  guts  and  inwards,  to  be
meant  here.

The  several  species  of  the  dove,  are  the  wood-
pigeon,  the  tame  pigeon,  the  ring-dove  or  tur¬
tle,  the  Picaipinima,  and  the  St.  Thomas’s  pi¬
geon.  The  three  first  often  occur  in  the  Bible,
under  the  names  of  the  pigeon  and  turtle-dove,
and  the  two  last  are  natives  of  America;  the
Picaipinima  being  the  grey  and  black  dove,  with
a  white  breast;  and  the  St.  Thomas’s  pigeon
being  the  Columba,  with  yellow  legs.

Gen.  8. 8.  Noah  sent  forth  a  d.  from  him,  10.  12.

9.  the  d.  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  toot
11.  the  d.  came  in  to  him  in  the  evening

15.  9.  he  said  to  him,  take  aturtle-tf.  Lev.  12.  6.
Psal.  55.  6.  Oh !  that  I  had  wings  like  a  d.

68.  13.  ye  shall  be  as  the  wings  of  a  d.  covered
74.  19.  O  deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  turtle-*/.
Cant.  1.  15.  thou  art  fair,  thou  hast  d.  eyes,  4.  1.

2.  14.  O  my  d.  let  me  see  thy  countenance

5.  2.  open  tome, my  sister,  my  love,  m y  d.

6.  9.  my  d.  my  undefiled  is  but  one,  she  is
Isa.  38.  14.  I  did  mourn  asarf.  mine  eyes  tail
Jer.  48.  28.  dwell  in  the  rock  and  be  like  the  d.
Hos.  7.  11.  Ephraim  also  is  like  a  silly  d.

11.  11.  they  shall  tremble  as  a  d.  out  of  Assyria
Mat.  3.  16.  Jesus  saw  the  Spirit  of  God  descending
like  a  d.  Mark  1.  10.  Luke  3.  22.  John  1.  32.

DOVES.

Kings  6.  25.  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  d.  dung

ns


Cant.  5. 12.  his  eyes  are  as  the  eyes  of  d.

Isa.  59. 11.  we  roar  like  bears,  we  mourn  sore  like  d
60.’  8.  that  flee  as  the  d.  to  their  windows
Ezek.  7.  16.  they  shall  be  like  the  d.  of  the  valleys
Nah.  2.  7.  lead  her  as  with  the  voice  of  d.  tabering
Mat.  10.  16.  be  wise  as  serpents,  harmless  as  d.

21.  12.  the  seats  of  them  that  sold  d.  Mark  11.  15.
John  2. 14.  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  d.

16.  said  unto  them  that  sold  d.  take  these  hence
Turtle- DOVES.

Lev.  14.  22.  he  shall  take  two  turtle-d.  or  pigeons
Luke  2. 24.  offer  sacrifice  of  two  turtle-d.  or  pigeons
DOUGH.

Exod.  8.  t  3.  the  frogs  shall  come  into  thy  d.

12.  t  34.  the  people  took  their  d.  before  it  was  lea
vened,  their  d.  being  bound  up  in  their  clothes
39.  they  baked  unleavened  cakes  of  the  d.

Num.  15.  20.  offer  a  cake  of  the  first  of  your  d.  21.
Dent  °8.  t  5.  blessed  shall  be  thy  basket  and  d.

Neh.  10.  37.  should  bring  the  first-fruits  ot  our  d.

Jer.  7.  18.  women  knead  their  d.  to  bake  cakes
Ezek  44.  30.  give  the  priests  the  first  of  your  d.

Hos  7  4  after  he  hath  kneaded  the  d.  till  leaveneu

Lev.  22. 7.  when  the  sun  is  d.  Deut.  23. 11.

Josh.  H.  29.  as  soon  as  sun  was  d.  Josh,  commanded
to  take  the  king  of  Ai’s  carcase  d.  from  the  tree
2  Sam.  3.  35.  if  1  taste  aught  till  the  sun  be  d.

Job  1.  7.  and  from  walking  up  and  d.  in  it,  2.  2.

Psal.  59.  15.  let  them  wander  up  and  d.  for  meat
109.  £3. 1  am  tossed  up  and  d.  as  the  locust
Ezek.  £8. 14.  hast  walked  up  and  d.  in  midst  of  stones
Zech.  10.  12.  they  shall  walk  up  and  d.  in  his  name
Acts’ 27  .  27.  as  we  were  driven  up  and  d.  in  Adria
Rev  1.  13.  clothed  with  a  garment  d.  to  the  foot

down-sitting.

Psal.  139.  C.  tliou  knerwest  my  d.  and  up-rising
DOWNWARD.

2  Kings  19.  30.  shall  again  take  root  d.  Isa.  37.  31.
Eccl.  3.  21.  the  spirit  of  the  beast  that  goeth  d.

F.zek  1. 27.  the  appearance  of  his  loins  d.  8.  2.
DOWRY.

Gen.  30.  20.  God  hath  endued  me  with  a  good  d.

34.  *12.  ask  me  never  so  much  d.  and  gift
Exod.  22. 17.  pay  according  to  the  d.  of  virgins
1  Sam.  18. 25.  the  kingdesireth  not  any  d.

DRAG.

llab.  1. 16.  they  burn  incense  to  their  d.

DRAGS.

Hab.  1. 15.  they  gather  ffenmiUtheir  d.

John  21.  8.  came  in  little  ship,  d.  the  net  with  fishes
DRAGON.

This  word  answers  generally  to  the  Hebrew,  Than
nim,  or  Thannin,  which  signifies  a  large  fish,  a
sea-dragon.  By  comparing  the  different  passages
where  the  word  tannin,  or  tannim,  is  to  be  met
with,  it  signifies  sometimes  large  river  or  .sea
fishes,  and  at  other  times  venomous  and  land  ser¬
pents,  and  more  particularly  the  crocodile  and
whale,  Gen.  1.  21.  Job  7«  12.  Isa.  34.  lo.  Ezek.
29.  3.  I  32.  2.

As  to  the  dragons  which  are  talked  of,  and  are
often  mentioned  in  books,  they  are  for  the  most
part  only  old  serpents  grown  with  age  to  a  pro¬
digious  size.  Some  are  described  with  wings,
feet,  claws,  crests,  and  heads  of  different  figures.
'There  is  no  question  but  there  are  winged  ser¬
pents ;  Moses  speaks  of  them  under  the  name  of
Zeraph,  Num.  21.  6.  Real  Dragons,  by  Solinus  s
account  of  them,  have  a  small  mouth,  and  cannot
bite  ;  or  if  they  do,  their  biting  is  not  venomous.
The  Egyptians  call  them  good  geniuses,  and
keep  them  tame  in  their  houses.  But  these  were
not  the  dragons  spoken  of  by  the  prophets ;  these
were  dangerous  creatures,  mischievous,  deadly,
and  wild.

As  serpents,  dragons,  and  venomous  beasts,  hide
themselves  in  uninhabited  places,  in  the  ruins  of
cities  and  in  rubbish  ;  for  this  reason,  where  there
is  mention  of  the  ruin  of  a  city,  the  ravaging  of  a
province,  or  of  a  land  reduced  to  a  wilderness,  it  is
said  to  he  a  dwelling  for  dragons,  Isa.  13.  22.  1

34. 13.  Jer.  9- 11.  ,  „  .  „  ,  J  ,7  _

This  word  is  taken  in  Scripture  jor  the  devil,  Rev.

12.  9.  so  called  for  his  great  strength,  and  bloody
cruelly  against  the  saints.  It  is  also  taken  for
cruel  tyrants,  as  Pharaoh,  Psal.  74.  13.  Ezek.
29.  3.  And  for  any  hurtful  thing,  Ps.  91. 13.

Psal.  91.  13.  the  d.  shalt  thou  trample  under  foot
Isa.  27. 1.  he  shall  slay  the  d.  that  is  in  the  sea
51.  9.  that  hath  cutRahab,  and  wounded  the  d.
Jer.  51.  34.  Nebucli.  hath  swallowed  me  up  like  a  d.
Ezek.  29.  3.  Pharaoh,  the  great  d.  that  lieth
Rev.  12.  3.  another  wonder,  behold,  a  great  red  d.

4.  the  d.  stood  ||  7.  d.  fought  |!  9.  d.  was  cast  out,  13.

16.  the  Hood  which  the  d.  cast  out  of  his  mouth

17.  and  the  d.  was  wroth  with  the  woman

13.  2.  the  d.  gave  him  his  power  and  his  seat
4.  they  worshipped  the  d.  ||  11.  he  spake  as  a  d.

16.  13.  like  frogs  came  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  d.
20. 2.  he  laid  hold  on  the  d.  that  old  serpent
DRAGON-aieff.

Neh.  2. 13.  I  went  out,  even  before  the  d.-well
DRAGONS.  .

Deut.  32.  38.  their  wine  is  the  poison  of  d.

Job  30.  29.  I  am  a  brother  to  d.  and  a  companion
Psal.  44. 19.  thou  hast  sore  broken  us  in  place  ot  d.

74. 13.  thou  breakest  the  heads  of  d.  in  the  waters
148. 7.  praise  Lord  from  earth,  ye  d.  and  all  deeps

Isa.  13. 22.  and  d.  in  their  pleasant  palaces
34.  13.  it  shall  be  an  habitation  for  d.  35.  7-
43.  20.  the  d.  and  the  owls  shall  honour  me
Jer.  9.  11.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  den  ot  d.

10.  22.  to  make  the  cities  of  Judah  a  den  of  d.

14.  6.  they  snuffed  up  the  wind  like  d.  -
49.  33.  llazorll  51.  37.  Babylon  a  dwelling  for  d.

Mic.  1. 8. 1  will  make  a  wailing  like  the  d.

Mai.  1.3.1  laid  his  heritage  waste  for  d.  ot  wilderness
DRAMS.

1  Chron.  29.  7.  the)'  gave  of  gold  ten  thousand  d.
Ezra  2.  69.  they  gave  61,000V.  of  gold


Ezra  8.27.  also  twenty  basins  of  gold,  of  a  thousand  A
Neh.  7. 70.  gave  to  the  treasure  a  thousand  d.  of  gold
71*.  gave  twenty  thousand  d.  ot  gold,  72.
DRANK.

Gen.  9. 21.  N  oah  d.  of  the  wine  and  was  drunken
24.  46.  1  d.  and  she  made  the  camels  drink  aiso


07  05.  and  he  brought  him  wine,  and  he  d.

43.  +34.  they  d.  largely,  were  merry'  with  him
Num.  20.  11.  the  congregation  d.  and  their  beasts
Kent.  31.  38.  and  d.  the  wineof  their  drink-offerings

1  Sam  .3o!l2.  nor  d.  water  three  days  and  three  nights-

2  Sam.  12.3. eat  of  his  own  meat, and  rf.of  his  own  cup
1  Kings  13. 19.did  eat  bread  in  his  house, and  d. water

17.  6.  brought  bread  and  flesh, and  h  >  d.  of  the  brook.
Dan  1  5.  the  king  appointed  of  the  wine  which  he  d.

8  that  he  would  not  defile  himself  with  wine  he  d,

5.  i.  Belshazzar  d.  wine  before  the  thousand

3  his  wives  and  his  concubines  d.  in  them
4!  they  d.  wine,  and  praised  the  gods  of  gold
Mark  14  23.  he  gave  to  them,  and  they  all  d.  of  it
Luke  17." 27.  they  eat,  they  d.  they  married,  28.

John  4. 12.  than  our  father  Jacob  who  d.  thereof
1  Cor.  10. 4.  for  they  d.  of  that  spiritual  rock
DRAVE.

Exod.  14.  25.  chariot-wheels,  they  d.  them  heavily
Josh.  16. 10.  they  d.  not  out  the  Canaanites  in  Gezer
24. 12.  and  d.  them  out  from  before  you,  Judg.  6.  9.

18.  the  Lord  d.  out  before  us  all  the  people
Judg.  1. 19.  Judah  d.  out  inhahitantsof  the  mountain

1  Sam.  30. 20.  which  they  d.  before  other  cattle

2  Sam.  6. 3.  Uzzah  and  Ahio  d.  the  cart,  1  C 'hr.  13.  7.

2  Kings  16.  6.  at  that  time  ltezin  d.  Jews  from  Elatb-

18.  21.  Jeroboam  d.  Israel  from  following  the  Ld.
Acts  7. 45.  whom  God  d.  out  before  our  fathers

18. 16.  Gallio  d.  them  from  the  judgment-seat
See  Drove.

DRAUGHT’.

Mat.  15. 17.  and  is  cast  out  in  the  d.  Mark  7.  19.
Luke  5.  4.  launch  out  and  let  downy  our  nets  for  a  d.

9  for  he  was  astonished  at  the  d.  of  the  fishes
DRAUGHT-HOUSE.

0  Kinas  10  27  .they  made  Baal’s  house  a  d.to  this  day
DRAW.

Gen  24.  44.  and  I  will  also  d.  for  thy  camels
Exod.  15.  9.  the  enemy  said,  I  will  d.  my  sword
Judg.  4. 6.rf.toward  mount  Tabor, and  take  with  thee-
7  I  will  d.  to  thee  Sisera,  captain  of  J abin’s  army.
5.  f  14.  out  of  Zebulun  they  that  d.  with  the  pen
9.  54.  Abimelech  said,  d.  thy  sword  and  slay  me,.

1  Sam.  31.  4. 1  Chron.  10.4.

20.  32.  d.  them  from  the  city  to  the  high-w  ays
2  Sam.  17. 13.  we  will  d.  that  city  into  the  river
Job  21. 33.  and  every  man  shall  d.  after  him
Psal.  28.  3.  d.  me  not  away  with  the  wicked
Eccl.  2. 1 3.  I  sought  to  d.  my  flesh  with  wine
Cant.  1.4 .  d.  me,  we  will  run  after  thee

Isa.  5. 18.  woe  to  those  d.  iniq.  with  cords  of  vanity.
66.  19.  send  those  to  the  nations  that  d.  the  bow
Ezek,  21.  3.  I  will  d.  my  sword  out  of  his  sheath
°8  7  and  strangers  shall  d.  their  swords
~,0.  11.  they  shall  d.  their  sw'ords  against  Egypt
32. 20.  d.  her,  and  all  her  multitudes
John  4.  11.  thou  hast  nothing  to  d.  with,  well  is  deep-
15  water  that  1  thirst  not,  nor  come  hither  to  d.

6  44  except  the  Father  which  hath  sentme*/.  him
12. 32.  if  1  be  lifted  up  from  earth,  d.  all  men  to  me

21.  and  now  they  were  not  able  to  d.  it
Acts  20.  30.  to  d.  away  disciples  after  them
Jam.  2.  6.  and  d.  you  before  the  judgment-seats

DRAW  back.

Ezek.  39.  +2.  I  will  d.  thee  back  with  a  hook
ELeb.  10. 38.  just  shall  live  by  faith,  but  if  any  d.  buck
39  we  are  not  of  them  who  d.  back  to  perdition
DRAW  near.

Judg  19  13.  let  us  d.  near  to  one  of  these  cities
1  Sam.  14.  36.  said  the  priest,  let  us  d.  near  to  Ged'
38.  Saul  said,  d.  ye  near  hither  all  the  chief
Psal.  73.  28.  it  is  good  for  me  to  d.  near  to  God
107. 18.  they  d.  near  to  the  gates  of  death
Isa  09.13.  this  people d.vear  with  their  lips  but  heart
45."~20.  d.  near,  ye  that  are  escaped  of  the  nations

57.  3.  d.  near  hither,  ye  sons  ot  the  sorceress
Jer.  30.  21.  and  I  will  cause  him  to  d.  near  to  me

46*  3.  order  the  buckler,  and  d.  near  to  battle
Ezek.  9.  1.  that  have  charge  over  the  city  to  d.  near
°2  4.  thou  hast  caused  thy  days  to  d.  near
Joel.  3.  9.  wake  up,  let  all  the  men  of  war  d.  near
Ileb  10.  22.  let  us  d.  near  with  a  true  heart,  m  full
DRAW  nigh.

Exod.  3  5.  he  said.  d.  not  nigh  hither,  put  off  shoes
Psal.  69. 18.  d.  nigh  to  my  soul,  and  redeem  it
119.  150.  they  d.  nigh  that  follow  mischief
Eccl.  12. 1.  nor  years  d.  nigh  when  thou  shalt  say
Isa.  5. 19.  let  the  counsel  of  the  holy  One  d.  nigh
Heb.  7.  19.  by  the  which  we  d.  nigh  unto  God
Jam.  4.  8.  d.  nigh  to  God,  he  will  d.  nigh  to  you
DRAW  out:

Exod.  12.  21.  d.  out  and  take  you  a  lamb,  and  knl
Lev  26.  33.  I  will  d.  out  a  sword  after  you  _

Judg.  3. 22.  he  could  not  d.  the  dagger  out  of  his .be! .  Mr
Job  41. 1.  canstthou  d.  out  leviathan  with  an  hook
Psal.  35.  3.  d.  out  also  the  spear,  and  stop  the  way
36. 1 10.  d.  out  at  length  thy  lovmg-kindness  _

85. 5.  wilt  thou  d.  out  thine  anger  to  all  generation?  r
Prov.  20.  5.  a  man  of  understanding  will  d.  it  out
Isa.  57.  4.  against  whom  do  ye  d.  out  me  tongue  .

58.  10.  if  thou  d.  out  thy  soul  to  the  hungry
Jer.  49.  20.  the  least  of  the  flock  d.  them  out,  50. 45.
Lam.  4. 3.  even  the  sea-monsters  d.  ovt  the  breast
Ezek.  5. 2.  a  third  part  shall  scatter  in  the  wind ,  and

I  will  d.  out  a  sword  after  them,  12.  |  12. 14.
Hag.  2.  16.  when  one  came  to  d.  out  fifty  vessels
John  2.  8.  d.  out  now,  and  bear  to  the  governor
DRAW  up.

Job  40. 23.  he  trusteth  that  he  can  d.  up  Jordan
DRAW  joined  with  water.

Gen.  °4. 11.  the  time  that  women  go  out  to  d.  w.  43.
13.  and  the  daughters  come  out  to  d.  water
20.  Rebekah  ran  again  to  the  well  to  d.  water
1  Sam.  9.  11.  found  young  maidens  going  to  d.waw
Ha.  12.  3.  with  ioy  shall  >re  d.  water  ot  wells  of  sal  .
Nah.  3. 14.  d.  thee  waters  for  the  siege,  tortily


I)  R  E


D  RE


D  R  I


io  'tn  4.  7-  cometh  a  woman  of  Samaria  to  d.  water
DRAWN.

f  ind.  2.  + 10.  and  she  called  his  name  d.  out
Sum.  22.  23.  the  ass  saw  the  angel,  and  his  sword  d.

in  his  hand,  31.  Josh.  5. 13.  1  Chron.  21. 10.
Dent.  21.  3.  an  heifer,  which  hath  not  d.  in  yoke
30. 17*  but  shalt  be  d.  away,  and  worship  gods
Josh.  8. 6.  till  we  have  d.  them  from  the  city
16.  they  were  d.  away  from  the  city,  Judg. (20.  31.
i6n*2.9-drank  of  that  which  young  men  have  d.
Jou  20.  25.  it  is  d.  and  cometh  out  of  the  body
Psal.  37- 14.  the  wicked  have  d.  out  the  sword
56. 21.  words  softer  than  oil  yet  were  they  d.  swords
Prov.  24.  11.  to  deliver  them  that  are  d.  to  death
Isa.  21.  15.  for  the3'  fled  from  the  d.  swords
28. 9.  and  them  that  are  d.  from  the  breasts
Jer.  22. 19.  d.  and  cast  forth  beyond  the  gates
31.  3.  with  loving-kindness  have  I  d.  thee.
lam.  2.  3.  he  hath  d.  back  his  right  hand  from
Ezek.  21.  5.  I  the  Lord  have  d.  my  sword,  28.

Acts  11.  10.  all  were  d.  up  again  to  heaven
Jam.  1.  14.  when  he  is  d.  away  of  his  own  lusts
DRAWER.

Deut.  29. 11.  from  the  hewer  of  wood  to  d.  of  water
DRAWERS.

Josh.  9. 21.  be  d.  of  water  to  the  congregation,  27.
23.  and  d.  of  water  for  the  house  of  my  God
DRAWETH.

Pent.  25. 11.  the  wife  of  the  one  d.  near  to  deliver
Judg.  19.  9.  now  the  day  d.  towards  evening
Job  24.  22.  he  d.  also  the  mighty  with  his  power
33.  22.  yea  his  soul  d.  near  to  the  grave
Psal.  10. 9.  catch  the  poor  when  he  d.  him  into  his  net
88. 3.  and  my  life  d.  nigh  unto  the  grave
Prov.  3. 1 13.  happy  man  that  d.  out  understanding
Isa.  26.  17-  that  d.  near  the  time  of  her  delivery
Ezck.  7-  12.  the  time  is  come,  the  day  d.  near
Amos  9. 1 13.  overtaketh  him  that  d.  forth  seed
Mat.  15.  8.  this  people  d.  nigh  with  their  lips
Luke  21. 8.  saying,  I  am  Christ,  and  the  time  d.  near

28.  then  loolc  up,  for  your  redemption  d.  nigh
Jam.  5.  8.  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  d.  nigh
DRAWING.

Judg.  5.  11.  are  delivered  in  the  places  of  d.  water

8.  f  10.  there  fell  120,000  every  one  d.  sword
John  6. 19.  they  see  Jesus  d.  nigh  to  the  ship

DREAD.

Gen.  9.  2.  the  d.  of  you  shall  be  on  every  beast
Exod.  15.  16.  fear  and  d.  shall  fall  upon  them
Dcut.  2.  25.  this  day  will  1  begin  to  put  the  d.  of
thee  and  fear  of  thee  upon  the  nations,  11.25.
Job  13.  11.  shall  not  his  d.  fall  upon  you?

21.  and  let  not  thy  d.  make  me  afraid
Isa.  8. 13.  let  him  be  your  fear,  let  him  be  your  d.
DREAD.

Deut.  1.  29.  I  said  to  you,  d.  not,  nor  be  afraid
1  Chr.  22. 13.  be  strong,  d.  not,  nor  be  dismayed
DREADFUL.

Gen.  28. 17.  Jacob  said,  how  d.  is  this  place  !

Job  15. 21.  a  d.  sound  in  his  ears,  in  prosperity
Ezck.  1.  18.  as  for  their  rings,  they  were  d.

Dan.  1. 7.  behold,  a  fourth  beast,  d.  and  terrible,  19.

9.  4.  and  I  said,  O  Lord,  the  great  and  d.  God
Hab.  1.  7.  the  Chaldeans  are  terrible  and  d.

Mai.  1.  14.  my  name  is  d.  among  the  heathen

4. 5.  the  coming  of  the  great  and  d.  day  of  the  Lord
DREAM.

By  this  word  are  to  be  understood  those  vain  images,
which  are  formed  in  the  imagination  while  we  are
asleep.  Job  20.  8.  He  shall  fly  away  as  a  dream,
and  shall  not  be  found ;  yea,  he  shall  be  chased
away  as  a  vision  of  the  night.  The  eastern  people,
and  in  particular  the  Jews,  had  a  very  great  re¬
gard  to  dreams  ;  they  observed  them,  and  applied  to
those  who  pretended  to  explain  them.  We  see  the
antiquity  of  this  custom  among  the  Egyptians,  in
the  history  of  Pharaoh’s  butler  and  baker,  and  in
Pharaoh  himself,  Gen.  40.  5,  8. 1  41.  15.  Ne¬
buchadnezzar  is  an  instance  of  the  same  among
the  Chaldeans,  Dan.  2.  1,  2,  3,  8(C.  God  had
very  expressly  forbidden  his  people  to  observe
dreams,  and  to  consult  those  who  took  upon  thqm
to  explain  them.  He  condemned  any  one  to  death
who  pretended  to  have§prophetic  dreams,  and  to
foretell  what  was  to  come,  though  what  he  should  so
foretell  were  to  come  to  pass,  if  after  this  he  would
engage  the  people  in  idolatry,  Deut.  13.  1,2,  3,
&c.  But  they  were  not  forbid,  when  they  thought
they  had  any  significative  dream,  to  address
themselves  to  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,  or  to  the
high-priest  dressed  in  his  epliod,  in  order  to  have  it
_  explained.

Wherefore  in  that  very  place,  wherein  God  for¬
bid  the  Hebrews  to  consult  diviners,  magicians,
and  interpreters  of  dreams ,  he  tells  them.  The
people  whose  land  ye  are  going  to  possess,
consult  soothsayers  and  diviners  ;  but  ye  have
not  been  so  taught.  The  Lord  shall  raise  up
from  the  midst  of  you,  and  among  your  bre¬
thren,  a  prophet  like  unto  me,  him  ye  shall
consult  and  hearken  to,  Deut.  18. 14,  15.  The
■Israelites  therefore  roere  to  address  themselves
to  God  and  his  prophets,  to  learn  the  explanation
of  their  dreams,  and  the  prediction  of  things
r- \tome"  Said,  a  little  before  the  battle  of
'  ulboa,  consulted  a  woman  with  a  familiar
spirit,  because  the  Lord  had  departed  from
him,  and  would  not  answer  him,  and  discover
the  success  of  this  war  to  him,  neither  by  dreams,
nor  by  Urim,  nor  by  prophets,  1  Sam.  28.

6,  15.

And  we  find  that  the  Lord  did  indeed  sometimes
discover  his  will  hi  dreams,  and  raised  up  per¬
sons  to  explain  them.  He  informed  Abimelech
in  a  dream,  that  Sarah  was  the  wife  of  Abra¬
ham,  Gen.  20.  3,  6.  He  shewed  Jacob  the
mysterious  ladder  in  a  dream,  Gen.  28.  12,
13,  14.  Joseph  was  favoured  very  early  with
prophetic  dreams,  the  signification  whereof  was
easily  discovered  by  Jacob  his  father,  Gen.  37.

Vi  l  P’  The  dreams  of  the  butler  and

tie  baker  belonging  to  the  king  of  Egypt,  were


explained  by  Joseph,  as  well  as  those  of  Pharaoh,
Gen.  40.  12,  18.  |41.25.  And  the  Lord  expressly
declares ,  that  he  would  sometimes  thus  reveal
himself,  Num.  12.  6.  If  there  be  a  prophet
among _you,  1  the  Lord  will  make  myself  known
unto  him  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unto  him
in  a  dream.  In  the  New  Testament,  we  read
that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  Joseph
m  a  dream  several  times.  Mat.  1.  20.  |  2.  19,  22.
And  it  is  among  the  signs  and  effects  of  the
promulgation  of  the  gospel,  prophetically  said ;
It  shall  come  to  pass,  that  1  will  pour  out  my
Spirit  upon  all  flesh  ;  your  sons  and  your  daugh¬
ters  shall  prophesy,  your  old  men  shall  dream
dreams  ;  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  Joel
2.  28.  The  prophet  Jeremiah  exclaims  against
the  false  prophets,  who  pretended  to  have  dreams,
Jer.  23.  25,  28,  29.  Dreams  are,  (I)  Natural,
Eccl.  5.  7.  (2)  Divine,  Gen.  28.  12.  (3)  Dia¬
bolical  and  sinful,  Deut.  13.  1,  2.  Jer.  23.  32.
Gen.  20.  3.  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  d.  6.

31.  10.  Jacob  saw  in  a  d.  the  rams  which  leaped

11.  the  angel  of  God  spake  to  Jacob  in  a  d.

^24.  God  came  to  Laban  the  Syrian  in  a  d.

37.  5.  Joseph  dreamed  a  d.  and  told  it,  9,  10.

40.  5.  butler  and  baker  dreamed  a  d.  both  of  them

41.  7.  awoke,  and  behold,  it  was  a  d.  1  Kings  3.15.

12.  did  interpret  to  each  man  according  to  his  d.
25.  Joseph  said,  thed.  of  Pharaoh  is  one,  26.

32.  for  that  the  d.  was  doubled  unto  Pharaoh
Num.  12.  6.  I  the  Lord  will  speak  to  him  in  a  d.
Judg.  7. 13.  a  man  that  told  a  d.  to  his  fellow

15.  when  Gideon  heard  the  telling  of  the  d.

1  Kings  3.  5.  the  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  in  a  d.
Job  20.  8.  he  shall  fly  away  as  a  d.  and  not  be  found
33.  15.  in  a  d.  he  openeth  the  ears  of  men
Psal.  73.  20.  as  a  d.  when  one  awaketh,  so,  O  Lord
Eccl.  5.  3.  for  a  d.  cometh  through  much  business
Isa.  29.  7.  nations  that  fight  against  Ariel  be  as  a  d.
Jer.  23.  28.  prophet  that  hath  a  d.  let  him  tell  a  d.
Dan.  2.  3.  my  spirit  was  troubled  to  know  the  d.

4.  tell  thy  servants  the  d.  ||  6.  if  ye  shew  the  d.

36.  this  is  the  d.  and  we  will  tell  the  interpretation

4.  19.  my  lord,  therf.  be  to  them  that  hate  thee
7.  1.  Daniel  had  a  d.  then  he  wrote  the  d.

Mat.  1. 20.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  Joseph
in  a  d.  saying,  fear  not  to  take  Mary,  2.  13,  19

2.  12.  and  being  warned  of  God  in  a  d.  22.

27. 19.  I  have  suffered  many  things  in  a  d.

DREAM,  Verb.

Psal.  126.  1.  we  were  like  them  that  d.

Joel  2.  28.  your  old  men  d.  dreams,  Acts  2.  17.

•  DREAMED.

Gen.  28.  12.  Jacob  d.  ||  37.  5.  Joseph  d.  a  dream

40.  5.  the  officers  d.  ||  41. 1.  Pharaoh  d.  15.

42.  9.  Joseph  remembered  the  dreams  which  he  d.
Jer.  23.  25.  the  prophets  said,  I  have  d.  I  have  d.

29.  8.  to  your  dreams  which  you  cause  to  bed.
Dan.  2.1.  Nebuchad.  d.  dreams,  spirit  was  troubled

3.  the  king  said  to  them,  1  have  d.  a  dream
DREAMER.

Gen.  37.  19.  they  said,  behold,  this  d.  cometh
Deut.  13.  1.  if  a  d.  of  dreams  arise  among  you
3.  thou  shalt  not  hearken  to  that  d.  of  dreams

5.  that  prophetord.  of  dreams  shall  beputtodeath
Jer.  29.  t  24.  thus  spake  to  Shemaiah  tne  d.

DREAMERS.

Jer.  27.  9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  diviners  nor  d.
Jude  8.  those  filthy  d.  defile  flesh,  despise  dominion
DREAMS.

Gen.  37.  8.  they  hated  Joseph  the  more  for  his  d.

20.  we  shall  see  what  will  become  of  his  d.

41.  12.  an  Hebrew,  and  he  interpreted  our  d.

42.  9.  Joseph  remembered  the  d.  he  dreamed

1  Sam.  28.  6.  the  Lord  answered  him  not  by  d.  15.
Job  7. 14.  then  thou  scarest  me  with  d.  and  terrifiest
Eccl.  5.  7.  in  multitude  of  d.  are  divers  vanities
Jer.  23.  27.  to  forget  my  name  with  their  d.

32.  I  am  against  them  that  prophesy  false  d.

27.  t  9.  nor  hearken  to  your  d.  29.  8.

Dan.  1. 17.  Daniel  had  understanding  in  d.  5.  12.
Zech.  10.  2.  the  diviners  have  told  false  d.

DREAMING.

Isa.  56.  f  10.  his  watchmen  are  d.  talking  in  sleep
DREAMETH.

Isa.  29.  8.  when  a  hungry  man  d.  a  thirsty  man  d.
DkEGS.

Psal.  75.  8.  the  d.  thereof  the  wicked  shall  drink  out
Isa.  51.  17.  thou  hast  drunken  the  d.  of  the  cup,  22.
DRESS.

Gen.  2. 15.  God  put  the  man  into  the  garden  to  d.  it
18. 7.  gave  it  to  a  young  man,  and  he  hasted  to  d.  it
Deut.  21.  1 12.  shave  her  head,  and  d.  her  nails

28.  39.  thou  shalt  plant  vineyards,  and  d.  them

2  Sam.  12.  4.  to  d.  of  his  own  for  the  way-faring  man
13.  5.  let  Tamar  d.  the  meat  in  my  sight

7.  go  to  Amnon’s  house,  and  d.  him  meat
1  Kings  17.  12.  that  I  may  d.  it  for  me  and  my  son
18. 23. 1  will  d.  the  other  bullock  and  lay  it  on  wood
25.  Elijah  said,  d.  it  first,  for  ye  are  many
DRESSED.

Gen.  18. 8.  Abraham  took  the  calf  which  he  had  d.
Lev. 1. 9-  all  that  is  d.  in  the  frying-pan  be  the  priest’s

1  Sam.  25.  18.  Abigail  took  five  sheep  ready  d.

2  Sam.  12. 4.  but  took  the  poor  man’s  lamb  and  d.  it
19-24.  Mephibosheth,  spnof  Saul,  had  not  d.  his  feet

1  Kings  18.  26.  they  d.  it,  and  called  on  Baal
Hab.  6.  7.  bringeth  herbs  for  them  by  whom  it  is  d.
DRESSER.

Luke  13.  7-  then  said  he  to  the  d.  of  the  vineyard
DRESSETH.

Exod.  30.  7-  when  he  d.  the  lamps,  he  shall  burn
DREW.

Gen.  24.  20.  Rebekah  d.  water  for  bis  camels,  45.

37. 28.  they  d.  and  lifted  up  Joseph  out  of  the  pit
38.  29.  it  came  to  pass,  Zarah  d.  back  his  hand
Exod.  2.  10.  because  I  d.  him  out  of  the  water
16.  Jethro's  daughters  came  and  d.  water

19.  an  Egyptian  d.  water  enough  for  us
Josh.  8.  26.  for  Joshua  d.  not  his  hand  back
Judg.  8. 10.  there  fell  120,000  men  that  d.  sword

20.  but  the  youth  d.  not  his  sword,  for  he  feared


Judg.  20. 2.  the  chief  of  Israel  400,000  that  d.  sword
15.  of  Benjamin  numbered  26,000  that  d.  sword
25.  ail  these  d.  the  sword.  35.

37.  liers  in  wait  d.  themselves  along,  and  smote
46.  fell  of  Benjamin  25,000  that  d.  the  sword
Ruth  4.  8.  buy  it  for  thee,  so  he  d.  off  his  shoe

1  Sam.  7. 6.  Israel  gathered  to  Mizpeh,  and  d.  water

17. 51.  David  d.  Goliath’s  sword  out  of  the  sheath

2  Sam.  22.  17.  he  sent  from  above,  he  took  me,  he

d.  me  out  of  many  waters,  Psal.  18. 16.

23. 16.  the  three  mighty  men  d.  water  of  the  well

of  Bethlehem,  1  Chron.  11. 18.
24. 9.  there  were  in  Israel  800,000  that  d.  the  sword

1  Kings  22. 34.  certain  man  d.  a  bow,  2  Clir.  18.  33.

2  Kings  3. 26.  king  of  Moab  took  700  that  d.  sword
9.  24.  Jehu  d.  a  bow  with  his  full  strength

1  Chr.  19.  16.  they  sent  and  d.  forth  the  Syrians
21.  5.  Israel  were  eleven  hundred  thousand  men

that  d.  sword,  Judah  was  470,000  that  d.  sword

2  Chron.  5.  9.  d.  out  staves  of  the  ark,  1  Kings  8. 8.
14.  8.  of  Benjamin  that  d.  bows,  280,000

Jer.  38.  13.  they  d.  up  Jeremiah  with  cords
Hos.  11.  4.  I  d.  them  with  cords  of  a  man
Mat.  13.48.  when  full,  they  d.  to  shore,  Mark 6. 53.

26. 51.  Peter  d.  his  sword,  Mark  14. 47.  John  18. 10.
Luke  23. 54.  the  preparation,' and  the  sabbath  d.  on
John  2.  9.  the  servants  which  d.  the  water  knew

21.  11.  and  d.  the  net  to  land  full  of  fishes
Acts  5.  37.  and  d.  away  much  people  after  him

14. 19.  stoned  Paul  and  d.  him  out  of  the  city

16. 19.  and  d.  Paul  and  Silas  into  the  market-place

27.  the  jailer  d.  his  sword,  and  would  have  killed

17.6.  they  d.  Jason  and  certain  brethren

19.  33.  they  d.  Alexander  out  of  the  multitude

21.  30.  they  took  Paul  and  d.  him  out  of  the  temple
Rev.  12.  4.  his  tail  d.  the  third  part  of  the  stars

DREW  near,  or  nigh.

Gen.  18. 23.  Abraham  d.  near  and  said,  wilt  thou
47.29.  the  time  d.  nigh  that  Israel  must  die
Exod.  14. 10.  when  Pharaoh  d.  niah  Israel  cried

20.  21.  Moses  d.  near  to  the  thick  darkness
Lev.  9.  5.  the  congregation  d.  near  before  the  Lord
Josh.  8. 11.  all  the  people  d.  nigh  before  Ai

1  Sam.  7. 10.  the  Philistines  d.  near  to  battle

9. 18.  Saul  d.  near  to  Samuel  in  the  gate

17. 16.  Goliath  d.  n.  morning  and  evening,  41, 48.
40.  David  d.  near  to  Goliath  the  Philistine

2  Sam.  10. 13.  Joab  d.  nigh  against  the  Syrians
18.  25.  Ahimaaz  came  apace  and  d.  near

Esth.  5. 2.  Esther  d.  near  and  touched  the  sceptre

9. 1.  the  king’s  decree  d.  near  to  be  put  in  execution
Zeph.  3. 2.  she  trusted  not,  she  d.  not  near  to  her  God
Mat.  21. 1.  and  when  they  d.  nigh  to  Jerusalem

34.  when  the  time  of  the  fruit  d.  near,  he  sent
Luke  15. 1.  then  d.  near  the  publicans  to  hear  him
25.  elder  son  came,  and  as  he  d.  nigh  to  the  house

22. 1.  now  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  d.  nigh
47.  and  Judas  d.  near  to  Jesus  to  kiss  him

24. 15.  Jesus  himself  d.  near,  and  went  with  them

28.  they  d.  nigh  to  the  village  where  they  went
Acts  7- 17«  when  the  time  of  the  promise  d.  nigh

31.  as  he  d.  near  to  behold  it,  the  voice  came

10.  9.  as  they  d.  nigh  to  the  city,  Peter  went

27.  27.  deemed  that  they  d.  near  some  country

DREWEST.

Lam.  3. 57.  thou  d.  near  in  the  day  that  I  called
Dried.  See  after  Dry.

.DRINK.

Gen.  21. 19..IIagar  filled  bottle,  and  gave  the  lad  d.
24.  14.  I  will  give  thy  camels  d.  also,  46.

Lev.  11. 34.  all  d.  that  may  be  drunk  in  such  vessel
Num.  20. 8.  thou  shalt  give  the  congregation  d.
Judg.  4. 19.  she  gave  Sisera  d.  and  covered  him
Ezra  3. 7.  they  gave  meat  and  d.  to  them  of  Zidon
Esth.  1. 7-  they  gave  them  d.  in  vessels  of  gold  *
Psal.  78. 15.  he  gave  them  d.  as  out  of  great  depths
102.  9-  for  I  have  mingled  inyrf.  with  weeping
104. 11.  the3r  gave  d.  to  every  beast  of  the  field
Isa.  32.  6.  he  will  cause  the  d.  of  the  thirsty  to  fail

43. 20.  rivers,  to  give  d.  to  my  people,  my  chosen
Dan.  1.  +  5.  the  king  appointed  them  of  his  d.  10.
Hos.  2. 5.  go  after  my  lovers  that  give  me  my  d.

4. 18.  their  d.  is  sour,  they  have  committed
Hab.  2. 15.  woe  to  him  that  giveth  his  neighbour  d.
Hag.  l,  6.  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  d.
Mat.  25. 35.  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  d.

37.  gave  thee  d.  ||  42.  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  d.
John  A.  9.  that  thou,  being  a  Jew,  askest  d.  of  me
6.55.myfleshismeatindeed,m3'  blood  isd.  indeed
Rom.  12. 20.  if  thine  enemy  thirst,  give  him  d.

14.  17.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  d.

1  Cor.  10.  4.  and  did  all  drink  the  same  spiritual  d.
Col.  2.  16.  let  no  man  judge  37ou  in  meat  or  in  d.
Strong  DRINK.

Lev.  10.  9.  do  not  drink  strong  d.  when  ye  go  in
Num.  6.  3.  Nazarite  separate  himself  from  strong  d.
Deut.  14. 26.  shalt  bestow  that  money  for  strong  d.

29. 6.  nor  have  ye  drunk  strong  d.  these  forty  years
Judg.  13. 4.  Manoah’s  wife  not  drink  strong  d.  7. 14.

1  Sam.  1. 15.  I  drunk  neither  wine  nor  strong  d.
Psal.  69.  tl2. 1  was  the  song  of  drinkers  of  strong  d.
Prov.  20. 1.  wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  d.  is  raging

31. 4.  it  is  not  for  princes  to  drink  strong  d.

6.  give  strong  d.  to  him  that  is  ready  to  perish
Isa.  5. 11.  that  they  may  follow  sir.  d.  woe  to  them

22.  woe  to  men  of  strength  to  mingle  strong  d.

24.  9.  strong  d.  shall  be  bitter  to  them  that  drink  it

28.  7.  but  they  also  have  erred  through  strong  d.
and  they  are  out  of  the  way  through  strong  d.

29.  9.  they  stagger,  but  not  with  strong  d.

56. 12.  come  ye,  we  will  fill  ourselves  with  strong  d.
Mic.  2. 11.  will  prophesy  to  thee  of  wine  and  sir.  d.
Luke  1. 15.  John  shall  not  drink  wine  nor  strong  d.

D  RI N  E-offering.

Gen.  35. 14.  Jacob  poured  a  d.  offering  on  the  pillar
Exod.  29.  40.  an  hm  of  oil,  and  the  fourth  part  ot
an  hin  of  wine  for  a  d.  offering,  Num.  15.  6.
41.  shalt  do  thereto  according  to  the  d.  offering

30.  9.  nor  shall  ye  pour  d.  offering  thereon
Lev.  23. 13.  and  the  d.  offering  shall  be  of  wine
Num.  6. 17-  the  priest  shall  ofter  also  his  d.  offering

15. 7.  for  a  d.  offer,  a  third  part  of  an  hin  of  wine

119


D  R  l


DRI


D  R  1


Num.15.  10.  bring  for  a  rf.  offering  half  an  bin  of  wine
24.  his  d.  offering  according  to  the  manner
oq  io  besides  the  continual  rf.  oft.  15,  A.  \&) .  io.

Isa.  57.6.  to  them  hast  thou  poured  a  rf.

65."  11.  that  furnish  the  rf.  offering  to  that  number
Joel  1.  9.  the  d.  off.  is  cut  off  from  the  house  of  E.

13.  the  d.  off.  is  withholden  from  house  of  God
2  14  if  he  will  return  and  leave  a  d.  offering
■  DRIN  K  offerings.  .

Lev.  23.  18.  they  shall  be„ fo/,a|^,'n3t10f|9
rf.  offerings ,  37.  Num.

Num.  28. 14.  their  rf.  shall  be  half  an  hin  of  wine
Deut.  32.  38.  and  drank  the  wine  of _their  rf.  offer.

1  ('hr  20  0  L  offered  with  their  d.ofj.  ~Lnr.  Jj.6o.

Ezra 7 flVT buy  speedily  meat-offerings  and  d.  off.

Psal  16  4.  their  d.  offer,  of  blood  will  I  not  offer
Jer.  7. 18.  and  to  pour  out  d.  (^mw^  to  otlier  gods
to  provoke  me  to  anger,  19. 13. 1  32.  JJ.

44. 17.pouroutrf.  off.  to  queen  of  heaven, IQ, 19,  ~5.

F"rh  °0  28.  there  they  poured  out  their  d.  ojr er.

45. 17-  prince’s  part  to^grve  rf.  offerings  m  the  feasts

To  drink  signifies  to  drink  liquor  moderately,  for
the  satisfying  of  thirst ,  Num.  6.  3.  Ruth  2.  9.
Sometimes  it  signifies  to  drink  Plentlful/^Jtbef
rally,  and  largely,  so  as  to  be  merry,  but  not  to  ex¬
cess  or  drunkenness  :  Thus  it  is  said,  Gen.  43.  34.
that  Joseph’s  brethren  drank  and  were  merry
with  him  :  The  Hebrew  word  here  used  ofton  sig¬
nifies  to  drink  to  excess ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  sup¬
posed  that  Jacob’s  sons  should  forget  themselves  so
far  upon  this  occasion,  as  to  be  wanting  m  that  de¬
cency  and  respect  which  they  owed  to  one  so  con¬
siderable  as  Joseph,  whom  as  yet  ^  knew 'not  to
be  their  brother.  And  in  John  2.  10. .  Lyery  man
at  the  beginning  doth  set  forth  good  wine ,  and
when  men  have  well  drunk,  then  that  which  is
worse;  but  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until
now.  It  is  incredible  that  our  Saviour  waited  ti  l
the  guests  were  drunk,  in  order  to  perform  the
miracle  which  he  wrought  at  Cana  in  their  favour.
And  in  1  Cor.  11.  21.  One  is  hungry,  and  another
is  drunken,  that  is.  One  wants ,  and  the  other
abounds  :  The  poor  Christians  were  hungry,
while  the  richer  sort  had  too  much,  and  jaied
liberally.  To  drink,  in  other  parts  oj  Scripture,
is  often  taken  in  an  odious  sense,  for  drinking  to
excess ,  for  being  intoxicated  with  liquor: Oen.

9.  21. Noah  drank  of  the  wine,  and  was  drunk¬
en,  and  he  was  uncovered  in  his  tent.  .Lots
two  daughters  made  their  father  drink  to
and  both  proved  with  child  by  him,  (jen.  19.

33  &c .

Our’ Saviour  says  in  the  gospel,  \ f  any  man  thirst,
let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink,  John  7.  37 .  1J
any  man  have  a  desire  after  spiritual  blessings,
let  him  come  unto  me  by  faith,  and  he  shall  par¬
take  largely  of  my  refreshing  grace.  And  he  tells
the  woman  of  Samaria,  John  4.  14.  Whosoever
drinketh  of  the  water  that  1  shall  give  him  shall
never  thirst.  W hosoever  partakes  of  the  graces
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  I  have  to  bestow,  and
do  offer  in  the  gospel,  he  shall  never  desire  and
pursue  worldly  things  as  his  chief  happiness.  It
is  said,  Job  15.  16.  That  the  wicked  drinketh
iniquity  like  water.  Besides  his  natural  prone¬
ness  to  sin,  he  has  contracted  habits  and  customs
of  sinning,  so  that  he  sinneth  as  readily,  greedily,
and  delightfully ,  as  men  used  to  drink  up  uJater,
especially  in  those  hot  countries .  And  h, linu
says.  Job  34.  7-  What  man  is  like  Job ,  who
drinketh  up  scorning  like  water  li  ho  with
greediness  and  delight  breaks  forth  into  scornful
and  contemptuous  expressions,  not  only  against
his  friends,  but  in  some  sort  even  against  Cod
himself,  whom  he  insolently  charges  with  rigorous
dealing.  Rab-shakeh  says,  that  Hezekiah  de¬
signed  to  persuade  the  Jew's  into  a  resolution  of
holding  out  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  that  so  he
might  reduce  them  to  the  necessity  of  drinking  their
own  urine;  that  is,  of  exposing  themselves  to  the
utmost  extremities  of  a  siege,  2  Kings  18.  2J.
Solomon  exhorts  his  disciple,  Prov.  5.  15.  to
drink  water  out  of  his  own  cistern  ;  that  is,
to  content  himself  with  the  lawful  pleasures  of
marriage,  without  thinking  on  that  which  was
prohibited  by  the  law.  To  eat  and  drink  is  used
in  Eccl.  5.  18.  to  signify  people's  enjoying  them¬
selves,  using  the  good  things  of  this  lije  liberally
and  decently  :  and  not  with  penuriousness,  which
is  base  and  dishonourable  :  It  is  good  and  comely
for  one  to  eat  and  drink,  and  to  enjoy  the  good
of  all  his  labour.  It  is  said  in  Mat.  11.  18,  19.
John  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking ;  that  is,
he  did  not  live  in  the  common  and  ordinary
manner,  as  other  men  did,  but  used  a  mean
and  peculiar  diet :  but  the  Son  of  man  came  eat¬
ing  and  drinking  ;  using  such  a  diet  as  other
men  did,  and  conversing  freely  and  sociably  with
all  sorts.  ,  T

Sennacherib  says  in  2  Kings  19.  24.  Isa.  37  -  25.

I  have  digged  and  drunk  strange  waters,  and
with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  1  dried  up  all
the  rivers  of  besieged  places.  1  have  brought
water  to  places  where  there  was  none  before,  to
supply  my  army .'  and  1  have  drunk  up  the  water
belonging  to  the  people  through  whose  country
I  have  marched  my  armies  j  I  have  exhausted
their  wells  and  their  cisterns.  The  prophet  Jere¬
miah  upbraids  the  Jews  with  having  had  re¬
course  to  Egypt  for  muddy  water,  to  drink  ;  and
with  having  addressed  themselves  to  the  Assyri¬
ans,  that  they  might  drink  the  water  of  then
river  ;  that  is,  with  having  sought  for  the  water
of  Kile  in  Egypt,  and  the  water  of  Euphrates  in
Assyria ;  thereby  describing  the  assistance  of
these  two  people,  which  the  Jews  sought  for,  Jer.
2.  i8.  .  .  .  .  ,  ,  ,

To  drink  blood,  signifies  to  be  satiated  with  slaugh¬
ter,  Ezek.  39.  18.  Ye  shall  drink  the  blood  of
the  princes  of  the  earth ;  ye  shall  put  them  to
120


death.  David  refused  to  drink  the  water  which
the  three  valiant  men  of  his  army  went  and  pro¬
cured  for  him  at  the  hazard  of  their  lives  ;  say¬
ing,  God  forbid  that  1  should  drink  the  blood
of  these  men  ;  but  he  poured  it  out  unto  the
Lord,  as  a  kind  of  drink-offering,  and  acknow-
ledgment  of  God's  goodness  in  preserving  the  lives
of  his  captains  in  so  dangerous  an  enterprise,  2
Sam.  23.  16,  17.  To  buy  water  to  drink,  and
to  drink  water  by  measure,  denote  the  utmost
scarcity  and  extreme  desolation,  Lam.  5.  4.  Ezek.

4.  11.  .  .  ,

God's  judgments  are  often  in  scnptuie  expressed
under  the  notion  of  a  cup  of  strong  and  intoxi¬
cating  drink  :  and  the  suffering  or  encliiring  of
these,  is  set  out  under  the  notion  of  drinking  such
a  cup.  See  Cup.  In  the  hand  of  the  Lord
there  is  a  cup,  and  the  wine  is  red,  the  dregs
thereof  all  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall  drink
them,  Psal.  75.  8.  Thou  hast  made  us  to  drink
the  wine  of  astonishment,  Psal.  60.3.  lhou
hast  filled  us  with  horror  and  astonishment ,  as
if  we  had  drunk  some  poisonous  wine.  Stand  up,

O  Jerusalem,  which  hast  drunk  at  the  hand  of
the  Lord  the  cup  of  his  fury  :  Hear  now  this,
thou  afflicted  and  drunken,  but  not  with  wine,
Isa.  51.  17,  21.  1  will  till  the  kings,  the  priests,
the  prophets,  and  all  the  inhabitants  ol  Jerusa¬
lem ,  with  drunkenness,  Jer .  13.  13.  that  ts,  with
the  wine  of  terror  and  astonishment,  by  season
of  those  grievous  calamities  that  shall  come  upon
them,  and  which  will  put  them  to  their  wit  s
end.  And  in  Ezek.  23.  33.  Thou  shalt  be  filled
with  drunkenness  and  sorrow.  See  Obad.  16.
Rev.  14.  10.  .  ,  ,  ,  .

Drink  is  put  for,  (1)  The  blood  of  Christ,  John  6.
55.  (2)  Spiritual  delight.  Cant.  8.  2.  (3)  Af¬
flictions,  Mat.  20.  23.  (4)  The  wrath  of  God,

Job  21.  20.  Rev.  14.  10.  (5)  Greedy  desire,  Job

Gen.  24.  14.  let  me  d.  17, 45.  II 18.  d.  my  lord,  46.
30.  38.  he  set  rods  when  the  flocks  came  to  rf.

Exod.  15.  24.  people  murmured,  what  shall  werf.
32.  20.  Moses  made  the  children  of  Israel  d.  or  it
Lev.  10.  9.  do  not  d.  wine  nor  strong  rf.  lest  ye  die
Num.  6.  3.  neither  shall  he  d.  liquor  of  grapes
Judg.  7. 5.  that  boweth  down  on  his  knees  to  rf.

Ruth  2.  9.  when  athirst,  go  to  the  vessels  and  rf.

2  Sam.  23.  16.  three  mighty  men  drew  water,  but
David  would  not  d.  thereof,  17-1  Chr.  11. 18, 19-
1  Kings  17.  4.  that  thou  shalt  d.  of  the  brook
Esth.  3.  15.  the  king  and  Haman  sat  down  to/.

7. 1 1.  the  king  and  Haman  came  to  d.  with  Esther
Job  21.  20.  he  shall  d.  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty
Ps.  36.  8.  make  them  d.  of  the  river  of  thy  pleasures
60.  3.  made  us  to  d.  the  wine  of  astonishment
69.  21.  in  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  d.

75.  8.  the  wicked  of  the  earth  shall  d.  them
78.  44.  their  rivers  into  blood,  they  could  not  <2.
80.  5.  thou  gavest  them  tears  to  d.

110. 7.  he  shall  d.  of  the  brook  in  the  way
Prov.  4. 17.  for  they  d.  the  wine  of  violence
31.  5.  lest  they  d.  and  forget  the  law,  and  pervert
7.  let  him  d.  and  forget  his  poverty
Cant.  5. 1.  d.  yea,  d.  abundantly,  O  beloved
Isa.  24.  9.  strong  drink  bitter  to  them  that  d.  it
51.  22.  thou  shalt  no  more  d.  it  again
62.  9.  they  shall  d.  it  in  the  courts  of  my  holiness
65. 13.  my  servants  shall  d.  but  ye  shall  be  thirsty
Jer.  16.  7-  rior  give  the  cup  of  consolation  to  d.

23.  15.  and  make  them  d.  the  water  of  gall
25.  15.  cause  nations,  to  whom  1  send  thee,  to  d.  it
16.  and  they  shall  d.  and  be  moved,  and  be  mad


17.  then  1  took  the  cup,  and  made  all  nations  to  rf.
27.  d.  ye,  and  be  drunken,  and  spue,  and  tali


28.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  ye  shall  certainly  rf.

35. 14.  to  this  day  they  d.  none,  but  obey  father  s
49. 12.  they  whose  judgment  was  not  to  rf.  of  the
cup,  shalt  not  go  unpunished,  shalt  surely  rf.  of  it
Ezek.  4. 11.  d.  by  measure,  from  time  to  time  shalt  d.
23.  32.  thou  shalt  d.  of  sister’s  cup  deep  and  large
34.  19.  they  d.  that  which  ye  have  fouled
Dan.  5.  2.  that  his  concubines  might  cl.  therein
Amos  4.  1.  say  to  their  masters,  bring,  and  let  us  d.
Obad.  16.  so  shall  all  the  heathen  d.  continually,
yea,  they  shall  d.  and  shall  swallow  down
Ilab.  2. 16.  d.  thou,  let  thy  foreskin  be  uncovered
Hag.  1.  6.  yerf.  but  ye  are  not  filled  with  drink
Zech.  9. 15.  and  they  shall  rf.  and  make  a  noise
Mat.  10.  42.  whoso  shall  give  to  d.  to  one  of  these
20. 22.  are  ye  able  to  d.  or  the  cup  that  I  shall  d .  or,
and  be  baptized  with  the  baptism  ?  Mark  10.  38
23.  ye  shall  d.  indeed  of  my  cup,  Mark  10.  39


j  c  oiion  c*'.  iiiuv/Vivi  ‘w7  r  ’  .  iif"  *x

26.  27.  he  gave  them  the  cup,  saying,  rf.  ye  all  ol  it
29.  I  say,  I  will  not  d.  henceforth  till  that  day
,  f  ,  ii’  . . :.u _  or.  T„loOO  i«


when  I  d.  it  new  with  you,  Mark  14. 25.  Luke  22. 18.
42.  if  cup  maynot  pass  except  Id.  thy  will  be  done
27  .  34.  gave  him  vinegar  to  d.  mingled  with  gall
48.  one  filled  a  spunge  with  vinegar,  and  put  it
on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to  d.  Mark  15.  36.
Mark  16.  18.  if  they  d.  any  deadly  thing,  not  hurt
John  4. 10.  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  give  me  to  rf.
7 .  37.  if  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  to  me  and  rf.


<  .  04  •  ell  IJ  LlJil  .Jt.,  ******  ^  ,  111  .  .  n

18. 11.  cup  my  father  hath  given  me,  shall  1  note./
1  Cor.  10.  4.  and  did  all  d.  the  same  spiritual  drink

.  _ X  3  _ ..  T  Ar-rl  onH  rvf  rlovi  I C


21.  ye  cannot  d.  the  cup  of  the  Lord  and. of  devils
]  1.  25.  this  do,  as  oft  as  ye  d.  in  remembrance  of  me
12.  13.  and  have  been  all  made  to  d.  into  one  spirit
DRINK  water, or  waters.  .

Gen.  24. 43.  give  me  a  little  water  of  thy  pitcher  to  d.
Exod.  7.  18.  shall  lothe  to  d.  water  of  the  river,  21.
24.  digged  round  about  the  river  for  water  to  rf.
15.  23.  they  could  not  d.  of  the  waters  of  Marah
17.  1.  there  was  no  water  for  the  people  to  rf.

6.  shall  come  water  out  of  it,  that  they  may  a.
Num.  5. 24.  cause  woman  to  d.  bitter  water,  2b,  27
20.  5.  neither  is  there  any  water  to  rf.  33. 14.

17.  nor  will  we  rf.  of  the  water  of  the  wells,  A  .2*.
Deut.l.  6.  buy  water  for  money,  that  ye  may  rf.  >8.
Judg.  4. 19.  give  me  a  little,  water  to  d.  1  am  thirsty
7.  6.  the  rest  bowed  upon  their  knees  to  d.  water
1  Sam.  30. 11.  and  they  made  the  Egyptian  d.  water


2  Sam.  23. 15.  David  said,  give  me  to  d.  of  the  water
of  the  well  of  Betn-lehem,  1  Chron.  11. 17.

1  Kings  13.8.  nor  will  1  eat  bread,  nor  d.  water,  9.
17. 10.  fetch  a  little  water  in  a  vessel  that  1  may  d.

2  Kings  3. 17.  valley  tilled  with  water  that  ye  may  rf.
18.  31.  d.  every  one  waters  of  his  cistern,  Isa.  36. 16.

Job  22.  7-  thou  hast  not  given  water  to  weary  to  d.
Prov.  5.  15.  d.  waters  out  of  thine  own  cistern
25  21.  if  thy  enemy  be  thirsty,  give  him  water  to  d.
Jer.  2.  18.  to  d.  the  waters  of  Sihor,  waters  ot  river
8  14.  Lord  hath  given  us  water  of  gall  to  d.  9.15.
Ezek.  4.  11.  thou  shalt  d.  water  by  measure,  16.

12. 18.  son  of  man,  d.  thy  water  with  trembling

19.  they  shall  d.  their  water  with  astonishment
31.  14.  all  their  trees  that  d.  water,  16.

Dan.  1.  12.  give  us  pulse  to  eat,  and  water  tp  d.
Amos  4. 8.  wandered  to  d.  water ,  were  not  satisfied
Jonah  3.  7.  let  them  not  feed  nor  d.  water
Mark  9.  41.  who  shall  give  you  a  cup  of  water  to  d.
John  4.  7.  Jesus  saith  to  her,  give  me  water  to  d.

1  Tim.  5. 23.  d.  no  longer  water,  but  use  a  little  wine

DRINK,  with  wine.

Gen.  19.  32.  let  us  make  our  father  d.  wine,  34.

33.  and  they  made  their  father  d.%  wine,  35.

Lev.  10. 9.  nor  d.  wine  when  ye  go  into  tabernacle
Num.  6.  3.  the  N azarite  shall  d.  no  vinegar  ot  wine

20.  after  that  the  N  azarite  may  d.  wine

Deut. 28.39.  thou  shalt  plant  v  iney  ards,  but  shalt  not
d.  of  the  wine,  nor  gather  the  grapes,  Amos  5. 11.
Judg.  13.  4.  Manoah’s  wife  might  d.  no  wine,  7,14.

2  Sam.  16.  *2.  the  a'i«e,that  such  as  be  faint  may  d.
Psal.  60. 3.  hast  made  us  d.  the  wine  ol.  astonishment
Prov.  4.  17.  for  they  d.  the  wine  of  violence

9.  5.  and  d.  of  the  wine  which  I  have  mingled
31.  4.  it  is  not  for  kings,  O  Lemuel,  to  d.  wine
Eccl.  9.  7.  go  and  d.  thy  wine  with  a  merry  heart
Cant.  8. 2.  I  would  cause  thee  to  d.  of  spiced  wine
Isa.  5. 22.  woe  to  them  that  are  mighty  to  d.  wine
24.  9.  they  shall  not  d.  wine  with  a  song
62.  8.  the  sons  of  the  stranger  shall  not  d.  thy  wine
Jer.  35.  2.  go  and  give  the  Rechabites  wine  to  d.

6.  we  will  d.  no  wine,  ye  shall  d.  no  wine  tor  ever
Ezek.  44.  21.  neither  shall  any  priest  d.  wine  when
Dan.  1.  16.  took  away  the  wine  that  they  should  i.
Joel  3.  3.  they  have  sold  a  girl  for  wine  to  d.

Amos  2.  8.  they  d.  the  wine  of  the  condemned
12.  but  ye  gave  the  Nazarites  wine  to  d.

6.  6.  that  d.  wine  in  bowls,  and  anoint  themselves
9.  14.  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  d.  wine  thereof
Mic.  6.  15.  but  shall  not  d.  wine,  Zeph.  1.  13.
A/«/Tl5.23.gave  him  to  d.  wine,  mingled  with  myrrh
Luke  1. 15.  John  shall  d.  neither  wine  nor  strong
Rom.  14.  21.  it  is  not  good  to  eat  flesh  or  d.wine
Rev.  14. 8.  she  made  all  nations  d.  ot  the  wine
10.  same  shall  d.  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  ot  Goa
DRINKERS.

Psal.  69. 1 12.  the  song  of  the  d.  of  strong  drink
Joel  1. 5.  awake,  and  howl,  all  ye  d.  ot  wine
DRINKS.  ,  ,

Heb.  9.  10.  which  stood  only  in  meats,  and  d  am

divers  washing;

DRINKETH.

Gen.  44.  5.  is  not  this  it  in  which  my  lord  d.J
Deut.  11. 11.  the  land  d.  water  of  the  rain  ot  heave*
Job  6.  4.  the  poison  whereof  d.  up  my  spirit
15.  16.  how  filthy  is  man,  who  d.  lmq.  like  water
34.  7.  like  Job  who  d.  up  scorning  like  water
40.  23.  behold,  he  d.  up  a  river,  and  hasteth  not
Prov.  26.  6.  he  that  sendeth  by  a  fool  d.  damage
Lsa.  29.  8.  he  d.  but  he  awaketh,  and  he  is.  taint
44.  12.  the  smith,  he  d.  no  water  and  is  faint
Mark  2.  16.  how  is  it  that  lie  d.  with  publicans?
John  4.  13.  whosoever  d.  of  this  water  shall  thirst
14.  whosoever  d.  of  water  that  1  shall  give  him
6.  54.  whoso  d.  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life
56.  that  d.  my  blood  dwelleth  in  me,  and  1  in  nir
1  Cor.  11.  29.  he  that  d.  unworthily  d.  damnation
Ileb.  6.  7.  for  the  earth  which  d.  in  the  rain
DRINKING.

Gen.  24.  19.  water  for  camels  till  they  have  done  1

22.  as  camels  had  done  d.  the  man  took  an  ear-nn
Ruth  3. 3.  till  Boaz  have  done  eating  and  d.

1  Sam.  30. 16.  they  were  eating  and  d.  and  dancin
1  Kings  4.  20.  Judah  and  Israel  were  many,  rf.

10.  21.  Solomon’s  d.  vessels  of  add,  2  Chr.  9.  20
16.  9.  Elah  was  d.  ||  20. 12.  Benhadad  was  d.  16.
1  Chron.  12. 39.  with  David  three  days  eating  and .
Esth.  1.8.  d.  was  according  to  the  law,  none  compe
Job  1.  13.  his  sons  and  daughters  were  d.  18.  .
Isa.  22.  13.  and  behold,  eating  flesh,  and  d.  wine
Mat.  11.  18.  for  John  came  neither  eating  nor
and  they  say,  he  hath  a  devil,  lrnke  7 .  3
19.  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  d.  Luke  7 •  34-
24.  38.  they  were  eating  and  d.  till  the  flood  canii
Luke  10.  7.  eating  and  d.  such  things  as  they  giv>
Col.  2.  1 16.  let  no  man  judge  you  tor  eating  or  a
DRIVE.

Exod.  6. 1.  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  d.  them  ou
23.28.  will  send  hornets,  which  shall  d._ out  llivi

29.  1  will  not  d.  them  out  before  thee  in  one  ye

30.  by  little  and  little  I  will  d.  them  out  before

31.  and  thou  shalt  d.  them  out  before  thee
33.  2.  1  will  if.  out  the  Oanaanite,  the  Amorife'

34. 11.  behold  l  d.  out  before  thee  the  Amonte
Num.  22.  6.  that  I  may  if.  them  outot  the  lana

11.  I  may  be  able  to  overcome  and  d.  them  out
33.  52.  then  shall  y erf. out  all  the  inhabitants
55.  hut  if  ye  will  not  rf.  out  the  inhabitants
Deut.  4.  38.  to  rf.  out  nations  from  before  tb<
greater  and  mightier  than  thee,  9.  4,  5.  Josh.  3.
<).  3.  so  shalt  thou  rf.  them  out  and  destroy  then
11.  23.  then  will  the  Lord  rf.  out  these  nations
18  12.  Lord  thy  God  doth  rf.  them  out  before  the
Josh.  13.  6.  them  will  1  rf.  out  from  before  Israt

14. 12.  then  I  shall  be  able  to  rf.  them  out,  as  L.  Sc
15.63.  the  children  of  Judah  could  notrf.  them  c
17  12.  the  children  of  Manasseh  could  not  rf.  0,

13.  hut  did  not  utterly  rf.  them  out ,  Judg.  1-  2
18.  for  thou  shalt  rf.  out  the  Canaanites  .

23.  5.  the  Lord  shall  rf.  them  out  of  your  sight
13.  the  Lord  will  no  more  rf.  out,  Judg.  2.  3,  2

JvdgA.19.  Judah  could  not  rf.  inhabitants  or  moi


D  II  O


1)  RU


DRY


Judy.  1.  21.  Beniamin  did  not  d.  out  the  .Tebusites

27.  Manasseh  rf.Jl  29.  Ephraim  ||  30.  Zebulun
31.  Asher  ||  33.  Naphtali  did  not  d.  out
11. 24.  whoni  the  Lord  our  God  shall  d.  out
l  Kings  4.  24.  d.  go  forward,  slack  not  riding  for  me
!  2  Chron.  20.  7.  who  didst  d.  out  the  inhabitants
Joh  18. 11.  terrors  shall  make  afraid,  and  d.  to  feet
+  18.  he  shall  d.  him  from  lijrht  into  darkness

24.  3.  they  d.  away  the  ass  of  the  fatherless
Psal.  44.  2.  how  thou  didst  d.  out  the  heathen
68.  2.  as  smoke  is  driven  away,  so  d.  them  away
Prov.  22.  15.  but  rod  of  correction  shall  d.  it  away
Isa.  22.  19-  and  I  will  d.  thee  from  thy  station
Jer.  24.  9.  to  be  a  curse  whither  1  shall  d.  them
27.  10.  that  I  should  d.  you  out,  and  ye  perish,  15.
46.  15.  they  stood  not,  because  Lord  did  d.  them
Etek.  4. 13.  among  Gentiles,  whither  I  will  d.  them
Dan.  4.  25.  and  they  shall  d.  thee  from  men,  32.
Hos.  9. 15.  1  will  d.  them  out  of  my  house
Joel  2.  20. 1  will  d.  the  northern  army  into  a  land
Zeph.  2.  4.  they  shall  d.  out  Ashdod  at  noon-day
AetsQj.  15.  the  ship  was  caught,  we  let  her  d.

Gal.  5.  t7.  ye  did  run  well,  who  did  d.  you  back  ?
DRIVEN.

Gen.  4.  14.  behold,  thou  hast  d.  me  out  this  day
Exod.  10. 11.  they  were  d.  from  Pharaoh’s  presence

22. 10.  the  beast  be  d.  away ,  no  man  seeing  it
Lev.  26.  t  36.  sound  of  a  d.  leaf  shall  chase  them
Num.  32. 21.  till  he  have  d.  out  enemies  before  him
Deut.  4. 19.  lest  thou  shouldest  be  d.  to  worship  them

30. 1.  whither  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  d.  thee
4.  if  any  of  them  be  d.  out  to  the  utmost  parts

Josh.  23.  9.  the  Lord  hath  d.  out  great  nations
1  Sam.  26.  19.  for  they  have  d.  me  out  this  day
Job  6.  13.  and  is  wisdom  d.  quite  from  me?

13.  25.  wilt  thou  break  a  leatV.  to  and  fro  ?

18. 18.  he  shall  be  d.  from  light  into  darkness
30. 5.  they  were  d.  forth  from  among  men
Psal.  40. 14.  let  them  be  d.  backward  that  wish  evil

68. 2.  as  smoke  is  d.  away,  so  drive  them  away
114.  3.  sea  saw  it  and  fled,  Jordan  was  d.  back,  5.

Prov.  14.  32.  wicked  is  d.  away  in  his  wickedness
Eccl.  3.  f  15.  God  requireth  that  which  is  d.  away
Isa.  8.  22.  and  they  snail  be  d.  to  darkness
19.  7.  every  thing  sown  by  the  brooks  be  d.  away
41.  2.  he  gave  them  as  d.  stubble  to  his  bow
Jer,  8.  3.  who  remain  in  all  the  places  whither  I
have  d.  them,  23.  3, 8.  I  29.  14,  18.  |  32.  37.
16. 15.  from  all  the  lands  whither  he  had  d.  them
23.  2.  ye  have  d.  them  away,  and  have  not  visited
12.  they  shall  be  d.  on  and  fall  therein
40. 12.  out  of  all  places  whither  they  were  d.  43. 5.
46. 28.  a  full  end  of  nations  whither  I  have  d.  thee

49.  5.  ye  shall  be  d.  out  every  man  right  forth

50. 17.  Israel,  the  lions  have  d.  him  away
Ezek.  31. 11.  1  have  d.  him  out  for  his  wickedness
34.  4.  nor  brought  again,  which  was  d.  away,  16.
Dan.  4. 33.  and  lie  was  d.  from  men,  5.  21.

9.  7-  thro’  all  countries  whither  thou  hast  d.  them
Hos.  13. 3.  as  the  chaff' that  is  d.  with  the  whirlwind
Mic.  4.  6. 1  will  gather  her  that  was  d.  Zeph .  3. 19.
Luke  8.  29.  be  was  d.  of  the  devil  into  the  wilderness
Acts  27.  17-  they  strakesail,  and  so  were  d.

27.  we  were  d.  up  and  down  in  Adria  at  midnight
Jam.  1.  6.  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea  d.  with  the  wind
3. 4.  the  ships  though  great  are  d.  of  fierce  winds
DRIVER.

1  Kings  22-  34.  Ahab  said  to  the  d.  of  his  chariot
lob  39.  7.  nor  regardeth  the  crying  of  the  d.

DRIVETH.

2  Kings  9. 20.  driving  is  like  Jehu,  for  he  d.  furiously
Psal.  1. 4.  ungodly  like  chaff  which  wind  d.  away
Prov.  25.  23.  the  north  wind  d.  away  rain

Mark  1. 12.  the  spirit  d.  him  into  the  wilderness
DRIVING.

Judg.  2.  23.  Lord  left  without  d.  them  out  hastily
2  Kings  9.  20.  and  the  d.  is  like  the  d.  of  Jehu
1  Chron.  17. 21  by  d.  out  nations  before  thy  people
DROMEDARY

Is  a  sort  of  camel ;  It  is  called  Dromedary  from
the  Greek,  bpeiuo,  I  run,  by  reason  of  its  run¬
ning  very  swiftly.  Dromedaries  are  smaller  than
common  camels,  slenderer,  and  more  nimble.
Upon  their  backs  they  have  a  kind  of  natural
saddle,  which  is  composed  of  a  great  deal  of  hair,
that  stands  up,  and  forms  as  it  were  a  large  bunch.
In  eastern  countries,  when  persons  would  go  any
where  with  speed,  they  generally  make  use  of  Dro¬
medaries.  It  is  said  that  they  can  go  an  hundred
miles  in  a  day  with  them  ;  nay,  some  affirm,  that
there  are  some  which  will  travel  an  hundred  and
—fifty  miles  in  a  day.

There  are  two  sorts  of  dromedaries,  one  of  a  larger
kind,  with  two  bunches  upon  its  back ;  the  other
lesser,  with  only  one.  Both  are  very  common  in
the  western  parts  of  Asia,  such  as  Syria,  and
Arabia.  That  which  hath  but  one  bunch  upon  its
back,  is  more  commonly  called  camel;  the  other
u  named  dromedary.  They  are  both  capable  of
very  great  fatigues  ;  their  hair  is  soft,  and  shorn,
but  about  the  middle  of  their  backs,  camels  have
*  little  eminence  covered  with  hair,  a  foot  high
upon  their  bunch;  and  dromedaries  have  two
bunches,  and  two  eminences  of  hair,  which,  how-
er«r,  are  very  small;  and  if  it  be  rightly  con-
std ered,  dromedaries  and  camels  are  no  more
bunch-backed  than  other  animals.  They  have  no
J angers  and  fore-teeth  ;  they  have  no  horn  upon
then  feet,  for  they  are  only  covered  with  a  fleshy
skin.  It  ts  said,  that  when  they  drink,  they  disturb
tne  water  with  their  feet :  some  believe  they  do  this
to  make  the  water  heavier,  that  it  may  continue
longer  tn  their  stomachs.  They  are  said  to  drink
?  great  deal,  and  keep  it  a  long  time,  against  their
btfing  thirsty  afterward* ;  nay,  some  will  have  it
that  travellers  upon  pressing  necessities  open  their
s.cmachs,  take  out  ths  water  contained  in  them,
and  satisfy  their  thirst  with  it :  The  stomach  of
ff  crcatyres  is  composed  of  four  ventricles,  and
1  tne  second  there  art  several  mouths  which  open
a  passage  into  about  twenty  cavities  made  like  sacks,
‘at  serve  them  for  conservatories  of  water.


Jer.  2.  23.  thou  art  a  swift  d.  traversing  her  ways
DROMEDARIES.

1  Kings  4.  28.  they  brought  barley  and  straw  for  d.
Fsth.  8.  10.  and  sent  letters  by  riders  on  young  d.
Isa.  60.  6.  d.  of  Midian  and  Ephah  shall  cover  thee
DROP.

Isa.  40.  15.  the  nations  are  as  the  d.  of  a  bucket
DROP,  Verb.

Deut.  32.  2.  my  doctrine  shall  d.  as  the  rain
33. 25?.  also  heavens  shall  d.  down  dew,  Prov.  3. 20.
Job  36.  28.  which  clouds  do  d.  and  distil  upon  man
Psal.  65. 11.  crownest  year,  and  thy  paths  d.  fatness
12.  they  d.  on  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness
Prov.  5.  3.  lips  of  a  strange  woman  d.  as  honey¬
comb

Cant.  4. 1 1.  thy  lips,  my  spouse,  d.  as  the  honey -comb
Isa.  45.  8.  d.  down,  ye  heavens,  from  above
Ezek. 20. 46.  d.  thy  word  toward  south,  and  prophesy

21.2.  d.  thy  word  toward  holy  places  and  prophesy
Joel 3.  18.  the  mountains  shall  d.  down  new  wine,
and  the  hills  shall  flow  with  milk,  Amos  9.  13.
Amos  7. 16.  d.  not  thy  word  against  the  house  of  Isaac
Mic.  2.  f  6.  d.  not,  say  they  to  them  that  prophesy
DROPPED.

Judg.  5.  4.  the  heavens  d.  the  clouds  also  d.  water

1  Aam.  14. 26.  were  come  into  wood,  behold  honey  d.

2  Sam.  21. 10.  till  water  d.  on  them  out  of  heaven
Job  29.  22.  and  my  speech  d.  upon  them

Psal.  68. 8.  the  heavens  also  d.  at  the  presence  ot  God
Cant.  5.  5.  my  hands  d.  with  myrrn,  and  fingers
DROPPETIl.

Psal.  119.  +  28.  my  soul  d.  for  heaviness,  strengthen
Eccl.  10.  18.  through  idleness  the  house  d.  through
DROPPING,  S.

Prov.  19.  13.  a  fooiish  son  is  calamity,  and  the  con¬
tentions  of  a  wife  are  a  continual  d.  27.  15.
Cant.  5.  13.  his  lips  d.  sweet-smelling  myrrh
Amos  6. 1 11.  I  will  smite  the  great  house  with  d.
DROPS.

Job  36.  27.  he  maketh  small  the  d.  of  water
38.  28.  or  who  hath  begotten  the  d.  of  the  dew  ?
Cant.  5.  2.  and  my  locks  with  the  d.  of  the  night
Luke  22. 44,  his  sweat  was  as  great  d.  of  blood
DROPSY.

Luke  14. 2.  there  was  a  man  before  him,  who  had  d.
DROSS.

Psal.  119. 119.  thou  puttest  away  the  wicked  like  d.
Prov.  25.  4.  take  away  the  d.  from  the  silver
26.  23.  are  like  a  potsherd  covered  with  silver  d.
Isa.  1. 22.  silver  is  become  d.  wine  mixed  with  water

25.  I  will  purely  purge  away  thy  d.  and  thy  fin
Ezek.  22.  18.  house  of  Israel  is  to  me  become  d.  19.
DROVE,  S.

Gen.  32. 16.  every  d.  by  themselves,  and  said,  pass
over  before  me,  and  put  a  space  betwixt  d.  and  d.
19.  so  commanded  he  all  that  followed  the  d.

33. 8.  what  meanest  thou  by  all  this  d.  which  I  met J
DROVE,  Verb.

Gen.  3.  24.  so  God  d.  out  the  man,  and  he  placed
at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubims

15. 11.  when  the  fowls  came,  Abram  d.  them  away
Exod.  2.  17.  the  shepherds  came  and  d.  them  away
Num.  21. 32.  they  d.  out  the  Amoritesthat  were  there
Josh.  15.  14.  Caleb  d.  thence  the  sons  of  Anak
1  Chr.  8.  13.  who  d.  away  the  inhabitants  of  Gath
Hab.  3.  6.  he  beheld,  and  d.  asunder  the  nations
John  2.  15.  he  d.  them  all  out  of  the  temple
DROUGHT.

Gen.  31.  40.  thus  I  was,  in  the  day  d.  consumed  me
Deut.  8.  15.  wherein  were  fiery  serpents  and  d.

28.  t  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  the  d.

Job  24.  19.  d.  and  heat  consume  the  snow  waters
Psal.  32. 4.  my  moisture  is  turned  into  d.  of  summer
Isa.  58.  11.  the  Lord  shall  satisfy  thy  soul  in  d.

Jer.  2.  6.  the  Lord  that  brought  us  thro’  a  land  of  d.

17.  8.  and  shall  not  he  careful  in  the  year  of  d.

50.  38.  a  d.  is  upon  her  waters,  thev  shall  be  dried
Hos.  13.  5.  I  did  know  thee  in  the  land  of  great  d.
Hag.  1.  11.  and  1  called  for  a  d.  upon  the  land

DROWN.

Cant.  8.  7.  cannot  quench  love,  nor  can  floods  d.  it
1  Tim.  6. 9.  into  foolish  lusts,  thatrf.  men  in  perdition
DROWNED.

Exod.  15. 4.  his  chosen  captains  are  d.  in  the  Red  sea
Amos  8.  8.  it  shall  be  d.  as  by  flood  of  Egypt,  9.  5.
Mat.  18.  6.  better  be  were  d.  in  the  midst  of  the  sea
Ileb.  11.  29.  which  the  Egyptians  assaying  to  do,

[were  d.

DROWSINESS.

Prov.  23.  21.  and  d.  shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags
DRUNK.

Lev.  11.  34.  all  drink  that  may  be  d.  shall  be

[unclean

Deut.  29-  6.  have  not  eaten  bread,  nor  d.  wine
32.  42.  I  will  make  mine  arrows  d.  with  blood
Judg.  15. 19-  when  Samson  bad  d.  Spirit  came  again
Ruth  3. 7*  when  Boaz  had  eaten  and  d.  he  went  to  lie

1  Sam.  1. 9.  Hannah  rose  up  after  they  d.  in  Shiloh
15.  1  have  d.  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink

2  Sam.  11. 13.  David  made  Uriah  d.  and  he  went  out

1  Kings  13.  22.  and  bast  eaten  bread  and  d.  water
16.  9.  as  Elah  was  in  Tirzah,  drinking  himself  d.
20.  16.  Benbadad  was  drinking  himself  d.  in  pavil.

2  Kings  6.  23.  they  had  eaten  and  d.  sent  them  away
19.24.  have  digged  and  d.  strange  waters,  Isa.  37.25.

Cant.  5.  1.  I  have  d.  my  wine  with  my  milk
Isa.  43.  t  24.  nor  hast  thou  made  me  d.  with  the  fat

51.  17-  which  hast  d.  the  cup  of  his  fury
63.  6.  and  I  will  make  them  d.  in  my  fury

Jer.  46.  10.  sword  shall  be  made  d.  with  their  blood
51. 57. 1  will  make  d.  her  princes  and  her  wise  men
Ezek.  34.  18.  and  to  have  d.  of  the  deep  waters
Dan.  5. 23.  thou  and  thy  concubines  have  d.  in  them
Chad.  16.  as  ye  have  d.  upon  my  holy  mountain
L.uke  5.  39-  no  man  having  d.  old  wine  desires  new
13.  26.  we  have  eaten  and  d.  in  thy  presence
John  2.  10.  when  men  have  well  d.  then  worse
Eph.  5.  18.  be  not  d.  with  wine  wherein  is  excess
Rev.  17. 2.  made  d.  with  the  wine  of  her  fornication

18.  3.  for  all  nations  have  d.  of  the  wine  of  wrath

DRUNKARD.

Deut.  21.  20.  this  our  son  is  a  glutton  and  a  d.


Prov.  23.21.  for  d.  and  glutton  shall  come  to  poverty

26.  9-  as  a  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  hand  of  a  d.
Isa.  24.  20.  the  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  d.
1  Cor.  5. 11.  with  a  brother  a  fornicator  or  a  d.  eat  not
DRUNKARDS.

Psal.  69.  12.  and  1  was  the  song  of  the  d.

Isa.  28.  1.  woe  to  pride,  to  the  d.  of  Ephraim,  3.
Ezek.  23.  +  42.  d.  were  brought  from  the  wilderness
Joel  1. 5.  awake,  ye  d.  and  weep,  howl,  ye  drinkers
Nah.  1.  10.  and  while  they 'are  drunken  as  d.

1  Cor.  6. 10.  nor  d.  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  Goa
See  on  Drink.

DRUNKEN.

Gen.  9.  21.  Noah  was  d.  and  he  was  uncovered
Deut.  29. 1 19.  to  add  the  d.  to  the  thirsty
1  Sam.  l.  13.  Eli  thought  Hannah  had  been  d.

14.  Eli  said  to  her,  how  long  wilt  thou  be  d.?

25.  36.  N  abal’s  heart  was  merry,  for  he  was  very  d.
Job  12. 25.  to  stagger  like  a  d.  man,  Psal.  107.  27.
Isa.  19. 14.  as  a  d.  man  staggereth  in  his  vomit

29.  9.  they  are  d.  but  not  with  wine,  51.  21.

34. 1 7.  and  their  land  shall  be  d.  with  blood
49.  26.  they  shall  be  d.  with  their  own  blood

51. 17.  thou  hast  d.  the  dregs  of  cup  of  trembling
Jer.  23.  9.  my  bones  shake,  I  am  like  a  d.  man

25.  27.  be  d.  and  spue,  and  fall,  and  rise  no  more
48.  26.  make  ye  him  d.  for  he  magnified  himself

49. 12.  behold,  they  have  assuredly  d.  and  art  thou
51 . 7.  Babylon  a  golden  cup  that  made  all  earth  d.

39.  I  will  make  them  d.  that  they  may  sleep
Lam.  3.  15.  he  hath  made  me  d.  with  wormwood
4.  21.  O  Edom,  thou  shalt  be  d.  Nah.  3.  11.

5. 4.  we  have  d.  water  for  money,  wood  is  sold
Ezek.  39. 19.  ye  shall  drink  blood  till  ye  be  d.

Nah.  1.  10.  and  while  they  are  d.  as  drunkards
Hab.  2. 15.  his  neighbour,  and  makest  him  d.  also
Mat.  24. 49.  shall  begin  to  smite  his  fellow-servant^
and  to  eat  and  drink  with  the  d.  Luke  12. 45
Luke  17.8.  make  ready,  serve  till  I  have  eaten  and  d
Acts  2. 15.  for  these  are  not  d.  as  ye  suppose
1  Cor.  11. 21.  one  is  hungry,  and  another  is  d.

1  Thess.  5. 7.  they  that  be  d.  are  d.  in  the  night
Rev.  17.  6.  I  saw  the  woman  d.  with  blood  of  saints
DRUNKENNESS.

Deut.  £9. 19.  I  walk  in  imaginat.  to  add  d.  to  thirst
Eccl.  10. 17.  princes  eat  for  strength,  and  not  for  d.
Jer.  13. 13.  will  fill  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  with  d.
Ezek.  23.  33.  thou  shalt  be  filled  with  d.  and  sorrow
l.uke  21. 34.  lest  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  d.
Rom.  13.  13.  let  us  walk,  not  in  rioting  and  d.

Gal.  5. 21.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  murders,  d.
DRY.

By  the  words  annexed  to  DRY,  the  meaning  is  ob¬
vious.  It  is  spoken  of  land,  ground,  provision,
waters,  trees,  and  other  things.  The  prophet
Isaiah  speaking  of  the  Messiah  says.  He  shall
grow  up  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground,  Isa.  53.
2.  Which  prophecy  respects  our  Saviour's  mean
original,  either  as  he  sprang  of  the  Jewish  nationr
which,  about  the  time  of  his  appearing  in  the
world,  was  poor,  despised,  and  enslaved.  Or,  by
the  dry  ground,  may  be  understood  the  royal  fa¬
mily  of  David,  which,  at  that  time,  was  poor,
decayed,  and  contemptible.  The  same  prophet
says,  chap.  56.  3.  Neither  let  the  eunuch  say,
behold  1  am  a  dry  tree.  The  Lord,  by  his  pro¬
phet,  does  here  encourage  the  eunuch,  who,  being
excluded  from  the  congregation  of  the  Lord,
Deut.  23.  1.  and  also  by  reason  of  his  barrenness,
which  was  often  threatened  as  a  curse,  and  was
a  matter  of  reproach  among  the  Jews,  might  be
ready  to  think  that  he  was  cast  out  of  God's
covenant,  and  cut  off  from  his  people,  to  whom
the  blessing  of  a  numerous  posterity  was  pro¬
mised.  Yet  he  is  desired  not  to  be  discouraged
on  these  accounts,  and  assured  that  God  would
accept  of  him,  notwithstanding  his  barrenness,
and  his  being  excluded  from  the  participation  of
church-privileges.

When  our  Saviour  was  led  away  to  be  crucified,  he
tells  the  Jews,  Luke  23.  31.  If  they  do  these
things  in  a  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the
dry  ?  If  such  evils  befall  me,  who  have  deserved
no  such  thing,  but  rather  to  be  cherished  and
kindly  entreated ;  what  will  befall  you,  who  are
fitted  for  destruction ,  like  dry  wood  for  the  fire  ?
The  prophets  sometimes  compare  a  barren  and
unfruitful  people  to  a  dry  land.  Isa.  41.  18.  1
will  make  the  dry  land  springs  of  water.  I  will
make  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  who  are  like  a  dry
and  barren  wilderness,  to  become  fruitful.  In
other  places,  when  judgments  are  threatened  upon
a  land,  it  is  said  to  be  made  a  wilderness,  a  dry
land,  a  desert,  Jer.  50. 12.

Lev.  7. 10.  meat-offering  mingled  with  oil  and  d.
13.  30.  it  is  d.  scald,  a  leprosy  on  the  head
Josh.  9. 5  bread  of  provision  was  d.  and  mouldy,  12.
Judg.  6. 37-  and  it  be  d.  on  all  the  earth  beside
39.  Gideon  said,  let  it  now  be  d.  onb7  on  the  fleece
Job  13.  25.  wilt  thou  pursue  the  d.  stubble  ?_

Psal.  105.  41.  they  ran  in  d.  places  like  a  river
Prov.  17.  1.  better  is  a  d.  morsel  and  quietness
Isa.  25.  5.  as  the  heat  in  a  d.  place,  even  the  heat
32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  d.  place
44.  27.  that  saith  to  the  deep,  be  d.  1  will  dry  up
56.  3.  neither  let  the  eunuch  say,  I  am  a  d.  tree
Jer.  4.  11.  a  d.  wind,  not  to  fan,  nor  to  cleanse
51.  36.  I  will  dry  up,  and  make  her  springs  d.
Ezek.  17.  24.  that  have  made  the  d.  tree  flourish
20.  47.  it  shall  devour  every  d.  tree  in  thee

30. 12.  I  will  make  the  rivers  d.  and  sell  the  land
37.  2.  the  bones  were  very  d.  (1  4.  O  ye  d.  bones

Hos.  9. 14.  sive  them.  O  L.  give  them  d.  breasts
13. 15.  his  spring  shall  become  d.  fountain  dried  up
Nah.  1.  4.  he  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  maketh  it  d.

10.  they  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble  fully  d.
Zeph.  2. 13.  will  make  N  ineveh  d.  like  a  wilderness
Hat.  12. 43.  he  walketh  thro’ d.  places,  Luke  11.  24.
Luke  23. 31.  if  in  green  tree  what  shall  be  done  in  dJ
DRY  ground.

Gen.  8. 13.  behold  the  face  of  the  ground  was  d.
Exod.  14. 16.  Isr.  shall  go  on  d.  ground  in  the  sea,  22.

121


DOS


DUM


D


US


Josh  3. 17.  the  priests  that  bore  the  ark  stood  firm  on
'd.  ground  in  Jordan,  Israel  passed  on  d.  ground
O  Kings  2.  8.  Elijah  and  Elisha  went  over  on  d.  g.
Psal.  107 . 33.  he  turneth  water-springs  into  d.  ground
35 ."he  turneth  d.  ground  into  water-springs
jsa.  44.  3.  I  will  pour  floods  upon  the  d.  ground
53.  2.  he  shall  grow  as  a  root  out  of  a  d.  ground
Ezek.  19. 13.  she  is  planted  in  a  d.  and  thirsty  ground
See  Land.

DRY,  Verb.

Job  12. 15.  he  withholdeth  the  waters  and  they  d.  up

15.  30.  the  flame  shall  d.  up  his  branches
Isa.  42.  15.  I  will  d.  up  herbs.  1  will  d.  up  the  pools
44. 27. 1  will  d.  up  thy  rivers  f|  50.  2. 1  d.  up  the  sea
Jer.  51.  36.  saitb  the  Lord,  I  will  d.  up  her  sea
Zech.  10. 11.  the  deeps  of  the  river  shall  d.  up

dried.

Cen.  8.7.  until  waters  were  d.  up  from  earth,  13.

14  on  the  twenty -seventli  day  was  the  earth  d.

Lev  2. 14.  shalt  offer  green  ears  of  com  d.  by  fire
Num.  6.  3.  nor  shall  he  eat  moist  grapes  or  d.

11. 6.  our  soul  is  d .  away  there  is  nothing  at  all
Josh.  2.  10.  have  heard  how  the  Lord  d.  up  Red  sea
4  °3  the  Lord  your  God  d.  up  waters  of  .1  ordan,  as
'Lord  did  Red  sea,  which  he  d.  up  from  before  us
5. 1.  heai  d  the  Lord  had  d.  up  the  waters  of  Jordan
Judg.  16.  7-  bind  me  with  withs  that  were  never  d.

1  Kings  13.  4.  and  Jeroboam’s  hand  d.  up

17  7  the  brook  d.  because  there  had  been  no  rain

2  Kings  19.  24.  and  with  the  sole  of  my  feet  have  I

d.  all  the  rivers  of  besieged  places,  Isa.  37.  25.
Job  18. 16.  his  roots  shall  bt  d.  up  beneath
28.  4.  they  are  d.  up,  they  are  gone  away
Psal.  22.  15.  my  strength  is  d.  up  like  a  potsherd
69.  3.  my  throat  is  d.  mine  eyes  fail  while  1  wait
106.  9.  lie  rebuked  the  Red  sea,  and  it  was  a.  up
Isa.  5. 13.  and  their  multitude  d.  up  with  thirst
19  5.  the  river  shall  be  wasted  and  d.  up
6.  the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be  emptied  and  d.  up
51.  10.  art  thou  not  it  which  hath  d.  the  sea  ?

Jer.  23.  10.  pleasant  places  of  wilderness  are  d.  up
50.  38.  upon  her  waters  and  they  shall  be  d.  up
Ezek.  17. 24.  shall  know  that  I  have  d.  up  green  tree
19.  12.  and  the  east  wind  d.  up  her  fruit

37.  11.  they  say,  our  bones  ared.  and  hope  is  lost
Hos.  9. 16.  their  root  is  d.  up,  they  shall  bear  no  fruit

13. 15.  and  his  fountain  shall  be  d.  up  .

Joel  1.10.  the  new  wine  isffi  up,  the  oil  languisheth
12.  the  vine  is  d.  up  ||  20.  rivers  of  water  are  d.  up
Zech.  11. 17.  his  arm  shall  be  clean  d.  up
Mark  5.  29.  the  fountain  of  her  blood  was  d.  up
11.  20.  they  saw  the  fig-tree  d.  up  from  the  roots
Eev.  14.  1 15.  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  d.

16. 12.  the  water  of  Euphrates  was  d.  up
DR1EDST.

Psal.  74.  15.  the  flood,  thou  d.  up  mighty  rivers
DRIEI H.

Job  14. 11.  and  as  the  flood  decayeth  and  d.  up
Prov.  17.  22.  but  a  broken  spirit  d.  the  bones
Nah.  1. 4.  L.  makes  thesea  dryland  d.  up  all  rivers

Isa.  11. 15.  shall  smite  river,  and  make  men  go  d.-sh.
DU  E.

Lev.  10.  13.  because  it  is  thy  and  thy  son’s  A.  14.
JDeut.  18.  3.  this  shall  be  the  priest’s  d.  from  people
1  Chr.  15.  13.  we  sought  him  not  after  the  d.  order

16.  29.  the  glory  d.  to  his  name,  Psal.  29.  2. 1  96.  8.
JSleh.  11.  23/ a  portion  for  singers,  d.  for  every  day
Prov.  3. 27.  withhold  not  from  them  to  whom  it  is  d.
Mat.  18.  34.  till  he  should  pay  all  that  was  d.  to


appointed  to  destruction.  (5)  For  one  that  is
made  speechless  by  a  divine  ecstasy  ;  Dan.  10.  15.
When  he  had  spoken  such  words,  I  became  dumb.
A  dumb,  or  deaf  spirit,  is  a  spirit  that  makes  those
persons  deaf,  or  dumb ,  whom,  he  possesses,  Mark  9.

17,  25.

Exod.  4.  11.  or  who  maketh  the  d.  or  deaf,  or  blind  t
Psal.  38. 13.  I  was  as  a  d.  man,  that  openeth  not  his

mouth

39.  2.  I  was  d.  with  silence,  I  held  my  peace,  9.
Prov.  31. 8.  open  thy  mouth  tor  the  d.  in  cause  of  al-1
Isa.  35. 6.  and  the  tongue  of  the  d.  shall  sing
53. 7.  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  d.

56. 10.  his  watchmen  are  blind,  they  are  all  d.  dogs
Ezek.  3. 26.  be  d.  and  shalt  not  be  to  them  a  reprover
24.  27.  thou  shalt  speak,  and  be  no  more  d.

33. 22.  my  mouth  was  opened,  and  I  was  no  more  d.
Ban.  10. 15. 1  set  my  face  to  the  ground,  I  became  d.
Hab.  2. 18.  trusteth  therein,  to  make  him  d.  idols
19.  woe  to  him  that  saith  to  the  d.  stone,  arise
Mat.  9.  32.  they  brought  to  him  a  d.  man,  possessed
33.  devil  was  cast  out,  the  d.  spake,  Luke  11. 14.
12.  22.  one  blind  and  d.  and  he  healed  him
15  30.  having  with  them  those  that  were  blind,  d.
31.  the  multitude  wondered,  when  they  saw  the
d.  speak,  and  the  blind  to  see,  Mark  7-37.
Mark  9. 17.  brought  my  son  who  hath  a  d.  spirit
°5.  thou  d.  spirit,  I  charge  thee  come  out  of  him
Luke  1.  20.  behold,  thou  shalt  be  d.  until  the  day

that

Acts  8. 32.  and  like  a  lamb  d.  before  his  shearer

1  Cor.  12.  2.  carried  away  to  these  d.  idols,  even  as

2  Pet.  2.  16.  the  d.  as  sneaking  with  man’s  voice

By  dung  is  represented  any  thing  that  is  nauseous,
or  loathsome,  as  the  carcases  of  the  dead,  Jer.  8.  2.

|  9.  22.  The  wicked  man,  says  Job,  shall  perish
for  ever,  like  his  own  dung,  Job  20.  7 -  which  men
cast  away  with  contempt  and  abhorrence,  lo
spread  dung  upon  the  face,  expresses  the  greatest
contempt,  undervalue,  and  scorn.  Mai.  2.  3.  I
will  spread  dung  upon  your  faces,  even  the
dung  of  your  solemn  feasts.  I  will  poy.r  dis¬
grace  and  contempt  upon  you,  and  reject  your
persons  and  sacrifices,  with  as  much  contempt  as
if  I  took  the  dung  of  those  sacrifices,  and  threw  it
in  your  faces .  The  apostle  Paul  says ,  Phil.  3.  8.
I  count  all  things  but  dung,  that  I  may  win
Christ.  All  things,  without  Christ,  are  as  dung,
utterly  insufficient  to  procure  our  pardon  and  ac¬
ceptance  with  God.

Dove’s  Dung  ;  see  on  Dove.

Exod.  29.  14.  but  the  flesh,  skin,  and  d.  shalt  thou
burn,  Lev.  4. 11.  |8.  17. 1 16.  27.  Num.  19.  5.

1  Kings  14. 10.  take  away,  as  a  man  taketh  away  d.

2  Kings  6.  25.  the  fourth  part  of  a  cab  of  doves’  d.

9.  37.  carcase  of  Jezebel  shall  be  as  d.  m  the  field

18.  27.  that  they  may  eat  their  own  d.  Isa.  36.  12.
Job  20. 7.  yet  he  shall  perish  for  ever  like  his  own  d.
Psal.  83.  10.  they  became  as  d.  for  the  earth

Isa.  5.  +25.  their  carcases  were  as  d.  Jer.  9.  22.

Jer.  8. 2.  they  shall  be  for  d.  on  the  face  of  the  earth
16.  4.  they  shall  be  as  d.  ||  25.  33.  they  shall  be  d.
Ezek.  4. 12.  bake  it  with  d.  that  cometh  from  man
15.  lo,  I  have  given  thee  cow’s  d.  for  man’s  d.
Zeph.  1.  17.  and  their  flesh  shall  be  as  the  d.

Mai.  2.  3.  I  will  corrupt  your  seed,  and  spread  d.

on  your  faces,  even  the  d .  of  your  solemn  feasts
Phil.  3.  8. 1  do  count  all  things  but  d.  to  win  Christ
DUNG,  Verb.

Luke  13.8.  let  it  alone,  till  I  dig  about  it,  and  d.  it


Luke  23.  41.  we  receive  the  d.  reward  of  our  deeds
Rom.  13.  7.  render  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  d.

DUE  benevolence.

1  Cor.  7.  3.  let  the  husband  render  to  the  wife  d.  b.
DUE  season.

Lev  26.  4.  1  will  give  you  rain  in  d.  s.  Deut.  11. 14.
Num.  28.  2.  observe  to  offer  to  me  in  their  d.  season
Psal.  104.27.  give  them  their  meat  in  d.  s.  145.  15.
Prov.  15.  23.  a  word  spoken  in  d.  s.  how  good  is  it !
Eccl.  10.  17 .  v  hen  thy  princes  eat  in  d.  season
Mat.  24.  45.  to  give  them  meat  in  d.  s.  Luke  12.  42.
Gal.  6.  9.  in  d.  season  we  shall  reap  if  we  faintnot
DUE  time.

Deut.  32.  35.  their  foot  shall  slide  in  d.  time
Rom.  5.  6.  in  d.  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungocHy
1  Cor.  15.  8.  seen  of  me,  as  of  one  born  out  of  d.  time
1  Tim.  2.  6.  a  ransom,  to  be  testified  in  d.  time
Tit.  1.  3.  but  hath  in  d.  time  manifested  his  word
1  Pet.  5.  6.  that  he  may  exalt  you  in  d.  time
D  U  ES.

Rom.  13. 7 .  render  therefore  to  all  their  d.  tribute
DUKE.

Gen.  36.  40.  d.  Alvah,  d.  Jetheth,  1  Chron.  1.  51.
DUKES.

Gen.  36.  15.  these  were  d.  of  the  sons  of  Esau,  19.

21.  these  are  the  d.  of  the  Horites,  29.

Exod.  15.  15.  then  the  d.  of  Edom  shall  be  amazed
Josh.  13. 21.11  ur,  and  Reba,  which  were  d.  of  Sihon
DULCIMER.

Ban.  3. 5.  flute,  d.  and^all  kinds  of  music,  10, 15.

Mat.  13.  15.  this  people’s  heart  is  waxed  gross,  and
their  ears  ar ed.  of  hearing,  Isa.  6.  9.  Acts  28.27.
Heb.  5. 11.  hard  to  utter,  seeing  ye  are  d.  of  hearing
DUM  U

Is  taken,  (1)  For  one  that  cannot  speak  for  want  of
natural  ability;  Exod.  4.  11.  Who  maketh  the
dumb,  or  deaf,  or  blind  ?  have  not  1  the  Lord  J
(2)  For  one  that  cannot  speak  to,  and  teach  others,
for  lack  of  <  >  ace  and  knowledge  ;  Isa.  56.  10.  II  is
watchmen  are  ignorant,  they  are  dumb  dogs,
they  cannot  bark.  (3)  For  one  that  will  not  speak,
though  he  can,  being  submissive  and  silent  under
the  dispensations  of  God's  providence ;  Psal.  39.
9.  I  was  dumb,  1  opened  not  my  mouth,  because
thou  didst  it.  (4)  For  such  as  cannot  speak  in
their  own  cause,  either  through  ignorance  and  in¬
firmity,  or  because  of  the  dread  of  their  more  po¬
tent  adversaries,  or  of  the  majesty  of  him  that  sits
in  judgment ;  Prov.  31.8.  Open  thy  mouth  for
the  dumb  in  the  cause  of  all  such  as  are
1 22


DUNG-^«te.

Neh.  3. 13.  Hanun  repaired  valley-gate  to  the  d.-gate
14.  but  the  d.-g.  repaired  Malchiasonof  Rechab
12.31.  one  company  went  on  wall  toward  d.-gate
DUNGHILL.

1  Sam.  2.  8.  he  lifteth  up  beggar  from  d.  Ps.  113.7-
Ezra  6. 11.  let  his  house  be  made  a d.  for  this
Isa.  25. 10.  even  as  straw  is  trodden  down  for  the  d.
Dan.  2.  5.  and  your  houses  shall  be  made  a  d.

3.  29.  their  houses  shall  be  made  a  d.  because
Luke  14. 35.  unsavoury  salt  is  not  fit  for  laird  or  d.
DUNGHILLS.

Lam.  4. 5.  were  brought  up  in  scarlet,  embrace  d.
DUNGY.

Deut.  29.  + 17.  ye  have  seen  d.  gods,  wood  and  stone
DUNG-porr.

Neh.  2. 13.  N ehemiah  went  to  the  d.-port  and  viewed
DUNGEON.

Gen.  40. 15.  that  they  should  put  me  into  the  d.

41.  14.  they  brought  Joseph  hastily  out  of  the  d.
Exod.  12.  29.  to  the  first-born  of  the  captive  in  d.
Isa.  24.  +  22.  shall  be  gathered  as  prisoners  in  the  d.
Jer.  37.  16.  when  Jeremiah  was  entered  into  the  d.
38.  6.  they  cast  him  into  d.  was  no  water  in  d.  9.

10.  take  up  Jeremiah  out  of  the  d.  betore  he  die

11.  let  them  down  by  cords  into  the  d.t o  Jeremiah
13.  so  they  drew  up  Jeremiah  out  of  the  d.

Lam.  3.  53.  they  have  cut  off  my  life  in  the  d.

55.  1  called  on  thy  name,  O  Lord,  out  of  the  d.
DURABLE.

Prov.  8. 18.  yea,  d.  riches  and  righteous,  are  with  me
Isa.  23. 18.  her  merchandise  shall  be  for  d.  clothing
DURETH.

Mat.  13. 21.  hath  not  root  in  himself,  d.  for  a  while
DURST.

Esth.  7. 5.  he  that  d.  presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so
Job  32.  6.  afraid,  I  d.  not  shew  you  mine  opinion
Mat.  22.  46.  no  man  able  to  answer  him,  nor  d.  ask
any  more  questions,  Mark  12.  34.  Luke  20.  40.
John  21. 12.  none  of  disciples  d.  ask,  who  art  thou  ?
Acts  5. 13.  and  of  the  rest  d.  no  man  join  to  them
7.  32.  then  Moses  trembled,  and  d.  not  behold
Jude  9.  he  d.  not  bring^a".  him  a  railing  accusation

The  Hebrews,  when  they  mourned put  dust  or
ashes  upon  their  heads.  Josh.  7-  6.  Joshua  and
the  elders  of  Israel  put  dust  upon  their  heads.
In  their  afflictions  they  sat  down  in  the  dust,
and  threw  themselves  with  their  faces  upon  the
ground.  Lam.  3.  29.  He  putteth  his  mouth  in
the  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  hope.  Isa.  47 .


1.  Come  down  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  virgin  j
daughter  of  Babylon,  sit  on  the  ground.  In
Acts  22.  23.  some  of  the  Jews,  in  the  height  of
their  rage,  threw  dust  into  the  air,  as  it  were  to
shew  that  they  would  reduce  to  powder  the  apostle
Paul,  whom  they  had  taken  in  the  temple.

The  dust  denotes  likewise  the  grave  and  death,  Gen.

3.  19.  Dust  thou  art,  and  to  dust  thou  shalt  re¬
turn.  Job  7-  21.  For  now  shall  I  sleep  in  the
dust,  Psal.  22.  15,  Thou  hast  brought  me  into  i
the  dust  of  death.  The  dust  signifies  likewise  a
multitude.  Gen.  13.16.  I  will  make  thy  seed  as
the  dust  of  the  earth.  And  Balaam,  upon  the
sight  of  the  Israelitish  camp,  says,  Who  can  count
the  dust  of  f  Num.  23.  10.  This  vast  mul-  3
titude  of  the  Israelites,  who  are  as  numerous  as
the  dust.  And  in  Psal.  78.  27.  He  rained  flesh
also  upon  them  as  dust :  a  great  multitude  of
quails  as  if  they  were  dust.

Dust  signifies  a  most  low  and  miserable  condition.

1  Sam.  2.  8.  God  raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of
the  dust.  Nah.  3.  18.  Thy  nobles  shall  dwell
in  the  dust :  They  shall  be  reduced  to  a  mean
condition.  Our  Saviour  commands  his  disciples  '
to  shake  the  dust  off  their  feet  against  those
who  would  not  hearken  to  them,  nor  receive
them,  Mat.  10.  14.  Lake  9.  5.  to  shew  thereby ,
that  they  desire  to  have  no  commerce  with  them;
that  they  ahhor  every  thing  belonging  to  them;,
and  that  they  give  them  up  to  their  misery  and
hardness.  Dust  signifies  earthly  things,  Amos

2.  7.

Gen.  3. 14.  d.  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  thy  life

19.  d.  thou  art,  and  unto  d.  shalt  thou  return

13. 16.  so  that  if  a  man  can  number  the  d.  of  earth
18.  27.  to  speak  to  Lord,  who  am  but  d.  and  ashes-
Exod.  8.  16.  say  to  Aaron,  smite  the  d.  of  the  land
17.  for  Aaron  smote  the  d.  of  the  earth

9.  9.  it  shall  become  small  d.  in  all  the  land
Lev.  14.  41.  shall  pour  out  the  d.  they  scrape  off

17.  13.  pour  out  the  blood,  and  cover  it  with  d.
Num.  19.  +  17.  take  of  the  d.  of  the  burnt  heifer

23. 10.  who  can  count  the  d.  of  Jacob  t

Deut.  9.  21.  I  cast  the  d.  into  brook,  2  Kings  23. 12.
28. 24.  Lord  shall  make  the  rain  of  thy  land  d.

Josh.  7.  6.  and  the  elders  put  d.  on  their  heads
2  Sam.  16.  13.  Shimei  cursed  David,  and  cast  J,

1  Kings  18. 38.  the  fire  of  the  Lord  consumed  the  d.

20. 10.  if  the  d.  of  Samaria  shall  suffice  for  handfuls-

2  Chron.  34.  4.  Josiah  made  d.  of  the  images
Job  2.  12.  they  sprinkled  d.  upon  their  heads

7.  5.  my  flesh  is  clothed  with  worms  and  clods  of  d ,

10.  9.  and  wilt  thou  bring  me  into  d.  again  ?

28.  +  2.  iron  is  taken  out  of  d.  and  brass  molten

6.  as  for  the  earth,  it  hath  d.  of  gold

34. 15.  all  flesh  perish,  man  shall  turn  again  to  d.

38.  38.  when  the  d.  groweth  into  hardness
42.  6.  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  d.  and  ashes
Psal.  22.  15.  thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  d.  j
30. 9.  shall  d.  praise  thee,  shall  it  declare  thy  truth  *
72.  9.  and  his  enemies  shall  lick  the  d.

78.  27.  he  rained  flesh  also  upon  them  as  d.

102. 14.  thy  servants  favour  the  d.  thereof
103.  14.  he  remem  bereth  that  we  are  d.

Eccl.  12. 7.  then  shall  the  d.  return  to  the  earth
Isa.  2.  +  19.  go  into  the  caves  of  the  d.  tor  tear
34.  7.  their  d.  shall  be  made  fat  with  fatness

9.  the  d.  thereof  shall  be  turned  into  brimstone

40.  12.  who  hath  comprehended  the  d.  of  earth  ?

49.  23.  they  shall  lick  up  the  d.  of  thy  feet

52.  2.  shake  thyself  from  the  d.  O  Jerusalem
65.  25.  and  d.  shall  be  the  serpent’s  meat
Lam.  2. 10.  have  cast  d.  on  their  heads,  Ezek.  27-  30;.
Ezek.  24. 7.  she  poured  it  not,  to  cover  it  with  d.

26.  4.  I  will  also  scrape  her  d.  from  her

10.  by  his  horses,  their  d.  shall  cover  thee
Amos  2.  7.  that  pant  after  the  d.  of  the  earth
Mic.  7. 17.  they  shall  lick  the  d.  like  a  serpent
Nah.  1.  3.  and  the  clouds  are  the  d.  of  his  feet
Hab.  1. 10.  for  they  shall  heap  d.  and  take  it
Mat.  10.  14.  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  city,  shake

off  the  d.  of  your  feet,  Mark  6.  11.  Like  9.  5.
Luke  10.  11.  even  the  d.  of  your  city  we  do  wipeofr
Acts  13.  51.  they  shook  off  the  d.  of  their  feet
22.  23.  and  as  they  threw  d.  into  the  air
Rev.  18.  19.  they  cast  d.  on  their  heads,  and  cried
As  the  DUST.

Gen.  13. 16.  I  will  give  thee  the  land,  and  make  thy
seed  as  the  d.  of  the  earth,  28.  14.  2  Chron.  1.  9.
Deut.  9.  21  I  stamped  the  calf  small  as  the  d.

2  Sam.  22.  43.  I  beat  them  as  small  as  d.  Ps.  18.  42-
Job  22.  24.  then  shalt  thou  lay  up  gold  as  the  d.

27. 16.  though  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  d.

Isa.  5.  24.  and  their  blossom  shall  go  up  as  d.

40. 15.  the  nations  as  the  small  d.  of  the  balance

41.  2.  he  gave  them  as  the  d.  to  his  sword
Zeph.  1.  17.  their  blood  shall  be  poured  out  as  rf-
Zech.  9.  3.  and  Tyrus  heaped  up  silver  as  the  d.

In  the  DUST.

Job  4.  19.  on  them,  whose  foundation  is  in  the  d.

7.  21.  now  shall  I  sleep  in  the  d.  thou  shalt  seek

16. 15.  and  I  have  defiled  my  horn  in  the  d.

17. 16.  when  our  rest  together  is  in  the  d.

20. 11.  which  shall  lie  down  with  him  in  the  d.

21. 26.  they  shall  lie  down  alike  in  the  d.

39.  14.  leaveth  eggs,  and  warmeth  them  in  the  d.

40.  13.  hide  them  in  the  d.  together,  and  bind
Psal.  7.  5.  let  the  enemy  lay  mine  honour  in  the  rX
Isa.  2.  10.  hide  thee  in  thed.  for  fear  of  the  Lord

26.  19.  awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  the  d.

47.  1.  come  down  and  sit  in  the  d.  O  virgin
Lam.  3.  29.  he  putteth  his  mouth  in  the  d.  if  so  be
Dan.  12.  2.  many  that  sleep  in  the  d.  shall  awake
Mic.  1. 10.  weep  not  at  all,  roll  thyself  in  the  d.
Nah.  3. 18.  thy  nobles  shall  dwell  in  thed.

Like  the  DUST.

2  Kings  13.  7.  make  them  like  the  d.  by  threshing
Isa.  29.5.  the  multitude  of  thy  strangers  be.  like  d.
Of  the  DUST.

Gen.  2.7.  Lord  formed  man  of  the  d.  of  the  ground
Num.  5.  17.  priest  shall  take  of  the  d.  in  the  tabern.
Deut.  32.  24. 1  will  send  poison  of  serpents  oj  t.iea


D  W  E


D  W  E


D  WE


1  Sam.  2.  8.  he  raiseth  poor  out  of  the  d.  Psa..  1 13.  7.
I  Kings  16.  2.  1  exalteii  thee  out  of  the  d.  and  made
Job  5.  6.  affliction  cometh  not  forth  of  the  d.

14.  19.  washest  away  things  that  grow  out  of  the  d.
Prov.  8.  26.  nor  highest  part  of  the  i.  of  the ‘world
Keel.  3.  20.  all  go  to  one  place,  all  are  of  the  d.
Isa.  29.  4.  thy  speech  shall  he  low  out  of  the  d.

To  the  DUST.

Psal.  22.  29.  all  that  go  down  to  the  d.  shall  bow

44.  25.  for  our  soul  is  bowed  down  to  the  d.

104.  29.  they  die  and  return  to  their  d.

1 19.  25.  my  soul  cleaveth  to  the  d.  quicken  me
Keel.  3.  20.  all  are  of  the  d.  and  turn  to  d.  again
Isa.  25.  12.  he  shall  bring  the  fortress  to  the  d.

26.  5.  he  bringeth  the  lofty  city  even  to  the  d.
DUSTED.

2  Sam.  16. 1 13.  Shimei  threw  stones  and  d.  with  dust

DUTY.

Exod.  21. 10.  her  d.  of  marriage  shall  he  not  diminish
Deut.  25.  5.  shall  perform  d.  of  a  husband’s  brother

7.  will  not  perform  the  d.  of  my  husband's  brother
2  Chron. 8. 14.  as  d.  of  everyday  required,  Ezra  3. 4.
Eccl.  12.  13.  for  this  is  the  whole  d.  of  man
Luke  17: 10.  we  have  done  that  which  was  our  d.  to  do
Horn.  15.  27.  their  d.  is  to  minister  in  carnal  things
DUTIES.

Esek.  18. 11.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  doth  not  those  d.
DWARF.

Lev.  21.20.  a  d.  shall  not  come  nigh  to  offer  offerings
DWELL.

To  dwell  signifies  to  abide  in,  to  inhabit,  to  have  a
fixed  residence  in  a  place,  Rum.. 33.  53.  Psal.
78.  55.  Sometimes  it  is  taken  for  sojourning,
Ileb.  11.  9.  where  it  is  said,  that  Abraham
dwelt  in  tabernacles ;  that  is,  sojourned :  for  he
had  no  fixed  abode  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  It  is
spoken,  [1]  Of  God,  who  is  said  to  dwell  in  the
heavens,  Psal.  123.  1.  He  hath  a  certain  and
glorious  place  where  he  resideth,  even  the  highest
heavens,  where  he  is  clothed  with  infinite  power
and  majesty,  and  from  whence  he  beholdeth  and
governeth  this  lower  world  and  all  that  is  in  it.
His  gracious  presence  with  his  people  on  earth
is  signified  by  dwelling  with  them.  Psal.  9.  11.
Sing  praises  to  the  Lord  who  dwelleth  in  Zion  :
where  the  ark  was,  which  was  the  symbol  of  his
special  and  gracious  presence.  And  in  Isa.  57.  15.

1  dwell  with  him  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble
spirit.

[2]  Of  Christ,  signifying,  CD  His  manifestation
in  the  flesh.  John  1.  14.  The  Word  was  made
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us  (2)  His  spiritual
abode  in  every  faithful  soul.  Eph.  3.  17.  T  hat
Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith.
Christ  dwells  in  his  people  by  his  merit  to  justify
them  ;  by  his  grace  and  Spirit  to  renew  and  purify
them;  by  his  power  to  keep  them ;  by  his  wisdom
to  lead  and  instruct  them  ;  and  by  his  communion
and  compassion  to  share  with  them  in  all  their
troubles.

[3]  Of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwells  in  the  soul  by  his
gracious  operations,  working  faith,  love,  and  other
graces  therein.  Rom.  8. 9.  But  ye  are  not  in  the
flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit,  if  so  be  that  the  Spirit  of
God  dwell  in  you.

Cl]  Of  the  word  of  God,  which  may  be  said  to  dwell
in  a  person,  when  it  is  diligently  studied,  firmly
believed ,  and  carefully  practised.  Col.  3.  16
Let  the  word  of.  God  dwell  richly  in  you  in  all
wisdom.


[5]  Of  Satan,  who  dwells  in  wicked  men,  when  he
fills  them  with  further  degrees  of  error ,  malice,
blasphemy,  impenitence,  and  blindness ;  thereby
making  them  highly  wicked,  and  worse  and  worse
r  daily.  Mat.  12.  45.

-6]  Of  the  godly ,  who  are  said  to  dwell  in  God,  1
John  3.  24.  They  have  most  intimate  union  and
communion  with  God  in  Christ.

Gen.  9.  27.  Japhet  shall  d.  in  the  tents  of  Shem
16.  12.  he  shall  d.  in  the  presence  of  his  brethren
19.  30.  Lot  went  up,  for  he  feared  to  d.  in  Zoar

15.  behold  my  land,  d.  where  it  pleaseth  thee
-4.3.  daughters  of  Canaanites,  amongst  whom  I  d.

34.  10.  land  before  you,  d.  and  trade  you  therein
16’We  will  d.  with  you,  and  become  one  people

35.  1.  arise,  go  up  to  Beth-el,  and  d.  there

a-  a  l21,  Moses  was  content  to  d.  with  the  man
fo.  8.  that  I  may  d.  amongst  them,  29.  46.

-9. 4o.  I  will  d.  amongst  the  children  of  Israel
Lev.  IS.  46.  the  uncieau  shall  d.  alone

42.  ye  shall  d.  in  booths,  43.  Neh.  8.  14.
f.  3.  their  camps,  in  the  midst  whereof  I  d.
to  1- °>  the  people  shall  d.  alone,  not  be  reckoned
L .  our  little  ones  shall  d.  in  fenced  cities

3o.  2.  that  they  give  to  the  Levites,  cities  to  d.  in,
t  uand  suburbs  round,  3.  Josh.  14.  4.  1  21.  2.
1  the  Lord  d.  among  the  children  of  Israel
oV1-,'}.!11’ to  cause  his  name  d.  there,  Ezra  6. 12.

Jo.  the  servant  escaped  shall  d.  with  thee
t)  n  he  shMi  d.  between  his  shoulders
on&'J"  Perad venture  ye  d.  among  us,  22.
n,  Vo  ••  1 in.  that  city,  till  he  stand  before
-4.  13.  cities  ye  built  not,  and  ye  d.  in  them

9.  41.  that  Gaal  should  not  d.  in  Shechem
.  0  to.  Micah  said  to  the  Levite,  d.  with  me


o  io'u  *  XxJ*  1  »  ,  A.  *  ,  .  tne  cnnaren  or  lsr&G
,1  he  would  d.  in  thick  darkness,  2  Chr.  6.  1.
get  thee  to  Zarephath,  and  d.  there
-  tying  s 4.  13.  she  answered.  Id.  among  mine  owi

7 }J‘  27.  let  them  go  and  d.  there,  let  him  teach°P*
.0  •  t  10-  ye  have  caused  to  d.  strange  wives
Tnf.*  increase  the  trespass  of  Israel,  Neh.  13.  +  23
,  ?  ,  i,  et  a  cloud  d.  upon  it,  let  blackness  of  da'
is  ‘etnot  wickedness  d.  in  thy  tabernacle

10.  sn  ally,  m  his  tabernacle,  because  none  of  hi
lriJhe  cldtsof  the  valleys,  in  caves
i  s  i  5V  neither  shall  evil  d.  with  thee

i 6  +  ‘o^V11,0  l*1*,1,1  d-  -in  thy  holy  hill  ?  .

•  t  9.  my  flesh  shall  d .  in  confidence


Fsal.  25. 13.  his  soul  shall  d.  at  ease,  and  seed  inherit
37.  27-  depart  from  evil,  and  d.  for  evermore
65.  4.  to  approach,  that  he  may  d.  in  thy  courts

8.  they  also  that  d.  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  earth

68.  16.  this  is  the  hill  which  God  desireth  tod.  in,

yea  the  Lord  will  d.  in  it  for  ever  and  ever

18.  that  the  Lord  might  d.  among  them

69.  35.  will  build  Judah  that  they  may  d.  there
72.  9.  they  that  d.  in  the  wilderness  shall  bow
78.  55.  and  made  Israel  to  d.  in  their  tents

84. 10.  than  to  d.  in  the  tents  of  wickedness
101.  6.  on  the  faithful,  that  they  may  d.  with  me
I07.  4.  they  wandered,  they  found  no  city  to  d.  in

36.  and  there  he  maketh  the  hungry  to  d.

113. 1 5.  like  the  Lord  who  exaltetn  himself  to  d.
120.  5.  woe  is  me,  that  I  d.  in  the  tents  of  Kedar

132. 14.  my  rest,  here  will  I  d.  for  I  have  desired  it

139.  9.  if  I  d.  in  uttermost  parts  of  the  sea

140.  13.  the  upright  shall  d ,  in  thy  presence
143.  3.  he  hath  made  me  to  d.  in  darkness

Prov.  1.  33.  whoso  hearkeneth  to  me  shall  d.  safely

8.  12. 1  wisdom  d.  with  prudence  and  find  out
21.  t  7..robbery  of  the  wicked  shall  d.  with  them

19.  it  is  better  to  d.  in  wilderness,  than  with
Isa.  6.  5.  I  d.  in  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips

11.  6.  the  wolf  also  shall  d.  with  the  lamb
13. 21.  owls  shall  d.  there,  satyrs  shall  dance  there

16.  4.  let  mine  outcasts  d.  with  thee.  Moab
23. 18.  merchandise  for  them  that  d.  before  the  Ld.
24.  6.  they  that  d.  therein  are  desolate

26.  5.  he  bringeth  down  them  that  d.  on  high
19.  awake  and  sing,  ye  that  d.  in  the  dust

30.  19.  the  people  shall  d.  in  Zion  at  Jerusalem

32.  16.  then  judgment  shall  d.  in  the  wilderness
18.  my  people  d.  in  a  peaceful  habitation

33.  14.  who  among  us  snail  d.  with  devouring  fire  ?

who  shall  d.  with  everlasting  burnings  ?
16.  he  shall  d.  on  high,  his  place  of  defence
24.  the  people  that  d.  therein  shall  be  forgiven

34.  11.  tne  owl  and  the  raven  shall  d.  in  it

40.  22.  he  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  tent  to  d.  in

49.  20.  give  place  to  me  that  1  may  d.

58.  12.  shall  be  called  the  restorer  of  paths  to  d.  in
65.  9.  and  my  servants  shall  d.  there
Jer.  29.  32.  Snemaiah  shall  not  have  a  man  to  d.

31.  24.  there  shall  d.  in  Judah  husbandmen

35.  7.  but  all  your  days  ye  shall  d.  in  tents
40.  5.  and  d.  with  him  among  the  people

10.  I  will  d.  at  Mizpeh  to  serve  the  Chaldeans

42. 14.  we  will  go  into  Egypt,  and  there  will  we  d.
44.  14.  they  have  a  desire  to  return  to  d.  there
49.8.  flee  ye,  d.  deep,  O  inhabitants  of  Dedan

18.  nor  shall  a  son  of  man  d.  in  it,  33. 1  50.  40.

31.  which  d.  alone  |]  51. 1.  that  d.  in  midst  of  them
Esek.  2.  6.  and  thou  dost  d.  among  scorpions

16.  46.  she  and  her  daughters  d.  at  thy  left  hand
43.  7.  where  I  will  d.  in  the  midst  of  Israel  for

ever,  9.  Zech.  2. 10,  11.

IIos.  12.  9.  I  will  make  thee  to  d.  in  tabernacles
14.  7.  they  that  d.  under  his  shadow  shall  return
Joel  3. 20.  but  Judah  shall  d.  for  ever,  and  Jerusal.
Amos 3. 12.  Isr.  shall  betaken  out  that  d.  in  Samaria
Mic.  4. 10.  thou  shalt  d.  in  the  field,  go  to  Babylon
7-  14.  the  flock  which  d.  solitarily  in  the  wood
Nah.  3.  18.  O  Assyria,  thy  nobles  shall  d.  in  dust
Hag.  1.  4.  is  it  time  to  d.  in  your  ceiled  houses  ?
Zech.  8.  4.  old  men  and  women  shall  d.  in  Jerusal.

9.  6.  and  a  bastard  shall  d.  in  Ashdod

14.  11.  shall  be  inhabited,  and  men  shall  d.  in  it
Mat.  12.  45.  they  enter  in  and  d.  there,  Luke  11.  26.
Luke  21.  35.  as  a  snare  shall  it  come  on  all  them
that  d.  on  face  of  the  whole  earth,  Acts  17.  26.
Acts  7. 4.  he  removed  into  land  wherein  ye  now  d.
28. 16.  Paul  was  suffered  to  d.  by  himself
Rom.  8.  9.  if  so  be  the  Spirit  of  God  d.  in  you,  11.

1  Cor.  7- 12.  and  she  be  pleased  to  d.  with  him

2  Cor.  6.  16.  as  God  hath  said,  I  will  d.  in  them
Eph.  3. 17.  that  Christ  may  d.  in  your  hearts  by  faith
Col.  1.  19.  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  d.

3.  16.  let  the  word  of  Christ  d.  in  you  richly
1  Pet.  3.  7-  likewise,  ye  husbands,  d.  with  them
1  John  4.  13.  hereby  know  we  that  we  d.  in  him
Rev.  7.  15.  he  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  d.

12. 12.  rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  thattf.  in  them
13.  6.  and  against  them  that  d.  in  heaven
21.  3.  is  with  men,  and  lie  will  d.  with  them
DWIiLL,  with  earth.

1  Kings  8.  27.  will  God  d.  on  earth  ?  2  Chr.  6.  18.
Dan.  4.  1.  languages  that  d.  in  all  the  earth,  6.  25.
Rev.  3.  10.  to  try  them  that  d.  on  the  earth

6.  10.  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  d.  on  earth
11. 10.  they  that  d.  on  the  earth  shall  rejoice

13.  8.  all  that  d.  on  the  earth  shall  worship
14.  and  deceiveth  them  that  d.  on  the  earth

14.  6.  to  preach  to  them  that  d.  on  the  earth

17.  8.  they  that  d.  on  the  earth  shall  wonder

DWELT.,  with  house.

Dent.  28.  30.  shalt  build  an  house,  and  shalt  not  d.
therein,  plant  vineyard,  not  gather,  Amos  5. 11.

2  Ram.  7.  2.  I  d.  in  a  house  of  cedar,  1  Chr.  17.  1.

5.  shall  build  me  an  house  to  d.  in,  1  Chr.  17.  1.

1  Kings  2.  36.  build  house  in  Jerusalem  and  d.  there
3.  17.  O  my  lord,  I  and  this  woman  d.  in  one  house
8.  13.  1  have  surely  built  thee  an  house  to  d.  in

2  Chron.  8. 11.  my  wife  shall  not  d.  in  house  of  David
Job  4. 19-  much  less  them  that  d.  in  houses  of  clay

19.  15.  they  that  d.  in  my  house  count  me  a  stranger
Psal.  23.  6.  I  will  d.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever

27.  4.  that  I  may  d.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord
84.  4.  blessed  are  they  that  d.  in  thy  house
101.  7,  worketh  deceit,  shall  not  d.  in  my  house
113.  t  9.  he  maketh  the  barren  to  d.  in  an  house

Prov.  21.  9.  better  d.  in  the  corner  of  a  house,  25. 24.
Jer.  20.  6.  all  that  d.  in  thy  hoiise  go  to  captivity
29.  5.  build  ye  houses,  and  d.  in  them,  28.

35.  9.  not  to  build  houses  for  us  to  d.  in,  nor

vineyard

DWELT,,  with  Jerusalem.

1  Chr.  23.  25.  that  ye  may  d.  in  Jerusalem  for  ever
Neh.  11.  1.  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  d.  in  Jerusalem
2.  willingly  offered  themselves  to  d.  at  Jerusalem
Jer.  33. 16.  J  udah  saved,  and  Jerusalem  shall  d.  safe.


Jer.  35. 11.  for  fear  of  Chaldeans  so  we  d.  at  Jerusal.
Zech.  8.  3.  and  I  will  d.  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem
8.  and  they  shall  d.  in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem
Acts  2. 14.  and  all  ye  that  d.  at  Jerusalem
4.  16.  is  manifest  to  all  them  that  d.  in  Jerusalem
13.  27.  they  that  d.  at  Jerusal.  have  condemned  him
DWELL,  with  land.

Gen.  24.  37.  of  the  Canaanites  in  whose  land  I  d.
26.  2.  d.  in  the  land  which  1  shall  tell  thee  of

34.  21.  let  them  d.  in  the  land,  and  trade  therein

45.  10.  and  thou  shalt  d.  in  the  land  of  Goshen

46.  34.  that  ye  may  d.  in  the  land  of  Goshen

47.  6.  in  the  land  of  Goshen  let  them  d.

Exod.  8.  22.  the  land  of  Goshen,  in  which  my

people  d.

23.  33.  they  shall  not  d.  in  thy  land,  lest  they
Lev.  25. 18.  and  ye  shall  d.  in  the  land  in  safety

26. 5.  ye  shall  eat  and  d.  in  your  land  safely
Num-  13.  19.  and  what  the  land  is  that  they  d.  in

35.  34.  defile  not  the  land  wherein  I  d.

Deut.  12. 10.  d.  in  the  land  which  the  L.  giveth  you
30.  20.  that  thou  mayest  d.  in  the  land  Lord

Josh.  17.  12.  could  not  drive  them  out,  but  the  Ca¬
naanites  would  d.  in  that  land,  Judg.  1.  27.

24.  15.  the  gods  in  whose  land  ve  d.  Judg.  6.  10.

2  Kings  <25. 24.  fear  not,  d.  in  land,  Jer.  25. 5. 1  40.  9.
Psal.  37.  3.  do  good,  so  shalt  thou  d.  in  the  land

68.  6.  but  the  rebellious  d.  in  a  dry  land

85.  9.  salvation  near,  that  glory  may  d.  in  our  land
Prov.  2.  21.  for  the  upright  shall  d.  in  the  land
Isa.  9.  2.  that  d.  in  land  of  the  shadow  of  death
Jer.  23.  8.  they  shall  d.  in  their  own  land,  27.  11.
24.  8.  that  d.  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  44. 1, 8, 13,  26.
35. 15.  ye  shall  d.  in  the  land,  Ezek.  36. 28.  |  37.  25.

42.  13.  if  ye  say,  we  will  not  d.  in  this  land

43.  4.  obeyed  not  L.  to  d.  in  the  land  of  Judah,  5.

50.  3.  make  the  land  desolate,  none  shall  d.  therein
Ezek.  28.  25.  then  shall  they  d.  in  their  land

38.  12.  the  people  that  d,  in  the  midst  of  the  land
Hos.  9.  3.  they  shall  not  d.  in  the  Lord’s  land
Hab.  2.  8.  for  the  violence  of  land,  and  all  that  d.  17.
Zeph.  1. 18.  make  a  riddance  of  all  that  d.  in  the  land
DWELL,  with  place.

Exod.  15.  17.  in  the  place  thou  hast  made  to  d.  in

1  Sam.  12.  8.  and  made  them  to  d.  in  this  place

2  Sam.  7.  10.  they  may  d.  in  a  place  of  their  own
2,  K  ings  6. 1.  behold  the  place  where  we  d.  is  strait

2.  let  us  make  us  a  place  where  we  may  d.

1 Chron.  17.  9.  and  they  shall  d.  in  their  place
Isa.  07.  15. 1  d.  in  the  nigh  and  holy  place
Jer.  f.  3.  1  w’ill  cause  you  to  d.  in  this  place,  7.
DW  ELL  safely.

Prov.  1.  33.  whoso  hearkeneth  to  me  shall  d.  safely
Jer. 23. 6.  in  his  days  Judah  shall  be  saved  and  Israel
shall  d.  safely,  Ezek.  28.  26. 1  34. 95,  28. 1  38.  8.
32. 37.  and  I  will  cause  them  to  d.  safely
Ezek.  38. 11.  I  will  go  to  them  at  rest  that  d.  safely
DWELL  in  safety.

Lev.  25. 18.  keep  my  judgments  and  do  them,  and
ye  shall  d.  in  the  land  in  safety,  19.  Deut.  12. 10.
Deut.  33.  12.  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  d.  in  safety

28.  Israel  then  shall  d.  in  safety  alone
Psal.  4. 8.  thou,  Lord,  only  makestme  to  d.  in  safety
DWELL  therein.

Lev.  27.  32.  enemies  which  d.  therein  be  astonished
Num.  14.  30.  the  land  I  sware  to  make  you  d.  therein
33.  53.  and  ye  shall  d.  therein,  Deut.  11.  31.

Psal.  24.  1.  the  world  and  they  that  d.  therein

37.  29.  the  righteous  shall  d.  therein  for  ever

69.  36.  they  that  love  his  name  shall  d.  therein
107.  34.  for  wickedn.  of  them  that  d.  th.  Jer,  12. 4.

Isa.  24.  6.  they  that  d.  th.  are  desolate,  .Imos  9.  5.
33.  24.  people  that  d.  therein  are  forgiven  iniquity
34.17.  from  generat.  to  generat.  shall  they  rf.  therein

51.  6.  they.thatd.  therein  shall  die  in  like  maimer
Jer.  4.  29.  city  forsaken,  and  not  a  man  d.  therein

8.  16.  devoured  the  city,  and  all  that  d.  therein

12.  4.  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  d.  therein

47.  2.  overflow  the  land  and  them  that  d.  therein

48.  9.  the  cities  desolate  without  any  to  d.  therein

50.  39.  the  wild  beasts  and  the  owls  shall  d.  therein
Ezek.  12.  19.  the  violence  of  them  that  d.  therein

32.  15.  when  1  shall  smite  them  that  d.  therein
37.  25.  they  and  their  children  shall  d.  therein

Mic.  7.  13.  desolate,  because  of  them  that  d.  therein
Nah.  1.  5.  yea,  the  world  is  burnt.,  and  all  that  d.  th.
Acts  1.  20.  his  habitation,  let  no  man  d.  therein
DWELL  together.

Gen.  13.6.  that  they  mights,  together,  their  substance
was  great,  so  that  they  could  not  d.  together
36. 7.  riches  more  than  that  they  might  d.  together
Deut.  25.  5.  if  brethren  d.  together,  and  one  die
Psal.  133.  1.  for  brethren  to  d.  together  in  unity
DWELLED.

Gen.  13.  7*  the  Perizzite  d.  then  in  the  land
12.  Abram  d.  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  Lot  d.  in  the
cities  of  the  plain,  and  pitch  d  toward  Sodom
20.  1.  and  Abraham  d.  between  Kadesh  and  Shur
Ruth  1.  4.  and  they  d.  there  about  ten  years

1  Sam.  12.  11.  God  delivered  you,  and  ye  d.  safe

DWELLER.

Psal.  69.  +  25.  let  there  not  be  a  d.  in  their  tents
DWELLERS.

Isa.  18.  3.  ye  d.  on  earth,  see  ye,  when  he  lifteth  up
Acts  1.  19.  it  was  known  to  the  d.  at  Jerusalem
2. 9.  the  d.  in  Mesopotamia,  we  do  hear  them  speak
DW  EL  LEST.

Dwr.12.29.  thou  sueceedest  them  and  d.  in  their  land

2  Kings  19.  15.  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  d.
between  the  cherubims,  Psal.  80.  1.  Isa.  37. 16.

Psal.  123.  1.  O  thou  that  d.  in  the  Heavens
Cant.  8.  13.  thou  that  d.  in  the  gardens
/fa. 10. 24.  O  my  people  that  d.  in"  Zion,  be  not  afraid
47.  8.  hear  now  this,  thou  that  d.  carelessly
Jer.  49.  16.  O  thou  that  d.  in  the  clefts,  (Jbad.  3.

51.  13.  O  thou  that  d.  upon  many  waters
Lam.  4.  21.  O  daughter  of  Edom,  that  d.  in  land

.  of  Uz

Ezek.  7.  7.  thou  that  d.  in  the  lan  I,  time  is  come
12. 2.  thou  d.  in  the  midst  of  a  rebellious  house
Mic.  1. 1 11.  pass  ye  away,  thou  that  d.  fairly

1  ¥3


E  AG


E  AG


D  WE


with  the  daughter  of  Babylon


Zech.  2.  7*  that  d,  --  ---- —  — .  ,  ,,  - .

J*>/*«  1.  38.  they  said,  Master,  where  d.  thou  .

Rev  2  13.  1  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  d.
DWELLETH.

Lev.  16.  +  16.  the  tabernacle  that  d.  among  them
1U.'.34.  but  the  stranger  that  d.  with  you  shall  be
25. 311.  if  thy  brother  that  d.  by  thee  De  poor,  47-
Deut.  33.  20.  God  d.  as  a  lion,  and  teareth  the  arm
Josh.  6.  25.  Rahab  d.  in  Israel  even  to  this  day

22.  10.  wherein  the  Lord’s  tabernacle  «.

1  Sam.  4.  4.  the  ark  of  covenant  of  Lord,  who  d.

between  cherubims,  2  Sam.  6.  2.  1  Laron,  13.  o.

2  Sam.  7.  2.  but  the  ark  d.  within  curtains
1  C '/iron.  23.  1 25.  the  Lord  d.  in  Jerusalem  for  ever
Job  15. 28.  he  d.  in  desolate  cities  and  in  houses

38.  19.  where  is  the  way  where  light  d. .

3Q.  28.  she  d.  and  abideth  on  the  rock
Psal  9  11  sing  praises  to  the  Lord  who*/.  in  Zion
26  8  Lord,  1  loved  the  place  where  thine  honour  d.

91  l'  he  that*/.  in  the  secret  place  of  the  most  High
113  5.  who  is  like  the  Lord  our  G.  who  d.  on  high?
135  si  blessed  be  the  Lord  who  d.  at  Jerusalem
Prov.  3.’ 29-  seeing  he  d.  securely  by  thee
Isa.  8.  18.  from  the  Lord,  who  d.  in  mount  Zion
33. 5.  the  Lord  is  exalted,  for  he  d.  on  high
Jer  44  2.  are  a  desolation,  and  no  man  d.  therein
49-  31.  the  wealthy  nation  that  d.  without  care
Lam.  1.  3.  Judah,  she  d.  among  the  heathen
Ezek.  16. 46.  thy  younger  sister  d.  at  thy  right  hand
17. 16.  where  the  king  d.  that  made  him  king
Van.  2.  22.  he  revealeth, and  the  light*/,  with  him
Has  4. 3.  the  land  shall  mourn,  and  every  one  that*/.

therein  shall  mourn,  Jim  os  8. 8.
Joel 3. 21. 1  will  cleanse  their  blood,  for  L.  d.  in  Zion
Mat.  23.  21w  sweareth  by  it  and  him  that  */.  therein
John  6. 56.  drinketh  my  blood,  d.  in  me,  and  1  in  him
14. 10.  the  Father  that  d.  in  me,  he  doeth  the  works

17.  the  Spirit,  for  he  d.  in  you,  and  shall  be  in  you
Acts  7.48.  d.  notin  temples  made  with  hands,  17.24.
Rom.  7.  17.  it  is  no  more  I,  but  sin  that  d.  in .me,  20.

18.  1  know  that  in  my  flesh  d.  no  good  thing
8.  11.  shall  quicken,  by  his  Spirit  that*/,  in  you

1  Cor.  3. 16.  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God*/,  in  you
Cot.  2.  9.  in  him  d.  the  fulness  ot  Godhead  bodily

2  Tim.  1.  14.  keep  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  d.  in  us
Jam.  4.5.  the  spirit  that  */.  in  us  lusteth  to  envy

2  Pet.  3. 13.  a  new  earth  wherein  */.  righteousness

1  John  3. 17.  how  */.  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?

24.  that  keepeth  his  commandments,  d.  in  him

4.  12.  if  we  love  one  another,  God  d.  in  us  _

15.  confess  that  Jesus  is  Son  of  God,  God  */,  in  him

16.  he  that  d.  in  love,  d.  in  God,  and  God  in  him

2  John  2.  for  the  trutfi’s  sake  which  d.  in  us
Rev.  2.  13.  was  slain  among  you,  where  Satan  d.

DWELLING,  Substantive.

Gen.  27.  39.  thy  d.  shall  be  the  fatness  of  the  earth
2  Kings  17.  25.  at  the  beginning  of  their  d.  there
2  C hr.  6.  2.  1  have  built  a  place  tor  ttiy  d.  for  ever
Ps.  49. 14.  shall  consume  in  the  grave  from  their  d.
91.  10.  nor  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy  </.

Prov.  21.  20.  there  is  oil  in  the  d.  ot  the  wise
24.  15.  lay  not  wait  against  the  d.  ot  the  righteous
Jer.  49.  33.  Hazor  shall  be  a  d.  for  dragons  and

desolation

Van.  2.  11.  the  gods,  whose  d.  is  not  with  flesh
4  25.  thy  d.  shall  be  with  the  beasts.  32.  1  5.  21.
Nah.  2.  11.  where  is  the  d.  of  the  lions  J.

Mark  5.  3.  who  had  his  d.  among  the  tombs
DWELLING.

Gen.  25.  27.  Jacob  was  a  plain  man,  </.  in  tents
30.  +  20.  and  she  called  Ins  name,  d.

Lev.  25.  29.  if  a  man  sell  a  d.  house  in  a  city
Num.  24.21.  and  he  said,  strong  is  thy  d.  place

1  Kings  8.  30.  hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  d.  place,

when  hearest  forgive,  39,  43,  49.  2  Chron
6.21,30,39.  .  ,

2  Chr.  30.  27.  their  prayer  came  up  to  his  holy  d.
36.  15.  the  Lord  had  compassion  on  his  d.  place

Job  8.  22.  the  d.  place  of  the  wicked  come  to  nought
21.  28.  where  are  the  </.  places  of  the  wicked  ?

Psal.  49.  11.  and  their  d.  places  to  all  generations
52.  5.  God  shall  pluck  thee  out  ot  thy  d.

74.  7.  by  casting  down  the  d.  place  of  thy  name
76.  2.  in  Salem  nis  tabernacle,  his  d.  place  in  Zion
79.  7.  for  they  have  laid  waste  his*/,  place
90.  1.  Lord  thou  hast  been  our  d.  place  in  all

generations

Isa.  4.  5.  the  Lord  will  create  on  every  d.  place

18.  4.  and  I  will  consider  in  my  </.  place
Jer.  6. 1 2.  I  likened  Zion  to  a  woman  d.  at  home

30. 18.  and  I  will  have  mercy  on  his  d.  places
46. 19. 0  thou  daughter  */.  in  Egypt,  furnish  thyself
51.  30.  have  burnt  their  */.  places,  bars  are  broken
37.  Babylon  shall  become  a  d.  place  for  dragons
Ezek.  6.  6.  in  all  your  d.  places  the  cities  laid

waste

37.  23.  I  will  save  them  out  of  all  their  d.  places
38. 11.  all  of  them  (/.without  walls,  bars,  nor  gates
Joel  3.  17.  that  1  am  the  Lord  your  God  d.  in  Zion
I  lab.  1. 6.  to  possess  the  */.  places  that  are  not  theirs
Zeph.  3.  7.  so  their  d.  should  not  be  cut  off
Acts  2.  5.  there  were  d.  at  Jerus.  Jews,  devout  men

19.  17.  was  known  to  the  Greeks,  */.  at  Ephesus
1  Cor.  4. 11.  are  naked,  and  have  no  certain  */.  place

1  Tim.  6.  16.  d.  in  the  light  no  man  can  approach
Heb.  11.9.  d.  in  tabernacles  with  Isaac  and  Jacob

2  Pet.  2.  8.  Lot,  that  righteous  man,  d.  among  them

DWELLINGS.

Exod.  10.  23.  all  the  children  of  Isr.  had  light  in  d.
Lev.  3.  17.  it  shall  be  a  perpetual  statute  through¬
out  all  your  d.  23.  14.  Num.  35.  29.
7.  26.  ye  shall  eat  no  blood  in  any  of  your  d.

23. 3.  ye  shall  do  no  work  in  all  your  d.  31.  _

Job  18. 19.  shall  not  have  any  remaining  in  his  d.
21.  surely  such  are  the  d.  of  the  wicked
39.  6. 1  have  made  the  barren  land  his  d.

Psal.  55.  15.  for  wickedness  is  in  their  d.

87.  2.  gates  of  Zion,  more  than  all  ttie  d.  of  Jacob
Isa.  32.  18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  sure  d
Jer.  9.  19.  because  our  d.  have  cast  us  out
Ezek.  25.  4.  men  of  the  east  make  their  d.  in  thee
Zeph.  2.  6.  the  sea-coast  snail  be  d.  for  shepherds
124


DWELT.

Gen.  11.  2.  and  they  d.  there,  31.  126. 17*  2  Kings
16.  6.  1  Chron.  4.  43.  2  Chron.  28.  18.
23. 10.  Ephron  d.  among  the  children  of  Heth
Lev.  18.  3.  the  doings  of  Egypt  wherein  ye  */.  not  do
Num.  31.  10.  wherein  they  d.  2  Kings  1?.  29.

1  Kings  13. 11.  d.  an  old  prophet  in  Beth-el,25.

Job  29.  25.  and  I  d.  as  a  king  in  the  army
Psal.  74.  2.  this  mount  Zion  wherein  thou  hast  d.

Isa.  29  1.  woe  to  Ariel,  the  city  where  David  d.

Jer.  2. 6.  led  us  through  a  land  where  no  man  d.

39.  14.  so  Jeremiah  d.  among  the  people
Ezek.  3. 15.  that  d.  by  the  river  of  Chebar
31.  6.  under  his  shadow  d.  great  nations,  17.

37.  25.  the  land  wherein  your  lathers  have  d.

Van  4. 21.  under  which  the  beasts  of  the  field  d.
Zeph.  2. 15.  this  is  the  rejoicing  city  that*/,  carelessly
Luke  1.  65.  fear  came  on  all  that  d.  round  about
John  1. 14.  the  word  was  made  flesh  and  d.  among  us
39  they  came  and  saw  where  he  </.  and  abode
Acts  13.  17.  when  they  d.  as  strangers  in  E^ypt
22. 12.  Ananias  having  good  report  of  all  that  d.

28  30  Paul  d.  two  years  in  his  own  hired  house
Rev.  li.  10.  tormented  them  that  d.  on  the  earth
DWELT  at.

Gen.  22. 19.  and  Abraham  </.  at  Beer-sheba
Num.il.  34.  Amor*  which  d.  at  Heshbon,  Veut.3.2.
Judo.  9. 41.  and  Abimelech  d.  at  Arumah

1  Kings  15. 18.  Benhadad  d.  at  Damasc.  2  Ch.  16.  2.

2  Kings  19. 36.  Sennacher.  d.  at  N  ineveh,  Isa.  37-37 •

1  Chr.  2.  55.  families  of  the  scribes  which  d.  at  Jabez

9.  34.  these  fathers  of  the  Levites  d.  at  Jerusalem
Acts  9. 22.  Saul  confounded  Jews  that  */.  at  Damas.
32.  Peter  came  to  the  saints  who  d.  at  Lydda
DWELT  in.

Num.  20. 15.  and  we  have  d.  in  Egypt  a  long  time

21.  31.  thus  Israel  d.  in  the  land  ot  the  Amorites
Veut.  2. 12.  d.  in  their  stead,  21, 22, 23. 1  Chr.  5.  22.

33. 16.  the  good  will  ot  him  that  d.  in  the  bush
Judg .  8. 11.  by  the  way  of  them  that  d.  in  tents
29,  Jerubbaal  went  and  d.  in  his  own  house

1  Sam.  19. 18.  David  and  Samuel  d.  in  Naioth
31.  7.  Philistines  came  and  </.  mtliem,  1  Chr.  10.  7-

2  Sam.  7.  6.  whereas  I  have  not  d.  in  any  house  since
1  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  1  Chron.  17.  5.

9. 12.  all  that  d.  in  the  house  ot  Ziba  were  servants

14.  28.  Absalom  d.  two  full  years  in  Jerusalem

1  Kings  2.  38.  Shimei  d.  in  Jerusalem  many  days
12.  2.  Jerob.  was  fled  from  Solomon,  d.  in  Egypt

2  Kings  13.  5.  Israel  */.  in  their  tents  as  aforetime

15.  5.  Ahaziah  */.  in  a  several  house,  2  Chr.  26.21.

22.  14.  Iluldah  the  prophetess,  witeot  Shallum,  d.
in  Jerusalem,  in  the  college,  2  Chron.  34.  22.

1  Chron.  4.  41.  these  came  and  d.  in  their  rooms

5. 10.  the  Hagarites  fell,  and  they  </.  in  their  tents
8.  28.  were  chief  men,  these  d.  in  Jerusalem
11. 7.  and  David  d.  in  the  castle,  2  Sam.  5.  9.

Ezra  2. 70.  the  priests,  the  Levites,  and  the  Nethi-
nims,  d.  in  their  cities.  Neb.  3. 26. 1 11.  21.
Neh. 7.73.  N  ethinims  and  all  Israel  d.  in  their  cities
Job  22.  8.  and  the  honourable  men  d.  in  it
Psal.  94.  17.  my  soul  had  almost  d.  in  silence
Isa.  13. 20.  shall  never  be  inhabited,  nor  shall  it  be
</.  in  from  generation  to  generation,  Jer.  50.  39.
Jer.  35.  10.  blit  we  have  d.  in  tents,  and  obeyed
41.  if.  they  d.  in  the  habitation  of  Chimham
Ezek.  36. 17.  when  Israel  d.  in  their  own  land
39.26.  when  d.  safely  in  their  land, none  made  afraid
Van.  4. 12.  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  d.  in  the  boughs
Mat.  2.  23.  Joseph  d.  in  a  city  called  Nazareth

4. 13.  Jesus  came  and  d.  in  Capernaum
Luke  13. 4.  were  sinners  above  all  that  d.  in  Jer.
Acts  7.2.  before  Abraham  */.  in  Charran,4.

19. 10.  all  they  who  d.  in  Asia  heard  word  of  Jesus
:  Tim.  1.  5.  which  */.  first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois

DWELT  therein.

Num.  32. 40.  he  gave  Gilead  to  Machir,  he  d.  therein
Vent.  2. 10.  Ernirns  */.  th.  |j  20.  giants  </.  th.  in  old  time
1  Kings  11.  24.  Rezon  went  to  Damascus  and  d.  th.
12. 25.  Jeroboam  built  Shechem,  and  d.  therein
Neh.  13.  16.  there  </.  men  of  Tyre  also  therein
Psal.  68. 10.  thy  congregation  hath  </.  therein
DWELT  with.

Ruth  2.23.  and  Ruth  d.  with  her  mother-in-law
1  Sam.  22.  4.  his  father  and  mother  d.  w.  k.  of  Moab
1  Chron.  4.  23.  there  they  d.  with  king  for  his  work
8.  32.  these  also  </.  with  their  brethren,  9.  38.

Psal.  120. 6.  my  soul  hath  long  </.  with  him  that
Jer.  40.  6.  Jeremiah  d.  with  him  among  the  people
l


E.


EACH.

Gen.  15. 10.  Abraham  laid  e.  piece  against  another
34.  25.  Simeon  and  Levi  took  e.  man  his  sword
40. 5.  e.  man  his  dream,  ||  45.22.  e.  changes  of  raim.
Exod.  18. 7.  and  they  asked  e.  other  of  their  welfare
30.  34.  of  e.  shall  there  be  a  like  weight
Num.  1.  44.  e.  one  was  for  the  house  of  his  fathers
7. 3.  and  they  brought  for  e.  one  an  ox
16.  17.  thou  also  and  Aaron  e.  of  you  his  censer
Josh.  22.14.  of  e.  chief  house  a  prince,/,  one  was  head
Judg.  8.  18.  e.  one  resembled  the  children  of  a  king
21. 22.  because  we  reserved  not  to  e.  man  his  wife
Ruth  1 . 9.  grant  that  they  may  find  rest  e.  of  you

1  Kings  4. 7 .  e.  man  his  month  in  a  year  made  prov.
22.  10.  and  the  kings  e.  sat  on  his  throne

2  Kings  15. 20.  he  exacted  of  e.  man  fifty  shekels
Psal.  85. 10.  righteousness  and  peace  kissed  e.  other
Isa.  2.  20.  they  made  e.  one  for  himself  to  worship

6. 2.  stood  the  seraphims,  e.  one  had  six  wings
35. 7.  where  e.  lay,  shall  be  grass,  reeds,  and  rushes
57.  2.  e.  one  walking  in  his  uprightness
Ezek.  4.  6.  1  have  appointed  thee  e.  day  for  a  year
Luke  13. 15.  doth  not  e.  on  sabbath  loose  his  ox  or  ass
Acts  2.  3.  cloven  tongues  sat  upon  e.  of  them
Phil.  2.  3.  let  e.  esteem  other  better  than  himself
2  Thess.  1. 3.  charity  toward  e.  other  aboundeth
Rev.  4.  8.  the  four  beasts  had  e.  of  them  six  wings
EAGLE

Is  a  bird  of  prep,  whereof  there  is  frequent  men¬


tion  in  scripture.  It  is  declared  in  Lev.  11  V>.
to  be  unclean,  as  are  all  other  birds  oj  its  species  ;
as  the  sea-eagle,  and  the  eagle  named  Ossifrage,
because  it  breaks  the  bones  in  order  to  extract  the
marrow.  The  hawk  and  vulture  may  also  be
reckoned  as  different  species  of  eagles.

It  is  said  that  when  an  eagle  sees  its  young  ones
so  well-grown,  as  to  venture  upon  flying,  it  hovers
over  their  nest,  flutters  with  its  wings,  and  ex¬
cites  them  to  imitate  it,  and  take  their  flight  ;
and  when  it  sees  them  weary  or  fearful,  it  takes
them  upon  its  back,  and  carries  them  so,  that
the  fowlers  cannot  hurt  the  young  without
piercing  through  the  body  of  the  old  one.  In  al¬
lusion  to  this,  it  is  said,  Exod.  19.  4-  That  God
delivered  his  people  out  of  Egypt,  and  bore  them
upon  eagles’  wings  ;  and  in  Deut.  32.  11.  That
the  Lord  took  upon  himself  the  care  of  his  peo
pie  ;  that  he  led  them  out  of  Egypt,  and  set  them
at  liberty  ;  as  an  eagle  takes  its  young  out  of  the
nest,  to  teach  them  how  to  fly,  by  gently  fluttering
about  them.

It  is  of  great  courage,  so  as  to  set  on  harts  and
great  beasts.  And  has  no  less  subtilty  in  taking
them  ;  for  having  filled  its  wings  with  sand  and
dust,  it  sitteth  on  their  horns,  and  by  its  wings
shaketh  it  in  their  eyes,  whereby  they  become  an
easy  prey.  It  flieth  very  high,  Prov.  30.  19.  yet,
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  seizeth  on  its  prey,
whether  on  the  earth,  or  in  the  sea.  It  buildeth
its  nest  very  high  in  the  tops  of  rocks,  Job  39.  27.

It  goeth  forth  to  prey  about  noon,  when  men  are
gone  home  out  of  the  fields.

It  hath  a  little  eye,  but  a  very  quick  sight,  and
discerns  its  prey  afar  off,  and  beholds  the  sun
with  open  eyes.  Such  of  her  young  as  through
weakness  of  sight  cannot  behold  the  sun  it  rejects
as  unnatural.  It  liveth  long,  nor  dieth  of  age
or  sickness,  say  some,  but  of  hunger  ;  for  by  age,
its  bill  grows  so  hooked ,  that  it  cannot  feed.  It
preys  not  on  small  birds,  but  on  geese,  hares,
harts,  serpents,  and  dead  carcases.  It  is  said,
that  it  preserves  its  nest  from  poison,  by  having
therein  a  precious  stone  named  Aetites,  C with¬
out  which  it  is  thought  the  eagle,  cannot  lay  her
eggs,  and  which  some  use  to  prevent  abortion,  and
helps  delivery  in  women,  by  tying  it  above  or
below  the  navel,)  and  keepeth  it  clean  by  the  fre¬
quent  use  of  the  herb  maiden-hair.  Unless  it  be
very  hungry,  it  devoureth  not  the  whole  prey,  but
leaveth  part  of  it  for  other  birds,  which  follow  it
Its  feathers  or  quills  are  said  to  consume  other
quills,  that  lie  near  them.  Between  the  eagle
and  dragon  there  is  constant  enmity,  the  eagle
seeking  to  kill  it,  and  the  dragon  breaks  all  the
eagle’s  eggs  it  can  find  ;  and  hearing  the  noise  of
the  eagle  in  the  air,  speedeth  to  its  den,  and
there  hides  himself.  To  provoke  its  young  ones
to  fly,  it  flutters  over  them  and  takes  them  on  its
wings,  Deut.  32.  11.  Isa.  40.  31.  and  if  they  at¬
tempt  not  to  fly,  it  beats  them  with  its  bill,  and
gives  them  no  food.  Being  exceedingly  hot  and
dry ,  it  soon  waxeth  angry,  nor  keepeth,  but  shuns
society  with  others.  Some  eagles  prey  in  the  air.
some  in  the  sea,  wherein  they  can  from  on  high
perceive  the  smallest  fish,  and  some  on  the  land.
The  eagle  moult ers  and  loses  its  feathers  yearly,
at  which  seasons  it  is  very  feeble.  It  is  said,
Psal.  103.  5.  Thy  youth  is  renewed  like  the
eagle’s;  that  is,  thy  bodily  health  and  strength
continue  vigorous  and  lively,  as  the  eagle’s  doth,
even  till  old  age.

In  Micah  1.  16.  it  is  said,  Enlarge  thy  baldness
as  the  eagle :  This  signifies,  that  they  to  whom
the  prophet  addresses  himself,  should  cut  off  their
hair  in  time  of  mourning,  should  be  naked  and
stripped  like  an  eagle  when  it  moults  its  fea¬
thers.  It  is  said  that  the  eagle,  at  that  season *
casts  almost  all  its  feathers,  and  falls  into  a  lan¬
guishing  condition,  so  as  neither  to  be  able  to  hun *
after  prey  as  usual,  nor  create  terror  in  other
birds.

Our  Saviour,  in  Mat.  24.  28.  says,  Wheresoever
the  carcase  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered
together.  Job  says  of  the  eagle,  chap.  39.  30.
Where  the  slain  are,  there  is  she.  Naturalists
observe,  that  the  common  sort  of  eagles  eat  no
carrion,  but  that  there  is  a  particular  species
which  does:  that  there  is  not  one  of  any  kind
but  what  eats  raw  flesh,  though  not  indifferently
of  all  sorts,  nor  that  of  any  creature  which  dies
of  itself,  but  such  only  as  is  fresh  and  lately
killed.  What  Job  says  concerning  the  eagle  is
to  be  understood  in  a  literal  sense :  but  our  Sa¬
viour  makes  an  allegory  of  it,  and  says,  that
wherever  there  are  Jews,  who  deal  unfaithfully
with  God,  there  will  be  also  Romans,  who  bore
the  eagle  in  their  standards,  to  execute  God's  ven¬
geance  upon  them.

As  the  eagle  generally  flies  most  swiftly,  especially
when  hunger  and  the  sight  of  prey  quicken  its
motion:  in  this  sense  the  days  of  men  are  com¬
pared  to  it.  Job  9.  26.  My  days  are  passed
away  as  the  eagle,  that  hasteth  to  the  prey.
So  are  riches  ;  Prov.  23.  5.  Riches  certainly
make  themselves  wings,  they  fly  away  as  an
eagle  toWards  heaven.  As  also  the  persecutors  of
the  church;  Lam.  4.  19-  Our  persecutors  are
swifter  than  the  eagles  of  the  heaven.  The  kings
of  Babylon  and  Egypt  are  also  compared  to  an
eagle,  Ezek.  17.  3,  7.  .

Lev.  11. 13.  the  e.  have  in  abomination,  Deut.  14. 12.
Deut.  28.  49.  a  nation  as  swift  as  the  e.  flieth
32.  11.  as  an  e.  stirreth  up  her  nest,  fluttereth  over
Job  9.  26.  as  the  e.  that  hasteth  to  the  prey
39.  27 .  doth  the  e.  mount  up  at  thy  command  ?
Prov.  23.  5.  riches  fly  away  as  an  e.  towards  heaven
30.  19.  the  way  of  an  e.  in  the  air  is  wonderful
Jer.  48.  40.  behold,  he  shall  fly  as  an  e.  over  Moab
49. 16.  tho’  thou  shouldest  make  thy  nest  high  as  e.
Ezek.  1.10.  they  four  also  had  the  face  of  an  e.  10. 14.


17.  3.  a  great  e.  with  great  wings  came,  7.


E  A  R


E  A  R


EAR


><in.  4. 33.  his  hairs  were  grown  iikee.  feathers
\  4.  ttie  first  beast  was  like  alien,  and  had  e.  wings
lot.  H.  1.  as  ane.  against  the  house  of  tiie  lxird
bad.  4.  tho’  thou  exalt  thyself  as  e.  bring  thee  down
iic.  1.  10.  enlarge  thy  baldness  as  the  e.
lab.  1.  8.  the  Chaldeans  shall  tly  as  the  e.

<e.v.  4.7.  the  fourth  beast  was  likea  flying  e.

12.14.  to  the  woman  were  given  wings  of  a  great  e.

EAGLES.

'.tod.  1 9. 4.  ye  have  seen  how  1  bare  you  on  e.  wings
Sam.  1 . 23.  were  swifter  than  e.  stronger  than  lions
'sal.  103.  5.  thy  youth  is  renewed  like  the  e.

' rov .  30. 17  •  and  the  young  e.  shall  eat  it

'mi.  40.  31 .  they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  e.

>r.  4.13.  his  horses  are  swifter  than  e.
am.  4.19.  our  persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  e.
Hat.  24.  28.  there  will  e.  be  gathered,  Luke  17. 37-
EAR.

The  ear  .s  the  instrument  or  organ  of  hearing ,
Eccl.  1.  8.  The  Lord  says  to  Isaiah,  Make
the  hearts  of  this  people  fat,  and  make  their
ears  heavy,  Isa.  6. 10. ;  that  is,  tell  them  that  I
u'ill  suffer  them  to  harden  their  hearts,  and  stop
their  ears  against  my  word.  The  scripture  some¬
times  says  that  the  prophets  do  what  they  foretell
only.  The  same  prophet,  speaking  of  himself,
says,  The  Lord  hath  opened  mine  ear,  and  1
was  not  rebellious,  Isa.  50. 5.  He  has  given  me
his  orders,  and  I  obey  without  contradiction.
And  speaking  to  the  Jews,  Thou  heardest  not,  yea,
thou  knewest  not,  yea,  from  that  time  thattnine
ear  was  not  opened,  Isa.  48.  8.  Thou  hast  never
heard  any  mention  made  of  what  I  am  going  to
tell  thee.  Uncircumcised  ears.  Jer.  6.  10.  are
ears  deaf  to  the  word  of  God  :  Their  ear  is  un¬
circumcised  ;  overgrown,  as  it  were,  with  a  thick
skin;  their  hearts  are  filled  with  obstinacy  and
impenitency,  which  make  them  incapable  of  enter¬
taining  any  good  counsel.  What  ye  hear  in  the
ear,  that  preach  ye  upon  the  house-tops,  Mat.
10.  27.  Declare  that  every  where,  and  publicly,
which  I  have  revealed  to  you  in  private.  He
that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear,  Mat.  11.  15.
He  that  hath  his  ears  opened,  that  hath  a  mind
enabled  by  God  to  believe  what  1  say,  let  him
make  use  of  these  abilities  to  understand  and
consider  it.  Ear  is  figuratively,  and  after  the
manner  of  men,  applied  to  Gtd,  denoting  his
readiness  to  hear  and  answer  the  prayers  of  his
people,  Psal.  34.  15. 1  116.  2.  His  ears  are  open
unto  their  cry.  Because  he  hath  inclined  his
ear  unto  me,  therefore  will  I  call  upon  him  as
long  as  I  live.

lo  uncover  the  ear  is  an  Hebraism,  whereby  is
meant,  to  show,  or  reveal  something  to  a  person.
1  Sam.  20.  +  2.  My  father  will  do  nothing
either  great  or  small,  but  that  he  will  uncover
mine  ear ;  that  is,  he  will  shew  it  me.  The
servant  who  renounced  the  privilege  of  being  freed
from  servitude  in  the  sabbatical  year,  had  his
ear  pierced  with  an  awl:  this  was  performed  in
the  presence  of  the  judges,  that  it  might  appear
that  this  was  his  own  free  choice,  and  that  he  was
not  overawed,  or  compelled  thereto  by  his  master  ;
and  likewise  that  the  agreement  being  so  pub¬
licly  and  solemnly  confirmed,  might  be  irrevoca¬
ble :  His  ear  was  bored  at  his  master's  door ;
which  was  a  mark  of  servitude  and  bondage,  arid
did  represent  his  settled  and  perpetual  obligation
to  abide  in  that  house,  and  there  to  hear  and
obey  his  master's  commands,  Exod.  21.  6.  Deut.
15.  16,  17.

The  Psalmist  speaking  in  the  person  of  the  Mes¬
siah,  says  to  God,  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou
didst  not  desire,  mine  ears  hast  thou  opened.
The  Hebrew  reads.  Mine  ears  hast  thou  digged  ;
thou  hast  opened  them  and  made  them  attentive  ;
thou  hast  given  me  ears  to  hear,  and  obey  thy
precepts:  Ur,  otherwise,  thou  hast  pierced  them,
as  those  servants  were  used,  who  chose  to  remain
with  their  masters  after  the  sabbatical  year ;
thou  hast  fitted,  inclined,  and  obliged  me  to  thy
service.  The  Septuagint,  whom  the  Apostle  fol¬
lows,  Heb.  10.  5.  read  this  passage,  A  body  hast
thou  prepared  me  :  Wherein,  though  the  words
differ,  the  sense  is  the  same.  That  Christ  might
become  God's  servant  for  ever,  which  was  signi¬
fied  by  boring  of  the  ear ,  God  the  Father  by  his
Spirit  did  furnish  him  with  an  human  nature,
that  so  he  might  perform  that  piece  of  service  which
God  required,  namely,  the  offering  up  himself  a
bloody  sacrifice  for  sin,  to  which  he  was  obedi¬
ent.  Phil.  2.  8.  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a
man,  he  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the
death  of  the  cross.  Thus  were  his  ears  bored,
which  could  not  be,  if  he  had  not  been  clothed
with  a  body.

Exod.  21.6.  his  master  shall  bore  his  e.  Deut.  15. 17.

1  Sam.  9. 15.  the  Lord  hath  told  Samuel  in  his  e.

20.  t  2.  but  that  he  will  uncover  mine  e.

+  12.  if  1  send  not  to  thee  and  uncover  thine  e.

22. +  8.  there  is  none  that  uncovereth  mine  e.

2  Sam.  7.  +27.  thou,  O  Lord,  hast  opened  the  e.

2  Rings  19.  16.  bow  down  thine  e.  Ps.  31.  2. 1  86. 1.
1 Chr .  17. 1 25.  hast  revealed  the  e.  of  thy  servant
Reh.  1.6.  let  thine  e.  be  attentive,  and  eyes  open,  11.
Job  4. 12.  and  mine  e.  received  a  little  thereof

12. 11.  doth  not  the  e.  try  words  ?34.  3.
i3.  l.mine  e.  hath  heard  and  understood  it

29.  11.  when  the  e.  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me

21.  to  me  men  gave  e.  waited,  and  kept  silence

32.11.  behold,  lgave  e.  to  your  reasons

36. 10.  heopeneth  also  their  e.  to  discipline

42. 5.  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  e.

I  sal.  10.  17.  thou  wilt  cause  thine  e.  to  hear
18.  +44.  at  the  hearing  of  the  e.  they  shall  obey

31.  2.  bow  down  thine  e.  to  me,  deliver  me  speedily
08. 4.  like  the  deaf  adder  that  stoppeth  her  e.

1 7-  1.  1  cried  unto  God,  and  he  gavee.  untome
44.  9.  he  that  planted  the  e.  shall  he  not  hear 1
116.2.  because  he  hath  inclined  his«.  untome
rrov.  5. 1.  and  bow  thine  e.  to  my  understanding


Prov.b.iS.  nor  inclined  my  e.  tc<  them  that  instructed
15.  31.  the  e.  that  hcareth  the  ieproof  cf  life
17-  4.  and  a  liar  giveth  e.  to  a  naughty  tongue

18. 15.  the  e.  of  the  wise  seeketh  knowledge

20. 12.  the  hearing  e.  the  seeing  eye,  Ld.  made  both

22. 17.  bow  thine  e.  hear  the  wonts  of  the  wise

25. 12.  so  is  a  wise  reprover  on  an  obedient  e.

28. 9.  he  that  turneth  away  his  e.  from  hearing
Eccl.  1. 8.  nor  is  the  e.  filled  with  hearing

Isa.  48.  8.  from  that  time  thine  e.  was  not  opened

50. 4.  he  wakeneth  my  e.  to  hear  as  the  learned

5.  Lord  hath  opened  mine  e.and  I  was  not  rebellious

59. 1.  nor  is  his  e.  heavy  that  it  cannot  hear

64. 4.  men  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  e.
Jer.  6. 10.  behold  their  e.  is  uncircumcised

7. 24.  they  hearkened  not,  nor  inclined  their  e.  26.

I  11.  8.  1  17-  23.  1  25.  4.  [  34.  14.  |  44.  5.
9.  20.  let  your  e.  receive  the  word  ot  the  Lord

35. 15.  but  ye  have  not  inclined  your  e.

Lam.  3.  56.  hide  not  thine  e.  at  my  breathing
Amos  3. 12.  taketh  from  the  hon  a  piece  of  an  e.
Mat.  10.  27.  what  ye  hear  in  the  e.  that  preach
26.  51.  and  smote  off"  his  e.  Mark  14.  47-

Luke  12.  3.  that  which  ye  have  spoken  in  the  e.

22.  51.  and  he  touched  his  e.  and  healed  him
John  18.  26.  the  servant  whose  e.  Peter  cut  off
1  Cor.  2. 9.  is  written,  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  e.  heard

12. 16.  if  the  e.  shall  say,  because  I  am  not  the  eye
Rev.  2. 7-  he  that  hath  an  e.  let  him  hear  what  Spirit

saith  to  churches,  11, 17,  29. 1  3.  5, 13,  22. 1 13.  9.
Incline  EAR.

Ps.  17.6.  O  God,  incline  thine  e.  tome,  and  hear  mv
speech, 71.  2. 1  88.  2.  Isa.  37.17.  Dan.  9. 18.

45. 10.  O  daughter,  consider,  and  incline  thine  e.
49.  4.  T  will  incline  mine  e.  to  a  parable

Prov.  2.  2.  so  that  thou  incline  thine  e.  to  wisdom
4. 20.  my  son,  incline  thine  e.  to  my  sayings
Isa.  55.  3.  incline  your  e.  and  come  unto  me
Give  EAR.

Exod.  15. 26.  if  wilt  give  e.  to  his  commandments
Deut.  1. 45.  but  the  Lord  would  not  hearken  nor  give
e.  to  your  voice,  2  Chron.  24. 19.  Neh.  9. 30.

32. 1.  give  e.  O  heavens,  and  I  will  speak
Jvdg.  5. 3.  bear,  O  ye  kings,  give  e.  O  ye  princes
Job  34.  2.  give  e.  to  me,  ye  that  have  knowledge
Psal.  5. 1.  give  e.  to  my  words,  O  Lord,  54.  2.

17- 1.  give  e.  unto  my  prayer,  55.  1. 1 86. 6.

39. 12.  hear  mv  prayer,  give  e.  to  my  cry,  141. 1.

49. 1.  givee.  all  ye  inhabitants  of  tne  world

78.  1 .  givee.  O  my  people  )|  80. 1 .  give  e.  shepherd
84.  8.  hear  my  prayer,  give  e.  O  God  of  Jacob
143.  1.  O  Lord ,give  e.  to  my  supplications
Isa.  1. 2.  give  e.  O  earth,  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken
10.  give  e.  to  the  law  of  our  God,  ye  people

8. 9.  give  e.  all  ye  of  far  countries,  gird  yourselves
28.  23.  give  ye  e.  and  hear  my  voice,  hearken

32. 9.  ye  careless  daughters,  give  e.  to  my  speech
42.  23.  who  among  you  will  give  e.  to  this?

51.  4.  hearken  and  give  e.  to  me,  O  my  nation
Jer.  13. 15.  give  e.  be  not  proud,  the  L.  hath  spoken
Hos.  5. 1.  and  give  ye  e.  O  house  of  the  king
Joel  1.  2.  give  e.  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  land
Right  EAR.

Exod.  29.  20.  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  e.  of  his
sons,  Lev.  8.  23,  24.  |  14.  14,  17,  25,  28.
Luke  22.  50.  one  cut  off  his  right  e.  John  18. 10.
EAR.

Exod.  9.  31.  for  barley  was  in  the  e.  and  flax  boiled
Mark  4.  28.  then  the  e.  the  full  corn  in  the  e.
EAR.

1  Sam.  8. 12.  the  king  will  set  them  to  e.  the  ground
Isa.  30.  24.  the  oxen  that  e.  the  ground  shali  eat

EARED.

Deut.  21.  4.  to  a  rough  valley  neither  e.  nor  sown
EARING.

Gen.  45. 6.  in  which  shall  be  neither  e.  nor  harvest
Exod.  34. 21.  in  e.  time  and  harvest  thou  shalt  rest
EARLY.

Gen.  19.  2.  ye  shall  rise  e.  and  go  on  your  way
Judg.  7.  3.  whoso  is  fearful,  let  him  departs.

19.  9.  and  to-morrow  get  you  e.  on  your  way

2  Kings  6. 15.  servant  of  the  man  of  G.  was  risen  e.
Psal.  46.  5.  God  shall  help  her,  and  that  right  e.

57. 8.  awake  up,  I  myself  will  awake  e.  108.  2.

63. 1.  thou  art  my  God,  e.  will  I  seek  thee

78.  34.  they  returned  and  enquired  e.  after  God
90.  14.  O  satisfy  us  e.  with  thy  mercy  that  we  may

101. 8.  I  will  e.  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the  land
Prov.  1.28.  they  shall  seek  me  e.  but  not  find  me

8. 17.  those  that  seek  me  e.  shall  find  me
Cant.  7-  12.  let  us  get  up  e.  to  the  vineyards
Isa.  26.  9.  with  my  spirit  will  I  seek  thee  e.

Hos.  5. 15.  in  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  e.

6. 4.  and  as  the  e.  dew  itgoeth  away,  13.  3.

Luke  24.  22.  women  who  were  e.  at  the  sepulchre
John  18.  28.  they  led  Jesus  to  the  hall,  and  it  was  e.

20. 1.  the  first  day  cometh  Mary  Magdalene  e.
Jam.  5.  7-  till  he  receive  the  e.  and  latter  rain

See  Arose,  Rise,  Risen,  Rising,  Rose,
Morning.

EAR-RING.

Gen.  24. 22.  that  the  man  took  a  golden  e.

30.  when  Laban  saw  e.  and  bracelets  on  his

[sister’s  hands

47. 1  put  the  e.  upon  her  face,  and  the  bracelets
.Job  42.  11.  every  one  gave  Job  an  e.  of  gold
Prov.  25. 12.  as  an  e.  of  gold,  so  is  a  wise  reprover
EAR-RINGS.

Gen.  35.  4.  they  gave  to  Jacob  all  their  e.

Exod.  32.  2.  break  off  the  golden  e.  and  bring  to  me
35.  22.  they  brought  e.  for  their  offerings
Num.  31. 50.  we  have  brought  e.  to  make  atonement
Judg.  8. 24.  give  every  man  the  e.  of  his  prey
La.  3.  20.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  e.

Ezek.  16.  12.  and  I  put  e.  in  thine  ears
LIos.  2. 13.  and  she  decked  herself  with  her  e.
EARS.

Gen.  23.  +  10.  Ephron  answered  in  the  e.  of  children
44. 18.  let  me  speak  a  word  in  my  lord’s  e.

50. 4.  speak,  I  pray  you,  in  the  e.  of  Pharaoh
Exod.  10.  2.  thou  mayest  tell  it  in  the  e.  of  thy  son

17. 14  and  rehearse  it  in  the  e.  of  Joshua


Num.  1 1.  +  1.  it  was  evil  In  the  e.  of  the  Lore
18.  for  you  have  wept  in  the  e.  of  the  Loro
Deut.  31.  30.  Moses  spake  in  the  e.  of  the  congre¬
gation

Josh.  20.  4.  declare  his  cause  in  t!  e  e.  of  the  elders
Judg.  9.  2.  in  the  e.  of  the  men  of  Shechem,  3.

1  Sam.  3.  11.  at  which  both  the  e.  of  every  one  that
heareth  it  shall  tingle,  2  Kings  21. 12.  Jer.  19. 3.

8.  21.  he  rehearseth  them  in  thee,  of  the  Lord
25. 1 24.  let  thine  handmaid  speak  in  thine  e.

2  Sam.  7.  22.  nor  any  god  beside  thee,  according  to
all  that  we  have  heard  with  our  e.  1  Chron.  17.  20.
22. 7.  and  my  cry  did  enter  into  his  e.%

Job  15.  21.  a  dreadful  sound  is  in  his  e.  in  prosperity

28.  22.  we  have  heard  the  fame  thereof  with  our  e.

33.  16.  then  lie  openeth  the  e.  of  men,  and  sealeth
Psal.  18.  6.  and  my  cry  came  even  into  his  e.

34.  15.  and  his  e.  are  opened  to  their  cry
44.  1.  we  have  heard  with  our  e.  O  God
115.  6.  they  have  e.  but  hear  not,  135.  17*

Prov.  21.  13.  whoso  stoppeth  his  e.  at  cry  of  the  poor

23.  9.  speak  not  in  the  e.  of  a  fool,  he  will  despise
26.  17.  like  one  that  taketh  a  dog  by  the  e.

Isa.  11.  3.  nor  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  his  e.

32.  3.  the  e.  of  them  that  hear  shall  hearken

33.  15.  that  stoppeth  his  e.  from  hearing  of  blood

35.  5.  and  the  e.  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped

42.  20.  opening  the  e.  but  he  heareth  not

43.  8.  bring  forth  the  blind  and  deaf  that  have  e.
Jer.  2.2.  go,  and  cry  in  thee,  of  Jerusalem

5.  21.  O  people,  which  have  e.  and  hear  not

29.  29.  Zephaniah  read  in  the  e.  of  Jeremiah

36.  15.  sit  down  now,  and  read  it  in  our  e.

21.  Jehudi  read  it  in  the  e.  of  the  king  and  princes
Mat.  28. 14.  if  this  come  to  the  governor’s  e.

Mark  7.  33.  he  put  his  fingers  into  his  e.  and  spit
35.  and  straightway  his  e.  were  opened

8. 18.  having  e.  hear  ye  not  ?  do  ye  not  remember  <
Acts  7.  51.  ye  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  e.  resist
11.  22.  tidings  came  to  the  e.  of  the  church
17.  20.  thou  bringest  strange  tilings  to  our  e.

Rom.  11.  8.  hath  given  e.  that  they  should  not  heal
2  Tim.  4.  3.  they  neap  teachers,  having  itching  e.
Jam.  5.  4.  are  entered  into  e.  of  the  Lord  of  sabaotlr
1  Pet.  3. 12.  and  his  e.  are  open  to  their  prayers
EARS  to  hear.

Deut.  29.  4.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  e.  to  hear
Ezek.  12.  2.  they  have  e.  to  hear,  and  hear  not
Mat.  11.  15.  he  that  hath  e.  to  hear,  let  him  hear
13.  9,  43.  Mark  4.  9,  23. 1  7. 16.  Luke  8
8.  1 14.  35.

Mine  EARS.

Num.  14.  28.  as  ye  have  spoken  in  mine  e.  I  will  dc>
Judg.  17.  2.  the  silver  thou  spakestofin  mine  e.

1  Sam.  15.  14.  this  bleating  of  sheep  in  mine  e?

2  Kings  19.  28.  tumult  come  into  mine  e.  Isa.  37.  29’
2  Chron.  7.  15.  and  mine  e.  attenttothe  pra3Ter
Job  33.  +  8.  surely  thou  hast  spoken  in  mine  e.

Psal.  40.  6.  mine  e.  hast  thou  opened,  burnt-offering

92. 11.  mine  e.  shall  hear  my  desire  of  the  wicked
Isa.  5.  9.  in  mine  e.  said_  the  Lord  of  hosts

22. 14.  it  was  revealed  in  mine  e.  by  the  Lord
Ezek.  8. 18.  tho’  they  cry  in  mine  e.  with  loud  voice

9.  1.  he  cried  also  in  mine  e.  with  a  loud  voice
Luke  1.44.  thy  salutation  sounded  in  mine  e.

EARS  of  the  people.

Exod.  11.  2.  speak  now  in  the  e.  of  the  people
Deut.  32.  44.  Moses  spake  in  the  e.  of  the  people
Judg.  7.  3.  go  to,  proclaim  in  the  e.  of  the  people

1  Sam.  11.  4.  told  the  tidings  in  the  e.  of  the  people

2  Kings  18. 26.  talk  not  in  tne  e.  of  people,  Isa.  36. 11.
Neh.  8. 3.  e.  of  the  people  were  attentive  to  the  law

13.  f  1.  on  that  day  they  read  in  the  e.  of  the  people,
Jer.  28.  7. 1  36.  6,  10, 13,  14.
Their  EARS.

Gen.  20.  8.  Abimelech  told  these  things  in  their  e.

35. 4.  gave  Jacob  ear-rings  which  were  in  their  e.
Exod.  32.  3.  people  brake  off  the  ear-rings  in  their  e.
Deut.  31.  28.  I  may  speak  these  words  in  their  e.

2  Kings  23. 2.  read  in  their  e.  2  Chr.  34.  30.  Jer. 36.15.
Job  36. 15.  he  openeth  their  e.  in  oppression
Isa.  6. 10.  make  heart  fat,  their  e.  heavy,  lest  they
hear  with  their  e.  Mat.  13. 15.  Acts  28.  27
Mic.  7- 16.  the  nations  shall  see,  their  e.  shall  be  deal
Zech.’l.\\.  but  they  stopped  their  e.  Actsl.  57.

2  Tim.  4. 4.  they  shall  turn  away  their  e.  from  truth
Thine  EARS.

1  Sam.  25.  +  24.  let  thine  handmaid  speak  in  thine  e.

2  Chron.  6.  40.  let  thine  e.  be  attent  to  the  prayer
Psal.  10.  17-  thou  wilt  cause  thine  e.  to  hear

130.  2.  let  thine  e.  be  attentive  to  the  voice
Prov.  23. 12.  apply  thine  e.  to  words  of  knowledge
Isa.  30.  21.  thine  e.  shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee
49. 20.  the  children  shall  say  again  in  thine  e.

Jer.  28. 7.  hear  this  word  that  I  speak  in  thine  e.
Ezek.  3. 10.  and  hear  with  thine  e.  40. 4.  |  44.  5.

16. 12.  1  put  ear-rings  in  thine  e.  and  a  crown

23.  25.  they  shall  take  away  thy  nose  and  thine  e.

24.  26.  to  cause  thee  to  hear  with  thine  e.

Your  EARS.

Deut.  5. 1.  hear  the  statutes  which  I  speak  in  your  e.
Job  13. 17.  hear  my  declaration  with  your  e.

Psal.  78. 1.  incline  your  e.  to  the  words  of  my  mouth
Jer.  26. 11 .  as  ye  have  heard  with  your  e.

15.  Lord  sent  me  to  speak  these  words  in  your  e.
Mat.  13. 16.  but  blessed  are  ymr  e.  for  they  hear
Luke  4.  21.  this  scripture  is  fulfilled  in  your  e.

9.  44.  let  these  sayings  sink  down  in  your  e.
EARS.

Gen.  41.  5.  behold,  seven  e.  of  corn  came  up,  22.
Lev.  2. 14.  shalt  offer  for  a  meat  offering  green  e.

23. 14.  not  eat  green  e.  till  ye  bring  an  offering
Deut.  23. 25.  mayest  pluck  tne  e.  with  thine  hand
Ruth  2.  2.  let  me  go  and  glean  e.  of  corn  after  him
2  Kings  4.  42.  brought  the  man  of  G.  full  e.  of  corn
Job  24.  24.  the  wicked  cut  off  as  tops  of  e.  of  corn
Isa.  17.  5.  the  glory  of  Jacob,  as  when  one  reapethe.
Mat.  12.1.  his  disciples  were  an  hungered, and  began

to  pluck  the  e.  of  corn,  Mark  2. 23.  Luke  6, 1.
See  Seven.

EARNEST.

The  apostle  Paul  speaks  of  the  earnest  of  the

125


EAR


EAR


EAR

Spii  it,  2  Cor.  1.  22.  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,
llom.  8.  23.  find  of  being  sealed  by  the  Spirit,
Eph.  1.  13.  These  phrases  signify  the  assurance
which  the  Spirit  of  adoption  does  give  believers  oj
their  inheritance  in  heaven.  For  as  the  first-fruits
were  pledges  to  the  Jews  oj  the  ensuing  crop  :  and
as  he  that  receives  earnest,  is  sure ■  to  have  the
full  sum  paid  him,  or  the  full  bargain  made  good,
when  the  person  that  gives  it  is  honest  and  faith¬
ful:  So  the  graces  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit
of  God,  such  as  love,  joy ,  peace,  4'C.  are  pledges  of
that  abundance  and  fulness  of  joy  and  felicity ,
which  believers  shall  partake  of  iu  heaven.  1  et  these
graces  and  comforts  which  the  godly  enjoy  here,
are  but  first-fruits  in  regard  of  their  order ;  they
precede  the  full  harvest :  And  in  regard  oj  their
quantity,  they  are  Imran  handful  in  comparison
of  the  whole  seal  and  earnest:  though  they  both
imply  assurance,  yet  they  differ  thus  ;  sealing
especially  refers  to  the  understanding ;  earnest
to  the  affections.  Though  the  seal  assures  vs,
yet  it  is  not  part  of  the  inheritance ;  but  the
earnest  so  assures  us,  that  it  gives  a  part  of
the  inheritance ;  It  works  that  joy  in  the  heart,
which  is  a  foretaste  of  heaven,  and  which  the  saints
are  filled  with  there.

2  Cor.  1.  22.  hath  given  the  e.  of  the  Spirit,  5.  5.
Eph.  1. 14.  which  is  the  e.  of  our  inheritance
EARNEST.

Prop.  27.  +  6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are  e.

Acts  12.  +  5.  e.  prayer  was  made  to  Goa  for  him
Rom.  8. 19.  the  e.  expectation  of  the  creat  ure  waiteth
2  Cor.  7.  7.  when  he  told  us  your  e.  desire
8. 16.  which  put  the  same  e.  care  into  Titus
Phil.  1. 20.  according  to  my  e.  expectation  and  hope
Heb.  2. 1.  we  ought  to  give  the  more  e.  heed  to  things
EARNESTLY.

Num.  22.  37.  did  I  not  e.  send  to  thee  to  call  thee  ?

1  Sam.  20.  6.  David  e.  asked  leave  of  me,  28.

Neh.  3.  20.  Baruch  e.  repaired  the  other  piece
13.  +6.  and  after  certain  days  I  e.  requested
Job  7.  2.  as  a  servant  e.  desireth  the  shadow
Jer.  11.  7.  for  I  e.  protested  to  ypur  fathers
31.  20. 1  do  e.  remember  him  still
Mic.  7.  3.  they  may  do  evil  with  both  hands  e.

Luke  22.  44.  being  in  an  agony  he  prayed  more  e.

56.  but  a  certain  maid  e.  looked  upon  Peter
Acts  3.  12.  men  of  Israel,  why  look  ye  so  e.  on  us  ?
23.  1.  Paul  e.  beholding  council,  said,  I  have  lived

1  Cor.  12.  31.  but  covet  e.  the  best  gifts

2  Cor.  5. 2.  in  this  we  groan,  e.  desiring  to  be  clothed
Jam.  5. 17.  Elias  prayed  e.  that  it  might  not  rain
Jude  3.  that  ye  should  e.  contend  for  the  faith

EARNETH.

Hag.  1. 6.  he  that  e.  wages,  e.  to  put  it  in  a  bag
EARTH,

Is  taken  (1)  For  that  gross  and  terrestrial  element
which  sustains  and  nourishes  us,  Gen.  1. 10.  God
called  the  dry  land,  earth.  In  this  sense  it  is
taken  in  those  passages,  where  the  earth  is  said  to
yield  fruit,  to  he  barren,  watered,  4'c.  _  (2)  For  all
that  rude  matter  which  was  created  in  the  begin¬
ning.  Gen.  1. 1.  God  created  the  heaven  and  the
earth  ;  that  is,  the  matter  of  all  sensible  beings.
(3)  By  the  earth  is  meant  the  terraqueous  globe,
the  earth  and  all  that  it  contains,  men,  animals,
plants,  metals,  waters,  fish,  &c.  Psal.  24.  1.  The
earth  is  the  Lord’s  and  the  fulness  thereof.  (4)
The  earth  is  often  taken  for  those  who  inhabit  it,
Gen.  6.  13.  1 11.  1.  The  earth  is  filled  with
violence,  The  whole  earth  was  of  one  language.
Psal.  96.  1.  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  the  earth.
(5)  Sometimes  the  whole  earth,  or  all  the  king¬
doms  of  the  earth,  signifies  no  more  than  the  whole
empire  of  Chaldea  and  Assyria.  Ezra  1.  2.  The
Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all  the  king¬
doms  of  the  earth.  Earth  is  taken  for  Canaan,
or  the  land  of  the  Jews;  Rom.  9.  28.  A  short
work  will  the  Lord  make  upon  the  earth.  lie
will  bring  a  sudden  destruction  upon  that  land  and
people.  And  in  Mat.  9.  26.  Mark  15.  33.  Luke
4.  25.  the  word  which  is  translated  land,  is  in  the
Greek,  earth.

A  man  of  the  earth,  Gen.  9.  t  20.  Noah  was  a  man
of  the  earth,  a  husbandman,  or  one  who  tilled  the
ground.  In  Psal.  10.  18.  the  man  of  the  eartli
signifies  a  mortal,  earthly-minded  man,  who  was
made  of  the  dust,  and  must  return  to  the  dust.
Earth,  in  the  moral  sense  of  it,  is  set  in  opposition
to  heaven;  things  earthly  and  carnal,  to  things
heavenly  and  spiritual.  John  3.  31.  He  that  is  of
the  earth  is  earthly,  and  speaketh  of  the  earth :
he  that  cometh  from  heaven  is  above  all.  Col.
3. 1,  2.  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those
things  which  are  above,  and  set  not  your  affec¬
tions  on  things  on  the  earth.  The  terrestrial  man
is  set  in  opposition  to  the  heavenly,  1  Cor.  15.  47,
48.  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy,  the
second  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven.  Adam,  the
first  public  person  and  head  of  the  old  covenant,
was  formed  of  the  earth  ;  he  was  mortal  and  cor¬
ruptible:  But  Christ,  the  second  public  person,
and  head  of  the  new  covenant,  is  of  a  heavenly
descent ,  and  has  a  divine  as  well  as  a  human
nature.  In  like  manner  the  earthly  house  is  set  in
opposition  to  the  heavenly ;  2  Cor.  5.  1.  If  our
earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,
we  have  a  building  of  God,  an  house  not  made
with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens. _  If  this  bodily
frame  of  nature  were  taken  to  pieces  by  death,
there  is  a  state  of  glory  provided  by  God  for  the
separate  soul  to  pass  unto.

Gen.  1. 2.  and  the  e  was  without  form  and  void

10.  and  God  called  the  dry  land  e.

11.  and  God  said,  let  the  e.  bringforth  grass,  24.

12.  and  the  e.  brought  forth  grass  and  herb

28.  be  fruitful,  replenish  the  r.  and  subdue  it,  9. 1.

6.  11  the  e.  also  was  corrupt  before  God

7.  17.  and  the  ark  was  lifted  up  above  the  e.

8.  14.  in  the  second  month  was  the  e.  dried

22.  while  e.  remaineth,  seed-time  shall  not  cease
9. 13.  for  a  token  of  a  covenant  between  me  and  e.
126


Gen.  10.25.  in  his  days  was  thee,  divided,  1  Chr.  1.19.

18. 18.  and  all  the  nations  of  the  e.  shall  be  blessed

in  him,  22.  18. 1  26.  4.  128.  14.
27.  28.  God  give  thee  of  the  fatness  of  the  e.

41.  47.  in  plenteous  years  e.  brought  forth  handfuls
Exod.  8.  22.  1  am  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  the  e.

9.  29.  that  thou  mayest  know  that  the  e.  is  the
Lord's,  Deut.  10.  14.  Psal.  24.  1.  1  Cor.  10.  26.

10.  5.  that  one  cannot  be  able  to  see  the  e.

15. 12.  stretchest  thy  hand,  e.  swallowed  them

20.  24.  an  altar  of  e.  thou  shalt  make  unto  me

Num.  16.30.  if  the  e.  open  her  mouth  and  swallow

32.  and  the  e.  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed
them  up  and  their  houses,  26. 10.  Psal.  106.  17.

34.  they  said,  lest  the  e.  swallow  us  up  also
Deut.  28. 1.  Inrd  will  set  thee  above  all  nations  of  e.

23.  the  e.  that  is  under  thee  shall  be  iron

32.  1.  and  hear,  O  e.  the  words  of  my  mouth

13.  he  made  him  ride  on  the  high  places  of  the  e.
22.  a  fire  shall  consume  the  e.  witli  her  increase

1  Ham.  2.  8.  for  the  pillars  of  the  e.  are  the  Lord’s

4.  5.  Israel  shouted,  so  that  the  e.  rang  again
14. 15.  they  also  trembled,  and  the  e.  quaked

2  Sam.  1.  2.  a  man  came  with  e.  on  his  head,  15.  32.
22.  8.  then  the  e.  shook  and  trembled,  Psal.  18.  7-

1  Kings  1. 40.  so  that  the  e.  rent  with  the  sound

2  Kings  5. 17-  to  thy  servant  two  mules’  burden  of  e.

1  Chron.  16.31.  and  let  the  e.  rejoice,  Psal.  96. 11.

33.  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  because  God

cometh  to  judge  the  e.  Psal.  96. 13. 1  98.  9.
Ezra  5. 11.  the  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven  and  e.
Neh.  9.  6.  thou  hast  made  thee.  Isa.  45.  12.

Job  5.  25.  and  thy  offspring  as  the  grass  of  the  e.

9.  6.  which  shaketh  the  e.  out  of  her  place

24.  the  e.  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  wicked

11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  longer  than  the  e.

12.  15.  he  sendeth  waters  and  they  overturn  the  e.

15. 19.  to  whom  alone  the  e.  was  given

16.  18.  O  e.  cover  not  thou  my  blood,  let  my  cry
18.  4.  shall  the  e.  be  forsaken  for  thee  ?

20.  27.  and  the  e.  shall  rise  up  against  him
22.  8.  but  as  for  the  mighty  man,  he  had  the  e.

24.  4.  the  poor  of  the  e.  hide  themselves

26.  7.  he  hangeth  the  e.  upon  nothing

30.  6.  to  dwell  in  the  caves  of  the  e.  and  in  rocks

8.  children  of  base  men,  they  were  viler  than  the  e.

34.  13.  who  hath  given  him  a  charge  over  the  e.  ?
37.  17.  when  he  quieteth  the  e.  by  the  south-wind
38.4.  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the  e.

18.  hast  thou  perceived  the  breadth  of  the  e.  ?
Psal.  2. 8.  give  thee  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  e.

10.  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  e.

10.  18.  that  the  man  of  the  e.  may  no  more  oppress
12.  6.  pure  words,  as  silver  tried  in  a  furnace  ofe.

25. 13.  and  his  seed  shall  inherit  the  e.

33.  5.  the  e.  is  full  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord

14.  he  looketh  on  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  e.

37.  9.  that  wait  on  Lor  i  shall  inherit  the  e.  11,22.

46.  2.  we  will  not  fear  though  the  e.  be  removed
6.  he  uttered  his  voice, thee,  melted

47.  9.  for  the  shields  of  the  e.  belong  unto  God

48.  2.  the  joy  of  the  whole  e.  is  mount  Zion
60.  2.  thou  hast  made  the  e.  to  tremble

63.  9.  shall  go  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  e.

65.  8.  that  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  e.

9.  thou  visitest  the  e.  and  waterest  it

67.  6.  then  shall  e.  yield  her  increase,  Esek.  34.  27.

68.  8.  the  e.  shook,  the  heavens  also  dropped
32.  sing  unto  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  e.

71.  20.  shalt  bring  me  up  from  the  depths  of  the  e.

72.  6.  shall  come  down  as  showers  that  water  the  e.

73.  9.  and  their  tongue  walketh  through  the  e.

75.3.  thee,  and  alEthe  inhabitants  thereof  are  dis¬
solved,  I  bear  up  its  pillars,  Isa.  24. 19.

8.  the  wicked  of  the  e.  shall  wring  them  out

76. 8.  the  e.  feared  ||  77- 18.  the  e.  trembled,  97-  4.

9.  when  God  arose  to  save  the  meek  of  the  e.

78. 69.  like  thee,  which  he  hath  established  for  ever

82. 8.  arise,  O  God,  judge  the  e.  thou  shalt  inherit
90. 2.  or  ever  thou  hadst  formed  the  e._

97. 1.  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  e.  rejoice
99.  1.  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  e.  be  moved
102. 25.  of  old  hast  thou  laid  the  foundation  of  the
e.  104.  5.  Prov.  8. 29.  Isa.  48. 13.

104. 13.  the  e.  is  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works

24.  O  Lord,  the  e.  is  full  of  thy  riches

114. 7.  tremble,  O  e.  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord

115. 16.  the  e.  hath  he  given  to  the  children  of  men
119. 64.  thee.  O  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  mercy

90.  thou  hast  established  the  e.  and  it  abideth
147.  8.  who  prepareth  rain  for  thee.

148. 13.  his  glory  is  above  the  e.  and  the  heaven
Prov.  3.  19.  the  Lord  hath  founded  the  e.  Isa.  24. 1.
8.  23.  I  was  set  up  from  everlasting,  or  ever  e.  was

26.  as  yet  he  had  not  made  the  e.  nor  fields

25.  3.  e.  for  depth  and  heartofkings  is  unsearchable

30. 16.  the  e.  that  is  not  filled  with  water

21.  for  three  things  the  e.  is  disquieted,  for  four
Eccl.  1.  4.  but  the  e.  abideth  for  ever

5.  9.  moreover,  the  profit  of  the  e.  is  for  all
Isa.  4.  2.  the  fruit  of  thee,  shall  be  excellent

11.  4.  that  smiteti.  the  e.  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth
9.  e.  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledie  of  the  Lord

13. 13.  the  e.  shall  remove  out  of  her  place

14.  16.  is  this  the  man  that  made  the  e.  to  tremble  ?
24.  4.  the  e.  mourneth  and  fadeth  away,  33.  9.

5.  the  e.  is  defiled  under  the  inhabitants  thereof
24.  19.  e.  is  utterly  broken  down,  the  e.  is  dissolved
20.  e.  shall  reel  ||  26.  19.  e.  shall  cast  out  the  dead

26.  21.  the  e.  also  shall,  disclose  her  blood

34.  1.  let  the  e.  hear,  and  all  that  is  therein

40.  22.  it  is  he  that  sitteth  on  the  circle  of  the  e.

28.  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  e.  tainteth  not

44.  24.  that  spread  abroad  the  e.  by  myself

45.  8.  let  the  e.  open  ||  12.  I  have  made  the  e.

22.  look  to  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ends  of  the  e.

49. 13.  sing,  G  heavens,  and  be  joyful.  O  e.

51.  6.  lookf  on  the  e.  the  e.  shall  wax  old

66.  1.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  e.  is  my. footstool
8.  shall  the  e.  be  made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day  r
Jer.  4.  23.  I  beheld  the  e.  it  was  without  form
28.  for  this  shall  the  e.  mourn,  heavens  be  black


Jer.  6. 19.  hear,  Of.  I  will  bring  evil  on  this  peopl

10.  10.  at  his  wrath  the  e.  shall  tremble

22.  29.  O  e.  e.  c.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  write
ye  this  man  childless,  Mic.  l.  <4

46.  8.  Egypt  saith,  I  will  go  up  and  cover  the  e.

49.  21.  the  e.  is  moved  at  the  noise,  50.  46.

51.  15.  he  hath  made  the  e.  by  his  power
Ezek.  7.  21.  1  will  give  it  to  the  wicked  of  the  e.  .
9.  9.  they  say,  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  the  e.

43.  2.  and  the  e.  shined  with  his  glory
Has.  2.  22.  the  e.  shall  hear  the  corn  and  the  wine
Joel  2.  10.  the  e.  shall  quake  before  them
Amos  8.  9.  I  will  darken  the  e.  in  the  clear.riay
Jonah  2.  6.  the  e.  with  her  bars  was  about  me
Mic.  6.  2.  hear,  ye  strong  foundations  of  the  e.

7.  17.  they  shall  move  out  like  worms  of  the  e.
Nah.  1.  5.  the  e.  is  burnt  up  at  his  presence
Hub.  2.  14.  the  e.  filled  with  knowledge  of  the  L.

3.  3.  and  the  e.  was  full  of  his  praise
9.  thou  didst  cleave  the  e.  with  rivers

Hag.  1. 10.  the  e.  is  stayed  from  iier  fruit
Zech.  1.  10.  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  thro’  the  e.  6-7

4.  10.  the  eyes  of  the  I.ord  which  run  thro'  the  e.
Mai.  4.  6.  lest  I  smite  the  e.  with  a  curse

Mat.  5.  5.  blessed  are  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  e

35.  swear  not  by  the  e.  it  is  God’s  footstool

13.  5.  where  they  had  not  much  e.  Mark  4.  5.
Mark  4.  28.  for  the  e.  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herse!
John  3.  31.  he  that  is  of  the  e.  is  earthly,  and  speakef
of  the  e.  he  that  cometh  from  heaven  is  above  all

1  Cor.  15.  47.  the  first  man  is  of  the  e.  earthy

2  Tim.  2.  20.  but  also  vessels  of  wood  and  ot  e.
Heb.  6.  7.  the  e.  which  drinketh  in  the  rain

12.  26.  whose  voice  then  shook  the  e.  but  now
Tam.  5.  7.  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  e.

18.  and  the  e.  brought  forth  her  fruit
2  Pet.  3. 10.  the  e.  and  works  therein  shall  be  burnt  u ;
Rev.  7.  3.  hurt  not  the  e.  nor  sea,  nor  the  trees

11.  4.  olive  trees  standing  before  the  God  ot  the  <

6.  have  power  to  smite  the  e.  with  all  plagues

12.  16.  the  e.  opened  and  swallowed  up  the  flooi
13. 12.  causeth  the  e.  to  worship  the  first  [least


18.  1.  and  the  e.  was  lightened  with  his  glory


19.  2.  the  great  whore,  which  did  corrupt  the  e.

20.  11.  from  whose  face  the  e.  fled  away

See  Beasts,  Dust,  Ends,  Face,  Kings,
Heaven,  People,  Whole.

All  the  EARTH.

Gen.  1.  26.  let  them  have  dominion  over  all  the  e

7.  3.  to  keep  seed  alive  on  the  face  of  all  the  e.

11.  9.  there  confound  the  language  of  all  the  e.

18.  25.  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  e.  do  right

19.  31.  to  come  in  to  us  after  manner  of  all  the  e
Exod.  9.  14.  there  is  none  like  me  in  all  thee.

16.  my  name  declared  thro’  all  the  e.  Rom.  9. 1
19.  5.  a  peculiar  treasure  ;  for  all  the  e.  is  mine
34.  10.  such  as  have  not  been  done  in  all  the  e.
Num.  14.  21.  all  the  e.  shall  be  filled  with  glory
Tosh.  3.  11.  the  Lord  of  all  the  e.  13.  Zech.  fi.  5.
23.  14. 1  am  going  the  way  of  all  the  e.  1  A  mgs  2.
Judg.  6.  37.  and  if  it  be  dry  on  all  the  e.  beside
L  Sam.  17. 46.  that  all  the  e.  may  know  there  is  a  G(

1  Kings  10.  24.  all  the  e.  sought  to  Solomon  to  he.

2  Kings  5. 15.  no  God  in  all  the  e.  but  in  Israel
1  Chr.  16.  14.  judgm.  are  in  all  the  e.  Psal.  105.

23.  sing  to  the  Lord,  all  the  e.  Psal.  96.  1.

30.  fear  before  him,  all  the  e.  Psal.  33. 8.  1  96. 9
Psal.  8.  1.  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the  e.  9.

45. 16.  whom  thou  mayest  make  princes  in  all  the

47.  2.  L.  is  a  great  king  over  all  the  e.  7 -  Zech.  14.
57.  5.  let  thy  glory  be  above  all  the  e.  11.  I  108.  5.1
66.  + 1.  make  a  joyful  noise  all  the  e.  98. 4.  1 100.  t

4.  all  the  e.  shall  worship  thee,  and  sing  to  the<
83.  18.  that  thou  art  most  high  over  all  the  e.  97 .
Isa.  10.  14.  so  have  I  gathered  all  thee,  none  moyi

12.  5.  done  excellent  things,  this  is  known  in  all
25.  8.  take  the  rebuke  of  his  people,  from  all  the

Jer.  26.  6.  I  will  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  the

33.  9.  it  shall  be  an  honour  before  all  the  e.

51.  7.  a  golden  cup  that  made  all  the  e.  drunkei
25.  O  mountain,  which  destroyest  all  the  e.

49.  so  at  Babylon  shall  fall  the  slain  of  all  the
Dan.  2.  39.  a  kingdom  shall  bear  rule  over  all  the
Hah.  2.  20.  let  all  the  c.%eep  silence  before  him
Zeph.  3.  8.  all  the  e.  shall  be  devoured  with  tire
Zech.  1.  11.  all  the  e.  sitteth  still  and  is  at  rest
Luke  23.  44.  there  was  a  darkness  over  all  the  e.
Rom.  10.  18.  their  sound  went  into  all  the  e.
Rev.  5.  6.  seven  Spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all
From-  the  EARTH.

Gen.  2.  6.  but  there  went  up  a  mist/row  the  e.
4.  11.  and  now  art  thou  cursed  Jrom  the  e.

6.  + 13.  behold,  I  will  destroy  them  from  the  e.

7.  23.  and  they  were  destroyed  from  the  e.

8.  11.  Noah  knew  waters  were  abated  jrom  the  <
Exod.  9.  15.  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  from  the  e.  Jo.

7.  9-  Psal.  109.  15.  Prov.  2.  22.  Nah.  2. .

1  Sam.  28-  23.  Saul  arose  from  the  e.  and  sat  on  t'

2  Sam.  4. 11.  shall  I  not  take  you  away  from  the  t

12. 17.  the  elders  went  to  raise  him  from  the  e.

20.  David  arose  from  the  e .  and  washed  himse

Job  18.  17.  his  remembrance  shall  perish /row  the
Psal.  21.  10.  shalt  destroy  their  fruit  from  thee.

34.  16.  cut  off  remembrance  of  them  from  thee.
148.  7.  praise  L.  from  the  e.  ye  dragons  and  (lee

Prov.  30.  14.  as  knives  to  devour  poor  from  the .
Jer.  10.  11.  even  they  shall  perish /Vow  thee.  1
Ezek  1. 19.  living  creatures  were  lift  up  from  e.
Dan.  7.  4.  and  it  was  lifted  up  from  the  e.

Amos  3.  5.  shall  one  take  up  a  snare  from  the  e.
John  12.  32.  and  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  jrom  the  e.
Acts  8.  33.  for  his  life  is  taken  from  the  e.

9.  8.  Saul  arose  from  the  e.  and  he  saw  no  man
22.  22.  said,  away  with  such  a  fellow/row  the  e

Rev.  6.  4.  power  given  him  to  take  peace/row  the

14.  3.  but  144,000  which  were  redeemed  jrom  the
In  the  EARTH.

Gen.  1.  22.  and  let  fowl  multiply  in  the  e.

4.  12.  a  vagabond  shalt  thou  be  tn  the  e.  14.

6.  5.  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  e.

10.  8.  Nimrod  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  m  the
19.  31.  not  a  man  in  the  e.  to  come  m  unto  u.


e  a  n


E  AS


E  AS


45. 7.  sent  me,  to  preserve  a  posterity  in  the  e.
d.  20. 4.  or  that  is  in  the  e.  beneath,  or  water

h. 1.  21.  and  behold  they  are  hid  in  thee,
ig.  18. 10.  no  want  of  any  tiling  that  is  in  the  e.
am.  7.9.  a  great  name,  like  to  the  name  of  the

great  men  that  are  in  the  e.  1  Chron.  17. 8.
3.  what  nation  in  e.  like  Israel  ?  1  Chr.  17.  21.
t,  20.  to  know  all  things  that  are  in  thee.
kron.29. 11.  for  all  that  is  in  thee,  is  thine
/non.  6. 14.  there  is  no  God  like  thee  in  the  e.

)  1. 7.  from  going  to  and  fro  in  the  e.  2. 2.

;.tlat  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  e.  2.  3.

;.  8.  though  the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  the  e.

\,  18.  their  portion  is  cursed  in  the  e.

).  14. ostrich,  which  leaveth  her  eggs  in  the  e.
a i.  16. 3.  but  to  tiie  saints  that  ar&in  the  e.

i.  8.  what  desolations  he  hath  made  in  the  e.

0.  be  still,  1  will  be  exalted  in  the  e.

S.  11.  verily  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  e.

16.  there  shall  be  a  handful  of  corn  in  the  e.
9.19.  1  am  a  stranger  in  the  e.  hide  notthy  com.

10. 11.  let  not  an  evil  speaker  be  established  in  e.
or.  11. 31.  the  righteous  be  recompensed  in  the  e.
26. 9.  for  when  thy  judgments  are  in  the  e.

8.  we  have  not  wrought  deliverance  in  the  e.

>.  24.  their  stock  shall  not  take  root  in  the  e.

J.  4.  till  he  have  set  judgment  in  the  e.

7.  till  he  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  e.

1.  16.  shall  bless  in  God  of  truth,  who  blesseth

himself  in  the  e.  and  he  that  sweareth  in  the  e.
-.17.  13.  that  forsake  thee,  be  written  in  the  e.

.  22.  the  Lord  hath  created  a  new  thing  in  the  e.

<s.  2. 23.  and  I  will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  e.

72. 30.  and  1  will  shew  wonders  in  the  e.

10s  5. 7-  ye  who  leave  off  righteousness  in  the  e.
it.  25. 18.  he  went  and  digged  in  the  e.  and  hid

5.  I  was  afraid,  and  hid  thy  talent  in  the  e.
irk4.  31.  it  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  when  it

is  sown  in  the  e.  is  less  than  all  seeds  in  the  e.
ohn  5. 8.  there  are  three  that  bear  witness  in  the  e.

On,  or  upon,  the  EARTH.
n.  6. 6.  repented  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  e.

2.  God  looked  upon  the  e.  behold  it  was  corrupt
4. 1  will  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  e.  forty  days
2.  the  rain  was  upon  the  e.  forty  days,  17.

17.  be  fruitful  and  multiply  upon  the  e.

1. 23.  sun  was  risen  upon  the  e.  when  Lot  entered

12.  and  behold  a  ladder  set  upon  the  e.
od.  10.  6.  since  the  day  they  were  upon  the  e.

■  v.  11 . 29.  things  that  creep  upon  the  e.  42,  44.
utA.  10.  all  days  they  li upon  the  e.  12. 1, 19.

6.  upon  the  e.  he  shewed  thee  his  great  fire
.  16.  ye  shall  pour  it  upon  the  e.  as  water,  24.
am.  12. 16.  David  lay  all  night  upon  the  e.

.  7.  not  leave  name  nor  remainder  upon  the  e.
lings  8.  27.  but  will  God  indeed  dwell  on  the  e.  ?

heaven  cannot  contain  thee,  2  Chron.  6. 18.

.  14.  till  the  day  the  Lord  sends  rain  upon  the  e.
hron.29. 15.  our  days  one.  as  ashadow,  Job  8.  9.
>7. 1.  is  there  notan  appointed  time  to  man  on  e.  ?
’.  25.  he  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  e.

'.  4.  knowest  not  since  man  was  placed  on  the  e.

.  6.  for  he  saith  to  the  snow,  be  thou  on  the  e.

.  33.  on  e.  there  is  not  his  like,  leviathan  made
al.  7. 5.  let  the  enemy  tread  down  my  life  on  the  e.

.  2.  and  he  shal.  be  blessed  upon  the  e.

.  2.  that  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  the  e.

25.  there  is  none  upon  e.  I  desire  besides  thee

2. 2.  his  seed  shall  be  mighty  upon  the  e.
ov.  30. 24.  four  things  that  are  little  upon  the  e.
cl.  7. 20.  for  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  the  e.

1. 7.  and  princes  walking  as  servants  upon  the  e.

.  2.  knowest  not  what  evil  shall  be  done  upon  e.

.  the  clouds  empty  themselves  upon  the  e.
nt.  2. 12.  flowers  appear  on  the  e.  time  of  singing
a  28. 22.  a  consumption  determined  upon  the  e.

.  6.  lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  upon  the  e.

'.  9. 3.  are  not  valiant  for  the  truth  upon  the  e.
m.  2. 11.  eyes  fail,  my  liver  is  poured  upon  the  e.

■  ii.  2. 10.  not  a  man  on  the  e.  can  shew  the  matter
’ins  3. 5.  can  a  bird  fall  in  a  snare  upon  the  e.

9.  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  fall  upon  the  e.
it.  0. 19.  lay  not  up  for  yours,  treasures  upon  e.

6.  may  know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on

e.  to  forgive  sins,  Mark  2. 10.  Luke  5. 24.
>.  34.  think  not  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  e.
i.  19;  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  e.  18.  18.
i.  19.  I  say,  that  if  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  e.

!.  9.  and  call  no  man  your  father  upon  the  e.

!5.  all  the  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  e.
irk  9. 3.  so  as  no  fuller  on  e.  can  white  them
ke  2. 14.  glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  on  e.  peace
49.  like  a  man  that  built  an  house  upon  the  e.

-•  49.  I  am  come  to  send  fire  on  the  e.

•1.  suppose  ye  that  1  am  come  to  give  peace  on  e.  ?

1.8.  the  Son  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on  e.?

l.  26.  tor  the  things  which  are  coming  on  the  e.

'm  17. 4.  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  e.

ijn.  9. 28.  a  short  work  will  the  Lord  make  on  the  e.
I-  3. 2.  set  your  affection  not  on  things  on  the  e.

>.  mortify  your  members  which  are  upon  the  e.

m. 8.  4.  if  he  were  on  e.  he  should  not  be  apriest
1. 13.  and  confessed  they  were  strangers  on  the  e.

-  25.  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  e.

>n.  5. 5.  ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  e.

W  •  it  lained  not  on  the  e.  for  three  years
tv.  3. 10.  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  e.

10.  made  us  kings  and  priests,  we  shall  reign  on  e.

■  10.  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  e.

•  L  that  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  the  e.

*  »•  hail,  and  fire,  and  they  were  cast  upon  the  e.

,  •  “•  ln  hand  of  angel  which  standeth  upon  the  e.

0  ic  dwe11 071  the  e •  13. 8, 14.  I  14.  6.  |  17.  8.

*■  lb-  and  he  thrust  in  his  sickle  on  the  e.

2.  the  first  poured  out  his  vial  upon  the  e.

■>•  24.  the  blood  of  all  that  were  slain  upon  the  e.
Out  of  the  EARTH.

inm.  28. 13.  1  saw  gflris  ascending  out  of  the  e.

23.  4.  as  tender  gl  ass  spring  ing  out  of  the  e.
19.  and  out  of  the  e.  shall  others  grow
—  'I011  j3  taken  out  of  the  e.  and  brass  molten
a.  as  tor  the  e.  out  [of  it  cometh  bread


Psal.  85. 11.  trutli  shall  spring  out  of  the  e.

104.  14.  that  he  may  bring  food  out  cf  the  e.

35.  let  the  sinners  be  consumed  out  of  the  e.

Dan.  7.17.  four  kings,  which  shall  arise  out  of  the  e.
Hos.  2. 18.  I  will  break  the  battle  out  of  the  e.

Mic.  7.  2.  the  good  man  is  perished  out  of  the  e.
ltev.  13.  11.  another  beast  coming  up  out  of  the  e.

To,  or  unto,  the  EARTH.

Gen.  24. 52.  be  worshipped,  bowing  himself  to  the  e.
37.  10.  to  bow  down  ourselves  to  thee,  to  the  e.

42.  6.  they  bowed  themselves  to  thee.  43.  26.

48.  12.  lie  bowed  himself  with  his  face  to  the  e.
Josh.  5. 14.  Joshua  fell  on  his  face  to  the  e.  7.  6.

1  Sam.  5.  3.  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his  face  to  the  e.
17-  49.  Goliath  fell  on  his  face  to  the  e.

24. 8.  David  stooped  with  his  face  to  the  e.

25.  41.  she  bowed  herself  to  thee.  1  Kings  1.  31.

26.  8.  let  me  smite  him,  I  pray  thee,  to  the  e.

20.  therefore  let  not  my  blood  fall  to  the  e.

2  Sam.  1.  2.  when  he  came  to  David  he  fell  to  the  e.

14. 11.  notone  hair  shall  fall  to  the  e.  1  Kings  1. 52.

2  Kings  10. 10.  fall  to  the  e.  nothing  of  tire  word  of  L.
2  Chron.  20.  24.  were  dead  bodies  fallen  to  the  e.

Job  12.  8.  or  speak  to  thee,  it  shall  teach  thee
Psal.  17.  11.  set  their  eyes,  bowing  down  to  thee.
44. 25.  for  our  belly  cleaveth  unto  the  e.

50.  4.  he  shall  call  to  thee,  that  he  may  judge

146. 4.  his  breath  goeth  forth,  he  returneth  to  the  e.
Eccl.  3. 21.  the  spirit  of  beast  that  goeth  to  the  e.

12. 7.  then  shall  the  dust  return  to  the  e.

Isa.  8.  22.  and  they  shall  look  unto  the  e.

63.  6. 1  will  bring'  down  their  strength  to  the  e.
Jer.  15.  10.  a  man  of  contention  to  the  whole  e.
Hos.  6.  3.  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  to  the  e.
Luke  24.  5.  and  bowed  down  their  faces  to  the  e.
Acts  9.  4.  Saul  fell  to  the  e.  and  heard  a  voice

10.  11.  as  a  great  sheet,  and  let  down  to  the  e.

26.  14.  and  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  e.

Rev.  6.  13.  and  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  to  the  e.

12.4.  drew  the  stars,  and  did  not  cast  them  to  the  e.

13.  when  the  dragon  saw  he  M  as  cast  unto  the  e.

EARTHEN.

Lev.  6.  28.  the  e.  vessel  wherein  it  was  sodden

11.  33.  the  e.  vessel  whereinto  any  of  them  falleth

14.  5.  one  of  the  birds  killed  in  an  e.  vessel,  50.

Num.  5.  17.  priest  shall  take  holy  water  in  e.  vessel
2  Sam.  17.  28.  brought  beds,  basins,  and  e.  vessels
Jer.  19.  1.  go  and  get  a  potter’s  e.  bottle
32.  14.  put  these  evidences  in  an  e.  vessel
Lam .  4. 2.  how  are  they  esteemed  as  e.  pitchers
2  Cor.  4. 7.  we  have  this  treasure  ine.  vessels
EARTHLY.

John  3. 12.  if  I  have  told  you  e.  things,  believe  not
31.  he  that  is  of  the  earth  is  e.  speaks  of  earth
2  Cor.  5. 1.  if  our  e,  house  of  tabem.  were  dissolved
Phil.  3.  19.  many  walk,  who  mind  e.  things
Jam.  3.  15.  this  wisdom  is  e.  sensual,  devilish
EARTHY.

1  Cor.  15.  47-  the  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  e.

48.  as  is  the  e.  such  are  they  also  that  are  e.

49.  and  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  e.

EARTHQUAKE.

The  Scripture  speaks  of  several  natural  earthquakes.
One  of  the  most  remarkable ,  is  that  which  was  in
the  twenty-seventh  year  of  Uzziah,  king  of  Judah.
There  is  mention  of  this  earthquake  in  Amos

I.  1.  and  in  Zech.  14.  5.  Josephus  says,  that  this
earthquake  was  so  violent,  as  to  divide  a  mountain
in  halves,  which  lay  to  the  west  of  Jerusalem,  and
moved  one  part  of  it  from  its  place  four  furlongs,
or  five  hundred  paces.

Another  very  memorable  earthquake,  was  that  at
the  time  of  our  Saviour's  crucifixion.  Mat.  27.  51.
Many  have  been  of  opinion,  that  this  motion  was
perceived  by  all  the  world.  Others  maintain,
that  it  was  sensible  only  in  Judea,  or  even  in
the  temple,  the  gates  whereof  were  shaken,  and
the  vail  rent  asunder.  It  must  have  been  at¬
tended  with  very  terrible  circumstances,  since
the  centurion,  and  they  who  %pcre  with  him,  were
so  affected  with  it,  and  were  induced  by  it  to
acknowledge  the  injustice  of  our  Saviour's  con¬
demnation,  Mat.  27.  54.

An  earthquake  is  a  great  shaking  or  trembling
of  the  earth,  or  of  some  parts  of  it,  Amos  1.  1.
Great  alterations  and  changes  are  expressed  in
Scripture  by  a  shaking  of  the  earth,  Heb.  12.
26.  The  delivering  of  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt
is  called  a  moving,  or  shaking,  of  the  earth,  Psal.
68.  8.  Arid  an  extraordinary  and  unexpected
alteration  in  the  state  of  affairs,  civil  or  ecclesi¬
astical,  is  represented  by  a  great  earthquake,
Rev.  6.  12.  and  16.  18.

1  Kings  19. 11.  after  the  wind,  an  e.  Ld.  was  not  in  e.

12.  after  the  e.  afire,  the  Ixird  was  not  in  the  fire
Isa.  29.  6.  thou  shalt  be  visited  of  the  Lord  with  e.
Amos  1. 1.  which  he  saw  two  years  before  the  e.
Zech.  14. 5.  like  as  ye  fled  from  before  the  e.

Mat.  27.  54.  now  when  the  centurion  saw  the  e.

28. 2.  behold,  there  was  a  great  e.  the  angel  of  the
Lord  came,  Acts  16.  26.  Rev.  6. 12. 1 11.  13.
Rev.  8. 5.  there  were  thunderingsand  an  e.  11. 19.
16.  18.  a  great  e.  so  mighty  an  e.  and  so  great
EABTHQU  AKES.

Mat.  24.  7.  there  shall  be  famines,  pestilences,  and
e.  in  divers  places,  Mark  13.  8.  Luke  21. 11.
EASE.

Deut.  28.  65.  among  nations  shalt  thou  find  no  e.
Judg.  20.  43.  they  trod  the  Benjamites  down  with  e.
Job  12.  5.  in  the  thought  of  him  that  is  at  e.

16.  12. 1  was  at  e.  ||  21. 23.  dieth,  being  wholly  at  e.
Ps.  25. 13.  his  soul  shall  dwell  at  e.  his  seed  inherit
123.  4.  with  the  scorning  of  those  that  are  ate.
Prov.  1. 132.  the  e.  of  the  simple  shall  slay  them
Isa.  32. 9-  rise  up,  ye  women  that  are  at  e.

II.  tremble, ye  women  that  are  ate.  be  troubled
Jer.  46.27.  Jacob  shall  return,  and  be  in  rest,  ate.

48.  11.  Moab  hath  been  at  e.  from  his  youth

49.  t  31.  get  you  up  to  the  nation  that  is  at  e.

Ezek.  23. 42.  a  voice  of  a  multitude  being  ate.
Amos  6. 1.  woe  to  them  that  are  ate.  in  Zion
Zech.  1. 15.  1  am  sore  displeased  with  heathen  at  e.


Luke  12.  19.  take  thine  e.  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry
EASE.

Deut.  23.  13.  when  thou  wilt  e.  thyself  abroad
2  Chron.  10.  4.  e.  thou  somewhat  the  yoke,  9.

Job  7. 13.  my  couch  shall  e.  my  complaint
Isa.  1.24.  ah,  I  will  e.  me  of  mine  adversaries
38. 1 14.  O  Lord,  1  am  oppressed,  e.  me
EASED.

Job  16.  6.  and  though  I  forbear,  what  am  I  e.  ?

2  Cor.  8.  13.  that  other  men  be  e.  and  ye  burdened
EASEMENT.

Judg.  3.  +  24.  he  doeth  his  e.  in  his  summer-chamber
EASIER.

Exod.  18.  22.  so  shall  it  be  e.  for  thyself,  shall  bear
Mat.  9.  5.  whether  is  e.  to  say,  thy  sins  be  forgiven
thee,  or  to  say,  arise,  Mark  2.  9.  Luke  5. 23.
19.  £4.  it  is  e.  for  camel  to  go  thro’  the  eye  of  needle,
than  a  rich  man,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18. 25.
Luke  16.  17.  it  is  e.  for  heaven  and  earth  to  pass
EASILY.

1  Cor.  13. 5.  charity  is  not  e.  provoked,  thinks  no  evil
Heb.  12. 1.  lay  aside  the  sin  which  doth  so  e.  beset  us
EAST.

The  Hebrews  express  the  east,  west,  north ,  and
south,  by  words  which  signify,  before,  behind,
left,  and  right,  according  to  the  situation  of  a
man  with  his  face  turned  towards  the  east.  By
the  east  they  describe  frequently  not  only  Arabia
Deserta,  and  the  lands  of  Moab  and  Ammon,
which  lay  to  the  east  of  Palestine  ;  but  Assyria
likewise,  Mesopotamia,  Babylonia,  and  Chaldea,
which  lie  rather  to  the  north  than  to  the  east  e/Ju¬
dea.  It  is  said,  in  Gen.  11.  1,  2.  that  the  sons
of  Noah  having  but  one  language,  departed  from
the  east,  and  came  into  the  land  of  Shinar.
Hereupon  some  difficulties  have  been  raised  :  for
the  land  of  Shinar  is  not  to  the  west  of  Armenia,
where  the  ark  rested ;  and  Armenia  does  not  lie
to  the  east  of  Babylonia,  where  the  land  of  Shi¬
nar  was.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  to  the  north  of
this  country.  Interpreters  and  commentators,  to
disengage  themselves  out  of  these  perplexities ,
hate  imagined  different  explanations  of  this  pas¬
sage.

Some,  by  the  Hebrew  word,  Kedem,  or  East,  have
understood  the  country  which  was  afterwards  peo¬
pled  by  Kedemah,  the  youngest  son  of  Ishmael.
Others,  that  Kedem  was  usetT-for,  At  the  begin¬
ning  ;  and  that  Moses  intended  to  describe  the
particular  time  at  which  the  first  men  departed
after  the  deluge,  in  order  to  spread  themselves
into  different  countries.  Others,  that  Moses  spoke
according  to  the  custom  of  //(e  Assyrians,  who
called  all  the  provinces  of  their  empire  which
were  situated  beyond  the  Tigris,  Kedem,  or  East ;
and  those  on  this  side  the  same  river,  the  West,
or  Arab.  Others,  instead  of,  they  departed  or
journeyed  from  the  east,  translate,  they  departed
to  go  towards  the  east.

Calmet  says,  that  it  appears  to  him  from  a  great
number  of  places  in  the  Old  and  even  in  the  New
Testament ,  that  the  sacred  writers  called  the  pro¬
vinces  which  were  beyond  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,
even  Mesopotamia,  Armenia,  and  Persia,  Kedem,
or  the  East.  Moses,  who  had  been  bred  up  in  Egypt,
and  lived  long  in  Arabia,  in  this  likewise  might
probably  follow  the  custom  of  the  country.  It  is  cer¬
tain,  says  he,  that  Babylonia,  Chaldea,  Susiana,
Persia,  and  a  part  of  Mesopotamia,  as  well  as  the
rivers  of  Euphrates  and  ligris,  for  the  greatest
part  of  their  course,  are  to  the  east  of  Palestine,
Egypt,  and  Arabia.

He  adds,  that  it  is  farther  certain,  that  the  people
who  came  from  Armenia,  Syria,  Media,  and  Up¬
per  Mesopotamia,  entered  Palestine  and  Egypt
from  the  east  side,  which  was  sufficient  for  the
Hebrews  to  say,  that  these  people  lay  to  the  east
with  respect  to  them.  He  proves  by  the  following
passages,  that  these  countries  were  known  among
the  Hebrews  by  the  name  of  East.  Jn  Num.  23.

7.  Balaam  says,  that  Balak,  king  of  Moab,  had
brought  him  from  the  mountains  of  the  east  ;
that  is,  from.  Pethor  upon  the  Euphrates.  Isaiah
says,  ch.  41.  2.  that  Abraham  came  from  the  east
into  the  land  of  Canaan: _  And  it  is  known  that
he  came  from  Mesopotamia  and  Chaldea.  The
same  prophet  says,  that  Cyrus  should  come  from
the  east  against  Babylon,  Isa.  46.  11.  He  places
Syria  to  the  east  of  Judea.  St.  Matthew  says,
that  the  wise  men,  who  came  to  worship  Christ,
set  out  from  the  east,  Mat.  2.  1.

All  this,  says  he,  demonstrates,  that  in  the  scripture
style,  the  East  is  often  used  for  the  provinces  which
lie  to  the  north  of  J  udea  and  Egypt,  from  whence,
however,  people  generally  enter  Palestine  by  the  way
only  of  Damascus,  which  is  to  the  north-east  of  this
country.

The  East  is  the  first  of  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the
horizon,  where  the  sun  is  seen  to  rise  when  in  the
equinoctial.

Gen.  3.24.  God  placed  at  the  e.  of  the  garden  of  Eden

12.8.  Abraham  removed  to  a  mountain  on  thee.

13. 11.  Lot  chose  the  plain,  and  journeyed  e.

28. 14.  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  west  and  e.

29. 1.  came  into  the  land  of  the  people  of  the  e.
Num.  3.  38.  but  those  that  encamp  toward  the  e.

23.7.  Balak  hath  brought  me  out  of  thee.

Judg.  6.  3.  the  children  of  the  e.  came  up  against
them,  33.  1  7.  12.  I  8.  10.  1  Kings  4.  30.
1  Kings  7.  25.  three  looking  toward  the  e.  2  Chr.  4. 4.
1  Chron.  9. 24.  the  porters  toward  the  e.  west,  north

12. 15.  they  put  to  flight  them  toward  the  e.

Job  1. 3.  the  greatest  of  all  the  men  of  the  e.

Psal.  75.  6.  promotion  cometh  not  from  e.  nor  west

103. 12.  as  far  as  the  e.  is  from  the  west
107.  3.  he  gathered  them  from  the  e.  and  west
Isa.  2. 6.  because  they  be  replenished  from  the  e.

11. 14.  they  shall  spoil  them  of  the  e.  Jer.  49. 28.

41. 2.  who  raised  up  the  righteous  man  from  the  e.
43.  5.  1  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  e.  Zech.  8. 7.
46.  11 .  calling  a  ravenous  bird  from  the  e.  the  man

Ezek.  8. 16.  men  25,  with  their  faces  towards  the  e.

12?


E  A  T


E  AT


EAT


F.^ek.  25.  4.  1  will  delivcrthee  to  the  men  oi  tnec.  10.
40  fi* then  came  he  to  the  gate  which  looketh  to¬
ward  the  e.  22.  1 43. 1.  1  44. 1.  |  46.  1.  12.

43. 2.  the  glory  of  God  came  from  the  way  ot  the  e.

47. 8.  these  waters  issue  out  toward  the  e.  <  ountry
<8.  10.  toward  the  e.  ten  thousand  in  breadth
17.  the  suburbs  of  the  city  toward  the  e.  250.
Dan.  8.  9.  the  horn  waxed  great  toward  the  e.

11. 44.  tidings  out  of  the  e.  shall  trouble  him
Joel  2.  20.  I  will  drive  him  toward  the  e.  sea
Amos  8. 12.  they  shall  wander  from  north  to  e.
Zech.  14.  4.  the  mount  shall  cleave  toward  the  e.
Mat.  2. 1.  there  came  wise  men  from  the  e.

2.  for  we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  e.  9.

8.  11.  many  come  from  e.  and  west,  Luke  13. 29.
24.  27.  as  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  e.

Rev  7.  2.  another  angel  ascending  from  the  e.

16. 12.  the  way  of  kings  of  e.  might  be  prepared
21  13  on  the  e.  three  gates,  on  the  north  three

east  Border.

Hum.  34.  10.  and  ye  shall  point  out  your  e.  border
Josh.  4.  19.  emcamped  in  the  e.  border  ox  Jericho
15  5  the  e.  border  was  the  salt  sea  to  end  of  Jordan
Ezek.  45.  7-  from  the  west  border  to  the  e.  border
48.  21.  of  the  oblation  toward  the  e.  border
EASTER.

Acts  12.  4.  intending  after  e.  to  bring  him  forth
EAST  GATE.

Neh.  3.  29.  Shemaiah,  the  keeper  of  the  e.  gate
Jer.  19.  2.  which  is  by  the  entry  of  the  e.  gate
Ezek.  10. 19.  every  one  stood  at  the  door  of  the  e.  g.

11.  1.  the  Spirit  brought  me  unto  the  e.gate
EAST  SIDE.

Exod.  27. 13.  the  breadth  of  the  court  on  the  e.  side
Num.  2.  3.  and  on  the  e.  side  shall  Judah  pitch
Tosh.  7.  2.  to  Ai,  which  is  on  the  e.  side  of  Bethel
*6.  5.  the  border  of  their  inheritance  on  the  e.  side
~udg.  11.  18.  came  by  e.  side  of  the  land  of  Moab
Ezek.  11.  23.  the  mountain  on  the  e.  side  of  the  city

42.  16.  he  measured  the  e.  side  with  the  reed
48  2.  from  the  e.  side  even  unto  the  west  side,  3,
4,  5,  6,  7  ,  8,  23,  24,  25, .26,  27.
Jonah  4.  5.  Jonah  sat  on  the  e.  side  of  the  city
EASTWARD.

Gen.  13. 14.  lift  up  thine  eyes  e.  and  look,  Deut.  3.27.
2  Kings  13. 17.  open  the  window  e.  and  he  opened  it
1  Chr.  26.  17.  e.  were  six  Levites,  northward  four
Esek.  47.  3.  the  man  with  the  line  went  forth  e.
VAST  WIND.


Gen.  41. 6.  thin  ears,  blasted  with  the  e.  wind,  23, 27.
Exod.  10.  13.  the  Lord  brought  an  e.  wind,  14.  21.
Job  15.  2.  and  fill  his  belly  with  the  e.  wind
27.  21.  e.  wind  carrieth  him  away,  he  departeth
38. 24.  which  scattereth  the  e.  wind  upon  the  earth
Psal.  48.  7.  thou  breakest  the  ships  with  an  e.  wind
78.  26.  he  caused  an  e.  wind  to  blow  in  heaven
Isa.  27. 8.  he  stayeth  his  rough  wind  in  day  of  e.  w.
Jer.  18.  17.  I  will  scatter  them  as  with  an  e.  wind
Ezek.  17.  10.  wither,  when  the  e.  wind  toucheth  it
19.  12.  and  the  e.  wind  drieth  up  her  fruit
27.  26.  the  e.  wind  hath  broken  thee  in  the  seas
Hos.  12.  1.  Ephraim  followeth  after  the  e.  wind

13.  15.  thougn  he  be  fruitful,  an  e.  wind  shall  come
Jonah  4.  8.  God  prepared  a  vehement  e.  wind
Hab.  1.  9.  their  faces  shall  sup  up  as  the  e.  wind
EASY.

Prov.  14.  6.  knowledge  is  e.  to  him  that  understands
Mat.  11.  30.  my  yoke  is  e.  my  burden  is  light
1  Cor.  14. 9.  except  ye  utter  words  e.  to  be  understood
Jam.  3.  17.  wisdom  from  above  is  e.  to  be  intreated
EAT.


To  eat  signifies,  [1]  To  chew  meat  with  the  teeth  to
make  it  fit  to  enter  the  stomach,  Gen.  27.  4.  [2]
To  enjoy,  Isa.  1.  19.  [3]  To  waste,  or  consume,
Eccl.  5.  11.  [4]  To  oppress  and  undo,  Psal.  14.  4.
[5]  To  believe,  John  6.  56.  L6]  To  have  fellow¬
ship  with,  1  Cor.  5.  11.  [7]  To  feed  on  God's
word,  Isa.  55.  1.  [8]  To  feast,  Isa.  22.  13.  [9]
To  do  the  will  of  God  with  delight,  John  4.  32.
It  is  said  in  Ezek.  3.  1.  Son  of  man,  eat  that
thou  findest,  eat  this  roll.  Head  attentively,
meditate  throughly,  impress  the  things  upon  thy
soul  deeply.  So  in  Jer.  15.  16.  Thy  words  were
found,  and  I  did  eat  them.

In  John  6.  53,  56.  our  Saviour  says,  Except  ye
eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his
blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you.  Except  ye  par¬
take  of  those  benefits  which  I  purchased  by  my
sufferings  in  my  human  nature,  ye  have  no  spi¬
ritual  life,  nor  communion  with  God,  hut  continue
in  your  sins,  and  shall  not  partake  of  eternal  life.
Again  :  He  that  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh
my  blood,  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I  in  him.  There
is  an  intimate  union  and  communion  between  us,
he  having  a  constant  dependence  upon  me  for
life,  which  is  his  dwelling  in  me  ;  and  I  giving
out  a  constant  influence  and  quickening  virtue  to
make  him  live,  which  is  my  dwelling  in  him.
And  in  John  4.  32.  he  says,  I  have  meat  to  eat
which  ye  know  not  of.  I  have  something  to  do
which  I  prefer  before  bodily  food,  namely,  to
bring  these  Samaritans  to  believe  in  and  own  me
for  the  true  Messiah.

ffhe  Psalmist  says,  Psal.  69.  9-  The  zeal  of  thine
house  hath  eaten  me  up:  That  fervent  passion
which  I  have  for  thy  house,  and  service,  and
glory,  and  people,  hath  enliausted  my  natural
moisture  and  vital  spirits.  The  Apostle  charges
the  Corinthians  not  to  eat  with  a  brother  that  is
a  fornicator,  or  covetous,  or  an  idolater  ;  not  to
entertain  any  unnecessary  familiarity  with  them,
1  Cor.  5.  11.  llosea,  speaking  of  the  priests,  says.
They  eat  up  the  sin  of  my  people.  Hos >  4.  8.
They  feast  upon,  and  pamper  themselves  with,
those  sacrifices  which  my  people  offer  for  their
sins,  and  are  greedy  after  them,  and  do  neither
desire  nor  endeavour  to  reclaim  the  people,  lest


thereby  their  gain  should  be  diminished.

The  ancient  Hebrews  did  not  eat  indifferently
with  all  sorts  of  persons;  they  would  have  pol¬
luted  and  dishonoured  themselves  in  their  own
opinion,  if  they  had  eaten  with  people  of  another
128


religion,  01  of  a  profession  that  teas  odious  and  in
disrepute.  In  the  patriarch  Joseph’s  time  they
neither  ate  with  the  Egyptians,  nor  the  Egyptians
with  them,  Gen.  43.  32.  In  our  Saviour's  time
they  did  not  eat  with  the  Samaritans  :  For  the  Jews
have  no  dealings  with  the  Samaritans,  John  4.9.
And  the  Jews  were  very  much  scandalized  to  see
that  Christ  made  no  scruple  of  eating  with  publicans
and  sinners :  Why  eateth  your  Master  with  pub¬
licans  and  sinners  ?  Mat.  9-  11.  As  there  were
several  sorts  of  meats ,  the  use  whereof  was  not
allowed  them,  they  could  not  conveniently  eat  with
those  who  partook  of  them,  for  fear  of  contracting
some  pollution  by  touching  them,  or  lest  by  acci¬
dent  any  part  of  them  should  fall  upon  them..
Before  they  sit  down  to  table,  they  are  very  care¬
ful  to  wash  their  hands  :  they  speak  of  this  prac¬
tice  as  a  ceremony  that  is  essential  and  strictly
obliging.

Gen.  2. 16.  of  every  tree  thou  mayest  freely  e.

3.5.  in  the  day  ye  e.  your  eyes  shall  be  opened
6.  Eve  took  and  did  e.  ||  12.  and  I  did  e.  13.

14.  and  dust  shalt  thou  e.  all  the  days  ot  thy  life

17.  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  e.  of  it  all  days  of  thy  life

18. 8.  he  stood  by  the  angels,  and  they  did  e.  19.  3.

27.  4.  savoury  meat,  bring  it  to  me.  that  I  maye.

31.  46.  and  they  did  e.  there  upon  the  heap
40.  17.  the  birds  did  e.  them  out  of  the  basket

43.  t  16.  these  men  shall  e.  with  me  at  noon

32.  for  the  Egyptians  did  e.  by  themselves
Exod.  10.  5.  the  locusts  shall  e.  every  tree  that  grow.

12.  the  locusts  may  e.  every  herb  of  the  land

12. 8.  roast  with  fire,  with  bitter  herbs  they  shall  e.  it
16.  no  work  done,  save  that  which  every  man  e.

43.  no  stranger  shall  e.  thereof,  48.  Lev.  22. 13.

44.  when  circumcised,  then  shall  he  e.  thereof

16.  25.  e.  that  to  day,  for  to  day  is  a  sabbath  to  L.
35.the  children  of  Israel  did  e.  manna  forty  years,

till  came  to  borders  of  Canaan,  John  6. 31, 49, 58.
23. 11.  that  the  poor  of  thy  people  may  e.

29.  32.  Aaron  and  sorts  shall  e.  Lev.  6.  16. 1  8.  31.
34.  15.  one  call  thee,  and  thou  e.  of  his  sacrifice
Lev.  6. 18.  males  shall  e.  it,  29- 1  7.  6.  Num.  18. 10.

26.  the  priest  that  offereth  it  for  sin  shall  e.  it

7. 19.  all  that  be  clean  shall  e.  thereof,  Num.  18. 11.
24.  any  other  use,  but  ye  shall  in  no  wise  e.  of  it

10.  12.  e.  it  without  leaven  beside  the  altar

11.  21.  yet  these  ye  may  e.  22.  Deut.  14.  20.

24.  9.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  e.  in  the  holy  place
25. 20.  if  ye  say,  what  shall  we  e.  the  seventh  year
26.  16.  shall  sow  in  vain,  your  enemies  shall  e.  it
Num.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  fish  we  did  e.  freely

13.  weep,  saying,  give  us  flesh,  that  we  may  e.

23.  24.  he  shall  not  lie  down  till  he  e.  of  the  prey

25. 2.  the  peo.  did  e.  of  their  sacrifices,  and  bowed

Deut.  2. 6.  ye  shall  buy  meat  of  them  that  ye  may  e.
12. 15.  e.  in  thy  gates,  21. 1  15.  22. 1  26.  12.

15.  the  unclean  and  clean  may  e.  22.  1 15.  22.

18.  thou  muste.  before  the  Lord,  14.  26. 1  15.  20.
20.  shalt  say,  I  will  e.  flesh,  thou  mayest  e.  flesh

14.  21.  give  it  to  the  stranger  that  he  may  e.

20.  6.  lest  he  die,  and  another  man  e.  ofit

23.  24.  then  thou  mayest  e.  grapes  thy  fill

28. 39.  not  gather  grapes,  for  worms  shall  e.  them
53.  shall  e.  fruit  of  thine  own  body,  Lam.  2.  20.

32.  38.  which  did  e.  the  fat  of  their  sacrifices
Josh.  5.  11.  they  did  e.  of  the  old  corn  of  the  land

24.  13.  of  the  vineyards  ye  planted  not  do  ye  e.
Judg.  19.  8.  they  tarried,  and  did  e.  both  of  them

1  Sam.  1.  18.  Hannah  did  e.  and  was  no  more  sad

9.  13.  and  afterwards  they  e.  that  be  bidden

14.  34.  and  e.  and  sin  not  against  the  Lord

20.  34.  Jonathan  did  e.  no  meat  the  second  day
28. 22.  and  e.  that  thou  mayest  have  strength

2  Sam.  9.  11.  he  shall  e.  at  my  table,  1  Kings  2. 7.

1  Kings  14. 11.  him  thatdieth  of  Jeroboam  snail  the

dogs  e.  16.  4. 1  21.  23.  2  Kings  9.  10,  36.

17.  12.  for  me  and  my  son,  that  we  may  e.  and  die
19. 5.  the  angel  said,  arise  and  e.  Acts  10. 13. 111.7.

2  Kings  4.  43.  they  shall  e.  and  leave  thereof

44.  they  did  e.  and  left  thereof,  according  to  word
6. 28.  this  woman  said,  give  thy  son  that  we  may  e.

him  to-day,  and  we  will  e.  mv  son  to-morrow
29.  so  we  boiled  my  son,  and  did  e.  him
18. 31.  ye  e.  every  man  of  his  own  vine,  Isa.  36. 16.

2  Chron.  30.  18.  yet  did  they  e.  the  passpver
Ezra  6.  21.  and  the  children  of  Israel  did  e.

Neh.  5.  2.  take  up  corn,  that  we  may  e.  and  live

9.  25.  so  they  did  e.  and  were  filled,  Psal.  78.  29.
Job  3.  24.  for  my  sighing  cometh  before  I  e.

31. 8.  then  let  me  sow,  and  let  another  e.

Psal.  22.  26.  the  meek  shall  e.  and  be  satisfied

29.  all  they  that  be  fat  on  earth  shall  e.

50.  13.  will  I  e.  the  flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink  blood
78.  25.  man  did  e.  angels’  food,  he  sent  them  meat
128.  2.  thou  shalt  e.the  labour  of  thine  hands
Prov  1. 31.  e.  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  Isa.  3. 10.

13.2.  but  the  soul  of  transgressors  shall  e.  violence
18.21.  and  they  that  love  it  shall  e.  the  fruit
24. 13.  my  son,  e.  thou  honey,  because  it  is  good

27.  18.  whoso  keepeth  fig-tree  shall  e.  fruit  thereof
30. 17.  the  eye,  and  the  young  eagles  shall  e.  it
Eccl.  2.  25.  for  who  can  e.  or  hasten  more  than  I  ?
5. 11.  goods  increase  they  are  increased  that  e.  them

12.  sleep  is  sweet,  whether  lie  e.  little  or  much

10.  16.  and  thy  princes  e.  in  the  morning

17.  blessed,  when  thy  princes  e.  in  due  season
Cant  4.  tl.  as  a  flock  of  goats  that  e.  of  Gilead

16.  come  into  his  garden  and  e.  his  pleasant  fruits
ha.  4. 1.  we  will  e.  our  own  bread,  and  wear  our

own  appare !

7.15.  butter  and  honey  shall  he  e.  that  he  may  know
22.  butter  and  honey  shall  every  one  e.  that  is  left
9.  20.  e.  on  the  left  hand,  e.  the  flesh  of  his  arm

11.  7.  the  lion  shall  e.  straw  like  the  ox,  65.  25.

30.  24.  oxen  and  asses  shall  e.  clean  provender
37.  30.  sow  ye  and  reap,  plant  vineyards,  and  e.

the  fruit  thereof,  65. 21.  Jer.  29-  5,  28.

51. 8.  and  the  worm  shall  e.  them  like  wool

55.  1.  come  ye,  buy  and  e.  yea,  come,  buy  wine
2.  hearken  to  me,  and  e.  that  which  is  good
62.  9.  they  that  have  gathered  it  shall  e.  it


Isa.  65. 4.  a  people  which  e.  swine's  flesl  and  broth

13.  my  servants  shall  e.  but  ye  shall  be  hungry
22.  they  shall  not  plant  and  another  e.

Jer.  15. 16.  thy  words  were  found,  and  1  did  e.  them
19.  9.  shall  e.  every  one  the  flesh  of  his  friend  in

the  siege  and  straitness
Ezek.  2.  8.  open  thy  mouth  and  e.  that  I  give  thee

3.  1.  son  of  man,  e.  that  thou  findest,  e.  this  roll

4.  10.  e.  by  weight  ||  5.  10.  fathers  shall  e.  sons
16. 13.  thou  didst  e.  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and  oil

22.  9.  and  in  thee  they  e.  upon  the  mountains
34.  3.  ye  e.  the  fat,  and  clothe  you  with  the  wool
Dan.  4.  33.  Nebuchadnezzar  did  e.  grass  as  oxen
Hos.  4.  10.  for  they  shall  e.  and  not  have  enough.

they  shall  not  increase,  Mic.  6.  14.  IJag.  ].  6

9.  3.  they  shall  e.  unclean  things  in  Assyria
4.  all  that  e.  thereof  shall  be  polluted

Amos  6.  4.  that  e.  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock
Mic.  3.  3.  who  also  e.  the  flesh  of  my  people
Zech.  11.  9.  let  the  rest  e.  every  one  flesh  of  another
16.  but  he  shall  e.  the  flesh  of  the  fat  and  tear
Mat.  12. 4.  how  David  did  e.  the  shew-bread

14.  20.  did  all  e.  and  were  filled,  took  up  frac

ments,  15.  37-  Mark  6.  42.  |  8.  8.  Luke  9.  17

15.  27.  yet  the  dogs  e.  of  the  crumbs,  Mark7, 28.

38.  they  that  did  e.  were  4000,  beside  women
26.  21.  and  as  they  did  e.  he  said,  Mark  14. 18, 22 1

26.  Jesus  took  bread,  brake  it,  and  said,  take,  e

this  is  my  body,  Mark  14. 22.1  Cor.  11.24
Mark  2.  16.  when  they  saw  him  e.  with  publicans

6.  44.  they  that  did  e.  were  above  5000  men
11.  14.  no  man  e.  fruit  of  thee  hereafter  for  ever

14.  12.  where  go  and  prepare  that  thou  mayest  e
the  passover  ?  14.  Luke  22.  8,  11.  John  18.  28

Luke  6.  1.  and  did  e.  rubbing  them  in  their  hands

7.  36.  one  desired  him  that  he  would  e.  with  him

10.  8.  e.  such  things  as  are  set  before  you

15.  23.  kill  fatted  calf,  let  use.  and  be  merry
24.  43.  he  took  it,  and  did  e.  before  them

John  4.  31.  disciples  prayed  him,  saying,  Master,  e

6.  26.  because  ye  did  e.  of  loaves  and  were  filler
50.  that  a  man  may  e.  thereof  and  not  die

53.  except  ye  e.  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man
Acts  2.  46.  they  did  e.  their  meat  with  gladness

11.  3.  thou  wentest  in  and  didst  e.  with  them

23.  14.  we  will  e.  nothing  till  we  have  slain  Paul
Rom.  14.  2.  one  believeth  he  may  e.  all  things

23.  he  that  doubteth  is  damned  if  he  e.

1  Cor.  8. 7.  for  some  e.  it  as  a  thing  offered  to  anidc
8.  neither  if  we  e.  are  we  the  better,  if  we  e.  not
13.  I  will  e.  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth

10.  3.  and  did  all  e.  the  same  spiritual  meat

18.  who  e.  of  the  sacrifices,  partakers  of  the.  alta
25.  whatsoever  is  sold  in  the  shambles,  that  e.

27.  e.  asking  no  question  for  conscience  sake

11.  34.  if  any  man  hunger,  let  him  e.  at  home

2  Thess.  3. 10.  if  any  work  not,  neither  should  he  ,
2  Tim,  2.  17.  their  word  will  e.  as  doth  a  canker
Jam.  5.  3.  and  shall  e.  your  flesh  as  it  were  fire
Rev.  17. 16.  shall  e.  her  flesh,  and  burn  her  with  fii

19.  18.  that  ye  may  e.  flesh  of  kings  and  captain
See  Blood,  Bread,  I  at.

EAT,  with  drink.

Gen.  24. 54.  and  they  did  e.  and  drink,  26.  30.  Exo
24.  11.  Judg.  9.  27. 1 19.
Exod.  32. 6.  sat  down  to  e.  and  drink,  1  Cor.  10.  7
34. 28.  nor  e.  bread,  nor  drink  water,  Deut.  9.  9,  1

1  Sam.  30.11.  Egyptians  did  e.  bread  and  drink  wat

2  Sam.  11. 11.  shall  I  go  to  my  house  to  e.and  drink

12.  3.  it  did  e.  of  his  meat  and  drink  ot  his  cup

19.  35.  can  thy  servant  taste  what  I  e.  or  drink?

1  Kings  1.  25.  they  e.  and  drink  before  Adonijaf

13.  8.  I  will  not  e.  bread  nor  drink  water,  9, 17,  -

16.  neither  will  I  e.  bread  nor  drink  water
18.  41.  Elijah  said,  get  thee  up,  e.  and  drink

2  Kings  6. 22.  set  bread,  that  they  may  e.  and  dn)

7.  8.  they  went  into  one  tent  and  did  e.  and  dn:
18.  27.  e.  own  dung  and  drink  piss,  Isa.  36.  12.

1  Chr.  29.  22.  and  did  e.  and  drink  before  the  Loj

2  Chron.  28.  15.  and  gave  them  to  e.  and  to  drink
Ezra  10.  6.  Ezra  did  e.  no  bread  nor  drink  water
Neh.  8.  10.  go  your  way,  e.  the  fat  and  drink  swe
Esth.  4.  16.  fast  for  me,  nor  e.  nor  drink  three  day
Job  1.  4.  called  sisters  to  e.  and  drink  with  them
Prov.  23.  7.  so  is  he,  e.  and  drink  saith  he  to  thei
Eccl.  2.  24.  there  is  nothing  better  than  that

should  e.  and  drink,  3.  13. 1  5.  18. 1  8.  1
Cant.  5.1.  e.  O  friends,  yea,  drink  abundantly
Isa.  21.  5.  e.  drink,  ye  princes,  anoint  the  shield
22.  13.  behold  joy  and  gladness,  let  us  e.and  drir
for  to-inorrow  we  shall  die,  1  Cor.  15.  ‘
Jer.  22.  15.  did  not  thy  father  e.  and  drink ?
Ezek.  25.  4.  shall  e.  thy  fruit  and  drink  thy  milk

39.  17.  that  ye  may  e.  flesh  and  drink  blood
Dan.  1.  12.  give  us  pulse  to  e.  and  water  to  drt
Zech.  7.  6.  when  ye  did  e.  and  when  ye  did  drir
Mat.  6.  25.  what  shall  e.  or  drink,  31.  Luke  12.  f

24.  49.  to  e.  and  drink  with  drunken,  Luke  12.  *
Luke  5.  30.  why  do  yee.  and  d.  with  publicans

33.  John’s  disciples  fast,  but  thy  disciples  «.  anti
12.  19.  take  thine  ease,  e.  drink,  and  be  merry

17 .  8.  and  afterward  thou  shalt  e.  and  drink
27.  they  did  e.  they  drank,  they  married,  28.

22.  30.  that  ye  may  e.  and  drink  at  my  table
Acts  9.  9.  Saul  three  days  did  neither  e.  oovdn

23.  12.  e.  nor  drink  till  they  had  killed  Paul,  21
Rom.  14.  21.  neither  to  e.  flesh  nor  drink  wine

1  Cor.  9. 4.  have  we  not  power  to  e.  and  to  dr  ml
10. 31.  wheth.  therefore  ye  e.  or  drink,  or  whate-

11 .  22.  have  ye  not  houses  to  e.  and  drink  in  1

26.  as  oft  as  ye  e.  this  bread  and  drink  this  cu[

27.  whosoever  shall  e.  and  drink  unworthily

28.  and  so  let  him  e.  and  drink  of  that  cup

He  did  EAT.

Gen,  3.  6.  Eve  gave  to  her  husband,  and  he  did< .
25. 28.  loved  Esau,  because  he  did  e.  of  his  vems<
27.  25.  he  brought  it  near  to  Isaac,  and  he  did  <
39.  6.  he  knew  not  ought,  save  the  bread  he  did

1  Sam.  30. 11.  gave  the  Egy  ptian  bread, and  hedto

2  Sam.  9. 13.  he  did  e.  continually  at  his  table

12.  20.  they  set  bread  before  him,  and  he  did  e.
Mark  1.6.  John  did  e.  locusts  and  wild  honey


EAT


EAT


E  I  G


tkt  4.  2.  and  in  those  days  he  did  e.  nothin?

,/  2  12.  tor  before  he  did  e.  with  the  Gentiles
EAT  not.

m.  2. 17.  but  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good
and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  e.  of  it,  3. 1,  3.

.  11.  whereof  I  commanded  thee  net  to  e.  17-
,  4  the  blood  thereof  shall  you  not  e.  J.ev.  19.  26.

Deut.  12. 16,  23, 24,  25.  |  15.  23.
'4,33.  I  will  note,  till  I  have  told  my  errand
2. 32.  the  children  of  Israel  e.  not  of  the  sinew

3. 22.  the  Egyptians  might  nor  e.  with  the  Hebrews
jod.  12.  9.  e.  not  of  it  raw,  nor  sodden  at  all
45.  a  foreigner  shall  not  e.  thereof,  29.  33.
ev.  11.  4.  these  shall  ye  not  e.  Deut.  14.  3,  7.

’  :2.  4.  a  leper  not  e.  of  the  holy  things,  6,  10,  12.

8.  dial  torn  he  shall  not  e.  to  defile  himself
urn.  11  19.  ye  shall  not  e.  one  day,  or  two  days

i gut .  14,21.  ye  shall  not  e.  of  any  thing  that  cfieth
of  itself,  shalt  give  it  to  stranger,  Ezek.  44.  31.

S.  31.  oxbe  slain,  and  thou  shalt  not  e.  thereof
•tdg.  13.  4,  and  e.  not  any  unclean  thing,  7, 14.

Sam.  1. 7.  therefore  she  wept,  and  d,id  not  e.

1. 13.  for  the  people  will  not  e.  till  hd  come

18.  23.  Saul  refused,  and  said,  I  will  not  e.

Kings  4.  40.  and  they  could  not  e.  thereof
’.  2.  shalt  see  it  with  thy  eyes,  but  not  e.  thereof,  19.
zra 2.  63.  not  e.  of  most  holy  things,  Neh.  7.  65.
'sal.  141. 4.  and  let  me  not  e.  of  their  dainties
'rov.  23. 6.  e.  not  bread  of  him  that  hath  an  evil  eye
zek.  24.  17.  cover  not  lips,  and  e.  not  bread  of  men
lark  7.  3.  Jews,  except  they  wash,  they  e.  not,  4.
nice  22. 16. 1  will  not  e.  thereof,  until  fulfilled
Cor.  5.  11.  with  such  an  one  no  not  to  e.

I.  8.  neither  if  we  e.  not  are  we  the  worse
.0. 28.  e.  not,  for  his  sake  that  shewed  it
Shall  ye  EAT.

'rod.  12.  11.  thus  shall  ye  e.  it,  with  loins  girded

15.  seven  days  shall  ye  e.  unleavened  bread,  20.
!2. 31.  nor  shall  ye  e.  any  flesh  torn  of  beasts
ev.  10.  14.  wave  breast  shall  ye  e.  in  a  clean  place
ill.  3.cheweth  the  cud,  that  shall  ye  e.  Deut.  14. 4, 6.

9.  these  shall  ye  e.  of  all  that  are  in  the  waters
9. 25.  in  the  fifth  year  shall  ye  e.  of  the  fruit
!6.  29.  the  flesh  of  your  daughters  shall  ye  e.
hut.  14.  9.  all  that  have  fins  and  scales  shall  ye  e.

Ye  shall  EAT.

en.  45. 18.  and  ye  shall  e.  the  fat  of  the  land
'tod.  12. 11.  ye  shall  e.  it  in  haste,  Lord's  passover

18.  first  month  at  even  ye  shall  e.  unleav.  bread

6. 12.  saying,  at  even  yesliall  e.  flesh,  and  in  mom.
ev.  7.  23.  ye  shall  e.  no  manner  of  fat,  24.

26.  yesliall e.  no  manner  of  blood,  17.  14.

.0. 13.  and  ye  shall  e.  it  in  the  holy  place

!3. 14.  ye  shall  e.  neither  bread  nor  parched  corn

!5. 12.  ye  shall  e.  the  increase  thereof  out  of  the  field

19.  ye  shall e.  your  till,  and  dwell  in  safety
22.  ye  shall  e.  of  the  old  store,  26. 10.

!6.2o.  and  ye  shall  e.  and  not  be  satisfied

29.  ye  shall  e.  the  flesh  of  your  sons  and  daughters
lum.  11. 18.  the  Lord  will  give  flesh,  and  ye  shall e.
18. 31.  and  ye  shall  e.  in  every  place,  and  households
lout.  12.  7.  there  ye  shall  e.  before  Lord  your  God
14. 11.  of  all  clean  birds  ye  shall  e.

Sam.  9.  19.  go  up,  hr  ye  shall  e.  with  me  to-day
Kings  19.  29.  this  shall  be  a  sign,  ye  shall  e.  this
year  such  things  as  grow  themselves,  Isa.  37.  30.
ta.  1.19.  if  obedient,  ye  shall  e.  the  good  of  the  land

51. 6.  ye  shall  e.  the  riches  of  the  Gent,  in  their  glory
■tek.  39.  19.  and  ye  shall  e.  fat  till  ye  be  full
oel.  2.  26.  ye  shall  e.  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied
.uke  12. 22.  take  no  thought  wnat  ye  shall  e.  nor  put
To  EAT.


'rod.  16. 8.  Lord  shall  give  you  in  evening  flesh  to  e.
fum.  11.  4.  said,  who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  e.  ?  18.
lent.  12.  20.  because  thy  soul  longeth  to  e.  flesh
18.  8.  they  shall  have  like  portions  to  e.

Sam.  9.  13.  before  he  go  to  the  high  place  to  e.

20. 24.  the  king  sat  him  down  to  e.  meat

Sam.  3.  35.  the  people  came  to  cause  David  to  e.

9. 10.  that  thy  master’s  son  may  have  food  to  e.

13.  9.  poured  before  him,  but  he  refused  to  e.

16.  2.  and  summer-fruit  for  the  young  men  to  e.

17.  29.  for  the  people  that  were  with  him  to  e.

Kings  4. 40.  so  they  poured  out  for  the  men  to  e.
Chron.  31. 10.  we  have  had  enough  to  e.  and  left
Heh.  9.  36.  land  thou  gavest,  to  e.  the  fruit  thereof
hal.  78.  24.  and  had  rained  manna  on  them  to  e.
-‘rov.  23.  1 1 .  when  thou  sittest  to  e.  with  a  ruler

25. 27.  it  is  not  good  to  e.  much  honey'

Wei.  5. 19.  hath  given  him  power  to  e.  thereof

6.  2.  yet  God  giveth  him  not  power  to  e.  thereof
so.  23.  18.  shall  be  for  them  to  e.  sufficiently
er.  19.  9.  cause  them  to  e.  the  flesh  of  their  sons
‘Mk.  3. 2.  and  he  caused  me  to  e.  that  roll

3.  he  said,  son  of  man,  cause  thy  belly  to  e.

Jan.  4.  25.  they  shall  make  thee  to  e.  grass,  32.
uic.  7. 1.  woe  is  me,  there  is  no  cluster  to  e.

lab.  1. 8.  they  shall  flee  as  eagle  that  hasteth  to  e.
uat.  12. 1.  they  began  to  pluck  ears  of  com,  and  toe.

4.  not  lawful  for  him  to  e.  Mark  2.  26.  Luke  6. 4.

14. 16.  give  ye  them  to  e.  Mark  6.  37.  Luke  9. 13.
15.  20.  to  e.  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not

32.  the  multitude  have  nothings  e.  Mark 8. 1, 2.

26. 17.  where  wilt  that  we  prepare  to  e.  passover  ?
*lark  5. 43.  that  something  should  be  given  her  to  e.
p.  31.  and  they  had  no  leisure  so  much  as  to  e.

[Mice 22.  15.  I  have  desired  toe.  this  passover

32. 1  have  meat  to  e.  that  ye  know  not  of

33.  hath  any  man  brought  him  aught  to  e.  ?

0. 52.  how  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  e.  ?
pets  27.  35.  when  he  had  broken  it,  he  began  to  e.

‘  Cor .  8. 10.  emboldened  to  e.  things  offered  to  idols

20.  when  ye  come,  this  is  not  to  e.  Lord’s  supper
33.  brethren,  when  ye  come  together  to  e.
neb.  13. 10.  an  altar  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  e.
Kev.  2. 7 .  will  1  give  to  e.  of  the  tree  of  life  in  midst
ii-  i°  things  sacrificed  unto  idols,  20.

1( .  1  will  give  to  e.  of  hidden  manna,  a  white  stone
r>  ....  EAT  up.

r,en'  ’I.  4.  the  lean  did  e.  up  the  seven  fat  kine,  20.
\V’  o  ^ant*  your  enemies  shall  e.  you  up
■sum.  24.  8.  he  shall  e.  up  the  nations  his  enemies


Deut.  28. 33.  a  nation  thou  knowest  not  shall  e.  up
Psal.  27. 2.  my  enemies  came  on  me  to  e.  up  my  flesh
105. 35.  did  e.  up  all  the  herbs  in  their  land
Isa.  50.  0.  the  moth  shall  e.  them  up,  51. 8.

Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  e.  up  thine  harvest  and  thy
bread,  e.  up  thy  flocks,  e.  up  thy  vines  and  fig-trees

22. 22.  the  wind  shall  e.  up  all  thy'  pastures
Hos.  4.  8.  they  e.  up  the  sin  of  my  people

Arnos  7.  4.  it  devoured  the  deep,  and  did  e.  up  a  part
Mic.  5. 1 6.  they  shall  e.  up  the  land  of  Assyria
Nah.  3. 15.  it  shall  e.  thee  up  like  the  canker-worm
Rev.  10.  9.  angel  said  to  me,  take  it,  and  e.  it  up
EATEN.

Gen.  3. 11.  hast  thou  e.  of  tree  whereofshouldestnot  ?
14.  24.  save  that  which  the  young  men  have  e.

31.  38.  the  rams  of  thy  flock  have  I  not  e.

41.  21.  when  they  had  e.  them  up,  it  could  not  be
known  that  they'  had  e.  them, but  were  ill-favoured
Exod.  12.  46.  in  one  house  shall  it  be  e.

13. 3.  there  shall  no  leavened  bread  be  e.  7.

21. 28.  ox  shall  be  stoned,  his  flesh  shall  not  be  e.

22.  5.  if  a  man  cause  a  field  or  vineyard  to  be  e.

29.  34.  it  shall  not  be  e.  because  it  is  holy
Lev.  6. 16.  it  shall  be  e.  in  the  holy  place,  26.  1 7-  6.
23.  it  shall  be  wholly  burnt,  it  snail  not  be  e.  j.  19.

30.  no  sin  offering  snail  bee.  it  shall  be  burnt

7. 15.  shall  be  e.  the  same  day  it  is  offered,  16.

18.  if  the  sacrifice  of  peace  offering  be  e.

10. 17.  why  have  ye  not  e.  the  sin  offering  ?

18.  ye  should  indeed  have  e.  it  in  the  holy  place

19.  if  I  had  e.  the  sin  offering  to  day

11.  13.  they  shall  not  bee.  41.  Deut.  14.  19.

19. 6.  it  shall  be  e.  the  same  day  ye  offer,  22.  30.

7.  and  if  it  be  e.  at  all  on  the  third  day

Num.  28. 17.  unleavened  bread  be  e.  Ezek.  45.  21.
Deut.  6.  11.  to  give  vineyards  thou  plantedst  not,
when  thou  shalt  have  e.  and  be  full,  8. 10, 12.

12. 22.  even  as  the  roebuck  and  the  hart  is  e.

20. 6.  hath  planted  a  vineyard,  and  hath  not  e.  of  it

26. 14.  I  have  not  e.  thereof  in  my  mourning

29.  6.  ye  have  not  e.  bread  nor  drunk  wine

31.  20.  when  they  shall  have  e.  and  be  filled

Josh.  5. 12.  after  they  had  e.  of  the  old  corn
Ruth  3.  7-  when  Boaz  had  e.  and  drunk,  he  went

1  Sam.  14.  30.  if  haply  the  people  had  e.  freely
28.  20.  for  he  had  e.  no  bread  all  the  day

30. 12.  when  he  had  e.  his  spirit  came  again

2  Sam.  19.  42.  have  we  e.  at  all  of  the  king’s  cost  ?

1  Kings  13.  22.  but  earnest  back,  and  hast  e.  bread

28.  the  lion  had  not  e.  the  carcase,  nor  torn  the  ass
Neh.  5. 14.  have  not  e.  the  bread  of  the  governor
Job  6.  6.  that  is  unsavoury  be  e.  without  salt

31. 17.  or  have  e.  my  morsel  myself  alone

39.  if  I  have  e.  the  fruits  thereof  without  money
Ps.  69.  9.  for  the  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  e.  me  up,
and  reproaches  are  fallen  upon  me,  John  2. 17.
102. 9. 1  have  5.  ashes  like  bread,  mingled  rny  drink
Prov.  9. 17.  and  bread  e.  in  secret  is  pleasant

23. 8.  the  morsel  that  thou  hast  e.  shalt  thou  vomit
Cant.  5. 1.  I  have  e.  my  honey-comb  with  my  honey
Lya.3.14.forye  have  5.up  the  vineyard  spoil  of  poor,
Jer.  10. 25.  they  have  e.  up  Jacob,  and  devoured  him

24.2.  figs  which  could  not  bee.  3. 8. 129.  17-
31.  29.  fathers  have  e.  sour  grapes,  Ezek.  18.  2.

Ezek.  4. 14.  I  have  not  e.  that  which  dieth  of  ftself

18.  6.  and  hath  not  e.  upon  the  mountains,  15.

11.  but  even  hath  e.  upon  the  mountains

Hos.  10.  13.  ye  have  e.  the  fruit  of  lies

Joel  1.  4.  that  locust  hath  left,  canker-worm  e.  2.25.

Mat.  14.  21.  and  they  that  had  e.  Mark  8.  9.

Luke  13. 26.  we  have  e.  and  drunk  in  thy  presence

17.8.  till  I  have  e.  afterward  thou  shalt  e.

John  6. 13.  which  remained  to  them  that  had  e.

Acts  10. 10.  he  became  hungry,  and  would  have  e.

14.  Lord,  1  have  never  e.  any  thing  common

12. 23.  he  was  e.  of  worms,  and  gave  up  the  ghost
20. 11.  when  he  had  broken  bread  and  e.  departed
27.  38.  when  they  had  e.  enough  they  lightened

Rev.  10. 10.  as  soon  as  1  had  e.  it,  my  belly  was  bitter
EATER .

Judy.  14. 14.  he  said,  out  of  the  e.  came  forth  meat
Isa.  55. 10.  that  it  may  give  bread  to  the  e.

Nah.  3. 12.  they  shall  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the  e.
EATERS.

Prov.  23.  20.  be  not  among  riotous  e.  ot  flesh
EATEST.

Gen.  2. 17.  in  the  day  thou  e.  thou  shalt  surely  die
1  Sam.  1.  8.  then  said  Elkanah,  why  e.  thou  not?

1  Kings  21.5.  why  spirit  so  sad  that  thou  e.  no  bread  ?
EATETH.

Exod.  12. 15.  who  e.  leavened  bread  be  cut  off,  19.
Lev.  7. 18.  the  soul  that  e.  20, 25,  27-  1 17- 10, 15.

19.  8.  every  one  that  e.  shall  bear  his  iniquity
Num.  13. 32.  a  land  that  e.  up  the  inhabitants
1  Sam.  14.  24.  cursed  be  the  man  that  e.  28.

Job  5. 5.  whose  harvest  the  hungry  e.  up

21.  25.  and  another  never  e.  with  pleasure

40. 15.  behemoth  which  I  made,  he  e.  grass  as  an  ox
Psal.  106. 20.  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  e.  grass
Prov.  13.  25.  the  righteous  e.  to  satisfying  of  his  soul

30.  20.  she  e.  and  wipeth  her  mouth,  and  saith

31.  27.  and  she  e.  not  the  bread  of  idleness
Eccl.  4. 5.  the  fool  foldeth  hands  and  e.  his  own  flesh

5. 17.  all  his  days  also  he  e.  in  darkness

6. 2.  but  a  stranger  e.  it,  this  is  vanity,  evil  disease
Isa.  28.  4.  while  it  is  yet  in  his  hand  he  e.  it  up

29. 8.  behold,  he  e.  but  awaketh,  and  is  hungry

44. 16.  and  with  part  thereof  he  e.  flesh,  roasteth
59. 5.  he  that  e.  of  their  eggs  dieth

Jer.  31. 30.  every  man  that  e.  the  sour  grape
Mat.  9. 11.  Pharisees  said,  why  e.  your  master  with
publicans  and  sinners  ?  Mark  2. 16.  Luke  15.  2.
Mark  14. 18.  Jesus  said,  verily,  one  of  you  who  e.

with  me,  shall  betray  me,  John  13.  18.
John  6.  54.  whoso  e.  my  flesh  hath  eternal  life

56.  he  that  e.  my  flesh  dwelleth  in  me,  1  in  him

57.  so  he  that  e.  me,  even  he  shall  live  by  me

58.  he  that  e.  of  this  bread,  shall  live  for  ever
Rom .  14. 2.  another  who  is  weak  e.  herbs

3.  let  not  him  that  e.  despise  him  that  e.  not
6.  that  e.  to  the  Lord,  that «.  not,  to  the  lord  5.  not

20.  it  is  evil  for  that  man  who  e.  with  offence


Rom.  14. 23.  damned  if  he  eat,  because  e.  not  ot  faith
1  Cor.  9.  7-  who  planteth  a  vineyard,  and  e.  not  of
fruit  thereof  <  and  e.  not  of  the  milk  of  the  flock

11. 29.  he  thate.  unworthily,  e.  damnation  to  hims.

EATING.

Gen.  2. 1 16.  of  every  tree  e.  thou  shalt  eat,  but  of  tree
Exod.  12.  4.  take  a  lamb  according  to  the  number  of
souls,  every  man  according  to  his  e.  16.16, 18,21.
Judg.  14.  9.  Samson  took  thereof,  and  went  on  e.

1  Sam.  14. 34.  sin  not  against  the  L.  in  e.  with  blood
30.  16.  they  were  spread  abroad  on  all  the  earth  e.

1  Kings  1.41.  Adonijah’s  guests  made  an  end  of  e.

2  Kings  A.  40.  as  they  were  e.  of  pottage,  cried  out
Job  HO.  23.  and  shall  rain  it  upon  him  while  he  is  e.
Isa.  66.  17.  e.  swine’s  flesh,  and  the  abomination
Amos 7.  2.  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  e.  grass
Mat.  26.  26  as  they  were  e.  Jesus  took  bread

Acts  1. 1  4.  and  e.  with  them,  commanded  tnem
1  Cor.  8. 4.  concerning  e.  of  things  sacrificed  to  idols
11. 21.  in  e.  every  one  taketh  his  own  supper
See  Drinking.

ECHO.

Ezek.  7.  +  7-  and  not  the  e.  of  the  mountains
.  EDGE.

Exod.  13. 20.  Etham  in  e.  of  wilderness,  Num.  33. 6.
26.  10.  make  fifty  loops  in  the  e.  of  one  curtain
Eccl.  10. 10.  be  blunt,  and  he  do  not  whet  the  e.

Luke  4. 1 29.  they  led  Jesus  to  the  e.  of  the  hill
See  Teeth.

EDGE  of  the  sword.

Gen.  34. 26.  and  they  slew  Hamor  with  the  e.  of  sword
Exod.  17. 13.  discomfited  Arnalek  with  thee,  of  sw.
Num.  21. 24.  and  Israel  smote  Sihon  with  e.  of  sword
Josh.  6. 21.  they  utterly  destroyed  all  with  e.  of  sword
8.24.  the  Israelites  smote  Ai  with  the  e.  of  sword
Judg.  4. 15.  Sisera  with  e.  of  s.  ||  21. 10.  Jabesh-gilead
Job  1. 15.  Joab’s  servants  slain  with  e.  of  sword ,  17.
Psal.  89.43.  thou  hast  also  turned  the  e.  of  the  sword
Jer.  21. 7.  Nebuchadnezzar  smite  them  with  e.  of  s.
Luke  21.  24.  the  Jews  shall  fall  by  the  e.  of  sword
Heb.  11.  34.  who  thro’  faith  escaped  the  e.  of  sword
EDGED.

Psal.  149.  6.  and  atwo-e.  sword  in  their  hand
Prov.  5.  4.  but  her  end  is  sharp  as  a  two-5.  sword
Heb.  4. 12.  word  of  God  sharper  than  a  two-5.  sword
Rev.  1.  16.  out  of  mouth  went  a  sharp  two-5,  sword
EDGES.

Exod.  28.  7.  joined  at  the  two  e.  thereof,  39.  4.

Judg.  3. 16.  Ehud’s  dagger  had  two  e.  length  a  cubit
Rev.  2. 12.  who  hath  the  sharp  sword  with  two  e.
EDIFICATION.

Rom.  15. 2.  let  every  one  please  his  neighbour  to  e.

1  Cor.  14.  3.  that  prophesieth  speaketh  to  men  to  e.

2  Cor.  10.  8.  which  the  Lord  hath  given  us  for  e.

13.  10.  power  which  the  Lord  hath  given  me  to  e.

EDIFY.

Rom.  14. 19.  things  wherewith  one  may  e.  another
1  Cor.  10.  23.  all  things  are  lawful,  but  e.  not
Eph.  4.  t  29.  that  which  is  good  to  e.  profitably
1  Thess.  5. 11.  e.  one  another,  even  as  also  ye  do
EDIFIED.

Acts  9. 31.  the  churches  had  rest,  and  were  e.

1  Cor.  8.  +  10.  conscience  of  him  that  is  weak  be  e.

14.  17.  givest  thanks  well,  but  the  other  is  not  e.

EDIFIETH.

1  Cor.  8.  1.  knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  e.

14.  4.  he  that  speaks  in  an  unknown  tongue  e.  him¬
self;  but  lie  that  prophesieth  e.  the  church
EDIFYING.

1  Cor.  14.  5.  that  the  church  may  receive  e.

12.  seek  that  ye  may  excel  to  the  e.  of  the  church
14.  26.  let  all  things  be  done  to  e.

2  Cor.  12. 19.  but  we  do  all  things  for  vour  e.

Eph.  4. 12.  for  the  e.  of  the  body  of  Christ

16.  increase  of  the  body,  to  the  e.  of  itself  in  love
29.  but  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  e.

1  Tim.  1.  4.  which  minister  questions  rather  than  e.

EFFECT,  Substantive.

Num.  30. 8.  her  husband  shall  make  her  vow  of  no  e.

2  Chron.  34. 22.  and  they  spake  to  her  to  that  e.

Psal.  33. 10.  makes  the  devices  of  people  of  none  e.
Isa.  32.17.  the  e.  of  righteousness,  quietness
F.zek.  12.  23.  days  are  at  hand,  and  e.  of  every  vision
Mat.  15.6.  make  commandment  of  God  of  nones.
Mark 7.  13.  making  the  word  of  God  of  none  e.
Rom.  3. 3.  unbelief  make  the  faith  of  God  without  e.  ?

4.  14.  the  promise  made  of  none  e.  Gal.  3.  17.

9.  6.  not  as  though  the  word  hath  taken  none  e.

1  Cor.  1. 17.  lest  the  cross  of  Christ  be  of  none  e.

Gal.  5.  4.  Christ  is  become  of  no  e.  to  you,  who  are

EFFECT,  Verb.

Jer.  48. 30.  it  shall  not  be  so,  his  lies  shall  not  so  e.  it
EFFECTED.

2  Chr.  7. 11.  Solomon  prosperously  e.  all  in  his  heart

EFFECTUAL.

1  Cor.  16. 9.  for  a  great  door  and  e.  is  opened  to  me

2  Cor.  1.  6.  which  is  e.  in  enduring  same  sufferings
Eph.  3.  7-  by  the  e.  -working  of  his  power  given  me

4.  16.  accordingto  the  e.  working  in  the  measure
Philem.  6-that  thy  faith  may  become  e.  by  good  thing
Jam.  5. 16.  the  e.  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availetk
EFFECTUALLY.

Gal.  2. 8.  for  he  that  wrought  e.  in  Peter,  same  in  me
1  Thess.  2.13.  the  word  e.  worketh  in  you  that  believe
EFFEMINATE.

1  Cor.  6.  9.  nor  e.  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God
EGG.

Job  6.  6.  is  there  any  taste  in  the  white  of  an  e.  ?
Luke  11. 12.  if  he  ask  an  e.  will  offer  him  a  scorpion  .
EGGS.

Deut.  22.  6.  whether  young  ones  or  e.  and  the  dam
sitting  on  the  young  or  e.  shall  not  take  the  dam
Job  39. 14.  the  ostrich  leaveth  her  e.  in  the  earth
Isa.  10. 14.  one  gathereth  e.  that  are  left,  I  gathered

59.  5.  they  hatch  cockatrice’s  e.  he  that  eateth  e.
Jer.  17.  11.  as  partridge  sitteth  on  e.  andhatcheth
ETGHT.

Gen.  17.12.  he  that  is  e.  days  old  shall  be  circum¬
cised,  every  man  child,  21.  4.  Luke  2.  21.

22.23.  these  e.  Milcah  did  bear  to  Nahor
Exod.H 6.25.  they  shall  be  e.  boards,  and  sockets  silver
Num.  7. 8.  Moses  gave  4  waggons,  e.  oxen  to  Merari

129


ELD


E  L  D


ELD


Num.  29.  29.  on  the  sixth  day  e.  bullocks,  two  rams
Judg.  3.8.  Israel  served  Chushan-rishathaim  e.  years
12. 14.  Abdon,  the  son  of  Hillel,  judged  Isr.  e.  years
1  Sam.  17.  12.  Jesse  the  Ephrathite  had  e.  sous

1  Kings  7.  10.  foundation  was  of  stones  of  e.  cubits

2  Kings8. 17.  Jehoram  reigned  e.  years  in  Jerusalem
22.  1.  Josiah  was  e.  years  old  when  lie  began  to

reign,  and  reigned  thirty-one,  2  Chr.  34.  1.

1  Chron.  24.  4.  e.  among  the  sons  of  lthamar

2  Chron.  29. 17.  they  sanctified  house  of  L.  in  <?.  days
Feel.  11.  2.  give  a  portion  to  seven,  and  also  to  e.
Jer.  41.  15.  but  lshmael  escaped  witli  e.  men
Ezek.  40.  31.  the  going  up  had  e.  steps,  34,  37.

41.  e.  tables,  whereon  they  slew  their  sacrifices
Mic.  5. 5.  raise  ag.  him  7  shepherds,  e.  principal  men
Luke  9.28.  about  an  e.  days  after  these  sayings,  Peter
John  20.  26.  after  e.  days  his  disciples  were  within
Acts  9.  33.  Eneas,  who  had  kept  his  bed  e.  years
1  Pet.  3.  20.  wherein  e.  souls  were  saved  by  water
EIGHTH.

Lev.  25.  22.  and  ye  shall  sow  the  e.  year  and  eat
1  Kings  6.38.  in  Bui , which  is  e.  month ,  house  finished
12.  32.  Jeroboam  ordained  a  feast  in  the  e.  month

1  Chron.  24.  10.  the  e.  lot  came  forth  to  Abijah
25.  15.  the  e.  to  Jeshaiah  ||  26.  5.  Peulthaia  the  e.

27. 11.  the  e.  captain  for  the  e.  month,  Sibbecai
Zech.  1.  1.  in  e.  month  the  word  came  to  Zechariah

2  Pet.  2. 5.  but  saved  N  oah  the  e.  person,  a  preacher
Rev.  17.  11.  beast  that  was,  is  not,  even  he  is  the  e.

21.  20.  the  e.  foundation  was  a  beryl,  ninth  a  topaz

See  Day,  Days.

EIGHT  hundred.

Gen.  5. 4.  Adam  lived  after  he  begat  Seth  e.  h.  years
5.  19.  Jared  lived  after  he  begat  Enoch  e.  h.  years
2  Sam.  23.  8.  Adino  slew  e.  hundred  at  one  time
2  Chron.  13. 3.  Jeroboam  set  in  array  e.  h.  thousand
EIGHTEEN.

Judg.  3. 14.  Isr.  served  Eglon  king  of  Moab  e.  years
10.  8.  Ammon  vexed  and  oppressed  Israel  e.  year's
1  Kings  7.  15.  for  he  cast  two  pillars  of  brass  e.
cubits  high  apiece,  2  Kings  25.  17-  Jer.  52.  21.

1  Chron.  26. 9.  Meshelemiah  had  sons  and  brethren  e.

2  Chron.  11.  21.  for  Rehoboam  took  e.  wives
Luke  13. 4.  or  those  e.  on  whom  tower  in  Siloam  fell

16.  whom  Satan  hath  bound,  lo,  these  e.  years
EIGHTEEN  thousand.

Judg.  20. 25.  Benjamin  destroyed  of  Israel  e.  thous.
44.  there  fell  of  Benjamin  e.  thous.  men  of  valour
1  Chr.  12.  31.  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  e.  th.

18. 12.  Abishai  slew  of  the  Edomites  e.  thousand
29.  7.  the  princes  gave  of  brass  e.  thousand  talents

Ezek.  48.  35.  the  city  round  was  e.  thous.  measures

EIGHTEENTH.

1  Kings  15. 1.  in  e.  year  of  Jeroboam,  2  Chr.  13.  1.

2  Kings  3. 1.  Jehoram  reigned  the  e.  year  of  Jehosh.

22.  3.  in  the  e.  year  of  king  Josiah,  the  king  sent

Shaphan,  23.  23.  2  Chron.  34.  8.  |  35.  19.

1  Chron.  24. 15.  the  e.  lot  came  forth  to  Aphses
25.  25.  the  e.  to  Ilanani,  he,  his  sons,  his  brethren
Jer.  32.  1.  was  e.  year  of  N  ebuchadnezzar,  52.  29.
EITHER.

Gen.  31.  24.  speak  not  to  Jacob  e.  good  or  bad,  29.
Lev.  10.  1.  N  adab  and  Abihu  took  e.  of  them  his
censer,  and  offered  strange  fire  before  the  Lord
Deut.  17. 3.  hath  worship,  other  gods,  e.  sun  or  moon
28. 51.  a  nation  shall  not  leave  thee  e.  corn  or  wine
1  Kings  18.  27.  e.  he  is  talking,  or  pursuing,  or  in
Eccl.  11.  6.  whether  shall  prosper,  e.  this  or  that
Isa.  7. 11.  ask  a  sign  e.  in  the  depth  or  height  above
Mat.  6. 24.  no  man  can  serve  two  masters,  for  e.  he
will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the  other,  Luke  16. 13.
12. 33.  e.  make  the  tree  good,  and  his  fruit  good
Luke  6.  42.  e.  how  canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother
15.  8.  e.  what  woman  having  ten  pieces  of  silver
John  19. 18.  crucified,  on  e.  side  one,  Jesus  in  midst
1  Cor.  14. 6.  except  I  speak  to  you  e.  by  revelation
Jam.  3.  12.  e.  can  a  vine,  my  brethren,  bear  figs  ?
Rev.  22.  2.  of  e.  side  the  river  there  was  tree  of  life
ELDER.

The  Elders  among  the  Hebrews  were  the  magis¬
trates ,  heads ,  or  rulers  of  the  people.  Even  while
they  were  slaves  to  the  Egyptians,  they  had  among
themselves  some  order  and  government,  and  had
doubtless  some  whom  they  owned  as  their  teachers
and  rulers,  as  heads  of  tribes  and  families  ;  hence,
when  the  Lord  sent  Moses  to  bring  the  children  of
Israel  out  of  Egypt,  he  says,  Exod.  3.  16.  Go
and  gather  the  elders  of  Israel  together,  and  say
unto  them,  the  Lord  hath  visited  you,  and  seen
what  is  done  to  you  in  Egypt.  These  elders
were  men  of  experience,  wisdom,  and  gravity,
and  of  authority  among  the  people.

But  the  first  institution  of  courts  of  judicature,  was
in  the  wilderness  ;  when  Jethro  brought  back  Zip-
porah  to  Moses,  who  was  then  encamped  at  the
foot  of  mount  Sinai.  Moses  having  related  all
that  the  Lord  had  done  for  the  Israelites,  Jethro
blessed  God  for  it,  offered  burnt  offerings,  and
peace  offerings,  and  did  eat  with  Moses,  Aaron,
and  the  elders  c/ Israel,  before  the  Lord.  The  next
day,  Moses  taking  his  seat  in  order  to  judge  Israel,
continued from  morning  to  evening  employed  in  this
manner.  Jethro  remonstrated  to  him,  that  this
was  a  fatigue  above  his  strength  to  undergo,  and
would  be  tiresome  both  to  himself  and  the  people  ;
that  therefore  he  should  choose  some  men  of  firmness
and  fortitude,  who  feared  God,  and  hated  covet¬
ousness,  that  they  might  share  with  him  in  the
weight  of  government ;  that  the  cognizance  of
lesser  affairs  should  be  referred  to  them;  and
those  of  more  consequence  should  he  reserved  to
himself.  Moses  submitted  to  this  advice,  and
chose  certain  men  of  merit  out  of  all  Israel,  whom
he  appointed  to  have  rule  over  the  people ;  some
over  a  thousand,  others  over  an  hundred,  fifty,
and  ten.  They  administered  justice  to  the  peo¬
ple ;  and  when  any  thing  of  greater  difficulty
than  ordinary  occurred,  they  referred  it  to  Moses,
Exod.  18.  1,  2,  3,  &’c.  The  commission  given  to
these  judges  is  recorded  in  Deut.  1.  16,  17.
Afterwards,  we  have  the  particular  appointment  of
God  concerning  this ,  Num.  11.  11,  12,  13,  &c.


Moses,  being  distant  aged  by  the  continual  mur-
murings  of  the  Israelites,  addressed  himself  to
God ,  and  desired  to  be  relieved  from  some  part  of
the  burden  of  government.  Then  the  Lord  said  to
him.  Gather  unto  me  seventy  men,  of  the  elders
of  Israel,  whom  thou  knowest  to  be  the  elders  of
the  people,  and  officers  over  them ;  and  bring
them  to  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  that
the}'  may  stand  there  with  thee.  And  1  will
come  down  and  talk  with  thee  there ;  and  I  will
take  of  the  spirit  which  is  upon  thee,  and  will
put  it  upon  them  ,  and  they  shall  bear  the  burden
of  the  people  witli  thee,  that  thou  bear  itnot  thy¬
self  alone.  Thete  elders,  which  composed  the
Senate  belonging  to  all  the  tribes  in  general,  sat
with  the  Leader,  Judge,  or  King,  who  presided  in
this  court.  Thus  we  read,  Deut.  27.  1.  Moses,
with  the  elders  of  Israel,  commanded  the  people,
saying,  &c.  And,  afterwards,  the  elders  of  the
congregation  consult  how  to  supply  the  remainder
of  the  Benjamites  with  wives,  Judg.  21.  16.
And  the  elders  of  Israel  gathered  themselves
together,  and  came  to  Samuel  to  Ramah,  1
Sam.  8.  4.  We  read  of  these  elders  continually,
to  the  time  of  the  captivity  :  And  we  find  them
again  after  the  return,  Ezra  10.  7,  8.  A  pro¬
clamation  was  made  throughout  Judah  and  Jeru¬
salem  unto  all  the  children  of  the  captivity,  ac¬
cording  to  the  counsel  of  the  princes  and  elders.

Besides  these,  there  were  likewise  elders  belonging
to  every  several  city.  These  elders  are  mentioned
by  Moses  in  the  law  ;  where  several  things  are  re¬
quired  to  be  done  by  the  elders  of  the  city,  Deut.
19.  12.  1 21.  3,  19.  Boaz  appealed  to  ten  men  of
the  elders  of  the  city  of  Beth-lehem-judah,  Ruth
4.  2.  And  we  read,  after  the  captivity,  of  the
elders  of  every  city,  Ezra  10.  14.

The  Rabbins  and  interpreters  give  the  following
account  of  courts  of  judicature  among  the  Jews.

(I)  There  were  three  judges  in  every  city,  who  had
the  cognizance  of  lesser  faults :  Matters  concern¬
ing  loss,  gain,  and  restitution,  were  pleaded  before
them.  These  three  judges  had  a  right  only  to
condemn  criminals  to  be  whipt:  The  parties
named  their  judges :  one  of  the  parties  chose  his
judge ;  the  other  named  a  second ;  and  these  two
judges  took  a  third,  with  whom  they  decided  causes.
This  tribunal  was  consulted  about  the  intercala¬
tion  of  months.

(II)  There  was  another  court  composed  of  three  and
twenty  judges,  who  decided  matters  of  importance,
and  of  a  more  criminal  nature,  and  their  sentences
were  such  as  generally  affected  the  lives  of  per¬
sons  :  no  causes  being  brought  before  them,  but
such  as  deserved  the  penalty  of  death.  Some
say,  that  they  could  only  sentence  to  death  by  the
sword.

(III)  Their  great  councilor  Sanhedrim,  which  con¬
sisted  of  seventy  senators,  and  which  had  the
cognizance  of  the  most  important  affairs  of  state
arid  religion,  and  of  those  which  concerned  the
king,  or  high-priest.  It  was  intended  as  a  court  of
appeal,  if  there  should  be  occasion,  from  any  of  the
inferior  courts.  Some  think  that  our  Saviour  alludes
to  these  two  last  courts,  when  he  says,  Mat.  5.  22.
"Whosoever  is  angry  with  his  brother,  without  a
cause,  shall  be  in  danger  of  the  judgment ;  and
whosoever  shall  say  to  his  brother,  Raca,  shall
be  in  danger  of  the  council ;  but  whosoever
shall  say,  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell-
fire.  Some  interpreters  suppose  that  our  Lord
proportions  the  punishments  in  the  next  world,
according  to  the  different  sentences  which  were
usual  in  the  different  courts  of  judicature  at  Je¬
rusalem.  Therefore  they  say,  the  judgment
means  that  court  where  the  judges  were  three  and
twenty,  and  who  could  only  sentence  to  death  by
the  sword  :  The  council  alludes  to  the  court  where
the  seventy  elders  sat,  which  was  the  great  San¬
hedrim,  and  could  punish  by  stoning  to  death  :
And  that,  by  hell-fire,  the  burning  of  the
greatest  malefactors  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom  is
implied.

As  to  the  Sanhedrim,  it  was  limited  to  the  place
where  the  ark  of  God  stood.  The  Jews  say,  that
in  the  time  of  Moses  this  council  was  held  at  the
door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony.  As  soon  as
the  people  were  in  possession  of  the  land  of  promise,
the  Sanhedrim  followed  the  tabernacle.  It  was
kept  successively  at  Gilgal,  at  Shiloh,  at  Kirjath-
jearim,  at  Nob,  at  Gibeon,  in  the  lumse  of  Obed-
edom  ;  and  lastly,  it  was  settled  at  Jerusalem,  till
the  Babylonish  captivity.  During  the  captivity
it  was  kept  up  at  Babylon.  After  the  return  from
Babylon,  it  continued  at  Jerusalem,  to  the  time
of  the  Sicarii,  or  Assassins ;  these  were  certain
robbers,  who  appeared  in  Judea  some  time  before
the  war  of  the  Jews  against  the  Romans.  They
were  called |  Sicarii,  from  Sica,  a  dagger  ;  because
they  carried  daggers  secretly  about  them,  so  as
not  to  be  perceived,  and  mixing  themselves  with
the  multitude  of  people  that  came  to  the  great
feast  at  Jerusalem,  they  stabbed  whom  they
thought  fit ;  and  then  were  commonly  the  first  to
cry  out  murder,  as  Josephus  relates.  The  Jews,
finding  that  these  profligate  wretches,  whose
number  increased  every  day,  sometimes  escaped
punishment  by  the  favour  of  the  president,  or
judges,  removed  the  Sanhedrim  to  Hamoth,
which  were  certain  abodes  situated,  as  the  Rab¬
bins  say,  upon  the  mountain  of  the  temple.
Afterwards  they  removed  to  J  amnia;  thence  to
Jericho,  to  Uzzah,  to  Sepharvaim,  to  Bethsa-
nim,  to  Sephoris,  last  of  all  to  Tiberias,  where
they  continued  to  the  time  of  their  titter  ex¬
tinction.  This  is  the  account  the  Jews  give  of  the
Sanhedrim.

What  the  scripture  says  of  this  court  is  found  in
Deut.  17.  8,  9,  10,  11,  12,  13.  If  there  arise
a  matter  too  hard  for  thee  in  judgment  I  speak¬
ing  to  the  inferior  magistrates J  between  blood
and  blood,  between  plea  and  plea,  and  between


stroke  and  stroke,  being  matters  ot  conti overs
w'ithin  thy  gates  ;  then  shalt  thou  arise,  and  g,
thee  up  into  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy  Go
shall  choose.  And  thou  shalt  come  unto  tn
riests,  the  Levites,and  unto  the  judge  that slal
e  in  those  days,  and  enquire ;  and  they  slal
shew  thee  the  sentence  of  judgment.  And  hoi
shalt  do  according  to  the  sentence,  which  theyo-
that  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose,  dhal
shew  thee,  Jr.  By  this  it  appears  that  thi  chit
Conductor,  Judge,  King,  1 1 igh- priest,  <r  who
ever  was  at  the  head  of  their  all  airs,  ztuts  to  h,
the  president  of  this  court.  The  rest  of  th,
judges  seem  to  have  consisted  chiefly  of  tht  priest'
and  Levites,  though  there  were  among  them  wise
and  learned  men  of  other  tribes,  as  is  acktww  \
hedged  by  the  Jewish  and  most  other  writers.

In  process  of  time,  as  their  kings  came  to  be  idcla
trous,  this  ordinance,  among  others,  was  neg'
lected.  For  we  find  Jehoshaphat  restoring  it
at  the  same  time  as  he  did  the  courts  in  tvern
city,  2  Chron.  19.  8,  9,  10,  11.  In  this  passug,
we  find,  that ,  if  the  cause  was  of  a  spiritual  0,
ecclesiastical  nature,  the  High-priest  was  tin.
chief  judge ;  if  otherwise,  a  chief  justice,  wh
sat  in  behalf  of  the  king  :  And,  behold,  Amariah
the  chief-priest,  is  over  you  in  all  matters  o
the  Lord  ;  and  Zebadiali,  the  ruler  of  the  houst
of  Judah,  for  all  the  king’s  matters.

Some  think  it  probable,  that  in  causes  ecclesiasti
cal,  the  court  was  made  up  of  the  High-priest
and  the  chief-priests,  or  Heads  of  the  four  ant
twenty  courses  only  :  and  that  in  matters  purely
temporal,  the  supreme  magistrate,  with  the  princes
elders,  and  scribes,  who  were  doctors  of  the  law
either  by  himself,  or  his  deputy,  took  cognizance
And  that,  where  any  one  was  accused  of  crime
relating  to  religion  and  state  both,  the  judges,  «;
each  of  these  faculties,  sat  to  hear  the  cause.  So
at  the  trial  of  our  blessed  Lord,  Joseph  of  An
matliea,  a  rich  man  and  a  counsellor,  probably ,
one  of  the  seventy  elders,  was  one  of  them  win
sat  as  judges ;  but  did  not  join  in  the  sentenc,
of  condemnation;  He  consented  not  to  th
counsel  and  deed  of  them,  Luke  HZ.  51.

This  council,  at  their  return  from  the  captivity
wa .  restored,  with  the  rest  of  their  commonwealth
as  the  prophet  Ezekiel  foretold  it  should,  Ezek
44.  23,  24.  The  priests,  the  Levites,  shall  teacl
my  people  the  difference  between  the  uncleai
and  the  clean.  And,  in  controversy,  they  shal
stand  in  judgment;  and  they  shall  judge  had
cording  to  my  judgments.

Some  are  of  opinion,  that  the  origin  of  the  San
bedrim  is  by  no  means  to  be  depended  upon ;  Jo
the  council  of  the  seventy  elders  established  b\
Moses,  was  not  what  the  Jews  understand  by  th
name  of  Sanhedrim.  Besides,  say  they,  zee  ctrn
not  perceive  that  this  establishment  subsisted  eithe
under  Joshua,  the  Judges,  or  the  Kings.  W
find  nothing  of  it  after  the  captivity,  till  the  tim
of  the  Maccabees.  Only  we  are  certain,  tha
this  Senate  was  in  being  in  the  time  of  our  Savt
our,  arid  when  the  Evangelists  wrote  their  gospels,
since  they  are  mentioned  in  their  writings:  Bn
then  their  authority  was  much  lessened  ;  for  afte
the  banishment  of  Archelaus,  the  Romans,  hai
ing  reduced  J  udea  into  a  province,  assumed  th
power  of  life  and  death  to  themselves  alone:  6
that  this  council  could  proceed  no  farther  tha.
to  condemnation  :  For  execution,  they  were  t

r  apply  to  the  Roman  Governor.

The  places  where  the  Hebrews  held  their  courts  t
judicature  were,  generally,  one  of  the  gates  c.
the  city.  See  Gate.  As  the  merits  of  ever,
cause  were  to  turn  upon  the  evidence  given;  si
what  rules  the  law  lays  down  in  reference  then
unto  in  Deut.  17.  6.  1  19.  15.  and  what  is  sai
in  relation  to  false  witnesses,  Deut.  19.  16, 17,  If
19.  It  was  likewise  a  part  of  their  law,  that  n
man  sh&uld  be  condemned  without  being  brougl
to  a  fair  trial,  and  nearing  what  he  had  to  sa
for  himself.  And  therefore  Nicodemus  says  t
the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees,  Doth  our  lav
judge  any  man  before  it  hear  him,  and  kno'
what  he  doeth  ?  John  7.  51.

The  method  of  proceeding  in  the  Sanhedrim,  f
said  to  be  this :  They  who  had  a  mind  to  implea
any  one,  applied  either  to  the  king,  or  the  higi
priest,  or  whosoever  filled  the  post  of  Chief  Justicx
and  informed  against  him.  Upon  this,  propi
officers  were  sent  to  take  him  up  ;  and  if  occasio
required,  a  detachment  from  the  temple- guard  wet
along  with  them.  'The  person  thus  taken  was  e.
amined  by  the  Justice,  and  then  committed,  eit/u
to  prison,  or  to  the  custody  of  the  officer  of  th
guard,  till  his  trial  came  on.

When  the  court  sat,  those  who  brought  the  infornu
tion  against  the  criminal,  did  it  in  these  word s
This  man,  having  done  so  or  so}  is  worthy  to  di<
And  they  who  were  to  defend  him ,  answered,  Th
man  is  not  worthy  to  die ;  for  he  has  only  done  >■
or  so.  And  when  the  pleadings  on  both  sides  wet
finished ,  the  Judges  gave  their  opinions  singly
whether  he  was  guilty  or  not :  And  according  :
the  majority  of  votes,  one  zoay  or  the  other ,  t>
culprit  was  acquitted  or  condemned.  .  . !

Of  the  manner  of  laying  the  indictment,  and  givir
in  the  anszeer,  we  have  an  instance  in  the  ca.
of  Jeremiah  ;  who  was  informed  against  for  pr
phesying  the  destruction  of  both  the  city  at,
temple  of  Jerusalem,  in  case  the  Jews  continv-
to  neglect  the  observance  of  God's  law,  Jer.  2
8,  9,  10,  &c.  See  the  form  of  condemnation  ;
Mat.  26.  65,  66.

Elder,  in  the  New  Testament,  is  a  general  nam,
comprehending  under  it  all  such  as  have  at
ecclesiastical  function,  as  apostles,  pastors,  teac
ers,  or  other  church  officers,  1  Tim.  5.  17.  Tit.

5.  The  apostle  Peter  calls  himself  an  elder.  1 1
elders  that  are  among  you  1  exhort,  who  also  a.
an  elder,  1  Pet.  5.  1.


ELL)


ELE


ELS'


10.  21.  Shem  the  brother  of  .lapliet  the  e.

23.  the  e.  shall  serve  the  younger,  Rom.  9.  1C.
am.  18.  17.  behold,  my  e.  daughter  Merab
•lings  C.  22.  ask  the  kingdom,  he  is  mine  e.  brother
)  15.  10.  very  aged  men,  much  e.  than  thy  father
\4.  l'lihu  waited,  because  they  were  e.  than  lie
tiA6. 46.  thy  e.  sister  is  Samaria,  younger  Sodom
5.  4.  the  names  of  them  were  Ahofah  the  e.
ikk\5. 25.  his  e.  son  was  in  the  field,  heard  music
ri>k,  5.  2.  intreat  the  e.  women  as  mothers
Pet. 5.  5.  ye  younger,  submit  yourselves  to  the  e.

V  ELDER  for  ruler.

Tim.  5. 1 .  rebuke  not  an  e.  but  intreat  him  as  father
(9,  against  an  e.  receive  not  an  accusat.  but  before
'  Det.  5. 1.  the  elders  1  exhort,  who  am  also  an  e.
John  1.  the  e.  to  the  elect  lady  and  her  children
Vm  1.  the  e.  unto  well-beloved  Gaius  whom  L  love
ELDERS.

m.  50.  7.  the  e.  of  his  house  went  up  with  him

4. 15.  the  e.  of  congreg.  shall  lay  their  hands
ton.  ii.  25,  L.  gave  of  the  Spirit  to  the  seventy  e.
'■ut.  25.  7.  go  up  to  the  gate  to  the  e.  and  say
3.  10.  ye  stand  before  the  L.  your  e.  and  officers
1. 28.  gather  to  me  all  e.  of  your  tribes  and  officers

2. 7.  ask  thy  father  and  e.  and  they  will  tell  thee
sh.  24.  31.  Israel  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of
oshua,  and  of  e.  that  overlived  Joshua,  Judg.  2. 7.
dg.  8.  14.  he  described  to  him  the  e.  of  Succoth
jam.  16.  4.  e.  of  the  town  trembled  at  his  coming
X  26.  he  sent  of  the  spoil  to  the  e.  of  Judah
kings.  20.  8.  all  the  e.  said  to  him,  hearken  not

1. 11.  the  e.  did  as  Jezebel  had  sent  to  them
Tings  6.  32.  Elisha  sat  in  house,  and  e.  sai  with  him

3.1.  Jehu  wrote  letters  and  sent  to  e.  of  Jezreel
J.  2.  Ilezekiah  sent  the  e.  of  the  priests  covered

with  sackcloth  to  Isaiah  the  prophet,  Isa.  37. 2.
■ja  5.  5.  the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  e.

14.  the  e.  of  the  Jews  builded  and  prospered

3. 8.  according  to  the  counsel  of  the  princes  and  e.
tail.  107.  32.  praise  him  in  the  assembly  of  the  e.
'ov.  31.  23.  her  husband  is  known  among  the  e.
zm.  1.19.  my  priests  and  e.  gave  up  the  ghost  in  city
.  10.  e.  of  Zion  sit  upon  the  ground  and  keep  silence

16.  respected  not  priests,  favoured  not  e.  5. 12.
14.  e.  have  ceased  from  gate,  young  m.  from  music
■.ek. 8. 1.  and  the  e.  of  Judah  sat  before  me
el  1.  14.  sanctify  a  fast,  gather  the  e.  2.  16.
at.  15. 2.  why  transgress  the  tradition  of  the  e.  ?

i.  21.  must  suffer  many  things  of  the  e.  27. 12.

I.  59.  the  e.  sought  false  witness  against  Jesus

7. 20.  chief  priests  and  e.  persuaded  the  multitude

II.  the  chief  priestsmocking  with  the  e.  said

3. 12.  and  when  they  were  assembled  with  the  e.
ark  7.  3.  the  Jews  holding  the  tradition  of  the  e.
.31.  must  suffer  and  be  rejected  of  the  e.  Luke  9. 22.
1.43.  with  Judas  a  great  multitude  from  the  e.

5. 1.  chief  priests  held  a  consultation  with  the  e.
ike22.  52.  Jesus  said  unto  the  captains  and  e.

~ts  4.5.  their  rulers  and  e.  were  gathered  together
.’3.  they  reported  all  that  the  e.  had  said  to  them
.  12.  they  stirred  up  the  people  and  the  e.

1. 30.  sent  it  to  the  e.  by  Barnabas  and  Saul
1.23.  when  they  ordained  e.  in  every  church

l.  4.  they  were  received  of  the  church  and  of  the  e.

1.  the  apostles  and  e.  came  together  to  consider
13.  the  apostles,  e.  and  brethren,  send  greeting

,3.  4.  they  delivered  the  decrees  ordained  of  the  e.
3. 17.  he  sent  and  called  the  e.  of  the  church

2.  5.  all  the  estate  of  the  e.  bear  me  witness

4. 1.  Ananias  the  priest  descended  with  the  e.

5. 15.  about  whom  the  e.  of  Jews  informed  me
Tim.  5. 17.  let  e.  that  rule  well  be  counted  worthy
f.  1. 5.  thatthou  shouldest  ordain  e.  in  every  city
eb.  11.  2.  by  faith  the  e.  obtained  a  good  report

m,  5. 14.  let  him  call  for  the  e.  of  the  church
Pet.  5.  1.  thee,  which  are  among  you,  I  exhort
tv.  4. 4.  upon  the  seats  I  saw  24.' e.  sitting,  clothed
10.  the 24 e.  fall  before  him,  5. 8, 14.  |  11.16.  1  19.4.

L  5.  and  one  of  the  e.  saith  unto  me,  weep  not

I.  and  lo,  in  the  midst  of  the  e.  stood  a  Lamb
LI.  I  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  about  the  e.

.  11.  all  angels  stood  about  the  e.  and  four  beasts
13.  one  of  the  e.  ans.  saying  to  me,  what  are  these  ?

4. 3.  they  sung  a  new  song  before  the  throne  and  e.

ELDERS,  with  city.

rat.  19.  12.  thee,  of  his  city  shall  fetch  him  thence

1. 3.  0.  of  that  city  shall  take  and  bring  the  heifer

3.  e.  of  that  city  shall  wash  their  hands  over  heifer
1. 19.  shall  bring  their  son  to  the  e.  of  his  oity

2. 15.  bring  tokens  of  virginity  to  the  e.  of  the  city
8.  the  e.  of  his  city  shall  call  and  speak  to  him

sh.  20. 4.  shall  declare  his  cause  to  e.  of  that  city
'dg.  8. 16.  he  took  the  e.  of  the  city  and  thorns
wh  4. 2.  Roaz  took  ten  men  of  the  e.  of  the  city
■ra  10.  14.  and  with  them  the  e.  of  every  city
ELDERS  of  Israel.

red.  3.  16.  go  and  gather  the  e.  of  Israel  together
;•  21.  Moses  called  for  all  the  e.  of  Israel
>•  and  take  with  thee  of  the  e.  of  Israel
f  12.  the  e.  of  Israel  came  to  eat  with  Jethro
•  L  seventy  of  the  e.  of  Israel,  9.  Num.  11.  16.
eul-  27. 1  the  e.  of  Israel  commanded  the  people
*•  O^Moses  delivered  this  law  to  the  e.  of  Israel
'l:1-  7. 6.  the  e.  of  Israel  put  dust  on  their  heads
■  am.  5.  3.  so  all  the  e.  of  Israel  came  to  the  king
_  .  at  Hebron,  1  Kings  8.  3.  2  C/iron.  5.  4.
n  4.  the  Saying  pleased  all  thee,  of  Israel
lo.  thus  did  Ahithophel  counsel  the  e.  of  Israel
1  D.  .3.  e.  of  Israel  came  to  the  king  to  Hebron
y  16.  David  and  e.  of  Israel  fell  upon  their  faces
"f  1  u  ■**  ^,en  came  the  e.  of  Israel  unto  me
(|.  L  the  e.  of  Israel  came  to  inquire  of  the  Lord
cts  4-  8.  ye.  rulers  of  the  people,  and  e.  of  Israel
ELDERS,  with  people.

*""•  19-  7 .  Moses  called  for  the  e.  of  the  people

‘  whom  thou  knowest  to  be  e.  of  the peo.
'  ■ .  Moses  gathered  70  men  of  the  e.  of  the  people
utn  4.  4.  buy  it  before  the  e.  of  my  people
'  a,mo,'  honour  me  before  the  e.  of  my  people
2L  the  e.  of  the  people  came,  Luke  22.  66.

>■  47.  with  a  multitude  from  e.  of  the  people
<•  l.e.  ot  the  people  took  counsel  against  Jesus


Acts  0  12.  they  stirred  up  the  people  and  the  e.
ELDEST.

Gen.  24  2.  Abraham  said  to  hisc.  servant  of  his  house
27- 1  •  I saac  called  Esau  his  e.  son,  and  said ,  my. son
44.  12.  and  he  searched,  and  began  at  the  e.

Num.  1  20.  Reuben,  Israel’s  e.  son,  26.  5.

1  Sam.  17. 13.  the  three  e.  sons  of  Jesse  followed,  14.
28.  Eliab  his  e.  brother  heard  David  speak

2  Kings  3.  27.  he  took  his  e.  son  and  offered  him

2  Chron.  22. 1.  for  the  band  of  men  had  slain  all  the  e.
Job  1.  13.  drinking  in  their  e.  brother’s  house,  18.
John  8. 9.  they  went  out  one  by  one,  beginning  at  e.
ELECT,

Or  Chosen,  is  spoken,  [1]  Of  Christ,  who  was
chosen  avid  set  apart  from  eternity  by  God  the
Father  to  the  great  work  of  redemption  and  me¬
diation,  Isa.  42.  1.  Mat.  12.  18.  [2]  Of  good

angels,  whom  God  chose  from  among  the  rest  to
eternal  life  and  happiness:  I  charge  thee  before
the  elect  angels,  1  Tim.  5.  21.  [3]  Of  the

Israelites,  who  were  God's  chosen  and  peculiar
people,  Isa.  65.  9,  22.  [4]  Of  such  as  are  chosen
by  God  in  Christ  to  eternal  life  and  salvation
out  of  all  the  nations  upon  earth.  Tit.  1.  1.  This
election  is,  [1]  An  act  of  distinguishing  love,
Deut.  7.  8.  [2]  Of  divine  sovereignty  irrespective
of  any  goodness  in  the  objects  of  it,  Rom.  9.  11,

12,  16.  [3]  Eternal,  Eph.  1.  4.  2  Thess.  2.

13.  [4]  Absolute,  and  irrevocable,  Rom.  9.  11.

2  Tim.  2.  19.  [5]  Personal,  that  is,  of  a  cer¬

tain  number  of  persons,  Mat.  20.  23.  2  Tim.  2.
19.  [6]  Of  some  of  the  chief  of  sinners,  1  Tim.
1.  15.  [7]  L  is  in  Christ,  Eph.  1.  4.  [8]  It

is  to  sanctification  and  holiness  as  the  means,
and  eternal  glory  as  the  end,  Eph.  1.  4.  1
Thess.  5.  9.

Isa.  42.1.  behold  mine  e.  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth

45. 4.  Israel  mine  e.  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name
65.  9.  mine  e.  shall  inherit  it,  and  my  servants

22.  mine  e.  shall  long  enjoy  work  of  their  hands
Mat.  24.  22.  no  flesh  should  be  saved,  but  for  the  e.
sake  those  days  shall  be  shortened,  Mark  13.  20.

24.  if  possible  deceive  the  very  e.  Mark  13.  22.

31.  shall  send  his  angels,  and  they  shall  gather
together  his  e.  from  the  four  winds,  Mark  13.  27.
Luke  18. 7.  «nd  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own  e.  ?
Rom. 8.33.  who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  charge  of  G.  e.  ?
Col.  3. 12.  put  on  as  the  e.  of  God  bowels  of  mercies

1  Tim.  5.  21.  I  charge  thee  before  the  e.  angels

2  Tim.  2. 10.  I  endure  al.  things  for  the  e.  sake
Tit.  1. 1.  an  apostle  according  to  the  faith  of  G.’s  e.

1  Pet.  1.2.  e.  according  to  foreknowledge  of  God
2. 6.  I  lay  in  Sion  a  chief  corner-stone,  e.  precious

2  John  1.  the  elder  to  the  e.  lady,  and  her  children
13.  the  children  of  thy  e.  sister  greet  thee

ELECTED.

1  Pet.  5. 13  church  at  Babylon  e.  together  with  you
ELECTION.

Rom.  9.11.  purpose  of  G.  according  to  e.  might  stand

11. 5.  there  is  a  remnant  according  to  the  cfot grace

7.  the  e.  hath  obtained  it,  the  rest  were  blinded
28.  but  as  touching  the  e.  they  are  beloved

1  Thess.  1.  4.  knowing,  brethren,  your  e.  of  God

2  Pet.  1.10.  all  dilig.  to  make  your  calling  and  e.  sure

Elegantly.

Isa.  32.  t  4.  the  ton  cue  of  stammerers  shall  speak  e.
ELEMENTS.

Gal.  4. 3.  we  were  in  bondage  under  e.  of  the  world
9.  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly  e.
Col.  2. 1 8.  after  the  e.  of  the  world,  not  after  Christ
+  20.  dead  with  Christ  from  the  e.  of  the  world
2  Pet.  3. 10.  the  e.  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  12.
ELEPHANT.


The  elephant  is  the  largest  of  all  four-footed  beasts.
They  who  have  studied  the  nature  of  the  elephant
with  most  accuracy,  tell  many  extraordinary
things  of  the  sagacity ,  faithfulness,  prudence,  and
even  understanding  of  this  creature.  Pliny  says
of  this  animal:  Maximum  animal  est  Elephas,
proximumque  humanis  sensibus :  quippe  mtel-
lectus  illis  sermonis  patrii,  &c.  I. list.  Nat.  lib.  8.
It  has  been  often  observed  to  do  such  things  as  are
much  above  the  capacity  of  other  beasts.  The
Hebrews  seem  generally  to  have  described  it  under
the  name  of  Behemoth,  zuhich  signifies  in  general,
beasts  of  service.  The  word  Elephas  may  be  de¬
rived  from  Aleph,  which  signifies,  to  instruct,  by
reason  of  the  docility  of  this  animal ;  or  from
Eleph,  which  signifies  a  head,  or  captain  ;  be¬
cause  the  elephant  is,  as  it  were,  the  head  of
all  other  terrestrial  animals.

The  Lord,  speaking  to  Job,  describes  the  elephant
or  Behemoth,  Job  40.  from  verse  15.  to  the  end
of  the  chapter.  It  is  there  said,  that  he  eateth
grass  as  an  ox.  Tins  agrees  well  with  what  his¬
torians  relate  of  the  elephant.  He  does  not  feed
upon  carrion,  and  is  ?iot  at  all  wild;  hay,  herbs,
and  legumens,  are  his  nourishment,  as  they  are
of  our  tame  beasts.

His  bones  are  as  strong  pieces  of  brass,  and  his
small  bones  like  bars  of  iron.  These  hyperbo¬
lical  expressions  shew  the  extraordinary  strength
of  the  elephant ;  with  one  stroke  of  his  trunk  he
kills  a  camel  or  an  horse.  An  elephant,  it  is
said,  has  been  seen  to  draw  two  cast  cannons  five
hundred  paces  with  his  teeth  ;  they  were  fastened
together  with  cables,  and  weighed  each  three  thou¬
sand  pounds.  And  there  is  mention  in  the  Macca¬
bees  of  an  elephant  in  Antiochus’s  army,  which
carried  two  and  thirty  armed  men.  They  zeere  all
in  a  tozver  made  of  very  solid  zcood,  upon  the  ele¬
phant’s  back,  and  the  tozver  was  bound  with  a
very  strong  chain  under  the  elephant’s  belly.

He  is  the  chief  of  the  ways  of  God.  He  is  a
remarkable  piece  of  the  creation  among  four-
footed  beasts.  He  exceeds  all  others  in  sice,
strength,  docility,  address,  fidelity,  agility,  long
life ,  modesty  and  pudicity ;  for,  it  is  said,  that
he  never  covers  the  female  as  long  as  any  one
appears  in  sight.  Toe  scripture  adds,  that  God,
who  made  him,  can  make  his  sword  to  ap¬
proach  unto  him  Though  he  be  so  strong  and


terrible,  yet  God  can  easily  subdue  and  destroy
him :  or,  God  hath  put  his  sword  into  his  hands,
hath  trzisted  him  with  his  arms ;  the  elephant  is
terrible,  when  provoked.  His  arms  are  his  trunk
and  his  teeth.  His  teeth  are  the  ivory,  so  well
known  in  Europe.

Surely  the  mountains  bring  him  forth  grasr.,
where  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  play.  Ele¬
phants  are  the  gentlest  of  animals ;  they  never
use  their  strength  but  when  they  are  compelled
to  it.  They  are  not  of  that  sort  of  animals  which
create  terror  in  others :  If  he  passes  through  a
herd  of  other  beasts,  he  puts  them  gently  out  0)
his  way  with  his  trunk  to  make  room  for  him;
He  feeds  in  the  fields  and  meadows,  and  the  weak¬
est  and  tamest  animals  play  with  impunity  before
him.

He  lieth  under  the  shady  trees,  in  the  covert  of  the
reeds  and  fens.  This  also  agrees  well  with  the
elephant,  according  to  the  account  that  historians
give  of  him.  yElian  says,  that  he  may  be  called
an  animal  of  the  marshes,  because  he  lives  along
waters,  and  in  moist  places.  He  sometimes
plunges  himself  into  rivers  in  such  a  manner,  that
no  more  of  him  is  to  be  seen  than  the  end  of  his
trunk:  In  the  summer  time  he  covers  himself  with
mud,  to  avoid  the  heat.

tie  drinketh  up  a  river,  and  hasteth  not :  he  trust-
eth  that  he  can  draw  up  Jordan  into  his  mouth.
This  also  may  be  fitly  applied  to  the  elephant ;  he
drinks  a  great  deal,  and  large  draughts,  as  if  he
were  to  swallow  up  a  river,  and  as  if  Jordan  were
.scarcely  sufficient  to  satisfy  his  thirst :  he  is  not
afraid  when  he  drinks,  but  does  it  leisurely,  and
takes  time  to  disturb  the  water  which  he  drinketh.
The  Scripture  adds,  He  taketh  it  with  his  eyes,
his  nose  pierceth  through  snares.  When  lie  sees
the  waters  of  a  river,  he  trusteth  that  he  can
drink  them  all  up :  his  eye  is  bigger  than  his
belly  ,  as  is  commonly  said.  He  thrusteth  his  snout
also  into  the  river,  and  if  there  be  any  snares  laid
for  other  creatures,  lie  breaks  them  to  pieces.  But
others  translate  this  verse.  Can  any  man  take  him
in  his  eyes,  or  pierce  his  nose  with  snares  or
gins  ?  Can  he  be  taken  openly  and  by  force  ?
Surely  no.  His  force  or  strength  is  too  great  for
man  to  resist  or  overcome.  Others  thus,  He  is
taken  by  the  eyes  as  a  fish  is  taken  by  a  hook.
Serpents  attack  elephants  principally  in  the  eyes,
as  Pliny  observes.  The  same  author  says,  that
there  are  serpents  in  the  Ganges,  sixty  yards  long „
who  take  elephants  by  the  trunk  as  they  are  drink¬
ing,  drag  them  along,  and  drown  them  in  the  waters,
Plin./f6.  8.  cap.  12.

Some  understand  by  Behemoth,  a  creature  called
hippopotamus,  or  the  sea-horse  ;  which  is  an  am¬
phibious  creature,  and  lives  and  preys  both  in  the
water  and  on  land.  This  animal,  say  they,  was
well  known  to  Joh  and  his  friends,  as  being  fre¬
quent  in  the  adjacent  parts:  and  the  description
here  given  of  the  Behemoth,  is  very  applicable  to
the  hippopotamus.

1  Kings  10.  +  22.  navy  bringing^.  teeth,  2  Chr.  9. 21.
Job  40.  f  15.  behold  the  e.  which  I  have  made

ELEVATION.

Judg.  20.  f  38.  they  should  make  great  e.  witli  smoke
ELEVEN.

Gen.  32.  22.  Jacob  took  his  e.  sons  and  passed  over
37.  9.  sun,  moon,  and  e.  stars,  made  obeisance  to  me
Exod.  26. 7*  curtains  of  goats’  hair,  e.  curt,  shalt  make

8.  the  e.  curtains  shall  be  all  of  one  measure

36. 14.  e.  curtains  he  made  ||  15.  e.  of  one  size
Num.  29-  20  on  the  third  day  e.  bullocks,  two  rams
Deut.  l.  2.  there  are  e.  days’  journey  from  Horeb
Josh.  15.  51.  e.  cities  with  their  villages

Judg.  16.  5.  we  will  give  thee  e.  hund.  pieces  of  silv.
17.  2.  I  took  the  0. hundred  shekels  of  silver
3.  when  he  restored  e.  hund.  shekels  to  his  mother

2  Kings 23. 36.  Jehoiakim  twenty-five  years  old,  he

reigned  e.  years  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chr.  36.  5.

24. 18.  Zedekiah  e.  years,  2  Chr.  36.  11.  Jer.  52.  1.
Mat. 28.16.  then  the  e.  discipleswentaway  to  Galilee
Mark  16. 14.  afterward  he  appeared  to  the  e.

Luke  24. 9.  they  told  all  these  things  to  the  e.  and  rest

33.  and  they  found  the  e.  gathered  together
Acts  1. 26.  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  e.  apostles

2. 14.  but  Peter  standing  up  with  the  e.  said  to  them

ELEVENTH.

1  Kings 6.  38.  in  thee,  year  was  the  house  finished

2  Kings  9. 29.  in  the  e.  year  of  Joram  began  Ahaziah

25.  2.  the  city  of  Jerusalem  was  besieged  to  the  e.

year  of  king  Zedekiah,  Jer.  52.  5.

1  Chron.  24. 12.  the  e.  lot  came  forth  to  Eliashib

25. 18.  the  e.  to  Azareel,  he,  his  sons,  and  brethren

27. 14.  the  e.  captain  for  the  e.  month,  Benaiah
Jer.  1. 3.  Jeremiah  prophesied  in  e.  yearof  Zedekiah

39.  2.  in  the  e.  year  the  city  was  broken  up
Ezek.  26.  1.  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Ezekiel  in  the
e.  year,  in  first  day  of  the  month,  30.  20.  |  31.  1.
Mat.  20.  6.  and  about  the  e.  hour  he  went  out

9.  they  came  that  were  hired  about  the  e.  hour
Rev.  21. 20.  e.  foundation  of  the  city  was  a  jacinth

ELOQUENT.

Exod.  4.  10.  Moses  said,  O  my  Lord,  I  am  note.
Prov.  1.  +  6.  to  understand  a  proverb  and  an  e.  speech
Isa.  3.  3.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  e.  orator
Acts  18.  24.  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos,  an  e.  man
ELSE.

Gen.  30.  1.  she  said,  give  me  children  ore.  I  die
Num.  20.  19. 1  will  without  doing  any  thing  e.  go
Deut.  4.  35.  thou  mightest  know  that  the  Lord  he  is
God,  there  is  none  e.  39.  1  Kings  8.  60.  Isa.
45.  5,  6,14,  18,  21. 22.  |  46.  9.  Joel  2.  27.

Josh.  23. 12.  e.  if  ye  do  in  any  wise  go  back  and  cleave
Judg.  7- 14.  this  is  nothing  e.  save  sword  of  Gideon

2  Sam.  3.  35.  if  I  taste  ought  e.  till  the  sun  be  down

1  Chr.  21. 12.  or  e.  three  days  sword  of  the  Lord

2  Chr.  23. 7-  whoso  e.  cometh  in,  shall  be  put  to  death
Neh.  2.  2.  this  is  nothing  e.  but  sorrow  of  heart
Psal.  51. 16.  desirest  not  sacrifice,  e.  would  1  give  it
Eccl.  2. 25.  who  e.  can  hasten  hereunto  more  than  1  f
Isa.  47.  8.  thatsa3’est,  I  am.  none  e.  besides  rne,  10.

I3t


K  xM  P


END


14.  11.  01  e.  believe  me  for  the  work’s  sake
Acts  17.  21.  spent  time  in  nothing  e.  but  tell  or  bear
Rom.  2.  15.  accusing  or  e.  excusing  one  another
1  Cor. 7 .14.  e.  were  your  child .  unclean ,  but  now  holy
14.  16.  e.  when  thou  shalt  bless  with  the  Spirit
Rev.  2. 5.  repent,  or  e.  1  will  come  to  thee  quickly  ,16.
EMBALM.

Gen.  50.  2.  Joseph  comm,  physicians  to  e.  his  father
EMBALMED.

Gen.  50.  2.  and  the  physicians  e.  Israel
3.  for  so  are  fulfilled  the  days  of  those  that  are  e.
26.  they  e.  Joseph,  put  him  in  a  coffin  in  Egypt
EMBOLDENED.

1  Cor.  8. 10.  the  conscience  of  him  that  is  weak  be  e.

EMBOLDEN  E  l'll.

Job  16.  3.  what  e.  thee  that  thou  answerest  ?
EMBRACE.

2  Kings  4.  16.  about  this  season  thou  shalt  e.  a  son
Job  24.  8.  they  e.  the  rock  for  want  of  a  shelter
Prov.  4. 8.  shall  bring  to  honor,  when  thou  dost  e.  her

5.  20.  why  wilt  thou  e.  the  bosom  of  a  stranger  ?
Eccl.  3.  5.  a  time  to  e.  and  refrain  from  embracing
Cant.  2.  6.  and  his  right  hand  doth  e.  me,  8.  3.
Lam.  4. 5.  that  were  brought  up  in  scarlets .  dunghills
EMBRACED.

Gen.  29. 13.  Laban  e.  Jacob  and  kissed  him
33.  4.  Esau  ran  and  e.  Jacob  and  kissed  him
48.  10.  Jacob  kissed  and  e.  Joseph’s  sons
Acts20.  1.  Paul  e.  disciples  and  departed  to  Maced.
Ileb.  11.  13.  having  seen  and  e.  the  promises
EMBRACING.

Eccl.  3. 5.  a  time  to  embrace  and  a  time  to  refrain  e.
Acts20.10.  Paul  e.  Eutychus, said,  trouble  notyours.
EMBROIDER.

Exod.  28.  39.  thou  shalt  e.  the  coat  of  fine  linen
EMBROIDERER.

Exod.  35.  35.  to  work  all  manner  of  work  of  the  e.

38.  23.  with  him  was  Aholiab,  an  e.  in  blue
EMERALD,  S.

Exod.  28.  18.  the  second  row  shall  be  an  e.  39.  11.
Ezek.  27. 16.  Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  e.
28.  13.  every  precious  stone  thy  covering,  the  e.
Rev.  4.  3.  there  was  a  rainbow  in  si^ht  like  unto  an  e.

21.  19.  the  fourth  foundation  of  the  city  w  as  an  e.
EMERODS.

Dent.  28.  27.  the  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  e.

1  Sam.  5.  6.  Lord  smote  them  of  Ashdod  with  the  e.

9.  men  of  the  city  had  e.  in  their  secret  parts

12.  the  men  that  died  not  were  smitten  with  e.

6. 4.  they  answered,  five  golden  e.  and  five  mice,  17.
5.  shall  make  images  of  your  e.  and  your  mice,  11.
EMINENT.

Job  22.  I  8.  and  the  e.  man  dwelt  in  the  earth
Isa.  3.  +  3.  doth  take  away  the  e.  in  countenance
Ezek.  16.  24.  thou  hast  built  to  thee  an  e.  place,  31.

39.  they  shall  throw  down  thine  e.  place
17-  22.  I  will  plant  it  on  an  high  and  e.  mountain
1  Tim.  2.  t2.  pray  for  kings  and  all  that  are  in  e.  place
.EMMANUEL,

Or  Immanuel,  is  a  Hebrew  word,  which  signifies
God  w'ith  us.  Isaiah,  in  that  prophecy,  wherein
he  declares  to  Ahaz  the  birth  of  the  Messiah,  who
was  to  be  born  of  a  virgin,  says,  This  child  shall
be  called,  and  really  be,  Emmanuel,  that  is,
God  with  us,  Isa.  7-  14.  He  repeats  the  same
thing  while  he  is  speaking  of  the  enemy's  army,
which,  like  a  torrent,  was  to  overflow  Judea,  in
which  Christ  was  to  be  born,  to  live  and  die  ;
The  stretching  out  of  his  wings  shall  fill  the
breadth  of  thy  land,  O  Emmanuel,  Isa.  8.  8.
Matthew  says,  that  this  prophecy  was  accomplish¬
ed  in  the  birth  of  Christ,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,
in  whom  the  two  natures,  divine  and  human,
were  united ;  and  so  in  this  sense  he  was  really
Emmanuel,  or  God  with  us.  Mat.  1.  23.
ha.  7. 14.  and  shall  call  his  name  Em.  Mat.  1.23.

8.  8.  he  shall  fill  the  breadth  of  thy  land,  O  Em.
EMPIRE.

Esth.  1.  20.  shall  be  published  throughout  all  his  e.
EMPLOY.

Deut.  20. 19-  for  the  tree  is  man’s  life,  to  e.  in  siege
EMPLOYED.

Deut.  20.  + 19.  O  man,  the  tree  is  to  be  e.  in  the  siege
1  Chron.  9.  33.  these  singers  were  e.  day  and  night
Ezra  10. 15.  Jonat.  and  Jahaziah  e.  about  this  matter
EMPLOYMENT.

Ezek.  39.  14.  shall  sever  out  men  of  continual  e.
EMP  EY.


Gen.  31.  42.  surely  thou  hadst  sent  me  away  now
37.  24.  the  pit  was  e.  there  was  no  water  in  it
41.  27.  the  seven  e.  ears  blasted  with  the  east  win
Exod.  3.  21.  that  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  not  go  e.

23.  15.  in  month  A  bib  earnest  from  Egypt,  none
shall  appear  before  me  e.  34.  20.  Deut.  16.  16.
Deut.  15.  13.  thou  shalt  not  let  him  go  away  e.
Judg.  7.  16.  he  put  in  every  man’s  hand  e.  pitche:
Ruth  1.  21.  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  home  e.

3.  17.  for  he  said,  go  note,  to  thy  mother-in-law

1  Sam.  6.  3.  they  said,  send  not  the  ark  away  e.
20. 18.  be  missed,  because  thy  seat  will  be  e.  25, 2

2  Sam.  1.  22.  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  e.

2  Kings  4.  3.  go,  borrow  thee  e.  vessels,  not  a  tew
Neh.  5.  f  13.  even  thus  be  he  shaken  out  and  e.
Job  11.  f  12.  for  e.  man  would  be  wise,  tho’  born  lit

22.  9.  thou  hast  sent  widows  away  e.  and  the  arn
26.  7.  he  stretcheth  out  the  north  over  the  e.  placi
Isa.  24.  1.  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth  e.  and  wast
29.  8.  a  hungry  man  awaketh,  and  his  soul  ise.
32.  6.  to  make  e.  the  soul  of  the  hungry
Jer.  14.  3.  they  returned  with  their  vessels  e.

51.  34.  the  king  of  Babylon  made  me  an  e.  vesse
Ezek.  24. 11.  then  set  it  e.  upon  the  coals  thereof
Hos.  10.  1.  Isr.  is  an  e.  vine,  he  bringeth  forth  fru
Rah.  2.  10.  Nineveh  ise.  and  void,  and  waste
• ,12-  44.  and  when  he  is  come,  he  findeth  it  e.
Mark  12.  3.  they  caught  him  and  beat  him,  ar
sent  him  away  e.  Luke  20.  10,  1
Luke  1.  53.  and  the  rich  he  hath  sent  e.  away
_  .  EMPTY,  Verb.

Lev.  W.  36.  priest  command  that  they  e.  the  hous
Eccl.  11.  3.  the  clouds  e.  themselves  on  the  earth
Jer.  48.  12.  and  send  wanderers  shall  e.  his  vessel

132


END

.Ter.  51.2.  tanners  that  shall  fan  her  and  e.  her  lanu
Hab.  1. 17.  shall  they  therefore  e.  their  net, not  spare
Zech.  4. 12.  which  e.’the  golden  oil  out  of  themselv.
Mai.  3. 1 10.  if  I  will  not  e.  you  out  a  blessing
EMPTIED.

Gen.  24.  20.  Rebekah  hasted  and  e.  her  pitcher
42.  35.  it  came  to  pass  as  they  e.  their  sacks
2  Chron.  24;  11.  the  nigh  priest  s  officer  e.  the  chest
Neh.  5.  13.  even  thus  be  he  shaken  out  and  e.

Isa.  3.  t  26-  she  being  e.  shall  sit  on  the  ground
19.  +  3.  spirit  of  Egy.  shall  be  e.  in  the  midst  thereof

6.  and  the  brooks  of  defence  shall  be  e.  _

24.  3.  the  land  shall  be  utterly  e.  and  spoiled
Jer.  48.  11.  Moab  not  been  e.  from  vessel  to  vessel
Nah.  2. 2.  for  the  emptiers  have  e.  them  out
EMPTIERS.

Nah.  2.  2.  for  the  e.  have  emptied  them  out
EMPTINESS.

La.  34. 11.  he  shall  stretch  out  upon  it  the  stones  of  e
EMPTYING.

Hos.  10.  +  1.  a  vine  e.  the  fruit  which  it  giveth
EMULATION.

Rom.  11. 14.  if  I  may  provoke  to  e.  my  brethren
EMULATIONS.

Gal.  5. 20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  e.  wrath,  strife
ENABLED.

1  Tim.  1.  12.  I  thank  Christ  Jesus  who  hath  e.  me

ENCAMP.

Exod.  14.  2.  that  they  e.  before  Pi-hahiroth
Num.  1. 50.  the  Levites  shall  e.  about  the  tabernacle
2. 17.  as  they  e.  so  shall  they  set  forward
3.  38.  but  those  that  e.  before  the  tabernacle

10.  31.  thou  knowest  how  we  are  to  e.  in  wilderness

2  Sam.  12.  28.  e.  against  Rabbah,  and  take  it

Job  19.  12.  his  troops  come  and  e.  about  my  ta¬
bernacle

Psal.  27.  3.  though  an  host  should  e.  against  me
Zech.  9-  8.  I  will  e.  about  mine  house  for  the  army
ENCAMPED.

Exod.  13.  20.  e.  in  Etham  ||  15.  27.  e.  by  the  waters
18.  5.  where  Moses  e.  at  the  mount  of  God
Num.  33.  10.  from  Elim  they?,  by  the  Red-sea

11.  from  Red-sea,  and  e.  in  the  wilderness  of  Sin
Josh.  4.  19.  people  came  up  and  e.  in  Gilgal,5.  10.
10.  5.  the  kings  of  the  Amorites  e.  before  Gibeon
Judg.  6.  4.  the  Midianites  e.  against  Israel
9.50.  Abimelech  e.  against  Thebezand  took  it
10.  17.  the  children  of  Ammon  e.  in  Gilead  and
Israel  assembled  themselves  and  e.  at  Mizpeh

1  Sam.  11.  1.  Nahash  e.  against  Jabesh-Gilead

13.  16.  but  the  Philistines  e.  in  Michmash

2  Sam.  11.  H.  the  servants  are  e.  in  the  open  fields
1  Kings  16. 15.  the  people  e.  against  Gibbethon,  16.

1  Chron.  11.  15.  the  Philistines,  e.  in  the  valley

2  Chr.  32.  1.  Sennacherib  e.  against  the  fenced  cities

ENCAMPETII.

Psal.  34.  7.  angel  of  the  Lord  e.  round  about  them
53. 5.  hath  scattered  bones  of  him  that  e.  agst.  thee
ENCAMPING.

Exod.  14.  9.  Egyptians  overtook  them  e.  by  the  sea
2  Kings  6. 1 8.  saying,  in  such  a  place  shall  be  my  e.
Encline,  Enclose  ;  see  Incline,  Inclose.
ENCOUNTERED.

Acts  17.  18.  then  certain  philosophers  e.  him
ENCOURAGE.

Deut.  1.  38.  e.  him,  he  shall  cause  to  inherit  it,  3.  28.
2  Sam.  11.  25.  thus  say  to  Joab,  and  e.  thou  him
Psal.  64.  5.  they  e.  themselves  in  an  evil  matter
ENCOURAGED.

1  Sam.  30.  6.  David  e.  himself  in  the  Lord  his  God

2  Chr.  17.  +  6.  his  heart  was  e.  in  ways  of  the  Lord
31.  4.  that  the  priests  and  Levites  might  be  e.

35.  2.  Josiah  e.  them  to  the  service  of  the  Lord

Isa.  41. 7.  so  the  carpenter  e.  the  goldsmith
END.

The  end  signifies  the  extremity  or  utmost  part  of
a  thing,  as  the  end  of  a  rod,  1  Sam.  14.  27.
The  end  of  an  heap  of  corn,  Ruth  3.  7-  The
ends  of  the  earth,  that  is,  The  extremities,  or
most  remote  parts  of  the  world,  Job  37.  3.  I  38.
13.  or  the  people  inhabiting  those  parts,  1  Sam.
2.  10.  The  Lord  shall  judge  the  ends  of  the
earth,  He  shall  condemn  and  punish  the  Philis¬
tines,  who  dwelt  in  the  utmost  borders  of  the  land
of  Canaan,  upon  the  sea-coast.  And  in  Psalm
98.  3.  All  the  ends  of  the  earth  have  seen  the
salvation  of  our  God  ;  that  is,  All  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  from  one  end  to  the  other.  End  is
taken  for  the  conclusion,  the  sum  or  substance  of  a
discourse,  Eccl.  12.  t  13.  Let  us  hear  the  con¬
clusion  of  the  whole  matter  ;  or,  the  end  of  the
matter.  It  is  also  taken  for  destruction,  Gen.  6.
13.  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me.  1
am  resolved  to  destroy  man  arid  beast.  And  in
Amos  8.  2.  The  end  is  come  upon  my  people  of
Israel:  The  time  of  their  utter  and  final  over¬
throw.  And  in  Mat.  24.  6.  our  Saviour  prophe¬
sying  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  of
the  temple,  says  to  his  disciples.  Ye  shall  hear  of
wars,  and  rumours  of  wars,  see  that  ye  be  not
troubled,  for  all  these  things  must  come  to  pass,
but  the  end  is  not  yet.  The  destruction  of  Je¬
rusalem  is  not  presently :  Or,  though  God
shall  bring  remarkable  judgments  upon  that
place  and  people ,  yet  he  will  not  utterly  destroy
them  :  Ur  by  end  here  may  be  understood,  the
day  of  judgment,  or  the  time  of  Christ’s  second
coming.

In  Rev.  21.  6.  Christ  says,  I  am  the  beginning  and
the  end  :  I  made  all  things  at  first,  and  I  will
bring  all  to  that  perfection  and  happiness  I  have
promised.  And  it  is  said,  Rom.  10.  4.  Christ
is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every
one  that  believeth  ;  that  is.  The  law  was  given
for  this  end,  that  sinners  being  thereby  brought
to  the  knowledge  of  their  sms,  and  their  lost
and  undone  estate,  by  reason  thereof,  should  fly
to  Christ  and  his  righteousness  for  refuge.  Or,
Christ  is  the  perfection  and  consummation  of
the  law.  He  perfected  the  ceremonial  law,
as  he  was  the  Substance,  whereof  all  the  cere¬
monies  qf  the  law  were  shadows ;  they  all  re¬


ferred  to  him  as  their  scope  and  end.  He  perfec
ed  also  the  moral  law,  both  by  his  active  otisdfenc
fulfilling  all  the  righteousness  thereof  ;  and  by  h
passive  obedience,  bearing  the  curse  andpunishmei
of  the  law  which  was  due  to  us.

The  end  of  the  commandment  is  charity,  or  lovi
1  Tim.  1.  5.  lie  truly  accomplish  the  lav
fulfilling  the  precept  of  love  ;  for  love  is  the  fu
filling  of  the  law,  Rom.  13.  10.  The  main  sco}
and  design  both  of  late  and  gospel,  is  to  produce
pure,  ardent  love  of  God,  and  of  men,  for  his  sah
There  is  also  mention  of  the  end  of  faith,
Pet.  1.  9..Keceiving  the  end  of  your  faith,  eve
the  salvation  of  your  souls  ;  that  is,  receiving  tin)
which  is  the  scope  or  mark  to  which  faith  tend
or  which  is  the  reward  of  faith,  namely,  the  a.uu
ance  of  the  salvation  of  your  souls.  To  endure  (i
the  end,  Mat.  10.  22.  is  to  fight  against  sin  ar
temptations  as  long  as  one  lives,  and  constants
to  adhere  to  Christ,  in  spite  of  all  persecutm
for  his  sake.  End  is  also  taken  for  reward  ij
wages,  Rom.  6.  21.  For  the  end  of  tho;
things  is  death.  Eternal  death  is  the  reward
wages  of  sin.

Gen.  6. 13.  the  e.  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me
47. 21.  from  one  e.  of  Egypt  even  to  the  other  e.
Exod.  23.  16.  the  feast  of  in-gathering  which  is
the  e.  of  year,  when  gathered  outor  field,  34.2
25. 19.  make  one  cherub  on  the  one  e.  and  the  oth
cherub  on  the  other  e.  even  of  mercy-se
Deut.  28. 64.  Lord  scatter  from  one  e.  of  the  earth
32.  20.  Lord  said,  I  will  see  what  their  e.  shall  be
Judg.  6. 21.  the  angel  put  forth  the  e.  of  his  staff
19.  9.  behold,  the  day  groweth  to  an  e.  lodge  here

1  Sam.  14. 27.  Jonathan  put  forth  the  e.  of  tne  rod
2Kings  10.21 .  the  house  of  Baal  was  full  from  one

21.  16.  filled  Jerusalem  with  blood  from  one  a.

2  Chron.  21. 19.  after  the  e.  of  twoyears,  his  bowel
Ezra  9.11.  filled  with  unclean  from  one  e.  to  anothe
J0A6.ll.  whatismy  e.  that  I  should prolongmy  lit

16. 3.  shall  vain  words  have  e.?  or  what  embolden

26. 10.  till  the  day  and  night  come  to  an  e.

28.  3.  he  setteth  an  e.  to  darkness,  and  searcheth
Psal.  7. 9.  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  come  to  an

9.  6.  destructions  are  come  to  a  perpetual  e.

19. 6.  his  going  forth  is  from  the  e.  of  heaven
37.  37.  upright  man,  for  the  e.  of  that  man  is  peao

38.  the  e.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off
.39.4. make  me  know  e.  ||  73. 17. 1  understood  their
61. 2.  from  the  e.  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  to  thee
102. 27.  thou  art  the  same,  and  thy  years  have  no  i
119.  96. 1  have  seen  an  e.  of  all  perfection
Prov.  5.  4.  her  e.  is  bitter  ||  23.  18.  there  is  an  e,

14.  12.  but  the  e.  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death

25.  8.  lest  thou  know  not  what  to  do  in  the  e.
Eccl.  4.  8.  yet  there  is  no  e.  of  all  his  labour

16.  there  is  no  e.  of  all  the  people  before  them

7.  2.  the  e.  of  all  men  ||  8.  better  the  e.  of  a  thin

10.  13.  the  e.  of  his  talk  is  mischievous  madness

12.  12.  of  making  many  books  there  is  no  e.

+  13.  let  us  hear  the  e.  of  the  whole  matter

Isa.  2.  7-  land  full  of  gold,  nor  is  there  any«.oftln
treasures,  nor  is  there  any  e.  of  their  charii
9.  7-  of  his  government  there  snail  be  no  e.

13.  5.  they  come  from  the  e.  of  heaven  to  destro

16. 4.  for  the  extortioner  is  at  an  e.  spoiler  ceaseth

23.  15.  after  e.  of  70  years  Tyre  shall  sing,  17.
42.  10.  sing  his  praise  from  the  e.  of  the  earth

45.  17.  shall  not  be  confounded  world  without

46.  10.  declaring  the  e.  from  the  beginning
Jer.  5.  31.  what  will  you  do  in  the  e.  thereof?

12.  12.  for  the  sword  of  the  Lord  shall  devq
from  one  e.  to  the  other  e.  of  the  land,  25. .

17. 11.  gets  riches,  and  at  his  e.  he  shall  be  a  foe

29.  11.  I  think  to  give  you  an  expected  e.

31. 17.  there  is  hope  in  thine  e.  saith  the  Lord
44.  27.  be  consumed,  till  there  be  an  e.  of  them
50.  t  26.  came  aeainst  Babylon  from  the  e.

51. 13.  O  thou  that  dwellest,  thine  e.  is  come
31 .  to  shew  that  his  city  is  taken  at  one  e.

Lam.  4.  18.  our  e.  is  near,  for  our  e.  is  come
Ezek.  7.  2.  an  e.  the  e.  is  come  on  the  land,  3, 6.

21.  25.  when  iniquity  shall  have  an  e.  29. 1  35. 5.
Dan.  7.  28.  hitherto  is  the  e.  of  the  matter

8.  17.  at  the  time  of  e.  shall  be  the  vision

19.  at  the  time  appointed  the  e.  shall  be,  11. 27.

9.  26.  the  e.  thereof  shall  be  with  a  flood,  and  to  e

11.  6.  and  in  the  e.  of  years  they  shall  join

35.  to  purge  them  even  to  the  time  of  the  e.  -  j.

40.  at  time  of  the  e.  king  of  south  shall  push  hin
45.  yet  he  shall  come  to  his  e.  and  none  help

12.  4.  seal  the  book  even  to  the  time  of  the  e.

8.  O  Lord,  what  shall  be  the  e.  of  these  things

9.  words  are  closed  up,  till  the  time  of  the  e.

13.  but  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  e.  be,  shalt  rest
Amos  3.15.  the  great  houses  shall  have  an  e.

5.  18.  to  what  e.  is  it  for  you  to  desire  the  day  ?
8.  2.  the  e.  is  come  upon  my  people  of  Israel

10.  1  will  make  the  e.  thereof  as  a  bitter  day
Nah.  2.  9.  for  there  is  none  e.  of  the  store

3.  3.  and  there  is  none  e.  of  their  corpses
Mat.  13.  39.  the  harvest  is  the  e.  of  the  world

24.  3.  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  the  e.  of  the  world

14.  the  gospel  be  preached,  then  shall  the  e.  con
31.  gather  from  one  e.  of  heaven  to  the  other

26.  58.  but  Peter  went  in  and  sat  to  see  the  e.

28. 1.  in  the  e.  of  thesabbath  came  Mary  to  see

Mark  3.  26.  he  cannot  stand,  but  hath  an  e.

Luke  1.  33.  of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  e.

18.  1 .  he  spake  a  parable  to  them,  to  this  e.

22.  37.  the  things  concerning  me  have  an  e.

John  18. 37 .  sayest  1  am  a  king,  to  this  e.  was  I  bor
Rom.  6.  21.  for  the  e.  of  those  things  is  death

22.  ye  have  fruit  to  holiness,  the  e.  everlasting  1

10. 4.  Christ  is  the  e.  of  the  law  for  righteousness
14. 9.  to  this  e.  Christ  both  died,  rose,  and  reviv

2  Cor.  2.  9-  for  to  this  e.  also  did  I  write  tp  knov-

11.  15.  whose  e. ‘shall  be  according  to  their  wort
Eph.  3. 21.  to  him  be  glory  world  without  e.  _
Phil.  3. 19-  many  walk,  whose  e.  is  destruction
1  Tim.  1. 5.  the  e.  of  the  commandment  is  charr
Heb.  6.  8.  nigh  to  cursing,  whose  e.  is  to  be  bun


END


E  N  1)


E  N  E


1  6.  16.  and  an  oath  is  to  them  an  e.  of  ah  strife
.  having  neither  beginning  nor  c.  of  life

11.  blit  now  once  in  the  e.  liatli  lie  appeared

7.  considering  the  e.  of  their  conversation

1.5.  11.  and  ye  have  seen  the  *.  of  the  Lord,
i  t,  1.9-  receiving  *.  of  your  faith,  even  salvation

7.  what  shall  be  the  e.  of  them  obey  not  gospel  ?
>21.6.  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning

and  the  *.  will  give  to  him  athirst,  22.  13.
At  the  EK  1).

( .  4.13.  at  the  e.  of  days  Cain  brought  offering
at  the  e.  of  forty  days  ISoah  opened  window
i.  at  the  e.  of  two  years  Pharaoh  dreamed
]  1. 12.  41.  at  the  e.  of  430  years.  Lord’s  hosts  went
i .  8.  33.  the  days  of  consecration  be  at  an  e.
i  t.  9.  11.  at  the  e.  of  40  days  and  40  nights

28.  at  the  e.  of  three  years  bring  the  tithe
1.  at  the  e.  of  every  seventh  year  a  release
10.  at  the  e.  of  every  seventh  year  read  this  law
.  9.  16.  at  the  e.  of  three  days  after  the  league

'  7.  11.  39.  at  the  e.  of  two  months  she  returned
\  h  3.  7.  Boaz  lay  down  at  the  e.  of  the  heap
l  m.  14.  26.  at  the  e.  of  every  year  he  polled  it

8.  !oab  came  to  Jerus.  at  the  e.  of  nine  months
1  bigs  2. 39.  at  the  e.  of  3  years  two  of  Shimei’s  ser.

+  7.  at  the  e.  of  days  the  brook  dried  up
r  ings  8.  3.  at  the  e.  of  7  years  the  woman  returned
10.  at  the  e.  of  three  years  they  took  Samaria
5  iron.  18.  +2.  at  the  e.  of  years  Jehoshaphat  went

16.  ye  shall  find  them  at  the  e.  of  the  brook

23.  at  the  e.  of  the  year  the  host  of  Syria  came
; 13.  +  6.  at  the  e.  of  days  I  obtained  leave

j  /.  107.  27.  they  stagger,  and  are  at  their  wit’s  e.
7.  3.  go  to  meet  Ahaz  at  the  e.  of  the  conduit
34.14.  at  the  e.  of  seven  years  let  go  every  serv.

,  k.  3. 16.  at  the  e.  of  seven  days  word  of  I,,  came
1.  5.  at  the  e.  they  might  stand  before  the  king

29.  at  the  e.  of  12  months  he  walked  in  palace
1 13.  at  the  e.  of  times  shall  come  with  an  army

13.  thou  shalt  stand  in  the  lot  at  the  e.  of  days

.  5.  2.  3.  but  at  the  e.  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie
.  f.  13.  40.  so  shall  it  be  in  the  e.  of  this  world
Bvt  the  END.

,  v.  14.  12.  a  way  that  seems  right  to  a  man.  Inn
the  e.  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death,  16.  25.

21.  hut  thee,  thereof  shall  not  be  blessed
r.24.6.  but  thee,  is  notyet,  Mark  13. 7. Luke  21. 9.

!  et.  4.  7.  but  the  e.  of  all  things  is  at  hand
Last  END.

.  71. 23. 10.  and  let  my  last  e.  be  like  his
.  12.  4.  they  said,  he  shall  not  see  our  last  e.

.  n.  1.  9.  she  remembereth  not  her  last  e.

.  'j.8.19.  make  thee  know  what  shall  be  in  the  last  e.
Latter  END.

.  W.24.  20.  his  latter  e.  shall  be  that  he  perish
.  it.  8.  16.  to  do  thee  good  at  thy  latter  e.

29.  that  they  wmuld  consider  their  latter  e.

,'h  3. 10.  shewed  more  kindness  in  the  latter e.

\  im.  2.  26.  it  will  be  bitterness  in  the  latter  e.

.  8.  7.  yet  thy  latter  e.  should  greatly  increase

12.  tne  Lord  blessed  the  latter  e.  of  Job  more
;>».  19. 20.  that  thou  mayest  be  wise  in  thy  latter  e.

41.  22.  consider  them,  and  know  the  latter  e.

7.  neither  didst  remember  the  latter  e.  of  it
1  et.  2. 20.  the  latter  e.  is  worse  than  the  beginning
Made  an  END.

l.  27.  30.  as  Isaac  had  made  an  e.  of  blessing

.  33.  Jacob  made  an  e.  of  commanding  his  sons
\  16. 20.  made  an  e.  of  reconciling  the  holy  place

m.  4.  15.  made  an  e.  of  covering  the  sanctuary
.  31.  had  made  an  e.  of  speaking,  Dent.  20.  9.
ut.  26.  12.  hast  made  an  e.  of  tithing  the  tithes

.  24.  when  Moses  had  made  an  e.  of  writing
.  45.  made  an  e.  of  speaking,  Judg.  15.  17-
1  Sam.  18.  1.  I  24.  16.  2  Sam.  13.  36.  1  Kings
1.  41. 1 3.  1.  Jer.  26.  8. 1  43.  1.  1  51.  63.
h.  5.  t  8.  they  had  made  an  e.  of  circumcising

24.  Israel  had  made  an  e.  of  slaying,  10.  20.

.  49.  they  made  an  e.  of  dividing  the  land,  51.

%.  3. 18.  he  had  made  an  e.  to  offer,  1  Sam.  13. 10.
am.  10.  13.  he  had  made  an  e.  of  prophesying
am.  11.  19.  when  thou  hast  made  an  e.  of  telling
lings  7.  40.  Hiram  made  an  e.  of  doing  the  work
54.  Solomon  made  an  e.  of  praying,  2  Chr.  7.1-
lings  10.  25.  as  soon  as  he  had  made  an  e.  of
offering,  1  Chron.  16.  2.  2  Chron.  29.  29.
■hr.  20. 23.  made  an  e.  of  the  inhabitants  of  Seir
.  10.  cast  into  the  chest,  till  they  had  made  one.
ra  10.17-  made  an  e.  with  all  that  had  strange  wives
ek.  42.  15.  made  an  e.  of  measuring  inner  house
.  23.  when  thou  hast  made  an  e.  of  cleansing  it
w  7-  2.  they  made  an  e.  of  eating  the  grass
it.  11. 1.  made  an  e.  of  commanding  his  disciples
Make  an  END.

'am.  3.  12.  when  I  begin,  I  will  also  make  an  e.
hr.  31.  +  1.  brake  the  images,  until  to  make  an  e.
h.  4. 2.  feeble  Jews,  will  they  make  an  e.  in  a  day
'  18.  2.  how  long  ere  you  make  an  e.  of  words  t
1. 33. 1 .  thou  shalt  make  an  e.  to  deal  treacherously
’•12.  to-night  wilt  thou  make  an  e.  of  me,  13.

20. 17.  eye  spared,  nor  did  I  make  ane.  of  them
<n.  9.  24.  seventy  weeks,  to  make  an  e.  of  sins
ih.  1.  8.  he  will  make  an  utter  e.  of  the  place,  9.
ph.  1. 1  2.  by  taking  away,  I  will  make  an  e?
Make  a  full  END.

4.  27.  the  whole  land  shall  be  desolate,  yet  will
I  not  make  a  full  e.  5.  18. 1  30.  11. 1  46.  28.
10.  go  ye  up  and  destroy,  but  make  not  a  full  e.
e*.  11.13.  ah  Lord,  wilt  thou  make  a  full  e.?

To  the  END.

■od.  8. 22. 1  will  sever  land  of  Goshen,  to  the  e.  thou
mayest  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,  Ezek.  20. 26.
r.  17 . 5.  to  the  e.  Israel  may  bring  sacrifices
tut.  15.  t  4.  to  the  e.  there  be  no  poor  among  you
’  t0i  ^>e  e •  that  he  should  multiply  horses
.0.  to  the  e.  that  he  may  prolong  his  days
19.  4.  their  words  to  the  e.  of  the  world
'■12.  to  the  e.  my  glory  may  sing  praise  to  thee
/  l1'-  t0  Perform  thy  statutes  even  to  the  e.

;/.  3.  11.  can  find  out  from  beginning  to  thee.

■  • t0  ihe  e.  man  should  find  nothing  after  him

’■  48.  20.  utter  it  even  to  the  e.  of  the  earth


Isa.  49-  6.  mayest  be  my  salvation  to  thee,  of  earth
Jer.  3.  5.  Ids  anger,  will  he  keep  it  to  the  c.  ?

Exek.  31.  14.  to  the  e.  that  none  of  the  trees  exalt
Dan.  4. 11.  sight  thereof  to  the  e.  of  all  the  eartli

22.  thy  dominion  reacheth  to  the  e.  of  the  earth
12. 6.  now  long  shall  be  to  the  *.  of  these  wonders  ?
Obad.  9.  to  the  e.  that  every  one  may  be  cut  off
Mat.  10.  22.  but  he  that  endureth  to  the  e.  shall  be
saved,  24.  13.  Mark  1.3.  13.
Acts  7. 19.  cast  out,  to  the  e.  they  might  not  live
Eom.  1. 11.  to  the  e.  you  may  be  established
4. 16.  to  the  e.  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  seed
2  Cor.  1. 13.  1  trust  you  shall  acknowledge  to  the  e.
.3. 13.  look  to  the  e.  of  that  which  is  abolished
1  Thess.  3. 13.  to  the  e.  he  may  establish  your  hearts
1  Pet.  1. 13.  wherefore  be  sober,  and  hope  to  the  e.
Unto  the  END.

Dent.  11. 12.  from  beginning  unto  the  e.  of  the  year
Josh.  15. 5.  the  east  border  was  unto  thee,  of  Jordan
Ruth  2. 23.  to  glean  unto  the  e.  of  barley  harvest
Job  34.  36.  my  desire  is  Job  may  be  tried  unto  the  e.
Psal.  46. 9.  maketh  wars  to  cease  unto  the  e.  of  earth
119.  33.  teach  me,  and  1  shall  keep  it  unto  the  e.

Isa.  62. 11.  L.  hath  proclaimed  unto  the  e.  of  earth
Jer.  1.3.  it  came  unto  the  e.  of  the  eleventh  year
Dan.  6.  26.  his  dominion  shall  be  even  unto  the  e.

7.  26.  to  destroy  his  dominion  unto  thee.

9.  26.  and  unto  the  e.  of  the  war  desolations
Mat.  28. 20. 1  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  e.
John  13.1.  having  loved ,  he  loved  them  unto  the  e.

1  Cor.  1.  8.  who  shall  also  confirm  you  unto  the  e.
Heb.  3. 6.  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence  unto  the  e.

14.  if  we  hold  the  beginning  stedfast?«tfu  the  e.

6. 11.  to  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  e.

Rev.  2.  26.  he  that  keepeth  my  works  unto  the  e.
END.

Mat.  10. 1 23.  ye  shall  not  e.  the  cities  of  Israel
ENDAMAGE.

Ezra  4.  1.3.  so  thou  shalt  e.  the  revenue  of  kings
ENDANGER.

Dan.  1. 10.  ye  shall  make  me  e.  my  head  to  the  king
ENDANGERED.

Eccl.  10. 9.  he  that  cleaveth  wood  shall  be  e.  thereby
ENDED.

Gen.  2. 2.  on  the  seventh  day  God  e.  his  work
41.53.  the  seven  years  of  plenteousness  were  e.
Deut.  31.  .30.  he  spake  the  words  till  they  were  e.

34.  8.  the  days  of  mourning  for  Moses  were  e.

2  Sam.  20. 18.  ask  counsel,  and  so  they  e.  the  matter
Esth.  9.  +  28.  nor  memorial  be  e.  from  their  seed
Job  31.  40.  the  words  of  Job  are  e.

Ps.  72. 20.  prayers  of  David,  the  son  of  Jesse  are*.
Isa.  60.  20.  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  e.
Jer.  8.  20.  the  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is  e.
Mat.  7.28.  when  Jesus  had  e.  these  sayings
Luke  4.  2.  when  forty  days  were  e.  he  hungered

13.  when  the  devil  haa  e.  all  the  temptation
John  13. 2.  supper  being  e.  the  devil  having  now  put
ENDETII.

Isa.  24.  8.  the  noise  of  them  that  rejoice  e.

.  ENDING.

1  Sam.  .3.  +  12.  I  will  perform  beginning  and  e.

Rev.  1. 8.  I  am  the  beginning  and  e.  saith  the  L.
ENDLESS.

1  Tim.  1.  4.  neither  give  heed  to  e.  genealogies
Heb.  7. 16.  who  ismade  after  the  power  of  an  e.  life

ENDEAVOUR.

2  Cor.  5.  +  9.  we  e.  that  we  may  be  accepted  of  him
2  Pet.  1. 15.  1  will  e.  that  you  may  be  able  after

ENDEAVOURED.

Acts  16. 10.  we  e.  to  go  into  Macedonia,  gathering
1  Thess.  2. 17.  wee.  to  see  your  face  with  great  desire
ENDEAVOURING.

Eph.  4.  3.  e.  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  bond
ENDEAVOURS.

Psal.  28. 4.  according  to  the  wickedness  of  their  e.
ENDOW.

Exod.  22. 16.  he  shall  surely  e.  her  to  be  his  wife
ENDS.

Deut.  3.3. 17.  shall  push  the  people  to  e.  of  the  earth
1  Sam.  2. 10.  the  Lord  shall  judge  the  e.  of  the  earth

1  Kingsti.  8.  thee,  of  staves  were  seen,  2  Chr.  5.  9.

2  Kings  10. 1 32.  L.  began  to  cut  off  the  e.  of  Israel
Job  28.  24.  for  he  looketh  to  thee,  of  the  earth

37.  3.  he  directeth  his  lightning  to  e.  of  the  earth

38.  13.  it  might  take  hold  of  the  e.  of  the  earth
Psal.  19.  6.  and  his  circuit  to  the  e.  of  it

22.  27.  all  thee,  of  the  world  shall  remember
48.  10.  so  is  thy  praise  to  the  e.  of  the  earth
59.  1.3.  God  ruleth  in  Jacob  to  the  e.  of  the  earth
65.  5.  the  confidence  of  all  the  e.  of  the  earth
67.  7.  all  the  e.  of  the  earth  shall  fear  him

98. 3.  the  e.of  earth  have  seen  the  salvation  of  God
135. 7.  the  Lord  causeth  the  vapours  to  ascend  from
thee. of  the  earth,  Jer.  10. 1.3.  |51. 16.
Prov.  17.24.  eyes  of  a  fool  are  in  the  e.  of  the  earth
.30.  4.  who  hath  established  all  the  e.  of  the  earth  ?
Isa.  40.  28.  the  Lord,  the  creator  of  the  e.  of  earth

41. 5.  the  e.  of  the  earth  were  afraid,  drew  near
9.  whom  I  have  taken  from  the  e.  of  the  earth

43. 6.  bring  my  daughters  from  the  e.  of  the  earth
45.  22.  look  to  me  and  be  saved,  all  e.  of  the  earth

52. 10.  all  the  e.  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God

Jer.  16. 19.  Gentiles  shall  come  from  e.  of  the  earth

25.  31.  a  noise  shall  come  to  the  e.  of  the  earth
Ezek.  15.  4.  the  fire  devoureth  both  the  e.  of  it
Mic.  5.  4.  now  shall  he  be  great  to  e.  of  the  earth
Zech.  9. 10.  his  dominion  to  the  e.  of  the  earth
Acts  13.  47.  thou  be  for  salvation  to  e.  of  the  earth
Rom.  10. 18.  and  their  words  to  the  e.  of  the  world

1  Cor.  10. 11.  on  whom  the  e.  of  the  world  are  come

ENDUED.

Gen.  30. 20.  God  hath  e.  me  with  a  good  dowry

2  Chron.  2. 12.  to  David  a  wise  son,  e.  with  prudence

1.3.have  sent  acunning  man,  *.with  understanding

Luke  24. 49.  till  ye  be  e.  with  power  from  on  high
Jam.  3. 13.  who  is  wise  and  e.  with  knowledge
ENDURE.

Gen.  3.3. 14.  and  as  the  children  be  able  to  e.

Exod.  18. 2.3.  then  thou  shalt  be  able  to  e.

Esth.  8. 6.  for  how  can  1  e.  to  see  evil  and  destruction
Job  ft.  15.  he  shall  hold  it  fast,  but t  shall  not  e.


Job .31.  2.3.  by  reason  of  his  highness  1  could  not*.
Psal.  9.7.  the  L.  shall  e.  for  ever,  tie  hath  prepared
his  throne  for  judgment,  i02. 12.  26. 1 104. 31.

30.  5.  weeping  may  *.  for  a  night,  but  joy  oometh
72. 5.  they  shall  fear  thee  as  long  as  sun  and  moon  e.

17.  his  name  shall  e.  forever,  as  long  as  the  sun
89.  29.  his  seed  will  I  make  to  e.  for  ever,  36.

Prov.  27.24.  doth  the  crown  e.  to  every  generation  ?
Exek.  22. 14.  can  thy  heart*,  or  thy  hands  be  strong?
Mat.  24. 1.3.  he  that  shall  *.  to  the  end,  Mark  13.  13.
Mark  4.  17.  having  no  root,  and  so*,  but  for  a  time
2  Thess.  1.  4.  in  all  your  tribulations  that  ye  *.

2  Tim.  2.  3.  thou  therefore  *.  hardness  as  a  soldier

10.  therefore  I  *.  all  things  for  the  elects’  sake
4.  3.  when  they  will  not  *.  sound  doctrine

5.  but  watch  thou  in  all  things,  *.  afflictions
Heb.  12.  7-  if  ye  e.  chastening,  G.  dealeth  with  you

20.  they  could  not  *.  -what  was  commanded
Jam. 5.  11. behold,  we  count  them  happy  who*.

1  Pet.  2. 19.  if  a  man  for  conscience  *.  grief

.  ENDURED.

Psal.  81.  15;  their  time  should  have  *.  forever
Rom.  9. 22.  if  Gode.  with  much  long-suffering

2  Tim.  3.  11.  hast  known  what  persecutions  1  *.
Heb.  6. 15.  after  he  had  patiently  e.  he  obtained  pro

10.  32.  ye  e.  a  great  fight  of  afflictions

11.  27.  tor  Moses  *.  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible

12.  2.  he  *.  the  cross  H  3.  he  *.  such  contradiction

ENDURETH.

Psal.  15.  t  3.  nor  e.  reproach  against  his  neighbour
30.  5.  for  his  anger  *.  but  a  moment,  favour  is  life
52. 1.  the  goodness  of  God  *.  continually
72. 7-  abundance  of  peace  so  long  as  the  moon  *.
10O.  5.  and  his  truth  e.  to  all  generations
145.  1.3.  thy  dominion  *.  through  all  generations
Mat.  10.  22.  he  that  *.  to  the  end  shall  be  saved
John  6.  27.  but  for  that  meat  which  e.  unto  life
1  Cor.  1.3.  7-  charity  hopeth  all  things,  e.  all  things
Jam.  1.  12.  blessed  is  the  man  thate.  temptation
E  N  DURETH  for  ever.

1  Chron.  16.  34.  for  his  mercy  *.  for  ever,  41.
2  Chron.  5.  13.  I  7.  3,  6. 1  20.21.  Ezra  .3. 11.
Psal.  106.  1.  I  107. 1.  I  U8.  1,  2,  3,  4.  |  136.
1,2,  .3,  4*.  |  138.8.  Jer.  33.  11.

Psal.  111.  .3.  his  righteousness  e.  for  ever,  112.  3,  9.
111.  10.  his  praise  *.  for  ever  |l  117 •  2.  his  truth  *.
119.  160.  every  one  of  thy  judgments  e.for  ever
135.  13.  thy  name,  O  Lord ,  e.for  ever,  thy  mem.

1  Pet.  1.  25.  but  the  word  of  tne  Lord  e.  for  ever

ENDURING.

Psal.  19. 9.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  *.  for  ever

2  Cor.  1.  6.  is  effectual  in  *.  the  same  sufferings
Heb.  10.  34.  have  in  heaven  a  better  and  *.  substance

ENEMY..

Exod.  15.  6.  thy  right  hand  haiii  dashed  in  pieces  *.

9.  the  e.  said,  1  will  pursue,  1  will  overtake

23.  22.  then  I  will  be  an  *.  to  thine  enemies
Num.  10.  9.  and  if  you  go  to  war  against  the  *.

35.  23.  and  was  not  his  *.  nor  sought  his  harm
Deut.  32. 27.  were  it  not  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the  *.
42.  from  the  beginning  of  revenges  upon  the  *.

.33. 27.  he  shall  thrust  out  the  *.  before  thee
Jvdg.  16. 2.3.  our  god  hath  delivered  our  e.  into,  24.

1  Sam.  2.  .32.  thou  shalt  see  an  e.  in  my  habitation

18.  29.  Saul  became  David’s  *.  continually

24.  19.  if  a  man  find  his  *.  will  he  let  him  go  ?

1  Kings  8.  33.  when  thy  people  be  smitten  down

before  *.  because  sinned  ag.  thee,  2  Chron.  6. 24.
46.  if  they  sin,  and  thou  deliver  them  to  the  e.

2  Chron.  25.  8.  G.  shall  make  thee  fall  before  the  e.
Esth.  7.4.  the  e.  could  not  countervail  the  damage

6.  Esther  said,  the  e.  is  this  wicked  liaman
Job  3.3. 10.  behold,  he  counteth  me  for  his  *.

Psal.  7.  5.  let  the  *.  persecute  my  soul  and  take  it

8.  2.  thou  mightest  still  the  *.  and  the  avenger

9.  6.  O  thou  *.  destructions  are  come  to  an  end

42.  9.  why  go  I  mourning  because  of  the  *.  ?  43.  2.

44. 10.  thou  makest  us  to  turn  back  from  the  *.

55.  3.  I  mourn,  because  of  the  voice  of  the  *.

12.  for  it  was  not  an  «.  that  reproached  me
61.  .3.  thou  hast  been  a  strong  tower  from  the  *.

64.  1.  preserve  my  life  from  fear  of  the  e.

74.3.  even  all  that  the  *.  hath  done  wickedly

10.  shall  the  *.  blaspheme  thy  name  for  ever  ?

18.  remember  the  *.  hath  reproached,  O  Lord

78. 42.  remembered  not  when  he  delivered  from  e.
89. 22.  the  e.  shall  not  exact  upon  him
143.  .3.  for  the  e.  hath  persecuted  my  soul
Prov.  27.  6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  *.  are  deceitful
Isa.  59.  19.  when  the  e.  shall  come  ill  like  a  flood
63.  10.  therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  their*.

Jer.  6.  25.  the  sword  of  the*,  is  on  every  side

15.  11.  1  will  cause  the  e.  to  entreat  thee  well
18.  17. 1  will  scatter  them  with  east-wind  befoie  *.
30.  14. 1  have  wounded  thee  with  wound  ot  an  *.
Lam.  1.  5.  are  gone  into  captivity  before  the  *.

9.  behold,  for  the  e.  hath  magnified  himself

16.  my  children  are  desolate,  because  *.  prevailed
2.  3.  he  hath  drawn  back  his  hand  before  the  *.

4.  he  hath  bent  his  bow  like  an  *.  he  stood

5.  the  Lord  was  as  an  e.  he  hath  swallowed  up
4. 12.  that  the  *.  should  have  entered  the  gates

Ezek.  .36. 2.  because  the  *.  had  said  against  you,  aha
Hos.  8.  3.  Israel,  the  e.  shall  pursue  him
Mic.  2. 8.  even  of  late  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an  *
Na.lt.  3. 11.  thou  shalt  seek  strength  because  of  *.
Mat.  1.3.  25.  his  *.  came,  sowed  tares,  went  his  way
28.  he  said  unto  them,  an  e.  hath  done  this

39.  the  e.  that,  sowed  them  is  the  devil
Luke  10. 19.  to  tread  over  all  the  power  of  the  *.
Acts  13. 10.  child  of  devil,  thou  e.  of  all  righteousn.

1  Cor.  15.  26.  the  last  e.  to  be  destroyed  is  death
Gal.  4. 16.  am  I  become  your  *.  because  I  tell  truth

2  Thess.  3.  15.  count  him  not  as  an  *.  but  admonish-
Jam.  4.  4.  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  e.  of  God

Hand  of  the  EN  EMY.

Lev.  26. 25.  I  will  send  the  pestilence,  and  ye  shall
be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  e.  Neh.  9. 27
Ezra  8.  31.  lie  delivered  us  from  the  hand  of  the  e.
Psal.  ,31.  8.  hast  not  shut  me  up  into  hand  of  the  e.
78.  61.  he  delivered  his  glory  into  the  *.  hand

106. 10.  redeemed  from  the  hand  of  the  e.  107 . 2.

133


ENE


ENG


E  N  M


Lam.  1.7.  her  people  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  e.

£.  7.  hath  {riven  into  the  hand  of  the  e.  the  walls
Mine  ENEMY.

1  Sam.  19. 17.  why  nast  thou  sent  away  mme  e.  ?

2  Sam.  22. 18.  delivered  me  from  my  e.  Psal.  18. 17-

1  Kings  21.20.  hast  thou  found  me,  O  minee.?

Job  16. 9.  mine  e.  sharpeneth  his  eyes  upon  me

27. 7.  let  mine  e.  be  as  wicked,  and  he  that  riseth
Psal.  7.  4.  yea,  I  delivered  him  that  is  minee.

23.  2.  how  long  shall  minee.  be  exalted  over  me  ?

4.  lest  mine  e.  say,  I  have  prevailed  against  him

41. 11.  because  mine  e.  doth  not  triumph  over  me
Lam.  2. 22.  those  I  swaddled  hath  mine  e.  consumed
Mic.  7.  8.  rejoice  not  against  me,  O  mine  e.

10.  then  she  that  is  mine  e.  shall  see  it,  and  shame
Thine  ENEMY.

JStod.  23. 4.  if  thou  meet  thine  e.  ox  or  his  ass
Pent.  28.  57.  thine  e.  shall  distress  thee  in  thy  gates

3  Sam.  24.  4.  deliver  thine  e.  into  thy  hand,  26.  8.
28. 16.  seeing  the  Lord  is  become  thine  e.

2  Sam.  4.  8.  behold  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth  thine  e.
Job  13.  24.  wherefore  holdest  thou  me  for  thine  e.  ?
Prov.  24. 17.  rejoice  not  when  thine  e.  falleth

25.  21.  if  thine  e.  hunger,  give  bread,  Rom.  12. 20.
Lam.  2. 17-  hath  caused  thine  e.  to  rejoice  over  thee
Zeph.  3. 15.  the  Lord  hath  cast  out  thine  e.

Mat.  5. 43.  it  hath  been  said,  thou  shalt  hate  thine  e.
ENEMIES.

1  Sam.  18.  25.  to  be  avenged  of  the  king’s  e.

20. 15.  when  the  Lord  hath  cut  off  the  e.  of  David
16.  the  Lord  require  it  at  the  hand  of  David’s  e.
25.  22.  so  and  more  do  God  to  the  e.  of  David
30.  26.  behold  a  present  of  the  spoil  of  e.  of  Lord

2  Sam.  12.  14.  given  occasion  to  e.  to  blaspheme

18.  32.  the  e.  of  my  lord  be  as  that  young  man  is

2  Chr.  20.  29.  Lord  fought  against  the  e.  of  Israel
Esth.  9. 1.  the  e.  of  the  .Tews hoped  to  have  power
Job  6.  23.  or  deliver  me  from  the  e.  hand
Psal.  17. 9.  hide  me  from  my  deadly  e.  who  compass
37.  20.  the  e.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  as  fat  of  lambs
45.  5.  thine  arrows  are  sharp  in  heart  of  king’s  e.
78.  61 .  he  delivered  his  glory  into  the  e.  hand
127.  5.  they  shall  speak  with  the  e.  in  the  gate
Jer.  12.  7.  have  given  beloved  into  hands  of  her  e.
48.  5.  the  e.  have  heard  a  cry  of  destruction
Lam.  1.  2.  all  her  friends  are  become  here.

5.  her  adversaries  are  the  chief,  her  e.  prosper
Mic.  7. 6.  a  man’s  e.  are  the  men  of  his  own  house
Rom.  5. 10.  if  when  we  were  e.  we  were  reconciled

11.  28.  as  concerning  the  gospel,  they  are  e.

1  Cot.  15.  25.  till  he  hath  put  all  e.  under  his  feet
Phil.  3.  18.  they  are  the  e.  of  the  cross  of  Christ
Col.  1. 21.  were  e.  in  your  mind  by  wicked  works

His  ENEMIES.

Gen.<2Z.  17.  thy  seed  shall  possess  the  gate  of  his  e.
Num.  24. 8.  he  shall  eat  up  the  nations  his  e.

32.  21.  till  he  hath  driven  out  his  e.  before  him
Pent.  33.  7.  be  thou  an  help  to  him  from  his  e.  _

2  Sam.  7.1.  the  Lord  hath  given  him  rest  from  his  e.

18.  19.  how  the  Lord  hath  avenged  him  of  his  e.

22. 1.  hast  delivered  him  out  of  hand  of  all  hise.

1  Chron.  22.  9. 1  will  give  him  rest  from  all  his  e.
Job  19. 11.  he  counteth  me  as  one  of  his  e.

Psal.  10.  5.  as  for  all  his  e.  he  puffeth  at  them

41.  2.  thou  wilt  not  deliver  him  to  the  will  of  hise.

68. 1.  let  God  arise,  let  his  e.  be  scattered

21.  but  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  his  e.

jf2.  9.  and  his  e.  shall  lick  the  dust
78.  66.  and  he  smote  his  e.  in  the  hinder  parts
89. 42.  thou  hast  made  all  his  e.  to  rejoice
97.  3.  a  fire  burneth  up  his  e.  round  about
112. 8.  until  he  see  his  desire  upon  his  e.

132. 18.  his  e.  will  I  clothe  with  shame
Prov.  16. 7.  he  maketh  his  e.  to  be  at  peace  with  him
Lsa.  9.  11.  the  Lord  shall  join  his  e.  together

42.  13.  he  shall  cry,  he  shall  prevail  against  his  e.
59.  18.  he  will  repay  recompence  to  his  e.

66.  6.  a  voice  that  rendereth  recompence  to  his  e.

14.  his  indignation  be  known  towards  hise.

Jer.  44.  30.  will  give  Pharaoh  into  hand  of  his  e.
Mali.  1. 2.  and  he  reserveth  wrath  for  his  e.

8.  and  darkness  shall  pursue  his  e.

Heb.  10. 13.  expecting  till  his  e.  be  made  his  footstool
Mine  ENEMIES.

Num.  23.  11. 1  t@ok  thee  to  curse  mine  e.  24.  10.
Deut.  32. 41.  I  will  render  vengeance  to  mine  e.

1  Sam.  2. 1.  my  mouth  is  enlarged  over  mine  e.

14.  24.  that  I  may  be  avenged  on  mine  e.

■2  Sam.  5.  20.  the  Lord  hath  broken  forth  upon  mine
e.  as  the  breach  of  waters,  1  Chr.  14. 11.

22.  4.  so  shall  I  be  saved  from  mine  e.  Psal.  18.  3.
38. 1  have  pursued  mine  e.  Psal.  18.  37.

41.  hast  given  me  the  necks  of  mine  e.  Ps.  18.  40.
49.  and  that  bringeth  me  forth  from  mine  e.

1  Chr.  12. 17.  if  ye  be  come  to  betray  me  to  minee.
Psal.  3.  7.  save  me,  for  thou  hast  smitten  all  mine  e.
5.  8.  lead  me,  O  Lord,  because  of  mine  e.

6. 7.  mine  eye  waxeth  old  because  of  all  mine  e.

10.  let  all  mine  e.  be  ashamed  and  sore  vexed

7.  6.  arise,  O  Lord,  because  of  the  rage  of  mine  e.
9.  3.  when  mine  e.  are  turned,  they  shall  fall
18.  48.  he  delivereth  me  from  mine  e.

23.  5.  thou  preparest  a  table  in  presence  of  mine  e.

25. 2.  let  not  mine  e.  triumph  over  me,  35. 19.

19.  consider  mine  e.  for  they  are  many

27.  2.  when  mine  e.  came  upon  me  to  eat  my  flesh

6.  now  shall  mine  head  be  lifted  up  above  mine  e.

11.  lead  me  in  a  plain  path,  because  of  mine  e.

12.  deliver  me  not  over  to  the  will  of  mine  e.

31. 11.  I  was  a  reproach  among  all  mine  e.

15.  deliver  me  from  the  hand  of  mine  e.

38. 19.  but  mine  e.  are  lively,  and  they  are  strong

41 . 5.  mine  e.  speak  evil  of  me  ;  when  shall  he  die

42.  10.  mine  e.  reproach  me  all  the  day,  102. 8.

54.  5.  he  shall  reward  evil  to  mine  e.  cut  them  off

7.  eye  hath  seen  his  desire  upon  mine  e.  59. 10.

56.  2.  mine  e.  would  swallow  me  up,  they  be  many

9.  when  I  cry,  then  shall  mine  e.  turn  back

59. 1.  deliver  me  from  mine  e.  O  my  God,  143.  9.
69.  4.  they  being  mine  e.  wrongfully  are  mighty
18.  draw  nigh,  deliver  me  because  of  mine  e.

71.  10.  mine  e.  speak  against  me,  they  lay  wait

134


Ps.  -92.  11.  mine  eye  shall  see  my  desire  on  mine  e.
119.  98.  thou  hast  made  me  wiser  than  mine  e.
139.  because  mine  e.  have  forgotten  thy  word
157.  many  are  mine  e.  yet  do  I  not  decline

138.  7-  stretch  forth  thy  hand  against  mine  e.

139.  22.  I  hate  them,  1  count  them  mine  e.

143. 12.  of  thy  mercy  cut  off  mine  e.  and  destroy
Isa.  1. 24.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  avenge  me  of  mine  e.
Lam.  1.  21.  all  mine  e.  have  heard  of  my  trouble
3. 52.  mine  e.  chased  me  sore  like  a  bird  without
Luke  19. 27-  those  mine  e.  bring  hither  and  slay  them
Our  ENEMIES.

Exod.  1. 10.  they  join  also  to  our  e.  and  fight
Deut.  32.  31.  our  e.  themselves  being  judges

1  Sam.  4.  3.  it  may  save  us  out  of  hand  of  our  e.

12.  10.  but  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  e.

2  Sam.  19.9.  saved  us  out  of  hand  of  our  e.  Ps.  44. 7*
Neh.  5. 9.  because  of  the  reproach  of  our  e.

6. 1 .  when  rest  of  our  e.  heard  I  had  builded,  16.
Psal.  44.  5.  through  thee  will  we  push  down  our  e.
60.  12.  he  it  is  shall  tread  down  our  e.  108.  13.

80. 6.  and  our  e.  laugh  among  themselves
136.  24.  and  hath  redeemed  us  from  our  e.

Lam.  3. 46.  our  e.  have  opened  their  mouths
Luke  1.  71-  that  we  should  be  saved  from  our  e.

74.  being  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  e.
Their  ENEMIES.

Exod.  32.  25.  had  made  them  naked  amongst  their  e.
Lev.  26.  36.  send  faintness  in  the  land  of  their  e.

44.  yet  when  they  be  in  the  land  of  their  e.

Josh.  7.  8.  Israel  turneth  backs  before  their  e.  12.
21. 44.  there  stood  not  a  man  of  their  e.  before  them,
the  Lord  delivered  all  their  e.  into  their  hand

23.  1.  had  given  rest  from  their  e.  Esth.  9.  16.
Judy.  2. 14.  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  their  e.

18.  delivered  them  out  of  hand  of  their  e.  8. 34.

2  Kings  21 . 14.  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  their  e.

and  be  a  prey,  2  Chr.  6.  36.  |  25.  20.  Neh.  9.  27-
Psal.  78.  53.  but  the  sea  overwhelmed  their  e.

81.  14.  I  should  soon  have  subdued  their  e.

105.  24.  and  made  them  stronger  than  their  e.

106. 11.  the  waters  covered  their  e.  not  one  was  left
42.  their  e.  oppressed  them,  he  delivered  them
Jer.  15.  9. 1  will  deliver  to  the  sword  before  their  e.

19.  7.  to  fall  by  the  sword  before  their  e.  20.  4.

9.  wherewith  their  e.  shall  straiten  them

20.  5.  all  treasures  of  kings  of  Judah  will  give  into
hands  of  their  e.  34.  20,  21. 1  21.  J.  Ezek.  39. 23.

Ezek.  39.  27.  gathered  them  out  of  their  e.  lands
Amos  9.  4.  tho’  they  go  into  captivity  before  their  e.
Zecli.  10. 5.  mighty  men,  which  tread  down  their  e.
Rev.  11.  5.  if  any  hurt,  fire  devoureth  their  e.

12.  they  ascended,  and  their  e.  beheld  them
Thine  ENEMIES.

Gen.  14.  20.  who  delivered  thine  e.  into  thy  hand
49.  8.  thy  hand  shall  be  in  the  neck  of  thine  e.
Exod.  23.  22.  then  I  will  be  an  enemy  to  thine  e.

27. 1  will  make  Mme  e.  to  turn  their  backs  to  thee
Num.  10.  35.  rise,  Lord,  let  thine  e.  be  scattered
Deut.  6. 19.  to  cast  out  all  thine  e.  from  before  thee

20.  1.  when  thou  goest  against  thine  e.  21.  10.

28. 53.  wherewith  thine  e.  shall  distress  thee,  55,  57.
33.  29.  thine  e.  shall  be  found  liars  to  thee
Josh.  7. 13.  thou  canst  not  stand  before  thine  e.
Judg.  5.  31.  so  let  all  thine  e.  perish,  O  Lord
11.  36.  hath  taken  vengeance  for  thee  of  thine  e.

1  Sam.  25.26.  now  let  thine  e.  be  as  Nabal
29.  the  souls  of  thine  e.  shall  he  sling  out

2  Sam.  7.  9.  I  have  cut  off  all  thine  e.  1  Chr.  17.  8.

19. 6.  in  that  lovest  thine  e.  and  hatest  thy  friends

24.  13.  or  flee  three  months  before  thine  e.

1  Kings  3. 11.  nor  asked  life  of  thine  e.  2  Chr.  1. 11.
1  Chr.  21.  12.  while  the  sword  of  thine  e.  over-

taketh

Psal.  8. 2.  hast  ordained  strength  because  of  thine  e.

21.  8.  thine  hand  shall  find  out  all  thine  e.

66.  3.  through  thy  power  shall  thine  e.  submit
68.  23.  thy  foot  may  be  dipped  in  blood  of  thine  e.
74.  4.  thine  e.  roar  ||  83.  2.  thine  e.  make  a  tumult
23.  forget  not  the  voice  of  thine  e.  the  tumult
89.  10.  thou  hast  scattered  thine  e.  with  thy  arm
51.  wherewith  thine  e.  have  reproached,  O  Lord
92.  9.  lo,  thine  e.  O  Lord,  thine  e.  shall  perish
110.  1.  till  I  make  thine  e.  thy  footstool,  Mat.  22.
44.  Mark  12.  36.  Luke  20.  43.  Heb.  1.  13.
2.  rule  thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  e.

139.  20.  and  thine  e.  take  thy  name  in  vain
Isa.  26. 11.  the  fire  of  thine  e.  shall  devour  them
62. 8.  no  more  give  thy  corn  to  be  meat  for  thine  e.
Jer.  15. 14.  I  will  make  thee  to  pass  with  thine  e.
Lam.  2. 16.  thine  e.  have  opened  their  mouth
Dan.  4.  19.  and  the  interpretation  be  to  thine  e.
Mic.  4.  10.  Lord  shall  redeem  thee  from  thine  e.

5.  9.  and  all  thine  e.  shall  be  cut  off
+  14.  pluck  up  groves,  so  will  I  destroy  thine  e.
Nah.  3. 13.  thy  gate  shall  be  set  open  to  thine  e.
Luke  19.  43.  thine  e.  shall  cast  a  trench  about  thee
Your  ENEMIES.

Lev.  26.  7-  ye  shall  chase  your  e.  they  shall  fall

8.  youre.  shall  fall  before  you  by  the  sword

16.  ye  shall  sow  in  vain,  for  your  e.  shall  eat  it

17.  and  ye  shall  be  slain  before  your  e.

37.  shall  have  no  power  to  stand  before  your  e.
Num  10.  9.  ye  shall  be  saved  from  your  e.

14. 42.  be  not  smitten  before  your  e.  Dent.  1.  42.
Deut  12. 10.  he  giveth  you  rest  from  all  your  e.

20.  3.  ye  approach  to  battle  against  your  e.

4.  the  Lord  goeth  to  fight  for  you  against yow  e.
28.  68.  and  there  ye  shall  be  sold  to  your  e.

Josh.  10.  25.  thus  shall  the  Lord  do  to  all  your  e.

22.  8.  divide  the  spoil  of  your  e.  with  your  brethren

1  Sam.  12. 11.  the  Lord  delivered  you  out  of  hand  of

your  e.  and  ye  dwelled  sate,  2  Kings  17.  39.
Mat.  5.  44  but  I  say,  love  your  e.  Luke  6.  27, 35.
Enflame  ;  see  Inflame.
ENGAGED.

Jer.  30. 21.  who  is  this  that  e.  his  heart  to  approach  5
ENGINE,  S.

2  Chron.  26. 15.  Uzziah  made  in  Jerusalem  e.

Jer.  6.  +  6.  pour  out  the  e.  of  shot,  Ezek.  26.  +8.

32.  +  24.  behold  the  e.  of  shot,  they  are  come
Ezek.  26. 9.  he  shall  set  e.  of  war  against  thy  walls


ENGRAFTED.

Jam.  1.  21.  receive  with  meekness  the  e.  word
ENGRAVE.

Exod.  28. 11.  like  a  signet  shalt  e.  the  two  stones
Zech.  3.  9.  behold,  I  will  e.  the  graving  thereof
ENGRAVEN.

2  Cor.  3.  7.  the  ministration  of  death  e.  in  stone<
ENGRAVER.

Exod.  28.  11.  with  the  work  of  an  e.  in  stone
35.  35.  to  work  all  manner  of  work  of  the  e.

38.  23.  Aholiab,  of  the  tribe  of  Dan,  an  e.
ENGRAVINGS.

Exod.  28.  11.  like  e.  of  a  signet,  21,  36. 1  39. 14,  •
ENJOY.  '{

Lev.  26.  34.  the  land  shall  e.  her  sabbaths,  43.
Num.  36. 8.  that  Israel  may  e.  inheritance  of  fa  the
Deut.  28.  41.  thou  shalt  beget  sons,  but  note,  the
Josh.  1. 15.  then  shall  return  to  the  land  ande.  ii
Job  7.  +  7.  mine  eye  shall  no  more  e.  good
Eccl.  2. 1.  e.  pleasure,  behold  this  also  is  vani+5

24.  he  should  make  his  soul  e.  good,  3. 13.  |  5. 18.

9.  +9.  e.  life  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lovest
Isa.  65.  22.  mine  elect  shall  long  e.  work  of  hand
Acts  24. 2.  seeing  by  thee  we  e.  great  quietness

1  Tim.  6.  17.  God,  who  giveth  us  all  things  to  e.
Heb.  11. 25.  than  e.  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  aseasoi

ENJOYED.

2  Chron.  36.  21.  till  the  land  e.  her  sabbaths

ENJOIN.

Philem.  8.  to  e.  thee  that  which  is  convenient
ENJOINED.

Esth.  9. 31.  to  confirm  days  of  Purim  as  Esth.  had
Job  36.  23.  who  hath  e.  him  his  ways  ?

Heb.  9. 20.  blood  of  testament  God  hath  e.  to  you
ENLARGE.

This  word  principally  signifies  the  dilatation  or  t
panding  of  the  heart ,  which  happens  on  occasio
of  prosperity  and  joy ,  opposite  to  that  contracti
and  oppression  of  the  heart  which  happens  in  adir
sity.  Psal.  4. 1.  Thou  hast  enlarged  me  wher
was  in  distress.  2  Cor.  6.  11.  O  ye  Corinthia,
our  mouth  is  open  unto  you,  our  heart  isenlai
ed.  Our  mouth  is  open  to  speak  freely  to  you,  it
to  communicate  to  you  the  whole  will  and  court
of  God:  Our  heart  is  enlarged  both  by  the  h
that  we  have  towards  you,  and  by  the  rejoin
that  we  have  in  you.  To  enlarge  is  used  liken
for  extending  one's  limits,  and  carrying  one's  a
quests  into  a  foreign  country.  Gen.  9-  27-  G
shall  enlarge  Japhet.  God  shall  give  him  a  la,
inheritance,  and  increase  his  posterity.  Or  oth
wise:  God  shall  persuade  Japhet ,  namely,
dwell  in  the  tents  of  Shem,  where  God  dweller
he  shall  bring  him  to  faith  and  obedience  ;  so  ti
this  may  be  a  prophecy  of  the  calling  of  the  Gi
tiles,  the  posterity  of  Japhet.  Also  in  Exod.
24.  For  I  will  cast  out  the  nations  before  th
and  enlarge  thy  borders.

Mv  mouth  is  enlarged,  says  Hannah,  1  Sam.  2.
It  is  opened  wide  to  pour  forth  abundant  prai
to  God ;  and  to  give  a  full  answer  to  all  the
proaches  of  my  adversaries  ;  whereas  before  it  z
shut  through  grief  and  confusion.  Thou  hast  1
largedthy  bed,  Isa.  57.  8.  Thou  hast  multipl
thine  idols  and  altars.  The  same  prophet  sn
chap.  5.  14.  Hell  hath  enlarged  herself,  a
opened  her  mouth  without  measure.  The  gr<
hath  opened  its  mouth  ;  it  is  ready  to  swallow  u,
vast  number  of  the  dead ;  it  desires  no  more  ti
to  devour ,  and  absorb  such  as  shall  die  by  t
famine,  or  otherwise.

Enlargement,  Heb.  Respiration,  Esth.  4. 14.  TI
shaU  their  enlargement  arise  to  the  Jews  fr
another  place..  They  were  so  filled  with  gi
and  terror  arising  from  their  present  danger,
that  they  could  scarce  breathe,  as  Job  speaks,  J
9.  18.  but  their  grief  and  sorrow  should  be  remov
and  then  should  they  have  a  breathing-time,  ati
of  sweet  refreshment.

Gen.  9.  27.  G.  shall  e.  Japhet,  he  shall  dwell  in  te
Exod.  34. 24. 1  will  cast  out  nations  and  e.  borders
Deut.  12. 20.  when  the  Lord  shall  e.  thy  border
1 9.  8.  if  the  Lord  e.  thy  coast  as  he  hath  sworn
1  Chr.  4. 10.  O  that  wouldest  bless  me,  and  e.  coasl
Psal.  119.  32.  when  thou  shalt  e.  my  heart
Isa.  54. 2.  e.  the  place  of  thy  tent  and  stretch  forth
Amos  1.  13.  that  they  might  e.  their  border
Mic.  1. 16.  make  bald,  e.  thy  baldness  as  the  eagle
Mat.  23.  5.  and  e.  the  borders  of  their  garments
ENLARGED.

1  Sam.  2.  1.  my  mouth  is  e.  over  mine  enemies

2  Sam.  22.  37.  thou  hast  e.  my  steps,  Psal  18.36
Psal.  4.  l.thou  hast  e.  me  when  1  wasindistre;
25. 17.  the  troubles  of  my  heart  are  e.  O  bring  me
Isa.  5. 14.  therefore  hell  hath  e.  hers,  opened  fnou
57.  8.  thou  hast  e.  thy  bed,  and  made  a  co venai
60.  5.  and  thine  heart  shall  fear  and  be  e.

2  Cor.  6.  11.  O  ye  Corinthians,  our  heart  is  e.

13.  for  a  recompence  in  the  same,  be  ye  also  el

10.  15.  having  hope,  that  we  shall  be  e.  by  you

ENLARGETH.

Deut.  33. 20.  he  said,  blessed  be  he  that  e.  Gad
Job  12. 23.  he  e.  the  nations,  and  straiteneth  them
Hab.  2.  5.  who  e.  his  desire  as  hell,  and  is  as  deatl
ENLARGEMENT.

Esth.  4. 14.  then  e.  shall  arise  from  another  place
ENLARGING.

Ezek.  41.  7.  and  there  was  an  e.  and  a  winding
EN  LIGHTEN.

Psal.  18. 28.  the  Lord  my  God  will  e.  my  darknc
ENLIGHTENED.  [

1  Sam.  14.27.  and  Jonathan’s  eyes  were  e.  29-
Job  33.  30.  to  be  e.  with  the  light  of  the  living
Psal.  97.  4.  his  lightnings  e.  the  world,  earth  sav
lsa.  60.  +  1.  arise,  be  e.  for  thy  light  cometh  ,  ,
Eph.  1 . 18.  the  eyes  of  your  understanding  hem:
Ileb.  6.  4.  it  is  impossible  for  those  who  were  one*
ENLIGHTENING.

Psal.  19.8.  commandment  of  TR.  ispute.e.  the  e:
ENMITY.

Gen.  3. 15.  I  will  pute.  between  thee  and  the  won
Num.  35.  21.  or  in  e.  smite  him  with  his  hand


E  N  T


ENT


EN  Q

, ,  ss.oc.  hut  if  he  thrust  him  suddenly  without  e.
j  23. 12.  for  before  they  were  at  e.  betw.  thems.
i  i  fi.  7.  the  carnal  mind  is  e.  against  God
t  .  2. 15.  having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  e.

.  by  the  cross,  having  slain  the  e.  thereby
4' 4  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  e.  with  G.
ENOUGH.

(  .  24. 25.  we  have  straw  and  provender  e.

9? and  Esau  said,  1  have  e.  my  brother
.  take,  1  pray,  my  blessing,  because  l  have  e.

21.  the  lanu,  behold  it  is  large  e.  for  them
28.  Israel  said,  it  is  e.  Joseph  is  yet  alive

j  d.  9. 28.  entreat  the  Lord,  tor  it  is  e.  that
5.  the  people  bring  much  more  than  e.  for  work
1  t.  1.  6.  ye  have  dwelt  long  e.  in  this  mount
(.  ye  have  compassed  this  mountain  long  e.

■  .  17.  10.  they  said,  the  hill  is  not  e.  for  us

a  m,  24. 16.  it  "is  e.  stay  thine  hand,  1  Kins/s  19.  4.

1  Chron.  21. 15.  Mark  14.  41.  Luke  22.  .‘58.
n  r.  31. 10.  we  have  had  e.  to  eat  and  have  left
j  r.  27. 27.  thou  shalt  have  goats’  milk  e.  for  food

19.  he-that  tilleth  land  have  plenty,  but  he  that
followeth  after  vain  persons  have  poverty  e.
15.  yea,  four  things  say  not,  it  is  e.
j.  and  the  lire  that  saith  not,  it  is  e.
j  56. 11.  greedy  dogs,  which  can  never  have  e.

..  49. 9.  they  will  destroy  till  they  have  e.
j .  4. 10.  for  they  shall  eat,  and  not  have  e.

(  d.  5.  would  they  not  have  stolen  till  they  had  e.

i.2. 12.  the  lion  did  tear  e.  for  his  whelps
]  ’.  1.6.  ye  eat,  but  ye  have  note,  ye  drink, but  not
’.  3. 10.  there  shall  not  be  room  e.  to  receive  it
]  '.10. 25.  itise.  for  the  disciple  to  be  as  his  master

9.  not  so,  lest  there  be  not  e.  for  us  and  you
i  e  15.17.  hired  servants  have  bread  e.  and  to  spare
,  r  27 .38.  when  they  had  eaten  e.  lightened  the  ship
ENQUIRE.

I  enquire  signifies  to  ask,  Acts  9.  11.  Enquire
the  house  of  Judas  for  one  Saul  of  Tarsus,
nd  Gen.  24.  57.  We  will  call  the  damsel,
id  enquire  at  her  mouth  :  We  will  ask  her
tether  she  be  willing  to  depart  so  very  soon,
•d  understand  her  mind  by  her  words  or  answer,
•me times  it  signifies  to  pray,  Ezek.  36.  37.
nd  also  to  examine  or  search  narrowly  into
thing.  Deut.  17.  4.  And  if  thou  hast  en¬
ured  diligently,  and  behold  it  be  true.  Sorne-
■nes  it  is  taken  for  saluting  a  person,  and  ask -
g  him  of  his  welfare,  1  Chron.  18.  10.  Tou
nt  Hadoram  his  son  to  salute  king  David,  to
k  of  his  welfare.  But  this  word  is  most  corn-
only  used  for  asking  counsel  and  direction  from
od.  Rebekah,  finding  the  two  children  with
iich  she  teas  big  struggling  together  in  her
mb,  and  giving  her  some  uneasiness ,  went  to
iquire  of  the  Lord,  Gen.  25.  22.  Either  she
'.t  up  ardent  prayers  immediately  to  God,  that
would  reveal  his  mind  to  her  herein:  Or  she
nsulted  God  immediately  by  her  father  Abra-
im,  or  by  some  other  godly  patriarch  yet  sur¬
fing,  by  whom  God  used  to  manifest  his  mind
id  will  to  others,  when  he  thought  fit.  As  to  the
Iferent  ways  of  consulting  God  under  the  Old
est ament,  see  the  word  Oracle.

< ;.  24. 57.  we  will  call  the  damsel,  and  e.  at  her

22.  Rebekah  went  to  e.  of  the  Lord

.  d.  18. 15.  the  people  come  to  me  to  e.  of  God
.  it.  12.  30.  and  that  thou  e.  not  after  their  gods

14.  then  shalt  thou  e.  and  make  search

9.  thou  shalt  come  unto  the  judge  and  e.

.  g.  4. 20.  when  any  man  doth  come  and  e.  of  thee
i  >n.  9. 9.  beforetime  when  a  man  went  to  e.  of  God

15.  did  I  then  begin  to  e.  of  God  for  him  ?

7-  seek  me  a  woman,  that  I  may  e.  of  her

i  ings 22.5.  Jehoshaphat  said,  e.  I  pray  thee,  at
the  word  of  the  Lord  to  day,  2  Chron.  18.  4.
none  besides,  that  we  may  e.  of,  2  Chron.  18. 6.

■  ings  1.  2.  go,  e.  of  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  Ekron
11.  is  there  not  here  a  prophet  to  e.  by  him  ?

i.  go  meet  the  man,  and  e.  of  the  Lord  by  him
15.  the  brazen  altar  shall  be  for  me  to  e.  by
13.  go  ye,  e.  of  the  Lord  for  me,  2  Chr.  34.  21.

1.  the  king  which  sent  you  to  e.  2  Chr.  34.  26.

;  hron.  10. 13.  that  had  a  familiar  spirit,  to  e.  of  it

10.  Tou  sent  to  David  to  e.  of  his  welfare

30.  David  could  not  go  before  it  to  e.  of  God

•  a  7.  14.  are  sent  to  e.  concerning  Judah  and

[Jerusalem

•  8.  8.  for  e.  I  pray  thee  of  the  former  age
d.27. 4.  beauty  of  the  L.  and  to  e.  in  his  temple

■  1.7. 10.  thou  dost  not  e.  wisely  concerning  this
• .  21.  12.  if  ye  will  e.  e.  ye,  return,  come

• .  21.  2.  e.  1  pray  thee,  of  the  Lord  for  us

7.  the  king  of  Judah  that  sent  you  to  e.  of  me

•  k.  14. 7.  and  cometh  to  a  prophet  to  e.  of  him
1.  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to  e.  of  the  Lord
thus  saith  the  Lord,  are  ye  come  to  e.  of  me  ?

•  1. 10. 11.  e.  who  in  it  is  worthy,  and  there  abide

•  re  22. 23.  to  e.  among  themselves,  John  16. 19.

-  s  9. 1L  e.  for  Saul  25. 1 20.  doubtful  how  to  e.

•  39.  but  if  ye  e.  concerning  other  matters

■  ’  o  ^  though  ye  would  e.  something  more,  20.

•  w.8. 23.  whether  any  do  e.  of  Titus  my  partner

„  ENQUIRED.

•  ^*17-  4.  thou  hast  heard  of  it,  and  e.  diligently
0-  -0. 27.  the  children  of  Israel  e.  of  the  "Lord

16. 22.  therefore  they  e.  of  the  Lord  further

10.  and  he  e.  of  the  Lord  for  him,  13.

•  2.  uierefore  David  e.  of  the  Lord,  4.  |  30.  8.  2

Sam.  2. 1. 1  5.  19,  23.  1  21 . 1.  1  Chr.  14.  10, 14
.  0.  when  Saul  e.  the  Lord  answered  him  not
m  David  sent  and  e.  after  the  woman
■  .3.  as  it  a  man  had  e.  at  the  oracle  of  God

•  ‘rim.  10. 14.  Saul  e.  not  of  the  Lord  he  slew  him
1  ?■  ™r  we  e.  not  at  the  ark  in  the  days  of  Saul

,  <8.  34.  they  returned  and  c.  early  after  God
*•  14.3  should  1  he  e.  of  at  all  by  them  ?

1  un  ]l.ve>saith  Lord,  I  will  not  be  e.  of  by  you

•  spall  I  be  e.  of  by  you,  O  house  of  Israel '  as  I
nve,  saith  Lord  God,  I  will  not  be  e.  of  by  you

* ' *7*  IwiU  yet  for  this  be  e.  of  by  Israel

•  l.  20.  m  all  matters  that  the  king  e.  of  them


Zeph.  1.  6.  those  that  have  note,  for  the  Lord
Mat. I.  7.  Herod  e.  of  the  wise  men  diligently,  16.
John  4.  52.  then  e.  he  the  lioui  he  began  to  amend
2  Cor.  8.  23.  or  our  brethren  be  e.  of.  are  messengers
1  Pet.  1.  10.  of  which  salvation  the  prophets  e.
ENQUIRES'!.

Job  10.  6.  that  thou  e.  after  mine  iniquity  and  sin
ENQUIRY.

Prov.  20.  25.  and  after  vows  to  make  e.

Acts  10.  17.  the  men  had  made  e.  for  Simon’s  house
ENRAGED.

Prov.  26. 1 17-  is  with  strife  belonging  not  to  him
EN  R  ICH.

1  Sam.  17.  25.  the  king  wil.  e.  him  with  great  riches
Ezek.  27.  33.  thou  didst  e.  the  kings  of  the  earth
ENRICHED.

1  Cor.  1. 5.  that  in  every  thing  ye  are  e.  by  him

2  Cor.  9. 11.  being  e.  in  every  thing  to  all  bountifuln.

EN  RICHEST.

Psal.  65.  9.  thou  great/y  e.  it  with  the  river  of  God
EN  ROLLED.

Luke  2. 1 1.  a  decree  that  all  the  world  should  be  e.
Heb.  12.  +  23.  church  of  the  first-born  e.  in  heaven
ENSAMPLE.

Phil.  3.  17.  be  followers,  as  ye  have  us  for  an  e.

2  Thess.  3.  9.  but  to  make  ourselves  an  e.  to  you
2  Pet.  2.  6  an  e.  to  those  that  should  live  ungodly
EN  SAMPLES.

1  Cor.  10  11.  these  tnings  happened  to  them  for  e.
1  Thess.  1. 7-  so  that  ye  were  e.  to  all  that  believe
1  Pet.  5.  3.  not  as  lords,  but  being  e.  to  the  flock
ENSIGN.

Ensigns  are  warlike  banners,  monuments ,  or  tro¬
phies  of  victory.  Psal.  74.  4.  Thine  enemies  set
up  their  ensigns  for  signs.  And  the  prophet  Isaiah,
threatening  the  Israelites  with  an  invasion,  tells
them.  That  God  would  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the
nations  from  far,  Isa.  5.  26.  He  would,  by  his
providence,  bring  the  Assyrians,  or  the  Chaldeans,
against  the  Jews  ;  he  would,  as  it  were,  invite  them
to  list  themselves  under  his  colours,  as  generals  use
to  lift  up  their  standards  for  the  raising  of  armies.
The  same  prophet  says.  That  there  shall  be  a  root
of  Jesse,  which  shall  stand  for  an  ensign  of  the
people,  and  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek,  Isa.  11.
10.  that  is,  That  Christ  the  Messiah  growing
upon  the  root  of  Jesse,  should  mount  up,  and  be
advanced,  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  to  a
great  height,  so  as  to  become  a  visible  and  emi¬
nent  ensign,  which  the  Gentiles,  as  well  as  the
J  ews,  may  discern  ;  to  whom  they  should  repair  by
faith,  and  in  whom  they  should  put  their  trust.
Isa.  5.  26.  he  will  lift  up  an  e.  to  the  nations  from  far

11 .  10.  which  shall  stand  for  an  e.  to  the  people

12.  and  he  shall  set  up  an  e.  for  the  nations

18.  3.  dwellers,  see  ye,  when  he  lifteth  up  an  e.

30.  17.  till  ye  be  left  as  an  e.  ou  an  hill

31.  9.  his  princes  shall  be  afraid  of  the  e.  saith
Zech.  9. 16.  as  the  stones  of  a  crown  lifted  as  an  e.

ENSIGNS.

Psal.  74.  4.  they  set  up  their  e.  for  signs
ENSNARE.

Psal.  12.  +5.  I  will  set  in  safety  from  him  would  e.
ENSNARED.

Job  34.  30.  hypocrite  reign  not,  lest  the  people  be  e.
ENSUE.

1  Pet.  3.  11.  let  him  do  good,  seek  peace,  and  e.  it

Entangle;  see  Intangle.

ENTER.

Judg.  18.  9.  not  slothful  to  e.  to  possess  the  land
Ezek.  44.  3.  prince  shall  e.  by  the  porch,  46.  2,  8.
Dan.  11. 17.  shall  also  set  his  race  to  e.  with  strength
24.  he  shall  e.  peaceably  on  the  fattest  places
Heb.  4.  6.  it  remaineth  that  some  must  e.  therein
ENTER  in,  or  into.

Gen.  12. 11.  Abram  was  come  near  to  e.  into  Egypt
Exod.  40.  35.  Moses  was  not  able  to  e.  into  the  tent
Hum..  4.  23.  all  that  e.  in  to  perform  the  service
5.  24.  the  water  thatcauseth  the  curse  shall  e.  into
the  woman,  and  become  bitter,  27.
Deut.  23.  8.  children  shall  e.  into  the  congregation
29. 12.  that  thou  shouldest  e.  covenant  with  L.
Josh.  10.  19.  suffer  them  not  to  e.  into  their  cities

2  Sam.  22.  7-  and  my  cry  did  e.  into  his  ears

1  Kings  14. 12.  when  thy  feet  e.  into  city,  child  die
22.  30. 1  will  disguise  myself  and  e.  into  the  battle

2  Kings  7-  4.  if  we  e.  into  the  city,  then  the  famine

11.  5.  a  third  part  of  you  that  e.  in  on  sabbath

19.  23.  and  I  will  e.  into  lodgings  of  his  borders,

and  into  the  forest  of  Carmel,  Isa.  .37.  24.
2  Chron.  23.  19.  that  none  unclean  should  e.  in
30.  8.  e.  into  his  sanctuary,  which  he  sanctified
Neh.  2.  8.  and  for  the  house  that  I  shall  e.  into
Esth.  4.  2.  for  none  might  e.  into  the  king’s  gate
Job  22.  4.  will  he  e.  with  thee  into  judgment  ?

34.  23.  that  he  should  e.  into  judgment  with  God
Ps.  37. 15.  their  sword  shall  e.  into  their  own  heart
45.  15.  they  shall  e.  into  the  king’s  palace
100.  4.  e.  into  his  gates  with  thanksgiving
118. 20.  the  gate  into  which  the  righteous  shall  e.
Prov.  18.  6.  a  fool’s  lips  e.  into  contention
Isa.  2. 10.  e.  into  the  rock,  and  hide  thee  in  the  dust
3.  14.  the  L.  will  e.  into  judgment  with  ancients
26.  2.  that  the  righteous  nation  may  e.  in

20.  come,  my  people,  e.  thou  into  thy  chambers
57.  2.  he  shall  e.  into  peace,  they  shall  rest  in  beds
Jer.  7-  2.  that  e.  in  at  these  gates,  17-  20.  [22.  2.

8.  14.  and  let  us  e.  into  the  defenced  cities
14.  18.  if  1  e.  into  the  city,  behold  famine

17.  25.  there  shall  e.  into  the  gates  kings,  22.  4.

21.  13.  or  who  shall  e.  into  our  habitations  ?

41.  17.  they  departed  to  go  to  e.  into  Fgypt

42.  15.  if  ye  set  your  faces  to  e.  into  Egypt
Lam.  3.  13.  hath  caused  arrows  to  e.  into  my  reins
Ezek.  7.  22.  robbers  shall  e.  into  it  and  defile  it

13.  9.  nor  shall  they  e.  into  the  land  of  Israel
26.  10.  when  he  shall  e.  into  thy  gates,  as  men
e.  into  a  city  wherein  is  made  a  breach
37.  5.  behold,  I  will  cause  breath  to  e.  into  you
42. 14.  when  the  priests  e.  therein,  then  not  go  out
44.  2.  this  cate  be  shut,  no  man  shall  e.  in  by  it
16.  they  shall  e.  into  my  sanctuary,  and  come  near


Ezek.  44.  17 .  when  they  e.  in  at  gates  of  inner  court
Dan.  H.7.  shall  e.  into  the  fortress  of  king  of  north
AO.  he  shall  e.  into  the  countries  an  1  overflow
41.  he  shall  e.  also  into  the  glorious  land
Joel  2.  9.  like  a  thief  they  shall  c.  in  at  the  windows
Amos  5.  5.  seek  not  Betn-el,  nor  e.into  Gilgal
Jonah  3.  4.  and  Jonah  he  nan  toe.  into  the  city
Zech.  5.  4.  flying  roll  shall  e.  into  the  house  of  thiet
M at.  5.  20.  in  no  case  e.  into  kingdom  of  heaven
6.  6.  when  thou  prayest,  e.  into  thy  closet
7-  13.  e.  in  at  the  strait  gate,  Luke  13.  24.

21.  not  every  one  that  saith,  Lord,  shall  e.  in
10.  11.  into  what  city  ye  shall  e.  Luke  10.8,  10.

12.  29.  e.  into  a  strong  man’s  house,  Mark  3.27.

45.  and  they  e.  in  and  dwell  there,  Luke  11.26.

18.  8.  it  is  better  for  thee  to  e.  into  life  halt  or
maimed,  rather  than  be  cast  into  everlasting
fire,  Mark  9.  43,  45,  47-

19.  17.  if  thou  wilt  e.  into  life,  keep  the  commands

23.  a  rich  man  shall  hardly  e.into  the  kingdom

24.  than  for  a  rich  man  to  e.  into  the  kingdom  ot

God,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25
25. 21.  well  done,  e.  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord
Mark  1.  45.  could  no  more  openly  e.  into  the  citv

5.  12.  that  Ave  may  e.  into  the  swine,  Luke  8.  32.

6.  10.  what  house  ye  e.  into,  Luke  9.  4. 1  10.  5.

9.  25.  come  out  ot  him,  and  e.  no  more  into  him

14.  38.  lest  ye  e.  into  temptation,  Luke  22.  46.

Luke  8. 16.  that  they  which  e.  in  may  see  light

13. 24.  many  will  seek  to  e.  in  and  shall  not  be  able
24.  26.  to  have  suffered,  and  to  e.  into  his  glory  ?
John  3. 4.  can  he  e.  into  bis  mother’s  womb  again  ?
5.  he  cannot  e.  into  the  kingdom  of  God

10.  9-  by  me  if  any  man  e.  in,  he  shall  be  saved
Acts  14. 22.  through  tribulation  e.  into  the  kingdom

20.  29.  grievous  wolves  shall  e.  in  among  you
Heb.  4. 3.  do  e.  into  rest,  if  they  shall  e.  into  rest,  5.

11.  let  us  labour  therefore  to  e.  into  that  rest

10.  19.  boldness  to  e.  into  holiest  by  blood  of  Jesus
Rev.  15.  8.  no  man  was  able  to  e.  into  the  temple

21.  27.  in  no  wise  e.  into  it  any  thing  that  defilet'n

22.  14.  may  e.  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city

ENTER  not.

Psal.  143. 2.  e.  not ‘  into  judgment  with  thy  servant
Prov.  4. 14.  e.  not  into  the  path  of  the  wicked

23.  10.  e.  not  into  the  fields  of  the  fatherless
Jer.  16.  5.  e.  not  into  the  house  of  mourning
Mat.  10.  5.  into  any  city  of  the  Samaritans  e.  not

26. 41.  that  ye  e.  not  into  temptation,  Luke  22.  40i
Not  ENTER.

Num.  20.24.  for  Aaron  shall  not  e.  into  the  land
Deut.  23.  1.  shall  not  e.  into  the  congregation,  2, 3.
2  Chron.  7.  2.  the  priests  could  not  e.  into  the  house
Psal.  95. 11.  that  they  should  not  e.  into  my  rest
Isa.  59.  14.  truth  is  fallen,  and  equity  cannot  e.
Lam.  1.  10.  they  should  wore,  into  thy  congregation
Ezek.  20.  38.  they  shall  not  e.  into  the  land
44.  9.  nor  uncirc.umcised  e.  into  my  sanctuary
IIos.  11.  9.  and  I  will  not  e.  into  the  city
Mat.  18.  3.  ye  shall  wore,  into  kingdom  of  heaven.
Mark  10.  15.  he  shall  not  e.  therein,  Luke  18.  17.
Heb.  3.  11.  they  shall  not  e.  into  my  rest,  18.

19.  we  see  they  could  not  e.  because  of  unbelief
See  Kingdom.

ENTRANCE.

Judg.  1. 24.  they  said,  shew  us  the  e.  into  the  city

25.  when  he  shewed  them  the  e.  they  smote  it

1  Kings  18. 46.  he  ran  before  Ahab  to  e.  of  Jezreel

22. 10.  the  two  kings  sat  in  the  e.  of  Samaria

2  Chron.  12.  10.  that  kept  thee,  of  the  king’s  house
Psal.  119. 130.  the  e.  of  thy  words  giveth  light

1  Thess.  2. 1.  yourselves  know  our  e.  in  unto  you

2  Pet.  1.  11.  so  an  e.  shall  be  ministered  to  you

ENTERED.

Gen.  7. 13.  the  self-same  day  e.  Noah  and  his  sons
19-  3.  the  angels  turned  in,  and  e.  into  his  house
23.  the  sun  was  risen  when  Lot  e.  into  Zoar

43.  30.  Joseph  e.  into  his  chamber  and  wept  there
Exod.  33.  9.  as  Moses  e.  into  the  tabernacle
Josh.  2. 3.  bring  the  men  that  are  e.  into  thy  house
Judg.  6.  5.  and  they  e.  into  the  land  to  destroy  it
9.  46.  they  e.  into  an  hold  of  the  god  Beritb

1  Kmgs  1.  +  1.  now  king  David  was  e.  into  days

2  Kings  7-8.  e.  into  another  tent,  and  took  thence
9.31.  as  Jehu  e.  in  at  the  gate,  Jezebel  said

2  Chron.  12.  11.  when  the  king  e.  into  the  house

15.  12.  they  e.  into  a  covenant  to  seek  the  Lord
27.  2.  Jotham  e.  not  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord

Neh.  10. 29.  they  e.  into  a  curse,  and  into  an  oath
Job  38.  16.  hast  thou  e.  into  the  springs  of  the  sea  t

22.  hast  thou  e.  into  the  treasures  of  "the  snow  r
Jer.  2. 7.  but  when  ye  e.  ye  defiled  my  land

9.  21.  for  death  is  e.  into  our  windows  and  palaces

34. 10.  the  people  which  had  e.  into  covenant
37. 16.  when  Jeremiah  was  e.  into  the  dungeon

Lam.  1.  10.  the  heathen  e.  into  her  sanctuary
4.  12.  that  the  enemy  should  have  e.  the  gates
Ezek.  2.  2.  spirit  e.  into  me  when  he  spake,  3.  24
16. 8.  yea,  I  sware  and  e.  into  a  covenant  with  thee
36.  20.  and  when  they  e.  unto  the  heathen
44.2.  because  the  Goa  of  Israel  hath  e.  in  by  it
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  foreigners  e.  into  his  gates

13.  thou  shouldest  not  have  e.  into  the  gate
Hab.  3. 16.  rottenness  e.  into  my  bones,  I  trembled
Mat.  8. 5.  when  Jesus  was  e.  into  Capernaum
9. 1.  and  he  e.  into  a  ship  and  passed  over
12. 4.  how  he  e.  into  the  house  of  God  and  did  eat
24.38.  day  thatNoahe.  into  the  ark,  Luke  17.27.
Mark  5.  13.  the  unclean  spii  its  went  out  ande.  into
tiie swine,  and  were  choked  in  the  sea,  Luke  8.  33.
6.56.  whithersoever  he  e.  they  laid  the  sick
Luke  1.  40.  Mary  e.  into  the  house  of  Zacharias
7. 44.  I  e.  thine  house,  thou  gavest  me  no  water
9.  34.  and  they  feared  as  they  e.  into  the  cloud
11. 52.  woe  to  lawyers,  ye  e.  not  in  yourselves
22.  3.  then  e.  Satan  into  ludas,  John  13.27.

10.  when  ye  are  e.  the  city  there  shall  meet  jrou
John  4.  38.  and  ye  are  e.  into  their  labours

18.  1.  where  was  a  garden,  into  the  which  he  e.

33.  then  Pilate  e.  into  the  judgment-hall
Acts  9. 17.  Ananias  e.  and  putting  his  hands  on  Saul

11.  8.  nothing  unclean  hath  e  into  my  mouth


E  N  T


EPH


E  P  I


Acts  23.  10.  lie  e.  into  the  castle  and  told  Paul,  went
25.  23.  Agrippa  was  e.  into  the  place  of  hearing
28.  8.  to  whom  Paul  e.  in,  and  prayed,  and  healed
Bom.  5. 12.  sin  e.  into  the  world  II  20.  the  law  e.

1  Cor.  2.  9.  neither  have  e.  into  the  heart  of  man
Heb.  4.  6.  they  e.  not  in  because  of  unbelief

JO.  for  he  that  is  e.  into  his  rest,  hath  ceased

6.  20.  whither  the  forerunner  is  for  us  e.  even  Jes.
9. 12.  he  e.  in  once  into  the  hoi/  place,  24.

Jam.  5.  4.  are  e.  into  the  ears  of  the  L.  of  sabaoth

2  JohnJ.  many  deceivers  are  e.  into  the  world
Bev.  11.  11.  Spirit  of  life  from  God  e.  into  them

ENTERETII.

Kum.  4.  30.  number  every  one  that  e.  into  the  ser¬
vice  to  do  work  of  the  tabernacle,  35,  39,  43.

2  Chr.  31. 16.  to  every  one  that  e.  house  of  the  L.
Prov.  2.  10.  when  wisdom  e.  into  thine  heart
17.  10.  a  reproof  e.  more  into  a  wise  man  than
Ezek.  21. 14.  the  sword  e.  into  their  privy  chambers
46. 9.  he  that  e.  in  by  the  way  of  the  north  gate
Mat.  15.  17.  whatsoever  e.  in  at  the  mouth,  goeth
into  the  belly,  and  is  cast  out,  Mark  7.  18.
Mark  5.  40.  and  e.  in  where  the  damsel  was  lying
Luke  22.  10.  follow  him  into  house  where  he  e.  in
T0hn  10.  1.  e.  not  by  the  door  into  the  sheepfold
2.  he  that  e.  in  by  the  door,  is  the  shepherd
Heb.  6.  19.  and  which  e.  into  that  within  the  vail

9.  25.  as  the  high-priest  e.  every  year  with  blood
ENTERING.

Josh.  8. 29.  cast  it  at  the  e.  of  the  gate  of  the  city

20.  4.  shall  stand  at  the  e.  of  the  gate  of  the  city
Judg.  9.  35.  Gaal  stood  in  the  e.  oT  the  gate  of  city
'  44.  Abimelech  stood  in  the  e.  of  the  gate  of  city
18. 16.  the  600  men  of  Dan  stood  by  the  e.  of  the  gate
17.  and  the  priest  stood  in  the  e.  of  the  gate

1  Sam.  23.  7.  by  e.  into  a  town  that  hath  gates,  bars

2  Sam.  10.  8.  put  the  battle  in  array  at  e.  in  of  gate

1  Kings  6.  31.  for  the  e.  of  the  oracle  he  made  doors
19.  13.  Elijah  stood  in  the  e.  in  of  the  cave

2  Kings  7. 3.  four  leprous  men  at  the  e.  of  the  gate
10. 8.  lay  the  heads  in  two  heaps  at  e.  of  the  gate
23.  8.  that  were  in  the  e.  of  the  gate  of  Joshua  _

2  Chr.  18.  9.  kings  sat  at  e.  of  the  gate  of  Samaria
Isa.  23. 1.  so  that  there  is  no  house,  no  e.  in
Jer.  1. 15.  set  thrones  at  the  e.  of  the  gates,  17-  27-
Ezek.  44.  5.  mark  well  the  e.  in  of  the  house
Mat.  23. 13.  for  ye  neither  go  in  yourselves,  nor  suf¬
fer  ye  them  that  are  e.  to  go  in,  Luke  11. 52.
Mark  4.  19.  the  lusts  of  other  things  e.  in  choke
7. 15.  nothing  without  e.  into  him  can  defile  him
16.  5.  e.  into  the  sepulchre  they  saw  a  young  man
Luke  19.  30.  at  your  e.  ye  shall  find  a  colt  tied
Acts  8.  3.  Saul  e.  into  every  house,  and  haling  men
1  Thess.  1.  9.  what  manner  of  e.  in  we  had  to  you
Heb.  4. 1.  a  promise  left  us  of  e.  into  his  rest
See  Hamath.

ENTERINGS.

Ezek.  26.  +  10.  according  to  the  e.  of  a  city  broken
ENTERPRISE.

Job  5. 12.  their  hands  cannot  perform  their  e.
ENTERTAIN.

Heb.  13.  2.  be  not  forgetful  to  e.  strangers
ENTERTAINED.

Heb.  13. 2.  for  thereby  some  havee.  angels
ENTICE

Signifies,  [l]  To  persuade,  or  allure ,  Judg.  14.  15.
1 16.  ft.  2  Chron.  18.  20.  [2]  To  deceive,  Jer.

20.  10.  Jam.  1.  14.  It  is  referred,  (1)  To  Satan
seducing  false  prophets,  by  inspiring  them  with
lies ,  2  Cnron.  18.  20.  (2)  To  a  man  cunningly
insinuating,  himself  into  a  maid's  affections,  in
order  to  gain  her  consent  to  lie  with  him,  either  by
his  persuasions,  promise  of  marriage,  or  reward,
Exod.  22.  16.

(3)  To  notorious  sinners,  such  as  thieves,  robbers,
murderers,  or  oppressors,  who  endeavour  to  allure
others  by  fair  pretences  to  associate  themselves  with
them,  Prov.  1.  10.  I  16.  29.

(4)  To  a  man's  own  lust  and  concupiscence,  which
may  promise  him  pleasure  in  sin,  and  may  thus
allure  him  to  the  commission  of  it,  more  than  any
temptation  which  lie  may  have  from  without.  Jam.
1. 11.

(5)  To  false  and  treacherous  friends,  the  enemies  of
God's  people,  who  watch  for  an  advantage  against
the  godly  ;  thus  Jeremian  complains,  chap.  20.  10.
All  my  familiars  watched  for  my  halting,  say¬
ing,  peradventure  he  will  be  enticed  ;  namely,
to  utter  something  which  we  may  lay  hold  on  to
accuse  him  for.

(6)  To  the  heart  allured  with  the  sight  of  outward
objects.  Job  31.  26,  27.  If  I  beheld  the  sun  when
it  shined,  and  my  heart  hath  been  secretly  en¬
ticed  ;  that  is,  inwardly  moved  to  esteem  either  the
sun  or  moon  as  deities,  or  secretly  to  adore  or
worship  them.

CD  To  false  teachers,  who  are  said  to  deceive  and
seduce  others,  by  enticing  words,  by  erroneous  phi¬
losophical  notions  and  fancies  mingled  with  the
gospel,  1  Cor.  2. 4.  Col.  2.  4.

(8)  To  unfaithful  wives,  flattering  their  husbands
with  a  purpose  to  deceive,  Judg.  14. 15. 1  16.  5.
Exod.  22. 16.  if  a  man  e.  a  maid  not  betrothed
Deut.  13.  6.  if  thy  wife  e.  thee  secretly,  saying
Judg.  14. 15.  e.  husband,  that  he  may  declare  riddle
16.  5.  the  lords  said  to  Delilah,  e.  him  and  see
2  Chr.  18. 19.  the  Lord  said,  who  shall  e.  Ahab  ?

20. 1  will  e.  him  ||  21.  thou  shalte.  him  and  prevail
Prov.  1.  10.  if  sinners  e.  thee,  consent  thou  not
ENTICED.

Job  31.  27.  if  my  heart  hath  been  secretly  e.

Jer.  20.  t  7.  thou  hast  deceived  me,  and  I  was  e.

10.  peradventure  he  will  be  e.  we  shall  prevail
Jam.  1.  14.  is  tempted  when  drawn  away  and  e.

.  ENT1CETH.

Prov.  16.  29.  a  violent  man  e.  his  neighbour
20. 1 19.  meddle  not  with  him  that  e.  with  lips
ENTICING.

1  Cor.  2.  4.  my  preaching  was  not  with  e.  words
Col.  2.  4.  lest  any  man  beguile  you  with  e  words
ENTIRE.

Amos  1. 1 6.  carried  them  with  an  e.  captivity

136


Jam.  1.  4.  that  ye  be  perfect  and  e.  wanting  nothing
ENTRY.

2  Kings  16. 18.  k.’s  e.  without  turned  he  from  house

1  Chron.  9. 19-  their  fathers  were  keepers  of  thee.

2  Chron.  4. 22.  doors  of  e.  of  the  house  were  of  gold
Prov.  8.3.  wisdom  crieth  at  the  gates,  ate.  of  the  city
Jer.  38. 14.  Zedekiah  took  Jeremiah  into  the  third  e.

43.  9.  hide  the  stones  at  the  e.  of  Pharaoh’s  house
Ezek.  8.5.  this  image  of  jealousy  in  thee.

Entries.

Ezek.  40.  38.  the  chambers  and  e.  were  by  the  posts
ENVY

Is  an  evil  affection  of  the  heart  which  makes  men
grieve  and  fret  at  the  good  and  prosperity  of  others,
Psal.  73.  3.  Rachel  envied  Leah,  because  of  her
fruitfulness,  Gen.  30.  1.  Joseph  was  envied  of
his  brethren,  because  his  father  loved  him,  Gen.  37.

11.  The  Jews  envied  Paul  and  Barnabas,  be¬
cause  they  preached  Christ,  Acts  13.  45.  Envy  at
the  good  of  others,  and  malice,  wishing  them  evil,  as
one  observes,  is  a  deep  pollution  of  spirit.  1  his
absolutely  alienates  men  from  the  nature  and  life
of  God :  for  the  clearest  conception  we  have  of  the
Deity  is,  that  he  is  good,  and  does  good.  This  is
not  only  contrary  to  supernatural  grace,  but  to
natural  conscience,  and  turns  a  man  into  a  devil.
This  vice  is  immediately  attended  with  its
punishment :  The  envious  man  is  his  own  tor¬
mentor.  Envy  slayeth  the  silly  one,  Job  5.  2.
Envy  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones,  Prov.  14.  30.
Besides,  this  stops  the  descent  of  divine  blessings,
and  turns  the  petitions  of  the  envious  into  impreca¬
tions  against  themselves .

The  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to  envy,
Jam.  4.  5.  According  as  spirit  is  taken,  either
for  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  for  the  human  spirit,
or  natural  corruption  ;  the  sense  of  these  words
may  be,  either.  Cl)  The  Spirit  of  God  that  dwelleth
in  us,  teacheth  us  better  things  than  strife  and
envy ;  for  it  lusteth  against  envy,  that  is,  makes
us  lust  against  it,  carries  out  our  hearts  to  hate  and
resist  it  :  The  Greek  preposition  n pop,  here
Englished  to,  often  signifies  against,  as  in  Luke
20.  19.  Eph.  6.  11.  Or,  (2)  Our  natural  corrup¬
tion,  excited  and  inflamed  by  the  devil,  strongly
inclines  us  to  envy,  and  consequently  to  other
wickedness.

Job  5. 2.  wrath  killeth,  and  e.  slayeth  the  silly  one
Prov.  14.  30.  e.  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones
27.  4.  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  e.  ?

Eccl.  4. 1 4.  this  the  e.  of  man  from  his  neighbour
9. 6.  their  love,  their  hatred,  and  e.  is  now  perished
Isa.  11. 13.  the  e.  also  of  Ephraim  shall  depart
26. 11.  they  shall  see  and  be  ashamed  for  their  e.
Ezek.  35. 11. 1  will  even  do  according  to  thine  e.
Mat.Tf.  18.  fore,  they  delivered  him,  Mark  15. 10.
Acts.  5.  t  17.  rose  up,  and  were  filled  with  e.

7.  9.  the  patriarchs  moved  with  e.  sold  Joseph
13.  45.  Jews  filled  with  e.  spake  against  those  things
if.  5.  the  .1  ews  which  believed  not,  moved  with  e.
Bom.  1.  29.  full  of  e.  murder,  debate,  deceit
Phil.  1. 15.  some  indeed  preach  Christ,  even  of  e.

1  Tim.  6.  4.  whereof  cometh  e.  strife,  railings
Tit.  3.  3.  we  were  foolish,  living  in  malice  and  e.
Jam.  4. 5.  the  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to  e.
ENVY.

Prov. 3.31  .e.  thou  not  oppressor,  choose  not  his  ways
23. 17.  let  not  thine  heart  e.  sinners,  be  in  fear  of  L.
Isa.  11. 13.  Ephraim  not  e.  Judah,  Judah  notvex
ENVIED.

Gen.  26.  14.  and  the  Philistines  e.  Isaac
30. 1.  Rachel  e.  her  sister,  and  said  unto  Jacob
.37. 11.  Joseph’s  breth.  e.  him,  his  father  observed
Psal.  106.  16.  they  e.  Moses  also  in  the  camp
Eccl.  4.  4.  for  this  a  man  is  e.  of  his  neighbour
Ezek.  31.  9.  the  trees  in  the  garden  of  God  e.  him
ENVIES.

1  Pet.  2.  1.  laying  aside  all  malice,  guile,  and  e.
ENV1EST.

Num.  11.  29.  Moses  said,  e.  thou  for  my  sake  ?

EN  VIET  IT.

1  Cor.  13.  4.  charity  suffereth  long,  and  e.  not
ENVYING.

Bom.  13. 13.  let  us  walk  honestly,  not  in  strife  and  e.

1  Cor.  3.  3.  whereas  there  is  among  you  e.  and  strife
Gal.  5.  26.  provoking  one  another,  e.  one  another
Jam.  3. 14.  but  if  ye  have  bitter  e.  and  strife  in  hearts

16.  where  e.  is,  there  is  confusion,  every  evil  work
ENVY1NGS.

2  Cor.  12. 20. 1  fear  lest  there  be  debates,  e.  wraths
Gal.  5. 21.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  e.  murders

ENVIOUS.

Psal.  37. 1 .  nor  be  e.  against  the  workers  of  iniquity
73.  3.  for  I  was  e.  at  the  foolish,  when  1  3aw
Prov.  24. 1.  be  not  thou  e.  against  evil  men
19.  fret  not,  neither  be  thou  e.  at  the  wicked
ENVIRON.

Josh.  7. 9.  the  Canaanites  shall  hear  and  e.  us  round
EPHAH

Is  an  Hebrew  measure  of  the  same  capacity  with
the  Bath,  containing  ten  homers.  See  Bath,
and  Homer.

Exod.  16. 36.  an  homer  is  the  tenth  part  of  an  e.
Lev.  5.  11.  the  tenth  part  of  an  e.  ot  flour,  6.  20.

19.  36.  ye  shall  have  a  juste.  Ezek.  45.  10.

Kum.  5.  15.  the  tenth  part  of  an  e.  of  barley-meal
Judg.  6. 19.  made  unleavened  cakes  of  an  e.  of flour
Buth  2. 17.  and  it  was  about  an  e.  of  barley
1  Sam.  17. 17.  take  now  an  e.  of  this  parched  com
Isa.  5.  10.  the  seed  of  an  homer  shall  yield  an  e.
Ezek.  45. 11.  the  e.  and  baths  shall  be  of  one  measure
46.  5.  and  an  hin  of  oil  to  an  e.  7, 11.

Amos  8. 5.  making  the  e.  small,  and  the  shekel  great
Zech.  5.  6.  he  said(>  this  is  an  e.  that  goeth  forth

8.  and  he  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  the  e.

See  Part.

EPHOD

Was  a  sort  of  ornament,  or  upper  garment,  worn
by  the  Hebrew  priests.  'There  were  two  sorts
of  ephods,  one  of  plain  linen  for  the  priests,
and  another  embroidered  for  the  high-priest.
That  for  the  high-priest  was  composed  of  gold.


blue,  purple,  crimson,  and  twisted  cotton  ;  that
it  was  a  very  rich  composition  of  different  coho  .
Upon  that  part  of  the  ephod,  which  came  v  l
the  two  shoulders  of  the  liigh-priest,  were  two  la
precious  stones,  upon  which  were  engraven  ;
names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  upon  e,
stone  six  names,  Exod.  28.  4,  5,  6.  &c.

There,  where  the  ephod  crossed  the  high-prie)
breast,  was  a  square  ornament,  called  the  bre>
plate,  wherein  twelve  precious  stones  were  ,
with  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  i
graved  on  them,  one  on  each  stone.  rl  he  upper  i  |
of  the  breast  plate  was  fastened  by  chains  of  g\
to  that  part  of  the  ephod  which  was  on  the  should]
and  the  lower  side  of  it,  by  blue  laces,  to  the  git1
of  the  ephod  ;  for  which  purpose  it  had  four  ri :
of  gold,  at  the  four  corners  ;  that  being  all  «
joined  together,  it  might  appear  like  one  em ]
garment,  Exod.  39.  21.  and  accordingly,  ;
whole  was  sometimes  called  and  understood  by
single  word  Ephod,  1  Sam.  30.  7.  Hos.  3.  4.
The  Ephod  worn  by  common  piiests,  which  was'
linen  only,  was  of  the  same  extent  and  use,
neither  so  rich,  nor  so  much  adorned.  This  g
ment  was  worn  sometimes  by  those  who,  stru
speaking,  were  not  priests  ;  as  by  Samuel  in
tabernacle,  when  he  was  but  a  child,  1  Sam
18.  and  by  David  when  he  brought  the  ark  f
the  house  of  Obed-Edom  to  Jerusalem,  2  Si

6.  14.  But,  as  both  these  were  holy  occasion. >
is  probable  the  Ephod  was  properly  an  holy  ro:
and  never  worn  by  any,  but  those  who  served
some  holy  employment .

Some  affirm  that  the  Jewish  kings  had  a  right
wear  the  Ephod,  and  to  consult  the  Lord  by  U:
and  Thummim.  They  ground  their  opinion p
cipally  on  what  is  said  concerning  David,  1  <$,j
30.  7-  when  he  came  to  Zikla g,  and  found  t>
the  Amalekites  had  pillaged  the  city,  and  car.
away  his  and  his  people's  wives,  he  said  to  A|
thar  the  high-priest,  Bring  me  hither  the  Epil
and  Abiathar  brought  thither  the  Ephod
David.  What  follows  verse  8.  favours  this  •
nion.  And  David  enquired  at  the  Lord,  say;
Shall  I  pursue  after  this  troop  <  And  he  ansv
ed  him,  Pursue.

But  the  generality  of  commentators  are  of  opin
that  neither  David,  Saul,  nor  Joshua,  nor  any  o\
prince  of  Israel,  dressed  themselves  in  the  i.
priest's  Ephod,  in  order  to  consult  God  of  th-
selves,  and  that  the  passage  now  related  sign
no  more  than,  Put  on  the  Ephod,  and  con  :
the  Lord  for  me.  Grotius  believes,  the  .)
priest  turned  the  Ephod,  or  breast  plate,  tow,-,
David,  that  he  might  see  with  his  own  eyes,  it
God  should  answer  to  him  by  the  stones  uponi
breast  plate.

Exod.  25.  7.  stones  to  be  set  in  the  e.  35.  9,  27.
28.  4.  they  shall  make  an  e.  and  a  robe,  6.

8.  curious  girdle  of  e.  27,  28.  |  39. 5, 20.  Lev.  I,

12.  put  them  on  the  shoulders  of  the  e.  25.

J5.  make  it  after  the  work  of  the  e.  .39. 8.

.31.  shalt  make  the  robe  of  the  e.  of  blue,  39.  S'
39.  2.  he  made  the  e.  of  gold,  blue,  and  purple
Lev.  8.  7.  he  put  the  e.  upon  him,  and  girded  h
Judg.  8.  27.  and  Gideon  made  an  e.  thereof
17.  5.  the  man  Micah  made  an  e.  and  teraphir
18. 14.  that  there  is  in  these  houses  an  e.  and  ter;.

1  Sam.  2.  18.  Samuel  was  girded  with  a  linen
28.  did  1  choose  him  to  wear  an  e.  before  me

14.  3.  and  Ahiah  the  Lord’s  priest  wearing  an

21 .  9.  the  sword  is  wTapt  in  a  cloth  behind  the

22.  18.  Doeg  slew  85  persons  that  did  wear  an,
2.3.  6.  Abimelech  fled  with  an  e.  in  his  hand

9.  David  said,  bring  hither  the  e.  30.  7-

2  Sam.  6.  14.  David  danced  before  the  Lord,  !

was  girded  with  a  linen  e.  1  Chron.  15 .
Hos.  3. 4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without;,
EPISTLE

Is  a  letter  or  writing,  whereby  one  person  corn
nicates  his  mind  to  another  at  a  distance ;  H
David  communicated  his  mind  to  Joab  in  a  It
which  he  sent  by  the  hand  of  Uriah,  2  Sam,  .
14.  The  holy  Apostles  likewise  communicate*
the  church  by  epistles  the  mind  and  will  of
according  as  the  Holy  Spirit  inspired  and  dirt*
them  ;  which  inspired  epistles  make  a  part  oji
Canon  of  the  holy  Scriptures.  And  the  t&
word  of  God  may  be  called  his  epistle,  beet
therein  he  has  declared  and  revealed  his  n
and  will  to  mankind.

The  apostle  Paul  writing  to  the  Corinthians,
Ye  arc  our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts,  kn*
and  read  of  all  men.  Forasmuch  as  ye  <
manifestly  declared  to  be  the  epistle  of  Cw
ministered  by  us,  w'ritten  not  with  ink,  but  t
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  not  in  tables  ofsta
but  in  fleshly  tables  of  the  heart,  2  Cor.  3.  i
that  is,  You  are  my  epistle  of  commendation  ;  f
conversion  to  Christianity  is  a  real  commendt*
of  my  ministry,  and  a  demonstration  of  its
cacy :  You  are  written  in  my  heart;  I  had
hearty  affection  for  you:  Nor  are  you  only  tf
notice  of  by  me  as  a  famous  church,  but  all  CM'
tians  look  upon  you  as  a  church,  to  the  plaH
and  watering  of  which  God  hath  blessed  my
hours.  And  it  appears  that  ye  are  our  epi  \
in  that  it  is  evident  that  Christ  has  written-
late  in  your  hearts,  by  my  ministry,  which  *
made  effectual  to  this  end  by  the  Holy  G/ws
Acts  15.  30.  they  delivered  the  e.  2.3. 33.

Bom.  16.  22. 1  Tertius  who  wrote  this  e.  salute  “

1  Cor.  5.  9. 1  wrote  to  you  in  an  e.  not  to  comft

2  Cor.  3. 2.  ye  are  our  e.  written  in  our  hearts
.3.  as  ye  are  declared  to  be  the  e.  of  Christ

7.  8.  I  perceive  that  the  same  e.  made  you  sor
Col.  4. 16.  when  this  e.  is  read  amongst  you,  p

wise  read  the  e.  from  Laod«

1  Thess.  5.  27.  this  e.  be  read  to  all  the  brethre

2  Thess.  2. 15.  been  taught  whether  by  word  or  0  ’
3.  14.  if  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  y

17.  which  is  the  token  in  every  e.  so  1  write


E  R  R


E  S  C


EST


/  s  l  this  second  e.  1  now  write  unto  you
EPISTLES.

3.  i.  or  need  we  e.  of  commendation  to  you
t  i  10.  as  also  in  all  his  e.  speaking  in  them
EQUAL.

i.  3.  f  8.  it  is  not  e.  for  the  king  to  suffer  them
i.  17.  2.  thine  eyes  behold  the  things  that  are  e.
13.  but  it  was  thou,  a  man,  mine  e.  my  guide
y.  26. 7.  the  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  e.

40  25.  to  whom  then  shall  1  be  e.  ? 46.  5.
i. 13.  what  shall  l  e.  to  thee,  O  virgin  daughter
Yb.  25.  yet  ye  say,  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not
e.  hear,  is  not  my  way  e.  ?  29. 1  33.  17,  20.
0  house  of  Israel,  are  not  my  ways  e.  ?

17.  but  as  for  them,  their  way  is  not  e.
i,  5.  t  21.  he  made  his  heart  e.  with  the  beasts
20. 12.  and  thou  hast  made  them  e.  to  us
r  20.  36.  for  they  are  e.  to  angels,  childr.  of  God
1 5.  18.  making  himself  e.  with  God
l  2.  6.  he  thought  it  not  robbery  to  bee.  with  G.
4.1.  masters,  give  your  servants  what  is  e.

21  16.  the  breadth  and  height  of  the  city  are  e.
EQUAL.

28. 17-  the  gold  and  the  crystal  cannot  e.  it
*  the  topaz  of  Ethiopia  shall  not  e.  it
EQUALITY.

,r  8  14.  but  by  an  e.  that  there  may  be  an  e.
EQUALLETH.

, m  22. 1 34.  he  e.  my  feet  with  hinds’  feet
EQUALLY.

d  36.  22.  one  board  had  two  tenons  e.  distant
EQUALS.

1.14. 1  profited  above  many  my  e.  in  my  nation
EQUITY.


I.  98.  9.  he  shall  judge  the  people  with  e.

4.  thou  dost  esta1  lish  e.  thou  executest  judgment
:  v.  1. 3.  to  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom  and  e.
).  then  shalt  thou  understand  judgment  and  e.
26.  it  is  not  good  to  strike  princes  for  e.

/.  2.  21.  there  is  a  man  whose  labour  is  in  e.

II.  4.  reprove  with  e.  for  the  meek  of  the  earth
1 1.  thussaith  the  Lord,  keep  e.  and  do  justice
14.  truth  is  fallen  in  street,  and  e. ’cannot  enter

;  ■.  3.  9.  hear  this,  ye  that  pervert  all  e.

'  1  2.  6.  he  walked  with  me  in  peace  and  e.

ERE.

d.  1. 19.  they  are  delivered  e.  the  midwives  come
j  m.  14. 11.  how  long  will  it  be  e.  they  believe  me  ?
,  18.  2.  how  long  e.  you  make  an  end  of  words  ?
.  47.  6.  O  sword,  how  long  e.  thou  be  quiet  ?

.  8. 5.  how  long  e.  they  attain  to  innocency  ?

.  'i  4. 49.  Sir,  come  down  e.  my  child  die
ERECTED.


i.  33. 20.  Jacob  e.  there  an  altar,  El-Elohe  Israel
ERRAND.


.  1. 24.  33. 1  will  not  eat  till  I  have  told  mine  e.

,  g.  3. 19.  I  have  a  secrete,  unto  thee,  O  king
<  ings  9.5.  he  said,  I  have  an  e.  to  thee,  O  capt.
ERR.

!  hron.  33. 9.  so  Manasseh  made  Judah  to  e.

.  5.  +  24.  thou  shalt  visit  thy  habitation,  and  not  e.
il.  95.  10.  a  people  that  do  e.  in  their  heart
).  21.  which  do  e.  from  thy  commandments

18.  hast  trodden  them  that  e.  from  thy  statutes
iz?.  5. 1 19.  and  e.  thou  always  in  her  love

.  fl7.  he  that  refuseth  reproof, causeth  to  e.

.  22.  do  they  not  e.  that  devise  evil  i

.27.  cease  to  hear  instruction  that  causeth  to  e.

.  3. 12.  O  my  people,  they  which  lead  thee  cause
thee  to  e.  and  clestroy  thy  paths,  9. 16.

.  14.  and  they  have  caused  Egypt  to  e.

.  7.  they  e.  in  vision,  they  stumble  in  judgment
.28.  there  shall  be  a  bridle  causing  them  to  e .

.  8.  the  wayfaring  men  shall  not  e.  therein
.  17.  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  e.  from  thy  ways  ?
.  23.  13.  the  prophets  prophesied  in  Baal,  and
caused  my  people  Israel  to  e.  Mic.  3.  5.
s.  4. 12.  spirit  of  whoredom  hath  caused  them  to  e.
'os  2. 4.  and  their  lies  caused  them  to  e.

■t.  22.  29.  Jesus  said,  ye  do  e.  not  knowing  the
scriptures  nor  power  of  God,  Mark  12. 24, 27-
b,  3. 10.  they  do  always  e.  in  their  hearts
n.  1. 16.  do  not  e.  my  beloved  brethren

19.  brethren,  if  any  of  you  do  e.  from  the  truth

ERRED.

|».  5.  18.  concerning  ignorance  wherein  he  e.
t  m.  15. 22.  ye  have  e.  and  not  observed  these  com.
am.  26. 21.  behold,  I  have  e.  exceedingly
*  6. 24.  cause  me  to  understand  wherein  I  have  e.
'.4.  be  it  indeed  that  I  have  e.  mine  err.  remaineth
al.  119.  110.  yet  I  e.  not  from  thy  precepts
f.  28.  7.  but  they  also  have  e.  thro’  wine  and  thro’
strong  drink,  the  priest  and  the  prophet  have  e.
k  24.  they  also  that  e.  in  spirit  shall  come
mi.  6. 10.  somecoveted  they  have  e.  from  the  faith
|!1.  some  professing  have  e,  concerning  the  faith
Tim.  2. 18.  who  concerning  the  truth  have  e.
ERR  E  l  II.


v.  10.  17.  but  he  that  refuseth  reproof  e.
k.  45. 20.  so  shalt  thou  do  for  everv  one  that  e.
ERROR


unifies,  [1]  A  mistake,  or  oversight,  Eccl.  5.  6.
2]  false  doctrine,  which  is  hot  agreeable  to  the
cord  of  God,  1  John  4.  6.  [3]  Sins  of  all  sorts,

’sal.  19.  12.  Heb.  9.  7.  [4]  Idols,  Jer.  10.  15.

5]  Sins  against  nature,  Rom.  1.  27.  [6J  Un¬

faithfulness  in  an  office,  Dan.  6.  4.
ie  error  of  Balaam,  Jude  11.  is  covetousness,  to
chick  the  persons  of  whom  the  apostle  speaks  were
excessively  addicted,  and  for  the  sake  of  filthy
[acre  did  corrupt  the  doctrine  of  Christ  as  Ba-
aam,  for  the  sake  of  gain,  taught  Balak  to  entice
■  he  children  of  Israel  to  commit  fornication,  and
eat  things  sacrificed  unto  idols.
b>  speaking  to  his  friends,  says,  Be  it  indeed
nat  1  have  erred,  mine  error  remaineth  with
nyselt,  Job  19.  4.  If  my  opinion  in  this
ooint  be  faulty  and  erroneous ,  as  you  pretend
!t  is,  it  is  likely  to  continue  ;  I  see  no  cause
rom  your  reasons  to  change  my  judgment.  Or,
1/  J  have  sinned,  you  see  I  suffer  deeply  for
Ul*  sms,  and  therefore  deserve  your  pity  and


help,  rather  than  your  reproaches,  whereby  you
add  affliction  to  the  afflicted.

Num.  35.+  11.  the  slaver  that  killeth  any  by  e.

2  Sam.b.'I,  anger  kindled,  G.  smote  Uzzah  for  his  e.
Job  19.  4.  if  erred  mine  e.  remaineth  with  myself
Eccl.  5.  6.  neither  say  thou  that  it  was  an  e.

10.  5.  there  is  an  evil  which  I  have  seen  as  an  e.
Isa.  32.  6.  and  to  utter  e.  against  the  Lord
Dan.  3. +  29.  who  speak  e.  against  God  of  Shadrach
4. 1 27.  if  it  may  be  a  healing  of  thine  e.

6. 4.  neither  was  there  any  e.  found  in  him
Mat.  27. 64.  the  last  e.  shall  be  worse  than  the  first
Rom.  1. 27.  receiving  that  recompence  of  their  e.
Jam.  5. 20.  converteth  the  sinner  from  e.  of  his  way
2  Pet.  2. 18.  were  escaped  from  them  who  live  in  e.

3. 17.  ye  being  led  away  with  the  e.  of  the  wicked
1  John  4. 6.  hereby  know  we  the  spirit  of  e.

Jude  11.  they  have  ran  greedily  after  e.  of  Balaam
ERRORS.

Ps.  19. 12.  who  can  understand  his  e.  ?  cleanse  me
Jer.  10. 15.  they  are  vanity,  the  work  of  e.  51. 18.
Heb.  9.  7.  which  he  offered  for  the  e.  of  the  people
ESCAPE.

Gen.  19. 17.  e.  for  thy  life,  e.  to  the  mountain

20.  O  let  me  e.  1|  22.  haste  thee,  e.  thither
32. 8.  the  other  company  which  is  left  shall  e.

Josh.  8.  22.  they  let  none  of  them  remain  or  e.

1  Sam.  27. 1.  e.  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines

2  Sam.  15. 14.  let  us  flee,  for  we  shall  not  else  e.

20.  6.  lest  Sheba  get  him  fenced  cities  and  e.  us

1  Kings  18. 40.  let  none  of  them  e.  2  Kings  Q.  15.

2  Kings  10. 24.  if  any  of  the  men  I  have  brought  e.

19.  31.  they  that  e.  out  of  mount  Zion,  Isa.  37-32.

23.  + 18.  they  let  his  bones  e.  with  bones  of  prophet

Ezra  9. 8.  grace  been  shewn,  to  leave  us  a  remn.  toe.
Esth.  4. 13.  think  not  thou  shalt  e.  in  king’s  house
Job  11. 20.  but  the  wicked  shall  not  e.  their  hope  fail
Ps.  56. 7.  shall  they  e.  by  iniquity  ?  cast  down  people
71. 2.  deliver  me  in  thy  right,  and  cause  me  to  e.
141.10.  let  the  wicked  fall,  whilst  I  withal  e.
Prov.  19.  5.  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall  not  e.

Eccl.  7.  26.  whoso  pleaseth  God  shall  e.  from  her
Isa.  20.  6.  we  flee  tor  help,  and  how  shall  we  e.

66.  19.  I  will  send  those  that  e.  to  the  nations
Jer.  11 . 11.  bring  evil  on  them  shall  not  be  able  to  e.
25. 35.  nor  the  principal  of  the  flock  to  e.

32.  4.  Zedekiah  shall  not  e.  34.  3.  1  38.  18,  23.

42. 17.  none  that  go  into  Egypt  shall  e.  44. 14.

44.  14.  none  shall  return  but  such  as  shall  e.

28.  yet  a  small  number  that  e.  the  sword

46.  6.  let  not  the  swift  flee,  nor  mighty  man  e.

48.  8.  the  spoiler  shall  come,  no  city  shall  e.

50. 28.  voice  of  them  that  flee  and  e.  out  of  Babylon

29.  let  none  thereof  e.  recompense  her  according
Ezek.  6.  8.  may  have  some  that  shall  e.  the  sword

9.  and  they  that  e.  of  you  shall  remember  me
7. 16.  they  that  e.  shall  e.  and  be  like  doves
17. 15.  shall  he  e.  that  doth  such  things  ?

18.  hath  done  all  these  things,  he  shall  not  e.

Dan.  11.  41.  but  these  shall  e.  out  of  his  hand

42.  and  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  not  e.

Joel  2.  3.  yea,  and  nothing  shall  e.  them
Obad.  14.  to  cut  off  tho.-e  of  his  that  did  e.

+ 17.  but  on  mount  Zion  shall  be  they  that  e.

Mat.  23.  33.  how  can  ye  e.  the  damnation  of  hell  ?
Luke  21. 36.  be  accounted  worthy  to  e.  these  things
Acts  27. 42.  counsel  to  kill  the  prisoners,  lest  any  e.
Rom.  2.  3.  that  thou  shalt  e.  the  judgment  of  God  ?
1  Cor.  10.  13.  but  will  also  make  away  to  e.

1  Thess.5. 3.  sudden  destruction,  and  they  shall  note.
Heb.  2.3.  howshall  we  e.  if  weneglectso  great  salva,
12.  25.  much  more  shall  not  we  e.  if  we  tu&n  away
ESCAPE.

Psal.  55. 8.  I  would  hasten  my  e.  from  the  storm
ESCAPED.

Gen.  14. 13.  there  came  one  that  had  e.  and  told
Exod.  10.  5.  the  locust  eat  the  residue  of  what  is  e.
Num.  21.29.  hath  given  his  sons  that  e.  into  captivity
Deut.  23. 15.  not  deliver  servant  e.  from  his  master
Judy.  3. 26.  and  Ehud  e.  while  they  tarried

29.  there  e.  not  a  man  of  them,  1  Sam.  30.  17.

21. 17.  must  be  an  inheritance  for  them  that  be  e.

1  Sam.  14. 41.  Saul  and  Jonath.  taken,  but  people  e.

19.  10.  David  fled  and  e.  that  night,  12,  18.

2  Sam.  1.  3.  out  of  the  camp  of  Israel  am  1  e.

4.  6.  and  Rachab  and  Baanah  his  brother  e.

1  Kings  20.  20.  Ben-hadad  the  king  e.  on  an  horse

2  Kings  19. 30.  the  remnant  that  is  e.  of  J  udah  shall

take  root  and  bear  fruit,  Isa.  37.  31.

1  Chron.  4. 43.  they  smote  the  rest  that  were  e.

2  Chron.  16. 7.  therefore  is  the  host  of  Syria  e.

30.  6.  and  he  will  return  to  you  that  are  e.

Ezra  9. 15.  for  we  remain  yet  e.  as  it  is  this  day
Neh.  1. 2. 1  asked  concerning  the  Jews  that  had  e.
Job  1.  15. 1  only  am  e.  to  tell  thee,  16,  17,  19.

19.  20.  and  1  am  e.  with  the  skin  of  my  teeth
Psal.  124.  7.  our  soul  is  e.  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare
of  the  fowlers,  the  snare  is  broken  and  we  are  e.
Isa.  4. 2.  shall  be  comely  for  them  that  are  e.  of  Israel

10.  20.  the  remnant  and  such  as  are  e.  of  Jacob

45. 20.  draw  near,  ye  that  are  e.  of  the  nations
Jer.  41. 15.  but  Ishmael  the  son  of  Nethaniah  e.

51. 50.  ye  that  have  e.  remember  the  Lord  afar  off
Lam.  2. 22.  so  that  none  in  that  day  e.  nor  remained
Ezek.  24.  27-  thy  mouth  be  opened  to  him  that  is  e.

33. 21.  that  one  that  had  e.  came  unto  me,  22.
John  10.  39.  but  he  e.  out  of  their  hands

Acts  27. 44.  so  it  came  to  pass,  they  e.  all  safe  to  land

28. 4.  though  he  e.  the  sea,  yet  vengeance  suffers  not
2  Cor.  11. 33.  I  was  let  down  and  e.  his  hands
Heb.  11. 34.  through  faith  e.  the  edge  of  the  sword
12. 25.  if  they  e.  not  who  refused  him  that  spake
2  Pet.  1.  4.  e.  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world
2.18.allure  thro’lusts  of  flesh  those  that  were  cleans.
20.  after  they  have  e.  the  pollutions  of  the  world
ESCAPER.

2  Kings  9.  + 15.  let  no  e.  go  out  of  the  city  to  tell
.  ESCAPETH.

1  Kings  19. 17-  him  that  e.  the  sword  of  TIazael  shall
Jehu  slay  :  him  that  e.  Jehu  shall  Elisha  slay
Isa.  15.  9.  bring  lions  upon  him  that  e.  of  Moab
Jer.  48. 19.  ask  her  that  e.  and  say,  what  is  done  ?


Ezek.  24. 26.  he  that  e.  in  that  day  shall  come  to  thee
Amos  9.  1.  lie  that  e.  of  them  shall  not  be  delivered
ESCAPING.

2  Kings  19.  +  30.  the  e.  of  the  house  of  J  udah  that
remaineth  shall  again  take  root,  Isa.  37-  +  31.

2  Chr.  20.  +  24.  they  were  dead,  there  was  not  an  e.
Ezra  9. 14.  so  that  there  should  be  no  remnant  nor  e
Isa.  4.  +  2.  the  branch  be  comely  for  the  e.  of  Isr.
37.  +  32.  the  e.  shall  go  forth  out  of  mount  Zion
Jer.  25.  +  35.  and  e.  from  the  principal  of  the  flock
ESCHEW.

1  Pet.  3.11.  let  him  e.  evil  and  do  good,  seek  peace
ESCHEWED,  ETH.

Job  1.  1.  one  that  feared  God  and  e.  evil,  8. 1  2.  3
ESPECIALLY  and  SPECIALLY.

Dent.  4. 10.  s.  the  day  thou  stoodest  before  the  Lord
Psal.  31.  11.  a  reproach  e.  among  my  neighbours
Acts  Q5.  26.  and  s.  before  thee,  O  king  Agrippa
26.  3.  e.  because  I  know  thee  to  be  expert
Gal.  6.  10.  e.  to  them  of  the  household  of  faith

1  Tim,  4.  10. the  Saviours,  of  those  that  believe

5.  8.  provide,  s.  for  them  of  his  own  house

17.  e.  they  who  labour  in  word  and  doctrine

2  Tim.  4.13.  thecloke  bring,  but  e.  the  parchments
Tit.  1.  10.  deceivers,  s.  they  of  the  circumcision
Philem.  16.  above  a  servant,  brother  beloved, s. to  me

ESPY.

Josh.  14.  7-  Moses  sent  me  to  e.  out  the  land
Jer.  48. 19.  stand  by  way,  and  e.  ask  him  thatfleeth
•  ESP  LED.

Gen.  42.  27.  he  e.  his  money  in  his  sack’s  mouth
Ezek.  20.  6.  into  a  land  that  1  had  e.  for  them
See  Spy,  Spied.

ESPOUSALS.

Cant.  3. 11.  his  mother  crowned  him  in  day  of  his  e.
Jer.  2. 2.  1  remember  thee,  the  love  of  thine  e.
ESPOUSED.

Espousing,  or  betrothing,  teas  a  promise  of  mar¬
riage  made  by  two  persons  each  to  other,  at  such
a  distance  of  time  afterwards.  This  was  done
either  by  a  formal  writing  or  contract  in  pre¬
sence  of  witnesses.  Ur  without  writing,  by  the
man's  giving  a  piece  of  silver  to  the  bride  before
witnesses,  and  saying  to  her,  Receive  this  piece
of  silver  as  a  pledge  that  at  such  a  time  you
shall  become  my  spouse.  After  the  marriage
was  thus  contracted,  the  young  people  had  the
liberty  of  seeing  each  other,  which  was  not  al¬
lowed  them  before.

We  read,  Mat.  1.  18.  that  when  Mary  was  es¬
poused  to  Joseph,  before  they  came  together,
she  was  found  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
God  would  have  his  son  to  be  born  of  a  betrothed
virgin,  (1)  That  he  might  not  be  under  the  re¬
proach  of  illegitimacy.  (2)  That  his  mother
might  not  be  subjected  to  the  punishment  of  the
judicial  law.  (3)  That  by  the  genealogy  of
Joseph,  of  whose  kindred  Mary  was,  her  pedi¬
gree  might  also  be  shewed.  (41  That  Christ  might
have  a  guardian  in  his  infancy.  _

The  union  of  believers  with  Christ  is  expressed
under  the  notion  of  a  marriage,  Isa.  54.  5.
Hence  the  apostle  tells  the  Corinthians,  1  nave
espoused  you  to  one  husband,  that  I^may  pre¬
sent  you  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ,  2  Cor.  11.  2.
The  husband  is  Christ,  Mat.  25.  6.  The  virgin
bride  are  all  true  believers.  The  contract,  or
marriage- covenant,  is  made  in  this  life,  in  making
of  which  faithful  ministers  are  instrumental;
1  have  espoused  you,  says  the  apostle.  But  the
marriage  is  celebrated  in  the  other  world,  where
believers  have  uninterrupted  communion  with
God  in  Christ,  Rev.  19-  7*

2  Sam.  3.  14.  deliver  me  my  wife  Michal  whom  I  e.
Mat.  1.  18.  when  hismother  Mary  was  e.  to  Joseph
Luke  1.  27.  to  a  virgin  e.  to  a  man  named  Joseph
2.  5.  Joseph  went  to  be  taxed  with  Mary  his  e.  wife
2  Cor.  11.  2.  for  I  have  e.  you  to  one  husband
ESTABLISH  and  STABLISH
Signifies,  [1]  To  fix,  or  settle,  1  Kings  9.  5.  [2}
To  confirm,  Num.  30.  13.  Rom.  1.  11.  [3]  To
perform,  or  make  good,  Psal.  119.  38.  [4]  'To
ordain,  or  appoint,  llab.  1.  12.  [5]  To  accom¬
plish  and  bring  to  a  good  issue,  Prov.  20.  18.
[6]  'To  set  up  one  thing  in  the  room  of  another.
Rom.  10.  3.  [7]  To  ratify,  Ileb.  10.  9.

The  Lord  shall  establish  thee  an  holy  people  unto
himself,  Deut.  28.  9.  He  shall  confirm  and
establish  his  covenant  with  thee,  by  which  he
separated  thee  to  himself  as  an  holy  and  peculiar
people,  and  shall  publicly  own  thee  for  such.
Establish  thou  the  work  of  our  hands,  Psal.  90. 17.
that  is,  Direct  us  in,  and  give  success  to,  all  our
undertakings  and  endeavours:  carry  them  on,
by  thy  continual  aid  and  blessing,  unto  perfec¬
tion.

Gen.  6.  18.  but  with  thee  will  1  e.  my  covenant,
9.  9. 1  17.  7-  Lev.  26.  9..  Ezek.  16.  62.

17.  19.  I  will  e.  my  covenant  with  him,  21.

Num.  30.  13.  every  vow,  her  husband  may  e.  it
Deut.  8. 18,  that  he  may  e.  his  covenant  he  sware

28.  9.  the  L.  shall  e.  thee  an  holy  people  to  himself

29.  13.  that  he  may  e.  thee  to-day  for  a  people

1  Sam.  1.23.  only  the  L.  e.  his  word,  2  Sam.  7.25.

2  Sam.  7.  12.  1  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  1  will

e.  hiskingdom,  13. 1  Chr.  17-  11. 1  22.  10. 1  28.  7
1  Kings 7.  +  21.  he  setup  and  called  the  name  of  th6
right  pillar,  he  shall  e.  2  Chron.  3.  +  17
9.  5.  I  will  e.  the  throne  of  thy  kingdom

15.4.  tosetuphis  son  after  him,  and  toe. Jerusalem

1  Chron.  17.  12.  and  1  will  s.  his  throne  for  ever

18.  3.  as  he  went  to  y.  his  dominion  by  Euphrates
29.  + 18.  O  Lord  God,  s.  their  heart  unto  thee

2  Chron.  7 .  18.  then  will  I  s.  throne  of  thy  kingdom

9.  8.  because  God  loved  Israel  toe.  them  for  ever
Esth.  9.  21.  to  s.  among  them  the  days  of  Purim
Job  36.  7.  yea  he  doth  e.  them  forever,  are  exalted
Psal.  7.  9.  but  e.  the  just  l|  48. 8.  God  will  e.  it

10.  +  17.  thou  wilt  e.  the  heart  of  the  humble
87.  5.  and  the  Highest  himself  shall  e.  her

89.  2.  thy  faith fdlness  shalt  thou  e.  in  the  heavens
4.  thy  seed  will  I  e.  for  ever,  and  build  thy  throne

137


EST


ET  E


EYE


Psal.  90. 17.  e.  thou  the  work  of  our  hands,  e.  thou  it
99. 4.  thou  dost  e.  equity,  thou  executest  judgment
i  19. 38.  s.  thy  word  to  thy  servant,  who  is  devoted
Prov.  15.  25.  he  will  e.  the  border  of  the  widow
Jsa.  9.  7.  to  e.  it  with  judgment  and  with  justice
49.  8.  give  thee  for  a  covenant  to  e.  the  earth
62.7.  till  he  e.  and  make  Jerusalem  a  praise
Jer.  33.  2.  the  lord  that  formed  it,  to  e.  it
Ezek.  16.  60.  I  will  e.  an  everlasting  covenant
Van.  6.  7.  have  consulted  to  e.  a  royal  statute

8.  O  king,  e.  the  decree,  and  sign  the  writing

11.  14.  shall  exalt  themselves  to  e.  the  vision
Amos5.l5.  love  the  good, and  e.  judgment  in  the  gate
Pom.  3.  31.  do  we  make  void  t  yea,  we  e.  the  law

10.  3.  going  about  to  e.  their  own  righteousness
16. 25.  now  to  him  that  is  of  power  to  s.  you
1  Thess.  3. 2.  we  sent  Timothy  our  brother  to  e.  you

1 3.  to  the  end  he  may  s.  your  hearts  unblameable
■2  Thess.  2. 17.  s.  you  in  every  good  word  and  work

3. 3.  the  Lord  shall  s.  you,  and  keep  you  from  evil
Heb.  10.9.  takes  away  first,  that  he  may  e.  second
Jam.  5.  8.  be  ye  also  patient,  s.  your  hearts

1  Pet.  5.  10.  the  God  of  all  grace  s.  settle  you

ESTABLISHED,  STABLISHED.

Gen.  9. 17*  the  token  of  the  covenant  which  I  have  e.
41.  32.  it  is  because  the  thing  is  e.  by  God
prod.  6. 4.  I  have  also  e.  my  covenant  with  them

15.  17.  in  the  sanctuary  which  thy  hands  have  e.
Vent.  32.  6.  hath  he  not  made  thee,  and  e.  thee  ?

3  Sam.  3.  20.«Samuel  was  e.  a  prophet  of  the  Lord
13. 13.  now  would  the  Lord  have  e.  thy  kingdom
20. 31.  thou  shalt  not  be  e.  nor  thy  kingdom

2  Sam.  5. 12.  David  perceived  that  the  L.  had  e.  him

7. 26.  Lord  is  God  over  Israel,  let  the  nouse  of  thy

servant  David  be  e.  for  ever,  1  Chron.  17.  24.
1  Kings  2. 12.  and  his  kingdom  was  e.  greatly

24.  as  the  Lord  livetli,  which  hath  e.  me
46.  the  kingdom  was  e.  in  the  hand  of  Solomon

1  Chron.  17.  23.  let  the  thing  be  e.  for  ever,  24.

2  Chron.  1.9.  now,  O  Lord  God,  let  thy  promise  be  e.

12.  1.  when  Kehoboam  had  e.  the  kingdom
17.  5  the  Lord  s.  the  kingdom  in  his  hand

25.  3.  when  the  kingdom  was^.  to  him,  he  slew
27.  t  6.  Jotham  e.  his  ways  before  the  Lord
30.  5.  so  they  e.  a  decree  to  keep  the  passover
Job  21.  8.  their  seed  is  e.  in  their  sight  with  them
38. 1 10.  when  I  e.  my  decree  upon  it,  and  set  bars
Psal.  24.  2.  for  he  hath  e.  it  upon  the  floods
37. 1 23.  the  steps  of  a  good  man  are  e.  by  the  Lord
40.  2.  he  set  my  feet  on  a  rock,  and  e.  my  goings
78.  5.  he  e.  a  testimony  in  Jacob,  and  law  in  Israel
69-  the  eartli  he  hath  e.  for  ever,  119.  90.

93.  1.  the  world  is  e.  |l  2..  thy  throne  is  e.  of  old

101.  f  7-  he  that  telleth  lies  shall  not  be  e.

111.  t  8.  his  commandments  are  s.  for  ever

112.  8.  his  heart  is  e.  he  shall  not  be  afraid
140.  11.  let  not  an  evil  speaker  be  e.  in  the  earth
148.  6.  he  hath  s.  the  waters  for  ever  and  ever

Prov. 3.19.  Lord,  by  understand,  hath  e.  the  heavens

4. 26.  ponder  thy  paths,  and  let  all  thy  ways  be  e.
f?.  28.  when  he  e.  the  clouds  above,  when  he

12.  3.  man  shall  not  be  e.  by  wickedness

15.  22.  in  multitude  of  counsellors  they  are  e.

16. 12.  for  the  throne  is  e.  by  righteousness

20. 18.  every  purpose  is  e.  by  counsel,  with  advice

24. 3.  and  by  understanding  is  an  house  e.

30.  4.  who  hath  e.  all  the  ends  of  the  earth

Isa.  7.  9.  if  ye  will  not  believe,  ye  shall  not  be  e.

16.  5.  and  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  e.

45. 18.  God  that  made  the-  earth,  he  hath  e.  it
Jer.  10. 12.  he  e.  the  world  by  his  wisdom,  51. 15.
Van.  4.  36. 1  was  e.  in  my  kingdom,  and  majesty
Hah.  1. 12. 0  mighty  God,  thou  e.  them  for  correct,
ik/ar. 18. 16.  mouth  of  two  witnesses  every  word  be  e.
Pets  16.  5.  so  were  the  churches  e.  in  the  faith
Pom.  1.  11.  impart  some  gift,  to  end  you  may  bee.
Col.  2.  7-  built  up  in  him,  and.r.  in  the  faith
Heb.  8.  6.  which  was  e.  upon  better  promises

13.  9.  it  is  good  that  the  heart  be  e.  with  grace
2  Pet.  1. 12.  though  ye  be  e.  in  the  present  truth

Shall  be  ESTABLISHED.

I.'jv.  25.  30.  house  shall  be  e.  for  ever,  2  .Sam.  7. 16.
Vent.  19. 15.  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses
shall  the  matter  be  e.  2  Cor.  13.  l.

1  Sam.  24.  20.  the  kingdom  shall  bee.  in  thine  hand

2  Sam.  7.  16.  thine  house,  thy  kingdom,  and  thy

throne,  shall  be  e.  for  ever,  1  Kings  2.  45.

1  Chr.  17.  14. 1  will  settle  him  in  my  kingdom,  and

his  throne  shall  bee.  for  evermore,  Psal.  89.  37.

2  Chr.  20.  20.  believe  in  Lord  God,  so  shall  ye  bee.
Job  22.  28.  thou  shalt  decree,  and  it  shall  be  e.

Psal.  89.  21.  with  whom  my  hand  shall  be  e.

96.  10.  the  world  shall  be  e.  before  thee

102.  28.  and  their  seed  shall  be  e.  before  thee
Prov.  12.  19.  the  lip  of  truth  shall  be  e.  for  ever

16.  3.  commit  thy  works, and  thy  thoughts  shall  bee.
25.  5.  his  throne  shall  be  e.  for  ever,  29. 14.

Isa.  2.  2.  mountain  of  the  Lord’s  house  shall  he  e.
16.  5.  and  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  be  e.

32.  f  8.  and  by  liberal  things  shall  lie  be  e.

54.  14.  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  be  e.

Jer.  30. 20.  their  congregation  shall  be  e.  before  me
Mic.  4.  1.  mountain  of  nouse  of  the  Lord  shall  be  e.
Zech.  5.  11.  to  build  it  an  house,  and  it  shall  bee.
ESTABLISHETH.

Num.  30.  14.  he  e.  all  her  vows,  or  all  her  bonds
Prov.  29.  4.  the  king  by  judgment  e.  the  land
Dan.  6. 15.  no  decree  the  king  e.  may  be  changed
Hab.  2.  12.  woe  to  him  that  e.  a  city  by  iniquity
2  Cor.  1. 31.  now  he  which  e.  us  with  you  in  Christ
ESTABLISHMENT.

2  Chron.  32. 1.  after  the  e.  Sennacherib  came
Psal.  89.  + 14.  j  ustice  and  j  udgment  are  the  e.  of  thy
throne,  mercy  and  truth  before  thee,  97.  t  2.
ESTATE,  STATE.

Gen.  43.  7-  the  man  asked  us  straitlv  of  our  s.

1  Chron.  17. 17-  to  the  e.  of  a  man  of  high  degree

2  Chron.  24.  13.  they  set  the  house  of  God  in  his  s.
Esth.  1.  7.  according  to  the  s.  of  the  king

19.  let  the  king  give  her  royal  e.  to  another

2.  18.  gave  gifts  according  to  the  s.  of  the  king
Job  22.  f  20.  whereas  our  e  is  not  cut  down
138


Psal,  39. 5.  every  man  at  his  best  s.  altogether  vanity
136.  23.  who  remembered  us  in  our  low  e.

Prov.  27.  23.  be  diligent  to  know  the  .c.  of  thy  flocks
28.  2.  by  a  man  of  knowledge  f.  shall  be  prolonged
Ecel.  1. 16.  saying,  lo,  I  am  come  to  great  e.

3.  18.  concerning  the  e.  of  the  sons  of  men
Isa.  22.  19.  from  thy  s.  shall  he  pull  thee  down
Ezek.  16.  55.  Samaria  shall  return  to  her  former  e.
Dan.  11. 7-  one  shall  stand  up  in  his  e.  21.

20.  then  shall  stand  up  in  his  s.  a  raiser  of  taxes
38.  but  in  his  e .  shall  he  honour  the  God  of  forces
Mat.  12.  45.  seven  other  spirits  enter,  the  last  s.  of
that  man  is  worse  than  the  first,  Luke  11.  26.
I.vke  1. 48.  hath  regarded  low  e.  of  his  handmaiden
Acts  22. 5.  all  e.  or  the  elders  doth  bear  witness
Pom.  12.  16.  but  condescend  to  men  of  low  e.

Phil.  2. 19. 1  may  be  of  comfort  when  1  know  your  s.
20.  like-minded,  will  naturally  care  for  your  s.

4.  11.  learned  in  whatsoever  .9.  I  am  to  be  content
Col.  4.  7.  all  my  s.  shall  Tychicus  declare  to  you

8.  whom  I  sent,  that  he  might  know  your  e.

Jude  6.  the  angels  which  kept  not  their  first  e.

ESTAl  ES.

Ezek.  36.  11.  I  will  settle  you  after  your  old  e.
Mark  6.  21.  Herod  made  a  supper  to  his  chief  e.
ESTEEM.

Job  36. 19.  will  he  e.  thy  riches  ?  no  not  gold
Psal.  119.  128.  I  e.  all  thy  precepts  to  be  right
Isa.  53.  4.  we  did  e.  him  smitten  of  God,  afflicted
Phil.  2. 3.  let  each  e.  other  better  than  themselves
1  Thess.  5. 13.  to  e.  them  highly  for  their  work’s  sake
1  Pet.  2.  1 17.  e.  all  men,  love  the  brotherhood
ESTEEMED.

Dent.  32.  15.  and  lightly  e.  the  rock  of  his  salvation
1  Sam.  2.  30.  they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  e.
18.  23.  seeing  I  am  a  poor  man  and  lightly  e.

Job  23.  12.  I  Have  e.  the  words  of  his  mouth  more
Prov.  17.  28.  shutteth  his  lips  is  e.  a  man  of  under¬
standing

Isa.  29.16. your  turning  shall  be  e.  as  the  potters’  clay

17.  the  fruitful  field  shall  be  e.  as  a  forest
53.  3.  he  was  despised,  and  we  e.  him  not
Lam.  4.  2.  how  are  they  e.  as  earthen  pitchers
Luke  16. 15.  highly  e.  among  men,  abominable  to  G.

1  Cor.  6.  4.  set  them  to  judge  who  are  least  e.

ESTEEMETH.

Job  41. 27.  he  e.  iron  as  straw,  brass  as  rotten  wood
Rom.  14.  5.  one  e.  one  day  above  another ;  another

e.  every  day  alike

14.  but  to  him  that  e.  any  thing  to  be  unclean
ESTEEMING.

Heb.  11. 26.  e.  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches
ESTIMATE.

Lev.  27.  14.  the  priest  shall  e.  it,  whether  it  be  good
or  bad,  as  the  priest  shall  e.  it,  so  shall  it  stand
ESTIMATION.

Lev.  5. 15.  bring  a  ram  with  thy  e.  by  shekels  of  silver
27.  2.  the  persons  shall  be  for  the  Lord,  by  thy  e.

3.  thy  e.  shall  be  of  the  male  from  20  years,  5.
This  word  found  often  in  this  Chapter.

Num.  18. 16.  from  a  month  old,  according  to  thy  e.

2  Kings  12.  t  4.  the  money  of  the  souls  of  his  e.

ESTIMATIONS.

Lev.  27.  25.  all  thy  e.  according  to  the  shekel
ESTRANGED.

Job  19.  13.  mine  acquaintance  are  e.  from  me
Psal.  58.  3.  the  wicked  are  e.  from  the  womb
78.  30.  they  were  not  e.  from  their  lust
Jer.  19. 4.  because  they  have  e.  this  place,  and  burnt
Ezek.  14. 5.  because  they  are  all  e.  from  me  thro’  idols
ETERNAL.

The  words  eternal,  everlasting,  for  ever,  are  some-
•  times  taken  for  a  long  time,  and  are  riot  always
to  be  understood  strictly  ;  for  example ,  it  is  said.
Gen.  17.  8.  I  will  give  to  thee  and  to  thy  seed
the  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting  possession.
And  in  chap.  13.  15.  I  will  give  it  to  thee,  and
to  thy  seed  lor  ever ;  that  is,  for  a  long  space  of
time.  And  in  Gen.  49.  26.  we  find  everlasting
hills,  so  called  to  denote  their  antiquity,  stability,
and  duration;  and  this  expression  is  used  to
shew  the  long  continuance  and  durableness  of
Joseph’s  blessing.  God  promises  a  throne  to
David,  an  eternal  kingdom,  a  posterity  that  will
never  be  extinguished ;  that  is,  that  his  and  his
sons'  empire  will  be  of  a  very  long  duration,  2
Sam.  7-  16.  1  Chron.  17.  14.  that  it  will  be  even
eternal,  if  hereby  the  kingdom,  of  the  Messiah
be  understood.  Thus,  Thou  shalt  be  our  guide
from  this  time  forth  even  for  ever,  that  is,
during  our  whole  life.  And  in  many  other  places
of  Scripture,  and  in  particular,  when  the  word
for  ever  is  applied  to  the  Jewish  rites  and  pri¬
vileges,  it  commonly  signifies  no  more  than
during  the  standing  of  that  commonwealth,  or
until  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  Exod.  12.  14,

17.  Num.  10.  8.

Eternity,  when  God  is  the  subject  in  question,
always  denotes  a  real  eternity.  Exod.  15.  18.
The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  Deut.
32.  40.  1  lift  up  my  hand  to  heaven,  and  say.
I  live  for  ever.  Deut.  33.  27.  The  eternal  God
is  thy  refuge.  The  blessed  will  enjoy  eternal
life  and  happiness ,  and  reprobates  be  cast  into
eternal  fire  ;  the  happiness  of  the  one ,  and  misery
of  the  other,  will  never  have  an  end.  Mat.  25.
46.  The  Son  of  God  is  eternal  in  the  highest
sense,  without  beginning K  without  end,  1  Tim.
1.  17.  He  is  called  a  priest  for  ever  after  the
order  of  Melchisedek,  Psal.  110.  4.  Hi's  gospel,
the  everlasting  gospel.  Rev.  14.  6.  The  same
gospel  that  was  from  the  beginning,  and  besides
which,  there  neither  is,  nor  ever  shall  be,  any
other  doctrine  of  salvation  revealed,  while  the
world  endureth.  _  The  redemption  which  he  has
procured  for  us,  is  an  eternal  redemption,  Heb.

9.  12.  Its  virtue  is  of  perpetual  continuance;
such  as  are  redeemed  from  the  guilt  and  punish¬
ment  of  sin,  are  so  for  ever.  The  Covenant,  or
New  Testament,  which  lie  confirmed  by  his  blood,
is  an  everlasting  covenant,  Heb.  13.  20.  It  is
a  covenant  never  to  be  changed,  as  the  former


was:  Everlasting  life  is  promised  in  it ;  and  ii
of  eternal  efficacy.  The  glory  and  reward  wh  f
he  hath  merited  for  us,  is  an  eternal  weight  '
glory,  2  Cor.  4.  17.  Everlasting  habitations,
tents,  Luke  16.  9.  are  the  habitations  appoint
by  God  in  heaven  for  the  predestinated ,  th  I
chosen  to  salvation  through  sanctification  of  i[
Spirit,  and  belief  of  the  truth.

Deut.  33. 27.  the  e.  G.  is  thy  refuge,  and  underne;
Isa.  60. 15.  I  will  make  thee  an  e.  excellency
Mark  3.  29.  but  is  in  danger  of  e.  damnation
Rom.  1.  20.  that  are  made,  even  his  e.  power  an
2  Cor.  4.  17.  worketh  for  us  an  e.  weight  of  glory  j

18.  but  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  e.  f

5.  1.  we  have  an  house  e.  in  the  heavens
Eph.  3.  11.  according  to  the  e.  purpose  in  Christ

1  Tim.  1.  17.  unto  the  Kinge.  be  honour  and  gU,!

2  Tim.  2. 10.  they  may  obtain  salvation  with  e.  git  ■
Heb.  5.  9.  he  became  the  author  of  e.  salvation

6.  2.  the  doctrine  of  baptisms,  and  of  e.  judgmei

9.  12.  having  obtained  e.  redemption  for  us

14.  who  thro’  t.he  e.  Spirit  offered  himself  to  0

15.  might  receive  the  promise  of  e.  inheritance]
1  Pet.  5. 10.  G.  called  us  unto  his  e.  glory  by  C h ,  .1
Jude  7.  an  example,  suffering  the  vengeance  ofe.  !>

ETERNAL  life.

Mat.  19. 16.  what  shall  I  do  that  I  may  have  e.  If

25.  46.  but  the  righteous  shall  go  into  life  e.
Mark  10.  17.  good  Master,  what  shall  1  do,  tha

may  inherit  e.  life?  Luke  10.  25.  |  18.
30.  he  shall  receive  in  the  world  to  come  e.  lift
John  3.  15.  believeth  in  him  should  have  e.  life

4.  36.  and  gathereth  fruit  unto  life  e.

5.  39.  search  scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  have  e.

6.  54.  whoso  drinketh  my  blood  hath  e.  life
68.  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  thou  hast  words  of  e.  1

10.  28.  I  give  unto  my  sheep  e.  life  never  peris!

12.  25.  that  hateth  his  life,  shall  keep  it  to  e.  h
17.  2.  he  should  give  e.  life  to  as  many  as  given  li

3.  this  is  life  e.  that  they  might  know  thee  and  Sc
Acts  13. 48.  many  as  were  ordained  to  e.  life  believ
Rom.  2. 7-  to  them  who  seek  for  glory  e.  life

5.  21.  even  so  might  grace  reign  to  e.  life  by  Je;

6.  23.  but  the  gift’ of  G.  is  e.  life  thro’  Jesus  Chr
1  Tim.  6. 12.  0  man  of  God,  lay  hold  on  e.  life,
Tit.  1.  2.  in  hope  of  e.  life,  which  God  promised!
3.  7-  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  e.  t.

1  John  1.  2.  e.  life  which  was  with  the  Father
2.  25.  this  is  the  promise  he  promised,  even  e.  i
3. 15.  no  murderer  hath  e.  life  abiding  in  him
5.  11.  the  record  that  God  hath  given  to  us  e.  li
13.  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  e.  life

20.  this  is  the  true  God,  and  e.  life

Jude  21.  looking  for  the  mercy  of  Lord  unto  e.  It'
ETERN ITY.

1  Sam.  15.  +  29-  also  the  e.  of  Israel  will  not  lie
Isa.  57. 15.  the  high  and  lofty  One  that  inhabited
Jer.  10.  +  10.  the  Lord  is  the  true  God,  King  of  1.
Mic.  5.  t  2.  whose  goings  have  been  from  days  0:

EVANGELIST.

Acts  21.8.  we  entered  into  the  house  of  Philip  the

2  Tim.  4. 5.  but  watch  thou,  do  the  work  of  an  e.

EVANGELISTS.

Eph.  4.  11.  he  gave  some  apostles  and  some  e.  ,
EVEN.

Gen.  19. 1.  there  came  two  angels  to  Sodom  at  e.
Exod.  12.  18.  on  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  at  >

16.  6.  Moses  said,  ate.  then  shall  ye  know  that  1,<
12.  ate.  eat  flesh  ||  13.  ate.  the  quails  came
18. 14.  the  people  stand  by  thee  from  morning  t(|
30.  8.  and  when  Aaron  lighteth  the  lamps  at  e. :
Lev.  11. 24.  shall  be  unclean  until  e.  25, 27,  28,
39,  40. 1 14. 46.  1 15.  5, 6, 7,  1 17- 13. 1  j

6.  1  Num.  19.  7,  8,  10,  21,  22.

23.  5.  the  fourteenth  day  of  first  month,  at  e.  is

Lord’s  passover,  Num.  9.  3.  Deut.  16
Num.  9. 11.  the  14th  day  of  the  second  month  a

21 .  when  the  cloud  abode  from  e.  to  morning  j

19. 19.  bathe  himself  in  water,  shall  be  clean  at;

Deut.  28.67.  thou  shalt  say,  would  God  it  were*
Judg.  20.  23.  they  wept  before  the  Lord  till  e.

26.  they  wept  and  fasted  till  e.  2  Sam.  1.  12.  .
21.  2.  the  people  abode  till  e.  before  God,  and  wi

Ruth  2.  17.  so  Ruth  gleaned  in  the  field  until  e.

1  Sam  .  20.  5. 1  may  hide  myself  unto  third  day  a  ,
1  Kings  22.  35.  Ahab  died  at  e.  2  Chron.  18.  34.

1  Chr.  23.  30.  praise  the  Lord  every  morning  anti
Ezek.  12. 4.  thou  shalt  go  forth  at  e.  in  their  sight

7.  in  the  e.  I  digged  thro’  the  wal-l  with  my  hai

24.  18.  I  spake  to  people,  and  at  e.  my  wife  diei
Mat.  8.  16.  when  the  e.  was  come,  20.  8.  I  26.  ■

I  27.  57-  Mark  4.  35.  1 6.  47.  1 11.  19.  1 15. 1
Mark  1.  32.  at  e.  they  brought  to  him  the  disease

13.  35.  at  e.  at  midnight,  or  at  cock-crowing  |
John  6.  16.  when  e.  was  come,  disciples  wentdo

EVEN.

1  Kings  1. 48.  sit  on  my  throne,  mine  eyes  e.  seein:
Prov.  22. 19.  1  made  known  to  thee,  e.  to  thee
Isa.  44.  28.  e.  saying  to  Jerusal.  thou  shalt  be  bi
56.  5.  e.  to  them  will  I  give  a  name  bettei  than
Ezek.  20. 11.  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  e.  live

21. 13.  what  if  the  sword  contemn  e.  the  lod
Rom.  8. 23.  e.  we  ourselves  groan  within  oursek

1  Cor.  11.  14.  doth  note,  nature  itself  teach  you  '

15.  24.  deliver,  up  the  kingd.  to  God,  e.  the  Fat!

2  Cor.  1.  3.  blessed  be  God,  e.  the  Father  of  our  I

10. 13.  hath  distributed  a  measure  to  reach  e.  toy
Phil.  2. 8.  obedient  to  death,  e.  the  death  of  thecn!

EVEN.  .  j

Exod.  27.  5.  that  the  net  may  be  e.  to  midst  of  al
Job  31.  6.  let  me  be  weighed  in  an  e.  balance
Psal.  26.  12.  my  foot  standeth  in  an  e.  place
Cant.  4.  2.  teeth  like  a  flock  of  sheep  that  are  e.  sho»
Luke  19. 44.  enemies  shall  lay  thee  e.  with  the  grou
EVENING.

Gen.  8. 11.  and  the  dove  came  in  to  him  in  the  e:
30. 16.  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  e.

Exod.  12. 6.  assembly  of  Israel  shall  kill  it  in  the
Deut.  23.  11.  but  when  e.  cometh,  shall  wash  hin
Josh.  10. 26.  they  were  hanging  on  the  trees  until
Judg.  19. 9.  now  the  day  draweth  towards  e.

1  Sam.  14. 24.  cursed  be  the  man  that  eateth  till  <


EYE


EYE


EYE


7.  30.  17.  David  smote  them  to  e.  of  next  day
2.  14.  m  the  e.  she  went,  and  on  the  morrow
,  ,  1 4.  when  shall  1  rise,  and  the  e.  be  measured  ?
>  59.  6.  they  return  at  e.  they  make  a  noise
at  e.  let  them  return  and  make  a  noise
l  i.  in  the  e.  it  is  rut  down  and  withereth
[  2.3.  man  gocth  forth  to  his  labour  until  the  e,

*  7.  9- be  went  the  way  to  her  house  in  the  e.

;  11.  6.  in  the  e.  withhold  not  thine  hand

j  i.  4.  the  shadows  of  the  e.  are  stretched  out
3.3.  22.  the  hand  of  Lord  was  on  me  in  the  e.

I  but  the  cate  shall  not  be  shut  till  the  e.

,  2.7.  in  Ashkelon  shall  they  lie  down  in  the  e.
I  14. 23.  when  e.  whs  come,  he  was  there  alone
.  when  it  is  e.  ye  say,  it  will  be  fair  weather
)  14.  17-  in  the  e.  he  cometh  with  the  twelve
s  24.  29.  abide  with  us,  for  it  is  towards  e.
i  :o.  19.  the  same  day  at  e.  came  Jesus  and  stood
EVENING,  with  morning.

1.  5.  the  e.  and  morning  were  the  first  day
;  he  second  day  |l  13.  third  day  ||  19.  fourth  day

•  the  fifth  day  ||  31.  were  the  sixth  day

.  18. 13.  people  stood  by  Moses  from  morn .  to  e.
’  1.  shall  order  it  from  c.  to  morn.  Lev.  24.  3.

,  1.  17-  16.  Philistine  drew  near  morning  and  e.
ig>  17-  6.  brought  him  bread  morning  and  e.

.  .  16.  40.  to  offer  burnt-offerings  morning  and
e.  2  Chr.  2.  4.  1  13.  11.  |  31.  3.  Ezra  3.  3.

) ,  20.  they  are  destroyed  from  morning  to  e.

'  30.  t  5.  weeping  in  the  e.  joy  in  the  morning
1,  7.  e.  and  morning,  and  at  noon,  will  I  pray
.  .  the  out-goings  of  morning  and  e.  to  rejoice
8. 1 14.  to  2300  e.  morning  sanctuary  cleans.


he  vision  of  the  e,  and  morning  is  true


1  i»v.  *  *v*v<i*  '  ■ »  Viiv.  K  111s.11  tj  11  uc

,  28.  23.  persuading  them  from  morning
EVENING,  Adjective.

;  10  nr\  1:11  .


to  e.


\  gs  18.  29-  they  prophesied  till  the  e.  sacrifice
.  t  the  time  of  the  offering  of  the  e.  sacrifice
.  igs  16. 15.  on  great  altar  burn  e.  meat-offering
;  9. 4.  1  sat  astonished  until  the  e.  sacrifice
;  t  e.  sacrifice  1  arose  from  my  heaviness
.'  141.  2.  let  my  prayer  be  as  the  e.  sacrifice
.  9. 21.  touched  me  about  the  time,  of  e.  oblation

I.  8.  and  are  more  fierce  than  the  e.  wolves

i  3.  3.  her  judges  are  e.  wolves,  they  gnaw  not
:  14. 7.  come  to  pass,  that  at  e.  time  shall  be  light
EVENINGS.

1  12.  +6.  shall  kill  it  between  the  two  e.

;  9. 1 3.  keep  the  passover  between  the  two  e.
f  4.  offer  the  other  lamb  between  the  two  e.

'.  6.  and  a  wolf  of  the  e.  shall  spoil  them
EVENT.

:  2. 14.  one  e.  happeneth  to  them  all,  9.  3.

.  there  is  one  e.  to  the  righteous  and  wicked
EVEN -TIDE,  or  EVI?N  ING-TIDE.

‘24.  63.  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  at  the  e.

.  7-  6-  Joshua  fell  on  his  face  till  the  e.

. .  and  the  king  of  Ai  he  hanged  on  a  tree  till  e.

•  11.  2.  in  an  e.  David  walked  on  the  top
1  7. 14.  behold,  at  e.  trouble,  and  before

II.  11.  now  the  e.  was  come,  Jesus  went  out
:  J.  3.  they  put  them  in  hold,  for  it  was  now  e.

EVER.

• ).  13.  the  fire  shall  e.  be  burning  on  the  altar
;  22.  .30.  hast  ridden  on,  e.  since  I  was  thine
>  4.  33.  did  e.  people  hear  the  voice  of  God  ?

■  •  to  love  God,  and  to  walk  e.  in  his  ways

•  11.  25.  did  e.  fight  against  Israel  ?

■  gs  5.  1.  for  Hiram  was  e.  a  lover  of  David

1 7.  remember,  who  e.  perished,  being  innocent  ?

;  11-  those  that  trust,  let  them  e.  shout  for  joy
: .  thy  tender  mercies  have  been  e.  of  old
[  mine  eyes  are  e.  towards  Lord,  shall  pluck
16.  he  is  e.  merciful ,  and  lendeth,seed  blessed
E  my  transgressions  and  my  sin  is  e.  before  me

•  or  e.  thou  hadst  formed  earth,  Prov.  8.  23.

1 5.  he  will  e.  be  mindful  of  his  covenant

1 98.  thy  commandments  are  e,  with  me
:  6. 12.  or  e.  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me  like

•  o*  28.  because  he  will  not  e.  be  threshing  it
•k  n°t  one  of  the  stakes  shall  e.  be  removed

:  n  f;  °[  e-  tl'ey  ™e  at  the  bottom  of  the  den
!  n°t  been  e.  the  like  nor  any  more

'  21.  such  as  was  not,  no,  nor  e.  shall  be

■  15.  8.  to  desire  him  to  do  as  he  had  e.  done

■  15.  31 .  and  he  said,  son,  thou  art  e.  with  me

29.  a  man  told  me  all  things  that  e.  I  did,  39.

•  servant  abideth  not,  but  the  Son  abidetb  e.

:  .  all  that  e.  came  before  me  are  thieves

•  >i  tau&ht  in  the  synagogue  and  temple

-  JfVve’ or  e- he  come,  are  ready  to  kill  him

■  ~9.  tor  no  man  e.  vet  hated  his  own  flesh

’ '  k  .  1l*  ,a,nt*  so  shall  we  e-  be  with  the  Lord
‘*ut  e.  tollow  that  which  is  good

r  o7\f*  l®3™’11?’  and  never  able  to  come
l  {•  *4.  but  this  man,  because  he  continueth  e.
>eemg  «.  hveth  to  make  intercession  for  them
0.  to  God  our  Saviour  be  glory,  now  and  e.

See  Endureth.

;  .  For  EVER .

bee  Signification  on  Eternal.

*i  Ince  will  I  give  it  and  thy  seed  for  e.

"  y?  ,5  n)e  bear  the  blame/or  e.  44.  32.

•115.  this  is  my  name/ore.  and  mv- memorial
■  •  Keep  it  a  feast  by  an  ordinance  for  e.  1~.

;  m  ordinance  to  thee,  and  to  thy  sons  for  e.
ye  shall  see  them  again  no  more/;;-  e.

•  mat  the  people  may  believe  thee  for  e.

i  oni’e  his  ear,  and  he  shall  serve  him  for  e.


- it  for  e.

,l„t . .  *«*«  3'iitn  nui  ve  sold  for  e.  is  mine

1  l^„10k1SnSLla  be  established  for  e.  to  him
fy  shall  be  your  bondmen  for  e.

8.  tor  an  ordinance  for  e.  15. 15. 1  18.  8.

1 ■  ls  a  covenant  of  salt  for  e.  unto  thee
Tj'f  sa'-U  Amalek  shall  perish  for  e.
‘j/fblictEber,  he  also  shall  perish  fore.
it  rl:  V1.®  earth  which  God  giveth  thee  for  e.
jc  be  well  with  them  for  e.  12. 28.

-  tai/2a  be  ?n,  beap/or  e.  not  built  again
,  •  ake  an  awl,  he  shall  be  thy  servant  for  e.


Dent.  18. 5.  God  hath  chosen  him  and  his  sons for  e.

23.  6.  thou  shalt  not  seek  their  peace  for  e.

28. 46.  they  shall  be  upon  thee  fora  sign  fore.

29.  29.  those  things  revealed  belong  to  us  for  e.
Josh.  4. 7  •  these  stones  shall  be  for  a  memorial  for  e.

24.  that  ye  might  fear  the  Lord  your  God  for  e.

8.  28.  Joshua  burnt  A 1,  and  made  it  an  heap/c/e.
14.  9.  the  land  shall  be  thine  inheritance  for  e

1  Sam.  1.  22.  appear  before  the  Lord  and  abide  fore.
2. 30.  1  said,  thy  house  should  walk  before  me  fore.

32.  there  shall  not  be  an  old  man  in  house  fur  e.

35.  he  shall  walk  before  mine  Anointed  for  e.

3.  13.  that  L  will  judge  his  house  fore,  for  iniquity
14.  iniquity  of  Eli’s  house  shall  not  he  purged /.  e.

20.  15.  thou  shalt  not  cut  off  thy  kindness/;;-  e.
23.  the  Lord  be  between  thee  and  me  for  e.  42.

27.  12.  therefore  he  shall  be  my  servant  fore.

28.  2.  I  will  make  thee  keeper  of  mine  head  ./hr  e.

2  <Sa//;.2.26.  Abner  said,  shall  the  sword  devour/,  e.  '?
3.  28.  1  and  mykingd.  are  guiltless  before  L .fore.
7-  24.  thou  hast  confirmed  Israel  to  thee  far  e.

26.  and  let  thy  name  be  magnified  for  e.

29.  that  his  housemay'  continue  fore,  before  thee

1  I\  mgs  8. 13.  settled  place  for  thee  to  abide  in  for  e.

9.  3.  this  house  built,  to  put  my  name  there  for  e

10.  9.  because  the  Lord  loved  Israel/or  ^.therefore

11.  39.  I  will  afflict  David’s  seed,  but  not  for  e.

12.  7.  they  will  be  thy  servants  for  e.  2  Chr.  10.  7

2  Kings  5.  27-  leprosy  cleave  to  thee  and  seed  for  e

1  Chron.  17.  22.  didst  thou  make  thine  own  for  e.

23. 13.  he  and  sons  for  e.  to  burn  incense  before  L
28.  9.  it  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  off  for  e.

29. 18.  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  keep  this/yr  e.

2  Chron.  7.  16.  that  my  name  may  be  there  for  e

21. 7.  he  promised  to  give  a  light  to  his  sons  for  e.

30.8.  his  sanctuary  which  he  hath  sanctified/or  e

33.  4.  in  Jerusalem  shall  my  name  be  fore.

Neh.  13.  1.  not  come  into  congregation  of  God  fore
Job  4.  20.  they  perish  fore,  without  any  regarding/

14.20.  thou  prevailest/or  e.  ag.  him, and  he  passeth

19.  24.  graven  with  iron  pen  in  the  rock  for  e.

20. 7.  yet  he  shall  perish  for  e.  like  his  own  dung
23.  7.  so  should  I  be  delivered/;/ e.  from  mv  iud«m

36.  f.  yea,  he  doth  establish  them  for  e.  0

Psal.  9.  7.  but  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  e.

18.  the  expectation  of  poor  shall  not  perish  for  e.

12.  7.  O  Lord,  thou  shalt  preserve  them  for  e.

13.  1.  how  long  wilt  thou  forget  me,  OL.for  e.?
19.  9.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  clean,  enduring/br  e.

21.  6.  thou  hast  made  him  most  blessed  for  e.

23.  6.  1  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  e.

28.  9.  feed  them  also,  and  lift  them  up  for  e.

29.  10.  yea,  the  Lord  sitteth  king  for  e.

30.  12.  I  will  give  thanks  to  thee  for  e.  79.  13.

33. 11.  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  e.

37.  18.  and  their  inheritance  shall  be  fore.

28.  and  his  saints  are  preserved  for  e.

29.  the  righteous  shall  dwell  in  the  land  for  e.

41.  12.  thousettest  me  before  tby  face  for  e.

44. 8.  and  we  praise  thy  nam efor  e.  Selah

23.  awake,  O  Lord,  arise,  cast  us  not  off  for  e.

45.  2.  therefore  God  hath  blessed  thee  for  e.

49.8.  tor  the  redemption  of  their  soul  ceaseth/or  e.

11.  thought  is,  that  their  houses  continue  fore.

52.  5.  God  shall  likewise  destroy  thee  for  e.

9.  I  will  praise  thee  for  e.  I  will  waiton  thy  name
61.  4. 1  will  abide  in  thy  tabernacle  for  e.

7 .  he  shall  abide  before  God  for  e.  prepare  mercy

8. 1  will  sing  praise  unto  thy  name  for  e.

66.  7-  he  ruleth  by  his  power  for  e.

68.  16.  yea,  the  Lord  will  dwell  in  it  for  e.

72.  17.  his  name  shall  endure/;;- e.  be  continued

19.  and  blessed  be  his  glorious  name  for  e.

73.26.  but  God  ismy  strength  and  portion  for  e.
74.  1.0  God,  why  hast  thou  cast  us  off for  e.  ?

10.  shall  the  enemy  blaspheme  thy  name  for  e.  ?
19.  forget  not  the  congregation  of  thy  poor/or  e.

75. 9. 1  will  declare/;;-  e.  I  will  sing  praises  to  G.
77.  7-  will  L.  cast  off  for  e.  ?  favourable  no  more  ?

8.  is  mercy  clean  gone  for  e.  ?  doth  promise  fail  ?
79.  5.  how  long,  Lord,  wilt  thou  be  angry  ?  for  e.  ?
81.  15.  but  their  time  should  have  endured  for  e.
83.  17-  let  them  be  confounded  and  troubled  fore.
85.  5.  wilt  thou  be  angry  with  us  for  e.  ?

89.  1. 1  will  sing  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  for  e.

2.  I  have  said,  mercy  shall  be  built  up  fore.

29.  bis  seed  also  will  I  make  to  endure  for  e.  36.

46.  hpw  long  wilt  thou  hide  thyself  ?  for  e.?

92. 7-  it  is  that  they  shall  be  destroyed  for  e.

93.  5.  holiness  becometh  thine  house,  O  L .  for  e.
103.  9.  neither  will  he  keep  his  anger  for  e.

105.  8.  he  hath  remembered  his  covenant  for  e.

110.  4.  thou  art  a  priest  for  e.  after  the  order  of

Melchizedek,  Heh.  5.6. 1  6.  20.  |  7.  17,21.

111.  9.  he  hath  commanded  his  covenant/;;-  e.

112.  6.  suiely  he  shall  not  be  moved/;;-  e.

119. 89 .for  e.  O  Lord,  tny  word  is  settled  in  heaven
125.  2.  from  henceforth  even  for  e.  131 .  3.  Isa.  9. 7.

132. 14.  this  is  my  rest  for  e  ~.  here  will  I  dwell
146.  6.  the  Lord  who  keepeth  truth  for  e.

10.  the  Lord  shall  reign  for  e.  even  thy  God
Prov.  27.  24.  for  riches  are  not  for  e.

Eccl.  2.16.  no  remembr.  of  wise  more  than  fool/or  e.

3. 14.  whatsoever  God  doth,  it  shall  be  for  e.

9. 6.  nor  have  they  more  a  portion  fore,  in  any  thing
Isa.  26.  4.  trust  ye  in  Lord  for  e.  'for  in  L.  Jehovah

32. 17.  of  righteousn.  quietness, and  assurance  fore.

34.  10.  the  smoke  thereof  shall  go  up  for  e.

17.  shall  possess  it/ere.  from  generation  to  gener.

40.8.  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  e.

47.  7.  and  thou  saidst,  1  shall  be  a  lady  for  e.

51. 6.  but  my  salvation  shall  be  for  e.  and  righteous.
8.  but  my  righteousness  shall  be  for  e.  and  saivat.

57. 16.  will  not  contend  fore,  nor  be  always  wroth
59.  21.  and  my  words  shall  not  depart  for  e.

60.21.  thy  peopie  shall  inherit  the  land  for  e.

64.9.  be  not  wroth  nor  remember  iniquity/;;-  e.

65. 18.  be  glad  and  rejoice  for  e.  in  what  1  create
Jer.  3.  5.  will  he  reserve  his  anger  for  e.  ?

12.  I  am  merciful,  I  will  not  keep  anger  for  e.

17.  4.  ye  kindled  afire  which  shall  burn  for  e.

25.  Jerusalem  and  this  city  shall  remain/or  e.


Jer .  31. 40.  it  shall  not  be  plucked  up  any  more  for  e.
32.  39.  give  one  heart  that  they  may  fear  me  for  e.

35.  6.  Jonadab  said,  ye  shall  drink  no  wine  for  e.

19.  Jonadab  shall  not  want  a  man  before  me  for  0.

49. 33. 1  lazor  be  for  dragons  and  a  desolation  for  c.
50. 39.  shall  be  no  more  inhabited  for  e.  51.  26, 62.

Lam.  3.  31.  for  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off/;;-  e. ""

5. 19.  thou,  O  L.  remainest  for  e.  thy  throne

20.  wherefore  dost  thou  forget  us  for  e.  ?

Ezek.  37. 25.  they  and  their  childr.  s-ha.ll  dwell  for  e

and  my  servant  David  shall  be  their  prince  for  e
43.  7-  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  Israel  for  e.  9,
Dan.  2. 44.  but  his  kingdom  shall  stand  for  e.

4.  34. 1  praised  and  honoured  him  that  nveth/or  e.
6.26.  G.  of  Daniel,  he  is  living  G.and  s  ted  fast  fore

7. 18.  saints  of  most  High  shall  possess  kingd.  for  e.
12. 7-  and  sware  by  him  that  hveth  for  e.

Hos.  2. 19.  I  will  betroth  thee  untome  for  e.  in  right.
Joel  3. 20.  but  J  ud.  shall  dwell/cr  e.  and  Jerusalem
Amos  1. 11.  Edom  cast  off  pity  and  kept  wrath  fore.
Chad.  10.  Edom,  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  for  e.

Jonah  2.  6.  earth  with  her  bars  was  about  me  for  e.
Mic.  2.  9.  ye  have  taken  away  my  glory  for  e.

4.  7.  and  the  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  fore.

7. 18.  retaineth  not  anger  for  e.  delights  in  mercy
Mai.  1.  4.  against  whom  L.  hath  indignation  fore.
JSlat.  6. 13.  for  thine  is  the  power  and  slory  for  e

21.19.  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  for  e.  Mark  11. 14.  ’
Luke  1.  .33.  and  he  shall  reign  over  Jacob  for  e  '.

55.  as  he  spake  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  for  e.
John  8. 35.  servant  abideth  not  in  the  house  for  e

12.  34.  we  have  heard  that  Christ  abideth  for  e.

14. 16.  the  Comforter  may  abide  with  you  for  e.
Horn.  1.  25.  more  than  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  e

9.  5.  Christ,  who  is  overall,  God  blessed  for  e.

II.  36.  to  whom  be  glory  for  e.  amen,  16. 27.  ’

2  Cor.  9.  9.  bis  righteousness  remaineth  for  e.
Philem.  15.  that  thou  shouldest  receive  him/;r  e.
Iieh.  10. 12.  fore,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God

14.  he  perfected  for  e.  them  that  are  sanctified

13.  8.  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  to-day  and  for  e.

1  Pet.  1.23.  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth/v  e.

25.  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  e.

2  Pet.  2.  17-  are  clouds  carried  with  a  tempest,  to

whom  mist  of  darkness  is  reserved  for  e.  Jude  13.
2  John  2.  for  truth’s  sake  which  shall  be  with  us  for  e.
See  Establish,  Established.

Live  for  EVER.

Gen.  3.  22.  test  he  eat  of  tree  of  life  and  live  for  e.
Dent.  32. 40. 1  lift  up  my  hand  and  say,  I  live  for  e.

1  Kings  1. 31.  said,  letmy  lord  king  David  live  for  e.
Neh.  2. 3. 1  said  to  the  king,  let  the  king  live  for  e.
Ps.  22.  26.  praise  the  L.  your  hearts  shall  live  for  e.

49. 9.  that  he  should  still  live  for  e.  not  see
Dan.  2.  4.  O  king,  live  for  e.  3.  9.  |  5. 10.  |  6.  6,  21.
Zech.  1.5.  and  the  prophets, do  they  live  fore.?'
John  6. 51. 1  am  the  living  bread  from  heaven,  if  any

man  eat  of  this  bread  he  shall  live  fore  58
For  EVER  and  EVER.

Erod.  15. 18.  the  Lord  shall  reign  for  e.  and  e.

1  Chron.  16.  36.  blessed  be  God  for  e.  and  e.  people
said  amen,  and  praised  Lord,  29. 10.  Dan.  2.  20.
Neh.  9. 5.  bless  the  Lord  your  God  for  c.  and  e.
Psal.  9.  5.  thou  hast  put  out  their  name  for  e.  and  e.

10. 16.  the  Lord  is  King/;;-  e.  and  e.  the  heathen’

21.  4.  thou  gavest  him  length  of  days  for  e.  and  e.
45.  6.  thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for  e.  and  e.

17.  the  people  shall  praise  thee/;;-  e.  and  e.

48.  14.  for  this  God  is  our  God  for  e.  and  e.

52.  8.  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  e.  and  e.

III. 8.  they  stand  fast/or  e.  and  e.  are  done  in  truth
119. 44.  so  shall  I  keep  thy  law  for  e.  and  e.

145.  1.  and  I  will  bless  thy  name  for  e.  and  e.

2.  and  I  will  praise  thy  name  for  e.  ande.  21.
148.  6.  he  hath  also  stablished  them  for  e.  and  e.
Isa.  30. 8.  that  it  may  be  for  time  to  com  e,  fore. ande.

34. 10.  none  shall  pass  through  it  for  e.  and  e.

Jer.  7. 7.  dwell  in  the  land  that  I  gave  for  e.  ande.

25. 5.  L.  given  to  you  and  your  fathers  for  e.  and  e.
Dan.  7. 18.  shall  possess  the  kingdom  for  e.  ande.

12.  3.  they  shall  shine  as  the  stars  for  e.  and  e.
Mic.  4. 5.  will  walk  in  the  name  of  G.  for  e.  ande.
Gal.  1.  5.  of  God,  to  whom  be  glory  for  e.  and  e.

Phil.  4.  20. 1  Ttm.  1. 17.  2  Tim.  4. 18.  Heh.  13.  21.
Ileb.  1.8.  he  saith,  thy  throne,  O  God,  is  fore.  ande.
Lev.  4.  9.  to  him  that  sat  on  the  throne,  who  liveth
for  e.  and  e.  10.  |  5.  14.  1 10.  6.  |  15.  7.

5. 13.  and  honour  be  to  the  Lamb  for  e.  ande.

7-.  12.  and  power  be  unto  our  God  fore,  and  e.

11.  15.  ana  Christ  shall  reign  for  e.  and  e.

14.  11.  the  smoke  ascendetff/cr  e.  and  e.  19.  3.

20. 10.  shall  be  torment,  day  and  night  for  e.  ande.

22. 5.  and  they  shall  reign  for  e.  and  e.

Statute  for  EVER.

Exod.  27. 21.  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  e.  28.  43. 1  30.
21.  Lev.  6.  18. 1  10.  9. 1  17-  7- 1  23.  14,  21,  31,
41.  |  24.  3.  Num.  18.  23.
29.  28.  it  shall  be  by  a  statute  for  e.  Lev.  7.  .34,  36.
T  ^  .  .  110.  15.  116.  31.  Num.  18. 11,  19

Lev.  6. 22.  it  is  a  statute  for  e.  unto  the  Lord
Num.  19. 10.  to  the  stranger  for  a  statute  for  e.
EVERLASTING.

See  Signification  on  Eternal.

Gen.  17. 8.  land  of  Canaan  for  an  e.  possess.  48.  4.
21.  33.  the  e.  God,  Isa.  40.  28.  Rom.  16.  26.

49.  26.  to  the  utmost  bound  of  the  e.  hills
Exod.  40.  15.  an  e.  priesthood.  Num.  25.  13.

Lev.  16.  34.  be  an  e.  statute  H  Dent.  33. 27.  e.  arms
Ps.  24. 7-  be  lift  up,  ye  e.  doors,  9.  ||  100.5.  mercy  e

112.  6.  the  righteous  shall  be  in  e.  remembrance
119/142.  thy  righteousness  is  an  e.  righteous.  144.
139.  24.  search  me,  O  God,  and  lead  me  in  way  e

145. 13.  thv  kingdom  is  an  e.  kingdom,  dominion
thro’  aH  generat.  Dan.  4. 3.  |  7. 27.  2  Pet.  1.11.

Prov.  10.  25.  but  the  righteous  is  an  e.  foundation
Isa.  9.  6.  hit  name  shall  be  called,  the  e.  Father

26.  4.  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  e.  strength

33. 14.  who  among  usshall  dwell  with  e.  burnings  f

35. 10.  they  shall  come  with  e.  joy,  51.11.  |  61. 7.

45. 17.  with  e.  salvation  ||  54. 8.  with  e.  kindness

55. 13.  for  an  e.  si-rn  |l  56.  5.  an  e.  name,  63. 12.

60.  19.  the  Lord  shall  be  unto  Ihee  an  e.  light.  20.

139


EYE


E  VI


E  VI


Jer  10. 10.  God  is  an  e.  King  ||  20. 11.  e.  confusion
2d.  40.  1  will  bring  an  e.  reproach  upon  you
SI  S.  yea  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  e.  love


51.  +  26.  but  thou  shalt  be  e.  desolations


14.


Dan.  4.  34.  whose  dominion  is  an  e.  domin.  7
Hah.  3.  6.  the  e.  mountains  were  scattered
Mat.  18.  8.  to  be  cast  into  e.  fire,  25,  41.

25.  46.  these  shall  go  away  into  e.  punishment
Luke  16. 9.  they'  may  receive  you  into  e.  habitations
2  Thess.  1. 9.  who  shall  be  punish,  with  e.  destruc.

2.  16.  loved  us,  and  hath  given  us  e.  consolation
1  Tim.  6. 16.  to  whom  be  honour  and  power  e.

Jude  6.  the  angels  he  hath  reserved  in  e.  chains
Rev.  14.  6.  having  the  e.  gospel  to  preach  to  them
See  Covenant.

From  EVER  LAST  Os!  G.

Ps.  41. 13.  blessed  be  G.frome.  to  everlast.  106. 48.

90.  2.  even  from  e.  to  everlasting  thou  art  God
93'.  2.  thy  throne  is  of  old,  thou  art  from  e.

103. 17.  but  the  mercy  of  the  Ld.  is  from  e.  to  ever.
Prov.  8.23. 1  was  set  up  from  e.  or  ever  the  earth  was
Jsa.  63.  16.  O  Lord,  thy  name  is  from  e.

Mic.  5. 2.  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  e.

Hab  1.  12.  art  thou  not  fram  e.  O  Lord  my  God  ?
EVER  LASTING  life.

Daw.12.2.  awake,  some  to  e.  life,  some  to  ever  .shame
Mat.  19.  29.  and  shall  inherits,  life
Luke  18.  30.  and  in  the  world  to  come  e.  life
John  3. 16.  whoso  believeth  should  have#.  life,  36.

4.  14.  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  toe.  life
5.24.  he  thatheareth  my  words  hath  e.  life
6. 27.  labour  for  the  meat  which  endurethtoe.  life
40.  every  one  who  seeth  the  Son  may  have  e.  life
47.  he  that  believeth  on  me  hath  e.  life
12.  50.  1  know  that  his  commandment  is  life  e.
Acts  13.  46.  iudge  yourselves  unworthy  of  e.  life
Pom.  6.22.  being  free  from  sin.ye  have  the  end  e.  life
Gal.  6. 8.  soweth  to  Spirit,  shall  of  Spirit  reap  life  e.

1  Tim.l  16.  should  hereafter  believe  on  him  to  life  e.

EVERMORE.

Deut.  28. 29.  thou  shalt  be  oppressed  and  spoiled  e.

2  Sam.  22.  51.  he  sheweth  mercy  unto  David  e.

2  Kings  17 .  37.  ye  shall  observe  to  do  for  e.

1  Chr.  17.  14.  his  throne  shall  be  established  for  e.
Psal.  16. 11.  atrighthand  there  are  pleasures  fore.

18.  50.  sheweth  mercy  to  David  and  his  seed  fore
37.  27.  depart  from  evil,  do  good,  and  dwell  for  e.

77. 8.  is  mercy  gone  ?  doth  Ins  promise  fail  for  e.  ?

86.  12.  I  will  praise  and  glorify  thv  name  for  e.

89.  28.  my  mercy  will  I  keep  for  him  for  e.

52.  blessed  be  the  Lord  for  e.  amen  and  amen
92.  8.  but  thou,  Lord,  art  most  high  for  e.

105.  4.  seek  the  Lord,  seek  his  face  e.

106. 31.  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousn.  for  e.
113.  2.  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  I.ord  for  e.

115.  18.  but  we  will  bless  the  Lord  fore.

121. 8.  L.  preserve  thy  going  out  and  coming  in  e.

132. 12.  their  children  shall  sit  upon  throne  for  e.
133.  3.  Lord  commanded  the  blessing,  life  for  e.

Ezek.  37  .  26.  I  will  make  a  covenant  and  will  set
my  sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them  for  e.  28.
John  6.  34.  said  to  Jesus,  Lord,  e.  give  us  this  bread

2  Cor.  11. 31.  the  Father  of  our  Lord  blessed  for  e.

1  Thess.  5. 16.  rejoice  e.  pray  without  ceasing
lleb.  7.  +  25.  he  is  able  also  to  save  them  e.

28.  maketh  the  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for  e.

Rev.  1.  18.  was  dead,  behold,  1  am  alive  fore.
EVERY.

Gen.  6. 5.  e.  imagination  of  his  heart  was  evil
17.  10.  e.  man-child  shall  be  circumcised
iep.19.10.  nor  shalt  gather  e.  grape  of  thy  vineyard
Num.  5. 2.  that  they  put  out  of  the  camp  e.  leper
1  Sam.  3. 18.  Samuel  told  him  e.  whit,  hid  nothing
Psal.  119. 101. 1  have  refrained  from  e.  evil  way
104.  therefore  I  hate  e.  false  way,  128.

Prov.  2.  9-  then  shalt  thou  understand  e.  good  path

7. 12.  now  in  streets,  she  lieth  in  wait  at  e.  corner
14. 15. the  simple  believeth  e.word,  but  prudent  man

15.  3.  the  eyes  of  the  Ld.  are  in  e.  place,  beholding
20. 3.  cease  from  strife,  but  e.  fool  will  be  meddling
30.  5.  e.  word  of  God  is  pure,  he  is  a  shield

Isa.  45.  23.  e.  knee  shall  dow,  e.  tongue  shall  swear
Jer.  51. 29.  e.  purpose  of  the  I  A.  shall  be  performed
Ezek.  12. 23.  days  at  hand ,  and  the  effect  of  e.  vision
Dan.  11.  36.  and  magnify  himself  above  e.  god
Zech.  12. 12.  the  land  shall  mourn,  e.  family  apart
Mai.  1. 11.  in  e.  place  incense  be  offered  to  my  name
Mat.  4. 4.  but  by  e.  word  that  proceedeth  from  God

19.  3.  for  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife  for  e.  cause
Mark 1.  45.  they  came  to  him  from  e.  quarter
L.uke  4.  37.  the  fame  of  him  went  into  e.  place
6. 44.  for  e.  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit
Acts 2. 43.  and  fear  came  upon  e.  soul, wonders  done
15. 21.  Moses  hath  in  e.  city  them  that  preach  him
Rom.  14.1 1.  e.  knee  shall  bow,  e.  tongue  shall  confess

1  Cor.  4.  17.  as  I  teach  e.  where  in  e.  church

2  Cor.  10.  5.  bringing  into  captivity  e.  thought
Eph.  1.  21.  far  above  e.  name  named,  Phil.  2.  9

4.  16.  e.  joint  supplieth,  in  the  measure  of  e.  part
Phil  A.  21.  salute  e.  saint  in  Christ  Jesus

1  Tim.  4. 4.  for  e.  creature  of  God  is  good  if  received

2  Tim.  2. 21.  and  prepared  unto  e.  good  work
Heb.  12.  1.  let  us  lay  aside  e.  weight,  and  the  sin
Jam.  1.  17.  e.  good  and  perfectgirt  is  from  above
1  Pet.  2. 13.  submit  to  e.  ordinance  of  man  for  Lord
1  John  4. 1.  beloved,  believe  note,  spirit,  but  try  spi.

See  Beast,  Oity,  Day,  Man,  Morning,
Way,  Side,  Thing.

EVERY  one.

Gen.  4. 14.  that  e.  one  that  findeth  me  shall  slay  me
27-  29.  cursed  be  e.  one  that  curseth  thee,  blessed
Num.  16. 3.  all  congregation  are  holy,  e.  one  of  them
Deut.  4. 4.  ye  are  alive  t.  one  of  you  this  day

1  Kings  22. 28.  hearken,  O  people,  e.  one  of  you

2  Kings  18. 31.  and  then  eat  ye  e.  one  of  his  ng  tree
2  Chron.  30. 18.  saying,  the  good  Lord  pardon  e.  one
Ezra  3.  5.  of  e.  one  that  willingly  offered  an  offering

9.  4.  were  assembled  to  me  e.  one  that  trembled>
Job  40.11.  behold  e.  one  that  is  proud,  and  abase  him
12.  look  on  e.  one  that  is  proud,  and  bring  him  low
Psal.  29.  9.  in  temple  e.  one  doth  speak  of  nis  glory
32.  6.  for  this  shall  e.  owe  that  is  godly'  pray
140


Psal.  49. 1 14.  grave  an  habitation  for  e.  one  of  them
63.  11.  e.  one  that  sweareth  by  him  shall  glory
68.  30.  till  e.  one  submit  himself  with  silver
71.  18.  and  thy  power  to  e.  onet hat  is  to  come
115. 8.  so  is  e.  one  that  trusteth  in  them,  135.  18.

119. 160.  e.  one  of  thy  judgments  endureth  for  ever
128.  1.  blessed  is  e.  one  that  fear  the  Ixird
Eccl.  10.  3.  he  saith  to  e.  one  that  he  is  a  fool
Cant  A.  2.  whereof  e.  one  bear  twins,  6.  6.

Isa.  7. 22.  honey  shall  e.  one  eat  that  is  left  in  the  land
9.  17.  for  e.  one  is  an  hypocrite  and  an  evil  doer
34.  15.  vultures  be  gathered,  e.  one  with  her  mate
4.3.7.  even  e.  one  that  is  called  by  my  name
55.  1.  ho,  e.  one  that  thirsteth,  come  to  the  waters
Jer.  5.  6.  e.  one  that  goeth  out  shall  be  torn  in  pieces
8.  e.  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour’s  wife
6.  13.  for  e.one  is  given  to  covetousness
20. 7. 1  am  in  derision  daily,  e.  one  mocketh  me
25.  5.  turn  ye  now  e.  one  from  his  evil  way
Ezck.  7. 16.  all  of  them  mourning,  e.  one  for  iniquity
16. 25.  hast  opened  thy  feet  toe.  one  that  passed  by
22.6.  behold  e.  one  were  in  thee  to  shed  blood
Dan.  12. 1 .  e.  one  that  be  found  written  in  the  book
Joel  2. 7.  they  shall  march  e.  one  on  his  ways
Zech.  5.  3.  for  e.  one  that  stealeth  shall  be  cut  off
Mat.  7.8.  e.  one  that  asketh, receiveth,  Luke  11. 10.
Mark  7. 14.  said  to  them,  hearken  tome,  e.one  of  you
Luke\9.  26.  to  e.  one  which  hath,  shall  be  given
John  3.8.  so  is  e.  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit
18. 37.  e.  one  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my  voice
Acts  2.  38.  repent,  and  be  baptized,  e.  one  of  you
17.  27 .  though  he  be  not  far  from  e.  one  of  us
20.  31. 1  ceased  not  to  warn  e.  one  night  and  day
Rom.  14. 12.  e.  owe  shall  give  account  of himself  toG.

1  Cor.  7.  17.  as  the  Lord  hath  called  e.  owe,  so  walk
Gal.  3. 10.  cursed  is  e.  one  that  continueth  not

2  Tim.  2. 19.  e.  owe  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ
1  John 4.  7.  e.  one  that  loveth  is  born  of  God

Rev.  6. 11.  white  robes  were  given  to  e.  owe  of  them
EVERY  where.

1  Chr.  13.  2.  send  abroad  to  our  brethren  e.  where
Mark  16.  20.  they  went  forth  and  preached  e.  where
Luke  9.  6.  preaching  the  gospel  e.  where,  Acts  8. 4.
Acts  17.  30.  commanding  all  mene.  where  to  repent
28. 22.  we  know  it  is  e.  where  spoken  against
1  Cor.  4. 17.  as  1  teach  e.  where  in  every  church
Phil.  4 . 12.  e.  where,  and  in  all  things  instructed
1  Tim.  2.  8.  1  will  therefore  that  men  pray  e.  where
EVIDENCE.

Jer.  32. 10.  I  subscribed  the  e.  and  sealed  it
11.  so  1  took  the  e.  ||  12.  I  gave  the  e.  to  Baruch

14.  this  e.  both  which  is  sealed,  and  this  e.  open
16.  when  1  delivered  the  e.  of  the  purchase

Heb.  11. 1.  faith  is  the  e.  of  things  not  seen
EVIDENCES.

Jer.  32. 14.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  take  these  e.

44.  men  shall  buy  fields  for  money'  and  subscribe  e.
EVIDENT.

Job  6.  28.  look  upon  me,  for  it  is  e.  to  you  if  I  lie
Gal.  3. 11.  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  law  is  e.
Phil.  1.  28.  which  is  to  them  an  e.  token  of  perdition
Heb.  7.  14.  it  is  e.  our  Lord  sprang  out  of  Judah

15.  and  it  is  yet  far  more  e.  for  that  after  Melchis
EVIDENTLY.

Acts  10.  3.  Cornelius  saw  in  a  vision  e.  an  angel
Gal.  3. 1.  Jesus  Christ  hath  been  e.  set  forth  crucified

evil.

Evil  is  taken  for  sin  and  wickedness :  thus  it  is  said
of  the  wicked  kings  of  Israel,  that  they  did  evil
in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  they  transgressed  his
law,  1  Kings  16.  25,  30.  And  in  Eccl.  9.  3.  The
heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  full  of  evil.  This
is  criminal  or  moral  evil.  It  is  likewise  taken
for  afflictions  or  punishments  which  God  inflicts
upon  a  person  or  people.  Job  2.  10.  Shall  we  re¬
ceive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not
receive  evil  ?  Isa.  45. 7.  I  make  peace  and  create
evil.  Amos  3.  6.  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city,
and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ?  This  is  the  evil
of  punishment,  or  penal  evil.  It  is  also  taken
for  injuries  or  wrongs  done  by  one  man  to  another.
Prov.  17.  13.  Whoso  rewardeth  evil  for  good,
evil  shall  not  depart  from  his  house.  Mat.  5.
39.  But  1  say  unto  you  that  ye  resist  not  evil.
It  is  put  for  dangers  or  calamities,  Prov.  22.
3.  A  prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth
himself.  He  sees  public  calamities  approaching ,
and  uses  all  lawful  means  to  secure  himself.  It
is  taken  both  for  corporal  and  spiritual  evil,  of
sin  and  suffering.  Mat.  6.  13.  Deliver  us  from
evil.

It  is  said  Mat.  5.  37.  Let  your  communication  be
yea,  yea  ;  nay,  nay ;  for  whatsoever  is  more  than
these  cometh  of  evil ;  that  is,  I  fit  your  discourse
be  confirmed  with  a  bare  affirmation  or  denial  only  ;
for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  proceedeth  from
an  evil  habit,  or  some  such  principle ;  and  most
commonly  from  the  devil,  that  wicked  one,  who_  is
evil  in  the  highest  degree  ;  who  commits  evil  with¬
out  ceasing ;  and  who  practises  all  sorts  and  de¬
grees  of  it  by  himself  and  his  ministers.  _

The  evil  of  sin.  The  internal  malignity  of  sin,
abstracted  from  its  dreadful  effects,  renders  it
most  worthy  of  our  hatred  ;  for  it  is  in  its  own
nature  direct  enmity  against  God}  and  obscures
the  glory  of  all  his  attributes  :  It  is  the  violation
of  his  majesty,  who  is  the  universal  Sovereign  of
heaven  and  earth ;  a  contrariety  to  his  holiness,
which  shines  forth  in  his  law  ;  a  despising  his
goodness,  the  attractive  to  obedience  ;  the  contempt
of  his  omniscience,  which  sees  every  sin  when  it  is
committed ;  the  slighting  of  his  terrible  justice
and  power,  as  if  the  sinner  could  secure  himself
from  his  indignation  ;  a  denial  of  his  truth,  as  if
the  threatenings  were  a  vain  terror  to  scare  men
from  sin.  Add  to  this  the  dreadful  judgments
and  punishments  which  God  inflicts  upon  sinners
for  sin,  sometimes  in  this  life,  but  especially  the
torments  of  hell,  which  are  the  just  and  full  recom-
pence  of  sin.

Evil  eye.  Prov  23.  6.  Eat  not  the  bread  of  him
that  hath  an  evil  eye ;  that  is,  of  the  envious


or  covetous  man;  who  secretly  grutrgeth  thee
meat  which  he  sets  before  thee.  In  the  same  st .
this  phrase  is  used,  Mat.  20.  15.  Is  thine  eye
because  I  am  good  ?  Art  thou  envious,  bee  aw
dispense  my  grace  to  others  besides  thyself  ?
Evil  day'  or  days.  Prov.  15.  15.  All  the  day:
the  afflicted  are  evil ;  that  is,  they  are  ted
and  uncomfortable  ;  he  takes  no  content  in
time  or  thing.  Eccl.  12.  1.  When  the  evil  <1
come  not ;  that  is,  the  time  of  old  age,  whic
burdensome  and  calamitous  in  itself ;  and
more  grievous  and  more  terrible  when  it  is  lot  ■
with  the  sad  remembrance  of  a  man's  you;
follies  and  lusts,  and  with  the  dreadful  prosper'
approaching  death  and  judgment.  And  in  A
6.  3.  Ye  that  put  far  away  the  evil  day;
is,  ye  that  drive  all  thoughts  of  approaching  dt
and  judgment  out  of  your  heads  ;  or  else  flu
yourselves  as  if  it  would  never  come,  or  at  l
not  for  a  great  while  hence.

Gen.  19. 19.  lest  some  e.  take  me  and  I  die

28.  +8.  daughters  of  Canaan  e.  in  eyes  of  Isaai
44.  5.  ye  have  done  e.  in  so  doing

34.  lest  I  see  the  e.  that  shall  come  on  my  fati
50.  20.  as  for  you,  ye  thought  e.  against  me
Exod.  5.  23.  since  I  came,  he  hath  done  e.  to  pec
10.  10.  look  to  it,  for  e.  is  before  you

21.  +  8.  if  she  be  e.  in  the  eyes  of  her  master
32.  14.  the  Lord  repented  of  the  e.  he  thought  ti

to  his  people,  2  Sam.  24.  16.  1  Chron.  21.
Num.  11.  +  l.  it  was  e.  in  the  ears  of  the  Lord

22.  f  34.  if  it  be  e.  in  thine  eyes,  I  will  get  ba>.
Deut.  19.  20.  commit  no  more  such  e.  among  j!

29.  21.  the  L.  shall  separate  him  to  e.  out  of  tr  i

30.  15.  see,  I  have  set  before  thee  death  and  e.

31.  29.  ana  e.  will  befall  you  in  the  latter  day
Josh.  24.  15.  if  it  seem  e.  to  you  to  serve  the  L
Judg.  2. 15.  the  hand  of  the  L.  against  them  for!

9.  57.  the  e.  of  the  men  of  Shechem  did  Godrei-

20.  34.  but  they  knew  not  that  e.  was  near  the

1  Sam.  20.  7.  be  sure  that  e.  is  determined  by  h
9.  if  I  knew  certainly  that  e.  were  determine

24.  11.  nor  is  e.  nor  transgression  in  mine  han
17.  me  good,  whereas  1  have  rewarded  thee

25.  17.  for  e.  is  determined  against  our  master

26.  they  that  seek  e.  to  my  lord,  be  as  Nabal
28.  e.  hath  not  been  found  in  thee  all  thy  da, ;

26. 18.  what  have  I  done  ?  _  what  e.  is  in  my  hi :

29.  6.  1  have  not  found  e.  in  thee  since  thy  coi ;

2  Sam.  3.  39.  the  Lord  shall  reward  the  doero '
12. 11.  behold  1  will  raise  up  e.  against  thee

16.  +8.  behold  thee  in  thy  e.  thou  bloody'  mar

19.  7.  will  be  worse  than  all  the  e.  that  befell  1

1  Kings  14. 9.  but  hast  done  e.  above  all  before  1
16.  25.  Omri  wrought  e.  in  the  eyes  of  the  Loi
22.  23.  a  lying  spirit  in  thy  prophets,  and  the  1

hath  spoken  e.  concerning  thee,  2  Chron.  If  !

2  Kings  21.  2. 1  am  bringing  such  e.  on  Jerusal
22.  20.  thine  eyes  shall  not  see  all  e.  on  this  p  ■

1  Chron.  21.  +7.  it  was  e.  in  the  eyes  of  the  Loi

17.  it  is  I  that  have  sinned  and  done  e.  indee

2  Chron.  20. 9.  if  when  e.  cometh  on  us,  as  thes  e
Esth.  7.  7.  he  saw  that  there  was  e.  determine

8.  6.  ror  how  can  I  endure  to  see  e.  to  my  per
Job  1.  1.  one  that  feared  God  and  eschewed  3


34.

36.

40.

41.


5.  19.  yea  in  seven  there  shall  no  e.  touch  the
31.  29.  or  lift  up  myself  when  e.  found  him
42.  11.  they  comforted  him  over  all  the  e.  on
Psal.  5.  4.  neither  shall  e.  dwell  with  thee
7. 4.  if  I  have  rewarded  e.  to  him  that  was  at  p

15.  3.  nor  doth  e.  to  his  neighbour,  nor  taketl)

21.  11.  for  they  intended  e.  against  thee

23.  4.  I  will  fear  no  e.  for  thou  art  with  roe
21.  e.  shall  slay  wicked,  those  hate  righteo
4.  he  deviseth  mischief,  he  abhorreth  note
14.  let  them  be  put  to  shame  that  wish  me

.  1 1.  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  the  day  c
5.  mine  enemies  speak  e.  of  me  ||  +7.  devise  e
49.  5.  wherefore  should  I  fear  in  the  days  of  e

50. 19.  thou  givest  thy  mouth  to  e.  and  thy  ton:
54.  5.  he  shall  reward  e.  unto  mine  enemies
56.  5.  all  their  thoughts  are  against  me  for  1

90.  15.  and  the  years  wherein  we  have  seen  1

91.  10.  there  shall  no  e.  befall  thee,  Jer.  23.
97.  10.  ye  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  e.  _

109.  20.  and  of  them  that  speak  e.  against  mjt

140. 11.  e.  shall  hunt  violent  man  to  overthrow  1
Prov.  1. 16.  for  their  feet  run  toe.  Isa.  59. 7-

.33.  dwell  safely,  and  shall  be  quiet  from  feai
3.  29.  devise  not  e.  against  thy  neighbour
5.14. 1  was  almost  in  all  e.  in  midst  of  congress

11 . 19.  he  that  pursueth  e.  pursueth  it  tp  his  0 '

12.  20.  deceit  in  the  heart  of  them  that  imagid

21.  there  shall  no  e.  happen  to  the  just

13.  21.  e.  pursueth  sinners  ||  14.  22.  that  dev  f

16.  4.  yea,  even  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  e.

27.  an  ungodly  man  diggeth  up  e.  fire  in  his*

30.  moving  his  lips  he  brmgeth  e.  to  pass

19.  23.  he  snail  not  be  visited  with  e.

20.  8.  a  king  scattereth  away  all  e.  with  his  <s

22.  say  not  thou,  I  will  recompense  e.  wait  on 1

21.  10.  the  soul  of  the  wicked  desireth  e.

22.  3.  a  prudent  man  foreseeth  the  e.  27*  12.

24.  +  18.  lest  it  be  e.  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord
30.  32.  if  thou  hast  thought  e.  lay  thine  handf

Eccl.  2.  21.  this  also  is  vanity',  and  a  great#.,

5.  13.  there  is  a  sore  e.  which  I  have  seen,  lc

6.  l.an  e.  which  I  have  seen  under  the  sun,  <
9.  3.  this  is  an  e.  among  things  that  are  done  )

the  sun,  the  heart  of  sons  of  men  is  ful
11. 2.  thou  knowest  not  what  e.  shall  be  on  e*
Isa.  3.  9.  for  they  have  rewarded  e.  to  them-
13.  11.  1  will  punish  the  world  for  their  e.
33.  15.  and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  e.
45.  7.  I  make  peace  and  create  e.  I  do  these  1

47. 11.  therefore  shall  e.  come  upon  thee
56.  2.  and  keepeth  his  hand  from  doing  any  _
57. 1.  that  the  righteous  is  taken  away  from

Jer.  1.  14.  out  of  the  north  an  e.  break  forth,  ■
2.  3.  e.  shall  come  upon  them,  saith  the  Lor,
i  28.  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  time  of  e


E  V  I


E  V  I


EVI


4  4.  lest  my  fury  come  forth  like  tire,  because
of  the  e.  of  your  doings,  23.  2.  |  26.  3.14  4.  22.
2.  it  is  not  he,  neither  shall  e.  come  upon  us
(0.  children  of  Judah  have  done  e.  in  my  sight
1 12.  shall  not  save  them  in  the  time  of  e.

4.  I  will  not  hear  when  they  cry  for  their  e.

\ .  when  thou  doest  e.  then  thou  rcjoicest
.  hath  pronounced  e.  against  thee  for  e.  of  Israel
11.  will  cause  to  entreat  thee  well  in  time  of  e.
1".  thou  art  my  hope  in  the  day  of  e.

,  hrin"  on  them  the  day  ofc.  and  destroy  them
8.  if  that  nation  turn  from  their  e.  I  will  repent
of  the  e.  1  thought  to  do,  26.  3,  13, 19.  1  42. 10
behold,  I  frame  e.  against  you  and  devise
I  will  bring  all  e.  that  1  nave  pronounced


15.


10.  I  set  my  face  against  this  city  for  e.

32.  e.  shall  go  forth  from  nation  to  nation

3.  the  prophets  prophesied  of  war  and  of  e.

•  11.  1  think  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  e.

;  30.  the  children  of  Judah  have  only  done  e.

.  because  of  all  thee,  of  the  children  of  Israel

:  17.  I  will  bring  on  Judah  and  Jerusalem  all
*  e.  that  1  have  pronounced  against  them,  36.  31.

.  9.  these  men  have  donee,  in  all  they  have  done

.  11. 1  will  set  my  face  ag.  you  for  e.  and  cut  off
,  we  had  plenty,  and  w'ere  well,  and  saw  no  e.
,  I  will  watch  over  them  fore,  and  not  for  good
.  my  words  shall  stand  against  you  for  e.

•  2.  in  Ileshbon  they'  have  devised  e.  against  it

,  24.  I  will  render  to  Babylon  all  e.  done  in  /ion
.  wrote  all  the  e.  that  should  come  on  Babylon

[  .  7.  5.  an  e.  an  only  e.  behold  it  is  come

22.  ye  shall  be  comforted  concerning  the  e.

[  .  9.  14.  the  Lord  hath  watched  upon  the  e.

12. 13.  the  I.ord  your  God  repenteth  him  of  the  e.

'  <s  3. 6.  shall  there  be  e.  in  a  city,  L.  not  done  it  ?

4 «.  who  say,  e.  shall  not  overtake  nor  prevent  us

1  h  3. 10.  and  God  repented  of  the  e.  he  said,  4.  2.

1.1.12.  but  e.  came  down  from  Lord  to  Jerusalem


i .  woe  to  them  that  work  e.  upon  their  beds
behold,  against  this  family  do  I  devise  an  e.


l.  is  not  the  Lord  among  us  t  no  e.  can  come
? .  1. 11.  that  imagineth  cLagainst  the  Lord

<  .  1. 13.  thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  e.

<  .  he  may'  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  e.

3. 15.  thou  shalt  not  see  e.  any  more
'  .  7.  10.  let  none  of  you  imagine  e.  8.  17.
1.1.8.  ye  offer  the  lame  and  sick,  is  it  not  e.  ?

!  7.  when  ye  say,  every  one  thatdoeth  e.  is  good
)  .5.  11.  shall  say  all  manner  of  e.  against  you
whatsoever  is  more  than  these,  cometh  of  e.
but  l  say  unto  you,  tliatye  resistnotc.

<  4.  sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  e.  thereof
!  .  wherefore  think  ye  e.  in  your  hearts  ?

1  23.  Pilate  said  to  them,  why,  what  e.  hath  he
done  ?  A dark  15.  14.  Luke  23.  22.
1  k  9.  3J.  that  can  lightly  speak  e.  of  me

-  •’  6.  45.  an  evil  man  bringeth  forth  what  is  e.

r  3. 20.  every  one  thatdoeth  c.  hateth  the  light
:  9.  they  that  have  done  e.  to  the  resurrection  of

23.  if  I  have  spoken  e.  bear  witness  of  the  e.

-  9. 13.  how  much  e.  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints

•  9.  a  great  cry,  saying,  we  find  no  e.  in  this  man

■ ,  2. 9-  anguish  on  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  e.
9.  but  the  e.  which  I  would  not,  that  I  do
:  9.  abhor  that  which  is  e.  cleave  to  what  is  good
recompense  to  no  man  e.  for  e.  provide  things
be  not  overcome  of  e.  overcome  e.  with  good

•  4.  a  revenger  to  execute  wrath  on  him  doeth  e.

•  20.  it  is  e.  for  that  man  who  eateth  with  offence
19. 1  would  have  you  simple  concerning  e.

r.  13. 5.  charity  not  provoked,  thinketh  no  e.
ess.  5. 15.  see  that  none  render  e.  for  e.  to  any
abstain  from  all  appearance  of  e.
vi.  6. 10.  the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  e.

;  3. 2.  put  them  in  mind  to  speak  e.  of  no  man
.  3. 8.  the  tongue  is  an  unruly  e.  full  of  poison
t.  3. 9.  not  rendering  e.  for  e.  or  railing,  but  bless.
m  11.  he  that  doeth  e.  hath  not  seen  God
Bring,  Brought  EVIL.

.  23. 15.  the  Lord  shall  bring  on  you  all  e.  things

m.  15. 14.  lest  he  overtake  and  bring  e.  on  us

14.  that  the  Lord  might  bring  e.  upon  Absalom
ngs  14.  Ip.  1  will  bring  e.  on  the  house  of  Jerob.

20.  he  snid,  hast  thou  also  brought  e.  on  widow  ?

-  21.  behold,  I  will  bring  e.  upon  thee

:  not  bring  e.  in  his  days,  but  in  his  son’s  days
ngs  22. 16.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  behold,  I  will
bring  e.  upon  this  place,  2  Chron.  34.  24
r  ren  34  28.  nor  eyes  see  all  the  e.  I  will  bring

•  *  ct  wul.Arjwg  e.  and  not  call  back  his  word
1  u  V  1,  ytll  bring  e.  from  the  north

=•  behold,  I  will  bring  e.  upon  this  people
1  mi 0  *,  I  bring  e.  upon  them

•  ,  k  i  "bring  e.  upon  the  men  of  Anathoth

;  4- behold,  1  will  bring  e.  on  this  place,  15.

;  }  w‘d  bring  e.  even  year  of  their  visitation

Sv?  T  •?,’ 1  Pegm  to  bring  e.  on  the  city


1 a  t  •  *  bring  on  J  udah  e.  pronounced ,  36.  31
r  t  "11  hring  my  words  on  this  city  for  e.

J •  1  wdl  bring  e.  upon  all  flesh,  saith  the  Lor
See  Did,  Do.

.  .  EVIL,  joined  with  good.

■  *'  u1 „  Jree  °t  knowledge  of  good  and  e.  17
•  •  >e  shall  be  as  gods  knowing  good  and  e.  22.
t  ‘iWilnrutoFe  have  ye  rewarded  e.  for  good  ?

’  y; ;?9- had  no  knowledge  between  good  and  e.

20. 21.  he  hath  requited  me  e.  for  good
71 •  j9-  ’5.  can  I  discern  between  good  and  e.  ?
ngs  22. 8.  not  prophesy  g.  concern,  me,  but  e.  1£
h”’ 18-  D, never  prophesieth  good  to  me,  hut  t
,  .Vi  1,  not  Prophesy  good  to  me,  but  e.

•  iu.  shall  we  receive  good,  and  not  receive  e.  ?
'  r  in°  ,  f°r  good,  then  e.  came  unto  me
pg10:, ‘2-  they  rewarded  me  e.  for  good,  109. 5.
u.  that  render  e.  tor  good  are  my  adversaries
-  -ou  Invest  e.  more  than  good,  and  lying

eyes  of  L.  beholding  the  e.  and  the  goo
m  o!l0S0-  ,r.e'vardeth  e.  for  good,  evil  not  depart
do  him  good  and  not  e.  all  her  da v
V  tri-/,'\0e  *°  them  that  call  e.  good,  and  good  t
o-  maj  know  to  refuse  e.  and  choose  good,  16.


Jer.  18. 20.  shall  e.  be  recompensed  for  good?

42.  6.  whether  it  be  good  or  e.  we  will  obey  Lord
Lam.  3.  38.  of  most  I  ligh  proceedeth  not  e.  and  g.
Amos 5. 14.  seek  good  and  note,  that  ye  may  live
9. 4.  1  will  set  mine  eyes  011  them  fore,  not  for  good
M/c.  3.2.  who  hate  the  good  and  love  the  e.

Rom.  7.21.  when  1  would  do  good.  e.  present  with  me
9.  11.  not  born,  neither  having  done  good  ore.

Heb.  5.  14.  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  g.  and  e.
3  John  11.  follow  not  what  ise.  but  what  is  good
See  Gr  r: at.

From  EV 1 L.

Gen.  48.  16.  the  Angel  who  redeemed  me  from  all  e.
1  Sam.  25.  39.  and  hath  kept  his  servant  J'rome.

1  Chron.  4. 10.  that  thou  wouldest  keep  mo  from  e.
Job  28. 28.  and  to  depart  from  e.  is  understanding
Psal.  34. 13.  keep  thy  tongue  from  e.  lips  from  guile

14.  depart  from  e.  do  good,  37.27.  Prov.  3.7.

121.7.  the  Lord  shall  preserve  thee  from  all  e.
Prov.  4.27.  turn  not,  remove  thy  foot  frame.

13.  19.  it  is  abomination  to  fools  to  depar tfrom  e.

14.  16.  a  wise  man  feareth,  and  departed]  from  e.

16. 6.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  e.
17.  the  high-way  of  upright  is  to  depart frome.

Isa.  59.  15.  that  departeth /.  e.  makes  hims.  a  prey
Jer.  9. 3.  they  proceed/,  e.  to  evil,  and  know  not  me

23.  22.  then  they  should  have  turned  them  from

their  e.  way,  and  from  the  e.  of  their  doings
51.64.  Babylon  not  rise  from  e.  1  will  bring  on  her
Mat.  6.  13.  but  deliver  us  from  e.  Luke  11.  4.

John  17.  15.  but  that  thou  shouldestkeep  them/,  e.

2  These.  3. 3.  shall  stablish  you,  and  keep  you /.  e.

1  Pet.  3. 10.  let  him  refrain  his  tongue  frome.

Put  away  EVIL.

Dent.  13.  5.  put  the  e.  away  from  the  midst  of  thee

17.  7.  so  thou  shalt  put  the  e.  away  from  among

you,  19. 19.  1  21.  21. 1  22.  21,  24. 1  24.  7.
12 put  e.  away  from  Israel,  21.  22.  Judg.  20.  13.
Eccl.  11. 10.  and  put  array  e.  from  thy  flesh
La.  1. 16.  wash  ye,  put  away  the  e.  of  your  doings
E  V I L  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.

Num.  32.  13.  had  done  e.  in  sight  of  L.  Judg.  3. 12.
Judg.  2.  11.  Israel  did  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,
3.  7,  12.  I  4.  1.  1  6.  1.  1  10.  6.  |  13.  1.  1  Kings

11.6.  |  14.22.1  15.26,34.  1  16.7,30.122.52.
2  Kings  8.  18,  27.  |  1.3.  2,  11.  1  14.  24.  1  15.  9,

18,  24,  28.  1  17.  2.  |  21.  2,  20.  2  Chron.  22.  4.  |
33.  2,  22.  I  36.  5,  9,  12.

1  Sam.  15.  19.  thou  didst  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

1  Kings  16. 19.  in  doing  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

21 .  20.  sold  to  work  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

2  Kings  3.  2.  he  wrought  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lwrd
17.  17.  sold  themselves  to  do  e.  in  the  sight,  of  L.

21.  16.  to  sin,  in  doing  that  which  was  e.  in  the
,  r,,  sight  °f  the  Lord,  23.  .32,  37-  I  24.  9,  19.

1  Chron.  2.  .3.  Erwas  e.  in  the  sight  of  the  l.ord

2  Chr.  33.  6.  he  wrought  much  e.  in  the  sight  of  L.

_  This  EVIL.

Exod.  32. 12.  and  repent  of  this  e.  against  thy  people

1  Sam.  6.  9.  then  he  hath  done  us  this  great  e.

12.  19.  we  have  added  this  e.  to  ask  a  Ling

2  Sam.  13.  16.  this  e.  in  sending  me  away  is  greater

1  Kings  9.  9.  the  J.ord  brought  on  them  all  this  e.

2  Kings  6.  33.  he  said,  behold,  this  e.  is  of  the  Lord
2  Chron.  7.  22.  therefore  he  brought  this  e.  on  them
Kelt.  1.3. 18. did  not  our  God  bringall  thise.  onus?

27.  shall  we  hearken  to  you  to  do" all  this  great  e.  ?
J ib  2.  11.  when  Job's  three  friends  heard  of this  e.
Psal.  51.  4.  I  have  done  this  e.  in  thy  sight
Jer.  16.  10.  the  L.  pronounced  all  this  e.  against  us

32.  23.  therefore  thou  hast  caused  all  t.  e.  on  then
42.  like  as  1  have  brought  all  thise.  on  this  peoph

40.  2.  God  hath  pronounced  thise.  on  this  place
44.  7  •  why  commit  ye  this  great  e.  ag.  your  souls
23.  therefore  this  e.  is  happened  unto  you
Dan.  9. 13.  it  is  written,  all  this  e.  is  come  uponu<
Jonah  l.  7.  know  for  whose  cause  this  e.  is  on  us,  8
EVIL,  Adjective.

Gen.  6. 5.  thoughts  of  his  heart  were  only  e.  8.  21
37.  20.  some  e.  beast  hath  devoured  him,  33.

Exod.  5.  19.  Israel  did  see  that  they  were  in  e.  cast

33.  4.  people  heard  these  e.  tidings  they  mourned
Num.  14.  27.  how'  long  bear  this  e.  congregation  ?

20.  5.  to  bring  us  in  unto  this  e.  place
Deut.  1.  35.  not  one  of  this  e.  generat.  shall  see  lane
6.  t  22.  the  L.  shewed  signs,  great  and  e.  on  Egyp

22.  14.  and  bring  up  an  e  name  upon  her,  19.

28.  54.  his  eye  shall  be  e.  toward  nis  brother

56.  her  eye  shall  be  e.  toward  her  husband
1  Sam.  2.  23.  for  I  hear  of  your  e.  dealings
1  K  ings  5. 4.  there  is  neither  advers.  nor  e.  occurreni
Ezra  9. 13.  after  all  that  is  conn  on  us  for  e.  deeds
Psal.  41.8.  an  e.  disease  cleavetli  fast  unto  him
64.  5.  they  encourage  themselves  in  an  e.  matter
78.  49.  trouble,  by  sending  e.  angels  among  them

112. 7.  he  shall  not  be  afraid  of  e.  tidings, heart  fixed
140. 11.  let  not  an e.  speaker  be  established  inearth

Prov.  6.24.  to  keep  thee  from  the  e.  woman
14.  19.  the  e.  bow  before  the  good,  the  wicked
Eccl.  5. 14:  but  those  riches  perish  by  e.  travel
6.  2.  this  is  vanity,  and  it  is  anc.  disease
9.  12.  as  the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  an  e.  net
Isa.  7.  5.  Ephraim  have  taken  e.  counsel  against
.  thee

.32. 7  •  the  instruments  also  of  the  churl  are  e.

Jer.  8.  3.  by  them  that  remain  of  this  e.  family

12. 14.  thus  saith  against  all  mine  e.  neighbours

13.  10.  this  e.  people  refuse  to  hear  my  words
2,3.  10.  their  course  is  e.  their  force  not  right

24.  3.  e.  figs,  very  e.  they  are  so  e.  8.  |  29.  17.

49.  23.  for  they  have  heard  e.  tidings,  faint-hearted

Esek.  5.  16.  I  will  send  on  them  e.  arrows  of  famine

17.  so  will  I  send  on  you  famine  and  e.  beasts

6.  11.  alas,  for  all  the  e.  abominations  of  Israel
.34. 25.  I  will  cause  the  e.  beasts  to  cease  from  land
38. 10.  and  thou  shalt  think  an  e.  thought

Hab.  2.  9.  woe  to  him  thatcoveteth  an  e.  covetous.
Mat.  5.  45.  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  e.  and  good

7.  11.  if  ye  then  being  e.  Luke  11.  1.3.

18.  a  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  e.  fruit

12.  34.  how  can  ye  being  e.  speak  good  things  ?

39.  an«.  generation  seeketh  a  sign,  Luke  11.  29.


Alai.  15. 19.  for  out  of  the  heart  proceed  e.  thoughts.

murders,  adulteries,  fornications,  Alark~,  21
24.  48.  if  thate.  servant  shall  say  in  his  heart
Luke  6.  22.  and  shall  cast  out  your  name  as  e.

35.  he  is  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  to  the  e.
John  3.  19.  loved  darkness,  for  their  deeds  were  e.
Acts  24.  20.  if  they  have  found  any  e.  doing  in  me
1  Cor.  15. 33.  e.  communicat.  corrupt  good  manners
Gal.  1. 4.  that  he  mightdeliver  us  from  this  e.  world
Eph.  4.  31.  let  e.  speaking  be  put  away  from  you
Phil.  3.  2.  beware  of  dogs,  bew'are  of  e.  w  orkers
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  therefore  e.  concupiscence
1  Tim.  6.  4.  whereof  cometh  e.  surnnsings
Tit.  1. 12.  the  Cretians  are  e.  beasts,  slow  bellies
Ileb.  10.22.  your  hearls  sprinkled  from  e.  conscience
Jam.  2.  4.  and  are  become  judges  of  e.  thoughts

4. 16.  ye  rejoice  in  boastings,  all  such  rejoicing  is  e.

1  Pet.  2. 1.  laying  aside  all  malice  and  e.  speakings
Rev.  2.  2.  how  thou  canstnot  bear  them  who  a rt  e.

EVIL  day  or  days.

G en.  47j  9.  few'  and  e.  have  the  days  of  my  life  been
Prov.  15.  15.  all  the  days  of  the  afflicted  are  e.
Eccl.  12. 1.  in  youth,  while  the  e.  days  come  not
Amos  6.  3.  ye  that  put  far  away  the  e.  day
Eph.  5. 16.  redeeming  the  time,  because  days  are  e.
6. 13.  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  e.  day
Day  oj  Evil  ;  see  Evil,  Substantive,
EVIL  doer,  or  doers.

Job  8.  20.  neither  w  ill  he  help  the  e.  doers
Psal.  26.  5. 1  hated  the  congregation  of  e.  doers
37.  1.  fret  not  thyself  because  of  e.  doers
9.  e.  doers  shall  be  cut  off,  but  those  that  wait  on  I,.

94. 16.  who  will  rise  up  for  me  against  the  e.  doers  *
119. 115.  depart  from  me,  ye  e.  doers,  I  will  keep

Isa.  1.  4.  ah, sinful  nation,  aseed  of  e.  doers
9. 17.  every  one  is  an  hypocrite,  and  anc.  doer
14. 20.  the  seed  of  e.  doers  shall  never  be  renowmed
.31.  2.  but  will  arise  against  the  house  of  e.  doers
Jer.  20. 13.  hath  delivered  soul  of  poor  from  e.  doers

23.  14.  they  strengthen  the  hanefs  of  e.  doers

2  Tim.  2.  9.  wherein  I  suffer  trouble  as  anc.  doer

1  Pet.  2. 12.  whereas  they  speak  ag.you  as  e.  doers

14.  are  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  e.  doers

3. 16.  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you  as  of  e.  doers
4. 15.  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  thief  or  an  e.  doer

Bee  Doings,  Eye.

EVIL  heart.

Gen.  8.  21.  imagina.  of  man’s  heart  is  e.  from  youth
Jer.  3. 17.  nor  walk  after  the  imagination  of  e.  heart
7.  24.  walked  in  the  imagination  of  their  e.  heart

11.  8.  every  one  in  imagination  of  their  e.  heart

16. 12.  every  one  after  imagination  of  his  e.  heart

18. 12.  every  one  do  the  imagination  of  his  e.  heart
lleb.  3.12.  lest  there  be  in  any  an  e.  heart  of  unbelier

EVIL  man  or  men.

Job  35.  12.  none  answer  because  of  pride  of  e.  men
Psal.  10.  J  5.  break  thou  the  arm  of  the  e.  man
140.  1.  deliver  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  e.  man
Prov.  2. 12.  to  deliver  thee  from  way  of  the  e.  man

4.  14.  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  e.  men

12.  12.  the  wicked  desireth  the  net  of  e.  men
17. 11.  an  e.  man  seeketh  only  rebellion
24. 1.  be  not  thou  envious  against  e.  men

19-  fret  not  thyself  because  of  e.  men
20.  for  there  shall  be  no  reward  to  the  e.  man
28.  5.  e.  men  understand  not  judgment

29. 6.  in  transgression  of  an  e.  man  there  is  a  snare
Mat.  12.  35.  and  an  e.  man  out  of  the  evil  treasure
bringeth  forth  evil  things,  Luke  6. 45.

2  Tim.  3. 13.  but  e.  men  shall  wax  worse  and  worse

See  Report.

EVIL  spirit  or  spirits.

Judg.  9.  23.  sent  e.  sp.  between  Abimelech  and  men

1  Sam.  16. 14.  an  e.  sp.  from  the  L.  troubled  him,  15.
16.  when  the  e.  spirit  from  God  is  upon  thee
2.3.  and  the  e.  spirit  departed  from  him

18.  lu.  the  e.  spirit  from  God  came  on  Saul,  19.  9.
Luke  7.  21.  that  hour  he  cured  many  of  e.  spirits
8. 2.  woman  w  hich  had  been  healed  of  e.  spirits
Acts  19. 12.  and  the  e.  spirits  went  out  of  them

13.  to  call  over  them  which  had  e.  spirits

15.  the  e.  spirit  said,  Jesus  I  know,  Paul  I  know

16.  the  man  in  whom  thee,  spirit  was,  leaped

EV  I L  thing.

Gen.  38.  +  10.  the  thing  he  did  was  e.  in  eyes  of  Lord

2  Kings  4.  +41.  there  was  no  e.  thing  in  the  pot
Neh.  13.  17.  what  e.  thing  is  this  that  ye  do  ?

Psal.  141.  4.  incline  notmy  heart  to  any  e.  thing
Eccl.  8.  3.  stand  not  in  an  e.  thing,  doth  what  pleases

5.  keepeth  commandment,  shall  feel  no  e.  thing

12. 14.  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  e.

Jer.  2.  19.  know  that  it  is  an  e.  thing  and  bitter
Tit,  2.  8.  having  no  e.  thing  to  say  of  you
EVIL  things.

Josh.  2.3. 15.  the  Lord  shall  bring  on  you  all  e.  things
Prov.  15.  28.  mouth  of  wicked  poureth  oute.  things
Jer.  3.  5.  thou  hast  done  e.  things  as  thou  couldest
Mat.  12.  35.  an  evil  man  bringeth  forth  e.  things
Mark  7.  23.  all  these  e.  things  come  from  within
Luke  16.  25.  and  likewise  Lazarus  e.  things
Rom,  1.  30.  proud,  boasters,  inventors  of  e.  things
1  Cor,  10.  6.  we  should  not  lust  after  e.  things
EVIL  times.

Psal.  37.  19.  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  in  the  e

tim

Eccl.  9.12.  so  the  sons  of  men  are  snared  in  an  e.  time
Amos  5. 13.  prudent  keep  silence,  for  it  is  an  e.  time
Mic.  2.  3.  nor  shall  go  haughtily,  for  this  time  ise.
EVIL  way.

1  Kings  13.  33.  Jeroboam  returned  not  from  e.  way
Psal.  119.101. 1  refrained  my  feet  from  every  e.  way
Prov.  8. 13.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  the  e.  way
28. 10.  who  causeth  righteous  to  go  astray  in  e.  way

Jer.  18. 11.  return  ye  now  every  one  from  his  e.  way
,  25.  5. 1  26.  3.1  35.  15.  |  36.  3,  7

23.  22.  should  have  turned  them  from  their  e.  way
Jonah  3.  8.  let  them  turn  every  one  from  his  e.  way
10.  and  saw  that  they  turned  from  their  e.  way
EVIL  ways.

2  Kings  17. 13.  turn  from  your  e.  ways,  Esek.  .3.3. 11.
Esek.  36.  31.  then  shall  ye  remember  your  own  e.  w.
Zech.  1. 4.  turn  ye  now  from  your  e.  ways  and  doings

141


EUN


E  X  A


EX  A


EVIL  work  or  works.

Eccl.  4.  3.  wno  hath  not  seen  e.  work  that  is  done
8. 11.  because  sentence  against  an  e.  zoork  is  not
John  j.  7 .  I  testify  that  the  works  thereof  are  e.

Horn.  13.  3.  are  not  a  terror  to  good  works  but  e.

-2  Tim.  4. 18.  L.  shall  deliver  me  from  every  e.  work
Jam.  3. 16.  there  is  confusion,  and  every  e.  work
1  John  3. 12.  because  his  own  works  were  e.

EVIL,  Adverb.

Exod.  5.  22.  why  hast  thou  so  e.  entreated  people  i
Deut.  26.  6.  and  the  Egyptians  e.  entreated  us
1  Chron.  7.  23.  because  it  went  e.  with  Ins  house
Job  24.  21 .  he  e.  entreateth  barren  that  beareth  not
John  18.  23.  if  1  have  spoken  e.  bear  witness
Acts  7.  6.  they  should  entreat  them  e.  400  years
19.  the  same  e.  entreated  our  fathers
L4  2  their  minds  e.  affected  against  the  brethren
19-  9.  but  spake  e.  of  that  way  before  the  multitude
23!  5.  shall  not  speak  e.  of  the  ruler  of  thy  people
Rom.  14. 16.  let  not  your  good  be  e.  spoken  of
1  Cor.  10.  30.  why  am  I  e.  spoken  of  tor  that  ?

Jam.  4. 11.  speak  not  e.  one  of  another,  brethren,  he
that  speaks  e.  of  his  brother,  speaks  e.  of  the  law
1  Pet.  3. 16.  that  whereas  they  speak  e.  of  you

17.  better  ye  suffer  for  well-doing  than  for  e.  doing
4. 4.  they  think  it  strange,  speaking  e.  of  you

14.  their  part  he  is  e.  spoken  of,  but  on  y  our  part
£  Pet.  2.  2.  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  e.  spoken  of

10.  are  not  afraid  to  speak  e.  of  dignities,  Jude  8.

12.  these,  as  natural  brute  beasts,  speak  e.  of  the
things  that  they  understand  not,  Jude  10.
EVILS.

Deut.  31.17.  many  e.  and  troublesshall  befall  them,
they  will  say.  are  not  these  e.  come  upon  us

18.  for  all  the  e.  which  they  shall  have  wrought
21.  when  many  e.  and  troubles  are  befallen  them

P^a/.  40.12.  innumerable  e.  have  compassed  me  abt.
Jer.  2. 13.  for  my  people  have  committed  two  e.
Ezek.  6.  9.  shall  lothe  themselves  for  the  e.  commit.

20. 43.  lothe  yourselves  in  your  sight  for  all  your  e.
Hos.  7.  + 1.  the  e.  of  Samaria  were  discovered
Luke  3. 19.  for  all  the  e.  which  Herod  had  done
Jam.  1. + 13.  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  e.

EUNUCH  .  .  .

Comes  from  the  Greek,  E 'jvovx°s>  rshich  signi¬
fies  one  who  guards  the  bed ;  because  generally
in  the  courts  of  the  eastern  kings  the  care  of
the  beds  and  apartments  belonging  to  princes  and
princesses  was  committed  to  them;  but  chiefly  of
the  princesses,  who  live  in  great  confinement,  re¬
mote  from  the  sight  and  company  of  men.  The
Hebrew  word  Saris,  signifies  a  real  eunuch,  or
one  deprived  of  his  genitals :  whether  he  be  na¬
turally  born  such,  or  made  an  eunuch  by  manual
operation.  But  this  word,  as  well  as  the  Greek
Eunouchos,  is  in  scripture  taken  for  an  officer
belonging  to  some  prince  attending  at  his  couit,
and  employed  in  the  inner  part  of  the  palace,  whe¬
ther  he  be  really  an  eunuch  or  not.  Potiphar,
Pharaoh’s  eunuch,  and  Joseph’s  master,  had  a
wife,  Gen.  39.  1,  7.  and  a  child  too,  if  Asenath
was  daughter  to  Joseph’s  master,  as  some  think,
though  the  generality  of  Commentators  be  of  the
contrary  opinion.

God  forbad  his  people  to  make  eunuchs,  Deut.  23.

1.  He  that  has  that  part  wounded  or  cut  off,
which  is  intended  for  the  preservation  of  tlie
species,  shall  not  enter  into  the  congregation  of
the  Lord.  Which  words  are  differently  explained.
Some  think  that  God  here  forbids  eunuchs  to
marry  with  Israelites  :  others,  that  God  forbids
them  to  enter  into  his  temple ;  others,  that  he
excludes  them  from  all  offices  of  the  magistracy ;
and  others,  that  God  debars  them  simply  the
possession  of  some  outward  privileges  belonging
to  the  Israelites  and  people  of  the  fjord.  They
were  looked  upon  in  the  commonwealth  as  dry
and  useless  wood.  Isa.  56.  3.  Behold  1  am  a  dry
tree.  See  Dry.

There  were  eunuchs  in  the  courts  of  the  kings  of
Judah  and  Israel,  officers  called  Sarism,  eunuchs.
Samuel,  describing  to  the  people  the  mariner  of
their  king,  tells  them,  1  Sam.  8.  15.  He  will  take
the  tenth  of  your  seed,  and  give  to  his  officers,
or  eunuchs.  Some  understand  this  properly,  that
he  should  against  the  command  of  God  make
some  of  his  people  eunuchs.  But  others  think
that  these  eunuchs,  in  all  probability ,  were  slaves
taken  from  some  foreign  people  :  or  if  they  were
Hebrews,  the  name  of  eunuchs,  which  is  given
them,  shews  no  more  than  their  office  and  dignity.
See  also,  1  Kings  22.  9.  2  Kings  9. 32. 1 24. 12, 15.
1  Chron.  28.  1.

Our  Saviour  in  Mat.  19.  12.  speaks  of  a  sort  of
eunuchs,  different  from  these  mentioned  persons,
who  have  made  themselves  eunuchs  for  the  king¬
dom  of  heaven’s  sake ;  that  is,  who,  upon  some
- eligious  motive,  do  abstain  from  marriage,  and
the  use  of  all  carnal  pleasures ;  that  they  may
be  less  encumbered  with  the  cares  of  the  world,
and  may  devote  themselves  more  closely  to  the
service  of  God.

Gen.  37.  +  36.  to  Potiphar  an  e.  of  Pharaoh’s
2  Kings  8.  +  6.  the  king  appointed  an  e.  to  restore

23.  +  11.  the  chamber  of  IS  athan-melech  thee.

25. 1 19.  out  of  the  city  he  took  an  e.  Jer.  52. 25.

Isa.  56.  3.  neither  let  the  e.  say,  1  am  a  dry  tree
Acts  8. 27.  an  e.  had  come  to  J  erusalem  to  worship

34.  e.  said,  of  whom  speaks  the  prophet  this  ?

36.  e.  said,  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized  ?
39.  Spirit  caught  Philip,  that  e.  saw  him  no  more
EUNUCHS.

.  Sam.  8.  + 15.  will  give  tenth  of  your  seed  to  his  e.

2  Kings  9.  32.  there  looked  out  two  or  three  e.

20. 18.  thy  sons  take  away,  and  they  shall  be  e.  in
the  palace  ofthe  king  of  Baby  Ion,  Isa.  39.  7.

24.  + 12.  Jehoiachin  went  out,  he  and  his  e.

1  Chron.  28.  tl.  and  David  assembled  thee.

2  Chron.  18. 8.  Ahab  called  for  one  of  his  e.

Esth.  1.  + 12.  Vashti  refused  to  come  by  hand  of  his  e.

4.  +  4.  Esther’s  maids  and  e.  came  and  told  it  her
Isa.  56. 4.  saith  the  L.  to  the  e.  that  keep  my  sabbath
142


Jer.  29. 2.  after  that  the  e.were  departed  from  Jerus.
34. 19.  e.  which  passed  between  the  parts  of  the  calf
38.  7-  when  Ebedmelech  one  of  the  e.  heard
41. 16.  the  e.  whom  he  had  brought  from  Gibeon
Van.  1.  3.  the  king  spake  to  the  master  of  his  e.

7.  to  whom  the  prince  of  the  e.  gave  names

8.  Daniel  requesteil  of  the  prince  of  the  e.

9.  Daniel  brought  into  favour  with  prince  of  e.

18.  then  the  prince  of  the  e.  brought  them  in

Mat.  19. 12.  some  are  e.  who  were  so  born,  some  are
made  e.  of  men,  some  have  made  themselves  e.
EUROCLYDON

Is  a  wind  which  blows  between  the  east  and  north.

It  is  very  dangerous,  of  the  nature  of  a  whirlwind,
which  falls  on  a  sudden  upon  ships,  makes  them
tack  about,  and  sometimes  causes  them  to  founder ,
as  Pliny  observes.

Acts  27. 14.  there  arose  atempestu.  wind,  called  e.
EWE  or  EV/ES.

Gen.  21.28.  Abraham  set  seven  e.  lambs  by  thems.

29.  he  said,  what  mean  these  seven  e.  lambs  t
31.  38.  e.  and  she-goats  have  not  cast  their  young
32. 14.  two  hundred  e.  and  twenty  rams  tor  Esau
Lev.  14.  10.  take  one  e.  lamb  ofthe  first  year

22.  28.  whether  cow  or  e.  ye  shall  not  kill  it

2  Sam.  12. 3.  poor  man  had  nothingsave  one  e.  lamb
Psal.  78. 71.  he  took  him  from  following  the  e.
EXACT.

Deut.  15. 2.  shall  note,  it  of  his  neighbour  or  brother
3.  of  a  foreigner  thou  mayeste.  it  again
Neh.  5. 7.  you  e.  usury  every  one  of  his  brother

10.  1  likewise  might  e.  of  them  money  and  corn

11.  restore  hundredth  part  of  money  ye  e.  of  them
Psal.  89.  22.  the  enemy  shall  note,  upon  him
Isa.  58.3.  behold,  in  your  fasts  ye  e.  all  your  labours
Luke  3.13.  he  said,e.  no  more  than  what  is  appointed

EXACTED.

2  Kings  15. 20.  Menahem  e.  the  money  of  Israel

23.  35.  Jehoiakime.  the  silver  and  the  gold

EXACTETH.

Job  11.  6.  G.  e.  of  thee  less  than  thine  iniq.  deserveth
EXACTION.

Neh.  10.  31.  we  would  leave  the  e.  of  every  debt
EXACTIONS.

Ezek.  45.  9.  take  away  your  e.  from  my  people
EXACTOR.

Job  39.  +7.  nor  regardeth  he  the  crying  of  the  e.
EXACTORS.

Isa.  60. 17. 1  will  also  make  thine  e.  righteousness
EXALT.

Exod.  15.  2.  he  ismy  father’s  God,  and  I  will  e.  him

1  Sam.  2. 10.  he  shall  e.  the  horn  of  his  anointed
Job  17.  4.  therefore  shalt  thou  not  e.  them
Psal.  34.  3.  and  let  us  e.  his  name  together

37.  34.  he  shall  e.  thee  to  inherit  the  land
66.  7-  let  not  the  rebellious  e.  themselves
92. 10.  but  my  hom  shalt  thou  e.  like  the  horn
99.  5.  e.  ye  the  Lord  our  God,  and  worship,  9.

107  .  32.  let  them  e.  him  in  the  congregation
118.  28.  thou  art  my  God,  I  will  e.  thee
140.  8.  further  not,  lest  the  wicked  e.  themselves
Prov.  4.  8.  e.  her,  and  she  shall  promote  thee
Isa.  13.  2.  e.  the  voice  unto  them,  shake  the  hand
14.  13. 1  will  e.  my  throne  above  the  stars  of  God
25.  1.  O  Lord,  thou  art  my  God,  I  will  e.  thee
Ezek.  21.  26.  e.  him  that  is  low,  abase  the  high
29. 15.  nor  shall  it  e.  itself  any  more  above  nations
31.  14.  to  the  end  none  of  the  trees  e.  themselves
_Daw.ll.14.  robbers  of  thy  people  shall  e.  themselves
36.  the  king  shall  e.  himself  above  every  god
Ilos.  11.7.  tho’  they  called,  none  at  all  wouldr.  him
Chad.  4.  though  thou  e.  thyself  as  the  eagle
Mat.  23. 12.  whoso  shall  e.  himself,  shall  be  abased

2  Cor.  11.  20.  if  a  man  e.  himself,  if  a  man  smite  you
lPef.5.6.  humble  yoursel.  that  hemaye.  in  due  time

EXALTED.

Num.  24.  7 .  and  his  kingdom  shall  be  e.

1  Sam.  2.  1.  she  said,  mine  horn  is  e.  in  the  Lord

2  Sam.  5. 12.  perceived  that  Lord  had  e.  his  kingdom
22.  47.  the  Lord  liveth,  and  e.  be  the  God  of  the

rock  of  my  salvation,  Psal.  18.  46.

1  Kings  1.  5.  then  Adonijah  e.  himself,  saying
14.  7.  1  e.  thee  from  among  the  people,  16.  2.

2  Kings  19.22.  against  whom  hast  thou  e.  thy  voice

and  lift  up  thine  eyes  on  high  ?  Isa.  37-  23.
1  Chr.  29. 11.  and  thou  art  e.  as  head  above  all
Neh.  9.  5.  which  is  e.  above  all  blessing  and  praise
Job  5. 11.  that  those  who  mourn  may  be  e.  to  safety
24.  24.  they  are  e.  for  a  little  while,  but  are  gone
36.  7.  he  doth  establish  them  for  ever,  they  are  e.
Psal.  12. 8.  wicked  walk  when  the  vilest  men  are  e.
13. 2.  how  long  shall  my  enemy  be  e.  over  me  ?

21.  13.  be  thou  e.  Lord,  in  thine  own  strength

46.  10.  be  still  and  know  I  am  God,'l  will  be  e.
among  the  heathen,  I  will  be  e.  in  the  earth

47.  9.  shields  of  earth  belong  to  G.  he  is  greatly  e.
57.  5.  be  thou  e.  O  God,  above  the  heavens,  11.

75.  10.  but  the  horns  of  the  righteous  shall  be  e.
89.  16.  in  thy  righteousness  shall  they  be  e.

17.  and  in  thy  favour  our  horig shall  be  e.

19.  I  have  e.  one  chosen  out  of  the  people
24.  and  in  my  name  shall  his  horn  be  e.

97.  9.  thou,  Lord,  arte,  far  above  all  gods
108.  5.  be  thou  e.  O  God,  above  the  heavens
112.  9.  his  horn  shall  be  e.  with  honour
118. 16.  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  is  e.

140.  +  8.  further  not,  let  not  the  wicked  be  e.

Prov.  11. 11.  by  the  blessing  of  the  upright  city  is  e.
Isa.  2.  2.  the  mountain  of  Lord’s  house  shall  be  e.
above' the  hills,  all  nations  flow  to  it,  Mic.  4.  1.
11.  the  Lord  shall  be  e.  in  that  day,  17.  15.  16.

12.  4.  praise  Ld.  make  mention  that  his  name  ise.
30. 18.  will  be  e.  that  he  may  have  mercy  on  you
33.  5.  the  Lord  is  e.  ||  10.  now  will  I  be  e.  _

40. 4.  every  valley  shall  be  e.  every  mountain  low
49.  11.  and  my  high-ways  shall  be  e.

52. 13.  behold  my  servant  shall  bee.  and  extolled

Ezek.  17.  24.  that  I  the  Lord  havee.  the  low'  tree
19.11.  and  her  stature  was  e.  among  branches,  31. 5.
Hos.  11.  +  7.  together  they  e.  not  him  _

13.  1.  Ephraim  spake,  lie  e.  himself  in  Israel
6.  they  were  filled,  and  their  heart  was  e.


Mat.  11.23.  Capernaum  e.  to  heaven,  l.uke  ]0,  3
23. 12.  e.  himself  be  abased,  that  shall  humble  kin
self  shall  be  e.  Luke  14.  11.  |  18. 1
Luke  1.  52.  and  be  hath  e.  them  of  low'  degree
Acts  2.  33.  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  e.

5.  31.  him  hath  G.od  e.  with  his  right  hand

13.  17.  the  God  of  Israel  e.  the  people  in  Egypt
2  Cor.  11.7.  abasing  myself  that  you  might  be  e.

12.  7-  lest  1  should  be  e.  above  measure,  7.

Phil.  2.  9.  wherefore  God  hath  highly  e.  him
Jam.  1.  9.  let  the  brother  rejoice  tiiat  he  is  e.
EXALTEST.

Exod.  9. 17.  as  yet  e.  thou  thyself  against  my  peop
EXALTETH.

Job  36.  22.  behold,  God  e.  by  his  power
Psal.  113.  +  5.  Lord  our  God,  who  e.  hims.  to  due
148. 14.  he  also  e.  the  horn  of  his  people
Prov.  3.  +  35.  wise  inherit  glory,  but  shame  c.  fix

14.  29.  he  that  is  hasty  of  spirit  e.  folly

34.  righteousness  e.  a  nation,  but  sin  is  a  reproac
17.  19.  lie  that  e.  his  gate  seeketh  destruction
Luke  14.  11.  he  thate.nims.  shall  be  abased,  18.  ]
2  Cor.  10.5.  casting  down  every  thing  thatc.  kit
2  Thess.  2. 4.  who  e.  hims.  above  all  that  is  called'’
EXAMINATION.

Acts  25. 26.  that  after  e.  had,  I  might  have  to  wri
EXAM1N  E,

When  applied  to  God,  denotes  the  particular  str,
notice  he  takes  of  his  creatures.  Psal.  26.
Examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  prove  me;  try  11
reins  and  my  heart.  As  if  the  Psalmist  had  sat
Because  I  may  be  mistaken,  or  be  partial  in  ■>.
own  cause,  therefore  I  appeal  to  thee,  and  of
myself  to  thy  trial  concerning  what  my  enem,
charge  me  with.

When  applied  to  man,  examination  is  either  p
rate  or  public.  Private,  when  a  Christian  tn
himself  by  the  word  of  God,  and  by  what  Chr
has  wrought  by  his  spirit  within  him,  whether
be  a  true  believer  in  Jesus,  and  has  any  grtm
to  hope  for  salvation  through  his  blood  and  rigli
ousness,  2  Cor.  13.  5.  Examine  yourselvi
whether  ye  be  in  the  faith,  prove  your  ov
selves.  And  this  duty  is  especially  to  be  p
formed  before  persons  partake  of  the  Lord's  si
per.  1  Cor.  11.  28.  But  let  a  man  exami
himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  a
drink  of  that  cup.  Let  him  compare  his  bet
and  life  by  the  word,  to  see  whether  he  be  di
gualijied  to  partake  of  this  ordinance,  in  regara
his  knowledge,  faith,  repentance,  love,  and  n
obedience.

Public  examination  is,  when  rulers  and  geverno i
whether  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  bring  such  as  C-
suspected  of  unsound  principles,  or  detected
enormities,  to  a  trial  for  the  same.  Thus  it,
said  of  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Ephesus,  li
2.  2.  Thou  hast  tried  them  which  say  they  r
apostles,  and  are  not ;  and  hast  found  tin
liars.  And  our  Saviour  was  examined  by  Pila
though  he  was  innocent,  and  the  things  laid
his  charge  were  unjust,  Luke  23.  13,  14.  A\
the  apostle  Paul  was  ordered  to  he  examined
scourging,  Acts  22.  24.  As  to  the  manner  of
amining  by  scourging,  or  putting  one  to
question.  See  on  Question.

Ezra  10.  16.  sat  down  the  first  day  to  e.  the  mal
Psal.  26.  2.  e.  me,  O  Lord,  prove  me,  try  my  re

1  Cor.  9.  3.  mine  answer  to  them  thate.  me.  is  t

11.  28.  let  a  mane,  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat

2  Cor.  13. 5.  e.  yourselves,  prove  your  own  selv

EXAMINED.  *

Luke  23. 14.  behold,  I  have  e.  him  before  you
Acts  4.  9-  if  we  this  day  be  e.  of  the  good  deed

12.  19.  Herod  e.  keepers,  and  commanded  to  de
22.  24.  brought,  that  be  should  be  e.  by  scourgi,

29.  they  depart,  from  him,  who  should  have  e.  I
28.  18.  when  they  had  e.  me  would  have  let  me
EXAMINING.

Acts  24.  8.  by  e.  of  whom  thou  mayest  take  kno
EXAMPLE

Is  taken  either  for  a  type,  instance,  or  preced
for  our  admonition,  that  we  may  be  c/ratio
against  the  sins  which  others  have  commuted,,
the  judgments  which  God  inflicted  on  them,  It
10.  11.  All  these  things  happened  unto  them
ensamples.  Or  example  is  taken  for  a  pati
for  our  imitation,  a  model  for  us  to  copy  aj
John  13.  15.  I  have  given  you  an  exaiwj.
that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you.
in  1  Pet.  2.  21.  Christ  suffered  for  us,  lead
us  an  example,  that  we  should  follow'  ms  sb
This  is  one  of  the  means  by  which  our  Bern •>
restores  his  people  to  holiness,  namely,  by  exhibi'
a  complete  pattern  of  it  in  his  life  upon  earth.
That  examples  have  a  peculiar  power  abort  ^
naked  precept,  to  dispose  us  to  the  practic
holiness,  may  appear  by  considering,  CD  J
they  most  clearly  express  to  us  the  nature  0)
duties  in  their  subjects  and  sensible  eff  ects,  tj
eral  precepts  form  abstract  ideas  of  virtue,  w
examples,  virtues  are  made  visible  in  all  their  '
cumstances.  (2)  Precepts  instruct  us  what  tn
are  our  duty,  but  examples  assure  us  that  they
possible.  When  we  see  men  like  ourselves,  who'
united  to  frail  flesh,  and  in  the  same  condw
with  us,  to  command  their  passions,  to  oven-
the  greatest  and  most  glittering  temptations'
are  encouraged  in  our  spiritual  warfare.  (3;  ■
amples,  by  a  secret  and  lively  incentive,  urgt
to  imitation.  We  are  touched  in  another  ?■
ner  by  the  visible  practice  of  saints,  whu
proaches  our  defects,  and  obliges  us  tot.ie  •*'
zeal,  than  by  laws,  though  holy  and  good.

The  example  of  Christ  is  most  proper  to  form
holiness,  it  being  absolutely  perfect,  and  acc •:
dated  to  our  present  state.  There  is  no  examp.
a  mere  man,  that  is  to  be  followed  without  lm
tion.  Be  ye  followers  ot  me,  as  1  am  or  U'
says  the  great  apostle,  1  Cor.  11.  1.  Bu ,
example  of  Christ  is  absolutely  pe-Ject.  >
conversation  was  a  living  law.  Ire  was


EX  C


EX  C


EX  E


i  ulcss,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners,
7 .  26.  His  example  is  also  most  accommo-
,  ij  to  our  present  state.  The  divine  nature  is
\  supreme  rule  of  moral  perfection  ;  for  tee  are
‘  manded  to  be  holy,  as  God  is  holy.  But  such
;  he  obscurity  of  our  minds,  and  the  weakness  of
\  natures,  that  the  pattern  was  too  high  and  glo-
•  s  to  be  expressed  by  its.  And  though  we  had
|  strength  to  ascend  to  him,  yet  he  had  goodness
.  gscend  to  us  ;  and  in  this  prese?it  state,  and  in
)  nature,  to  set  before  us  a  pattern  more  fitted
i  ur  capacity  :  So  that  the  divine  attributes  are
.  uened  in  the  Son  of  God  incarnate  ;  and  being
\  'ed  with  the  graces  proper  for  the  human  na-
,  >  are  more  perceptible  to  our  minds,  and  more
Gable  by  us.

1 1.19.  Joseph  not  willing  to  make  her  a  public  e.
o  13. 15.  for  I  have  given  you  an  e.  that  ye  do
jj  15. 1 5.  be  like  minded  after  the  e.  of  Christ
?.  4. 12.  but  be  thou  an  e.  of  the  believers
/  4. 11.  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  e.

1  who  serve  unto  the  e.  of  heavenly  things
a  5.10.  take  the  prophets  for  an  e.  of  suffering
i .  2.  21.  Christ  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  e.
i,  7.  set  forth  for  an  e.  suffering  the  vengeance
EXAMPLES.

( ,  10. 6.  now  these  things  were  our  e.  not  to  lust
See  Ensample,  S.

EXCEED.

).  25.  3.  forty  stripes  he  may  give,  and  not  e.

st  if  he  should  e.  thy  brother  seem  vile  to  thee
1  5.  20.  exceptyour  righteousness  e.  the  scribes
(  3.9. ministration  ofrighteousn.  dothe.  in  glory
EXCEEDED.

■.  20. 41.  and  they  wept,  till  David  e.
i  gs  10. 23.  Solom.  e.  all  kings  of  earth  for  riches
t ).  9.  sheweth  their  transgressions  that  they  e.
EXCEEDEST.

(  on.  9.  6.  for  thou  e.  the  fame  that  I  heard
EXCEED  ETH.

i  gs  10. 7.  thy  wisdom  e.  the  fame  which  I  heard
EXCEEDING.

■t  15. 1.  I  am  thy  shield,  and  thy  e.  great  reward
.1;.  I  will  make  thee  c.  fruitful,  make  nations
JJ4.  and  Esau  cried  with  an  e.  bitter  cry
1. 7.  the  children  of  Israel  waxed  e.  mighty
.<  6.  and  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  e.  loud
h  14. 7.  the  land  we  passed  through  is  e.  good
i!i.  2. 3.  talk  no  more  so  e.  proudly
1 1.  8. 8.  king  David  took  e.  much  brass
a ,  the  rich  man  had  e.  many  flocks  and  herds
gs  4. 29.  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  e.  much
’. .  left  vessels  unweighed,  they  were  e.  many
( .  20. 2.  he  brought  e.  much  spoil  out  of  the  city
!!  and  the  house  must  be  e.  magnifical
( m.  11. 12.  and  he  made  the  cities  e.  strong

-  4.  for  there  was  e.  much  spoil  in  them

i '.  Asa  diseased,  until  his  disease  waxed  e.  great
’f.  J.  Uezekiah  had  e.  much  riches  and  honour
(3L  6.  thou  hast  made  him  e.  glad  with  thy  coun,
if  .  then  will  I  go  unto  God  my  e.  joy
j  ?6.  but  thy  commandment  is  e.  broad
‘j  30.  24.  there  be  four  things  which  are  e.  wise
c  7.24.  thatwjjich  ise.  deepT  who  can  find  it  out  ?
r.  j.  29.  we  heard  the  pride  of  Moab,  he  is  e.  proud

-  9.  9.  the  iniquity  of  Israel  is  e.  great

f  3.  thou  didst  eat  oil,  and  waste,  beautiful

-  5.  e.  in  dyed  attire  upon  their  heads

'1 3.  stood  up  upon  their  feet  an  e.  great  army

'  0.  as  the  fish  of  the  great  sea,  e.  many

k  3.  22.  because  the  furnace  was  e,.  hot

i. .  then  was  the  king  e.  glad  for  him

'. .  the  fourth  beast  which  was  e.  dreadful

!.  came  forth  a  little  horn,  which  waxed  e.  great

31 3.  3.  now  Nineveh  was  an  e.  great  city
so  Jonah  was  e.  glad  of  the  gourd
R2. 10.  saw  star,  they  rejoiced  with  e.  great  joy
1  Herod,  when  he  was  mocked,  was  e.  wroth
;•  taketh  him  up  into  an  e.  high  mountain
'.  rejoice  and  be  e.  glad,  great  is  your  reward
'<•  met  him  two  poss.  with  devils,  e.  fierce
\  J.  they  shall  kill  him  ;  they  were  e.  sorry
1 2.  they  were  e.  sorrowful,  and  began  to  say
£  :ny  soul  is  e.  sorrowful,  Mark  14  34.

'  6.  26.  the  king  was  e.  sorry,  yet  for  the  oath
'•  his  raiment  became  e.  white  as  snow
4  23.  8.  when  Herod  saw  Jesus,  he  was  e.  glad
t  7. 20.  Moses  was  born,  and  was  e.  fair
1  7. 13.  that  sin  might  become  e.  sinful
t  4. 17.  worketh  for  us  an  e.  weight  of  glory
•  I  am  e.  joyful  in  all  our  tribulation
'•  •  who  long  after  you,  for  e.  grace  of  God  in  you
1 1. 19. .what  is  the  e.  greatness  of  his  power
•  he  might  shew  the  e.  riches  of  his  grace
•  to  him  that  is  able  to  do  e.  abundantly
j  .  1. 14.  the  grace  of  our  Lord  was  e.  abundant
j  4. 13.  that  ye  may  be  glad  also  with  e.  joy
ft  1-4.  given  to  us  e.  great  and  precious  promises
*24.  able  to  present  you  faultless  with  e.  joy
f  16.  21.  for  the  plague  thereof  was  e.  great
J  EXCEEDINGLY.

<  7 . 19.  the  waters  prevailed  e.  on  the  earth
•  h  but  the  men  of  Sodom  were  sinners  e.

[  0.  the  angel  said,  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  e.

; ;  i  will  make  my  coven,  and  multiply  thee  e.

;  1  will  multiply  Ishmael  e.  a  great  nation
'*  3-  and  Isaac  trembled  very  e.  and  said
,  3.  and  Jacob  increased  e.  4J.  27.

‘  26.  21.  I  have  played  the  fool  and  erred  e.

•  1. 13. 15.  then  Amnon  hated  her  e.  and  said
‘  tgs  10._4.  the  elders  of  Samaria  were  e.  afraid
■  29. 25.  Ld.  magnified  Solom.  e.  2  Chr.  1. 1.

:  •  J7-  12.  Jehoshaphat  waxed  great  e.

'  Uzziah  strengthened  himself  e.

' 2. 10.  they  heard  of  it,  it  grieved  them  e.

'  4-  the  queen  was  e.  grieved,  and  sent  raiment

’•  22.  rejoice  e.  when  they  can  find  the  grave
<  ,7,  •  yea>  let  the  righteous  e.  rejoice
.  14.  lusted  e.  in  the  wilderness,  and  tempted  G.

.  *67-  kept  thy  testimonies,  I  love  them  e.

’•  'or  we  are  e.  filled  with  contempt,  4.

'  4. 19.  the  earth  is  dissolved,  earth  is  moved  e.


Dan  7.  7.  and  behold,  a  fourth  beast  strongs.
Jonah  1.  10.  men  were  e.  afraid,  and  said  to  him
16.  then  the  men  feared  the  Lord  e.  and  offered
4. 1.  but  it  displeased  Jonah  e.  and  he  was  angry
Mat.  19.  25.  heard  it,  they  were  e.  amazed,  saying
Mark  4.  41.  they  feared  e.  and  said  one  to  another
15. 14.  they  cried  out  the  more  e.  crucify  him
Acts  16.20.  these  men  <10  e.  trouoie  our  city
26. 11.  being  e.  mad  against  them,  I  persecuted
27. 18.  and  we  being  e.  tossed  with  a  tempest
2  Cor.  7. 13.  yea,  and  e.  the  more  joyed  we  for  Titus
Gal.  1.  14.  being  more  e.  zealous  of  the  traditions

1  Thess.  3.  10.  night  and  day  praying  e.  to  see  you

2  Thess.  1.  3.  because  that  your  faith  groweth  e.
Heb.  12.  21.  Moses  said,  l  e.  fear  and  quake

EXCEL.

Gen.  49.  4.  unstable  as  water,  thou  shaltnote.

1  Chron.  15.  21.  with  harps  on  the  Sheminith  to  e.
Psal.  103.  20.  ye  his  angels,  that  e.  in  strength
Isa.  10.  10.  and  whose  graven  images  did  e.  them
1  Cor.  14.  12.  seek  that  ye  may  e.  to  edifying
EXCELLED.

1  Kings  4.  30.  Solomon’s  wisdom  e.  wisdom  of  Egypt

EXCELLEST.

Prov.  31.  29.  done  virtuously,  but  thou  e.  them  all
EXCELLETH.

Eccl.  2. 13.  wisdom  e.  folly,  as  far  as  light  e.  dark.

2  Cor.  3.  10.  by  reason  of  the  glory  that  e.

EXCELLENCY.

Gen.  4.  1 7.  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  have  the  e.  ?
49.  3.  the  e.  of  dignity,  and  the  e.  of  power
Exod.  15.  7.  and  in  the  greatness  of  tlnne  e.

Deut.  33.26.  who  ridetn  in  his  e.  on  the  sky
29.  shield  of  help,  and  who  is  the  sword  of  thy  e.
Job  4.  21.  doth  not  their  e.  go  away?  they  die
13.  11.  shall  not  his  e.  make  you  afraid  ?

20.  6.  though  his  e.  mount  up  to  the  heavens
22.  1 20.  but  their  e.  the  fire  consumeth
37.  4.  he  thundereth  with  the  voice  of  his  e.

40.  10.  deck  thyself  now  with  majesty  and  e.

Psal.  47.  4.  the  e.  of  Jacob  whom  be  loved
62.  4.  they  consult  to  cast  him  down  from  his  e.

68. 31.  his  e.  is  over  Israel,  and  his  strength
Prov.  17.  +  7.  a  lip  of  e.  hecometh  not  a  fool
Peel.  2.  +  13. 1  saw  that  there  is  an  e.  in  wisdom
7. 12.  the  e.  of  knowledge  is,  that  wisdom  gives  life
Isa.  13. 19.  Babylon  the  beauty  of  the  Chaldees’  e.

35.  2.  e.  of  Carmel,  Sharon ;  aiid  the  e.  of  our  G.

60. 15. 1  will  make  thee  an  eternal  e.  a  joy
Ezek.  16. 1 56.  Sodom  not  mentioned  in  day  of  e.

24.  21.  my  sanctuary,  the  c.  of  your  strength
Amos  6.  8.  saith  the  Lord,  I  abhor  the  e.  of  J  acob
8. 7.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  e.  of  Jacob
Pah.  2.  2.  for  the  Lord  hath  turned  away  the  e.  of
Jacob,  as  the  e.  of  Israel,  emptiers  emptied  them
Mai.  2.  -j-  15.  yet  had  he  the  e.  of  the  Spirit

1  Cor.  2. 1. 1  came  not  to  you  with  e.  of  speech

2  Cor.  4. 7.  that  the  e.  of  the  power  may  be  of  God
Phil.  3.  8. 1  count  all  things  loss  for  the  e.  of  Christ


EXCELLENT.

Psth.  1.4.  Ahasuerus  showed  his  e.  majesty

Job  37. 23.  the  Almighty  is  e.  in  power

Psal.  8. 1.  how  e.  is  thy  name  in  all  the  earth  !  9.

16. 3.  and  to  the  e.  in  whom  is  all  my  delight
36. 7.  how  e.  is  thy  loving-kindness,  O  God !

76.  4.  thou  art  more  e.  than  the  mountains  of  prey

141. 5.  let  him  reprove  me,  it  shall  be  an  e.  oil
148. 13.  praise  the  Lord,  his  name  alone  is  e.

150.  2.  praise  him  according  to  his  e.  greatness
Prov.  8.  6.  hear,  for  I  will  speak  of  e.  things
12.  26.  the  righteous  is  more  e.  than  his  neighbour
17.  7.  e.  speech  hecometh  not  a  fool
27.  a  man  of  understanding  is  of  an  e.  spirit
22.  20.  have  I  not  written  to  thee  e.  things?

Cant.  5.  15.  his  countenance  e.  as  the  cedars
Isa.  4. 2.  and  the  fruit  of  the  earth  shall  be  e.

12.  5.  sing  to  the  Lord,  he  hath  done  e.  things
22.  +  17.  Lord  covered  thee  with  an'e.  covering
28.  29.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  e.  in  working
Pzek.  16. 7.  and  thou  art  come  to  e.  ornaments
27.  +  24.  these  were  thy  merchants  in  e.  tilings
Pan.  2. 31.  this  image,  whose  brightness  was  e.

4.  36.  an  e.  majesty  was  added  unto  me

5.  12.  an  e.  spirit  was  found  in  Daniel,  6.  3.

14.  I  heard  that  e.  wisdom  is  found  in  thee

Luke  1.  3.  to  write  to  thee,  most  e.  Theopliilus
Acts  23.  26.  Claudius,  to  the  c.  governor  Felix
Pom.  2. 18.  and  approvest  things  more  e.  Phil.  1. 10.

1  Cor.  12.  31.  yet  shew  I  unto  you  a  more  e.  way
Heb.  1.  4.  he  obtained  a  more  e.  name  than  they

8.  6.  but  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  e.  ministry
11.  4.  Abel  offered  to  God  a  more  e.  sacrifice

2  Pet.  1. 17.  there  came  a  voice  from  the  e.  glory


EXCEPT.

Gen.  31.  42.  e.  the  G.  of  my  father  had  been  with  me
32.  26. 1  will  not  let  thee  go,  e.  thou  bless  me
42. 15.  e.  your  youngest  brother  come,  43.  3, 5.

43. 10.  e.  we  had  lingered,  we  had  now  returned
47.  26.  fifth  part,  e.  the  land  of  the  priests  only
JVum.  16.  13.  e.  thou  make  thyself  a  prince  over  us
Deut.  32.  30.  e.  their  Rock  had  sold  them
Josh.  7.  12.  e.  you  destroy  accursed  from  among  you

1  Sam.  25.  34.  e.  thou  hadst  hasted  to  meet  me

2  Sam.  3.  9.  e.  as  the  Lord  hath  sworn  to  David
13.  e.  thou  first  bring  Michal,  Saul’s  daughter

'5.  6.  e.  thou  take  away  the  blind  and  the  lame
2  Kings  4.  24.  slack  not  thy  riding  e.  I  bid  thee
Psth.  2. 14.  e.  the  king  delighted  in  her  and  called

4.  11.  e.  the  king  shall  hold  out  the  golden  sceptre
Psal.  127. 1.  e.  the  Lord  build  the  house,  e.  the  Lord
keep  the  city,  the  watchmen  watch  but  in  vain
Prov.  4.  16.  sleep  not,  e.  they  have  done  mischief
Isa.  1.  9.  e.  the  Lord  had  left  a  remnant,  Pom.  9.  29.
Dan.  2.  11.  none  other  can  shew  it,  e.  the  gods
3.  28.  nor  worship  any  god,  c.  their  own  God

6.  5.  e.  we  find  it  concerning  the  law  of  his  God
Amos  3.  3.  can  two  walk  together,  e.  they  be  agreed  ?
Mat.  5.  20.  e  your  righteousness  exceed  that  of

scribes

12. 29.  c.  he  first  hind  the  strong  man,  Mark  3.  27.

18. 3. 1  say  to  you,  e.  ye  be  converted,  and  become
19.  9.  put  away  his  wife,  e.  it  be  for  fornication


Mat.  24.  22.  and  e.  those  days  shomri  be  shortened
there  should  no  flesh  he  saved,  Mark  13  20
26. 42.  if  this  cup  may  not  pass,  e.  I  drink  it,  thy  wil*
Mark  7.  3.  the  Pharisees,  e.  they  wash  oft,  eat  not
Luke  9. 13.  e.  we  go  and  buv  meat  for  this  people
13.  3.  e.  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish,  5.
John  3. 2.  can  do  these  miracles,  e.  G.  be  with  him
3.  e.  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingd.

5.  e.  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit  *

27.  can  receive  nothing,  e.  it  be  given  from  heaven

4. 48.  e.  ye  see  signs  and  wonders,  ye  will  not  bel.
6. 44.  e.  the  Father  who  hath  sent  me  draw  him
53.  e.  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man
65.  e.  it  were  given  unto  him  of  my  Father
12.  24.  e.  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground
15.  4.  ye  cannot  bear  fruit,  e.  ye  abide  in  me

19. 11.  no  power,  e.  it  were  given  thee  from  above
20.  25.  e.  1  shall  see  the  prints  of  the  nails
Acts  Q.  1.  they  were  all  scattered,  e.  the  apostles
31.  how  can  I,  e.  some  man  should  guide  me  ?

15. 1.  e.  ye  be  circumcised,  ye  cannot  be  saved
24.  21.  e.  it  be  for  this  one  voice,  that  T  cried

26.  29.  all  were  such  as  I  am,  e.  these  bonds

27.  31.  Paul  said,  e.  these  abide  in  ship,  ye  cannot
hom.  7.  7. 1  had  not  known  lust,  e.  the  law  had  said
10. 15.  how  shall  they  preach,  e.  they  be  sent

1  Cor. 7 .5.  defraud  not  oneanoth.  e.  it  be  with  consent

14. 5.  that  speaketh  with  tongues,  e.  he  interpret

6.  e.  I  shall  speak  to  you  eitlrer  by  revelation

7.  e.  they  give  a  distinction  in  the  sounds
9.  e.  ye  utter  words  easy  to  be  understood

15. 36.  that  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened,  e.  it  die
2 Cor.  12. 13.  e.  it  be  that  I  was  nor  burdensome

13. 5.  that  Christ  is  in  you,  e.  ye  be  reprobates  ?

2  Thess.  2. 3.  e.  there  come  a  falling  away  first

2  Tim.  2. 5.  he  is  not  crowned,  e.  he  strive  lawfully
Rev.  2. 5. will  remove  thy  candlestick,  e.  thou  repent
£2.  into  tribulation,  e.  they  repent  of  their  deeds
EXCEPTED.

1  Cor.  15.27.  he  is  e.  who  did  put  all  things  under  him
EXCESS.

Mat.  23.  25.  within  are  full  of  extortion  and  e.

Eph.  5. 18.  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  e.

1  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  lusts,  e.  of  wine
4.  that  ye  run  not  with  them  to  the  same  e.
EXCHANGE.

Gen.  47. 17.  Joseph  gave  them  bread  in  e.  for  horse3
Lev.  27. 10.  then  it  and  the  e.  thereof  shall  be  holy
Job  20.  + 18.  according  to  the  substance  of  his  e.

28. 17.  and  the  e.  of  it  shall  not  be  for  jewels
Mat.  16.  26.  if  gain  world  and  lose  his  soul,  wnat
shall  a  man  give  in  e.  for  his  soul  ?  Mark  8. 37.
EXCHANGE.

Ezek.  48. 14.  they  shall  not  sell  of  it,  nor  e.  first-fruits
EXCHANGERS.

Mat.  25. 27.  oughtest  to  have  put  my  money  to  e.
f  EXCLUDE.

Gal.  4. 17.  they  would  e.  yon,  that  you  might  affect
EXCLUDED.

Rom.  3.  27.  where  is  boasting  then  ?  it  is  e.

EXCOMMUNICATED.
Excommunication  is  an  ecclesiastical  censure,
whereby  they  who  incur  the  guilt  of  any  heinous
sin,  are  separated  from  the  communion  of  the
church,  and  deprived  of  spiritual  advantages ;
that  they  may  be  brought  to  repentance,  and
others,  by  their  example,  kept  from  the  like
enormities.  Mat.  18.  15,  16,  17.  1  Cor.  5.  5,  7.
r  2  Thess.  3. 14,  15.

There  are  generally  three  sorts  of  Excommunica¬
tion,  distinguished  among  the  Jews.  The  first  is
called  Niddui,  that  is,  separation.  This  is  the
lesser  Excommunication.  It  lasted  thirty  days,
and  separated  the  excommunicated  persons  from
the  use  of  things  holy.  The  second  was  called
Cherim,  that  is  Anathema ;  this  was  an  aggra¬
vation  of  the  first,  and  answers  almost  to  our
greater  excommunication.  It  excluded  a  man
from  the  synagogue,  and  deprived  him  of  all  civil
commerce.  The  third  sort  of  Excommunication
is  called  Scammatha,  and  was  of  a  higher  nature
than  the  greater  excommunication.  It  was  pub¬
lished,  as  they  say,  by  sound  of  four  hundred  trum¬
pets,  and  removed  all  hope  of  returning  to  the  syna¬
gogue.  Some  affirm,  that  the  penalty  of  death  was
annexed  to  it.  But  Selden  maintains ,  that  these
three  terms,  Niddui,  Cherim,  and  Scammatha,
are  oftentimes  synonymous,  and  that  the  Jews
never  had,  properly  speaking,  more  than  two  sorts
of  excommunication  ;  one  greater  the  other  less.
Selden  de  synedriis  veterum  Hebrteorum,  lib.  1.
cap.  7.  and  8.

John  9.  f  34.  dost  thou  teach  us  ?  and  they  e.  him
EXCUSE.

Luke  14. 18.  they  with  one  consent  began  to  make  e.
John  15. 1 22.  now  have  they  no  e.  for  their  sin
Rom.  1. 20.  clearly  seen,  so  that  they  axe  without  e.
EXCUSE.

2  Cor.  12. 19.  think  you  that  we  e.  ourselves  to  vou  ?
EXCUSED.

Luke  14.  18.  I  pray  thee  have  me  e.  19.

EXCUSING.

Rom.  2. 15.  their  thoughts  accusing  or  else  e.  one  an.
EXECRATION.

Jer.  42. 18.  and  ye  shall  be  an  e.  and  a  curse

44. 12.  and  they  shall  be  an  e.  and  a  reproach
Acts  23.J12.  bound  themselves  with  an  oath  of  e.

EXECUTE.

Exod.  12. 12. 1  will  e.  judgment  on  the  gods  of  Egypt
Num.  5. 30.  the  priest  shall  e.  upon  her  all  this  law
8. 11.  that  they  may  e.  the  service  of  the  Lord
Deut.  10. 18.  he  doth  e.  the  judgment  of  the  widow
1  Kings  6. 12.  if  thou  wilt  e.  my  judgments
Psal.  119. 84.  when  wilt  thou  e.  judgm.  on  them  that
149. 7-  to  e •  vengeance  upon  the  heathen
9.  to  e.  upon  them  the  judgment  written
Isa.  16. 3.  take  counsel,  e.  judgment,  hide  outcasts
Jer.  7. 5.  e.  judgm.  between  a  man  and  his  neighb.

21. 12.  e.  judgment  in  the  morning,  and  deliver

22.  3.  e.  judgm.  and  righteousness,  deliver  spoiled

23.  5.  branch  shall  e.  judgm.  and  justice,  33. 15.

Ezek.  5. 8.  I  will  e.  judgments  in  thee,  10.

143


EVE


EXO


EXP


EZek  5. 15.  when  I  sha.l  e.  judgments  in  tlite  in  fmy

11.  9.  and  1  wil.  e.  judgments  among  you
If*"  41.  they  shall  e.  judgments  upon  thee
11.  and  1  will  e.  judgments  upon  Moab
"17,  and  I  will  e.  great  vengeance  upon  them
30. 14.  I  set  fire  in  Zoan,  and  e.  judgments  in  Iso
19.  thus  will  I  e.  judgments  in  Pgypt  .

45.  9.  remove  violence,  e.  judgment  and  justice
Hoi.  11. 9.  I  will  not  e.  the  fierceness  ot  mine  anger
Mic.  5. 15.  and  1  will  e.  vengeance  in  anger
7. 9.  till  he  plead  my  cause,  and  e.  judgrn.  tor  me
Zech.  7.  9.  e.  true  judgment,  and  shew  mercy
8.  16.  e.  the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace
John  5.  27.  hath  given  him  authority  to  e.  judgment
Bom.  13.  4.  he  is  the  minister  ot  God  to  e.  wrath
Jude  15.  to  e.  judgment  on  all,  and  to  convince
EXECU  I  ED.

Num.  33.  4.  on  their  gods  the  Lord  e. judgments
Bent  33.  21.  he  e.  the  justice  of  the  Lord
o  gam  8.  15.  David  e.  judgment,  1  Chron.  18. 14.

1  Chron.  6.  10.  lie  it  is  that  e.  the  priest’s  office
24.  2.  Eleazar  and  Ithamar  e.  the  priest  s  othce

2  Chron.  24.  24.  thej'  e.  judgment  against  Joash
Ezra  7.  26.  let  judgment  be  e.  speedily  on  him
p.v.  106.  30.  then  stood  up  Phinehas,  and  e.  judgment
Eccl.  8.  11.  because  sentence  is  note,  speedily
Jcr.  23.  20.  anger  of  L.  shall  not  return  till  he  havee.
Ezek.  11 . 12.  neither  e.  my  judgments,  20.  24.

18.  8.  hath  e.  truejudgm.  betw.  man  and  man,  17.

23!  10.  for  they  had  e.  judgment  upon  her
28.  22.  when  1  shall  have  e.  judgments,  26.

39.  21.  heathen  shall  see  my  judgrn.  that  I  havee.
Luke  1  8.  while  Zacharias  e.  the  priest  s  othce
EXECUTEDST.

1  Sam  °8.  18.  nor  e.  his  fierce  wrath  on  Amalek

EXECUTES'^  .

Ps.  99. 4.  thou  e.  judgrn.  andrighteousness m  Jacob

Psal.  9.  16.  Lord  is  known  by  the  judgment  he  e.

103.  6.  the  Lord  e.  righteousness  and  judgment
146. 7.  the  Lord  e.  judgment  tor  the  oppressed
Isa.  46  11.  the  man  that  e.  my  counsel  from  atar
Jer.  5. 1.  if  any  e.  judgment,  I  will  pardon  it
Joel  2. 11.  for  he  is^sLong^that^.^lns  word

2  Kings  10.  30.  thou  hast  done  well  in  e.  on  Ahab
2  Chron.  11.14.  Jeroboam  had  cast  them  off  from  e.
~og  8  when  Jehu  was  e.  judgment  on  Ahab’s  house

EXECUTION.

Esth.  9. 1.  his  decree  drew  near  to  be  putin  e.
EXECUTIONER.

Mark  6  27.  the  king  sent  an  e.  and  commanded
EXECUTIONERS.

Gen.  37.  t  36.  sold  him  to  Potiphar,  chief  of  the  e.
Jer.  39.  +  9.  Nebuzar-adan,  chief  of  the  e.  52.  +  12.
Dan.  2.  t  14.  to  Arioch  the  chief  of  the  e.

EXEMPTED.

1  Kinas  15.  22.  Asa  made  proclamation,  none  was  e
EXERCISE.

1  Tim.  4. 8.  bodily  e.  profrtejMittle,  godliness  profit.

Psal.  131 .  1.  nor  do  I  e.  myself  in  things  too  high
Jer.  9.  24.  I  am  the  Lord  which  e.  loving-kindness
Mat.  20. 25.  ye  know  that  princes  of  the  Gentiles  e.
dominion  over  them,  and  they  that  are  great  e.
authority  upon  them,  Mark  10.  42.  Luke  22.  25.
Acts  24. 16.  herein  do  I  e.  myself  to  have  a  conscience

1  Tim.  4.  7.  and  e.  thyself  rather  unto  godliness

EXERCISI  D.

Eccl.  1 .  13.  sore  travail,  to  be  e.  therewith,  3. 10,
Ezek.  22.  29.  the  people  of  the  land  have  e.  robbery
Heb.  5.  14.  senses  e.  to  discern  both  good  and  evil

12.  11.  fruit  of  right,  to  them  which  arc  e.  thereby

2  Pet.  2. 14.  an  heart  e.  with  covetous  practices

EXERCISETH.

Rev.  13.  12.  he  e.  all  the  power  of  the  first  beast
EXHORT.

Acts  2.  40.  with  many  words  did  he  testify  and  e.
27. 22.  and  now  I  e.  you  to  be  of  good  cheer
2  Cor.  9.  5.  therefore  I  thought  it  necessary  to  e.

1  ThessA.  1.  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  and  e.  you
+  18.  wherefore  e.  one  another  with  these  words

5.  +  11.  wherefore  e.  yourselves  together,  edify

14.  now  we  e.  you,  warn  them  that  are  unruly

2  Thess.  3. 12.  such  we  command  and  e.  by  Christ

1  Tim.  2. 1.  I  e.  that  first  of  all,  pray,  be  made  for  all

6.  2.  these  things  teach  and  e.

2  Tim.  4.  2.  e.  with  all  long-suffering  and  doctrine
Tit.  1.  9.  may  be  able  to  e.  and  convince  gainsayers
2.  6.  young  men  likewise  e.  to  be  sober-minded

9.  e.  9  rvants  to  be  obedient  to  their  masters

15.  speak,  e.  and  rebuke  with  all  authority
Heb.  3.  13.  e.  one  another  daily  while  it  is  called
1  Pet.  5. 1.  the  elders  who  are  among  you  I  e.

Jude  3.  it  was  needful  for  me  to  write  and  e.  you

EXHORTATION.

Luke  3.  18.  many  other  things  in  his  e.  preached  he
Acts  13. 15.  if  ye  have  any  word  of  e.  say  on
15.  t  31.  when  they  read,  they  rejoiced  for  the  e.

20.  2.  and  when  Paul  had  given  them  much  e.

Rom.  12.  8.  he  that  exhortetb,  let  him  wait  on  e.

1  Cor.  14.  3.  speaketh  unto  men  to  e.  and  comfort

2  Cor.  8. 17.  for  indeed  he  accepted  the  e.

1  Thess.  2.  3.  for  our  e.  was  not  of  deceit  nor  guile
l  Tim.  4.  13.  till  I  come,  give  attendance  to  e.

Heb.  12.  5.  ye  have  forgotten  the  e.  which  speaketh

13.  22.  and  1  beseech  you,  suffer  the  word  of  e.
EXHORTED.

Acts  11.  23.  Barnabas  e.  them  to  cleave  to  the  Lord
15.  32.  they  e.  the  brethren  with  many  words
1  Thess.  2. 11.  as  vou  know  how  we  e.  and  comforted
'EXHORTING.

Acts  14.  22.  and  e.  them  to  continue  in  the  faith
18.  27.  brethren  wrote  e.  disciples  to  receive  him
Heb.  10. 25.  but  e.  one  another,  and  so  much  more

1  Pet.  5.  12.  by  Silvanus  I  have  written  briefly,  e.

EXILE.

2  Sam.  15. 19.  for  thou  art  a  stranger,  and  also  an  e.
Isa.  51.  14.  the  captive  e.  hasteneth  to  be  loosed

EXORCISTS.

This  word  comes  from  the  Greek  ’Ef opm^eiv,  Ex-
orcisein,  which  signifies  to  adjure,  to  conjure,  to

114


me  the  name  of  God,  with  a  design  to  cast  devils
out  of  the  bodies  which  they  possess.  I  Then  our
Saviour  sent  out  his  disciples  to  preach  the  gospel,
he  gave  them  power  over  unclean  spirits,  to  cast
them  out.  Mat.  10.  1.  And  when  the  seventy  re¬
turned,  they  told  our  Saviour,  Luke  10.  17-  Lord,
even  the  devils  are  subject  to  us,  through  thy
name.  By  this  gift,  they  gained  repute  among
the  people,  confirming  them  that  they  were  sent  of
God.  St.  Paul,  in  Acts  16.  18.  cast  out  a  devil,
in  the  name  of  Christ  ;  I  command  thee,  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  come  out  of  her  :  and
he  came  out  the  same  hour.  This  gift  continued
in  the  church,  after  the  death  of  the  apostles,  as
some  say,  for  about  two  hundred  years,  and  ceased
by  degrees.  .

Those  Jewish  exorcists,  mentioned  Acts  19. 13 .  were
such  as  usurped  and  counterfeited  this  gift,  though
they  had  it  not  ;  but  what  they  did  was  only  by
witchcraft,  and  compact  with  the  devil.

Josephus  relates  strange  stories  concerning  these  ex¬
orcists.  He  says,  that  one  Eleazar,  a  Jew ,  cured
the  possessed  with  the  help  of  a  ring,  in  which  a
root  was  set,  said  by  some  to  have  been  discovered
by  Solomon.  The  smell  of  this  root,  put  under
the  nose  of  the  possessed  person,  made  him  fall  on
the  ground  ;  and  the  exorcist  conjured  the  devil,
forbidding  him  to  return  into  that  body  ;  Joseph.
Avtiq.  lib.  8.  cap*  2.  Justin,  Origen,  and  Ter-
tullian,  speak  of  Jews,  who  boasted  of  a  power  to
cast  out  devils,  and,  it  is  said,  that  sometimes  in
reality  they  did  so,  by  calling  upon  the  God  oj
Abraham.  „  ,

Acts  19. 13.  then  certain  of  the  vagabond  Jews,  e.

EXPANSION.

Gen.  1. 1  6.  let  there  be  an  e.  in  midst  of  the  waters
EXPECTATION.

Chron.  29.  +  15.  days  as  a  shadow,  there  is  no  e.
Job  6.  +  8.  O  that  God  would  grant  me  mine  e.

Ps.  9. 18.  the  e.  of  the  poor  shall  not  perish  for  ever
62.  5.  wait  thou  on  God,  for  my  e.  is  from  him
Prov.  10.  28.  the  e.  of  the  wicked  shall  perish,  11. 7.
11.  23.  but  the  e.  of  the  wicked  is  wrath
23.  18.  thine  e.  shall  not  be  cut  off,  24. 14.

Isa.  20.  5.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  their  e.

6.  the  inhabitants  shall  say,  behold,  such  is  cure.
Jer.  29.  +  11.1  think  to  give  you  an  end  and  e.

Zech.  9. 5.  Ekron  for  her  e.  shall  be  ashamed
Luke  3. 15.  and  as  the  people  were  in  e.  John  said
Acts  12. 11.  Lord  hath  delivered  me  from  e.  of  Jews
Rom.  8.  19.  for  the  e.  of  the  creature  waiteth  for
Phil.  1.  20.  according  to  my  earnest  e.  and  hope
EXPECTED.

Tab  32.  +  4.  Elihu  had  e.  till  Job  had  spoken
Jer.  29.  11.  for  I  think  to  give  you  an  e.  end
EXPECTING.

Acts  3.  5.  e.  to  receive  something  of  them
Heb.  10. 13.  e.  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool
EXPEDIENT.

John  11.  50.  that  it  is  e.  for  us  that  one  man  die
16.  7.  I  tell  you,  it  is  e.  for  you  that  I  go  away
18.  14.  it  was  e.  that  one  man  die  for  the  people
Cor.  6.  12.  but  all  things  are  not  e.  10.  23.


2  Cor.  8. 10.  this  is  e.  for  you  who  have  begun  before
12. 1.  it  is  not  e.  for  me  doubtless  to  glory
EXPEL.

Josh.  23.  5.  God  shall  e.  them  from  before  you
Judg.  11. 7.  did  not  ye  hate  me,  e.  me  out  of  house  ?
EXPELLED.

Josh.  13. 13.  Tsr.  e.  notGeshurites,  nor  Maachathites
Judg.  1.  20.  he  e.  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak
2  Sam.  14. 14.  that  his  banished  be  not  e.  from  him
Acts  13.  50.  they  e.  them  out  of  their  coasts
EXPEN  CES.

Ezra  6.  4.  let  the  e.  be  given  out  of  the  king’s  house
8. 1  decree  that  e.  forthwith  be  given  to  these  men
EXPERIENCE.

Gen.  30. 27.  by  e.  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me
Eccl.  1. 16.  my  heart  had  great  e.  of  wisdom
Rom.  5. 4.  and  patience  worketh  e.  and  e.  hope
Heb.  5.  + 13.  that  useth  milk  hath  no  e.  in  the  word
EXPERIMENT.

2  Cor.  9. 13.  whiles  by  the  e.  of  this  ministration
EXPERT.

1  Chron.  12.  33.  of  Zebulun  fifty  thousand  e.  in  war
35.  of  Danites  28,600 1|  36.  of  Asher,  40,000  e.
Cant.  3.  8.  they  all  hold  swords,  being  e.  in  war
Jer.  50.  9.  their  arrows  shall  be  as  of  an  e.  man
Acts  26.  3.  I  know  thee  to  be  e.  in  all  customs
EXPIATION.

Num.  35.  +  33.  and  there  can  be  no  e.  for  the  land
EXPIRED.

1  Sam.  18. 26.  and  the  days  were  not  e.

2  Sam.  11. 1.  after  the  year  was  e.  1  Chron.  20.  1.

1  Chron.  17.  11.  shall  come  to  pass  when  days  bee.

2  Chron.  36.  10.  when  year  e.  Nebuchadnezzar  sent
Esth.  1.  5.  when  these  days  weree.  the  king  made
Ezek.  43.  27.  when  these  days  are  e.  it  shall  be  that
Acts  7.  30.  and  when  forty  years  were  e.

Rev.  20.  7.  when  1000  years  are  e.  Satan  be  loosed
EXPLOITS.

Dan.  11.  28.  to  his  land  he  shall  do  e.  and  return
32.  but  the  people  shall  be  strong  and  do  e.
EXPOSED.

Judg.  5.  +  18.  Zebulun  and  N  aphtali  a  people  e.
EXPOUND.

Lev.  24.  +  12.  put  him  in  ward,  to  e.  mind  of  God
Juda.  14. 14.  they  could  not  in  three  days  e.  riddle
■EXPOUNDED.  .

Judg.  14.  19.  garments  to  them  who  e.  the  riddle
Mark  4.  34.  when  they  were  alone,  he  e.  all  things
Luke  24.  27.  he  e.  to  them  in  all  the  scriptures
Acts  11.4.  but  Peter  e.  it  by  order  unto  them
18.  26.  Aquila  and  Priscilla  e.  to  him  way  of  God
28.23.  Paule.  and  testified  the  kingdom  of  God
EXPRESS.

Heb.  1. 3.  who  being  the  e.  image  of  his  person
EXPRESS,  ED.

Num.  1.  17.  took  men  which  are  e.  by  their  names

1  Chr.  12. 31.  and  of  Manasseh  18,000,  e.  by  name
16.  41.  who  were  e.  by  name,  to  give  thanks  to  L.

2  Chron.  28.  15.  m*u  e.  took  captives,  clothed  naked


Chron.  31.  19.  men  e.  to  give  portions  to  fhema
Ezra  8.  20.  the  N  ethinims  were  e.  by  name
Job  6.  t  3.  therefore  I  want  words  to  e.  my  grief
EXPRESSLY.

Sam.  20.  21.  if  I  e.  say  to  the  lad,  behold  arrov
Ezek.  1.  3.  the  word  came  e.  to  Ezekiel  the  piles
Tim.  4. 1.  now  the  Spirit  speaketh  e.  soniedepa
EXPULSIONS.

Ezek.  45. 1 9.  take  away  your  e.  from  my  people
EXTEND.

Psal.  109.  12.  let  there  be  none  to  e.  mercy  to  hi'
Isa.  66.  12.  behold,  I  will  e.  peace  to  her  like  a  rivt
EXTENDED.

Gen.  39.  +  21.  but  the  Lord  e.  kindness  to  Joseph
Ezra  7. 28.  e.  mercy  to  me  ||  9.  9.  e.  mercy  to  us
Jer.  31.  +3.  I  have  e.  loving-kindness  to  thee
EXTENDETH.

Psal.  16.  2.  my  Lord,  my  goodness  e.  not  to  thee
EXIT  N  CT.

Job  17. 1.  my  days  are  e.  the  graves  are  ready  for  n
Isa.  43.  17. 'they  are  e.  they  are  quenched  as  tow
EXTINGUISH.  |

Ezek.  32.  +  7.  when  I  shall  e.  thee,  I  will  cover  hca
EXTINGUISHED.

Job  6.  +  17.  when  it  is  hot,  they  are  e.  out  of  plae<
EXTOL.

Psal.  30.  1. 1  will  e.  thee,  O  Lord, hast  lifted  men
68.  4.  e.  him  that  rideth  upon  the  heavens
145.  1. 1  will  e.  thee,  my  God,  O  King,  and  ble
Dan.  4.  37. 1  Nebuchadnezzar  e.  King  of  heaver
EXTOLLED.

Psal.  66.  17.  and  he  was  e.  with  mv  tongue
Isa-  52.  13.  behold,  my  servant  shall  be  e.
EXTORTION.

Ezek.  22.  12.  thou  hast  greedily  gained  by  e.
Mat.  23.  25.  but  within  they  are  full  of  e.

EXTORTIONER.

Psal.  109. 11.  let  the  e.  catch  all  that  he  hath
Isa.  16.  4.  thee,  is  at  an  end,  the  spoiler  ceaseth
1  Cor.  5.  11.  if  any  man  be  a  drunkard,  an  e.
EXTORTIONERS.

Luke  18. 11 .  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  e.

1  Cor.  5.  10.  yet  not  altogether  with  e.  for  then
6.  10.  nor  e.  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God
EXTREME.

Dent.  28. 22.  the  L.  shall  smite  thee  with  e.  bumi;
EXTREMITY.

Job  35.  15.  yet  he  knoweth  it  not  in  great  e.
EYE,

The  organ  of  sight,  by  which  visible  objects  are  d:
cerned.  Eye,  or  eyes,  in  Scripture,  are  figuA
tively  applied  to  God  after  the  manner  if  ma j
Prov.  15.  3.  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  eve
place ;  that  is,  his  infinite  knowledge  and  pro
dence.  And  as  in  men  the  eye  is  the  organ  win
shews  compassion  or  fury,  vengeance  or  pardi.
gentleness  or  severity  ;  in  these  senses  eye  is
f erred  to  God;  Psal.  34.  15.  The  eyes  oft
Lord  are  upon  the  righteous :  He  favours  the
and  heaps  blessings  on  them.  1  Kings  8. 29.  II
thine  eyes  may  be  opened  toward  this  hoi
night  and  day  ;  that  is,  that  thou  mayest  heh
it  with  an  eye  of  favour  and  compassion.  So  /i.j
wise  in  Jer.  24.  6.  I  will  set  mine  eyes  up
them  for  good.  On  the  contrary  it  is  said,  An
9.  8.  Behold,  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  t!
sinful  kingdom ;  that  is,  in  a  way  of  sever
and  judgment.  Also  Ezek.  5.  11.  N  either  sh
mine  eyes  spare,  neither  will  1  have  any  pity
Eye,  when  referred  to  man,  is  not  only  taken  for
organ  of  sight,  but  also  for  the  understanding
judgment .  Deut.  16.  19.  A  gift  doth  blind
eyes  of  the  wise  :  It  corrupteth  and  perverteth
mind,  that  as  he  will  not,  so  oftentimes  he  can
discern  between  right  and  wrong.  So  in  Acts
18.  I  send  thee  to  the  Gentiles  to  open  their  ey
that  is,  To  preach  the  gospel  unto  them  whet
they  may  attain  unto  a  spiritual  understandini
their  duty.  Likewise  in  Gen.  3.  7-  The  eyes
them  both  were  opened.  Their  consctei
were  touched  with  a  sense  of  the  heinousnes.
their  sin,  whereby  they  had  defiled  their  sm
and  of  the  greatness  of  the  misery  they  had  bm
upon  themselves  and  their  posterity.

The  Hebrews  call  colours,  eyes,  Num.  11.
And  the  eye,  or  colour  of  the  manna,  war
the  eye,  or  colour  of  bdellium.  To  set  m
eyes  upon  any  one  is  to  do  him  service,  to  fax
him  greatly  ;  or  barely  to  see  him  with  friends,
Gen.  44.  21.  Thou  saidst,  bring  Benjamin  ul
me,  that  I  may  set  mine  eyes  upon  him.  i
N  ebuchadnezzar  recommends  it  to  N  ebuzar-ac .
that  he  would  set  his  eyes  upon  Jeremiah,  ■
permit  him  to  go  where  he  pleased,  Jer.  39-  f<
1  40.  +  4.  To  find  grace  in  one’s  eyes,  t 1
win  his  favour  and  friendship,  Ruth  2.  10.  1
says,  I  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  Job  29.  15.  thao
I  instructed,  directed,  and  assisted  such  as  f
not  how  to  manage  their  own  affairs.

To  have  the  eyes  towards,  or  upon  one,  denotes
the  person  expects,  or  waits  for  something  Ji
him  on  whom  the  eyes  are  placed.  J  bus  J
Adonijah,  without  his  father's  knowledge,  1
usurped  the  kingdom,  Bathsheba  told  king  1+aji
1  Kings  1.  20.  The  eyes  of  all  Israel  are
thee,  that  thou  shouldest  tell  them  who  s-
sit  upon  the  throne  of  my  lord  the  king  <
him;  that  is.  The  generality  of  the  people  ax
suspense  whether  Adonijah’s  practices  be  [j
thy  consent,  or  no,  and  wait  for  thy  sentence .
cerning  thy  successor,  which  they  will  ieeji
embrace.  Also  in  Psal.  25.  15.  Mine  eyes
ever  towards  the  Lord;  that  is,  my  exPef*', ,
of  help  is  only  from  him.  And  Psal.  I-  •
As  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto  the  bar.
their  masters ;  either  for  the  supply  oj  :
wants,  which  comes  from  their  masters  bana
for  help  and  defence  against  their  oppressors ..
Solomon  says,  that  the  wise  man’s  eyes  are  1
head,  Eccl.  2.  14.  He  knows  where  he  goes.?
what  he  has  to  do;  he  does  not  act  igrwrai
rashly,  or  foolishly.  He  says  likewise,  ;


E  Y  E


E  ^  E


E  Y  E


.  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  riches,  Eccl.  4.  8.

•  covetous  mind ,  or  desire ,  ;#  insatiable.  Eye
,  me  times  taken  for  something  that  is  most  de-
/  /«/  and  dear  to  a  person.  Mat.  5.  29.  It  thy
c  :  eve  offend  thee  pluck  it  out.  Gal.  4.  15.
\  would  have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes,  and
p  .  given  them  to  me.  It  is  likewise  taken  for
,,  iou,  or  conceit.  Prov.  3.  ~.  he  not  wise  in

own  eyes.  And  for  a  diligent  and  careful
,  jction  into  affairs.  Prov.  20.  8.  A  kingscat-
t,  h  away  all  evil  with  his  eyes.  Eviltye  ;  see
o  A  ll..

(  i5.  t  CO.  let  not  your  e.  spare  your  stun
r  10.  t  5.  the  locusts  cover  the  e.  of  The  earth
j'  .  e.  for  e.  Lev.  24. 20.  Dent.  19. 21.  Mat.  5.  38.
2  f  a  nian  smite  the  e.  ot’  his  servant,  or  the  e.

S’  1.  20.  or  that  hath  a  blemish  in  his  e.

».  11.17-  the  e.  of  manna  was  as  thee,  of  bdellium
c  28.  54.  hise.  shall  be  evil  toward  his  brother

5  ler  e.  shall  be  evil  towards  her  husband
2  ).  he  kept  him  as  the  apple  of  his  e.

4  his  e.  was  not  dim,  nor  his  force  abated
:  ).  5.  the  e.  of  their  Clod  was  on  the  elders
/  8.  e.  that  hath  seen  me,  shall  see  me  no  more
jit.  given  up  the  ghost,  and  no  e.  had  seen  me
[i  the  e.  which  saw  him,  shall  see  him  no  more
4  i.  thee,  of  the  adulterer  waiteth  for  twilight,
ing,  no  e.  shall  see  me,  and  disguiseth  his  face
K  a  path  which  fhe  vulture’s  e.  hath  not  seen

1  ind  his  e.  seeth  every  precious  thing

li  .  when  the  e.  saw  me,  it  gave  witness  to  me
33.  18.  e.  of  the  L.  is  on  them  that  fear  him
z ).  neither  let  them  wink  with  the  e.

:  hey  said,  aha,  aha,  our  e.  hath  seen  it
4  he  that  formed  the  e.  shall  he  not  see  ?
r!  10. 10.  that  winketh  with  the  e.  causeth  sorrow
Ol !.  the  seeing  e.  hearing  ear,  Lord  hath  made

2  he  that  hath  a  bountiful  e.  shall  be  blessed
Bj*.  the  e.  that  mocketh  at  his  father

•  1.  8.  the  e.  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing
.  i  neither  is  his  e.  satisfied  with  riches

a  5.  18.  their  e.  shall  not  spare  children
2  thy  watchmen  sing,  for  they  shall  see  e.  to  e.

4  neither  hath  the  e.  seen,  1  Cor.  2.9.
i  2.4.  and  slew  all  that  were  pleasant  to  the  e.
:  9. 5.  let  not  your  e.  spare,  neither  have  pity

6 .  none  e.  pitied,  to  do  any  of  these  to  thee

1 1.  11.  be  defiled,  and  let  our  e.  look  on  Zion
* ).  22.  the  light  of  the  body  is  the  e.  Luke  11.  34.
.  hou  beholdestthe  mote  in  thy  brother’s  e.  ami
not  the  beam  in  thine  own  e.  Luke  6.  41,  42.
f  if  thine  e.  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out

1 1.  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through  e.  of  a  needle
than  a  rich  man,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25.

.12.16.  because  1  am  not  the  e.  1  am  not  of  body
l  f  the  whole  body  were  an  e.  ||  21.  e.  cannot  say
£ '..  in  twinkling  of  an  e.  at  the  last  trump
e  he  cometh,  and  every  e.  shall  see  him
Evil  EVE.

r  23. 6.  the  bread  of  him  that  nath  an  evil  e.

1 2.  he  that  hasteth  to  be  rich  hath  an  evil  e.

W6. 23.  but  if  thine  e.  be  ev  l,  Luke  11.  34.

(  5.  is  thine  e.  evil  because  1  am  good  ?

'■  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  proceedeth  an  evil  e.
Mine  EYE.

i  •  24. 10.  bade  kill  thee,  but  mine  e.  spared  thee
'■  7-  mine  e.  shall  no  more  see  good
•'  •  mine  e.  hath  seen  all  this,  mine  ear  heard
1 0.  but  mine  e.  poureth  out  tears  to  God
]  doth  mine  e.  continue  in  their  provocation  ?

7  tine  e.  also  is  dim  by  reason  of  sorrow
-  •  heard  of  thee,  but  now  mine  e.  seeth  thee
<  6.  7-  mine  e.  is  consumed  with  grief,  31.  9.

‘  ■  instruct  thee,  I  will  .guide  thee  with  mine  e.
•  niinee.  hath  seen  hisdesi  e  on  mine  enemies
» .  mhie  e.  mouineth  by  reason  of  affliction

•  L  mine  e.  shall  see  my  desire  on  mine  enemies
).i4.  come  to  Babylon  I  will  set  mine  e.  on  thee

c  1.  16.  mine  e.  minee.  rnnneth  down,  3.48.

mine  e.  trickleth  down  and  ceaseth  not
{.mine  e.  affecteth  iny  heart,  because  of  daugh.

•  o.  11.  neither'sliall  mine  e.  spare,  nor  will  I

have  any  pity,  7.  4,  9-  I  8.  18.  |  9.  10.

•  i  •  nevertheless  mine  e.  spared  them

Thine  EY  E.

'•  7-  16.  thine  e.  shall  not  pity,  nor  shalt  thou
serve  their  gods,  13.  8.  I  19.  13,  21.  |  ‘  5.  12.

•  and  thine  e.  be  evil  against  thy  poor  brother
'  6.  22.  if  thine  e.  be  single,  Luke  11.  34.

•  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  ov  n  e.  Luke  6.  41.

t .  if  thine  e.  offend  thee  pluck  it  out,  Mark  9.47.
See  Apim.e.

EYE-BROWS.

e  4.9.  he  shall  shave  all  his  hair  off’  his  e. -brows
.  EYE  LIDS.

’:+9.  nor  let  it  see  the  e.  of  the  morning
.6.  a.ml  on  mine  r,  is  the  shadow  of  death

8.  his  eyes  are  like  the  e.  of  the  morning

•  11-4.  hise.  try  the  children  of  men

■  4.  sleep  to  mine  eyes,  or  slumber  to  mine  e.

1  4.  25.  let  thine  e.  look  straight  before  thee
sle.eP  to  thine  eyes,  or  slumber  to  thine  e.

,  “other  let  her  take  thee  with  her  e.

* ,  .''ovf  *ofty  their  eyes,  their  e.  are  lifted  up

•  >■  18.  that  our  e.  may  gush  out  with  waters

Eight  EYE.

6  11.  17.  the  sword  shall  be  on  his  arm  and  on

r  e  n  •  *’*s  r*ffht  e.  shall  he  utterly  darkened

5.  .9.  it  thy  right  e.  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out
EYE-SALVE.

•  '•  18.  anoint  thine  eyes  with  e. -salve  to  see

.  EYE-SERVICE.

f  o.  0.  not  with  e. -service  as  men  pleasers,  but
as  the  servants  of  Christ,  Col.  3.  22.
.  .  EYE-SIGHT.

to.  the  Ld. hath  recompensed  meaccord-
ng  to  my  cleanness  in  his  e.  sight,  Psal.  18.  24.

I’YE-WI  I  N  ESSES.

1-2.  who  from  beginning  were  e. -witnesses
■  1.  16.  Out  were  e.  witnesses-  ot  his  majesty
,0  „  ,  EYED.

'  •  18.  9.  and  Saul  e.  David  from  that  day


Tender-V.y  ED

Gen.  29.  17*  Leah  was  tender-e.  Rachel  beautiful
EY  ES.

Gen.  3.  6.  was  good  for  food  and  pleasant  to  the  e.

7.  and  tlie  e.  of  them  both  were  opened

16.  4.  her  mistress  was  despised  in  her  e.

5.  she  had  conceived,  1  was  despised  in  her  e.

20.  16.  behold,  he  is  to  thee  a  covering  of  tlie  e.

21.  19.  God  opened  1 1  agar's  e.  she  saw  a  well

28.  +8.  the  daughters  of  <  'anaan  evil  in  e.  of  Isaac
30.  41 .  lacob  laid  the  rods  before  the  e.  of  the  cattle

39.7-  his  master’s  wife  cast  her  e.  on  Joseph

41.  37.  was  good  in  the  t.  of  Pharaoh,  45.  +16.

48. 10.  now  the  e.  of  Israel  were  dim  for  age
Exod.  5.  21.  to  he  abhorred  in  the  e.  of  Pharaoh

21.  +8.  if  she  he  evil  in  the  e.  of  her  master
24. 17.  glory  of  Lord  was  like  fire  in  e.  of  Israel

Lev.  4. 13.  it  sin  through  ignorance,  and  the  thing  be
hid  from  the  e.  of  the  assembly,  Num.  15.  t24.
26.16  the  burning  ague  shall  consume  the  e.

Num.  5. 13.  he  hid  from  the  e.  of  her  husband
10.31.  and  thou  mayest  be  to  us  instead  of  e.

16.  14.  wilt  thou  put  out  the  e.  of  these  men  ?

20. 12.  to  sanctify  me  in  the  e.  of  Israel

22.  31.  then  the  Lord  opened  the  e.  of  Balaam

24.  3.  the  man  whose  e.  are  open  hath  said,  15.
Dent.  16.  19.  a  gift  doth  blind  the  e.  of  the  wise
28.65.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  failing  of  e.

29.  4.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  e.  to  see
Judg.  16.  28.  that  I  may  be  avenged  for  my  two  e.

1  Now. 8. +6.  the  thing  was  evil  in  the  e.  of  Samuel

16.  +  7.  man  looketh  on  the  e.  the  Lord  on  the  heart
+  12.  David  was  ruddy,  and  withal  fair  of  e.

18.  +8.  the  saying  was  evil  in  thee,  of  Saul
29.  +6.  thou  art  not  good  in  the  e.  of  the  lords

+  7-  that  thou  do  not  evil  in  the  e.  of  the  lords

2  Sam.  6.  20.  who  uncovered  himself  in  e.ofhandm.

17.  +  4.  the  saying  was  right  in  the  e.  of  Absalom
24.  3.  that  the  e.  of  my  lord  the  king  may  see  it

1  Kings  1 . 20.  the  e.  of  all  Israel  are  upon  thee

2  Kings  6.  17-  Lord  opened  the  e.  of  the  young  man
20.  Elisha  said,  Lord,  open  the  e.  of  these  men

9.  +  30.  Jezebel  heard  of  it,  put  here,  in  painting

25.7.  put  out  e.  of  Zedekian,  Jer.  39.  7.  I  52. 11.

1  Chron.  13.  4.  was  right  in  the  e.  of  all  the  people

2  Chron.  30.  +  4.  the  thing  was  right  in  the  e.  of  tlie

king  and  all  tlie  congregation,  Esth.  1.  +21.
Neh.  8.  +  5.  izra  opened  the  hook  in  e.  of  fhe  people
Job  10.  4.  hast  thou  e.  of  flesh  '  or  seest  as  man  seeth  i

11. 20.  but  the  e.  of  the  wicked  shall  fail

17.  5.  even  the  e.  of  his  children  shall  fail
22. 1  29.  he  shall  save  him  that  hath  low  e.

28.  21.  seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  e.  of  all  li  ing

29.  15.  1  was  e.  to  the  blind,  and  feet  to  tlie  lame

31. 16.  or  have  caused  the  e.  of  the  widow  to  fail

39.  29.  seeketh  prey,  and  her  e.  behold  afar  off’
Psal.  15.  4.  in  whose  e.  a  vile  person  is  contemned

19.  8.  commandment  is  pure,  enlightening  the  e.
115.  5.  e.  have  they,  but  they  see  not,  135. 16.

123.  2.  as  the  e.  of  servants,  the  e.  of  a  maiden

145.  15.  the  e.  of  all  wait  upon  tljee,  thou  givest

146.  8.  the  Lord  openeth  the  e.  of  the  blind
Prov.  1.  +  17.  in  vain  the  net  is  spread  in  the  e.  of  bird
6.  +  17.  haughty  e.  are  abomination  to  the  Lord

10.  26.  as  smoke  to  the  e.  so  is  the  sluggard
15.  30.  the  light  of  the  e.  rejoiceth  the  heart

17.  8.  a  gift  is  as  a  precious  stone  in  the  e.  of  him

24.  the  e.  of  a  fool  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth
23. 29.  who  hath  wounds  ?  who  hath  redness  of  e.  ?
27.  20.  so  the  e.  of  man  are  never  satisfied
Eccl.  2. 14.  the  wise  man’s  e.  are  in  his  head
6.  9.  better  the  sight  of  e.  than  wandering  of  desire

11. 7-  it  is  pleasant  for  the  e.  to  behold  the  sun
Cant.  1.  15.  thou  art  fair,  thou  hast  dove’s  e.  4. 1 .

Isa.  3. 8.  against  Lord,  to  provoke  the  e.  of  his  glory

16.  the  daughters  of  Zion  walk  with  wanton  e  ~.
5. 15.  the  e.  of  the  lofty  shall  be  humbled
29.  18.  the  e.  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  obscurity
32.  3.  the  e.  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  dim
35.  5.  then  the  e.  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened

42.  7.  to  open  the  blind  e.  to  bring  out  the  prisoners

43.8.  bring  forth  the  blind  people  that  have  e.

52. 10.  Lord  made  bare  his  arm  in  e.  of  all  nations
59.  10.  like  the  blind  we  grope  as  if  we  had  no  e.

Jer.  4.  +  30.  thou  rentest  thine  e.  witli  painting
5.  21.  which  have  e.  and  see  not,  Ezek.  12.  2.

Ezek.  1.  18.  and  their  rings  were  full  of  e.

10.  12.  the  wheels  were  full  of  e.  round  about

23. 16.  and  as  soon  as  she  saw  them  with  her  e.
38.23.  I  will  be  known  in  the  e.  of  many  nations

Dan.  7.  8.  in  this  horn  were  e.  like  the  e.  of  man
20,  even  of  that  horn  that  had  e.  and  a  mouth
Dab.  1.  13.  thou  art  of  purer  e.  than  to  behold  evil
Zech.  3.  9.  upon  one  stone  shall  be  seven  e.

8.6.  if  it  be  marvellous  in  the  e.  of  the  remnant
9. 1.  when  the  e.  of  man  shall  he  towards  the  1  ord

Mat.  18.  9.  better  to  enter  with  one  eye  rather  than
having  two  e.  to  be  cast  into  hell-tire,  Mark  9.  47.
Markih.  18.  having  e.  see  ye  not?  and  ears,  hear  not
Ijuke  4.  20.  and  the  e.  of  all  were  fastened  on  him

10.  23.  blessed  are  the  e.  which  see  tlie  things
John  9. 6.  he  anointed  the  e.  of  the  blind  man

32.  that  any  opened  e.  of  one  that  was  born  blind  ?

10. 21.  can  a  devil  open  tlie  e.  of  the  blind

11.  37.  could  not  this  man,  which  opened  the  e.  ?
Acts  9.  40.  Dorcas  opened  her  e.  ana  sat  up
Rom.  11.8.  hath  given  them  e.  they  should  not  see
Gal.  3. 1.  before  whose  e.  Christ  been  set  crucified
Eph.  1. 18.  the  e.  of  your  understanding  enlightened
Heb.  4. 13.  but  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to  the

e.  of  him  with  whom  we  nave  to  do
2  Pet .2. 14.  having  e.  full  of  adultery,  not  cease  sin
1  John  2. 16.  the  lust  of  the  e.  and  pride  of  life
Rev.  4.  6.  in  the  midst  of  throne  four  beasts  full  ofe.

8.  had  each  six  wings,  ami  were  full  of  e.  within

5. 6.  a  Lamb,  as  it  had  been  slain,  having  seven  e.

His  EY  ES.

Gen.  27.  1.  Isaac  wasold,  and  his  e.  were  dim

49. 12.  his  e.  shall  be  red  with  wine,  teeth  white
Num.  24.  4.  into  a  trance,  having  his  e.  open,  16.
Dent.  24. 1 .  that  if  she  find  no  favour  in  his  e.

Judg.  16. 21.  Philistines  took  him  and  put  out  his  e.


1  Sam.  3.  2.  Eli,  his  e.  began  to  wax  dim, 4.  15.

14.  27.  he  tasted,  and  his  e.  were  enlightened

18.  +  20.  and  the  thing  was  right  in  his  e.

’  Sam.  19.  +  18.  and  to  do  the  good  in  hit  e.

22.  4  25.  ace  rding  to  my  cleanness  before  his  e.

1  Kings  9.  +  12.  and  they  were  not  right  in  his  e.

14.  4.  Ahijah  could  not  see,  fo  his  e.  were  set

2  Kings  4.-34.  he  lay  on  child  and  put  his  e.  >1  his  e,

35.  the  ( hild  sneezed  seven  times  and  opened  hisc.
6.  17.  I  pray  thee,  open  his  e.  that  he  may  see

25.7.  they  slew  the  sons  of  Zedekiah  before  hi.se.
and  put  out  eves  of  Zedekiah.  Jer.  39.  6.  I  52. 10.

1  Chron.  21 . 23.  let  the  king  do  what  is  good  in  his  e.
Esth.  8.  5.  if  thingseem  right,  and  1  pleasing  in  hi.se.
Job  16.  9.  mine  enemy  sharpeneth  his  e.  on  n.e

21.  20.  his  e.  shall  see  his  destruction,  and  drink
24.  23.  he  resteth,  yet  his  e.  are  on  their  ways
27. 19.  the  rich  man  openeth  lui.se.  and  he  is  not
34.  21.  his  e.  are  on  the  ways  of  man,  and  he  seeth

36. 7.  he  withdraweth  not  his  e.  from  the  righteous

40.  24.  lie  taketh  it  with  his  e.  his  nose  pierceth

41.  18.  his  e.  are  like  the  eye  lids  of  the  morning
Psal.  10.  8.  his  e.  are  privily  set  against  the  poor

11.  4.  his  e.  behold  the  children  of  men
36.  1.  that  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  hi.se.

66.7.  he  ruleth  by  power,  his  e.  behold  the  nations
Prov.  6. 13.  he  winketh  with  his  e.  he  speaketh

16.  30.  he  shutteth  his  e.  to  de  ise  froward  things

20.  8.  a  king  scattereth  away  all  evil  with  his e.

21. 10.  his  neighbour  findeth  no  favour  in  his  e.

24.  +18.  lest  Lord  see  it,  and  it  be  evil  in  his  e.

28.  +  11.  the  rich  man  is  wise  in  his  own  e.

27.  he  that  hideth  hi.se.  shall  have  many  a  curse
Eccl.  8.  16.  nor  day  nor  night  sleepeth  with  his  e.
Cant.  5. 12.  hi-  e.  are  as  the  eyes  of  doves

8. 10.  I  was  in  his  e.  as  one  that  found  favour
Jsa.  11.3.  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  hise.

17. 7-  hi.se.  shall  have  respect  to  the  holy  One
33.  15.  and  shutteth  his  e.  from  seeing  evil
59.  +  15.  evil  in  his  e.  that  there  was  no  judgment
Jer.  32.  4.  and  his  e.  shall  behold  hise.

Ezek.  12. 12.  that  he  see  not  the  ground  with  his  e.

20.  7-  cast  ye  away  the  abomination  of  his  e.

Dan.  8.  5.  had  a  notable  horn  between  his  e.  21
10.  6.  and  his  e.  were  as  lamps  of  fire
Mark  8.  23.  when  he  had  spiton  his  e.  and  put  hands

25.  after  that  he  put  his  hands  again  on  his  e.
John  9. 14.  when  J  esus  made  cluy,  and  opened  his  e.

21.  or  who  hath  opened  his  e.  we  know  not
Acts  3.  4.  Peter  fastening /m  e.  upon  him,  said

9.  8.  and  when  his  e.  were  opened  he  saw  no  man

18.  there  fell  from  his e.  as  it  had  been  scales

13.  9.  then  Saul  set  his  e.  on  him,  and  said
1  John  2. 11.  because  darkness  hath  blinded  his  e.
Rev.  1. 14.  his  e.  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  2. 18.  1 19.  12.
Lift  or  lifted  up  EYES.

Gen.  13. 10.  Lot  lifted  up  his  e.  and  beheld  Iordan

14.  lift  up  now  thine  e.  and  look,  31. 12.  Dent.  S.
27.  2  Kings  19.  22.  Isa.  49. 18.  1  60. 4.  Jer.
3.  2.  Ezek.  8.  5.  Zech.  5. 5.

18.  2.  and  Abraham  lift  up  his  e.  22.  4, 13.

24.  63.  1  saac  ||  64.  R  ebekah  lift  up  her  e.

31.  10.  Jacob,  33. 1. 1|  43.  29.  Joseph  lift  up  his  e.
Exod.  14. 10.  lift  up  their  e.  the  Egyptians  marched
Num.  24.  2.  Balaam  lift  up  his  e.  and  saw  Israel
Dent.  4. 19.  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  e.  unto  heaven
.Tosh.  5. 13.  Joshua  lifted  up  his  e.  and  looked
Judg.  19. 17.  the  old  man  lift  up  hise.  and  saw  a  man

1  Sam.  6. 13.  lifted  up  their  e.  and  saw  the  ark

2  Sam.  13.  34.  the  watchman  lift  up  his  e.  18.  24.

1  Chr.  21. 16.  David  lift  up  his  e.  and  saw  the  angel
Job  2.  12.  they  lift  up  their  e.  and  knew  him  not
Psal.  121. 1.  I  will  lift  up  mine  e.  to  the  hills
123. 1.  to  thee  lift  1  up  mine  e.  thou  that  dwellest
Jsa.  37.  23.  against  whom  hast  thou  lifted  up  thy  e.  ?
51 .  6.  lift  up  your  e.  Ezek.  33. 25.  John  4.  35.
Ezek.  18.  6.  nor  hath  lift  up  his  e.  to  idols,  15.

12.  hath  spoiled,  hath  lift  up  hisc.  to  idols

23.  27.  so  that  thou  shalt  not  lift  up  thine  e.

Dan.  4.  34.  I  N  ebuchadnezzar  lift  up  mine  e.

8.  3.  then  T  lifted  up  minee.  and  saw,  and  behold,

10. 5.  Zech.  1. 18.  I  2.  1.  |  5. 1,  5,  9.  I  6. 1.
Mat.  17. 8.  had  lift  up  their  e.  they  saw  no  man
Luke  6. 20.  Jesus  l.up  \\\%e.John(o. 5.  |  11.41.  |  17.1.
16.  23.  in  hell  he  lift  up  his  e.  being  in  torments

18. 13.  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  .lis  e.  to  heaven
EY  ES  of  the  Lord.

Gen.  6.  8.  Noah  found  grace  in  the  e.  oj  tne  Lord
38.  1 10.  the  thing  was  evil  in  the  e.  of  the  Lord
Dent.  11. 12.  the  e.  of  the  Lord  are  always  on  it

13.  18.  to  do  what  is  right  in  the  e.  if  the  Lord

1  Sam.  26. 24.  my  life  much  set  by  in  the  e.  if  the  L.

2  Sam.  11.  +  27-  but  the  thing  that  David  did  was

evil  in  the  e.  of  the  Lord,  1  Chron.  21.  +  7-

15.  25.  if  1  find  favour  in  the  e.  of  the  Lord

1  Kings  15.5.  because  David  did  what  was  right  in

the  e.  of  the  Lord,  11.  I  22.  43.  2  Chron.  14.  2.

2  Chron.  16.  9-  the  e.  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro

through  the  whole  earth,  Zech.  4.  10.
Psal.  34.  15.  the  e.  of  the  L.  are  upon  the  righteous,
and  his  ears  are  open  to  their  cry,  1  Pet.  3. 12.
Prov.  5.  21.  ways  of  man  are  before  the  e.  of  the  L.
15.  3.  the  e.  of  " the  Lord  are  in  every  place

22.  12.  tlie  e.  of  the  Lord  preserve  knowledge

Is  a.  49. 5.  yet  shall  1  be  glorious  in  the  e.  of  the  D-rd
Amos  9.  8.  the  e.  of  the  L.  are  on  the  sinful  kingdom
Mine  EYES.

Gen.  31 . 40.  and  my  sleep  departed  trom  mine  e.

44. 21.  bring  him,  that  1  may  set  mine  e.  upon  him
Judg.  14.  +  3.  get  her  for  me,  she  is  right  in  mine  e.

1  Sam.  12.  3.  or  received  any  bribe  to  blind  mine  e.

14.  29.  see  how  mine  e.  have  been  enlightened

26.  24.  thy  life  much  set  by  this  day  in  mine  e.

1  Kings  1 . 48.  hath  given  one  to  sit,  mine  e.  seeing  it

9.  .3.  have  hallowed  this  house,  mine  e.  and  mine
heart  shall  be  there  perpetually ,  2  Chron.  7.  16.

10.  7-  until  mine  e.  had  seen  it,  2  Chron.  9.  6.

11.  33.  have  not  walked  in  my  ways,  to  do  that

which  is  right  in  mine  e.  14. 8.  2  Kings  10.  30.

2  Chronil.  15.  now  mine  e.  shall  be  open,  ears  attent
Job  3. 10.  because  it  hid  not  sorrow  from  mine  e.

4. 16.  it  stood  still,  an  image  was  before  mine  e,

G  145


E  Y  E


F  A  B


F  A  C


Job  19.  27.  mince,  shall  behold,  and  not  another
3k  1.  1  made  a  covenant  w  ith  mine  e.  why  then
7.  and  mine  heart  walked  after  mine  e.

Ps.  13. 3.  lighten  mtnee.  lest  1  sleep  the  sleep  of  death

25. 15.  mine  e.  are  ever  toward  the  Lord

26.  3.  for  thy  loving- kindness  is  before  mine  e.

38. 10.  as  for  the  light  of  mine  e.  it  is  gone  from  me
69.  3.  rninee.  fail,  whilst  I  wait  for  my  God
73.  t  16.  to  know  this,  it  was  labour  in  mine  e.

77.  4.  thou  holdest  mine  e.  waking,  I  am  troubled
101.  3.  1  will  set  no  evil  thing  before  mine  e.

6.  mine  e.  shall  be  on  the  faithful  of  the  lan  1
116.  8.  thou  hast  delivered  mine  e.  from  tears
119.  18.  open  rninee.  ||  37.  turn  away  mine  e.

82.  mine  e.  fail  for  thy  word,  saying,  comfort  me
123.  mine  e.  fail  for  thy  salvation,  and  for  the.  word
136.  rivers  of  waters  run  down  mine  e.

148.  mine  e.  prevent  the  night-watches

131.  1.  mine  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  e.  lofty

132.  4.  1  will  not  give  sleep  to  mine  e.  or  slumber
141.  8.  but  rninee.  are  unto  thee,  O  God,  the  Lord

Bed.  2.  10.  whatsoever  mine  e.  desired,  1  kept  not
Isa.  1. 15.  1  will  hide  mine  e.  fiomyou
16.  put  away  the  evil  doings  from  before-  mine  e.
6.5.  mine  e.  have  seen  the  king,  the  l.ord  of  hosts

38.  14.  rninee.  fail  with  looking  upward

65. 12.  but  did  evil  before  mine  e.  66.  4.

16.  and  because  they  are  hid  from  mine  e.

Jer.  9. 1.  O  that  mine  e.  were  a  fountain  of  tears

13.  if.  mine  e.  shall  weep  sore,  and  run  down

14.  17.  shall  say,  let  mine  e.  run  down  with  tears
16.  17.  rninee.  are  on  their  ways,  they  are  not  hid

from  me,  nor  is  their  iniquity  hid  from  mine  e.

24.  6. 1  will  set  mine  e.  upon  them  for  good
Lam.  2.  11.  minee.  do  fail  with  fears,  my  bowels
Hos.  13.  14.  repentance  shall  be  hid  from  mine  e.
Amos  9.  4.  1  will  set  mine  e.  on  them  for  evil
Mic.  7. 10.  mine  e. shall  behold  her,  be  trodden  down
Zech. 8.  6.  should  it  also  be  marvellous  in  mine  e.
9.8.  for  now  have  1  seen  with  mine  e.

12.  4.  1  will  open  minee.  on  the  house  of  Judah
Luke  2.  30.  for  mine  e.  have  seen  thy  salvation
John  9- 11. Jesus  made  clay,  and  anointed  mine  e.15.

30.  whence  he  is,  yet  he  hath  opened  mine  e.

Acts  11.  6.  on  the  which  when  1  had  fastened  mine  e.
Our  EY  ES.

Num.  11.  6.  nothing  but  this  manna  before  our  e.
Dent.  6.  22.  the  Lord  shewed  signs  before  our  e.

21. 7.  not  shed  this  blood,  nor  have  our  e.  seen  it

2  6'«w.20.  +  6.  lest  Sheba  deliver  himself  from  cure.
2  Chron.  20. 12.  but,  O  God,  our  e.  are  upon  thee
Ezra  9.  8.  that  our  God  may  lighten  our  e.

Psal.  118.  2.3,  this  is  the  Lord’s  doing,  it  is  marvel¬
lous  ill  our  e.  Mat.  21.  42.  Mark  12.  11.
123.  2.  no  cure,  wait  upontha  Lord  our  God
Jer.  9.  18.  that  our  e.  may  run  down  with  tears
Lam.  4  17-  our  e.  asyet  failed  forourvain  help

5.  17.  heart  is  faint,  tor  these  things  our  e.  are  dim
Joel  1.  16.  is  not  the  meat  cut  off  before  our  e.

Mat.  20.  33.  Lord,  thatowr  e.  may  be  opened

1  John  1.  1.  that  which  we  have  seen  with  our  e.

Own  EYES.

Num.  15.  39.  that  ye  seek  not  after  your  own  e.
Vent.  12.  8.  ye  shall  not  do,  every  man  whatsoever
is  right  in  his  own  e.  Judg.  17.  6.  (  21.  25.

2  Sam.  4.  t  10.  was  in  his  ownc.  a  bringer  of  good
Neh.  6.  16.  enemies  much  cast  down  in  their  owne.
Job  32.  1.  because  he  was  righteous  in  his  own  e.
Psal.  36.  2.  he  tiattereth  himself  in  his  ozone.

Prov.  3.  7.  be  not  wise  in  thine  own  e.  fear  God

12. 15.  the  way  of  a  fool  is  right  in  his  own  e.

16.  2.  all  the  ways  of  man  are  clean  in  his  owne.

21.  2.  every  way  of  man  is  right  in  his  own  e.

26.  t  5.  answer  a  fool,  lest  he  be  wise  in  his  own  e.

30. 12.  a  generation  that  are  pure  in  their  own  e.
Isa.  5.  21.  woe  to  them  that  are  wise  in  their  own  e.
Gal.  4.  15.  ye  would  have  plucked  out  your  own  e.

Their  EYES.

Gen.  42. 24. he  took  and  bound  Simeon  before  their  e.
Exod.  8. 26.  abomination  of  Egyptians  before  their  e.
Lev.  20.  4.  do  any  ways  hide  their  e.  from  the  man
Num.  20.  8.  speak  to  the  rock  before  their  e.

27. 14.  to  sanctify  me  at'the  water  before  their  e.
Josh.  22. 1 30.  it  was  good  in  their  e.  2  Sam.  3.  t  36.

2  Kings  6.  20.  the  Lord  opened  their e.  and  they  saw
Ezra  3. 12.  foundation  was  laid  before  their  e.
Esth.  1. 17.  they  shall  despise  their  husbands  in  t.  e.
Job  21.  8.  and  their  offspring  before  their  e.

Psal.  17. 1 1  -  they  have  set  their  e.  bowing  down
69.  23.  let  their  e.  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not
73.7-  their  e.  stand  out  with  fatness,  have  more
Prov.  29. 13.  the  Lord  lighteneth  both  their  e.

30. 13.  a  generation,  O  how  lofty  are  their  e.

Eccl.  5. 11.  saving  the  beholding  them  with  their  e.
Isa.  6. 10.  make  their  ears  heavy,  shut  their  e.  lest

they  see  with  their  e.  Mat.~  13. 15.  Acts  28.  27.

13.  16.  children  be  dashed  to  pieces  before  their  e.
44. 18.  for  lie  hath  shut  their  e.  they  cannot  see

Jer.  14. 6.  their  e.  did  fail, because  there  was  no  grass
Ezek.  6.  9.  and  with  their  e.  which  go  a  whoring

20.8.  not  castaway  the  abominations  of  their  e.

24.  and  their  e.  were  after  their  father’s  idols

21 . 6.  and  with  bitterness  sigh  before  their  e.

22.  26.  and  have  hid  their  e.  from  my'  sabbaths

24.  25.  when  1  take  from  them  the  desire  of  their  e.

36.  23. 1  shall  be  sanctified  in  you  before  their  e.

37.  20.  sticks  shall  be  in  thy  hand  before  their  e.  ’

38. 16.  sanctified  in  thee,  O  Gog,  before  their  e.
Zech.  14.  12.  and  their  e.  shall  consume  away
Mat.  9.  29.  then  touched  he  their  e.  saying

30.  their  e.  were  opened,  and  esus  charged  them
13.  15.  their  e.  theyT  have  closeu,  lest  at  any  time

20.  34.  Jesus  touched  their  e  their  e.  received  sight
26.  43.  for  their  e.  were  heavy,  Mark  14.40.

Luke  24. 16.  but  their  e.  were  holden,  that  they

31.  their  e.  were  opened,  and  they  knew  him
John  12. 40.  he  hath  blinded  their  e.  and  hardened
Acts  26.  18.  to  open  their  e.  and  to  turn  them

J\  om .  3. 18.  there  is  no  tear  of  God  before  their  e.

11. 10.  let  their  e.  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not
Itev.7. 17.  the  Lambshall  feed  them,  and  God  shall
wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  e.  21. 4.

146


Thine  EY  ES.

Gen.  16.  +  6.  do  to  her  that  which  is  good  in  thine  e.
20. 1 15.  Abimelech  said,  dwell  as  is  good  in  thine e.

30.  27.  if  1  have  found  favour  in  thine  e.  tarry

46.  4.  Joseph  shall  put  his  hand  on  thine  e.

47.  19.  wherefore  snail  we  die  before  thine  e.  ?
Exod.  13.  9.  for  a  memorial  between  thine  e.

16.  for  frontlets  between- thine  e.  Dent.  6.  8.

Num.  22.  +  34.  if  it  be  evil  in  thine  e.  I  will  go  hack
Dent.  3.  21.  thine  e.  have  seen  all  that  the  Lord

27-  lift  up  thine  e.  behold  it  with  thine  c.

4.  9.  forget  the  things  which  thine  e.  have  seen
7.  19.  the  great  temptations  thine  e.  saw,  29-  3.
10.21.  terrible  things  which  thine  e.  have  seen

28.  31.  thine  ox  shall  be  slain  before  thine  e.

32.  thine  e.  shall  look,  and  fail  with  longing

34.  thou  shalt  be  mad  for  the  sight  of  thine  e.  67-
.34.  4.  1  have  caused  thee  to  see  it  with  thine  e.
Judg.  10.  +  15.  Israel  said,  we  have  sinned,  do  to  us
whatsoever  is  good  in  thine  e.  2  Kings  10.  5.
liuth  2.  9.  let  thine  e.  be  on  the  field  they  reap

10.  she  said,  why  have  1  found  grace  in  thine e.  ?

1  ■'•am.  2.3.3.  shall  be  to  consume  thine  e.

20.  3.  knoweth  that  l  have  found  grace  in  thine  e.
29.  and  now  if  1  have  found  favour  in  thine  e.

24.  10.  thine  e.  have  seen  how  the  Lord  delivered

25.  8.  let  the  young  men  find  favour  in  thine  e.

26.  21.  my  soul  was  precious  in  thine  e.  this  day

27.  5.  if  1  have  found  grace  in  thine  e.  give  me

2  Sam.  10.  t  3.  the  princes  said  to  Hanun,  in  thine
e.  doth  Pavid  honour  thy  father,  1  Chron.  19.  t  3.

11.  +  25.  let  not  this  thing  be  evil  in  thine  e.

12.  11.  1  will  take  thy  wives  before  th/ne  e.

19.  27.  do  therefore  what  is  good  in  thine  e.

22.  28.  thine  e  are  on  the  haughty  to  bring  down

1  Kings  8.  29.  that  thine  e.  may  be  open  toward  this

house  night  and  day,  52.  2  Chron.  6.  20,  40.

20.  6.  w  hatsoever  is  pleasant  in  thine  e.

21.  +2.  if  it  be  good  in  thine  e.  1  will  give  the  worth

2  Kings  7.  2.  behold,  thou  shaltsee  it  with  thine  e.

19.  16.  open,  I  ord,  thine  e.  and  see,  Isa.  37. 17.

22.  20.  and  thine  e.  shall  not  see  all  the  evil

1  Chron.  17-  17-  this  wasasmall  tiling  in  thine e.

2  Chron.  34.  28.  nor  shall  thine  e.  see  all  the  evil
Neh.  1.  6.  let  thine  ear  be  attentive,  and  thine  e.  open
Job 7.  8.  thine  e.  are  upon  me,  and  l  am  not

11.  4.  my  doctrine  is  pure,  l  am  clean  in  thine  e.

14.  3.  dost  thou  open  thine  e.  upon  such  an  one  ?

15.  12.  and  what  do  thine  e.  wink  at  i

Psal.  5.  +5.  the  foolish  shall  not  stand  before  thine  e.

31.  22.  I  said,  1  am  cut  off  from  before  thine  e.

50.  21.  and  set  them  in  order  before  thine  e.

91.  8.  only  with  thine  e.  shalt  thou  behold  and  see
139.  16.  thine  e.  did  see  my  substance  unperfect
Prov.  3.  21.  let  them  not  depart  from  thine  e.  4. 21.
4.25.  let  thine  e.  look  right  on,  and  thine  eyelids

6.  4.  give  not  sleep  to  thine  e.  nor  slumber  toeyelids

20.  13.  open  thine  e.  and  thou  shalt  be  satisfied

23.  5.  wilt  thou  set  thine  e.  on  that  which  is  not  ?
26.  give  me  thy  heart,  let  thine  e.  observe  my  ways

33.  thine  e.  shall  behold  strange  women
25.7.  of  the  prince  whom  thine  e.  have  seen
Eccl.  11.  9. 0  young  man,  walk  in  the  sight  of  thine  e.
Cant.  4.  9.  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  thine  e.

6.  5.  turn  away  thine  e.  from  me,  they  overcome

7.  4.  thine  e.  like  the  fish-pools  in  Heshbon
Isa.  30.  20.  but  thine  e.  shall  see  thy  teachers

33.  17-  thine  e.  shall  see  the  king  in  his  beauty
20.  thine  e.  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation

Jer.  5.  3.  O  Lord,  are  not  thine  e.  upon  the  truth?
20.  4.  fall  by  the  sword,  thine  e.  shall  behold  it
22. 17-  thine  e.  are  not  but  for  thy  covetousness

31.  16.  refrain  weeping,  and  thine  e.  from  tears

32.  19.  thine  e.  are  open  on  all  the  ways  of  men

34.  3.  thine  e.  shall  behold  the  king  of  Babylon

39.  +  12.  take  Jeremiah,  and  set  thine  e.  on  him
42.  2.  we  are  but  tew,  as  thine  e.  do  behold  us
Lam.  2.  18.  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  e.  cease
Ezek.  23.  40.  for  whom  thou  paintedst  thine  e.

24.  16.  1  take  froi  1  thee  the  desire  of  thine  e.

40.  4.  son  of  man,  behold  with  thine  e.  44.  5.

Van.  9.  18.  open  thine  e.  and  behold  our  desolation
Luke  19.  42.  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  e.
John  9. 10.  said  to  him ,  how  were  thine  e.  opened  ?  26.

17.  sayest  thou  that  he  hath  opened  thine  e?

Rev.  3.  18.  and  anoint  thine  e.  with  eye  salve

Your  EYES.

Gen.  3.  5.  in  the  day  ye  eat  yevr  e.  shall  be  opened
19.  8.  do  ye  to  them  as  is  grxiri  in  your  e.

34.  11.  Shechem  said,  let  me  find  grace  in  you)  e.
45.  t  5.  neither  let  there  be  anger  in  your  e.

12.  your  e.  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother  Penja  ..in
50.  4.  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  your  e
Num.  33.  55.  those  which  ye  let  remain  shall  be
pricks  in  your  e.  thorns  in  sides,  Josh.  23.  13.
Dent.  1.  30.  that  he  did  before  your  e.  4.  34.  I  29.  2.
4.  3.  your  e.  have  seen  what  the  T.ord  did  because
of  Baal  peor,  11.  7.  Josh .  24.7.
9.  17.  1  brake  the  two  tables  before  ymcre.

11.  18.  they  may  be  as  frontlets  between  your  e.

14.  1.  not  make  any  baldness  between  your  e.

1  Sam.  12.  16.  what  the  Lord  will  do  before  your  e.

2  Chron.  29.  8.  and  to  hissing,  as  ye  see  with  your  e.
Isa.  29.  10.  for  the  l  ord  hath  closed  your  e.

40.  26.  lift  up  your  e.  on  high,  Jer.  13.  20.

Jer.  7  - 11.  is  this  house  a  den  of  robbers  in  your  e.

16.  9.  cause  to  cease  out  of  this  place  in  your  e.

29.  21.  and  he  shal  l  slay  them  before  your  e.

Ezek.  24.  21.  the  desire  of  your  e.  and  what  you  pity
Zeph.  3. 20.  when  1  turn  your  captivity  before  your  e.
Ilag.  2.  3.  in  your  e.  in  comparison  is  nothing
Zech.  11.  1  12.  if  good  in  your  e.  give  me  my  price
Mai.  1.  5.  your  e.  shall  see,  the  L.  w  ill  be  magnified
Mat.  13.  16.  but  blessed  are  your  e.  for  they  see

Right  EYES.

1  Sam.  11.2.  that  1  may  thrust  out  all  your  right  e.

F.

FABLES.

1  Tim.  1.  4.  nor  give  heed  to/,  and  genealogies


1  Tim.  4.  7-  but  refuse  profane  ami  old  wives’  / .

2  Tim.  4.  4.  and  they  shall  be  turned  unto  J\  '
Tit.  1.  14.  not  giving  heed  to  Jewish/,  and  comm.
2  Pet.  1.16.  have  notfollowed  cunningly  devised  '

FACE,

Countenance,  or  visage,  is  a  part  of  the  body  wi
known  :  It  is  thereby  that  our  inward  motions  t.
made  known  to  others:  Love ,  hatred ,  desire,  d
like,  joy,  grief,  confidence,  despair,  cow  a,
cowardice,  admiration,  contempt,  pride,  modes
cruelty,  compassion,  and  the  rest  of  the  offer  to,,
are  discovered  by  their  proper  aspects.  The  eou
tenance,  as  one  phrases  it,  is  a  crystal,  where:
the  thoughts  and  affections,  otherwise  invisible,  A
pear  ;  and  is  a  natural  sign,  known  to  all.  jt
by  the  face,  also,  that  one  man  is  known  and  d-.
tinguished  from  another :  And  it  is  matter  \
admiration,  that  so  Jew  parts  composing  it,  and
so  small  a  compass,  and  always  in  the  same  siii
tion,  yet  there  is  such  a  diversity  of  figures  as  <
faces  in  the  world.  These  innumerable  differt
characters  in  the  faces  of  men,  is  the  counsel  11.
most  zeise  Providence,  for  the  universal  benefit
the  world:  For  human  societies  cannot  be  presen]
without  union  and  distinction:  the  one  preiei
division,  the  other  confusion  ;  and  this  distincti
is  caused  by  the  variety  of  countenances.

The  Face  of  a  man  is  al  0  taken  for  the  man  hi
self:  1  had  not  thought  to  see  thy  face  ;  that  !
thy  person,  says  Jacob  to  his  son  Joseph,  C<|

48.  11.  Before  one’s  face  ;  that  is,  in  his  sight]
presence,  FI  urn.  19.  3.  1  o  w  ithstand  a  person  !

the  face,  is  to  reprove  him  boldly.  Gal.  2.  11.  I
pride  of  Israel  doth  testify  to  his  face,  l Ids.  5.1
It  is  so  full  and  evident  a  witness  against  Isra  ;
that  no  other  testimony  need  be  produced,  to  conviv
the  most  impudent  arid  shameless  among  them .
fall  to  the  earth  upon  one’s  face,  was  a  postures
adoration.  Josh.  7-  6.  Joshua  fell  to  the  earth  u  pi
his  lace,  in  deep  humiliation  and  fervent  suppnA
tion.  To  accept  one’s  face,  is  to  shew  onea  faml
and  grant  his  request.  Gen.  19. 1 21.  Peradventi-'
he  will  accept  of  my  face  ;  he  will  be  reconciled  u\
me,  and  accept  of  my  person.  To  spit  in  one’s  face  '
a  sign  of  the  utmost  contempt.  The  woman,  wh\
husband  died  without  children,  if  her  husband's  b'
ther  refused  to  marry  hex,  spit  in  his /acc,Deut.25
Face  is  likewise  referred  to  God,  and  denotes
times  his  anger.  Psal.  34.  16.  The  face  of  p
Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil.  Rev.  6.
Hide  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  is
throne.  At  other  times,  it  denotes  his  love  a
favour,  Psal.  31.  16.  |  80.  7*  Make  thy  face;
shine  upon  thy  servant.  Cause  thy  face  to  sliil
and  we  shall  be  saved.  Dan.  9.  17-  Cause  t
face  to  shine  upon  thy  sanctuary  which  is  dej
late.  It  is  also  taken  for  his  omniscience ,  1  Sa
26.  20.  Let  not  my  blood  fall  to  the  earth  befij
the  face  of  the  Lord  ;  that  is,  if  thou  dost  shed  ,
blood,  remember  that  God,  the  Judge  of  all
earth,  seeth  it,  and  will  avenge  it.

The  Lord  promises  Moses,  that  his  face  shall  go
fore  the  Israelites.  Exod.  33.  14.  My  presence
Hebrew,  my  face,  shall  go  with  thee;  that  in
myself  will  go  with  thee.  'The  Angel  of  my  f
fence,  namely,  the  Messiah,  Isa.  63.  9.  who  u  1
ways  in  the  bo-  om  of  the  Father,  and  continue
making  intercession  for  his  people  :  and  iikeu
the  pledge  of  my  presence,  shall  go  with  thee,  na
ty,  the  cloudy  pillar.  Moses,  in  the  same  chap!
begs  of  God  to  shew  him  his  glory.  God  rep
to  him,  1  will  make  all  my  goodness  pass  bet
thee,  or  all  my  glory  ;  thou  shalt  have  a  sudd,
transient  view  if  it ;  and  1  will  proclaim  1
name,  which  1  will  give  thee  as  a  signal  of ,
presence,  that  thou  may est  attend:  but  for  my  fa
thou  canst  not  see  it ;  for  there  shall  no  nil
see  it  and  live :  Thou  canst  not  see  the  majt
and  glory  attending  that  external  shape  I  h
now  assumed  ;  nor  those  manifestations  of  my  yi
which  the  saints  are  favoured  with  in  another  W
for  such  is  the  weakness  of  man  in  this  life,  rj
if  I  should  display  all  the  beams  of  my  gloij
him,  it  zvould  icrtainly  astonish,  overwhelm ,  \
destroy  him.  It  was  a  certain  persuasion,  /<
very  prevalent  in  the  world,  that  no  man  A
support  the  sight  of  God  without  expiring.
Gen.  16.  13.  |  32.  30.  Exod.  20.  19.124
.1  udg.  6.  22,  23.  1  13.  22.

Nevertheless,  it  is  said  in  Num.  12.  8.  With  Jl/J
will  1  speak  mouth  to  mouth,  even  appareni
and  not  in  dark  speeches.  And  in  chap.  14.

1  he  Canaanites  have  heard  that  thou  art  an if
this  people,  and  that  thou  art  seen  face  to  t;
And  in  Deut.  5.  4.  it  is  said,  that  God  tab
with  the  Israelites  face  to  face,  out  of  the  mf
of  the  fire  :  But  mall  these  places,  face  to  face
to  be  understood  simply,  as  if  he  had  said,  ■
God  manifested  himself  to  the  Israelites,  that
made  them  hear  his  voice  in  a  manner  as  dist :
as  if  he  had  appeared  to  them  face  to  face:  if
he  spake  to  them  personally  and  immediately ,  -
not  by  an  interpreter ;  and  familiarly,  so  as  i
to  overwhelm  and  confound  them.  The  ap»:.
speaking  of  the  difference  between  our  kmwlm
here  and  in  heaven,  says.  Now  we  see  throud
glass  darkly  ;  but  then  face  to  face,  1  Cor.  13|
that  is,  there  is  as  much  difference  between  ’
knowledge  here  and  in  heaven,  as  between  loo $
through  a  perspective  glass  upon  a  thing  a  gf
way  off,  and  covered  with  many  obscurities ; »
looking  immediately  with  the  naked  eye ,  upon*
whole  object  nigh  at  hand.

The  bread  of  faces,  the  shew-bread,  which  zra.f
ways  in  the  presence  of  God.  See  Br  f.ap.
Gen.  1.  +  20.  fowls  may  fly  in  /,  of  the  firmaiineS
3.  19.  in  the  sweat  of  thy/,  shalt  thou  eat  brey
16.  8.  1  flee  from  the/,  of  my  mistress  band
19.  +  21.  1  have  accepted  thy  /.  concerning  the.
24.  47.  and  I  put  the  ear-rings  upon  her/.

32.  +  20.  peraaventure  he  will  accept  iny  /.
t  30.  Jacob  called  the  place,  the  f.  of  God


FAC


F  A  C


F  A  C


',eti.  35. 1 .  when  thou  fleddest  from  the /.  of  Esau,  7.
:>d.  6.  Esau  went  from  the  /.  of  his  brother  Jacob
46.  ‘*8.  he  sent  to  Joseph  to  direct  his/,  to  Goshen
48.  12.  Joseph  bowed  with  his /.  to  tiie  earth
Wxod.  ‘2.  15.  Moses  tied  from  the/,  of  Pharaoh

14.  -25.  said,  let  us  flee  from  the /.  of  Israel

25.  t  37-  niav  give  light  against  the /.  of  it
34.29.  the  skin  of  his  /.  shone,  30,  35.
j  33.  till  he  had  done  speaking,  he  put  avail  on  his/.
',ev.  13.  41.  that  hath  his  hair  fallen  towards  his /.

19.  32.  thou  slialt  honour  the /.  of  the  old  man
Sum.  12.  14.  if  her  father  had  but  spit  in  her/.

10.  3.  one  shall  slay  the  red  heifer  before  his  /.
Jevt.  1. 17.  ye  shall  not  be  afraid  of  the  /.  of  man
7.  Id.  and  repayeth  them  that  hate  him  to  their/,
t  23.  the  Lord  shall  delivei  them  before  thy  /.

and  shall  destroy  them,  9.  3.  |  28.  7.
R.  20.  the  nations  the  1x1.  destroyeth  before  your/.

25.  2.  cause  the  wicked  man  be  beaten  before  his /.

9.  shall  loose  his  shoe,  and  spit  in  his/,  and  say

28.  31 .  thine  ass  shall  be  taken  before  thy/,
t  50.  a  nation  strong  of/,  which  shall  not  regard
,31.  5.  the  Lord  shall  give  them  up  before  your/,
f'e.vi.  7. 10.  wherefore  Iiest  thou  upon  thy/.  ?

Judg.  11.  +  3.  lephthah  fled  from/,  of  his  brethren
Sam,  5.  3.  behold,  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his/.  4.
1*.  +  24.  they  fled  from  Goliath’s/,  and  were  afraid

19.  t8.  and  the  Philistines  fled  from  his  /.

24.  8.  David  stooped  with  his  /.  to  the  earth

2 5.  41.  Abigail  bowed  on  her/,  and  said

28.  14.  Saul  stooped  with  his/,  to  the  ground
Sam.  2.  22.  how  should  1  hold  up  my/,  to  Joab?
7.  ■)  9.  1  have  cut  off  thine  enemies  from  thy/.

14.  33.  Absalom  bowed  on  his/,  to  the  ground

17.  t  11.  that  thy  /.  or  presence  go  to  battle
i24.20.  and  Araunah  went  out  and  bowed  himself

before  the  king  on  his/.  1  67 iron.  21.  21.
Kings  1. 23.  Nathan  bowed  himself  with  his  f.

31.  Bath-sheba  bowed  with  her  /.  to  the  earth

2.  +  16.  I  ask  one  petition,  turn  not  away  my/.

13. 14.  the  king  turned  his  /.  about,  2  Chron.  0.  3.

10.  1 24.  all  the  earth  sought  the /.  of  Solomon

18.  42.  Elijah  put  his  /.  between  his  knees
19. 13.  that  he  wrapped  his/,  in  his  mantle

20. 38.  proohet  disguised  hims.  with  ashes  on  his  /.

21. 4.  Ahah  turned  away  his /.  and  would  not  eat
Kings  4. 29-  lay  my  staff  upon  the /.  of  the  child

31.  Gehazi  laid  his  staff  on  the  /.  of  the  child

3.  15.  Hazael  spread  it  on  his  /.  so  that  he  died
3.  30.  Jezebel  painted  her/,  and  tired  her  head
.32.  Jehu  lift  up  his/,  to  the  window,  and  said

I. 3.  14.  Joash  wept  over  his /.  and  said,  O  my  father
t  23.  neither  cast  he  them  from  his/,  as  yet

18.  24.  how  wilt  thou  turn  away  /.  of  one,  Isa.  36.  9.
20.2.  Hezekiah  turned  his  /.  to  the  wall,  La.  38.  2.
21.  1 13.  he  wipetli  and  turneth  it  on  the  /.  thereof

25.  +  19.  five  men  that  saw  king's /.  Jer.  52.  1  25.

C 'hr.  6.  42.  O  Lord  God,  turn  not  away  the  /.  of
thine  anointed,  Psal.  132.  10.
30.  9.  ftie  Lord  will  not  turn  away  his  /.  from  you

32.  t  2.  when  Hezekiah  saw  thatnis/.  was  to  war
21.  he  returned  with  shame  of/,  to  his  own  land

34.  +  4.  and  strowed  it  upon  the  f.  of  the  graves

35.  22.  Josiah  would  not  turn  his /.  from  him
'.zra  9.  6. 1  blush  to  lift  up  my/,  to  thee,  my  God
7-  to  confusion  of  f.  as  it  is  this  day,  Dan'  9.  8.
ob  1.  11.  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  /.  2.  5.

4. 15.  then  a  spirit  passed  before  my  /.

;5.  +  28.  for  it  is  before  your  /.  if  I  lie
111.  15.  then  shalt  thou  lift  up  thy/,  without  spot
+  19.  yea,  many  shall  entreat  thy/.

16.8.  my  leanness  beareth  witness  to  my  /.

16.  rny  /.  is  foul  with  weeping,  on  my  eyelids
21.  .31.  who  shall  declare  his  way  to  his  /.  ?

1 22.  26.  and  thou  shalt  lift  up  thy  /.  unto  God
24.  15.  no  eye  shall  see  me  ;  and  disguiseth  his /.

26.  9.  he  holdeth  back  the /.  of  his  throne
|3u.  10.  and  they  spare  not  to  spit  in  my  /.

11.  13.  who  can  discover  the /.  of  his  garment?

1 4.  who  can  open  the  doors  of  his  /.  ?

42.  +  8.  Job  shall  pray,  for  his  /.  will  I  accept
t 9.  the  Lord  also  accepted  the /.  of  Job
)sai.  5.  8.  make  thy  way  straight  before  my  /.

+  13.  O  Lord,  prevent  his  /.  cast  him  down

15.  I  will  behold  thy/,  in  righteousness

21.  12.  make  ready  arrows  against  the  /.  of  them

II.  12.  thou  set  test  me  before  thy/,  for  ever

15.  t  12.  even  the  rich  shall  entreat  thy  /.

>8.  +  1.  let  them  that  hate  him  flee  from  his  /.

'4. 9.  and  look  upon  the  /.  of  thine  anointed
S9.  14.  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy/.

23.  1  will  beat  down  his  foes  before  his  /.

119.  t  58.  1  entreated  thy  j.  with  my  whole  heart
’rov.  6.  t  35.  he  will  not  accept  the /.  of  a  ransom
13.  and  with  an  impudent  /.  said  unto  him
21.  29.  a  wicked  man  hardeneth  his/.
cel.  8. 1.  the  boldness  of  his  /.  shall  he  changed
a.  5.  +  21.  woe  to  the  prudent  before  their/.

16.  4.  be  a  covert  from  the  /.  of  the  sooiler

21. 1 15.  for  they  fled  from  the  /.  of  the  sword

24.  f  1.  the  Lord  perverteth  the/,  of  the  earth
25  7.  he  will  destroy  the  f.  of  the  covering

28.  25.  when  he  hath  made  plain  the  /.  thereof

29.  22.  neither  shall  his  /.  now  wax  pale

19.  23.  they  shall  bow  down  to  thee  with  their /.
f>5.  3.  that  provoketh  me  continually  to  iny  /.
er.  1.  t  13.  /.  thereof  -was  from  the  /.  of  the  north

2.  27.  turned  their  back,  and  not  the /.  .32.  33.

4. 30.  though  thou  rentest  thy/,  with  painting

13. 26.  therefore  will  1  discover  thy  skirts  upon  thy
/.  that  thy  shame  may  appear,  Nah.  3.  5.
18.  17.  1  will  shew  them  the  back,  and  not  the/.
22.25.  from  hand  of  them  whose  /.  thou  fearest

32.  31. 1  should  remove  it  from  before  my  /.
am.  3.  35.  the  right  of  man  before  /.  of  most  High
1.  10.  they  four  had  the  /.  of  a  man,  the  f.  of
a  lion,/,  of  an  ox,  the /.  of  an  eagle
—  t  4.  they  are  hard  of/,  and  Stiff  hearted

3.  8.  1  made  thy  /.  strong  against  their  faces
<  •  22.  my/,  will  1  turn  also  from  them

10.  14./.  of  a  man,/,  of  a  lion,/,  of  an  eagle,  41. 19.
14.  3.  put  stumbling  block  before  their/.


F.zek.  38.  18.  that  my  fury  shall  come  up  in  m3’/.
Dan.  8.  18.  1  was  in  a  deep  sleep  on  my/.  10.  9.
10.6.  his/,  as  the  appe  ranee  of  lightning
11. 18.  he  shall  turn  his /.  unto  the  isles
Dos.  5.  5.  the  pride  of  Israel  testifieth  to  his/.  7. 10.
7.  2.  now  their  own  doings,  they  are  before  m3'  /.
Joel  2.  6.  before  their /.  people  be  much  pained

20.  will  drive  him  with  his/,  toward  the  east  sea
Nah.  2.  1.  that  dasheth  in  pieces,  come  before  thy  f.
Zeph.  1. 1  2.  1  will  consume  from  the/,  of  the  land
Mai.  1.  +  9.  now,  I  pray  you,  beseech  the  /.  of  God
Mat.  6. 17-  anoint  thine  head,  and  wash  thy/.

11.  10.  behold,  1  send  my  messenger  before  thy/.

to  prepare  thy  way,  Mark  1.2.  Luke  7.  27.
18.  10.  their  angels  behold  the  /.  of  my  Father

26.  67-  then  did  they  spit  in  his/,  and  buffeted
Luke  2.  31.  thou  hast  prepared  before /.  of  all  people

9.  52.  he  sent  messengers  before  his/.  10.  1.

53.  his  6  was  as  though  he  would  go  to  Jerusalem
22.64.  the3'  struck  him  on  the/,  and  asked  him
John  11. 44.  his /.  was  hound  about  with  a  napkin
Acts 2.25.  1  foresaw  the  Lord  always  before  my/.
7-  45.  God  drave  out  before  the  /.  of  our  fathers

1  Cor.  14.25.  sc  falling  down  on  his/,  will  worship

2  Cor.  3. 7.  could  not  sted fast ly  behold  the /.  of  Moses
13.  not  as  Moses,  who  put  a  vail  over  his /.

18.  but  we  all  with  open  /.  beholding  the  glory

4.  6.  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  /.  of  Jesus  Christ

5.  t  12.  which  glory  in  the  /.  and  not  in  the  heart

11.  20.  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  smite  you  on  the/.

Cal.  1.  22.  1  was  unknown  by/,  to  the  churches
2.  11.1  withstood  him  to  the  /.  because  he  was

Jam.  l.  23.  beholding  his  natural /.  in  a  glass
Lev.  4.  7-  the  third  beast  had  a /.  as  a  man

10.  1.  and  his  /.  was  as  it  were  the  sun

12.  14.  where  nourished  from  the  /.  of  theserjsnt

20.  11.  from  whose  /.  the  earth  and  heaven  fled
See  Seek,  Set,  Shine,  Sky,  Waters,  Wil¬
derness,  World.

FACE  with  cover,  or  covered.

Gen.  38.  15.  an  harlot,  because  she  covered  her/.
Excd.  10.5.  locusts  shall  core/- the /.  of  the  earth,  15.
Num.  22.  5.  behold,  they  cover  the  /.  of  the  earth
2  Sam.  19.  4.  the  king  covered  his/,  and  cried
Esth.  7.8.  word  went  out,  they  covered  Hainan's/.
Job  15.  27.  he  covereth  his  /.  with  his  fatness
23.  17.  nor  hath  lie  covered  darkness  from  my/.
Psal.  44.  15.  the  shame  of  my  /.  hath  covered" me
69.  7-  for  thy  sake  shame  hath  covered  my /.

Prov.  24.  31.  nettles  had  covered  the  /.  thereof
Isa.  6. 2.  with  twain  he  covered  bis /.  and  bis  feet
Esek.  12.  6.  thou  shalt  cover  thy/,  that  thou  see  not

12.  the  prince  shall  cover  his  /,  that  he  see  not
Mark  14.  65.  began  to  spit  on  him,  and  cover  his  /.

E  .A  C  E  of  the  country.

2  Sam.  18.  8.  battle  was  scattered  over  /.  of  country
FACE  of  the  deep.

Gen.  1.  2.  darkness  was  upon  the /.  of  the  deep
Job  38.  30.  and  the /.  of  the  deep  is  frozen
Prov.  8.  27.  he  set  a  compass  on  the /.  of  the  depth
FACE  of  the  earth.

Gen.  1.  29.  ever3-  herb  upon  the/,  of  the  earth
4.  14.  thou  hast  driven  me  from'the /.  of  the  earth

6.  1.  men  began  to  multipl3r  on  the/,  of  the  earth

7.  3.  to  keep  seed  alive  on  the  /.  of  all  the  earth

4.  I  will  destroy  from  off  the  /.  of  the  earth.  Dent.

6.  15.  1  Kings  13.  34.  Amos  9.  8.

8.  9.  the  waters  w  ere  on  the  /.  of  the  whole  earth

11.4.  lest  w-e  be  scattered  on  the/,  of  the  earth
41.  56.  the  famine  was  over  all  the  /.  cf  the  earth

Erod.  32.  12.  to  consume  them  from/,  of  the  earth

33.  16.  from  all  people  unto  the /.  of  the  earth
Num.  12.  3.  meek  above  all  men  on  /.  of  the  earth
Dent.  7.  6.  above  all  people  on  the  /.  of  the  earth

1  Sam.  20.  15.  cut  oft  every  one  from  f.  of  the  earth

2  Sam.  14.  +7-  nor  remainder  on  the  /.  of  the  earth
Psal.  104.  30.  thou  renewest  the  /.  of  the  earth
Isa.  23.  17.  with  all  kingdoms  on  the  /.  cf  the  earth
Jer.  8.  2.  be  for  dung  on  the f.  of  the  earth,  16.  4.

28.  16.  1  will  cast  thee  from  the /.  of  the  earth
Ezek.  38.  20.  all  men  on  the  /.  of  the  earth  shake
Dan.  8.  5.  an  he  goat  came  on  the  /.  of  the  earth
Amos  5.  8.  poureth  them  on  the  /.  of  the  earth,  9.  6.
Zech.  5.  3.  curse  that  goeth  over  the /.  of  the  earth
Luke  12.  56.  ye  can  discern  the  /.  of  the  earth

21.  35.  that  dwell  on  the  /.  of  the  whole  earth
Acts  17.  26.  to  dwell  on  all  the /.  of  the.  earth

FACE  to  FACE.

Gen.  32.  30.  Peniel ;  for  l  have  seen  God  /.  to  f.
Erod.  33. 11.  and  the  l  ord  spake  to  Moses/,  tof.
Num.  14. 14.  that  thou,  Lord,  art  seen  /.  tof.

Dent.  5.  4.  the  Ix>rd  talked  with  you  f.  to  f.

34. 10.  like  Moses,  whom  the  Lord  knew/,  to  f.
Judg.  6.  22.  because  1  have  seen  an  angel  f.  to  f.
Prov.  27.  19.  as  in  water  /.  answereth  to  f.

Ezek.  20.  35.  there  T  will  plead  with  you  /.  tof.

Acts  25.  16.  before  he  have  the  accusers  /.  tof.

1  Cor.  13. 12.  w'e  see  thro’  a  glass,  but  then  /.  to  f.

2  John  12.  I  trust  to  come  to  you,  and  speak /.  to  f.

3  John  14. 1  trust  to  see  thee  and  speak  /.  to  f.

Fell  on  FACE  or  FACES.

Gen.  17.  t  3.  Abram  fell  on  h  is  /.  and  laughed,  17-
50.  1.  Joseph  fell  on  his  father’s  /.  and  wept
18.  his  brethren  fell  down  before  his  /.

Eev.  9.  24.  when  the  people  saw,  they  fell  on  their/.
Num.  14.  5.  Moses  and  Aaron  fell  on  f.  16.  22,  45.

16.4.  Moses  i|  22.  31.  Balaam  fell  flat  on  his/.

Josh.  5. 14.  Joshua/e//o«  his  /.  to  the  earth,  7.  6.
Judg.  13.  20.  Manoah  and  his  wife  fell  on  their/.
Ruth  2.  10.  then  she  fell  on  her  f.  to  the  ground

1  Sam.  17-  49.  Goliath  ||  20.  41.  David  fell  on  his  /.

25.  23.  Abigail  ||  2  Sam.  9.  6.  Mephibosh./?//  on  f.

2  Sam.  14.4.  the  woman  of  'l  ekoah  fell  on  her/.

22.  Joab  ||  18.  28.  Ahimaaz  fell  on  his/.

1  Kings  I8.7.  Obadiah  ||  39.  people/?//  on  their /.

1  Chr.  21.  16.  David  and  elders  fell  on  their/.

Ezek.  1.  28.  when  I  saw  it  1  fell  upon  my  /.  3.  2.3.

19.8.  |  11.  13.  |  43.3.  I  44.4.  Dan.  8.  17.
Dan.  2.  46.  Nebuchadnozzar  Jell  upon  his  /.

Mat.  17-  6.  disciples  ||  26.  39.  Jesus  fell  on  his  /.

Luke  5.  12.  leper  ||  17.  16.  Samaritan/?//  on  his /.
Rev.  11. 16.  the  twenty  -four  elders  fell  on  their  /.


FACE  of  the  field

Lev.  14+7  living  bird  loose  on  the  /.  of  the  field
2  Kings  9.  37.  Jezebel  as  dung  on  the  /.  of  the  field
Ezek.  29.  +  5.  thou  shalt  fall  on  the/,  of  the  field
39.  t  5.  Gog  shall  fall  on  the/,  of  the  field
FACE  of  the  gate.

Ezek.  40.  15.  from  the/,  of  the  gate  of  the  entrance
FACE  of  the  ground.

Gen.  2.  6.  a  mist  watered  the  whole  /.  of  the  ground

7.  23.  destroyed,  that  was  on  the  /  of  the  ground

8.  8.  were  abated  from  off  the  /.  of  the  ground

13.  and  behold,  the  /.  of  the  ground  was  dry

Hide,  hideth,  or  hid  FACE.

Gen.  4.  14.  and  from  thy  /.  shall  1  be  hid
Erod.  3.  6.  and  Moses  hid  bis  /.  for  he  was  afraid
Deut.  31.  17-  will  hide  my /.  from  them,  18.  I  32.  20.
Job  13.  24.  wherefore  indest  thou  thy  /.  and  boldest
me  for  thine  enemy  ?  Psal.  44.  24.  |  88.  14.

34.  29.  when  he  hideth  his  /.  who  can  behold  ?
Psal.  10.  11.  he  hideth  his  /.  he  will  never  see  it

13.  1.  how  long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  /.  from  me  ?

22.  24.  neither  hath  he  hid  his /.  from  him

27.  9.  hide  not  thy  f.  69.  17.  I  102.  2.  1 143.  7.

30.  7-  hast  made  my  mountain  strong,  thou  didst
hide  thy/,  and  1  was  troubled,  104.  29.
51.  9.  hide  thy/,  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all
Isa.  8.  17.  hideth  his/,  from  the  house  of  Jacob
50.  6.  1  hid  not  my/,  from  shame  and  spitting
54.  8.  in  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  /.  from  thee
59.  2.  your  sins  have  hid  bis/,  from  you
64.  7.  thou  hast  hid  thy/,  from  us  and  consumed
Jer.  16.  17.  thy  ways  are  not  hid  from  my/.

33,  5.  I  have  hid  my  /.  from  this  city
Ezek.  39.  23.  therefore  hid  I  my  /.  from  them,  24.

29.  nor  will  I  hide  my  /.  any  ihore  from  them
Mic.  3.  4.  he  will  even  hide  his/,  at  that  time
Rev.  6.  16.  hide  us  from  the  /.  of  him  that  sitteth
FACE  of  the  house.

Ezek.  41.  14.  the  breadth  of  the  /.  of  the  house
FACE  of  the  Lord'.

Gen.  19.  13.  the  cry  great  before  the  /.  of  the  Lord
Exod.  32.  +  11.  Moses  entreated  the/,  of  the  Lord
1  Sam.  26.  20.  let  not  my  blood  fall  before/,  of  Lord

1  Kings  13.  6.  entreat  now  the  /.  of  the  Lord
Psal.  34.  16.  the/7  cf  the  Lord  is  against  them  that

do  evil,  to  cut  off'  from  the  earth,  1  Pet.  3.  12.
Jer.  26.  +  19.  Hezekiah  besought  the  /.  of  the  Lord
Lam.  2.  19.  pour  out  thy  heart  before  /.  of  the  Lord
4.  +  16.  the  /.  of  the  Lord  hath  divided  them
Luke  1.  76-  thou  shalt  go  before  the  f.  of  the  Lord
FACE  of  the  porch.

Ezek.  40.  15.  to  the/,  of  the  porch  were*  fifty  cubits
41.  25.  were  thick  planks  on  the  /.  of  the  porch
FACE  with  look,  looked,  see,  saw,  seen.

Gen.  32.  20.  and  afterward  1  will  see  his  f.

33.  10.  for  therefore  I  have  seen  thy  /.  as  though

43.  3.  ye  shall  not  see  my  /.  except,  5.  I  44.  23.

44.  26.  for  we  may  not  see  the  man’s  /.  except
46.  30.  now  let  me  die,  since  1  have  seen  thy  f.

48.  11.  I  had  not  thought  to  see  thy/,  and  lo

Exod.  10.  28.  Pharaoh  said  to  him,  see  my/,  no  more
29.  Moses  saidf  1  will  see  th3r/.  again  no  more

33.  20.  and  he  said,  thou  canst  not  see  my/.

23.  see  back  parts,  but  my  /.  shall  not  be  seen

34.  35.  children  of  Israel  saw  the /.  of  Moses

2  Sam.  3.  13.  not  see  my  /.  except  thou  bring  Michaf

14.  24.  the  king  said,  let  him  not  see  rny  f.

28.  Absalom  dwelt  two  years  and  saw  not  king’s/.
32.  now  therefore  let  me  see  the  king’s  /.

2  Kings  14.  8.  sent  messengers  saying,  come,  let  us
look  one  another  in  the  /.  2  Chron.  25.  17.

11.  and  they  looked  one  another  in  the  /.

Esth.  1.14.  tne  seven  princes  who  saw  the  king’s /.
Job  33.  26.  and  he  shall  see  his /.  with  joy
Acts  6.  15.  saw  his  /.  as  it  had  been  /.  of  an  angel

20.  25.  1  know  that  ye  shall  see  my  /.  no  more,  .38.
Col.  2. 1.  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  /.  in  the  flesh
1  Thess.  2.17.  endeavoured  to  see  your/,  with  desire
.3.  10.  praying,  that  we  might  see  your  /.

Rev.  22.  4,  and  they  shall  see  his/,  and  his  name
Seek  FACE.

1  Cliron.  16. 11.  seek  his /.  continually,  Psal.  105.  4.

2  Chron.  7. 14.  if  my  people  shall  pray  and  seek  my  /.
Psal.  24.  6.  a  generation  that  seek  thy /.  O  Jacob

27.  8.  when  thou  saidst,  seek  ye  rny  /.  my  heart  said

unto  thee,  thy  /.  Lord  will  I  seek
Prov.  7-15.  I  came  diligently  to  seek  thy/.

29.  t  26.  many  seek  the  /.  of  a  ruler
Has.  5.  15.  return  tomy  place,  till  they  seek  my  /.
Set  FACE.

Gen.  .31.  21.  Jacob  set  his /.  toward  mount  Gilead
Lev.  17. 10.  I  will  set  my  /.  against  that  soul,  20.  6.
20.  3.  set  my/,  against  that  man,  5.  Ezek.  14.  8.
2f.  17>  I  will  set  my /.  against  you,  Jer.  44.  11.
Num.  24.  1.  Balaam  set  his  /.  toward  wilderness
2  Kings  12.  17.  Hazael  set  his  /.  to  Jerusalem

1  Chron.  19. 1 10.  when  Joab  saw  f.  of  battle  was.ccr

2  Chron.  20.  t  3.  Jehoshaphat  set  his  /.  to  seek  Lord
/.fa.50.7-1  have^e/my  /.  like  a  flint,  not  be  ashamed
Jer.  21.  10.  1  have  set  my  /.  against  this  city
Ezek.  4.  3.  set  thy /.  against  it,  it  shall  be  besieged

7.  thou  shalt  set  thy  /.  towards  the  siege  at  Jerus.

6.  2.  set  thy/,  towards  the  mountains  of  Israel

I. 3.  17.  set  thy/,  against  the  daughters  of  my  peop

15.  7-  and  1  will  set  my  /.  against  tliern

20.  46.  son  of  man,  set  thy/,  toward  the  south

21.  2.  son  of  man,  set  thy  J.  toward  Jerusalem

16.  go  thee  whithersoever  thy/,  is  set

25.  2.  son  of  man,  set  thy/,  against  the  Ammomtei

28.  21.  /.  against  Zidon  ||  29.  2.  /.  against  Pharaoh
.35.  2./.  against  mount  Seir  ||  .38.  2.  /.  against  Gog
Dan.  9.  3.  and  1  set  my  f.  unto  the  I.ord  God

10. 15.  I  set  my/,  toward  ground  and  became  dumb

II.  17.  he  shall  set  his /.  to  enter  with  strength
Luke  9.  51.  he  stedfastly  set  his  /.  to  go  to  Jerusal

FACE  shine.

Num.  6.  25.  the  I.ord  make  his  /.  to  shine  upon  thee
Psal.  31.  16.  make  thy  f.  to  shine  on  thy  servant,
save  me  for  thy  mercies’  sake,  119.  135.
67.  1.  God  bless  us,  and’eause  his  /.  to  shine  on  us
80.  3.  cause  thv  /.  shine,  we  shall  be  saved,  1,  19.
104.  15.  and  oil  to  make  his  f.  to  shine

G  >  147


F  A  I


F  A  1


FA  I


Eccl.  8.  1.  a  man’s  wisdom  maketh  his/,  to  shine
Dan.  9.  17.  cause  thy  /.  to  shine  on  thy  sanctuary
Mat.  17.  2.  and  his J.  did  shine  as  the  sun
FACE  of  the  sky.

Mat.  16.  3.  O  ye  hypocrites,  ye  can  discern  the  /.
of  the  sky,  but  can  ye  not  the  times  t  Luke  12.  56.
FACE  of  the  waters.

Gen.  1.2.  Spirit  of  God  moved  on  the/,  of  the  waters
7.  18.  the  ark  went  upon  the  /.  of  the  waters
Eccl.  11.  t  1.  cast  thy  bread  on  the/,  of  the  waters
Hos.  10.  t  7.  her  king  cut  off  as  foam  on/,  of  waters
FACE  of  the  wilderness.

Exod.  16.  14.  on  the/,  of  the  wilderness  lay  manna
FACE  of  the  world.

Job  37.  12.  do  what  he  commandeth  on/,  of  world
Isa.  14.  21.  nor  fill  the  /.  of  the  world  with  cities
27.  6.  Israel  shall  fill  the/,  of  the  world  withtruit
FACES.

Gen.  9.  23.  their/,  were  backward,  they  saw  not
30.  40.  set/,  of  the  flocks  toward  the  ring-straked

40.  +7.  wherefore  are  your/,  evil  to-day  ?

42.  6.  they  bowed  with  their/,  to  the  earth

Exod.  19.  7-  Moses  laid  before  their /.  all  these  words
20.  20.  that  his  fear  may  be  before  your  f.

25.  20.  and  their  /.  shall  look  one  to  another
37.  9.  to  the  mercy -seat- ward  were  /.  of  eherubims
Dent.  1.  t  17.  shall  not  acknowledge  /.in  judgment
Judy.  18.  23.  turned  their/,  and  said,  what  aileth
2  Sam.  19.  5.  thou  hast  shamed  the  f.  of  thy  servants
1  Kings  2.  15.  that  all  Israel  set  their/,  on  me

1  Chron.  12.8.  whose/,  were  like  the/,  of  lions

2  Chron.  3.  13.  and  their  /.  were  inward

29.  6.  our  fathers  have  turned  away  their/.

Neh.  8. 6. they  worshipped  with  their/,  to  the  ground
Job  9.  24.  he  covereth  the/,  of  the  judges

40. 13.  hide  in  dust,  and  bind  their/  in  secret
Psal.  34.  5.  and  their  /.  were  not  ashameu

83. 16.  fill  their /  with  shame,  O  Lord

Isa.  3. 15.  and  that  ye  grind  the/,  of  the  poor
13.  8.  shall  be  amazed,  their  /.  shall  be  as  flames
25.  8.  God  will  wipe  away  tears  from  off  all/.

53.  3.  and  we  hid  as  it  were  our/,  from  him
Jer.  1.  8.  be  not  afraid  of  their/  l  am  with  thee
17.  be  not  dismay,  at  their  /.  lest  I  confound  thee
5.  3.  they  have  made  their  /.  harder  than  a  rock
7.  19.  provoke  to  the  confusion  of  their  own  /.

30.  6.  and  all  /.  are  turned  into  paleness

42. 15.  if  ye  set  their  /.  to  enter  Egypt,  17. 1  44. 12.

50.  5.  the  way  to  Zion,  with  their/,  thitherward

51.  51.  are  confounded,  shame  hath  covered  our  /.
Lam.  5.  12.  the  /.  of  the  elders  were  not  honoured
Ezek.  1.  6.  and  every  one  had  four  /.  10,  11,  15.

3.  8.  I  made  thy  face  strong  against  their/

7.  18.  shame  shall  be  on  their /.  and  baldness

8. 16.  twenty-five  men,  with  their /.  toward  the  east
14.6.  turn  away  your  /.  from  all  abominations
20.  47.  and  all  /.  shall  be  burnt  therein

41.  18.  and  every  cherut-  had  two /.

Dan.  1.  10.  for  why  should  he  see  your/,  worse
9-  7-  but  unto  us  confusion  of/,  as  at  this  day
Joel  2.  6.  be  much  pained,  all /.  shall  gather  blackn.
Nah.  2.  10.  the  /.  of  them  all  gather  blackness
Hah.  1.  9.  their/,  shall  sup  up  as  the  east-wind
Mai.  2.  3.  behold,  I  will  spread  dung  on  your  /

+  9.  but  ye  have  accepted/,  in  the  law
Mat.  6.  16.  the  hypocrites  disfigure  their/.

Luke  24.  5.  as  they  have  bowed  down  their/,  to  earth
Rev.  7.  11.  fell  before  the  throne  on  their/

9.  7.  the  /.  of  the  locusts  were  as  the /.  of  men
See  Fell  on  Face,  or  Faces.

FACTION  S.

1  Cor.  3.  t  3.  for  whereas  there  is  among  you  /.

FADE.

Exod.  18.  +  18.  surely  fading  thou  wilt  /.  away

2  Sam.  22.  46.  strangers  shall /  away,  Psal.  i8.  45.
Psal.  1.  +3.  his  leaf  also  shall  not  /.  shall  prosper
Isa.  64.  6.  are  all  unclean,  and  we  all/,  as  a  leaf
Jer.  8.  13.  I  will  consume  them,  and  the  leaf  shall /.
Ezek.  47.  12.  trees  for  meat,  whose  leaf  shall  not  /.
Jam.  1. 11.  so  the  rich  man  shall /.  away  in  his  ways

FADETH.

Job  14.  t  18.  surely  the  mountain  falling/.

Isa.  1.  30.  ye  shall  be  as  an  oak,  whose  leaf  /.

24.  4.  the  earth  mourneth  and  /  the  world  /.

40.  7-  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower  /.  8.

1  Pet.  1.  4.  to  an  inheritance  that  /.  not  away
5.  4.  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  /.  not  away
FADING.

Isa.  28. 1.  whose  glorious  beauty  is  a /.  flower
4.  the  glorious  beauty  shall  be  a  /.  flower
FAIL.

Josh.  3.  10.  will  without/,  drive  out  Canaanites
Judg.  11.  30.  ifthou  without /.  deliver  Ammon
1  Sam.  30. 8.  pursue,  thou  shalt  without/recover  all
F,zra  6.  9.  let  it  be  given  day  by  day  without  /.
FAIL,  Verb.

Gen.  47.  16.  .Tos.  said,  give  your  cattle,  if  money  /.
Dent.  28.32.  thine  eyes  shall /  with  longing  for  them
31.  6.  Lord  doth  go  with  thee,  he  will  not  /.  thee
nor  forsake  thee,  8.  Josh.  1.  5.  1  Chron.  28.  20.

1  Sam  2.  16.  let  them  not  /.  to  burn  fat  presently
17.  32.  David  said,  let  no  man’s  heart/,  him

20.  5.  I  should  not  /.  to  sit  with  the  king  at  meat

2  Sam.  3.  29.  let  there  not  /.  from  the  house  of  Joab
l  Kings  2.  4.  there  shall  not  /  thee  a  man  on  the

throne  of  Israel,  8.  25.  1  9.  5.  2  Chron.  6.  16.
17-  14.  neither  shall  the  cruse  of  oil  /.  16.

Ezra  4.  22.  take  heed  that  3'e  /.  not  to  do  this
Esth.  6.  10.  let  nothing  /.  of  all  thou  hast  spoken
9.  27.  not  f.  to  keep  these  days  of  Purim,  28.

Job  11.  20.  but  the  eyes  of  the  wicked  shall  f.

14.  11.  as  waters /.  from  the  sea,  and  flood  drieth  up
17.  5.  even  the  eyes  of  his  children  shall  /.

31. 16.  or  caused  the  eyes  of  the  widow  to  /.

Psal.  12.  1.  for  the  faithful  /.  from  among  men
69.  3.  mine  eyes  /.  while  1  wait  for  my  God
77-  8.  doth  his  promise  /  for  evermore  ?

89.  33.  nor  will  I  suffer  my  faithfulness  to/.

119.  82.  mine  eyes/,  for  thy  word,  saying
123.  mine  eyes  f.  for  thy  salvation  and  for  word
Prcv.  22.  8.  and  the  rod  of  his  anger  shall  /.

Eccl.  12.  t  3.  the  grinders /.  because  they  grind  little

148


Eccl.12. 5.desire  shal  1/  bee.  man  goeth  to  long  home
Isa.  19.  3.  the  spirit  ot  Egy.  shall  /.  in  midst  thereof
5.  waters  shall  /  |l  21.  16.  glory  of  Kedar/.

31.  3.  and  they  all  shall  /  together

32.  6.  he  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  thirsty  to/.

10.  ye  shall  be  troubled,  for  the  vintage  shall/.

34.  16.  no  one  of  these  shall  /.  nor  want  her  mate
38.  14.  mine  eyes  /.  with  looking  upward
42.  4.  he  shall  not  /.  nor  be  discouraged
51.  14.  hasteneth  that  his  bread  should  not/.

57. 16.  for  the  spirit  should  /.  before  me

58. 11.  and  like  aspring  whose  waters  /.  not

Jer.  14. 6.  their  eyesdid /.  because  there  was  no  grass
15. 18.  wilt  thou  be  unto  me  as  waters  that  /.  /

48.  33.  I  caused  wine  to/,  from  presses,  Hos.  9.  2.
Lam.  2.  11.  mine  eyes  do /.  with  tears,  my  bowels
3. 22.  notconsumed,  because  his  compassions  /.  not
Amos  8.  4.  even  to  make  the  poor  ot  the  land  to/.
Ilab.  3.  17.  although  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall  /.
Luke  16.  9.  that  when  ye/,  they  may  receive  you
17.  earth  to  pass,  than  one  tittle  ot  the  law  to/

22.  32.  I  have  prayed  that  thy  faith/,  not
1  Cor.  13.  8.  whether  prophecies  they  shall  /

Heb.  1.  12.  thouartthe  same,  thy  years  shall  not/.
11.  32.  the  time  would  j.  me  to  tell  of  Gideon

12. 15.  looking  lest  any  man  /.  of  the  grace  of  God

FAILED.

Gen.  42.  28.  their  heart/  them,  they  were  afraid
47.  15.  and  when  money  /.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
Josh.  3. 16.  the  waters  /.  and  were  cut  off
21.  45.  there/,  not  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord
promised  to  Israel,  23.  14.  1  Kings  8.  56.
Job  19. 14.  my  kinsfolk  have  /.  and  my  friends
Psal.  142.  4.  refuge /  me,  no  man  cared  for  my  soul
Cant.  5.  6.  my  soul  /,  when  he  spake,  I  sought  him
Jer.  51 . 30.  their  might  /.  they  became  as  women
Lam.  4.  17.  our  eyes  as  yet /  for  our  vain  help
FA1LETH.

Gen.  47.  15.  why  should  we  die  ?  for  money/.

Lev.  25.  +  35.  if  thy  brother's  hand  /.  relieve  him
Job  21.  10.  their  bull  gendereth  and  /  not
Psal.  31.  10.  my  strength  /.  me,  38.  10.

40. 12.  therefore  my  heart/,  me, 73.  26.

71.  9.  forsake  me  not  when  my  strength  /.

109.  24.  my  knees  are  weak,  my  flesh/  of  fatness
143.  7.  hear  me  speedily,  O  Lord,  my  spirit/.

Eccl.  10.  3.  when  he  walketh,  his  wisdom  /  him
Isa.  15.  6.  the  grass  /.  there  is  no  green  thing

40.  26.  for  that  he  is  strong  in  power,  not  one  /.

41.  17.  poor  seek  water,  their  tongue/,  for  thirst

44. 12.  yea,  he  is  hungry  and  his  strength  /.

59. 15.  truth  /.  and  he  that  departeth  from  evil
Ezek.  12.  22.  days  are  prolonged  and  every  vision/.
Zeph.  3.  5.  bring  his  judgment  to  light,  he/,  not
Luke  12.  33.  a  treasure  in  the  heavens  that/,  not

1  Cor.  13.  8.  charity  never/  but  prophecies  fail
FAILING.

Dent.  28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  /.  of  eyes
Luke  21.  26.  men’s  hearts/  them  for  fear
FAIN.

Job  27  .  22.  he  would  /.  flee  out  of  his  hand
Luke  15. 16.  would /.  have  filled  his  belly  with  husks
FAINT.

Gen.  25.  29.  Esau  came  from  field,  and  he  was  /.  30.
Dent.  25. 18.  smote  thee  when  thou  wast /.  and  weary
Judg.  8. 4.  passed  over  Jordan,/,  yet  pursuing  them
5.  give  loaves  of  bread  to  the  people,  for  they  he  /.

1  Sam.  14.  28.  and  the  people  were  very  /.  31.

30.10.  so/,  that  they  could  not  go  over,  21.

2  Sam.  16.  2.  the  wine,  that  such  as  be  /.  may  drink
21.  15.  David  fought  and  waxed  /.

Isa.  1. 5.  the  whole  head  is  sick,  the  whole  heart  is /
13.  7.  therefore  shall  all  hands  be  /.  heart  melt
29.  8.  but  he  awaketh,  and  behold  he.  is  /.

40.  29.  hegiveth  power  to  the /.  and  increaseth
44. 12.  he  drinketh  no  water,  and  is  /.

Jer.  8. 18. 1  would  comfort  myself,  my  heart  is/

I. am.  1.  22.  for  my  sighs  are  many,  my  heart  is  /.

5. 17.  for  this  our  heart  is /.  our  eyes  are  dim
Zeph.  3.  1 16.  and  to  Zion,  let  not  thine  hands  be  /.
FAINT,  Verb.

Dent.  20.  3.  let  not  your  hearts  /.  fear  not
8.  lest  his  brethren’s  heart /  as  well  as  his  heart
Josh.  2.  9.  the  inhabitants  of  land  /.  because  of  you
24.  all  the  inhabitants  of  country/,  because  of  us
Prov.  24. 10.  if  thou  /.  in  the  day  of  adversity
Isa.  40.  30.  even  the  youths  shall  /.  Amos  8.  13.

31.  shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  walk  and  not/
Jer.  51.  46.  and  lest  your  hearts /.  and  ye  fear
I, am.  1.  13.  he  hath  made  me  /.  all  the  day
2.  t  11-  the  sucklings/.  ||  19.  young  children/
Ezek.  21. 7-  every  spirit  shall  /.  knees  shall  be  weak

15.  their  heart  may  /  and  ruins  be  multiplied
Mat.  15.  32.  not  send  them  away  fasting,  lest  they  /.
Mark  8.  3.  if  I  send  them  away  fasting,  they  will /.
Luke  18. 1.  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  not  to  /.
2  Cor.  4. 1.  as  we  have  received  mercy  we /.  not

16.  for  which  cause  we  /.  not,  tho’  outward  man
Gal.  6.  9.  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  /.  not
Fph.  3. 13.  that  ye  /.  not  at  my  tribulations  for  you
2  Thess.  3.  +  13.  brethren,  /  notin  well-doing
Heb.  12.  3.  lest  ye  be  wearied,  and/,  in  your  minds

5.  nor/,  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him
FAINTED.

Gen.  45.  26.  Jacob's  heart/,  for  he  believed  not
47.  13.  all  the  land  of  Canaan /.  by  reason  of  famine
Psal.  27.  13.  I  had/,  unless  1  had  believed  to  see
107.  5.  hungry  ana  thirsty,  their  soul  /.  in  them
Isa.  51. 20.  thy  sons /.  they  lie  at  head  of  all  streets
Jer.  45.  3.  I  /.  in  my  sighing,  I  find  no  rest
F.zek.  .31.  15.  the  trees  of  the  field/,  for  him
Dan.  8.  27.  I  Daniel  /.  and  was  sick  certain  days
Jonah  2. 7.  when  my  soul /.  I  remembered  the  Lord
4.  8.  that  he/,  and  wished  m  himself  to  die
Mat.  9.  36.  with  compassion  on  them,  because  they /.
Rev.  2.  3.  thou  hast  laboured,  and  hast  not  /.
FAINTEST.

Job  4.  5.  now  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thou  /.
FAINTETH.

Psal.  84.  2.  my  soul  /.  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord
119.  81.  my  soul  /.  for  thy  salvation
Isa.  10. 18.  they  shall  be  as  when  a  standard-bearer/


Isa.  40.  28.  the  Creator  of  the  ends  ot  the  earth/,  not
FAIN  1-11EA  REED.

Dent.  20.  8.  who  is  fearful  and  /.  let  him  return
Isa.  7.  4.  fear  not,  nor  be  /.  tor  the  two  tails
Jer.  49.  23.  Hamath  and  Arpad  are/.

FAINTNESS.

I.ev.  26.  36.  I  will  send  a /.  into  their  hearts
FA  IK.

Gen.  6.  2.  saw  that  the  daughters  of  men  were/,

12.  11.  Sarah  was /.  14.  H  24.  16.  Kebekah/.  26.  7.

1  Sam.  16.  t  12.  David  was  /  of  eyes,  17 .  42.

2  Sam.  13. 1.  1  amar  Absalom's  sister  was/.  14.  27
1  Kings  1.  4.  Abishaga /.  damsel  cherished  David
Esth.  1.  11.  Vashti  the  queen /.  ||  2.  7;  Esther  f.

2.  2.  let  /.  young  virgins  be  sought  for  the  king

3.  that  they  may  gather  the  /.  young  virgins
Job  37.  22./.  weather  cotneth  out  ot  the  north
42. 15.  no  women  found  so  /  as  Job’s  daughters
Prov.  7.  21.  with  /  speech  she  caused  him  to  yield
11.  22.  so  is  a/,  woman  without  discretion

26.  25.  when  he  speaketh  /.  believe  him  not
Cant.  1.  15.  behold,  thou  art/.  16.  14.  1,  ~.

2.  10.  rise  up,  my  love,  my/,  one,  come  away,  13.

4.  10.  how /.  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  my  spouse!  >
6. 10./.  as  the  moon  H  7-  6-  now/,  art  thou,  O  love
Isa. 5. 9.  many  houses  great  and /  without  inhabitant
54.  11.  I  will  lay  thy  stones  with/,  colours
Jer.  4.  30.  in  vain  shalt  thou  make  thyselt/.

11.  16.  and  olive-tree  /  and  of  a  goodly  fruit

12.  6.  though  they  speak  /.  words  unto  thee

46. 20.  Egypt  is  like  a  very  /.  heifer,  destrucl.  comes
Ezek.  16.  17.  thou  hast  also  taken  thy/ jewels
39.  and  they  shall  take  thy  /.  jewels,  23.  26.

31.  3.  was  a  cedar  in  Lebanon  with  /.  branches
7.  thus  was  he  f.  in  his  greatness,  in  branches
9.  1  have  made’him/.  by  multitude  of  his  branches
Dan.  4. 12.  leaves  thereof  were  /.  fruit  much,  21.
Hos.  10.  11.  but  1  passed  over  upon  her/,  neck
Amos  8.  13.  the  f.  virgins  shall  faint  for  thirst
Zech.  3.  5.  let  them  set  a /.  mitre  upon  his  head
Mat.  16.  2.  it  will  be/,  weather,  for  the  sky  is  red
Acts  7.  20.  Moses  was  born,  and  was  exceeding/.
Rom.  16.  18.  by  /  speeches  deceive  the  simple
Gal.  6. 12.  a  desire  to  make  a  /.  shew  in  the  flesh
FAIR  havens.

Acts  27.  8.  we  came  to  a  place  called  the  /.  havens
FAIRLY.

Mic.  1.  t  11.  pass  ye  away,  thou  that  dwellest/.
FAIRER.

Judg.  15.  2.  is  not  her  younger  sister/,  than  she*
Psal.  45.  2.  thou  art  /,  than  the  children  of  men
Dan.  1.  15.  their  countenances  appeared/.
FAIREST.

Cant.  1.  8.  O  thou  /.  among  women,  5.  9- 1  6.  1.
FAIRS.

Ezek.  27.  12.  they  traded  in  thy  /  14,  16,  19,  22

27.  thy  riches  and  thy/,  shall  fall  into  the  seas-
FAITH.

Faith  is  a  dependence  on  the  veracity  of  another.
Thus  trust  is  called  faith,  because  it  relies  npot
the  truth  of  a  promise :  And  one  is  said  to  keep
his  faith  inviolate,  when  he  performs  the  promm
that  another  relied  on.  Faith,  in  the  propriety  0
expression,  is  an  assent  on  account  of  the  veracit 3
of  the  speaker.  Accordingly,  divine  faith  is  t
firm  assent  of  the  mind  to  things  upon  the  au
thority  of  divine  revelation.  Faith  by  divines  ii
generally  distinguished  into  four  kinds,  namely,
historical,  temporary,  the  faith  of  miracles,  ant
justifying  or  saving  faith.

I.  Historical  faith  is  a  speculative  knowledge  of,
and  bare  assent  to,  the  truths  revealed  in  the  scrip
ture :  Of  this  kind  of  faith  the  apostle  James
speaks,  Jam.  2.  17»  24.  Faith,  if  it  have  not
works,  is  dead.  Ye  see  how  that  by  works  a
man  is  justified,  and  not  by  faith  only  ;  that  is,
not  by  a  mere  profession  of  faith,  or  a  bare  asserts
to  the  truth,  without  good  works,  which  proceto
from  faith,  and  shew  it  to  be  of  the  right  kind.

This  kind  of  faith  the  devils  themselves  have.
Jam.  2.  19.  Ihou  believest  that  there  is  one
God  ;  the  devils  also  believe,  and  tremble.  They
are  fully  persuaded  that  there  is  a  God,  and.  that
Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  shall  be  their  judge
as  they  acknowledge.  Mat.  8.  29.

II.  Temporary  faith,  together  with  the  knowledge
of,  and  assent  to,  revealed  truths,  has  likewise  in
it,  an  approbation  of,  and  joy  in,  receiving  and
hearing  these  truths ;  but  this  joy,  arising  from
some  worldly  consideration,  soon  vanishes  amt
comes  to  nothing  :  Of  this  kind  of  faith  our  Savioro
speaks  in  the  parable  of  the  sower.  Mat.  13.  20.1
He  that  received  the  seed  into  stony  places,  re¬
ceives  it  with  joy  ;  he  understands  it,  assents  to
it,  he  hears  it  gladly,  considers,  and  approves  ij
it;  and  it  springs  up  in  an  outward  profession
and  reformation :  Y et  hath  he  not  root  in  him¬
self,  but  dureth  for  a  while  ;  he  has  no  sufficient
or  considerable  root,  because  it  wants  the  soil  of  a
sincere  heart,  and  true  affections,  firm  and  fxea
resolutions,  and  habitual  dispositions  of  grace  :  rJe
has  some  good  purposes  and  desires,  but  they  ait
soon  overpowered  by  unmortified  corruption,  ava
the  force  of  temptation :  for  when  tribulation  or,
persecution  ariseth  because  of  the  word,  by  aiw
by  he  is  offended  ;  He  stumbles,  and  falls  of
from  all  his  former  profession  of  religion.

III.  The  faith  of  miracles  is  a  firm  assent  of  the

mind  to  some  particular  promise  concerning  ani
miraculous  event,  which,  if  performed  by  ns,  t-
called  an  active  miraculous  faith  ,  of  which  out
Saviour  and  the  apostle  Paul  speak.  Mat.  1<
20.  1  Cor.  13.  2.  But  if  it  he  wrought  upon  ns
it  is  called  a  passive  miraculous  faith  :  thus  th,
lame  man  at  Lystra  had  a  firm  persuasion  tha
Paul  and  Barnabas  were  able  to  cure  him,  Ace
14.  9.  ■

IV.  Justifying  faith  is  a  saving  grace  wrought  n
the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  wt  r«
ceive  Christ  as  he  is  revealed  in  the  gospel,  r
be  our  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  trust  f.
and  rely  upon  him  and  his  righteousness  aim


F  A  1


F  A  1


F  A  I


r  justification  and  salvation.  This  faith  begets
stnce it-  obedience  in  the  life  and  conversation,
he  apostle  to  the  Hebrews  calls  faith,  the  sut>-
tnce  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things
>t  seen,  II eh.  11.  1.  It  assures  us  of  the  reality
id  worth  of  eternal  invisible  things,  and  produces
satisfaction  and  assured  confidence,  that  God
ill  infallibly  perform  what  he  has  promised,
hereby  the  believer  is  as  confident  of  them,  as  tj
ey  were  before  his  tyes,  and  in  his  actual  pos¬
ition.  The  object  oj  faith  is  the  word  of  God  in
neral,  and  especially  the  d  ctrines  and  promises
at  respect  the  salvation  of  men  through  Christ,

) licit  reason  cannot  discover  by  its  own  light,  nor
rfectly  understand  when  revealed.  The  firm
initiation  of  faith  is  the  essential  supreme  pcr-
ctions  of  God  ;  his  unerring  knowledge,  immuta-
e  truth,  infinite  goodness,  and  almighty  power.
aith  has  a  prevailing  influence  upon  the  will,  it
■aws  the  affections,  and  renders  the  whole  man
tsequiovs  to  the  gospel.

this  faith,  we  are  said  to  be  justified,  Rom.  5. 1.
Ye  are  justified  by  faith,  not  formally,  as  if  it
ere  our  righteousness,  or  the  meritorious  cause  of
ir  justification  before  God;  but  instrumentally
id  relatively ,  as  it  apprehends  and  applies  to  us
ie  righteousness  and  blood  of  Christ,  which  is  the
iject  of  faith,  and  which  only  cleanseth  us  from
ll  sin  and  renders  us  acceptable  to  God.  It  is
died  the  faith  through  which  we  are  saved,  Eph .

.  8.  Faith  is,  as  it  were,  a  condition  on  our  part,
hereby  we  come  to  be  partakers  of  the  blessings  of
ie  new  covenant.  It  is  a  faith  which  worketh
y  love.  Gal.  5.  6.  It  is  not  an  idle,  unactive,
>>id  inoperative  grace,  but  shows  itself  by  produc-
ig  in  us  love  to  God  and  our  neighbour.  It  puri-
es  the  heart,  Acts  15.  9.  It  is  called  the  faith  of
sod’s  elect.  Tit.  1.  1.  because  it  is  bestowed  only
pon  those.  I  his  grace  increase!  h  from  one  degree
-  another,  Rom.  1.  17.  being  in  some  strong  and
rut,  Met.  8.  10.  in  others  weak  and  languishing,
lat.  14.  ‘cl.  Lastly,  this  grace  is  the  special  gift
'  God ,  Eph.  2.8.  By  grace  ye  are  saved  through
aith  ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of
iod  ;  that  is,  that  you  believe,  is  not  by  any
bility  of  your  own;  and  that  you  are  saved,  is
ot  for  any  worth  in  yourselves.  Likewise  in
hil.  1.  29.  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  believe  on
lirist.

th,  in  scripture,  is  taken  for  the  truth and  fait  Il¬
lness  of  God,  Rom.  3.  3.  Shall  their  unbelief
take  the  faith  of  God  without  effect  3  Shall  their
nbelief  make  the  faithful  promises  of  God,  of
; nding  the  Messiah,  and  of  redemption  by  him,
ot  to  be  accomplished  l  It  is  also  taken  for  a  per-
■iasion  of  the  lawfulness  of  things  indifferent,
■tom.  14.  22,  23.  Hast  thou  faith  i  have  it  to  thy -
d  f  before  God .  F or  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is
Hn  ;  that  is,  Hast  thou  a  persuasion  of  the  lawful-
ess  of  such  and  such  meats,  then  keep  it  to  thy-

■  ?//.  without  making  an  unseasonable  discovery  of

to  the  offence  of  others:  For  whatever  a  man
oeth  with  a  wavering  mind,  without  being  per¬
vaded  .that  it  is  pleasing  to  God,  and  warranted  by
is  word,  he  sinneth  in  the  doing  of  it.  F  aith  is
Iso  put  for  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  is  the
bject  of  faith.  Acts  24.  24.  Felix  heard  Paul  con-
erning  the  faith  in  Christ.  Gal.  1.  23.  Fie
reachetih  the  faith  which  once  he  destroyed.
lad  faith  is  taken  for  Christ,  and  his  righteous-
ess ;  that  is,  his  active  and  passive  obedience,
’hich  are  apprehended  by  faith,  and  are  the  ob-
cts  of  it,  in  all  those  passages  where  we  are  said
>  be  justified  by  faith.  It  is  put  for  a  belief
nd  profession  of  the  gospel,  Rom.  1.  8.  Your
iith  is  spoken  of  throughout  the  whole  world.
hid  for  fidelity  in  performing  of  promises,  Deut.

2.  20.  Children  in  whom  is  no  faith  ;  that  is,
bey  neither  believe  what  I  say,  nor  perform  what

t  'itmselies  promise.

w'.  32. 20.  they  are  children  in  whom  is  no  /.
a.  6.  30.  O  ye  of  little  /.  therefore  take  no
thought,  8.  26.  |  14.  31.  j  16.  8.  Luke  12.  28.

10.  found  so  great/,  no  not  in  Israel,  Luke  j.  9.

.  20.  if  ye  have  /.  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed
.  21.  if  ye  have  /.  ye  shall  not  only  do  this
.  23.  and  have  omitted  judgment,  mercy,  and  /.
rk 4. 40.  he  said  to  them,  how  is  it  ye  have  no  f.  ?

■  22.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  have  /.  in  God

ke  17. 5.  the  apostles  said  to  the  L.  increase  our  /.

.  if  ye  had  /.  ye  might  say  to  this  sycamine-tree
.  8.  when  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  f.?
■s  3.  16.  the  /.  which  is  by  him,  hath  given  him
this  perfect  soundness  in  presence  of  you  all

5.  and  they  chose  Stephen,  a  man  full  of/.  8.

.a  great  company  of  priests  were  obedient  to  the/.

•  24.  Barnabas  was  a  good  man,  full  of/.

•  8.  seeking  to  turn  the  deputy  from  the  /.

•  9.  who  perceiving  that  he  had  /.  to  be  healed

l.  and  exhorting  them  to  continue  in  the  f.

i.  how  he  had  opened  the  door  of/,  to  Gentiles

•  5.  the  churches  were  established  in  the  f.

•  t  31.  whereof  he  hath  offered  /.  to  all  men
.  21.  and /.  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ

•  24.  Felix  heard  Paul  concerning  the /.

1. 5.  we  have  received  grace  for  obedience  to  f.
*•  the  righteousness  of  God  revealed  from  /.  to /.

3.  unbelief  make  the/,  of  God  without  effect
I-.,  where  boasting  t  It  is  excluded  by  law  off.

5.  his/,  is  counted  for  righteousness,  9.

1.  circumcision  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  /.

2.  but  also  walk  in  steps  of  that  /.  of  Abraham

i.  but  was  through  the  righteousness  of /.

t.  if  they  of  the  law  be  heirs,  /.  is  made  void
ft.  it  is  of/,  which  is  of  the/,  of  Abraham
■30.  even  the  righteousness,  which  is  of/.  10.  6.
•8-  that  is  the  word  of/,  which  we  preach
'  ■  f.  cometh  by  hearing,  hearing  by  word  of  Clod

•  3.  accord,  as  God  hath  dealt  the  measure  of/,
prophesy  according  to  the  proportion  of /.

•  22.  hast  thou  f.  ?  have  it  to  thyself  before  God

3.  he  eateth  not  of  what  is  not  of  f.  is  sin


Rom.  16.  26.  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience  of  /.

1  Cor.  12.  9-  to  another  f.  by  the  same  Spirit

13.  2.  though  1  have  all  f.  and  have  no  charity

13.  now  abideth /.  hope,  charity,  these  three

2  Gor.  4.  13.  we  having  the  same  Spirit  off.

Gal.  1.  23.  now  preached /.  which  once  he  destroyed
3.  2.  by  the  works  of  law,  or  by  the  bearing  off.  5.

7.  know  ye,  that  they  which  are  off.  9.

12.  law  is  not  of/,  but  the  man  that  doeth  them
23.  before  /.  came  ||  25.  after  that /.  is  come

5.  6.  but  /.  which  worketh  by  love

22.  but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,/.

6.  ll).  unto  them  who  are  of  the  household  off.
Eph.  4.  5.  one  Lord,  one  /.  one  baptism

13.  till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the /.

6.  16.  above  all,  taking  the  shield  off.

23.  peace  be  to  the  brethren,  with  /.  from  God
2  hit.  1.25.  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  off.

*  27.  striving  together  for  the  f.  of  the  gospel

1  These.  1. 3.  remembering  your  work  off.

5.8.  putting  on  the  breast  plate  of/,  and  love

2  These .  1.  4.  we  glory  for  your  patience  and  /.

11.  would  fulfil  the  work  off.  with  power

3.  2.  we  may  be  delivered,  for  all  men  have  not /.

1  Tim.  1.  5./.  unfeigned  ||  5.  8.  he  hath  denied  the /.

14.  grace  of  our  Lord  exceeding  abundant  with

19.  holding/,  and  a  good  conscience  ;  which  some
put  away  concerning/,  have  made  shipwreck

3.  +  6.  not  one  newly  come  to  the  /.

9.  holding  the  mystery  of  f.  in  a  pure  conscience

4. 1.  in  latter  times,  some  shall  depart  from  the  /.
6.  nourished  up  in  words  off.  and  good  doctrine

5.  12.  because  they  have  cast  off  their  first /.

6.  10.  they  have  erred  from  the  /.  21.

1 1 .  follow /.  1|  12.  fight  the  good  fight  of /.

2  Tim.  1.  5.  the  unfeigned/,  that  is  in  thee

2.  18.  and  overthrow  the /.  of  some

22.  follow /.  ||  3.  8.  reprobate  concerning  the /.

3.  10.  but  thou  hast  fully  known  my  f.  charity

4.  7.  1  have  finished  my  course,  1  have  kept  the /.
Tit.  1.1.  according  to  the  /.  of  God’s  elect

4.  to  Titus  mine  own  son,  after  the  common  /.
Phi/em.  5.  hearing  of  thy  /.  toward  the  Lord  Jesus
Fleb.  4.2.  word  dkfnot  profit,  not  being  mixed  with /.

6. 1.  not  laying  again  the  foundation  of f.

10.  22.  with  a  time  heart  in  full  assuianceof /.

23.  let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  /.

11. 1. /.  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  tor
6.  without  /.  it  is  impossible  to  please  God

12.  2.  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  /.

13.  7.  whose /.  follow,  considering  the  end
Jam.  2. 1.  have  not  the /.  with  respect  of  persons

14.  though  a  man  say  he  hath /.  can /.  save  him  ?

17.  even  so/,  without  works  is  dead,  20.  26.

18.  a  man  may  say,  thou  hast /.  and  1  have  works

22.  seest  thou  how  /.  wrought  with  his  works,  and

by  works  was  /.  made,  perfect

5.  15.  and  the  prayer  of/,  shall  save  the  sick
2  Pet.  1. 1.  that  have  obtained  like  precious /.

1  John  5.  4.  thatevevcometh  the  world,  even  our/.
Jude  3.  ye  should  earnestly  contend  for  the  /.

20.  building  up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy /.
Rev.  2.13.  thou  boldest  fast  and  hast  not  denied  my /.

19.  I  know  thy  works,  and  /.  and  thy  patience
13. 10.  here  is  the  patience  and  the  /.  of  the  saints

14.  12.  here  are  they  that  keep  the/,  of  Jesus

By  FAITH.

Hab.fi.  4.  but  the  just  shall  live  by  his  /.  Rom.  1.

17.  Gal.  3.  11.  fleb.  10.  38.
Acts  15.  9.  purifying  their  hearts  byf.

26. 18.  who  are  sanctified  by  f.  that  is  in  me
Rom.  i.  12.  may  be  comforted  by  the  mutual /.

3.  22.  the  righteousness  of  God  by J.  of  Jesus  Chr.

28.  a  man  is  justified  by.  f.  5.  1.  Gal.  2. 16.  |  3.  24.
30.  which  shall  justify  the  circumcision  byf.

5.  2.  by  whom  we  have  access  by  f.  to  this  grace

9.  32.  because  they  sought  it  not  by  f.

11.  20.  thou  standest  by  f.  2  Cor.  1. 24.

2  Cor.  5.7.  for  we  walk  by  f.  not  by  sight
Gal.  2.  20.  I  live  by  the /.  of  the  Son  of  God

3.  22.  that  the  promise  by  f.  might  be  given

26.  ye  are  the  children  or  God  by  f.  in  Christ  Jes.
5.  5.  we  wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness  by /.
Eph.  3.  12.  in  whom  we  have  access  by  f.  of  him
17.  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  byf.
Phil.  3.9.  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  f.
Heb.  4.  t  2.  because  they  were  not  united  by  f.

11.  4.  by  f.  Abel  ||  5.  by  f.  Enoch  ||  7.  by /.  Roah

8.  byf.  A  brail.  9,  17-  II  20.  by  f.  Isaac  blessed  Jac.

21 .  by  f.  Jacob  ||  22.  by  f.  Joseph  made  mention

23.  by  f.  Moses,  24,  27-  II  31.  by  f.  Rahab

29.  by  f.  they  passed  through  the  Red  sea

30.  by  f.  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down

Jam.  2,  24.  you  see  then,  how  that  by  works  a  man

is  justified,  not  by  f.  only
In  FAITH.

Rom.  4.  19.  being  not  weak  in  f.  he  considered  not

20.  he  staggered  not,  but  was  strong  in  f.

14.  1.  him  that  is  weak  in  the/,  receive  you

1  Cor.  16.  13.  watch,  stand  fast  in  the /.  be  strong

2  Cor.  8.  7-  as  ye  abound  in  f.  and  utterance

13.  5.  examine  yourselves  whether  ye  he  in  the  /.
Col.  1.23.  if  ye  continue  in  the/,  grounded

2.  7-  rooted  in  him,  and  stablished  in  the /.

1  Tim.  1.  2.  unto  '1  irnothy  my  own  son  in  the /.

4.  rather  than  godly  edifying  which  is  in  f.

2-7-  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  f.  and  verity

15.  be  saved,  if  they  continue  in  f.  and  charity
.3. 13.  they  purchase  great  boldness  in  the /.

4.  12.  be  thou  an  example  of  believers  in  f.

2  Tim,  1 .  13.  hold  fast  the  form  in  f.  and  love
Tit.  1. 13.  that  they  may  be  found  in  the /.  2.  2.

3. 15.  greet  them  that  love  us  in  the /.  grace  be
Heb.  11. 13.  these  all  died  in f.  not  having  received
Jam.  1.  6.  but  let  them  ask  in  f.  not  wavering

2.  5.  God  cliosen  the  poor  of  this  world,  rich  in  f.

I  Pet.  5.  9.  whom  resist,  stedfast  in  the  /.

Their  FAITH.

Mat.  9. 2.  Jes.  seeing  their  f.  Mark  2.  5.  Luke  5.  20.
Through  FAITH.

Acts  3.  16.  through  f.  in  his  name  this  man  strong
Rom.  3.  25.  a  propitiation  through  f.  in  his  blood


Rom.  3.30.  who  shall  justify  uncircumcis.  through  /.

31.  do  we  make  oid  the  law  through  f.  ?  G.  forbid
Gal.  3.  8.  God  would  justify  the  heathen  through  f.

14.  might  receB  e  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  thro'  f.
Eph.  2.  8.  for  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  J.
Phil.  3.  9.  but  that  righteousness  which  is  thro'  f.
Col.  2. 12.  risen  thro'  the  /.  of  the  operation  of  God
2  Tim.  3.  15.  make  thee  wise  to  salvation  thro'  f.
Ileb.  6. 12.  who  through  f.  inherit  the  promises

11.3.  through  f.  we  understand  the  worlds  framed
11.  through  f.  Sara  recei  ed  strength  to  conceive
28.  thro'  f.  he  kept  the  passover,  and  sprinkling
33.  who  thro'  J.  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  right.
39.  having  obtained  a  good  report  through  f.

1  Pet.  1 . 5.  kept  by  power  of  G.  thro'  f.  to  salvation
Thy  FA  11  H.

Mat.  9.  22.  thy  f.  haih  made  thee  whole,  Mark  5.

34.  |  10.  52.  Luke  8.  48. 1  17-  19.

15.  28.  Jesus  said,  O  woman,  great  is  thy  f.

Luke  7.50.  thy  f.  hath  saved  thee,  go  in  peace, 18.42.

22.  32.  1  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  f.  fail  not
Philem.  6.  the  communication  of  thy  f.  effectual
Jam.  2.  18.  shew  me  thy  f.  without  tny  works
Your  FAITH.

Mat.  9.  29.  according  to  your  f.  be  it  unto  you>
Luke  8. 25.  he  said  unto  them,  where  is  your  f.  ?
Rom.  1.8.  your  f.  is  spoken  of  through  the  world-.

1  Cor.  ft.  5.  yourf.  should  not  stand  in  wisdom  of  men

15.  14.  and  your  f.  is  also  vain,  17.

2  Cor.  1.  24.  not  nave  dominion  over  your  f.

10.  15.  having  hope  when  your  f.  is  increased

Eph.  1.  15.  after  1  heard  of  your  f.  in  ihe  Lord
Phil.  ft.  17.  if  1  be  offered  on  the  service  of  your  f.
Col.  1. 4.  since  we  heard  of  your  f.  in  Christ  Jesus

2.  5.  beholding  the  stedfastness  of  your  f.  in  ChrisC
1  These.  1. 8.  your  f.  to  God-ward  is  spread  abroad/

3.  2.  and  to  comfort  you  concerning  your  f,

5.  1  sent  to  know  your  f.  lest  the  tempter

6.  Timothy  brought  us  good  tidings  of  your  f.

7.  we  were  comforted  over  you  by  your  f.

10.  and  might  perfect  what  is  lacking  in  your  f.
ft  These.  1.  3.  that  yourf.  groweth  exceedingly
Jam.  1.  3.  the  trying  of  your  f.  worketh  patience

1  Pet.  1.7.  the  trial  of  your  f.  being  more  precious

9.  receiving  the  end  of  yourf.  even  salvation

21.  that  your  /.  and  hope  might  be  in  God

2  Pet.  1. 5.  add  to  yourf.  virtue,  to  virtue  knowledge

FAITHFUL.

Num.  12.  7.  Moses  is /.  in  mine  house,  Heb.  3. 2,  5.
Deut.  7.  9.  the  /.  God  whokeepeth  covenant

1  Bam.,  ft.  35.  I  will  raise  me  up  a /.  priest

3. 1 2  >.  Samuel  was /.  to  be  a  prophet  of  the  Lord

22.  14.  Ahimelech  sa;d,  who  is  so  f.  as  Da'  id  3

2  Bam.  20. 19.  I  am  one  of  them  that  are  /.  in  Israel
Neh.  7.  2.  Ilananiah  was  a /.  man  and  feared  God

9.  8.  and  foundest  his  heart  /.  before  thee
13.  13.  for  they  were  counted  /.  to  distribute

Job  12.  +  20.  he  removeth  the  lip  of  the  /.

Peal.  12.  1.  for  the  /.  fail  from  among  men
31.  23.  O  love  the  Lord,  for  Lord  preserveth  the/.
89.  37.  and  as  a  /.  witness  in  heaven
101.  6.  mine  eyes  shall  be  on  the  /.  of  the  land
119.  86.  all  thy  commandments  are  /.

138.  thy  testimonies  are  righteous  and  very  f.
Prov.  11.  13.  a /.  spirit  concealetli  the  matter

13.  17.  but  a  J.  ambassador  is  health

14.  5.  a /.  witness  will  not  lie,  but  a  false  utter  lies

20.  6.  but  a  /.  man  who  can  find  ?

25.  13.  as  snow  in  harvest,  so  is  a  /.  messenger

27.  6.  /.  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend,  but  the  kisses

28.  20.  a /.  man  shall  abound  with  blessings
Isa.  1.  21.  how  is  the  /.  city  become  an  harlot !

26.  afterwards  thou  shalt  be  called  the  /.  city

8.  2.  1  took  unto  me /.  witnesses  to  record

49. 7-  kings  shall  see,  because  of  the  Lord  that  is/.
Jer.  42.  5.  the  Lord  be  a  f.  witness  between  us
Dan.  6.  4.  could  find  none,  forasmuch  as  be  was  /.
Has.  11.  12.  but  Judah  is/,  with  the  saints
Mat.  24.45.  'vvho  then  is  a /.  and  wise  servant 3
25.  21.  well  done,  thou  good  and  /.  servant

23.  thou  hast  been  /.  in  a  few  things,  Luke  19.  17.
Luke  12.  42.  who  then  is  that /.  and  wise  steward  3

16.  10.  he  that  is  /.  in  the  least  is  f.  a’so  in  much

11.  have  not  been /.  in  the  unrighteous  mammon

12.  have  not  been  /.  in  what  is  another  man’s
Acts  16.  15.  if  ye  have  judged  me  /.  to  the  Lord

1  Cor.  1 . 9.  God  is /.  by  whom  ye  were  called, 10. 13.

4.  2.  it  is  required  in  stewards,  that  a  man  be /.

17.  I  have  sent  you  Timothy  /.  in  the  Lord

7.  25.  that  hath  obtained  mercy  of  the  Lord  to  be  /.
Gal.  3.  9-  they  are  blessed  with /.  Abraham
Eph.  1.  1.  to  the  saints  and  /.  in  Christ  Jesus

6.  21.  Tyehicus  a  /.  minister  in  the  Lord
Col.  1 .  2.  to  the  saints  and  f.  brethren  in  Christ

7.  Fpaphras,  who  is  for  you  a  /.  minister,  4.  7.

4.  9.  Onesitnus,  a  /.  brother,  who  is  one  of  you

1  Ihess.  5.  24./.  is  he  thatcalleth  you,  who  will  do  it'

2  These.  3.  3.  the  Lord  is  /.  who  shall  stablish  you

1  Tim.  1 .  12. 1  thank  Christ,  that  he  counted  me  f.

15.  this  is  a/,  saying,  4.  9.  Tit.  3.  8.

3.  11.  their  wives  must  be  sober,  and /.  in  all  things

6.  2.  rather  do  them  service  because  they  are/.

2  Tim.  ft.  ft.  the  same  commit  thou  to /.  men
11.  it  is  a /.  saying  ||  13.  3'et  he  abideth/.

Tit.  1.  6.  if  any  be  blameless,  having /.  children

9.  bolding  fast  the/,  word, as  he  was  taught
Heb.  ft.  17.  that  he  might  be  a  /.  high-priest

3.  2.  who  was  /.  to  lnm  that  appointed  him

10.  23.  for  he  is /.  that  promised,  11,  11.

1  Pet.  4. 19.  commit  their  souls,  as  unto  a/.  Creator

5.  12.  I  have  written  by  Silvanus  a/,  brother

1  John  1.  9.  if  we  confess,  he  is/,  to  forgive  us
Rev.  1.  5.  Christ  who  is  the  /.  witness,  3.  14.

2.  10.  be /.  to  death,  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life

13.  those  days  wherein  Antipas  was  my/,  martyr
17. 14.  they  that  are  with  him,  are  called,  and  f.

19.  11.  and  hethatsat  upon  him  was  called /,’

21.  5.  these  words  are  true  and  f.  22.  6.

FAITHFULLY.

2  Kings  12.  15.  for  they  dealt  /.  22.  7-

2  Chron.  19.  9.  thus  do  in  the  tear  of  the  Lord  /.

31  12.  and  they  br,  'ght  in  the  offerings  /.

149


F  A  L


F  A  L


F  AL


S  Chron.  34.  1C.  and  the  men  did  the  work/.

Prov.  29.  14.  the  king  that  /.  judgeth  the  [>oor
Jer.  23.  C8.  hath  my  word,  let  him  speak  my  word/.

3  John  5.  thou  doest /.  whatsoever  thou  dost  to  bre-
1AI  l  H  FULNESS.  [thren

1  Sam.  26.  23.  the  l  ord  render  to  every  man  his  /.
Psal.  5.  9.  for  there  is  no  /.  in  their  mouth
36.  5.  and  thy  /.  reacheth  unto  the  clouds
40.  10.  1  have  declared  thy/,  and  thy  salvation
88.  11.  or  shall  thy/,  be  declared  in  destruction  ?

80.  1. 1  will  make  known  thy/,  to  all  generations
£.  thy  /.  shalt  thou  establish  in  the  heavens
5.  thy/,  also  in  the  congregation  of  the.  saints
8.  who  is  like  to  thee,  or  to  thy/,  roundabout  thee  ?

24.  but  my  f.  and  my  mercy  shall  be  with  him
33.  nor  willl  suffer  my/,  to  fail
92.  2.  it  is  good  to  shew  forth  thy  /.  every  night
119.  75.  and  that  thou  in/,  hast  afflicted  me
+  86.  all  thy  commandments  are  /.

90.  thy  /.  is  unto  al  1  generations
t  138.  thy  testimonies  are  righteous  and  very/.

14.3.  1.  hear  my  prayer-;  in  thy/,  answer  me
Isa.  11.  5.  and  /.  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his  reins
25. 1.  thy  counsels  of  old  are  /.  and  truth
Lam.  3.  23.  thy  mercies  are  new,  great  is  thy/.

Hos.  2.  20.  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  in/.

FAITHLESS.

Mat.  17. 17.  O /.  generat.  Mark  9. 19.  Lvke  9.  41.
John  20.  27.  and  be  not  /.  but  believing
FALL.

The  fall  of  man.  Mari's  greatest  excellency  at
jirst  was  a  perfect  conformity  to  the  divine  pat¬
tern.  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the
image  of  God  created  he  him,  Gen.  1.  27.  This
includes,

T.  The  similitude  of  God  in  the  substance  of  the
soul,  as  it  is  an  intelligent,  free,  spiritual,  and
immortal  being.  This  is  assigned  to  be  the  rea¬
son  of  the  law,  that  whoso  sheds  man’s  blood,
by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  ;  for  in  the  image
of  God  made  he  man,  Gen.  9.  6.

II.  A  moral  resemblance  in  its  qualities-  and  per¬
fections.  Man  was  conformed  to  God  in  holi¬
ness  :  this  the  apostle  insinva'es,  when  he  sets
forth  the  sanctification  of  corrupt  man,  by  the
expression  of  renewing  him  in  know  ledge,  righte¬
ousness,  and  holiness,  after  the  image  of  the
Creator,  Eph.  4.  23,  24.  Col.  .3.  10.  The  renova¬
tion  of  things,  being  a  restoring  of  them  to  their
primitive  state  ;  and  is  more  or  less  perfect,  by
its  proportion  to,  or  distance  from,  the  original.
Man's  understanding  was  enriched  with  know¬
ledge,  which  was  neither  acquired  by  study,  nor
confined  to  that  or  the  other  particular  creature,
but  reached  through  the  whole  compass  of  the
creation.  Besides,  he  had  such  a  knowledge  of
the  Deity  as  was  sufficient  for  his  duty  and  fe¬
licity.  He  discover ed  almighty  power,  admirable
wisdom,  and  infinite  goodness,  from  their  effects
in  creating  the  world.  The  image  of  God  was
likewise  resplendent  in  man  s  conscience,  the  seat
of  practical  knowledge,  and  treasury  of  moral
principles.  The  directive  faculty  was  sincere  and
uncorrupt  ;  it  was  clear  from  all  prejudices,  which
might  render  it  an  incompetent  judge  of  good  and
evil.  There  was  also  a  divine  impression  on  the
will.  Spiritual  reason  kept  the  throne,  and  the
inferior  faculties  observed  an  easy  and  regular
subordination  to  its  dictates.

III.  The  image  of  God  consisted,  though  in  an
inferior  degree,  in  the  happy  state  of  man,  which
was  the  consequent  and  accession  to  his  holiness  :
And  herein  he  resembled  that  infinitely  blessed
Being,  as  he  is  perfectly  exempt  from  all  evils
which  might  allay  and  lessen  his  felicity,  and
enjoys  those  pleasures  which  are  worthy  of  his  pure
nature  and  glorious  state.  This  happiness  had
relation  to  the  two  natures,  which  enter  into  man's
composition.  (1)  The  animal  and  sensitive,  and
this  consisted  both  in  the  excellent  disposition  of
his  organs ,  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  convenient
objects.  His  body  being  formed  Immediately  by
God,  was  not  liable  to  those  defects  which  pro¬
ceed  from  the  weakness  of  second  causes:  no
blemish  or  disease,  which  are  the  effects  and
footsteps  of  sin,  were  to  be  found  in  him  :  all  his
senses  were  quick  and  lively,  able  to  perform  with
facility,  vigour,  and  delight,  their  operations.
'Not  only  were  his  organs  excellently  disposed,
but  there  were  also  convenient  objects  to  entertain
his  sensitive  faculties:  he  enjoyed  nature  in
its  original  purity,  crowned  with  the  benediction
of  God,  before  it  was  blasted  with  the  curse.
The  world  was  all  harmony  and  beauty,  becom¬
ing  the  goodness  of  the  Creator ;  and  not  as  it
is  since  the  fall,  disordered  and  deformed  in  many
parts,  the  effect  of  his  justice.  The  earth  was
liberal  to  Adam  of  all  its  treasures  ;  the  heavens
of  their  light  and  sweetest  influences.  And  he
was  seated  in  Lden,  a  place  of  great  beauty  and
delight.  But  (2)  His  chief  happiness  consisted  in
the  exercise  of  his  most  noble  faculties  on  their
proper  objects.  The  highest  faculties  in  man
are  the  understanding  and  will :  and  their  happi¬
ness  consists  in  union  with  God  by  knowledge  and
love.  He  saw  the  admirable  beauty  of  the  Crea¬
tor  through  the  transparent  veil  of  the  creatures :
And  from  hence  there  arose  in  the  soul  a  pleasure
pure,  solid,  and  satisfying.

IV.  There  was  in  man's  dominion  and  power  over
the  creatures  a  shining  part  of  God’s  image.
God  gave  him  the  solemn  investiture  of  his  dig¬
nity,  when  he  brought  the  creatures  to  receive
their  names  from  him,  which  was  a  mark  of
their  homage ,  and  a  token  of  his  empire  to  com¬
mand  them  by  their  names,  Psal.  8.  6,  7,  8.
Thus  holy  and  blessed  was  Adam  in  his  primi¬
tive  state.

Man  only  of  all  creatures  on  earth  was  in  a  state
of  moral  dependence,  and  capable  of  a  law-.
For,  a  law  being  the  declaration  of  the  Supe¬
rior's  will  requiring  obedience,  and  threatening

1.50


|  punishment  on  the  failure  thereof,  there  must  be  a
principle  of  reason  and  choice  in  that  nature  which
is  governed  by  it :  both  to  discover  the  authority
that  enjoins  it ;  to  discern  the  matter  of  the  law  ;
and  to  determine  itself,  out  of  judgment  and  elec¬
tion,  to  obedience,  as  most  excellent  in  itself,  and
advantageous  to  the  performer.  As  therefore  reason
made  man  capable  of  a  law,  so  it  was  impossible
he  should  be  exempt  from  a  law  ;  for  as  the  notion
of  a  God,  that  is,  of  the  first  and  supreme  Being,
excludes  all  possibility  of  obligation  to  another,
and  ( f  subjection  to  a  law  ;  so  the  quality  if  a
creature  includes  the  relation  of  dependence  and
natural  subjection  to  the  will  of  God.

The  law  cf  nature,  to  which  man  was  subject  upon
his  creation,  contains  those  moral  pnncij  les  con¬
cerning  good  and  evil,  which  have  an  essential
equity  in  them,  and  are  the  measures  of  his  duty
to  God,  to  himself,  and  to  his  fellow-creatures.
This  law  was  published  by  the  voice  of  reason,
and  is  holy,  just,  and  pood ;  and  the  obligation
to  it  is  eternal ;  it  being  the  unchangeable  will
of  God,  grounded  on  the  natuial  and  invariable
relations  between  God  and  man,  and  between  man
and  the  creatures.  Besides  the  particular  direc¬
tions  cf  the  law  of  nature,  this  general  principle
was  planted  in  the  reasonable  soul,  to  obey  God  in
any  instance  wherein  he  did  prescribe  his  pleasure.
Accordingly,  to  declare  his  sovereign  right,  in  all
things,  and  to  make  trial  of  man's  obedience,  God
entered  into  covenant  with  man  ;  he  forbids  him
to  eat  of  the  tree  of  know  ledge  of  good  and  evil,
for  in  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt
surely  die.  This  established  an  inseparable  con¬
nection  between  duty  and  felicity ,  disobedience
and  misery.  In  this  threatening  of  death  upon
disobedience,  the  promise  of  life  upon  his  obedience
was  implied,  and  easily  suggested  itself  to  the  ra¬
tional  mind.

Man  was  created  perfectly  holy,  but  in  a  natural,
therefore  mutable,  state,  lie  was  invested  with
power  to  prevent  his  falling,  yet  under  a  possibi¬
lity  of  it  :  he  was  complete  in  his  own  order,  but
receptive  of  sinful  impressions.  Being  therefore
set  upon  by  the  most  subtle  of  those  rebellious  spirits,
who  had  fallen  from  their  obedience  and  glory,  he
was  corrupted  and  seduced  by  him,  and  involved
both  himself  and  his  posterity  in  sin  and  misery.
As  to  the  manner  in  which  the  devil  seduced  our
first  parents,  see  on  Devil.

'The  honour  and  majesty  of  the  whole  law  was  vio¬
lated  in  the  breach  of  that  symbolical  precept :  for
in  that  grand  apostasy  many  sins  were  included :
as,  I.  Infidelity  and  unbelief.  God  had  said.  Of
the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou
shalt  not  eat  of  it ;  for  in  the  day  thou  eatest
thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die.  This  was  the  first
step  to  ruin,  as  appears  by  the  order  of  the  tempta¬
tion:  it  was  first  said  by  the  devil ,  re  shall  not
die  to  weaken  their  faith  ;  then.  Ye  shall  be  as
gods,  to  flatter  their  ambition.  This  infidelity
is  greatly  aggravated,  as  it  implies  an  accusation
of  God.  (1)  Of  envy  ;  as  if  he  had  denied  them
the  perfections  becoming  the  human  nature,  and
they  might  ascend  to  an  higher  orb  than  that
wherein  they  were  placed,  by  eating  the  forbidden
fruit.  (2)  Of  falsehood  ;  as  if  God  had  threat¬
ened  to  inflict  a  punishment  upon  man's  disobe¬
dience  which  he  had  no  design  to  do ;  and  what
heightens  this  is,  that  when  he  distrusted  the
fountain  of  truth,  he  gave  credit  to  the  father  of
lies ;  as  appears  by  his  compliance,  the  real
evi device  of  his  faith.

II.  This  sin  included  in  it  prodigious  pride.  Tie
was  scarcely  out  of  the  state  of  nothing,  no  sooner
created  but  he  aspired  to  be  as  God.  Not  content
with  his  image,  he  affected  an  equality,  to  be  like
him  in  his  inimitable  attributes .  lie  would  rob
God  of  his  eternity,  to  live  without  end,  to  enjoy
an  immortality ,  not  depending  on  God's  wilt,
but  absolute,  which  is  proper  to  God  alone;  of
Iris  sovereignty ,  to  command  without  dependence  ;
and  of  his  wisdom,  to  know  all  things  without
reserve.

III.  Horrid  ingratitude.  He  was  appointed  heir
apparent  of  all  things  ;  yet  undervaluing  his  pre¬
sent  portion,  he  entertains  a  project  of  improving
his  happiness.  The  excellent  state  newly  con¬
ferred  upon  him,  was  a  strong  obligation  to  pay
so  small  an  acknowledgment  to  the  Lord.  The  use
of  all  the  garden  was  allowed  him,  only  a  tree
excepted.  Now  in  the  midst  of  such  variety  and
plenty,  to  be  inflamed  with  the  intemperate  appe¬
tite  cf  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  to  break  a  com¬
mand  so  equal  and  easy,  what  was  it  but  a  depising
the  rich  goodness  of  his  great  Benefactor  ?

IV.  A  bloody  cruelty  to  himself,  and  to  all  his
posterity.  When  God  had  made  him  a  depository
in  a  matter  of  infin  ite  moment  ;  that  is,  of  his  own
happiness,  and  all  mankind' s,  this  should  have
been  a  powerful  motive  to  have  kept  him  vigilant :
but  giving  a  ready  ear  to  the  tempter ,  he  betray¬
ed  his  trust,  and  at  once  breaks  both  the  tables  of
the  law,  and  becomes  the  greatest  sinner,  being
guilty  of  the  highest  impiety  and  cruelty.

By  voluntary  disobedience  our  first  parents  fell
from  and  lost  their  original  rectitude  and  perfec¬
tion  oj  nature ;  which  consisted  in  knowledge,
holiness,  and  perfect  happiness,  Gen.  1.  £6.  Col.
3.  10.  Eph.  4.  24.

By  the  fall  of  man  all  the  powers  of  nature  were
depraved,  polluted,  and  corrupted :  [1]  'The  under¬
standing  was  darkened.  Eph.  4.  18.  [2]  7 he  con¬
science  defiled.  Heb.  10.  22.  [3]  The  will  obsti¬
nate  and  rebellious,  Isa.  28.  14.  Lorn.  8.  7-  [4]
The  affections  carnal  and  sensual,  Eph.  2.  3.  [5]
All  the  thoughts  uninterruptedly  evil,  Gen.  6.  5.
and  the  whole  mind,  or  heart,  a  vest  of  all  manner
of  abominations,  jer,  17.  9.  Mat.  15.  19.

FALL,  Substantive.

Prov.  16.  18.  and  an  haughty  spirit  before  a/.

29.  16.  but  the  righteous  shall  =ee  their/.


Jer.  49.  21 .  earth  is  moved  at  the  noise  of  their  /
Ezek.  26.  15.  the  isles  shake  at  the  sound  of  then  J

18.  the  isles  shall  tremble  in  the  day  of  thy  f,  I
31. 16.  the  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound  of  his/
32.  10.  every  man  for  his  life  in  the  day  of  thy
Mat.  7. 27.  the  house  fell,  and  great  was  the  /.'o'
Luke  2.  .34.  child  is  set  for  the/,  and  rising  of  ma
Bom.  11.  11.  but  through  their/',  salvation  is  co  1

unto  the  Genti

12.  if  the  /.  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  world

FALL,  Verb.

Gen. 2.  21.  God  caused  adeepsleepto /.  upon  Ad  :
4.3. 18.  he  may  seek  occasion  against  us,  ana/,  on
45.  24.  he  said,  see  that  ye/,  not  out  by  the  wa

49.  17.  so  that  his  rider  shall  /.  backward
Exod.  15.  16.  fear  and  dread  shall/,  upon  them

21. 3.3.  if  a  man  dig  a  pit,  and  an  ox  or  ass  /.  then.
Lev.  11.  32.  on  whatsoever  any  of  them  doth/,  j

37.  if  their  carcase/,  on  any  sowing  seed,  38.
19. 29.  lest  land /.  to  whoredom  and  become  wicl'j
26.  7.  they  shall  /.  before  you  by  the  sword,  8.
36.  and  they  shall/,  when  none  pursueth
.37.  and  they  shall  /'.  one  upon  another
Num.  5.  +  21.’  the  Lord  doth  make  thy  thigh  to  f.
6.  t  12.  but  the  days  that  were  before  shall  f."

11.  .31.  and  let  them/,  by  the  camp  round  abot

14.  29.  your  carcases  shall/,  in  the  wilderness,  3
34.  2.  this  is  the  land  that  shall/,  to  you
Dent.  22.  8.  if  any  man /.  from  thence

Judg.  8.  21.  they  said,  rise  thou,  and/',  upon  us

15.  12.  Samson  said,  swear  ye  will  not/,  upon
18.  and  /.  into  the  hand  of  the  uncircumrised  r

Ruth  2. 16.  let/',  some  handfuls  of  purpose  for  h1
t  22.  that  they  /'.  noton  thee  in  another  field
3.  18.  until  thou  know  how  the  matter  will  f

1  Sam.  3. 19.  let  none  of  his  words/,  to  the  grou
14.  45.  there  shall  not  one  hair  of  his  head  /,  to

ground, 2  Sam.  14. 11. 1  Kings  1. 52.  Acts  27.
18^25.  Saul  sought  to  make  David /.  by  Philistiii
22.  17.  would  not  /.  on  the  priests  of  the  Lord

18.  the  king  said,  turn  thou,  and/,  on  the  pric
26.  20.  therefore  let  not  my  blood  f.  to  the  eart!

2  Sam.  1. 15.  go  near  and  /.  on  him,  1  Kings  2.  29.

24.  14.  let  us /'.  into  the  hand  of  God,  let  me

/.  into  the  hand  of  man,  1  Chron.  21.  |i

1  Kings  22.  20.  who  shall  persuade  Ahab  to  go  1

and  /  .  at  liamoth  gilead  t  2  Chron.  18.

2  Kings  7.  4.  let  us  /.  unto  the  host  of  the  Syrian
10.  10.  shall/',  nothing  of  the  word  of  the  1  ord
14.  10.  w  hy  shouldst  meddle,  that  thou  shouldst

1  Chron.  12.  19.  he  will  f.  to  his  master  Saul

2  Chron.  21. 15.  have  sickness,  till  thy  bowels  /.  cl

25.  8.  God  shall  make  thee  /.  before  the  enemj

19.  that  thou  shouldest /.  and  Judah  with  thee
Esth.  6. 1 10.  suffer  not  a  whit  to /.  of  all  that

13.  before  whom  thou  hast  begun  to /.  shall  not  |
vail  against  him,  but  shalt  surely  /.  before  I

Job  6.  +  27.  vea,  ye  cause  to /.  upon  the  fatherh

12.  +  3.  1  /.‘not  low'ej  than  you

13.  11.  and  shall  not  his  dread/,  upon  you
31.  22.  let  mine  arm/,  from  my  shoulder-blade
Psal.  5.  10.  let  them  /.  by  their  own  counsels  ;

9. 3.  mine  enemies  shall /  .and  perish  at  thy  prese

10. 10.  that  the  poor  may  /.  by  his  strong  ones
.35.  8.  into  that  very  destruction  let  him  /.

37  .  24.  tho’  he/,  he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  do
45.  5.  arrows,  whereby  the  people  /.  under  the
64.  8.  make  their  tongue  to/,  on  themselves
78.  28.  and  he  let  it  /.  in  the  midst  of  their  can
82.  7.  but  ye  shall  /.  like  one  of  the  princes
91.  7.  a  thousand  shall  /.  at  thy  side,  and  10,0'.
106.  t27.  make  their  seed/,  among  the  nations
118.  13.  thou  hast  thrust  at  me  that  1  might/.
140.  10.  let  burning  coals/,  upon  them

141. 10.  let  the  wicked  /.  into  their  own  nets
145.  14.  the  lord  upholdeth  all  that/.

Prov.  4.  16.  unless  they  cause  some  to/.

10.  8.  but  a  prating  fool  shall/.  n0

11.5.  the  wicked  shall  /.  by  his  own  wickedne:

14.  where  no  counsel  is  the  people  /.

28.  he  that  trusteth  in  his  riches  shall  /.  '

22. 14.  he  that  is  abhorred  of  the  Ld.  shall  /.  the  1
24.  16.  but  the  wicked  shall /.  into  mischief

26.  27.  whoso diggeth  a  pit  shall/,  therein, he  4
rolleth  a  stone  it  will  return  on  him,  EcclA ,

28.  10.  causeth  to  go  astray  shall  /.  into  hisowil

14.  but  he  that  hardeneth  his  heart  shall/.

18.  but  he  that  is  perverse  shall  /.  at  once

Eccl.  4. 10.  if’thev  /.  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow

11.3.  if  the  tree /.  toward  the  south  or  noith  y
Isa.  8.  15.  many ’among  them  shall  stumble  an-

10.  4.  and  thev  shall /.  under  the  slain
34.  and  Lebanon  shall/,  by  a  mighty  one
22.  25.  nail  fastened  in  the  sure  place  shall/

24.  18.  who  fleeth  from  fear  shall  /.  into  the  pi

20.  the  earth  shall /.  and  not  rise  again

28.  13.  that  they  might  go  and  /.  backward  0
30.  13.  iniquity  shall  be  as  a  breach  ready  to/
25.  in  the  day  of  slaughter,  when  the  tower:,
40.  30.  and  the  young  men  shall  utterly  7.

47.  11.  therefore’ mischiefs  shall/,  upon  thee
54.  15.  whoso  shall  gather  shall/',  tor  thy  sak>

Jer.  .3.  12.  1  will  not  cause  mine  anger  to/.  on<>
6. 15.  they  shall  /.  among  them  that  /.  8. 12.

21.  the  fathers  and  sons  shall  /.  upon  them  •

8.  4.  saith  the  Lord,  shall  they/,  and  not  arise

9.  22.  even  the  carcases  of  men  shall  /.  as  duij

15.  8.  1  have  caused  him  to /.  upon  it  sudden,

2.3.  12.  they  shall  be  driven  bn,  and  /.  therm.
19.  a  whirlwind  /.  on  the  head  of  wicked,  at

25.  27.  drink  ve,  and  be  drunken,  and  spue,  A
34.  and  ye  shall  /.  like  a  pleasant  vessel

37.  14.  it  is  false,  l  /.  not  away  to  the  C  halde:
t  20.  let  my  supplication /.  before  thee
42.  +  2.  let  our  supplication  /.  before  thee
44. 12.  thev  shall  all  f.  in  the  land  ot  Egypt
46.  6.  they  shall  stumble  and  /'.  toward  the  n

16.  he  made  many  to/,  yea  one  tell  on  anoM

48.  44.  he  that  fleeth  shall/  into  the  pit
49.26.  her  young  men/,  in  her  streets,  50.  3"

50.  .32.  and  the  most  proud  shall  stumble  an<

51.  4.  the  slain  shall  /'.  in  la  id  of  Chaldeans,  f


F  A  L


F  A  M


51.  44.  yea,  the  wall  of  Pabylon  snail  /.

.  as  Pabylon  caused  the  slain  of  Israel  to /.

Jt.  1.  14.  he  hath  made  my  strength  to  /.

,  6.7.  the  slain  shall/,  in  the  midst  ot  you

11.  say  unto  them  that  it  shall  /.and  ye, '()  great
hailstones,  shall/,  and  a  stormy  wind  rent  it

.  foundation  shall  be  discovered,  and  it  shall/.

6.  bring  it  out  piece  by  piece,  let  no  lot  /.  on  it
‘27.  all  thy  company  shall  /.  into  the  seas,  34
5.  thou  shalt /.  upon  the  open  fields,  3(1.  5.

4.  great  pain,  when  the  slain  shall  /.  in  Egypt
they  also  that  uphold  Egypt  shall  t.

.  I  will  cause  the  sword  to /.  out<  f  his  hand
112.  by  swords  will  1  cause  thy  multitude  to /.

12.  not/,  thereby  in  the  day  that  he  turneth

8.  and  In  all  thy  rivers  shall  they  /.

t  14.  nor  cause  to/,  thy  nations  any  more

20.  the  steep  places  shall /.  every  wall  shall  J.

3.  arrows  to/.  ||  4.  shalt/.  on  the  mountains

12.  they  caused  Israel  to /.  into  iniquity
t  1.  when  ye  cause  the  land  to  /.  by  lot

14.  thus  land  shall  /.  to  you  for  inheritance
1 1.  9.  1 18.  we  cause  not  our  supplications  to  /.
14.  also  the  robbers  of  thy  people  shall  /.

.but  he  shall  stumble  and /.  and  not  be  found
.  when  they  shall/.  ||  35.  some /.  to  try  them

I .  4.  5.  therefore  shalt  thou  /  in  the  day,  the

prophet  also  shall  /.  with  thee  in  the  night
.  the  people  that  doth  not  understand  shall  /

>.  Israel  and  Ephraim  shall  /.  ludah  shall  /.

8.  and  they  shall  say  to  the  hills,/,  on  us

9.  but  the  transgressors  shall  /.  therein

i  <s  3. 5.  can  a  bird  /.  in  a  snare  where  no  gin  is  r
.  the  horns  of  the  altar  shall  /.  to  the  ground

4.  even  they  shall  /'.  and  never  rise  again
J  i.  yet  shall  not  the  least  grain  /.to  the  earth
3.  7.  8.  rejoice  not.  O  mine  enemy,  when  1  /.

At.  3.  12.  they  shall  /.  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater
/ .  2.  t  8.  ye  have  caused  many  to  /  in  the  law

i .  JO.  29.  not  one  sparrow  /.  to  ground  without
11.  if  it  /.  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath-day

14.  both  shall  /.  into  the  ditch,  Luke  6.  39.

j.  eat  crumbs  which /.  from  masters’  table

44.  whoso  /.  on  this  stone  be  broken,  on  whom  it
■hall  /.  it  will  grind  him  to  powder,  Luke  20.  18.
29.  the  sun  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  stars
shall/,  from  hea'en,  Mark  13.  25.

1  e  10. 18.  1  beheld  Satan  as  lightn.  from  heav.

■  30.  shall  begin  to  say  to  the  mountains  /.  on  us
h  12. 24.  except  a  corn  /.  into  the  ground  and  die
c  27. 17.  fearing  lest  they  should  f.  into  quicks
.  then  the  soldiers  cut  the  ropes  and  let  her  /'.  off
.  shall  notan  hair  /.  from  the  head  of  any  of  you

I I.  11.11.  have  they  stumbled  that  thev  should  /.

13.  put  an  occasion  to  /.  in  his  brother’s  way
l  r.  10.  12.  him  thatstandeth  take  heed  lest  he

I  m.3.  6.  he/,  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil
have  a  good  report,  lest  he  /.  into  reproach
• '.  they  that  will  be  rich  /.  into  temptation
I  ■  4.  11.  lest  any/,  after  the  same  example
31.  it  is  fearful  to  /.  into  hands  of  living  God
1  . 1.2.  count  it  joy,  when  ye/,  into  temptation
.  2.  swear  not,  lest  ye/,  into  condemnation
l  ? t .  1.  10.  if  ye  do  these  things  ye  shall  never/.

7.  beware  lest  ye/,  from  your  sted fastness

I  ■  6. 16.  said  to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  /  on  us
' .  I  saw  a  star/,  from  heaven  unto  the  earth
FALL  away.

f  ?  8. 13.  and  in  the  time  of  temptation/,  away

1 .6.6.  if  they/,  away  to  renew  them  again

FALL  (/own.

[  0  22;  4.  see  thy  brother’s  ass  f.  down  by  the  way

1 . 6.  5.  the  wall  of  the  city^hall /.  down  flat
•«.  21.  13.  David  let  his  spittle  /.  down

r '.  72. 11.  all  kings  shall  f.  down  before  him
f  13.  t  7.  therefpre  shall  all  hands/,  down

•  3.  and  he  that  is  hoi  pen  shall  /.  down

•  4.  their  host  shall/,  down  as  the  leaf  falleth
‘  19.  shall  I  /.  down  to  the  stock  of  a  tree  ?

‘  14.  the  Sabeans  shall /.  down  onto  thee
-5.  they  /.  dozen,  yea,  they  worship
r '.  30.  25.  and  the  arms  of  Pharaoh  shall /.  down
...3.  5.  ye  /.  </oamand  worship  the  image,  10.
if  ye/.  </«ai«and  worship  the  image,  well

26.  and  many  shall  /.  down  slain
'•4.9.  all  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou
wilt/,  down  and  worship  me,  Luke  4.  7.

1  4. 10.  the  twenty-four  elders /  down  before  him
r ,  FALL,  joined  with  sword.

•  5.  3.  lest  he/,  on  us  with  pestilence  01  sword
V.  14. 3.  brought  us  to  this  land  to  f.  by  sword
and  ye  shall  /.  by  the  sword
oys  19.7.  Sennacherib  /.  by  s.  2  Chr.  32.  t  21.

'  i°3-  10.  they  shall  /  by  the  sword,  Ezek.  6. 11.

•  3.  25.  thy  men  shall/,  by  the  sword

j  15.  and  every  one  shall  /.  by  the  sword
i-'  r,n  the  Assyrian  /.  with  the  sword
‘i.  behold,  I  will  cause  him  to  /.  by  the

-  ,A  .  ,  s.wo,rd  in  his  own  land,  Jer.  19.7.

'  io  4‘  Pas-lur  s  friends  shall  /  by  the  sword

:  18.  and  thou  shalt  not  /.  by  the  sword

•  •  5.  12.  a  third  part  shall  f.  by  the  sword

1  r  *n<1  h,e  ^jat  is  near  shall  /.  by  the  sword
1  ‘f-i/e  shall/,  by  the  sword ,  I  will  judge  you
"ls  fugitives  shall  /.  by  the  sword
a!1<l  Oiy  remnant  shall  /.  by  the  sword
•  -V0l'r  sons  and  daughters  shall  /  by  sword

-  3,  and  they  of  Dedan  shall  /.  by  the  sword

.  the  men  in  the  league  shall  /.by  the  sword
rom  the  tower  of  Syene,  shall  /.  by  the  sword
1  if*  men  shall  /•  by  the  sword
>  -1  Yu  caus?  ’lie  sword  to  /  out  of  his  hand
>'1,'  00^'  iln  f le  "’astes  shall  /.  by  the  sword
11.  33.  they  that  understand  shall  /.  by  sword
1  J,6-  princes  shall  /.  by  the  sword

d 6.  Samaria  shall  /.  by  the  sword
~.ja. w  lien  they  /.  on  the  sword  not  be  wounded
'i,];  thy  sons  and  daughters/,  by  the  sword
-1-  »4.  they  shall  /  by  the  edge  of  the  sword
;  , ,  T  FALLEN.

„  ,,  .1"  sa>d  to  C  ain,  w  hy  is  thy  countenance  {.?

J.  41.  that  hath  his  hair  /.  off  from  his  head


as


F  AL

Lev.  25.  35.  if  thy  brother  be/,  in  decay  with  thee
Josh.  8.  24.  all  Ai  were /.  on  the  edge  of  the  sword
Judy.  3.  25.  behold,  their  lord  was  f.  down  dead

18.  1.  their  inheritance  had  not /.  unto  them

19.  27.  behold,  the  woman  was)',  at  the  door

1  ■'dam.  5.  3.  Dagon  was/.  ||  26.  12.  a  deep  sleep/.

31.  8.  they  found  Saul  and  his  sons/.  J  Chr.  10.8.

2  Sam.  1.  10.  sure  he  could  not  live  after  he  was /
12.  and  they  mourned,  because  they  were/.

3.  38.  there  is  a  great  man /.  this  day  in  Israel
17  v+  9-  when  some  of  them  be  /.  at  the  first

1  Kings  8.  t  56.  hath  not  /.  one  word  of  his  promise

20.  +  25.  number  an  army  like  army  that  was  /.

2  Kings  1.3.  14.  now  Elisha  was/,  sick  of  his  sickness

25.  +  11.  the  /.  away  did  the  (  aptain  carry  away
2  Chron.  20.  24.  were  dead  bodies /.  to  the  earth

29.  9.  for  lo,  oui  fathers  have /.  by  the  sword
E  th.  7.  8.  Hainan  was /.  on  bed  where  Esther  w
Psal.  20.  8.  they  are  brought  down  and  /.

36.  12.  there  are  the  workers  of  iniquity/.

Isa.  14.  12.  how  art  thou /.  from  heaven,  O  Lucifer  !

26.  18.  nor  have  the  inhabitants  of  the  world /.
Ezek.  32.  22.  all  of  them  /.  by  the  sw-ord,  23,  24.
IIos.  14.  1.  for  thou  hast/,  by  thine  iniquity
Zech.  12.  t  8.  he  that  is  /.  at  that  day  be  as  David
Luke  14.  5.  which  of  you  shall  have  ox  /.  into  a  pit  ?
si  its  8. 16.  the  Holy  Ghost  was/,  on  none  of  them

20.  9.  Eutychus  being /.  into  a  deep  sleep  fell  down

26.  14.  w’hen  we  w'ere  all  /.  1  heard  a  voice

27.  29.  fearing  lest  they  should  have /.  on  rocks

28.  6.  looked  when  Paul  should  have/,  (town  dead
Phil.  1.  12./.  out  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel
Rev.  2.  5.  remember  from  whence  thou  art  f.

Are  FALLEN.

2  Sam.  1.  4.  many  of  the  people  are  f.  and  dead
19.  how  are  the  mighty  /.  !  25,  27-
22.  39.  they  are /.  under  my  feet,  Psal.  18.38.
Psal.  16.  6.  the  lines  aref.  to  me  in  pleasant  places
55.  4.  the  terrors  of  death  are  f.  upon  me
57.  6.  into  the  midst  whereof  they  are  f.  themselves
69.  9.  the  reproaches  of  them  are  f.  upon  me
Isa.  9.  10.  the  bricks  are  f.  down,  but  we  will  build
Jer.  38.  19.  the  Jews  that  are  f.  to  the  Chaldeans
46. 12.  the  mighty  men,  they  are  f.  both  together
50.  15.  Pabylon’s  foundations  aref.  walls  down
Lam.  2.  21.  my  virgins  are  f.  by  the  sword
Ezek.  31.  12.  his  branches  are  f.  his  boughs  broken

32.  27.  they  shall  not  lie  with  the  mighty  that  are  f.
IIos.  7 ■  7.  all  their  kings  are  f.  none  calleth  to  me

1  Cor.  15.  6.  part  remain,  some  are f.  asleep,  18.
Gal.  5.  4.  justified  by  the  law,  ye  are /.  from  grace
Rev.  17.  10.  are  seven  kings,  five  are  f.  and  one  is

Is  FALLEN.

Lev.  13.  40.  the  man  whose  hair  is  f.  off  his  head
Num.  32. 19.  our  lot  is  f.  on  this  sine  Jordan
Josh.  2.  9.  I  know  that  your  terror  is  f.  upon  us
Job  1.  16.  the  fire  of  God  isf.  from  heaven
Psal.  7.  15.  and  is  f.  into  the  diten  which  he  made
Isa.  3.  8.  Jerusalem  is  ruined,  and  Judah  is f.

16.  9.  the  shouting  for  thy  summer-fruits  isf.

21.  9.  Babylon  is f.  is  f.' Rev.  14.  8.  I  18.  2.

59.  14.  for  truth  is  f.  in  the  streets,  equity  cannot
Jer.  48.  32.  the  spoiler  isf.  on  thy  summer  fruits
51.8.  Babylon  is  suddenly /.  and  destroyed
/  am.  5. 16.  the  crow  11  is  f.  from  our  heads,  woe  to  us
Ezek.  1.3.  12.  lo,  w  hen  the  wall  isf.  shall  it  not  be  said
Amos  5.  2.  the  virgin  of  I  sr.  is  /.shall  no  more  rise
9.  11.  1  will  raise  up  the  tabernacle  that  is  f.

Zech.  11.  2.  how  l,  tir-tree,  for  the  cedar  is  f.

Acts  15.  16.  build  tabernacle  of  David  which  is  f.
FA  LEER.

Jer.  46. 1 16.  he  multiplied  the /.  one  fell  on  another
FALLEST.

Jer.  37.  13.  saying,  thou  /.away  to  the  Chaldeans
FALLETH.

Exod.  1.  10.  w'hen  there  /.  out  any  w'ar,  they  join
Lev.  11.  .3.3.  evn-y  vessel  whereinto  any  of  them  /.

35.  every  thing  whereupon  their  carcase/.

Num.  33.  54.  inheritance  shall  be  where  his  lot/.

2  Sam.  3.  29.  not  fail  one  that  /.  011  the  sword

34.  as  a  man/,  before  wdeked  men,  so  fellest  tnou
17-  12.  will  light  on  him  as  dew  /.on  the  ground
Job  4.  1.3.  when  deep  sleep /.  on  men,  33.  15.

Prov.  13.  17.  a  wicked  messenger/,  into  mischief

17.  20.  a  perverse  tongue /.  into  mischief

24.  16.  a  just  man/,  seven  times,  riseth  up  again
17-  rejoice  not  when  thine  enemy/.

Eccl.  4.  10.  wme  to  him  that  is  alone  when  he/.

9.  12.  sons  of  men  are  snared  w  hen  it /.  on  them
11.  3.  where  the  tree  /.  there  shall  it  be
Isa.  34.  4.  as  the  leaf/,  off  from  the  vine
44.  15.  maketh  an  image,  and  /.  down  thereto,  17.
Jer.  21.  9.  he  that/,  to  Chaldeans  shall  live
Dan.  3.  6.  whoso  /.  not  down,  and  worshippeth,  11.
Mat.  17.  15.  for  oft  times  he  f.  into  the  fire
Luke  11.  17.  a  house  divided  against  a  house/.

15.  12.  give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that /.  to  me
Rom.  14.  4.  to  his  own  master  he  standethor/.

Jam.  1.  11.  the  flower  thereof /.  1  Pet.  1.  24
FALLING.

Num.  24.  4.  /.  into  a  trance,  but  his  eyes  open,  16.
Dent.  19.  t  16.  to  testify  against  him/,  away
Job  4.  4.  thy  words  have  upholden  him  that  was/,

14.  18.  the  mountain  f.  cometh  to  noueht
Ps.  56.  13.  wilt  not  deliver  my  feet  from/.  116.  8.
Prov.  25.  26.  a  righteous  man  /.  before  tlie  wicked
l  a.  34.  4.  and  as  a/,  fig  from  the  fig-tree
Luke  8.  47.  came  trembling  and  /.  dow  n  before  him

22.  44.  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood/,  dow  n
Atjs  1. 18.  and  Judas/,  headlong,  burst  asunder

27.  41.  and/,  into  a  place  where  two  seas  met

1  Cor.  14.  25.  and  so/,  down,  he  will  worship  God

2  7 hess.  2.  .3.  except  there  come  a/,  aw  ay  first
Jude  24.  to  him  that  is  able  to  keep  you  from  f.

FALLINGS.

Job  41 .  t  23.  the/,  of  his  flesh  are  joined  together
FALLOW.

Jer.  4.  3.  break  up  your/,  ground,  IIos.  10. 12.

See  Deer.

FALSE.

Exod.  2,3.  1.  thou  shalt  not  raise  a  /.  report
7.  keep  thee  far  from  a  f.  matter


2  Kings  9.  12.  and  they  said,  it  is  f.  tell  us  now
Job  36.  4.  for  truly  my  words  shall  not  be  /.

Psal.  119.  104.  therefore  1  hate  every  /.  way,  128.
120.  3.  what  shall  be  done  to  thee,  thou  /.  tongue
Prov.  11.  1.  a/,  balance  is  an  abomination  to  the  L.
17-  4.  a  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to/,  lips
20.  23.  and  a/,  balance  is  not  good

25.  14.  w hoso  boasteth  of  a /.  gift,  is  like  wind
Jer.  8. 1 8.  the /.  pen  of  scribes  worketh  for  falsehood
14. 14.  they  prophecy  unto  you  a  /.  vision

23.  32.  I  am  against  them  that  prophesy  /.  dreams
37.  14.  then  aid  Jeremiah,  it  is  /.  1  fall  not  away
Lam.  2. 14.  but  have  seen  for  thee  /.  burdens
Ezek.  21. 23  it  shall  be  to  them  as  a /.  divination
Zech.  8.  17-  let  none  imagine  evil,  love  no /.  oath

10.  2.  and  the  diviners  have  told  /.  dreams
Mai.  3.  5.  1  will  be  swift  witness  against /.  swearers
Mat.  24.  24.  for  there  shall  arise  /.  Christs  and
/.  prophets,  and  shall  shew  wonders,
Mark  1.3.  22.

Lnke\9.  8.  have  taken  any  thing  by  f.  accusation
2  Cor.  11.  13.  for  such  are  /.  apostles,  deceitful

26.  I  have  been  in  perils  amona  brethren


2  Pet.  2. 1.  there  shall  be  /.  teachers  among  you
See  Prophet.

FALSE  prophets.

Mat.  7.  15.  beware  of/,  prophets  in  sheep’s  clothing

24.  11.  and  many  f.  prophets  shall  rise,  24.

Mark  13.  22.  /.  prophets  shall  rise,  and  shew  signs
Luke  6.  26.  so  did  their  fathers  to  the/,  prophets

2  Pet.  2. 1.  there  were  /.  prophets  among  the  people
1  John  4.  1.  /.  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world
F  A  LS  E  witness.

Exod.  20.  16.  thou  shalt  not  bear  /.  witness  against
thy  neighbour,  Deut.  5.  20.  Mat.  19.  18.
Dent.  19.  16.  if  a/,  witness  rise  up  against  any  man
18.  and  behold,  if  the  witness  be  a /.  witness
Prov.  6.  19-  a/,  witness  that  speaketh  lies

12.  17.  a/,  witness  sheweth  forth  deceit,  14.5.

19.  5.  a/,  witness  shall  not  be  unpunished,  9.

21.  28.  a  /.  witness  shall  perish

25.  18.  a  man  that  beareth  /.  witness  is  a  maul
Mat.  15.  19.  for  out  of  the  heart  proceed  /.  witness

26.  59.  the  elders  sought  /.  witness  against  Jesus
Mark  14.  56.  many  bare  /,  witness  against  him,  57.

FALSE  witnesses.

Psal.  27. 12.  f.  witnesses  are  risen  up  against  me
35.  1 1 .  /.  witnesses  did  rise,  they  laid  to  my  charge
Mat.  26.  60.  tho’  many  /.  witnesses  came,  yet  found
they  none,  at  the  last  came  two  /.  witnesses
Acts  6.  13.  and  set  up  /.  witnesses,  who  said

1  Cor.  15.  15.  and  we  are  found  /.  witnesses  of  God

,  FALSEHOOD.

2  Sam.  18.13.  should  have  wrought  /,  against  my  life
Job  21.  34.  in  your  answers  there  remaineth  /.

Psal.  7.  14.  behold,  he  hath  brought  forth /.

119. 118.  hast  trodden  them  dow  11,  for  deceit  is  /.
144.  8.  their  hand  is  a  right  hand  off.  11.

Prov.  20. 1 17.  bread  of/,  is  sw'eet  to  a  man
25.  +  14.  whoso  boasteth  himself  in  a  gift  of/.

Isa.  28. 15.  and  under/,  have  we  hid  ourselves
57.  4.  are  ye  not  a  seed  of /.  f  ||  59. 13.  words  of/.
Jer.  3. 1 10.  she, hath  turned  to  me  but  in  /.

8.  t8.  the  false  pen  of  scribes  worketh  tor/.

10.  14.  for  his  molten  image  is /.  51.  17.

13.  25.  thou  hast  forgotten  me,  and  trusted  in/

37. 1 14.  then  said  Jeremiah,  it  is  a/.

IIos.  7.1.  for  they  commit/,  and  the  thief  cometh  in
Mic.  2.  11.  if  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  /.
FALSELY.

Gen.  21.23.  swear  to  me  that  thou  wilt  not  deal  f.
Lev.  6.  3.  have  found  what  was  lost,  and  sweareth  /•
5.  or  all  that  about  which  he  hath  sworn /.

19. 11.  neither  deal/,  nor  lie  one  to  another
12.  and  ye  shall  not  swear  by  my  name/

Deut.  19.  18.  if  the  witness  have  testified  f.

Psal.  35. 1  19.  let  not  mine  enemies  /  rejoice
44. 17.  nor  have  we  dealt/,  in  thy  covenant
Jer.  5.  2.  tho’  they  say,  the  Loid  liveth.they  sw'ear /.
31.  the  prophets  prophesy/,  unto  you,  29.  9.

6.  13.  prophet,  priest,  every  one  dealeth /.  8.  10.

7.  9.  will  ye  steal,  murder,  and  swear /.  ?

40. 16.  tor  thou  speakest  /.  of  Ishmael

43.  2.  thou  speakest/'.  the  Lord  hath  not  sent  thee
Dos.  io.  4.  swearing/  in  making  a  covenant
Mic.  2. 1 1 1 .  if  a  man  walk  with  the  wind  and  lie  /.
Zech.  5.  4.  the  curse  enter  his  house  that  sweareth  /.
Mat.  5.  11.  say  evil  against  you  /.  for  my  sake
Luke  3. 14.  nor  accuse  any  /.  be  content  with  wages
1  I  im.  6.  20.  oppositions  of  science,  /  so  called
1  Pet .  3.  16.  /.  accuse  your  good  conversa.  in  Christ
FALSIFYING.

Amos  8.  5.  and  /.  the  balances  by  deceit
FAME.

Gtfw.  45.  16.  the  /  was  heard  in  Pharaoh’s  house
i\um.  14. 15.  nations  that  have  heard  the  /.  of  thee
Josh.  6.  27.  Joshua’s/,  was  noised  thro’  the  country
9.  9.  we  heard  the  /  of  God,  what  he  did  in  Egypt
1  Kings  A.  31.  his/,  was  in  all  nations  round  about
10. 1.  the  queen  heard  /  of  Solomon,  2  Chron.  9. 1.
7.  thy  wisdom  exceedeth  the./'.  2  Chron.  9.6.

1  Chron.  14.  17 .  the/,  of  David  went  to  all  lands
22.  5.  and  the  house  must  be  off.  and  of  glory
Isth.  9.  4.  Mordecai’s/.  went  through  the  provinces
Job  28.  22.  we  have  heard  the/  with  our  ears
Isa.  66.  19.  to  the  isles  that  have  not  heard  my/

Jer.  3.  t  9.  thro’  the /.  of  her  whoredom  she  defiled
6.  24.  we  have  heard  the  /.  our  hands  wax  feeble
Zeph.  3. 19.  and  1  will  get  them  f.  in  every  land
Mat.  4.  24.  the  /  ot  Jesus  went  abroad,  Mark  1. 28,

Luke  4.  14,  37. 1  5.  15
9.  26.  the  /.  thereof  went  abroad  into  all  that  land
31.  they,  when  departed,  spread  abroad  his/

14.  1.  Herod  the  tetrarch  heard  of  the  /'.  of  Jesus
FA  Ml  LIAR,

Job  19. 14.  my  /.  friends  have  forgotten  me
Psal.  41.  9.  my/,  friend  hath  lift  up  his  heel  ag.m
FAMILIAR,  spirit.

Lev.  20. 27  ■  man  or  woman  of  a /.  spirit  put  to  dea

151


F  A  M


F  A  M


FAR


I  Sam.  28. 7.  seek  me  a  woman  that  hath  a  /.  spirit
to  inquire  of  her ;  a /.  spirit  at  Endor

8.  divine  tome  by  the /.  spirit  and  bring  him  up

1  Chr.  10.  13.  Saul  inquired  of  one  that  had  a/,  sp.

2  Chron.  33.  6.  Marrasseh  dealt  with  a/,  spirit
Isa  29.  4.  thy  voice  as  of  one  that  hath  a/,  spirit

FAMILIAR  spirits.

J.ev.  19.  31.  regard  not  them  that  have/,  spirits

20.  6.  against  that  soul  that  turneth  after/,  spirits
Dent.  18.  11.  nor  a  consulter  with/,  spirits

1  Sam.  28.  3.  Saul  put  away  those  that  had  /.  spirits

9.  how  he  hath  cut  off  those  that  have  /.  spirits

2  Kinas  2l.fi.  Manasseh  dealt  with/,  spirits

23.  24.  workers  with  /.  spirits  Josiah  put  away

Isa.  8.  19.  when  they  say  to  you,  seek  f.  spirits

19.  3.  they  shall  seek  to  them  that  have/,  spirits

FAMILIARS.

Jer.  20.  10.  all  my  /.  watched  for  my  halting
FAMILY.

Lev.  20.  5.  1  will  set  my  face  against  his  /.

25. 10.  ye  shall  return  every  man  to  his  /.  41.

47.  sell  himself  to  the  stock  of  the  stranger’s/.

49.  his  uncle  or  any  of  his  /.  may  redeem  him
yum.  3.  21.  of  Gershon  was  the  /.  of  the  Libnites
27.  of  Kohath  was  the/,  of  the  Amramites
■26.  5.  the  /.  of  the  Handchites, /.  of  the  Palluites
F a  m  I  i,y  mentioned  often  to  the  59th  verse.

27-  4.  why  our  father’s  name  done  away  from  /.  ?
11.  give  his  inheritance  to  the  next  of  his/.

36.  6.  marry  to  /.  of  their  father’s  tribe,  8,  12.
[Dent.  29. 18.  lest  a  /.  turn  away  from  Lord  our  God
.  Josh.  7.  14.  the /.  which  the  Lord  taketh  shall  come

17.  and  he  took  the  f.  of  the  Zarhites

Judg.  1.  25.  but  they  let  go  the  man  and  all  his/.

6.  15.  behold,  my/,  is  poor  in  Manasseh

9.  1.  communed  with  the  /.  of  his  mother’s  father

13.  2.  Manoah  a  man  of  the  /.  of  the  Danites

17.  7.  a  young  man,  a  Levite  of  the  /.  of  Judah

18.  2.  the  Danites  sent  of  their  /.  fi  ve  men  to  spy

19.  or  that  thou  be  a  priest  to  a/,  in  Israel

21.  24.  Israel  departed, every  man  tc  his  f.

1  Ruth  2. 1.  she  haa  a  kinsman  of  the  /.  of  Elimelech
1  Sam.  9.  21 .  my/,  the  least  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin

10.  21. /.  of  Ma'tri  was  taken,  and  Saul  was  taken

18.  18.  what  is  my  life,  or  my  father’s/,  in  Israel?

20.  6.  a  yearly  sacrifice  there  for  all  the  /.  29.

-2  Sam.  14.7.  whole/,  is  risen  against,  thine  handmaid
16.  5.  a  man  of  the  /.  of  Saul,  his  name  Shimei
1  Chron.  4.  27.  neither  did  all  their  /.  multiply
6.  61.  to  the  /.  of  Kohath  were  cities  given,  70.

13.  14.  the  ark  remained  with  the  f.  of  Obed-edom
F.sth.  9.  28.  these  days  of  Purim  kept  by  every  /.
Jer.  3. 14.  I  will  take  one  of  a  city,  and  two  of  a  /.

8.  3.  death  shall  be  chosen  by  residue  of  this  evil/.
Amos  3.  1.  against  the  /.  T  brought  out  of  Egypt
Zech.  12.  12.  every/,  shall  mourn  apart,  13,  14.

14.  18.  if  the /.  of  Egypt  go  not  up,  and  come  not
Eph.  3.  15.  whole  /  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named

FAMILIES.

Gen.  8.  t  19.  creepeth  on  the  earth,  after  their/.
JO.  5.  the  isles  of  Gentiles  divided  after  their  /.

18.  were  the /.  of  the  Canaanites  spread  abroad

20.  the  sons  of  Ham  after  their  /.  ||  31./.  ofShem
12.  .3.  in  thee  all  the /.  of  earth  he  blessed,  28.  14.
36.  40.  the  dukes  of  Esau  according  to  their  /.

47-  12.  Joseph  nourished  his  brethren  with  their  /.

E-cod.  6.  14.  these  be  the /.  of  Reuben,  the  first  born
of  Israel,  Num.  26.  7-  Josh.  13. 15,  23.


15.  these  are  the /.  of  Simeon,  Num.  26.  12,  14.

Josh.  19.  1,  8.

•17.  the  /.  of  Gershon,  Num.  3.  18,  21. 1  4.  22,  24,

38,  40,  41.  Josh.  21.  33.
J9,  these  are  the  /.  of  Levi,  25.  Num..  4.  46  I  26.

51,  58.  Josh.  21.  27.  1  Chron.  6.  19.
16  t>\  take  you  a  lamb  according  to  your/.

Lev  25.  45.  of  the  f.  of  strangers  shall  ye  buy
\nm  1  2.  take  the  sum  of  Israel  after  their/.

",3  19.  and  the  sons  of  Kohath  by  their/.  27.  29,  30.

|  4.  37.  Josh.  21.  4,  10.
20.  the  sons  of  Merari,  by  their/.  33,  35.  I  4.33,
4°,  44.  45.  Josh.  21.  34,  40.  1  Chron.  6.63.

4  18  cut  not  off  the  tribe  of  the  /.  of  Kohathites
l'l.  10.  Moses  heard  them  weep  through  their/.

26.  15.  the  f.  of  Gad,  18.  Josh.  13.  24,  28.

20.  the/,  of  Judah,  22.  Josh.  15.  1,  12.  20.

23.  the  sons  of  Issachar  after  their/.  25.  Josh.  19.

17,  23.  |  21.  6. 1  Chron.  6.  62. 1  7-  5.
26.  the/,  of  Zebulun,  27;  Josh.  19.  10,  16.

28  the  sons  of  Joseph  after  their/.  36.  1.

M\  the  f.  of  Manasseh,  36. 12.  Josh.  13. 29.  I  17/?.
35.  these  are  sons  ot  Ephraim  after  their  f.  37
Josh.  16.  5,  8. 1  21.  5,  20.  1  Chron.  6.  66.
38.  the  sons  of  Benjamin  after  their/.  41  .Josh.  18.

11,  20.  21.  1  Sam.  10.  21.
42.  the  sons  of  Dan  after  their  /.  Josh.  19.  40,  48
44.  sons  of  Asher  after  their/.  Josh.  19.  24,  31.

48.  sons  of  Naphtali  after  their/.  50.  ./  ■'/,  19  32.
C7.  1.  daughters  of  Zelopheiiad  of  Manasseh  s  J,
33,  54.  divide  vour  land  by  lot  among  your/.

’36’.  1.  the  chief  fathers  of  the/,  of  Gilead
Josh  6  +  23.  brought  out  Hahab  and  all  her/.

7.  14.  tribe  the  Lord  taketh  come  according  to/.
13  31  to  half  the  children  of  Machir.  by  their  J.

19  40.  the  tribe  of  Dan  according  to  their/.  48.
Sam.  9  21.  the  least  of  all  the  /.  of  Benjamin

1  Chr.  2.  53.  the  f.  of  Kirjath-jearim,  the  Pulutes
55.  the  f.  of  the  scribes  which  dwelt  at  Jabez

4.  2.  these  are  the  /.  of  the  Zorathites
21.  the/. of  them  that  wrought  fine  linen
38.  these  mentioned  were  princes  in  their/.

2  Chron.  35.  5.  according  to  the  divisions  of  the


Neh.  4.  13.  T  set  the  people  after  their/.

Job  31.  34.  did  the  contempt  of  f.  terrify  me  '
Psal.  68.  6.  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  /.

107.  41.  andmaketh  him/,  like  a  Hock
Jer.  1.  15.  I  will  call  all  the  /.  of  the  north
o  4.  hear  all  the /.  of  the  house  ot  Israel

10.  25.  fury  on  the  /.that  call  not  on  thy  name
15  t  3.  and  l  will  appoint  over  them  tour/.

25.  9.  behold,  I  will  take  all  the/,  of  the  north
31.  i.  I  will  be  the  God  of  all  the  /.  ot  Israel


152


Jer.  33.  24.  the  two /.  which  the  Lord  hath  chosen
Ezek.  20.  32.  we  will  be  as  the/,  of  the  countries
Amos  3.  2.  you  have  I  known  of  all  /.  of  the  earth
Nah.  3.  4.  thatselleth  /.  through  her  witchcrafts
Zech.  12.  +  12.  and  the  land  shall  mourn,/. /.

14.  all  the /.  that  remain,  every  family  apart
14. 17.  whoso  will  not  come  up  of  all  the/.
FAMINE.

The  scripture  speaks  of  several  famines  which  have
been  in  Palestine,  and  in  the  neighbouring  coun¬
tries:  as  that  in  the  time  of  Abraham,  an  /  again
in  the  time  of  Isaac,  Gen.  12.  10.  126.  1.  But
the  rno't  remarkable  whereof  we  have  any  ac¬
count ,  is  that  of  seven  years ,  which  fell  out  m
Egypt,  while  Joseph  abode  there ,  Gen.  41.  27.
It  is  considerable  for  the  continuance,  extent,
and  greatness  of  it  ;  and  in  this  particular  the
more  so,  that  Egypt  is  a  country  least  subject  to
these  calamities,  by  reason  of  its  extreme  fruit¬
fulness.

Famine  is  sometimes  a  natural  effect,  as  when  the
Nile  does  not  overflow  in  Egypt;  or  the  rains  do
not  fall  in  Judea,  at  the  customary  times,  that
is,  in  spring  or  autumn ;  or  when  the  caterpillars
and  locusts  swarm  in  the  country,  and  destroy  the
fruits  of  it.  The  prophets,  in  several  places,  take
notice  of  these  last  causes  of  famine,  Joel  1.  3,
4,  fcc.  ,

Famine  was  also  often  the  effect  of  God  s  anger
against  his  people.  For  examp  e  :  the  Lord  sent
the  prophet  Gad  to  David,  to  tell  him,  that  as  a
punishment  of  his  vanity,  whereby  he  had  been
induced  to  number  his  people,  God  gave  him  the
option  of  seven  years'  famine,  or  of  being  for
three  months  pursued  by  his  enemies,  or  of  seeing
the  plague  raging  for  three  days  in  his  country,
2  Sam.  24.  12,  13.  And  in  the  reign  of  Allah,
'Che  T^ord  called  for  a  famine,  and  it  came  upon
the  land  seven  years,  2  Kings  8.  1,  2.  Amos
threatens  the  people  of  God  with  another  sort  of
famine,  want  of  heavenly  bread,  which  was  that
of  hearing  the  word  of  God,  Amos  8.  11.  The
Israelites  now  despise  a  prophet' s  counsel,  then
they  shall  seek  for  it,  but  not  have  a  prophet  to
give  them  counsel.

Gen.  12.  10.  for  the  /.  was  grievous  in  the  land
26.  1.  there  was  a /.  in  the  land,  besides  the  first/.

41.  27-  seven  empty  ears  shall  be  seven  years  of  /.

30.  and  the /.  shall  consume  the  land

31.  the  plenty  shall  not  be  known  by  reason  off.

50.  to  Joseph  were  born  two  sons  before  the/.

56.  the  f.  was  over  all  the  face  of  the  earth

47.  13.  the  land  fainted  by  reason  of  the/.

Ruth  1.  1.  when  the  judges  ruled  there  was  a  /.

2  Sam.  21.  1.  there  was  a  /.  in  the  days  of  David

24.  13.  shall  seven  years  of/,  come  to- thee  in  land  ?

1  Kings  8.  37.  if  there  be  in  the  land  /.  2  Chr.  20.  9‘.
18.  2.  there  was  a  sore /.  in  Samaria,  2  Kings  6.  25.

2  Kings  j.  4.  then  the  f.  is  in  the  city,  we  shall  die
8.  1.  the  Lord  hath  called  for  a  /,  it  shall  come

25.  3.  the  f.  prevailed  in  Jerusalem,  no  bread

2  Chr.  32.  11.  Uezekiah  persuadeth  you  to  die  by/.
Job  5.  20.  in  /.  he  shall  redeem  thee  from  d'eath

22.  at  destruction  and  /.  thou  shalt  laugh
30.  3.  for  want  and  they  were  solitary
Psal.  33.  19.  and  to  keep  them  alive  in/.

37.  19.  in  the  days  of/,  they  shall  be  satisfied
105.  16.  moreover,  he  called  fora  /.  on  the  land
Isa.  5.  t  13.  and  their  glory  are  men  of/.

14.  30.  and  I  will  kit?  thy  root  with/.

51. 19.  destruction,/,  and  sword,  are  come  on  thee
Jer.  5.  12.  nor  shall  we  see  sword,  nor  f.  14. 13’,  15.

14.  15.  by  sword  and /.  shall  prophets  be  consumed
16.  the  people  shall  be  cast  out,  because©!  the/.
18.  then  behold  them  that  are  sick  with/.

15.  2.  and  such  as  are  for  the/,  to  the/.

18.  21.  deliver  up  their  children  to  the/.

21. 7.  deliver  from  the  /.  to  N  ebuchadnexsar
24.  10.  I  will  send  the/,  among  them,  29.  17-

27.8.  that  nation  will  I  punish  with  the/.

29.  18.  T  will  persecute  with  the  sword  and  /.

32.  24.  the  city  is  given  to  Chaldeans  because  of/.
34.  17.  T  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you  to  the/.

42.  16.  the/,  shall  follow  close  after  you

52.  6.  the/,  was  sore  in  the  city ,  there  was  mo  bread
Lam.  5.  10.  our  skin  was  black,  because  of  the/.
Ezek.  5.  12.  a  third  part  shall  be  consumed  with/.

16.  when  l  send  on  them  the  evil  arrows  of/.

17.  so  will  I  send  on  you  /.  14.  13.

7.  15./.  within,  f.  and  pestilence  shaR  devour
12.  16.  but  I  will  leave  a  few  men  from  the/.


36.  29.  and  l  will  lay  no/,  upon  you
30.  ve  shall  receive  no  more  reproach  of  f.

Amos?,.  11.  1  will  send  a /.  notot  bread,  butofword
Luke  4.  25.  when  great  /.  was  thro’  alt  the  land

15.  14.  there  arose  a  mighty/,  in  that  land

Rom.  8.  35.  shall  f.  separate  us  from  love  of  Christ  ?
Rev.  18.  8.  her  plagues  come  in  one  day,  death,/.
Py  the  FAMINE.

Jer.  1 1 . 22.  their  sons  and  danght.  shall  die  by  the  f.
14.  12.  but  l  will  consume  them  by  the  f.  15.

16.  4.  they  shall  be  consumed  by  f.  44.  12,  18,  27-
21.  9.  he  that  abideth  in  the  city  shall  die  by  thef.
27.  13.  why  will  ye  die  by  the  f.  and  pestilence  i
32.  36.  be  delivered  to  the  king  of  Babylon  by  thef.
38  2.  remaineth  in  city  shall  die  by  f.  Izek.  6. 12.
42  17.  they  shall  die  by  the  f.  and  pestilence

22.  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  die  by  the  f.

44.  13.  as  I  have  punished  Jerusalem  by  thef.
Ezek.  6. 11.  they  shall  fall  by  thef.  and  pestilence
FAMINES.

Mat.  24. 7-  there  shall  be/,  pestilences,  and  earth¬
quakes  in  divers  places,  Mark  13.  8.  Luke  21. 11.
FAMISH  and  FAMISHED.

Gen.  41 . 55.  when  all  the  land  of  Egypt  was  /.
Prov.  10.  3.  the  E.  will  not  suffer  the  righteous  to/.
Isa.  5.  13.  and  their  honourable  men  are/.

Zeph.  2.  11.  for  he  will/,  all  the  gods  of  the  earth
FAMOUS.

Nnm.  16.  2.  princes  f.  in  tin*  congregation,  26.  9.
Ruth  4.  11.  and  be  thou /.  in  Bethlehem
14.  that  his  name  may  be/,  in  Israel


1  Chron.  5.  24.  and  these  were  /.  men,  12.  30.

Psal.  74.  5.  a  man  was/,  as  he  had  lifted  up  axes
136.  18.  give  thanks  to  him  who  slew  /.  kings
Ezek.  23.  10.  and  she  became  /.  among  women

32.  18.  and  the  daughters  of  the  /.  nations
FAN,  •'Substantive.

Isa.  30.  24.  clean  provender  winnowed  with  the  /.
Jer.  15.  7.  I  will  fan  them  with  a/,  in  the  gates
Mat.  3.  12.  whose  /.  is  in  his  hand,  Euke  3.  17.
FAN,  Verb.

lsa.41 .16. shalt /.  them,  wind  shall  carry  them awav
Jer.  4. 11.  a  dry  wind  not  to/,  nor  to  cleanse  (

15.  7.  I  will  /.  them  with  a  fan  in  the  gates

51.  2.  I  will  send  fanners  that  shall/,  her
FAB.

Gen.  18.  25.  that  be  /.  from  thee  to  slay  righteous
Exod.  8.  28.  only  you  shall  not  go  very  /.  away

23.  7.  keep  thee  /.  from  a  false  matter
Deut.  12.  21.  if  the  place  be  too  /.  from  thee,  14. 24.
29.  22.  the  stranger  that  shall  come  from  a/,  land
Josh.  3.  16.  waters  stood  very  /.  from  the  city

Adam

8.  4.  go  not  very  /.  from  the  city,  but  be  read  v

9.  22.  say  in  j,  we  are/,  from  you,  when  ye  dwell
Judg.  9.  17.  my  father  adventured- his  life /.

18.  7.  they  were /.  from  the  Zidonians,  28.

19.  11.  they  were  by  Jebus,  day  was /.  spent
1  Sam.  20.  9-  Jonathan  said,/,  he  it  from  thee

1  Kings?,.  46.  that  they  carry  them  away  /.  or  neat

2  Chr.  26.  15.  and  his  name  was  spread  /.  abroad
Ezra  6.  6.  now  therefore  be  ye  /.  from  thence
Neh.  4.  19.  vve  are  separated  one/,  from  another
F.sth.  9.  20.  to  all  the  Jews  both  nigh  and/.

Job  5.  4.  his  children  are  /.  from  safety

11.  14.  put  iniquity  /.  away,  22.  23.

34.  10.  /.  be  it  from  God  to  do  wickedness
P  al.  10.  5.  thy  judgments  are  /.  out  of  sight
22.  1,  why  art  thou  so  /.  from  helping  me  -
73.  27.  they  that  are  /.  from  thee  shall  perish
97-  9.  Lord,  thou  art  exalted  /.  above  all  gods
103.  12.  as  /.  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  /,
hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from  u;
109.  17.  so  let  blessing  be  /.  from  him
119. 150.  that  follow  mischief  are/,  from  thy  law
155.  salvation  is  /.  from  the  wicked
Prov.  4.  24.  and  perverse  lips  put/,  from  thee

5. 8.  remove  thy  way /.  from  her,  come  not  nigh  hoi
15.  29.  the  Lord  is  f.  from  the  wicked

19.  7.  much  more  do  his  friends  go/,  from  him
22.  5v  doth  keep  his  soul  shall  be/,  from  them
15.  the  rod  of  correction  shall  drive  it/,  from  him
31.  10.  for  her  price  is /.  above  rubies
Feci.  2.  13.  as  f.  as  light  excel leth  darkness
3v  t  5.  and  a  time  to  be /.  from  embracing
Isa.  6. 12,  and  the  Lord  have  removed  men ./'.  awav
19.  6.  and  they  shall  turn  the  rivers/,  away

26.  15.  thou  hast  removed  the  nations  /.

46.  12.  hear  ye  that  are  /.  from  righteousness
I  49.  19.  that  swallowed  thee  shall  he/,  away
54.  14.  thou  shalt  be  /.  from  oppression
59<.  9.  therefore  is  judgment  /.  from  us
Jer.  12.  2.  thou  art  /.  from  their  reins
25.  25.  all  the  kings  of  the  north/,  ami  near
27. 10.  prophesy,  to  remove  you  /.  from  your  lam)
48.  24.  upon  all  the  c  ities  of  Moab/.  or  near
4IJ.  thus  /.  is  the  judgment  of  Moab
51.  64.  thus/,  are  the  words  of  Jeremiah
Lam.  3.I7.  thou  hast  removed  my  soul/,  from  peao
Ezek.  7.  20.  therefore  have  I  set  it  /.  from  them

11.  15v  they  have  said,  get  ye/,  from  the  Lord
Dan.  11.2.  the  fourth  king  f.  richer  than  they  all
Joel  3.  6. that  ye  might  remove  them  /.  from  horde
Arnos  61  3-.  ye  that  pot  /.  away  the  evil  day
Mic.  7.  11.  in  that  day  shall  decree  be/,  removed
Mat.  16.  22.  Peter  said,  be  it  /.  from  thee.  Lord
Mark  6.  35.  and  when  the  day  was  now  /.  spent

12.  34,  thou  art  not/,  from  the  kingdom  of  God

13.  34.  Son  of  man  is  as  a  man  taking  a/,  joorne;
Luke  7.  6'.  when  he  was  not /.  from  the  house

22.  51.  Jesus  said,  suffer  ye  thu3  /.  he  healed  hin

24.  29.  abide  with  us,  for  the  day  is/,  spent
51.  and  be  led  them  out  as  f.  as  to  Bethany
I  John  21.  8.  for  they  were  not/,  from  land
!  Acts  11.  19-  they  travelled  as/,  as  Phenice
22.  that  Barnabas  should  go  as/,  as  Antioch
if.  27.  though  he  be  not/,  from  every  one  ot  10
22.  21.  Iwill  send  thee /.  hence  to  the  Gentile^

!  28.  15.  they  came  to  meet  us  as/,  as  Appii  form
Rom.  13. 12.  the  night  is/,  spent,  the  day  isathai:
2  Cor. 4. 17.  worketh  a/,  moieexc.  weight  ot  glor

10.  14.  for  we  are  come  as/,  as  to  you  also
Eph.  1.  21./.  above  al)  principality  and  power
4.  10.  that  ascended  up/,  above  all  heavens
Phil.  1.  23.  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is/,  better
lleb.I.Xb.  it  is  yet /.  more  evident,  after  Melchisede
See  Country,  Countries.

FAR  from  me.

1  Sam.  2.  30.  but  now  the  Lord  saith,  be  it  :.fr<"'
me,  22.  15.  2  Sam.  20.  20.  |  23.  1.
Job  13.  21.  withdraw  thine  hand  /.  from  me
19.  13.  he  hath  put  my  brethren  /.from  me

21.  16.  the  counsel  of  wicked  is  /.  from  me,  22.  It
30.  10.  they  flee /.  from  me,  and  spare  not  to  spij

Psal.  22.  11.  O  Lord,  be  not  ('.from  me,  for  trout'
is  near,  19. 1  35.  22. 1  38.  21. 1  7L  L

27.  9.  hide  not  thy  face  /.  from  me,  leave  me  no

88.8.  thou  hast  put  mine  acquaintance  f.jrom  v
18.  lover  and  friend  hast  thou  put/,  from  me
Prov  30.  8.  remove  f.  from  me  vanity  and  lies
Feel.  7.  23.  I  will  be  wise,  but  it  was/,  fiom  tut
Isa.  29. 13.  but  have  removed  their  heart  f.  frown
Jer.  2.  5.  they  are  gone  /.  from  me,  and  become  vai
I, am.  1.  16.  because  the  comforter  is  /.  from  me
Ezek.  43.  9.  the  carcases  of  their  kings/,  from  mt
44.  10.  the  T.evites  that  are  gone  /.  from  me
Mat.  15.  8.  their  heart  is  f.jrom  me,  Mark  7.  b.
From  I  A  R .

Deut.  28. 49.  a  nation  against  thee  from  f.  Jer .  0. 1
Job  36.  3.  1  will  fetch  my  knowledge  from  f.

Isa.  5.  26.  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign  fromf.

10.  3.  desolation  which  shall  come  fromf.  1

22.  3.  they  are  bound  which  are  fled  fromf.


FAS


FAS


«.  SO.  27-  the  name  of  the  Lord  eometh  from  f.
(.6.  bring  my  sons  from  f.  and  daughters,  60.  9.

J.  1.  listen,  (3  isles,  hearken,  ye  people,  from  f.

2.  behold,  these  shall  come  from  f.

).  4.  thy  sons  shall  come  from  /.  and  daughters
r.  30.  10.  for  lo,  1  will  save  thee  from  f.
ek.  23.  40.  that  ye  sent  for  men  to  come  from  f.
d>.  l.  8.  and  their  horsemen  shall  come  from  f.
ark  8.  3.  for  divers  of  them  came  from  f.

See  Afar.

FA  R  off.

•n.  44.  4.  when  they  were  gone,  and  not  yet/,  off

tm.  2.  2.  they  shall  pitch  /  off  about  the  tabernacle

■ut.  13. 7.  not  consent  to  serve  gods  of  people /.  off

).  15.  thus  do  to  all  the  cities  very  /.  off

).  11.  neither  is  the  commandment /.  off

1am.  15.  17.  the  king  tarried  in  a  place /.  off

'/iron.  6.  36.  carry  their  captives  to  a  land  /.  off

al.  55.  7.  lo,  then  I  would  wander/,  off

or.  27. 10.  is  better  than  a  brother  /.  off

cl.  7.  24.  that  which  is  /.  off  who  can  find  out  ?

1.  17. 13.  they  shall  flee  /.  off  and  be  chased
i.  13.  hear,  ye  that  are  /.  off  what  I  have  done

7.  they  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  /.  off
;>.  13.  my  righteousness  shall  not  be /.  off

;  9.  and  thou  didst  send  thy  messengers  /.  off
9.  peace  to  him  that  is  /  off  and  him  that  is  near
1.  11.  we  look  for  salvation,  but  it  is /.  off
ek.  6. 12.  he  that  is /.  off  shall  die  of  the  pestilence
6.  that  I  should  go/,  off  from  my  sanctuary
.  16.  although  I  have  cast  them  /.  off
.27.  he  prophesieth  of  times  that  are  f.  off
;  5.  those  that  be/,  off  from  thee  shall  mock
in.  9-7-  confusion  to  Israel  that  are  near  and  /.  off
/ 2. 20.  I  will  remove  /.  off  the  northern  army

8.  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  Sabeans  /.  off
c.  4.  7.  make  her  that  was  cast  /.  off  a  nation

•h.  6. 15.  they /g/shall  come  and  build  in  temple

h.  2.  13.  ye  who  were  /.  off  made  nigh  by  Christ

FARTHER  ;  see  Further.

FARE.

<am.  17.  18.  and  look  how  thy  brethren  /.

FARE.

tah  1.  3.  so  he  paid  the  /.  thereof,  and  went  into  it
FARED.

ke\6. 19.  the  rich  man/,  sumptuously  every  day
FAREWELL.

ke  9. 61 .  let  me  first  go  bid  them  /.  at  home
ts  15.  29.  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  do  well,/.

.  21.  Paul  bade  them /.  saying,  1  must  keep
.  30.  to  say  what  they  had  to  say  against  him,/.

or.  13.  11.  finally,  brethren,/,  be  perfect

FARM.

it.  22.  5.  they  went  their  ways,  one  to  his  /
FARTHING,  S.

it.  5.  26.  till  thou  hast  paid  the  uttermost  /.

.  29.  are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a /.  ?
irk  12.  42.  she  threw  in  two  mites  which  make  a  /.
ke  12. 6.  are  not  five  sparrows  sold  for  two /. ?
FASHION.

n.  6.  15.  this  is  the  /  thou  shalt  make  the  ark  of
od.  26.  30.  the/,  of  the  tabernacle  as  was  shewed
.  19.  bowls  made  he  after  the  /.  of  almonds
lings  6.  38.  according  to  all  the  /.  of  the  house
lings \f>.  10.  Ahaz  sent  the  /.  ot  the  altar

pi.  43.  11.  shew  them  the  form  and /.  thereof
ib.  2.  t  18.  the  fashioner  of  his  /  trusteth

irk  2.  12.  saying,  we  never  saw  it  on  this /.
ke 9.  29.  the  /.  of  his  countenance  was  altered
ts  7.  44.  make  the  tabernacle  according  to  /.  seen
'or.  7.  31.  for  the/,  of  this  world  passeth  away
til. 2. 8.  being  found  in /.  as  a  man,  humbled  hims.

7 1. 1.  11.  and  the  grace  of  the/,  of  it  perisheth
FASHION.

+  31.  15.  and  did  not  one  /  us  in  the  womb  ?
FASHIONED.

od.  32.  4.  Aaron /.  the  calf  with  a  graving-tool
Kings  7.  +  15.  for  he /  two  pillars  of  brass
ilO.  8.  thine  hands  nave/,  me,  Psal.  119.  73.
al.  139.  16.  which  in  continuance  were  /

1.  22.  11.  neither  had  respect  to  him  that  /.  it
ek.  16.  7.  thy  breasts  are/,  thine  hair  is  grown
til.  3.  21.  that  it  may  be  /.'like  his  glorious  body
FASHION  ETH.

al.  33. 15.  he /.  their  hearts  alike,  considers  works
1.  44.  12.  the  smith  /.  it  with  the  hammers

i.  9.  clay  say  to  him  that /.  it,  what  makest  thou  ?

FASHIONING.

°et.  1.  14.  not /.  yourselves  to  the  former  lusts

Fashions.

ek.  42. 11.  their  goings  were  according  to  their  /.
FAST.

ra  5.  8.  this  work  goeth /.  on,  and  prospereth
FAST.

n.  20. 18.  the  Lord  had  /.  closed  up  the  wombs
dg.  4.  21.  Sisera  was  f.  asleep  and  weary
>.  13.  but  we  will  bind  thee/,  and  deliver  thee
i.  11.  he  said,  if  they  bind  me/,  with  new  ropes
<th  2.  8.  Boazsaid,  abide  here  /.  by  my  maidens
•1.  Boazsaid  tome,  keep  /.  by  my  young  men
b  38.  38.  when  the  clods  cleave /.  together
al.  65.  6.  his  strength  setteth  /.  the  mountains
!.  9.  he  commanded  and  it  stood  /.
on.  4.  13.  take/,  hold  of  instruction,  keep  her
r-  48. 16.  the  affliction  of  Moab  hasteth  /.

)•  33.  all  that  took  them  captives  held  them  /.
aah  1.  5.  he  lay  in  the  ship,  and  was /.  asleep
'ts  16.  24.  who  made  their  feet/,  in  the  stocks
'.  41.  the  forepart  stuck  /.  remained  unmoveable
FAST.

Sting  has,  in  all  ages,  and  among  all  nations,  been
m  exercise  much  in  use  in  times  of  mourning ,  sor-
ow,  and  afflictions.  The  sense  of  it  is  in  some
ort  inspired  by  nature,  which,  in  these  circum¬
stances, denies  itself  nourishment ,  and  takes  off  the
'dge  of  hunger.  There  is  no  example  of  fasting,

' roperly  so  called,  to  be  seen  before  Moses  ;  yet  it  is
iresumahle  that  the  patriarchs  fasted,  since  we  see
hat  there  were  very  great  mournings  among  them,
ind  those  too  very  particularly  described,  such  as
hat  of  Abraham  for  Sarah,  Gen.  23. 2.  and  that  of
lacob  for  his  son  Joseph,  Gen.  37-  34.


Moses  enjoins  no  particular  fast  in  his  five  books,
excepting  that  upon  the  solemn  day  of  expiation,
which  was  generally  and  strictly  observed,  Lev.
23.  27,  29.  On  the  tenth  day  of  this  seventh  month,
ye  shall  afflict  your  souls  ;  that  is,  Ye  shall
humble  yourselves  deeply  before  God,  both  inwardly
by  godly  sorrow,  judging  and  loathing  yourselves  ;
and  outwardly,  by  fasting  and  abstinence  from  all
carnal  comforts  and  delights.  .Since  the  time" of
Moses,  examples  of  fasting  have  been  very  common
among  the  Jews.  Joshua  and  the  elders  of  Israel
remained  prostrate  before  the  ark  from  morning
until  evening  without  eating,  after  the  Israelites
were  defeated  by  the  men  of  A i,  Josh.  7.  6.  The
eleven  tribes  which  had  taken  arms  against  that
of  Benjamin,  seeing  they  could  not  hold  out  against
the  inhabitants  of  Gibeah,  fell  down  before  the
ark  upon  their  faces,  and  so  continued  till  the
evening  without  eating,  Judg.  20.  26.  The  Israel¬
ites,  perceiving  themselves  to  be  pressed  by  the
Philistines,  assembled  before  the  L,ord  at  Miz-
peh,  and  fasted  in  his  presence  till  the  evening,
1  Sam.  7-  6.  And  David  fasted  while  the  first
child  he  had  by  Bathsheba,  the  wife  of  Uriah,  was
sick,  2  Sam.  12.  16.

Moses  fasted  forty  days  on  mount  Horeb,  Exod.  34.

28.  Elijah  passed  as  many  days  without  eating
any  thing,  1  Kings  19.  8.  And  our  Saviour
fasted  in  the  wilderness  forty  days  and  forty
nights.  Mat.  4.  2.  These  fasts  were  miraculous,
and  out  of  the  common  rules  of  nature.

The  very  heathens  themselves  sometimes  fasted;  and
the  king  of  Nineveh,  terrified  by  Jonah’s  preach¬
ing,  made  an  order,  that  not  only  men,  but  beasts
also,  should  continue  without  eating  or  drinking  ;
that  both  men  and  beasts  should  be  covered  with
sackcloth,  and  each  after  their  manner  should  cry
unto  the  Lord,  Jonah  3.  6,  7»  8.  The  Jews,  in
times  of  public  calamity,  made  even  the  children
at  the  breast  fast,  Joel  2.  16.

It  does  not  appear  by  our  Saviour's  own  practice,  or
any  commands  that  he  gave  to  his  disciples,  that
he  instituted  any  particular  fasts,  or  enjoined  any
to  be  kept  out  of  pure  devotion.  But  when  the  Pha¬
risees  in  the  way  of  reproach  told  him,  that  his  dis¬
ciples  did  not  fast  so  often  as  theirs,  or  .1  ohn  the
Baptist’s,  he  replied,  Can  ye  make  the  children
of  the  bride-chamber  fast,  while  the  bridegroom
is  with  them  but  the  days  will  come,  when  the
bridegroom  shall  be  taken  away  from  them,  and
then  shall  they  fast  in  those  days,  Luke  5.  33,
34,  35.  that  is.  Fasting  is  a  duty  fitted  to  a  day
of  mourning  and  affliction  :  it  is  not  yet  a  time
of  mourning  to  my  disciples,  while  I  am  bodily
present  with  them  ;  yet  the  time  shall  come  when
1  shall  be  taken  from  them,  as  to  my  bodily  pre¬
sence  ;  and  when  they  shall  meet  with  many
troubles  and  calamities,  then  it  will  be  seasonable
for  them  to  perform  this  duty  of  fasting.  Accord¬
ingly,  the  life  of  the  apostles  and  first  believers
was  a  life  of  self-denial,  of  sufferings,  austeri¬
ties,  and  fasting,  as  appears  from  the  life  of  the
apostle  Paul,  2  Cor.  6.  4,  5. 1  11.  27.  hasting  is
likewise  confirmed  by  our  Saviour's  discourse  on
the  mount,  though  ru  t  as  a  stated,  yet  as  an  oc¬
casional,  duty  of  Christians,  in  order  to,  and  as
an  indication  of,  their  humbling  their  souls  for
their  sins,  or  under  the  afflicting  hand  of  God,
Mat.  6.  16.  Where  our  Saviour  requires  that
this  duty  be  performed  in  sincerity,  and  not  in
hypocrisy  ;  for  the  glory  of  God,  not  for  ostenta¬
tion  and  appearance  unto  men.

2  Sam.  12.  t  16.  David  fasted  a /.  and  lay  on  earth

1  Kings  21. 9.  proclaim  a /.  and  set  N  aboth  on  high
12.  they  proclaimed  a /.  and  set  Naboth  on  high

2  Chron.  20.  3.  Jehoshaphat  proclaimed  a/.

Ezra  8.  21.  Ezra  proclaimed  a /.  at  the  1  h  er  Ahava
Isa.  58.  3.  in  the  day  ot  your  f.  you  finu  pleasure

5.  is  itsuch/.  1  have  chosen  r  wilt  thou  call  this/.?

6.  is  not  this  the  /.  that  l  have  chosen  ?

Jer.  36.  9.  they  proclaimed  a  /  before  the  Lord
Joel  1.  14.  sanctify  a /.  call  an  assembly,  2.  15.
Jonah  3.  5.  the  people  of  Nineveh  proclaimed  a /.
Zech.  8. 19.  the  f.  of  the  fourth  month,  of  the  fifth,
seventh,  ana  tenth  months,  be  jov  and  gladness
Acts  27.  9.  because  the /.  was  now  already  past
FAST,  Verb.

2  Sam.  12.  21.  thou  didst/,  and  weep  for  the  child
23.  but  now  he  is  dead,  wherefore  should  I /.  ?
Esth.  4.  16./.  ye  for  me,  I  and  my  maidens  will  /
Isa.  58.  4.  ye  f.  for  strife,  ye  shall  not  /.  as  ye  do
Jer.  14.  12.  when  they  /.  1  will  not  hear  their  cry
Zech.  7.  5.  did  ye  at  all/,  unto  me,  even  to  me  ?
Mat.  6.  16.  when  ye  /.  be  not  as  hypocrites  of  a  sad
countenance,  that  they  may  appear  to  men  to/.

18.  thou  appear  not  to  men  to  /.  hut  to  thy  Father

9.  14.  why  do  we /.  disciples  /.  not  ?  Mark  2.  18.

15.  then  shall  they  /.  Mark  2.  20.  Luke  5.  35
Mark  2.  18.  the  disciples  of  John  used  to /.

19.  can  children  of  the  bride-chamber  /.  while
bridegroom  with  them  ?  they  cannot /.  Luke  5.  35.

Luke  5.  33.  why  do  the  disciples  of  John /.  often  ?
18.  12.  1  /.  twice  in  the  week,.!  give  tithes  of  all
FASTEDl

Judg.  20.  26.  the  people  /.  that  day  until  even

1  Sam.  7.  6.  they  drew  water,  and  /.  on  that  day
31. 13.  buried  them,  and /.  seven  days,  1  Chr.  10.12.

2  Sam.  1.  12.  and  they  mourned  and  /.  for  Saul
12. 16.  David /.  I|  22.  while  the  child  was  alive  I /.

1  Kings  21.  27.  Ahab/  ||  Ezra  8.  23.  so  we  /

Neh.  1.4.  Nehemiah/.  and  prayed  before  God
Isa.  58.  3.  why  have  we/,  say  they, and  seestnot  ?
Zech.  7.  5.  when  ye /.  in  the  fifth  and  seventh  month
Mat.  4.  2.  Jesus  /,  forty  days  and  forty  nights
Acts  13.  2.  as  they  ministered  to  the  Lord  and  /.

3.  when  they  had  /.  they  laid  their  hands  on  them
FASTEST.

Mat.  6. 17.  when  thou  f.  anoint  thv  head,  wash  face
FASTING.

Neh.  9.  1.  were  assembled  with  /  and  sackclothes
Esth.  4.  3.  where  the  decree  came,  there  was /.

Psal.  35. 12  1  humbled  my  soul  with/,  and  prayer


FAT

Psal.  69. 10.  when  I  wept  ami  chastened  my  son/

with  /

109.  24.  my  knees  are  weak  thro’/,  my  flesh  fails
Jer.  36.  6.  read  the  words  of  the  Lord  on  the  /.  day
Dan.  6.  18.  then  the  king  passed  the  night  /.

9.  3.  Daniel  set  himself  to  seek  by  prayer  and  /.
Joel  2. 12.  turn  ye  with/,  weeping,  and  mourning
Mat.  15.  32.  and  l  will  not  send  them  away  /.

17.  21.  this  goeth  not  out  but  by  /.  Mark  9.  29.
Marks.  3.  if  I  send  them  away  /.  they  will  faint
Acts  10.  30.  four  days  ago  1  was/,  till  this  hour
14.  23.  had  ordained  elders,  and  had  prayed  with/,
27.  33.  that  is  the  fourteenth  day  ye  continued  f.

1  Cor.  7.  5.  ye  may  give  yourselves  to /.  and  prayer

FASTINGS.

Esth.  9.  31.  the  matters  of  the  /  and  their  cry
Luke  2.  37.  Anna  served  God  with  /  and  prayers

2  Cor.  6.  5.  approving  ourselves  in  stripes,  in /.

11.  27.  in  /.  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness

FASTEN.

Exod.  28. 14.  shalt/.  the  chains  to  the  ouches,  25.

39.  31.  to  /.  the  plate  on  high  upon  the  mitre
Isa.  22.  23.  I  will  /.  him  as  a  nad  in  a  sure  place
Jer.  10.  4.  they  /.  it  with  nails  and  with  hammers

FASTEN  ED.

Exod.  10.  + 19.  and  /.  the  locusts  into  the  R  ed  sea
39. 18.  the  ends  of  chains  they  /.  in  the  two  ouches

40.  18.  Moses  /.  his  sockets,  set  up  the  boards
Judg.  4.  21.  Jael/.  the  nail  into  the  ground

16.  14.  Delilah  }.  it  with  a  pin,  and  said  to  him

1  Sam.  31. 10.  they  /.  Saul’s  body  to  the  wall

2  Sam.  20. 8.  with  a  sword /.  upon  his  loins  in  sheath
1  Kings  6.  6.  that  the  beams  should  not  be /.

1  Chron.  10. 10.  /.  his  head  in  the  temple  of  Dagon

2  Chron.  9.  18.  six  steps  were  /.  to  the  throne
Esth.  1.6.  hangings  /.  with  cords  of  fine  linen
Job  38.  6.  whereupon  are  the  foundations  /.

EccI  12. 11.  as  nails  /.  by  the  masters  of  assemblies
Iso .  22.  25.  the  nail  that  is/,  in  the  sure  place
»i.  7 •/.  it  with  nails  that  it  should  not  be  moved
E.zek.  40.  43.  and  within  were  hooks  /.  round  about
Luke  4.  20.  and  the  eyes  of  all  were /.  on  him
Acts  11.  6.  upon  the  which  when  1  had  /.  mine  eyes
28. 3.  came  a  viper  out  of  heat  and  /.  on  his  hand
FASTENING.

Hab.  2.  +11.  the  /.  of  the  timber  shall  answer  it
Acts  3.4.  Peter  /his  eyes  upon  him,  said,  look  on  us
FAT.

God  forbade  the  Hebrews  to  eat  the  fat  of  beasts.
Lev.  3.  16,  17.  All  the  fat  is  the  Lord’s.  It
shall  be  a  perpetual  statute  for  your  genera¬
tions  throughout  all  your  dwellings,  that  ye
eat  neither  fat  nor  blood.  Some  interpreters
take  these  words  in  all  the  rigour  of  the  letter,
and  suppose  the  use  of  fat  as  well  as  blood  to
be  entirely  forbidden  the  Jews.  Josephus  says,
that  Moses  forbids  only  the  fat  of  oxen,  goats,
sheep,  and  their  species,  which  agrees  with  the
law  in  Lev.  7-  23.  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner
of  fat  of  ox,  or  of  sheep,  or  of  goat.  The  mo¬
dern  Jews  observe  this  custom;  and  with  respect
to  the  fat  of  every  other  sort  of  clean  creature,
they  think  it  is  allowed  them,  even  that  of  beasts
which  have  died  of  themselves :  this  is  confortn-
able  to  that  other  law.  Lev.  7-  24.  And  the  fat
of  the  beast  that  dieth  of  itself,  and  the  fat  of
that  which  is  torn  with  beasts,  may  be  used  in
any  other  use.

But  other  interpreters  maintain,  that  the  law  which
seems  to  forbid  generally  the  use  of  fat,  is  to  be
restrained  to  fat  separated  from  the  flesh,  such  as
that  which  covers  the  kidneys  and  intestines  ;  and
this  only  in  the  case  of  its  being  actually  offered
in  sacrifice  ;  which  is  confirmed  by  this  passage
in  Lev.  7.  25.  Whosoever  eateth  of  the  fat  of
the  beast,  of  which  men  offer  an  offering  made
by  fire  unto  the  Lord,  even  the  soul  that  eateth
it,  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people.

The  word  fat  in  the  Hebrew  style  signifies  not  only
that  of  beasts,  but  every  thing  likewise  which
relates  to  it  in  other  things,  as  in  Psal.  147.  14.
He  filleth  thee  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat,
in  Hebrew,  with  the  fat  of  wheat.  And  in
Psal.  81.  16.  He  should  have  fed  them  with
the  fat  of  wheat.  Fat  is  also  used  sometimes
for  the  source  or  cause  of  compassion  or  mercy.
As  the  bowels  are  stirred  at  the  recital  of  any
great  calamity ;  or  at  the  view  of  some  melan¬
choly  and  afflicted  object ,  it  has  been  thought
that  sensibility  resided  principally  in  the  bowels,
which  are  commonly  loaded  with  fat.  The
Psalmist  upbraids  the  wicked  with  being  inclosed
in  their  fat,  with  having  shut  up  their  bowels
against  him,  with  being  in  no  sort  affected  with
compassion  at  the  sight  of  his  extreme  grief.
Psal.  17.  10.  Mine  enemie’s  compass  me  about,
they  are  inclosed  in  their  own  fat.  And  in  Psal.
119.  70.  Iheir  heart  is  as  fat  as  grease.  They
are  stupid,  and  insensible,  and  past  feeling ;
they  are  not  affected  either  with  the  terrors  or
comforts  of  God.

Fat  denotes  abundance  of  spiritual  blessings,  .Ter.
31.  14.  J  will  satiate  the  souls  of  the  priests
with  fatness.  Psal.  63.  5.  My  soul  shall  be  sa¬
tisfied  as  with  marrow  and  fatness.  The  fat  of
the  earth  implies  the  fruitfulness  of  it,  Gen.
27.  28.  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven,
and  the  fatness  of  the  earth,  and  plenty  of  corn
and  wine.

Gen.  4. 4.  Abel  also  brought  of  the  /.  of  his  flock
Exod.  23. 18.  nor  shall  the  /  of  my  sacrifice  remain

29.  13.  thou  shalt  take  the  /.  that  covereth  the  in¬
wards,  and  the  /.  upon  the  kidneys,  22.
Lev.  3. 3, 4, 9, 10, 14, 15.  I  4.  8. 1  7  -  3,  4.

Lev.  1. 8.  priests  shall  lay  head  and  /  in  order,  12.

3.  16.  offering  for  a  sweet  savour,  the  /.  is  Lord’s
4.8.  he  shall  fake  of  the /.  of  the  bullock,  31, 35.

26.  burn  his /.  6. 12.  1  7-  3, 31. 1  17-  6.  Num.  18. 17-
7.  24./.  of  beast  dieth  of  itself,  or  is  torn  to  be  used

30.  the  f.  with  the  breast,  it  shall  he  bring
33.  he  tnatoffereth/.  shall  have  the  right  shoulder
8. 20.  Moses  burnt  the  head  and  the/,  of  the  ram

153


FAT


FAT


FAT


Lev.  8.  26.  he  took  one  wafer  and  put  them  on  the/.

9.  10.  but  the/,  he  burnt  upon  tne  altar,  20.

24.  and  tire  from  the  Lord  consumed  the/.

16.  25.  the /.  of  sin  offering  shall  burn  on  altar

J 'Sum.  18.  t  12.  the 7.  of  the  oil  have  1  given  thee
t  29.  an  heave  offering  to  the  Lord  of  all  the/.
Dent.  32.  14./.  of  lambs  with  /.  of  kidneys  of  wheat
Judt 7.  3.  22.  and  the /.  closed  upon  the  blade
+  29.  they  slew  of  Moab  about  10.000  men  all  /.

1  Sam.  2. 15.  before  they  burnt/,  priest's  serv.  came

16.  let  them  not  fail  to  burn  the/,  presently

15.  22.  to  hearken  is  better  than  the/,  ot  rams

2  Sam.  1.  22.  from/,  of  the  mighty,  bow  turned  not

1  Kings 64.  altar  was  too  little  to  receive  the/.

2  C’hr.  7.  7.  offered  the  /.  of  peace-offerings,  29.  35.

35.  14.  priests  busied  in  offering  the  /.  until  night

Job  15.  27.  he  maketh  collops  of/,  on  his  flanks
Psal.  17.  10.  they  are  inclosed  in  their  own  ■/.

20.  ^  3.  the  Lord  make  /.  thy  burnt  sacrifice
23.  t  5.  thou  makest /.  my  head  with  oil
73.  t  4.  but  their  strength  is  /.  no  bands  in  death
81.  1 16.  he  should  have  fed  them  also  with  the  /.

of  wheat,  with  honey  out  of  rock,  147-  t  14.
Isa.  1.  11.  I  am  full  of  the/,  of  fed  beasts

34.  6.  made/,  with  the /.  ofthe  kidneys  of  rams
'43.  24.  nor  hast  filled  me  with  /.  of  thy  sacrifices
'Ezek.  44.  7.  when  ye  offer  the  J.  and  the  blood

15.  shall  stand  to  offer  to  me  the/,  and  the  blood
Eat  FAT.

Gen.  45.  18.  and  ye  shall  eat  the/,  of  the  land
Lev.  3. 17.  a  statute  that  y era/  no/,  nor  blood,  7. 23.

7.  25.  whoso  eateth  f.  of  the  beast  shall  be  cut  off
Vent.  32.  38.  which  did  eat  the  /.  of  their  sacrifices
Neh.  8.  10.  go  your  way,  eat  the  /.  and  drink  sweet
Ezek.  34.  3.  ye  eat  f.  and  clothe  you  with  the  wool
39.  19.  ye  shall  eat  f.  till  ye  be  full  and  drink

blood

Zeeh.  11.  16.  but  he  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the/.

FAT.

Gen.  41.  2.  there  came  up  seven  kine/.  fleshed

4.  and  they  did  eat  up  the  seven/,  kine.  20.

1 5.  seven  ears  of  corn  came  up /.  and  good

49.  20.  out  of  Asher  his  bread  shall  be/.

JCum.  13.  20.  what  the  land  is,  whether/,  or  lean
Dent.  31.  20.  waxen  /.  then  they  turn  to  other  gods

32. 15.  Jeshurun  waxed /.  and  kicked,  thou  waxen/.
Judg.  3.  17.  and  Eglon  was  a  very/,  man
1  Sam.  2.  29.  to  make  you /.  with  the  offerings

28.  24.  the  woman  had  a /.  calf  in  the  house
1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep, /.  cattle,  19. 25.

4.  23.'  his  provision  for  one  day  was  ten  /.  oxen
1  C/iron.  4.  40.  and  they  found/,  pasture  and  good
Neh .  9.  25.  they  took  a  /.  land  and  became  /.

35.  have  not  served  thee  in  the  large  and/,  land
Psal.  22.  29.  that  be/,  on  earth  shall  eat  and  worship
37  .  20.  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  as  the  /.  of  lambs
92.  14.  they  shall  be/,  and  flourishing
119.  70.  their  heart  is  f.  as  grease,  l  delight  in  law
Prov.  11.  25.  the  liberal  soul  shall  be  made/.

13.  4.  the  soul  of  the  diligent  shall  be  irade /.

15.  30.  a  good  report  maketh  the  bones./.

28.  25.  he  that  trusteth  the  1  X)fd  shall  be  made /.
Isa.  5. 17.  waste  places  of/,  ones  shall  strangers  eat

6.  10.  make  the  heart  of  this  people  /.  ears  heavy

10.  16.  Lord  shall  send  among  his/,  ones  leanness

25.  6.  make  a  feast  of  /.  things  full  of  marrow
28.  1.  which  are  on  the  head  of  the/,  valleys

4.  the  beauty  which  is  on  the  head  of  the/,  valley
30.  23.  and  bread  shall  be /.  and  plenteous
34.  6.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  is  made  /.  with  fatness

7.  and  their  dust  shall  be  made/,  with  fatness
58.  11.  and  the  Lord  shall  make  /,  thy  bones
Jer.  5.  28.  they  are  waxen  /.  they  shine

50.  11.  ye  are  grown  /.  as  the  heifer  at  grass
Ezek.  34. 14.  in  a /.  pastureshall  they  feed,  in  Israel

16.  but  1  will  destroy  the  /.  and  the  strong

20.  I  wilt  judge  between  the /.  cattle  and  the  lean
45.  15.  one  lamb  out  of  the  /.  pastures  of  Israel
Amos  5.22.  nor  will  I  regard  the  offering  of/,  beasts
Hab.  1.  16.  because  by  them  their  portion  is  /.
FATHER.

This  word ,  besides  the  common  acceptation  of  it
for  an  immediate  father ,  is  likewise  taken  in  the
scripture  style  for  grand  father,  great  grand¬
father,  or  the  very  author  and  first  father  of  a
family,  how  remote  soever  he  may  be  from  tf  jse
who  speak.  For  example,  the  .lews  in  our  Sa¬
viour's  time,  and  their  descendants  of  this  present
generation,  call  themselves  sons  of  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob.  And  Nebuchadnezzar  is
termed  Belshazzar’s  father,  though  Belshazzar
was  his  grand -son.

By  father  is  likewise  understood  the  inventor,  the
master  of  those  who  are  of  a  certain  profession,
Gen.  4.  20,  21,  22.  Jabal  was  the  father  of  such
as  dwell  in  tents,  and  such  as  have  cattle.  Juba!
was  the  father  of  all  such  as  handle  the  harp
and  organ.  The  famous  founder  of  Tyre,  IJu-
ram,  is  called  the  father  of  the  king  of  Tyre,  2
Chron.  2.  13.  and  even  of  Solomon,  2  Chron.  4.

16.  because  he  was  their  principal  workman,  and
the  chief  director  of  their  undertakings.  The  prin
cipal,  the  eldest  of  the  prophets,  were  considered
as  the  masters  and  fathers  of  the  rest,  who  were
their  disciples  ;  for  this  reason  the  young  prophets
are  called  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  and  these
style  the  eldest,  fathers.  My  father,  my  father,
said  Elisha  to  Elijah,  the  chariot  of  Israel  and
the  horsemen  thereof,  2  Kings  2.  12.

Father  is  a  term  of  respect  which  inferiors  often
give  to  their  superiors,  and  servants  to  their  mas¬
ters  ;  My  father,  said  N aaman’s  servants  to  their
master,  2  Kings  5.  13.  The  king  of  Israel,  in
like  manner,  called  the  prophet  Elisha  his  father,
2  Kings  6.  21.  My  father ,  shall  1  smite  them  ?
And  the  same  prophet  being  upon  his  death-bed,
Joash  came  to  see  him,  and  said,  O  my  father,
my  father,  the  chariot  of  Israel,  and  the  horse
men  thereof,  2  Kings  13.  14.

A  man  is  said  to  be  a  father,  to  the  poor  and  or¬
phans  when  he  takes  care  to  supply  their  ne¬
cessities.  is  affected  with  their  miseries  and

154


provides  for  their  wants  ;  I  was  a  father  to  the
poor,  Job  29.  16.  God  declares  himself  to  be  a
rather  of  the  fatherless,  and  a  Judge  of  the
widow.  Psal.  68.  5.

God  is  frequently  called  heavenly  Father,  and  sim¬
ply  Father.  He  is  truly  and  eminently  the  Fa¬
ther,  Creator,  Preserver,  and  Protector,  of  all
creatures,  and  principally  of  those  who  call  upon
■  him,  who  knew  and  serve  him.  Is  he  not  thy
Father  that  bought  thee  ?  Dent.  32.  6.  Hath
he  not  made  thee,  and  established  thee  ?  And
through  Christ,  who  has  merited,  adoption  and
filiation  for  his  people,  every  believer  has  a  right
to  call  God  Father,  Rom.  8.  15,  16.

Job  entitles  God  the  Father  of  rain,  Job  38.  28.
He  produces  it,  he  makes  it  to  fall.  And  in
chap.  17.  14.  I  have  said  to  corruption,  1  hou
art  my  father.  I  acknowledge  that  1  am  sprung
out  of  corruption,  and  shall  return  to  the  putre¬
faction  of  the  grave  ;  or,  in  the  condition  which
I  am  reduced  to,  I  look  upon  worms  and  putre¬
faction  as  my  friends  arid  relations.

Joseph  says,  that  God  had  made  him  a  father  to
Pharaoh,  Gen.  45.  8.  that  he  had  given  him  very
great  authority  in  this  prince's  kingdom,  and
that  Pharaoh  looked  upon  him  as  his  father,  and
had  so  much  confidence  in  him,  and  consideration
for  his  person,  that  he  gave  him  the  government
of  his  house  and  of  all  his  dominions.

The  devil  is  called  the  father  of  the  wicked ;  Ye
are  of  your  father  the  devil,  says  our  Saviour,
John  8.  44.  Ye  would  imitate  the  desires  of
your  father  ;  he  was  a  murderer  from  the  begin¬
ning,  he  abode  not  in  the  truth.  He  is  a  liar,
and  the  father  of  it ;  he  is  a  falsifier,  a  deceiv¬
er,  a  seducer.  He  deceived  Eye  and  Adam  ;  he
introduced  sin  and  falsehood  into  the  world:  he
inspires  his  followers  with  his  spirit  and  senti¬
ments  ;  he  keeps  the  school  of  fraud  and  deceit ;
his  only  business  is  to  tempt  and  ensnare  man¬
kind.

To  be  gathered  unto  their  fathers;  To  sleep  with
their  fathers ;  To  go  to  their  fathers  ;  are  com¬
mon  expressions,  to  signify  death.  In  these  pas¬
sages,  the  fathers  signify  those  who  lived  before
us,  and  whom  we  are  going  to  meet  again  in  an¬
other  world.

God  is  called  the  Father  of  spirits,  Heb.  12.  9.
Our  fathers  are  the  fathers  of  our  bodies  only,
but  God  is  the  Father  of  our  spirits  •  he  not  only
creates  them,  but  he  justifies  them  likewise,  glori¬
fies,  and  makes  them  happy.  Our  Saviour,  in
Mat.  23.  9.  forbids  us  to  give  any  man  the  name
of  father,  because  we  have  one  only  who  is  in
heaven.  Not  that  we  should  abandon  or  despise
our  earthly  fathers  ;  God  requires  us  to  honour
them,  and  give  them  all  necessary  assistance  ;  but
when  the  interests  of  God  are  at  stake,  his  glory,
or  our  oxen  salvation,  if  our  fathers  and  mothers
are  an  obstacle  to  them,  we  should  say  to  them.
We  know  you  not:  for  what  our  parents  have
done  for  us,  in  comparison  of  what  we  owe  to
God,  is  so  inconsiderable,  that  zee  may  say,  our
fathers  are  nothing  to  us,  and  that  God  alone
deserves  the  title  of  our  Father.

Gen.  4.  20.  Jabal  was /.  of  such  as  dwell  in  tents

21.  Jubal  was  the  /.  of  all  such  as  handle  harp

9.  18.  went  out  of  ark,  and  Ham  is  the/,  of  Canaan

17.  4.  be  the/,  of  many  nations,  5.  Rom.  4.  17,  18.

44.  19.  have  "ye  a  /.  ?  ||  20.  and  we  said,  we  have  a/.

45.  8.  God  made  me  a /.  to  Pharaoh,  lord  of  house
Lev.  24.  10.  whose  /.  was  an  Egyptian,  he  went  out
N<um.  11.  12.  as  a  nursing  /.  beareth  sucking  child

30.  16.  are  statutes  between  /.  and  his  daughter
Dent.  22.  15.  /.  shall  bring  forth  tokens  of  virginity

29.  the  man  shall  give  the  damsel's/,  fifty  shekels
Judg.  9.  1.  the  family  of  the  house  of  his  mother's/.

17.  10.  dwell  with  me,  and  be  to  me  a /.  and  a  priest

18.  19.  go  with  us,  and  be  to  us  a/,  and  a  priest

19.  3.  the  f.  of  the  damsel  saw  him,  he  rejoiced

4.  damsel's/,  retained  him,  he  abode  three  days
1  Sam.  9.  3.  and  Kish  was  the  /.  of  Saul,  14.  51.

1  Chron.  2.  51.  Salma  the  /.  of  Bethlehem
55.  of  Hemath,  the/,  of  the  house  of  Reehab
4.  14.  Joab  the  f.  of  the  valley  of  Charashim

8.  29.  at  Gibeon  dwelt  the/,  of  Gibeon,  9-  35.
Esth.  2.  7.  Esther  had  neither/,  nor  mother
Job  29.  16.  I  was  a  /.  to  the  poor,  and  searched  out

31.  18.  he  was  brought  up  with  me,  as  with  a  /.

38.  28.  Iiath  the  rain  a  f.  ?  or  who  begat  the  dew  ?
Ps.  68.  5.  /.  of  fatherless,  and  judge  of  widows,

is  God

103. 13.  as  a  /.  pitieth  his  children,  so  Lord  pities
Prov.  3. 12.  tne  Lord  correcteth,  even  as  a  f.  the  son
4.  1.  hear,  ye  children,  the  instruction  of  a  /.

10.  1.  a  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  /.  15.  20.

17.  21.  and  the/,  of  a  fool  hath  no  joy  _

23.  24.  the  /.  ofthe  righteous  shall  rejoice

Isa.  9.6.  his  name  shall  be  called,  the  everlasting  F.
22.21.  Eliakim  shall  be  a/,  to  inhabitants  of  Jerus.
38.  19.  the /.  to  child,  shall  make  known  thy  truth
Jer.  31.  9.  I  will  lead  them,  for  I  am  a /.  to  Israel
Ezek.  18.  4.  as  the  soul  ofthe  /.  so  of  the  son,  is  mine

19.  doth  not  the  son  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  /.  ?

20.  the  son  shall  not  bear  the  iniquity’  of  the  /.

22.  7.  in  thee  they  set  light  by  /.  and  mother

44.  25.  for  f.  or  mother  they  may  defile  themselves
Mic.  7.  6.  for  the  son  dishonoureth  the  /.

Mai  1.  6.  if  I  then  be  a  /.  where  is  mine  honour  ?

2.  10.  have  we  not  all  one  /.  ?  one  God  created  us
Mat.  10.  21./.  deliver  up  the  child,  Mark  13.  12.
37.  he  that  loveth  /.  or  mother  more  than  me
11. 25.  Jesus  said,  I  thank  thee,  O  F.  Lord  ofheav.

26.  so  F.  it  seemed  good,  I.vke  10.21.  John  11 .  41.

27.  and  no  man  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  F.

15.  4.  he  that  curseth/.  let  him  die,  Mark  7.  10.
19.  5.  lpave /.  and  mother,  and  cleave  to  his  wife

29.  every’  one  that  hath  forsaken  /.  mother ,  or
wife,  for  my  name's  sake,  Mark  10.  29.

28.  19.  baptizing  them  in  the  name  ofthe  F.
Mark  5.  40.  he  taketh  /.  of  the  damsel,  Luke  8.  51.

9.  24.  the /.  of  the  child  cried,  Lord,  I  believe


Mark  13.  32.  of  that  day  knoweth  no  man,  but  the

14.  36.  Abba,  F.  all  things  are  possible  to  thee

15.  21.  Simon,/,  of  Alexander,  to  bear  his  cros
Luke  10. 22.  no  man  knows  who  the  F.  is  but  the  S>

11.  11.  if  a  son  shall  ask  bread  of  any  that  is  a /

12.  53.  the /.  shall  be  divided  against  the  son,  at
the  son  against  the  fr  mother  against  daughi

15.  21.  son  said,/.  1  have  sinned  against  heaver.

22.  the  /.  said,  bring  forth  the  best  robe

16.  27.  1  pray  thee,/,  send  to  my  father's houst

22.  42.  F.  if  thou  be  willing,  remove  this  cup  frcl

23.  34.  F.  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not
46.  F.  into  thy  hands  l  commend  my  spirit

John  1 . 14.  the  glory  as  of  the  only-begotten  of  the

18.  the  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  F.

3.  35.  the  F.  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given,  5. '.

4.  21.  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem  worship  the  F.

23.  shall  worship  the  F.  in  spirit  and  in  truth
53.  the  /.  knew  that  it  was  at  the  same  hour

5.  19.  do  nothing  but  what  he  seeth  the  F.  do

21.  for  as  the  F.  raiseth  up  the  dead,  so  the  So:

22.  F.  judgethno  man,  but  hath  committed  all

23.  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  F.

that  honours  not  the  Son ,  honours  not  the
26.  for  as  the  F.  hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath  give

30.  1  seek  not  mine  own.  but  the  will  of  the  I.

36.  for  the  works  which  the  F.  hath  given  me  bt-

witness  that  the  F.  hath  sent  1

37.  the  F.  which  hath  sent  me,  hath  borne  wit&

of  me,  8.  16. !  12.  49.  1  14. 24. 1  John  4.

45.  think  not  that  1  will  accuse  you  to  the  F.

6.  27.  for  him  hath  God  the  /’.sealed

37.  all  that  the  F.  giveth  me  shall  come  to  me
39.  and  this  is  the  F.'s  will,  that  I  lose  nothin:
42.  is  not  this  J  esus,  whose /.  and  mother  we  kno
44.  no  man  can  come,  except  the  F.  draw  hitr
4?.  that  hath  learned  of  the  F.  cometh  to  me

46.  not  that  any’  hath  seen  the  F.  he  hath  seen
57.  as  the  F.  hath  sent  me,  and  l  live  by  the  f

8.  16.  I  am  not  alone,  but  l  and  the  F.  that  sent

18.  the  /'.  that  sent  me  beareth  witness  of  me
27-  they  understood  not  he  spake  to  them  of  I

29.  F.  hath  not  left  me  alone,  l  do  those  things
41.  then  said  they,  we  have  one  /’.  even  Goa
44.  the  devil  is  a  liar,  and  the  /.  of  it

10. 15.  as  the  F.  knoweth  me,  even  so  know  I  the

36.  say  ye  of  him  whom  the  F.  hath  sanctified

38.  believe  that  the  F.  is  in  me,  and  1  in  Inm
12. 27.  what  shall  I  say  ?  F.  save  me  from  this h<

2-8.  F.  glorify  thy  name  ;  then  came  there  a  vei
50.  even  as  the  F.  said  unto  me,  so  1  speak

13.  1.  Jesus  knew  that  he  should  depart  unto  the
3.  knowing  that  the  /’.  had  given  all  things

14.  6.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  I  am  the  way,  truth,?

fife,  no  man  cometh  to  the  F.  but  by

8.  Lord,  shew  us  the  F.  and  it  sufficeth  us

9.  Philip,  he  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the

11.  that  l  am  in  the  F.  and  the  F.  in  me,  17.  2
13.  that  the  F.  may  be  glorified  in  the  Son

16.  and  1  will  pray  the  F.  for  you,  16.  26.  J
26.  but  the  Comforter  whom  the  F.  will  send

31.  I  love  the  F.  as  the  F.  gave  me  commandm

15.  9.  as  the  F.  hath  loved  me  ,  so  have  I  loved  y

16.  that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the  F.  in

name,  he  may’  give  it  you,  16.
26.  the  Comforter  whom  I  will  send  yrou  ft
the  F.  the  Spirit  who  proceedeth  from  the

16.  3.  because  they  have  not  known  the  F.  nor

15.  all  things  that  the  F.  hath,  are  mine

16.  ye  shall  see  me,  because  1  go  to  the  F.  17.
25.  but  I  shall  shew  you  plainly  of  the  F.  _  ,
27-  the  F.  loveth  you,  because  ye  have  lo\ed  ;
28.  I  came  forth  from  the  F.  and  go  to  the  F.

32.  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  F  is  with  me

17.  1.  F.  the  hour  is  come,  glorify  thy  Son

5.  O  F.  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self

11.  Holy’  F.  keep  those  whom  thou  hast  given

24.  F.  1  will  that  they  given  me  be  where  1  a

25.  O  righteous  F.  the  world  hath  not  known  ti
Acts  1.  4.  but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  F.

7.  the  seasons,  the  F.  hath  put  in  his  own  now

2.  33.  received  ot  the  F.  the  promise  of  the  II .  Gl  •
Rom.  4.  11.  he  might  be/,  of  all  them  that  bell

12.  and  the /.  of  circumcision  to  them  who  are

16.  the  faith  of  Abraham,  who  is  the/,  of  us  a

6.  4.  as  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the.

8. 15.  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba.

11.  28.  as  to  election,  are  beloved  for  F's  sake1
15.  6.  may  glorify  God  the  F.  of  our  Lord  Jo

Christ,  2  Cor.  1.  3.  I  11.31.  Eph.  1.  3.  1  Pet.

1  Cor.  8.  6.  but  to  us  there  is  but  one  God,  the
15.  24.  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God  thf

2  Cor.  1.  3.  /'.  of  mercies,  the  God  of  all  comfci
6.  18.  I  will  be  a  F.  unto  you, ye  shall  be  ray:')
Gal.  1.1.  Paul  an  apostle  by  Jes.  C.  and  G.  tnl

3.  and  peace  from  G.  the  F.  2  Tim.  1.  2.  Tit.  •

4.  according  to  the  will  of  God  and  our  F.

4.  2.  until  the  time  appointed  of  the  F.

6.  sent  Spirit  into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba
Fph.  1.  17.  the  God  of  our  L.  Jesus  the  F.  ofg  ■

2.  18.  by  him  have  access  by  one  Spirit  to  the

3.  14.  for  this  cause  I  bow  my’  knees  unto  the  l

4.  6.  one  God  and  F.  of  all,  who  is  above  all  !

5.  20.  giving  thanks  to  the  /'.  Col.  1.  3, 12. 1  3.  1

6.  23.  and  love  with  faith  from  God  the  F.  and  .
Phil.  2.  11.  that  J  esus  is  Lord  to  the  glory  ot  th  ■■

22.  as  a  son  with  the /.  he  hath  served  with  it
Co/A.  19.it  pleased  F.  that  in  him  all  fulness d  !
2. 2.  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery  ot  tin ,
1  il'hess.  1.  1.  unto  the  church  which  is  in  God  tl

2.  11.  we  charged  you,  as  a/,  doth  his  childrf .
1  Tim.  5.  1.  rebuke  not  an  elder,  entreat  him  as  _
Heb.  1.5.  will  be  to  him  a  F.  he  shall  be  to  me  a  '

7.  3.  Melchisedec  without /.  without  mother

12.  7.  what  son  is  he  whom  the  F.  chasteneth
9.  be  in  subjection  to  the  /'.  of  spirits,  and  lfi

Jam.  1. 17.  every  good  gift  cometh  from  F.  ot  I)  ■
27.  pure  and  undefiled  religion  before  God  an

3.  9.  therewith  bless  we  God,  even  the  F.

1  Pet.  1.2.  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  /■

17.  if  ye  call  on  the  F.  who  judgeth  man’s  w»

2  Pet.  1.  17-  he  received  from  God  the  F.  hoiu


FAT


FAT


FAT


>hn  1.  2.  we  shew  eternal  life,  which  was  with  F.

.  our  fellowship  is  with  the  F.  and  his  Son

I.  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  F.  Jesus  Christ

1.  1  w  rite  to  you,  hecaus j  ye  have  known  the  F.

5.  if  any  love  w-orld,  the  love  of  F.  is  not  in  him
).  pride  ot  life  is  not  of  the  F.  but  of  the  world

2.  he  is  antichrist  that  denieth  the  F.  and  Son

{.  whoso  denieth  the  Son,  hath  not  the  F.  he  that
acknowledged  the  Son  hath  the  also
i.  ye  shall  continue  in  the  Son  and  in  the  F.

1.  what  manner  of  love  F.  hath  bestowed  onus
l".  three  bear  record,  the  F.  Word,  and  Spirit
S  ohn  3.  mercy  and  peace  from  God  the  F.  and
from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  F.
as  we  received  a  c  ommandment  from  the  F.
he  that  abideth  in  Christ  hath  the  F.  and  Son
.  *  1.  to  them  that  are  sanctified  by  God  the  F.
See  A  BR  A  H  A  M.

Her  FA  1 IIER.

1 1. 19. 33.  the  first-born  went  in  and  lay  with  her f.

9.  Rachel  came  w  ith  h.f.'s  sheep,  she  kept  them
’.  he  wa s/ierf.'s  brother, she  ran  and  told  her f.

19.  Rachel  had  stolen  images  that  were  her  f.'s

II.  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in  herf.'s  house
.  d.  22.  17-  if  her  f.  utterly  refuse  to  save  her

_  .  21.  9.  she  protaneth  her  f.  she  shall  be  burnt

13.  it  she  is  returned  to  herf.'s  house,  as  in  her

youth,  she  shall  eat  of  herf.'s  meal
.7!.  12.  14.  if  her  f.  had  but  spit  in  her  face

3.  if  a  woman  vow  a  vow  in  her  f.'s  house
and  her  f.  hear  her,  and  shall  hold  his  peace
if  her  f.  disallow  her  in  the  day  he  heareth

i.  being  yet  in  her  youth,  in  her  f.'s  house

8.  shall  be  wife  to  one  of  the  tribe  of  her  f.
id. 21. 13.  and  bewail  her  f.  and  mother  amonth

21.  bring  to  door  of  herf.'s  house,  because  she
rought  tolly,  to  play  the  whore  in  herf.'s  house

j  1.  6.  23.  the  spies  brought,  out  Rahab  and  her  f
1.  he  saved  her  f.'s  household  and  all  she  had

18.  to  ask  of  her f.  a  field,  Judy.  1.  14.

■W.  11.  39.  in  two  months  she  returned  to  her  f.

1.  but  her  f.  would  not  suffer  him  to  go  in
the  Philistines  burnt  her  and  her  f.  with  tire

3.  she  brought  him  into  herf.'s  house
lh.  2.  7.  when  her  f.  and  mother  were  dead

His  FA  I  HER.

C.  2.  24.  therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  f.  and
)ther,  and  cleave  to  wife,  Mark  10. 7.  FpA.  5.  31.

22.  Ham  saw  the  nakedness  of  hisf.  and  told

28.  and  Haran  died  before  his  f.  Terah

41.  the  blessing  wherewith  his  f.  blessed  him
7.  Jacob  obeyed  his  f.  and  mother,  was  gone
53.  Jacob  sw*are  by  the  tear  of  his  f.  Isaac

■  1.  in  the  land  wherein  his  f.  was  a  stranger
Joseph  brought  to  his  f.  their  evil  report”

.  he  told  the  dream  to  his  f.  his  f.  rebuked  him

•  brethren  envied,  but  his f.  observed  the  saying
.  he  might  rid  him,  to  deliver  him  to  his  f.

22.  and  we  said,  the  lad  cannot  leave  his  f.

1.  he  offered  sacrifices  to  the  God  of  his  f.

.  and  Joseph  went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  f.

12.  Joseph  nourished  his  f.  and  brethren
;  10.  he  made  a  mourning  for  his  f.  seven  days

14.  6.  20.  and  Amram  took  his  f.'s  sister  to  wife

15.  he  that  smiteth  his  f.  shall  be  put  to  death
.  he  that  curseth  his  f.  shall  die,  Lev.  20.  9.

J.19. 3.  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother  and  his  f.

'■  1.1-  man  that  lieth  with  his  f.'s  wife,  both  die
.  1.  a  man  take  his  f.'s  daughter,  they  shall  die
:  2.  a  son  of  Aaron  may  be  defiled  for  hisf.

, .  the  high- priest  not  defile  himself  for  hisf.

*  0.  7 .  a  Kazarite  not  make  unclean  for  his  f.

'  l9i  shall  give  inheritance  to  his  f.'s  brethren

•  it  hisj.  have  no  brethren,  to  his  kinsman

1  'W.1  Pot  obey  his  f.  and  mother

.  then  shall  his  f.  bring  him  to  the  elders
30.  a  man  shall  not  take  his  f.'s  wife
:  ]6.  cursed  be  he  that  setteth  light  by  hisf.
.cursed  be  he  that  lieth  with  daughter  of  his  f.

■  9.  who  said  to  hisf.  1  have  not  seen  him

en?7-  Cideon  feared  his  f.'s  household
■2.  Gideon  was  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  f.
o.  God  rendered  the  wickedness  he  did  to  his  f
,  4-  "*//•  knew  not  that  it  w'as  of  the  Lord
mC  1  i1,  but  Jonathan  told  not  hisf.

.  heard  not  when  hisf.  charged  the  people

4.  Jonathan  spake  good  of  David  to  his  f.

33.  it  was  determined  of  hisf.  to  slay  David

,  •  because  hisf.  had  done  him  shame

2-  32.  Asahel  buried  in  sepulchre  of  his  f.

■  4.  i  will  be  hisf.  and  he  shall  be  my  son
ooauS  -V  shewed  kindness  to  me,  1  (  hr.  19.  2.

a  iS.l  on?  !n  his  f.'s  concubines

<  n  e  b'thophel  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  his  f.

14.  aaul  buried  in  the  sepulchre  of  Kish  his  f.

was  a  man  of  lyre,  2  C'hr.Q.  14
which  hisf.  had  dedicated,  15. 'l5. 2  Chr.  15. 18.

4.  not  perfect,  as  the  heart  of  David  his  f.
bolomon  went  not  fully  after  the  Lord,  as  did
J  15-  11-  2  Kings  18.  3.  2  C hr.  28.

•  not  as  did  David  his  f.  2  Kings  14.  3.  I  16  2
3;dn,(1  be  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  his  f.

>adab  did  evil  and  walked  in  the  way  of  his
'  001,  /•  22.  43,  52.  2  Finns  21.  21.

",  ?9S,  3-  2-  Jehoram  did  evil,  but  not  like  his  f.

•o.  l  and  thou  rode  together  after  A  hah  his  f.
the  cities  taken  out  of  the  hand  of  hisf.

NvR'i‘ih’i,he  S(ln  °,f.‘loash,  slew  the  servants
,  had  slain  the  king  his  f.  2  C/tron.  °5  j
l  him  king  instead  of  hisf.  23.  30,  34

is’  i  \0  i'iV*/!**!'  his  f.'s  bed,  birth  right  given

<  lp’A ,vi  ‘  bo  hisf.  he  shall  he  my  son,  28.  6.

>  ton™?  irsA'b°?n’  ?et  /us  J-  made  him  the  chief
l  1  a',.,  ;  the  b°rd  appeared  to  David  hisf.

,  fconx  mg  to  the  order  of  David  his  f.  J

i'ehn«h.  i'!  111  th,e  first  ways  of  ms  f.  David

■  <2hhihdp  n  4  sought  the  Lord  God  of  his  f.

<  »"l  |  ln  t,le  way  of  Asa  his  f.

•  o'  b|S  counsel |ors  after  the  death  of  his  f.


lo  he  J,7  II  1  •  uel  me  oeatn  or  his-.
Ff'7"  +  i,ked  m  the  ways  of  David  his  f.  3.
"  -7.  as  a  son  to  continue  his  f.'s  name


Prov.  13. 1 .  a  wise  son  heareth  the  instruction  of  hisf.
15.  5.  a  fool  despiseth  his  f.'s  instruction

17.  25.  a  foolish  son  is  a  grief  to  his  f.

19.  13.  a  foolish  son  is  the  calamity  of  his  f.

26.  he  that  wasteth  his  f.  is  a  son  causeth  shame

20.  20.  whoso  curseth  hisf.  his  lampshall  be  putout

28.  7  -  a  companion  of  riotous  men  shameth  his  f

24.  whoso  rohbeth  hisf.  or  mother,  and  saith

29.  3.  whoso  loveth  wisdom,  rejoiceth  hisf.

30.  17.  the  ravens  pick  out  eye  that  mocketh  his  f.
Isa.  45.  10.  woe  to  him  that  saith  to  his  f.  what  begets
Ezek.  18.  14.  beget  a  si  n  that  seeth  all  his  f.'s  sins

17.  he  shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of  his  f.

18.  as  for  hisf.  because  he  cruelly  oppressed
Dan.  5.  2.  to  bring  the  golden  vessels  hisf.  had  taken
Amos  2.  7.  a  man  and  hisf.  go  in  to  the  same  maid
Zech.  13.  3.  hisf.  and  mother  shall  thrust  him  thro’
Mai.  1.  6.  a  son  honours  hisf.  a  servant  his  master
Mat.  10.  35.  to  set  a  man  at.  variance  against  his  J.

15.  5.  whoso  shall  say  to  hisf.  it  is  a  gift,  Mark!.  11 .

6.  and  honour  not  his  f.  or  mother,  he  shall  be  free

16.  27.  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of
his  F.  with  his  angels,  Mark  8.  38.  Luke  9.  26.

21.  31.  whether  of  them  did  the  will  of  his  f.  ?
Mark  9.  21.  he  asked  hisf.  how  long  ago  it  is  since
Luke  1.  32.  Lord  shall  give  him  the  throne  of  his  f.

59.  they  called  him  afier  the  name  of  his  f.

62.  they  made  signs  unto  his  f.  how  to  call  him
67.  his  f.  Zachanas  was  filled  with  the  H.  Ghost

9.  42.  Jesus  delivered  him  again  to  hisf.

14.  26.  if  any  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  hisf.

15.  12.  and  the  younger  of  them  said  to  his  f.  •

20.  arose  and  came  to  hisf.  his  f.  saw  him,  and  ran
28.  therefore  came  hisf.  and  entreated  him

John  5.  18.  because  he  said,  that  God  was  hisf.
Acts  16.  1.  son  of  a  Jewess,  but  hisf.  was  a  Greek
1  Cor.  5.  1.  that  one  should  have  his  f.'s  wife
He  6.  7-  10.  for  he  was  yet  in  the  loins  of  hisf.

Fev.  1.  6.  made  us  kings  and  priests  to  G.  and  his  F.
14.  1.  his  F.'s  name  written. in  their  foreheads
See  House.

FATH E  R -in-law.

Gen.  38.  13.  behold,  thv  f.-in-law  goeth  toTimnath

25.  when  brought  forth,  she  went  to  her  f.-in-law
Exod.  3. 1.  the  flock  of  Jethro  his  f.-in-law,  4.  18

18. 1.  Moses’  f.-in-law,  8, 14, 17.  Judg.  1. 16.  I  4. 11.

27.  Moses  let  his  f.-in-law  depart,  and  he  went
Num.  10.  29.  Raguel  the  Midianite,  Moses  'f.-in-law
Judg.  19.  4.  his/.-m-Zaai  retained  him,  and  he  abode

7.  when  he  rose  to  depart,  his  f.-in-law  urged  him
1  Sam.  4. 19.  when  she  heard  f.-in  law  was  dead,  21.
John  18.  13.  Annas  was  f.-in-law  to  Caiaphas

My  FATHER.

Gen.  19.  34.  behold,  T  lay  yesternight  with  my  f.
20.  12.  she  is  daughter  of  my  f.  not  of  my  mother
27.  12.  my  f.  peradventure  will  feel  me,  I  shall

34.  Esau  cried,  bless  me,  even  me  also,  O  my  f.

31.  5.  the  God  of  my  f.  42.  ||  32.  9.  Exod.  18.  4.

44.  24.  when  we  came  to  thy  servant  my  f.  27,  30.

32.  for  1  became  surety  for  the  lad  to  my  f.

45.  3.  doth  myf.  yet  live  ?  H  9.  haste  to  go  up  to  myf.

13.  tell  my  J.  ||  47.  1.  myf.  and  brethren  are  come

48.  18.  not  so,  myf.  for  this  is  the  first  born
Dent.  26.  5.  a  Syrian  ready  to  perish  w’as  my  f.
Josh.  2.  13.  ye  will  save  alive  myf.  and  mother
Judg.  9.  17.  myf.  tought  for  you,  and  delivered  vou

11.  36.  myf.  it  thou  bast  opened  thy  mouth

14.  16.  1  have  not  told  it  my  j.  nor  iny  mother

1  Sam.  9-  5.  lest  my  f.  leave  caring  for  the  asses

14.  29.  Jonathan  said,  my  f.  doubled  the  land
18. 18.  who  am  I,  and  what  is  my  f.'s  family  ?

19.  2.  saying,  Saul  my  f.  seeketh  to  kill  thee
3.  and  I  will  commune  with  my  f.  of  thee

20.  2.  my  f.  will  do  nothing,  but  he  will  shew  it  me

13.  Lord  be  with  thee,  as  he  hath  been  with  my  f.

22.  3.  let  myf.  and  my  mother  be  with  you

23.  17.  the  hand  of  Saul  my  f.  shall  not  find  thee

2  Sam.  16.  3.  restore  me  the  kingdom  of  myf.
19.37.  that  I  may  be  buried  by  the  grave  of  myf.

1  Kings  2.  26.  thou  barest  the  ark  of  the  Lord  before

David  myf.  in  all  wherein  my  f.  was  afflicted

32.  my  /.  David  not  knowing  thereof

44.  the  wickedness  that  thou  didst  to  David  myf.
3.  6.  thou  hast  shewed  to  David  my  f.  great  mercy
7-  hast  made  thy  servant  king  instead  of  my  f.

5.  3.  David  my  f.  could  not  build  an  house

5.  as  the  Lord  spake  to  David  my  f.  saying

8.  17.  it  was  in  the  heart  of  David  my  f.  to  build

24.  who  hast  kept  with  thy  servant  David  myf.

26.  let  my  word  be  verified  to  my  f.  2  Chr.  6.  16.

12.  10.  thus  thou  shaltsay,  my  little  finger  shall
be  thicker  than  my  f.'s  loins,  2  Chron,  10.  10.

'11.  myf.  lade  you  with  a  heavy  yoke,  2  Chr.  10. 11.

14.  myf.  chastised  you  with  whips,  2  Chr.  10.  14.

15.  19.  league  between  my  f.  and  thy  f.  2  Chr.  16.  3.

19.  20.  let  me,  I  pray  thee,  kiss  my  f.  and  mother
20;  34.  the  cities  my  f.  took  1  will  restore

2  Kings  2. 12.  Elisha  saw  it,  and  heci  ied,  my  f.  myf.

6.  21 .  myf.  shall  I  smite  them  ?  shall  I  smite  them  ?

13.  14.  Elisha  said,  myf.  my  f.  the  chariot  of  Israel

1  Chr.  28.  4.  Lord  chose  me  before  all  the  house  of

myf.  and  among  the  sons  of  my  f.  he  liked  me

2  Chr.  2.  3.  as  thou  didst  deal  with  my  f.  so  deal
Neh.  2.  3.  the  place  of  my  f.'s  sepulchres  lieth  waste

5.  send  me  to  the  city  of  my  f.'s  sepulchres  *
Job  17.  14.  I  said  to  corruption,  thou  art  my  f.

34.  +  36.  myf.  let  Job  be  tried  to  the  end
Psal,  27. 10.  when  my  f.  and  my  mother  forsake  me
89.  26.  he  shall  cry  unto  me,  thou  art  my  F.  my  G.
Prov.  1.  3.  for  I  was  my  f.'s  son,  tender  and  beloved
Isa.  8.  4.  the  child  have  knowledge  to  cry,  myf.
Jer.  2.  27.  saying  to  a  stock,  thou  art  my  f.

3.  4.  wilt  thou  not  cry  unto  me.  my  F.  ?  19.

20.  15.  cursed  be  man  who  brought  tidings  to  myf.
Dan.  5.  13.  whom  myf.  brought  out  of  Jewry
Mat.  7.  21.  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  F.  12.  50.

8.  21.  suffer  me  to  go  and  bury  myf.  Luke  9.  59.

10.  32.  him  will  I  confess  before  my  F.  in  heaven
3.3.  him  will  I  also  deny  before  myF.  in  heaven

11.  27.  are  delivered  to  me  of  my  F.  Luke  10.  22.
15.  13.  plant  my  heavenly  F.  hath  not  planted

,  16.  17.  but  my  F.  who  is  in  heaven  revealed  it


Mat.  18.  10.  their  angels  behold  the  face  of  my  F.

19.  it  shall  be  done  of  my  F.  who  is  in  heaven

35.  so  shall  my  heavenly  F.  also  do  unto  you

20.  23.  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  my  F.

24.  36.  that  day  knoweth  no  man  but  my  F.  only

25.  34.  the  King  shall  say,  come  ye  blessed  of  my  F.

26.  29.  1  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  F.'s  kingdom
39  O  my  F.  it  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  me

42.  my  F.  if  this  cup  may  not  pass,  thy  will  be  done

53.  thinkest  thou  that  l  cannot  pray  to  my  F.  ?
Luke  2.  49.  that  1  must  be  about  my  F.'s  business

15.  17.  how  many  hired  serv.  of  my  f.  have  bread  ?

18.  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  myf.  and  will  say,  /.

16.  27.  I  pray  thee,  send  him  to  my  f.'s  house
22.  29.  as  my  F.  hath  appointed  unto  me

24.  49.  1  send  the  promise  of  my  F.  upon  you
John  5.  17.  my  F.  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work

43.  I  am  come  in  my  F.'s  name,  ye  receive  me  not

6.  32.  but  my  F.  giveth  you  the  true  bread

65.  none  come  to'  me,  except  it  be  given  of  my  F.

8.  19.  Jesus  said,  ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  F.

28.  as  my  F.  hath  taught  me,  1  speak  these  things
38.  1  speak  that  which  1  have  seen  with  my  F.

49.  but  I  honour  my  F.  and  ye  dishonour  me

54.  it  is  my  I.  that  honoureth  me,  of  whom  ye  say

10. 17.  therefore  doth  my  F.  love  me,  because

18.  this  commandment  have  I  received  of  my  F.
25.  works  1  do  in  my  F.'s  name  bear  witness  of  me

29.  my  F.  who  gave  them  me,  is  greater  than  ail,
none  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  F.'s  hauo

30.  I  and  my  F.  are  one

32.  many  good  works  have  1  shewed  from  my  F.
37.  if  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  F.  believe  me  not

12.  26.  if  any  serve  me,  him  will  my  F.  honour

14.  7.  if  knownme,  should  have  known  my  F.  also

12.  greater  works,  because  1  go  to  my  F.  16.  10.

20.  at  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  1  am  in  my  F.

21.  he  that  loveth  me,  shall  be  loved  of  my  F.  23!
28.  I  go  to  the  Father,  my  F.  is  greater  than  L

15.  1.  1  am  the  vine,  my  F.  is  the  husbandman
8.  herein  is  my  F.  glorified,  that  ye  bear  fruit

10.  even  as  I  have  kept  my  F.'s  commandments

15.  all  that  l  heard  of  my  F\  I  have  made  known

23.  he  that  hateth  me,  hateth  my  F.  also,  24.

18. 11.  the  cup  my  F.  hath  given,  shall  1  not  drink  it?

20. 17.  touch  not,  for  I  am  hot  yet  ascended  to  my  F
say  to  them,  1  ascend  to  my  F.  and  your  Father

21.  as  my  F.  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  1  you
Rev.  2.  27.  even  as  I  received  of  my  F.

3. 5. 1  will  confess  his  name  before  my  F.  and  angels
Our  FATHER.

Gen.  19.  31.  our  f.  is  old  ||  32.  make  ourf.  drink  wine
31.  1.  Jacob  hath  taken  away  all  that  is  our  f.  16.

42.  13.  the  youngest  is  this  day  with  our.  f.  32.

43.  28.  thy  servant  our  f.  is  in  good  health

44.  31.  bring  ourf.  with  sorrow  to  the  grave
Num.  27 .  3.  ourf.  died  in  the  wilderness,  had  no  sons

4.  why  should  the  name  of  our  f.  be  done  awav  ■*
1  Chr.  29. 10.  blessed  be  thou,  L.  God  of  Isr .oHr~F.
Isa.  63.  16.  doubtless,  thou,  art  our  F.  Abraham  ig-

64.  8.  O  Lord,  thou  art  our  F.  we  are  the  clay^
Jer.  35.  6.  our  f.  commanded  us  to  drink  no  wine
8.  we  have  obeyed  the  voice  of  our  f.  10.

Mat.  6.  9.  our  F.  which  art  in  heaven,  Luke  11.  2
Mark  11.  10.  blessed  be  the  kingdom  of  our  f.  David
Luke  1.73.  the  oath  which  he  sware  to  ourf.  A  brah.
3.  8.  begin  not  to  say,  we  have  Abraham  to  our  f
John  4.  12.  art  thou  greater  than  ourf?  8.  53.

Acts  7.  2.  the  God  of  glory  appeared  to  our  f.

Rom.  1.7.  grace  to  you,  and  peace  from  G od  our  F.
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  1-  Cor.  1.  3.  2  Cor
1.  2.  2  Thess.  1.  2.  1  Tim.  1.  2.  Philem.  3.

9.  10.  conceived  by  one,  even  by  ourf.  Isaac
Gal.  1.  4.  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  our  F.
Eph.  1.  2.  grace  be  to  you,  and  peace  from  G .  our  F

and  L.  Jes.  Ch.  Phil.  l.  2.  Col.  1.  2.  1  Thess.  1. 1.
P hil.  4.  20.  unto  God  our  F.  be  glory  for  ever,  amen

1  Thess.  1.  3.  in  the  sight  of  God  and  our  F\

3.  11.  now  God  cur  F.  direct  our  way  unto  you

13.  may  stablish  you  in  holiness  before  G.  our  F.

2  Thess.  1.  l.  Paul  unto  the  church  in  God  our  F.

2.  16.  now  God,  even  our  F.  comfort  your  hearts

Their  FATHER.

Gen.  9. 23.  Shem  and  Japhet  covered  the  nakedness
of  their  f.  and  saw  not  the  nakedness  of  their  f.

19.  33.  they  made  their  f.  drink  wine  that  night

36.  both  Lot’s  daughters  with  child  by  their

37.  12.  his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  f.'s  flock
Exod.  2.  16.  filled  troughs  to  water  their  f.'s  flock

40.  15.  anoint  them  as  thou  didst  anoint  their  f.
Num.  36.  6.  to  the  tribe  oi  their f.  shall  they  marry
Josh.  19.  47.  after  Dan  their  f.  Judg.  18.  29.

1  Sam.  2.  25.  they  hearkened  not  to  voice  of  their  f.

10.  12.  one  of  the  same  place  said,  who  is  their  f.  ?
1  Kings  13.  11.  the  prophet’^  sons  told  their  f.

1  Chr.  I.  22.  Ephraim  their  f.  mourned  man v  days

24.  2.  -N  adab  and  Abihu  died  before  their  f.

25.  3.  under  the  hands  of  their  f.  Jedutlnm,  6.

2  Chron.  21.  3.  their  f.  gave  them  great  gifts
Job  42.  15.  their  f.  gave  them  inheritance

Prov.  30.  11.  there  is  a  generation  that  curseth  th.f.
Jer.  16.  7.  cup  of  consolation  to  drink  for  their  f.
35.  14.  Jonadab's  sons  obeyed  t.  f.'s  command.  16
Ezek.  22.  10.  they  discovered  their  f.'s  nakedness  *
Mat.  4.  21.  in  a  ship  w  ith  Zebedee  their  f.

22.  they  left  ship  and  their  f.  and  followed  him
13.  43.  righteous  shall  shine  in  kingdom  of  their  f
Thy  FATHER.

Gen.  12.  1.  Lord  said,  get  thee  from  thy  f.'s  house

27.  6.  1  heard  thy  f.  speak  to  1  sail  thv  brother
10.  thou  shalt  bring  it  to  thy  f.  that  be  eat

38.  11.  Judah  said,  remain  a  widow  at  thy  f.'s  house

46.  3.  1  am  the  God  of  thyf.  fear  not  to  go  down

49.  25.  by  the  God  of  thyf.  who  shall  help  thee

26.  the  blessings  of  thy  f.  have  prevailed  above

50.  16.  thy  f.  commanded  before  he  died,  say  in tr

17.  forgive  the  servants  of  the  God  of  thy  f.  “
Exod.  20.  12.  honour  thyf.  and  thy  mother  that  thy

days  may  belong,  Deut.  5.  16.  Mat.  15.4.  1  19.  19.
Num.  18.  2.  thy  brethren  of  the  tribe  of  thy  f.  brin»
Deut,  6.  3.  as  the  God  of  thy  f,  promised  thee  °

135


FAT


FAT


FAT


Dent.  32.  6.  is  not  he  thyf.  that  bought  thee  ?

7.  ask  thy  f.  and  he  will  shew  thee,  thy  elders
Euth  2. 11.  how  thou  hast  left  thy  f.  and  mother

1  Sam.  20. 1.  and  what  is  my  sin  before  thyf.  ?

6.  if  thy  f.  at  all  miss  me,  then  say,  David  asked

2  Sam.  6. 21.  the  Lord  which  chose  me  before  thy  f.

10.  3.  thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thy  f.

that  he  sent  comforters  to  thee  ?  1  Chron.  19.  3.
16.  19.  as  1  have  served  in  thy  f.'s  presence

1  Kings  11. 12.  I  will  notdoitfor  David  thyf.  .tsake

12.  4.  thy  f. made  yoke  grievous,  10.  2  Chron.  10. 4.

15. 19.  there  is  a  league  betw.  my  father  and  thyf.

20.  34.  the  cities  which  my  father  took  from  thyf.

2  Kings  3.  13.  get  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thyf.

20.  5.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  ot  David  thy  f.

2  Chron.  21.  12.  Isa.  38.  5.

1  Clir.  28.  9.  my  son,  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  f.

2  Chr.  7.  17.  if  thou  wilt  walk  before  me  as  thyf.

Job  15.  10.  are  aged  men  much  elder  than  thy  f.
Prov.  1.  8.  hear  the  instruction  of  thyf.  23.  22.

6. 20.  my  son,  keep  thy  f.'s  commandment

23.  25.  thyf.  and  mother  shall  be  glad,  she  rejoice
27.  10.  thine  own  and  thy  f.'s  friend  forsake  not
Isa.  43.  27.  thy  first  /.  hath  sinned  against  me

58. 14.  feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob  thy  f.
Jer.  12. 6.  house  of  t.f.  dealt  treacherously  with  thee

22. 15.  did  not  thy  f.  eat,  drink,  and  do  judgment
Ezek.  16. 3.  thyf.  was  an  Amorite,  mother  an  Hittite
Dan.  5. 11.  in  the  days  of  thyf.  the  king,  1  say  thyf.

18.  God  gave  thy  f.  a  kingdom  and  glory
Mat.  6.  4.  thy  F.  which  seeth  in  secret,  6,  18.

6.  shut  thy  door,  pray  to  thy  F.  who  is  in  secret
Mark  7.  10.  for  Moses  said,  honour  thy  f.  and  mo¬
ther,  10.  19.  Luke  18.  20.  Eph.  6.  2.

Luke  2.  48.  thy  f.  and  I  sought  thee  sorrowing
15.  27.  and  thy  f.  hath  killed  the  fatted  calf
John  8. 19.  then  said  they  unto  him,  where  is  thy  f.  ?
Your  FATHER.

Gen.  31. 6.  with  all  my  power  1  have  served  your  f.

7.  your  f.  hath  deceived  me,  and  changed  my  wages
43.7.  is  yourf.  alive  ?  have  ye  another  brother.''

44. 17.  as  for  you,  get  you  up  in  peace  to  your  f.

45. 19.  take  you  waggons,  bring  your  f.  and  come
49.  2.  sons  of  Jacob,  hearken  unto  Israel  your  f.

Jer.  35. 18.  because  ye  obeyed  Jonadab  your  f.

Ezek.  16.  45.  mother  an  Hittite,  yourf.  an  Amorite
Mat.  5. 16.  may  glorify  your  F.  who  is  in  heaven
45.  may  be  tne  children  of  your  F.  in  heaven
48.  be  ye  perfect,  as  your  F.  in  heaven  is  perfect
6. 1.  otherwise  ye  have  no  reward  of  your  F.

8.  your  F.  knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need  of

before  ye  ask  them,  32.  Luke  12.  30.

14.  if  ye  forgive,  your  heavenly  E.  will  forgive  you

15.  if  ye  forgive  not,  neither  will  your  F.  forgive

your  trespasses,  Mark  11.  25,  26.
10.  29.  not  one  sparrow  shall  fall  without  your  F.

18. 14.  it  is  not  tne  will  of  your  F.  that  one  perish
23.  9.  call  no  man  your  f.  upon  the  earth,  for  one
is  your  F.  which  is  in  hea;  en
Luke  6. 36.  be  ye  merciful,  as  your  F.  also  is  merciful

12.  32.  it  is  your  F.’s  pleasure  to  give  you  kingdom
John  8.  38.  ye  do  what  ye  have  seen  with  your  f.

41.  ye  do  the  deeds  of  your  f.  then  said  they  to  him

42.  Jes.  said, if  God  were  your  F.ye  would  lo'  erne
44.  ye  are  of  your  f.  the  devil,  and  the  lusts  of’

your  f.  ye  will  do,  he  was  a  murderer

20. 17.  I  ascend  to  my  F.  and  your  F.  to  my  God

FATHERS.

Exod.  6. 14.  these  are  the  heads  of  their  f.s'  houses, 25.

Josh.  14.  1.  |  19.  51.  |  21. 1.  1  Chr.  8. 10, 13,  28.
10. 6.  neither  thy  father,  nor  thy  f.s'  father  have  seen
20.  5.  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  /.  upon  the
children,  34.  7-  Num.  14.  18.  Deut.  5.  9.
Deut.  24.  16.  the  /.  shall  not  be  put  to  death  for  the
children,  nor  children  for  /.  2  Kings  14.  6.
Job  30.  1.  whose  /.  I  would  have  disdained  to  set
Prov.  19. 14.  house  and  riches  are  inheritance  of/.
Isa.  49. 23.  kings  shall  be  thv  nursing/,  and  queens
.  Jer.  6.21./.  and  sons  shall  tall  on  them,  13.  14.

7.  18.  children  gather  wood,/,  kindle  the  fire
31. 29./.  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  Ezek.  18.  2.

32.  18.  recompenses!  iniquity  of  the  /.  on  children

47. 3.  the  /.  shall  not  look  back  to  their  children
.Ezek.  5. 10.  the  /.  shall  eat  the  sons  in  midst  of  thee
Mai.  4.  6.  he  shall  turn  the  heart  of  the/,  to  the
children,  and  children  to  their/.  Luke  1.  17.
Eohn  7.  22.  not  because  it  is  of  Moses,  but  of  the  /.
Acts  7.  2.  men,  brethren,  and/,  hearken,  22.  1.

13.  32.  the  promise  which  was  made  unto  the/.

22.  3.  the  perfect  manner  of  the  law  of  the/.

Pom.  9.  5.  whose  are  the/,  of  whom  Christ  came

1  Cor.  4. 15.  though  instructors,  yet  have  not  many  /.
Eph.  6.  4.  /.  provoke  not  your  children,  Col.  3.  21.
Ileb.  1.  1.  God  who  spake  in  times  past  to  the/.

12.  9.  we  had/,  of  our  flesh  who  corrected  us

2  Pet.  3.  4.  since  the /.  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue
1  John  2. 13.  I  write  unto  you  /.  ye  have  known,  14.

See  Buried,  Chief.

His  FA  THERS.

1  Kings  15.  12.  he  removed  the  idols  his  f.  made

2  Kings  12. 18.  took  the  things  his  f.  had  dedicated
15.  9.  he  did  what  was  evil  as  his  f.  had  done
21.22.  he  forsook  Lord  God  of  his  f.  2  Chron.  21. 10.

23.  32.  according  to  all  his  f.  had  done,  37.  1  24.  9.

2  Chron.  21. 19.  no  burning  like  the  bm  ningof  his  f.
28.25.  Ahaz  provoked  the  Lord  God  ol  his  f.

30. 19.  prepareth  his  heart  to  seek  the  God  of  his  f.
33. 12.  he  humbled  himself  before  God  of  his  f.
Psal.  49.  19.  he  shall  so  to  the  seneration  of  his  f.

109. 14.  ket  the  iniquity  of  his  f.  be  remembered
Daw.  11.24.  shall  do  what  his  f.  ha' e  not  done

37.  neither  shall  he  regard  the  God  of  his  f.

38.  and  a  god  whom  his  f.  knew  not  shall  honour
Acts  13.  36.  David  was  laid  to  his  f.  saw  corruption

My  FATHERS.

Gen.  47. 9-  not  attained  to  the  years  of  my  f.

30.  I  will  lie  with  my  f.  carry  me  out  of  Egypt

48. 16.  and  the  name  ot  my  f.  be  named  on  them
49.  29.  bury  me  with  my  f.  in  the  cave  in  field
Exod.  15.  2.  he  is  my  f.  God,  1  will  exalt  him
l  Kings  19.  4.  for  1  am  no  better  than  my  f.

SI.  3.  give  the  inheritance  of  my  f.  to  thee,  4.

156


2  Kings  19.  12.  have  gods  of  the  nations  delivered
them  my  f.  destroyed  ?  2  Chr.  32.  14.  Isa.  37. 12.

2  Chr.  32.  13.  know  not  what  I  and  my  f.  have  done
Psal.  39. 12.  for  1  am  a  sojourner,  as  all  my  f.  were
Dan.  2.  23.  1  thank  and  praise  thee,  O  God  of  my  f.
Acts  24.  14.  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my  f.

Gal.  1.  14.  being  zealous  of  the  traditions  of  my  f.
Our  FATHERS.

Gen.  46.  34.  till  now  both  we  and  also  ourf.  47-  3.
Num.  20.  15.  how  our  f.  went  down  into  Egypt
Deut.  5.  3.  Lord  made  not  this  covenant  with  our  f.

6.  23.  land  which  he  sware  to  our  f.  26.  3, 15.

26.  7.  cried  to  the  God  of  our  f.  the  Lord  heard
Jsh.  22.  28.  the  pattern  of  the  altar  our  f.  made
24.  17.  brought  our  f.  out  of  the  land  ot  Egypt
Judg.  6.  13.  where  be  miracles  which  our  f.  told  of?

1  Kings  8.  57.  God  be  with  us,  as  he  was  with  ourf.
58.  his  statutes,  which  he  commanded  our  f.

2  Kings  22.  13.  because  our  f.  have  not  hearkened

1  Chron.  12. 17.  the  God  of  our  f.  look  and  rebuke  it
29.  15.  for  we  are  sojourners,  as  were  all  our  f.

18.  O  Lord  God  of  our  f.  keep  for  ever  in  the
thoughts  of  the  heart  of  thy  people,  2  Chr.  20.  6.

2  Chron.  6.  31 .  which  thou  gavest  our  f.  Neh.  9.  36.
29.  6.  for  our  f.  have  trespassed  and  done  evil

9.  for  lo,  our  f.  have  fallen  by  the  sword
34.  21.  our  f.  have  not  kept  the  word  of  the  Lord
Ezra  5.  12.  but  after  our  f.  had  provoked  God
7-  27.  blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  our  f.

9.7.  since  the  days  of  our  f.  in  a  great  trespass
Neh.  9.  9.  didst  see  the  affliction  of  our  f.  in  Egypt
16.  ourf.  dealt  proudly,  and  hardened  their  necks
Psal.  22.  4.  our  f.  trusted  in  thee,  they  trusted
44.  1.  ourf.  have  told  us  what  thou  didst,  78.  3.

106.  6.  we  have  sinned  with  ourf.  and  committed
7.  ourf.  understood  not  thy  wonders  in  Egypt
Isa.  64.  11.  house  where  ourf.  praised  thee
Jer.  3.  24.  shame  hath  devoured  the  labour  of  ourf.

25.  we  and  our  f.  have  not  obeyed  the  voice

16.  19.  surely  our  f.  have  inherited  lies,  vanities
44.  17.  as  we  have  done,  we  and  ourf.  our  kings
Lam.  5.7  .our  /.have  sinned,  and  are  not,  have  borne
Dan.  9.  8.  confusion  of  face  belopgeth  to  our  f.

16.  for  our  sins  and  the  iniquities  of  our  f.

Mic.  7.  20.  sworn  to  our  f.  from  the  days  of  old
Mai.  2. 10.  by  profaning  the  covenant  of  our  f.

Mat.  23.  30.  if  we  had  been  in  the  days  of  ourf.
Luke  1.  55.  as  he  spake  to  ourf.  to  Abraham
72.  to  perform  the  mercy  promised  to  our  f.

John  4.  20.  our  f.  worshipped  in  this  mountain

6.  31.  our  f.  did  eat  manna  in  the  desert

Acts  3. 13.  God  of  ourf.  hath  glorified  his  Son  Jesus
25.  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  our/.

5.  30.  God  of  our  f.  raised  up  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew

7.  11.  came  dearth,  our  f.  found  no  sustenance
15.  Jacob  went  down  and  died,  he  and  ourf.

19.  and  evil  entreated  ourf.  and  cast  out  children

38.  this  is  he  which  spake  in  Sinai  and  with  ourf.

39.  to  whom  ourf.  would  not  obey,  but  thrust
44.  ourf.  had  the  tabernacle  of  witness  in  wildern.

13. 17.  God  of  this  people  of  Israel  chose  ourf.

15.  10.  a  yoke  which  ourf.  nor  we  were  able  to  bear

26.  6.  for  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  to  our  f.

28.  25.  well  spake  Holy  '  host  by  Esaias  to  our  f.

1  Cor.  10. 1.  all  our  f.  were  under  the  cloud
Slept  with  FATH  ERS.

1  Kings  2. 10.  so  David  slept  with  his/.  11.  21.

43.  Solomon  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  9.  31.

14.  20.  Jeroboam  slept  with  his/.  2  Kings  14.  29.

31.  Rehoboam  slept  with  his  /.  2  Chron.  12.  16.

15.  8.  A  bijam  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  14. 1.

24.  and  Asa  slept  with  his /.  2  Chron.  16.  13.

16.  6.  so  Baasha  slept  with  f.  H  28.  Omri  slept  withf.
22.  40.  Ahab  si.  w.  f.  ||  50.  Jehoshaphat,  2  Chr.  21. 1.

2  Kings  8.  24.  Jorarri  slept  his  f.  ||  10.  35.  Jehu

13.  9.  Jehoahaz  slept  with  his/.  ||  13.  Joash,  14. 16.

14.  22.  after  that  the  kin g  slept  withf.  2  Chr.  26.  2.
15.7-  Azariah  slept  with  his/.  ||  22.  Menahem

38.  Jotham  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  27.  9.

16.  20.  Ahaz  slept  with  his /.  2  Chron.  28.  27-

20.  21.  Hezekiah  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  32.  33.

21.  18.  Manasseh  slept  with  his/.  2  Chron.  33.  20.
24.  6.  Jehoiakim  slept  with  his/.

2  Chron.  26.  23.  Uzziah  slept  with  his/.

Their  FATHERS.

Exod.  4.  5.  that  the  God  of  their  f.  hath  appeared
6.  14.  heads  of  their  f.  2 5.  Josh.  14.  1. 1  19.51.  121.

1.  1  Chron.  5.  24.  |  7-  2,  7-  I  8.  6.  I  9.  9,  13.
Lev.  26.  39.  in  iniquity  of  their  f.  shall  pine  away
40.  if  they  confess  the  iniquity  of  their  f.

Num.  11. 12.  the  land  thou  swarest  to  give  to  their/.

14.  23.  Dent.  10. 11.  1  31.  20.  Josh.  1.  6.

I  5.  6.  I  21.  43,  44.  Jer.  32.22.

Deut.  29.  25.  have  forsaken  the  covenant  of  their  f.
Josh.  4.  6.  when  your  children  ask  their  f.  21.

22.  14.  each  one  a  head  of  the  house  of  their  f.
Judg.  2. 10.  that  generation  were  gathered  to  their  f.

12.  they  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their  f.

17.  they  turned  out  of  the  way  their  f.  walked  in

10.  they  corrupted  themselves  more  than  their  f.
20.  my  covenant  which  1  commanded  their  f.

22.  if  they  keep  way  of  Lord,  as  their  f.  kept  it

3.  4.  wich  he  commanded  their  f.  by  Moses

1  Kings  8.  34.  and  bring  them  again  to  the  land
thou  gavest  to  their  f.  48.  2  Chron.  6.  25,  38.

9^?.  who  brought  forth  their  f.  out  of  Egypt
14.  15.  out  of  the  land  which  he  gave  to  their  f.

2  Kings  21.  8.  Jer.  16.  15. 1  24.  10.
22.  provoked  above  all  that  their  f.  had  done

2  Kings  21 . 15.  since  day  their f.  came  out  of  T  gypt

1  Chron.  4.  38.  'he  house' of  their  f.  increased  greatly
5.25.  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their  f.

29.  2o.  blessed  the  God  of  their  f.  and  bowed  down

2  Chr.  7.  22.  forsook  God  of  their  f.  24.  24.1  28.  6.

11.  16.  came  to  sacrifice  to  the  God  of  their  f.

13.  18.  they  relied  on  the  Lord  God  of  their  f.

14.  4.  commanded  to  seek  God  of  their  f.  15.  12.

19.  4.  brought  them  back  to  the  God  ot  their  f.

20.  .33.  not  prepared  their  hearts  to  God  of  their  f.

30.  7.  which  trespassed  against  the  God  of  their  f.
22.  making  confession  to  the  God  of  their  f.

34.  .32.  according  to  the  covenant  of  God  of  their  f.


2  Chr.  34.  .33.  from  following  Lord  the  God  of  their  J
.36.  15.  God  of  their  f.  sent  by  his  messengers
Neh.  9.  2.  confessed  sins  and  iniquities  of  their f.

23.  into  the  land  thou  promisedst  to  then /.

Job  8.  8.  prepare  thyself  to  the  search  ot  their  f.

15.  18.  which  wise  men  have  told  from  their f.
Psal.  78.  8.  and  might  not  be  as  their  f.  a  stubbori
12.  marvellous  things  did  he  in  sight  of  their  f
57.  they  dealt  unfaithfully  like  their  f.

Prov.  17-  6.  and  the  glory  of  children  are  their  f.
Isa.  14.  21.  slaughter  for  the  iniquity  of  their  f.
Jer.  7.  26.  they  did  worse  than  their f.

9.  14.  after  Baalim,  which  their  f.  taught  them
16.  whom  they  nor  their  f.  have  known,  19.  4,

23.  27.  as  their  f.  have  forgotten  my  name
31.32. 1  will  make  anew  covenant,  not  according (1
covenant  1  made  with  their  f.  11. 10.  Heb.  8.  y
50.  7.  have  sinned  against  Lord,  the  hope  of  their  f
Ezek.  2.  .3.  they  and  their  f.  have  transgressed
5. 10.  the  fathers  shall  eat  sons,  and  sons  eat  their j
20.  4.  cause  them  to  know  abominations  of  their  j

24.  their  eyes  were  after  their  f.  idols

Amos  2.  4.  their  lies,  after  which  their  f.  walked
Mai.  4.  6.  turn  the  heart  of  the  children  to  their  j.
Luke  it.  2.3.  for  in  like  manner  did  their  f.

26.  for  so  did  their  f.  to  the  false  prophets
Thy  FATHERS.

Gen.  15.  15.  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  f.  in  peace
49.  8.  thy  f.  children  shall  bow  down  before  thee
Exod.  13.  5.  into  land  which  he  sware  to  thy  f.  1;
Deut.  6.  10,  18.  1  7-  12,  13.  1 8.  18.  |  9.  5.

1.3.  17- 1  19.  8. 1  28.  11. 1  29.  13. 1  30.  20.
Deut.  1.  21.  go  up,  possess  it,  as  God  of  thy  f.  sai
4.  31.  nor  forget  the  covenant  of  thyf.  he  sware
.37.  and  because  he  loved  thy  f.  10.  15.

8.  3.  humbled  thee  and  fed  thee  with  manna  whir
thou  knewest  not,  neither  did  thyf.  know,  If

10.  22.  thy  f.  went  into  Egy.  with  seventy  person’

12.  1.  land  which  the  God  of  thyf.  giveth  thee

13.  6.  other  gods  thou  nor  thyf.  known,  28.  £4.
19.  8.  give  the  land  which  he  promised  thy  f.  27,  ‘
28.  36fto  a  nation  thou  nor  thyf.  have  known

30.  5.  do  thee  good  and  multiply  thee  above  thy  1

9.  rejoice  over  thee,  as  he  rejoiced  over  thy  f.

31.  16.  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  f.  2  Sam.  7.  12

1  Kings  13.  22.  shall  not  come  to  sepulchre  of  thy .

2  Kings  20.  17.  what  thy  f.  laid  up  be  carried  awa
22.  20.  I  will  gather  thee  to  thy  f.  2  Chr.  34.  28.

1  Chron.  17.  11.  thou  must  go  to  be  with  thy  f.
Ezra  4.  15.  search  the  book  of  the  records  of  thyf
Psal.  45.  16.  instead  of  thy  f.  shall  be  thy  childre
Prov.  22.  28.  remove  not  the  land  mark  thyf.  set
Jer.  34.  5.  burned  with  the  burnings  of  thy  f.
Acts  7.  32.  1  am  God  of  thy  f.  the  G.  of  Abrahan
Your  FA  THERS.

Gen.  48.  21.  shall  bring  you  to  the  land  of  your  f.
Exod.  3.  1.3.  the  God  of  your  f.  hath  sent  me,  Dev
1.  11.  I  4.  1.  Josh.  18.  3.  2  Chron.  28.  9-  I  29. .
Num.  32.  8.  thus  did  your  f.  Neh.  13.  18.

14.  behold  ye  are  risen  up  in  your f.  stead
Deut.  1.  8.  possess  the  land  the  Lord  sware  toyoi
/.  .35.  |  7-  8. 1  8.  1.  I  11.  9,  21.  Judg.  2.

32.  17.  sacrificed  to  gods  whom  your  f.  feared  n
Josh .  24.  2.  your  f.  dwelt  on  the  other  side  the  flot

6.  I  brought  your  f.  out  of  Egypt,  Egypt  pursue

14.  put  away  the  gods  which  your  f.  served

15.  whether  the  gods  which  your  f.  served

1  Sam.  12.  7.  acts  the  Lord  did  to  you  and  your

8.  yourf.  cried,  the  Lord  brought  forth  your  f.

15.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  against  you  as  ag.  your

2  Kings  17-  13.  the  law  which  I  commanded  your
2  Chron.  13.  12.  fight  ye  not  ag.  the  God  of  your

30.7.  be  not  lik e  your  f.  and  brethren,  8.  feck.  1 .

33.  8.  remove  out  of  the  land  appointed  for  year
Ezra  8.  28.  free-will  offering  to  the  God  of  your

10.  11.  make  confession  to  the  God  of  yourf.
Psal.  95.  9.  when  yourf.  tempted  me,  Heb.  .3.  (
Isa.  65.  7.  your  and  the  iniquities  of  yourf '.  togel
Jer.  2.  5.  what  iniquity  have  yourf.  found  in  me

3.  18.  shall  come  to  the  land  l  have  given  to  you)

7.  7.  dwell  in  the  land  I  gave  to  your  f.  14.1  23.  F

1  25.  5.  |  35.  15.  Ezek.  20.  42.  I  36.  28.  I  47-  1
22. 1  spake  not  to  your  f.  in  the  day  1  brought  the

25.  since  the  day  your  f.  came  forth  out  ot  Egy
11.4.  which  1  commanded  your  f.  17-  22.

7.  for  I  earnestly  protested  unto  yourf.

16.  11.  because  your  f.  have  forsaken  me

12.  done  woise  than  yourf.} |  13.  ye  nor  your J

34.  13.  I  made  a  covenant  with  yourf.  in  the  aa
14.  but  your  f.  hearkened  not  unto  me

44.  .3.  whom  they  knew  not,  neither  they  nor y< tr

9.  have  ye  forgotten  the  wickedness  of  yourf. .

10.  in  my  statutes  1  set  before  you  and  your  J

21.  the  incense  ye,  yourf.  and  kings,  burn
Ezek.  20.  18.  walk  ye  not  in  the  statutes  of  your

27.  in  this  yourf.  have  blasphemed  me  (!

.30.  are  ye  polluted  after  the  manner  of  your  f.,
.36.  like  as  1  pleaded  with  your  f.  so  with  you
37.25  shall  dwell  in  the  land  whereinyotu’/dw
Dos.  9.  10.  1  saw  your  f.  as  the  first  ripe  of  fig-t
Joel  1.  2.  hath  this  been  in  the  days  of  yourf.  ?
Zech.  1. 2.  the  I.ord  hath  been  displeased  witnyotd
4.  be  not  as  your  f.  |l  5.  yi  ur  f.  w  here  are  they
6.  did  not  my  words  take  hold  o iyourf.?

3. 14.  when  your  f.  provoked  me  to  wrath
Mai.  3.  7.  from  days  of  your  f.  ye  are  gone  away
Mat.  23.  32.  till  \  e  up  then  the  measureof  your  J.
Luke.  11.  47.  of  prophets,  and  your  f.  killed  them
48.  ye  witness  that  ye  allow  the  deeds  of  </«  ')•.
John  6.  49.  your  f.  did  "eat  manna  and  are  dead
58.  not  as  your  f.  did  eat  manna  and  are  dead
Acts  7.  51.  ye  resist  Holy  Ghost  as  yourf.  did, so  :  i
52.  who  of  the  proph.  have  not  yourf.  pereeeul
1  Pet.  1. 18.  received  by  tradition  from  yourf.

FATHERLESS.

Ernd.  22.  22.  ve  shall  not  afflict  any  /.  child
24.  your  wi  es  shall  be  widows,  and  children  f
Deut.  10.  18.  he  doth  execute  the  judgment  of  tl
and  widow,  Psal.  82.  3.  Isa.  i
Joh  0.  27.  ye  overwhelm  tin  f  and  dig  a  pit

22.  9  the  arms  of  the  /.  have  been-broken

24. 3.  they  drive  away  the  ass  of  the/.


F  AF


FE  A


FE  A


424.  9-  Jiey  pluck  the  /.  from  the  breast
‘  ]2.  because  I  delivered  the  poor  and  the/.

17.  eaten  alone,  and /.  hath  not  eaten  thereof
it’l  have  lifted  up  my  hand  against  the/.

/.  10.  14.  thou  art  the  helper  of  the/.

‘  5.’ to  judge  the /.  and  the  oppressed

5.  a  father  ot  the  /.  a  judge  of  the  widows
).  9.  let  his  children  be  /.  Ids  wife  a  widow
\  nor  let  any  favour  his/,  children
,,'p.  2:5.  10.  enter  not  into  the  fields  of  the/.

1.  23.  they  judge  not  the  /'.  Jer.  5.  28.

’  17.  the  Lord  shall  not  have  mercy  on  their/.

2.  widows  their  prey, that  they  may  rob  the/.
49.  11.  leave  thy/,  children,  1  will  preserve

*  .,(.5.3.  we  are  orphans  and /.  our  mothers  widows

k.  22.7.  in  thee  have  they  vexed  the /.  and  widow
f  14.  3.  for  in  thee  the  /.  findeth  mercy

‘  /.  3.  5.  a  witness  against  those  that  oppress  the/.
>1. 1. 27.  pure  religion  is  to  visit  the /.  and  widows
FATHERLESS,  with  stranger,
ut.  14.29.  the  stranger,  and  the  /.  and  the  widow
shall  come  and  eat,  24.  19,  20,  21.  |  26.  12,  13.

.  11.  the  stranger  and /.  rejoice  with  thee,  14.

17.  nor  pervert  judgment  of  stranger  nor/.

.  19.  cursed  that  perverts  judg.  of  stranger  and  /.

il.  94.  6.  they  slay  the  stranger  and  murder  the  /.

6."  9.  the  Lord  preserveth  the  strangers  and  /.

.  7.6.  if  oppress  not  the  stranger,  the/.

and  the  widow,  22.  3.  Zech.  7.  10.
FATHOMS.

>s  27. 28.  they  found  it  twenty  /.  again  fifteen  /.
FAILING.

.11.6.  the  calf,  the  young  lion,  and  the/,  together
FATL1NGS.

am.  15.  9.  Saul  spared  A  gag  and  the  best  of  the/,
j am.  6.  13.  David  sacrificed  oxen  and/.
it.  66. 15.  I  will  offer  to  thee  burnt  sacrifices  of /.
Ut. 39.  18.  all  of  them  /.  of  Bashan
•t.  22.  4.  my  oxen  and  my  /.  are  killed,  all  ready
FATNESS.

n.  27.  28.  God  give  thee  of  the  /.  of  the  earth
(9.  thy  dwelling  shall  be  the  /.  of  the  earth
ut,  32. 15.  thou  art  thick  and  covered  with  /.

,/g.  9.  9.  the  olive-tree  said,  should  I  leave  my/.
...  15.  27.  because  he  covereth  his  face  with  his/.

.  16.  that  set  on  thy  table  should  be  full  of/.
al.  36. 8.  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  /.  of  thy  house
5.  my  soul  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and  /.

.  11.  tnou  crownest  year,  all  thy  paths  drop  J
.7.  eyes  stand  out  with  /.  have  more  than  wish
9.  24.  knees  are  weak,  my  flesh  faileth  off.
t.  17.  4.  once  the/,  of  his  flesh  shall  wax  lean
.  6.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  is  made  fat  with/.

.  their  dust  shall  be  made  fat  with  /.

l.  2.  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  /.

■.  31.  14.  I  will  satiate  the  soul  of  priests  with  /.

m.  11.  17.  with  them  partakest  of /.  of  the  olive

FATS.

2  2.  24.  the  /.  shall  overflow  with  wine  and  oil

13.  for  the  press  is  full,  the /.  overflow
FATTED.

Kings  4.  23.  ten  oxen,  beside  harts,  and  /.  fowl
'.  46.  21.  her  hired  men  are  like /.  bullocks
See  Calk.

FATTER,  see  Countenances.

FAT  LEST.

al.  78.  31.  the  wrath  of  God  slew  the /.  of  them
at.  11. 24.  shall  enter  on  /.  places  of  the  province
FAULT,  S.

n.  41.  9.  butler  said,  I  remember  my  /.  this  day
od.  5.  16.  but  the  /.  is  in  thine  own  people

•ut.  25  2.  cause  to  be  beaten  according  to  his  /.
■iam.  i'J.  3.  and  1  have  found  no  /.  in  him
iam.  3.  8.  thou  chargest  me  this  day  with  a  /.

al,  19.  12.  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  /.
f.  4.  they  run  and  prepare  without  my  J.

in.  6.  4.  they  could  find  no  occasion  or  /.  in  him
at.  18. 15.  it  thy  brother  trespass,  tell  him  his /.
ark  7.  2.  eat  with  unwashen  hands,  they  found  /.
it«2 3.  4.  Pilate  said,  chief  priests  and  people,  1
find  no  /.  in  this  man,  14.  John  18.  38.  |  19.  4,  6.
>m,  9. 19.  thou  wilt  say, .why  doth  he  yet  find  /.  ?
lor.  6.  7.  now  there  is’utterfy  a /.  among  you

11.  6.  1.  if  a  man  be  overtaken  in  a  /.  restore  him
eb.  8. 8.  for,  finding  /.  with  them,  he  saith,  behold
■  t  14.  who  offered  nimself  without  /.  to  God

m.  5. 16.  confess  your  /.  one  to  another,  pray  one
Pet.  2.  20.  if  when  ye  buffeted  for  your  /.
tv.  14.  5.  are  without  /.  before  the  throne  of  God
FAULTLESS.

eb.  8.  7.  if  the  first  covenant  had  been/,  then
de  24.  him  that  is  able  to  present  you  /.  w  ith  joy
FAULTY.

am.  35. 1 31.  no  satisfaction  for  a  murderer  /.  to  die
Sam.  14.  13.  the  kin^doth  speak  as  one  which  is  /.
os,  10. 2.  heart  divided,  now  shall  they  be  found /.

FAVOUR.

en.  39.  21.  gave  Joseph  /.  in  the  sight  of  the  keeper
rod.  3.  21.  I  will  give  this  people  /.  in  sight  of  the
Egyptians,  shall  not  go  empty,  11.  3.  I  12.  36.
eut.  28.  50.  which  shall  not  shew  J.  to  the  young

3.  23.  he  said,  O  Naphtali,  satisfied  with  f.

''h.  11.  20.  and  that  they  might  have  no  /.

Sam.  2.  26.  Samuel  was  in  /.  with  Lord  and  men
'b  10.  12.  thou  hast  granted  me  life  and/.
sal.  5.  12.  with  /.  wilt  compass  him  as  with  a  shield
"0.  5.  his/,  is  life,  weeping  may  endure  for  anight
7  •  by  thy  /.  thou  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand

4.  3.  because  thou  hadst  a  /.  unto  them

5.  12.  even  the  rich  shall  entreat  thy  /.

*9. 17.  in  thy  /.  our  horn  shall  be  exalted

06.  4.  remember  me  with  the  /.  thou  bearest  thine

12.  5.  a  good  man  sheweth/.  and  lendeth

19.  58.  1  entreated  thy  /.  with  my  whole  heart
n>v.  11.27.  he  that  seeketh  good  procureth  /.

•3.  15.  good  understanding  giveth  /.

L  9.  but  among  the  righteous  there  is  /.  •

35.  the  king’s/,  is  toward  a  wise  servant

6.  15.  his/,  is  as  a  cloud  of  the  latter  rain
!9.  6.  many  will  entreat  the  /.  of  the  prince

12.  the  king’s  /.  is  as  dew  upon  the  grass
iL  10.  his  neighbour  findeth  no  /.  in  his  eyes


Prov.  22. 1.  loving  /.  rather  to  be  chosen  than  silver
29.  26.  many  seek  the  ruler’s  /.

31.  30./.  is  deceitful,  and  beauty  is  vain
Eccl.  9.  11.  race  not  to  swift,  nor  /.  to  men  of  skill
Isa.  26.  10.  let  /.  be  shewed  to  the  wicked

27.  11.  he  who  formed  them  will  shew  them  no /.
60.  10.  but  in  my  /.  have  1  had  mercy  on  thee

Jer.  16.  13.  a  land,  where  I  will  not  shew  you /.

31.  t9.  and  with  /.  will  1  lead  them
Dan.  1.  9.  God  had  brought  Daniej  into  /.  and  love
Luke  2.  52.  Jesus  increased  in/,  with  God  and  men
Acts  2.  47-  praising  God,  having /.  with  all  people

7.  10.  God  gave  Moses /.  in  sight  of  Pharaoh
25.  3.  the  high  priest  desired  /.  against  him
Find,  or  found,  FAVOUR.

Gen.  18.  3.  if  now  1  have  found  f.  in  thy  sight,
30.27.  Num.  11.  15.  I  Sam.  20.  29.
Neh.  2.  5.  Esth.  5.  8. 1  7-  3.  1 8.  5.
Num.  11.  11.  and  wherefore  have  I  not  found  f.  ?
Deut.  24. 1.  it  come  to  pass  sh efnd  no/,  in  his  eyes
Ruth  2.  13.  let  me  find  f.  in  thy  sight,  my  lord

1  Sam.  16.  22.  David  hath  found  f.  in  my  sight
25.  8.  let  the  young  men  find  f.  in  thy  sight

2  Sam.  15.  25.  if  1  shall  find  f.  in  eyes  of  the  Lord
1  Kings  11.  19.  Hadad  found  f.  in  sight  of  Pharaoh
Prov.  3.  4.  so  shalt  thou  find  f.  in  the  sight  of  God

28.  23.  shall  find  more  /.  than  he  that  flattereth
Cant.  8.  10.  I  was  in  his  eyes  as  one  that  found  f.
Luke  1.  30.  fear  not,  for  thou  hast  found  f.  with  G.
Acts  7.  46.  David  found /.  before  God,  and  desired

Obtain,  or  obtained,  FAVOU  K.

Esth.  2.  15.  now  Esther  obtained  f.  17- 1  5.  2.

Prov.  8.  3L.  whoso  findeth  me,  shall  obtain  f.  of  Lord
12.  2.  a  good  man  ohtaineth /.  of  the  Lord

18.  22.  whoso  findeth  a  wife,  ohtaineth  f.  of  Lord
FAVOUR.

1  Sam.  29-  6.  nevertheless,  the  lords/,  thee  not
Psal.  35.  27.  be  glad,  that/,  my  righteous  cause

102.  13.  the  time,  the  set  time  to/,  her  is  come

14.  for  thy  servants  /.  the  dust  thereof

109.  12.  nor  let  any  to  /.  his  fatherless  children
FAVOURABLE.

Judg.  21.  22.  be  /.  unto  them  for  our  sakes
Job  33.  26.  shall  pray,  and  God  will  be/,  unto  him
Psal.  77.  7.  will  the  L.  cast  off,  and  be/,  no  more  ?
85.  1.  Lord,  thou  hast  been  f.  to  thy  land
FAVOURED.

Gen.  29.  17-  Rachel  was  beautiful  and  well-/.

39.  6.  Joseph  was  well/.  ||  41.  2.  kine  well  /.  18.
41.  3.  out  of  the  river  ill  /,  kine,  4,  19,  21,  27-
Prov.  21.  +  10.  his  neighbour  is  not/,  in  his  eyes
Lam.  4.16.  T.ord  divided  them,  they/,  not  the  elders
Dan.  1.  4.  children  well  /,  and  skilful  in  all  wisdom
Nah.  3.  4.  the  whoredoms  of  the  well-/,  harlot
Luke  1.  28.  hail,  thou  art  highly  /.  Lord  with  thee
Evil-FA  VO  U  R  E  D  N  ESS.

Deut.  17.  1.  any  bullock  wherein  is  any  evilf.

FA  VO U REST.

Psal.  41.  11.  by  this  I  know  that  thou/,  me
86. 1 2.  preserve  my  soul,  for  I  am  one  whom  thou/.
FAVOURETH.

2  Sam.  20. 11.  he  that/.  Joab,  let  him  go  after  Joab

FEAR.

Fear  is  a  passion,  implanted  in  nature,  that  causes
a  flight  from  an  approaching  evil,  either  real  or
imaginary.  1  he  fear  ot  God  is  either  filial  or
servile.  The  filial  fear  of  God  is  a  holy  affec¬
tion,  or  gracious  habit  wrought  in  the  soul  by
God,  Jer.  32.  40.  whereby  it  is  inclined  and
enabled  to  obey  all  God's  commandments,  even
the  most  difficult,  Gen.  22.  12.  Eccl.  12.  13.  and
to  hate  and.  avoid  evil,  Neh.  5.  15.  Prov.  8.  13.

I  16.  6.  Slavish  fear  is  the  consequence  of  guilt ;
it  is  a  judicial  impression  from  the  sad  thoughts
of  the  provoked  Majesty  of  heaven  ;  it  is  an  alarm
within,  that  disturbs  the  rest  of  a  sinner ;  thus
Felix  feared,  Acts  24.  25.  Though  this  fear  be
in  wicked  men,  yet,  through  the  mercy  and  grace
of  God,  it  often  proves  a  preparative  to  faith.
Acts  2.  37.  Rom.  8.  15.

Fear  is  likewise  used  for  the  object  of  fear.  Ihus
it  is  said,  the  fear  of  Isaac,  to  describe  the  God
whom  Isaac  feared,  Gen.  31.  42.  Except  the  fear
of  Isaac  had  been  with  me,  surely  thou  hadst
sent  me  away  now  empty.  And  in  Prov.  1.  26.
I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh  ;  that  is,  the
calamity  you  feared.  God  says,  that  he  will  send
his  fear  before  his  people ;  that  is,  a  terror
wrought  by  him,  in  order  to  terrify  and  destroy
the  inhabitants  of  Canaan,  Exod.  23  .  27.

Fear  is  put  for  the  whole  worship  of  God,  in  Psal.
34.  11.  I  will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  I
will  teach  you  the  true  and  principal  way  of  wor¬
shipping  and  serving  God  with  his  acceptation,
and  to  your  own  salvation.  It  is  likewise  put  for
the  law  and  word  of  God,  Psal.  19.  9.  1  he  fear

of  the  Lord  is  clean,  enduring  for  ever.  I  he
law  is  so  called,  because  it  is  the  object,  the  cause,
and  the  rule,  of  the  grace  of  holy  tear.

Gen.  9.  2.  the/,  of  you  shall  be  on  every  beast
31.  42.  except  the  f.  of  Isaac  had  been  with  me
53.  Jacob  sware  by  the/,  of  his  father  Isaac
Exod.  15.  16./.  and  dread  shall  fall  upon  them
23.  27.  I  will  send  my/,  before  thee,  and  destroy
Deut.  2.  25.  I  will  put  the/,  of  thee  on  the  nations
11.  25.  the  Lord  shall  lay  the /.  of  you  on  the  land
t  Chron.  14. 17 .  Lord  brought  /.  of  him  on  nations
Ezra  3.  3.  /.  was  on  them  because  ot  the  people
Neh.  6.  14.  think  on  them  that  put  me  in  /.  19-
Esth.  8.  17.  the  /.  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  them,  9.  2.
9.  3.  because  the  /.  of  Mordecai  fell  on  them
Job  3.  t  25.  I  feared  a /.  and  it  came  upon  me
4.  6.  is  not  this  thy  /.  thy  confidence,  thy  hope  ?
14./.  came  upon  me  and  trembling
6.  14.  he  forsaketh  the /.  of  the  Almighty
0.  34.  and  let  not  his  J.  terrify  me

15.  4.  yea,  thou  castest  off/,  and  restrainest  prayer
21.  9.  houses  safe  from  /.  nor  rod  ot  God  on  them
22. 10.  snares  round  about,  sudden/,  troubleth  thee
25.  2.  dominion  and/,  are  with  him.  makes  peace
39.  22.  he  mocketh  at/,  and  is  not  affrighted

Psal.  5. 7.  in  thy/,  will  I  worship  toward  thy  temple


Psal.  9. 20.  put  them  in /.  O  Lord,  that  nations  may

14. 5.  there  were  they  in  great  /.  God  is  in  general.

31.  11.  and  I  was  a/,  to  mine  acquaintance

13./.  was  on  every  side,  they  took  counsel  ag.  me

48.  6.  /.  took  hold  upon  them  there,  and  pain
53.  5.  there  were  they  in /.  where  no/,  was
64.  1.  preserve  my  life  from/,  of  the  enemy
90.  11.  according  to  thy  /.  so  is  thy  wrath
105.  38.  for  the  f.  of  them  fell  upon  them
119.  38.  thy  servant,  w'ho  is  devoted  to  thy  /.
Prov.  1.  26.  1  will  mock  when  your  /.  cometh

27.  whenyour/.cometh  as  desolation  and  destruc.
33.  and  shall  be  quiet  from  /.  of  evil

3.  25.  be  not  afraid  of  sudden  /.  nor  desolation
10.  24.  the  /.  of  the  wicked  shall  come  upon  him

20.  2.  the  /.  of  a  king  is  as  the  roaring  or  a  lion

29.  25.  the  /.  of  man  bringeth  a  snare

Cant.  3.  8.  hath  his  sword  because  off.  in  the  night
Isa.  7.  25.  there  shall  not  come  the  /.  of  briers

8.  12.  neither  fear  ye  their  /.  nor  be  afraid

13.  the  Lord,  let  him  be  your/,  and  your  dread
14.3.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy/.

21.  4.  the  night  of  pleasure  be  turned  into/,  to  me
24. 17./.  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare  are  upon  thee

18.  that  fleeth  from/,  shall  fall,  Jer.  48.  44.

29. 13.  their  /.  toward  me  is  taught  by  men
63.  17.  and  hardened  our  heart  f'ro-.n  thy  f.

Jer. 2. 19.  an  evil  thing,  that  my  /.  is  nut  m  thee
6.  25.  the  sword  and  /.  is  on  every  side,  00.  10.

20.  +  3.  Lord  hath  called  thy  name  /.  round  about

30.  5.  we  ha<.  e  heard  a  voice  of  /.  not  of  peace

32.  40.  but  l  will  put  my  /.  in  their  hearts

48.  43.  /.  and  the  pit  shall  be  upon  thee,  O  Moab

49.5.  behold,  l  will  bring  a /.  upon  thee, saith  I..
24./.  hath  seized  on  Damascus,  anguish  and  sorr.
29.  they  shall  cry  to  them,/,  is  on  every  side

Lam.  3.  47 •/.  and  a  snare  is  come  upon  us
Ezek.  21.  +  15.  /.  of  the  sword  against  their  gates

30.  +  4.  great/,  shall  be  in  Ethiopia

13.  I  will  put  a /.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
Mai.  1.  6.  if  1  be  a  master,  where  is  ray  /.  ?

Luke  1.12.  when  Zachariassaw  him,/,  fell  upon  him

65./.  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round  about  them,  7.

16.  Acts 2.  43.  I  5.  5, 11.  I  19- 17-  Rev.  11. 11.
3. 1 14.  he  said  to  the  soldiers,  put  no  man  in  /.

Rom.  13.  7.  render/,  to  whom /.  is  due

1  Cor.  2.  3.  I  was  with  you  in  weakness  and  in  /.

2  Cor.  7.  11.  what  /.  /  what  vehement  desire  !

2  Tim.  1.  7.  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  /.

Col.  2. 1. 1 .  ye  knew  what  great  /.  1  have  tor  you
tleb.  2. 15.  and  deliver  them  who  thro’/,  of  death
12.  28.  may  serve  God  with  reverence  and  godly  /.

1  Pet.  1. 17.  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourn,  here  in  /.
3. 15.  give  an  answer  with  meekness  and/.

1  John  4. 18.  no  /.  in  love,  but  love  casteth  out/.
For  FEAR.

Deut.  28.  67.  Jor  the  /.  wherewith  thou  shalt  fear
Josh.  22.  24.  have  not  rather  done  it  for  f.  of  thing
Judg.  9.  21.  dwelt  for  f.  of  Abimelech  his  brother

1  Sam.  21. 10.  Dav.  arose,  fled  that  day  for  f.  of  Saul
23.  26.  David  made  haste  to  get  away  forf.  of  Saul

Job  22.  4.  will  he  reprove  thee  forf.  of  thee  ?

Isa.  31.  +8.  they  shall  flee  forf.  of  the  sword

9.  he  shall  pass  over  to  his  strong  hold  for  f.

Jer.  35.  11  .for  f.  of  the  army  of  the  Chaldeans
37. 11.  army  broken  up  for  f.  of  Pharaoh’s  army
41.  9.  which  Asa  had  made  for  f.  of  Baasha

46. 5.  for  f.  was  round  about,  saith  the  Lord
50. 16.  forf.  of  the  oppressing  sword  they  return

Mai.  2.  5.  for  the  f.  wherewith  he  feared  me
Mat.  14.  26.  the  disciples  cried  out  for  f.

28.  4.  for  f.  of  him  the  keepers  did  shake
l.uke  21 . 26.  men’s  hearts  failing  them  for  f.

John  7. 13.  no  man  spake  openly  for  f.  of  the  Jews

19.  38.  a  disciple,  but  secretly  for  f.  of  the  Jews
20. 19.  disciples  were  assembled  for  f.  of  the  Jews
Rev.  i8.  10.  afar  off  forf.  of  her  torment,  15.
FEAR  of  God.

Gen.  20. 11.  surely  the/,  of  God  is  not  in  this  place

2  Sam.  23.  3.  must  be  just,  ruling  in  the/,  of  God
2  Chr.  20. 29.  the  /.  of  God  was  on  all  kingdoms
Neh.  5.  9.  ouaht  ye  not  to  walk  in  the/,  of  God ?

15.  but  so  did  not  I,  because  of  the/,  of  God
Psal.  36.  1.  there  is  no/,  of  God  before  his  eyes
Rom.  3.  18.  there  is  no  /.  of  God  before  their  eyes
2  Cor.  7.  1.  perfecting  holiness  in  the/,  of  God
Eph.  5.  21.  submitting  one  to  another  in/,  of  God
FEAR  of  the  Lord.

1  Sam.  11.  7.  /.  of  Lord  fell  on  people,  2  Chr.  17-  10.

2  Chr.  14.  14.  the/,  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them

19.  7.  lei  the/,  of  the  Lord  be  upon  you,  take  heed

9.  thus  shall  ye  do,  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord,  faithfully
Job  28. 28.  to  man  he  said ,  the  /.  of  Lord  is  wisdom
Psal.  19.  9.  the/,  of  Lord  is  clean,  enduring  tor  ever

34  11.  children,  l  will  teach  you  the/,  of  the  Lord

111.  10.  /.  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom
Prov.  l.f./.  of  Ld.  beginning  of  knowledge,  9.  10.

29.  and  did  not  choose  the  f.  of  the  Lord

2.  5.  then  shalt  thou  understand  the  /.  of  the  Lord
8  13.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  to  hate  evil

10.  27.  the  f.  of  the  Lord  prolongeth  days

14.  26.  in  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence
27.  the  /.  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  life

15.  16.  better  is  a  little  with  the/,  of  the  Lord

33.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  the  instruction  ot  wisdom

16.  6.  by  the  /.  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil
19.  23.  the  f.  of  the  Lord  tendeth  to  life

22.  4.  by  the  f.  of  the  Lord  are  riches  and  honour
2T  17.  be  thou  in  the/,  of  the  Lord  all  day  long
Isa.  2.  10.  hide  thee  in  the  dust  for/,  of  the  Lord
19.  they  shall  go  into  caves  forf.  of  the  Lord
21.  to  go  into  clefts  of  rocks  for/,  of  the  Lord
11.2.  spirit  of  knowledge,  and  of  the /.  of  the  Ld.

3."  of  quick  understanding  in  the/,  of  the  I^rd
33.  6.  the  /.  of  the  Lord  is  his  treasure
Acts  9.  31.  walking  in  f.  of  the  Lord  and  comfort
With  FEAR.

Psal.  2.  11-  serve'the  Lord  with  f.  and  rejoice
Jonah  1.  t  10.  then  were  the  men  with  great/.

Mat.  28.  8.  they  departed  with  f.  and  great  joy
Luke  5.  26.  and  they  were  all  filled  withf.

8.  37.  the  Gadarents  were  taken  with  great/,

157


F  E  A


F  E  A


F  E  A


S  Cor.  7.  15.  how  with  /.  you  received  him
Eph.  6.  5.  obedient  to  masters  with  /.  and  trembling
i'hil.  2. 12.  work  out  salvation  with  f.  and  trembling
He/>.  11.7.  Noah  moved  with  /.  prepared  an  ark
1  Pet.  2.  18.  servants,  be  subject  to  masters  with  f.

3.  2.  behold  your  chaste  conversat.  coupled  withf.
Jude  23.  and  others  save  with  f.  pulling  them  out
Without  FEAR.

Job  39.  16.  her  labour  is  in  vain  without  f.

41.  33.  there  is  not  his  like,  who  is  made  without  f.
Luke  1.  74.  that  we  might  serve  him  without/.

1  Cor.  16.  10.  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  f.
Phil.  1.  14.  are  bold  to  speak  the  word  without  f.
Jude  12.  they  feast,  feeding  themselves  without  f.

FEARS.

Job  15.  +  21.  a  sound  of  f.  is  in  his  ears
Psal.  34.  4.  the  Lord  delivered  me  from  all  my  /.
Eccl  12.  5.  and  when  /.  shall  be  in  the  way
Isa.  66.  4.  and  l  will  bring  their/,  upon  them

2  Cor.  7.  5.  without  were 'fightings,  within  were  /.

FEAR,  Verb.

Lev.  19. 3.  ye  shall /.  every  man  his  mother  and  fath.
Num.  14.  9.  neither  /.  ye  the  people  of  the  land
Deut.  4.  10.  hear,  that  they  may  learn  to  /.  me

5.  29.  O  that  they  would  /.  me,  keep  my  command.
28.  58./.  this  glorious  name,  the  Lord  thy  God

66.  thou  shalt /.  day  and  night,  have  no  assurance
Of.  for  the  fear  of  heart  wherewith  thou  shalt  f.
Judg.  7. 10.  if  thou /.  to  go  down,  go  with  Phurah

1  Kings  8.  40.  that  they  may  /.  thee,  2  Chron.  6.  31.
43.  may  know  thy  name  t;o  /.  thee,  2  Chr.  6.  33.

2  Kings  17-  38.  neither  shall  ye  /.  other  gods

39.  but  Lord  your  God  ye  shall  /.  and  he  deliver

1  Chron.  16.  30./.  before  him  all  earth,  Psal.  96.  9.
Neh.  1.  11.  thy  servants  who  desire  to  /.  thy  name
Job  31.  34.  did  I  /.  a  great  multitude  ?

Psal.  23.  4.  1  will  /.  no  evil,  for  thou  art  with  me
27. 1.  the  Lord  is  my  salvation,  whom  shall  I  /.  ?

31.  19.  thy  goodness  laid  up  for  them  that/,  thee
40.  3.  many  shall  see  it,  and  /.  and  shall  trust  in  L.
49.  5.  wherefore  should  1/.  in  the  days  of  evil  ?

52.  6.  the  righteous  shall  see  and /.  and  laugh  at  him

60.4.  thou  hast  given  a  banner  to  them  that  /.  thee
61.  5.  the  heritage  of  those  that  /.  thy  name

64.  9.  all  shall  t.  and  declare  the  work  of  God

72.5.  they  shall  /,  thee  as  long  as  the  sun  endureth
86.  11.  unite  my  heart  to/,  thy  name

102.  15.  so  the  heathen  shall /.  thy  name
119.  39.  turn  away  my  reproach  which  1  /.

63.  1  am  a  companion  ot  all  them  that  /.  thee
74.  they  that  /.  thee  will  be  glad  when  they  see  me
79.  let  those  that /.  thee  turn  unto  me
Eccl.  3.  14.  God  doeth  it,  men  should  /.  before  him
Isa.  8. 12.  neither  /.  ye  their  fear,  nor  be  afraid
19.16.  Egypt  like  to  women,  shall  be  afraid  and  /.
25.  3.  the  city'  of  the  terrible  nations  shall  /.  thee
44.  11.  the  workmen  shall  /.  and  be  ashamed

59. 19.  so  shall  they  /.  the  name  of  the  Lord
60.  5.  thine  heart  shall  /.  and  be  enlarged

Jer.  10. 7.  who  would  not  /.  thee,  O  is  ing  of  nations  ?
23.4.  and  they  shall  /.  no  more,  nor  be  dismayed

32.  39.  will  give  them  one  heart  that  may  /.  me

33.  9.  they  shall /.  and  tremble  for  all  the  goodness
51.  46.  lest  your  heart  faint,  and  ye  /.  for  rumour

Dan.  1. 10.  the  prince  said,  1/.  my  lord  the  king

6.  26.  that  men  /.  before  the  God  of  Daniel
Hos.  10.  5.  the  inhabitants  of  Samaria  shall  /.
Mic.7.  17*  move  as  worms,  and/,  because  of  thee
Zeph.  3.  7-  I  said,  surely  thou  wilt/,  me

Hag.  1. 12.  and  the  people  did  /.  before  the  Lord
Zech.  9.5.  Ashkelon  shall  see  it  and  /.  Gaza  also  see
Mai.  4.  2.  to  you  that  /.  my  name  snail  sun  of  right.
Mat.  21.26.  if  we  shall  say,  of  men,  we  /.  the  people
Luke  12.  5.  1  will  forew  arn  you  whom  ye  snail  /.
Horn.  8. 15.  not  received  spirit  of  bondage  again  to /.

11.20.  be  not  high-minded,  but  /.

2  Cor.  11.  3.  1  /.  lest  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve
12.20. 1  /.  lest  I  shall  not  find  you  such  as  I  would

1  Tim.  5.  20.  rebuke  before  all,  that  others  may  /.
HebA.l.  let  us/,  lest  promise  being  left  us  of  entering
12.  21.  Moses  said,  1  exceedingly  /.  and  ciuake
Rev.  2.  IO.  /.  none  of  those  things  thou  shalt  suffer

11.  18.  give  reward  to  them  that /.  thy  name

FEAR  God.

Gen.  42. 18.  he  said,  this  do,  and  live,  for  1  /.  God
Exod.  18.  21.  provide  able  men,  such  as /.  God
l.ev.  19. 14.  but  shalt  /.  thy'  God,  l  am  the  Lord,  32.
25. 17-  but  thou  shalt  /.  thy  God,  36,  43.

Job  1.  9.  Satan  said,  doth  lob /.  God  for  nought?
Psal.  66.  16.  come  and  hear,  all  ye  that /.  God
Eccl.  5-7-  in  words  are  vanities,  but  /.  thou  God
8.  12.  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  /.  God

12.  13./.  Goa',  and  keep  his  commandments
Isa.  29.  23.  and  they  shall  /.  the  God  of  Israel
Luke  2.3.40.  rebuked  him,  saying,  dost  not  /.  God?
Acts  13.  16.  and  ye  that  /.  God  give  audience

1  Pet.  2.  17.  honour  men,/.  God,  honour  the  king
Rev.  14.7*  saying,/.  God,  and  give  glory  to  him

Hear  and  FLAK.

Deut.  13.  11.  all  Israel  shall  hear  and  f.  21.  21.

17.  13.  and  all  the  people  shall  hear  and f.

19.  20.  those  which  remain  shall  hear  and/.
FEAR  him,

Gen.  32.  11.  deliver  me  from  Esau,  for  1  /.  him,
Deut.  13.  4.  ye  shall  walk  after  God,  and  /.  him

2  Kings  17-  36.  him  shall  ye  /.  him  shall  ye  worship
Job  37.  24.  men  therefore/,  him,  he  respecteth  not
Psal.  22.  23.  and/,  him  all  ye  the  seed  of  Israel

25.  1  will  pay  my  vows  before  them  that/,  him
25.  14.  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that/,  him
33.  18.  the  eye  of  the  Lord  is  on  them  that  f.  him
34.7.  angel  encampeth  about  them  that/,  him
9.  for  there  is  no  want  to  them  that  /.  him
67-  7-  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  /.  him
85.  9  surely  his  salvation  is  nigh  them  that  /.  him
103. 11.  great  is  his  meicv  to  them  that /.  him
13.  so  tee  Lord  pitieth  them  that/,  him
17.  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  on  them  that  /.  him
111.  5.  he  hath  given  meat  to  them  that /.  him
145.  19.  he  wilt  fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that/,  him
147.  11.  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  them  that/,  him
Mat.  10.  28./.  him  who  is  able  to  destroy,  Luke  12. 5.

158


Luke  1. 50.  his  mercy  is  on  them  that /.  him
Rev.  19.5.  praise  God,  ye  that /.  him,  small  and  great
FEAR  the  Lord.

Deut.  6.  2.  that  thou  mightest/.  the  Lord  thy  God

13.  thou  shalt /.  L.  thy  God,  10.  20. 2  Kings  17. 39.

24.  to  /.  the  Lord  our  God  for  our  good  always

10.  12.  f.  the  Lord,  walk  in  his  ways,  and  love  him

14.  23.  learn  to  /.the  Lord,  17 .  19.  I  31.  12,  13.

Josh  4.  24.  that  ye  might /.  the  Lord  your  God

24. 14.  now  therefore  /.  the  Lord,  and  serve  him

1  Kam.  12.  14.  if  ye  will  /.  the  Lord,  and  ser>  e  him
24.  only  /.  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in  truth

1  Kings  18.  12.  I  thy  servant /.  the  L.  2  Kims  4.  1.

2  Kings  17.  28.  taught  them  how  they  should /.  L.
Psal.  lb.  4.  he  honoureth  them  that/,  the  L.

22.  23.  ye  that  /.  the  Lord,  praise  him

33.  8.  let  all  the  earth /.  the  Lord,  and  stand  in  awe

34.  9.  O /.  the  Lord,  ye  his  saints,  there  is  no  want
115.  11.  ye  that  /.  the  Lord,  trust  in  the  Lord

13.  he  w  ill  bless  them  that/,  the  Lord

118.  4.  that /.  the  Lord,  say,  his  mercy  endureth
135.  20.  ye  that  /.  the  Lord,  bless  the  Lord
Prov.  3.  7-/.  the  Lord,  and  depart  from  evil

24.  21.  my  son,/,  thou  the  Lord,  and  the  king
Jer.  5.  24.  neither  say  they,  let  us  /.the  Lord

26.  19.  did  he  not  /.  the  Lord,  and  besought  Lord  ?
Hos.  3.  5.  afterward  shall  Israel/,  the  Lord
Jonah  1.  9.  and  I  /.  the  Lord,  the  God  of  heaven
FEAR  not.

Gen.  15.1./.  not,  Abram,  1  am  thyshield  and  reward

21.  17-  /.  not,  God  hath  heard  the  voice  of  the  lad
26.  24./.  not,  I  am  w  ith  thee,  and  will  bless  thee

35.  17.  the  midwife  said  to  Rachel,/.  not

43.  23.  and  he  said,  peace  be  to  you,/,  not
46.  3.  he  said,/,  not  to  go  down  into  Egypt

50.  19.  Joseph  said,/,  net,  for  am  1  in  place  of  God
21./.  not,  1  will  nourish  you  and  your  little  ones

Exod.  14.  13./.  not,  stand  and  see  salvation  of  Ld.

20.  20.  Moses  said,  /.  not,  God  is  come  to  prove
Num.  14.  9.  the  Lord  is  w  ith  us,  /,  them  not

21.  31.  the  Lord  said  to  Moses,/  him  not
Deut.  1.  21.  go  up  and  possess  the  land,/,  not
3.  2.  /.  n  t  ()g,  22.  |i  20.  3./.  not  your  enemies

31.  6./.  not  the  Canaanites,  Josh.  10.  8,  25.

8.  the  Lord  will  go  before  thee,  he  w  ill  not  for¬
sake  thee,/,  not,  Josh.  8.  1.1  Chron.  28.  20.
Judg.  4. 18.  turn  in,  my  lord,  turn  in  to  me,  /.  not
6.  10.  I  said,/,  not  the  gods  of  the  Amorites
23.  peace  be  to  thee,/,  not,  thou  shalt  not  die
Ruth  3.  11.  and  now,  my  daughter,/,  not

1  Sam.  4.  20.  women  that  stood  by  said  to  her,/,  not

12.  20.  and  Samuel  said  to  the  people,/,  not

22.  23.  abide  thou  with  me,/,  not,  he  that  seeKetb

23.  17.  Jonathan  said  unto  David,/,  not

2  Sam.  9.  7-  David  said  to  Mephibosheth,/.  not

13.  28.  he  said  to  his  servants,  kill  Ainnon,/.  not

1  Kings  17.  13.  Elijah  said  to  the  widow,/,  not

2  Kings  6.  16./.  not  more  with  us  than  with  them

17.  34.  unto  this  day,  they  f.  not  the  Lord

25.  24./.  not  to  serve  Chaldees,  Jer.  40.  9.

2  Chron.  20.  17.  the  Lord  will  be  with  you,/,  not
Psal.  55.  19.  no  changes,  therefore  they  /.  not  God
64.  4.  suddenly  do  they  shoot  at  him,  and/,  not
Isa.  7.  4./.  not  the  tails  of  smoking  firebrands
35.  4.  say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart,/,  not
41.  10./.  thouKoz,  for  I  am  with  thee,  43.5.

1.3.  for  1  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hold  thy  right
hand,  saying  to  thee,/,  not,  1  will  help  thee

14.  /.  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Isr.

43.  1./.  not,  I  have  redeemed  thee,  thou  art  mine

44.  2./.  riot,  O  Jacob  my  servant,  and  Jeshurun

whom  I  have  chosen,  Jer.  30.  10. 1  46.  27,  28.
8.  /.  ye  not,  nor  be  afraid,  have  not  1  told  thee  ?

51.  7-  hearken  to  me,/,  net  the  reproach  of  men
54.  4.  /.  not,  for  thou  shalt  not  be  ashamed

Jer.  5.  22./.  ye  not  me,  saith  the  Lord  ?

Lam.  3.  57.  thou  drewedst  near,  thou  saidst,/.  not
Ezek.  3.  9.  /.  not,  nor  be  dismayed  at  their  looks
Dan.  10.  12.  then  said  he  to  me,/,  not,  Daniel,  19.
Joel  2.  21./.  not,  O  land,  be  glad  and  rejoice
Zeph.  3. 16.  it  shall  be  said  to  Jerusalem,/,  not
Hag.  2. 5.  my  Spirit  reinaineth  among  you,/,  not
Zech.  8.  13.  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing,/,  not

15.  again  1  will  do  well  to  Judah, /.  ve  not
Mai.  3.  5.  a  swift  witness  ag.  them  that  f.  not  me
Mat.  1.  20./.  not  to  take  to  thee  Mary  thy  wife

10.  26./.  them  net,  there  is  nothing  covered
28.  and /.  not  them  which  kill  the  body
31./.  not,  ye  are  of  more  value,  Luke  12.  7.

28.  5.  the  angel  said  to  the  women,/,  not
Luke  1.  13./.  not,  Zacharias,  |i  39./.  not,  Mary
2.  10.  to  the  shepherds,/,  not.  ||  5.  10.  Simon,/,  not

8.  50.  Jairus,/.  not  ||  12.  32.  /.  not,  little  flock

18.  4.  though  1/  not  God,  nor  regard  man
John  12.  15./.  not,  daughter  of  Sion,  behold

Acts  27. 24./.  not,  Paul,  thou  must  be  before  Cesar
Rev.  1.  17-  /.  not,  I  am  the  first  and  the  last
Not  FEA  R.

Exod.  9.  30.  I  know  ye  will  not  yet /.  the  Lord
2  Kings  17.  35.  ye  shall  not  f.  other  gods,  .37.

Job  9.  35.  then  would  1  speak,  and  not  f.  him

11. 15.  put  iniquity  faraway,  then  thou  shalt  not  f.
Psal.  27.3.  tbp’  an  host  encamp,  my  heart  shall  net  f.
46.  2.  we  will  not  f.  though  the  earth  be  removed
56.  4.  I  will  net  f.  what  flesh  can  do,  118.  6.

l  a.  54.  14.  far  from  oppression,  thou  shalt  not  f.
Jer.  10.  7-  who  would  not/,  thee,  O  King  of  nations?
Amos  3.  8.  the  lion  hath  roared,  who  will  not  f.  ?
Luke  23.  40.  the  other  said,  dost  not  thou  /.  God  ?
Heb.  13.6.  I  will  not  f.  whatman  shall  do  to  me
Rev.  15. 4.  who  shall  not  f.  thee,  O  L.  and  glorify  ?
FEARED.

Gen.  19.  30.  Lot/,  to  dwell  in  Zoar,  dwelt  in  a  cave

26.  7-  Isaac/,  to  say  of  Rebekah,  she  is  my  wife
Exod.  2.  14.  Moses  /.and  said,  this  thing  is  known

9.  20.  he  that /.  the  word  of  the  Ld.  made  servants
Deut.  25.  18.  Amalek  smote  thee,  and  /.  not  God

32.  17.  to  new  gods  whom  your  fathers  /.  not

27.  were  it  not  that  1  /.  the  wrath  of  the  enemy

Josh.  4 . 14.  they/.  Joshua  as  they  did  Moses
Judg.  6.  27.  Gideon  /.  11  8.  20.  J ether  /.  to  slay  them
1  Sam.  3.  15.  Samuel  /.  to  shew  Eli  the  vision


1  Sam.  14. 26. honey  dropped,  for  tht  peop./.the  3ath

15.  24.  because  1  /.  the  people,  and  obeyed  them

2  Sam.  3.  11.  Ish-bosheth  not  answer,  he  J.  Aimer

10.  19.  the  Syrians /.  to  help  Ammon  any  more

12.  18.  David’s  serv. /.  to  tell  him  child  was  dead

1  Kings  1.  50.  Adonijah  /.  because  of  Solomon

3.  28.  all  Isr.  heard  the  judgment,  and/,  the  king

2  Kings  17.  7-  /•  other  gods  11  25.  they  /.  not  the  L.

1  Chron.  16.  25.  to  be /.  above  all  gods,  Psal.  96.  4.

2  Chron.  20.  3.  Jehoshaphat/.  and  proclaim,  a  fast
Job  32.  +6.  Elihu  said,  1/  to  shew  mine  opinion.
Psal.  14.  f  5.  there  they  J.  a  great  fear,  53.  +  5.

76.  7.  thou,  even  thou,  art  to  be /.  |l  8.  the  earth  f.

11.  bring  presents  to  him  that  ought  to  he  j.

78.  53.  he  led  them  safely,  so  that  they  /.  not
130.  4.  there  is  forgiveness,  that  thou  mayest  be  f .
Isa.  41 .  5.  the  isles  saw  it  and /.  the  ends  of  the  earth
51.  13.  and  hast /.  continually  every  day-
57.  11.  whom  hast  thou /.  that  thou  hast  lied
Jer.  3.  8.  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  /.  not

42. 16.  the  sword  which  ye.  /.  shall  overtake  you
44.  10.  they  are  not  humbled,  nor  have  they/.
Ezek.  11.  8.  ye  have/,  the  sword,  1  will  biingit
Dan.  5.  19.  all  people  and  nations/,  before  him
Mai.  2.  5.  for  the  fear  wherewith  he  /.  me
Mat.  14.  5.  Herod/,  the  multitude,  21.  46.

Mark  A.  41.  and  they  /.  exceedingly,  and  said
6.  20.  Herod/.  John,  knowing  he  was  a  just  man

11.  18.  the  scribes  and  the  t  hief  priests /.  Jesus
32.  if  we  shall  say  of  men,  they  /.  the  people  12,

12.  Luke  20.  19.  I  22.  2.  Acts  5.  26.
Luke  9.  34.  and  they  /.  as  they  entered  into  the  cloud

45.  and  they  /.  to  ask  him  of  that  saying

18.  2.  there  was  in  a  city  a  judge  which /.  not  God-

19.  21.  1  /.  thee  because  thou  aft  an  austere  man
John  9.  22.  spake  thus,  because  they/,  the  Jews
Acts  16.  38.  the  magistrates/,  when  they  heard
Heb.  5.  7.  Christ  was  heard  in  that  he  /.

FEARED  God.

Exod.  1. 17-  but  the  mid  wives  /.  God,  saved  children
21.  because  they /.  God,  be  made  them  houses
Neh.  7.  2.  he  was  faithful,  and  /.  God  above  many
Job  1. 1.  Job  was  one  that/.  God,  and  eschewed  evil
Acts  10.  2.  Cornelius  was  one/.  God  with  his  house
FEARED  greatly
Josh.  10.  2.  the  Canaanites  /.  greatly
1  Sam.  12.  18.  all  the  people  greatly  f.  the  Lord

1  Kings  18.3.  now  Obadiah/.  the  Lord  greatly
Job  3.  25.  the  tiling  1  greatly  f.  is  come  upon  me
Psal.  89.  7-  God  is  greatly  to  be /.  in  the  assembly
Mat.  27.  54.  centurion  and  they  wdth  him  /.greatly

FEARED  the  Lord.

Exod.  14.31 .  the  people /.  the  L.  and  believed  Moses

2  Kings  17.  32.  so  they  /.  the  Lord,  33,  41.

Hos.  10.  3.  no  king,  because  we/,  not  the  Lord
Jonah  1.16.  the  men  /.  the  Lard  exceedingly
Mai.  3.  16.  they  that/.  I,,  spake  oft  one  lo  another,

a  book  of  remembrance  for  them  that  /.  the  Lord:
FEAREST.

Gen.  22.  12.  for  now  I  know  that  thou/.  God
Isa.  57.  11.  of  whom  afraid  or  feared,  have  not  1
held  my  peace  even  of  old,  and  thou  /.  me  not:
Jer.  22.  25.  give  thee  into  hand  of  them  thou  f.
FEAREI  H.

1  Kings 1.  51.  behold,  Adonijah /.  king  Solomon
Job  1.  8.  Job,  one  that  /.  G.  and  escheweth  evil, 2. 3.
Psal.  25.  12.  what  man  is  he  that  /.  the  Lord  ?
112.  1.  blessed  is  the  man  that/,  the  Lord
128.  1.  blessed  is  every  one  that /.  the  Lord
4.  thus  shall  the  man  be  blessed  that  /.  the  Lord
Prov.  13. 13.  that /.  the  commandment  be  rewarded

14.  2.  he  that  walketh  in  his  uprightness /.  Lord

16.  a  wise  man  /.  and  departeth  from  evil

28.  14.  happy  is  the  man  that/,  always
31.  30.  woman  that  /.  the  Lord  shall  be  praised
Eccl.  7 •  18.  that/.  God  shall  come  forth  ot  them  all

8.  13.  because  trie  wicked  f.  not  before  God

9.  2.  he  that  sweareth,  as  he  that /.  an  oath
Isa.  50.  10.  who  is  among  you  that /.  the  I/ird
Acts  10.  22.  Cornelius  just,  and  one  that /.  God

35.  he  that /.  him,  is  accepted  with  him

13.  26.  and  whosoever  among  you  /.  God

1  John  4.  18.  he  that /.  is  not  perfect  in  love
FEARING.

Josh.  22.  25.  our  children  cease  from/,  the  Lord
Mark  5.  33.  the  w'oman  /.  and  trembling  came
Acts  23.  10.  the  chief  captain  /.  lest  Paul  be  pulled

27.  17-/.  lest  they  fall  into  the  quicksands,  29.
Gal.  2.  12./.  them  which  were  of  the  circumcision
Col.  3.  22.  but  in  singleness  of  heart  /.  God
Heb.  11.  27.  forsook  Egypt,  not  /.  wrath  of  the  king1

FEARFUL.

Exod.  15. 11.  O  Lord,  who  is  like  thee,/,  in  praise;
Deut.  20. 8.  what  man  is/,  let  him  return,  Judg.  7 ■  3,

28.  58.  mayest  fear  this/,  name,  the  Lord  thy'  God
La.  35.  4.  say  to  them  ofa  /.  heart,  be  strong
Mat.  8.  26.  why  are  ye  /.  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?
Mark  4.  40.  he  said  to  them,  why  are  ye  so /.  ?
Luke  21.  11./.  sights  shall  be  in  divers  places
lleb.  10.  27.  a  certain  /.  looking  for  of  judgment

31.  /.  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God
Rev.  21.  8.  the/,  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake
FEARFULNESS.

Psal.  55.  5.  /.  and  trembling  are  come  upon  me
Isa.  21.  4.  my  heart  panted,  /.  affrighted  me

33.  14.  /.  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites
FEA R FULLY.

Psal.  139.  14.  1  am /.  and  wonderfully'  made
FEAST.

God  out  0/  his  great  wisdom  appointed  several  fes
tivals  among  the  Jews  /or  many  reasons.  1.  7 it
perpetuate  the  memory  0/  those  great  events  ana
wonders  which  he  had  wrought  in  J'avour  0/  his
people :  the  Sabbath  brought  to  remembrance
the  creation  0/  the  world;  the  Passover,  the  de¬
parture  out  0/  'Egypt;  the  Pentecost,///  lan-
given  at  Sinai,  <Scc.  2.  To  keep  them  .firm  to
their  religion  ;  with  the  i  iew  0/  ceremonies  ana
the  majesty  0/  divine  service.  3.  To  give  them
instruction ;  J'or  in  their  religious  assemblies
the  law  of  God  was  read  and  explained.  4.  1°
renew  the  acquaintance,  correspondence,  anc


FE  A


FE  A


FEE


riendship  of  their  tribes  and  families  with  one
mother,  by  coming  from  the  several  towns  in  the
ountry .  and  meeting  three  times  a  year  in  the
■o/y  city.

,.  Hebrews  had  a  great  number  of  feasts.  I  he
irrt,  and  most  ancient  of  all,  was  the  sabbath,  or
he  seventh  day  of  the  week,  instituted  to  preserve
he  memory  of  the  worth's  creation,  Gen.  2.  3.
\n  I  Hod  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and  sancti-
ied  it,  because  in  it  he  haa  rested  from  all  his
vork.  Commentators  are  not  agreed  about  the
irst  institution  if  the  sabhain :  many  are  if
pinion  that  the  sabbath  hath  been  observed  among
he  righteous  from  the  beginning  of  the  world:  that
to-  ancients  having  preserved  the  memory  of  the
-!  cation,  observed  the  sabbath  also ,  in  consequence
f  the  natural  law  which  obliged  them  thereto.
<ome  are  of  opinion,  that  /  eop/e  d/d  not  begin  to
ease  from  work  upon  that  day.  til!  after  the  com-
rand  which  God  gave  the  Israelites  to  that  pur¬
pose,  some  time  after  their  coming  cut  of  Egypt,
then  they  were  encampet  at  Marah.

<e  Sabbatical  Year,  which  returned  every  seven
/ears,  and  was  entirely  set  apart  for  rest :  ■ and
lubilee  year,  which  was  at  the  end  of  seven  times
seven  years,  or  of  the  forty-ninth  year,  were  sorts
sf  feasts  too,  and  may  be  considered  as  conse¬
quences  of  the  sabbath.

ie  Passover  was  celebrated  on  the  fourteenth,  or
■other  fifteenth,  day  of  the  first  month  in  the  eccle¬
siastical  year,  which  was  the  seventh  of  the  civil
i/ear.  The  feast  began  after  noon  on  the  four¬
teenth,  and  was  celebrated  properly  on  the  fifteenth
jo f  N  isan  :  it  lasted  seven  days.  But  the  first  and
'ast  days  only  of  the  octave  were  days  of  rest,
Exod.  12. 14,  Arc.  See  Passover.
ie  feast  of  Pentecost  was  celebrated  on  the  fiftieth
day  after  the  Passover,  in  memory  of  the  laws
being  given  to  Moses  on  mount  Sinai  fifty  days,  or
seven  weeks,  after  the  departure  out  of  Egypt.  See
Pentecost.

ie  feast  of  Trumpets  was  celebrated  at  the  begin¬
ning,  or  on  the  first  day,  of  the  civil  year ,  upon
which  a  trumpet  was  sounded,  proclaiming  the  be¬
gin?- /ng  of  the  year,  which  was  in  the  month  Tisri,
answering  to  our  September.  This  day  was  kept
solemn  ,  all  servile  business  was  forbid  to  be  done
upon  it  ;  and  particular  sacrifices  were  offered,

1  ev.  23.  24,  25.  The  Scripture  does  not  acquaint
{ us  with  the  occasion  of  appointing  this  feast.
Theodoret  believes,  it  was  in  memory  of  the  thun¬
der  and  lightning  upon  mount  Sinai,  when  God
gave  his  law  from  hence.  ’The  Rabbins  will  have
it,  that  it  was  in  remembrance  of  the  deliverance
of  Isaac,  in  whose  stead  a  ram  was  sacrificed  by
Abraham.  Others  say,  that  as  the  seventh  day
of  every  week  was  a  sabbath,  and  every  seventh
year  was  to  be  kept  as  a  holy  sabbatical  year,  so
the  seventh  month  was  to  be  holy  in  some  singular
manner  above  the  rest  of  the  months,  for  the  many
sabbaths  and  solemn  feasts  that  were  to  be  observed
in  this  more  than  any  other  month  ;  such  as  the
feast  of  Expiation,  and  of  Tabernacles.

lie  New  Moons,  or  first  days  of  every  month, were
in  some  sort  a  consequence  of  the  feast  of  1  rum-
pets.  And  though  these  were  not  reckoned  among
the  solemn  feasts  in  Lev.  23.  yet  were  celebrated
as  such,  by  the  sound  of  trumpets,  N  um.  10.  10.
by  extraordinary  sacrifices,  Mum.  28.  11,  12,  &c.
by  abstaining  fiom  servile  works,  Amos  8.  5.  and
by  attendance  upon  the  ministry  of  God's  word,

2  Kings  4.  23.  Upon  these  days  also  some  sort  of
entertainments  were  made,  1  Sam.  20.  5,  18.  And
God  ordained  it  thus,  that  by  giving  him  the  first-
fruits  of  every  month  they  should  acknowledge  him
as  the  Lord  of  alt  their  time,  and  own  his  provi¬
dence,  by  which  all  times  and  seasons  are  ordered.
he  feast  of  Expiation,  or  Atonement,  was  kept
upon  the  tenth  day  of  the  month  Tisri,  or  Septem¬
ber.  The  Hebrews  call  it  Kippur,  or  Chippur,
that  is,  pardon,  or  expiation,  because  it  was  in¬
stituted  for  the  expiation  of  all  the  sins,  irrever¬
ences,  and  pollutions  of  all  the  Israelites,  from  the
high  priest  to  the  lowest  of  the  people,  committed
by  them  throughout  the  whole  year.  Upon  this
day  they  fasted  strictly,  and  offered  several  sacri¬
fices.  The  high  priest,  after  he  had  washed  not
only  his  hands  and  his  feet,  as  usual  in  common
sacrifices ,  but  his  whole  body,  dressed  himself  in
plain  linen,  like  the  rest  of  the  priests.  He  then
neither  wore  his  purple  robe,  nor  the  ephod,  nor  the
breastplate,  because  he  was  going  to  expiate  his
own  and  the  people's  sitis.  lie  first  of  all  offered
a  bullock  and  a  ram  for  his  own  sins,  and  those  of
all  the  other  priests.  lie  put  his  hands  upon  the
heads  of  these  victims,  and  confessed  his  own  sins,
and  the  sins  of  his  house  :  then  he  received  from  the
princes  of  the  people  two  goals  fur  a  sin-offering,
and  a  ram  for  a  burnt-offering,  to  be  offered  in  the
name  of  all  the  multitude.  Lev.  16.  2.  3,  ike.  As
to  the  ceremonies  used  with  the  goats,  see  Offer¬
ing.

tiie  feast  of  Tents  or  Tabernacles.  See  Taber¬
nacle.

Betides  these  feasts  mentioned  hy  Moses,  we  find  the
teast  ot  Lot3,  or  Puriin,  which  was  celebrated  among
the  Jews  of  Shusban,  on  the  fourteenth  day  if
Adar  ;  and  among  the  other  people  of  the  Persian
empire  cn  the  fifteenth  of  the  same  month,  which
answers  to  our  Februaiy,  Esth.  9-21.  The  Jews
observe  the  first  of  these  days  with  fasting  and
crying ,  and  other  expressions  of  vehement  grief  and
fear  ;  and  the  latter  with  thanksgiving ,  and  all  de¬
monstrations  of  joy  and  triumph.  See  PURIM.

I  he  feast  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Temple,  or
rather  of  the  restoration  of  the  temple,  which  had
been  piofaned  by  Antioch  us  Epiphanes,  which
is  thought  to  he  the  feast  mentioned  in  the  gos¬
pel,  John  10.  22.  was  celebrated  in  the  winter.
Joseph  us  says,  it  was  called  the  feast  of  Lights  ;
probably  this  happiness  befell  them  when  they
least  expected  it ;  and  they  looked  upon  it  as  a


new  light  that  had  risen  upon  them,  Joseph.
Antiq.  lib.  12.  cap.  11.  'There  is  an  account
of  this  dedication  in  1  Maccab.  4.  52,  54,  55,
&c.  where  it  is  related,  that  Judas  Maccabeus
and  his  brethren  having  defeated  the  am/y  of
Gorgias,  they  went  directly  to  the  temple  of  Jeru¬
salem,  which  they  found  forsaken  and  profaned,
so  that  the  courts  tvere  full  of  thick  bushes  and
brambles,  the  doors  were  burnt,  the  attar  pro¬
faned,  and  the  buildings  in  ruins.  After  having
shed  abundance  of  tears  on  this  occasion,  they
began  to  clean  every  thing,  and  employed  the
priests  in  demolishing  the  altar  which  had  been
polluted;  and  erected  another  of  rough  stone.
They  refitted  the  holy  place  and  the  sanctuary,
and  placed  therein  the.  candlestick,  the  table  of
shew- bread,  and  the  altar  of  perfumes.  'They
kindled  the  lamps,  put  the  loaves  upon  the  sacred
table,  set  the  incense  on  fire,  offered  sacrifices
and  burnt-offerings ,  and  performed  the  dedication
of  the  temple  in  eight  days,  with  all  the  so¬
lemnity  that  circumstances  would  allow  of.  After
which  Judas  Maccabeus  made  it  a  law,  that  the
feast  should  he  kept  yearly  for  eight  days,  in
memory  of  that  mercy  which  God  had  shewed
them.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  it  was  during
this  feast  our  Saviour  was  at  Jerusalem.  It  was
celebrated  upon  the  twenty-fifth  and  following  days
of  the  month  Casleu,  which  answers  to  our  Mo-
vember  and  December,  and  it  is  therefore  said,
that  it  was  winter.

Love-feasts,  or  feasts  of  charity,  were  used  among
the  primitive  Christians  in  the  public  meetings
of  the  church,  to  shew  their  unity  among  them¬
selves,  to  promote  and  maintain  mutual  charity ,
and  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  among  them,  at  the
close  whereof  they  administered  the  Lord's  supper,

J  ude  12.  But  these  feasts  being  abused,  some
think  that  the  apostle  Paul  abolished  them,  1  Cor.

11.  21,  22,  34.

In  the  Christian  church  we  have  no  festival  that
appears  clearly  to  have  been  instituted  by  Christ
Jesus,  or  his  apostles.  Nevertheless,  as  some  say,
our  Saviour  seems  to  have  instituted  a  feast,  in  a
perpetual  memory  of  his  passion  and  death,  when
he  instituted  the  sacrament  of  bread  and  wine  as
symbols  of  his  body  and  blood,  and  pledges  of
spiritual  blessings.  Christians  have  always  cele¬
brated  the  memory  of  Christ's  resurrection,  and
keep  this  feast  on  every  first  day  of  the  week  ;
which  day  was  called  the  Lord’s  day,  even  so
early  asm  St.  John's  time  ;  Rev.  1.  10.  1  was  in
the  Spirit  on  the  lord's  day.

Gen.  19.  3.  Lot  made  a  /.  ||  21.8.  Abraham  made  a  /.
26.  30.  Isaac  made  a /.  |l  29.  22.  Laban  made  a /.
40.  20.  Pharaoh  made  a /.  to  all  his  servants
Exud.  5.  1.  that  they  may  hold  a /.  unto  me,  10.  9.

12.  14.  you  shall  keep  it  a/.  Lev.  23.  39,  41.

13.  6.  the  seventh  da.v  shall  be  a /.  to  the  Lord
23.  14.  three  times  thou  shah  keep  a  f.  in  the  year

16.  the  /.  of  harvest,  the  first-fruits  of  thy  labours
32.  5.  Aaron  said,  to-morrow  is  a /.  to  the  Lord

A 'um.  28. 17-  the  fifteenth  day  of  this  month  is  the /.
29.  12.  ye  shall  keep  a  /.  to  the  Lord  seven  days
l)eut,  16.  14.  and  thou  sbalt  rejoice  in  thy/.

Judg.  14.  10.  and  Samson  made  there  a  f.

12.  declare  it  within  the  seven  days  of  the/.

17.  and  she  wept  before  him  while  their/,  lasted

1  Sam.  9. 1 12.  there  is  a/,  to-day  in  the  high  place
20.  t  6.  there  is  a  yearly  /.  for  all  the  family

25.  36.  Mabal  held  a/,  in  his  house  like  a  king

2  Sam.  3.  20.  David  made  Abner  and  his  men  a /.

1  Kings  3.  15.  Solomon  made  a /.  to  his  serv.  8. 65.

8.  2.  all  the  men  of  Israel  assembled  at  the  /.

12.  32.  Jeroboam  ordained  a/,  like  to  the /.  that  is
in  Judah,  and  he  offered  upon  the  altar
33.  he  ordained  a  /.  to  the  children  of  Israel

2  Chr.  5.  3.  the/,  in  the  seventh  month,  Neh.  8. 14.
7.  8.  Solomon  kept  the/,  seven  days,  and  all  Israel

with  him,  9.  1  30.  22.  Neh.  8.  18.  l  '.zek.  45.  25.
Esth.  1.  3.  Ahasuerus  made  a /.  5.  1  2.  18.

9.  Vashti  made  a/.  ||  8.  17-  the  Jews  had  a/.
Prov.  15.  15.  a  merry  heart  hath  a  continual  /.
£cc/.10.19./.is  made  for  laughter, wine  makes  merry
Isa.  25.  6.  the  Lord  shall  make  to  all  people  a /.
Jer.  16.  +  5.  enter  not  the  house  of  mourning  /.
Ezek.  45.  23.  seven  days  of  the /.  he  shall  prepare
Dan.  5.  1.  Belshazzar* the  king  made  a  great  /.
Mat.  27.  15.  at  that  /.  the  governor  was  wont  to
release  to  the  people  a  prisoner,  Mark  15.  6.
Luke  2.  42.  they  went  up  after  the  custom  of  the  /.

5.  29-  Levi  made  him  a  great /.  in  his  house

14.  13.  but  when  thou  makesta  /.  call  the  poor
23.  17.  he  must  release  one  unto  them  at  the  /.

John  2.  8.  draw,  and  hear  to  the  governor  of  the/.

9.  when  the  ruler  of  the /.  tasted  the  water

4.  45.  tlie  Galileans  having  seen  all  that  tie  did  at

the/,  at  Jerusalem,  for  they  also  went  to  the/.

5.  1.  after  this  there  was  a/,  of  the  Jews

6.  4.  the  passover,  a /.  of  the  Jews,  was  nigh

7.  8.  go  ye  up  to  this /.  1  go  not  up  yet  to  this/.

10.  then  went  he  also  up  to  the  /.  not  openly

11.  then  the  Jews  sought  him  at  the/,  and  said
14.  now  about  the  midst  of  the  /.  Jesus  taught
37.  in  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the/.

10.  22.  it  was  at  Jerusalem  the  f.  of  dedication
11. 56.  what  think  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to/.  ?

12.  12.  next  day  much  people  that  were  come  to/.
20.  certain  Greeks  among  them  that  came  to/.

13.  29.  buy  what  we  have  need  of  against  the/.
Acts  18.  21.  1  must  by  all  means  keep  this/.

1  Cor.  5.  8.  let  us  keep  the  /.  not  with  old  leaven
10.  27.  if  any  that  believe  not  bid  you  to  a/.

F HAS  I  -day,  days.

I  Jos.  2.  11.  1  will  also  cause  her  f.-days  to  cease
9.  5.  what  will  ye  do  in  day  of  the/,  ot  the  Lord  ?
Amos  5.  21.  1  hate,  1  despise  your  f.-days
Mat.  26.  5.  they  said,  not  on  the  f.-day.  Mark  14.  2.
John  2.  23.  in  the  f.-day  many  believed  in  his  name
FEAS  I  of  the  passover.

Exod.  34.  25.  nor  the  sacrifice  of/,  of  passover  be  left
Mat.  26.2.  after  two  davs  is  /.  of  passover,  Mark  14.1.


Luke  2.  41 .  every  year  at  /.  of  pass  his  parents  went
John  13. 1.  before/,  of  passover  Jesus  knew  his  hour
Solemn  FEAST.

Deut.  16.  15.  seven  days  shall  thou  keep  a  solemn  f.
Psal.  81. 3.  blow  the  trumpet  on  our  solemn  /.-da}
Lam.  2.  7.  made  a  noise  as  m  the  solemn  /.-day
FEAST  of  tabernacles.

Lev.  23.  31.  the  fifteemh  day  shall  be  /.  of  taber.
Dent.  16.  13.  thou  shalt  observe  /.  of  tab.  seven  days
16.  three  times  appear  in  f.  of  tabernacles,  31.  10.

2  Chr  on.  8.  13.

Ezra  3.  4.  they  kept  /.  of  tabernac.  as  it  is  written
Zech.  14.  16.  shall  even  go  up  to  keep /.  of  tabernac.

18.  heathen  that  come  not  to  keep  /.  of  taber.  19.
John  7.  2.  now  the  Jews’  /.  of  tabernac.  was  at  hand
FEAST  <f  unleavened  bread.

Exod.  12. 17.  yeshall  obs./.  of  uni.  hr.  23. 15.  1  34.18.
Lev.  23.  6.  and  on  fifteenth  day  is  /.  of  unleav.  br.
Deut.  16.  16.  appear  in/,  of  uni.  br.  2  Chr.  8.  13.

2  Chr.  30.  13.  people  assembled  to  keep  /.  of  uni.  br.

21.  children  of  lsr.  kept  /.  of  uni.  hr.  seven  days
35. 17 ./.  of  un.  b.  seven  days, Ezra  6.22.  Ezek.  45.21.
Mat.  2b.  17.  first  day  of/,  of  uni.  br,  disciples  came
Mark  14.1.  after  two  days  was /.  of  un.br.  Luke  22.1.

F  E A  S  I’  of  weeks.

Exod.  34.  22.  thou  shalt  obs./.  of  w.  Deut.  16.  10.
Deut.  16.  16.  all  thy  males  appear  in  the  f.  of  weeks
2  Chr.  8.  13.  Solomon  offered  burnt  offer,  in/,  of  w,
FEAST,  ED.

Job  1.  4.  his  sons  went  and  /.  in  their  houses
2  Pet.  2.  13.  sporting,  while  they  /.  with  you
Jude  12.  these  are  spots,  when  they  /.  with  you
FEAST  l  MG.

Esth.  9.  17-  made  it  a  day  of /.  and  gladness,  18.

22.  they  should  make  them  days  of  /.  and  joy
Job  1.  5.  when  the  days  of  their  /.  were  gone
Eccl  7. 2.  of  mourning,  than  to  go  to  the  house  of  /.
Jer.  16.  8.  thou  shalt  not  go  into  the  house  of/.

FEASTS.

Lev.  23.  2.  even  these  are  my  /.  4,  37,  44.

Psal.  35.  16.  with  hypocritical  mockers  in  /.

Isa.  5. 12.  the  harp,  pipe,  and  wine  are  in  their  /.
Jer.  51.  39.  in  their  heat  1  will  make  their  /.

Ezek.  45. 17  •  the  princes  part  to  give  offerings  in  /.
46.  11.  in/,  the  meat  offering  shall  be  an  ephah
Amos  8.  10.  1  will  turn  your/,  into  mourning
Zech.  8.  19.  shall  be  joy,  gladness,  and  cheerful  /.
Mat.  23.  6.  they  love  the  uppermost  rooms  at  /.  and
chief  seats  in  synagog.  Mark  12.  39.  Luke  20.  46.
Jude  12.  these  are  spots  in  your/,  of  charity
Appointed  FEASTS.

Isa.  1.  14.  your  app.  f.  my  soul  hateth,  a  trouble
Set  FEASTS.

Nurn.  29.  39-  these  things  ye  shall  do  in  your  set  f.

1  Chron.  23.  31.  to  offer  on  the  set  f.  Ezra  3.  5.

2  Chron.  31.  3.  the  king's  portion  for  the  set  f.

Neh.  10.  33.  we  chaiged  for  offerings  in  the  set  f.

Solemn  FEASTS.

Num.  15.  3.  when  you  make  offer,  in  your  sol.  f.

2  Chr.  2.  4.  build  an  house  for  offering  on  solemn  f.

8.  13.  offering  on  solemn  f.  three  times  in  a  year
Lam.  1.  4.  because  none  come  to  the  solemn  f.

2.  6.  he  hath  caused  the  solemn  f.  to  be  forgotten
Ezek.  36.  38.  as  the  flock  of  Jerusalem  in  solemn  f.

46.  9.  when  people  come  before  the  Lord  in  sol.  f.
Has.  2.  11.  1  will  cause  to  cease  her  solemn  f.

12.  9.  make  thee  dwell  as  in  the  dajs  of  solemn  f.
Nah.  1.15.  O  Judah,  keep  thy  sol.  f.  perform  vows
Mai.  2.  3.  even  the  dung  ot  your  solemn  f.
Feathered,  see  Fowl.
FEATHERS.

Lev.  1.  16.  shall  pluck  away  his  crop  yith  his  /.
Job  39. 13.  gavest  thou  the  goodly  wings  to  the  pea
cock  ?  or  wings  and  /.  to  the  ostrich  ?
Psal.  68.  13.  and  her  /.  cov  ered  with  yellow  gold
91.  4.  shall  cover  thee  with  his  /.  under  his  wings
Ezek.  17.  3.  an  eagle  long-winged,  full  of /.  7.

Dan.  4.  33.  his  hairs  were  grown  like  eagle’s  /.

FED.

Gen.  30.  36.  Jacob  /.  the  rest  of  Laban’s  flock
36.  24.  as  he /.  the  asses  of  Zibeon  his  father
41. 2.  and  the  seven  kine  /.  in  a  meadow,  18.

47.  17.  he /.  them  with  bread  for  their  cattle

48.  15.  the  God  who /.  me  all  my  life  long
Exod.  16.  32.  the  bread  wherewith  l  have/,  you
Dent.  8.  3.  he  /.  thee  witli  manna,  thou  knewest  not

16.  who  f.  thee  in  the  wilderness  with  manna
2  Sam.  20. 3.  put  the  concubines  in  ward,  and /.  them
1  Kings  18.  4.  he /.  them  with  bread  and  water,  13.

1  Chron.  27.  29.  over  the  herds  that  /.  in  Sharon
Psal.  37.  3.  trust  in  the  Lord,  verily  thou  shalt  be /.
78.72.  so  he  /.  them,  according  to  his  integrity
81.  16.  he  should  have/',  them  with  finest  of  wheat
Isa.  1.  11.  1  am  full  of  the  fat  of/,  beasts
Jer.  5. 7-  when  1  had/,  them  to  the  full,  they  comm.

8.  they  were  as  /.  horses  in  the  morning
Ezek.  16.  19.  and  my  honey  wherewith  1  /.  thee

34.  3.  ye  eat  the  fat,  and  kill  them  that  are /.

8.  the  shepherds  f.  themselves,  and /.  not  my  flock
Dan.  4.  12.  and  all  flesh  was /.  with  it
5.21.  they  /.  M  ebuchadnezzar  with  grass,  like  oxen
Zech.  11.7-  I  took  two  staves,  and  1  /.  the  flock
J7i7/‘. 25. 37.  when  saw  we  thee  hungreu,  and /.  thee  ?
Mark  5. 14.  they  that /.  the  swine  fled,  Luke  8.  34.
Luke  16.  21.  desiring  to  be  /.  with  crumbs  that  fell
1  Cor.  3.  2.  1  have  /.  you  with  milk,  not  with  meat

FEE.

Dan.  2. 16.  ye  shall  receive  of  me,  gifts  and  /.

5.  t  n.  give  thy  /.  to  another,  yet  I  will  read
FEEBLE.

Gen.  30.  42.  when  cattle  were  /.  he  put  them  not  in
Dent.??).  18.  the  Amalekites  smote  all  that  were  /.

1  Sam.  2.5.  that  hath  many  children,  is  waxen  /.

2  Sam.  4. 1 .  Abner  dead,  Ish-bosheth’s  hands  were /.
2  Chron.  28.  15.  carried  all  the  /.  of  them  on  asses
Neh.  4.2.  and  he  said,  what  do  these /.  Jews?

Job  4. 4.  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the /.  knees
Psal.  38.8.  1  a  n  /.  and  sore  broken,  1  have  roared

105.  37.  was  not  one/,  person  amongst  their  tribes
Prov.  30.  26.  the  conies  are  but  a /.  folk,  yet  make
Isa.  16.  14.  the  remnant  shall  be  very  small  and /.

35.  3.  strengthen  the  weak  hands,  confirm  f.  knees

159


FEE


FEE


FEE


Jer.  6.  24.  we  have  heard  the  fame,  our  hands  wax/.

49.  24.  Damascus  is  waxed  /.  and  turneth  to  flee

50.  43.  the  king  of  Babylon's  hands  waxed  /.

Ezek.  7.  17.  all  hands  shall  be/.  21.  7.

Zech.  12.  8.  and  he  that  is  /.  shall  be  as  David

1  Cor.  12.  22.  the  members  which  seem  to  be  more  /.

1  Thess.  5.  14.  brethren,  comfort  the  /.  minded
Heb.  12.  12.  lift  up  the  hands  and  the /.  knees

FEEBLER.

Gen.  30.  42.  so  the/,  were  Laban’s,  stronger  Jacob’s
1  EE B  LEIN  ESS.

Jer.  47.  3.  the  fathers  shall  not  look  back  for/.
FEED.

To  feed  signijies  to  eat,  to  take  meat  or  nourishment
for  the  body,  and  this  is  common  to  man  with
the  beasts.  Jude  12.  Feeding  themselves  with¬
out  fear.  Isa.  27.  10.  There  shall  the  calf  feed,
and  there  shall  he  lie  down.  It  also  signifies  to
furnish  or  supply  others  with  food ;  thus  Joseph
fed  the  Egyptians  for  their  cattle:  that  is,  he
gave  them  food  and  provision  for  one  year,  for
which  they  gave  him  their  cattle ,  Gen.  47-  17.  And
Agar  prays  that  God  would  feed  him  with  food
convenient  for  him  ;  that  he  would  furnish  him
with  food  suitable  to  his  necessities  and  occasions,
Prov.  30.  8.

But  feeding,  generally  in  Scripture,  is  taken  for
the  business  and  calling  of  a  shepherd,  and  com¬
prehends  all  the  duties  belonging  to  that  office :
not  only  that  of  feeding,  or  providing  pasture  for
his  flock,  but  also  of  guiding,  observing,  and  de¬
fending  them.  In  this  sense,  feeding  is  applied,

I.  To  God,  and  that  (1)  In  respect  of  his  church,
which  he  rules,  defends ,  directs,  sustains,  and  nou¬
rishes,  both  inwardly,  by  the  gifts  and  graces  of  his
Spirit ;  and  outwardly,  by  his  power  and  provi¬
dence,  Gen.  48.  15.  The  God  which  fed  me  all
my  life  long  unto  this  day.  And  the  Psalmist,
Feed  them  also,  and  lift  them  up  for  ever,  Psal.

28.  9.  Hence  God  is  called  a  Shepherd,  Psal.

23.  1.  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd :  he  provides
for  me,  he  brings  me  out  of  the  wrong  way,  and
guides  me  in  the  right.  (2)  In  respect  of  the  un¬
godly  ,  upon  whom  he  executes  his  judgments.  Ezek.
34.  16.  I  will  feed  them  with  judgment.  And
in  Hos.  4.  16.  The  Lord  will  feed  them  as  a
lamb  in  a  large  place;  he  will  make  them  to
wander,  tike  a  lost  lamb  in  a  wilderness,  and
scatter  them  into  Assyria.  (3)  In  respect  of  the
creatures  which  receive  their  supplies  wholly  from
God.  Psal.  145.  15.  The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon
thee,  and  thou  givest  them  their  meat  in  due
season.  Mat.  6.  26.  The  fowls  of  the  air  neither
sow  nor  reap,  yet  your  heavenly  Father  feedeth
them.

II.  To  Christ.  Isa.  40.  11.  He  shall  feed  his  flock
like  a  shepherd.  And  our  Saviour  says  of  him¬
self,  I  am  the  good  Shepherd,  John  10. 11.  Christ
Jesus  performs  all  the  offices  of  a  tender  and  faith¬
ful  Shepherd  towards  his  people,  carrying  himself
with  great  wisdom,  and  condescension,  and  com¬
passion,  to  every  one  of  them,  according  to  their
several  capacities  and  infirmities :  he  feeds  them
by  his  word,  Spirit,  grace,  fulness,  redemption,
ordinances,  and  providences.

III.  To  man.  And  then,  besides  the  common  ac¬
ceptation  of  the  word,  for  feeding  cattle,  it  is
taken,  (1)  For  instructing  and  teaching  others  by
wholesome  doctrine  ;  for  ruling  and  censuring  by
ecclesiastical  discipline,  John 21. 15,  16.  Feed  my
lambs:  Feed  my  sheep.  And  in  Jer.  3. 15.  I  will
give  you  pastors  according  to  mine  heart,  which
shall  feed  you  with  knowledge  and  understand¬
ing.  (2)  For  ruling  and  governing  politically.
Thus  kings  and  magistrates  are  compared  to  shep¬
herds,  2  Sam.  5.  2.  Thou  shalt  feed  my  people
Israel,  Psal.  78.  71-  He  brought  David  to  feed
Jacob  his  people.

IV.  To  the  enemies  of  the  church,  whom.  God
sometimes  makes  use  of  for  the  chastisement  of
his  people.  Jer.  6.  3.  The  Babylonian  princes,
with  their  armies,  shall  feed  every  one  in  his
place :  they  shall  take  up  their  quarters  in  the
places  assigned  them,  and  make  spoil  of  all  they
can  find  there.

V.  To  such  as  flatter  themselves  with  vain  hopes  of
help  and  assistance,  Hos.  12.  1.  Ephraim  feed-
eth  on  wind:  the  ten  tribes  flatter  themselves
with  hopes  of  help  from  the  Egyptians  and  Assy¬
rians,  but  they  are  supporting  themselves  with
hopes  as  unfit  to  sustain  them,  as  the  wind  is  to
feed  the  body  and  nourish  it :  they  make  new  alli¬
ances  and  friendships ,  but  all  of  them  will  prove
lies  to  them  at  last,  like  the  wind  they  feed  upon.

VI.  To  rulers,  both  political  and  ecclesiastical,  who
contrive  their  own  ease,  advantage,  honour,  and
ambitious  projects  ;  but  feed  not  their  flocks  ;  take
no  care  to  support  them,  either  with  wholesome
counsel,  or  necessary  relief,  as  they  ought  to  do,  ac
cording  to  their  respective  offices.  Ezek.  34.  2,  3.
Woe  to  the  shepherds  that  do  feed  themselves :
should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  flocks  ?  Ye  kill
them  that  are  red  ;  but  ye  feed  not  the  flock.

Gen.  37. 12.  his  brethren  went  to /.  their  father’s  flock
16.  tell  me,  I  pray,  where  they /.  their  flocks
46.  32.  for  their  trade  hath  been  to  /.  cattle
Exod.H1.  5.  and  shall  /.  in  another  man’s  field
34.  3.  neither  let  flocks /.  before  that  mount

2  Sam.  5.  2.  thou  shalt/.  my  people  Israel

7.7- whom  I  commanded  to/.  Israel,  1  Chr.  17.6.

1  Kings  17.  4.  have  commanded  the  ravens  to  /.  thee
Job  24.  2.  they  take  away  flocks  and  /.  thereof

20.  the  worms  shall  /.  sweetly  on  him
Psal.  28.  9 if.  them,  and  lift  them  up  for  ever
49.  14.  laid  in  the  grave,  death  shall /.  on  them
78.  71-  he  brought  David  to /.  Jacob  his  people
Prov.  10.  21.  the  lips  of  the  righteous  f.  many
Cant.  4.  5.  like  two  roes  which /.  among  the  lilies

6.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  to  /.  in  the  gardens
Isa.  5.  17-  the  lambs  shall  /.  after  their  manner
11. 7.  and  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  /.

14.  30.  and  the  first-born  of  the  poor  shall  /.

160


Isa.  27.  10.  there  shall  the  calf/,  and  shall  lie  down
30.  23.  thy  cattle  shall  /.  in  large  pastures
40.  11.  he  shall  /.  his  flock  as  a  shepherd

49.  9.  they  shall  /.  in  the  ways  and  high  places
61.  5.  and  strangers  shall  stand  and  /.  your  flocks
65.  25.  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  /.  together

Jer.  2.  +  16.  the  children  of  N’oph  f.  on  thy  crown

3.  15.  pastors  who  shall  /.  you  with  knowledge
6.  3.  they  shall  /.  every  one  in  his  place
23.  2.  against  the  pastors  that/,  my  people

4.  1  will  set  up  shepherds  which  shall /.  them

50.  19.  Israel  shall  /.  on  Carmel  and  Bashan
Lam.  4.  5.  they  that /.  delicately  are  desolate
Ezek.  34.  2.  woe  to  the  shepherds  that  do  /.  thems.

3.  ye  eat  the  fat,  but  ye/,  not  the  flock

10.  neither  shall  the  shepherds  /.  themselves
23.  even  my  servant  David  shall  /.  them
Dan.  11.  26.  they-  that /.  of  his  meat  destroy  him
Hos.  4.  16.  now  the  Lord  will  /.  them  as  a  lamb

9.  2.  the  flour  and  the  wine-press  shall  not /.  them
Jonah  3.  7-  let  them  not /.  nor  drink  water
Mic.  5.  4.  he  shall  /.  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord
Zeph.  2.  7.  they  shall /.  thereupon,  God  shall  visit

3.  13.  they  shall  /.  none  shall  make  them  afraid
Zech.  11.  9.  then  said  1 ,  I  will  not  /.  you
16.  the  shepherd  shall  not /.  that  standeth  still
Mat.  2. 1 6.  out  of  thee  a  Governor  that  shall/.
Luke  15.  15.  he  sent  him  to  his  fields  to/,  swine
Acts  20.  28.  take  heed  to  /.  the  churc  h  of  God
1  Cor.  9.  t  13.  they  f.  of  the  things  of  the  temple

13.  3.  though  I  give  all  my  goods  to /.  the  poor
Rev.  7. 17.  for  the  Lamb  shall/,  them  and  lead  them

12.  6.  that  they  should  /.  her  there  1260  days
FEED,  Imperatively.

Gen.  25.  30./.  me  with  that  same  red  pottage

29.  7 .  water  ye  the  sheep,  and  go  and  /.  them
1  Kings  22.  27-/.  him  with  bread  and  water  of  afflic¬
tion,  until  1  come  in  peace,  2  Chr.  18.  26.
Prov.  30.  8./.  me  with  food  convenient  for  me
Cant.  1.  8./.  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds’  tents
Mic.  7.  14./.  thy  people  with  thy-  rod,  the  flock
Zech.  11.  4.  saith  Lord,/,  the  flock  of  the  slaughter
John  21.  15./.  my  lambs  ||  16./.  my  sheep,  17.
Rom.  12.  20.  if  thine  enemy  hunger,/,  him

1  Pet.  5.  2.  /.  the  flock  of  God  which  is  among  you

I  will  FEED.

Gen.  30.  31.  I  will  again/,  and  keep  thy  flock

2  Sam.  19.  33.  I  will  f.  thee  with  me  in  Jerusalem
Isa.  49.  26.  1  will  f.  them  that  oppress  thee

58.  14.  7  will f.  thee  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob
Jer.  9.  15.  I  will  f.  them  with  wormwood,  23.  15.
Ezek.  34.  13.  1  will  f.  them  upon  the  mountains

14.  7  will f.  them  in  a  good  pasture,  on  mountains

15.  7 will f.  my  flock,  and  cause  them  to  lie  down

16.  7  will  f.  the  fat  and  the  strong  with  judgment
Zech.  11.  7.  7  will  f.  the  flock  of  slaughter,  the  poor

FEEDER.

GenA.tl.Abel  was  /.  of  sheep,  Cain  tiller  of  ground
FEEDEST.

Psal.  80.  5.  thou  /.  them  with  the  bread  of  tears
Cant.  1.  7.  tell  me  where  thou  /.  thy  flock
FEEDETH.

Prov.  15.  14.  the  mouth  of  fools /.  on  foolishness
28.  +7.  he  that  f.  gluttons,  shameth  his  father
Cant.  1.  16.  my  beloved  /.  among  the  lilies,  6.  3.
Isa.  44.20. he /.  on  ashes,  a  deceived  heart  turned  him
Hus.  12. 1 .  Ephraim  f.  on  wind  followeth  east-wind
Mat.  6.  26.  yet  your  heavenly  Father  /.  them
Luke  12.  24.  the  ravens  sow  not,  yet  God /.  them
1  Cor.  9. 7  who /.  a  flock,  and  eateth  not  the  milk
FEED  I  NG.

Gen.  37.  2.  Joseph  was/,  his  flock  with  his  brethren
Job  1.  14.  the  oxen  were  plowing,  the  asses  /.  by
Ezek.  34. 10.  cause  them  to  cease  from /.  the  flock
Nah.  1.  11.  where  is  the/,  place  of  young  lions  ?
Mat.  8.30.  an  herd  of  swine  /.  Markb. 11.  LukeR.  32.
Luke  17.  7-  which  of  you  having  a  servant /.  cattle
Jude  .12./.  thems.  without  fear,  clouds  without  water
FEEL.

Gen.  17.  12.  my  father  peradventure  will  /.  me

21.  come  near,  that  I  may/,  thee,  my  son
Judg.  16.  26.  suffer  me  that  1  may  /  the  pillars
Job  20.  20.  surely  he  shaU  not  /.  quietness
Psal.  58.  9.  before  your  pots  can/,  the  thorns
Eccl.  8. 5.  whoso  keepeth  commandm.  shall /.  no  evil
Acts  17.  27.  seek  the  L.  if  haply  they  might  /'.  after
FEELING.

Eph.  4.  19.  who  being  past /.  have  given  themselves
Heb.  4.  15.  touched  with  the  /.  of  our  infirmities
FEEL'.

Gen.  29.  +  1.  then  Jacob  lift  up  his /.  and  came
49.  10.  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his /.  till
33.  Jacob  gathered  up/,  in  the  bed,  yielded  ghost
Exod.  3.  5.  put  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  /.  Acts  7.  33.

11.  +  8.  get  out,  and  the  people  that  is  at  thy/

12.  11.  shall  eat  the  passover  with  shoes  on  your/.
Lev.  11.  21.  have  legs  above  their  /.  ye  may  eat
Deut.  1.  28.  only  I  will  pass  through  on  my/

11.  t  6.  all  the  substance  which  w-as  at  their  /.

28.  57-  young  one  that  cometh  from  between  her/.
33.  3.  and  they  sat  down  at  thy  /.  every  one
Josh.  3. 15.  the  /.  of  the  priests  weredipped  in  Jordan

9.  5.  old  shoes,  and  clouted  upon  their /.

10.  24.  put  your  /.  on  the  necks  of  these  kings
14.  9.  the  land  whereon  thy  /.  have  trodden

Judg.  1.  +  7-  having  thumbs  of  hands  and /.  cutoff

3.  24.  surely  he  covereth  his  /.  in  Ins  chamber

4.  15.  so  that  Sisera  fled  away  on  his /.  17.

5.  t  15.  Barak  was  sent  on  his  /.  into  the  valley
27-  at  her /.  bowed,  at  her  f.  he  fell  down  dead

Ruth  3.  4.  go  in,  uncover  his  /.  and  lay  thee  down

8.  he  turned,  and  behold  a  woman  lay  at  his /.

1  Sam.  1.  9.  he  will  keep  the  /.  of  his  saints
14.  13.  Jonathan  climbed  on  his  hands  and /.

24.  3.  and  .Saul  went  in  to  cover  his/.

25.  t  27-  young  men  that  walk  at  the/  of  my  lord
42.  Abigail  rode  with  five  damsels  at  her /.

2  Sam.  1.  t  18.  Asahel  was  light  of  his  f.  as  a  roe

3.  34.  hands  not  bound,  nor  thy  /.  put  into  fetters

4.  4.  Jonathan's  son  was  lame  of'  Ins/.  9.  3,  13.

12.  they  cutoff  their  hands  and  their/.

19.  24.  Mephibosheth  had  not  dressed  his/.


2  Sam.  22.  34.  maketh  my  /.  like  hinds’/,  and  sett
me  upon  high  places,  Psal.  18.  33.  1 lab.  3  p
37.  so  that  my  J.  did  not  slip,  Psal.  18.  36.

1  Kings  1.  5.  put  the  blood  of  war  in  shoes  on  his  (  '■

14.  6.  when  Ahijali  heard  the  sound  of  her  /  '
12.  when  thy/,  enter  the  city,  the  child  shall  die

15.  23.  Asa  was  diseased  in  his  /.  2  Churn.  16  y

2  Kings  3.  t  9.  no  water  for  the  cattle  at  their  /

4.  27-,w'hen  she  came,  she  caught  him  by  the/

6  32.  is  not  the  sound  of  his  master’s/,  behind  him  ■

9.  35.  but  they  found  no  more  of  her  than  the/.

13.  21 .  dead  man  revived,  and  stood  upon  his f.
18.  +  27.  that  they  may  drink  the  water  of  their/
21.  8.  nor  make  the  /.  of  Israel  move  any  more

1  Chum.  28.  2.  then  David  the  king  stood  on  his /  '
Nth.  9. 21.  clothes  waxed  not  old ,  their /.  sw  el  led/ f
Job  12.  5.  he  that  is  ready  to  slip  with  his/.

13.  27.  thou  puttest  my  /.  in  the  stocks,  3.3. 11.  thoil

settest  a  print  upon  the  heels  of  my  1

18.  8.  for  he  is  cast  into  a  net  by  his  own/.

11.  terrors  make  afraid,  and  drive  him  to  his /

29. 15.  I  was  eyes  to  the  blind,/,  was  I  to  the  lam

30.  12.  the  youth  rise,  tliey  push  away  my/

39.  +21.  his/,  dig  in  the  valley,  he  rejoiceth  j
Psal.  11. 16.  they  pierced  my  hands  and  my/.

25. 15.  for  he  shall  pluck  my /.  out  of  the  net

31.  8.  thou  hast  set  my  /.  in  a  large  room

40.2.  he  set  my  /.  on  rock,  and  established  my  going.
56. 13.  wilt  tnou  not  deliver  my  f.  from  falling.-"’
66.  9-  and  suffereth  not  our/,  to  be  moved

73.  2.  but  as  for  me,  my  /.  were  almost  gone

74.  3.  lift  up  thy /.  to  the  perpetual  desolations
105.  18.  whose  f.  they  hurt  with  fetters

115.  7.  f.  have  they,  but  they  w-alk  not,  nor  speak  lj

116.  8.  thou  hast  delivered  mv/.  from  falling
119.59.  I  turned  my/,  unto  thy  testimonies

101.  I  refrained  my  /.  from  every  evil  way
105.  thy  word  is  a  lamp  to  my/,  a  light  to  my  pafll
122.  2.  our /.  shall  stand  within  thy  gates
Prov.  1.  16.  their  /.  run  to  evil,  6.  18f  Isa.  59.  7.  1

4.  26.  ponder  the  path  of  thy  /.  ways  be  established

5.  5.  her  /.  go  down  to  death,  steps  take  hold  on  be  1 1

6.  13.  the  wicked  man  speaketh  with  his /.

28.  can.one  go  on  coals,  and  his/,  not  be  burnt  :

7.  11.  she  is  loud,  her /.  abide,  not  in  her  house

19.  2.  and  he  that  hasteth  with  his  /.  sinneth

26.  6.  cutteth  off  the  /.  and  drinketh  damage
29.  5.  a  flatterer  spreadeth  a  net  for  his  /.

Cant.  7-  1.  how  beautiful  are  thy /.  with  shoes!  *
Isa.  3.  16.  and  making  a  tinkling  with  their  /.

18.  Lord  take  aw-ay  the  ornaments  about  tlieir/.

6.  2.  with  twain  he  covered  his /.  with  twain  did  fi;
7-  20.  the  Lord  shall  shave  the  hair  of  the/

23.  7.  her  own  /.  shall  carry  her  afar  off  to  sojour
26.  6.  the  /.  of  the  poor  shall  tread  it  down

32.  20.  that  send  forth  the/,  of  the  ox  and  ass.

41.  3.  by  the  way  that  he  had  not  gone  with  his/.
49.  23.  they  shall  lick  up  the  dust  of  thy/.

52.  7.  the /.  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings
60.  13.  1  will  make  the  place  of  my /.  glorious
Jer.  13. 16.  before  your /.  stumble  on  the  mountain

14.  10.  loved  to  wander,  have  not  refrained  their  j
18.  22.  they  digged  a  pit,  and  hid  snares  for  my /. 1
38.  22.  thy  /.  are  sunk  in  the  mire,  and  are  turned

Lam.  1.  13.  he  hath  spread  a  net  for  my/.

Ezek.  1.7-  and  their  f.  were  straight /.

2. 1.  he  said  to  me,  son  of  man,  stand  upon  thy/
2.  and  the  Spirit  set  me  upon  my/.  3.  24.

16.25.  hast  opened  thy /.  to  every  one  that  passed  b;
24. 17.  and  put  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy /.

23.  tires  shall  be  on  your  heads,  shoes  on  your/

25.  6.  because  thou  hast  stamped  with  the/.

32.2.  thou  troubledst  the  waters  with  thy  /

34.  18.  but  ye  must  foul  the  residue  with  your/.

19.  what  ye  have  trodden  and  fouled  with  your  ;
37.  10.  they  lived,  and  stood  up  upon  their/.

Dan.  1.  33.  nis /.  part  of  iron,  and  part  clay ,  42.
34.  a  stone  smote  the  image  upon  his  /.

41 .  thou  sawest  the /.  and”  toes  part  of  clay
7-  7-  and  stamped  the  residue  with  the/,  ot  it,  19.

10.  6.  his /.  like  polished  brass,  Rev.  1. 15.  I  2. 18|
Nah.  1.  3.  and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  his /.

15.  the  /.  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings
Zech.  14.  4.  his  /.  shall  stand  upon  mount  of  Olives
Mat.  10. 14.  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  house  or  city }
shake  off  the  dust  of  your/.  Mark  6. 11.  Luke  9.  f

15.  30.  cast  the  lame  and  blind  down  at  Jesus’/.
18.  8.  rather  than  having  two/,  to  be  cast  into  nre
28.  9.  they  held  him  by  the/,  and  worshipped  hii)|

Luke  1 . 79.  to  guide  our  /.  into  the  way  of  peace
7-  38.  she  kissed  his /.  and  anointed  them
45.  this  woman  hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my/.

8.  35.  they  found  a  man  sitting  at  the /.  ot  Jesus
41.  Jairus  fell  down  at  Jesus’/  and  besought  hirrj

10.  39.  Mary,  w-ho  sat  at  Jesus'/,  heard  his  word

15.  22.  put  a  ring  on  his  hand,  and  shoes  on  his  I

24.  39.  behold  my  hands  and  my/,  that  it  is  I

40.  he  shewed  them  his  hands  and  his/.

John  11.2.  and  wiped  his/,  with  her  hair,  12.  3.

12.  3.  and  Mary  anointed  the  /.  of  Jesus

20. 12.  one  angel  at  the  head,  the  other  at  the/.
Acts  3. 7-  and  Immediately  his  /.  received  strengtl

4.  35.  laid  them  down  at  the  apostles’/.  37.  1 5. 2.

5.  9.  the  /.  of  them  w'ho  have  buried  thy  husband  j
7-  58.  they  laid  their  clothes  at  a  young  man’s/.

13. 25.  shoes  of  his/.  I  am  not  worthy  to  loose

51.  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  /.  against  then

14.  8.  there  sat  at  Lystra  a  man  impotent  in  his;
10.  Paul  said,  stand  upright  on  thy  /.  he  leaped

16.  24.  who  made  their  /.  fast  in  the  stocks

21.  11.  Agabus  bound  his  own  hands  and  /.

22.  3.  yet  brought  up  at  the /.  of  Gamaliel

26.  16.  but  rise,  and  stand  upon  thy /.

Rom.  3. 15.  their  /.  are  swift  to  shed  blood

10.  15.  the  /,  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel
1  Cor.  12. 21.  nor  head  to  the  f.  1  have  no  need  of  yot
Eph.6.15.  you r/.  shod  with  the  preparation  ofgospe
Heb.  12.  13.  and  make  straight  paths  for  your/.
Rev.  3. 9.  make  them  come  and  worship  before  thyj

10.  1.  another  mighty  angel,  his/,  as  pillars  of  nr

11.  11.  the  two  witnesses  stood  upon  their/.  ,

13.  2.  his /.  were  as  f.  of  a  bear,  mouth  of  a  lion


FEL


F  E  L


F  E  M


1.  22.  8. 1  tell  down  to  worship  before  his  f.

At  his  FEEl'.

<d.  4.  25.  Zipporah  cast  the  foreskin  at  hisf.

.  £.4.  10.  Barak  went  with  ten  thousand  at  hisf.
'.h  3.  14.  she  lay  at  hisf.  until  the  morning
.  im.  25.  24.  Abigail  fell  at  hisf.  and  said
‘  ings  4.  37.  the  woman  of  Shunem  fell  at  his  f.
4.8.3.  Esther  fell  down  at  his  f.  and  besought  him
h.  3.  5.  and  burning  <  oals  went  forth  at  his f.

.  t.  18.  29.  his  fellow-servant  fell  down  at  his  f.
,rk5.  22.  Jairus,  when  he  saw  him,  fell  at  his  f.
25.  Syrophenician  woman  came,  and  fell  at  his  f.
.el .  38.  she  stood  at  his  f.  behind  him  weeping
.  i  11.32.  Mary  tell  down  at  hisf.  saying
,  ,«5.10.Sapphirafeliaf /ii.y/.  and  yielded  upghost
25.  Cornelius  met  him,  and  tell  down  at  nis  f.
j  .  1.  17-  when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  hisf.  as  dead
10.  and  1  fell  at  hisf.  to  worship  linn
FEET  joined  With  sole  or  soles,
i  it.  11.  24.  soles  of  your/,  tread  shall  be  yours
.  i.  3. 13.  as  soon  as  soles  of  the  priests’  /.  4.  18.
i  inffs  5. 3.  till  L.  put  them  under  the  soles  of  his/.
£ in.  19.  24.  with  f. of  my  /.  have  dried,  Is.  37.25.

.  60.  14.  shall  bow  down  at  the  soles  of  thy  f.
j  k.  1.7-  the  sole  of  their/,  was  like  a  calf’s  foot

7.  the  place  of  soles  of  my/,  no  more  detiled

4.  3.  wicked  shall  be  ashes  under  s.  of  your  f.
Under  FEEl'.

1  d.  24. 10.  under  his/,  as  it  were  a  sapphire  stone

2  m.  22. 10.  darkness  was  under  his /.  Psal.  18.  9.

.  yea,  they  are  fallen  under  my  /.

11.6.  6.  thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  /.

1  Cor.  15.  27.  Eph.  1.  22.
3.  he  shall  subdue  the  nations  under  our  /.

13.  the  dragon  shaltthou  trample  under  f.

]  i4.  19.  as  a  carcase  trodden  under  f.

.  3.  drunkards  of  Ephraim  shall  be  trod .  under f.
h.  3.  34.  to  crush  under  his/,  all  prisoners
.  •.  7.  6.  lest  they  trample  them  under  their/.

1 1.  16.  20.  God  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your/.

1  r.  15.  25.  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his /

J  •  2.  8.  tor  he  put  all  in  subjection  under  his  /  ‘

/  .  12.  1.  clothed  with  the  sun,  moon  under  her  /
FEEl  with  wash,  or  washed.

C .  18.  4.  let  water  be  fetched,  and  wash  your  /

2.  tarn  in,  tarry  all  night,  and  wash  your /.'

‘j  32.  and  Laban  gave  water  to  wash  his  /.

•  24.  gave  them  water,  and  they  washed  their /.
hi.  30.  19.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  wash  their

hands  and  their  /.  thereat,  21.  |  40.  31
J  19.  21.  Levite  and  concubine  washed  their  /. '

1  m.  25.  41.  to  wash  the  /.  of  servants  of  my  lord

2  m.  11.  8.  Uriah,  go  to  thy  house,  wash  thy  /.

7  '.  58.  10.  shall  wash  his  J.  in  blood  of  the  wicked
C  .5. 3. have  washed  my/,  how  shall  1  detilethem'
7“  7-38.  she  began  to  wash  his/,  with  tears
but  she  hath  washed  my  /.  with  tears
J  13.  5.  he  began  to  wash  the  disciples’  /.

Peter  saith  to  him,  Lord,  dost  thou  wash  my  /.  ?
Peter  saith  to  him,  thou  shalt  never  wash  my /  ’
needeth  not  save  to  wash  his /.  but  is  clean  '

S9  after  he  had  washed  their  /.  he  said  to  them
it  1  your  Ld.  and  Master  have  washed y our  f
1  m.  5. 10.  if  she  have  washed  the  saints’  t.

FEIGN.  J

•  n.  14.  2.  I  pray/,  thyself  to  be  a  mourner

1  nds  14.  5.  she  shall/,  herself  to  be  another  worn
7:  20.20.  which  should/,  themselves  just  men
FEIGN  ED.

I  m. 21.  13.  David/,  himself  mad  in  their  hands
.  ai.  22.  t  45.  strangers  shall  yield /.  obedience
n  4  ,  unto  me,  Psal.  18.  144.

I-  ..L.l.  to  my  prayer  that  goeth  notoutof/.  lips
'  t  3.  thine  enemies  shall  yield  /.  obedience
h L 15.  the  haters  of  the  Lord  yielded /.  obedience
■  t.  2.3.  with/,  words  make  merchandise  of  you
FEIGN  ESP.

. W o!4.  6.  why/,  thou  thyself  to  be  another  ?
v  0.8.  but  thou  /  them  out  of  thine  own  heart
FEIGN  EDLY.

'>3.  10.  hath  turned  to  me  but/,  saith  the  Lord
.  FELL.

T  ^  ,ain  wr°th,  and  his  countenance  f.
f  0.  the  kings  ot  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  /.
r> [  ,„a ,  ue p sl?eP /•  on  Abram,  and  lo,  an  horror
-  18.  Ishmael/  in  the  presence  of  his  brethren
a  is  ,  u  ran>  and /•  on  his  brother’s  neck
’  ’•  Joseph  s  brethren/,  before  him  011  ground
,  /  Joseph  /  on  Benjamin’s  neck  and 'wept
4.9.  Jacob  j.  on  Joseph’s  neck  and  wept
f  J2!28/  there/,  of  the  people  3000  men
t;  lo.  9.  the  goat  on  which  the  Lord’s  lot  /.  10.‘
•11.  4.  the  mixt multitude/,  a  lusting
he  dew/  on  the  camp,  the  manna  f.  upon  it
f  '.  Moses  and  Aaron  /.  16.  22,  45.  |  20.  6.
j'  8.  25.  that  all  that/,  that  day,  were  12,000
J  .so  Joshua  came  and  f.  upon  them
t  -o-  and  wrath/,  on  all  the  congregation
r :  V0-  oisera’s  host  /.  on  the  edge  of  the  sword
0  .  Sisera  J.  ||  8. 10.  tor  there  /.  120,000  men
!  •'  a,CHke,°l  bread  smote  the  tent  that  it  /.

1  j.  there/  of  Ephraimites  at  that  time  42,000
W.  the  house  J.  on  the  lords  and  on  the  people

•  „  •  an'*  Ibere  /  ot  Benjamin  18,000  men

u  iTV1?'  tllere /.  ot  Israel  30,000  footmen
th  c  1 10111  cls  seat  backward  by  the  gate


0  — —  e-vpiiraicu,  itimj.uown  that  day

a  ,,  *.  ??§  turned,  and  /.  upon  the  priests
~  0  <? mgsul/-  at  David’s  teet,  and  said
^  u.  saul/  straightway  along  on  the  earth
l  mnnu  no  fault  in  him  since  he  /.  on  me
J.  because  three  days  agone  1  /.  sick
therefore  Saul  took  a  sword  and  /  upon  it
'I  f^'^/beitrer/.  likewise,  1  C 'hr.  lo.  4,  5.


•  n  4  A  it  •  |  f,*  v  '  HhC  *V  j  1  L/t/  ,  IU.  4.

1  2  Yy*  Mephibosheth  /.  and  became  lame
i.  there  J.  some  of  the  people  of  David
?j;  ^'n‘\on  /■ Slck  for  his  sister  lamar


1U1  nis  sister  lamar
;•  ;^bs sword/,  out  as  he  went  forth
.  .j ;;  Jv  7  al* 3e,ven  together  in  days  at  harvest
■'ey/,  by  the  hand  ot  David,  1  Chron.  20.  8.


1  R  ings  2.  25.  Benaiah  /.  on  Adonijah  that  he  died
32.  who/,  upon  two  men  more  righteous  than  he
34.  Benaiah /.on  I oab  ||46.  Benaiah  /.  on  Shimei
12.  +  19.  so  Israel/,  from  the  house  of  David
14.  1.  Abijah  the  son  or  Jeroboam/  sick
17.  17-  the  son  of  the  woman  /.  sicx,  it  was  so  sore
J8.  38.  nre  ot  l  ord/,  and  tonsumed  the  sacrifice

20.  ,‘H).  a  wall  j,  on  27,(00  men  that  were  left

<2.  Kings  1.  13.  third  captain/,  on  knees  before  Elijah
2.  13.  lie  took  mantle  ot  Elijah  that/,  from  him
4.  8.  it/  on  a  day  Elisha  passed  to  Shunem,  11.
18.  it  J.  on  a  day  the  child  went  to  the  reapers
37.  Shunammite  f.  at  his  feet  and  bowed  herself
6.  5.  the  axe-head  /  into  the  water,  and  he  cried
6.  and  the  man  ot  God  said,  where/,  it  r
7-  20.  so  it/,  out  to  him,  the  people  trode  on  him
25.  It.  the  fugitives  that  /.away  to  the  king

1  C hr.  12.  19.  there/,  some  of  Manasseh  to  David

21.  14.  and  there/,  of  Israel  70,000  men

2J.  24.  because  there  /  wrath  for  it  against  Israel

2  Chron.  15.  9.  tor  they  /.  to  David  out  of  Israel
17. 10.  the  fear  of  Ld.  /  on  all  kingdoms  of  lands

20.  18.  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  /  before  Ld

21.  19.  his  bowels/,  out  by  reason  of  sickness
25.  13.  the  soldiers  of  Israel /.  on  cities  of  Judah


Ezra  9.  5.  If.  on  my  knees  and  spread  my  hands*
’.  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews  /.  on  them,  9.  2


Psth.  8.  17 -  - . . .

9.  3.  because  the  fear  ot  Mordecai  /  upon  them

^he  Sabeans  /.  on  the  asses,  and  took  them
17  .Chaldeans  J.  on  camels,  and  carried  them  away
19.  the  house  /  on  young  men,  and  they  are  dead
Psal.  27. 2.  wicked  came  to  eat  up  my  flesh,  they  f
78.  64.  their  priests/,  by  sword,  widows  not  lament
105.  38.  for  the  fear  ot  Israel  /  on  Egypt
Jer.  39.  9.  those  that  f.  away,  that/,  to  him,  52. 15
46.  16.  one/,  upon  another,  and  they  said,  arise  ’
Earn.  1.7.  her  people/,  into  the  hand  of  tk«.  enemy
5.  13.  and  the  children  f.  under  the  wood
Ezek.  8.  1.  the  hand  of  trie  Lord  f.  upon  me  11  'l
39.  23.  so  /.  they  all  by  the  sword
Van.  4.  31.  there/,  a  voice  from  heaven,  sayin^

7-  20.  other  whicli  came  up,  before  whom  three’ /

10.  7.  but  a  great  quaking  /.  upon  them

Jonah  1.7.  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  /.  on  Jonah
Mat.  7.  25.  the  house/,  not  ||  27.  it /.  Luke  6.  49

13.  4.  seed  /.  by  the  way-side,  Mark  4.  4.  Luke  8  5
5.  some/  upon  stony  places,  Mark  4.  5.  Luke  6  6
7-  and  some/,  among  thorns,  Markk.  7.  Luke 8  7
8.  other  /.  into  good  ground,  Mark  4.  8.  Luke  a’  a'

Mark  5.  22.  Jairus  when  he  saw  him,/,  at  his  feet
7. 25.  Syrophenician  woman  came,  and/,  at  his  feet

9.  20.  he/,  on  the  ground  and  wallowed  foamin

14.  35.  Jesus/,  on  the  ground  and  prayed
Luke  1.  12.  and  fear/,  upon  Zacharias

8.  23.  but  as  they  sailed,  Jesus  /.  asleep

10.  30.  a  certain  man  /.  among  thieves,  36.

13.  4.  upon  whom  the  tow  er  in  Siloarn/

15.  20.  his  father/,  on  his  neck  and  kissed  him

16.  21.  crumbs  which/,  from  the  rich  man’s  table
John  18.  6.  went  backward  and  /  to  the  ground
Acts  1.  25.  from  which  Judas  by  transgression /.

26.  gave  forth  lots,  and  the  lot/,  upon  Matthias

7.  60.  and  when  he  had  said  this,  he  /  asleep

9.  4.  Saul/,  to  the  earth  and  heard  a  voice

18.  there  /  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been  scales
1?:  U.\:  P.e,te!'  became  hungry,  and  /  into  a  trance

44.  the  Holy  Ghost  J.  on  them  all,  ll.  15.

12.  7.  the  chains/,  off  from  Peter’s  hands

13.  11.  there/,  on  him  a  mist  and  a  darkness
36.  David  /.  on  sleep  and  saw  corruption

19. 17.  and  fear/,  on  all  the  Jews  at  Ephesus

20.  lo.  Paul  vyent  down,  and  /.  on  Eutychus
37-  they  all/,  on  Paul’s  neck,  and  kissed  him

22.  7.  I  /.  unto  the  ground,  and  heard  a  voice
Rom.  11.  22.  on  them  which  /.  severity

15.  3.  reproaches  of  them  reproached  thee  /.  on  me

1  Gcr.  10.  8.  and/,  in  one  day  twenty-three  thous.
Heb.  3. 17.  whose  carcases /.  in  the  wilderness

2  Pet.  3.  4.  since  fathers/,  asleep  all  things  continue
Rev.  1.  17.  when  I  saw  him  1  /  at  his  feet  as  dead

6.  13.  and  the  stars  of  heaven  /.  unto  the  earth

8.  10.  and  there  /.  a  great  star  from  heaven

11.  11.  and  great  fear/,  on  them  who  saw  them
13.  the  tenth  part  of  the  city  /  by  earthquake

16.  2.  and  there/,  a  noisome  and  grievous  sore

19.  the  city  was  divided,  and  cities  of  nations/

21.  there/,  on  men,  great  hail  out  of  heaven
19.  10.  and  If.  at  his  feet  to  worship  him

See  Face,  Faces.

FELL  down.

Num.  22.  27.  when  the  ass  saw  the  angel,  she  /  d.
Deut.  9.  18.  and  1/  down  before  the  Lord,  25.

Josh.  6.  20.  the  people  shouted,  the  wall/,  d.  Hat
Judg.  5.  27.  where  he  bowed  there  he/,  down  dead
19.  26.  the  concubine  /  down  at  door  of  the  house

1  Sam.  17.  52.  the  Philistines  /.  down  by  the  way
31. 1.  men  of  Israel/,  down  in  Gilboa,  1  Chr.  10. 1.

2  Sam.  2.  16.  so  they  /.  down  together

23.  Asahel/.  down  there,  and  died  in  the  place
18.  .28.  Ahimaaz /  down  ||  19.  18.  Shimei /  down

2  Kings  1.  2.  and  Ahaziah  /.  down  through  a  lattice

1  Chr.  5.  22.  there/,  d.  many  slain,  war  was  of  G.

2  Chron.  1.3. 17-  there/,  d.  of  Israel  500, (MX)  men
Esth.  8.3.  Esther/,  down  at  Ahasuerus’  feet

Job  1.  20.  Job/,  d.  on  the  ground  and  worshipped
Psal.  107.  12.  they/,  down  there  was  none  to  help
Dan.  3.  7.  all  nations  /,  d.  and  worshipped  image
23.  these  three  /  down  bound  in  the  furnace
Mat.  2.  11.  wise  men/,  down -&nd  worshipped  him

18.  26.  the  servant  therefore  /.  down  saying,  29.
Mark  3.  11.  and  unclean  spirits  /.  down  before  him
5.  33.  the  woman  with  the  issue  of  blood,/,  down

Luke  5.  8.  Simon  Peter  /  down  at  Jesus’  knees
8.  28.  man  which  had  devils /.  down  before  Jesus
41.  Jairus  J.  down  ||  17.  16.  the  Samaritan  /.  d.
John  11.  32.  Mary  /  down  at  his  feet,  saying
Acts  5.  5.  Ananias /.  down  ||  10.  Sapphira  J.  down
10.  25.  Cornelius/,  down  ||  16.  29.  jailer/,  down

19.  35.  the  image  which/,  down  from  Jupiter

20.  9.  Eutychus/.  rfotowfrom  the  third  loft
Deb.  11.. ‘lo.  by  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  f.  down
Rev.  5.  8.  elders/,  d.  before  the  Lamb.  14.  |  19.  4.


Rev.  22.  8.  John  /.  down  to  worship  before  the  an  >>
r  .  FELL.

2  Kings  3. 19.  and  ye  shall /  e'  er\r  good  tree
FELLED.

2  Kings  3.  25.  and  they  /  all  the  good  trees
.  FELLER.

Isa.  14.  8.  saying,  no/,  is  come  up  against  us

FULLEST.

2  Sam.  3.  34.  as  a  man  before  wick,  men,  so  /.  thoir

2  Kings  6.  5.  as  one  was/,  a  beam,  the  axe-head  fell
FELLOES.

1  Kings  7.  33.  their/,  and  their  spokes  were  molten
FELLOW.

Gen.  19.  9.  they  said,  this  one  /.  came  in  to  sojourn
Exod.  2. 13.  wherefore  smitest  thou  thy  f.f
18. 1 16.  and  1  judge  between  a  man  and  his/
Judg.  7.  13.  there  was  a  man  told  a  dream  to  his /
22.  the  Lord  set  every  man’s  sword  against  his/.

through  all  the  host,  1  Sam.  14.  20.
1  Sam.  21.  15.  that  ye  have  brought  this  /  to  play
the  madman  ;  shall  this/,  come  into  my  house  ?
2o.  21.  in  vain  have  1  kept  all  that  this /  hath
29.  4.  make  this/,  return,  he  may  go  to  his  place
Sam.  ^.10.  caught  ev  ery  one  his/,  by  the  head
1  Kings  22. 27 .  put  this/,  in  prison,  2  Chron.  18.  26.
“n  H;.  therefore  came  this  mad  f.  to  thee  -

Eccl.  4. 10.  if  they  fall,  one  will  lift  up  his /.

Isa.  34.  14.  the  satyr  shall  cry  to  his /.

Jonah  1.  7.  they  said  every  one  to  his  /.  cast  lots
Zech.  11.  t  9.  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  his  /.

13.  7 •  awake,  O  sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  anti
,,  against  the  man  that  is  my/,  saith  Lord  of  hosts
Mat- 12.  24.  t Jus/,  doth  not  cast  out  devils  but  by
26.  61.  this  j.  said,  1  am  able  to  destroy  the  temple
71.  this  /  was  also  with  Jesus,  Luke  22.  59.

Luke  23.  2.  we  found  this/,  perverting  the  nation
John  9.  29.  as  for  this/,  we  know  not  w lienee  he  is
1L  16.  Didymussaid  to  his/,  disciples,  let  us  go
Acts  17. 1 18.  some  said,  what  will  this  base  /'.  say  >
18.  13.  this/,  persuadeth  men  to  worship  God
22.  22.  away  with  such  a/,  from  the  earth
24.  5.  we  have  found  this  man  a  pestilent/
FELLO  -citizens.

Eph.  2. 19.  bu tf. -citizens  with  saints  and  household1
FELLO  \V -heirs.

Eph.  3.  6.  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  f. -heirs
4  FEL  LO  W  -helper.

2  Cor.  8.  23.  1  itus  my  J  .-helper  concerning  you

FELLO  \V -helpers.

3  John  8.  that  we  might  be  f.  -helpers  to  the  truth

FELLOW -labomer.

1  Jhess.  3.  2.  we  sent  Timotheus  our /■ labourer
Philern.  1.  Paul  to  Plrlemonour  f. -labourer
.  FELLO  \ V -labourers.

Phil  4.  3.  Clement,  with  other  my  f. -labourers
Philern.  24.  Marcus,  Demas,  Lucas,  my  f.- labourers
.  r  ELLOW -piisoner.

Aristarchus  my  f. -prisoner  saluteth  you,
Philern.  23.  Epaphras  my  f. -prisoner  in  Christ'
FELLOW  -prisoners,

Rom.  16. 7.  Andronicus  and  J unia  my  f .-prisoners
FELLOW  -servant,  or  servants.

Mat.  18.  28.  found  one  of  his  f.-serv.  who  owed  him
~9.  bis  J  .-servant  tell  down  at  his  feet,  saying
31.  so  when  his  f. -servants  saw  what  was  done
have  had  compassion  on  f. -servant  as  1  on  thee
24.  49.  and  shall  begin  to  smite  his  f. -servant.
Amr?'  learnecl  of  Epaphras  our  f. -servant
4.  7 .  lychicus,  who  is  a  f. -servant  in  the  Lord
Rev.  6. 11.  till  their/. -servants  should  be  fulfilled
19. 10.  see  thou  do  it  not,  1  am  thy  f. -servant,  °2  0
FELLO  W -soldier.

Phil  2.  25.  to  send  Epaphroditus  my /■ -soldier
Philern.  2.  Paul  to  Archippus  our  f. -soldier
FELLO  \\ -workers.

Col.  4.  11.  these  only  are  my  f. -workers  to  kingdom
FELLOWS.

Judg.  11.  37.  bewail  my  virginity,  I  and  my/

J«.  25.  lest  angry /.  run  on  thee,  and  thou  lose  life
20. 1 11.  all  Israel  were  gathered/,  as  one  man
~  i>am.  6.20.  as  one  ot  the  vain /.  uncovereth  himseli
Psal.  45.  7-  with  oil  of  gladness  above  /  Heb.  1.  y
Isa.  AA.  11.  behold  all  nis/.  shall  be  ashamed
Ezek.  37.  19.  i  will  take  the  tribes  of  Israel  his  f
’  K  18- theY  sought  Daniel  and  his /  to  be  slain
18.  that  Daniel  and  his/  should  not  perish
7 •  20.  whose  look  was  more  stout  than  his  /

Zech.  3.  8.  thou  and  thy/,  that  sit  before  thee
Mat.  11.  16.  like  to  children  calling  to  their  /

Acts  17.  5.  Jews  took  lewd  /  of  the  baser  sort
FELLOWSHIP.

Lev.  6.  2.  which  was  delivered  him  to  keep,  or  in  /.

94.  20.  shall  the  throne  of  iniq.  have  /.with  thee?
Acts  2.  42.  they  contin.  in  apostles’  doctrine  and  /

1  Cor.  1.  9.  ye  were  called  to  the /.  of  his  Son
10.  20.  not  that  ye  should  have  /.  with  devils

2  Cor.  6. 14.  what /'.hath  righteousness  with  unright¬

eousness  <  what  comm  union  light  with  daikn..1

8.  4.  take  on  us  the/,  of  ministering  to  the  saints
Gal.  2.  9.  they  gave  to  me  the  right  hand  of/

Eph.  3.  9.  to  make  men  see  what  is  the/,  of  mystery

5.  11.  have  no/,  with  unfruitful  works  of  darkness
Phil.  1.  5.  for  your/,  in  the  gospel  till  now

2.  1.  it  there  be  any/,  of  the  spirit,  if  bowels  ‘

3.  10.  that  i  may  know  the  /.  of  his  sufferings

1  John  1 .  3.  that  ye  also  may  have  /  with  us  and
truly  our/,  is  with  Father,  and  with  Son  J  C

6.  it  we  say  that  we  have/,  with  him,  and  walk  iii

7.  if  we  walk  in  light,  we  have/  one  with  anothei

Gen.  27.  22.  Jacob  went  near,  and  Isaac/,  him
31. +  34.  Laban/,  all  the  tent,  but  found  them  not
Exod.  10.21.  over  land, even  darkness  that  may  be/
Prov.  23.  35.  they  have  beaten  me,  and  I  /.  it  not
Mark  5.  29.  she/,  she  was  healed  of  that  plague
Acts  28.  5.  he  shook  off  the  beast  and  /'.  no  harm
FEM  A  LE.

Gen.  1.  27.  male  and/,  created  he  them,  5.  2
6. 19.  two  of  every  sort,  they  shall  be  male  aim  L
7.  2.  take  to  thee  by  sevens,  the  male  and  the  I.  X

9.  there  went  in  two  and  two.  the  male  and  the/

161


FIE


F  E  T


F  1  E


xJen.  7.  16.  they  that  went  in,  went  in  male  and  /.
Lev.  .3.  1.  if  he  offer  it,  whether  it  be  male  or/.

5.  if  his  offering  be  of  the  Hock,  male  or/.

4.  28.  offering  a /.  without  blemish,  32.  I  5.  6.

12.  7.  law  for  her  that  hath  born  a  male  or/.
•27.4.  if  it  be  a/,  thy  estimation  shall  be  30  shekels

5.  thy  estimation  for  the./',  ten  shekels,  7-

6.  for  the /.  from  a  month  old,  three  shekels
Kiim.  5.  3.  both  male  and/,  shall  ye  put  out
Deut.  4. 16.  graven  image,  the  likeness  of  male  or  /.
7.  14.  shall  not  be  a  male  or/,  barren  among  you

Mat.  19.  4.  made  them  male  and/.  Mark  10.  0.
<Jal.  3.  28.  in  Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor  /.
FENCE.

Ps  62  3  ve  be  as  a  bowing  wall  and  a  tottering  /.

'  '  J  FENCED.

Job  10. 11.  he  hath /.  me  with  bones  and  sinews


jTUU  1U.  11.  UCHftuv  —  ,  - 1

19.  8.  he  hath /.  up  my  way  that  l  cannot  pass  #
*,a  5  c  mv  beloved  hath  a  vineyard,  and  he  /  1
‘  FENCED.


it


Deut.  28.  52.  till  thy  high  and/,  walls  come  down
2  Sam.  23.  7.  man  that  shall  touch  them  must  be/.

2  Kings  3.  19.  and  ye  shall  smite  every  /.  city
10.  2.  there  are  with  you  a  /.  city  and  armour
17!  9.  from  the  tower  to  the/,  city,  18.  8.

19.  +  24.  I  have  dried  up  the  rivers  of  /.  places
with  the  sole  of  my  feet,  Isa.  37- +  25.
Asa.  2. 15.  the  day  of  the  Lord  on  every/,  wall
Jer.  15.  20.  I  will  make  thee  a/,  brazen  wall
Ezek. 36. 35.  the  waste  and  ruined  cities  are  become/.
Hab.  2.  t  1.  1  will  set  me  upon  the/,  place

FENCED  cities.  .  .

Num.  32. 17.  our  little  ones  shall  dwell  in/,  cities
Deut.  3.  5.  all  these  cities  were/,  with  walls
9.  1.  to  possess  cities  great  and/,  up  to  heaven
Josh.  10.  20.  the  rest  of  them  entered  into/,  cities
14.  12.  and  that  the  cities  were  great  and  f.

1  Sam.  6.  18.  golden  mice,  according  to  number  of

/.  cities

■2  Sam.  20.  6.  pursue,  lest  he  get/,  cities  and  escape

2  Kings  18. 13.  Sennacherib  came  up  against  all  the

/.  cities  of  Judah  and  took  them,  2  Chr.  12. 4.
19.  25.  thou  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste/,  cities
2  Chron.  8.  5.  Solomon  built/,  cities  with  walls
12.  4.  Shishak  took  the  /.  cities  of  .1  udah
14.6.  Asa  built/,  cities  in  I  udah,  land  had  rest
17.  2.  Jehoshaphat  placed  forces  in  the  /.  cities,  19.
19.  5.  he  set  judges  throughout  all /.  cities  of  Jud.
21.  3.  Jehoshaphat  gave  them/,  cities  in  Judah
33.  14.  Manasseh  put  captains  of  war  in  f.  cities
Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  impoverish  thy/,  cities
■Dan.  11.  15.  king  of  north  shall  take  most/,  cities
Dos.  8.  14.  Judah  hath  multiplied  /.  cities
EephAAd.  day  of  alarm  against/,  cities  and  towers
FENS.

Job  40.  21.  Behemoth  lieth  in  covert  of  reed  and/.
FERRET.

Lev.  11.  30.  the/,  chameleon  and  lizard  unclear.
FERRY-Aent.

2  Sam.  19.  18.  there  went  a  /.-boat  for  king's  housh.
FERVENT.

Acts  18.  25.  A  polios,  being/,  in  spirit,  taught
Horn.  12.  11./.  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord
2  Cor.  7.  7.  he  told  us  your/,  mind  towards  me
Jam.  5. 16./.  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  avails  much


«/  (l  ft  l .  kj  »  iUi  J  •  [R  cij  v/i  ico  ci  j  u  nt  14  n.  ^  u,*lu  “*uv

1  Pet.  4.  8.  above  all  things  have/,  charity

2  Pet.  3.  10.  elements  shall  melt  with/,  heat,  12.

FERVENTLY.


Gel.  4. 12.  Epaphras  labouring/,  for  you  in  prayers
1  Pet.  1.  22.  see  that  ye  love  one  another  with  a
FETCH.  [pure  heart/.

■Gen.  18.  5.  I  will  /.  a  morsel  of  bread  and  comfort
27.  9.  go,/,  me  two  kids  of  the  goats,  13.

45.  then  l  will  send  and/,  thee  from  thence
Exod.  2.  5.  when  saw  the  ark.  she  sent  maid  to/,  it
Num.  20.  10.  must  we  /.  water  out  of  this  rock  '.
Deut.  19.  12.  the  elders  shall  send  and  /.  him

24. 10.  thou  shall  not  go  to/,  his  pledge,  19.

30.  4.  from  whence  will  the  Lord  thy  God  f.  thee
Judg.  11.  5.  elders  of  Gilead  went  to/.  Jephthah

20. 10.  take  men  to/,  victuals  for  the"  people

1  Sam.  4.  3.  let  us/,  the  ark  of  the  covenant

6.  21.  saying,  come  ye  down,  and/,  it  up  to  you
16.  11.  Samuel  said  to  Jesse,  send /.  Saul,  20.  31.

26.  22.  let  us  come  over  and  /.  the  spear

2  Sam.  5.  23.  but /.  a  compass  behind  them
14.  13.  the  king  doth  not  /.  home  his  banished

20.  to  /.about  this  form  of  speech  Joab  done  this

1  Kings  17.  10./.  me,  1  pray  thee,  a  little  water
11.  as  she  was  going  to/,  it,  he  called  her

2  Kings  6.  13.  go  spy  where  lie  is,  that  1  may  /.  him
2  Chron.  18.  8.  f.  quickly  Micaiah  the  son  of  Inda
Neh.  8. 15.  /.  olive-branches,  pine  and  myrtle
Job  36.  3-  1  will  /.  my  knowledge  from  afar

Isa.  56.  12.  come  ye,  say  they,  j  will  /.  wine
Jer.  36.  21.  the  king  sent  Jehiidi  to  /.  the  roll
Acts  16.  37.  let  them  come  themselves  and/,  us  out
FETCHED.

Gen.  18.  4.  let  a  little  water,  I  pray  you,  be/.

7.  Abraham/,  a  calf  tender  and  good

27.  14.  Jacob  went  and  /.the  kids  to  his  mother
Judg.  18.  18.  they  /.  the  carved  image,  the  ephod

1  Sam.  7. 1.  men’ cameand/.  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord

10.  23.  and  they  ran,  and  /.  Saul  thence

2  Sam.  4.  6.  as  though  they  would  have/,  wheat
9.  5.  king  David  sent  and  /.  Mephibosheth

11.  27.  David  sent  and /.  Bath-sheba  to  his  house
14.  2.  Joab  f.  from  Tekoah  a  wise  woman

1  Kings  7.  13.  kingSolomon  f.  11  iram  out  of  Tyre
9.  28.  they/,  from  Ophirgold,  420 talents

2  Kings  3.  9.  /.  a  compass  of  seven  days’  journey

i  1  A  T  ..  I  ......  .  .  1  .  .  m  .  .  «  _  1  S'  ^  ,  1  ,  ,  ..r*  f  \  t  ’  ,*  L,  u  1,  /  1  1*0/1  c


2  Kings 25.7-  they  put  out  the  eyesof  Zedekiah,  and
bound  him  with  /.  ot  brass,  Jer.  39. 1 1  •  ,  5..  1 11.

2  Chron.  33.  11.  Manasseh  was  bound  with/

36.  6.  Jehoiakim  bound  with/,  to  carry  to  Babylon
Psal.  105.  18.  whose  feet  they  hurt  with/.

149  8.  to  bind  their  nobles  with/,  ot  iron
Mark  5  4.  being  often  bound  with/.  Luke  8.  29.
FEVER.

Deut.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  a/.  (

Mat  8.  14.  Jesus  was  come,  he  saw  Peter’s  wife  s
mother  sick  of  a/.  Mark  1.30.  Luke  4.  38.
John  4.  52.  yesterday  at  seventh  hour  the/ left  him
Acts  28.  8.  the  father  of  Publius  lay  sick  ot  a/.

F  E  W .

Gen  °4  55  let  the  damsel  abide  with  us  a/,  days
27.‘44.  tarry  a/,  days  till  thy  brother  s  fury  turn
34'  g  ),  1  being/,  in  number,  they  will  slay  me
47.  9.  f.  and  evil  have  the  days  ot  my  lite  been
Lev.  26.  22.  1  w  ill  make  you/.  Deut .  4.  27 ■  1  28.  62
Num.  9.  20.  the  cloud  was  a/,  days  on  the  tabern.

13.  18.  see  the  people  whether  they  be  J.  or  many
26  54  to  f.  shall  give  the  less  inheiitance,  35.  8.

56.  possession  shall  be  divid.  between  many  and/.
Deut.  26.  5.  my  father  sojourned  there  with  a/.

33.  6.  let  Heuben  live,  let  not  his  men  be/.

1  Sam.  14.  6.  no  resrraint,  to  save  by  many  or/.

17.  28.  with  whom  hast  thou  left  those/,  sheep !

2  Chron.  29.  31.  but  the  priests  were  too/.

~Neh  0  1°.  I  arose,  1  and  some/,  men  with  me

7.  4.  the  city  large,  but  the  people  were/,  therein
Job  10.  20.  are  not  my  days/.  ?  cease  then,  let  alone

14.  1.  man  is  of/,  days,  and  full  of  trouble
16.  22.  when  a/,  years  are  come,  then  1  shall  go
32.  +  6.  1  am  /.  of  days,  and  ye  are  very  old
Psal.  109.  8.  let  his  days  be/,  and  let  another  take
Eccl.  5. 2.  God  is  in  heaven,  therefore  let  words  be/.

9.  14.  there  was  a  little  city,  and  /.  men  in  it
12.  3.  the  grinders  cease,  because  they  are/

Isa  10.  19.  the  rest  of  the  trees  of  forest  shall  be  f.

24  6  the  inhabitants  are  burned,  and  /  men  left
41  1 14.  fear  not  Jacob,  yef.  men  of  Israel
Ezek.  5.  3.  thou  shalt  also  take  a/,  in  number
12.  16.  1  will  leave  a /.  men  from  the  sword
Dan  11.  20.  within/,  days  he  shall  be  destroyed
Mat.  7.  14.  strait  is  gate,  and/,  there  be  that  find  it
9.  37.  but  the  labourers  are  /.  Luke  10.  2.

15.  34.  seven,  and  a/,  little  fishes,  Mark  8.7.

20.  16.  many  be  called,  but/,  are  chosen,  22.  14.
25.21.  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a/,  things,  23.
Mark  6.  5.  laid  hands  on  a/,  sick  folk,  healed  them
Luke  12.  48.  shall  be  beaten  with  /.  stripes

13  23  one  said,  Lord,  are  there/,  that  be  saved
Acts  24.  4.  that  thou  wouldest  hear  us  a/,  words
Eph.  3.  3  the  mystery  as  1  wrote  afore  ir./.  words
Ueb.  12. 10.  for  they  verily  for  a/,  days  chastened  us
13  22.  for  1  have  written  unto  you  in/,  words
1  Pet  3  20  wherein/,  that  is,  eight  souls  were  saved
Lev.  2.14.  1  have  a/,  things  against  thee,  20.

3.  4.  thou  hast  a  /.  names  even  in  Sardis
But  a  FEW.

Gen.  29.20.  they  seemed  to  him  but  a  f.  days
I.ev.  25.  52.  if  there  remain  but  f.  years  to  jubilee
Josh.  7  ’  3.'  the  men  of  Ai  are  but  j.

1  Chron.  16.  19.  when  ye  were  but  f.  Psal.  105. 12.
Jer.  42.  2.  for  we  are  left  but  a  f.  ot  many

Not  a  FEW.

2  Kings  4.  3.  borrow  empty  vessels,  borrow  not  af.
Isa  10.  7-  to  destroy,  and  cut  off  nations  not  a  J.
Jer.  .30!  19.  multiply  them,  and  they  shall  not  be  f.
Acts  17.  4.  chief  women  not  af.  V,  12.  of  men  not  a  f.

F  E.  W  E  K .

Num.  33.  54.  to/,  ye  shall  give  the  less  inheritance
Job  30. 1 1.  but  they  that  are  of  /.  days  than  I
FEW  ES  T.

Deut.  7.  7.  for  ye  were  the/,  of  all  people
FEWNESS.

Lev.  25. 16.  according  to /.  of  years  diminish  pride
FIDELITY.

Tit.  2.  10.  servants  not  purloining,  shewing  good/.
FIELD.

Gen.  23. 11 .  the/,  give  I  thee,  and  the  cave  therein
20.  the  f.  and  cave  were  made  sure  to  Abraham
27.  27.  the  smell  of  my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  a/.
31.4.  Jacob  called  Racbel  and  Leah  to  the/.

49.  30.  in  the/,  which  Abraham  bought,  50.  13.
Erod.  22.  5.  if  a  man  shall  cause  a/,  to  be  eaten
6.  so  that  the  corn  or  /.  be  consumed  therewith
Lev.  19. 19.  shalt  not  sow  thy  f.  with  mingled  seed
25.  3.  six  years  shalt  sow  thy/,  and  prune  vineyard
4.  in  the'seventh  vear  thou  shalt  not  sow  thy/.

27.  17.  if  he  sanctiYy  his/,  from  year  of  jubilee,  18.
20.  if  he  will  not  redeem  the/,  or  if  he  sold  the/.
Dent.  5.  21.  nor  shalt  thou  covet  thy  neighbour’s/.
Josh.  15.  18.  to  ask  of  her  father  a/.  Judg.  1.  14.
Ruth  2.  8.  go  not  to  glean  in  another/,  but  abide
4  5.  Poaz  said,  what  day  thou  buyest /.  of  N  aomi
2  Sam.  2.  +  16.  place  was  called  the  f.  ot  strong  men
14.  .30.  Joab’s  /.  is  near  mine,  and  he  hath  barley
31.  why  have  thy  servants  set  my /.  on  fire  r
2  Kings  18.  17.  they  stood  by  upper  pool,  which  is
in  the  high-way  ot  the  fuller’s/.  Isa.  7-  3.1  36. .2,
Neh.  1.3.  10.  the  Levites  fled  every  one  to  his/.
Psal.  96.  12.  let  the /.  be  joyful  and  all  therein
Prov.  24.  30.  I  went  by  the  /.  of  the  slothful
n~ ,  of,,  lambs  for  clothing,  and  goats  the  price  of/,


Luke  17.  7.  will  say  to  him,  when  come  from  ti  e
Acts  1.  18.  this  man  purchased  a/,  w  ith  reward
fruitful  FIELD.

2  Kings  19.  +  23.  1  will  enter  his/./.  Isa.  37, t  2
Jsa.  In.  18.  shall  consume  the  glory  ot m% fruitful \
29.  17.  Lebanon  shall  be  turned  into  a Jruitfu/j\
sK  15.  till  Spirit  be  poured  out,  and  the  wild,
ness  be  a  fruitful  f.  and  the  fruitful  f.
counted  a  forest

16.  and  righteousness  in  the  fruitful  f.

Ezek.  17.  5.  he  planted  the  seed  in  a  fruitful  f.
In  the  FIELD.

Gen.  4.  8.  it  came  to  pass  when  they  were  in  the
24.  63.  Isaac  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  f.

29.  2.  he  looked,  and  behold  a  well  in  the  f.

37.  15.  behold,  Joseph  was  wandering  in  thef.  :
Exod.  9.  19.  send  and  gather  all  thou  hast  in  the
25.  the  hail  smote  in  Egypt  all  that  was  in  the

1  1  „  _  _ n  l .  1  1  if  411  t  ii  n  C


'JO.  II1G  110,11  tjuivu.  V  7  •  •  ,  '

16.  25.  to-da.v  ye  shall  not  find  it  in  the  f.


1U.  lU-U<iy  /c  Oimn  live  ‘  ,  . - V  l

Dent.  21.  1.  if  one  be  found  slam,  lying  in  thef.
22.  25.  if  a  man  find  a  betrothed  damsel  in  thif.
2b!  .3.  blessed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city  and  in.au,

16.  cursed  shalt  thou  be  in  the  city  and  in  thef]
Judg.  1.3.  9.  angel  came  to  woman  as  she  sat  in  th<

1  Sam.  6. 18.  which  stone  reinaineth  inf.  of  Josh?
19.  .3.  I  will  stand  beside  mv  father  in  thef.

.30.  11.  and  they  found  an  Egyptian  in  thef.

2  Sam.  14.  6.  two  sons,  and  they  two  strove  inth,
1  Kings  11.  29.  and  they  two  were  alone  in  the

14.  li.  him  that  dieth  of  Jeroboam  in  thef.

21.  24.  him  that  dieth  of  Ahab  in  the  f.  fowls  e.
1  Chron.  19.  9.  kings  were  by  themselves  int  e
27  .  26.  over  them  that  did  the  work  in  thef
Job  24.  6.  they  reap  every  one  his  corn  in  the  j.
Psal.  78.  12.  marvellous  things  *»  thtj.  of  Zosn,
Prov.  24.  27.  make  it  for  thyself'  in  the  f.

Jer.  14.  5.  yea,  the  hind  cal  ed  in  thef.

17.  3.  O  my  mountain  in  the  f.  1  will  give  tosp
41  8.  for  we  have  treasures  in  the  f.  ot  wheat  ;

Ezek.  7.  15.  he  that  is  in  thef.  shall  die  by  the  sw.i
26.  6.  he  shall  slay  thy  daughters  m  thef.  8.
Mic.  4. 10.  thou  sha'.t  dwell  in  thef.  and  goto  IT
Zech.  10.  1.  shall  give  to  every  one  grass  in  the  J
Mai.  3. 11.  nor  shall  your  vine  cast  her  fruit  tntl]
Mat.  24. 18.  neither  let  him  who  is  in  thef.  retur,
take  his  clothes,  Mark  13. 16.  Luke  17.
40.  then  shall  two  be  in  the  f.  Luke  17..  36.
Luke  2. 8.  there  were  shepherds  abiding  in  thef
12  28.  clothe  the  grass  which  is  to-day  in  the /
15.  25.  now  his  elder  son  vras  in  the  f.  heard  mi
Into  the  FIELD.

Num  22.  23.  ass  turned  aside,  and  went  into  V
Judg.  <).  42.  the  people  went  out  into  thef.

1  Sam.  6.  14.  the  cart  came  into  thef.  ot  Joshua
20.  11.  Jonathan  said,  come  let  us  go  into  the]

2  Sam.  11.  23.  the  men  came  out  unto  us  into  ti ,
20.  12.  removed  Amasa  out  of  the  way  into  tl\
l  Kings  4.  39.  one  v’ent  into f.  and  gathered  gou;.
Cant.  7.  11.  my  beloved,  let  us  go  forth  into  tin
Jer.  6.  25.  go  not  forth  into  f.  nor  walk  by  the  v

14.  18.  if  1  go  forth  into  the  f.  behold  the  slai:

Of  the  FIELD.  I

Gen.  2.  5.  God  made  every  plant  and  herbo/ 1..
34.  7,  and  the  sons  of  Jacob  came  out  <>/  thef.
47.  24.  four  parts  your  own,  for  seed  of  the  J .
Lev,  26.  4.  the  trees  of  the  J'.  yield  fruit
27.  28.  no  devoted  thing  if  thef.  shall  be  sold;
Deut.  20.  19.  for  the  tree  of  the  f.  is  man  s  life
Juog.  5.  4.  when  thou  marchedstout  of  the  J.
19.  16.  came  an  old  man  from  his  work  out  of  1 ,
liuth  2.  3.  on  a  part  of  the  f.  belonging  to  Boa

1  Sam.  11.5.  Saul  came  after  the  herd  out  3/ (

2  Kings  9.  25.  cast  him  in  portion  of  thef.  o.  Na  1
37.  carcase  shall  be  as  dung  upon  the  face  oft

Job  5. 23.  shal  I  be  in  league  with  the  stones  of  th


■v  lit  1  •  r •  ;7  .  »  •  ii  vv/ in  1/1  viv  •  —

11.  4.  Jehoiada  sent  and  /.  rulers  over  hundreds
■2  Chron.  1.  17-/.  from  Egypt  a  chariot  and  horse


31.  16.  she  considered  a  f.  and  buyetli  it
Eccl.  5.  9.  the  king  himself  is  served  by  the/.

Jsa.  5.  8.  woe  to  them  that  lay  /.  to/,  till  no  place
16.  10.  and  joy  is  taken  outot  the  plentiful  /.
Jer.  12.  4.  how  long  shall  herbs  of  every/,  w  ither  .
2ff  18.  Zion  shall  be  plow  ed  like  a/.  Mic.  3.  12.

_ —  ■  ,  1  _ _  _  r  a  I l  f  -  L,  \  »-* .  » 4-  T


a.  III  UIC,  A*  I  (  .  /  ,  i  1  will  pi  a  V/IHU  “I

12. 11.  the  guard  came  and  /.  the  shields
Jer.  26.  23.  and  they/,  forth  Uri.iah  out  of  Egypt
Acts  28. 13.  and  from  thence  w  e  /.  a  compass
FETCH  ETIL

Deut.  19.  5.  and  his  hand  /.  a  stroke  with  the  axe
FETTEKS.

Judg.  16.  21  they  bound  Samson  with  /.  of  brass
2  Sam.  3.  34.  thy  hands  were  not  bound,  nor  thy

feet  put  into  /.

162


32.  7.  buy  thee  my/,  that  is  in  Anathoth,  8.

.  . /a.i. u  . .  ^  tint'  f  nnr


On


O.


j  .  uu  v  uict  in/  j  •  v  **-■  in  -  •  — - /  '  .

35.  9.  neither  have  we  vineyard,  nor/,  nor  seen
48.  33.  joy  and  gladness  is  taken  from  plentiful/.
Ezek.  17.  +  8.  w  as  planted  in  a  good/,  by  great  waters
Joel  1. 10.  the /.  is  wasted,  the  land  mourneth
Mat.  13.  24.  that  sowed  good  seed  in  bis/.  .31.

38.  the /.  is  the  world,  good  seed  child r.  ot  kingd
44.  again  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  treasure
”  hid  in  a /.  he  selleth  all,  and  bu^-eth  that/.
27.  7.  they  bo  unfit,  with  them  the  potter’s/.  10.

8.  the  /'.  was  called  the  f.  of  blood.  Acts  1.  19


Psal.  103.  15.  as  a  flower  of  the  f.  he  ftounshe
Cant.  2.  7.  1  charge  you  by  the  roes  of  thef.
Isa.  37.  27.  the  inhabitants  w'ere  as  mass  oft/


40.  6.  all  flesh  is  grass,  and  as  the  flower  of  t
43.  20.  the  beast  of  the  f.  shall  honour  me


't*>.  «.V.  MIC  VJ  If! C  .  ,

55.  12.  all  the  trees  of  the  f.  shall  clap  their  n
Jer.  4.  I?,  as  keepers  of  the  /.  are  they  against

...  .  .»  r*  t  1  _ _ ♦Vii-v  r a/'I/  nr  I


e/  .  “t.  14.  j 7  V- 1  O  VJ  J  •  -  [j  w  I  f

18.  14.  the  snow  of  Lebanon  from  the  rock  oj  \
.  t-~‘~oft |


Lam.  4.  9.  stricken  for  want  of  the  fruits  u
Ezek.  16.  7.  caused  thee  to  multiply  as  bude/J
17.  24.  all  trees  of  the  /’.  shall  know  that  I  L'J
34.  27.  the  tree  of  the  /'.  shall  yield  her  fruit
.36.  30.  1  will  multiply  the  increase  oj  the  J.
39.  10.  so  they  shall  take  no  wood  outo/ the  .
Dan.  4. 15.  in  tender  nrass  of  thef.  and  wet  witt 1
Ilos.  10.  4.  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  the!  .j
12.  11.  their  altars  as  heaps  in  furrows  of  the
Joel  1.11.  because  the  harvest  of  thef.  is  pen
12.  even  all  the  trees  of  the  f.  are  withered
19.  and  the  flame  hath  burnt  all  the  trees  of  .
Mic.  1.  6.  1  will  make  Samaria  as  an  heap  oj  .
Mat.  6.  28.  consider  the  lilies  of  thef.  how  they
0  1  w  herefore,  if  God  soelothe  the  grass  ol ..


3i).  >v  uei  t*lUi  c,  11  wtiouip  <  r

13.  36.  declare  the  parable  of  the  tares  of  the
See  Beast,  Beasts.

Open  FIELD.

Lev.  14. 7.  shall  let  living  bird  loose  into  thee
17.5.  bring  sacrifices  w  hich  they  offer  in  then
Jer.  9.  22.  men’s  carcases  as  dung  upon  the  c
Ezek.  16. 5.  but  thou  w^ast  cast  out  in  the  open

32.  4.  1  will  cast  thee  forth  upon  the  open/  (

33.  27.  him  that  is  in  the  open/.  L  will  give  to  j
39.  5.  thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open  f.  saith  1  <

FI  ELDS.

Exod.  8.  13.  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  houses
L.ev.  25.  31.  shall  he  counted  as  the/,  ol  t  ie  a
27.  22.  which  is  not  of  the  /.  ot  his  possess'0!

Num.  16.  14.  thou  hast  not  given  us  inheritiuw

20. 17.  w  e  will  not  pass  thro’/,  or  vineyards,  ■

Deut.  11. 15.  and  l  will  send  grass  into  thy
32.  13.  that  he  might  eat  the  increase  ot  the
.32.  their  \  ine  is  as  the  vine  of  the  /.  or  Dor
Josh.  21. 12.  but  the  /'.and  villages  gave  they  to,
1  Sam.  8.  14.  he  will  take  your/,  and  viney ?•,
22.  7.  w  ill  the  son  of  Jesse  give  each  ot  you,
25.  15.  they  were  a  wall  to  us  when  w  e  we-
1  Kings  2.  26.  get  thee  to  Anathoth,  to  thine


F  1  F


FIG


FIG


h  js  16.  4.  him  that  dieth  of  Baasha  in /.  shall

fowls  eat

(  m.  16.  32.  let  the/,  rejoice  and  all  therein
7  j.  and  over  the  store  houses  in  the/,  in  cities
(  m.  26.  1 10.  had  vine-dressers  in  fruitful  /.

10.  and  who  sendeth  waters  upon  the  /.
s.  107-  37-  and  sow  the/,  and  plant  vineyards
3  j.  we  found  it  in  the  f.  of  the  wood
r,  8.  26.  while  as  yet  he  had  not  made  the/.

3 ).  and  enter  not  into  the  /.  of  the  fatherless
■a  .8.  for/,  ot  lleshbon  languish  and  vine  of  Sib.
C  ].  thev  shall  lament  for  teats,  the  pleasant /.
7  1C.  their/,  shall  be  turned  toothers,  8.  10

3  \  I  have  seen  thine  abominations  in  the  /'.
e  ). /.  shall  be  possessed  again  in  this  land

4  .  Bought  ||  44.  men  shall  buy/,  for  money

9 1.  N  ebuzar-adan  gave  them /.  at  the  same  time
0  the  captains  of  forces  which  w  ere  in  the/.  13.

19.  they  shall  possess  the  /.  of  Ephraim
7  ;.  2.  they  covet  /'.  and  tjtke  them  by  violence

4  lining  aw'ay,  he  hath  divided  our/.

a  1.  1".  although  the/,  shall  yield  no  meat
U2. 23.  he  went  through  the  corn-/.  Luke  6.  1.

<), .  35.  lift  up  your  eves,  and  look  on  the /.

1/ ..  4.  the  labourers,  which  reaped  down  youi !
Open  FIELDS.

?7 1.53.  he  shall  let  go  the  living  bird  into  open/
it  19.  16.  one  slain  with  a  sword  in  the  open  f.

5  11.  11.  servants  are  encamped  in  theo^e/i /,
u  29t  5.  thou  shalt  fall  upon  the  open/.

FIERCE.

v  9.  7.  cursed  be  their  anger,  for  it  wras/.
r.  28. 50.  L.  bring  a  nation  of  a/,  countenance
b  10.  the  voice  of  /.  lion  and  teeth  are  broken
iJi.  thou  lmntest  me  as  a /.  lion,  thou  shewest
t  nor  hath  the  /.  lion  passed  by  it
IJi.  none  is  so  /.  that  dare  stir  him  up
a  .4.  and  a/,  king  shall  rule  over  them,  saith  L.
5.  thou  shalt  not  see  a/,  people  of  deeper  speech
Mi.  23.  a  king  of/,  countenance  shall  stand  up
a.. 8.  horses  are  more/.  than  the  evening  wolves
a  .28.  two  possessed  with  devils,  exceeding/.
ia 3. 5.  and  they  were  more /.  saying,  he  stirreth
Vt  3. 3.  for  men  shall  be  incontinent,/,  despisers
n  .  4.  the  ships  which  are  driven  of/,  winds
See  Anger,  Wrath.
FIERCENESS.

b  24.  heswalloweth  the  ground  with/,  and  rage
r.  1. 38.  land  desolate  for  the  /.  of  the  oppressor
See  Anger.  Wrath.

FIERCER.

19.  43.  words  of  Judah  were/,  than  of  Isr.
FIERY.

»21.  6.  the  Ld.  sent/,  serpents  among  people
3.  ake  thee  a/,  serpent,  and  set  it  upon  a  pole
n  3. 15.  wherein  were  /.  serpents  and  scorpions
3.  from  his  right-hand  went  a  /.  law'  for  them
'.  9.  shalt  make  them  as  a  /.  oven  in  thy  anger
»:.  29-  and  his  fruit  shall  be  a  /.  flying  serpent
21.6.  into  the  midst  of  a/,  furnace,  11,  15,  21.

7  ourG.  is  able  to  deliver  us  from/,  furnace
!S  iree  men  fell  down  into  midst  of  f.  furnace
’tame near  to  the  mouth  of  the /.  furnace
( is  throne  was  like  the  /.  flame  and  his  wheels
t  /.  stream  issued  and  came  forth  from  him
v .  t  3.  the  chariots  shall  be  with  /.  torches
>/.  16.  able  to  quench  the  /.  darts  of  the  wicked
:L0.  27.  a  looking  for  of  judgment,  and/,
r,  , .  ,  .  indignation

J  4.  12.  think  it  not  strange  concerning/,  trial
FIFTH.

17.  Leah  bare  Jacob  the  /.  son,  Tssachar
9.  24.  and  the  /.  lot  came  out  for  Asher
<a  2.  23.  Abner  smote  Asahel  under  the/,  rib
L-  Abner  under  the/,  rib  ||  4.  6.  lsh-bosheth
L.  Joab  smote  Amasa  in  the  /.  rib,  he  died
5.  Sanballat  sent  the  /.  time  to  Nehemiah
e  9.  when  he  had  opened  the /.  seal  I  saw  souls
-he/.  angel  sounded,  and  1  saw’  a  star  fall
'•!•/•  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  seat  of  beast
• .  the/,  a  sardonyx  ;  the  sixth,  a  sardius
See  Day,  Part.

FIFTH  month.

7  33.  38.  Aaron  died  the  first  day  of  the/,  m.
Of  25. 8./.  m.  came  N ebuzar-adan,  Jer.  52. 12.
’i.  27.  8.  the  fifth  captain  for  the  f.  month
Ti ■  8-  Ezra  came  to  Jerusalem  in  the  f.  m.  9.

'•  3.  carrying  Jerusalem  captive  in  the /.  m.

'  (in  the/,  month  Hananiah  spake  unto  me
e  0. 1.  in  the  /.  month  the  elders  sat  before  me
.  3.  saying  should  1  weep  in  the  /.  month?

•  len  ye  tasted  and  mourned  in  the  /.  month
Hastot  fourth  and  of/,  m.  be  jovr  and  gladn.

.  FIFTH  year.

'■  ’•  ^5.  in_the  /.  y.  ye  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof
hf  *,4-  25.  in  the  /.  year  of  king  llehoboam,

-  'a*  came  up  ag.  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  12.  2.
hr  8. 16.  in  the/,  y.  of  Joram,  Jehoram  began

■  ■  9.  in/,  y.  ot  Jehoiakim,  proclaimed  a  fast

■  2.  was  the/,  year  of  Jehoiachin's  captivity

;■  .  FIFTEEN.

71  y0-  /•  cubits  upwards  did  the  waters  prevail
"  ,<  •  14.  the  hangings  to  be/,  cubits,  15.  |  38.  14.

1  n  [k  then  estimation  shall  be  /.  shekels

■  v-i  now  Zl!>a  had  /.  sons,  and  twenty  serv.

7  ' .  *nd  his/,  sons  went  over  Jordan

'  1  lay  9n  forty -five  pillars,/,  in  a  row

,  V  -.v*  Amaziah  lived  after  Jehoash /.  years

•  I  will  add  to  thy  days/,  years,  and  deliver
„  '«  h'om  Assyria,  2  Chron.  25.  25.  Isa.  38.  5.
n  o  j  [/’  shekels  shall  beyourmaneh

L.:,  *•  1  bought  her  to  me  for  J.  pieces  of  silver
™  .ethany  was/,  fm  longs  off  Jerusalem
they  sounded,  anil  found  it  /.  fathoms

■  8.  i  went  to  Jerus.  I  abode  with  Peter /.  days
■0  ..  n  .  FIFTEENTH.

•  -3.in/.  year  of  Amaziah,  Jerobo.  began

■  ’  .'?•  ■**.  /.  to  Bilgah  ||  25.  22.  /.  to  Jerimoth

10. .10.  gathered  to  Jerusalem  in  the/,  year

■  1.  in  the/ year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  (Jesar

,  rlFTEENTII  day.


0 16. 1.


day.

came  to  Sin,  on/,  day  of  second  month


Lev.  23. 6.  on  the/,  day  of  the  same  month  is  feast
ot  unleavened  bread  to  L.  AW.  28.  17.  |  33.  3.
34.  the  /.  day  of  this  seventh  month  shall  be  the
feast  ot  tabernacles  to  Ld.39.  Num  29  1°

1  Kings  12.  32.  on  the/,  d.  of  the  eighth  month  was

Jeroboam  s  feast,  he  offered  on  the  altar,  33.
Esth.  9. 18.  on  the/,  day  they  rested  yearly,  21.
Ezek.  32. 17.  /.  day  of  twelfth  year  came  the  word
45.  25.  in  /.  day  shalDio  like  in  feast  of  seven  days

Gen.  6. 15.  the  breadth  of  the  ark  shall  be/,  cubits
18.  24.  not  spare  the  place  for  /.  righteous  t  26.
Exod.  26. 5./.  loops  shalt  thou  make,  10.  |  36. 12. 17.

6.  shalt  make/,  taches  of  gold,  11.  |  36.  13,  18.’

2T.  12.  shall  be  hangings  of/,  cubits,  38. 12.

30.  23.  of  cinnamon  two  hundred  and  /.  shekels,

of  sweet  calamus  two  hundred  and /.  shekels
Lev.  23.  16.  after  the  7th  sabbath,  number  /.  (lays

27. 3.  of  males  thy  estimation  /.  shekels  of  silver

16.  an  homer  of  barley -seed  devalued  at  /.  shek.
Num.  4. 3.  from  thirty  years  old  and  upward,  even

„  ,  to/,  years  old,  23,  30,  35,  39.

8.  25.  from  the  age  ot/.  they  shall  serve  no  more
16.  2.  two  hundred  and/,  princes  of.the  assembly

17.  and  bring  two  hundred  and  /.  censers

26. 10.  the  fire  devoured  twro  hundred  and/,  men

31.  .30.  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  off.  for  l.evites
47.  Moses  took  one  portion  of /.  of  man  and  beast

Dent.  22. 29.  shall  give  to  damsel’s  father  f.  shekels
Josh.  7.21.  1  took  a  wedge  of  gold  of/,  shekels

2  Sam.  15.  1.  Absalom  had  /.  men  to  run  before  him

1  Kings  1.  5.  Adonijah  had/,  men  to  run  before  him

7.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  house  of  the  forest  /.  cubits

18.4.  hid  them  by/,  in  a  cave,  and  fed  them,  13.

2  Kings  1.  9.  a  captain  of/,  with  his/.  1],  13.

10.  then  let  fire  consume  thee  and  thy/.  12."

2.  7.  /.  men  of  sons  of  the  prophets  stood  to  view
17.  they  sent  therefore /.  men  to  seek  Elijah
13.  7.  he  left  to  Jehoahaz  but  /.  horsemen
15.  20.  Menahem  exacted  of  each/,  shekels
25.  but  Pekah  slew /.  men  of  the  Gileadites
2  Chr.  3.  9-  the  weight  of  nails  was  /.  shekels  of  gold
Ezra 8.6.  Ebed  son  of  Jonath.  wentup  with /.  males
Neh.  7.  70.  the  Tirshatha  gave  to  treasure  /.  basins
Esth.  5. 14.  let  a  gallows  be  made/,  cubits  high,  7.9.
Isa.  3.  3.  tne  Lord  will  take  away  the  captain  of/
Ezek.  40.  15.  to  the  face  of  the  porch  were /.  cubits’
21.  the  length  /.  cubits,  25,  29,  33,  36.  |  42.  7.

42.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  north  door  w’as  /.  cubits
flag.  2. 16.  when  one  came  to  draw  out /.  vessels
Luke  7.  41.  the  one  owed  500  pence,  the  other  /.
16.6.  he  said,  sit  down  quickly,  and  write/.

John  8.57.  thou  art  notyet /.  years  old,  hast  thou  seen
FI  FTY-ta’c.

2  Kings  15.  2.  Azariah  reigned  f.-two  years
Ezra  2.  29-  the  children  of  Nebo /.-/?«>,  Neh.  7.  33.
Neh.  6.  15.  the  wall  wras  finished  in  f.-two  davs
FIFTY-*/*.

Ezra  2.  22.  the  men  of  Netophah,/.  and  six
F 1  FT Y  thousand.

1  Sam.  6.  19.  he  smote  of  the  people/,  thousand
1  Chr.  5.  21.  they  took  of  their  camels/,  thousand
12.33.  of  Zebulun/.  thousand  could  keep  rank
Acts  19.  19.  price  of  books  burnt  /.  thousand  pieces
FIFTY -three  thousand.  [of  silver
Num.  1.43.  of  Naphtali  numb./.-/,  t.  2.  30.  |  26.  47.
Fil  l N -four  thousand.

Num.  1. 29.  of  Issachar  f.-four  th.  four  hundred,  2.6.
F  l  FT Y -seven  thousand.

Num.  1.31.ofZebulun/.-j«r*7i  th.  four  hundred  ,2.8.
FIFTY -nine  thousand.

Num.  1.23.  of  Simeon  numbered  f.-n.  //(.three  bund.
FIFTIES.

Exod.  18.21.  place  such  be  rulers  of/.  25.  Dent.  1. 15.

1  Sam.  8.  12.  the  king  appoint  him  captains  over/.

2  Kings  1.  14.  fire  burnt  up  the  two  captains  of/.
Mark  6.  40.  and  they  sat  down  by/.  Luke  9. 14.

FIFTIETH.

Lev.  25.  10.  and  ye  shall  hallow  the/,  year

11.  a  jubilee  shall  that  /.year  be  to  you,  not  sow

2  Kings  15.23.  in  the/.yearof  Azariah  king  of  Judah
FIG,  S.

The  fig-tree  and  its  fruit  are  well  known:  they  were
very  common  in  Palestine,  and  there  is  mention
often  made  of  them  in  Scripture.  Our  first  pa¬
rents  covered  their  nakedness  with  fig-leaves,
Gen.  3.  7.  gathered  either  from  common  fig-trees ,
or  from  some  of  another  kind,  the  leaves  whereof
are  much  larger.  This  tree  hath  in  it  a  milky  or
fat  oily  liquor  ;  it  is  very  fruitful.  M.  Tourne-
fort  says,  that  in  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago,
one  of  their  fig  trees  generally  produces  two  hun¬
dred  and  four-score  pound-weight  of  figs.  It  be¬
comes  barren,  either  through  the  defect  of  the
above-mentioned  liquor,  which  the  husbandman
cures  by  dung  and  sweet  water  ;  or  through  abun¬
dance  thereof,  which  is  remedied  by  causing  the
superfluous  juice  to  exiravasate.  The  prophet
Isaiah  gave  orders  to  apply  a  lump  of  figs  to
1 1  ezekiah’s  boil ;  and  immediately  after  he  was
cured,  2  Kings  20.  7-  Physicians  agree  that
figs  are  employed  with  good  success  in  bring¬
ing  imposthumes  to  a  ripeness,  to  healing  ulcers,
quinsies,  and  sore  throats  :  and  it  is  presumable
that  Ilezekiah  had  some  such  disease,  though  the
Scripture  makes  no  particular  mention  of  it.

It  is  said  in  Mat.  21.  19.  that  Jesus  coming
from  Bethany  early  m  the  morning,  and  find¬
ing  himself  to  be  hungry,  drew  near  to  a  fig-
tree,  with  a  design  of  gathering  some  figs :
and  seeing  nothing  but  leaves  upon  it,  he  cursed
it,  and  immediately  it  withered  to  the  root.
The  generality  both  of  the  ancient  and  modern
interpreters  have  looked  upon  this  action  of  our
Saviour's,  as  a  figure  of  the  rejection  of  the
Jews.  But  a  difficulty  arises,  from  a  passage
which  St.  Mark  adds  to  this  history,  that  this
was  not  a  time  for  figs,  Mark  11.  13.  The
earliest  figs  are  in  the  months  of  July  and  Au¬
gust,  and  the  latest  in  September  and  Octo¬
ber.  But  what  is  related  in  the  gospel  came  to
pass  four  or  five  days  before  the  passover,  and


conseqiiently  before  the  fifteenth  day  from  the
moon  tn  March.  This  season  therefore  was  not  a
time  to  expect  figs  :  why  then  doth  our  Saviour
curse  this  tree  ?

To  solve  this  difficulty,  some  interpreters  have  trans¬
lated  this  passage.  For  this  was  not  a  year  fer
figs  ;  they  had  failed  this  year.  But  this  rather
increases  than  lessens  the  difficulty  ;  for  why  should
our  Saviour  curse  it  for  having  no  figs,  when  this
was  not  a  seasonable  year  for  figs,  when  figs  had
failed  this  year  ?  Others  translate  it  thus ,  Fo**
there  where  he  was,  it  was  a  season  for  figs.  To
support  this  version,  both  the  pointing  and  the
common  accents  of  the  text  must  be  changed,  and
the  Evangelist  made  to  speak  in  tco  concise  «j
manner,  too  different  from  the  general  style  of  St,
Mark.

But  others  say,  that  though  this  was  not  the  time  of
figs,  as  is  evident  from  St.  Mark,  yet  there  might
be  some  of  the  forward  kind,  and  our  Saviour
might  presume  so,  seeing  the  tree  full  of  leaves.
It  is  certain  that  there  are  forward  figs:  Isaiah
compares  the  beauty  of  Samaria  to  these  early  figs,
which  people  gathered,  and  ate  as  soon  as  they
found  them.  Isa.  28.  4.  As  the  hasty  fruit  before
the  summer,  which  when  he  that  looketh  upon
it,  seeth  it,  while  it  is  yet  in  his  hand,  he  eat-
.  eth  it  up.  And  Hosea  says,  that  the  Lord  found
Israel  in  the  wilderness  as  the  first  ripe  in  the
hg-tree  at  her  first  time,  Hos.  9.  10.  And  Je
remiah  describes  them  as  excellent  figs.  Jer.  24.
2.  One  basket  had  very  good  figs,  even  like  the
hgs  that  are  first  ripe.  Pliny  acknowledges,  that
there  is  a  sort  of  fig-tree  always  green,  and  al¬
ways  with  fruit  upon  it  ;  some  ripe,  or  very  far
advanced,  according  to  the  season  ;  the  other  in
blossom,  or  Cu-ds,  Plin.  lib.  13.  cap.  8.  and  lib.
15.  cap.  18.  In  Palestine,  where  the  winter  is
very  mild,  there  might  easily  be  forward  figs  in
March  ;  wherefore  our  Saviour  might  look  for  figs-
at  this  season  upon  a  fig-tree  that  had  leaves
on  ;  and  his  cursing  the  barren  fig-tree  upon
this  occasion,  is  an  exact  figure  of  the  rejection,
of  the  Jews.  The  fig-tree  had  only  leaves  upon
it  ;  herein  it  resembled  the  Jews,  who  had  only
the  appearances  of  piety  and  religion.  'The  fig-
tree  may  be  said  to  be  culpable  for  not  bearing
fruit  at  a  time  when,  according  to  its  kind ,
fruit  might  have  been  expected  from  it  :  so
the  Jews  were  criminal  for  net  bringing  forth
the  fruits  of  righteousness,  when  our  Saviour
appeared  among  them.  He  cursed  the  barren
fig-tree,  to  show  the  malediction  which  was-
ready  to  fall  upon  the  incredulous  and  impeni¬
tent  Jews.

To  dwell  under  one’s  own  vine,  or  fig-tree,  repre¬
sents  in  Scripture  a  time  of  happiness  and  pros¬
perity,  safety,  and  security  ',  1  Kings  4.  25.

Gen.  3.  7.  they  sewed  /.  leaves  together  for  aprons
A  um.  13.23.  they  brought  of  the  pomegranate/  and/,

20.  5.  it  is  no  place  of  seed,  or  of /.  or  vines

1  Sam.  25.  18.  Abigail  took  200  cakes  of/'.

30.  12.  they  gave  the  Egyptian  a  cake  of/.

2  K  ings  20.  7.  he  said,  take  a  lump  of /.  Isa.  38.  21,
1  Chron.  12.  40.  they  that  were  nigh  brought/.

Neh.  13.  15.  on  the  sabbath  some  brought  /.

Cant.  2.  13.  the  fig-tree  putteth  forth  her  green  /.
Isa.  34.  4.  as  a  falling  /.  from  the  fig-tree

Jer.  8.  13.  there  shall  be  no /.  on  the  fig-tree
24.  1.  two  baskets  of  f.  one  had  very  good  /.  2,3.

8.  as  the  evil  f.  that  cannot  be  eaten,  so  evil
29. 17.  1  will  make  them  like  vile /.  not  to  be  eaten
Amos  7.  1 14.  but  I  was  a  gatherer  of  wild  /.

Nah.  3.  12.  shall  be  like  fig-trees  with  first  ripe /,
Mat.  7. 16.  do  men  gather  /.  of  thistles  i  Luke  6.  44.
Jam.  3.  12.  can  the  fig-tree  bear  berries,  or  a  vine/./
llev.  6.  13.  as  a  fig-tree  casteth  her  untimely  /.
FIG-TREE.

Judg.  9. 10.  the  trees  said  to  the  /.  come,  reign,  11.

1  Kings  4.  25.  dwelt  safely  under  his/.  Mic.  4.  4,

2  Kings  18.  31.  eat  every  one  of  his /.  Isa.  36.  36.
Prov.  27.  18.  whoso  keepeth/.  shall  eat  the  fruit
IIos.  9- 10. 1  saw  fathers  as  first-ripe  in  the /.  thereof
Joel  1.7.  he  hath  barked  my  /.  and  made  it  bare

12.  the  vine  is  dried,  and  the/,  languisheth
2.  22.  the/,  and  vine  do  yield  their  strength
Iiab.  3.  17.  although  the /.  shall  not  blossom
Hag.  2.  19.  as  yet  the  /.  hath  not  brought  forth
Zech.  3.  10.  ye  shall  call  every  man  under  the  /.
Mat.  21.  19.  when  he  saw  a  /.  in  way,  Mark  II.  13.
20.  how  soon  is  the /.  withered  t  Mark  1 1 .  20,  21.
24.  32.  learn  a  parable  of  the/.  Mark  13.  28.

Luke  13.  6.  a  man  had  a/,  planted  in  his  vineyard
7.  behold,  I  come,  seeking  fruit  on  this  J.

21.  29.  behold  the  /.  and  all  the  trees

John  1.  48.  w’hen  wast  under  the  /.  I  saw  thee,  50,
FIG-TREES.

Deut.8.  8.  a  land  of  wheat;  barley,  vines,  and/.
Psal.  105.  33.  he  smote  their  vines  also  and  f.

Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  eat  up  thy  vines  and  /.

Hos.  2.  12.  1  will  destroy  her  vines  and  her/.
Amos  4.  9.  when  your  gardens  and  /.  increased
Nah.  3.  12.  thy  strong  holds  shall  be  like /.
FIGHT,  Substantive.

1  Sam.  17.  20.  as  the  host  was  going  forth  to  the  /.

1  Tim.  6.  12.  fight  the  good/,  ot  faith,  lay  hold  on

2  Tim.  4.7.  1  have  fought  a  good  /.  1  have  finished
Heb.  10.  32.  ye  endured  a  great  /.  of  afflictions

11.  34.  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in  /'.
FIGHT,  Verb.

Deut.  1.  41.  then  ye  said,  we  will  go  up  and  f.

42.  go  not  up,  nor/,  for  I  am  not  among  you
2.  32.  Sihon  and  his  people  came  to  /.  at  .Iahaz
Judg.  11.  12.  thou  art  come  ag.  me  to/,  in  my  land

1  Sam.  4.  9.  quit  yourselves  like  men,  and /.

17.  10.  give  me  a  man  that  we  may/,  together

2  Sam.  1 1 .  20.  why  went  ye  so  nigh  v  hen  y  e  did  /.  *

1  K  ings  22.  31./.  not  small  nor  great,  2  Chr.  18. 30w

2  Chr.  18.31.  compassed  about  Jehoshaphat  to/,

20.  17.  ye  shall  not  need  to/,  in  this  battle

Psal.  144.  1.  which  teacheth  my  fingers  to  /.

Jer.  51.  30.  the  mighty  men  have  forborn  to  /.

163


t  i  L


F  I  L


F1L


Zech.  10.  5.  shall /.  because  the  Lord  is  witn  them

14.  14.  and  Judah  also  shall/,  at  Jerusalem
John  18.  36.  if  kingdom,  then  would  my  servants/.

1  Cor.  9.  26.  so /.  I,  not  as  one  that  beateth  the  air
J  Tim.  6.  12./.  the  good  fight  of  faith,  lay  hold  on
Jam.  4.  2.  ye  kill,  ye  /.  and  war,  yetye  have  not
See  Battles.

FIGHT  against.  .

Exod.  1.  10.  lest  they  join  our  enemies  and/,  a^.iis
Dent.  20.  10.  when  come  nigh  to  a  city  toy.  ag.  it
Josh  10  25.  so  do  to  enemies  against  whom  yet.
11.5.  they  came  and  pitched  to/,  against  Israel
IQ.  47.  the  Danites  went  up  toy.  against  Leshem
Judg.  1.  1.  who  shall  go  up  first  toy.  against  them  i
3.'  that  we  may/,  against  the  C'anaanites

10.  <1.  Ammon  passed  over  Jordan  to  J.  ag.  Judah
11  8.  Tephthah  to/,  against  Ammon,  9.

25.  did  he  ever  strive  ag.  Israel,  or/,  ag.  them  <

42.  3.  why  come  ye  this  day  to/,  against  me  i
20.  20.  Israel  set  themselves  to  /.  against  Benjamin
1  Sam.  15.  18.  f.  against  Amalekites  till  consumed
23.  1.  behold,  the  Philistines/,  against  Keilah
29.  8.  that  I  may  not  /.  against  enemies  ot  king
%  Kings  12. 21.  Rehoboam  assembled  all  J udah  with
Benjamin  to  /.  against  Israel,  2  Chron.  11. 1.
24.  ye  shall  not  f.  ag.  your  brethren,  2  Chr.  11 .4.
20.  23.  but  let  us  /.  against  them  in  the  plain,  25.

22.  32.  they  turned  to  /.  against  Jehoshaphat
1  Kings-  3.  21.  the  kings  were  come  to/,  ag.  them
19.  9.  behold,  he  is  come  out  to/,  against  thee

1  Chron.  13.  12.  O  Israel,/,  ye  not  ag.  the  Lord
32.  2.  Sennacherib  purposed  to/,  ag.  Jerusalem
35.  20.  N  echo  came  to  /.  against  Carchemish

Neh.  4.  8.  conspired  to  come  and  /.  ay.  Jerusalem
Psal.  35.  1.  f.  against  them  that/,  against  me
56.  2.  they  be  many  that/,  ag.  me,  O  most  High
Isa.  19. 2.  they  shall /.  every  one  against  his  brother
29.  7-  all  the  nations  that/,  against  Ariel

8.  the  nations  that /.  against  mount  Zion

Jer.  1.  19.  shall  /.  ag.  thee,  but  not  prevail,  15.  20.

21. 4.  wherewith  ye /.  ag.  the  king  ot  Babylon
5.  1  myself  will  /.  against  you  with  strong  arm

32.  24.  behold,  the  city  is  given  into  the  hand  ot
Chaldeans  that  /.  against  it,  29. 1  34.  22.  |  37  •  8.

37.  10.  had  smitten  Chaldeans  that/,  against  you
Zech.  14.  3.  the  Lord  shall  /.  against  those  nations
Acts  5.  39.  lest  ye  be  found  to/,  against  God
23.9.  if  angel  hath  spoken,  let  us  not/,  og.  God
Rev.  2. 16.  /.  ag.  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth
FIGHT  for.

Exod.  14.  14.  L .f.fo,  you,  Dent.  1.  30.  |  3.  22.  1  20.4.

2  Kings  10.  3.  and  f.  for  your  master’s  house
Neh  4.  14.  f.for  your  brethren,  sons,  and  wives

20.  resort  ye  thither  to  us,  our  God  shall  f.for  ns
Isa.  31.4.  the  Lord  shall  come  to  f.  for  mount  Zion
FIGHT  with.

Exod.  17. 9-  choose  men,  go  out  /.  with  Amalek
Josh.  9.  2.  Canaanites  gathered  to  /.  with  Joshua
Judg.  8.  1.  when  wentest  to /.  with  the  Midianites

9.  38.  go  out  now  and  /.  with  Abimelech

11.6.  that  we  may  /.  with  the  children  of  Ammon

1  Sam.  1.3.  5.  Philist.  gathered  to /.  with  Israel,  28.  1.
17.  9.  if  he  be  able  to /.  with  me,  and  to  kill  me

32.  thy  servant  will  go  and  /.  zr/Mthis  Philistine

2  Chron.  35.  22.  Josiah  disguised  hims.  to/,  w.  him
Isa.  30.  32.  in  battles  of  shaking  will  lie/,  with  it
Jer.  32.5.  though  ye/,  with  Chaldeans,  not  prosper

33.  5.  they  came  to  /.  with  the  Chaldeans

41.  12.  they  took  men,  and  went  to/,  w.  Ishmaej
Dan.  10. 20.  I  will  return  to  /.  with  prince  of  Persia

11.  11.  the  king  of  the  south  come  and  /.  with  him
FIGHTETH.

Exod.  14.  25.  the  L.  /.  for  them  against  Egyptians
Josh.  23.  10.  the  Lord  God,  he  it  is  that/,  for  you
1  Sam.  25.  28.  my  lord  /.  the  battles  of  the  Lord
FIGHT  IN  G.

Num.  22.  t  11.  peradventure  l  shall  prevail  in/.

1  Sam.  17-  19.  Israel  were /.  with  the  Philistines
*2  Chron.  26.  11.  Uzziah  had  an  host  of  /.  men
Psal.  56. 1.  be  merciful,  ()  God,  he /.  oppressed)  me

FIGHTINGS.

2  Cor.  7.  5.  without  were/,  within  were  fears
Jam.  4.  1.  whence  come  wars  and  /.  among  you  r

FIGURE.

Deut.  4.  16.  lest  ye  make  the  similitude  of  any/.
Isa.  44.  13.  he  maketli  it  after  the/,  of  a  man
Rom.  5.  14.  who  is  the  /.  of  him  that  was  to  come
1  Cor.  4. 6.  these  1  have  in  a  /.  transferred  to  myself
Heh,  9.  9.  which  was  a  f.  of  the  time  then  present
11.  19.  from  whence  also  he  received  him  in  a  /.

•1  Pet.  3.  21.  the  like  /.  whereunto  even  baptism
FI  GUN  ES.

1  Kings  6.  29.  he  carved  with  carved  /.  of  cherubims
Acts  7.  43.  /.  which  ye  made  to  worship  them
1  Cor.  10.  t  6.  now  these  things  were  our/.

Heh.  9.  24.  holy  places,  which  are  the/,  of  the  true
FIGURED.

Lev.  26.  +  1.  neither  shall  ye  set  up  any/,  stone
FILE.

1  Sam.  13.  21.  yet  they  had  a  /.  for  the  mattocks
FILL,  Substantive.

Lev.  25.  19.  and  ye  shall  eat  your  /.  in  safety
Deut.  23.  24.  then  thou  mayest  eat  grapes  thy/
Prov. 7. 18.  come,  let  us  take  our /.  of  love
FILL,  Verb.

Gen.  1.  22.  multiply,  and  /.  the  waters  in  the  seas
42.  25.  Joseph  commanded  to  /.  their  sacks,  44.  1.
Exod.  10.6.  the  locusts  shall/,  thy  houses
16.  32.  Moses  said,  f.  an  homer  of  it  to  be  kept
32.  t  29.  Moses  said,  /.  your  hands  to-day  to  the  L.
Lev.  16.  +  32.  the  priest,  he  shall  /.  his  hand
S  Sam.  16.  1./.  thine  horn  with  oil,  and  go  to  Jesse
1  Kings  1. +  14.  I  will  come  in  and  /.  up  thy  words
18.33./.  four  barrels  with  water,  and  pour  it  on

1  Chr.  29.  +  5.  who  then  is  willing  to  /.  his  hand  t

2  Chron.  13.  +  9.  whosoever  cometh  to  f.  his  hand
Jufi8*  21 .  till  he /.  thy  nouth  with  laughing,  and  lips

15.2.  should  a  wise  m„n /.  his  belly  with  east-wind
20.  23.  when  he  is  about  to  /.  his  belly,  God  cast  fury

23.  4.  I  would  /.  my  mouth  with  arguments

38.  3Q.  or  /.  the  appetite  of  the  young  lions
41.  7.  canst  thou  /.  his  skin  with  barbed  irons  l

164


Psal.  81.  10.  open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will/,  it
83. 16./.  tneir  taces  with  shame  to  seek  thee.  O  L.

1 10.  6.  he  shall  /.  the  places  with  the  dead  bodies
Prov.  1.  13.  we  shall  /.  our  houses  with  spoil

8.  21.  to  inherit  substance,  I  will/,  their  treasures
Isa  8.  8.  his  wings  shall/,  the  breadth  ot  thy  land

14  21.  nor/,  the  face  of  the  world  with  cities
27  6.  Isr.  shall  /.  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit
56  12.  they  say. we  will /.  ourselv.  with  strongdrink
Jer.  13.  13.  I  will  /.  inhabitants  with  drunkenness
23.  24.  do  not  I  /.  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the  L.
33'  5  it  is  to  /.  them  with  the  dead  bodies  of  men
51  14.  surely  I  will/,  thee  with  men  as  caterpillars
Ezek.  3.  3.  son  of  .man,/,  thy  bowels  with  this  roll
7.  19.  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls  nor/,  their  bowels

9.  7.  /.  the  courts  with  the  slain,  go  ye  forth

10.  2.  go  in,/,  thine  hand  with  coals  of  hre

24!  4.  gather  the  pieces,/,  it  with  the  choice  bones
30.  11.  they  shall  /.  the  land  with  the  slam
3"  4.  I  will/-  the  beasts  ot  the  whole  earth  with  hre
5.  I  will  /.  the  valleys  with  thy  height
35.  8.  I  will  /.  his  mountains  with  the  slain
43.  t  26.  they  shall  purge  altar,  and/,  their  hands
Zeph.  1.9.  who/,  their  masters’  houses  with  violence


Hag  2  7.  I  will /.  this  house  with  glory,  saith  Lord
Zech.  9.  +  15.  anil  they  shall  /.  both  the  bowls
Mat.  9.  16.  for  that  which  is  put  in  to/,  it  up

15.  33.  whence  have  bread  to/,  such  a  multitude  l

23.  32./.  ye  up  then  the  measure  of  your  fathers
John  2.  7./.  the  watei-pots  with  water
Rom.  15. 13.  G.  of  hope/,  you  with  all  joy  and  peace
Eph.  4.  10.  he  ascended,  that  he  might/,  all  things
Col.  1.24./.  up  what  is  behind  ot  sufferings  ot  C  hrist
1  Thess.  2.  16.  the  Jews,  to  f.  up  their  sins  alway
Rev.  >8.  6.  the  cup  she  hath  filled,/,  her  double

TILLED.

Gen.  6. 13.  the  earth  is/,  with  violence  through  men
21.  19.  Hagar  went  and  /.  the  bottle  with  water

24.  16.  Bebekah /.  her  pitcher  and  came  up
26.  15.  the  Philistines  had/,  the  wells  with  earth
Exod.  1.  7.  the  children  of  Israel  /.  the  land
2.  16.  they  f.  the  troughs  to  water  their  flock
28.  3.  whom  I  have  /.  with  wisdom,  35.  35.

31.  3.  I  have  f.  him  with  the  Spirit  ot  God,  35.  31.
40.  34.  the  glory  of  the  Lord/,  the  tabernacle,  35.
Dent.  26. 12.  they  may  eat  within  thy  gates  and  be/.
31.  20.  when  they  have  eaten  and/,  themselves

Josh.  9. 13.  these  bottles  we/,  were  new  and  are  rent

1  Kings  8.  10.  the  cloud  /.  the  house  of  the  Lord
11.  glory  of  L.  /.  the  house,  2  Chr.  5.  14.  |  7. 1,  2

18.  35.  and  he/,  the  trench  also  with  water

20.  27.  but  the  Syrians /.  the  country

2  Kings  3.  25.  they  cast  every  man  his  stone  and/,  it

21.  16.  Manasseh  /.  Jerusalem  with  blood,  24.  4.

23.  14.  Josiah  /.  their  places  with  the  bones  ot  men
Ezra  9.  11.  which  have/,  it  from  one  end  to  another
Jobs.  15.  with  princes  who/,  their  houses  with  silver

16.  8.  and  thou  hast /.  me  with  wrinkles

22.  18.  yet  he/,  their  houses  with  good  things
Psal.  38.7.  for  my  loins  are/,  with  loathsome  disease
71.8.  let  my  mouth  be/,  with  thy  praise  and  honour
72.  19.  let  the  whole  earth  be/,  with  his  glory
80.  9.  didst  cause  it  to  take  deep  root,  it  f.  the  land
104.  28.  thou  openest  thine  hand,  are/,  with  good
123.  3.  for  we  are  exceedingly/,  with  contempt

4.  our  soul  is  exceedingly  /.  with  scorning
Prov.  5.  10.  lest  strangers  be/,  with  thy  wealth

25.  16.  lest  thou  be  /.  with  honey  and  vomit  it
30.  16.  the  earth  that  is  not/,  with  water

22.  and  for  a  fool  when  he  is/,  with  meat
Eccl.  1.  8.  nor  is  the  ear/,  with  hearing
6.  3.  and  his  soul  be  not  /.  with  good
7.  and  yet  the  appetite  is  not/.

Cant.  5.  2.  open  to  me,  my  head  is/,  with  dew
Isa.  6. 1.  high  and  lifted  up.  and  his  train/,  the  temp.
21.  3.  therefore  are  my  loins/,  with  pain
33.5.  the  Lord  hath  f.  Zion  with  judgment
34.  6.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  is/,  with  blood
43.  24.  nor  f.  me  with  the  fat  of  thy  sacrifices
65.  20.  nor  an  old  man  that  hath  not/,  his  days
Jer.  15.  17.  for  thou  hast/,  me  with  indignation
16.  18.  they/,  mine  inheritance  with  carcases
19. 4.  they  have /.  this  place  with  blood  of  innocents
41.  9.  Ishmael  /.  the  pit  with  them  that  were  slain
46.  12.  and  thy  cry  hath  f.  the  land
51.  34.  he  hath/,  his  belly  with  my  delicates
Lam.  3.  15.  he  hath  /.  me  with  bitterness
30.  he  is  f.  full  with  repioach
Ezek.?,.  17".  they  have/,  the  land  with  violence

10.  3.  and  the  cloud  /.  the  inner  court

11.  6.  ye  have/,  the  streets  with  the  slain
28.  16.  they  /.  the  midst  of  thee  with  violence
36.  38.  waste  cities  shall  be/,  with  flocks  ot  men
43.  5.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  /.  the  house,  44.  4.

Dan.  2.  35.  the  stone  cut  out  /.  the  whole  earth
Nah.  2.  12.  the  lion  /.  his  holes  with  prey

Hah.  2.  16.  thou  art/,  with  shame  for  glory
Hag  1.  6.  ye  drink,  but  ye  are  not/,  with  drink
Zech  9.  13.  I  have/,  the  bow  with  Ephraim
Mat.  27  .  48.  one  of  them  ran,  and  /.  a  spunge  with
vinegar,  Mark  15.  36.  John  19-  29.
Mark  2.  21.  new  piece  that /.  it  up  taketli  from  old
7.  27.  Jesus  said,  let  the  children  first  be/.

Luke  1.  53.  he  hath  /.  the  hungry  with  good  things
2.  40.  Jesus  waxed  strong  in  spirit,/,  with  wisdom

5.  7-  and  they  came  and  /.  both  the  ships

14.  23.  compel  them  to  come,  that  my  house  be  f.

15.  16.  would  fain  have  /.  his  belly  with  husks
John  2.  7.  and  they/,  them  up  to  the  brim

6.  13.  they/,  twelve  baskets  with  fragments

16.  6.  I  said  these  things,  sorrow  hath/,  your  heart
Acts  2.  2.  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  /.  the  house

4.  8.  then  Peter,/,  witli  the  Holy  Ghost,  said

5.  3.  why  hath  Satan  /.thine  heart  to  lie  to  H.  Ghost  i
28.  ye  have /.  Jerusalem  with  your  doctrine

9.  17.  that  thou  miehtest  be  f.  with  the  Holy  Ghost
13.  9.  Paul,/,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  set  his  eyes
Rom.  1.  29.  being /.  with  all  unrighteousness
15.  14.  that  ye  also  are  /.  with  all  knowledge
24.  if  first  1  be  somewhat  /.  with  your  company
2  Cor.  7.  4.  I  am  /.  with  comfort,  I  am  joyful
Eph.  3.  19.  might  be  /  with  all  the  fulness  of  Goa


Eph.  5.  18.  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  but/,  w  ith  Xpn
Phil.  1.  11.  being  /.  with  the  fruits  of  righteousne
Col.  1.  9.  might  be  f.  with  the  knowledge  of  his  wi
2  Tim.  1.  4.  fliat  I  maybe/,  with  joy
Jam.  2.  16.  depart  in  peace,  be  ye  warmed  and
Rev.  8. 5.  angel  /.  the  censer  with  the  fire  of  the  alt

15.  1.  for  in  them  is/,  up  the  wrath  ot  God
18.  6.  in  the  cup  which  she  hath  /.  fill  to  her  dout

Shall  he  FILLED.

Exod.  16.  12.  in  morning  ye  shall  be  f.  with  bre«l
Num.  14.  21.  the  earth  shall  he  f.  with  glory  ot  (

2  Kings  3.  17.  that  valley  shall  bef.  with  water  ;
Prov.  1.  31.  they  shall  he  f.  with  their  own  devitr:
3.  10.  so  shall  tny  barns  he  f.  with  plenty

12.  21.  but  the  wicked  shall  he  f.  with  mischief  *
14.  14.  the  backslider  shall  he  f.  with  his  own  wa
18.  20.  with  the  increase  of  his  lips  shall  he  bef.
20. 17.  afterward  his  mouth  shall  he  f.  with  grail

24.  4.  and  by  knowledge  shall  the  chambers^

Jer.  13.  12.  every  bottle  shall  he  f.  with  wine
Ezek.  23. 3.3.  thou  shah  bef.  with  drunkenness

39.  20.  thus  ye  shall  he  f.  at  my  table  with  horsl
Hah.  2.  14.  earth  shall  be  f.  with  knowledge  of  Lc
Zech.  9.  15.  and  they  shall  bef.  like  bowls  I
Mat. 5.6. blessed  are  they  that  hunger,  they  shall C
Luke  1.  15.  John  shall  bef.  with  the  Holy  Ghos
3.  5.  every  valley  shall  be  f.  mountain  broughtF
6.  21.  blessed  ye  that  hunger  now,  ye  shall  be /.
Mas  FILLED.

Gen.  6.  11.  and  the  earth  was  f.  with  violence

1  Kings 7. 14.  and  Hiram  was  f.  with  wisdom  1

2  Kings  3.  20.  and  the  country  was  f.  with  wate
2  Chron.  5.  13.  then  the  house  wasf.  with  a  cloud

16.  14.  the  bed  which  wasf.  with  sweet  odours
Psal.  126.  2.  then  our  mouth  was  f.  with  laughtij
Isa.  6.  4.  and  the  house  was  f.  with  smoke

Jer.  51.  5.  tho’  their  land  wasf.  with  sinag.  Boll
Ezek.  10.  4.  and  the  house  wasf.  with  the  cloud
Luke  1.  41.  Elisabeth  wasf.  with  the  Holy  Gho
67.  Zacharias  wasf.  with  the  Holy  Ghost
John  12.  3.  house  was  f.  with  the  odour  ot  ointml
Acts  19.  29.  the  whole  city  wasf.  with  confusiol
Rev.  15.8.  and  the  temple  wasf.  with  smoke
Were  FILLED.

Hos.  13.  6.  according  to  their  pasture  so  were  tlj
/.  they  were  f.  and  their  heart  was  exal
Luke  4.  28.  when  they  heard,  they  weref.  with  w>

5.  26.  they  glorified  God,  and  were  f.  with  fear

6.  11.  they  were  f.  with  madness,  and  commun
8.  23.  they  were  f.  with  water,  and  in  jeopardy

John  6.  12.  when  th ey  weref.  he  said,  gather  up
26.  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  wen
Acts  2. 4.  they  were  all /.  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 4.
3.  10.  they  were  f.  with  wonder  and  amazeinen
5.  17-  rose  up,  and  weref.  with  indignation

13.  45.  the  Jews  were  f.  with  envy,  and  spake
52.  disciples  were  f.  with  joy  and  the  Holy  G1

Rev.  19.  21.  all  the  fowls  were  f.  with  their  flesl
See  Eat.

FILLEDST

Deut.  6.  II.  and  houses  full,  which  thou/,  not
Ezek.  27. 33.  when  wares  went  forth,/,  many  pec
FILLEST.

Ps.  17- 14.  whose  belly  thou  /.with  thy  hid  treas
F1LLETH.

Joh  9.  18.  but  he  /.  me  with  bitterness
Psal.  84.  6.  the  rain  also  /.  the  pools
107.  9.  he /.  the  hungry  soul  with  goodness
129.  7-  wherewith  the  mower  /.  not  his  hand
147.  14.  he /.  thee  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat
Eph.  1.  2.3.  the  fulness  of  him  that/,  all  in  all
FI  LLET.

Jer.  52.  21.  a  /.  of  twelve  cubits  did  compass  it
FILLETS.

Exod.  27.  10.  the  hooks  of  the  pillars,  and  the
shall  be  of  silver,  11.  |  38.  10.  11,  12, 17.
36.  38.  he  overlaid  their  chapiters  and/,  with)
FILLETED.

Exod.  27.  17.  all  shall  be /.  with  silver,  38.  17.
38.  28.  he  overlaid  their  chapiters  and/,  them
FILLING.  ,

Acts  14. 17./.  our  hearts  with  tood  and  gladne

FILTH.

Lev.  1. 1  16.  pluck  away  his  crop  with/,  there
Isa.  4.  4.  when  the  Lord  washed  away  the/,  or
Nah.  3.  6.  I  will  cast  abominable  /.  upon  thee
1  Cor.  4.  13.  we  are  made  as  the/,  of  the  work
1  Pet.  3.  21.  not  putting  away  the  /.  of  the  lies
FILTHY.  .

Job  15. 16.  how  much  more  abomma.  and/,  is  mr
Psal.  14.  3.  they  are  altogether  become  J.  o3. 3.
Isa.  64.  6.  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as/,  rat
Zeph.  3.  1.  woe  to  her  that  is  /.  and  polluted
Zech.  3.  3.  Joshua  was  clothed  with  /.  garmen
4.  take  away  the  /.  garments  from  him


IHKC  uic  J.  memo  i»  um  j«J

Col.  3.8.  you  also  put  off /.  communic  at.  trom  m"

1  Tim.  3.  3.  no  striker,  not  greedy  of/,  lucre,  H
Tit.  1.  7.  not  soon  angry,  not  given  to  J.  lucre  (

11.  teaching  things  for  f.  lucre’s  sake,  1  ctt.e

2  Pet.  2.  7-  Lot  vexed  with /.  conversation  otwiu
Jude  8.  likewise  these /.  dreamers  defile  the  n<
Rev.  22. 11.  he  that  is /.  let  him  be/,  still

FILTHINESS.

2  Chron.  29. 5.  carry  out  the  /.  out  ot  the  holy  1
Ezra  6.  21.  had  separated  from  the  /.  of  the  her
9.  11.  unclean  land  with  the/,  of  the  Pe0P'e- ,


Prov  30.  12.  and  yet  is  not  washed  from  tbei


Isa.  28.  8.  for  all  tables  are  full  of  vonut  and
Jer.  5.  t30.  astonishment  and/,  is  committed  m

23.  +  14.  I  have  seen  /.in  the  prophets  ot  Jerus
Lam.  1.  9.  her /.  is  in  her  skirts,  rememb.  not  he
Ezek.  16.  36.  because  thy  /.  was  poured  out
22.  15.  and  1  will  consume  thy  /.  out  ot  thee

24.  11.  that  the/,  of  it  may  he  molten  in  it  •
13.  in  thy  /.  is  lewdness  :  because  I  have  pi

thee,  and  thou  wast  not  purged,  thou
not  be  purged  from  thy  /.

36.  25.  from  all  your  /.  will  1  cleanse  you
2  Cor. 7. 1.  let  us  cleanse  ourselv.  trom  all  /• 0
Eph.  5.  4.  nor  let/,  be  once  named  aiming
Jam.  1.21.  wherefore  lay  apan  ally  .receive  the.
Rev.  17.  4.  cup  full  of  abominat.  and/,  ot  toi


F  1  N


F  1  N


FIN


FIN  ALL  \

•  13.  11./.  my  brethren,  larewell,  Eph,  6. 10.
Phil.  3.  1. 1  4.  8.  2  Thess.  3. 1.  1  Pet.  3.  8.

FIND

■  es,  [1]  To  convert ,  or  recover  a  thing  that  was
.  Luke  15.  8,  9,  32.  [2]  To  invent,  or  discover,

iron.  2.  14.  [3]  To  know  experimentally,
jji.  4.  1.  llev.  2.  2.  [4]  To  obtain  what  we
,  and  desire  of  God,  Mat.  7-  7-  [5]  To  come
L  ob  3.  22.  [8 1  To  understand  throughly.  Job
.  [7]  To  do,  or  perform.  Isa.  58.  13.  18]  To
t  Job  33.  10.  [9]  To  happen  upon  without

i  ng,  Gen.  37. 15.  [10]  To  choose  and  ap/oint,

1  13.  22.  [11]  To  turn  to,  or  light  on,  Luke  4.

•  [12]  To  observe,  Mat.  8.  10.

I,  is  used  sometimes  for  to  attack,  to  surprise
« ,  enemies,  to  discover  their  ambushes.  It  is
c  rstood  in  this  sense,  J  udg.  1.5.  1  ney  found

.  ti-bezek  in  Bezek.  They  attacked  him  there.

1  ,  1  Sam.  31.  3.  according  to  the  Hebrew,  the
i  ers  belonging  to  the  Philistines  found  Saul,

,  attacked  him.  In  this  sense  some  explain
,  passage  in  Gen.  36.  24.  This  was  that  Anah
t  found  the  mules  in  the  wilderness.  In  the
rew,  he  found  the  Emims.  These  Emims

-  teheved  to  be  powerful  people  ;  Deut.  2.  10, 11.

|  Emims  dwelt  therein  in  times  past,  a  people
r  t,  and  many,  and  tall,  as  the  Anakims,  &c.
i  ilso  were  neighbours  to  the  Horites  here  spoken
i  .v  appears  from  Gen.  14.  5,  6.  Anah  therefore
I  d  a  troop  of  these  people  :  he  surprised,  attack-
,  nd  defeated  them.  Others  render  the  Hebrew
i'  Jemiru,  which  is  no  where  else  used,  by
\  -rs  ;  that  he  found  out  some  springs  of  water,
i  h  in  those  hot  countries  were  rare  and  precious  ;
i.  lot  waters,  some  hot  and  medicinal  springs.

,  rs  again  mules,  as  in  our  translation  ;  that
t  mnd  out  the  way  of  the  generation  of  mules,
r  le  copulation  of  an  ass  and  a  mare.

■19.  11.  they  wearied  themselves  to  /.  the  door
jji.  you  shall  speak  to  Esau,  when  you  /.  him
i  32.  23.  be  sure  your  sin  shall  /.  you  out
V.  the  revenger  of  blood  /.  him  without  city
nj  22. 25.  a  man /.  a  damsel  and  lie  with  her,  28.
(17.8.  to  sojourn  where  he  could  /.  a  place,  9.

( 1.  9.  the  L.  grant  ye  may  /.  rest,  eacli  of  you
! .  20.  21.  saying,  go,/,  out  the  arrows,  36.
y.  if  a  man  /.  his  enemy,  will  he  let  him  go  ?
i  is  18 . 5.  perad v.  we  may  /.  grass  to  save  horses
n.  2. 14.  to  /.  out  every  device  be  put  to  him
!  why  should  Assyria  come  and /.  much  water?

(  .  3.  O  that  I  knew  where  1  might /.  him

I  .  cause  every  man  to/,  according  to  his  ways
10.  15.  seek  out  his  wickedn.  till  thou  /.  none

•  2.  5.  thou  shalt/.  the  knowledge  of  God
.  my  words  are  life  to  those  that /.  them
they  are  right  to  them  that  /.  knowledge

I I  /.  out  knowledge  of  witty  inventions

■  7.  14.  a  man  should  /.  nothing  for  him
Counting  one  by  one,  to  /.  out  the  account
70.  he  sought  to  /.  out  acceptable  words

i  5.8.  if/,  lily  beloved,  tell  him  l  am  sick  of  love
!  4.  14.  the  screech-owl  shall  /.  a  place  of  rest
? .  in  the  day  of  your  fast  vou  /.  pleasure
i ).  18.  will  distress  them,  that  they  may  /.  it  so
i  1.  6.  are  become  like  harts  that  /.  no  pasture
her  prophets  also /.  no  vision  from  God
;  6.  4.  the  princes  sought  to  /.  occasion  against
Daniel,  but  could  /.  none  occasion  nor  fault
;  (all  not /.  except  we  /.  it  concerning  law  of  G.

<  7.  14.  strait  is  gate.,  and  few  there  be  that /.  it
LI.  and  if  so  be  that  he  /.  it,  he  rejoiceth  more

■  11.  13.  if  haply  he  might  any  thing  thereon
‘6.  lest  coining  suddenly,  he  /.  you  sleeping

■  6. 7-  that  they  might  /.  an  accusation  ag.  ium
id.  and  /.  them  so,  blessed  are  those  servants

1 .  he  said  I  come  seeking  fruit  and  f.  none
1  .  and  go  after  that  which  is  lost,  till  lie/,  it
Loth  she  not  seek  diligently  till  she/,  it?

>  10.  9.  he  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  J.  pasture

i  .  46.  desired  to  /.  a  tabernacle  for  G.  of  Jacob
i7.  they  might  feel  after  him  and /.  him
3 .  scribes,  saying,  we  /.  no  evil  in  this  man

-  9. 19.  thou  wilt  say,  why  doth  he  yet  /.  fault  2
;i )A.  they  come  with  me,  and /.  you  unprepared

1. 18.  he  may  /.  mercy  of  the  L.  in  that  day
See  Favour.

Can  or  const  FIND.

s  11.38.  Phar.said,  can  we  /.such  a  one  as  this  is?
i  5.  11.  go,  get  you  straw  where  you  can  f.  it
:  7.  16.  all  the  silver  and  gold  thou  canst  f.
i  22.  and  are  glad  when  they  can  f.  the  grave
1 .  canst  thou  by  searching  /.  out  God  ?  canst
thou/,  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection?

[  20.  6.  but  a  faithful  man  who  can  f.  ?

•  >.  who  can f.  a  virt.  woman  price  above  rubies2

■  3. 11.  no  man  can  f.  out  the  work  God  maketh

■  .  that  which  is  exceeding  deep,  who  can  f.  it?

1 '.  1.  if  ye  can  f.  a  man  that  seeketh  truth

Cannot  FIND.

1 38.22.  he  returned,  and  said,  I  cannot  f.  her
> ’-gs  18. 12.  if  he  cannot  f.  thee,  he  will  slay  me
7.  10.  1  cannot  f.  one  wise  man  among  you
j!3.  touching  Almighty,  we  cannot  f.  him  out

<  8. 17.  a  man  cannot  f.  out  the  work  under  sun

FIND  grace.

>  32.  5. 1  may  /.  grace  in  thy  sight,  Exod.  .3.3.  13.
• !.  these  are  to  /.  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord

let  me  f.  gr.  ||  34. 1 1 .  let  me  /.  gr.  in  your  eyes
'5.  let  us/,  grace  in  the  sight  of  my  lord
;  2.  2.  in  whose  sight  1  shall  /.  grace
,  *•  1  •  18.  let  thy  handmaid  /.  grace  in  thy  sight
16.  4.  that  1  may  /.  grace  in  thy  sight,  ( >  king
4. 16.  that,  we  may/,  gr.  to  help  in  time  of  need
I  FIND.

1  18.  26.  if  1  /.  in  Sodom  fifty  righteous  in  city
'*  1  /.  there  forty  five  11  30.  if  1  f.  thirty  there
132.5  till  If,  out  a  place  for  the  Lord
1  7-  26.  and  If.  more  bitter  than  death  the

woman

\  L  when  1  should  /.  thee,  I  would  kiss  thee
15.  3.  1  tainted  in  my  sighing,  and  1  f.  no  rest


Luke  23.  4.  Pilate  said  to  the  chief  priests,  I /.  no
fault  in  this  man,  John  18.  38.  1  19.  4,  6.
Rom.  7. 18.  to  perform  that  which  is  good  I  f.  not
21.  If.  then  a  law,  that  when  1  would  do  good
Not  FIND,  or  FIND  not.

Exod.  16.  25.  to-day  ye  shall  not  f.  it  in  the  field
Lev.  12.  t  8.  if  her  hand/,  not  sufficiently

1  Sam.  23.  17.  Saul  my  father  shall  not  f.  thee

2  Sam.  17.  20.  had  sought,  and  could  not  f.  them
Prov.  1.  28.  they  shall  seek  me  early,  but  they  shall

not  f.  me,  II os.  5.  6.  John  7.  34,  36.
Eccl.  7-  28.  which  my  soul  seeketh,  but  I  /.  not
Cant.  5.  6.  I  sought  him,  but  l  could  not  f.  him
Isa.  41. 12.  seek  them,  but  shalt  not  /.  them,  Hos.  2.7.
Dan.  6.  5.  we  shall  not  f.  any  occasion  against  D*n.
Hos.  2.  6.  make  a  wall  that  she  shall  not f.  her  paths
Amos.  8. 12.  shall  run  to  seek  the  word ,  and  notf.  it
Luke  5.  19.  not  f.  what  way  they  might  bring  him
19-  48.  could  not  f.  what  [hey  might  do  to  Jesus
John  7.  35.  whither  go,  that  we  shall  not  f.  him
Rom.  7.  18.  how  to  do  that  which  is  good,  I  /.  not
2  Cor.  12.  20.  I  shall  not  f.  you  such  as  I  would
Rev.  9.  6.  shall  men  seek  death,  and  shall  not  f.  it
Shall,  or  shalt  FIND.

Gen.  44. +  34.  lest  I  see  the  evil  that  shall f.  my  father
Deut.  4.  29.  if  thence  thou  seek  L.  thou  shalt  f.  him
28.  65.  thou  shalt  f.  no  ease  among  these  nations
Judg.  9.  33.  then  mayest  do  as  thou  shalt  f.  occasion

1  Sam.  9.  13.  ye.  shall  f.  him  before  he  go  up  to  eat
10.  2.  there  shall  f.  two  men  by  Rachel’s  sepulchre

+  7-  thou  shalt  do  as  thy  hand  shall f.

2  Kings 7. 1 9.  if  we  tarry,  we  shall  f.  punishment
2  Chr.  20.  16.  ye  shall  f.  them  at  end  of  the  brook

30. 9.  your  brethren  and  child,  shall  f.  compassion
Ezra  4.  15.  thou  shalt  f.  in  the  book  of  records
Psal.  17.  3.  thou  hast  tried  me.  and  shalt  f.  nothing
21.  8.  thy  hand  shall  f.  out  all  thine  enemies
Prov.  1. 13.  we  shall  f.  all  precious  substance
8. 17.  they  thatseek  me  early  shall f.  me,  Jer.  29. 13.
16.  20.  that  handleth  matter  wisely,  shall  f.  good
19.  8.  he  that  keepeth  understanding  shall f.  good
Eccl.  11. 1.  for  thou  shalt  f.  it  after  many  days
Jer.  2.  24.  in  her  month  they  shall  f.  her
6.  16.  ye  shall  f.  rest  to  your  souls,  Mat.  11.  29.
Hos.  12.8.  in  labours  they  shall f.  none  iniquity  in  me
Mat.  7.7-  seek  and  ye  shall  f.  Luke  11.9.

10.  39.  he  that  losetn  his  life  for  my  sake  shall f.  it
17. 27.  thou  shalt  f.  a  piece  of  money ,  that  take

21.  2.  ye  shall  f.  an  ass  tied,  and  a  colt,  MarkW.  2.

22.  9.  as  many  as  ye  shall  f.  bid  to  the  marriage
24.  46.  when  cometh,  s.  f.  so  doing,  Luke  12.  37,  43.

Luke  2. 12.  ye  shall f.  babe  wrapt  in  ssvaddl.  clothes
18.  8.  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  f.  faith  on  earth  ?
John  21. 6.  cast  the  net  on  the  right  side,  ye  shall  f.
Rev.  18. 14.  and  thou  shalt  f.  then)  no  more  at  all
FINDEST.

Gen.  31.  32.  with  whomsoever  thou/,  thy  gods
Ezek.  3. 1.  eat  that  thou /.  eat  this  roll,  and  go  speak
FINDETH.

Gen.  4.  14.  every  one  that /.  me  shall  slay  me
Deut.  19. 1 5.  the  head  slippeth,  and /.  his  neighbour
Job  33. 10.  behold,  he  /.  occasions  against  me
Psal.  119.  162.  1  rejoice  at  word,  as  one  that/,  spoil
Prov.  3.  13.  happy  is  the  man  that/,  wisdom
8.  35.  whoso /.  me,/,  life,  shall  obtain  favour  of  Ld.

14.  6.  ascorner  seeketh  wisdom,  and /.  it  not
if.  20.  he  that  hath  a  froward  heart,  /.  no  good

18.  22.  whoso /.  a  wife /.  good  thing,  obtains  favour
21.  10.  his  neighbour  /.  no  favour  in  his  eyes

21.  he  that  followed)  after  mercy /.  life  and  honour
Eccl.  9.  10.  whatsoever  thy  hand  /.  to  do,  do  it
Lam.  1.  3.  she  dwells  among  heathen,  she /.  no  rest
Hos.  14.  3.  for  in  thee  the  fatherless  /.  mercy
Mat.  7.8.  and  he  that  seeketh /.  Luke  11.  10.

10.  39.  he  that /.  his  life  shall  lose  it
12.43.  walketh  thro’  dry  places,  seeking  rest,/,  none
44./.  it  empty,  swept,  and  garnished,  Luke  11. 25.
26.  40.  he  /.  his  disciples  asleep,  Mark  14.  37.

John  1.  41.  he  first /.  his  own  brother  Simon
43.  Jesus /.  Philip  ||  45.  Philip  /.  Nathaneel
5.  14.  afterward  Jesus /.  him  in  the  temple
FIN  DING.

Gen.  4.  15.  lest  any/.  Cain  should  kill  him
Job  9.  10.  whodoeth  things  past  /.  out  and  wonders
Psal.  32.  +  6.  every  one  shall  pray  in  a  time  of /.
Isa.  58.  13./.  thine  own  pleas,  nor  speaking  words
Luke  11.  24!  unclean  spirit  seeking  restand /  none
Acts  4.  21./.  nothing  how  they  might  punish  them

19.  1.  Paul  came,  and  /.  certain  disciples,  21.  4.

21.  2.  /.  ship  sailing  over  to  Phenicia,  went  aboard

Rom.  11.  33.  unsearchable,  and  Ins  ways  past/,  out
Heb.  8.  8.  for /.  fault  with  them,  ne  saith,  behold
FINE.

Job  28.  1.  there  is  a  place  for  gold  where  they/,  it
FINE.

Ezra  8.  27.  and  two  vesseis  of /.  copper,  as  gold
Job  28.  +  15./.  gold  shall  not  be  given  for  wisdom
Isa.  19.  9.  they  that  work  in  /.  flax  be  confounded
Rev.  1.  15.  his  feet  like  unto  /.  brass,  2. 18.

FINE  four.

Lev.  2.  1.  his  offering  shal  be  of  f.  flour,  24.  5.

4.  cakes  of/,  flour  "mingled  with  oil,  5.  7  -  1  7  12.

14.  10,  21.  |  23.  13.  Nurn.  6.  15.  |  7-  13,  19,
25,  31,  37  ,  43,  49,  55,  61.  1  8.  8.

5.  11.  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  /.  flour,  6.  20.

1  Kings  A.  22.  thirty  measures  of/,  flour  in  one  day

2  Kings 7. 1 .  measure/,  flour  sold  for  shekel,  16, 18.

1  Chr.  9.29.  were  appointed  to  oversee  f.  flour,  23.29.
Ezek.  16.  13.  thou  didst  eat  f.  flour,  honey,  and  oil

19.  1  gave  thee  J'.  flour,  and  oil,  and  honey
46.  14.  an  hin  of  oil  to  temper  with  the  /.  flour
Rev.  18.  13.  none  buyeth  her  merchandise  of/,  flour
FINE  gold.

2  Chr.  3.  5.  ceding,  which  he  overlaid  with  /.  gold
8.  the  most  holy  he  overlaid  with /.  gold

Job  28.  +  15./.  gold  shall  not  be  given  for  wisdom
17.  exchange  of  it  shall  not  be  for  jewels  of  /.  gold
31.  24.  or  said  to  /.  gold,  thou  ai  t  my  confidence
Psal.  1 9.  10.  are  more  to  be  desired  than  much  /.  gold
119.  127.  I  love  thy  commandments  above  /.  gold
Prov.  3.  14.  and  the  gain  of  wisdom  than  /.  gold
8. 19.  my  fruit  is  better  than  gold,  than/,  gold


Prov.  25. 12.  as  an  ornament  of f.  gold,  so  is  a  reprover
Cant.  5. 11.  his  head  is  as  most/,  gold  locks  bushy

15.  his  legs  are  as  pillars  set  on  sockets  of/,  gold
La.  13. 12.  will  make  a  man  more  precious  than/,  g.
Lam.  4. 1.  how  is  the  most  /.  gold  changed  !

2.  the  precious  sons  of  Zion  comparable  to  /.  gold
Dan.  2. 32.  this  image’s  head  /.  gold,  breast  of  sil  ver
10. 5.  whose  loins  were  girded  with/,  gold  of  Uphaz
Zech.  9. 3.  l  yrus  heaped/,  gold  as  mire  of  the  streets
FINE  linen.

Gen.  41. 42.  Pharaoh  arrayed  him  in  vest,  of /.  linen
Exod.  25.  4.  this  is  the  offering  ye  shall  take,  /.  linen

26.  1.  with  ten  curtains  off.  twined  linen

31.  the  vail  of/,  linen,  36.  35.  2  Chron.  3. 14.

36.  thou  shalt  make  an  hanging  of/,  twined  linen,
27-  9,  16,  18.  1  36.  37. 1  38.  9,  16, 18.
28.  5.  take  gold  and  /.  linen  to  make  garments

6.  shall  make  the  ephod  of/,  linen,  39.  2.

8.  girdle  /.  linen,  39.  5, 29.  II 15.  breast-plate,  39. 8.
39.  thou  shalt  embroider  the  coat  of/,  linen,  and
thou  shalt  make  the  mitre  off.  linen

35.  6.  let  him  bring  an  offering  off.  linen

2.3.  every  man  with  whom  was  found  /.  linen
25.  the  women  brought  of  scarlet  and  /.  linen
35.  them  hath  he  filled  with  wisdom  to  work  all

manner  of  work  and  /.  linen,  38.  23.  2  Chron.
2.  14.

36.  8.  that  wrought  curtains  of /.  linen  and  blue
39.  27.  they  made  coats  off.  linen  for  Aaron

28.  made  a  mitre  of/,  linen,  and  bonnets  of  /.  linen
1  Chron.  4.  21.  families  of  them  that  wrought  /.  linen

15.  27.  David  was  clothed  with  a  robe  of  f.  linen
Estli.  1. 6. were  hangings  fasten,  w  ith  cords  off.  linen
8.  15.  Mordecai  went  with  a  garment  of/,  linen
Prov.  7. 16.  I  have  decked  my  bed  with/,  linen
31.  24.  she  maketh  /.  linen,  and  selleth  it
Isa.  3.  23.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the /.  linen
Ezek.  16.  10.  I  girded  thee  about  with  /.  linen

13.  thy  raiment  was  of/,  linen  and  silk

27.  7.  /.  linen  from  Egypt  was  to  be  thy  sail

16.  Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  /.  linen
Mark  15.  46.  Joseph  bought/,  linen  and  wrapped
Luke  16. 19.  rich  man  clothed  in  purple  and  /.  linen
Rev.  18. 12.  merchandise  of f.  linen  depart,  from  thee

16.  that  city  clothed  in  /.  linen  is  come  to  nought

19.  8.  to  her  was  granted  to  be  arrayed  in  /.  linen

14.  the  armies  in  heaven  were  clothed  in  /.  linen

FINE  meal.

Gen.  18. 6.  make  ready  three  measures  of /.  meal
FIN  ER.

Prov.  25.  4.  there  shall  come  forth  a  vessel  for  the  /
FINEST.

Psal.  81.  16.  have  fed  thee  with  the  /.  of  the  wheat
147. 14.  he  filleth  thee  with  the /.  of  the  wheat
FINING.

Prov.  17.  3./.  pot  is  for  silv.  furnace  for  gold,  27-  21.
FINGER.

The  finger  of  God  signifies  his  power,  his  opera¬
tion.  Pharaoh’s  magicians  discovered  the  finger
of  God  in  the  miracles  which  Moses  wrought,
Exod.  8.  19.  This  legislator  gave  the  law  writ¬
ten  with  the  finger  of  God  to  the  Hebrews,
Exod.  31.  18.  It  was  written  immediately  by  the
power  or  Spirit  of  God,  and  not  by  any  art  of
man.  Our  Saviour  says,  he  cast  out  devils  by
the  finger,  or  Spirit,  of  God,  which  he  intimates
was  a  sign  that  the  kingdom  of  <  od  was  come ;
that  God's  spiritual  government  of  his  church  was
begun  to  be  exercised  among  the  Jews  by  the  Mes¬
siah,  Luke  11.  20.

To  put  forth  one’s  finger  is  a  bantering,  insulting
gesture.  Isa.  58.  9.  If  thou  take  away  from  the
midst  of  thee  the  yoke,  and  the  putting  out  of  the
finger.  If  thou  take  away  from  the  midst  of  thee
the  chain  or  yoke  wherewith  thou  overwhelmest
thy  debtors,  and  forbear  pointing  at  them,  and
using  jeering  and  insulting  gestures.  Some  take
this  for  a  menacing  or  threatening  gesture.

Exod.  8. 19.  the  magicians  said,  this  is  the  /.  of  God

29.  12.  put  of  the  blood  on  the  altar  with  thy  /.

31. 18.  tables  written  with  the/,  of  God,  Deut.  9. 10.

Lev.  4.  6.  priest  shall  dip  his  /.  in  the  blood  and
sprinkle  it,  17,  25,  30,  34.  |  8.  15.  19.  9.1  16.
14,  19.

14.  16.  the  priest  shall  dip  his  right  /.  in  the  oil,  and
sprinkle  of  the  oil  with  his  /.  seven  times,  27.
Num.  19.  4.  priest  shall  take  of  her  blood  with  his/.

1  Kings  12.  10.  my  little /.  thicker, 2  Chron.  10. 10.
Isa.  58.  9.  if  take  away  the  putting  forth  of  the/.
Luke  11.  20.  1:  1  with  the  /.  of  God  cast  out  devils

16. 24.  that  ne  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  /.  in  water
John  8.  6.  and  with  his  /.  wrote  on  the  ground

20.  25.  ann  put  my  /.  into  the  print  of  the  nails
27-  reach  hitner  thy  /.  and  behold  my  hands

FINGERS.

2  Sam.  21.  20.  on  every  hand  six  /.  1  Chr.  20.  6.
Psal.  8.  3.  when  consider  thy  heavens,  work  of  thy  /.

144.  1.  the  Lord,  who  teacheth  my  f.  to  fight
Prov.  6.  13.  a  wicked  man  teacheth  with  his/.

7.  3.  bind  them  on  thy  /.  write  them  on  thy  heart
Cant.  5.5.  and  my  /.  with  sweet-smelling  myrrh
La.  2.  8.  that  which  their  own/,  have  made,  17.  8.

59. 3.  hands  defiled  with  blood,  and  f.  with  iniquity
Jer.  52.21.  the  thickness  of  one  pillar  four  /.

Dan.  5.  5.  came  forth  /.  of  a  man’s  hand,  and  wrote
Mat.  23.  4.  they  bind  heavy  burdens,  but  they  will

not  move  them  with  one  of  their  /.  Luke  1 1.  46.
Mark 7.  33.  and  he  put  his  /.  into  his  ears  and  he  spit
FI  NISH.

To  bring  to  pass,  fulfil,  perfect.  Our  blessed  Lord
said  on  the  cross,  It  is  finished,  John  19.  30.  Our
great  Redeemer.  by  what  he  did  and  suffered .
performed  the  will  of  God,  and  the  whole  work
which  the  Father  gave  him  to  do  ;  which  was  to
obtain  eternal  redemption.  He  was  the  substance
and  end  of  all  the  types,  and  the  legal  dispensa¬
tion.  He  completed  and  finished  righteousness,
■removed  the  curse,  and  radically  completed  our
salvation.

Gen.  6.  16.  and  in  a  cubit  shalt  thou  /.  it  above
Dan.  9.  24.  to /.  transgression,  and  make  end  of  sin
Zech.  4.  9.  Zo;  ubbabel’s  hands  shall  also/,  it

>65


F  I  II


FIR


FIR


Mat.  10.  +  23.  ye  shall  not /.  the  cities  of  Israel
L.vke  14.  28.  whether  he  have  sufficient  to/.

29.  alter  laid  the  foundation,  and  is  not  able  to /.  it

30.  this  man  began  to  build,  was  not  ableto/.
£hn  4.  34.  my  meat  is  todo  his  will,  and /.his  work

5.  36.  works  which  the  Father  hath  given  me  to/.

Acts  20.  24.  that  1  might /.  my  o'  ur»e  with  joy
Rom.  9.  28.  for  he  will /.  the  vvoik,  and  cut  short
2  Cor.  8.  6.  so  he  would  also  /.  in  you  the  same  grace
Phil.  1.  t  6.  he  that  hath  begun,  will  also/,  it
FINISHED.

Gen.  2.  1.  thus  the  heavens  and  the  earth  were/.
Exod.  39.  32.  Ihus  was  all  the  work/.  40.  33.

Deut.  31.  24.  an  end  of  writing,  till  they  were/.
Josh.  4.  10.  the  priest  stood,  till  every  thing  was/.
Ruth  3. 18.  the  man  not  rest,  till  he  have/,  the  thing
1  Kings  6.  9.  Solomon  built  the  house  and  /.  it,
14,  22,  38.  2  Chron.  5.  1.  1  7-  IE

7.  1.  Solomon/,  all  his  house,  9. 1,25.  2  Chr.  8. 16.

22.  so  was  the  work  of  the  pillars/.

1  Chr.  27.  24.  Joat>  began  to  number,  but  he/,  not

28.  20.  Lord  not  fail  thee,  till  thou  hast/,  the  work

2  Chr.  24.  14.  and  when  they  had /.  the  repairing

29.  28.  the  singers  sang,  till  burnt-offering  was/.

31.  7.  they  /.  the  heaps  in  the  seventh  month

Ezra  4.+  12.  the  Jews  have/,  the  walls

5.  16.  hath  it  been  in  building,  and  yet  it  is  not/.

6.  14.  the  elders  of  the  Jews  built  and  /.  it,  15.
Neh.  6.  15.  so  the  wall  was  /  in  fifty -two  days
Van  5.  26.  God  hath  numbered  thy  kingd.  and  /.  it

12.  7.  all  these  things  shall  be/.

Mat.  13.  53.  when  Jes  s  had /.  these  parables

19.  1.  when  Jesus  had/,  these  sayings,  26.  1.

John  17.  4.  1  have/,  the  work  thou  gavest  me  to  do

19.  30.  he  said,  it  is/,  and  he  bowed  his  head
Arts  21. 7.  when  we  had  f.  our  course  from  1  yre

2  Tim.  4.7.  1  have /.  my  course,  1  have  kept  the  faith
lleb.  4.  3.  the  works  were /.  from  the  foundation
Jam.  1.15.  sin,  when  it  is /  bringeth  forth  death
Rev.  10.  7.  the  mystery  ot  God  should  be/.

11.  7.  when  witnesses  shall  have /  their  testimony

20.  5.  lived  not,  till  the  thousana  years  w'ere/.

FINISHER.

Heb.  12.  2. looking  to  Jesus,  author  and/,  of  our  faith
FINS.

Lev.  1 1 .9. whatever  hath /.  and  scales  eat,  Dent. 14. 9.

10.  that  hath  not /.  shall  be  an  abomination,  12.
FIRE

Is  one  of  the  four  elements,  which  not  only  affords
light  and  heat,  but  whereby  likewise  we  try  and
purge  metals.  God  hath  often  appeared  in  fire,
and  encompassed  with  tire  ;  as  when  he  shewed
himself  in  the  burning  bush,  and  descended  on
mount  Sinai  in  the  midst  of  flames,  thunderings,
and  lightning ,  Exod.  3.  2.  1  19.  18.  Fire  is  a
symbol  of  the  holiness  and  justice  of  God  :  lhe
i.ord  thy  God  is  a  consuming  fire,  Deut.  4.  24.
lie  shewed  himself  to  his  prophets,  Isaiah,
Ezekiel,  and  St.  John  in  the  midst  of  fire,  Isa.
6.  4.  Ezek.  1.  4.  Rev.  1.  14.  The  Psalmist  de¬
scribes  the  chariot  of  God  as  all  in  a  flame,
Psal.  18.  12,  13,  14.  And  it  is  said  that  God
will  appear  in  the  midst  of  fire  at  his  second
coming,  2  Ihess.  1.  8.  Daniel  says,  that  a  fiery
stream  issued  and  came  forth  from  before  him  ;
voting  the  speedy  executing  of  his  judgments  for
the  terror  of  the  wicked  and  comfort  of  the  godly,
Dan.  7-  10.  'The  wrath  of  God  is  compared  to
fire,  Psal.  18.  8.  and  the  effects  of  his  wrath,
which  are  war,  famine,  and  other  scourges,  are
described  under  the  same  idea,  Psal.  66.  12.  Jer.

48.  45..

Our  Saviour  is  compared  to  fire.  Mai.  3.  2.  He
is  like  a  refiner’s  fire,  and  like  fuller’s  soap.
He  shall  consume  the  wicked  by  his  judgments,
and  purify  those  who  are  sincere  by  his  doc¬
trine.  'lhe  Holy  Ghost  likewise  is  compared  to
fire.  Mat.  3.  11.  He  shall  baptize  you  with
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  tire.  To  verify  this
prediction,  Jesus  sent  the  Holy  Ghost  who  de¬
scended  upon  his  disciples  in  the  form  of  tongues,
or  like  sparks  of  fire,  Acts  2.  3.  It  is  the  work
of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enlighten,  purify,  and
sanctify  the  soul,  and  to  inflame  it  with  love  to
God,  and  zeal  for  his  glory.  The  angels  them¬
selves,  as  the  ministers  of  God,  are  compared  to  a
burning  fire,  speedy  and  irresistible  in  the  ex¬
ecution  of  his  commands,  Psal.  104.  4.  The  Eord,
or  his  angel,  led  the  Israelites  in  their  journey
through  the  wilderness,  under  the  form  of  a  pil¬
lar  of  fire,  Exod.  13.  21.

Fire  from  heaven  fell  frequently  on  the  victims
sacrificed  to  the  Lord,  as  a  mark  of  his  presence
and  approbation.  It  is  thought  that  God  in  this
manner  expressed  his  acceptance  of  Abel’s  sacri¬
fices,  Gen.  4.  4.  When  the  Lord  made  a  cove¬
nant  with  Abraham,  a  fire,  like  that  0)  a  fur¬
nace,  passed  through  the  divided  pieces  of  the  sa¬
crifices,  and  consumed  them,  Gen.  15.  17.  Fire
fell  upon  the  sacrifices  which  Moses  offered  at  the
dedication  of  the  tabernacle.  Lev.  9.  24.  And
upon  those  of  Manoah,  Samson's  father,  Judg.
13.  19,  20.  Upon  Solomon's  at  the  dedication  of
the  temple,  2  Chron.  7-  1.  And  upon  Elijah’s  at
mount  Carmel,  1  Kings  18.38.

The  torments  of  hell  ate  described  by  fire,  both  in
the  Old  and  New  Testament.  Moses  inveighing
against  the  Israelites,  who  rebelled  against  the
Lord,  says  to  them  ;  A  fire  is  kindled  in  mine
'anger,  and  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  hell,
Deut.  32.  22.  Isaiah  is  still  more  express,
\Vho  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devour¬
ing  fire  r  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  ever¬
lasting  burnings  ?  Isa.  33.  14.  And  in  chap.
66.  24.  1  heir  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall
their  fire  be  quenched.  Our  Saviour  makes
use  of  the  same  similitude ,  to  represent  the
punishment  of  the  damned,  Mark  9.  44.  He
likewise  speaks  frequently  of  the  eternal  fire
prepared  for  the  devil,  his  angels,  and  repro¬
bates,  Mat.  25.  41.  'The  sting  and  remorse  of
conscience  is  the  worm  that  will  never  die ;
166


and  the  wrath  of  God  upon  their  souls  and  bodies,
the  fire  that  shall  never  go  out.  There  are  like¬
wise  11  ho  maintain  that  by  worm  is  to  be  under¬
stood  a  common,  living,  and  material,  not  an  al¬
legorical  and  figurative  worm  ;  and  by  fire,  a
real,  elementary ,  and  material  fire.  Among  the
maintained  of  this  opinion  are  Austin,  Cyprian,
Chrysostom,  Jerome,  &c.

The  word  of  God  is  compared  to  fire,  Jer.  23.  29.
Is  not  my  word  like  as  a  fire  ?  It  is  full  of  life
and  efficacy ;  like  a  fire,  it  warms,  melts,  and
heals  my  people,  and  is  powerful  to  consume  the
dross,  and  burn  up  the  chaff  and  stubble.  And
the  apostle  says,  that  every  man's  doctrine  should
be  tried  by  fire,  that  is,  by  the  light  cf  the  word,
of  what  nature  it  is,  whether  it  be  true  or  false,
sound  and  solid,  or  corrupt  and  frothy,  1  Cor.

3.  13.  Fire  is  likewise  taken  for  persecution,
dissension,  and  division.  Luke  12.  49.  1  am
come  to  send  fire  on  the  earth  ;  that  is,  Upon
my  coming  and  publishing  the  gospel,  there  will
follow,  through  the  devil's  malice,  and  the  corrup¬
tion  < f  men,  much  persecution  to  the  professors
thereof,  and  manifold  divisions  in  the  world,
whereby  men  will  be  tried  whether  they  be  faith¬
ful  or  not.  The  church  of  God  is  compared  to  a
fire.  Obad.  18.  rlhe  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a
fire:  The  church  shall  subdue  all  her  enemies.
Carnal  vain  shifts  of  men's  own  devising,  whereby
they  seek  to  support,  relieve ,  and  comfort  them¬
selves  against  the  judgments  denounced  against
them,  are  likewise  compared  to  fire,  Isa.  50.  11.
As  are  also  the  lies,  slanders,  and  other  provoking
speeches  of  ungodly  men  ;  Prov.  16.  27.  And  in
his  lips  there  is  a  burning  fire.

Gen.  15. 1 17.  a  lamp  of/,  passed  betw.  those  pieces

22.6.  Abraham  took /  in  his  hand,  and  a  knife

7.  my  father, behold  the/,  and  the  wood,  but  where
Exod.  3.  2.  and  behold,  the  bush  burned  with  /.

9.  23.  Lord  sent  hail  and  the  /.  along  on  ground
24.  there  was  hail,  and /.  mingled  with  the  hail

12.  8.  shall  eat  the  flesh  in  that  night  roast  with /.  9.

19.  18.  the  Ld.  descended  upon  niount  Sinai  in/.

22.  6.  if/,  break  out,  and  catch  in  thorns

32.  24.  then  1  cast  gold  into/,  and  came  this  calf
40. 38.  and /.  was  on  the  tabernacle  by  night  through

all  their  journey,  Num.  9.  16.  Deut.  1.  33.
Lev.  1.  7.  the  sons  of  the  priest  shall  put  /.  on  the
altar,  and  lay  wood  in  order  upon  the /.

8.  upon  the  wood  that  is  in  the/.  12,  17.  1  3.  5.

2. 14.  shalt  offer  green  ears  of  corn  dried  by  the  /.

6.  9.  the  /.  of  the  altar  be  burning  in  it,  10, 12,  13.

9.  24.  there  came  a  /.  out  from  before  the  Lord

10.  1.  the  sons  of  Aaron  put  /.  in  their  censers

2.  there  went  out/,  from  Ld.  and  devoured  them

16.  13.  he  shall  put  the  incense  upon  the /.

18. 21.  thou  shalt  not  let  any  of  thy  seed  pass  thro'/.

to  Alnlech,  Deut.  18.  10.  2  Kings  17  .17-  1  23.  10.
Num.  6.  18.  shall  take  the  hair,  and  put  it  in  the /.
11. 2.  w  hen  Moses  prayed  the  /.  w  as  quenched
16. 7-  take  ye  censers,  and  put  /.  therein,  18.

37.  that  he  take  the  censers,  and  scatter  /.yonder
46.  take  a  censer,  and  put  /'.  therein  from  off  altar

18.  9.  be  thine  of  most  holy  things  reserved  from  /.

21.  28.  for  there  is  a /.  gone  out  from  Heshbon
31.  23.  every  thing  that  may  abide  /.  go  thro’  the  /.
Deut.  4.  11.  and  the  mountain  burnt  with/.  9. 15.
36.  and  upon  earth  he  shewed  thee  his  great /.

5.  5.  for  ye  w  ere  afraid  by  reason  of  the  /.

18.  16.  nor  let  me  see  this  great/,  any  more

33.  t  2.  from  his  right  hand  went  a/,  ot  law  for  them
Josh.  7.  25.  all  Israel  burned  Achan  with  /.

Judg.  6.  21.  and  there  rose  up  /.  out  of  the  rock

9. 15.  let /.  come  out  of  bramble  and  devour  cedars
16.  9.  as  a  thread  of  tow  when  it  toucheth  the/.

1  Kings  18.  23.  lay  it  on  wood,  put  1109.  under,  25.
24.  the  God  that  answereth  by/,  let  him  be  God

38.  then  the  /.  of  the  Lord  fell,  2  Chron.  7. 1,  3.
19. 12.  after  the  earthquake  a  /  but  the  Lord  w  as

not  in  the  /.  after  the /.  a  still  small  voice

2  Kings  1.  10.  then  let  f.  come  down  from  heaven
12.  and  the  /.  of  Gou  came  down  from  heaven

2.  11.  there  appeared  a  chariot  and  horses  of/.

6.  17.  the  mountain  wras  full  of  chariots  of/.

16.  3.  Aliaz  made  his  son  to  pass  through  the  /.

19.  18.  and  have  cast  their  gods  into  the  /.

21. 6.  Manasseh  made  son  pass  thro’/.  2  Chr.  33.  6.

23.  10.  no  man  might  make  his  son  pass  thro’  the /.

1  Chr.  21.  26.  Lord  answered  him  from  heaven  by  /.

2  Chr.  35.  13.  they  roasted  the  passover  with  /.
Neh.  2.  3.  the  gates  therepf  are  consumed  with  /.  13.
Job  1.  16.  the/,  of  God  is  fallen  from  heaven

18.  5.  and  the  spark  of  his  /.  shall  not  shine
28.  5.  and  under  it  is  turned  up  as  it  were /.

41.  19-  burning  lamps,  and  sparks  of/,  leap  out
Psal.  39.  3.  while  I  w  as  musing  the  /.  burned
46.  9.  he  burneth  the  chariot  in  the/.

66.  12.  we  went  through  /.  and  through  water
68.  2.  as  wax  melteth  before /.  so  let  w  ieked  perish

74.7.  they  have  cast/,  into  thy  sanctuary
78.  14.  all  the  night  with  a  light  off.  105.  39.

83. 14.  as  the /.  burneth  the  wood,  and  as  the  flame
97-  3.  a /.  goeth  before  him  and  burneth  up  enemies
105.  32.  he  gave  hail  and  flaming/,  in  their  land
118.  12.  they  are  quenched  as  the/,  of  thorns
140.  10.  let  them  be  cast  into  the /.  into  deep  pits
148. 8.  /.  and  hail,  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  word

Prov.  6.  27.  can  a  man  take  f.  in  his  bosom
16.  27.  and  in  his  lips  there  is  as  a  burning /.

26.  20.  where  no  wood  is,  there  the/,  goeth  out
21.  as  wood  is  to  /.  so  is  contentious  man  to  kindle
30. 16.  the  grave  and  the  /.  saith  not,  it  is  enough
Isa.  9.5.  this  shall  be  with  burning  and  fuel  off.

18.  for  w  ickedness  burneth  as  the  /.

19.  the  people  shall  be  as  the  fuel  of  the  /.

10.  16.  shall  kindle  a  burning  like  burning  of  a /.

17.  and  the  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a /.

30. 14.  not  be  found  a  sherd  to  take  /.  from  hearth
33.  the  pile  thereof  is /.  and  much  w  ood

31.  9.  saith  the  Lord,  w  hose  /.  is  in  Zion
37. 19.  Kings  of  Assyria  have  cast  their  gods  into  /.
,  43.  2.  wheu  thou  -walkest  through  /.  not  be  burnt

*


Isa.  44. 16.  he  burneth  part  thereof  in  the  /.he  warr
eth  himself,  and  saith.  aha,  1  have  seen  the

47.14.  they  shall  be  as  stubble,  the/,  shall  burn  the  :

50.  11.  wi.  lk  in  light  of  your./,  and  in  the  spark

64.  2.  as  when  the  melting  /.  burneth,  the  J.  cat,
eth  the  w  aters  to  boil  to  make  thy  name  know

65.  5.  these  are  a  /.  that  burnetii  all  the  day

66.  15.  for  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  w  ith /.

16.  for  by  /.  will  the  I.ord  plead  with  all  flesh

24.  worm  not  die,  neither  their  /.  be  quenched

Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my  fury  come  forth  like  /  and  bur
5.  14.  1  will  make  my  words  in  thy  mouth/

20.  9.  his  word  was  as  a  /.  shut  up  in  my  brines
21.12.  lest  my  fury  go  out  like/,  and  burn, that  nor

22.  7.  shall  cut  dow  n  cast  choice  cedars  in  the /'
29.  22.  whom  the  king  of  Eab\  Ion  roasted  in  the
32.  35.  high  places,  to  cause  their  sons  to  pass  thf

the  /.  to  Molech,  Ezek.  16.  21.  |  20.  26,  3
36.  22.  and  there  was  a/,  on  the  hearth  burning

23.  Jehudi  cut  the  roll,  and  cast  it  into  the /

48.  45.  but  a  f.  shall  come  forth  out  of  Heshbon

51.  58.  the  folk  shall  labour  in  vain  and  in  the  /
Lam.  2.  3.  he  burned  against  Jacob  like  a  fiamink

4.  he  bent  his  bow,  he  poured  out  his  fury  iike
Ezek.  1.  4.  I  looked,  behold,  a /.  infolding  itself

13.  the  /.  was  bright,  and  out  of  the  /.  lieiitnini
10.  6.  saying,  take  /.  from  between  the  w  heels

7.  one  cherub  stretched  forth  his  hand  to  the  f

21.  31.  I  will  blow  against  thee  in  the  /.  22.  21.
32.thou  shalt  be  for  fuel  to/,  no  more  remefnbert

22.  20.  to  blow  /.  upon  it,  to  melt  it,  so  gather  y<

24.  9.  saith  Lord,  1  will  even  make  pile  for/,  gre

12.  her  scum  shall  be  in  /.  in  filthiness  is  lewane
28.  18.  w  ill  bring  forth  a /.  from  the  midst  of  th.
36.  5.  in  the /.  of  my  jealousy  have  1  spoken,  38  1
Dan.  3. 27-  upon  w  hose  bodies  the/  had  no  powe

nor  the  smell  of  /  had  passed  on  the
7-9.  his  throne  like  flames,  wheels  like  burning

10.  6.  his  face  as  lightning,  his  eyes  as  lamps  of
lies.  7. 6.  in  the  morning  it  burneth  as  a  flaming
Joel 2.  30.  blood /.  and  pillars  of  smoke,  Acts  2.1
Amos  5.  6.  lest  he  break  out  like /.  in  house  of  Jose"

7.  4.  behold,  the  Lord  God  called  to  contend  by
Obad.  18.  and  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a /.
Mic.  1.4.  shall  be  molten  under  him  as  wax  before
Nah.  1.6.  fury  poured  out  like /.  rocks  thrown  do\
Hub.  2.  13.  tne  people  shall  labour  in  the  very/,
Zech.  2. 5.  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of  /.  round  aoo

3.  2.  is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  f.f
12. 6.  like  a  hearth  off.  and  like  torch  of  /.  in  she

13.  9.  1  will  bring  tbe  third  part  through  the /.

Mai.  3.  2.  he  is  like  a  refiner’s  /.  and  fuller's  so.
Mat.  3.  10.  every  tree  that  bringeth  not  forth  go
fruit  is  cast  into/.  7- 19.  Luke  3.  9.  John  15.

11.  baptize  with  Holy  Ghost,  and /.  Luke  3.  li

13.  42.  and  shall  cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  f.f

17.  15.  oft-times  he  falleth  into  the  /.  Mark  9.  2

18. 8.  rather  than  having  two  hands  or  twm  feet,

be  cast  into  everlasting/.  Mark  9.  43, ;

25.  41.  depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast
Mark  9.  44.  where  the  /.  is  not  quenched,  45.

14.  54.  and  Peter  w  armed  himself  at  the/.

Luke  9.  54.  wilt  thou  that  we  command  /.  to  com

17-  29.  the  same  day  it  rained  /.  and  brimstone
22.  56.  a  maid  beheld  him  as  he  sat  by  the  f.  \
Acts  2.3.  appeared  to  them  cloven  tongues,  like  a>
28.  3.  when  Paul  had  laid  sticks  on  the  /.

5.  he  shcok  off  the  beast  into  the  /.  felt  no  bar

1  G'cr.  3.  13.  it  shall  be  revealed  by  /.  and  iiiej

shall  try  every  man’s  w  ork,  of  what  sort  it

15.  he  himself  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  /,

2  Thess.  1. 8.  in  flaming/,  taking  vengeance  on  tin
lleb.  1.  7.  who  maketh  his  ministers  a  flame  ofj

11.  34.  who  thro’  faith  quenched  the  violence  otf

12.  18.  are  not  come  to  mount  that  burned  with
Jam.  3.  5.  how  great  a  matter  a  little  f.  kindled

6.  and  the  tongue  is  a /.  a  world  of  iniquity
5.  3.  and  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were  J.

1  Pet.  1.  7.  than  ot  gold,  tho’  it  be  tried  with/.

2  Pet  3.7.  reserved  unto /.  against  day  of  judgmi

12.  the  heavens  being  on  /.  shall  be  dissolved
Jude  7-  suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  /.

23.  others  save  pulling  them  out  of  the/.

Rev.  3.  18.  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the./

4.  5.  seven  lamps  off.  burning  before  the  thron

8.  5.  the  angel  filled  the  censer  with  /.  of  the  <d

7.  there  followed  hail  and  /.  mingled  with  bk

8.  as  it  were  a  great  mountain  burning  with  J

9.  17.  and  out  of  their  mouths  issued/.  11.  5.

18.  the  third  part  of  men  w  as  killed  by  the/.

13.  13.  he  maketh  /.  come  down  from  heaven
14. 18.  another  angel  which  had  pow  er  over  tin
15.2.  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glassmingled  witl

16.8.  pow-er  was  given  him  to  scorch  men  w  itl

20.  9.  and/,  came  down  from  God  out  of  hea'

10.  the  devil  was  cast  into  lake  of  /.  and  brimsto,,

14.  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake  of/

15.  whoso  not  written  in  book  of  life,  cast  int<

21.  8.  have  part  in  the  lake  which  burneth  with
See  Br  imston  e,  Burn, or  Burnt,  Coals,  (  t

sume,  Consuming,  Devour,  Devour*
Devouring,  Flame,  Hell,  Midst.
Kindle,  or  kindled  FIRE.

Exod.  22. 6.  he  that  kindled  the  /.  make  restitutio:
35.  3.  ye  shall  kindle  no/,  on  the  sabbath  day  •
Deut.  32.  22.  for  a  /.  is  kindled  in  my  anger,/
shall  burn  to  lowest  hell,  Jer.  15.  14. 1  17-
2  Sam.  22.  13.  before  him  were  coals  of/,  kind!  1
Psal.  78.  21.  so  a  /.  was  kindled  against  Jacob
106.  18.  a /.  was  kindled  in  their  company  :
Isa.  10.  16.  he  shall  kindle  a  burning  like  a/.
50. 11.  behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a/,  that  comp
Jer.  7. 18.  children  gathered  wood, fathers kindte[

11.  16.  he  hath  kindled  f.  on  the  green  olive
17-  27.  then  will  1  kindle  a /.  in  the  gates  there
21.  14.  1  will  kindle  a  /.  in  the  forest  thereof
43.  12.  I  will  kindle  a /.  in  the  houses  of  the  poj

49.  27.  1  will  kindle  a/,  in  the  wall  of  Dam;  sc

50.  32.  and  I  w  ill  kindle  a  /.  in  his  cities  S
Lam.  4.  11.  and  the  Lord  hath  kindled  a/.  111  /
Ezek.  20.47.  1  will  kindle  a/,  in  the  forest  1
24. 10.  heap  on  wood,  kindle  the /.  consume  the  is


FI  R


F  1  R


F  I  R


q  1 1. 14.  I  wil  kindle  a/.  in  (lie  wall  of  Rabbah
t.  1. 10.  nor  do  ye  kindle  f.onmy  altarfor  nought
1C.  49.  to  send/,  and  what  if  already  kindled?
5  >3.  when  they  bad  kindled  a  /.  in  the  hall
i  C8.  C.  the  barbarians  kindled -a  f.  and  received  us
Made,  with  FI  li  E.

■  .  C9.  18.  an  offering  made  by  f.  unto  the  T.ord,
41.  Lev.  1.  9,  13,  17.  I  2.  C,  9,  16.  I  3.  3,  5,  9,

14,  It)  1  7-  5,  25  I  8.  21,  28. 1  21.  6.  |  22.  27.  I
8,  13,  18,  25,  27  ,  36,  37. 1  24.  7-  A'««.  15.  3,
13,  14. 1  18.  17.  I  28.  3.

2.  3.  the  offerings  ot  the  Lord  made  by  f.
I  4.  35.  |  5.  12.1  6.  17,  18.  I  7-  SO,  35.  1  lb.

15.  1  21.  21.124.  9.  Dent.  18.  1.  1  Ham.
?8.

1  3  sacrifices  made  by  /.  Num .  28.  2.  Josh.  13.  14.
V  .  15.  25.  brine  their  sacrifice  made  by  /.  unto
the  Lord,  28.  6.  8,  13,  19,  24.  |  29-  6,  13,  .36.
Pillar  of  FI  R E.

"  .  14.  24.  the  I .ord  looked  thro’  the  pillar  off.
i  10. 1.  face  as  the  sun,  and  his  feet  as  pillars  off.
See  Bp  Night.

Send,  or  sent  FIRE.

.  1.  13.  from  above  he  sent  f.  into  my  bones
.  39-  6.  and  1  will  send  a /.  on  Magog

I  8.  14.  but  I  will  send  a  /.  upon  his  cities
jlfl.  4.  1  will  send  a  /.  into  the  house  of  llazael

II  will  send  a/,  on  the  wall  of  Gaza

I  will  send  a.  f.  on  wall  of  Cyrus  ||  12.  on  Teman
Z  1  will  send  a  f.  on  Moab  ||  5.  send  f.  on  Judah
,  12.  49.  1  am  come  to  send  f.  on  the  earth
Set  FIRE.

1 .  32.  22.  set  on  /.  foundations  of  mountains
fc!  8.  8.  ve  shall  set  the  city  of  Ai  on/.

and  tney  hasted,  and  set  the  city  on  /.
i.  1.  8.  now  Judah  had  set  Jerusalem  on /.

0  1.  the  people  set  the  hold  on /.  upon  them
i  j.  had  set  the  brands  on  /.  and  burnt  the  corn
218.  they  set  on/,  all  the  cities  of  Benjamin
n.  14.  30.  servants  set  Joab’s  field  on  /.
why  have  thy  servants  set  my  field  on/.  ?

■iffs  8.  12.  llazael  will  set  strong  holds  on/.

J  57-  4.  I  lie  among  them  that  are  set  on  /.
y  .  29.  t  8.  scornful  men  set  a  city  on  /.
j  27.  11.  the  women  come  and  set  them  on  /.

4  25.  he  hath  set  him  on  /.  round  about
rt5.  1.  set  up  a  sign  of/,  in  Bcth-haecerem
329.  the  Chaldeans  shall  set  on /.  this  city
S .  30.  8.  when  I  have  set  a /.  in  Egypt
1  will  set f.  in  Zoan  1|  16.  set  f.  in  Egypt
3).  set  on  /.  and  burn  the  weapons  of  Clog
rc,  3.  6.  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  and  setteth  on/,  the
course  of  nature,  and  it  is  set  on/,  of  hell
Strange  FIRE.

r  10.  1.  Nadab  and  Abihu  offered  strange  f.

\  .  3.  4.  died  when  thev  offered  strange  f.  26.  61.
FI  REBRAN  D,  S.

.  7-  + 16.  and  he  put  /.  within  the  prtehers
I  t.  Samson  took  /.  and  put  a  /.  in  the  midst
* .  26.  18.  as  a  mad  man  who  casteth  /.

'•  f.  4.  for  the  two  tails  of  these  smoking /.

1 )  4. 11.  ye  were  as  a /.  plucked  out  of  burning
FIRE-PANS.

-  .  27.  3.  thou  shalt  make  basons  and  f.-pans

3  ?.  he  made  the  f.-pans  and  all  vessels  of  brass
<igs  25.  15.  f.-pans  carried  he  away,  Jer.  52. 19.

FIRES.

.1 24.  15.  wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the /.
FIRKINS.

'<  2.  6.  six  water-pots  containing  two  or  three /.
FIRM.

r  3. 17.  the  priests  stood  /.  on  dry  ground

4  the  place  where  priests’  feet  stood  /.

ri  1.  23.  are/,  in  themselves,  cannot  be  moved
his  heart  is  as  f.  as  a  stone,  yea,  as  hard
L  73.  4.  no  bands  in  death,  but  their  strength  is /.
,L  6. 7-  they  consulted  to  make  a/,  decree
1  3.  6.  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  /.  to  the  end
I  .  FI RMAMEN'l .

't  said,  Gen.  1.7.  that  God  made  the  firmament
the  midst  of  the  waters,  in  order  to  separate
inferior  from  the  superior  waters.  The  word
re  used  fv  rakiah,  which  is  translated  ex  pan-
11,  something  expanded;  or  firmament,  some-
■ig  firm  and  solid.  The  verb  rakah,  from
'nee  rakiah  is  derived ,  signifies  to  spread
<al  with  the  hammer,  to  make  fiat,  to  crush
pieces,  to  beat.  Moses  uses  this  word  to  de-
ibe  the  gold,  which  uas  beaten  in  order  to
er  the  ark  and  the  tables  of  the  Holy  with
Exod.  39.  3.  Num.  16.  38,  39.  Isaiah,  to
,'ote  the  plates  of  gold  wherewith  the  idols  were
ered,  Isa.  40.  19.  and  the  same  prophet,  and
Psalmist,  to  express  the  spreading  forth  of
earth,  and  its  floating  on  the  waters,  for  this
|r  the  conception  which  the  Hebrews  had  of  it,

,  .42.  5.  Psal.  1.36.  6.

'  intimates,  that  by  the  word  firmament,  ra¬
il,  the  Hebrews  understood  the  heavens,  which,
°  a  solid  and  immense  arch  C though  it  be  soft

I  liquid )  served  as  a  bank  and  barrier  between
upper  and  lower  waters :  and  that  the  stars
set  in  this  arch,  like  so  many  precious  stones

gold  and  silver,  Gen.  1.  17.  When  firma-
nt  is  taken  for  the  starry  heaven,  then  by
per  waters  is  meant ,  that  sea  or  collection  of
'ers  placed  by  God  above  all  the  visible  hea-
>,  and  there  reserved  for  ends  known  to  him -
!•  If  hy  firmament,  we  understand  the  air,
led  the  expansion,  oecause  it  is  extended  far
i  wide ;  and  the  firmament,  because  it  is
d  in  its  proper  place,  from  whence  it  cannot
moved,  unless  by  force ;  then  by  the  superior
ters  are  to  be  understood  the  waters  in  the
uds :  and  these  may  he  said  to  be  above  the
unament  or  air,  because  they  are  above  a  con-

II  able  part  of  it.

J  }■  6.  let  there  tie  a/,  in  midst  of  the  waters
' '0(1  made  the/,  waters  under  and  above /.
md  God  called  the /.  Heaven
God  said,  let  there  be  lights  in  the  /.  15.
and  God  set  them  in  the  f.  of  heaven


Gen.  1. 20.  and  fowl  that  may  flv  above  in  the  open/.
Psal,  19.  1.  and  the/,  shewetn  his  handy  work
150.  1.  praise  him  in  the/,  of  his  power*

Ezek.  1.  22.  the  likeness  of  the  /.  w  as  as  crystal

25.  there  was  a  voice  from  the /.  over  their  heads

26.  above  the/,  w'as  the  likeness  of  a  throne

10.  1.  in  the/,  that  was  above  the cherubims

Dan.  12.  3.  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  f.
FIR.

1  Kings  5.  8.  1  will  do  all  concerning  timber  of /.

6.  15.  he  covered  the  floor  with  planks  of  /.

Cant.  1.  17.  our  beams  are  cedar,  our  rafters  of/.
FIRM  REE.

1  Kings  6.  34.  and  the  two  doors  were  of  /.

2  Chron.  3.  5.  the  greater  house  he  ceiled  with  /.
Isa.  41. 19.  1  will  set  in  the  desert  the  /.  and  the  pine
55.  1.3.  instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the/.

60. 1.3.  the /.  the  pine-tree,  and  box  together
Hos.  14. 8.  1  am  like  a  green  f.  II  Zech.  11.2.  howl,/.

Fllt-l  ltEES.

1  Kings  5. 10.  so  Hiram  gave  Solomon /.  9.  11.

2  Kings  19.  2.3.  1  will  cut  down  tall/.  Isa.  .37  .  24.

2  Chron.  2.  8.  send  me/.  ||  Isa.  14.  8.  the /.  rejoice
Psal.  104.  17.  as  for  the  stork  the  /.  are  her  house
Ezek.  27.5.  they  made  thy  ship-boards  of/,  of  Senir

31.  8.  the/,  were  not  like  his  boughs
Nah.  2.  3.  and  the  /.  shall  be  terribly  shaken
FIR-WOOD.

2  Sam.  6.  5.  Israel  played  on  instruments  made  of  /.
FIRS  l.

This  word  signifies,  I.  Thai  which  is  before  another
in  respect  of  time  ;  and  then  it  is  a  word  of  order,
and  hath  a  reference  to  the  second,  third,  fourth.
Mat.  10.  2.  1  he  first  is  Simon  called  Peter ;
that  is,  he  was  first  called  to  be  an  apostle.  And
in  1  Cor.  15.  47-  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,
the  second  is  from  heaven.  II.  That  which  is
chief,  or  most  excellent.  Rom.  3.  2.  Chiefly,  be¬
cause  unto  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of
God.  Chiefly,  in  the  original,  is  first,  and  shews
the  quality  and  excellence  of  the  privilege  here
mentioned.  So  also  in  Luke  15.  22.  Bring  forth
the.  best,  in  Greek,  the  first  robe.  A  thing  or
person  may  be  said  to  be  first,  (1 )  In  number,  Gen.

8.  5,  13.  (2)  In  order,  Mat.  28.  1.  (3)  By  cre¬
ation,  1  Cor.  15.  47.  (4)  By  generation,  Deut.21.
17-  (5)  In  dignity,  Dan.  6.  2.  (6)  In  time,  Heb.

9.  1.

First-Born.  This  word  is  not  always  to  be  un¬
derstood  strictly  according  to  the  letter  ;  it  is
sometimes  taken  for  that  which  is  first,  most  ex¬
cellent,  most  distinguished  in  any  thing.  Thus  it
is  said  of  Christ,  Col.  1.  15.  That  he  is  the
first-born  of  every  creature.  And  in  Rev.  1.  5.
he  is  called,  'lhe  first-begotten  of  the  dead;
that  is,  begotten  of  the  lather  before  any  crea¬
ture  was  produced ;  and  the  first  who  rose  from
the  dead  by  his  own  power.  The  first-born  of  the
poor,  Isa.  14.  30.  signifies,  the  most  miserable  of
a/l  the  poor ;  and  in  Job  18.  13.  lhe  firstborn
of  death  ;  that  is,  the  most  terrible  of  all  deaths.
The  first-born  among  the  Hebrews,  as  well  as  among
all  other  nations,  enjoyed  particular  privileges :
and  as  polygamy  was  in  use  with  them,  it  was
highly  necessary  to  fix  these  rights.  Moses  regu¬
lates  this  particular  in  Deut.  21.  15,  16,  17-  The
privileges  of  the  first-born  consisted,  (1)  In  a  right
to  the  priesthood,  which,  before  the  law,  was  fixed
to  the  eldest  of  the  family.  This  right  continued
in  force  only  while  brethren  dwelt  together  in  the
same  place  and  family  ;  for  as  soon  as  they  were
separated,  and  made  a  family  apart,  every  one  be¬
came  the  priest  and  head  of  his  own  house.  (2)
The  first  born  had  a  double  portion  among  his
brethren.  This  is  explained  two  ways:  Some  be¬
lieve  that  half  of  the  whole  inheritance  was  given
to  the  elder  brother,  and  that  the  other  half  was
shared  in  equa'  parts  among  the  rest.  But  the
Rab’dns  say,  on  the  contrary,  that  the  first-born
for  his  share  took  twice  as  much  as  any  one  of  his
brothers.  If  a  father  left  six  sons,  they  made  a
division  into  seven  equal  parts  ;  whereof  the  eldest
had  two,  and  each  of  the  others  one.  lj  the  eldc't
was  dead,  and  had  left  children,  his  right  devolved
upon  his  children  and  his  heirs.

When  God  by  the  sword  of  the  destroying  angel  had
killed  all  the  first-born  of  the  Egyptians,  Exod.  12.
29-  he  ordained,  that  all  the  first  born,  both  of  men
and  tame  beasts  for  service,  should  be  consecrated
to  him.  The  male  children  only  were  subject  to
this  law.  "The  children  were  offered  in  the  temple,
and  their  relations  redeemed  them,  for  the  sum  of
five  shekels,  Exod.  1.3.  12,1.3.  N  um.  18.  16.

If  it  were  a  clean  beast,  as  a  calf,  a  lamb,  or  a
kid,  it  was  to  be  offered  at  the  temple.  It  was  not
to  he  redeemed,  but  it  was  killed ;  the  blood  of  it
was  sprinkled  about  the  altar,  the  fat  was  burnt  in
the  fire  upon  the  altar,  and  the  flesh  was  for  the
priest,  N um.  18. 17, 18.  19.  If  it  were  an  unclean
beast,  and  such  as  they  were  not  allowed  to  eat,
such  as  an  horse,  an  ass,  or  a  camel,  it  was  either
redeemed,  or  something  else  was  given  in  exchange
for  it.  The  firstling  of  an  ass  was  redeemed  by
giving  a  lamb  ;  if  it  were  not  redeemed,  it  was  to
be  killed,  Exod.  13.  13,

First-Fruits.  The  presents  were  so  called  which
the  Hebrews  made  to  God,  consisting  of  part
of  the  fruits  of  their  harvest,  to  express  their
submission  and  dependence,  and  to  acknowledge
the  sovereign  dominion  of  God  the  author  of  all
happiness.  The  day  after  the  feast  of  the  Passover
they  brought  a  sheaf  into  the  temple,  as  the
first-fruits  of  the  barley-harvest.  'The  sheaf  was
threshed  in  the  court  ;  and  of  the  grain  that  came
out  they  took  a  full  homer  ;  that  is,  about  three
pints.  Af  ter  it  had  been  we11  winnowed,  parched,
and  bruised,  they  sprinkled  over  it  a  log  of  oil ;
that  is,  near  a  pint.  They  added  to  it  a  hand¬
ful  of  incense  ;  and  the  priest  that  received  this
offering  shook  it  before  the  Lord  towards  the
four  quarters  of  the  world ;  be  cast  part  of  it  upon
the  altar,  and  the  rest  was  his  own.  After  this,


every  one  might  begin  men  harvest.  Lev.  23.  10,
11,  dec.  This  was  offered  in  the  name  of  the
whole  nation,  and  by  this  the  whole  harvest  was
sanctified  unto  them.

When  the  wheat  harvest  was  over,  that  is,  the  day
of  Pentecost,  they  offered  again  first-fruits  of  an¬
other  kind  in  the  name  of  all  the  nation,  which
consisted  of  two  loaves  of  two  tenth-deals  :  that  is,
of  about  three  pints  of  flour  each.  The  loaves
were  made  of  leavened  dough.

First-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  see  Earnest.
Gen.  25.  25.  the  /.  came  out  red  all  over

26.  1.  there  was  a  famine  beside  the /.  famine
38.  28.  the  midwife  said,  this  came  out /.

Exod.  4.  8.  if  they  will  not  hearken  to  the/,  sign

2.3.  19.  the/,  of  the  first-fruits  bring  to  the  Lord
28.  17.  the/,  row  shall  be  a  sardius,  .39. 10.

.31.  1.  two  tables  like  to  the /.  4.  bent.  10.  1,  .3.
Lev.  5.  8.  shall  otter  what  is  for  the  sin-offering/.
Num.  2.  9.  camp  of  Judah,  these  shall  /.  set  forth

10.  13.  and  they/,  took  their  journey

13.  20.  it  W'as  the  time  of  the/,  ripe  grapes

15.  20.  ye  shall  otter  up  a  cake  of  the  f.  of  your
dough  for  an  heave-offering,  21.  Ezek.  44.  30.

18.  1.3.  whatsoever  is /.  ripe  shall  be  thine
24.  20.  Amalek  was  the  f.  of  the  nations
Deut.  10. 10.  according  to  the  /.  time,  forty  day3

11.  14.  I  will  give  thee/,  rain  and  latter  rain

1.3.  9.  thine  hand  shall  be  /.  upon  him

17.  7-  the  hands  of  witnesses  shall  be /.  upon  him

18.  4.  the  /.  of  the  fleece  of  thy  sheep  give  him

3.3.  21.  he  provided  the  f.  part  for  himself
Josh.  21.  10.  theirs  was /.  lot,  1  Chr.  24.  7.  |  25.  9.
Judg.  1.  1.  who  shall  go  up /.  to  fight,  20.  18.

20.  39.  Israel  are  smitten  as  in  the  f.  battle

1  •Sam.  14.  14.  that  /.slaughter  was  twenty  men
35.  the  same  was  the  /.  altar  Saul  built  to  Lord

2  Sam.  3. 13.  except  thou  J.  bring  Michal  Saul’s  dau.

19.  20.  I  am  come  the  /.  this  day  to  meet  my  lord
43.  that  advice  should  not  be/,  had  in  bringing

23.  19.  he  was  their  captain,  howbeit  lie  attained

not  unto  the  /.  three,  23.  1  Chron.  11.  21, 25.
1  Kings  17.  1.3.  hut  make  thereof  a  little  cake  f.

18. 25.  and  dress  it /.  for  ye  are  many

20. 17.  the  young  men  of  the  princes  went  out /.

1  Chron.  9.  2.  now  the  /.  inhabitants  that  dwelt
11.6.  whosoever  smiteth  the  Jeb  .sites /.

16.7-  that  day  David  delivered/,  this  psalm,

2  Chron.  3.  3.  length  by  cubits  after  the/,  measure
Ezra  3.  12.  that  had  seen  the  glory  of  the/,  house
Esth.  1.  14.  which  sat  the/,  in  the  kingdom

Job  15.  7-  art  thou  the  /.  man  that  was  born  }

Prov.  18.  17.  that  is /.  in  his  own  cause  seemeth  just
Isa.  41.  27-  the  /.  shall  say  to  Zion,  behold  them

4.3.  27.  thy/,  father  hath  sinned  against  me
60.  9.  the  ships  of  Earshish /.  to  bring  thy  sons

Jer.  4.  .31.  her  that  bringeth  forth  her  /.child

16.  18./.  1  will  recompense  their  iniquity

24.  2.  good  tigs,  even  like  the  figs  that  are/,  ripe
.36.  28.  write  the  words  that  were  in  the /.  roll
50.  17./.  the  king  of  Assyria  hath  devoured  him
Dan.  6.  2.  Dan.  was/,  president,  of  an  excellent  sp.

7.  4.  the /.  beast  was  like  a  liou,  Ilev.  4.  7.

24.  and  another  shall  be  diverse  from  the  /.

8.  21.  the  great  horn  between  his  eyes  is  the /.  king

10.  +  13.  but  lo,  Michael  the /.  came  to  help  me
Hos.  2.  7.  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  /.  husband
9. 10.  the  /.  ripe  in  the  tig  tree  at  her  J.  time

Amos  6.  7-  shall  go  captive  with  the  /.that  gocapt.
Mic.  4.  8.  to  thee  shall  come  the  /.  dominion
Nah.  3.  12.  like  fig-trees  with  the /.  ripe  figs
Hag.  2.  3.  who  is  left  that  saw  house  in  her/,  glory  ?
Zech.  6.  2.  in  the/,  chariot  were  red  horses

12.  7.  the  Lord  shall  save  the  tents  of  Judah/.

A  tat.  5.  24 ./.  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  come

6.  33.  seek  ye /.  the  kingdom  of  G.  and  righteousn.
7-5./.  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  eye,  Luke  6.42.
8. 21.  me  /.  to  go  and  bur\  my  father,  Luke  9.  59.

12.  29-  except  he /.  bind  the  strong  man,  Mark  3.27-

45.  latter  state  worse  than  the  f.  Luke  11.26.

1.3.  30.  gather  ye  together/,  the  tares,  bind  them
17-  10.  that  Elias  must/,  come,  11.  Mark  9.  12.

27.  and  take  up  the  fish  that  /.  cometh  up

20.  10.  but  when  the  /.  came,  they  supposed
21. 28.  he  came  to  the/,  and  said,  son,  go  work

31.  who  of  the  twain,  they  say  unto  him,  the /.
.36.  he  sent  other  servants  more  than  the  /.

22.  25.  /.  when  married,  Mark  12.  20.  l.uke  20.  29.
.38.  this  is /.  commandment,  Mark  12.  28, 29,  30.

23.  26.  Pharisee,  cleanse  /.  that  which  is  within
Mark  4.  28./.  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  corn

7.  27-  Jesus  said  to  her,  let  the  children  f.  be  fi'led

9.  .35.  if  any  desire  to  be /.  he  shall  be  last

13.  10.  and  the  gospel  must  /.  be  published
16.  9-  he  appeared  f.  to  Mary  Magdalene

Luke  1.  .3.  had  perfect  understanding  from  the  /.

2.  2.  was  /.  made  w  hen  Cyrenius  was  governor
6.  1.  on  the  second  sabbath  after  the /.  he  went
10.5./.  say,  peace  be  to  this  house

11.  38.  that  he  had  not  /.  washed  before  dinner

14.  28.  sitteth  not  down  /.  and  counteth  the  cost
17-  25.  but  /.  must  he  suffer  many  things

21.  9.  for  these  things  must  /.  come  to  pass
John  1.  41.  he/,  findeth  his  brother  Simon

5.  4.  whosoever  /.  stepped  in,  was  made  whole

8.  7-  without  sin,  let  him  /.  cast  a  stone  at  her
10.40.  into  the  place  where  John  at/,  baptized

18.  13.  anil  led  him  away  to  Annas/.

19.  .32.  soldiers  came,  and  brake  the  legs  of  the /.

20.  4.  the  disciple  came  /.  to  the  sepulchre,  8.

Acts  .3.  26.  to  you /.  God  sent  him  to  bless  you  in
7. 12.  Jacob  sent  out  our  fathers/.

11.  26.  discip.  were  called  Christians /.  at  Antioch

12.  10.  they  were  past  the  /.  and  second  ward

1.3.  24.  when  John  had  /.  preached  baptism

46.  necessary  it  should  J.  have  been  spoken  to  you
16.  +  12.  Philippi  the /.  city  of  Macedonia

26. 20.  but  shewed  /.  unto  them  of  Damascus
23.  Christ  should  be  /.  that  should  rise  from  dean

27.  43.  should  cast  themselves/. into  the  sea
Pom.  1.8./.  1  thank  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ
2.  9.  of  the  Jew /.  and  also  of  the  Gentile,  10.

167


F  I  R


F  I  S


F  I  V


iom.  11.  .35.  or  who  hath  /.  given  to  him  ?

15.  24.  iff.  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  company

1  Cor.  12.  28./.  apostles,  secondarily  prophets

14.  30.  let  the/,  hold  his.  peace  .

15.3.  for  I  delivered  /.  of  all  that  which  l  received

45.  the/,  man  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul

46.  howbeit  that  was  not  /.  which  is  spiritual

47.  tlie  /.  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy

2  l  or.  8.  5.  /.  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord
12.  for  if  there  be  /.  a  willing  mind,  it  is  accepted

Eph.  1.  12.  who /.  trusted  in  Christ

4.  9.  descended  into  the  lower  parts  pt  the  earth

6.  2.  which  is  the  /.  commandment  with  promise

1  Then.  4.  16.  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise/.

2  Then.  2.  3.  except  there  come  a  tailing  away/.

1  Tim.  1.  16.  that  in  me/.  Christ  Jesus  might  shew

2.  13.  for  Adam  was /.  formed,  then  Eve

3.  10.  let  these  also  /.  be  proved,  then  let  them  use

5.  4.  let  them  learn  /.  to  shew  piety  at  home

12.  because  they  have  cast  oft  their/,  taith

2  Tim.  1.  5.  faith  dwelt  /.  in  thy  grandmother  Lois
2.  6.  husbandman  must  be/,  partaker  of  the  fruits

4.  16.  at  my  /.  answer  no  man  stood  with  me
Tit.  3.  10.  after/,  and  second  admonition,  reject
Heh.  4.  6.  to  whom  it  was  /.  preached,  entered  not

5.  12.  one  teach  you  which  be  the  /.  principles

7.  2.  /.  being  by  interpretation,  king  ot  righteousn.
27.  offer/,  for  his  own  sins,  then  for  the  people’s

8.  7.  the  /.  covenant.  13.  1  9.  1,  15,  18.

9.  2./.  tabernacle,  wherein  was  shew-bread,  6,  8.

10.  9.  he  taketh  away  the  /.  that  he  may  establish
Jam.  3.  17.  wisdom  that  is  from  above,  is/,  pure

1  Pet.  4.  17.  if  judgment./,  begin  at  us,  what  end

2  Pet.  1.  20.  knowing  this/,  that  no  prophecy,  3.  3.

1  John  4.  19.  we  love  him,  because  he/,  loved  us
Jude  6.  the  angels  who  kept  not  their/,  estate
Rev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast  left  thy/,  love

5.  repent,  and  do  the /.  works,  else  1  will  come

13.  12.  he  exerciseth  all  the  power  of  the/,  beast

20.  5.  this  is  the/,  resurrection

21.  1.  the  f.  heaven  and/,  earth  were  passed  away

19.  the  J.  foundation  was  jasper,  second  sapphire

See  Day,  Last.

At  the  FIRST.

Gen.  13.  4.  where  Abram  made  the  altar  at  the f.
28. 19.  the  city  was  called  Luz  at  the  f.

43.  18.  because  of  the  money  returned  at  the  f.

20.  we  came  down  indeed  at  thef.  to  buy  food
Vent.  9. 18.  1  fell  down  before  Lord  as  at  thef.  25.
Josh.  8.  5.  when  they  come  against  us  at  thef.

6.  they  will  say,  they  flee  before  us  as  at  the  f.
Judg.  18.  29.  name  of  the  city  was  Laish  at  thef.

20.  32.  are  smitten  down  before  us  as  at  the  f.

2  Sam.  17.  9.  some  of  them  be  overthrown  at  the  f.

I  Kings  20.  9.  all  thou  didst  send  for  to  thy  serv.  atf.

1  Chron.  15.  13.  because  ye  did  it  not  at  thef.

Neh.  7. 5.  a  register  ot  them  which  came  up  at  thef.
Isa.  1.  26.  I  will  restore  thy  judges  as  at  thef.

9.  1.  when  at  the  f.  he  lightly  afflicted  the  land
Jer.  7.  12.  my  place  where  1  set  my  name  at  the  f.
33!  7.  and  I  will  build  them  as  at  thef.

11.  return  the  captivity  of  the  land,  as  at  the  f.
Dan.  8.  1.  after  that  which  appeal  ed  to  me  at  the  f.
John  12.  16.  his  disciples  understood  not  at  the  f.

19.  39.  which  at  the  f.  came  to  Jesus  by  night
Acts  15.  14.  God  at  the  f.  did  visit  the  Gentiles

26.  4.  which  was  at  the  f.  among  mine  own  nation
Gal.  4.  13.  I  preached  the  gospel  unto  you,  at  thef.
Heh .2.  3.  which  at  thef.  began  to  be  spoken  by  Ld.

FIRST-BORN.

Gen.  19.31.  the/,  said  to  the  younger,  34.

33.  the/,  went  in,  and  lay  with  her  father
37.  the/,  bare  a  son,  and  called  his  name  Moab

27.  19.  and  Jacob  said,  1  am  Esau,  thy/.  32.

29.  26.  not  done  to  give  the  younger  before  the/.
43.  33.  the  /.  according  to  his  birth  right

48.  18.  not  so  my  father,  for  this  is  the/.

Exod.  4.  22.  saith  Lord,  Israel  is  my  son,  even  my/.
23.  behold,  1  will  slay  thy  son,  even  thy  /.

11.5.  all  the  f.  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  die

12.  12.  and  1’will  smite  all  the/,  in  the  land
29.  the  Lord  smote  all  the/,  in  Egypt,  13.  15.

13.  2.  sanctify  unto  me  all  the/,  it  is  mine
22.  29.  the/,  of  thy  sons  shaltthou  give  to  me
34.  20.  /.  of  thy  sons  shalt  redeem,  Num .  18.  15.

Lev.  27.  t  26./.  of  beasts  no  man  shall  sanctify  it
Num.  3.  12.  instead  of  all  the/.  41,45.  1  8.  17,  18.
13.  because  all  the  /.  of  Israel  are  mine,  I  hal¬
lowed  to  me  all  the  f.  of  Israel
40.  number  all  the/,  of  the  males  of  Israel
42.  Moses  numbered  all  the  /.  ot  Israel
50.  of  the  f.  of  Israel  took  he  the  money

33.  4.  for  the  Egyptians  buried  all  their  /.

Dent.  21.  15.  if  the  /.  son  be  her' s  that  was  hated

17.  beginning  of  strength,  for  the  right  ot/.  is  his

25.  6./.  which  she  beareth,  succeed  in  name
Josh.  6.  26.  shall  lay  the  foundation  in  his/.

1  Kings  16.  34.  laid  foundation  in  Abiram  his/.

1  Chron.  5. 1.  sons  of  Reuben  the/,  for  he  was  the/.

26.  10.  though  he  was  not  the  /.  yet  his  father

2  Chrcn.  21.  3.  Jehoram,  because  he  was  the/.

Nek.  10.  36.  to  bring  the  /.  to  the  house  of  God
Job  18.  13.  the  /.  of'death  shall  devour  his  strength
P  sal.  78. 51.  he  smote  all  the  /.  in  Egypt,  the  chief  of

their  strength,  105.  36.  1  135.  8. 1  136.  10.
89.  27.  will  make  him  my/,  higher  than  kings
Isa.  14.  30.  and  the /.  of  the  poor  shall  feed
Jer.  31.  9.  I  am  a  father  to  Israel,  Ephraim  is  my/.
Mic.  6.  7.  shall  I  give  my/,  for  my  transgression  ?
Zech.  12.  10.  as  one  in  bitterness  for  his/.

Mat.  1.  25.  Mary  brought  forth  her/,  son,  Luke  2.  7.
Rom.  8.  29.  might  be  the/,  among  many  brethren
Col.  1.  15.  who  is  the /.  of  every  creature

18.  who  is  the  beginning,  the/,  from  the  dead
Heb.  11.  28.  lest  he  that  destroyed  the/,  touch  them

12.  23.  ye  are  come  to  the  church  ot  the  /.

FI  RSI -FRUIT,  or  fruits.

Exod.  22. 29.  not  delay  to  offer  the/,  ripe  frnHs
23. 16.  the  f. -fruits  ot  thy  labour  thou  hast  sown
19-  first  of f. -fruits  of  thy  land,  34.  26.  Dent.  26.  2.

34.  22.  the  least  of  the  J.  fruits  of  wheat  harvest
^.Ler.  2.  12.  oblation  of  the  f. -fruits  ye  shall  offer

168


Lev.  2. 14.  the  meat-offering  of  f. -fruits  green  ears
21.  10.  bring  a  sheaf  of  th ef.  fruits  of  harvest

17.  they  are  the  f. -fruits  unto  the  Lord

20.  wave  them  with  the  bread  of  the  f. -fruits
Num.  18. 12. /.-/'rttft.vof  oil, wine, wheat,  1  have  given
28.  26.  in  the  day  of f.  fruits  when  ye  offer  to  Lord
Dent.  18.  4.  the  f.  fruits  of  thy  corn,  wine,  and  oil

26.  10.  I  have  brought  the  f. -fruits  of  the  land

2  Kings  4.  42.  and  brought  the  man  of  God  f.  fruits
2  Chron.  31.  5.  brought  in  abundance  the  f.  fruits
Neh.  10.  35.  bring  f.  fruits  of  our  ground,  ot  trees
37.  we  should  bring  the  f. -fruits  ot  our  dough
12. 44.  appointed  over  chambers  for  /. fruits,  13.  31.
Prov.  3.  9.  honour  the  Lord  with  the  f. -fruits
Jer.  2.  3.  Israel  was  the  f.  fruits  of  his  increase
Ezek.  20.  40.  there  will  l  require  the  f. -fruits
44.  30.  the  first  of  all  the  f.  fruits  of  all  things
48.  14.  nor  exchange  the  f. -fruits  ot  the  land
Amos  6.  tl.  named  the /  fruits  of  the  nations
Mic.  7.  1.  my  soul  desired  the/,  rip e  fruit
Rom.  8.23.  which  have  thef. -fruits  ot  the  Spirit
11. 16.  if  the  f.  fruit  be  holy,  the  lump  is  holy

16.  5.  who  is  the  f.  fruits  of  Achaia,  1  Cor.  16.  15.

1  Cor.  15.  20.  Christ  /.  fruits  of  them  that  slept,  23.
Jam.  1.  18.  a  kind  off. -fruits  of  his  creatures
Rev.  14.  4.  being  the  f. -fruits  unto  God  and  Lamb
FIRST  month.

Gen.  8. 13.  in  the  /.  month ,  the  /.  day  of  the  month
Exod.  12.  2.  shall  be  the/,  month  of  the  year  to  you

18.  in/,  month  eat  unleavened  bread,  Lev.  23.  5.
40.  2.  first  day  of/,  month  set  up  tabernacle,  17 .
Num.  9.  1.  in  the /.  month  keep  the  passover,  28.  16.

2  Chron.  35. 1.  Ezra  6. 19.  Ezek.  45.  21.

20. 1.  came  into  the  desert  of  Zin  in  the/,  month
33.  3.  departed. from  Rameses  in  the/,  month

Josh.  4.  19.  people  came  out  of  Jordan  in/,  month

1  Chron.  12. 15.  these  went  over  Jordan  in/,  month

27.  2.  the  captain  that  served  the  /.  month,  3.

2  Chron.  29.  3.  in  the/,  month  opened  the  doors  of

the  house  of  the  Lord

17.  they  began  on  first  day  off.  month  to  sanctify
and  in  the  sixteenth  day  off.  month  made  an  end

Ezra  7 .  9.  f.  month  began  he  to  go  from  Babylon
8.  31.  the/,  month  we  departed  from  Ahava
10.  17-  they  made  an  end  with  them  by  /.  month
Esth.  3.  7.  in  the  /.  month  they  cast  Pur,  on  the
thirteenth  day  of  the/,  month
Ezek.  45. 18.  in  the  /.  month  take  a  young  bullock
Joel  2.  23.  cause  former  and  latter  rain  in  /.  month
FIRST  year.

Exod.  12.  5.  your  lambs  shall  be  male  of  the/. year
29.  38.  offer  two  lambs  of  the  /.  year  day  by  day
continually.  Lev.  23. 19.  Num.  28.  3,  9.
Lev.  9.  3.  take  a  kid  of  the  /.  year  without  blemish

12.  6.  he  shall  bring  a  lamb  of  the  /.  year,  Num.  6.
12. 1  7-  15,  21,  27  ,  33,  39,  45,  51,  57  ,  63,  69,
75,  81.  Ezek.  46.  13.

14. 10.  take  an  ewe-lamb  of  the/,  year,  Num.  6. 14.

23. 12.  offer  an  he-lamb  of  the/.  peai ,  Num.  6. 14.

18.  ye  shall  offer  seven  lambs  of  the/,  year  without

blemish,  Num.  28. 11, 19,  27-  1  29. 2, 8, 36.
Num.  7.  17.  for  a  peace-offering  five  lambs  of  the
/.  year,  23,  29,  35,  41,  47,  53,  59.

87.  the  lambs  of  the  /  year  twelve  for  burnt  offer.

88.  the  lambs  of  the  /  year  sixty  for  a  peace-offer.
15.27.  then  he  shall  bring  a  she-goatot  the/,  year

29. 13.  offer  a  burnt-offering,  fourteen  lambs  of  the

/.  year,  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32.
2  Chr.  29.  3.  Hezekiah  in  the/,  year  of  his  reign
36.  22.  in/,  year  of  Cyrus,  Ezra  1. 1. 1  5. 13.  |  6. 3.
Jer.  25.  1.  that  was  the /.  year  of  N  ebuchadnezzar
52.  31.  in  the /.  year  ot  the  reign  of  Evil-merodach
Dan.  1.  21.  Daniel  continued  to  the  f.year  of  Cyrus

7. 1.  in  the /.  year  of  Belshazzar  Daniel  dreamed

9. 1.  in  /.  year  of  Darius  1  understood  by  books,  2.

11. 1.  in  the  /.  year  of  Darius  I  stood  to  confirm

FIRSTLING.

Exod.  13. 12.  shalt  set  apart  every  /.  that  cometh  of  a
beast,  the  males  shall  be  the  Lord’s,  34.  19.

13.  every  J.  of  an  ass  thou  shalt  redeem,  34.  20.
Lev.  27.  26.  the  Lord’s/,  no  man  shall  sanctify  it
Num.  18.  15.  the  /.  of  unclean  beasts  shalt  redeem
17.  the  /.  of  a  cow,  sheep,  or  goat,  not  redeem
Deut.  15.  19.  all  the  /.«nales  sanctify  to  the  Lord
33.  17.  Joseph’s  glory  is  like  the/,  of  a  bullock
I’lRSTLlNGS.

Gen.  4.  4.  Abel  brought  of  the  /.  of  his  flock
Num.  3.  41.  instead  of  all  the  /.  among  the  cattle
Deut.  12. 6.  ye  shall  bring /.  of  your  herds  and  flocks
17.  thou  mayestnot  eat  within  thy  gates  the/.

14.  23.  eat  the/,  in  the  place  the  Lord  shall  choose
Neh.  10. 36./.  of  our  herds  bring  to  the  house  ot  God
FISH.

Gen.  1 . 26.  let  them  have  dominion  over/,  of  sea,  28.
Exod.  7. 18.  the/,  in  the  river  shall  die,  21.

Num.  11.  5.  we  rememb.  the /.  we  did  eat  in  Egypt
22.  shall  all  the/,  of  the  sea  be  gathered  together
Deut.  4.  18.  nor  likeness  of  any/,  in  the  water
Neh.  13. 16.  men  of  lyre  also,  which  brought/.
Psal.  8.  8.  thou  hast  put  the/,  under  his  teet
105.  29.  turned  waters  into  blood,  and  slew  their/.
Isa.  19.  10.  all  that  make  sluices  and  ponds  tor/.
50.  2.  their/,  stinketh  because  there  is  no  water
Ezek.  29.  4.  I  will  cause  the  f.  to  stick  to  thy  scales
5,  1  will  leave  thee,  and  all  the/,  of  thy  rivers
47.  0.  and  there  shall  be  a  very  great  multitude  ot/.
10.  their /.  shall  be  as  the/,  of  the  great  sea
Jonah  1. 17.  the  Ld.  had  prepared  a  great/,  to  swal-
low  up  Jonah,  he  was  in  belly  of/,  three  days

2. 1.  Jonah  prayed  to  the  Lord  out  of  the  f.'s  belly
10.  Lord  spake  to  the  /.  and  it  vomited  out  Jonah

Mat.  7.  10.  if  he  ask  a /.  will  he  give  him  a  serpent  t
17. 27.  cast  a  hook,  take  up  the  /  that  first  cometh
Luke  24.  42.  they  gave  him  a  piece  ot  a  broiled/.
John  21.  9.  they  saw  /.  laid  thereon,  and  bread
10.  bring  of  the  /.  which  ye  have  now  caught
13.  Jesus  taketh  bread,  and  giveth  them,  and/.
FISH.

Jer.  16. 16.  will  send  fishers,  and  they  shall  /.  them
FISH-GATE.

2  Chr.  33.14.  Manasseh  built  to  entering  of  f. -gate
Neh.  3.  3.  the  f.  gated  id  the  sons  of  llassenaah  build


Neh.  12.  39.  and  I  after  them  from  above  tB
Zeph.  1.  10.  the  noise  of  a  cry  from  the  f.-g
FISH-HOOKS.

Amos  4.  2.  I  will  take  your  posterity  with
FISH-POOLS.

Cant.  7.  4.  thine  eyes  like  the  [.  pools  of  If
FISH-SPEARS.

Job  41.  7.  canst  thou  fill  his  head  with/.-#
FISHERMEN.

Luke  5.  2.  but  the  /.  were  gone  out  of  then
FISHERS.

Isa.  19.  8.  the/,  also  shall  mourn  and  lam
Jer.  16. 16.  behold,  I  will  send  for  many/,  sai
Ezek.  47.  10.  that  the/,  shall  stand  upon  it
Mat.  4. 18.  net  into  sea,  for  they  were/.  Ma
19.  I  will  make  you  /.  of  men,  Mark  1.
John  21. 7.  Peter  girt /.  coat  to  him,  for  he  wa
FISHES.

Gen.  9.  2.  the  fear  of  you  shall  be  on  all  /.  0
48.  t  16.  let  the  lads  grow  as  /.  do  increas
1  Kings  4.  33.  he  spake  of  creeping  things
Job  12.  8.  the  /.  of  the  sea  shall  declare  unt
Eccl.  9.  12.  the  /.  that  are  taken  in  an  evil
Ezek.  38.  20.  so  that  the  /.  of  the  sea  shall  I
Hos.  4.  3.  the  /.  of  the  sea  shall  be  taken  a’
Ilab.  1.  14.  and  makest  men  as  the  /,  of  thi
Zeph.  1.  3.  1  will  consume  the  /.  of  the  sea
Mat.  14. 17.  we  have  here  but  five  loaves  an
Mark  6.  38.  Luke  9.  13.  Jo
15.  34.  seven  loaves  and  a  few  little  /.  Ma
Luke  5.  6.  they  inclosed  a  great  multitude

9.  for  he  was  astonished  at  the  draught  0
John  21  6.  not  able  to  draw  it  for  multitud

11.  Simon  Peter  drew  net  to  land  full  of
1  Cor.  15.  39.  one  flesh  of  beasts,  another  0
FISHING.

John  21.  3.  Simon  Peter  saith  unto  them,  I
FISHY.

1  Sam.  5.  +  4.  the  /  part  of  Dagon  was  left
FIST,  S.

Exod.  21.  18.  and  one  smite  another  with  1
Prov.  30.  4.  who  hath  gathered  the  wind  in
Isa.  58.  4.  and  to  smite  with  the  /.  of  wick
Mark  7.  t  3.  they  wash  their  hands  with  tl
FIT.

Lev.  16.  21.  send  him  away  by  the  hand  of
1  Chron.  7. 11.  /.  to  go  out  to  war  and  batt
Job  34.  18.  is  it /.  to  say  to  a  king,  thou  art
Prov.  24.  27.  make  it/,  for  thyself  in  the  f
Ezek.  15.  5.  the  vine  was  made/,  for  no  v
Luke  9.  62.  looking  back,  is/,  for  kingdom
14.  35.  it  is  not  /.  for  the  land  nor  dungh
Acts  22.  22.  it  is  not  /.  that  he  should  live
Col.  3.  18.  wives,  submit  as  it  is  /.  in  the  '
FI  1  CUES.

Isa.  28.  25.  doth  he  not  cast  abroad  the  /.  j
27.  the/,  are  not  threshed,  /.  are  beaten
Ezek.  4.  9.  take  thou  wheat,  barley,  millel
FI  1  TED.

1  Kings  6.  35.  with  gold/,  upon  the  carve
Prov.  22. 18.  they  shall  withal  be/,  in  thy
Rom.  9.  22.  the  vessels  of  wrath  /  to  dest
Heb.  10.  t  5.  but  a  body  hast  thou  /.  me
FIITETH.

Isa.  44.  13.  the  carpenter/,  it  with  planes
FITLY.

Prov.  25. 11.  a  word /.  spoken  is  like  apple
Cant.  5.  12.  his  eyes  washed  with  milk,  ai
Eph.  2.  21.  in  whom  all  building/,  framed
4.  16.  from  whom  whole  body  /.  joined  t
FIVE.

Gen.  14. 9.  battle  in  vale  of  Siddim ,  four  kin
18.  28.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  for  lack  of /
43.  34.  Benjamin’s  mess  was/,  times  so  1
45.  6.  /.  years  in  which  no  earing  or  harvt

22.  to  Benjamin  he  gave  /.  changes  of  r;
47.  2.  he  presented  /.  of  his  brethren  to  I

Exod.  13.  +  18.  but  Israel  went  up/,  in  a
22.  1.  the  thief  shall  restore  /.  oxen  for  a

26.  3.  other  /.  curtains  coupled,  9.  1  36. 1<
26.  make  /.  bars  for  the  boards,  27-  I  36.
37./.  pillars,  36.  38.  ||  36.  38./.  sockets

27.  1.  an  altar /.  cubits  long,/,  cubits  br<
18.  the  height  of  the  hangings/,  cubits,

38.  1./.  cubits  the  breadth,  and/,  the  ler
Lev.  26.  8./.  of  you  shall  chase  an  hundr
27.  5.  if  thy  estimation  be  from/,  years  1
6.  if  it  be  from  a  month  old  to/,  years  c
Num.  3.  47.  even  take  /  shekels  apiece,  1
7.  17.  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace-offerings,
/  goats,/  lambs,  23,  29,  35,  4
31.  8.  slew  /.Tings  of  Midian,  Balaam  soi
Josh.  1.  t  14.  ye  shall  pass  marshalled  by

10.  5./.  kings  of  Amorites  went  against

16.  these  /.  kings  fled  and  hid  themselvt

17.  /.  kings  hid  ||  22.  bring  out  the/,  kir

23.  they  brought  out  these  /.  kings  unto
26.  he  slew  them  and  hanged  them  on  /.

13.  3./.  lords  of  the  Philistines,  Judg.  3.
Judg.  7. 1 11.  he  went  to  outside  of  ranks
18.  2.  the  children  of  Dan  sent  /.  men  fro

1  Sam.  6.  4./.  golden  emerods,/.  golden
16.  when  the  f.  lords  of  the  Philistines  ha

17.  40.  David  chose  him/,  smooth  stone:
21.  3.  give  me  /.  loaves  of  bread  in  my  1
25.  18.  she  brought  /.  sheep, /  measures
42.  Abigail  rode  on  an  ass  with/,  dams

2  Sam.  4/4.  Mephibosheth  was/,  years  1

tidings  came  of  Saul’s  and  Jonatba
21.  8.  but  David  took  the  /.  sons  of  Micl

1  Kings  7.  39./  bases  on  the  right,/,  on  th<
49.  candlesticks  of  pure  gold,  /  on  the  r

and  /.  on  the  left,  2  Cl

2  Kings  6. 25.  part  of  cab  of  dove’s  dung  soli
7.  13.  let  some  take  /.  of  the  horses  that  re
13.  19.  thou  shouldest  have  smitten  /.  or
25.  19./  men  that  were  in  the  king’s  pres

1  Chron.  2.  6.  the  sons  of  Zera,  /.  of  them
11.23.  Benaiahslew  an  Egyptian /.  cubi
Isa.  17.  6.  four  or  /.  in  the  utmost  fruitful
19. 18./.  cities  in  Egypt  speak  language  c
30.  17.  at  the  rebuke  of/,  shall  ye  flee


FLA


F  L  E


FEE


I",  they  said  to  him,  we  have  here  hilt  /.
es  and  "two  tishes,  Mark  6  38.  I.uke  9.  13.
»/.  loaves  ot’  the  /.  thousand,  Mark'd,  19.
ot'  them  were  wise,  and  /.  were  foolish
unto  one  he  gave /.  talents,  lfi.
rare  not/,  sparrows  sold  for  two  farthings
e  shall  he  /.  in  one  house  divided
nother  said,  1  have  bought /.  yoke  of  oxen
end  him  to  my  father’s.  1  have  /.  brethren
:ji  rd,  ihy  pound  hath  gained  /.  pounds
tin  u  also  over  j.  cities
■8.  ror  thou  hast  had  /.  husbands
re  is  a  pool  hethesda  having  /.  porches
re  is  a  lad  which  hath  /,  bai  ley-loaves
ii  the  fragments  of  the  /.  barley-loaves

9.  I  had  rather  speak  J.  words  with  unders.
.‘24./.  times  received  1  forty  stripes

10.  there  are  seven  kings,/,  are  fallen

l-  l  VE-SQUAI<  E.

5.  +  31.  lintel  and  side-posts  were  f. -square

FIXED.

1C.  t  14.  Rehoboam  f.  not  his  heart
7.  O  God,  my  heart  is/.  I  will  sing,  108. 1 .
is  heart  is  /.  trusting  in  the  Lord
26.  between  us  and  vou  there  is  a  gulf/.
FLAG,  S.

3.  she  laid  the  ark  in  the  /.  by  the  river
when  she  saw  the  ark  among  the  /.

.  can  the  /.  gTow  wilhout  water  r
p.  the  reeds  and  /.  shall  wither
FLAGON.

19.  t<-  each  a  /.  of  wine,  1  Chron.  16.  3.
FLAGONS.

j.  stay  me  with/,  comfort  me  with  apples
!4.  from  cups,  even  to  all  the  vessels  of/.

.  who  look  to  other  gods,  love  /.  of  wine
FLA  K  ES.

?.  the  f.  of  his  flesh  are  joined  together
FLAME.

!.  angel  appeared  in  a /.  of  tire.  Acts  7.  30.
C8.  a  /.  from  the  city  ot  Sihon,  Jer.  48.  45.
CO.  w  hen  /.  went  up,  anuel  went  in  the  J.
hat  they  should  make  a  great /.  to  rise
/.  of  the  city  ascended  up  to  heaven
i.  the  /.shall  dry  up  his  branches
nd  a  J.  goeth  out  of  his  mouth
14.  as  the  /.  setteth  the  mountains  on  tire
the /.  burnt  jp  the  wicked
,5.  coals  of  fire,  which  hath  a  vehement  /.

.  and  as  the  /.  consumed)  the  chaff
.  nd  his  Holy  One  shall  be  for  a /.
alt  be  visited  with  the  /.  of  devouring  fire
name  of  L.  comes  with  grievousness  of/.

I  ord  shall  shew  his  arm  with  the  J.
ither  shall  the  /.  kind  I*  upon  thee
hey  shall  not  deliver  themselves  from  /.

47.  the  flaming/,  shall  not  be  quenched
C.  /.  slew  those  men  that  took  up  Shadrach
,  throne  was  like  the  fiery  /.  and  his  wheels
his  body  was  given  to  the  burning  /.
yet  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword  and  bv/.
I.  the  J.  hath  burnt  all  the  trees  of  the  field
re  devours,  and  behind  them  a  /.  burnetii
the  noise  of  a  /.  of  fire  that  devoureth
an  1  the  house  of  Joseph  shall  be  a  /.

:  3.  the  horseman  lifted)  up  the  /.of  sword
C4.  for  1  am  tormented  in  this/.

.  who  maketh  his  ministers  a  /.of  tire

4.  eves  were  as  a /.  of  fire,  C.  18. 1  19.  12.

FLAMES.

7.  the  voice  of  Ix>rd  divideth  the  /.  of  fire
►  18.  as  a  madman  who  casteth  /.  and  death
,  .shall  be  amazed,  their  faces  shall  be  as /.
_ord  come  to  render  rebuke  with  /.  of  fire
FLAMING.

4.  he  placed  at  garden  of  Eden  a/,  sword
47.  the/,  flame  shall  not  be  quenched

t.  the  chariots  shall  be  with  /.  torches
See  Fike.

FLANKS.

the  fat  that  is  on  them,  which  is  by  the./,
it  shall  he  takeaway,  10.  15. 1  4.  9. 1  7.  4.
7-  he  maketh  collops  of  fat  on  his /.
FLASH.

14.  as  the  appearance  of  a  /.  of  lightning
FLAT.

5.  an  offering  baken  on  a /.  plate,  7.  t  9.
le  that  hath  a /.  nose  shall  not  approach
.31.  Balaam  bowed,  and  fell  /.  on  his  face
>.  the  wall  of  the  city  shall  fall  down  /.

people  shouted,  the  wall  fell  down /.
FLATTER.

).  no  faithfulness,  they  /.  with  their  tongue
hey  did  /.  him  with  their  mouth,  and  lied
FLATTER  E  l  11.

.  2.  for  he  /.  himself  in  his  own  eyes

6.  from  stranger  who /.  with  her  words,  7.5.
lieddle  not  with  him  that./,  with  his  lips
■hall  find  more  favour  than  he  that  /.
man  that  /.  spreadeth  a  net  lor  his  feet

FLA  LEERING.

1.  neither  let  me  give/,  titles  to  man
1  know  not  to  give  /.  titles

.2.  with /.  lips  and  double  heart  do  speak
iXird  shall  cut  off  all  /.  lips,  and  the  tongue
21.  with  the  /.  of  her  lips  she  forced  him
uid  a/,  mouth  worketh  ruin
.24.  there  shall  be  no  more  /.  divination

2.  5.  neither  used  we  at  any  time  /.  words

FLATTERY.

>.  he  that  speaketh  /.  to  his  friends
24.  to  keep  from  the /.  of  a  strange  woman
FLAT  I  ER I  ES.

•  21.  but  he  shall  obtain  the  kingdom  by/
h  as  do  wickedly  shall  he  corrupt  by/.

t  many  shall  cleave  to  them  with  /.

FLAX.

31./.  and  barley  was  smitten,  J.  was  1  Killed

6.  she  hid  them  with  the  stalks  of  /.

•  14.  cords  became  as/,  that  was  burnt

•  13.  she  seeks  wool  and  /.  and  worketh
9.  they  that  work  in  tine  J.  confouuded


1  Isa.  42. 3.  smoking/,  shall  he  not  quench.  Mat.  12.20.
Ezek.  40.  3.  a  man  with  a  line  of/,  in  his  hand
H»s.  2.  5. 1  will  go  after  my  lovers  that  give  me  /.

9.  and  1  will  recover  my  wool  anil  my/.

FLAY.

Mic.  3.  3./.  their  skins  from  1  ff  them,  break  bones
FLA  V  I  D.

2  C/ir.  35.  11.  sprinkled  blood,  the  Levites /.  them
FLEA.

1  Sam.  24.  14.  is  the  king  come  after  a  /.  ?  26.  20.

FLED.

Gen.  14.  10.  the  kings  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  /.

16.  6.  Hagar /.  ||  31.  22.  Jacob /.  Hos.  12.  12.
Erud.  2.  15.  Moses./,  from  Pharaoh,  4.  3.  Acts  7.29.

14.  5.  it  was  told  king  of  Egypt  that  the  people /.

27.  and  the  Egyptians /.  against  the  sea

Num.  16.  34.  Isr.  round  about  /.  at  the  cry  of  them
Dent.  34.  t7-  nor  was  his  natural  force  /.

Josh.  8.  15.  Israel  /.  by  the  way  of  the  w  ilderness

10.  16.  these  five  kings /.  and  hid  themselves
Judf/.  1.6.  Adoni-bezek  /.  ||  4.  15.  Sisera  /.  away

7.  21.  all  the  host  ran  and  cried,  and  f  22.

8.  12.  Zalmunna /.  ||  9.  21.  Jotham  ran  and /.

9.  51.  to  the  tower/,  ail  the  men  and  women

11.  3.  lephthah/,  I1 20.  45.  the  Benjamites /.  47.

1  Sam.  4.  16.  and  I  /.to-day  out  of  the  army
14.  22.  when  they  heard  that  the  Philistines /.

17.  24.  the  men  of  Israel  /.  from  Goliath

19.10.  David  /.  and  escaped,  12,  18.1  20.1.1  21.  10.
22.  20.  Abiathar  escaped  and  /.  after  David,  23. 6.
30.  17.  save  tour  hundred  w  hich  rode  and  /.

31. 1.  Israel  /.  from  the  Philistines, 7.  2  Sam.  19.  8.

2  Sam.  4.  3.  Beerothites  /.  to  Gittaim  and  sojourned
4.  and  his  nurse  /.  I|  10.  14.  the  Syrians /.  18.

13.  29.  Absalom  and  the  king’s  sons /.  34.  37,  38.

18.  17.  all  Israel  /.  every  one  to  his  tent

1  Kings  2.  7-  for  so  they  came  to  me  when  I  /.

28.  Joab/.  *0  the  tabernacle,  29. 1(11. 1 7 .  Hadad  /.
11.  23.  Rezon  f.  from  his  lord  H  4'  .  Jeroboam  /.

20.  20.  the  Syrians  /.  1  C/ir.  19.  18.  2  Kings  7.  7.

2  Kings  8.  21.  and  the  people /.  to  then-  tents

9. 10.  the  prophet  opened  door  and  /.  ||  23.  Joram  /.

25.  4.  all  the  men  of  war/,  by  nignt,  Jer.  52.  7.

1  C/ir,  10.  1.  the  men  of  Isr./.  11.  13.  2  ('hr.  1.3.  16.
%  Chron.  14.  12.  Lord  smote  Ethiopians  and  they  /.
Neh.  13. 10.  the  Levites/.  every  one  to  his  field
Esth.  6.  t  1.  king  Ahasuerus's  sleep /.  away
Psal.  31.  11.  they  that  did  see  me  /.  from  me
114.  3.  the  sea  saw  it  and  J.  Jordan  was  driven
Isa.  21.  14.  they  prevented  with  bread  him  that /.
22.  3.  all  thy  rulers  are  /.  together,  they  are  bound
33.  3.  at  the  noise  of  the  tumult  the  people /.

Jer.  4.  25.  all  the  birds  of  the  heavens  were  /.

9.  10.  the  fowl  and  beast  are /.  they  are  gone

26. 21.  Urijali  heard  and /.  ||  46. 5.  Egyptians  are /.
46.  21.  also  her  hired  men  are  /.  aw  ay  together
Jonah  4.  2.  therefore  I  /.  before  to  1  arshish
Zech.  14.5.  shall  flee  as  ye/,  before  the  earthquake
1\  at.  8.  .3.3.  they  that  kept  them /.  and  went  aw  ay

26.  56.  disciples  forsook  him  and /.  Mark  14.  50.
Mark  16.  8.  they  went  out  and  J.  from  the  sepulchre
Acts  16.  27.  supposing  the  prisoners  had  been/.
Ileb.  6.  18./.  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  l  ope
Per.  12.6.  the  woman  /.  ||  16.20.  every  island  J.  aw’ay

20.  11.  from  whose  face  earth  and  heaven  /.  away

He  FLED.

Gen.  31.  20.  in  that  he  told  him  not  that  he  f.

21.  so  he /.  |J  35.  7-  when  he  f.  from  his  brother
39.  12.  he  left  his  garment  and  /’.  13, 15, 18.

Josh.  20.  6.  then  the  slayer  shall  come  to  his  own
house,  to  the  city  from  whence  hef.  Num.  35.  25.
Judg.9.  40.  Abimelech  chased  Gaal,  and  he  f.

1  Sam.  22.  17-  because  they  knew  when  he  J.

2  Kings  9.  27.  Ahaziali  fled,  and  he  f.  to  Megiddo

14.  19.  and  he  f.  to  Lachish,  2  Chron.  25.  27.

Jonah  1.  10.  and  he f.  from  the  presence  of  the  L.
Mark  14.  52.  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  J.  naked

Is  FLED.

Num.  35.  32.  take  no  satisfaction  for  him  that  is  /.

1  Sam.  4.  17.  Israel  is  f.  before  the  Philistines

2  Sam.  19.  9.  Dav.  is  /.out  of  the  land  for  Absalom
ha.  10.29.  Ramah  is  afraid,  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  J.

They  FLED.

Gen.  14.  10.  they  that  remained  /.to  the  mountains
Josh.  7.  4.  they J.  from  before  the  men  of  Ai

10.  11.  as  they  /.  the  T.ord  cast  down  great  stones

1  Sam.  4.  10.  Philistines  fought,  Israel  w  as  smitten,
and  they  f.  every  man  to  his  tent,  2  Kings  14. 12.

17.  51.  when  saw  their  champion  w  as  dead  they  f.
19.8.  1*  avid  slew  Philistines,  and  they  f.  from  him

2  Sam.  10.  1.3.  Joab  drew  nigh  .they  j.  1  Chr.  19.  14.
2  Kings  3.  24.  smote  Moabites,  they  f.  before  them

I  Chron.  10.7.  when  all  Israel  saw  that  they  )'.

Psat.  104. 7- at  thy  rebuke  they  f.  they  hasted  away
Isa.  21 . 15.  for  they  /.  from  the  swords,  and  bent  bow
Jer.  39.  4.  then  they /.  and  went  forth  of  the  city
Earn.  4.  15.  when  they  f.  away,  and  wandered
Dan.  10.  7-  so  that  they  /.  to  save  themselves
Dos.  7. 13.  woe  unto  them,  for  they  have /.  from  me
I.uke  8.  34.  when  they  saw  what  was  done,  they  f.
Acts  19. 16.  so  that  they out  of  that  house  wounded
FLEDDES  I  .

Gen.  35.  1.  when  thou  /.  from  the  face  of  Fsau
Psal.  114.  5.  what  ailed  thee,  ()  sea,  that  thou  /.  ?
FLEECE.

Deut.  18.  4.  the  first  of  the /.  of  sheep  give  Levites
Jvdg.  6.  37.  1  will  put  a /.  of  wool  in  the  floor

38.  Gideon  wringed  the  dew  out  of  the  /.

39.  let  it  now  be  dry  only  upon  the  /.

Job  31.  20.  if  not  warmed  with  the  /.  of  my  sheep

FLEE.

Gen.  16.  8.  I  /'.  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  Sarai

19.  20.  behold  this  city  is  near  to  /.  unto

27.  43.  arise,/,  to  Laban  my  brother  to  Haran
Erod.  14.  25.  let  us /.  from  the  face  of  Isrnel

21.  13.  appoint  a  place  whither  he  shall/.

Lev.  26.  17.  ye  shall  /.  when  none  pursueth,  36.
Num.  10.  35.  that  hate  thee /.  before  thee,  Psal.  68. 1.
24.  11.  therefore  now/,  thou  to  thy  place

35.  6.  six  cities,  that  tne  man  slaver  may  /'.  thither,
11,  15.  Deut.  4.  42.  I  19.  3,  4.5.  Josh.  20.  3,  4,  9.
Deut.  28.  7.  and/,  before  thee  seven  ways,  25.


Josh.  8.  5.  as  at  first  we  will /.  before  them,  6.

20.  had  no  power  to /.  this  way  or  that  way
Judg.  20.  32. let  us /.  and  draw  them  from  the  city
2  Sam.  4.  4.  as  his  nurse  made  haste  to  /.  she  fell
15. 14./.  else  we  shall  not  escape  from  Absalom

19.  3  as  men  steal  away  when  they  /.  in  battle

24.  13.  wilt  thou/,  three  months  before  enemies  ‘

1  Kings 12.  18.  Rehoboam  made  speed  to  get  to  hb

char  ot,  and  /.  to  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  10. 18.

2  Kings  9  3.  then  open  the  door,  and  /.  tarry  not
Neh.  6.  1 1..  I  saiil,  should  such  a  man  as  I  /.?

Job  20.  2  -.  lie  shall  /.  from  the  iron  weapon

27.  22.  I  e  would  fain  /.  out  of  his  hand

3  '.  10.  t  rey  abhor  me,  they  /.  far  from  me
41.  28.  die  arrow  cannot  make  him  /.

I 'sal.  11.1.  how  say  ye,/,  as  bird  to  your  mountain  ?
68.  12.  kings  ot  armies /.  apace,  she  that  tarried
139.  7.  or  whither  shall  I  /.  from  thy  presence  •
143.  9.  deliver  me,  ()  Lord,  I  /.  to  thee  to  hide  me
Prop.  28.  I.  the  wicked/,  when  no  man  pursueth
17.  he  shall  /.  to  the  pit,  let  no  man  stay  him
Isa.  10.  3.  to  whom  will  ye /.  tor  help  -
1.3.  14.  and/,  every  one  into  his  own  land
15.  5.  his  fugitives  shall  /.  unto  7oar
17.  13.  they  shall  /.  far  off,  and  shall  be  chased

20.  6.  such  our  expectation  whither  we  /,  for  help
30  16.  but  ye  said  no,  for  we  will  f.  on  horses

17.  at  the  rebuke  of  five  shall  ye /.

48.  20.  go  from  Babylon./,  ye  from  the  Chaldeans
Jer.  4.  29.  the  city  shall  /.  for  the  noise  of  horsemen

6.  1.  gather  yourselves  to  /.  out  of  Jerusalem

25.  35.  the  shepherds  shall  have  no  way  to /.

48.  6.  /.  save  your  lives,  and  be  like  the  heath

9.  give  wings  to  Moab,  that  it  may /.  and  get  away
49.8.  Edom  shall /.  ||  24.  Damascus  turned  to  /.  ’
30./.  dwell  deep,  O  ye  inhabitants  of  llazor

50.  16.  they  shall  /.  every  one  to  his  own  land

28.  voice  of  them  that  /.  and  escape  from  Babymn

51.  6./.  out  of  the  midst  of  Babylon,  Zech.  2.  6.
Amos  5.  19.  as  if  a  man  did  /.  from  a  lion,  and  bear
J -uah  1.  3.  Jonah  rose  up  to/,  to  I  arshish

Nah.  3.7.  all  they  that  look  on,  shall  /.  from  thee
Mat.  2.  13.  arise,  take  the  young  child  and  /.

3.  7.  hath  warned  you  /.  from  wrath  ?  Luke  3.  7.
10.  23.  when  persecute  you  in  city  /.  to  another
24. 16.  then  let  them  which  be  in  Juilea  /.  to  tne
mountains,  Mark  13.  14.  I.uke  21.21.
John  10.5.  a  stranger  w  ill  not  follow,  but  ./,  from
Acts  27  .  30.  as  the  shipmen  were  about  to/.

1  Cor.  6. 18./.  fornication  |l  10.  14./.  from  idolatry

1  Jim.  6. 11.  butthou,  O  man  of  God/,  these  things

2  Tim.  2.  22./.  also  youthful  lusts,  follow  faith
Jam.  4.7.  resist  the  devil,  and  he  will/',  from  you
Pev.  9.  6.  in  those  days  death  shall  /.  from  them

12.  14.  that  the  woman  might /.  into  wilderness
See  Fly.

FLEE  away.

Gen.  31. 27.  wherefore  didst  thou  /.  away  secretly  ■

2  Sam.  18.  3.  if  we  /.  away  they  will  not  care  for  us
Job  9.  25.  my  days  /.  away,  they  see  no  good
20.  8.  /.  an  ay  as  a  dream,  and  shall  not  be  found
Psal.  64.  8.  all  that  see  therm  shall  /.  away
Cant.  2. 17-  till  flay  break,  and  shadows  /.  away  A.  0.
Isa.  35.  10.  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  f.  away,  5 1.  11.
Jer.  46.  6.  let  not  the  swift  /  away,  nor  escape
Amos  2.  16.  he  that  is  courageous  shall/,  away

7.  12.  O  thou  seer,  go/,  away  into  the  land  of  Judah
9. 1.  he  that  fleeth  ot  them,  shall  not /.  away
Nah.  2.  8.  Nineveh  shall/,  away,  they  shall  cr\

3.  17-  as  great  grasshoppers  in  hedges'  they  /.  awat,

FLEEING.

/  ev.  26.  36.  they  shall  flee  as/,  from  a  sword
/  cut.  4.  42.  tliat  /.  to  one  of  these  cities  he  might  live
Ji  bdi.  +  22.  in  J.  he  woidd  flee  out  of  his  hand
30.  3.  for  want  and  famine  /.  to  the  wdlderness
FLEETH.

Deut.  19. 11.  smite  him  mot  tally,/,  into  one  of  cities
Job  14.  2.  he  /.  as  a  shadow'  and  continued)  not
Isa.  24.  18.  that  he  w  ho  /.  from  the  noise  of  fear
Jer.  48.  19.  ask  him  that  /'.  and  her  that  escapeth
44.  he  that  /.  from  the  fear,  shall  fall  into  the  pit
Amos  9.  L  he  that /.  of  them  shall  not  flee  away
John  10.  12.  but  he  that  is  an  hireling/.  13.
FLESH.

Flesh  is  understood  different  tcays,  as,  (1)  Eor  the
flesh  which  is  the  matter  of  bodies,  whether  of
men  or  animals.  Lev.  13.  10.  N  um.  11.33.  (2)
lor  living  men,  and  even  all  animals  in  general ,
Gen.  6.  13.  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before
me  :  I  am  resolved  to  destroy  every  thing  that
hath  life  ;  Gen.  7.  15,  16.  They  went  in  two  and
two  of  all  flesh,  that  is,  animals  of  all  species.
(3)  Flesh  is  taken  for  a  relation,  one  of  the  same
stock  or  kindred,  Gen.  37  .  27.  Let  not  our  hand
be  upon  him,  for  he  is  our  flesh,  he  is  mr
brother.  And  in  2  Sam.  19.  12,  13.  Ye  are  my
bones  and  my  flesh.  Art  thou  not  of  my  bpne,
and  01  my  flesh  ?  f4)  Eor  every  man  u-ho  is  of
the  same  nature  with  mr  selves,  and  where  we
may  contemplate  our  own  flesh  :  In  this  lati¬
tude  it  is  taken  in  Isa.  58.  7.  And  that  thou
hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own  flesh  ;  from  thy
neighbour,  from  any  one  of  thine  own  nature,  to
whom  thou  hast  an  opportunity  of  doing  good.
(5)  For  mankind,  considered  as  impotent  anil
feeble,  unable  to  help  either  himself  or  others ,
ler.  17.  5.  Cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  flesh
his  arm  ;  that  depends  upon  any  human  power  for
help.  (6)  F  r  the  quality  of  corruption,  which  is
not  sinful,  but  the  effect  of  sin,  to  which  our
bodies  are  subject  in  this  life.  1  Cor.  15.  50.
Mesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of
God  :  that  is,  our  frail  corruptible  bodies  < an-
nvt  come  to  heaven  :  that  which  shall  inherit  heaven
must  be  as  incorrupt  flesh,  a  hooy  without  corrup¬
tion.  (7)  For  the  estate  of  this  present  life,  Phil.
1.  24.  To  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for
you.  (8)  For  that  which  is  according  to  the
ordinal y  course  if  nature.  Gal.  4.  23.  Tie  who
was  of  the  bond-woman*  was  born  after  the
flesh.  Islimael  was  born  after  the  manner
of  other  men,  by  the  mere  and’  sole  effcacy  of  na •

trip


FLE


FL  E


FLE


Hire,  not  by  promise ,  as  was  Isaac,  when  his  mother
was  naturally  past  conception.  (9)  Flesh  is  taken
for  whatsoever  in  man  is  reputed  most  excellent  and
glorious  without  the  grace  of  Christ ;  as  nobility,
wisdom,  understanding  or  reason,  Mat.  16.  1? •
Flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee  :
nothing  of  nature  has  done  it.  And  in  John  1.  13.
Born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  ot  the  flesh  :
that  is,  neither  by  their  descent  from  sum  and
such  ancestors,  nor  by  the  power  oj  their  own  free¬
will.  (10)  For  all  that  in  religion  which  is  out¬
ward,  and  to  be  seen  tilth  the  eye,  as  moral  works,
or  ce  e monies,  Horn.  4.  1.  What  hath  Abraham
found  as  pertaining  to  the  tiesh  :  Lite  word  flesh
in  the  following  verse,  is  explained  to  be  the  works
of  Abraham,  which  did  not  justify  him  before
God.  Thus  Beza,  Piscator,  and  others,  interpret
the  place.  And  in  this  sense  flesh  is  taken,  Gal.

3.  3.  Are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  ?  that
is,  by  works,  and  the  carnal  ceremonies  if  the  law.
ell)  For  the  whole  nature  oj  man,  as  it  cometh
into  the  world  corrupt,  vile,  and  infected  with  sin,
Horn.  7.  5.18.8.  When  we  were  in  the  flesh.
They  tnat  are  in  the  flesh  ;  that  is,  in  a  carnal,
corrupt  state ;  such  cannot  please  God,  namely,
while  they  continue  so,  and  till  they  be  converted .
Likewise  in  all  other  places  where  the  word  flesh
is  applied  to  men  unregenerated,  it  signifies  the
whole  corruption  and  depravity  of  our  nature,
raging  and  reigning  both  in  the  understanding
and  will :  but  in  those  places  of  Scripture,  where
flesh  is  attributed  to  persons  that  are  converted,
and  is  set  in  opposition  to  the  Spirit,  it  signifies
the  remainder  of  natural  corruption,  even  so  much
of  that  vicious  quality  of  sin,  as  is  still  unmortified
in  regenerated  persons.  See  Rom.  7.  18,  25.  Gal.

5.  17,  24.

To  be  one  flesh,  denotes  a  most  inseparable  union,
and  an  intimate  communion,  as  if  the  two  were
but  one  person,  or  one  body,  Gen.  2.24.  And  they
shall  be  one  flesh.  This  phrase  is  used  by  the
upostle  to  show  the  union  and  communion  that  is
between  Christ  and  believers,  Eph.  5.  30,  31.
Flesh  also  signifies  the  human  nature  of  Christ,
Htb.  10.  20.  Through  the  vail,  that  is  to  say,  his
flesh.  It  is  called  flesh,  because  it  was  subject  to
unless  weaknesses  and  infirmities,  and  whereby
his  divine  nature  was  veiled  and  covered  over  ;
even  as  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  mercy-seat,
and  the  most  holy  place,  were  by  the  vail.  1  he
flesh  of  Christ  signifies  whole  Christ,  both  God
and  man  in  one  person,  John  6.  55.  My  flesh  is
meat  indeed,  that  is,  I  myself,  with  all  my  bene¬
fits,  being  received  and  applied  by  faith.  A  heart
of  flesh  denotes  a  tender,  tractable  temper  and  dis¬
position  of  soul,  Ezek.  36.  26.  Flesh  is  also  taken
for  the  outward  appearance,  John  8.  15.  Ye  judge
after  the  flesh.

Gen.  2.  21.  God  c  losed  up  the /.  instead  thereof

24.  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  one /.

6.  3.  shall  not  strive  with  man,  for  that  he  is/.

17.  11.  ye  shall  circumcise  the/,  of  your  foreskin

14.  whose  /.  is  not  circumcised  shall  be  cut  off
23.  Abraham  circumcised  the  /.  of  their  foreskin

37  .  27-  for  he  is  our  brother  and  our/.

F.xod.  4.  7-  his  hand  was  turned  again  as  his  other /.

28.  142.  make  linen  breeches  to  cover  the/.

29.  14.  burn  the/.  Lev.  9.  11.  1  16.  27-  Num.  19.  5.

30.  32.  upon  man’s  f.  shall  it  not  be  poured

Lev.  6.27.  what  shall  touch  /.  thereof  shall  he  holy

7.  19.  as  for  /.  all  that  are  clean  shall  eat  thereof
8-  31.  boil  the  /.  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle

13.  10.  if  there  be  quick  raw  f.  14,  15,  16,24.

38.  if  in  the  skin  of  their  J.  have  bright  spots,  39.

15.  7-  that  toucheth  the  /.  of  him  that  hath  an  issue

19.  if  her  issue  in  her/,  be  blood,  she  is  put  apart

21.  5.  nor  shall  make  any  cuttings  in  their/

Num.  11.  33.  while  the  /.  was  between  their  teeth
12. 12.  as  dead, of  whom  the/,  is  half  consumed

18.  18.  and  the  /.  of  them  shall  be  thine
Deut.  32.  42.  and  my  sword  shall  devour/.

Judg.  6.  20.  taike  the  /.  and  the  unleavened  cakes

21.  there  rose  up  fire  out  of  rock,  and  consumed  /.

1  Sam.  2.  13.  servant  came,  while  f.  was  in  seething

15.  he  said,  give  /.  to  roast  for  tne  priest

2  Sam.  6.  19.  David  dealt  to  each  /.  1  Citron.  16.  3.

1  Kings  17.  6.  the  ravens  brought  him  bread  and  /.

in  the  morning,  and  bread  and  /.  in  the  evening

19.  21.  boiled  their  /.  with  the  instruments  of  oxen

2  Kings  A  34.  and  the/,  of  the  child  waxed  warm
2  C 'hr.  32.  8.  with  him  is  an  arm  of  /.  with  us  is  God
Kelt.  5.  5.  yet  our/,  is  as  the  /.  of  our  brethren
Job  10.  4.  hast  thou  eyes  of/.  ?  or  seest  as  man  seeth  ?

11.  thou  hast  clothed  me  with  skin  and/.

Psal.  56.  4.  I  will  not  fear  what /.  can  do  untome

78.  20.  can  he  provide  /.  for  his  people  ?

27.  he  rained  /.  also  upon  them  as  dust

39.  tor  he  remembered  thatthej  were  but/.

79.  2.  the/,  of  thy  saints  given  to  beasts  of  earth
Prov.  4. 22.  my  sayings  are  health  to  their/.

23.  20.  be  not  among  riotpus  eaters  of/.

Isa.  10.  1 18.  consume  the  glory  from  soul  to  the /.

31.  3.  and  their  horses  are /.  and  not  spirit
49.  26.  1  will  feed  them  with  their  own  /.

Jer.  11.  15.  and  the  holy/,  is  passed  from  thee

12.  12.  the  spoilers  are  come,  no /.  shall  have  peace
17.5.  cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  /.  his  arm

Ezek.  4. 14.  nor  came  abominable  /.  into  my  mouth

10.  +  12.  their/,  backs,  wings,  were  full  of  eyes

11.  3.  this  city  is  the  caldron,  and  we  be  the /.

7.  your  slain  in  midst  of  it,  they  are  the/.

11.  nor  shall  ye  be  the  /.  in  the  midst  thereof
19.  and  1  will  give  them  a  heart  of/.  36.  26.

16.  26.  great  of/,  and  hast  increased  thy  whoredoms

23.  20.  paramours,  whose  /.  is  as  /.  of  asses

24.  10.  heap  on  wood,  consume  the  /.spice  it  well
37.  6.  and  I  will  bring  up  /.  upon  you,  8.

Dan.  2.  11.  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not  with/.
7.  5.  they  said  to  it,  arise,  devour  much /.

10.  3.  neither  cam e/.  nor  wine  in  my  mouth
Dos.  8. 13.  they  sacrifice /.  for  sacrifices  of  off  erings
Mic.  3.  2.  who  pluck  the/,  from  ofl  their  bones
170


Zeph.  1.  17.  their  /.  shall  be  poured  out  as  dung
Hag.  2. 12.  if  one  bear  holy/,  in  skirt  of  his  garment
Z.ech.  14.  12.  their/,  shall  consume  away
Mat.  16.  17./.  and  blood  hath  n*t  revealed  it  to  thee
19.  5.  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  twain  shall
be  one /.  6.  Mark  10.  8.  1  (dor.  6.  16.  Eph.  5.  31.
24.  22.  there  should  no /.  be  saved,  Mark  13.  20.
26.  41.  spirit  willing,  but /.  is  weak,  Mark  14.  .38.
l.uke  24. 89.  spirit  hath  not/,  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me
John  1.  14.  the  word  was  made/,  and  dwelt
6. 63.  the  Spirit  quickeneth,  the/,  protiteth  nothing
Acts  2. 30.  the  seed  of  Dav.  according  to/.  Rom.  1 . 3.
Rom.  3.  20.  there  shall  no  /.  be  justified  in  his  sight

4.  1.  that  Abraham  as  pertaining  to  the/,  found

7.  25.  but  with  the  /.  1  serve  the  law  ot  sin

8.  3.  in  that  the  law  was  weak  through  the/.  God

sent  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful/.

9.  3.  for  my  brethren  and  kinsmen  according  to/.
5.  of  whom  as  concerning  the  /.  C  hrist  came

13.  14.  make  not  provision  for  the/,  to  fulfil

1  Cor.  1.  29.  that  no/,  should  glory  in  his  presence
15.  39.  there  is  one  f.  of  men,  another  of  beasts

50./.  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingd.  of  God

2  Cor.  1.  17.  do  I  purpose  according  to  the/.  ?

4. 11.  that  life  of  Jesus  be  made  manifest  in  our/.
7.  5.  our/,  had  no  rest,  but  we  were  troubled

10.  2.  as  if  we  w  alked  according  to  the/.

Gal.  1.  16.  I  conferred  not  with  /.  and  blood

2. 16.  by  works  of  the  law  shall  no /.  be  justified
3.  3.  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the/,  f

5.  13.  use  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the/.
17./.  lusteth  asiainst  the  Spirit,  Spirit  against/.
24.  they  that  are  Christ’s  have  crucified  the/.


Eph.  2.  3*.  we  all  had  our  conversat.  in  lusts  of  our/.
6.  5.  y<  ur  masters  according  to  the/.  Col.  3.  22.


12.  for  we  wrestle  not  against/,  and  blood
Heb.  2.14.  the  children  are  partakers  of/,  and  blood
12.  9.  we  had  fathers  of  our/,  who  corrected  us
Jude  7.  and  going  after  strange/,  are  an  example
8.  likewise  these  filthy  dreamers  defile  the/.

23.  hating  even  the.  garment  spotted  by  the  /.

Rev.  19. 18l  may  eat  /.  of  captains,/,  of  mighty  men

21.  and  all  the  fowls  w'ere  filled  with  their/.

See  Eat,  Eateth.

After  the  FLESH.

John  8.  15.  ye  judge  after  the  f.  1  judge  no  man
Rom.  8. 1.  are  in  Christ,  who  w  alk  not  after  the  f.  4.

5.  they  that  are  after  the  f.  mind  things  of  the  /.-

12.  not  debtors  to  the  flesh  to  live  after  thef.

13.  for  if  ye  live  after  the  f.  ye  shall  die

1  Cor.  1.26.  not  many  w’ise  men  after  thef.  are  called
10.  18.  behold  Israel  after  the  f.

2  Cor.  5. 16.  we  know  no  man  after  the  f.  though  we

have  known  Chr.  after f.  yet  know’  him  no  more

10.  3.  tho’  w'alk  in  flesh,  we  do  not  war  after  thef.

11.  18.  seeing  that  many  glory  after  thef.  I  also
Gal.  4.  23.  Ishmael  was  born  after  the  J'.  29.

2  Pet.  2.  10.  chiefly  them  that  walk  after  the  f.

All  FLESH.

Gen.  6.  12.  for  all  f.  had  corrupted  his  way  on  earth
13.  God  said,  the  end  of  all  f.  is  come  before  me

6.  19.  of  all  f.  tw  o  of  every  sort  shalt  thou  bring  in¬

to  the  ark  to  keep  them  alive,  7.  15.

7.  21.  all  f.  died  that  moved  upon  the  earth

8.  17.  bring  forth  of  all  /.  both  of  fowl  and  cattle

9.  11.  nor  shall  all  f.  be  cut  off  any  more,  15.

16.  covenant  between  me  and  all  f.  on  earth,  17.

Lev.  17-  14.  for  the  life  of  all  f.  is  the  blood
Num.  8.7.  let  them  shave  all  their  /.and  wash  clothes

16.  22.  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  f.  27-  16.

18. 15.  every  thing  that  openeth  the  matrix  of  all  f.
Dent.  5.  26.  who  of  all  f.  heard  the  word  of  Gocf
Job  12. 1 10.  in  w'hose  hand  is  breath  of  all  f.  of  man

34. 15.  all  f.  shall  perish  together,  man  turn  to  dust
Ps.  65.2.  thou  hearest  prayer, to  thee  shall  atlf.  come

136. 25.  who  giveth  food  to  all  f.  his  mercy  for  ever
145.  21.  let  all  f.  bless  his  holy  name  for  ever
Isa.  40.  5.  and  all  f.  shall  see  it  together
6.  all  f.  is  grass,  as  flower  of  the  field,  1  Pet.  1 . 24.
49.  26.  all  f.  shall  know  1  am  thy  Sav.  Ezek.  21. 5.
66.  16.  for  by  fire  will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  f.

23.  allf.  shall  come  to  wmrship  before  me,  saith  L.

24.  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  to  allf.

Jer.  25.  31.  he  will  plead  with  all /.  saith  the  Lord
32.27.  behold,  I  am  the  Lord  the  God  of  all  f.

45.  5.  for  behold,  I  will  bringevil  on  all  f.  saith  L.
Ezek.  20.  48.  all  f.  shall  see  that  1  have  kindled  it
21. 4.  shall  my  sword  go  forth  ag,  all f.  from  south
Dan.  4.  12.  fowls  dwelt,  and  all  f.  was  fed  of  it
Joel  2. 28.  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  on  allf.  Acts  2. 17.
Zech.  2.  13.  be  silent,  O  all  f.  before  the  Lcrd
l.uke  3.  6.  and  all  f.  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God
John  17.  2.  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  f.

1  Cor.  15.  39.  all  f.  is  not  the  same  flesh,  one  of  men
His  FLESH.

Exod.  21.  28.  and  his  f.  shall  not  be  eaten
29.  31.  and  seethe  his  f.  in  the  holy  place
Lev.  4.  11.  burn  all  his  f.  with  his  head,  8.  17.

6.  10.  he  shall  put  linen  breeches  on  hisf.  16.  4.

13.  2.  shall  have  a  rising  in  the  skin  of  his  f.

3.  priest  look  on  the  plague  in  the  skin  of  his  f.

4.  if  bright  spot  be  white  in  the  skin  of  his  f.

11.  it  is  an  old  leprosy  in  the  skin  of  his  f.  13.

14.  9.  he  shall  wash  his  clothes,  also  wash  his  f.  in

water,  15.  16.  1  16.  24,  28.  Num.  19.  7

15.  2.  any  man  hath  a  running  issue  out  of  his  f.
3.  whether  his  f.  run  with  his  issue,  or  be  stopped

17.  16.  but  if  he  wash  them  not,  nor  bathe  hisf.

22.  6.  be  unclean,  unless  he  wash  his  f.  with  water
Kings  21. 27.  Ahab  put  sackcloth  on  Ms  f.


Acts  2.  31.  neither  his  /.did  see  corruption
Gal.  6.  8.  he  that  sow’eth  to  his  f.  shall  reap  comic
Eph.  2.  15.  having  abolished  in  his  f.  the  enmity

5.  29.  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own/.

30.  for  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  hisf.

Col.  1.  22.  now  hath  reconciled  in  the  body  of  hi.,
Llcb.  5. 7-  who  in  days  of  hisf.  when  offered  prayei
10.  20.  consecrated  thro’  vail,  that  is  to  say,  his  t  I
In  the  FLESH,  or  in  FLESH.

Gen.  17.  24.  Abraham  was  circumcised  in  the  f.

25.  Ishmael  circumcised  in  the  J'.  of  his  foreskic
Ezek.  44.  7.  brought  in  uncircumcised  in  the  j.

9.  uncircumcised  in  the  f.  not  enter  the  sanctua;
Dan.  1.15.  counten.  appeared  fairer  and  fatter  m  ‘
Rom.  2.  28.  circumcision  which  is  outward  in  the  ,

7.  5.  for  when  we  were  in  the  f.  the  motions  of  si  j

8.  3.  and  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  /

8.  they  that  are  in  the  f.  cannot  please  God

9.  but  ye  are  not  in  the  f.  but  in  the  Spirit

1  Cor.  7. 28.  such  shall  have  trouble  in  the  f.

2  Cor.  10. 3.  though  we  w'alk  in  thef.  net  war  after

12.  7.  there  was  given  to  me  a  thorn  in  the  f.  |
Gal.  2.  20.  life  which  1  now  live  in  the  f.  is  by  fai

6.  12.  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  shew  in  the  f.
Eph.  2.  11.  in  time  past  Gentiles  in  the  f.  callc

the  circumcision  in  the  f.  made  by  hair
Phil.  1. 22.  if  1  live  in  the  f.  this  is  the  fruit  of  labo
24.  to  abide  in  the  f.  is  more  needful  for  you

3.  3.  and  have  no  confidence  in  thef.

4.  though  I  might  have  confidence  in  thef.

Col.  2. 1.  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the

5.  tho’  I  be  absent  in  the  f.  1  am  with  you  in  spir
1  Tim.  3.  16.  God  was  manifest  in  thef.  justine
Philem.  16.  how  much  more  to  thee,  both  in  the .
1  Pet.  3.  18.  Christ  being  put  to  death  in  the  f.

4.  1.  Christ  hath  suffered  tor  us  in  thef.  for  he  tf

hath  suffered  in  the  f.  hath  ceased  from  s

2.  no  longer  live  the  rest  of  his  time  in  the  f.

6.  might  be  judged  according  to  men  in  the  f.  >

1  John  4.  2.  denieth  that  Christ  is  come  in  the  f.

2  John  7.  confess  not  that  Christ  is  come  in  the

My  FLESH.

1  Sam.  25. 11.  shall  1  then  take  my  bread  and  myy
Job  4.  15.  the  hair  of  my  f.  stood  up

6.  12.  is  my  strength  of  stones  r  or  is  my  f.  brat

7.  5.  my  f.  is  clothed  with  worms  and  dust  j

13.  14.  wherefore  do  I  take  my  f.  in  my  teeth'
19.  20.  my  bone  cleaveth  to  my  skin,  and  my  f.

22.  why  persecute,  and  not  satisfied  with  my

26.  worms  destroy  body,  yet  in  myf.  shali  1  see

21.  6.  and  trembling  taketh  hold  of  my  f.

Psal.  16.  9.  my  f.  shall  rest  in  hope,  Acts  2.  26.
38.  3.  there  is  no  soundness  in  myf.  7.  "'I

63.  1.  myf.  longeth  for  thee  in  a  dry  thirsty  la
73.  26.  my  f.  faileth,  but  G.  is  my  portion  for  e’
84.  2.  my  heart  and  myf.  crieth  out  for  God
102.  +  5.  by  groaning  my  bones  cleave  to  my  f.
109.  24.  my  knees  are  weak,  myf.  faileth  of  fatu
119.  120.  my  f.  trembleth  for  fear  of  thee
Eccl.  2.  +  3.  I  sought  to  draw’  myf.  with  wine
Jer.  51.  35.  the  violence  done  to  me,  and  to  my
Lam.  3.  4.  my  /.  and  my  skin  hath  he  made  old
John  6.  51.  the  bread  that  1  will  give,  is  myf.  \

54.  whoso  eateth  my  f.  hath  eternal  life,  56.

55.  my  f.  is  meat  indeed,  my  blood  drink  inde
Rom.  7.  18.  in  my  f.  dwelled;  no  good  thing

11.  14.  if  I  may  provoke  them  which  are  myf,
Gal.  4.  14.  my  temptation  which  was  in  my  J.
Col.  1.  24.  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  myf.

See  Bone.

Of  the  FLESH.

Exod.  12.  46.  shalt  not  carry  forth  ought  of  the
29.  34.  if  ought  of  the  f.  remain  unto  morning
Deut.  28.  55.  nor  give  of  thef.  of  his  children
Prov.  14.  30.  a  sound  heart  is  the  lite  of  the  r.
Fed.  12.  12.  much  studv  is  a  weariness  of  the  j
John  1.  13.  born,  notof  the  will  of  the  f.  butof(

3.  6.  that  which  is  born  of  thef.  is  flesh
Rom.  8.  5.  that  after  flesh  do  mind  the  things  of  tl

t  6.  for  the  minding  of  thef.  is  death
t7.  the  minding  of  thef.  is  enmity  against  Gc.

9.  8.  that  is,  they  which  are  the  children  of  the

1  Cor.  5.  5.  to  Satan  for  the  destruction  of  thef.

2  Cor.  7. 1.  let  us  cleanse  from  all  filthiness  of  tl
Gal.  4.  13.  through  infirmity  of  thef.  I  preach  J

5.  16  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  f.

19.  now  the  works  of  the  f.  are  manifest,  adull

6.  8.  that  soweth  to  j.  shall  of  the  f.  reap  corrup
Eph.  2.  3.  walked  in  lusts  of  the  f.  desires  of  0
Col.  2.  11.  putting  off  the  body  of  sins  oj  the).

23.  not  in  honour  to  the  satisfying  of  the  J.
Heb.  9.  13.  sanctifieth  to  the  purging  of  thef.

1  Pet.  3.  21.  not  the  putting  away  the  filth  of  ti

2  Pet.  2.  18.  they  allure  through  the  lusts  of  th
1  John  2.  16.  the  lust  of  thef.  the  lust  of  the  e;<

Thy  FLESH.

Gen.  40.  19.  the  birds  shall  eat  thy  f.  from  off  tl.


1


1  Sam.  i7. 44. 1  will  give  thy  f.  unto  fowls  of  th/

2  Sam.  5. 1.  we  are  thy  bone  and  thy  f.  1  Chr.  1


2  Kings  5.  14.  his  f.  came  again,  and  he  was  clean
6.  30.  behold  Joram  had  sackcloth  on  hisf.

Job  2.  5.  touch  his  bone  and  his  f.  he  will  curse  thee

14.22.  but  hisf.  upon  him  shall  have  pain

31.  31.  if  men  said  not,  O  that  we  had  of  his  f.
33.  21.  his  f.  is  consumed  away,  it  cannot  be  seen
25.  his  f,  shall  be  fresher  than  a  child’s

41. 23.  the  flakes  of  his  f.  are  joined  fogethe
Prov.  11.  17.  he  that  is  cruel  troubled;  hisf.

Eccl.  4. 5.  the  fool  folded;  his  hands,  and  eateth  his  f.
Isa.  17.  4.  the  fatness  of  his  f.  shall  wax  lean
John  6.  52.  can  this  man  give  us  his  f.  to  eat  l


2  Kings  5.  10.  w’ash,  and  thy  /.  shall  come  aga,
Prov.  5. 11.  mourn  at  last,  when  thy  f.  is  consul
Eccl.  5.  6.  suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy/.  t< 1
11.  10.  therefore  put  away  evil  from  thy  I.

Isa.  58.  7.  that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  tliyfiL
Ezek.  32.  5.  I  w  ill  lay  thy  f.  on  the  mountains
Your  FLESH.

Lev.  19.  28.  ye  shall  not  make  cuttings  in  your
Judg.  8.  7.  then  I  will  tear  your  f.  with  the  tlio
Ezek.  36.  26.  1  will  take  stony  heart  out  ot  you  I
Rom.  6.  19.  because  of  the  infirmity  ot  your  j.
Gal.  6.  13.  that  they  may  glory  in  your  f.  ,
Col.  2.  13.  being  dead  in  uncircumcision  01 yv  •
Jam.  5.  3.  rust  shall  eat  your  f.  as  it  were  fire
Fleshed,  see  Fat,  Lean.

FI  ESII-HOOK.  .  1

1  Sam.  2. 13.  the  priest’s  servant  came  with  a/.- r

14.  all  that  th ef.-hook  brought  up,  the  pnest  *

Elfish -hooks.  .

Exod.  27.  3.  shalt  make  his / .-hooks  and  his  tire  ■
38.  3.  he  made  all  the  vessels  and  th ef. -hooks
Num.  4. 14.  put  upon  the  purple  cloth  tie  J.-b  f


1  Chr.  28. 17.  David  gave  pure  gold  foi  die/.-


F  L  O


FLO


FLO


.4.  16.  he  made  also  the  pots  and  the  f. -hooks
FLESH  LY.

»  r.  1.  1C.  that  in  simplicity,  not  with/,  wisdom
not  in  stone,  but  in  /.  tables  of  the  heart

O, 2.  lit.  vainly  puffed  up  by  his/,  mind

I  \C.  11.  beloved,  abstain  from  1.  lusts  that  war
FLESH-PO  I  S.

r  '.  16.  3.  when  we  sat  by  the  f.-pots  and  did  eat
FLEW.

n.  14.  .32.  and  the  people /.  upon  the  spoil
p  14.  and  our  mastery,  upon  them
r,  r>.  6.  then  /.  one  of  the  seraphims  unto  me
FLIES.

E  8.  Cl.  I  will  send  swarms  of/,  upon  thee
he  removed  the  swarms  of/,  from  Pharaoh
p.  78.  45.  he  sent  divers  sorts  of/,  among  them
1  31.  and  there  came  divers  sorts  of/.

1  10. 1.  dead  /.  cause  the  ointment  to  send  forth

FLlEl’H.

n  .  4.  17.  the  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that/.
1 19.  every  creeping  thing  that/,  is  unclean
C  49.  shall  bring  a  nation  as  swift  as  the  eagle/.

P.  91.  5.  nor  for  the  arrow  that  /.  by  day

\  3.  16.  the  cankerworm  spoileth  and  /.  away
FLIG1I1.

h;  1.  +  CO.  and/,  shall  perish  from  the  wicked
6  52.  12.  shall  not  go  ou*  with  haste  nor  go  by  f.
6  4 6.  t  5.  their  mighty  ones  are  tied  a  /.

1).  9.  t  21.  Gabriel  was  caused  to  fly  with  /.

■1 1  2.  14.  the/,  shall  perish  from  the  swift
\l  24.  20.  pray/,  be  not  in  winter,  Mark  13.  18.
If  11.  34.  turned  to/,  the  armies  of  the  aliens
See  Put.

FLINT.

9 . 8.  15.  brought  water  out  of  the  rock  of  /.
b8.  t  9.  he  putttth  forth  his  hand  on  the  /.

Pi.  114.8.  turning  the/,  into  a  fountain  of  waters
U5.  28.  their  horses  shall  be  counted  like /.

5r.  therefore  have  1  set  my  face  like  a /.

L .  3. 9.  harder  than  /.have  1  made  thy  forehead
FLINTY.

D .  32. 13.  made  him  to  suck  oil  out  of  the  /.  rock
FLU.

h  19.  t  30.  flee,  /.  greatly,  O  inhabitants  of  Ilazor
FLOCK.

7.  4.  4.  Abel  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  f.
218.  Abraham  set  ewe-lambs  of/,  by  themselves
29.  go  now  to  the  /.  and  fetch  two  good  kids

2  10.  Jacob  watered  the  /.  of  Laban
351.  1  will  again  feed  and  keep  thy  /.

1  will  pass  through  all  thy  /.  to-day
.  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  Laban’s  J.

Jacob  did  separate  all  the  brown  in  the/.

34.  Jacob  called  Rachel  and  Leah  to  his /.

the  rams  of  thy  /.  have  l  not  eaten
313.  if  men  overdrive  them,  the/,  will  die

32.  Joseph  was  feeding  the  /.  with  his  brethren
his  brethren  went  to  feed  their  /.  1.3.

317.  I  will  send  thee  a  kid  from  the/.
tV.  2.  16.  the  troughs  to  water  their  father’s  /.
Moses  helped,  and  watered  their  /.  19.

3  Moses  led  the  /.  to  the  back -side  of  the  desert
L 1. 2.  bring  of  your  offering  of  the  herd  or  /.

5  he  shall  bring  a  female  from  the/,
he  shall  bring  a  ram  without  blemish  out  ot
the/.  6.  6.  Ezra  10.  19.  Ezek.  4.3.  2.3,  25.
212.  concerning  the  tithe  of  the  herd  oi  of  the  /.
V..  15.  3.  make  a  sweet  savour  of  the  herd  or  /.

1 1  •  12. 21.  then  thou  shalt  kill  of  thy  herd  and  /.

1  14.  thou  shalt  furnish  him  liberally  out  of

thy  /.

all  the  firstling  males  of  thy  /.  shalt  sanctify
U.  shalt  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  thy  God  of  the/.

n.  17.  .34.  a  lion  took  a  lamb  out  of  the/.

|  n.  12.  4.  he  spared  to  take  of  his  own  /.

■  ron •  35.  7.  Jcsiah  gave  to  the  people  of  the/.

0.  1.  1  disdained  to  set  with  tne  dogs  of  my/.

•  - 1  •  7  -  where  thou  makest  thy  /.  to  rest  at  noon
to  thy  way  forth  by  the  footsteps  of  the/.

4 .  thy  hair  is  as  a/,  of  goats,  6.  5.

hy  teeth  are  like  a /.  of  sheep,  6.  6.

'*'40.  11.  he  shall  feed  his /.  like  a  shepherd
fdl.  brought  them  with  the  shepherd  of  his/,
><13.17.  because  the  Lord’s  /.  is  carried  captive
/’here  is  the  /.  was  given  thee,  thy  beautiful/.  ?

ye  have  scattered  m.v  /.  and  driven  them
I  will  gather  the  remnant  of  my  /.

234.  cry  and  wallow,  ye  principal  of  the/,
nor  the  principal  ot  the  /.  to  es.-ape
an  hovding  of  the  principal  of  the/,  be  heard
•■'10.  and  keep  him  as  a  shepherd  doth  his/.

they  shall  sing  for  the  young  of  the/.

7 20.  least  of  the/,  shall  draw  tnem  out,  50.  45.
/23.  will  break  in  pieces  the  shepherd  and  his/.
'•24. 5.  take  the  choice  of  the  /.  burn  the  bones
3.  ye  eat  the  fat,  but  ye  feed  not  the /.
my  /•  was  scattered  on  the  face  of  the  earth
Lirely  because  my  /.  became  a  prey,  my  /.  meat
1  will  require  my/.  I  will  deliver  my/,
p  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his/,  in  the  day
j, W"J.  ^ed  my/.  ||  17.  as  for  you,  O  my  /.
therefore  will  1  save  my  /.  no  more  a  prey
.j  je  my  f.  the  /.  of  my  pas'  ure,  are  men
.  ">  as  the  holy  /.  as  the  /.  of  Jerusalem

10.  ye  shall  offer  one  lamb  out  of  the  /.

,£  6.  4.  and  eat  the  lambs  out  of  the/.

J  /me  I.ord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  f.

1  n  ”•  'et  not  herd  nor/,  taste  any  thing
j  ::»*•  as  the  /.  in  the  midst  of  their  fold
.thou,  O  tower  of  the  /.  the  strong  hold
1  4.  teed  thy  people,  the/,  of  thine  heritage
/ •  '7-  tho’  the/,  shall  be  cut  oft  from  the  fold

to  iu  ‘  save  them  as  the  /.  of  his  people
'■  therefore  they  went  their  way  as  a/.
i*  ■  .  Lord  of  hosts  hath  visited  his/.

:  sa,th  the  I.ord,  will  feed  the  /.  of  slaughter,  7.
•he  poor  of  the/,  that  waited  on  me,  11.

1  T°,e.t0  .tlie  j ( 1 0 1  shepherd,  that  leaveth  the  /.

1  ok  o’  t’ece'vor  w  hich  hath1  in  his  /.  a  male
r  ’  the  sheep  of  the  /.shall  be  scattered

1 \-ioe  KeePm-  watch  over  their  /.  by  night
2.  tear  not  little  f.  it  is  your  Father’s  pleasure


Acts  20.  28.  take  heed  therefore  to  all  the  f.

29.  grievous  wolves  shall  enter,  not  sparing  the/.
1  Cor.  9.  7.  who  feedeth  a/,  and  eareth  not  ot  milk  ?
t  Pet.  5.  2.  teed  the/,  of  God  which  is  among  you

3.  not  as  being  lords,  but  being  ensamples  to  the  /.
Like  a  FLOCiv.

Job  21.  11.  send  forth  their  little  ones  like  a f.

Psal.  77.  20.  thou  leddest  thy  people  like  a  /.

78.  52.  he  guided  them  in  the  wilderness  like  af.
80.  1.  thou  that  leadest  Joseph  like  af.

107.  41.  and  maketh  him  families  like  a  f.

Ezek.  36.  37.  1  will  increase  them  with  men  like  a  f
FLOCKS.

Gen.  29.  2.  and  lo,  three  /.  of  sheep  lying  by  the
well,  for  out  of  that  they  watered  the/
.3.  and  th’ther  were  all  the  f.  gathered

8.  we  cannot,  till  all  the/,  be  gathered  together
30.  38.  Jacob  set  the  rods  he  pilled  before  the /.

39.  ami  ihe /.  conceived  before  the  rods

40.  Jacob  set  the  faces  of  the  /.  towards  the  ring-

sfraked,  he  put  his  own  /.  by  themselves

32.  5.  I  have  oxen,  asses,/,  and  men-servants
7.  he  divided  the/,  and  nerds,  and  camels
37.  14.  go,  see  whether  it  be  well  with  the  /.

16.  tell  me,  1  pray  thee,  where  they  feed  their  /.

47 .  4.  thy  servants  have  no  pasture  for  their  /.

17.  Joseph  gave  bread  in  exch.  for  horses  and  /.
Lev.  1. 10.  if  his  offering  be  of  the  f.  of  the  sheep
5. 15.  bring  a  ram  without  blemish  out  of  the  /.

A 'urn.  .31. 9.  Israel  took  spoil  of  all  their/,  and  goods

30.  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  of  the /.

32.  26.  our  wives,  our/,  and  cattle,  shall  be  there
Vent.  7.  13.  he  will  also  bless  the  /.  of  thy  sheep
28.  4.  blessed  shall  be  the  /.of  thy  sheep

18.  cursed  shall  be  the  /.  of  thy  sheep
51.  who  shall  not  leave  the  /.  of  thy  sheep

Judg.  5.  16.  to  hear  the  bleatings  of  the /.

1  KingsZO.  27.  pitched  like  two  little  /.  of  kids

1  Chron.  4.  39.  they  went  to  seek  pasture  for  their/.

41.  because  there  was  pasture  tor  their /.

27.  31.  and  over  the/,  was  Jaziz  the  Magarite

2  Chron.  17.  11.  the  Arabians  brought  him/.

Job  24.  2.  violently  take  away  /.  and  feed  thereof
Psal.  8.  t  7 ■/.  and  oxen  all  under  his  feet
65.  13.  the  pastures  are  clothed  with  /.

78.  48.  he  gave  their  /.  to  hot  thunderbolts
Cant.  1. 7.  turn  aside  by  the  /'.  of  thy  companions
Isa.  17.  2.  cities  of  Aroerare  forsaken,  shall  be  tor/.

32.  14.  the  palaces  shall  be  a  pasture  off.

60. 7.  all  the  /.  of  Kedar  shall  be  gathered  together
61.5.  and  strangers  shall  stand  and  feed  your/

65. 10.  Sharon  shall  be  a  fold  for/,  valley  of  Achor
Jer.  6.  3.  the  shepherds  with  their/  shall  come  to  her
10.  21.  shall  not  prosper,  all  /.  shall  be  scattered
31.24.  dwell  in  Judah  they  that  go  forth  with/.

33.  12.  shepherds  causing  their  /.  to  lie  down

13.  the  /.  shall  pass  again  under  the  rod
49.29.  their  tents  and  f.  shall  they  take  away
50.  8.  and  be  as  the  he-goats  before  the  f.

Ezek. ‘lb.  5.  Ammonites  acouching-place  for /.

34.  2.  should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  f.f

36.  .38.  the  waste  cities  shall  be  filled  with  /.  of  men
Joel  1.  18.  the  /.  of  sheep  are  made  desolate
Mic.  l.  +  ll.  inhabitant  of  country  of/,  came  not  forth

5.8.  as  a  young  lion  among  the  /.  of  sheep
Zeph.  2.  6.  and  the  sea-coast  shall  be  folds  for/.

14. /.  shall  lie  down  in  the  midst  of  Nineveh

FLOCKS  with  herds.

Gen.  13.  5.  Lot  also  had /.  and  herds,  and  tents
24.  35.  the  Lord  hath  given  Abraham  /.  and  herds
26.  14.  Isaac  had  possession  of/,  ami  herds

32.  7-  Jacob  divided /.  and  herds  into  two  bands

33.  1.3.  the /.  and  herds  with  young  are  with  me
45.  10.  thou  shalt  be  near  me,  thou,  thy  /.  and  herds
47. 1.  my  brethren,  their/,  and  herds  are  come

50. 8.  their /.  and  herds  left  they  in  land  of  Goshen
Exod.  10.  9.  we  will  go  with  our/,  and  our  herds

24.  only  let  your  /.  and  your  herds  be  stayed
12.  32.  also  take  your /.  and  herds,  and  be  gone

34.  3.  neither  let /.  nor  herds  feed  before  the  mount
Nvm.  11. 22.  shall  the /.  and  herds  be  slain  for  them
Dent.  8.  13.  when  thy  herds  and  thy  /.  multiply

12.  6.  firstlings  of  h.  and  /.  17.  |  14.  23.  Neh.  10.  36.

1  Sam.  30. 20.  David  took  all  the/,  and  the  herds

2  Sam.  12.  2.  rich  man  had  exceeding  many  /.  and  h.
2  Chr<  71.  32.  29.  provided  possessions  off.  and  herds
Prov.  27  .  23.  know  thy  f.  look  well  to  thy  herds
Jer.  3.  24.  shame  had  devoured  their  /.  and  herds

5.  17-  an  ancient  nation  shall  eat  thy  /.  and  herds
Hos.  5. 6.  they  shall  go  with  f.  and  herds  to  seek  Ld.

_  FLOOD.

Not  only  that  terrible  inundation  is  in  Scripture
called  flood,  whereby  God  destroyed  all  mankind,
and  all  the  animals  of  the  earth  and  air,  which
were  not  in  the  ark  but  It  by  Noah  ;  but  likewise  all
sorts  of  inundations  or  extraordinary  collections  of
waters.  Thus  the  Psalmist  speaking  of  the  waters
of  the  sea,  or  of  a  river,  expresses  it  by  the  word
Hood,  Psal.  6b.  6.  They  went  through  the  Hood
on  foot.  The  same  Psalmist  sets  forth  extreme
dangers  tinder  the  notion  of  a  flood,  Psal.  69.  15.
Let  not  the  water-flood  overflow  me.  And  the
violent  assaults  and  sudden  incursions  of  the  devil
and  his  instruments  against  the  church  are  com¬
pared  to  a  flood,  Isa.  59.  19.  When  the  enemy
shall  come  in  like  a  Hood.  By  floods  are  also
signified  great  plenty  and  abundance  of  spiritual
and  temporal  blessings,  Isa.  44.  .3.  1  will  pour
floods  upon  the  dry  ground.

Gen.  6. 17  •  1 ,  even  1 ,  bring  a  /.  of  water  on  the  earth
7.6.  when  the/,  of  waters  was  upon  the  earth
7.  Noah  went  in,  because  of  the  waters  of  the  /,

10.  after  seven  da3’S  the  /.  was  on  the  earth
7. 17-  the /.  was  forty  days  on  the  earth
9. 11 .  nor  shall  be  any  more  a /.  to  destroy  the  earth

28.  Noah  lived  after  the/.  350  3'ears
10.  1.  to  them  were  sons  born  after  the  /.

32.  the  nations  were  divided  in  the  earth  after /.
Josh.  24. 2.  your  fathers  on  either  side  of  f.  3.  14, 15.
Job  14.  11.  as  the /.  decayeth  and  drieth  up
22. 16.  whose  foundation  was  overthrown  with  a  /.
28. 4.  the  /.  breaketh  out  from  the  inhabitant


Psal.  29.  10.  the  Lord  sitteth  upon  the  /.  he  is  king
66.  6.  they  went  thro’  the  /.  on  foot,  we  rejoiced
69.  15.  let  not  the  water-/,  overflow  me
74.  15.  thou  didst  eleave’the  fountain  and  the/.
90.  5.  thou  carriest  them  away  as  with  a /.

Isa.  28.  2.  astrong  one,  which  as  a/,  shall  cast  down
59.  19.  the  enemy  shall  come  in  like  a /.

Jer.  46.  7-  who  is  this  that  cometh  up  as  a/.  ?

8.  Egypt  riseth  up  like  a/,  waters  are  moved
47.  2.  behold,  waters  shall  be  an  overflowing/.
Dan.  9.  26.  the  end  thereof  shall  be  with  a /.

11.  22.  with  the  arms  of  a  /.  shall  they  be  overflown
Amos  8.8.  it  shall  rise  up  wholly  as  a /.  9.  5.

9.  5.  and  shall  be  drowned  as  by  the /.  of  Egypt
A  'ah.  1.  8.  with  an  overrunning  f.  make  an  end
Mat.  24.  .38.  in  days  before  the  /.  they  were  eating
39.  and  knew  not  till  the /.  came,  Luke  17.  27.
Luke  6.  48.  when  the/’,  arose  the  stream  beat
2  Pet.  2.  5.  bringing  in  the  /.on  world  of  ungodly
Rev.  12.  15.  the  dragon  poured  out  water  as  a/.

16.  the  earth  helped,  and  swallowed  up  the  J.
FLOOD  GA  I

Gen.  7.  +  11.  the  f. -gates  of  heaven  were  opened
FLOODS.

Exod.  15.  8.  the/,  stood  upright  as  an  heap
2  Ham.  22.  5./.  of  ungodly  made  me  afraid,  Ps.  18.4.
Job  20.  17.  he  shall  not  see  the  rivers  and  the  /.

28.  11.  he  bindeth  the  /.  from  overflowing
Psal.  24.  2.  he  hath  established  it  upon  the/.

32.  6.  surely  in  the/,  of  great  waters  not  come  nigh
69.  2.  into  deep  waters,  where  the /.  overflow  me
78.  44.  and  had  turned  their/,  into  blood
93.  3.  the/,  have  lifted  up,  O  "Lord,/,  have  lifted  up
98.  8.  let  the/,  clap  their  hands,  let  hills  be  joyful
Cant.  8.  7-  neither  can  the/,  drown  love
Isa.  44.  3.  for  1  will  pour/,  upon  the  dry  ground
Ezek. 31.15.  1  restrained  the/,  thereof, waters  stayed
Jonah  2.  .3.  the/,  compassed  me  about,  thy  billows
Mat.  7.  25.  the/,  came,  winds  blew,  and  beat,  27.
FLOOR,  Verb.

2  Chron.  34.  11.  and  for  timber  to /.  the  houses
F LOO  R ,  Substantive.

Gen.  50.  10.  they  came  to  the  threshing/,  of  Atad

11.  when  inhabitants  saw  mourning  in/,  of  Atad
A  urn.  5. 17.  the  priests  shall  take  dust  that  is  in  /.

15.  20.  as  ye  do  the  heave-offering  of  threshing/.
18.  27-  as  tho’  it  were  the  corn  of  the  threshing/.

30.  be  counted  as  the  increase  of  the  threshing/.
Deut.  15.  14.  thou  shalt  furnish  him  out  of  thy/.

16.  t  13.  after  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy'  /.

Judg.  6.  .37.  I  will  put  a  fleece  of  wool  in  the/.
Ruth  3.  2.  he  winnoweth  in  the  threshing  f.

2  Sam.  6.  6.  came  to  N  achon’s  thresh./.  1  Chr.  13.  9.
24.  18.  rear  an  altar  in  the  threshing  /.  of  Arauuah
21.  David  said,  to  buy'  the  threshing/,  of  thee

1  Kings  6.  30.  he  overlaid  the  /.  of  house  with  gold
7.  7-  with  cedar  from  one  side  of  the/,  to  the  other

2  Kings  6.  27.  out  of  the  barn-/,  or  the  wine-press  i

1  Chron.  21.  28.  L.  had  answered  in  the  threshing/.

2  Chron.  3.  1.  prepared  in  threshing/,  of  Oman
18.  +  9.  they  sat  in  a/,  at  the  entering  of  the  gate

ha.  21.  10.  O  my  threshing,  and  the  corn  of  my/.
Jer.  51.  .3,3.  daughter  of  Bab.  is  like  a  threshing/.
Hos.  9.  1.  thou  hast  loved  a  reward  on  every  corn  /
2.  the/,  and  wine  press  shall  not  feed  them
13.  3.  as  the  chaff  that  is  driven  out  of  the/.

Mic.  4.  12.  shall  gather  them  as  sheaves  into  the /
Mat.  3.  12.  he  will  throughly  purge  his /.  Luke 3.  17.
FLOORS.

1  Sam.  2.3.  1.  and  they  rob  the  threshing /.

Dan.  2.  .35.  Like  chaff"  of  the  summer  threshing/.
Joel  2.  24.  and  the  f.  shall  be  full  of  wheat
FLOTES,  or  FLOATS.

1  Kings  5.  9.  and  I  will  convey  them  by  sea  in/,  to
the  place  thou  shalt  appoint  me,  2  Chr.  2.  16.
FLOURISH.

Psal.  72.  7*  'n  Lis  days  shall  the  righteous  /.

16.  they  of  the  city  shall/,  like  grass  of  the.  earth
92.  7-  when  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  f.

12.  the  righteous  shall  /.  like  the  palm-tree

13.  they  shall  /.  in  the  courts  of  our  God
132.  18. "but  upon  himself  shall  his  crown  /.

Prov.  11.  28.  the  righteous  shall  /.  as  a  branch
14. 11.  the  tabernacle  of  the  upright  shall  /.

Eccl.  12.  5.  when  the  almond-tree  shall /.

Cant.  7.  12.  let  us  get  up,  let  us  see  if  the  vine  /.
Isa.  17.  11 .  in  morning  thoushaltmake  thy  seed  to/.
66.  14.  y’our  bones  shall /.  like  an  herb
Ezek.  17.  24.  1  the  L.  have  made  the  dry  tree  to  /,
FLOURISHED.

Cant.  6.  11.  I  went  down  to  see  whether  the  vine /.
Phil.  4.  10.  y'ourcare  of  me  hath  /.  again
FLOURISH  El'll.

Psal.  90.6.  in  the  morning  it  /.  and  groweth  up
103.  15.  as  a  flower  of  the  field,  so  he /.

FLOURISHING.

Psal.  92.  14.  in  old  age,  they'  shall  be  fat  and/.
Cant.  2.  f  9.  he  looketh  forth,/,  through  the  lattice
Dan.  4.  4.  I  was  at  rest,  and  /.  in  my  palace
FLOW.

Job  20.  28.  his  goods  shall  /.  away  in  day  of  his  wrath
Psal.  147.18.  he  causeth  the  wincl  blow, and  waters/.
Cant.  4. 16.  that  the  spices  thereof  may  /.  out
Isa.  2.  2.  and  all  nations  shall  /.  unto  it
48.  21.  he  caused  waters  to/,  out  of  the  rock
60.  5.  then  thou  shalt  see  and  /.  together
64. 1.  mountains  might /.  down  at  thy  presence
Jer.  31.  12.  shall /.  to  the  goodness  of  the  Lord
51.44.  nations  shall  not /.  together  any  more  to  him
Joel  S.  18.  in  that  day’  the  hills  shall’/,  with  milk,
and  the  rivers  of  Judah  shall /.  with  waters
Mic.  4. 1.  the  people  shall  /.  to  the  mountain  of  I..
John  7.  38.  out  of  his  belly  shall  /.  living  water
FLOWED.

Josh.  4.  18.  Jordan  /.  over  all  his  banks
Judg.  5.  +  5.  the  mountains  /.  before  the  Lord
Isa.  64.  .3.  the  mountains /.  down  at  thy  presence
Lam.  .3. 51.  the  waters /.  over  mine  head,  then  I  said
FLOWETH.

Lev.  20.  24.  a  land  that  /.  with  milk  and  honey,
Nvm.  13.  27. 1  14.  8.  I  16.  13,  14.  Deut.  6.  3.

I  11.  9. 1  26.  15. 1  27  .  3. 1  31. 20.  Josh.  5.  6.

171


F  O  L


F  O  L


FOL


Exod.


FLOWING.  .

3.  8.  to  brine  them  to  a  land/,  with  milk  and
honey ,  17  •  t  13.  5.  1 33.  3.  jer.  11.  5.  1  32.  22.
Ezek.  20.  6,  15.  .  ,  ,

Prov.  18.  4.  the  well-spring  of  wisdom  as  a/.  brook
Isa.  66. 12.  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a/,  stream
jer.  18.  14.  or  shall  the  cold  /.  waters  be  forsaken  .'

49.  4.  wherefore  glcxriest  thou  in  thy  /.  valley  t
FLOUK.  ,

Exod.  29.  2.  of  wheaten  /.  shalt  thou  make  them
Lev.  2.  2.  he  shall  take  his  handful  of  the  J.  6.  15.
Num.  28.  5.  and  a  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  ot  /.  tor
a  meat-offering,  20,  28.  1  29.  3,  9, 14.
Judg.  6.  19.  cakes  of  an  ephah  off.lHam.  1.24.

1  Ham  28.  24.  she  took  J  .  and  kneaded  it,  2  Harn.  13.8.

2  Sam.  17.  28.  brought  /.  parched  corn,  and  beans

See  Deal.,  Fine.

FLOWER.

1  Sant.  2.  33.  the  increase  shall  die  in  f.  of  their  age
l  Cor.  7.  36.  if  she  pass /.  other  age  and  need  require
FLOWER.

Exod.  25.  33.  with  knop  and/,  in  one  branch,  37. 19.
Job  14.  2.  he  cometh  forth  as  a/,  and  is  cut  down
15.  33.  he  shall  cast  off  his/,  as  the  olive
Psal.  103.  15.  as  a /.  of  field,  so  he  tiourisheth
Isa.  18.  5.  and  the  sour  grape  is  ripening  in  the/.

28. 1.  whose  glorious  beauty  is  a  fading  J.  4.

40.  6.  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the./,  ot  the  field

7. /.  fadeth,8.  Neh.  1.4.  Jam.  1. 10, 11.1  Pet.\. 24.

FLOWERS.

Exod.  25.  31.  his/,  shall  be  of  the  same,  37- 17.

37  .  20.  made  like  almonds,  his  knops  and  his/.
Num.  8.  4.  to  the  /.  thereof  was  beaten  work

1  Kings  6. 18.  cedar  of  the  house  within  was  carved

with  knops  and  open/.  29.  32,  35.  1  7-  26,49.

2  Chr.  4.  5.  like  the  brim  of  a  cup  with./,  ot  lilies

21.  the/,  lamps,  and  tongs  made  he  ot  gold

Cant.  2.  12.  the/,  appear  on  earth,  timeot  singing
5.  13.  his  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  sweet/.
FLOWERS.

Lev.  15.  24.  if  her  f.  be  upon  him,  he  shall  be  unclean
S3,  of  her  that  l's  sick  of  her/,  of  him  with  issue
FLUTE,  S.

1  Kings  1. 1  40.  all  people  piped  w  ith/,  and  rejoiced
Pan.  3.  5.  when  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the/.  7- 10, 15.
FLUTTER  El  H.

Deut.  32.  11.  as  an  eagle/,  over  her  young
FI.UX.

Acts  28.8.  the  father  of  Publius  lay  sick  of  a/.

FLY.

Isa.  7. 18.  the  Lord  shall  hiss  for  the  /.  in  Egypt
FLY,  Verb.

Gen.  1.  20.  and  fowl  that  may  /.  above  the  earth

1  Sam.  15. 19.  but  didst/,  on  the  spoil,  and  didst  evil

2  Sam.  ZQ.  11.  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  and  did./,
and  was  seen  on  wings  of  the  wind,  Psal.  18. 10.

Job  5.  7.  man  born  to  trouble  as  sparks/,  upward
39.  26.  doth  the  hawk  J.  by  thy  wisdom  r
Psal.  18.  10.  be  did  i.  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind
55.  6.  for  then  would  1  J.  away,  and  be  at  rest
90.  10.  for  it  is  soon  cut  off,  and  we/,  away
Prov.  23.  5.  riches  /.  away  as  an  eagle  to  heaven
Isa.  6.2.  each  had  six  wings,  and  with  twain  he  did/.
11.  14.  but  they  shall  /.  upon  shoulders  of  Philist.
60.  8.  who  are  these  that /.  as  a  cloud,  and  as  doves
Jer.  48.  40.  behold,  he  shall/,  as  an  eagle
Ezek.  13.  20.  ye  hunt  the  souls  to  make  them  /.

Dan.  9.  21.  Gab.  being  caused  to./,  swiftly,  touched
II os.  9. 11.  their  glory  shall  /.  av7ay  like  a  bird
Hab.  1.8.  they  shall  J.  as  the  eagle  that  hasteth  to  eat
Kev.  14.6.  I  saw  another  angel/,  in  midst  of  heaven
19. 17.  to  all  the  fow  ls  that/,  in  the  midst  of  heaven
See  Flee,  Flieth.

FLYING.  [thing

Lev.  11.  21.  these  may  ye  eat  of  every/,  creeping
23.  but  all  oth^r /.  creeping  things  an  abomination
Psal.  148.  10.  all  cattle  and  /.  fowl,  praise  the  Lord
Prov.  26. 2.  as  swallow  by  /.  so  the  curse  causeless
Isa.  14.  29.  and  his  fruit  shall  be  a  fiery /.  serpent

30.  6.  from  whence  come  viper  and  fiery  /.  serpent

31.  5.  as  birds  /.  so  will  the  Lord  defend  Jerusalem
Zech.5.  1.  1  looked,  and  behold,  a/,  roll,  2.

Kev.  4.  7.  the  fourth  beast  w  as  like  a/,  eagle

8.  13.  heard  an  angel  /.  thro’  the  midst  of  heaven

FOAL,  S.

Gen.  32. 15.  Jacob  took  ten  bulls,  twenty  asses,  ten/.
49.  11.  binding  his  /.  to  the  vine,  and  his  ass’s  colt
Zech.  9.  9.  upon  a  colt  the/,  of  an  ass,  Mat.  21.  5.
FOAM.

Has .  10.  7 .  the  king  of  Samaria  is  cutoff  as/.
FOAMETH.

Marl  9.18./.  and  gnasheth  with  his  teeth,  Luke  9. 39.
FOAMING.

Mark  9.  20.  he  fell  on  the  ground  and  wallowed,  f.
Jude  i3.  1  aging  waves  of  sea,/,  out  their  own  shame
FODDER.

Job  6.  5.  or  loweth  the  ox  over  his  /.

FOES.

1  Clin  n.  21.  12.  or  to  be  destroyed  before  thy/.
Esth.  9.  16.  the  Jews  slew  of  their/.  75, (XX)

I’.uil.  27.  2.  mine  enemies  and/,  came  upon  me

3o.  1 .  thou  hast  not  made  my/,  to  rejoice  over  me
89.23.  1  will  beat  down  his /.  before  his  face
Mat.  10.  36.  a  man’s/,  shall  be  they  of  his  household
Acts  2.  35.  until  1  make  thy  /.  thy  footstool
FOLD.

Ueb.  1. 12.  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  /.  them  up
FOLD.

Isa.  13.  20.  shall  the  shepherds  make  their/,  there
65.  10.  Sharon  shall  be  J.  for  flocks,  valley  ot  Achor
Lzek.  34.  14.  on  the  mountains  shall  their/,  be
Mic.  2.  12.  as  the  flock  in  the  midst  of  their/.

Hab.  3.  17.  the  Hock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the/.
Mat.  13.  8.  brought  forth  fruit,  some  an  hundred,
some  sixty,  some  thirty  /.  23.  Mark  4.  8,  20.

19.  29.  hath  forsaken  houses,  shall  receive  100/.
John  10. 16.  and  other  sheep  I  have,  w  hich  are  not  of
this /.  and  there  shall  be  one /.  and  one  shepherd
FOLDS.

Nnm.  32.  24.  build  ye/,  for  your  sheep,  36.

Psal.  50.  9.  1  will  take  no  he-goats  out  of  thy/.
Jv~ .  23.  3.  I  will  bring  them  again  to  their  t

XV-J


Zeph.  2.  6.  the  sea-coast  shall^ be/,  for  flocks

Nah.  1.  10.  while  they  be/,  together  as  thorns
FOLDETH.

Eccl.  4.  5.  the  fool  /.  his  hands  together  and  eateth
b  OLD l  N  O.

1  Kings  6.  34.  the  two  leaves  of  one  door  were/.
Prov.  6. 10.  a  little /.  of  the  hands  to  sleep,  24.  33.
FOLK.  .

Gen.  33.15.  let  me  now  leave  with  thee  some  of  the/.
Prov.  30. 26.  the  conies  are  but  a  feeble./,  yet  make
Jer.  51. 58.  the /.  shall  labour  in  tire  and  be  weary
Ma-k  6.  5.  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  sick/.

John  5.  3.  in  these  lay  a  multitude  ot  impotent  /.
Acts.  5.16.  a  multitude  round  about,  bringing  sick/.
FOLLOW

Signifies,  [1]  To  come  after  one  that  goeth  before,
as  servants  come  after  their  masters,  1  fam.
25.  27.  Let  it  be  given  to  the  young  men
that  follow  my  lord.  [2]  To  imitate,  or  do  as
another  gives  ns  an  example,  5]  at.  16.  24.  Let
him  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me.  1  Cor.
11.  1.  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  am  of
Christ.  [3]  'To  believe  and  obey,  John  10.  27.
My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  they  follow  me.
And  in  all  passages  where  men  are  said  to  fol¬
low  strange  gods,  it  signifies,  to  put  trust  in
them,  to  rely  upon  them,  and  yield  them  ser¬
vice.  1  Kings  18.  21.  If  Baal  be  God,  then
follow  him.  Judg.  2.  12.  1  hey  forsook  the

Lord,  and  followed  other  gods.  [4]  To  side,
or  take  part  with,  2  Sam.  2.  10.  2  Kings  11.

16.  [5]  To  endeavour  ajter,  and  pursue  with
great  desire  and  diligence.  Phil.  3.  12.  Rut  I
follow  after,  if  that  1  may  apprehend  that  for
which  1  am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.  [6]
To  die  with  one.  John  13.  36.  Thou  canst  not
follow  me  now,  that  is,  bear  me  company  in
my  sufferings,  and  die  with  me.  do  follow  the
Lamb,  Rev.  14.  4.  These  are  they  that  follow  the
Lamb :  that  keep  dose  to  Christ  in  all  his  ordi¬
nances  :  are  led  by  his  word  and  Spirit,  and  depend
upon  the  virtue  and  merit  of  his  sacrifice  alone  j  or
pardon  and  acceptance,  and  not  on  saints,  or  their
own  merits,  as  the  followers  of  antichrist  do.

Gen.  24.8.  if  the  woman  will  not  be  willingto/.  thee

44.  4.  Joseph  said,  up,/,  after  the  men

Exod.  11.  8.  get  thee  out,  and  people  that/,  thee
J4.  4.  1  will  harden  Pharaoh  that  ne  shall /.  them

17.  and  the  Egyptians  shall/,  them

21.  22.  if  hurt  a  woman,  and  yet  no  mischief/.

23.  and  if  any  mischief/,  then  life  for  life

23.  2.  thou  shalt  not  /.  a  multitude  to  do  evil
l)eut.  16.  20.  what  is  altogether  just  shalt  thou  /.

18.  22.  if  the  thing/,  not,  nor  come  to  pass
Judg.  9.  3.  their  hearts  inclined  toy.  Abimelech

1  Ham.  25. 27.  it  be  given  young  men,  who/,  my  lord
30.  21.  so  faint  that  they  could  not/.  David

2  Ham.  17.  9.  among  the  people  that/.  Absalom

I  Kings  19.  20.  let  me  kiss  father,  tnen  I  will/,  tnee
Psal.  38.  20.  because  l  /.  the  thing  that  good  is

45.  14.  the  virgins  her  companions  that/,  her
94.  15.  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall/.  it

119.  150.  they  draw  nigh  that/,  after  mischief
Isa.  5.  11.  that  they  may/,  strong  drink
51.  1.  hearken,  ye  that /.  after  righteousness
Jer.  17. 16.  1  hastened  from  being  a  pastor  to/,  thee
42.  16.  the  famine  shall  /.  close  after  you
Ezek.  13.  3.  the  prophets  that/,  their  own  spirit
Dos.  2.  7.  and  she  shall  /.  after  her  lovers
6.  3.  we  shall  know,  if  we/,  on  to  know  the  Lord
Mat.  8. 19.  Master,  1  will  /.  thee,  Luke  9.  57  61.
Mark  16.  17.  these  signs /.  them  that  believe
Luke  17.  23.  go  not  after  them,  nor/,  them

22.  49.  when  they  about  him  saw  w  hat  wou  .  f
John  10.  5.  and  a’stranger  will  they  not/.

13.  37.  Peter  said,  Lord,  why  cannot  If.  thee  now  ?
Acts?,.  24.  all  the  prophets  from  Samuel,  and  that/.
Rom.  14.  19.  let  us  f.  things  that  make  for  peace

1  Cor.  14.  1.  /.  after  charity,  desire  spiritual  gifts
Phil.  3.  12.  but  1  /.  after,  if  that  1  may  apprehend
_  Thess.  5. 15.  but  ever  /.  that  which  is  good

2  Thess.  3.  7.  for  yoursel.  know  how  ye  ought  to/,  us
9.  to  make  ourselves  an  ensample  to  you  to/,  us
Tim.  5.  24.  and  some  men  they  /.  after

6. 11.  O  man  of  God,/,  righteousness,  2  Tim.  2. 22.
Heb.  12.  14.  y.  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness
13.  7.  whose  faith  /.  considering  the  end

1  Pet.  1. 11.  w  hen  it  testified  the  glory  that  should  /.
2.  21.  an  example,  that  ye  should  /.  his  steps

2  Pet.  2.  2.  many  shall  /.  their  pernicious  ways

3  John  1 1./.  not  that  which  is  evil,  but  what  is  good
Rev.  14.  4.  these  are  they  that  /.  the  Lamb

13.  blessed  are  dead  in  Lord,  that  they  may  rest
from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  f.  them
FOLLOW  him.

1  Kings  18.  21.  if  the  l  ord  be  God,/,  him
Maik  5.  37.  and  he  suffered  no  man  to/,  him
6.  1.  he  went  out  thence,  and  his  disciples/,  him
Luke  22.  10./.  him  into  the  house,  Mark  14.  13.
John  10.  4.  he  goeth  before,  and  the  sheep/,  him
FOLLOW  me.

Gen.  24. 5.  the  worn,  will  not  be  willing  to /.  me,  39.
Judg.  3.  28.  F.hiid  said  unto  them,/,  after  me
8.  5.  give  bread,  1  pray,  to  the  people  that/,  me

1  Kings  20. 10.  for  handfuls  for  the  people  that/,  me

2  Kings  6.  19./.  me.  I  w  ill  bring  you  to  man  ye  seek
Ps.  23.  6.  goodness  and  mercy  shall/,  me  all  my  life
Mat.  4.  19.  Jesus  saith,/.  me  and  1  w  ill  make  you

fishers  of  men,  8.  22.  |  9.  9.  Mark  2. 14.  Luke  5.  27.
16.24.  let  him  deny  himself  and  take  up  his  cross
and  /.  me,  Mark  8.  34.  1  10.  21.  Luke  9.  23.
19.21.  sell  that  thou  hast,/,  me,  Luke  18.  22.
Luke  9.  59.  he  said,/,  me,  John  1.  43.  I  21.  22.
John  10.  27.  my  sheep  hear  my  voice  and/,  me

12.  26.  if  any  man  w  ill  serve  me,  let  him  /.  me

13.  36.  thou  canst  not  /.  me  now,  but  afterwards
Acts  12.  8.  cast  thy  garment  about  thee,  and  /.  me

FOLLOWED.

Gen.  24.  61.  Rebekah  and  her  damsels/,  the  man
32. 19.  so  commanded  he  all  that/,  the  droves
Num.  32. 12.  thev  have  w  holly  /,  the  L.  Dent.  1.  36.


Deut.  4.  3.  for  all  the  men  that/.  Baal-peor
11. 1 6.  swallowed  the  substance  which/,  them
Josh.  6. 8.  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant  /.  them
14.  8.  but  1  wholly  f.  the  Lord  my  God,  9.  14,
Judg.  2.  12.  they  forsook  the  I  ord  and  /.  other  god

9.  49.  cut  down  his  bough  and/.  Abimelech

1  Sam.  14.  22.  they  /.  hard  after  the  Philistines
17. 13.  Jesse's  three  sons  /.  Saul  to  battle,  14.

31. 2.  Philistines/.  Saul,  2  Ham.  1. 6.  1  C hr.  lo.  <

2  Ham.  2.  10.  but  the  house  of  Judah/.  David

3.  31.  and  king  David  himself/,  the  bier

17.  23.  Ahithophel  saw  his  counsel  was  not  f.

20.  2.  Israel  /.  Sheba  the  son  of  Bichri

1  Kings  12.  20.  there  was  none  that/,  house  of  Davf
16.  21.  half  of  the  people/.  1  ibni,  halt/.  Omri,  21
18. 18.  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  thou  hast/.  Baaliri
20.  19.  came  out,  and  the  army  which/,  them

2  K ings  3.9.  was  no  water  for  the  cattle  that  /.  then

4.  30.  Elisha  arose  and/,  her

5.  21 .  so  Gehazi  /.  after  N  aatnan,  is  all  well  r

9.  27.  Jehu/,  after  Ahaziah,  and  said,  smite hinc
13.  2.  Jehoahaz  /.  sins  of  Jeroboam  son  of  Neka
17. 15.  and  they  /.  vanity,  and  became  vain
Psal.  68.  25.  the  players  on  instruments/,  after
Ezek.  10.  11.  whither  the  head  looked,  they /.  it
Amos  7.  15.  the  Lord  took  me  as  1  /.  the  flock
Mat.llj.55.  many  women  which/.  Jes.  from  ( .alile:
Mark  10.  28.  we  left  all  and/,  thee,  Luke  18.  28.

32.  were  amazed,  and  as  they  /.  they  were  afrai
Luke  22.  54.  they  took  him,  and  Peter/,  afar  off
Acts  13.43.  religious  proselytes/.  Paul  and  barnat
16.  17.  the  same  /.  Paul  and  us,  and  cried
Rom.  9.  30.  Gentiles  who/,  not  after  righteousnesj

31.  who/,  after  the  law  of  righteousness

1  Cor.  10.  4.  they  drank  of  that  rock  that/,  them

1  Tim.5.10.  if  she  have  diligently/,  every  good  wor

2  Pet.  1.  16.  we  have  not /.  cunningly  devised  table
Rev.  6. 8.  his  name  was  Death,  and  hell  /.  with  hit
8.  7.  there/,  hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood
14. 8.  and  there /.  another  angel, saying,  Babylon.

9.  and  the  third  angel  /.  them,  saying,  if  any  ma
FOLLOWED  him.

Nnm.  16.  25.  Moses  rose  up.  the  elders  of  lsr./.  hi\
Judg.  9.  4.  hired  vain  and  light  persons  who/,  hi,

1  Ham.  13.  7.  and  all  the  people/,  him  trembling

2  Ham.  11.8.  there  /.  him  a  mess  of  meat  from  the!
Mat.  4.20.  they  left  their  nets  and  /.  him,  Mark  1.11

22.  they  immediately  left  the  ship  and  /.  him
25.  and  there /.  him  great  multitudes  of  peopli
8.  1. 1  12.  15.  I  19.  2.  1  20.  29.  Mark  2,  l
I  5.  24.  Luke  23.  27-  John  6.  2.

8.23.  when  entered,  his  disciples/,  him,  Luke  22.3
9.27.  two  blind  men/,  him,  crying,  and  saying
26.58.  but  Peter  /.  him  afar  off  ,  Mark  14.54.
Mark  14.  51.  there/,  him  a  certain  young  man
Luke  5.  11.  they  forsook  all  and  /.  him,  28.

7.  9.  Jesus  said  to  the  people  that  f.  him,  not  four
Acts  12.  9.  Peter  went  out  and  /.  him  and  wist  n
Rev.  19.  14.  the  armies  /.  him  on  white  horses
FOLLOW  ED  me.

Num.  14.  24.  my  servant  Caleb  hath/,  me  fully

32.  11.  because  they  have  not  wholly/,  me

1  Kings  14.  8.  David  who/,  me  with  all  his  heal
Neh.  4.  23.  nor  the  men  of  the  guard  which/',  mi
Mat.  19-  28.  ye  that f.  me  in  the  regeneration

FOLLOW  EDST.

Ruth  3.  10.  thou  /.  not  young  men,  poor  or  rich
FOLLOWER.

2  Tim.  3. 1 10.  hast  been  adiligent  /.  ot  my  doctri

FOLLOWERS.

1  Cor.  4.  16.  have  begotten  you  through  the  gos|

1  beseech  you,  be  /.  of  me,  11.  1.  Phil.  3. 1
Eph.  5.  1.  be  ye  /.  of  God  as  dear  children
1  Thess.  1.  6.  ye  became/,  of  us  and  of  the  Lori
2.  14.  for  ye  became/,  of  the  churches  ot  God
Heb. 6.12.  be /.  of  them  who  thro’  faith  inherit  proi

1  Pet.  3. 13.  if  ye  be  /'.  of  that  which  is  good

FOLLOW  ETU.

2  Kings  11. 15.  him  that /'.  her  be  killed,  2  Chr.  23.
Ps.  63.  8.  my  soul  /'.  hard  after  thee,  hand  uphol
Prov.  12. 11.  but  he  that  /.  vain  persons,  28.  19-

15.  9.  he  loveth  him  that  /.  righteousness,  21.  2
Isa.  1 .23.  every  one  loveth  gifts  and  /.  afterrewai
Ezek.  16.  34.  none/,  thee  to  commit  whoredoms
Hos.  12.1.  Ephraim  feeds  on  wind,/,  after  east-"  1
Mat.  10.  38.  he  thattaketh  not  up  his  cross  and /.u
Mark  9.  38.  because  he  /.  not  ns,  Luke  9.  49.
John  8.  12.  he  that /.  me  shall  not  walk  in  darkn
FOLLOWING.

Gen.  41.31.  plenty  not  known  by7  reason  of  famnr
Deut.1.  4.  they  will  turn  away  thy  son  from/.
12.  30.  take  heed  thou  be  not  snared  by  /.  them
Josh.  22.  16.  from  /.  the  Lord,  18.  23,  29.  1
12.  20.  2  Kings  17.  21.  2  Chi .  25. 27. 1  34.
Judg.  2. 19.  corrupted  in  /.  other  gods  to  serve  tli
Ruth  1. 16.  or  to  return  from/,  after  thee

1  Ham.  12.  14.  if  ye  confinue/.  the  l  ord  your  t

14.  46.  Saul  w'entup  from/,  the  Philistines
15. 11.  Saul  is  timed  back  from/,  me  j

24.  1.  when  Saul  was  returned  from  /.  Philistn

2  Ham.  2.  19.  Asahel  turned  not  from  /.  Abner,
26.  bid  the  people  return  from  /.  their  bretlir

7.  8.  1  took  tnee  from /.  the  sheep,  to  beruleroj
my7  people,  1  C ’/iron.  17-7-  Psal.ip-
1  Kings  1.7.  and  they  /.  Adonijah,  helped  bin
9.  6.  but  if  you  shall  at  all  turn  from/,  me

21.  26.  Ahab  did  very  abominably  in/,  idols
Psal.  48. 13.  that  ye  may  tell  it  to  the  generate
109-  13.  ingenerat.  /.  let  their  name  be  blotted
Mark  16. 20.  and  confirming  the  word  withsijP
Luke  13.33.  1  muiitwalk  to-morrow, and  the m
John  _  _

.  e


John  1.  38.  then  Jesus  turned  and  saw  them/
43. 1  he  day  /.  ||  6. 22.  the May/. when  the  people
21 . 20.  Peter  seetli  the  disciple  v  hom  Jesus  lov


LI  JCV  III  mv  v  1 1'  ‘  ^  "  . .  .

Acts  21.  1.  we  came  the  day/,  unto  Rhodes,!

23.  11.  and  the  night/,  the  Lord  stood  by  him
2  Pet.  2. 15.  are  gone  astrav,/.  the  way  of  rai
FOLLY.

Gen.  34.7.  because  Shechem  had  wrought  /,  m
Dent.  22.  21 .  she  wrom  ht /.  by  play  irig the  wn
josh.  7.  15.  because  Achaii  wrought/,  in  Isrm
Judg.  19.  23.  nay,  1  pray  you.  do  not  this/


FO  O


FOO


F  O  O


j  g.  + 24.  to  this  man  do  not  the  matter  of  this  /.

i  they  have  committed  lewdness  and/,  in  l sr.

11  ccording  to  the/,  that  they  wrought  in  Isr.
S,  25.  25.  Nabal  is  his  name,  and  /.  is  with  him
\  13.  12.  my  brother,  do  not  thou  this /

h  i  22.  in  all  this  .lob  attributed  not  /  to  God
behold,  his  angels  he  charged  with  /

I.  .  yet  God  layeth  not  /.  to  them

I,  lest  1  deal  with  you  after  your /.

a  i9.  13.  this  their  way  is  their  /.  yet  posterity

y  but  let  them  not  turn  again  to  /

rt,  i.  23.  in  the  greatness  of  Ids /.  he  shall  go  astray

I.;;  but  a  fool  layeth  open  his/.

I,  but  the  /.  of  fools  is  deceitful

18  e  simple  inherit  /,  but  prudent  are  crowned

»4  rown  of  wise  is  riches,  foolishness  of  fools  is  /.

ut  he  that  is  hasty  of  spirit  exalteth  /.
i.  /•  is  joy  to  him  that  is  destitute  of  wisdom
i.  .  but  the  instruction  of  fools  is  /.
f"  .  let  a  bear  meet  rather  than  a  fool  in  his/,
i.  before  he  heareth  it,  it  is /.  and  shame  to  him
i.  tnswer  not  a  fool  accord,  to  his  /.  lest  like  him
s.  a  fool  accord,  to  his  /  lest  wise  in  conceit
[1  jdogto  vomit,  so  a  fool  returneth  to  his /.

■c. .  17.  I  g»ve  my  heart  to  know  wisdom  and /.

;  sought  in  my  heart  to  lay  hold  on /.

12  lined  to  behold  /.  ||  13.  wisdom  excelleth  /.

5  1  applied  to  know  the  wickedness  of/.

1,  iso  doth  a  little  /  him  that  is  in  reputation

i.  is  set  in  great  dignity,  rich  sit  in  low  place
-i .  I*,  an  evil  doer,  and  every  mouth  speaketh  /.
r.  .  13.  1  have  seen/,  in  the  prophets  of  samar.
>s  1 10. 1  will  discov.her /.  in  sight  of  her  lovers
Je.ll.  1.  ye  could  hear  with  me  a  little  in  my  /.
PV  3.  9.  their/ shall  be  made  manifest  to  all  men

FOOD.

7i  9.  every  tree  pleasant  and  that  is  good  for/.

6  ie  woman  saw  the  tree  was  good  for  /

5  take  thou  to  thee  of  all  /.  that  is  eaten

I.  .  let  them  gather  all  /.  of  those  good  years
;.  come  to  buy/.  10.  |  43.  2,  4,  20,  22.  |  44.  25.

13  ke/.  forthe  famine  of  your  households

j.  he  commanded  to  till  the  sacks  with /.

'.  for  your  /.  and  for  /  for  your  little  ones
0, 1.  10.  her/,  shall  not  be  diminished
1:  11.  the  /.  of  the  offering  made  by  tire,  16.

I.  shall  have  planted  all  manner  of  trees  for  /.
..  7.  not  approach  to  offer  the  /.  of  his  God
I.  shall  eat  of  holy  things,  because  it  is  his/.
n  0. 18.  the  stranger,  in  giving  him /.  and  raim.
w  14.  24.  cursed  that  eateth  /  till  evening,  28.
a.  ).  10.  that  thy  master’s  son  may  have  /  to  eat

ii  5.  9.  my  desire,  in  giving  /.  for  my  househ.
l.olom.  gave  Hiram  wheat  for  /  to  lus  househ.
vl.  +25.  they  possessed  trees  of/,  in  abundance
15 12.  thy  words  more  than  my  necessary/,
uvilderness  yieldeth /.for  them  and  children
I.  who  provideth  for  the  raven  his/.  ?

1.  surely  the  mountains  bring  him  forth  /.
ai\i.  25.  man  did  eat  angels’/,  he  sent  them  meat
0  .  he  may  bring  forth  /  out  of  the  earth
16  .  who  giveth /.  to  all  flesh,  his  mercy  for  ever

6  the  Lord  who  giveth  /  to  the  hungry

7  he  giveth  to  the  beast  nis  /.  to  young  ravens
«<’.  8.  the  ant  gathereth  her  /  in  harvest

i.  much  /.  is  in  the  tillage  of  the  poor
.  thou  shalt  have  goats’  milk  enough  tor  thy  /.

1.  s  like  a  sweeping  rain  which  leaveth  no  /.

I.  feed  me  with  /.  convenient  for  me

.  like  ships,  she  bringeth  her  /.  from  afar
A6.  27.  1  have  diminished  thine  ordinary/

.  the  increase  thereof  shall  be  for  /.  to  them
t\.  17.  fruitful  seasons,  fillingour  hearts  with  /.

■v  1. 10.  both  minister  bread  for  your  /.

'1  6.8.  having  /.  and  raiment,  let  us  be  content
»  15.  if  naked  and  destitute  of  daily  /.

:  .  FOOL,

II. '  Foolishness,  are  to  be  understood  not  only
riding  to  their  natural  and  literal  meaning ,
ir  e  who  is  an  idiot,  or  a  very  weak  man,  and
>r  e  discourses  and  notions  of  fools  and  mad-
'(  hut  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  especially
'i  hook  of  Proverbs,  fool  is  the  usual  character
f  ■  sinner,  and  folly  and  foolishness  are  put
'ri.  /'.fa/.  38.  5.  JViy  wounds  stink,  and  are
01  pt,  because  of  my  foolishness,  my  sin.  And
’<  ini.  69.  5.  O  God,  thou  knowest  my  foolish-
ef  -Solomon  sets  the  fool  in  opposition  to  the
•/lit  man.  Prov.  13.  16.  Every  prudent  man
edh  with  knowledge  ;  but  a  fool  layeth  open
(Slly.  f  or  as  by  prudence  a  man  so  governs
>'■(!,  and  regulates  his  actions,  as  to  avoid
K  ding  evils,  and  to  obtain  that  good  which
\  table  to  his  necessities :  so  it  is  the  effect
1  ly,  not  to  foresee  evils  to  prevent  them,

0  neglect  the  season  of  obtaining  what  is

II I:

P-.  13.  20.  Solomon  opposes  the  fool  to  the
r,:  nan.  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men,  shall
*  ->e ;  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  de-
'r"d.  As  it  is  with  relation  to  the  affairs  of
“  'Je  >  the  man  of  prudence  and  conduct  in
o  'airs,  who  takes  the  best  method  of  managing
!  '0  his  own,  his  family's,  and  friend' s,  or

"■  ciety’s  reputation ,  comfort,  and  advantage,
m  ho  minds  his  business  more  than  his  plea-
1  is  the  wise  man ;  and  the  inconsiderate,

1  ss,  slothful  man,  who  neglects  the  principal
,  *  °J  Hfe,  or  goes  into  improper  or  unlikely
as  of  managing  them  to  advantage,  or  who
f  tts  pleasure  more  than  his  business,  is
- 1(>1  for  this  world ;  so  it  is  with  respect  to
''■r  world:  the  truly  wise  man  is  he  who
.  ef  .  things  of  God,  and  the  everlasting
't  of  his  immortal  soul,  as  his  highest  end,
'ursues  them  with  the  utmost  care  and  di/i-
'  ‘n.  ,e  way  of  God's  appointment  through
,,\  ennst  our  only  Saviour  ;  and  who  seeks
•mgs  else  with  less  solicitude  and  concern,

1  J  iJl/'t,r(^!T,a/ion  to  these.  And  the  fool,
j  ‘  O’hcr  hand,  is  he,  who  makes  something
'*  woi  Id  /its  highest  end  and  aim ,  and


spends  his  chief  time  and  care,  concern  and  la-
bour,  about  it,  to  the  neglect  of  the  infinitely
higher  interests  of  Ijod's  glory  and  his  own  soul's
everlasting  happiness.  So  that  the  highest  folly
is  justly  charged  upon  every  wilful  impenitent
sinner.

Such  also  are  called  by  the  name  of  fools,  who,
though  they  he  godly,  yet  have  much  ignorance  and
unbelief  remaining  in  them.  O  fools,  and  slow
ot  heart  to  believe,  says  our  Saviour  to  the  dis¬
ciples  that  were  going  to  Etnmaus,  Luke  24.  25.
And  it  is  the  character  of  all  men,  as  they  are
born  possessed  of  natural  ignorance  and  corrup¬
tion.  l  it.  3.  3.  V\  e  ourselves  were  sometimes
foolish.  The  Apostle  says,  1  Gor.  4.  10.  We  are
fools  for  Christ’s  -sake  :  that  is,  we  are  accounted
so  by  the  wise  men  of  the  world.  And  in  Horn.  1.

22.  he  says.  Professing  themselves  to  be  wise,
they  became  fools:  that  is,  IV  hile  they  pretended
to,  and  boasted  of,  more  than  ordinary  wis  om,
their  learned  men  being  at  first  usually  called
sophists,  or  wise  men,  though  afterwards  philo¬
sophers,  they  entertained  and  vented  many  gross
and  absurd  opinions  and  practices,  and  so  shewed
themselves  to  be  real  fools.  The  same  apostle  says,
in  1  Cor.  1.  18.  I  lie  preaching  of  the  cross  is  to
them  that  perish  foolishness.  The  doctrine  of
Christ  crucified,  to  purchase  eternal  salvation  for
believers,  is  by  unbelievers,  that  judge  only  accord¬
ing  to  carnal  reason  and  sense,  accounted  an  ab¬
surd,  ridiculous,  impossible  thing,  and  which  none
in  their  wits  will  believe,  according  to  the  princi¬
ples  of  their  philosophy.  And  in  1  Cor.  2.  14.
ihe  tilings  of  God  are  foolishness  to  the  natural
man.  He  counts  them  the  most  foolish  things  in
the  world  ;  he  looks  upon  them  as  either  trifling  and
impertinent ;  or  as  containing  means  and  ends
disproportionate  ;  or  as  undesirable  in  comparison
oj  what  may  be  set  up  in  competition  with  them.

1  Sam.  26.  21.  behold  1  have  played  the  /  and  erred
Psal.  14.  1.  they,  hath  said  in  his  heart,  53.  1.

49.  10.  likewise  the  /.  and  brutish  person  perish
92.  6.  neither  doth  a  /  understand  this
Prov.  lo.  8.  but  a  prating/,  shall  fall,  10.

23.  it  is  a  sport  to  a/,  to  do  mischief

11.  29.  the/,  shall  be  servant  to  the  wise  of  heart

12.  15.  the  way  of  a  /.  is  right  in  his  ow  n  eyes

16.  ay.  wrath  is  presently  known,  but  prudent  man
13. 16.  wise  man  feareth,  but /  layeth  open  his  folly

14.  16.  but  the  /.  rageth  and.  is  confident

15.  5.  a /.  despiseth  his  father’s  instruction

17.  7-  excellent  speech  becometh  not  a  /.

10.  areproof  more  than  a  hundred  stripes  into  a /
12.  let  a  bear  meet  a  man  rather  than /.  in  his  folly

16.  why  is  a  price  in  hand  of  a  f.  to  get  wisdom  r

21.  he  that  begetteth  a  /.  doth  it  to  his  sorrow

28.  a/,  when  he  holdeth  his  peace  is  counted  wise

18.  2.  a/,  hath  no  delight  in  understanding

6.  /.  lips  enter  into  content. mouth  calls  for  strokes

7.  ay.  mouth  is  his  destruction,  lips  a  snare

20.  3.  but  every  /  will  be  meddling

26.  4.  answer  not  a /.  ||  5.  answer  a  /.

8.  so  is  he  that  giveth  honour  to  a/.

10.  the  great  G.  rewardeth  the /.  and  transgressors

11.  as  a  dog  so  a  /.  returneth  to  his  folly

27.  3.  but  a  /.  wrath  is  heavier  than  them  both

22.  though  thou  shouldest  bray  a /.  in  a  mortar
29.11./.  uttereth  all  his  mind,  but  a  w  ise  man  keeps

Lccl.  2.  14.  but  the  /.  walketh  in  darkness

15.  as  it  happeneth  to  the  f.  so  even  to  me

16.  is  no  remembrance  of  wise  man  more  than  of/

19.  who  knoweth  whether  he  be  wise  or  a  f.  t

4.  5.  the y.  foldeth  his  hands  together,  eats  his  flesh

5.  3.  a  /  voice  is  known  by  multitude  ot  words

6.  8.  for  what  hath  the  wise  more  than  the  /  ?

10. 2.  at  right  hand,  but  a /.  heart  is  at  his  left  hand

14./.  is  full  of  words,  man  cannot  tell  what  to  be
Jer.  17.  11.  and  at  his  end  he  shall  be  a /.

Mat.  5.  22.  whosoever  shall  say,  thou  /.  be  in  danger
Luke  12.  20.  /.  this  night  thy  soul  shall  he  required

1  Cor.  3.  18.  let  him  become  a  f.  that  he  may  be  w  ise

15.  36.  thou  /.  that  thou  sowest  is  not  quickened

2  Cor.  11.  16.  I  say  again,  let  no  man  think  me  a /

12.  6.  tho’  1  would  desire  to  glory,  shall  not  be  a/.

11.  I  am  become  a/,  in  glorying,  ye  compelled  me

As  a  FOOL.

2  Sam.  3.  33.  David  said,  died  Abner  as  a  f.  dieth  ?
Prov.  7.  22.  as  a  f.  to  the  correction  of  the  stoi  ks
Eccl.  2.  16.  how  dieth  the  wise  man  ?  as  the  f.

2  Cor.  11.  16.  if  otherwise,  yet  as  a  /.  receive  me

23.  are  they  ministers  ?  1  speak  as  a  f.  I  am  more

For  a  FOO  I,.

Prov.  19. 10.  delight  is  not  seemly  for  a  f.

24.  7.  wisdom  is  too  high  for  a  f.  opens  not  mouth
26.  1.  so  honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  f.

3.  a  bridle  for  the  ass,  and  a  rod  for  the  f.  back
30.  22.  for  a  f.  when  he  is  filled  with  meat
Is  a  FOOL.

Prov.  10.  18.  he  that  uttereth  a  slander  is  a  /

19. 1.  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  lips,  and  is  a  f.

28.  26.  he  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a /

Eccl.  10.  3.  when  he  that  is  a  f.  walketh,  his  w  isdom

failetli  him,  he  saith  to  every  one  that  he  is  a  f.
Hos.  9.  7-  the  prophet  is  a /the  spiritual  man  is  mad

1  Tim.  6.  +  4.  he  is  a  f.  and  knoweth  nothing

Of  a  FOOL.

Prov.  12. 15.  the  way  of  a  f.  is  right  in  his  own  eyes

17.  21.  and  the  father  oj  a  f.  hath  no  joy

24.  the  eyes  of  a  f.  are  in  the  ends  of  the  earth
23.  9.  speak  not  in  the  ears  of  a  t.  he  will  despise
26.  6.  he  that  sendeth  a  message  by  the  hand  of  a  f.

12.  there  is  more  hope  of  a  f.  than  of  him,  29.  20.
Eccl.  7.  6.  as  crackling  of  thorns,  so  laughter  of  the  f.
10.  12.  but  the  lips  of  a  f.  will  swallow  up  himself

FOOLS.

2  Sam.  13. 13.  thou  shalt  be  as  one  of  the /.  in  Israel
Job  12.  17.  and  he  maketh  the  judges  /

30. 8.  they  were  children  of  f.  children  of  base  men
Psal.  75.  4.  I  said  to  the/,  deal  not  foolishly
94.  8.  and  ye  /.  when  will  ye  be  wise  f
107-  17-  /.  because  of  their  transgress,  are  afflicted
Prov.  1.7.  but  /.  despise  wisdom  and  instruction


Prov.  1.  22.  how  long,  ye /.  will  ye  hate  knowledge*

32.  and  the  prosperity  of/  shall  destroy  them'

3.  35.  but  shame  shall  be  the  promotion  of /.

8.  5.  and  ye/,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  heart
10.  21.  but /  die  for  want  of  wisdom

12.  23.  but  the  heart  of/  proclaimeth  foolishness-
13. 19.  but  it  is  abominatiou  to  J.  to  depart  from  evil

20.  but  a  companion  off.  shall  be  destroyed

14.  8.  folly  off.  is  deceit  ||  9./.  make  a  mock  at  sin
24.  crown  of  wise  is  riches,  foolishness  off.  is  folly

33.  what  is  in  the  midst  off.  is  made  known

15.  2.  the  mouth  off.  poureth  out  foolishness
14.  the  mouth  of/,  feedeth  on  foolishness

16.  22.  but  the  instruction  off.  is  folly

19.  29-  stripes  are  prepared  for  the  back  of/

26.  7.  so  is  a  parable  in  the  mouth  off.  9.

Eccl.  5. 1.  more  ready  to  hear,  than  give  sacrifice  of /.

4.  he  hath  no  pleasure  in/,  pay  what  hast  vowed

7.  4.  but  the  heart  of/,  is  in  the  house  of  mirth

5.  than  for  a  man  to  hear  the  song  off.

9.  be  not  hasty,  for  anger  resteth  in  the  bosom  of /

9.  17.  more  than  cry  of  him  that  ruleth  among /.
Isa.  19.  11.  surely  the  princes  of  Zoan  are  /  13.

35.  8.  way-faring  men.  tho’/.  shall  not  err  therein.
Mat.  23.  17.  ye/,  and  blind,  whether  is  greater,  19.
Luke  11  40.  ye/,  did  not  he  that  made  that  without
24.25.  Of.  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  the  prophets
Rom.  1.  22.  professing  to  be  wise,  they  became/

1  Cor.  4.  10.  we  are/,  for  Christ's  sake,  ye  wise  in  C.

2  Cw.11.19.  for  ye  suffer/,  gladly,  seeing  ye  arc  wise-
Lph.  5.  15.  see  then  that  ye  walk  not  as  J.  but  as  wise

FOOLISH.

Deut.  32.  6.  do  ye  thus  requite  the  L.  O  /.  people  ?

21.  will  provoke  them  with  a/,  nation,  Rom.  10. 19i
Job  2. 10.  thou  speakest  as  one  off.  women  speakttfc

5.  2.  for  wrath  killeth  the  /.  man,  envy  slays
3.  I  have  seen  the  /.  taking  root,  but  1  c  ursed
Putl.  5.  5.  the  /.  shall  not  stand  in  thy  sight
39.  8.  make  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  /.

73.  3.  for  1  was  envious  at  the/,  when  L  saw  prosp,.

22.  so  /  was  I  and  ignorant,  I  was  as  a  beast

74.  18.  the/,  people  have  blasphemed  thy  name

22.  rememb.  how  the/,  man reproachethihee daily.
Prov.  9.  6.  forsake  the /.  and  live,  go  in  way  underst..

13.  a/,  woman  is  clamor,  is  simple,  knousnoth..

10.  1.  but  a  /.  son  is  the  heaviness  of  his  mother

14.  but  the  mouth  of  the  /  is  near  destruction
14. 1.  but  the /.  plucketh  it  down  with  her  hands

3.  in  the  mouth  of  the/,  is  a  rod  of  pride
7 .  go  from  the  presence  of  a  /.  man

15.  7.  hut  the  heart  of  the /.  doeth  not  so

20.  but  a /  man  despiseth  his  mother

17-  25.  a /  son  is  a  grief  to  his  father,  and  bitter-
19.  13.  a/  son  is  the  calamity  of  his  father

21.  20.  a/  man  spendeth  a  treasure

29.  9.  it  a  wise  man  contendeth  with  a  /.  man
Led.  4.  13.  better  is  a  wise  child  than  a /.  king
7.  17-  be  not  overmuch  wicked,  neither  be  thou  /.

10.  i5.  laboui  of  the  /.  wearietli  every  one  of'  them:

Isa.  44.  25.  he  maketh  their  knowledge  /.

Jer.  4. 22.  for  my  people  are /  they  are  sottish  childr.
5.  4.  1  said,  surely  these  are  poor,  they  are  /.

21.  hear  now  this,  Of.  people,  who  see  not
10.  8.  but  they  are  altogether  brutish  and  /.

Lam.  2.  14.  thy  proph.  have  seen  vain  and/,  things
Ezek.  13.  3.  thus  saith  the  Ld.  woe  to  the /  prophets
Zech.  11.  15.  take  the  instruments  of  a  /.shepherd
Mat.  7.  26.  shall  be  likened  unto  a /.  man  who  built

25.  2.  five  of  the  virgins  were  wise,  and  five  /
Rom.  1.  21.  and  their  /  heart  was  darkened
2.  20.  an  instructor  ot  the  /.  a  teacher  of  babes
1  Cor.  1.  20.  hath  not  G.  made /.  wisd.  of  this  woi  Id.
Gal.  3.  1.  O  /.  Galatians,  who  hath  bewitched  you  *
3.  are  ye  so  /. '!  having  begun  in  the  spirit
Eph.  5.  4.  neither  filthiness,  nor /.  talking

1  Tim.  6.  9.  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into/  lusts

2  Tim.  2.  23.  but  /.  questions  avoid,  'Jit.  3.  9.

Tie.  3.  3.  we  ourselves  were  sometimes /.  deceived?.

1  Pet.  2. 15.  may  put  to  silence  the  ignor.  off.  mem

FOOLISHLY.

Gen.  31 . 28.  thou  hast  now  done /.  in  so  doing,  in  my
power  to  hurt  you,  1  Sam.  13.  13.  2  G hr.  16.  9-
Num.  12. 11.  the  sin  on  us  wherein  we  have  done  /

2  Sam.  24.  10.  1  have  done  very  /  1  C/iron.  21.  8.
Job  1.  22.  in  all  this  Job  sinned  not,  nor  charged  G ./
Psal.  75.  4.  1  said  to  the  fools,  deal  not  /.

Prov.  14.  17-  he  that  is  soon  angry  dealeth  /

30.  32.  if  thou  hast  done/,  in  lifting  thyself

2  Cor.  11.  17.  I  speak  it  as  it  were  /.  in  this  boasting
21.  I  speak /.  1  am  bold  also,  are  they  Hebrews  r
FOOLLSHiN  ESS.

2  Sam.  15.  31.  turn  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  into /
Psal.  38.  5.  my  wounds  stink  because  of  my  /.

69.  5.  O  God,  thou  knowest  my  /,  sins  are  not  hid
Prov.  12.  23.  but  the  heart  of  fools  proclaimeth  /

14.  24.  but  the /.  of  fools  is  folly

15.  2.  but  the  mouth  of  fools  poureth  out  /.

14.  but  the  mouth  of  fools  feedeth  on  /

19.  3.  the /  ot  man  perverteth  his  way

22.  15./  is  bound  in  the  heart  of  a  child

24.  9.  the  thought  of f.  is  sin,  the  scorner  abominat.
27-22.  yet  will  not  his/,  depart  from  him
Eccl.  7.  25.  to  know  the  wicked,  off.  and  madness
10.  13.  the  beginning  of  the  words  of  his  mouth  is /
Mark  7.  22.  thefts,  pride,/,  come  from  within
1  Cor.  1 . 18.  preaching  of  cross  to  them  that  perish  /.
21.  it  pleased  God  by  the/,  of  preaching  to  save

23.  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  the  Greeks /.

25.  because  the  /.  of  God  is  wiser  than  men

2.  14.  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  /.  to  him

3.  19.  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  f.  with  God

FOOL

Is  a  part  of  the  body  well  known.  In  old  times
it  was  customary  to  wash  the  feet  of  strangers
upon  their  coming  off  a  journey,  Gen.  18.  4.  |
19.  2.  I  24.  32.  because  generally  they  were
barefoot,  or  wore  sandals  only,  which  did  not
secure  them  from  the  dust  or  dirt.  St.  Paul
enjoins  inquiry  to  he  made,  whether  the  widows
who  were  to  be  taken  into  the  number  of  thost
who  were  to  be  maintained  by  the  church,  hac
washed  the  feet  of  the  saints ;  whether  the,

173


FOO


F  O  O


FOR


k  fi  been  i  tady  to  do  the  meanest  offices  to  the  ser¬
vants  of  God,  1  I  im.  5.  10.  Christ  Jesus,  to  give
m  an  example  cf  humility ,  washed  the  feet  <J  Ins
apostles  ;  and  thereby  taught  them  to  perform  all
the  most  humble  services  for  one  another,  John

13.  5.  ..

feet,  in  the  style  of  the  sacred  writers,  often  mean
inclinations,  affections,  propensities,  actions,  mo¬
tion-.  Keel.  5.  1.  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest
to  the  house,  of  Cod.  Psal.  36.  11.  Let  not  the
foot  of  pride  come  against  me.  And  in  1  sal.
HQ  5Q.  |  turned  mv  feet  unto  thy  testimonies.
Also  in  Eph.  6.  15.  And  your  teet  shod  with  the
preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace.  1  o  be  at  any
ones  feet,  tv  used  for  obeying,  being  m  Ins  ser-
licCy  following  him.  AbisHil  tells  Drviu,  that
the  presents  which  she  brought,  h  tn,  were  toi  the
young  men  that  walked  at  his  feet ;  for  the  sol-
diets  who  followed  him,  1  Sam.  25.  +  27,.  Moses
says.  Dent.  .33.  3.  that  the  Lord  loved  his  people,
and  they  sat  down  at  his  feet :  like  scholars,
they  heard  him,  they  belonged  to  him,  they  were
taught  and  instructed  in  his  doctrine.  St.  Paul
says,  that  he  was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gama¬
liel,  Acts  22.  3.  And  Mary  sat  at  our  Saviour  s
feet,  and  heard  his  word,  Luke  10.  39.

In  Deut.  11.  10.  it  is  said,  that  the  land  of  Canaan
is  not  like  the  land  of  Egypt,  where  thou  sowedst
thy  seed,  and  wateredst  it  with  thy  foot ;  that  is,
that  Palestine  is  a  country  where  the  rams  are
not  extremely  rare,  where  the  dews  are  plentiful,
where  there  are  many  springs,  rivulets,  and  brooks,
without  reckoning  the  river  Jordan,  which  supply
the  earth  with  all  the  moisture  that  is  necessary  to
its  producing  fruit  ;  whereas  Egypt  is  a  country
where  there  is  no  river  but  the  >1  ile,  where  it  never
rains,  and  where  the  lands  which  are  not  within
reach  to  be  watered  by  the  inundations  of  this
river,  continue  parched  and  barren.  To  supply
this  want,  ditches  are  dug.  and  water  distributed
throughout  the  several  villages  ;  the  digging  these
ditches,  and  dispersing  these  waters,  create  a  great
deal  of  labour  to  the  feet.

But  notwithstanding  these  precautions,  theie  are
many  places  which  have  no  water ;  and  in  the
course  of  the  year,  the  places  which  are  nearest
to  the  Nile  require  to  be  watered  again  in  an  arti¬
ficial  manner.  It  is  done  by  the  help  of  some  ma¬
chines,  which  Philo  describes  thus :  It  is  a  wheel
which  a  man  turns  with  the  motion  of  his  feet,  by
ascending  successively  the  several  steps  which  are
within  it.  But  as  while  he  is  thus  continually
turning,  he  cannot  keep  himself  up,  he  holds  a  stay
in  his  hands,  which  is  not  movable,  and  this  sup¬
ports  him  ;  so  that  in  this  work,  the  hands  do  the
office  of  the  feet,  and  the  feet  that  of  the  hands  :
since  the  hands  which  should  act,  are  at  rest  ;  and
the  feet  which  should  be  at  rest,  are  in  action,  and
give  motion  to  the  wheel.  This  is  what  is  meant
by  watering  the  earth  with  their  feet.

It  is  said,  in  .Ter.  2.  25.  Withhold  thy  foot  from
being  unshod,  and  thy  throat  from  thirst.  Do
not  continue  to  prostitute  yourselves,  as  you  have
hitherto  done,  to  strange  people.  He  speaks  to
the  tnfidel  and  idolatrous  Jews.  So  likewise
F.zek.  16.25.  Ihou  hast  opened  thy  feet  to  every
one  that  passed  by.  It  is  a  modest  expression,
for  exposing  one's  nakedness,  or  going  into  the
bed  of  lu.-.t.  Jacob  said  to  Laban,  Gen.  30.  +  30.
The  Lord  hath  blessed  thee  at  my  foot  ;  that  is,
ever  since  I  came  to  you  ;  since  my  feet  entered
into  thy  house :  or,  by  my  foot ;  that  is,  by  my
ministry  and  labour,  as  the  phrase  is  used,  Deut.

1L  10.

I'o  be  under  any  one’s  feet,  to  be  a  footstool  to
him,  is  a  figurative  way  of  speaking,  to  signify
the  subjection  of  a  subject  to  his  sovereign,  of  a
servant  to  his  master,  Psal.  8.  6.  1  18.  38.  |  110.
1.  Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet.
Mine  enemies  are  fallen  under  my  feet.  Sit
thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make  thine  ene¬
mies  thy  tootstool.  To  lick  the  dust  off  one’s
feet,  Isa.  49.  23.  They  shall  how  down  to  thee
with  their  face  toward  the  earth,  and  lick  up  the
dust  of  thy  feet.  They  shall  highly  reverence  and
honour  thee,  and  shall  most  humbly  and  readily
submit  themselves  unto  thee.  The  expressions  are
borrowed  from  the  practice  of  the  eastern  people  in
their  prostrations  and  adorations,  when  they  bowed
so  low’  as  to  touch  and  kiss  the  ground,  whereby  they
did  or  might  seem  to  lick  up  the  very  dust  of  the
ground,  which  was  about  or  under  the  feet  of  those
whom  they  adored.  .

£  akedness  of  feet  was  a  sign  of  mourning  :  Forbear
to  cry,  says  God  to  Ezekiel,  make  no  mourning
for  the  dead,  and  put  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy  feet,
Ezek.  24.  1”.  It  was  also  a  mark  of  respect,  reve¬
rence,  and  adoration,  Exod.  3.  5.  Put  off  thy
shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  where  thou
standest  is  holy  ground.  To  wash  one’s  foot
with  oil,  or  with  butter,  signifies  plenty  of  a/l
sorts  of  good  things,  Deut.  33.  24.  Job  29.  6.  I  o
wash  one’s  feet  in  the  blood  of  sinners;  to  take
remarkable  vengeance  on  them,  to  shed  rivers  of
their  blood,  Psal.  58. 10.

A  wicked  man  speaketh  with  his  feet,  says  Solo¬
mon,  Prov.  6.  13.  He  uses  much  gesture  with  his
hands  and  feet  while  he  is  talking  ;  he  secretly  sig¬
nifies  to  his  companions  his  intentions  or  desires  of
some  evil  towards  another  person,  which  he  is
afraid  or  ashamed  to  express  openly.  The  ancient
sages  blamed  those  who  used  too  much  gesticula¬
tion,  and  spoke  with  all  their  members.  Ezekiel
reproaches  the  Ammonites  with  clapping  their
hands,  and  stamping  with  their  feet  in  token  of  jgy,
upon  seeing  the  desolation  of  J  erusalem  and  the
temple,  Ezek.  25.  6.  And  in  chap.  6.  11  .he  makes
the  same  motions  the  signs  of  grief,  because  of  the
ruin  of  his  people.

The  prophet  Isaiah  says,  Blessed  are  ye  that
sow  beside  all  waters,  that  send  forth  thither
the  feet  of  the  ox  and  the  ass,  Isa.  32  20.

174


Happy  are  the  people  that  sow  their  corn  upon
a  well  watered  soil,  who  with  their  oxen  and
as\es  pi  ugh  a  fat  and  fruitful  land  ;  or  who  feed
there  their  oxen  and  their  asses,  lo  send  out
their  feet,  that  is,  to  send  them  there,  to  feed
them,  to  plough  there  with  them.  But  this  pas¬
sage  may  be  understood  mystically ,  and  seems  to
respect  the  times  of  the  go  pel:  that  is,  Happy
are  the  apostles  and  gospel-ministers,  in  com¬
parison  of  those  that  lived  before  them,  who  shall
find  abundant  success  of  their  labours  in  the
conversion  of  multitudes  unto  Christ.  The  same
prophet  says,  chap.  58.  13.  If  thou  turn  away
thy  foot  from  the  sabbath,  from  doing  thy  plea¬
sure  on  my  holy  day.  This  is  taken ,  either
properly,  if  thou  forbear  walking,  or  taking  any
unnecessary  journeys  on  the  sabbath-day :  or,
metaphorically ,  that  is,  if  thou  keep  thy  mind
and  affections  clear,  and  restrain  thyself  from
whatever  may  pnfane  it  ;  feet  being  often  put
for  affections,  because  the  mind  is  moved  by  the
affections,  as  the  body  is  by  the  teet.

Job  says,  that  he  was  feet  to  the  lame,  and  eyes
to  the  blind,  Job  29.  15.  Ile  led,  he  directed,
and  instructed  the  one,  and  supported  the  other.
And  in  chap.  13.  27-  he  says,  that  Cud  had  put
his  feet  in  the  stocks,  and  looked  narrowly  unto
all  his  paths :  that  he  had  encompassed  him
with  his  judgments ,  so  that  he  had  no  way,  or
possibility  to  escape  ;  he  was  like  a  bird  taken  by
the  foot  in  a  snare.

Gen.  41.  44.  without  thee  no  man  shall  lift  up  his /.
Exod.  12.  37.  about  six  hundred  thousand  on /.

21.  24.  thou  shalt  give  /.  for  /.  Deut.  19.  21.

30.  18.  shalt  make  a  laver  of  brass  and  his  /.
28.  |  31.  9.  I  35.  16. 1  38.  8.  1  39.  39.  I  40.  11.
l  ev.  8.  11.

Lev.  13.  12.  if  a  leprosy  cover  from  head  to/.

Num.  22.  25.  the  ass  crushed  Falaam’s  f.  agst.  wall
Deut.  8.  4.  nor  did  thy/,  swell  these  forty  years
11.  10.  and  wateredst  it  with  thy/,  as  a  garden

25.  9.  she  shall  loose  his  shoe  from  off  his/.

29.  5.  thy  shoe  is  not  waxen  old  upon  thy/.

32.  35.  tomevengcan.  their  /.shall  slide  in  due  time

33.  24.  Moses  said,  let  Asher  din  his/,  in  oil
Josh.  1.  3.  every  place  your/,  shall  tread  upon

5.  15.  loose  thy  shoe  from  off  thy/.  Joshua  did  so
Judg.  5.  15.  Tarek  was  sent  on/,  to  the  valley

1  Sam.  23.  +  22.  and  see  where  his  /.  shall  be

2  Sam,  2.  18.  Asahel  was  as  light  of/,  as  a  roe
21.  20.  had  on  every  /.  six  toes,  1  Chron.  20.  6.

2  Kings  9.  33.  Jehu  trod  Jezebel  under/.

2  Chr.  33.  8.  nor  any  more  removed  the  /.  of  Israel
Job  23. 11.  my/,  hath  held  his  steps,  his  way  I  kept
28.  4.  even  the  waters  forgotten  of'  the/.

.31.  5.  or  if  my  /.  hath  hasted  to  deceit

39. 15.  and  forgetteth  that  the/,  may  crush  them
Psal.  9.  15.  in  the  net  they  hid  is  their  /.  taken

26.  12.  mv/.  standeth  in  an  even  place

36.  11.  let  not  the  /.  of  pride  come  against  me

38. 16.  when  my  /.  slipneth,  magnify  themselves
66.  6.  they  went  through  the  flood  on  /.

68.  23.  that  thy  /.  mav  be  dipped  in  blood
91.  12.  his  angels  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  thou  dash
thy  /.  against  a  stone,  Mat.  4.  6.  Ijitke  4.  11.
94.  18.  1  said  illy/,  slippeth,  thy  mercy  held  me  up
121.  3.  he  will  not  suffer  thy/,  to  be  moved
Prov.  1.  15.  refrain  thy  /.  from  their  path
3.23.  shalt  walk  safely,  and  thy/,  shall  not  stumble
26.  the  Lord  shall  keep  thv/.  from  being  taken
4.  27.  turn  not  to  right  or  left,  remove  thy/,  from

25.  17.  withdraw  thy  /.  from  thy  neighbour’s  house
19.  confidence  in  unfaith.  men  is  like/,  out  of  joint

Eccl.  5.1.  keep  thy  f.  when  goest  into  house  of  God
Isa.  14.25.  on  my  mountains  tread  him  under/.

18.  7.  a  nation  meted  out  and  trodden  under/.

20.  2.  and  put  off  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  f.

26.  6.  the/,  shall  tread  it  down,  even  of  the  poor
41.  2.  who  called  the  righteous  man  to  his/.

58.  13.  if  thou  turn  away  thy  /.  from  my  sabbath
Jei.  2.  25.  withhold  thy/,  from  being  unshod
12.  10.  they  have  trodden  my  portion  under/.
Lam.  1. 15.  Ld.  hath  trodden  under/,  mighty  men
Ezek.  6.  11.  stamp  with  thy/,  and  say,  alas
16.  t  6.  when  trodden  under  /.  1  said  to  thee,  live
25.  +  6.  because  thou  hast  stamped  with  the  /.

29. 11.  no/,  ofman,  no/,  of  beast  shall  pass  thro’  it
32.  13.  neither  shall  the /.  of  man  trouble  them
Dan.  8.  13.  to  give  the  host  to  be  trodden  under/.
Amosl.  15.  that  isswiftof  /.shall  not  deliver  himself
Mat.  5.  13.  salt  unsavoury,  trodden  under  /,  of  men
14.  13.  the  people  followed  him  on  /.  out  of  cities
18.  8.  if  thy /.  offend  thee,  cut  it  off,  Mark  9.  45.

22.  13.  bind  him  hand  and  /.  cast  him  into  darkn.
Mark  6.  33.  many  ran  a  /.  thither  out  of  all  cities
John  11.  44.  was  dead  came  forth  bound  hand  and/.
Acts  7. 5.  not  so  much  as  to  set  his /.  on,  yet  promised
20. 13.  so  had  appointed,  minding  himselt  to  go  a/.

1  Cor.  12. 15.  if  the  /  say,  because  I  am  not  the  hand
Heb.  10.  29-  hath  trodden  under/,  the  Son  of  God
Rev.  1. 13.  Son  of  man  clothed  with  a  garm.  to  the/.

11  2.  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under/,

Sole  of  FOOT.

Gen.  8.  9.  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  sole  c/her/.
Dent.  28. 35.  L.  smite  thee  with  a  botch  from  sole  off.
56.  not  set  sole.cf  her /.  on  ground  for  delicateness
65.  nor  shall  the  sole  of  thy  /.  have  rest  [on
Josh.  1.  3.  every  place  the  sole  of  your  /.  shall  tread

2  Sam.  14.  25.  none  like  A  bsalom,  from  the  sole  of  f.
Job  2.  7.  Job  smitten  with  boils  from  sole  of  the/.
Isa.  1.  6.  from  sole  cf  f.  to  the  head  no  soundness
Ezek.  1.  7-  sole  of  f.  was  like  the  sole  of  a  calf’s/.

FOOT  breadth.

Deut  2. 5.  will  not  give,  no  not  so  much  as / '.-breadth
Left  FOOT.

Rev.  10.  2.  and  he  set  his  left  f.  upon  the  earth
Right  FOOT.

Rev.  10.  2.  a  little  book,  he  set  his  right  f.  on  the  sea
See  Toe.

FOOTED.

Lev.  11.3.  whatsoever  is  cloven  /,  that  ye  shall  eat
7.  and  the  swine  though  he  be  cloven-/,  is  unclean


Lev.  21.  19.  man  that  is  broken  /.  shall  n  >t  approa*
Acts  10.  12.  all  manner  of  four-/,  beasts,  11.

Rom.  1.  23.  image  made  1  ike  birds  and  four-/.  bea;  1
FOOTMEN.  "  I

Num.  11. 21.  the  peoplearesix  hundred  thousand  I
1  Sam.  22.  17.  Saul  said  to  the  /.  slay  priestsol  H  I
Jer.  12.  5.  if  hast  run  with/,  and  they  wearied  lb  |
FOOTS  1  EPS.

Psal.  17.  5.  hold  up  my  goings  that  my/,  slip  n  j
77. 19.  thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  thy/,  are  not  know  1
89.  51.  they  reproached  the /.  of  thine  anoin  ed
Cant.  1.  8.  go  thy  way  forth  by  the/,  of  the  tlo  I
FOOlS  FOOL.

1  Chron.  28.  2.  build  an  house  for  the  /.  ot  ourGi  1

2  Chr.  9.  18.  were  six  steps  to  throne  with/,  of  gcj  1
Psal,  99.  5.  worship  at  his/,  for  he  is  holy,  132. jji

110.  i.  sit  thou  at  my  right-hand  till  1  make thi ’  |
enemies  thy  /.  Mat.  22.  44.  Mark  12.  a  1
Luke  20.43.  Acts  2.  35.  Heb.  1.  13.

Isa.  66.  1.  heaven  is  my  throne,  and  earth  is  my  [

Acts  1 'j

Lam.  2. 1 .  remembered  not  his  /.  in  day  ofbisana  1
Mat.  5.  35.  swear  not  by  the  earth,  it  is  his  /.

Heb.  10.  13.  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  made  hi;
Jam.  2.  3.  say  to  the  poor,  sit  here  under  my/.

FO II .

Deut.  4.  7-  so  nigh  in  all  things  that  we  call  on  hirr  I
2  Sam.  11. 22.  shewed  David’ all  Joab  had  sent  bin  j
Prov. 28. 21.  /.piece  of  bread  that  man  will  transgr*
Mat.  5.  45./.  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  evil  and  go  I
6.  7.  they  think  to  be  heard /.  their  much  speakii
25.  35./.  1  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  meat,  4
John  1 .  16.  out  of  his  fuln.  we  received  grace/,  gr;  1
Rom.  13.  6././.  this  cause  ye  pay  tribute  also
2  Cor.  5.  1 .  /.  we  know,  if  this  house  were  dissolv  *

13.  8./.  we  can  do  nothing  against  but  /.  the  tn

2  Pet.  3.  12.  looking/,  the  coming  of  the  day  of'G  1
FORASMUCH.

Gen.  41.  39./.  as  God  hath  shewed  thee  all  this
Deut.  12.  12.  /.  as  he  hath  no  inheritance  with  yi
Judg.  11.  36.  /.  as  the  Ford  hath  taken  vengearic

1  Sam.  20.  42./.  as  we  have  sworn  both  ot  us

2  Sam.  19.  30./.  as  my  lord  is  come  again  in  pe
1  Kings  13.  21./.  as  thou  hast  disobeyed  the  L
1  Chron.  5. 1./.  as  Reuben  defiled  his  father’s  b
Isa.  29. 13./.  as  this  peo.draw  near  with  their  mo
Jer.  10.  6./.  as  there  is  none  like  to  thee,  O  Lor

7./.  among  all  wise  men  of  nations  none  like  t
Dan.  2.40./.  as  iron  break,  and  subdu.  all  thin
Luke  19.  9.  /.  as  he  also  is  the  son  of  Abraham
Acts  11.  17./.  then  as  God  gave  them  the  like;
17.  29./.  then  as  we  are  the  offspring  of  God  }
24.  10./.  as  I  know  that  thou  hast  been  ajudgi  I
1  Cor.  11.7./.  as  he  is  the  image  and  glory  off  [

14.  12./.  as  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual  gifts

15.  58.  /.  as  ye  know  your  labour  is  not  in  vai  |

1  Pet.  1.  18./.  as  ye  know  ye  were  not  redeem*

4. 1.  /.  then  as  Christ  hath  suffered  for  us

FORBADE.

Dent.  2.  37.  nor  unto  whatsoever  the  Lord/,  u:  ,
Mat.  3.  14.  but  John/,  him,  saying,  1  have  nee'  ,
Mark  9.  38.  we  saw  one  casting  out  dev  ils  in  ’  ■
name,  we /.  him,  because  he  followeth  noti*
Luke  9.  49-

2  Ptt.  2.  16.  the  ass/,  the  madness  of  the  prop

FORBARE.

1  Sam.  23.  13.  Pav.  escaped,  and  Saul/,  to  go  fit

2  Chron.  25. 16.  then  the  prophet/,  and  said,  I  ki*
Jer.  41.  8.  so  lshmael  f.  and  slew  them  not

FORBEARANCE.  .  !]

Rom.  2.  4.  or  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his/,

3.  25.  for  the  remission  of  sins,  through  the/.  0  .
FORBEAR.


Exod.  23. 5.  if  see  his  ass,  and  would./,  to  help
Deut.  23.  22.  ifthoushalt /.  to  vow ,  it  shal  1  be m
I  Sam.  11.  +  3.  /.  us  seven  days  that  we  may  se
l  Kings  22.  6.  shall  1  go,  or/.  ?  2  Chron.  18.  5,
l  Chron.  25.  16.  f.  why  shouldest  thou  he  srmtti
35.21./.  thee  from  meddling  with  God
Neh.  9.  30.  yet  many  years  didst  thou/,  them
Job  16.  6.  and  though  l  f.  what  am  l  eased  ?
Prov.  24. 11.  thou  f.  to  deliver  them  drawn  tod
Jer.  40.  4.  but  if  it  seem  ill  to  thee  to  come,/
Ezek.  2.  5.  whether  they  will  hear  or/.  7 •  I  3.  1
3.  27.  and  he  that  forbeareth,  let  him/.

24.  17./.  to  cry,  make  no  mourning  for  the  de
Zech.  11.  12.  1  said,  give  me  my  price,  if  not,

.  ^  «  /•  1.  _ 1  _  _ _ _ f  ...nrl'inO-  /


Cor.  9.  6.  have  not  we  power  to/,  working?

!  Cor.  12.6.  f.  lest  any  should  think  of  me  above  \


Thess.  3.1.  wherefore  when  we  could  no  longer
FORBEARETH.

Kum.  0. 13.  that/,  keep  the  passover  shall  be  cu
Ezek.  3.  27.  ancf  he  that  /.  let  him  forbear
FORBEARING.

Prov.  25. 15.  by  long/,  is  a  prince  persuaded
Ter.  20.  9.  I  was  weary  with /.  I  could  no'sta.
Eph.  4.  2.  f.  one  another  in  love,  Col.  3.  13.

6.  9.  masters,  do  the  same  things,/,  threatenn
->  Tim  2.  1 24.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  be
FORBID.

Knm.  11.  28.  Joshua  saiii,  my  lord  Moses,  f.  0
L  Sam.  24.  6.  the  I  oro  /.  I  should  do  this  thing
26.  11.  Lord/.  1  should  stretch  forth  mine  nan
1  Kings  21.  3.  Naboth  said  to  Ahab,  the  I  d.  M
1  Chron.  11.  19.  my  God  /.it  me,  that  1  should  do?
Mark 9.39.  but  Jesus  said./,  him  not,  Lukeifj
10.  14.  suffer  little  childr./.  them  not,  I.uke  lo
Luke  6.  29.  taketh  thy  cloke,/.  not  to  take  coat
Acts  10.  47.  Peter  answered,  can  any/.

that  these  should  not  be  baptn
24.  23.  should  /.  none  of  his  acquaintance  to  c
iCor.  14.  39.  and/,  not  to  speak  with  tongues
God  FORBID.

44.  7.  God  f.  17-  Josh  22.  29.  1  !

Sam.  12.  23.  I  14.  45.  I  20.  2.  Job  *i
Luke  20.  16.  Rom.  3.  4,  6,  31.  1  6.  2. -  \
7.  7,  13.  1  9.  14.  I  11.  L  11.  I  Cor.  6.
Gal.  2.  17-  1  3.  21.  1  6.  14.

FORBIDDEN.

r.ev.  5.  17.  if  a  soul  commit  any  of  these  ttun^
'lent.  4.  23.  or  the  likeness  of  what  the  Lorn  na
lets  16.  6.  and  were  /.  to  p-  each  the  word  in  n


1


Ten.


FOR


F  O  R


FOR


FORBIDDETH.

,hn  10.  and  /.  them  tnat  would  receive  brethren
FORBIDDING.

'  !eC3.  2.  and  /.  to  give  tribute  to  Ctesar,  saying
■s  28.  31.  preaching  kingd.  of  G.  no  man  f.  him
htss.Q,  16./.  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles
im.  4.  3.  /.  to  marry,  commanding  to  abstain
FOR  BOHN  E.  [from

.  51.  30.  mighty  men  of  l’abylon  have  /.  to  tight
FORCE.

it.  31.31.  peradventure  thou  wouldest  take  by/.
ut.  34.  7.  eye  not  dim,  nor  was  his  natural  /.

abated

7 m.  2.  16.  shalt  give  it,  if  not,  I  will  take  it  by  J.
r a  4. 23.  they  made  them  to  cease  by  /.  and  power
30. 18.  by  great  /.  of  my  disease,  earm.  changed
.  36.  and  his /.  is  in  the  navel  of  his  belly
.  18.  21.  pour  out  their  blood  by  /.  of  the  sword
.  10.  their  course  is  evil,  and  then  /,  is  not  right
.  45.they  stood  under  the  shadow,  because  of  the /.
T.  34.  4.  with  /.  and  cruelty  have  ye  ruled  them
.  5.  thou  hast  shed  blood  by  the  /.  of  the  sword
ios  2.  14.  the  strong  shall  not  strengthen  his /.

•r.  11.  12.  and  the  violent  take  it  by  /.
ft  6. 15.  when  perceived  they  would  take  him  by  /.
:.t  23.  10.  to  take  Paul  by/,  from  among  them
b,  9. 17.  for  a  testament  is  of  /.  after  men  are  dead
FORCE.

ut.  22.  25.  if  the  man  /  her  and  lie  with  her
am.  13.  12.  nay,  my  brother,  do  not  /.  me
h.  7. 8.  will  he /.  the  queen  also  before  me  in  house
FORCED.

lg.  1.  34.  the  Ammonites  /.  the  children  of  Dan
.  5  my  concubine  have  they/,  that  she  is  dead
am.  13.  12. 1  /.  myself  therefoie,  and  offered
am.  13.  14.  Amnon  /.  Tamar  and  lay'  with  her
2.  hated  Amnon,  because  he /.  his  sister  Tamar
2.  determined  from  theday  that  he /.  his  sister

u.  7.  21.  with  the  flattering  ot  her  lips  she  f.  him

FORCES.

hr.  17.  2.  Jehoshaphat  placed  /.  in  fenced  cities
>36.  19.  he  will  not  esteem  all  the  /.  of  strength
.  60.  5.  the  /.  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thee
1.  men  may  bring  to  thee  the  /.  of  Gentiles
.  40.7.  when  the  captains  of  the  /.  that  were  in  the
field,  13.  1  41.  11,13,  16.  |  42.  1,  8. 1  43.  4,  5.
77.  11.  10.  and  shall  assemble  a  mult,  of  great/.
8.  but  in  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the  God  off.
ad.  11.  that  strangers  carried  away  captive  his/
13.  shouldest  not  have  laid  hands  on  their/.
FORCIBLE.

1  >  6. 25.  how  /.  right  words,  what  arguing  prove  ?
FORCING.

ut.  20. 19.  not  destroy  trees  by /.  axe  against  them
or.  30.  33.  so  the  /.  of  wrath  bringeth  forth  strife
FORD,  S.

n.  32.  22.  Jacob  passed  over  the  /.  Jabbok
h.  2.  7-  and  the  men  pursued  the  spies  to  the  /.
dg.  3.  28.  Israel  went  and  took  the /.  of  Jordan
!.  16. 2.  the  daughters  of  Moab  at  the /.  of  Arnon
FORECAST.

in.  11.  24.  and  he  shall/,  his  devices,  25.
FOREFATHERS.

'.  11.  10.  are  turned  to  the  iniquities  of  their  /.
77/7.  1.  3.  1  thank  God,  whom  1  serve  from  my  /.
FOREFRONT.

od.  26. 9.  six  curtains  in  the /.  of  the  tabernacle
1.  .37.  a  blue  lace,  on  the  /  of  the  mitre  it  shall  be

v.  8.  9.  upon  his  /.  did  be  put  the  golden  plate
'am.  14.  5./.  of  one  rock  was  situate  north-ward
'am.  11.  15.  set  ye  Uriah  in  the  /.  of  the  battle
dings  16.  14.  he  brought  the  brazen  altar  from  /.
■hron.  20.  27-  Jehoshaphat  in  the /.  of  them
«L40. 19.  from/,  of  lower  gate  to/,  of  inner  court
'.  1.  the/,  of  the  house  stood  towards  the  east

FOR  EH  EAD.

n.  24.  t  22.  the  man  took  a  jewel  for  the  /.

■crf.28.  .38.  the  plate  shall  be  on  Aaron’s/,  always
v.  13.  41.  he  is  /.-bald,  yet  is  he  clean

12.  it  is  a  leprosy  sprung  up  in  his  bald  /.

13.  if  the  rising  be  reddish  m  his  bald/

55.  whether  it  he  in  the  head  or  /.  thereof

'am .  17. 49.  David  took  astone,  slang  it,  and  smote
the  Philistine  in  his /.  the  stone  sunk  in  Ids /.
Ihron.  26.  19.  the  leprosy  rose  up  in  Uzziah’s  /.
JO.  and  behold  he  was  leprous  in  his  /.
r.  3.  3.  and  thou  hadsta  whore’s  /.  not  ashamed
»T.  3.  t  7.  Israel  are  stiff  of/,  and  hard  of  heart
'>•  have  made  thy/,  strong  against  their  foreheads
j.  as  an  adam.  harder  than  Hint  have  made  thy  /.

>.  12.  I  put  a  jewel  upon  thy  /.  and  ear-rings  in
/•  14.  9.  and  receive  the  mark  of  the  beast  in  his/
’.  5.  and  upon  her /.  was  a  name  written,  Mystery
FOREHEADS.

■ek.  3. 8.  made  thy  forehead  strong  against  their  /.
4._setamark  on  the  /.  of  them  tnat  sigh  and  cry
•v-  7.  3.  have  sealed  the  servants  of  God  in  their  f.

1.  which  have  not  the  seal  of  God  in  their/
k  16.  he  causeth  all  to  receive  a  mark  in  their/.

l.  1.  having  his  Father’s  name  written  in  their  /.
]•  4.  nor  had  received  his  mark  upon  their/.

-  4.  and  his  name  shall  be  in  their/.
FOREIGNER.

'I'd.  12.  45.  /.  and  hired  servant  shall  not  eat
at.  15.  3.  of  a  f.  thou  mayest  exact  it  again
.  .  FOREIGNERS.

;  ’o  1‘  m  t*lat  /  ellterefl  into  his  gates

2.  19.  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  /.
FOREKNEW.

m.  11.  2.  G.  hath  noteastaway  people  which  he /.

_  FOREKNOW.

>7/7.  8.  29.  whom  he  did  /.  he  also  did  predestinate
FOREKNOWLEDGE.
ts  ...  23.  him  being  delivered  by  the  /.  of  God
'  et.  1.  2.  elect  according  to  /.  of  God  the  Father
„  FOREMOST.

/of  ■  ac°6  commanded  the,/',  saying
>•  ...  he  put  the  handmaids  and  their  children  /.
«.'7/.  18.  27.  the  running  of  the  /,  is  like  Ahimaaz

,  foreordained.

oil  1  * hath/,  to  be  a  propitiation
et-  *•  «-0.  who  verily  was  /.  before  the  world


FOREPART.

Exod.  28.  27.  two  rings  towards/,  of  ephod,  .39.  20,

1  Kings  6. 20..  the  oracle  in  the  /.was  twenty  cubits
Ezek.  42.  7-  the  wall  011  the  /.  of  the  chambers
Acts  27.41.  the/,  of  ship  stuck  fast  and  remained
FOR  Eli  UN  N  ER.

Ueb.  6.20.  whither  the /.  is  for  us  entered,  even  Jesus
FO  RESAW.

Acts-  2.  25.  I  /.  the  Lord  always  before  my  face
FOR  ESEETH.

Prov.  22.  3.  a  prudent  man /.  ihe  evil,  27.  12.
FORESEEING.

Gal.  3.8.  the  scripture /.  God  would  justify  heathen
FO  R  ES  EEN .

Heb.  11. 1 40.  God  having  /.  some  better  thing  for  us
FOR  E-SHIP.

Acts  27.  30.  they  would  have  cast  anchors  out  of/.
FOR  ESK1N.

Gen.  17.  11.  ye  shall  circumcise  the  flesh  of  your  /.
14.  whose  flesh  of  his  /.  is  not  circumcised
23.  and  circumcised  the  flesh  of  their  /.  24,  25.
Exod.  4.  25.  then  /ipporah  cut  off  the /.  of  her  son
Lev.  12.  .3.  the  flesh  of  his  /.  shall  be  circumcised
Dent.  10.16.  circumcise  therefore  the  /.  of  your  heart
Elab.  2.  16.  drink  then,  and  let  thy  /.  be  uncovered
FORESKINS.

Josh.  5.  3.  circumcised  Israel  at  the  hill  of  the /.

1  Sam.  18.  25.  but  an  hundred  /.  of  the  Philistines
27.  David  brought  their  /.  gave  them  to  the  king

2  Sam.  3. 14.  which  I  espoused  to  me  for  an  hund./.
JerAA.  take  away/,  of  your  heart,  ye  men  of  J  udah

FOREST.

1  Sam.  22.  5.  David  came  into  the  /.  of  Ilareth

1  Kings  7.  2.  Solomon  built  the  house  of  the  /

10.  17.  put  them  in  the  house  of  the  /.  2  C/iron.  9.  16.

2  Kings  19.  23.  into  the  /.  of  his  Carmel,  Isa.  .37.  24.
Neh.  2.  8.  a  letter  to  Asaph,  keeper  of  the  king’s  f.
Psal.  50.  10.  for  every  beast  of  the  /.  is  mine

104.  20.  wherein  all  beasts  of  the /.  do  creep  forth
Isa.  9-  18.  and  shall  kindle  in  the  thickets  of  the/
10.  18.  and  shall  consume  the  glory  of  his /

19.  the  rest  of  the  trees  of  his  /.  shall  be  few
21. 13.  in  the  /.  of  Arabia  shall  ye  lodge
22.  8.  thou  didst  look  to  the  armour  of  the/.

29.  17.  the  field  shall  be  esteemed  as  a /.  32. 15.

32.  19.  when  it  shall  hail, coming  down  on  the/
44.  14.  taketh  cypress  from  among  trees  of  the/.
23.  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  mountains,  Of.
56.  9.  all  ye  beasts  of  the  /.  come  to  devour
Jer,  5.  6.  wherefore  a  lion  out  of /.  shall  slay  them
10.  3.  for  one  cutteth  a  tree  out  off.  with  the  axe
12.8.  mine  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  lion  in  the /.

21.  14.  1  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  f.  thereof
26.  18.  become  as  high  places  of  the /.  il lie.  3.  12.
46.  23.  they  shall  cut  dowm  her /.  saith  the  Lord
Ezek.  15.  6.  as  the  vine-tree  among  the  trees  of  the  /.
20.  46.  prophesy  against  the  /.  of  the  south  field
47.  say  unto  the  /.  of  the  south,  hear  the  word
Hos.  2.12. 1  will  make  them  a /.  beasts  shall  eat  them
Amos  3.  4.  will  lion  roar  in  the f,  when  hath  no  prey?
Mic.  5.  8.  as  a  lion  among  themeasts  of  the  /.

Zech.  11.2.  the/,  of  the  vintage  is  come  down
FOR  ESTS.

2  Citron.  27-  4.  Jothain  built  castles  in  the/.

Psal.  29.9.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  discovered!  the/.
Isa.  10.  34.  he  shall  cut  down  the  thickets  of  the’/
Ezek.  39. 10.  neither  cut  dowm  any  out  of  the  f.
FORETELL.

2  Cor.  13.  2.  1  /.  you  as  if  I  w>ere  present  sec.  time'
FORETOLD.

Mark  13.  2.3.  take  heed,  bell.  1  have  /.  you  all  things
Acts  3. 24.  the  proph.  have  likewise  /.  of  these  days
FOREWARN.

Luke  12.  5.  but  1  will  /.  you  whom  ye  shall  fear
FOREWARNED.

1  Thess.  4.  6.  as  we  also  have  /.  you  and  testified
FORFEITED.

Ezra  10.  8.  all  his  subst.  should  be /.  he  separated
FORGAT.

Gen.  40. 2.3.  butler  not  remember  Joseph,  but  /.him
Judg.  3.  7-  the  children  of  Israel  /.  the  Lord

1  Sam.  12.  9.  and  when  they  /.  the  Lord  their  God
Psal.  78. 11.  and  they  /.  his  works  and  his  w  onders

106. 1.3.  soon /.  his  works  ||  21./.  G.  their  Saviour
Lam.  3. 17-  removed  far  from  peace,  1  /.  prosperity
Hos.  2. 13.  she  went  after  her  lov.  and /.  me,  saith  L.
FORGAVE.

Psal.  78.  38.  he/,  their  iniquity,  destroyed  them  not
Mat.  18.  27.  he  loosed  him,  and  /.  him  the  debt
32.  O  wicked  servant,  1  /.  thee  all  that  debt
Luke  7-  42.  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly/,  them
43.  I  suppose  that  he  to  whom  he /.  most

2  Cor.  2.  10.  for  if  l  /.  any  thing  to  whom  I  f.  it

for  your  sakes  /.  I  it  in  the  person  of  Cfirist
Col.  3.  13.  even  as  Christ /.  you,  so  also  do  ye
FORGAVEST.

Ps.  .32.  5.  1  will  confess,  thou  /.  the  iniquity  of  my
99.  8.  was  G.  that  /.  them.tho’  tookest  vengeance
FORGED.

Psal.  119-  69.  the  proud  have/,  a  lie  against  me
FORGERS.

Job  13.4. ye  are/.of  lies,  are  all  physicians  of  no  val.
FORGET

Signifies,  [1]  To  let  things  slip  out  of  the  memory ,
l)eut.  4.  9.  Lest  thou  forget  the  things  thine
eyes  have  seen.  [2]  To  let  God,  his  word,
and  benefits,  slip  out  of  mind  :  whereupon
follow  disobedience ,  neglect  of  God's  worship,
and  wicked  contempt  of  God,  as  a  fruit  and
consequence  of  such  forgetfulness.  Judg.  3.  7-
Ihe  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight
of  the  Lord,  and  forgat  the  Lord  their  God,
and  served  Baalim  and  the  groves.  Thus  men
forget  God ;  the  wicked  wholly,  the  godly  in
part.  [3]  To  cast  off  one,  to  cease  to  love,
care,  and  provide  for  him,  Psal.  77-  9.  Hath
God  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ?  Thus  God  for¬
gets  the  wicked:  and  the  godly  do  sometimes
think  that  they  are  thus  forgotten,  yet  are
not  so.  See  also  Isa.  49.  15.  Can  a  woman
forget  her  sucking  child  ?  yea,  they  may  for¬
get,  3’et  will  i  not  forget  thee.  She  may  cease


to  lute  her  child ,  but  1  will  not  cease  to  hie  ana
provide  for  thee.  [41  To  omit  to  punish.  Amos

8.  7.  Surely  I  will  never  forget  any  of  then
works  ;  I  will  not  always  defer  to  punish  them,
though  it  may  seem  1  have  forgotten.  [5]  Not
to  esteem ,  but  to  pass  over  a  matter  as  unwirthy
cur  remembrance,  Phil.  3.  13.  Forgetting  those
things  which  are  behind  :  not  so  much  consider¬
ing  or  regarding  what  I  have  already  done,  as
what  I  have  yet  further  to  do.

Joseph  called  the  name  of  his  first-born,  Manasseh,
that  is,  forgetting ;  for  God,  said  he,  hath  made
me  forget  all  my  toil,  and  all  my  father’s  house  :
he  has  expelled  all  sorrowful  remembrance  of  my
slavery  in  Egypt,  and  of  my  sufferings  from  my
brethren,  by  my  present  comfort  and  glory,  hi
Psal.  45.  10.  the  Psalmist  speaking  to  the  church
says.  Forget  also  thine  own  people,  and  thy  fa¬
ther’s  house  :  he  alludes  to  the  law  of  matrimony,
Gen.  2.  24.  Thou  must  forget  and  forsake  all
carnal  relations,  as  far  as  they  hinder  from  Christ,
and  likewise  all  those  prejudices,  false  persuasions ,
corrupt  inclinations,  and  evil  practices,  tvhich  are
so  natural  to,  and  even  part  of,  thyself.  Mat.  5.  29,

30.  And  by  these  words  he  seems  tacitly  to  fore¬
tell,  that  even  the  legal  worship  appointed  by
Moses,  and  delivered  to  them  by  their  parents
successively  for  many  generations,  should  be  re¬
linquished  by  the  believing  Jews,  and  abolished
by  Christ's  coming.

Gen.  27.  45.  till  he/,  that  which  thou  hast  done  him
41.  51.  foi  God  hath  made  me /.  all  my  toil
Dent.  4.  9.  lest  thou/,  the  things  thine  eyes  have  seen
2.3.  lest  ye /.  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God

31.  the  L.  will  not /.  the  covenant  of  thy  fathers
6.  12.  beware  lest  tnou /.  the  Lord,  8.  11,  14,  19.

9.  7.  /•  not  how  thou  provokedst  the  Lord  thy  God
25.  19.  shalt  blot  out  Amalek,  thou  shalt  no  if.  it

1  Earn.  1.  11.  if  thou  wilt  not /.  thine  handmaid

2  Kings  17.  38.  the  covenant  1  made  ye  shall  not/.
Job  8.  1.3.  so  are  the  paths  of  all  that  /.God

9.  27.  if  1  say,  1  will  f.  my  complaint
11.  16.  because  thou  shalt/.  thy  misery

24.  20.  womb  shall  /.  him,  worm  shall  feed  on  him
Psal.  9.  17-  and  all  the  nations  that  /.  God

10.  12.  arise,  O  I  ord, /.  not  the  humble
13.  1.  how  long  wilt  thou  /.  me,  O  Lord  ?

45.  10./.  also  thine  own  people,  and  father’s  house>
50.  22.  now  consider  this,  ye  that  /.  God
59.  11.  slay  them  not,  lest  my  people /.  scatter  them
74.  19./.  not  the  congregation  of  thy  poor  for  ever
23./  not  the  voice  of  thine  enemies
78.  7-  that  they  migntnot  /.  the  works  of  God

102.  4.  heart  smitten,  so  that  I  /.  to  eat  my  bread

103.  2.  bless  the  Lord,  and /.  not  all  his  benefits
119.  16.  I  will  not /.  thy  word

83.  yet  do  I  not  /  thy  statutes,  109,  141.

93.  I  will  never  f.  thy  precepts,  hast  quickened  me
153.  deliver  me,  for  l  do  not  /  thy  law
176.  for  1  do  not  /.  thy  commandments
137.  5.  if  I  /.  thee,  O  Jerusalem,  let  my  hand  /.
Prov.  3.  1.  my  son,  /.  not  my  law,  but  let  thy  heaj  4
4.  0.  get  wisdom,  get  understanding,/,  it  not

31.  5.  lest  they  drink  and/,  the  law,  and  pervert
7.  let  him  drink  and  /.'poverty,  reniemb.  no  more

Isa.  49. 15.  can  a  woman  /.  her  sucking  child  ?  yea,
they  may  /.  yet  will  I  not  /.  thee
54.  4.  for  thou  shalt  f.  the  shame  of  thy  youth
65.  11.  ye  are  they  that /.  my  holy  mountain
Jer.  2. 32.  can  maid /.  her  ornaments,  or  bride  attire  *
23.  27.  who  think  tocause  my  people  to /.  my  name
39.  behold,  1,  even  I,  will  utterly/,  you
Lam.  5.  20.  wherefore  dost  thou  /.  us  tor  ever  >
Hos.  4.  6.  forgotten  the  law,  I  will  also /  thy  child*.
Amos  8.  7 •  I  will  never  /.  any  of  their  works
Heb.  6. 10.  God  is  not  unrighteous  to/,  your  woiks
13.  16.  to  do  good  and  communicate  /  not
FORGETFUL.

Heb.  13.  2.  be  not  /.  to  entertain  strangers
Jam.  1.  25.  he  being  not  a /.  hearer,  but  a  doer
FO  RGETFULN  ESS.

Psal.  88.  12.  and  thy  righteousness  in  the  land  of  i
FORGETT  EST.

Psal.  44.  24.  wherefore  /.  thou  our  affliction  ?

Isa.  51.  13.  and/,  the  Lord  thy  Maker
FORGETTETH.

Job  39.  15.  and  /.  that  the  foot  may  crush  them
Psal.  9.  12.  he  /.  not  the  cry  of  the  humble
Prov.  2. 17.  and /.  the  covenant  of  her  God
Jam.  1.  24.  he /.  what  manner  of  man  he  was
FORGETTING.

Gen.  41.  +51.  Joseph  called  the  first-born,/.

Phil.  3.  13./.  those  things  which  are  behind
FORGIVE.

Gen.  50.  17 ./  I  pray,  the  trespass  of  thy  brethren,
/.  the  trespass  ot  serv.  of  God  of  thy  father
Exod.  10. 17-  /.  1  pray  thee,  my  sin  only  this  once

32.  32.  yet  now,  if  thou  wilt  /'.  their  sin
Num.  30.  5.  and  the  Lord  shall  /.  her,  8,  12.

Josh.  24.  19.  anholyr  God,  he  will  not /.  your  sins

1  Sam.  25.  28. 1  pray,/,  the  trespass  of  thy  handmaid

1  Kings  8. 30.  when  hearest  /.  39.  2  Chron.  6.  21 , 30

34.  near,  and  /.  the  sin  of  thy  people  Israel
36./.  the  sin  of  thy  servants,  2  Chron.  6.  25.27,  39
50.  /.  thy  people  that  have  sinned  against  thee

2  Chron.  7. 14.  then  will  I  hear  and  /.  their  sin
Psal.  25.  18.  look  on  my  pain,  and  /  all  my  sms
86.  5.  for  thou,  Lord,  art  good  and  ready  to /.

Isa.  2.  9.  the  mean  man  boweth,  therefore/,  them
Jer.  18.  23,/not  their  iniquity  nor  blot  out  their  sin

31.  34.  for  I  will /.  their  iniquity ,  not  remember  siii
36.  3.  that  I  may  /.  their  iniquity  aqd  their  sin
Dan.  9.  19.  O  Lord  hear,  ()  lord  /.  Lord  hearken
Arnos  7.  2.  1  said,  O  Lord  God,/.  1  beseech  thee
Mat.  6.  12./.  us,  as  we  /.  our  debtors,  Luke  11.4.

14.  ifye /.  men  their  trespasses,  your  Father  will/.

15.  it  ye  /.  not,  nor  will  your  Father/,  vour

9.  6.  hath  power  to /.  sin,  Maik  2.  10.  Luke  5.  24.
18.  21.  how  oft  my  brother  sin,  and  I  /.  him  ?

35.  ifye  from  your  hearts/,  not  every  one
Mark  2. 7-  who  can /.  sins,  but  God  omy  ■  Luke  5. 2L

11.  25.  prayjng,  j.  that  your  Father  mav  /.  you  .

175


FOR


FOR


FOR


Mark  11.  26.  but  if  ye  do  not  /.  Father  will  not/.
Junket).  .'17 . /.  and  y’c  shall  be  forgiven

17.  3.  and  if  thy  brother  repent,  /.  him,  4.

*s3.  .'14.  Father,/,  them,  they  know  not  what  they  do
2  Cor.  2. 7  -  ye  ought  rather  to /.  him  and  comfort  him
]<).  to  whom  ve/.  any  thing,  1  /.  also

12.  13.  1  was  not  burdensome,  /.  me  this  wrong
1  John  1.  y.  he  is  faithful  and  just  to /.  us  our  sins
FORGIV  EN.

Get. .  4.  +  13.  my  iniquity  is  greater  than  may  be/.
Lev.  4.  20.  make  atonement,  and  it  shall  be/,  them,
26.  31,  35.  I  5.  10,  13,  16,  18.  |  6.  7-  1 19.  22.
Slum.  15.  25,  26,  28.  Dent.  21.8.

JYnm.  14.  19.  pardon,  as  thou  hast/,  from  F.gypt
P.,a.  32. 1.  blessed,  whose  transgress,  is/.  Rom.  4. 7.
85.  2.  thou  hast/,  the.  iniquity  of  thy  people
La.  33.  24.  the  people  shall  be/,  their  iniquity
Mat.  9.  2.  son,  be  of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  be /.  thee,

5.  Mark  2.  5,  9.  Luke  5.  20,  23.  |  7-  48.

12.  31.  all  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be /.  but  ag.
11.  (ill.  shall  not  e/.  32.  Murk  3.  28.  Luke  12. 10.

Mark  4.  12.  and  their  sins  should  he  /.  them
Luke  6.  37.  forgive,  and  ye  shall  be/.

7.  47.  her  many  sins  are/,  but  to  whom  little  is /.
Acts  8.  22.  the  thought  of  thy  heart  may  be/,  thee
Eph.  4.  32.  as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath/,  you
•Col.  2. 13.  he  quickened,  having/,  you  all  trespasses
Jam.  5. 15.  if  committed  sins,  the"'’  shall  be/,  him

1  John  2.  12. 1  write  to  you,  because  your  sins  are /.

FORGIVE  111.

P*.  103.  3.  heals  thy  diseases,  who /.  all  iniquities
Luke  7 .  49.  they  began  to  say ,  who  is  this/,  sins  also
FORG  I  VETS  Ess.

Ps.  130.  4.  there  is /.  with  thee  that  mayest  be  feared
Mark  3.  29.  hath  never/,  but  is  in  danger  of  hell
Acts  5.  31.  him  hath  God  exalted  to  give  /,  of  sins

13.  38.  thro’  him  is  preached  unto  you/,  of  sins
26.  18.  to  God,  that  they  may  receive /.  of  sins

Eph.  1.7.  in  wnom  we  have /.  of  sins,  Col.  1. 14.
FORGIVEN  ESSES.

Dan.  o.  9.  to  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies  and  /.
FORGIVING.

Exod.  .34.  7.  /.  iniquity,  transgression,  Num.  14. 18.
Eph.  4.  32.  forbearing,/,  one  another,  Col.  3. 13.
FORGOT.

Deut.  24.  19.  and  hast  /.  a  sheaf  in  the  field
FORGOTTEN .

•Gen.  41.  30.  and  all  the  plenty  shall  he /.

Deut.  26.13.  not  transgressed  <  om.  nor  have  1  /.  them
31 . 21.  it  shall  not  be/,  out  of  months  of  their  seed

32.  18.  thou  hast  /.  edd  that  formed  thee
Job  19.  14.  my  familiar  friends  have  /.  me
28.  4.  Hood  breaks  out,  even  waters/,  of  the  foot
Psal.  9.  18.  for  the  needy  shall  not  afway  be /.

10.  11.  he  hath  said  in  his  heart,  God  hath  /.

31.  12.  1  am /.  as  a  dead  man  out  of  mind

42.  9.  1  will  say,  my  rock,  why  hast  thou  /.  me  ?

44. 17.  all  this  is  conie  on  us,  yet  have  we  not/,  thee
20.  if  we  have  /.  name  of  our  God,  or  stretched  out
77-  9.  hath  G./.  to  be  gracious  '  hath  he  shut  mercy
119.  61.  hut  1  have  not /.  thy  law
139.  because  mine  enemies  have  /.  thv  words
Eccl.  2. 16.  in  the  days  to  come  shall  afl  be  /.

8.  10.  and  the  wicked  were./,  in  the  city

9.  5.  for  the  memory  of  them  is/.

La.  17. 10.  thou  hast/,  the  God  of  thy  salvation
23.  15.  that  l  yre  shall  be/,  seventy  years

16.  take  an  harp,  thou  harlot  that  hast  been  /.

44.  21.  G  Israel,  thou  shalt  not  be  /.  of  me

49.  14.  but  Zion  said,  my  Lord  hath/,  me
65.  16.  because  the  former  troubles  are/.

Jer.  2.  32.  my  people  have  /.  me,  13.  25.  1 18.  15.

3.  21.  they  have  /.  the  I  ord  their  God

20.  11.  their  confusion  shall  never  be /.  23.  40.

23.  27.  to  forget,  as  their  fathers  have  /.  my  name

50.  14.  all  thy  lovers  have/,  thee,  they  seek  thee  not
44.  9.  have  ye  /,  the  wickedness  of  your  fathers
50.5.  let  us  join  in  a  covenant  that  shal  l  not  he  /.

6.  they  turned  away,  have/,  their  resting-place
Jm m.  2.  6.  1  .ord  caused  the  sabbath  to  he  /.  in  Zion
Ezek.  22.  12.  thou  hast /.  me,  saith  the  I  ord
23.  35.  saith  the  Lord,  because  thou  hast /.  me
•llos.  4.6.  seeing  thou  hast  the  law  of  thy  God

8.  14.  for  Israel  hath  /.  Maker,  and  builds  temples

13.  6.  their  heart  exalted,  therefore  have  f.  me
Mat.  16.  5.  they  had  /.  to  take  bread,  Mark 8  14.
Luke  12.  6.  and  not  one  of  them  is  /.  before  God
Heb.  12.  5.  and  ye  have/,  the  exhortation  that  speaks

2  Pet.  1.  9.  I.  that  he  was  purged  from  his  old  sins

FORKS/

4  Sam.  13.  21.  yet  tiiey  had  a  file  for  the/,  and  axes
FOR  M,

Is  taken  for  the  figure,  shape,  or  likeness  of  a  thing,
.lob  4.  16.  It  stood  still,  but  1  could  not  discern
■the  form  thereof.  Likewise  for  outward  splendour,
pomp,  and  dignity,  Isa.  53.  2.  He  hath  no  form
nor  comeliness  ;  no  such  outward  splendour  as  the
.lews  expected  in  their  Messiah.  It  is  also  taken
for  a  draught  or  pattern,  2  Tim.  1.  13.  Hold
fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which  thou  hast
heard  of  me.  Make  thy  discourses  conform  to  the
pattern  of  sound  and  true  doctrine,  wherein  thou
hast  been  instructed  by  me.  The  apostle  Paul,
•advertising  Timothy  of  what  should  come  to  pass
in  the  latter  times,  says,  2  Tim.  3.  5.  That  there
should  be  men  who  had  a  form  of  godliness,  but
deny  the  power  thereof  :  they  should  have  an
outward  appearance  and  shew  of  religion,  pretend
to  a  right  way  of  worshipping  God  ;  to  be  the
church,  the  only  church  of  God  ;  and  yet  not  only
be  destitute  of,  hut  reject  and  refuse  the  inner
part  which  is  lively,  active,  and  powerful  to  make
a  thorough  change.

It  is  said,  Mark  16.  12.  that  after  his  resurrection ,
Jesus  appeared  in  another  form  to  two  of  his
disciples  :  another  form  either  in  regard  of  his
habit,  or  Lightness  of  his  countenance,  or  some
such  particular .  And  the  apostle,  speaking  if

Christ,  says,  Phil.  2.  6.  Who  being  in  the  form
ot  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal
with  God  :  that  is.  Who  being  the  essential
image  of  the  lather,  and  enjoying  the  divine

176


essence  and  nature,  with  alt  its  glory,  knew  that
it  was  no  usurpation  in  him,  to  account  him¬
self  equal  with  the  Lather,  and  carry  himself
upon  all  occasions  as  such,  iso  by  the  form  of
God  is  meant  hi,  essence  and  nature.  It  fol¬
lows  in  verse  7  Rut  made  himself  of  no  re¬
putation,  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  ser¬
vant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men.
Yet  he  emptied  himself  of  that  divine  glory  and
majesty,  by  hiding  it  in  the  vail  of  his  fie  ft  ;
and  took  upon  him  the  quality  and  condition  of
a  mean  person,  not  if  a  glorified  saint,  or  if
some  great  moital;  and  was  subject  to  all  the
frailties  and  infirmities  of  human  nature,  sin
only  excepted.

Gen.  1.  2.  the  earth  was  without /.  and  void
Judy.  8. 1 18.  each  according  to  the  /.  of  a  king

1  Sam.  28.  14.  he  said  unto  her,  what  /.  is  he  of?

2  Sam.  14.  20.  fetch  about  this  /.  of  speech  Joabdone
Esth.  2.  +7.  and  the  maid  was  tail-  of/.

Job  4.  16.  but  I  could  not  discern  the/,  thereof
Isa.  52.  14.  and  his  /.  more  than  the  sons  of  men
53.  2.  he  hath  no /.  nor  comeliness
Jer.  4.  23.  and,  lo,  it  was  without/,  and  void
Ezek.  10.  8.  there  appeared  the /.  of  a  man’s  hand

43.  11.  shew  them  the/,  of  the  house  and  fashion
Dan.  3. 19.  and  the/,  of  his  visage  was  changed
25.  the  /.  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  Son  of  God
Mark  16.  12.  appeared  in  another/,  to  two  of  them
Rom.  2.  20.  which  hast  /.  of  knowledge  and  of  truth

6.  17-  but  ye  have  obeyed  that/,  of  doctrine
Phil.  2.  6.  who  being  in  the /.  of’God,  thought  it  no

7.  but  took  upon  him  the  /.  of  a  servant
2  Tim.  1.  13.  hold  fast  /.  of  sound  words  bast  heard
3.  5.  having/,  of  godliness,  denying  power  thereof
FORM.

Isa.  45.  7.  I  /•  the  light  and  create  darkness
FORMED.

Gen.  2.  7-  the  Lord  God  /.  man  of  the  dust
19.  out  of  the  ground  God/,  every  beast  of  field
Deut.  32.  18.  and  hast  forgotten  God  that./',  thee
2  Kings  19.  25.  that  1  have  /.  it,  Isa.  37  .  26.

Job  26.  5.  dead  things  are  /'.  from  under  the  water

13.  his  hand  hath  /,  the  c  rooked  serpent

33.  6.  behold,  1  also  am /.  out  of  the  clay
Psal.  90.  2.  or  ever  thou  hadst/.  the  earth

94.  9.  he  that  /.  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see  ?

95.  5.  the  sea  is  his,  and  his  hands/,  the  dry  land
Prov.  26.  10.  the  great  God  that  /.  all  things

Isa.  27.  11.  he  that  j.  them  will  shew  them  no  favour

43.  J.  thus  saith  he  that /.  thee,  O  Israel,  fear  not
7.  1  have /.  him,  yea,  1  have  made  him

10.  before  me  there  was  no  god  /.  nor  after  me
21.  this  peo.  have  1  /.  for  myself,  shall  shew  praise

44.  2.  that  made  thee,  and  /.  thee  from  the  womb
10.  who  hath  /.  a  god,  or  molten  a  graven  image  ?
21.  for  thou  art  my  servant,  I  have  /.  thee

24.  thus  saith  he  that  /.  thee  from  the  womb

45.  18.  God  himself  that/,  the  earth,  he/,  it

49.  5.  Lord  that /.  me  from  womb  to  be  his  servant

54. 17.  no  weapon/,  against  thee  shall  prosper
Jer.  1.5.  before  I  /.  thee  in  the  belly,  I  knew  thee

33.  2.  the  Lord  that/,  it  to  establish  it

Amos'! .  1.  and  behold,  he /.  grasshoppers  in  beginn.
Rom.  9.  20.  shall  the  thing  /.  say  to  him  that  f.  it
Gal.  4.  19.  1  travail  in  birth,  till  Christ  be/,  in  you
1  Tim.  2.  13.  for  Adam  was  first  /.  then  Eve
FORMER.

Gen.  40. 13.  slialtdeliver  the  cup  after  the /.  manner
Nnm.  21 . 26.  had  fought  against  the /.  king  of  Moab
Deut.  24.  4.  her  /.  husband  which  sent  her  away
Ruth  4.  7.  was  the  manner  in  /.  time  of  redeeming

1  Sam.  17.  30.  people  answered  after  the/,  manner

2  Kings  1.  14.  the  two  captains  of  the/,  fifties

17.  34.  they  do  after  the/,  manner,  40.

Neh.  5.  15.  the  /.  governors  were  chargeable
Job  8.  8.  inquire,  1  pray  thee,  of  the  /.  age
30.  3.  the  wilderness  in /.  time  desolate  and  waste
Psal.  79.  8.  O  remember  not  against  us  /.  iniquities
89.  49.  where  are  thy  /.  loving-kindnesses  •

Eccl.  1. 11.  there  is  no  remembrance  of /.  things

7.  10.  that  the /.  days  were  better  than  these
Isa.  41. 22.  let  them  shew  the  /.  things,  43.  9.

42.  9.  behold  the  /.  things  are  come  to  pass

43. 18.  remember  ve  not  the /.  things,  nor  consider

46.  9.  remember  the /.  things  of  old,  for  I  am  God
48.  3.  I  have  declared  f.  things  from  the  beginning
61.4.  they  shall  raise  up  the/,  desolations

65.  7-  I  will  measure  their  /.  work  into  their  bosom

16.  because  the  /.  troubles  are  forgotten

17.  the  f.  shall  not  be  rememb.  nor  come  to  mind
Jer.  5.  24.  the  1  ord  our  God  that  giveth  the  /.  and

latter  rain  in  his  season,  Hos.  6.  3.  Joel 2.  23.
10.  16.  for  he  is  the  /.  of  all  things,  51.  19.

34.  5.  the  /.  kings  which  were  before  thee

36.  28.  write  in  it  all  the  /.  words  in  the  first  ro.I
Ezek.  16.  55.  thy  daughter  shall  return  to  /.  estate
Dun.  11. 13.  set  forth  a  multitude  greater  than  the /.

29.  but  it  shall  not  be  as  the  /.  or  as  the  latter
Hag.  2.  9-  the  glory  be  greater  than  of  the  /.  house
Zech.  1. 4.  the  f.  prophets  have  cried,  7.  7,  12.

8.  11.  1  will  not  be  to  this  people  as  in  J.  days

14.  8.  waters  go  half  of  them  toward  the  J.  sea
Mai.  3.  4.  shallbe  pleasant  to  the  l.ord  as  in/,  years
Acts  1.  ].  the /.  treatise  have  1  made,  O  I  heopliilus
Eph.  4.  22.  put  off  concerning  the  /.  conversation

1  Pet.  1.14.  not  according  to  the /.  l  usts  in  ignorance
Rev.  21.  4.  for  the  /.  things  are  passed  away
FORMETH.

Amos  4.  13.  for,  lo,  he  that  /.  the  mountains
Zech.  12.  1.  and  /.  the  spirit  of  man  within  him
FORNICATION.

This  word  is  taken  (1)  For  the  sin  of  impurity
committed  between  unmarried  persons.  1  Cor.
7.  2.  'lo  avoid  fornication,  let  every  man  have
his  own  wife,  and  let  every  woman  have  her
own  husband.  (2)  Eor  the  sin  of  adultery,  when
cue  or  both  persons  are  married.  Mat.  5.  32.
Whosoever  putfeth  away  his  wife,  saving^  tor
the  cause  of  fornication,  causeth  her  to  commit
adultery.  (3)  For  the  sin  if  incest,  1  Cor.
5.  1.  Such  fornication  as  is  not  so  much  as


named  among  the  Gentiles,  &c.  (4)  Eor  the  sin  I
of  idolatry,  which  is  infidelity  to,  and  forsaking  I
of,  the  true  God  for  false  gods,  2  Chron.  21.  li.  I
Jehoram  made  high  places  in  the  mountains  oijl
Judah,  and  caused  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  I
to  commit  fornication.  Rev.  19.  2.  He  hath  I
judged  the  great  whore,  whicli  did  corrupt  thee  1
earth  with  her  fornication.

2  C ’hr.  21. 11.  high  places,  caused  .Terns,  commit  /
Isa.  23. 17.  lyre  shall  commit /.  withkingd.of  w<  rut}  I
Ezek.  16.  29-  thou  hast  multiplied  thy/,  in  Canaati  |
Mat.  5.  32.  saving  for  the  cause  of/.  19.  9.

John  8.  41.  then  said  they,  we  he  not  I  orn  of/.

Acts  15.  20.  that  they  abstain  from  /.  29. 1  21.  25.  j
Rom.  1.  29-  being  filled  with  all  /.  full  of  envy

1  Cor.  5.  1.  thattiiere  is  /.  among  you,  and  such  /.  I
6.  13.  the  body  is  not  tor /.  hut  tor  the  Lord  ’

18.  fiee  /.  1|  7.  2.  nevertheless,  to  a  oid  /.

2  Cor.  12.  21.  and  have  not  repented  of  their /.

( ial.  5. 19.  the  works  of  the  flesh,  which  are  these, /J
Eph.  5.  3.  /.  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  you
Col.  3.  5.  mortifv  therefore /.  uncleanness
1  Thess.  4.3.  will  of  G.thatye  should  abstain  from  /.j  1
Jude  I.  Sodom  and  cities  giving  themseh  .  over  to /.  >
Rev.  2.  21 .  1  gave  Iter  space  to  repent  of  her  /.  (

9.  21.  neither  repented  they  of  their/,  nor  thefts

14.  8.  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  /.

17.  2.  ha'e  been  made  drunk  with  wine  of  her  f.  ;  !
4.  a  golden  cup  full  of  the  filthiness  of  her  /.

t  5.  Babylon  the  great,  mother  ot  /.  and  abomi '  1

nation?!

18.  3.  all  nations  drunk  with  wine  of  wrath  of  hern

19.  2.  which  did  corrupt  the  earth  with  her  /.

FORNICATIONS.

Ezek.  16. 15.  thou  pouredst  out  thy  /.  on  every  one
Mat.  15. 19.  outofheart  proceed /.  thefts,  Martel. 21.
See  Commit,  Committed.

FORN ICATOR.

1  Cor.  5.  1 1 .  if  any  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a /.
Heb.  12.  16.  lest  there  be  any  /.  or  profane  person
FORN  1C  A  TORS.

1  Cor.  5.  9.  1  wrote  to  you  not  to  company  with  /.J

10.  yet  not  altogether  with  the  /.  of  this  world

6.  9.  nor  shall  /.  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God
FORSAKE.

Deut.  31.  16.  this  people  will /.  me  and  break  coven
17.  in  that  day  I  will  /.them  and  hide  my  face
Josh.  24.  16.  God  forbid  we  should  /.  the  1  ord

20.  if  ye  /.  the  1  ord  and  serve  strange  gods
Jvdg.  9.  11 .  should  1  f.  my  sweetness  and  my  fruit  1

2  Kings 21 .  14.  I  will/,  remnant  of  my  inheritaac;]  1

1  C/uwi.28.9.  if  thou  /.  him,  will  cast  thee  off Tor  ew

2  Chron.  7.  19.  if  ye  turn  away,  and/,  my  statute

15.  2.  but  if  ye/,  him,  he  will  /.  you

Ezra  8.  22.  his  wrath  is  against  them  that/,  him
Psal.  27.  10.  when  my  father  and  mother  /.  me
37.  8.  cease  from  anger  and  f.  wrath,  fret  not
89.  30.  it  his  children  /.  my  law  and  walk  not
94.  14.  neither  will  he /.  Ins  inheritance
119.53.  horror  taken  hold,  because  wicked  /.  law
Prov.  3. 3.  let  not  mercy  and  truth /.  bee,  bind  then

9.  6./.  the  foolish,  and  live,  go  in  way  of  underst

28.  4.  they  that /.  the  law,  praise  the  wicked
Isa.  1.  28.  they  that  /.  the  Lord  shall  be  consume?
55.  7-  let  wicked  /.  his  way,  unright,  his  thought!  j
65. 11.  ye  are  they  that/.  L.  forget  my  holy  mount

Jer.  17.  13.  all  that  /.  tne  Lord  shall  be  ashamed
23.  33.  I  will  even  /.  you.  saith  the  I  ord,  39.

51.  9./.  her,  and  let  us  go  every  one  to  his  country
Lam.  5.  20.  wherefore  dost  thou  /.  us  so  long  time’
Dan.  11.  30.  with  them  that/,  the  holy  covenant
Jonah  2.8.  observe  lying  vanities,/,  thenown  merej  1
Acts  21.  21.  thou  teachest  the  Jews  to/.  Moses
FORSAKE  not.

Deut.  12.  19.  take  heed  that  thou  /.  not  the  l.evite:
.I  b  20. 13.  though  he  spare  wickedness  and /.  it  n
Psal.  38.  21./.  me  not,  O  Lord  my  God,  71.  9,  T  I
119.8.  I  will  keep  thy  statutes,  Of.  me  nut  utterl;
138.  8./.  not  the  works  of  thine  own  hands
Prov.  1.  8.  and  /.  not  the  law  of  thy  mother,  6.  2<

4.  2.  1  give  you  good  doctrine,/,  ye  not  my  law
6./.  her  not  and  she  shall  preserve  thee
27.  10.  thine  own  friend  ana  father's  friend/,  at-
Not  FORSAKE.

Deut.  4.  31.  he  will  n<  t  f.  thee,  31. 6, 8. 1  Chr.  28.  Ct
14.  27-  and  the  Levite,  thou  shalt  not  f.  him
Josh.  1.  5.  1  will  not  fail  nor  /.  thee,  Heb.  13.  5.

1  Sam.  12.  22.  L.  will  not  f.  his  people,  1  Kings  6. 15

1  Kings  8.  57.  let  him  not  leave  us,  nor  f.  us  1
Neb.  9.  31.  thou  didst  not  consume,  nor/,  them

10.  39.  we  will  not  f.  the  house  of  our  God
Psal.  27.  9.  neither  f.  me,  O  God  of  my  salvatim
Isa.  41.  17.  1,  the  Got)  of  Israel,  will  not  f.  them
42.  16.  these  things  will  1  do,  and  not  /.  them
Ezek.  20.  8.  nor  did  they  /.  the  idols  ot  Egypt

FORSAKEN.

2  Chr.  21.  10.  because  he  had /.  the  T..  24.  24. 1  28.  6
Neh.  13.  11.  1  said,  why  is  the  house  of  God/. ?
Job  18.  4.  shall  the  earth  be  /.  for  thee  J

Psal.  37  .  25.  yet  have  I  not  seen  the  righ'eous /.
Isa.  7 •  16.  the  land  shall  be  /.  of  both  her  kings

17.  2.  the  cities  of  Aroer  are  /.  shall  be  for  flocks
9.  shall  be  as  a /.  bough,  and  an  uppermost  branc

27.  10.  and  the  habitation  shall  be/,  and  left
32.  14.  because  the  palaces  shall  he  /.  city  left
51.  6.  the  Lord  hath  called  thee  as  a  woman  /.

62.  4.  thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed/.

Jer.  4. 29.  every  city  shall  be /.  no  man  dwell  there i'

18.  14.  shall  cold  waters  from  another  place  bey.
Ezek.  36.  4.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  cities  /.

Amos  5.  2.  the  virgin  of  Israel  is /.  on  her  land
Zeph.  2.4.  for  Gaza  shall  be/,  and  Ashkelon  desolat

Have,  hast,  hath  FORSAKEN.

Der  t.  28.  20.  thy  doings,  whereby  thou  ha  t  f.  nt

29.  25.  because  they  have  f.  the  Ford,  Jndg.  10.  It
Jvdg.  6.  13.  hut  now  the  1  ord  hath  f.  us

10.  13.  yet  ye  have  f.  me,  and  served  other  gods
1  Sam.  8.  8.  the  works  wherewith  they  have  J ■  tut
12.  10.  we  have  sinned,  because  we  have  f.  the  L.

1  Kings  11.  33.  because  that  they  have  f.  me

18.  18.  ye  have  f.  the  commandments  of  the  Lore.

19.  10  for  Israel  have  f.  thy  covenant,  14.


FOK


FOR


FOU


King*™-  17.  because  they  have  f.  me  and  burnt
license  to  gods,  2  Chr.  31.  25.  Jer.  10.  11. 1  19.  4.
■/non.  12.  5.  ye  have /.  me,  and  1  have  left  you
1  11.  we  keepchargeof  the  L.  but  ye  have  /.  him

1.  CO.  because  ye  have  /.  the  Lord,  he  hath  f.  you
i.  6.  for  fathers  have  done  evil,  and  have  f.  him
ra  9.  10.  for  we  have  )'.  thy  commandments
>20. 19.  because  he  hath  oppressed  and /.  the  poor
a/.  22.  1.  my  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  /.

me?  Mat.  27  .  40.  Alark  15.  34.

.  11.  they  take  counsel,  saying,  God  hath/,  him
:.  1. 4.  they  have /.  the  L.  and  provoked  Holy  One
(j.7.  forasmall  moment  have  I  /.  tliee,i.vu.  49. 14.
■.  1.  10.  havef.  me,  burnt  incense  t>  other  gods

13.  they  have f.  me  the  fountain  of  living  waters

7.  in  tliat  thou  hast  f.  the  Lord  thy  God,  19.

7.  how  shall  1  pardon  thee  r  thy  child,  havef.  me

9.  thou  shalt  answer,  like  as  ye  have  J.  me
13.  tlie  Lord  saith,  because  they  havef.  my  law
9.  are  confounded,  because  ye  have  f.  the  land
7.  1  have  f.  my  house,  1  have  left  my  heritage
>.  6.  thou  hast  f.  me,  saith  the  Lord
13.  they  have  /.  the  fountain  of  living  waters
!.  9.  because  they  have  f.  the  covenant  of  God
i.  38.  he  hath  f.  his  covert  as  the  lion
ek.  8.  12.  the  Lord  hath  f.  the  earth,  9.  9.
at.  19.  27.  we  havef.  all  and  followed  thee
!y.  every  one  that  hath  f.  houses  or  brethren
Tun.  4.  io.  Detnas  hath  J.  me,  having  loved  world
I’et.  2. 15.  which  have  f.  the  right  way,  gone  astray
Not  FORSAKEN.

I //iron.  13.  10.  but  as  for  us,  the  Lord  isoiir  God,
we  have  not  f.  him,  priests  minister  to  the  Lord
.ra  9.  9.  yet  God  hath  not  f.  us  in  our  bondage
al.  9.  10.  thou  hast  not  f.  them  that  seek  thee

1.  62.  12.  shall  be  called,  sought  out,  a  city  not  f.
r.  51.  5.  Isr.  hath  nut  been /.  nor  .1  udah  of  his  God
/or.  4.  9.  we  are  persecuted,  but  not  f.  cast  down

FORSAKE  1 11.

h  6.  14.  but  he  f.  the  fear  of  the  Almighty
al.  37.  28.  for  the  Lord  /,  not  his  saints
).  1 12.  more  than  my  hairs,  therefore  heart  /.  me
ov.  2.  I?,  from  her  who  f.  the  guide  of  her  youth
1 3.  10.  correction  grievous  to  him  that  /.  the  way
•  3.  13.  whoso  confesseth  and  f.  shall  have  mercy
tke  14.  33.  whoso  /.  not  all  that  he  hath  cannot
FORSAKING.

7.  6.  12.  until  there  be  a  great  f.  in  the  land
!  eh.  10.  25.  not  /.  the  assemb.  of  ourselves  together
FORSOOK.

!  mt.  32.  15.  then  he  /.  God  that  made  him
<lg.  2.  12.  and  they  f.  the  Lord  God,  13.  I  10.  6.
•ia/n.  31. 7.  they/,  their  cities  and  fled,  1  C 'hr.  10.  7.
Kings  9.  9.  because  they/,  the  Lord  their  God
/.  8.  but  Rehoboam  /.the  counsel  of  old  men,  and
consulted  with  young  men,  13.  2  Chr.  10.  8,  13.
Kings  21.  22.  Anion  f.  the  God  of  his  fathers
'/iron.  7.  22.  they/,  the  Gpd  of  their  fathers

2.  1.  Rehoboam  /.  law  of  the  Lord  and  Israel

with  him

sal.  78.  60.  he  /.  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh

19.  87.  consumed  me,  but  l  /.  not  thy  precepts
a.  58.  2.  that'/,  not  the  ordinance  of  God
r.  11.5.  the  hind  calved  in  the  held  and  /.  it
at.  26.  56.  disciples/,  him  and  fled,  Mark  14.  50.
ark  1.  18.  they /.  their  nets  and  followed  him
ike  5.  11.  they  /.  all  and  followed  him
77m.  4*  16.  none  stood  with  me,  all  men /.  me
\eb.  11. 27.  by  faith  Moses/.  Egvpt,  for  he  endured
FORSOOK  ESI.

eh.  9.  17.  art  a  God  slow  to  anger,  and/,  them  not
19-  thou  in  thy  mercies /.  them  not  in  wilderness
FORSWEAR.

at.  5.  33.  thou  shalt  not /.  thys.  but  perform  oaths
FORT,  S.

''am.  5.  9.  so  David  dwelt  in  the/,  the  city  of  Dav.
Kings  25. 1.  they  built /.  ag.  Jerus.  Jer.  52.  4.

а.  25.  12.  high  /.  of  thy  walls  shall  he  bring  down
9.  3.  and  1  will  raise  /.  against  thee

2. 14.  the  /.  and  towers  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever
-ek. 4.  2.  and  built  a/,  against  it,  21.  22. 1  26.  8.
7.  17.  and  building/,  to  cut  off  many  persons

1.  22.  was  the  divination  for  Jerus.  to  build  a /.

б.  8.  and  he  shall  make  a /.  against  thee

3.  27.  and  they  that  be  in  the/’,  shall  die

an.  11. 19.  shall  turn  toward  the /.  of  his  own  land
FORTH.

eh.  4. 16.  from  that  time /.  my  servants  wrought
3.  21.  from  that  time /.  came  they  no  more
sal.  113.  2.  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord,  from
this  time  /.  and  for  ever,  115. 18. 1  121.  8.
'r.  49.  5.  ye  shall  be  driven  out  every  man  right  /.
Kit.  16.  21.  from  that  time  /.  began  Jesus  to  shew

2.  46.  nor  durst  from  that  clay  /.  ask  him  questions
>hn  11.  53.  from  that  day  /.  they  took  counsel

FORTHWITH.

zra  6.  8.  that /.  expences  be  given  to  these  men
iat.  1.3.  5./.  sprung  up,  because  no  deepn.  of  earth
’6.  49.  he  /.  came  to  Jesus,  and  said,  hail,  Master
lark  1.  29.  and /.  when  come  out  of  the  synagogue
4.3.  he  straitly  charged  him,  and /.  sent  him  away
’■  13.  and /.  Jesus  gave  the  unclean  spirits  leave
j ‘hn  19.  34.  and /.  came  thereout  blood  and  water
ets  9.  18.  he  received  sight  /.  and  arose,  and  was

baptized

•2. 10.  and  /.  the  angel  departed  from  him
•1. 30.  they  drew  Paul  out,  and /.  doors  were  shut
FORTY.

en.  18.29.  he  spake  again,  peradventure  there  shall
,  be  /.  found  ;  he  said,  1  will  notdo  it  for/,  sake
■rod.  26.  19.  thou  shalt  make /.  sockets  of  silver
21.  and  their/,  sockets  of  silver,  36.  24,  26.
ai/y.  12.  14.  Abdon  had/,  sons  and  thirty  daugh.
Kings 8.9.SO  llazael  went  and  took /.camels'burd.

5.  15.  the  governors  had  taken  /.  shekels
lets  23. 13.  more  than /.  made  this  conspiracy,  21.
FORTY  baths.

mngs1.2&.  made  ten  lavcrs,one  contained /.  baths
■  FORTY  cubits.

A  nigs  6. 17.  the  house  before  it  was  /.  cubits  long
41.  2.  he  measured  the  length  thereof/,  mbits
»(’.  22.  there  were  courts  joined  off.  cubits


See  Days,
forty  kine.

Gen.  32.  15.  J.  kine,  ten  bulls,  a  present  to  Esau
FU  R  1  7'  stripes.

Dent.  25.  3.  /.  sir.  he  may  give  him,  and  not  exceed
2  Cur.  11.  24.  of  the  Jews  1  received  f.str.  save  one
FORT  Y  years.

Gen.  25.  20.  Isaac  was  f.y.  when  he  took  Rebekah
26.  34.  Esau/,  years  when  he  took  to  wife  Judith
Exod.  16.  35.  Israel  did  eat  manna  /.  y.  Neh.  9.  21.
Nittn.  14.  33.  shall  wander  in  wildern./.  y.  32.  13.

34.  ye  shall  bear  your  iniquities /.  years
Dent.  2.  7*  he  knoweth  thy  walking  these  /.  years

8.  2.  the  way  which  God  led  thee  f.  years,  29.  5.

4.  neither  aid  thy  foot  swell  these  /.  years
Josh.  5.  6.  Israel  walked  /.  years  in  the  wilderness

14.  7-  /•  years  old  was  1  when  Moses  sent  me
Jndg.  3.  11.  the  land  had  rest  /,  years, 5.  31.  |  8.  28.

13.  1.  Israel  into  the  hand  of  Philistines  /.  years

1  Sunt.  4. 18.  Eli  had  judged  Israel  /'.  years

2  Sa/n.  2.  10.  lsh-bosheth  j.  y.  old  when  he  began

5.  4.  David  reigned  /.  years,  1  Kings  2.  11.

15.  7-  after  /.  years  Absalom  said  to  the  king

1  Kings  11.  42.  time  Solomon  reigned  was  /.  years

2  Kings  12. 1.  Jehoash  reigned /.  years  in  Jerusalem
2  Chron.  24. 1.  Joash  reigned  /.  years  in  Jerusalem
Psal.  95. 10.  f.  y.  was  1  grieved  with  this  generation
Ezek.  29.  11.  nor  shall  it  be  inhabited/,  years

12.  and  her  cities  shall  be  desolate  /.  years

13.  at  the  end  of/,  y.  1  will  gather  the  Egyptians
Arnos  2.  10.  1  led  you  /.  years  in  the  wilderness

5.  25.  ye  ottered  sacrifices /.  years,  Acts  7-  42.
Acts  4.  22.  for  the  man  healed  was  above/,  y.  old
7.  23.  Moses  was  /.  y.  old,  he  visited  his  brethren

30.  when  f.  y.  expired,  there  appeared  an  angel

36.  had  shewed  wonders  in  the  wilderness /.  y.
13.  18.  the  time  off.  y.  suffered  he  their  manners
21.  God  gave  them  haul  by  space  of/,  years
Ileb.  3. 9.  when  your  fathers  saw  my  works /.  years

17.  but  with  whom  was  he  grieved  /.  years  /
FORTY-ONE  years.

1  Kings  14.  21.  Rehoboam  was  f.-one  years  old

when  he  began  to  reign,  2  Chron.  12.  13.

15.  10.  Asa  reigned  f.-one  years  in  Jerusalem

2  Kings.  14.23.  Joroboam  reigned  f.-one  y.  Samaria

FORT  Y-i  WO.

Num.  35.  6.  to  cities  of  refuge  add  f.-two  cities
2  Kings  2.  24.  two  bears  tare  /.  and  two  children

10.  14.  Jehu  took  them  alive,  even  /.  and  two  men
2  Chr.  22.  2 .f.-two  years  old  Ahaz.  when  he  began
Ezra  2.  24.  the  children  of  Azmaveth  /.  anti  two
IS' eh.  7.  28.  the  men  of  Eeth-azmaveth  /.  and  two
llev.  11.  2.  holy  city  they  tread  f.-two  months
13.5.  powerwas  given  him  to  continue  f.-two  months
FORTY-FOUR.

1  Chron.  5.  18.  of  Reuben  and  Gad,  44,760
FORTY-FIVE.

Gen.  18.  28.  iff  find  f.-Jive,  I  will  not  destroy  it
Josh.  14.  10.  Lord  kept  me  alive  these  f.-Jive  years

1  Kings  f.3.  upon  the  beams  that  lay  on  f.-Jive  pillars

FORTY-SIX.

John  2.  20.  f.-six  years  was  this  temple  in  building
FORTY-EIGHT.

Num.  35.  7.  cities  of  Levites  f. -eight,  Josh.  21.  41.
FORTY-NINE.

Lev.  25.  8.  the  space  shall  be  to  thee  f.-nine  years
I  O  R 1  Y  thousand.

Num.  1. 33.  those  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim
were  /.  thousand  five  hundred,  2. 19. 1  26.  18.
Josh.  4.  13.  about/,  thousand  prepared  for  war
Judg.  5. 8.  was  a  shield  or  spear  seen  among/,  t/wus.

2  Ham.  10.  18.  Dav.  slew  J.  t.  horsem.  1  Chr.  19.  18.
1  Kings  4.  26.  Solo,  had  /.  thousand  stalls  of  horses
1  Chron.  12.  36.  of  Asher  expert  in  war/,  thousand

FORTY-ON E  thousand.

Num.  1.  41.  of  Asher  were /.  and  one  thousand,  2. 28.

FORTY-TVV  O  thousand.

Judg.  12.  6.  there  fell  of  Ephraimites  f.-two  thous.
Ezra  2.  64.  whole  congrega.  was  42,360,  Neh.  7.  66.

FO RT  Y  -1 11 R  EE  thousand.

Num.  26.  7-  families  of  the  Reubenites  was  43,730
FOR  I  Y-FO U R  thousand.

1  Chr.  5.  18.  the  children  of  Reuben  were  44,760
An  hundred  FORTY-FOUR  thousand.

See  Hundred.

FORTY-FIVE  thousand.

Num.  1.  25.  that  were  numbered  of  Gad  45,650
26.  41.  that  were  numbered  of  Benjamin  45,600
50.  of  Naphtali  were  numbered  45,400
FORTY -SIX  thousand.

Num.  1.  21.  of  Reuben  were  46.500,  2.  11.
FORTIETH.

Num.  33.  38.  Aaron  died  there  in  the  /.  year  after
Dent.  1.  3.  in  the /.  year  Moses  spake  to  Israel

1  Chr.  26.  31.  in  the  /.  year  of  the  reign  of  David

2  Chr.  16. 13.  Asa  died  in  one  and  /.  year  of  his  reign

FORTIFY.

Judg.  9.  31.  and  behold,  they  /.  the  city  against  thee
Neh.  4.  2.  will  these  feeble  Jews /.  themselves?
Isa.  22.10.  houses  have  ye  broken  down  to/,  the  wall
Jer.  51.  53.  tho’  she  should  /.  height  of  her  strength
Nah.  2.  1.  watch  the  way,/,  thy  power  mightily

3. 14.  draw  thee  waters  for  siege, /.  thy  strongholds
FORTIFIED.

2  Chron.  11.  11.  Rehoboam  /.  the  strong  holds
26.  9.  Uzziah  built  towers  and  /.  them
Neh.  3.  8.  they  /.  Jerusalem  to  the  broad  wall
Mic.  7.12.  in  that  day  he  shall  come  from  the/,  cities
FORTRESS,  ES.

2  Sam.  22.  2.  the  Lord  is  my  rock  and  my  /.  Psal.

18.  2.  |  31.  3.  I  71.  3.  |  91.  2.  I  144.  2.
Prov.  12.  +  12.  wicked  desireth  the/,  ot  evil  men
Isa.  17.  3.  the  /.  also  shall  cease  from  Ephraim
25.  12.  the/,  of  the  high  fort  shall  he  bring  down

31.  13.  nettles  and  brambles  come  up  in  the/.

Jer.  6.  27.  1  have  set  thee  for  a /.  among  my  people

10. 17.  gather  thy  wares,  O  inhabitant  of  the  /.

16.  19.  O  Lord,  my/,  in  the  day  of  affliction
Dan.  11.7.  enter  into  the  /.  of  the  king  of  the  north

10.  shall  he  return  and  be  stii  red  up  even  to  his  j.
t  39  thus  shall  he  do  in  the  /.  of  munitions
II os.  10.  14  an  l  all  thy  /'.  shall  be  spoiled


Amos  5. 9.  that  the  spoiled  shall  come  against  trie  /.
Mic.  7. 12.  in  that  day  he  shall  come  to  thee  from  /.
EUR  WARD.

Num.  32. 19.  we  will  not  inherit  on  yonder  side  or  J.
Jer.  7.  24.  and  they  went  backward  and  not /.
Ezek.  43.  27.  it  shall  be  upon  the  eighth  day  and  so  /.
Zech.  1.  15.  and  they  helped  /.  the  affliction

2  Cor.  8. 10.  notonly  to  do,  but  also  to  be/,  year  ago

17.  but  being  more/,  of  his  own  accord  he  went

Gal.  2. 10.  the  same  which  1  also  was  /.  to  do

3  John  6.  whom  if  thou  bring/,  on  their  journey

See  That  Day,  Go,  Set,  Went.
FORWARDNESS.

2  Cor.  8.  8.  but  by  occasion  of  the  /.  of  others

9.  2.  for  1  know  /.  of  your  mind,  for  which  1  boast
FOUGHT.

Exod.  17.  8.  then  came  Amalek  and/,  with  Israel

10.  so  Joshua /.  with  Amalek,  Moses  went  up
Num.  21. 1.  then  king  Arad./,  ag.  Isr.  and  took  some

23.  Sihon  came  and  J.  against  Israel,  Judg.  11.  20.

26.  Sihon  /.  against  the  former  king  of  Moah
Josh.  10.  14.  for  the  Lord  /.  for  Israel,  42.  I  23.  3.

29.  Joshua  and  all  Israel  /.against  Libnah

31. /.  against  Lachish  ||  34.  Eglon  ||  36.  Hebron

24.  8.  the  Amorites  011  tire  other  side  /.  with  you

11.  and  the  men  of  Jericho  f.  against  you
Judg.  1.  5.  they  found  Adom-bezek  and  f.  ag.  him

8.  Judah  had/,  against  Jerusalem,  and  taken  it
5.  19.  the  kings  came,  then /.  the  kings  of  Canaan

20.  they/,  from  heaven,  the  stars  in  courses /.

9.  17.  my  father/,  for  you  and  delivered  you
39.  Gaal  went  out  and  /,  witii  Abiinelecn

12.  4.  all  the  men  of  Gilead  J.  with  Ephraim

1  Sam.  4.  10.  the  Philistines/.  1  Chron.  10.  1.

14. 47.  Saul  /.  against  all  his  enemies  on  every  side

15.  t  5.  Saul/,  against  Amalek  in  the  valley

19.  8.  so  David/,  wiihthe  Philistines,  23.  5.

2  Sam.  2. 28.  people  stood  still,  nor  /.  they  any  more
8.  10.  he  had  /.  against  Hadadezer,  1  Chr.  18. 10.

10. 17.  the  Syrians /.  against  David,  1  Chr.  19.  17.

12.  29.  David  /.  against  Rabbah  and  took  it
2  Kings  8. 29.  Joram /.  against  Hazael,  9.  15.

12. 17.  then  Hazael  went  and  /.  against  Gath

13.  12.  Joash  J.  against  A maziah,  14.  15.

2  Chr.  20. 29.  Lord  /.  against  the  enemies  of  Israel
Psal.  109.  3.  they  /.  against  me  without  a  cause
Isa.  20. 1.  T  artan  f.  against  Ashdod  and  took  it

63. 10.  he  was  turned  their  enemy  and  /.  ag.  them
Jer.  34.  1.  the  people /.  against  Jerusalem,  7.

Zech.  14.  3.  as  when  he  /.  in  the  day  of  battle

12.  Lord  will  smite  them  that/,  against  Jerusalem

1  Cor.  15.  32.  1  have  /.  with  beasts  at  Ephesus

2  Tim.  4. 7. 1  have /.  a  good  fight,  finished  my  course
llev.  12. 7.  Michael  and  his  amrels /.  against  dragon

FOUL.

Job  16. 16.  my  face  is  f.  with  weeping,  on  my  eyelids
Mat.  16.  3.  ye  say,  it  will  be /.  weather  to-day
Mark  9.  25.  he  rebuked  the  /.  spirit,  saying  to  him
lie v.  18.  2.  Bab.  the  hold  of  every  j.  spirit  and  cage
FOUL.

Ezek. 34. 18.  but  ye  must /.  the  residue  with  your  feet
FOULED.

Ezek.  34. 19.  they  drink  that  ye  have  /.  with  your  feet
FOULEDST.

Ezek.  32. 2.  thou  troubledst  waters  and /.  their  rivers
Fouls,  see  Fowls.

FOUND.

Gen.  2.  20.  for  Adam  there  was  not  /.  an  help  meet
8.  9.  the  dove  /.  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  her  foot

19.  1 15.  take  thy  two  daughters  which  are  /.

26.  f  12.  Isaac  sowed,  and  f.  an  hundred  fold

19.  Isaac’s  servants  digged  and /.  a  well  of  wafer

32.  Isaac’s  servants  said  to  him,  we  have  /.water

27.  20.  how  is  it  that  thou  hast  J.  it  so  quickly  ?

30. 14.  Reuben  went  and  /.  mandrakes  in  the  field
31.  33.  Laban  went  into  tents,  but/,  not  images

37.  iv  hat  hast  thou  /.  of  all  thy  household  stuff?

36.  24.  Anali  that  /.  the  mules  in  the  wilderness

37.  32.  brought  the  coat,  and  said,  this  have  we  /.

38.  23.  1  sent  this  kid,  and  thou  hast  not /.  her
44.  8.  money  which  we/,  in  our  sacks  we  brought

16.  God  hath  /.  out  the  iniquity  of  his  servants
Exod.  15.  22.  they  went  three  days  and  f.  no  water

16.  27.  they  went  to  gather  manna  and  /.  none

18.  t  8.  Moses  told  all  the  travel  that  had  /.  them
Lev.  6.  3.  or  if  he  have  f.  that  which  was  lost

+  5.  restore  it  in  the  day  of  his  being/,  guilty

25.  f  26.  and  if  his  band  hath  f.  sufficiency
Num.  15.  32.  f.  a  man  that  gathered  sticks  on  sabb.

33.  they  that/,  him  brouglithim  to  Moses

20.  t  14.  thou  knowest  the  travel  that  hath  /.  us
31.  t  50.  we  have  brought  what  every  man  bath /.

Deut.  21.  + 17.  giving  double  portion  ot  all  /.with  him
22.  3.  with  what  thou  hast  J.  shall  do  likewise

14.  when  1  came  to  her  1  /.  her  not  a  maid,  17.

27.  he/,  her  in  the  held,  and  the  damsel  cried
24. 1.  because  lie  hath  f.  some  uncleanness  in  her

32. 10.  he  f.  him  in  a  desert  land,  he  led  him  about
Josh. 2.  22.  the  pursuers  sought,  but  /.  them  not

10.  17. five  kings  are  /.  hid  macaveat  Makkedah
Judg.  1.  5.  they  f.  Adoni-bezek  and  fought  ag.  him

14.18.  if  not  plowed  with  heifer,  not/,  out  my  riddle

15.  15.  and  ne /.  a  new  jaw-bone  of  an  ass

21.  12.  and  they  /.  four  hundred  young  virgins

1  £tf»L9. 4. passed  thro’  Shalisha,  but  they/,  not  asses

11.  they  /.  young  maidens  going  to  draw  water

20.  as  for  thine  asses  they  are/.  10.  2,  16.

12.  5.  is  witness  ye  have  not/,  ought  in  my  hand

13.  19.  now  there  was  no  smith/,  in  Israel

22.  no  sword  nor  spear  /.  in  hand  of  the  people
25.  28.  and  evil  hath  not  been /.  with  thee

29.  3.  I  have  f.  no  fault  in  him,  since  he  fell  to  me

30.  11.  and  they  f.  an  Egyptian  in  the  field

31.  8./.  Saul  and  his  three  sons  fallen  in  Gilboa

2  Sam.  7.27.  therefore  thy  servant/,  in  his  heart  to

pray  this  prayer  to  thee,  1  Chron.  17 .  25.

1  Kings  7 •  47-  nor  was  the  weight  of  the  brass  /.  out

11.  29.  the  prophet  Aliijah/.  Jeroboam  in  the  way
13.  28.  he  went  and  /.  his  carcase  cast  in  the  way

18. 10.  he  took  an  oath  that  they  /.  thee  not

19.  19.  Elijah  departed  thence  and  f.  Elisha

20.  36.  behold,  a  lion/,  him  and  slew  him

h  177


FO  U


FOU


FOU


1  Kings  Cl.CO.hast  thou  /.rrie.O  m.  enemy  'have/.thee

2  Kings 2.  17.  they  sought  Elijah,  but/,  him  not

9.  +21.  they  /.  Jehu  in  the  portion  of  Naboth

35.  they  /.  no  more  of  her  than  the  skull

22.  8.  I/,  the  book  of  the  law  in  house  of  the  Lord

25.  19.  he  took  sixty  men  that  were/,  in  the  city

1  Chron.  4.  40.  they  /.  fat  pasture  and  good
29.8.  they  with  whom  precious  stones  were/.

2  Chron.  19.  3.  there  are  good  things/,  in  thee
Ezra  2.62.  sought  their  register  among  those  reckon¬
ed  by  genealogy,  but  they  were  not/.  Neh.  7.  64.

8. 15.  and  1  /.  there  none  of  the  sons  of  Levi
Neh.  5.  8.  then  they  /.  nothing  to  answer

8. 14.  they/,  written  in  the  law  of  Lord  by  Moses
Esth.  4.  +  16.  gather  all  the  Jews/,  in  Shushan
Job  28.  13.  nor  is  wisdom  /.  in  the  land  of  the  living

31.  +25.  if  I  rejoiced  because  my  hand/,  much

29.  or  lift  up  myself  when  evil  /.  mine  enemy

32.  3.  wrath  kindled,  because  they  had /.  no  answer

13.  lest  ye  should  say,  we  have  /.  out  wisdom

33.  24.  deliver  from  the  pit,  1  have /.  a  ransom

42. 15.  no  women  /.  so  fair  as  the  daughters  of  Job
Psal.  69.  20.  1  looked  for  comforters,  but  /.  none

76. 5.  none  of  the  men  of  might  have  f.  their  hands
84.  3.  yea,  sparrow  hath  /.  an  house,  and  swallow
89.20.  I  have/.  David  my  servant,  l  anointed  him
107.  4.  they  wandered  and  /.  no  city  to  dwell  in
116.  +  3. 1  /.  trouble  and  sorrow,  pains  of  hell /.  me
119.  +  143.  trouble  and  anguish  have/,  me
132.  6.  we  /.  it  in  the  fields  of  the  wood
Prov. 7. 15.  to  seek  thy  face,  and  1  have/,  thee
24.  14.  so  shall  wisdom  be  when  thou  hast  /.  it

25. 16.  hast  thou  f.  honey '  eat  so  much  as  is  sufficient
Eccl.  7.  27.  behold,  this  have  1/.  saith  the  preacher

28.  one  man  among  a  thousand  have  1  /.  but  a

woman  among  all  those  have  1  not  /.

29.  this  only  have  I  f.  that  God  made  man  upright
Cant.  3.  1.  1  sought  him,  but  1  /.  him  not,  2.

3.  the  watchmen  f.  me,  to  whom  1  said,  5.  7.

4.  but  If.  him  whom  my  soul  loveth

Isa.  10. 10.  as  my  hand  hath  /.  kingdoms  of  idols

14.  my  hand  hath  /.  the  riches  of  the  people

22.  3.  all  that  are  /.  in  thee  are  bound  together
24.  +  22.  after  many  days  shall  they  be  /.  wanting
57.  10.  thou  hast  J.  the  life  of  thine  hand

65.  1.  I  am/,  of  them  that  sought  me  not
Jer.  2. 5.  what  iniquity  have  your  fathers  /.  in  me  ?

34.  in  thy  skirts  is  /.  the  blood  of  poor  innocents

5.  26.  for  among  my  people  are/,  wicked  men
14.  3.  they  came  to  the  pits  and*/,  no  water

15. 16.  thy  words  were/,  and  I  did  eat  them

23.  11.  in  my  house  have  1  f.  their  wickedness
41.  8.  ten  men  were/,  that  said,  slay  us  not
50.  7.  all  that  /.  them  have  devoured  them

Lam.  2. 16.  this  is  the  day,  we  have  /.  we  have  seen
Ezek.  22.  30.  1  sought  for  a  man,  but  1  /.  none
Dari.  5. 12.  an  excellent  spirit  was/,  in  Daniel
27.  thou  art  weighed,  and  art/,  wanting

6.  4.  nor  was  there  any  fault/,  in  Daniel

11.  these  men  /.  Daniel  praying  before  his  God
Aos.  9. 10.  1/  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  wilderness

12.  4.  he  /.  him  in  Beth-el,  and  there  spake  with  us

8.  Ephraim  said,  1  have /.  me  out  substance

14.  8.  I  am  like  a  tree,  from  me  is  thy  fruit /.
Jonah  1.  3.  he /.  a  ship  for  Tarshish,  so  he  paid  fare
Mic.  1. 13.  the  transgressions  of  Israel  were/,  in  thee
Mat.  2.  8.  when  ye  have  /.  him  bring  me  word

8. 10. 1  have  not/',  so  great  faith  in  Israel,  Luke  7.  9.
13.44.  which  when  a  man  hath/,  he  hideth  it
46.  when  he  had  /.  one  pearl  of  great  price

18.  28.  and  /.  one  of  his  fellow-servants  who  owed

20.  6.  he  went  out  and /.  others  standing  idle

21.  19.  /.nothing  thereon,  Mark  11. 13.  Luke  13.  6.
22. 10.  they  gathered  all  as  many  as  they/.

26.  43.  he /.  them  asleep,  Mark  14.  40.  Luke  22.  45.
60.  sought  witnesses,  yet /.  they  none,  Mark  14.55.

27.  32.  they/,  a  man  of  Gyrene,  Simon  by  name
Mark  1.  37.  when  they  had  /.  him,  they  said  to  him

7.  2.  some  ate  with  defiled  hands,  they/,  fault

30.  when  she  was  come,  she  /.  the  devil  gone  out
11.4.  they/,  the  colt  tied  by  the  door  without

Luke  2.  16.  they/,  the  babe  lying  in  a  manger
46.  after  three  days  they/.*him  in  the  temple

4.  17.  he/,  the  place  where  it  was  written

7.  10.  they  returning/,  the  servant  whole

8.  35.  they/,  man  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind

15.  5.  when  he  hath /.  the  sheep,  he  layeth  it

6.  rejoice,  for  1  have /.  my  sheep  which  was  lost

9.  when  she  hath  /.  the  piece,  she  calleth  friends
17. 18.  are  not  any  /.  that  returned  to  give  glory

19.  32.  they/,  even  as  he  had  said  to  them, 22. 13.

23.  2.  we  /'.  this  fellow  perverting  the  nation
14.  behold,  1  have  f.  no  fault  in  this  man

24.  2.  and  they/,  the  stone  rolled  away

.3.  they/,  not  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus
23.  when  they/,  not  his  body,  they  came,  saying
33.  and  they  /.  the  eleven  gathered  together
John  1.  41.  and  saith,  we  have  f.  the  Messias,  45.

2. 14.  Jesus  /.  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  oxen
Acts  5. 10.  the  young  men  came  in,  and  /.  her  dead

22.  when  the  offic  ers  /.  them  not  in  the  prison
7.  11.  and  our  fathers  /.  no  sustenance

9.  2.  that  if  he/,  any  of  this  way,  whether  men

10.  27.  Peter  /.  many  that  were  come  together

12.  19.  Herod  sought  for  Peter,  and /.  him  not

13.  6.  they  /.  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  prophet
22.  I  have  /.  David,  a  man  after  mine  own  heart

17.  23.  1  /.  an  altar  with  this  inscription

24.  5.  we  have  /.  this  man  a  pestilent  fellow

20.  if  they  have/,  any  evil  doing  in  me

25.  25.  If.  he  hath  done  nothing  worthy  of  death

28. 14.  we  came  to  Puteoli,  where  we/,  brethren
Pom.  4. 1.  what  Abraham  our  father  hath  /.

7- 10.  which  was  ordained  to  life,  I  /.  to  be’to  death

1  Cor.  15.  15.  yea,  w'e  are/1,  false  witnesses  of  God

2  Cor. ‘2. 13.  because  1  /.  not  Titus  my  brother
Gal.  2.  17-  we  ourselves  also  are /.  sinners
Phil.  2.8.  and  being/,  in  fashion  as  a  man

1  Ttm.  3. 10.  use  the  office,  being  /.  blameless

2  Tim.  1.  17.  Onesiphorus  sought  me  and/,  me
Heh.  12.  17.  for  he/,  no  place  of  repentance

1  Pet.  1.  7.  that  your  faith  might  be/,  to  praise


2  John  4. 1  /.  of  thy  children  walking  in  tiuth
Pev.  2. 2.  tnou  hast  tried  them,  and  hast /.  them  liars

3.  2.  I  have  not /.  thy  works  perfect  before  God
12.  8.  nor  was  their  peace  /.  any  more  in  heaven

16.  20.  and  the  mountains  were  not  /.

Be  FOUND.

Gen.  18.  29.  peradventure  there  shall  be  forty  /.

44.  9.  with  whomsoever  of  thy  servants  it  be  f.
Exod.  12. 19.  seven  days  no  leav.  shall  be /.  in  houses

21.  16.  thatstealeth  a  man  ,  if  he  be  f.  in  his  hand

22.  2.  if  a  thief  be  f.  breaking  up,  7.

4.  if  the  theft  be  certainly  /.  in  his  hand

Deut.  22.  28.  if  a  man  lie  with  her,  and  they  be  f.

1  Sam.  10.  21.  they  sought  him,  he  could  not  be  f.

2  Sam.  17. 12.  shall  come  on  him  where  he  shall  be  f.

1  Kings  1.  52.  if  wickedness  be  f.  in  him  he  shall  die
1  Chron.  28.  9.  if  seek  him,  will  be  f.  of  thee,  but  if

forsake  him  will  cast  off  for  ever,  2  Chron.  15. 2.
Job  20.  8.  he  shall  fly  away,  and  shall  not  be  f.

28.  12.  but  where  shall  wisdom  bef.f
Psal.  32.  6.  shall  pray  in  time  when  tnou  maj^estfo /.

36.  2.  till  his  iniquity  be  f.  to  be  hateful

.37  .  36.  I  sought  him,  but  he  could  not  be  f.

Prov.  6.  31.  if  he  be  f.  he  shall  restore  seven-fold
16.  .31.  if  it  be  f.  in  the  way  of  righteousness

30.  6.  lest  he  reprove  thee  and  thou  be  f.  a  liar

10.  lest  he  curse  thee,  and  thou  be  f.  guilty
Isa.  30. 14.  there  shall  not  be  f.  a  sherd  to  take  fire

35.  9.  no  lion,  nor  any  beast  shall  be  f.  thereon
51.  .3.  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  f.  therein
55.  6.  seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  f.

Jer.  29.  14.  1  will  be  f.  of  you,  saith  the  Lord
50.  20.  sins  of  Judah  be  sought  for,  shall  not  be  f.
Ezek.  26.  21.  yetshalt  thou  never  be  f.  again
Dan.  11. 19.  he  shall  stumble  and  fall,  and  not  be  f.
12.  1.  every  one  that  shall  be  /.written  in  the  book
Dos.  10.  2.  now  shall  they  be  f.  faulty
Zeph.  3. 13.  nor  a  deceitful  tongue  be  f.  in  mouth
Zech.  10.  10.  and  place  shall  not  be  f.  for  them
Acts  5.  39.  lest  ye  be  f.  to  fight  against  God

1  Cor.  4.  2.  it  is  required  that  a  steward  be  f.  faithful

2  Cor.  5.  3.  if  clothed,  we  shall  not  be  f.  naked

11.  12.  wherein  glory,  they  may  be  f.  even  as  we

12.  20.  that  I  shall  be  f.  such  as  ye  would  not
Phil.  3.  9.  bef.  in  him,  not  having  my  own  righteous.
2  Pet.  3. 14.  that  ye  may  be  f.  of  lum  in  peace
Pev.  18. 21.  the  city  of  Babylon  be f.  no  more  at  all

22.  no  craftsman  shall  be  f.  any  more  in  thee
See  Favour.

FOUND  grace.

Gen.  6.  8.  Noah  /.  grace  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord

19.  19.  thy  servant  hath  /.  grace  in  thy  sight

33.  10.  if  I  have  /.  g.  in  thy  sight,  47-  29.  I  50.  4.
39.  4.  Joseph  /.  grace  in  his  sight,  he  served  him
Exod.  33.  12.  thou  hast  also  f.  grace  in  my  sight,  1".

13.  if  I  have  /.  grace  in  thy  sight,  consider  this
nation  thy  people,  34.  9.  Judg.  6.17-  1  Sam.  27-  5.
16.  how  known  that  I  and  thy  people  have  /.  g.  ?

Num.  32.  5.  if  we  have  /.  grace  in  thy  sight
Ruth  2.  10.  why  have  I  /.  grace  in  thine  eyes  ?

1  Sam.  20.  3.  thy  father  knoweth  I  have /.  grace

2  Sam.  14.  22.  thy  servant  knoweth  1  have  /.  grace
Jer.  31.  2.  the  people  /.  grace  in  the  wilderness

Is  FOUND.

Gen.  44. 10.  he  with  whom  it  is  f.  be  my  servant,  16.
Deut.  20.  11.  people  that  is  f.  shall  be  tributaries

1  Kings  14. 13.  in  him  there  is  f.  some  good  thing

2  Kings  22. 13.  this  book  that  is  f.  2  Chron.  .34.  21.
Ezra  4.  19.  it  is  f.  this  city  hath  been  rebellious
Job  19.  28.  seeing  the  root  of  the  matter  is  f.

Prov.  10.  13.  in  the  lips  of  him  wisdom  is  f.

Isa.  13.  15.  every  one  that  is  f.  shall  be  thrust  thro’

37.  +  4.  lift  up  thy  prayer  for  remnant  that  is  f.
65.  8.  as  the  new  wine  is  f.  in  the  cluster

Jer.  2.  26.  as  the  thief  is  ashamed  when  he  is  f.

.34.  in  thy  skirts  is  f.  the  blood  of  innocents

11.  9.  a  conspiracy  is  f.  among  the  men  of  Judah
Dan.  5.  12.  excellent  wisdom  is  f.  in  thee,  14.

Hos.  14.  8.  I  am  like  a  tree,  from  me  is  thy  fruit/.
I.uke  15.  24.  this  my  son  w'as  lost  and  is  f.  32.

2  Cor.  7.  14.  our  boasting  I  made  is  f.  a  ti  uth
Was  FOUND.

Gen.  44.  12.  the  cup  was  f.  in  Benjamin’s  sack

47. 14.  Joseph  gathered  the  money  that7ra^ /.
Exod.  35.  23.  every  man  with  whom  was  f.  purple
24.  every  man  witli  whom  was  f.  shittim-wood
Judg.  20.  +  48.  smote  with  the  sword  all  that  was f.

1  Sam.  1.3.  22.  with  Saul  and  Jonathan  there  was  f.

2  Kings  12. 10.  high  priest  told  the  money  that  wasf.
20. 13.  shewed  ail  that  was f.  in  treasury,  Isa.  39. 2.
22.  9.  gathered  the  money  that  was  f.  2  Clir.  34. 17.
2.3.  2.  read  book  which  was  f.  2  Chron.  .34.  30.

2  Chron.  15.  4.  sought  him,  he  was  f.  of  them,  15.
21.  17.  carried  away  the  substance  thatwaf/.

Ezra  6.  2.  there  was  f.  at  Achmetba  a  roll
Eccl.  9-  15.  there  was  f.  in  it  a  poor  wise  man
Jer.  48. 27.  was  Isr  a  derision  ?  was  he /.  am.  thieves  ?
Ezek.  28. 15.  perfect  till  iniquity  was  f.  in  thee
Dan.  1.  19.  among  all  none  teas  f.  like  Daniel
2.  35.  iron,  clay  broken,  no  place  was  f.  for  them

5.  11.  like  the  wisdom  of  the  gods  was  f.  in  him

6.  22.  because  before  him  innocency  was  f.  in  me
Mat.  1.  18.  she  was  f.  with  child  of  the  Holy  Ghost
I.uke  9.  36.  when  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  f.  alone
Acts  8.  40.  but  Philip  was  f.  at  Azotus,  he  preached
Pom.  10.  20.  I  was  f.  of  them  that  sought  me  not

1  Pet.  2.  22.  neither  was  guile/,  in  his  mouth
Pev.  5.  4.  no  man  was  f.  worthy  to  open  the  book

14.  5.  and  in  their  mouth  was  f.  no  guile

18.  24.  in  her  was  f.  the  blood  of  the  prophets

20.  11.  and  there  was  f.  no  place  for  them

Was  not  FOUND.

Mai.  2.  6.  and  iniquity  was  not  f.  in  his  lips
Heb.  11.  5.  Enoch  was  not  f.  because  God  translated
Pev.  20. 15.  w  hoso  was  not  f.  written  in  book  of  life
FOUNDATION

Ts  the  ground-work,  or  lowest  part,  of  a  building,
which  supports  the  other  parts ;  as  the  founda¬
tion  of  a  house,  of  a  castle,  of  a  fort,  tower,
&c.  Christ  Jesus,  both  in  the  Old  and  New
Testament,  is  called  a  Foundation,  Isa.  28.  16.
Behold,  1  lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation,  a  stone,


a  tried  stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  a  sure
foundation.  Christ  is  the  foundation  on  which
the  church  is  built;  the  foundation  of  all  t/u
hopes,  and  comtoit,  and  happiness,  of  the  people  oj
God  ;  the  foundation  of  the  covenant  of  grace  madt
with  the  church,  and  oj  all  the  promises  containet
therein;  he  is  a  sure  foundation,  on  whom  hit
people  may  securely  rest ;  one  who  will  not  fail
them,  nor  deceive  them  ;  and  he  ts  the  corner-stone
that  unites  the  several  parts  of  the  building  toge
ther ;  he  makes  Jevs  and  Gentiles,  that  on  a
were  implacable  enemies,  one  church.  6 '0  also  it,

1  Cor.  3.  11.  Other  foundation  can  no  man  iay
than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ.  And  the
above-mentioned  passage  in  Isaiah  is  cited  by  ,$t
Peter,  and  applied  to  Christ,  1  Pet.  2.  6.

God' s  decree  of  election  is  the  firm  immovable  foun
dation  upon  which  the  saltation  of  the  elect  de¬
pends.  2  '1  im.  2.  19.  '1  he  foundation  of  Goc
standeth  sure,  having  this  seal,  I  he  Lord  know¬
eth  them  that  are  his.  See  more  of  this  passage
on  the  word  SEAL.  The  foundation  of  the  apos
ties  and  prophets,  is  that  foundation  which  they
laid  by  their  preaching  and  doctrine,  namely
Christ,  whom  they  held  forth  as  the  only  mediate,
between  God  and  man,  the  only  Saviour  arid  Heat,
of  the  church.  Eph.  2.  20.  Ye  are  built  upor
the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets  j
Your  faith  is  grounded  upon  the  doctrine  delivered
by  them.  Foundation  is  likewise  taken  for  th,
first  principles  of  Christianity,  taught  in  an  easy
and  plain  method,  so  as  to  make  people  of  meat
capacities  to  understand  them;  such  as  concern
ing  the  necessity  and  nature  of  repentance  ani\
faith  ;  the  nature,  institution,  signification,  am
use  of  the  sacraments  ;  concerning  the  last  judg'
ment,  and  the  like ;  these  the  apostle  calls  th,
foundation.  Heb.  6.  1,  2.  Not  laying  again  the
foundation  of  repentance,  &c.  And  in  Bom

15.  20.  The  apostle  says,  So  have  I  strived  t<|
preach  the  gospel,  not  where  Christ  was  named
lest  1  should  build  upon  another  man’s  foun
dation.  1  did  not  choose  to  preach  the  gospel
where  the  fundamentals,  the  first  principles  el
religion,  had  been  taught  by  another,  lest  1  s/toul
seem  to  assume  to  myself  the  credit  due  to  him
Heaven,  which  is  the  eternal  inheritance  of  at
believers,  is  described  as  a  city  which  hath  foun
dations,  to  denote  that  the  state  of  the  elect  i,
heaven,  and  their  glory  there,  is  not  subject  t
corruption,  or  the  least  alteration.  II eb.  11.  10
Abraham  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  founda
tions,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God.

Magistrates  are  also  called  foundations.  Psal.  82

5.  All  the  foundations  of  the  world  are  out  0
course:  all  magistrates,  rulers,  and  governor f
that  should  settle  and  establish  justice  arid  order
have  disturbed  it  by  their  irregular  and  disorder /.>
proceedings.  Solomon  says,  Prov.  10.  25.  Th
righteous  is  an  everlasting  foundation  :  or,  hat!
an  everlasting  foundation  :  His  hope  and  happt
ness  is  built  upon  a  sure  foundation.

Exod.  9.  18.  as  hath  not  been  in  Egypt  since  the  /.
Josh.  6.  26.  he  shall  lay  the /.  in  his  first-born

1  Kings  5. 17.  they  brought  hewn  stones  to  lay  the/

6.  37.  in  the  fourth  year  was  /.  of  house  of  L.  law
7-  9.  w  ere  of  costly  stones  even  froni  the  /.  10.

16.  .34.  he  laid  the  /.  of  Jericho  in  his  first-born  |

2  C '/iron.  8.  16.  work  was  prepared  to-day  of  the /

31.  7.  they  began  to  lay  the/,  of  the  heaps

Ezra  .3.  6.  the/,  of  the  temple  w’as  not  yet  laid

10.  when  the  builders  laid  the  /.  of  temple,  12.

5.  16.  Sheshbazzar  laid  the  /.  of  the  house

7-  +  9.  on  the  first  day  was  the  /.  of  going  up
Job  4. 19.  howr  much  less  in  them  whose  f.  is  in  duJ
22.  16.  whose  /.  w  as  overflown  with  a  flood
Psal.  87. 1.  his  /.  is  in  the  holy  mountains
102.  25.  of  old  thou  hast  laid  the /.  of  the  earth
137-  7-  tase  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  /.  thereof
Prov.  10.  25.  the  righteous  is  an  everlasting /.

Isa.  28.  16.  I  lay  in  Zion  for  a/,  tried  a  stone  .
44.  28.  saying  to  the  temple,  thy/,  shall  be  laid  i
48.  13.  my  hand  hath  laid  the /.  of  the  earth
Ezek.  13.  14.  the /.  thereof  shall  be  discovered
Iiab.  .3. 13.  by  discovering  the/,  to  the  neck
Hag.  2.  18.  from  the  day  that  the  /.  was  laid
Zech.  4.  9.  Zerubbabel  hath  laid  /.  and  shall  finis

8.  9.  prophets  which  were  when  the/,  was  laid  j
12. 1.  the  Lord,  which  layeth  the  /.  of  the  earth  ;

Luke  6.  48.  digged  deep,  and  laid  the  /.  on  a  roo,
49.  like  a  man  that  without  a/,  built  an  house  }

14.  29.  lest  haply  after  he  hath  laid  the  /.

Pom.  15.  20.  lest  I  should  build  on  another  man’s/
1  Cor.  3. 10.  as  a  wise  master-builder  I  laid  the/

11.  for  other/,  can  no  man  lay  than  is  laid

12.  if  any  man  build  on  this /.  gold,  silver,  wool
Eph.  2.  20.  are  built  on  the  f.  of  the  prophets  |

1  Tim.  6.  19.  laying  up  instore  for  thems.agood,

2  Tim.  2.  19.  nevertheless /.  of  God  standeth  sui  t
Heb.  1.  10.  thou,  Lord,  hast  laid  the/,  of  the  earf

6.  1.  not  laying  the/,  ofrepentance  and  faith
Rev.  21.  19.  the  first  /.jasper;  second  sapphire

FOUNDATION  of  the  world.

Mat.  13.  .35.  kept  secret  from  the  /.  of  the  world
25.  .34.  kingdom  prepared  from  the  /.  of  the  wori
I.uke  11.  50.  the  blood  shed  from  the  /.  of  the  work
John  17.24.  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  /.  of  the  wor .
Eph.  1.  4.  chosen  us  in  him  before  the/,  of  the  wor,
Heb.  4.  S.works  were  finished  from  the  /.  of  the  wor,

9.  26.  must  have  oft  suffered  since /.  of  the  world

1  Pet.  1.20.  foreordained  before  the  /.  of  the  work
Pev.  13.  8.  Lamb  slain  from  the  /.  of  the  world

17.  8.  names  not  wmitten  from  the  /.  of  the  world

FOUNDATIONS.

Deut.  32.  22.  and  set  on  fire  the  /.  of  themountaii

2  Aam.  22.  8.  the/,  of  heaven  moved  and  shook
16.  /.  of  the  woi  ld  were  discovered,  Ps.  18. 7. 1

Ezra  4.  12.  have  set  up  the  walls  and  joined  the.
6.  .3.  and  let  the/,  thereof  be  strongly  laid
Job  38.  4.  where  wast  thou  when  1  laid /.  of  eartl
6.  whereupon  are  the  /.thereof  fastened
Psal.  11. 3.  if/,  be  destroyed,  whatcan  righteous dc


FO  U


FOU


FO  W


’m/.  82.  5.  all  the  f.  of  the  earth  are  out  of  course
Itvt.  5.  who  laid  the  /  of  earth  not  to  be  removed
'roii.  8.  29.  when  he  appointed  the  /.  of  the  earth
wi.  id.  7 .  tor  the  /.  of  K  ir-hareseth  shall  ye  mourn
>4.  18.  and  the/,  of  the  eartli  do  shake
jo!  Cl.  have  ye  not  understood  from  /.of  earth  ?

51 1  13.  the  Lord  that  laid  the/,  of  the  earth

10.  that  1  may  lay  the  /.  of  the  earth
>4.  11.  I  will  lay  thy/,  with  sapphires
is!  12.  thou  shaft  raise  up  /.  of  many  generations
er.  31.37.  if  the  /  of  the  earth  can  be  searc  hed
-Jo’  13.  her/,  are  fallen,  her  vvalls  are  thrown  down
ll!  20.  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  a  stone  tor  /

,am.  4.  11.  and  it  hath  devoured  the/,  thereof
\iek.  .10.  4.  Egypt’s /.  shall  be  broken  down

11.  u.  the/,  of  the  side  chambers  were  a  full  reed
lie.  1.  6.  and  I  will  discover  the /.  thereof
■j.  2.  hear,  O  mountains,  and  ye  strong  /.  of  earth
lets  16.  26.  the/,  of  the  prison  were  shaken
lei.  11.  10.  for  he  looked  for  a  city  that  hath/.
lev.  <21.  14.  the  walls  of  the  city  had  twelve/.

19  the/,  were  garnished  with  precious  stones

FOUNDED.

Chron.  9.  +  22.  these  were  porters  whom  David/.
C/tron.  3.  t  3.  the  things  wherein  Solomon  was/.
•zra  3.  t  6.  but  the  temple  was  not  yet/.

}sa/.  8.  +  2.  out  of  mouths  of  babes  hast/,  strength

24.  2.  for  he  hath/,  it  upon  the  seas  and  the  Hoods
78.  t  69.  like  the  earth  which  he  hath  /.  for  ever
89. 11.  world  and  fulness  thereof,  thou  hast/,  them
104.  t  5.  he  hath/,  the  eartli  upon  her  bases

8.  to  the  place  which  thou  hast/,  for  them
119. 152.  thy  testimonies,  thou  hast /.  them  forever
x,ov.  3.  19.  the  Lord  by  wisdom  hath/,  the  earth
sa.  14.  32.  answer,  that  the  Lord  hath/.  Zion
23. 13.  this  people  was  not  till  the  Assyrian  /.  it
bn  os  9.  6.  and  he  hath  /.  his  troop  in  the  eartli
Jab.  1.  +12.  O  God,  thou  hast /.  them  for  correction
4 at.  7.  25.  and  it  fell  not,  for  it  was/,  on  a  rock
iuke  6. 48.  could  not  shake  it,  it  was/,  on  a  rock
FOUNDER.

udg.  17.  4.  his  mother  gave  them  to  the/.
sa.  41.  +7-  so  the  carpenter  encouraged  the/.
er.  6.  29.  the  bellows  are  burnt,/,  melteth  in  vain
10.  9.  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  /.

14.  every  /.  confounded  bv  graven  image,  51. 17.
FOUND  ESI'.

Wi.  9.8.  and  /.  his  heart  faithful  before  thee
FOUNDING.

Chron.  24.  t  27-  concerning  .loash  /.  the  house
FOUNTAIN

s  properly  the  source  or  spring-head  of  waters.  Me¬
taphorically,  God  is  called  the  fountain  of  living,
waters,  Jer.  2. 13.  Springs  or  fountains  are  called
living,  when  they  never  cease  or  intermit ,  but  are
always  sending  forth  their  waters  :  Such  had  God's
care  and  kindness  been  over  and  to  the  Jews,  of
whom  he  complains.  That  they  had  forsaken  him,
the  fountain  of  living  waters.  The  blood  of
Christ,  which  washes  believers  from  all  unclean -
ness  of  sin,  is  called  a  fountain.  Zeeli.  13.  1.  In
that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the
house  of  David,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusa¬
lem,  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  The  legal  wash¬
ings  were  but  shadows  and  types  of  this  matchless
healing  and  purging  fountain,  namely,  the  blood
of  Christ,  which  never  failed  to  heal  any  that  ever
used  it.  All  spiritual  graces  and  refreshments
communicated  by  the  Spirit,  are  also  compared  to
a  fountain.  Joel  3.  18.  A  fountain  shall  come
forth  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  water
the  valley  of  Shittim.  As  waters  are  of  a  cooling,
refreshing,  arid  fructifying  nature,  so  these  gifts
and  graces  should  make  the  most  barren  to  become
fruitful.  And  in  John  7.  38.  He  that  believeth
on  me,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow-  rivers  of  liv¬
ing  water.  He  shall  be  endued  with  the  gifts
and  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  a  plentiful  measure,
which  shall  not  only  refresh  himself,  but  shall
break  forth,  and  be  communicated  to  others,  also
for  their  refreshing.

fountains  are  taken  for  children,  or  posterity ,  Prov.

5.  16.  Let  thy  fountains  be  dispersed  abroad  :
May  your  posterity  be  numerous.  In  this  pas¬
sage  fountains  are  put  for  streams  or  rivers  flow¬
ing  from  them,  by  a  metonymy  of  the  cause  for
the  effect.  In  the  same  sense  it  is  used  in  Deut.
33.  28.  The  fountain  of  Jacob  shall  be  upon  a
land  of  corn  and  wine  :  that  is,  the  people  that
proceed  from  Jacob.  The  title  of  fountains  may
be  the  more  fitly  given  to  children,  because  as  they
are  rivers  in  respect  of  their  parents,  so  when  they
grow  up,  they  also  become  fountains  to  their  chil¬
dren.  In  Prov.  5.  18.  fountain  is  put  for  a  wife.
Let  thy  fountain  be  blessed.  Let  thy  wife  be
blessed  with  children :  barrenness  being  esteemed
a  curse  and  reproach  among  the  Israelites  ;  or,  let
her  be  a  blessing  and  comfort  to  thee,  and  not  a
curse  and  a  snare,  as  a  harlot  will  be  :  or,  let  her
be  made  happy  by  the  enjoyment  of  thy  society,
and  cleaving  to  her  alone.

Solomon  says,  Prov.  13.  14.  The  law  of  the  wise
is  a  fountain  of  life,  to  depart  from  the  snares  of
death  ;  that  is,  the  doctrine,  instruction,  or  counsel
of  a  holy,  pious  man,  is  a  means  to  preserve  life,
and  to  help  men  to  depart  from  the  snares  of  death.
-By  spring  and  fountain  in  IIos.  13. 15.  are  meant
a  prosperous  condition,  and  all  blessings  which
seemed  to  be  for  a  continuance  ;  His  spring  shall
become  dry,  mid  his  fountain  shall  be  dried  up.
Fountain  is  taken  for  the  right  ventricle  of  the
heart,  which  is  the  spring  of  life,  and  of  the  vital
spirits.  Eccl.  12.  6.  Or  the  pitcher  be  broken  at
the  fountain  :  this  may  be  said,  when  the  veins  do
not  return  the  blood  to  the  heart,  but  suffer  it  to
stand  still,  and  cool  within  them,  whence  comes
that  coldness  of  the  outward  parts,  which  is  a  near
forerunner  of  death.  Fountain  of  blood,  is  the
blood  of  a  person  incommoded  with  a  loss  of  blood,
5  Vgl r  nutura^  or  otherwise,  Lev.  20.  18.  Mark

16. 7 .  the  angel  of  the  L01  d  found  II agar  by  a /.


Lev.  11.  36.  a/,  wherein  is  water  shall  be  clean

20.  18.  he  discovered  her /.  the  /.  of  her  blood
Deut.  33.  28.  /  of  Jacob  shall  be  on  a  land  of  corn
1  Ham.  29. 1.  the  Israelites  pitched  by  a /  in  Jezreel
Psal.  36.  9.  for  with  thee  is  the  /.  of  life

68.  26.  bless  the  Lord  from  the  /.  of  Israel
74.  15.  thou  didst  cleave  the  /.  and  the  Hood
114.  8.  who  turned  the  Hint  into  a/,  of  water
Prov.  5.  18.  let  thy  /.  be  blessed,  rejoice  with  wife

13.  14.  the  law  of  the  wise  is  a  /.  of  life

14.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a /  of  life

25.  26.  is  as  a  troubled  /.  and  corrupt  spring
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  the  pitcher  be  broken  at  the /.

Cant.  4.  12.  a /.  sealed  ||  15.  a/,  of  gardens
Jer.  2. 13.  have  forsaken  /  of  living  waters,  17. 13.

6.  7.  as  a /.  casteth  out  ner  waters,  so  she

9.  1.  0I1  that  mine  eyes  were  a /.  of  tears

Joel  3. 18.  a/,  shall  come  forth  of  house  of  the  Lord
Zech.  13.  1.  in  that  day  a  /.  shall  be  opened
Mark  5.  29.  the  /.  of  her  blood  was  dried  u  p
Jam.  3.  11.  doth  a  f.  send  forth  sweet  waters?

12.  no  /.  can  y  ielil  salt  water  and  fresh
Rev.  21.  6. 1  will  give  of  the  /.  of  life  freely
FOUNTAINS.

Gen.  7.  11.  the  /.  of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up
8.  2.  the  /.  also  of  the  deep  were  stopped
Dent.  8.  7-  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  land  of /.

1  Kings  18.  5.  go  into  the  land,  to  all/,  of  water

2  Chron.  32.  3.  he  took  counsel  to  stop  waters  of/.

4.  there  was  much  people,  who  stopt  all  the  /.

Prov.  5.  16.  let  thy/,  be  dispersed  abroad
8. 24.  when  there  were  no  /.  abounding  with  water

28.  when  he  strengthened  the  /.  of  the  deep

Isa.  41. 18.  1  will  open  /.  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys
IIos.  13.  15.  and  his  /.  shall  be  dried  up
Rev.  7.  17.  and  he  shall  lead  them  to  living/.

8. 10.  the  star  fell  upon  the  /.  of  waters
14.  7.  worship  him  that  made  the/,  of  water
16.  4.  the  third  angel  poured  his  vial  upon  the/.
FOUR.

Gen.  2. 10.  a  river  parted,  and  became/,  heads
14.  9./.  kings  joined  battle  with  Hve
47.  24.  and/,  parts  shall  be  your  own  for  seed
Exod.  22.  1.  he  shall  restore  /.  sheep  for  a  sheep

25.  26.  thou  shalt  make  for  it  /,  rings  of  gold
34.  shall  be /.  bowls  made  like  unto  almonds

26.  2.  the  breadth  of  one  curtain  f.  cubits,  8.

27.  16.  their  pillars/,  their  sockets/.  38.  19.

37.  20-  and  in  the  candlestick  were  /.  bowls

38.  5.  he  cast  /.  rings  for  the  /.  ends  of  the  grate

39.  10.  /.  rows  of  stones  set  in  the  breast-plate
Lev.  11.  20.  all  fowls  that  creep  going  on  all  /.

2%  of  beasts  that  go  on  all  /.  unclean,  42.

Num.  7.  7.  two  w'agons,  /.  oxen  to  sons  of  Gershon
8.  /.  wagons,  eight  oxen  to  the  sons  of  Merari
Deut.  22.  12.  make  thee  fringes  on  the /.  quarters
Judg.  11.  40.  a  custom  to  lament/,  days  m  a  year
2  Sam.  21.22.  these/,  were  born  to  the  giant

1  Kings  18.  33.  he  said,  Hll/.  barrels  with  water

2  Kings  7.  3.  there  were /.  leprous  men  at  the  entry
Job  42.  16.  saw  his  son’s  sons,  even  f.  generations
Prov.  30. 15.  yea,/,  things  say  not,  it  is  enough

18.  yea,  there  be  /.  things  which  I  know  not

21.  and  for  /.  things  which  it  cannot  bear
24.  there  be /.  things  which  are  little  on  earth

29.  yea,/,  things  are  comely  in  going

Isa.  17.  6./.  or  Hve  in  the  utmost  fruitful  branches
Jer.  15.  3.  I  will  appoint  over  them  /.  kinds
36.23.  when  Jehudi  had  read  three  or/,  leaves
Ezek.  1.  5.  the  likeness  of  /.  living  creatures
6.  and  every  one  had  /.  faces,  15.  |  10.  14.  and
every  one  had  /.  wings,  10.  21.

16.  and  they/,  had  one  likeness,  10.  10.
if.  they  went  upon  their/,  sides,  10.  11.

14.  21.  when  1  send  my  /.  sore  judgm.  on  Jerus.
37.  9.  and  say,  come  from  the /.  winds,  O  breath

40.  41./.  tables  were  on  this  side,/,  on  that
43.  15.  the  altar /.  cubits,  and  upward  /.horns
Dan.  1.  17.  these/,  children  God  gave  knowledge

3.  25.  lo?  I  see  /.  men  loose,  walking  in  the  fire

7.  2.  the/,  winds  of  heaven  strove  on  the  sea
3.  and  /.  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  sea

17.  these/,  beasts  are  /.  kings  who  shall  arise

8.  8.  came/,  notable  horns  towards  the/,  winds

22.  whereas /.  stood  up,/,  kingdoms  shall  stand
11.4.  his  kingdom  divided  towards  the  /.  winds

Amos  1.  3.  and  for  /.  1  will  not  turn  away  the
punishment  thereof,  6,  9,  11,  13.  I  2.  1,  4,  6.
Zech.  1.  18.  I  saw,  and  behold /.  horns
20.  and  the  Lord  shewed  me/,  carpenters
6.  1.  and  behold,  there  came  j.  chariots  out
Mat.  24.  31.  he  shall  send  his  aneels,  and  they  shall
gather  his  elect  from  the  /.  winds,  Mark  13.  27.
Mark  2.  3.  one  sick  of  the  palsy  who  was  borne  of/.
John  4.  35.  are  yet  /.  months,  then  cometh  harvest
11.  17.  Lazarus  had  lain  in  the  grave  /.  days

19.  23.  the  soldiers  made  /.  parts  of  his  garment
Acts  10.  30./.  days  ago  1  was  fasting  to  this  hour

21.  9.  Philip  had  /.  daughters,  virgins,  who  proph.

23.  we  have /.  men  which  have  a  vow  on  them

27.  29.  they  cast  /.  anchors  out  of  the  stern
Rev.  4.  6.  round  about  the  throne  were/,  beasts

8.  the  /.  beasts  had  each  of  them  six  wings

5.  14.  the/,  beasts  said,  amen,  and  the  elders  fell
6. 6.  I  heard  a  voice  in  the  midst  of  the  /.  beasts
7. 1. 1  saw /.  angels,  on  /.  corners,  holding/  winds

9.  13.  a  voice  from  the  /.  horns  of  the  golden  altar
14.  loose  the/,  ang.  who  are  bqund  in  Euphrates

14.  3.  they  sung  a  new  song  before  the /.  beasts

15.  7.  one  of  the  /  beasts  gave  seven  vials

19.  4.  the  24  elders  and  the  /.  beasts  fell  down
See  Corners,  Days.

FOUR  times.

A Teh.  6.  4.  yet  they  sent  to  me  /.  times  after  this  sort
FO  UK  FOLD.

2  Sam.  12.  6.  and  he  shall  restore  the  lamb/

Luke  19.  8.  if  1  have  taken  any  thing,  1  restore  /.
See  F  o  0 t  e  1 ) ,  T  ■ w  k  n  t  y  ,  l'l  u  n  d  r  e  d  ,  T  h  o  u  s  a  n  d  .
FOUU-SQUARE.

Exod.  27.  1.  altar  shall  be  f. -square,  height  3  cubits

28.  16.  the  breast-plate  f. -square,  being  doubled

1  Kings  6.  t  33.  he  made  posts  of  olive-tree  f. -square


Ezek.  40.  47.  he  measured  the  court  f. -square
48.  20.  ye  shall  otter  the  holy  oblation  f. -square
Rev.  21.  16.  and  the  city  lietli  f .-square
FOURSCORE.

Exod.  7-  7-  Moses  was  /.  years  old,  and  Aaron  /.

and  three  years  old,  when  they  spake  to  Pharaoh
Judg.  3.  30.  and  tile  land  had  rest  J.  years
2  Sam.  19.  32.  Barzillai  was /.  years  old,  35.

2  Kings  6.25.  an  ass’s  head  was  sold  for  /.  pieces

10.  24.  Jehu  appointed  /  men  without,  and  said

1  Chron.  15.  9.  Eliel  the  chief,  and  his  brethren  /.

2  Chron.  26.  17-  with  him /.  priests,  valiant  men
Ezra  8.  8.  Zebadiah,  and  with  him  /.  males
Psal.  90.  10.  and  if  by  strength  they  be  /.  years
Cant.  6.  8.  are  threescore  queens,  and  /.  concubines
Jer.  41.  5.  there  came  from  Samaria,/,  men
Luke2.  37.  she  was  a  widow  about/  andfouryears

16. 7.  he  said  to  him,  take  thy  bill,  and  write/

FOURSCORE  and  five.

Josh.  14.  10.  lo,  I  am  this  day  /.  and  five  years  old
1  Sam.  22. 18.  Doeg  slew  that  day  /.  and  five  pels,
FOURSCORE  and  six.

Gen.  16.  16.  Abra.was /.  and  six  when  Hagarbare
One  hundred  and  FOURSCORE.

Gen.  35.  28.  days  of  Isaac  were  one  hundred  andf.

Four  hundred  and  FOURSCORE.

1  Kings  6. 1.  in  four  h.  f.  years  after  come  out  of  Eg.

FOURSCORE  thousand.

1  Kings  5. 15./.  thous.  hewers  in  mount,  2  Chr.  2. 18,
FOURSCORE  and  seven  thousand.

1  Chr.  7.  5.  Issachar  reckoned  in  all  /.  and  seven  th.
One  hundred  FOURSCORE  and  five  thousand.

2  Kings  19.  35.  angel  smote  in  camp  of  Assyria  one  h.

FOURTEEN.

Gen.  31.  41.  I  served  /  years  for  thy  daughters
46.  22.  who  were  born  to  Jacob,  all  the  souls  were /
Num.  29. 13.  ye  shall  offer  for  burnt-offering/,  lambs
ot  the  first  year.  17 .  20,  23,  26,  29,  32.
Josh.  15.  36.  the  tribe  ot  Juaah  had  in  the  valley
f.  cities  with  their  villages,  18.  28.
1  Kings  8.  65.  Solomon  and  Isr.  held  a  feast  /.  days

1  Chr.  25.  5.  God  gave  to  Reman /.  sons,  3  daught.

2  Chr.  13.  21.  Abijah  waxed  mighty,  mar.  /  wives
Ezek.  -i3. 17-  the  settle  shall  be  /  cubits  long
Mat.  1.  17-  from  Abraham  to  David  /.from  David

to  carrying  to  Babylon  /  to  Christ/  generations
2  Cor.  12.  2.  I  knew  a  man  above  /.  years  ago
Gal.  2.  1.  then  /.  years  after  I  wentup  to  Jerusalem
FOURTEEN  thousand.

Job  42.  12.  Job  had/,  th.  sheep,  and  6,000  camels
FOURTEEN  thousand  seven  hundred.

Num.  16. 49.  that  died  in  plague  were  /.  th.  seven  h.
FOURTEENTH.

Gen.  14.  5.  in  the  /  year  came  Chedorlaomer
2  Kings  18. 13.  in  the /.  yearof  Hezekiah,  Isa.  36.  1.

1  Chron.  24.  13.  the/,  lot  came  forth  to  Jeshebeab
25.  21.  the/,  lot  came  forth  to  Mattithiah

Ezek.  40. 1.  in  the /.  year  after  the  city  was  smitten
Acts  27.  27.  but  when  the /.  night  was  come
See  Day.

FOURTH.

Gen.  2.  i4.  and  the  f.  river  is  Euphrates

15.  16.  in /.  generation  they  shall  come  hither
Exod.  20.  5.  visiting  iniquity  of  fathers  to  the  /.

generation,  34.  7.  Num.  14. 18.  Deut.  5.  9.
28.  20.  and  the  /.  row  shall  be  a  beryl,  39.  13.
Lev.  19.  24.  in  the  /.  year  the  fruit  shall  be  holy
Josh.  19. 17-  the /  lot  came  out  to  Issachar

2  Sam.  3.4.  David’s /  son,  Adonijah,  1  Chron.  3.2.
2  Kings  10. 30.  thy  children  of  /.  generation,  15. 12,
Ezek.  10.  14.  the/,  had  the  face  of  an  eagle

Dan.  2.  40.  the  /  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron
3.  25.  the  form  of  the  /.  is  like  the  Son  ot  God
7.  7.  behold,  a /.  beast  dreadful  and  strong
19.  then  1  would  know  the  truth  of  the  /.  beast
23.  the  /.  beast  shall  be  the  /.  kingdom  on  eartU

11.  2.  the/,  shall  be  far  richer  than  they  all
Zech.  6.  3.  in  the  /.  chariot  were  grisled  horses
Mat.  14. 25.  Jesus  came  in  the /.  watch  of  the  night
Rev.  4.  7.  the  /.  beast  was  like  a  Hying  eagle

6.  7.  when  he  had  opened  the  /.  seal,  1  heard

8. 12.  the  /.  angel  sounded,  the  sun  was  smitten

16. 8.  the/,  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  the  sun

21. 19.  the  third  ,  a  chalcedony  ;  the  /.  an  emerald

See  Day,  Month,  Part.

FOURTH  year.

1  Kings  6. 1.  in  the  /.  year  of  Solomon’s  reign  over

Israel  he  began  to  build,  37-  2  Chron.  3.  2.
22. 41.  J  ehoshaphat  began  to  reign  in  /.  y.  of  Ahab

2  Kings  18.  9.  in  the  /.  year  of  lfezekiah  Shalmane¬

ser  came  up  against  Samaria  and  besieged  it
Jer.  25. 1.  word  came  to  Jerem.  in /.  yearof  Jehoiak.
28.  1.  in  the  /.  year  of  Zedekiah,  Uananiah  spake
36.  1.  in  the  /.  year  of  Jehoiakim  this  word  came
to  Jeremiah  from  the  Lord,  45. 1.  1  46.  2.
51.  59.  commanded  Seraiah  in/,  year  of  Zedekiah
Zech.  7. 1.  in /  year  of  Darius  word  came  to  Ze.char.
FOWL.

Gen:  1.  26.  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  /  28.

2. 19.  out  of  the  ground  God  formed  every  /.  of  air

7.  23.  the  /.  of  the  heaven  was  destroyed

8.  17. bring  forth  of  all  Hesh,  of/,  of  cattle

9.  2.  the  fear  of  you  shall  be  on  every  /.  of  the  air

10.  behold,  1  establish  my  covenant  with  the/.

Lev.  7.  26.  eat  no  blood,  whether  of/,  or  beast

11.  46.  this  is  the  law  of  the  beasts  and/

Deut.  4. 17.  the  likeness  of  any  winged  /.  in  the  air
Job  28.  7.  there  is  a  path  which  no/,  knoweth
Psal.  8.  8.  to  have  dominion  over  the  /.  ot  the  air
148.  10.  beasts  and  flying  /.  praise  the  Lord
Jer.  9. 10.  the/,  of  the  heavens  and  beast  are  fled
Ezek.  17.  23.  and  under  it  shall  dwell  all /.

39.  17.  son  of  man,  speak  to  every  feathered  /.

44. 31 .  priest  shall  not  eat  any  thing  torn,/  or  beast
Dan.  7.  6.  had  on  the  back  of  it  four  wings  of  a/.
FOWLS.

Gen.  7.  3.  take  of  /.  also  of  the  air  by  sevens
15.  11.  when  the  /.  came  down  on  the  carcases
Lev.  1.  14.  if  tVe  burnt-sacrifice  to  Lord  be  of/

11. 13.  these  /.  ye  shall  have  in  abomination
Deut.  14.  20.  but  of  all  clean/,  ye  may  eat
28.  26.  thy  carcase  shall  be  meat  to  all/,  of  the  air

H  2  179


FOX


FRE


FRI


1  Sam.  17.  44.  I  will  give  thy  flesh  to  the/.  46.

1  Kings  4.  33.  Solomon  spake  of  beasts  and  of/.

14.  11.  that  dieth  in  fields,  /.  eat,  16.  4.  |  21.  24.
AVn5.18.also/.  were  prepared  lor  me,  store  of  wine
Job  12.  7.  ask'the /.  and  they  shall  tell  thee
Psal.  50.  11.  I  know  all  the/,  of  the  mountains

78.  27.  he  rained/,  like  as'the  sand  of  the  sea
Isa.  18.  6.  they  shall  be  left  to  the/,  of  the  moun¬
tains,  and  the /.  shall  summer  upon  them
Dan.  4.  14.  let  the  /.  get  from  his  branches
Mac.  6.  26.  the/,  they  sow  not,  neither  reap
13. 4.  the/,  devoured  the  seed,  Marie  4. 4.  1m ire  8.5.
Mark  4.  32.  that /.  may  lodge  under  it,  Lake  13.  10.
Luke  12.  24.  how  much  more  are  ye  better  than/.
Acts  10.  12.  a  sheet  wherein  were  /.  11.  6.

Rev.  19.  17.  an  angel  cried  to  all  the/,  that  fly

21.  and  all  the/,  were  tilled  with  their  flesh
I'O  vV  LS  of  the  heaven.

Job  28.  +  21.  kept  close  from  the  /.  of  the  heaven
35.  11.  who  maketh  us  wiser  than  the/,  of  heaven
Psal.  79. 2.  bodies  of  thy  servants  meat  to/,  ofheav.
104.  12.  by  them  the  /.  of  hen.  have  their  habitation
Jer.  7.  33.  the  carcases  of  this  people  shall  be  meat
for  the  /  of  the  heaven,  16.  4.  1  19.  7- 1  34.  20.

15.  3.  I  will  appoint  the  /.  of  the  heaven  to  destroy
Lzek.  29.  5.  given  Pharaoh  for  meat  to  /.  of  heaven

31.  6.  the  /.  of  heaven  made  their  nests  in  Assyria
13.  on  his  ruin  shall  all  the  ./',  of  heaven  remain

32.  4.  will  cause,  all  /.  of  heaven  to  remain  on  thee
38.  20.  the /.  of  heaven  shall  shake  at  my  presence

Dan.  2.  38.  the  /.  of  heaven  given  to  Nftbuchadnezz.
Jlos.  2.  18.  made  a  covenant  for  them  with/,  of  h.

4.  3.  every  one  shall  languish  with  f.  of  heaven
f.  12.  I  will  bring  them  down  as  the/,  of  heaven
Zeph.  1.  3.  I  will  consume  the/,  of  the  heaven
Luke  13.  19.  the  /.  of  heaven  lodged  in  the  branches
fOW  1.1',  R.

Psal.  91.  3.  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  snare  of  the/
Prov.  6.  5.  deliver  as  a  bird  from  the  hand  of  the  /.
Ilos.  Q.  8.  but  the  proph.  is  a  snare  of  a/  in  his  ways
FOW  L  liltS.

Psal.  124. 7.  our  soul  is  escaped  out  of  the  snare  off.
Jer.  5.  t26.  my  people  pry,  as/,  lie  in  wait
FOX,

In  Greek,  Alopex,  in  Hebrew,  Shual  :  It  is  a
creature  very  well  known,  and  very  remarkable,
principally  for  its  cunning.  There  is  mention
made  of  it  in  several  places  of  the  Scripture.
Our  Saviour  calls  Herod  the  tetrarch  of  Galilee,
fox,  signifying  thereby  his  craft,  and  the  refine¬
ments  of  his  policy,  Luke  13.  32.  And  to  give
an  idea  of  his  own  extreme  poverty,  he  says,  1  he
foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  have
nests,  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay
his  head,  Luke  9.  58.  Ezekiel  compares  the  false
prophets  with  foxes.  Lzek.  13.  4.  I  by  prophets
are  like  the  foxes  in  the  deserts  :  whether  it  teas
his  design  to  heighten  their  cunning  and  hypocrisy
in  imitating  the  true  prophets,  and  so  covering
themselves  with  sheep's  clothing,  though  they  were
ravening  wolves  ;  or  whether  he  intended  to  shew,
that  these  false  prophets,  instead  of  supporting
Jerusalem,  endeavoured  only  to  destroy  it,  by
undermining  its  walls,  and  shaking  its  founda¬
tions,  as  foxes  undermine  the  ground  to  make
holes  for  themselves .  In  the  same  sense,  seducers
and  false  teachers  are  compared  to  foxes.  Cant.
2.  15.  Take  us  the.  foxes  that  spoil  the  vines.

It  is  said,  in  Judg.  15.  4,  5.  that  Samson  took
three  hundred  foxes,  -which  he  tied  two  and  two
together  by  the  tails,  and  that  having  fastened  a
firebrand  in  the  middle  of  the  cord  which  bound
them  so  together,  he  let  them  loose  among  the
crops  of  standing  corn  belonging  to  the  Philis¬
tines,  and  they  burnt  them,  prom  the  fields  they
went  into  the  olive  yards,  and  burnt  them  like¬
wise.  Some  infidels  are  much  scandalized  at  this
history,  and  pretend  it  incredible  that  Samson
could  muster  up  so  great  a  number  of  foxes.  But
to  this  it  is  replied,  that  foxes  are  very  common
in  this  country  ;  which  is  proved  from  scripture,
and  the  testimony  of  travellers.  Solomon  in  his
Song  says,  that  the  little  foxes  spoiled  the  vines,
Cant.  2.  15.  Jeremiah  says,  that  the  foxes  walk
upon  the  mountain  of  Zion,  which  is  desolate,
Lam.  5.  18.  There  are  some  provinces  and  cities
in  Palestine  which  take  their  name  from  foxes,
doubtless  by  reason  if  the  great  number  of  these
animals  thereabouts.  Lor  example:  the  land  of
Shual,  or  the  fox,  1  Sam.  1.3.  17-  Hazarshual,
the  fox’s  habitation,  a  city  of  Judah,  or  Simeon,
Josh.  15.  28.  1  19.  3.

Belon  says,  that  in  Palestine,  particularly  about
Caesarea,  there  is  a  kind  of  creature  between  a
wolf  and  a  fox,  which  so  abounds  there,  that  some¬
times  troops  of  two  or  three  hundred  of  them  are
to  be  seen.  M.  Morizon,  who  has  travelled  in
this  country,  says,  that  foxes  swarm  there,  and
that  there  are  very  great  numbers  of  them  in  the
hedges  and  ruins  of  buildings.  Besides,  Samson
being  so  eminent  a  person,  and  the  fudge  of  Is¬
rael,  might  have  employed  abundance  of  people  to
catch  this  great  number  of ]  foxes,  and  they  might
have  provided  them  some  time  before  for  his  pur¬
pose.  Nor  can  it  at  all  perplex  any  man's  reason
or  faith,  if  it  be  allowed,  that  the  God  who  made
the  world,  and  by  his  singular  providence  watched
over  Israel,  and  intended  them  deliverance  at  this
time,  could  easily  dispose  things  so  that  they
might  be  taken.

No  animal  was  fitter  for  his  design,  especially
when  coupled  together  in  this  manner  ;  for  a  fox
runs  very  swiftly,  but  uses  a  great  many  turn¬
ings  and  windings,  not  going  straight  on,  but
running  sometimes  on  one  side,  sometimes  on  an¬
other,  so  that  while  one  dragged  one  way,  and
another  another  way,  they  spread  the  fire  over  all
the  fields  of  the  Philistines,  and  could  not  easily
yet  into  the  woods,  or  holes  in  the  rocks,  where
their  fire  brands  had  been  extinguished,  and  Sam¬
son's  stratagem  rendered  ineffectual.

Many  things  are  said  concerning  the  craft  and

180


subtilty  of  foxes.  They  lay  their  dung  in  the
entrance  of  the  badger's  den,  and  by  that  means
obtain  it  for  their  own  use.  They  fright  the
wolves,  who  are  their  enemies,  from  their  dens,
by  laying  the  herb  sea  onion  at  the  mouth  of
them.  They  dig  holes  for  themselves,  but  then
they  leave  several  outlets,  that  if  the  huntsman
lays  his  snare  at  one,  they  may  escape  at  the
other.  When  sick,  they  eat  the  gum  of  pine
trees,  whereby  they  are  not  only  cured,  but  their
days  lengthened.  It  is  said,  that  when  they  are
pursued  by  hunters,  they  make  urine  on  their
tails,  and  strike  them  upon  the  dog's  faces.
‘Some  having  been  taken  in  a  gin  by  the  leg,
have  bit  it  off,  and  so  escaped;  others  have
feigned  themselves  dead,  till  they  have  been  taken
out,  and  then  have  run  away.  Being  hungry,
they  feign  themselves  dead,  on  whom  the  fowls
lighting  for  prey,  they  snatch  and  devour  them.
Many  'other  things  are  storied  of  their  cunning.
Neh.  4.  3.  a  /  shall  break  down  their  stone  wall
Luke  13.  32.  go  and  tell  that/.  I  cast  out  devils
FOXES.

Judg.  15.  4.  Samson  caught  three  hundred/.

Psal.  63.  10.  they  shall  be  a  portion  for/.

Cant.  2.  15.  take  the /.  the  little/,  that  spoil  the  vines
Lam.  5.  18.  Zion  is  desolate,  the/,  walk  upon  it
Lzek.  13.4.  thy  prophets  are  like/,  in  the  deserts
Mat  8  20./.  have  holes,  the  birds  nests,  Luke  9.  58.
FRAGMENTS.

Mat.  14.  20.  they  took  up  the  /.  twelve  baskets  full,
Mark  6.  43.  Luke  9.  17:  John  6.  13.
Mm k  8.  19.  how  many  baskets  full  of/.  ?  20.

John  6.  12.  gather  up  /.  that  remain,  nothing  be  lost
Fit  AIL.

Psal.  39.  4.  that  I  may  know  how/.  I  am
FRAME.

Psal.  103.  14.  he  knoweth  our  /.  he  remembereth
Jer.  7. 1 18.  to  make  cakes  to  the  /  of  heaven
44. 1  17.  to  burn  incense  to  the  /.  of  heaven
Lzek.  40  2.  by  which  was  as  the/  of  a  city  on  south
FRAMES.

Jer.  18.  +  3.  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the/.
FRAME,  Verb.

Judg.  12.  6.  for  he  could  not  /.  to  pronounce  it  right
Jer.  18.  11.  behold,  l  /.  evil  against  you  and  devise
Dos.  5. 4.  they  will  not /.  their  doirms  to  turn  to  God
FRAMED.

Isa.  29. 16.  shall  the  thing/,  say  to  him  that/,  it  ?
F.ph.  2.  21.  in  whom  all  the  building/,  groweth  to
Ileb.  11.  3.  the  worlds  were/,  by  the  word  of  God
FRAME!  Tl.

Psal.  50. 19.  thy  mouth  to  evil,  thy  tongue/,  dfeceit
94.20.  throne  of  iniquity, /.  mischief  by  a  law
FRAN  KIN  CENSE.

Exod.  30.  34.  take  these  spices  with  pure  /.

Lev. 2.1.  put/  thereon,  15. 1  5. 11.  I  24.7.  Num.  5.15.
2.  he  shall  take  the  oil  with  all  the/,  thereof

16.  the  priest  shall  burn  the  oil  with  all/  6. 15.

1  Chron.  9.  29.  some  were  appointed  to  oversee  the/
Neh.  13.  5.  where  they  laid  the  /  and  vessels
9.  thither  brought  1  the  vessels  and  the/.

Cant.  3.  6.  who  is  this  that  comes  perfumed  with/.  ?
4.  6.  till  day  break,  I  will  get  me  to  the  hill  of/
14.  calamus,  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of  /.

Mat.  2.  11.  they  presented  to  him  gifts,  gold,/.
Rev.  18.  13.  no  man  buyeth  their/  wine  and  oil
FRANKLY.

Luke  7.  42.  nothing  to  pay,  lie/,  forgave  them  both
“  FRAUD.

Psal.  10.  7.  his  mouth  is  full  of  cursing  and/

Isa.  30. 1 12.  wherefore  because  ye  trust  in/.

Jam.  5.  4.  hire  by  you,  kept  back  by/,  crieth
FRAY.

Deut.  28.  26.  no  man  shall  /.  them  away,  Jer.  7.  33.
Zech.  1.  21.  but  these  are  come  to/,  them
FRECKLED.

Lev.  13.  39.  it  is  a  /  spot  that  groweth  in  the  skin
FREE.

Exod.  21.  2.  an  Hebrew  servant,  in  the  seventh  year
he  shall  go  out  f.  Deut.  15. 12.  Jer.  34.  9, 14.

5.  if  the  servant  shall  say,  I  will  not  go  out/.

11.  then  shall  she  go  out" /.  without  money

26.  he  shall  let  him  go/,  for  his  eye’s  sake

27.  he  shall  let  him  go  /.  for  his  tooth’s  sake
Lev.  19.  20.  not  be  put  to  death  because  not/.
Num.  5.  19.  be  thou  /.  from  this  bitter  water

28.  if  the  woman  be  not  defiled,  she  shall  be/.
Deut.  15.  13.  and  when  thou  sendest  him  out/.

18.  not  seem  hard  when  thou  sendest  him/.

24.  5.  but  he  shall  be  /.  at  home  one  year
1  Sam.  17.  25.  make  his  father’s  house  /  in  Israel
1  Kings  15.  +  22.  Asa  made  a  proclam,  none  was /

1  Chr.  9.  33.  the  singers,  who  remaining  were/.

2  Chr.  26.  +21.  Uzziah  dwelt  in  a/,  house.

29.  31.  and  as  many  as  were  of  J.  heart  offered
Job  3.  19.  and  the  servant  is/,  from  his  master
39.  5.  who  hath  sent  out  the  wild  ass/.  ?

Psal.  51.  12.  and  uphold  me  with  thy/.  Spirit
88.  5.  f.  among  the  dead,  like  slain  in  the  grave
105.  20.  the  king  loosed  him,  and  let  him  go/.
Isa.  58.  6.  and  to  let  the  oppressed  go/

Jer.  34.  9.  each  man  should  let  his  servant  go/.

11.  caused  them  whom  they  let  go/,  to  return
Mat.  15. 6.  and  honour  not  his  father,  he  shall  be/

17.  26.  Jesus  saith,  then  are  the  children/.

Mark  7. 11.  if  a  man  say,  it  is  Corban,  he  shall  be/.
John  8.  32.  and  the  truth  shall  make  you/

33.  how  sayest  thou,  ye  shall  be  made  J.

36.  if  Son  shall  make  you/,  ye  shall  bey.  indeed
Acts  22.28.  and  Paul  said,  but  l  was/,  born
Rom.  5. 15.  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  is  the/,  gift
16.  but  the/,  gift  is  of  man^  offences  to  justiticat.

18.  even  so  the  /.  gift  came  upon  all  men  to  justif.

6.  18.  being  then  made  /  from  sin,  22.

20.  servants  of  sin  ye  were. /.  from  righteousness

7.  3.  it  her  husband  be  dead,  she  is/,  iroiri  that  law

8.  2.  the  Spirit  of  life  made  me  /.  from  death

l  Cor.  7.  21.  but  if  thou  mayest  be  made/,  use  it
+  22.  he  that  is  called  in  the  Lord  is  made/

9. 1.  am  1  not  an  apostle  i  am  1  not/  ?

19.  though  I  be  /.  from  all  men,  yet  a  servant


1  Cor.  12. 13.  baptiz.  by  one  Spirit  whether  bond  or  j  \
Gal.  3.28.  there  is  neither  bond  no  if.  Col.  3.  11.

4.  26.  but  Jerusalem  which  is  above,  is/.

31.  not  children  of  the  bond-woman,  but  of  the/  I

5.  1.  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us/  I
'.pli.  6.  8.  shall  receive  of  Lord,  whether  bond  or/  .1
1'hess.  3.  1.  pray  that  the  word  may  have/,  coursi
Pet.  2.  16.  as/,  and  not  using  your  liberty

Rev.  13. 16.  causetli  all,/,  and  bond,  to  rec.  mar
19.  18.  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  both  bond  and  /.
FREED.

Josh.  9.  23.  and  there  shall  none  of  yon  be /.

Rom.  6.  7.  for  he  that  is  dead  is/,  from  sin
FREEDOM.

Lev.  19.  20.  lieth  with  a  woman,  not/,  given  her
Ezek.  27.  t  20.  Dedan  thy  merchant  in  clothes  of/
Acts  22.  28.  with  a  great  sum  obtained  l  this/.
FREELY.

Gen.  2.  16.  of  every  tree  thou  mayest/.  eat
Num.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  fish  we  did  eat/.

1  Sam.  14.  30.  if  the  people  had  eaten/,  to-day
Ezra  2.  68.  some  of  the  chief  fathers  offered/.

7.  15.  which  the  king  hath  offered/,  to  God
Psal.  54.  6.  I  will  /.  sacrifice  to  thee,  O  Lord  •  J
Dos.  14. 4.  heal  their  backsliding,  1  will  love  them  j
Mat.  10.  8./.  ye  have  received,  /.  give

Acts  2.  29.  men  and  brethren,  let  me  /.  speak
26.  26.  the  king  knoweth,  before  whom  1  speak
ltom.  3.  24.  being  justified /.  by  his  grace  througj
the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jest]  I

8.  32.  will  with  him  also /.  give  us  all  tilings
.  Cor.  2. 12.  might  know  the  things/,  given  us

!  Cor.  11.  7.  have  preached  the  gospel  of  God/.
Rev.  21.  6.  1  will  give  of  the  fountain  of  life/.

22.  17.  and  whosoever  will  let  him  take/.

FREEMAN.

Cor.  7.  22.  he  that  is  called,  is  the  Lord’s/

Rev.  6.  15.  every  bondman  and /.  hid  themselves.  •
FREE  offerings.

Exod.  36.  3.  brought  /.  offerings  every  morning  j
Amos  4.5.  proclaim  and  publish  the  /  offerings  I
FREQUENT.

Prov.  27.  +  6.  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are/.  ;

2  Cor.  11.  2.3.  in  prisons  more,  f.  in  deaths  oft

FREE-WILL.

Ezra  7.  13.  of  their  f.-will  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem!  I
Fit  EE- W  1  LL  offering.

Lev.  22.  21.  who  offered)  f.-w.  off.  it  shall  be  perfe  J

23.  a  bullock  thou  mayest  offer  for  a  f.-will  off  I
Num.  15.  3.  when  ye  will  make  sacrifice  in  f.-w.  J
Deut.  16. 10.  keep  feast,  with  a  tribute  of  f.-will  oJM

23.  2.3.  a  f.-will  offer,  shalt  thou  keep  and  pertor)  j
Ezra  1.  4.  help  him  with  beasts  besides/. -to//  off  a  J

3.  5.  that  willingly  offered  a  f.-w.  off.  to  the  Lor,
7. 16.  all  the  silver  thou  canst  find  with  f.-will  oj  1
8.  28.  the  silver  and  gold  are  a  f.-will  off.  to  I.or:  j
FREE-WILL  offerings.  11

Lev.  22. 18.  who  will  offer  oblation  lov  f.-will  off
23.  38.  and  beside  all  your/.-w.  off.  Num.  29.  3j
Deut.  12.  6.  thither  shall  ye  bring  your  f.-will  <d  J
17.  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  gates  thy  f.-w.  off  ■
2  Chron.  31.  14.  Kore  was  over  f.-will  offer,  of  Gdfl
Psal.  119.  108.  accept  the  f.-will  offer.  ofmymou|  I
FREEWOMAN.

Gal.  4.  22.  had  two  sons,  by  bond-maid,  and  by  a!  <
23.  but  he  ot'the /.  was  by  promise
30.  shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the/.

31  we  are  not  children  of  bond-woman,  but  of
FRESH.

Num.  11.8.  taste  of  manoa  was  as  the  taste  of  /.  d  j
Job  29.  20.  my  glory  was  /'.  in  me,  my  bow  renew,  :
Psal.  92.  10.  I  shall  be  anointed  with/,  oil
Jam.  3. 12.  no  fountain  can  yield  salt  water  and
FRESHER.

Job  33.  25.  his  flesh  shall  be/,  than  a  child’s

FRET.

Lev.  13.  55.  shalt  burn  it  in  the  fire,  it  is/,  inwal  .
FRET.

1  Sam.  1.  6.  also  provoked  her  to  make  her  /.

Psal.  37.  1.  /•  not  thyself,  7.  8.  Prov.  24. 19.

Isa.  8.  21.  when  they  be  hungry,  they  shall/.
FRETTED.

Ezek  16.  43.  but  thou  hast/,  me  in  these  things
FREiiTETH.

Prov.  10.  3.  and  his  heart  against  the  Lord
FRETTING.

Lev.  13.  51.  the  plague  isa /.  leprosy,  52. 1  14. 44
FRIED.

Lev.  7. 12.  cakes  mingled  with  oil  of  flour/.

1  Chr  23. 29.  Levites  to  wait  about  that  which  lSj  1
FRIEND  J]

Is  taken  for  one  whom  we  love  and  esteem  abc
others,  to  whom  we  impart  our  minds  more  j  -
miliar ly  than  to  others  ;  and  that  from  a  con
deuce  of  his  integrity,  and  good  will  towards  «
thus  Jonathan  and  David  were  mutually  frien\
Solomon  in  his  book  of  Proverbs  gives  t,


qualities  of  a  true  friend.  Prov.  17.  17-  Affnei
loveth  at  all  times;  not  only  in  prosperity, t{


also  in  adversity.  Chap.  18.  24.  'I  here  is  a  trie:
that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother ;  he  is  nu\
hearty  in  the  performance  of  all  friendly  offci
He  reproves  and  rebukes  when  he  sees  any  thr
amiss.  Prov.  27.  6.  Faithful  are  the  wounds  o(,
friend;  his  sharpest  reproofs  proceed  from  anU
right,  and  truly  loving  and  faithful  soul,  rjd i
known  by  his  good  and  faithful  counsel,  as  welly
by  his  seasonable  rebukes.  Prov.  27.9.  Ointint
and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart :  sodoth  the  swe
ness  of  a  man’s  friend  by  hearty  counsel ;  j
such  counsel  as  comes  from  his  very  heart  a-
soul,  and  is  the  language  of  his  most  inwt.
and  serious  thoughts.  7  he  company  and  c<
versation  of  a  friend  is  refreshing  and  reytnt
to  a  person,  who  when  alone  is  sad,  and  do
and  unactive.  Prov.  27-  17-  Iron  shaipent
iron,  so  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance
liis  friend.  ,  ,

By  friend  is  meant  also  the  favourite  of  a  prm
Hujhai  was  the  friend,  the  favourite,  of  Dav
2  Bain.  15.  37.  Zebuil,  the  son  of  Nathan,/*.
Solomon’s  friend,  1  Kings  4.  5.  And  Abuzz*


FRI


FRO


FRU


was  the  particulat  friend  of  A  bimelech  king  of
Gerar,  Gen.  26..  26.  r

he  friend  of  God.  This  title  is  principally  given
to  Abraham,  as  in  2  Chron.  20.  7.  Art  not  thou
ourt'Od,  who  gavest  this  laud  to  the  seed  of
Al>raham  thy  friend  for  evert  And  in  Isa.  41.
8.  Hut  thou,  Israel ,  art  the  seed  of  Alnaham  my
friend.  The  apostle  .lames  likewise  makes  men¬
tion  of  this ,  Jam.  2.  23.  And  the  scripture  was
fulfilled,  which  saith,  Abraham  believed  God,
and  it  w  as  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness  ;  anti
he  was  called  the  friend  of  God.  This  title  is
given  him  not  only  because  God  fregncnt/y  ap¬
peared  to  him,  coniersed  familiarly  with  him,  and
revealed  secrets  to  him,  Gen.  18.  17.  Shall  1  hide
from  Abraham  that  thing  which  1  do  r  Hut  also
because  he  entered  into  a  covenant  of  perpetual
friendship,  both  with  him  and  his  seed,  Gen.  12.  2,
3.  1 17-  2,  4,  7.  and  specially  because  he  renewed
the  covenant  with  him,  upon  the  sacrificing  of  his

Ison  Isaac,  and  confirmed  it  by  an  oath,  and  thereby
dmittcd  him  to  a  nearer  degree  of  friendship  and
communion,  Gen.  22.  16,  17,  tSrc.  And  it  is  upon
this  trial  of  Abraham’s  obedience,  namely,  the
offering  up  of  his  son,  that  the  apostle  James  quotes
the  passage, where  Abraham  is  called  the  friend  of '
God,  Jam.  2.  21,  22,  23.

W  Saviour  calls  his  apostles  friends,  John  15.  15.
But  I  have  called  you  friends ;  he  adds  the  reason
of  it,  for  all  things  that  1  have  heard  of  my  Father,

I  have  made  known  unto  you.  As  men  used  to
communicate  their  counsels  and  their  whole  mind
to  their  friends,  especially  in  things  which  are  of
any  concern,  or  may  he  of  any  advantage  for  them
to  know  and  understand ;  so  I  have  revealed  to
you  whatsoever  is  necessary  for  your  instruction,
office,  comfort,  and  salvation.  And  this  title  is
not  peculiar  to  the  apostles  only,  but  is  common
with  them  to  all  true  believers.  Cant.  5.  1.  Eat,  (J
friends.

he  friend  of  the  bridegroom,  is  the  bride-man  ;  he
who  does  the  honours  of  the  wedding,  and  leads
his  friend's  spouse  to  the  nuptial  bed.  John  the
Baptist,  with  respect  to  Christ  and  his  church,
was  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom  ;  by  his  preach¬
ing  he  prepared  the  people  of  the  Jews  for  Christ,
John  3.  29.

riend  is  a  word  of  ordinary  salutation,  whether  to
friend  or  foe.  He  is  called  friend  who  had  not  on
a  wedding  garment.  Mat.  22. 12.  And  our  Saviour
calls  Judas  the  traitor,  friend,  Mat.  26.  50.  Some
are  of  opinion  that  this  title  is  given  to  the  guest
by  an  irony  or  antiphrasis,  meaning  the  contrary
to  what  the  word  importeth  ;  or  that  he  is  called
so,  because  he  appeared  to  others  to  be  Christ’s
fnend,  or  was  so  in  his  own  esteem  and  account,
though  falsely,  being  an  hypocrite.  However,  this
being  spoken  in  the  person  of  him  who  made  the
feast,  it  is  generally  taken  fur  an  usual  compella-
tion  ;  and  that  Christ,  following  the  like  courteous
custom  of  appellation,  and  friendly  greeting,  did  so
salute  J  udas,  which  yet  left  a  sting  behind  it  in  his
conscience ,  who  knew  himself  to  be  the  reverse  of
what  he  was  called.  'The  name  of  friend  is  like¬
wise  given  to  a  neighbour.  Luke  11.  5.  Which
ot  you  shall  have  a  friend,  and  shall  go  unto
him  at  midnight,  and  say ,  friend,  lend  me  three
loaves  ?


m  W1UCC1  ,  Mill'  S  J

Lhf.  20.  7.  gavest  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  thy  f.
'bn.  14.  to  him  afflicted  pity  be  shewed  from  his/.
27.  and  ye  dig  a  pit  for  your  /'.

2n1


en.  38.  20.  J  udah  sent  the  kid  by  the  hand  of  his/.
rod.  33. 11.  God  spake  to  Moses  as  a  man  to  his/.

13.  6.  or  if  thy  wife  or  f.  entice  thee  secretly
mg.  14.  20.  to  companion  whom  he  used  as  his/.
ftnv  13.  3.  Amnon  had  a/,  his  name  was  Jonadab
o.  37.  Ilushai,  David’s/,  came  into  city,  16.  16.
0.  7-  Absalom  said  to  Ilushai,  is  this  thy  kind


— -  11  iiijimi)  jo  nun  111  ivinti-

ness  to  thy/.  ?  why  wentest  thou  not  with  thy  /.  ?
Kings  4.  5.  Zabud  was  principal  officer,  king’s/.


6.  t  21.  O  that  one  might  plead  for  a  man  with
God,  as  a  man  pleadeth  for  bis /.  /
35. 14.  as  though  he  had  been  my  /,  or  brother
}■  9.  my  familiar  f.  hath  lifted  up  his  heel  ag.  me
8. 18.  lover  and /.  hast  thou  put  far  from  me
rov.  6.  1.  my  son,  if  thou  be  surety  for  thy/.

/  When  in  the  hand  of  thy  f.  make  sure  thy  f.

'•  H-/  loveth  at  all  times,  brother  born  for  adver.
18.  and  becometh  surety  in  the  presence  of  his/,
n  c1'  a  ,*'at  sljcketh  closer  than  a  brother

9.  6.  every  man  is  a/,  to  him  that  giveth  gifts
r  J1- . -  I  grace  of  his  lips,  the  king  shall  be  his/.
1.  0.  faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a  J.

"  sweetness  of  man’s/,  by  hearty  counsel
I  ,  ihln,e  °wn /.  and  father’s /.  forsake  not
|4.  he  that  blesseth  his  f.  with  a  loud  voice
h-  a  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of  his  f.
lnt'.  16.  this  is  my  beloved,  this  is  my/.  G  daugh.
a%  b-  thou  art  the  seed  of  Abraham  my /.
r‘f  20.  surely  as  a  wife  departeth  from  her/,
un  1  neighbour  and  his /.  shall  perish
• '  si?a*‘  ^at  eyery  one  flesh  of  his /.  in  the  siege
os.  3.  1.  beloved  of  her/,  yet  an  adulteress
i;3;  trust  ye  notin  a/,  put  not  confidence
<*.11.  19.  behold  a/,  of  publicans,  Luke  7.  34.

.  13.  lie  answered,/.  I  do  thee  no  wrong
}■  ir  ''e  sa,'b  to  him,/,  how  earnest  thou  hither  ?

Jesus  said,/,  wherefore  art  thou  come  ?

*U:  a-.whmh  of  you  shall  have  a  f.  and  shall
6  vAdt  n'ldmght  and  say,/,  lend  me  three  loaves
h  11  ai’.of  m.y?e  in  his  journey  is  come  to  me
..  inough  he  will  not  give  him  because  he  is  his  f.
//„  ,  oq  l(,at  hade  thee  may  say,/,  go  up  higher
,  u  ‘  .  ,/•  ot  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth

,,1,7  h?  saith.  our/.  Lazarus  sleepetb
,;..V.  L!  !0U  ■‘jt  this  man  go,  art  not  Cesar’s /.

;;;;  r,  ?‘.M'  having  made  Blastus  their  f.

Abraham  was  called  the  /'.  of  God
w  111  be  a  J.  of  the  world,  is  the  enemy  ot  God
,,  1ft  „  ,  ,  FRIENDLY.

ii'i  16  ^vite  "ient  sPeak/-  to  her

13.  thou  hast  spoken  J.  to  thine  handmaid


Proc.  18.24.  that  hath  friends,  must  shew  himself/.
Jlos.  2.  tl4.  1  will  bring  her,  and  speak /.  to  her
0  FRIENDS.

1  Sam.  30.26.  David  sent  of  the  spoil  to  bis/.

2  Sam.  3.  8.  which  do  shew  kindness  to  Saul’s/.
19.  .6.  thou  lovest  thine  enemies,  and  liatest  thy  /

If  mgs  16.  11.  Zimri  left  him  not  one  of  his/.
iLetth.  j.  10.  Ham  an  sent  and  calied  tor  his  /.

14.  then  said  his  wife  and  all  his/,  to  him
6.  13.  Daman  told  his  w  ife  and  /.  every  thing
Job  2.  11.  when  Job’s  three/,  heard  of  this  evil

16.  20.  my/. scorn  me,  but  mine  eye  poureth  tears

17.  5.  he  that  speaketh  flattery  to  his/.

19.  14.  my  familiar/,  have  forgotten  me

19.  all  my  inward  /.  abhorred  me

21.  have  pity  on  me,  have  pity  on  me,  Oye  /.

32.  3.  J’.linu’s  wrath  was  kindled  against  his  /.

42.  7 •  Lord’s  wrath  kindled  against  Eliphaz  and  /.

10.  the  Lord  tin  ned  when  he  prayed  tor  his  /.
Psal.  38.  11.  my  /.stand  aloof  from  my  sore
Prov.  14. 20.  the  poor  is  hated,  the  rich  hath  many  /.
16. 28.  a  whisperer  separateth  chief/.

17-  9.  he  that  repeateth  a  matter,  separateth/.

18.  24.  that  hath/,  mustshew  himself  friendly

19.  4.  wealth  maketh  many/,  but  poor  separated
7-  how  much  more  do  his  /.  go  far  from  him

Cant.  5.  1.  eat.  Of.  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly
Jer.  20.  4.  1  will  make  thee  a  terror  to  thy  /.

6.  thou  shalt  be  buried  there,  thou  and  al  l  thy  /.
38. 22.  women  shall  say,  thy /.  have  set  thee  on
Lam.  1.  2.  all  her/,  have  dealt  treacherously
Zech.  13.  6.  1  was  w'ounded  in  the  house  of  my  /.
Mark  3. 21.  when  his  /.  heard  of  it,  they  went  out

5.  19.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  go  home  to  thy  /.

Luke  7.6.  the  centurion  sent/,  to  him,  saying

12. 4.  my  /.  be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body

14.  12.  when  thou  makest  a  dinner,  call  not  thy  /.
15.6.  he  calleth  together  his /.  saying,  rejoice

9.  site  calleth  her/,  and  neighbours,  saying
29.  that  1  might  make  merry  with  my/.

16.  9.  make  to  yourselves  /.  of  the  mammon
21.  16.  ve shall  be  betrayed  by  parents  and/.

23. 12.  the  same  day  Pilate  and  Herod  were  made /.
John  15. 13.  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  /.

14.  ye  are  my/,  if  ye  do  what  I  command  you

15.  not  servants,  but  I  have  called  you /.

Acts  10.  24.  Cornelius  called  together  his /.

19. 31.  certain  which  were  his  /.  sent  to  him
27.  3.  Julius  gave  him  liberty  to  go  to  his/

Horn.  16.  f  10.  them  which  are  of  Aristobulus’s/.

til.  greet  the/,  of  Narcissus  in  the  Lord
3  John  14.  our/,  salute  thee,  greet  the  /.  by  name
FRIENDSHIP.

Prov.  22.  24.  make  no  /.  with  an  angry  man
Jam.  4.  4.  the/,  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God
FRINGE,  S.

Nnm.  15.  38.  bid  them  make/,  put  on/,  a  ribband
39.  it  shall  be  to  you  for  a/,  that  ye  may  look
Dent.  22. 12.  make  thee  /.  on  the  four  quarters
FROGS.

Exod.  8.  2.  I  will  smite  all  thy  borders  with  /.

7-  the  magicians  brought  up/,  on  the  land
Psal.  78.  45.  he  sent  f.  which  destroyed  them
105.  30.  and  the  land  brought  forth  /.
liev.  16. 13.  I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  f.

To  and  FRO.

Gen.  8.  7-  he  sent  a  raven,  which  went  to  and  f.
Exod.  29.  t  24.  shake  to  and  f.  a  wave-offering
2  Kings  4.  35.  Elisha  walked  in  the  house  to  and  f.
Jobl.  7.  Satan  said,  front  going  to  andf.  in  earth,  2. 2.
7-  4.  I  am  full  of  tossings  to  and f.  to  the  dawning
13.  25.  wilt  thou  bl  eak  a  leaf  driven  to  and  f.  ?
Psal.  107.  27.  they  reel  to  and  f.  and  sfasser
Prov.  21.  6.  is  a  vanity  tossed  to  and  f.  of  them
Isa.  24.  20.  earth  shall  reel  to  and  f.  like  a  drunkard
33.  4.  as  the  running  to  and  f.  of  locusts  shall  run
49.  21.  a  captive,  and  removing  to  and  f.

Ezek.H1.  19.  Dan  also  and  Javan  going  to  andf.
Zech.  1. 10.  Lord  sent  to  walk  to  and  f.  through  earth

11.  we  have  walked  to  and  f.  through  the  earth

6.  7.  that  they  might  walk  to  and  f.  through  the
earth,  so  they  walked  to  and  f.  through  the  earth

Eph.  4.  14.  be  no  more  children  tossed  to  and  f.

See  Run.

FROM.

1  Sam.  6. 5.  his  hand/,  off  you,  and/,  off  your  land
Mat.  4.  25.  then  followed  him  multitudes/.  Deca¬
pods,/.  Jerusalem,  /.  Judea,/,  beyond  Jordan

FRONT.

2  Sam.  10.  9.  Joab  saw/,  of  the  battle  against  him
2  Chron.  3.  4.  the  porch  in  the  /.  of  the  iiouse

FRONTIERS.

Ezek.  25.  9.  from  his  cities  wmich  are  on  his/.
FRONTLEi’S.

These  were  square  pieces  of  hard  calf's  skin,  in¬
cluding  four  pieces  of  parchment,  upon  which  the
Jews  wrote  four  passages  of  the  law,  and  hound  them
with  strings  on  their  foreheads.  The  four  passages
which  they  wrote  are  those:  On  the  first  piece  of
parchment,  Exod.  13 .from  verse  2.  to  10.  On  the
second,  Exod.  13.  from  verse  11.  to  16.  On  the
third,  Deut.  6.  from  verse  4.  to  9.  And  on  the
fourth,  Deut.  11.  from  verse  13.  to  21.  Opinions
are  much  divided  whether  the  use  of  frontlets,  and
other  phylacteries,  was  ordained  by  Moses,  as  an
observance  to  which  the  Jews  were  obliged,  and
such  as  required  a  literal  compliance,  so  that  the
Hebrews  have  at  al/  times  worn  them ;  or  have
been  obliged  to  wear  them.

They  who  believe  the  use  of  them  to  he  rigorously
binding,  ground  their  persuasion  on  the  text  of
Moses,  which  speaks  ot  it  in  a  positive  manner ,
as  of  other  precepts  of  ,  he  law ;  he  requires  that
the  commandments  of  Jod  should  be  for  a  sign
on  their  hands,  anil  as  frontlets  between  their
eyes,  Deut.  6. 8.

But  the  generality  of  interpreters  on  the  contrary
maintain,  that  the  precepts  of  Moses  which  men¬
tion  these  writings  on  the  doors,  the  signs  upon
their  hands,  and  frontlets  between  their  eyes,
should  be  taken  in  a  figurative  and  allegorical
sense  ;  as  meaning  that  they  should  he  very  care¬


ful  to  preserve  the  remembrance  of  Gcd's  law,  and
observe  his  commands;  that  they  should  always
have  them  before  them,  and  never  forget  them
It  is  certain  that  before  the  Babylonish  captivits
not  the  least  footsteps  of  them  were  to  he  seen  in
the  history  of  the  Jews.  The  prophets  never  in¬
veighed  against  the  omission  or  neglect  of  this  prac  ■
tice  ;  nor  was  there  ever  any  question  concerning
them  in  the  reformation  of  manners  at  any  time
proposed  among  the  old  Hebrews.

Exod.  13.  16.  it  shall  be  for /.  between  thine  eyes
Deut.  6.  8.  shall  be  as /.  between  thine  eyes,  11.  18.
FROST.

Gen.  31. 40.  drought  consumed  by  day,/,  by  night
Exod.  16.  14.  round  thing,  as  small  as  the  hoar/.
Job  37.  10.  by  the  breath  of  God /.  is  given
38.  29.  the/,  of  heaven,  who  hath  gendered  it  ?
Psal.  78. 47.  destroyed)  their  sycamore  trees  with/.
147.  16.  he  scattereth  the  hoar  /.  like  ashes
Jer.  36.  30.  Jehoiakim’s  body  cast  out  to  the/.
FROWARD.

Deut.  32.  20.  for  they  are  a  verv  /.  generation
2  Bam.  22.  27*.  with  the  pure  thou  wilt  shew  thyself
pure,  with  the/,  shew  thyself /.  Psal.  18.  26.
Job  5.  13.  the  counsel  of  the/,  is  carried  headlong
Psal.  101.  4.  a/,  heart  shall  depart  from  me
Prov.  2.  12.  from  the  man  that  speaketh  /.  things

15.  ways  are  crooked,  and  they/,  in  their  paths

3.  32.  for  the/,  is  abomination  to  the  Lord

4.  24.  put  away  from  thee  a/,  mouth

6.  12.  the  wicked  walked)  with  a/,  mouth
8.  8.  there  is  nothing  /.  or  perverse  in  them
13.  the  evil  way,  and  the /.  mouth  do  I  hate

10.  31.  hut  they,  tongue  shall  be  cutout

11.  20.  of  a/,  heart,  are  abomination  to  the  Lord
If.  28.  a/,  man  soweth  strife,  whisperer  separateth

30.  he  shutteth  his  eyes  to  devise  f.  things
17.  20.  he  that  hath  a/,  heart,  findeth  no’good

21.  8.  the  way  of  a  man  is  /.  and  strange

22.  5.  thorns  and  snares  are  in  the  way  of  the/.

1  Pet.  2. 18.  servants  be  subject  to  masters,  to  the/.
FROWARDLY.

Isa.  57.  17.  he  went  on  /.  in  the  way  of  his  heart
FROWARDNESS.

Prov.  2. 14.  who  delight  in  the  /.  of  the  wicked
4.  +  24.  put  away  from  thee  /.  of  mouth
6. 14./.  is  in  his  heart,  he  deviseth  mischief
10.  32.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  speaketh  /.
FROWNED.

1  Sam.  3.  f  13.  his  sons  made  vile,  he/,  not  on  them
FROZEN.

Job  38.  30.  and  the  face  of  the  deep  is  /.

FRUIT

Is  the  product  of  the  earth,  trees,  plants,  S>c.  Deut.
28.  4.  Blessed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  ground
and  cattle.  The  fruit  of  the  booy  signifies  chil¬
dren.  Deut.  28.  4.  Blessed  shall  he  the  fruit  of
thy  body.  Psal.  132.  11.  Of  the  fiuit  of  thy
body  will  I  set  upon  thy  throne.  By  fruit  is
sometimes  meant  reward.  Prov.  l.  31.  I  hey  shall
eat  of  the  fiuit  of  their  own  way;  They  shall
receive  the  reward  rf  their  bad  conduct,  and  pu¬
nishments  answerable  to  their  sins.  The  fruit
of  the  lips  is  the  sacrifice  of  praise  or  thanksgiv¬
ing,  Heb.  13.  15.  The /raj*  of  the  righteous,  that
is,  the  counsel,  example,  instruction',  and  reproof
of  the  righteous,  is  a  tree  of  life  ;  is  a  means  of
much  good,  both  temporal  and  eternal,  and  that
not  only  to  himself  but  to  others  also,  Prov.  11.
30.  Solomon  says  in  Prov.  12.  14.  A  man  shall
be  satisfied  with  good  by  the  fruit  of  his  mouth  ;
that  is,  he  shall  receive  abundant  blessings  from
God  as  the  reward  of  that  good  he  has  done  by
his  pious  and  profitable  discourses.  I  M  ill  punish
the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart  of  the  king  of  As¬
syria.  Isa,.  10.  12.  I  will  punish  him  for  his
.insolent  discourses  against  me.  Fruits  meet  for
repentance,  are  such  holy  lives  and  conversations
as  may  manifest  the  reality  and  sincerity  of  re-
r  pentance.  Mat.  3.  8.

'1  he  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  those  gracious  habits
which  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  produces  in  those
m  whom  he  dwelleth  and  worketh,  with  those  acts
which  flow  from  them  as  naturally  as  the  tree
produces  its  fruit.  The  apostle  enumerates  these
fruits  in  Gal.  5.  22,  23.  But  the  fruit  of  the
Spirit  is  love,  both  to  God,  and  our  neighbours ;
joy,  or  a  delight  in  God,  arising  from  a  sense
of  our  interest  in  him  ;  peace  with  God,  quietude
of  conscience,  and  a  peaceable  disposition  towards
rnen,  as  opposed  to  strife,  variance,  emulation,
Sc.;  long-suffering,  patiently  bearing  and  for¬
giving  many  provocations  and  injuries  ;  this  'is
opposed  to  a  hastiness  to  revenge ;  gentleness,  or
an  affableness,  and  easiness  to  be  entreated,  when
any  one  has  wronged  us:  goodness,  kindness,
friendliness,  or  readiness  to  do  good  to  others ;
faith,  or  faithfulness,  to  speak  nothing  hut  the
truth,  and  to  perform  all  our  engagements ;
meekness,  forbearance  of  passion,  rash  anger ,
and  hastiness  of  spirit ;  and  temperance,  or  a
curbing  of  all  carnal  desires,  and  a  sparing  use
ff  all  sensual  delights .

1  he  apostle  in  Eph.  5.  9.  comprehends  the  fruits
of  the  sanctifying  Spirit  in  these  three  things ,
(1)  Goodness,  which  is  that  quality  or  disposi¬
tion  which  is  contrary  to  malice  and  wickedness ;
or  it  may  mean  benignity  and  bounty.  (2)  Right¬
eousness,  which  is  opposed  to  injustice,  whereby
one  becomes  hurtful  to  another,'  through  deceit,
covetousness,  oppression,  and  violence.  (3)  Truth,
which  is  opposed  to  errors,  lies ,  heresies,  hypo¬
crisy,  both  in  common  affairs,  and  also  in  mat¬
ters  of  religion.

The  fruits  of  righteousness  are  such  good  . corks
and  holy  actions  as  spring  from  a  gracious
frame  of  heart..  Phil.  1.  li.  Being  filled  with
the  fruits  of  righteousness.  Fruit  is  taken  fo"
a  charitable  contribution,  which  is  the  fruit  c-
effect  of  faith  and  love.  Rom.  15.  28.  When
1  have  sealed  unto  them  this  fruit ;  when  I
hare  safely  delivered  this  contribution.  When  fruit

181


FR  U


FUL


FRF


*.f  spoken  of  good  men,  then  it  is  to  he  understood
of  the  fruits  or  works  of  holiness  and  righteous¬
ness:  But  when  of  evil  men ,  then  are  meant  the
fruits  of  sin,  immorality ,  and  Wickedness  :  'dhts  is
our  Saviours  doctrine,  Mat.  7-  16, 17,  18-  1'irst-
fruits.  See  Fikst.

Uncircumcised  fruit,  or  impure,  whereof  there  is
mention  in  Lev.  19.  23.  is  the  fruit /or  the  three
first  years  of  a  tree  newly  planted  ;  it  was  reputed,
unclean,  and  no  one  was  permitted  to  eat  of  tt in
all  this  time.  In  the  fourth  year  it  was  offered  to
the  Lord :  after  which  it  was  common,  and  gene¬
rally  eaten.  Various  reasons  are  assigned  for  this
precept,  as,  (1)  Because  the  first-fruits  were  to  he
offered  to  God,  who  required  the  best  ;  hut  m  this
time  the  fruit  was  not  come  to  perfection.  ( ~)  It
was  serviceable  to  the  trees  themselves ,  which  giew
the  better  and  faster,  being  early  stript  of  those
fruits,  which  otherwise  would,  have  derived  to  them-
selves,  and  drawn  away  much  of  the  strength  from
the  root  and  tree.  (3)  It  tended  to  the  advantage
of  men,  both  because  the  fruit  was  then  waterish,
indigestible,  and  unwholesome ,  and _  because  here¬
by  men  were  taught  to  bridle  their  appetites,  a
lesson  of  great  use  and  absolute  necessity  in  a  godly

Gen.  1. 29. 1  have  given  you  every  tree  wherein  is/.

4.  3.  Cain  brought  of  the/,  of  the  ground

30.  2.  hath  withheld  from  thee  the  /.  ot  the  womb
Exod.  21.  22.  so  that  her/,  depart  from  her
Lev.  19.  23.  ye  shall  count  the  /'.  uncircumcised

24.  in  the  fourth  year  the/,  shall  be  holy
23.  t  40.  take  on  first  day  the  f.  ot  goodly  trees

25.  3.  six  years  thou  shalt  gather  in  the/.

27.  30.  the  tithe  of  the./,  is  the  Lord  s,  it  is  holy
Hum.  13.  26.  they  shewed  them  the  /.  ot  the  land

27.  we  came  to  the  land,  and  this  is  the/,  of  it
Veut.  1.  25.  they  took  of  the./',  in  their  hands

7.  13.  he  will  also  bless  the/,  of  thy  land
22. 0.  lest/,  of  thy  seed,/,  of  thy  vineyard  be  defiled

26.  2.  thou  shalt  take  of  the  first  of  all  the  /.

28.  4.  blessed  shall  be  the  /.  of  thy  body  and  ground

11.  make  thee  plenteous  in/,  of  thy  body,  30.  9-

18.  cursed  shall  be  the  /,  of  thy  body  and  of  land
40.  for  thine  olive  shall  cast  his./.

42.  all  thy  trees  and  /.  shall  the  locust  consume
Judg.  9.  11.  should  1  forsake  my  sweetness  and/.?

2  Sam.  16.  2.  summer/,  for  the  young  men  to  eat
Ps.  21. 10.  their  /.  shalt  thou  destroy  from  the  earth
58.  f  11.  verily  there  is/,  for  the  righteous
72. 16.  the  /.  thereof  shall  shake  like  Lebanon

104.  13.  the  earth  is  satisfied  with/,  ot  thy  works

105.  35.  the  locusts  devoured  the/,  ot  their  ground
1°7  3  the/,  of  the  womb  is  his  reward

132.  11.  of/,  of  thy  body  will  I  set  on  thy  throne
Prov.  8. 19.  my/,  is  better  than  fine  gold

10.  16.  the/,  of  the  wicked  tendeth  to  sin

11.  30.  the/,  of  the  righteous  is  a  tree  ot  life

12.  14.  a  man  is  satisfied  by  the  /'.  of  his  mouth
18.  20.  shall  be  satisfied  with  the/,  of  his  mouth

31.  16.  with  the/,  other  hand  she  planteth

31.  give  her  of  the  /.  of  her  hands
Cant.  2.  3.  and  his/,  was  sweet  to  my  taste
8. 12.  those  that  keep  the  /'.  thereof  two  hundred
Isa.  3.  10.  they  shall  eat  the/,  of  their  doings
4.  2.  the/,  of  the  earth  shall  be  excellent

10.  12.  I  will  punish  the  /.  of  the  stout  heart

13. 18.  they  shall  have  no  pity  on  the/,  of  the  womb
14.  29.  his/,  shall  be  a  fiery  flying  serpent

27.  6.  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  /.

9.  this  is  all  the/',  to  take  away  his  sin

28.  4.  as  the  hasty  /.  before  the.  summer

57.  19.  1  create  the  /'.  of  the  lips,  peace,  peace
65.  21.  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  eat/,  ot  them
Jer.  6.  19.  I  will  bring  the/,  of  their  thoughts

7.  20.  my  fury  shall  be  on  the/,  ot  the  ground

11.  16.  a  green  olive-tree,  fair,  and  of  goodly  /.

19.  let  us  destrov  the  tree  with  the  /.  thereof

17. 10.  according'to/.ot'his  doings,  21.  14.  1  32. 19.
Ezek.  17.  9.  cut  off  tin  /'.  thereof  that  it  wither

19.  12.  and  the east-\. ind  dried  up  her/.

14.  fire  is  gone  which  hath  devoured  her/.

25.  4.  they  shall  eat  thy  /'.  and  drink  thy  milk
36.  30.  I  will  multiply  the/,  of  the  tree

47.  12.  nor  shall  the  /.  thereof  be  consumed
VanA.ll.  the  leaves  fair  and  the/,  thereof  much,  21

14.  he  cried,  and  said  thus,  scatter  his  /.

Hos.  9.  t  14.  give  them  a  womb  that  casteth  the/.
10. 13.  ye  have  eaten  the  /.  of  lies  .

14. 8. 1  like  a  green  fir-tree,  from  me  is  thy  /.  found
Amos  2.  9.  I  destroyed  his/',  from  above

6.  12.  have  turned  /.  of  righteousness  into  hemlock

7. 14. 1  was  an  herdman,  a  gatherer  of  sycamore  /.

8.  1.  and  behold  a  basket  ot  summer/. -2.

Mic.  6.7.  shall  I  give /'.  of  body  for  sin  of  my  soul  ?

7.  13.  the  land  desolate,  for  the/,  ot  their  doings
lfab.  3.  17.  neither  shall  /.  be  in  their  vines
Hag.  1.  10.  the  earth  is  stayed  from  her/.

Zech.  8.  12.  seed  prosperous,  the  vine  shall  give

her/.

Mai.  1.  12.  the  table  is  polluted,  and  the  /,  thereof
3.  11.  nor  shall  your  vine  cast  her/,  before  time
Mat.  12.  33.  make  tree  good,  and  his  /.  good,  tree
corrupt,  /.  corrupt,  for  the  tree  is  known  by  his/.

21.  19.  he  said,  let  no/,  grow  on  thee  for  ever
34.  when  the  time  of  the/,  drew  near  he  sent

26.  29.  1  will  not  drink  of /'.  of  the  vine,  till  I
drink  it  new  in  Father’s  kingdom,  Mark.  14.25.
Mark  12.  2.  might  receive  the/',  of  the  vineyard
Luke  1.  42.  and  blessed  is  the/,  of  thy  womb

13.  6.  he  sought/,  thereon,  and  found  none
7.  behold,  I  corne  seeking/',  on  this  fig-tree

20.  10.  that  they  should  give  him  of  the  /'.

John  4.  36.  and  gathereth  /.  to  life  eternal
Acts  2.  30.  of  the  /.  of  his  loins  he  would  raise
Pom.  1.  13.  that  1  might  have  some/',  among  you

6.  21.  what/,  had  ye  then  in  those  things  whereof

22.  being  free,  ye  have  your  /.  unto  holiness

15.  28.  when  I  have  sealed  to  them  this/.

Gal.  5. 22.  but  the/,  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace
Eph.  5.  9.  the  f.  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness
Phil.  1.  22.  if  I  live,  this  is  the/,  of  my  labour

182


PhilA.\~.\ desire/,  that  may  abound  toyouraccount
lleb.  13. 15.  by  him  let  11s  offer  the/,  ot  our  lips
Jam.  3.  18.  the /'.  of  righteousness  is  sown  in  peace
5.  7.  the  husbandman  waitedi  for  the  precious/.

Jude  12.  trees  whose  /.  withereth,  without/.

See  Eat.

Bear,  or  beareth  FRUIT.

2  Kings  19.  30.  shall  bear  /'.  upward,  Isa.  37.  31.
Ezek,  17.  8.  in  a  good  soil,  that  it  might  bear  j.

23.  in  the  height  of  Israel  it  shall  bear  f .

Hos.  9. 16.  their  root  is  dried  up,  they  shall  bear  no /.
Joell.  22.  be  not  afraid,  the  tree  beareth  her/.

Mat.  1.3.  23.  in  good  ground,  is  he  who  beareth  f.

Luke  8.  8.  other  fell  on  good  ground,  and  bare  J.

13.  9.  if  it  bear  f.  well,  if  not,  cut  it  down
John  15.  2.  every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not/.

every  branch  that  beareth  ).  he  purgeth  it
4.  as  the  branch  cannot  bear  f.  of  itself,  except  it
8.  that  ye  bear  much/,  so  shall  ye  be  my  disciples
Bring,  bringeth,  or  brought  forth  I  RU  1 1 .

Lev.  25.21.  it  shall  bring  forth  f.  for  three  years
Nnm.  13.  20.  and  bring  ot  the/',  ot  the  land
Neh.  10.  35.  to  bring  the/,  of  all  trees,  37.

Psal.  1.  3.  that  bringeth  forth  f.  in  his  season
92.  14.  they  shall  still  bring  forth  f.  in  old  age
Cant.  8.  11.  every  one  for  the/,  was  to  bring  silver
Jer.  12.  2.  tire  wicked  grow,  they  bring  forth  f.

Ezek.  36.  11.  they  shall  increase,  and  bring  forth  f.

47.  12.  it  shall  bring  forth  new/,  for  meat
Hos.  10.  1.  Israel  bringeth  forth  f.  to  himself
Mat.  3.  10.  bring,  not  forth  good/'.  7- 19.  Luke  3.  9.

7. 17.  every  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good/.

18.  a  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil/.

13.  26.  but  when  the  blade  brought  forth  f.

Mark  4.  20.  such  as  hear  the  word  and  bring  forth  f.

28.  for  the  earth  bringeth  forth  f.  of  herself
Luke  8.  14.  and  bring  no/,  to  perfection

15.  they  keep  it  and  bring  forth  f.  with  patience
John  12.  24.  it  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  /.

15.  2.  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more/.

5.  abideth  in  me,  the  same  bringeth  forth  niuen/.

16.  I  ordained  that  you  should  bring  forth  f.

Rom.  7.  4.  that  we  should  bring  forth  f.  to  God

5.  motions  did  work  to  bring  forth  /.  unto  death
Col.  1.  6.  the  gospel  bringeth  forth  j .  in  you
Jaw.  5. 18.  Elijah  prayed,  the  earth  brought  fort  hf.
See  Fir st- Fruit.
FRUIT-TREES.

Neh.  9.  25.  and  possessed  f. -trees  in  abundance
Yield,  yieldeth,  yielding  FRUIT.

Gen.  1.  11.  and  the  fruit-tree  yielding  f.  12.

Lev.  25.  19.  and  the  land  shall  yield  her  /.

26.  4.  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  yield  their  /.

Vent.  11.  17.  and  that  the  hand  yield  not  her/.

Prov.  12.  12.  the  root  of  the  righteous  yieldeth  f.
Jer.  17.  8.  neither  shall  cease  from  yielding  f.

Ezek.  34.  27.  the  tree  of  the  field  shall  yield  her  /.
36.  8.  and  yield  your/,  to  my  people  Israel
Mark  4.  7.  the  thorns  choked  it,  it  yielded,  no/.

8.  other  fell  on  good  ground  and  did  yield  j.

Heb.  12. 11.  yieldeth  peaceable  /.  of  righteousness
Rev.  22.  2.  the  tree  yielded  her  /'.  every  month
FRUITFUL.

Gen.  1.  22.  God  blessed  them,  saying,  be  f.  and
multiply,  28.  I  8.  17- 1  9-  7-  1 35.  H*

17.  6.  and  I  will  make  thee  exceeding/.

20.  I  will  make  Ishmael/.  ||  48. 4.  make  Jacob/.
26.  22.  God  hath  made  room  for  us,  we  shall  be/.
28.  3.  God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  make  thee/.
41.  +52.  called  him/,  for  God  caused  me  to  be/.
49.  22.  Joseph  is  a/',  bough,  even  a/,  bough

Exod.  1.  7.  and  the  children  of  Israel  were/.

Lev.  26.  9.  1  will  make  you/,  and  multiply  you
2  Chr.  26.  +  10.  Uzziah  had  husbandmen  in/,  fields
Psal.  107.34.  he  turneth  a /.  land  into  barrenness
128.  3.  thy  wife  shall  be  as  a/,  vine
148.  9.  mountains  and/,  trees,  praise  the  Lord
Isa.  5. 1.  my  beloved  hath  a  vineyard  in  a/,  lull
17.6.  four  or  five  in  the  outmost/',  branches  thereof
32.12.  thev  shall  lament  for  the/,  vine
Jer.  4.  26.  fo,  the/,  place  Mas  a  wilderness
2.3.  3.  and  they  shall  be/,  and  increase
Ezek.  19. 10.  she  was  /.  and  full  ot  branches
Hos.  1.3. 15.  though  he  be  /.  an  east  wind  shall  come
Acts  14.  17.  and 'gave  us  rain  and  /.  seasons
Co/.l.lO.  being/,  in  every  good  work,  and  increasing
See  Field.

FRUITS.

Gen.  43. 11 .  take  of  the  best  f.  in  the  land  in  vessels
Exod.  22. 29.  not  delay  to  offer  the  first  ot  thy  ripe  /.
23.  10.  six  vears  shalt  gather  in  the/,  thereof
Lev.  15. 15.  according  to  the  years  of  the/.  16.

22.  till  her  /.  come  in,  eat  of  the  old  store
26.  20.  neither  shall  the  trees  yield  their/.

Veut.  33. 14.  for  precious /.  brought  forth  by  the  sun
2  Sam.  9. 10.  thou  and  thy  sons  shall  bring  in/.

2  Kings  8.  6.  restore  to  her  all  the/,  of  the  field
19.29.  plant  vineyards,  and  eat  the/,  thereof
Job  31.  39.  if  1  have  eaten  the/,  without  money
Ps.  107. 37.  sow  fields, which  may  y  ield/.ot  increase
Eccl.  1.  5.  1  planted  trees  of  all  kind  of/.

Cant.  4.13.  the  plants  are  an  orchard  with  pleasant/.
16.  let  my  beloved  eat  his  pleasant/.

6.  11.  1  went  down  to  see  the/,  of  the  valley
7. 13.  at  our  gates  are  all  manner  of  pleasant/.
Isa.  33.  9.  Bash  an  and  Carmel  shake  off  their/.
Lain.  4.  9.  pine  away  for  want  of  the  /.  of  the  earth
Mai.  3. 11.  he  shall  not  destroy  the/,  of  your  ground
Mat.  3.  8.  bring/,  meet  for  repentance,  Luke  3.  8.
7. 16.  ye  shall  know  them  by  their/.  20..

21.  34.  that  they  might  receive  the/,  of  it
41.  who  shall  render  him  the.  /.  in  their  seasons
43.  kingdom  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  /.

Luke  12.  17.  I  have  no  room  M’hereto  bestow  my/.

18.  and  there  will  I  bestow  all  my/.

2  Cor.  0. 10.  increase  the/,  of  your  righteousness
Phil.  T.  11 .  filled  with  the  /.  of  righteousness
2  Tim.  1.  6.  the  husbandman  first  partaker  ot  the  /.
Jam.  3. 17.  wisdom  from  above  is  full  ot  good  /.
Rev.  18. 14./.  thy  soul  lusted  after  departed  from

22.  2.  the  tree  of  life  bare  twelve  manner  of/.
See  First.


Summer  FRUITS.

2  Sam.  16.  1 .  Ziba  with  an  hundred  of  summer  f.

Isa.  16.  9.  thy  summer  f.  and  harvest  are  fallen
Jer.  40.  10.  but  gather  ye  wine  and  summer  f.

12.  Jews  gathered  wine  and  summer  f.  very,  much
48.  32.  the  spoiler  is  fallen  on  thy  summer  f.

Mic.  7.  1.  as  when  they  gathered  the  summer  f.
FRUSTRATE.

Ezra  4.  5.  and  hired  counsellors  to /.  their  purpose
Psal.  33.  +  10.  Lord  maketh /.  counsel  of  heathen
Mark- A  9.  full  well  ye/,  the  commandment  of  Cod
Gal  0  21. 1  do  not  f.  the  grace  of  God

frustrate™.

Isa.  44.  25.  that  /.  the  tokens  of  the  liars
FRYING-PAN.

Lev.  1.  7.  if  oblation  be  a  meat-offering  in  the/.

7. 9.  all  that  is  dressed  in  the  /.  shall  be  the  priest’s  •
FUEL.

Isa.  9.  5.  this  shall  be  with  burning  and/,  of  fire
19.  the  people  shall  be  as  the/,  of  the  fire
Ezek.  15.  4.  the  vine-tree  is  cast  into  the  fire  for/.  6.

21.  32.  thou  shalt  be  for/,  to  the  fire
FUGITIVE.

Gen.  4.  12.  a  f.  and  a  vagabond  shalt  thou  be

14.  1  shall  be  a  /.  and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth
FUGITIVES.

Judg.  12.  4.  ye  Gileadites  are  /.  of  Ephraim
2  Kings  15.  11 .  and  the  /.  that  fell  away  to  the  king
Isa.  15. 5.  shall  cry  for  Moab,  his/,  shall  flee  to  Zoar
Ezek.  17.  21.  all  his /.  shall  fall  by  the  sword

FULFIL.  ‘  I

Gen.  29.  27.  /.  her  week,  and  we  will  give  thee  this
Exod.  5.  1.3.  /.  your  works,  your  daily  task

23.  26.  the  number  of  thy  days  I  will  /.

1  Kings  1.  27.  that  he  might  f.  the  M'ord  of  the  Lord;

1  Chr.  22.  13.  if  thou  takest  heed  to/,  statutes  ot  L.

2  Chron.  36.21.  to/,  threescore  and  ten  years

Job  39. 2.  canst  thou  number  months  that  they  /.  ?  :
Ps.  20.4.  the  Lord  grant  thee  to/,  all  thy  counsel

5.  the  Lord/,  all  thy  petitions
145. 19.  he  will/,  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  Inm
Mat.  3.  15.  it  becometh  us  to/,  all  righteousness

5.  17.  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to/.

Acts  13.  22.  found  David,  who  shall  /.  all  my  will
Rom.  1.  27.  uncircumcision,  if  it/,  the  law

13.  14.  for  the  flesh,  to  /.  the  lusts  thereof
Gal.  5.  16.  ye  shall  not  f.  the  lustsof  the  flesh

6.  2.  bear  burdens,  and  so  /.  the  law  of  Christ
Eph.  4.  +  10.  ascended  that  he  might/,  all  things
Phil.  2. 1.f.  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  like-minded
Col.  1.  25.  is  given  to  me,  to/,  the  word  of  God  i

4.  17.  take  heed  thou/,  the  ministry, 2  Tim.  4. +5
2  Thess.  1. 11./.  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will
Jam.  2.  8.  if  ye  /.  'he  royal  law,  ye  do  well  ;
Rev.  17. 17.  for  God  put  in  their  hearts  to/,  his  wil
FULFILLED.

Gen.  25.  24.  when  her  days  to  be  delivered  were/;

29.  21.  give  me  my  wife,  for  my  days  are/.

50.  3.  forty  days  were  /.  for  so  are/,  the  days
Exod.  5.  14.  wherefore  have  ye  not/,  your  task  ?

7.  25.  seven  days/,  after  Lord  hath  smitten  rive
Lev.  12.  4.  till  the  days  of  purification  be/.  6.
Nnm.  6.  13.  when  the  days  of  his  separation  are/

32.  +  11.  because  they  have  not/,  after  me
Veut.  1.  +  36.  Caleb  hath  /.  to  go  after  me

1  Sum.  18.  +  26.  and  the  days  were  not/.

2  Sam.  7.  12.  when  days  be /.  and  thou  shalt  slee;

14.  22.  in  that  the  king/,  the  request  of  servant

1  Kings  8. 15.  and  hath  with  his  hand/,  it
24.  and  hast  f.  it  with  thy  hand,  2  Chron.  6.  15.

11 .  +  6.  Solomon/,  not  after  the  Lord,  as  David

2  Chr.  6. 4.  the  Lord  hath  /.  that  which  he  spake
Ezra  1.  1.  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  might  be./
Job  36.  17.  thou  hast/,  the  judgment  of  the  wicke
Jer.  44.  25.  ye  and  your  wives  have  /.  with  you

han

Lam.  2. 17.  he  hath  /.  his  word  he  had  commande
4.  18.  our  davs  are  /.  for  our  end  is  come
Ezek.  5.  1.  when  the  days  of  the  siege  are/.

Van.  4.  3.3.  the  same  hour  was  the  thing/.

10.3.  till  three  whole  weeks  were /.

Mat.  1 . 22.  that  it  might  be/.  2. 15,  23. 1  8.  17-  1 1-
17.  I  13.  35.  1  21.  4.  1  27.  35.  John  12.  38.  I  1.

25. 1  17.  12. 1  18.  9,  32.  I  19.  24,  28,  36.

2.  17.  then  was  /.  that  which  was  spoken,  27-9.

5. 18.  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law  till  all  be.
13. 14.  in  them  is  f.  the  prophecy  ot  Esaias

24.  34.  shall  not  pass  till  all  these  things  be /.
Mark  1.  15.  the  time  is  /.  kingd.  of  God  is  athanj
13.  4.  what  sign  when  all  these  things  shad  be/4
Luke  1.20.  my  w'ords  which  shall  be/,  in  their  seascj
2.  43.  when  they  had /.the  days,  they  returned
21. 22.  that  all  things  which  are  written  may  be  /
24.  until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be/.

22.  16.  not  eat  till  it  be  /.  in  the  kingdom  of  G01J
24.  44.  all  things  must  be  /.  spoken  by  Moses
John  3.  29.  this  my  joy  therefore  is/.

17.  13.  they  might  have  my  joy/,  in  themselves
Acts  3.  18.  what  God  had  shewed,  he  hath  so/

9.  23.  after  many  days  were/.  Jews  took  couns

12.  25.  Paul  and  Barnabas  /.  their  ministry

13.  25.  and  as  John  /’.  his  course,  he  said

27.  they  have  /.  them  in  condemning  him  .

29.  when  they  had /.  all  that  was  written  of  hi*

33.  God  hath /.  the  same  to  us  their  children

14  °6.  to  grace  of  God  for  the  work  which  they J.
Rom.  8.  4.  the  righteousness  of  law  might  be/,  in
13.8.  he  that  loveth  another  hath/,  the  law
2  Cor.  10.  6.  when  your  obedience  is/.  .

Gal.  5.  14.  the  law  is/,  in  one  word,  even  in  this
Rev.  6.  11.  till  killing  of  their  brethren  should  be

15.  8.  till  the  seven  plagues  of  seven  angels  were
17.  17.  till  the  words  of  God  shall  be/.

2o"  3.  should  deceive  no  more,  till  1000  years  be  j|
See  Scripture.
FULFILLING.

Psal.  148.  8.  fire,  hail,  stormy  wind/,  his  word
Rom.  13.  10.  therefore  love  is  the/,  of  the  law

Evh  0  3.  A  the  desires  or  the  flesh  and  ot  the  nun

p  '  FULL  .  >

Signifies,  [1]  Satisfied  with.  Isaiah  1.  11  •  \  ‘
full  of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams.  [21  l',


FUL


FUR


FUL


which  in  perfect ,  complete ,  which  wants  no¬

thing.  2  John  8.  That  we  receive  a  full  reward  ;
that  whole  portion  of  glory  which  God  hath  pro¬
mised  to  diligent,  persevering  Christians.  [3]
Such  as  are  proud,  and  puffed  up  with  a  high
conceit  of  their  own  sujficiency  and  worth,  so  as
they  feel  no  need  of  Christ.  Luke  G.  25.  Woe
unto  you  that  are  full.  [4]  One  enabled  both  to
conceive  and  bring  forth.  1  Sam.  2.  5.  Full  of
years,  one  who  had  lived  long  enough,  as  long
as  he  desired,  Gen.  25.  8.  Full  of  faith,  and  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  endued  with  a  plentiful
measure  of  faith,  and  of  the  gifts  and  graces  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  Acts  6.  5.  1  he  fulness  of  time,
is  the  time  wherein  the  Messiah  appeared,  which
uas  appointed  by  God,  promised  to  the  fathers,
foretold  by  the  prophets,  expected  by  the  Jews
themselves,  and  earnestly  longed  for  by  all  the
faithful;  the  fulness  of  this  time',  is  when  that
time  was  fully  come.  Gal.  4.  4.  When  the  ful¬
ness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  his  Son.

1  he  fulness  of  God,  is  such  a  measure  of  per¬
fection  as  God  hath  appointed  to  every  one  of
the  elect  through  Christ,  Eph.  3.  19.  That  ye
might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  ;  that
is,  until  you  arrive  at  the  highest  degree  of  the
knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  God,  and  immediate
influence  from  him.  and  an  entire  conformity  to
him.

he  fulness  of  Christ,  is  the  infinite  treasures  of
grace  and  mercy  with  which  he  was  filled.  John
1.  16.  Of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received.  And
whereas  men  are  said  to  be  filled  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  as  John  the  Baptist,  Luke  1.  15.  and
Stephen,  Acts  6.  5.  This  differs  from  the  fulness
of  Christ  ix  these  three  respects,  (1)  Grace  and
the  Spirit  be  in  others  by  participation ;  as  the
moon  hath  her  light  from  the  sun,  rivers  their
waters  from  the  fountain,  and  the  eye  its  sight
from  the  soul ;  but  in  Christ  they  be  originally,
naturally,  and  of  himself.  (2)  In  Christ  they  be
infinite  and  above  measure,  John  3.  34.  But  in
the  saints  by  measure,  according  to  the  gifts  of
Goa,  l’.ph.  4.  lfi.  The  moon  is  full  of  light,  but
the  sun  is  more  full ;  rivers  are  full  of  waters
but  the  sea  mors  full.  (3)  The  saints  cannot  com¬
municate  their  graces  to  others  ;  whereas  the  gifts
of  the  Spirit  be  in  Christ  as  an  head  and  foun¬
tain,  to  impart  them  to  his  members.  John  1.
16.  We  have  received  of  his  fulness.  It  is  said,
tol.  2.  9.  That  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead
dwells  m  Christ  bodily;  that  is,  The  whole
nature  and  attributes  of  God  are  in  Christ,  and
that  r<  illy,  essentially,  or  substantially ,  and  also
oersonol/y,  by  nearest  union,  as  the  soul  dwells  in
'he  body,  so  that  the  same  person  who  is  man,  is
God  also.

ie  church  is  called  the  fulness  of  Christ,  Eph.

1.  23.  It  is  the  church  which  makes  him  a  com¬
pete  and  perfect  Head,  and  without  which  he
mdd  account  himself  but  empty  and  maimed,  as
•t  were  ;  for  though  he  has  a  natural  and  personal
ulness,  as  God ;  yet  as  Mediator,  he  is  not  full
ind  complete  without  his  mystical  body,  (as  a  king
snot  complete  without  his  subjects,)  but  receives
ni  outward,  relative,  and  mystical  fulness  j'rom
ns  members.  And  then  the  church  does  manifest
md  set  forth  his  fulness,  serving  an  an  empty  vessel
or  him  to  fill  and  to  shew  his  fulness  in;  and  this
<e  does,  by  bringing  every  member  to  his  full
tature ;  by  dispersing  all  variety  of  gifts  and
'races  among  them  ;  and  by  bringing  them  all  to
•eaven  at  last,  so  that  not  one  shall  be  wanting.

>w  much  more  their  fulness!  Rom.  11.  12.  If
he  fall  of  them  be  the  riches  of  the  world,  and
he  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  the  Gen-
fles;  how  much  more  their  fulness?  If  the
ailing  away  of  the  Jews,  from  being  God's  people,
'trough  their  rejecting  the  gospel,  and  the  small
"timber  of  believers  among  them,  was  the  occasion
t  Gods  manifesting  his  abundant  grace  in  the
onver sion  of  the  Gentiles,  and  spreading  the  know-
-pge  of  Christ  all  the  world  over  ;  how  much  more
nail  a  general  conversion  of  the  Jews,  towards  the
w  of  the  world,  confirm  the  faith  of  the  believing
'entiles,  and  also  be  a  means  to  convert  those  of
tern  that  do  not  yet  believe,  all  over  the  world?

15. 16.  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet/.

•  8.  Abraham  an  old  man,  and  f.  of  years

•  29.  Isaac  being  old  and  /.  of  days,  died

•  }•  at  the  end  of  two/,  years,  Pharaoh  dreamed

•  the  thin  ears  devoured  the  seven  /.  ears,  22.

•  21.  every  man’s  money  in  his  sack/,  weight
*■8.  21.  the  houses  shall  be  /.  of  swarms  of  dies
.  33.  and  put  an  homer  /.  of  manna  therein
.  3.  for  he  should  make /.  restitution

•  1 J-  shalt  offer  even  corn  beaten  out  of /.  ears
■  J2.  censer/,  of  coals,  hands /.  of  incense

*9.  and  the  land  became/,  of  wickedness

•  29.  within  a/,  year  may  he  redeem  it

•  “  not  redeemed  in  a  /.  year,  then  the  house
m'  <•  13-  both  of  them  were  /.  of  fine  dour,  19,

25,  31,  37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79.
k  one  spoon  of  ten  shekels /.  of  incense,  20,  26,

1«  f  n  i  'I2,  ?8,  44’  50’  56’  62>  68>  74’  80,  86.
i«.  ir  Halak  give  me  house  /.  of  silver,  24.  13.

6-  !]•  an<i  houses/,  of  all  good  things,  when
,“>ou  shalt  have  eaten  and  be  /.  8.  10,  12.

lo.  wil  1  send  grass,  t  hat  thou  may  est  eat  and  be /.

13.  she  shall  bewail  her  father  a/,  month
■  i  iJPktali/.  with  the  blessing  of  the  Lord
^Joshua  was/,  of  the  Spirit  of  wisdom

7.  o.  38.  wringed  the  dew,  a  bowl  /.  of  water
/{ •  now  the  house  was  /.  of  men  and  women
to  ,  'vent out/,  and  the  Lord  hath  brought
and  a/,  reward  be  given  thee  of  the  Lord
they  that  were /.  hired  out  themselves
~7.  they  gave  them  in  f.  tale  to  the  king

"aval  dwelt  in  country  of  Phil ist.  a/,  year
a“d  with  one  /.  line  to  keep  alive
!/•  +  16.  she  and  her  house  did  eat  a  f.  year
:/s  3.  .6.  make  this  valley  /  of  ditches


2  Kings  4  6.  when  vessels  were/,  she  said  to  her  son
o.  17.  behold,  the  mountain  was /.  of  horses
7-  15.  and  lo,  all  the  way  was/,  of  garments

10.  ^1.  house  of  Baal  was/,  from  one  end  to  another
1  Chron.  21.  22.  shall  grant  it  me  for  the/,  price

24.  nay  but  1  will  verily  buy  it  for  a /.  price
-3.  1.  when  David  was  old  and  /.  of  days,  29  °8
Esth.  3.  5.  then  was  Haman  /.  of  wratli  ^  *

5.  9.  he  was/,  of  indignation  against  Mordecai
Job  o.  26.  thou  shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  a  /  a"e
7-  4.  I  am  /.  ot  tossings  to  and  fro  to  dawning  of  day
10. 15.  I  am  /.  ot  contusion,  see  mine  affliction

11.  2.  and  should  a  man  /.  ot  talk  be  justified  >

14.  1.  man  is  of  few  days  and  /.  of  trouble
20. 11.  his  bones  are/,  of  the  sins  of  his  youth
21  23.  one  dieth  in  his/,  strength,  being  at  ease
on  io1Sibrea.ts  are/-  ot  milk,  his  bones  moistened

vl'  ,am/  matter,  the  Spirit  constraineth  me
36.  16.  that  on  thy  table  should  be  /.  of  fatness
42.  17.  so  Job  died,  being  old  and /.  of  days

If’  uhe?  are  /•  of  children,  and  leave  rest
69.  20.  hath  broken  my  heart,  1  am/,  of  heaviness
4,  '',at,eIS,ot  a/-  CUP  are  wrung  out  to  them
Jo  e  dark  places  are/,  of  habitations  of  cruelty
j8.  25.  man  did  eat  angels’  food,  sent  meat  to  the  /
}64-  16.  the  trees  of  the  Lord  are/,  of  sap

,PPy  that  hath  his  quiver/,  of  them
144.  13.  that  our  gai  ners  may  be /.  affording  store
"rov.  1  ( .  1 .  tli an  an  house  /.  of  sacrifices  with  strife

25.  t  17.  lest  he  be/,  of  thee,  and  hate  thee

27.  7 •  the/,  soul  loatheth  an  honey-comb

20.  hell  and  destruction  are  never/.

30.  9.  lest  I  be/,  and  deny  thee,  and  say,  who  is  L  ?

Eccl.  1.7;  run  into  the  sea,  yet  the  sea  is  not  /.

8.  all  things  are/,  ot  labour,  man  cannot  utter

4.  6.  than  both  hands/,  with  travail  and  vexation
11.  3.  it  the  clouds  be/,  of  rain,  they  empty

Isa.  1.  Il  l  am  /.  of  the  burnt  offerings  of  rams
15-  i  W1A  n0.t  hear,  your  hands  are  /.  of  blood

21.  the  faithful  city,  it  was  of  judgment

11.  9.  tlfe  earth  shall  he  f.  of  knowledge  of  the  Ld
13.  21.  their  houses  shall  be/,  of  doleful  creatures
15.  9.  the  waters  of  Dimon  shall  be/,  of  blood
22.  2./.  of  stirs  ||  7.  valleys  shall  be/,  of  chariots

2 6.  6.  a  feast  of  fat  things,  a  feast/,  of  marrow

28.  8.  for  all  tables  are/,  of  vomit  and  filthiness
30.  27.  his  lips  are/,  of  indignation,  and  his  ton<’ue
51.  20.  they  are  /.  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord

Jer.  4. 12.  a/,  wind  from  those  places  shall  come

5.  7.  when  I  had  ted  them  to  the  /.  they  committed

6.  11.  therefore  1  am/,  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord

28.3.  within  two/,  years  will  I  bring,  11.

35.  5.  I  set  before  the  Rechabites  pots  f.  of  wine

Lam.  1.1.  how  city  sit  solitary  that  was  f.  of  peon
3.  30.  he  is  filled  /.  with  reproach  1

Ezek.  1.  18.  and  their  wings  were  /.  of  eyes

10. 4.  court  -was/,  of  the  brightness  of  Lord’s  glory

12.  the  wheels  were/,  of  eyes  round  about
17-  3.  a  great  eagle  with  wings  /.  of  feathers
19.  10.  she  was  fruitful  and  /.“of  branches
28. 12.  the  sum,/,  of  wisdom,  and  perfect  in  beauty
32.  6.  and  the  rivers  shall  be  /.  of  thee
37.  1.  in  midst  of  the  valley  which  was/,  of  bones
39. 19.  ye  shall  eat  fat  till  ye  be  /.  and  drink  blood

Van.  3.  19.  then  was  Nebuchadnezzar/,  of  fury

8.  23.  when  the  transgressors  are  come  to  the  /.

10.  2.  in  those  days  Daniel  mourne'd  three /.  weeks

Joel  2.  24.  the  floors  shall  be /.  of  wheat
Mic.  3.  8.  but  truly  I  am/,  of  power  by  the  Spirit
6.  12.  the  rich  men  thereof  are  /.  of  violence
Had.  3.  .3.  and  the  earth  was  /.  of  his  praise
Zech.  8.  5.  the  streets  shall  be  /.  of  boys  and  girls
Mat.  6.  22.  thy  body  shall  be /.  of  light,  LukeXl.  36.

13.  48.  which  when  it  was  /.  they  drew  to  shore

14.  20.  of  fragments  twelve  baskets  /.  Mark  6.  43.

15.  37.  they  took  up  that  was  left  seven  baskets/.

23.  25.  but  within  are/,  of  extortion  and  excess

27.  but  within  are/,  of  dead  men’s  bones

28.  within  ye  are/,  of  hypocrisy  and  iniquity
Mark  7.  9./.  well  ye  reject  commandment  of  God

15.  36.  one  ran  and  filled  a  spunge  /'.  of  vinegar
Luke  1.  57.  now  Elizab ./.  time  came  to  be  deliver.

4. 1.  Jesus  being /.  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  led

5.  12.  behold  a  man/,  of  leprosy,  fell  on  his  face

6.  25.  woe  unto  you  that  are  f.  ye  shall  hunger

16.  20.  Lazarus  was  laid  at  his  gate /.  of  sores
John  1.  14.  and  dwelt  among  us,/,  of  grace  and  truth

7-  8.  I  go  not  up,  for  my  time  is  not  yet /.  come
15.  11.  and  that  your  joy  might  he  /.  16.  24.

19.  29.  there  was  set  a  vessel/,  of  vinegar
Acts  2. 13.  others  said,  these  men  are  /.  of  new  wine
28.  shalt  make  me  /  of  joy  with  thy  countenance

6.  3.  look  ye  out  men  /'.  of  the  Iloly  Ghost
5.  Stephen/,  of  faith  and  the  H.  Ghost,  8.  |  7.  55.

7.  23.  when  Moses  was/,  forty  years  old

9.  36.  Dorcas/,  of  good  works  and  alms  deeds

11.  24.  Barnabas/,  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  faith
1.3.  10.  and  said,  O  /.  of  all  subtilty  and  mischief
19.  28.  they  were/,  of  wrath,  and  cried  out

Rom.  1.  29.  being/,  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit
15. 14.  I  am  persuad.  that  ye  also  are  /.  ot  goodn.

1  Cor.  4.  8.  now  ye  are /.  now  ye  are  rich
Phil.  2.  26.  for  he  longed  and  was/,  of  heaviness

4.  12.  [  am  instructed  to  be/,  and  to  be  hungry
18.  but  I  have  all,  and  abound,  I  am  f.

2  Tim.  4.  5.  make  /.  proof  of  thy  ministry
Ileb.  5. 14.  but  strong  meat  to  them  that  are  of /.  age
Jam.  3. 8.  tongue  an  unruly  evil,/,  of  deadly  poison

17.  wisdom  from  above  is  pure,/,  of  mercy

1  Pet.  1.  8.  j'e  rej.  with  joy  unspeak.  and /.  of  glory

2  Pet.  2.  14.  eyes/,  of  adultery,  not  cease  from  sin

1  John  J.  4.  we  write  to  you,  that  your  joy  may  be/.

2  John  8.  but  that  we  receive  a/,  reward

12.  speak  face  to  face,  that  our  joy  may  be  /.

Rev.  4.  6.  there  were  four  beasts  /,  of  eyes,  8.

5.  8.  having  every  one  golden  vials  f.  of  odours

15.  7.  seven  golden  vials  /.  of  the  wrath  of  God

16.  10.  and  his  kingdom  was/,  of  darkness

17.  3.  I  saw  a  woman  /.  of  names  of  blasnhemy
4.  a  golden  cup/,  of  abominations  and  filthiness

21.  9.  the  seven  vials/,  of  the  seven  last  plagues
See  Assurance,  Compassion.


Is  FULL.

2  Kings  4.  4.  thou  shalt  set  aside  that  which  is  f.
Psal.  10.  7-  his  mouth  is  f.  of  cursing,  Rom.  3.  14
,  26.  10.  and  their  right  hand  is /.  of  bribes
29.  4.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  f.  of  majesty
33.  5.  the  earth  is  f.  ot  the  goodness  of  the  Lord
48.  10.  thy  right  hand  isf.  of  righteousness
Go.  9.  with  the  river  of  Clod,  which  is  f.  of  water
75.  8.  and  the  wine  is  red,  it  is  f.  of  mixture
88.  3.  my  soul  is  f.  of  troubles,  and  my  life
104.  24.  O  Lord,  the  earth  is  f.  of  thy  riches
119.  64.  the  earth,  O  Lord,  isf.  of  thy  merev
heel.  9. 3.  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  f.  of  evil
10.  14.  a  fool  isf.  of  words,  man  not  tell  what  to  bo
Isa.  2.  7-  their  land  isf.  ot  silver,  isf.  of  horses

8.  their  land  also  isf.  of  idols,  they  worship
6.  3.  holy  is  Lord,  the  whole  earth  is  f.  of  his  glory
Jer.  5. 27.  as  acage  isf.  ot  birds,  houses  full  of  deceit
6.  11.  the  aged,  with  him  that  isf.  of  days
23. 10.  for  the  land  isf.  of  adulterers
Lzek.  7.  23.  land  isf.  ot  crimes,  city  isf.  of  violence

9.  9.  land  is  J.  ot  blood,  city  is  f.  of  perverseness
Joel  3.  13.  for  the  press  isf.  the  tats  overflow
Amos  2.  1.3.  a  cart  is  pressed,  that  is f.  of  sheaves
ffah.  3.  1.  it  is  all/  ot  lies  and  robberies
Luke  11.  34.  body  is  f.  ot  light,  isf.  of  darkness
o9.  but  your  inward  part  is  f.  of  ravenin'’

To  the  FULL.

Exod.  16.  3.  when  we  sat  and  did  eat  bread  to  the  f.

8.  when  L.  shall  give  in  the  morn,  bread  to  the  f.
Lev.  26.  5.  ye  shall  eat  your  bread  to  the  f.
FULLER,  S.

2  Rings  18.  17.  they  came  and  stood  in  the  high-
,  ,  .wav  of  the/,  field,  Isa.  7.  3.  I  36.  2.

Mai.  3.  2.  he  is  like  a  refiner’s  fire,  and  /.  soap
Mark  9.  3.  so  as  no/  on  earth  can  white  them
_T  FULLY.

Num.  14.  24.  but  Caleb  that  followed  me/

Ruth  2.  11.  Boaz  said,  it  hath/,  been  shewed  me

1  Kings  11.  6.  Solomon  went  not /.  after  the  Lord
Lecl.  8. 11.  the  heart  of  sons  of  men  is /.  setto  do  evil
Jer.  12.  t  6.  yea,  they  cried  after  thee/.

A  ah.  1. 10.  they  shall  be  devoured  as  stubble,/,  dry
Acts  2.  1.  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was/,  come
Rom.  4.  21.  being  /  persuaded,  that  what  he  pro-

-  ,  .  ,  ,  ,  .  mised

14. 5.  let  every  man  be/,  persuad.  in  his  own  mind
15.19.  I  have/,  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ
i//l- 1  25.  made  a  minister /.  to  preach  the  word

2  hm.  3.  10.  thou  hast  /.  known  my  doctrine

4. 17-  that  to’  me  the  preaching  might  be  /.  known
Rev.  14.  18.  thrust  in  thy  sickle,  grapes  are  f.  ripe
FULNESS.

Gen.  48.  +19.  his  seed  become  a  f.  of  nations
Exod.  22.  +  29.  thou  shalt  not  delay  to  offer  thy/.
Rum.  18.  27.  reckoned  as  the/,  of  the  wine-press
Deut.  22.  +  9.  lest  the/,  of  thy  seed  be  defiled
33. 16.  precious  things  of  the  earth,  and  /.  thereof
1  Sam.  28.  +20.  Saul  fell  with  the  /  of  his  stature
1  Chron.  16.  32.  let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  /  thereo;

_  .  „  Psal.  96.  11.  |  98.7.

Job  20.  22.  in/,  of  sufficiency  shall  be  in  straits
Psal.  16.  11.  in  thy  presence  is  /’.  of  joy
24. 1.  earth  is  the  Lord’s,  and  its/  1  Cor.  10.  26,  28.
50. 12.  the  world  is  mine,  and  f.  thereof,  89. 11.

Isa.  6.  +3.  his  glory  is  the  /  of  the  whole  earth
8.  +  8.  the/,  of  the  breadth  of  thy  land  shall  be  the
stretching  out  of  his  wings,  O  Immanuel
34.  +  1.  let  the  earth  hear,  and  the /.  thereof
42.  +  10.  ye  that  go  down  to  sea,  and  the  f.  thereof
Jer.  8.  +  16.  have  devoured  the  land  and/,  thereof
47-  +2.  waters  shall  overflow  the  land  aqd/.  thereof
Ezek.  16.  49.  iniquity  of  sister  Sodom, /.  of  bread
12.  +19.  land  was  desolate,  and  the/.  19. 7.  1 30. +  12.
Amos  6.  +  8.  I  will  deliver  up  city,  and  the /.  thereof
Mic.  1.  +  2.  hearken,  O  earth,  and  the/,  thereof
John  1. 16.  of  his/,  have  we  received  grace  for  grace
Rom.  11 .  12.  how  much  more  their  /.  ?

25.  till  the /.  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in
15. 29.  I  shall  come  in  the  /.  of  the  gospel  of  Christ
Gal.  4.  4.  when  the/,  of  the  time  was  come
Eph.  1.  10.  that  in  the  /  of  times  he  might  gather
23.  the  /.  of  him  that  filleth  all  in  all

3.  19.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  the /.  of  God

4.  13.  we  come  to  the  stature  of  the/,  of  Christ
Col.  1.  19.  pleased  Father,  in  him  should  all  t.  dwell

2.  9.  in  him  dwelleth  the  f.  of  the  Godhead'  bodily
FUNDAMENT.

Judg.  3.  +22.  not  draw  dagger,  it  came  out  at  the/.
FURBISH.

Jer.  46.  4.  f.  the  spears,  put  on  the  brigandines
FURBISHED.

Ezek.  21.  9.  asword  is  sharpened,  and  also/.  10.

11.  given  to  be  /.  ||  28.  sword  /.  to  consume

.  FURY.

Gen.  27.  44.  tany,  till  thy  brother’s/,  turn  away
Lev.  26.  28.  I  will  walk  contrary  to  you  in  /

Job  20.  23.  God  shall  cast  the /.  of  his  wrath  on  him
Isa.  27. 4.  /.  is  not  in  me,  who  would  set.  briers
34.  2.  and  his  /.  is  upon  all  their  armies
51.  13.  hast  feared  because  of  the  /.  of  the  oppres¬
sor  ;  and  where  is  the /.  of  the  oppressor  ?

17.  O  Jerusalem,  which  hast  drunk  cup  of  his/.

20.  as  wild  bull,  the>’  are  full  of  the /.  of  the  Lord
22.  even  the  dregs  of  cup  of  my  /.  no  more  drink
59. 18.  he  will  repa3’ /.  to  his  adversaries
63.  3.  for  I  will  trample  them  in  my/.

5.  my  arm  brought  salvation,  my/,  it  upheld  me

6.  and  I  will  make  them  drunk  in  my/.

66.  15.  Lord  will  come  to  render  his  anger  with  f.
Jer.  4.  4.  lest  my/,  come  forth  like  fire, and  burn
6. 11.  therefore  1  am  full  of  the  /.of  the  Lord
21.5. 1  will  fight  against  you  in  /.  and  wrath

12.  lest  my/,  go  out  like  fire,  and  burn

23.  19.  a  whirlwind  is  gone  forth  in  /.  30.  23.

25.  15.  take  the  wine-cup  of  this/,  at  my  hand
32.31.  this  city  hath  been  a  provocation  ofnpv/.

33.  5.  whom  l  have  slain  in  mine  anger  and  f.

36.  7-  great  is  the/,  the  Lord  hath  pronounced
Lam.  4.  11.  ffie  Lord  hath  accomplished  his /.

Ezek.  5. 13.  1  will  cause  my  /.  to  rest  on  them,  they
shaL  know  when  1  have  accomplished  my  /.

ias


GAR


FUR


GAL


Ezek. 5. 15.  when  I  shall  execute  judgments  in/.

6.  12.  thus  will  1  accomplish  my  /.  on  them

8.  18.  therefore  will  1  deal  in/,  m3;  eye  not  spare

13.  13. 1  will  rend  with  a  stormy  wind  in  my  J .
iti.  38.  1  will  give  thee  blood  in/,  and  jealousy
42.  so  will  1  make  my/,  towards  thee  to  rest

19.  12.  but  she  was  plucked  110  in  my  /.  castdown
20.33.  with/,  poured  out  will  1  rule  over  you

21.  17.  and  l  will  cause  my/,  to  rest

22.  20.  so  will  1  gather  you  in  mine  anger  and  j.

24*  8. that  it  might  cause  /.  to  come  up  to  vengeance

13.  not  purged,  till  L  have  caused  xx\y  j.  to  rest
25.  14.  they  shall  do  in  Edom  according  to  my  /.

36.  6.  I  have  spoken  in  my  jealousy  and  in  my  j.

38.  18.  that  my/,  shall  come  up  in  my  face
Van.  3. 13.  Nebuchadnezzar  in  Ins/,  commanded
19  then  was  Nebuchadnezzar  full  of/.

8.  6.  and  he  ran  unto  him  in  the  /.  ot  his  power
q  16  let  thy  /.  be  turned  away  from  thy  city  .lerus.

li.  44  he  shall  go  forth  with  great/,  to  destroy
]MiC'  5.  15.  1  will  execute./',  on  the  heathen
ah.  1. 1  2.  the  Lord  revengeth,  that  hath  /.

Zech  8  2.  I  was  jealous  for  her  with  great/.

See  Pouit,  Poured.

FURIOUS.

Prov.  22.  24.  with  a/,  man  thou  shalt  not  go
29. 22.  a/,  man  aboundeth  in  transgression
Ezek.  5. 15.  execute  judgment  in/,  rebukes,  25. 1J.
Van.  2. 12.  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  was  very  J.
Hah.  1.2.  the  Lord  revengeth,  and  is/.

FURIOUSLY.

2  Kings  Q. 20.  like  the  driving  of  Jehu,  he  driveth/.
Ezek.23.  25.  and  they  shall  deal/,  with  thee
FURLONGS.

Luke  24.  13.  Emmaus  was  from  Jerusalem  sixty/.
John 6.  19.  had  rowed  about  five  and  twenty/.

11.  18.  Bethany  nigh  Jerusalem  about  fifteen/.

Eev.  14.20.  blood  came  out  by  the  space  ot  1600/.
21.  16.  he  measured  the  city  with  reed,  12,000/
FURNACE

Signifies,  [1]  A  fire-place  for  melting  gold  and  other
metals,  Prov.  17. 3. 1  27-  21.  [2]  A  place  oj  cruel
bondage  and  oppression;  such  xvas  Egypt  to  the
Israelites,  mho  there  met  with  much  hardship,
rigour,  and  severity,  for  to  try  and  purge  them,
Pent.  4.  20.  Jer.  11.4.  [3j  Most  sharp  and  grievous
afflictions  and  judgments  wherewith  God  tries  his
people,  Ezek.  22.  18,  20,  22.  [4]  A  place  of  tem-
poral  torment ;  such  was  IS  ebuchadnezzar  s  fiery
furnace.  Van.  3.  6,  11.  [5]  Hell,  the  place  oj

endless  torment.  Mat.  13.  42.

Gen.  15. 17.  a  smoking/,  and  a  burning  lamp
19.  28.  the  smoke  went  up  as  the  smoke  of  a/.
Exod.  9.8.  take  you  handfuls  of  ashes  of  the/.

10.  and  they  took  ashes  of  the  /  and  stood
19. 18.  the  smoke  ascended  as  the  smoke  of  a/.
Vent.  4.  20.  the  Lord  hath  taken  you  out  ot  the/.

1  Kings  8.  51.  from  the  midst  of  the/.  Jer.  11.  4.
Psal.  12. 6.  pure  words,  as  silver  tried  in  a /  ot  earth
Prov.  17.  3.  fining  pot  for  silver, /.  for  gold,  27.  21.
Isa.  31.  9.  whose  fire  is  in  Zion,  his  ./.in  Jerusalem
48.  10.  1  have  chosen  thee  in  the/,  of  affliction
Ezek.  22.  18.  Israel  is  dross  in  the  midst  ot  the/.

20.  1  will  gather  you  as  tin  in  the  midst  ot  the/
22.  as  silver  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  the/.

Van.  3.  6.  be  cast  into  midst  of  a  burning  fiery /.  11.
Mat.  13. 42.  and  shall  cast  them  into  a/,  ot  tire,  50.
Pev.  1. 15.  his  feet  like  brass,  as  if  they  burned  in  a/.

9.  2.  arose  a  smoke,  as  the  smoke  ot  a  great/.
FURNACES.

Ifeh.  3.  11.  Ilashub  repaired  the  tower  ot  the/.

12.  38.  from  the  tower  of  the/,  to  the  broad  wall
FURNISH.

Vent.  15. 14.  thou  shalt/.  him  liberally  out  of  flock
Psal.  78.  19.  can  God  /.  a  table  in  the  wilderness?
Isa.  65. 11.  that/,  the  drink-offering  to  that  number
Jer.  46. 19.  /.  thyself  to  go  into  captivity
FURN  1SHED.

1  Kings  9. 11.  Hiram/.  Solomon  with  cedar
Prov.  9.  2.  she  hath  also  /.  her  table
Mat.  22. 10.  and  the  wedding  was/,  with  guests
Mark  14.  15.  will  shew  you  a  room/.  I,uke22.  12

2  Tim.  3.  17.  thoroughly  /.  unto  all  good  works

FURNITURE.

Gen.  31 . 34.  Rachel  put  them  in  the  camels’  /.

Exod.  31.  7.  the  tabernacle  and  his/.  39.  33.

8.  table  and  his  /.  ||  9.  altar-  with  all  his/.

35.  14.  the  candlestick  and  his/,  and  his  lamps
Hah.  2.  9.  there  is  none  end  of  all  the  pleasant/.
FURROW.

1  Sam.  14.  +  14.  slew  twenty  men  within  half  a/.
Job  39.  10.  canstthou  bind  the  unicorn  in  the/./
FUR  HOWS.

Job  31.  38.  or  the/,  thereof  likewise  complain
Psal.  65. 10.  thou  settlest  the  /.  thereof
129. 3.  the  plowers  plowed,  they  made  long  their/.
Ezek.  17.  7.  might  water  it  by  /.  of  her  plantation

10.  it  shall  wither  in  the  /.  where  it  grew
Ilos.  10.  4.  judgment  as  hemlock  in  the  /.  of  the  field
10.  when  shall  bind  themselves  in  their  two  f.

12. 11.  their  altars  as  heaps  in  the/',  of  the  fields
FURT  HER.

Hum.  22. 26. angel  went  /'.  and  stood  in  narrow  place
Vent.  20.  8.  officers  shall  speak  /.  to  the  people
1  Sam.  10.  22.  thev  inquired  of  the  Lord/.

Job  38.11.  hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no/.

40.  5.  yea,  twice,  but  I  will  proceed  no/.

Eccl.  8. 17-/.  though  a  wise  man  think  to  know  it
12.  12./.  by  theseT  my  son,  be  admonished
Mat.  26.  39.  he  went  a  little/,  and  tell  on  his  face
65.  saying,  what /.  -need  have  we  of  witnesses  :

Mark  14.  63.  Luke  22.71.
it  lark  1.  19.  when  ne  had  gone  a  little/,  thence
5.  35.  why  troublest thou  the  Master  any/.  ?


Heb  7. 11.  what/,  need  another  priest  should  rise
FURTHER,  Verb.

Psal.  140.  8.  O  Lord,/,  not  his  wicked  device
FURTHERANCE.

Phil.  1.  12.  the  things  which  happened  unto  me
have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the  /.  of  the  gospel
25.  shall  abide  with  you  toryour/.  and  joy  ot  faith
FURTHERED.

Ezra  8.  36.  they  /.  the  people  and  the  house  ot  God
FURTHERMORE.

Exod.  4.  6.  Lord  said/,  to  Moses,  put  tlnne  hand
Ezek.  8.  6.  Lord  said/,  to  Ezekiel,  son  ot  man


G.


GADDEST.

Jer.  2.  36.  wh y  g.  thou  about  to  change  thy  way .
GAIN .

Judo.  5. 19.  the  kings  of  Canaan  took  no  g.  of  money
Job  22.  3.  is  it  g.  to  him  to  make  thy  way  pel  feet .
Prov'  i.  19.  so  are  the  ways  of  every  one  greedy  ot  g.
3  14.  the  g.  thereof  is  better  than  tine  gold
15.  27.  he  that  is  greedy  of  g.  troubled)  his  house
°8.  8.  that  by  usury  and  unjust)/,  increased)  _

Isa.  33.  15.  he  that  despiseth  the  g.  ot  oppressions
56."  11.  every  one  for  his  g.  from  his  quarter
Ezek.  22.  13.  have  smitten  hand  at  thy  dishonest  g.

07  her  princes  like  as  wolves  to  get  dishonest  g.
Van.  11.  39.  he  shall  divide  the  land  tor  g.

Mic.  4.  13-  I  will  consecrate  their  g.  to  trie  Lord
Ilaii.  2.  1  9.  woe  to  him  that  gaineth  an  evil  g.
Acts  16.  16.  which  brought  her  masters  much  g.
19.  24.  brought  no  small  g.  to  the  craftsmen


jy.  X-K  UJUUqIH  omul)  {/  •  ^  * - , -  T  ,  -

2  Cor.  12.  17.  did  I  make  a  g.  of  you  by  any  I  sent :


18.  did  Titus  make  a  g.  of  you  ?  .

Phil  1  °1  for  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is//.


J vnil.  1.  XI.  me  IU  - ~  4  1”  ,

3  7  what  things  were  g.  to  me,  I  counted  loss
1  Tim.  6.  5.  supposing  that  g.  is  godliness


.  •}«/•  >*11/  U  UUIJIcol  1 1  It  Hi  INC  Hi  flolCi  clti/  ,f  •  •

Luke  24. 28.  he  made  as  tho’  he  would  have  gone  /.
Acts  4. 17-  that  it  spread  no/,  among  the  people


21.  when  had /.  threatened  them,  they  let  them
12.  3.  Herod  proceeded  /.  to  take  Peter  also
21.  28./.  he  brought  Greeks  also  into  the  temple
24.  4.  that  1  be  not  /.  tedious  unto  thee
27. 28.  they  had  gone  a  littie  /.  they  sounded
2  Tim.  3.  9-  but  they  shal.  proceed  no/.

184


go


6.  but  godliness  with  contentment  is .great g.

Jam.  4.  13.  go  to  a  city,  there  buy,  sell,  and  get  g.
GAIN,  Verb.

Van.  2.  8.  I  know  that  ye  would  g.  the  time
Mat.  16.  26.  what  profited  if  lie  should  g.  the  whole
world,  and  lose  his  soul  ?  Mark  8.  36.  Juke  9.

1  Cor.  9. 19.  servant  to  all,  that  I  might  //,  the  more

20.  that  1  might  g.  the  Jews  11  22.  g. .  the  weak

21.  that  I  might  g .  them  that  are  without  law

GAINED.  ,

Job  27.  8.  what  hope  hath  hypocrite,  tho  he  hath  g. :
Ezek.  22.  12.  thou  hast  greedily  g.  by  extortion
Mat.  18.  15.  if  he  hear,  thou  hast  g.  thy  brother
25.  17.  that  received  two  had  also//,  other  two,  2~.
20.  1  have  g.  besides  them  five  talents  more
Luke  19. 15.  how  much  every  man  had  g.  by  trading
16.  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  g.  ten  pounds
18.  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  //.  five  pounds
Acts  °7  °1.  and  to  have  g.  this  harm  and  loss

2  John  t  8.  that  ye  lose  not  the  things  ye  have  g.

GAINS.

Acts  16.  19.  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  g.  was  gone
GAINSAY.

Luke  21. 15.  your  adversaries  shall  not  be  able  to  g.

J  GAIN  SAYERS.

Tit.  1.  9.  that  ye  might  be  able  to  convince  the  g.
GAINSAYING.

Acts  10.  29.  therefore  came  I  to  you  without  g.
Pom.  10.  21.  1  stretched  forth  my  hands  to  a  g.  peo.
Tit.  2.  t  9.  servants  to  please  them,  not  g.

Jude  11.  they  have  perished  in  the  g.  of  Core
GA  LL

Is  a  bitter  juice,  one  of  the  humours  in  the  body  of
man  anil  beast.  It  is  put  for  any  thing  that  is
bitter  and  pernicious.  Job  20.  14.  \  et  Ins  meat
in  his  bowels  is  turned,  it  is  the  gall  ot  asps
within  him  :  It  will  be  very  painful  and  destruc¬
tive  to  him  at  last.  Psal.  69.  21.  1  hey  gave  me
gall  for  my  meat;  or  poison,  or  bitter  herbs.  St.
Matthew  says,  that  they  gave  our  Saviour  vinegai
to  drink  nunglea  with  gall,  Mat.  27-  34.  St.
Mark  calls  it  wine  mingled  with  myrrh,  Mark
15.  23.  It  is  generally  thought  that  the  gall  and
myrrh  signify  but  one  and  the  same  thing,  that  is,
something  that  was  very  bitter.  It  is  said  to  have
been  an  ordinary  custom  to  give  dying  persons
some  intoxicating  potion,  to  make  them  less  sensi¬
ble  of  their  pain.  To  give  water  of  gall  to  drink,
denotes  some  very  bitter  affliction,  Jer.  8.  14.
Their  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall,  Vent.  32.  32.
Their  fruits,  or  actions,  are  displeasing  to  (jod,
malicious  and  mischievous  to  others,  and  will  at
last  be  pernicious  to  themselves.  A  root  that
beareth  gall,  Vent.  29.  18.  may  denote  some
secret  and  subtle  idolaters ,  who  might  secretly
infect  and  poison  others,  by  drawing  them  to
idolatry  ;  which  will  produce  bitter  fruits,  how
pleasant  soever  it  may  be  for  the  present,  lo  be
in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  bond  of  iniquity,
is  to  be  in  a  state  of  great  impiety,  to  be  under
the  power  of  sin  and  corruption,  oj  hypocrisy  and
ambition.  It  is  put  for  great  affliction.  Job  16.
13.  For  wrong,  injustice,  Amos  6.  12.

Vent.  29. 18.  lest  there  should  be  a  root  that  bear.  g.
32.  32.  their  grapes  are  grapes  of//,  clusters  bitter
Job  16. 13.  he  poureth  out  my  g.  on  the  ground
20.  14.  his  meat  is  the  g.  of  asps  within  him
25  the  glittering  sword  cometh  out  of  his  g.

Psal.  69.  21.  they  gave  me  also  g.  for  my  meat
Jer.  H.  14.  God  hath  given  us  water  ot  g.  to  drink
9.  15.  I  will  give  them  water  of  j.  23.  15.

Lam.  3.  5.  he  hath  compassed  me  wth  g.  and  travel
19.  remembering  the  wormwoon  and  the  g.

Amos  6.  12.  for  ye  have  turned  judgment  into  g.
Mat.  27.  34.  they  gave  him  vinegar  mingled  with  g.
Acts  8.  23. 1  perceive  thou  art  in  the  g.  of  bitterness
GALLANT.

Isa.  33.  21 .  no  galley,  nor  shall  a.  ship  pass  thereby
GALLANT&.

Hah.  2.  +  5.  he  shall  recount  his  g.  they  shall  stumble
Zech.  11.  t  2.  howl,  because  the  g.  are  spoiled
GALLERY,  1  ES.

Cant.  1. I  17.  the  beams  are  cedar,  and  our  g.  of  fir


Cant.  7.5.  thy  head  like  Carmel,  king  is  held  in  then.
Ezek.  41. 15.  he  measured  the  g.  thereof  on  one  side
4°  3.  aeainstthe  pavem.  was y.  against  g.  in  stories
GALLEY.

Isa.  33.  21.  wherein  shall  go  no  g.  with  oars

G  ALLOW  S.  .<■

Esth.  6.  4.  Haman  spake  to  hang  Mordecai  on  g.

7  10.  so  they  hanged  Haman  on  the  g.  8.  7.

9  13  let  Hainan’s  ten  sons  be  hanged  onthe/>,25
GANGRENE.

2  Tim.  2.  t  17.  and  their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  g.  j
GAP .

Fvek  °2  30.  a  man  that  should  stand  in//,  before  in*

‘  GAPED.

Job  16.  10.  they  have  g.  upon  me,  Psal.  22. 13.

GAP  El  II.

Job  7.  t  2.  as  a  servant  g.  after  the  shadow
GAPS.

Ezek.  13. 5.  yehave  not  gone  up  into  the//,  for  Israel
GARDEN

Is  a  plot  of  ground  furnished  with  plants,  flowers,  1  |
£c  Gen  2.  15.  The  church  is  resembled  to  a  ,
garden,  Cant.  4.  12. 1  5.  1.  As  a  garden  is  taken
out  of  the  common  waste  ground  to  be  appropriated  ,
to  a  more  particular  use,  so  the  church  of  Christ  |  1
is  chosen  from  among  the  rest  of  the  world  to  a
particular  use.  In  a  garden  nothing  that  is  good ;  <
comes  up  naturally  oj  itselj,  but  as  it  is  planted  4
and  set  ;  so  nothing  is  good  in  the  heart,  but  what  j
planted  and  set  by  the  heavenly  Husbandman.  In 1
a  warden  nothing  uses  to  be  planted,  but  what  ts\  ;
useful  and  delightful ;  so  there  is  no  glace  m  the
heart  oj'  a  Christian  but  what  is  useful  and  neces¬
sary.  In  a  garden  there  are  variety  oj  flowers  and
spices;  so  in  a  Christian  there  is  somewhat  ot  every
grace.  As  men  delight  much  in  their  gardens,  tv  J
walk  there  and  take  their  pleasure,  and  take  care  '
to  fence,  weed,  water,  and  plant  them  ;  so  Christ?
care  and  delight  is  for  his  church.  As  gardens  use  >
to  have  fountains  and  streams  running  throng/,
them,  as  Paradise  had  four  streams  which  raw  i
through  it  ;  so  the  church  is  Christ  s  I  aradise  i
and  his  Spirit  is  a  spring  in  the  midst  oj  it,  to  re  i
fresh  the  souls  of  believers.  A  garden  stand!  \
always  in  need  oj'  weeding  and  dressing  ;  so  m  tin.
hearts  of  Christians,  Christ  hath  always  somewhat  f
to  do,  they  would  else  soon  be  overgrown  and  tun
wild.  The  prophet  Isaiah  upbraids  the  Jews  wit\
the  abominations  and  acts  oj  idolatry  which  the,  (
committed  in  their  gardens.  T  e  shall  be  coil;  1
founded  for  the  gardens  which  ye  have  chosen  I
Isa.  1.  29.  These  gardens  were  either  consecrate, j  ,1
to  idols,  or  were  such  as  the  heathens  worshipped .
idols  in  ;  there  they  sacrificed,  Isa  65.  .3.  ajteM
zvhich  they  thought  that  they  were  well  jrunjiefa*
when  they  had  washed  themselves  in  the  watei ,  Isa

Gen.  2.  15.  God  took  the  man  and  put  him  m  the*

3.  23.  Lord  sent  him  forth  from  the  g.  ot  Eden
13. 10.  the  plain  of  Jordan  was  as  the  //.ot  the  Lc
Vent.  11.  10.  and  waterest  it  as  a  g.  ot  herbs  1
1  Kings  21.  2.  that  1  may  have  it  tor  a  g.  of  herbs
Job  8.  16.  his  branch  shooteth  forth  in  his  g.

Cant.  4.  12.  a  g.  inclosed  is  my  sister,  my  spouse
16.  blow  upon  my  y.  let  him  come  into  ms£.  J

5.  1.  1  am  come  into  my  g.  my  sister,  my  spous

6.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  into  his  g.  11.

Isa.  1.  8.  the  daughter  of  Zion  is  as  a  lodge  mat

30.  ye  shall  be  as  a  g.  which  hath  no  water
51.  3.  he  will  make  her  desert  like  the  g.  ot  God
58.  11.  and  thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered  g.

61.  11.  as  the  g.  causeth  things  sown  to  spring
Jer.  31. 12.  their  souls  shall  be  as  a  watered  y.


to  '  •  «J  1  •  I  «  •  II1C11  i/UUlO  OlltV  «

Lam.  2. 6.  taken  away  histabernac.  as  it  were  or  a
Ezek.  28.  13.  thou  hast  been  in  Eden  the  g.  ot  ut


31.  8.  cedars  in  g.  of  God  could  not  hide  him
9.  all  the  trees  in  the  g.  of  God  envied  him
36.35.  desolate  land  is  become  like  the  g.  of  Eat
Joel  2.  3.  land  is  as  the  g.  of  Eden  before  them.
Luke  13.  19.  which  a  man  took  and  cast  intojns
John  18.  1.  over  the  brook  Cedron,  where  was  a
26.  did  not  1  see  thee  in  the  g.  with  him.

19.  41.  there  was  a  g.  and  in  the  g.  a  sepulchre
GARDENS.

Hum.  24.  6.  thy  tents  as  g.  by  the  liver  side
Eccl.  2.  5.  I  made  me  g.  and  orchards,  and  plant
Cant.  4.  15.  a  fountain  of//,  a  well  of  waters
6.  2.  to  feed  in  the  a.  and  to  gather  lilies

8.  13.  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  g.  cause  me  to  lie
Isa.  1.  29.  and  ye  shall  be  confounded  tor  the  g\

65.  3.  a  people  that  sacrificeth  in  g.  burns  meet
66. 17.  they  that  purify  themselves  in  the//.

Jer.  29.  5.  plant//,  and  eat  the  fruit  ot  them,  *8.
Amos  4.  9.  I  sent  blasting,  when  your  //.  mcreas

9.  14.  they  shall  also  make  g.  and  eat  fruit  ot  tn<j

GARDENER.

John  20.  15.  she  supposing  he  had  been  the/7.
GARRISON,  S.

1  Sam. 10.  5.  to  hill  where  isfi.pt  the  Philistine

13.  3.  Jonathan  smote  the  g.  of  the  1  hilistmea

14.  1.  let  us  go  over  to  the  Philistines  g.  6.

15.  the  g.  and  the  spoilers,  they  also  trembleu

2  Sam.  8.6.  David  put//,  in  Syria,  1  Oh  run.  ml
14.  David  put  g.  in  Edom,  1  Chron.lv>.  13.

23. 14.  g.  of  Phil  ist.  in  Beth  lehem,  1  Chron.  11.

2  C  ’hr.  17. 2.  Jehoshap.  set//,  in  Judah  and  Epmit
Ezek.  26.  11.  thy  strong//,  shall  go  down  to  grot
2  Cor.  11.  32.  the  governor  kept  the  city  witn  a
GAR  IAN  DS.

Acts  14. 13.  the  priest  of  Jupiter  brought  oxen  a0‘
GARRICK.  „

Hum.  11. 5.  we  remember  the  g.  we  did  eat  in  C-  -
GARMENT  ...

Is  that  wherewith  one  is  clothed.  Mat.  27.  3i>.  >

parted  my  garments.  Ey  the  wedding  *  _

is  meant  Christ  with  his  peiject  n////<e<'«rwe.  n
pvted,  which  as  a  garment  doth  hide  the  spit  ‘
nakedness,  and  decks  and  adorns  the  soul  wit
ritual  beauty.  Mat.  22. 11.  Some  by  jveddm.-  -


nVent  understand  the  grace  of  sanctification,  1


11  It’ll  l  II/IUCI  -----  r  ^  .  qj,

holy  life,  answerable  to  one  s  projesston ,  v~\‘ ;
sense  garment  is  taken  in  Rev.  3.4.1  hou  hast  .


GAR


GAT


GAT


names  in  Sardis  which  have  not  defiled  their
garments ;  who  are  of  unhlameab/e  lives.  He
was  clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  Ids  foot,
Rev.  1.  13.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  this  denoted
the  purity  and  inriocency  of  that  priesthood,  which
Christ  did  exercise  for  his  church:  Others,  that
it  denoted  the  dignity  and  majesty  of  Christ,  as
King  of  his  church:  it  being  usual  for  kings  to
wear  lung  robes  in  token  of  majesty.  Garments
rolled  or  dyed  in  blood,  Isa.  9.  5.  |  63.  2.  are
garments  sprinkled  and  stained  with  the  blood  of
the  shin,  such  as  warriors  wear ,  which  have
overcome  their  enemies  in  battle,
en.  9.  23.  Shem  and  Japhet  took  a  g.  and  laid  it
5.25.  the  first  came  out.  red,  like  a  hairy  g.

9. 12.  she  caught  Joseph  by  his  g.  lie  left  his  g.

15.  he  left  his  y.  witli  me  and  fled  out,  18.

9.16.  she  laid  up  his  <7.  till  her  lord  came  home
tv.  6.  27.  sprinkled  of  the  blood  thereof  on  any  g
3.  47;  g.  wherein  is  the  plague  of  leprosy,  49.

51.  if  plague  be  spread  in  the  g.  in  warp  or  woof
59.  the  law  of  the  plague  of  leprosy  in  ay.  14.  55.

5. 17.  every  g.  whereon  is  the  seed  of  copulation

9. 19.  nor  g.  mingled  come  on  thee.  Dent.  22. 11.
eut.  22.  5.  a  man  shall  not  put  on  a  woman’s  g.
sh.  7-  21.  when  I  saw  a  goodly  Babylonish  g.

24.  Joshua  took  Achan,  the  silver,  and  the  g


*  *■  •••'  ■*  *  j  on  »  01  y  turn  ti  1C  y  .

■dg.8.  25.  they  spread  a  g.  and  cast  ear-rings
Sun .  13. 18.  1  amar  had  a  g.  of  divers  colours  on  her


19.  she  rent  her  g.  and  went  on  crying
Kings  1 1.  29.  J  eroboam  clad  himself  with  a  new  g.
Kings  4. 1 42.  brought  him  ears  of  corn  in  his  g.

•  13.  took  every  man  his  g.  and  put  under  him
■ra  9. 3.  when  l  heard  this  1  rentmy  y.  and  mantle
5.  having  rent  my  g.  and  mantle  1  fell  on  knees
;th.  8.  15.  Mordecai  went  with  a  g.  of  purple

b  13.  28.  consu-meth,  as  a  g.  that  is  moth-eaten
).  18.  by  force  of  my  disease  is  my  g.  changed
3.  9.  yhen  I  made  the  cloud  the  g.  thereof
L4.it  is  turned  as  clay  to  the  seal,  they  stand  as  ay.

1.  13.  who  can  discover  the  face  of  his  g.  ?
ial.  69.  11.  1  made  sackcloth  also  my  g.

?.  6.  pride  compasseth,  violence  cover,  them  as  g
)2.  26.  they  shall  perish,  yea,  all  of  them  shall
wax  old  like  a  g.  Isa.  50.  9.  I  51.  6.  Heb.  1. 11.
}4. 2.  thou  coverest  thyself  with  light,  as  with  ay.
i.  thou  coveredst  it  with  the  deep  as  with  a  g.
)9.  18.  he  clothed  himself  with  cursing  as  a  g.
19.  let  it  be  to  him  as  the  g.  which  covereth  him
■ov.  20.  16.  take  his  g.  that  is  surety,  27.  13.

>.  20.  as  he  that  taketh  away  a  g.  in  cold  weather
).  4.  who  hath  bound  the  waters  in  a  g.  ?

7.51. 8.  the  moth  shall  eat  them  up  like  a  g.

1.  3.  to  give  g.  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness
r.  43. 12.  as  a  shepherd  putteth  on  his  g.
eh.  18.  7.  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  g.  16.
in,  7 .  9.  whose  g.  was  white  as  snow
ic.  2.  8.  ye  pull  off  the  robe  with  the  g.  from  them
2g.  2. 12.  it  pne  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  skirt  of  his  g.
ch.  13. 4.  neither  shall  wear  a  rough  g.  to  deceive
el.  2. 16.  tor  one  covereth  violence  with  his  g.
at.  9. 16. new  cloth  to  old  g.  Mark2.il.  Luke  5. 36.
!0.  behold,  a  woman  diseased  touched  the  hem  of
his  g.  21.  1  14.  36.  Mark  5.  27.  Luke  8.  44.
..11. 1  saw  a  man  who  had  noton  a  wedding-  g,  12.
ark  13. 16.  not  turn  back  again  to  take  up  his  g .
).  5.  a  young  man  clothed  with  a  long  white  a,
ike  22.  36.  let  him  sell  his  g.  and  buy  one
'ts  12.  8.  cast  thy  g.  about  thee  and  follow  me
de  23.  hating  even  the  g.  spotted  by  the  flesh
v.l.  13.  Son  of  man  clothed  with  a  g.  down  to  foot
GARMENTS.

'■n.  35.  2.  and  be  clean,  and  change  your  g.

!.  14.  lamar  nut  her  widow’s  g .  off  from  her

I.  11.  washed  hisy.  in  wine,  his  clothes  in  grapes
•oa.  28. 3.  may  make  Aaron’s  y .  to  consecrate  him

l.  21.  sprinkled  the  blood  on  Aaron’s  y.  Lev.  8. 30.
'■  10.  1  have  given  them  wisdom  to  make  y.

t.  6. 11.  put  off  his  y.  put  on  other  y.  16.  23, 24.

15.  38.  make  fringes  in  the  borders  of  their  y.
'•96- strip  Aaron  of  his  y.  put  them  on  Eleazar
8.  Moses  stript  Aaron  of'  y.  put  them  on  Eleazar

m. 9.5.  Gibeonites  brought  old  y.  mouldy  bread
14- 12.,I  will  give  you  thirty  change  of  y.

.  t  10. 1  will  give  thee  ten  shekels  and  order  of  y.
\am,  18.  4.  Jonathan  gave  David  his  y.

'f"*- 10-4- cut  offtheiry.  in  the  middle,  1  Chr. 19  A.
k31.  David  tare  his  y.  and  lay  on  the  earth
sings 5.  26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  money  and  y.  ?

lo.  all  the  way  was  full  of  y.  and  vessels
:•  „  14.  Iluldah,  wife  of  Shallum,  keeper  of  y.

*•  "9.  he  changed  Jehoiakim’s  y.  Jer.  52.  33.
ra2.  69.  they  gave  one  hundred  priests’  y.

•  7°.  the  I  irshatha  gave  530  priests’ y.

1 .People  gave  sixty -seven  priests’  y.

'  ;  on  ,'„  ,w  thy  g •  are  Wiirm,  when  he  quieteth
■  a  tl,ey  part  my  O-  among  them,  cast  lots

.8.  an  thy  smell  of  myrrh,  aloes,  and  cassia
z.  ointment  that  went  down  to  skirts  of  his  y.
t2E  her  household  clothed  with  double  y.
«.9. 8.  letthvy.  be  always  white,  and  thy  head
4. 11.  smell  of  thy  y.  is  like  smell  of  Lebanon

J.  9.  5.  every  battle  is  with  y.  rolled  in  blood
’f  r  Ru* on  Ihy  beautiful  y.  O  Jerusalem

•  0.  their  webs  shall  not  become  y.

7-  he  put  on  the  y.  of  vengeance  for  clothing
’  |°-  be  hath  clothed  me  with  the  y.  of  salvation
J;  ‘!,a *  conjeth  with  dyed  g.  from  Bozrah  ?
r  3fai  *  °°^  sbaH  be  sprinkled  upon  my  y.


m  -  ^  opi  uiiucu  upon  my  g .

4  it  yet  xy  were  n()t  afraid,  nor  rent  g.


.  yy.  A  «  ,  ^  ,  J  loll  flltl,  UU1  1  till  (7,

;"?■ '  i^^o50  ti,1at  men  could  not  touch  their  y.

,  i.  A18, to,okest thy  broid. y.  and  covered  thei
i  in  !i  re  shall  lay  their  y.  they  ministered  in
/,;y-  ‘ey  shall  not  sanctify  people  with  their  g.
=/  o  "e,re  bound  m  their  coats  and  other' y
;.,2- 13>  r®lu|  your  heart,  and  not  your  y.

. Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  g.
take  away  the  filthy  y.  from  him


at  01  c»  .  , y .  mmi  mm

•  Vli,8'  sPr.eH(t  their y.  in  the  way,  Mark  11.  8
’■  :?r  '  i  y  enlarge  the  borders  of  their  g.
'rA,;!h^y  lotted  hisy. casting  lots,  Mark  15.  21
* 1U* 50-  Eartimeus  casting  away  his  y.  arost


Mark  11.7.  they  cast  their  y.  on  the  colt ,Luke  19. 35.
Luke  24.  4.  two  men  stood  by  them  in  shining  y.
John  13.  4.  he  laid  aside  hisy.  and  took  a  towel
Acts  9.  39.  shewing  coats  and  y.  which  Dorcas  made
Jam.  5.  2.  and  your  y.  are  moth-eaten
Rev.  3.  4.  tew  names  which  have  notdefiled  theiry,

16.  16.  blessed  that  watcheth  and  keepeth  bis  a

Holy  GARMENTS.

Exod.  28.  2.  thou  shalt  make  holy  g.  for  Aaron,  4.
31.  10.  1  have  put  wisdom  to  make  holy  g.

Lev.  16.  4.  these  -Are  holy  g.  he  shall  wash,  32.

Ezek.  42.  14.  lay  their  holy  g.  wherein  they  minister
GARNER.

Mat.  3.  12.  gather  his  wheat  into  the  g.  Luke  3.  17
GARNERS.

Peal.  144.  13.  our  y.  may  be  full,  affording  store
Joel  1.  17. they. are  laid  desolate,  barns  broken  down
GARNISH,  ED.

2  Chron.  3.  6.  hey.  the  house  with  precious  stones
Job  26.  13.  by  his  Spirit  he  hath  y.  the  heavens
Mat.  12.  44.  findethit  sweptand  y.  I.uke  11.  25.

23.  29.  you  y.  the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous
Rev.  21.  19.  the  foundations  of  the  wall  are  y.
GAT.

Exod.  24. 18.  Moses  y.  him  up  into  the  mount
Num.  16.  27.  they  y.  up  from  tabernacle  of  Korah
Judg.  9.  51.  and  y.  them  up  to  the  top  of  the  tower
2  Sam.  8. 13.  and  David  y.  him  a  name
1  Kings  1. 1.  they  covered  him,  but  he  y.  1:0  heat
Psal.  116.  3.  the  pains  of  hell  y.  hold  on  me
Eccl.  2.  8.  1  y.  men-singers,  and  women-singers
Lam.  5.  9.  we  y.  our  bread  with  the  peril  of  our  lives
GATE

Is  the  entrance  into  a  house  or  city.  Judg.  16.  3.
Samson  took  the  doors  of  the  gate  of  the  city.
lhe  word  gate  is  often  used  in  scripture  to  de¬
note  the  place  of  public  assemblies,  where  justice
was  administered.  One  particular  form  of  these
judgments  is  to  be  seen  in  that,  which  was  given
at  the  gate  of  Beth-lehem,  between  Boaz  and
another  person,  a  relation  of  Naomi's  upon  the
subject  of  Ruth’s  marriage,  who  was  a  Moabitess,
Ruth  4.  1.  And  in  A  braham’s  purchase  of  a  field
to  bury  Sarah,  Gen.  23.  10,  18.  Jeromj-yy^,  that
as  the  Jews  were  for  the  most  part  employed  in
labouring  in  the  field,  it  was  wisely  provided,
that  assemblies  should  be  held  at  the  city  gates,
and  justice  administered  there  in  a  summary
manner ,  that  those  laborious  men,  who  were  busy
at  their  work,  might  lose  no  time,  and  that  the
country  people  who  had  affairs  upon  their  hands
in  the  town,  might  not  be  obliged  to  enter  and  spend
time  there.

The  word  gate  is  likewise  sometimes  pvt  to  signify
power  or  dominion.  God  promises  Abraham,  that
his  posterity  should  possess  the  gates  of  their
enemies,  their  towns,  their  fortresses,  Gen.  22.

17.  "They  should  conquer  them,  they  should  have
dominion  over  them,  'l  he  gates  of  hell  shall  not
prevail  against  the  church,  Mat.  16.  18.  that  is,
neither  the  power  nor  policy  of  the  devil  and  his
instruments.  Tor  the  gates  of  cities  were  fie  places
both  of  jurisdiction  or  judicature,  and  of  for¬
tification  and  chief  strength  in  war,  Judg.  5.  8.
Psal.  147.  13.  lhe  gates  of  brass,  are  the  strong¬
est  helps  and  defences.  Psal.  107.  16.  He  hath
broken  the  gates  of  brass  ;  he  restored  them  to
liberty,  in  spite  of  all  impediments  and  opposi¬
tions.  lhe  strait  gate  signifies  regeneration  and
conversion,  and  true  holiness  in  heart  and  life,
which  prepares  the  soul  for  heaven.  Mat.  7.  13.
Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate.

The  gates  ot  death  are  the  brink ,  or  mouth  of  the
grave.  Psal.  9.  13.  Thou  that  liftest  me  up
from  the  gates  of  death,  that  preservedst  me
when  I  was,  as  it  were,  dropping  into  the  grave.
And  king  Hezekiah,  having  received  a  message
of  death,  represents  in  his  hymn  the  condition  he
had  been  in  when  he  zcas  sick,  and  expresses  him¬
self  thus :  I  said,  1  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the
grave  ;  I  perceive  I  must  die,  without  any  hopes
of  prevention,  Isa.  38.  10.  The  Hebrews  looked
upon  death  or  the  grave,  as  a  place,  whither
people  came  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  there  to
enter  upon  another  life.  L  he  gates  of  righteous¬
ness,  Psal.  118.  19.  are  those  of  the  Lord's  ta¬
bernacle,  where  the  righteous,  the  saints,  the
priests  of  the  Lord,  the  true  Israelites,  paid
their  vows  and  praises  to  the  Lord ;  where  none
were  to  enter  but  purified  Israelites,  a  nation
of  righteous  men.  'l  he  gates  or  everlasting  doors
mentioned  in  Psal.  24.  7,  9.  are  either  the  gates
of  the  temple,  which  by  faith  and  the  spirit  of
prophecy  David  beheld  as  already  built ;  these
gates  he  bids  lift  up  their  heads,  to  receive  the
glorious  King  Jehovah,  who  dwelt  in  the  temple,
and  between  the  cherubim  :  or  the  passage  may
admit  of  a  mystical  sense  j  for  as  the  temple  was
a  type  of  Christ,  and  of  his  church,  and  of  heaven
itself  ;  so  this  place  may  also  contain  a  represen¬
tation,  either  of  Christ’s  entrance  into  his  church,
or  into  the  hearts  of  his  faithful  people,  who  are
here  commanded  to  set  open  their  hearts  and  souls
for  his  reception :  or,  it  may  represent  his  as¬
cension  into  heaven,  where  the  saints  or  angels
are  poetically  introduced  as  preparing  the  way,
and  opening  the  heavenly  gates  to  receive  their
Lord  and  A  ing,  returning  to  his  royal  habitation
with  triumph  and  glory.

Gen.  22. 17.  thy  seed  possess  they,  of  enemies,  24.60.

28. 17.  Jacob  said,  this  is  the  y.  of  heaven
Exod.  32.  27.  go  in  and  out  from  y.  toy.  thro’ camp
Dent.  21. 19.  his  father  shall  bring  him  to  the  y.

22.  24.  bring  them  both  out  to  the  y.  of  the  city
25-7.  let  his  brother’s  wife  go  up  to  they.

Josh.  2.  7.  they  were  gone  out,  they  shut  they.
Judg.  16.  3.  Samson  took  the  doors  of  they.

Ruth  4.  1.  then  went  Boaz  to  the  y.  and  sat  down

10.  the  name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  off  from  the  y.

1  Sam.  4.  18.  P.li  fell  backward  by  the  side  of  the  y.

2  Sam.  15.  2.  Absalom  stood  beside  the  way  of  they.
18. 33.  the  king  went  up  to  the  chamber  over  the  y.


2  Sam.  23. 15.  water  of  Beth-leh.  byy.16. 1  C/tr.  11.18.

1  Kings  17. 10.  when  Elijah  came  to  the  y.  of  thecity

2  Kings  7.  17.  a  lord  to  have  the  charge  of  the  y.

1  Chron.  26.  13.  and  they  cast  lots  for  every  y.
2Chron.  8.  14.  he  appointed  the  porters  at  every  y.
Neh.  13.  19.  I  commanded  the  y.  sliould  be  shut'
Esth.  4. 2.  Mordecai  came  before  the  king’s  y.  6. 12.
Job  29.  7-  when  I  went  out  to  the  y.  and  prepared*
Psal.  118.  20.  thisy.  of  the  Lord,  the  righteous  enter
Cant.  7.  4.  thine  eyes  like  the  fish-pools  by  the  y.
Isa.  14.  31.  howl,  O  y.  cry,  O  city,  shall  come  smoke

24.  12.  the  y.  is  smitten  with  destruction
28.  6.  to  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  the  y.

Jer.  36. 10.  Baruch  read  at  the  entry  of  new  y.
Lam.  5.  14.  the  elders  have  ceased  from  the  y.
Ezek.  8.  3.  brought  me  to  the  door  of  the  inner  g.

11.  1.  at  the  door  of  the  y.  twenty-five  men

43.  4.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  came  by  way  of  the  y.

44.  2.  this  y.  shall  be  shut,  none  shall  enter

3.  prince  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the y.  46. 2, 8.

45.  19.  put  the  blood  on  the  posts  of  the  y.

46.  1.  the  y.  of  the  inner  court  shall  be  shut

2.  but  they,  shall  not  be  shut  till  evening

12.  one  shall  open  him  the  y.  one  shall  shut  the  y.
48.  31.  one  y.  of  Reuben,  one  y.  of  Judah,  of  Levj

Chad.  13.  not  entered  into  the  y.  of  my  people
Mic.  1.9.  he  is  come  into  the  y.  of  my  people  to  Jer.
12.  evil  came  down  from  Lord  to  the  y.  of  Jerus."

2. 13.  they  have  passed  through  the  y.

Mat.  7.  13.  enter  in  at  the  strait  y.  wide  is  the  y.

and  broad  is  the  way,  14.  Luke  13.  24.
Luke  7. 12.  when  he  came  nigh  they-  of  thecity
16. 20.  a  beggar  Lazarus  laid  at  hisy.  full  of  sores
Acts  10. 17.  men  from  Cornelius  stood  before  the  y.
12.  10.  they  came  to  the  iron  y.  which  opened

14.  Rhoda  opened  not  the  y.  for  gladness
Heb.  13.  12.  Jesus  also  suffered  without  the  q.

Rev.  21.  21.  every  several  y.  was  of  one  pearl

See  Entering,  Entereth.

GATE.

Prov.  17. 19.  that  exalteth  hisy.  seeketh destruction
At  the  GATE.

Gen.  23. 10.  of  all  that  went  in  at  the  g.  of  city,  18.
2  Kings  9.  31.  as  Jehu  entered  in  at  the  g.  she  said

11.  6.  a  third  part  shall  be  at  the  g.  of  Sur,  and  a

third  at  the  g.  behind  the  guard,  2  Chr.  23.5.

23.  8.  which  were  on  a  man’s  left  hand  at  the  g.

2  Chr.  24. 8.  set  a  chest  at  the  g.  of  the  house  of  Lord
Esth.  5. 13. 1  see  Mordecai  sitting  at  the  king's  y.
Isa.  22. 7 .  horsemen  set  themselves  in  array  at  theg.
Acts  3.  2.  they  laid  daily  at  the  g.  of  the  temple
10.  who  sat  for  alms  at  beautiful  y.  of  the  temple
See  Eish-gate.

•High  GATE.

2  Chron.  23.  20.  they  came  through  the  high  g.

27.  3.  Jotham  built  the  highg.  of  the  house
Jer.  20.  2.  put  Jeremiah  in  the  stocks  in  the  high  g.
See  Horse-gate.

In  the  GATE.

Gen.  19.  1.  and  Lot  sat  in  the  g.  of  Sodom
Exod.  32.  26.  Moses  stood  in  the  g.  of  the  camp
Dent.  22. 15.  bring  tokens  of  virginity  to  elders  in  g.
Judg.  16.  2.  they  laid  wait  for  Samson  in  the  g.
Ruth  4.  11.  people  in  the  g.  said,  we  are  witnesses

1  Sam.  9- 18.  Saul  drew  near  to  Samuel  in  the  g.

2  Sam.  3. 27.  Joab  took  Abner  aside  in  the  g.

19.  8.  king  sat  in  the  g.  they ’told  all  the  people

2  Kings  7.  1.  two  measures  for  a  shekel  in  theg.  18.

20.  the  people  trod  on  him  in  the  g.  and  he  died
Esth.  2.  19.  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king’s  y.  21.

5.  9.  when  1 1  am  an  saw  him  in  the  king’s  y.

Job  5.  4.  his  children  are  crushed  in  the  g.

31.  21.  when  l  saw  my  help  in  the  g.

Psal.  69.  12.  they  that  sit  in  theg.  speak  against  me
127.  5.  but  they  shall  speak  with  the  enemies  ing,
Prov.  22.  22.  nor  oppress  the  afflicted  in  the  g.

24.  7.  he  openeth  not  his  mouth  in  the  g.

Isa.  29.  21.  lay  a  snare  for  him  that  reproveth  in g.
Jer.  7.  2.  stand  in  the  g.  of  the  Lord’s  nouse

17. 19.  stand  in  the  g.  ot  the  children  of  the  people

37.  13.  when  he  was  in  the  g.  of  Benjamin

38.  7-  the  king  then  sitting  in  the  g.  of  Benjamin

39.  3.  all  the  princes  of  Babylon  sat  in  the  g.

Dan.  2.  49.  but  Daniel  sat  in  the  g.  of  the  king
Amos  5.  10.  they  hate  him  that  rebuketh  in  the  g.

12.  they  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  g.

15.  hate  evil,  and  establish  judgment  in  the  g.

Old  GATE.

Neh.  3.  6.  the  old  g.  repaired  Jehoiadasonof  Paseah
12. 39.  the  priests  went  above  the  oldg.  and  fish-gate
Pmwi-GATE.

Neh.  12.  39.  and  they  stood  still  in  the  prison-g.
Sheep- GATE.

Neh.  12.  39.  they  went  even  unto  the  sheep-g.

John  5.  f  2.  by  the  sheep-g.  there  is  a  pool
Valley- GATE.

2  Chron.  26.  9.  Uzziah  built  towers  at  the  valley-g.
Neh.  2.  13.  and  I  wentoutby  the  y.  of  the  valley

15.  and  I  entered  by  the  y.  of  the  valley

3. 13.  the  valley  g.  repaired  Hanun

t  Water- GATE.

Neh.  3.  26.  Nethinims  dwelt  over  against  water-g.
8.  1.  gathered  into  the  street  before  the  water-g.

3.  he  read  in  the  law  before  the  water-g.

16.  made  booths  in  the  street  of  the  water-g.

12.  37.  priests  went  even  to  the  water-g.  eastward
GATES.

Dent.  12. 12.  rejoice,  ye  and  Levite,  within  your  y.
Josh.  6. 26.  in  his  youngest  son  set  upy.  1  Kingsld. 34,
Judg.  5.  8.  chose  new  gods,  then  was  war  in  the  y.
5.  11.  the  people  of  the  Lord  shall  go  to  the  y.

2  Chron.  31.  2.  1 1  ezekiah  appointed  to  praise  in  the  y.
Neh.  1.  3.  the  y.  are  burnt  with  fire,  2.  3,  13,  17.

7.  3.  let  not  the  y.  of  Jerusalem  be  opened
12.  30.  the  priests  and  Levites  purified  the  y.

13. 19.  some  of  my  servants  set  I  at  the  y.

22.  1  commanded  the  Levites  to  keep  the  y.

Psal.  9.  14.  may  shew  forth  thy  praise  in  the  y.

24. 7-  ldt  up  your  heads,  O  ye  y.  and  be  ye  lift  up,  9.
87-  2.  the  Lord  loveth  the  y.  of  Zion,  more  than
100.  4.  enter  into  his  y.  with  thanksgiving
107.  16.  for  he  hath  broken  the  y.  ot  brass

185


G  AT


GAT


Psal.  118.  19.  open  to  me  the  g.  of  righteousness
Prov.  1.  21.  wisdom  crieth  in  the  openings  of  g.  8. 3.

8.  34.  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my  g.

14.  19.  the  wicked  at  the  g.  of  the  righteous

31.  23.  her  husband  is  known  in  the  g.

31.  let  her  own  works  praise  her  in  the  g.

Cant.'!.  13.  at  our  g.  are  all  manner  ot  pleasant  truits
Isa.  3.26.  and  her  g.  shall  lament  and  mourn

13.  2.  they  may  go  into  the  g.  of  the  nobles

26.  2.  open  ye  the  g .  that  the  righteous  may  enter
38.  10.  1  shall  go  to  the  g.  of  the  grave
45.  1.  to  open  before  him  the  two-leaved  g.

2.  1  will  break  in  pieces  the  g.  ot  brass

62. 10.  go  thro’,  go  thro’  the  g.  prepare  the  way
Jer.  7.  2  hear,  ye  that  enter  in  at  the  g.  17 . 20.  1  22. 2.

14.  2.  Judah  mourneth,  and  the  g.  languish

15.  7.  1  will  fan  them  with  a  fan  in  g.  of  the  land

17.  19.  go  and  stand  in  all  the  g.  of  Jerusalem

21.  bear  no  burden  on  the  sabbath  by  the  g.  24.

25.  then  shall  there  enter  into  the  g.  22.  4.

27.  1  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  g.  ot  Jerusalem

22.  19.  shall  be  drawn  and  cast  fortli  beyond  the
Lam.  1.  4.  Zion’s  g.  are  desolate,  her  priests  sigh
2. 9.  her  g.  are  sunk  into  the  ground,  bars  broken
4.  12.  the  adversary  should  have  entered  the  g.
Ezek.  21.15. 1  have  set  point  of  sword  againsttheir^.

22.  to  appoint  battering  rams  against  the  g.

26.  2.  she  is  broken  that  was  the  g.  of  the  people

48.  32.  at  the  east  side  three  g.  one  of  Joseph
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  foreigners  entered  Ins  g.
Nah.  2.  6.  the  g.  of  the  rivers  shall  be  opened

3.  13.  the  g.  of  thy  land  shall  be  set  wide  open
Zech.  8. 16.  exec.  judg.  of  truth  and  peace  m  yqur  g.
Mat.  16. 18.  the  g.  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it
Acts  9.  24.  and  they  watched  the  g.  to  kill  Paul

14. 13.  Jupiter’s  priests  brought  oxen  to  the  g.

Rev.  21. 12.  the  city  had  twelve g.  at  g.  twelve  angels

13.  on  the  east  three  g.  on  the  north  three  g.

21.  the  twelve  g.  were  twelve  pearls
25.  the  g.  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by  day

See  Bars,  Death.

Thy  GATES.

Exod.  20.  10.  thy  stranger  within  thy  g.  Dent.  5. 14.
Deut.  6.  9.  thou  shalt  write  them  on  thy  g.  11.  20.

12.  15.  thou  mayest  eat  flesh  in  thy  g.  21.  _

17.  thou  mayest  not  eat  within  thy  g.  the  tithe

18.  thou  must  eat,  thou  and  Levite  in  thy  g.

14.  21.  give  it  to  the  stranger  that  is  in  thy  g.

27.  Levite  within  thy  g.  thou  shalt  not  forsake

28.  thou  shalt  lay  up  the  tithe  within  thy  g.

29.  the  widow  within  thy  g.  shall  come  and  eat

15.  7.  if  there  be  a  poor  man  within  any  of  thy  g.

22.  thou  shalt  eat  the  firstling  within  thy  g.

16.  5.  not  sacrifice  the  passover  within  thy  g.

11.  shalt  rejoice,  and  Levite  in  thy  g.  14.  1  26. 12.
18.  judges  and  officers  shalt  thou  make  in  all  thyg.

17.  5.  bring  forth  that  man  or  woman  to  thy  g.

18.  6.  if  a  Levite  come  from  any  of  thy  g.

23.  16.  servant  escaped  dwell  in  one  of  thy  g.

24. 14.  thou  shalt  r.ot  oppress  within  thy  g.

28.  52.  he  shall  besiege  thee  in  all  thy  g.

55.  thine  enemies  shall  distress  thee  in  all  thy  g.
31.  12.  gather  the  people  within  thy  g.  to  hear
Psali  122. 2.  our  feet  shall  stand  rvithin  thy  g.  O  Jer.
Isa.  54.12.  1  will  make  thy  g.  of  carbuncles
60.  11.  therefore  thy  g.  shall  be  open  continually

18.  call  thy  walls  salvation,  and  thy  g.  praise
Ezek.  26.  10.  when  he  shall  enter  thy  g.  as  men

GATHER.

Gen.  31.  46.  he  said,  g.  stones,  and  they  took  stones

41.  35.  let  them  g.  all  the  food  of  those  years
Exod.  5. 7.  let  them  go  and  g.  straw  ||  12.  g.  stubble

9.  19.  g.  thy  cattle  ||  16.  4.  shall  g.  a  certain  rate
16.5.  g.  twice  as  much  ||  26.  six  days  g.  it

23. 10.  six  years  sow  thy  land  andi?.  Lev.  25.  3.
Lev.  19.  9.  shalt  not  g.  the  gleanings,  23.  22.

10.  thou  shalt  not  g.  every  grape  of  thy  vineyard
25.  5.  nor  g.  grapes  of  the  vine  undressed,  11.

20.  we  shall  not  sow,  nor  g.  in  our  increase
Hum.  10.  4.  if  with  one  trumpet,  then  princes  g.

11.  16.  g.  seventy  men  of  the  elders  of  Israel

19.  9.  a  man  that  is  clean  shall  g.  the  ashes
L>eut.  11.  14.  1  will  give  rain  that  thou  mayest  *7.

13.  16.  thou  shalt  g.  all  the  spoil  of  it  into  street
28.  30.  plant  a  vineyard  and  not  g.  grapes,  39.

38.  carry  much  seed  out,  and  g.  but  little  in

30.  3.  he  will g.  thee  from  all  nations,  Ezek.  36.24.
Josh.  2.  t  18.  shalt  g.  thy  father  and  mother  home

2  Kings  4.  39.  one  went  into  the  field  to  g.  herbs
22.  20.  1  will  g.  thee  to  thy  fathers,  2  Chr.  34.  28.

1  Chron.  13.  2.  send  to  brethren  and  Levites  to  g.

2  Chron.  24.  5.  g.  money  to  repair  house  of  the  Ld.
Neh.  1.  9.  yet  will  I  ^."them  from  thence

12.  44.  some  appointed  to  g.  for  the  priests
Job  24.  6.  they  g.  the  vintage  of  the  wicked

34. 14.  if  he  g.  to  himself  his  spirit  and  his  breath
39. 12.  will  he  bringseed,  and  g.  it  into  thy  barn  ?
Psal.  26.  9.  g.  not  my  soul  with  sinners,  nor  life
27.  + 10.  when  Father  and  mother  forsake,  L.  will  g.
39.  6.  and  knoweth  not  who  shall  g.  them
104.  28.  that  thou  givestthem  they  g.

106.  47.  save  us,  and  g.  us  from  among  the  heathen
Prov.  28.  8.  shall  g.  for  him  that  will  pity  the  poor
Eccl.  2.  26.  to  sinner  travel  to  g.  and  heap  up
Cant.  6.  2.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  to  g.  lilies
Isa.  34. 15.  there  the  owl  g.  under  her  shadow

40. 11.  he  shall  g.  the  lambs  with  his  arms
43.  5.  fear  not,  I  will  g.  thee  from  the  west
52. 1 12.  the  God  of  Israel  will  g.  you  up,  58.  +  8.

54.7.  but  with  great  mercies  will  1  g.  thee

56.8.  yet  will  I  g.  others  to  him,  besides  those

62.10.  cast  up  the  high-way  ,g.  out  the  stones
66. 18.  1  will  g.  all  nations  and  tongues

Jer.  6. 1.  g.  to  flee  ||  7. 18.  the  children  g.  wood

9.  22.  none  shall  g.  them  ||  10. 17. g.  up  thy  wares
23. 3.  1  will  g.  the  remnant  of  my  floex
29. 14. 1  will  g.  you  from  all  the  nations

31.8.  I  will  g.  them  from  the  coasts  of  the  earth,

32.  37.  Ezek.  20. 34, 41.  1 34. 13.

10.  he  that  scattered  Israel  will  g.  him

40. 10.  g.  ve  wine,  and  summer-fruits,  and  oil
47.  to.  O  sword,  g.  thyself  into  thy  scabbard

186


Jer.  49. 5.  and  none  shall  g.  up  him  that  wandcreth
Ezek.  11.  17.  I  will  even  g.  you  from  the  people
16.  37.  I  will  g.  all  thy  lovers  against  thee
22.  19.  1  will  g .  you  into  the  midst  of  Jerusalem
20.  as  they  g.  silver,  so  will  1  g.  you  in  fury,  21.

24. 4.  g.  the  pieces  ||  29.  13.  I  will  <7.  the  Egyptians
37.  21.  I  will  <7.  them  on  every  side,  39.  it.

Hos.  8. 10.  though  hired  among  the  nations,  1  will g.

9.  6.  Egypt  shall  g.  them  up,  Memphis  bury  them
Joel  1.  14.  g.  the  elders  and  the  inhabitants  ot  land

2.  6.  people  much  pained,  all  faces  shall  g.  blackn.
16.  g.  the  people,  g.  the  children  that  suck

3.  2.  I  will  g.  all  nations,  and  bring  them  down
Mic.  2.  12.  1  will  surely  g.  the  remnant  of  Israel

4.  6.  I  will  g.  her  that  was  driven  out,  Zeph.  3. 19.

12.  he  shall  g.  them  as  sheaves  into  the  floor

5.  1.  g.  thyself  in  troops,  O  daughter  of  troops
Nah.  2.  10.  the  faces  of  them  all  g.  blackness
Ilab.  1.  9.  they  shall  g.  the  captivity  as  the  sand

15.  they  catch  them,  and  g.  them  in  their  drag
Zeph.  3.  8.  for  my  determination  is  to  g.  the  nations
18.  I  will  g.  them  that  are  sprrowtul  for  assembly

20.  bring  you  even  in  the  time  that  I  g.  you
Zech.  10.  8.  I  will  hiss  for  them  and  g.  them

10.  and  I  will  g.  them  out  of  Assyria

14.  2.  I  will  q.  all  nations  against  Jerusalem
Mat.  3. 12.  g. ‘his  wheat  into  his  garner,  Luke  3. 17-

6.  26.  they  sow  not,  nor  do  they  g.  into  barns

7.  16.  do  men  g.  grapes  of  thorns  ?  I,uke6.  44.

13.  28.  wilt  thou  that  we  go  and  g.  them  up  ?

29.  he  said,  nay,  lest  while  ye  g.  up  the  tares

30.  burn  tares,  but  g.  the  wheat  into  my  barn
41.  shall  g.  out  of  his  kingd.  all  things  that  oflend

25.  26.  and  that  I  g.  where  I  have  not  strawed
Luke  13.  34.  as  a  hen  doth  g.  her  brood  under  wings
John  6.  12.  g.  up  the  fragments  that  remain

15.  6.  men  g.  them  and  cast  them  into  the  fire
Rev.  14.  18.  g.  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the  earth

16.  14.  g.  them  to  the  battle  of  that  day  of  God

GATH  EL  together.

Gen.  34.  30.  I  being  few  they  shall  g.  tog.  ag.  me
49.  1.  g.  yourselves  together ,  ye  sons  of  Jacob,  2.
Exod.  3.  16.  go  g.  the  elders  of  Israel  together
Lev.  8.  3.  g.  congregation  of  Israel  tog.  Num.  8.  9.
Num.  20.  8.  and  g.  thou  the  assembly  together

21.  16.  g.  the  people  together ,  Dent.  4. 10.  |  31.  12.

2  Sam.  12.  28.  g.  the  rest  together  and  encamp

1  Chron.  16.  35.  save  us,  O  God,  and  g.  us  together

22.  2.  David  commanded  to  g.  tog.  the  strangers
Neh.  7.  5.  God  put  in  my  heart  to  g.  together  nobles
Esth.  2.  3.  may  g.  together  all  the  fair  virgins

4.  16.  g.  together  the  Jews  present  in  Shushan
Job  11.  10.  if  he  g.  together ,  who  can  hinder  him  ?
Psal.  50.  5.  g.  my  saints  together  unto  me
56.  6.  they  g.  themselves  tog.  to  mark  my  steps
94.  21.  they  g.  together  against  the  righteous
104.  22.  the  sun  ariseth,  they  g.  themselves  tog.
Eccl.  3.  5.  there  is  a  time  to  g.  stones  together
Isa.  11.  12.  he  shall  g.  tog.  the  dispersed  of  Judah
49.  18.  these  <7.  together  and  come  to  me,  60.  4.

54. 15.  they  shall  surely  g.  together ,  but  not  by  me
Jer.  4.  5.  blow  the  trumpet,  cry,  g.  together
49.  14.  g.  ye  together  and  come  against  Edom
Van.  3.  2.  the  king  sent  to  g.  together  the  princes
Joel  3.  11.  g.  yourselves  together  round  about
Zeph.  2.  1.  g.  tog.  yea,  g.  tog.  O  nation  not  desired
Mat.  13.  30.  g.  together  first  the  tares,  and  bind
24.  31.  they  shall  g.  together  his  elect,  Mark  13.  27.
John  11.  52.  he  should  g.  together  in  one,  Eph.  1. 10.
Rev.  19.  17.  g.  tog.  to  the  supper  of  the  great  God
20.  8.  to  g.  Gog  and  Magog  together  to  battle
GATHERED.

Gen.  25.  8.  Abraham  died  and  was  g.  to  his  people

17.  Ishmael  was  g.  ||  35.  29.  Isaac  was  g.  to  people
49.  29.  Jacob  was  g.  to  his  people,  33.

Exod.  16.  17.  and  they  g.  some  more,  some  less

18.  he  that  g.  much,  he  that  g.  little,  2  Cor.  8.  15.

21.  they  g.  it  every  morning,  every  man  according

23.  16.  when  thou  hast  g.  in  thy  labours  out  of  field
Lev.  23.  39.  when  ye  have  g.  in  the  fruits  of  the  land
Num.  11.  32.  the  people  g.  quails  ||  15.  32.  g.  sticks

16.  19.  Korah  g.  congregation  against  Moses,  42.
20.  24.  Aaron  shall  be  g.  to  his  people,  26.

27.  13.  Moses  g.  to  his  people,  31.  2.  Deut.  32. 50.
Judg.  1.  7.  kings  g.  their  meat  under  my  table
2.  10.  that  generation  was  g.  to  their  fathers
6.  34.  and  Abiezer  was  g.  after  him

11.  3.  there  were  g.  vain  men  to  Jephthah

1  Sam.  5.  8.  they  g.  all  the  lords  of  the  Philistines

22.  2.  every  one  that  was  in  distress  g.  to  David

2  Sam.  14.  14.  as  water  spilt  which  cannot  be  g.  up
2  Kings  3.  21.  they  g.  all  able  to  put  on  armour

22.  20.  Josiah  be  g.  to  grave  in  peace,  2  Chr.  34.  28.
Neh.  5.  16.  all  my  servants  were  g.  to  the  work
Job  27.  19.  rich  man  lie  down,  but  shall  not  be  g.
Psal.  59.  3.  the  mighty  are  gr.  against  me
107.  3.  and  he  g.  them  out  of  the  lands
Prov.  27  .  25.  and  herbs  of  the  mountains  are  g.

30.  4.  who  hath  g.  the  wind  in  his  fists  t
Eccl.  2.  8.  I  g.  me  also  silver  and  gold  and  treasure
Cant.  5.  1.  1  have  g.  my  myrrh  with  my  spice
Isa.  5.  2.  lie  fenced  it,  and  g.  out  the  stones
10.  14.  as  one  srathereth  eggs,  have  I  g.  the  earth
27.  12.  ye  shall  be  g.  one  by  one,  O  Israel
34.  15.  vuitnres  be  g.  ||  16.  his  Spirit  g.  them
49.  5.  tho’  Israel  be  not^.  yet  shall  I  be  glorious
56.  8.  1  will  gather  others,  besides  those  that  are  g.
62.  9.  but  they  that  have  g.  it  shall  eat  it
Jer.  3.  17.  and  all  nations  shall  be  g.  unto  it
8.  2.  they  shall  not  be  g.  nor  buried,  25.  33.

26.  9.  all  people  g.  against  Jeremiah  in  house  of  L
40. 15.  all  the  Jews  u.  to  thee  should  be  scattered
Ezek.  28.  25.  when  1  shall  have  <7.  the  house  of  Israel
29.  5.  thou  shalt  not  be  brought  together  nor  g.

38.  13.  hast  thou  g.  thy  company  to  take  a  prey  t

39.  27.  have  g.  them  out  .A  their  enemies’  lands
28.  but  1  have  g.  them  to  their  own  land

Ilos.  10. 10.  the  people  shall  be  g.  against  them
Mic.  7.  1.  I  am  as  when  they  g.  the  summer-fruits
Mat.  13.  40.  as  tares  are  g.  and  burnt  in  the  tire
47.  a  net  cast  into  the  sea,  and  g.  of  every  kind
25.  32.  before  him  shall  be  g.  all  nations


G  A  V

Mat.  27.  27.  and  g.  to  him  the  whole  band  of  soldiers
John  11.  47.  then  g.  chief  priests  a  council,  and  said
Acts  17.  5.  g.  a  company ,  set  the  city  on  an  uproar
28.  3.  when  Paul  had  g.  a  bundle  of  sticks
llev.  14.  19.  the  angel  g.  the  vine  of  the  earth
GATHERED  together.

Exod.  8.  14.  they  g.  them  together  upon  heaps
Num.  10.7.  when  the  congregation  is  to  be  g.  together

11.  22.  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  sea  be  g.  tiyether  ?
Judg.  20.  1.  the  congregation  was  g.  together  as

one  man,  11.  Ezra  3.  1.  Neh.  8.  1,

2  Chron.  20.  4.  Judah  g.  together  to  ask  help  of  Ld.
Job  16.  10.  they  g.  themselves  together  against  me
30.  7.  under  the  nettles  were  they  g.  together
Psal.  35.15.  the  abjectsg.  themselves  together  ag.  me
47.  9.  the  princes  of  the  people  are  g.  together
102.  22.  when  people  are  g.  together  to  serve  the  L..
140.  2.  continually  are  they  g.  together  for  war
Prov.  30.  t  27.  locusts  go  forth  all  g.  together
Hos.  1.11.  then  shall  children  of  J  udah  be  g.  together
Mic.  4. 11.  many  nations  are  g.  together  ag.  thee
Zech.  12.  3.  tho’*  all  people  be  g.  together  against  it
Mat.  18.  20.  where  two  or  three  are  g.  together

23.  37.  how  often  would  1  have  g.  thy  children

together ,  as  a  hen  her  chickens,  Luke  13.  34.
24.28.  there  will  eagles  be  g.  together ,  Luke  17-  3?.
Mark  1.  33.  all  the  city  was  g.  together  at  the  door
Luke  15.  13.  the  younger  son  g.  all  together

24.  33.  they  found  the  eleven  g.  together

Acts  4.  26.  rulers  were  g.  together  against  the  Ld.

12.  12.  where  many  were  g.  together  praying

14.  27.  when  they  had  g.  the  church  together

1  Cor.  5.  4.  when  ye  are  g.  together  and  my  spirit
Rev.  16.  16.  g.  t.  into  a  place  called  Armageddon

19.  19.  beast  and  iris  army  g.  together  to  make  wax
GATHERER,  S.

Jer. 6. 9.  turn  back  thy  hand  as  a  grape  g.  into  baskets

49.  9.  if  grape  g.  come  to  thee,  Obad.  5.

Amos  7.  14.  but  1  was  a  g.  of  sycamore-fruit
GATHER  ESI.

Deut  24.  21.  when  thou  g.  the  grapes  of  vineyard
GATH  ERE  ILL

Num.  19. 10.  that  g.  the  ashes  shall  wash  his  clothes
Judg.  19.  +  18.  there  is  no  man  that  g.  me  to  house
Psal.  33.  7.  he  g.  the  waters  of  the  sea  together
41.  6.  his  heart  g.  iniquity  to  itself
147.  2.  he  g.  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  Isa.  56.  8.
Prov.  6.  8.  the  ant  g.  her  food  in  the  harvest
10.  5.  he  that  g.  in  summer  is  a  wise  son

13.  11.  but  he  that  g.  by  labour  shall  increase
Isa.  10.  14.  as  one  g.  eggs  that  are  left

17.  5.  it  shall  be  as  when  the  harvest-man  g.

Jer.  17.  +  11.  as  the  partridge  g.  young  which  she
hath  not  brought  forth,  so  he  that  gets  riches
Nah.  3.  18.  thy  people  is  scattered,  and  no  man  g.
Ilab.  2.  5.  but  g.  to  him  all  nations,  and  heapeth
Mat.  12.  30.  he  that  g.  not  scattered),  Luke  11.  23d
23. 37.  as  a  hen  g.  her  chickens  under  her  wings  ,
John  4.  36.  he  that  reapeth  g.  fruit  to  life  eternal
GATHERING.

Gen.  49.  10.  to  him  shall  the  g.  of  the  people  be
Exod.  7.  t  19.  stretch  thy  hand  on  all  g.  of  waters
Lev.  11.  +  36.  a g.  together  of  waters  shall  be  clean
Num.  15.  33.  they  that  found  him  g.  sticks

1  Kings  17. 10.  the  widow  woman  was  there  g.  sticks!

2  Chron.  20.  25.  they  were  three  days  in  g.  spoils
Isa.  24.  +  22.  be  gathered  with  the  g.  of  prisoners

32.  10.  the  vintage  shall  fail,  the  g.  shall  not  come

33.  4.  your  spoil  like  the  g.  of  the  caterpillar
Ezek.  22.  +  20.  according  to  the  g.  of  silver,  bmss
Mat.  25.  24.  and  g.  where  thou  hast  not  strawed
Acts  16. 10.  assuredly  g.  the  Lord  hath  called  us
2  Thess.  2. 1.  and  by  our  g.  together  unto  him

GATHERINGS.

1  Chron.  26.  +  15.  to  Obed-edom  the  house  of  g.
Mic.  7'.  +  1.1  am  as  the  g.  of  summer-fruits
1  Cor.  16.  2.  that  there  be  no  g.  when  I  come
GAVE.

Gen.  2.20.  Adam  g.  names  to  all  cattle  and  to  fow
3. 12.  the  woman  g.  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  gat

14.  20.  and  he  g.  him  tithes  of  all,  lleb.  7.  2,  4.

25.  5.  and  Abraham  g.  all  that  he  had  to  Isaac
28.  4.  the  land  which  God  g.  to  Abraham,  35.  12

Exod.  11.  3.  the  Lord  g.  tl>e  people  favour,  12.  36
14.  20.  the  cloud  g.  light  by  night  to  these
Num.  11. 25.  Ld.  took  of  the  Spirit,  and  g.  to  seventy
Deut.  22.  16.  I  g.  my  daughter  to  this  man  to  wife}
Josh.  19.  50.  they  g.  him  the  city  which  he  asked
21.  43.  the  Lord  g.  to  Israel  all  the  land
44.  the  Lord  g.  them  rest,  2  Chron.  15. 15. 1  20. 3®
Judg.  6.  9.  1  drave  them  out,  and  g.  you  their  lane
Ruth  4. 13.  the  Lord  g.  her  conception,  and  she  bar

1  Sam.  10.  9.  God  g.  to  Saul  another  heart

2  Sam.  12.  8.  and  I  g.  thee  thy  master’s  house

1  Kings  4.  29.  the  Lord  g.  Solomon  wisdom,  5.12

2  Kings  13.  5.  and  the  Lord  g.  Israel  a  saviour

1  Chron.  25.  5.  God  g.  to  Heman  fourteen  sons

2  Chron.  32.  24.  and  God  g.  Hezekiah  a  sign
Neh.  8.  8.  read  in  book  of  the  law,  and  g.  the  sens
Job  1. 21.  Lord  g.  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away

42.  10.  God  g.  Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had  betor
Psal .  18.  13.  and  the  Highest  g.  his  voice

68.  11.  the  Ld.  g.  the  word,  great  was  the  compan;

69.  21.  they  g.  me  also  gall,  they  g.me  vinegar
78.  29.  for  lie  g.  them  their  own  desire,  106.  L-

Eccl.  12. 7.  the  spirit  shall  return  to  God  that  p.  it
Isa .  42.  24.  who  g.  Jacob  for  aspoil,  and  Israel

43.  3.  1  g.  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Seba  tor  thee

50.  6.  1  g.  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheek

Jer.  1.  +  5.  I  g.  thee  a  prophet  to  the  nations
Ezek.  16.  19.  my  meat  also  which  l  g.  thee

20.  11.  I  g.  them  my  statutes,  and  shewed  them

12.  moreover  also,  1  g.  them  my  sabbaths
25.  1  g.  them  also  statutes  that  were  not  good
Dan.  1.  17.  God  g.  these  four  children  knowlecL
6.  10.  Daniel  prayed  and  g.  thanks  before  God
Hos.  2.  8.  for  she  did  not  know  that  1  g.  her  coin

13.  11.  I  g-  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger  .

Amos  2.  12.  ye  g.  the  N  azarites  w me  to  drink
Mai.  2.  5.  1  a-  my  covenant  to  Levi  ot  life
Mat’.  10.  1.  Jesus  <7.  them  power  against  unclea
spirits  to  cast  them  out,  Mark  6. 7 •  Luke  9.


GEN


GEN


G  E  N


Mat.  14.  19.  he  braae  and  g.  the  loaves  to  his  dis¬
ciples,  15.  36.  I  CO.  16.  Mark  6.  41. 1  8.  6.  I

14.  22.  Luke  9.  16.  1  2'.’.  19.

21.  23.  who#.  thee  author,  r  M ark  Ttl.C8. Luke  20.  2.

25.  35.  ye  g.  me  meat,  ye  g.  me  drink,  took  me  in
42.  ye  g.  me  no  meat,  and  y eg.  me  no  drink

Luke  15.  16.  with  husks,  and  no  man/;,  unto  him
John  1.  12.  to  them  g.  lie  power  to  become  sons  of  G.
3.  16.  God  so  loved  world  that  he  g.  his  only  Son

6.  31.  he  g.  them  bread  horn  heaven  to  eat

10.  29.  my  Fath.  who#,  them  me  is  greater  than  all

14.  31.  as  the  Father/;,  me  commandment,  so  1  do
Acts  2.  4.  to  speak  as  the  Spirit  g.  them  utterance

7.  5.  and  he  g.  them  no  inheritance  in  it

10.  God  g.  Joseph  favour  and  wisdom  before  Pha.
10. 2.  Cornelius  g.  much  alms  to  the  people

11.  17.  as  God  g.  them  the  like  gift  as  he  did  to  us
12. 23.  smote  him,  because  lie#,  not  God  the  glory
13.  21.  afterward  God/;. them  Saul  forty  years
14. 17-  he  did  good,  and  g.  us  rain  from  heaven

15.  24.  to  whom  w eg.  no  such  commandment

26.  10.  when  put  to  death,  I  g.  my  voice  ag.  them
Horn.  2.  28.  God  g.  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind

1  Cor.  3.  5.  even  as  the  Lord  g.  to  every  man

6.  A  polios  watered,  but  God//.  the  increase

2  Cor.  8.  5.  but  first  g.  their  own  selves  to  the  Lord
Gal.  1.  4.  who  g.  himself  for  our  sins,  Tit.  2.  14.

2.  20.  who  loved  me,  and  g.  himself  for  me

3.  18.  but  God  g.  it  to  Abraham  by  promise
Eph.  1. 22.  and  g.  him  to  bs  head  over  all  things

4.8.  he  led  captivity  captive  and g.  gifts  to  men

11.  and  he  g.  some  apostles  ;  some  prophets

5.  25.  Christ  loved  the  church,  and  g.  himself  for  it
1  Thess.  4. 2.  ye  know'  what  commandment  w-e  //.you
1  Tim.  2.6.  who/;.  himself  a  ransom  for  all
Ileb.  12.9.  w  ho  corrected  us,  w eg.  them  reverence
Jam.  5.  18.  he  prayed,  and  the  heavens  g.  rain

1  Jo/m 3. 23.  love  one  another,  as  he/;,  us  command.
5. 10.  he  believeth  not  the  record  God  g.  of  his  Son

Rev.  1.  l.the  revelation  of.)  es.  Christ  which  God  g.

2.  21.  1  g.  her  space  to  repent  of  her  fornication
13.  2.  the  dragon  g.  him  his  power  and  his  seat,  4.

GAVE  up.

Get..  25.  8.  Abraham  g.  up  the  ghost  and  died
17.  lshmael||35.29.  and  Isaac/;,  up  ghost  and  died

2  Ham.  24.  9.  Joab  g.  up  the  sum  of  the  number

2  Chr.  30.  7-  "  ho  g.  them  up  to  desolation,  as  ye  see
Psal.  78.  48.  he  g.  up  their  cattle  also  to  the  hail
81.  12.  I  g.  them  up  to  their  own  hearts’  lust
Lam.  1.  19.  my  elders  g.  up  the  ghost  in  the  city
Mark  15.  37.  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  g.

up  the  ghost,  39.  Luke  23.  46.  John  19.  30.
Acts  5.  5.  Ananias  g.  up  the  ghost  ||  12.  23.  Herod

7.  42.  God  (7.  them  up  to  worship  the  host  of  heaven
Horn.  1.24.  God  also//.  them  up  to  uncleanness

26.  for  this  cause  God  g.  them  up  to  vile  affections
Rev.  20.  13.  the  sea  g.  up  the  dead  that  were  in  it

G  A  VEST.

Gen.  3. 12.  the  woman  whom  thou  g.  to  be  with  me
1  KingsS.  34.  the  land  which  thou  g.  to  their  fathers,
40,  48.  2  C '/iron.  6.  25,  31,  38.  Neh.  Q.  35.
Neh.  9.  7-  thou  g.  him  the  name  of  Abraham
13.  thou/;,  them  right  judgments,  true  laws
15.  g.  them  bread  from  heaven  for  their  hunger
20.  thou  g.  also  thy  good  Spirit,  g.  water  for  thirst

22.  thou  g.  them  kingdoms  and  nations

27.  thou  g.  them  saviours  who  saved  them
JobS-9. 13.  g.  thou  the  goodly  wings  to  the  peacocks  ?
Psal.  21.  4.  he  asked  life  of  thee  ;  thou  g.  it  him
74. 14.  thou  g.  him  to  be  meat  to  the  people

Luke  7. 44.  thou  g.  me  no  water  for  my  feet
45.  thou/;,  me  no  kiss,  but  this  woman  not  ceased
15.  29.  yet  thou  never  g.  me  a  kid,  to  make  merry
John  17.  4.  1  have  finished  work  thou  g.  me  to  do
'  vnaniiested  to  the  men  w  hom  thou  g.  me  out  of
■*. t  world,  thine  they  were,  and  thou  g.  them  me
8. 1  have  given  them  the  words  which  thou/;,  me

12.  those  that  thou  g.  me  1  have  kept,  none  lost
22.  Hie  glory  which  thou//,  me,  I  have  given

18,  9.  of  them  whom  thou  g.  me  have  I  lost  none
GAY.

Jam.  2.  3.  respect  to  him  that  weareth  g.  clothing
GAZE.

Exod.  19.  21.  lest  they  break  thro’  to  the  Lord  to  g.
GAZING.

fiah.  3.  6.  and  I  will  set  thee  as  a  g.  stock
sices  1. 11.  why  stand  yeg.  up  into  heaven  ?

Heb.  10.  33.  partly  whilst  ye  were  made  a g.  stock
_  GENDER.

Lev.  19. 19.  shalt  not  let  cattle  g.  with  diverse  kinds
-  Jim.  2.  23.  knowing  that  thev  do  g.  strifes
T,  GENDERED,  ETH.

Job  21.  10.  their  bull  g.  and  faileth  not
38.  29.  the  hoary  frost  of  heaven,  who  hath  g.  it?
u al •  4.  24.  from  mount  Sinai,  which  g.  to  bondage
GENEALOGY

L omes  from  the  Greek  word  Genealogia,  which  sig¬
nifies  a  list  of  our  ancestors ,  a  description  of  the
^/'fk ,  lineage,  or  pedigree  of  any  person  or  family.

1 'ie  common  Hebrew  expression  for  it  is  Scpher
toledoth.  Liber  generationis.  The  Hebrews  were
very  careful  in  preserving  their  genealogies  ;  and
perhaps  there  never  was  any  nation  more  circum
spect  in  this  point  than  that  of  the  Jews.  At  this
day  we  find  genealogies  in  their  sacred  writings ,
carried  on  for  above  three  thousand  fire  hundred
years ;  and  in  the  Evangelists  we  have  the  ge¬
nealogy  of  Jesus  Christ  deduced  for  four  thousand
years,  Jrom  Adam  to  Joseph  or  Mary,  Luke

3.  23,  <Vc.  The  Jews  were  very  exact  in  their
genealogies,  partly  from  their  own  choice  and
interest,  that  they  might  preserve  the  distinctions
-  l'ie  several  tribes  and  families,  which  was  ne
cesxary  both  to  make  out  their  claims  or  titles  to
ojfices  or  inheritances  which  might  belong  to  them
oy  death,  or  otherwise;  and  to  govern  them
selves  thereby  in  the  matter  of  marriages,  and
some  other  things,  wherein  the  practice  of  some
laws  required  the  knowledge  of  these  things;  It
ts  observed  in  Ezra  2.  62.  that  such  priests  as
efr*  7"’t  t0  Pr°duce  an  exact  genealogy  of
their  families,  were  not  permitted  to  exccise


their  functions  ;  This  their  exactness  was  likewise
ordered  by  the  special  providence  of  God,  that
so  it  might  be  certainly  known  of  what  tribe  and
family  the  Messiah  was  born.

Josephus  says,  that  they  had  in  his  nation  an
uninterrupted  succession  of  priests  for  two  thou¬
sand  years.  lie  adds,  that  the  priests  were  par¬
ticularly  careful  to  preserve  their  genealogies,
and  that  not  only  in  Judea,  but  also  in  Ba-
bylon  and  Egypt :  and  wherever  they  were,  they
never  married  below  themselves,  and  had  exact
genealogical  tables  prepared  from  those  authentic
monuments  which  were  kept  at  Jerusalem,  and
to  which  they  had  recourse  upon  occasion  :  that
in  all  their  wars ,  persecutions,  and  public  cala¬
mities,  they  always  were  particularly  diligent  in
securing  those  monuments,  and  to  renew  them
from  time  to  time.

Notwithstanding,  since  the  war  which  the  Romans
carried  on  against  the  Jews,  about  thirty  years
after  the  death  of  our  Saviour,  aud  since  their
entire  dispersion  in  the  reign  of  Adrian,  the
Jews  have  lost  their  ancient  genealogies;  and
perhaps  there  is  not  one  of  those  who  say  they
are  of  the  sacerdotal  race,  that  is  able  to  pro¬
duce  any  authentic  proofs  of  his  genealogy.
Jerom  says,  that  the  Jews  are  so  versed  in  the
reading  oj  their  books,  and  know  so  perfectly
the  genealogies,  which  are  there  set  forth,  that
they  can  repeat  all  the  names  from  Abraham
to  Zerubbabel,  as  easily  as  they  can  pronounce
their  own.  St.  Paul  seems  to  condemn  the  af¬
fectation  of  knowing  old  genealogies  :  he  looks
upon  them  to  be  useless  and  vain,  as  in  reality
they  are,  when  they  serve  only  for  ostentation,
and  not  for  edification  :  This  study  was  of  great
use  before  the  Messiah  came,  that  it  might  be
known  distinctly  of  what  tribe  and  family  he  was
horn ;  but  he  being  come,  this  study  is  vain,
though  still  the  Jews  are  addicted  to  it.

The  genealogies  set  down  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,
in  some  particulars  vary:  The  reason  whereof
is  assigned  by  Dr.  Prideaux  in  these  terms.

for  the  true  settling  of  these  genealogies,”
says  he,  “  search  was  made  by  Nehemiah  for
the  old  registers,  and  having  among  them  found
the  register  of  the  genealogies  of  those  who  came
up  at  first  from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel  and
Joshua  ;  he  settled  this  matter  according  to  it,
adding  such  as  afterwards  came  up,  and  expung¬
ing  others,  whose  families  were  extinguished  :  and
this  hath  caused  the  difference  that  is  between  the
accounts  which  we  have  of  these  genealogies  in
Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  For  in  the  second  chapter
oj  Ezra,  we  have  the  old  register  made  by  Zerub¬
babel  ;  and  in  the  seventh  of  Nehemiah,  from
the  sixth  verse,  we  have  a  copy  of  it  as  settled
by  Nehemiah,  with  the  alterations  that  are  now
mentioned.'’  Prideaux’s  Connection,  Part  I.
Book  VI.

1  C/tron.  5.  1.  and  the  g.  is  not  to  be  reckoned

after  the  birth-right

Ezra  2.  62.  these  sought  their  g.  Neh.  7.  64.

8.  1.  this  is  the  g.  of  them  that  went  up  with  me
Neh.  7.5.  I  found  a  register  of  the  g.  which  came  up
GENEALOGIES.

1  Chron.  9. 1.  so  all  Israel  were  reckoned  by  g.

2  Chr.  12.  15.  the  book  of  Shemaiah  concerning  g.
31.  19.  to  give  portions  to  all  reckoned  by  g.

1  Tim.  1.  4.  give  no  heed  to  fables  and  endless  g.
Tit.  3.  9.  avoid  foolish  questions,//,  and  contentions
GENERAL.

1  Chron.  27.  34.  the/;,  of  the  king’s  army  was  Joab
Heb.  12. 23.  to g.  assembly  and  church  of  first-born

GENERALLY.

2  Sam.  17. 11.  I  counsel  that  Israel  be  g.  gathered
Jer.  48. 38.  be  lamentation  g.  on  house-tops  of  Moab

GENERATION.

This  word  is.  used  for  the  history  and  genealogy  of
any  man.  For  example  :  This  is  the  book  of
the  generations  of  Adam,  Gen.  5.  1.  This  is
the  history  of  Adam’s  creation,  and  that  of  his
posterity.  These  are  the  generations  of  the
heavens  and  of  the  earth,  Gen.  2.  4.  This  is
a  recital  of  the  creation  of  heaven  and  earth.
And  in  Mat.  1.  1.  The  book  of  the  generation
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  David.  This  is  the
genealogy  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  history  of  his
life,  death,  and  resurrection.  It  is  likewise  taken
for  persons  or  people  who  live  in  some  one  age.
Ileb.  3.  10.  I  was  grieved  with  that  generation ;
with  those  men  that  came  out  of  Egypt,  and  re¬
belled  against  me  in  the  wilderness.  Mat.  24  .  34.
'this  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these
things  be  fulfilled.  All  who  are  at  present  living,
shall  not  be  dead,  when  this  shall  come  to  pass.
There  are  some  at  this  day  living,  who  shall  be
witnesses  of  the  evils  which  I  have  foretold  shall
befall  the  Jews.  The  men  of  this  generation,
the  men  who  are  now  alive,  Luke  11.  31.  O  faith¬
less  and  perverse  generation!  Iruke  9.  41.  And,
save  yourselves  from  this  untoward  generation,
from  these  perverse  men.  Acts  2.  40.  To  genera¬
tion  and  generation,  denotes  future  ages,  Psal.
33.  t  11.  Who  shall  declare  his  generation  ?
Isa.  53.  8.  Who  can  declare  or  number  the  Mes¬
siah’s  spiritual  seed,  the  number  of  those  who  shall
believe  in  him,  anil  he  converted  to  him  by  the
preaching  of  the  gospel ?  Generation  is  also  taken
for  men  of  like  quality  and  disposition,  though
neither  of  one  place  nor  age.  Psal.  14.  5.  God  is
in  the  generation  of  the  righteous.

The  ancients  sometimes  computed  by  generations,
and  the  Scripture  follows  frequently  this  method,
Gen.  15.  16.  150.  23.  In  the  fourth  generation
thy  descendants  shall  come  hither  again.  Joseph
saw  Ephraim's  children  of  the  third  generation.

A  bastard  shall  not  enter  into  the  congregation
even  to  his  tenth  generation,  Deut.  23.  2.  By
some  of  the  ancients  a  generation  was  fixed  at
an  hundred  years,  by  others  at  an  hundred  and
ten,  by  others  at  thirty-three,  thirty,  five-and-


twenty,  and  even  at  twenty  years.  So  .hat  they*
was  nothing  uniform  and  settled  in  this  matter.
Only  it  is  remarked,  that  the  continuance  of  gene¬
rations  is  so  much  longer ,  as  it  comes  nearer  to
the  more  ancient  times.

Gen.  7.  1.  thee  have  1  seen  righteous  in  this  g.
Exod.  1.  6.  Joseph  died,  and  all  that//.

17.  16.  will  have  war  with  Amalek  trom  g.  to  g.
Num.  32. 13.  till  that  g.  was  consumed.  Dent.  2. 14.
Deut.  1.  35.  not  one  of  this  evil g.  shall  see  that  land
23. 2.  a  bastard  shall  not  enter  even  to  his  tenth  g.
3.  an  Ammonite  to  tenth  g.  shall  not  enter

8.  Edomite  and  Egypt,  in  the  third  g.  shall  enter
29.  22.  so  that  the  g.  to  come  shall  rise  up  and  say
32.  5.  they  are  a  perverse  and  crooked  g.  20.
t  7.  consider  the  years  of/;,  and  g.

Judg.  2. 10.  all  that  g.  were  gathered  to  their  fathers,
and  there  arose  another  g.  after  them
Esth.  9. 28.  these  days  shall  be  rememb.  in  every  g.
Psal.  10.  t  6.  1  shall  not  be  moved  to  g.  and  g.

12.  7.  thou  shalt  keep  them,  O  Lord,  thou  shalt
preserve  them  from  this  g.  for  ever
14.  5.  for  God  is  in  the  g.  of  the  righteous

22.  30.  it  shall  he  accounted  to  the  Lord  for  a  g.
24.  6.  this  is  the  g.  of  them  that  seek  him

48.  13.  that  ye  may  tell  it  to  the  g.  following

49.  19.  he  shall  go  to  the  g.  of  his  fathers

7L  18.  till  1  have  shewed  thy  strength  to  tin's  g.
73.  15.  1  should  offend  ag.  the  g.  of  thy  children

77.  +  8.  doth  his  promise  fail  to  g.  and  g.  ?

78.  4,  shewing  to  the  g.  to  come  the  praises  of  Ld.

6.  that  the  g.  to  come  might  know  them

8.  might  not  be  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  g.

95.  10  forty  years  grieved  with  this  g.  Ileb.  3.  10.
102.  18.  this  shall  be  written  for  the  g.  to  come
109. 13.  in  g.  following  let  their  name  be  blotted  out
112,  2.  the  g.  of  the  upright  shall  be  blessed
145.  4.  on  eg.  shall  praise  thy  works  to  another
Prov.  27-  24.  doth  the  crown  endure  to  every  g.  ?
30. 11.  there  is  a  g.  that  curseth  their  father

12.  there  is  a//,  that  are  pure  in  their  own  eyes

13.  a  g.  lofty  ||  14.  a  g.  whose  teeth  are  swords
Eccl.  1.  4.  one  g.  passeth  away,  another  g.  cometh
Isa.  13.  20.  not  dwelt  in  from  </.  to  g.  Jer.  50.  39.

34.  10.  from//,  to  g.  it  shall  lie  waste
17.  from//,  to  g.  they  shall  dwell  therein
51.  8.  but  my  salvation  shall  be  from  g.  to  g.

53.  8.  who  shall  declare  his  g.  ?  Acts  8.  33.

Jer.  2.  31.  O  g.  see  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord

7.  29.  the  Lord  hath  rejected  the//,  of  his  wrath
Lam.  5.  19.  thy  throne,  G  L.  remains  from  g.  to  g.
Dan.  4.  3.  and  his  dominion  is  from  g.  to  g.  34.

Joel  1.  3.  and  let  their  children  tell  another  g.

3.  20.  Jerusalem  shall  dwell  from  g.  to  g.

Mat.  1.  1.  the  book  of  the  g.  of  Jesus  Christ
3.  7-  O  g.  of  vipers,  12.  34  |  23.  33.  'Luke  3.  7.

11.  16.  whereto  shall  I  liken  this  g.  Luke  7.  31.

12.  39.  an  evil  and  adulterous  g.  seeketh  after  a

sign,  16.  4.  Mark  8.  12.  Luke  11.  29

41.  shall  rise  in  judgment  with  this//.  Luke  11.32.

42.  queen  of  the  south  rise  up  with  g.  Luke  11.  31.
45.  even  so  shall  it  be  also  to  this  wicked  g.

17.  17.  O  perverse//.  Mark  9.  19.  Luke  9.  41.

23.  36.  all  these  things  shall  come  on  this  g.

24.34.  this//,  shall  not  pass,  Mark  13. 30.  Luke  21.32.

Mark  8.  38.  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  in  this  sinful  g.
Luke  1.  50.  his  mercy  is  on  them  from  g.  to  g.

11.  30.  so  shall  the  bon  of  man  be  to  this  g.

50.  the  blood  of  the  prophets  required  of  this  g.  51.

16.  8.  children  of  this  world  in  their  g.  are  wiser

17.  25.  the  Son  of  man  must  be  rejected  of  this  g.
Acts  2.  40.  save  you  from  this  untoward  g.

13.  36.  David,  after  he  had  served  his  own  g.

1  Pet.  2.  9.  ye  are  a  chosen  g.  a  royal  priesthood
See  Fourth.

GENERATIONS.

Gen.  2.  4.  these  are  the  g.  of  the  heavens  and  earth

5.  1.  th eg.  of  Adam  ||  6.  9.  the  g.  of  Noah,  10.  1.

6.  9.  Noah  was  a  just  man,  and  perfect  in  his  g.

9.  12.  of  the  covenant  I  make  for  perpetual  g.

11.  10.  these  are  the//,  of  Shem  ||  27.  g.  ofTerah
1“.  7-  covenant  between  me  and  thy  seed  in  their//.

9.  thou  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  g.

12.  every  man-child  in  your  g.  must  be  circum¬


cised

25.12.  these  are  the  g.  of  Tshmael,  13. 1  Chr.  1. 29.
19.  these  are  the/;,  of  Isaac  H  36. 1.  the/;,  of  Esau,  9,
37.2.  these  are  the//,  ofjacob,  Joseph  17  years  old
Exod.  3.  15.  and  this  is  my  memorial  unto  all  g.

6.  16.  the  sons  of  Levi  according  to  their  g.  19.

12.  14.  a  feast  to  the  Lord  throughout  your  g.

17.  ye  shall  observe  this  day  in  your  g.

42.  a  night  to  be  much  observed  by  Isr.  in  their  g.
16.  32.  fill  an  homer  to  be  kept  for  your  g.  33.

27.  21.  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  to  their  g.  30.
21.  Lev.  3.  17.  |  6.  18.  1  7-  36. 1  10.  9. 1  17.  7.

|23,  14.  21,  31,  41.

29.  42.  a  contin.  burnt-offering  throughout  your  g.

30.  8.  burn  incense  ||  31.  oil  throughout  your  g.

31.  13.  my  sabbaths  a  sign  throughout  your  g.  16.
40.  15.  an  everlasting  priesthood  through  their  g.

Lev.  21. 17.  of  thy'  seed  in  their//,  that  hath  blemish

23.  43.  your//,  may  know  that  1  made  Israel  dwell

24.  3.  a  statute  for  ever  in  g.  Num.  10.  8.  1 18.  23.
Deut.  7-  9.  Lord  keepeth  covenanttoa  thousand  g.

32.  7.  consider  the  years  of  many  g.

Josh.  22.  27.  a  witness  between  you  and  our//.

28.  when  they  should  say  to  our  g.  in  time  to  come
Judg.  3.  2.  the  g.  of  Israel  might  teach  them  war
Ruth  4.  18.  now  these  are  the  g.  of  Pharez

Chron.  16. 15.  of  his  covenant,  the  word  which  lie
commanded  to  a  thousand  g.  Psal.  105.  8.
Job  42.  16.  Job  saw  his  sons’  sons,  even  four/;.
Psal.  33.  11.  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  a.’l  g.

45. 17.  make  thy  name  to  be  remembered  in  all  g.
49.  11.  their  dwelling-places  continue  to  all  g.

61.  6.  thou  wilt  nrolongthe  king’s  years  as  many/;,
72.  5.  they  shall  fear  thee  throughout  all  g.

79.  13.  we  will  shew  forth  thy  praise  to  all  g.

85.  5.  wilt  thou  draw  out  thine  anger  to  all  g.  ?
89.  1.  I  will  make  known  thy  faithfulness  to  all  g.
4.  and  I  will  build  up  thy  throne  to  all  g.


187


GEN


G  I  A


GET


Psal.9 0.1.  thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  m  all  g.

100.  5.  ami  liis  truth  endureth  to  all  g.

402.  1C.  and  thy  remembrance  unto  all  g.

24.  thy  years  are  throughout  all  g.

106.31.  was  counted  to  him  tor  righteous,  to  all  g.

119.  90.  thv  faithfulness  is  unto  all  g.

135.  13.  and  thy  memorial  throughout  all  g.

145. 13.  and  thy  dominion  throughout  all  g.

146.  10.  thv  God,  O  Zion,  shall  reign  to  all  g.

Isa.  41.  4.  calling  the  g.  from  the  beginning

51.  9.  awake,  O  arm  ot  the  Ld.  as  m  the  //.of  old

5K.  1C.  shall  raise  up  the  foundations  ot  many  g.

60.  15.  1  will  make  thee  a  joy  ot  many  g.

61.  4.  they  shall  repair  the  desolations  or  many  o •

Joel  C.  C.  even  to  the  years  of  many  g.

Mat.  1. 17.  the  g.  from  Abraham  to  David  are  14  g.

Luke  1.  48.  behold,  all  g.  shall  call  me  blessed

Col.  1.  26.  mystery  hath  been  hid  from  ages  and  g.

G  E  N  1  1 1  T..

The  Hebrews  call  the  Gentiles  by  the  general  name
of  Goiim, which  signifies  the  nations  that  have  not
received  the  faith,  or  law  of  God.  All  who  are
not  Jews,  and  circumcised,  are  comprised  under
the  word  Goiim.  Before  Christ,  the  door  to  lije
and  justification  was  opened  to  the  world  by  the
belief  only  and  profession  of  the  Jewish  religion .
Those  who  were  converted,  and  embraced  .1  udaism,
they  culled  Proselytes.  Since  the  preaching  oj  the
gospel,  the  true  religion  is  not  confined  to  any  one
nation  and  country,  only,  as  heretofore.  God,  who
had  promised  by  his  prophets  to  call  the  Gentiles
io  the  faith,  with  a  superabundance  of  grace,  has
executed  this  promise  :  So  that  the  Christian  chuich
is  composed  of  scarcely  any  other  beside  Gentile
converts ;  arid  the  Jews,  who  were  too  proud  oj

their  particular  privileges,  for  the  most  part  have
keen  abandoned  to  their  re  probated  sense  of things ,
and  have  disowned  Jesus  Christ  then  Mfcssiali
and  Redeemer,  for  whom,  for  so  many  ages,  they
wished  so  impatiently .  ,  _

The  apostle  Paul  generally  comprehends  the  Gen¬
tiles  under  the  name  of  Greeks,  Rom.  1.  16.  Jew
and  Greek  signify  Jew  and  Gentile.  See  also
Horn.  C.  9,  10.  1  3.  9. 1  10.  12.  1  Cor.  1.  — ,  -4.
Gai.  3.  C8.  Arid  St.  Luke,m  the  Acts,  expressed
himself  in  the  same  manner,  Acts  11.  20. 1  18.  4.
St.  Paul  is  commonly  called  the  Apostle  or  the
Gentiles,  or  the  Greeks,  1  Tim.  2.  7 •  because  he
was  principally  sent  to  idolatrous  people,  to  preach
Christ  to  them;  whereas  St.  Peter,  and  the  other
apostles, preached  move  generally  to  the  Jews  ;  Jot
which  reason  they  are  called  the  apostles  oj  the  cir-


Zecli.  1.  21.  are  come  to  cast  out  the  horns  ot  g.
Mai.  1.11.  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  g.
Mat.  4.  15.  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  ot  the  g.

6.  32.  for  after  all  these  things  do  the  g.  seek

10.  5.  saying,  go  not  intp  the  way  of  the  g.

18.  for  a  testimony  against  them  and  the  g,

12.  21.  and  in  his  name  shall  the  g.  trust
20. 19.deliv.  him  to  the g.  Mark  10.33.  Luke  18.3..
25.  princes  of  the  g.  exercise  domin.  Luke  22.  Co.
Luke  HI.  24.  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  ot
the  g.  till  the  times  ot  the  g.  be  fulfilled
John  7.  35.  to  the  dispersed  among  g.  and  teach  g.


John  7.  35.  to  the  dispersed  among  g.  and  ..  „

Acts  4.  27.  Pilate  with  g.  were  gathered  together


7.  45.  with  Jesus  into  the  possession  of  the  g.

9.  15.  to  bear  my  name  before  the  g.  and  kings

10.  45.  on  the  g.  also  was  poured  out  the  gift

11.  1.  heard  that  the  g.  received  the  word  ot  God

18.  hath  God  to  the  g.  granted  repentance  to  life  t
13  42.  g.  besought  these  words  might  be  preached

46.  Paul  and  Barnabas  said,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  g.
48.  when  the  g.  heard  this,  tljey  were  glad

14.  2.  the  unbelieving  Jews  stirred  up  the  g.

5.  there  was  an  assault  made  both  ot  Jews  and g.

27.  lie  hail  opened  the  door  ot  faith  to  the^.

15.  3.  declaring  the  conversion  of  the  g.  great  joy
7.  that  the  g.  by  my  mouth  should  bear  the  wot  cl

12.  what  wonders  God  had  wrought  among  the  g .
14.  Simeon  declared  how  God  at  first  did  visits.

17.  and  all  the  g.  on  whom  my  name  is  called

19.  we  trouble  not  them,  which  from  among  the 50


cumcision-  (JaL  C.  7;  l  lie  gospel  ot  the  uneir


ftos-


’  send  greeting  to  the  brethren  of  the  g.


18.  6.  from  henceforth  1  will  go  to  the  0-

21.  11.  shall  deliver  Paul  into  the  hands  of  the//.
19.  God  wrought  among  the  g.  by  his  ministry
21.  teachest  the  Jews  among  g.  to  forsake  Moses
25.  as  touching  the  g .  which  believe,  have  written

22.  21.  for  l  will  send  thee  far  hence  to  the  g.

of,’.  17.  delivering  thee  from  the  people  and  the  g.
~20.  shewing  to  the  g.  that  they  should  repent


,  that  Christ  should  shew  light  to  the  g.


28.  28.  the  salvation  of  God  is  sent  to  the  g.

Bom.  1.  13.  have  some  fruit,  as  among  other  g.
o  14.  for  when  the  g,  which  have  not  the  Jaw
~24  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among  the  g.
3.  9.  we  have  proved  both  Jews  and  g.  under  sin

29.  is  he  not  also  of  the  g.  ?  yes,  ot  the  g.  also
9  24.  not  of  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  g.

30.  g.  which  followed  not  after  righteousness

11.  11.  salvation  is  come  to  the  g.  to  provoke  them

12.  the  diminishing  of  them  the  riches  of  tne  g.

13.  1  speak  to  you  g.  as  the  apostle  of  the  g.


25'.  till  the  fulness  of  the  g.  be  come  in


cumcision  was  committed  unto  me,  as  the
pel  of  the  circumcision  was  unto  Peter.

The  old  prophets  declared  in  a  very  particular  man¬
ner  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  Jacob  foretold,
that  when  Shiloh,  or  the  Messiah  should  come,  to
him  should  the  gathering  of  the  people  be;  that
is,  the  Gentiles  should  yield  obedience  to  Christ,
and  acknowledge  him  for  their  Lord  and  Saviour .
And  how  sincerely  and  heartily  the  ancient  and
godly  Jews  desired  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,
may  appear  from  the  prayer  which  Solomon  ad¬
dresses  to  God  after  the  dedication  of  the  temple
which  he  had  built .  1  Kings  8.  41,  42,  43.  If  hen
the  stranger  shall  come  and  pray  towards  this
house ,  hear  thou  in  heaven ,  that  all  people  ot
the  earth  may  know  thy  name,  to  tear  thee  as
thy  people  Israel.  The  Psalmist  says,  that  the
Lord  shall  give  the  Gentiles  to  the  Messiah  for  an
inheritance.  Psal.  2.  8.  That  the  kings  ot  lar-
shish  and  of  the  isles  shall  bring  presents  ;  the
kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer  gifts  ;  yea,  all
kings  shall  fall  down  before  him,  Psal.  72.  10, 11.
And  in  Psal.  87.  4.  I  will  make  mention  ot
Egypt  and  Babylon,  to  them  that  know  me  :  be¬
hold,  Philistia  and  Tyre,  with  Ethiopia  .-this man
was  born  there.  Isaiah  abounds  with  prophecies  oj
the  like  nature ;  see  Isa.  2.  2,  3,4.1  1 1 . 10. 1  42. 1 , 6.
In  the  New  Testament  we  see  the  Gentiles  came
sometimes  to  Jerusalem  to  worship  God  there.
Some  of  these  arriving  there  a  little  before  the  death
of  our  Saviour,  addressed  themselves  to  Philip,  de¬
siring  him  to  shew  them  Jesus,  John  12.  20,  At .
Philip  told  Andrew,  and  both  of  them  informed
Jesus  ;  who  answered  them,  1  he  hour  is  come,  that
the  Son  of  man  should  be  glorified  ;  that  is.  Do
the  Gentiles  seek  me?  why,  the  time  approaches
wherein  I  shall  be  glorified  by  their  conversion,
and  owning  of  me  ;  but  1  must  die  first,  like  a
grain  of  corn,  and  from  thence  will  spring  up
plentiful  crop  among  the  Gentiles.  Queen  Can¬
dace’s  eunuch,  who  came  to  Jerusalem,  was  like
wise  a  Gentile,  as  several  affirm,  Acts  8.  27-.  .
Mark  7.  t  26.  the  woman  was  a  g.  a  Syrophenician
Horn.  2.  9.  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  g.  10.
GEN  T1  LBS.

Gen.  10.  5.  by  these  the  isles  of  the  g.  were  divided
Judg.  4.  2.  Sisera  dwelt  in  llarosheth  of  the  g.

Isa.  11.  10.  a  root  of  Jesse,  to  it  shall  the  g.  seek
42. 1.  he  shall  bring  judgment  to  the  g.  Mat.  12. 18.
6.  for  a  light  to  g.  49.  6.  Luke  2.  32.  Acts  13.  47.
49.  22.  behold,  I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the  g
54.  3.  and  thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  g.

60.  3.  and  the  g.  shall  come  to  thy  light
5.  the  forces  of  the  g.  shall  come  to  thee,  11.

16.  thou  shalt  also  suck  the  milk  ot  the  g.

61.  6.  ye  shall  eat  the  riches  ot  the  g.

9.  and  their  seed  shall  be  known  among  the  g.

62.  2.  and  the  g.  shall  see  thy  righteousness
66.  12.  the  glory  of  the  g.  like  a  flowing  stream

19.  they  shall  declare  my  glory  among  the  g.
Jer.  4.  7.  the  destroyer  of  the  g.  is  on  his  way  .  .
14.  22.  can  any  of  the  vanities  of  the  g.  cause  rain:
16. 19.  the  g.  shall  come  to  thee  from  ends  ot  earth
46.  1.  the  word  came  to  Jeremiah  against  the  g.
Earn.  2.  9.  her  king  and  princes  are  among  the  g.
Ezek.  4.  13.  eat  their  deliled  bread  among  the  g.
Hos.  8.  8.  now  shall  they  be  among  the  g.

Joel  3. 9-  proclaim  ye  this  among  the  g.  prepare  war
Mic.  5. 8.  the  remnant  of  J  acob  shall  be  among  the  g.
188


15.  9.  that  the  g.  might  glorify  God  for  his  mercy  ;
for  this  cause  I  will  confess  to  thee  among  the  g.

10.  he  saith,  rejoice,  ye  g.  with  his  people

11.  praise  Lord,  all  ye g.  and  laud  him,  all  people

12.  to  reign  over  the//,  in  him  shall  the  g.  trust
16.  that  f  should  be  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ

to  the  g.  that  the  offering  up  of  the  g.
18.  to  make  the  g.  obedient  by  word  and  deed
27.  for  if  the  g.  have  been  made  partakers  ot

16.  4.  not  only  T,  but  all  the  churches  ot  the  g.

1  Cor.  5.  1.  is  not  so  much  as  named  among  the  <7.

10.  20.  the  things  which  the  g.  sacrifice  to  devils
32.  give  none  offence,  neither  to  Jews  nor  <7.
12.2.  ye  know  ye  were  g.  carried  away  to  idols

13.  into  one  body,  whether  we  be  Jews  or  g.

Gal.  2.  2.  that  gospel  which  I  preach  among  the  g.

8.  the  same  was  mighty  in  me  towards  the  g.

12.  for  before  some  came,  be  did  eat  with  the  g.

14.  livest  after  manner  of  g.  why  compellest  g.  ?

15.  we  who  are  Jews,  and  not  sinners  ot  trie  g.

3.  14.  blessing  of  Abraham  might  come  on  the  g.

Eph.  2.  11.  ye  being  in  time  past  g.  in  the  flesh

3.  l.  I  Paul  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you  <7.
6.  that  g.  should  he  fellow-heirs  of  the  same  body
8.  preach  among  the  g.  the  unsearchable  riches

4.  17.  that  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  other  g.

Col.  1.  27.  tfie  glory  of  this  mystery  .among  the  g.
1  Thess.  2.  16.  forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  g.

4.  5.  not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence,  as  the  g.

1  Tim.  2.  7.  I  am  ordained  a  teacher  ot  the  g.

3.  16.  preached  to  the  g.  believed  on  in  the  world

2  Tim.  1.11.  am  appoint,  an  apostle  and  teacher  ot  g


4.  17.  and  that  all  the  g.  might  hear
1  Pet.  2. 12.  your  conversation  honest  among  the//.
4.  3.  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  g.

3  John  7.  they  went  forth,  taking  nothing  of  the  g.
Rev.  11.  2.  for  the  court  is  given  to  the  g.

GEN  I  EE.

1  Thess.  2 . 7 .  we  were  g.  among  you ,  even  as  a  nurse

2  Tim.  2.  24.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  be  g.

~Tit.  3.  2.  but  g.  shewing  all  meekness  to  all  men
Jam.  3.  17.  the  wisdom  from  above  is  pure  and  g.

1  Pet.  2. 18.  be  subject  not  only  to  the  good  and  g.

GENTLENESS.

2  Sam.  22.  36.  thy  g.  hath  made  me  great,  Ps. .18.  35.
2  Cor.  10.  1.  I  beseech  you  by  the  g.  ot  Christ
Gal.  5.  22.  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  g.  goodness

G  EN  1  L  Y .

2  Sam.  18.  5.  deal  g.  with  the  young  man  Absalom
Isa.  40.  11.  lie  will  g.  lead  those  with  young
G  E I .

Gen.  34.  4.  saying,  g.  me  this  damsel  to  wife
Exod.  1.  10.  and  so  g.  them  upoutot  the  land
14.  17.  and  1  will  g.  me  honour  upon  Pharaoh
Lev.  14.  21.  if  he  be  poor  and  cannot  g.  so  much

22.  two  pigeons,  such  as  he  is  able  to  g.  30,  31.

32.  the  law  of  him  whose  hand  is  not  able  to  g.

Num.  6.  21.  besides  that  that  his  hand  shall  g.

22.  34.  now  therefore  1  will  g.  me  back  again
Dent.  8.  18.  it  is  he  givetb  thee  power  to  g.  wealth
28.  43.  the  strangers  shall  g.  up  above  thee
Judg.  14.  2.  therefore  g.  her  for  me  to  wife,  3.

1  Sam.  20.  29.  let  me  g.  away  and  see  my  brethren

23.  26.  David  made  haste  to  g.  away  tor  tear

2  Sam.  20.  6.  lest  Sheba  q.  fenced  cities  and  escape

1  Kings  1.  2.  that  my  lord  the  king  may  g.  heat
12.  18.  king  ltehoboam  made  speed  to  g.  up  to  Ins

chariot  to  flee  to  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  10.  18.

2  Kings  7. 12.  shall  catch  them  alive,  and  g.  the  city
Psal.  119. 104.  thro’  thy  precepts  I  g.  understanding


Prov.  4.  5.  g.  wisdom,  g.  understanding,  7.

6.  33.  a  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he//.

16. 16.  much  better  it  is  to  g.  wisdom  than  gold,  and
to  g.  understanding  rather  to  be  chosen  than  silver

17. 16.  a  price  in  the  band  of  a  fool  to  g.  wisdom
22.  25.  lest  tliou  learn  his  ways  and  <7.  a  snare

Reel.  3. 6.  there  is  a  time  to  g.  and  a  time  to  lose
Cant.  4.  6.  1  will  g.  me  to  the  mountains  of  myrrh

7.  12.  let  11s  <7.  up  early  to  the  vineyards  and  see  if
Jer.  5.  5.  1  will  g.  me  to  great  men,  and  will  speak

19.  1.  and  g.  a  potter's  earthen  bottle
46.  4.  harness  the  horses,  and  g.  up,  ye  horsemen
48.  9.  give  wings  to  Moab,  that  it  may  g.  away
Lam.  3. 7.  he  hath  hedged  me  about,  1  cannot  //.out
Ezek.  22.  27.  to  destroy  souls,  to  g.  dishonest  gain
Dan.  4.14.  let  the  beasts  g.  away  from  under  it
Zeph.  3.  19.  1  will  q.  th-.i  praise  from  every  land
Mat.  10.  t  9.  g.  neither goid  nor  silver  in  your  purses

14.  22.  constr.  them  to  g.  into  ship,  Mark  6.  45.
Luke  9.  12.  that  they  may  lodge  and  g.  victuals
Acts  27.  4.3.  cast  themselves  into  sea,  and  g.  to  land
2  Cor.  2.  11.  lest  Satan  should  g.  the  advantage  of  us
Jam.  4. 13.  continue  there,  buy,  sell,  and  g.  gain
GE  E  thee.

Gen.  12.  1.  g.  thee  out  of  thy  country,  Acts'!.  3.

22.  2.  he  said,  g.  thee  into  the  land  ot  Moriah

31.  13.  (j.  thee  out  from  this  land,  and  return
Exod.  7. 15.  g.  thee  to  Pharaoh  in  the  morning
10.  28.  g.  thee  from  me,  take  heed  to  thyself
IL8./7.  thee  out,  and  all  the  people  that  follow  thee
19.  24.  Lord  said  to  Moses,  away,  g.  thee  down  ,
and  tliou  shalt  come  up,  32. 7.  Dent.  9.  12.
Num.  27 .12.  g.  thee  to  mount  Abarim,  Dent.  32.49.
Dent.  3.  27.  g.  thee  up  to  the  top  of  Pisgah
17.  8.  g.  thee  up  to  the  place  the  Lord  shall  choose
Josh.  7.  10.  q.  thee  up,  wherefore  Best  thou  thus:
17. 15.  then  g.  thee  up  to  the  wood  country
Judg  7.  9.  arise,//,  thee  down  unto  the  host
Ruth  3.  3.  wash  thyself,  g.  thee  down  to  the  floor
4.  t  11.//.  thee  riches  in  Ephratah,  and  be  famous
1  Sam.  22.  5.  depart,  g.  thee  into  the  land  of  Judah

1  Kings  1.  13.  go,//,  thee  into  king  David,  and  say
2.  26.  g.  thee  to  Anathoth  to  thine  own  fields

14.  2.  g.  thee  to  Shiloh,  behold  there  is  Ahijab
12.  arise  therefore,  g.  thee  to  thine  own  house

17.  3.  g.  thee  hence  |)  9.  0-  thee  to  Zarephath

18.  41.  Elijah  said,  g.  thee  up,  eat  and  drink
44.  g.  thee  down,  that  the  rain  stop  thee  not

2  Kings  3.  13.  g.  thee  to  the  prophets  of  thy  father
Neh.  9. 10.  so  didst  thou/7,  thee  a  name  as  this  day
Isa.  22. 15.  g.  thee  to  this  treasurer,  to  Shebnah

30.'  22.  thou  shalt  say  unto  it,  g.  thee  hence
40.  9.  O  Zion,//,  thee  up  into  the  high  mountain
47.  5.  sit  thou  silent,  and  g.  thee  into  darkness
Jer.  13. 1.  g.  thee  a  linen  girdle,  put  it  on  thy  loins
Ezek.  3.  4.  son  of  man,  g.  thee  to  the  house  ot  Israel
11.  and  go,  g.  thee  to"  them  of  the  captivity
Mat.  4. 10.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  g.  thee  hence,  Satan

16.  23.  lie  turned,  and  said  to  Peter,  g.  thee  behind
me,  Satan,  Mark  8.  33.  Luke  4.8.
Luke  13.  31.  g.  thee  out,  for  Herod  will  kill  thee  1
Acts  10.  20.  arise,  g.  thee  down,  go  with  them
22.  18.  g.  thee  quickly  out  ot  Jerusalem,  will  not
GET  ye.

Gen.  19. 14.  Lot  said,  up,  g.  ^eoutof  this. place
Isa  30. 11.  g.  ye  outof  the  way,  turn  aside  from  patf
Jer.  49.  31 .  arise,  g.  ye  up  to  the  wealthy  nation
Ezek.  11. 15.  have  said,  g.  ye  far  lrom  the  Lorn
Joel  3.  13.  come,  g.  ye  down,  tor  the  press  is  tuff
Zech.  6.  7-  lie  said,  g.  ye  hence,  walk  to  and  fro
G  ET  you.

Gen. 34. 10.  dwell  and  trade,  g.you  possessions  there
42.  2.  g.  you  down  thither  and  buy  for  us  thence
44'  17.  rise  up,  a.  yon  up  in  peace  unto  your  fathe
Exod. 5.  4.  the  king  s.  id,  g.  you  to  your  burdens
11.  go  you,  <7.  you  straw  where  you  can  nnd  it
12  31.  rise  up,  g.  you  forth  from  among  my  peoph
Num.  14.  25.  turn  you,  g.  you  into  the  wilderness
16.  24.  g.  you  up  from  about  tabernacle  of  lvoral
22*.  13.  Balaam  said,  g.you  into  your  land
Deut.  5.  30.  g.you  into  your  tents  again,  Josh.  22. 4
Josh.  2. 16.//.  y.  to  the  mountain,  lest  pursuers  meet
Judg.  10.  9.  to-morrow  g.  you  early  on  your  way

1  Sam.  9.  13.  g.  you  up,  tor  ye  shall  find  him

15.  6.  a.  you  down  from  among  the  Amalekites
25.  5.  g.  you  up  to  Carmel,  and  go  to  Nabal

Jer.  49. 30.  flee  g.  yon  far  off,  dwell  deep,  ye  ot  Haze
G E 1  P E Lit.  . ,

2  Sam.  5.  8.  whosoever  g.  up  to  the  gutter,  be  chic
Prov  3.  13.  happy  is  the  man  that g.  understanciii

9  7  he  that  reproveth  a  scorner  g.  to  hansel
shame,  he  that  rebuketh  a  wicked  man  g.  a  blQ
15.  32.  he  that  heareth  reproof//,  understanding
18.  15.  the  heart  of  the  prudent  g.  knowledge
19  8.  he  that  g.  wisdom  loveth  his  own  soul
Jer.  17.  11- so  he  that  g.  riches,  and  not  by  right
48  44  lie  that  g.  out  ot  the  pit  shall  be  taken
1  ‘  GETTING.  ,

Gen.  31.  18.  Jacob  carried  away  the  cattle  otlns/
Prov.  4.  7.  with  all  thy  g.  get  understanding
°1  6  the  q.  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue  is  vantt
GHOST.

Ge».49.33.  Jacob  yielded  up  the  <7.  was  gatheiei
Job  io!  18.  O  that  1  had  given  up  the  g.  no  eye.  see
11.  20.  their  hope  shall  be  as  the  giving  uppt  <7.
14. 10.  yea.  man  giveth  up  the  g.  and  where  ls  jie
Ter  15. *9.  hath  horn  seven,  she  hath  given  up  the,
Mat.  27.  50.  Jesus  cried,  and  yielded  up  tb e  g.
Acts  5. 10.  Sapphira  tell  down  and  yielded  up  the.
See  Gave,  Give,  Holy.

Gi  AN1  .  y ■

In  Greek,  Gigas,  in  Hebrew,  Nephel,  or>
pliilim,  which  may  signify  a  monster,  orate
man,  who  beats  and  bears  down  other  men.
Scripture  speaks  of  Giants  who  hied  bejot
flood;  they  are  called  Nephilim,  mighty
which  were  of  old,  men  ot  renown,  G en.  v-
Aquila,  instead  of  Gigantes,  translates  n
word  Nephilim,  'Eviuimovres,  lnen  ."  ‘

tack,  who  fall  with  impetuosity  upon  their  eh
mies ;  a  translation,  says  one,  which  ream
very  well  the  whole  force  oj  the  Hebrew  ter.


GIF


GIR


G  I  R


vminaclius  translates  it  R<a<o<,  violent  men,
cruel,  ti'hose  only  rule  of  their  actions  is  violence ,
and  force  of  arms.

'he  Seri/  true  calls  them  sometimes  Kephaims.
Lor  example  :  Chedorlaoiner  and  his  allies  heal
the  Kephaims  or  giants  at  Ashteroth  harnaim,
(Jen.  14.  5.  The  limims,  ancient  inhabitants  of
the  land  of  Moab,  were  of  a  gigantic  stature ,  they
t cere  of  the  number  of  the  Kephaims  or  giants,
Deut.  2.  10,  11.  The  ltephaims  and  the  "Periz-
sites  are  joined  together  as  old  inhabitants  of  the
land  of  Canaan,  Gen.  15.  20.  Job  says,  that  the
undent  Kephaims  mourn  or  groan  under  the
waters,  .lob  26.  5.  These  giants  of  the  old  world,
who  once  carried  themselves  insolently  towards
Hod  and  men,  but  were  quickly  subdued  by  the
divine  power,  and  drowned  with  a  deluge,  do  now
mourn  or  groan  from  under  the  waters  where  they
were  buried,  or  in  their  subterranean  and  infernal
habitations.  But  this  passage  is  otherwise  ex¬
plained  by  some.  Solomon  in  Prov.  2.  18.  says,
that  the  paths  of  a  debauched  woman  lead  to  the
Kephaims,  that  is,  to  hell,  where  the  rebellious
giants  are  ;  and  that  he  who  deviates  from  the  ways
of  wisdom,  shall  go  and  dwell  in  the  assembly  of
the  giants  in  hell,  Prov.  21 . 16.
he  Anakims,  or  the  sorts  of  Anak,  were  the  most
famous  giants  e/Palestine.  They  dwelt  at  Hebron,
and  thereabouts.  Their  stature  was  so  much
above  what  was  common,  that  the  Israelites,  who
were  sent  to  view  the  promised  land,  told  the
people  at  their  return,  that  they  had  seen  giants  of
the  race  of  Anak  in  this  country,  who  were  of  so
monstrous  a  size,  that  the  Israelites,  in  com¬
parison,  were  but  grasshoppers  to  them,  Kum,
13.  33.

he  Septuagint  sometimes  translate  the  Hebrew
word  (jibbor,  giant,  though  literally  it  signifies  no
more  than  a  strong  man,  a  man  of  valour  and
bravery,  a  warrior.  For  example:  they  say  that
Nimrod  was  a  giant  before  the  Lord,  Gen.  10.  8,
9.  That  the  sun  rises  like  a  giant  to  run  its
course,  Psal.  19.  5.  That  the  Lord  will  destroy
the  giant  and  the  warlike  man,  Isa.  3.  2.  That


- '  ‘  Jill  « •  J l  /tile

ill  cull  his  giants  in  his  wrath,  to  take  veil-


c‘*"**‘w  '  ‘  '  ‘  t ut'ij  n'  •mho  (/C/t

yeance  oj  his  enemies,  Isa.  13.  3.  That  he  will  de¬
stroy  the  power  of  Egypt  by  the  sword  of  his  giants  ;
that  is,  of  his  warriors,  Ezek.  32.  12,  21,  27.
s  to  the  existence  of  giants,  several  writers,
both  ancient  and  modern,  have  imagined,  that  the
giants  spoken  of  in  Scripture  were  indeed  men  of
an  extraordinary  stature,  but  not  so  much  above
,  what  was  common  as  they  have  fancied,  who  de¬
scribe  giants  as  three  or  four  times  larger  than
men  ate  at  present.  They  were,  say  they,  men
famous  for  the  violences  which  they  committed,  and
for  their  crimes  rather  than  for  their  strength,  or
the  greatness  of  their  stature,
is  very  probable,  that  the  first  men  were  all  of  a
strength  and  stature  much  superior  to  those  of
mankind  at  present,  since  they  lived  a  much  longer
time;  long  life  being  commonly  the  effect  of  a
strong  and  vigorous  constitution.  Anil  that  for¬
merly  there  were  men  of  a  stature  much  above
that  of  common  men  cannot  be  denied,  at  least  not
without  contradicting  the  holy  Scriptures.  The
Israelites  who  traversed  the  Holy  Land,  told
their  brethren,  that  they  had  seen  giants  in  this
country  of  Anak’s  race,  who  were  so  vnmeasure-
ably  large,  that  other  me  were  but  grasshoppers  in
comparison  to  them,  Num.  13.  33.  Moses  speaks
°f  Gg  the  king  of  Baslian’s  bed,  which  was  nine
cubits  long,  and  four  wide;  that  is,  fij'teen  feet
tour  inches  and  a  half  long,  Deut.  3.  11.  Goli¬
ath  was  six  cubits  and  a  span  in  height,  that  is
to  say ,  ten  feet  seven  inches;  1  Sam.  if.  4.  ’These
sorts  nj  giants  were  still  common  in  Joshua’s
and  David’s  times,  when  the  life  of  men  was  al¬
ready  so  much  shortened,  and  as  may  be  presumed,
toe  size  and  strength  of  human  bodies  were  very
much  diminished.  Besides  the  giants,  mentioned
m  scripture,  several  historians  make  mention  of
giants;  as  Herodotus,  Diodorus  Siculus,  Pliny,
Homer,  Plutarch,  &c.

Sam.  21.  16.  was  of  sons  of  the  g.  18.1  Chr.  20.  4.
J/iron.  20.  6.  the  son  of  the#.  I|  8.  born  to  the*/.
b  16. 14.  lie  runneth  upon  me  like  a  g.

GIANTS.

en-  6.  4.  there  were  g.  in  the  earth  in  those  days
um.  13.  33.  there  we  saw  the  g.  the  sons  of  Anak
mh  '■  H.  Emimswere  counted  g.  as  the  Anakims
.  11.  tor  only  Og  ot  Bashan  remained  of  the  rem-
-o  .  ,  .  .  nant  of/;.  Josh.  12.  4. 1  13.  12.

13.  Bashan  which  was  called  the  land  ot  g.
mi.  15.  8.  the  lot  of  Judah  went  up  at  valley  of  g.
'•  j*?-  then  get  thee  up  to  the  land  of  the  g.
i.  16.  Benjamin  came  to  the  valley  of  the  g.

„  ,  G1ER-EAGLE.

■v.  11. 18.  these  in  abomination,  the g.  Deut.  14.17.
.r  r  GIFT

/nines,  [1]  A  present,  Esth.  2.  18.  Mat.  2.  11.

i  reua,d>  Dan.  5.  1*.  [3]  A  recompence
or  the  reparation  of  an  injury  or  wrong  done
0  a,  person,  or  something  given  in  testimony  of
espect  and  kindness,  Gen.  34.  12.  [4]  A  bribe,

,  something  given  to  a  judge  by  one  who  has  a
gv.se  depending  in  order  to  bring  the  judge  to
,  I  lCtt  ir  nm »  which  is  forbidden  by  the  law,
eut.  16.  19.  because  such  gifts  corrupt  and
las  the  mind,  that  as  the  judge  will  not,  so  oft
imes  he  cannot,  discern  between  right  and  wrong.

■  o$n  °"tation,  or  Jree-will  offering,  Mat.

Hst  Jesus  is  called  the  gift  of  God,  John  4.  10.
II  u  “e  greatest  gift  that  God  ever  gave  to
a  otld,  J  he  Holy  Ghost  and  his  miracu-
\7iSoF,>-riare  ?lso  c ailed  the  gift  of  God.  Acts
.  •  Diou  hast  thought  that  the  gift  of  God


,  me  gin  ui  VjOU

;aj  be  purchased  with  money.  Every  good
lam  ”ifn  receive  is  the  gift  of  God.

it,"’  37 . .  Every  good  gift  is  from  above,

ot  righteousness  signifies  those  benefits


which  Christ  by  his  righteousness  or  obedience
has  purchased  for  us,  Korn.  5.  17.  By  un¬
shakable  gift,  in  2  Cor.  9.  15.  some  understand
CJirist  >  others  under  stand  the  gospel,  by  xchich
the  hearts  of  men  are  subdued,  effectually  dis¬
posed,  and  inclined  to  obey  the  will  of  God:
Others  think  it  is  to  be  under.' tood  of  that  habit
<J  brotherly  love,  which  from  the  Spirit  of  Christ,
by  the  gospel,  was  wrought  in  the  hearts  of  these
Corinthians.

Gen.  34.  12.  ask  me  never  so  much  dowry  and  g.
Trod.  23.  8.  take  no#.  a  g.  blindeth,  Dent.  16.  19.
Film.  8. 19.  1  have  given  the  Levites  as  a  g.  18.  6.
18.7-  1  have  given  your  office  as  a  service  of  #’
IE  this  is  thine,  the  heave-offering  of  their  g.
Dent.  16. 1 17.  every  man  according  to  g.  of  his  hand
2  Sam.  19.  42.  or  hath  he  given  us  any  g. ?

Tsai.  45. 12.  daughter  of  Tyre  shall  be  there  with  g.
Prov.  17.  8.  a  g.  is  as  a  precious  stone  in  the  eyes

23.  a  wicked  man  taketh  a  g.  out  of  the  bosom
18.  16.  a  man’s  g.  maketh  room  for  him

21.  14.  a  g.  in  secret  paeifieth  anger
25.  14.  whoso  boasteth  himself  ot  a  false  g.

Lccl.  3.  13.  enjoy  good,  it  is  the  g.  of  God,  5.  19.

7-  7-  and  a  g.  destroyeth  the  heart

Ezek.  46.  t  5.  meat-offering  the  g.  of  his  hand

16.  if  a  prince  give  a  g.  to  any  of  his  sons

17.  if  he  give  a  g.  to  one  of  his  servants
Mat.  5.  23.  if  thou  bring  thy  g.  to  the  altar

24.  leave  there  thy  g.  before  the  altar  and  go

8- 4.  and  offer  the  <j.  that  Moses  commanded

15.  5.  but  ye  say,  it  is  a  g.  by  whatsoever  thou

„„  lightest  be  profited  by  me,  Mark  7.  11.

23. 18.  whoso  sweareth  by  the  g .  is  guilty,  19.

John  4.  10.  he  said,  if  thou  knewest  the  g.  of  God
Acts  2.  38.  ye  shall  receive  the  g.  of  the  Holy  Gh.

8.  20.  thought  the  g .  ot  God  may  be  purchased

10.  45.  on  the  Gentiles  also  was  poured  out  the  g.

11.  17.  God  gave  them  the  like  g.  as  he  did  to  11s
Rom.  1.  ll.  1  may  impart  to  you  some  spiritual  g.
5.  15.  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  is  free  g.  the  grace

of  God  and  the  g.  by  grace  abounded  to  many

16.  so  is  the  g.  the  free  g.  is  of  many  offences

17.  they  which  receive  the  g.  of  righteousness

18.  the  free  #.  came  on  all  men  tojustification

6-  23.  the  g.  ot  God  is  eternal  life  thro’  Jesus  Christ

1  Cor.  1. 7.  so  that  ye  come  behind  in  no  g  waiting

7-  7-  every  man  hath  his  proper  g.  of  God

13.2.  tho’  I.  have  the  g.  of  prophecy  and  understand
16. 1 3.  I  will  send  them  to  bring  your  g.  to  Jerusal.

2  Lor.  1.  11.  that  for  the  g.  bestowed  upon  us

8.  4.  praying  us  that  we  would  receive  the  g.

+  19.  was  chosen  to  travel  with  us  with  this  g.

9.  15.  thanks  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  g.

Eph.  2. 8.  faith  is  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  g.  of  G  od

3.  7-  1  was  made  a  minister,  according  to  the  g.

4. 7.  according  to  the  measure  of  the  #.  of  Christ
ThjJ.  4. 17.  not  because  1  desire  a  g.  but  fruit

1  Tim.  4. 14.  neglect  not  the  g.  that  is  in  thee

2  Tim.  1.  6.  stir  up  the  ■ q.  that  is  in  thee  by  puttin;
lleb.  6.  4.  and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  g.

Jam.  1 .17 .  every  good  g.  and  perfect  g.  is  from  above

1  Pet.  4. 10.  as  every  man  hath  received  the  <7.

GIFTS.

Gen.  25.  6.  Abraham  gave  g.  to  sons  of  concubines
Exod.  28.  38.  which  Israel  shall  hallow  in  their  g.
Lev.  23.  38.  these  are  your  feasts,  besides  your  g.
Fum.  18.  29.  out  of  all  your  g.  offer  the  best

2  Sam.  8.  2.  the  Moabites  and  Syrians  became  Da¬

vid’s  servants,  and  brought  g.  6. 1  Citron.  18.  2.

2  Chron.  19.  7-  with  the  Lord  is  110  taking  of  q.

21.  3.  Jehoshaphat  gave  great  g.  of  silver  and  gold
26.  8.  the  Ammonites  gave  g.  to  Uzziah
32.  23.  and  many  brought  g.  unto  the  Lord
Esth.  2. 18.  Ahasuerus  made  a  feast  and  gave  g.

9.  22.  make  them  days  of  sending  g.  to  the  poor
Psal.  16.  +4.  that  give  g.  to  another  god
68. 18.  thou  hast  received  g.  for  men,  for  rebellious


•  vvv.  .V..  1/,  1U1  11JVU,  |W1  j  C  L/C.  1 1  1C

10.  the  kings  ot  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer


Prov.  6.  35.  not  content,  though  thou  givest  many  a.
15.  27.  but  he  that  hateth  g.  shall  live

19.  6.  every  man  is  friend  to  him  that  giveth  <7.

29.  4.  he  that  receiveth  <7.  overthroweth  judgment
Isa.  1.23.  every  one  loveth#.  followeth  after  rewards
Ezek .  16.  33.  they  give  g.  to  whores,  g.  to  lovers

20.  26.  and  I  polluted  them  in  their  own  <7.

31.  when  ye  offer  vour  g.  ye  pollute  yourselves
39.  pollute  my  holy  name  no  more  with  your  g
22. 12.  in  thee  have  they  taken  g.  to  shed  blood
Dan.  2.  6.  if  ye  shew  the  dream,  ye  shall  receive  g.
48.  the  king  gave  Daniel  many  great  g.

5. 17.  then  Daniel  said,  let  thy  g.  be  to  thyself
Mat.  2. 11.  they  presented  to  him  <7.  gold,  myrrh
7. 11.  if  ye  know  how  to  give  good  g.  Luke  11.  13.
Luke  21 .  1.  the  rich  casting  their  g.  into  the  treasury
5.  temple  was  adorned  with  goodly  stones  and  g.
Rom.  11.  29.  the  <7.  of  God  are  without  repentance
12.6.  having  g.  differing  according  to  the  grace
1  Cor.  12. 1.  now  concerning  spiritual  g.  brethren
4.  there  are  diversities  of  g.  but  the  same  Spirit
9.  to  another  the  g.  of  healing,  28,  30.

31.  but  covet  earnestly  the  best  g.

14.  1.  follow  after  charity  and  desire  spiritual  g.
12.  forasmuch  as  ye  are  zealous  of  spiritual  g.
Eph. 4. H.  he  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave  g.  to  men
Heb.  2.  4.  God  also  bearing  them  witness  with  <7.

5.  1.  that  he  may  offer  g.  and  sacrifices  for  sins

8.  3.  every  high-priest  is  ordained  to  offer  g.

4.  seeing  that  there  are  priests  that  offer  q.

9.  9.  which  were  offered,  both  g.  and  sacrifices
11. 4.  God  testifying  of  Abel’s  g.  dead  yet  speaketh

Rev.  11.  10.  they  that  dwell  on  earth  shall  send  q.
GILDED.

Rev.  17.  f  4.  and  the  woman  was  g.  with  gold
GIN.

Job  40.  +  24.  will  any  bore  his  nose  with  a  g.  ?

Isa.  8. 14.  be  tor  a  <7.  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem
Amos  3. 5.  can  a  bird  fal  1  in  a  snare  where  no  q.  is  ?

„  GIRD.

Gen.  3. +  7.  made  themselves  things  to  g.  about
Exod.  29.  5.  g.  him  with  the  curious  girdle,  9.

Judy.  3. 16.  Ehud  did  g.  his  dagger  under  raiment


1  Sam.  25.  13.  g.  ye  on  every  man  his  sworn

2  Kings  3.  t  21.  that  were  able  to  #.  themselves
Psal.  45.  3.  g.  thy  sword  on  thy  thigh,  O  most
I'<t.  8.  9.  g.  yourselves,  and  ye  shall  be  broken
Ezek.  44.  18.  not  <7.  with  what  causeth  sweat
Joel  1.  13.  g.  yourselves,  and  lament,  ye  priests
Luke\2.Wl .  shall  <7.  himself,  and  make  them  sit  down

17.  8.  y.  thyself,  and  serve  me,  till  l  have  eaten
John  21. 18.  when  old,  another  shall  g.  thee
Acts  12.  8.  g.  thyself  and  bind  on  thy  sandals

See  Loins,  Sackcloth.

G1KDED.

Lev.  8.  7-  be  g.  him  with  the  girdle  and  clothed  him
Deut.  1.41.  when  ye  g.  on  every  man  his  weapons
Judg.  18.  11.  six  hundred  men  g.  with  weapons
1  Sam.  2.  18.  Samuel  g.  with  a  linen  ephod
2Sam.6.14.  David  danced,  and  was  <7.  with  an  ephod
20.  8.  and  Joah’s  garment  was  g.  unto  him
22.40.  thou  hast  g.  me  with  strength,  Psal.  18.  39.
t  Kings  20.  32.  they  g.  sackcloth  on  their  loins
Tsai.  30.  11  thou  hast  g.  me  with  gladness
65.  6.  setteth  last  mountains,  bein#  y.  with  power
t  12.  little  hills  are  g.  with  joy  on  every  side
93.  1.  strength  wherewith  he  hath  g.  himself
109.  19-  and  for  a  girdle  wherewith  he  is  <7.

Isa.  45. 5.  1  g.  thee,  tho’  thou  hast  not  known  me
Lam.  2.  10.  the  elders  of  Zion  g.  with  sackcloth
Ezek.  16.  10.  1  g.  thee  about  with  fine  linen
23.  15.  images  of  the  Chaldeans  g.  with  girdles
Joel  1.  8.  lament  like  a  virgin  g.  with  sackcloth
John  13.  4.  he  took  a  towel  and  g.  himself
5.  to  wipe  with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  g.
Rev. 15.6.  seven  angels,  breasts#,  with  golden  girdle
See  Loins,  Sword.

GIRDEDST.

John  21. 18.  when  thou  wast  young  thou  g.  thyself

1  Kings  20. 11.  let  not  him  that  g.  on  his  harness
Job  12.  18.  and  he  #.  their  loins  with  a  girdle
Psal.  18.  32.  it  is  God  that  g.  me  with  strength
Prov.  31.  17.  she  g.  her  loins  with  strength
GIRDING.

Isa.  3.  2i.  instead  of  a  stomacher,  a  g.  of  sackcloth
22.  12.  ti>  Lord  did  call  to  <7.  witli  sackcloth
GIRDLE.

The  Hebrews  generally  wore  no  girdle  iiv the  house,
nor  even  abroad,  unless  when  they  were  at  work,  or
upon  a  journey.  At  these  times  they  tucked  them¬
selves  up,  and  girt  their  clothes  about  them ,  as  the
eastern  people  still  at  this  day  wear  them.  This
appears  from  many  passages  if  the  Old  and  New
Testament.  Elijah  girded  up  his  loins,  and  ran
before  Ahab.  l  Kings  18.  46.  And  Elisha  ordered
his  servant  Gehazi  to  gird  up  his  loins,  and  to  go
and  lay  his  stall  on  the  face  ot  the  Shunammite' s
child,  2  Kings  4.  29.  Our  Saviour  putting  himself
in  a  proper  condition  to  wash  the  feet  of  his  dis¬
ciples,  girt  himself  about  witli  a  towel,  John  1.3.
4.  The  soldiers  likewise  had  their  belts  generally
girt  about  them,  to  which  the  Psalmist  alludes,  Psal.

18.  39.  Thou  hast  girded  me  with  strength  unto
the  battle.

Belts  or  girdles  were  often  made  of  very  precious
stuff .  The  virtuous  woman  made  rich  girdles,  and
sold  them  to  the  merchants,  Prov.  31.  24.  These
girdles  were  used  in  common  both  by  men  and
women.  Our  Lord  appeared  to  St.  John  in  a  girdle
ot  gold,  Rev.  1.  13.  noting  the  excellency  of  his
ministration  as  priest.  And  in  Rev.  15.  6.  the
seven  angels,  who  came  out  of  the  temple,  were
clothed  with  linen,  and  girt  about  with  golden
girdles.  On  the  contrary,  the  prophets,  and  per¬
sons  who  made  particular  professions  of  humility
and  contempt  of  the  world,  wore  girdles  of  leather.
The  prophet  Elijah  had  one  of  this  sort,  2  Kings
1.  8.  as  well  as  John  the  Baptist,  Mat.  3.  4.  In
times  of  mourning  they  used  girdles  of  sackcloth,
as  marks  of  humiliation  and  sorrow.  God  threatens
the  daughters  of  Zion,  who  had  offended  him  with
the  excess  of  their  ornaments,  to  reduce  them  to  the
wearing  of  sackcloth,  Isa.  3.  24.  And  in  chap.
22.  12.  the  Lord  threatens  Jerusalem  with  bring¬
ing  her  into  captivity,  with,  cutting  off  her  hair,
the  instrument  of  her  pride,  and  obliging  her  to
f  gird  herself  about  with  sackcloth.

Ihe  military  girdle,  or  belt,  did  not  come  over  the
shoulder,  as  among  the  old  Greeks,  but  was  worn
upon  the  loins ;  whence  the  following  expressions
have  their  original.  Every  man  had  his  sword
girded  by  his  side,  or  upon  his  loins.  Felt.  4. 18.
Girded  with  girdles  upon  their  loins,  Ezek.  23.

15.  These  belts  were  generally  rich,  and  some¬
times  given  as  rewards  to  soldiers.  Joab  tells  him
who  had  seen  Absalom  hanging  on  a  tree,  that  if
he  had  smitten  him  to  the  ground,  he  would  have
given  him  ten  shekels  of  silver  and  a  girdle,  2
Sam.  18.  11.  Jonathan  the  son  o/Saul  made  Da¬
vid  a  present  of  his  girdle,  1  Sam.  18.4.  Job,
exalting  the  power  of  God,  says,  That  lie  looseth
the  bond  ot  kings,  and  girdeth  their  loins  with  a
girdle  ;  he  deposeth  them  from  their  thrones,  and
reduceth  them  to  a  mean  and  servile  condition.

Job  12.  18.

The  priest’s  girdle  or  sash  was  of  several  colours,  of
gold,  of  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine
twined  linen,  Expd.  28.  4,  8.  Josephus  says,  that
the  priests  wore  A  upon  their  breasts,  under  their
arms  ;  that  a  kind  of  flower-work  was  there  repre¬
sented,  with  threads  of  purple,  scarlet,  and
hyacinth  ;  that  it  went  twice  round  the  body,  was
tied  before,  and  the  ends  hung  down  to  the  feet,  to
render  the  priests  more  venerable.  When  they
were  in  the  act  of  sacrificing,  they  threw  this  girdle
over  the  left  shoulder,  that  they  might  perform  their
office  with  the  greater  freedom.

The  girdle  was  used  formerly  for  a  purse,  as  appears
from  Mat.  10.  9.  where  our  Saviour  forbids  his
apostles  to  carry  money  in  their  nurses,  or  girdles.
These  girdles  were  large  and  hollow,  much  like  the
cast  skin  of  a  serpent,  or  an  eel.

Our  Saviour  says,  Luke  12.  35.  T.et  your  loins
be  girded  about ;  that  is,  be  always  prepared

189


GIV


Gl^

for  any  service  that  God  requires  of  you,  and  dill-
1  .It  about  it  :  be  like  servants  who  are  girded,
,ii, d  ready  to  obey  their  master's  commands,  or
•ike  soldiers  who  wait  for  orders  from  their  com¬
manders.  The  Apostle  Paul,  describing  the
Christian's  armour,  makes  truth  the  girdle  of  the
loins.  Eph.  6.  14.  Having  your  loins  girt  about
with  truth  ;  that  is.  Let  your  minds  and  spirits
be  strengthened  and  established  with  soundness  of
judgment  and  sincerity  of  heart,  and  in  stedjastly
endeavouring  to  have  a  conscience  void  oj  ojjeyice
towards  God  and  men.  See  LOINS.

Exod.  28.  4.  these  garments  they  shall  make  a  #.

8.  the  curious  g.  ot  the  ephod  which  is  upon  it,
07,  C8. 1  29.  5. 1  39.  5,  20.  Lev.  8.  7-
39.  thou  shalt  make  the  g.  of  needle  work
39.  20.  they  made  a  g.  ot  fine  tw  ined  linen

1  Sam.  18.  4.  Jonathan  gave  Daeui  his  bow  and  g.

2  Sam.  18.  11.  and  1  would  have  given  thee  a  g.

1  Kings  2.  5.  he  put  the  blood  of  war  on  his  g.

2  Kings  1.  8.  F.lijah  was  girt  with  a  g.  ot  leather
3  f  21.  that  could  gird  themselves  with  a  g.

Job  12.  18.  he  girdeth  the  loins  of  kings  with  a  g.

+  21.  he  looseth  the  g.  ot  the  strong
Psal.  109. 19.  for  a  g.  wherewith  he  is  girded
Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  a  g.  there  shall  be  a  rent
5.  27.  nor  shall  Ihe  g.  of  their  loins  be  loosed
11.5.  and  righteousness  shall  be  the  g.  of  his  loins,
and  faithfulness  the  #.  of  his  reins

22.  21.  I  will  strengthen  Fliakim  with 1  thy  g.

23.  1 10.  O  daught.  of  Tarshish,  there  is  no  more#.
Jer.  13. 1.  go,  get  thee  a  linen  #,  put  it  on  thy  loins

10.  this  people  shall  be  as  this  #.  good  for  nothing
Mat.  3.  4.  John  had  a  leathern  #.  Mark  1.  6.
ActsZl.  11 .  took  Paul’s  #.  man  thatowneth  this#.
Rev.  1.  13.  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  #.
GIRDLES.

Exod.  28.  40.  thou  shalt  make  for  Aaron’s  sons  #.
29  9  and  thou  shalt  !>ird  Aaron  and  sons  with  #.
T.eri.  8.  13.  Moses  did  gird  Aaron’s  sons  with  #.


y.  aim  muu  snail  ifiiw  jr-y  <*.**-’  iicum  .

Lev.  8.  13.  Moses  did  gird  Aaron’s  sons  with  #.
Prov.  31.  24.  she  delivereth  #.  to  the  merchant
Ezek.  23. 15.  the  images  of  Chaldeans  girded  with  #.
Dan.  5.  t  6.  that  the#,  of  his  loins  were  loosed
Rev.  15.  6.  seven  angels  girded  with  golden  #.
GIKL,  S.

Joel  3.  3.  they  have  sold  a  #.  for  wine  to  drink:

Zech.  8.  5.  streets  of  city  shall  be  full  ot  boys  and  #.
GIRT.

1  Sam.  2.  4.  they  that  stumbled  are  #.  with  strength

2  Kings  1.  8.  he  was  #.  with  a  girdle  of  leather
John  21.  7.  Simon  Peter  #.  his  fisher’s  coat  to  him
Eph.  6.  14.  stand,  having  your  loins  #.  with  truth
Rev.  1.  13.  #.  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle

G  ITT  UI1.

This  is  the  title  prefixed  to  Psalms  8,  81,  and  84.
The  conjectures  of  interpreters  are  various  concern¬
ing  this  word.  Some  think  it  signifies  a  sort  of
musical  instrument ,  or  tune  to  which  they  were  set  j
others,  that  the  hymns  of  this  kind  were  invented
in  the  city  of  Gath  ;  others,  that  Gittith  signifies
wine-presses,  and  that  the  Psalms  with  this  title
were  sung  after  the  vintage  ;  others  that  if  wine¬
presses  were  meant  by  it,  it  should  be  Gitteth  ;  and
that  Gittith  signifies  a  woman  of  Gath  ;  and  that
these  Psalms  were  given  to  the  class  of  young
women,  or  songstresses  of  Gath,  to  be  sung  by
them.  Dr.  Ilammond  thinks  that  the  Psalms
with  this  title  were  all  set  to  the  same  tune,  and
made  on  Goliath  the  Gittite
GIVE.

Gen.  15.  2.  what  wilt  #.  me,  seeing  I  go  childless  ?

23.  11.  the  field  I  #.  tliee,  and  the  cave  therein

28.  22.  of  all  thou  shalt  #.  me,  I  will  g.  the  tenth

29.  19.  better  1  #.  her  thee,  than  #.  her  to  another

34.  16.  then  will  we  #.  our  daughters  to  you
Exod.  10.  25.  thou  must#,  us  also  sacrifices

22.  17.  if  her  father  utterly  refuse  to  p.  her  to  him

30.  on  the  eighth  day  thou  shalt  #.  it  me

30.  12.  then  they  shall  #.  every  man  a  ransom

13.  this  they  shall  g.  every  one  half  a  shekel
Num.  3.  9.  thou  shalt  #.  the  Levites  unto  Aaron

11.  4.  they  said,  who  shall  #.  us  flesh  to  eat  (  18.

22.  18.  if  Balak  would  #.  me  his  house  full,  24.  13.

25.  12.  I  #.  to  Phinehas  my  covenant  of  peace

26.  54.  to  many  q.  thou  the  more  inheritance,  to

few  thou  shalt  #.  the  less  inheritance,  33.  54.

35.  2.  ye  shall  #.  to  Levites  suburbs  for  the  cities
Deut.  15.  10.  thou  shalt#.  him  thine  heart,  14.

16. 17.  every  man  #.  as  he  is  able,  Ezek.  46.  5, 11.

24.  15.  at  his  day  thou  shalt  #.  him  his  hire

25.  3.  forty  stripes  he  may  #.  him,  and  not  exceed
Josh.  20.  4.  that  fleeth,  they  shall  #.  him  a  place
Judg.  7. 2.  to  #.  the  Midianites  into  their  hands

8.  25.  they  answered,  we  will  willingly  #.them

1  Sam.  2.  16.  nay,  but  thou  shalt  #.  it  me  now
32.  in  all  the  wealth  which  God  shall  #.  Israel

17.  25.  the  king  will  #.  him  his  daughter

22. 7.  will  the  son  of  Jesse  #.  every  one  fields  l

25.  11.  shall  I  then  #.  it  to  men  whom  1  know  not

2  Sam.  23. 15.  oh  that  one  would  #.  me  drink  of  the

water  of  the  well  ot  Beth-lehem,l  Cltr.  11.  17-
24.  23.  all  these  did  Araunah  #.  1  Chron.  21.  23.

1  Kings  13.  8.  if  thou  wilt#,  me  half  thine  house

2  Chron.  30.  +  8.  but  #.  the  hand  unto  the  Lord

12.  the  hand  of  God  was  to  g.  them  one  heart

Ezra  y.  8.  and  to  #.  us  a  nail  in  his  holy  place
9.  to  #.  us  a  reviving,  to#,  us  a  wallin  Judah
Job  2.  4.  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  #.  for  his  life

14.  t4.  who  will  #.  a  clean  thing  out  of  unclean  ?
Psal.  2.  8.  ask  of  me,  and  1  shall  #.  thee  the  heathen

14.  t  7.  who  will  #.  salvation  out  of  Zion,  53.  +  6.
37.  4.  he  shall  #.  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart
49.  7*  none  can  #.  to  God  a  ransom  for  him
51.  16.  thou  desirest  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I  #.  it
68.  +  33.  lo,  he  doth  #.  out  his  mighty  voice
78.  20.  can  he  g.  bread  also  ?  can  he  provide  flesh  ?
91.  11.  he  shall  #.  his  angels  charge,  Mat.  4.  6.
100.  4.  but  1  #.  myself  unto  prayer
120.  +  3.  what  shall  the  deceitful  tongue  #.  thee?
Prov.  29. 15.  the  rod  and  reproof#,  wisdom
17.  he  shall  #.  thee  rest,  shall  #.  delight  to  thy  soul
Eccl.  2.  26.  that  he  may  #.  to  him  that  is  good
190


GIV

Cant.  8. 7.  if  a  man  would  g.  substance  of  his  house
Isa.  30.  23.  then  he  shall  #.  the  rain  ot  thy  seed
55.  10.  that  it  may  #.  seed  to  the  sower ,  and  bread
61.  3.  to  #.  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes
Jer.  3.  19.  how  shall  1  #.  thee  a  pleasant  land  !

6.  10.  to  whom  shall  1  speak  and  #.  warning .

9.  + 1.  who  will  #.  my  head  waters,  my  eyes  tears
17.  10.  to  #.  man  according  to  his  ways,  32. 19
29.  11.  1  think  to  #.  you  an  expected  end
Ezek  2.  8.  open  thy  mouth,  eat  that  1  #.  thee
3  3.  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  roll  that  1 g.  thee
16.  36.  by  blood  of  thy  childr.  which  didst#,  them
20.  28.  when  1  had  brought  them  to  land,  I  lifted
up  mine  hand  to  #.  it  to  them,  42.  I  47 .  14.
33.  15.  if  wicked  g.  again  that  he  had  robbed
46.  16.  if  the  prince  #.  a  gift  to  his  sons.  17.

Dan  9.  22.  I  am  come  forth  to  #.  thee  skill
Mic.  6.  7.  shall  1  #.  my  first-b.  for  my  transgression
Zech  8.  12.  the  vine  shall  #.  her  fruit,  the  ground
shall  #.  increase,  and  the  heavens  g.  their  dew
Mat.  7.  9.  if  he  ask  bread,  will  lie  g.  him  a  stone?

10.  if  he  ask  fish,  will  he#,  a  serpent  ?  Luke  11. 11.

11.  how  to  #.  gifts  to  your  children,  so  your  Fa¬

ther  to  #.  them  that  ask  him,  Luke  11.  13.

10  42.  whoso  shall  #.  to  drink  a  cup  of  cold  water
14*  7  he  promised  to  #.  her  what  she  would  ask
16’.  26.  #.  in  exchange  for  his  soul  ?  Mark  8.  37-  .

19.  7.  why  comm,  to  #.  a  writing  ot  divorcement  r
20!  23.  sit  on  hand  is  not  mine  to  #.  Mark  10.  40.
26.  15.  what  will  ye#,  me,  and  1  wil  deliver  him

Mark  6.  25.  I  will  that  thou  #.  me  the  head  of  John

12.  9.  and  he  will  #.  the  vineyard  unto  others
Luke  4.  6.  and  to  whomsoever  1  will,  I  #.  it

6.  38.  good  measure  shall  men  #.  into  your  bosom
11.  8.  he  will  #.  him  as  many  as  he  needeth
16.  12.  who  shall  #.  you  that  which  is  your  own  ?
John  4.  14.  whoso  drinketh  the  water  I  shall  #.  him
6.  27.  meat  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  #.  you
52.  how  can  this  man  #.  us  his  flesh  to  eat .

10.  28.  and  1  #.  to  them  eternal  life,  never  perish

11  °2.  what  thou  wilt  ask,  God  will  #.  it  thee
13*  29.  that  he  should  #.  something  to  the  poor
14!  16.  he  shall  #.  you  another  Comforter  to  abide

27.  peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  1  #.  to  you
not  as  world  giveth#.  1  to  you,  be  not  troubled

15.  16.  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,  he  may  #.  it

16.  23.  whatsoever  ye  ask  he  will  #.  it  you

17.  2.  that  he  should  #.  eternal  life  to  as  many
Acts  3.  6.  such  as  I  have#.  I  thee,  rise  and  walk

6.  4.  but  we  will  #.  ourselves  to  prayer

7.  5.  he  promised  he  would  #.  it  for  a  possession

20.  35.  it  is  more  blesspd  to  #.  than  to  receive
Rom.  8.  32.  with  him  also  freely  #.  us  all  things

1  Cor.  7.  5.  that  ye  may  #.  yourselves  to  tasting
Eph.  1.  17.  God  may  #.  you  the  spirit  ot  wisdom

4.  28.  that  he  may  liave  to#,  to  him  that  needeth

2  Tim.  4.  8.  which  the  righteous  Judge  shall  #.  me
Heb  0  1  we  ought  to  #.  the  more  earnest  heed
1  John  5.  16.  #.  life  for  them  that  sin  not  to  death
Rev.  13.  15.  he  had  power  to  #.  life  to  the  image

+  16.  to  #.  a  mark  in  their  right  hand  or  foreheads

16.  19.  to  #.  her  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  his  wrath
22.  12.  to  #.  every  man  according  to  his  work

See  Account,  Glory,  Sware.

GIVE,  Imperatively.

Gen.  14.  21.  #.  me  the  persons,  and  take  the  goods
27  °8  therefore  God  #.  thee  ot  dew  ot  heaven

29.  21.  #.  me  my  wife  ||  30. 1.  #.  children  else  1  die

30.  26.  #.  nie  my  wives  and  my  children
Num.  6.  26.  and  the  Lord  #.  thee  peace
Josh.  2.  12.  swear  to  me,  and  #.  me  a  true  token

14.  12.  now  therefore  #.  me  this  mountain

15.  19.  #.  me  a  blessing,  #.  springs,  JW#.  1.  15.

1  Sam.  8.  6.  when  they  said,  #.  us  a  king  to  judge  us

17.  10.  #.  me  a  man  that  we  may  fight  together

21.  9.  David  said,  none  like  that,  #.  it  me

1  Kings  3.  9.  #.  thy  servant  an  understanding  heart
26.  O  my  lord,  #.  her  the  living  child,  27.

8.  39.  #.  every  man  according  to  his  ways
17. 19.  he  said,  #.  me  thy  son,  and  he  took  him

2  Kings 6.  29. 1  said,  #.  thy  son,  that  we  may  eat  him
10.  15.  if  it  be,  #.  me  thine  hand,  and  he  gave  it

9.  saying,  #.  thy  daughter  to  my  son  to  wife


14.  Vf.  saving,  y-  n'j  ■”  r— -  r

1  Chr.  16.  28.  #.  to  Lord,  ye  kindreds  ot  the  people,

glory  and  strength,  29.  Psal.  29.  1,  2.  1  96.  7, 8.
22. 12.  the  Lord  #.  thee  wisdom  and  understanding

2  Chron.  1. 10.  #.  me  now  wisdom  and  knowledge
~Neh  4  4  and  #.  them  for  a  prey  in  land  of  captivity
Job  32.  21.  nor  let  me  #.  flattering  titles  to  man
Psal.  28.  4.  #.  them  according  to  their  deeds

60  11.  #.  us  help  from  trouble,  108.  12.

86.  16.  O  turn,  #.  thy  strength  to  thy  servant
119.  34.  #.  me  understanding,  73,  125,  144  169.
Prov.  9.  9.  #•  instruct,  to  a  wise  man  he  will  be  wiser
23  26.  my  son,  #.  me  thine  heart,  observe  my
25.  21.  if  enemy  hunger,  #.  him  bread,  Rom.  12. 20.
30.  8.  #.  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches,  feed  me
15.  horse  leech  hath  two  daughters,  crying,#.  #.
Eccl.  11.  2.  #.  a  portion  to  seven,  also  to  eight
Isa.  49.  20.  #.  place  to  me,  that  I  may  dwell
62.  7.  #.  him  no  rest  till  he  establish  Jerusalem
Jer.  18.  19.  #.  heed  to  me,  O  Lord,  and  hearken
35.  2.  bring  them,  and  #.  them  wine  to  drink
Lam.  2.  18.  let  tears  run  down,  #.  thyself  no  rest
3.  65.  #.  them  sorrow'  of  heart,  thy  curse  to  them
Ezek.?,.  17.  and  #.  them  warning  from  me
Dan.  5.  17-  and  #.  thy  rewards  to  another
El  os.  4.  18.  her  rulers  with  shame  do  love,  #.  ye
9. 14.  #.  them,  O  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  #.  ?

13  10.  thou  saidst,  #.  me  a  king  and  princes
14.  f  2.  take  away  all  iniquity,  and  #.  good

Zech  11.  12.  #.  me  my  price,  it  not  forbear
Mat.  5.  42.  #.  to  him  that  asketh  thee
6  11.  #.  us  this  dav  our  daily  bread,  Luke  11.

9.  24.  #.  place  ||  10.  8.  freely  ye  received,  freely#.

14  16  g.  ye  them  to  eat,  Mark  6.  37.  Luke  9-  13.
17  27. ‘that  take,  and  #.  to  them  tor  me  and  thee

10.  21.  go  sell,  and  #.  to  the  poor,  Mark  10.  21.

20.  8.  call  the  labourers,  and  #.  them  their  hire

°5  8  #  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  gone  out

Luke  6.  38.  #.  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you  ^

11.  41.  #.  alms  of  such  things  as  ye  have,  12.  jj


,  3.


Luke  14.  9.  he  that  bade  thee  say,  #.  this  man  place
15  12.  the  younger  said,  #.  me  the  portion  ot  goods
John  4.  7.  Jesus  saith  to  her,  #.  me  to  drink,  10.

6  34.  thev  said.  Lord,  evermore  #.  us  this  bread
9  °4  #.  God  the  praise,  this  man  is  a  sinner
Acts  8.' 19.  Simon  said,  #.  me  also  this  power
Rom.  12.19.  avenge  not,  but  rather#,  place  to  wrath

1  Cor.  10.  32.  #.  none  offence,  neither  to  the  Jews

2  Cor.  9.7.  so  let  him  #.  not  grudgingly  or  of  necessity
Col.  4. 1.  #.  lo  your  servants  that  which  is  just

1  Tim  4. 13.  #.  attendance  to  reading,  to  doctrine

15.  meditate,#,  thyself  wholly  to  them
Rev.  10.  9.  #.  me  the  little  book,  he  said,  take  it

18.  7.  so  much  torment  and  sorrow'  #.  her
See  Charge,  Far,  Glory,  Light.

1  will  GIVE.

Gen.  17.8.  I  will  g.  to  thee  and  thy  seed  the  land
wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  48.  4.  Dint.  34.  4.

16.  1  will  g.  thee  a  son  also  of  her,  and  bless  her
28  22.  I  will  surely  #.  the  tenth  to  thee

34. 11.  what  ye  shall  say  to  me  1  will  #.  12.

Exod.  3.  21.  and  I  will  g.  this  people  favour
33. 14.  my  presence  with  thee,  and  7  will g.  thee  rest
Lev  26.4!  Iwillg.  you  rain  in  season,  Dent.  11.  14.

6.  I  will  g.  peace"  in  the  land,  ye  shall  lie  down  f

1  Sam.  1.  11.  1  will  g.  him  to  the  Lord  all  his  life
18. 21.  1  will g.  her,  that  she  may  be  a  snare  to  him

2  Sam.  12.  11.  I  wilt  q.  thy  wives  to  thy  neighbour  :
1  Kings  11. 13.  not  fend  all,  but  1  wilt ' g.  one  tribe

31.  behold,  I  will  #.  ten  tribes  to  thee

13.  7.  come  home,  and  7  will  g.  thee  a  reward
21.  2.  I  will  g.  thee  for  it  a  better  vineyard

7.  7  will  g.  tliee  the  vineyard  ot  Naboth

1  Chr.  22.  9.  7 willg.  him  rest,  Iwillg.  peace  to  Isr,

2  Chr.  1. 12.  I  will  g.  thee  riches,  wealth,  honour
Psal.  30.  12.  O  Lord,  7  willg.  thanks  to  thee

57.  7.  7  will  sing  and  #.  praise,  108.  1.

Prov  3.  28.  to-morrow  7  will  g.  w  hen  thou  hast  it
Isa.  3.  4.  7  will  g.  them  children  to  be  princes

41  27.  shall  say  to  Zion,  behold,  and  7  will g.  to
Jerusalem  one  that  bringeth  good  tidings

42  6.  Iwillg.  tbee  for  covenant  of  the  people,  49- 8.
45.  3  7  will  g.  thee  the  treasures  ot  darkness
49  6.  7  will  #.  thee  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles
56.  5.  Iwillg.  them  an  everlasting  name

Jer  3  15.  I  will  g.  pastors  according  to  my  heart
9.  15.  7  will  g.  them  waters  of  gall  to  drink
14  13.  7  will  g.  you  assured  peace  in  this  land
15- 1 4.  7  will  g.  them  for  a  removing  into  kingdoms

17.  3.  7  will  g.  thy  substance  to  the  spoil
24.  7.  7  will  g.  them  an  heart  to  know  me
30  39.  J  will  g.  them  one  heart,  Ezek.  11.  19.

34  18.  7  will  g.  the  men  that  have  transgressed

Ezek.  7.  21.  7  will  g.  it  into  the  hand  of  strangers

11. 17.  and  7  will  g.  you  the  land  of  Israel
16  38.  7  will  g.  thee  blood  in  fury,  and  jealousy
39.  7  will  also  #.  tbee  into  their  hand
61.  7  will  g.  them  to  tbee  for  daughters  .

°1  27.  he  come  whose  right  it  is,  7  will  g.  it  him
03  j6  7  wil!  a.  them  to  be  removed  and  spoiled
29*  19.  7  will  g.  land  of  Egypt  to  isefnichadnezzai
ci.  7  will  g.  thee  the  opening  of  the  mouth
36.26.  and  7  will  g.  you  an  heart  ot  flesh
Ilos.  2.  15.  7  will  g.  her  vineyards  from  thence
Mat.  11. 28.  come  unto  me,  anil  7  will  #.  you  rest
16.  19.  7  will  g.  to  tbee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom
20.  4.  and  whatsoever  is  right,  1  will  #.  you

14.  7  will  g.  to  this  last  even  as  unto  thee
Mark  6.  22.  ask  what  thou  wilt,  7  will  g.  it  thee
Luke  21. 15.  for  7  will g.  you  a  mouth  and  w  isdom
John  6.  51.  1  am  living  bread,  the  bread  7  will #1
my  flesh,  which  7  willg.  for  the  hte  ot  the  work
Acts  13.  34.  7  will  g.  you  the  sure  mercies  ot  David
Heb.  8.  +  10.  7  will  q.  my  laws  into  their  mind
Rev.  2. 10.  be  faithful,  7  will  g.  thee  a  crown  of  life
17  I  will  q.  him  a  w  hite  stone  and  a  new  name
23.  I  wilt  g.  to  every  one  according  to  your  work:
28.  and  7  will  #.  him  the  morning  star
11  3  and  7  will  q.  power  to  my  two  witnesses
21  6  7  willg.  to  him  that  is  athirst  water  of  life
Wilt  I  GIVE.

Gen.  12.  7.  to  thy  seed  will  I  #.  this  land,  13. 1.

I  24  7.  I  28.  13.  I  35.  12.  Exod.  32.  13.  I  33.
Dent.  1.36.  save  Caleb,  to  him  will  I  g.  the  land
39  they  shall  go  in  thither,  to  them  will  1  g.  it
Josh.  15.  16.  to  him  will  1  #.  Aclisah,  Jitdg.  l.  12.

1  Sam.  9.  8.  that  will  1  #•  to  the  man  of  God  to  tel.

18. 17.  my  daughter  Merab,  her  will  I #.  thee
1  Chr.  16. 18.  to  thee  will  lg.  land,  Psal.  10:>.  11.
Psal.  18.  49.  therefore  will  I  g.  thanks  to  tliee
Cant.  7.  12.  there  will  1  g.  thee  my  loves
Isa.  43.  4.  therefore  will  7  #.  men  tor  thee
56.  5.  to  them  will  1  #.  in  mine  house  a  place
Jer.  24.  8.  so  will  Ip.  Zedekiah  king  ot  Judah
45.  5.  thy  life  will  7  #.  to  thee  tor  a  prey
Ezek.  15.“6.  so  will  7  #.  inhabitants  ot  Jerusalem

36.  26.  new  heart  also  will  1  g.  you,  and  new  spin
Hag.  2.  9.  and  in  this  place  will  I  g.  peace
Mat.  4.  9.  devil  said,  all  these  things  will  lg.  thee
Luke  4.  6.  all  this  power  will  lg.  thee, and  glory
Rev.  2.  7.  to  him  that  overcometh  will  1  g.  17.  -b.
Lord  GIVE.

Exod.  12.  25.  when  ye  come  to  the  land  which  L.  w
#.  you.  Lev.  14.  34.  |  23. 10. 1  25.;2.  Num.  la-

16.  8.  w  hen  the  Lord  shall  #.  you  flesh  to  eat
Num.  11. 18.  therefore  the  Lord  will  #.  you  flesh

14.8.  if  the  Lord  delight  in  us,  lie  ■will  g.  it  us
22. 13.  the  Lord  refuseth  to  #.  me  leave  to  go
34.  13.  the  Lord  commanded  to  #.  the  nrnetril.es
36.  2.  the  Lord  commanded  to  #.  the  land  b>  to
Deut.  1.  25.  it  is  a  good  land  the  TLerddoth  #.

28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  #.  thee  a  trembling  heart
Josh.  9. 24.  the  Lord  com n landed  Moses  to gx lie  la'

17.  4!  the  Lord  commanded  to  #.  us  inheritance
°1  2  the  Lord  commanded  to  #.  us  cities

Ruth  4. 12.  which  the  L.  shall  #.  thee  of  this  worn;

1  Kings  15.  4.  the  Lord  his  God  did#,  him  a  lam  I

2  Citron.  25.  9.  the  Lord  is  able  to  #.  tliee  much
Psal.  29. 11.  the  Lord  will  #.  strength  to  his  peo(

84.  il.  the  Lord  will  #.  grace  ami  glory

85.  12.  the  Lord  shall  #.  that  w  hich  is  srood
Isa.  j.  14.  the  Lord  himself  shall  #.  you  a  sign


G  I  V


G  IV


GIV


'fa.  14.  3.  the  Lord  shall  g.  thee  rest  from  sorrow
JO.  20.  though  the  Lordg.  you  bread  of  adversity
'ech.  10.  1.  the  Lord  shall  g.  them  showers  of  rain
.uke  1.  32.  Lord  shall//,  him  the  throneof  his  Father
Tim.  1. 16.  Lord  g.  mercy  to  house  of  Onesiphorus
Not  GIVE,  or  GIV  E  not.

Jew. 30. 31 .  Jacob  said,  thou  shalt  not  g.  me  anything
'.rod.  5.  10.  1  will  not  g.  you  straw,  go,  get  straw

30.  15.  the  rich  shall  not  g.  more,  poor  not  g.  less
,ev.  25.  37-  thou  shalt  not  g.  thy  money  on  usury
lent. 2.  5.  I  will  not  g.  you  of  their  land,  9,  19.

7.  3.  thy  daughter  thou  shalt  not  g.  to  his  son

28.  55.  he  will  not  g.  of  the  flesh  of  his  children
udg.  21. 1.  shall  not  any  of  us  g.  hisdaught.  to  Henj.

7.  we  have  sworn  we  will  not  g.  them  wives
Sam.  30.  22.  we  will  notg.  them  ought  of  the  spoil
Kings  21.  4. 1  will  not  g.  inheritance  of  my  fathers
'zra  4.  1 13.  then  will  they  not  g.  toll,  tribute

9.  12.  g.  not  your  daughters,  Neh.  10.  30.  I  13.  25.
'sal.  132.  4.  1  will  not  g.  sleep  to  mine  eyes

'rov.  6.  4.  g.  not  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber

31.  3.  g.  not  thy  strength  unto  women

'.cel.  7.  +  21.  g.  not  thy  heart  unto  all  words
sa.  13.  10.  constellations  shall  not  g.  their  light

42.8.  my  glory  will  1  not  g.  to  another,  *48.  11.

52.8.  1  will  wo  more//,  thy  corn  to  enemies

er.  18. 18.  let  us  not  g.  heed  to  any  of  his  words
26.  24.  not  g.  Jeremiah  into  the  hand  of  the  people
,zek.  32. 7-  l  will  cover  sun  with  a  cloud,  the  moon
shall  not  g.  her  light,  Mat.  24.  29.  Mark  13.  24.
fan.  11.21.  to  whom  not  g.  honour  of  kingdom
los.  5.  +  4.  notg.  their  doings  to  turn  to  the  Lord
oel  2. 17.  g.  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach
lat.  7-  6.  g.  not  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs
lark  12.  l5.  shall  we  g.  or  shall  we  not  g.  ?

.0/1.  4.  27.  neither  g.  place  to  the  devil
am.  2.  16.  and  g.  not  those  things  they  need
GIVE  thanks.

Sam.  22.  50.  I  will  g.  thanks  to  thee,  Psal.  18.  49.
Chron.  16.  8.  g.  thanks  to  the  Lord,  call  upon
his  name,  Psal.  105.  1.  1  106. 1.  1 107 .  1.  1  118.
1,29.  1 136.  1,3.

35.  save  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  that  we  may
g.  thanks  to  thy  holy  name,  Psal.  106.  47.
41.  who  were  expressed  by  name,  to  g.  thanks
15.  3.  sons  of  Jeduthun  with  a  harp  to  g.  thanks
Chr.  31.  2.  Ilezekiah  appointed  Levites  to  q.  th.
'sal.  6.  5.  in  the  grave  who  shall  g.  thee  thanks

10.  4.  sing  to  Lord,  ye  saints  of  his,  and  g.  thanks

at  the  remembrance  of  his  holiness,  97.  12.
12.  O  Lord,  I  will  g.  thanks  to  tliee  for  ever
15.  18.  I  will  g.  thanks  in  the  great  congregation
12.  +5.  I  shall  g.  thanks  for  help  of  countenance
'5.  1.  to  thee,  O  God,  do  we  g.  thanks,  do  g.  thanks
■9. 13.  so  we  thy  people  will  g.  thee  thanks
12. 1.  it  is  a  good  thing  to  g.  thanks  to  the  I,ord
06,  47.  save  us  to  g.  thanks  to  thy  holy  name

19.  62.  at  midnight  1  will  rise  to  g.  thanks
■22.  4.  whither  the  tribes  go  up  to  g.  thanks
i3fi.  2.  O  g.  thanks  unto  the  God  of  gods
26.  O  g.  thanks  unto  the  God  of  heaven
[40.  13.  righteous  shall  g.  thanks  to  thy  name
'oot.  16.  4.  to  whom  not  only  I  g.  thanks
Cor.  10.  30.  for  that  for  which  I  g.  thanks
■pit.  1.  16.  I  cease  not  to  g.  thanks  for  you
ol.  1.  3.  we  g.  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father
Thess.  1.  2.  we  g.  thanks  to  God  always  for  you
>.18.  in  every  thing/7,  thanks,  this  is  the  will  ofGod
Thess.  2.  13.  we  are  bound  to  g.  thanks  for  you
'ev.  11.  17.  we  g.  thee  thanks.  Lord  God  Almightv
GIVE  up.  «

lent.  23. 14.  Lord  walketh  to  g.  vp  thine  enem.  31. 5.
Kings  14.  16.  lie  shall  g.  lsr.  up,  because  of  sins
>o3.  11.  why  did  not  1  g.  ?///the  ghost?

•3. 19.  if  I  hold  my  tongue,  l  shall  g.  vp  the  ghost
**•43.  6.  I  will  say  to  north,//,  vp,  and  to  south
‘os.  11.  8.  how  shall  I  g.  thee  vp,  Ephraim  ?
he.  5.  3.  therefore  will  he  g.  them  vp
>•  14.  that  Which  thou  deliverest  will  I  g.  vp
GIVEN.

en.il.  7.  Sarah  should  have//,  children  suck

20.  3.  because  he  hath  g.  his  seed  to  IWolecb
um.  18.  6.  they  are  g.  as  a  gift  for  the  Lord
'cut.  12.  15.  according  to  the  blessing//.  16.  17.
nth  2.  12.  a  full  reward  be  g.  thee  of  the  Lord
■3am.  2.  +  32.  wealth  which  God  would  have g.  lsr.
oam.  4.  10.  who  thought  I  would  have  g.  a  reward
*•  8. 1  would  have  g.  thee  such  and  such  things

8.  11. 1  would  have  g.  thee  ten  shekels  of  silver
•9.  42.  or  hath  the  king//,  us  any  gift?

Lings  13.  5.  the  sign  which  the  man  of  G.  had  g.
yor.29.  14.  and  of  thine  own  have  we  g.  thee
tra  6.  9.  let  it  be  g.  them  day  by  day  without  fail
,1  the  silver  is  g.  to  thee,  the  people  also

•  3-  my  life  b eg.  me  at  my  petition  and  people

3-  20.  why  is  light  g.  to  him  that  is  in  misery  ?

-  in,  ls  9-  to  a  man  whose  way  is  hid  ?

0.  19.  to  whom  alone  the  earth  was  g.

10  t,ead  bodies  of  thy  servts.  g.  to  be  meat

};•  9.  he  hath  g.  to  the  pool’,  2  Cor.  9.  9.

15. 16.  the  earth  hath  he//,  to  the  children  of  men
ro1'-  19.  17.  that,  which  he  hath  g.  will  lie  pay  him
rr/.  8. 8.  nor  wickedn.  deliver  those  that  are  g.  to  it
"  tL  which  are  from  one  shepherd

u  u  tor.to  us  a  Ghild  is  born,  to  us  a  Son  is  g.

/•  8.  therefore  hear,  thou  that  art g.  to  pleasures
[•  t|-  13-  every  one  is  //.  to  covetousness,  8.  10.

-1.  co.  he  said  to  all  who  had  g.  him  that  answer
ive  bave  g.  the  hand  to  the  Egyptians
"in  1  1  un,°  us ls  this  land  g.  .33.  24.

P\  t*ey  are  desolate,  they  are  g.  to  consume
a>s  f  t  ,f‘asts>  fowls  hath  lie//,  into  thine  hand

•  “0llhe  a  non,  an  I  a  man's  heart  was  <7.  to  it

’  1  et  rt  I’1 “longing  in  life  was  g.  them

no.  she  shall  he //.  up,  and  they  that  brought  her
«<•  13.  1 1.  it  is  g.  to  you  to  know  the  mysteries  of
0  11  11  the  kingdom,  Mark  A.  11.  Luke  8.  10.

1  J.j  cannot  receive,  save  they  to  whom  it  is//.

•o  a  nation  bringing  forth  fruits

a >»  marriage,  Mark  12.  25.  Luke  20. 35.

.  y.  sold  for  much  and  g.  to  the  pool',  Mark  14.  5.

•  10.  all  power  is//.  to  me  in  heaven  ami  earth


Mark  4.  24.  unto  you  that  hear  more  shall  be  g.
Luke  12.48.  to  whom  much  <7.  of  him  much  required
John  3.  27-  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  g.

5.  26.  he  hath  g.  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself

6. _  39.  of  all  he  hath  g.  me,  1  should  lose  nothing
65.  no  man  can  come  tome,  except  it  were  g.  him

19.  11.  except  it  were  g.  thee  from  above
Acts  4. 12.  there  is  none  other  name  g.  among  men
24.  26.  lie  hoped  that  money  should  be  g.  him
llom.  5.  5.  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  g.  to  us
11. 35.  or  who  hath  firsts',  to  him,  and  recompensed
15. 15.  because  of  the  grace  that  is//,  me  of  God

1  Cor.  2.  12.  might  know  things  freely  g.  us  of  God

2  Cor.  1.  11.  that  thanks  may  be  g.  by  many
Cal.  3.  21.  been  a  law  g.  which  could  have  g.  life
Eph.  3. 2.  dispensation,  which  is  g.  me  to  you-ward

8.  to  me  who  am  the  least  is  this  grace  g.

4.  ly.  who  have  g.  themselves  over  to  lascivious¬

ness

5.  2.  Christ  hath  loved  us,  and  g.  himself  for  us
Phil.  1.  29.  to  you  it  is  g.  in  behalf  of  Christ

2.  9.  and  hath  g.  him  a  name  above  every  name
Tieh.  4.8.  for  if  Jes.  had  g .  them  rest,  then  notspoken
1  John  3.  24.  by  the  Spirit  which  he  hath  g.  us
4.  13.  because  he  hath  //.us  of  his  Spirit
Rev.  6.  11.  white  robes  were  g.  to  every  one  of  them
13.  5.  power  wms  g.  him  to  continue  42  months

7.  it  was  g.  to  him  to  make  war  with  the  saints

God  or  Lord  hath,  had  GIVEN.

Gen.  24.  35.  the  L.  hath  g.  Abrah.  flocks  and  herds

30.  6.  and  Rachel  said,  God  hath  g.  me  a  son
18.  and  Leah  said,  God  hath  g.  me  mine  hire

31.  9.  thus  God  hath  g.  me  your  father’s  cattle
33.  5.  the  children  which  G.  hath  graciously  g.  me
43.  23.  God  hath  g.  you  treasure  in  your  sacks
48.  9.  the  children  God  hath  g.  me  in  this  place

Exod.  16.  15.  the  bread  which  the  Lord  hath  g.  you

29.  for  that  the  Lord  hath  g.  you  the  sabbath
Num.  32.  7-  from  going  over  to  the  land  which  the
Lord  hath  g.  them,  9.  Deut.  3.  18.  |  28.  52.
Josh.  2.  9, 14. 1  23. 13, 15.  Jer.  25.  5.

Josh.  6.  16.  shout,  for  the  Lord  hath  g.  you  the  city
18.  3.  to  possess  land  which  the  Loid  hath  g.  you

1  Ham.  1.  27.  Lord  hath  g.  me  my  petition  1  asked
15.  28.  L.  hath  g.  it  to  a  neighbour  of  thine,  28.  17.

30.  23.  not  to  do  so  with  what  the  Lord  hath  g.

2  Chr.  36.  23.  kingdoms  hath  God  g.  me,  Ezra  1.  2.
Eccl.  5.  19.  everyman  to  whom  G.  hath  g.  riches.
Isa .  8.  18.  1  and  the  children  L.  hath  g.  II eh.  2. 13.

23.  11.  the  Lord  hath  g.  a  commandment  against
50.  4.  the  L.  hath  g.  me  the  tongue  of  the  learned
Jer.  11. 18.  the  Lord  hath  g.  me  knowledge  of  it
47.  7-  seeing  the  Lord  hath  g.  it  a  charge
John  6.  23.  after  that  the  Lord  had  g.  thanks
Acts  5. 32.  whom  G.  hath  g.  to  them  that  obey  him
27.  24.  God  hath  g.  thee  all  that  sail  with  thee
Rom.  11.8.  God  hath  g.  them  the  spirit  of  slumber
2  Cor.  10.  8.  the  L.  hath  g.  us  for  edification,  13. 10.

1  Jhexs.  4.  8.  but  G.  who  hath  g.  us  his  Holy  Spirit
1  John  5.  11.  this  is  the  record  God  hath  g.  to  us
See  Rest.

I  have,  or  have  I  GIVEN.

Gen.  27.37.  brethren  have  1  g.  him  for  servants
1  Kings  3.  13.  1  have  g.  thee  that  thou  hast  not  asked
Isa.  4.3.  28.  therefore  1  have  g.  Jacob  to  the  curse
55.  4.  I  have  g.  him  for  a  witness  to  the  people
Jer.  8.  13.  things  1  have  g.  shall  pass  from  them
27.  5.  1  have  g.  it  to  whom  it  seemed  meet  to  me
Ezek.  4. 15. 1  have  g.  thee  cow’s  dung  for  man’s  dung
29.  20.  1  have  g.  him  the  land  of  Egypt  for  labour
Amos  4.  6.  1  also  have  g.  you  cleanness  of  teeth

9.  15.  no  more  be  pulled  out  of  land  1  have  g.  them
John  13.  15.  I  have  g.  you  an  example,  that  ye  do

17.8.  1  have  g.  them  the  words  thou  gavest  me,  14.
22.  the  glory  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  g.  them
1  Cor.  16.  1.  as  1  have  q.  order  to  the  churches
Not  GIVEN.

Gen.  38.  14.  and  she  was  not  g.  unto  him  to  wife
Dent.  26.  14.  1  have  not  g.  ought  thereof  for  the  dead
29.  4.  yet  Lord  hath  not  g.  you  an  heart  to  perceive
1  Chr.  22. 18.  hath  he  not  g.  you  rest  on  every  side  ?
Neh.  13.  10.  the  portion  of  Levites  had  not  been  g.
Job  22.  7-  thou  hast  not  g.  water  to  the  weary
Psal.  78.  63.  their  maidens  were  not  g.  to  marriage
118.  18.  but  he  hath  not  g.  me  over  to  death
124.  6.  who  hath  not  g.  us  as  a  prey  to  their  teeth
Isa.  37.  10.  Jerus.  not  be//,  into  the  hand  of  Assyria
Jer.  39-  17-  thou  shalt  not  be  g.  into  hand  of  the  men
Ezek.  3.  20.  because  thou  hast  not  g.  him  warning
18.  8.  he  that  hath  not  g.  forth  upon  usury
Mat.  13.  11.  it  is  given  to  you,  to  them  it  is  not  g.
John  7.  39.  for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  <7.

1  Tim.  3. 3.  bishop  notg.  to  wine,  no  striker,  Tit.  1.7.

8.  deacons  not  g.  to  much  wine,  not  greedy

2  Tim.  1.  7.  God  hath  not  g.  us  the  spirit  of  fear
Tit.  2.  3.  aged  women  likewise  not  g.  to  much  wine

Shall  he  GIVEN.

Num.  26.  54.  to  every  one  shall  inheritance  he  g.
Deut.  28.  31.  thy  sheep  shall  he  g.  to  thine  enemies

32.  thy  sons  shall  he  g.  to  anoiher  people
Ezra  4.  21.  till  another  commandment  shall  he  g.
Esth.  5.  3.  it  shall  he  g.  to  half  of  the  kingdom
Psal.  72.  15.  to  him  shall  he g.  of  gold  of  Sheba
120.  3.  what  shall  he  g.  to  thee,  thou  false  toneue  ?

Isa.  3.  11.  the  reward  of  his  hands  shall  he  g.  him

33.  16.  bread  shall  he  g.  him,  waters  shall  be  sure
35.  2.  the  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  he  g.  to  it
Jer.  21.  10.  this  city  shall  he  g.  into  the  hand  of  king
of  Babylon,  and  he  shall  burn  it,  38.  3,  18.
Ezek.  47.  11.  the  marishes,  they  shall  he  g.  to  salt
Dan.  7.  25.  the  saints  shall  he  g.  into  his  hand
27.  the  kingdom  shall  he  g.  to  the  saints
Mat.  7.  7-  ask,  and  it  shall  he  g.  you,  Luke  11 .  9.

10. 19.  it  shall  he  g.  you  in  same  hour,  Mark  13. 11.

12.  39.  no  sign  shall  he  g .  Mark  8.  12.  Luke  11. 29.

13.  12.  for  w  hosoever  hath,  to  him  shall  he  g.  and
more  abundance,  25.  29.  Mark  4.  25.  I  .uke  8. 18.

20.  23.  it  shall  he  g.  them  for  whom  it  is  prepared

21.  43.  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  g.  to  a  nation
Luke  6. 38.  give,  and  it  shall  he  g.  you,  good  measure
Philetn.  22.  that  thro’  your  prayers  1  shall  he  g.  you
Jam.  1. 5.  let  him  ask  of  God,  and  it  shall  be  g.  him


Thou  hast,  or  hast  thou  GIVEN.

Gen.  15.  3.  Abram  said,  to  me  thou  hast  g.  no  seed
Deut.  26.  15.  bless  the  land  which  thou  hast  g.  us
Josh.  15.  19.  thou  hast  g.  me  south  land,  Judg.  1. 15.
17.  14.  why  hast  thou  g.  me  butonelot  to  inherit?
Judg.  15.  18.  thou  hast  g.  this  great  deliverance

1  Sam.  22.  13.  thou  hast  g.  him  bread  and  a  sword

2  Sam.  12.  14.  by  this  deed  thou  hast  g .  occasion
22.  36.  thou  hast  also  g.  me  the  shield  of  thy

salvation,  and  gentleness  made  me  great,  Psal.
18.  35.

41.  thou  hast  g.  me  the  necks  of  enemies,  Ps.  18.40.

1  Kings  3.  6.  thou  hast  g.  him  a  son  to  sit  on  throne

8.  36.  rain  on  thy  land  thou  hast  g.  2  Chron.  6.  27.

9.  13.  what  cities  are  these  thou  hast  g.  me  ?

2  Chr.  20. 11.  cast  us  out  of  possession  thou  hast  g.
Ezra  9.  13.  thou  hast  g.  us  such  deliverance  as  thii
Psal.  21.  2.  thou  hast  g.  him  his  heart’s  desire

44.  11.  thou  hast  g.  us  like  sheep  for  meat

60.  4.  thou  hast  g.  a  banner  to  them  that  fear  thee

61.  5.  thou  hastg.  me  the  heritage  of  those  that  fear
7L  3.  thou  hast  g.  commandment  to  save  me

John  17.  2.  as  thou  hast  g.  him  power  over  all  flesh
7.  that  all  things  thou  hast  g.  me,  are  of  thee

9.  I  pray  not  but  for  them  which  thou  hast  g.  me
11.  keep  through  thy  name  those  thou  hast  g.  me

Rev.  16.  6.  thou  hast  g.  them  blood  to  drink
GIVER.

Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  the  taker  of  usury,  so  with  the  g.
2  Cor.  9.7.  not  grudgingly,  God  loveth  a  cheerful  g.
GIVES'!.

Deut.  15.  9.  thou  g.  him  nought,  and  he  cry  to  Ld.

10.  thy  heart  not  be  grieved  when  thou  g.  him
Job  35.  7-  if  thou  be  righteous,  what  g.  thou  him  ?
Psal.  50. 19.  thou  g.  thy  mouth  to  evil,  thy  tongue
80.  5.  thou/7,  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  measure
104.  28.  that  thou  g.  them,  they  gather

145. 15.  thou  g.  them  their  meat  in  due  season
Prov.  2.  t.3.  if  thou  g.  thy  voice,  for  understanding
6.  35.  nor  rest  content,  though  thou  g.  many  gifts
Ezek.  3.  18.  thou  g.  not  warning,  to  save  his  life
16.  33.  but  thou  g.  thy  gifts  to  all  thy  lovers
34.  in  that  thou  g.  a  reward,  and  none  is  given

1  Cor.  14.  17.  for  thou  verily  g.  thanks  well*

GIV  El  f  1 .

Exod.  16.  29.  he  g.  you  on  sixth  day  bread  of  two

20.  12.  thy  days  may  be  long  in  the  land  which  1,

thy  God  g.  thee,  Deut.  4.  40.  |  5.  16.  I  25.  15.
25.  2.  every  man  that/7,  it  willingly  with  his  heart
Lev.  27.  9.  all  that  any  man  g.  of  such  shall  be  holy
Deut.  2.  29.  into  the  land  which  the  Lord  our  God
g.  thee,  4.  1,  21. 1  11.  17,  31 .  |  12.  1,  10.  |  15.  4,
7-  I  16.  20. 1  17.  14.  I  18.  9. 1  19.  1,  2,  10,  14. 1
21.  1,  23.  |  24.  4. 1  26.  1,  2. 1  27-  2,  3.  |  28.  8.
Josh.  1.  11,  15.

8.  18.  it  is  he  that  g.  thee  power  to  get  wealth

9.  6.  God  g.  not  this  land  for  thy  righteousness

12.  10.  when  he  g.  you  rest  from  enemies,  25.  19.

13.  1.  if  a  prophet  g.  thee  a  sign  or  a  wonder
16.  5.  in  thy  gates  which  Lord  g.  thee,  18.  |  17.  2.

2  Sam.  22. 1 48.  it  is  God  g.  avengement  for  me,  and

bringeth  down  people  under  me,  Psal.  18.  t  47.

1  Kings  17.  f  14.  till  the  day  the  Ld.  g.  rain  on  earth
Job  5.  10.  who  g.  rain  upon  the  earth  and  field

33.  13.  he  g.  no  account  of  any  of  his  ways

34.  29.  when  he  g.  quietness  ||  35. 10.  who  g.  songs

36.  6.  but  g.  right  to  the  poor  ||  31.  he  g.  meat
Psal.  18.  50.  great  deliverance  g.  he  to  his  king

37.  21.  but  the  righteous  sheweth  mercy  and  g.

68.  35.  the  God  of  Israel  is  he  that  g.  strength
119. 130.  the  entrance  of  thy  words  g.  light
127.  2.  for  so  he  g.  his  beloved  sleep

136.  25.  who  g.  food  to  all  flesh,  146.  7-1  147.  9.
144. 10.  g.  salvation  to  kings  ||  147.  16.  he  g.  snow
Prov.  2.  6.  the  Lord  g.  wisdom  out  of  his  mouth

3.  34.  he  g.  "race  to  the  lowly,  Jam.  4.  6. 1  Pet.  5.5.

13.  15.  good  understanding  g.  favour

21.  26.  the  righteous  g.  and  spareth  not,  22.  9.

28.  27-  he  that  g.  to  the  poor  shall  not  lack

Eccl.  2.  26.  God  g.  to  a  man  that  is  good,  wisdom
and  knowledge,  but  to  sinner  he  g.  travel
6.  2.  yet  God  g.  him  not  power  to  eat  thereof
Isa.  40.  29.  he  g.  power  to  the  faint  ||  42.  5.  g.  breath
Jer.  5.  24.  g.  rain  ||  31.  35.  g.  the  sun  for  a  light

22.  13.  woe  to  him  that  g.  him  not  for  his  work
Lam.  3.  30.  he  g.  his  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him
Dan.  2.  21.  he/7,  wisdom  to  the  wise,  and  knowledge

4.  17.  and  g.  it  to  whomsoever  he  will,  25,  32.

IIos.  10.  1 1.  a  vine  emptying  the  fruit  which  it  g.
Hah.  2.  15.  woe  to  him  that  g.  his  neighbour  drink
Mat.  5.  15.  it  g.  light  to  all  that  are  in  the  house
John  3.  34.  God  g.  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  to  him

6.  32.  but  my  lather  g.  you  the  true  bread
33.  who  conieth  down  and  g.  life  to  the  world
37.  all  that  the  Father  g.  me  shall  come  to  me

10.  11.  the  good  shepherd  g.  his  life  for  the  sheep

14.  27.  not  as  the  world  g.  give  I  unto  you

Acts  17.  25.  he  g.  to  all  life,  breath,  and  all  things
Rom.  12.  8.  he  that  g.  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity

14.  6.  he  eateth  to  the  Lord,  for  he  g.  God  thanks

1  Cor.  3.  7.  but  God  that//,  the  increase

7-  38.  he  that  g.  her  in  marriage  doth  well

15.  38.  God  g.  it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased  him
57.  but  thanks  be  to  (tod  who  g.  us  the  victory

2  Cor.  3.  6.  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit//,  life
1  Tim.  6.  17.  who  g.  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy
Jam.  1.  5.  ask  of  God,  that  g.  to  all  men  liberally

4.  6.  g.  more  grace,  God  g.  grace  to  the  humble
1  Pet.  4. 11.  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability that  God  g.
Rev.  22.  5.  for  the  Lord  God  g.  them  light
GIVING.

Deut.  10.  18.  he  loveth  the  stranger  in  g.  him  food
21.  17.  by  g.  him  a  double  portion  of  all  he  hath
Ruth  1.  6.  Lord  visited  his  people  in  g.  them  bread

1  Kings 5.  9.  shalt  accomplish  my  desire,  in  g.  food

2  Chr.  6.  23.  by  g.  him  according  to  righteousness
Job  11.  20.  their  hope  be  as  the  g.  up  of  the  ghost
Mat.  24.  38.  were  marrying  and  g.  in  maniage
Acts  8.  9.  g.  out  that  himself  was  some  great  one

15.  8.  g.  them  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  he  did  to  us
Rom.  4.  20.  was  strong  in  faith,  g.  glory  to  God
9.  4.  the  g.  of  the  law,  and  the  service’  of  God

191


G  L  A


GLO


GLO


1  Cor.  14. 7.  things  a.  sound  ||  16.  at  thy  #.  of  thanks

2  Cor.  6.  3.  #.  no  offence  in  any  thing,  ministry  not
Phil.  4. 15.  concerning  and  receiving,  butye  only
1  Tim.  4.  \.g.  heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines

1  ret.  3.7.#.  honour  to  the  wife  as  to  weaker  vessel

2  Pet.  1.  5.  y.  all  diligence,  add  to  faith  virtue
Judej.  y.  themselves  over  to  fornication

See  1  hanks.

GLAD.  .  ,

Exod.  4. 14.  when  he  seeth  thee,  he  will  be#.  in  heart
Judy.  18.  20.  and  the  priest’s  heart  was  y.

1  Sam.  11.  9-  and  the  men  ot.labesh  were  fir.

1  Kings  8.  66.  Israel  went  to  tents  <7.  2  C /iron.  7. 10.
Esth.  5. 9.  Daman  y.  ||8.  15.  the  city  Shushan  was  fir.
Job  3.  22.  and  are  y.  when  they  can  find  the  grave
22. 19.  righteous  see  it  and  are  y.  Psal.  64.  10.
Psal.  16.  9.  therefore  my  heart  is  y.  glory  rejoiceth

21.  6.  thou  hast  made  him  y.  with  thy  countenance

34.  2.  the  humble  shall  hear  and  be  g.  69.  32.

35.  27.  them  be  g.  that  favour  my  righteous  cause

45.  8.  whereby  they  have  made  thee  g.

46.  4.  the  streams  shall  make  g.  the  city  of  God
67.  4.  let  the  nations  be  fir.  and  sing  for  joy

90. 15.  make  us  g.  ||  92.  4.  thou  L.  hast  made  me  g.
97.  1.  let  the  isles  b eg.  |l  8.  Zion  heard,  and  was y.

104.  15.  wine  that  maketh  g.  the  heart  of  man

34.  1  will  be  y.  in  the  Lord  ||  105.38.  EgyptwaSfir.
107.  30.  then  are  they  g.  because  they  be  quiet
119.74.  they  that  fear  thee  will  be£r.  when

122.  1.  1  was  g.  when  they  said  to  me,  let  us  go
126.  3.  done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  ar  eg.
Prov.  10.  1.  a  wise  son  maketh  a  #.  father,  15.  20.

12.  25.  but  a  good  word  maketh  it  g.

17.  5.  that  is  g.  at  calamities,  not  be  unpunished

23.  25.  thy  father  and  thy  mother  shall  be  g.

24.  17.  let  not  thy  heart  be  g.  when  he  stumbleth
27.  11.  my  son,  be  wise,  and  make  my  heart g.

Eccl.  10.  t  19.  and  wine  maketh#.  the  life
Isa.  35.  1.  the  wilderness  shall  be#.  for  them

39.  2.  Hezekiah  was  g.  of  them,  and  shewed  them
Jer.  20. 15.  a  child  is  born,  making  him  very  g.

50.  11.  because  ye  were  g.  O  ye  destroyers
Lam.  1.  21.  they  are  g.  that  thou  hast  done  it
Dan.  6.  23.  then  was  the  king  exceeding g.

Hos.  7.  3.  they  make  the  king#.  with  their  wickedn.
Jonah  4.  6.  Jonah  was#,  because  of  the  gourd
Zech.  10.  7-  their  children  shall  see  it  and  be  g.
Mark  14.11.  were g.  and  promised  money, Luke22. 5
Luke  1.  19.  1  am  sent  to  shew  thee  these#,  tidings

8.  1.  shewing  the  #.  tidings  of  the  kingdom
15.  32.  was  meet  we  should  make  merry  and  be#.
John  8.  56.  Abraham  saw  my  day  and  was  #.

11.  15.  1  am  #.  for  yoursakes  that  1  was  not  there
Acts  11. 23.  when  had  seen  the  grace  of  G.  he  was #.

13.  48.  the  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  were  #.

Horn.  16.  19.  1  am  #.  therefore  on  your  behalf

1  Cor.  16.  17-  1  am  #.  of  the  coming  of  Stephanas

2  Co)'.  2.  2.  who  is  he  then  that  maketh  me  y.t
13.  9.  we  are  #.  when  we  are  w'eak,  and  ye  strong

1  Pet.  4.  13.  his  glory  revealed,  ye  may  be  #.  also
GLAD  joined  with  rejoice.

1  Chron.  16.  31.  let  the  heavens  be  #.  and  let  the

earth  rejoice ,  the  Lord  reigneth,  Psal.  96.  11.
Psal.  9.  2.  1  will  be  #.  and  rejoice  in  thee
14.7.  Jacob  shall  rejoice,  Israel  shall  be#.  53.  6.

31.  7. 1  will  be  #.  and  rejoice  in  thy  mercy

32.  11.  be#,  and  rejoice,  ye  righteous,  68.  3.

40.  16.  that  seek  thee,  be#,  and  rejoice,  70.  4.

48.  11.  let  Zion  rejoice,  daughters  of  Judah  be  #.

90.  14.  that  we  may  be#,  and  rejoice  all  our  days
118.  24.  this  is  the  day,  we  will  rej.  and  be  #.  in  it

Cant.  1.4.  we  will  be#,  and  rejoice  in  thee
Isa.  25.  9.  we  will  rejoice  and  be#,  in  his  salvation

65.  18.  but  be  you  #.  and  rejoice  for  ever

66.  10.  rej.  ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  be  #.  with  her
Lam.  4.  21.  rejoice  and  be  #.  O  daughter  of  Edom
Joel 2.  21.  fear  not,  O  land,  be  #.  and  rejoice

23.  be  #.  ye  children  of  Zion,  and  rejoice  in  Lord
Hah.  1.  15.  therefore  they  rejoice  and  are#.

Zeph.  3.  14.  be#,  and  rej.  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem
Mat.  5.  12.  rejoice  and  be  #.  great  is  your  rew'ard
Acts  2.  26.  my  heart  did  rejoice,  mytongue  was  #.
Eev.19.  7.  be  #.  and  rejoice  the  marriage  is  come
GLADLY.

Mark  6.  20.  Ilerod  feared  John,  and  heard  him  #.
12. 37.  the  common  people  heard  Christ  #.

Acts  2.  41.  that#,  received  the  word  were  baptized

21.  17-  when  come,  the  brethren  received  us  #.,

2  Cor.  11.  19-  ye  suffer  fools  #.  seeing  ye  are  wise

12.  9.  most#,  therefore  will  I  rather  glory
15.  I  will  very  #.  spend  and  be  spent  for  you

GLADNESS.

Num.  10. 10.  in  the  day  of  your  #.  ye  shall  blow
Deut.  28.  47.  servedst  not  the  Lord  with  #.  of  heart
2  Sam.  6.  12.  David  brought  up  the  ark  with  #.

1  Chron.  16.  27.  strength  and  #.  are  in  his  place

29.  22.  and  did  eat  and  drink  that  day  with  great  #.

2  Chron.  29.  30.  and  they  sang  praises  with  #.

30.  21.  Israel  kept  feast  of  unleavened  bread  with#.
23.  and  they  kept  other  seven  days  with  #.

Neh.  8. 17-  and  there  was  very  great#.

12.  27.  Levites,  to  keep  the  dedication  with  #.
Esth.  8. 16.  the  Jews  had  light,  and  #.  and  joy,  17.

9.  17-  they  made  it  a  day  of  feasting  and  #.  18. 19.
Psal.  4.  7*  thou  hast  put  #.  in  my  heart  more  than
30. 11.  and  thou  hast  girded  me  with  #.

43.  t  4.  1  will  go  to  God  the  g.  of  my  joy
45^7-  hath  anointed  thee  with  oil  of#.  Heh.  1.  9.

15.  with  #.  and  rejoicing  shall  they  be  brought
51.  8.  make  me  to  hear  joy  and  #.  that  the  bones
97-  11.  and  #.  is  sowm  for  the  upright  in  heart
100.  2.  serve  the  Lord  with  #.  come  with  singing

105.  43.  he  brought  forth  his  chosen  with  #.

106.  5.  that  1  may  rejoice  in  the  #.  of  thy  nation
Prov.  10.  28.  the  hope  of  the  righteous  shall  be  #.
Cant.  3.  11.  and  in  the  day  of  the#,  of  his  heart
Isa.  16. 10.  joy  and  #.  is  taken  away  out  of  the  held

22.  13.  and,  behold,  joy  and  #.  slaying  oxen

50.  29.  ye  shall  have  a  song  and  #.  of  heart

35.  10.  they  shall  obtain  joy  and  #.  51.  11.

51.  .3.  joy  and#,  shall  be  found  therein

Jer.  7.  34.  cease  voice  of  mirth  and  #.  16.  9. 1  25.  10.
192


Jer.  31.7.  sing  with  #.  for  Jacob,  shout  among  nations
33. 11.  there  shall’be  heard  a  voice  of  jov  and  #.

48.  33.  joy  and  #.  taken  from  the  plentiful  held
Joel  1. 16.  joy  and  #.  from  the  house  of  our  God
Zech.  8.  19.  shall  be  to  house  of  Judah  joy  and  #.
Mark  4.  16.  who  immediately  receive  it  with  #.

Luke  1. 14.  shalt  have  joy  and  #.  and  many  rejoice
Acts  2.  46.  did  eat  their  meat  with  #.  of  heart
12. 14.  she  opened  not  the  gate  for  #.  but  ran

14.  17.  tilling  our  hearts  with  food  and  #.

Phil.  2.  29.  receive  him  in  the  Lord  with  all  #.

GLASS.

1  Cor.  13. 12.  for  now  we  see  through  a  #.  darkly

2  Cor.  3.  18.  with  open  face,  beholding  as  in  a  #.
Jam.  1.23.  a  man  beholding  his  natural  face  in  a#.
Rev.  4.  6.  there  was  a  sea  of#,  like  unto  crystal

15.  2.  and  1  saw  a  sea  of  #.  mingled  with  tire
21. 18.  the  city  was  pure  gold,  like  clear  #.  21.

GLASSES.

Isa.  3. 23.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  #.  and  vails
See  Looking.

GLEAN.

Lev.  19. 10.  thou  shalt  not#,  vineyard,  Deut.  24. 21.
Evth  2.  2.  let  me  now  go  to  the  field  and  #.  ears
Jer.  6.  9.  they  shall  thoroughly  #.  the  remnant
GLEANED.

Judg.  1.  +7.  kings  #.  their  meat  under  my  table
20.  45.  and  they  #.  of  them  in  the  high-ways
liuth  2.  3.  she  came  and  #.  after  the  reapers
GLEANING,  S.

Lev.  19.  9.  not  gather  the  #.  ot  harvest,  23. 22.

Judg.  8.  2.  is  not  the  #.  of  the  grapes  ot  Ephraim  ?
Isa.  17.6.  yet#,  grapes  shall  be  lett  in  it  as  shaking
24.  13.  as  the  #.  grapes  when  vintage  is  done
Jer.  49.  9.  would  they  not  leave  some  #.  ?  Chad.  1 5.
Mic.  7. 1.  1  am  as  the  grape  #.  of  the  vintage

GLEDE.

Deut.  14. 13.  ye  shall  not  eat  the  #.  kite,  vulture
GLISTERING.

1  Chron.  29.  2.  now  1  have  prepared  #.  stones
Job  20.  25.  the  #.  sword  cometh  out  of  his  gall
Luke  9.  29.  and  his  raiment  was  white  and  #.
GLITTER,  1NG.

Deut.  32.41.  if  1  whet  my  #.  sw*ord  I  will  render
Job  39.  23.  the  #.  spear  rattleth  against  him
Ezek.  21.  10.  it  is  furbished  that  it  may  #.

28.  it  is  furbished  to  consume,  because  ot  the  #.

A 'ah.  3.  3.  the  horseman  lifteth  up  the  #.  spear
Ilab.  3.11.  they  went  at  the  shining  of  thy  #.  spear
GLOOMINESS.

Joel  2.  2.  a  day  of  darkness  and  #.  Zeph.  1.  15.

GLORIFY.

To  glorify,  signifies  to  make  glorious,  Rom.  8.
30.  Whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  glorified.
Thus  God  glorifies  the  elect,  by  adorning  them
Kith  gifts  and  graces  in  this  world,  and  by
bringing  them  to  the  full  possession  of  glory  and
blessedness  in  the  other  world.  When  man  is
said  to  glorify  God,  it  is  not  to  be ^  understood
as  if  he  could  add  any  thing  to  God's  essential
glory :  but  we  may  be  said  to  glorify  God,
when  we  acknowledge  him  to  be  glorious,  and
ascribe  to  him  the  glory  of  every  excellency
whether  of  nature  or  grace,  and  confess  that  he
is  worthy  to  receive  honour,  glory,  might,  and
majesty,  Rev.  4.  11.  When  we  confess  that  all
the  glory,  gifts,  and  dignity  which  we  have  above
other  men,  are  given  11s  of  God,  1  Chron.  29.  11,

12.  When  ire  are  willing  to  abase  ourselves  in
the  acknowledgment  of  our  own  vileness,  that
God  may  be  magnified  in  any  of  his  attributes
or  ordinances  by  it,  Jer.  1.3.  16.  Mai.  2.  2.
When  we  believe  God's  promises,  and  wait  fur
the  performance  of  them,  though  we  see  no  means
likely  for  their  accomplishment,  Rom.  4.  20.
When  we  publicly  acknowledge  true  religion,  or
any  special  truth  of  God,  when  it  is  generally
opposed,  Luke  23.  47-  When  we  suffer  for  God,

1  Pet.  4.  16.  When  on  the  sabbath  we  devote
ourselves  only  to  the  service  of  God,  Isa.  58.  13.
When  we  give  thanks  to  God  for  benefits,  or  de¬
liverances,  Psal.  113.  4.  Luke  17.  18.  When  we
love,  praise,  admire,  and  esteem  Christ  above  all,
John  1.  14.  1 11.  4.

God  the  Father  is  glorified  in  Christ  the  Mediator
by  his  obedience  unto  death,  and  thereby  consum¬
mating  the  work  of  man's  redemption,  which
tends  so  much  to  the  advancement  of  the  justice,
wisdom,  mercy,  and  holiness  of  God:  but  Christ
the  Hon  is  glorified  of  the  Father,  as  touching  his
human  nature,  by  sustaining  it  against  the  gates
of  hell  in  his  agony  arid  passion  on  the  cross ;
by  manifestly  owning  him  to  be  his  Son  ;  by  en¬
abling  him  to  triumph  over  his  and  his  people' s
enemies,  in  his  resurrection,  ascension,  and  ex¬
altation  to  his  Father's  right  hand.  John  17.  1.
Father,  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may
glorify  thee.

Psal.  22. 23.  all  ye  the  seed  of  Jacob#,  him  and  fear
50.  15.  1  will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  #.  me
86.  9.  all  nations  shall  come  and  #.  thy  name
12.  and  1  will  #.  thy  name  for  evermore
Isa.  24.  15.  wherefore  #.  ye  the  l.ord  in  the  fires
25.  3.  therefore  shall  the  strong  people  #.  thee
60.  7.  and  I  will  #.  the  house  of  my  glory
Jer.  30.  19.  I  will  multiply,  I  will  also  #.  them
Mat.  5.  16.  #.  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven
John  12.  28.  Father,  #.  thy  name  ;  I  will  #.  it

13.  32.  God  shall  also  g.  him  in  himself
16. 14.  he  shall  #.  me ;  tor  he  shall  receive  of  mine
17.  1.  #.  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  #.  thee

5.  now,  O  Father,  #.  me  with  thine  own  self
21. 19-  signifying  by  what  death  he  should#.  God
Rom.  15. 6.  ye  may  with  one  mind  and  mouth#.  God
9.  thatthe  Gentiles  might#.  God  for  his  mercy

1  Cor.  6. 20.  #.  G.  in  body  and  spirit  which  are  God’s

2  Cor.  9. 13..#.  God  for  your  professed  subjection
1  Pet.  2. 12.  may#.  God  in  the  day  of  visitation

4.  16.  but  let  him  #.  God  on  this  behalf
Rev.  15. 4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee,  and  #.  thy  name  ?
GLORIFIED.

Lev.  10.  3.  before  all  the  people  I  will  be  #.


Isa.  26.  15.  thou  hast  increased  nation,  thou  art  #.
44.  23.  for  the  Lorn  hath  #.  himself  in  Israel
49.  3.  art  my  servant,  O  Isr.  in  whom  l  will  be#
55.  5.  the  Holy  One  of  Isr.  he  hath#,  thee,  60.  9.

60.  21.  the  work  of  my  hands,  that  l  may  be  #.

61.  3.  the  planting  of  the  Lord  that  he  might  be  #
66.  5.  your  brethren  said,  let  the  Lord  be  #.

Ezek.  28.  22.  I  will  be  #.  in  the  midst  of  thee
39.  13.  be  a  renown  in  the  day  that  I  shall  be  g.
Dan.  5.  23.  and  the  God  in  w  hose  hand  thy  breath
is,  and  whose  are  all  thy  ways,  hast  thou  not  #.
Hag.  1.  8.  I  will  take  pleasure  in  it,  and  be  #.
Mat. 9. 8.  marvelled,  and#.  G.MarkQ..  12.Li2jie5.C6.
15.  31.  and  they  #.  the  God  of  Israel
I.uke  A.  15.  he  taught  in  synagogues,  being#,  of  all
7.  16.  there  came  fear  on  all,  and  they  #.  God

13.  13.  and  she  w'as  made  straight,  and#.  God

17. 15.  the  leper#.  God  ||  23. 47-  the  centurion  #.  G.
John  7.  39.  11.  Ghost  not  given,  because  Jesus  not#.

11.  4.  that  the  Son  of  God  might  be  #.  thereby

12. 16.  but  when  Jes.  was  #.then  remembered  they

23.  the  hour  is  come  the  Son  of  man  should  be  #.
28.  I  have  both  #.  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again

13.  31.  now  is  the  Son  of  man  #.  God  is  #.  in  him
32.  if  God  be  #.  in  him,  God  shall  glorify  him

14.  13.  that  the  Father  may  be  #.  in  the  Son

15.  8.  herein  is  my  Father  #.  that  ye  bear  fruit

17.  4.  1  have#,  thee  on  earth,  1  have  finished

10.  and  thine  are  mine,  and  I  am  #.  in  them

Acts  3.  13.  the  God  of  our  fathers  hath  #.  his  Son

4.  21.  for  all  men  #.  God  for  what  was  done

11.  18.  they  held  their  peace,  and  #.  God,  saying
13.  48.  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  #.  word  of  Lord
21.  20.  they  of  Jerusalem  #.  the  Lord,  and  said
Rom.  1. 21.  they  knew  God,  they  #.  him  not  as  God
8. 17.  if  we  suffer  with  him,  that  we  may  be  also #
30.  and  whom  he  justified,  them  he  also  #.

Gal.  1.  24.  and  they  #.  God  in  me
2  j'hess.  1.  10.  when  he  shall  come  to  be  #.  in  saints

12.  that  the  name  of  Jesus  may  be  #.  in  you
3. 1.  that  the  word  of  the  l.ord  may  be  #.

Heh.  5.  5.  so  Christ  #  v;ot  himself  to  be  high-priesj
1  Pet.  4.  11.  God  in  all  things  may  be#,  thro’  Jesiv

14.  is  evil  spoken  of,  but  oh  your  part  he  is  #.
Rev.  18.  7.  how  much  she  hath#,  herself
G LORI  FIE  L  II,  ING.

Psal.  50.  23.  whoso  offereth  praise  #.  me
Luke  2.20.  the  shepherds  returned,#.  God

5.  25.  he  departed  to  his  own  house,  #.  God

18.  43.  the  blind  man  followed  him,  #.  God

GLORY

Is  taken  for  worldly  splendour  and  magnificence
which  make  kings  glorious  before  men,  Mat.  6. 2S>
Solomon  in  all  his  glory,  in  all  his  lustre,  and  2,
his  richest  ornaments,  was  not  so  beautiful  as  ,
lily.  Thus  riches,  authority,  sumptuous  building
and  garments,  which  men  are  ready  to  praise,  an
which  make  their  possessors  glorious  before  merl
are  called  in  Scripture  glory.  Psal.  49. 16.  Whe
the  glory  of  his  house  is  increased.  By  glory  1
meant  the  tongue,  which  is  that  peculiar  exce
lency,  wherein  chiefly,  except  reason,  man  sur
passes  all  other  creatures.  Psal.  16.  9.  My  hear
is  glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiceth :  My  tongi
breaks  out  into  holy  boastings  and  praises.  So  i.
Psal.  108.  1.  I  will  sing  and  give  praise,  eve
wdth  my  glory.  'I  he  glory  of  the  king  of  A\
syria,  is  his  splendid  princes,  brave  captain
valiant  commanders,  and  powerful  armies,  whia
would  make  a  gallant  shew,  and  wherein  he  worn
glory, 0tid  boast  exceedingly.  Isa.  8.  7-  'I  he  Lor
bringeth  upon  them  the  king  of  Assyria,  and  a
his  glory.  Glorv  is  put  for  the  ark  of  the  cot
nant,  which  was  a  glorious  type  and  assurance
God's  presence,  and  the  great  safeguard  and  om,
ment  of  Israel,  which  they  could  glory  in  abo\

'  all  other  nations.  1  Sam.  4.  21.  The  glory  is  cl
parted  from  Israel.  Rom.  9.  4.  To  whom  pe
taineth  the  glory .

Glory  is  put  fur  the  church,  which  God  makes  gl
rious,  not  only  in  his  own  eyes,  but  even  in  t.
eyes  of  the  world.  Isa.  4.  5.  Upon  all  the  gloi
shall  be  a  defence;  upon  all  holy  assemblies
sincere  Christians.  It  is  put  for  grace,  2  Cor.
18.  We  are  changed  into  the  same  image,  fro
glory  to  glory  ;  growing  from  one  degree  of  gt
rious  grace  to  another,  till  it  come  to  its  perfect!
in  eternal  glory.  The  apostle  calls  man  the  ima
and  glory  of  God,  and  for  this  reason  he  oug
not  to  cover  his  head ;  that  is.  Since  God  won
have  the  male  sex  to  be  a  kind  of  representati
of  his  glory,  majesty,  and  power,  a  man  ought  n<
by  hiding  his  face,  wherein  these  things  are  no.
conspicuous,  to  conceal  the  glory  if  God  shini .
in  him.  David  calls  God  Iris  glory,  Psal.  3.
'1  hou  art  my  glory  ;  thou  art  the  Author
that  royal  dignity  to  which  I  am  advanced:  cj
thou  art  the  matter  of  my  glorying,  thou  ha
formerly  given,  and  wilt  further  give,  me  ocean
of  glorying  or  boasting  of  thy  power  and  favour
me.  Glory  is  taken  for  the  unspeakable  blesst
ness,  joy,  and  felicity  of  the  saints  in  heart
Psal.  73.  24.  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  tl
counsel,  and  afterwards  receiv'e  me  to  glor
God  promises  to  be  to  his  church  a  wall  ot  tl
round  about,  and  the  glory  in  the  midst,  Zc<
2.  5.  that  lie  would  protect  his  church,  a
that  his  presence  and  power  should  make  h
glorious.  It  is  prut  for  the  presence  of  God,  Ps;
‘63.  2.

When  the  Israelites  forsook  God  in  the  wilderne
they  changed  their  gloi'y  into  the  similitude  ot
ox  that  eateth  grass,  Psal.  106.  20.  't  hey  chana
their  glory  ;  that  is,  their  God,  who  was  ind>
their  glory,  into  the  golden  image  of  an  ox
calf.  Joshua  speaking  to  Achan  says,  ( •  i v e  gh
to  God,  Josh.  7-  19.  Confess  the  truth,  0
ascribe  unto  God  the  glory  of  his  omniscience
knowing  thy  sin,  and  of  his  justice  in  pnnuht
thte  according  to  thy  desert.  When  God  tlwiu
fit  to  ca/l  his  servant  Moses  to  himself,  he
reeled  him  to  go  up  to  mount  Abarim,  and  ■


GLO


GLO


GLO


there,  Sum.  27.  12,  etc.  Moses  hereupon  de-
aredof  God  that  he  mould  provide  a  man  who  should
be  set  over  the  multitude.  '1  he  Lord  therefore  com¬
manded  him  to  take  Joshua,  the  son  of  N  nil,  say-
ina,  1  le  is  a  man  who  is  tilled  with  the  Spirit,  lay
tii'me  hand  upon  him,  and  give  him  a  charge  in
the  presence  of  the  multitude,  and  put  some  of
thine  honour,  in  Hebrew,  of  thy  glory  or  splendour,
upon  him.  The  question  is,  what  glory  this  was,
which  Moses  communicated  to  Joshua.  Onkelos,
and  some  of  the  Itabbins,  are  of  opinion,  that
Moses  imparted  to  him  some  of  that  lustre  which
appeared  upon  his  countenance ,  after  the  conversa¬
tion  which  he  had  been  admitted  to  with  God.
Moses,  they  say,  shined  like  the  sun,  and  .loshua
like  the  moon :  this  was  a  weak  and  borrowed
brightness.  But  it  is  to  be  understood  of  that
authority,  and  empire,  whereof  he  stood  in  need
for  the  government  of  the  people.  Moses  laid  his
hands  on  him,  and  by  this  ceremony  appointed  him
for  his  successor  in  the  conduct  of  the  Israelites  :
He  gave  him  his  orders  and  instructions,  that  he
might  acquit  himself  with  honour  in  this  employment.
he  glory  of  God.  Moses  earnestly  begged  of  God
to  shew  him  his  glory,  Exod.  33.  18.  1  beseech
thee,  shew  me  thy  glory  ;  that  is,  the  highest
manifestation  of  thy  divine  glory  that  I  am
capable  of;  or  that  glorious  shape,  which,  together
with  an  human  voice,  thou  hast  now  assumed,  the
heavens  declare  the  atory  of  God,  Psal.  19.  1.
The  visible  heaven?  afford  matter  and  occasion,  in
respect  of  their  vast  extent,  glorious  furniture,  and
powerful  influences,  to  acknowledge  and  admire
the  glorious  being,  infinite  power,  wisdom,  and
goodness  of  God.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  hath
filled  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  that  is,  the  cloud,
which  was  an  usual  token  of  God  s  glorious  pre¬
sence,  1  Kings  8.  11.  Christ  says  to  Martha,  John
11.  40.  If  thou  wouldest  believe,  thou  shouldest
see  the  glory  of  God  ;  that  is,  an  admirable  in¬
stance  of  the  divine  power,  in  raising  thy  dead
brother.  The  miracles  which  our  Saviour  wrought,
manifested  his  glory,  or  his  divine  power,  John  2.

11.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  he  revealed,  Isa.
40.  5.  that  is,  the  glorious  power  and  goodness  of
God  shall  be  manifested  in  the  deliverance  of  the
Jews  from  Babylon,  but  more  especially  in  the
redemption  of  all  nations  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,
do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,  1  Cor.  10.  31.  that  is,
let  the  glory  arid  honour  of  God  be  habitually  and
really  the  chief  end  of  all  your  actions.

'<en.  31. 1.  of  our  fathers  hath  he  gotten  all  this  g.
Tod.  28.  2.  make  garments  for  Aaron  for  g.  40.
Sam.  2.  8.  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  g.

4.  21.  the  g.  is  departed  from  Israel,  22.
t  21.  where  is  the  .<7.  ?  there  is  no  g.

Chr.  22.  5.  house  for  Lord  must  be  of  r.  and  fame

29. 11.  thine  is  greatness,  power,  and  g.  Mat.  0. 13.
isth.  5.  11.  Hainan  told  of  the  <7.  of  his  riches

rob  39.  20.  the  g.  of  his  nostrils  is  terrible

40. 10.  and  array  thyself  with  g.  and  beauty'

’’sal.  24.  7.  and  the  King  of  g.  shall  come  in,  9.

10,  who  is  this  King  of  g.?  the  1  ord  is  King
29.  3.  the  God  of  g.  thundereth,  Lord  on  waters

49. 16.  when  the  g.  of  his  house  is  increased
73.  24.  thou  shalt  afterward  receive  me  to  g.

79.  9.  help  us,  O  God,  for  the  g.  of  thy  name
85.  9.  that  g.  may  dwell  in  our  land

89.  17.  for  thou  art  the  g.  of  their  strength
106. 20.  they  changed  their  g.  into  similitude
145.  11.  speak  of  the  g.  of  tiiy  kingdom
149.  5.  let  the  saints  he  joyful  in  g.

Jrov.  3.  35.  the  wise  shall  inherit  g.

17.  6.  the  g.  of  children  are  their  fathers
-20.  29.  the  g.  of  young  men  is  their  strength
25.  t  6.  set  not  out  thy  g.  in  presence  of  the  king
27-  so  for  men  to  search  their  own  g.  is  not  g.

28. 12.  when  the  righteous  men  rejoice  there  is  g.

Tsa.  2. 10.  hide  thee  for  the  g.  of  his  majesty,  19.21.
4:  t  2.  branch  of  the  Lord  shall  be  beauty  and  g.

5.  for  upon  all  the  g.  shall  be  a  defence

5.  +  13.  and  their  g.  are  men  of  famine

14.  their  <7.  and  pomp  shall  descend  unto  it

10.  3.  and  where  will  ye  leave  your  g.  ?

12.  I  will  punish  the  g.  of  his  high  looks

i8.  and  shall  consume  the  g.  of  his  forest

11.  1 10.  a  root  of  Jesse,  his  rest  shall  be  g.

13. 19.  Babylon  the  17.  of  kingd.  shall  be  as  Sodom

14.  18.  all  of  them  lie  in  g.  each  in  his  house

16.  14.  the  g.  of  Moab  shall  be  contemned
17. 3.  they  shall  be  as  the  g.  of  the  children  of  Isr.

4.  that  the  g.  of  Jacob  shall  be  made  thin

20.  5.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  Egypt  their  g.

21. 16.  and  all  the  g.  of  Kedar  shall  fail

22.  24.  shall  hang  on  him  g.  of  his  Father's  house

23.  9.  hath  purposed  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  g.

24.  16.  we  heard  songs,  even  g.  to  the  righteous
+  23.  there  shall  be/7.  before  his  ancients

35.  2.  the  a.  of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  to  it
61.  6.  in  their  <7.  ye  shall  boast  yourselves
66.  11.  be  delighted  with  the  abundance  of  her  <7.
12.  the  g.  of  the  Gentiles  as  a  flowing  stream
for.  2.  11.  but  my  people  have  changed  their  g.

13. 11.  that  they  might  be  to  me  for  a  g.

18.  shall  come  down,  even  the  crown  of  your  g.
Ezek.  20.  6.  which  is  the  g.  of  all  lands,  15.

24.  25.  when  I  take  from  them  the  joy  of  their  g.

25.  9.  I  will  open  the  g.  of  the  country

26.  20.  I  shall  set  g.  in  the  land  of  the  living

31.  18.  to  whom  art  thou  thus  like  in  g.  ?

Gan.  2.37.  God  hath  given  thee  power  and  g.  7.  14.
4.36.  the  g.  of  my  kingdom  returned  to  me

11.  39.  shall  acknowledge,  and  increase  with  g.
Hos.  4.  "•  .1  will  change  their  g.  into  shame
?,\  as  f°r  Ephraim,  their  g.  shall  fly  away
»'V  6.  the  priests  that  rejoiced  for  the  77.  thereof
4/ic.  ].  15.  he  shall  come  to  Adullam  the  g.  of  Isr.
111'"'  *'lere  none  end  of  the  store  and  g.

11  ■  2.  16.  thou  art  tilled  with  shame  for  g.

- ‘"g.  2.  3.  who  saw  this  house  in  her  first  a.  ?

••  I  will  fill  this  house  with  g.  saith  the  "Lord


Hag.  Q.O.g.  of  this  latter  house  greater  than  of  form.
Zech.  2.5.  1  will  be  the  g.  in  the  midst  of  her

8.  after  the  <7.  hath  he  sent  me  to  the  nations

6.  13.  he  shall  build  temple,  he  shall  bear  the  <7.

11.  3.  their  g.  is  spoiled,  a  voice  of  roaring  of  lions

12.  7-  g-  of  the  house  of  David,  g.  of  Jerusalem
Mat.  4.  8.  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  g.  of  them

6.  2.  sound  trumpet,  that  they  may  have  g.  of  men
16.  27.  shall  come  in  the/7,  of  his  Bather,  Mark  8.38.

21.  30.  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  with
power  and  great  .<7.  Mark  13.  26.  Luke  ‘11.  “27 .

Luke  2.  14.  saying,  g.  to  (tod  in  the  highest,  19.  38.

32.  light  to  Gentiles,  and  the  g.  of  thy  people  Isr.
4.  6.  all  this  power  will  L  give  thee,  and  the  g.

9.  31.  who  appeared  in  g.  and  spake  of  his  decease
John  17.  5.  with  the  g.  which  I  had  with  thee

22.  the  g.  thou  gavest  me,  I  have  given  them
Acts  7.  2.  the  God  of  g.  appeared  to  our  father

12.  23.  because  he  gave  not  God  the  g.

22.  11.  when  1  could  not  see  for  the  g.  of  light
Horn.  4.  20.  was  strong  in  faith,  giving  g.  to  God

6.  4.  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  g.  of  the  Father

8.  18.  are  not  worthy  to  he  compared  with  the  g.

9.  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  <7.  and  covenants

23.  which  he  had  afore  prepared  unto  y.

11.  36.  of  him  are  all  things,  to  whom  be  g.  for  ever,
Gal.  1.  5.  2  Tim.  4.  1  H.  fleb.  13.  21.  1  Pet.  5.  11.
16.  27.  to  God  only  wise  he  g.  1  Tim.  1.  17.

1  Cor.  2.  7.  which  God  hath  ordained  to  our  g.

8.  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  g.

11.  7.  but  the  woman  is  the  g.  of  the  man

15.  .if  a  woman  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  g.  to  her

15.  40.  g.  of  celestial  is  one,  the  g.  of  the  terrestrial
41.  one  g.  of  the  sun,  another  g.  of  the  moon

43.  it  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  is  raised  in  g.

2  Cor.  3.  7.  for  the  g.  of  his  countenance,  which  g.

9.  if  the  ministration  of  condemnation  be  g.  the
ministration  of  righteousness  doth  exceed  in  g.

10.  had  no  g.  by  reason  of  the  g.  that  excelleth
18.  but  we  all  are  changed  from  g.  to  g.

4.  17.  worketh  for  us  an  eternal  weight  of  g.

8.  19.  administered  to  us  to  the  g.  of  the  same  Ld.

23.  they  are  messengels,  and  the  g.  of  Christ
F.ph.  1 .  6.  to  the  praise  of  the  g.  of  his  grace

17.  the  Father  of  g.  may  give  you  the  Spirit

18.  ye  may  know  what  is  the  riches  of  the  g.

3.  13.  my  tribulations  for  you,  which  is  your  g.

21.  to  him  be  g.  in  the  church  by  Christ  Jesus
Phil.  1.  11.  fruits,  which  are  by  Christ  to  g.  of  God
3.  19.  and  whose  g.  is  in  their  shame

4. 19.  according  to  his  riches  in  g.  by  Christ
20.  now  to  God  and  our  Father  be  g.  for  ever
Col.  1.  27.  what  is  the  riches  of  the  g.  of  this  mys¬
tery,  which  is  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  g.
3.  4.  then  shall  ye  appear  with  him  in  g.

1  T/iess.  2.  6.  nor  of  men  sought  we  g.  nor  of  you
12.  who  hath  called  you  to  his  kingdom  and  g.

20.  for  ye  are  our  g.  and  joy

2  T/iess.  1.  9.  punished  from  the  g.  of  his  power

2.  14.  to  the  obtaining  of  the  g.  of  our  Lord

1  Tim.  3.  If),  seen  of  angels,  received  up  into  <7.

2  Tim.  2.  10.  salvation  in  Christ,  with  eternal  g.
JJeb.  2.  10.  in  bringing  many  sons  to  <7.  to  make

3.  3.  this  man  was  counted  worthy  of  more  g.

9.  5.  over  it  the  cherubims  of  g.  shadowing
Jam.  2  1.  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  the  Lord  of  g.

1  Pet.  1.  8.  rennet:  with  joy  unspeakable,  full  of  g.

11.  it  testified  the  g.  that  should  follow

21.  that  God  raised  him  up,  and  gave  him  g.

24.  and  all  the  g.  of  man,  as  the  flower  of  grass

2.  20.  for  what  g.  is  it,  if  when  ye  be  buffeted  ?

4.  14.  the  Spirit  of  g.  and  of  God  restetli  on  you

5.  1.  a  partaker  of  the  g.  that  shall  he  revealed

10.  hath  called  us  to  eternal  g.  by  Christ  Jesus

2  Pet.  1.  3.  that  hath  called  us  to  g.  and  virtue
17.  came  such  a  voice  to  him  from  excellent  g.

3.  18.  to  him  be  g.  both  now  and  ever,  Rev.  1.  6.
Jude  25.  to  the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour  be  g.
Rev.  4.  11.  thou  art  worthy  to  receive  g.  5.  12.

7.  12.  blessing  and  g.  and  wisdom  be  to  our  God

11.  13.  remnant  were  affrighted,  and  gave  g.  to  God

See  Grown,  Honour,  Vain.

Give  GLORY.

Josh.  7-  19.  my  son,  give  g.  to  the  God  of  Israel
1  Sam.  6.  5.  ye  shall  give  g.  to  the  God  of  Israel
1  Chron.  16.  28.  give  to  the  Lord  g.  give  to  Lord  g.

and  strength,  29.  Psal.  29. 1,2. 1  96.7, 8.  Jer.  13. 16.
Psal.  84.  11.  the  I.ord  will  give  grace  and  g.

115.  1.  not  to  us,  but  to  thy  name  give  the  g.

Isa.  42.  12.  let  them  give  g.  unto  the  Lord
Mai.  2.  2.  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  heart  to  give  g.
Luke  17.  18.  that  returned  to  give  g.  to  God
Rev.  4.  9.  when  those  beasts  give  g.  and  honour

14.  7.  fear  God,  and  give  g.  to  him,  worship  him

16.  9.  were  scorched,  and  repented  not  to  give  g.

GLORY  of  God.

Psal.  19.  1.  the  heavens  declare  the  g.  of  God
Prov.  25.  2.  it  is  the  g.  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing
Ezek.  8.  4.  the  g.  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  there

9.  3.  the  g.  of  God  was  gone  up  from  the  cherub

10.  19.  the  g.  of  God  was  over  them  above,  11.  22.
43.  2.  the  g.  of  God  came  from  the  way  of  the  east

John  11.  4.  this  sickness  is  for  the  g.  of  God
40.  if  believe,  thou  shouldest  see  the  g.  of  God
Acts7.  55.  Stephen  looked  up  and  saw  the  g.  of  God
Rom.  3. 23.  all  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  g.  of  God
5.  2.  we  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  g.  of  God

15.  7-  as  Christ  also  received  us  to  the  g.  of  God

1  Cor.  10.  31.  ye  eat  or  drink,  do  all  to  the  g.  of  G.

11.  7.  for  a  man  is  the  image  and  g.  of  God

2  Cor.  1. 20.  promises  in  him  yea  and  amen,  to g.o/G.

4.  6.  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  g.  of  God
15.  thanksgiving  of  many  redound  to  g.  of  God

Phil.  1.  11.  which  are  by  Christ  to  the/7,  of  God
2.  11.  confess  that  Jesus  is  Lord  to  the  g.  of  God
Rev.  15.  8.  temple  filled  with  smoke  from  g.  of  God
21.  11.  the  holy  Jerusalem,  having  the  <7.  of  God
23.  no  need  of  the  sun,  g.  of  God  did  lighten  it
Ilis  GLORY.

Vent.  5.  24.  the  Lord  ourG.  hath  shewed  us  his  g.

33.  17.  his  g.  like  the  firstling  of  a  bullock

1  Chr.  16. 24  declare  hi*  a.  among  heath.  Ps.  96. 3.


Psal.  21.  5.  his  g.  is  great  in  thy  salvation
29.  9.  in  his  temple  doth  every  one  speak  of  /ns  g.
49.  17-  his  g.  shall  not  descend  after  him
72.  19.  let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  Ins  g.

78.  61.  delivered  his  g.  into  the  enemies’  hand

89.  44.  thou  hast  made  his  g.  to  cease
9“.  6.  and  all  the  people  see  his  a.

102.  16.  when  L.  build  Zion, shall  appear  in  his g.
113.  4.  and  his  g.  above  the  heavens,  148.  13.

Prov.  19.  11.  it  is  his  g.  to  pass  over  transgression
Isa.  3.  8.  to  provoke  the  eyes  of  his  g.

6.  3.  one  cried,  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  g.

8.7.  the  king  of  Assyria  and  his  g.  shall  come  up

10.  16.  under  his  g.  he  shall  kindle  a  burning

59.  19.  shall  fear  his  g.  from  rising  of  the  sun

60.  2.  and  his  g.  shall  be  seen  upon  thee

Jer.  22.  18.  not  lament,  ■  aying,  ah  lord,  or  ah  his g.
Ezek.  43.  2.  and  the  earth  shined  with  his  g.

Dan.  5.  20.  and  the}'  took  his  g.  from  him
Ilah.  3.  3.  God  came,  his  g.  covered  the  heavens
Mat.  6.29.  Solomon  in  all  his  g.  Luke  12.  27-

19.  28.  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  his  g.  Luke  9.  26
Luke  9.  32.  when  they  were  awake,  they  saw  his  g.

24.  26.  to  have  suffered,  and  to  enter  into  his  g.
John  1.  14.  we  beheld  his g.  the  glory  as  of  the  Mily

2.  11.  thus  did  Jesus,  and  manifested  forth  hi;  g.

7-  18.  but  he  thatseeketh  his  g.  that  sent  him

12. 41.  these  things  said  Fsaias,  when  he  saw  n.S g.
Rom.  3. 7-  hath  abounded  through  my  lie  unto  hi « g,

9.  23.  might  make  known  the  riches  of  his  g.

Eph.  1.  12.  should  be  to  the  praise  of  his  g.  14.

3.  16.  grant  you  according  to  the  riches  of  his  g.
Ileb.  1.  3.  who  being  the  brightness  of  his  g.

1  Pet.  4.  13.  that  when  his  g.  shall  be  revealed
Jude  24.  present  you  before  the  presence  of  Ins g.
Rev.  18. 1.  the  earth  was  lightened  with  his  g.

My  GLORY.

Gen.  45.  13.  tell  my  father  of  all  my  g.  in  Egypt
Exod.  29.  43.  tabernacle  shall  be  sanctified  by  my  g.
33.  22.  while  my  g.  passeth  by,  1  will  put  thee
Nvm.  14.  22.  those  men  which  have  seen  my  g.

Job  19.  9.  he  hath  stript  me  of  my  g.  and  taken
29.  20.  my  g.  was  fresh  in  me,  my  bow  renewed
Psal.  3.  3.  thou  art  my  g.  and  lifter  up  of  my  head

4.  2.  how  long  will  ye  turn  my  g.  into  shame  ?

16.  9.  my  g.  rejoicet'h  ||  30.  12._  my  g.  may  sing

57.  8.  awake  up  my  g.  |l  62.  7-  in  God  is  my  g.

108.  1.  I  will  sing  and  give  praise  with  my  g.

Isa.  42.8.  my  g.  will  l  not  give  to  another,  48.  11.
43.  7.  for  1  have  created  him  for  my  g.

46.  13.  L  will  place  salvation  for  Israel,  my  g.

60.  7.  I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  <7.

66. 18.  and  they  shall  come  and  see  my  g.

19.  have  not  seen  my  g.  they  shall  declare  my  g.
Ezek.  39.  21.  I  will  set  my  g.  among  the  heathen
Mic.  2.  9.  from  children  have  ye  taken  away  my  g.
John  8.  50.  and  I  seek  not  mine  own  g.  one  seeks

17.  24.  be  with  me,  that  they  may  behold  my  g.

GLORY  of  the  Lord.

Exod.  16. 7.  in  morning  ye  shall  see  g.  of  the  Lord

10.  the  g.  of  the  I.ord appeared  in  the  cloud,  Lev.

9.  23.  Nvm.  14.  10. 1  16.  19,  42.  |  20.  6.
24.  16.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  abode  on  mount  Sinai

17.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  was  like  devouring  fire
40.  34.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  filled  the  tabernacle,  35.

Lev.  9.  6.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  shall  appear  unto  you
Num.  14.  21.  earthshall  be  filled  with/7,  of  the  Lord

1  Kings  8.  11.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house,

2  Chr.  5. 14. 17. 1,2,  3.  Ezek.  43.  5.  1  44.  4.
Ps.  104. 31.  the  g .  of  the  Lord  shall  endure  for  ever
138.  5.  for  great  is  the  g.  of  the  Lord
Isa.  35.  2.  they  shall  see  the  g.  of  the  Lord
40.  5.  and  the  g.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed

58.  8.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  shall  he  thy  rereward
60.  1.  and  the  g.  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee

Ezek.  1 . 28.  appearance  of  the  likeness  o  fg.  of  Lord
3.  12.  blessed  he  the  g.  of  the  Lord  from  his  place
23.  and  behold,  the  g.  of  the  Lord  stood  there

10.  4.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the  cherub

18.  g.  of  the  Lord  departed  from  the  threshold

11.  23.  the  g .  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the  city
43.  4.  the  g.  of  the  Lord  came  into  the  house

Ilab.  2. 14.  filled  with  knowledge  of/7,  of  the  Lord
Luke  S.  9.  g.  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  them

2  Cor.  3.  18.  beholding  as  in  a  glass  g.  of  the  Lord

Thy  GLORY.

Exod.  33. 18.  he  said,  I  beseech  thee  shew  me  thyg.
Psal.  8.  1.  who  hast  set  thy  g.  above  the  heavens
45.  3.  gird  thy  sword  on  thy  thigh  with  thy  g.

57.  5.  let  thy  q.  be  above  all  the  earth,  11. 1  108.  5.
63.  2.  to  see  thy  power  and  thy  g.  as  I  have  seen

90.  16.  let  thy  g.  appear  unto  their  children
102.  15.  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  thy  g.  ■

La.  22. 18.  the  chariots  of  thy  g.  shall  be  the  shame

60. 19.  thy  God  thyg.  ||62.2.  kings  sballsee  thyg.
63.  15.  behold  from  the  habitation  of  thy  g.

Jer.  14.  21.  do  not  disgrace  the  throne  of  thy  <7.

48.  18.  come  down  from  thy  g.  and  sit  in  thirst
Ilab.  2. 16.  and  shameful  spewing  shall  be  on  thyg
Mark  10.  37.  the  other  on  thy  left  hand  in  thyg.
GLORIOUS.

Exod.  15.  6.  thy  right  hand,  O  Lord,  is  become  g.

11.  who  is  like  thee,  O  Lord,  g.  in  holiness
Dent.  28.  58.  that  thou  mayest  tear  this  g.  name

2  Sam.  6.  20.  how  g.  was  the  king  of  Israel  to  day .
1  Chron.  29. 13.  we  thank  and  praise  thy  g.  name
Neh.  9. 5.  blessed  he  thy  g.  name  which  is  exalted
Psal.  29.  +2.  worship  Ld.  in  g.  sanctuary,  96. 1 9.
45.  13.  the  king's  daughter  is  all  g.  within
66.  2.  sing  forth  his  honour,  make  his  praise  g.

72. 19.  and  blessed  be  his  g.  name  for  ever

76. 4.  thou  art  more  g.  than  the  mountains  of  prey
87.  3.  <7.  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city  of  God
111.3.  his  work  is  honourable  and  g.

145.  5.  I  will  speak  of  the  g.  honour  of  thy  majesty

12.  to  make  known  the  g.  majesty  of  his  kingdom
Isa.  4.  2.  the  branch  of  the  Ford  shall  he  g.

11. 10.  he  a  root  of  Jesse,  and  his  rest  shall  be  g.
22.  23.  he  shall  be  for  a  g.  throne  to  his  F.  house
28. 1.  whose  g.  beauty  is  a  fading  flower

4.  the  g.  beauty  which  is  on  head  of  the  fat  vallef
30. 30.  the  Lord  shall  cause  his/7,  voice  to  be  heard

193


GO


G  O


G  O

Is  a.  33. 2*.  #.  Lord  will  be  to  us  a  place  of  streams
49.  5.  yet  shall  1  be  #.  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord
tX).  13.  1  will  make  the  place  of  my  feet  #.

03.  1.  who  is  this  that  is  g.  in  his  apparel  ?

12.  that  led  them  by  Moses  with  Ins  #.  arm

14.  didst  lead  people  to  make  thyself  a  #.  name
Jer.  17.  12.  ng.  high  throne  front  the  beginning
Ezek.  27 •  25.  made  very  g.  in  the  midst  of  the  seas
Dan.  11.  16.  and  he  shall  stand  in  the  g.  land
41.  he  shall  enter  also  into  the  g.  land
45.  between  the  seas  in  the  g.  holy  mountain
Luke  13.  17.  people  rejoiced  for  the#.  things  done
Rom.  b.  21.  into  the  g.  liberty  of  the  children  of  G.
2  Cor.  3. 7.  if  ministration  engraven  in  stones  was#.

3.  8.  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  rather  g.

'  4.  4.  lest  light  of#,  gospel  should  shine  unto  them
Eph.5.  27.  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a#,  church
Phil.  3.21.  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  to  his  #.body
Co/.  1.  11.  strengthened  according  to  his#,  power

1  Tim.  1.11.  according  to  the#,  gospel  of  blessed  G.
Tit.  2. 13.  looking  for  the#,  appearing  of  the  great  G.

GLORIOUSLY.

Excel.  15. 1.  sing  to  the  Lord,  he  hath  triumphed  #.
Isa.  24.  23.  the  Ld.  shall  reign  before  his  ancients #.
GLORY,  Perh.

Exod.  8.  9.  #.  over  me,  when  shall  1  entreat  for  thee

2  Kinos  14.  10.  #.  of  this,  and  tarry  at  home

1  C/i. .  16.  10.  #.  ye  in  his  holy  name,  Psal.  105.3.

3.c'  we  may  give  thanks,  and  #.  in  thy  praise
Psc.l.  63. 11.  every  one  thatsweareth  by  him  shall  #.
64.  10.  and  all  the  upright  in  heart  shall  #.

106.  5.  that  1  may  #.  with  thine  inheritance
Isa.  41.  16.  and  shalt  #.  in  the  holy  One  of  Israel
45.  25.  in  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  #.
Jer.  4.  2.  bless  in  him,  and  in  him  shall  they  #.

9.  23.  let  not  the  wise,  mighty,  the  rich  man  #.

24.  let  him  #.  in  this,  that  lie  knoweth  me
Rom.  4.  2.  he  hath  whereof  to  #.  but  not  before  God

5.  3.  not  only  so,  but  we#,  in  tribulations  also
15. 17. 1  have  therefore  whereof  1  may  #.thro’ Jesus

1  Cor.  1.  29.  that  no  flesh  should  #.  in  his  presence

31.  he  that  glorieth #.  in  the  Lord,  2  Cor.  10.  17.

3.  21.  therefore  let  no  man  #.  in  men,  all  are  yours

4.  7-  why  dost  thou#,  as  if  thou  hadstnot  received

9.  16.  though  1  preach,  1  have  nothing  to#,  of

2  Cor.  5.  12.  give  occasion  to  #.  on  our  behalf;  to
answer  them  who  #.  in  appearance,  not  in  heart

11. 12.  wherein  they  #.  they  may  be  found  as  we

18.  seeing  many#,  after  the  flesh,  1  will#,  also

30.  if  1  must  needs  #.  1  will#,  of  my  infirmities
12.  1.  it  is  not  expedient  for  me  doubtless  to  #.

5.  of  such  an  one  will  I  #.  of  myself  I  will  not  #.

6.  for  though  1  would  desire  to  #.  I  shall  not  be  a  f.
9.  therefore  I  will  rather  #.  in  mine  infirmities

Gal.  6. 13.  you  circumcised,  that  they  may#. in  flesh
14.  G.  forbid  1  should  #.  save  in  the  cross  of  Jesus
2  Thess.  1 .  4.  that  we  ourselves  #.  in  you  in  churches
Jam.  1.  f  9.  let  the  brother  of  low  degree  #.

3.  14.  if  ye  have  envying  in  your  hearts,  #.  not
GLOR1EST.

Jer.  49.  4.  wherefore  #.  thou  in  the  valleys  ?
GLORIETH.

Jer.  9.  24.  let  him  that#.  1  Cor.  1.  31.  2  Cor.  10.  17.
Jam.  2.  1 13.  and  mercy  #.  against  judgment
GLORYING.

1  Cor.  5.  6.  your  #.  is  not  good,  a  little  leaven

9.  15.  than  that  any  man  should  make  my  #.  void

2  Cor.  7.  4.  great  is  my  boldness,  great  my  #.  of  you
12.  11.  1  am  become  a  fool  in  #.  ye  compelled  me

l  IViess.  2.  tl9.  what  is  our  crown  of#.  ?  are  not  ye
G  LU  IT  ON  ,  S.

Dent.  21.  20.  this  our  son,  is  a  #.  and  a  drunkard
Prov.  23.  21.  drunkard  and  #.  shall  come  to  poverty
28.  t  7-  he  that  feedeth  #.  shameth  his  father
GLUTTONOUS.

Mat.  11.  19.  they  said,  behold  a  man  #.  Luke  7. 34.
GNASH.

Ps.  112. 10.  he  shall  #.  with  his  teeth,  and  meltaway
Lam.  2.  16.  all  thine  enemies  hiss  and #.  the  teeth
GN ASHED.

Psal.  35.  16.  they  #.  upon  me  with  their  teeth
Acts  7.  54.  and  they  #.  on  him  with  their  teeth
GNASH  ETH.

Job  16.  9.  he#,  on  me  with  his  teeth,  Psal.  37.  12.
Mark  9.  18.  he  foameth  and  #.  with  his  teeth
GNASHING.

Mat.  8.  12.  there  shall  be  weeping  and  #.  of  teeth,

13.  42,  50.  1  22. 13.  |  24.  51.  1  25.  30.  Luke  13.  28.

G  N  AT.

Mat.  23. 24.  who  strain  at  a  #.  and  swallow  a  camel
GNAW.

Zeph.  3.3.  her  judges#,  not  the  bones  till  the  morrow
GNAWED.

Rev.  16.  10.  and  they  #.  their  tongues  for  pain
GO.

To  go  down,  and  go  up;  We  go  up  to  Jerusalem ,
Mat.  20.  18.  He  goes  down  to  Jericho ,  Luke  10.

30.  Abraham  went  up  out  of  Egypt ,  Gen.  13.  1.
Jacob  went  down  into  Egypt ,  Gen.  46.  3.  Go  up
to  Ai,  Josh.  7.  3.  He  went  down  to  Cesarea,
Acts  12.  19.  By  all  which  nothing  more  is  meant,
than  that  they  went  to  Jerusalem,  into  Egypt,  to
Jericho,  Ai,  and  Cesarea;  but  the  situation  of
the  place  they  were  going  to,  is  described  by  the
words  going  up  and  going  down.

To  go  down  into  hell,  or  scheol  ;  to  go  down  to  the
grave,  the  place  where  the  dead  are.  Psal.  55.  15.
Let  them  go  down  quick  into  hell ;  Let  them  go
down  alive  into  the  grave  ;  cut  them  off  by  a  sudden
and  violent  death,  like  lvorah,  Dathan,  and  Abi-
ram.  1  he  dead  praise  not  the  Lord,  neither  any
that  go  down  into  silence  ;  into  the  grave,  Psal.
115.  17-  All  they  that  go  down  to  the  dust,  shall
bow  before  him,  Psal.  22. 29.  Such  as  are  poor,  and
in  great  misery  and  distress,  shall  own,  submit
unto,  and  adore  Christ  as  their  supreme  Lord.
They  who  go  down  into  the  sea,  are  the  merchants
or  manners  who  make  voyages  upon  the  sea,  Psal.
107.  23.  Jonah  says  that  lie  went  down  to  the  very
bottoms  of  the  mountains ;  that  is,  to  the  bottom
oj  the  sea,  where  the  mountains  have  their  basis  and
foundation,  Jonah  2.  6.  See  on  11  ELL.

194


To  go  in  and  out,  signifies  all  the  actions  of  life.
Psal.  121.  8.  the  Lord  shall  preserve  thy  going
out  and  thy  coming  in  :  lie  shall  guard  and  as¬
sist  thee  in  all  thy  expeditions,  affairs ,  and  ac¬
tions,  either  at  home  or  abroad.  And  in  2  Sam.

3.  25.  Abner  came  to  know  thy  going  out  and  thy
coming  in  ;  to  search  out  thy  counsels  and  secret
designs.  To  go  in  and  out,  denotes  also  freedom
and  security,  John  10.  9.  He  shall  go  in  and  out,
and  find  pasture :  lie  shall  have  much  spiritual
freedom  and  security  of  mind.  Togo  into  a  wo¬
man’s  chamber,  to  enter  her  apartment,  was  allow¬
able  only  for  her  husband,  Judg.  15.  1.  To  go  in
unto  her,  that  is,  to  use  the  marriage  bed,  or  the
particular  rights  which  the  husband  claims  over
his  wife's  person,  Gen.  29.  23.  |  30.  3.

Gen.  3. 14.  on  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  eat  dust

16.8.  whence  earnest  thou?  whither  wilt  thou  go?
24.42.  if  now  thou  do  prosper  my  way  which  1  go

55.  abide  a  few  days,  after  that  Rebekah  shall  go

56.  send  me  away,  that  1  may  go  to  my  master
58.  wilt  thou##  with  this  man  ?  she  said,  I  will  go

26.  16.  and  Abimelech  said  to  Isaac, ## from  us
28.  20.  if  God  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go

30.  25.  send  me  awmy  tnat  1  may  go  to  my  place

32.  26.  let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh  ;  and  Jacob

said,  l  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless
37.  30.  the  child  is  not,  and  1,  whither  shall  l  go?

43.8.  send  lad  with  me,  and  we  will  arise,  and  go
Exod.  3. 19.  king  of  Egypt  will  not  let  you##,  4. 21.

20.  and  after  that  he  will  let  you  go,  11.  1.

21.  that  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  not##  empty

4.  23.  let  my  son  go  ;  if  thou  refuse  to  let  him  go,  1

will  slay  thy  first-born,  8.  2,  21. 1  9.  2.  1  10.  4.

26. so  he  let  him  go,  then  she  said,  a  bloody'  husb.

5.  1.  thus  saitli  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  let  my

people  go,  7.  16.  1  8.  1,  20.  |  9.  1,  13  1  10.  3.

2.  I  know  not  the  Lord,  nor  will  1  let  Israel  go

8.  8.  and  I  will  let  thy  people  go,  28.  |  9.28.

32.  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart,  neither  would  he
let  the  people  go,  7.  14.  |  9.  35.  |  10.  26,  27.

10.  7-  let  the  men  go  ||  8.  who  are  they  that  shall  go  ?

9.  we  will  go  with  our  young  and  with  our  old

13.  21.  light  to  go  by  day  and  night,  Nek.  9. 12. 19.

14.5.  that  we  have  let  Israel##  from  serving  us
t  25.  chariot-wheels,  and  made  them##  heavily

17.  5.  Lord  said  to  Moses,  go  on  before  the  people

23.  23.  mine  Angel  shall  go  before  thee,  32.  34.

32.  23.  make  us  gods  to  go  before  us,  Acts  7.  40.

33.  14.  he  said,  my  presence  shall  go  with  thee

34.9.  if  1  have  found  grace  in  sight,##  amongst  us
Num.  10.  32.  and  it  shall  be,  if  thou  go  with  us

20.  17.  we  will##  by  the  king’s  high  way,  19.

22.  13.  the  Lord  refuseth  to  give  me  leave  to  go

20.  if  men  call  thee,  rise  up,  and  go  with  them,  35.

24.  14.  and  now  behold,  I  go  unto  my  people

31.  23.  shall  make  it  go  through  the  fire  anu  water

32.  6.  shall  your  brethr.##  to  war,  and  ye  sit  here.'

17.  but  we  will##  ready  armed  before  Israel
Deut.  1.  33.  to  shew  you  by  what  way  ye  should##

4.  5.  inland  whither  ye  go,  26.  |  11.  8,  11.  |  30. 18.
40.  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee,  5. 16.  |  19. 13.

11.  28.  a  curse,  it  ye  #0  after  other  gods,  28.  14.

20.5.  let  him##  and  return  to  his  house,  6.  7,  8.

21.  14.  then  thou  shalt  let  her  go  whither  she  will

22.  7-  thou  shalt  in  anywise  let  the  dam  go
24. 2.  she  may  go  and  be  another  man’s  wife

31.  6.  thy  God,  he  it  is  that  doth  go  with  thee

7.  for  thou  must##  with  this  people  to  the  land

8.  the  Lord,  he  it  is  that  doth  go  before  thee

16.  the  land  whither  they  go  to  be  amongst  them

21.  1  know  their  imagination  they  go  about
Josh.  1. 16.  whither  thou  sendest  us  we  will  go

3.  4.  ye  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye  must  go
Judg.  1.  25.  but  they  let  go  the  man  and  his  family

4.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go  with  me,  then  1  will  go

6.  14.  the  Lord  said  to  him,  go  in  this  thy  might

7. 4.  of  whom  I  say,  this  shall  go,  the  same  shall##

11.  8.  we  turn  to  thee,  that  thou  mayest##  with  us
16. 17.  if  1  be  shaven,  then  my  strength  will  go

18.  5.  whether  our  way  we  go  shall  be  prosperous  ?

6.  before  the  Lord  is  your  way  wherein  ye  go

9.  be  not  slothful  to## to  possess  the  land

10.  when  ye  go  ||  19.  hold  thy  peace,  go  with  us

19.  25.  when  day  began  to  spring,  they7  let  her  #0
Ruth  1.  11.  turn  again,  why  will  ye  go  with  me  ?

18.  she  saw  she  was  sted lastly  minded  to  go

2.  2.  let  me  go  to  the  field  and  glean,  #0  my  daugh.

1  Sam.  5.  11.  let  it  go  again  to  its  own  place

6.  6.  did  they  not  let  people  go  ?  and  they  departed
8.  take  the  ark,  send  it  away,  that  it  may  go

9.  6.  let  us  go  thither,  he  can  shew  us  our  way
7-  if  we  go  what  shall  we  bring  the  man  ?

19.  go  up  before  me,  to-morrow  l  will  let  thee  go

10.  9.  when  he  turned  his  back  to  go  from  Samuel

12.  21.  for  then  should  ye  go  after  vain  things

16.  2.  how  can  I  go?  if  Saul  hear  it  lie  will  kill  me
17. 33.  thou  art  not  able  to##  against  this  Philistine

18.  2.  Saul  would  let  him##  no  more  home

19.  17-  he  said,  let  me  go,  why  should  1  kill  thee?

20.  5.  but  let  me  go,  that  I  may  hide  myself  in  field

23.  13.  David  and  his  men  went  whither  could  go
26.  19.  driven  me  out,  saying,##  serve  other  gods
28.  7.  a.  woman,  that  1  may  go  and  inquire  of  her

2  Sam.  12.  23.  1  shall  go  to  him,  he  shall  not  return

13.  1.3.  whither  shall  l  cause  my  shame  to  go?

15.  7.  Absalom  said,  let  me  go  and  pay  my  vow

20.  seeing  I  ##  whither  1  may,  return  thou

17. 11.  that  thou  go  to  battle  in  thy  person

19.  36.  thy  servant  will  go  a  little  way  over

20. 11.  that  is  for  David,  let  him  #e  after  Joab

1  Kings  2.  2.  I  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth,  be  strong

11.  21.  let  me  depart,  that  I  may  go  to  my  country

22.  nothing,  howbeit,  let  me##  in  any  wise

12.  27.  shall  kill  me,  and  ##to  Hehoboam

13.  17.  nor  turn  to  go  by  the  way  thou  earnest

20.  42.  because  thou  hast  let  go  a  man  appointed
22.  4.  wilt  thou  go  with  me  to  battle  .'  2  Chr.  18. 3.

2  Kings  3.  7-  wilt  thou  go  with  me  against  Moat)  ?

4.  23.  wherefore  wilt  thou  go  to  him  to-day  ?

6.  22.  set  bread  and  water,  that  they  may  go  and  eat
10.  24.  he  that  letteth  him  go  his  life  be’  tor  him


2  Kings  18.21.  it  will  #0  into  hand  pierce  it,  Isa.  36.6
2  Chr.  14.  11.  in  thy  name  we  ##ag.  this  multitude

25.  7-  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  with  thee

8.  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  it.  be  strong  for  battle
Job  6.  18.  they##  to  nothing  and  perish

10.  21.  before  1  go  w  hence  shall  not  return,  16.  22
20. 26.  it  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  left  in  tabern.
21  29.  have  ye  not  asked  them  that  go  by  the  \va>  ■

27.  6.  my  righteousness  L  will  not  let  go
Psal.  32.  8.  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  thou  shalt #1
.39.  13.  before  I  go  hence,  and  be  no  more
42.  9.  I  will  say  to  God,  why  go  l  mourning,  43.  2
49. 19.  he  shall  go  to  the  generation  of  his  fathers
84. 7.  they  go  from  strength  to  strength,  till  appeal,
85.  13.  righteousness  shall  go  before  him
89.  14.  mercy  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face
107-  7.  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  habitation

132. 7-  we  will  go  into  his  tabernacles,  will  worship  ’
139.  7-  whither  shall  1  go  from  thy  presence  r

Prov.  2.  19.  none  that  go  unto  her  return  again

3.  28.  go  and  come  again,  to-morrow  1  will  give
6.  28.  can  one  go  on  hot  coals,  and  not  be  burnt'
9.  15.  to  call  passengers  who  go  right  on  their  wav

14.  7.  go  from  the  presence  of  a  foolish  man  1

15.  12.  neither  will  the  scorner  go  to  the  wise
19-  7-  much  more  do  his  friends  go  far  from  him

22.6.  train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go

23.  30.  they  that  go  to  seek  mixt  wine

30.  29.  there  be  three,  things  which  go  well
Eccl.  1.  f  7.  rivers  come,  thither  they  return  to  go

3.  20.  all  go  unto  one  place,  all  are  of  the  dust

5.  15.  naked  shall  he  return  to  go  as  he  came,  16.

6.  6.  hath  seen  no  good,  do  not  all  go  to  one  place

7.  2.  it  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  i

9.  3.  and  after  that,  they  go  to  the  dead

10.  15.  because  he  knoweth  not  how  to  go  to  city
12.  5.  and  the  mourners  go  about  the  streets

Cant.  3.  4.  1  held  him,  I  would  not  let  him  go
Isa.  3.  16.  walking  and  mincing  as  they  go

6.  8.  whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  us '

9.  he  said,  ##  and  tell  this  people,  Acts  28.  26.

27.  4.  I  will  go  through  them,  i  would  burn  then

28.  13.  that  they  might  #0  and  fall  backward
45. 13.  he  shall' let  go  my  captives,  not  for  price
48.  17-  leadeth  thee  by  the  way  thou  shouldest  g\
58.  8.  thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee

62.  10.  go  thro’,  go  thro’  the  gates,  prepare  the- waj
Jer.  1.  7-  thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  1  send  thee
9.  2.  I  might  leave  my  people,  and  go  from  then

12.  t  2.  they  have  taken  root,  they  go  on

29.  12.  ye  shall  go  and  pray  to  me,  1  will  hearket

31.  22.  how  long  wilt  thou  go  about,  O  daughter

34.  3.  thou  shalt  go  to  Babylon,  Mic.  4.  loT

40.  4.  whither  it  seemeth  good  to  go,  there  go,  5.

5.  he  gave  him  reward,  and  let  him  go
15.  saying,  letme  go,  and  1  will  slay  Ishmael
42.  22.  ye  shall  die,  in  place  whither  ye  desire  to #1
46.  22.  the  voice  thereof  shall  go  like  a  serpent
48.  t  2.  O  Madmen,  the  sword  shall  go  after  thee
50.  4.  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God

33.  held  them  fast,  they  refused  to  let  them  go
Ezek.  1.  12.  whither  the  Spirit  was  to  go,  20.

8.  6.  that  1  should  go  far  from  my  sanctuary

9.  4.  go  through  the  midstof  the  city,  5.

14.  17.  or  if  I  say,  sword,  go  through  the  land

20.  29.  what  is  the  high  place  whereto  ye  go?

21.  16.  go  thee  one  way  or  other,  either  on  right
ILos.  5.  6.  they  shall  go  with  docks  to  seek  the  Lon

7.  11.  they  call  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  Assyria
12.  when  they  shall  go  will  spread  my  net  on  then

11.  3.  1  tauvht  Ephraim  also  to  #0,  they  knew  no
Mic.  5. 8.  who,  if  he  go  through,  both  treadeth  cowj
Zech.  6.  7-  the  bay  went  forth,  and  sought  to  go

8.  these  go  towards  north,  have  quieted  my  spiri

8.  21.  inhabitants  of  one  city  shall  go  to  another

23.  we  will  go  with  you,  for  we  have  heard

9.  14.  and  shall  go  with  whirlwinds  of  the  soutli
Mat.  2.  22.  Joseph  was  afraid  to  go  thither

5. 41.  compel  thee  to##  a  mile,##  twain,  Luke  7.  £

8.  9.  and  1  say  to  this  man,##,  and  he  goeth

32.  he  said  to  them,  go,  they  went  into  the  herd

9.  13.  but  go  ye  and  learn  what  that  meaneth

10.  6.  go  rather  to  the  lost  sheep  of  house  of  Israe

21.  30.  he  answered,  I  ##,  sir,  and  went  not

25.  9.  but##  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy

26.  36.  sit  ye  here,  while  1  go  and  pray  yonder

28.  10.  go,  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  to  Galile

19.  go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all  nations
Mark  6.  38.  go  and  see  ||  11.  6.  and  they  let  them  go
Luke  1.17.  shall  go  before  him  in  the  power  of  Liia,

9.  51.  he  stedfastly  set  his  face  to  go  to  Jerusa-en
60.  but  go  thou  and  preach  the  kingdom  of  God

10.  37.  then  said  Jesus, #0,  and  do  likewise

14. 18.  1  bought  ground  and  must  needs##  and  se

22.  33.  I  am  ready  to  go  w  ith  thee  to  prison
68.  you  will  not  answer  me,  nor  let  me  go

23.  22.  I  will  chastise  him,  and  let  him  00
John  6.  68.  Peter  said,  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go

7.  33.  and  then  1  ##  unto  him  that  sent  me

8.  14.  but  I  know  whence  1  came  and  whither  I#

21.  I  go  my  way,  whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come

11.  44.  Jesus  saitli,  loose  him,  and  let  him  go

13.  36.  whither  I  go  thou  canst  not  follow  now

14.  2.  T  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you

4.  whither  1  go  ye  know,  the  way  ye  know

12.  because  l  go  unto  my  Lather,  16.  10.

28.  because  Isaid,  I  go  to  the  Lather,  16.  17,28.

19.  12.  the  Jews  cried,  if  thou  let  this  man##

21.  3. 1  go  a  fishing,  they  say ,  we  also  go  with  the<

Acts  1.  25.  that  he  might  go  to  his  own  place

3.  13.  when  he  was  determined  to  let  lmn  go

4.  21.  when  had  threatened  them,  they  let  them  #
°o.  being  let  go  they  w  ent  to  their  com  pany

5.  40.  that  they  should  not  speak,  and  let  them  #

11.  22.  that  Barnabas  should  go  as  far  as  Antioct

16. 7-  they  essayed  to  go  into  Bithynia,  but  Spbn

35.  magistrates  sent,  saying,  let  those  men  go

17.9.  had  taken  security  of  Jason,  they  letthem#

20.  22.  1  go  bound  in  the  Spirit  to  Jerusalem

25.12.  hast  appealed  to  Cesar,  to  Cesar  shalt  thoay
28.  18.  had  examined  me,  would  have  let  me  go

Rom,  15.  25.  but  now  I  ##  to  Jerusalem  to  mimste.


G  O

ir. 'ti.  1.  Harr  you  go  to  law  before  the  unjust  ?

if  any  bid  you  and  ye  lie  disposed  to  go

4.  if  it  be  meet  that  l  go  also,  they  shall  go
or.  9-  5-  exhort  the  brethren  that  they  go  before
,/  o.  23.  as  l  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with  me
./  4*.  13.  we  wdll  go  into  such  a  city  and  buy
See  Fkf.k.

GO  aside.

m.  5.  12.  if  any  man’s  wife  go  aside  and  commit
,tt.  28. 14-  thou  sha.lt  not  go  aside  from  words
15.  5.  who  shall  go  aside  to  ask  how  thou  dost
•s  4.  i  j.  when  they  commanded  them  to  go  aside
(<()  astray.

ut.  22.  1.  thou  shalt  not  see  brother’s  ox  go  astray
, /’ 3.  they  go  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  born
5. 23.  in  greatness  of  his  folly  he  sha  11  go  astray
25.  decline  notto  her  ways, go  not  astray  into  path
'  10.  whoso  causeth  the  righteous  to  go  astray
.  50.  6.  their  shepherds  caused  them  to  go  astray
ek.  14.  11.  house  of  Israel  may  go  no  more  a  stray
GO  an  ay.

od.  8.  28.  only  you  shall  not  .00  very  far  away
ut.  15.  13.  thou  shalt  not  let  him  go  away  empty

6.  if  he  say,  1  will  not  go  away  from  thee
an..  15.  27-  as  Samuel  turned  about  to  go  away
.  19.  find  his  enemy,  will  he  let  him  go  away  ?
i"  4.  Cl.  doth  not  their  excellency  go  away  /

..  30.  by  breath  of  his  mouth  shall  he  go  away
•’  51.  Sit.  ye  that  escaped  the  sword,  go  away

is.  5.  14.  1,  even  1,  will  tear  and  .<70  away

7 1.  8.  31.  suffer  us  to  go  array  into  the  swine
i.  46.  these  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment
in  6.67.  then  said  Jesus  will  ye  also  go  away  /
,.28.  ye  have  heard  how  1  said,  l  go  away,  16.  7.
GO  h is  way.

dg.  19.  27.  her  lord  rose  up  and  went  to  go  ms  w.
GO  their  way.

hn  18.  8.  if  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go  their  way
GO  thy  way.

■n.  12.  19.  behold  thy  wife,  take  her,  go  thy  way
>am.  Co.  22.  go  thy  way,  the  Lord  hath  sent  thee
Kings  4.  29-  he  said,  take  my  staff,  and  go  thy  zr.
■cl.  9.  7.  go  thy  way,  eat  thy' bread  with  joy
nt.  1.8.  go  thy  way  forth  by  footsteps  of  the  flock
m.  12.  9.  go  thy  way,  for  the  words  are  closed  up
1-3 .gothy  way  till  the  end  be,  for  thou  shalt  rest
at.  5.24.  go  thy  way,  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother
.4.  gothy  nay,  shew  thyself  to  the  priest
).  14.  take  that  thine  is,  and  go  thy  way
ark  7.  29-  he  said,  for  this  saying,  go  thy  way
1.  21.  go  thy  way,  sell  whatsoever  thou  hast
52.  go  thy  w.  faith  made  thee  whole,  I/uke  17.  19.
hn  4.  50.  Jesus  saith,  gothy  way ,  thy  son  liveth
~ts  9.  15.  go  thy  way,  for  he  is  a  chosen  vessel

l.  25.  Felix  answered,  go  thy  way  for  this  time

GO  your  way.

m.  19.  2.  ye  shall  rise  up  and  go  on  your  ways
s/t.  2.  16.  afterward  go  your  way,  Judg.  19.  5.
nth  1.  12.  turn  again  my  daughters,  go  your  way
eh.  8. 10.  go  your  w.  eat  the  fat,  drink  the  sweet
at.  27.  65.  go  your  w.  make  it  as  sure  as  you  can
ark  11.  2.  go  your  way  into  village  over  against
6.  7-  go  your  way,  tell  his  disciples  that  he  goeth
iUe7.CC.  go  your  w.  tell  John  what  things  ye  heard
0. 3.  go  your  ways,  I  send  you  as  lambs  am.  wolves

10.  they  receive  you  not,  go  your  ways  to  streets
ev.  16.  *1.  go  your  ways,  pour  out  the  vials  of  wrath

GO  hack.

rod.  14.  21.  the  Lord  caused  the  sea  to  go  hack
<sh.  23. 12.  else  if  ye  do  in  any  wise  go  back
tdg.  11.  35.  I  opened  my  mouth,  1  cannot  go  hack
Kings  19.  20.  go  h.  again,  what  have  1  done  to  thee  ?
Kings  20.  9.  shall  the  shadow  go h.  ten  degrees  ?
sal.  80.  18.  so  will  not  we  go  hack  from  thee
t.  40.  5.  go  hack  to  Gedaliah,  son  of  Ahikam
zek.  24.  14.  1  will  not  go  back,  nor  will  1  spare
GO  down.

en.  11.  7.  let  us  .<70  d.  and  confound  their  language

11.  21.  1  will  go  down  now,  and  see  whether
6.  2.  the  Lord  said,  go  not  down  into  Egypt

.3.  5.  if  thou  wilt  not  send  him,  we  will  not  go  d.
4.  26.  we  cannot  go  down,  then  will  we  go  down
6.  .3.  fear  not,  Jacob,  to  170  down  into  Eg3rpt
rod.  19.  21.  Lord  said,  go  down,  charge  the  people
um.  16.30.  and  they  go  down  quick  into  the  pit
'cut.  24.  15.  nor  shall  the  sun  go  down  on  his  hire
ish.  10.  13.  sun  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a  day
•dg,  7-  10.  if  thou  fear  to  go  dozen,  go  with  Phurah
Sam.  10.  8.  thou  shalt^o  down  !  efore  me  to  Gilgal
4.  36.  let  us  go  dozen  after  Philistines  by  night
’3.  4. 170  dozento  Keilah,  I  will  deliver  Philistines
6.  6.  who  will  go  dozen  with  me  to  Saul
'9.4.  let  him  not  go  down  with  us  to  battle
Sam.  11.8.  David  said,  go  dozen  to  thy  house
10.  why  didst  thou  not  go  dozen  to  thine  house  ?

5. 20.  should  1  this  day  make  thee  go  u  p  and  dozen
Kings  21. 18.  go  dozen  to  meet  Ahab  kingof  Israel
Kings  1.  15.  go  dozen  with  him,  be  not  afraid
’0.  10.  for  the  shadow  to  go  dozen  ten  degrees
Chron.  20. 16.  to-morrow  go  dozen  against  him
~>b  21.  13.  in  a  moment  go  dozen  to  the  grave
'sal.  22.  29.  all  that  go  dozen  to  the  dust  shall  bow
’8.  1.  1  become  like  them  that  go  dozen  to  the  pit
55.  15.  and  let  them  go  dozen  quick  into  hell
107.  23.  they  that  go  dozen  to  the  sea  in  ships
115.  17.  neither  any  that  go  down  into  silence
1 43.  7.  lest  1  be  like  them  that  go  dozen  to  the  pit
'rov.  5.  5.  her  feet  go  down  to  death,  her  steps  take
sa.  14.  19.  thou  art  cast  out,  as  those  that  go  down
10. 2.  woe  to  them  that  walk  to  go  d.  to  Egypt,  31. 1.

58. 18.  they  that  go  dozen  into  pit  cannot  hope
X).  20.  sun  shall' not  go  dozen  nor  moon  withdraw
er.  50.  27.  let  them  go  down  to  the  slaughter
:ek.  24. 1 16.  neither  shall  thy  tears  <711  dozen
-6.  11.  and  thy  strong  garrisons  shall  go  dozen
°Q.  when  1  shall  set  thee  with  them  that  go  down
to  the  pit,  31.  14.  |  .32.  18,  24,  25,  29,  30.

17.  8.  these  waters  go  dozen  into  the  desert
imm  6.  2.  then  go  dozen  to  Gath  of  the  Philistines

8.  9.  I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  dozen  at  noon
die.: 3.  6.  the  sun  shall  go  dozen  over  the  prophets
dark  13.  15.  let  him  that  is  on  house-top  notf/c  dozen


G  O

Acts  25.  5.  which  are  able  to  go  down  with  me
Eph.  4.  26.  let  not  the  sun  go  down  on  your  wrath
GO  forth.

Gen.  8. 16.  go  forth  of  the  ark,  thou  and  thy  wife
42. 15.  not  go  forth  hence,  except  brother  come
Let.  14  3.  the  priest  shall  go  forth  of  the  camp
Nutt.  1.  3.  all  able  to  go  forth  to  war,  2  Chr.  25.  5.
Dent.  2.3.  12.  thou  shalt  have  a  place  to  go  forth

1  Sam.  2.3.  13.  and  be  forbare  to  go  forth

2  Sam.  11.  1.  at  time  when  kings  go  forth  to  battle

18.  2.  1  will  surely  go  forth  witii  you  myself

19.7.  il  thou  go  not  forth,  there  will  not  tarry

1  Kings  2.  36.  and  go  not  forth  thence  any  whither

22.  22.  he  said,  I  will  go  forth  :  go  forth  and  do  so

2  Kings  9.  15.  if  it  he  your  minds,  let  none  go  forth

19.  31.  out  of  Jerusalem  shall  go  forth  a  remnant
they  that  escape  out  of  mount  /ion,  Isa.  .37.  32.

Job  24.  5.  as  wild  asses  go  they  forth  to  their  work
Psal.  7R.  52.  lie  made  his  own  people  to  go  forth

108. 11.  wilt  not  thou  go  forth  with  our  hosts  ?
Prov.  25.  8.  go  not  forth  hastily  to  strive,  lest  thou

30.  27.  have  no  king,  yet  go  they  forth  by  bands
Cant.  3.  11.  go  forth,  l)  ye  daughters  ot  Zion

7. 11.  come,  let  us  go  forth  into  the  villages

Isa.  2.  3.  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law.  Mic.4.2.

42. 13.  the  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty  man

48.  20.  go  forth  of  Babylon,  flee  ye,  Jer.  50.  8.

49.  9.  that  thou  mayest  say  to  prisoners,  go  forth

17.  they  that  made  thee  waste  shall  go  forth

62. 1.  till  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth
Jer.  6.  25.  go  not  forth  into  the  field,  nor  walk

11.  til.  they  shall  not  he  able  to  go  forth

14. 18.  it  I  go  forth  into  the  field,  then  the  slain

15. 1.  let  them  go  forth  ||  2.  whither  shall  w  egof.?
25.  .32.  evil  shall  go  forth  from  nation  to  nation
31.4.  O  Israel,  thou  shalt  go  forth  in  the  dances

39.  the  measuring-line  shall  yet  go  forth

38. 17.  it  thou  wilt  go  forth  to  the  king  ot  Babylon

18.  but  if  thou  wilt  hot  <70  forth  to  the  princes,  21.

43. 12,  he  shall  go  forth  from  thence  in  peace
Ezek.  12.  4.  go  forth  ns  they  that  go  forth  into  capt.

12.  prince  go  forth  ||  21. 4.  my  sword  shall  go  forth
30.  9.  in  that  day  messengers  shall  go  forth
46.  8.  and  he  shall  go  forth  by  the  way  thereof

9.  but  he  shall  go  forth  over  against  it
Dan.  11.  44.  he  shall  go  forth  with  great  fury
Joel  2.  16.  let  the  bridegr.  go  forth  of  his  chamber
Hah.  1.4.  and  judgment  doth  never  go  forth
Zech.  6.  5.  these  are  the  lour  spirits  which  go  forth

6.  black  horses  go  forth  into  the  north  country

14.  .3.  then  shall  the  Lord  go  forth  and  tight  ^

Mai.  4.2.  ye  shall  go  forth  and  grow  up  as  caives
Mat.  24.  26.  behold,  lie  is  in  the  desert,  go  not  forth
Acts  16.  3.  him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth
Heh.  13. 1.3.  let  us  go  forth  to  him  without  the  camp
llev.  16. 14.  the  spirits  of  devils  which  go  forth
GO  forward.

Exod.  14. 15.  speak  to  Israel  that  they  go  forward
Num.  2.  24.  they  shall  go  forward  in  the  third  rank
2  Kings  20.  9.  shall  shadow  go  forward  ten  degrees  i
Job  23.  8.  behold,  1  go  forward,  but  he  is  not  there
GO  in,  or  into,  or  not  GO  in.

Gen.  11.31.  from  Ur,  to  go  into  land  ofCanaan,  12. 5.
Exod.  30.  20.  when  go  into  tabernacle,  shall  wash
.32.  27.  go  in  and  out  from  gate  to  gate  thro’  camp
Lev.  10. 9.  do  not  drink  w  ine,  wlrenye^miOitabern.
14.  36.  empty  the  house,  before  the  priest  go  in
21.  11.  neither  shall  he  go  in  to  any  dead  body

23.  only  he  shall  not  go  in  to  the  vail  or  near  altar
Num.  4.  19.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  go  in  and  ap.

20.  but  they  shall  not  go  in  to  see  when  holy  things
8.  15.  and  after  that  shall  the  Levites  go  in

27. 17.  which  may  go  out,  and  go  in  before  them
32.  9.  that  they  should  not  go  into  the  land
Dent..  1.  37.  thou  also  shalt  not  go  in  thither,  4.  21.

3e.  but  Joshua  son  of  Nun  lie  shall  go  m  thither

4. 1.  that  ye  may  live,  and  go  in  and  possess,  8. 1.

6. 18.  that  thou  mayest  go  in  and  possess.  10. 11.

11. 8.  that  ye  may  be  strong,  and  <70  in  and  possess

24. 10.  not  go  into  his  house  to  fetch  his  pledge
Judg.  19.  15.  they  turned  aside  to  go  in  and  lodge
Ruth  3.4.  thou  shalt  go  in,  and  uncover  his  feet

2  Sam.  11. 11.  shall  I  then  go  into  mine  house  to  eat  ?

1  Kings  13.  8.  1  will  not  go  in,  nor  eat  with  thee
16.  1  may  not  return,  nor  go  in  with  thee

17. 12.  may  go  in,  and  dress  it  for  me  and  my  son

2  Kings  9.2.  look  out  Jehu,  and  go  in,  make  him  arise

10.  25.  00  in  and  slav  them,  let  none  come  forth
2  Chron.  18.  24.  thou  s'halt  go  into  an  inner  chamber

23.  6.  they  that  minister  of  the  Levites  shall  go  in
Neh.  6. 11.  who  is  there  as  I  am  would  go  into  the
temple  to  save  his  life  ?  I  will  not  go  in
Esth.  2. 15.  when  Esther’s  turn  was  come  to  go  in
4.  8.  and  to  charge  her  that  she  sliquld  00  in
16.  and  so  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king,  if  1  perish

5. 14.  then  go  thou  in  merrily  unto  the  king
Job  .34. 1  2.3.  he  should  go  into  judgment  with  God
Psal.  26.  4.  nor  will  1  go  in  with  dissemblers

118.  19.  open  the  gates,  1  will  go  in  to  them

119.  35.  make  me  <70  in  path  of  thy  commandment
132. 7.  we  will  go  into  his  tabernacle  and  worship

Prov.  27. 10.  nor  go  mto  thy  brother’s  house
Isa.  2. 19.  they  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  rocks
Jer.  4.  5.  and  let  us  go  into  the  detenced  cities
.36.  5.  1  cannot  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord

42. 14.  no,  hut  we  Will  go  into  the  land  ot  Egypt

19.  the  Lord  hath  said,  go  ye  not  into  Egypt

Ezek. I.  +  17.  all  knees  shall  go  into  water,  21.  f  7-

46. 10.  the  prince  when  they  go  in  shall  go  in
Kah.  3.  14.  go  into  clay,  and  tread  the  mortar
Zech.  6. 10.  go  into  house  of  Josiah  sonot  Zephamah
Mat.  2.  20.  take  the  young  child,  and  go  into  lsr.

7.  13.  and  many  there  be  that  go  in  thereat

20.  4.  go  into  the  vineyard,  and  they  went,  7.
21.2.  go  into  village  over-against  you,  Luke  19.  30.

31.  harlots  go  into  kingdom  ot  God  betore  you

22.9.  go  into  the  high-ways,  as  many  as  ye  find,  bid
23.  13.  ye  neither  go  in,  nor  suffer  others  to  go  in

26. 18.  go  into  the  city,  to  such  a  man,  Mark  14. 13.
Mark  6.  36.  that  they  may  go  into  the  country

8.  26.  nor  go  into  the  town,  nor  tell  it  to  any
16.  15.  go 'into  all  the  world,  preach  the  gospel


G  O

Luke  8.  51.  lie  suffered  no  man  to  go  in,  save  Peter

15.  28.  and  he  was  angry,  and  would  not  go  in
John  10.  9.  he  shall  go  m  and  out,  and  find  pasture
Acts  1.11.  shall  so  come,  as  ye  see  him  go  into  heaven
ltev.  17.8.  the  beast  was,  is  not,  shall  00  into  perdition
See  Lahti  v  ity.

GO  in.

Gew.16.2.  Sarai  said,  1  pray  thee,  go  in  unto  my  maid

19.  34.  make  him  drink  w  ine,  and  go  thou  in
30.  3.  behold  my  maid  Bilhah,0<»  in  unto  her

.38.  8.  go  in  unto  thy  brother’s  wife,  and  marry  her
Dent.  21.  13.  after  that  thou  shalt  go  in  unto  her
22.  1.3.  if  take  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto  her,  hate  her
25.  5.  her  husband’s  brother  shall  go  in  unto  her
Josh.  23.  12.  make  marriages,  and  go  in  unto  them
Judg.  15. 1 .  1  will  go  in  to-ruy  wife  into  the  chamber
2  Sam.  16.  21.  go  in  unto  thy  father’s  concubines
1  Kings  11.  2.  ye  shal  I  not  go  in  to  them,  nor  they
Ezek.  23.  44.  went  to  her  as  they  go  in  to  a  woman
Amos  2.  7-  a  man  and  his  father  go  in  to  same  maid
GO  in  peace.

Gen.  15.  15.  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers  in  peace
Exod.  4. 18.  Jethro  said  to  Moses,  go  in  peace
18.  23.  this  people  shall  go  to  their  place  in  peace
Judg.  18.  6.  the  priest  said  to  Danites,  go  in  peace

1  Sam.  1.  17.  Eli  said  to  Hannah,  go  in  peace

20.  42.  Jonathan  said  to  David, go  in  peace
25.  35.  David  said  to  Abigail,  go  up  in  peace
29.  7.  Achishsaid  to  David,  go  in  peace

2  Sam.  15.  9.  the  king  said  to  Absalom,  go  in  peace

1  Kings  2.  6.  let  not  his  hoary  head  go  down  inpeace

2  Kings  5.  19.  Elisha  said  to  Naaman,  go  in  peace
Isa.  57.  t  2.  he  shall  go  in  peace,  they  shall  rest
Mark  5.  .34.  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  plague
Luke  7. 50.  faith  hath  saved  thee,  go  in  peace,  8.  48.
Acts  15.  33.  they  were  let  go  in  peace  from  brethren

Let  us  GO.

Gen.  37.  17.  I  heard  them  say,  let  us  go  to  Dothan
Exod.  3. 18.  now  let  us  go  three  days’ journey,  5.  3.

5.  8.  therefore  they  say,  let  us  go  sacrifice,  17.

1.3.  15.  when  Pharaoh  would  hardly  let  us  go
l)eut.  13.2.  let  us  go  after  other  gods,  6.  13.

1  Sam.  9.  9.  thus  he  spake,  let  its  go  to  the  seer,  10.

11.  14.  let  us  go  to  Gilgal,  and  renew  the  kingdom
14.  1.  let  us  go  over  to  the  Philistines’  garrison,  6.

2  Kings  6. 2.  let  us  goto  Jordan,  take  thence  abeam
Psal.  122.  1.  let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  I.ord
Isa.  2.  3.  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord
Jer.  4.  5.  let  us  go  into  the  defenced  cities

6.  5.  let  us  go  by  night,  and  destroy  her  palaces

35. 11.  let  us  go  to  Jerusalem  for  fear  ot  Chaldeans
46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  again  to  our  own  people
51.  9.  let  us  go,  every  one  to  his  own  country

Zech.  8.  21.  let  us  go  to  pray  before  the  Lord
Mark  1.  38.  he  said,  let  us  go  into  the  next  towns
14.  42.  rise  up,  Ictus  go,  he  that  betrayeth  is  athand
Luke  2.  15.  let  us  go  to  Bethlehem,  see  this  thing
John  11.  7.  then  saith  he,  let  us  go  to  Judea  again
15.  let  us  go  to  him  ||  16.  let  us  go  that  we  may  die

14.  31.  even  so  I  do  ;  arise,  let  us  go  hence
Acts  15.  36.  let  us  go  again,  and  visit  our  brethren
Ileh  6. 1.  let  us  go  on  to  perfection,  not  layingagain

I  will  GO.

Gen.  13. 9.  I  will  go  to  the  right,  7  will  go  to  the  left

24.  58.  wilt  thou  go  with  this  man  ?  I  will  go
33.  12.  let  us  go,  I  will  go  before  thee,  Isa.  45.  2.
45.  28.  my  son  is  alive,  1  will  go  ace  him  before  1  die
Num.  20.  19.  I  will  only  go  through  on  my  feet

2.3.  3.  stand  by  thy  burnt-offering,  and  I  mil  go
Dent.  2.  27.  1  will  go  along  by  the  high-way
Judg.  1.3.  I  will  go  likewise  with  thee  into  thy  lot

4.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go  with  me,  then  will  1  go

9.  and  she  said,  I  zcill  surely  go  with  thee

16.  20.  1  zcill  go  out  as  at  other  times  betore
Ruth  1. 16.  11  util  said,  whither  thou  goest,  I  zcill  go
2  Kings  6.  3.  go  with  servant,  he  answered,  I  zcill  go
2  Chron  *  18.  29.  he  said,  I  will  go  to  the  battle
Psal.  43.  4.  then  will  1  go  to  the  altar  ot  God
66.  1.3.  I  will  go  into  thy  house  with  burnt-offering
71.  16.  I  will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God
1 18. 19.  open  the  gates  of  righteousness,  I  zcill  go  in
Jer.  2.  25.  1  loved  strangers,  after  them  1  zcill  go
Ezek.  38.  11.  I  will  go  to  them  that  are  at  rest
II  ns.  2.  5.  for  she  said,  I  zcill  go  after  my  lovers

7.  I  zcill  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband

5.  15.  I  zci/l  go  to  mv  place,  till  they  seek  my  face
Mic.  1. 8.  1  will  wail,  I  will  go  stript  and  naked
Zech.  8.  21.  go  to  seek  the  Lord  ;  7  zcill  go  also
Mat.  26.32.  7  zvil! go  before  into  Galilee,  Mark  14.28.
Lutte  15. 18.  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father
Acts  18. 6.  henceforth  I  zcill  go  to  the  Gentiles

GO  near.

Dent.  5.  27.  go  near,  and  hear  all  the  Lord  says
2  8am.  1.  15.  David  said ,  go  near,  and  fall  on  him
Job  31.  37.  as  a  prince  would  1  go  near  unto  him
Acts  8.  29.  go  near,  join  thyself  to  this  chariot
GO  not,  or  not  GO.

Exod.  33. 15.  if  thy  presence  go  not  with  me
Num.  10.  30.  llohah  said,  1  will  not  go,  but  depart
20.  20.  and  he  said,  thou  shalt  not  go  through
22.  12.  God  said  to  Balaam,  shalt  not  go  with  them
18.  1  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  I.ord,  24.  13.
Dent.  3.  27.  thou  shalt  not  go  over  this  Jordan

6. 14.  ye  shall  n.  go  after  other  gods,  1  Kings  II.  1C

15.  16.  if  he  say,  1  will  not  go  away  from  thee
24.  19.  thou  shalt  not  go  again  to  fetch  it

32.  52.  hut  thou  shalt  not  go  thither  to  the  land
Josh.  8.  4.  go  not  far  from  the  city,  but  be  ready
Judg.  4.  8.  if  thou  wilt  not  go  with  me,  1  will  not  go

7.  4.  1  say,  this  shall  not  go,  the  same  shall  not  go
20.  8.  we  will  not  any  of  us  .170  to  his  tent

Ruth  3.  17.  go  not  empty  to  thy  mother- in  law

1  8am.  17.  39.  David  said,  1  cannot  go  with  these
29.8.  that  1  may  not  go  tight  ag.  enemiesof  the  king

2  Sam.  13. 25.  let  710/  all  go,  howbeit  he  would  not  go
2  Kings  2.  18.  he  sain,  did  l  not  say  to  you,  go  not  ?

1  Chron.  21.  30.  but  David  could  not  go  before ’t

2  Chron.  25. 13.  soldiers  that  should  not  go  to  battle
Prov.  4. 13.  take  hold  of  instruction,  let  her  not  go

14.  and  .00  not  into  the  way  of  evil  men
22.  24.  with  a  furious  man  thou  shaft  not  go
Isa.  52.  12.  for  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste


GO

Jer.  10. 5.  they  must  be  borne,  because  they  cannot  no
16.  8.  thou  shalt  ?/<>/  go  into  the  house  of  feasting
25. 6.  go  not  after  other  gods  to  serve  them,  35.  15.

27.  18.  that  the  vessels  left  go  not  to  Babylon

43.  2.  go  not  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there,  42.  19.
49. 12.  thou  shalt  not  go  unpunished,  but  drink  of  it
J.am.  4.  18.  hunt  steps,  that  we  cannot  go  in  our  str.
Ezek.  42.  14.  when  the  priests  enter,  shall  not  go  out
Mat.  10.  5.  go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles
Luke  10.  7-  go  not  from  house  to  house

I".  23.  see  here  or  there,  go  ?iot  after  them,  21.  8.
(ft)  over.

J)?vt.  3. 25.  I  pray  thee  let  me  go  over  and  see  land

28.  Joshua  shall  go  over  before  the  people,  31.  3.
4.  14.  land  whither  ye  go  over ,  26.  1  31.  13. 1  32.  47.

22.  1  must  not  go  over  Jordan,  yc  shall  go  over
24.  20.  thou  shalt  not  go  over  the  boughs  again

30.  13.  who  shall  go  over  sea  for  us  and  bring  it?

31.  3.  the  Lord  thy  God  will  go  over  before  thee
34.  4.  but  thou  shalt  not  go  over  thither

Josh.  1.  2.  therefore  arise,  go  over  this  Jordan
Judg.  12.  5.  the  Ephraimites  said,  let  me  go  over

1  Sam.  14. 1.  come,  let  us  go  over  to  the  Philistines,  6.
30.  10.  so  faint,  they  coidd  not  go  over  the  brook

2  Sam.  16.  9.  let  me  go  over  and  take  off  his  head

19.  37.  thy  servant  Chimham,  let  him  go  over
Jsa.  8.  7-  be  shall  come  and  go  over  all  his  banks

11.  15.  he  shall  make  men  go  over  dry-shod
51.  23.  which  said,  bow  down,  that  we  may  go  over

54.  9.  the  waters  of  Noah  should  no  more  go  over
Jer.  41. 10.  lslnnael  depart,  to  go  over  to  Ammonites
Luke  8.  22.  let  us  go  over  to  the  other  side

GO  out.

Gen.  9.  10.  from  all  that  go  out  of  the  ark

24.  11.  the  time  that  women  go  out  to  draw  water

45.  1.  he  cried,  cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me
Erod.  6.  11.  that  he  let  children  of  Israel  go  out

8.  29.  behold,  l  go  out  from  thee,  I  will  entreat

11.  8.  after  that  i  will  go  out.  and  he  went  out

10.  he  would  not  let  tiie  children  of  Israel  go  out

12.  22.  none  of  you  shall  g.  0.  at  the  door  of  house
16.  4.  people  shall  g.  0.  and  gather  a  rate  every  day

29.  let  no  man  go  out  of  his  place  on  seventh  day
21.  2.  in  the  seventh  year  he  shall  go  out  free

3.  if  he  came  in  by  himself,  shall  go  out  by  himself ;

if  married,  his  wife  shall  go  out  with  him

4.  her  master’s,  and  he  shall  go  out  by  himself

5.  if  the  servant  say,  I  will  not  go  out  free

7.  a  maid-servant  not  go  out  as  men-servants  do

11.  then  shall  she  go  out  free  without  money
Lev.  6.  13.  the  tire  on  the  altar  shall  never  go  out
8.  33.  shall  not  go  out  of  tabernacle  in  seven  days
10.  7.  ye  shall  not  go  out  at  the  door,  lest  ye  die

14.  38.  then  the  priest  shall  go  out  of  the  house

15.  16.  if  any  man’s  seed  of  copulation  go  out
36.  18.  he  shall  go  out  to  the  altar  before  the  Lord
21.  12.  nor  shall  he  go  out  of  the  sanctuary

25.  28.  and  in  the  jubilee  it  shall  go  out,  31,  .33.

30.  it  shall  not  go  out  injubil.  II  51.  he  shall  go  out
Deut.  24.  5.  taken  a  wife,  he  shall  not  go  out  to  war

28.  25.  thou  shalt  go  out  one  way,  flee  seven  ways
Josh.  2. 19.  who  shall  go  out,  his  blood  be  on  his
Judg.  9.  38.  go  out,  I  pray  now,  add  fight  with  them

36.  20.  he  said,  l  will  go  out  as  at  other  times

20.  28.  shall  I  yet  again  g.  o.  to  battle  ag.  Benjamin
liuth  2.  22.  it  is  good  thou  go  out  with  liis  maidens

1  Sam.  19.  3.  1  will  go  out  and  stand  beside  my  father

20.  11.  come,  let  us  go  out  into  the  field

28.  1.  Achish  said,  thou  shalt  go  out  with  me

2  Sam.  5.  24.  then  the  Lord  shall  go  out  before  thee

21.  17.  thou  shalt  go  no  more  out  with  us  to  battle
1  Kings  15.  17.  that  he  might  not  suffer  any  to  go

out,  or  come  in  to  Asa,  2  Chron.  16.  1.
20.  31.  put  ropes  on  heads,  and  go  out  to  the  king

1  Chron.  20.  1.  at  the  time  kings  go  out  to  battle

2  Chron.  18.  21.  go  out  and  be  a  lying  spirit,////  out
20.  17.  fear  not,  to-morrow  go  out  against  them
26. 18.  go  out  of  sanctuary,  for  thou  hast  trespassed

20.  yea,  himself  hasted  also  to  go  out
Job  15.  13.  lettest  such  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth
Psal.  60.  10.  which  didst  not  go  nut  with  our  armies
109.  t  7-  when  he  is  judged,  let  him  go  out  guilty
Prov.  22.  30.  cast  out  the  scorner,  contention  go  out
Keel.  8.  3.  be  not  hasty  to  go  out  of  his  sight
Isa.  52.  11.  depart  ye,  go  ye  out  from  thence

12.  ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste  or  by  flight

55.  12.  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and  be  led' forth
Jer.  21.  12.  lest  my  fury  go  out  like  fire  and  burn

51.  45.  my  people,  go  ye  out  of  the  midst  of  her
Kzek.  15.  7.  they  shall  go  out  from  one  fire

44.  3.  the  prince  shall  go  out  the  same  way

46.  9.  entereth  by  north,  shal  I  go  out  by  south-gate
Amos  4.  .3.  and  ye  shall  go  out  at  the  breaches
Zech.  14.  8.  that  living  waters  go  out  from  Jerusalem
Mat.  25. 6.  bridegroom  cometh,  1 go  ye  out  to  meet  him
I.uke  9.  5.  when  ye  go  out  of  the  city  shake  off  dust

14.  21.  go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and  lanes

23.  go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges

1  Cor.  5. 10.  then  must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  world
Jleb,  11.  8.  Abraham,  when  he  was  called  to  go  out
Rev.  3. 12.  he  that  overcometh,  shall  go  no  more  out
20.  8.  and  shall  go  out  to  deceive  the  nations
GO  to.

Gen.  11 . 3.  go  to,  let  us  make  brick,  and  burn  them

4.  go  to,  let  us  build  ||  7-  go  to,  let  us  confound
Keel.  2. 1.  go  to  now,  T  will  prove  thee  with  mirth
Isa,  5.  5.  go  to,  I  will  tell  you  what  l  will  do
Jam.  4.  13.  go  to  now,  ye  that  say,  to-day,  or  to-mor.

5.  1.  go  to  now,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl

GO  up.

Gen.  35.  1.  arise,  go  up  to  Bethel,  dwell  there,  3.
44.  33.  aivj,  let  the  lad  go  up  with  his  brethren
34.  how  snail  1  go  up  to  my  father?  45.  9.

50.  6.  Pharaoh  said,  go  up  and  bury  thy  father
Erod.  8.  3.  frogs  shall  go  tip  and  come  into  thy  house

19.  12.  take  heed  ye  go  not  up  into  the  mount

20.  26.  nor  shalt  thou  go  up  by  steps  to  my  altar
24.  2.  neither  shall  the  people  go  up  with  him

32.  30.  ye  have  sinned  a  great  sin,  I  will  go  up

33.  1.  depart  and  ye  up,  thou  and  the  people
3.  for  1  will  not  go  up  in  the  midst  ot  thee

34.  21.  not  desire  thy  land,  when  thou  shalt  go  tip

1 96


•  GOE

Lev.  19. 16.  shalt  not  go  up  and  down  as  a  tale-bearer
Num.  13.  .‘10.  let  11s  go  up  at  once  and  possess  it

31.  we  be  not  able  to  go  up  against  mis  people

14.  40.  lo,  we  be  here,  and  will  go  up,  Deut,  1.41.
42.  go  not  up  ||  44.  but  they  presumed  to  go  up
Dent.  25.  ~.  let  his  brother's  wife  go  up  to  the  gate
.30.  12.  who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  heaven,  and  bring
Josh.  7.  3.  let  not  all  go  up,  let  3tXX)  men  go  up

22.  3.3.  did  not  intend  to  go  up  ag.  them  in  b  ttlle
Judg.  1.1.  who  shall  go  up  for  us  to  fight  them
2.  the  Lord  said,  Judah  shall  go  up,  20.  18.

2.  1 .  an  angel  said,  1  made  you  go  up  out  of  Egypt

9.  1  9-  should  1  go  up  and  down  for  other  trees  r

11.  37.  that  l  may  go  up  and  down  on  the  mountains

18.  9.  arise,  that  we  may  go  up  against  them

20.  9.  we  will  go  up  by  lot  against  Gibeah

18.  which  of  11s  shall  go  up  first  to  battle  ?

2.3.  shall  I  go  up  again  ?  ||  28.  go  up  agaiust  him

1  Sam.  f.  22.  1  will  not  goup  till  the  child  be  weaned

6.  9.  if  it  go  up  by  the  way  of  his  own  coast
20.  and  to  whom  shall  he  go  up  from  us  ?

9.  13.  ye  shall  find  him  before  he  go  up  to  eat

14.  Samuel  came  to  go  up  to  the  high  place,  19.

14.  9-  if  they  say,  tarry,  we  will  not  go  up

10.  if  they  say,  come  up  unto  us,  we  will  go  up

2  Sam.  2.  1.  David  said,  shall  I  go  up  to  any  of  the

cities  of  .1  udah  ?  the  Lord  said,  go  up  to  Hebron

5.  19.  shall  I  go  up  against  the  Philistines  ?

15.  20.  should  1  make  thee  go  up  and  down  with  us  ?

19.  34.  how  long  have  1  to  live,  that  1  should  go  up

24.  18.  go  up,  rear  an  altar  in  floor,  1  Chr.  21.  18.

1  Kings  12.  24.  ye  shall  not  go  up,  2  Chron.  11.4.

27.  if  this  people  go  up  to  do  sacrifice  at  Jerusal.

28.  it  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem

18.  43.  go  tip,  look  towards  the  sea,  and  he  went
22.  6.  go  up,  for  the  Lord  shall  deliver  it  into  the

hand  of  the  king,  12.  2  Chron.  18.  11,  14,

20.  may  go  up  and  fall  at  Kamoth,  2  Chr.  if!.  19.

2  Kings  1.  3.  go  tip,  meet  the  messengers  of  the  king
2.  23.  go  up  thou  bald-head,  go  up  thou  bald-head
.3.  7.  wilt  thou  go  up  with  me  against  Moab  ?

8.  and  he  said,  which  way  shall  we  go  tip

12.  17.  llazael  set  Ids  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem
18. 25.  Lord  said,  goup  against  the  land,  Isa.  36.10.

20.  5.  on  third  day  thou  shalt  go  up  to  the  house
8.  what  the  sign  that  1  shall  go  up?  Isa.  38.22.

22.  4.  go  up  to  fl  ilkia.li  high-priest  to  sum  silver

1  Chr.  14. 10.  shall  L  go  up  ||  14.  go  not  up  after  them

2  Chron.  18.  5.  shal  1  we  go  up  to  Kamoth-gilead  ?
36.  23.  God  be  with  him,  let  him  go  up,  Ezra  1.3.

Ezra  7-  9.  he  began  to  go  up  from  Babylon

13.  all  which  are  minded  to  go  tip  go  with  me
Neh.  4.  3.  if  a  fox  go  up  he  shall  even  break  down
Psal.  104.  8.  they  go  up  by  the  mountains
132.  3.  surely  1  will  not  go  up  into  my  bed
Cunt.  6.  6.  as  a  flock  of  sheep  that  goup  from  washing
7-  8.  I  said,  l  will  go  tip  to  the  palm-tree
Jsa.  2.  3.  let  us  go  up  to  mountain  of  Lord,  Mic.  4. 2.

7.  6.  let  us  go  up  against  Judah  and  vex  it

15.  5.  with  weeping  shall  they  go  it  tip

21.2.  go  up,  O  Elam,  ||  34. 10.  the  siiioke  shall  go  up
35.  9.  nor  any  ravenous  beast  shall  go  tip  there
36. 10.  go  up  against  this  land,  and  destroy  it
Jer.  5-  10.  go  ye  up  upon  her  walls  and  destroy

6.  4.  arise,  and  let  us  go  vp  at  noon,  woe  unto  us

21.  2.  that  IN  ebuchadnezzar  may  goup  from  us
£2.  20.  go  up  to  Lebanon,  and  cry,  lift  up  thy  voice

31.  6.  let  us  go  up  to  /.ion,  to  the  Lord  our  God
46.  8.  he  saith,  1  will  go  up  and  cover  the  earth

U.  go  tip  into  Gilead,  and  take  balm,  O  virgin

48.  5.  continual  weeping  shall  go  up

49.  28.  go  tip  to  Kedar.  and  spoil  men  of  the  east

50.  21.  govp  against  the  land  of  Merathaim
Esek.  .38.11.  1  will  goup  to  land  of  unwalled  villages

40.  26.  there  were  seven  steps  to  go  up  to  it
11  os.  4. 15.  neither  go  tip  to  Beth-aven,  nor  swear
Hag.  1.  8.  go  tip  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood
Zech.  14.  16.  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship
Mat.  20.  18.  we  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  Son  of  man
shall  be  betrayed,  Mark  10.  .33.  Luke  tti.  31.
Luke  14.  10.  he  may  say  to  thee,  friend,  go  up  higher
John  7.  8.  go  ye  up  to  this  feast,  I  go  not  up  vet
Acts  15.  2.  go  tip  to  Jerusalem  about  this  question

21.  4.  that  Paul  should  not  go  vp  to  Jerusalem
12.  we  besought  him  not  to  go  tip  to  Jerusalem

25.  9-  wilt  thou  go  up  to  Jerusalem  and  be  judged  ?

GO  a  whoring.

Erod.  34.  15.  lest  they  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods

16.  and  thy  sons  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods
Lev.  20. 5. 1  will  cutoff  all  that  go  a  whor.  after  him
6.  1  will  cut  off' such  as  go  a  whor.  after  wizards
Num.  15.  39-  ways,  alter  which  ye  use  to  go  a  whor.
Deut.  31.  16.  this  people  will  go  a  whor.  after  gods
2  Chron.  21. 13.  Jehoram  made  Judah  go  a  whoring
Psal.  73.  27.  destroyed  all  that  go  a  whor.  from  thee
Kzek.  6.  9.  eyes  which  go  a  whoring  after  idols
GOEST.

Gen.  28. 15.  will  keep  thee  in  places  whither  thou  g.
32. 17.  whose  art  thou  ?  whither  g.  thou  ?  Judg.  i9.

17.  Zech.  2.  2.  John  13.  .36.  1  16.  5.
Erod.  33.  16.  is  it  not  in  that  thou  g.  with  us  ?

34.  12.  no  coven,  with  inhabitants  whither  thou  g.
Num.  14.  14.  and  thou  g.  before  them  by  day-time
Deut.  7.1.  when  Lord  God  shall  bring  thee  into  the
land  whither  thou  g.  to  possess  it,  11.  29.

11.  10.  the  land  whither  thou  g.  is  not  as  Egypt

12.  29.  God  shall  cut  off  nations  whither  thou  g.
£0.  1.  when  thou  g.  to  battle  and  seest,  21.  10.

23.  £0.  God  may  bless  thee  in  all  that  thou  settest

thine  hand  to,  whither  thou  g.  Josh.  1.7.
28.  6.  blessed  shalt  thou  he  when  thou  g.  out

19.  cursed  shalt  thou  be  when  thou  g.  out

£1 .  make  pestilence  cleave  to  thee  whither  thou  g.
63.  shall  be  plucked  off  the  land  whither  thou  g.

32.  50.  and  die  in  the  mount  whither  thou  g.

Josh.  1.  9.  the  Lord  is  with  thee  whither  thou  g.
Judg.  14.  3.  that  thou  g.  to  take  a  wife  of  Pliilist.
liuth  1. 16.  for  whither  thou  g.  1  will  go

2  Sam.  15.  19.  wherefore  g.  tiiou  also  with  11s  ?

1  Kings  2.  37.  on  the  day  thou  g.  over  the  brook,  42.
Psal.  44.  9.  but  thou  g.  not  forth  with  our  armies
Prov.  4.12.  when  thou  g.  steps  shall  not  be  straitened


GOI

Prov.  6.  22.  when  thou  g.  it  shall  lead  thee  1
Eccl.  5.  1.  keep  thy  foot  when  thou  g.  to  hous^off

9.  lo.  nor  wisdom  in  the  grave  whither  thou  //.
Jer.  45.  5.  I  will  give  for  a  prey  whither  thou  g.
Mat.  8.  19.  I  will  follow  thee  whither g.  Luke  9.5-
Luke  12.  58.  when  thou  g.  with  thine  adversary
John  11.  8.  sought  to  stone  thee,  g.  thither  again'

14.  5.  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  thou  g.

GOETH.

Erod.  7.  15.  lo,  he  g.  out  unto  the  water

22.  26.  shall  deliver  it  by  that  the  sun  g.  down
28.  29.  Aaron  shall  bear  them  when  he. g.  in
30.  they  shall  be  on  Aaron's  heart  when  heir.  j;|
35.  his  sound  shall  be  heard  when  he  g.  in
Lev.  11.  21.  these ye  may  eat  that  g.  on  all  four
14.  46.  he  that  g.  into  the  house  shall  be  unclean
15.32.  law  of  him  whose  seed  g.  from  him,  22.  4-

16.  17.  none  in  the  tabernacle  when  he  g.  in

22.  3.  who  g.  to  holy  things  having  uncleanness

27.  21 .  the  field,  when  it  g.  out  in  jubilee,  be  holy
Num.  5.  29.  this  is  the  law,  when  a  wife  g.  aside  1
Deut.  1.  30.  the  Lord  which  <7.  before  shall  fight
9.  3.  thy  God  is  he  that  <7.  over  before  you

19.  5.  as  when  a  man  g.  into  wood  with  his  neight

20.  4.  the  Lord  your  God  is  he  that  g.  with  you
23.9.  when  the  host  g.  forth  against  thy  enemies

24.  13.  deliver  the  pledge  when  the  sun  g.  down)
Judg.  5.  31.  be  as  the  sun  when  he  g.  forth  inmigh

1  Sam.  22.  14.  as  David  who 47.  at  thy  bidding  1

30.  24.  as  his  part  is  that g.  down  to'the  battle

2  Kings  5.  18.  my  master  g.  to  house  of  Uimmon

11.8.  be  with  the  king  as  he  g.  out,  2  Chron.  23.  ]
Ezra  5.  8.  this  work  g.  fast  on  and  prospered)

Job  7.  9.  that  <7.  down  to  grave  come  up  no  more

9.  11.  lo,  he  g.  by  me,  and  1  see  him  not

16.  r  6.  and  though  1  forbear,  what  g.  from  me
34.  8.  when  g.  in  company  with  workers  ofiniquit1
37.  2.  hear  the  sound  that  g.  out  of  his  mouth
39.  21.  he  g.  on  to  meet  the  armed  men
Psal.  17.  1.  prayer  that g.  notout  of  feigned  lips
41.  6.  wnen  he  g.  abroad,  hetelleth  it
68.  21.  such  a  one  as//,  on  in  his  trespasses
88.  16.  thy  fierce  wrath  g.  over  me
97*  3.  afire  g.  before  him,  and  burnethup  enemie
104.  2.3.  man  g.  forth  to  his  work  until  evening  j
126.  6.  lie  that  g.  forth  and  weepeth,  bearing
146.4.  his  breath  //.  forth  ;  he  returneth  to  earth
Prov.  6.  29.  so  he  that  <7.  in  to  his  neighbour’s  wit
7-22.  g.  after  her,  as  an  ox  g.  to  the  slaughter

11.  10.  when  it//,  well  with  righteous,  city  rejoice!

16.  18.  pride//,  before  destruction,  a  haughty  spiri

20.  19.  that//,  about  as  a  tale-bearer  reveals  secret

26.  9-  as  a  thorn  g.  up  into  the  hand  of  a  drunkanj

20.  where  no  wood  is,  there  the  fire  g.  out

31.  18.  her  candle  g.  not  out  by  night

Eccl.  1.  5.  the  sun  g.  down  ami  hasteth  to  hisplac
.3.  21.  spirit  of  man  g.  up,  spirit  of  beast  g.  dowi

12.  5.  because  man  g.  to  his  long  home

Cant.  7.  9.  that//,  down  sweetly,  causing  the  lips
Isa.  28.  19.  from  the  time  it  g.  forth,  it  shall  take
30.  29.  when  one  g.  with  a  pipe  to  come  to  moun
55.  11.  so  shall  my  word  be  that  </.  forth  of  moutl

59.8.  whoso  g.  therein  shall  not  know  peace
63. 14.  as  a  beast  g.  down  into  the  valley

Jer.  5.  6.  every  one  that//,  out  thence  shall  be  tor.1
6.  4.  woe  unto  us,  for  the  day  g.  away

21.  9.  that  g.  out  to  Chaldeans  shall  live,  38.  2.

22.  10.  hut  weep  sore  for  him  that  g.  away

30.  23.  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  g.  forth  with  fury
44.  17.  we  will  do  what  g.  out  of  our  own  mouti
49.  17-  every  one  that//,  by  it  be  astonished,  50. 15
Ezek.  7.14.  they  have  blown,  but  none  g.  to  battl

33.  31.  their  heart  g.  al  ter  their  covetousness
44.27-  in  the  day  that  he  g.  into  the  sanctuary
llos.  6. 4.  yourgoodn.is  as  the  early  dew,  it  g.  awa;

5.  thy  judgments  are  as  light  that  g.  forth
Zech.b.  3.  this  is  the  curse  that  g.  forth

6.  he  said,  this  is  an  ephah  that//,  forth

Mat.  8.  9-  1  say  to  this  man,  go,  and  he//.  Luke 7.8

12.  45.  then  g.  he  andtaketh,  Ltike  11.  26.

13.  44.  for  joy  thereof//,  and  selleth  all  he  hath
15.11.  not  that  which  g.  into  mouth  defiletb  amai
17.21.  this  kind//,  notout  but.  by  prayer

26.  24.  the  Son  of  man  g.  as  it  is  written  of  hint
Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22;1

28.  7-  lie  g.  before  you  into  Galilee,  Mark  16.7.
John  3.  8.  but  canst  not  tell  whither  it  g.

7-  20.  thou  hast  a  devil ;  who  g.  about  to  kill  thee  ?

10.  4.  lie  g.  before  them,  the  sheep  follow  him

11.  31.  she  g.  unto  the  grave  to  weep  there

12.  35.  knoweth  not  whither  lie  g.  1  John  2.  11.

1  Cor.  6.  6.  but  brother  g.  to  law  with  brother

9. 7.  who  g.  a  warfare  any  time  at  his  own  charge
Jam.  1.  24.  he  behokleth  himself  and  g.  his  way
Rev.  14. 4.  that  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  hey

17.  11.  and  is  of  the  seven,  and  g.  into  perdition
19.  15.  and  out  of  his  mouth  g.  a  sharp  sword

G  O I N  G.

Gen.  15.12.  sun  //.down,  a  deep  sleep  fell  on  Abrarr

25.  t  32.  Esau  said,  behold,  1  am  g.  to  die
Erod.  17.  12.  his  hands  steady,  to  g.  down  of  thesm

23.  4.  if  thou  meet  thine  enemy’s  ox  g.  astray
Num.  .34.  4.  g.  forth  of  border  from  south  to  Kadesl
Dent.  16.  6.  sacrifice  the  passover  at//,  down  of  sur

33.  18.  he  said,  rejoice,  Zebulun,  in  thy  g.  out
Josh.  7.  5.  and  smote  them  in  the  g.  down

10.  11.  as  they  were  in  the//,  down  to  Beth-horon

27. atthe//.downof  the  sun  carcases  taken  dowr

23.  14.  I  am  <7.  the  way  of  all  the  earth

Judg.  8.  +  30.  G ideon  had  70  sons  g.  out  of  his  thigl
19.  18.  1  am  now  g.  to  the  house  of  the  Lord

28.  up,  let  us  be  g.  buf  none  answered

1  Sam.  10.  3.  meet  thee  three  men  q.  up  to  God

2  Sam.  2.  19.  in  //.  turned  not  from  following  Abnett
5.  24.  hearest  a  sound  of//,  in  trees,  1  Chr.  14.  13

1  Kings  17.  11.  as  she  was  g.  to  fetch  it,  he  called
22.  36.  went  a  proclamation  at  g.  down  of  the  sin

2  Kings  2.  23.//.  by  the  way, children  mocked  hin
9-  27.  they  smote  Ahaziah  at  the  g.  up  to  Gur

1  Chron.  11.  t  9.  David  went  in  g.  and  increasing

2  Chron.  18.  34.  at  time  of  sun  //.down,  he  died
Ezra  7.  +  0  foundatioi  of  the  g.  from  Babylon


GOA


GOD


GOD


1.  7.  from  #.  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  C.  2.

‘.’4.  deliver  him  from  #.  down  to  the  pit
(.'he  will  deliver  his  soul  from  g.  into  the  pit
t.\  10.  6.  his  g.  forth  is  from  the  end  of  heaven
i.  tiie  mighty  God  calleth  the  earth,  from  rising
of  sun  to  g.  down,  113.  3.  Mai.  1. 11.

l.  19.  the  sun  knoweth  his  g.  down

7.  27.  q.  down  to  the  chambers  of  death
lo.  but  the  prudent  man  looketh  well  to  his#.

’  <20.  rliree  go  well, yea,  four  are  comely  in  g.

.  13.  10.  the  sun  shall  be  darkened  in  Ins#,  forth
.  43.  5.  in  the  #.  up  to  Luhith,  continual  weep¬
ing  shall  go  up ;  in  the  #.  down  of  I  loronaim
.  4.  #.  and  weeping  they  snail  seek  the  Lord

k.  40.  31.  the  #.  up  had  eight  steps,  34,  37.

.  5.  with  every  #.  forth  of  the  sanctuary

.  12.  after  his  #.  forth,  one  shut  the  gate
».  6.  14.  and  laboured  till#,  down  or  the  sun
25.  from  the  #.  forth  of  the  commandment
,.6.  3.  his  #.  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning
it.  8.  t  7.  from  the  country  of  g.  down  of  the  sun
21.  #.  speedily  to  entreat  the  face  of  the  Lord

a.  25.  t  8.  give  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  #.  out
.  46.  rise,  let  us  be #.  behold,  he  is  at  hand
ke  14.  31.  what  king  #.  to  war  with  another

n  8.  59.  #.  through  midst  of  them,  so  passed  by
fi  CO.  5.  these  #.  before,  tarried  at  I  roas

m.  10. 3.  #.  about  to  establish  their  righteousness
im.5.  24.  some  men’s  sins  #.  before  to  judgment

b.  7.  18.  is  a  disannulling  of  command  #.  before
ie  7.  #.  after  strange  Mesh  are  set  forth  an  examp.

See  Coming.

GOINGS.

m.  33.  2.  and  Moses  wrote  their#,  out

.  5.  the  #.  out  of  their  borders,  8,  9,  12.  Josh.

15.4,  7,  11.  I  16.  3,  8.  I  18.  12,  14.
>34.  21.  his  eyes  are  on  man,  he  seeth  all  his  #.
al.  17. 5.  hold  up  my  #.  in  thy  paths  that  footsteps
L  f  31.  none  of  his  #.  shall  slide
.  2.  he  set  my  feet  on  a  rock,  established  my  #.

.  1 18.  nor  have  our  #.  declined  from  thy  way
.  24.  they  have  seen  thy  #.  even  the#,  of  G.

0.  4.  who  have  purposed  to  overthrow  my  #.
or. 5.  21.  before  Lord,  and  he  pondereth  all  his#.

1.  24.  man’s  #.  are  of  the  Lord,  how  can  a  man
>.  59.  8.  there  is  no  judgment  in  their  #.
ek.  42. 11.  their  #.  out  w  ere  according  to  fashion
.  11.  shew  them  #.  out  thereof  and  comings  in

c.  5.  2.  whose  #.  forth  have  been  from  of  old

GOAD,  S.

/#.  3.  31.  Shamgtir  slew  600  men  with  an  ox  #.
Jam.  13.  21. they  had  a  file  to  sharpen  the#.
cl.  12. 11.  the  w'ordsof  the  wise  are  as  #.  and  nails
GOAT.

n.  15.  9.  take  a  heifer,  a  she-#,  of  three  years
od.  22.  +1.  if  a  man  steal  an  ox  or  a  #.

r.  3.  12.  if  his  offering  be  a  #.  then  shall  offer  it
24.  he  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the#.

23.  he  shall  eat  no  fat  of  ox,  sheep,  or  of#.

15.  he  took  the  #.  which  was  the  sin-offering
).  16.  Moses  sought  the  #.  of  the  sin-offering
i.  9.  Aaron  shall  bring  the  #.  on  which  the  lot  ‘ell
!2.  he  shall  let  go  the #.  in  the  wilderness
'.  3.  whosoever  killeth  a  #.  in  the  camp
>.  27.  when  a  #.  is  brought  forth  seven  days

im.  15.  27.  if  sin  thro’  ignorance  shall  bring  a#.

l.  17.  the  firstling  of  a  #.  thou  shalt  not  redeem

i.  22.  one  #.  for  a  sin-offering,  to  make  an  atone¬
ment  for  you,  29.  22,  28,  31,  34,  38.
’lit.  14.  4.  ye  shall  eat  the  ox,  sheep,  and  the  #.

If.  1 1.  not  sacrifice  a  #.  Wherein  is  blemish
dg.  6. 1 4.  the  Midianites  left  no  ox,  or  #.  or  ass
.ek.  43.  25.  seven  days  prepare  every  day  a  #.

in.  8. 5.  the  #.  had  a  notable  horn  between  his  eyes
ill.  the  rough  #.  is  the  kingof  Grecia

jHe-GOAT.

'oik  30.  31.  four  are  comely  in  going,  an  he-g.
r.  51. 40.  bring  them  down  like  rams  with  he-g.

m.  8. 5.  behold,  an  he-g.  came  from  the  west
1.  therefore  the  he-g.  waxed  very  great

Live  GOAT.

’■v.  16. 20.  bring  live  g.  ||  21.  lay  both  hands  on  /.-#.
aS’c^c-GOAT.

See  Signification  on  Offering.

16.  8.  and  the  other  lot  for  the  scape-g.

10.  to  let  him  go  for  a  scape-g.  into  the  wilderness
[  26.  he  that  let  go  scape-g.  shall  wash  his  clothes
Wild  GOA  L’.

cut.  14.  5.  ye  shall  eat  the  wild  g.  and  wild  ox
GOAL’S.

cn.  4.  +4.  Abel  brought  the  firstling  of  the  #.

7. 9.  fetch  me  from  thence  two  kids  of  the  #.

16.  she  put  the  skins  of  the#,  on  his  hands
0.  32.  all  the  spotted  and  speckled  among  the#.

33.  is  not  speckled  among#.  11 35.  lie  removed  #.

l.  38.  thy  she-#,  have  not  cast  their  young

2. 14.  two  hundred  she-#,  and  twenty  he-#.

7.  31.  .loseph’s  brethren  killed  a  kid  of  the  #.

8.  t  17.  1  will  send  thee  a  kid  from  the#.

sod.  12.  S.yesliall  take  it  out  from  the  sheep  or  g.
ev.  1.  10.  if  his  offering  be  of  the  sheep  or  #.

.23.  if  his  sin  come  to  his  knowledge,  he  shall
bring'  his  offering,  a  kid  of  the  #.  28.  i  5.  6.
.  3.  take  a  kid  of  the  #.  fora  sin  offering
Ci.  5.  two  kids  of  the  #.  11  7-  two  #.  present  them

2.  19.  ye  shall  offer  a  male  of  the  sheep  or  #.
t  21.  a  free-will  offering  in  beeves  or#.

3.  19.  then  ye  shall  sacrifice  one  kid  of  the  #.  for

a  sin  offering,  Num.  7.  16. 1  15.  24.
urn.  7. 17.  five  rams,  five  he-#,  five  lambs,  23,29,
,  35,41,47,53,59,05,71,77,83.

pj(  ■  the  kids  of  the  #.  for  a  sin  offering,  twelve
88.  the  he  #.  sixty,  the  lambs  of  hrstyear  sixty
L  t  30.  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  of  the  #.

'em.  32. 14.  rams  and  he-#,  of  the  breed  of  Bashan
<da  6.  f  19.  Gideon  made  ready  a  kid  of  the  #.
San,.  25. 2.  N  abal  had  a  thousand  #.  was  shearing
Chr  mi.  17.  ll.  the  Arabians  brought  7 ,700 he-#.

9.  21.  they  brought  seven  he-#,  for  a  sin-offering
’-ra  6.  17.  offered  at  the  dedication  twelve  he-#.

2  35.  children  out  of  captivity  offered  12  lie-#.
sal.  5;).  9.  1  will  take  no  lie-#,  out  of  thy  fold


Psal.  50. 13.  or  will  1  drink  the  blood  of  #.  ?

66.  15.  1  will  offer  to  thee  bullocks  with  #.

Prov.  27.  26.  the  #.  are  the  price  of  thy  field
27.  thou  shalt  have  #.  milk  enough  tor  food
Cant.  4.  1.  thy  hair  is  as  a  flock  of  #.  6.  5.

Isa.  1.  11.  1  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  he-#.

14. +  9.  it  stirreth  up  for  thee  all  great  #.

34. 6.  sword  of  the  Lord  fat  with  the  blood  of#.
Jer.  50.  8.  and  be  as  the  lie-#,  before  the  Hocks
Ezek.  27.  21.  Arabia  occupied  with  thee  in  #.

34.  17.  1  judge  between  the  rams  and  he-#.

39. 18.  ye  shall  drink  the  blood  of  lambs  and  #.

43.  22.  on  the  second  day  offer  a  kici  of  the  #.

45.  2.3.  a  kid  of  the  #.  daily  for  a  sin  offering
Mic.  5.  +  8.  as  a  young  lion  among  the  flocks  of  #.
Zech.  10.  3.  my  anger  was  kindled,  1  punished  the#.
Mat.  25.32.  a  shepherd  divideth  the  sheep  from  the  #.

33.  lie  shall  set  the  #.  on  his  left  hand
Heb.  9.  12.  nor  entered  by  blood  of#,  and  calves
13.  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  #.  sanctifieth
19.  he  took  the  blood  of#,  and  sprinkled  the  book
10. 4.  is  not  possible  the  blood  of  #.  take  away  sins
GOATS-HAIlt.

Exnd.  25.  4.  this  is  the  offering  ye  shall  take,  g.-hair
26.  7.  thou  shalt  make  curtains  of  g.-hair

35.  6.  who  is  willing,  let  him  bring  g.-hair
23.  every  man  with  whom  was  found  g.-hair
26.  and  all  the  women  spun  g.-hair

36. 14.  she  made  curtains  of  g.-hair  for  the  tent
Num.  31.  20.  purify  all  work  of  g.-hair  and  wood

1  Sam.  19. 13.  put  a  pillow  of  g.-hair  for  bolster,  16.
GOAT-SKINS.

Ileb.  11.  37.  wandering  in  sheep-skins  and  g. -skins
Wild  GOATS.

1  Sam.  24.  2.  to  seek  David  on  rocks  of  the  wild  #.

Job  39. 1 .  kno  west  thou  when  the  wild g.  bring  forth  ?
Psal.  104. 18.  high  hills  are  a  refuge  for  the  wild g.

"  GOBLET.

Cant.  7.  2.  thy  navel  is  like  a  round  #.

GOD,  referred  to  man.

F.xod.  4.  16.  thou  shalt  be  to  Aaron  instead  of#.

7.  1.  I  have  made  thee  a  #.  to  Pharaoh
GOD,  for  idol.

Dent.  32.  21.  moved  me  with  that  which  is  not  #.
Judg.  6.  31.  if  he  be  a#,  let  him  plead  for  himself
8. 3.3.  they  made  Baal-berith  their  #.

9. 27.  they  went  into  the  house  of  their  #.  and  eat
11.24.  possess  that  which  Chemosh  thy  #.  giveth
16.  23.  the  Philistines’  #.  was  Dagon,  24.

1  Sam.  5.  7 •  his  hand  is  sore  on  us,  and  our  #.

1  Kings  11.  S3.  Israel  worshipped  the#,  of  Moabites

18.  27-  he  is  a  #.  either  talking,  or  pursuing

2  Kings  1.  2.  Eaal-zebub  the  #.  of  K.kron,  3,  6, 16.

19.  37.  worshipping  in  the  house  of  Nisroch  his  #.

smote  with  sword,  2  Chr.  32.  21.  Isa.  37.  38.
Psal.  16.  4.  sorrows  multiplied,  hasten  after  other  #.
Isa.  44.  10.  who  hath  formed  a  #.  or  molten  image  t

15.  he  maketh  a  #.  and  worshipped!  it,  17.

45.  20.  and  that  pray  to  a  #.  that  cannot  save

46.6.  he  maketh  it  a#,  they  fall  down,  they  worship
I) an.  1.  2.  he  carried  the  vessels  into  house  of  his#.

4.  8.  Belteshazzar  according  to  the  name  <  f my  #.
11.36.  and  magnify  himself  above  every  #.

Amos  5. 26.  the  star  of  your#,  ye  made,  Acts  7.  43.

8. 14.  that  swear,  and  say,  thy  #.  O  Dan,  liveth
Jonah  1.  5-  the  mariners  cried,  every  man  to  his  #.
Mic.  4.  5.  all  people  will  walk  in  the  name  of  his#.
llab.  1.11.  imputing  this  his  power  to  his  #.

Acts  12.  22.  it  is  the  voice  of  a  #.  not  of  a  man

Any  GOD.

Exod.  22.  20.  that  sacrifice  to  any  g.  save  the  Lord
2  Sam.  7 . 22.  nor  is  there  any  ( l.  beside,  1  Chr.  17.  20.
I)an.  3.  28.  that  they  might  not  worsh.  any  g.  except

6.  7.  who  shall  ask  a  petition  of  any  g.  or  man,  12.
11.  37.  neither  shall  he  regard  any  g.

Other  GOD.

Exod.  34.  14.  thou  shalt  worship  no  other  g.

Dan.  3.  29.  because  there  is  no  other  g.  can  deliver
1  Cur.  8.  4.  there  is  none  other  g.  but  one.

Strange  GOD.

Dent.  32. 12.  there  was  no  strange  #.  with  them
Psal.  44.  20.  stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange  g.

81.9.  no  strange  g.  be  in  thee,  nor  worsh.  strange  g.
Isa.  43. 1C.  when  there  was  no  strange  g.  among  them
Dan.  11.  39.  thus  shall  he  do  with  a  strange  g.
GOD.

This  is  one  of  the  names  which  ice  give  to  that
eternal ,  infinite ,  and  incomprehensible  Being,  the
Creator  of  all  things,  who  preserves  and  governs
every  thing  by  his  almighty  power  and  wisdom,
and  is  the  only  object  of  our  worship.  The  He¬
brews  give  to  God  generally  the  name  of . Ieho-
vah,  he  who  exists  of  himself,  and  gives  being
and  existence  to  others :  this  is  a  name  ineffable
and  mysterious,  which  denotes  the  eternity,  im¬
mutability,  and  independence  of  God,  and  the
infallible  certainty  of  his  word  and  promises.
The  import  of  this  name  is  opened  and  predicated
of  Christ,  in  Rev.  1.4,  8.  The  Hebrews  had
such  a  veneration  for  this  holy  name,  that  they
never  pronounced  it,  but  instead  of  it  made  use
of  that  of  Adonai,  which  signifies  properly  My
Lords,  in  the  plural  number :  and  of  Elohi,  Eloi,
or  Elohim.  They  likewise  called  him  El,  which
signifies  Strong j  or  Shaddai,  whereby  may  be
meant  one  who  is  self-sufficient :  or,  according  to
another  pronunciation,  the  Destroyer,  the  power¬
ful  One  ;  or  Elion,  the  most  High,  or  El-sabaoth,
the  God  of  Hosts  ;  or  .la,  God.

This  name  .Iehovah,  in  the  Hebrew,  consists  of
four  letters,  as  for  the  most  part  it  doth  in  all
languages.  Thus  among  the  Persians  the  name
is  V.opv  ;  among  the  Arabians,  Alla  ;  among  the
Assyrians,  Adad  ;  among  the  /Egyptians,  OoivO.
or  Sent) ;  with  the  Grecians,  ©eor  the  Latins,
Deus  ;  the  French,  Dieu  ;  the  Spaniards,  Dios  ;
the  Italians,  Idio  ;  and  with  the  Germans,  Gott.
Hereof  some  give  this  reason ,  that  the  number
of  four  is  a  perfect  number,  and  so  hereby  the
perfection  of  God  is  noted.  Others  say,  that
God  is  he  who  created  all  things,  consisting  of
four  elements.


God  declared  to  Moses,  that  he  was  not  known  tiy
the  name  Jehovah  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Ja¬
cob  ;  and  yet  God  is  called  by  the  name  Jehovah,
in  Gen.  15.  7.  1  26.  24.  This  is  not  to  be  under¬
stood  of  the  name,  but  of  the  thing  signified  by
that  name.  lor  that  denotes  a/l  his  perfections,
and,  among  others,  the  constancy  and  immuta¬
bility  of  his  nature  and  will,  and  the  infallible
certainty  of  his  word  and  promises.  And,  though
this  was  believed  by  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Ja¬
cob  ;  yet  God  had  not  given  any  actual  being
to  his  promises  fur  their  deliverance,  by  the  ac¬
complishment  of  them  :  for  they  only  saw  the  pro¬
mises  afar  off.  This  expression  may  likewise  be
understood  comparatively  ;  they  knew  this  but
darkly  and  imperfectly,  which  was  now  to  be  made
known  more  clearly  and  fully .

God  is  taken,  I.  Properly  ;  and  that  either  essen¬
tially,  for  the  whole  Trinity,  Isa.  40.  28.  John

4.  24.  Or,  personally,  (1)  For  the  Father,  Eph.

I.  3.  (2)  The  Son,  John  1.  1.  (3)  For  the  Holy
Ghost,  Acts  5.  3,  4.  11.  Improperly,  (1)  For  an
idol,  or  false  and  imaginary  god,  Exod.  22.  20.
Judg.  11.  24.  (2)  For  princes,  magistrates,  and
judges,  Exod.  22.  28.  Psal.  82.  1,  6.  (3)  F01  the
ark  of  God.  Thus,  when  the  ark  came  into  the
camp  of  the  Israelites,  the  Philistines  said,  God  is
come  into  their  camp  ;  this  name  they  give  to  the
ark,  as  they  used  to  do  to  the  images  of  their  false
gods,  1  Sam.  4.  7.  The  Lord  tells  Moses,  Exod.

7.  1.  See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh  ;
Thou  shalt  represent  my  person,  and  act  like  God,
by  requiring  his  obedience  to  thy  commands,  and
by  punishing  his  disobedience  with  such  punish¬
ments  as  none  but  God  can  inflict  ;  t  >  which  end,
thou  shalt  have  my  omnipotent  assistance.  Satan
is  called  the  god  of  this  world,  2  Cor.  4.  4.  be¬
cause  he  rules  over  the  greatest  part  of  the  world,
and  they  are  his  servants  and  slaves.  St.  Paul,
in  Phil.  3.  19.  speaks  of  some  that  make  their
belly  their  god  ;  that  is,  who  mind  nothing  but  the
satisfaction  of  their  fleshly  appetites.  <  •  od  forbid,
is  a  strong  form  of  denial,  with  a  lathing  of  what
is  objected,  Rom.  3.  31.  1  9-  14.  In  the  original
it  is.  Let  it  not  be.

Gen.  16.  13.  called  name  of  Lord,  thou  G.  seest  me
:i7.7.  to  be  a  G.  to  thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee
31. 13.  1  am  the  G.  of  Beth-el,  where  thou  vovvedst
42.  28.  what  is  this  that  G.  hat!)  done  to  us  ?

45.  8.  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither,  but  G.

48.  21.  behold,  I  die,  but  G.  shall  be  rvithyou
Exod.  6.  7.  I  will  take  you  to  me,  and  be  to  you  a  G.
18. 19.  give  thee  counsel,  and  G.  shall  be  with  thee
Num.  23.  23.  said  of  Jacob,  what  hath  G.  wrought  f
24.  23.  alas,  who  shall  live  when  G.  doth  this  1
Deut.  4.  7.  what  nation  which  hath  G.  so  nigh  ?

29.  13.  that  he  may  tie  to  thee  a  G.  as  he  said

1  Sam.  3.  17.  G.  do  so  and  more  also,  14.  44.  I  25.

22.  2  Sam.  3.  9,  35.  1 19. 13.  1  Kings  2.  23.
2  Kings  6.  3 1 .

17-  46.  all  may  know  that  there  is  a  G.  in  Israel
22.  3.  till  1  know  what  G.  will  do  forme

2  .'am.  22.  32.  who  is  G.  save  the  Ld.  ?  Ps.  18.  31.

1  Kings  18.  21.  if  the  Lord  be  G.  follow  him

39.  the  Lord,  he  is  the  ft.  the  Lord,  he  is  the  G.

2  Kings  19.  15.  tliou  art  the  G.  even  thou  alone

2  Chr.  20.  6.  O  Lord  G.  art  not  thou  G.  in  heaven  l
Ezra  1.  3.  his  G.  be  with  him,  he  is  the  G.

Neh.  9.  17.  art  a  G.  ready  to  pardon,  slow  to  anger
Job  22. 13.  sayest,  how  doth  G.  know  t  Psal.  73. 11.
Ps.  5.  4.  art  not  a  G.  that  hast  pleasure  in  wickedn.
52.  7.  the  man  that  made  not  G.  his  strength

86. 10.  thou  art  great,  thou  art  G.  alone,  Isa.  37-16.
Isa.  12.  2.  behold,  G.  is  my  salvation,  1  will  trust

44.  8.  is  there  a  G.  besides  me  ?  yea,  there  is  no  G.

45.  22.  look  unto  me,  L  am  G.  there  is  none  else

46.  9.  1  am  G.  there  is  none  else,  none  like  me
Jer.  31.  33. 1  will  be  their  G.  they  my  people,  32.  38.
Ezek.  28.  2.  hast  said,  I  am  a  god,  I  sit  in  seat  of  G.

9.  but  thou  shalt  be  a  man,  and  no  #.

Ilos.  8.  6.  workman  made  it,  therefore  it.  is  not  G.

II.  9.  for  1  am  G.  and  not  man,  the  holy  One
Mic.  7.  18.  who  is  a  G.  like  to  thee,  that  pardons
Mat.  1.  2.3.  name  Immanuel,  which  is  G.  with  us

6.  24.  ye  cannot  serve  G,  and  mammon,  Luke

16.  13.

19. 17.  there  is  none  good  but  one,  that  is  G.  Mark

10.  18.  Luke  18.  19.
Mark  12.  32.  there  is  one  G.  and  none  other  but  be
John  1. 1.  the  Word  was  with  G.  and  Word  was  G.

3.  2.  can  do  miracles,  except  G.  be  with  him

8.  41.  they  said,  we  have  one  Father,  even  G.

42.  for  l  proceeded  forth,  and  came  from  G.

if.  3.  they  might  know  thee,  the  only  true  G.

Acts  2.  22.  by  wonders,  which  G.  did  by  him

5.  29.  we  ou  rht  to  obey  G.  rather  than  men

7.  9.  patriarchs  sold  Joseph,  but  G.  was  with  him

10.  34.  1  perceive  G.  is  no  respecter  of  persons
Rom.  3. 4.  let  G.  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar

8.  31.  if  G.  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?

15.  5.  now  the  G.  of  patience  and  consolation

1  Cor.  8.  6.  to  us  there  is  but  one  G.  the  Father
15.  28.  that  G.  may  be  all  in  all

2  Cor.  1.  21.  be  which  hath  anointed  us,  is  G.

4.  4.  the  #.  of  this  world  hath  blinded  minds
13.  11 .  G.  of  love  and  peace  shall  be  with  you

2  Thess.2.4.  above  all  called  G.  so  that  he  as  G.

1  Tim.  3. 16.  G.  was  manifest  in  the  flesh
Tit.  1.  16.  they  profess  that  they  know  G.

Heb.  3.  4.  but  he  that  built  all  things  is  G.

4.  10.  ceased  from  his  works,  as  G.  did  from  his

8.  10. 1  will  be  to  them  a  G.  they  to  me  a  people
1  John.  1.  5.  G.  is  light,  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all
4. 12.  no  man  hath  seen  G.  at  any  time
Rev.  21.  3.  and  G.  himself  shall  be  with  them
4.  G.  shall  wipe  away  all  tears
7.  1  will  be  his  G.  and  he  shall  be  riy  son
Against  GOD.

Gen.  39.  9.  how  do  this  wickedness,  and  sin  ag.  G.  ?
Num.  21.  5.  the  people  spake  ag.  G.  Psal.  78.  19.

1  Citron.  5.25.  and  they  transgressed  against  G.

2  Citron.  32.  19.  spake  against  the  G.  of  Jerusalem

197


GOD


GOD


GOD


job  15.  13.  thou  turnest  thy  spirit  against  G.

25.  for  he  stretcheth  out  his  baud  against  G.
34.37.  he  multi plieth  his  w  orcis  against  G.

Van.  3.  29.  which  speak  amiss  ag.  G.  of  Shadrach

11.  36.  speak  marvellous  things  ag.  G.  of  gods
tlos.  13.  16.  she  hath  rebelled  against  her  G.

Acts  5.  39.  lest  ye  be  found  to  fight  against  G.  ^

6.  11.  he  hath  spoken  blasphemous  words  ag.  G.

23.  9.  let  us  not  fight  against  G.

Rom.  8.  7.  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  G.

9.  20.  who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  G .  '!

Rev.  13.  G.  opened  his  mouth  in  blasphemy  ag.  G.

See  Almighty.

Before  GOD.

Gen.  6.  11.  the  earth  was  corrupt  before  G.

Exod.  18. 12.  eat  bread  with  Moses’  father  before  G.
Josh.  24.  1.  they  presented  themselves  before  G.
Jndg.  21.  2.  the  people  abode  till  even  before  G.

1  Chron.  13.8.  David  and  all  lsr.  played  before  G.

10.  and  there  Uzza  died  before  G.

16.  1.  they  offered  burnt-sacrifices  before  G.

2  Chr.  33.  12.  Manasseh  humbled  himself  before  G.
34.  27.  .losiah’s  heart  was  humbled  before  G.

Ezra  7.  19.  deliver  before  the  G.  of  Jerusalem
Job  15.  4.  yea,  thou  restrainest  prayer  before  G.
Psal.  42.  2.  when  shall  I  appear  before  G.  ?

.56.  13.  may  walk  before  G.  in  light  of  living
61.  7-  he  shall  abide  before  G.  for  ever
68.  3.  let  the  righteous  rejoice  before  G.

84.  7-  every  one  in  Zion  appeareth  before  G.
Eccl.  2.  26.  give  to  him  that  is  good  before  G.

5.  2.  heart  hasty  to  utter  any  thing  before  G.

8.  13.  because  he  feareth  not  before  G.

Van.  2.  t  18.  would  desire  mercies  from  before  G.

6.  10.  gave  thanks  before  his  G.  as  aforetime

11.  found  him  making  supplication  before  G.

26.  that  men  tremble  before  the  G.  of  Daniel
Luke  1.  6.  they  were  both  righteous  before  G.

12.  6.  not  one  of  them  is  forgotten  before  G.

24.  19.  a  prophet  mighty  in  deed  and  word  bef.  G.
Acts  7-  46.  who  found  favour  before  G.

10.  4.  thine  arms  are  come  for  a  memorial  before  G.
33.  we  are  all  here  present  before  G.  to  hear

23.  1.  1  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before  G.
lium.  2.  13.  not  hearers  of  law  are  just  before  G.

3.  19.  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  G.

4.  2.  hath  whereof  to  glory,  but  not  before  G.

14.  22.  hast  thou  faith  (  have  it  to  thyself  before  G.
2  Cor.  12.  19.  we  speak  before  G.  in  Christ
Gal.  1.  20.  behold,  before  G.  1  lie  not
1  Thess.  3. 13.  he  may  establish  your  hearts  bef.  G.
1  Tim.  5.  4.  that  is  good  and  acceptable  before  G.

21.  1  charge  thee  before  G.  2  Tim.  4.  1.

Jam.  1.27.  pure  religion  and  undefiled  before  G.
Rev.  3.  2.  not  found  thy  works  perfect  before  G.

9. 13.  a  voice  from  the  horns  of  the  altar  before  G.

12.  10.  which  accused  them  bef.  G.  day  and  night
16.  19.  Babylon  came  in  remembrance  before  G.

20.  12.  I  saw  dead,  small  and  great,  stand  bef.  G.
See  Called,  Chosen,  Commanded.’
Eternal  GOD.

Dent.  33.  27-  the  eternal  G.  is  thy  refuge
Everlasting  GOD.

■Gen.  21.  33.  Abraham  called  on  name  of  ever.  G.
Isa.  40.  28.  the  ever.  G.  fainteth  not,  nor  is  weary
Rom.  16.  26.  according  to  commandment  of  ever.  G .
See  Father,  Fear,  Foruid,  Gave,  Glorify.
High  GOD.

Gen.  14. 18.  v’as  priest  of  the  most  high  G.  Heb.  7. 1.

19.  blessed  be  Abraham  of  the  most  high  G.

20.  blessed  be  the  most  high  G.  which  delivered

22.  I  have  lift  up  my  hand  to  the  most  high  G.
Psal.  57-  2.  1  will  cry  unto  G.  most  high,  unto  G.

78.  35.  G.  was  their  rock,  the  high  G.  their  Redeem.
56.  they  tempted  and  provoked  the  most  high  G.
Van.  3.  26.  servants  of  most  high  G.  come  forth

4.  2.  shew  the  wonders  the  high  G.  hath  wrought

5.  18.  high  G.  gave  Is  ebuchadnezzar  a  kingdom

21.  till  he  knew  that  the  most  high  G.  ruled
Mic.  6.  6.  and  bow  myself  before  the  most  high  G.
Mark  5.  7  •  thou  Son  of  the  most  high  G.  Luke  8.  28.
Acts  16. 17.  these  men  are  servants  of  most  high  G.

Holy  GOD.

Josh.  24.  19.  he  is  an  holy  G.  he  is  a  jealous  God

1  Sam.  6.  20.  who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy  G.?
Psal.  99.  9.  for  the  Lord  our  G.  is  holy

Isa.  5. 16.  G.  that  is  holy  shall  be  sanctified  in  right.
GOD  of  heaven.

2  Chron.  36.  23.  all  kingdoms  of  the  earth  hath  the

Lord  G.  of  heaven  given  me,  Ezra  1.  2.
Ezra  5.  11.  we  are  the  servants  of  the  G.  of  heaven

12.  our  fathers  have  provoked  the  G.  of  heaven

6.  9.  for  burnt-offerings  of  the  G.  of  heaven ,  10.

7.  12.  a  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  G.  of  heaven,  21.

23.  whatever  is  commanded  by  the  G.  of  heaven
Neh.  1.  4.  I  fasted  and  prayed  before  the  G.  of  h.

2.  4.  so  I  prayed  to  the  G.  of  heaven,  and  said
Psal.  136.  26.  O  give  thanks  to  the  G.  of  heaven
Dan.  2.  18.  they  would  desire  mercies  of  G.  of  h.
19.  then  Daniel  blessed  the  G.  of  heaven
44.  the  G.  of  heaven  shall  set  up  a  kingdom
Jonah  1.  9.  1  fear  the  Lord,  the  G.  of  heaven
Rev.  11.  13.  the  remnant  gave  glory  to  G.  of  he  a.
16.  11.  and  they  blasphemed  the  G.  of  heaven
GOD  of  hosts.

Psal.  80.  7-  turn  us  again,  O  G.  of  hosts,  19.

14.  return,  we  beseech  thee,  O  G.  of  hosts
Amos  5.  27.  saith  Lord,  whose  name  is  the  G.  of  hosts
See  Lord  God.

GOD  is.

Gen.  21.  22.  G.  is  with  thee  in  all  that  thou  doest
31.  50.  see,  G.  is  witness  betwixt  me  and  thee
Exod.  20.  20.  fear  not,  for  G.  is  come  to  prove  you
Num.  23.  19.  G.  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie
Dent.  3.  24.  what  G.  is  there  in  heaven  who  can  do  ?
33.  27 .  the  eternal  G.  is  thy  refuge,  and  underneath
Josh.  24. 19.  our  holy  G.is  a  jealous  God,  is  ah.  1. 2.

1  Sam.  4.  7.  G.  is  come  into  the  camp,  woe  unto  us

10.  7.  for  G.  is  come  with  thee,  1  Chron.  17.  2.
28.  15.  <  is  departed  from  me,  he  answereth  not

2  Sam.  22.  33.  G.  is  my  strength  and  power

1  Chron.  14. 15.  G.  is  gone  forth  before  thee  to  smite

198


2  Chr.  13.  12.  G.  himself  is  with  us  for  our  captain
Job  3.3.  12.  1  answer  thee,  G.  is  greater  than  man
36.  5.  behold,  G.  is  mighty  and  despiseth  not  any
26.  behold,  G.  is  great,  and  we  know  him  not
Psal.  7-  11.  G.  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day

10.4.  G.is  notinall  his  thoughts,  not  seek  after  G.
14.  5.  for  G.  2. s'  in  the  generation  of  the  righteous

33. 12.  blessed  nation,  whose  G.  is  Lord,  144.  15.

46.1.  G.  is  our  reruge  and  strength.  62.  8.

5.  G.  is  in  the  midstof  her,sheshall  not  be  moved
47-  5.  G.  is  gone  up  with  a  shout  ||  7-  for  G.  is  King
48.  3.  G.  is Known  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge
50.  6.  for  G.  is  judge  himself,  Selah,75.  7-
54.  4.  behold,  G.  is  iny  helper,  Lord  is  with  them
56.  9.  turn  back  ;  this  1  know’,  for  G.  is  for  me
59.  9.  1  will  wait,  for  G.  is  my  defence,  17.

62.  7-  in  G.  is  my  salvation  and  glory,  Isa.  12.2.

68. 5.  a  father  of  the  fatherless  is  G .  in  his  habitation

73. 1.  truly  G.  is  good  to  Israel,  even  tosuch  as  are
26.  G.is  strength  of  my  heart, and  portion  for  ever

74. 12.  G.  is  my  King  of  old,  working  salvation
89.  7.  G.  is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly
116.  5.  gracious  is  the  Lord,  our  G.  is  merciful
118.  27.  G.  is  the  Lord  that  hath  shewed  us  light

Eccl.  5.  2.  for  G.  is  in  heaven,  and  thou  on  earth
Isa.  5. 16.  G.  that  is  holy  shall  be  sanctified  in  right.
8. 10.  for  G.  is  with  us  ||  45. 14.  surely  G.  is  in  thee
Zech.  8.  23.  we  have  heard  that  G.  is  with  you
Mat.  3.  9.  G.  ?sableofthesestonestoraise,LreLg3.8.

22.  32.  G.  is  not  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living
John  3.  33.  hath  set  to  his  seal  that  G.  is  true

4.  24.  G.  is  a  Spirit  ||  13.  31.  G.  is  glorified  in  him
Acts  10.  34.  G.  is  no  respecter  of  persons

Rom.  1.  9.  for  G.  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve

11.  23.  for  G.  is  able  to  graft'  them  in  again
14.  4.  for  G.  is  able  to  make  him  stand

1  Cor.  1.  9.  G.  is  faithful,  by  whom  ye  were  called

10.  13.  G.  is  faithful  who  will  not  suffer  you
14.  25.  and  report  that  G.  is  in  you  of  a  truth

33.  G.  is  not  author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace

2  Cor.  1. 18.  as  G.  is  true,  our  word  w’as  notyea,  nay

9.  8.  G.  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  to  you

Gal.  3.  20.  but  G.  is  one  ]|  6.  7.  G.  is  not  mocked
Eph.  2.  4.  but  G.  who  is  rich  in  mercy  quickened  us
Phil.  1.8.  G.  is  my  record,  how  greatly  1  long  after

3.  19.  for  many  walk,  w’hose  g.  is  their  belly
1  Thess.  2. 5.  nor  cloke  of  covetousness,  G.  is  witness
Ileb.  6. 10.  G.  is  not  unright,  to  forget  your  work

11.  16.  G.  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God

12.  29.  for  0111  G.  is  a  consuming  tire

13.  16.  for  with  such  sacrifices  G.  is  well  pleased
1  John  1.  5.  G.  is  light  H  4.  8.  for  G.  is  love,  16.

3.  20.  G.  is  greater  than  our  heart,  knows  all  things

GOD  of  Israel.

Exod.  24.  10.  they  went  up,  and  saw’  the  G.  of  lsr.
JS'um.  16.  9.  the  G.  of  Israel  hath  separated  you
Josh.  7. 19.  to  give  glory  to  the  G .  of  lsr.  1  Sam.  6. 5.

13.  33.  tlie  G.  of  Israel  was  their  inheritance

22.  16.  what  trespass  ye  committed  ag.  G.  of  Israel

24.  what  have  ye  to  do  with  the  G.  of  Israel?

24.23.  incline  your  heart  to  the  G.  of  Israel
Jndg.  11.23.  G.  of  Israel  dispossessed  the  Amorifes
Ruth  2.  12.  a  full  reward  be  given  thee  of  G.  of  lsr.
1  Sam.  1. 17.  the  ( • .  of  Israel  grant  thy  petition

5.  11.  send  away  the  ark  of  the  G.  of  Israel

1  Kin.  8.  23.  L.  G.  of  lsr.  no  G.  like  thee, 2  Chr.  6. 14.

14.  13.  some  good  thing  toward  the  G.  of  Israel

1  Chron.  4.  10.  Jabez  called  on  the  G.  of  Israel
17.  24.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  G.  of  Israel

2  Chron.  15.  13.  who  would  not  seek  the  G.  of  lsr.  ?
Ezra  7.  15.  have  freely  offered  to  the  G.of  Israel

9.  4.  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  G.  of  Israel
Ps.  41. 13.  blessed  be  the  L.  G.  of  lsr.  from  everlast.

to  everlasting,  72.  18. 1  106.  48.  Luke  1.  68.
Isa.  41.  17.  1  the  G.  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them
45.  3.  I  which  call  thee  by  name,  am  G.  of  Israel
48.  2.  they  stay  themselves  on  the  G.  of  Israel
Ezek.  8.  4.  the  glory  of  the  G.  of  Israel  was  there
Mat.  15.  31.  the  multitude  glorified  the  G.  of  Israel
Living  GOD.

Dent.  5.  26.  that  heard  the  voice  of  the  living  G.
Josh.  3. 10.  hereby  know  the  living  G.  isamongyou

1  Sam.  17. 26.  should  defy  the  armies  of  living  G.  36.

2  Kings  19.  4.  w  hom  the  king  of  Assyria  hath  sent

to  reproach  the  living  G.  16.  Isa.  37.  4, 17.
Psal.  42.2.  my  soul  thirsteth  for  God  ,  the  living  G.
84.  2.  my  heart  and  flesh  crieth  out  for  living  G.
Jer.  10.  10.  he  is  the  living  G.  an  everlasting  King

23.  36.  have  perverted  the  words  of  the  living  G.
Dan.  6.  26.  he  is  the  living  G.  and  stedfast  forever
Hos.  1.  10.  shall  be  said,  ye  are  sonsof  the  living  G.
Mat.  16.  16.  art  Christ,  Son  of  living  G.  John  6.  69.

26.  63.  1  adjure  thee  by  the  living  G.  tell  us
ActslA.  15.  turn  from  these  vanities  to  the  living  G.
Rom.  9.  26.  they  shall  he  called  children  of  living  G.
2  C or.  3.  3.  but  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  G.

6.  16.  for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  G.

1  Thess.  1.  9.  from  idols  to  serve  living  and  true  G.

1  Tim.  3.  15.  which  is  the  church  of  the  living  G.

4.  10.  because  we  trust  in  the  living  G.  6.  17.
Ileb.  3. 12.  an  evil  heart  in  departing  from  living  G.

9. 14.  purge  your  conscience  to  serve  the  living  G.

10.  31.  it  is  fearful  to  fall  into  hands  of  living  G.

12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  Zion,  the  city  of  living  G.

Reg.  7-  2 .  angel  having  the  seal  of  tiie  living  G.

Eord  GOD,  Lord  his  GOD,  Lord  my.  Lord
our,  thei, ,  your  GOD.  See  these  in  the
divisions  of  the  word  Lord.

Merciful  GOD.

Exod.  34. 6.  the  Lord,  the  Lord  G .merciful,  gracious
Dent.  4.  31.  the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  merciful  G.

2  Chr .  30.  9.  Lord  your  G.  is  merciful  if  ye  turn
Neh.  9.  31.  thou  art  a  gracious  and  merciful  G.
Psal.  116. 5.  gracious  is  the  Lord,  our  G.  is  merciful
Jonah  4.  2.  1  knew  that  thou  art  a  G.  merciful

Mighty  GOD.

Gere.  49. 24.  bow  abode  by  hands  of  mighty  G.of  .Tac.
Dent.  7.  21.  Lord  is  among  you,  a  mighty  G.  10. 17.
Neh.  9.  32.  now  therefore  our  Clod,  the  mighty  G.
Job  36.  5.  behold,  G.  is  mighty,  and  despiseth  notany
Psal.  50.  1.  the  mighty  G.  the  Lord  hath  spoken
132.  2.  how  he  vowed  to  the  mighty  G.  of  Jacob


Psal.  1.32. 5.  till  I  find  an  habitation  re?.  G.of  lace
Isa.  9.  6.  his  name  shall  be  called  the  mighty  G.

10.  21.  the  remnant  shall  return  to  the  mighty  ’(
Jer.  32.  18.  mighty  G.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  nan
liab.  1.  12.  O  mighty  G.  thou  hast  stablished  then

My  GOD.

Gen.  28.21.  Jacob  said,  then  shall  the  Ld.  be  my  (
Exod.  1.5.  2.  he  is  my  G.  my  father’s  G.  1  wiliexa
Ruth  1. 16.  thy  people  be  my  people,  thy  God  my  I
2  Sam.  22.  7-  1  cried  to  my  G.  he  heard,  Psal.  ]({.
22.  and  have  not  departed  from  my  G.  Psal.  38.  Vi
30.  by  my  G.  I  have  leaped  over  a  wall,  Ps.  ]g.  o
VChr.  28. 20.  for  God,  even  my  G.  will  be  with  tin
2  Chr.  18.  13.  what  my  G.  saith,  that  will  I  speak
Neh.  5.  19.  think  upon  me,  my  G.  for  good,  13,3

13.  14.  remember  me,  my  G.  concerning  this,  22
Psal.  22.1 .  my  G .  my  G .  w’hy  hast  thou  forsaken  n~.  •
why  so  far  from  helping  me  ?  Mat.  27.  41
10.  thou  art  my  G.  from  my  mother’s  helly

31.  14.  1  trusted  in  thee,  I  said,  thou  art  my  G.
38.  21.  O  my  G.  be  not  far  from  me,  71.  12.

89.  26.  he  shall  cry,  thou  art  my  Father,  my  G.
104.  33.  I  will  sing  praises  to  my  G.  146.  2.

118.  28.  thou  art  my  G.  and  I  will  praise  thee
145.  1.  1  will  extol  thee,  my  G.  O  King,  and  hie:

Prov.  30.  9.  and  take  the  name  of  my  G.  in  vain
Isa.  7-  13.  but  will  ye  weary  my  G.  also  ?

40.  27.  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  G.
44.  17.  he  saith,  deliver  me,  for  thou  art  my  G.'
61.  10.  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  G.

Dan.  6.22.  my  G.  hath  sent  his  angel,  hath  shut  lion
Hos.  2. 23.  they  shall  say,  thou  art  my  G.  Zech.  13.  !

8.  2.  Israel  shall  cry  to  me,  my  G .  we  know  the,

9.  17-  my  G.  will  cast  them  away,  not  hearken
Mic.  7.  7.  I  will  wait,  for  my  G.  will  hear  me
John  20. 17.  and  say ,  1  ascend  to  my  G .  and  your  Cl

28.  Thomas  answered  and  said,  my  L.  and  my  (
Rom.  1.8.  I  thank  my  G.  through  Jesus  Christ,  fc
you  all,  1  Cor.  1.4. 1  14. 18.  Phil.  1.3.  PhilemA
2  Cor.  12. 21.  lest  w’hen  l  come,  my  G.  will  humb,
Phil.  4.  19-  my  G.  shall  supply  all  your  need
Rev.  3.  12.  I  will  write  on  him  the  name  of  my  C
See  Lord  my  God.

No  GOD.

Dent.  32.  39. 1,  even  I  am  he,  there  is  no  G.  with  tr

1  Kings  8.  23.  there  is  no  G.  like  thee,  2  Chr.  6. 1

2  Kings  1.  )6.  is  it  because  there  is  no  G.  in  lsrae

5.  15.  now  1  know  there  is  no  G.  in  all  the  earth
2  Chron.  32.  15.  no  G.of  any  nation  abletodelivt
Psal.  14. 1.  the  fool  hath  said,  there  is  no  G.  53. 1
Isa.  43.  10.  before  me  there  wras  no  G.  formed

44.  6.  besides  me  there  is  no  G.  8. 1  45.  5,  14,  21
Ezek.  28.  9.  but  thou  shalt  be  a  man,  and  no  G.
Hos.  13.  4.  and  thou  shalt  know  no  G.  but  me
G  GOD.

Nnm.  12.  13.  heal  her  now,  O  G.  I  beseech  thee
Jndg.  16.  28.  strengthen  me,  only  this  once,  U  G
Psal.  4.  1.  hear  me,  G  G.  of  my  righteousness

25.  22.  redeem  Israel,  G  G.  out  of  all  his  troublr
51.  14.  deliver  me  from  blood-guiltiness,  O  G.
56.  12.  thy  vows  are  upon  me,  U  G.  I  will  rende
Isa.  6 4.  4.  nor  hath  the  eye  seen,  G  G.  besides  tht
Heb.  10.  7-  1  said,  lo,  1  come  to  do  thy  will,  G  G.
Of  GOD.

Exod.  9.  1  28.  entreat  there  be  no  more  voices  of  0

1  Sam.  14.  t  15.  so  it  was  a  trembling  of  G.

2  Chr.  10. 15.  hearkened  not,  for  the  cause  was  of  d

25.  20.  Amaziah  would  not  hear,  for  it  came  <y  (
Psal.  7. 10.  my  defence  is  of  G.  who  saveth  uprigli
Isa.  29-  t  1.  w  oe  to  the  lion  of  G.  add  year  to  ye;

53.  4.  we  did  esteem  him  smitten  of  G .  and  alfhctt
Mat.  16.  23.  savourest  not  things  of  G.  Mark?,.'!
John  1.  13.  born  not  of  the  will’ of  man,  buto/  G

6.  46.  he  which  is  of  G.  hath  seen  the  Father

7.  17-  shall  know  of  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  G

8.  47-  he  that  is  of  G.  heareth  ;  ye  are  not  of  G.

9.  16.  this  man  is  not  e/G.  ||33.  if  he  were  note/ A

12.  4.3.  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  of  G.
Acts  5.  39.  if  it  be  of  G.  ye  cannot  overthrow  it
Rom.  2.  29.  whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  G.

9.  16.  but  of  G.  tlrstt  sheweth  mercy

13.  1.  no  power  but  of  G.  powers  ordained  of  G

1  Cor.  1.  30.  who  of  G.  is  made  unto  us  wisdom

6.  19.  which  ye  have  of  G.  ye  are  not  y’our  own

11.  12.  but  all  things  are  of  G.  2  Cor.  5.  18.

2  Cor.  2.17.  but  as  0/ G.  in  the  sight  e/G.  speak  v
3.  5.  we  are  not  sufficient,  our  sufficiency  is  of  (

Phil.  1.  28.  but  to  you  of  salvation,  anil  that  of  (i

3.  9.  the  righteousness  which  is  of  G.  by  faith
Heb.  5.  4.  he  that  was  called  of  G.  as  was  Aarot
1  John  3.  10.  doeth  not  righteousness,  is  not  of  G

4.  1.  beloved,  try’  the  spirits  whether  they  ar eofl
3.  confesseth  not  that  Christ  is  come,  is  not  of  (
6.  we  are  of  G.  ||  5. 19.  we  know  that  we  are  of  l

3  John  11.  follow  good,  he  that  doeth  good  is  of  (
See  Angel,  Ark,  Born,  Children,  Chose!

Church,  Counsel,  Fear,  Glory,  Graci
Hand,  House,  Kingdom,  Knowledc
Love,  Man,  People,  Power,  Servav
Sight,  Son,  Sons,  Spirit,  Will,  Word
Work,  Works,  World,  Wrath.

Our  GOD.

Exod.  5.  8.  they  cry,,  let  us  go  and  sacrifice  to  our  (
Dent.  31.  17.  because  our  G.  is  not  amongst  us

32.  3.  ascribe  ye  greatness  unto  our  G.

Josh.  24.  18.  we  will  serve  the  Lord,  he  is  our  G.
Jndg.  10.  10.  because  we  have  forsaken  our  G.

1  Sam.  2.  2.  neither  is  there  any  rock  like  our  G.

2  Sam.  10. 12.  anil  let  us  play  the  men  for  our  prop!

and  for  the  cities  ot  our  G.  1  Chron.  19-  1
22.  32.  who  is  a  rock,  save  our  G.  ?  Psal.  18.  31

1  Chr.  29.  13.  now  therefore,  our  G.  we  thank  tlv

2  Chron.  2.  5.  for  great  is  our  G.  above  all  gods

14.  11.  O  Lord,  thou  art  our  G .  let  not  man  preva
20.  7.  art  not  thou  our  G.  who  didst  drive  out

Ezra  9. 10.  now,  O  our  G.  what  shall  we  say  attei
Neh. 4. 4.  hear,  O  our  G.  |l  20. our  G.  shall  tight  fori
6.  16.  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  our  (,.

9.  32.  now  therefore  our  G.  the  great,  mighty  G(

13.2.  our  G.  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing
Ps.  40.  3.  hath  put  a  new  song,  even  praise  to  our  (
48.  14.  this  God  is  our  G.  for  ever  and  e-er


GOD


GOD


GOD


al.  50.  5.  our  G.  shall  come  and  not  keep  silence
.  6.  anil  God, even  our  own  (/.shall  bless  us
.  CO.  he  that  is  our  G.  is  tile  God  of  salvation
.  13.  who  is  so  great  a  God  as  our  G.  ?

7.  he  is  our  G.  ||  115. 3.  our  G.  is  in  the  heavens
6. 5.  gracious  is  the  Lord,  our  G.  is  merciful
.  25.  9'.  lo,  this  is  our  G.  we  have  waited  for  him
.'7.  to  our  G.  for  he. will  abundantly  pardon
"  13.  and  departing  away  from  our  G.

.  2.  to  proclaim  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  G.
•n.  3.  17-  °ur  G.  whom  we  serve  isable  to  deliver
■h.  9.7.  he  that  remaineth  shall  be  for  our  G.

1  'or.  6. 11.  ye  are  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  our  G.
b.  1C.  29.  for  our  G.  is  a  consuming  tire
v.  5. 10.  best  made  us  to  our  G.  kings  and  priests

10.  salvation  to  our  G.  who  sitteth  on  the  throne
j  C.  blessing,  and  honour,  and  power  be  to  our  G.

Peace,  Said,  Saith, Serve,  Sent,  Speak,

1  'FEED,  Spoken.

Their  GOD.

n.  17.  8. 1  will  be  their  G.  Exod.  C9.  45.  Jer.  C4.  7.

31.  33.  |  3C.  38.  Ezek.  11.  CO.  |  34.  C4.  1  37.  23,

7.  Zech.  8.  8.  2  Cor.  6.  16.  Rev.  21. 3.

v.  21. 6.  they  shall  be  holy  to  their  G.  for  offerings
Uf  the  Lord,  and  bread  of  their  G.  they  do  offer

■.  45.  that  1  might  be  their  G.  Ezek.  14.  11.

am.  7.  24.  thou  art  become  their  G.  1  Chr.  17.  22.

I  ra  5.  5.  the  eye  of  their  G.  was  on  the  elders
al.  79. 10.  where  is  their  G.  /  115.  2.  Joel  2.  17-
’.  8.  19-  should  not  a  people  seek  to  their  G.  /

1.  shall  fret,  and  curse  their  king,  and  their  G.
.2.  and  forsook  not  the  ordinance  of  their  G.

■.  5.  4.  they  know  not  the  judgment  of  their  G.5.
■n.  11.  32.  but  the  people  that  know  their  G.
s.  4.  12.  have  gone  a  whor.  from  under  their  G.

4.  not  frame  their  doings  to  turn  to  their  G.

:/<.  12. 5.  my  strength  in  the  l  ord  of  hosts  their  G.

b.  11.  16.  he  is  not  ashamed  to  be  ealied  their  G.

See  Lord  their  God.

Thy  GOD.

r>.  19. 14.  thou  shalt  fear  thy  G.  25.  17,  36,  43.
nt.  10.  21.  he  is  thy  praise,  and  he  is  thy  G.

.  17.  hast  avouchetf  this  day  the  Ld.  to  be  thy  G.
th  1.  16.  thy  people  my  people,  thy  G.  my  God
’  Hugs  19. 10.  let  not  thy  G.  deceive  thee,  Isa. 37. 10.

I  hr.  12. 18.  peace  to  thee,  for  thy  G.  helpeth  thee
|  hr.  9. 8.  because  thy  G.  loved  Isr.  made  thee  king
'ra  7.  14.  according  to  law  of  thy  G.  in  thy  hand

5.  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  G.  laws  of  thy  G.

h.  9.  18.  this  is  thy  G.  that  brought  thee  up

.  42. 3. continually  say  to  me,  where  is  thy  G.  ?  10.

.  7.  God,  My  G.  hath  anointed  Ihee,  ILeb.  1.  9.

.  7.  hear,  O  Israel,  1  am  God,  even  thy  G.

.28.  thy  G.  hath  commanded  thy  strength

7. 12.  praise  the  Lord,  praise  thy  G.  O  / ion
:.  41.  10.  be  not  dismayed,  for  1  am  thy  G.

.  20.  they  are  full  of  the  rebuke  of  thy  G.

.7-  that  saith  to  Zion,  thy  G.  reigneth
.  19.  l.ord  shall  be  a  light,  and  thy  G.  thy  glory
.  5.  so  shall  thy  G.  rejoice  over  thee

6.  16.  thy  G.  whom  thou  servest  will  deliver
;  0.  is  thy  G.  whom  thou  servest  continually  able  ?
'.  12.  and  to  chasten  thyself  before  thy  G.
j  .  4.  6.  thou  hast  forgotten  the  law  of  thy  G.

1.  thou  hast  gone  a  whoring  from  thy  G.

:.  6.  turn  thou  to  thy  G.  anil  wait  on  thy  G.

•ios  4.  12.  prepare  to  meet  thy  G.  O  Israel
inh  1.  6.  ()  sleeper,  arise,  call  u  pon  thy  G.

c.  6.  8.  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  G.

See  Lord  thy  God.

To,  or  unto  GOD.

n.  40.  8.  do  not  interpretations  belong  to  G.  ?
od.2.  23.  they  cried,  and  their  cry  came  up  to  G.
U’.  21.  7*  for  he  is  holj’  unto  his  G.
nt.  32.  17.  sac.  to  devils  not  to  G.  1  Cor.  10.  20.
ft.  26.  there  is  none  like  to  the  G.  of  Jeshurun
dg.  13.5.  shall  be  a  Nazarite  unto  G.  7.  I  16.  17.
dm.  10. 3.  shall  meet  the  three  men  going  up  to  G.
Ihrov.  26.32.  for  every  matter  perfaining  to  G.

1  22.  2.  can  a  man  be  profitable  to  G.  ?

I.  31.  surely  it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  G.  I  have
al.  62.  11.  I  have  heard,  power  belongeth  to  G.

i.  20.  to  G.  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  death

II.  Ethiopia  shall  stretch  her  hands  to  G.

’>■  28.  it  is  good  forme  to  draw  near  to  G.

'.1.  I  cried  to  G.  even  to  G.  with  my  voice
1  cl.  12.  7.  and  the  spirit  shall  return  unto  G.

J.  58.  2.  they  take  delight  in  approaching  to  Cr.
yon.  3.  41.  let  us  lift  up  our  heart  with  hands  to  G.
at.  22.  21.  render  unto  G.  the  things  which  are

God’s,  Mark  12.  17.  Luke  20.  25.
'in  13.  3.  that  he  was  come  from  God,  went  to  G.
'ts  4.  19.  to  hearken  to  you  more  than  unto  G.

4.  thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  G.

)•  18.  to  turn  them  from  power  of  Satan  unto  G.

10.  turn  to  G.  and  do  works  meet  for  repentance
>m.  6.  10.  he  liveth  unto  G.  ||  11.  but  alive  unto  G.
13.  yield  yourselves  unto  G.  as  alive  from  dead
4.  that  we  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto  G.

’•  1.  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  unto  G.

1. 12.  every  one  give  account  of  himself  to  G.

'lor.  14.  2.  speaketh  not  unto  men  but  unto  G.

0.  24.  he  shall  have  delivered  up  kingdom  to  G.
01.  4.20.  npw  unto  G.  and  our  Father  be  glory
co- 7 •  25.  he  is  able  to  save  them  that  come  unto  G.
L  6.  he  that  cometh  to  G.  must  believe  that  he  is
2.  23.  hut  ye  are  come  to  G.  the  Judge  of  all
rn-  4.  7.  submit  yourselves  therefore  to  G.
^Ghld.Christoncesuffered,  might  bringus  to  G.
.6.  but  live  according  to  G.  in  the  Spirit
cv.  5.  9.  thou  hast  redeemed  us  to  G.  by  thy  blood
—  5.  her  child  was  caught  up  unto  G .  to  his  throne
4.  4.  being  the  first-fruits  unto  G.  and  the  Lamb
See  Tree.

With  GOD.

en;5.  22.  Enoch  walked  uith  G.  and  was  not,  24.
•  9.  Noali  walked  ||  32.  28.  .1  acob  hath  power  w.  G.
rod.  19.  17.  Moses  brought  people  to  meet  with  G.
yam.  J4.  45.  he  hath  wrought  with  G.  this  day
‘ram.  23.  5.  although  my  house  De  not  so  with  G.
hn071'  ’P*  forbear  from  meddling  with  G.

0  9.  2.  how  should  man  b»  just  with  G.  ?


Job  13.  3.  and  I  desire  to  reason  with  G.

16.  21.  O  that  one  might  plead  for  a  man  with  G.
25.  4.  how  then  can  a  man  be  justified  with  G.  ?

27. 13.  this  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man  with  G.

34.  9.  that  he  should  delight  himself  with  G.

23.  that  he  should  enter  into  judgment  with  G.
37.  22.  with  G.  is  terrible  majesty
Psal.  78.  8.  whose  spirit  is  not  stedfast  with  G.
Hos.  11.  12.  but  Judah  yet  ruleth  with  G.

12.  3.  Jacob  by  his  strength  had  power  with  Cr.
Mat.  19.  26.  with  men  this  is  impossible,  but  with
G.  all  things  possible,  Mark  10.  27*  Luke
1.  37.  I  18.  27.

Luke  1.  30.  for  thou  hast  found  favour  with  G.

2.  52.  Jesus  increased  in  favour  with  G.  and  man
John  1.1.  the  Word  was  with  G.  the  Word  was  God
5. 18.  making  himself  equal  with  G.  Phil.  2.  6.
Rom.  2.  11.  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  G.

5. 1.  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  withG.
9. 14.  is  there  unrighteousn.  with  G. !  God  forbid

1  Cor.  3.  9-  we  are  labourers  together  with  G.

19.  the  wisdom  of  this  world  isfoolishness  with  G .

7.  24.  let  every  man  therein  abide  with  G.

2  These.  1 . 6.  a  righteous  thing  with  G.  to  recompense
Jam.  4.  4.  the  friendship  of  world  is  enmity  with  G.
1  Pet.  2.20.  take  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  G.

Would  God,  see  Would.

Four  GOD.

Gen.  43.23.  your  Cr.  hath  given  you  treasure  in  sacks
Eiod.  8.  25.  go  ye,  sacrifice  to  your  G.  in  the  land
Lev.  11.45.  Lord  that  bringeth  you  out  of  Egypt  to
be  your  G.  22.  33. 1  25.  38.  Nurn.  15.  41.
26. 12. 1  will  be  your  G.  and  ye  shall  be  my  people,
Jer.  7.  23.  I  ll .  4. 1  30.  22.  Ezek.  36.  28.
Num.  10. 10.  be  to  you  a  memorial  before  your  G.

15.  40.  do  m3'  commandments,  be  holy  to  your  G.
Josh.  24.  27.  stone  be  witness,  lest  ye  deny  your  G.

1  Sam.  10.  19  ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  G.

2  Chron.  32.  14.  that  your  G.  should  deliver  3'ou
15.  how  much  less  shall  your  Cr.  deliver  you?

Ezra  4.  2.  let  us  build,  for  we  seek  your  G.  as  ye  do
Isa.  35.  4.  your  G.  will  come  with  vengeance

40.  1.  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  G.

9.  say  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  behold  your  G.

59.2.  iniquities  separated  between  you  and  your  G.

Ezek.  34.  31.  1  am  your  G.  saith  the  Lord  God
Dan.  2.  47-  of  a  truth  it  is,  your  G.  is  a  God  of  gods
Hos.  1.9.yeare  notiny  people,  I  will  not  be  your  G .
John  8.  54  of  whom  ye  say  that  he  is  your  G.

20.  17.  1  ascend  to  my  God  and  your  G.

See  Lord  your  God.

GODDESS.

1  Kings  11.5.  Solom.  went  after  the  g.  of  Zidonians
33.  they  have  worshipped  Ashtoreth,  the  g.

Acts  19.  27-  the  temple  ot  great//.  Diana  be  despised

35.  Ephesians  are  worshippers  of  the  g.  Diana
37.  nor  yet  blasphemers  ot  your/7.

GODHEAD.

Acts  17.  29.  nor  think  that  the  g.  is  like  to  gold
Rom.  1.  20.  even  his  eternal  power  and  g.

Col.  2. 9.  in  him  dwelleth  the  fulnessof  the g.  bodily
GODLY.

Psal.  4.  3.  the  Lord  hath  set  apart  him  that  is  g.

12. 1.  help,  Lord,  for  the  g.  man  ceaseth

32.  6.  for  this  shal  1  every  one  that  is  g.  pray
Mic.  7-  +  2.  the  g.  man  is  perished  out  of  the  earth
Mai.  2. 15.  that  he  might  seek  a  g.  seed

2  Cor.  1.  12.  in  g.  sincerity  had  our  conversation
7.  9.  we  were  made  sorry  after  a g.  manner,  11.

10.  for  g.  sorrow  worketh  repentance

11.2.  1  am  jealous  over  you  with  g.  jealousy
2  Tim.  3. 12.  all  that  will  live/7,  in  Christ,  suffer
Tit.  2.  12.  that  ye  should  live  g.  in  this  world
Heb.  12.  28.  let  us  serve  God  with  rever.  and  g.  fear

2  Pet.  2.  9.  the  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  g.

3  John  6.  if  thou  bring  forward  after  a  g.  sort

GODLINESS.

Isa.  57.  +1.  and  men  of  g.  are  taken  away

1  Tim.  2.  2.  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  life  in  all  g.

10.  which  becometh  women  professing  g.

3. 16.  great  is  the  mystery  of  g.  God  in  the  flesh
4.  7.  and  exercise  thyselfrather  unto  g.

8.  but  g .  is  profitable  unto  all  things
6.  3.  to  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  g.

5.  corrupt  men,  supposing  that  gain  is  g.

6.  but.  g.  with  contentment  is  great  gain

11.  follow  after  righteousness,  g.  faith,  love

2  Tim.  3.  5.  having  a  form  of  g.  but  denying  power
Tit.  1. 1.  acknowledging  the  truth  which  is  after  g.

2  Pet.  1.  3.  all  things  that  pertain  to  life  and  g.

6.  add  to  patience  g.  to  g.  brotherly  kindness,  7.
3. 11.  what  manner  of  persons  ought  to  be  in  all  g.
GOD-WARD.

Exod.  18. 19.  God  with  thee,  be  thou  for  people  to  G.
2  Cor.  3.  4.  such  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  G.

1  These.  1.  8.  your  faith  to  G.  is  spread  abroad
GODS.

Gen.  3.  5.  ye  shall  be  as  g.  knowing  good  and  evil

31.  30.  yet  wherefore  hast  thou  stolen  my  g.  ?
Exod.  12. 12.  against  all  g.  of  Egypt  1  will  execute

20.  23.  shalt  not  make  with  me  g.  of  silver  or  gold
22.28.  thou  shalt  not  revile  the  g.  nor  curse  ruler
23.  24.  thou  shalt  not  bow  down  to  their  g.

32.  shalt  make  no  covenant  with  them  nor  their  g.
32. 1 .  up, make  us  g.  to  go  before  us,  23.  Acts 7.  40.
4  these  be  thy  g.  O  Israel,  which  brought,  8.

31.  Moses  said,  they  have  made  them  g.  of  gold
34. 15.  lest  they  go  a  whoring  after  their  g.

Num.  25. 2.  called  people  to  the  sacrifices  of  their  g.

33.  4.  upon  the  Egyptians’  g.  also  the  Lord  exe¬

cuted  judgment,  Jer.  43. 12, 13.  I  46.  25.
Dent.  7.25.  the  images  of  their  g.  shall  ye  burn

10. 17.  Lord  vour  God  is  God  of  g.  Lord  of  lords

12.  3.  ye  shall  hew  down  the  images  of  their  g.

30.  that  thou  enquire  not  after  their  g.

31.  have  done  every  abomination  to  their  77.  burnt

their  sons  and  daughters  in  the  fire  to  their  g.

13.  7.  entice  thee  to  the  g.  of  people  round  about

20. 18.  not  to  do  as  they’  have  done  to  their  g.

29.  +17.  and  ye  have  seen  their  dungy  g.

32.  37.  and  ye  shall  say,  where  are  their  77.  ?
Josh.  22.  22.  the  Lord  God  of  g.  knoweth


Josh.  23.  7*  nor  make  mention  of  the  name  of  their  g.
Judg.  5. 8.  they  chose  new  g.  then  was  war  in  gates
6.  10.  1  said,  fear  not  the  g.  of  the  Amorites
10.  14.  go  and  cry  to  the  g.  which  ye  have  chosen

17.  5.  the  man  Micah  had  an  house  of  77.

18.  24.  ye  have  taken  away  my  77.  which  I  made
Ruth  1. 15.  thy  sister-in-law  is  gone  back  to  her  g.

1  Sam.  4.  8.  these  are  the  g.  that  smote  Egyptians

6.  5.  will  lighten  his  hand  from  off  you  and  your  g

17.  43.  the  Philistine  cursed  David  by  his  g.

28. 13.  she  said,  1  saw  g.  ascending  out  of  the  earth.

2  Sam.  7.23.  thou  redeemest  from  Egypt  and  their  17..

1  Kings  ll.  2.  they  will  turn  your  heart  after  their/7.

8.  Solomon  burnt  incense  and  sacrificed  to  their  g

12.  28.  jt  is  too  mud)  to  go  up,  behold  thy  g.

18.  24.  and  call  ye  on  the  name  of  your  g.  25.

19.  2.  let  the  g.  do  so  to  me  and  more  also,  20. 10..

20.  23.  their  g.  are  g.  of  the  hills,  therefore

2  Kings  17.  29.  every  nation  made  g.  of  their  own

33.  they  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their  own  g.

18.  33.  hath  any  of  the  <7.  delivered  his  land  ?  19. 12.

2  Chron.  32.  13,  14.  Isa.  36.  18.  ]  37-12.

34.  where  are  the  g.  of  Hamath  ?  Isa.  36.  19.

19.  18.  have  cast  their  g.  into  fire,  they  were  no  g.

1  Chron.  5.  25.  went  a  whoring  after  g.  of  the  land
10.  10.  put  Saul’s  armour  in  the  house  of  their  g.

14.  12.  they  left  their  77.  David  burnt  them

2  Chron.  13.  8.  golden  calves  Jeroboam  made  for  g.

9.  the  same  may  be  a  priest  to  them  that  are  no  g.
25.  14.  Amsziah  brought  g.  of  Seir  to  be  his  g.

28.  23.  Ahaz  sacrificed  to  the  g.  of  Damascus

32.  17.  the  g.  of  the  nations  have  not  delivered

Ezra  1 . 7.  N ebucli.  pur  vessels  in  the  house  of  his g.
Psal.  82.  1.  God  standeth,  he  judgeth  among  the g.
6.  I  have  said,  ye  are  g.  John  10.  34.

136.  2.  O  give  thanks  unto  the  God  of  77.

138.  1.  before  the  77.  will  I  sing  praise  unto  thee
Isa.  21.  9.  Babylon  is  fallen,  and  her  77.  broken

41.  23.  that  we  may  know  that  ye  are  77.

42.  17.  that  say  to  molten  images,  ye  are  our  g.
Jer.  2.  11.  hath  a  nation  changed  her  77.  are  no  g.  ?

28.  where  are  thy  77.  thou  hast  made  ;  according:

to  the  number  of  thy  cities  are  thy  77.  11.  13.
5.  7.  children  have  sworn  by  them  that  are  no  77.

10.  11.  the  77.  that  have  not  made  the  heavens

11. 12.  cry  to  the  77.  to  whom  they  offer  incense

16.  20.  shall  a  man  make  g. and  they  are  no  77.  ?'

48.  35.  to  cease  him  that  burnetii  incense  to  his  g.

Dan.  2.  11.  no  other  can  shew  it.  except  the  77.

47.  of  a  truth  it  is,  that  your  God  is  a  God  of  77.

4.  8.  in  whom  is  the  spirit  of  the  holy  77.

9.  I  know  spirit  of  holy  77.  is  in  thee,  18. 1  5.  14.

5.  4.  they  praised  the  77.  of  gold  and  silver,  23.

11.  and  wisdom  like  the  wisdom  of  the  77.

11.8.  carry  captives  into  Egypt  77.  with  princes

36.  shall  speak  marvellous  things  against  G.  of  g.
Hos.  14.  3.  neither  will  we  say  more,  ye  are  our  g
Nah.  1. 14.  out  of  the  house  of  thy  77.  1  will  cut  off:
John  10.  35.  if  he  called  them  77.  to’whom  the  word
Acts  14.  11.  the  g.  are  come  down  to  us  like  men

17.  +  23.  I  beheld  your  77.  that  you  worship

19.  26.  they  be  no  77.  which  are  made  with  hands
1  Cor.  8.  5.  be  that  are  called  77.  there  be  g.  many
Gal.  4.  8.  did  service  to  them  which  by  nature  no  g.
See  Serve.

All  GODS.

Exod.  18.  11.  I  know  the  Lord  is  greater  than  allg.

1  Chr.  16. 25.  to  be  feared  above  all  77.  Psal.  96. 4.
26.  all  77.  of  the  people  are  idols,  Psal.  96.  5.

2  Chr.  2.  5.  great  is  God  above  all  77.  Psal.  135.  5.
Psal.  95.  3.  the  Lord  is  a  great  King  above  all  g.
97. 7.  worship  him,  a/lyeg.  |i  9.  exalted  above  allg.

Zeph.  2.  11.  he  will  famish  all  the  77.  of  the  earth
Among  the  GODS.

Exod.  15. 11.  among  the  77.  who  is  like  thee,  O  Lord  l
2  Kings  18.  35.  who  among  the g.  could  deiivei  their
country  ?  2  Chron.  32.  14.  Isa.  36.20*
Psal.  86.  8.  among  the  77.  there  is  none  like  thee
Molten  GODS.

Exod.  34.  17.  shalt  make  no  molten  g.  Lev.  19.  4.
Other  GODS.

Exod.  20.  3.  shalt  have  noo.  77.  before  me,  Deut .  5. 7-

23. 13.  make  no  mention  of  names  of  other  g.

Deut.  6.  14.  ye  shall  not  go  after  other  g.  11.  28..

|  28.  14.  1  Kings  11.  10.  Jer.  25.  6. 1  35.  15.

7.  4.  they  will  turn  thy  son  to  serve  other  77.

8.  19.  if  thou  walk  after  other  g.  and  serve  them

13.  2.  let  us  go  after  other  g.  and  serve  them,  6.  13.

17.  3.  hath  gone  and-  served  other  g.  29.  26.  Josh.

23. 16.  Judg.  10.  13.  1  Sam.  8.  8.  Jer.  11.  10.

18.  20.  prophet  that  shall  speak  in  name  of  other  g.

30.  17.  but  shalt  be  drawn  away,  and  worship  other

77.  and  serve  them,  Jer.  22.  9.

31.  18.  in  that  day  they  turned  to  other  g.

20.  then  will  they  turn  to  other  77.  and  provoke  me
Judg.  2. 12.  forsook  the  Lord,  and  followed  other  g.
17.  went  a  whoring  after  other  g.  bowed  to  them

19.  in  following  other  g.  to  serve  them,  and  to  bow
1  Sam.  26. 19.  driven  me  out,  saying,  go  serve  other  g.

1  Kings  9.  9.  have  taken  hold  upon  other  g.  £  Chr.

7.  22.

11.  4.  his  wives  turned  his  heart  after  other  g.

14.  9.  for  thou  hast  gone  and  made  thee  other  77.

2  Kings  5. 17. 1  will  not  offer  sacrifice  to  other  g.
17.  7-  Israel  had  sinneo,  and  had  feared  other  77.

35.  ye  shall  not  fear  other  g.  nor  bow  to  them,
nor  serve  them,  nor  sacrifice  to  them,  37, 38.

22.  17.  have  forsaken  me,  and  burnt  incense  to
other  77.  2  Chron.  34.  25.  Jer.  1.  16.  !  19.  4
2  Chron.  28.  25.  Ahaz  burnt  incense  to  other  g.

Jer.  7.  6.  nor  walk  after  other  g.  to  your  hurt

9.  walk  after  other  g.  whom  ye  know  not,  13. 10.
16. 11.  have  forsaken  me,  and  walked  after  other  77.
44.  5.  hearkened  not  to  burn  no  incense  to  other  g.

8.  burning  incense  to  other  77.  in  land  of  Egypt,  15.
IIos.  3. 1.  look  to  other  g.  and  love  flagons  ot  wine-
See  Serve.

Strange  GODS.

Gen.  35.  2.  put  away  the  strange  g.  1  Sam.  7  •  3.

4.  they  gave  Jacob'  the  strange  g.  Josh.  24.  23.
Deut.  32.  16.  provoked  him  to  jealousy  with  str.  g.
Josh.  24.  20.  if  ye  forsake  Lord,  and  serve  strange  9.

199


GOL


GOL


GON


Jude;.  10.  16.  they  put  away  their  strange  g.

2  Chr.  14.  3.  As.i  took  away  the  altar  of  strange  g.
33.  15.  Josiah  took  away  the  strange  g.  and  idol
Jer.  5.  19.  as  ye  served  strange  g.  so  serve  strangers
Acts  17.  18.  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  g.
GOLD.

Gen.  2. 11.  whole  land  of  Havilah,  where  there  is  g.

12.  the  g.  of  that  land  is  good,  there  is  bdellium

41.  42.  he  put  a  chain  of  g.  on  Joseph's  neck
Exod.  20.  23.  nor  shall  ye  make  you  gods  or  g.

25.  12.  thou  shalt  cast  four  rings  ot  g.  tor  the  ark,

26.  1  26.  29.  I  28.  23,  26,  2?.  I  37-  3,  13.

13.  shalt  make  staves  of  s'nittim-wood,  overlay
them  with  g.  28.  1 26. 29,  37 •  I  30.  5. 1  37 .  4, 15,  28.

18.  thou  shalt  make  two  cherubims  ot  g.  37.  7-

26.  6.  thou  shalt  make  fifty  taches  of  g.  36.  13.

32.  their  hooks  shall  be  of  g.  37-  1  36.  38.

£8.  6.  ephod  g.  ||  8.  girdle  £/.  ||  15.  breast- plate  g.

11.  to  be  set  in  ouches  of  g.  13.  1  39.  6,  13,  16.

24.  chains  of  g.  II  .33.  thou  shalt  make  bells  of  g.
32.  24.  who  hath  any  g.  let  him  break  it  off
31.  oh,  this  people,  have  made  them  gods  of  g.

35.  22.  they  brought  jewels  of  g.  an  offering  of  g.

36.  34.  he  overlaid  the  boards  with  g.  bars  with  g.
38.  he  overlaid  their  chapiters  and  fillets  with  g.

38.  24.  all  the  g.  that  was  occupied  in  the  work
139.  3.  they  did  beat  the  g.  into  thin  plates
40.  5.  thou  shalt  set  the  altar  of  g.  before  the  ark
Num.  7.  14.  one  spoon  often  shekels  of  9.  20.

84.  at  dedication  of  the  altar  twelve  spoons  of  g.
86.  all  the  g.  of  the  spoons  was  120  shekels
?l.  50.  the  captains’  oblation,  jewels  of  g.  chains
Josh.  7.  21.  Achan  took  a  wedge  of  g.  of  50  shekels
24.  Joshua  took  Achan  and  the  wedge  of  g.

Judg.  8.  26.  the  ear-rings  1700  shekels  of  g.

1  Sam.  6.  8.  and  put  the  jewels  of  g.  in  a  coffer

11.  they  laid  coffer  and  the  mice  of  g.  on  the  cart

15.  Levites  took  the  coffer  with  the  jewels  off/.

2  Sam.  8.  7.  David  took  shields  of  g.  1  Chr.  18.  7-

1  Kings  6.  22.  house,  altar,  he  overlaid  with  g.

28.  he  overlaid  cherubims  with  g.  2  Chron.  3.  10.
7.  48.  Solomon  made  the  altar  and  table  of  g.

49.  lamps  and  tongs  of  g.  11  50.  hinges  of  g.

9. 11.  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  furnished  Solomon  with
g.  and  cedar  trees,  10.  11.  2  Chron.  9.  10.

10.  2.  queen  of  Sheba  came  with  g.  2  Chron.  9.  1.

14.  the  weight  of  g.  come  in  one  year,  2  Chr.  9. 13.

16.  Solomon  made  200  targets  of  beaten  g.

17.  he  made  three  hundred  shields  of  g.

18.  lie  overlaid  the  throne  with  the  best  g.

12.  28.  Jeroboam  made  two  calves  of  g.

22.  48.  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  to  go  for  g.

2  Kings  18.  16.  llezekiah  cut  off'  g.  front  the  doors

1  Chron.  28.  14.  David  gave  of  g.  by  weight  for  g.

2  Chron.  3.  6.  and  the  g.  was  g.  of  Parvaim

4.  7-  ten  candlesticks  of  g.  ||  8.  basins  of  g.

22.  snuffers,  censers,  and  spoons  of  pure  g.

9.  18.  steps  to  the  throne,  with  a  footstool  of  g.

12.  9.  Shtshak  carried  away  the  shields  of  g.

Ezra  8  27.  basins  of  g.  copper  precious  as  g.

Neh.  7.  70.  1  irshatha  gave  thousand  drachms  of  g.

71.  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  g.  ||72.  people  gave  g.
Job  22.  24.  lay  up  g.  as  dust,  the  g.  of  Ophir

f  25.  yea,  the  Almighty  shall  be  thy  //.

23.  10.  when  tried,  I  shall  come  forth  like  g.

28.  6.  as  for  the  earth,  it  hath  the  dust  of  g.

15.  wisdom  cannot  be  gotten  for  g.  nor  silver

16.  it  cannot  be  valued  with  the  g.  of  Ophir

17.  the  g.  and  the  crystal  cannot  equal  it

31.  24.  if  I  made  g.  my  hope,  or  said  to  tine  g.

36.  19.  will  he  esteem  thy  riches  '  no  not  g.

37.  t  22.  g.  cometh  out  of  the  north

42.  11.  every  one  gave  Job  an  ear-ring  of  g.

Psal.  19.  10.  more  to  be  desired  are  they  than  g.

45.  9.  did  stand  the  queen  in  g.  of  Ophir

72.  15.  to  him  shall  be  given  of  the  g.  of  Sheba
Pi  ■ov.  11.  22.  as  a  jewel  of  g.  in  a  swine’s  snout

16.  16.  much  better  it  is  to  get  wisdom  than  g.

20.  15.  there  is  g.  and  a  multitude  of  rubies

Cant.  1.  10.  thy  neck  is  comely  with  chains  of  g.

5.  14.  his  hands  are  as  g.  rings  set  with  beryl
Isa.  14.  t  4.  how  hath  the  exactness  of  g.  ceased

30.  22.  ye  shall  detile  ornament  of  thy  images  of  g.
40.  19.  the  goldsmith  spreadeth  it  over  with  g.

60. 17.  for  brass  l  will  bring  g.  for  iron  bring  silver
Jer.  4.  30.  thou  deckest  thee  with  ornaments  of  g.
Lam  A.  1.  howisthe^/.  become  dim  !  tiney.  changed !
Ezek.  27.  22.  merchants  of  Sheba  occupied  with  g.
Dan.2.  38.  art  head  of  <7.  ||  3. 1.  IS  eb.  made  image  of g.
5.  23.  and  thou  hast  praised  the  gods  of  g.

29.  they  put  a  chain  of  g.  about  Daniel’s  neck
Zech.  4.  2.  and  behold  a  candlestick  all  of  g.

13.  9.  and  1  will  try  them  as  g.  is  tried

Mat.  2.  11.  they  presented  to  him  g.  and  myrrh

23.  16.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  g.  of  the  temple

17.  for  whether  is  greater,  the  g.  or  the  temple  ?

1  Tim.  2. 9.  not  adorned  with  g.  or  pearls,  1  Pet.  3.3.
Heb.  9.  4.  the  ark  overlaid  round  about  with  g.
Jam.  2.  2.  if  there  come  a  man  with  a  g.  ring
1  Pet.  1.  7.  the  trial  of  faith  more  precious  than  g.
Rev.  3.  18.  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  g.  tried
4.  4.  the  elders  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  y.

9.  7-  the  locusts  had  on  their  heads  crowns  of  g.

17.  4.  the  woman  w'as  decked  with  g.  and  pearls

18.  16.  that  great  city  that  was  decked  with  g.

See  Beaten,  Crown,  Tine.

Pure  GOLD.

j Exod.  25. 11.  thou  shalt  overlay  the  ark  with  pure  g.
within  and  without,  24.1  30.  3.  j  37.  2,  11.  26.
17-  thou  shalt  make  a  mercy-seat  of  pure  g.  37.  6.
29.  dishes,  spoons  and  covers  of  p.  g.  37.  16,  23.
31.  make  acandlest.  of p.  g.  37-  17.  1  Kings’ll.  49.
38.  snuff-dishes  p.  g.  1  Kings  J.  50.  2  Chr.  4.  22.
28.  14.  two  chains  of  pure  g.  at  ends,  22.  |  39.  15.
36.  thou  shalt  make  a  plate  of  pure  g.  .39.  30.

1  Kings  6.  20.  the  oracle  he  overlaid  with  pure  g.

10.  21 .  vessels  of  Lebanon  of  pure  g.  2  Chr.  9.  20.

1  Chron.  28.  17 .  pure  g.  for  flesh-hooks,  bowls,  cups
£  Chron.  3.  4.  overlaid  the  porch  within  with  pure  g.

9.  17-  he  overlaid  the  throne  with  pure  g.

Job  28.  19.  wisdom  not  to  he  valued  with  pure  g.
Psal.  21.  3.  settest  a  crown  ot  pure  g.  on  his  head
t?()0


Rev.  21.  18.  city7  was  pure  g.  ||2l.  street  of  j.-1/re  g.
GOLD  with  Alter.

Gen.  13.  2.  Abram  was  rich  in  stiver  and  g.  24.  35.
44. 8.  steal  out  of  my  lord’s  house  silver  or  g.

Exod.  3.  22.  jewels  of  silver  and  g.  11.  2.  1 12.  35.

25.  3.  this  is  the  offering,  take  silver  and  g.

31.  4.  to  work  in  g.  silver,  and  brass,  35.  32.

Num.  22.  18.  his  house  full  of  silver  and  g  24.  13.
31.  22.  only  g .  and  silver  that  may  abide  the  tire
Dent.  7.  25.  shalt  not  desire  silver  and  g.  on  idols
8.  13.  when  thy  silver  and  g.  is  multiplied
17.  17.  nor  shall  he  greatly  multiply  stiver  and  g.
29.  17.  ye  have  seen  their  idols,  silver  and  g.

Josh.  6.  19.  silver  and  g.  are  consecrated  to  Ld.  24.

22.  8.  return  to  your  tents  with  silver  and  <7.

2 Sam. 8. 11.  s'ffr.and g.  Dav.  dedicated,  1  Kings'! .51.
21.4.  we  will  have  no  silver  or  g.  of  Saul

1  Kings  15. 15.  Asa  brought  into  house  of  Ld.  silver

and  g.  he  had  dedicated,  2  Chron.  15.  18.

18.  Asa  took  all  the  silver  and  g.  2  Chron.  16.  2.

19.  I  have  sent  a  present  of  slv.  and  g.  2  Chr.  16.3.

20.  3.  silv.  and  g.  is  mine  ||  5.  deliver  silv.  and  g.

2  Kings  7.  8.  carried  thence  silver  and  g.  raiment

14.  14.  Jehoash  took  the  silv.  and  g.  2  Chr.  25.  24.

16.  8.  Ahaztook  silv.  and  g.  found  in  Ld.’s  house
20.  13.  Hezek.  shewed  them  silv.  and g.  Isa.  39.  2.

23.  .35.  Jehoiak.  gave  silv.  and  g.  exacted  silv.  and  g.
25.  15.  things  of  g.  in  g.  of  silv.  in  silv.  Jer.  52.  19.

1  Chr.  29.  3.  of  my  own  proper  good ,  of  g.  and  silv.

2  Chr.  1.  15.  the  king  made  silver  and  g.  plenteous
Ezra  1.  4.  men  of  his  place  help  with  silver  and  g.

2. 69.  gave  silv.  and  g.  ||  7- 15.  to  carry  silv.  and  g.

8.  25.  they  weighed  them  the  silver  and  g.  33.

Esth.  1.  6.  beds  were  of  g.  and  silver  on  a  pavement
Job  28.  1.  there  is  a  vein  for  silver,  a  place  for  g.
Psal.  68.  13.  covered  with  silv.  her  feathers  with  g.
105.  37.  he  brought  them  out  with  silver  and  g.

115.  4.  their  idols  are  silver  and  g.  135.  15.

119.  72.  thy  law  is  better  than  g.  and  silver
Prov.  8.  10.  not  silv.  receive  knowl.  rather  than  g.

17.  3.  fining-pot  for  silver,  furnace  for g.  27.  21.

22.  1.  loving  favour  rather  than  silver  or  g.

25.  11.  like  apples  of  g.  in  pictures  of  silver
Eccl.  2.  8.  1  gathered  me  also  silver  and  g.

Cant.  1.  11.  make  borders  of  <7.  with  studs  of  silv.

3. 10.  he  made  the  pillars  of  silver,  bottom  of  g.
Isa.  2.7-  the  land  also  is  full  of  silver  and  g.

20.  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silv.  and  g.  31.  7.

1.3.  17.  which  shall  not  regard  silver  or  g.

46.  6.  they  lavish g.  out  of  the  bag,  and  weigh  silv.
60.  9.  to  bring  their  silver  and  g.  with  them
Jer.  10.  4.  they  deck  it  with  silver  and  g.

Ezek.  7. 19.  they  shall  cast  away  their  silver  and  g.
silver  and  g.  not  able  to  deliver  them,  Zeph.  1. 18.

16.  13.  thus  wast  thou  decked  with  g.  and  silver
Dan.  2.  35.  then  was  silv.  and  g.  broken  to  pieces, 45.

5. 4.  they  praised  the  gods  of  silver  and  g.  23.

11.  38.  a  god  shall  he  honour  with  g.  and  silver

43.  have  power  over  treasures  of  g.  and  silver
Ilos.  2.  8.  did  not  know  1  multiplied  her  silv.  and  g.
8.  4.  of  their  silver  and  g.  have  they  made  idols
Joel  3.  5.  because  ye  have  taken  my  silver  and  g.
Nah.  2.  9.  take  the  spoil  of  silver  and  spoil  of g.
Jlab.  2.  19.  behold,  it  is  laid  over  with  silv.  and  g.
l!ag.  2.  8.  the  silver  is  mine,  and  the  g.  is  mine
Zech.  6.  11.  then  take  silver  and  g.  and  make  crowns
Mai.  3.  3.  he  shall  purge  them  as  g.  and  silver
Mat.  10.  9.  provide  neither  g.  nor  silver,  nor  brass
Acts  3.  6.  Peter  said,  silv.  and  g.  have  1  none

17.  29.  nor  think  Godhead  is  like  to  silver  and  g.
20.  33. 1  have  coveted  no  man’s  silver  or  g.

1  Cor.  3. 12.  if  any  build  on  this  foundation^.  silver

2  Tim.  2.  20.  in  a  great  house  vessels  of  silv.  and g.
Jam.  5.  3.  your  g.  and  silver  cankered,  rust  of  them

1  Pet.  1. 18.  we  were  not  redeemed  with  silv.  and  g.
Rev.  9.  20.  repented  not  of  idols  of  silver  and  g.

Talent  and  talents  of  GOLD.

Exod.  25.  39.  of  a  talent  of  pure  g.  shall  he  make  it
37.  24.  of  a  talent  of  pure  g.  made  he  it

2  Sam.  12.  30.  weight  of  crown  a  t.  of  g.  1  Chr.  20. 2.

1  Kings  9. 14.  Hiram  sent  Solomon  120  talents  of  g.
28.  they  sent  from  Ophir  420  talents  of  g.

10.  10.  she  gave  Solomon  120  t.  of  g.  2  Chr.  9.  9.
14.  in  one  year  came  to  Solomon  666  talents  of  g.

2  Kings  2.3. 33.  put  the  land  to  a  t.  of  g.  2  Chr.  36.  3.

1  Chron.  22. 14.  David  prepared  100,000  talents  of  g.
29.  4.  prepared  of  my  proper  good  3(XX)  talents  of  g.

7.  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  5000  talents  of  g.

2  Chron.  8.  18.  took  from  Ophir  450  talents  of  g.
Ezra  8.  26.  1  weighed  of  g.  vessels  100  talents

Vessels  of  GOLD.

2  Sam.  8. 10.  Toi  sent  to  Dav.  vessels  of  g.  1  GV/r.18.10.

1  Kings  10.  21.  Solomon's  drinking  vessels  were  of

g.  2  Chron.  9.  20.

25.  every  man  brought  present,  v.  of  g.  2  Chr.  9. 24.

2  Kings  12.  13.  not  made  for  house  of  Lord  v.  of  g.

24.  13.  Nebuchadnezzar  cut  in  pieces  vessels  ot  g.

2  Chr.  24.  14.  of  rest  of  money  made  they  v.  of  g.
Ezra  1.  11.  all  the  vessels  of  g.  and  silver  5400

5.  14.  the  vessels  of  g.  Cyrus  delivered  to  one
8.  26.  I  weighed  of  vessels  of  g.  1(X>  talents
Esth.  1.7- they  gave  them  drink  in  vessels  of  g.
Dan.  11.  8.  shall  also  carry  into  Egypt  vessels  of  g.
2  Tim.  2.  20.  not  only  vessels  of  g.  but  of  wood
GOLDEN.

Exod.  25.  25.  a  g.  crown  to  the  border  round  about
28.  34.  a g.  bell  |l  30.  4.  two g.  rings,  39.  20.

32. 2.  Aaron  said,  break  off  the  g.  ear-rings
Lev.  8.  9.  upon  forefront  he  put  the  g.  plate
Num.  7.  26.  one  g.  spoon  of  ten  sliek.  fidl  of  incense
Jndg.  8.  24.  had  g.  ear-rings,  because  lshmaelites

26.  the  weight  of  g.  ear-rings  he  requested

1  Sam.  6.  4.  five  g.  emerods,  five  g.  mice,  17,  18.

2  Kings  10. 29.  Jehu  departed  not  from  the g. calves

1  Chron.  28.  17.  for  the  g.  basins  he  gave  gold

2  Chron.  13.8.  there  are  with  you  g.  calves
Ezra  6.  5.  and  also  let  the- g.  vessels  be  restored
£jM.4.11.kingshall  holdout  a  g.  sceptre,  5. 2.  I  8.4.
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  the  g.  bowl  be  broken,  or  pitcher
Isa.  13.  12.  man  more  prec.  than  g.  wedge  of  Ophir

14.  4.  how  hath  the  oppressor,  the  g.  city  ceased
Jer. 5 1.7.  Babylon  hath  beetij/.cupin  Lord’s  hand


Dan.  3.  5.  fall  down  and  worship  the g.  image,]”

5.  2.  Belshazzar  commanded  to  bring  the  g.  vessel
3.  they  brought  the  g.  vessels  taken  out  of  tempi
Zech.  4.  12.  through  the  g.  pipes,  empty  the  g.  oi

Heb. 9. 4.  had  the  (7.  censer  and  ark  where  wasjr.  po  4
Rev.  1. 12.  being  turned,  1  saw  sevens,  candlestick.  ■"

13.  one  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  g.  girdle
20.  the  mystery  of  the  seven  g.  candlesticks
2. 1.  who  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the//,  candlestick
5.  8.  g.  vials,  15.  7-  ll  8.  3.  having  a  g.  censer

14.  14.  on  his  head  a  g.  crown  ||  17.  4.  a  g.  cup  ful

21.  15.  had  a  g.  reed  to  measure  the  city  and  gate:

■'>ee  Altar.

GOLDSMITH,  S.

Neh.  3.  8.  Uzziel  of  the  g.  repaired  next  to  him

31.  the  <7.  son  ||  32.  g.  and  merchants  repaired
Isa.  40.  19.  the  g.  spreadeth  it  over  with  gold

41. 7 .  so  the  carpenter  encouraged  the//.

46.  6.  they  hire  a  g.  and  he  maketh  it  a  god
GONE.

Gen.  24.  +  1.  Abraham  was  old,  and  g.  into  days
31.  30.  and  now  though  thou  wouldest  needs  be g
.34.  17.  take  our  daughter,  and  we  will  be  g.

42.  33.  take  food  for  your  households,  and  be  g.
Exod.  12.  32.  take  your  flocks  and  herds,  and  be
Dent.  32.  36.  when  he  seeth  their  power  is  g.

1  Sam.  14.  3.  the  people  knew  not  Jonathan  wa s
17.  number  now,  and  see  who  is  g.  from  us

15.  20.  1  have  g.  1  lie  way  which  the  Lord  sentm
20.  41.  as  soon  as  the  lad  was  g.  David  arose

2  Kam.  3.7.  wherefore  g.  into  my  father’s  concubin

24.  he  is  quite  g.  ||  13.  15.  Amnonsaid,  arise,  b tg

1  Kings  2.  41.  that  Shimei  had  g.  from  Jerusalem

13.  24.  when  he  was  g.  a  lion  met  him  by  the  way

14.  10.  as  a  man  takes  away  dung  till  it  be  all  g“.

18.  12.  as  soon  as  1  am  g.  Spirit  shall  carry  the:
20.  40.  as  1  was  busy  here  and  there,  he  was  g.

22.  13.  the  messenger  that  was  g.  to  call  Micaiah
1  Chron.  17.  5.  but  have  g.  from  tent  to  tent
Job  7.  4.  when  shall  1  rise,  and  the  night  be  g.  ?

19.  10.  he  hath  destroyed  me,  and  I  am  g.

24.  24.  they  are  exalted  for  a  while,  but  are  g.

28.  4.  they  are  dried  up  and  g.  away  from  men
Psal.  38.  10.  as  for  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  also  is
42.  4.  1  had  g.  with  the  multitude  to  house  of  Go/

73.  2.  but  as  for  me,  m3'  feet  were  almost  g.

77.  8.  is  his  mercy  clean  g.  for  ever  ?

103.  16.  the  wind  passeth  over  it,  and  it  is  g,

109.  23. 1  am  g.  like  the  shadow  that  declineth
Prov.  7-  19.  the  good  man  is  g.  a  long  journey

20.  14.  when  lie  is  g.  his  way7,  then  he  boasteth
Eccl.  8. 10.  who  had  come  and  g.  from  place  of  hoi.
Cant.  2.  11.  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and

5.  6.  but  my  beloved  had  withdrawn,  and  was

6.  1.  whither  is  thy  beloved  g.  O  thou  fairest  ?

Isa.  5. 13.  therefore  my  people  are .9.  intocaptivit

24.  11.  ail  joy  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land  g
41.  3.  by  the  way  he  had  not  g.  with  his  feet
Jer.  2.  5.  what  iniquity  in  me,  that  they  are  g.

23. how  canst  thou  say,  I  have  not g. after  Baalim
5.  23.  but  this  people  are  revolted  and//.

9. 10.  beasts  are  g.  ||  15.  6.  thou  art  g.  backward

44.  14.  none  that  are  g.  into  Egypt  shall  escape
28.  all  the  remnant  that  are  g.  shall  know
5o.  6.  they  have.//,  from  mountain  to  hill
Lam.  1.  3.  J  udali  is  g.  ||  5.  Zion’s  children  are  g.

6..//.  without  strength  ||  18.  my  virgins  are  g.
Ezek.  37. .21.  take  Israel  from  heathen  whither  g.
Dan.  2.  5.  the  king  said,  the  thing  is  g.  from  me,  1
Ilos.  4.  t  18.  their  drink  is  g.  they  committed
9.6.  for  lo,  they  are  g.  because  of  destruction
Amos  8.  5.  when  will  new  moon  be g.  that  we  ma
Luke  2.  15.  angels  were  g.  from  them  into  heave  ■

24.  28.  he  made  as  if  he  would  have  g.  further
John  4.  8.  for  his  disciples  were  g.  to  bu>'  meat

12.  19.  behold,  the  world  is  g.  after  him
Acts  16. 19.  their  masters  saw  hope  of  gains  was  .<  ;

20.  25.  among  whom  1  have  g.  preaching  ti

kingdom  of  Go/

1  Pet.  3.  22.  who  is  g.  into  heaven  on  right  hand
Jude  11.  they  have  g.  in  the  way  of  Cain
GONE  about.

1  Sam.  15.  12.  Saul  is  g.  about  and  passed  to  Gilg.
Job  1.  5.  when  days  of  their  feastings  were  g.  abm
Isa.  15. 8.  for  the  city  is  g.  about  the  borders  of  Mot
Acts  24.  6.  hath  g.  about  to  profane  the  temple

GONE  aside.

Num.  5. 19.  if  thou  hast  not  g.  aside  to  uncleanne
20.  if  hast.//,  aside  to  anoth.  instead  of  husband
Psal.  14.  3.  they  are  all  g.  aside,  they  are  filthy
Acts  26.  31.  when  they  were  g.  aside,  they  talked
GONE  astray.

Psal.  119.  176.  I  have  g.  astray  like  a  lost  sheep
Isa.  53.  6.  all  we  like  sheep  have  g.  astray
Mat.  18.  12.  if  a  man  have  100  sheep,  one  of  them  I
g.  astray,  he  seeketh  that  which  is  g.  astrc

2  Pet.  2. 15.  forsaken  the  right  way , and  are  g.  astro

G  O  N  E  aviay.  (

2  Sam.  3.22.  but  Abner  was  g.  away  in  peace,  2
2.3.  9.  anti  the  men  of  Israei  were  g.  au  ay
Job  28.  4.  even  the  waters  are  g.  away  from  men
Isa.  1.4.  they  are  g.  away  backward
Ezek.  44.  10.  Levites  which  are  g.  away  from  me
Mai.  .3.  7.  ye  are  g.  away  from  mine  ordinances
John  6.  22.  but  his  disciples  were  g.  away  alone
GONE  back.

Ruth  1.  15.  behold,  thy  sister-in-law  is  g.  back
Job  23.  12.  nor  have  I  g.  back  from  commandmen
Psal.  5.3.  .3.  every  one  is  g.  back,  none  doeth  got
Jer.  40.  5.  while  he  was  not  vet.//,  b.  he  said,  go  bat
GON  E  down.

1  Sam.  15.  12.  Saul  is  passed,  and//.  /towtoGilg

1  Kings  1.  25.  Ationijah  is  g.  down.  an/I  slain  ox/

21.  18.  Ahab  g.  down  to  possess  Naboth’s  vmeyai

2  Kings  20.  li.  by  which  the  shadow  had  g.  dm

in  the  dial  of  Ahaz,  Isa.  38.
Cant .  Ci.  2.  my'  beloved  is  g.  down  into  his  garden
Jer.  15.  9.  her  sun  is  g.  down  while  it  was  yet  day
48.  15.  his  young  men  are  g.  downt o  slaughter
Ezek.  31.  12.  all  people  g.  down  from  his  shadow

32.  21.  the  strong  are  g.  down  slain  by  the  sword

J


GOO


GOO


GOO


iah  1. 5.  Jonah  was  g.  down  to  sides  of  the  ship
GON  E  forth.

n.  19-  +  23.  sung,  forth  when  [  ot  entered  Zoar
od.  19. 1.  in  third  month  whei  Isr.  was g.  forth
\ings6. 15.  when  servant  of  Klulia  whs g.  forth
'/iron.  14. 15.  God  is  g.  forth  before  thee  to  smite
(.51.5.  my  salvation  is  g.  forth,  and  my  arn«

4.  7.  he  is  a.  forth  to  make  thy  land  desolate
■ ).  CO.  my  children  are  g.  forth  of  me,  and  are  not
i.  15.  is  profaneness  g.  forth  into  all  the  land
g.  a  whirlwind  of  the  Lord  is  g.  forth  in  fury
).  16.  brethren  that  are  not  g.  forth  into » aptivity
ek.  j.  10.  day  is  come,  the  morning'  is  g.  forth
i.  CO.  these  are  people  of  the  1 ..  and  are  g.  forth
in.  C.  14.  g.  forth  to  slay  wise  men  of  Babylon
).  CO.  when  1  am  g.  forth,  prince  of  Greeia  come
irk  10. 1".  when  he  was/ forth  one  came  running
GON  E  out.

■od.  9.C9.  as  soon  as  I  am  g.out  I  will  spread  hands
im.  16.  46.  there  is  wrath  g.  out  from  the  Lord
:ut.  13.  13.  certain  men  //.out,  and  withdrawn
1.C3.  that  which  is  g.out  of  thy  lips,  shalt  keep
dg.  4. 14.  is  not  the  Lord  g.  out  before  thee  ?
ith  1. 13.  hand  of  the  Lord  is  g.out  against  me
dam.  9.  +7-  bread  is  g.  out  of  our  vessels
i.  37.  when  the  wine  was  g.  out  of  Nabal
Kings  b.  C.  the  Syrians  had  g.  out  by  companies
1C.  we  be  hungry,  therefore  they  are  g.  out

1.4.  afore  Isaiah  was  g.  out  into  the  court

■a/.  19.  4.  their  line  is  g.out  through  all  the  earth
t).  34,  alter  the  thing  that  is  g.  out  of  my  lips

l.  45.  23.  the  word  is  g.  out  of  my  mouth
■ek.  24.  6.  pot,  whose  scum  is  not  g.  out  of  it

nt.  12. 43.  when  unclean spir.  is//,  out,  Luke  11. 24.

1 5.  8.  give  11s  of  your  oil.  our  lamps  are  g.  out
arkb.  30.  that  virtue  had  g.  out  of  him,  Lnke8. 40.

.  29.  devil  is/7.  out  of  daughter,  30.  Luke  11. 14.
hi  13.  31.  when  he  was  g.  out,  Jesus  said

m.  3. 12.  they  are  all  g.  out  of  way,  unprofitable
bhn  4. 1.  many  false  prophets  are  g.  out  into  world

GON  E  over.

V7 m.  17.  20.  they  be  g.  over  the  brook  of  water
•a/.  38.  4.  mine  iniquities  are  g.  over  my  head
2.7.  all  thy  waves  and  billows  are  g.  over  me

24.4.  then  the  stream  had  g.  over  our  soul

3.  the  proud  waters  had  g.  over  our  soul

a.  10. 29.  they  are  g.  over  the  passage,  and  taken  up

5.  8.  they  are  g.  over  the  sea,  Jer.  48.  32.
at.  10. 23.  shall  not  have  g.  over  the  cities  of  Isr.
GONE  up.  ,

’ii.  49.  9.  from  the  prey,  my  son,  thou  art g.  up
Kings  1 . 4.  not  come  off  bed' on  which  g.  up,  6, 16.
<al.  47. 5.  God  is//,  up  with  a  shout,  sing  praises
a.  15.  2.  he  is  g.  up  to  Bajith  and  to  Dibon
7-8.  discovered  to  another  than  me,  and  art  g.  up
r.  3.  6.  she  is  g.  up  on  every  high  mountain

4.  2.  and  the  cry  of  Jerusalem  is  g.  up

4. 21.  the  king  of  Babylon’s  army,  which  are  g.  up
.3. 15.  Moab  is  spoiled)  and  g.  up  out  of  her  cities
•.ek.  9.  3.  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  g.  up
3. 5.  ye  have  not  g.  up  into  the  gaps
os.  8. 9.  for  they  are  g.  up  to  Assyria,  a  wild  ass
hi  7- 10.  but  when  his  brethren  were g.  up
cts  18.  22.  when  he  had//,  up  and  salut.  the  church
GONE  a  whoring.

tv.  17.  7.  after  whom  they  have  g.  a  whoring
-ek.  23.  30.  because  thou  hast//,  a  whoring
;  os.  4. 12.  g.  a  whoring  from  under  their  God
.  1.  for  thou  hast  g.  a  whoring  from  thy  God
GOOD

taken,  (1)  For  that  sort  of  happiness  which  all
men  desire,  as  being  pleasant  and  agreeable  to
them.  Psal.  4.  6.  Who  will  shew  us  any  good  ?
tC)  For  that  which  is  virtuous,  morally  honest,
and  just.  Psal.  34.  14.  Depart  from  evil  and
'do  good.  (3)  For  that  which  is  beautiful  and
agreeable ■;  J'or  something  perfect  in  its  kind.
Cod  beheld  every  thing  he  had  created,  and  it
was  very  good,  Gen.  1.  31.  Fiery  creature  had
the  goodness,  beauty,  and  perfection  which  it  re¬
quired.  And  in  2  Chron.  18.  7-  This  man  never
prophesieth  good  unto  me,  nothing  agreeable.
(4)  For  that  which  is  pleasing  and  acceptable
to  God.  Psal.  14.  1.  There  is  none  that  doeth
good.  (5)  That' which  is  expedient  or  convenient.
Gen.  2.  18.  It  is  not  good  that  the  man  should
be  alone  :  It  is  not  convenient  either  for  my
purpose  of  the  increase  of  mankind,  or  for  man's
personal  comfort.  Also  in  1  Cor.  7.  1.  It  is
good  tor  a  man  not  to  touch  a  woman.  It  were
more  convenient  for  a  man  not  to  marry .  (6)  It
signifies  seasonable  and  commendable.  Mat.  26.

10.  The  woman  hath  wrought  a  good  work  on
me.  (.7)  Cheerful  and  festival.  1  Sam.  25.  8.
”  e  Come  in  a  good  day  ;  in  a  time  of  feasting
and  rejoicing.  (8)  Lawful  to  be  used.  1  Tim.  4.

4.  Every  creature  of  God  is  good.  (9)  Christian
liberty.  Rom.  14.  16.  Let  not  your  good  be
evil  spoken  ot :  Use  not  your  Christian  liberty
unduly,  whereby  it  should  come  to  be  reproached ,
as  it  it  were  only  profane  licentiousness,  and
matter  of  contention.  (10)  Kind,  merciful,  boun-
t’jul,  Rom.  5.  7.  For  a  good  man  some  would
e>en  dare  to  die.  (11)  Useful  and  valuable,
l  eut.  6.  11.  (12)  Pleasant  and  agreeable,  Psal.
133.  1.  (13)  Sweet.  Prov.  C4.  13.  Eat  honey,  be¬
cause  it  is  good.  (14)  Pious  and  religions.  Acts
D-  24.  The  good  of  the  land  denotes  all  sorts  of
temporal  blessings,  Isa.  1.  19-  The  good  hand  of
V.°  .>  l  ,at  *'v>  the  favour  and  kind  providence  of
God,  N eh.  2.  8.

GOOD,  Substantive .

;^.3C.lo,th°u  saidst,  1  will  surely  do  thee  g.

give  you  the  g.  of  the  land  of  Egypt
vi  on  r  <7.  of  the  land  of  Egypt  is  yours
*  •  ~0.  God  meant  it  unto  g.  to  bring  to  pass

Ford  hath  spoken g.  concerning  Israel
+  "10u  s'iaff  not  seek  their  peace  nor  g.

~J.20.  consume  you,  after  he  hath  done  vou/7.

12.  behold,  if  there  he  g.  toward  David
..k.  t°r  thou  hast  rewarded  me//,  for  evil
J.  wherefore  the  Lord  rewarded  thee  g.


1  Sam.  25.  30.  according  to  all  the  g.  he  hath  spoken

2  Sam.  14.  32.  it  had  been//,  for  me  to  been  there

16.  12.  Lord  will  requite /7.  for  his  cursing  this  day

1  Kings  22.  13.  words  of  the  prophets  declare  g.  to
the  king  with  one  mouth,  2  Chron.  18. 12.

1  Chr.  29-  3.  1  have  prepared  of  mine  ou  n  proper//.

2  Chron.  24.  16.  because  he  had  done/7,  in  Israel
Ezra  9. 12.  be  strong,  and  eat  the  g.  of  the  land
F.sth.  7.  9.  who  had  spoken  g.  for  the  king

Job  2.  10.  shall  we  receive  g.  at  the  hand  of  God  ?

5.  27.  hear  it,  and  know  thou  it  for  thy  g.

7-  7.  mine  eye  shall  no  more  see  g.

9.  25.  my  days  flee  away,  they  see  no  g.

15.  3.  or'with  speeches  wherewith  he  can  do  no  g.

21.  16.  lo,  their//,  is  not  in  their  hand

22.  21.  be  at  peace,  thereby  g.  shall  come  to  thee
24.  21.  and  he  doeth  not  g.  to  the  widow

Psal.  4.  6.  many  say,  who  will  shew  us  any  g.  ?

14. 1.  none  doeth  g.  not  one,  3.  153. 1, 3.  Rom.  3. 12.
34.  12.  and  loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  see  g.

39.2.  1  was  dumb,  1  held  my  peace,  even  from  g.
104.  28.  thou  openest  h/pid,  they  are  tilled  with  g.
106.  5.  that  1  may  see  the  g.  of  thy  chosen

122.  9.  because  or  house  of  Lord  i  will  seek  thy//.
128.  5.  shalt  see  the  g.  of  Jerusalem  all  thy  life
Prov.  3.  27.  withhold  not//,  from  them  to  whom  due
It.  17.  the  merciful  man  doth  g.  to  his  own  soul
27.  he  that  diligently  seeketh  g.  procureth
12. 14.  a  man  satisfied  with  g.  by  fruit  of  his  mouth

13.  2.  a  man  shall  eat  g.  by  the  fruit  of  his  mouth

21.  but  to  the  righteous  g.  shall  be  repaid

14.  22.  mercy  and  truth  be  to  them  that  devise  g.

16.  20.  handleth  a  matter  wisely,  shall  find  g.

17.  20.  he  that  hath  a  froward  heart,  findeth  no  g.

22.  a  merry  heart  doeth  g.  like  a  medicine

19.  8.  he  that  keepeth  understanding  shall  find  g.
Eccl.  2.  24.  make  Ids  soul  enjoy  g.  3.  13.  |  5.  18.

3.  12.  I  know  that  there  is  no  g.  in  them

4.8.  whom  do  1  lalour,  and  bereave  my  soul  of//.  ?

b.  11.  and  what  g.  is  there  to  the  owners  thereof  ?

6.  3.  his  soul  be  not  filled  with  g.  and  no  burial

6.  yet  hath  he  seen  no g.  all  go  to  one  place

7.  20.  not  a  man  just,  that  doeth  g.  and  sinneth  not
9.  18.  but  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  g.

Isa.  1.  19.  if  willing,  ye  shall  eat  the  g.  of  the  land
52.  7.  that  bringeth  good  tidings  of  g.  of  salvation
Jer.  8.  15.  we  looked  for  peace,  no  g.  cauie,  14. 19.

17.  6.  he  shall  not  see  when  g.  cometh

18.  10.  if  it  do  evil,  l  will  repent  of  the  g.

20.  1  stood  before  thee  to  speak  g.  for  them

29.  32.  neither  shall  he  behold  the  g.  1  will  do

32.  42.  1  will  bring  all  the  g.  1  have  promised

33.  9.  which  shall  hear  all  the  g.  that  l  do  them
Lam.  3. 1 17.  my  soul  far  from  peace,  1  forgat  g.
Fzek.  16.  50.  1  took  them  away  as  I  saw  g.
flos.  14.  +  2.  take  away  all  iniquity,  and  give  g.
Zech.  1.  t  17-  my  cities  through g\  shall  be  spread

11.  12.  I  said,  if  ye  think  g.  give  me  my  price
Flat.  26.  24.  been  <7.  for  that  man  had  not  been  born
Mark  10.  +  42.  think  g.  to  rule  over  the  Gentiles
John  b.  29-  that  have  done  g.  to  the  resurrection
Acts  10.  38.  who  went  about  doing  g.  and  healing

14. 17.  in  that  he  did  g.  and  gave  us  rain
Porn.  2.  10.  honour  to  every  man  that  worketh  g.

1  Thess.  3.  1.  we  thought  it//,  to  be  left  at  Athens
1  John  3. 17.  who  hath  this  world's//,  and  shutteth  up
For  GOOD.

Deut.  6.  24  to  fear  the  I.ord  for  our/7,  always
10. 13.  which  I  command  thee  this  day  for  thy  g.
28. 1 11.  Ld.  shall  make  thee  plenteous  for  g.  30.  9.

30.  9.  the  Lord  will  again  rejoice  over  thee  for  g.
Ezra  8.  22.  hand  of  our  God  on  all  of  them  for  g.
Neh.  5. 19.  think  upon  me,  O  my  God,  for g.  13.  31.
Job  5.  27-  hear  it,  and  know  thou  it  for  thy  g.

Psal.  86.  17-  shew  me  a  token  for  g.  they  may  see

119.  122.  be  surety  for  thy  servant  for  g.

Jer.  14.  11.  pray  not  for  this  people  for  their  g.

24.5.  whom  1  sent  out  of  this  place  for  their  g.

6.  for  1  will  set  mine  eyes  on  them  forg.

32.  39.  may  fear  me  for  ever,  for  the  g.  of  them
Mic.  1. 12.  Maroth  waited  carefully  for  g.

Pom.  8.  28.  we  know  all  things  work  together/or  g.
13.  4.  he  is  the  minister  of  G  od  to  thee  for  g.

15. 2.  let  every  one  please  his  neighbour  for  g.

See  Bad,  Evil.

GOOD,  Adjective.

Gen.  21. 16.  II agar  sat  her  down  a  g.  way  off

24.  12.  1  pray  thee,  send  me  g.  speed  this  day
+  16.  Rebekah  was  g.  of  countenance,  a  virgin

26.  29.  as  we  have  done  to  thee  nothing  but  g.

27.  46.  Rebekah  said,  what  g.  shall  my  life  do  me  ?
41.  5.  g .  ears  ||  26.  g.  kine  ||  35.  g.  years

43.  28.  thy  servant  our  father  is  in  g.  health
46.  29-  Joseph  wept  on  his  father’s  neck  a  g.  while
Deut.  33.  16.  for  //.-will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  bush

1  Sam.  2.  24.  my  sons,  it  is  no  g.  report  that  I  hear

12.  23.  I  will  teach  you  the  g.  and  right  way

25.  15.  men  were  very  g.  to  us,  we  were  not  hurt

29.  9.  1  know  that  thou  art  g.  in  my  sight

2  Sam.  15.  3.  see  thy  matters  are  g.  and  right

19.  18.  and  to  do  what  the  king  thought  g.

1  Kings  8.  36.  that  thou  teach  them  the  g.  way
56.  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  his  g.  promise

12.  7-  and  speak  p.  words  to  them,  2  Chron.  10.7.

2  Kings  20. 19.  g.  is  the  word  of  the  I.ord,  Isa.  39. 8.
2  Chron.  19.  11.  the  Lord  shall  be  with  the  g.

30.  18.  saying,  the  //.  Lord  pardon  every  one
Ezra  7.  9.  the  e/.  hand  of  his  God  on  him,  Neh.  2.8.

8.  18.  and  by  the  g.  hand  of  our  God  upon  113
Neh.  9.  13.  thou  gavest  them  true  laws,  g.  statutes

20.  thou  gavest  thy  g.  Spirit  to  instruct  them
Job  10.  3.  is  it  g.  that  thou  shouldest  oppress  ?

13.  9.  is  it  g.  that  he  should  search  you  out  ?

22.  +2.  doth  his  g.  success  depend  thereon  ?

39.  4.  their  young  ones  are  in  g.  liking

Psal.  25.8.  g.  and  upright  is  the  I.ord,  therefore
37-  23.  steps  of  a  g.  man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord
45.  1 .  my  heart  is  inditing  a  g.  matter
86.  5.  thou,  Lord,  art  g.  ready  to  forgive,  119.  68.
112.  5.  a  <7.  man  sheweth  favour,  and  lendeth
119.  39.  turn  reproach,  thy  judgments  are  //.

66.  teach  me  g.  judgment  and  knowledge


Prov.  2.  9.  thou  shalt  understand  ev<  //,.  path

20.  that  thou  mayest  walk  in  the  way  of  g.  men

12.  25.  but  a  g.  word  maketh  the  heart  glad

14.  19.  the  evil  bow  before  the  g.  and  the  wicked

15.  23.  and  a  word  in  due  season,  how  g.  is  it !

30.  and  a  g.  report  maketh  the  bones  fat

20.  18.  and  with/7,  advice  make  war

22.  1.  a  g.  name  rather  to  be  chosen  than  riches
Eccl.  4.  9.  they  have  a  g.  reward  for  their  labour

5.  11.  what  g.  is  there  to  the  owners  thereof;'

9.  2.  there  is  one  event  to  the  g.  and  to  the  clean

11.  6.  or  whether  they  both  shall  be  alike  g.

Jer.  6.  16.  where  is  the  g.  way,  and  walk  therein

24.  2.  g.  figs  |j  3.  very  g.  ||  5.  like  g.  figs,  so  will  I
29.  10.  I  will  perform  my  g.  word  toward  you
Ezek.  17.  8.  planted  in  a g.  soil  by  great  waters

24.  4.  gather  every  g.  piece,  thigh,  and  shoulder
Dan.  4.  2.  1  thought  it  g.  to  shew  the  signs

Zcch.  1.  13.  Lord  answered  the  angel  with  g.  words
Mai.  2.  13.  received)  it  with  //.-will  at  your  hand
Mat.  7. 11.  know  how  to  give  g.  gifts,  Luke  11.  13.

17.  every  g.  tree  bringeth  forth  g.  fruit,  18.

9.  22.  daughter,  be  of  g.  comfort,  Luke  8.  48.

13.  8.  fell  in  g.  gr.  23.  Mark  4.  8, 20.  Luke  8.  8,  15.
24.  g.  seed  ||  19.  16.  g.  Master,  what  g.  thing

19.  17-  why  calledst thou  meg.?  none  g.  but  one

20.  15.  is  tliine  eye  evil  because  1  am  g.  ?

25.  21.  well  done,  thou  g.  and  faithful  servant
Luke  2.  14.  peace  on  earth, //.-will  towards  men

6.  38.  g.  measure,  pressed  down,  shaken  together

10.  42.  and  Mary  hath  chosen  that  g.  part

12.  32.  it  is  your  Father’s  g.  pleasure  to  give  you
John  2. 10.  but  thou  hast  kept  the  g.  wine  until  now

10. 11.  I  am  the/7.  Shepherd,  the/7.  Shepherd  giveth
Acts  15.  7-  ye  know  how  that  a  g.  while  ago
Pom.  7. 12.  commandment  is  holy,  and  just,  and  g.
12.  2.  what  is  that//,  and  perfect  will  of  God
1  Cor.  15.  33.  evil  communications  corrupt  g.  mann.

1  Thess.  3.  6.  that  ye  have  g.  remembrance  of  us

2  Tim.  3.  3.  despisers  of  those  that  are  g.

Tit.  1.  8.  a  bishop  must  be  a  lover  of  g.  men
Deb.  6.  5.  that  have  tasted  the  g.  word  of  God
Jam.  1.  17.  every  g.  gift  ||  2.  3.  sit  in  a  g.  place

1  Pet.  2. 18.  be  subject  not  only  to  the  g.  and  gentle

3.  10.  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  g.  days
See  Bad,  Cheer,  Conscience,  Courage,

Do,  Day,  Old  age.

As  GOOD.

Ileb.  11.  12.  sprang  of  one,  and  him  as  g.  as  dead
GOOD  heed.

Dent.  2.  4.  take  ye  g.  heed,  4.  15.  Josh.  23.  11.
Eccl.  12.  9.  preacher  gave  g.  heed,  and  sought  out
Is  GOOD.

Gen.  2.  12.  and  the  gold  of  that  land  is  g.

16.  t  6.  do  as  is  g.  ill  thine  eyes,  19.  8.  I  20.  +  15.
Dent.  1.  14.  the  tiling  which  thou  hast  spoken  is  g.

6.  18.  do  that  which  is  g.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

23.  t  16.  he  shall  dwell  where  it  is  g.  for  him
Judg.  9.  +  2.  speak  whether  it  is  g.  for  you

1  Sam.  29.  6.  coming  in  with  me  in  the  host  is  g.

1  Kings  2.  38.  and  Sliimei  said,  the  saying  is  g.

42.  the  word  that  I  have  heard  is  g.  18.  t  24.

22.  13.  and  speak  that  which  is  g.

2  Kings  20.  3.  I  have  done  that  which  is  g.  Isa.  38.  3,
1  Chron.  16.  34.  the  Lord  is  g.  2  Chr.  b.  13.  17.3.

Ezra  3.  11.  Psal.  100.  5.  1 106.  1. 1  107.  1.  |
118.  1,  29.  I  135.  3.  1 136.  1. 1  145.  9.  Jer.  33.

11.  Lam.  3.  25.  Nah.  1.  7.

19.  13.  the  Lord  do  that  which  is  g.  in  his  sight
Job  34.  4.  know  among  ourselves  what  is  g.

Psal.  34.  8.  O  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  g.

69.  16.  hear  me,  for  thy  loving-kindness  is  g.

73. 1.  truly’  God  is  g.  to  Israel,  to  such  as  are
85.  12.  the  Lord  shall  give  that  which  is  g.

109.  21.  because  thy  mercy  is  g.  deliver  me
143.  10.  thy  Spirit  is  g.  lead  me  into  the  land
Prov.  11.  23.  the  desire  of  the  righteous  is  only  g.
fib.  25.  so  is  g.  news  from  a  far  country

31.  18.  she  perceiveth  her  merchandise  is  g.

Eccl.  2.  26.  God  giveth  to  a  mail  that  is  g.  in  his
sight,  may  give  to  him  that  is  g.  before  God
6.  12.  who  knoweth  what  is  g.  for  man  in  life  ?

7-  11.  wisdom  is  g.  with  an  inheritance
+  26.  that  is  g.  before  God  shall  escape
9.  2.  as  is  the  g.  so  is  the  sinner
Isa.  55.  2.  eat  ye  that  which  is  g.  let  your  soul
Jer.  13.  10.  this  girdle  which  is  g.  for  nothing
Tlos.  A.  13.  because  the  shadow  thereof  is  g.

Mic.T).  8.  he  hath  shewed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  g .
Mai.  2.  17-  say,  every  one  that  doeth  evil  is  g.
Mark  9.  50.  salt  is  g.  but  if  the  salt,  Luke  14.  34.
Luke  6.  45.  bringeth  forth  that  which  is  g.

18.  19.  none  is  g.  save  one,  that  is  God
Pom.  7.  13.  was  then  that  which  is  g.  made  death

18.  but  how  to  perform  that  is  g.  I  find  not

12.  9.  abhor  evil,  cleave  to  that  which  is  g.

16.  19.  I  would  have  you  wise  to  that  which  is  g.

1  Cor.  7.  26.  that  this  is  g.  for  the  present

Eph.  4.  29.  no  communication  hue  that  is  g.

1  Thess.  5.  15.  follow  that  which  is  g.  3  John  11.

21.  prove  all  tilings,  hold  fast  that  which  <7.

1  Tim.  1.  8.  but  we  know  that  the  law  is  g.

2.  3.  this  is  g.  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God

4.  4.  for  every  creature  of  God  is  g.

b.  4.  for  that  A  g.  and  acceptable  before  God
1  Pet.  3.  13.  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  g.

It  is  GOOD.

Psal.  52.  9. 1  will  wait  on  thy  name,  for  it  is g.  54. 6.
73.  28.  it  is  g.  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God
92.  1.  it  is  a  g.  thing  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord
119.  71.  it  is  g.  for  me  that  1  have  been  afflicted
147.  1.  it  is  g.  to  sing  praises  unto  our  God
Prov.  24. 13.  my  son,  eat  thou  honey,  because  it  is  g.
Eccl.  b.  18.  it  is  g.  and  comely  for  one  to  eat  and  dr.
7- 18-  it  is  g.  that  thou  shouldest  take  hold
Isa.  41.  t7.  saying cf  the  soder,  it  is  g.

Lam.  3.  26.  it  is  g.  that  a  man  should  both  hope
27.  it  is g.  that  a  man  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth
Mat.  b.  13.  it  is  g.  for  nothing  but  to  be  cast  out

17.  4.  it  is g.  for  us  to  be  here,  Mark 9-  b.  Luke  9.  S3.
Pom.  7-  16-  1  consent  unto  the  law,  that  it  is  g.

14.  21.  it  is  g.  neither  to  eat  flesh  nor  drink  wine

901


GOO


GOO


GOS


1  Cor.  7. 1  .itisg.  foraman  not  to  touch  a  woman,  8.

20.  1  say,  it  is  g.  tor  a  man  so  to  be
•Gal.  4.  18.  it  is  g.  to  be  zealously  affected  always
GOOD  land.

Exod.  3. 8.  come  to  bring  them  to  g.  land.  Vent.  8.  7-
N urn.  14.  7-  the  land  we  searched  is  a  g.  land
Dent.  1.  25.  it  is  a  g.  land  which  the  Lord  doth  give
35.  none  of  that  generation  see  that  g.  land
3.  25.  I  pray,  let  me  go  over,  and  see  the  g.  land
4. 21.  Lord  sware  I  should  not  go  unto  thaty.  land
22.  ye  shall  go  over  and  possess  that  g.  land
6.  18.  thou  mavest  go  in  and  possess  the  g.  land

8.  7.  the  Lord  thv  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  g.  land
10.  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God  for  the  g.  land

9.  6.  giveth  not  this  g.  land  for  thy  righteousness
11. 17:  lest  ye  perish  from  off  g.  land  Lord  giveth

Josh.  23.  13.’ until  ye  perish  from  this  g.  land,  15.

16.  ye  shall  perish  quickly  from  off  the  g.  land
Judg.  18.  9.  we  have  seen  the  land-  and  it  is  very  g.

1  Kings  14.  15.  shall  root  Israel  out  of  this  g.  land

2  Kings  3.  19.  mar  every  g.  piece  of  land,  25.

1  Chron.  28.  8.  that  ye  may  possess  this  g.  land

GOOD  with  ,nale.  {

Exod.  21. 34.  the  owner  of  pit  shall  make  it  g.  22. 14.
22.  11.  the  owner  shall  not  make  it  g.  13.  15.

L,ea.  24.  18.  he  that  killeth  a  beast  shall  make  it  g.
Nnm.  23.  19.  hath  spoken,  shall  he  not  make  it  g.?
Jer.  18.  11.  and  make  your  ways  and  doings  g.
GOOD  man.

2  Sam.  18.  27.  the  king  said,  Ahimaaz  is  a  g.  man
Psal.  37. 23.  steps  of  a  g.  man  are  ordered  by  the  L.

112.  5.  a  g.  man  sheweth  favour  and  lendeth
Prov.  7.  19.  the  g.  man  is  not  at  home,  he  is  gone

12.  2.  a  g.  man  obtaineth  favour  of  the  Lord

13.  22.  a  g.  man  leaveth  an  inheritance  to

14.  14.  a  g.  man  is  satisfied  from  himself,  12.  14.
Mic.  7.  2.  the  g.  man  is  perished  out  of  the  earth
Mat.  12.  35.  g.  man  out  of  good  treasure,  Luke  6.  45.

20.  11.  they  murmured  against  the  g.  man
24.  43.  if  the  g.  man  of  the  house  had  known  in  what
watch  the  thief  would  come,  Luke  12.  39.
Luke  23.  50.  Joseph  was  a  g.  man,  and  a  just
John~  .1".  some  said,  he  is  a  g.  man,  others  said,  nay
Acts  11.24.  Barnabas  was  a  g.  man,  full  of  Holy  G.
Rom.  5.7.  for  a  g.  man  some  would  even  dare  to  die
Not  GOOD.

Gen.  2.  18.  it  is  not  g.  that  man  should  be  alone
1  Sam.  29.  +6.  thou  art  wot  in  the  eyes  of  the  lords
‘2  Sam.  17.  7-  the  counsel  is  not  g.  at  this  time
Psal.  36.  4.  setteth  himself  in  a  way  that  is  not  g.
Prov.  16.  29.  leadethhim  into  way  that  is  not  g.

17.  26.  also  to  punish  the  just  is  not  g.

18.  5.  is  not  g.  to  accept  the  person  of  the  wicked

19.  2.  that  the  soul  be  without  knowledge  is  notg.

20.  23.  and  a  false  balance  is  not  g.

24.  23.  not  g.  to  have  respect  of  persons,  28.  21.

25.  27.  it  is  not  g.  to  eat  much  honey

Isa.  65.  2.  which  walketh  in  a  way  ’that  is  not  g.
Ezek.  18.  18.  and  did  that  which  is  not  g.  among
20.  25.  I  gave  them  statutes  that  were  not  g.

36.  3L  remember  your  doings  that  were  not  g.
Mat.  19.  10.  if  the  case  be  so,  it  is  not  g.  to  marry
Acts  15.  38.  Paul  thought  not  g.  to  take  him  with
1  Cor.  5.  6.  your  glorying  is  not  g.  know  ye  not
Seem,  seemed,  seemeth  GOOD.

Josh.  9.  25.  as  it  seemeth  g.  to  thee  to  do  unto  us,  do,
Judg.  10.  15.  1  Sam.  14.  36,  40.  Ezra  7.  18.
Esth.  3.  11.  Jer.  26.  14.  |  40.  4.

Judg.  19.  24.  do  to  them  what  seemeth  g.  unto  you

1  Sam.  1. 23.  do  what  seemeth  g.  3.  18. 1  11.10. 1  24.4.

2  Sam.  3.  19-  Abner  spake  all  seemed  g.  to  Israel

10.  12.  the  Lord  do  that  seemeth  him  g.  15.  26.

19.  37.  do  to  Chimham  what  shall  seem  g.  38.

24.  22.  take  and  offer  up  what  seemeth  g.  unto  him
1  Kings  21.2.  if  it  seem  g.  to  thee,  Jer.  40.  4.

1  Chron.  13.  2.  if  it  seem  g.  to  you,  let  us  send
Ezra  5.  17.  if  it  seem  g.  to  the  king,  Esth.  5.  4.

Jer.  18.  4.  as  seemed  g.  to  the  potter  to  make  it
Mat.  11.  26.  so  it  seemed  g.  insight,  Luke  10.  21.
Jjuke  1 . 3.  it  seemed  g  .to  me,  having  perfect  unders.
Acts  15.  25.  it  seemed  g.  unto  us,  Being  assembled
28.  it  seemed  g.  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  us
GOOD  with  thing.

Exod.  18. 17.  the  thing  that  thou  doest  is  not  g.
Deut.  26.  11.  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  every  g.  thing
Josh.  21.  45.  there  failed  not  aught  of  any  g.  thing
1  Sam.  26.  16.  this  thing  is  not  g.  thou  hast  ckme

1  Kings  14. 13.  in  him  there  is  found  some  trthing

2  Kings  8.  9.  Llazael  took  of  every  f.  thing  ofDamas.
Psal.  34.  10.  that  seek  Lord  not  want  any  g.  thing

38.  20.  because  1  follow  the  thing  that  g.  is
84.  11.  no  g.  thing  will  he  withhold  from  them
92.  1.  it  is  a  g.  thing  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord
Prov.  18.  22.  whoso  tindeth  a  wife,  findeth  a g.  thing
Jer.  33.  14. 1  will  perform  g.  thing  I  have  promised
J I  os.  8.  3.  Israel  hath  cast  off  the  thing  that  is  g.
Mat.  19.  16.  what  g.  thing  shall  I  do  to  inherit  life  ?
John  1.  46.  can  any  g.  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth?
Rom.  7.  18.  that  is  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  noy.  thing
Gal.  4. 18.  good  to  be  zealously  affected  in  a g.  thing
Eph.  4.  28.  working  with  his  hands  thing  which  is  g.
6.  8.  knowing  that  what  g.  thing  any  man  doeth
2  Tim.  1. 14.  that  <7.  thing  committed  unto  thee,  keep
Philem.  6.  by  acknowledging  every  g.  thing  in  you
Ileb.  13.  9.  it  is  a  g.  thing  the  heart  be  established
GOOD  things.

Vent.  6. 11.  to  give  thee  houses  full  of  all  g.  things
Josh.  2.3.  14.  not  one  failed  of  all  the  g.  things
15.  that  as  all  g.  things  are  come  upon  you
2  Kings  25. 1 28.  he  spake  g.  t.  with  him ,  Jer.  52.1 .32.
2  Chron.  12.  12.  in  Judah  there  were  g.  things
19.  3.  in  Jehoshaphat  there  are  g.  things  found
Job  22.  18.  yet  he  tilled  their  houses  with  g.  things
Ps.  103.  5.  who  satisfieth  thy  mouth  with  g.  things
Prov.  28.  10.  the  upright  shall  have  g.  things
Jer.  5.  25.  your  sins  have  withholden  g.  things
12.  t  6.  believe  not,  though  they  speak  g.  things
Mat.  7*  11.  give  g.  things  to  them  that  ask  him  ?

12.  34.  how  can  ye  being  evil  speak  g.  things?

35.  a  good  man  bringeth  forth  g.  things
Luke  1.  5.3.  he  hath  tilled  the  hungry  with  g.  things
202


I.uke  16.  25.  in'thy  life-time  receivedst  thy  g.  things
Rom.  10.  15.  and  bring  glad  tidings  of  g.  things
Gal.  6.  6.  communicate  unto  him  in  all  g.  things
Tit.  2.  .3.  the  aged  women  be  teachers  of  g.  things
3.  8.  these  things  are  g.  and  profitable  unto  men
lleb.  9.  11.  Christ  being  an  high-priest  of  g.  things

10.  1.  the  law  having  a  shadow  of  g.  things  to  come

GOOD  tidings.

2  Sam.  4.  10.  thinking  to  have  brought  g.  tidings
18.  27.  a  good  man,  and  cometh  withy,  tidings

1  Kings  1.  42.  a  valiant  man,  and  br  ingest  y.  tidings

2  Kings 7.  9-  this  day  is  a  day  of  g.  tidings
Isa.  40.  9.  O  Zion,  that  bringest  g.  tidings

41. 27.  1  will  give  Jerusalem  one  that  bringeth  g.  t.
52.  7.  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  g.  tidings

61.  1.  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  g.  tidings
Nah.  1.  15.  behold  feet  of  him  who  bringeth  g.  tid.
Luke  2.  10.  I  bring  you  g.  tidings  of  great  joy
1  Thess.  3.  6.  brought,  us  g.  tidings  of  your  faith
IV as  GOOD.

Gen.  1.  4.  God  saw  that  it  was  g.  10, 12,  18,21,25.

31.  God  saw  every  thing,  behold  it  was  very  g.

3.  6.  the  woman  saw  that  the  tree  was  g.  for  food

40.  16.  the  baker  saw  the  interpretation  was  g.

41.  37.  thing  was g.  in  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  45.  +  16.
49.  15.  Issachar  saw  that  rest  was  .  and  the  land

Josh.  22.  1 30.  it  was  g.  in  the  eyes  of  Phinehas

1  Sam.  15.  9.  Saul  and  people  spared  all  that  was  g.

2  Chron.  14.  2.  Asa  did  that  which  was  g.  and  right
31.20.  Ilezekiah  wrought  that  which  was  g.

Neh.  2.  18.  the  hand  of  my  God  which  was g.

Eccl.  2.  3.  till  1  might  see  what  was  that  g.  for  sons
GOOD  understanding .

1  Sam.  25.  .3.  Abigail  was  a  woman  ofy.  understand.
Psal.  111.  10.  g.  and.  have  all  that  do  his  command.
Prov.  3.  4.  so  shalt  thou  find  favour  and  g.  undent.

13.  15.  g.  understanding  giveth  favour
GOOD  work.

Neh.  2.  18.  strengthen  their  hands  for  this  g.  toork
Mat.  26.  10.  she  hath  wrought  ay.  work,  Mark  14.  6.
John  10.  33.  for  ay.  work  we  stone  thee  not

2  Cor.  9. 8.  that  ye  may  abound  to  every  y.  work
Phil.  1.  6.  that  he  which  hath  begun  ay.  work
Col.  1.  10.  being  fruitful  in  every  y.  work

2  Thess.  2. 17.  stablish  you  in  every  y.  word  and  work

1  Tim.  3.  1.  office  of  a  bishop,  desireth  a  y.  work

5.  10.  if  she  diligently  followed  every  y.  work

2  Tim.  2.21.  and  prepared  unto  every  y.  work
Tit.  1.  16.  and  unto  every  y.  work  reprobate

.3.  1.  put  them  in  mind  to  be  ready  to  every  y.  work
Ileb.  13. 21.  God  make  you  perfect  in  every  y.  work
GOOD  works.

1  Sam.  19.  4.  his  works  to  thee  have  been  very  y.
Mat.  5.  16.  that  they  may  see  youry.  works
John  10.  32.  many  g.  works  have  1  shewed  you
Acts  9.  36.  Dorcas  full  ofy.  works  and  alms-deeds
Rom.  1.3.  3.  for  rulers  are  not  a  terror  to  y.  works
Eph.  2.  10.  created  in  Christ  Jesus  untoy.  works

1  Tim.  2.  10.  that  women  be  adorned  with  g.  works

5.  10.  a  widow  well  reported  of  fory.  works

25.  the  y.  works  of  some  are  manifest  before-hand

6.  18.  charge  the  rich,  that  they  be  rich  iny.  works

2  Tim.  3.  17.  thoroughly  furnished  to  all  y.  works
Tit.  2.  7-  shewing  thyself  a  pattern  in  y.  works

14.  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  y.  works
3.  8.  they  be  careful  to  maintain  y.  works,  14.

Ileb.  10.  24.  to  provoke  unto  love  and  y.  works
1  Pet.  2.  12.  they  mav  by  your  y.  works  glorify  God
GOODLY.

Gen.  27. 15.  Rebekah  took  y.  raiment  of  her  son
.39.  6.  Joseph  was  a  y.  person,  and  well-favoured
49.  21.  Naphtali  a  hind  let  loose,  giveth  y.  words
Exod.  2.  2.  when  she  saw  he  was  ay.  child

39. 28.  they  made  y.  bonnets  of  fine  linen

Lev.  23.  40.  on  the  first  day  boughs  of  the  y.  trees
Num.  24.  5.  how  y.  are  thy  tents,  O  Jacob!

.31.  10.  they  burnt  all  their  y.  castles  with  fire
Deut.  3.  25.  let  me  see  that  y.  mount,  and  Lebanon
6.  10.  great  and  y.  cities  winch  thou  buildest  not

8.  12.  lest  when  thou  hast  built  y.  houses
Josh.  7.  21.  I  saw'  ay.  Babylonish  garment

1  Sam.  9.  2.  Saul,  a  choice  young  man,  and  a  y.

16.  12.  David  was  ruddy  and  y.  to  look  to

2  Sam.  23.  21.  Benaiah  slew  an  Egyptian,  ay.  man

1  Kings  1.  6.  Adonijah  also  was  a  very  y.  man

2  Chron.  36.  10.  brought  to  Babylon  the  y.  vessels
19.  burnt  palaces,  and  destroyed  the  y.  vessels

Job  39. 13.  gavest  thou  y.  wings  to  the  peacocks  ?
Psal.  16.  6.  yea,  I  have  a  y.  heritage
80.  10.  the  boughs  were  like  the  y.  cedars
Jer.  3.  19.  how  shall  1  give  thee  a  y.  heritage  !

11.  16.  a  green  olive-tree,  fair,  and  ofy.  fruit
Ezek.  17.  8.  was  planted,  that  it  might  be  a  y.  vine

2.3.  it  shall  bear  fruit,  and  be  a  y.  cedar
Dan.  11.  t  16.  he  shall  stand  in  the  y.  land,+  41.

t  45.  he  shall  plant  in  the  y.  holy  mountain
Dos.  10.  1.  they  have  made  y.  images
Joel  .3.  5.  carried  into  your  temples  my  y.  things
Zech.  10.  .3.  hath  made  them  as  hisy.  horse  in  battle
11 .  1.3.  a  y.  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of  them
Mat.  1.3.  45.  a  merchant-man  seeking  y.  pearls
Luke  21.  5.  how  it  was  adorned  with  y.  stones
Jam.  2.  2.  if  there  come  a  man  in  y.  apparel
Rev.  18.  14.  all  thincs  dainty  and  y.  are  departed
_  GOODLIER.

1  Sam.  9.  2.  not  in  Israel  ay.  person  than  Saul
GOODLIEST.

1  Sam.  8. 16.  he  will  take  your  y.  young  men

1  Kings  20.  3.  thy  children,  even  tire  y.  are  mine

GOOD  LI  NESS.

Isa.  40.  6.  the  y.  thereof  as  the  flower  of  the  field
GOODN  ESS.

Exod.  18.  9.  Jethro  rejoiced  for  all  y.  Lord  had  done
33.  19.  I  will  make  all  my  y.  pass  before  thee
.34.  6.  the  Lord  God  abundant  in  y.  and  truth
Num.  10.  .32.  that  what  y.  the  Lord  shall  do  to  us

2  Sam.  7. 28.  thou  proinisedst  this  y.  1  Chron.  17.  26.

1  Kings 8.  66.  joyful  fory.  L.  had  done,  2  Chr.  7. 10.
10.  t7.  thou  hast  added  wisdom  and  <7.  to  the  fame

2  Chron.  6.  41.  let  thy  saints  rejoice  in  y.

32.  32.  Ilezekiah  hisy.  ||  .35.  26.  Josiah  and  hisy.
Neh.  9.  25.  and  delighted  themselves  in  thy  y.


Neh.  Q.  35.  they  have  not  served  thee  in  thy  great
Psal.  16.2.  my  y.  extendeth  not  to  thee

21. 3.  for  thou  preventest  him  with  blessings  ofy.

23.  6.  surely  y.  and  mercy  shall  follow  me

25.  7.  remember  thou  me,  for  thy  y.  sake,  O  Lorf
t  13.  his  soul  shall  lodge  in  y.  seed  inherit  earth
27.  13.  I  had  believed  to  see  the  y.  of  the  Lord
.31.  19.  O  how  great  is  thy  y.  thou  hast  laid  up

33.  5.  the  earth  is  full  of  they,  of  the  Lord
52.  1.  the  y.  of  God  enduveth  continually
65.  4.  we  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  y.  of  thy  house
11.  thou  crownest  the  year  with  thy  y.

68.  10.  thou  hast  prepared  of  thy  y.  for  the  poor
107.  8.  praise  the  Lord  for  his  y.  15.  21,  31.

9.  and  tilleth  the  hungry  soul  with  g.

14-1.  2.  my  y.  and  my  fortress,  my  high  tower
145.  7.  they  shall  utter  the  memory  of  thy  y.
Prov.  20. 6.  most  men  will  proclaim  every  one  hisy
Isa.  (A.  7.  the  great  y.  toward  the  house  of  Israel
Jer.  2.  7-  I  brought  you  to  eat  the  y.  thereof
31.  12.  they  shall  flow  togetherto  the  y.  of  the  Iff

14.  people  shall  be  satisfied  with  my  y.  saith  Iff

3.3.  9.  they  shall  fear  and  tremble  for  all  the  y.
lias.  3.  5.  they  shall  fear  the  Lord  and  hisy.

6.  4.  your  y.  is  as  a  moraine-  cloud  and  early  dew

10.  1.  according  to  y.  of  his  land  they  made  images
Zech.  9.  1?.  for  how  great  is  his  y.  and  his  beauty  1
Rom.  2.  4.  or  despisest  thou  the  riches  of  his  y.  no-

knowing  the  y.  ofGodleadeth  thee  to  repentance

11.  22.  behold,  therefore,  the  y.  and  severity  0.
God,  toward  thee  y.  if  thou  continue  in  Ins  g

15.  14.  I  am  persuaded  that  you  are  full  of  y.
Gal.  5.  22.  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  y.  Eph.  5.  9.

2  Thess.  1.  11.  f  ulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  g.
GOODS.

Gen.  14.  16.  Abram  broughtback  all  they. and  I/.
21.  give  me  the  persons,  and  take  they,  to  thysd.

24.  10.  the  y.  of  his  master  were  in  his  hand
31. 18.  Jacob  carried  away  all  his  y.  46.  6.

Exod.  22.  8.  not  put  hand  to  his  neighbour’s  y.  11.
Num.  16.  32.  the  earth  swallowed  them  and  their y!
.31.  9.  Israel  took  the  spoil  of  Midian  and  their y|
35.  3.  the  suburbs  shall  be  for  Levites’  cattle  and  m
Dent.  28. 11.  Lord  shall  make  thee  plenteous  iny:
2  Chr.  21.  14.  the  Lord  will  smite  thy  wives,  thy yl
Ezra  1.  4.  let  the  men  of  his  place  help  him  withyj
6.  all  about  them  strengthened  their  hands  withyj

6. 8.  that  of  king’s  y.  expenses  be  given  to  these  met

7.  26.  to  banishment  or  to  confiscation  of  y.

Neh.  9.  25.  they  possessed  houses  full  of  all  y.

Job  20.  10.  and  his  hands  shall  restore  their  y.

21.  therefore  shall  no  man  look  for  hisy.

28.  his  y.  shall  flow  away  in  the  day  of  his  wratl
Eccl.  5. 11.  when  y.  increase,  they  are  increased
Ezek.  38.  12.  which  have  gotten  cattle  and  y.

1.3.  art  thou  come  to  take  away  cattle  and  y.  ?
Zeph.  1. 13.  their y.  shall  become  a  booty
Mat.  12.  29.  how  enter  a  strong  man’s  house,  am
spoil  his  y.  except  he  bind  strongman,  Mark 3. 271

24.  47.  he  shall  make  him  ruler  over  all  his  y.

25.  14.  who  called  and  delivered  to  them  his  y.
Luke  6.  30.  of  him  that  taketh  away  thy  y.  ask  no

11.  21.  keepeth  his  palace,  his  y.  are  in  peace

12.  18.  there  will  I  bestow  all  my  fruits  and  my  A
19.  thou  hast  muchy.  laid  up  formally  years  )

15.  12.  give  me  the  portion  of  y.  that  falleth  to  nr

16.  1.  was  accused  to  him  that  he  wasted  hisy.

19.8.  the  half  of  my  y.  1  give  to  the  poor
Acts  2.  45.  sold  their  y.  ana  parted  them  to  allmei
1  Cor.  1.3.  .3.  tho’  1  bestow  all  my  y.  to  feed  the  poo,
Heb.  10.  .34.  yetook  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  youry
Rev.  3.  17.  I  am  rich,  and  increased  withy.

GOPHER  wood.

Gen.  6.  14.  make  thee  an  ark  of  y.  wood,  rooms
GORE,  ED.

Exod.  21. 28.  if  an  ox  y.  man  or  woman  that  they
31.  whether  he  have  y.  a  son  ora  daughter
GORGEOUS.

Luke  23. 11.  Herod  arrayed  Jesus  in  a y.  robe
GORGEOUSLY.

Ezek.  23. 12.  she  doted  on  Assyrians  clothed  most y
Luke  7.  25.  that  are  y.  apparelled  in  king’s  courts
GOSPEL.

The  Gospel  is  a  revelation  of  the  grace  of  God  1
fallen  man  through  a  Mediator.  Or,  it  is  a  wise
a  holy,  and  gracious  constitution  of  God,  for  th
recovery  of  fallen,  sinful,  and  miserable  man, j rot
that  deplorable  state  into  which  sin  had  brougl
him,  by  sending  his  own  Son  Jesus  Christ  into  th\
flesh,  to  obey  his  law  which  man  had  broken,  i
make  a  proper  atonement  for  sin  by  his  death,  an
thus  to  procure  pardon,  and  the  favmtr  of  G oq
and  eternal  happiness  for  all  that  believe  and  rei
pent,  and  receive  the  gospel-salvation ;  togethe
with  a  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work  this  fait
and  repentance  in  their  hearts,  to  renew  their  sir
ful  natures  unto  holiness,  to  J'orm  them  on  eart
Jit  for  this  happiness,  and  to  bring  them  to  the  fir
possession  of  it  in  heaven.

Hence  it  is  called  the  gospel  of  God,  as  it  cam
originally  from  the  lather,  Rom.  1.  1.  It  *
called  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  Acts  Ct
24.  because  it  proceeds  from,  and  manifests  h>
favour,  and  is  the  means  whereby  his  grace  is  bt,
stowed.  It  is  called  the  gospel  of  Christ,  Rom.  J

16.  as  he  is  the  immediate  Author,  and  the  sub  jet
matter  of  it.  In  the  same  passage  it  is  said  to  h
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  :  it  is  the  meal,
which,  by  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  i
made  effectual  to  salvation.  It  is  called  the  go?
pel  of  salvation,  Eph.  1.  1.3.  It  brings  the  go,
news  that  salvation  is  to  be  had ;  it  offers  th
saltation;  it  shews  the  nay  how  it  is  attained;
works  grace  to  Jit  for,  and  bring  men  to  salvation
This  gospel  the  Spirit  of  God  preached  to  Apr;
ham  under  the  Old  Testament.  Gal.  3.  8,  D
Scripture  foreseeing  that  God  would  justify  tl
heathen  through  faith,  preached  before  the  go:
pel  unto  Abraham ,  saying,  In  thee  shall  a
n  tions  be  blessed.  The  glad  tidings  oj  just
Jication  and  salvation  by  faith  in  Christ,  wet
preached  to  Abraham,  and  were  contained  a


GOT


GRA


G  R  A


it  promise  mad '  to  him ,  which  is  the  sum  oj
o,  covenant ,  In  thy  seed  shall  all  nations  .be
•ssed  >  Gen.  22.  18.

'  Lord  gospel,  in  the  original,  'Evay^eXtov,  sig-
ies  good  news,  or  glad  tidings.  And  surely
en  a  sinner,  who  is  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God,
sensible  of  his  guilt  and  danger,  it  must  needs
glad  tidings  to  him  to  hear  of  a  way  oj  salva-
n,  and  an  all-svjficient  Saviour.

(  pel  is  taken  for  an  historical  narration  of  what
irist  did  and  spake,  of  his  life,  miracles,  death,
■urrection,  and  doctrine  :  as  the  Gospel  accord-
/  to  Matthew,  Mark,  &c.  Ihe  beginning  of
j  gospel  of  Christ,  Mark  1.1,  Sometimes  it  is
ken  for  the  preaching  and  publication  of  the
,-pel,  and  administration  of  affairs  that  concern
Rom.  1.  9.  Whom  I  serve  with  my  spirit  in
<  gospel  of  his  Son.  It  is  put  for  the  doctrines
fee  grace,  Rom.  11.  SB.

1  k  1. 1.  the  beginning  of  the  g.  of  Jesns  Christ
.  Jesus  came,  saying,  repent  and  believe  the  g.
;5.  whoso  shall  lose  his  life  for  my  sake  and  g.
29.  that  hath  left  house  for  my  sake  and  g.

10.  the  g.  must  he  published  among  all  nations
p  15.7.  that  the  Gentiles  by  my  mouth  hear  y.

24.  to  testify  the  g.  of  the  grace  of  God

]  1. 1. 1.  an  apostle,  separated  to  the  g.  of  God
whom  1  serve  with  tny  spirit  in  g.  of  his  Son
.  for  1  am  not  ashamed  of  the  g.  of  Christ
6.  shall  judge  secrets  of  men  according  to  my  g.
10.  but  they  have  not  all  obeyed  the  g.

28.  as  concerning  the  g.  they  are  enemies
16.  to  the  Gentiles,  ministering  the  g.  of  God
.  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  g.  of  Christ

25.  of  power  to  stablish  you  according  to  g.

1  r.4. 15.  in  Jesus  1  have  begotten  you  thro’  tiie  g.

2.  lest  we  should  hinder  the  g.  of  Christ

.  a  dispensation  of  the  g.  is  committed  to  me
.  when  1  preach  g.  1  may  make  the  <j.  of  Christ
without  charge  ;  that  1  abuse  not  my  power  in  q.

.  this  1  do  for  the  g.  sake  to  be  partaker  thereof
l  r.  4.  3.  if  our  g.  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  are  lost
lest  light  of  glorious  g.  of  Ciirist  should  shine
8.  s=nt  the  brother,  whose  praise  is  in  the  g.

3.  for  your  professed  subjection  to  g.  of  Christ

4.  if  ye  receive  another  Spirit  or  g.  G al.  1 . 6.
f .  1.  7.  and  would  pervert  the  g.  of  Christ

1  communicated  to  them  the  g.  I  preach
that  the  truth  of  the  g.  might  continue
when  saw  the  g.  of  uncircum.  committed  to  me
.  not  uprightly  according  to  the  truth  of  the  g.
j  .1.13.  the  word  of  truth  the  y.  of  your  salvation
.  be  partakers  of  his  promise  in  Christ  by  the  g.

5.  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  g.  of  peace
.  to  make  known  the  mystery  of  the  y.

i  !.  1.  5.  for  your  fellowship  in  the  g.  till  now
in  the  defence  and  continuation  of  the  g.  17.

.  have  fallen  out  to  the  furtherance  of  the  g.

.  only  let  your  conversation  be  as  beconieth  the
g.  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  g.
.’2.  he  hath  served  with  me  in  the  g.
i.  help  wom.n  who  laboured  with  me  in  the  g.

.  know  also  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  g.

(  1.5.  ye  heard  before  in  word  of  truth  of  the  g.

.  be  not  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  g.

1  less.  1. 5.  g.  came  not  in  word  but  in  power
’.  we  were  bold  to  speak  the  g.  of  God  to  you
were  allowed  of  God  to  be  put  in  trust  with  g.
were  willing  to  have  imparted  not  the  g.  only
Timothy  our  fellow- labourer  in  the  g.

1  ess.  1. 8.  on  them  that  obey  not  the g.  1  Pet.  4. 17.

4.  whereunto  lie  called  you  by  our  g.

I  m.  1. 11.  according  to  the  g.  of  the  blessed  God
i  m.  1. 8.  be  partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the  g.

.  brought  immortality  to  light  through  the  g.
ji.  Jesus  Christ  was  raised  according  to  my  g.

]  !em.  13.  have  ministered  to  me  in  bonds  of' the  g.

■  SPEL  joined  with  pi  each,  preached,  preaching,
i  .4.23.  Jesus  went  preaching  g.  9.  35.  Mark  1. 14.

5.  the  poor  have  the  g.  preached,  Luke  7.  22.

14.  thisy.  shall  be  preached,  26. 13.  Mark  14.  9.
i  k  16. 15.  go,  preach  the  g.  to  every  creature

i  e  4. 18.  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  q.

'•  they  departed ,  preaching  the  g.  and  healing
1.  that  as  iie  taught,  and  preached  the  g.

■  •  8.  25.  and  preached  the  g.  to  the  Samaritans
7-  and  there  they  preached  the  g.

■  when  they  had  preached  the  g.  to  that  city
10.  that  the  Lord  had  called  us  to  preach  the  g.

'  >■  1. 15.  1  am  ready  to  preach  the  g.  at  Rome

15.  how  beautiful  feet  of  them  that  preach  g.
19.  I  have  fully  preached  the  g.  of  Christ

.  so  have  1  strived  to  pleach  the  g.  not  where
I  r.  1. 17.  sent  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  g.
4.  that  preach  the  g.  should  live  of  the  gospel

■  though  \  preach  the  g.  have  nothing  to  glory  of,
for  necessity  on  me,  woe  to  me  if  1  preach  not  g.

■  that  when  1  preach  the  g.  1  may  make  gospel
.  1. 1  declare  to  you  the  g.  which  I  preached

■  r.  2.  12.  when  1  came  to  Troas  to  preach  the  g.
14.  come  as  far  as  to  you  in  preaching  the  g.

f  7-  because  I  preached  to  you  freely  the  g.

■  .1.8.  though  we  or  an  angel  preach  any  other  g. 9.

•  'he  g.  preached  of  me  is  not  after  man

!’•  Preached  before  the  g.  to  Abraham,  saying
3.  through  infirmity  of  flesh  1  preached  the  <j.

I  tess.  2.  9.  we  preached  to  you  the  g.  of  God
j  -4-2.  to  us  was  the  g. preached  as  well  as  to  them
V  ?'•  by  them  that  preached  the  g.  to  you
.  this  is  the  word  which  by  g.  is  preached  to  you
»•  tor  this  cause  was  the  g.  preached  to  the  dead
1  ■  14.  6.  having  everlasting  g.  to  preach  to  them
.  GOT.

•  39. 12.  Joseph  fled  from  her  and  y.  him  out,  15.

‘  ■  44.  3.  they  g.  not  the  land  by  their  own  sword

'  2.  7.  I  g.  me  servants  and  maidens

1  1 3.  2.  I  g.  a  girdle  according  to  word  of  T.ord
take  the  girdle  that  thou  hast  g.  and  arise

j  .  gotten.

-4. 1.  she  said,  1  have  g.  a  man  from  the  Lord
j*  what  was  our  father’s  hath  he  g.  all  this
1 «.  14. 18.  when  I  have#,  me  honour  on  Pharaoh


Lev.  6.  4.  or  the  thing  he  hath  deceitfully  g,

Num.  31.  50.  what  every  man  hath  g.  of  jewels
Dent.  8.  17.  might  of  my  hand  hath  g.  this  wealth
2  Sam.  17,  13.  moreover  if  he  be  y.  into  a  city
Job  28. 15.  wisdom  cannot  be  g.  for  gold
31.  25.  if  I  rejoiced  because  my  hand  had  y.  much
I'sal.  98. 1.  his  holy  arm  hath  g.  him  the  victory
Plot.  13. 11.  wealthy,  by  vanity  shall  be  diminished
20.  21.  an  inheritance  may  he  g.  hastily  at* begin.
31.  t  29.  many  daughters  have  g.  riches
Eccl.  1.  16.  have  g.  more  wisdom  than  all  before  me
Isa.  15.  7-  the  abundance  g.  they  shall  carry  away
Jer.  48.  36.  because  riches  he  hath  g.  are  perished
Ezek.  28.  4.  with  thy  wisdom  thou  hast  g.  riches
Van.  9.  15.  thou  hast#,  thee  renown  as  at  this  day
Mat.  11.  t  12.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is//,  by  force
llev.  15.  2.  1  saw  them  that  had  g.  the  victory
GOVERN.

1  Kings 21.7-  dost  thou  now//,  the  kingdom  of  Isr.  ?
Job  34.  17.  shall  even  he  that  hateth  right  g.  ?

Psal.  67. 4.  for  thou  shalt  g.  the  nations  upon  earth
GOVERNMENT,  S.

Isa.  9.  6.  and  the  g.  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder
7.  of  the  increase  of  his  g.  there  shall  be  no  end
22.  21.  1  will  commit  thy./7.  into  his  hand

1  Cor.  12.  28.  helps,  g.  diversities  of  tongues

2  Pet.  2. 10.  but  chiefly  them  that  despise  g.

GOVERNOR.

Gen.  42.  6.  Joseph  was  g.  over  the  land,  45.  26.

1  Kings  18.  3.  Obadiah  was  y.  over  Ahab’s  house

1  Chr.  29.  22.  they  anointed  Solomon  to  be  chief  g.
Ezra  5.  14.  Cyrus  delivered  the  vessels  to  the  g.
Neh.  5.  14.  1  have  not  eaten  the  bread  of  the  g.

18.  for  all  this  1  required  not  the  bread  of  the  g.
10.  t  1.  those  that  sealed  were,  Nehemiah  the  g.
Psal.  22.  28.  he  is  the  g.  among  the  nations
Jer.  30.  21.  their  g.  shall  proceed  from  midst  of  them
40.  5.  he  said,  go  back  also  to  Gedaliah  the  g.
41.2.  then  Ishmael  smote  Gedaliah  they.  18.

Hag.  1.  14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  /erubbabel  the  g.
2.  2.  speak  to  Zerubbabel  they,  and  to  Joshua,  21.
Zech.  9.  7.  and  he  shall  he  as  ay.  in  Judah
Mai.  1.8.  offer  it  now  to  thy  y.  will  he  accept  person
Mat.  2.  6.  out  of  thee  shall  cotne  ay.  to  rule  Israel
27.  2.  they  delivered  him  to  Pontius  Pilate  the  y.
28. 14.  and  if  this  come  to  the  y.’s  ears
John  2.  8.  draw  out,  and  bear  to  the  y.  of  the  feast
Acts  HA.  1.  who  informed  they,  against  Paul

2  Cor.  11.  32.  the  y,  under  Aretas  the  king  kept  city
Jam.  3.  4.  the  ships  turned  whither  the  y.  listeth

GOVERNORS.

Judg.  5.  9.  my  heart  is  towards  the  y.  of  Israel
14.  out  of  Machir  came  down  y.

Ezra  8.  36.  delivered  the  king’s  commissions  to  y.
Neh.  2.  7-  let  letters  be  given  me  toy.  beyond  l  iver
5.  15.  but  the  formery.  were  chargeable  to  people
Isa.  19.  1 13.  they  have  seduced  the  y.  of  Egypt
Van.  2.  48.  the  king  made  Daniel  chief  of  the  y.
Zech.  12.  5.  the  y.  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their  heart

6.  I  will  make  the  y.  of  Judah  like  a  hearth
Mat.  10.  18.  ye  shall  be  brought  before y.  and  kings
Gal.  4.  2.  but  the  heir  is  under  tutors  and  y.  fill

1  Pet.  2.  14.  submit  yourselves  to  y.  as  sent  by  him
GOURD.

In  Hebrew,  Kikajon.  This  word  is  found  in  Jonah
4.  6.  where  the  Septuagint  translate  it  KoXo/onTffl.
Jerom  uses  Hedera,  ivy;  as  also  does  Aquila.
Jeroin  acknowledges,  that  the  word  Ivy  does  riot
answer  the  signification  of  the  Hebrew  Kikajon;
but  as  he  could  not  find  any  Latin  words  proper  to
express  it,  he  chose  rather  to  set  down  Hedera,
than  to  leave  Kikajon,  which  might  be  taken  for  a
monstrous  animal  in  the  Indies,  or  mountains  of
Bceotia.  His  account  of  Kikajon  is  this:  It  is  a
shrub  which  grows  in  the  sandy  places  of  Pales-
tine  ;  and  increases  so  suddenly ,  that  within  few
days  it  comes  to  a  considerable  height.  'The  leaves
of  it  are  large,  and  like  those  almost  of  the  vine.
It  is  supported  by  its  trunk  without  being  upheld
by  any  thing  else,  and  furnishes  a  very  agreeable
shade  under  the  thickness  of  its  leaves.

Modern  interpreters  almost  all  agree  that  the  Hebrew
Kikajon  signifies  the  Palma  Christi,  or  Ricinus,
in  Egyptian  called  Kiki,  and  in  Greek,  Selicy-
prion.  It  is  a  plant  like  a  lily,  the  leaves  whereof
are  smooth,  scattered  here  and  there,  and  spotted
with  black  spots.  Dioscorides  says,  that  there  is
a  sort  of  it  which  grows  large  like  a  tree,  and  as
high  as  a  fig-tree.  'The  leaves  of  it  are  like  those
of  the  plum-tree ;  though  broader,  smoother,  and
blacker.  'The  branches  and  trunk  of  it  are  hollow
like  a  reed.  Hume  '/link,  that  Jonah  speaks  of  this
last  species.

Wild  gourd,  in  Hebrew,  Pekaah.  This  is  a  plant
which  ptoduces  leaves  and  branches  much  like
garden  encumbers,  which  creep  upon  the  earth,
and  are  divided  into  several  branches.  Its  fruit
is  of  the  size  and  figure  of  an  orange.  It  is  of  a
light,  white  substance,  if  you  pare  off  the  rind  ;  and
so  bitter  to  the  taste,  that  it  has  been  called  the
gall  of  the  earth.  Mention  is  made  of  this  plant
in  2  Kings  4.  39.

Jonah  4.  6.  God  prepared  a  y.  Jonah  glad  of  the  y.

7.  a  worm  smote  they,  that  it  withered

10.  thou  hastliad  pity  on  they,  for  which  hast  not
GOURDS.

1  Kings  6.  t  18.  cedar  of  the  house  carved  with  y.

Wild  GOURDS.

2  Kings  4.  39.  one  gathered  wild  g.  his  lap  full

GRACE

Is  taken  (1)  For  the  free  and  eternal  love  and  favour
of  God,  which  is  the  spring  and  source  of  all  the
benefits  which  we  receive  from  him.  Rom.  11.

6.  And  if  by  grace,  then  it  is  no  more  of
works.  2  'Tim.  1.  9-  Who  hath  saved  us,  and
called  us  with  an  holy  calling,  according  to  his
own  purpose  and  grace.  This  free  and  unmerited
love  of  God  is  the  original  mover  in  our  salva¬
tion,  and  hath  no  cause  above  it  to  excite  or  draw
it  forth,  but  merely  arises  from  his  own  will.
It  was  this  mercy  or  love  of  God  that  found  out
redemption  for  mankind:  God  so  Icved  the  world,


that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son  x,  die  tor  us,
John  3.  16.  And  wliat  could  his  love  give  more
than  the  life  of  his  Hon  ?  (2)  Grace  is  taken  for
the  free  imputation  if  Christ’s  righteousness,  by
the  merit  whereof  true  believers  become  righteous
in  the  sight  of  God.  Rom.  5.  20.  Where  sin
abounded  grace  did  much  more  abound.  (3/
For  the  work  of  the  Hpirit,  renewing  the  soul  after
the  image  of  God,  and  continually  guiding  and
strengthening  the  believer  to  obey  his  will,  to  re¬
sist  and  mortify  sin,  and  to  overcome  it.  Rom.

6.  14.  Yc  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under

grace.  2  Cor.  12.  9-  My  grace  is  sufficient  for
thee.  (4)  For  that  excellent  and  blessed  state  of
reconciliation,  friendship,  and  favour  with  God,
which  God  graciously  bestows  upon  his  people.
Rom.  5.  2.  By  whom  also  we  have  access  by
faith,  into  this  grace  wherein  we  stand.  (5)  For
the  free  love,  favour,  and  bounty  of  Christ.
2  Cor.  8.  9.  Ye  know  the  grace  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  (6)  For  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,
which  proceeds  from  the  grace  of  God,  and
wherein  Ins  grace  is  offered  and  bestowed  upon
all  penitent  believers.  1  Pet.  5.  12,  This  is  the
true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  stand  ;  the  true  and
only  doctrine  of  the  gospel .  (7)  For  a  liberal

and  charitable  disposition,  wrought  in  the  heart
by  the  grace  of  God.  2  Cor.  8.  7.  As  ye  abound
in  every  thing,  see  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace
also.  (8)  For  spiritual  instruction  and  edifica¬
tion.  Kph.  4.  29.  That  your  communication
may  minister  grace  to  the  hearers;  that  it  may
be  a  means  of  some  spiritual  advantage  to  them.
(9)  Grace  is  taken  for  the  office  of  aposileship,
which  was  given  of  grace,  together  with  ability
arid  other  qualifications  necessary  for  the  faithful
discharge  of  that  office.  Rom.  15.  15.  I  have
written  the  more  boldly  to  you,  because  of  the
grace  that  is  given  me  of  God.  Fph.  3.  8.  To
me,  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is
this  grace  given,  that  I  should  preach,  &c.  (10)
For  the  free  and  undeserved  love  and  favour  of
God,  and  a  lively  sense  thereof  in  the  soul ;  this
the  apostle  wishes  to  be  continued  with  and  in¬
creased  in  the  Romans,  Bom.  1.  7.  (11)  For
the  love  and  fear  of  God  dwelling  in  the  heart ;
or,  for  the  assistance  of  divine  grace.  2  Cor.  1.

12.  By  the  grace  of  God,  we  have  had  our  con¬
versation  in  the  world.  (12)  For  faith,  patience,
and  other  graces  that  enable  to  bear,  and  sup¬
port  under  sufferings,  2  Pet.  3.  18.  Phil.  1.  7.
Ye  all  are  partakers  of  my  grace.  (13)  For
eternal  life,  or  final  salvation,  which  God  will
graciously  bestow  upon  his  people,  at  the  appear¬
ing  of  Christ,  at  the  day  of  judgment.  1  Pet.  1.

13.  1  he  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  to  you  at
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  (14)  For  some¬
thing  acceptable,  beautiful,  and  graceful.  Prov.
4.  9.  She  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  ornament
of  grace  ;  a  beautiful  ornament .  (15)  For  favour
or  friendship  with  men.  Joseph  found  gl  ace  in
the  sight  of  Potiphar,  Gen.  39.  4.  Hee  Save.

Ezra  9.  8.  for  a  little  space  y.  hath  been  shewed
Fsth.  2.  17.  Esther  obtained  y.  in  his  sight
Psal.  45.  2.  y.  is  poured  into  lips,  G.  hath  anointed
84.  11.  the  Lord  is  a  sun,  he  will  givey,  and  glory
Prov.  1.  9.  they  shall  be  an  ornament  of  y.  to  head

3.  22.  so  shall  they  be  life  and  y.  to  thy  neck
34.  but  he  giveth  y.  to  the  lowly,  Jam.  4.  6.

4.  9.  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  ornament  of  y.

22.  11.  for  the  y.  of  his  lips  the  king  be  bis  friend

Feel.  10.  1 12.  words  of  a  wise  man’s  mouth  are  y,
Zech.  4.  7-  with  shoutings,  crying,  y.  y.  unto  it

12. 10.  I  will  pour  the  Spirit  of  y. 'and  supplications
John  1. 14.  begotten  of  Father,  full  of  y.  and  truth

16.  of  his  fulness  we  have  all  received,  y.  for,  y.

17.  but  y.  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ
Arts  4.  33.  and  great  y.  was  on  them  all

14.  3.  which  gave  testimony  to  the  word  of  his  y.
18.  27-  helped  them  which  lmd  believed  through  y.
20.  32.  I  commend  you  to  the  word  of  his  y.

Bom.  1.  5.  by  whom  we  received//,  and  apostleship

7.  y.  and  peace  to  you  from  God  our  Father,

1  Cor.  1.3.  2  Cor.  1.  2.  Gal.  1.  3.  Fph.  1.  2.
Phil.  1.  2.  Col.  1.  2.  1  j h ess.  1.  1.  2  Thess.
1.  2.  Phi/em.  3.

3.  24.  being  justified  freely  by  hisy.  through  redem.

4.  4.  the  reward  is  not  reckoned  of  y.  but  of  debt

16.  it  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  g.

5.  2.  wre  have  access  into  this  y.  wherein  we  stand

17.  much  more  they  who  receive  abundance  of  y.

20.  where  sin  abounded  y.  did  much  more  abound

21.  even  so  mighty,  reign  through  righteousness

6.  1.  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  y.  may  abound  ?

14.  under  y.  ||  15.  shall  we  sin,  because  under  g.  ?

11.  5.  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  y.

6.  and  if  by  y.  then  it  is  no  more  of  works

12.  3.  for  l  say,  through  the  y.  given  unto  me

6.  gifts  differing  according  to  the  y.  given  to  us

15.  15.  because  of  the  y.  given  to  me  of  God

1  Cor.  10.  30.  for  if  I  by  y.  be  a  partaker,  why

15. 10.  his  y.  bestowed  upon  me  was  not  in  vain

2  Cor.  1.  t  15.  that  ye  might  have  a  second  y.

4.  15.  abundant  y.  might  redound  to  glory  of  God

8.  6.  so  he  would  also  finish  in  you  the  same  y.  also

7.  see  that  ye  abound  in  this  y.  also

19.  who  was  chosen  to  travel  with  us  with  this  y.

9.  8.  and  God  is  able  to  make  all  y.  abound  to  you
12.  9-  be  said,  my  y.  is  sufficient  for  thee

Gal.  1.  6.  removed  from  him  w  ho  called  you  to  y.

15.  when  it  pleased  God,  who  called  me  by  his  y,
2.  9.  when  James  perceived  the  y.  given  to  "me

5.  4.  justified  by  the  law,  ye  are  fallen  from  y.
Fph.  1.  6.  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  y.

7.  forgiveness,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  y.

2.  5.  by  g.  ye  are  saved  through  faith,  8.

7.  he  might  shew  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  y.

3.  8.  to  me  the  least  of  all  saints  is  this  y.  given

4.  7.  but  unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  y.

29.  thatitmayr  minister  y.  to  the  hearers

6.  24.  y.  be  with  all  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus
Phil.  1.  7 -  ye  all  are  partakers  of  myy.

203


GR  A


GRA


G  R  A

Col.  3. 16.  singing  with  g.  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord
4.6.  let  speech  heal  way  with  y.  seasoned  with  salt
18.  y.  be  with  you,  2  Tim.  4.  22.  Tit.  3. 15.  Ileb.

13.  25.

2  Thess.  2.  16.  hath  given  us  good  hope  through  y.

1  Tim.  1.2 .y.  mercy,  and  peace  from  <4.  our  Lather
and  our  L.  .1 .  Chr.  2  Tim.  1. 2.  Tit.  ) .  4. 2  John  3.

14.  the  y.  of  our  Lord  was  exceeding  abundant
6.  21.  y.  be  with  thee.  Amen

2  Tim.  1.  9.  who  called  us  according  to  his  y.

2.  1.  be  strong  in  the  y.  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus
Tit.  3.7.  being  justified  by  his/7,  we  should  be  heirs
Heb.  4.  16.  let  11s  come  boldly  to  the  throne  ot  y.

10.  29.  and  hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  y.

12.  28.  let  us  have  y.  to  serve  Cod  acceptably

13.  9.  it  is  good  the  heart  be  established  with  y.
Jam.  1.  11.  the  y.  of  the  fashion  ot  it  pensheth

4.  6.  he  giveth  more y .  giveth  y.  to  the  humble

1  Pet.  1.  2.  y.  and  peace  be  multiplied,  2  Pet.  1.  2.
10.  who  prophesied  of  the  y.  to  come  to  you

13.  hope  for  the  y.  ||  3.  7.  as  being  heirs  ot  y.

5.  5.  God  resisteth  the  proud,  giveth  y.  to  humble
10.  the  God  of  y.  who  hath  called  us  to  glory

2  Pet.  3. 18.  grow  in  y.  and  knowledge  ot  Jes.  (.'hr.
Jude  4.  turning  the y.  of  God  into  lasciviousness
Rev.  1.  4.  fir.  and  peace  from  him  which  is  and  was

See  Lind,  or  Found.

GRACE  of  God.

Luke  2.  40.  and  the  y.  of  God  was  upon  him
Acts  11.  23.  when  he  had  seen  y.  of  God,  was  glad
13.  43.  persuaded  them  to  continue  in  the  y.ofG.
14.26.  had  been  recommended  to  y.  of  G.  15.  40.
20.  24.  to  testify  the  gospel  of  the  y.  of  God
Rom.  5. 15.  much  more  the. 9.  of  God  hath  abounded

1  Cor.  1. 4.  the  y.  of  God  given  you  by  Jesus  Christ

3.  10.  according  to  y.  of  God  which  is  given  to  me
15.  10.  by  the  y.of  God  I  am  what  1  am,  yet  not  1,

but  the  y.  of  God  which  was  with  me

2  Cor.  1. 12.  by  the  y.  of  God  we  had  our  conversation

6.  1.  that  ye  receive  not  the  y.  of  God  in  vain

8.  1.  of  the  9.  of  God  bestowed  on  the  churches

9.  14.  for  the  exceeding  y.  of  God  in  you
Gal.  2.  21.  1  do  not  frustrate  the  y.  of  God

Eph.  3.2.  if  have  heard  qf  dispensation  of  y.  of  God
7.  according  to  the  gift  of  the  y.  of  God  given  me
Col.  1.  6.  since  the  day  ye  knew  the  y.  of  God
2  Thess.  1. 12.  and  ye  in  him,  according  to  y.  oj  God
Tit.  2. 11.  the  9.  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation
Heb.  2.  9.  that  he  by  y.  of  God  should  taste  death
12. 15.  looking  lest  any  man  tail  of  the  y.  of  God

1  Pet.  4.  10.  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  y.  of  God
5.  12.  testifying  that  this  is  the  true  y.  of  God

GRACE  of  our  Lord  Jesus.

Acts  15. 11.  through  y.  of  L.  J.  we  shall  be  saved  as
Rom.  16. 20.  the  y.  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with
you ,  24.  1  Cor.  16.  23.  Phil.  4.  23.

1  Thess.  5.  28.  2  Thess.  3.  18.

2  Cor.  8.  9.  for  ye  know  the  y.  of  our  Lord  J.  Christ
13.  14.  the  y .  of  our  L.  J.  Christ,  love  of  God,  and

communion  of  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all
Gal.  6. 18.  y.  of  L.  J.  Chr.  be  with  spirit,  Philem.Q5.
Eev.lA. 21.  y.  ot'L.  J.  Christ  be  with  you  all.  Amen
GRACIOUS.

Gen.  43.  29.  and  he  said,  God  be  y.  to  thee  my  son
Exod.  22.  27.  when  he  crieth,  I  will  hear,  for  1  am  y.

33.  19.  I  will  be  y.  to  whom  I  will  be  g.

34.  6.  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  y.  2  Chron.  30.  9.

Psal.  103.  8.  I  116.  5.  |  115.  8.  Joel  2.  13.
Num.  6.  25.  the  Lord  make  his  face  shine,  and  be  y.

2  Sam.  12.  22.  who  can  tell  whether  God  will  be  g.

2  Kings  5.  t  1 .  now  FI  aaman  was  y.  with  his  master
13.  23.  and  the  Lord  was  y.  unto  them
Neh.  9.  17. aGod  ready  to  pardon,  g.  merciful,  31.
Job  33.  24.  then  he  is  g.  to  him,  and  saith,  deliver
Psal.  4.  t  1.  be  y.  unto  me,  and  hear  my  prayer
77.  9.  hath  God  forgotten  to  be  g. '!

86.  15.  but  thou,  O  Lord,  art  G.  y.  111.  4.  |  112.  4.
Prov.  11.  16.  a  g.  woman  retaineth  honour
26.+  25.  when  he  maketh  voice  y.  believe  him  not
Eccl.  10. 12.  the  words  of  a  wise  man’s  mouth  are  y.
Isa.  30.  18.  the  Lord  will  wait  that  he  may  be  y.

19.  he  will  be  very  y.  to  thee  ||  33.  2.  be  y.  to  us
Jer.  22.  23.  how  g.  when  pangs  come  upon  thee
Amos  5. 15.  may  be  the  Lord  will  be  y.  to  remnant
Jonah  4.  2.  for  i  knew  that  thou  art  a  y.  God
Mai.  1.  9.  beseech  God  that  he  will  be  g.  to  us
Luke  4.  22.  wondered  at  g.  words  which  proceeded
1  Pet.  2.  3.  if  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  g.
GRACIOUSLY.

Gen.  33.  5.  the  children  which  G.  hath  g.  given  me
11.  because  God  hath  dealt  g.  with  me
Psal.  119.  29.  and  grant  me  thy  law  g.

Llos.  14.2.  take  away  all  iniquity,  and  receive  us  y.
Luke  1.  +  28.  hail,  thou  that  art  g.  accepted
GRAFT,  ED.

Rom.  11.17.  thou  being  a  wild  olive-tree  wert/7,  in
19.  branches  were  broken  that  I  might  be  y.  in

23.  they  shall  be  g.  in,  for  God  is  able  to  y.  them

24.  were  cut  out  and  g.  much  more  these  be  g.

GRAIN ,  S.

Joel  1.  +  17.  the  g.  are  rotten  under  the  clods
Amos  9.9.  yet  shall  not  the  least y.  fall  on  the  earth
Mat.  13.  31.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  g.  of
mustard-seed,  Mark  4.  31.  Luke  13.  19.
17.  20.  if  ye  have  faith  as  a  g.  of  mustard-seed,  ye
shall  say  unto  this  mountain,  remove,  Luke  17. 6.
1  Cor.  15.  37.  bai  e  q.  wheat,  or  some  other  g.
giiAndlathek.

Dan.  5.  +  11.  in  days  of  thy  g.  in  him  whom  thy  77.
+  13.  that  Danief  whom  a.  brought  out  of  Jewry
GRAN  DMOIUEll.

1  Kings  15.  +  10.  his  y.'s  name  was  Maaehah

2  Tim.  1.  5.  faith  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  y.  Lois

GRANT.

Ezra  3.  7.  according  to  the  g.  they  had  of  Cyrus
GRAN  i'.

Lev.  25.  24.  y'e  shall  y.  a  redemption  for  the  land
Ruth  1.  9-  the  Lord  g.  you  that  you  may  line!  rest
1  Sam.  1.  17.  the  God  of  Israel  g.  thee  thy  petition
1  Chron.  21.  22.  y.  me  the  place  of  this  threshing-
floor  ;  thou  sbalt  g.  it  me  for  the  full
£  Chron.  12. 7.  but  I  willy.  them  some  deliverance
SJ04


Kelt.  1.  11.  and  y.  him  mercy  in  sight  of  this  man
Esth.  5.  8.  if  it  please  the  king  to  y.  my  petition
Job  6.  8.  that  God  w'ould  g.  the  thing  1  long  for
Psal.  20.  4.  y.  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart
85.  7.  shew  us  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  g.  us  salvation
119.  29.  andy.  me  thy  law  graciously
140.  8.  g.  not  O  Lord,  the  desires  ot  the  wicked
Mat.  20.  21.  g.  my  two  sons  may  sit,  Mark  10.  37-
Luke  1.  74.  y!  to  us,  that  we  being  delivered
Acts  4.  29.fi/.  that  with  boldness  we  may  speak
Rom.  15.  5.  now  God  y.  you  to  be  like-minded
Eph.  3.  16.  g.  you  to  be  strengthened  with  might
2  Tim.  1.  18.  the  Lord  y.  that  he  may  find  mercy
Rev.  3.  21.  will  1  g.  to  sit  with...me  in  my  throne
GRANTED.

1  Chron.  4.  10.  God  y.  him  that  which  he  requested

2  Chron.  1.  12.  wisdom  and  knowledge  is  fit.  thee
Ezra  7.  6.  and  the  king  <7.  him  all  his  requests

A  eh.  2.  8.  the  king  y.  according  to  good  hand  of  G.
Esth.  5.  6.  what  thy  petition,  shall  he  y.  7.  2.  1  9. 12.

9.  13.  let  it  be/7,  to  the  .levs  in  Hiushan
Job  10.  12.  thou  hast  y.  me  life  and  favour
Prov.  10.  24.  the  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  g.
Acts  3.  14.  and  desired  a  murderer  to  be//,  you

11.  18.  then  hath  God  also  to  the.  Gentiles  y.  re¬
pentance  unto  life

14.  3.  who 77.  signs  to  he  done  by  their  hands
Rev  19.  8.  to  her  was  y.  she  should  be  arrayed  in
GRAPE.

There  teas  abundance  of  fine  vineyards,  and  excellent
grapes  in  Palestine.  How  large  this  fruit  was  in
that  country,  we  may  judge  by  the  hunch  of  grapes
which  was  cut  in  the  valley  of  Eshcol,  and  was
brought  upon  a  staff  between  two  men  to  the  camp
of  Israel  at  Kadeshbarnea,  Num.  13.  23,  24.
Travellers  relute,  that  there  was  some  to  be  seen
there  of  a  prodigious  size.  Strabo  and  Pliny
affirm  the  same,  •'dome  affirm,  that  in  the  valley
of  Eshcol  there  were  bunches  of  grapes  to  be  found
s  till  of  ten  and  twelve  pounds.

Moses  in  the  law  commanded,  that  when  the  Israel¬
ites  gathered  their  grapes,  they  should  not  be
careful  to  pick  up  those  which  fell,  nor  be  so  exact
as  to  leave  none  upon  the  vines.  What  Jell,  and
was  left  behind,  he  ordered  should  be  for  the  poor.
Lev.  19.  10.  Deut.  24.  20,  21.  People  who  were
passing  that  way  were  permitted  to  go  into  an¬
other  man's  vineyard,  and  eat  what  grapes  they
would ;  but  they  were  not  allowed  to  carry  any
away  with  them,  Deut.  23.  24.

Some  learned  men  are  of  opinion,  that  the  prohibi¬
tion  delivered  by  Moses  against  gleaning  grapes
after  the  vintage,  may  signify  a  second  vintage
after  the  first,  which  was  never  so  good  or  so  plen¬
tiful  as  the  former ;  for  this,  they  say,  was  over
in  the  hot  countries  about  the  end  of  August,  and
the  other  in  September.  God  requires  therefore
that  this  second  vintage  should  be  left  to  the  poor,
as  well  as  the  grapes  of  the  first  which  had  escaped
the  observation  of  the  gatherers.

It  is  frequent  in  Scripture  to  describe  an  almost
total  destruction,  by  the  similitude  of  a  vine  strip¬
ped  in  such  a  manner  that  there  was  not  a  bunch
of  grapes  left  for  those  who  came  a  gleaning.  Isa.
24.  13.  Thus  it  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  the  land,
there  shall  be  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when  the
vintage  is  done.  And  Jer.  6.  9.  they  shall
thoroughly  glean  the  remnant  of  Israel  as  a  vine.
See  Jer.  49.  9.  Obad.  5.

The  blood  of  grapes,  Gen.  49.  11.  signifies  wine.
He  washed  bis  clothes  in  the  blood  ot  grapes.
His  habitation  shall  be  in  a  country  where  there
are  vineyards.  And  Deut.  32.  14.  'ihou  didst
drink  the  pure  blood  of  the  grape ;  pure,  unmixed
wine.  'I  he  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour  grape,  and
the  children’s  teeth  are  set  on  edge,  Jer.  31.  29.
Ezek.  18.  2.  This  is  a  proverbial  way  of  speaking
in  the  sacred  text  ;  meaning,  that  the  fathers  have
sinned,  and  the  children  have  borne  the  punishment
of  their  crimes.  It  was  a  complaint  made  by  the
jews  to  God,  who  punished  those  sins  in  them,
whereof  they  pretended  they  were  not  guilty.  But
the  Lord  said,  he  would  cause  tins  proverb  to  cease
in  Israel,  and  that  for  the  future  every  one  should
suffer  the  punishment  of  his  own  iniquity.

Lev.  19.  10.  nor  gather  every  g.  of  thy  vineyard
Deut.  32.  14.  thou  didst  drink  the  blood  of  the  g.
Job  15.  33.  he  shall  shake  off  his  unripe  77.  as  vine
G 'ant.  2.  13.  vines  with  tender  77.  give  a  good  smell
7.  12.  let  us  see  whether  the  tender  77.  appear
Isa.  18.  5.  the  sour  y.  is  ripening  in  the  flower
Jer.  31.  29.  the  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour  77.

30.  every  man  that  eateth  the  sour  77.

Mic.  7.  1.  I  am  as  the  77. -gleanings  of  the  vintage
G  R  API i-gatherer.

Jer.  6.  9.  turn  back  thy  hand  as  ay. -gatherer
49.  9.  if  77.-77.  come,  would  they  not  leave.’'  Obad.  5.
GRAPES.

Gen.  40. 10.  the  clusters  thereof  brought  forth  ripe  77.
49. 11.  he  washed  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of  g.

Lev.  25.  5.  nor  gather  the  77.  of  thy  vine  undressed
11.  in  jubilee,  nor  gather  the  g.  of  thy  vine
Num.  6.  3.  nor  shall  he  eat  moist  77.  or  dried
13.  20.  the  time  was  the  time  of  the  first  ripe  77.

23.  they  cut  down  a  branch  with  one  cluster  of  y.
Deut.  23.  24.  then  thou  mayest  eat  77.  thy  fill

24.  21.  v'hen  thou  gatherest  the  77.  of  thy  vineyard

28.  30.  shalt  plant  a  vineyard,  not  gather  the  77.  39-
32.  32.  their  77.  are  77.  of  gall,  their  clusters  bitter
Judy.  8.  2.  is  riot  the  gleaning  of  the  77.  of  Ephraim
9.  2“.  they  trode  the 77.  and  cursed  Abimelech
A 'eh.  13.  15.  bringing  in  wine  and  y.  on  the  sabbath
Cant.  2.  15.  for  our  vines  have  tender  77.

7.  7.  and  thy  breasts  are  like  to  clusters  of  q.

Isa.  5.  2.  he  looked  it  should  bring  forth  g.

4.  should  bring  forth//,  brought  it  forth  w  ild  g.?
17.6.  yet  gleaning/;,  shall  be  left  in  it

24.  137  as  die  gleaning//,  when  vintage  is  done
Jer.  8.  13.  there  shall  be  no  77.  on  the  vine

25.  30.  shall  give  a  shout,  as  they  that  tread  the  g.
49.  9.  would  not  leave  some  gleaning  y.  Obad.  5.

Ezek.  18.2.  the  fathers  have  eaten  sour  77.


Hos,  3.  +  1.  look  to  gods,  and  love  flagons  of  g.

9.  10.  I  found  Israel  like  y.  in  the  wilderness
Amos  9.  13.  D  eader  of  //,  shall  overtake  thesowei
Mat.  7. 16.  do  men  gather  77.  of  thorns,  tigs  of  thistle
Luke  6.  44.  norofa  bramble-bush  gather  they  y.
Rev.  14.  18.  thrust  in  sickle,  her  77.  are  fully  rii>
GRASS.

Gen.  1.  11.  God  said,  let  the  earth  bring  forth  y.

12.  and  the  earth  brought  forth 77.  and  herb
Num.  22.  4.  as  the  ox  licketh  up  the  y.  of  the  fie

Deut.  11.15.  I  will  send  77.  in  thy  fields  for  thy  catt

29.  23.  it  is  not  sown,  nor  any  77.  groweth  thereii
32.  2.  my  speech  shall  1  distil  as  showers  upon  the
2  Bam.  23.4.  as  the  77.  springing  out  of  the  earth

1  Kings  18.  5.  peradventure  liud//.  to  save  horsej

2  Kings  19.  26.  they’  were  as  the  77.  of  the  field, ;

green  herb,  as  77.  on  the  house-tops,  La.  37.  g.
Job  5.  25.  thine  offspring  is  the  77.  of  the  earth
6.  5.  doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he  hath  y.  f
40.  15.  behold,  behemoth  eateth  g.  as  an  ox
Psal.  23.  +  2.  to  lie  down  in  pastures  of  tender  g
37.  2.  for  they  shall  soon  he  cut  down  like  the  q. '
72.  6.  he  shall’ come  down  like  rain  upon  mown  ,

16.  they  of  the  city  shall  flourish  like  y.  of  eartl'j
90.  5.  in  the  morn,  they  are  like  7 7.  w  hich  growetlj
92.  7.  when  the  wicked  spring  as  the  77.  and  flouri;

102.  4.  my  heart  is  smitten,  and  w  ithered  like//.
11.  my  oays  like  a  shadow,  am  withered  like  g\

103.  15.  as  for  man,  his  days  are  as  //.  asa  Howe
104. 14.  he  (  auseth  g.  to  grow  for  cattle

106.  20.  in  tlie  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth  <7.
129.  6.  let  them  be  as  the  g.  upon  the  house-tops
147.  8.  who  maketh  y.  to  grow  upon  the  mountain
Prov.  19.  12.  the  king's  favour  is  as  dew  upon  the
27.  25.  hay  appeareth,  the  tender  77.  sheweth  itse;
Isa.  15.  6.  the 77.  faileth,  there  is  no  green  thing  !
35.  7.  in  the  habitation  of  dragons  shall  be  g.

4o.  6.  the  voice  said,  cry.  all  flesh  is  77.  1  Pet.  1.3
7.  the//,  withereth,  surely  the  people  is  77.  8
44.  4.  they  shall  spring  up  as  among  the  7?

51. 12.  the  son  of  man  which  shall  be  made  as  g.
Jer.  14.  5.  bind  forsook  it,  because  there  was  nog.
50.  11.  ye  are  grown  fat  as  the  heifer  at  77.

Da/ 4.  4.  15.  leave  the  stump  in  the  tender  77.  23.

25.  shall  make  thee  eat//,  as  oxen,  32, 3.3.  |  5.  21]
Amos  7.  2.  they  had  made  an  end  of  eating 77.  of  lap
Mic.  5.  7.  as  showers  upon  the 77.  that  tarrieth  11c
Zeclt.  10.  1.  Lord  shall  give  every  one 77.  in  the  fie:
Mat.  6.  30.  if  God  so  clothe  the  77.  Luke  12.  28.  1
14.  19.  the  multitude  to  sit  down  on  77.  Mark  0. 31
John  6.  10.  now  there  w’as  much  77.  in  the  place  :
Jam.  1.10.  as  the  flower  of  the  77.  he  shall  pass  awi
11.  sun  is  no  sooner  risen,  but  it  withereth  the
Rev.  8.  7.  and  all  green  g.  was  burnt  up
9.  4.  that,  they  should  not  hurt  the  g.  of  theeartj
GRASSHOPPER,  S.

Lev.  11.  22.  these  ye  may  eat,  the  77.  after  his  kin;
Num.  13.  33.  and  we  were  in  our  own  sight  as  y,
Judg.  6.  5.  they  came  as//,  for  multitude, 7-  12.
Job  39.  20.  canst  thou  make  him  afraid  as  a g. !  \
Ltd.  12.  5.  and  the  77.  shall  be  a  burden,  desire  f
Jsa.  40.  22.  the  inhabitants  thereof  are  as  g.

Jer.  46.  23.  because  they  are  more  than  the  <7.
Amos  7. 1.  behold,  he  formed  g.  in  the  beginning
Nah.  3.  17.  thy  captains  are  as  the  great  g.
Gkatr,  Bee  IIrasen.

GRAVE,  Bubstantive.

Gen.  35.  20.  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  upon  her  g.  tl|
is  die  pillar  of  Rachel’s  g.  unto  this <11

37.  .35.  I  will  go  down  to  y.  to  my  son,  mourni
42.  38.  bring  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  g.  44.
50,  5.  bury  me  in  my  g.  which  l  have  digged  :
Num.  19.  16.  whosoever  toucheth  a  77.  is  unclean

18.  sprinkle  it  on  him  that  touched  one  dead  oil

1  Bam.  2.  6.  the  Lord  bringeth  down  to  the//.

2  Sam.  3.  32.  the  king  and  people  wept  at  Abner’.1!
19.  37.  and  be  buried  by  the  77.  of  my  father

1  Kings  2.  6.  let  not  his  head  go  to  the  77.  in  pe<:

9.  iiis  head  bringdown  to  the  77.  with  blood

13.  30.  and  lie  laid  his  carcase  in  his  own  g.

14.  13.  he  only  of  Jeroboam  shall  come  to  the

2  Kings  22.  20.  thou  gathered  to  thy  g.  2  Chr.  34.
Job  3.  22.  who  are  glad  when  they  can  find  the

5.  26.  thou  shalt  come  to  thy  77.  in  a  full  age
7.  9.  so  be  that  goeth  to  77.  shall  come  up  no  mil
10. 19. 1  should  have  been  carried  from  womb  to
14.  13.  O  that  thou  wouldest  hide  me  in  the  y.

17.  13.  if  1  wait,  the  77.  is  my  house

21.  13.  and  in  a  moment  they  go  down  to  the  77.
32.  yet  shall  he  be  brought  to  the  77.  and  in  ton;
24. 19.  so  doth  the  77.  those  that  have  sinned

30.  24.  he  will  not  stretch  out  his  hand  to  the  7 r
33.  22i  yea,  his  soul  draweth  near  to  the  77.
Psal.  6.  5.  in  the  y.  who  shall  give  thee  thanks:
30.  3.  thou  hast  brought  up  my  soul  from  they
31. 17.  let  the  wicked  be  silent  in  the  77.,

49.  14.  like  sheep  laid  in  the  77.  consume  in  the/?;

10.  redeem  my  soul  from  the  pow’er  of  they.
55.  +  15.  let  them  go  down  quick  into  they.

86.  +  13.  thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the

88.  3.  and  my  life  draweth  nigh  to  the  77.  _

5.  free  among  the  dead,  like  slain  that  lie  in  tin

11.  thy  loving-kindness  be  declared  in  they.  |

89.  48.  shall  lie  deliver  his  soul  from  hand  of  77.
141.  7.  our  bones  are  scattered  at  the  y.'s  mout!’

Prov.  1.  12.  let  us  swallow  them  alive  as  they.
30.  16.  y.  and  barren  womb,  say  not,  it  is  enoii
Eccl.  9.  10.  no  wisdom  in  the  y.  whither  thou  ec
Cant.  8.  6.  love  is  strong,  jealousy  is  cruel  as  the ;
Isa.  14.  +9.  the  77.  is  moved  for  thee  to  meet  thee
11.  thy  pomp  is  brought  down  to  the  y.

19.  thou  art  cast  out  of  thy  77.  like  a  branch

38.  10.  I  said,  1  shall  go  to  the  gates  ot  the  y.

18.  the  y.  cannot  praise  thee,  death  cannot

53. 9.  he  made  his  g.  with  the  wicked,  and  with  1
Jer.  20. 17.  that  my  mother  might  have  been  my
Ezek.  31. 15.  the  day  when  be  went  down  to  th<
32.  23.  and  her  company  is  round  about  her  y.
lies.  13.  14. 1  will  ransom  them  from  the  power  o'
will  redeem  from  death,  O  y.  I  will  bedestrucU
Jonah  2. +  2.  out  of  the  belly  of  they,  cried  I
Nah.  1.  14.  I  will  make  thy  y.  for  thou  art  vile


G  R  E


G  RE


G  RE


in  11.  17-  he  found  he  had  lain  in  the  #.  four  days
1.  saying,  she  goeth  to  the  #.  to  weep  there

8.  .Jesus  again  groaning,  cometh  to  the  g.

.  17-  when  he  called  Lazarus  out  of  his  g.

''or.  15.  55.  O  g.  where  is  thy  victory  t

v.  20. 1 13.  death  and  g.  delivered  up  the  dead

(iHAV  t L- clot hes.

n  11. 44.  Lazarus  came  forth  bound  with  g.-cl.
GRAVE,  Adjective.

'im. 3. 8.  deacons  must  b eg.  ||  11.  wives  must  be#.
■.  2.  2.  that  aged  men  be  sober,  g.  temperate
GRAY  I'.

id.  28. 9.  thou  shalt  g.  on  the  onyx-stones  names

6.  shait  make  a  plate  of  pure  gold,  and  g.  on  it
'/iron.  2. 7-  send  me  a  man  that  can  skill  to  g.

4.  1  have  sent  a  cunning  man  to  g.  any  graving

GRAVED.

tugs  7-  36.  on  the  borders  he  <7.  cherubims
/iron.  3.  7.  and  he  g.  cherubims  on  the  walls
GRAVEL.

w.  20. 17.  hut  his  mouth  shall  be  filled  with  0.
.48.  19.  offspring  of  thy  bowels  like  g.  thereof
’/i.  3. 16.  hath  broken  my  teeth  with  g.  stones

G  R A  VEN ,  Verb.

.  49- 16.  I  have  g.  thee  on  the  palms  of  my  hands
b.  2.  18.  that  the  maker  thereof  bath  g.  it
GRAVEN.

.  >d.  32. 16.  was  the  writing  of  God  g.  on  tables
.  6.  g.  as  signets  are  g.  with  the  names  of  1  srael
.  19. 24.  that  they  were  g.  with  an  iron  pen
. .  17. 1.  it  is  g.  upon  the  table  of  their  heart
.  s  17.  29.  that  the  Godhead  is  like  gold  g.  by  art
GRAVEN  image.

id.  20.  4.  thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  g.

image,  Lev.  26.  1 .  1  lent.  5.  8.

.  it.  4. 16.  lest  ve  corrupt  and  make  a  g.  image,  25.

15.  cursed  the  man  that  maketh  any  g.  image
.  g.  17. 3.  the  silver  for  my  son  to  make  a  g.  image
gave  them  to  the  founder,  who  made  a  g.  image
14.  there  is  in  these  houses  a  <7.  image
j.  the  g.  image  H  30.  Dan  set  up  the  g.  image,  31.
i  ings 21.  7-  Manasseh  set#.  image  in  house  of  G.

.  40. 19.  the  workman  melteth  a  g.  image
).  heseeketh  a  workman  to  prepare  a  #.  image

9.  they  that  make  a  g.  image  are  vanity

).  who  hath  molten  a  g.  image  not  profitable
’.  with  the  residue  thereof  he  maketh  his  g.  im.
20.  that  set  up  the  wood  of  their  g.  image

5.  and  my#,  image  hath  commanded  them

.  10. 14.  founder  confounded  by  g.  image,  51.  17.

-  1. 1. 14.  I  will  cut  oft  the  g .  and  molten  image
A.  2. 18.  what  profiteth  the  g.  image  ?

GRAVEN  images.

j  it.  7. 5.  ye  shall  burn  their#.  images  with  fire,  25.

'•  3.  ye  shall  hew  down  the  g.  im.  of  their  gods
J7. 3. 1 19.  Ehud  turned  by  the;/,  images  atGilgal
i  ings  17 .  41.  feared  the  Lord  and  served  g.  im.

£  iron.  33. 19.  set  up  g.  im.  before  he  was  humbled
7-  when  he  had  beaten  the#.  images  to  powder
j  /■  78. 58.  moved  him  to  jealousy  with  g.  images

7.  confounded  be  ail  they  that  serve  g.  images
*  19. 10.  whose  g.  im.  did  excel  them  of  Jerusal.

9.  Babylon  is  fallen,  and  all  the  g.  images

22.  shall  defile  the  covering  of  thy  g.  images

8.  neither  will  l  give  my  praise  to  g.  images

.  shall  be  greatly  ashamed  that  trust  in  g.  im.

.  8. 19.  provoked  me  to  anger  with  their  g.  im.

38.  it  is  the  land  of  g.  images,  they  are  mad
47.  1  will  do  judgment  on  the  g.  images,  52.

■  11.  2.  they  burnt  incense  to  g.  images

A  •  1-  7.  all  the  g .  images  shall  be  beaten  to  pieces
3.  thy#.  images  also  will  L  cut  off

GRAVES.

id.  14.  11.  because  there  were  no  g.  in  Egypt
. n.  11. 434.  he  called  the  [dace  the  g.  of  lusts
Zings  13.  6.  cast  the  powder  on  the  g.  of  the  peo.

£  mm.  34.  4.  strowed  it  on  the  g.  of  them  that
Jl7.  1.  days  extinct,  the  g.  are  ready  for  me
+  32.  yet  shall  he  be  brought  to  the  g.

I  65. 4.  which  remain  among  the  g.  and  lodge
J  8, 1.  shall  bring  the  priest's  bones  out  of  their  g

23.  and  cast  his  dead  body  into  g.  of  the  people
JL  32.  22.  his  g.  are  about  him,  23.  25,  26.

12.  1  will  open  your  g.  and  cause  you  to  come
, '  ,  ,  up  01ft  of  your  g.

■  when  I  have  opened  your. <7.  brought  out  of  g.

1  11-  1  will  give  Gog  a  place  of  g.  in  Israel
1  ■  27-52.  the;/,  were  opened,  many  saints  arose

■  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints  came  out  of  g.
Jell.  44.  for  ye  are  as  .<7.  which  appear  not
-j  t  0.  28.  all  that  are  in  the  g.  shall  hear  his  \  oice
J  ■  11.  9.  not  suffer  their  bodies  to  be  put  in  a

GRAVE  I II.  J'

16.  as  he  that  g .  an  habitation  in  a  rock
J  GRAVING.

J  !■  32.  4.  he  fashioned  golden  calf  with  a  g.  tool
GRAVING.

"■  r'a  ski,ful  t0  Srave  any  manner  of  g.  +  7.

1 '.  3.  9.  1  will  engrave g.  thereof,  saith  the  Lord
CRAVINGS.

1  ngs 7.  31.  upon  the  mouth  of  the  laver  were  g
.  .  GRAVITY.  J

T •  having  children  in  subjection  with  all  g.
i  -  (.  in  doctrine  shewing  g.  sincerity
Guay,  see  Hairs  and  1 1  tv  u.

■  G  RA  X -headed,

j  fl*  V;  -•  lap  1  old  and  g.-h.  my  sons  are  with  you
/ ; .."  itl'  lls  a>'e  the  g. -headed  and  aged

•  <  1. 18.  when  1  am  old  and  g.-h.  forsake  me  not

1,  _  GREASE.

•  Uj.  |0.  their  heart  is  as  fat  as#.  but  I  delight

5  .  .  GREAT.

icord  is  put  for  rich,  powerful,  celebrated,
blast rious,  ancient.  Naaman  was
'  "'an  with  the  /  mg  his  master ;  he  was
great  consideration  with  him,  2  Kings  5.  1.  I
make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  Gen.  12.  2.  1
male  thee  head  or  father  of  a  numerous
Peovlt.  Moses  was  very  great  in  the
1  LffVptf  Exod.  11.  3.  The  whole  country
upon  him  as  an  extraordinary  man,  and
one  sent  from  God.  The  Great  Sea,  Num.


34.  6.  tn  the  way  of  eminence,  is  ihe  Mediter¬
ranean,  greater  beyond  comparison  than  the  Dead
sea  \nd  the  sea  <4  Genncsaretli,  which  are  but
/ales.  The  ling  of  Assyria  is  called  the  great
king,  the  Euphrates,  the  great  river,  the  city  of
N  ineveli,  the  great  city  ;  because  the  king  of  As¬
syria  was  the  most  powerful  king  in  the  east  ;  the
Eu pirates  the  greatest  rtver  in  Syria  ;  and  Nine¬
veh  the  greatest  city  in  the  dominions  of  the  king
cj  Assyiia,  and  of  all  the  countries  round  about.
Gen.  12.2.  1  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  name g.
24.  35.  Abraharn  my  master  is  become  g.

30.8.  with  g.  wrestlings  have  I  wrestled  with  sister
39.  9.  how  can  1  do  this  g.  wickedness  and  sin !
45.  7-  to  save  your  lives  by  a;/,  deliverance
48.  19.  I  know  it,  my  son,  he  also  shall  be  g.

Dent.  .3.  5.  beside  unwalled  towns  a  ;/.  many

10.  17.  (lie  Lord  your  God  is  a  g.  God,  2  C hr:  2.  5.

11.  7.  your  eyes  have  seen  the  g.  acts  of  the  Lord

18.  10.  neither  let  me  see  this  g .  fire  any  more
29.  2t.  what  meaneth  the  heat  of  this #." anger  ?

Josh.  7.  9.  what  wilt  thou  do  unto  thy  g.  name  ?

14. 12.  thou  lieardestthe  cities  were  g.  and  fenced
22.  10.  htiil  I  there  a  #.  altar  by  .Iordan  to  see  to
24.  17.  for  lie  did  those  g.  signs  in  our  sight
Judg.  5. 15.  divisions  ot  Reuben#,  thoughts  of  heart

1  Ham.  12.  17.  may  perceive  your  wickedness  is  g.
22.  t  15.  1  knew  nothing  of  all  this,  little  or#.

2  Sam.  5. 10.  Dav.  wenton,  and  grew  #.  L.  with  him
7-  9.  I  have  made  thee  a  #.  name,  I  was  with  thee

22.  thou  art  #.  O  Lord  God,  none  is  like  thee

12.  14.  given  #.  occasion  to  enemies  to  blaspheme
22.  36.  thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  ;/.  Ts.  18.  35.

1  kings  8.  42.  shall  hear  of  thy  #.  name,  2  Chr.  6.32.

19.  7-  because  the  journey  is  too  g.  for  thee

2  A  ings 4. 8.  passed  to  Shunem,  where  was#,  woman
22.  13.  #.  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  that  is  kindled

1  Ghron.  16.  25.  #.  is  the  Lord,  and  greatly  to  be

praised,  Psal.  48.  1. 1  96.4.  |  135.  5.  1  145.  3.
21. 1.3.  into  Lord's  hand,  for  very  #.  are  his  mercies
29.  12.  and jn  thine  hand  it  is  to  make  #.

2  Ghron.  2.  5.  the  house  I  build  is#,  for#,  is  our  G.
9.  the  house  l  am  to  build  shall  be  wonderful  #.

17.  12.  .lehoshaphat  waxed  #.  exceedingly
28  13.  our  trespass  is  #.  ||  34.  21.  #.  wrath  poured
IS  eh.  4.  14.  remember  the  L.  who  is  #.  and  terrible
9.  32.  now  tliereforcourGod,  the  #.  the  mighty  God
Lsth.  1.20.  published  thro’  all  his  empire,  for  it  is#.
Job  5.  25.  thou  shalt  know  that  thy  seed  shall  he  #.
22.  5.  is  not  thy  wickedness  #.  iniquities  infinite  1

30. 18.  by  #.  force  of  my  disease  garment  changed

35.  15.  yet  he  knoweth  it  not  in#,  extremity'

36.  18.  a#,  ransom  ||  26.  God  is#,  we  know  him  not
38.  21.  or  because  the  number  of  thy  days  is#.

39. 11.  wilt  thou  trust  him,  because  strength  is  g.  ?
Psal.  12.  +3.  cut  off  tongue  that  speaks  #.  things

14.  5.  there  were  they  in  #.  fear,  53.  5.

19.  11.  and  in  keeping  of  them  there  is#,  reward
21.  5.  his  glory  is  #.  in  thy  salvation,  honour

25.  11.  O  Lord,  pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  #.

31. 19.  O  how  #.  is  thy  goodness  thou  hast  laid  up
86.  10.  thou  art#,  and  doest  wondrous  things

92.  5.  how  g.  are  thy  works  ||  103.  +  8.  <7.  of  mercy
139.  17-  G  God,  how  #.  is  the  sum  of  them  !

Lccl.  9. 13.  this  wisdom  seemed  #.  unto  me
Isa.  5.  9.  houses  even#,  and  fair  without  inhabitant

9.  2.  sat  in  darkness,  have  seen  #.  light,  Mat.  4.  16.

12.  6.  #.  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  midst  of  thee

19.  20.  I>e  shall  send  them  a  Saviour  and  a  #.  one

53.  12.  I  will  divide  him  a  portion  with  the  #.

54.  13.  and  #.  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children
Jer.  5.  27.  therefore  they  are  become  #.  ami  rich

10.  6.  thou  art  #.  and  thy  name  is  #.  in  might

20.  17-  and  her  womb  to  be  always  #.  with  me
32.  18.  the#,  the  mighty  God  is  his  name

19.  #.  in  counsel,  and  mighty  in  work
44.26.  behold,  1  have  sworn  by  my  #.  name
Lam.  3.  23.  they  are  new,#,  is  thy  faithfulness
Ezek.  16.  7.  thou  hast  increased  and  waxed  #.

17-  3.  a  g.  eagle  with  #.  wings,  long-winged,  7.

24.  9.  I  'will  even  make  the  pile  for  fire#.

29.  18.  to  serve  a  #.  service  aeainst  Tyros
31.  4.  the  waters  made  him  #.  the  deep  set  him  up
36.  23.  and  i  will  sanctify  iny  #.  name
Dan.  4.  3.  how#,  hissigns,  how  mighty  his  wonders!

8.  4.  I  saw  the  ram  pushing,  and  he  became  #.

Joel 3.  13.  get  you  down,  for  their  wickedness  is  #.
Amos  6.2.  and  from  thence  go  to  Hamath  the#.

Mic.  5.  4.  now  shall  he  be  #.  unto  ends  of  the  earth
Zech.  9.  17-  how#,  his  goodness,  how  g.  his  beauty !
Mai.  1. 11.  my  name  shall  be  #.  among  Gentiles,  11.
Mat.  5.  12.  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,  for#,  is

your  reward  in  heaven,  Luke  6.  23,’  35.
19.  shall  be  called#,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven
6.  23.  it  light  be  darkness,  how  #.  is  that  darkness 1

13.  46.  one  pearl  of#,  price  ||  15. 28.  #.  is  thy  faith

19.  22.  for  he  had#,  possessions,  Mark  10.  42.

20.  25.  they  that  are  #.  exercise  authority

26.  whosoever  will  be#,  amongyou,  Mark  10.  43.
£2.  36.  Master,  which  is  the  #.  commandment  ?

38.  this  js  the  first  and  #.  commandment
Luke  1.  15.  he  shall  be  #.  in  sight  of  the  I.ord

9.  48.  that  is  least  amongyou,  the  same  shall  be  #.

10.  2.  the  harvest  truly  is  #.  but  the  labourers  few

16.  26.  between  us  and  you  there  is  a  #.  gulf
Acts  8.  9.  giving  out  that  lie  was  some  #.  one

19.  28.  #.  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians!  34.

2  Gor.  7.  4.  #.  is  my  boldness,  #.  is  my  glorying
Col.  4.  13.  that  lie  hath  a  #.  zeal  for  you  and  them

1  Tim,  3. 16.#.  ismystery  of  godliness,  G.  manifest

2  Tim.  2.  20.  in  #.  house  not  only  vessels  of  gold
Tit.  2.  13.  the  glorious  appearing' of  the  #.  God
lleh.  7.  4.  now  consider  how  g.  this  man  was
Jam.  3_.  5.  how  #.  a  matter  a  little  tire  kindleth
Lev.  15. 1.  and  1  saw  another  sign  in  heaven.  #.

16. 19. #.  Babylon  came  in  remembrance  before  G.

17.  5.  Babylon  the  g.  the  mother  of  harlots,  18.  2.
19. 17-  gather  together  unto  the  supper  of  the  #.  G.

See  City,  Company,  Congregation,  Cry,
Day,  Destruction.

G  RE  AT  evil.

1  Sam.  6.  9.  then  lie  hath  done  us  this  #.  evil


Neh.  13.  27.  h/arken  unto  you  to  do  all  this  #.  evil
Eccl.  2.21.  this  also  is  vanity,  and  a  #.  evil
Jer.  16.  10.  wherefore  Lord  pronounced  this  g.evit
26.  19.  thus  might  we  procure#,  evilag.  0111  souls

32.  42.  I  have  brought  this#,  evil  upon  this  people
44.  7.  why  commit  this  g.  evil  against  your  souls  r

Dan.  9. 12.  confirmed,  by  bringing  upon  us  a  #.  evil
See  Exceeding,  .Ioy.

G  REA  1  king  or  kings.

2  Kings  18.  19.  thus  saith  the  #.  k.  28.  Isa.  3G.  4, 13.
Ezra  5.  11.  which  a  g.  king  of  Israel  budded
Psal.  47.  2.  the  Lord  is  a#.  King  over  ail  the  earth
48.  2.  is  mount  /ion,  the  city  of  the  g.  King
95.  3.  the  Lord  is  a  #.  King  above  all  gods
136.  17.  giv  e  thanks  to  him  that  smote  #.  kings
Eccl.  9.  14.  and  there  came  a  #.  king  against  it
Jer.  25.  14.  g.  kings  shall  serve  themselves,  27.  7.
Mol.  1.  14.  tor  1  am  a#.  King,  saitli  the  Lord
Mat.  5.  35.  Jerusalem  is  the  city  of  the  #.  King
GREAT  men.

2  Sam.  7.  9.  like  name  of  #.  m.  in  earth,  1  Chr.  17. 8.
2  A  ings  10.  6.  Ahab's  sons  were  witli  #.  men  of  city
11.  Jehu  slew  all  Ahab’s  #.  men  and  kinsfolks
ts  eh.  11.  14.  Zabdiel  overseer,  son  of  one  of#,  men
Job  32.  9.  #.  men  are  not  always  wise,  nor  the  age.  j
/  roo.  18.  16.  a  gift  bringeth  him  before  #.  men
25.  6.  and  stand  not  in  the  place  of#,  men
Jer.  5.  5.  1  will  get  me  unto  the#,  men  and  speiiit
52.  13.  all  the  houses  of  the  #.  men  burnt  he
Ezek.  21.  14.  it  is  the  sword  of  the  #.  men  slain
Jonah  3.  +  7.  with  the  consent  of  his  #.  men
Nah.  3.  10.  all  her  #.  men  were  bound  in  chains
Lev.  6.  15.  #.  men  hid  themselves  in  dens  and  rocks

18.  23.  thy  merchants  were  the  #.  men  of  the  earth

GREAT  multitude,  multitudes.

Num.  32. 1.  Reuben,  Gad  had  a#,  multitude  of  cattle

1  Kings  20.  1.3.  hast  thou  seen  ail  this  g.  multitude  ?
28.  1  will  deliver  this#,  multitude  into  thine  hand

2  Ghr.  13.  8.  ye  be  a  #.  mult,  ye  have  golden  calves
20^  2.  there  cometh  a  #.  multitude  against  thee

15._not  dismayed  by  reason  of  this  #.  multitude
28.  5.  carried  a#,  multitude  captives  to  Damascus
Job  31.34.  did  I  fear  a#,  multitude  or  did  contempt
Isa.  16.  14.  all  that#,  multitude  shall  be  contemned
Jer.  44.  15.  women  that  stood  by,  even  a  #.  mult.
Ezek.  47.  9.  there  shall  be  a  very  #.  multitude  of  fish
Dan.  11.  ll.  king  of  south  shall  set  forth  a  #.  mult.
Mat.  4.  25.  #.  multitudes  followed  him,  8.  1. 1  12.

15.  I  19.  2.  |  20.  29.  Mark  3.  7.  John  6.  2.
8.18.  when  Jesus  saw#,  mult.  14.  14.  Mark  9. 14.
15.  30.  g.  mults.  came,  having  lame,  blind,  dumb

33.  whence  so  much  bread  as  to  fill  so  #.  a  mult.
21.  8.  a#,  multitude  spread  their  garments  in  way
26. 47 .  with  J  udas  a  #.  m.  with  swords,  Mark  14. 43.

Luke  5.  6.  they  inclosed  a  #.  multitude  of  fishes
15.  a#,  in.  came  together  to  hear  and  be  healed
John  5.  3.  in  these  lay  a  #.  mult,  of  impotent  folk
Acts  14.  1.  a#,  mult,  of  Jews  and  Greeks  believed

17.  4-  and  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  #.  multitude
llev.  7.  9-  a#,  multit.  which  no  man  could  number

19.  6.  I  heard  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  #.  multit.

GREAT  nation  and  nations.

Gen.  12.  2.  I  will  make  of  thee  a  #.  nation,  and
will  bless  thee,  18.  18.  |  46.  3.  Exod.  32.  lo.

17.  20.  I  will  make  Ishmael  a  #.  nation,  21.  18.
Deut.  4.  6.  surely  this  #.  nation  is  a  wise  people

26.  5.  he  became  there  a  nation  #.  and  mighty
Josh.  23. _9.  hath  driven  out  before  you  #.  nations
Psal.  135.  10.  who  smote#,  nations,  and  slew  kings
Jer.  6.  22.  a  #.  nation  shall  be  raised  from  the  sides
50.  9. 1  will  raise  against  Bah.  an  assembly  of#,  n.
41.  people  shall  come  from  the  north,  a  #.  nation
Ezek.  31.  6.  under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  #.  nations
GR  EAT  people.

Deut.  2.  10.  the  Eniims  dwelt  therein,  a  people  g.

21.  Zamzummims,  -a  people  g.  many  and  tall

9.  2.  a  petple  g.  and  tall,  children  of  Anakims
Josh.  17.  14.  why  but  one  lot,  seeing  I  am  a g. people
15.  if  thou  be  a#,  people  11  17.  thou  art  a#,  people
1  Kings  3.  8.  a  #.  people  that  cannot  be  numbered
9.  who  is  able  to  judge  this  #.  people  ?  2  Ghr.  1. 10,

5.  7-  given  David  a  wise  son  over  this  #.  people
Isa.  1 3.  4.  the  noise  in  mountains  like  as  of  #.  people
Joel  2.  2.  a  #.  people  hath  not  been  ever  the  like

GREAT  power.

Exod.  32.  11.  thy  people  thou  hast  brought  out  of
Egypt  with  #.  power,  2  Kings  17.  36.  Neh.  1. 10.
Num.  14.  17-  let  t lie  power  of  my  lord  be  g.

Josh.  17.  17.  thou  art  a  great  people  and  hast#,  v.

Job  23.  6.  will  he  plead  against  me  with  #.  power?
Psal.  147.  5.  great  is  our  Lord,  and  of#,  power
Jer.  27.  5.  I  have  made  the  earth,  the  man  ami
the  beast  on  the  ground,  by  my  #.  power,  32.  17.
Ezek.  17.  9.  it  shall  wither  even  without  g.  power
Nah.  1. 3.  the  I.ord  is  slow  to  anger,  #.  in  power
Mark  13.  26.  coining  in  the  clouds  with  #.  power
Acts  4.  33.  with  #.  power  gave  the  apostles  witness

8.  10.  saying,  this  man  is  the  #.  power  of  (tod
Lev.  11.  17.  thou  hast  taken  to  thee  thy  #.  power

18.  1.  angel  come  from  heaven,  having  #.  power

GREAT  sea.

Num.  34.  6.  ye  shall  have  the  #.  sea  for  a  border
Josh.  1.  4.  from  the  wilderness  unto  the  #.  sea

9.  1.  when  the  kings  in  the  coasts  of  #.  sea  heard
15.  12.  the  west  border  was  to  the  g.  sea  and  coast

47.  inheritance  of  Judah,  to  ttie  g.sea  and  bordei
23.  4.  witli  all  nations  I  have  cut  off  to  the  g.  sea
Ezek.  47.  10.  as  fish  of  the  #.  sea,  exceeding  many
15.  border  of  land  toward  north  from  the  #.  sea
Dan.  7.  2.  the  four  winds  strove  upon  the  g.  sea
•See  Sin.

GREAT  slaughter.

Josh.  10.  10.  slew  them  with  a  #.  ,y.  at  Gibeon

20.  made  an  end  of  slaying  fliem  with  #.  s.

Judg.  11.  33.  Jephthah  smote  Ammon,  with  #.  s.

15.  8.  Samson  smote  the  Philistines  with  #.  s.

1  Sam.  4.  10.  Philistines  smote  Isr.  witli  #.  ,v.  17.

6.  19.  Lord  had  smitten  the  people  with  a  #.  s.

19.  8.  David  slew  Philistines  with  a#.  .».  23.  5.

2  Sam.  18.  7.  a  g.  slaughter  that  day  of  20,(XKt  men

1  Kings  20.  21 .  king  of  Israel  slew  Assyr.  with  g.  s

2  Ghron.  13.  17.  Abijah  slew  Israel  with  a  #.  s.

205


G  RE


GRE


G  R  E


2  Chr.  26.  5.  kin?  of  Israel  smote  Ahaz  with  a  y.  s.
Isa.  3u.  25.  in  day  of  ±\  '•  when  the  towers  tall
34  6.  Lord  hath  af  .* laughter  in  land ot  Idumea
So  GREAT.

Exod.  32.  21.  thou  hast  brought  sag.  asm  upon  them
Dent.  4.  7.  what  nation  so  y.  hath  God  so  nigh  '8.

1  Kings  3.9.  who  able  to  judge  sog.  peopler  _C/i.  1.10.
Psal.  77.  13.  who  is  so  g.  a  God  as  our  God  r

103.  11.  sog.  is  his  mercy  to  them  that  tear  him
Mat.  ii.  10.  not  found  sog.  faith  m  Israel,  Luke  7.  9-
15.  33.  so  much  bread  as  to  fill  so  g.  a  multitude

2  Cor.  1.  10.  who  delivered  us  from  so  g.  a  death
lleb.  2.  3.  how  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  g. .salvation.

12.  1.  are  compassed  with  so  g.  a  cloud  ot  witnesses
Jam.  3.  4.  ships  tho’  so  g.  yet  turned  with  an  helm
Rev.  Iti.  18.  so  mighty  an  earthquake  and  so  g.

18.  17.  in  one  hour  so  g.  riches  come  to  nought
Small  and  G  R  EA  1 .  .

Gen.  19.  11.  smote  men  with  blindness  small  and g.
Dent.  1.  17-  but  ye  shall  hear  small  as  well  as  g.

25.  13.  shalt  not  have  divers  weights,  a#,  andsrn.

14.  shalt  not  have  divers  measures,  a  g.  and  sm.

1  Sam.  5. 9.  smote  the  men  sm.  and  g.  with  emerods
20.  2.  my  father  will  do  nothing  g.  or  small

30.  2.  they  slew  not  any  either  g.  or  small

19.  there  was  nothing  lacking  neither  sm.  nor  y.

1  Kings  22.  .31.  fight  not  with  sm.  nor  g.  2  Car .  18. 3D.

2  Kings  23.  2.  sm.  andg.  went  to  house,  2  Car .  34.30.


- - > - .  ,,  .

2tl.  all  the  people  small  and  g.  came  to  Egypt


gD.  VO.  ail  uie  —  .7--'  *

1  Chiron.  26.  13.  they  cast  lots  as  well  th esmall  as  g

2  Citron.  15.  13.  be  put  to  death,  whether  sm.  or  g.

31.  15.  to  give  to  brethren  by  courses,  g.  and  sm.

36.  18.  gave  into  his  hand  vessels,  g.  and  small
Esth.  1.  5.  Ahasuerus  made  a  least  unto  g.  andsrn

20.  shall  give  to  husbands  honour  y.  and  small
Job  3.  19.  small  and  g.  are  there,  servant  is  tree

37.  6.  he  saith  to  the  small  rain,  and  to  g.  ram
Psal.  104.25.  are  things  creeping,  small  andg.

115. 13.  bless  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  small  and  g.
Eccl.  2.  7.  1  bad  possessions  ot  g.  and  small  cattle
Jer.  16.  6.  g.  and  small  shall  die  in  this  land
Amos  8.  5.  making  the  ephah  small,  the  shekel  g.
Acts  26.  22.  1  continue  witnessing  to  small  and  g.
Kev.  11. 18.  reward  to  them  that  tear  him,  sm.  and  g.
13. 16.  he  caused  small  and  g.  to  receive  a  mark
19.5.  praise  our  God,  ye  that  tear  him,  smullandg.
is.  that  ye  may  eat  flesh  ot  all  men,  small  andg.
20. 12.  1  saw  the  dead,  sm.  and g.  stand  before  God
GREAL  stone  and  stones.

Gen.  29.  2.  a  g.  stone  was  upon  the  well’s  mouth
Dent.  27.  2.  that  set  up  g.  stones  and  plaster  them
Josh.  10.  11.  Lord  cast  down  g.  stones  from  heaven

18.  roll  g.  stones  upon  the  mouth  ot  the  cave
24.  26.  Joshua  took  a  g.  stone,  and  set  it  up  there

1  Sam.  6. 14.  the  cart  came  where  there  was  ay.  stone

15.  and  the  Levites  put  them  on  the  g.  stone

18.  to  the  g.  stone  of  Abel,  whereon  they  set  ark
14.  33.  ye  have  transgressed,  roll  a g.  stone  untome

2  Sam.  20.  8.  when  they  w  ere  at  g.  stone  in  Gibeon

1  Kings 5. 17.  they  brought  g.  stones  to  lay  toundat.

7.  10.  the  foundation  was  ot  g.  stones,  Ezra  5.  8.

2  Chron.  26.  15.  he  made  engines  to  shoot  g.  stones
Ezra  6.  4.  three  rows  of  g.  stones  and  a  row  ot  timber
Jer  43  9.  take  g.  stones  and  hide  them  in  clay
Mat.  27. 60.  he  rolled  a  g.  stone  to  door  ot  sepulchre

GREAT  thing  and  things.

Dent.  4.  32.  whether  any  such  tiling  as  thisy.  thing  is
10.  21.  he  is  thy  God  that  hath  done  g.  things

1  Ham.  12.16.  stand  and  see  this  </.  thing  Lord  will  do

24.  consider  how  g.  things  he  hath  done  tor  you

26.  25.  thou  shalt  both  do  g.  things  and  prevail

2  Sam.  7.  21.  for  word’s  sake  hast  thou  done  g.  things

23.  and  to  do  for  you  g.  things  and  terrible

2  Kings  5.  13.  if  prophet  had  bid  thee  do  some  g.  t.

8.  4.  tell  me  all  the  g.  things  Elisha  hath  done
13.  is  he  a  oog,  that  he  should  do  this  g.  thing  ?

1  Chron.  17.  19.  in  making  known  these  g.  things
Job  5.  9.  to  God  who  doeth  g.  things,  9.  10.1  37.  5.
Psal.  71.19.  who  hast  done  g.  things,  who  is  like  thee
106.  21.  they  torgat  God  who  had  done  g.  things
126.  2.  the  Lord  hath  done  g.  things  tor  them,  3.
Jer.  33.  3.  I  will  shew  thee  g.  and  mighty  things
45.  5.  and  seekest  thou  g.  things  tor  thyself '.

Dan.  7.  8.  a  mouth  speaking  g.  th.  20.  Key.  13.  5
Dos.  8.  12.  1  have  written  the  g.  things  ot  my  law
Joel  2.  20.  because  he  hath  done  g.  things

21.  fear  not,  O  land,  the  Lord  will  do  g.  things
Mot  3.  8.  when  they  heard  what  g.  things  he  did

5.  19.  tell  how  g.  things  Lord  hath  done,  Evke  8. 39
Piute  1.  49.  he  that  is  mighty  hath  done  g.  things
8  39.  he  published  how  g.  things  Jesus  had  done
Acts  9.  16.  1  will  shew  how  g.  things  he  must  sutler

1  Cor.  9. 11.  is  it  a  g.  thing  if  we  reap  carnal  things  r

2  Cor.  11. 15.  no  g.  th.  if  his  ministers  be  transform.
Jam.  3.  5.  tongue  a  little  member  boasteth  g.  things

Very  GREAT.

Gen.  26. 13.  Isaac  grew  till  he  became  very  g.
Exod.  11.3.  the  man  Moses  was  very  g.  in  the  land
Num.  11-  33.  Ld.  smote  people  with  a  very  g.  plague
13.  28.  and  the  cities  are  walled  and  very  g.

22.  17.  1  will  promote  thee  unto  very  g.  honour
\Sam.  2.  17.  the  sin  of  the  young  men  was  very  g.

4.  10.  and  there  was  a  very  g,  slaughter
14. 15.  very  g.  trembling  ||  20.  very  g.  discomfiture
25.2.  ISSabal  was  a  very  g.  man,  he  had  3000  sheep
2  Sam.  18. 17-  they  laid  a  very  g.  heap  on  Absalom

19.  32.  for  Barzillai  was  a  very  g.  man
1  Kings  10.  2.  qu.  of  Sheba  came  vvith  a  very  g.  train

1  Chron.  21.  13.  for  very  g.  are  his  mercies

2  Chron.  16. 14.  they  made  a  very  g.  burning  for  Asa

24.  24.  Ld.  delivered  a  very  g.  host  into  their  hand
30. 13.  assembled  a  very  g.  congregation,  Ezra  10.1.
33.  14.  Manass.  raised  up  the  wall  a  veryg.  height

Neh.  8. 17.  and  there  was  a  very  g.  gladness
Job  1.3.  Job  a  very  g.  household,  greatest  m  the  east
2.  13.  for  they  saw  that  his  grief  was  very  g.

Psal.  104. 1.  O  Lord  my  God,  thou  art  very  g.
Ezek.  47.  9-  there  shall  be  a  very  g.  multitude  ot  fish
Dan.  8.  8.  therefore  the  he  goat  waxed  very  g.

11. 25.  king  of  south  stirred  up  with  a  very  g.  army
Joel  2.  11.  tor  his  camp  is  very  g.  he  is  strong
Zech.  14.  4.  apd  there  shall  be  a  very  g.  valley
206


Mat.  21. 8.  a  veryg.  multitude  suread  their  garments
Mark &.  1.  the  multitude  veryg.  naying  nothing
16  4.  the  stone  was  rolled  away,  tor  it  was  very  g.
Was  GREAT.

Gen.  6.  5.  God  saw  the  wickedness  of  man  was  g.
13.6.  their  substance  wasg.  so  that  they  could  not
1  Kings  3.  4.  to  Gibeon,  that  was  the  g.  high  place
0  Kings  3.  27-  there  teas g.  indignation  against  Isi .
Esth.  4.  3.  where  the  decree  came  wasg.  mournin '

9.  4.  Mordecai  was  g.  in  the  king  s  house,  10.  3.

Job  31.  25.  if  l  rejoiced  because  my  wealth  arcy  g.
Eccl.  2.  9.  1  was g.  and  increas. more  than  all  before
Pam.  1.1.  she  that  was  g.  among  the  nations
Dim.  4.  10.  the  tree’s  height  was  ft.  and  it  grew
Mat.  7.  27.  it  fell,  and  g.  was  the  tallot  it.EwXc6.49.

GREA  T  waters-

0  Sam  00  1 17.  drew  me  out  of  g.  w.  Psal.  18.  +  16.
'Psal.  29.  +  3.  the  voice  of  Lord  is  upon  g.  waters
32.  6.  in  floods  of  y.  waters  shall  not  come  nigh
77. 19  thy  wav  is  in  the  sea,  thy  path  m  g.  waters
107.  23.  they  that  do  business  111  g.  waters
144.7.  send  from  above,  deliver  me  put  oly.  waters
Isa.  23.  3.  and  by  g.  waters  the  seed  ot  •‘sin or
Jer  41  1°  found  lshmael  by  g.  waters  ot  Gibeon
5L  55’.  when  her  waves  do  roar  like  <7.  waters
Ezek.  1.  24.  the  noise  of  their  wings  like  g.  wateis
17.  5.  he  placed  of  the  seed  by  g.  waters,  set  it
8.  it  was  planted  in  a  good  soil  by  g.  waters
26. 19.  when  g.  waters  shall  cover  thee
07  oQ  thy  rowers  brought  thee  into  g.  waters
31*  7.  'he  was  fair,  for  his  root  was  by  g.  waters
15  1  restrained  floods,  the  g.  waters  were  stayed
32.  13.  1  will  destroy  all  the  beasts  beside  <7.  waters
llab.  3. 15.  didst  walk  through  the  heap  ot  g.  waters
G  R  EA  T  while.  ,

r* Sum.  7.19.  but  thou  hast  spoken  also  of  thy  servant  s
house  for  a g.  while  to  come,  1  Chron.  17-17.
Mark  1.  35.  rising  up  ay.  while  before  day,  he  went
Luke  10.  13.  had  g.  while  ago  repented  111  sackcloth
Acts  28.  6.  after  the  barbarians  looked  a  g.  while
GREAT  work  and  works.

Exod.  14.  31.  Israel  saw  that  g.  work  the  Lord  did
Judq.  2.  7-  who  had  seen  all  the  g.  -works  ot  the  Lord
1  Chron.  29. 1.  my  son  is  young,  and  the  work  is  g.
Neh.  4.  19.  the  work  is  g.  and  we  are  separated
6.  3.  I  am  doing  a  g.  work,  1  cannot  come  down
Psal.  111.  2.  the  works  of  the  Lord  a  re  <7.  Rev.  In.  3.
Eccl  2.  4.  1  made  g.  works,  1  budded  me  houses
GREATER.

Gen.  1. 16.  God  made  the  g.  light  to  rule  the  day
4.  13.  my  punishment  is  g.  than  1  can  bear
39.  9.  there  is  none  g.  in  this  house  than  l
41.  40.  only  in  the  throne  will  1  be  g .  than  thou
48.  19.  his  younger  brother  shall  be  y.  than  lie
Exod.  18.  11.  1  know  the  Lord  is  g.  than  all  gods
Num.  14.  12.  make  of  thee  g.  nation.  Dent.  9.  14.
Dent.  1.  28.  the  people  is  g.  andjtaller  than  we
4.  38.  drive  nations g .  than  thou,  7- 1. 1  9.  L  1  11.  23.
Josh.  10.  2.  because  Gibeon  was  g.  than  Ai
1  Sam.  14.30.  had  there  been  a  much  g.  slaughter
n  Sam.  13.  15.  the  hatred  was  g.  than  the  love

16.  this  evil  is  g.  than  the  other  thou  didst  me
1  Kings  1. 37.  make  his  throne  g.  than  David,  47.

1  Chron.  11.9.  David  waxed  g.  and  g.  Id.  was  with

2  Chron.  3.  5.  the  g.  house  he  ceiled  with  fir-tree
Esth.  9.  4.  for  this  man  Mordecai  waxed  g .  and  g
Job  33.  12.  1  will  answer,  that  God  is  g.  than  man
Lam.  4.  6.  is  g.  than  the  punishment  ot  Sodom^
Ezek.  8.  6.  thou  shalt  see  g.  abominations,  13,  Id.
Dan.  11.13.  shall  set  forth  a  multitude  than  former
Amos  6.  2.  or  their  border  g.  than  your  border
Dag.  2.  9.  the  glory  of  latter  house  g.  than  former
Mat.  11 . 11 .  not  risen  up  ay.  than  John  t he  Baptist,

least  in  kingdom  of  heaveny.  than  he,  Luke  7 . 28
12.  6.  in  this  place  is  one  y.  than  the  tempie

41.  behold,  a y.  than  Jonas  is  here,  Luke  11.  32.

42.  behold,  ay.  than  Solomon  is  here,  Luke  11.  31.
23. 14.  receivingy.  damn.  Mark  12.  40.  Luke  20.47.

17.  for  whether  is  y.  the  gold,  or  the  temple  ?

19.  for  whether  is  y.  the  gift  or  the  altar

Mark  4.  32.  sown,  it  becometh  y.  than  all  herbs
12.  31.  there  is  no  other  command,  y.  than  these
Luke  12.  18.  1  will  pull  down  my  barns,  and  buddy.
22  27.  whether  isy.  he  that  sitteth  or  thatserveth  '
John  1.  50.  thou  slvalt  see  y.  things,  5.  20.  I  14.  12.

4.  12.  art  thou  y.  than  our  father  Jacob  i

5.  36.  1  have  a  y.  witness  than  that  ot  John

8.  53.  art  thou  y.  than  our  fatner  Abraham  ?

10.  29.  my  Father  is  y.  than  all,  14.  28.

13. 16.  the  servant  is  noty.  than  his  lord,  15.  20.

15. 13.  y.  love  hath  no  man  than  this  to  lay  down
19. 11.  he  that  delivered  me  to  thee  hath  the  y.  sm

Acts  15.  28.  to  lay  upon  you  no  y.  burden  than  these
Rom.  9. +  12.  it  was  said,  they,  shall  serve  the  lesser

1  Cor.  14.  5.  fory.  is  he  that  prophesieth,  than  he
15  6.  of  whom  the  y.  part  remain  unto  this  present

Deb.  6. 13.  because  he  could  swear  by  no  y.  he  swore
16.  for  men  verily  swear  by  the  y.  and  an  oath

9.  11.  by  ay.  and  more  perfect  tabernacle
11. 26.  esteeming  the  reproach  ot  Christy,  riches

Jam.  3. 1.  knowing  weshall  receivey.  condemnation

2  Pet.  2. 11.  whereas  angels  which  are  y.  in  power
1  John3.  20.  God  isy.  than  our  heart,  and  knoweth

4.  4.  y.  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  in  the  world

5.  9.  witness  of  God  isy.  this  is  the  witness  of  God

3  John  4.  1  have  no y.  joy  than  to  hear  that  children
GREATEST.

1  Chr.  12. 14.  least  was  over  100,  y.  over  a  thousand
29.  hitherto  they,  part  had  kept  the. ward  ot  Saul
Job  i.  3.  this  man  was  the  y.  ot  all  in  the  east
Jer.  6. 13.  from  least  to  y.  given  to  covetousn.  8. 10.
31.  34.  all  know  me,  from  least  to  they.  Deb.  8.  11.
4°  1  all  people  from  the  least  to  the  y.  came  near
8.  Jeremiah  called  the  people  from  least  to  they.
44.  12.  they  shall  die,  from  the  least  to  the  g.
Jonah  3.  5.  put  on  sackcloth,  from  the  y.  to  the  least
Mat.  13.  32.  when  grown,  it  is  they,  among  herbs
18.1.  who  is  they,  in  the  kingdom  ot  heaven
4.  humble  himself  as  this  little  child,  same  isy.
23.  11.  but  he  that  is  y.  shall  be  your  servant
Mark  9.  34.  disputed  who  shoulu  be  g.  Luke  9.  46.
Luke  22.  24.  there  was  a  strife  who  should  be  y


Luke  22. 26. but  he  that  isy.lethim  be  as  the  youngi
Acts  8.  10.  all  gave  heed  from  the  least  to  they,
i  Cor.  13.  13.  but  the  y.  of  these  is  charity
G  R  E  A  1  LI .

Gen.  3.  16.  he  said,  1  will  y.  multiply  thy  sorro
10.  3.  Lot  pressed  upon  them  y.  and  they  turned)
24.  35.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  my  master  y.

27.  +  33.  Isaac  trembled  with  a  trembling  y.

32.  7.  then  Jacob  was  y.  afraid  and  distressed
Exod.  19.  18.  and  the  whole  mount  quaked  y.
Num.  11.  10.  the  anger  of.the  Lord  was  kindled,
14  39.  Moses  told,  and  the  people  mourned  y.
Deut  15.  4.  the  Lord  shall  y.  bless  thee  in  the  lar.

17.  17.  nor  shall  he  y.  multiply  silver  and  gold
Judq.  2.  15.  Lord  ag.  them,  they  were  y.  distress!

6.  6.  Israel  was  g.  impoverished  by  Mutian

1  Sam.  11.  6.  Saul’s  anger  was  kindled  y.

15.  Saul  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  rejoiced  y.

12.  18.  the  people  y.  feared  the  Lord  and  Sainm
16  21.  he  loved  him  y.  became  his  armour  bea.
17’  11  when  heard  Philistine  they  werey.  alraiC
28  5.  Saul  saw  the  Philist.  his  heart  trembled
30.  6.  David  was y.  distressed,  for  the  people  spal

2  Sam.  ]0. 5.  the  men  werey.  ashamed,  1  Chr.  1 9.  j

12.  5.  David’s  anger  was  y.  kindled  ag.  the  man

13.  t  15.  Ainnon  hated  her  with  great  hatred  y.
t  36.  the  king  wept  with  a  great  weeping  y.

14. 1 25.  was  not  a  beautiful  man  in  lsr.  to  praise
24.  10.  David  said,  1  have  sinned  y.  1  Chr.  21. 1
1  Kings  2.12.  Solomon’s  kingdom  was  established
5.7.  Hiram  heard  Solomon's  words,  herejoiced

18.  3.  now  Obadiah  feared  the  Lord  y.

1  Chr.  4.  38.  the  house  of  their  fathers  increased  d

16.  25.  great  is  the  Lord,  y.  to  be  praised,  to
feared  above  all  gods,  Ps.  48.  1 .  1  96.  4.  |  145.

Chr.  25.  10.  their  auger  was  y.  kindled  ag.  Jud

33.  12.  Manasseh  humbled  himselt  y.  before  Goj
Ezra  10.  t  13.  we  have  y.  offended  in  this  thing
Job  8.  7.  yet  thy  latter  end  should  y.  increase  j
Psal.  21.  1.  in  thy  salvation  how  g.  shall  herejoi]

28.  7.  therefore  my  heart  y.  rejoiceth,  1  will  pra
38.6.  1  am  bowed  downy,  go  mourning  all  tiled  I
45.  11.  so  shall  the  kingy.  desire  thy  beauty
47. 9.  shields  of  earth  belong  to  God,  he.  isy.exallt
62.  2.  he  is  my  defence,  l  shall  not  he  y.  moved
65.  9.  thou  y.  enrichest  it  with  the  river  of  God  1
71.23.my  lipsshally.  rejoice  when  1  sing  untoti
78.  59.  he  was  wroth,  andy.  abhorred  Israel
105.  24.  he  increased  his  people  y.  107  .  38.

109.  30.  1  will  y.  praise  the  Lord  with  my  moi1
112.  1.  blessed  that  delighteth  y.  in  bis  conimai
116.  10.  1  was  y.  afflicted,  I  said  in  my  haste
119.  51.  the  proud  have  had  me  y.  in  derision  ;
Prov.  23.  24.  the  father  of  righteous  shall  g.  rejcl
Isa.  42.  17.  shall  bey.  ash  anted  that  trust  inima
61.  10.  1  will  y.  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  soul  be  joy
Jer.  3.  1.  shall  not  that  land  be  y.  polluted  ?

4. 10.  surely  thou  hast  y.  deceived  this  people
9. 19.  we  are  y.  confounded,  have  forsaken  the  la

20.  11.  persecutors  shall  bey.  ashamed  not  pros;
Ezek.  20.  13.  and  my -sabbaths  they  y.  polluted
25. 12.  because  that  Edom  hatliy.  offended  |
Dan.  5.  9.  then  was  king  Belshazzar  y.  trouble

9.  23.  for  thou  art  y.  beloved.  10.  11, 19.

Chad.  2.  I  made  thee  small,  thou  art  y.  despised
Jonah  4.  +  4.  art  thou  y .  angry  i  ||  +  9-  1  am  y.  angi
Zeph.  l.  14.  the  great  day  ot  the  Lord  hasteth  y.
Zech.  9.  9.  rejoice  y.  O  daughter  ot  Zion,  shout
Mat.  27.  14.  insomuch  that  governor  marvelled  j
Mark  5. 23.  J  airus  besought  him  y.  saying.my  da

38.  lie  seeth  them  that  wept  and  wailed  y.

9.  15.  when  they  beheld,  they  were  amazed  y.
12.  27.  the  God  of  the  living,  ye  therefore  doy.
John  3. 29.  rejoiceth  y.because  of  bridegroom  s  v<_
Acts  3. 11.  all  the  people  ran  to  porch,  y.  wondei;
6.  7. number  of  disci  pies  multiplied  in  Jerusalem
1  Cor.  16. 12.  Iy.  desired  Apollos  to  come  unto  I
Phil.  1.  8.  bow  y.  1  long  after  you  all  in  Jesus  Ch|
4.  10. 1  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  y.  that  at  last  your  <•

1  [Chess.  3.  6.  desiring  y.  to  see  us,  as  we  to  see..

2  Tim.  1.  4.y. desiring  to  see  thee,  that  1  may  be  Ii  I

4.  15.  for  he  hath  y.  withstood  our  words  U
1  Pet.  1.  6.  ye  g.  rejoice  tho’  now  ye  are  in  heaviB
o  j0i,n  4.  l  rejoiced  y.  that  I  found  children  walls

3  John  3.  I  rejoiced  y.  when  the  brethren  testifii
See  Feared.

GREATS  ESS.

Exod.  15. 7.  in  y.  of  thy  excellency  overthrow  th

16.  by  y.  of  thine  arm  they  shall  be  still  as  astu
Num.  14. 19.  pardon  according  to  y.  of  thy  mei»
Deut.  3.  24.  thou  hast  begun  to  shew  thy  serv.  tbM

5.  24.  the  Lord  hath  shewed  us  his  glory  and
9.  26.  which  thou  hast  redeemed  through  thy  j  I
11.  2.  not  with  children  who  have  not  seen  Im
32.  3.  ascribe  ye  y.  unto  our  God,  he  is  the  rocM

1  Chr.  17.  19.  to  thy  own  hurt  hast  done  all  th: .
21.  to  make  thee  a  name  of  y.  and  terribleneal

29.  11.  thine,  O  Lord,  is  they,  power  and  glor

2  Chr.  9.  6.  one  half  of  y.  of  thy  wisdom  not  shed
24.  27.  and  the  y.  of  the  burdens  laid  upon  h#
Neh.  13.  22.  spare  me  according  to  y.  ot  thy  ml
Esth.  10.  2.  the  declaration  of  the  y.  of  Morder
Psal.  66.  3.  by  y.  of  thy  power  enemies  submil
71.  21.  thou  shalt  increase  my  y.  and  comtor  a
79.  ll.  according  to  the  y.  of  thy  power,  pres.e
145.  3.  liis  y.  is  unsearchable  ||  6.  1  declare  tl
150.  2.  praise  him  according  to  his  excellent  g
Prov.  5.  23.  in  the  y.  of  his  folly  he  shall  go  as  }1
Isa.  40.26.  he  calleth  by  name,  by  y.  ot  his  null
57. 10.  thou  art  wearied  in  they,  ot  thy  way
63.  1.  travelling  in  the  y.  of  his  strength

Jer.  13.  22.  for  y.  of  iniquity  thy  skirts  discord
Ezek.  31.  2.  whom  art  thou  like  in  thy  gA

7.  thus  was  he  fair  in  his  y.  in  his  branches
Da/i.4. 22.  thy  y.  is  grown  and  reached)  to  lies  '
7.  27.  the  y.  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  given  tos 1

Evh  1.  19.  what  is  the  exceeding  y.  of  his  pow

y  GREAVES.

1  Sam.  17.  6.  Goliath  had  y.  of  brass  upon  hi  s
GREEDY.

Psal.  17.  12.  like  as  a  lion  that  is  y.  of  his  Pri
Prov.  1. 19.  so  is  every  one  that  is  y.  of  gam


GRI


GRO


GRI


>r.  15.  27-  lie  that  is  g.  of  gain  troublefh  his  nouse
.  56.  11.  lhe.y  are  g.  doss,  can  never  have  enough
bn.  3.  3.  notff.  of  filthy  lucre,  but  patient,  8.'
GREEDILY.


*  A  %»  A  A  J  1  »

v.  Cl.  CO.  he  coveteth  g.  all  the  day  long
i.  22.  1C.  thou  hast  g.  gained  of  thy  neighbours
11.  they  ran  g.  after  the  error  of  Balaam

GREEDINESS.


'  *  IV  AJiwt/l  il  JJOO.

1.  4.  19.  given  over  to  work  all  unclean,  with  g

GREEK.

e  C3. 38.  superscription  written  in  G.  Jo/m19.  CO
.  jCI.  37.  chief  captain  said,  canst  thou  speak  G.
.  .9. 11.  but  inG.  tongue  hath  his  name  Apollyon
GREEN.  [meat

1 1.  1.30.  to  beast  I  have  given  every  g.  herb  for
3.  as  the  g.  herb  havel  given  you  all  things
37.  Jacob  took  rods  of  g.  poplar  and  hazel
.  tl.  10. 15.  there  remained  not  any  g.  thing  in  trees
.  .  2.  14.  otter  for  thy  first-fruits  g.  ears  of  corn

14.  eat  no  g.  ears,  till  ye  have  brought  an  offer

9.  16.  7-  if  they  bind  me  with  seven  g.  withs
then  they  brought  to  her  seven  g.  withs
i  bigs  19.  C 6.  inhabit,  were  as g.  herbs,  Isa.  37.  C7.
Ji.  1. 6.  where  were  white,  g.  and  blue  hangings
.  8.  16.  he  is  g.  before  the  sun.  branch  shooietir
3C.  and  his  branch  shall  not  be  g.

8.  the  wild  ass  seareheth  after  every  g.  thing
1  /.  C3.  C.  he  maketh  me  lie  down  in  g.  pastures

2.  and  they  shall  wither  as  the  g.  herb

.  1  have  seen  wicked  spread,  likea  g.  bay-tree
1 14.  in  old  age  they  shall  be  fat  and  g.
it.  1.  16.  thou  art  fair,  also  our  bed  is  g.

13.  the  fig-tree  putteth  forth  her  g.  figs
j  15.  6.  the  grass  faileth,  there  is  no  g.  tiling
„  11. 16.  the  Lord  called  thy  name,  a  g.  olive
8.  as  tree  spreadeth  her  roots,  leaf  shall  be  g.

1 .  14.  8.  1  am  like  a  g.  fir-tree,  from  me  thy
/  is  7-  +  1.  he  formed  g.  worms  in  the  beginning
1  k  6. 39.  sit  down  by  companies  on  the  g.  grass

1.8. 7.  hail  and  fire,  and  all  g.  grass  was  burnt  up
.  were  commanded  not  to  hurt  any  <7.  thing

GREEN  tree.

1 1. 12. 2.  nations  served  gods  under  every  .<7.  tree
1  ngs  14.23.  images  und. every  g.  t.  2  Kings 17. 10.

I  ngs  16.  4.  Asa  sacr.  und.  every  g.  t.  2  Chr.  28.  4.

1  52.  8.  I  am  like  a  g.  olive-tree  in  house  of  God
1  57.5.  inflaming  yourselves  under  every  g.  tree
)  2.  20.  when  under  every  g.  tree  thou  wanderest
.  i.  under  every  g.  tree ,  there  played  the  harlot
.  hast  scattered  thy  ways  unner  every  g.  tree
l  r.  6.  13.  thy  slain  shall  be  under  every  g.  tree
24.  know  that  I  have  dried  up  the  <7.  tree

■  47.  it  shall  devour  every  g.  tree  and  dry  tree
le  23.  31.  if  they  do  these  things  in  a  g.  tree

GREEN  trees.

)  17. 2.  whilst  children  remember  groves  by  <7.  tr.
GREENISH.

L  13.49.  if  the  plague  be  g.  in  the  garment
37.  if  plague  be  with  hollow  strakes  g.  or  red
GREEN  N  ESS.

1 5.  12.  whilst  it  is  yet  in  his  g.  and  not  cut
GREET.

1  m.  25.  5.  go  to  Nabal  and  g.  him  in  my  name
l 16.  3. £7.  Priscilla  and  Aquila  helpers  in  C.  J.
g.  church  ||  6.  g.  Mary  who  bestowed  labour
<7.  Amplias  ||  11.  g.  the  household  of  Narcissus
1  r.  16.  20.  all  the  brethren  g.  you,  Phil.  4.  21.

•  9 ■  ye  one  another,  2  Cor.  13. 12. 1  Pet.  5.  14.

-  4.  14.  Luke  the  physician  and  Demas  g.  you
Cess.  5.  26.(7.  the  brethren  with  an  holy  kiss

1  3.  15.  g.  them  that  love  us  in  the  faith

-  fltl3.  the  children  of  thy  elect  sister  g.  thee

I  m  14.  peace  be  to  thee,  g.  the  friends  by  name
GREETET1I.

.  w.4.  21.  Eubulus  g.  thee,  Pudens,  and  Linus
j  GREETING,  S.

1 . 23. 7.  g.  in  markets,  Luke  11.  43. 1  20.  46.

:  aP?stles,  elders,  and  brethren,  send  g.

■  -0.  Claudius  Lysias  to  Felix  sendeth  g.

'•1.1.  to  the  twelve  tribes  scattered  abroad,  g.

GREW.

^  2.  5.  the  Lord  muHp  p.vprv  h*»rh  hpfnrti  if


1  r*  11 ana  muiupn

f  A  more  they  afflicted,  more  they  a.

1  5ses/'  II  Judges  11.  2.  his  wife’s  sons  <7.  up
•  ^  24.  Samson  £7.  and  the  Lord  blessed  him
n"  V  1  ie  Samuel  £7.  before  the  Lord,  26
n.p.  10.  and  David  went  on  and  g.  great
A-  *  UP  together  with  nim,  did  eat  of  his  meat
r  •  b-  and  became  a  spreading  vine


1  •  ujc  uiuiiib  (j .  up  ana  cnoKea  it
"  P*  no tli mg  bettered,  but  rather  g.  worse

1 10  i'1"  and  waxed  strong  in  spirit,  2. 40.


ll(, . n,,u  >»fiAe(.js'iung  inspirit,

iiy.  ana  it  g.  and  waxed  a  great  tree
1  h  l7\ *Jle  People  £7.  and  multiplied  in  Egypt
.4.  but  the  word  of  God  g.  and  multiplied


1  V1  U<JU£7.  anu  multiplied

-0. so  mightily  g.  the  word  of  God  and  prevailed

:  in  9,  GREY-/iomw</.

•ou.  oi.  tour  comely  in  going,  a  g. -hound

v  grief,  s.

k” ich  were  a  17.  unto  Isaac  and  Rebekah
r  11  *1,;  the  abundance  of  g.  have  I  spoken

,  VM,  1 be  no^Ao  thee,  or  offence  ot  heart

•  1. wlien  every  one  shall  know  his  own  g.
r  'A;' f  ’ey  saw  that  his  g.  was  very  great
on  that  my  g.  were  thoroughly  weighed
■  tneretore  I  want  words  to  express  my  £7.

hoiurhMiVinff<^ niy  dps  should  assuage,  your  g.
’  iug  ^  speak,  my  g.  is  not  assuaged
Jin  .I*’1??  >s  consumed  because  of  .<7.  31.9.
j  >6  thcv  ♦  ifs?pent  'vith  !h  my  years  with  sigh.


;  >c  ,1  ,  '  £/•  my  yeaits  wnnsign,

I  (oi  J  ta.lk  to  g.  of  those  tliou  hast  wounded
I  t  <1  VSef  1  ,  ere  be  any  way  of  g.  in  me


i  r  L  i  ^  » ay  iji  (/.  111  1

1  T,,  be  healeth  and  bindeth  up  their  g.

1  1  ‘in  a  •  0  son  *s  a  d.  to  his  father
>  or  in  much  wisdom  is  much  g.

f  I  (ii  fp?  oays  are  sorrows,  and  his  travail  g.
•  ’  ru.  it  is  g.  even  the  solemn  meeting


Isa.  17.  11.  the  harvest  shall  be  a  heap  in  day  of  g,
53.  3.  a  manct  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  g.

4.  he  hath  borne  our  g.  and  carried  our  sorrows

10.  it  pleased  Ld.  to  bruise  him,  he  put  him  to  g
Jer.  6.  7.  before  me  continually  is  g.  and  wounds
10.  19.  I  said,  truly  this  is  a  g.  and  1  must  bear  it
45.  3.  for  the  Lord  hath  added  g.  to  my  sorrow
Lam.  3.  32.  tho’  he  cause £7.  he  will  have  compassion
Lzek.  32.  +  9.  I  will  provoke  many  people  to  g.
Jonah  4.  6.  a  gourd,  a  shadow  to  deliver  him  from  g.
2  Cor.  2.  5.  if  any  caused  g.  he  hath  not  grieved  me
Heh.  13.  17.  may  do  it  with  joy  and  not  with  g.

1  Pet.  2.  19.  for  conscience  toward  God  endure  a
GRIEVANCE.

Hah.  1.  3.  why  dost  tliou  cause  me  to  behold  g.?
t  13.  thou  art  of  purer  eyes  than  to  look  on  g.
GRIEVE.

1  Sam.  2.  33.  the  man  shall  be  to  g.  thine  heart

2  Kings  3.  +  19.  he  shall  g.  every  good  piece  of  land

fC/ir.  4. 10.  keep  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  g.  me
Psal.  78.  40.  bow  oft  did  they  g.  him  in  the  desert  ?
Lam.  3*.  33.  doth  not  wil  lingly  g.  the  children  of  men
Lph.  4.  30.  g.  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby
„  GRIEVED.  *

Gen.  6.  6.  and  it  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made

man  oil  the  earth,  and  it  g.  him  at  his  heart
34.  7.  Jacob’s  sons  heard  and  were  g.  and  wroth
45.  5.  now  be  not  g.  that  ye  sold  me  hither
49.  23.  the  arches  have  sorely  g.  him,  and  shot
Lxod.  1.  12.  and  they  were  g.  because  of  Israel
Pent. 15.10.  shall  not  be  £7.  when  thou  givest  unto  him
Judg.  10.  16.  his  soul  was  g.  for  the  misery  of  Israel
1  ■Sam.  1.  8.  why  weepest  thou  r  why  is  thy  heart  17.  ?

15.  11.  it  g.  Samuel,  and  he  cried  unto  the  Lord
20.  3.  let  not  Jonathan  know  this  lest  he  Le  <;.

34.  Jonathan  arose,  for  he  was  g.  for  David
30.  6.  because  the  soul  of  all  the  people  was  <j.

~  Sam.  19. 2.  heard  how  the  king  was  g.  for  his  son
Kelt.  2.  10.  it  g.  them  exceedingly,  that  there  was
13.  8.  it  £7.  me  sore,  and  1  cast  forth  all  the  stuff
Lsth.  4.  4.^  then  was  the  queen  exceedingly  g.

Job  4.  2.  if  we  assay  to  commune,  wilt  thou  be  g.?
30,  25.  was  not  my  soul  g.  for  the  poor  ?

Psal.  73.  21.  thus  my  hearMvas  g.  1  was  pricked
95.  10.  forty  years  was  I  g.  with  this  generation
112.  10.  the  wicked  shall  see  it,  and  he  g.

119-158.  1  beheld  the  transgressors  and  was  g.

139.  21.  am  not  1  g.  with  those  that  rise  up  ag.  thee
Isa.  54.  6.  the  L.  called  thee  as  a  woman  g.  in  spirit
57.  10.  therefore  thou  wast  not  g.

Jer.  5._3.  thou  hast  stricken  them,  they  have  not  g.
Dan.  7.  15.  1  Dan.  was  <1.  in  spiritin  midst  of  body

11.  30.  therefore  he  shall  he  g.  and  return
Jlmos  6.  6.  they  are  not  g.  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph
Mark  3.  5.  being  g.  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts
10.  22.  he  went  away  g.  for  he  had  great  posses-

sions

John  21 . 17.  Peter  was  £7.  because  he  said  third  time
Acts  4.  2.  being  g.  that  they  taught  the  people

9.  t  38.  that  he  would  not  be  g.  to  come  to  them

16.  18.  Paul  being  g.  said  to  the  spirit,  come  out
Pom.  14.  15.  if  thy  brother  be  g.  with  thy  meat


2  Cor.  2.  4.  I  wrote  not  that  ye  should  be  g.


5.  caused  grief,  he  hath  not  £7.  me,  but  in  part
Ilei.  3.  10.  wherefore  1  was  g.  with  that  generation
17.  but  with  whom  was  he  q.  forty  years.'

.  GK1EVE1H.

Puth  1.  1.3.  for  it  £7.  me  much  for  your  sakes
Prou.  26. 15.  it  g.  him  to  bring  it  again  to  his  mouth
GRIEVING.

Lzek.  28. 24.  shall  be  no  more  a  g.  thorn  unto  Israel
GRIEVOUS.

Gen.  12.  10.  for  the  famine  was  g.  in  the  land
18.  20.  Lord  said,  because  their  sin  is  veor  g.

21.  11.  the  thing  was  very  g.  in  Abraham’s  sight
12.  God  said,  let  it  not  be  g.  in  thy  sight
41.  31.  for  the  famine  shall  be  very  g.

50.  11.  this  is  a  g.  mourning  to  the  Egyptians
Lxod.  8.  24.  there  came  a  g.  swarm  of  flies

9.  3.  a  (7.  murrain  ||  18.  to  rain  a  very  g.  hail,  24.

10.  14.  locusts  were  very  g.  before  were  no  such

1  Kings 2.  8.  Shimei,  who  cursed  me  with  a g.  curse
12.  4.  make  the  g.  service  lighter,  2  Chron.  10.  4.
Psal.  10. 5.  his  ways  always  g.  judgment  out  of  sight
31.  18.  which  speak  g.  things  against  the  righteous
Prov.  15.  1.  but  £7.  words  stir  up  anger
10.  correction  is  g.  unto  him  that  forsaketh  the  way
Eccl.  2.  17.  work  wrought  under  the  sun  is  £7.  tome
Isa.  15.  4.  his  life  shall  he  g.  unto  him
21.  2.  a  g.  vision  is  declared  unto  me
Jer.  6.  28.  they  are  all  g.  revolters,  walking  with
10.  19.  woe  is  me  for  my  hurt,  mv  wound  is  q.

14.  17.  virgin  of  my  people  broken  with  a  g.  blow
16.  4.  they  shall  die  of  £7.  deaths,  not  he  buried
23.  19.  a  g.  whirlwind  shall  fall  on  the  wicked
30. 12.  bruise  incurable,  thy  wound  is  g.  Nah.  3. 19.
Mat.  23.  4.  bind  heavy  burdens  and  g.  Luke  11.46.
Acts  20.  29.  shall  g.  xvolves  enter  in  among  you
25. 7.  Jews  laid  many  g.  complaints  against  Paul
Phil.  3.  1.  to  me  indeed  is  not  g.  but  for  you  safe
Heh.  12.  11.  no  chastening  seems  joyous,  but  g.

1  John  5.  3.  and  his  commandments  are  not  g.

Rev.  16.  2.  a  g.  sore  on  men  that  had  mark  of  beast
GRIEVOUSLY.

Isa.  9.  1.  and  afterward  did  more  g.  afflict  her
Jer .  23.  19.  it  shall  fall  g.  on  the  head  of  the  wicked
Lam.l.ft.  Jerusal.  hath £7.  sinned,  therefore  removed
20.  my  heart  is  turned,  for  I  have  g.  rebelled
Ezek.  14. 13.  when  land  sinneth  by  trespassing  g.
Mic.  1.  t  9.  she  is  g.  sick  of  her  wounds
Mat.  8.  6.  £7.  tormented  I]  15.  22.  daughter  g.  vexed
GRIEVOUSNESS.

Isa.  10.  1.  that  write  g.  which  they  have  prescribed
21.  15.  for  they  fled  from  the  g.  of  w'ar
GRIND.

Judg.  16.  21.  Samson  did  g.  in  the  prison-house  .
Job  31.  10.  then  let  my  wife  g.  unto  another
Eccl.  12.  t  3.  the  grinders  cease  because  they  g.  little
Isa.  3.  15.  what  mean  ye  to  £7.  the  faces  of  the  poor?
47.  2.  take  millstones  and  g.  meal,  uncover  locks
Lam.  5.  13.  they  took  the  young  men  to  g.

Mat.  24.  4  It  will  £7.  him  to  powder,  Luke  20  18.


|  GRINDERS.

!  Job  29.  +  17.  I  brake  the  g.  of  the  wiciced
Eccl.  12.  3.  the  g.  cease,  because  they  are  few
GRINDING.

Lecl.  12.  4.  when  the  sound  of  the  g.  is  low
Mat.  24.  41.  two  women  g.  at  the  mill,  Luke  17.  35.
GRIN.

Job  18.  9.  the  £7.  shall  take  him  by  the  heel
GRINS.

Psal.  140.  5.  the3'  spread  a  net,  they  set  g.  for  me
141.  9.  keep  me  from  the  g.  of  the  workers  of  iniq.
■See  Gin.

GRISLED.

Gen.  31.  10.  the  rams  were  speckled  and  g.  12.
Zech.  6.  3.  in  the  fourth  chariot  were  g.  horses
6.  the  £/.  go  forth  toward  the  south  country
_  GROAN.

Job  24. 12.  men  g.  from  out  of  the  city
Jer.  51.52.  thro’  all  her  land  the  wounded  shall  g.
Lzek.  30.  24.  Pharaoh  shall  g.  before  him
Joell.  18.  how  do  the  beasts £7.  herds  have  no  pasture
Pom.  8.  23.  we  ourselves  £7.  within  ourselves
2  Cor .  5.  2.  iu  this  we  g.  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon
4.  we  in  this  tabernacle  do  g.  being  burdened
_  ,  GROANED.

John  11. 33.  he  g.  in  spirit,  and  was  troubled
GROAN  ETH.

Pcm.  8.  22.  we  know  that  the  whole  creation  g.
GROAN  ING,  S.

Lxod.  2.  24.  God  heard  their  .<7.  and  remembered
6.  5.  1  have  heard  the  g.  of  Israel,  Acts  7.  34.
Judg.  2. 18.  it  repented  the  Lord  because  of  their  g .
Job  23.  2.  my  stroke  is  heavier  than  my  g.

Psal.  6.  6.  1  am  weary  with  q.  all  the  night
38.  9.  and  my  g.  is  not  hid  from  thee
102.  5.  by  reason  of  my  g.  bones  cleave  to  my  skin
20.  to  hear  the  g.  of  the  prisoner,  to  loose  those
Lzek.  30.  24.  with  the  g.  of  a  deadly-wounded  man
Rom.  8.  26.  for  us  with  g.  that  cannot  be  uttered
GROAN  1  N  G.

John  11.  38.  Jesus  £7.  in  himself,  cometh  to  the  grave
„  GROPE,  ETIL

Dent.  28. 29.  thou  shalt  g.  at  noon  as  the  blind  g.
Job  5.  14.  they  g.  in  noon-day  as  in  the  night
12.  25.  they  g.  in  the  dark  without  light
Isa.  59. 10.  we  g.  for  the  wall  like  the  blind,  we  g.

_  GROSS.

Isa.  60.  2.  and  £7.  darkness  shall  cover  the  people
Jer.  13. 16.  while  look  for  light,  make  it  g.  darkness
Mat.  13. 15.  people’s  heart  is  waxed  g.  Acts  28.  27.
_  GROVE.

Gen.  21.  33.  Abraham  planted  a g.  in  Beer-sheba
Dent.  16.  21.  thou  shalt  not  plant  a£7.  near  the  altar
Judg.  6.  25.  and  cut  down  the  g.  that  is  by  it
28.  the  £7.  was  cut  down  that  was  by  it
1  Sam.  22. 1 6.  Saul  abode  under  a  £7.  in  a  high  place

1  Kings  15.  13.  because  she  had  made  an  idol  in  a

„„  ..  ,  ,  ,  £7.  2  Chron.  15.  16.

lo.  33.  Ahab  made  a  g.  and  did  more  to  provoke  G.

2  lungs  13.  6.  there  remained  the  g.  in  Samaria

17.  16.  Israel  made  a  g.  and  served  Baal

21. 3.  Manasseh  reared  up  altars,  and  made  a  g.

23.  4.  to  bring  out  the  vessels  made  fdr  the  g.

6.  he  brought  out  the  g.  from  house  of  the  Lord
15.  Josiah  burnt  the  high  place  and  the  g.

^  GROVES.

Lxod.  34.  13.  ye  shall  cut  down  their  g.  Deut.  7.  5.
Deut.  12.  3.  ye  shall  bum  their  g.  with  fire
Judg.  3. 7.  forgat  Lord,  and  served  g.  2  Chr.  24.  18.

1  Kings  14. 15.  shall  root  up  Israel  out  of  this  good

land,  because  they  have  made  their  g.
23.  built  them £7.  on  every  high  hill,  2  Kings  17.10.

18.  19.  the  prophets  of  the  g.  four  hundred

2  A  mgs  18. 4.  liezek.  cut  down  g.  and  brake  serp.
23.  14.  Josiah  cut  down  the  g.  2  Chron.  34.  3,  4.

2  Chr.  14. 3.  Asa  brake  images,  and  cut  down  the  g.
17.  6.  Jehoshaphat  took  away  the  g.  out  of  Judah

19.  3.  in  that  thou  hast  taken  away  the  g.

31.  1.  all  Israel  that  were  present  cut  down  the  g.

33.  3.  Manasseh  madej7.  ||  19.  where  he  set  up  £7.

34.  3.  Josiah  began  to  purge  Judah  from  the g.

7.  when  he  had  broken  down  the  altars  and  the  g.
Isa.  17.  8.  neither  shall  he  respect  the  g.  or  images

27.  9.  the  (7.  and  the  images  shall  not  stand  up
Jer.  17.  2.  whilst  children  remember  altars  and  £7.
Mic.  5. 14. 1  will  pluck  up  thy  £7.outofmidstof  thee
GROUND.

Exod.  32.  20.  he  £7.  the  calf  to  powder,  Deut.  9.  21.
Num.  11.  8.  the  people  g.  the  manna  in  mills
GROUND  corn.

2  Sam.  17.  19.  spread  g.  corn  on  the  well’s  mouth
GROUND.

Gen.  2.  5.  and  there  was  not  a  man  to  till  the  g.

7.  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  g.
19.  out  of  the  £7.  the  Lord  formed  every  beast
17.  he  said,  cursed  is  the  g.  for  thy  sake


4.  2.  A  bel  a  keener  of  sheep,  hut  Cain  a  tiller  of  g.
10.  thy  brothers  blood  crieth  to  me  from  the  g.

5.  29.  because  of  the  g.  the  Lord  hath  cursed
8.  21.  1  will  not  again  curse  the  g.  any  more

18.  2.  Abram  bowed  himself  toward  the  g.

19.  1.  Lot  bowed  himself  with  his  face  toward  g.
Exod.  3. 5.  where  thou  standest  is  holy  a.  Acts  7.  33.
8.  21.  £7.  whereon  they  are  shall  be  full  of  flies
Hum.  16.  31.  the  g.  clave  asunder  under  them
Deut.  28.  4.  blessed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  g.  11.
Judg.  4  21.  Jael  fastened  the  nail  into  the  g.

1  Sam.  8.  12.  he  will  set  them  to  ear  his  <7.  and  reap
26.  7*  his  spear  stuck  in  the  g.  at  his  holster

2  Sam.  23. 11.  where  was  a  piece  of  g.  full  of  ientiles
12.  he  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  g.  and  defended  it

2  Kings  2. 19.  but  the  water  is  naught,  and  g.  barren
9. 26.  now  take  him  and  cast  him  into  the  plat  of  g.

1  Chr.  11. 13.  where  was  a  parcel  of  £7.  full  of  barley

2  Chr.  4.  17-  the  king  did  cast  them  in  the  clay  g.
Neh.  10. 35.  and  to  bring  the  first-fruits  of.  our  £7.

37- and  bring  the  tithes  of  our  g.  to  the  Levites
Job  5.  6.  nor  doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  g.

14.  8.  and  though  the  stock  thereof  die  in  tlie  9.

18.  10.  the  snare  is  laid  for  him  in  the  g.

38.  27.  to  satisfy  the  desolate  and  waste  g.

39.  24.  he  swallows  the  g.  with  fierceness  and  rage

207


HAB


GRO


GUI


Pial.  105.  35.  locusts  devoured  tlie  fruit  of  their  g.
107  .  33.  he  turneth  the  water  springs  into  dry  g.
35.  and  he  turneth  dry  g.  into  water-springs
Isa.  28.  24.  doth  lie  open  and  break  clods  ot  his  g..

29.  4.  and  thou  shalt  speak  out  ot  the  </..

30.  23.  seed  that  thou  sliait  sow  the  g.  withal

24.  oxen  and  young  asses  that  ear  the  g.  shal  l  eat
35.  7.  and  the  parched  g.  shall  become  a  pool
51.  23.  and  thou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the  g.

Jer.  4.  3.  break  up  your  tallow  g.  Hus.  10.  1 -.

7.  20.  my  fury  shall  be  poured  on  the  truit  ot  the  g.
14.  4.  because  the  g.  is  chant,  there  was  no  ram
Lam.  2.  2.  her  gates  are  sunk  into  the  g.

Ezek.  12.  6.  cover  thy  face,  thou  see  not  the  g.  1-.
41. 16.  ceiled  from  the  g.  up  to  the  windows
Van  8.  5.  an  lie-goat  came,  and  touched  not  the  g.

18.’ Daniel’s  face  was  towards  the//.  10.. 9,  15.
Vos.  2. 18.  make  covenant  with  them  tor  things  ot  g.
Zech.' if. 12.  and  the  g.  shall  give  her  increase
Mai.  3. 11.  he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  ot  your  g.
Mat.  13.  8.  but  other  fell  into  good//.  Luke  8.  8.


ie  that  received  seed  into  good  g.  Luke  8. 15.


Mark  A.  26.  as  if  a  man  should  cast  seed  into  the.//.
Luke  12. 16.  the  //.of  a  certain  rich  man  brought  forth
13  7.  cut  it  down,  why  cumbereth  it  the  g.  r
14. 18.  the  first  said,  1  have  bought  a  piece  ot  g.

19  44.  they  shall  lay  thee  even  with  the  g.

John  4.  5.  near  the  parcel  of  g.  Jacob  gave  Joseph
12.  24.  except  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the//

See  Dry,  Face.

On  or  upon  the  GROUND.  .

Gen.  38.  9.  he  spilled  it  on  the  g.  lest  he  should  give
44.  14.  Joseph's  brethren  fell  before  him  on  theg.
Exod.  4.  3.  cast  the  rod  on  the  g.  he  cast  it  on  the  g.
9  23.  thunder,  and  the  fire  ran  along  upon  the  g.
14.  16.  Israel  shall  go  on  dry  g.  through  thesea,™

16.  14.  as  small  as  the  hoar  trost  on  the  g.


Vent.  in.  23.  pour  the  blood  upon  the  g.  as  water
22.  6.  if  a  bird’s  nest  chance  to  be  on  the  g.


28.  56.  woman  that  would  not  set  her  toot  upon  g
Judg.  6.  39.  and  upon  all  the  g.  let  there  be  dew
40.  and  there  was  dew  upon  al  1  the  g.

1  Sam.  14.  25.  and  there  was  honey  upon  theg.

32.  the  people  slew  oxen  and  calves  on  the  g.

20.  31.  as  long  as  the  son  ot  Jesse  liveth  on  the  g.

2  Sam.  14.  14.  for  we  are  a3  water  spilt  on  the  g.

17.  12.  shall  light  on  him  as  dew  talleth  on  the  g

2  Kings  13.  18.  he  said,  smite  upon  theg.  he  smote
Job  1.  20.  Job  fell  upon  the  g.  and  worshipped

2. 13.  they  satdown  with  him  upon  theg.  seven  days

16. 13.  he  poureth  out  my  gall  upon  the  g .

Isa.  3.  26.  she  being  desolate  shall  sit  on  the  g.

47. 1.  O  daughter  of  Babylon,  sit  on  the  g.

Jer.  25.  33.  they  shall  be  dung  upon  the  g.

27.  5.  I  have  made  man  and  beast  upon  the  g.
Lam.  2. 10.  the  elders  of  daught.  of  Zion  sit  on  theg.

21.  young  and  old  lie  on  the  g.  in  the  streets
Ezek.  24. 7~  she  poured  it  notnpon  the  g.  to  cover  it

26. 16.  then  all  the  princes  shall  sit  upon  the  g.
Mat.  15.  35.  the  multitude  to  sit  on  the  g.  Mark 8.  6.
Mark  4.  5.  some  fell  on  stony  g.  ithad  notearth,  16

8.  and  other  fell  on  good  g.  20.  Luke ^8. 8, 15.

9.  20.  he  fell  on  the  g.  and  wallowed  foaming
14.  35.  he  went  forward,  and  fell  ong.  and  prayed
John  8.  6.  he  wrote  on  the  g.  8.  |l  9. 6.  he  spat  on  the  g.

To  or  unto  the  GROUND.

Gen.  3. 19.  till  thou  return  unto  the  g.  for  out  of  it

33.  3.  Jacob  bowed  himself  to  the  g.  seven  times
Judg.  13.  20.  Manoah  and  his  wife  tell  to  the  g.

20.  21.  Benjamin  destroyed  to  the  g.  22,000  men

25.  and  destroyed  to  the  g.  of  Israel  18,000  men
Ruth  2.  10.  Ruth  bowed  and  fell  to  the g.

1  Sam.  3.  19.  let  none  of  his  words  fall  to  the  g.

5.  4.  Dagon  was  fallen  on  his  face  to  the  g.

14.  45.  shall  not  one  hair  of  his  head  fall  to  the  g.
20.  41.  David  arose  and  fell  on  his  face  to  the  g.
25.  23.  Abigail  bowed  to  the  g.  before  David

28. 14.  Saul  stooped  with  his  face,  to  the  g.

2  Sam.  2.  22.  wherefore  should  1  smite  thee  to  the  g.?
8.  2.  he  smote  Moab,  casting  him  down  to  the  g.
14.  4.  woman  of  Tekoah  fell  on  her  face  to  the  g.

22.  Joab  fell  to  theg.  ||  33.  Absalom  bowed  to  theg.

18.  11.  why  didst  not  thou  smite  him  to  the  g.  ?

20.  10.  Joab  shed  out  Amasa’s  bowels  tc  the  g.

1  Kings  1. 23.  N athan  bowed  to  theg.  before  the  king

2  Kings  2.  15.  sons  of  the  prophets  bowed  to  theg.
4.  37.  woman  of  Shunam  bowed  herself  to  the  g.

1  Chron.  21.  21.  Oman  bowed  to  the  g.  to  David

2  Chron. 7.  3.  all  Israel  bowed  with  their  faces  to  g.
20.  18.  Jehoshapliat  bowed  with  his  face  to  the  g.

Meh.  8.  6.  worshipped  Lord  with  their  faces  to  theg.
Psal.  74.7.  the  dwelling-place  of  thy  name  to  the  g.
89.  39.  profaned  his  crown,  by  casting  it  to  the  g.
44.  thou  hast  cast  his  throne  down  to  the  g.

143.  3.  he  hath  smitten  my  life  down  to  the  g.

147.  6.  he  casteththe  wicked  down  to  the  g


I',  lie  LOJIUI1  UK.  ..  ..  ..

Isa.  14.  12.  how  art  thou  cut  down  to  the  g.  !
21.  9.  Babylon’s  images  he  hath  broken  to  the


25. 12.  lay  low,  bring  to  the  g.  even  to  the  dust

26.  5.  the  lofty  city  he  layeth  even  to  theg.

Jer.  14.2.  her  gates  languish,  are  hlack  to  the  g.
Lam.  2.  2.  hath  brought  strong  holds  of  Judah  to  g

10.  virgins  of  Jerusal.  hang  their  heads  to  the  g.
Ezek.  13.  14.  I  will  bring  down  the  wall  to  the  g.

19. 12.  thy  mother  was  cast  down  to  the  g.

26.  11.  thy  strong  garrison  shall  go  down  to  the  g.
28.  17.  I  will  cast  thee  to  the  g.  I  will  lay  thee
Van.  8.7.  he  cast  the  ram  down  to  theg.  and  stamped
10.  it  cast  down  some  of  hosts  and  stars  to  the  g.,
12.  and  cast  down  the  truth  to  the  g.

Amos  3.  14.  the  horns  of  the  altar  shall  fall  to  the  g.
Obad.  3.  saith,  who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  g.?
Mat.  10.  29.  one  of  them  shall  not  fall  to  the  g
Luke  22.  44.  as  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  g.
John  18.  6.  they  went  backward,  and  fell  to  the  g.
Acts  22.  7. 1  fell  to  the  g.  and  heard  a  voice
GROUND.

1  Tim.  3.  15.  which  is  the  pillar  and  g.  of  truth
Ileb.  11.  t  1.  faith  is//,  of  things  hoped  for
GROUNDED.

Isa.  30.  32.  in  every  place  where  g.  staff  shall  pass
Eph.  3.  17.  that  ye  being  rooted  and  g.  in  love
208


Col.  1. 23.  if  ye  continue  in  the  faith,//,  and  settled'
GROW.

Gen.  2.  9-  the  Lord  God  made  every  tree  to  g.

48.  16.  and  let  them  g.  into  a  multitude
Mum.  6.  5.  and  shall  let  the  locks  ot  his  hair  g.

Vent.  21. 1 12.  she  shall  suffer  her  nails  to  g.

Judg.  16.  22.  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  g.

2  Sam.  23.  5.  all  my  desire,  tho’  he  make  it  not  to  g.

2  Kings  19.  29.  eat  such  things  as  g.  ot  themselves
Ezra  4. 22.  why  should  damage  g.  to  hurt  ot  kings  .

Job  8.  11.  can  the  rush  g.  up  without  mire  i
19.  and  out  of  the  earth  shall  others//.

14. 19.  thou  washest  away  things  that  g.  out  ot  dust
31.  40.  let  thistles//,  instead  ot  wheat,  and  cockle
39.  4.  they  g.  up  with  corn,  they  go  forth
Psal.  92. 12.  he  shall  g.  like  a  cedar  in  Lebanon
104. 14.  he  causeth  grass  to  g.  tor  the  cattle,  147.  8.
Eccl.  11.  5.  nor  how  the  bones  g.  in  the  womb
Isa.  11. 1.  and  a  branch  shall  g.  out  of  his  roots
17.  11.  in  the  day  shalt  thou  make  thy  plant  g.

53.  2.  he  shall  g.  up  before  him  as  a  tender  plant
Jer.  12.  2.  they  g.  yea  they  bring  forth  fruit
33.  15.  the  branch  of  righteousness  to  g.  to  David
Ezek.  44.  20.  nor  suffer  their  locks  to  g.  long
47.  12.  by  the  liver  shall  g.  all  trees  tor  meat
II  os.  14. 5.  he  shall  //.as  the  lily,  cast  forth  his  roots
7.  they  shall  revive  as  the  corn,  and  g.  as  the  vine
Jonah  4. 10.  nor  madest  it  17.  which  came  up  in  night
Zech.  6.  12.  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  he  shall//.

9. 1 17.  corn  shall  make  the  young  men  g.

Mai.  4.  2.  ye  shall  g.  up  as  calves  ot  the  stall
Mat. 6. 28.  consider  the  lilies  how  they  g.  Luke  12. 27 .

13.  30.  let  both  g.  together  till  the  harvest
21.  19.  let  no  fruit  q.  on  thee  henceforward
Mark  4.  27.  seed  should  g.  up,  he  knoweth  not  how
Acts  5.  24.  they  doubted  whereunto  this  would  g.

Eph.  4.  15.  may  g.  up  into  him  in  all  things

1  Pet.  2. 2.  desiring  the  milk  of  word,  that  ye  may  g.

2  Pet.  3. 18.  g.  in  grace  and  in  knowledge  ot  Lord

GRO  W  N .

Gen.  38.  11.  till  Shelah  be  g.  ||  14.  Shelah  was  g.
Exod.  2.  11.  that  when  Moses  was  g.  he  w  ent  out
9  3°.  were  not  smitten,  for  they  were  not  g.  up
l)eut.32. 15.  thou  art  <7-.  thick,  covered  with  fatness
Ruth  1 . 13.  would  ye  tarry  for  them  till  they  were//.

2  Sam.  10.  5.  tarry  till  your  beards  be//.  1  Chr.  19.  5.

1  Kings  12.  8.  consulted  with  young  men  g.  10.

2  Kings  A.  18.  when  the  child  was  g.  up,  it  tell  sick
19.26.  as  corn  blasted  before  it  beg.  Isa.  37.  27.

Ezra  9.  6.  our  trespass  is  g.  up  to  the  heavens
Psal.  144. 12.  that  our  sons  may  be  as  plants  g.  up
Prov.  24.  31.  and  lo,  it  was  all  //.  over  with  thorns
Jer.  50.  11.  because  ye  are  g.  fat  as  the  heifer
Ezek.  16. 7.  thy  breasts  are  fashioned,  thy  hair  is  g.
Van.  4.  22.  thou  art  g.  strong,  thy  greatness  is//.

33.  till  his  hairs  were  g.  like  eagle’s  feathers
Mat.  13.  32.  when  it  is  g.  it  is  greatest  among  herbs
GROW  KTH.

Exod.  10.  5.  the  locusts  shall  eat  every  tree  that//.
Lev.  13.  39.  a  freckled  spot  that  <7.  in  the  skin
25.  5.  which  g.  of  its  own  accord,  not  reap,  11.
Vent.  29.23.  nor  any  grass  g.  therein,  like  Sodom
Judg.  19.  9.  behold,  the  day  g.  to  an  end,  lodge  here
Job  38.  38.  when  the  dust/7,  into  hardness  and  clods
Psal.  37.  t  35.  the  wicked  spreadeth  as  tree  that  g.
90  5.  in  the  morning  like  grass  which  g.  up,  6.

129.  6.  as  the  grass,  which  withereth  afore  it  g.  up
Isa.  37  .  30.  ye  shall  eat  this  year  such  as g.  of  itself
Mark  4. 32.  when  it  is  sown  it  g.  up  and  becometh
Eph.  2.  21.  Q.  unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord
2  I'hess.  1.  3.  because  ^our  faith  g.  exceedingly

Amos  7. 1.  shooting  up  of  latter  g.  lo,  it  was  latter  g.
GRUDGE.

Lev.  19.  18.  nor  bear  any  g.  against  thy  people
Mark  6. 1 19.  Herodias  had  a £.  against  John

Psal.  59. 15.  let  them  g.  if  they  be  not  satisfied
Jam.  5.  9.  g.  not  one  apains^tanother,  brethren

A  Pet  4  9  use  hospitality  one  to  another  without  g.
GRUDGINGLY.

2  Cor.  9.  7.  let  him  give,  not  g.  or  of  necessity
GUARD.

Gen.  37. 36.  Joseph  sold  to  a  captain  ot  the//.  39. 1.
41. 12.  an  Hebrew,  servant  to  a  captain  ot  the  g.

1  Sam.  22.  +  17.  king  said  to  the  g.  slay  the  priests

2  Sam.  23.  23.  Dav.  set  him  over  his 77. 1  Chr.  11.25.

1  Kings  14.  27.  shields  to  captain  of/7.  2  Chr.  12. 10.
28.  g.  bare  them  and  brought  them,  2  Chron.  12. 11.

2  Kings  11.  6.  a  third  part  at  the  gate  behind  the//.
25.  8.  captain  of  <7.  came  to  Jerusalem,  Jer.  52. 12.

10.  captain  of//,  brake  down  walls,  Jer.  52. 14.

11.  the  rest  of  people  captain  ot  g.  carried  away

12.  the  capt.  of  the  q.  left  of  the  poor  ot  the  land
Neh.  4.  22.  that  in  the  night  they  may  b.e  a  <7.  to  us

23.  nor  I  nor  men  of  the  g.  put  oft  our  clothes
Jer.  39. 11.  charge  to  captain  of  g.  concerning  Jere.
40.  1.  when  the  captain  of  the  g.  had  let  him  go
5.  the  captain  of  the//,  gave  him  victuals
52.  30.  the  captain  of  the  g.  took  captive  4600
Ezek.  38.  7.  be  thou  prepared,  and  be  a  g.  to  them
Van.  2. 14.  Daniel  answered  the  captain  ot  the  g.
Mark  6.  t27.  king  sent  one  of  his  g.  and  commanded
Acts  28.  16.  delivered  the  prisoners  to  captain  ot  g.
GUARD  chamber.

1  Kings  14. 28.  guard  bare  them  to  g.  ch.  2  CV/r.12.11 .

G  u  es  r .

Luke  19.  7.  he  was  gone  to  be  g.  with  a  sinner
GU  EST  chamber.

Mark  14. 14.  where  is  the  g.  chamber  ?  Luke  22. 11.
GUESTS.

1  Kings  1.41.  Adonijah  and  all  g.  with  him  heard  it
49.  all  g.  with  Adonijah  were  afraid  and  rose  up
Prov.  9.  18.  that  her  g.  are  in  the  depths  of  hell
Zeph.  i.7.  for  the  Lord  hath  prepared  and  bid  g.
Mat.  22. 10.  and  the  wedding  was  furnished  with  g.
11.  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  g.  he  saw
GUIDE,  S.  ,

Psal.  48.  14.  he  will  be  our  g.  even  unto  death


Prov.  6.  7.  which  having  no  g.  overseer,  or  ruler
Jer.  3. 4.  my  father,  thou  art  the  g.  of  my  youi:,
Mic.  7 . 5. trust  not  friend ,  put  ye  not  confidence  in  g
Mat.  23.  16.  woe  to  you,  ye  blind  q.  24.

Acts  1.  16.  who  was  g.  to  them  that  took  Jesus
Rom.  2.  19.  art  confident  thou  art  g.  of  the  blind
lleb.  13.  t  7.  remember  them  that  are  g.  over  >ou
GUI  DE.

Job  38.  32.  canst  thou  g.  Arcturus  with  his  sons  r
Psal.  25.  9.  the  meek  will  he  g.  in  judgment

31.  3.  for  thy  name’s  sake  lead  me  and  g.  me

32.  8.  1  will  teach  and  g.  thee  with  mine  eye
73.  24.  thou  shalt  g.  me  with  thy  counsel
112.  5.  he  will  g.  his  affairs  with  discretion

Prov.  11.3.  the  integrity  of  the  upright  shall//,  then
23.  19.  be  wise,  and  g.  thine  heart  in  the  way
Isa.  49.  10.  by  springs  of  water  shall  he  g.  them  :t
51.  18.  there  is  none  to  g.  her  among  all  the  sous
58.  11.  the  Lord  shall//,  thee  continually
Luke  1.  79.  to  g.  our  feet  into  the  way  ot  peace
John  16.  13.  he  will  g.  you  into  all  truth
Acts 8.  31.  how  can  1 ,  except  some  man  g.  me  ?

1  I’hess.  3.  ||  11.  now  G.  himself  g.  our  way  to  y0

1  Tim.  5. 14.  younger  women  bear  children, g.hous
Ileb  13.  1 17.  obey  them  that  g.  you,  and  submit

GUIDED,  ING.  .

Gen.  48.  14.  Israel  g.  his  bauds  wittingly
Exod.  15.  13.  thou  hast  g.  them  in  thy  strength

2  Chron.  32.  22.  the  Lord  g.  them  on  every  side
'job  31.  18.  1  have  g.  her  from  my  mother’s  womb
Psal.  78.  52.  g.  them  in  the  wilderness  like  a  Hoe

70.  hast  n.  them  by  the  skilfulness  of  his  hands  ,
GUILE.

Exod.  21.  14.  if  a  man  slay  with  g.  let  him  die
Psal.  32.  2.  and  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no//.

34.  13.  keep  lips  from  speaking  g.  1  Pet.  3. 10.

55.  11.  deceit  and  g.  depart  not  from  her  streets
John  1.  47.  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  g.

2  Cor.  12. 16.  being  crafty,  1  caught  you  with  g.

1  I'hess.  2.  3.  for  our  exhortation  was  not  in//.

1  Pet.  2. 1.  laying  aside  all  malice  andg.andenvi

22.  who  dill  no  sin,  nor  was  g.  found  in  hismou
Rev.  14.  5.  and  in  their  mouth  was  found  no//.
GUILT.

Veut.  19.  13.  put  away  g.of  innocent  blood,  21.  5
Gil  IL1L .  (  ||

Gen.  42.  21.  we  arc  verily  g.  concerning  our  broth
Exod.  31.  7.  will  by  no  means  clear  g.  Num.  14. 1
Lev.  4. 13.  which  should  not  be  done,  are  g.  22,  S  ,

5.  2.  if  hid  from  him,  he  shall  be  unclean  and  g.

3.  when  he  knoweth  of  it,  he  shall  b eg.  4.

5.  when  he  shall  be  g.  he  shall  confess  his  sin
17.  tho’  he’ wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  g.  and  shad  be

6.  4.  because  he  sinned  and  is  a.  he  shall  restore
Mum.  35.  27.  tho’  he  kill  the  slayer  shall  not  be

31.  take  no  satisfaction  for  a  murderer //.of  (let
Judg.  21.  22.  ye  did  not  give,  that  you  should  be
Ezra  10.  19.  being//,  offered  a  ram  ot  the  flock
Ps.  5.  +  10.  to  make  them  g.  let  them  fall  from  cot
34.  t21.  they  that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  g.
109.  1 7.  when  he  shall  be  judged,  let  him  goout
Prov.  30.  10.  lest  he  curse,  and  thou  be  found  g.
Ezek.  22.  4.  art  become//,  in  blood  thou  hast  she
Vos.  5.  +  15.  1  will  return  to  the  place  till  they  be
Zech.  11.5.  slay  them,  and  hold  themselves  not
Mat.  23.  18.  swear  by  the  g.  on  it,  he  is//.

26.  06.  they  said,  he  is  g.  of  death,  Mark  14.  64
Rom.  3.  19.  all  the  world  may  become  g.  before
1  Cor.  11 . 27.  shall  be  g.  of  the  body  and  blood  ot.
Jam.  2.  10.  shall  offend  in  one  point,  he  is  /’.of
GUILTINESS.


Gen.  26.  10.  thou  shouldest  have  brought//,  on  1  |
Ezra  9.  t  6.  our  g.  is  grown  up  to  the  heavens


Psal.  51.  14.  deliver  me  from  bloody.  O  God
69.  t  5.  and  my  g.  is  not  hid  from  thee  1  ;
GUILTLESS.

Exod.  20.  7.  Lord  will  not  hold  him  77.  Dent.  5.
Mum.  5.  31.  then  shall  the  man  be//,  from  imqu|  j
32.  22.  afterward  shall  return  and  be//,  before  1,
Josh.  2.  19.  his  blood  be  on  him,  and  we  will  bej  t

1  Sam.  26.  9.  hand  agst.  Lord’s  anointed  and  be  ;

2  Sam.  3.  28.  1  and  my  kingdom  are//,  ot  blood
14.  9.  women  said,  the  king  and  bis  throne  be  .  j

1  Kings 2. 9.  hold  him  not  g.  for  thou  art  a  wiser!
Mat.  12.  7.  ye  would  not  have  condemned  the,  .

GULF.  ,  .

Luke  16.26.  between  us  and  you  is  a  great  g.  fi.
GUSH,  ED.

1  Kings  18.  28.  till  the  blood  a.  out  upon  them;  |
Psal.  78.  20.  he  smote  the  rock,  the  waters  g.  01

1Q5.  41.  be  opened  the  rock,  the  waters  g.  out
I\a.  48.  21.  he  clave  the  rock,  and  the  waters  <7.
Jer.  9.  18.  and  our  eye  lids//,  out  with  waters,  1
Acts  1.  18.  he  burst  asunder,  and  his  bowels //.o
GUTTER,  S.  ,  ,

Gen.  30.  38.  Jacobset  rods  in  the  g.  before  the  c<  *  ■
41.  laid  rods  before  the  eyes  of  the  cattle  m  tr

2  Sam.  5. 8.  who  getteth  up  to  the  g.  andsmitet


H.


HA.


55. 13.  it  was  thou,  a  man,  my  g.  my  acquaintance
Prov.  2.  17.  who  forsaketh  the  g.  ot  her  youth


Job  39.  25.  he  saith  among  the  trumpets,  ha,  H

HABERGEON.  J

Exod.  28.  32.  as  it  were  the  hole  of  an  h.  39.  -
Job  41. 26.  the  spear,  the  dart,  the  li.  cannot  he
HABERGEONS.

2  Chron.  26.  14.  h.  and  bows  Uzziah  prepared
Neh.  4.  16.  half  of  my  servants  held  bows  ana
HABITABLE.

Prov.  8.  31.  rejoicinu  in  the  h.  part  of  hiscaitn
HABITATION.  ,

Exod.  15.  2.  be  is  my  God,  1  will  prepare  him  *<
Lev.  13.  46.  without  the  camp  shall  his  //.  fie  .
Dent.  12.  5.  even  to  his  h.  shall  ye  seek  and  cj ,

1  Sam.  2.  29.  why  kick  at  offerg.  commanded  i  -
32.  and  thou  shalt  see  an  enemy  in  my  »•  ,

0  Sam.  15. 25.  he  will  shew  me  both  it  and  !'•  rj

2  Chron.  6.2.  1  have  built  an  house  of  //.  toi

29.  6.  and  have  turned  from  the  h.  of  tlie  ir  ri

30.  t  27.  prayer  came  up  to  the  h  ot  his  turn.


II  A  D


U  A  L


~.ra7.  15.  to  G oil  of  Israel  whose  h.  is  in  lerusa
'!>  5. 3.  foolish  taking  root,  but  suddenly  1  cursed  h
24.  thou  shalt  visit  thy  h.  and  shalt  not  sin
.  0.  make  the  //.  of  thy  righteousness  prosperous

8.  15.  brimstone  shall  be  scattered  upon  his  h
sal.  2b.  8.  I  have  loved  the  //.  of  thy  house

3. 14.  from  the  place  of  his  //.  he  looketh

9.  f 14.  the  grave  an  //.  for  every  one  of  them

9.  2d.  let  their  //.  be  desolate,  none  dwell  in  tents
1.3.  be  thou  my  strong  h.  whereunto  1  mav  resort

9. 14.  and  judgment  the  //.  of  thy  throne  97  o
l.  9.  thou  hast  made  the  most  High  thy  h

>4. 12.  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  have  their  //.

)7.  7.  that  they  might  go  to  a  city  of  h.  36.

12.  5.  find  an  h.  for  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob

13.  forthe  Lord  hath  desired  it  for  his  h.

ov.  3.  33.  but  he  blesseth  the  //.  of  the  just
*•  16-  and  that  grayeth  an  h.  for  himself

.  10.  and  the  h.  shall  be  forsaken  and  left

••  18-  mv  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  //

5.  20.  thine  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  //.

1. 13.  it  shall  be  an  A.  of  dragons,  and  a  court
;•  J: 111  OjeA-ot  dragons  shall  be  grass  with  reeds
..  Id.  and  behold  from  the  h.  of  thy  holiness
9.  6.  thine  h.  is  in  the  midst  of  deceit
>.  25.  and  they  have  made  his  h.  desolate
’•  ^•  uheTLor!lLsH1  mightily  roar  on  his  li.

■;  r4’  *!?e  E?rd  bless  thee,  O  h.  of  justice,  50.  7.

’•  the  cities  thereof  be  an  h.  of  shepherds
.  17.  and  they  dwelt  in  the  h.  of  Chimham
’  I1  e  s,,  ,  Pome  against  h.  of  strong,  50.  44.

.  1J.  I  will  bring  Israel  again  to  bis  h.
surely  heshall  make  their  h.  desolate
thy  h-  is  of  the  land  of  Canaan
‘  r  1  „  1  ^ause  Egypt  to  return  to  their  h.

10 j  d- 1.>.  and  cause  the  h.  of  violence  to  come  near
irf.  3.  whose  h.  is  hipJi,  that  saith  in  his  heart
,  i  A,  •  i  -  sun  and  moon  stood  still  in  their  h.

J  E  ,w'dlen>  ^et  his  h.  be  desolate

;  determined  the  boun  is  of  their  It

i.  2.  22.  tor  an  It.  of  God  through  the  Spirit
'  e  !?  angels  which  left  their  own  h.

18.  -.  Babylon  is  become  the  h.  of  devils

Holy  HABITATION.

<d.  Id  13.  thou  hast  guided  them  to  thy  holy  h.


HAN


V  uiter  ins  voice  from  holy
.  n.  >.  13.  tor  he  is  raised  up  out  of  his  holy  h.

.  t habitations.

j Y*  5.  instruments  ot  cruelty  are  in  their  h.

'  \  a,i  y°ur  h.  shall  eat  unleav.  bread

» 'i^o  kindle  no  fire  thro’  your  h.  on  sabbath
'  /  -V  Jf  7e  be  cpme  into  the  h.  I  give  you

'  ^heiPdfairfkfPnCeSOuea,rth  fuI1  of /i.  of  cruelty
f".  he  let  it  fall  round  about  their  A.

'  o  in  n161)1  sketch  forth  curtains  of  thy  h.

'  ?»  h%  0ti  the,w'  derness  a  lamentation

13.  which  say,  who  shall  enter  into  our  k.  ?

37-  anu  the  peaceable  h.  are  cut  down
-0.  surely  he  shall  make  their  h.  desolate
•  £'  7\  TO  swallowed  up  the  h.  of  Jacob

i  Yo  IVVii  nem  h:,  muake  the  land  desolate
i  i  *  Su  a »  ^em  111  their  two  h .

■n't  *  / llat!1devoured  //.of  the  wilderness

1  fir,’  o'  fl  h ’  ot  t,ie  sbePherds  shall  mourn

-  b.  9.  they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  h.

..  n  ,  .  HAD.  °

;  •-*’ V  2.  his  servants  that  ruled  over  all  that  he  h
f  if?  nkoleuV  110t  ought  he  h.  save  bread  he  eat
j  •  gathered  much  //.  nothing

V,1  thie  ^0r<  a  delight  in  thy  fathers
'  i  wi,  Joshua  saved  Kahab  and  all  that  she  A.
I*  fi°SohoUa  '^k  Acban  and  all  that  he  A.

3'.  6.22.  of  them  shall  1  be  It.  in  honour

'  a*  thpdUse  he  1-ld  thls  thing,  and  h.  no  pity

fw9  3?\rhpSo0^m7lg^ty  1-len  whom  David  h.
r  13  i  i  S  |®salu!’/i'  Z‘m,r.1  Peace  who  slew'  mast.

V  as  for  ,L?r<  jessed  his  house  and  all  he  h.

and  the  pattern  ot  all  that  he  h.  by  the  Spirit
26  I  was  not  in  safety,  neither  //.  I  rest
I  J'  the  LorHai-d  ao\’.oh  that  we  h.  of  his  flesh  !

'  55  6  u  f  i  e,  ""1Ttrce.a3  much  as  he  A.
in  t  'rlth  L°  th,at  1  /'•  wings  like  a  dove
f-toKp/  be  a  door-keeper  m  house  of  God
51°thp  nr!f  reverence  of  all  them  about  him

4]as^Pr‘‘haVe  h-  r!le  ,8Teat|y  m  derision
n  LT  u  oppressed,  they  li.  no  comforter

g*  ?eSid’  •/  pea,ce  1  h‘  Sreat  bitterness
,  ,,  in®?  °Pe  as  'f  we  h.  no  eyes,  we  stumble

23  Stertave  1  h-  n'ercy  on  thee
7  for  n  /  the  heavens,  and  they  h.  no  light

-  1  W  we  ?ie'?ty  of  victuals,  were  well
1  he' Amp  iP  easant  things  she  h.  in  days  of  old

23  18  vph“  wonderfully,  h.  no  comforter
Jhi.tr  -i  hf  no  wages  tor  the  service
A  oUU  t-  P1A'  f0Ij mine  holy  name
ea '  h./,  "1S  strength  Jacob//,  power  with  God
?^L];°TTrir  !he  “Pl  and  prevailed
1  2.  15  v?t  /  L  tilch  t  rnu  hast  //,  indignation
1  li  u  '  i  ,e  the  residue  of  the  Spirit

'Kw4hoseCw?Kd  f  that  he  //.  and  bought  it
io  'osewite  of  seven,  for  they  all  h.  her?

4  fvt  'r,  °f  ler  want  did  cast  in  all  she  h

1,last/'-  five  husbands

■  Judas  i  thi'h  6  °f  whatsoever  disease  he  h.

1  'o  jf.- 1  ')  *  bare  what  was  in  it

;  the  ilorv1  r*  7C0!n.e.  they  //.  not  //.  sin

■  44g‘?R. 1  /•:  with  thee  before  the  world  was
ii.  bavin  .J  If  beiieved  //  all  things  common

5  tliaf  aft fb°ni  h?s  head,  tor  he  //.  a  vow

4  ,examination  //.  I  might  write

•  what  fruit  f  ^et  b?'"g  uncircumcised,  12.

7-  °<)  that  h  '  1,1  things  whereof  ashamed

97b.it  w5! /"•  "one


9  but  x  as  trio  tnev  //.no

'  ■  1  0  ulf  the  sentence  of  death  in  us
J.  6  and  hif  ln,a.n.ner  of  entering  in  h.  toy
i  ‘^essed  him  that  //.  the  Dromis^s


ou


7  „i"i  blessed  him  that//,  the  promises

:  5.  that  whiT if1*11/  Ahich  A'e  h-  from  fiegin.
tt  ,  r  '1  from  tbe  beginning  °
all,  Co-Mrassiox.


»  „  IIADST.

pn’/  'Ti'  'f '  J°r  d  %vas  tittle  thou  //.  before  I  came
J  sal.  44.  3.  because  thou  //.  a  favour  to  them
J.e/ -Ls-  and  thou  //.  a  whore’s  forehead
Ueb.  It).  8.  and  oflerin:|  for  sin  thou  //.  no  pleasure

Judy.  3.  22.  and  the  //.also  went  in  after  the  blade

18-  1  will  cause  it  to  rain  a  very  grievous  //.
the  Lord  sent  thunder  and  h.  the  tire  ran  alon<y
2b.  where  children  of  Israel  were,  was  there  no  h.
i'y*  n?.r  shall  there  be  any  more  //.  ||  33.  //.  ceased
n>.  D.  that  which  remameth  from  the  //.  12,  15.
it  2r  last,  thou  seen  the  treasures  of  the  //.  ?

t  sal.  78.  4/ .  lie  destroyed  their  vines  with  //.

48.  he  gave  up  their  cattle  also  to  the  //.

T?o'o2A  he  Fave  thein  h-  for  rain,  and  fiaming  fire
r1™*8..  me,  //.snow,  and  vapour,  fulfilling  his  word
Jsa  ‘8.  2.  which  as  a  tempest  of  //.shall  cast  down
r/‘-  me  //.  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies
Jy-J-}7:}  smpte  you  with  //.  in  all  the  labours
iff  / there  followed  //.  and  fire  mingled  blood
re'  of  P  opened,  and  there  was  great  //.

lb.  21 .  there  fell  on  men  a  great  //.  out  of  heaven
T  HAIL.

32-  19.  my  people  shall  dwell  when  it  shall  h.
7i/r  oc  .  HAIL.

4A  Judas  said,  h.  master,  and  kissed  him
k- 'N  °t  the  Jews,  Mark  15. 18.  John  19.  3.

,  -Bi/Xt  1.  28.  the  angel  came  to  Mary,  and  said,  //.

,  ,  ,  hailstones.

pf";  f  ft*  there  were  more  which  died  with  //.

hfaw  8 -in'  V  h°T  dS  S?f1  ’  ■  and  coals  of  fire,  13.

f.wf  vf the  Lord  shall  shew  indignation  with//.
JEandye-  O  great//,  shall  fall,  and  a  wind
e  sball  be  great  h.  in  my  fury  to  consume  it
38.  1  will  rain  great  //.  fire,  and  brimstone

r  HAIR.

I?-3'  Ahen  the  h‘  ?,n  the  plague  is  turned  white
30.  it  in  plague  a  yellojv  //.  ||  31.  no  black  h.  in  it
£  acf  "•  Sr°wn  II 14. 8.  shave  off  h.  9.
tlle  h-  °t  bis  separation  is  shaven
Judy.  ,0. 10.  every  one  could  sling  stones  at//,  brea

2  ' 14' 11 '  ?i0t  ?ne  h '  ?f  thy  son  fall  to  the  eartli

~0..  hecause  the  //.  was  heavy  on  him,  he  polled  it

lNeh‘!v\ 1  '  hcr  S.lai  notan  //.of  him  fall  to  earth

T,/;  ;?■  1  plucked  olf  their  h.  and  made  them

rw'  ]5i  Vin  a,sp-int  Passed,  //.  of  my  flesh  stood  up
V  A4of  thy  A  is  as  a  flock  of  goats,  6.  5.

7  bn  A4'  t‘k1  |nstead  of  well  set  h.  baldness
7.  20.  the  Lord  shall  shave  the  head,  and  //.  of  feet
pO.  6.  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  h

Ezok'’?9!  CUt|°,ftl-1D  ^'i0  J®fusalem,  cast  away
Zech  13  +'  f1'1  dlVfJf,  h- 1' 16-  7-  thy  A.  is  grown
+i4i.  u  s.ha1-1  they  ^’ear  a  garment  of  h.
r/’J3-  '}■  J°hn  had  raiment  of  camel’s  //.  Mark  1  6
5.  06  thou  canst  not  make  one  //.  white  or  black
John  ll  2.  anti  wiped  his  feet  with  her  //.  12  3
1  ff;/1-  14-  if  a  man  have  long  h.  it  is  a  shame

1  7V„  fo  o  AfA  0.np  ^#Jt  Is  a  glory  to  her

1  Urn.  2.  9.  not  with  broidered  h.  or  gold,  or  nearls

V>feA3- 3-  not  ot  plaiting  the  //.  and  wearing  gold
Rev.  6.  1  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  h.

9.  8.  and  they  had  //.  as  the  h.  of  women
See  Goats,  Head.

_  _  HAIRS.

uen.  4..  38.  ye  shall  bring  down  my  //.  44.  29  31
f fv-  t3.21.  if  there  be  no  white  A.  therein

nafhl'i  it  |he  ng  also  with  man  of  gray  h.
Ruth  4.  f  15.  he  shall  be  a  nourisherof  thy  gray  h

PsaL  40. 12.  are  more  than  the  h.  of  my  head,  69  4
,1.  1 18.  now  to  gray//.  ()  God, forsake  me  not'  '
Isa.  46.  4.  and  even  to  hoar  //.  will  I  carry  vou
Dan.  A.  33.  till  //.  were  grown  like  eagle’s  feathers
/'•  aje  here  and  there  upon  him
Mat.  10.  .>0.  the  //.ot  our  head  numbered,  Luke  12  7
Luke  7 .  38 .  did  wipe  them  with  h.  of  her  head,  44
Rev.  1. 14.  his  head  and //.^vere  white  like  wool  ’

Gen.  <25. 25.  the  first  red,  all  over  like  an  //.  garment
27.  11.  Esau  is  an  *.  man  ||  23.  his  hands  were  h
2pAf^E8-Elljah  was  an  //.  man,  and  girt  with
Psal.  68.  -1.  the  h.  scalp  of  such  a  one  as  goetli  on

Luke  12.  58.  lest  the  advepfar^//.  thee  to  the  judge

Acts  8. 3.  Saul  //.  men^amLwomen,  committed  them

M,?SeS  H0k  h-  the.blood,  //.  he  sprinkled
rt  'A4'otAkf  ,b?aAt  sweet  cinnamon  h.  so  much
4^ev.  o.  *0.  h.  of  it  in  the  morning,  and  h.  at  ni<dit

7be  djesl1  *s  ,l •  consumed  =

T1;  29.  take  it  of  their  //.  and  give  it  to  Eleazar
Josh.  8.  33.  //.  of  them  over  against  mount  Ebal
1  Sam.  14.14.  within  as  it  were  an//,  acre  of  land
As' 3'  i°'  VJ^un  shaved  off  one  //.  of  their  beards
1  n'  /u  l-  °f  l'S  die,  will  they  care  for  us

A  me  people  of  Israel  conducted  David

h5't  gue  of7tlle  cll'ld  to  one,  //.  to  other
aud  behold,  the  //.  was  not  told,  2  C.hr.  0  6
It 8: »  ‘houwdt  give  me*,  thine  house,  I  will'  not

10.  ~1. //.  of  the  people  followed  Tibni  h  Omri
Neh.  3.  9.  the  ruler  of  the  //,  part  of  Jerusalem,  12.

16.  //.  part  of  Bethzur  |  17.  //.  of  Keilah,  18.

13  24.  children  spake  //.  in  the  speech  of  Ashdod
„  ,  U-.3.  to  the//  ot  the  kingdom,  7.  2.  Mark  6  03
Psal.  5d.  2.i.  bloody  men  shall  not  live  h.  their  days
Lzek.  lp.pl.  nor  hath  Samaria  committed  //.  thy  sins
Dan.  12. 7  .be  for  time,  times,  and  an  //.  Rev.  12. 14.

Hos.  3.  2.  I  bought  her  tor  //.  an  homer  of  barley
Zech.  14.  2.  h.  of  the  city  shall  go  into  captivity
rt'/ttn  ^?Unt  f® ward  the  south  ||  8.  //.  toward  sea
30.  and  departed,  leaving  him  h.  dead
19. 8.  behold,  the  //.  ot  my  goods  1  give  to  the  poor
Af’-8- L  wus  silence  about  space  of//,  an  hour

11.  9.  shall  see  dead  bodies  three  days  and  an//.  11

bee  Shekel,  Hin,  Tribe.

__  .  HALL.

soldiers  took  Jesus  into  common  //.
Mark  Id.  16. ■  tlie  soldiers  led  him  away  to  the  //.

JjUAe  55.  had  kindled  a  fire  in  the  midst  of  the  h .

See  Judgment.


HALLOW.

Pfed.  28.  38.  which  the  children  of  Israel  siiali  /».

1ao  A®  minister  to  me  in  priest’s  office
J'f'’-  r-  ln  those  things  which  they  h.  to  me,  8.
32.  I  wil  be  hallowed,  I  am  the  Lord  who  //.  you
2d.  10.  shall  //.  the  fiftieth  year,  proclaim  libertv
Rum.  6. 11.  and  he  shall  /*  his  head  that  same  day
1  &i7ips 8.  of.  same  day  did  king//,  court.  2  C/ir  7  7
Jet-.  17.  22.  but  //.  ye  the  sabbatli-day,  24,  27

1,  n7°tr°-  ar}d  !n>’  sabbaths,  they  shall  beasign
44.  _4.  they  shall  keep  laws  aud  //.  my  sabbaths

„  hallowed.

o<)0(ot°\  J1-  Ed’  blessed  the  sabbath-day  and  //.  it
-9.  21.  Aaron  shall  be  //.  and  his  garments
it' r,42u  4’  sbe  shall  touch  no  //.  thing,  nor  come
It  8- because  he  hath  profaned  the  //.  thing  of  L.
td2’  32«  \  ^  ,l-  among  the  children  0/  Israel

^um  3.  13.  I  h.  unto  me  all  the  first-horn  in  Israel
i  A  o4  an,  ever-v,  man’s  //.  tilings  shall  be  his
IP.  37.  take  up  the  censers,  for  they  are  h.  38.

18.  8.  of  all  the  //.  things  I  have  given  unto  thee
-J.  even  the  //.  part  thereof  out  of  it
Ueut.  26.  13.  I  have  brought  awav  the  //.  things
1  aI-4’  ],s  n°  common,  but  there  is  h.  bread

i  a\  ^b'uieiech  the  priest  gave  him  //.  bread
1  Kings  9.  3. 1  have  //.  tins  house  thou  hast  built  ”

~  kings  12.  18.  Jehoash  took  all  the  //.  things  ’  '  ‘

IgtTo36,;  M  P,olluted  die  house  of  L.  he'had  //.
Mat.  6.  9.  «.  be  thy  name,  Luke  11  2
.  HALT.

r  /  It  ^  1S  better  to  enter  into  life  h.  Mark  9  45
LidelA.  21.  bring  in  hither  the  //.  and  the  blind
John  5. 3.  of  //.  waitin|Tor  the  moving  of  the  water

To  halt,  to  be  lame  on  both  sides.  With  this  Elijah
reproaches  the  Israelites  of  the  ten  tubes,  l  Km-s
I/v  ~1’JPiow  °'?g  half  ye  between  two  opinions  -
J/tey  did  not  adore  God  with  a  pure  and  unmired
worship  but  were  for  reconciliny  the  worship  of

ldolAu  Sal/S’ 1  wdl  assemble
her  that  halteth,  and  her  that  is  driven  out,  Mic.

4.  0.  1  hat  is,  I  will  restore  my  people  of  the

Jews,  thouyh  now  in  a  weak,  banished,  afflicted
condition,  to  their  former  privileyes,  and  plant
them  in  their  own  country  ;  I  will  determine  such
oj  them  to  return,  who  seem  unresolved  whether  to
lhl  .Psalmist  says,  that  his  enemies
leioiced  to  see  him  halt,  Psal.  35.  15.  But  in  mine
adversity,  Heb.  halting,  they  rejoiced.  When  1
was  in  y real danyer  offal  liny  into  trouble  ;  when
J  had  any  sickness,  or  ill  success  in  my  affairs

And  in  Jer  20.  10  All  my  familiars  wStched

for  my  halting:  I  hey  lay  m  wait  to  take  me
tnppmy  m  any  tinny,  if  they  could,  that  they
miyhtyive  mine  adversaries  any  advantaye  ayainst

lPsnl% 's’/it21'  how  Long  ;'’,ye  between  two  opinions3
Psal.  38. 17.  am  ready^to  /^  my  sorrow  is  before  me.

C'f.w’  32.  31.  as  Jacob  passed,  he  //.  upon  his  thigh
Mic.  4.  7.  I  will  make  her  that  //.  a  remnant
HALTETH.

i,  t’  L1?  that  day  I  will  assemble  her  that //
Aeph.  o.  19.  behold  at  that  time  I  will  save  her  that//.

T  halting.

Jer.  20.  10.  all  my  familiars  watched  for  my  h
T  ,  ,  ,  HAMMER.  *  '

r?ik  4 '  '-I:  ^,ier?  Jael  took  an  //.  in  her  hand
d. -.6.  with  //.  she  smote  Sisera,  smote  off  his  head  '
//  u'S~'  7'  aVuS  n,eitber  //.  nor  axe  heard  in  house
r  11’  J' ai,H!  be  that  smootheth  with  the  h.

J%L'  J3-  r9-  Eke  a  h.  that  breaketh  rock  in  pieces
50.  2.1.  how  is  the  li.  of  whole  earth  cut  asunder
JSah.  2.  t  1.  the  //.  is  come  up  before  thy  face
z>  1  "r A  a  ,  HAMMERS.
rSa  \  /Eo-  oceak  down  the  carved  work  with  h.

Isa.  44.  12.  the  smith  fashioneth  it  with  h.

Jei.  10.  4.  they  fasten  it  with  nails  and  with  //.

HAND

Is  apart  of  the  body  well  known.  By  hand,  is  some¬
times  understood  the  venyeavee  of  God  exercised
upon  any  one;  1  Sam.  5.  6,  7.  The  hand  of  the
Lord  was  heavy  upon  them  of  Ashdod,  after  they
had  taken  the  ark;  and  had  been  told  that  it  should
continue  to  oppress  them,  till  they  should  send  it
back  with  presents .

To  pour  water  on  any  one>  hands,  siynifies  to  serve
uv’  uv  ,  Elisha  is  said  to  have  poured  water  on.
-Elijah  s  hands,  thereby  meaniny  that  he  was  Ins.
servant,  2  Kings  3.  11.

To  wash  one’s  hands,  denoted  that  the  person  was
innocent  of  mans! any  liter,  when  the  murderer  was
not  known,  T)e,nt.  21.  6,  7.  Pilate  washed  his  hands
Mat.  27.  24.  to  denote  his  being  innocent  of  what
was  required  oj  him,  token  he  proceeded  to  condemn
Jesus,  in  whom  he  found  nothing  to  deserve  such  a
sentence.  Some  think  that  Pilate,  living  among
the  Jews,  had  learned  this  rite  from  them  ;  but
others  are  oj  opinion,  that  it  was  a  ceremony  used  .
in  protestations  of  innocency  among  other  people  as
well  as  the  Jews.

I  o  kiss  one’s  hand,  is  an  act  rf  adoration,'  Job  31  n7
it  l  beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  and  my  mouth
hath  kissed  my  hand.  1

To  fill  one’s  hand,  signifies  to  put  one  in  possession
ot  the  priesthood,  to  enter  him  in  the  enjoyment  of
the  sacerdotal  dignity  ;  because  in  this  ceremony
the  parts  of  the  victim,  which  were  to  be  off  ere, l
were  put  into  the  new  priest's  hand.  Exod  or  41
Lhou  shalt  consecrate  them  ;  in  Hebrew,  fill  their
hand,  bee  also  Judg.  17.  5, 12.  1  Kin^s  13  33
Jo  lean  upon  anyone's  hand,  is  a  mark' of  fami/i-
aruy  and  superiority .  The  king  of  Israel  had  on  >

;t  his  confidents  upon  whom  he  leaned ,  0  I\in»s  7
--  H.  And  in  like  manner  the  king  of  Syria  learn
«</  (/?*  jS  aaman,  when  he  went  up  to  the' temple  of
fits  god  Runmon,  2  Kings  5,  18.  •  J

1  o  lilt  up  one  s  hand,  is  a  way  of  taking  an  oath
\7\..uie  wtt!l . a/l  nations,  Gen.  14.  22.  I  have
lifted  up  mine  hands  unto  the  Lord.  It  was
likewise  a  posture  used  in  praying  for  a  blessing
upon  the  people.  Lev.  9.  22.  Aaron  lifted  up
1  -20  9


H  A  N


H  AN


H  A  N


his  hands  towards  the  people,  and  blessed  them.
To  lilt  up  the  hand  against  one,  m  to  rebel
IgJnst  him.  2  Sam,  20.  21.  Sheba  hath  lilted
uo  his  hand  against  king  Varna.

To  give  one's  hand,  signifies  to  grant  Peai^ A0
swear  friendship,  to  promise  all  security,  to  ma  e
aUtanie.  %  Kings  10.  15.  Jehu  salt 1  to  'J^onadab
Is  thine  heart  right,  as  my  heart  is  with  thy
hp-u  t '  If  it  be,  give  me  thine  hand ,  and  ne
save  him  his  hind.  The  Jews  say,  they  were
^obliged  to  give  the  hand  to  the  Egyptians  and
Assyrians  that  they  might  procure  bread,  that
to  make  an  alliance  with

them,  that  they  might  be  enabled
in  their  extreme  necessity  the ^  w  £
their  lives.  Others  think  that  by  this  p/uase  is
mi  ant  that  the  Jews  were  glad  to  labour  with
their  hands,  and  work  for  them,  tn  order  to  pio-
cure  the  necessaries  of  life,  Earn.  f>.  o.  ,

Hight  hand.  The  right  hand  denotes  power,  strength.
The  scripture  generally  imputes  to  God
band  all  the  effects  of  his  omnipotence.  Exod.
15  6.  Thy  right  haul  O Lord  is  become  ^o-
riows  in  power;  thy  right  hand,  O  L  ,
dashed  in  pieces  the  enemy,  See  Psal.  17-  1-1

To 'sif  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Hie  Son
of  God  is  often  represented  as  sitting  at  the  rijht
hand  of  his  heavenly  father.  Psal.

Lord  *aid  to  my  Lord,  sit  thou  at  my  ncnt
hand.  **  Thou  hast  done  thy  work  upon  earth,  now
take  possession  of  that  sovereign  kingdom  and  plot  y ,
Mi  by  right  lelongeth  to  thee  ; do  thou  rule  with
authority  and  honour,  as  thou  art  Mediator.

The  right  hand  commonly  denotes  the  south,  g-  « «
left  hand  denotes  the  north.  for  the  Hebrews
iveak  of  the  Quarters  oj  the  world  in  lespect  oj
themselves,  hiving  their  f^s  turned
east,  their  backs  to  the  west,  then  right  hands  to
the  south ,  and  their  left  to  the  J  bus  Ke

deni,  which  signifies  before,  Jo’*'les

east  ■  and  Achor,  which  signifies  behind,  marks
out  the  west;  Jamin.fAe  right  hand,  ^fc^Ar
and  Shernol,  the  left  hand,  is  the  noith.  for
example:  Doth  not  David  hide  himself  with  us
in  strong  holds  in  the  woods,  m  the  hill  ot  Ua


in  strong  noius  in  uie  >vuuuo,  •  >  h^k

chilah,  which  is  on  the  south  ot  Jeshimon  ■  Ueb.
on  the  right  hand  of  J  eslnmon

...1.,  1. .  . ..  .1  n  C  t  h  0


on  tne  ngnt  nanu  oj  .  ,

The  accuser  was  commonly  at  the  f  .  .

accused.  Psal.  109-  6.  Let  Satan  stand  at  his
right  hand.  And  in  Zech.  3.  1.  Satan  was  at
the  right  hand  of  the  high  priest  Joshua  to  ac-

Often,  in  a  contrary  sense,  to  be  at  one’s  right  hand
signifies  to  defend,  to  protect  to  swppmt  !nm
Psal.  16.  8. 1 109.  31.  I  have  set  the  Lord  atways
before  me ;  because  he  is  at  my  i  Kand  I
shall  not  be  moved.  1‘ or  lie  shall  stand  at  the
right  hand  of  the  poor,  to  save  him  from  those
that  condemn  his  soul.

To  turn  from  the  law  ot  God,  neither  to  the  i  ight
hand,  nor  to  the  left,  is  a  J  sequent  Scnpture ex¬
pression,  Josh.  1.  7-1  23  6.  2  Kings  22.  2.  1  he
■meaning  is,  that  we  must  not  depart  Jiorn  it  at
all,  neither  by  attempting  to  go  beyond  it,  and
doing  more  than  it  requires,  nor  by  doing  less.
But  we  must  observe  it  closely,  constantly,  and
invariably,  as  a  traveller,  who  does  not  go  out  oj
his  way,  either  to  the  right  or  to  the  left.

Our  Saviour,  in  Mat.  6.  3.  to  shew  with  what
privacy  we  should  do  good  wot  Is,  says ,  #  1  hat  our
left  hand  should  not  know  what  our  right  hand
does.  Above  all  things  we  should  avoid  vanity
and  ostentation  in  all  the  good  we  unde)  take  to
do,  and  should  not  think  that  thereby  we  merit

To  stretch  or  spread  out  the  hands,  l^orfet\mfs  a
gesture  that  denotes  mercy.  Isa.  Go.  -•  1  ha'e
spread  out  my  hands  all  the  day  unto  a  re¬
bellious  people;  f  have  invited  them  by  my  pio-
phets,  and  used  all  means  to  allure  tne >n  to  my¬
self.  So  in  Prov.  1.  24.  I  have  called,  and  ye
have  refused;  I  have  stretched  out  my  hand,
and  no  man  regarded.  I  would  not  put  toith
my  hand  against  the  Lord  s  anointed,  7  iww/rf
not  kill  him,  1  Sam.  24.  10.  lo  put  forth  one  s
hand  upon  any  thing,  to  take,  to  steal  it.  L^oa.
no  3  u  |je  shall  swear  that  he  hath  not  put
his  hinds  to  his  neighbour’s  goods.

Hand  is  likewise  frequently  taken  for  the  power  and
impression  of  the  Holy  Spirit  felt  by  some  pio-
phet.  1  Kings  18.  46.  The  hand  of  tne  Lord  was
on  Elijah.  See  2  Kings  3.  15.  Ezek^l.  3.  I  o.  1  .
It  is  said  in  several  places •,  that  God  gate  Ins
law,  or  sent  his  orders,  by  the  hand  ot  Moses,  or
some  other  prophet ;  that  he  spake  to  his  people
by  the  hand  of  prophets,  &c.  that  is,  by  their
means,  by  their  mouth.

Laying  on  hands,  or  imposition  of  hands,  is  un¬
derstood  in  different  ways  both  in  the  Old  and
New  Testament.  (1)  It  is  often  taken  for  ordina¬
tion  and  consecration  of  priests  and  ministers,  as
well  among  the  Jews  as  Christians,  A wm.  8.  10.
Acts  6.  6.1 1.3.  3.  1  Tim.  4.  14,  (2)  It  is  some¬
times  also  made  use  of  to  signify  the  establish¬
ment  of  judges  and  magistrates,  on  whom  it  was
usual  to  lay  hands,  when  they  were  intrusted  with
these  employments  :  Thus  when  Moses  constituted
Joshua  his  successor,  God  appointed  him  to  lay
his  hands  upon  him,  Num.  27.  18.  Jacob  laid
his  hands  upon  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  when  he
gave  them  his  last  blessing,  Gen.  48.  14.

The  high  priest  stretched  out  his  hands  to  the  peo
vie,  as  often  as  he  recited  the  solemn  form  of
blessing,  Lev.  9.  22.  The  Israelites  who  pre¬
sented  sin-offerings  at  the  tabernacle,  confessed
their  sins,  while  they  laid  their  hands  upon
them.  Lev.  1.  4.  This  testified  that  the  person
acknowledged  himself  worthy  of  death,  that  tie
laid  his  sins  upon  the  sacrifice,  that  he  trusted
in  Christ  for  the  expiation  of  his  sins,  and  that
he  devoted  himself  to  God.  Witnesses  laid  their

210


hands  upon  the  head  of  the  accused  person,  as  it
were  to  signify  that  they  charged  upon  him  the
guilt  of  his  blood,  and  freed  themselves  Jiom  it,
nent  13  9  l  17.7-  Our  Saviour  laid  his  hands
upon  the  children  that  were  Presented  to  him,
aid  blessed  them,  Mark  10.  10.  And  the  Holy
Ghost  was  conferred  on  those  who  weie  baptised,
by  the  laying  on  oj  the  apostle  s  hands,  Acts  8.

Hand' when  referred,  I.  To  God,  signifies,  [1]  His
eternal  purposes,  and  executive  power,  -acts  -i.

°8  30.  r 21  His  providential  bounty  and  goodness,

Psal  104.  28.  [31  His  mighty  power  to  preserve

S  Join  10.  SB,  29.  M

and  corrections,  Judg.  15.  Psal.  • •  I
2.  [5]  His  sovereign  dispose,  Psal.  31.  lo.  LOJ
His  help.  IS! eh.  2.  8.  Psal.  74-  IK  UfiHls
vour,  Luke  1.  66.  [8.]  His  Spirit,  1  Kings  18.

46.  Ezek.  1.  3.137.  1-  [0]  His  providence,  1

Rffe™endflL  %l°mlAnifieth  [1 }  An  instni-

If  WHishefp*  2*  King's  lfl9™&
Possession,  1  Kings  11.  31.  [5]  Jrfr'ce,  2  Sam.

14.  19.  [6]  lyranny,  Exod.  18.  9.  uJ  Work,

Ge».'9.  2*.' into  your  li.  are  they  delivered
39  6  he  left  all  that  he  had  in  Joseph  s  h.

44.  17.  but  the  man  in  whose  A.  the  cup  is  found
Exod.  6.  1.  with  a  strong  h.  shall  he  drive  them  out

13.  3.  by  strength  ot  h.  Lord  brought  out

14.  8.  Israel  went  out  with  an  high  h,  JSum.  33.  3.

16.  stretch  out  thine  A.  over  the  sea
t  31.  Israel  saw  that  great  h.  Lord  did  on  Ebypt

17.  +  16.  the  h.  upon  the  throne  of  the  Lord  .

10. 13.  there  shall  not  a  h.  touch  it,  but  he  shall
21.  24.  li.  for  h.  foot  for  foot,  Deut.  19.  21.

28.  t  41.  anoint  them,  and  till  their  h.  -9.  +  9.

34  oq.  two  tables  of  the  testimony  in  Moses  h.

38.  15.  on  this  h.  and  that  •/<.  were  hangings
Lev.  12.  t  8.  if  her  A.  find  not  sufficiency,  then
25.  28.  remain  in  the  h.  ot  lnm  that  bought  it
Num.  15.  t  30.  soul  that  doeth  ought  with  an  high  h.

35.  1 17-  if  he  smite  him  with  the  stone  ot  the  h.

Deut.  13.  9.  afterwards  the  h.  ot  all  the  people
25. 12.  tiiou  shalt  cut  off  her  {'.  pity  hei  not
32.  t  36.  repent,  when  he  seeth  their  li.  is  gone
josh.  2. 19.  his  blood  on  our  head  it  any  h.  °n  him
judg  1  35  the  h.  of  the  house  ot  Joseph  prevailed
4  the  Lord  shall  sell  Sisera  into  h.  of  a  woman
15  18.  now  fall  into  the  h.  ot  the  uncircumcised
t  5.  Micah  tilled  the  h.  of  one  of  his  sons
20.48.  lsr.  smote  all  that  came  to  A.  ot  ?

1  Sam.  12.  3.  of  whose  h.  have  l  received  any  bribe  .

13.  22.  nor  spear  found  in  the  h.  of  any  ot  Israel
1?!  50*.  there  was  no  sword  in  the  A.  ot  David
20. 19.didst  hide  thyself  when  the  business  was  m  h.

22.  17.  because  their  A.  also  is  with  David

2  Sam.  13.  5.  that  1  may.  see,  and  eat  it  at  her  h.  6.

14.  19.  is  not  the  h.  of  Joab  with  thee  in  all  this.

21.  20.  had  on  every  A:  six  lingers,  1  Citron.  20.  6.

24. 14.  let  me  not  fall  into  A.  of  men,  1  C/ir.  -1. 13.

1  Kings  2. 46.  kingdom  established  111/1.  of  Solomon
13.  6.  and  the  king’s  A.  was  restoied  again
18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  cloud  like  a  man  s  /i.

22.  6.  they  said,  go  up,  tor  the  Lord  shall  dejn er
it  into  the  king  s  A.  12,  15.  ~  Chron.M.O.

0  Kings  7. 2.  lord  on  whose  h.  the  king  leaned,  17*

13.  5.  went  out  from  under  the  A.  of  the  Syrians
10.  t  26.  inhabitants  were  shoit  of  A.  Isa.  •’[•{-{•

1  Chr  29.  t  24.  sons  of  Dav.  gave  A.  under  Solom.
o  Chrcmjn.  5.  hath  Lord  left  you  m  h.  of  Shishak
~Ezra  7  Q  according  to  good  //.ot  his  God  on  him
9:  2.  the  A.  of  princes  have  been  chief  m  trespass
job  9.  24.  earth  is  given  in'o  the  A.  of  the  wicked
1°  6  into  whose  A.  God  bringeth  abundantly
10.  in  whose  A.  is  the  soul  of  every  living  thing
°0.  22.  every  A.  of  the  wicked  shall  come  on  him
21. 16.  lo,  their  good  is  not  in  their  A.

34!  20.  the  mighty  shall  be  taken  away  without  A.

S7  7  he  sealeth  up  the//,  oteveiy  man.

/  1^.31. 8.  thou  hast  notshi.it  me  into  //.of  enemy
36.  11.  let  not  the  A.  of  the  wicked  remote  me
fj  j  4  Bpliv  me  out  ot  //.  ot  wicked,  8~.  4.  1  It).

103  o  as  eyes  of  servants  look  to  the  A.  of  masters

127!  4.  as  arrows  are  in  the  A  ot  a  mighty  man
149.  6.  let  a  two-edged  sword  be  m  their  A.

Prov  6  3.  when  thou  art  come  into  A.  of  thy  trienu

10  -i  lie  becometh  poor  that  dealeth  with  a  slack

10.  4.  he  iwomemp^  of  thediligent  maketh  rich

11.  21.  tho’  A.  join  A.  wicked  not  unpunished,  10.  0.
yn  04  Oie  A.  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rul<i
17'.  1*6.  why  a  price  in  A.  ot  a  fool  to  get  wisdom  .
oe.  (j  as  a  thorn  goeth  up  into  the  A.  ot  adiunkard

Feel  4  1 1.  on  the  A.  of  their  oppressors  was  power
io.5.  the  staff  in  their  A.  is  my  indjgnation
13.  2  shake  the  h.  that  they  may  go  into  the  ates
14  2G.  and  this  is  the  //.  that  is  stretched  out
19'  4.  l  will  give  over  into  the  A.  °f  a  crl.1,eJ
28.2.  Ld.  shall  cast  down  to  the  earth  with  the  A.
jer.  12.  7.  have  given  dearly  belov.  into  A.  of  ene.
18*  4  vessel  was  marred  in  the  A.  of  the  potter
f’  JX‘in  the  potter’s  A.  so  are  ye  111  mine
<n  If  with  an  outstretched  A.  I  will  fight  ag,  you
26*  ^4  the  A.  of  Ahikam  was  with  Jeiemiah,  not  to
give  him  into  h.  of  people  to  put  him  to  death
50.rl5.  shout  agst.  her  round,  she  hath  giver ihe  •
Lam.  5.  6.  we  have  given  the  *•  to  the  Egyptians
12.  princes  are  hanged  up  by  then  A.

T-ek  0  0.  an  A.  was  sent  me,  and  lo,  a  roll
0“  3  ‘a'nd  lie  put  forth  the  form  ot  an  A.  10.  8.

16  4q  nor  did  she  strengthen  the  A.  ot  the  needy

2Lt  14.  prophesy,  and  smite  A  to  A.  together
^4  1  sav  vf!  shall  be  taken  with  the  //.

°8  0  be  no”  ^od  in  the  A.  of  him  that  sjayeth  thee
34!  10  behold  I  will  reciuire  my  fiock .  at  1 he  r  A
37.  19.  take  the  stick  which  is  in  the  A.  ot  Ephraim
40  5  and  in  the  man’s  A.  a  measuring  reed
I )’,  5  5  there  came  forth  the  fingers  of  a  man  s  A.

23.  God",  in  whose  A.  thy  breath  is,  hast  notglont.

8.  25.  but  he  shall  be  broken  without  A.

10.  10.  behold,  an  A.  touched  me,  which  set  me


Toel3  8  sell  sons  and  daughters  into  A.  0!  Judah
'Mic.il.  1.  because  it  is  in  the  power  of  their  A.

/orl,  4. 10.  shall  see  plummet  in  h.  of  /erubbabel
Mat] 8. 15.  he  touched  her  A.  j|  22.  13.  bind  him  A.
Mark  3. 1.  a  man  who  had  a  withered  A.  3.  Luke  6. 8
14  41  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  h.  ot  sinners

I  like  1  1  as  many  have  taken  in  h.  to  set  forth
74  bein’"'  delivered  out  of  the  A.  ot  our  enemies

go  21,  the  A.  of  him  that  betrayeth  me  is  with  me
John  10.  39.  but  he  escaped  out  ot  their  A.

II  44  that  was  dead  came  forth,  bound  A.  and  foot
Acts  l’>  17.  Peter  beckoning  to  them  with  the  n

f  cor.  12.15.  because  1  am  not  the  A.  I  am  not  body
o]  pve  cannot  say  to  the  h.  1  hav  e  no  need  of  thee
Gal  3.19.  ordained  by  angels  in  the  A.  of  a  mediator
Hev.  JO.  8.  take  little  book  open  m  A.  of  the  angel
17.  4.  the  woman,  having  a  golden  cup  m  her  A.

19  2.  hath  avenged  the  ^^00(\°^Ts.e^^I}^s  ^ier
At  HAND,  or  at  the  HAND.

Gen.  Q.5.  at  the  A.  ot  every  beast  1  will  require  it,

'  at  the  h.  of  man,  at  the  A.  of  man  s  brother
on  41.  the  days  of  mourning  for  my  father  ai; eat  A.
33  19  field  Jacob  bought  at  A.  of  child, of  Hainor
Deut.  15.  9.  saying,  the  year  ot  release  is  at  h.

3°  35.  for  the  day  ot  their  calamity  is  at  h.

1  Sam  9. 8.  1  have  here  at  h.  fourth  bart  of  a  shekel
20. 16.  let  Lord  require  it  at  A  of  David’s  enemies

2  Kings  9. 7*  may  avenge  blood  at  the  h.ot  Jezebel
Neh  11.  24.  Pethahiah  was  at  the  kings //.  in  ah
Isa.  1.3.  6.  day  of  Lord  is  at  h.  Joel  1.15.  Zeph.  1. ,
ter  °3  23.  am  1  a  God  at  A.  and  not  a  God  afai  pit
Lzeic  12~  23.  the  days  are  at  A.  and  effect  of  vision

33  6  but  his  blood  will  1  require  at  watchman  s  A.
36  8  and  yield  fruit,  for  they  are  at  A.  to  come
Joel  2. 1.  the  day  of  the  Lord  corneth,  it  is  nigh  at*.
Mat  3  2.  kingdom  ot  heaven  is  at  n.  4,17-  1 10.  i.
26.  18*.  my  time  is  at  A.  ||  45.  the  hour  is '  at  ,l.

46.  lie  is  at  h.  that,  doth  betray  me,  Mark  14.  42
Mark  1.  15.  kingdom  of  God  is  at  h.  Luke  .1.  31.
Luke  21.  30.  that  summer  is  now  nigh  at  A.

John 2. 13.  and  the  Jews’  passover  was  at  A.  11.55.
7.  2.  now  the  Jews*  teast  ot  tabernacles  was  at  It,
19.'*42.  for  the  sepulchre  was  nigh  at  A.  .

Horn.  13.  12.  the  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  h.

I  Phil  4. 5.  let  moderation  be  known  the  Lore,  is  at  A.
°  Thess.  2.  2.  as  that  the  day  ot  Christ  is  at  A.
a  rim  4.  6.  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at
~\  Pet  4  7  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  A.  be  ye  sober
Pel  1.  3.  for  the  time  is  at  A.  22. 10.

By  the  HArJD.

Exod.  4. 13.  send  hy  A.  ot  him  whom  thou  wilt  send

38  °1.  sum  of  tabernacle  counted  by  h.  ot  ltbaniar

Lev.  8!  36.  winch  Lord  commanded  Ay  A.  of  Moses
10.  11. 1  26.  46.  Num.  4.  3),  45,  49.


40. 1  27-  23.  |

O


23.  UO.  13. 1  15.  23.  !  16.  - -

36.  13.  Josh.  14-2.120  2.  ,21.  2  8
22.  9.  Judg.  3.  4.  1  Kings  8.  53,  o(>
j" Chr  on.  33.  8. 1  35.  6.  Neh.  9.  14;
Psal.  77-20.  ,  .  „

16  21.  send  him  away  by  the  A.  ot  a  fit  man
Josh.  20. 9.  not  die  by.  tlieh.  ot  the  avenger  ot  blood
Judg.  16.  26.  Samson  said  to  lad  that .held by the  A.  t
]  Sam.  18.25-  make  Dav.  fall  Ay  the  h.ot  Philistine
27.  1.  1  shail  one  day  perish  Ay  the  A.  of  Saul
2  Sam.  3.18.  Ay  the  A.  of  my  servant  David  I  wilt  sav.;  ,

10.  2.  David  sent  to  comtort  him  Ay  A.  ot  servants  ,

11.  14.  David  wrote  a  letter,  sent  it  Ay  A.  ot  Lriah  I

12.  25.  he  sent  Ay  the  A.  of  {Nathan  the  prophet
21  22.  they  fell  Ay  the  A.  of  David,  1  Chr.  ~0.8.

1  Kings  2. 25.  Solomon  sent  Ay  the  A.  ot  Benaiah  1 1
14. 18.  which  he  spake  Ay  the  A.  of  his  serv.  Ahnalij
16. 7.  also  Ay  the  A.  of  Jehu  came  word  of  the  Lor
o  Kings  14.  25.  which  he  spake  Ay  the  A.  ot  Jonat
~  27.  he  saved  them  Ay  the  h.  of  Jeroboam
o  G/ir.  10. 15.  word  which  he  spake  by  h.  ot  Alnjaw  j
~12.  7.  not  pour  out  wrath  Ay  the  A.  of  Shishak
Ezra  1 . 8.  bring  out  vessels  Ay  the  h.  of  Mithredatl
8.  33.  the  vessels  weighed  Ay  the  h.  of  MeremotlB
Job  8.  +20.  nor  will  lie  take  ungodly  Ay  the  h.
Prov  26.  6.  that  sendeth  a  message  by  A.  ot  a  too:  |
1  Isa  51  18.  nor  any  that  taketh  her  Ay  the  li.

Jer.  27.  3.  send  yokes  Ay  the  h.ot  the  messengers
31  32.  in  the  day  I  took  them  by  the  A.  Heb.8.9
Ezek.  25. 14.  my  vengeance  on  Edom  Ay  A.  ot  isra;. .
30  12.  I  will  lay  the  land  waste  Ay  A.  of  strangei
12.  +  10.  used  similitudes  by  the  h.  of  proplie,  j
Mat.  9. 25.  he  went  in  and  took  her^y  *Ae  A.  Ill  a  ■

Mark  8. 23.  he  took  the  blind  man  Ay  A.  and  led  liii
0  °7  lesus  took  him  that  was  possessed  byt  he  A.
Acts  7.  35.  send  to  be  a  deliverer  Ay  A.  oftheang
9. 8.  he  saw  no  man,  but  they  led  him  Ay  then.

13.  11.  he  went  seeking  some  to  lead  him  by  the
Col  4  18.  the  salutation  Ay  the  A.  ot  me,  Paul
See  Chaldeans,  Enemy.

71 A  IS  D  joined  with  enemies.

1  Sam.  4. 3.  the  ark  of  the  covenant  may  save  us  c
of  the  A.  of  our  enemies,  12. 10.  2  Sam.  3.  ■  •
1"  11.  deliv.  you  out  of  A.  ot  e.  2  Kings  17-  A).,  I
r>  sam.  18.  +  19.  Lord  judged  him  from  A.  of  eiurni
~19.  9.  the  king  saved  us  out  ot  the  A.  of  owr  enein
O  'Kings  21.  l-i.  I  will  deliver  them  into  the  A.

their  enemies,  2  Chron.  25.  ,0.  Ac  A.  ..
Kelt.  9.  28.  leftest  thou  them  in  A.  ot  their  ene >1
Ps.  31. 15.  deliver  me  from  the  A.  ot  mine  enew
Ter.  20.  5.  1  will  give  this  city  into  the  A.  ot  t
enemies,  21.  7- 1  34, 20,  21.  Ezek.  39-
44.30.  1  will  give  Pharaoh  into  A.  ofhis«^
Mic.  4. 10.  redeem  thee  from  the  h.  of  thy  en£n
Luke  1 . 74.  delivered  out  of  the  A.  ot  our  enem,
From  the  HAND.  „

Gen.  32. 11.  deliver  me  from  A.  ot  my  brother  E
Deut.  7. 8.  L.  redeemed  you  from  the  A.  ot  Phan
Judg.  8. 22.  thou  hast  delivered  us  from  h  ot  -
1  25. 39.  pleaded  my  reproach  from  A-  <  >|

Job  5. 15.  he  saveth  the  poor  Jrom  the  A.  ot  m i-  ‘  .

6.  23.  or  redeem  me  from  the  h.ot  the  mij  .
j  \  00.  ^  20.  ileliver  my  darling  from  A.  ot  tne
49. 1 15.  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from  h.  0  A  -
89.  48.  deliver  his  soul  Jrom  the  A.  of  the  gi  a  (
106. 10.  he  saved  them  Jrom  tlie  h .  of  hmi  that  U
them,  and  redeemed  them  from  A.  ot  the  em,


HAN

Ps.  144. 7.  deliver  me  from  A.  of  strange  children,  11.
Prov.  6.  5.  deliver  thyselt  as  a  roe  from  A.  of  hunter
Jer.  20. 13.  he  hath  delivered  poor  from  A.  of  evil
31. 11.  from  h.  ot  him  that  was  stronger  than  he
Dan.  6.  f  27. .delivered  Daniel  from  A.  of  the  lions
Hos.  13. 1 14.  i  will  ransom  them  from  A.  of  the  <>rave
Luke  1.  71.  be  saved  from  the  h.  of  all  that  hate  us
H  A  N  D  oj  ( )od.

1  Sam.  5. 11.  h.  of  God  was  heavy  on  them  of  Ashdod

2  Chr.  30. 12.  A.  oj  (tod  was  to  give  them  one  heart
Ezra  7.  9.  according  to  the  good  h.  of  God.  Neh.  2.8.
8. 18.  by  good  h.  of  ( iod upon  us.  they  brought  us

22.  A.  of  God  is  \i pon  all  them  for  good  that  seek
31.  the  A.  of  God  is  upon  us,  and  lie  delivered  us
Reh.  2.  18.  then  1  told  them  of  the  h.  of  God  on  me
Job  2.  10.  shall  we  receive  good  at  the  A.  of  God  '
19. 21.  have  pity  on  me,  h.  of  God  hath  touched  me
.  L  will  tea  ’  1  "  '


HAN


HAN


27.  11.  L  will  teach  you  by  the  h.  of  God
I'ccl.  2.  24.  this  1  saw  that  it  was  from  die  h.  of  God

9.  1.  the  wise  and  their  works  are  in  the  h.  of  God
!'<*•  62.  3.  shalt  be  aroyal  diadem  in  h.  of  thy  God
Mark  16. 19.  into  heaven,  and  sat  011  right  h.  of  God,
Horn.  8.  34.  Col.  3. 1.  II eh.  10. 12. 1  Pei  3  00
Acts  2.  33.  being  by  the  right  h.  of  God  exalted'  ”
7. 55.  saw  Jesus  standingon  the  right  h.  of  God  56
l  Pee.  5.6.  humble  yourselves  under  the  A.  of  God
Ihs  11 AN1).

Gen.  3. 22.  lest  he  put  forth  his  h.  and  take  tree  of  life

16.  12.  his  A.  will  be  against  every  man,  and  every
...  .  ..  ,  man’s  hand  against  him

19.  16.  while  he  lingered,  men  laid  hold  on  his  h.
24.  10.  all  the  goods  ot  his  master  were  in  his h
32.  13.  Jacob  took  of  that  which  came  to  his  h.

39.  3.  Lord  made  all  that  he  did  prosper  in  his  h.
41,  4C,  Pharaoh  took  the  rin^off  h  is  fi,  and  put  it
Lxod.  4.  4.  he  put  forth  hish.  it  became  a  rod  in  his  h.
"a  t11  took  it  out,  his  h.  was  leprous  as  snow
CO.  Moses  took  the  rod  of  God  in  /its  h.

8.  6.  Aaron  stretched  out  his  h.  over  the  waters  17

10.22.  Moses  stretched  forth  his  h.  toward  heaven
JL  ,whe'\  Closes  held  up  his  h.  let  down  his  h

21.  13.  but  God  delivered  him  into  his  h.

16.  if  found  in  his  h.  ||20.  lie  die  under  his  h.

22.  4.  it  the  theft  be  certainly  found  in  his  h.  alive

8.  to  see  whether  he  hath  put  his  h.  to  goods  11
24. 11.  on  the  nobles  of  Israel  he  laid  not  his  h.

id.  t\vo  tables  ot  testimony  were  in  his  h.  34.  4.
heshatl  put/m*  h.  on  head  of  burnt-offering
o.  t  7-  it  his  h.  cannot  reach  to  sufficiency  of  a  lamb

10.  1 32.  the  priest  whom  he  shall  till  his  h.

Sum.  5.  18.  priest  shall  have  in  his  h.  bitter  water
0.  21.  besides  that  that  his  h.  shall  get
21.  26.  and  had  taken  all  his  land  out  of  his  h.

22.23.  his  sword  drawn  in  his  A.  31.  1  Chr.  21.16.
jp*  1  •  Phniehas  took  a  javelin  in  his  h.  and  went
Veut.  ig.  d.  hts  h .  fetcheth  a  stroke  with  the  axe

a  nK,tn  4i'ith  his  sword  drawn  in  his  h.

8.  26.  Joshua  drew  not  Am  A.  back  till  destroyed
not  deliver  the  slayer  up  into  his  A.
ludg  6.  21.  put  forth  the  end  of  the  staff  in  his  A.

7.  14.  into  his  A.  hath  God  delivered  Midian
1 5am.  6. 3.  known  why  his  A.  is  notremov.  from  you

9.  that  it  is  not  his  h.  that  smote  us,  but  chance
1L  26.  but  no  man  put  his  A.  to  his  mouth

27.  hut  Jonathan  put  his  A.  to  his  mouth
o.i  ^a4  6e  shall  play  with  his  A.  thou  be  well
.3.  took  an  harp  and  played  with  his  A.  18. 10
‘li40-.  1/avid  took  his  staff  and  his  sling  in  his  A
o<  .  with  the  head  ot  the  Philistine  in  his  A.

19. 5.  he  put  his  life  in  hish.  andslew  the  Philistine
-3.  lb.  and  Jonathan  strengthened  his  h.  in  God
.  Sam.  b.  6.  Uzzah  put  his  h.  to  ark,  1  Chr.  13  10
1 ,  ‘frngs  8.  15.  and  hath  with  his  A.  fulfilled  it
**•  ta'<e  the  whole  kingdom  out  of  his  A.

13.  . 4.  his  A.  which  he  put  forth  against  him  dried  up

11.  ca  1  on  Ld.  andstrike  his  A.  over  place
, '  o'  he  ",av£  um  /l'  t0°k  him  dp  in  chariot
ft.  8.  ye  shall  compass  the  king  every  man  with
, .  -  .,  his  weapons  in  his  li.  11.  2  Chr  on.  23.  7.
J4.  o.  the  kingdom  was  confirmed  in  his  A.

7a  of  /,ts/l-  be  with  him  to  confirm  kingdom
in  ?o  whlcV  a  man  lean  will  go  into  his  A.

1  beseech  tnee,  save  us  out  of  Am  A
c/ir.  28.  19.  niade  me  understand  by  Am  A.  on  me
t  o.  who  is  willing  to  fill  his  A.  this  day  *

■  Cantu  26. 19.  Uzziah  had  a  censer  in  his  h.

. *7.  he  gave  them  all  into  his  A.
tkk  5;sent  hjs  servant  with  open  letter  in  his  A.
is  M9'„he  w°uld  let  oose  his  A.  and  cut  me  off
15.  .3.  the  day  of  darkness  is  ready  at  hish.
oA°io°r/  he  stretc..eth  out  his  A.  against  God
in'  ,  A-  hath  formed  the  crooked  serpent
ol’  rr  would  fain  fiee  out  of  his  A.

28.  9.  he  putteth  forth  his  A.  upon  the  rock

; ?<  *  24.  the  Lord  upholdeth  him  with  his  A.
fo  ,ihe  °rti  will  not  leave  him  in  Am  A.
in  o-’.  ^remembered  not  his  A.  nor  the  day
39.  ~o.  I  will  set  Am  A.  also  in  the  sea,  and  right  hand
JO.  4.  in  Am  A  are  tlie  deep  places  of  the  earth
ini',  ,us  A- to-day  jr  ye  will  hear  his  voice

mo  7°’  tLleref°ro  he  lifted  up  Am  A.  against  them
i-9.  7.  wherewith  the  mower  filleth  not  Am  A.

\qVo1'  +  7°',  ufh  taken  a  hag  of  monev  in  his  h.

'  c  a  alothful  man  hideth  his  A.  26.  15.

■eel.  5 .14.  begets  a  son,  and  nothing  is  in  his  A.
o.  nothing  which  he  may  carry  away  in  hish.

,  k  o-4',IT'y  beloved  put  in  Am  A.  by  hole  of  door
a'a;2o.  his  anger  not  turned  away,  but  his  h.  is
in  \oet^e<i  °,Vl  >ti 1,9..  12,  17,  21.  f  10.  4.  |  14.  27.
n  iV  t  s  }  shake  his  h.  against  mount.  Zion
h  ,  f  snail  set  his  h.  again  the  second  time
‘o">V)?n<i  he  shall  shake  his  A.  over  the  river
•77’  71’  i-,  1  eommit  thy  government  into  Am  A.

,,  I!'  ''bile  it  is  yet  in  his  A.  he  eateth  it  up
2 '  L  when  the  Lord  shall  stretch  out  Am  A.

'  *•  therefore,  O  Lord,  save  us  from  Am  A.

•  ...  who  measured  waters  in  hollow  of  his  A.

>  .  o.  another  shall  subscribe  with  Am  A.  to  Lord
w  r',a  the  shadow  of  his  A.  hath  he  hid  me

the  pleasure  of  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  A.

’  iW  2(  ,^ne,p?th  Am  A.  trom  doing  any  evil

•  -/.  8.  till  1  have  consumed  them  by  his  h


Lam.  1. 14.  yoke  of  my  transgression  bound  by  A.  A.

2.  8.  lie  hath  not  withdrawn  his  h.  trom  destroying

3.  3.  he  turneth  his  A.  against  me  all  the  day
Lzek.  8. 11 .  even  every  man  with  his  censer  in  his  A.

9. 1.  every  man  with  his  destroying  weapon  in  A  A*
17-  18.  despiseth  oath,  when  lo,  he  had  given  hish
30  22.  I  will  cause  the  sword  to  fall  out  of  his  A.

'■g  and  I  will  put  my  sword  in  Am  A.

46. 7 -  for  lambs  according  as  Am  A.  shall  attain  unto
UanA.DD.  none  can  stay  h.  h .  or  say ,  what  doest  thou?
8.  4.  neither  any  that  could  deliver  out  ot  his  h.  7
25.  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in  Am  A.

11.  11.  hut  the  multitude  shall  be  given  into  his  A
41.  but  these  shall  escape  out  of  A.  A.  even  Edom

Hos.  7.  5.  he  stretched  out  his  h.  with  scorners

12.  7.  the  balances  of  deceit  are  in  his  A.

Hub.  3.  4.  he  had  horns  coming  out  of  his  A.

Zeph.  2.  15.  passeth  her  shall  hiss  and  wag  his  h.
Zech.  8. 4.  every  man  with  staff  in  his  A.  for  very  a,re

14.  13.  hts  A.  rise  up  ag.  the  hand  of  his  neighbour
Mat.  3.  12.  whose  fan  is  in  his  h.  Luke  3.  17.

26.  23.  he  that  dippeth  his  A.  with  me  in  the’  dish
Mark 3.  5.  and  his  A.  was  restored  whole,  Luke  6. 10.
7.  32.  they  beseech  him  to  put  Am  A.  upon  him
Luke  9.  62.  no  man  having  put  his  A.  to  the  plough

15.  22.  put  a  ring  on  his  h.  and  shoes  on  his  feet
John  3.  35.  and  hath  given  all  things  into  his  A.

18.  22.  an  officer  struck  him  with  the  palm  of  his  A.
flirts  7.  25.  how  God  by  Am  A.  would  deliver  them
28.  3.  a  viper  fastened  on  his  A.  ||  4.  hang  on  his  h.
Lev.  6.  j.  he  that  sat  had  a  pair  of  balances  in  his  h.
10.  2.  and  lie  had  in  his  h.  a  little  book  open
14.  9.  receive  his  mark  in  bis  forehead,  or  in  Am  A
14.  having  golden  crown,  and  in  A.  A.  sharp  sickle
_0. 1.  an  angel  came  with  a  great  chain  in  his  A
HAND  of  the  Lord,  or  Lord's  HAND.

Lxod.  9.  3.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  is  upon  thy  cattle

16.  3.  would  to  God  we  had  died  by  A.  of  the  Lord
Rum.  1 1.2j3.  said  to  Moses,  is  Lord's  h.  waxed  short J.
l)evt.  2. 15.  A.  of  the  L.  was  against  them  to  destroy
Josh.  4.  C4.  all  people  know  that  h.  of  Ijor  t  is  mighty

22.  31.  ye  have  delivered  Israel  out  of  A.  of  the  L.
Jvdf/.  2.  15.  the  A.  oj  the  Lord  wasag.  them  for  evil
Liith  1. 13.  the  A.  oj  the  Lord  is  gone  out  against  me

1  fam.  5.  6.  h.  oj  L.  was  heavy  on  them  of  Ashdod
"•  »/  L.  was  against  the  city  with  destruction

7.  13.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  against  the  Philistines

12.  lo.  then  shall  the  A.  of  the  Lord  be  against  you

2  ‘Sam.  24. 14.  let  us  fall  into  A.  of  L.  1  Chr  °1  13
1  Rings  18.  46.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  on  Elijah
~  Rings  3.  15.  that  the  A.  if  L.  came  upon  Llisha
Lzra  t .  6.  king  granted  according  to  A.  of  L.  on  him
Job  12.  9.  A.  of  Lord  hath  wrought  this,  Isa.  40.  20.
Psal.  75.  8.  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  cup
Prov.  21.  1.  king's  heart  is  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord
Isa.  19.  16.  because  of  the  shaking  of  the  A.  of  Lord
2o.  10.  m  this  mountain  shall  the  A.  of  the  L.  rest
40.  2.  she  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  h.  double
51. 17.  hast  drunk  at  A.  of  Lord  the  cup  of  his  fury

59. 1.  Lord's  A.  is  not  shortened,  that  it  cannot  save
62.  3.  thou  shalt  be  a  crown  of  glory  in  A.  of  Lord
66.  14.  A.  of  Lord  shall  be  known  toward  servants

Jer.  25. 17.  then  took  I  the  cup  at  the  L.ord's  A.

51.  7.  Babylon  hath  been  a  golden  cup  in  Lord's h.
Lzek.  E  3.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  there  upon  him
3. 14.  the  A.  of  the  L.  was  upon  me,  22. 1  8. 1. 1  37.  l.
33. 22.  the  A.  of  the  Loot'd  was  on  me  in  the  evening

40. 1.  the  self-same  day  the  h.  of  Lord  was  with  him
Luke  1.  66.  and  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  with  him
fids  11.  21.  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  with  them

13.  11.  behold,  the  A.  of  the  L,ord  is  upon  thee
See  Lay,  or  Laid.

..  Left  HAND.  .

Gen.  13.  9.  it  thou  wilt  take  left  A.  I  will  go  to  right

14.  15.  Hobah  which  is  on  left  A.  of  Damascus
24.  49.  that  I  may  turn  to  the  right  A.  or  to  the  left
48.  1.3.  Joseph  took  Ephraim  in  his  right  hand  to¬
ward  Israel's  left  h.  and  Manasseh  in  his  left  A

14.  Israel  laid  his  left  A.  upon  Manasseh’s  head
Lxod.  14.  22.  waters  a  wail  on  the  right  A.  and  left
J.ev.  14.  15.  pour  the  oil  into  his  own  left  A.  27.
Num.  20.  17.  sve  will  not  turn  to  the  right  A.  nor  to
the  left.  Dent.  2.  27.  1  5.  32.  I  17.  11,  20. 1  28.  14

22.  26.  no  way  to  turn  either  to  right  A.  or  left
Josh.  1.  7.  turn  not  from  it  to  right  A.  or  to  left,

that  thou  mayest  prosper,  23.  6.  1  Sam.  6.  i2*
Prov.  4.  27.

Jndg.  3.  21.  Eliud  put  fortli  left  A.  and  took  dagger

7.  20.  the  companies  held  lamps  in  their  left  Ji7°

16.  29.  Samson  took  hoRl  of  other  pillar  with  left  A.

2  Sam.  2. 19.  he  turned  not  to  left  A.  from  following
14.  19.  none  can  turn  to  the  right  A.  or  to  the  left°

16.  6.  all  the  mighty  men  were  on  right  A.  and  left

1  Rings  22.  19.  host  of  heaven  on  his  left  A.  2  Chr.

2  Kings  22.  2.  Josiah  turned  not  to  the  right  h} or  left

23.  8.  which  were  on  a  man’s  left  A.  at  the  gate

1  Chr.  6.  44.  the  sons  of  Merari  stood  on  the  left  A
12.  2.  they  could  use  both  right  A.  and  left  in  hurl.

2  Chr.  3.  17.  he  called  name  of  that  on  left  h.  Boaz
4.  6.  and  he  put  five  on  the  left  A.  to  wasli  in  them

7-  five  candlesticks  on  the  right,  five  on  the  left  h
JSeh.  8. 4.  Ezra  on  pulpit,  on  his  left  A.  stood  Pedaiah
Job  23.  9.  on  left  It.  he  doth  work,  not  behold  him
Prov.  3.  16.  and  in  her  left  ft.  riches  and  honour
Reel.  10.  2.  but  a  fool’s  heart  is  at  his  left  A.

Cant.  2.  6.  left  A.  is  under  my  head,  right  embraces

8.  3.  his  left  A.  under  my  head,  right  embrace  me
Isa.  9. 20.  he  shall  eat  on  left  A.  and  not  be  satisfied

30.  21.  ears  hear  a  word,  when  ye  turn  to  the  left  A.

54.  3.  thou  shalt  break  forth  on  the  right  A.  and  left
Ezek.  16.  46.  her  daughters  dwell  at  thy  left  h.

21.  16.  go  thee  either  on  the  right  A.  or  on  the  left
39.  3.  1  will  smite  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  A.

Dan.  12.  7-  when  he  held  up  his  left  A.  to  heaven
Jonah  4.11.  cannot  discern  between  right  A.  anti  left
Zech.  12.  6.  shall  dev.  all  people  on  l  ight  A.  and  left
Mat.  6.  3.  let  not  left  A.  know  what  thy  right  doeth
20.  21.  one  on  right  A.  other  on  left,  Mark  10.  37.

23.  to  sit  on  right  A.  and  left  not  mine,  Mark  10. 40.

25. 33.  he  shall  set  sheep  on  his  right  A.  goats  on  left
41.  he  shall  say  to  them  on  left  A.  depart  from  me


Mat.  27 . 38.  were  two  thieves,  one  crucified  on  right
A.  other  on  the  left,  Mark  15.  S7.  Luke  23.  33.
we  Cyprus  on  the  >tft  A.  and  sailed
-  Cor.  6. 1 .  armourot  righteousn.  on  right  A.  and  left
See  Li kt  hand  or  hands.

Mighty  11 A  N  D.

Erod.  3. 19.  will  not  let  you  go,  no  not  with  mighty  A.
32.  11.  people  thou  broughtest  forth  with  mighty  h.
Dent,  3,  24.  hast  began  toshew  servant  thy  mighty  h

4.  34.  assayed  to  take  him  a  nation  by  a  mighty  A

5.  15.  God  brought  thee  out  of  Egypt  by  a  might  ’v
A.  6.  21.  |7.  8,  19. 1  9.  26.  |'ll.  2.  |  26.' 8.  \

%  34.  12.

2  Chr.  6. 32.  stranger  that  is  come  for  thy  mighty  h.
Ezek.  20.  33.  with  a  mighty  A.  will  1  rule  over  you
34.  and  1  will  bring  you  out  with  a  mighty  h.
Han.  9.  15.  brought  you  out  of  Egy  pt  with  mighty  /,.
1  1  et.  o.  6.  humble  yourselves  under  mighty  A.ot'G.
Mine  and  my  HAND.

Gen.  14.  22.  1  have  lifted  up  mine  h.  unto  the  1  ord

21.  30.  seven  ewe-lambs  shalt  thou  take  of  my  A.
°L  *y'. 11  1S  ,ln  the  power  of  my  A.  to  do  you  hurt

•>9.  1  bear  loss,  ot  my  h.  didst  thou  require  it
}t).  1  pray  thee,  receive  my  present  at  my  /,.
12'  'i7'I‘ullver  hlm  lnto  n,V  h-  1  wili  bring  him  thee

9.  I  11  be  surety ,  of  my  A.  shalt  thou  require  him
Exod  7.  17  I  11  smite  with  the  rod  that  is  in  mine  h.

lo'  ■  ,s,hal  1  <les!,0>' t,lem  I1 17.  9.  rod  in  mine  A.

33.22.  1  will  cover  thee  with  my  A.  while  1  pass
at"!-  1  'vll*.tfike  away  mine  A.  and  thou  shalt  see
\~ ' lf  "?,,'vllt  deliver  tins  people  into  my  h.

22.  29.  I  would  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  A.
Dent.  8.17 •  might  ot  my  A.  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth

10.  3.  went  up,  having  the  two  tables  in  mine  h
32.  39.  nor  and  deliver  out  of  my  A.  Isa.  43.  13]

40.  1  lift  up  my  A.  to  heav.  and  say,  1  live  for  evei

41.  and  it  mine  A.  take  hold  on  judgment
Jndg.  6.  36.  if  thou  wilt  save  Israel  by  my  A.  37

7.  2.  lest  vaunt,  saying,  mine  own  A.  hath  saved  i’ne

8.  7.  when  Lord  hath  delivered  Xeba  into  mine  A
'W0Vlc,1  to  God  this  people  were  under  my  h.

1—  3.  and  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  my  A.

17.  3.  dedicated  the  silver  to  the  Lord  from  my  A

12.  5.  that  ye  have  not  found  ought  in  my  A
17-  46.  Lord  will  deliver  thee  this  day  into  miveh.

18.  17.  Saul  said,  let  not  mine  A.  be  upon  him
21.  4.  there  is  no  common  bread  under  mine  A
23.7.  God  hath  delivered  him  into  mine  A.

24.  6.  to  stretch  mine  A.  against  Lord’s  anointed

11.  see  skirt  in  mine  A.  no  transgression  in  m.  A.

12.  but  mine  h.  shall  not  be  upon  thee,  13.

26. 18.  what  have  1  done  ?  what  evil  is  in  mine  A.  ?

.3.  Lord  delivered  thee  into  my  h,  to-day,  °4  10
28-  21.1  have  put  my  life  in  my  A.  and  hearkened
-Sam. 3. 12.  my  A.  shall  be  with  thee  to  bring  Israel
5. 19.  wilt  thou  deliver  the  Philistines  into  mine  A  ?

1  will  doubtless  deliver,  1  Chr  on.  14.  10
18^12.  yet  not  put  forth  mine  A.  against  A  hsalorn
1  R  ings  13.  6.  that  my  A.  may  be  restored  me  again
~-ico^Su'  ,e  lean<?tb  on  my  A.  in  houseof  llimm.

_  34.  have  they  del  ivered  Samaria  out  of  my  A  f
3o.  have  delivered  their  country  out  of  my  h.  that
the  L.  should  deliver  .Jerusalem  out  of  mine  A
l  ?lv,en  inhabitants  of  land  into  my  h.

-  Chr.  32. 15.  shall  G.  deliver  you  out  of  my  A  ‘t  17
™  14-  wherefore  do  1  put  my  life  in  mine  A.  >
,0.  and  my  bow  was  renewed  in  my  h.

31.25.  rejoiced  because  mine  A.  had  gotten  much
27.  or  iny  mouth  hath  kissed  my  h.

33.  7*  neither  shall  my  A.  lie  heavy  upon  thee

o,  V' +  r  rny  h'EAn  in  tlle  night,  and  ceased  not
81.  14.  and  turned  my  A.  against  their  enemies
89.  21.  with  whom  my  h.  shall  he  established
119. 109.  iny  soul  is  continually  in  my  A.

/  rov.  E_24.  ]  have  stretched  out  my  A.  none  regarded
Isa.  1.25. 1  will  turn  my  A.  upon  me  and  purge  dross

10.  10.  as  my  A.  hath  found  the  kingdoms  of  idols

13.  by  the  strength  of  my  A.  1  have  done  it

14.  my  h.  hath  found  as  a  nest  the  riches  of  people
3b.  19.  have  they  delivered  Samaria  out  of  my  A.  ?

20.  that  L.  should  deliver  Jerusalem  out  or  my  A.

48. 13.  mine  h.  also  hath  laid  foundation  of  earth
50.  2.  is  my  A.  shortened  ||  11.  this  ye  have  of  my  A.
jl.  16.  have  covered  thee  in  the  shadow  of  mine  h
66.  2.  all  those  hath  mine  It.  made.  Acts  7.  50.

Jer.  b.  12. 1  will  stretch  out  my  A.  15.  6.  |  51.  25.

16.  Cl.  will  cause  them  to  know  mine  h.  and  rniMit
18.  6.  so  are  ye  in  mine  h.  ()  house  of  Israel
25.  15.  take  the  wine-cup  of  this  fury  at  my  A.
iLzek.  6.  14.  so  will  I  stretch  out  my  ii.  upon  thern
42. 7.  in  the  even  I  digged  thro’  the  wall  with  my  A

13.  9.  mine  A.  shall  be  upon  prophets  that  see  vanity

20.5. 1  lifted  up  mine  A.  saying,  I  am  the  Lord  vour

00  r  6'  23V8’  4f  1  36-  7.  I  44. 12.  I  -17.  1  4.

I  withdrew  my  h.  and  wrought  for  name's  sake

22. 13. 1  have  smitten  mine  A.  at  thy  dishonest  gam
37.  39.  one  stick,  and  they  shall  be  one  in  mine  A.

xJos.  10.  none  shall  deliver  her  out  of  mine  /i.

Amos  1.  8.  I  will  turn  mine  A.  against  Ekron
9.  2.  tho  into  bell,  thence  shall  mine  h.  take  them
Zech ^  2.  9.  behold,  I  will  shake  mine  A.  on  them
13.  7.  I  will  turn  mine  A.  upon  the  little  ones
John  10.  28.  nor  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  A.

29.  none  is  able  to  pluck  them  outofwy  Father's  A
20.  25.  except  I  shall  thrust  my  A.  into  his  side
1  Cor.  16.21.  the  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine
own  A.  the  grace  of  Lord  J.  C.  2  Thess.  3. 17
Gal.  6.  11.  1  have  written  with  my  A.  Phi/em  19*
Uur  HAN  I).  '

Gen.  37.  27.  let  note?/;-  A.  be  on  him,  he  is  our  brother
43.  21.  and  we  have  brought  it  again  in  our  A.

Num.  31.  +  49.  taken  sum  of  men  of  war  under  our  A
Deut.32.27.  lest  adversaries  should  say ,owh.  is  liivli
Jndg.  16.23.  our  god  hath  delivered  Sams,  into  our  h

1  Sam.  14.  10.  L.  hath  de.liv.  them  into  our  A.  30  '’S  ’

Jer.  11.  21.  prophesy  not,  that  thou  die  not  byoio  li.

2  Cor .  10. 16.  to  boast  in  things  made  ready  to  our  A.

Out  of  II  AN  D,  or  out  of  the  HA  N  D.

Gen.  48.  22.  which  I  took  out  of  the  A.  of  Amoritt
Exod.  2. 19.  Egyptian  delivered  us  out  of  h.  otsh.-p.

3.  8.  to  deliver  them  out  of  A.  of  Egyptians,  14. 30.
Rum.  5. 25.  take  jealousy-offering  out  /{/'woman's  A.

)2  '211


H  A  N


HAN

..  xum  11.  15.  if  thus,  kill  me.  I  pray  thee,  ofh.

‘i5  05  deliver  him  vutojj  n.  of  the  aveng.  ot  blood
j'h  q.  26.  deliver  them  out  of  the  A.  ot  Isiael
Uida  °  16.  judges  which  delivered  them  out  of  the  h.

6  0  1  delivered  you  out  of  the  h.  ot  Egyptians
13.5.  deliver  Israel  out  of  the  h.  ot  the  1  hi  Us  tines

1  4  8.  who  shall  deliv.  us  out  cf  A.  ot  these  gods.

17  37.  L  will  deliver  me  out  of  A  ot  this  Philistine

2  Sam  1°.  7.  1  delivered  thee  out  oj  A.  ot  Saul,  ...  1-
23.  21  plucked  the  spear  out  of  the  Lmrtian  s  .

1  Kinas  11. 12.  will  remi  kinir.  out  of  h.  ot  bolom.  31.

2-3  vetake  it  not  out  ofh.  of  the  king  of  Syrnt
&  Kings  l.U 05.  took  again  out  of  h.  9t  Ben-hada^

00.  6.  out  of  h.  ot  the  king  ot  Assyria,  i^a.. 38.  6.

Psal  71  4  deliver  me  out  of  the  h.  ot  the  wicked
go  4 1  rid  them  out  of  the  h.  ot  the  wicked
of  lb.  he  delivered!  them  out  of  h.  ot  the  w  lcked
Irr  15  21  I  will  deliver  thee  out  of  h.  ot  the  wicked
o[\  Jo  him  spoiled  out  of  A.  of  the ■  oppressor,  VI. ,S.
on  j  not  escape  out  of  h.  ot  Chaldeans,  38.  18,  ,3.

Lam  5  8.  none  doth  deliver  us  out  of  their  A.

ZeTh  11.  6.  out  of  their  h.  1  will  not  deliver  them
JohnlO.30.  to  take  him,  but  he  escaped  «// 'of their  k.

■lets  10.  11.  deliver  me  out  of  the  A.  o.  Herod
Rev  8  4  ascended  before  G.  out  of  angel  s  h.  10. 10.
Right  HAND.

Gen.  35.+  18.  Jacob  called  him  son  of  the  r‘ff'‘t  h.

48  14.  put  his  right  h.  on  Ephraim  s  head,  18.

Exod  15  6.  thy  right  h.  O  Lord,  is  become  glorious
09  20  put  the  blood  on  the  thumb  of  their
right  h.  Lev.  8.  03,  04. 1  14.  14,  17,  ~o,  -8.
Deut  33  0.  from  his  right  h.  w  ent  a  fiery  law
JmX  5.  06.  her  right  h.  to  the  workman  s  hammer
o  $0 tn  20.  9.  Joab  took  Amasa  w  ith  right  h.  to  kiss
1  Kinrs  °  10.  Bath-sheba  sat  on  Solomon  s  right  h.

0  Kings  03. 13.  on  right  h.  of  the  mount  of  corruption
lob  °3  9  he  hideth  himself  on  the  right  A.

30.  10.  upon  my  right  A.  rise  the  youth,  they  push
40.  14.  that  thine  own  right  h.  can  save  thee  ^

Psal.  16.  8.  lie  is  at  my  right  h.  I  shall  not  be  moved
11  at  thy  right  h.  are  pleasures  tor  evermore
17  7  savest  by  thy  right  h.  them  that  trust  in  thee
8i  35  and  thy  right' h.  hath  holden  me  up
20  6  with  the  saving  strength  of  his  right  h.
oi  O  th v  right  h.  shall  find  out  those  that  hate  thee
26.'  l’o.  and' their  right  A.  is  full  ot  bribes
44  3  but  thy  right  h.  and  thy  aim  saved  them
.  J5  4  thy  right  li.  shall  teach  thee  terrible  things  .

9.  on  thy  right  h.  did  stand  queen  in  gold  of  Oplnr
48.  10.  thy  right  A.  is  full  ot  righteousness,
r.  cotru  with  thy  right  h.  anti  hear  me
63*.  8.  niy  soul  followeth,  thy  right  A.  upholdeth  me

73.  03.  thou  hast  holden  me  by  my  right  h.

74.  ll.whv  withdrawest  thou  thy  right  h.

77.  10.  I  will  remember  the  years  ot  the  right  A.

78.  54.  to  mountain  which  his  right  A.  purchased
80".  15.  the  vineyard  which  thy  right _A.  planted

17.  let  thy  hand  be  upon  the  man  ot  thy  right  h.

•S9  13  strong  is  thy  hand,  high  is  thy  right  h.

25.  I  will  also  set 'his  right  h.  in  the  rivers
40.  tnou  hast  set  up  the  right  A.  of  his  adversaries
01  7  ten  thousand  shall  tall  at  thy  1  ight  A.

9sV  1 .  his  right  h.  hath  gotten  him  the  victory
108.  6.  save  with  thy  right  h.  and  answer  me
100  6.  and  let  Satan  stand  at  his  right  It.

31.  for  he  shall  stand  at  the  right  A.  ot  the  poor
110.1.  sit  thou  at  my  right  h.  till  I  make  enemies  thy
footstool,  Luke  20.  40.  Acts  2. ^34.  Heb.  1  13.

5.  the  Lord  at  thy  right  h.  shall  stake  thro  kings
118  15  the  right  h»  ot  the  Lord  doeth  \  alianu^-
id.  right  h.  of  the  Lord  is  exalted,  doeth  valiantly
ini  5#  the  Lord  is  thy  shade  upon  thy  right  h.

137. 5.  it  l  forget,  let  my  right  h .  torget  her  cunning
138'.  7.  and  thy  right  h.  shall  save  me
139.  10.  even  there  thy  right  h.  shall  hold  me
140. 4.  looked  on  my  right  h.  none  would  know  me
144.8.  their  right  h.  is  a  right  A.  of  falsehood,  11.
Rrov.  3.  16.  length  of  days  is  in  her  right  h.
o-.  jo.  the  ointment  ot  his  right  h.  bewray  eth
Feel.  10. 2.  a  wise  man’s  heart  is  at  his  right  h.

Cant.  2.  6.  and  his  right  /i.  doth  embrace  me
8.  3.  and  his  right  h.  should  embrace  me
Isa  41  10.  1  will  uphold  thee  with  right  A._ of  right.

13.  1  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hold  thy  right  ft.

44.  20.  nor  say,  is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  h.

45  1.  to  Cyrus  whose  right  h.  I  have  holden
48.  13.  my  right  h.  hath  spanned  the  heavens
62.  8.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  his  right  It.

63. 10.  that  led  them  by  the  right  A  ot  Moses
ifr  go  04  tlio’  Coniah  were  the  signet  on  my  right  h.
[.am.  2.  3.  hath  drawn  back  his  right  A. .from  enemy
4  he  stood  with  his  right  h.  as  an  adversary
Fzek  01.  22.  at  right  h.  divination  tor  Jerusalem
liab’.i.  16.  cup  of  Lord’s  right  h.  shall  be  turned  to
Zech.  3. 1.  Satan  standingat  his  right  h.  to  resist  him
Mat.  5.  30.  if  thy  right  h.  offend  thee,  cut  it  off
6  3.  let  not  thy  left  know  what  thy  right  h.  doeth
Mark  14.60.  ye  shall  see  Son  of  man  sitting  on  the
r  h.  of  power,  coming  in  clouds,  Luke  2-.  69.

“>•  WK  f°8  hlT“.'  S!uc.™  1  Pa.

hike  6.  6.  was  a  man  whose  right  A.  was  w  ithered
Jets  0.  05.  he  is  on  my  right  A.  I  shall  not  bejnoyed
hein0"  bv  the  fight  //•  ot  God  exalted,  p.  31.

3  7.  he Whim  by  the  right  /-  and  lift  him  up
7.  55.  saw  Jesus  standing  on  right  h  ot  God,  5 6.
Rom.  8.  34.  who  is  even  at  the  right  h.  or  God
f  ph.  1. 00.  set  him  at  his  right  h.  in  heavenly  places
Col.  3. 1.  where  Christ  sittethon  the  right  h  ot  God
Rev.  1. 16.  he  had  in  his  r.  h.  seven  stars,  ,0. I  -.  1.

17.  laid  right  h.  upon  me,  saying,  tear  not
5.  1.  I  saw  in  his  right  A.  a  book  written  within,  7.
13  16.  to  receive  mark  in  their  right  h.  or  foreheads
See  Left  Hand.

Right  HANDS.  ..  .

Gal. ‘2. 9-  gave  to  me  and  Baruab.  right  h.  or  tellovv.

To  stretch  forth  or  out  HAND.

Gen.  20. 10.  Abraham  stretched  forth  \wsh. .to  slay
Exod.  3.00. 1  will  stretch  out  my  A.  on  Eg.7 -5- 1  91o.
14.  16.  stretch  out  thy  h.  over  the  sea,  26.  7 ,  19.
21.  Moses  stretched  out  his  h.  over  the  sea.


HAN


*4  l,  illOScb  Ait  Clt/lCl*  Ulllr  1*40  •  1

l  Sam.  06.  9.  wl.o  can  st.f.  h.  aga.  Lord  s  anointed
212


o  Sam.  1. 14.  how  vast  not  afraid  to  stretch  f.  thy  A.

~p»al.  138.7.  will  stretch  forth  thine  A.  aga.  enemies
Prov.  31. 20.  she  stretclietli  out  her  h.  to  the  poor
E~ek  14. 9.  I  will  stretch  out  my  h.  on  that  prophet
13.  then  will  1  stretchout  mine  h.  upon  the  land
25  7.  1  will  str.out  mine  A.  upon  the  Ammonites
13.  'i  will  also  stretch  out  mine  h.  upon  -Edom
16!  I  will  stretch  out  mine  A.  on  the  Philistines
35.  3.  I  will  stretch  out  mine  A.  against  mount  aeir
Dan  11.  40.  shall  stretch  f.  his  A.  on  the  countries
Zeph.  1.  4.  on  Judah  ||  0.  13.  against  Assyria
See  Strong.

Thine  or  thy  HAND.

Gen.  4. 11.  to  receive  thy  brother  s  blood  from  thy  A.

16.  6.  thy  maid  is  in  thy  A.  do  to  her  as  it  pleasetli
02. 12.  and  he  said,  lay  not  thine  A.  upon  the  lad
24.  2.  put,  I  prav,  thy  h.  under  my  thigh,  4<  .29*

49.  8.  thy  A.  snail  be  in  the  neck  ot  thy  enemies
Exod.  4'.  2.  what  is  that  in  thine  h.f  he  said,  a  red
17.  thou  shalt  take  this  rod  m  t.h.  7-.15-]

8.  5.  stretch  forth  thine  A.  over  the  ri'eis,  9. -2.

1 10.  12,  01.  Mat.  12.  13.  Mark  3.  5.

13.  9.  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  on  t.  A.  16.  Deut.  6.  8.

23.  1.  put  not  thine  A.  with  wicked  to  be  witness
Yum.  01.  34.  for  1  have  deliyered.Og  into  thy  h.

Deut  2  7  L.  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee  in  works  ot
thy  i  ll  29.  I  15. 10. 1  03  00  1  28  8, 12,  20.

04.  behold,  1  have  given  into  thy  A.  Sihon
3  u  i  will  deliver  Og  and  Ins  people  into  thy  A.

13  O.  thy  A.  shall  be  first  on  him ,  to  put  him  to  death
17."  shall  cleave  nought  of  cursed  thing  to  thine  A.

14. 05.  thou  shalt  bind  up  the  money  in  thine  A.

15.  7.  nor  shut  thine  h.  trom  thy  poor  brother

8.  thou  shalt  open  thine  A.  wide  to  thy  brother
03.  05.  thou  mayest  pluck  the  ears  with  Mine  A.

08.  32.  there  shall  be  no  might  in  thine  A.

30.  9.  make  thee  plenteous  in  .every  work  . of  t  A
33. 3.  he  loved  the  people,  all  Ins  saints  are  in  thy  A.

Josh.  6.  2.  I  have  given  into  thine  A.  Jericho
8.  18.  for  I  will  give  Ai  into  thine  A.

9  05.  now'  behold,  we  are  in  thine  A.  to  do  to  us
10.  6.  slack  not  thy  A.  from  thy  servants,  save  us
8  1  have  delivered  kings  ot  Canaan  into  t hy  A.
Judo.  4.  7.  I  will  deliver  Sisera  into  thine  h.

7.  7.  1  will  deliver  the  Midiamtes  into  thine  A.

8. 15.  are  hands  of  Zeba  and  Zalrnunna  in  thine  A.

18. 19.  hold  thy  peace,  lay  thine  A.  on  thy  mouth
20  03.  I  will  deliver  Benjamin  into  thine  A.

1  Sam.  14. 19.  Saul  said  to  the  priest,  withdraw  thy  A.

°1  3  w'hat  is  under  thine  A.  ?  give  me  five  loaves
03'  4.'  I  will  deliv.  Philistines  into  t.  A.  2  Sam.  5.19.
o' Sam.  1.3. 10.  bring  meat,  that  1  may  eat  ot  thine h.

04. 16.  it  is  enough,  stay  thme  A.  1  Chron.  -1. 15.

17.  let  thine h.  1  pray,  be  ag.  me,  1  Chron.  21.  1 1 .

1  Kings  8. 24.  hast  fulfilled  it  with  t.  h.  2  Chr .  6.  Id.

17.  li.  she  said,  bring  me  a  morsel  of  bread  nit.  A.

20  13.  I  will  deliver  Syrians  into  thine  A.  08.

40  because  thou  hast  let  go  out  ot  thy  A.  a  man
0  Kings  4.  09.  and  take  my  staff  in  thine  A.

8.8.  the  kina  said,  take  a  present  in  thine  h.

9.  1.  Elisha  said,  take  this  box  of  01  ;n  thine  A.

16. 15.  give  me  thine  h.  and  he  gave  him  his  hand
13.  16.  and  he  said,  put  thine  h.  upon  the  bow

1  Chron.  4. 10.  and  that  thine  A  might  he  with  me
°9. 10.  in  thine  h.  power  ;  and  to  make  great

16.  all  this  store  tor  house  cometh  ot  thine  A.

«  Chron.  00.  6.  in  t.  A.  is  there  not  power  and  might?
Ezra  7. 14.  the  law  of  thy  God  which  is  in  thine  A.

05.  after  wisdom  of  God,  that  is  in  thme  A.

Job  1.  11.  but  put  forth  thine  A.  and  touch,  _.  5.

10.  only  upon  himself  put  not  forth  thine  A.

2.  6.  behold,  he  is  in  thine  A.  but  save  his  life

10  7.  there  is  none  that  can  deliver  out  ot  thine  A.

11  14.  if  iniquity  be  in  thme  A.  put  it  tar  aw  ay
13.  21.  withdraw  t.  A.  far  from  me,  let  not  thy  dread
35.  7.  or  what  receiveth  he  of  thine  h.f  .

Psal.  10. 12.  arise,  O  Lord,  O  God,  lift  up  thine  A.

14.  beholdest  spite  tq  requite  it  with  thy  A.

17.  14.  from  men  which  are  thy  A.  U  Lora_

01.  8.  thine  A.  shall  find  out  all  thine  enemies
31.  5.  into  thine  h.  I  commit  my  spirit

15.  my  times  are  in  thy  h,  deliv.  me  trom  enemies
30.  4.  for  day  and  night  thy  A.  was  heavy  upon  me
38. 2.  thy  h.  presseth  me  ||  39. 10.  by  blow  ot  thine  h.
74  11.  w  hy  withdrawest  thou  thy  A.  ?  pluck  it  out
80. 17.  let  thy  h.  be  upon  the  man  of  thy  right  A.

88.  5.  and  they  are  cut  ofif  from  thy  h.

104. 08.  thou  openest/Ay  A.  filled  with  good,  14o.  16.
109.  07.  that  they  may  know  thatbns  is  thy  A.

119. 173.  let  thy  h.  help  me  H  139.  o.  laid  t.  A.  on  me
139. 10.  even  there  shall  thy  A.  lead  me
144.7.  send  thine  A.  from  above,  rid  me,  deliver  me
Prov  3.  07.  w  hen  it  is  in  power  ot  thme  A.  to  do  it
6.  1 .  if  thou  hast  stricken  thy  A.  with  a  stranger
30  30.  if  thought  evil,  lav  thy  A.  upon  thy  niquth

Eccl.  7- 18.  yea  also  from  this  withdraw  not  thine  A
o.  10.  whatsoever  thy  A.  findeth  to  do,  do  it

11.  6.  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thine  It.

Isa.  3.  6.  and  let  this  ruin  be  under  thy  h.

06. 11.  when  thy  A.  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not  see
•40  6  I  the  Lord  will  hold  thine  A.  and  keep  thee
*47’  6.  I  have  given  my  inheritance  into  thine  h.
51.02.  I  have  taken  outot  thy  A.  cup  ot  trembling
57!  10.  thou  hast  found  the  life  of  thme  A.

64  8.  art  our  Father,  we  are  the  w’ork  ot  thy  A.
Jer.  6.  9.  turn  back  thine  A.  as  a  grape- gatherer

15. 17.  I  sat  alone  because  of  thy  A.  thou  hast  filled
of  on  if  they  refuse  to  take  the  cup  at  thme  A.

36.  ll!  take  in  thy  A.  the  roll,  wherein  thou  hast  read
40  4  free  from  chains  which  were  upon  thirieh.

EzeESAS.  his  blood  will  1  require  at  t.  A-  20  1  33. 8.
6. 11.  smite  with  thine  h .  and  stamp  "vvith  thy  toot
10.  2.  and  fill  thine  A.  with  cohIs  ot  fire  _

23  31.  therefore  1  will  gi'e  her  cup  into  thine  A.
°q!  7.  when  they  took  hold  of  thee  by  thy  A.  .

37. 17.  go  in  and  they  shall  become  one  in  thine  A,
38. 12.  to  turn  thine  A.  upon  the  desolate  places
Dan.  2.  38.  the  fowls  hath  he  given  into  r Awe  A.

3  17.  our  God  will  deliver  us  out  of  thme  h.
i lic  5  q.  th.  h.  shall  be  lift  up  on  thine  adversaries
12!  1  w  ill  cut  off  witchcrafts  out  ot  thine  A.

Mat.  18.  8.  if  thy  A.  or  foot  offend  thee,  Mark  9-  43.


John  °0  27.  reach  thy  A.  and  thrust  it  into  my  side
jets 4. 08.  todo  whatever  t.  A.  and  counsel  detenu.
30.  by  stretching  forth  thine  A.  to  heal
Your  HAND.

Gen.  9.  2.  intoytwr  A.  are  they  delivered

43.  12.  and  take  double  money  in  your  A.  _

Exod  1°  11.  with  shoes  on  your  feet,  staff  myour  A.
«3  31. 'the  inhabitants  of  the  land  into  your  A
Deut  12  7.  ye  shall  rejoice  in  all  ye  put  your  A.  to
Josh  8.  7.  God  will  deliver  it  into  your  A.  00.

10.  19.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  them  into  year  A.

°4  8  1  cave  the  Amoritcs  into  your  A.  11.
j'udg.  3.  28.  Moabites  H  7  •  15..  Midiamtes  into  your  h.

0  Sam  4  11.  shall  1  not  require  his  blood  ot  your  h. .»
o  chr  ’  18  14.  they  shall  be  delivered  into  your  A.

~°8  9  fiod  hath  delivered  them  into  your  A.

Isa'  i*  12.  who  hath  required  this  at  your  h.  /
jer  °<j  14  1  aminy.  A.  do  withme  as seemeth gooa
38!  5.'  Zedekiah  said,  behold,  he  is m  your  h.

44.  05.  ye  have  spoken  and  fulfilled  with  your  A.
E~ek  13  °1.  and  they  shall  be  no  more  111  your  A.

h  1  will  deliver  my  people  out  ot  your  A.

Mai  1  10.  nor  will  1  accept  an  offering  at  your  h.

13.'  should  l  accept  this  ot  yoiir  h.f  saiththe  Lord
2.  13.  or  receiveth  it  with  good-will  at  your  h .
Handed,  see  Left,  Weak.
HAND-BREADTH.

Exod.  25.  05.  a  border  of  an  A.  round  about,  37. 10.

1  Kings  7.  26.  a  molten  sea  a  A.  thick,  2  Chron.  4.  b.
Psal.  39.  5.  tliou  hast  made  my  days  as  an  A.

Esek.  40.  5.  a  reed  of  six  cubits  long,  and  an  A.

43  13.  the  cubit  is  a  cubit  and  an  A.

HAN  D-broad.

F-ek  40  43  within  w ere  hooks  an  h. -broad fastened

handful.

joV  o  o  the  priest  shall  take  thereout  an  A.  of
hour,  5.  12.  1  6. 15. 19.  17-  5.  06.

1  Kings  17.12.  an  A.  of  meal  in  a  barrel,  oil  in  a  cruse
ps.  72.  16.  there  shall  be  an  A.  ot  corn  in  the  earth  •
Eccl.  A.  6.  better  is  A.  with  quietness,  than  both  hands
Ter  Q  00  and  as  the  A.  after  the  harvest-man

handfuls.

Gen.  41.  47.  and  the  earth  brought  forth  by  A.
Exod  9.  8.  take  to  you  A.  ot  ashes  ot  the  turnace
Ruth  2.  16.  let  fall  also  some  A.  ot  purpose  tor  her
1  Kings  20.  10.  if  dust  of  Samaria  shall  suffice  tor  h.
F~ek  13  19.  will  ye  pollute  me  tor  A.  ot  barley  r  ,
HANDY.  ,  .  ,

Psal  10  1.  and  the  firmament  sheweth  his  A.  work
HANDKERCHIEFS

Acts  19. 10.  from  his  body  were  brought  to  the  sick  h,
HANDLE.  ,

Gen.  4.  01.  Jubal  was  father  ot  such  as  A.  the  harp
Judo.  5.  14.  they  that  A.  the  pen  ot  the  writer
1  Chr.  10.  8.  men  that  could  A.  spear,,  Chr.  ‘.0.5
Psal.  115.  7-  they  have  hands,  but  they  A.  not
Jer.  0.  8.  and  they  that  A.  the  law  knew  me  not
46.' 9.  and  the  Libyans  that  A.  the  shield
F-ek  ‘■’7.  °Q.  all  that  A.  the  oar,  and  all  the  pilots
Lu ke  04 . 39.  A . m e  aiuUee  21  • taste  not’  ,M0

Ezek.  21.  11.  to  be  furbished,  that  it  may  be  A  .
bark  'l2.4.  and  they  sent  him  away  shamefully  h
1  John  1.  1.  our  hands  have^/o^ot  the  wordot  lire

Prov.  16. 00.  he  that  A.  matter  wisely, shall  find  goo.
Jer  50. 16. cut  off  him  that  A. sickle  in  time  ot  liarve:.
.1  rnos  °.  15.  nor  shall  he  stand  that  A.  the  bow
HANDLING.

Ezek.  38.  4.  great  company,  all  of  them  A.  sword
0  Cor  4  0  not  A.  the  w  ord  of  God  deceittully
HANDLES.  t

Cant  5.  5.  hands  dropped  with  myrrh  on  A.  o.  otk
HANDMAID.

Gen.  16.  1.  Saraihadan  A  whose  name  w  as  Hag*
29.  24.  Laban  gave  Zilpah  to  be  Leah  s  n.  M.J
oq  j  a,  o^ave  Bilhah  to  be  Rachel  s  A.  30.4.  1  3.J.-
Exod.  03.  12.  that  son  of  thy  A.  may  be  retreshed
Tuda  19. 19. there  is  bread  and  w  ine  forme  and  thy
Ruth  2.13. for  that  thou  hast  spoken  in  end  ly  to  th)  >.
3  9.  and  she  answered,  1  am  Ruth  thine  A.

1  Sam.  1.  11.  if  wilt  look  on  the  affliction  ot  thine
16  count  notthine  A.  for  a  daughter  ot  Belial
18.  Hannah  said,  let  thy  A.  find  grace lntliV-'i-
05  o4  let  thy  A.  speak  ||  31.  remember  thy  A.
~4i  le’tthv  A.  be  a  servant  to  wash  feet  ot  sen  an
o  .Sam.  14.0.  thy  A.  had  two  sons,  they  two  strou
~°0  17.  she  said  to  him,  hear  the  wrnrds  ot  th\  /<.

1  Kings  1.1 3.  didst  not  thou  ,my  lor'i.sw'eartotlo-
17.  thou  swarestby  the  Lord  thy  God  to  th)  A.

3  0*0  she  took  my  son  while  thine  A.  slept

o  Kings  4.  2.  thy  A.  hath  not  any  thing.save  pot  of «
'  16.  nay,  thou  man  of  God,  do  not  lie  to  thine  A
Ps„l  8 6.  16.  turn  to  me,  and  save  the  son  of  tip
116.  16.  I  am  thy  servant,  and  the  son  ot  thy  A.
Prov  .30.  03.  and  an  A.  that  is  heir  to  her  mistres
Jer  34  16.  ye  caused  every  man  his  A.  to  return
Luke  1.  38.  behold  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  be  it  to  me
Ll  AN  DMA  I  DEN.  ...

Juke  1  48.  he  hath  regarded  the  low  estate  ot  nis
^  HANDMAIDS.

Gen  33.  1.  Jacob  divided  the  children  to  the  two
U  he  put  the  A.  and  their  children  torenmst
Tilth  2.  13.  though  1  be  not  like  to  one  ot  thy  1.
o  Sam.  6. 20.  who  uncovered  himself  m  eyes  of  the
jer.  34.  11.  they  caused  the  A.  to  return  tor  «•
joe) ’2.  29.  on  the  A.  will  I  pour  my  spirit,  Acts  -
HANDS.  ,  ,

Gen.  16.  9.  return  and  submit  thyself  under  he

07.  20.  the  voice  is  Jacob's,  the  A.  are  the  A.  *
49. 04.  A.  were  made  strong  by  A.  ot  <.*<

Frod  17.  12.  but  Closes’  A. were  heavy,  took  * -  (
06.  t  17.  two  A.  shall  be  in  one  board  set  *n
29.  24.  and  thou  shalt  put  all in  the  A.  o>  -  j
30. 1 09.  Moses  said,  fill  your  A.  to-day  to  the ^  •
lev-  8- C7.  Put  all  on  Aaron ,s  A  and  on  h  ^


/  ei\  o.  27.  pul  all  on  n  3  .  »  •  1.

7 Sum.  5.  18.  put  the  offering  of  inemorial  ui
6.  19.  and  shall  put  them  on  the  A.  of  the  >  ^
Deut.  4.  08.  there  ve  shal)  serve  gods  the  « ora
men's  A  07.  lo.  2  Kings  19.  18.
q.  15.  the  tablesof  the  covenant  were  in  m\  t  ^
17  ]  cast  them  out  of  my  two  A.  and  brake  ,


H  A  N


H  A  N


A-Mf.  1/.7.  the//,  of  witnesses  shall  be  first  on  him
31.  29.  to  provoke  him  through  the  work  of  your  A
Judg.  2.  14.  he  delivered  them  into  A.  of  the  spoilers
6. 13.  into A.  of  M ldianites  ||  10.  7-  into  A.  of  Philist.

8.  t>.  are  //.ot  /eba  and  /alniunna  in  thy  hand  -  15
34.  delivered  them  out  of//,  ofenem.  1  Sam.  14  4k’

18.  10.  tor  God  hath  given  Irtish  into  your  A.’

19.  27-  and  her  A.  were  upon  the  threshold

1  Satrf.  30.  15.  nor  deliver  me  into  A.  of  iny  master
*$“*■  v  7*  kt  your  A.  be  strong.  Zed,.  8.  y,  13.
1®*  ".then  the  n.  ot  all  with  thee  shall  lie  stron°r

21.  9.  delivered  them  into  the  //.  of  the  Gibeonites
23.  b.  because  they  cannot  be  taken  with  A

1  Kings  10.  +  19.  there  were  A.  on  seat.  2  Chr.'o.  +  i«
14.  27.  into  the  A.  of  the  guard,  2  Chron.  12  10

2  Kings  3.  11.  who  poured  w  ater  on  the  A.  of  Kliikh

9.  35.  tliey  found  the  skull  and  the  palms  of  her  A

10.  24.  the  men  whom  I  brought  into  your  A

1  Chron.  25.  2.  sons  of  Asaph  under  the?/,  of  Asaph
3.  under  the  A  ot  .leduthun  ||  6.  A.  of  their  father

2  Chron.  Id.  be  strong,  let  not  your  A.  be  weak
~3.  t  18.  was  ordained  by  the  //.  or  David,  29.  t27
j[a.  4-  4;  weakened  the  A.  of  the  people  of  J  udah
Job  4.  3.  thou  hast  strengthened  the  weak  A

?i+,7°'/e‘!eumLm  war,troni  ^e  h.  of  the  sword
lb.  11.  G  od  hath  turned  me  into  the  //.of  the  wicked
17.  3.  who  is  he  that  w  ill  strike  A.  with  me  ?

9.  that  hath  clean  //.shall  be  stronger  and  stronger
.PW  24.  4.  who  shall  ascend  f  he  that  hath  clean  h

2o.  10.  in  whose  A.  is  mischief  ||  47. 1.  clap  your//'

+ ’in*  mf  L~hK*he  V1°'®nc®  your//,  in  the  eartli

g-  ?1110-l.'.V^ke  hlT  out,by  tbe  A.  of  the  sword
68^31.  Kthiopia  shall  stretch  out  her  A.  unto  God
llo.  4.  idols,  the  work  of  men's  A.  1.35. 15  L  37  jo
Ve/<*  but.handJe  not>  f®et-  but  walk  not
134.  ..  lift  up  j  our  A.  in  the  sanctuarv,  and  bless  I
140. 4.  keep  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  //.'of  the  wicked
Pror.6.  10.  a  little  folding  of  the  A.  to  sleep,  24.  33
17;  Ld-  doth  hate  the  A.  that  shed  innocent  blood
1..  14.  the  reepm pence  ot  man’s  A.  be  rendered  him
14.  1.  tlie  foolish  plucketh  it  down  with  her  //.

man  stnketh  h.  and  becometh  surety

22.  2o.  be  not  thou  one  of  them  that  strike  A
fj  28.  sp.der  taketh  hold  with  her  A.  is  in  palaces
,,’,  '7  ,  sh,e  w°rketh  willingly  with  her  h.

19.  she  layeth  her  A  tp  the  spindle,  her  h.  hold

20.  yea,  she  reacheth  forth  her  A.  to  the  needv
31.  give  her  ot  the  fruit  of  her  A.  and  let  her  works

tulf  with  travel  and  vexation
/.  - b.Jier  A  are  as  bands  ||  10. 18.  the  idleness  of  h.

.  an.  •  ( .  1.  the  work  ot  the  A.  of  a  cunning  workman
ha.  1.  lo.  when  ye  spread  forth  vour  A.  I  will  hide
„  ft  "Ze>'es  f™.m  you  ;  your  A.  are  full  of  blood
r;  8-  worship  the  work  of  their  own  A.
if  2  therefore  shall  all  h.  be  faint,  and  heart  melt
J.  idols  which  your  own  A.  have  made  to  you
“V- .,  tbe  Lord  w  ill  be  a  place  broad  of  A. '

3j.  3.  sti  engthen  ye  the  weak  A.  and  confirm  knees
4o.  9.  or  shall  thy  work  say,  he  hath  no  h.

S'  4  V'hYYY  wdh,b  o°d,  fiugers  with  iniquity
m'  -j  Y  fl*at  spieadeth  her  A.  saying,  woe  is  me

u’  kkn  )e  'Vor,k  °f tbe  A.  of  the  workman
9.  and  of  the  A.  ot  the  founder,  blue  and  purple

4'  4*  wilft,  le'h  b-V  h'  tbat  seek  lives

4'  A1  tu™  back  weapons  that  are  in  vour  A.

-o.  14.  they  strengthen  also  the  A.  of  evil  doers
that  none  return  from  wickedness,  Ezek.  13  00 ’

33  ioPfhVnke  me  n°t  with  the  works  of  your  A.'f
_>3.  13.  shall  pass  under  A.  ot  him  thattefleth  them
5*  L  he  weakeneth  A.  ot  men  of  war,  A.  of  people
18.  37.  upon  all  the  A.  shall  be  cuttings  P
fo'  17  •  flon  spreadeth  her  A.  none  to  comfort

Vth  °t  esteemed  as  the  work  of  A.  of  the  potter  1

101/  ofmtmVierthr°'Vn.’  and  n?A  stayed  on  her
W^A  of  pitiful  women  have  sodden  their  children
all  h.  shall  he  feeble,  Cl.  7
S' ’ °o  h4ft  shed  blood  of  Israel  by  A.  of  the  sword
I,  '-"-!  M  4  a  stone  was  cut  out  without  A  45
‘•  h  that  they  may  do  evil  with  both  A.  earnestl  y
)±  3'  a11  shall  clap  the  A.  over  thee  *

ef/i  r  YthlV^r^bmir  of  your  A.  1  srn°te  vou
^rubbabei  laid  the  foundation
-  4  ;C°'c-0  eat  with  unwashen  A.  Mark  7.  2,5
<.  the  .  on  ot  man  shall  be  betrayed  into  the

3  r  men.  20.  45.  Mark  9.31.  Luke  Q.  44

GrAii  two  A.  to  be  cast  into  fire,  Mark  9.  43.

uke  v/'  ternPle  made  with  A.  another  without  A.
tVii'iiKt  u  6  ftretched  forth  no  A.  against  me
cts  *  “  1-  delivered  into  the  A.  of  sinful  men

l®*'hv  Abnfficked  ,tm  ihave  cruclfied  and  slain
48  8  3  ii  5*  th®  apostles  were  wonders  wrought

MthW  n0tu^  lemP,es  made  with  A.  17.  C4
1  3)  'ft3'1?®  ?n  of  the  apostles'  A.

7  25  derS  b3'lt.he  h- -of  Barnabas  and  Saul

is  worshipped  with  men's  A.

O'34'that  th«  ^  ?°  ?°ds.  which  are  made  with  A
in*  \hJ11  fsr  h-  h.ave  ministered  to  my  necessit.

Cor  5  1  Ld  £lver  himu Into  tl,e  h- of  ,he  Gentiles
oh  d\  1  me  have  an. house  not  made  with  A.

7  9  11  tb®  circumcision  in  flesh  made  by  A.

•it'  V'nV1!u  tfhe  clrcumcision  made  without  A.

Tim  0  8  tiling  6  Study  t0  w°rk  with  your  own  A.
u  1  ■  Pray  every  where  lifting  up  holy  A

,  4'ob>!  aVng0n of/i-otthe  presbyterv,  Bed. 6 .°
VfcSlby.  greater  tabernacle  not'with  A.

>31  fearful  mrie.dm.t0hL°^'  plaC®  ,llad®  with  A.

’,2  wh»r  fto  f?y  mt0  ,the  h-  °t  'he  living  God
m  4  r  huiret0rc  htt  u?  ‘he  A.  which  hang’davvii
•  4.  8.  cleanse  your  A.  ye  sinners,  purify  vour
Kee  Clap.

■n  no  .  •  His  HANDS.
od  in  were  hairy  II  48. 14.  guiding  Aw  A.

’  10  n  7\^nd  -^aron  and  Hurstaj  cd  up  his  h

•  19.  and  Moses  cast  the  tables  out  of  A/a  A

i  iV  pwn  A.  shall  bring  the  offering

*  1  ).*  hath 1  not  rinseti  his  h.  in  water

i  Lro?*!  11  i0t  sweet  incense  beaten  small
i  Aotrt?,Shal  fey. both  Aw  /,.  on  head  of  live  g.

Mt  •  •  aI^d  Balak  smote  his  h.  toirether
1  hli.«  'r  ’i"  A.  be  sufiicient  for  him

’©  rbr  \r4rd  ’  ianl  ia^Se P'  ,he  work  of  Aw  A.

•  or  -'loses  had  laid  his  h.  upon  Joshua


Ju?g: 9 •  i6-  done  according  to  the  deserving  of  his  A
+  24.  who  strengthened  his  A.  to  kill  his  brethren'

.’Ptb  t  'r  palys  of  Aw  A.  were  cut  off
14. 1.3.  Jonathan  climbed  up  on  Aw  A.  aivi  bis  feet
4v*  td-  lonathan  went  and  strengthened  Aw  A.  in  G
2  Kam.  4. 1.  when  Saul  sson  heard,  his  A.  were  feeble
1  Kings V,.  olomon 1  stood  and  spread  forth  his  h.

e  toward  heaven,  38.  54.  2  Chron.  6.  1°,  13  00

16. 7.  in  provoking  him  with  the  work  of  Aw  A  ’

he  Tv111  up  and  put  Aw  A.  upon  Aw  A
f  kbi}- 11  spared  ^  aaman  in  not  receiving  at  Aw  A

oV?  10'  .ha  p,ut  A«4  a.  upon  the  king's  hands
~  Chron.  6.  4.  who  hath  with  his  A.  fulfilled  that
^  e[l-  4;  17  -with  one  ot  his  h.  wrought  in  the  work
Job  1.  10.  thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  A.

£•, ld-  b®  wound eth,  and  his  A.  make  whole
20.  10.  and  Aw  A.  shall  restore  their  goods
34. 19.  tor  they  all  are  the  works  of  his  A.

37 .  tor  he  clappieth  his  h.  amongst  us
Esal  9. 16.  the  wick,  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his  A
iS'  Xk  ,ey  r®.?ard  not  the  operation  of  Aw  A
<?•  <2.  he  guided  them  by  the  skilfulness  of  Aw  A.
81.  6.  Aw  A.  were  delivered  from  the  pots

tb®  sea 's  bis>  and  his  A.  formed  drv  land

111.7.  the  works  ot  his  A.  tme  verity  and  judgment
Prov.  21, 25  for  Aw  A.  refuse  to  labour  J  *  e  U

.  4.  5.  the/ool  foldeth  his  A.  together
Cant.  5.  U.  his  A.  are  as  gold  rings  set  with  beryl
Ea  3.  11.  the  reward  ot  Aw  A.  shall  be  given  him
5^  12.  nor  consider  the  operation  of  Aw  A
1/ .  8.  he  shall  not  look  to  altars,  the  work  of  his  A.
~o.  11.  L.  shall  spread  forth  ^15  //.  in  midst  of  them
31  1“  ^’4  swrniuieth  spreadeth  his  A.  to  swim

.3.3.10.  that  shaketh  his  A.  from  holding  bribes

why  see  every  man  with  Aw  A.  on  his  loins  -
50.  43.  king  heard  the  report,  Aw  A.  waxed  feeble
4  fO-  the  deep  lifted  up  his  A.  on  high
Zee//.  4.  9.  Aw  A.  shall  also  finish  the  house

J9:  13-  sb?u|,d,Puf  on  them,  Mark  10.  16.
be  "  ashed  hts  h.  before  the  multitude

p  oo6'  ~C  Sush  T'^b13'  wPrks  al  e  "  rought  by  his  A.

8.  —3.  when  he  had  put  his  h.  on  his  eyes  °5
Enke  24. 40.  shewed  them  his  A.  and  feet,'  John  20.  °0
t^’  lifted  up  hts  A.  and  blessed  them

wTo!3' 3' the*  Jr ath'  ,had  given  all  things  into  Aw  A.
^;/o'AXCepVr  See/  ln/m' A.the  print  of  the  nails
io  i9'tj7‘  PP'V11;  uSJ‘-  °,n  hlm’  said’  brother  Saul
U.  1.  Werod  stretch,  forth  Aw  A.  to  vex  the  church
7.  and  his  chains  fell  off  from  his  A.

4-/-H.8.3.  was  letdown  by  a  wall,  and  escap.  Aw  A,
L^j//.  4.  28.  working  with  Aw  A.  thing  that  is  <*ood
‘Stec  Lay,  Laid.

,.  ^  Mine  HANDS,  my  HANDS.

innocencv  of  v,y  A.  have  I  done  this
/l.  42.  God  hath  seen  the  labour  of  my  h

/  v  1  "  lU  sPread  abroad  my  h.  Ezra  9.5.

a'sHm  Vo  m1  put  IJ3,  life  in  my.  h-  and  passed  over
*  yi  ";  "■  -1-  accord,  to  dean,  ot  my  P.».]8  20  °4
e?L  be  teacheth  my  h.  to  war,  Ps.  18.  34.  I  144’V
VC/  7  V' 17'  seelln'  tbere  is  no  wrong  in  mine  A.
fob  o ' nW'V dl e ,fc  1° l  e '  0  God,  strengthen  my  A.

1  j?  ®._30.  and  it  1  make  my  1i.  never  so  clean
10.  J  / .  not  tor  anj’  injustice  in  mine  h.

31. 1  and  if  any  blot  hath  cleaved  to  mine  h.
oosl'i u  °  Lord,  it  there  be  iniquity  in  my  A.

22-  thej  pierced  my  h.  and  mv  feet
^0.  0. 1  will  wash  m.  h.  in  innocenc:y,so  will  1  com.

28.  -.  "  b®?..1  Jiff  OP  my  A.  toward  thy  holy  oracle
o3-  4. 1  w  ill  lift  up  my  h.  in  thy  name
oq’  n  ‘t1?  vaiI\  I  have  washed  my  /,.  in  innocency
!*•  9-  J  have  stretched  out  my  h.  unto  thee
V?’  o8’i -Vy  h'  ^  iH.1  lift  to  thv  commandments
i/V  E  Vft!n?  pPpt  my  A.  as  the  evening  sacrifice
T343:  6-  I  stretch  fortli  my  h.  to  thee,  my  soul
Keel.  11.  on  all  the  works  that  my  h.  had  wrought
T?ntinJfc  t,rose’,a?d  A.  dropped  with  myrrh
Vo'  „V9'  7,°r  bl®ssed  be  Assyria  the  work  of  my  h.

-9.  ~3.  when  he  seeth  the  work  of  mine  A.  in  thee
4?- 11-  ®sk  me  concerning  the  work  of  my  h
.^.evenwy  A.  have  stretched  out  the  heavens
?9-  Ip.  I  have  graven  thee  on  the  palms  of  my  h
66-  21.  thy  people  also  the  work  of  my  h.

have  spread  out  my  A.  all  day  to  rebellious
1  i  *  I  will  also  smite  mine  7/.  together
7 f?'  "  b?  ’S  God  to  deliveryou  out  of  my  h?

/  ,?}io'.a?r,hE 'Tfech  me  on  the  Palms  of  my  A.
r  /  7,4';F'  behold  my  A.  and  my  feet,  John  20.  27.

Jn,Z  V9o,n0tne5t  on,V>  but  also  my  h.  and  head
Korn.  10.  21.  all  day  I  have  stretched  forth  my  A.

-  hm.  1.  6.  the  gift  in  thee  by  putting  on  of  my  h
r .  ,  _  ,  ,,  Ovr  HANDS.

shall  comfort  us  concerning  toil  of  ovr  h
n  7*7  o  Pr  rponey  have  we  brought  in  ovr  h.

Beitf.  3. 3.  G.  deliver,  into  ovr  A.  Og  king  of  Bashan
t'i  1 7>.«a«  fa3p  °?rh- .have  not  shed  this  blood
Judo  T32t'iL;Vath  d^hv®red  ovr  h.  all  the  land

ifioVV  ;'r-  Pt*ueC1eli'-ed  a  meat-offering  at  ovr  A.
lb.  -4.  our  G.  hath  delivered  into  ovr  A.  our  enemy

uT\  /7*  4<  ■  and  he  will  give  you  into  ovr  A.

(vfi.44'  20.  or  stretched  out  our  A.  to  a  strange  god
t*  3  ^ A  establish  thou  the  workot  our  h .  upon  us
Jer.  6.  24.  we  have  heard  the  fame,  ovr  A.  wax  feeble
L.am.  3.  41.  let  us  htt  up  our  heart  with  ovr  h.  to  G.

“if*  If*  'l;  HP1*  s*y %Y°fk  of  cur  ft.  ye  are  our  gods
Jets  -4.  7.  Lysias  took  him  away  out  of  ovr  A.

1  Cor.  4.  1-.  and  labour  working  with  ovr  own  A.

1  Jo/m  1.  1.  our  h .  have  handled  the  word  of  life
Their  HANDS.

3” •  21.  he  delivered  him  out  of  their  h.  22.

Exod.  29. 10.  shall  put  their  h.  on  head  of  the  bullock
io.  shall  put  their  A.  on  the  head  of  the  ram,  10.

'5-  tb°u  shalt  receive  them  of  their  A.  T,ev.  8.  28.
^^•8. 10.  Israel  shall  put  their  A.  on  the  J.evites
1_.  the  fievites  shall  lay  their  h.  on  the  bullock
Vent  1  Co.  they  brought  of  fruit  of  land  in  their  h.

'!•  fiAhe elders  shall  wash  their  A.  over  the  heifer
2-  J°9.  many  to  give  Midianites  into  their  h
12.  2.  ye  delivered  me  not  out  of  their  h

O  a,nd  tt?e3'  cutoff  their  h-  anti  their  feet

'Vm7-  Vk.'7  Vey  rla.PF^ti  lheiT  /'•  said,  G.  save  king
— •  !<•  that  they  might  provoke  me  to  anger  with
all  the  works  of  their  A.  2  Chron.  34.  25


H  A  N

Ezra  1.6.  strengthened  their  A.  witli  vessels  ol  siivei
Y°r.  goe,b  fast  on  and  prospereth  in  their  h
i  A2?V?u fl  en"t  ,eI}  e,iet.rh-  in  the  work  of  th..  lious.
10. 19.  they  gave  their  h.  that  they  would  put  away
\eh-  2;  18-  so  they  strengthened  their  h.  for  the  work
o.  9.  their  h.  shall  be  weakened  from  the  work
9-  24.  gavest  them  into  their  h.  with  their  kin "s
5-  12.  their  It.  cannot  perform  their  enterprise
p)'rAvbere,.°  m‘£ht  strength  of  their  A.  profit  met
Psa/._  28. 4.  give  them  after  the  work  of  their  A
/6.  o.  the  men  ot  might  have  not  found  their  A
91.  12.  the  angels  shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  A  '
125.  .3.  lest  righteous  put  forth  then  A.  to  iniquity
LHX‘  £°' 1  'j  PLnde>  to^ther  with  the  spoils  of  their  h.
oy.  6.  and  the  act  ot  violence  is  in  their  h
,  •  22-  mine  elect  shall  enjoy  the  work  of  their  A.
Jer.  1  16.  worshipped  the  works  of  their  own  A
5  +  3L  the  priests  take  into  their  A.  by  their  means
~n'  o47  accord-  to  the  works  of  their  h.  I.am.  3. 64
•>  30.  provoked  to  anger  with  works  of  their  h.


V7?1™1 ' 14'  die  Lord  hath  delivered  me  into  their h
rvL^.v^omen  eat  children  swaddled  with  their  h.
„  ,  10-  12>  their  h.  and  wings  full  of  eyes  round

r2*  3<^  committed  adultery,  blood  is  in  their  h.  45.
43-  '  26.  they  shall  purge  altar  and  fill  their  A.
Jonah  O.  8.  turn  from  the  violence  that  is  in  their  A.
{ig/A'f  14-'tf°  Is  ,®v®r3  wLorLk  of  their  h-  unclean
‘Yi  o4'/k  th  thlhm  tl,e-)'  sh‘  bear  thee  up ,Luke  4.11.
lo.  _  they  wash  not  t/ieir  h.  when  they  eat  bread

A/0,  >7'  s',10Tte  wlth  Palms  of  their  h.  Mark  14.  65.
r.i2  ?■  Je"'s.  except  they  wash  their  h.  eat  not
Jt  ,ke. anddld  ®at,  rubbing  them  in  their  h.
John  19.  .3.  and  they  smote  him  with  their  h
Acts  41.  they  rejoiced  in  the  works  of  their  h
14.3.  granted  signs  and  wonders  to  be  done  by  th  A
ft//- 7 •  9.  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their' A  ’
9;  20.  yet  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their  A
-0.  4.  nor  had  received  his  mark  in  their  h
r  .  -  Thine  or  thy  HANDS.

Exod.  15. 17.  in  sanctuary  which  thy  h.  have  estab
iW  16.  lo.  the  Lord  shal  l  bless  thee  in  all  Yorks
or  thins  h,  theietore  shalt  surely  rejoice,  24.  19
Judg.  7.  11.  afterward  shall  thine  h.  be  strengthened”

>5?o  V?-  it*  h'  'v®re,not  .bound,  nor  feet  in  fetters
Job  10,3.  u  it  good  to  despise  the  M-ork  of  thine  h.  ?
8.  thine  li.  have  made  and  fashioned  me  together

™  in'  lh,?H  *Jar6  desir?  t0  the  work  of  thine  h.
p':,3(o  finfd  i!  1S  d,ehv®r®d  by  pureness  of  thine  h.
Psat.  8. 6.  to  have  dominion  over  the  worksof  thy  A.
92- 4- j  "  'll  triumph  in  the  works  of  thy  h.

I  Va‘  a?d  ,fb®  heavens  are  the  work  of  thy  A
1 19-  IW1-  hare  made  me  and  fashioned  me

i3^'  »  f  thL°U  YY  eat  th,e  labour  of  thine  h.

138.  8.  forsake  not  the  works  of  thine  own  A
} 43v5- 1  meditate,  I  muse  on  the  work  of  thy  h
144.  +  ( .  send  thme  A.  from  above,  rid  me.  deliv  m«.

■f ^  by  sb°.uld  G.  destroy  the  work  of  th  A

Jer.  2.  .3/ .  thou  shalt  go  forth,  and  th.  h.  on  thy  head

IPek  %  ftjY'ft  up, thy  h-  fer  th®  Ufe  of  thy  children
“"•/ft  14-,  Prophesy  and  smite  thine  h.  together
Jr  14‘  *£”!*  b®  stron?  m  the  day  that  I  deal  -

0.13, shalt  no  more  worship  the  work  of  th  h

h  v i  Y'  aIld  1°  Zl0P’  I®1  not  t,tine  h.  be  slack
■y  , 'A3,  6*  "hat  are  these  wounds  in  thine  h. ?

G/  m'lo'  ft,ath®r- “'to  thy  h.  I  commend  my  spirit
John  21. 18.  thou  shalt  stretch  forth  thy  A.  V
Beh.  1  10.  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  thine  h.

i .  thou  didst  set  him  over  the  works  of  thy  A
_  HA  N  D -staves.

Ezek.  39.  9.  and  shall  burn  the  h. -staves  and  spears
-T  U  A  N  TJ-veapon.

Kvm.  35.  18.  or  if  he  smite  him  with  a  h. -weapon
n  ,  |  HAN  D-rrr/V/V/<7.

c ol-  2- 14.  blotting  out  the  h. -writing  of  ordinances
HANG.

G en.  40.  19.  Pharaoh  shall  h.  thee  on  a  tree
Kvm.  2o. 4.  A.  them  before  the  Lord  against  the  sun

thou  *  him °n  a  tree,  his  bod?
28.  66.  and  thy  ite  shall  A.  in  doubt  before  thee
-ft  6-  anti  "  e  will  A.  them  up  unto  the  Lord
Efth-  6.  4.  to  speak  to  the  king  to  A.  Mordecai
( .  9.  then  the  king  said,  A.  him  thereon

T?nt'oo'o*  'Ahere?n,t,h,er®  h-  a  thousand  bucklers
Isa.  .4.  thej’  shall  A.  upon  him  all  the  glory
Lam  2. 10.  the  virgins  of  Jerusalem  A.  their  heads
Jij~ek.  lo.  3.  Mill  men  take  pin  to  h .  any  vessel

Y2*' £7. 40>  on  these  two  A.  all  the  law  and  prophets
7^'  4A  SM-' ti)e  yenomous  beast  A.  on  his  hand
Heh.  12. 12.  htt  up  hands  A.  down  and  feeble  knees
HANGED.

Gen.  40.  22.  but  he  A.  the  chief  baker,  41.  13.
r,t-~l-p-  f0,r  be  that  is  A.  is  accursed  of  God
Joj/z.  8.  ..9.  and  the  king  of  Ai  he  A.  on  a  tree

10.  26.  the  five  kings  A.  he  on  five  trees

4Vu\.  B^'hab  and  Baanah  A.  over  the  pool

23.  Ab'thophel  A.  himself  |l  18. 10.  Absalom  A.

21.  9.  the  seven  sons  of  Saul  A.  they  in  the  hill
¥ r“  6- 11.  and  being  set  up,  let  him  be  A.  thereon
Esth.  2.  23.  the  two  chamberlains  were  A.  on  a  tree
7. 10.  they  A.  Haman  ||  9. 14.  they  A.  his  ten  sons
Psal.  137.  2.  we  A.  our  harps  on  the  willows
J‘am-  m  12.  princes  are  A.  up  by  their  hands
Ezek.  27.  10.  they  A.  the  shield  and  helmet  in  thee

11.  they  //.their  shields  upon  thy  wal  Is  round  about
Mat.  18.  6.  it  were  better  lor  him  that  a  millstone

were  A.  about  his  neck,  Mark  9.  42.  EukeYl  °

27.  5.  Judas  departed,  and  went  and  A.  himself”'

YYon19'+  48J.uUlh-e  peopl®  h-  on  him  to  hear  him
23.  39.  one  ot  the  thieves  who  were  A.  railed  on  him
Jicts  5.  30.  whom  ye  slew  and  h.  on  a  tree.  10  30
^  HANGl  .  I  H.

Job  26.  7-  and  he  A.  the  earth  upon  nothin"

Gal.  3.  13.  cursed  is  even-  one  that  A.  on  a  tree
T  HANGING.

Josh.  10.  26.  they  were  A.  on  trees  till  the  evening
r  .  HANGING.

,  l^1011  shalt  make  an  A.  for  door  of  tent
.37.  thou  shalt  make  for  the  A.  five  pillars
7-  16.  A  for  court  gate,  .38.  18  I  39.4<t.  |  40.  8,38.
oO.  lo.  the  n .  tor  the  door  at  the  entering  in  of
the  tabernacle,  36.  37. 1  39.  38.  |  40^  5,  28.

213


HAR


H  A  R


HAR


HANGINGS.  ,oon11
Fxnd.  27.  9.  A.  of  an  hundred  cubits,  11  I  38.  y,  11.

1C.  there  shall  be  A.  ot  titty  cubits,  38.  1  —

14  the  A.  on  either  side  ot  irate,  15.  138.

35. 17.  the  A.  of  court,  his  pillars  and  their  sockets,

33.  9,  16,  18. 1  39.  40.  Num. ,3.  36.  |  4.26.

•2  Kin  as  C3. 7.  where  women  wove  A.  for  the  gio\  e
LMA.E6.blue  A. fastened  with  cords  ot  lin.  and  pui  p.

HAP.  _  ,  c  , ,

Ruth  2.  3.  and  her  h.  was  to  light  on  Eoaz  held
HAP  •  n  1

1  Sam  14  30  if  h.  the  people  had  eaten  treely
Mark'll.  13.  if  h.  he  might  find  any  fruit  thereon
Luke  14  °9.  lest  A.  after  he  had  laid  the  foundation
jrlcts  5.  39.  lest  h.  ye  be  found  to  tight  against  God

17  °7  if  A  they  might  feel  after  him  and  find  him

2  Cor.  9. 4.  lest  A.  if  they  of  Macedonia  come  with  me

1  Sam.  28. 10.  no  punishment  /j.  to  thee  for  this  tiling
Prov  12.  21.  there  shall  no  evil  h.  to  the  just
ju.  41  22.  and  let  them  shew  us  what  shall  A.

A] ,irk  10  32.  began  to  tel  1  what  thing  should  h. to  him
Ma  11 APPEN  ED-

Rvth  2.  t  3.  her  hap  h.  to  light  on  Boaz  held

1  Sam.  6.  9.  it  was  a  chance  that  h.  to  us

2  Sam.  1. 6.  as  1  h.  by  chance  upon  mount  Gilboa
20.  1.  and  there  h.  to  he  there  a  man  ot  Be Ual

Esth.  4.  7.  Mordecai  told  him  of  all  that  had  n.

Jer.  44. 23.  therefore  this  evil  is  h.  to  you  at  this  day
Luke  24.  14.  they  talked  of  all  things  that  had  h.

Acts  3. 10.  were  filled  with  wonder  at  that  which  A.
Rom.  11.  25.  that  blindness  in  part  is  A.  to  Israel
1  Cor.  10. 11.  now  all  things  A.  to  them  tor  ensamples
Phil.  1.  12.  the  things  which  h.  to  me  have  fallen
1  Pet.  4. 12.  as  though  some  strange  thing  h.  to  you
op,/  o  on  it  is  A.  to  them  according  to  the  provero

-  HAPPEN ETH.

Fed  °  14.  I  perceived  that  one  event  h.  them  all

15. "  1  said,  as  it  h.  to  the  fool,  so  it  /(.even  to  me
8. 14.  there  be  just  men,  wicked  men  to  whom  it  n.

9. 11.  but  time  and  chance  In  to  them  all

Gen.  30. 13.  h.  am  I,  for  daughters  will  call  me  bless.

1 13.  and  Leah  called  his  name  Asher,  h.  p
Vent.  33. 29.  h.  art  thou,  O  Isr.  who  is  like  to  thee  .

1  Kings  10. 8.  h.  thy  men ,  A.  thy  servants,  2  -Chr.  9. 7.

Job  5.  17.  h.  is  the  man  whom  God  correcteth
Psal.  127.  5.  h.  man  who  hath  quiver  full  of  them
1°8  °.  h.  shalt  thou  be,  it  shall  be  well  with  thee
137 '.  8.  h.  shall  he  be  that  rewardeth  thee,  9.

144. 15.  A.  is  that  people  that  is  in  such  a  case,  yea
h.  is  that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord
146. 5.  h.  is  he  that  hath  God  of  Jacob  for  his  help
Prov  3  13.  h.  is  the  man  that  findeth  wisdom
18  "arid  h.  is  every  one  that  retaineth  her
14.  21.  h.  is  he  that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor

16.  20.  and  whoso  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  h.  is  he
28. 14.  h.  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway
29'.  18.  but  he  that  keepeth  the  law,  A.  is  he

Jer.  12. 1.  why  are  they  A.  that  deal  treacherously  .
Mai.  3.  15.  and  now  we  call  the  proud  A.

John  13.  17.  if  ye  know  these  things,  A.  it  do  them
Acts  26.  2.  1  think  myself  A.  king  Agnppa
Rom  14.22.  A.  is  he  that  condemneth  not  himselt
Jam.  5.  il.  behold,  we  count  them  A.  who  endure
1  Pet.  .3. 14.  if  ye  suffer  tor  righteousness  sake,  A.  ye
4  14  if  reproached  tor  name  ot  Christ,  h.  are  ye
HAPPIER.

1  Cor.  7.  40.  but  she  is  A^R  she  so  abide,  after  my

Is  taken  for  difficult,  sad,  or  sorrowful,  cruel,  au¬
stere,  Sc.  Pharaoh  overwhelmed  the  Israelites
with  hard  bondage,  with  cruel  and  insupportable
slavery,  Exod.  1.  14.  The  sons  ot  Zeruiah  are
too  hard  for  me  ;  they  are  too  powerful,  they
treat  me  with  insolence,  with  unseasonable  cru¬
elty,  2  Sam.  3.  39.  Joseph  spake  hard  things
with  his  brethren  ;  he  spake  roughly,  or  harshly
to  them,  Gen.  42.  +  7-  The  hard,  or  difficult
causes  they  brought  to  Moses,  Exod.  18.  -o.
Thou  art  not  sent  unto  a  people  ot  an  hard
language,  of  an  unintelligible  language  :  that  is,
they  will  need  no  interpreter  to  understand  thee,
neither  wilt  thou,  to  understand  them.  ^  Hannah
said  to  Eli,  1  am  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit,
Heb.  hard  of  spirit.  1  know  thee  that  thou
art  an  hard  man,  a  severe,  austere,  rigorous,
and  churlish  man.  Mat.  25.  24.  Solomon  says,
that  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,  or  rough,
it  is  offensive  and  hateful  to  trod  mid  men,  as
rough  ways  are  to  a  traveller \  Or ,  he  is  feice,
intractable,  and  incorrigible  in  his  sinful  course,
Prov.  13.  15.  .  .

When  God  is  said  to  harden  the  heart,  it  is  not
to  be  understood  as  if  God  did  properly  and  posi¬
tively  make  men's  hearts  hard,  but  only  pitvately ,
either  by  denying  to  .them,  or  withdrawing  from
them  that  grace ,  which  alone  can  make  the  hear  ts
of  men  soft ,  flexible,  and  pliable  to  the  divine
•will ;  as  the  sun  hardens  the  clay  by  dr  aw  mg  out
of  it  that  moisture  which  made  it  soft ;  or  by  ex¬
posing  them  to  those  temptations  of  the  world,  or
the  devil,  which  meeting  with  a  corrupt  heal  t,
are  apt  to  harden  it.

Gen.  18.  14.  is  any  thing  too  A.  for  the  Lord  t
35. 16.  Rachel  travailed,  and  had  A.  abour,  1J.

42. 1 7-  Joseph  spake  A.  things  with  them,  1 30.
Rxod.  1. 14.  they  made  their  lives  bitter  with  A.  bond.
18.26.  the  A.  causes  they  brought  unto  Moses
Pent.  1. 17.  cause  that  is  too  A.  you  bring  it  to  me
15. 18.  it  shall  not  seem  A.  to  thee  when  thou  send.

17.  8.  if  there  arise  matter  too  A.  for  thee  in  judg.
26.  6.  Egyptians  afflicted  and  laid  on  A.  bondage
Judg.  4. 1 24.  the  hand  of  Israel  was  A.  against  Jabin

1  Sam.  l.t  I5.no, mv  lord,  I  amawoman  A.ot  spirit
2.  +  3.  let  not  A.  come  out  of  your  mouth

2  Sam.  3.  39.  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  be  too  A.  for  me
13. 2.  Amnon  thought  it  A.  to  do  any  thing  to  her

1  Kings  10. 1.  to  prove  with  A.  questions,  2  Chr .9.1.
14.  to.  for  I  am  sent  to  thee  with  A.  tidings

2  Kings  2. 10.  he  said,  thou  hast  asked  a  A.  thing
lob  30. 1 25.  did  not  I  weep  for  him  was  A.  of  day  i

214


lob  41.  24.  as  A.  as  a  piece  of  the  nether  millstone
psal. 31. 1 18.  let  the  lying  lips, which  speak  a  A.thin0
60.  3.  tliou  hast  shewed  thy  people  A.  things


60.  3.  tiiou  nasi  sneweu  mg  x-.i

88.  7.  thy  wrath  liethA.  on  me,  thou  hast  afflicted

04  4  how  long  shall  the  wicked  speak  A.  things  .


ti_l  ^  HOW  lUll^  oiicvii  *  *T  *  •  1

Prov.  13.  15.  but  the  way  ot  transgressors  is  h.

Isa.  14.  3.  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  A.  bondaDe
01  '  +  o.  a  A.  vision  is  declared  unto  me
fer  32.  17.  and  there  is  nothing  too  A.  tor  thee
27.  I  am  Ld.  is  there  any  thing  too  A. .tor  me  .
Ezek.  2.  +  4.  for  they  are  children  A.ot  race
3.  5.  thou  art  not  sent  to  a  people  of  A.  f '

Dan.  5.  12.  and  shewing  A.  sentences,  weie  found
Mat  ’.  25.  24.  Lord,  I  knew  that  thou  art  an  A.  man
Mark  10. 24.  how  A.  for  them  trust  in  riches  to  entei
John  6.  60.  this  is  an  A,  saying,  who  can  hear  it
Acts  9.  5.  it  is  A.  tor  thee  to  kick  ag.  pricks,  ~t>.  14.
Heb  5.  11.  many  tilings  to  say,  and  A.  to  be  uttered
0  Pet.  3.  16.  in  which  are  things  A.  to  be  understood
Jude  15.  to  convince  aU  ungodly  of  their  A.  speeches

Lev  3  9.  the  rump  shall  takeoff  A.  by  the  back-bone

Judg.  9.  52.  Abimelecli  went  A.  to  the  door  °t  tower
on  45  Israel  pursued  A.  after  Benjamin  to  Gideon
1  ~Sam  14  22.  followed  A.  atter  Philistines  111  battle
31  2."  the  Philistines  followed  A.  upon  Said.  aod
upon  bis  sons,  2  Sam.  1.  0.1  C/ir. IV.  -.
1  Kings 21.  1.  Naboth  had  a  vineyard  A.  by  the  pal.
1  Chr  19.  4.  cut  off  garments  A.  by  their  buttocks
Psal.  63.  8-  my  soul  followeth  A.  after  thee
Jonah  1. 13.  the  men  rowed  A.  to  bring  it  to  the  land
Acts  18  7.  whose  house  joined  A.  to  the  synagogue

'  harden.  .

Frod  4  21.  I  will  A.  Pharaoh’s  heart,  7-.  3. 1  14.  4
14  17.  I  will  A.  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians
Dent.  15.7.  shalt  not  A.  thy  heart,  nor  shut  thy  hand
Josh.  11.  20.  it  wasot  the  Lord  to  A.  tneir  hearts
1  Sam.  6.  6.  wherefore  then  dp  ye  A.  your  hearts  .

0  Chr  30.  t  8.  A  not  your  necks  as  your  fatheis
Job  6."  10."  yea,  TwouldVi.  myself  m  sorrow
Psal.  95.8.  A.  not  your  hearts,  Heb.  3.  8,  lo.  I  4.  ,
HA  RDLN  1*.D.


Exod.  7.  13.  Lord  A.  Pharaoh’s  heart, he  hearkened
not  to  them,  9.  12.  1  10.  1,  20,  2*.  1  H.  10.


14.  Pharaoh’s  heart  is  A.  11 22.  was  A.  8. 19.1  9-7,35.

8.  15.  he  A.  his  heart  and  hearkened  not,  32. 1  9-  >4.
Deut  2.30.  the  Lord  thy  G.  A.  his  spirit  and  heart

1  Sam  6  6.  as  Egyptians  and  Phar.  A.  their  heai  ts
o  Kings  17  14-  they  A.  their  necks  like  to  their  tatli.

2  CAr  36.  13.  Zedekiah  A,  l>eart  from. turning  to  L.

Neh  9. 16.  they  and  our  lathers  A.  their  necks,  17  >-9.

JcA  9.  4.  who  hath  A.  himself  ag.  him  and  prospered

39. 16.  she  is  A.  against  her  young  ones,  as  not  hers
Isa.  63. 17.why  hast  thou  A.  our  heart  from  thy  tear .

Jer  7.  26.  they  hearkened  not,  but  A.  their  neck
19’.  15.  have  A.  their  necks  not  to  hear  my  words
Dan.  5.  20.  but  when  his  mind  was  A.  111  pride
Mark  6.52.  they  consider,  not,  tor  their  hem  t  was  A.

8. 17.  perceive  yenot  f  have  ye  your  heaityet  A.

John  12. 40.  he  hath  blind,  their  eyes.  A.  their  heart
Acts  19  9  but  when  divers  were  A.  and  believed  not
Rom. 11 :  +  7.  election  obtained  it  and  rest  were  A.
Heb.  3.  13.  lest  any  of  you  be /l  thro  deeeittulness

Pmr  °1  °9  a  wicked  man  A.  his  face,  but  he  directs

o8  14  he  that  A.  his  heart  shall  fall  into  mischief

29’.  1.  lie  that  being  often  reproved  A- hisneck
Korn.  9.18.  mercy  on  whom  he  will,  w  hom  he  w  ill  h
HARD -hearted.

pZPk  3  7  all  the  house  of  Israel  are  h.-hearted
*  ‘  HARDER.

Prov.  18.  19-  brother  offended  A.  to  be  won  than  city

jer  5  3  they  have  made  their  faces  A.  than  a  rock

Fuki  9  A.  than  flint  have  I  made  thy  forehead
^  HARDLY.  .  u  u  .  _  .

Gen.  16.  6.  when  Sarai  dealt  A.  with  her  she  fled
Fxod.  13.  15-  and  when  Pharaoh  would  A.  let  us  o0
Jsa  8.  21.  shall  pass  thro’  it  n.  bestead  and  hungry
Mat.  IQ.  23.  1  say  that  rich  man  shall  A  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God,  Mark  10.  23.  Euke  18.  24.
hike  9  39.  a  spir.  taketh  him,  A.  depart,  from  him
Acts  °7  8.  A.  passing  it,  we  came  to  the  fair  havens
Mc  '  HARDNESS.

Job  38.  38.  when  dust  groweth  into  A.  clods  cleave
Psal.  81 .  + 12. 1  gave  them  up  to  the  A.  ot  their  hear  ts
Alat.  19.8.  because  ot  A.  ot  your  hearts,  MarAlo.  o.
Mark  3.  5.  he  being  grieved  tor  the  A.  ot  their  hearts
16  14  he  upbraided  them  with  their  A.  ot  lieai  t
Rom  °.  5.  but  after  thy  A.  and  impenitent  heart
11  +05  not  ignorantthat  A.  in  part  happen,  to  1  si .
o  r;m  2  3.  endure  A.  as  a  good  soldier  otJes.  Lin.

~  HARE.

Lev  11  6.  the  A.  is  unclean  to  you,  Deut.  14.  < .

Is  taken  for  whore  or  prostitute,  Prov.  29.  3.  Also
for  one  who  forsakes  the  true  God  and  his  pine
worship,  to  follow  idols  and  false  gods.  Isa.  1.  .1.
IIow  is  the  faithful  city  become  an  harlot !  that
is,  like  an  harlot,  leaving  God  her  husband,  to
cleave  to  false  gods.  By  harlots  may  also  be
understood  the  most  infamous  and  scandalous  sin¬
ners  Mat.  21.  31.  Publicans  and  harlots  go  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  you.

Rahab  who  received  into  her  house  and  concealed  the
spies  sent  by  Joshua  to  view  the  city  of  Jericho,  ts
called  an  harlot.  The  Hebrew  text,  Josh.  2.  1.
calls  her  Zona,  which  St.  Jerom  and  many
others  understand  of  a  woman  of  an  ill  life.
The  Septuasnnt  render  it  by  Tropvti,  as  atsotue
avostle  Paul  in  Heb.  11.  31.  And  James  .Jam.
r/  05.  Some  think  that  she  was  only  an  hostess
or  inn-keeper  ;  and  that  this  is  the ^  true  unifi¬
cation  of  the  original  word.  Had  she  been  a
woman  of  ill  fame,  say  they,  would  SMmon,  a
prince  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  one  of  our
Saviou/s  ancestors ,.  have  taken  £erJ°  -%*{e’,Z
could  he  have  done  it  by  the  law  ?  Besides,  the
spies  of  Joshua  would  hardly  have  gone  to  lodge
with  a  prostitute,  a  common  harlot,  they  who
were  charged  with  so  nice  and  dangerous  a  com¬
mission.


Gen  34  31.  should  deal  with  our  sister  as  with  A.  f
38.  15.  J  udah  saw  her,  he  thought  her  to  be  an  A.

24.  Tamar  thy  daughter-in-law  hath  played  A.
Lev.  21. 14.  the  high-priest  shall  not  take  an  A.  -
jo\h~°  1  spiescame  intoan  A.'.v  house  named  Rahab
6.  17' only  Kahab  the  A.  shall  live,  and  all  with  her
Judg.  11. 1.  now  Jephthah  was  the  son  ot  an  A.

16. 1.  Samson  saw  there  an  A.  and  went  in  unto  her
Prov.' 7 .  10.  a  woman  met  him  with  attire  ot  an  A.
Da.  1. 21.  how  is  the  faithful  city  become  an  A./

23!  15.  after  seventy  years  shall  lyre  sing  as  an  a.
~16.  "take  an  harp,  tliou  A.  that  hast  been  forgotten
Jer  0  20  when  tliou  wanderest,  playing  the  A.

3.  I?  thou  hast  played  the  A.  with  many  lovers  1
6.  under  every  gr.  tree,  and  there  hath  played  A.

8  ludah  feared  not,  but  went  and  played  A.  also
E*'ck  16. 15.  played st  the  A.  because  ot  thy  renown
16."plavedst  A.  thereon ||  28.  played  A.  with  them
31. 1  last  not  been  as  an  A.  ||  35.  O  A.  hear  the  word
41  1  will  cause  thee  to  cease  from  playingthe/r.
23.  5.  Aholah  played  the  A.  when  she  was  mine
19  the  days  wherein  she  had  played  the  A.

44'  as  they  go  in  unto  a  woman  that  playeth  the  A.
Ilos  °.  5.  tor  their  mother  hath  played  the  h.

3  3  1  said  unto  her,  thou  shalt  not  play  the  A.

4’  15  tho’  Israel  play  the  A.  let  not  Judah  offend
Joel  3.  3.  they  have  given  a  boy  tor  a  A.

Amos  7  17.  thy  wife  shall  be  an  A.  in  the  city
Mic  1.7.  they  shall  return  to  the  hire  ot  an  A.

Na/i  3  4  the  whoredoms  of  the  well-favoured  A.

1  Cor.  6. 15.  shall  1  make  them  the  members  ot  an  A.?,
16  that  he  who  is  joined  to  an  A.  is  one  body
Ileb  11  31.  by  faith  the  A.  Rahab  perished  not
Jam  0  "°5.  was  not  Rahab  the  A.  justihed  by  works  5
HA  PLOTS.

1  Kings  3  16.  there  came  two  women  A.  to  the  king
Prov.  29.  3.  that  keepeth  company  with  A.  spendetli
Jer.  5~7.  they  assemble  by  troops  in  A.  houses
J los.  4. 14.  separated  with  whores,  sacrifice  with  //,
Mat.  21  31.  publicans  and  A.  go  into  kingdom  or  G.j
.32.  but  the  publicans  and  the  A.  believed  him
J  uke  15  30.  who  hath  devoured  thy  living  with  A
Rev.  17.5.  mystery,  Babylon  the  great,  mother  ot  A
HARM.

Gen.  31. 52.  shalt  not  pass  over  this  pillar  to  me  for/'.  4
Lev.  5. 16.  shall  make  amends  for  A.  lie  hath  done
Num  35.  23.  was  not  his  enemy,  nor  sought  his  A.

1  Sam.  26.  21.  return,  I  will  no  more  do  thee  A

0  Sam  20. 6.  now  shall  Sheba  do  more  A.  than  Abs.il

2  Kings  4.  41.  and  there  was  no  A.  in  the  pot

1  Chr.  16.  22.  do  my  prophets  no  A.  Psal,  lOo.  15.
Prov  '.  .3.  30.  strive  not,  if  lie  have  done  thee  no  h.
Ter  39  12.  look  well  to  him.  and  do  him  no  A.  '
Acts  16.  28.  do  thyself  no  A.  I|27.  21.  gained  this  A
28.  5.  lie  felt  no  A.  ||  6.  saw  no  A.  ||  21.  spake  any  Is
HA11M.  .

1  Pet  3  1.3.  who  will  A.  you,  if  followers  ot  good
HARMLESS.

Mat  10  16.  be  wise  as  serpents,  and  h.  as  doves
Rom.  16.  +  19.  would  have  you  A.  concerning  evr
Phil.  2.  15.  that  ye  may  be  A.  the  sons  ot  God
Heb.  7  '.  26.  is  holy,  A.  undefil.  separate  from  sinnei
HARNESS,  Substantive.

1  Kings  2 0. 11.  let  not  him  girdethon  A.  boast  hims
22.  .34.  between  joints  ot  his  A.  2  Cnron.  18.  43.

cft'iir  9  24.  they  brought  every  man  A.  and  spin

HARNESS,  Verb.

Ter  46  4.  A.  the  horses,  and  get  up,  ye  horsemen
jer.  40.  HARNESSED.  ,  .  _

Exod.  13. 18.  Israel  went  up  A.  out  of  land  ot  Eg}
HARP.

Gen.  4.  21.  Jubal  was  father  of  them  that  handle
31  27.  might  have  sent  thee  away  with  tabr.  and
1  >am.’l0.  5.  meet  a  company  of  prophets  with  a
16.  16.  a  man  who  is  a  cunning  player  011  an  n.
2.3.  David  took  an  A.  and  played  with  Ins  ham
1  Chr.  25. 3.  six  prophesied  with  a  A.  to  give  than
job°  1  1°  thev  take  the  timbrel  ana  h.  and  i ejoi
.30.  31.  my  A.  also  is  turned  to  mourning,  and  org
Psal  33.  2.  praise  the  Lord  with  the  n.  loO.  3.

4.3  4  vea.ou  the  A.  will  1  praise  thee,  O  my  G
49.  4.  I  will  open  my  dark  saying  upon  the  A
ft  awake  psaltery  and  h.  I  will  awake,  j()o.
71.  eg  s.ng  w.th  A.  92.  3.  |  98.  5. 1  147.  7. 1  LW-
81  2.  bring  hither  the  pleasant  h .  with  the  psalte
Jsa  5.  12.  the  A.  and  the  viol  are  in  their  feasts
16  11  mv  bowels  shall  sound  like  an  h.  for
23'.  16.'  take  an  A.  II  24  8.  the  jov  ot  tho  A  cease
Dan.  3.  5.  at  sound  ot  the  A.  tall  down,  i ,  10.  L
1  Cor  14.  7.  whether  pipe  or  A.  except  they  give
iL  1  HARPS,

o  Sam.  6. 5.  David  and  all  Isr.  played  oil  A.  and  co
1  Kings  10. 12.  the  king  made  ot  the  almug-tree.
Psal.1 137-  2.  we  hanged  our  A.  upon  the  willov
Isa.  30.  32.  it  shall  be  with  tablets  and  /l-
Esek.  26. 13.  the  sound  ot  thy  A.  shall  be  jT,
Rev.  5.  8.  having  every  one  of  them  A.  and
14  2  harping  with  their  A.  ||  15.  2.  the  A.  ot
See  Cymbal.

HARPED.  ,  .  .  .

1  Cor  14  7.  howshall  be  known  what  is  pipeuc.

HARPERS.  .  ....  .

Pev.  14.  2. 1  heard  the  voice  of  A.  harpingwith  m
18. 22.  the  voice  of  A.  shall  be  heard  no  more

Job  39. 10.  or  wiE  he  A.  the  valleys  after  thee.

j  i  <

o-Sam.  12.  31.  he  put  them  under  saws  and  A.  or

1  Chr  20. 3.  and  cut  them  with  saws  and  A.  ot  1
HART.

Deut  12. 15.  may  eat  flesh  as  of  the  A.  14. 5.1  •  *

PW.  42.1.  as  the  A.  panteth  after  the  water-bi
Isa.  35.  6.  then  shall  ttmlame man  leap  as  an
See  Young.

HARTS.  ,  .  ,

1  Kings  4. 23.  ten  fat  oxen,  besides  A.  andr«e-tn  ^
Lam. 1.6.  her  princes  become  like  A.  w ithout  \

HAR  VLSI  .  \t

Is  the  time  of  reaping  corn  and  other  Jn <  ■
earth,  Gen.  8.  22.  It  is  taken  for  a


earth,  Gen.  8.  sa.  J*  w  -1  "  10.  5

and  proper  time  for  business.  Pr0'  •  V  r ..

.  .  ic  U  «;nn  that  C<i


aud  proper  nine  jvt  -

that  sleepeth  in  harvest,  is  a  son  tha.


ti


HAS


H  A  T


shame,  lie  that  neglecteth  and  misimproveth
the  proper  seasons  and  opportunities  of  doing  good
■to  himselj  and  to  others,  causetli  shame  both  to
htmse.f  Jor  his  folly,  and  the  poverty  and  misery
which  follows  thereupon;  and  also  to  his  parents,
to  whose  negligent  or  evil  education  such  things
are  often,  and  sometimes  justly  imputed .

Harvest  is  put  for  a  people  whose  sins  are  ripe  for
judgment.  Joel  3.  13.  Put  ye  in  the  sickle,  tor
the  harvest  is  ripe  :  Cut  down  these  sinners  that
are  ripe  tor  judgment.  The  time  of  Babylon's
harvest  shall  come :  the  time  when  she  shall  be  cut
aomiy  Jer.  ol.  o3.  Our  Saviour,  in  the  parable  of
the  sower,  calls  the  end  of  the  world,  or  the  day  of
judgment,  the  harvest.  Mat.  13.  39.  Then  God  will
separate  the  tares  from  the  wheat,  the  wicked  from
the  godly.  In  Mat.  9.  30,  3?.  Christ,  seebig  mul¬
titudes  coming  to  hear  him,  said  to  his  disciples,

I  he  harvest  truly  is  plenteous  ;  many  are  willing
to  receive  instruction.  This  was  spoken  at  the
feast  of  la  be  mac  les,  which  was  in  harvest.

8.  Cg.  while  earth  remaineth  h.  shall  not  cease
30.H4.  Reuben  went  in  days  of  wheat-/;.

45.6.  in  five  years  shall  neither  be  earing  nor  h.
ffod.  ..3.  16.  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  h.  34  00
34.  21.  in  earing-time  and  in  h.  thou  shalt  rest
,«>.19.  9.  when  ye  reap/;.  23. 10,  22.  Dent.  24. 19.

.  'vbat  Sr0ws  its  own  accord  of/;,  not  reap
ikMI.  came  to  Beth-lehem  in  begin,  of  barley-/;!
’•21.  tarry  with  my  maidens  till  end  of  h.  23.

6-  j1’?*  men  of  Beth-shemesh  reaping  their  /;.

1.  1—  and  lie  will  set  them  to  reap  his  /;

12.  17.  is  it  not  wheat-/;,  to-day,  1  will  call  to  Ld.
isam.  21. 9.  were  put  to  death  in  /;.  in  barley-/;.

10.  spieati  it  for  her  from  beginning  of  barley-/;.

:b  5. 5.  whose  /;.  the  hungry  eateth  up  and  taketh  it
rov.  6.  8.  the  ant  gathereth  her  food  in  the  /;.

0.  5.  he  that  sleepeth  in  /;.  causetli  shame

111  "•  so  honour  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool
a.  9. 3.  they'  joy  before  thee  according  to  joy  in/;

0.  9.  for  the  shouting  for  thy  h.  is  fallen
7. 11.  but  the  /;.  shall  be  a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief
8.4.  and  like  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  heat  of  /;.

5.  for  afore  the  h.  when  the  bud  is  perfect
3. 3.  the  /;.  of  the  river  is  her  revenue
r.  o.  YJ.  they  shall  eat  up  thine  /;.  and  thy  bread
*i  roserveth  to  us  the  appointed  weens  of  /;.

'  a  H1?  !Sr Past, summer  is  ended,  we  not  saved
<w.  6.  li.  O  Judah,  he  hath  set  an  /;.  for  thee
"J1 11.  because  the  /;. .of  the  field  is  perished
.  13.  put  in  the  sickle,  for  the  /;.  is  ripe,  c  ome
7.  when  there  were  yet  three  months  to  /;.
at.  9. 37.  the/;,  is  plenteous,  the  labourers  are  few
the  Tord  the  /;.  to  send,  Luke  10. 2.
j;  let  both  grow  together  until  /;.  in  time  of  /;
’9-,™ eZA  1S  e  •  of,  the  world,  reapers  the  angels
a,r*  t-  7?’uPut  -1? the  Sickle  because  /;.  is  come
;  2? said  unt°  them,  the  /;.  truly  is  great

hn  4. 3o  then  cometh  h  the  fields  are  white  to  /;.

>,v*  14. 15.  time  is  come,  for  the  h.  of  eartii  is  ripe
HARVEST-waw.

*•  5.  it  shall  be  as  when  the  /;.  gathereth  corn

"•  9. 22.  carcases  shall  fall  as  the  handful  after  h
HARVEST-/;/?^.

;h.  3. 15.  Jordan  overfloweth  all  the  time  of  h
’lg.l5.1.mtimeof  wheat  /;.  Samson  visited  wife
<wra.23.13.  three  chiefs  came  to  David  in  h.-time
or.  25. 13.  as  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  time  of  /;

’•  50. 16.  cut  off  him  handleth  sickle  in  h.-time

•  33-  a  little  while  the  time  of  her  /;.  shall  come
It.  13. 30.  in  the  time  of  h.  I  will  say  to  the  reapers

.  HAST.

19,12.  the  men  said  to  Lot,  /;.  thou  here  any
besides  .  whatsoever  thou  /;.  in  city  bring  out
‘  ^sau  said>  7;.  thou  but  one  blessing,  father '

•  a  Pnnce  /;.  thou  power  with  G.  and  men
.  9.  Esau  said,  keep  that  thou  /;.  to  thyself

• 10-  cP^ne  th9u’  flock>  an,t  all  that  thou  /;.

’d.9.  19.  send  and  gather  all  that  thou  /;.  in  field
•U. every  firsthng  thou  A.shaU  be  the  Lord’s
vf'tQo  S1‘ve.r.  gold,  and  all  thou  /;.  ismultiplied

•  g.  38.  3.  what  makest  thou  ?  what  /;.  thou  here
, am**j>*  Peace  be  to  thee  and  all  that  thou  h
;  \m .  15.  35. //.thou  not  here  with  thee  Zadok  ?

'  ^4>2- Ehshasaid,  tell  me,  what  /;.  in  house

•  10.4.  A.  tliou  eyes  of  flesh,  pr  seest  as  man  ?

,  an  ann  like  God  ?  or  canst  thunder

oe’-iT8'  Hy.  Vot:  go,  when  thou  /;.  it  by  thee

'  '/iVm  what  /;.  thou  here  ?  whom  /,.  thou  here
‘  a11  thou  h-  Mark  10.  21.  Luke  18.  2°

25*  lo ,  there  thou  /;.  that  is  thine
‘  ir  fr°m  whence  then  /;.  thou  living  water  ;
sand  he  whom  thou  now  h.  is  not  thine  husband
£*•  whom  go  ?  thou  h.  words  of  eternal  life
o  v,  peoP^  said,  tliou  /;.  a  devil,  8.  48,  52.

«’  01  wash  thee  not,  thou  /;.  no  part  with  me
ad,?11  h-  neither  partnor  lot  in  this  matter
oo~;  ~l!'  b'oo.  who  /;.  the  form  of  knowledge
2-./;.  thou  faith  ?  have  it  to  thyself  before  God
o ’10  wba*  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive
1  '  O  map  may  say .  thou  /;.  faith  and  I  works
hTiVfVic  In 1 u  ^-.patience,  and  for  my  name’s  sake
fiattk.ls  t  \°pl /'-  II  3. 1.  thou  /;.  a  name  to  live,  4.
thou  /;.  a  little  strength  ||  11.  hold  what  tliou  /;.

I  .  HAS1E,  Substantive.

,  ,10- 16:  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses  and  A  aron  h
i-y^sha'leat  it  in  /;.  with  your  loins  girded

•  might  send  them  out  of  land  in  h.  Devt.  16.  3

8-  because  the  king’s  business  required  h.
the  Synans  had  cast  away  in  their/;.

,  4.  23.  they  went  up  in  /;.  to  Jerusalem

ii ' t  •  iSaic^  m  my  /'•  ^  am  cut  from  thee
A1,  t  said  in  my  h.  all  men  are  liars

°o  I-'  Xc  .shall  not  go  out  with  /;.  nor  by  flight
i ~5;  Arioch  brought  Dan.  before  king  in  /;.

0  ff,,e  k,ng  rose  up  in  /;.  and  spake,  and  said
t went  m  h-  unto  the  den  of  lions
1  -in’  s,,e  came  in  straightway  with  /;.  to  king
s' .h!!  u  ,ry  went  into  the  hill-country  with  /;.

•  me  shepherds  came  with/;,  and  found  Mary
HASTE.

E.  22.  /;.  thee,  escape  thither,  for  I  cannot  do


HAT


45.  9. /;.  ye  and  go  up  to  my  father,  say,  13
20. 38.Jonathan  cried,  make  speed  /;.stavnot

p'hfdo' ioe<ti0r  1  h.llistmes  have  invaded  the'land
Psal.  22. 19.  O  my  strength,  /;.  thee  to  help  me
See  Make  haste.

„  ,  HASTED.

oaWio8;7'  gUm  man,  and  he  /;.  to  dress  it

rJ  ;j8«sl1'oSaldf  rjnnk,  my  lord,  and  she  /;.20.
Lxod.  5.  13.  and  the  task -masters /;.  them,  saying
«  1  L  10.  the  people/;,  and  passed  over  Jordan
8.  14.  and  when  the  king  of  Ai  saw  it,  they  /;.
-.i9-,ol'!>ambLlsl,1  h-  and  set  tbecityon  fire
r10J  th®  su19  h-  not  m  go  down  a  whole  day
Judg.  -0.  37.  liers  in  wait  /;.  and  rushed  on  Gibeah
J7-  48.  David  /;  ||  25. 23.  Abigail  h.  42.

^o'  ??.'  ®?cePt  thou  hadst  /;.  and  come  to  meet
.8.  24.  the  witch  at  Jm-dor  /;.  and  killed  the  calf
i  r??1- lp' 16*  Shimei,  who  was  of  Bahurim,  h.

1  Kings  J).  41.  the  prophet  /;.  and  took  ashes  away
~  Kings  9.13.  they/;,  and  put  garments  under  Jehu

2  C/;;w;  26.  20.  yea,  himself/;,  also  to  go  out

1  ^  to  his  house  mourning

Aoify  h‘  -fp  bring  Hainan  unto  the  banquet
Job  31.  5.  or  if  my  foot  hath  h.  to  deceit

48- 5.  tliey  were  troubled  and  /;.  away,  104. 7.
ActsS).  16.  Paul  /1.  to  be  at  Jerusalem  at  Pentecost
,  HASTEN.

1  K  ings  22.  9.  h.  hither  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah
x  Chiron.  „4.  5.  and  see  that  ye  h.  the  matter
V-ai-  ld-  4.sorrowsnmltiplied  h.  after  another  god
j?~/8nnz0U m,y  escaPe  from  the  windy  storm
k.ccl.~.  ,0 .  or  w  1 1  o  else  can  /;.  hereunto  more  than  L  i

Ko  ool9f  !u.s  work  that  we  may  see  it

60.  22.  I  the  Lord  will  /;.  it  in  his  time
Jer.  1. 12.  I  will  /;.  my  Word  to  perform  it
HASTENED,  ETH.

Gm.  18.  6.  Abraham  /;.  into  the  tent  unto  Sarah

9c),lnt'  'doPlS  u  ‘  L,ot!  saying,  arise,  take  thy  wife

2  C /iron.  24.  5.  howbeit  the  Levites  /;.  it  not
Ksl/t .3. 15.  posts  went  out,  being  /;.  b.v  kin0-,  8  14
Isa.  51.  14.  the  captive  exile  /;.  to  be  loosed"

Jer.  17.  16. 1  have  not/;,  from  being  a  pastor
r  ,  ^  „  HASTETH.

JoJ>  9.  26.  as  the  eagle  that  /;.  to  the  prey
P?;2^boo0ld’  bedrinketh  up  ariver,  and  /;.not

1  o°  o  2i3i  aS*u  ^;d  l'  *;0  spare,  and  knoweth  not
19-  2-  and  he  that  /;.  with  his  feet  sinneth
-.8.  -2.  he  that  /;.  to  be  rich,  hath  an  evil  eye
‘  5;  fbp  sun to  the  place  where  he  arose
Jer.  A&.  16.  the  affliction  of  Moab  /;.  fast
Hub  1.  8.  they  shall  fly  as  the  eagle  that  /;.  to  eat
Aeph.  1. 14.  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  /;.  greatly
HASTILY"

*}•  ,th|y  brought  Joseph  h.  outofdungeon
n?:  2.  2.5.  left  nations  without  driving  them  out/;.
9.54.  Abimelech  called  /;.  unto  his  armour-bearer
1  Sam.  4.  14.  and  the  man  came  in  h.  and  told  Eli
the  men  did  /;.  catch  it,  and  they  said
Krov  20.  21.  an  mlietitance  may  be  gotten  /;.

forth  /;.  to  strive,  lest  tliou  know  not
John  11.  31.  when  Jews  saw  Mary  that  she  rose  /;.

oSa6  J6-  5.  seeking  judgment,  and  /;.  righteousness
~  Pet.  3.  12.  and  /;.  unto  the  coming  of  day  of  tiie  1
„  HASTY.

Pf  - 29.  but  he  that  is  /;.  of  spirit  exalteth  folly
21.  5.  but  of  every  one  that  is  /;.  only  to  want
29.  20.  seest  thou  a  man  that  is  /;.  in  his  words
Lccl.  5.  2.  let  not  thy  heart  be  /;.  to  utter  before  G

7.  9.  be  not  /;.  in  thy  spirit  to  be  angry

8.  3.  be  not  too  h.  to  go  out  of  his  sight
Jsa.  28.  4.  as  the  /;.  fruit  before  the  sun  -ner

^ heart  of  tiie//.  shall  understand
do.  f4.  say  to  them  that  are  of//,  heart,  be  strong
Dan.  2.  15.  why  is  the  decree  so  /;.  from  the  king  '
tlab.  1.  6.  the  Chaldeans,  that  bitter  and  /;.  nation

hatch.

34.15.  owl  shall  /;.  and  gather  under  her  shad.

59.  5.  they  /;.  cockatrice-eggs,  weave  spiders’  web
HATCHETH.

Jer.  17.II.  as  partridge  sitteth  on  eggs  and  h.  not

,T.  .  Hate.

lo  liafe,  is  not  always  to  be  understood  rigorously
It  frequently  signifies  no  more  than  a  lesser  degree
oj  love.  Deut.  21.  15.  If  a  man  have  two  wives
one  beioved,  and  another  hated  ;  that  is,  less  be-
fn'  ,  -  IUS  our  Saviour  says,  that  he  who  would
follow  him,  must  hate  father  and  mother;  that  is,
should  love  them  less  than  Christ,  less  than  his  own
salvation ;  he  ought  not  to  prefer  them  to  God
-Solomon  says,  that  he  that  spareth  his  rod!
hateth  his  son,  Prov.  13.  24.  Fathers  often  spare
their  children  out  of  an  excessive  love  to  them  ■
but  this  is  not  a  proper  instance  of  affection,  to
forbear  correcting  them;  their  fond  affection  is
as  pernicious  to  their  children,  as  other  men's
hatred  could  be  ;  they  keep  back  from  them  rvhat
would  do  them  good.  There  is  a  malicious  hatred  of
the  persons  of  men,  not  of  their  sins;  thus  Ahab
hated  the  Lord  s  prophet  Micaiah,  1  Kings  22.  8.

And,  wicked  men  do  thus  hate  the  righteous.  Psal.

•34;  21.  They  that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  de¬
solate.  1  here  is  also  an  hatred  of  the  sins  of  men,
not  of  their  persons  ;  thus  the  righteous  hate  even
{'if.  fforu/ent  spotted  with  corruption,  Jude  23
\\  hat  l  hate,  that  do  I,  Rom.  7.  15.  The  godly
hate  sin  because  it  is  a  breach  of  God's  law.

™  ?4:P0>  let-  ®eed  Possess  gate  of  those  that  /;.

M.  lo.  they  said,  Joseph  will  peradventure  /;.  us
Lev.  f9.  17 .  tliou  shalt  not/;,  thy  brother  in  heart
~o.  17.  tliey  that  /;.  you  shall  reign  over  you
Anm.  10.  35.  let  them  that  /;.  thee  flee  before  thee
Pff:  7-  10.  and  repayeth  them  that  /;.  him  to  face
in  1,  'P  ay  them  upon  them  that  /;.  thee,  30.  7.
lo  il‘-rPVy  maI?  his  neighbour  and  lie  in  wait
,,3.\P,ta7e  a  wife,  and  go  in  unto  her  and/;,  her
24.  Lit  the  latter  husband  /;.  her  and  write  a  bill
33  H  smite  through  the  loins  of  them  that/;,  him
-  Chr.  ip.  2.  and  love  them  that  /;.  the  Lord  ?

Job  8.  22.  that/;,  thee  shall  be  clothed  with  shame
V.  A,21’,8’  thy  hand  shall  And  those  that/;,  thee
34.  21.  they  that/;,  the  righteous  shall  be  desolate


|  Psal.  44.  10.  they  which  /;.  us  spoil  forthems.
a'  !  |-f  Ah,ras°tba^-  him  flee  before  him
8  - Ft  Z  t  lat  -f tklee  have  lifted  up  the  head
89.  -.3.  and  I  will  plague  them  that  /;.  him
9; .  10.  ye  that  love  the  Lord  /;.  evil

ion  t5',  be„turned  their  heart  to  h.  his  people
129.  5.  let  them  be  turned  back  that  /;.  Zion
Prov  1  22.  how  long,  fools,  will  ye/;,  knowledge
6.  16.  these  six  doth  the  Lord  /;.  a  proud  look
8.  13.  tear  ot  the  Lord  is  to  /;.  evil  ;  pride  do  I  h
9-  8-  reprove  not  a  scorner,  lest  he  h.  thee
19.  7.  all  the  brethren  of  the  poor  do  h.  him
on'  ffst,h,e  be  weary  of  thee,  and  so  /;.  thee
29.  10.  the  blood-thirsty  /;.  the  upright
ific;  8-8.  a  time  to  love  and  a  time  to  /;.

Lzek.  16. 27.  deli  vered  unto  will  of  them  that  /;.  thee
Pan.  4.  19.  the  dream  be  to  them  that  /;.  thee
Amos  5.  10.  tliey  /;.  him  that  rebuketh  in  the  gate
5.  h.  the  evil  and  love  the  good,  establish  judgm.

Mat'  %  l^h10  h‘  th(i  g,00d’  and  Iove  evil,  who  pluck
Mat.  5.  43.  been  said,  love  thy  neighbour,  /;.  enemy

fi4tad  ;7i?0d  ,t0  thT,that  h-  you-  Luke  6.  27.
oi2fn  th<i  be'vdl  h-  tbe  011e»  Luke  16.  13.
r  i  ?'  alld  shall  betray  and  shall  /;.  one  another
f&SLKP-  saved  from  the  hand  of  all  that  /;.  us
6.  2.~.  blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  /;.  you
r4;26’and  h-  n°f  ms  father,  and  mother,  and  wife
1 5  IK  milf  Yorld  cannot  /; .  you,  but  me  it  hateth

Rev1Q\7  i?,  u  'I01  lfuthe  w0Vld  h-  yo",  1  John  3. 13.
Kev.  17. 16.  the  ten  horns,  these  shall  h.  the  whore
.  I  HATE.

1  70?;^  22.8.  there  is  one  man,  77;.  him,  2  C/;r  18  7

Vm'uu'H’  1  e'  the,Tork  °f  them  that  turn  aside
ff/-  f04-  therefore  1  /;.  every  false  way,  128.

A  va“ 'thoughts  II 163.  III.  and  abhor  lying
139.  21.  do  not  J /;.  them,  O  Lord,  that  hate  thee?
ZZ.  yea,  1  /;.  them  with  perfect  hatred

8. 13.  the  evil  way  and  froward  mouth  do  Ih.
IJ°.  61  •  8.  J  h.  robbery  for  burnt-offering
Jer.  44.  4.  do  not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  h
Amos  5.  21  J  /;.  I  despise  your  feast-Jays
v  1  o  Palaces,  therefore  will  I  deliver  city
Zee/;.  8.  17.  for  all  these  are  things  that  1  h.  saith  L
Pom.  7.  15.  but  what  I  /;.  that  do  I
Rev.  2.  6.  the  deeds  of  the  N  ic*>laitanes  I  h.  15.
HATE  me.

PrnA2!'  t0  me’  seein§:  ye  h.  me  f

Lxod.  20.  5.  visiting  iniquity  to  the  third  and  fourth

generation  of  them  that  /;.  me,  Deut  5  o‘
aT’i°,2V41J  and  1  wdl  roward  them  that  h.  me  ’
Judg.  11  7.  do  notye  /;.  me?  ||  14. 16.  tliou  dost  /;.  me
~  Kam.  22.  41.  destroy  them  that  /;.  me,  Ps  18  40
TW.  9. 13.  trouble  which  I  suffer  of  them  that  h.  me
2'2- 19-  and  thej'  /;.  me  with  cruel  hatred

f  .f11'  \vink  that  /l-  me  without  a  cause
58. 19.  they  that  /;.  me  wrongfully  are  many,  69.  4.
Zl-  7-  all  that  /;.  me  whisper  together  against  me
*o  D  T?  casf  miquity  upon  me,  in  wrath  /;.  me
69-  14.  let  me  he  delivered  from  them  that  h.  me
86.  17-  that  they  which  /;.  me  may  see  it

13.  1:  1  shall  see  my  desire  upon  them  that  h.  me
1  tov.  8.  36.  all  they  that  /;.  me  love  death

HATED.

Va,cob-  because  of  the  blessing
29.  31  the  L  saw  Leah  was  /;.  ||  33.  that  I  was  h.
a!,'  brethren  /;.  Joseph  yet  the  more,  5,  8

49.  23.  the  archers  shot  at  him  and  /;.  him
a11a(A  V  ?T*  and  said,  because  the  Lord  h.  us,  9  28
4.  42.  /;.  him  not  in  times  past,  19.  4,  6.  Josh.  20.  5!
21-  15.  another  h.  ||  16.  before  the  son  of  the  /;.

17 .  shall  acknowledge  the  son  of  /;.  for  first-born
Judg.  15.  o.  I  thought  that  thou  hadst  utterly  h.  her
IKum.  b.  8.  the  lame  and  blind  that  are  /;.  of  David’s

lo  io  KmV°r  h‘  Tamar  \\  22.  Absalom  /i.Amnon

23.  18.  he  delivered  me  from  my  strong  enemv
and  from  them  that  /;.  me,  Psal.  18  17

Lsjh  -9.  1.  the  Jews  had  rule  over  them  that/;,  them
r,  ,,ld„!ha!  they  would  unto  those  that  h.  them
n  ?1'^29’  at  tile  destruction  of  him  that  /;.  me

u  1  h;iV1 h-  th«  congregation  of  evil  doers
ol.  0.  I  have  /;.  them  that  regard  lying  vanities
44.  7.  thou  hast  put  them  to  shame  that  /;.  us

50.  12.  neither  was  it  he  that  /;.  me,  that  did  ma-unf  y
106.  10.  he  saved  them  from  him  that  /;.  them

41.  and  they  that  /;.  them  ruled  over  them
P/°Fi  T  29.  they  /;.  knowledge,  and  did  not  choose
5.  12.  and  say,  how  have  I  /;.  instruction

14.  17.  and  a  man  of  wicked  devices  is  /;.

20.  the  poor  is  /;.  even  of  his  own  neighbour

Feel.  2.  17.  therefore  I  /;.  life  ||  18.  1  /;.  labour
Ha'  £°;  15.  whereas  thou  hast  been  forsaken  and  h.

66.  5.  brethren  that  /;.  you  said,  Lord  be  glorified
Jer.  12.  8.  therefore  have  I  /;.  mine  heritage
Lxek.  16.  37- 1  will  gather  all  them  that  thou  hast  h.

35.  t>.  sith  thou  hast  not  /;.  blood,  blood  pursue
Bos  9. 15.  for  there  I  /;.  them  for  wickedn.  ofdoin°-s
Mai.  1.  3.  I  loved  Jacob,  and  /;.  Esau,  Rom.  q  13
Mat.  10. 22.  ye  shall  be  /;.  Mark  13.  13.  Luke  21.  17*

24.  9.  ye  shall  be  /;.  of  all  nations  for  my  name
Luke  19. 14.  his  citizens  /;.  him,  and  sent  a  message
John  15.  18.  ye  know  that  it  /;.  me  before  it  /;.  you

24.  have  both  seen  and  /;.  both  me  and  my  Father

25.  written  in  their  law,  they  h.  me  without  a  cause
17.  14.  world  hath  /;.  them,  because  not  of  world

Lph.  5.  29.  no  man  ever  yet  /;.  bis  own  flesh
Heb.  1. 9.  thou  hast  loved  righteousn.  and  /;.  iniouitv
HATEFUL.

Psal.  36.  2.  until  his  iniquity  be  found  to  be  /;.

Lit.  3.  3.  we  were  /;.  and  hating  one  another
Rev.  18.  2.  a  cage  of  every  unclean  and  h.  bird
_  ,  HATEFULLY.

Ezek.  23.  29.  and  they  shall  deal  with  thee  h
„  HATERS.

Psal.  81. 15.  the  /;.  of  Lord  should  have  submitted
l\om.  1.  30.  backbiters,  /;.  of  God,  despiteful
HA  TEST.

2 'Sam .19. 6.  lovest  thine  enemies,  and  /;.  thy  friends
1  sal,  5.  5.  thou  //.  all  workers  or  iniquity
45. 7-  thou  lovest  righteousness,  and  /;.  wicked  ness
50.  17.  thou  //.  instruction,  and  castest  my  words
Lzek.  23.  28.  deliver  thee  into  hand  whom  thou  h.

Kev.  2.6.  thou  /;.  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitane*

215


HAY


HAY


HAT


HATETH.  ,
hxod.  23.  5.  if  see  the  ass  of  him  that  /'.  thee  lying

/ 7  10  Lord  not  be  slack  to  him  that  A.  him

J12  31  every  abomination  he  /i.  have  they  don
16  20.  nor  set  up  any  image  which  theLmd";
oo_  Pi.  1  .rave  my  daughter  unto  this  man,  he  /t.  her
Job  16.  9-  he  teareth  me  in  his  wrath,  who  _•

‘U.  1?.  shall  even  he  that  A.  right,  govei  •  ,  ,
■psal.  11.  5.  him  that  loveth  vio  ence,  his  soul  .

120  6  my  soul  long  dwelt  with  him  that  //.  peace
S.  11  15  and  he  that  A.  suretyship  is  sure
i o  i  he  that  h.  reproof  is  brutish

g;  k  a  ri  'hteous  man  A.  lying,  but  a  wicked  man
24.  he  that  spareth  his  rod  A.- his  son.

15.  10.  and  he  that  A.  reproof  shall  di
hut  he  that  h.  gifts  shall  live  , .

26?  *2  4.  he  that  A.  dissembleth  with  bis  Hps
'a  1  vin0-  tongue  h .  those  that  are  athlete
6  lie  that  A  "covetousness  shall  prolong  days
™  •  hoso  is  partner  with  a  thief  A.  his  own  soul

i  14  and  your  appointed  feasts  my.soul  A.
Mai  k  16  the  lord  saith,  that  he  A.  put  ing  away
Tnbo  3  20  every  one  that  doeth  evil  A.  the  light
7  7  hut  me  the  world  A.  because  1  testi  v  ot  it
\o  7o5.  he  that  A.  his  life  in  this  world  shall  keep >  it
15  19  ye  are  not  of  world,  therefore  world  A.  you
09  he  that  A.  me  A.  my  Father  also
1  John  2.  9.  he  that  A.  his  brother  is  in  darkness,  11.
s  15  whosoever  A.  his  brother  is  a  murdere
•4  20! if  say , I  love  God,  and  A.  his  brother, is  a  liar
HATING


Fmrl  18  21.  provide  men  of  truth.  A.  covetousness
Tit  i  t  in  times  past  hateful,  and  A.  one  another


Judih.'  Eeven  the  garment  spotted  by  the  flesli

Gen.  24.  36.  and  unto  him  A.  he  giv.  all  that  he  A.
i  ■ ...  oo  5  whatsoever  uncleanness  he  A.

4  28^0  devoted  thing  of  all  he  A.  shall  be  sold
'Sum.  23. 22.  he  h.  the  strength  of  an  iimcorn, -4.  8.

°7.  4.  wiiy  name  done  away  because  he  A  n
Dent  21. 16.  his  sons  to  inherit  that  which  he  .

17.  the  first-born  a  double  portion  of  all 6®  A.

tos a  6  22.  bring  out  thence  woman  and  all  she  A.

7  15  he'shall  be  burnt  with  fire,  lie  and  all  he  A.

1  Sam.  15 .22 !  A .Lord  as  great  delight  in  offerings?
o  Kings  4.2.  thine  handmaid  A.  not  any  thing  in  hou.

14.  verily  she  A.  no  child,  her  husband  is  old
Job  1.  10.  hedge  about  all  he  A.  H  11.  touch  all  he  A.

12  behold,  all  that  he  A.  is  in  thy  power
o' 4.  ail  that  a  man  A.  will  he  give  tor  his  life  }

5*  16  so  the  poor  A.  hope  ||  38.  28.  A.  rain  a  father  .

Psal.  il.  16?  a  rittle  that  a  righteous  man  A  is  better
lou  11  let  the  extortioner  catch  all  that  he  A.
m  5.  happy  is  the  man  A.  his  quiver  full  of  them
146  5  happy  he  that  A.  God  ot  Jacob  toi  his  help
Proh.  12. 9.  he  that  isdespised  and  A.  aservantis  bet.
io  4  t^0  sluRRard  desireth,  and  h .  nothin,-,

?!  there  is  that  maketh  himself  rich  yet  A  nothing

16.  22.  understanding  is  life  unt?

17.  8.  a  precious  stone  in  eyes  of  hm  that  A.  it
IQ.  23.  and  he  that  A.  it  shall  abide  satisfied
°3  29  who  A.  woe  ?  who  A.  sorrow  j  who  A.  wounds .

Ech  4.  8?  yea,  he  A.  neither  ch  Id  nor  brother
10.  for  he  A.  not  another  to  help  him  up  ;

6.  8.  for  what  A.  the  wise  more  than  the  fool
o  q  neither  h.  he  power  m  the  day  ot  death

Cant  8  8  we  have  a  little  sister,  and  she  A.  no  breasts

if  a.  29  .’a’,  behold  he  is  taint,  and  his  soul  A.  appetite
45  9? he  A.  no  hands  ||  50.  10.  and  A.  no  light
53  o  he  A.  no  form  nor  comeliness,  when  see  him
55*  l!  he  that  A.  no  money,  come  ye,  buy  and  eat
Jer  23. 28.  prophet  that  A.  a  dream ,  let  him  tell ,  anc
’  ~h’e  that  A.  my  word,  let  him  speak  my  woid
49. 1.  A.  Israel  no  sons  ?  A.  he  no  heir,  why  then

il/«/.i. 14.  cursed  be  deceiver  which  A.  in  flock  a  male

Mat.  8. 20.  A.  not  where  to  lay  head,  Luke  9. 58.

11  15.  he  that  A.  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear,  13.  9,
43.  Mark  4.  9.  Luke  8.  8.  1 14.  35.  Lev.  ~.  7-
18.  nor  eating,  nor  drinking,  they  say  he  A.  adevil
13  12.  whosoever  A.  to  him  shall  be  given.andmoie
abundance ;  who  A.  not,  from  him  shal  be  taken
that  he  A.  25. 29-  Mark 4  25.  LukeQ.lQ.\jy.~0.

44.  selleth  all  that  he  A.  and  buyeth  thattie  i
56.  whence  A.  this  man  these  things
Marks  °°  he  A.  Beelzebub,  and  casteth  out  devils
m  because  they  said,  he  I,  an  unclear >  spir.t
Luke  7-  33.  and  ye  say,  he  A.  adevul ,  John  10.  ~0.
i«  44  he  will  make  him  ruler  ovei  all  that  ne n
IF  33!  that  forsaketh  not  all  that  he  A.  cannot  be
20. 24.  whose  superscription  A.  it .  they ^said  Gesar  s
o o  gfi  he  that  A.  a  purse,  he  that  A.  no  swoid
04  39  a  spirit  A.  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  see  me
John  3. 29.  he  that  A.  the  bride,  is  the  biidegi  ooni
36.  believeth  A.  everlasting  hie,  5. 24. 1  6.  47,54.

5  °6.  as  the  Father  A.  life  in  himself,  so  A.  gi^  en
12.  48.  A.  one  iudgeth  him,  the  word 1  have  spoken
IF  21."  he  that  A.  my  commandm.  and  keepeth  them
30  the  prince  of  this  world  A.  nothing  in  me
15  13.  "reater  love  A.  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man
16.  15. 'all  things  that  the  Father  A.  aie  mine
19'.  11.  delivered  thee  unto  me,  A.  the  greater  sin
Pont  3  1.  what  advantage  then  A.  the  Jew  .

4.  2.'  if' justified  by  works,  he  A.  whereofto  glory
9.  21.  A.  not  the  potter  power  ovei  the  day  •  .

1  Cor.  7. 4.  the  wife  A.  not  power  of  her  own  bo<  y
7.  but  every  man  A.  his  proper  gift  of  God

14. 26.  every  one  of  you  A.  a  psalm,  A.  a  doctrine

2  Cor.  6. 14.  what  fellowship  A.  righteousness  with

unright.  ?  what  communion  A.  light  w  ith  darkn. .
15.  wfiat  concord  A.  Christ?  ||  16.  A.  temple  of  G.
8. 12.  it  is  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  “•
Gal  4.27.  for  the  desolate  A.  more  children  than  she
Eph.  5. 5.  nor  idolater  A.  any  inheritance  in  kingdom
Phil.  .3.  4.  if  any  thinketh  he  A.  whereof  may  trust
Ueb.  3.  3.  the  builder  A.  more  honour  than  the  house
7  °4  this  man  A.  an  unchangeable  priesthood
I0.~3f>.  confidence,  which  A.  recompense  of  reward
Jam.  2. 14.  though  a  man  say  he  A.  faith,  not  works
1  John  0  23.  who  denieth  Son,  same  A.  not  f  atler
3  3  every  man  that  A.  this  hope  111  him  punfieth
'15' ve  know  that  no  murderer  A.  eternal  life
17'  whoso  A.  this  world’s  good,  and  seetli  brother

216


1  John  4. 16.  we  have  bel.  the  love  that  God  A.  to  us
18.  there  is  no  fear  in  love,  because  teai  A. ' form.

5  10  he  that  believeth  on  Son  of  G.  A.  the  witness
40  iie  that  A.  the  Son  A.  life,  A.  not  .son  A.  not  life

0  John  9.  whoso  abideth  not  in  doctrine  of  Christ  A.

~  not  God,  that  abideth  A.  both  the  l  athei  and  Son
liev  3-  7-  that  A.  key  of  David  opens,  no  man  shuts
lo  8.  wildern.  where  she  A.  a  place  prepaied  of  G.

10  because  he  knoweth  that  he  ^\&uta  short  time
17' 7 .  beast  which  A.  the  seven  heads  and  ten  horns
y  and  here  is  the  mind  which  A.  wisdom
20.  6.  on  such  the  second^death  A.  no  power

01  tli6V  cii<ra  ed  another  well, called  it  A.

Num  35.  20.' if  he  thrust  him  of  A  or  hurl  at  him
0  Sam.  13.  15.  A.  wherewith  he  hated  her  gi  eater
Psal.  25.  19-  and  they  hate  me  with  cruel  A.

109  3  they  compassed  me  about  with  A.

5? they  have  rewarded  me  A.  for  my  love
13Q  QP  1  hate  them  with  perfect  A.  I  count  them
Proii. To.  12.  A.  stirs  up  strifes,  love  covers  all  sins

18  he  that  hicleth  A.  with  lying  lips,  is  a  fool
15^17  better  than  a  stalled  ox,  and  A.  therewith
26  26.  whose  A.  is  covered  by  deceit,  his  wickedn.

Vrrl  9  1  no  man  knoweth  either  lo\e  or  A.

6  their  iove,  their  A.  and  envy  is  now  perished
Ezek.  25. 15.  vengeance  to  destroy  it  for  the  old  /.

35  5  because  thou  hast  bad  a  perpetual  A.

1  i  T  will  do  according  to  envy  hast  used  out  of  A.

Hos‘  9  7  for  multitude  of  iniquity ,  and  for  great  A
8.  but  the  prophet  is  A.  in  the  house  of  his  God
Gal.  5.  20.  witchcraft,  A^the  works  ot  the  flesh

T)a7i  3  °l  men  were  bound  in  their  hosen  and  A.

HAUGHTY.  .

0  Sam.  22. 28.  thine  eyes  are  upon  A.  to  bring  down

~Psal  131  1  Lord,  my  heart  is  not  A.  nor  eyes  lofty

Prov. 6.t  17  the Lordhateth A  eyes, a  lying  tongue
16  18  and  a  A.  spirit  goeth  before  a  fall
is'.  12.  before  destruction  the  heart  of  man  is  A.
oi  04.  proud  and  A.  scorner  is  his  nan le
7'  /  3  46  because  the  daughters  ot  /ion  are  A.

10.  33.  high  hewn  down,  and  A.  shall  be  humbled
04.  4.  the  A.  people  of  the  earth  do  languish
l'*ek  16  50.  were  A.  before  me,  I  took  them  away

Zeph.  3. 11.  no  m^Ir^l4jGinTLY  °f  ^  m0Unta
Mic  2.  3.  neither  shall  ye  go  A.  this  time,  is  evil
HAUGHTINESS.

Prov  °1.  +  4.  the  A.  of  eyes  and  a  proud  heart  is  sin
Jja.2.11.  A.  of  men  shall  be  bowed  down,  L.  exalted
li'and  the  A.  of  men  shall  be  made  low
13. 'll.  and  1  will  lay  low  the  A.  °f  the  tcrnWe
16  6.  we  heard  of  the  A.  of  Moab,  Jer.  48.  ~9-
HAUN1.  .

1  Sam  °3  °2.  go  and  see  his  place  where  his  A.  is
1  HAUNT.  . .  ,

1  Sam.  30. 31.  where  David  and  men  were  wont  to  A.
Ezek.  26. 17 .  cause  their  terror  to  be  on  all  that  A.  it
HAVE.

Gen.  11.  6.  the  Lord  said,  ^eyA.allonelanguage
43. 7.  A.  ye  another  brother  t  [44. 19.  A.  ye  a  rauie  .

46.  32.  and  they  have  brought  all  that  they  A.

Exod.  20.  3.  thou  shalt  A.  no  other  gods,  5.  1.

Lev  7.7.  priest  that  maketh  atonement  shall  A.  it, 8.

10.  every  meat-offering  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  A.

19. 36.  a  just  epliali  and  a  just  hin  shall  j  e  A.

00  13.  priest’s  daughter  h.  no  child ,  JSum.  ^7*8,  .  •
Num.  1 L13.  whence  should  I  h.\ lesh  to  give  nto  all
00  38.  //.  I  now  any  powei  at  all  tpoa>  any  tn in_

25' 13  covenant  of  peaceheand  hisseed  shallA.it
35!  8.' from  them  that  A.  many,  them  that  A.  few
Vent.  5. 26.  who  hath  heard  voice  of  God, as  v  e  A..
Josh.  2. 13.  ye  will  save  alive  father  and  all  they  A.
17.  18.  though  they  A.  iron  chariots  and  be  strong
22!  24.'  what  A.  you  to  do  with  Lord  God  of  Israel.
Judo ■  it.  15.  A.  ye  called  us  to  take  that  we  A. .
18?24.  ye  A.  taken  my  gods,  and  what  A.  I  more  .
Filth  1. 12.  turn  again,  tor  1  am  too  old  to  A.  an  hus
band,  if  l  should  A.  an  husband  also  to-night
1  Sam  8  19.  but  we  will  A.  a  king  over  us
9.  7.  there  is  not  a  present  to  bring;  what  A.  we  .

15.  3.  go  and  utterly  destroy  all  that  they  A.

18  8  what  can  he  A.  more  but  the  kingdom  .

2l!  15  A  I  need  of  madmen,  that  ye  A.  brought  ?

9  Sam.  13.  9.  Amnon  said,  A.  out  all  men  from  me
15  36.  they  A.  there  with  them  their  two  son.->>

16. 10.'  what  A.  1  to  do  with  you,  ye  sons  ot  Zeruiah.
18.18. 1  A.  no  son  to  keep  my  name  in  remembrance
19. 28.  what  right  A.  1  yet  to  cry  any  more  to  king  ?
34.  Barzillai  said  unto  king,  how  lonB  A.  I  to  li  e.
Tsrapl  said,  W6  h.  ten  parts  in  the  Kin0

1  Kings  8.28.  A.  thou  respect  unto  prayerof  thy  serv.
1°  16.  saying,  what  portion  A.  we  in  David
17*  12.  I  A.  not  a  cake,  but  an  handful  of  meal
op  4  my  lord,  O  king,  1  am  thine,  and  all
04  2  that  I  may  A.  it  for  a  garden  of  herbs

22!  17.  Israel  scattered  as  sheepthatA.  no  shephe

>  Kinas  11. 15.  A.  her  forth  without,  2  L  hi  .  23.  14.
°0  9.  Isaiah  said,  this  sign  shalt  thou  A.  of  the  L.

2  Chron.  1. 12.  nor  shall  any  after  thee  A.  the  like

16.  9.  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  A.  wars  3

35  what  A.  1  to  do  with  thee,  king  ot  Judah.

23.  he  laid,  A.  me  away,  for  lam  sore  wounded
Keh.  5.  5.  other  men  A.  our  lands  and  vineyards
Toh  3  9  let  it  look  tor  light  but  A.  none
'  83.'o  that  1  might  A.  my  request,  that  God  would

10  then  should  1  yet  A.  comfort,  yea,  1  would
21  15  what  profit  should  we  A.  if  pray  unto  him?

30  13  they  mar  my  path,  they  A.  no  helper

35!  3  vvhat  profit  shill  I  A.  if  be  cleansed  from  sin
Psal  2.4.  the  Lord  shall  A.  them  in  deiision

14.  4.  A.  workers  of  iniquity  no  knowleilge  .  53  4

16.  6.  in  pleasant  places,  1  A.  a  goodly  benta^e

31  °5  let  them  not  say,  ah,  so  would  we  A.  it
7.3'.  25'.  whom  A.  I  in  heaven  but  thee  f  none  upon

104. 33.  I  will  sing  to  my  God  w/lllenItf'">a  ‘  t  do
111.  10.  a  good  understanding  A  all  they  that  do
115.  5.  they  A.  mouths  ;  eyes  A.  the>  ,  butsee  not
h  thev  h  ears  ;  noses  h .  they, 7- 1  •

119.  42.  so  shall  1  A.  wherewith  to  answer  liun
165.  great  peace  A.  they  which  love  th>  law


p.  1 46  2.  sin"  pr.  unto  my  G.  while  I  A.  any  being
149.  d'  this  honour  A.  all  his  saints,  praise^  Lord

Prov  1  14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  all  A.  one  puise

oo  4  the  slug,  shall  beg  in  harvest,  and  A.  nothing
oo’  04  shall  A.  him  become  his  son  at  the  .ength
on*  o  Vnd  I  A.  not  the  understanding  of  a  man
3.  nor  A.  1  tlie  knowledge  ot  the  Holy
V/  ri  10  veil  they  h.  &ll  one  breathy  so  th<itHrn<in
7.' ^l2?\haiwis’doniygiveth  life  to  them  that  A.  it
9  5  neither  A.  they  any  more  a  reward
6  neither  A  they  any  more  portion  tor  ever
Cant.  8. 8.  we  A.  a'little  sister  and  she ihath  no  breasts
]<’  thou,  O  Solomon,  must  A.  a  thousand
Isa'.  5.  13.  are  gone,  because  they  A.  no  knowledge

r/3  1°.  pass  over,  there  also  shalt  thou  A.  no  rest
06  4  we  A.  a  strong  city,  salvation  will  G.  appoint

30  29 .  ye  shall  A.  a  song  as  in  the  night  when  a  holy
43  8  brino-  the  blind  that  A.  eyes,  death  that  A  eai  s
45  01  A  not  I  the  Lord  ?  there  is  no  G  .  beside  me
oi  sav  in  the  L.  A.  1  righteousness  and  strength

49  °0  the  children  which  thou  s.ialt  A.  shall  say

50  2  is  my  hand  shortened  ?  A.  1  no  power  to  deli  v .  *

1  i .  this  A.  of  my  hand  ye  shall  lie  down  in  sorrow

50  5  therefore  what  A.  1  here,  saith  the  Lord
56.  li.  are  greedy  dogs,  which  <jan  never  A.  enough
61  7.  for  your  shame  you  shall  A.  double
lei  5.  21.  which  A.  eyes  and  see  not,  which  A.  ears
34.  my  people  love  to  A.  it  so.what  will  ye  do  in
12.  12.  sword  of  L.  devour,  no  flesh  shall  A.  peace
46.  2.  neither  shalt  A.  sons  nordaugh.  in  this  place
°3  17.  the  Lord  hath  said,  ye  shall  A.  peace,  2^.  1 .
35'.  7.  ye  shall  not  plant  vineyard,  nor  A.  any
36.  30.  he  shall  A.  none  to  sit  upon  throne  of  David
38  0  he  shall  A.  his  life  for  a  prey ,  and  shall  live
4ll  14.  to  the  which  they  A.  a  desire  to  return
49  9  they  will  destroy  till  they  A.  enough

31.  the  nation  which  A.  neither  gates  nor  bars
Lam.  .3. 21. this  1  recall  tomy  mind,  there t.A.  I hope
Ezek.  5. 11.  neither  will  1  A.  pity, 7. 4. 1  8. 18. 1  9. 10.

9.  5.  let  not  your  eye  spare,  neither  A  y  e  pity
48  23.  A.  I  any  pleasure  that  the  wicked  die

32. '  f  A.  no  pleasure  in  the  death  ot  him,  33. 11.

01  05  when  iniquity  shall  A.  an  end,  ~y.

Dan  0  30.  for  any  wisdom  that  l  A.  more  than  any
.3.  25.  I  see  four  men  loose,  and  they  A.  no  hurt

5  7.  shall  A.  a  chain  ot  gold  about  his  neck,  16.

6  0  and  the  king  should  A.  no  damage
Posh  10.  3.  for  now  they  shall  say  we  A.  no  lung
Mic  3  6.  night  shall  be  unto  you,  ve  shall  not  A.  us.
Zevh  0  10.  this  shall  they  A.  tor  their  pride  .
Haa.  1.  6.  ye  eat,  but  ye  A.  not  enough  ;  ye  drink
Mai'  2. 10.  A.  we  not  all  one  father  hath  not  Ood
Mat.  3.  9.  we  A.  Abraham  to  our  father,  Luke  3. 8.

5.  40.  take  thy  coat,  let  him  A.  thy  cloak  also
46  if  love  them  wholoveyou  what  reward  A.  ye.

6  2  verilv  I  say,  they  A.  their  reward,  5, 16.

8  00.  the  foxes  A.  holes,  birds  A.  nests,  Luke  9 .  58.
29.  what  A.  we  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Son  of
y  God  ?  Mark  1 . 24.  Luke  4. 34.

13  12.  and  he  shall  A.  more  abundance,  25.  29.

14.  4.  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  A.  her,  Mark  6. .18.

15.  33.  whence  should  we  A.  so  much  bi  ead  in  wild.
.34.  how  many  loaves  A.  ye  .  Mark  6.  j38^1  8.5.

17.  20.  if  A.  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard,  21. 21
19. 16.  what  shall  I  do,  that  I  may  A.  eternal  life
27.  followed  thee,  what  shall  we  A.  therefore
°6.  11.  ye  A.  the  poor  always  with  you,  but  mere
A.  not  always,  Mark  14.  7-  John  1~.8.
65.  what  further  need  A.  we  of  witnesses .

07  19.  A.  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man
'43  let  him  deliver  him  now,  if  he  will  A.  him
Mark  0  17.  the  whole  A.  no  need  ot  the  physic  ian
19  as  long  as  they  A.  the  bridegroom  with  them
4  0.3.  if  any  man  A.  ears  to  hear,  7.  16.  Pev.13.  9.

40  why  are  ye  so  fearful,  how  is  it  ye  h.  no  fait  .1
8  16  saying,  it  is  because  we  A.  no  bread
9.  50."  A.  salt  in  yourselves,  A.  peace  one  with  anotii,
in  04  thou  shalt  //.treasure  m  heaven,  LukeX6.  --
1 1!  23.  but  shall  believe,  shall  A.  whatsoev.  he  salt

04.  believe  ye  receive  them,  and  ye  shall  A.  ther
Luke  6.  32.  who  love  you,  what  thank  A.  ye  .3.3, 3
8.  18?  from  him  be  taken  what  he  seemeth  to  //.

11  5  which  of  you  shall  A.  a  friend,  and  shall  _o

41  but  rather  give  alms  of  such  things  as  ye  A.
10  4  and  after  that  A.  no  more  that  they  can  do

24.  which  neither  A.  store-house  nor  barn
33  sell  thatye  A.  and  give  alms,  provide  ba=s
14. 18.  must  go  and  see  it.  I  pray  A.  me  vxcused,  l
15.  31.  thou  art  ever  with  me,  all  that  1  A.  r  tni
19. 14.  we  will  not  A.  this  man  to  reign  o\  e
22.  31.  Satan  hath  desired  to  A.  you,  that  he  m.
24.  47.  what  communications  ye  A.  one  t0  ™  *  ,

39.  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  >  e  see  i
44.  he  said,  A.  ye  here  any  meat .  Jotm  21- >•
John  2. 3.  the  mother  of  J  esus  said ,  they  A.  no
4.  woman,  what  A.  I  to  do  vvith  thee  .

3.  15.  should  not  perish,  but  A.  everlast.  Afe,  16-

f  %

38.  and  ye  A.  not  his  word 1  abiding  in  you


38.  and  yen.  not  ms  wuiu

42. 1  know  that  ye  A.  not  the  love  of  God  in

i.  40.  believeth  on  him  may  //.  everlasting  life

_ _ 1  ,,,,  L10  ^dcVi  vp  /1  no  life  in  you


6.  40.  beiieveui  on  mm  * T;7*  vnn
53.  except  j’e  eat  his  flesh,  ye  A.  no  life  m  >

8.  6.  tempting,  that  they  might  A.  toaccuse
12.  he  that  followeth  m^shall  A.  the  light
41.  A.  one  father,  even  God  ||  49.  1  A.  not

9.  41.  if  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  A.  ms  m
10. 10. 1  am  come  that  they  might  h.  life_  a .  n

16.  other  sheep  L  A.  which  are  not  of  t •

12.  35.  walk  while  ye  A.  light,  lest  darkness,  1

16.  33.  that  in  me  ye  might  A.  peace,  in  the
ye  shall  A.  tribulation,  1  A.  overcornethc

13  39.  but  ye  A.  a  custom  that  1  shou ld  re leas
19.  7  we  A.  a  law  ||  15.  we  A.  noking  bu  Cesa.
00  31.  that  believing  ye  might  A.  life  .

dr  'tvS  6  silver  and  gold  A.  I  none,  but  such

9  i: ’he ^sSd.  Lord.  W  wilt  thoo /..»>«  »£.

17.  28.  in  him  we  live,  move,  and  A.  om  e

19.  25.  know  that  by  this  craft  we  A.  ou  ,
21.  23.  we  A.  four  men  which  A.  a  vov  .  ,

Pom.  2. 14.  when  the  Gentiles,  which  / ^.nott
6.  22.  ye  A.  your  fruit  unto  holiness,  tne  ei.a


H  A  V


fl  E


Rem.  8.  9.  now  if  any  man  A.  not  Spirit  of  Christ
9.9.  this  tune  I  will  come,  and  Sara  shall  A.ason
1C.  4.  and  all  members  A.  not  the  same  office
14.  22.  hast  thou  faith  ?  A.  to  thyself  before  God
lo.  17-  l  h.  whereof  I  may  glory  through  Christ
1  Cor.  2.  16.  but  we  h.  the  mind  of  Christ

4.  11.  are  naked,  and  h.  no  certain  dwelling-place
lo.  though  instructors,  yet  A.  ye  not  many  fathers

5.  1.  that  one  should  /i.  his  father's  wife

6.  19.  Holy  Gil.  which  is  in  you,  which  ye  A.  of  G.
t  •  2.  to  avoid  fornication,  let  every  man  A.  his  own

wife,  let  every  woman  A.  her  own  husband
C8.  yet  such  shall  A.  trouble  in  the  flesh
29.  they  that  A.  wives  be  as  tho’  they  had  none
32.  1  wpuld  A.  you  without  carefulness
40.  I  think  also  that  1  h.  the  Spirit  of  God

8.  1.  we  know,  that  we  all  A.  knowledge

9.  4.  A.  we  not  power  to  eat  and  drink  ?  5,  G.

11. 14.  it  a  man  A.  long  hair,  it  is  a  shame  to  him

10.  it  a  woman  A.  long  hair,  it  is  a  glory  to  her

16.  we  A.  no  such  custom,  nor  the  churches  of  G.
22.  what,  A.  ye  not  houses  to  eat  and  drink  in  ?

'}•  eXep°t  say  to  hand,  l  A.  no  need  of  thee
30*  the  gifts  of  healing  ?do  alt  interpret  ?

}•  '*•  I10J  charity,  l  am  become  sounding  brass

2.  though  I  A.  all  faith  and  A.  not  charity,  .3.
lo.  31.  by  your  rejoicing  which  I  A.  Christ  Jesus
34.  tor  some  h.  not  the  knowledge  of  God
2  C°r.  3. 4.  such  trust  A.  we  thro’  Christ  to  God-ward

4.  1.  seeing  we  A.  this  ministry,  we  taint  not
8. 11.  a  performance  out  of  that  which  ye  A.
ciii 28-  he  may  A.  to  give  to  him  that  needeth

5.  11  /;.  nofedowship  with  the  unfruitful  works
PhU.  1  7.  I  A.  you  m  my  heart  ||  4. 18.  but  I  A.  all
Col  1.  4.  and  love  which  ye  A.  to  all  the  saints

2.  1.  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  L  A.  for  you

3.  ]3.  it  any  man  h.  aauarrel  against  any

4.  1.  knowing  that  ye  also  h.  a  Master  in  heaven

1  nett.  2.  14.  ye  suffered,  as  they  A.  of  the  Jews

2  lhess.  3.  2.  pray  for  us,  tor  all  men  A.  not  faith

9.  not  1 because  we  A.  not  power,  but  to  make

2- 4.  who  will  A.  all  men  to  be  saved
Uet.  4. 13.  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  A.  to  do
14.  seeing  then  that  we  A.  a  great  high-priest
?•  by  reason  of  use  A.  their  senses  exercised
o.  19.  which  hope  we  h.  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul
8‘  f.  su' '  “  High-Priest,  set  on  right-hand

3.  that  this  man  somewhat  also  to  offer
10.  34.  that  ye  h.  in  heaven  a  better  substance

13.  5.  be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  h

10.  we  A.  an  altar  whereof  they  h.  no  right  to  eat

14.  here  A.  we  no  continuing  city,  we  seek  one
Jam.  1.  4.  but  let  patience  A.  her  perfect  work

2.  1.  ".not  faith  of  Christ  with  respect  of  persons
14.  and  h.  not  works,  can  faith  save  him  *

17.  even  so  faith,  if  it  h.  not  works,  is  dead

18.  aman  may  say,  thou  hast  faith,  and  I  A.  works

3.  U.ffve  /i.  bitter  envy,  and  strife  in  your  hearts
4. 2.  ye  lust  and  h.  not,  ye  desire  to  A.  ye  fight  and

d  .  i  r.  Yar’  ye  ^  not>  because  ye  ask  not
.  v>et’  1'  ab°ve  all  things  h.  fervent  cliarity
fee.  1. 19.  wei  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy
-T 14* “heart  they  h.  exercised  with  covetousness
John  1.8.  it  we  say ,  we  h.  no  sin,  deceive  ourselv
h-  “  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus
,0.  butye  A.  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One

4.  21.  and  tins  commandment  h.  we  from  him
5. 13.  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  h.  eternal  life

14.  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  li.  in  him
lo.  know  we  A.  the  petitions  we  desired  of  him
o  1  no  gI!eat,er  J°>’  than  to  hear  that  my
lev  ^10*rePhes,  \vho  loveth  to  h.  the  pre-eminence
;  1#  18;  t  ,l •  the  keys  of  hell  and  ot  death
-.4.  yet  1  h.  somewhat  against  thee,  14,  20.

10.  and  ye  shall  h.  tribulation  ten  days

ot'  k°  fyoUu’  ?nd  l?  a3,mai?3r  33  h •  not  this  doctrine
.5.  but  what  ye  A.  already,  hold  fast  till  I  come
b  uc,^  /i-  not  the  seal  of  God  in  their  foreh.

}r*7*  “d  A.  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ
17  i  V  !iy  V  no  rest.day  nor  ni8ht  who  worship
Q  in'  lfhe  li  one  ™md.  and  give  their  power
2? '  R°j?ytri)  euth,rie?  tua*  h‘  the  testimony  of  Jesus
»  il  rs,la11  h-  the‘r  Par,t  in  the  lake  that  burns
c~‘  14.  that  they  may  h.  right  to  the  tree  of  life
■see  Compassion,  Dominion.

HAVING.

irf’io  7°;  ‘‘  hjs uncleanness  upon  him,  22.  3.
um s!ckness  ||  22. 22.  h.  a  wen  or  scurvy
trance,  but  A.  liis  eyes  open,  16.

clrlh  ^'l  /  >e  nHy  t0f  then?  froni  h-  husbands

Chnl,'  ri-  !'  t  dl'awn  sword  in  his  hand
’«A  fi'iV*  12<  h'  ■  u(Jah  a,nd  Benjamin  on  his  side
W  r  X  '  ™?l>rn>ng,  and  h.  his  head  covered
•  °t  V;,whi^  l-  n9  ?uidLe>  overseer,  or  ruler
'/“.till  and  h-  neither  bars  nor  gates
ech  o  •«ye  away-/'-  thy  shame;naked
tat  7  oq  i??  king  comelh  to  thee,  h.  salvation
■  q\1:  r9,  he  taught  as  one  h.  authority
36  !vprroaucth,0nty ./'-soldiers  under  me.LvAe  7. 8.

8  li  l ^feaasheep/'.  no  shepherd,  Mark-  6. 34.

9  L  tha?  h‘ two  hands  or  two  feet

-o  j o  than  h-  two  eyes  to  be  cast,  Mark  Q.  43.

04  rAhoiv  earnest,  not  A  a  wedding-garment  ?

■W  ?an  dle*  /l-  no  children,  Luke  20.  28.

6  7  e[‘ llis  wife  to  his  brother

'arl's  ?  "  Vi,an  a'ahaster  box,  Mark  14.3.
Wi.™  h'  nothing  to  eat,  Jesus  called


H  E  A


4-  Vr  we  A.  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  as  written
b.  10.  as  h.  nothing,  and  yet  possessing  all  things
7. 1.  h.  therefore  these  promises,  beloved,  cleanse
^•8- y.e  always  A.  ail  sufficiency  in  all  things
1  a  k  *  '/a  ureadlnrss  ,0  revenge  all  disobedience
•  , '  o h0pu’  wl^n  your  taith  is  increased


t't  n  “nui  is  increased

iT' l'  n°.  hope  |[  5.  27 .  not  h.  spot  or  wrinkle


18  '  uuu“  8,lu  cat, .  1  esus  called

1  '13*  MyfS*See^eino  '•  ears,  hear  ye  not?
uke  h"  i  ^?,  ree  «•  leaves  ||  12.  6.  h.  one  son


7  7  k,7*  .':.,i“-lVy'i“,au  "•  ten  pieces  01  silver  ‘
Ani  is  iWJ1K:,h  of  yo,u  f  a  servant  ploughing
3  10  fu:l‘°cV  kn°ws  he  letters,  A.  never  learned?

then  Simeon  Peter  h.  a  sword  drew  it
2  io'  a  "•  laPd’  sold  it.  and  brought  the  money
1*  o,7'  / '  a  K00d  report  of  the  Jew*,  who  dwelt
".  more  perfect  knowledge  of  that  way
j  6~>.  .I/';  n<?t  the  law,  are  a  law  to  themselves
Jcr  V.  1  / n  gdts  d'ffering  accord,  to  grace  given
37  hot K o* ^ff’atteragainst  another, goto  law
ne  that  standeth  stedfast  h.  no  necessity


6.  14.  h.  your  loins  girt  about” with ‘truth
oJ- ,l\2rhA-  adesire  to  depart,  and  be  with  Christ
'/•  h-  this  confidence  ||  30.  h.  the  same  conflict

r  oiw116  °Te  ^  9‘  I?ot  ^:,my  ,°wn  righteousn.

Cl'/.  1. 20.  h.  made  peace  thro’  the  blood  of  his  cross
,2.19.  h.  nourishment  ministered,  and  knit  together
1  itw.  3. 4.  h.  his  chil.  in  subjection  with  all  gra\  itv

4.  8.  h.  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is

5.  12.  A. .damnation,  because  they  have  cast  off
o.  8.  and  h.  tood  and  raiment,  let  us  be  content

~  2. 19.  A.  this  seal,  the  Lord  knoweth  his

3.  5.  A.  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the  power

4.  3  they  shall  heap  teachers,  A.  itching  ears

1  \.b.A.  faithful  children,  not  accused  of  riot

V. ft*  2- 12.  A.  conversation  honest  among  Gentiles
<?b\6;  o  ,a.g?od  conscience,  they  may  be  ashamed

3u4'  1‘  ?yes  adult,  that  cannot  cease
Jude  19.  these  be  sensual,  A.  not  the  Spirit
l\ev  5.  6.  A.  seven  horns  ||  8.  A.  every  one  harps

7.  2.  I  saw  an  angel,  A.  the  seal  of  the  living  God

8.  3  /i.  a  golden  censer  ||  9. 17-  A.  breast-plates
J2.  3.  A.  seven  heads  ||  12.  A.  great  wrath
}*■  o-  «•  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to  them
15.  2.  A.  the  harps  of  God  ||  17.  4.  A.  a  golden  cup
o?'  B^-greuat. Power  ||  20.  1.  A.  the  key  of  the  pit
~1. 11.  the  holy  Jerusalem,  A.  the  glory  of  God

HAVEN.

Gen.  49.13.  Zebul  shall  dwell  at  the  A.  an  A.  ofships
Vra*.  10<  •  30.  he  bringeth  them  to  their  desired  A
Acts  27.  12.  A.  not  commodious,  an  A.  of  Crete
Fair  HAVENS.

Acts 27. 8.  came  to  a  place  which  is  called  the  f  A
.  ,  HAVOCK.  *

Acts 8. 3.  as  for  Saul,  lie  made  A.  of  the  church
HAWK.

IP-  {l-  had  in  abomination,  Deut.  14. 15
Job  39.  26.  doth  the  A.  fly  by  thy  wisdom  J

r,  HAY-

r'ov-'F  25.  the  A.  appeareth  and  tender  grass
Isa.  15. 6.  the  A  is  withered  away,  the  grass  faileth
1  C or.  3. 12.  who  buildeth  on  this  foundation,  A
_  HAZEL.

Lren.  30.  37-  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  A.  and  chesnut
HE.

D en.  3.  16.  and  Ae  shall  rule  over  thee
b.  3.  not  always  strive  with  man,  for  he  is  flesh
44. 10.  Ae  with  whom  it  is  found  shall  be  my  servant
48. 19.  younger  brother  shall  be  greater  than  Ae
49.  8.  ar t  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise
Lxod.  4. 16.  Ae  shall  be  thy  spokesman  to  the  people
n  „  jnu  j  shaB  be  to  thee  instead  of  a  mouth
oF  o-.  ,  hardened  his  heart,  Ae  and  his  sen  ants
35.  34.  he  hath  put  in  his  heart  that  he  may  teach
both  he  and  Aholiab  of  the  tribe  of  Dan
Lev.  J.  33.  he  among  the  sons  of  Aaron  that  offereth
25.  54.  shall  go  out  in  jubilee,  he  and  his  children
Amwi.  ^4.  9.  and  cursed  is  he  that  curseth  thee
Deut.  .3.  1.  came,  Ae  and  all  his  people  to  battle
8.  18.  it  is  he  that  giveth  power  to  get  wealth
27 . 16.  cursed  be  he.  So  to  the  end  of  the  chapter
31. 6.  he  that  doth  go  with  thee,  Ae  will  not  fail,  8.

18  not\e  thy  Father  that  hath  bought  thee  ?

39.  1,  even  I  am  Ae,  and  there  is  no  God  with  me
r  Lsa.  41.  4.  |  43.  10,  13.  |  46.  4. 1  48.  12*

Josh.  *3.  3.  L.  your  G.  is  he  that  fought  for  you  10'
Judg.  10.  IB.  what  man  is  he  will  begin  to  light?

1  Sam .  4. 16.  I  am  he  that  came  out  of  the  army
9-2- there  was  not  a  goodlier  person  than  he

16. 12.  this  is  he  ||  25.  25.  as  his  name  is  so  is  Ae

1  A  mgs  2.  32.  who  fell  on  two  men  better  than  Ae
17. 15.  sue  and  he  and  her  house  did  eat  many  davs
18.  17.  art  thou  Ae  that  troubleth  Israel  ?

2  Kings  18.  22.  is  not  that  Ae  whose  places,  Isa.  36  7
T,VnJ 3-  Ke  in  first  year  of  reign  opened  doors
Job  9.  24.  if  not,  where,  and  who  is  Ae?

13. 19-  who  is  he  that  will  plead  with  me  ?

14. 10.  man  dieth,  and  where  is  he  ?  20. 7.  Isa  63  11
Ksal.  22. 9.  thou  art  he  that  took  me  out  of  the  womb

60. 12.  he  it  is  shall  tread  down  enemies,  108. 13
68-20.  he  that  is  our  God  is  the  God  of  salvation
100.  3.  he  is  God,  it  is  Ae  that  hath  made  us

144. 10.  it  is  he  that  giveth  salvation  to  kinas
Krov.  16.  20.  that  trusteth  in  L.  happy  is  Ae,  29. 18.
Feel.  5. 8.  Ae  that  is  higher  than  the  highest  regard.

6.  3.  I  say  that  an  untimely  birth  is  better  than  Ae
lsa.  40.  22.  it  is  he  sitteth  on  the  circle  of  the  earth
51. 12. 1,  even  I,  am  he  that  comforteth  you,  52  6
T  -  ,n  .  ff<;A»18.  5,  6,  8.  llev.  1.  '18.  |  2.  23!

Jer.  5. 12.  have  belied  the  Lord,  and  said,  it  is  not  Ae
14.  22.  art  not  thou  Ae,  O  Lord  our  God
38.  5.  the  king  is  not  he  that  can  do  any  thing
48.  26.  and  he  also  shall  be  in  derision
Fzek.  38. 17.  art  thou  Ae  of  whom  1  have  spoken  ?
nab.  1.  13.  the  man  that  is  more  riahteous  than  he
Mat.  2.  2.  where  is  he  that  is  born  king  of  the  Jews  ?
3..3.  this  is  Ae  that  was  spoken  of  by  the  prophet
11. 3.  art  thou  Ae  that  should  come  'Luke  7.  19,  20.

12.  30.  Ae  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me,  and' he
that  gathereth  not  with  me,  Luke  11.  23.

•  4~.  what  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  whose  son  is  Ae  ?

~4.  >6.  he  is  in  the  desert,  Ae  is  in  the  secret  chamb.

~6.  48.  the  same  is  he,  hold  him  fast,  Mark  14.44.
Mark  12.  32.  and  there  is  none  other  but  Ae
Luke  10.  22.  Ae  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal  him
11.  7.  and  he  from  within  shall  answer  and  say
~0-  2.  who  is  Ae  that  gave  thee  this  authority  ?

22.  27 .he  that  sitteth  at  meat,  or  he  that  serveth
~4.  6.  they  .'-aid,  he  is  not  here,  but  is  risen
21.  we  trusted  he  should  have  redeemed  Israel
John  1.  15.  this  was  he  of  whom  I  spake,  30.

4.  26.  Jesus  saith,  I  that  speak  to  thee,  am  he
7.H.  where  is  he  ?  ||  25.  is  not  this  Ae  they  seek  to  k  ?
8*~4- B  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die
»8.  then  shall  ye  know  that  I  am  Ae
9. 8.  they  said,  is  not  this  Ae  that  sat  and  begged  ?


John  9.  9.  some  said,  this  is  Ae,  but  he  said.  I  am  he
86-  who 1S  he,  Ld.  ||  37 .  Ae  that  talketii  with  thee
13. 19.  I  tell  you  that  ye  may  believe  that  1  am  Ae
knew  it  was  he  who  sat  for  alms
7*  38.  this  is  he  that  was  in  the  church  in  wildern.

1S  not  this  he  tliat  destroyed  them  who  called
10.  21.  Peter  said,  1  am  he  whom  ye  seek
42.  he  that  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  jrnffie

13.  25.  whom  think  ye  that  I  am  ?  I  am  not  Ae°
Rom.  2.  28.  he  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  one  outwardly

29.  but  he  is  a  Jew  that  is  one  inwardly

14.  18.  Ae  that  in  these  things  serveth  Christ
1  Cor.  10.  22.  are  we  stronger  than  Ae  ?

°  Cor.  10.  7.  of  himself  think  this  again,  th*it  as  Ae
.  ....  ,  „ .  is  Christ’s,  even  so  are  we  Christ’s

i  nl!ess'  6.-L  taitliful  is  Ae  that  calleth  you,  will  do  it
-  lhess.  2.  7  Ae  who  letteth,  will  let  till  he  be  taken

12. 7;  what  son  is  he  the  father  cliasteneth  not  ?
10.  but  he  tor  our  profit,  that  we  might  be  partak.

1  Pet.  1.  15.  as  Ae  which  hath  called  you  is  holy
Vnio  b  'J'^walk  in  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light
^.-8.  when  he  shad  appear,  we  may  have  confidence
3*  7 •  is  righteous,  even  as  Ae  is  righteous
24.  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  him,  4.  15.

4- 4.  greater  is  Ae  that  is  in  you,  than  Ae  in  world
17 -  because  as  he  is  so  are  we  in  this  world
O.  12.  he  that  hath  the  Son,  hath  life;  and  he  that

i  r  i  ii  c  ii  1  not  ^e  Son  of  God,  hath  not  life
3  John  1L  follow  not  evil,  he  that  doeth  good  is  of

n  ™  7f°,d  i  that  doeth  evil  hath  not  seen  God
Rev.  20.6.  hcdy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  first  resurrec.
22.  11.  he  that  is  unjust,  he  that  is  filthy
See  Blessed,  Did,  Saith.
rpr  ,  .  .  .  HEAD.

me  bead  is  the  uppermost  and  chief  part  of  the  body.
It  is  sometimes  taken  for  the  whole  man.  Prov.
10.  6.  Blessings  are  upon  the  head  of  the  just,
that  i.s,  upon  their  persons.  And  God  says  of  the
wicked,  1  will  recompense  their  way  upon  their
bead,  Eiek.  9.  10.  It  is  taken  also  for  the  life.
JJan.  1.  10.  Ye  shall  make  me  endanger  my  head
to  the  king.  It  also  signifies  a  chief  or  capital
cjty-  lsa.  7.  8.  1  he  head  of  Syria  is  Damascus.
It  denotes  a  chief  or  principal  member  in  any  so¬
ciety.  Isa.  9.  14,  15.  The  Lord  will  cut  off  from
Israel  head  and  tail.  The  ancient  and  honour¬
able,  he  is  the  head.  It  is  said.  Gen.  3.  15.  The
seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent’s
head  ,  that  is,  Christ  Jesus,  the  blessed  seed  of  the
woman,  shall  overthrow  the  power,  policy,  and
works  of  the  devil.

Head  is  taken  for  one  that  hath  rule  andpre-eminence
over  others.  Thus  God  is  the  head  of  Christ,  as
Mediator  /  from  hint  he  derives  all  his  dignity  and
authority  :  Christ  is  the  only  spiritual  head  of  his
church,  both  in  respect  of  eminence  and  influence  :
he  communicates  life,  motion,  and  strength  to  every
believer :  also  the  husband  is  the  head  of  his  wife
because  by  God's  ordinance  he  is  to  rule  over  her,
Gen.  3.  16.  Also  in  regard  of  pre-eminence  of  sex',

8  i  e  j;  3-  7 .  and  excellency  of  knowledge,  1  Cor.  14.
35.  1  he  apostle  mentions  this  subordination  of
persons  in  1  Cor.  11.  3.  But  I  would  have  you
iVn0iW’  at  the  head  of  every  man  is  Christ:  and
the  head  of  the  woman  is  the  man  ;  and  the  head
ot  Christ  is  God.

The  river  in  Paradise  was  divided  into  four  heads,
into  four  springs,  four  branches,  Gen.  2.  10.  The
stone  which  the  builders  rejected,  was  made  the
bead  of  the  corner,  Psal.  118.  22.  it  was  the  first
in  the  angle,  whether  it  were  disposed  at  the  top  of
that  angle  to  adorn  and  crown  it,  or  at  the  bottom
to  support  it.  This  in  the  New  Testament  is  applied
to  Christ,  who  is  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the
church,  to  unite  the  several  parts  thereof,  namely,
both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  together.  Thou  hast
caused  men  to  ride  over  our  heads,  Psal.  66.  12.
lhou  hast  given  us  masters  who  use  us  like  slaves,
yea,  like  beasts  to  carry  their  burdens.  The  Lord
shall  make  thee  the  head,  and  not  the  tail,  Deut.

28.  13.  Thou  shall  be  always  master,  and  never
in  subjection.

Head  is  taken  sometimes  for  poison,  because  the  He-
brew  word,  Rosch,  which  signifies  head,  signifies
likewise  poison.  Job  20. 16.  l  ie  shall  suck  the  poi¬
son,  or  head  of  asps.  In  times  of  mourning,  they
covered  their  heads,  they  cut  and  plucked  off  their
hair  ;  I  will  bring  baldness  upon  every  head,  says
the  prophet,  speaking  of  calamitous  times,  Amos  8.

10.  On  the  contrary,  in  prosperity  they  anointed
their  heads  with  sweet  oils.  Eccl.  9.  8.  Let  thy
head  lack  no  ointment.  To  shake  the  head  atone,
is  a  gesture  of  contempt  and  insult.  Psal.  22.  7.
They  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head.

Gen.  3. 15.  it  shall  bruise  thy  A.  thou  bruise  his  heel
40.  13.  yet  Pharaoh  shall  lift  up  thy  h.  19.

49.  26.  blessings  shall  be  on  the  h.  of  Joseph,  and
on  the  top  of  the  h.  of  him,  Deut.  33. 1 6.
Fxod.  29.  10.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  put  their
hands  upon  h.  of  the  bullock,  Lev.  4.  4.  |  8.  14.
lo.  put  hands  on  A.  of  the  ram,  19.  Lev.  8. 18,  22.

Lev.  1.  4.  shall  put  hand  on  the  A.  of  burnt-offering
.3.  2.  shall  lay  nis  hand  on  the  A.  of  his  offering

4.  29.  lay  his  hand  on  the  A.  of  sin-offering,  33.

13.  44.  he  is  leprous,  his  plague  is  in  his  A.

45.  his  clothes  shall  be  rent,  and  his  A.  bare
21.  5.  they  shall  not  make  baldness  on  their  A.

10.  shall  not  uncover  his  A.  nor  rend  his  clothes
Num.  5. 18.  the  priest  shall  uncover  the  woman’s  A.

6.  5.  there  shall  no  razor  come  on  the  N  azarite’s  A.

7.  the  consecration  of  his  God  is  on  his  A.

9.  then  he  shall  shave  his  A.  18.  Deut.  21. 12.

11.  and  he  shall  hallow  his  A.  that  same  day
Josh.  2.  19.  his  blood  be  on  his  A.  blood  on  our  A.

Judg.  5.  26.  she  smote  off  Sisera’s  A.  when  she  had

13. 5.  shalt  bear  a  son,  no  razor  shall  come  on  his  A.

1  Sam.  17.  57.  Goliath’s  A.  ||  31 .  9.  cut  off  Saul’s  A.

25.  39.  the  wickedness  of  Nabal'on  his  own  A.

28.  2.  I  will  make  thee  keeper  of  my  A.  forever

2  Sam.  1.  2.  a  man  came,  and  earth  upon  his  A.  15. 32.

16.  thy  blood  be  upon  thy  A.  1  Kings 2.  37.

3.  8.  Abner  was  wroth,  and  said,  am  I  a  dog’s  A  *

217


HE  A


H  E  A


HE  A


o  Sam.  3. 29.  let  it  rest  on  A.  of  Joab,  on  his  house
1C  9.*  let  me  go  over,  and  take  oil  ins  A.
o  Kings  2.  3.  take  thy  master  from  thy  A. to-day,  5.

*4  19  and  he  said  unto  his  father,  my  A.  my  A.

6  31.  if  the  h.  ot  Elisha  shall  stand  on  him
32.  son  of  a  murderer  sent  to  take  away  my  n.

10.  21.  the  virgin  despised  thee,  the  daughter  of  Je¬
rusalem  ha tir  shaken  her  A.  at  thee,  Isa.  37.

05  27.  did  lift  up  the  A.  of  Jehoiachin,  Jer.  5-.  31.
o'  Chron.  6.  23.  by  recompensing  his  way  on  his  A.

~Ezra  9.  6.  our  iniquities  are  increased  over  our  A.

Sell.  4.  4.  and  turn  their  reproach  on  their  own  A.

Esth.  9.  25.  his  device  should  return  on  his  om  n  A.

Job  1  °0  lob  arose,  shaved  his  A.  and  tell  down

10.  15  if  righteous,  yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my  A.

16.  4.  and  I  could  snake  my  A.  at  you  .

Psa/  3  3  my  glory  and  the  litter  up  of  mine  A.

7.16.  his  mischief  shall  return  on  his  own  A.

2°.  7.  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  A.
oo‘  5  thou  anointest  my  A.  with  oil,  cup  runneth
27.  6.  now  shall  my  A.  be  lifted  up  above  enemies
38  4.  mine  iniquities  are  gone  over  mine  A.

44. 14.  a  shaking  of  the  A.  among  the  People
60  7.  Ephraim  is  the  strength  of  my  A.  108.  8.

68.  21.  God  shall  wound  the  A.  of  his  enemies
83.  2.  they  that  hate  thee  have  lift  up  the  /i,

1107.  therefore  shall  he  lift  up  the  A.

140.  9.  as  for  the  A.  of  those  that  compass  me

141.  5.  be  an  oil,  which  shall  not  break  my  A.

Prov-  10.  6.  blessings  are  on  the  A.  of  the  just

11. 26.  blessing  on  the  A.  ot  him  which  selleth  corn
25.  2-2.  shalt  heap  coals  ot  fire  on  his  A.  Rom.  12.20.
Eccl.  2. 14.  the  wise  man’s  eyes  are  in  his  A.

Cant.  2.  6.  his  left  hand  is  under  my  A.  8.  3.

5. 2.  my  A.  is  filled  with  dew,  my  locks  with  drops

11.  his* A.  as  most  fine  gold  1 7 . 5.  thy  A.  as  Carmel
Isa.  1.  5.  the  whole  A.  is  sick  and  the  heart  faint
51.  11.  everlasting  joy  shall  be  on  their  A.

58.  5.  is  it  to  bow  down  his  A.  as  a  buliush  .  _

59.  17.  he  put  on  an  helmet  ot  salvation  on  his /*.
fer  2  37.  go  forth,  and  thine  hands  on  thy  h.

9.  1.0  that  my  A.  were  waters,  mine  eyes  tears
23.  19.  fall  grievously  on  the  h,  ot  wicked,  30.  w.
Ezek.  9.  10.  recompense  their  way  on  their  A.

°Q  18.  every  A.  was  made  bald,  shoulder  peeled
Dan  2.  38.  0  king,  thou  art  this  A.  ot  gold
Tnfi  4  return  vour  recompense  on  your  h.  7.

Amos' 1  '  I .  that  pant  after  dust  on  the  A.  of  the  poor

8.  10.  and  1  will  bring  baldness  on  every  A.

9.  l.  he  said,  cut  them  in  the  A.  all  of  them
Zech.  1.  21.  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up  Ins  A.

6.  11.  then  set  the  crowns  on  the  A.  or  Joshua
Mat.  5.  36.  neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  A.

27  .  30.  and  they  smote  him  on  the  h.  Mark  15.19.
Mark  6.  24.  she  said,  the  A.  ot  John  the  Baptist
Luke  7.  46.  my  A.  with  oil  thou  didst  not  a.noint
John  13.  9.  not  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands  and  A.

1  Cor.  11.  4.  his  A.  covered,  dishonoureth  Ins  A.

10  the  woman  ought  to  have  power  on  her  A.

12  21.  the  A.  to  the  feet,  1  have  no  need  of  you
Pvh  1  22.  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  ana  gave
P  '  '  him  as  A.  to  the  church,  4.  15.  Col.  1.  18.
Col  2.  19.  not  holding  the  A.  from  which  the  body
Rev  19  12. eyes  flame  of  fire,  and  his  A.  many  crowns
See  Beard,  Bald,  Bow,  Bowed,  Cover,
Covered,  Crown.

Axe-llEAD.  .

Dent.  19.  5.  and  the  axe- A.  slippeth  from  the  helve
r>  Kings  6.  5.  axe-h.  fell  into  the  water,  and  ne  cried
jBerfVHEAD.

Gen.  47.  31.  Israel  bowed  himself  on  the  led  s-h.
Spear' s-W  EAD.

1  Sam.  17.7.  s.-h.  weighed  600 shekels, .2  Sam.  21.16.
HEAD-^one.

Psal.  118.  22.  is  become  the  h.-stone of  the  corner
Zech'  4  7.  bring  forth  the  h.-stone  with  shoutings
HEAD  of  the  corner.

Mat  21.  42.  is  become  the  A.  of  the  corner ,  Mark

12.  10.  Luke  20.  17-  Acts  4.  11.  1  Pet.  2.  7-
HEAD,  for  Ruler,  Governor.

Sum.  17-  3.  one  rod  shall  be  for  the  A.  of  the  house
*25.  15.  he  was  A.  over  a  people  ot  a  chief  house
Dent.  28. 13.  Lord  will  make  thee  the  A.  not  the  tail
44.  he  shall  be  the  A.  and  thou  shalt  be  the  tail
Josh.  22. 14.  each  one  an  A.  of  house  of  their  fathers
Judo.  10.  18.  he  shall  be  A.  oyer  all  Gileaci,  11.  8.
11.9.  shall  1  be  your  h.?\\  11.  the  people  made  him  A.

1  Sam.  15.  17.  wast  thou  not  made  the  A.  ot  Israel:1

2  Sam. 22. 44.  thou  hast  keptme  to  be  A.  LW.  18. 43.

1  Chron.  11.  +  6.  who  smiteth  Jebusites,  shall  be  A.

29. 11.  and  thou  art  exalted  as  A.  aboye  all
Isa.  7.  8.  A.  of  Damascus  is  Kezin,  A.  ot  Samaria,  9.
9.  14.  Lord  will  cut  off  from  Israel  h.  and  tail
15.  the  ancient  and  Honourable,  he  is  the  A.

19. 15.  nor  work  which  A.  or  tail,  or  rush,  may  do
Jer.  22.  6.  thou  art  Gilead  to  me,  A.  of  Lebanon
Hos.  1. 11.  they  shall  appoint  themselves  one  A.
llab.  3. 13.  woundest  the  A.  out  of  house  of  wicked
14.  thou  didst  strike  through  the  A.  of  his  vil  ages
1  Cor.  11.  3.  that  the  A.  of  every  man  is  Christ, the  A.

of  the  woman  is  the  man,  the  A.  ot  Christ  is  God
Eph.  5.  23.  the  husband  is  the  A.  of  the  wife,  even
as  Christ  is  A.  of  the  church,  and  Saviour  of  body
CoL  2.10.  wiio  is  the  A.  of  all  principality  and  power
HEAD,  for  Top,  Chief.

Psal.  137. 1  6.  prefer  Jerusalem  before  A.  of  my  joy
Isa.  28.  1.  which  are  on  the  A.  ot  tat  valleys,  4.

51.  20.  they  lie  at  the  A.  of  all  the  streets
Ezek.  16.  25.  built  high  places  at  A.  ot  the  way
21. 19-  choose  it  at  the  A.  of  the  way  to  the  city
21.  king  of  Babylon  stood  at  the  A.  of  two  ways
HEAD,  with  hair  or  hairs.

Lev.  13. 40.  the  man  whose  hair  is  fallen  off  his  A.  41.
14.  9.  the  leper  shall  shave  all  his  hair  off  his  A.
Sum.  6.  5.  let  the  locks  of  the  hair  of  his  A.  grow
18.  and  shalt  take  the  hair  of  A.  of  his  separation
Judg.  16.  22.  the  hair  of  his  A.beiran  to  grow  again

1  Sam.  14.  45.  not  an  hair  of  his  A.  shall  tall  to  ground

2  Sam.  14.  26.  weighed  hair  of  his  A.  at  200  shekels
Ezra  9.  3.  I  plucked  oft  the  AflzVofmy  A.  and  beard
Psal.  40. 12.  thev  are  more  than  hairs  of  my  A.  69. 4.
Cant.  7.  5.  and 'the  hair  of  thine  A.  like  purple

218


Dan  3  27.  nor  was  an  hair  of  their  A.  singed
7.  9!  the  hair  of  his  A.  like  the  pure  wool
MaL  10.30.  hairs  of  your  A.  are  numbered,  LukeMJ.

Luke  7.  38.  did  wipe  them  with  hairs  of  her  n.  44.

21. 18.  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  your  A.  perish
Acts  27.  34.  not  an  hair  fall  from  the  A.  of  any
Rev.  1. 14.  his  A.  and  his  hairs  were  white  like  wool
Diary  HEAD.

Lev  19  32.  thou  shalt  rise  before  the  hoary  h.
HEADBANDS.

Isa  3.  20.  Lord  will  take  away  the  A.  and  tablets
HEADY.

o  Tim  3  4.  for  men  shall  be  A.  high-minded
HEADLONG.

Job  5.  13.  the  counsel  of  the  froward  is  carried  A.

Juke  4.  29.  that  they  might  cast  him  down  A.

Acts  1.  18.  and  falling  AHrj  burst  asunder  in  midst

Gen  43  28.  they  bowed  down  their  A.  Exo  /.  4.  31.

Lev'.  10.’  6.  uncover  not  your  A.  lest  ye  die
Tosh  7  6.  and  put  dust  upon  their  A.  Job  1  —

Judo.  8.  28.  so  that  they  lifted  up  their  A.  no  more
*9  57.  all  the  evil  did  God  render  upon  their  A.

I  Sam  29.  4.  should  it  not  be  with  the  A.  of  theoe

1  Kings  20.  31.  let  us,  l  pray,  put  ropes  on  oui  A.

32.  put  ropes  on  their  h.  and  came  to  the  king

2  Kings  10.  6.  take  ye  the  A.  of  your  master  s  sons
8  they  have  brought  the  A.  ot  the  king  s  sens

1  Chron.  12.  +  19.  he  will  fall  to  Saul  on  our  A.

Psal.  24.  7.  lift  up  your  A.  O  ye  gates,  and  be  lift,  J.

66.  12.  thou  hast  caused  men  to  ride  over  our  h.

74. 13.  thou  brakestthe  A.  ot  the  dragons  inwateis
14.  thou  brakest  the  A.  of  leviathan  in  pieces
109  25.  they  looked  on  me,  they  shaked  their  n.

Isa.  15.  2.  on  all  their  A.  shall  be. baldness
35. 10.  to  Zion  songs,  and  everlasting  joy  on  their  h.
jer.  14.  3.  they  were  ashamed  and  covered  then  h.

4  plowmen  were  ashamed,  they  covered  their  A.
Ezek.  7.  18.  and  baldness  shall  be  on  all  their  A.

11  °1  I  will  recompense  their  way  on  their  A - 31.

32’.  27.  they  laid  their  swords  under  their  h.

4L  18.  shall  have  linen  bonnets  on  their  A.

20.  nor  shall  they  shave,  they  shall  poll  their  A.

Mat.  27.  39.  reviled,  wagging  their  A.  Mark  lo.  ~9.
Luke  21.  28.  then  look  up,  and  lift  up  your  A.

Acts  18.  6.  he  said,  your  blood  be  upon  your  own  A.
Rev.  9.  7.  and  on  their  A.  were  as  it  were  crowns
19.  their  tails  were  like  to  serpents,  and  had  h.

13.  1.  I  saw  a  beast  having  seven  A  and  on  bis  n.

3  I  saw  one  of  his  A.  as  it  were  wounded  to  death
17.  9.  the  seven  A.  are  seven  mountains,  on  which
18  19.  they  cast  dust  on  their  A.  and  cried,  alas !

HEADS,  for  Governors.

Exod.  18.  25.  and  made  them  A.  over  the  people
Nvm  1.  16.  they  were  A.  of  thousands  in  Israel
05  4  take  all  the  A.  of  the  people  and  hang  them
Josh.  22.  21.  Beuben  and  Gad  answered  the  A.

23  2.  Joshua  called  for  their  A.  and  for  their  jueges

1  Chron.  12.  32.  the  A.  of  Israel  were  two  hundred
0  Chron.  5.  2.  Solomon  assembled  all  the  A.  to  bring

°8  12.  certain  of  the  A.  of  Ephraim  stood  up
Psal.  110.  6.  shall  wound  the  A.  over  many  countries
Isa  29  +  10.  the  prophets  and  A.  hath  he  covered
iili'c.  3. 1.  hear.  O  A.  of  Jacob,  and  princes  of  Isr.  9.

11.  A.  thereof  judge  for  reward,  and  priests  teach
See  Fathers.

HEAL.

Mum.  12. 13.  A.  her  now,  O  God,  I  beseech  thee
Devt.  32.  39.  I  kill  and  make  alive,  I  wound,  I  A.

0  Kings  20.  5.  1  will  A.  thee,  and  add  to  thy  days
8.  what  shall  be  the  sign  that  the  L.  will  A.  me

2  Chr  7. 14.  I  will  forgive  their  sin,  and  will  A.  land
Psal  6.  2.  O  Lord,  A.  me,  for  my  bones  are  vexed

41.  4.  A.  my  soul,  for  I  have  sinned  against  thee
60.  2.  A.  the  breaches  thereof,  tor  it  shaketh
Eccl.  3.  3.  a  time  to  kill,  and  a  time  to  A
Isa.  19.  22.  shall  smite  and  A.  it,  and  lie  shall  A.  them
57.  18.  I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  A.  him,  19.
Jer  3.  22.  return,  and  I  will  A.  your  backslidings
17  14.  A.  me,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  healed
30  17.  I  will  A.  thee  of  thy  wounds,  saith  the  L.
Lam.  2. 13.  for  thy  breach  is  great,  who  can  A.  thee  :
Hos.  5.  13.  yet  could  he  not  A.  you,  nor  cure  you

6.  1.  let  us  return,  he  hath  tom,  and  will  A.  us
14.  4.  I  will  A.  their  backslidings,  I  will  love  freely
Zech  11.  16.  lie  shall  not  A.  that  that  is  broken
Mat.  8.  7.  Jesus  saith,  I.  evil  1  come  and  A.  him

10  1.  to  A.  all  manner  of  sickness,  Mark  3.  lo.

8.  A.  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  Luke  9.  2.  1 10.  9.
12  10  is  it  lawful  to  A.  on  sabbath-day?  Luke  14.  3.

13.  15.  I  should  A.  them,  John  12.  40.  Acts  28.  ' 2.7-
Mark  3. 2.  w  hether  he  would  A.  on  sabbath ,  Luke  6. 7-
Luke  4. 18.  he  hath  sent  me  to  A.  the  broken-hearted

23.  ye  will  surely  say,  physician,  A.  thyself
5. 17.  the  power  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  A.  them

7.  3.  beseeching  that  he  would  come  and  A.  his  serv.
John  4.  47.  that  he  would  come  down  and  A.  his  son
Acts  4.  30.  by  stretching  for th^ thine  hand  to  A.

Gen.  20. 17.  God  A.  Abimelech  and  his  wife
Exod.  21. 19.  he  shall  cause  him  to  be  thoroughly  A.
Lev.  13.  18.  the  bile  is  A.  |l  37.  the  scall  is  A.

14.  3.  and  if  the  plague  of  leprosy  be  A.  48.

Dent  28.  27.  with  itch,  whereof  thou  canst  not  be  n.

1  Sam".  6.3.  return  an  offering,  then  he  shall  be  A.

2  Kings  2.  21.  have  A.  the  waters  (|  22.  waters  were  A.
~8.  29.  king  Joram  went  to  be  A.  in  Jezreel

9.  15.  Joram  was  returned  to  be  A.  2  Chron.  2«.  6.
2  Chron.  30.  20.  the  L.  hearkened  and  A.  the  people
~Psal.  30.  2.  1  crier!  to  thee,  and  thou  hast  A.  me

107." 20."  he  sent  his  word,  and  A.  them
Isa.  6.  10.  lest  they  see,  and  convert,  and  be  A.

53. 5.  he  was  bruised,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  A.
Jer.  6.  14.  they  have  A.  the  hurt  slightly,  8.  11.

15  18.  my  wound  incurable,  which  retuseth  to  be  a.
17!  14.  heal  me,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  A.

51. 8.  howl  for  her,  take  balm,  if  so  be  she  may  be  A.
9.  we  would  have  h,  Eabylon,  but  she  is  not  //.
Ezek.  30.  21 .  and  lo.  it  shall  not  be  bound  up  to  be  A.
34.  4.  neither  have  ye  A.  that  which  was  sick
47.  8.  brought  forth  into  sea,  the  waters  shall  be  a.  9.
11.  and  the  marishes  thereof  shall  not  be  A.


Hos.  7. 1.  when  I  would  have  A.  Isr.  then  iniquity
11.  *3.  but  they  knew  not  that  1  A.  them
Mat.  4.  24.  those  that  had  the  palsy,  and  he  A.  them
*8.  8.  speak,  and  my  servant  shall  be  A.  Luke  7.  7.

12. 15.  multitudes  followed  him,  he  A.  them,  14. 14
Mark  5.  23.  that  she  may  be  A.  and  she  shall  live
Luke  8.  43.  had  spent  all,  nor  could  be  A.  ot  any

13  14  therefore  come  and  be  A.  and  not  on  sabbath
17.  I5l  when  he  saw  that  he  was  A.  turned  back
00'  51  and  he  touched  his  ear,  and  A.  him

John  5  13.  he  that  was  A.  wist  not  who  it  was
'lets  4.  14-  and  beholding  the  man  who  was  A.

*5.  16.  and  they  were  A.  every  one

14  9  and  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  tone/z.

QQ.  8.  Paul  prayed,  and  A.  the  father  of  Publius

Heb  12.  13.  be  out  of  the  way,  but  let  it  rather  be  A.
Jani  5H6.  pray  one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be  A.
1  pet  0  04  py  whose  stripes  ye  were  A.

Rev.  13.  3.  and  his  deadly  wound  was  A.  12.
HEALER.

Isa.  3.  7.  shall  swear,  saying,  I  will  not  be  an  A.

II  EALEl  II.

Exod  15.  26.  for  I  am  the  Lord  that  A.  thee
Psal'.  103.  3.  bless  the  Lord  who  A.  all  thy  diseases
147  3  he  A.  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bmdeth  up
Isa.  30.  26.  and  he  A.  the  stroke  ot  their  wound
If  EA  LI N  G,  Substantive,
o  Chron. 24.  t  13.  and  the  A.  went  up  upon  the  work
36.  +  16,  wrath  of  Lord  arose,  till  there  was  no  A.
Prov.  15.  t  4.  the  A.  of  a  tongue  is  a  tree  ot  life
Jer  14  19.  there  is  no  A.  for  us,  the  time  of  A.
Dan.  4.  t  27.  if  it  may  be  an  A.  ot  thy  error
Nah  3.19.there  is  no  A.of  thy  bruise  .w  ound  grievous
Mai  4  2.  shall  Sun  of  rieht. arise  with  A.in  his  wings
Luke  9.  11.  and  he  healed  them  that  had  need  ot  A.
Acts  4.  22.  on  whom  this  miracle  of  A.  was  shewed
1  Cor  12.  9.  is  given  to  another  the  gift  of  A.  28.
30.  have  all  the  gifts  of  A.  ?  do  all  interpret  >-

.  1  _  f  il,  „  tiTArn  k  r\t*  A  Ar  IT


OKJ,  iuuc  nu  hip

Rev  22. 2.  leaves  of  the  free  were  tor  A.  ot  nations


HEALING.  .  .  .

Jer.  30. 13.  none  to  plead,  thou  hast  no  A.  medicines
Mat.  4.  23.  went  about  A.  all  manner  of  sickness
Luke  9.  6.  preaching  the  gospel,  and  A.  every  where
Acts  10.  38.  A.  all  that  were  oppressed  otthe  devil  I
HEALTH.

Gen.  43.  28.  our  father  is  in  good  A.  he  is  yet  alive
2  Sam.  <10.  9.  Joab  said,  art  thou  in  A.  my  brother'  j
Psal.  38-  +  3.  neither  is  there  any  A.  in  my  bones
42.  11.  who  is  the  A.  of  my  countenance,  43.  5.
67.2.*thy  saving  A.may  be  known  among  all  nations
Prov.  3.  8.  it  shall  be  A.  to  thy  navel  and  marrow
4.  22.  for  they  are  A.  to  all  their  flesh

12.  18.  but  the  tongue  of  the  w  ise  is  A.

13.  17.  but  a  faithful  ambassador  is  A.

16.  24.  sweet  to  the  soul,  and  A.  to  the  bones
La'.  58. 8.  thy  A.  shall  spring  forth  speedily
Jer.  8.  15.  looked  for  a  time  of  A.  behold  trouble
22.  why  is  not  the  A.  of  my  people  recovered  !

30  17  for  1  will  restore  A.  unto  thee,  and  heal  thee
33.  6.  behold,  I  will  bring  it  A.  and  cure
Acts  27.  34.  taketsome  meat,  tor  this  is  for  your  A.

3  John  2.  mayest  be  in  A.  as  thy  soul  prospeieth

HEAP,  Substantive.  f

Gen.  31.  46.  they  made  a  A.  and  did  eat  on  the  A.  :

52.  this  A.  be  witness,  and  this  pillar  be  witness
Exod.  15. 8-waters  gathered,  the  floods  stood  uprndit
as  an  A.  Josh.  3.  13,  16.  Psal.  33.  7-  I  78. 13-
Devt.  13.  16.  shall  bean  A.  forever,  nor  built  again
Josh.  7.  26.  they  raised  over  him  a  great  A.  ot  stone:
i  8.  28.  Joshua  burnt  Ai,  and  made  it  an  A.  for  eve:
29.  raise  on  the  king  of  Ai  a  great  A.  ot  stones
11.  -f  13.  the  cities  that  stood  stdl  on  their  A.

Judg.  15.  + 16.  with  the  jaw-bone  ot  an  ass,  an  A.
Ruth  3.  7.  to  lie  down  at  the  end  of  the  A.  of  corn
2  Sam.  18.  17.  they  laid  very  great  A.  on  Absalom
Job  21.  +  32.  yet  snail  he  watch  in  the  A.  I

30  t  24.  he  will  not  stretch  out  his  hand  to  the  A
Prov.  26*.  +  8.  that  putteth  a  precious  stone  in  an  h
Cant.  7-  2.  thy  belly  is  like  an  A.  of  wheat  set  abou
Isa  17.  1.  Damascus  shall  be  a  ruinous  A.

11.  harvest  shall  bean  A.  in  the  day  of  grief
25.  2.  for  thou  hast  made  of  a  city  an  A.

Jer.  30. 18.  the  city  shall  be  budded  on  her  own  /<
49!  2.  "and  Kabbah  shall  be  a  desolate  A.

Mic.  1.6.  will  make  Samaria  as  an  A.  of  the  fiekffl
Hab.  3. 15.  didst  walkthrough  the  A.  of  great  watet
Jiao'  2.  16.  when  one  came  to  an  A.  of  20measun
u  HEAP.

Dent.  32.  23. 1  will  A.  mischiefs  upon  them
Job  16.  4.  1  could  A.  up  words  against  vou
27.  16.  though  he  A.  up  silver  as  the  dust
36.  13.  but  the  hypocrites  in  heart  A.  up  wrath
Prov.  25.  22.  thou  shalt  A.  coals  of  tire,  Rom.  12.  -
Eccl.  2.  26.  to  sinner  he  giveth  to  gather  and  to  A.  1
Ezek.  24.  10.  A.  on  wood,  kindle  the  fire,  cousin  1
Hub.  1.  10.  for  they  shall  A.  dust  and  take  it
0  Tim.  4. 3.  A.  to  themselves  teachers,  having  item!
HEAPED.

Zech: 9. 3.  Tyrus  A.upsilver  as  the  dust, and  fine  go
Jam.  5.  3.  ye  have  A.  treasure  together  for  last  cia,
HEAPETH.

Psal.  39. 6.  he  A.  up  riches,  and  knoweth  not  v  tie
Hab.  2.  5.  and  he  A.  unto  him  all  people
HEAPS.

Erod.  8. 14.  they  gathered  them  together  on  h.
Judg.  15.  16.  with  the  jaw-bone  of  an  ass,  A.  on  a
2  Kings  10. 8.  lay  ye  them  in  two  A.  at  entei  MW  1
19.25.  to  lay  waste  fenced  cities  into  ruinous  /'■


2  Chr.  31.  6.  they  brought  tithe,  and  laid  them
~  7.  in  the  third  month  they  began  to  lay  the  «•

8.  when  the  princes  came  and  saw  the  h.

Meh.  4.  2.  will  they  revive  the  stones  out  ot  tnt  /
Job  15.  28.  in  houses  which  are  ready  to  nccoim
Psal.  79.  1.  they  hare  laid  Jerusalem  on  h.

Jer.  9.  11.  and  1  will  make  Jerusalem  A.  -6.  IB-  t
31.  21.  set  thee  up  way-marks,  make  thee  -
50.26.cast  Bab  v  Ion  up  as  A.  and  destroy  net  ut  e
51.  37.  and  Babylon  shall  become  A.

Hos.  12. 11.  their  altars  are  as  A.  in  the  turroas
Mic.  3.  12.  and  Jerusalem  shall  become  A.

HEAR  .  ;

Signifies,  (1)  To  receive  a  voice  or  sound  bV  !l,e


HE  A


HE  A


To


1.


grant  or  answer
1  love  the  Lord


our

be-


■  hath  heard  my  voice.  It  is  often  used  in
e,  tn  the  Psalms  and  elsewhere.  And  God


2  Sam.  15.  10.  (2)
prayer.  Psal.  116
cause  he

this  sense,  . „  v,u<

ts  said  not  to  hear,  when  he  does  not  grant  one's  de¬
sires.  John  9.  31.  ^  e  know  that  God  heareth  not
sinners.  (3)  Jo  listen  to  God's  word  only  with  the
outward  sense  of  the  ear.  Mat.  13.  1<J.  When  any
one  heareth  the  word  of  the  kingdom,  and  under-
Standeth  it  not.  Thus  all  wicked  men  who  are
within  the  church  do  hear  the  word  ;  they  hear  the
sound  of  the  words,  but  then  they  have  not  so  much
as  a  notional  knowledge  of  these  things,  or  else  re¬
gard  them  not,  never  consider,  or  lay  them  to  heart.
(4)  lo  yield  a  willing  assent  in  our  minds  to  the
word  of  God,  with  a  firm  purpose  to  obey  it.  John

8.  47.  He  that  is  ot  God,  heareth  God’s  word  ;  he
believes  and  obeys  it.  So  in  John  10. 27.  My  sheep
hear  my  voice,  and  follow  me.  It  is  used  often  in
this  sense.  Deut.  1.  43.  1  spake  unto  you,  and  ye
would  not  hear;  ye  would  not  obey  me.  1  Sam  24

9.  w  heretore  hearest  thou  men’s  words  ?  IVhy
beltevest  thou,  what  mine  enemies  say  against  me?
So  tn  Mat.  17.  5.  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear

believe  and  obey  him.  (5)  To  learn,  John  8.


H  E  A


him


nr  4A  1 -  .  r  ,  **  /Ly  171 III  o.

-G,  40.  1  speak  to  the  world  those  things  which  I
nave  heard  ot  him;  those  things  which  he  hath
taught  me,  which  he  hath  communicated  to  me.  (6)


rr  j.  ,  t  w*  st/  //it,  \L//

lo  approve  oj,  and  embrace.  1  John  4.  5.  Thev


speak  of  the  world,  and  the  world  heareth  them  ;
these  seducers  and  false  teachers  preach  such  doc-
trtnes  as  may  gratify  and  comply  with  the  corrupt
affections  of  worldly  men  ;and  they  greedily  hearken
;  to,  approve  and  embrace  such  doctrines.  (7)  To
judge  and  determine.  2  Sam.  15.  3.  Thy  matters
jare  -pod  and  right,  but  there  is  no  man  deputed
I  or  the  king  to  hear  thee  ;  to  determine  thy  cause
with  justice  and  equity.

\en‘  21.  6.  so  that  all  that  h.  will  laugh  with  me
3.  0.  h.  us,  my  lord,  thou  art  a  mighty  prince
rod  19.  9.  that  the  people  may  h.  when  i  speak
j  2. 18.  hut  the  noise  of  them  that  sing  do  I  h.
i  «*•  16-  »■  h.  I  pray  you,  ve  sons  of  Levi

3.  18.  rise  up,  Balak,  and  h.  hearken  unto  me
J.  4.  and  her  father  h.  her  vow  and  her  bond
tut.  1.16.  h.  the  causes  between  your  brethren
.  10.  and  I  will  make  them  A.  my  words

1.  h.  Israel  the  statutes  and  judgments,  6.  3.  I
.  ,  9.  1.  |  20.  3.  Isa.  48.  1.  Mark  12.  29.

7 no *  11  1  * the  lx>rd  our  God  doth  say

k*  in  •*,  these  words  which  I  command  thee
}*•  it  thou  shalt  h.  say  in  one  ot  thy  cities
.  12.  bring  it,  that  we  may  h.  it  and  do  it,  13 .

1. 12.  that  they  may  h.  and  fear  Ld.  13.  Jcr.  6.  lo.
s/t-  3-  9.  h.  the  words  of  the  Lord  your  God
5.  when  ye  A.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the
people  shall  shout,  Neh.  4.  20.  Dan.  5,  15.
dg.  5.  3.  A.  O  ye  kings,  give  ear,  O  ye  princes
,6.  why  abodest,  to  h.  the  bleatings  of  the  flocks  ?
f.  13.  put  forth  thy  riddle,  that  we  may  h.  it
sam.  2.  23.  for  I  h.  ot  your  evil  dealings  by  all

4.  nay,  my  sons,  it  is  no  good  report  that  l  h.

14  and  the  lowing  ot  the  oxen  which  1  h.

>.2  how  can  I  got  if  Saul  h.  it,  he  will  kill  me
!•  ;4-  "• me  words  of  thy  handmaid,  2  Sam.  20. 17.

>.  19.  let  my  lord  the  king  h.  words  of  his  servant
'am.  14.  1 17.  so  is  my  lord  the  king  to  h.  good
'.  3.  there  is  no  man  deputed  of  the  king  to  h.  thee
0.  as  soon  as  ye  h.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet
0.  that  what  tiling  soever  thou  shalt  li.
t).  ye  .shall  send  to  me  every  thing  that  ye  h.

.  5.  and  let  us  h.  likewise  what  Hushaisaith
.  lo.  a  wise  woman  cried  out  of  the  city,  A.  A.

;  .4o.  soon  as  they  h.  shall  be  obedient,  Ps.  18.  44.
iings  3. 1 11  asked  understanding  to  //.judgment
0  A;  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  10.  8,  24  0
tI  Citron.  9.  7,  23.  Mat.  12.  42.  Luke  11.  31.
3U.  then  h.  thou  in  heaven  and  forgive,  3°  34

0,  „  'I6’  39-  43. 49.  2  Chron.  6.’  21 !

; -6.  they  called  on  Baal,  saying,  O  Baal,  h.  us
‘oP  Jp;  made  the  host  to  h.  a  noise  of  chariots

•  -8.  //.  the  wont  of  the  great  king,  Isa.  36.  13.

•  lo.  *.  the  words  of  Sennacherib,  Isa.  37.  17.

44-  15.  when  thou  shalt  A.  a  sound  of  going
0  j.  0.  that  thou  mayest  h.  the  prayer  of  servant
O  -/or  we  are  despised,  turn  reproach

that  could  h.  with  understanding
":.fC  «md  know  thou  it  for  thy  good
■  17.  "-diligently  my  speech  with  ears,  21.  2.

•  9.  will  God  It  his  cry  ?  ||  34.  2.  h  my  words
/'.1  l,eseech  diee,  and  1  will  speak

V'  ?a2Jr?*rf£  uponme>  h-  my  prayer,  O

1  th  t  ’  T,12.' 1  54‘  2'J  84-  8-  1  102-  !•  I  143. 1.

1.  the  Lord  h.  thee  in  the  day  of  trouble

save,  Lord,  let  the  king  h.  us  when  we  call
h  ,  ^  ■ Lord,  when  1  cry  with  my  voice
1  >  .1  •  ,  nl,  and  have  mercy  upon  me

V  7  «>“»  a|l  ye  people,  give  ear,  all  inhabitants
I.  h.  0  my  people,  and  I  will  speak,  81.  8.

7  clTT  and  gladness,  that  the  hones

7.  sm  ords  m  lips,  tor  who,  say  they ,  doth  It.  ?

1 :  "•  my  cry,  O  God,  attend  to  my  prayer
_ Pi.  come,  and  h.  all  ve  that  fear  God
;•  groaning  of  the  prisoner,  to  loose  those
"hen  they  A.  the  words  ot  thy  mouth
'.  8.  cause  me  to  A.  thy  loving-kindness  in  morn.
i‘/' vkTT’  //.the  instruction  of  thy  father
i-  ".  ve  children,  the  instruction  of  a  father
.  n.  u  my  son,  and  receive  my  sayings,  19.  20  ’

>•  A.  for  I  will  speak  of  excellent  things
•0*.  mstruction,  and  he  wise,  refuse  it  not
-j.  cease  to  h.  instruction  that  causeth  to  err
if.'  P°w  tlune  ear,  h.  the  words  of  the  wise
i  1  thou, my  son,  be  wise,  and  guide  thy  heart
!  •  ?•  1.  and  be  more  ready  to  h.  than  to  give
Jv  I3  better  to  h.  the  rebuke  of  the  wise
i  u  10  L!S  Jhe  conclusion  of  the  matter
•  8. 13.  hearken  to  thy  voice,  cause  me  to  h.  it
1  ■  z.  n.  U  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth
*-y«  indeed,  but  understand  not,  Mark 4.  t°

3.  and  when  he  bloweth  a  trumpet,  h.  ye
n.  ye  that  are  atar  ott  what  1  have  done


Js"-  3f  -  }•  let  the  earth  h  and  all  that  is  therein
42-  It.  ve  deaf  ||  23.  who  will  h.  for  time  to  come
43.  9- or  let  them  h.  and  say,  it  is  trutli

48.  14.  all  ye,  assemble  yourselves  and  h.

I8-  «.  ye  tins,  1  have  not  spoken  in  secret

5o.  3.  h.  and  your  soul  shall  live,  John  5.  25.
Jer.l.  21.  shall  1  h.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  ?
o.  18.  therefore  h.  ye  nations  ||  19.  h.  O  earth
11.  2.  h.  ye  the  words  of  this  covenant,  6.

10.  forefathers  who  refused  to  h.  13  10
?3.  15.  h.  ye,  give  ear,  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken

18.  then  1  will  c<iuse  thfee  to  //.  my  words
23.22.  and  l.ad  caused  my  people  to  h.  my  words
38.  25.  it  the  princes  h.  that  1  have  talked

49.  20.  therefore  h.  the  counsel  of  the  Ld.  50.  45
Lam.  1.16.  h.  1  pray  you,  all  people,  and  behold
Tzek.  8.  h.  what  1  say  ||  3. 17.  lr.  at  my  mouth  33. 7
3.'27.  he  that  heareth,  let  him  h.  he  that  forbears
oo'  IS:  b#y  your  lying  to  my  people,  that /1.  your  lies
33.  30.  h.  what  is  the  word  that  cometli  forth

31.  they  //.  thy  words,  hut  will  not  do  them,  32.
Dan.  9.  17.  O  God,  h.  the  prayer  of  thy  servant

19.  O  Lord,  h.  O  Lord,  forgive,  liearken,  and  do
tlos  5. 1.  ".  ye  tins,  O  priests,  and  hearken,  give  ear
Joel  1. 2.  ".tins, ye  old  men,  and  give  ear,  all  inhabit.
Amos  3.  l./iithis  wd.L.  hath  spoken,  4.1.  |  5.1.  I  8  4
Mic.  1.  2.  //.  all  ye  people,  hearken,  O  earth

3.  1.  1  said,  h.  1  pray  you,  O  heads  of  Jacob,  9.

6. 2.  It.  ye,  O  mountains  ||  9.  h.  ye  the  rod  and  him

1  Nan.  3.  19.  all  that  h.  the  bruit  of  thee  shall  clap
tech.  7. 12.  lest  they  should  It.  the  law  and  words
Mat.  11. 4.  shew  John  the  things  which  ye  h.  and

5.  lame  walk,  and  deaf  A.  Mark  7.  37.  Luke  7.  22

13.  17.  to  It.  those  things  that  ye  h.  Luke  10.  24
15. 10.  he  said  to  the  multitude  It.  and  understand

17.  0-  this  is  my  beloved  Son,  A.  him.  Mark  9  7

18.  17.  he  neglect  to  h.  them,  to  h.  the  church
Mark 4. 18.  are  such  as  h.  the  word,  20.  Luke  8. 12  13.

24.  take  heed  what  ye  h.  you  that  h.  more  given
Luke  5.  1.  pressed  on  him  to  h.  the  word  of  God
15.  multitudes  came  together  to  A.  and  be  healed
G.  17.  which  came  to  A.  him,  and  to  be  healed
27.  1  say  to  you  which  A.  love  your  enemies
8. 18.  take  heed  therefore  how  ye  A.  whoever  hath
21.  are  these  which  A.  the  word  and  do  it,  11.  28
9.  9.  but  who  is  this  of  whom  I  A.  such  things'?  *

15. 1 .  then  drew  near  publicans  and  sinn.  to  h  him

16.  2.  he  said,  how  is  it  that  I  A.  this  of  thee  ?

29.  they  have  Moses  and  propli.  let  them  A.  them

18.  6.  Ixird  said,  A.  what  the  unjust  judge  saith

19.  48.  the  people  were  very  attentive  to  A.  him
21.  .38.  came  to  him  in  the  temple  for  to  h.  him

John 5.  38.  as  I  h.  I  judge  H  6.  60.  who  can  h.  it?
7-51.  doth  our  law  judge  a  man  before  it  h.  him

9.  27.  wherefore  would  ye  It.  it  again

10. 3.  the  sheep  h.  his  voice,  and  he  calleth  by  name

12.  47.  it  any  man  h.  mv  words,  and  believe  not

14.  24.  and  the  word  which  ye  h.  is  not  mine
Acts  2.  8.  how  A.  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue

.33.  hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and  A

10.  22.  to  send  for  thee,  and  to  A.  words  of  thee
33.  to  A.  all  things  that  are  commanded  thee

13.  7.  and  desired  to  A.  the  word  of  God

44.  the  whole  city  came  together  to  h.  the  word

15.  7.  Gentiles  by  my  mouth  should  A.  the  word

17.  21.  either  to  tell  or  to  h.  some  new  thing

19.  26.  ye  h.  Paul  hath  turned  away  much  people
22. 1.  h.  ye  my  defence  which  1  make  now  to  you

24.  4.  that  thou  wouldest  A.  us  of  thy  clemency

25.  22.  Agrippa  said,  1  wodld  h.  the  man  myself

28.  22.  but  we  desire  to  ft.  what  thou  thinkest
\  Cor.  11.  18.  1  A.  there  be  divisions  among  you
Phil.  1 . 27.  or  else  be  absent,  I  may  A.  of  your  affairs

2  I  ness.  3.  11.  we  A.  that  some  walk  disorderly

1  Tun.  4.16.  shalt  save  thyself  and  them  that  A.  thee
2 \  Inn.  4.  17.  and  that  all  the  Gentiles  might  A.

Jam.  1. 19.  let  every  one  be  swift  to  A.  slow  to  speak
1  John  5.  15.  we  know  that  he  A.  us,  what  we  ask

3  John  4.  than  to  A.  my  children  walk  in  truth
Rev.  1.  3.  blessed  that  A.  words  of  this  prophecy

9.  20.  which  neither  can  see,  nor  A.  nor  walk
See  Eak,  Ears,  Voice.

HEAR  me.

Exod.  6.  12.  how  then  shall  Pharaoh  A.  me?

1  Kings  18.  37.  A.  me,  O  Lord  A.  me,  that  this  people
1  Chron.  28.  2.  A.  me,  my  brethren,  and  my  people
2 Chron.  13.  4.  A.  me,  thou  Jeroboam,  and  all  Israel
15.  2.  A.  me,  Asa  ||  20.  20.  and  he  said,  A.  me,  O

29. 5.  A.  me,  ye  Levites,  sanctify  now  yourselves
Job  15. 17.  1  will  shew  thee,  A.  me,  I  will  declare
31.  35.  O  that  one  would  A.  me,  my  desire  is
Psal.  4. 1.  A.  me  when  l  call,  O  G.  of  my  righteousn.

13.  3.  consider,  and  A.  me,  O  Lord  my  God
17.  G.  1  called  upon  thee,  for  thou  wilt  A.  me
38. 16.  for  I  said,  A.  me,  lest  they  should  rejoice
.55.  2.  attend  unto  me,  and  A.  me,  1  mourn
60.  5.  save  with  thy  right-hand,  and  A.  me
69. 13.  O  God,  in  the  multitude  of  thy  mercy  A.  me
17.  for  I  am  in  trouble,  A.  me  speedily,  143.  7.

Mic.  7. 7.  1  will  wait  for  God,  my  God  will  A.  me
Acts  26.  3.  wherefore  1  beseech  thee  to  A.  me

29.  but  also  all  that  A.  me,  were  such  as  I  am
1  Cor.  14.  21.  yet  for  all  that  will  (hey  not  A.  me

HEAR  not,  or  not  HEAR.

Dent.  28.  +  49.  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  A.

30.  17-  so  thou  wilt  not  A.  hut  worship  other  gods
l  Sam.  8. 18.  the  l.ord  will  not  It.  you  in  that  day
Job  30.  20.  1  cry  unto  thee,  and  thou  dost  not  A.  me’

35.  13.  surely  God  will  not  A.  vanity,  nor  regard  it
Psal.  66. 18.  it  I  regard  iniquity,  Lord  will  not  A.  me
94.  9.  he  that  planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  A.?

Isa.  1. 15.  when  make  many  prayers,  1  will  not  A.
Jer.  7. 16.  I  11. 14.  |  14. 12.  Ezek.  8. 18.  Amos 5.23.

•30.  9.  children  that  will  not  A.  the  law  of  the  Lord
59.  1.  neither  his  ear  heavy  that  it  cannot  A.

2.  he  will  not  A.  ||  65. 12.  when  1  spake  ye  did  noth.

66.  4.  when  1  spake,  they  did  not  h.  Zech.  1.  4.

Jer. 5.21.  haveears and  A. not,  Ezek.  12.2.  Mark 8. 18.

13.  17.  bnt  if  ye  will  not  A.  22.  5.  Mai.  2.  2.

17.  23.  that  they  might  not  A.  19. 15.  Zech.  7.  11.

22.  21.  I  spake,  hut  thou  saidst,  1  will  not  h.


Dan.  j.  2.3.  thou  hast  praised  the  gods  of  silver
...  „  which  see  not,  nor  A.  nor  know.  Rev.  9.  20
//  /  3J  f:  ?haI1,CI>  ‘V  IfOrd*  but  he  will  not  A.  them
k2\1‘ow  Iohs  s,!a11  1  cry,  and  thou  wilt  not  h.
" not  receive  you,  nor  A.  your  words
18.  16.  ff  he  will  not  A.  thee,  then  take  one  or  two
Luje  \6.  31.  it  they  A.  not  Moses  and  the  prophets
John  8.  43.  even  because  ye  cannot  A.  my  word
47- ye  therefore  A.  them  not,  because  not  of  God
2J*  b.e  alls\vered,  1  told  you,  and  ye  did  not  A.
10.  B.  ai e  jobbers,  but  the  sheep  did  not  ht  them
Acts  3.  23.  every  soul  which  will  not  h.  be  destroy
1  tor.  14.  21.  yet  tor  all  that  will  they  ?u>t  h.  me
Gal.  4.  21.  ye  under  the  law,  do  ye  not  h.  the  law
Would  not  H  EAR.

Gen.  42.  21.  when  lie  besought  us,  we  would  not  A.

do  not  sin  against  the  child,  ye  would  not  A.
j,;  J •  jf).  behold,  hitherto,  thou  wouldest  not  h.
ffeut.  1.  43.  Israel  would  not  h.  3.  26.  2  Kings  17.  14
11.  Amaziah  would  not  A.  2  Chr  25
18. 12.  Israel  would  not  A.  Neh.  9.  29.  Zech  7  is

Jer'  ri  'rT  (mS  \s*Ke  refreshing,  yet  they  wou/diwt  hi
If  44*  rc'Sbf  be  tor  praise,  they  w.  n.  A.  29. 19.
36.  >0.  he  would  not  A.  ||  Zech.  7.  13. 1  would  not  A.
11  l.AR  now,  or  now  HEAR.


7 it  ^  MW  XliSrAil.

Rum.  12.  6.  and  he  said,  A.  now  my  words,  20.  10.
1  ‘iomi,  "hi:  h.  -  ye  Benjamites


to  7  4i  , -  vv .  *  /CUZi/y  ye  jjenjaii

P0)0’  t  lou  son  °4  Ahitub,  he  answered
tpZtkV  ?ow  my  reasomng,  and  hearken

pit  nW  ST  t7herefore>  0  7e  children
lsa.  7.  13.  and  he  said,  A.  yenow,  O  houseof  David

47*  ft  f  S  '  0 -]acob  my  servant,  and  Israel
7?'  8;  \  nowj  thou  that  art  given  to  pleasures
t’  TTTor?’  h‘  now  thls> thou  amicted
JSoh  71'  Prefer6,  tlils>  0  foolish  people

28 '  45-  h.  now  Hananiah  ||  Zech.  3.8.  A.  now,  O  Josh.
37.  20.  A.  now,  1  pray  thee,  O  my  lord  (he  king
JVlic.  6.  1.  A.  ye  now  what  the  Lord  saith,  arise
y  33-  sbed  forth  this  which  ye  now  see  and  A.
Phil.  1.  30.  which  y  e  saw  in  me,  and  now  h.  to  be  m
„  ,  „  _  ,  Shall  HEAR.

Exod.  lj.  14.  the  people  shall  A.  and  be  afraid,  Dent
t»t  13.  11.  |  17.  13.  1 19.  20  |  01  01’

Rum  14. 13.  Moses  said,  then  the  Egypt,  shall  h.  ii
Do  of.  1-,17'  y e/Aa//  A.  small  as  well  as  great
2.  25.  who  shall  1  .  report  of  thee,  and  shall  tremble
t  OTT8  sh?n,  /-all  these  statutes  and  say
Josh.  7.  9.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall  A.  of  it
Judg .  7.  11.  and  thou  nhalt  h,  what  they  say
L  6am .  16.  21.  Israel  shall  h.  that  thou  art  abhorred
1  Kings  8.  42.  tor  they  shall  A.  of  thy  great  name
2-TnTi9'  7\and  ^  ‘tail  h.  a  rumour,  Isa  37  7
v  72AT  O  !ualJ  make  prayer  to  him,  he  shall  A.

1  2'  tHle  bumble  shall  h.  thereof,  and  be  glad
4>V1JI  pray  and  cry,  and  he  shall  h.  my  voice

19.  God  shall  A.  and  afflict  them,  even  he  that
?2;  14-  mine  ears  shall  h.  desire  of  the  wicked

ok  ioey-  shSllh  my  words,  for  they  are  sweet
~9-  4B.  in  that  day  shall  the  deaf  A.  the  words
of  49-.  when  he  shall  A.  it  he  will  answer  thee
21.  thine  ears  shall  A.  a  word  behind  thee
Jje.r-  33-  9-  which  shall  A.  all  the  good  that  I  do
oo'  7i  21 '  ai?d  the  heaven  shall  A.  the  earth
71?“'  T  eartb  shall  A.  the  com  and  the  wine

4-3-14.  by  hearing,  ye  shall  A.  Acts  28.  26.

18. 15.  if  he  shall  A.  thee  thou  hast  gained  tin
r  /'  6;  ye  shall  h.  ot  wars,  Mark  13.  7.  Luke  21 .  o
John  5.  25.  the  dead  shall  A.  \*>ice  of  the  Son  of  God
/i6;  4q3’  T^everhe  shall  A.  that  shall  he  speak
"Cte  3.  22.  him  shall  ye  A.  in  all  things,  7.  .37.

*.5.  ^2.  to-morrow,  said  he,  thou  shalt  h.  him
Horn.  10.  14.  how  shall  they  h.  without  a  preacher
r  Will  HEAR.

2Too20V19'  speak  with  118,  we  will  A.  Deut.  5.  27.

23-  if  they  cry,  I  will  surely  A.  their  cry,  27.

]\  7/777.  9.  8,  I  will  h.  what  the  Lord  will  command
^  6am.  14.  16.  king  mil  h.  to  deliver  his  handmaid

2  Kings  19.  4.  it  may  be  thy  God  will  A.  the  words
■LChr.  7.  14.  then  will  I  A.  from  heaven,  Ps.  20.  6

~0.  9.  then  thou  wilt  A.  and  help,  Psal.  38.  15
ol  o4-3-  the  Lord  will  A.  ||  17.  6.  thou  wilt  A.  me
V11  P  "bat  God  the  Lord  will  speak
145.  19.  he  also  will  A.  their  cry,  and  save  them
t0V\+  ‘vv.1SeJIian  It.  and  increase  learning
T  17.  the  Lord  will  A.  them,  and  not.  forsake
6j.  24.  while  they  are  yet  speaking,  I  will  A.

Jer  -  30.  3.  it  may  he  the  house  of  Judah  will  A.

Lzek.  2.  5.  whether  they  will  A.  or  forbear,  7.  |  3. 11.
Dos.  2.  21.  1  will  A.  the  heavens,  they  the  earth
r}lc:  7-  7.  I  Will  wait  for  God,  my  C^od  will h.  me
Z.ech.  10.  6. 1  am  their  God  and  will  h.  them,  13  9
we  will  h.  thee  again  of  this  matter’

21-  22.  for  they  will  A.  that  thou  art  come

'  4  willji.  thee,  when  thy  accusers  are  come
28. 28.  salvation  is  sent  to  the  Gentiles,  they  will  A
,  .  HEAR  the  word  of  the  Lord.

1  Kings  22.  19.  A.  therefore  the  word  of  the  Lord,

2  Chr.  18.  18.  Jer.  29.  20.  |  42.  15.  Amos  lo!

2  Kings  7.  1.  then  Elisha  said  A.  ye  the  word  of  the

.  .  Jjord,  Jer.  17 .  20.  I  21.  11

20. 16.  Isaiah  said  to  Hezekiah,  A.  word  of  Lord,  al  i
in  thy  house  be  carried  to  Babylon,  Isa.  39.  5
1-  10.  A.  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  rulers  of  Sodom  ’
2?-  44.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  scornful  men
66.  j.  A.  word  of  Lord,  ye  that  tremble  at  his  word
.  n  V4,  ,  uord  °f  Lord,  O  house  of  Jacob,  io.  l.

7.  2.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  ye  of  Judah
9.  20.  yet  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  women
19.  3.  A.  word  of  Lord,  O  kings  of  Judah,  c,°  °

22.  29.  O  earth,  earth,  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord'

31.  10.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  nations
34.  4.  yet  A.  word  of  Lord,  O  Zedekiah  king  of  Jud
44.  24.  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  all  Judah,  °6
Lzck  6.  3.  ye  mountains  of  Israel,  A.  the  word  ot
the  Lord,  1  will  bring  a  sword  on  you  .36  1  4
13.  2.  sav  to  prophets  h.  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord  '

46-  -35.  w heretore,  O  harlot,  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord
^0.  47.  forest  ot  the  south,  h .  the  word  oj  the  lord
25.  3.  say  to  Amnionites,  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord
34.  7-  ye  shepherds,  A.  the  word  of  the  Lord,  9
37.  4.  say,  O  ye  dry  bones,  A.  the  word  of  the'  L.ord
Dos.  4.  1.  A.  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children  of  Israel

219


HE  A


HE  A


HE  A


Amos  7. 16.  Amaziah,  A.  thou  the  word  of  the  Lord
I’lEARD*  rn  •  i*

Gen.  16. 11.  because  the  Lord  hath  h.  thy  affliction
Vn  05  neither  yet  h.  1  ot  it,  but  to-day
29!  33  *  because  the  Lord  hath  A.  that  I  was ^ hated
45.  2.  Joseph  wept  aloud,  and  the  Egyptians  A.

Exod.  2.  24.  God  h.  their  groaning,  and  remembered
16.  9.  for  he  hath  h.  your  murmunngs

23.  13.  neither  let  it  be  A.  out  of  thy  mout  .  ,

2B.  35.  his  sound  shall  be  /(.when  he  goethin  a

33.  4.  when  the  people  A.  these  evil
Lev.  24.  14.  let  all  that  h.  him  lay  their  hands
Num.  11.  1.  the  people  complained,  the  Lord  A.

12.2.  Miriam  spake  against  Moses,  theLonli.

14  14.  they  have  h.  thou  art  among  this  people

15.  the  nations  which  have  A.  the  tame  of  thee
30  7  held  his  peace  at  her  tr,e  day  he  n.  it,  m.

Josh.  *9  16.  they  A.  that  they  were  their  neighbours
I  Ham.  7.  9.  Samuel  cried,  and  the  Lord  A  .him
11  will  Saul  come,  as  thy  servant  hath  A. . .

1  Kings  1.  11.  hast  not  A.  that  Adonijah  doth  reign
6  7  nor  was  any  tool  of  iron  h.  in  the  house
lb.  7 .  the  half  not  told  me,  thy  wisdom  and  prospe¬
rity  exceedeth  the  fame  which  I  h.  Qthi.9.6.

2  Kings  19.25.  hast  thou  not  A.  long  ago,  Isa.  3 7.  -6.

2  Chr.  5.  13.  make  one  sound  to  be  h.  in  praism

33.  13.  he  was  entreated  and  A.  his  supplications
Ezra  3.  13.  people  shouted,  the  noise  was  A.  atar
Neh  12.  43.  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  A.  even  atar  on
Job  15.  8.  hast  thou  h.  the  secret  of  God  t

19  7.  I  cry  out  ot  wrong,  but  1  am  n<?t /<■

26.  14.  but  how  little  a  portion  is  A.  ot  him
29.  11.  when  the  ear  h.  me,  then  it  blessed  me
Psal.  6.  9.  the  Lord  hath  A.. my  supplication

10. 17.  thou  hast  A.  the  desire  ot  the  humble
22.  21.  save  me,  for  thou  hast  A.  r2e/1'on‘.th,e1‘l”rn1s

24.  but. when  he  cried  he  A.  34.  6. 1  40.  1.  1 1-0-  1-

34.  4.  I  sought  the  Lord,  and  he  A.  me,  and  deliv.

38.  13.  but  1  as  a  deaf  man  A.  not,  1  was  dumb
61. 5.  thou,  O  G.  hast  h.  my  vows,  thou  hast  gnen
66. 19.  verily  God  hath  A.  me,  he  hath  attended
76.  8.  cause  judgment  to  be  A.  from  heaven
78.  21.  therefore  the  Lord  A.  tins  and  was  wroth

59.  when  God  A.  this,  was  wroth,  and  abhorred
81.  5.  where  l  A.  a  language  that  1  understood  not

97.  8.  Zion  A.  and  was  glad,  and  Judah  rejoiced

106.  44.  he  regarded  their  affliction,  when  he  A.

118.  21.  for  thou  hast  A.  me,  and  art  my  salvation
132.  6.  lo,  we  A.  of  it  at  Ephratah,  we  found  it
Prov.  21.  13.  he  shall  cry  himself,  but  not  be  A.

Isa.  10. 30.  cause  it  to  be  A.  unto  Laish,  O  Anatnotn
40. 21.  have  ye  not  A.  ?  hath  it  not  been  told  you .

28.  hast  thou  not  A.  everlasting.God  famtetti  not.

48.  6.  thou  hast  A.  see  all  this,  will  not  ye  declare  .

52.  15.  which  they  had  not  A.  shall  they  consider

60. 18.  violence  shall  no  more  be  A.  in  thy  land.

64.  4.  men  have  not  A.  what  he  hath  prepared

65. 19.  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  more  A.

66.  8.  who  hath  A.  such  a  thing,  who  hath  seen  i

19.  to  the  isles  afar  off,  that  have  not  A.  my  tame
Jer.  4. 19.  because  thou  hast  A.  sound  of  trumpet
6.  7.shecasteth  out  wickedness,  spoil  is  A.  in  her
7. 13.  1  spake  unto  you,  rising  early,  but  ye  A.  not
8.  6.  I  hearkened  and  A.  but  they  spake  not  aright
18.  13.  ask  the  heathen,  who  hath  A.  such  things
22.  let  cry  be  A.  from  houses  when  shalt  bring

25.  *36.  an  howling  of  the  flock  shall  be  A.

26.  11.  for  he  hath  prophesied  as  ye  have  A.

34. 10.  A.  every  one  should  let  his  man-servant  go

35.  17.  1  have  spoken,  but  they  have  not  A.

46. 12.  the  nations  have  A.  of  thy  shame

50.  46.  and  the  cry  is  A.  among  the  nations

51.  46.  a  rumour  that  shall  be  A.  in  the  land
Lam.  1  21.  they  have  A.  that  I  sigh,  there  is  none

3.  61.  thou  hast  A.  their  reproach,  O  I.ord
Ezek.  19.  4.  the  nations  A.  ot  him,  he  was  taken
26.  13.  the  sound  of  thy  harps  shall  be  no  more  A.
33. 5.  he  A.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  took
Van.  12.  8.  and  I  A.  but  1  understood  not
Bos.  7. 12.  chastise  them,  as  their  congrega.  hath  A.
Jonah  2.  2. 1  cried  unto  the  I.ord,  and  he  A.  me
Mic.  5. 15.  in  fury,  such  as  they  have  not  A.

Bab.  3.  16.  when  l  A.  my  belly  trembled
Mai.  3. 16.  and  the  Lord  hearkened  and  A.  it
Mat.  5.  21.  ye  have  A.  it  was  said,  27  ,  33,  38,  43.

6.  7.  they  shall  be  A.  for  their  much  speaking
13. 17.  3’e  hear,  and  have  not  A.  them,  Luke  10.  -4.
15.  12.  were  offended  after  they  A.  this  saying
22.  7.  when  the  king  A.  thereof,  he  was  wroth
26. 65.  ye  have  A.  his  blasphemy,  Mark  14.  64.
Mark  4.  15.  but  when  they  have  A.  Satan  cometh
14.  11.  and  when  they  A.  it  they  were  glad
Luke  1. 13.  fear  not,  thy  prayer  is  A.  Acts  10.  31.

12.  3.  what  ye  have  spoken,  shall  be  h.  m  the  light
20'.  16.  when  they  A.  it,  they  said,  God  forbid
John  3.  32.  what  he  hath  A.  that  he  testifieth
6.  45.  every  man  that  hath  A.  ot  the  lather

8.  6.  wrote  on  the  ground,  as  tho’  he  A.  them  not

9.  32.  since  the  v'orld  began  was  it  not  A.

11.  41.  Father,  1  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  A.  me

18.  21.  ask  them  which  A.  me,  what  I  have  said
21. 7.  when  Simon  Peter  A.  that  it  was  the  Lord

Acts  1. 4.  wait  for  the  promise  ye  have  A.  of  me
2.  37.  when  they  A.  this,  they  were  pricked  111  heart

4.  4.  many  of  them  which  A.  the  word  believed

5.  5.  fear  came  on  all  them  that  A.  these  things

13.  48.  when  the  Gentiles  A.  this  they  were  glad

14.  9.  the  same  A.  Paul  speak,  who  beholding

16.  14.  a  woman  which  worshipped  God,  A.  us

25.  sang  praises  to  God,  and  the  prisoners  A.  them

19.  5.  when  they  A.  this,  they  were  baptized

22. 15.  shalt  witness  of  what  thou  hast  seen  and  A.
24.  24.  A.  him  concerning  the  faith  in  Christ
Pom.  10. 14.  in  him  of  whom  they  have  not  A.

18.  but  I  say,  have  they  not  A.  !  yes,  verily'

15.  21.  they  that  have  not  A.  shall  understand
1  Cor.  2.  9.  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  A.  neither
Gal.  1.  13.  for  ye  have  A.  of  my  conversation
Eph.  1.  13.  after  that  ye  A.  the  word  ot  truth

15.  after  I  A.  of  your  faith  in  the  Jjird  Jesus
4  21.  if  so  be  ye  have  A.  him  and  been  taught
Phil  2.26.  that  ye  had  A.  that  he  hud  been  sick

220


Phil.  4.  9.  those  thingsye  have  A.  and  seen  in  me, do
Col.  1.  4.  since  we  A.  of  your  taitli  111  Christ
6.  since  day  ye  A.  ot  it,  and  knew  the  grace  ot  G.

9.  since  day  we  A.  it,  do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you
0  Tim  °.  2.  things  thou  hast  A.  ot  me,  commit  to
~Heb.  2*.  3.  was  confirmed  to  us  by  them  that  A.  him
3.  16.  for  some  when  they  had  A.  did  provoke

4  2.  not  being  mixed  with  taith  in  them  that  n.

5  7.  offer,  up  prayers,  and  was  A.  in  that  he  feared
Jam.  5. 11.  ye  have  A.  of  the  patience  ot  Job
1  John  2. 18  ye  A.  that  antichrist  sha U  come,  4.  3.

24.  have  A.  from  the  beginning,  3.  11.  2 ■  John  6.

Rev  3.  3.  remember  therefore  how  thou  hast  h.

5.  13.  and  all  that  are  in  them  A.  I,  saying

7  4  I  A.  the  number  of  them  which  were  sealed

9’  1*6  and  1  A.  the  number  of  the  horsemen
18  8  and  I  A  the  angel  of  the  waters  say
IB*  22.  the  voice  of  trumpeters  shall  be  A.  no  more
°3.  the  voice  of  bride  shall  be  A.  no  more  in  thee
on  «.  1  saw  these  things,  and  A.  them,  when  1  n.

I  have  HEARD.

Gen.  17.  20.  and  as  for  Ishmael  I  have  A.  thee
41  15.  1  have  dreamed  a  dream,  I  have  A.  say  ™
thee  thou  canst  interp.  dreams.  Van.  o.  14,  10.

40  2.  I  have  A.  tiiat  there  is  corn  in  Egypt
Exod.  3.7- 1  have  A.  their  cry  II  6.5.  Ih.  A.  groaning
16  12.  I  have  A.  the  murmuring,  Num.  14.  27.
Veut.  5.  28.  I  have  A.  the  voice  ot  your  words
1  Sam.  25.  7.  now  I  have  h.  that  thou  hast  sheaiers

1  Kings  2.  42.  the  word  that  I  have  A.  is  good

0.  3.  I  have  A.  thy  prayer  thou  hast  made  before
me,  2  Kings  20.  5.  2  Chr  on.  7.  12.  Isa.  38.  5.

2  Kings  19.  20.  that  which  thou  hast  prayed  LA.  A.
00  19.  I  also  have  h.  thee,  saith  L.  -  Chr.  34.  ~7>

Joh\()  o.  I  have  A.  many  such  things,  miserable  com.
20.  3.  I  have  A.  the  check  ot  my  reproach
42.  5.  I  have  A.  of  thee  by  the  hearing  ot  the  ear
Psal.  31.  13.  for  1  have  A.  the  slander  of  many
62. 11.  twice  1  have  A.  this,  power  belongeth  to  G.
Isa.  21. 10.  that  which  1  have  A.  ot  Lord  ot  hosts
28."  22.  1  have  A.  from  the  I.ord  a  consumption
49I  a  in  an  acceptable  time  have  Ih.  2  Cor.  0.

Jer.  23  25.  I  have  A.  what  the  prophets  said
31.  18.  i  have  A.  Ephraim  bemoaning  himself  thus
42  4.  I  have  A.  you,  behold,  L  will  pray  unto  the  L.
49. 14.  I  have  A.  a  rumour  from  the  Lord
Ezek.  35.  12.  know  I  have  A.  ail  thy  blasphemies
Bos.  li.  8.  I  have  h.  him  and  observed  him  .
Hah.  3.  2.  O  L.  I  have  h.  thy  speech,  and  was  afraid
Zcph.  2.  8.  I  have  A.  the  reproach  ot  Moab
John  8.  26.  I  speak  those  th mgs  1  ha ve  h .  ot  him
40.  told  you  t/.e  truth,  which  1  have  A.  ot  hod
15.  15.  all  things  that  1  have  A.  ot  my  l  ather
Acts  7  34  I  have  A.  their  groaning,  and  am  come
9  13.  Lord  1  have  A.  by  many  of  this  man,  how
HEARD,  joined  with  voice.  .

Gen.  3.  8.  they  A.  voice  ot  the  L.  walking  in  garden
10.  I  A.  thy  voice,  and  was  afraid,  because  naked
°1.  17.  God  h.  the  voice  of  the  lad,  the  angel  called
30*.  6.  God  hath  A.  my  voice,  and  given  me  a  son
39.  15.  when  he  A.  that  I  lifted  up  my  voice
Num.  7.  89.  then  he  A.  the  voice  ot  one  speaking
°0  16  we  cried,  he  A.  our  voice,  and  sent  an  angel
Vent.  1.  34.  the  Lord  A.  the  voice  of  your  words

4.  12.  saw  no  similitude,  only  he  A.  a  voice
33  hear  v.  of  God  as  thou  hast  A.  and  live,  5.  *6.

5.  2*3.  ve  A.  the  voice  out  ot  the  midst  ot  darkness
of  Ed  have  A.  his  voice  out  ot  the  midst  of  the  til  e
28*.  and  the  Lord  A.  the  voice  of  your  words

°6.  7  we  cried,  the  J.ord  A.  our  voice,  and  looked
Judg.'lQ.  25.  let  not  thy  voice  be  A.  among  us


juag.  IB.  vo.  lei  uui  iiiv  7-  ■■■  •

1  Sam.  1.  13.  her  lips  moved,  her  vuice_ was mot  A.
1  Kings  17.  22.  the  Lord  A.  the  voice  ot  Elijah


2  Chum.  30.  27.  their  voice  was  A.  prayer  came  up
Job  4. 16.  there  was  silence,  l  A.  a  voice,  saying
33.  8. 1  have  A.  the  voice  ot  tliy  words,  saying
37.  4.  lie  will  not  stay  them  when  his  voice  is  A.
Psal.  3.  4.  1  cried  to  the  L.  with  my  voice,  lie  A.  me
6.  8.  the  Lord  hath  A.  the  voice  of  my  weeping

18.  6. 1  called,  he  A.  my  voice  out  pt  hts  temple

19.  3.  there  is  no  speech  where  their  voice  is  not  n.
28. 6.  because  he  hath  A.  the  voice  ot  my  suppnea.
66.  8.  and  make  the  voice  of  his  praise  to  be  n.
116.1.  i  love  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  A.  my  voice

Cant.  2.  12.  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  A.  in  out'  land
Isa.  6.  8.  also  1  A.  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saynig
15.  4.  their  voice  shall  be  A.  even  unto  Jahaz

30.  30.  Lord  shall  cause  his  glorious  voice  to  be  «•
42.  2.  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  A.  in  the  street
58.  4.  not  fast,  to  make  your  voice  be  A.  on  high
65.  19.  voice  of  w'eeping  shall  no  more  be  A.  in  her

Jer.  3.  21.  a  voice  was  A.  upon  the  high  places
4.  31.  I  have  A.  a  voice  as  of  a  woman  in  travail

9.  19.  for  a  voice  of  wailing  is  A.  out  of  Zion
30. 5.  we  have  A.  a  voice  of  trembling,  ot  tear

31.  15.  a  voice  was  A.  in  Ramah.  Mat.  2.  18.

Lam.  3.56.  thou  hast  A.  my  voice,  hide  not  thine  ear
Ezek.  1.  28.  and  1  A.  a  voice  of  one  that  spake

3.  12.  1  A.  behind  me  a  voice  of  great  rushing
19.  9.  that  his  voice  should  no  more  be  A.

27.  30.  and  shall  cause  their  voice  to  be  A.  ag.  thee
Van.  8. 16.  1  A.  a  man’s  voice  between  the  banks

10.  9.  yet  A.  1  the  voice  of  his  words,  when  I  A.
Nah  2.  13.  voice  of  thy  messengers  no  more  be  A.
John  5. 37  -  ye  have  neither  A.  his  voice  atanv  time
Acts  9.4.  h.  a.  voice,  saying,  Saul,  Saul,  22. 1 .  |  -b.14.

11.7.  1  A.  a  voice  saying  to  me,  arise,  slay  and  eat
22*  9.  they  A.  not  the  voice  of  him  that  spake
Heb.  *12.  19.  which  voice  they  that  A.  entreated
2  Pet.  1. 18.  the  voice  which  came  from  heaven  we  A.
Rev.  1.  10.  I  A.  a  great  voice,  16.  1. 1  19-1-1  21.  o.

4  1  the  first  voice  1  A.  was  as  it  were  ot  a  trumpet

5  11.  I  beheld,  and  A.  the  voice  of  many  angels

6  6  I  A.  a  voice  in  the  midst  ot  the  tour  beasts
7  l  A.  a  voice  of  the  fourth  beast  say,  come  and  see

9  13  1  A.  a  voice  from  the  four  horns  ot  the  altar
10.  4. 1  A.  a  voice  from  hea\'cn,8. 1  14. 2,13. 1  18.  4.
12. 10.  and  1  A.  a  loud  voice,  saying  in  heaven
14.  2. 1  A.  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with  harps
19  6. 1  A.  as  it  were  the  voice  of  a  great  multitude
We  have  HEARD.

Josh.  2.  10.  we  have  A.  how  the  Lord  dried  Red  sea


JAfA.2. 11.  soon  as  we  had  A.  these  things  hearts  melt
9  9  we  have  h.  the  tame  of  him,  and  all  he  did
2  Sam.  7.  22.  there  is  none  like  thee  according  to
all  we  have  h.  with  our  ears,  1  Chi .  17.  20.

1  Kings  20. 31.  we  haveh.  kings  of  Isr.  are  merciful
Job  28.  22.  we  have  A.  the  fame  thereof,  Jer.  6.  24.
pSal.  44. 1 .  we  have  A.  with  our  ears,  our  fathers  told
48.  8.  as  we  have  A.  so  have  we  seen  in  city  ot  Lord
78.  3.  dark  sayings  which  we  have  A.  and  known
Isa.  16. 6.  we  have  h.  ot  pride  of  Moab,  Jer.  48. 29.

24.  16.  we  have  h.  songs,  glory  to  the  righteous
Jer.  30.  5.  we  have  A.  a  voice  ot  trembling,  ot  tear
51.51.  confounded,  because  we  have  A.  reproach
Obad.  1.  we  have  A.  a  rumour  from  the  1  ord
Zech,  8.  23.  for  we  have  h.  that  God  is  with  }'0u
Mark  14.  58.  we  have  h.  him  say,  1  will  destroy
Luke  4.  2.3.  whatever  we  have  A.  done  in  Capernaum
22.  71.  we  ourselves  have  h.  of  his  own  mouth
John  4.  42.  we  believe,  we  have  h.  him  ourselves
12. 34.  we  have  h.  out  of  the  law  that  Christ  abideth
Acts  4.  20.  we  cannot  but  speak  things  we  have  A
6  11.  we  have  A.  him  speak  blasphemous  words
14.  we  haveh.  him  say,  this  Jesus  shall  destroy
15.  24.  we  haveh.  that  certain  have  troubled  you
19.  2.  we  have  not  A.  whether  there  be  any  Holy  Gb.
Heb.d.  1.  to  give  heed  to  things  which  we  have  h.

1  John  1.  1.  that  which  we  have  A.  and  seen,  3.

5.  this  is  the  message  which  we  have  A.  of  him
HEARD,  joined  with  word  or  words.

Gen.  24.  30.  and  when  he  A.  the  words,  of  llebekah
52.  when  Abraham’s  servant  A.  their  words
27.  34.  and  when  Esau  A.  the  words  ot  his  father
31.  1.  Jacob  A.  the  words  of  Laban’s  sons,  saying
39.  19.  when  his  master  A.  the  words  of  his  wife
Num.  24.  4.  he  hath  said,  which  A.  words  ot  God, 16.
Josh.  22.  30.  when  heads  of  Isr.  A.  words  of  Reuben
24.  27.  for  it  hath  A.  all  the  words  ot'  the  Lord
Judg.  9.  30.  when  Zebul  A.  the  words  of  Gaal
1  Sam.  8.  21.  Samuel  A.  all  the  words  of  the  people

17.  11.  Saul  and  Israel  A.  Goliath’s  words
23.  accord,  to  the  same  words,  and  David  A.  them
31.  when  the  words  were  A.  which  David  spake

1  Kings  2.  42.  the  word  that  I  have  A.  is  good
5.  7.  when  Hiram  A.  Solomon’s  words  he  rejoiced
21.  27.  when  Ahab  A.  those  words,  rent  his  clothes

2  Kings  6. 30.  when  the  king  A.  words  of  the  woman
19.  6.  be  not  afraid  of  words  thou  hast  A.  Isa.  37 .  6..

22. 11.  when  the  king  had  A.  the  words  of  book  of
law,  he  rent  his  clothes,  18.  2  Chr.  34. 19.

2  Chron.  15.  8.  Asa  A.  these  words,  he  took  courage
Neh.  1.  4.  A.  these  words,  1  sat  down  and  wept
5.  6.  and  1  was  angry  when  l  A.  these  words
8.  9.  the  people  wept,  when  they  A.  words  ot  the  law
Job  33.  8. 1  have  A.  the  voice  of  thy  words,  saying
Eccl.  9. 16.  the  poor  man’s  words  are  not  A.

17.  the  words  of  wise  men  are  A.  in  quiet
Isa.  37.  4.  will  reprove  the  words  which  God  hath  A.
Jer.  23. 18.  hath  perceived,  marked,  and  A.  his  word
25.  8.  therefore  because  ye  have  not  A.  my  words

26. 12.  against  this  city  all  the  words  ye  have  A.

21.  when  the  king  and  all  the  princes  A.  his  words

36.  13.  declared  unto  them  all  the  words  he  had  A.
24  they  were  not  afraid  that  A.  these  words
38. 1.  Pashur  A.  the  words  Jeremiah  had  spoken
Dan. 6.14.  when  Darius  A. these  words  was  displeased

10. 12.  thy  words  were  A.  I  am  come  for  thy  words
Mat.  22. 22.when  they  A.these  words  they  marvelled
Mark  5.  36.  as  soon  as  Jesus  A.  the  word  spoken
Luke  10. 39.  Mary  sat  at  J esus’  feet,  and  A.  his  word
Acts  10.  44.  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  them  who  A.  word
2  Cor.  12.  4.  caught  up,  and  A.  unspeakable  wow
~Evh.  1.  13.  after  that  ye  A.  the  word  of  truth
Col  1.  5.  whereof  ye  h.  in  the  word  of  the  gospel

1  These.  2.  13.  received  the  word  which  ye  A.  ot  us

2  Tim.  1.13.  hold  fast  form  of  sound  w.  hast  A.  of  me
~Heb.  12.  19.  they  that  A.  entreateth  that  the  word
1  John  2. 7.  the  word  ye  have  A.  from  the  beginning

UEARDEST.

Dent.  4.  36.  and  thou  A.  his  words  out  of  the  fire
Josh.  14. 12.  for  thou  A.  in  that  day  how  Anakims
0  Kinns  22.  19.  when  thou  A.  what  1  spake  against
this  place,  hast  rent  thy  clothes,  2  Chr.  34.  '-7-
Neh.  0.  9.  and  thou  A.  their  cry  by  the  Red  sea
27.  they  cried,  thou  A.  them  from  heaven,  28.
Psal  31.  22.  thou  A.  the  voice  of  my  supplications
’  119  *26. 1  have  declared  my  ways,  and  thou  A.  me
Isa  48  7.  before  the  day  when  thou  A.  them  not
8.  yea,  thou  A.  not,  yea,  thou  knewest  not
Jonah  2.  2.  out  of  belly  of  helM  cried,  thou  A.

Jam.  1 . 23.  if  any  be  a  A.  of  the  word ,  and  not  a  doa
05  i,e  bemo-  not  a  forgetful  A.  but  doer  of  ■work
'  °  HEARERS.

sl\om.  2.  13.  not  the  A.  of  the  law  are  justified
Eph.  4.  29.  that  it  may  minister  grace  unto  the  A.
o  Tim.  2. 14.  but  to  the  subverting  of  the  A.

7  . ,,  1  00.  be  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  A.  only
Ja  '  '  *  HEAREST.

Rnthl2.fi-  Boazto  Ruth,  A.  thou  not,  my  daughter
1  Sam'.  24.  9.  wherefore  A.  thou  men’s  words  r
o  %am,  5.  24.  when  A.  sound  in  the  mulberry-trees
1  King  s  8.  30.  when  thou  A.  forgive,  2  Chron.  6.  -E;
Psal  2(2.  2.  I  cry  in  the  day  time,  but  thou  A.  not
f.r.  0  t  hou  that  A.  prayer,  unto  thee  all  flesh  come
-  Atat~o\-,  16.  said  unto  him,  A.  thou  what  these  sav
o-  j «  A.  thou  not  how  many  things  they  witness,
John  3  *8.  wind  bloweth,  and  thou  A.  the  sound
*11  4°'  ai^d  1  knew  that  thou  A.  me  always
HEARETH.

Exod.  16.  7.  for  that  lie  A.  your  murmuring?,  8.
Num'.  30.  5.  if  father  disallow  her  in  day  mat  he
Eeut  °9  19  when  he  A.  the  words  ot  this  cur.e
1  Sam  3  9 's  l>eak,  Lord,  for  thy  servantA.  10.  r
11  1*  will  dC>  a  thing  at  which  ears  ot  every  on?
that  A  'Mall  tingle,  2  Kings  21. .12.  Jer.  19.  ■»
o  <zam  J7.0  .whosoever  A.  it  will  say , there  is  aslaufck
~r,<b  34*  Et>.  and  he  A.  the  cry  of  the  afflicted
Psal-  34. 17*  the  righteous  cry,  and  the  Lord  A.

14.  thus  1  was  as  a  man  that  A.  not  :

6a.  33.  Ed.  A.  poor,  and  despiseth  not  his  Prl^"-
Prov.  8.  34.  blessed  is  the  man  that  A.  me.  watenn,
13. 1.  a  wise  son  A.  his  father  s  instruction


HE  A


HE  A


Prov.  13. 8.  ransom  bis  riches,  but  poor  A.  not  rebuke
15.  29.  but  he  A.  the  prayer  of  the  righteous
31.  the  ear  that  A.  the  reproof  of  life,  32
18.  13.  he  that  answereth  a  matter  before’  he  A  it
21.  28.  but  the  man  that  A.  speaketh  constantly
25.  10.  lest  he  that  A.  it  put  thee  to  shame
29.  24.  he  A.  cursing,  and  bewrayeth  it  not
Isa.  41.  26.  yea,  there  is  none  that  A.  your  words
42.  20.  •pening  the  ears,  but  he  A.  not

3.  27.  thou  shalt  say,  he  that  A.  let  him  hear
33.  4.  whosoever  A.  the  sound  of  the  trumpet
Mat.l  .24.  whoso  A.  these  sayings,  26.  Luke6.  47,49.
13.  19.  when  any  one  A.  the  word  of  the  kingdom
20.  the  same  is  he  that  A.  the  word,  22,  23.

Luke  \0.\6.  he  that  A.  you  A.  me,  and  that  despisoth
John  3.  29.  whostandetli  and  4.  him  rejoiceth  greatly
,,  u  !vat.  'word,  and  believeth  on  him

8.  47.  he  that  is  ot  God  h.  God's  words

9.  31.  God  A.  not  sinners,  but  if  any  man  be  a  wor-

JJhipper  04  God,  and  doeth  his  will,  him  lie  A.
18.  3 4 .  every  one  that  is  ot  the  truth,  h.  my  voice
2  Cor  12.  6.  think  of  me  above  that  he  A.  of  me
t  John  4. 5.  are  ot  the  world,  and  the  world  A.  them
6.  we  are  ot  God,  he  that  knoweth  God  h  us
u  ask.  according  to  his  will,  he  //.'us

Rev.  22.  17.  and  let  him  that*//.  say,  come
18.  lor  1  testify  to  every  man  that  h.  the  words
r.  HEARING.

*  qVV  13hwJh?1?  heard  the  A.  of  Jacob

t  33.  she  called  his  name  Simeon,  that  is,  h.

Vein.  31. 11.  shalt  read  this  law  to  Israel  in  their  h.

.  oam.  18. 12.  tor  in  our  h.  the  king  charged  thpe
\VA  T+o  bilt  th^r?  was  neither  voice  nor  h.
r  1 1  iei  aT  be^ore  all  that  understood  in  h.
r°b  83.  8  surely  thou  hast  spoken  in  my  h.

37.  t  2.  hear  in  h.  the  noise  of  his  voice  and  sound
ia,v,e  heard  °4  thee  by  the  A.  of  the  ear


H  E  A


rsal'e.  I4,  at  kl'  °f  l''e  ear  they  will  obey
sa.  6.  t  9.  hear  ye  in  h.  but  understand  not


11.  3.  nor  reprove  after  the  h.  of  kis  ears
21.  3.  1  was  bowed  down  at  the  h.  of  it
;£•  J ,9',  whom  shall  he  make  to  understand  the  A.  ?

15.  he  that  stoppeth  his  ears  from  h.  of  blood
53 ■'  4*  who  hath  believed  our  h.  ?  Rom.  10.  +  16
io^-i9’w'JL°thei!?  hetsaid  m  my  A.  go  after  him

m  ™  9nt0  ,hem  ln  my  h-  0  wheel

16.  t56.  thy  sister  Sodom  was  not  for  A.  in  the  day

a  ITan,11I?e,0l  the  word  of  the  Lord
+„r  9  1  have  heard  thy  h.  I  was  afraid

o-i  21*  t0  be  reserve(J  to  the  A.  of  Augustus
23.  Agnppa  was  entered  into  the  place  of  A
^n-faith  cometh  by  A.  and  A.  by  word  of  G.
Vo  li  whe.re  were  the  A.?  if  whole  were  A.
'{&  K2'  Re  works  of  law  or  by  the  A.  of  faith,  5.
ieb.  5. 11.  many  things  hard,  seeingye  are  dull  of  A.
HEARING.


rr*  0  xiuniuitiu.

>VnW' tfo9,i,v5  thy  serLvant  an  h-  heart  to  judge
S°-  2/h  12.  the  A.  ear,  the  Lord  hath  made  “


?,79%th^tturneth,awa’y  the  ear  from  A.  the  law
:cc[-  Ik8/  n9r  1S  44ie  ear  filled  with  A.

In *  i«4‘  ,,e?reth  the  sound  of  trumpet

14  n  lhey  hear,  n?t,  nor  understand

1**  11 he,aF’  s^laH  not  understand

15.  the, rears  dull  of  A.  Acts  28.  27.  Heb.  5.  11
2-  tnany him  were  astonished,  saying’
“55  ?•  46.  both  A.  them  and  asking  them  questions
cts  5.  5.  Ananias  A.  these  words  fell  down
.  6.  A  and  seeing  the  miracles  which  he  did

8  h  m.  rsph*-  a  X°-ice’  but  see*ng  no  man
8.  8.  many  of  the  Corinthians  A.  believed

pf/no  o  t  °f tl,y  loVe  and  faith  toward  I  d.  Jesus
reL  *• 8*  Lot  m  sc|m^and  vexed  his  righteous

'°fA^Vbell,old’  ,how  shall  Pharaoh  A.  to  me  ?

1  13 ’if’ wy,en 4?  these  judpients,  and  keep  them
dl will  A.  diligently  to  my  commands
5.5.  if  thou  carefully  A.  to  voice  ot  Ld.  Jer.  17

R  i1!' ^r0pie!  llke  t0  me’ t0  him  ye  shall  A.
\4ihou  to  commandments,  1  Kings  11.38
1*  17.  as  to  Moses,  so  will  w e  h.  unto  thee
^Z!:  \5.22.  and  to  A  than  the  fat  of  rams
oo'n10  will  A.  to  you  in  this  matter  ?

K  ;£l,,av(e  thou  respect  to  h .  to  cry  and  prayer

fh  Wl'  1?  the  /Prf,yer’  52-  2  C7'"«.6.19,  20.
7nl  R1  S7nh!  w;e  A.  then  to  you  to  do  all  this  ?
“  ;  8V  B-0  Israel,  if  thou  wilt  A.  unto  me

,  V  V'Vjji  ^.ru^ ‘er  ‘Slip®'  servants  are  wicked
3Vand.thc  ears  of  them  that  hear  shall  A.
r  o'fi  o  hS  W‘11  /i;,and  hear  for  the  time  to  come
>'  to  *3V«f*k°  be  thty  will /1.  and  turn  from  evil  ?
l’  10  khie,  Prophets  whom  I  sent  unto  you

)’ 13 ‘will  t0-  We-’  a.nd  1  .win  h-  unto  you

cA  7  n  hJ  01  receive  instruction  to  A.  to  words

(s'J'lQ'fn  A 11 J?Z  refused  t0  h-  ?topped  their  ears
)  A  lv4°  "•  vnt0  A  ^  more  than  unto  God
-  13.  33  peter  knocked,  a  damsel  came  to  A.

,  I1LARKE1S,  Imperatively.

wives  of  I^amech,  A.  to  my  speech

wWrii™0 T  11  i9- L!°  l3n ^our father
w’ 41  i  roe,up’  7  unto  me,  thou  son  of  Zippor
0  i?- 9  lsrae1/  to  the  statutes  I  teach  you

i?’9U7  0  lsrae1’  thls  da>’  thou  art

u«w:R3n  fnAd:u  - 10  me,’-  ye.  men  of  Shechem
r  f  t°  the  supplications,  2  Chr.  6.  21.

•hfnn  IRO-’  A-°  people,  every  one  of  you

'15  i  v.*1  iia?djhu  sajdJ  3fe  People
('  13  «  J ndah-  and  ye  inhabitants  of  Jeru .

10  *  ♦  h’  1°  the  Pleadings  ot  my  lips

*  10*  A  33‘  S1'  ^  33'  2* /,i* to  my  words
4  let  .  »?.t0  me.  ye  men  ot  understanding

i3lifiraan'' 11  14;,  h- 1°  this,  O  Job

ov  7  '  04  ’  1  ’  J  will  teach  you  ||  45. 10.  A.  O  daught.

9R ‘01  k '  to  me.  therefore,  O  children,  8.  32.
l  cmi.  ar  my  voice,  A.  and  hear  my  speech
i  e  near,  ye  nations,  A.  ye  people,  49  1
2V;'0ni?:,°  h?use  of  Jacob,  48P 12:  lA  1.

.*1  I  tn  mS  Ou  4l.kar(?di’,are  far  troni  righteous.

A  unto  mp  ’  tbat  follow  after  righteousness
A  tcfmJ116’  People,  give  ear,  O  my  nation
A  Jpt™  ye  that  know  righteousness

•  •  6. 17  lint ^y,unt0  me,  eat  that  which  is  good

7.  a>  mg,  A.  to  the  sound  of  the  trumpet


'  ?'  IP'P  J,°rd.  A.  and  do  ;  defer  not,  O  my  God
AJ/V/A  °  earth,  and  all  that  therein  is
Arto  1 14-  be  sa,d»A-  to  me,  every  one  of  you

i  o  hit*  yA  men  °t'k‘dah’  h-  to  my  words
7.  2.  he  said,  men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  A.

I5-13-  *aytng.  men  and  brethren,  A.  to  me
Jam.  5.  A.  my  beloved  brethren,  hath  not  God
&ee  Voice.

HEARKEN  not,  or  not  HEARKEN
Gen.  34.  17 -if  ye  will  not  h.  to  be  circumcised
Rxod.JJ.  4.  Pharaoh  shall  not  A.  to  you,  22.  Ill  Q
26.  14.  but  if  ye  will  not  A.  to  me,  18*  °1  °*7
Dent.  13  3.  thou  shalt  not  A.  to  that  dreamer  '7'
-.S’  unto  him,  nor  shall  thine  eye  pity  him

47 •  12.  the  man  that  will  not  A.  to  die  pries!

18.  19.  tliat  whosoever  will  not  A.  to  my  words
zb  chastened,  he  will  not  A.  to  them

23.  5.  Lord  would \  not  A.  to  Balaam,  Jos  A.  24.  10
1*  l8,  and  will  not  h.  to  thy  words  in  all
^^  2. 17.  yet  they  would  not  A.  to  their  judges
in'  n7-.'  !tle  klDg  ot  Ldom  would  not  A.  thereto
If  -  Jhe  men  of  Gibeah  would  not  A.  to  hiih
yO.  I3.  the  children  of  Benjamin  would  not  A.

I  -0.  S.  elders  said,  A.  not  to  him,  nor  consent

2i »  I7’  4«- d,d«°t  A  .hut  rl  id  after  their  manner

l8;.31-/'-  not  to  Hezekiah,  Isa.  36.  16.

'00  1 A  10‘  ?6-  ■ amg  Rehoboam  would  not  A.  to  them

.7ol33°‘3R  if  /L°i,rdii?k  ke’  but  they  would  not  A.

*  /'  h°ld  thy  peace,  I  shall  teach  thee
Psal.  58. 5.  who  will  not  A.  to  the  voice  of  charmers
/1lnb,iJ  my  people  would  not  A.  toniy  voice
Jer.  G.  iO.  then- ear  is  uncircumcised,  they' cannot  A
•  hut  they  said,  we  will  not  A.  44.  16.

2{.  thou  shalt  speak,  they  will  not  A.  unto  thee
J'lk  th°  they  cry  to  me,  I  will  not  A.  to  them
}j'  mter  evi[. heart,  that  they  may  not  A.  to  me
47 •  f7'  14  •> e  will  not  A.  to  me,  26.  4.  Ezek.  20.  .39

"ft  h  rnot- t0  Pr°Phe,ts,  2?.  9, 14, 16, 17.  |  29.  8.

08.  15.  if  I  give  counsel,  wilt  thou  not  A.  to  me  '

V'  7Wi  ‘n t0, thee? for  they  will  not  A.  to  me
20.  8.  they  rebelled,  and  would  not  A.  unto  me
Jrlos*  9.1/.  because  they  did  710 1  h.  to  him.  Zech  1  4

~  .  hearkened.

3nW‘i73'r£i  f  bflaTamu/n  t0  Pphron,  and  weighed
ii'  I!'  h-  t0  ^eal?,H  ?2.  God  A.  to  Rachel
00  ?4.  to  Hamor  A.  all  that  went  out  of  the  gate

f9'J°A  fnatkJ?SnP  1  h,‘  not  t0  her,  to  lie  by  her
LZd'o-  9i  'u1  the^./i-  n°tto  Moses,  16.  20.

A v«the  children  of  Israel  have  not  A.  to  me
7.  lo.  Pharaoh  h.  not  to  them.  8. 15,  19.  I  Q

7/ftWi'a9'*k9"^'orf-  ,l’  *9  me  at  that  time,  lO.  ’loT’

18.  14.  these  nations  /;.  to  observers  of  times

9-  sraelA-  to  Joshua  as  to  Moses,  Josh.  1.  17.
Judff.  11.28.  king  of  Ammonites//,  not  to  Jephthah
1  woman  of  EndorA.  to  Saul’swords

1  oi  miv'/  5;iklng/'- 1104 to  People,  16. 2  CAr.  lo.  15.
itVne£  '■  hT,°Je  to,,he  word  of  the  Lord
lo.  20.  Ben-hadad  A.  to  king  Asa,  2  CAron  16  4

21?W  V*  anfJ  Ihe  Lord  h-  to  Jehoahaz  4*
4,6-  9-  the  king  of  Assyria //.  to  Asa

0?'  13.  Ilezekiah  //.to  the  messengers  from  Babylon
00'  ?kdudaf  i;  no4 }° 4ke  4aw,  Manasseh  seduced
y 3o j  Ui/a!k C1S  ? '  fiot  to  the  words  of  the  book
~ok  \'eC*k  17‘  then  Joash  A.  to  the  princes  of  Judah
3n  cn‘  WHZ/afh  n°t  t°  the  prophet’s  counsel
3A  00'  w^dA'/;^0  b’  a,ld  Sealed  the  people

3o.  » —  Josiah  h.  not  to  Pharaoh-necho

ReA.  9.16.  our  fathers  dealt  proudly,  and  A.  not
to  thy  commandments,  29,  34.  Jer  34  14
If;-  m4i,“o  nh,e1’  Mordecail,’not  t6  th'em*

r sal  81.13.  O  that  my  people  had  A.  tome
4h  ‘  ^VdLhP/ntly  with  much  heed

T^r  intb4i!  th0uU  hadst //.  to  my  commandments
Jer.  o.  19.  they  have  not  A.  to  my  word  7

26. 1  25.  3,  4,  7. 1  26.  5.  |  29  9.  |  3«  V’l  34
17.  1.35  14,  15,  16.  |  36.  31.  |  44.5  '  34’

t3';.44,-  1J1Jiah>,  not  to  Jeremiah,  so  he  took  him
V)nn'  o'  no'.i 1  Sint’  they  would  have  A.  to  thee

7k/f/'39'ifi  ti  rer  i'a/Ve  t0  4h>’  servants
,a‘-  '3.  46-  the  J.ord  A.  and  heard  it,  Jer  8  6

Rets  2, .  21.  Paul  said,  sirs,  ye  should  have  A.  to  me
oee  Voice.

HEARKEN  EDST.

Lieut.  ^8,  4o.  because  thou  h.  not  to  voice  cf  the  T

v>  ,  hearkeneth.

33.  but  whoso//.  t0  me  shall  dwell  safely
1-.  lo.  but  he  that  //.  to  counsel  is  wise

hearkening.

JiaL  103-  20.  ye  an^L/Ltothe  voice  of  his  word

TAe  Hebrews  look  upon  the  heart  as  the  source  of
utt,  understanding ,  love,  courage,  grief,  and  pie  a-

A  rf'hr,l  ZU?,?le  derAl\ed  many  rvays  of  speaking.
An  honest  and  good  heart;  that  is,  a  heart  stu¬
dious  oj  holiness,  being  prepared  by  the  Spirit  of
Cod,  to  entertain  the  word  with  due  affections,  dis¬
positions,  and  resolutions.  Luke  8. 15.  ti  e  read  of

debnpd Evn  lefart’  rif  u  eart’  an  evil  heart,  a  har-
„^,rr!'eirt’a  kbe'al  hefirt,  «  heart  that  does  an


pAesy  according  to  their  own  inclinations  and  affec¬
tions,  and  what  their  own  imaginations  suggest  to  -
them,  without  any  warrant  Jrom  God.  lolav
any  thing  to  heart,  to  set  one  s  heart  011  any
tiung ,  that  is,  to  remember  it,  to  apply  oneself  to
it,  to  have  it  at  heart.  No  man  layethittoheart,.
no  one  concerns  himself  about  it,  Jer.  12  11
I  As  heart  dilates  with  joy,  contracts  with  sadness,
breaks  with  sorrow,  grows  fat,  and  hardens  in
prosperity ;  it  resists  truth  ;  God  opens  it  pre¬
pares  and  turns  it  as  he  pleases.  '1  o  steal  one’s
neart  is  an  expression  in  Gen.  31.  t  20  Jacob
stole  away  the  heart  of  Laban;  that  is,  he  went
away  without  Ais  knowledge  and  consent.  1  h<?
heart  melts,  under  discouragement ;  the  heart
forsakes  one,  under  terror  :  the  heart  is  desolate
in  amazement ;  the  heart  is  fluctuating,/?/  doubt'.

I  o  speak  to  one  s  heart,  to  comfort  Aim,  to  sag
pleasing  and  affecting  things  to  him.
try  the  heart  likewise  the  middle  of  any  thing  is
meant:  Tyre  is  in  the  heart  of  the  seas,  in  the
Seas'  Ez-ek-  27-  4.  We  will  not  fear
‘  °5,  H  jpnnn43^8  he  carried  into  the  heart
or  midst  of  the  sea,  Psal.  46.  2.  As  Jon  ,

sor^h»nath  aad  three  nigllts  in  whale’s  belly  •
so  ah  all  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and  three

Mat.  12n4o!e  hCart  0t  thC  earth’  m  the  Vruve>
% **+3'1  +  20-  ;,acob  st7le  away  the  //.  of  I.aban
lk|ASheule'!1  !p?tke  t0,4he  ,l-  of  l^iuah

an°l-  s  1‘  4ainted,  lor  he  believed  them  not
on^i/wi,9'  49ry.e,  know  the  //.  of  a  stranger
-8.  30.  they  shall  be  on  Aaron’s  //.  when  ife  goeth  in

35.  d  whoso  is  ot  a  willing//,  let  him  bring  it
3o.  them  hath  he  filled  with  wisdom  of  A.

A sha11  consunie  eyes,  cause  sorrow  of  A.
Aw??/.  32.7.  wherefore  discourage  ye  the  //.of  Israel  ?

T  f-  .they  d fShou raged  the  A.  ot  the  children  of  Isr
^RWo'}f'fnrV  hhiN  thefe  were  such  an  A.  in  them
'a-i  28k  Eord  shall  smite  with  astonishment  of  A
47.  thou  seryedst  not  the  Lord  with  gladness  of  A
LTrdAualli  give  tliee  there  a  trembling  A  *
r29/4’,  1  o  L?rd  hath, not  glven  >°u  a  //.  to  perceive  .

44- 8.  .they  in  ad  e  the//,  of  the  peoplemelt
J  idf'p-fp-  4or  divisions  were  great  thoughts  of  A.
i  s)doo01*  dlvislonstliere  were  great  searchings  of  A.

48J  20'  )he  priest’s  A.  was  glad,  he  took  the  ephod
\^Von  1Vl3*  now  41ar>uah,  she  spake  in  her  A
4-  +20.  she  answered  not,  nor  set  her  A.  to  it

in'  ?'  A  St  4ba+  God  gave  him  another  A.
hut  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  //.

of  et  no  I?an’s  ,l- 4ail  because  of  him

oi'  31  D<mV'n  1  ''  srnot.e  him,  because  he  cut  off

'4  3anHhA'  i  ,4)e,n°,erief  ’  nor  o4k'nce  of  A.  to  my  Id.

36.  and  Nabal  s  A.  was  merry  within  him

'13  6'  i16,  S  aC  desP,13ed  him  in  A.  l  CAron.  15.29.-

14'  i'8’th  i1 A.mn,.)n  ?  h-  1S  meri'y  with  wine
in  V, “at  the  kings  //,  was  toward  Absalom

io  +7  n^am,mUSt  ?ar,s  through  the  A.  of  Absal.

V*  r°  ^or.^I  an,c^  speak  to  h.  ot  thy  servants
1  at'  be  h°wed.the  h.  ot  all  the  men  of  Judah
1  Lings  3.  9.  give  thy  servant  an  understanding  A
42'4  >lave  thee  an  understanding  A.  °
q  7P-  G.  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  largeness  of  A
8. 1/ .  it  was  in  the  A.  of  David,  2  CAron.  6  7
6b.  people  went  to  tents  glad  of  A.  2  CAron  7  10
10.  _.  comniuned  of  all  was  in  her  A.  2  CAron.  Q.  l’

44,  4-  perfect,  as  was  the  A.  of  David  his  father
4~.  .2/  •  then  shall  the  A.  of  this  people  turn

Jo  Tthatl-Am  ®u''  -°! king  of  Assy '  ia  was  troubled
L..  4.  that  comet  li  into  any  man  s  A.  2  Chr.  00  31

1  CAron .12.  33.  they  were  not  of  double  A.  *  '

4  3J-  'hey  were  without  a  A.  and  a  A.

on  V-'  ,he  /i‘,°4  them  rejoice,  Psal.  105.  3.

29.  1< .  1  know  thou  triest  the  //.  18.  Jer  11  20

~3n/'+'o!'  li  *  aad  all„thatcame  into  Solomon’s  A.

30.  t  — .  Ilezekiah  spake  to  the  A.  of  the  I  evites
Lzraff  22  turned  the  A.  of  the  king  of  Assyria

put  such  a  thing  as  this  in  the  kin< '  '


v.  j  »  '  *  —  ~ 7* - ■ '  **  *-*-***i^j,  CU  lino  uj  tut;  Kiijm’s  )i

i.  e,'i  V2,‘*,SUIS  n9thil,‘g  else  hut.  sorrow~of  A.
s  n'  if  when  the  A.  of  the  king  was  merry
i\9n  VmuVdU  went  forth  that  day  with  a  glad  A

Jto  9+' 3'  hefSi"i1Se  m  h‘,  and  mifihty  in  strength
12.  t  3.  but  I  have  an  A.  as  well  as  you


n.  ,  ,  ,  ‘  .  . ^  CIO  OC11  (13  vuu

9  t a^et  1  1 -e<  ,°f  ^le  ^kiefof  people  -

q  1  liA  fjaus^.(i  widow  s  //.  to  sing  for  joy


V?  •  T  *  V  *  iicai  l,  a  /mail

3  n  °Louf7> e!7 S[ee/y’  voluntarily,  with  generosity.

!  le  heart  to  God  ;  to  beseech  him  to


„  1  vjuu  ;  to  oeseec/i  turn  to

iviu  gn  *t0.ny  heaf,s  mto  hearts  of  flesh  ;  to  love

fk  hlri  mo  S  hua,rj’ &c-  T°  turn  the  heart  of  the
tathers  to  the  children,  and  the  heart  of  the  chil-

flZ  4°  49eir  Others,  Mai.  4.  6.  that  is,  to  cause
them  to  be  perfectly  reconciled,  and  that  they
should  be  oj  the  same  mind.  Let  no  man’s  heart
ran  ;  let  no  wan  be  discouraged,  1  Sam.  17.  32.
lo  want  heart,  sometimes  denotes  to  want  under -
fl’/d7f,  and  Prudence.  Ilos.  7-  11.  Ephraim  is
like  a  silly  dove,  without  heart ;  they  call  to  Egypt,

,  ey  to0  JP  Assyria.  J  hey  have  no  judgment  orun-


derstanding  of  the  right  way,  to  free  themselves  from
their  troubles ,  winch  2^  seen  in  their  seeking  to  Kgy  pt


men  without  insight  and  understanding ,  Luke  °4
7,  4  his  people’s  heart  is  waxed  gross  ,  lest

they  should  understand  with  their  heart,  Mat.  13
ih.  Iheir  heart  is  stvpified,  so  as  to  be  destitute


34  1 10  therefore  hearken  to  m^  ye  men  Zh.

3«  3h  h  ''  te-  me’  et  a  wise  man  hear

3°*  4-3-  ,but  the  hypocrites  in//,  heap  up  wrath
3  7-  ~4.  he  respecteth  not  any  that  are  wise  of/,.

38.  30.  who  hath  given  understandibg  to  the  A
icfsi  m'e'V  a*nt.  Wltj\a  double  A.  do  they  speak’
34'^'ftit  s4?4lilt?s  04  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  A.
34 '  48-  Te  ,Ld- 15  ni§h  them  that  are  of  a  broken  A.
44-  21.  tor  he  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  A.

4i'  o' ?ne  arrowis  ar-e ,sharp  in  the  A.  of  enemies
-3'  V  n  f ' y®  work  wickedness  ||  64.6.  the  A.  is  deep .
mi  9  4 h®J  have  more  than  A.  could  wish
loi.  4.  a  froward  A.  shall  depart  from  me
in’.an,illgh-  l°ok’,  and  a  proud  A.  will  not  T  suffer
104.  15.  wine,  that  maketh  glad  the  A.  of  mar  •
75  r  10  bread,  which  strengtheneth  man’s  A.’
fifo  d‘  ,8-  an  that  deyiseth  wicJced  imaginations,
J  32>  wh°so  commute th  adultery,  lacketh  A.

7.  40-  behold,  there  met  him  a  woman  subtle  of  A
m  li a*id  y e.t°°Js,  be  ye  of  an  understanding  A.

£-  8;,  t  ui  W1f  fii In  will. receive  commandments

20.  the  A.  of  the  wicked  is  little  worth

]od2d IfZflv1  (joward  A.  are  abomination  to  Ld.
i79' tbe  49o1  ®hall  be  servant  to  the  wise  of  A.

12.  8.  but  he  that  is  of  pen  erse  A.  shall  be  demised
20.  deceit  is  m  the  A  of  them  who  imagine  evil
2o  heaviness  in  the  A.  of  man  maketh  ft  stoop

13.  12.  hope  deferred  maketh  the  A.  sick
34.  30.  the  h.  knoweth  his  own  bitterness

48-  ^veP  in  laughter  the  A.  is  sorrow  ful

14.  backslider  in  A.  be  filled  with  his  own  ways
30.  a  sound  A.  Is  the  life  of  the  flesh. hut  envv  the
3.L  wisdom  resteth  m  A.  of  him  that  hath  underst
lo.  i .  but  the  A.  ot  the  foolish  doeth  not  so
13.  a  uierry  A.  maketh  a  cheerful  <  ountenance;
but  by  sorrow  ot  the  A.  the  spirit  is  broken

‘221


HE  A


HE  A


H  E  A


Prov.  15. 14.  A.  of  him  that  hath  underst.  seeketh  kn.
15  he  that  is  of  a  merry  h.  hath  a  continual  least
28  the  h.  of  the  righteous  studieth  to  answer
30  the  light  of  the  eyes  rejoiceth  the  h.

+ 32.  lie  that  heareth  reproof  possesseth  an  A.

16. 1.  the  preparations  ot  h.  m  man  from  the  L
5  every  one  proud  in  A.  is  an  abomination  to  L  .
9. 1  man9s  A.Vdseth  his  -ay,  but  Lord  directs
23.  the  A.  ot  the  wise  teacheth  his  mouth
17. 16.  a  price  in  hand,  seeing  he  hath  no  A.  t
20.  he  that  hath  a  troward  A  fmdetli  no  ^ood
on  a  nierrv  A.  doeth  good  like  a  medicine
18-12.  before  destruction  the  h.  ot  man  is  haugh  y
15.  the  h.  of  the  prudent  getteth  knowledge
19.  21.  there  are  many  devices  in  a  man  s  «•

20 !  5.  counsel  in  the  A.  ot  man  u deeP ''ate
Cl.  1.  the  kind's  h.  is  in  the  hand  ot  the  LiOicl
4  an  hi°h  look,  and  a  proud  h.  is  sin  .

Of’  n  that  loveth  pureness  of  A.  the  king  his  friend
*15.  foolishness  is  bound  in  ;r;

24  12  doth  not  he  that  pondereth  the  A.  consider  it.

05’  3  and  the  A.  of  kings  is  unsearchable
*20.'  so  is  he  that  singetli  songs  to  an  heavy  A.

26.  23.  a  wicked  h.  is  like  a  potsherd  co\  ei  ed  w  ith
07  9  ointment  and  perfume  rejoice  the  n.

10  so  the  A.  of  man  answereth  to  man
or  05.  lie  that  is  of  a  proud  A.  stirreth  up  strife

3l!  11."  the  A.  other  husband  doth  safely  trust  in  her
£cc/.7.3.  by  sadness  ot  countenance  the  A.  is  better
4  the  A.  of  the  wise  is  in  the  house  of  mournin^,
but  the  A.  of  fools  is  in  the  house  of  mirth
7.  oppression  makes  mad,  a  gift  destroyed the  h
8. 5.  wise  man’s  A.  discerneth  both  time  and  judgm.
11.  the  A.  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  eul
9  3  also  the  A.  of  the  sons  of  men  is  full  of  e\  ll
7.  eatthy  bread,  and  drink  thy  wine  with  merry  A.
10. 2.  a  wise  man’s  A.  is  at  right  hand,  fool  s  h. at  left


IU.  V.  a  wise  limn  on.  10  i^.ou  on

Isa.  6. 10.  make  their  A.  fat,  Mat.  13. 15.  Acts  ~8.  -7-
Q  Q  that  say  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  ot  n.
30.12.  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  h.  of  king
13.7.  all  hands  faint, every  mans  //.shall  melt
30.  £9.  ye  shall  have  gladness  ot  h.  as  when  one
V  4  the  A.  of  the  rash  shall  understand  knowledge
33.4.  say  to  them  that  are  of  fearful  A.  be  stron-
40. +  2.  speak  ye  to  the  A.  of  Jerusalem
42.  25.  it  burned  him,  yet  he  laid  it  not  to  A.

44.  20.  a  deceived  A.  hath  turned  him  aside
57’.  1.  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  A.  Jer.  R.  11.

15.  and  to  revive  the  A.  of  the  contrite  ones
50.  13.  uttering  from  the  A.  words  of  falsehood
65. 14.  behold,  my  servants  shall  sing  tor  joy  of  A
but  ye  shall  cry  for  sorrow  ot  A.  and  howl


LH1 L  VC  aiinu  j  - -

x  37.  the  former  heavens  not  come  upon  the


*  J7.  tne  ionnei  nw' .  7
Jer  2.  + 24.  that  snuffeth  wind  at  the  desire  ot  liei  A.

3.  + 16.  neither  shall  it  come  upon  the  A  .

4.  9.  the  A.  of  the  king  and  princes  shall  perish

5.  23.  but  this  people  hath  a  rebellious  A.  .

9.  26.  the  house  ot  Israel  are  uncircumcised  in  A.

11.  20.  O  Lord,  that  triest  the  reins  and  the  A.

17!  9.  the  A.  is  deceitful  above  all  things

10.  I  the  Lord  search  the  A.  I  try  the  reins
20. 12.  O  Lord,  that  seest  the  reins  and  A.

^3  26.  how  long  shall  this  be  in  the  A.  ot  prophets  .

2l!  7.  and  1  will  give  them  a  A.  to  know  me  ^

48.  41.  be  as  the  A.  of  a  woman  in  her  pangs,  49.

Lam.  3. 65.  give  them  sorrow  of  A.  thy  cui  se  to  them
Ezek  6  9.  1  am  broken  with  their  whonsh  A.

11. 19.  1  will  take  the  stony  A.  out  of  their  flesh
13.  22.  with  lies  ye  made  A.  of  the  righteous  sad
is!  31.  and  make  you  a.  new  A.  and  a  new  spirit
•01  7  every  h.  shall  melt,  all  hands  shall  be  teeble
*5.  6*.  rejoiced  in  h.  with  all  thy  despite  ag.  Israel
15.  have  taken  vengeance  with  a  despiteful  A
■°"I  31  shall  weep  for  thee  with  bitterness  ot  A.

36.  -6-  and  I  will  give  you  a  A.  of  flesh
44.  7.  strangers  uncircumcised  in  A.  J.  / lets  7.  01.
Dan  4.  16.  let  a  beast’s  A.  be  given  unto  him
7.  4.  and  a  man's  A.  was  given  to  it
llos.  2. + 14.  I  will  allure  her,  and  speak  to  her  A.

4  11.  whoredom  and  wine  take  away  the  A.

7. 11.  Ephraim  is  like  a  silly  dove  without  A.

Nah  2.  10.  the  A.  melteth,  and  the  knees  smite
Zevh.  2. 15.  this  the  city  that  said  in  her  A.  1  am
Mai.  2.  2.  if  ye  will  not  lay  it  to  A.  to  give  gloi  y ,  T
will  send  a  curse,  because  ye  do  not  lay  it  to  A.

4.  6.  shall  turn  the  A.  ot  fathers,  and  A.  of  children
Mat.  11.  29.  come  to  me,  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  A.

"  12.  34.  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  A.  Luke  6.  4j.

35.  out  of  the  treasure  ot  the  A.  Luke  6.  45.

15. 18.  come  forth  from  the  A.  and  defile  the  man
19.  out  of  the  A.  proceed  evil  thoughts,  MarkT.A.
Mark  16. 14.  he  upbraided  them  with  hardness  of  A.
Luke  2. 19.  Mary  kept  and  pondered  them  m  her  A.
51.  but  his  mother  kept  these  sayings  in  her  A.

8  15  which  in  a  good  A.  having  heard  the  word
24.  25.  O  fools,  slow  of  A.  to  believe  the  prophets
John  13. 2.  the  devil  having  put  into  the  A.  ot  J  udas
Acts  2.  46.  did  eat  their  meat  with  singleness  of  A.

5.  33.  heard  that,  they  were  cut  to  the  A.  7 .  54.

11  23.  with  purpose  ot  A.  they  would  elea\  e  to  -La.

Rom.  2.  5.  after  thy  impenitent  A  treasurest  up
29.  circumcision  is  that  ot  the  A.  in  the  bpn  it
6. 17.  ve  have  obeyed  from  the  A.  that  doctune
10.  10.  with  the  A.  man  believeth  to  righteousness

1  Cor.  2.  9.  neither  have  entered  into  the  A.  ot  man

7.  37.  hath  so  decreed  in  his  A.  that  lie  will  keep

2  Cor.  2.  4.  out  of  much  anguish  of  A.  I  wrote  you.
3.  3.  not  in  stone,  but  written  111  fleshly  tables  ot  A.
5.12.  which  glory  in  appearance,  and  not  in  n.

8.  16.  the  same  earnest  care  into  the  A.  ot  litus
Eph.  6.  6.  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the •  h.

Col.  3.  22.  but  in  singleness  of  A.  tearing  boa

l  Thess.  2.  17.  taken  from  you  in  presence,  not  in  A.
lleh.  4. 12.  is  a  discerner  of  the  intents  of  the  A.

10. 22.  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  A.  in  assurance
13'.  9.  it  is  good  that  the  A.  be  established  with  grace

1  Pet.  3.  4.  let  it  be  the  hidden  man  of  the  A.

2  Pet.  2. 14.  an  A.  exercised  with  covetous  practices
*Rev.  lb!  7.  for  she  saith  in  her  A.  1  sit  a  queen

HEART.

Exod.  15.  8.  depths  were  congealed  in  A.  of  the  sea
Deut  4.  +11.  mountain  burnt  to  the  A.  of  heaven

222


Ps-  46  +  2.  though  mountains  be  carried  into  A.  of

Prov  23  +34.  as  lie  that  lieth  down  111  A.  ot  sea
30  t  19.  the  way  of  a  ship  in  the  A.  ot  the  sea
Isa.  19.  1.  A.  of  Egypt  shall  melt  in  the  midst  of  it
Mat  1 0  40.  so  shall  Son  ot  man  be  in  A.  ot  earth
HEART  with  all.

Deut.  11.13.  to  serve  him  with  all  your  h.  and I  with
all  your  soul,  Josh.  22.  5.  1  Sam.  1~. ■  -0,  -4.

13.  3.  love  the  Ld.  with  all  your  A.  and  soul,  .Wro.

Mat.  22.  37.  Mark  12.  30,  33.  Luke  \0.  ~7.

26.  16.  thou  shalt  keep  and  do  them  with  aA  thy  A.

30.  2.  return  to  the  L.  with  all  thine  A.  10.  1-

Judff.  16.  17-  that  Samson  told  her  „3

1  Kinas  2.  4.  walk  before  me  with  all  their  A.  h.  -0.

8  48.  and  so  return  to  thee  with  all  their  A.  an

all  their  soul,  *  Kings  23.  25.  2  Chrm.  6.  38.

14.  8.  David,  who  followed  me  with  all  his  /<.

2  Kings  10.  31.  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  with  atth.

23.  3.  made  a  covenant  to  walk  betorethe  L.  with

all  their  A.  and  all  their  soul,  2  CAron.34.  31.
o  Chr.  15.  12.  seek  God  of  fathers  with  all  their  A.

*  15  for  they 'had  sworn  with  all  their  A.

22.  9.  Jehoihaphat  sought  the  Lord  with  aUhts  A.

31.  21.  he  did  it  with  all  his  A.  and  prospered
Ps'al.  86.  12.  I  will  praise  thee,  O  L. .with  all  my  A.
Prov.  3.  5.  trust  in  the  L.  with  all  thy  A.  lean  not
Ter  29. 13.  when  ye  search  tor  me  with  all  your  A.
E»k  36.  5.  with  the  joy  of  all  their  A.  to  cast  it  out
Zevh  3  14  be  glad  with  all  the  A.  O  Jerusalem
Acts  37-  if  thou  believest  with  «^thy  A.mayest
See  Apply,  Broken,  Clean,  E\il,  Hardly  ,

Hardened.  HijHEARJ

Gen.  6.  5.  every  imagination  of  Aw  A.  was  only  e\il
6.  it  repented  the  Lord  and  grieved  him  at  his  h.

8  21.  L.  said  in  his  A.  ||  17-17 -  Abraham  in  lush
27.  41 .  Esau  said  in  his  A.  the  days  of  mourmn,

Exod.  4. 14.  whenseeth  thee,  he  will  be  glad  in  his  A.

7.  23.  neither  did  he  set.  Air  A.  to  this  also
°5.  2.  every  man  that  giveth  willingly  with  his  A
oq\  29.  in  the  breast-plate  of  judgment  upon  his  A.

35*.  34.  he  hath  put  in  his  A.  that  he  may  teach
Deut.  2.  30.  the  Lord  hath  made  his  A.  obstinate
17  17.  multiply  wives,  that  his  A.  turn  not  away

20.  his  A.  be  not  lifted  up  above  his  brethren
19.  6.  lest  the  avenger  pursue,  while  his  h.  is  not
°0  8.  lest  his  brethren’s  heart  faint  as  well  as  Ins  A.

24.  15.  for  he  is  poor,  and  setteth  his  A.  upon  it
oq'  19.  that  he  bless  himself  in  his  h.  saying

Ruth  3.  7.  his  A.  was  merry  ,  he  went  to  lie  down

1  Sam .  4.  13.  his  A.  trembled  for  the  ark  of  God

21.  12.  David  laid  up  these  words  in  his  A.

25.  +  25.  let  notmy  lord  lay  it  to  Aw  A.

37.  it  came  to  pass  that  his  A.  died  within  h  m

27-  1.  David  said  in  his  A.  ||  28.  5.  his  A.  fi  euibled

2  Sam.  7-  27.  thy  servant  hat  1  found  m  Ayr  A.  to
pray  this  prayer  unto  thee,  1  Citron.  11.  ~o.

13.  33.  let  not  my  lord  take  the  thing  to  his  A.

1  Kin.  10.  24.  which  G.  had  put  111  /us  h.  _  Chr.J.  ~3.

11.  3.  and  his  wives  turned  away  his  n  4.  9-

12.  26.  Jeroboam  said  in  hts h.  the  kingdom  leturn
a  Rinas  9.  24.  the  arrow  went  out  at /ns  A.  amt  sunn.

2  Chr  on.  12.14.  because  lie  prepared  not  Am  A.  to
17.  6.  his  li.  was  lifted  up  in  the  ways  ot  the  Lord
26. 16.  his  A.  was  lifted  up  to  his  destruction
30.  19.  that  prepareth  his  A.  to  seek  God,  Lord  Ot.

3°  25  for  Ins  A.  was  lifted  up,  therefore  was  wrath

26.  he  humbled  himself  for  the  pride  of  his  h.

31,  that  he  might  know  all  that  was  in  his  h.

Ezra  7.  10.  Ezra  prepared  his  h.  to  seek  law  ot  U
Neh.  9.  8.  and  foundest  his  A.  faithful  before  thee
Esth.6.  6.  Hainan  thought  in  Aw  A.  to  whom  the  kg.

7.  5.  where  is  he  that  durst  presume  in  hts  A.  to  do
Job  34.  14.  if  he  set  his  A.  upon  man,  it  lie  gather
41.  24.  his  h.  is  as  firm  as  a  stone,  yea  as  hard
Psal.  10.  3.  the  wicked  boasteth  ot  hts  A.  desire
|  6.  he  hath  said  in  his  A.  11 . 1 3. 1  14.  1.1  53.  1.

15.  2.  thatspeaketh  truth  in  hts  A  shall  dwell
21.  2.  thou  hast  iriven  him  hts  h.  desire,  nast  not
33  11.  the  thoughts  of  his  h.  to  all  generations
37.  31.  law  of  his  God  is  in  his  A.  none  ot  Ins  steps
4l!  6.  his  A.  gathereth  iniquity  to  itself
55.  21.  words  were  smooth,  but  war  was  in  Ins  It.

78*  7°.  he  fed  them  according  to  integrity  ot  hts  A.
112,  7.  his  A.  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord
8.  his  h.  is  established,  he  shall  not  be  afraid
Prov.  6. 14.  frowardness is  in  Aw  A.deviseth  nuscht.

18.  2.  but  that  his  A.  may  discover  dselt

19.  3.  and  his  h.  fretteth  against  the  Lord
23.7.  for  as  he  thinketh  in  Aw  A.  so  is  he,  eat  and

drink,  saith  he,  but  his  h.  is  not  with  thee
28.  14.  but  he  that  hardenetli  Ins  h.  shall  tall
Eccl.  2.  23.  yea  his  A.  taketh  not  rest  in  the  night
5.  20.  God  answereth  him  in  the  joy  ot  hts  h.

Cant.  3.  H.  in  the  day  of  the  gladness  of  Aw  A,

Isa.  7.  2.  his  A,  was  moved,  and  the  A.  of  Ins  people
10  7.  he  meaneth  not  so,  neither  doth  Ins  h.  think
so,  but  it  is  in  his  A,  to  destroy  and  cut  off  natious

32. 6.  Aw  A.  will  work  iniquity,  to  practise  hypocrisy
44.  19.  none  considereth  in  his  A.  neither  is  there
57  17.  he  went  on  frowardlv  in  the  way  ot  his  it.
Jer.  9.  8.  but  in  A.  he  layeth  Aw  wait  ,

23.  20.  he  have  perfonned  the  thoughts  ot  his  n.

3o"  21.  that  engaged  Aw  A.  to  approach  unto  me
«4  until  lie  liave  performed  the  intents  ot  Aw  A.
48  29.  we  have  heard  the  haughtiness  ot  Aw  A.
Ezek  14.  4.  that  setteth  up  his  idols  in  Aw  A.  7-
31. 10.  his  A.  lifted  up  111  Ins  height,  Dan.  -0.
Dan.  1.8.  Daniel  purposed  m  Aw  A.  that  he  would


1.  O.  DOUILI  l'u*  1  ,  --

4.  16.  let  Aw  A.  he  changed  from  man  s,  21.


6.  14.  the  king  set  his  h.  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him
8  25.  and  heslwll  magnify  himself  m  his  h.

11  his  h.  shall  be  lifted  up,  shall  cast  down
28.  his  A.  shall  he  against  the  holy  covenant
Chad.  3.  that  saith  in  Aw  A.  who  shall  bring
Mat.  5.28.  hath  committed  adultery  with  her  in  A.  A.
13.  19.  and  catcheth  away  that  was  sowm  m  his  h.
04  48.  if  evil  servant  shall  say  in  Ins  A.  Luke  l -■  4u.
Mark  7.  19.  because  it  entereth  not  mto  A»^  A.

11.  23.  and  shall  not  doubt  in  hts  h.  but  believe
Luke  6. 45.  good  man  out  of  aood  treasure  ot  Ins  h.  an
evil  man  out  of  the  evil  treasure  of  Ins  A.


Acts  7.  23.  it  came  into  his  h.  to  visit  his  biethren
1  Cor.  7-  37.  he  that  standeth  stedfast  in  Aw  A.

14  °5  thus  are  the  secrets  ot  his  A.  made  manifest
O  Cor.  9.  7.  as  he  purposeth  in  his  A.  so  let  him  give
Mine  or  my  HEAR1.

Gen  20.  5.  in  the  integrity  of  my  A.  have  I  done  this
04  45  done  speaking  m  mine  A.  Rebekah  came
Trent#)  19  tho’  1  Walk  in  the  imagination  ot  m.  A.

Tos  t  14  7  I  brought  him  word  as  it  was  in .mine  h
Judo.  5  9.  my  h.  is  toward  the  governors  of  Israel
1  Sam.  2.  1.  she  said,  my  h.  rejoiceth  in  the  Lord
35  shall  do  according  to  that  which  is  in  mine  A.

1  Kings  9.  3.  to  put  my  name,  and  my  eyes  and  mine

'h.  shall  be  there  perpetually.  2  CAnm.  7- 16.

2  Kings  5.  26.  went  not  mine  A.  with  thee,  when
10  15  is  thine  A.  right,  as  my  A.  is  with  thy  A..

1 30.  hast  done  according  to  all  that  was  in  mine  A.

1  Chr  1°.  17.  if  to  help,  mine  A.  shall  be  knit  unto
08  o  l  had  in  mine  h.  to  build  an  house  ot  rest
o~ ( ‘be  on  10.  it  is  in  mine  A.  to  make  a  covenant^
~Neh.  2.”  12.  what  God  had  put  in  my  h.  to  do,  t .  0.

5.  +  7.  then  my  h.  consulted  in  me,  I  tebuked
job  17*.  11.  the  thoughts  of  my  h.  are  broken,  off
23.  16.  God  maketh  my  A.  soft,  and  the  Aimigh  y
°7  6  my  It.  shall  not  reproach  me  so  long  as  1  in  e
31  7.  and  mine  h.  walked  after  mine  eyes
9  if  mine  A.  have  been  deceived  by  a  woman
27.  and  my  A.  hath  been  secretly. enticed
33  3.  my  words  shall  be  of  the  uprightness  of  my  ft.

37.  1.  at  this  also  my  A.  trembleth,  and  is  moved
Ps  4  7.  thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  h.  more  than

13  o  how  long  take  counsel,  sorrow  in  my  h.  daily
b  but  1  trusted,  my  A.  shall  rejoice  111  thy  sal  vat
16. 9.  my  A.  is  glad  ||  17. 3.  tlipu  hast  proved  mine  A.

19  14  let  the  meditation  ot  my  A.  be  acceptable
ob'u.'m.  A.  is  like  wax  1|26.2.  try  mv  reins  and  m./t.

^5  17  the  troubles  oi  my  A.  are  enlarged,  t  bring
07  3  my  h.  shall  not  fear  though  war  should  rise
8.  myh.  said  to  thee,  thy  face,  Lord,  will  1  seek
°8.  7.  my  h.  trusted  in  him,  myh  greatly  rejoiceth
36*.  1 .  the  transgression  of  the  wicked  saith  in  my  /<•

38.  8.  by  reason  of  the  disquietness  ot  my  It.

10.  my  A.  pauteth,  my  strength  taileth,  Isa.  A  A.

39.  3.  my  h.  was  hot  within. me,  while  musing
40  8.  vea,  thy  law  is  within  my  A.

10.1  have  not  hid  thy  righteousness  with m  my  A.

1°.  notable  to  look  up,  therefore  my  A.  taileth  me
45— 1.  my  A.  is  inditing  a  good  matter,  I  speak
49.  3.  the  meditation  of  myh,  be  of  understanding
55.4 .  my  A.  is  sore  pained  w lthm  me, ter;  ors  ot  death
57  7  my  A*  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  h.  is  fixed,  108. 1.
f.  1  o  1  will  cry,  when  my  A.  is  overwhelmed
66".  1*8.  if  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  It  L.  will  not  hear
69  fl0  reproach  hath  broken  my  h. .1  am  full
73'  13  verilv  1  have  cleansed  my  It.  in  vam  .

2i .  my  It.  was  grieved,  1  was  pricked  in  my  reins
06  my  A.  taileth,  but  God  is  the  strength  of  my  A
84.  2.  my  It.  and  fiesh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God
86  11.  unite  my  A.  to  fear  thy  name
iqo  4.  my  A,  is  smitten  and  withered  like  grass
lOQ  °2.  and  my  A.  is  wounded  xiithin  me
lit)".  11.  thy  word  iiave  I  hid  in  wy  A.  not  to  sin
l  will  run,  when  thou  shalt  enlarge  7tiy  h .

36!  incline  my  It.  to  thy  testimonies,  not  to  covet.
80.  let  my  h.  be  sound  in  thy  statutes
111.  thy  testimonies  are  the  rejoicing  of  iny  /*.

1 10  1  have  inclined  mine  A.  to  pertorm  thy  staf.
131. 1.  Lord,  my  It.  is  not  haughty,  noi  e>es  lo.ty
139.  23.  search  me,  and  know  my  A.  try  me
141.  4.  incline  not  my  A.  to  any  evil  thing
143  4,  mu  h.  within  me  is  desolate
Prov  5  12.  how  hath  my  A.  despised  reproof
9.  who  can  say.  I  have  made  wy  A.  clean  ,

03  15.  if  thine  heart  be  wise,  my  A.  shall  rejoice*
Eccl  1  13.  1  gave  my  A.  to  seek  and  search  out
16  mu  A.  had  great  experience  ot  wisdom
17.  1  gave  myh.  to  know  wisdom  and  madness
2.  1.  I  in  mine  h.  1  will  prove  thee,  15. 1^3.

3  1  sought  in  mine  It.  to  give  myself  to  wine,  yet
acquainting  mine  h.  with  wisdom,  to  lay  hold

10.7  withheld  not  my  h.  from  an.v  joy
20.  to  cause  my  h.  to  despair  of  all  the  labou
7  °5  1  applied  mine  h.  to  know  and  seaicii,  o.  t  •
9  i  ’for  all  this  1  considered  in.  my  It.

Cant.  4.  9,  thou  hast  ravished  my  A.  my  sister,  9-
5.  2.  1  sleep,  but  my  A.  waketh,  it  is  the  voice
Isa. *15.  5.  my  It.  shall  cry  out  tor  Meab
63  4.  for  the  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine  h.

Tpv  3  15  1  will  give  you  pastors  according  to  wi.  ••
Jtl9.  I  am  pained  at  my  h.  my  A.  maketh  a  noise
7  31.1  commanded  not,  neither,  came  it  into  my  ■
8!  18.  when  1  comfort  myself,,  my  A.  is  [am  tin  me
12.  3.  hast  seen  me,  and  tried  mine  A.  toward  thee
15  16.  thy  word  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  mitieh.  ,
oo  9  his  word  was  in  mine  h.  as  a  hurmmr  fire
23".  9.’  mine  It.  is  broken 1  H  48.  31.  my  ^

48.  36.  therefore  mine  h.  shall  sound  tor  Woa
Lam.  1.  20.  behold,  mine  h.  is  turneil  within  n
00  rny  sighs  are  many,  and  my  //.  is  taint
3  51  mine  eye  atfecteth  mine  h.  because  of  all
Dan.  7.  28.  but  1  kept  the  matter  in  rny  h.

Hos.  11.  8 .'mine  A.  is  turned  within  me,  my  repen  .
Acts  2.  26.  therefore  did  my  A.  rejoice,  tongue  glad
nf  i3.  what  mean  ye  to  weep, and  break -mine  A..
Ro'm  9.  2.  1  have  continual  sorrow  m  my  >>■

10  1  my  h.  desire  to  God  for  lsr.  is,  they  be.
Phil.  I.T.  because  1  ha-ve  you  in  myh.  inasnmcl)
See  Aurli ed.

One  H  EART.  ,

«  Chr.  30.  12.  hand  of  God  was  to  give  them  <m
Ter  3“’  .'to.  I  will  give  them  one  h.  I'.zes.  U.  its-
lets  4.  32.  multitude  that  believed  were  oi  01
Otan  H  E A  R  T.  ,

Ntirn.  15.  39.  that  ve  seek  net  after  y««r.  mm

1  Sam.  13.  14.  sougVitman  atterhiso.  h.

2  Sam.  7-21.  for  thy  word's- sake,  according  y

on  n  A.  hast  thou  done  these  things.  h

1  Kings  8.  38.  know  every  man  plague  ot  his  0.1
12.  33.  which  he  had  devised  his  «•  ,

Neh.  6.  8.  thou  feignest  them  out  of  thine  ow


H  E  A


H  E  A


Psal.  4.  4.  commune  with  your  own  h.  on  your  bed
CO.  4.  grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  h.

37-  15  their  sword  shall  enter  into  their  own  h.
77-  6.  I  commune  with  my  own  h.  and  my  spirit
P-ov.  C8.  26.  he  thattrusteth  in  his  own  h.  is  a  tool
Reel.  1.  16.  I  communed  with  mine  own  h.  saving
7.  £2.  thy  own  h.  knows  thou  hast  cursed  others
Jer.  9.  14.  after  imagination  of  their  own  /,.  23. 17.
23.  16.  they  speak  a  vision  of  their  own  h.

26.  prophesy  the  deceit  of  their  o.  h.  Ezek.  13. 17.
Ezek.  14.  5.  may  take  house  of  Israel  in  their  own  h.
Jam.  1.  26.  but  deceiveth  his  own  h.  this  man's
Our  HEART.

Dent.  1.  28.  our  brethren  have  discourager
Psal.  33.  21.  for  our  h.  shall  rejoice  in  him
44.  18.  our  h.  is  not  turned  back,  neither  our
Lam .  3.  41.  let  us  lift  up  our  h.  with  our  hands
5.  15.  the  joy  of  our  h.  is  ceased  ||  17.  cur  h.  is  faint
Luke  21.  32.  did  not  our  h.  burn  within  us,  while  he
2  Cor.  6.  11.  our  mouth  is  open,  our  h.  is  enlarged
1  John  3.  20.  if  our  h.  condemn  us,  God  is  greater
21.  if  our  It.  condemn  us  not,  we  have  confidence
Perfect  HEART.

1  Kings  8.  61.  let  your  h.  be  perfect  with  the  Lord
11.  4.  his  h.  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord,  15.  3.
15.  14.  nevertheless  Asa's  h.  was  perfect  with  the

Lord  all  his  days,  2  Chron.  15.  17.

2  Kings 20.  3.  Hezekiah  said,  remember  how  1  have

walked  before  thee  with  a  perfect  h.  Isa.  38.  3

1  Chr.  12.  38.  came  with  perf.  It.  to  make  D.  kino-
28.  9.  Solomon,  my  son,  serve  God  with  a  per.  h.
29.9.  because  wither/,  h.  they  offered  willingly

19.  and  give  unto  Solomon  my  son  a  perfect  h.

2  Chr.  16.  9.  in  behalf  of  them  whose  h.  is  perfect
19.  9.  thus  shall  ve  do  in  fear  of  Ld.  with  perf.  h
25.  2.  Amaziah  did  right,  but  not  with  a  perfect  h.
Psal.  101.2.  1  will  walk  in  my  house  with  perf.  h

Pure  HEART.

Psal.  24.  4.  who  shall  ascend  ?  that  hath  a  pure  h.
Mat.  5.  8.  blessed  are  pure  in  h.  they  shall  see  God

1  L'm-  end  of  command,  is  charity  out  of  p.  h

2  Tim.  2.  22.  that  call  on  the  Lord  out  of  a  pure  h

1  Pet.  1.  £2.  love  one  another  with  a  p.  h.  fervently

Their  HEART.

Gen  42.  28.  their  h.  failed  them,  they  were  afraid
Josh.  5.  1.  the  kings  of  Amorites  heard  t.  h.  melted

2  Sam.  18.  +  3.  if  we  flee,  they  will  not  set  t.  h.  on  us

I  Kings  8.  +  47.  if  they  bring  back  to  t.  h.  2  Chr.  6. 1 37
18.  37.  thou  hast  turned  their  h.  back  again

1 Chron.  29.  18.  and  prepare  their  h.  unto  thee
Job  8.  10.  shall  they  not  utter  words  out  of  t.  h.  ?
17.4.  thou  hast  hid  their  h.  from  understanding
Psal.  10.  17.  Lord,  thou  wilt  prepare  their  h.

78.  8.  a  generation  that  set  not  their  h.  aright
18.  they  tempted  God  in  their  h.  by  asking  meat
37.  their  A.  was  not  right  with  him,  nor  were
95.  10.  it  is  a  people  that  do  err  in  their  h.

105.  25.  he  turned  their  h.  to  hate  his  people
107.  12.  therefore  he  brought  down  their  h.

119.7°.  t.  h.  is  as  fat  as  grease,  I  delight  in  thy  law
140. 2.  which  imagine  mischiefs  in  t.  h.  with  labour
Pfov.  24.  2.  for  their  A.  studieth  destruction
Lccl.  3.  11.  also  he  hath  set  the  world  in  their  A.

9.  3.  madness  is  in  their  h.  while  they  live
Isa.  6.  10.  lest  they  hear  with  their  ears  and  under¬
stand  with  their  A.  Mat.  13.  15.  Acts  28.  27.
29.  13.  t.  A.  is  far  from  me.  Mat.  15.  8.  Mark  7.  6.
10'  ,n.el,°ler  say  they  in  t.  A.  let  us  fear  the  Ld.

13.  10.  which  walk  m  the  imagination  of  their  h.

14. 14.  the  prophets  prophesy  the  deceit  of  their  h.
17.  l.sm  of  J  udah  is  graven  on  the  table  of  their  h

Lam.  2.  18.  their  h.  cried  to  the  L.  O  wall  of  Zion
5.  these  have  set  up  their  idols  in  their  h.
~0.  16.  for  their  A.  went  after  their  idols

that  tAeir  h.  may  faint,  ruins  be  multiplied
33.  31.  but  their  h.  goeth  after  their  covetousness
u**  set  h-  on  their  iniquity
<•  6'  they  have  made  ready  their  A.  like  an  oven
/tttey  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  h.

7”  their  h.  is  divided  ||  1.3.  6.  their  A.  was  exalt.
x3.  8.  1  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  h.  and  devour
feph.  1. 12. 1  will  punish  the  men  that  say  in  t.  A.
ink  l  their  h.  shall  rejoice  in  the  Lord
Jf-  p.  the  governors  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their  h
Mark 6.52.  for  their  A.  was  hardened,  Rom.  1.  21
r 1  ?.47.  Jesus  perceiving  the  thought  of  their  h.
lohn  12.  40.  he  hath  hardened  their  A.  that  they
4  o  |houltl  not  see  nor  understand  with  their  A.

>  r  9  7 •  'vel  e  pricked  in  their  h.  and  said  to  Peter
vJcl'a  .  15-  when  Moses  is  read,  vail  is  on  then  A.
-pa.  4. 18.  because  of  the  blindness  of  their  A.

.  ,  Thine,  thy  HEART.
nh  trho9  didst  this  in  the  integrity  of  thy  A.

?  °a\K  "•  /.  send  all  my  plagues  upon  thine  A
^v.  19. 17.  thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  t.  A.
3o/-ct4'  nT  th.e-V  depart  from  thy  h.  all  thy  life
a  on  1  ^lnc  ’  t^10u  see*<  him  with  all  thy  A.

2*  “9.  know  and  consider  it  in  thine  h.  8.5.

0.  5.  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  with  all  thine  li.

(•  IT*  it  thou  shalt  say  in  thine  h.  these  nations
a  ©  1  a,rf.more  ‘ha0  L'8.  17-  I  18.  21.  Jer.  13.  22.

II  ,e?> to  know  what  was  in  thine  h.

14.  then  thine  h.  be  lifted  up,  and  thou  forget  L.

K  ’  SPrak  not.thou  in  thine  h.  after  that  the  Lord

10'  a®1  for  uprightness  of  thine  h.  dost  thou  go  to
is  ol°  Se[ve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  h.

10 "• 'here  be  not  a  thought  in  thy  wicked  h.
on'eZ,lce  3^all  not  be  grieved  when  thou  eivest

10  a  '  -  le  tear  thine  h.  wherewith  shalt  fear
HkC!r?mclse,M,"e  h-  and  the  h.  of  thy  seed
17  fr.,.  e  jvord  is  very  nigh  to  thee  in  thy  h.

,..[ne  li.  turn,  so  that  thou  wilt  not  hear
i<w;  '  1  ,  '"hen  thine  h.  is  not  with  me
o'  .y  a’K>  let  thine  h.  be  merry,  9.  1  Kings  21.  7.
o-  me  damsel's  father  said,  comfort  thine  h.

.1 "  hy  deepest  thou  ?  why  is  thy  h.  griev.  ?

V  fi’  Vle  ntan  of  thine  shall  he  to  grieve  thine  A.

11  7  1  w11,11  teI1  thee  all  that  is  in  thine  /,.

ir  o°i!  L.it,sin  lhine  h-  ~  Sam-  7-  3.  1  Chron.

)7  behold,  1  am  with  thee,  according  to  thy  h.
ol  ,  know  thy  pride  and  naughtiness  of  thv  h.
am'  3.  21.  reign  over  all  that  thine  A.  desireth


2  Sam.  13.  +  20.  he  is  thy  brother,  set  not  th.  A.  on  this
rr  «  ny?  •  knowest  wickedness  thine  h .  is  privy
8.  18.  in  thine  h.  to  build,  2  Chron.  1.  11.  |  6.8.

2  Kings  10.  15.  Jehu  said,  is  thine  h.  right  asmyL
. ,  ,  .ls  ™  thy  A.  Jehonadab  answered,  it  is

14. 10.  thine  A.  hath  lifted  thee  up,  2  CAr.  25.  19

22.  19.  because  thine  A.  was  tender, 0  Chr  34  27
2 Chron .  19.  3.  hast  prepared  thine  h.  to  seek  God'
Job  1_.  +  8.  hast  thou  set  thy  h.  on  my  servant  Job  ?

7.  1/.  <md  that  thou  sliouldest  set  thine  h.  upon  him

10.  13.  and  these  things  hast  thou  hid  in  thine  h

11.  13.  if  thou  prepare  thine  h.  and  stretch  out '
In.  12.  why  doth  thine  h.  carry  thee  away

22.  22.  receive,  and  lay  up  his  words  in  thine  h.
Psal.  27.  14.  and  he  shall  strengthen  thine  h.

37.  4.  and  he  shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine h
Prov.  2.2.  and  apply  thine  h.  to  understanding

10.  when  wisdom  entereth  into  thine  h.

3.  1.  my  son,  let  thine  h.  keep  my  commandments
3.  write  them  upon  the  table  ot  thine  h.  7.  3.

4.  4.  he  said,  let  thine  h.  retain  my  words,  21.

23.  keep  thy  h.  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it

6.  21.  bind  them  continually  upon  thine  A.

25. _lust  not  after  her  beauty  in  thine  h.

7.  25^  let  not  thine  h.  decline  to  her  ways

23.  15.  my  son,  if  thine  h.  be  wise,  my  h.  rejoice
li  .  let  not  thine  li.  envy  sinners,  but  be  in  fear

19.  hear,  my  son,  and  guide  thine  h.  in  the  way

26.  my  son,  give  me.  thine  h.  let  thy  eyes  observe
33.  and  thine  h.  shall  utter  perverse  things

24.  17 .  let  not  thine  h.  be  glad  when  be  stiimbleth

27.  +23.  and  set//;y  h.  to  thy  herds
Lccl.  5.  2.  not  thine  h.  be  hasty  to  utter  any  thing

t .  +  21.  also  give  not  thine  li.  unto  all  words
11.  9.  let  thy  li.  cheer  thee  ;  walk  in  ways  of  thy  h.
10.  therefore  remove  sorrow  from  thy  A.

Isa.  14.  13.  thou  hast  said  in  thine  A.  1  will  ascend
33.18.  thine  A.  shall  meditate  terror,  where  is
47.7.  thou  didst  not  lay  these  things  to  thy  h.  5J.  11.

8.  that  sayest  in  thine  h.  I  am,  and  none  else,’  10.
49.  21.  then  shalt  thou  say  in  thine  h.  who  hath

Jer.  4.  14.  O  .Terns,  wash  thine  A.  from  wickedness
18.  it  is  bitter,  because  it  reacheth  unto  thine  A
22.  17.  thine  h.  are  not  but  for  thy  covetousness
31.  21.  set  thine  A.  toward  the  high-way,  turn
49. 16.  the  pride  of  thine  A.  deceived  thee,  Chad  3
Lam.  2.  19.  pour  out  thine  A.  like  water  before  Ld'
Lzek.  3. 10.  receive  in  thine  h.  hear  with  thine  ears

16.  30.  how  weak  is  thine  A.  saith  the  Lord  God
22. 14.  can  thine  A.  endure  in  days  l  deal  with  thee

28.  2.  because  thine  h.  is  lifted  up  for  thv  riches  5.
6.  thou  hast  set  thine  h.  as  the  heart  of  God

17 .  thine  h.  was  lifted  up  because  of  thy  beauty

40.  4.  set  thine  h.  upon  all  that  I  shall  shew  thee
Dan.  2.  30.  mightest  know  the  thoug  hts  of  thy  h.

5.  22.  and  thou  hast  not  humbled  thine  A.

10. 12.  thou  didst  set  thine  h.  to  understand
Acts  5.  3.  why  hath  Satan  filled  thine  h.  to  lie
4.  why  hast  thou  conceived  this  in  thine  li.  9

8.  21.  tor  thy  h.  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God
Acts  8.  22.  thought  of  thine  h.  may  be  forgiven  thee
Rom.  10.  6.  say  not  in  thine  h.  who  shalfascend

9.  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  h.  that  God  raised
Upright  in  HEART.

-Chr.  29.  34.  Levites  were  more  upright  in  A.

Psal.  7.  10.  which  saveth  the  upright  in  li.

11.  2.  that  they  may  shoot  at  the  upright  in  A.

32.  11.  shout  for  joy,  ye  that  are  uprig/rt  in  A.

36.  10.  continue  thy  righteousness  to  upright  in  A.
64. 10.  and  all  the  upright  in  h.  shall  glory
94.  15.  and  all  the  upright  in  h.  shall  follow  it
97.  11.  gladness  is  sown  for  the  upright  in  h.
Uprightness  of  HEART.

1  Kings  3.  6.  lie  walketh  in  uprightness  ofh.  9.  4.
Psal.  119. 7*  I  will  praise  thee  with  uprightness  of  h

Whole  HEART.

Psal.  9. 1.1  will  praise  thee,  O  Lord,  with  my  whole
h.  will  shew  forth  thy  works,  111.  1. 1  138.  1.
119.  2.  blessed  that  seek  him  with  the  whole  A.

10.  with  mv  whole  h.  have  I  sought  thee
34.  yea,  1  shall  observe  it  with  my  whole  h.

58.  1  entreated  thy  favour  with  my  whole  h.

69.  1  will  keep  thy  precepts  with  my  whole  A.

14o.  I  cried  with  my  whole  h.  hear  me,  O  Lord

Isa.  1.  5.  the  whole  head  is  sick,  the  whole  h.  is  faint
Jer.  3.  10.  not  turned  with  whole  h.  but  feignedly

24.  7.  they  shall  return  unto  me  with  their  w.  h.

32.  41.  I  win  plant  them  in  land  with  my  whole  A.
Whose  HEART.

Exod.  35.21  .whose  A.  stirred  him  up,  29.  I  36.  21
26.  all  the  women  whose  h.  stirred  them  up
Deut.  29. 18.  whose  A.  turneth  away  this  day  from  Ld

2  Sam.  17. 10.  whose  A.  is  as  the  heart  of  a  lion

1  K  mgs  8.  39.  "whose  A.  thou  knowest,  2  Chr.  6.  30.

2  Chron.  16.  _9.  in  behalf  of  them  whose  h.  is  perfect
Psal.  84.  5.  in  whose  h.  are  the  waj's  of  them
Reel.  7.  26.  the  woman  whose  h.  is  snares  and  nets
Isa.  51.  7 •  hearken  ye  people,  in  whose  A.  is  my  law
Jer.  17.5.  whose  h.  departeth  from  the  Lord
Ezek.  11, 21.  whose h.  walketh  after  detestable  things
Acts  16. 14.  whose  A.  the  Lord  opened,  she  attended

Your  HEAR  T.

Deut.  10. 16.  circumcise  foreskin  of  your  A.  Jer.  4.  4.

11. 16.  take  heed  that  your  h.  be  notdeceived

18.  ye  shall  lay  tip  these  mv  words  in  your  A.

1  Kings  11.  2.  surely  they  will  turn  away  your  A.

1  CAr.  22. 19.  set  your  li.  and  soul  to  seek  the  Lord
1  sal.  22.26.  meek  shall  eat, your  A. shall  live  for  ever
31.  24.  he  shall  strengthen  your  A.  ye  that  hope
62.  8.  ye  people,  pour  out  your  h.  befoie  him
10.  if  riches  increase,  set  no tyour  A.  upon  them
69.  32.  and  your  A.  shall  live  that  seek  God
Isa.  66.  14.  when  ye  see  this,  your  A.  shall  rejoice
Jer.  51.  46.  and  lest  your  A.  faint,  and  ye  fear
Joel  2.  13.  and  rend  your  h.  and  not  your  garments
Zech.  7.  10.  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  h.
Mat.  6.  21.  there  will  your  A.  be  also,  I.nke  12. 34.
Mark  8. 17.  have  ye  your  A.  yet  hardened  ?

10.  5.  for  the  hardness  of  your  h.  he  wrote
John  14.  1.  let  not  your  h.  be  troubled,  27.

16.6.  because  I  said  this,  sorrow  hath  filled  your  A.

22.  I  will  see  you,  and  your  A.  shall  rejoice


HE  A

1  Eph.  6.  5.  in  singleness  of  your  A.  as  unto  Christ

_  hearted.

Erol.tt.  22.  they  came,  as  many  as  were  willing-/,.
rsal.  (().  «).  the  stout-//,  are  spoiled,  they  slept
Isa.  24. 7 .  new  wine  mourns,  all  the  merry-/,,  do  sigh
61.  1.  he  hath  sent  me  to  hind  up  the  broken-/,  '
Ezek.  3.  7.  all  the  house  of  Israel  are  hard-/,.
Tam/HEARTED.

Deut.  20.  8.  what  man  is  there  that  is  faint-h.  9
Tender-W  EARTED.

2  Chron.  13.  7.  Rehoboam  was  young  and  tender  h.
Eph.  4.  32.  and  be  kind  one  to  another,  tender-h

Wise  -  F I E  A  RT  E I ) .

Exod.  28.  3.  thou  shalt  speak  unto  all  that  are  w  -h.
31.  6.  and  in  the  hearts  of  all  that  are  wise-h.
3/?'10;,an,i  every  wise-h.  among  you  shall  come

2o.  all  the  women  that  were  wise-h.  did  spin
36.  1.  then  wrought  every  wise-h.  man,  2,  8.

^  .  HEARTH.

Uen.  18.  6.  knead  it,  and  make  cakes  upon  the  h
l  sal.  102.  3.  and  my  hones  are  burnt  as  an  /,.

Jsa.  30.  14.  not  a  sherd  to  take  fire  from  the  /,.

Jer.  36.  22.  a  lire  on  the  h.  burning  before  him
23.  cast  the  roll  into  fire  that  was  on  the  A.

Zech.  12.  6.  make  govemm.  of  Judah  like  /,.  of  fire
r  ,  HEARTILY.

Luke  22.  + 15.  J  have  h.  desired  to  eat  this  passover
Col.  3.  23.  what  ye  do,  do  it  /,.  as  to  the  Lord,  not  ts
HEARTS.

j  «  •  7innAhtref(]rerthe  h‘  °f the  People  melted

1  Lam.  10. 26.  band  of  men,  whose  h.  G.  had  touched

2  Sam.  15.  6.  so  Absalom  stole  the  h.  of  Israel
13.  the  h.  ot  the  men  of  Israel  are  after  Absalom

1  Lings 8. 39.  thou  only  knowest  the  h.  2  Chr.  6  30
\  Citron.  28.  9.  for  the  Lord  searcheth  all  /,.

{ /•  7.  9.  the  righteous  God  trieth  the  /,.  Prov.  17  3
Prov.  15. 11.  how  much  more  then  the  /,.  of  men

21.  2.  but  the  Lord  pondereth  the  h.

31.  6.  give  wine  to  those  that  be  of  heavy  /,.

Ter,  48.  41 .  miDhtv  mpn’s  h  nf*  Mrkuh  ^


Jer .  48.  41.  mighty  men’s  /,.  of  Moah  like  a  woman
Ezek.  32.  9.  1  will  also  vex  the  /,.  of  many  people
Dan.  11. 27-  both  these  k.’s  h.  shall  he  to  do  mischief
Luke  1. 17.  turn  the  h.  of  the  fathers  to  the  children

2.  35.  that  the  thoughts  of  h.  may  be  revealed
21.  26.  signs  in  the  sun,  men’s  h.  failing  them

Acts  1.  24.  which  knowest  the  It.  of  all  men,  15  8
Rom.  8.  27.  he  that  searcheth  the  /,.  knoweth  the  *
16. 18.  by  fair  speeches  deceive  the  h.  of  the  simple
j  Cor.  4.  5.  make  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  /,.
Rev.  2.  23.  1  am  he  that  searcheth  the  reins  and  h.
Our  HEARTS.

Josh.  2.  11.  as  soon  as  we  heard,  our  h.  did  melt

1  Kings  8.  58.  that  he  may  incline  our  A.  to  him
Acts  14.  17.  filling  our  A.  with  food  and  gladness
Rom.  5.  5.  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  h.

2  Cor.  1.  22.  given  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  in  our  A

3.  2.  ye  are  our  epistle  written  in  our  A.

4.  6.  God  hath  shined  in  our  A.  to  give  the  light

7.  3.  that  you  are  in  our  A.  to  die  and  live  with  you
ITAess.  2.  4.  but  pleasing  God,  who  trieth  our  A.
Heb.  10.22.  our  h.  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience

1  John  3. 19.  and  shall  assure  our  h.  before  him

Their  HEARTS.

Lev.  26.  36.  I  will  send  a  faintness  into  their  h.

41.  it  then  their  uncircumcised  A.  be  humbled
Judg.  9.  3.  their  h.  inclined  to  follow  Abimelech
16.  25.  when  their  h.  were  merry,  they  said

19.  22.  as  they  were  making  their  h.  merry

2  Chron.  6.  14.  walk  before  thee  with  all  their  h.

11.  16.  such  as  set  their  A.  to  seek  the  Lord  God

20.  33.  the  people  had  not  prepared  their  A.  to  God
Job  1  5.  it  may  be  my  sons  have  cursed  G.  in  their  A.
Psal.  28.  3.  speak  peace,  but  mischief  is  in  their  A

33. 15.  he  fashioneth  their  h.  alike,  he  considers
35.  25.  let  them  not  say  in  their  h.  ah,  so  would  we
74.  8.  they  said  in  their  h.  let  us  destroy  them
81.  12.  I  gave  them  up  to  their  own  h.  lust
125. 4.  and  to  them  that  are  upright  in  their  A.

Isa.  44. 18.  hath  shut  t.  A.  they  cannot  understand
Jer.  31.  33.  and  write  my  law  in  their  h.  Heb.  8.  10.
32.  40.  but  I  will  put  my  fear  in  t.  h.  not  to  depart
Ezek.  13.  2.  that  prophesy  out  of  their  own  A.

Hos.  7.  2.  and  they  consider  not  in  their  A.

Yech.  7. 12.  yea,  they  made  their  h.  as  an  adamant
Mark  2.6.  sitting  there,  and  reasoning  in  their  A.

3.  5.  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their  h.

4. 15.  taketh  away  word  sown  in  t.  h.  J.uke  8. 12.
Luke  1.  51.  scattered  proud  in  imaginations  of  t.  /,.

66.  all  that  heard  laid  them  up  in  their  A.

3. 15.  all  men  mused  in  t.  h.  of  John,  whether  Ch.
Acts  7.  39.  in  their  A.  turned  back  again  to  Egypt;*
Rom.  1. 24.  through  the  lust  of  their  h.  to  dishonour

2.  15.  shew  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their  h.
Col.  2. 2.  that  their  A.  might  be  comforted,  being  knit
Heb.  3.  10.  said,  they  do  always  err  in  their  /,.

Rev.  17. 17.  God  hath  put  in  their  A.  to  fulfil  his  will
Your  HEARTS.

Gen.  18.  5.  comfort  ye  your  A.  after  that  pass  on
Dent.  20.  3.  O  Israel,  let  not  your  h.  faint,  fear  not
32.  46.  set  your  A.  to  all  the  words  which  I  testify
Josh.  23.  14.  and  ye  know  in  all  your  h.  and  souls
24.  23.  incline  your  h.  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel
1  Sam.  6.  6.  wherefore  then  do  ye  harden  your  /,.  ?

7-  3.  it  ye  return  to  the  Lord  with  all  your  h.  and
prepare  your  li.  to  the  Lord  to  serve  him  only
Jer .  42.  20.  ye  dissembled  in  your  h.  when  ye  sent
Zech.  8. 17.  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  in  your  h.
Mat.  9.  4.  Jesus  said,  wheref.  think  ye  evil  in  y.  h.?
18.  35.  if  ye  from  your  h.  forgive  not  every  one
19.8.  because  of  the  hardness  of  y.  ^.suffered  you
Mark  2. 8.  why  reason  ye  these  things  in  your  h.  ?
Luke  5.  22.  Jesus  said,  what  reason  ye  in  your  /,.  9
16. 15.  ye  justify  yourselves,  God  knoweth  your  h.
21.  14.  settle  it  in  your  h.  not  to  meditate  before
34.  lest  at  any  time  your  h.  be  overcharged
24.  38.  and  why  do  thoughts  arise  in  your  h.?

Gal.  4.  6.  God  sent  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  h
Lph.  3.  17 •  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  h.  by  faith
5.19.  making  melody  in  y.  h.  to  the  Lord,  Col.  3.  Hi.

6.  22.  I  sent  that  he  might  comfort  your  h.

Phil.  4.  7*  shall  keep  your  h,  and  minds  through

Clirist  Jesus

£>3


II  E  A


HE  A


11  E  A


C„l.  3. 15.  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  j tour  h.  \

4.  might  know  your  estate  and  comfort  your  A.

1  i'hess.  3. 13.  he  may  establish  your  A.  unblameable
o  'i'hess.  2.  if.  comfort  your  A.  and  stablish  you
*3.  5.  the  Lord  direct  your  It.  into  the  love  of  God
Jam.  3. 14.  if  ye  have  strife  in  your  A.  glory  not

4.  8.  and  purify  your  A.  ye  double-minded

5.  5.  have  been  wanton,  ye  have  nourished  your  h.

8.  be  ye  also  patient,  stablish  your  A.  the  coming

1  Pet.  3.  15.  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  h.

2  Pet.  1. 19.  till  day  dawnymdday-star  arise  in  y.  h.

Prov  °7. 9.  so  the  sweetness  of  a  friend  by  A.  couns.

.  HEAT.  .

Gen.  8  22.  cold,  A.  summer,  winter,  shall  not  cease

18.  i.  sat  in  the  tent-door  in  the  A.  of  the  day
Exod  11.  +  8.  and  he  went  out  in  the  A.  of  anger
Deut  29.24.  what  meaneth  the  A.  of  this  greatanger.

3®  24  they  shall  be  devoured  with  burning  lx.

1  Sam.  11. 11.  slew  the  Ammonites  till  A.  of  the  day

2  Sam  4  5.  and  they  came  about  the  A.  of  the  day

1  Kings  1. 1.  but  he  gat  no  lx.  |i  2.  my  lord  may  get  A.

Job  6  t  if.  ice  and  snow  vanish  in  the  lx.  thereof

24  19  drought  and  h.  consume  the  snowwaters

30.  30.  my  skin  black,  my  bones  are  burnt  with  lx.
Psal.  19.  6.  there  is  nothing  hid  from  the  lx.  thereof
Eccl  4.  11.  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have  lx.

Isa.  4.  6.  a  shadow  in  the  day-time  from  lx.  25.  4.

18.  4.  I  will  take  my  rest,  like  a  clear  A.  on  herbs,
and  like  a  cloud  of  dew  in  the  lx.  of  harvest
25.  5.  as  the  lx.  in  a  dry  place,  even  the  lx.

49. 10.  neither  shall  the  h.  nor  sun  smite  them
Jer.  17.8.  and  shall  not  see  when  A.  cometh
36.  30.  dead  body  shajl  be  cast  out  in  the  day  to  lx.

51.  39.  in  their  lx.  .1  will  make,  their  feasts
Ezek.  3.  14.  and  1  went  in  the  A.  of  my  spirit
Hos.  7. 1 5.  have  made  him  sick  with  A.  through  wine
Mat.  20. 12  have  borne  the  burden  and  A.  of  the  day
Luke  12.  55.  when  south-wind  blow,  there  will  be  A.
Acts  28.  3.  there  came  a  viper  out  of  the  A.  .

Jam  1  11.  the  sun  no  sooner  risen  with  a  burning  A.

2  Pet.  3. 10.  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  lx.

HEAT.

Van.  3.  19.  A.  the  furnace  more  than  wont  to  be

heated

HEATED.

Dan.  3.  19.  the  furnace  more  than  wont  to  be  A
Hos.  7. 4.  are  adulterers,  as  an  oven  A.  by  the  baker
H  E  A 1 H .

Jer.  17.6.  he  shall  be  like  the  A.  in  the  desert
48  6.  flee,  and  be  like  the  lx.  in  the  wilderness
HEATHEN.

Lev.  25.  44.  bond-men  shall  be  of  the  A.  round  you
26.  45.  whom  1  brought  forth  in  sight  of  the  A.

2-6 am,  22.44.  kept  me  to  be  head  ot  h.  Psal.  18.  43.

2  Kings  16. 3.  walked  according  to  the  abominations
of  the  A.  17.  15. 1  21.  2.  2  Chr.  28.  3.  136.  14.

17.  8  Israel  walked  in  the  statutes  ot  the  lx.

11  as  did  the  A.  whom  the  Lord  carried  away

1  Citron.  16.35.  save  us,  and  deliver  us  from  tne  lx.

2  Chron  20.  6.  thou  rulest  over  all  kingdoms  ot  A.

33.  2.  but  did  like  to  the  abominations  of  the  A.

9  Manasseh  made  Judah  to  do  worse  than  the  A.
Ezra  6.  21.  as  had  separated  from  filthiness  of  the  A.
Neh.  5. 8.  we  redeemed  the  .1  ews  who  were  sold  to  A.

*  9  because  of  the  reproach  of  the  A.  our  enemies
6. 16.  all  the  A.  that  were  about  us  saw  these  things

Psal.  2.  1.  why  do  the  A.  rage  ?  Acts  4.  25.

8.  I  shall  give  thee  the  A.  For  thy  inheritance
9  5.  thou  hast  rebuked  the  A.  thou  hast  destroyed

15.  the  A.  are  sunk  in  the  pit  that  they  made

•  9. 19.  arise,  let  the  A.  be  judged  in  thy  sight

10.  16.  the  A.  are  perished  out  ot  his  land
33  10.  the  Lord  brings  the  counsel  ot  A.  to  nought
44.  2.  we  heard  how  thou  didst  drive  out  the  A.

46*.  6.  the  A.  raged,  the  kingdoms  were  moved
47.  8.  God  reigneth  over  the  A.  Gqd  sitteth  on
59.  5.  thou,  therefore,  awake  to  visit  all  the  A.

8.  thou  shalt  have  all  the  lx.  in  derision

78.  55.  he  cast  out  the  A.  also  before  them,  80.  8.

79.  1.  the  lx.  are  come  into  thine  inheritance

6.  pour  out  thy  wrath  upon  the  lx.  Jer.  10.  25.

10.  wherefore  should  the  lx.  say,  where  is  their
God  ?  let  him  be  known  among  the  A.  115.  2.

94. 10.  he  that  chastiseth  the  lx.  shall  not  he  correct  r
98.  2.  he  hath  openly  shewed  in  the  sight  of  the  A.

102.1 5.  the  A.  snail  fear  the  name  of  the  Lord

105.  44.  and  gave  them  the  lands  of  the  A.

106.  41.  and  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  pf  the  A.
111.  6.  he  may  give  them  the  heritage  of  the  A.

135. 15.  the  idols  of  the  A.  are  silver  and  gold
149. 7.  to  execute  vengeance  upon  the  A.

Isa.  16.  8.  the  lords  of  the  A.  have  broken  down
Jer.  10. 2.  learn  not  way  of  the  A.  be  not  dismayed  at
signs  of  heaven,  for  the  lx.  dismayed  at  them
49. 14.  an  ambassador  is  sent  to  the  A.  saying
Lam.lAO.  seen  that  the  A.entered  into  her  sanctuary
Ezek.  7.  24.  l  will  bring  the  worst  ot  the  A.

11.  12.  but  have  done  after  the  manners  of  lx.

20-  9.  should  not  be  polluted  before  the  A.  14.  22.

32.* that  yesay,  we  will  be  as  the  A.

41.  I  will  be  sanctified  before  the  A.  28.  25.

22.  4.  I  have  made  thee  a  reproach  to  the  A.

16.  take  thine  inheritance  in  sight  of  the  A.

23.  30.  thou  hast  gone  a  whoring  after  the  A.

-  25.  7.  1  will  deliver  thee  for  a  spoil  to  the  A.

8.  behold,  the  house  of  Judah  isliketoall  the  A.
30.  3.  day  is  near,  it  shall  be  time  of  the  A.

•  31.  11.  into  the  hand  of  the  mighty  one  of  the  A.

17.  that  dwelt  under  his  shadow  in  midst  ot  the  A.

34.  28.  they  shall  no  more  be  a  prey  to  the  A.

29.  neither  bear  the  shame  of  the  A.  any  more
,36.  3.  might  be  a  possession  to  the  residue  of  the  A.
4.  which  became  a  derision  to  the  residue  ot  the  A.

6.  because  ye  have  borne  the  shame  of  the  lx.

20.  when  they  entered  unto  the  A.  whither
23.  A.  know  1  am  L.  36. 1  37-  28. 1  38.  16.  I  39.  7.
39.  21.  and  all  the  A.  shall  see  my  judgment
Joel  2.  17.  that  the  A.  should  rule  over  them
3.  11.  and  come,  all  ye  A.  and  gather  yourse  ves

12.  let  the  A.  be  wakened,  and  come  up  to  valley  of
Jehoshaphat,  there  will  I  .'it  to  judge  all  the  A.

224


Amos  9.  12.  they  may  possess  remnant  of  all  the  A.
Vbad  15.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near  011  all  the  A.

16.  so  shall  all  the  A.  drink  continually
Mic.  5.  15.  I  will  execute  fury  upon  the  A.

Hub.  3.  12.  thou  didst  thresh  the  A.  in  anger  .

Zeplx.  2. 11.  all  the  isles  of  the  A.  shall  worship  him
Han.  2.  22.  1  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  A.

Zeclx.  1.  15.  1  am  sore  displeased  with  the  A.

9.  10.  and  he  snail  speak  peace  to  the  A.

14.  14.  the  wealth  of  all  the  A.  shall  be  gathered
18.  the  plague  wherewith  Lord  will  smite  the  A.

Mat.  6.  7.  use  not  vain  repetitions  as  the  A.  do
18. 17.  let  him  be  to  thee  as  an  A.  man  and  publican
2  Cor  11.  26.  in  perils  by  the  A.  in  perils  in  the  sea
Gal.  2.  9.  that  we  should  go  unto  the  A.

3.  8.  that  God  would  justify  the  A.  through  faith
Among  the  HEATHEN .

Lev.  26.  33. 1  will  scatter  you  among  the  A.  and  land
be  desolate,  Jer.  9.  16.  Ezek.  -0.  23.1  15.

38.  and  ye  shall  perish  among  the  A.  and  the  land
Deut  4.  27.  ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number  among  A.

2  Sam.  22.  50.  I  will  give  thanks  to  thee,  O  Lord,

among  lx.  and  sing  praises  to  thy  name,  Ps.  18.  49.

1  Chron.  16.  24.  declare  his  glory  among  h.  Ps.  90. 3.
Neh.  5.  17.  that  came  to  us  from  among  the  A.

6.  6.  it  is  reported  among  the  A.  Gashmu  saith  it
Psal.  44.  11-  thou  hast  scattered  us  among  the  A.

14.  thou  makestus  a  by-word  among  the  A.

46.  10.  I  am  God,  1  will  be  exalted  among  the  h.

79.  10.  let  him  be  known  among  the  A.  in  sight
96.  10.  say  among  the  A.  that  the  Lord  reigneth
106.  35.  but  they  were  mingled  among  the  A.

47.  save  us,  O  Lord,  and  gather  us  from  among  h.

110.  6.  he  snail  judge  among  the  A.  he  shall  fill
126. 2.  said  among  the  A.  L.  hath  done  great  things
Jer.  18. 13.  ask  among  the  A.  who  heard  such  tilings
49. 15. 1  will  make  thee  small  among  the  h.

Lam.  1.  3.  she  dwelleth  among  the  lx.  she  hinleth
4  15.  said  among  the  A.  they  shall  no  more  sojourn
20  under  his  shadow  we  shall  live  among  the  A.
Ezek.  11. 16.  tho’  1  have  cast  them  tar  off  among  the  It.

12  1*6.  may  declare  their  abominations  among  t.h.

16  14.  thy  renown  went  forth  among  the  A.

36.  19.  and  1  did  scatter  them  among  the  lx.

21.  which  Israel  profaned  among  the  lx.  22,  ^3.

24.  I  will  take  you  from  among  the  lx.  37-  21.

30.  no  more  reproach  of  famine  among  the  lx.

39.  21.  and  I  will  set  my  glory  among  the  A.

28.  caused  them  to  be  led  into  captivity  among  h.

Joel  2. 19.  no  more  make  you  a  reproach  among  t.  lx.
Chad.  1.  an  ambassador  is  sent  among  the  A.

2.  behold,  1  have  made  thee  small  among  the  A.
Hab.  1.  5.  behold  ve  among  the  A.  regard,  wonder
Zeclx.  8. 13.  that  as  ye  were  a  curse  among  the  It.

Mai.  1.  11.  my  name  shall  be  great  among  the  A.

14.  and  my  name  is  dreadful  the  A.

Gal  1.  16.  that  1  might  preach  him  among  the  lx.

HEAVE.  ,  n  ,  ..

Num.  15. 20.  as  ye  do  heave-offering,  so  shall  ye  A.  it
H  EAVED.

Exod.  29.  27.  is  A.  of  the  ram  of  consecration
Nutn.  18.  30.  when  ye  have  A.  the  best  thereof,  32.
See  Offering,  Shoulder.

HEAVEN.  ,  ,

Heaven  and  earth,  in  Gen.  1.  1.  are  used  for  the
substance  a7id  common  matter  oj  all  sensible  ci ea-
tures.  Heaven  is  often  taken  for  the  air :  A  he
fowls  of  heaven,  are  the  birds  which  fly  in  the  air,
Job  35.  11.  the  dew  of  heaven,  the  clouds  ot
hea  ven,  the  winds  ot  heaven ;  in  all  which  pas¬
sages,  heaven  is  put  for  the  air.  .

The  stars  are  placed  in  heaven,  or  in  the  firmament,
Gen.  1.  17.  They  are  called  the  host  or  army
of  heaven,  Deut.  17.  3.  God,  .like  a  poweijul
monarch,  calleth  them  by  their  names,  and  givetlx
them  his  orders.  The  God  of  the  Hebrews  is
named,  not  only  by  the  Jews,  but  also  by  the  hea¬
thens  and  strange  people ,  the  God  of  Heaven,
Ezra  1.  2.  1  5.  11.  1  6.  9,  10. 1  7:  12.  Jonah  1.  9.
because  the  Jews  adored  nothing  sensible,  and
said,  their  God  was  in  heaven ;  that  there  he  had
his  throne,  and  exercised  his  sovereign  dominion
over  all  creatures.

The  heaven  of  heavens  is  the  highest  heaven,  as
the  song  of  songs  is  the  most  excellent  song,  the
God  of  gods,  the  Lord  of  lords;  the  greatest  of
the  gods,  the  most  powerful  of  lords,  from  these
passages  it  appears,  that  rAe  Hebrews  acknow¬
ledged  three  heavens:  (1)  Ilie  aerial  heaven,
where  the  birds  fly,  the  winds  blow,  and  the  show¬
ers  are  formed.  (2)  The  heaven,  or  firmament ,
wherein  the  stars  are  disposed.  (3)  1  he  heaven
of  heavens,  or  the  third  heaven,  which  is  the  place
of  God's  residence,  the  dwelling  of  angels  and  the
blessed.  This  is  the  true  palace  of  God,  entirely
separated  from  the  impurities  and  imperfections,
the  alterations  and  changes,  of  the  lower  world ;
where  he  reigns  in  eternal  peace.  It  is  the  temple
of  the  divine  Majesty,  where  his  excellent  gloxy  ef
revealed  in  the  most  conspicuous  manner.  It  is
the  habitation  of  his  holiness,  the  place  where
his  honour  dwells.  It  is  the  sacred  mansion  of
light,  and  joy,  and  glory.  ,  ,  „  .

Heaven,  or  heavens,  is  put  for  God,  who  dwelleth
and  reigneth  there.  Dan.  4.  26.  After  thou  shalt
have  known  that  the  heavens  do  rule,  iso  m
Luke  15.  21.  I  have  sinned  against  heaven.
Also  for  the  angels  in  heaven.  Job  15.  15.  Hie
heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  sight ;  the  angels
that  dwell  in  heaven  are  not  pure  simply ,  perfectly,
and  comparatively  to  God.  It  is  put  also  fox  the
visible  church.  Rev.  12.  7,  9-  There  was  war  in
heaven.  Heaven  by  an  hyperbole  is  put  for  a
great  height.  Deut.  1.  28.  1  heir  cities  are  walled
up  to  lieaven.  It  is  taken  for  great  g lot  y  and
royal  majesty,  Isa.  14.  12.  How  art  thou  fallen
from  heaven,  O  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning.
speaking  of  the  overthrow  of  the  king  of  Laby  Ion
by  the  Medes  and  Persians.  .

The  enjoyment  of  the  divine  presence  in  heaven,
is  the  supreme  and  everlasting  felicity  of  the
saints ;  whatsoever  is  requisite  to  their  complete


blessedness  is  enjoyed  there  ;  there  is  an  exemp¬
tion  from  all  evils  j  sin  and  all  the  penal  con¬
sequences  are  abolished  j  the  hidy  is  revived  to  a
glorious  life,  and  the  soul  lives  in  communion
with  God  and  Christ.  The  understanding  there
shall  be  clearly  enlightened  with  the  knowledge
of  God.  Here  the  revelation  of  God,  in  his
works  and  word,  is  according  to  our  capacities,
but  in  heaven  it  is  most  glorious,  and  our  facul¬
ties  are  raised  and  refined  to  receive  it.  The
communion  also  of  the  angels  and  saints  tn  hea¬
ven  affords  the  purest  pleasure.  And  the  fulness
of  joy  in  heaven  is  everlasting,  witlwut  defect,
and  without  end.

Gen  1  1.  in  the  beginning  God  created  A.  and  earth
8.  and  God  called  the  firmament  A.

14.  let  there  be  lights  in  the  firmament  ot  A.  15.

20.  fowl  that  may  fiy  in  the  open  firmament  of  A.

7.  11.  and  the  windows  cf  A.  were  opened

8.  2.  and  the  windows  ot  A.  were  stopped

14. 19.  most  high  God,  possessorot  A.  andet/th,22.

19.  24.  Lord  rained  fire  from  the  Lord  out  ot  A.

21.  17.  the  angel  of  God  called  to  Hagar  out  ot  A.

22.  11.  the  angel  called  to  Abraham  out  of  A.  15.  I
27!  28*.  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  ot  A.  39.

28.  17.  and  he  said,  this  is  the  gate  ot  A.

49.  25.  shall  bless  thee  with  blessings  ol  A.  above
Exod.  20. 11.  six  days  I  d.  made  A.  and  earth,  31 . 17.

24.  10.  as  it  were  the  body  ol  A.  in  bis  clearness
Lev.  26. 19.  1  will  make  your  A.  as  iron,  earth  brass
Deut.  4. 11.  the  mountain  burned  to  the  midst  of  A.

26.  1  call  A.  and  earth  to  witness,  30. 19. 1  31.28.  I

32.  ask  from  the  one  side  of  A.  to  the  other
36.  out  of  A.  lie  made  thee  hear  his  voice

10. 14.  behold,  the  A.  and  A.  ot  heavens,  Ps.  115. 16,  I
11.  11.  and  drinketh  water  ot  the  rain  or  A.

17.  he  shut  up  A. 1  Kings  8.  35.  2  Chr .  6.  *-6. 1  ( •  lo.

21.  be  multiplied  as  the  days  ot  h.  on  the  earth

28.  12.  open  the  h.  to  give  thee  rain  n:  his  season  j

23.  the  A.  that  is  over  thy  head  shall  pe  brass  1
30.  4.  scatter  thee  to  the  utmost  part  of  A.  Neh.  1.9  I

33.  13.  for  the  precious  things  ot  A.  for  tne  dew
26.  God  of  Jeshurun  rideth  upon  the  A.  in  thy  help

1  Sam.  2.  10.  out  of  A.  shall  he  thunder  on  them

2  Sam.  18. 9.  he  was  taken  up  between  A.  and  earth

21.  10.  till  water  dropped  on  them  out  ot  A.

22.  8.  the  foundations  of  A.  moved  and  shook

1  Kings  8.  27.  behold,  the  A.  and  the  A.  ot  heavens

cannot  contain  thee,  2  Chron .  2.  o.  I  o.  18.

35.  when  A.  is  shut  up,  and  there  is  no  rain

18.  45.  mean  while  the  A.  was  black  with  clouds

2  Kings  19.  15.  thou  art  God  of  all  kingdoms,  thou

hast  made  A.  and  earth,  2  Chr.  2.  12.  Eeh.  9.6.

1  Chron.  21.  16.  angel  stood  between  A.  and  eaitii
Job  11.  8.  it  is  as  high  as  A.  what  canst  thou  do  1

20.  27.  the  A.  shall  reveal  his  iniquity,  earth  rise  up
22. 12.  is  not  God  in  height  ot  A.?  behold  height

14.  and  he  walketh  in  the  circuit  of  A.

26.  11.  the  pillars  of  A.  tremble  at  bis  reproof
38.  29.  the  hoary  frost  of  A.  who  hath  gendered  it:
33.  knowest  thou  the  ordinances  of  h.  ?

37.  or  who  can  stay  the  bottles  ot  A.?

Psal.  19.  6.  his  going  forth  is  from  the  end  or  4.
20.  6.  he  will  hear  him  from  his  holy  A.

69.  34.  let  A.  and  earth  praise  him,  the  seas
78.  23.  and  though  he  opened  the  doors  ot  h.

24.  and  had  given  them  of  the  corn  of  A.

89.  29.  his  throne  to  endure  as  the  days  ot  A.

103.  11.  for  as  the  A.  is  high  above  the  earth
105.  40.  he  satisfied  them  with  the  bread  ot  A.

115.  15.  the  Lord  who  made  A.  and  earth,  121. .

1 124.  8.  1 134.  3.  1  146.  6.  Isa.  37-  16.  Jer.  3.
17.  Acts  4.  24.  |  14.  15.  Bev.  14.  7-

147.  8.  who  covereth  A.  with  clouds,  who  prepare

148.  13.  his  glory  is  above  the  earth  and  A.

Prov.  25.  3.  tbe  A.  for  height,  the  earth  tor  deptn
Isa.  13.  5.  they  come  from  far,  from  the  end  of  lx.

40.  12.  who  hath  meted  out  A.  with  a  span  .

66.  1.  A.  my  throne,  earth  my  footstool,  Acts 7. v-
Jer.  7.  18.  to  make  cakes  to  the  queen  ot  A.

10.  2.  and  be  not  dismayed  at  the  signs  of  A.

23.  24.  do  not  I  fill  A.  and  earth  ?  saith  the  L010

31.  37.  if  A.  above  can  be  measured
33.  25.  if  1  have  not  appointed  ordinances  ot  A.
44.  17.  to  burn  incense  to  queen  ot  A.  18, 19.

40.  36.  four  winds  from  the  tour  quarters  ot  lx.

:  51.  15.  hath  stretched  out  the  A.  by  bis  understani
1  48.  the  A.  and  earth  shall  sing  for  Eabylon

Lam.  4. 19.  our  enemies  swifter  than  the  eagles  or  <
Ezek.  8.  3.  the  Spirit  lifted  me  between  earth  and

32.  7.  I  will  cover  the  A.  and  make  the  stars  cant
8.  the  lights  of  A.  will  I  make  dark  oy er  thee  ^

Dan.  4. 15.  be  wet  with  dew  of  A.  23.  25,  33. 1  5. 2
35.  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  army  ot  /'
37.  now  1  extol  and  honour  the  King  or  A.

5.  23.  hast  lifted  up  thyself  against  the  Lord  or

7.  2.  the  four  winds  of  A.  strove  upon  the  sea

13.  one  like  Son  of  man,  came  with  clouds  ot  /.

8.  8.  four  horns  toward  the  four  winds  of  A.

11.  4.  his  kingdom  divided  toward  tour  "

Amos  9.  6.  he  that  buildeth  his  stories  m  the •lx.
Hag.  1.  10.  the  A.  over  you  is  stayed  from  dew
Zech.  2.  6. 1  have  spread  you  as  the  four  winds  or
5.  9.  lifted  the  ephah  between  the  earth  and  A.
Mai.  3.  10.  if  I  will  not  open  the  windows  or  A.
Mat.  5.  18.  till  A.  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  not  pa-

34.  nor  swear  by  A.  it  is  God’s  throne,  Jam.  5.  J
11.25.  I  thank  thee,  Father,  Lord  of  A.  LukeW.-

23.  22.  he  that  shall  swear  by. A.  sweareth  by  G

24.  30.  then  shall  appear  the  sign  ot  the  Son  of  n
coming  in  the  clouds  of  A.  26.  64.  Mark  >  •

31.  gather  elect  from  one  end  of  A.totheotne

35.  A.  earth  shall  pass  away,  Mark  13.  3L^

36.  no,  not  the  angels  of  A.  but  my  Father  on)
Mark  13.27.  gather  his  elect  horn  utmost  paito
Luke  3.  21.  and  Jesus  praying,  the  A.  v as  open

4.  25.  when  the  A.  was  shut  up  three  3  ears

15.  18.  father,  1  have  sinned  against  A.  21.

16.  17.  it  is  easier  for  A.  and  earth  to  pass
21  26.  for  the  powers  of  A.  shall  be  snaKen
John  1.  51.  hereafter  ye  shall  see  A.  open,  and  ang


II  E  A


H  E  A


II  E  A


•tt  3.21.  whom  the  //.  must  receive  until  the  times
>.  11.  I  saw  /;.  opened,  and  a  vessel,  Rev.  19.  11.

7*  *24.  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of//,  and  earth
w.~5.  IB.  he  prayed  again,  and  the  //.  gave  rain
(,v[  3.  12.  cometh  down  out  of  //.  from  my  God

14.  //.  departed  as  a  scroll  when  it  is  rojied
’  13.  an  angel  flying  through  the  midst  of//.  14.  6.

0.  Ci.  who  created  h.  and  the  things  therein
l!  6.  these  have  power  to  shut  //.  that  it  rain  not
tj'.  1".  came  a  great  voice  out  of  the  temple  of  //.

21.  there  fell  on  men  a  great  bailout  of//.

8.  20.  rejoice  over  her,  thou  //.

y,  17.  to  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of  //.
q*  y.  and  fire  came  down  from  God  out  of  //.
li.  earth  and  //.  fled  away,  and  there  was  no  place

I.  1.  1  saw  a  new  //.  and  earth,  the  first  //.  passed

10.  holy  Jerusalem  descending  out  of  //.  from  God

See  Fowl,  Fowls.

From  HEAVEN.

en.  8.  2.  and  the  rain  from  h.  was  restrained
xod.  16.  4. 1  will  rain  bread  from  //.  for  you
0.  22.  1  have  talked  with  you  from  h.  A :eh.  9.  13.
ewL26.15.look  down/row  //.  Isa.  63. 15.  l.am.  .3.50.
’8.24.  as  dust  from  //.shall  it  come  down  on  thee
, s’h.  10.  11.  Lord  cast  great  stones  from  //.  on  them
id<j,  5.  20.  they  fought  from  h.  the  stars  fought
Sam.  22. 14.  Lord  thundered  from  //.  and  uttered
Kings  1.  10.  then  let  fire  come  down  from  h.  and
there  came  down  fire  from  h.  12.  14.
Chron.  21.  26.  he  answered  him  from  h.  by  fire
Chron.  6.  21.  hear  thou  from  //.  23,  27*  30.

.  1.  the  fire  came  down  from  h.  and  consumed
14.  then  will  I  hear  from  h.  and  will  forgive
reh.  9.  15.  gavest  them  bread  from  h.  for  hunger
27.  they  cried,  thou  heardest  them  from  h.  28.

<b  1.  16.  the  fire  of  God  is  fallen  from  h.

'sal.  14.  2.  the  Lord  looked  down  from  h.  5.3.  2.

!3.  13.  the  Lord  looketh  from  li.  and  beholdeth
,7. 3.  shall  send  from  h.  and  save  me  from  reproach

6.  8.  didst  cause  judgment  to  be  heard  from  h.

10. 14.  O  God,  look  down  from  h.  and  behold

15. 11.  righteousness  shall  look  down  from  h.

.02.  19.  from  h.  did  the  Lord  behold  the  earth

ui.  14. 12.  how  art  thou  fallen  from  h.  O  Lucifer  !
>5. 10.  as  snow  falleth  from  h.  and  returneth  not
.am.  2.  1.  Lord  cast  down  ftom  h.  beauty  of  Israel
)an.  4.  1,3.  behold,  a  watcher  came  down  from  h.

,  2.3.  the  king  saw  an  holy  one  coming  down  from  h.

31.  fell  a  voice /row  h.  saying,  kingd.  is  departed
from  thee,  Mat.  3. 17.  Luke  3.  22.  John  12.  28.
fat.  16.  1.  he  would  shew  them  a  sign  front  h.

II.  25.  the  baptism  of  John,  whence  was  it  ?  from

//.  or  of  men  ?  Mark  11.  30.  Luke  20.  4.
18.2.  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  for  the  angel
descended  fromh.  Rev.  10.  1. 1  18.1.  I  20.  1.
lark  8. 11.  seeking  of  him  a  sign/.  //.  Luke  11. 16.
,uke  9.  54.  we  command  fire  to  come  down  fromh.
10.18.  I  beheld  Satan  as  lightning  fall  from  h.

17.  29.  it  rained  fire  and  brimstone  /.  //.  on  Sodom

21. 11.  and  great  signs  shall  there  be  from  li.

22.  43.  appeared  an  angel  /.  //.  strengthening  him
ohn  1. 32.  I  saw  the  Spirit  descending  from  h.

3. 13.  but  he  that  came,  down  from  h.  6.  3.3.

27.  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given  him  from  h.‘

31.  he  that  cometh  from  h.  is  above  all

6.  31.  he  gave  them  bread  from  li.  to  eat

32.  Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread  from  h.

.38. 1  came  from  h.  not  to  do  mine  own  will,  42.

41.  bread  which  came  down  fromh.  50.  51,  58.
lets 2.  2.  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from  h.

9.3.  a  light  /.  //.  shined  about  him,  22.  6.  1  26.  13.

11.  5.  as  it  had  been  a  great  sheet  let  down  from  h.

9.  but  the  voice  answered  me  again  from  h.

14. 17.  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain/,  h.
Korn.  1.  18.  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  h.

;  Cor.  15.  47-  the  second  man  is  the  Lord  from  h.

Cor.  5.  2.  clothed  on  with  our  house  that  is  from  h.
pal.  1.8.  an  angel  from  h.  preach  any  other  gospel
Thess.  1.  10.  and  to  wait  for  his  Son  from  h.

4. 16.  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  h.

Thess.  1.7.  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed/.//.
Heb.  12.  25.  if  turn  from  him  that  speaketh from  h.
Pet.  1.  12.  by  them  that  have  preached  the  gospel
to  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  h.
Rev.  8. 10.  and  there  fell  a  great  star  from  h.

9.  1.  and  1  saw  a  star  fall  from  h.  to  the  earth

10.  4. 1  heard  a  voice  /.  //.  seal  up  those  things,  and

write  them  not,  8. 1  11.  12. 1  14.  2,  13.  1 18.4.

13. 13.  that  he  maketh  fire  come  down  fromh.

See  God  of  heaven.

Host,  or  hosts  of  HEAVEN.

Deut.  4. 19.  seest  the  //.  of  //.  shouldest  worship  him
17- 3.  hath  gone  and  worshipped  the  host  of  h.

4  Kings  22. 19. 1  saw  the  Lord  sittingon  the  throne,
and  the  host  of  h.  standing  by  him,  2  C 'hr.  18. 18.

2  Kings  17.  16.  Israel  worshipped  the  host  of  h.

21.  3.  Manasseh  worshipped  host  ofh.  2  Chr.  33.  3.
5.  he  built  altars  for  the  host  of  h.  2  Chron.  33.  5.

23.  4.  Josiah  brought  out  vessels  made  for  //.  of  h.
5.  put  down  theni  that  burnt  incense  to//,  of  h.

■Kelt.  9.  6.  thou  hast  made  the  //.  of  heavens  with
their  host,  and  the  host  of  h.  worshippeth  thee
Isa.  34.  4.  all  the  host  ofh.  shall  be  dissolved
Jer.  8.  2.  they  shall  spread  them  before  the  //.  of  h.
19.  13.  they  burnt  incense  to  all  the  host  of  h.

33. 22.  as  the  host  of  h.  cannot  be  numbered
Dan.  8.  10.  it  waxed  great,  even  to  the  host  of  h.
Zeph.  1.  5. 1  will  cut  off  them  that  worship  //.  of  h.
Jets’!.  42.  gave  them  up  to  worship  the  host  of  h.

In  HEAVEN.

Ezod.  20. 4.  nor  likeness  of  any  thing  in  h.  Deut.  5.  8.
Deut.  3.  24.  what  god  in  h.  can  do  like  thy  works  ?
4.  39.  that  the  Lord  he  is  G.  in  h.  above  and  earth

30. 12.  it  is  not  in  h.  that  thou  shouldest  say,  who
Josh,  2.  11.  for  Lord  your  G.  he  is  God  inh.  above

1  Kings  8.  23.  is  no  God  like  thee  in  h.  2  Chr.  6. 14.
30.  hear  thou  in  h.  .32,  .34,  36,  .39,  43,  45,  49.

2  Kings  7.  2.  if  the  Lord  make  windows  in  h.  19.

1  Chron.  29. 11.  all  that  is  in  h.  and  earth  is  thine

2  Chr.  20.  6.  O  lord  God,  art  not  thou  God  in  h.  ?
Job  16.  19.  also  now  behold,  my  witness  is  in  h.
Ptal  11  4  the  Lord's  throne  is  in  h.  his  eyes  behold


Ps.  7-3.25.  whom  have  I  in  h.  but  thee,  none  on  earth

77.  18.  the  voice  of  thy  thunder  was  in  the  //.

78.  26.  he  caused  an  east  wind  to  blow  in  the  /z.

89.  6.  who  in  h.  can  be  compared  to  the  Lord  ?

37.  shall  be  established  as  a  faithful  witness  inh.
113.  6.  humbleth  himself  to  behold  things  in  h.

119.  89.  for  ever,  Lord,  thy  word  is  settled  in  h.

I. 35.  6.  that  did  he  inh.  and  earth,  in  the  seas
Feel.  5.  2.  for  God  is  in  h.  and  thou  upon  earth
Isa.  .34.  5.  for  my  sword  shall  be  bathed  inh.  behold
Jer.  8.  7.  yea,  the  stork  in  h.  knoweth  her  times
Dan.  2.  28.  there  is  a  God  in  h.  that  revealeth  secrets

6.  27.  worketh  signs  and  wonders  in  h.  and  earth
Amos  9.  6.  lie  that  buildeth  his  stories  mthe  //.

Mat.  5. 12.  rejoice,  for  great  is  your  reward  in  h.

16.  and  glorify  your  Father  who  is  in  h.

45.  the  children  of  your  Father  who  is  in  h.

48.  be  perfect,  as  your  Father  in  h.  is  perfect
6. 9.  pray  ye,  our  Father  which  art  in  h.  Luke  11. 2.
10.  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  h.  Luke  11.  2.

20.  but  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  h.

7.  11.  shall  your  Father  in  h.  give  good  things

21.  that  doth  the  will  of  my  Father  in  h.  12.  50.

10.  .32.  him  will  I  confess  before  my  Father  in  h.

.3.3.  him  will  I  deny  before  my  Father  inh.

16. 17.  but  my  Father  which  is  in  h.  revealed  it
19.  shall  be  bound  in  h.  be  loosed  in  h.  18.  18.

18.  10.  despise  not  these  little  ones,  in  h.  angels  do

always  behold  the  face  of  my  Father  in  h.

19.  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  in  h.

19.  21.  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  h.  Luke  18.  22.

22.  30.  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in  h.  Mark  12.  25.

23.  9.  for  one  is  your  Father  who  is  in  h.

24. 30.  shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  man  m  h.
28.  18.  all  power  is  given  to  me  in  h.  and  in  earth
Mark  11.  26.  nor  will  your  Father  in  h.  forgive  you
13.  25.  the  powers  that  are  in  h.  shall  be  shaken
32.  no,  not  the  angels  which  are  in  h.  nor  the  Son
Luke  6.  23.  for  behold,  your  reward  is  great  in  h.

10.  20.  because  your  names  are  written  in  h.

15.  7.  joy  shall  be  in  h.  over  one  sinner  that  repent.
19.  .38.  peace  in  h.  and  glory  in  the  highest
John  3.  13.  even  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in  h.

Acts  2. 19. 1  will  shew  wonders  in  h.  above  and  signs
1  Cor.  8. 5.  and  called  gods,  whether  in  h.  or  in  earth
Eph.  1.  10.  he  might  gather  in  one,  things  in  h.

3.  15.  of  whom  the  whole  family  in  li.  is  named

6.  9.  knowing  that  your  master  is  in  li.  Col.  4.  1.
Phil.  2. 10.  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  h.

3.20.  our  conversation  is  in  h.  front  whence  we  look
Col.  1.  5.  for  the  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  h.
16.  by  him  were  all  things  created  that  are  in  h.

20.  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  in  h.  and  earth
Ileb.  10.  34.  that  ye  have  in  h.  a  better  substance

12.  23.  the  first-born  which  are  written  in  h.

1  Pet.  1.  4.  to  an  inheritance  reserved  in  h.  for  you

1  John  5.  7-  there  are  three  that  bear  record  in  h.
Rev.  4.  1.  and  behold,  a  door  was  opened  in  h.

2.  a  throne  was  set  in  h.  and  one  sat  on  the  throne
5.  3.  no  man  in  h.  or  earth  was  able  to  open  book

13.  every  creature  in  h.  saying,  blessing,  honour

8.  1.  was  silence  in  h.  ||  11.  15.  great  voices  in  li.

II.  19.  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  inh.

12.  1.  there  appeared  a  great  wonder  in  h.  3.

7.  there  was  war  in  h.  Michael  and  his  angels

8.  nor  was  their  place  found  any  more  inh.

10.  I  heard  a  loud  voice  saying  in  h.  19.  1.

13.  6.  to  blaspheme  them  that  dwell  in  h.

14. 17.  angel  came  out  of  the  temple  which  is  in  h.
15.  1.  I  saw  another  sign  in  h.  great  and  marvell.

5.  the  tabernacle  of  testimony  in  h.  was  opened
19. 14.  the  armies  that  were  in  h.  followed  him
Into  HEAVEN.

2  Kings  2. 1.  the  Lord  would  take  up  Elijah  into  h.

11.  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  h.

Psal.  139.  8.  if  I  ascend  into  h.  thou  art  there
Prov.  30.  4.  who  hath  ascended  into  h.  ?  Rom.  10.  6.
Isa.  14.  13.  thou  hast  said,  I  will  ascend  into  h.
Mark  16.  19.  the  Lord  was  received  up  into  h.

Luke  2.  15.  as  the  angels  were  gone  away  into  h.

24.  51.  he  was  parted  from  them,  carried  up  into  h.
Acts  1.  11.  gazing  up  into  h.  taken  from  you  into  h.

Jesus  shall  come  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  h.

7.  55.  Stephen  looked  upstedfastly  into  h.  and  saw
10.  16.  the  vessel  was  received  up  into  h.  11.  10.

Ileb.  9.  24.  but  into  h.  itself,  to  appear  for  us
1  Pet.  3. 22.  who  is  gone  into  h.  on  right  hand  of  God
See  Kingdom.

HEAVEN  joined  with  stars.

Gen.  1. 17.  God  set  stars  in  the  firmament  of  //.

22. 17. 1  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  stars  of  //.  26. 4.

Exod.  32. 13.  1  Chron.  27  .  23.  Neh.  9.  23.
Deut.  1.  10.  you  are  this  day  as  stars  of  //.  10.  22.
28.  62.  whereas  ye  were  as  stars  of  //.  formultitude
Isa.  1.3.  10.  the  stars  of  h.  shall  not  give  light
Ezek.  32.  7. 1  will  cover  //.  and  make  stars  dark
Nah.  .3.  16.  multiplied  merchants  as  stars  of  //.
Mat.  24. 29.  the  stars  shall  fall  from  //.  Mark  13.  25.
Rev.  6.  13.  and  the  stars  of  //.  fell  on  the  earth

12.  4.  his  tail  drew  the  third  part  of  stars  of  //.

To  HEAVEN,  or  unto  HEAVEN.

Gen.  11.  4.  a  tower  whose  top  may  reach  unto  h.

28.  12.  a  ladder,  and  the  top  of  it  reached  to  h.
Deut.  1.  28.  the  cities  great  and  walled  up  to  h.  9. 1.
4.  19.  and  lest  thou  lift  up  thine  eyes  unto  h.

.30. 12.  v'ho  shall  go  up  for  us  to  h.  and  bring  it  to  us
.32.  40.  for  I  lift  up  my  hand  to  h.  and  say,  I  live
Josh.  8.  20.  the  smoke  of  the  city  ascended  up  to  h.
Judg.  20.  40.  the  flame  of  the  city  ascended  up  to  h.
1  Sam.  5. 12.  and  the  cry  of  the  city  went  up  to  h.

1  Kings  8.  54.  with  his  hands  spread  up  to  It.

2  Chron.  28.  9.  in  a  rage  that  reacheth  up  unto  h.
.30.  27.  their  prayer  came  up  even  unto  h.

32.  20.  the  prophet  Isaiah  prayed  and  cried  to  h.
Psal.  107.  26.  they  mount  up  to  h.  they  go  down
Jer.  51.  9.  for  her  judgment  reacheth  unto  h.

Dan.  4. 11.  the  tree  whose  height  reached  to  h.  20.
12.  7.  when  he  held  up  his  left  hand  unto  h.

Amos  9.  2.  though  they  climb  up  to  h.  thence  will  I
Mat.  11.  23.  Capernaum,  which  art  exalted  to  h.

14.  19.  and  looking  up  to  h.  Mark  6. 41.  Luke  9. 16.
Mark  7. 34.  looking  up  to  h.  he  sighed,  and  saith


I.uke  18. 13.  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  h.
John  3.  1.3.  and  no  man  hath  ascended  up  to  h.

17.  1.  Jesus  lift  up  his  eyes  to  h.  and  said.  Father
2  Cor.  12.  2.  such  an  one.  caught  up  to  third  //.

Dev.  10.  5.  the  angel  lifted  up  his  hand  to  h.

11.  12.  and  they  ascended  up  to  h.  in  a  cloud

18.  5.  for  her  sins  have  reached  unto  h.

Toward  HEAVEN.

Gen.  15.  5.  look  now  toward  h.  and  tell  the  stars
Exod.  9.  8.  let  Moses  sprinkle  it  toward  the  //.

10.  and  Moses  sprinkled  it  up  toward  h.

22.  stretch  forth  thine  hand  toward  h.  10.  21.

23.  Moses  stretched  forth  his  rod  towaid  h.

10.  22.  Moses  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  /..
Judg.  13.  20.  when  the  flame  went  up  toward  h.

1  Kings  8.  22.  Solomon  stood  before  altar  of  Lord,
and  spread  forth  his  hands  toward  h.  2  Chr.  6. 13.

Job  2.  12.  sprinkled  dust  on  their  heads  toward  h.
Prov.  2.3.  5.  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  tozvard  h.
Acts  1.  10.  while  they  looked  stedfastly  toward  h
Under  1 1 E  A  V  E  N .

Gen.  1.  9.  let  the  waters  under  h.  be  gathered

6.  17-  a  flood  to  destroy  all  flesh  from  under  h.

7.  19.  the  high  hills  under  the  whole  //.  were  cover.
Exod.  17.  14.  I  will  utterly  put  out  the  remem

brance  of  Amalek  from  under  h.  Deut.  25. 19.
Deut.  2.  25.  the  fear  of  thee  on  nations  under  h.

4.  19.  God  hath  divided  to  all  nations  under  h.

7.  24.  shalt  destroy  their  name  from  under  h.  9. 14.
29.  20.  Lord  shall  blot  out  his  name  from  under  h.

2  Kings  14.  27.  blot  out  name  of  lsr.  from  under  h.
Job  28.  24.  for  God  seeth  under  the  whole  //.

37.  3.  he  directeth  it  under  the  whole  //.

41.  11.  whatsoever  is  under  the  whole  //.  is  mine
Eccl.  1.  1.3.  to  search  out  all  things  done  under  h.

2.  .3.  what  was  that  good  they  should  do  under  h.

3.  1.  a  time  to  every  purpose  under  the  //.

Luke  17.  24.  that  lighteneth  out  of  one  part  under  h.
Acts  2.  5.  devout  men  of  every  nation  under  h.

4.  12.  none  other  name  under  h.  given  among  men
Col.  1.  23.  gospel  preached  to  every  creature  und.  h.

HEAVENLY.

Mat.  6.  14.  your//.  Father  will  forgive  you
26.  yet  your  //.  Father  feedeth  them

32.  your//.  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need

15. 13.  every  plant  my  //.  Father  hath  not  planted
18.  35.  so  shall  my  //.  Father  do  also  to  you

Luke  2.  13.  a  multitude  of  the//,  host  praising  God

11.  13.  your  //.  Father  shall  give  the  Spirit  to  them
John  3.  12.  how  believe,  if  1  tell  you  of  //.  things
Acts  26.  19.  I  w-as  not  disobedient  to  the  //.  vision

1  Cor.  15.  .48.  as  is  the  //.  such  are  they  that  are  h.
49.  we  shall  also  bear  the  .image  of  the  //.  _

Eph.  1.3.  with  spiritual  blessings  in  //.  places  in  Chr.

I.  20.  set  him  at  his  right  hand  in  //.  places,  2.  0.

3.  10.  that  now  unto  the  powers  in  //.  places

2  Tim.  4. 18.  Ld.  will  preserve  me  to  his  //.  kingdom
Heb.,3.  1.  brethren,  partakers  of  the  //.  calling

6. 4.  once  enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the  //.  gift

8.  5.  who  serve  to  example  and  shadow  of  //.  things

9.  23.  but  //.  things  with  better  sacrifices  than  these

II.  16.  an  //.  country  II  12.  22.  the//.  Jerusalem

HEAVENS.

Gen.  2.  1.  thus  the  //.  and  the  earth  were  finished
4.  these  are  the  generations  of  the  //.  and  the  earth
in  the  day  that  the  Ld.  made  the  //.  and  earth
Deut.  32.  1.  give  ear,  O  //.  L  will  speak,  Isa.  1.  2.

33.  28.  also  his  //.  shall  drop  down  dew
Judg.  5.  4.  the  earth  trembled,  the  //.  dropped

2  Sam.  22.  10.  he  bowed  the  h.  and  came,  Ps.  18.9.
1  Kings  8.  27.  the  heaven  of  //.  cannot  contain  thee

1  Chr.  16.  26.  the  gods  are  idols,  but  the  J.ord  made

the  //.  Neh.  9.  6.  Psal.  96.  5.  I  102.  25.  |  136.  5.
31.  let  the  //.  be  glad,  let  the  earth  rejoice^

2  Chron.  6.  25.  then  hear  from  the  //.  33,  35,  39.
Ezra  9.  6.  our  trespass  is  grown  up  to  the  h.

Job  9.  8.  which  alone  spreadeth  out  the  //.

14.  12.  man  riseth  not  till  the  //.  be  no  more

15.  15.  yea,  the  //.  are  not  clean  in  his  sight
20.  6.  though  his  excellency  mount  up  to  the  //.

26.  13.  by  his  Spirit  he  hath  garnished  the  //.

35.  5.  look  to  the  //.  and  see,  and  behold  the  clouds
Psal.  8. 1.  thou  hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  //.  113.  4.
.3.  when  I  consider  thy  //.  the  work  of  thy  fingers
19. 1.  the  //.  declare  the  glory  of  God, and  lirmam
.33.  6.  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  //.  made

50. 4.  shall  call  to  the  //.  from  above,  and  to  earth
6.  the  //.  shall  declare  his  righteousn.  G.  is  judge

57.5.  be  thou  exalted,  O  God,  above //.  11.  |  108.  5.

10.  for  thy  mercy  is  great  unto  the  //.  It  8.  4.

68.  4.  extol  him  that  rideth  upon  the  //.  .3.3.

8.  the  //.  also  dropped  at  the  presence  ot  God
73. 9.  they  set  their  mouth  against  the  //.

89.  5.  the  //.  shall  praise  thy  wonders,  O  Lord

11.  the  //.  are  thine;  the  earth  also  is  thine

96. 11.  let  the //.  rejoice,  earth  be  glad,  Rev.  12.  12.
97.  6.  //.declare  his  righteousness,  people  his  glory
104.  2.  who  stretchest  out  the  h.  Isa.  40.  22.

108.  4.  for  thy  mercy  is  great  above  the  //.

115.  16.  the  heaven,  even  the  //.  are  the  Lord’s
144.  5.  bow  thy  //.  O  Lord,  and  comedown,  toucl
148.  1.  praise  ye  the  Lord  from  the  //.  praise  him
4.  praise  him  ye  //.  of  //.  and  waters  above  the  //.
Prov.  3. 19.  by  understanding  he  established  the  //.
8.  27-  when  he  prepared  the  //.  1  was  there
Isa.  13. 13.  will  shake  the  //.  and  earth,  Hag. 2. 6,21.

34.  4.  the  //.  shall  be  rolled  together  as  a  scroll

42. 5.  thus  saith  he  that  created  the  //.  45.  18.

44.  23.  sing,  O  ye  //.  for  the  Lord  hath  done  it

24.  saith  the  Lord,  that  stretcheth  forth  the  //
45.  12. 1  51.  13.  Jer.  10.  12.  Zech.  12.  1.
45.8.  drop  down  ye//,  from  above,  let  the  skies  pour
48^  13.  my  right  hand  hath  spanned  the  //.

49.  13.  sing,  l)  //.  and  be  joyful,  O  earth
50.3.  I  clothe//,  with  blacKness,  I  make  sackcloth
51.  6.  lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  //.  and  look,  the  //.
shall  vanish  away  like  smoke,  and  earth  wax  old

16.  that  I  may  plant  the  //.  and  lay  foundations
55.  9.  for  as  the  //.  are  higher  than  the  earth
64.1.  that  thou  wouldest  rend  the  //.  and  come  down
65. 17.  behold,  l  create  new  //.  and  a  new  earth
66.  22.  for  as  the  new  //.  which  1  will  make


HE  D


HEX


H  EL


Jer.  2.  12.  be  astonished,  O  ye  A.  and  be  afraid

4.  2.3.  1  beheld  the  A.  and  they  had  no  light

25.  all  the  birds  of  the  A.  were  fled,  9-  10.

28.  for  this  shall  the  earth  mourn,  A.  above  black
10.  11.  the  gods  that  have  not  made  the  A.  and  the
earth  shall  perish,  and  from  under  these  A.
14.  22.  or  can  the  A.  give  showers.'  art  not  thou  he
Lam.  3.  66.  destroy  them  from  under  the  A.  of

[the  Lord

Ezek.  1.  1.  that  the  h.  were  opened.  Mat.  3.  16.
Pan.  4.  26.  shalt  have  known  that  the  h.  do  rule
Ho  a.  2. 21.  L  will  hear  the  A.  they  shall  hear  the  earth
Joel 2. 10.  the/i.  shall  tremble, sun  and  moon  be  dark
3.  16.  and  the  A.  and  the  earth  shall  shake
Hah.  3.  3.  God  came,  his  glory  covered  the  A.
'/Lech.  6.  5.  these  are  the  four  spirits  of  the  A.

8.  12.  and  the  A.  shall  give  their  dew

Mat.  24.  29.  the  powers  of  the  A.  shall  be  shaken
Mark  1.  10.  and  coming  up,  he  saw  the  h.  opened
Acts  2.  34.  for  David  is  not  ascended  into  the  h.

7.  56.  behold,  I  see  the  h.  opened,  and  Son  of  man
lieh.  1. 10.  the  h.  are  the  work  of  thine  hands
4. 14.  we  have  an  lligh-Priest  that  is  passed  into  li.
~.  26.  an  High-Priest  made  higher  than  the  A.

2  Pet.  3.  5.  by  the  word  of  God  the  h.  were  of  old

7.  but  the  A.  which  are  now,  are  kept  in  store
10.  the  h.  shall  pass' away  with  a  great  noise
12.  wherein  the  A.  being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved
In  the  I  I  F, /WENS.

Psal.  2.  4.  he  that  sitteth  in  the  h.  shall  laugh

18.  13.  the  Lord  also  thundered  in  the  h.

36.  5.  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  is  in  theh.  thy  faithfuln.
89-  2.  thy  faithfulness  shalt  thou  establish  in  the  h.
103. 19.  the  Lord  hath  prepared  his  throne  in  the  h.
115.  3.  God  is  in  theh.  he  hath  done  what  pleased

123. 1.  1  lift  my  eyes,  O  thou  thatdwellesta«/AeA.
Isa.  5.  30.  the  light  is  darkened  in  the  h.  thereof
Jer.  10.  13.  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  A.  51.  16.
Lam.  3.  41.  let  us  lift  up  our  hearts  to  God  in  the  h.
Joel  2.  30.  I  will  shew  wonders  in  the  h.

Luke  12.  33.  a  treasure  in  the  h.  which  faileth  not
2  Cor.  5. 1 .  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  li.
lleb.  8.  1.  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the  li.

9.  23.  necessary  that  the  patterns  of  things  in  the  li.

11  EAV  Y.

Gen.  41. 131.  for  the  famine  shall  be  very  h.

48. 1 10.  now  the  eyes  of  Israel  were  h.  for  age
Lxod.  5. 1  9.  let  the  work  be  h.  upon  the  men
17-  12.  Moses’  hands  were  h.  they  took  a  stone
18.  18.  for  this  thing  is  too  h.  for  thee,  thou  art
not  able  to  perform  it  thyself  alone
Num.  11.  14.  not  able,  because  it  is  too  li.  for  me
Judg.  1. 1 35.  the  hand  of  the  house  of  Joseph  was  h.

1  Sam.  4. 18.  for  Eli  was  an  old  man  and  It.

5.  6.  hand  of  the  L.  was  h.  on  them  of  Ashdod,  11.

2  Sam.  14.  26.  because  the  hair  was  A.  on  him

1  Kings  12.  4.  thy  father’s  h.  yoke  lighter,  we  will

serve  thee,  10, 11, 14.  2  Chr.  10.  4, 10, 11, 14.
14.  6.  for  I  am  sent  to  thee  with  A.  tidings
20.  43.  king  Ahab  went  to  his  house  A.  21.  4.

2  Kings  6.  +  14.  the  king  sent  to  Dothan  an  h.  host
18. 1 17.  Sennacherib  sent  to  Hezekiah  an  A.  host

Neh.  5.  18.  because  the  bondage  was  A.  on  people
Job  33.  7-  neither  shall  my  hand  be  h.  upon  thee
Psal.  32.  4.  day  and  night  thy  hand  was  h.  on  me
38.  4.  as  an  h.  burden  they  are  too  h.  for  rne
Prov.  25.  20.  he  that  singeth  songs  to  an  h.  heart
27.  3.  stone  is  li.  and  sand  weighty,  but  fool’s  wrath
31.  6.  give  wdne  to  those  that  be  of  h.  hearts
Isa.  6.  10.  make  their  ears  h.  shut  their  eyes

24.  20.  the  transgression  thereof  shall  be  h.  upon  it
30.  27-  with  his  anger,  and  the  burden  thereof  is  h.

46. 1.  your  carriages  were  h.  loaden,  are  a  burden

58.  6.  is  not  this  the  fast,  to  undo  the  h.  burdens  ?

59.  1.  neither  his  ear  h.  that  it  cannot  hear
Lam.  3.  7-  hedged  me  about,  hath  made  my  chain  h.
Mat.  11.  28.  come  to  me,  all  ye  that  are  h.  laden

23.  4.  tor  they  bind  h.  burdens,  and  gr.ievous  to  be

26.  37.  he  began  to  be  sorrowful,  and’  very  h.

43.  for  their  eyes  were  very  h.  Mark  14.  33,  40.
Luke  9.  32.  that  were  with  him,  were  h.  with  sleep
HEAVIER.

Job  6.  3.  now  it  would  be  h.  than  the  sand  of  the  sea
23.  2.  my  stroke  is  h.  than  my  groaning
Prov.  27.  3.  a  fool’s  wrath  is  h.  than  them  both


HEAVILY.

Lxod.  14.  25.  take  off  wheels,  so  that  drave  them  h.
Psal.  35. 14. 1  bowed  down  A.  as  one  thatmournetl
Isa.  47.  6.  on  the  ancient  hast  thou  A.  laid  thy  yok
HEAVINESS.

Ezra  9.  5.  at  the  evening  sacrifice  I  rose  from  my  h
Job  9.  27.  if  1  say,  I  will  leave  off dny  h.  and  comfor
Psal.  69.  20.  broken  my  heart,  and  1  am  full  of  l
119.  28.  my  soul  melteth  for  h.  strengthen  thou  m
Prov.  10. 1.  a  foolish  son  is  the  h.  of  his  mother
12.  25.  h.  in  the  heart  of  man  rnaketh  it  stoop
14.  13.  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  is  h.

Isa.  1. 1 4.  ah  sinful  nation,  a  people  of  A.  with  iniq
29.  2.  and  there  shall  be  h.  and  sorrow
30. 1 27.  with  his  anger,  and  the  burd .  thereof  is  h.
61.  3.  to  give  the  garment  of  praise  for  spirit  of  h.
llum.  9-  2.  that  1  have  great  h.  and  continual  sorrov
2  Cor.  2.  1.  I  would  not  come  again  to  you  in  h.
Phil.  2. 26.  Epaphroditus  my  brother  was  full  of  h
Jam.  4.  9.  iet  your  joy  be  turned  into  h.

1  Pet.  1.6.  tlio’  now  for  a  season,  if  need,  ye  are  in  A
r  HEDGE.

Job  1.  10.  hast  thou  not  made  an  h.  about  him  ?
,/0/. 15,  iy-  ttle  wa>’  °*  slothful  is  an  h.  of  thorn;
Led- 10.  8.  whoso  breaketh  a  li.  a  serpent  shall  bite
La.  5.  5.  I  will  take  away  the  h.  thereof
Lam.  2.4  6.  he  hath  violently  taken  away  his  h.
Ezek.  13. 5.  nor  made  up  the  h.  for  the  house  of  Israe
92.  30.  I  sought  a  man  that  should  make  up  the  A
M/c.  7.  4.  the  most  upright  sharper  than  a  thorn  A.
Mark  12. 1.  he  set  a  A.  about  it,  digged  for  wine-fat
TT  HEDGE.

llos.  2.  6.  behold,  I  w  ill  A.  up  thy  way  with  thorns
HEDGED.

Job  3.  23.  whose  W'ay  is  hid,  w  hom  God  hath  A.  in
10. 1 11.  thou  hast  A.  me  with  bones  and  sinews
Lam.  3.  7-  he  hath  A.  me  about,  I  canuot  get  out
226


Ezek.  13.  +  5.  ye  have  not  A.  up  the  hedge  for  Israel
M  at.  21 .33.  planted  a  vineyard ,  and  A.  it  round  about
HEDGES.

1  Chr.  4.  23.  those  that  dwelt  amongst  plants  and  A.
Psal.  80. 12.  hast  thou  broken  down  her  A.  ?  89.  40.
Jer.  49.  3.  lament  and  run  to  and  fro  by  the  A.
Nah.  3.  17.  as  grasshoppers  which  camp  in  the  A.
Luke  14.  23.  go  out  into  the  high-ways  and  A.

HEED.

2  Sam.  20.  10.  but  Amasa  took  no  A.  to  the  sword
2  Kings  10.  31.  Jehu  took  no  A.  to  walk  in  the  law
Psal.  119.  9.  by  taking  A.  according  to  thy  word
Prov.  17.  4.  a  wicked  doer  giveth  A.  to  false  lips
Eccl.  12.  9.  the  preacher  gave  good  A.  and  sought  out
Isa.  21.  7.  he  hearkened  diligently  with  much  A.
Jer.  18.  18.  let  us  not  give  A.  to  any  of  his  words

19.  give  A.  to  me,  O  Lord,  and  hearken  to  voice
Acts  3.  5.  he  gave  A.  unto  them,  expecting  to  receive

8.  6.  the  people  of  Samaria  gave  A.  to  Philip

10.  they  gave  A.  to  Simon  from  least  to  greatest
1  Tim.  1.  4.  neither  give  A.  to  fables,  Tit.  1.  14.

4.  l.some  giving  A.  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines
Jleb.  2.  1.  we  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  A.

See  Lakk.

HEEL,  S.

Gen.  3. 15.  it  bruise  thy  head,  thou  shalt  bruise  his  A.

25.  26.  his  hand  took  hold  on  Esau’s  A.  Ilos.  12.  3.

49.  17.  Dan  be  an  adder  that  biteth  the  horse  A.
Job  13.  27.  thou  settest  a  print  on  the  A.  of  my  feet

18.  9.  the  gin  shall  take  him  by  the  A.  robber
Ps.  41.  9.  hath  lift  up  his  A.  against  me,  John  13. 18.

49.  5.  when  iniquity  of  my  A.  compass  me  about
Jer.  13.  22.  for  thine  iniquity  are  thy  A.  made  bare

HEIFER.

Gen.  15.  9.  take  me  an  A.  of  three  years  old,  and  goat
Num.  19. 2.  bring  a  red  A.  )|  5.  burn  the  A.  in  his  sight
9-  gather  up  the  ashes  of  the  A.  and  lay  them  up
Deut.  21.  3.  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  take  an  A.

4.  shall  strike  off  A.  neck  ||  6.  wash  hands  over  the  A.
Judg.  14.  18.  if  ye  had  not  plowed  with  my  A.

1  Sam.  16.  2.  the  Lord  said,  take  an  A.  with  thee
Isa.  15.5.  cry  out  for  Moabas  an  A.  of  three  years  old
Jer.  46.  20.  Egypt  is  like  a  fair  A.  destruction  comes

48.  34.  uttered  their  voice  as  an  A.  of  three  years

50.  11.  because  ye  are  grewn  fat  as  an  A.  at  grass
Ilos.  4. 16.  for  Israel  slideth  back,  as  a  backsliding  A.

10.  11.  and  Ephraim  is  as  an  A.  that  is  taught
lleb.  9. 13.  the  ashes  of  an  A.  sprinkling  the  unclean

HEIGHT.

Gen.  6.  15.  the  A.  of  the  ark  shall  be  thirty  cubits
Exod.  25.  10.  shalt  make  an  ark  of  shittim-wood,  a
cubit  and  a  half  shall  be  A.  of  it,  2-3.  1  37. 1,  10.
27-  1.  h.  of  the  altar  shall  be  three  cubits,  38.  1.

18.  A.  of  the  court  shall  be  five  cubits,  38.  18.

30.  2.  A.  of  altar  of  incense  two  cubits,  37  -  25.

1  Sam.  16.  ?•  look  not  on  the  A.  of  his  stature
17-  4.  Goliath’s  A.  W'as  six  cubits  and  a  span

1  Kings  6.  2.  the  A.  of  house  of  God  was  thirty  cubits

20.  the  oracle  twenty  cubits  in  the  A.  thereof

26.  the  A.  of  the  one  cherub  was  ten  cubits

7.  2.  the  A.  of  the  house  of  Lebanon  thirty  cubits
16.  the  A.  of  the  one  chapiter  was  five  cubits
23.  the  A.  of  the  molten  sea  was  five  cubits

27.  the  A.  of  one  base  was  three  cubits

2  Kings  19.  23.  with  multitudes  of  chariots  I  am

__  come  up  to  the  A.  of  the  mountains,  Isa.  37.  24.
25.  17-  the  A.  of  one  pillar  was  eighteen  cubits
2  Chr.  33.  14.  and  raised  it  up  a  very  great  A.

Ezra  6.  3.  the  A.  of  God’s  house  sixty  cubits
Job  22.  12.  is  not  God  in  the  A.  ot  heaven?  and
behold  the  A.  of  the  stars,  how  high  they  are
Psal.  102.  19.  Lord  looked  from  A.  of  his  sanctuary
Prov.  25.  3.  the  heaven  for  A.  the  earth  for  depth
Isa.  7.  11-  ask  it  in  the  depth,  or  in  the  A.  above
Jer.  31. 12.  they  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  A.  of  Zion

49.  16.  O  thou  that  boldest  the  A.  of  the  hill

51.  53.  tho’  she  should  fortify  the  A.  of  her  strength
Ezek.  17.  23.  in  mountain  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  20.  40.

19.  11.  she  appeared  in  her  A.  with  her  branches
31.5.  therefore  his  A.  was  exalted  above  all  the  trees

10.  because  thou  hast  lifted  up  thyself  in  A.

14.  that  none  of  the  trees  exalt  themselves  for  A.
32.  5.  I  will  fill  the  valleys  with  thy  A.

Pan.  3. 1.  image  of  gold  whose  A.  was  sixty  cubits
4.  10.  I  saw  and  beheld  a  tree  whose  A.  was  great

11.  and  the  A.  thereof  reached  unto  heaven,  20.
Amos  2.  9.  whose  A.  was  like  the  A.  of  cedars
Pom.  8. 39.  nor  A.  nor  depth  shall  be  able  to  separate
Eph.  3.  18.  what  is  the  A.  of  the  love  of  Chri3t  ?
Rev.  21.  16.  the  breadth  and  A.  of  the  city  are  equal

HE1GPITS.

Job  o.  f  8.  which  treadeth  upon  the  A.  of  the  sea

11.  +  8.  it  is  the  A.  of  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do  ?
Psal.  95.  t  4.  the  A.  of  the  hills  are  his  also

148.  1.  praise  the  Lord,  praise  him  in  the  A.

Eccl.  10.  t  6.  folly  is  set  in  great  A.  rich  sit  low
Isa.  14. 14. 1  will  ascend  above  the  A.  of  the  clouds
33. 1 16.  he  shall  dwell  on  A.  his  place  of  defence
HEINOUS.

Job  31.  11.  for  this  is  an  A.  crime,  yea,  an  iniquity
HEIR,  S.

Gen.  15.  3.  and  lo,  one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  A.
4.  word  came,  saying,  this  shall  not  be  thine  A.

21.  10.  Ishmael  shall  not  be  A.  with  my  son  Isaac
Judg.  18.  +7.  there  was  no  A.  of  restraint  in  the  land
2  Sam.  14.  ~.  and  we  will  destroy  the  A.  also
Prov.  30.  23.  an  handmaid  that  is  A.  to  her  mistress
Jer.  49.  1.  hath  Israel  no  sons  ?  hath  he  no  A.  ?

2.  Israel  shall  be  A.  unto  them  that  were  his  A.
Mic.  1. 15.  yet  will  I  bring  an  A.  unto  thee,  O  inhab.
Mat.  21.  38.  this  is  the  A.  Mark  12.7.  Luke  20. 14.
Pom.  4.  13.  that  he  should  be  A.  of  the  world
14.  for  if  they  which  are  of  the  law  be  A.

8.  17.  if  children,  then  A.  A.  of  God,  and  joint  A.

with  Christ;  if  we  suffer  to  be  glorified
Gal.  3.  29.  ye  are  A.  according  to  the  promise
4.  1.  I  say,  that  the  A.  as  long  as  he  is  a  child
7.  if  a  son,  then  an  A.  of  God  through  Christ
30.  the  son  of  the  bond-woman  shall  not  be  A.
Eph.  3.  6.  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellow-A.

Tit.  3.  7.  A.  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life
Lleb.  1.  2.  whom  he  appointed  A.  of  all  tilings


Heb.  1.  14.  for  them  who  shall  be  A.  of  salvation

6.  17.  God  willing  to  shew  unto  the  A.  of  promis
11.7.  became  A.  of  the  righteousness  by  faith

9.  and  Jacob  A.  with  him  of  the  same  promise
Jam.  2.  5.  A.  of  the  kingdom  he  hath  promised
1  Pet.  3.  7.  as  A.  together  of  the  grace  of  life
HELD.

Gen.  48. 17.  Joseph  A.  up  his  father’s  hand
Exod.  17. 11.  when  Moses  A.  up  hand,  Isr.  prevailed
36.  12.  the  loops  A.  one  curtain  to  another
Judg.  7.  20.  and  A.  the  lamps  in  their  left-hands
16.  26.  Samsonsaid  unto  lad  that  A.  him  by  the  hanr
Path  3. 15.  when  she  A.  it,  hemeasured  six  measure!

1  Sam.  25.  36.  Nabal  A.  a  feast  in  his  house

2  ■''am.  18.  16.  for  Joab  A.  back  the  people

1  Kings  8.  65.  at  that  time  Solomon  A.  a  feast

1  Chron.  11.  + 10.  these  A.  strongly  with  David

2  Chron.  4.  5.  the  sea  A.  three  thousand  baths
Neh.  4.16.  the  other  half  of  them  A.  both  spears,  Cl

17.  and  with  the  other  hand  he  A.  a  weapon
Esth.  5.  2.  the  king  A.  out  the  golden  sceptre

7.  4.  if  we  had  been  sold,  I  had  A.  my  tongue
Job  23. 11.  my  foot  A.  his  steps,  his  way  have  1  kept!
Psal.  32.  9.  whose  mouth  must  be  A.  in  with  hit

94. 18.  my  foot  slippeth,  thy  mercy,  O  L.  A.  nje  up
Prov.  16.  t  5.  not  be  A.  innocent,  17.  t  5.  |  19.  1  ;>,  S
Cant.  3.  4.  1  A.  him,  and  would  not  let  him  go
7.  5.  hair  like  purple,  the  king  is  A.  in  the  galleries!
Jer.  50.  33.  that  took  them  captives,  A.  them  fast  |
Dan.  12.7-  when  he  A.  up  his  right-hand  andswarel
Mat.  12.  14.  A.  a  counsel  against  him,  Mark  15. 1
Luke  22.  63.  tire  men  that  A.  Jesus  mocked  him
Acts  3. 11.  the  same  man  that  was  healed,  A.  IV  toil
14.  4.  part  A.  with  the  Jews,  part  with  the  apostle;]
Pom.  7.  6.  that  being  dead  wherein  we  were  A.
Pev.  6.  9.  were  slain  for  the  testimony  which  they  A  I
HELD  peace.

Gen.  24.  21.  the  man  wondering  at  her,  A.  his  peace  S,
34.  5.  Jacob  A.  his  peace  until  they  w  ere  come
Lev.  10.  3. 1  will  be  glorified,  and  Aaron  A.  his  .genre;
Num.  30. 7-  her  husband  A.  his  peace  at  her,  li.  14.  (

1  Sam.  10.  27-  they  despised  Saul,  lie  A.  his  peace  J

2  Kings  18.  36.  but  people  A.  their  peace,  would  nol
Neh.  5.8.  they  A.  their  peace,  and  found  nothing  5
Job  29. 10.  nobles  A.  their  peace,  their  tongue  cleuvedjl
Psal.  39.  2.  1  was  dumb,  I  A.  my  peace  from  good  p
Isa.  36.  21.  they  A.  their  peace,  Mark  3.  4. 1  9.34.  I
57.  11.  have  not  1  A.  my  peace,  even  of  old  r

Mat.  26.  63.  but  Jesus  A.  his  peace
Luke  14.  4.  they  A.  their  peace,  20.  26.  Acts  11. 18. 1
Acts  15. 13.  they  A.  their  peace,  James  answered
HELL,

In  Hebrew,  Scheol.  This  word  most  commonly]
signifies  the  grave,  or  the  place  or  state  of  t/nl
dead.  Jacob  says,  Gen.  37  -  35.  1  will  go  downl
into  the  grave  unto  my  son,  mourning.  1  wilt]
die  with  grief,  1  will  never  leave  mourning  till  I
die.  So  in  Gen.  42.  38.  If  mischief  befall  Ben¬
jamin,  then  shall  ye  bring  down  my  grey  hairs
wdth  sorrow  to  the  grave.  You  will  make  me,
who  am  worn  away  already,  to  die  with  grief.  The
conspirators,  Korah,  Dathan,  and  A  biram,  were]
swallowed  up  in  the  earth,  and  descended  quick,
into  the  grave ;  they  were  buried  alive,  Num.  16.
30,  31.  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell;:
thou  wilt  not  suffer  my  body  to  putrefy  in  the
grave,  Psal.  16. 10.  which  is  prophetically  spoken
of  the  Messiah.  And  in  Psal.  55.  15.  Let  death
seize  upon  them,  and  let  them  go  down  quick1,
into  hell,  into  the  grave.  Jonah  says,  that  lie
cried  to  the  Lord  out  of  the  belly  of  hell ;  that  is,
out  of  the  belly  of  a  fish,  wherein  he  was  shut  up
as  in  the  grave,  Jonah  2.  2.  This  word  Scheol!
is  sometimes  put  for  hell,  the  place  where  the
wicked  or  the  damned  are  tormented  ;  as  in  Job
11.  8.  The  secrets  of  God's  providence  are  high
as  heaven,  and  deeper  than  hell.  And  in  Prov.!
15. 11.  Hell  and  destruction  are  before  the  Lord ;
the  place  and  state  of  the  damned  are  known  to:
God.  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  Psal.

9.  17.

As  the  happiness  of  heaven  is  expressed  in  Scrip¬
ture  under  the  idea  of  a  feast  or  wedding,  at
which  there  is  a  great  deal  of  light,  joy,  and  plea¬
sure  ;  so  hell,  in  the  New  Testament,  is  set  forth
by  such  representations  as  may  powerfully  in¬
struct  and  terrify  even  the  most  carnal  man.  No¬
thing  is  more  intolerably  painful  than  suffering
the  violence  of  fire  enraged  with  brimstone  ;  ana
hell  is  described  by  a  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,
Rev.  19.  20.  |  21.  8.  It  is  represented  as  a  dis¬
mally  dark  place,  where  there  is  nothing  but  grief \
sadness,  vexation,  rage,  despair,  and  gnashing
of  teeth,  like  one  excluded  or  shut  out,  during  the
obscurity  of  the  night,  and  severity  of  the  cold,
Mat.  8.  12.  The  wicked  in  hell  not  only  undergo:
the  punishment  of  sense,  but  also  that  of  loss,
which  is  a  separation  from  God,  a  privation  of
his  sight,  and  of  the  beatific  vision.  Add  to  these
the  eternity  of  their  misery,  which  above  all  other
considerations  makes  it  intolerable  :  Their  worm
dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  quenched,  Mark,
9.  48.

By  the  gates  of  hell,  Mat.  16.  18.  is  meant  the, ,
power  and  policy  if  the  devil  and  his  instruments.

I  he  sorrow  s  of  hell,  the  pains  of  hell ;  that  is,
deadly  or  killing  pains,  such  agonies  and  horrors
as  dying  persons  used  to  feel  within  themselves,  ot
such  sorrows  as  bring  to  the  brink  of  the  grave.
Psal.  18.  5.  I  116.  3.

Deut.  32.  22.  a  fire  shall  burn  unto  the  lowest  A.

2  Sam.  22.  6.  sorrows  of  A.  compassed  rne,  Ps.  18. 5.
Job  11.8.  deeper  than  A.  what  canst  thou  know  ?

26.  6.  A.  is  naked  before  him,  and  destruction
Psal.  0.  17-  the  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  A.

16.  10.  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  A  Acts'll.  27-
49.  + 15.  redeem  my  soul  from  power  of  A.  86. 13.
55. 15.  and  let  them  go  dowm  quick  into  A.

116.  3.  and  the  pains  of  A.  gat  hold  upon  me
139.  8.  if  1  make  my  bed  in  A.  thou  art  there
Prov.  5.  5.  her  feet  to  death,  her  steps  take  hold  on  A.
7.  27.  her  house  is  the  way  to  A.  going  down


H  EL


HEN


HER


,  0. 18.  that  her  guests  are  in  the  depths  of  A.

\  h.  and  destruction  are  before  the  Lord
;  lint  he  may  depart  from  A.  beneath
:  ».  and  shaft  deliver  his  soul  from  A.

-  o’ /t..  and  destruction  are  never  full

'  14.  therefore  A.  hath  enlarged  herself

'  ‘  ft.  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee  to  meet
i  vet"  thou  shatt  be  brought  down  to  A.

.  y  and  with  A.  are  we  at  agreement
i  your  agreement  with  It.  shall  not  stand
..  and  didst  debase  thyself  even  unto  A.

'  31.  Id.  when  l  cast  him  down  to  A.  with  them
"  thev  also  went  down  unto  A.  with  him
»  p  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of  A.

,  which  are  going  down  to  A.  with  weapons
'  0  2.  tlio’  they  dig  into  A.  thence  my  hand  take
Jl  :‘2. 2.  out  of  the  belly  of  A.  cried  I,' thou  heardest
i  ,r5.  who  enlargeth  his  desire  as  It.  is  as  death
r  5.  22.  say,  tool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  it.  tire
.  thy  whole  body  should  be  cast  into  It.  30.
i  g.  to  destroy  soul  anil  body  in  A.  Luke  12. 5.

X  Capernaum  brought  dow  n  to  h.  Luke  10.  15.

[i  8.  the  gates  of  It.  shall  not  prevail  against  it

l .  having  two  eyes,  to  be  cast  into  h.  Mark  0. 47-

>  ’5.  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of  A.

■  how  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  A.  ?

,i  16.  23.  in  A.  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  in  torments
Ho.  31.  that  his  soul  was  not  left  in  A.

”  15.  +  55-  O  A.  where  is  th}T  victory  ?
o  3.  6.  the  tongue  is  set  on  tire  of  A.

.  2.  4.  if  God  spared  not,  castangels  down  to  A.

>  p’l8.  and  1  have  the  keys  of  A.  and  of  death
■y  name  w  as  Death,  and  A.  followed  with  him

t  ,3.  death  and  A.  delivered  up  the  dead  in  them
"  death  and  A.  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire
HELM.

,  3.  4.  they  are  turned  about  with  a  small  A.
HELMET.

|n.  17.  5.  he  had  a  A.  of  brass  upon  his  head,  38.
jy,  17-  and  an  A.  of  salvation  upon  his  head
.  23.  24.  shall  set  against  the  shield  and  A.

10.  they  hanged  the  shield  and  A.  in  thee
).  alt  of  them  with  shield  and  A.

6. 17.  take  A.  of  salvation,  and  sword  of  Spirit
,-i.  5.  8.  and  for  an  A.  the  hope  of  salvation
HELMETS.

■on.  26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  spears  and  A.

(16.  4.  get  up  and  stand  forth  with  your  A.
HELP,  Substantive.

I  2. 18.  T  will  make  him  an  A.  meed  for  him
there  was  not  found  an  A.  meet  for  him
l .  18.  4.  God  of  my  father,  said  he,  was  my  A.

[}•.  33.7.  be  thou  an  It.  to  him  from  his  enemies
who  rideth  upon  the  heavens  in  thy  A.

C)  people,  saved  by  the  L.  the  shield  of  thy  A.

[  .  5.  23.  they  came  not  to  the  A.  of  the  Lord
m.  11.  9.  by' time  sun  be  hot,  ye  shal  l  have  A.

1  run.  20. 4.  .1  udah  gathered  to  ask  A.  of  the  Lord
l 13.  is  not  my  A”,  in  me  ?  is  wisdom  driven?

■  21.  lift  my  hand,  when  I  saw  my  A.  in  the  gate
1 . 3.  2.  say  of  my  soul,  there  is  no  A.  for  him

i  2.  the  Lord  send  thee  A.  from  the  sanctuary
< thou  hast  been  my  A.  leave  me  not,  O  God
:  20.  our  soul  waits  for  L.  he  is  our  It.  and  shield
M.take  hold  of  shield,  stand  up  for  mine  A.  44.  26.

-  17.  thou  art  my  A.  and  my  deliverer,  70.  5.

-  5.  praise  him  ter  the  A.  of  his  countenance

•  l.God  is  a  very  present  A.  in  time  of  trouble

1 11.  give  us  A.  for  vain  is  the  A.  of  man,  108. 12.

>  7.  because  thou  hast  been  my  A.  therefore
'  12.  O  my  God,  make  lmste  for  my  A.

!  19.  I  have  laid  It.  upon  one  that  is  mighty
1 17.  unless  the  Lord  had  been  my  A.  my  soul
.  9.  he  is  their  A.  and  their  shield,  10.  11.

.  1.  to  the  hills,  from  whence  cometh  my  A.
my  A.  cometh  from  Lord  which  made  heaven
.8.  our  A.  is  in  name  of  the  Lord,  who  made
.  3.  trust  not  in  man,  in  whom  there  is  no  A.
happy  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for  his  It.
i  10.  3.  to  whom  will  ye  flee  for  A.  ?  ami  where

■  6.  whither  we  flee  for  'It.  to  be  deliver,  from  king
S.nor  be  an  A.  nor  profit,  but  shame  and  reproach
1.  woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  A.
against  the  A.  of  them  that  work  iniquity

1  4.  17.  our  eyes  as  yet  failed  for  our  vain  A.

/  /.  11.  34.  they  shall  be  holpen  with  a  little  A.

1  .13.  9.  hast  destroyed  thys.  but  in  me  is  thine  A.

•  s  26.  22.  having  obtained  A.  of  God,  1  continue

HELP,  Verb.

( s.  49. 25.  by  the  G.  of  thy  father,  who  shal  1  A.  thee
j  </.  23. 5.1ying  under  his  burden,  wouldest  forbear
.  to  A.  him,  thou  shalt  surely  A.  him,  Dent.  22.  4.
t  it.  32.  38.  let  them  rise  and  A.  you,  and  be  your
>.  c  1. 14.  pass  before  your  brethren,  and  A.  them
4.  come  unto  me,  and  A.  me,  that  we  may  smite
come  up  to  us  quickly,  and  save  us,  and  A.  us
i.  lloram  king  ot  Gezef  came  up  to  A.  Lachish
'■  'in.  10. 11.  then  A.  me,  will  A.  thee,  1  Citron.  19. 12.
K  Syrians  feared  to  It.  Ammon,  1  C/trvn.  19. 19.
4.  woman  said,  A.  O  king,  2  Kings 6.  £6.

•  limn.  12.  17.  if  ye  be  come  unto  me  to  A.  me
l.  day  by  day  there  came  to  David  to  It.  him

•  -j.  Syrians  of  Damascus  came  to  It.  Hedarezer

■  17-  David  commanded  to  It.  Solomon  his  son

1  hr  on.  14. 11.  it  is  nothing  with  thee  to  A.  A.  us,  O
Ld.  our  G.  we  rest  on  thee,  and  in  thy  name  go
.  2.  shouldest  thou  A.  the  ungodly,  and  love  them
.9.  if  we  cry,  then  thou  wilt  hear  and  A.

.  8.  for  God  hath  power  to  A.  and  to  cast  down
.  13.  made  war  with  mighty  power  to  A.  the  king
.  16.  send  unto  the  kings  of  Assyria  to  A.  him
3.  the  gods  of  Syria  It.  them,  that  they  may  A.  me
.  31.  their  brethren  the  Levites  did  It.  them
.  3.  his  princes  and  his  mighty  men  did  A.  him
.  but  with  us  is  the  Lord  our  God,  to  It.  11s
ra\.  4.  let  the  men  of  his  place  A.  him  with  silver
22.  1  was  ashamed  to  require  horsemen  to  A.

'>  8.20.  neither  will  he  A.  the  evil  doers
'•  12.  1  delivered  him  that  had  none  to  A.  him
it/.  12.  1.  A.  Lord  li  22.  11.  for  there  is  none  to  A.

’•  19.  haste  thee  to  A.  me,  38.  22.  I  40.  13.  |  70.  1.

■  40.  Lord  shall  A.  them  (|  46.  5.  God  shall  A.  her


Ps.  59.  4.  awake  to  It.  me  ]|  79.  9.  It.  us,  O  G.  of  salv.
107. 12.  they  fell  there  was  none  to  A.  Isa.  63. 5.

109.  26.  A.  me,  O  Lord  my  God,  O  save  me
118. 7.  Lord  taketh  my  part  with  them  that  A.  me
119.  86.  A.  thou  me  ||  17.3.  let  thine  hand  A.  me
175.  let  my  soul  live,  and  let  thy  judgments  A.  me
Eccl.  4.  10.  for  he  hath  not  another  to  A.  him  up
Isa.  30. 7-  for  the  Egyptians  shall  A.  in  vain
41.  10.  fear  not,  1  will  A.  thee,  13,  14.  1  44.  2.

50.  7.  for  the  Lord  God  will  A.  me,  9-
Jer.  37.  7-  Pharaoh’s  army,  which  is  come  to  A.  you
Lam.  1.  7.  her  people  fell,  and  none  did  A.  her
Ezek.  12.  14.  1  will  scatter  all  about  him  to  A.  him
32.  21.  speak  out  of  hell  with  them  that  A.  him
Dan.  10. 13.  lo,  one  of  the  princes  came  to  A.  me

11.  45.  shall  come  to  his  end, and  none  shall  A.  him
Mat.  15.  25.  she  worshipped  him,  saying,  L.  A.  me
Mark  9.  22.  have  compassion  on  us,  and  A.  us

24.  Lord,  1  believe,  A.  thou  mine  unbelief
Luke  5. 7.  they  beckon,  that  they  should  come  and  A.
It).  40.  bid  her  therefore  that  she  A.  me
Acts  16.  9.  come  over  into  Macedonia,  and  A.  us
£1.  28.  the  Jews  crying  out,  men  of  Israel  A.

Phil.  4.3.  A.  those  women  which  laboured  with  me
Neb.  4.  16.  we  may  find  grace  to  A.  in  time  of  need
HELPED.

Exod.  2. 17.  but  Moses  stood  up  and  A.  them
1  Sam.  7.  12.  Ebenezer,  hitherto  hath  the  Ld.  A.  us
1  Kings  1.7.  and  they  following  Adonijah,  A.  him
20.  16.  the  thirty  and  two  kings  that  A.  him

1  Citron.  5.  20.  and  they  were  A.  against  them

12.  19.  but  they  It.  them  not,  for  the  lords  sent

21.  they  A.  David  against  the  band  of  the  rovers
15.  26.  when  God  A.  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark

2  Chr.  18.  31.  the  Lord  A.  .lehoshaphat,  and  moved
£0.  23.  every  one  A.  to  destroy  another

26.  7.  God  A.  him  against  the  Philistines
15.  for  he  was  marvellously  A.  till  lie  was  strong
28.  21.  but  the  king  of  Assyria  A.  him  not
Ezra  10.  15.  and  Shabbethai  the  Levite  A.  them
Est/i.  9.  3.  the  officers  of  the  king  A.  the  Jews
Job  26. 2.  how  hast  thou  A.  him  that  is  without  power
Ps.  £8.  7.  and  1  am  A.  ||  118.  13.  but  the  Ld.  A.  me
116. 6.  I  was  brought  low,  and  he  A.  me
Isa.  41.  6.  they  A.  every  one  his  neighbour
49.  8.  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  1  A.  thee
Zech.  1.  15.  and  they  A.  forward  the  affliction
Acts  18.  27.  who,  when  he  was  come,  A.  them  much
Rev.  12.  16.  the  earth  A.  the  woman,  and  opened
EIELPER.

2  Kings  14.  26.  nor  was  there  any  A.  for  Israel
Job  30. 13.  they  mar  my  path,  they  have  no  A.

Psal.  10.  14.  thou  art  the  A.  ot  the  fatherless

22.  f  11.  be  not  far  from  me,  for  there  is  not  a  A.

30.  10.  Lord,  be  thou  my  A.  ||  54.  4.  God  is  my  A.
72.  12.  he  shall  deliver  him  that  hath  no  A.

Jer.  47. 4.  cut  off  from  Tyrus  and  Zidon  every  A.
Rom.  16.  9-  salute  Urbane,  our  A.  in  Christ
Ileb.  13.  6.  the  L.  is  my  A.  I  will  not  fear  whatman
HELPERS.

1  C/tr.  12.  1.  among  the  mighty  men,  A.  of  the  war

18.  peace  be  to  thee,  and  peace  be  to  thine  It.

Job  9.  13.  the  proud  A.  do  stoop  under  him
Ezek.  30. 8.  when  all  her  A.  shall  be  destroyed
Nab.  3.  9.  Put  and  Lubim  were  thy  A.

Rom.  16.  3.  Priscilla  and  Aquila  my  A.  in  Christ

2  Cor.  1.24.  but  are  A.  of  your  joy  ;  by  faith  ye  stand

3  John  8.  that  we  might  be  fellow-A.  to  the  truth

HELPS.

Acts  27. 17.  they  used  A.  undergirding  the  ship
1  Cor.  12.  28.  gifts  of  healings,  A.  governments
HELPETH.

1  Chr.  12.  18.  peace  unto  thee,  for  thy  God  A.  thee
Isa.  31.  3.  both  he  that  A.  shall  fall,  he  that  is  holpen
Rom.  8.  26.  the  Spirit  also  A.  our  infirmities
1  Cor.  16. 16.  ye  submit  to  every  one  that  A.  with  us
HELPING.

Ezra  5.  2.  where  the  prophets  of  God  It.  them
Psal.  22. 1.  why  art  thou  so  far  from  A.  me  t
0  Cor.  1. 11.  ye  also  A.  together  by  prayer  for  us
H  ELVE.

Dent.  10.  5.  and  the  head  slippeth  from  the  A.
HEMLOCK.

Hos.  10.  4.  thus  judgment  springeth  up  as  A.  in  field
Amos  6. 12.  ye  turned  fruit  of  righteousness  into  A.
HEM,  S.

Exod.  28.  33.  upon  the  It.  of  it  thou  shalt  make  pome¬
granates  of  blue  and  purple,  34.  1  39.  24, 25,26.
Mat.  9.  20.  woman  touched  A.  of  his  garment,  14. 36.
HEN.

Mat.  23.  37.  as  a  A.  gathereth  chickens,  Luke  13. 34.
HENCE.

Gen.  37.  17.  the  man  said,  they  are  departed  It.

42.  15.  by  the  life  of  Phar.  ye  shall  not  go  forth  A.
50.  25.  carry  up  my  bones  from  A.  Exod.  13. 19.
Exod.  11.  1.  he  will  let  you  go  A.  thrust  you  out  A.
33. 1.  depart  and  go  up  A.  thou  and  the  people
15.  if  thy  presence  not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  A.
Dent.  9.  12.  arise,  get  thee  down  quickly  from  A.
Josh.  4.  3.  take  A.  out  of  Jordan  twelve  stones
Judg.  6. 18.  depart  not  A.  1  pray  thee,  until  I  come
Etith°.8.  neither  go  A.  but  abide  fast  by  my  maidens
1  Kings  17.  3.  get  thee  A.  Isa.  30.  22.  Mat.  4. 10.

Ps.  39.  13.  O  spare,  before  I  go  A.  and  be  no  more
Jer.  38. 10.  say  intr,  take  from  A.  thirty  men  with  thee
Zech.  6.7-  he  said,  get  you  A.  walk  to  and  fro
Mat.  17.  20.  shall  say,  remove  It.  to  yonder  place
Luke  4.  9.  if  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  down  from  A.

13.  31.  get  thee  out,  and  depart  A.  John  7 .  3.

16. 26.  they  which  would  pass  from  A.  to  you  cannot
John  2. 16.  take  things  It.  make  not  my  Father’s

14.  31.  arise,  let  us  go  A.  |j  18.  36.  my  kingd.  not  A.
20. 15.  sir,  if  thou  have  borne  him  A.  tell  me  where

Acts  1.  5.  baptized  with  Holy  G.  not  many  days  A.
22.  21.  1  will  send  thee  far  A.  unto  the  Gentiles
Jam.  4.  1.  come  they  not  A.  even  of  your  lusts  ?
HENCEFORTH.

Gen.  4. 12.  the  ground  not  A.  yield  thee  her  strength
Num.  18.  22.  neither  must  Israel  A.  come  nigh  taber .
Dent.  17.  16.  ye  shall  A.  return  no  more  that  way

19.  20.  shall  A.  commit  no  more  any  such  evil
Judg.  2. 21.  1  will  not  A.  drive  out  any  before  them


2  Kings  5. 17.  thy  serv.  will  A.  not  offer  to  other  gods
2  Citron.  16. 9.  from  A.  thou  shalt  have  wars
Psal.  125.  2.  so  is  Lord  about  his  people  from  It.

131.  3.  Israel  hope  in  the  Lord  from  A.  and  for  evei
Isa.  9.  7.  to  establish  it  with  justice  from  A.  forever
52.  1.  A.  there  shall  no  more  come  the  unclean
59.21.out  of  mouth  of  thy  seed’s  seed  A.  and  for  ever
Ezek.  36.  12.  thou  shalt  no  more  A.  bereave  them
jll/c.4.7.  the  Lord  shall  reign  in  mount  Zion  from  A.
Mat.  23. 39.  ye  shall  not  see  me  A.  till  ye  say
26.  29.  I  will  not  drink  A.  of  this  fruit  of  vine
Luke  1.  48.  A.  all  generations  shall  call  me  blessed
5.  10.  fear  not,  from  A.  thou  shalt  catch  men
12.  52.  A.  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house
John  14.  7.  A.  ve  know  him,  and  have  seen  him

15.  15.  A.  I  call  you  not  servants,  but  friends
Acts  4.  17.  they  speak  A.  to  no  man  in  this  name
18.6.  I  am  clean,  A.  I  will  go  unto  the  Gentiles
Rom.  6.  6.  that  A.  we  should  not  serve  sin
2  Cor.  5. 15.  should  not  A.  live  unto  themselves,  but  fo

16.  A.  know  we  no  man.  It.  know  we  him  no  more
Gal.  6.  17.  from  A.  let  no  man  trouble  me,  for  I  bear
Eph.  4. 14.  we  A.  be  no  more  childr.  tossed  to  and  fro

17.  that  ye  A.  walk  not  as  other  Gentiles  walk

2  Tim.  4.8.  A.  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  right.
Ileb.  10.  13.  A.  expecting  till  enemies  be  made
Rev.  14.13.  blessed  are  they  who  die  in  Lord,  from  A.

HENCEFORWARD.

Num.  15.  23.  and  A.  among  your  generations
Mat.  21.  19.  let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  A.  for  ever
HERALD.

Dan.  3. 4.  an  A.  cried  aloud ,  to  you  it  is  commanded
HERB.

Gen.  1. 11.  bring  forth  the  A.  yielding  seed,  12.

29.  I  have  given  you  every  A.  bearing  seed

2.  5.  made  every  A.  1|  3.  18.  thou  shalt  eat  the  A.

9.  3.  even  as  the  A.  1  have  given  you  all  things

Exod.  9.  22.  the  hail  smote  every  A.  of  the  field,  2o.
10. 12.  the  locusts  eat  every  A.  of  the  land,  15.

Dent.  32.  2.  as  the  small  rain  upon  the  tender  A.

2  Kings  19.  26.  were  as  the  green  A.  Isa.  37.  £7.

Job  8.  12.  flag  withereth  before  any  other  A.

38.  27.  to  cause  the  bud  of  the  tender  A.  to  spring
Psal.  37.  2.  for  they  shall  wither  as  the  green  A.

104.  14.  he  causeth  A.  to  grow  for  service  of  man
Isa.  66. 14.  your  bones  shall  flourish  like  an  A.
HERBS.

Exod.  12.  8.  and  with  bitter  A.  eat  it,  Num.  9.  11.
Deut.  11.  10.  and  wateredst  it  as  a  garden  ot  A.

1  Kings  21.  2.  that  l  may  have  it  for  a  garden  ot  A.

2  Kings  4.39.  one  went  into  the  field  to  gather  A.

Psal.  105.  35.  and  did  eat  up  all  the  A.  in  their  land
Prov.  15.  17.  better  is  a  dinner  of  A.  where  love  is

27.  25.  and  A.  of  the  mountains  are  gathered
Isa.  18.  4.  I  will  consider  like  a  clear  heat  upon  A.
26. 19.  for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  A.  and  earth
42. 15. 1  will  dry  up  all  their  A.  make  rivers  islands
Jer.  12.  4.  how  long  the  A.  of  every  field  wither  r
Mat.  13.  32.  is  greatest  among  all  A.  Mark 4.  32.
L.uke  11.  42.  for  ye  tithe  all  manner  ot  A.

Rom.  14.  2.  another  who  is  weak  eateth  A.

Ileb.  6. 7.  and  bringeth  forth  A.  meet  for  them
HERD,  S.

Gen.  18. 7.  Abraham  ran  to  the  A.  and  fetched  a  calf
32.  7.  Jacob  divided  his  A.  into  two  bands
47.  18.  my  lord  also  hath  our  A.  of  cattle
Exod.  10.  9.  with  our  flocks  and  A.  will  we  go
Leu.  1.  2.  ye  shall  bring  your  offering  ot  the  A.

3.  1.  if  ye  offer  it  of  A.  male  or  female,  Num.  15.  3.
27.  32.  concerning  the  tithe  of  the  A.  or  flock
Dent.  12.  21.  thou  shalt  kill  of  thy  A.  and  flock

15.  19.  the  firstling  males  that  come  otthy  A.

1  .Sam.  11.  5.  Saul  came  after  the  A.  out  of  the  field

2  Sam.  12.  4.  he  spared  to  take  of  his  A.  to  dress

1  Chr.  27.  29.  over  the  A.  in  Sharon,  A.  in  valleys
Isa.  65. 10.  Achor  a  place  for  the  A.  to  lie  down  in
Jer.  31.  12.  shall  flow  together  for  young  of  the  A.
Joel  1 .  18.  the  A.  ot  cattle  are  perplexed.no  pasture
Jonah  3.  7.  let  not  the  A.  nor  flock  taste  any  thing
Halt.  3. 17.  and  there  shall  be  no  A.  in  the  stalls
Mat. 8.  30.  A.  of  swine  feed.  Mark  5.11.  Luke  8.  32.
32.  whole  A.  ran  violently,  Mark  5. 13.  Luke  8. 33.
See  Flocks.

HERDMAN.

Amos  7.  14.  I  was  no  prophet,  but  I  was  an  A.
IIERDMEN.

Gen.  13. 7.  a  strife  between  the  A.  of  Abram  and  Lot

8.  let  there  be  no  strife  between  my  A.  and  thy  A.
26.  20.  the  A.  of  Gerar  did  strive  with  Isaac’s  A.

1  Sam.  HI.  7.  Doeg  chiefest  of  A.  belonged  to  Saul
Amos  1.  1.  who  was  among  the  A.  of  Tekoa
HERE.

Gen.  19. 12.  the  men  said,  hast  thou  A.  any  besides  J

15.  arise,  take  thy  two  daughters  which  are  A.

°1  23  now  therefore  swear  unto  me  A.  by  God

22!  1.  A.  1  am,  7-  H.  I  27-  L  1». 1  31.  11. 1  37-  13.

|  46.  2.  Exod.  3.  4.  1  Sam.  3.  4,  5,  6,  8,  16.
2  Sam.  1.  7.  I  15.  26.  Isa.  6.  8.

5.  abide  ye  A.  with  the  ass,  I  and  lad  will  go  yond.
24.  13.  behold.  1  stand  A.  by  the  well  ot  water

31.  37.  set  it  A.  before  my  brethren  that  they  may
40.  15.  and  A.  also  have  I  done  nothing  to  put  me
42.  3.3.  leave  one  of  your  brethren  A.  with  me

47.  23.  lo,  A.  is  seed  for  you,  ye  shall  sow  the  land
Exod.  24.  14.  tarry  ye  A.  for  us,  till  we  come  to  you
Num.  14.  40.  saving,  lo,  we  be  A.  and  will  go  up
22.  8.  lodee  A.  this  night,  I  will  bringyou  word,  19.
2.3.  1.  build  A.  seven  altars,  prepare  A.  oxen,  29.

32.  6.  shall  your  breth.  go  to  war,  and  vou  sit  A. '!

16.  we  will  build  sheep-folds  A.  for  our  cattje
Deut.  5.  3.  even  us,  who  are  all  of  us  A.  alive  this  day

12.  8.  after  all  the  things  we  do  A.  this  day
29.  15.  with  him  that  standeth  A.  that  is  not  It.
Josh.  18.  6.  that  I  may  cast  lots  for  you  A.  8.

Judg.  4. 20.  is  there  any  man  A.  I  thou  shalt  say,  no

18.  3.  and  what  hast  thou  A.  ?  ||  19.  9.  lodge  A.

19.  24.  behold,  It.  is  my  daughter,  a  maiden

20.  7.  give  A.  your  advice  and  counsel
Ruth  2.  8.  but  abide  A.  fast  by  my  maidens

4. 1.  unto  whom  he  said,  turn  aside,  sit  down  A.  2.
1  Sam.  1.  26.  I  am  the  woman  that  stood  by  thee  A

9.  11.  they  went  up  the  hill  and  said,  is  the  seer  A.


HER


H  E  R


H  1  D


1  Sam.  1C.  3.  behold,  //.  1  am,  22.  1C.  Isa.  58.  9.

14. 34.  slay  them  //.  and  eat,  and  sin  not  against  L.

16. 11.  Samuel  said  to  Jesse,  are  //.  all  thy  children

21.8.  is  there  not  h.  under  thine  hand  a  spear  ?

9.  it  is  h.  wrapped  in  a  doth,  none  save  that  //.

53.  3.  behold,  we  be  afraid  //.  in  Judah  ;  how  much
29.  3.  the  princes  said,  what  do  these  Hebrews  li.  ?

2  Sam.  ll.  12.  tarry  //.  to-day  ||  18.  30.  turn  aside  h.
20.  4.  be  thou  h.  present  ||  24.  22.  //.  be  oxen  _

1  Kings  2.  30.  and  he  said,  nay,  but  1  will  die  //.

18.8.  tell  thy  lord,  behold,  Elijah  is  h.  11.  14.

19.  9.  he  said,  what  doest  thou  //.  Elijah  i  13.

20.  40.  as  thy  servant  was  busy  h.  and  there
22. 7. is  there  not//,  aprophetof  L.  2  Kings 3. 11.

2  Kings 2.  2.  Elijah  said,  tari-y  //.  I  pray  thee,  6.

3.11. //.  is  Elisha  |1 7. 3.  why  sit  we  A.  until  we  die  ?
7.  4.  the  lepers  said,  it'  we  sit  still  //.  we  die  also

10.  23.  look  there  be  h.  none  of  the  servants  of  Lord

1  C 'hr.  29. 17.  with  joy  thy  people  present  //.  to  offer
Job  38.  11.  //.  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed
35.  that  lightnings  may  say  unto  thee,  //.  we  are
Psal.  132.  14.  this  is  my  rest,  //.  will  1  dwell
Isa.  21.  9.  behold,  //.  cometh  a  chariot  of  men
22. 16.  what  hast  thou  h.  ?  whom  hast  thou  h.  ?

28.  10.  //.  a  little,  and  there  a  little,  13.

52.  5.  now  therefore,  what  have  I  //.  ?  saith  Lord
Ezek.  8.  6.  the  house  of  Israel  committeth  h.  17.
Hos.  7.  9.  gray  hairs  are  //.  and  there  upon  him
Mat.  12. 41.  a  greater  than  Jonas  is  //.  Luke  11.  32.
42.  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  //.  Luke  11.  31.

14. 8.  give  me  h.  John  Baptist’s  head  in  a  charger

17.  we  have  //.  but  five  loaves,  and  two  fishes

16.  28.  there  be  some  standing  //.  Luke  9.  27.

17. 4.  Lord,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  //.  let  us  make  h.
24. 2.  shall  not  be  left  //.  one  stone  upon  another

23.  if  any  say  to  you,  lo,  //.  is  Chr.  Mark  13.  21.
26.  36.  sit  ye  //.  while  1  go  and  pray,  Mark  14.  32.
38.  tarry  ye  //.  and  watcli  with  me
28. 6.  he  is  not  h.  he  is  risen,  Mark  16. 6.  Luke  24. 6.
Mark  6.  3.  and  are  not  his  sisters  h.  with  us  ?

13.  1.  Master,  see  what  stones  and  buildings  are//.
Luke  4.  23.  what  heard  done,  do  //.  in  thy  country

9.  12.  for  we  are  h.  in  a  desert  place

17.  21.  neither  shall  they  say,  lo  //.  or  lo  there

23.  say  to  you,  see  //.  or  see  there,  go  not  after  th.
19.  20.  behold,  //.  is  thy  pound  which  I  have  kept
22.  3-5.  h.  are  two  swords,  he  said,  it  is  enough

24.  41.  he  said  unto  them,  have  ye  //.  any  meat?

Jo/m  6.  9.  there  is  a  lad  //.  which  hath  five  loaves
11. 21.  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  //.  my  brother,  32.
Acts  8.  36.  h.  is  water  ||  9. 10.  behold,  1  am  //.  Lord

9. 14.  and  //.  he  hath  authority  from  the  priests

10.  33.  are  we  all  h.  present  before  God,  to  hear

16.  28.  do  thyself  no  harm,  for  we  are  all  //.

24.  19.  who  ought  to  have  been  //.  before  thee

25.  24.  and  all  men  which  are  //.  present  with  us
Col.  4.  9.  make  known  unto  you  all  things  done  //.
Heb.  7.  8.  and  //.  men  that  die  receive  tithes

13. 14.  for  li.  have  we  no  continuing  city,  seek  one
Jam.  2.  3.  sit  //.  in  a  good  place,  or  sit  //.  under

1  Pet.  1. 17.  pass  time  of  your  sojourning  //.  in  fear
Rev.  13. 10.  //.  is  the  patience  of  the  saints,  14.  12.

18.  li.  is  wisdom ;  let  him  that  hath  understanding

14. 12.  li.  are  they  that  kept  the  commandments

17.  9.  and  //.  is  the  mind  which  hath  wisdom

See  Stand.

HEREAFTER.

Isa.  41.  23.  shew  the  things  that  are  to  come  h.
Ezek.  20.  39.  //.  also,  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me
Dan.  2.  29.  what  should  come  to  pass  //.  45.

Mat.  26.  64.  h.  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man  sitting
MarkW.  14.  no  man  eat  fruit  of  thee  //.  for  ever
Luke  2 2.  69.  //.  shall  Son  of  man  sit  on  right  hand
John  1.  51.  1  say,  //.  ye  shall  see  heaven  opened

13.  7-  thou  knowest  not  now,  thou  shalt  know  //.

14.  30.  li.  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you

1  Tim.  1 . 16.  pattern  to  them  which  //.  believe  on  him
Rev.  1.  19.  write  the  things  which  shall  be  //.

4.  1.  1  will  shew  thee  things  which  must  be  h.

9. 12.  and  behold,  there  come  two  woes  more  //.

U  EREBY.

Gen.  42. 15.  //.  ye  shall  be  proved,  by  life  of  Pharaoh
33.  h.  shall  1  know  that  ye  are  true  men
Hum.  16.  28.  h.  know  that  the  Lord  hath  sent  me
Josh.  3. 10.  h.  know  that  the  living  God  is  among
1  Cor.  4,  4.  1  know  nothing,  yet  am  I  not  h.  justified

1  John  2.  3.  h.  we  do  know  that  we  know  him

5.  keepeth  word,  //.  know  we  that  we  are  in  him

3.  16.  h.  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  because

19.  and  h.  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  truth

24.  and  //.  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us

4.  2.  h.  know  ye  the  Spirit  of  God,  every  spirit

6.  //.  know  we  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  of  error
13.  h.  know  we  that  we  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us

HEREIN.

Gen.  34. 22.  only  //.  will  the  men  consent  unto  us

2  Chr.  16.  9.  h.  thou  hast  done  foolishly,  therefore
John  4.  37.  h.  is  that  saying  true,  one  soweth

9.  30.  li.  is  a  marvellous  thing,  that  ye  know  not

15.  8.  h.  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  fruit
Acts  24. 16.  h.  do  I  exercise  myself  to  have  conscien.

2  Cor.  8. 10.  li.  I  give  my  advice,  for  this  expedient
k  John  4. 10.  li.  is  love  ||  17.  h.  is  love  made  perfect

HERESY.

This  word  comes  from  the  Greek,  ITaeresi.s,  and  sig¬
nifies  in  general ,  a  sect,  or  choice.  It  is  some¬
times  taken  in  a  good  sense,  as  in  Acts  26.  5.  After
the  most  strait est  sect,  or  heresy,  of  our  religion,
1  lived  a  Pharisee.  St.  Paul  commends  the  sect,
opinion,  and  way  of  the  Pharisees,  as  being  more
learned  and  strict,  and  as  coming  nearer  to
the  truth  in  many  things,  than  the  other  sect,
of  the  _  Saddueees.  But  most  commonly  it  is
taken  in  a  bad  sense,  for  some  fundamental  error
in  matters  of  religion,  adhered  to  with  obsti¬
nacy.  St.  Paul  enumerates  heresies  among  the
work -  if  the  flesh.  Gal.  5.  20.  And  St.  Peter
says  /here  shall  be  false  teachers  among  you,
who  privily  shall  bring  in  damnable  heresies,
even  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  2  Pet.
2.  1.  St.  Paul  says  in  1  Cor.  11.  19.  't  here  must
be  also  heresies  among  you,  that  they  which

22B


are  approved  may  be  made  manifest  among
you.  It  is  not  simply  and  absolutely  necessary
that  there  should  be  such  schisms  and  divisions  in
the  church,  but  God  has  decreed  to  permit  Satan
to  shew  his  malice,  and  men  to  discover  the
lusts  and  corruptions  of  their  nature,  by  causing
such  divisions,  that  the  sincerity  of  his  people
may  be  tried  and  known  by  their  stedfastness
to  the  truth,  and  opposition  to  these  corruptions .
Christianity  was  called  a  sect,  or  heresy,  by
Tertullus  and  the  profane  Jews,  Acts  24.  5,  14.
We  have  found  this  man  a  pestilent  fellow,  and
ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes.  This
I  confess,  says  St.  Paul,  that  after  the  way
which  they  call  heresy,  so  woiship  I  the  God
of  my  fathers.

As  to  the  Sects,  or  Heresies  among  the  Jews,  See
Sect.

From  the  very  beginning  of  the  Christian  church
there  were  very  dangerous  and  pernicious  here¬
sies  ;  for  the  most  essential  doctrines  of  religion
were  attacked,  such  as  the  divinity  of  Christ,
his  quality  of  Messiah,  the  reality  and  truth  of
his  incarnation,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the
liberty  of  Christians,  and  their  freedom  from  the
legal  ceremonies,  and  other  points  of  this  nature.
The  most  ancient  of  these  founders  of  heresy,  is
Simon  the  magician,  who  desired  to  buy  the  gift
of  God  with  money,  and  afterwards  set  himself  up
for  the  Messiah,  and  God  Almighty  the  Creator,
Acts  8.  9,  10.  The  false  apostles,  against  whom
St.  Paul  so  often  speaks  in  his  epistles,  had  a
mind  that  the  faithful  should  receive  circumci¬
sion,  and  subject  themselves  to  all  the  legal  ob¬
servances,  Gal.  5.  11.  |  6.  12.

The  N  icolaitanes  allowed  of  a  community  of  women,
and  without  any  scruple  committed  the  most  ig¬
nominious  actions,  and  followed  the  superstitions
of  heathenism .  It  is  said,  they  went  over  to  the
sect  of  the  Cainists,  who  acknowledged  a  power
superior  to  that  of  the  Creator.  St.  John  speaks
of  the  IS  icolaitanes,  as  a  sect  of  heretics  then
subsisting,  and  producing  great  disorders  in  the
churches  of  Asia,  Rev.  2.  6,  15.  At  the  same
time  there  were  false  Christs,  and  false  prophets,

1  John  2.  18,  22.  2  John  7.  St.  Paul  speaks  of
Hymeneus  and  Philetus,  who  departed  from  the
truth,  saying,  that  the  resurrection  is  already
past,  2  Tim.  2.  17,  18.  He  foretold  that  in  the
last  times  there  would  be  some  who  should  forsake
the  faith,  and  give  themselves  up  to  the  spirit  of
error,  and  the  doctrines  of  devils,  1  Tim.  4.  1.
St.  Peter  and  Jude  foretell  the  same  thing,

2  Pet.  2.  1.  Jude  18.  And  herein  they  only
copy  what  Jesus  Christ  himself  had  said  in  the
gospel,  Mat.  7.  15.  1 24.  24.  Beware  of  false
prophets,  which  come  to  you  in  sheep’s  cloth¬
ing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves.
For  there  shall  arise  false  Christs,  and  false
prophets,  and  shall  shew  great  signs  and  won¬
ders;  insomuch  that,  if  it  were  possible,  they
shall  deceive  the  very  elect.

Acts  24.  14.  after  the  way  which  they  call  //.

HERESIES.

1  Cor.  11.  19.  there  must  be  also  h.  among  you
Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh,  wrath,  strife,  h.

2  Pet.  2.  1.  who  privily  bring  in  damnable  //.

HERETIC.

Tit.  3. 10.  an  //.  after  the  second  admonition,  reie  <
HERETOFORE.

Exod.  4. 10.  I  am  not  eloquent,  neither  //.  nor  sine*

5.  7.  no  more  give  straw  to  make  brick  as  //.

Josh.  3.  4.  for  ye  have  not  passed  this  way  h.

Ruth  2. 11.  to  a  people  which  thou  knewest  not  h.

1  Sam.  4.  7-  there  hath  not  been  such  a  tiling  //.

2  Cor.  13.  2.  I  write  to  them  which  h.  have  sinned

HEREUNTO.

Eccl.  2.  25.  or  who  else  can  hasten  h.  more  than  I  ?
1  Pet.  2.  21.  for  even  //.  were  ye  called,  because
HEREWITH.

Ezek.  16.  29.  and  yet  thou  wast  not  satisfied  li.
Mai.  3. 10.  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house,
and  prove  me  now  li.  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts
HERITAGE.

Exod.  6.  8.  the  jand,  I  will  give  it  you  for  an  h.

Job  20.  29.  and  the  //.  appointed  by  God  for  him

27. 13.  the  li.  of  oppressors  which  they  shall  receive
Ps.  16.  6.  in  pleasant  places,  yea,  I  have  a  goodly  //.

61.  5.  give  me  the  //.  of  those  that  fear  thy  name
.94.  5.  they  break  thy  people,  they  afflict  thy  h.

111.  6.  he  may  give  them  the  //.  of  the  heathen
119.  111.  thy  testimonies  have  1  taken  as  an  //.

127-  3.  lo,  children  are  an  h.  of  the  Lord
135.  12.  and  gave  their  land  for  an  //.  136.  21,  22.
Isa.  54. 17.  this  is  the  //.  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord

58. 14.  I  will  feed  thee  with  the  //.  of  Jacob
Jer.  2.  7-  and  ye  made  mine  //.  an  abomination

3.  19.  how  shall  I  give  thee  a  goodly  h.f
12.  7-  I  have  left  mine  h.  ||  8.  mine  h.  is  as  a  lion
9.  mine  //.  is  unto  me  as  a  speckled  bird,  the  birds
■  15.  I  will  bring  them  again  every  man  to  his  h.

17.  4.  thou  shalt  discontinue  from  thine  h.  1  give
50.  11.  O  destroyers  of  mine  h.  because  grown  fat
Joel  2.  17-  and  give  not  thine  h.  to  reproach
3.  2.  I  will  plead  with  them  for  my  h.  Israel
Mic.  2.  2.  so  they  oppress  a  man  and  his  //.

7.  14.  feed  the  nock  of  thine  h.  with  thy  rod

18.  that  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  his  //.
Mai.  1.3.  L  laid  Esau’s  mountains  and  h.  waste
1  Pet.  5.  3.  neither  as  being  lords  over  God’s  //.
HERITAGES.

Isa.  49.  8.  to  cause  to  inherit  the  desolate  //.
HERODIANS.

See  Signification  on  Sect.

Mat.  22. 16.  they  sent  unto  him  their  disciples,  with
H.  saying,  we  know  thou  art  true,  Mark  12. 13.
Mark  3.  6.  the  Pharisees  took  counsel  with  the  H.

HERON.

Lev.  11. 19.  the  stork,  the  h.  unclean,  Deut.  14. 18.

Herself,  See  Self.

HER’S.

Job  39. 16.  ostrich  is  hardened  astho’  they  were  not//.


HEW.

Exod.  34. 1.  li.  thee  two  tables  of  stone,  Deut.  lo
Deut.  12.  3.  ye  shall  //.down  the  graven  images  I

19. 5.  when  a  man  goeth  with  neighbour  to  //.’woe
1  Kings  5.  6.  that  they  //.me  cedar-trees  out  of  Leli

18.  Solomon’s  and  Hiram’s  builders  did  h.  thei

1  Chr.  22.  2.  David  set  masons  to  //.  stones

2  Chr.  2.  2.  Solomon  told  80,000  to  //.  in  mountair
Jer.  6.  6.  //.  ye  down  trees  and  cast  a  mount  '
Dan.  4. 14.  he  cried  aloud,  //.  down  the  tree  2"

HEWED.

Exod.  34. 4.  he  h.  two  tables  like  the  first,  Deut.  lo.:

1  Sam.  11.  7.  Saul  //.  oxen  in  pieces,  and  sentther
15.  33.  and  Samuel  //.  Agag  in  pieces  in  Gilgal  |

1  Kings  5.  17.  //.  stones  to  lay  foundation  of  hous

6.  36.  with  three  rows  of  h  stones,  7.  12.

7.  9.  according  to  the  measures  of  h.  stones,  ll,

2  Kings  12.  12.  buy  //.  stone  to  repair  »he  breaches
Isa.  22.  16.  thou  hast  //.  thee  out  a  sepulchrt
Jer.  2.  13.  my  people  have  //.  them  out  cisterns
Hos.  6. 5.  therefore  have  1  //.  them  by  the  prophets

HEWER.

Deut.  29. 11.  from  h.  of  wood,  unto  drawer  of  wate
HEWERS.

Josh.  9.  21.  let  them  be  h.  of  wood  and  drawers,  2;
27.  Joshua  made  them  that  day  //.  of  wood

1  Kings  5. 15.  and  80,000 //.in  mountains,  2  Chr. 2.U

2  Kings  12.  12.  laid  out  money  to  masons  and  h.

1  Chron. 22. 15.  are  h.  with  thee  in  abundance

2  Chr.  2. 10.  1  will  give  to  thy  servants  the  h.

Jer.  46.  22.  shall  come  against  Egypt  as  //.of  wooi

HEWETH.

Isa.  10. 15.  shall  the  axe  boast  against  him  that  A.
22. 16.  as  he  that  //.  him  out  a  sepulchre  oft  high

44. 14.  he  h.  him  down  cedars,  and  taketh  cypres
HEWN.

Prov.  9.  1.  she  hath  //.  out  her  seven  pillars
Isa.  10.  33.  the  high  ones  of  stature  shall  be  h.  dow:
33.  9.  Leban.  is  ashamed,  and  h.  down,  Sharon  likl
51.  1.  look  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are  //.

Mat.  3.10.  h.  down  and  cast  into  fire, 7. 19.  Luke  3.g|
27.  60.  and  laid  it  in  a  sepulchre  which  he  had  h
out  in  the  rock,  Mark  15.  46.  Luke  23.  53
See  Stone.

HID.

Gen.  3.  8.  and  Adam  and  his  wife  h.  themselves
10.  afraid  because  I  was  naked,  and  I  //.  myself
35.  4.  Jacob  //.  them  under  the  oak  by  Shecherr.
Exod.  2. 2.  goodly  child,  she  h.  Moses  three  month
12.  Moses  slew  the  Egyptian,  and//,  him  in  sam
3.  6.  Moses  //.  his  face,  for  he  was  afraid  to  look
Josh.  2.  4.  Rahab  h.  the  spies  with  stalks  of  liax,  6
6. 17.  because  she  h.  the  messengers  we  sent,  25.

7-  21.  and  behold  they  are  h.  in  the  earth
10.  16.  the  five  kings  //.  themselves  in  a  cave
Jvdg.  9-  5.  yet  Jotham  was  left,  for  he  //.  himself
1  Sam.  3. 18.  Samuel  told  Eli  and  //.noth,  from  bin

10.  22.  Saul  li.  himself  ||  20.  24.  David  //.  himself

1  Kings  18.  4.  Obadiah  //.  the  prophets,  13.

2  Kings  4.  27*  and  the  Lord  hath  li.  it  from  me
6.  29.  I  said,  give  thy  son,  she  hath  h.  her  son

7. 8.  lepers  went  and  h.  it,  carried  thence,  and  //.  it

11.  2.  they  //.  him  and  his  nurse,  2  Chron.  22.11.

1  Chron.  21.  20.  Oman  and  four  sons  //.themselve
Job  3.  10.  nor  h.  sorrow  from  mine  eyes

10. 13.  these  things  hast  thou  //.  in  thine  heart
17. 4.  thou  hast  h.  their  heart  from  understands
23. 1 12.  I  have  //.  the  words  of  his  mouth

29.8.  the  young  men  saw  me  and  //.  themselves
Psal.  9. 15.  in  net  which  they  h.  their  own  foot  take!,

22.  24.  neither  hath  he  //.  his  face  from  him

35.  7.  without  cause  they  //.  for  me  their  net

8.  let  his  net  that  he  hath  //.  catch  himself
55.  12.  then  I  would  have  //.  myself  from  him
119.  11.  thy  word  have  I  //.  in  mine  heart

140. 5.  the  proud  have  //.  a  snare  for  me,  and  cord;
Isa.  28. 15.  under  falsehood  have  we  //.  ourselves

49.  2.  in  shadow  of  his  hand,  in  quiver  he  h.  me

50.  6.  I  h.  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting

53.  3.  and  we  //.  as  it  were  our  faces  from  him

54.  8.  in  a  little  wrath  I  //.  my  face  from  thee
57.  17.  1  h.  me  and  was  wroth,  and  he  went
59.  2.  and  your  sins  have  //.  his  face  from  you
64.7.  for  thou  hast  h.  thy  face  from  us

65.  16.  because  they  are  h.  from  mine  eyes
Jer.  lo.  5.  so  1  went  and  h.  it  by  Euphrates
7. 1  took  girdle  from  the  place  where  I  had  //.  i
18.  22.  for  they  have  //.  snares  for  my  feet

33. 5.  1  have  //.  my  face  from  this  city

36.  26.  to  take  them,  but  the  Lord  //.  them

43. 10.  will  set  his  throne  on  these  stones  I  have  //.
Ezek.  22. 26.  have  //.their  eyes  from  my  sabbaths

39.  23.  therefore  //.  I  my  face  from  them,  24.

Mat.  11. 25.  thou  hast  li.  from  the  wise,  Luke  10. 21
13.  33.  //.  in  three  measures  of  meal,  Luke  13.  21

25.  18.  but  he  went  and  h  his  lord’s  money
25.  1  went  and  //.  thy  talent  in  the  earth
Luke  1.  24.  Elizabeth  //.  herself  live  months
John  8. 59.  but  Jesus  //.  himself,  and  went  out
Rev.  6.  15.  bond-man  and  free-man  //  themselves
HID.

Deut.  33. 19.  they  shall  suck  of  treasures //.  in  sane
Josh.  7.22.  and  behold,  it  was  //.  in  his  tent
10.  17.  the  five  kings  are  found  h.  in  a  cave

2  Sam.  17.  9.  behold,  he  is  h.  now  in  some  pit

18.  13.  no  matter  h.  from  king,  1  Kings  10.  3

2  Chr  oh.  9.  2

2  Kings  11.3.  he  was  //.  in  house  of  G.  2  Chr.  22. 12
2  Chron.  22.  9.  Ahaziah  was  //.  in  Samaria
Job  3.  21.  and  dig  for  it  more  than  for  li.  treasures  ■■

23.  why  is  light  given  to  a  man  whose  way  is  h  :
6.  16.  stream  of  brooks,  wherein  the  snow  is  h.

28. 11.  the  tiling  that  is  //.  bringeth  he  forth
21.  seeing  it  is  //.  from  the  eyes  of  all  living

29.  t  10.  the  voice  of  the  nobles  was  //.

38.  30.  the  waters  are  h.  as  with  a  stone
Ps.  17.  14.  whose  belly  thou  fillest  with  //.  treasure

19.  6.  nothing  is//,  from  the  heat  thereof

Prov.  2. 4.  and  searches/  for  her  as  for  //.  treasures
Isa.  40.  27.  why  sayest,  my  way  is  //.  from  the  Ld
42.  22.  and  they  are  //.  in  prison-houses
Jer.  16.  17.  nor  their  iniquity  //.  from  mine  eyes


HTI)


H  I  G


HIG


1  32.  +  1*.  and  there  is  nothin"  /(.  from  thee
1  13. 12.  sin  of  Ephraim  bound  up,  his  sin  is/(.

,  in  26.  there  is  nothing  A.  tliat  shall  not  be
known,  Mark  4.  22.  Luke  B.  17 -  I  12.  2.
leO.  45.  this  saying  was  li.  trotn  them,  18.  34.

42.  but  now  they  are  h.  from  thine  eyes
.  3.  9.  from  the  beginning  hath  been  h.  in  God
fi'j.Vg.  mystery  which  hath  been  //.  from  ayes
"in  whom  are  h.  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom
>’  and  your  life  is  h.  with  Christ  in  God
i  ll  03.  bv  faith  Moses  was  /(.three  months
V  Be  Hll).

<  4.  14.  hast  driven  me,  from  thy  face  shall  1

be  h.

1  4. 13.  thing  be  h.  from  the  assembly,  5.  3,  4.

■  5  13.  and  it  be  h.  from  the  eyes  of  herhusb.

5*  oj .  shall  be  h.  from  the  scourge  of  the  tongue
<;6;  darkness  shall  be  h.  in  his  secret  places
]  29*.  14.  the  understanding  of  prudent  men  be  h.

]  *13  14.  repentance  shall  be  /».  from  mine  eyes
.  \s  9.  3.  and  though  they  be  h.  from  my  sight
t(>  3,  11.  thou  shalt  be  drunken,  thou  shalt  be  h.
~'iK  o  3.  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  It.  in  the  day
r  4.  3.  if  our  gospel  be  h.  it  is  hid  to  the  lost
Not  be  H 1 D.

".  5.  14.  a  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill  can  not  be  h.

*'  "/-7.  24.  entered  an  house,  but  he  could  not  be  A.
i  5  25.  they  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  h.
Not  II1D.

j  15.  18.  told  from  their  fathers,  and  not  h.  it
I  /.  32.  5.  and  mine  iniquity  have  1  not  h.

9.  and  my  groaning  is  not  h.  from  thee

10.  1  have  7 wt  h.  thy  righteousness  within
5.  and  my  sins  are  not  A.  from  thee

>.  15.  my  substance  was  not  h.  when  I  was  made
_  16.  1?.  my  eyes  upon  their  ways,  they  are  not  h.

‘  rom  my  face,  neither  is  iniq.  hid  from  my  eyes
j!f.  5.3.  l'know  Ephrairn,  Israel  is  not  h.  from  me
e  8  47 .  woman  saw  that  she  was  not  h.  she  came
HIDDEN.

j  d.  9.  +  32.  for  the  wheat  and  the  rye  w  ere  A.
j .  5. 2.  if  it  be  h.  from  him,  he  shall  be  unclean
,  it.  39.  11.  it  is  not  h.  from  thee,  nor  is  it  afar  off
.  3.  16.  as  an  h.  untimely  birth,  L  had  not  been

20.  the  number  of  years  is  h.  to  the  oppressor
1 10.  the  snare  is  /(.for  him  in  the  ground
1.  seeing  times  are  not  h.  from  thee
A.  51.  6.  in  /(.  part  shalt  make  me  know'  wisdom
iip.  28.  12.  when  the  w  icked  rise,  a  man  is  h.

.  45.  3.  1  will  give  thee  /(.  riches  of  secret  places
6. 1  have  shewed  thee  new  things,  h.  things
..  33.  t  3.  and  1  will  shew  thee  h.  things
,<d.  6.  how  are  his  h.  things  sought  up  !

.  /(.  ll.  +  16.  shepherd  not  visit  those  who  be  h.

:s  26.  26.  none  of  these  things  are  h.  from  him
1  pr.  2.7.  even  the  /(.wisdom  which  God  ordained
5.  will  bring  to  light  the  h.  things  of  darkness
•or.  4. 2.  have  renounced  h.  things  of  dishonesty
:  }et.  3.  4.  but  let  it  be  the  h.  man  of  the  heart
L.  2.  17. 1  will  give  to  eat  of  the  h.  manna
HIDDEN  ones.

'il.  83.  3.  they  consulted  against  thy  h.  ones
HIDE,  Substantive.

k  8. 17.  his  /(.  and  flesh  he  burnt  with  fire,  9.11.
HIDE

nifies,  [1]  j».i  conceal ,  or  keep  any  thing  from
he  sight  and  knowledge  of  others.  1  Sam.  20.  2.
Vhy  should  my  father  lade  this  thing  from  me  ?
f? en .  18.  17.  Shall  1  hide  from  Abraham  that
king  which  I  do  ?  1  will  not,  I  cannot  hide  it  ;

it  is  against  the  laws  of  friendship  to  conceal  my
ecrets  from  him.  [2J  Not  to  confess  one's  sins,
r  to  excuse  and  extenuate  them.  Psal.  32.  5.1
acknowledged  my  sin  unto  thee,  and  mine  im-
juity  have  I  not  hid.  And  in  Prov.  28.  13;  He
hat  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper.  That
'oes  not  confess  them  to  God,  and  men  too,  when
ccasion  requires  it :  that  being  convinced,  or
admonished  of  his  sms,  either  justifieth,  or  de-
neth,  or  excuseth  them.  [3]  To  cover  sin  by  free
\ardon  and  forgiveness.  Psal.  51.  9.  Hide  thy
ace  from  my  sins  ;  look  not  upon  them  with  an
ye  of  revenge,  hut  forget  and  forgive  them.  [4.
I'o  protect  and  keep  safe.  Psal.  27-  5.  In  the
ime  of  trouble  he  shall  hide  me  in  his  pavilion.
The  saints  are  called  the  hidden  ones.  Psal.
83.  3.  They  have  consulted  against  thy  hidden
ones  ;  against  thy  people,  whom  thou  hidest  as  a
precious  treasure,  and  protectest  from  the  rage
f  their  enemies.  [5]  To  put  oneself  under  the
Protection  of  the  Almighty  hy  faith,  prayer,  and
repentance.  Prov.  22.  3.  lhe  prudent  man
iforeseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  himself.  Thus
the  godly  hide  themselves  under  the  wings  of  God's
promises.

he  Psalmist  says,  I  have  not  hid  thy  righteous¬
ness  within  my  heart,  Psal.  40.  10.  that  is,  1  have
not  smothered,  or  shut  it  up  there,  but  spread  it
abroad  for  thy  glory,  and  the  good  of  the  world.
Our  first  parents  hid  themselves  from  the  presence
<of  God,  after  they  had  eaten  the  forbidden  fruit,
being  Jilted  with  shame  and  conscience  of  their
atilt,  and  dread  of  judgment,  Gen.  3.  8.  The
Psalmist  prays.  That  God  would  not  hide  him¬
self  from  his  supplication,  Psal.  55.  1.  that  is,
that  he  would  not  turn  away  his  face  and  ear,  as
one  resolved  not  to  hear  nor  help ;  but  that  he
would  be  pleased  to  hear  him,  to  look  favourably
upon  him.  It  is  spoken  after  the  manner  of  men,
who  show  their  aversion  and  estrangement,  by
hiding  their  face,  hy  turning  from  any  one.  Jn
Psal.  119.  19.  David  prays  to  God,  not  to  hide
his  commandments  from  him  ;  to  discover  to  him
the  sense  and  meaning  of  them.

■en.  18. 17.  shall  I  h.  from  Abraham  what  I  do?

17. 18.  we  will  not  h.  it  from  my  lord,  how  that
rod.  2.  3.  and  when  she  could  not  longer  //.  him
■ev.  20  4.  any  ways  h.  their  eyes  from  the  man
leut.  22. 1.  go  astray,  and  h.  thyself  from  them,  4.
3.  with  all  lost  things,  thou  mayest  not  //.  thyself
osh.  2. 16.  and  h.  yourselves  there  three  (lays
'.  19.  tell  what  thou  hast  done,  /(.  it  not  from  me


Judg.  ft.  11.  to  /(.  the  wheat  from  the  Midianites
1.  'Jam  .3. 17.  /(.  it  not  from  me,  if  thou  A.  2  Sam. 14. 18.

19.  2.  abide  in  a  secret  place,  and  h.  thyself

20.  2.  why  should  my  father  h.  this  thing  from  me  ?

5.  let  me  go,  that  1  may  /1.  myself  in  the  field
19.  come  to  the  place  where  thou  didst  h.  thyself

1  Kings  17.  3.  and  A.  thyself  by  the  brook  Cherith
22.  25.  into  an  inner  chamber  to  h.  2  C 'hr.  18.  24.

Job  13.  20.  then  will  1  not  h.  myself  from  thee
14. 13.  O  that  thou  wouldest  h.  mein  the  grave
20.  12.  though  he  A.  it  under  his  tongue

33.  17.  from  his  purpose,  and  h.  pride  from  man
40.  13.  /(.  them  in  the  dust  together,  and  bind
Psal.  17.  8.  h.  me  under  the  shadow  of  thy  wings
27.5.  time  of  trouble  he  shall  /(.mein  his  pavilion,

in  secret  of  his  tabernacle  shall  he  h.  me

30.  7.  thou  didst  h.  thy  face  and  1  was  troubled
31.20.  thou  shalt /(.  them  in  secret  ot  thy  presence
55.  1.  and  h.  not  thyself  from  my  supplication
64.  2.  /(.  me  from  the  secret  counsel  or  the  wicked
78.  4.  we.  will  not  h.  them  from  their  children
89.  46.  how  long,  O  Lord,  wilt  thou  h.  thyself  ?

119.  19.  /(.  not  thy  commandments  from  me

143.  9.  deliver  me,  O  Lord,  1  tiee  to  thee  to  h.  me
Prov.  2. 1.  and  h.  my  commandments  with  thee
Isa.  1.15.  1  will  /(.  my  eyes  from  you,  I  will  not  hear

2.  10.  and  h.  thee  in  the  dust,  for  fear  ot  the  Lord

3.  9.  they  h.  nottheii  sin  ||  16.  3.  h.  the  outcasts
26.  20.  /(.  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment
29. 15.  woe  to  them  that  seek  deep  to  h.  their  conns.
58.  7.  that  thou  h.  not  thyself  from  thine  own  flesh

Jer.  13.  4.  and  /(.  it  there  in  a  hole  of  the  rock

6. ' girdle  which  I  commanded  thee  to/(.  there
36.  19.  go,  h.  thee,  thou,  and  Jeremiah,  and  let

38.  14.  I  will  ask  thee  a  thing,  h.  nothing  from  me
25.  /(.  it  not  from  us  ||  43.  9.  h.  them  in  the  clay

Lam.  3.  56.  h.  not  thine  ear  at  my  breathing,  my  cry
Ezek.  28.  3.  there  is  no  secret  they  can  h.  from  thee

31.  8.  cedars  in  garden  of  God  could  not  h.  him

39.  29.  neither  will  1  h.  my  face  any  more  from  th.
Jam.  5.  20.  and  shall  /(..  a  multitude  of  sins

Lev.  6.  16.  h.  us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth
See  Lace.

HIDE  himself.  .

1  Sam.  23. 19.  doth  not  David  h.  himself  ?  26.  1.

Jer.  2.3. 24.  can  any  h.  himself  in  secret  places  ?

49.  10.  and  he  shall  not.  be  able  to  h.  himself
John  12.  36.  and  Jesus  did  h.  himself  from  them
HIDE  themselves.

Dent.  7.  20.  till  they  that  A.  themselves  he  destroyed

1  Sam.  13.  6.  the  people  did  h.  themselves  in  caves

2  Kings  7.  12.  Syrians  gone  to  h.  themselves  in  field
Job  24.  4.  the  poor  of  the  earth  h.  themselves

34.  22.  where  workersof  iniquity  may  h.  themselves
Psal.  56.  6.  they  h.  themselves,  they  mark  my  steps
Prov.  28. 28.  when  the  wicked  rise,  men  h.  themselves
Dan.  10.  7.  so  that  they  fled  to  h.  themselves
Amos  9.  3.  tho’  they  h.  themselves  in  top  of  Carmel

HIDEST.

Job  13.  24.  why  h.  thy  face  ?  Psal.  44.  24. 1  88.  14.
Psal.  10. 1.  why  /(.  thou  thyself  in  times  ot  trouble?
104.  29.  thou  A.  thy  face,  they  are  troubled
Isa.  45.  15.  verily  thou  art  a  God  that  h.  thyself
HIDETH.

1  Sam.  23.  23.  find  the  lurking  places  where  he/(.
Job  23.  9.  he  /(.  himself  on  the  right  hand,  that
34.  29.  when  he  h.  his  face,  who  can  behold  him  ?
42.3.  who  is  he  that  /(.  counsel  without  knowledge
Psal.  10. 11.  he  h.  his  face,  he  will  never  see  it
139.  12.  yea,  the  darkness  h.  not  from  thee
Prov.  10.  18.  he  that  h.  hatred  with  lying  lips
19.  24.  the  slothful  h.  his  hand  in  his  bosom,  26.15.
22.  .3.  a  prudent  man  foreseeth  and  h.  himself,  27 .12.

27.  16.  whosoever  A.  her,  /(.  the  wind

28.  27.  lie  that  h.  his  eyesshall  have  many  a  curse
Isa.  8.  17.  that  h.  his  face  from  the  house  ot  Jacob
Mat.  13.  44.  which  when  a  man  hath  found,  he  h.

HIDING..

Job  31.  33.  by  h.  mine  iniquity  in  my  bosom
Psal.  32.  7.  thou  art  my  h.  place,  119.  114.

Isa.  28. 17.  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  /(.  place
32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  as  an  h.  place  trom  the  wind
Ilab.  3.  4.  and  there  was  the  h.  of  his  pow  er
HIGH.

High  places,  in  Hebrew,  Bamoth.  7 hey  are  often
spoken  of  in  Scripture,  and.  the  prophets  upbraid
the  Israelites  for  nothing  with  so  much  zeal  as  for
worshipping  upon  the  high  places.  The  destroying
of  these  high  places  is  a  commendation  given  but
to  few  princes  in  the  scripture  ;  and  many  oj  them,
though  otherwise  zealous  for  the  observance  oj  the
law,  had  not  the  courage  tc  ruin  these  eminences,
and  prevent  the  people  from  sacrificing  upon  them.
While  the  temple  was  not  built,  there  was  nothing
in  high  places  expressly  contrary  to  the  Jaw,  pro¬
vided  God  only  was  adored  there,  and  that  no  in¬
cense  or  victims  -were  offered  to  idols.  Under  the
Judges  they  seem  to  have  been  tolerated ;  arid
Samuel  offered  sacrifices  in  several  places  be¬
sides  the  tabernacle,  where  the  ark  was  not  pre¬
sent.  Even  in  David’s  time,  they  sacrificed  to
the  Lord  at  Shiloh,  Jerusalem,  and  Gibeon.  But
after  that  the  temple  was  built,  and  a  place  pre¬
pared  Jot  the  fixed  settlement  of  the  ark,  it  was  no
more  allowed  of  to  sacrifice  cut  (/  Jerusalem.
Solomon,  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  went  to
Gibeon  to  sacrifice  there,  1  Kings  3.  4.  But  from
that  time  we  see  no  lawful  sacrifices  offered  out  of
the  temple.

Dr.  Prideaux  thinks  it  probable  that  the  Proseu-
chfe,  which  he  says  were  open  courts,  built  like
those  in  which  the  people  prayed  at  the  tabernacle,
and  at  the  temple,  and  in  one  of  which  our  Saviour
is  said  to  have  continued  all  night  in  prayer  to
God,  Luke  6.  12.  were  the  same  which  in  the  Old
Testament  are  called  high  places.  And  he  says,
that  he  is  confirmed  in  this  opinion,  in  that  the
Proseuchas  had  groves  in  or  about  them,  in  the
same  manner  as  the  high  places  had.  Connect.
Part  i.  Book  6.

Gen.  29.7.  and  lie  said,  lo,  it  is  yet  h.  day
£jc(/.14.8.  Israel  went  out  with  A.  hand.  Bum.  33. 3.


Num.  11.  31.  brought  quails  as  it  were  two  cubits  h.
Deut.  3.  5.  the  cities  w  ere  fenced  with  h.  walls
12.  2.  served  their  gods  on  the  h.  mountains
26.  19.  and  to  make  thee  /(.  above  all  nations
28.  43.  the  stranger  shall  get  up  above  thee  very  h.
52.  till  thy  h.  and  fenced  walls  come  down

32.  27.  lest  they  should  say,  our  hand  is  h.

1  Kings  9.  8.  at  this  house  which  is  /(.  every  one  hiss

1  G’/ir.  17.17.  to  the  estate  of  a  man  of  A.  degree

2  Chr.  7. 21.  this  house  is /(.shall  he  an  astonishment
EstA.  5. 14.  a  gallows  be  made  of  titty  cubits  h.  7-  9.
Job  11. 8.  it  is  as  A.  as  heaven,  what  canst  thou  do '

21.  22.  seeing  he  judgeth  those  that  are  h.

22.  12.  and  behold  the  stars,  how  h.  they  are
.‘58.  15.  and  the  A.  arm  shall  be  broken

41.  34.  he  beholdeth  all  h.  things,  he  is  a  king
Psal.  18.  27.  but  thou  wilt  bring  down  A.  looks
49.  2.  give  ear,  both  low  and  A.  rich  and  poor
62.  9.  and  men  of  A.  degree  are  a  lie
71.  19'.  thy  righteousness  also,  O  God,  is  very  h.

78.  69.  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  h.  palaces

89. 13.  strong  is  thy  hand,  h.  is  thy  right  hand
97.  9.  thou,  Lord,  art  h.  above  earth,  99. 2.  1  113.  4.
101.  5.  him  that  hath  an  A.  look  and  proud  heart
103.  11.  for  as  the  heaven  is  h.  above  the  earth
131.  1.  nor  do  I  exercise  in  things  too  h.  for  me
138.  6.  though  the  Lord  be  A.  yet  hath  he  respect
1.39.  6.  such  knowledge,  it  is  h.  cannot  attain  to  it

149.  6.  let  the  h.  praises  of  God  be  in  their  mouth

150.  5.  praise  him  on  h.  sounding  cymbals
Prov.  18.  11.  and  as  an  A.  wall  in  his  own  conceit

21.  4.  an  h.  look  and  a  proud  heart,  is  sin
24.  7.  wisdom  is  too  h.  for  a  fool,  he  openeth  not
Eccl.  12.  5.  when  shall  be  afraid  ot  that  which  is  h.
Isa.  2. 13.  day  of  the  Lord  on  all  cedars  that  are  /(.
14.  and  upon  all  the  A.  mountains  and  hills

6. 1.  the  Lord  sitting  on  a  throne  h.  and  lifted  up

10. 12.  I  will  punish  the  glory  of  His  h.  looks

33.  the  A.  ones  of  stature  shall  be  hewn  down
24  21.  punish  the  host  of  the  h.  ones  that  are  on  h.

25. 12.  the  fortress  of  h.  fort  shall  he  bring  down

30.  13.  as  a  breach  swelling  out  in  an  h.  wall

52. 13.  behold  my  servant  shall  be  very  h.

57. 15.  for  thus  saith  the  A.  and  lotty  One

Jer.  17.  12.  a  glorious  A.  throne  trom  the  beginning

31.  21.  set  up  way -marks,  make  thee  h.  heaps

49. 16.  though  thou  make  thy  nest  h.  as  the  eagle
51.  58.  her  It.  gates  shall  be  burnt  with  tire
Ezek.  1.  18.  as  for  their  rings  they  w  ere  so  h.

17.  24.  that  I  have  brought  down  the  h.  tree
21.  26.  exalt  the  low,  and  abase  him  that  is  h.

31.  3.  behold  the  Assyrian  was  of  h.  stature

34.  14.  I  w  ill  feed  them  on  the  h.  mountains
Dan.  8.  3.  the  tw'O  horns  were  h.  one  was  higher
Obad.  3.  whose  habitation  is  h.  tliat.  saith  in  his  heart
Zeph.  1. 16.  a  day  of  alarm  against  the  h.  towers  _
John  19.  31.  for  that  sabbath  day  w'as  an  /(.  day
Acts  13. 17.  with  an  h.  arm  brought  he  them  out
Rom.  12. 16.  mind  not  h.  things  ||  13. 11.  it  is  A.  time
2  Cor.  10. 5.  casting  down  every  h.  thing  that  exalts
Phil.  3. 14.  for  the  prize  of  the  A.  calling  ot  God
Rev.  21. 12.  holy  Jerusalem  had  a  w'all  great  and  h.

See  Gate,  God,  Hill,  Hills.

Most  HIGH.

Num.  24. 16.  and  knew  thcknowledge  of  the  most  11.
Deut.  32.8.  when  the  most  H.  divided  to  the  nations
2  Sam.  22. 14.  when  the  most  II.  uttered  his  voice
Psal.  7. 17.  I  will  praise  the  Lord,  and  sing  praise
to  the  name  of  the  Lord  most  H.  9. 2. 1  92. 1.
21.7  thro’  mercy  of  the  most  11.  shall  not  be  moved
46. 4.  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle  ot  the  most  II.
47.  2.  the  Lord  most  II.  is  terrible,  a  great  king

50.14.  offer  to  G  od ,  and  pay  thy  vows  to  the  most  H .
56.  2.  that  fight  against  me,  O  thou  most  H.

57  2  1  will  cry  unto  God  most  II.  unto  God  that
7.3!  11.  and  is  there  knowledge  in  the  most  II.?

77. 10.  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  most  11.

78. 17.  by  provoking  the  most  11.  in  wilderness,  56.
82.  6.  all  of  you  are  the  children  ot  the  most  II.

83. 18.  that  thou  art  most  II.  over  all  the  earth
gi,  l.  dw’elleth  in  the  secret  place  ot  the  most  U.

9.  thou  hast  made  the  most  11.  thy  habitation
92. 8.  but  thou,  Lord,  art  most  II.  for  evermore
107. 11.  contemned  the  counsel  ot  the  most  H.

Isa.  14. 14. 1  will  ascend,  1  will  he  like  the  most  II.
Lam.  3.  35.  turn  aside  before  the  face  of  the  most  II.

38.  out  of  mouth  of  most  II.  proceedeth  not  evil
Dan  A.  17.  that  the  most  II.  ruleth  in  the  kingdom

24.  and  this  is  the  decree  of  the  most  H.

25.  that  the  most  II.  rules  in  kingdom  ot  men,  32.
34.  and  I  blessed  the  most  H.  and  1  praised  him

7.  18.  the  saints  of  most  II.  shall  take  the  kingdom
22.  judgment  was  given  to  the  saints  of  most  11.
25.  shall  speak  great  words  against  the  most  II.
07.  to  the  people  of  the  saints  ot  the  most  II.
Hos.  7.  16.  they  return,  but  not  to  the  most  H.

11.  7.  though  they  called  them  to  the  most  H.
Acts  7. 48.  the  most  11.  dwelled)  not  in  temples  made
See  Mountain.

On  HIGH.

Exod.  25.  20.  cherubims  stretch  wings  on  h.  37.  9.

39.  31.  they  tied  a  lace  of  blue,  to  fasten  it  on  h.
Deut.  28. 1.  thy  God  will  set  thee  onh.  above

2  Sam.  22.  49.  thou  also  hast  lifted  me  up  on  h.

23. 1.  and  the  man  who  was  raised  up  on  h.  said

1  Kings  21. 9.  set  N  aboth  on  h.  among  the  people,  12.
°  Kings  19.22.against  whom  hast  thou  lifted  up  thine
~  eyes  on  h.  ?  against  Holy  One  of  Israel  ?  Is  a. 37 . 23.

1  Chron.  14.  L.  for  his  kingdom  was  lifted  up  on  h.

2  Chr.  20. 19.  stood  up  to  praise  God  of  Israel  on  h.
Job  5.  11.  to  set  up  on  h.  those  that  be  low

16. 19.  witness  is  in  heaven,  and  my  record  is  on  h.

31 . 2.  what  inheritance  of  the  Almighty  from  on  h.
39.  18.  what  time  she  lifteth  up  herself  on  h.

27.  the  eaule  mount  up  and  make  her  nest  on  h.  ?
Psal.  7.  7.  for  their  sakes  therefore  return  on  h.

68.  18.  thou  hast  ascended  onh.  thou  hast  led

69.  29.  let  thy  salvation,  O  God,  set  me  up  on  h.
75.  5.  lift  not  up  your  horn  on  h.  speak  not  with

91 . 14.  I  will  set  him  on  h.  because  he  hath  known
93.  4.  the  Lord  onh.  is  mightier  than  the  noise
107.  41.  setteth  he  the  poo:  on  h.  from  affliction


II I  L


H  1M


HIM


Psal  A  13.  5.  who  is  like  to  our  God,  who  dwell,  on  h.  ?
Isa.  22.  16.  that  heweth  him  out  a  sepulchre  onh.?

24.  18.  for  the  windows  from  on  h.  are  open
21  punish  the  host  of  h i ” h  ones  that  are  on  It.

26.  5.  ho  bringeth  down  them  that  dwell  on  h.

32.  15.  till  the  Spirit  be  poured  on  us  from  on  A.

33.  5.  he  dwelleth  on  h.  if  10.  he  shall  dwell  on  h.

40.  20.  lift  up  your  eyes  on  h.  and  behold

58.  4.  to  make  your  voice  to  be  heard  on  li.

Ter.  25.  30.  the  Lord  shall  roar  from  on  h.

Ezek.  31.  4.  the  deep  set  him  up  on  h.  with  her  rivers
Hah.  2.  9.  that  he  may  set  his  uest  on  h..  to  be  deliver.

3.  10.  the  deep  lifted  up  his  hands  on  h.

Lukel.  78.  the  day-spring  from  on  h.  hath  visited  us
24.  49.  till  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  h.
Eph.  4. 8.  when  he  ascended  upow  h.  he  led  captivity
lleb.  1.  3.  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  h.
See  Place.  Places,  Priest,  Tower.
HIGH -way,  or  ways.

Lev.  26.  22.  and  your  h.-ways  shall  be  desolate
Num, 20.17.  hy  king’s  h.-way,  19.  |  21. 22.  Dent. 2. 27 .
Judg.  5.  6.  in  flays  of  .lael  h.-ways  were  unoccupied
20.  31.  they  began  to  kill  the  people  in  the  h.-ways
32.  let  us  flee,  and  draw  them  unto  the  h.-ways
45.  gleaned  of  them  in  the  h.-ways  5000  men

1  Sam.  6.  12.  the  kine  went  along  the  h.-way  lowing

2  Sam.  20. 12.  Amasa  wallowed  in  blood  in  h.-way
2  Kings  18. 17-  h.-w.  of  fuller’s  field,  Isa.  7. 3. 1  36.2.
Prov.  16.  17.  h.-w.  of  upright  to  depart  from  evil
Isa.  11.  16.  an  h.-way  for  the  remnant  of  his  people

19.  23.  shall  be  a.  h.-way  out  of  Egypt  to  Assyria
33.  8.  h.-ways  lie  waste,  way-faring  man  ceaseth
35.  8.  and  an  h.-way  shall  be  there,  and  a  way

40.  3.  make  in  the  desert  a  h.-way  for  our  God
49.  11.  and  my  h.-ways  shall  be  exalted

62. 10.  cast  up,  cast  up  the  h.-way,  gather  stones
Jer.  31.  21.  set  thine  heart  toward  the  h.-way
Amos  5.  16.  they  shall  say  in  all  the  h.-ways,  alas
Mat .  22. 9.  go  therefore  into  the  h.-ways,  Luke  14. 23.
Mark  10.  46.  Bartimeus  sat  by  the  h.  way  begging
.HIGHER.

1 N'kwj.  24.  7.  and  his  king  shall  be  li.  than  Agag
1  Sam.  9.  2.  Saul  was  h.  than  any  of  the  people
■2  Kings  15.  35.  .lotham  built  h.  gate  of  the  house
Neh.  4.  13.  on  the  h.  places,  I  even  set  the  people
•Job  35.  5.  behold  the  clouds,  which  are  h.  than  thou
Psal.  61.  2.  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  h.  than  I
89.  27.  I  will  make  him  h.  than  kings  of  the  earth
Eccl.  5.  8.  he  regardeth,  and  there  be  h.  than  they
Isa.  55.  9.  as  the  heavens  are  h.  than  earth,  so  my
ways  A.  than  your  ways,  thoughts  than  yours
Jer.  36.  10.  then  read  Baruch  in  the  li.  court
Ezek.  9.  2.  six  men  came  from  the  way  of  the  It.  gate

42.  5.  for  the  galleries  were  h.  than  these

43.  13.  and  this  shall  be  the  h.  place  of  the  altar
Dan.  8.  3.  one  horn  h.  than  the  other,  h.  came  last
Luke  14.  10.  he  may  say  to  thee,  friend,  go  up  h.
Pom.  13. 1.  let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  h.  powers
Heb.  7.26.  ah  High  Priest  made  h.  than  the  heavens

HIGHEST.

~Chr.  32.  +  .33.  buried  Hezekiali  in  h.  of  sepulchres
Psal.  18.  13.  Lord  thundered,  the  H.  gave  his  voice
87.  5.  and  the  if.  himself  shall  establish  her
Prov.  8.  26.  nor  the  h.  part  of  the  dust  of  the  world

9.  3.  she  crieth  upon  the  h.  places  of  the  city
Eccl.  5.  8.  he  that  is  higher  than  the  h.  regardeth
Ezek.  17.  3.  and  took  the  h.  branch  of  the  cedar

22.  I  will  take  of  the  h.  branch  of  the  cedar

41.  7.  so  increased  from  lowest  chamber  to  the  h.
Mat.  21.  9.  saying,  Hosanna  in  the  h.  Mark  11. 10.
Luke  1. 32.  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  H.

35.  the  power  of  the  if.  shall  overshadow  thee
76.  thou  shalt  be  called  the  prophet  of  the  H.

2. 14.  glory  to  God  in  the  h.  on  earth  peace,  19.  38.
6.  35.  and  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the  II

14.  8.  when  bidden  sit  not  down  in  the  h.  room

20.  46.  and  love  the  h.  seats  in  the  synagogues

_  HIGHLY.

Luke  1.  28.  the  angel  said,  thou  art  h.  favoured

16.  15.  that  which  is  h.  esteemed  amongst  men
Acts  12.  20.  Herod  was  h.  displeased  with  Tyre
Pom.  12.  3.  not  to  think  of  himself  more  //.  than
Phil.  2.  9.  wherefore  God  also  hath  h.  exalted  him
1  Ihess.  5.  13.  and  to  esteem  them  very  h.  in  love

HIGH-MINDED.

Pom.  11.  20.  be  not  h.  but  fear,  1  Tim.  6.  17.

'2  lun.  3.4.  traitors,  heady,  h.  lovers  of  pleasure
_  „  HIGHNESS.

Job  31.  23.  b3r  reason  of  his  h.  I  could  not  endure
ha.  13.  3.  even  them  that  rejoice  in  my  h.

„  IIILL.

Exod.  24.  4.  Moses  built  an  altar  under  the  h.
yum.  14.  45.  the  Canaanites  which  dwelt  in  that  h.
Dent.  1.  41.  ye  were  ready  to  go  up  into  the  h.  43.
Josh.  5.  3.  circumcised  Israel  at  the  h.  of  fore-skins

17.  16.  they  said,  the  It.  is  not  enough  for  us

24.  30.  Joshua  buried  on  the  h.  Gaash,  Judg.  2.  9.
33.  Eleazar  was  buried  in  a  h.  that  pertained

Judg.  7.  1.  the  Midianites  were  by  the  h.  of  Moreh

1  Sam.  7. 1.  ark  into  the  house  of  Abinadab  in  the  h.

9.  11.  as  Saul  and  his  servants  went  up  the  h.

10.  5.  after  that  thou  shalt  come  to  h.  of  God,  10.

23.  19.  David  hid  in  the  h.  of  Hachilah,  26.  1.

25.  20.  Abigail  came  down  by  the  covert  of  the  h.

2  Sam.  2.  24.  when  they  were  come  to  h.  of  Ammah

13.  34.  much  people  came  by  the  h.  behind  him

16.  13.  Shimei  went  along  on  the  h.  side,  cursing

21.  9.  they  hanged  them  in  the  h.  before  the  Lord
l  Kings  11.  7.  Solomon  built  in  the  h.  for  Chemosh

16._24.  Omri  bought  the  h.  Samaria,  built  on  h.
Kings  4.  27-  she  came  to  the  man  of  God  to  the  h.
If-  2,4.  3.  who  shall  ascend  into  the  h.  of  the  Lord
0.  I  will  remember  thee  from  the  h.  Mizar
68.  la.  the  h.  of  God  is  as  the  h.  of  Bashan
lb.  this  is  the  h.  which  God  desireth  to  dwell  in
(.ant.  4.  6.  I  will  get  me  to  the  h.  of  frankincense
Isa.  .>.  1.  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful  h.

10.  32.  shall  shake  his  hand  against  h.  of  Jerusalem

30.  17.  till  ye  be  left  as  an  ensign  on  an  h.

31.  4.  Lord  of  hosts  shall  fight  for  the  h.  thereof
40.  4.  every  mountain  and  h.  shall  be  made  low

Jer  16.  16.  they  shall  hunt  them  from  every  h.

230


Jer.  31.  39.  the  measuring  line  upon  the  h.  Gareb

49.  16.  thou  that  boldest  the  height  of  the  h.

50.  6.  they  have  gone  from  mountain  to  h.

Ezek.  34. 26.  will  make  places  about  my  h.  a  blessing
Mat .  5.  14.  a  city  that  is  set  on  an  h.  cannot  be  hid
Luke  3.  5.  and  every  h.  shall  be  brought  low

4.  29.  and  they  led  him  to  the  brow  of  the  h.

9.  37.  when  they  were  come  down  from  the  h.
Acts  17. 22.  then  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  Mar’s  h.

H 1  LI. -country.

Josh.  13.6.  inhabitants  of  h.-country  will  I  drive  out

21.  11.  gave  to  the  sons  of  Aaron,  Al  ba  in  h.-coun.
Luke  1.  39.  and  Mary  went  into  the  h.-countiy
65.  were  noised  thro’  all  the  h.-country  of  Judea
High  HILL,  S.

Gen.  7-  19.  all  high  h.  under  heaven  were  covered
1  Kings  14.23.  groves  on  every  high  h.  2  Kings  17.10.
Psal.  68. 15.  is  a  high  h.  as  the  hill  of  Bashan
16.  why  leap  y e,yehigh.  It.?  this  is  hill  G.  desires
104.  18.  high  h.  are  a  refuge  for  the  wild  goats
Isa.  30.  25.  and  on  every  high  h.  rivers  of  waters
Jer.  2. 20.  when  on  every  high  h.  thou  wanderest,  23.

17.  2.  whilst  children  remember  groves  on  high  h.
Ezek.  6.  13.  slain  men  among  idols  on  every  high  A.

20.  28.  then  they  saw  every  high  h.  and  thick  trees

34.  6.  my  sheep  wandered  on  every  high  h.

Holy  HILL.

Psal.  2.  6.  I  have  set  my  king  on  m3’  holy  h.  of  Zion

3.  4.  I  cried  to  Lord,  he  heard  me  out  of  his  holy  h.

15.  1.  Lord,  who  shall  dwell  in  thy  holy  h. ?

43.  3.  let  them  lead  me,  bring  me  to  thv  holy  h.
99.  9.  worship  at  his  holy  h.  the  Lord  is  holy

II I LL,  with  top.

Exod.  17.  9.  to-morrow  I  withstand  on  top  of  the  h.

10.  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Ilur,  went  to  top  of  the  A.
Num..  14.  44.  they  presumed  to  go  up  to  the  A.  top
Judg.  16.  3.  Samson  carried  them  to  the  top  of  an  h.

1  Sam.  26.  13.  David  stood  on  the  top  of  an  h.

2  Sam.  2.  25.  and  Abner  stood  on  the  top  of  an  h.

16.  1.  David  was  a  little  past  the  top  of  the  A.

2  Kings  1.  9.  Elijah  sat  on  the  top  of  an  h.

HILLS.

Gen.  49. 26.  to  the  utmost  bound  ofthe  everlasting  h.
Num.  23.  9.  and  from  the  h.  1  behold  him
Dent.  8.  7..  that  spring  out  of  the  valleys  and  h.

9.  out  of  whose  h.  thou  mayest  dig  brass

11.  11.  it  is  a  land  of  h.  and  valleys,  and  drinketh
33.  15.  for  the  precious  things  of  the  lasting  h.
Josh.  10.  40.  Joshua  smote  all  the  country  of  the  h.

11.  16.  so  Joshua  took  all  that  land,  the  h.

1  Kings  20.  23.  their  gods  are  the  gods  of  the  h.  28.
22. 17.  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  on  the  h.

2  Kings  16.  4.  burnt  incense  on  the  h.  2  C '/iron.  28.  4.
Job  l5.  7-  or  wast  thou  made  before  the  h.  I
Psal.  18.  7.  the  foundations  also  of  the  It.  moved

50. 10.  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  h.  are  mine
65.  12.  the  little  h.  rejoice  on  every  side
72.  3.  and  the  little  h.  by  righteousness

80.  10.  the  h.  were  covered  with  the  shadow  of  it
95.  4.  the  strength  ofthe  h.  is  his  also

97.  5.  the  h.  melted  like  wax  at  the  presence  of  L.

98.  8.  let  the  A.  be  joyful  together

104. 10.  he  sendeth  springs,  which  run  among  the  h.

13.  he  watereth  the  h.  from  his  chambers

32.  he  toucheth  the  h.  and  they  smoke

114.  4.  and  the  little  h.  skipped  like  lambs,  6.

121.  1.  I  wilt  lift  up  mine  eyes  to  the  h.  whence
148.  9.  mountains  and  all  h.  praise  the  Lord
Prov.  8.  25.  before  the  h.  was  I  brought  forth
Cant.  2.  8.  he  cometh  skipping  upon  the  h.

Isa.  2.  2.  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  A.

14.  the  day  of  the  Lord  shall  be  on  all  the  h.

5.  25.  the  h.  did  tremble,  their  carcases  were  torn
7.  25.  on  all  h.  shall  not  come  the  fear  of  briers

40.  12.  who  hath  weighed  the  h.  in  a  balance  i

41.  15.  and  thou  shalt  make  the  h.  as  chaff

42.  15.  I  will  make  waste  mountains  and  A.

54.  10.  mountains  shall  depart,  the  h.  be  removed
55. 12.  the  h.  shall  break  forth  into  singing
65.  7-  which  have  blasphemed  me  upon  the  h.

Jer.  3.  23.  in  vain  is  salvation  hoped  for  from  the  A.

4.  24.  I  beheld,  and  lo,  the  A.  moved  lightly
13.  27.  1  have  seen  thy  abominations  on  the  A.

Esek.  6.  3.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  h.  36.  4.

35.  8.  with  his  slain  men  in  thy  h.  and  valleys

36.  6.  and  say  to  the  h.  to  the  rivers,  and  valleys
Hos.  4.  13.  they  burn  incense  on  the  //.  under  oaks

10.  8.  and  they  shall  say  to  the  A.  fall  on  us
Joel  3.  18.  and  the  h.  shall  flow  with  milk
Amos  9.  13.  drop  wine,  and  all  the  A.  shall  melt
Mic.  4.  1.  and  it  shall  be  exalted  above  the  A.

6.  1.  arise,  and  let  the  h.  hear  th>T  voice
Nah,  l.  5.  the  A.  melt,  and  the  earth  is  burnt
Hab.  3.  6.  the  perpetual  h.  did  bow,  his  ways
Zeph.  1.  10.  and  a  great  crashing  from  the  h.

Luke  23.  30.  they’  shall  bee  in  to  say’  to  the  h.  cover  us

HIM.

Gen.  41.  13.  me  he  restored,  and  h.  he  hanged
Exod.  32. 33.  whoso,  hath  sinned.  It.  I  will  blot  out
Num.  14.24.  Caleb,  It.  will  1  bring  into  the  land

16.  5.  to  come  near,  even  It.  whom  he  hath  chosen
Deut.  10.  20.  It.  shalt  thou  serve,  and  to  A.  cleave

18.  5.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  //.and  his  sons  forever
1  Sam.  10.24.  see  ye  h.  whom  the  Ld.  hath  chosen

1  Kings  14.  11.  h.  thatdieth  in  city’,  16.  4.  |  21.  24.
21.  21.  h.  that  pisseth  against  the  wall,  2  Kings 9.  8.

2  Kings  11.  2.  and  they  hid  It.  even  h.  and  his  nurse

15.  and  It.  that  followed  her.  kill  with  the  sword

17.  36.  It.  shall  ye  fear.  It.  shall  ye  worship

Neh.  13.  26.  A.  did  outlandish  women  cause  to  sin
Esth.  8.  7-  A.  they  have  hanged  on  the  gallows
Job  15.  31.  let  not  h.  that  is  deceived  trust  in  vanity
29.  12.  1  delivered  It.  that  had  none  to  help  It.

36.  22.  behold,  who  teacheth  like  h.?

40.  9.  or  canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like  It.?

42.  8.  Job  shall  pray  for  you,  for  It.  will  I  accept
Psal.  4.  3.  the  Lord  hath  set  apart  It.  that  is  godly’
25.  12.  h.  shall  he  teach  in  the  way  he  shall  choose
45.  11.  worship/*.  |)72.  12.  h.  who  hath  no  helper
101.  5.  h.  will  I  cut  off.  It.  that  hath  an  high  look
Prov.  6.  19-  h.  that  soweth  discord  among  brethren

24.  24.  It.  shall  the  people  curse,  nations  shall  abhor


Eccl.  10.  l.  a  little  folly  h.  that  is  in  reputation
Jer.  48.  35.  It.  that  offerethin  the  high  places
Ezek.  35.  7.  and  cut  off  from  it  h.  that  passeth  ou  1
Amos  1.  5.  and  It.  that  holdeth  the  sceptre
Mai.  2.  12.  will  cut  off  It.  that  offeretn  an  offerin
Mat.  4.  10.  h.  only  shalt  thou  serve,  Luke  4.  8.

10.  32.  whosoever  shall  confess  me  before  men,
will  I  confess  also  bef.  my  Father,  Luke  is!

33.  It.  will  I  deny  before  my  Father  in  heaven
40.  receiyeth  It.  that  sent  me,  Mark  9.  37.  1

17.  5.  this  is  my  Son,  hear  ye  h.  Acts  3.  22.  |  7.  3  J

18.  15.  go  tell  A.  between  thee  and  It.  alone

24.  18.  nor  let  It.  in  the.  field  return,  Mark  13.  p
27.  32.  A.  they  compelled  to  bear  his  cross
Mark  13.  14.  let//,  that  readetli  understand
15.  let//,  that  is  on  the  house-top  not  go  down  I
Luke  23.25.  /*.  that  for  sedition  and  murder  was  '
24.  24.  as  the  women  had  said,  but  //.  they  saw  n
John  5.  38.  whom  he  hath  sent,  It.  ye  believe  not

43.  come  in  his  own  name,  It.  ye  will  receive
6.  27.  for  It.  hath  God  the  Father  sealed

37.  h.  that  cometh  unto  me,l  will  in  no  wise  casto  1

9.  31.  h.  he  heareth  II 12.  26.  It.  will  my  Father  ho,
13.  32.  God  shall  also  glorify  //.  in  himself

Acts  2.  23.  h.  being  delivered  |!  5. 31. //.  God  exalte

10.  40.  /*.  God  raised  up  the  third  day.  and  shew*

16.  3.  //.  would  Paul  have  to  sso  fortn  with  //.

17.  23.  whom  ye  worship  //.  declare  1  unto  you  I
Rom.  14. 1.  //.  that  is  weak  in  the  faith  receive

3.  let  not  It.  that  eateth,  despise  It.  thateatethn

1  Cor.  3. 17.  any  defile  temple,  //.  shall  God  destre ;

10.  12.  let  //.  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  ■

2  Cor.  5.  21.  for  he  hath  made  h.  to  be  sin  for  us
Gal.  6.  6.  let  It.  that  is  taught  in  the  word
Eph.  4.  28.  let  h.  that  stole  steal  no  more

Phil.  2.  23.  It.  therefore  1  hope  to  send  presently  ,
29.  receive  /*.  therefore  in  the  Ld.  with  gladne
2  T/tess.  2.  9.  h.  whose  coming  is  after  theworkii
Heb.  2. 14.  might  destroy  It.  that  had  power  of  dea  I

11.  12.  sprang  there  of  one  and  //.  as  good  as  deal

Above  HIM.

Dan.  11.5.  shall  be  strong  above  h.  and  have  domi
About  HIM.

1  Sam.  22.  6.  his  servants  were  standing  about  It.
17.  king  said  to  the  footmen  that  stood  about  It.

1  Kings 5.  3.  not  build  for  wars  which  were  about

2  Citron.  18.  31.  they  compassed  about  It.  to  tight
Job  1.  10.  hast  not  thou  made  an  hedge  about  It.  ;|
Psal.  76.  11.  let  all  round  about  h.  bring  present.*
89.  7-  and  to  be  had  in  reverence  of  all  about  //.,

Jer.  48.  17-  all  ye  that  are  about  A.  bemoan  him
39.  Moab  shall  be  a  dismaying  to  all  about  It.
50.  32.  and  it  shall  devour  all  round  about  h.
Lam.  1. 17.  his  adversaries  shall  be  round  about
Ezek.  12. 14.  scatter  all  that  are  about  h.  to  help  hi

32.  22.  his  graves  are  round  about  h.  25.  26.
Mat. 8. 18.  when  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  about
Mark  3.  32.  the  multitude  sat  about  h.  and  said
John  10.  24.  then  came  the  Jews  round  about  It.
Rev.  4.8.  four  beasts  had  each  six  wings  about  It.

After  HIM.

Gen.  17.  19.  with  him  and  with  his  seed  after  It.

18.  19.  he  will  command  his  household  after  It.
Exod.  28. 43.  it  shal  1  be  a  statute  for  his  seed  after  It

29.  29.  the  holy  garments  shall  be  his  son’s  after  It)
Lev.  20.  5.  will  cut  off  all  that  go  a  whoring  after
Num.  32. 15.  for  if  ye  turn  away  from  after  //.
Josh.  20.  5.  if  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  after  ■
Judg.  1.  6.  Adoni-bezek  fled,  they  pursued  after  o
3.  28.  they  went  after  It.  and  took  the  fords
6.  34.  and  Abiezer  was  gathered  after  h.  .35.

1  Sam.  14.  13.  and  his  armour-bearer  after  h.

]?.  35.  I  went  out  after  It.  and  smote  him

26.  3.  and  David  saw  that  Saul  came  alter  h,

2  Sam.  1.6.  the  horsemen  followed  hard  after  It.
15. 17.  king  went  forth  and  all  the  people  after  h

23. 10.  the  people  returned  after  It.  only  to  spoil

1  Kings  1.  20.  on  the  throne  of  my  lord  after  h.  2"-
15.  4.  to  set  up  his  son  after  It.  and  establish  Jer.

2  Kings  5.  20.  1  will  run  after  A.  and  take  some  wh;
9.  27.  Jehu  followed  after  h.  and  said,  smite
14. 19.  sent  after  It.  to  Lachish,  2  Citron.  25. 2/.

18.  5.  so  that  after  It.  w’as  none  like  him,  23. 25.

1  C '/iron.  27.  7.  Joab,  and  Zebadiah  his  son  after

2  Citron.  26. 17.  Azariah  the  priest  went  in  ajter  h
Neh.  3.  16.  after  It.  repaired.  So  to  the  3 hr  verse
Job  18.  20.  they  that  come  after  It.  shall  be  astonie

21.  21.  what  pleasure  bath  he  in  his  house  after

33.  and  every  man  shall  draw  after  It.

41.  32.  he  maketh  a  path  to  shine  after  h.

Psal.  49. 17-  his  glory  shall  not  descend  after  h.
Prov.  20.  7.  his  children  are  blessed  after  It.

Eccl.  3.  22.  bring  to  see  what  shall  be  after  It.  6.  V.

7.14.  that  man  should  find  nothing  after  It.

10. 14.  what  shall  be  after  It.  who  can  tell  him  ?  I
Ezek.  9.  5.  go  ye  after  It.  thro’  the  city,  and  smite
I.uke  19.  14.  and  sent  a  message  after  h.  sav  ing
John  12.  19.  behold,  the  world  is  gone  after  h.
Acts  5.  37.  and  drew  away  much  people  after  It.

7. 5.  he  would  give  it  to  him,  and  tohis  seed  after  /
17.27.  seek  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  ■

19.  4.  believe  on  him  which  should  come  ajter  h.

Against  II 1 M .

Gen.  16.  12.  and  every  man’s  hand  against  It.

32.  25.  lie  saw  that  he  prevailed  not  against  A.

37.  18.  they  conspired  against  It.  1  Kings  15.  27;

I  16.  9-  2  Kings  14.  19.  I  15.  10,  25.  1  21.  2!
Exod.  16.  8,  Lord  heareth  your  murmurings  whic
ye  murmur  against  It.  Num.  14.  36.  1  16.  V
Num.  22.  22.  stood  for  an  adversary  against  h.
Dent.  19.  1 1 .  but  if  any  man  rise  up  against  h.

J6.  if  a  false  witness  rise  to  testify  against  It.

33.  11.  smite  through  the  loins  that  rise  against  >
Josh.  5.  13.  there  stood  a  man  over  against  It.

Judg.  14.  5.  behold  a  young  lion  roared  against  h-

15.  14.  the  Philistines  shouted  against  h.

20.  23.  and  the  Lord  said,  go  up  against  A.  'I
2  Sam.  10.  9.  the  front  of  the  battle  was  against  h.

1  Kings  13.  4.  band  he  put  forth  against  It.  dried  u

21.  10.  sons  of  Belial  to  bear  witness  against  h.

2  Kings 23.  29.  and  king  Josiah  went  up  against  /
24.  2.  Lord  sent  against  It.  bands  of  Chaldees


H  I  M


H  1  M


H  I  M


on  32. 17-  to  rail  and  to  speak  against  h.

‘  o’  i;(.  tliou  shalt  not  prevail  against  b.

*>  :i.  although  thou  movedst  me  against  b.
f  if  thy  children  have  sinned  against  b.

'  who  hardened  himself  a#,  h.  and  prospered?

20.  thou  prevailest  for  ever  against  h.

PI  why  dost  thou  strive  against  b.  ?

6.  if  thou  sinnest,  what  doest  thou  against  h.  ?

,  /  78.  17.  and  tliey  sinned  yet  more  against  h.

17.II.  a  cruel  messenger  shall  be  sent  agst.  b.

/’  4  jo.  and  if  one  prevail  against  h.  two  withst.

J  io.’lo.  shall  the  axe  boast  agst.  h.  that  heweth  ?

‘  or  the  saw  magnify  itself  ag.  h.  that  shaketh  it  r
4.  when  shepherds  are  called  forth  against  h.

<>4  all  that  are  incensed  against  b.  be  ashamed
J9,  spirit  of  L.  shall  lift  up  a  standard  agst.  h.

•20.'  10.  be  enticed  and  we  snail  prevail  agst.  b.

20.  for  since  I  spake  agst.  h.  I  remember  him
,  3.  against  h.  that  bendeth,  let  the  archer  bend
.  k'.29.  2.  and  prophesy  agst.  b.  and  Egypt,  38.  2.

J  21.  and  I  will  call  for  a  sword  against  h.

!.  1  will  plead  ag.  h.  with  pestilence  and  blood
9.  11.  because  we  have  sinned  against  h.

J  16.  but  he  that  cometh  agst.  h.  shall  do  accord.

...  3.  5.  they  even  prepare  war  against  h.

).  t  WJ11  bear,  because  1  have  sinned  against  h.
j  k.  2.  6.  shall  not  these  take  up  a  parable  ag.  h.  ?
it.  12. 14.  and  held  a  counsel  against  h.  Mark  3. 6.
„i«14.  31.  to  meet  him  that  cometh  against  h.

\  $  22.  24.  wherefore  they  cried  so  against  h.

'  30.  to  say  before  thee  what  they  had  against  li.

3.  the  high-priest  desired  favour  against  h.

).  Jews  desiring  to  have  j udgment  against  h.

.  e  9.  durst  not  bring  against  h.  a  railing  accusat.

*  5,  which  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against  h.
19. 19.  make  war  against  h.  that  sat  on  the  horse
At  HIM.

n.49. 23.  the  archers  shot  at  h.  and  hated  him
:»7>n.20.  33.  Saul  cast  a  javelin  at  h.  to  smite  him
imi.  16. 13.  Shimei  threw  stones  at  h.  and  cast  dust
,  27-23.  men  shall  clap  their  hands  at  h.

'  il.  12. 5.  in  safety  from  him  that  putfeth  at  h.

.  13.  the  Lord  shall  laugh  at  h.  for  he  seeth
.  6.  the  righteous  also  shall  see  and  laugh  at  h.

.  4.  suddenly  do  they  shoot  at  h.  and  fear  not
.  52. 15.  the  kings  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  h.
n.  11.  40.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  push  at  h.
h.  1.5.  the  mountains  quake  at  h.  and  hills  melt
rk  6.  3.  and  they  were  offended  at  h.

.4.  at  h.  they  cast  stones,  and  wound,  him  in  head

7.  and  they  marvelled  at  h.

kep  9.  lie  marvelled  at  h.  and  turned  about
19.  they  could  not  come  at  h.  for  the  press
<n  6.  41.  the  Jews  then  murmured  at  h.

59.  then  took  they  up  stones  to  cast  at  h.

Before  HIM.

n.  24.  33.  there  was  set  meat  before  h.  to  eat
.  3.  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  h.  to  Esau
1.  so  went  tbe  present  over  before  h.

.  43.  and  they  cried  before  h.  bow  the  knee
.  33.  they  sat  before  h.  [|  44. 14.  fell  before  h.
od.  34.  6.  and  the  Lord  passed  by  before  h.
im.  11.  20.  and  have  wept  before  h.  saying

h.  6. 5.  ascend  up  every  man  straight  before  h.

.  27.  might  do  the  service  of  the  Lord  before  h.

!g.  9.40.  Abimelech  chased,  he  fled  before  h.

r.  16.  Samson’s  wife  wept  before h.  and  said,  17.
ant.  16. 6.  surely  the  Lord’s  anointed  is  before  h.
kl.  and  David  came  to  Saul  and  stood  before  h.

7.  and  one  bearing  a  shield  went  before  h.

1 am.  10.  13.  the3T  fled  before  h.  1  Cliron.  19. 14.

il.  13.  Uriah  did  eat  and  drink  before  h.

.'.20.  when  he  required,  they  set  bread  before  h.

>.  1.  and  fifty  men  to  run  before  h.  1  Kings  1.  5.

2.24.  1  was  also  upright  before  h.  Psal.  18.  23.
Kings  3. 16.  then  came  two  harlots,  stood  before  h.

1.  25.  Omri  did  worse  than  all  before  h.  30,  33.

i.  10.  and  set  two  men,  sons  of  Belial,  before  h.
Kings  2. 15.  they  bowed  to  the  ground  before  h.

.  12.  the  Shunammite  when  called,  stood  before  h
58.  the  sons  of  the  prophets  were  sitting  before  h.

.  32.  and  the  king  sent  a  man  from  before  h.

'.  4.  kings  stood  not  before  h.  how  shall  we  stand

7.2.  not  as  kings  of  Israel  that  were  before  h.

8. 5.  nor  any  that  were  before  h.  were  like  him

1. 11.  that  the  Amorites  did,  which  were  before  h.

3.25.  like  to  Josiah  there  was  no  king  before  h.

15. 29.  did  eat  bread  continually  before  li.  Jer.  52.33.

I Chr.  16. 29.  bring  an  offering,  and  come  before  h.
30.  fear  before  li.  Psal.  96.  9.  Peel.  3.  14.  1  8.  12.

9.25.  not  any  before  h.  like  Solomon  for  majesty
\Chron.  2.  4.  to  burn  before  h.  sweet  incense,  6.

4.  5.  and  the  kingdom  was  quiet  before  h.

9. 11.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  stand  before  h.
eh.  2. 1.  it  came  to  pass  that  wine  was  before  b.
stb.  4. 8.  to  make  request  before  h.  for  her  people

5.9.  proclaim  before h.  11.  ||  1.3.  fall  before  It.

>b  13.  15.  but  1  will  maintain  my  ways  before  h.

16.  an  hypocrite  shall  not  come  before  h.

’1.33.  as  there  are  innumerable  before  b.

3.  4.  1  would  order  my  cause  before  h.  and  fill
•fi.  6.  hell  is  naked  before  h.  and  destruction
55. 14.  judgment  is  before  b.  therefore  trust  in  him
11.22.  and  sorrow  is  turned  into  joy  before  b.
sal.  18.  6.  my  cry  came  before b.  even  to  his  ears

12.  at  the  brightness  that  was  before  b.

22.29.  all  that’ go  to  the  dust  shall  bow  before  h.
50.  3.  God  shall  come,  a  fire  shall  devour  before  h.
>2.8.  ye  people,  pour  out  your  heart  before  h.

J8.  1 .  let  them  that  hate  him  flee  before  b.

_4.  sing  unto  God,  sing  and  rejoice  before  h.

72. 9.  they  that  dwell  in  wildern.  shall  bow  before  h.
11.  kings  shall  fall  before  h.  nations  shall  serve  h.

35. 13.  righteousness  shall  go  before  h.  and  set  us
96.6.  honour  and  majesty  are  before  b.  strength
9.  worship  the  Lord,  fear  before  h.  all  the  earth
‘9L  3.  a  fire  goeth  before  h.  and  burneth  enemies
'06.23.  had  not  Moses  his  chosen  stood  before  h.

142.2.  I  showed  before  h.  my  trouble

rov.  8. 30.  his  delight,  rejoicing  always  before  h .
,’7.21.  wisdom  is  before  h.  that  hath  understanding
■>«.  40. 10.  reward  with  him,  work  before  h.  62.  11.


Isa.  40.  17.  all  nations  before  h.  are  as  nothing
41.  2.  gave  nations  before  b.  and  made  him  rule
45.  1.  1  have  holden  to  subdue  nations  before  h.

Jer.  42.  9.  to  present  your  supplications  before  h.
Lzek.  28.  9.  wilt  thou  say  before  h.  that  slayeth  thee
30.  24.  shall  groan  before  h.  with  groanings
Dan.  7. 10.  ten  thousand  times  10,000  stood  before  b.

8.  4.  so  that  no  beasts  might  stand  before  A.

7.  there  was  no  power  in  the  ram  to  stand  before  h.

11. 16.  to  his  own  will,  none  shall  stand  before  h.

22.  they  shall  be  overflown  from  before  h.

Mic.  6.  6.  shall  1  come  before  h.  with  burnt  offerings
Bab.  2.  20.  let  all  the  earth  keep  silence  before  b.

3.  5.  before  h.  went  the  pestilence  and  burning  coals
Mai.  3. 16.  a  hook  of  remembrance  written  before  h.
Mat.  25.  32.  before  h.  be  gathered  all  nations
27  .  29.  they  bowed  the  knee  before  h.  and  mocked
Mark  3. 11.  fell  down  before  h.  and  cried,  5.  33.

Luke  1.17.  he  shall  go  before  h.  in  the  spirit  of  Elias
75.  in  holiness  and  righteousness  before  h.

5.  18.  they  sought  means  to  lay  him  before  h.

11 . 6.  a  friend  is  come,  I  have  nothing  to  set  bef .  h.
John  3.  28.  1  said,  that  1  am  sent  before  h.

Acts  23.  33.  they  presented  Paul  also  before  A.

Bom.  4.  17.  before  b.  whom  he  believed,  even  God
Lph.  1.  4.  holy  and  without  blame  before  h.  in  love
Heb.  12. 2.  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  h.

1  John  2.  28.  not  be  ashamed  before  h.  at  his  coming

3.  19.  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before  h.

Bev.  13. 12.  all  the  power  of  the  first  beast  before  h.

19. 20.  false  prophet  that  wrought  miracles  before  h.
Behind  HIM.

Gen.  18.  10.  Sarah  heard  in  the  tent-door  behind  h.

2  Sam.  2.  23.  that  the  spear  came  out  behind  h.

2  Kings  6.  32.  is  not  sound  of  his  master’s  feet  belt,  b.?
Joel  2.  14.  and  repent,  and  leave  a  blessing  behind  b.
Zech.  1. 8.  belt.  h.  were  red  horses  speckled  and  white
Mat.  9.  20.  a  woman  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood

came  beh.  h.  and  touched  the  hem,  Luke  8.44.
Mark  12.  19.  brother  die,  and  leave  his  wife  beh.  b.
Luke  7.  38.  stood  at  his  feet  behind  h.  weeping
Beside  HIM.

Dent.  4. 35.  the  Lord  is  God,  there  is  none  beside  h.

2  Sam.  15.  18.  his  servants  passed  on  beside  h.
Neb.Q.  4.  beside  b.  stood  Mattithiah  and  Shema
Between  H  IM.

Lev.  £6.  46.  laws  the  L.  made  between  h.  and  Isrl.
Mai.  3.  18.  shall  discern  between  h.  that  serveth  God
Beyond  HIM.

1  Sam.  20.  36.  Jonathan  shot  an  arrow  beyond  h.

By  HIM.

Deut.  2.  30.  but  Sihon  would  not  let  us  pass  by  h.

33.  12.  the  beloved  of  L.  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  li.
Judg.  .3.  15.  by  h.  children  of  Israel  sent  a  present

19.  all  that  stood  by  h.  went  out  from  him
1  Sam.  2.  3.  and  by  b.  actions  are  weighed

20.  7.  then  be  sure  that  evil  is  determined  by  h.

1  Kings  22.  19.  the  host  of  heaven  standing  by  h.

2  Kings  3.  11.  we  may  inquire  of  the  L .byh.  8.  8.

5.  1.  by  h.  the  Lord  had  given  deliverance  to  Syria

1  Chr.  11.  11.  three  hundred  slain  by  h.  at  one  time
Neh.  2.6.  king  said  to  me,  the  queen  also  sitting  by  li .

4.  3.  now  Tobia  the  Ammonite  was  by  h.

Psal.  63.  11.  every  one  that  sweareth  by  h.  glory
Isa.  27.  7.  the  slaughter  of  them  that  are  slain  by  h.
Dan.  8.  11.  by  h.  daily  sacrifice  was  taken  away?

12.  7.  sware  by  h.  that  liveth  for  ever,  Be v.  10.  6.
Nab.  1.  6.  and  the  rocks  are  thrown  down  by  h.
Mat.  23.  21.  sweareth  by  h.  who  dwelleth  therein

22.  sweareth  by  h.  that  sitteth  thereon

Luke  3. 19.  Herod  being  reproved  by  h.  shut  up  John
9.  ".  Herod  heard  of  all  that  was  done  by  h.

13.  17.  the  glorious  things  that  were  done  by  h.
John  1 .  3.  all  things  were  made  by  h.  without  him

10.  the  world  was  made  by  h.  and  knew  him  not
Acts  2. 22.  by  miracles  and  wonders  God  did  by  h.

3.  16.  the  faith  which  is  by  h.  hath  given,  4.  10.

13.  39.  by  /nail  that  believe  justif.  from  all  things

23.  11.  the  night  following  the  Lord  stood  by  b.

1  Cor.  1.  5.  in  every  thing  ye  are  enriched  by  h.

8.  6.  by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  by  h.

Lph.  4.  21.  heard  him,  and  have  been  taught  by  h.
Col.  1.16.  for  by  h.  were  all  things  created  in  heaven
17.  he  is  before  all  things,  by  h.  all  things  consist

20.  by  li.  to  reconcile  all  things  to  himself  by  h.

3.  17.  giving  thanks  to  God  the  Father  by  h.

2  Tim.  2.  26.  who  are  taken  captive  by  h.  at  his  will
Heb.  7.  25.  to  save  them  that  come  to  God  by  h.

13.  15.  by  b.  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise

1  Pet.  1.  21.  who  by  h.  do  believe  in  G.  thatraised
2.  14.  are  sent  by  h.  for  punishment  of  evil-doers

Concerning  HIM.

Judg.  21.  5.  made  an  oath  cone.  h.  that  came  not  up

2  Kings  19.  21 .  word  I..  hath  spoken  con.  h.  Is.  37 .22.
Lsth.  3. 2.  the  king  had  so  commanded  concerning  h.
Dun.  5.  29.  and  made  a  proclamation  concerning  b.
John  7 .  12.  murmuring  amongpeople  concern,  h.  32.

9.  18.  the  Jews  did  not  believe  concerning  h.

Acts  2.  25.  for  David  speaketh  concerning  h.

23.  15.  ye  would  inquire  something  concerning  b.

1  Cor.  5.  3.  concerning  h.  that  hath  so  done  this

See  Fear.

Far  HIM.

Gen.  2.  18.  I  will  make  him  an  help  meet  for  h.  20.
37  .  35.  thus  Joseph's  father  weptjer  h.

4.3.  9.  I  will  be  surety  Jer  h.  of  my  hand  require
Exod.  22.  2.  no  blood  shed /.  h.  ||3.  blood  shed  for  h.
Lev.  1.  4.  and  it  shall  be  accepted  for  b.  to  make
atonement  for  h.  4.  26,  31.  15.  13.  I  14.  18,  19,
20,  31. 1  15.  15.  1  19.  22.  Num.  5.  8.  I  6.  11.  I
15.  28.

Num .  27.  21 .  tlie  priest,  who  shall  ask  counsel/or  h.
*35.  32.  ye  shall  take  no  satisfaction /<Wn  that  is  fled
Dent.VJ.  11.  lie  in  wait  for  h.  and  rise  up  against  him
33  7 .  let  his  hands  he  sufficient  for  b.  be  help  to  him
Judg.  6.  31.  he  that  will  plead Jor  h.  let  him  die

1  Sam.  2.  25.  if  a  man  sin,  who  shall  entreat /or  «.  ?
15.  2.  how  he  laid  waitjbr  b.  in  the  way,  when
17.  31.  they  rehearsed  them,  and  Saul  sent  for  h.
22.  10.  and  he  inquired  of  the  Lord  for  b.  15.

27.  4.  and  he  sought  no  more  again  Jer  h.

2  Sam.  9.  10.  thy  servants  shall  till  the  land  for  h.


1  Kings  2.  22.  ask  for  b.  the  kingdom,  even  for  h.

13.  23.  saddled  for  h.  the  ass,  to  wit,  for  the  proph.

14.  13.  all  Israel  shall  mourn  for  b.  and  bury  him

2  Chr.  16.  14.  tliey  made  very  great  burning  Jer  h.

21.  19.  and  his  people  made  no  burning  for  h.

Lsth.  5.  4.  to  the  banquet  that  1  have  prepared  Jer  h
9.  when  Ilaman  saw  that  he  moved  not  for  h.

6.  3.  the  servants  said,  there  is  nothing  done  for  4.

4.  to  hang  on  the  gallows  he  had  prepared  Jer  h.
Job  13.  7.  and  will  you  talk  deceitfully  for  b.  /

30.  25.  did  not  I  weep  for  h.  that  was  in  trouble  '
Psal.  3.  2.  who  say,  there  is  no  help  for  h.  in  God
37.  7.  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  h.

49.  7.  nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  h.

72. 15.  prayer  also  shall  be  made  for  h.  continsmiiy
Prov.  9.  4.  as  for  b.  that  wanteth  understanding,  16.

28.  8.  he  shall  gather  it  for  b.  that  will  pity  the  poor
Cant.  5.  4.  and  my  bowels  were  moved  for  b.

Isa.  8.  17.  I  will  wait  upon  the  Lord  and  look  Jer  h.

25.  9.  we  have  waited  for  b.  he  will  save  us,  9.

29.  21.  that  lay  a  snare  for  h.  that  reproveth  in  gate

30.  18.  blessed  are  all  they  that  wait  for  h.

40.  10.  Lord  will  come,  his  arm  shall  rule/er  h.

64.  4.  what  he  hath  prepared  for  h.  that  waiteth  for  !u
Jer.  22.  18.  they  shall  not  lament  for  b.  18.

31.  20.  therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled  for  h.

Lam.  3.  25.  Lord  is  good  to  them  that  wait  for  It.
Lzek.  17.  17.  nor  shall  Pharaoh  make  for  h.  in  war

31.  15.  I  covered  the  deep  for  h.  1  caused  Lebanon
to  mourn  for  b.  trees  of  the  field  fainted  for  h.
45.  20.  so  shalt  thou  do  for  h.  that  is  simple
Dan.  11.  17.  not  on  his  side,  nor  shall  she  be  for  h.
Amos  3.  5.  fall  in  a  snare  where  no  gin  is  for  h.

Zeph.  1.  6.  have  not  sought  Ld.  nor  Inquired  for  h.
Zech.  12. 10.  shall  mourn  fork,  be  in  bitterness  for  h.
Mat.  12.  4.  which  was  not  lawful  for  b.  to  eat
18.  6.  it  were  better  for  b.  that  a  millstone  were
hanged  about  his  neck,  Mark  9.  42.  Luke  17-  2.

24.  50.  when  he  looketh  not  for  h.  Luke  12.  46.
Mark  5.  20.  how  great  things  Jesus  had  done  for  h.
Luke  2.  27.  brought  in  the  child  Jesus,  to  do  for  h.

after  the  custom  of  the  law

8.  40.  for  they  were  all  waiting  Jor  li.

9.  52.  and  they  went  to  make  ready  for  h.

Acts  12.  5.  but  prayer  was  made  unto  God /or  ft.

1  Cor.  16.  11.  for  1  look  for  h.  with  the  brethren
Col.  1.  16.  all  things  were  created  by  him  and/or  h.
Heb.  9.  28.  to  them  that  look  for  h.  shall  he  appear

From  HIM.

Gen.  35.  13.  and  God  went  up  from  h.  in  the  place
Lev.  5.  3.  it  be  hid  from  h.  when  he  knoweth  jf  it
Judg.  3.  19.  all  that  stood  by  him,  went  out  from  h.
16.  19.  to  shave  locks,  his  strength  went  from  h.

1  Sam.  3.  18.  and  Samuel  hid  nothing  from  h.

2  Sam.  11.  15.  retire  from  h.  ||  13.  9.  went  out  fr.  h.

1  Kings  20.  33.  whether  any  thing  would  come  fr.  h.

2  Kings  25.  5.  all  his  army  were  scattered  from  h.

2  Chron.  12.  12.  the  wrath  of  the  L.  turned  from  b.
Job  14.  6.  turn  from  h.  that  he  may  rest,  till  he  shall
Psal.  22.  24.  nor  hath  he  hid  his  face  from  h.

35.  10.  the  poor  from  h.  that  spoileth  him
55.  12.  then  1  would  have  hid  myself  from  h.

62.  1.  waiteth  on  God ,/r.  h.  cometh  my  salvation
Isa.  5.  23.  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  fr.  h.
53.  3.  and  we  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  h.

Jer.  3.  1.  she  go  from  h.  and  become  another  man’s
Dan.  5.  24.  then  was  part  of  the  band  sent  from  h.
Amos  5.  11.  ye  take  from  h.  burdens  of  wheat
Jonah  3.  6.  he  arose,  and  laid  his  robe  from  h.

Mat.  5.  42.  from  b.  that  would  borrow  of  thee

13. 12.  fr.  h.  shall  be  taken,  Mark  4.  25.  Luke  8.18.

25.  29.fr.  h.  hath  not  shall  be  taken,  Luke  19.  26.
Mark  14.  35.  prayed,  that  the  hour  might  pass  Jr.  h.
Luke  11.  22.  he  taketh  from  h.  all  his  armour
John  7.  29.  I  am  fr.  h.  11 10.  5.  but  will  flee  from  b.
Gal.  1.  6.  are  so  soon  removed  fr.  b.  that  called  you
Heb.  12.  25.  if  we  turn  away  from  h.  that  speaketh
1  John  3. 17.  shutteth  up  bowels  of  compassion  fr.  It.

4.  21.  and  this  commandment  have,  we  from  h.
llev.  1.  4.  and  peace  from  h.  which  is,  which  was
See  Depart,  Departed.

In  HIM.

Gen.  18. 18.  all  nations  of  earth  shall  be  blessed  in  h.
Exod.  23.  21.  beware  of  him,  for  my  name  is  in  b.
Judg.  9.  26.  men  of  Shechem  put  confidence  in  h.

1  Sam.  28.  20.  and  there  was  no  strength  in  b.

29.  3.  1  have  found  no  fault  in  h.  John  19.  4,  6.

2  Sam.  22.  3.  in  b.  will  I  trust,  Psal.  91.  2.

31.  he  is  a  buckler  to  all  that  trust  in  h.  Isa.  36.  6.

1  Kings  1.  52.  if  wickedness  be  in  h.  he  shall  die
3.  £8.  they  saw  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  h.

14. 13.  because  in  h.  there  is  found  some  good  thing'

17.  17.  sickness,  that  there  was  no  breath  left  tn  b.

1  Citron.  5.  20.  because  they  put  their  trust  m  h.
Job  13.  15.  though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  h.

35.  14.  judgment  is  before  him,  trust  thou  in  h.
Psal.  2. 12.  blessed  are  they  that  put  their  trust  in  h.

18.  30.  a  buckler  to  all  those  that  trust  in  h.

28.  7.  my  heart  trusted  in  b.  and  I  am  helped

33.  21.  our  heart  shall  rejoice  in  b.  66.  6.  I  149.  2-

34.  8.  blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  h.

22.  none  of  them  that  trust  in  b.  shall  be  desolate

37.  5.  trust,  in  h.  ||  40.  because  they  trust  in  h.

62.  8.  trust  in  h.  at  all  times,  ye  people,  pour  out

64. 10.  the  righteous  shall  he  glad  and  trust  in  b.
72.  17.  men  shall  be  blessed  in  b.  all  nations  call
92.  15.  is  no  unrighteousness  in  h.  John  7.  18.
Prov.  14.  7.  perceives!  not  in  h.  lips  ot  knowledge
30.  5.  he  is  a  shield  to  them  that  put  their  trust  in  lu
Lccl.  4.  16.  that  come  after  shall  not  rejoice  in  b.
Jer.  4.  2.  the  nations  shall  bless  themselves  in  h.
40.  25.  Pharaoh  and  all  them  that  trust  in  h.

48.  11.  therefore  his  taste  remained  in  h.

Lam.  3.  24.  my  portion,  therefore  will  I  hope  m  n.
Dan.  3.  28.  delivered  his  servants  who  trusted  in  h.
6.  4.  nor  was  any  error  or  fault  found  in  b.

Obail.  7.  there  is  none  understanding  in  &.

Nab.  1.  7.  he  knoweth  them  that  trust  in  b.

Hab.  2.  4.  behold,  his  soul  is  not  upright  in  b.

Mat.  13.  57.  and  they  were  offended  in  h.

14.  2.  mighty  works  do  shew  themselves  in  h.
Luke  23.  22.  I  have  found  no  cause  of  death  in  h.

231


H  I M


HIM


H  I  M


Tb/m  1.  4.  in  Ji.  was  life,  the  life  was  light  of  men
3.  15.  whosoever  believeth  in  h.  16.  Acts  10.  43.

4. 14.  shall  be  in  h.  a  well  of  water  springing  up

6.  56.  du  elleth  in  me  and  1  in  h.  10.  38. 1  15.  5.

7 ■  5.  neither  did  his  brethren  believe  in  h.

8.  44.  because  there  is  no  truth  in  h.

9-  3.  made  manifest  in  h.  ||  11.  It',  no  light  in  h.
13.  31.  God  is  glorified  in  h.  ||  32.  if  glorified  ink.
Jets  17.  28.  in  h.  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being
Bom.  10.  14.  how  shul  1  they  believe  in  h.  of  whom

15.  12.  in  h.  shall  the  Gentiles  trust
1  Cor.  2.  11.  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  h.

8.  6.  of  whom  are  all  things,  we  in  h.  1  John  5.  20.
£  Cor.  1. 19.  was  not  yea,  nay,  but  in  h.  was  yea,  20.
5.21.  might  be  made  the  nghteousn.  of  God  in  h.
13.4.  for  we  are  weak  in  h.  but  shall  live  with  him
Eph.  1.  4.  chosen  us  in  h.  ||  10.  gather  even  in  h.
Phil.  3.  9.  that  1  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  ink.
Col.  1.  19.  that  in  h.  should  all  fulness  dwell,  2.  9-

2.  6.  so  walk  yc  in  h.  II  7.  rooted  and  built  up  in  h.

9.  ink.  dwelleth  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily

10.  ye  are  complete  in  h.  who  is  the  head  of  all
Heb.  2.  13.  and  again,  1  will  put  my  trust  in  h,

10.  38.  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  h.

1  John  2. 4.  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  h.

5.  wheso  keepeth  his  word,  in  h.  verily  is  love  of
God  perfected,  hereby  know  we  that  we  are  in  h.

6.  he  that  saith  he  abideth  in  li.  ought  to  walk

8.  which  thing  is  true  in  h.  and  in  you

10.  and  there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  h.

15.  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  h.  3. 1”.

27-  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  li.  28.

3.  3.  and  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  k.

5.  in  h.  is  no  sin  ||  6.  who  abideth  in  h.  sinn.eth  not

9.  tor  his  seed  remaineth  in  h.  he  cannot  sin

15.  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  abiding  in  h.

24.  dwelleth  in  h.  and  he  in  h.  4.  13,  15,  16.

5. 14.  this  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  h.

Into  HIM.

1  Kings  17.  21.  let  this  child’s  soul  come  into  h.

22.  the  soul  of  the  child  came  into  h.  again
Evke8.30.  because  many  devils  were  entered  into  h.
John  13.  27.  after  the  sop,  Satan  entered  into  h.
Bph.  4.  15.  may  grow  up  into  h.  in  all  things
Of  HIM.

Gen.  25.  21.  and  the  Ford  was  entreated  of  ft.

Exod.  23.  21.  beware  of  h.  and  obey  his  voice

32.  1.  we  wot  not  what  is  become  of  h.  23.

Lev.  15.  7.  that  toucheth  flesh  ofh.  hath  the  issue,  33.

25.  36.  take  thou  no  usury  of  h.  nor  increase
Nvm.  35.  33.  but  by  the  blood  ofh.  that  shed  it
Dent.  18. 19.  not  hearken,  I  will  require  it  of  h.

22.  thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  h.  2  Kings  1.  15.

1  Sam.  17.  32.  let  no  man’s  heart  fail  because  of  h.

2  Kings  5.  20.  I  will  run  and  take  somewhat  of  li.

10.  24.  his  life  shall  be  for  the  life  of  h.

1  Chr.  5.  2.  of  h.  came  the  chief  ruler,  but  birth-right

2  Chr.  28.23.  they  were  the  ruin  ofh.  and  Israel

33.  13.  prayed,  and  he  was  entreated  of  h.  19.
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  h.  a  right  way  for  us

Job  7. 8.  eye  of  h.  hath  seen  me  shall  see  me  no  more
12.  5.  despised  in  the  thought  of  h.  that  is  at  ease

18.  21.  this  is  the  place  of  h.  that knoweth  not  God

23.  15.  when  1  consider,  I  am  afraid  of  h.

Ps.  37. 7.  fret  not  thyself  because  of  h.  who  prospers
Prov.  16.  26.  for  his  mouth  craveth  it  of  h.

23.  24.  begetteth  a  wise  child,  shall  have  joy  of  h.

26.  12.  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  h.  29.  20.

27.  13.  take  a  pledge  of  h.  for  a  strange  woman
Isa.  29.  16.  shall  the  work  say  of  h.  that  made  it

52.  7.  the  feet  ofh.  bringeth  good  tidings,  Nah.  1.15.
Jer.  20.  9.  I  said,  I  will  not  make  mention  of  h.

42.  11.  be  not  afraid  of  h.  saith  the  Lord
Ezek.  14.  10.  as  the  punishment  of  h.  that  seeketh

17.  13.  king  of  Babylon  hath  taken  an  oath  of  h.

18.  32.  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  h.  that  dieth

19.  4.  the  nations  also  heard  of  h.  he  -was  taken
,28.  9.  in  the  hand  of  h.  that  slayetli  thee
Zech.  8.  23.  take  hold  of  skirt  of  h.  that  is  a  Jew

9.  8.  I  will  encamp  because  of  h.  that  returneth
Mat.  26.  24.  as  it  is  written  of  h.  Mark  9. 13. 1  14. 21.

27.  19.  1  suffered  in  a  dream,  because  of  h.

Mark  8.  30.  that  they  should  tell  no  man  of  h.

38.  ofh.  shall  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  Luke  9.  26.
Luke  6. 30.  of  h.  that  taketh  thy  goods,  ask  not  again

12.  48,  much  given,  of  h.  shall  much  be  required
John  10.  36.  say  ye  of  h.  whom  Father  sanctified
Bom.  3.26.  the  justiher  of  h.  that  believeth  in  Jesus

9.  11.  not  of  works  but  of  h.  that  calleth

16.  it  is  not  of  h.  that  willeth,  but  of  God

11.  36.  for  of  h.  and  through  him  are  all  things

1  Cor.  1.  30.  but  of  h.  are  ye  in  Christ,  who  of  God

1  Pet.  2. 9.  shew  forth  praises  of  h.  who  called  you

2  Pet.  3. 14.  that  ye  may  be  found  of  h.  in  peace

1  John  1.5.  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  of  li.
2.  27.  the  anointing  which  yc  have  received  of  h.
29.  he  that  doeth  righteousness  is  born  of  h.
Kev.1.7.  allkindr.  ot  earth  shall  wail  because  ofh.
On,  or  upon  HIM,

Exod.  21.  30.  shall  give  whatsoever  is  laid  upon  h.
Ley.  7.  20.  eateth,  having  his  uncleanness  upon  h.
15.  24.  if  her  flowers  be  upon  h.  he  is  unclean
19. 17 •  thou  shalt  rebuke,  and  not  suffer  sin  upon  h.

20.  9.  he  cursed  father,  his  blood  shall  be  upon  h.

21.  12.  crown  of  anointing  oil  of  his  God  is  upon  h.
Mum.  11.  25.  took  of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  h.

15.  31.  shall  be  cutoff,  his  iniquity  shall  be  upon  h.
35.  23.  seeing  him  not,  cast  it  upon  h.  that  he  die
Vent.  13.  9.  thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  h.

17.  7-  the  hands  of  witnesses  shall  be  first  upon  h.
29.  20.  all  curses  written  in  this  book  lie  upon  h.
Josh.  2.  19.  be  on  our  head,  if  any  hand  be  upon  h.
Judg.  3. 10.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  h.  14.  6,
19. 1  15. 14.  Mum.  24.  2.  1  Sam.  10.  10.  1 19.  23.

1  Sam.  18.  17.  the  hand  of  the  Philistines  be  upon  h.

2  Sam,  17.2.  I  will  come  upon  h.  while  he  is  weary

1  Kings  8.  31.  an  oath  be  laid  upon  h.  2  Chr.  6.  22.

13.  4.  put  forth  his  hand,  saying,  lay  hold  on  h.

~  Bings  4.  21.  she  shut  the  door  uponh.  and  went  out
0.  31.  it  the  head  ot  Blisba  stand  on  h.  this  day

7.  17.  me  people  trode  uponh.  in  the  gate,  20.

2  Chi  on.  32.  25.  therefore  there  was  "wrath  upon  li.


Ezra  7.  6.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  his  God  upon  h.  9.
Job  7*  17.  that  thou  shouldest  set  thy  heart  upoit  h.
15.21.  in  prosperity  the  destroyer  shall  come  u.  h.

20.  22.  the  hand  of  the  wicked  shall  come  upon  h.
23.  and  shall  rain  it  upon  h.  while  he  is  eating
25.  the  sword  comefh,  terrors  are  upon  h.

27.  9.  will  God  hear,  when  trouble  cometh  upon  It.?
Psal.  116.  2.  I  will  call  upon  h.  as  long  as  1  live

145. 18.  Ld.  is  nigh  to  all  that  call  upon  h.  in  truth
ha.  44.  3.  I  will  pour  water  upon  h.  that  is  thirsty
53.  5.  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  h.
55.  6.  seek  the  I  ord,  call  ye  upon  h.  while  he  is  near

7.  return  to  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  h.
Jer.  31.  20.  f  will  surely  have  mercy  upon  h.

Izek.  12.  13.  my  net  also  w  ill  I  spread  upon  h.

18.  20.  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be
upon  h.  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  upon  h.

I/os.  7.  9.  yea,  gray  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  h.

12.  14.  therefore  he  shall  leave  his  blood  upon  h.
Mat.  12. 18.  and  I  will  put  my  Spirit  upon  h.

27  .  30.  and  they  spit  upon  h.  and  smote  him
Luke  23.  26.  and  on  h.  they  laid  the  cross
John  1.  32.  it  abode  upon  h.  ||  33.  remaining  on  h.

3.  18.  he  that  believeth  on  h.  is  not  condemned,  5.

24.  |  6.  40.  Rom.  9.  33.  1  Pet.  2.  6.

19.  37-  the}7  shall  look  on  h.  whom  they  pierced
Acts  13.  9.  then  Saul  set  his  eyesow  h.  and  said
Phil.  1.  29.  not  only  to  believe  on  h.  but  to  suffer

2.  27.  but  God  had  mercy  on  h.  and  not  on  h.  only
Ileb.  2.  16.  he  took  not  on  h.  the  nature  of  angels
Rev.  6.  2.  and  he  that  sat  on  h.  5,  8.  1 19.  11.

20.  3.  shut  him  up,  and  he  set  a  seal  upon  h.

Over  HIM.

Gen.  4.  7.  be  his  desire,  thou  shalt  rule  over  h.

Lev.  16.  21.  and  confess  over  h.  all  the  iniquities

25.  43.  thou  shalt  not  rule  over  h.  with  rigour,  53.
2  Sam.  3.  34.  all  the  people  wept  again  over  h.

1  Kings  13.  30.  they  mourned  over  h.  saying,  alas

16.  18.  burnt  the  king’s  house  over  h.  with  fire
Psal.  109. 6.  set  thou  a’  wicked  man  over  h.  let  Satan
Ezek.  19.  8.  the  nations  spread  their  net  over  h.
Dan.  4.  16.  and  let  seven  times  pass  over  h.  23.
Acts  8.  2.  devout  men  made  lamentation  over  h.
Rom.  6.  9.  death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  h.
Jam.  5. 14.  is  any  sick  ?  let  them  pray  over  h.

Through  HIM.

John  1.  7.  that  all  men  through  h.  might  believe

3.  17.  that  the  world  through  li.  might  be  saved
Rom.  5.  9.  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath,  thro'  h.

8.  37.  more  than  conquerors  thro'  h.  that  loved  us

11.  36.  of  him,  thro'  h.  and  to  him,  are  all  things
Eph.  2.  18.  through  h.  we  have  access  to  the  Father
1  John  4.  9.  sent  his  Son  that  we  might  live  t.  h.

To,  or  unto  HIM.

Gen.  4.  26.  to  Seth,  to  h.  also  there  was  born  a  son

12.  7.  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  who  appeared  unto  h.

17.  17.  shall  a  child  be  born  unto  h.  that  is  old  ?

21.  2.  at  set  time  of  which  God  had  spoken  to  h.

24.  36.  unto  h.  hath  he  given  all  that  he  hath

49.  10.  unto  h.  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be
Exod.  4. 16.  thou  shalt  be  to  h.  instead  of  God

22.  25.  thou  shalt  not  he  to  h.  as  an  usurer

28.  43.  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever  unto  h.  30.  21.
Deut.  1.  36.  and  to  h.  will  I  give  the  land

18. 15.  raise  up  a  prophet,  unto  h.  ye  shall  hearken
Judg.  15.  10.  to  do  to  h.  as  he  hath  done  to  us

1  Sam.  28. 17-  the  Lord  hath  done  to  h.  as  he  spake

2  Sam.  3.  9.  hath  sworn  to  David,  even  so  I  do  to  h.
2  Kings  A.  23.  wherefore  wilt  thou  go  to  li.  to-day  ?

7.  20.  so  it  fell  out  unto  h.  for  the  people  trode

2  Chron.  13. 5.  even  to  h.  and  his  sons  by  covenant

34.  26.  as  for  the  king,  so  shall  ye  say  unto  h.

Job  6. 14.  to  h.  that  is  afflicted,  pity  should  be  shewed
j5.  6.  if  thou  sinnest,  vrhat  doest  thou  unto  h.  ?

Psal.  68. 33.  to  h.  that  rideth  on  the  heavens
72.  15.  to  h.  shall  be  given  of  the  gold  of  Sheba
136. 7.  to  h.  that  made  great  lights,  for  his  mercy

17 .  to  h.  that  smote  great  kings,  for  his  mercy
Eccl.  9.  2.  all  things  come  alike  to  all,  one  event  to

h.  that  sacrificeth,  and  to  h.  that  sacrificeth  not
Isa.  9.  13.  people  turneth  not  to  h.  that  smiteth

31.  6.  turn  ton.  from  whom  Israel  have  revolted
40.  17.  they  are  counted  to  h.  less  than  nothing

18.  or  what  likeness  will  ye  compare  unto  h.  ?

45.  24.  even  to  h.  shall  men  come,  and  all  that  are
49.  7*  thus  saith  the  L.  to  h.  whom  man  despiseth
57.  19.  peace  to  h.  that  is  afar  off,  and  to  h.  near
66. 2.  1  will  look,  even  to  h.  that  is  poor  and  contrite

Mat.  7-  8.  to  h.  thatknocketh,  it  shall  be  opened
Luke  6.  29.  to  h.  that  smiteth  thee  on  one  cheek

8.  18.  whosoever  hath,  to  li.  shall  be  given

12.  10.  to  /(.that  blasohemeth  against  Holy  Ghost

20.  38.  the  God  or  the  living,  for  all  live  unto  h.
John  7.  33.  then  I  go  unto  h.  that  sent  me,  16.  5.

10.  3.  to  h.  the  porter  openeth,  the  sheep  hear
Acts  5.  40.  to  h.  they  agreed,  and  called  apostles

8. 11.  toh.  they  had  regard  because  he  had  bewitch.
10. 43.  to  h.  give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  thro’
Rom.  4.  4.  now  to  h.  that  -worketh,  is  the  reward
5.  to  li.  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  him
7.  4.  even  to  li.  w  ho  is  raised  from  the  dead

11.  36.  and  to  h.  are  all  things,  to  whom  he  glory

14. 14.  to  li.  that  esteemeth,  to  h.  it  is  unclean

16.  25.  now  to  h.  that  is  of  power  to  stablish  you

1  Cor.  14.  11.  I  be  to  h.  who  speaketh  a  barbarian
Gal.  3.  6.  it  was  accounted  to  h.  for  righteousness
Eph.  3.  21.  unto  h.  be  glory  in  the  church  by  Christ
Ileb.  1.  5. 1  will  be  to  h.  a  Father,  he  to  me  a  son

5.  7.  to  h.  that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death
Jam.  2.  23.  it  was  imputed  unto  h.  for  righteousness
4. 17.  to  h.  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  to  h.  it  is  sin
Rev.  1.  5.  unto  h.  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us
2.  7.  to  h.  that  overcometh  will  I  give,  17.  |  3.  21.

26.  to  h.  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations

21.  6. 1  will  give  unto  h.  that  is  athirst,  of  fountain

Toward  HIM.

Gen.  31.  2.  behold,  it  was  not  toward  h.  as  before
Judg.  8.  3.  their  anger  was  abated  toward  h.

2  Chr.  16. 9.  of  them  whose  heart  is  perfect  toward  li.
Job  11.  13.  and  stretch  out  thine  hands  toward  h.
Lam.  2. 19.  lift  up  thy  hands  toward  li.  for  thy  child.
Ezek.  17.  6.  whose  branches  turned  toward  h.


2  Cor.  2. 8.  ye  would  confirm  your  love  toward  1,
Under  H 1M.

Exod.  17. 12.  they  took  a  stone  and  put  it  under  i
2  Sam.  18.  9.  the  mule  that  was  under  h.  went  aw
Job  9. 13.  the  proud  helpers  do  stoop  under  h.
Isa.  58.  5.  to  spread  sackcloth  and  ashes  under  h.
Ezek.  17.  6.  the  roots  thereof  were  under  h.  ’

1  Cor.  15.  27.  all  things  put  under  h.  28.  Heb  2  fi
With  HIM.

Gen.  39. 3.  his  master  saw  that  the  Lord  was  with
Exod.  31.  6.  I  have  given  with  li.  Aholiab,  38. 23
Mum.  12.8.  with  h.  will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth*  ev
apparently,  not  in  dark  speeches,  Jer.  3"

23.  21.  the  Lord  his  God  is  with  h.  and  the  shout-
Deut.  29. 15.  with  h.  that  standeth  here  with  us,  ai
with  h.  that  is  not  here  with  us  this  d;

32.  12.  and  there  was  no  strange  god  with  h.

1  Sam.  3. 19.  and  the  Lord  was  with  h.  18. 12, 14

16. 18.  the  Lord  is  with  h.  ||  25.  25.  folly  is  with  h  '

2  Sam.  5. 10.  I  ord  of  hosts  was  with  h.  1  Chr.  11

16. 18.  his  will  I  be,  and  with  h.  will  I  abide

1  Kings 8.  65.  Solomon  held  a  feast,  and  all  Isra

with  h.  from  Hamath  to  Egypt,  2  Chr.  7

2  Kings  3.  12.  said ,  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  with  h

15. 19.  gave  silver,  that  his  hand  might  be  with  I
18.  7.  the  Lord  was  with  h.  and  he  prospere

1  Chron.  9.  20.  2  Chron.  1. 1. 1  15,

2  Chron.  15.  2.  Lord  is  with  you,  while  ye  be  with
26. 17.  with  h.  fourscore  priests  of  the  Lord

32.  7.  for  there  be  more  with  us  than  with  h.

8.  with  h.  is  an  arm  of  flesh,  with  us  the  Lord

36.  23.  the  Lord  his  God  be  with  h.  Ezra  1.  3.
Ezra  8.  3.  with  h.  150  males  ||  4.  with  h.  200  males
6.  with  h.  50  males  ||  Job  12.13 .with  h.  is  wisdom, 1
Job  18.  6.  and  his  candle  shall  be  put  out  with  hA

22.  21.  acquaint  thyself  with  h.  and  be  at  peace
Psal.  89.  24.  and  my  mercy  shall  be  with  h.
91.15. 1  will  be  withh.  in  trouble,  I  will  deliverhi
130.  7-  and  with  li.  is  plenteous  redemption
Prov.  8. 30.  then  was  1  as  one  brought  up  with  h'
Eccl.  8. 15.  that  shall  abide  with  h.  of  bis  labour
Isa.  3, 10.  say  to  the  righteous,  it  shall  be  well  with

11.  woe  unto  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  ill  with  h.
40. 10.  behold,  his  reward  is  with  h.  62.  11.

57.  15.  with  li.  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  spirit
Jer.  22.  15.  and  then  it  was  well  with  h.  16.
Ezek.  31. 11.  the  mighty  one,  he  shall  deal  with  h
Mai.  2.  5.  my  covenant  was  with  h.  of  life
Mat.  5.  25.  agree  whiles  thou  art  in  the  way  with  h
Mark  3. 14.  ordained  12,  that  they  should  be  with  I
5. 18.  prayed  that  he  might  be  with  h.  Luke  8.  38.
Luke  1.  66.  and  the  band  of  the  Lord  was  with  I,

22.  56.  a  maid  said,  this  man  was  also  withh.
John  3. 2.  do  these  miracles,  except  God  be  with  h
14.  23.  we  will  come  and  make  our  abode  with  h.
Acts  7  ■  9.  sold  Joseph,  but  God  was  with  h.  10. 31
10.  35.  he  that  feareth  him  is  accepted  with  h.

21.  36.  multitude  followed,  crying,  away  with  I
jRu?».6.4.weare  buried  withh.  by  baptism,  CW.2.1

8.  live  with  h.  2  Cor.  13. 4. 1  Thess.5.10. 2  Tim: 2.1
8.  32.  how  shall  he  not  with  h.  give  us  all  things

1  Thess.  4. 14.  sleep  in  Jesus,  will  God  bring  with

2  Tim.  2. 12.  we  also  shall  reign  with  h.  Rev.  20.  f !
Heb.  11.  9.  the  heirs  withh.  of  the  same  promise
2  Pet.  1. 18.  when  we  were  with  h.  in  the  holv  raou
Rev.  3.  20.  and  I  will  sup  with  h.  and  he  w’ithir.c

14. 1.  with  h.  144,000  having  his  Father’s  name

17.  14.  they  that  are  with  h.  are  called  chosen
Within  HIM.

Job  14.  22.  and  his  soul  within  h.  mourn

20. 14.  his  meat  is  the  gall  of  asps  within  li.
Prov.  26.  24.  and  layeth  up  deceit  within  h.

Isa.  63. 11.  is  he  that  put  his  Holy  Spirit  within  It.
Zech.  12. 1.  and  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  \

Without  HIM.

John  1.  3.  and  without  h.  was  not  any  thing  mad
See  Hymn.

HIMSELF.

Gen.  43.  32.  they  set  on  for  him  by  h.  and  for  the
Exod.  21.  3.  if  he  came  in  bv  h.  he  shall  go  out  by
Lev.  9.  8.  sin-offering  which  was  for  lu  16  6, 1L
16.  11.  shall  make  an  atonement  for  h.  17,  24.
Mum.  16.  9.  separated  you  to  bring  you  near  to

31.  53.  men  of  war  had  taken  spoil,  every  man  for
Deut.  7. 6.  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  people

h.  14.  2. 1  28.  9. 1  29.  13.  2  Sam.  7.  C

33.  21.  and  he  provided  the  first  part  for  h.
Josh.  22.  23.  let  the -Lord  h.  require  it

Judg.  3.  19.  be  h.  turned  again  from  the  quarrie
1  Sam.  30.  6.  but  David  encouraged  h.  in  the  Loi

1  Kings  19.  4.  but  Elijah  h.  went  a  day’s  journe

and  he  requested  for  h.  that  he  might  ri:

2  Chron.  13.  12.  God  h.  is  with  us  for  our  captain

26.  20.  thrust  him  out,  yea,  h.  hasted  also  to  go-oi
Ezra  10.  8.  h.  separated  from  the  congregation  1
Job  1.  12.  only  on  h.  put  not  forth  thine  nand

22.  2.  he  that  is  wise  may  be  profitable  to  h.

27.  10.  will  be  delight  h.  in  the  Almighty?

32.  2.  because  he  justified  h.  rather  than  God

34.  9.  that  he  should  delight  li.  with  God

41. 25.  when  he  raiseth  h.  the  mighty  are  afraid
Psal.  4.  3.  hath  set  apart  him  that  is  godly  for  h.

10.  14.  the  poor  committeth  h.  unto  thee

35.  8.  let  his  net  that  he  hath  hid  catch  /;.

36.  4.  he  setteth  h.  in  a  way  that  is  not  good
50.  6.  for  God  is  judge  h.  Selah

87.  5.  and  the  Highest  /(.  shall  establish  her
132.  18.  but  on  h.  shall  his  crown  flourish
135.  4.  for  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Jacob  to  h.
Prov.  5.  22.  his  own  iniquities  shall  take  wicked

1 1 . 25.  he  that  watereth  shall  be  watered  also  h.
13.7.  that  maketh  h.  rich,  that  maketh  h.  poor

14. 14.  and  a  good  man  shall  be  satisfied  from  k
16.  4.  the  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  h.

26.  he  that  laboureth,  laboureth  for  h.

21.  13.  he  also  shall  cry  h.  but  shall  not  he  heat

22.  3.  foreseeth  the  evil,  and  hideth  h.  27.  12.

29. 15.  but  a  child  left  to  h.  bringeth  to  .’mnic
Cant.  5.  6.  hut  my  beloved  hath  withdraw:.  //.
Isa.  7.  14.  the  Lord  h.  shall  give  you  a  sign

38.  15.  he  hath  spoken,  and  h.  hath  done  it
44.5.  another  shall  call  h.  by  the  name  ot  Jaco


H  IN


H  1 II


HIT


,  yj  jr,  departeth  from  evil,  maketh  A.  a  prey
io’  to  make  A.  an  everlasting  name  _  .

,  0*o3.  1  know  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  A.
'  1i,’an  that  is  mad,  and  maketh  A.  a  prophet
-  14  ‘  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  A.  Amos  6.  8..

45  oo.  on  that  day  shall  prince  prepare  tor  A.
•  V  26.  Messiah  shall  becutotf,  but  not  tor  A.
r  5  6  he  hath  withdrawn  A.  from  them
,  i  Israel  an  empty  vine,  bringeth  forth  fruit  to  A.
s°  i4.  nor  shall  the  mighty  deliver  A.
he’ that  is  swift  of  foot  shall  not  deliver  A.
i  t5  4.  A.  shall  reward  thee  openly
1  7  A  took  our  infirmities,  bare  our  sicknesses


'  oj  yet  hath  he  not  root  in  A.  butdureth  a  while

<  1°’ saved  others,  A.  he  cannot  save,  Mark  15. 31.
i  k  3  21.  for  they  said,  he  is  beside  A.

\  i  let  him  deny  h.  and  take  hiscross,  Luke  9.  23.

33  to  love  his  neighbour  as  h.  is  more  than
ju  iq  i.  sent  them,  whither  he  h.  would  come
of,  he  taketh  seven  spirits  more  w  icked  than  A.

.7. who  knew  his  lord’s  will,  and  prepared  not  h.

17  and  when  he  came  to  h.  he  said,  how  many
;  4o.  a  nobleman  went  to  receive  for  h.  a  kingdom

<  ’  saving,  that  he  h.  is  Christ,  a  king
'  who  also  h.  waited  for  the  kingdom  ot  God

*  27.  he  expounded  the  things  concerning  A.

lesus  h.  stood  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  saith
7  t4  2.  tho’  .lesus  A.  baptized  not,  bat  his  disciples
8.  God  was  his  lather,  making  h.  equal  with  G.
verily  l  say,  the  Son  can  do  nothin"  ot  h.
for  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  h.  so  the  Son
i  for  he  h.  knew  what  he  would  do
when  .lesus  knew*  in  h.  that  his  disciples
’.  and  he  h.  seeketh  to  be  known  openly
.  he  that  speaketh  of  h.  seeketh  his  own  glory
?1  he  is  ot  age,  ask  him,  he  shall  speak  tor  h.

151.  this  spake  he  not  of  lu  but  being  high-priest
32.  God  shall  glorify  him  in  h.  and  glorify  him

13.  he  shall  not  speak  of  h.  but  whatsoever
.  the  Father  h.  loveth  you,  because  ye  loved  me

12.  whoso  maketh  A.  a  king,  speaketh  ag.  Caesar

1.  Jesus  shewed  h.  again  to  the  disciples,  14.

?  5. 13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  h.  to  them
j.  rose  up  Theudas,  boasting  A.  to  be  somebody
Ij.  giving  out  that  A.  was  some  great  one
..  of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet  this  ?  of  A.

17.  now  while  Peter  doubted  in  A.  w’hat  this
11.  and  when  Peter  was  come  to  A.  he  said
17.  he  left  not  A.  without  w  itness,  in  that
8.  w'hile  he  answered  for  A.  26. 1.

24.  as  he  spake  for  A.  Festus  said  with  loud  voice
16.  but  Paul  was  suffered  to  dwell  by  A.
jn.  12.  3.  not  to  think  of  A.  more  highly  than  lie
7.  none  of  us  liveth  to  A.  no  man  dieth  to  A.

3.  for  even  Christ  pleased  not  A.  but  as  is  written
lor.  2.  15.  yet  he  A.  is  judged  of  no  man

15.  but  he  A.  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire
28.  but  let  a  man  examine  A.  so  let  him  eat
,  28.  then  shall  the  Son  A.  be  subject  to  him
i  n.  5. 18.  who  hath  reconciled  us  to  A.  by  Jesus, 19.

.  7.  if  any  man  trust  to  A.  let  him  of  A.  think
.  20.  for  ye  suffer  if  a  man  exalt  A.  if  a  man  smite

I.  1. 4.  who  gave  A.  for  our  sins,  that  he  might
20.  gave  A.  for  me  ||  6.  3.  think  A.  to  be  something

4.  then  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  A.  alone
A.  2. 15.  to  make  in  A.  ot  twain  one  new*  man
0.  Jesus  A.  being  the  chief  corner  stone

2.  hath  given  A.  for  us  ||  25.  gave  A.  for  it

7.  he  might  present  it  to  A.  a  glorious  church

8.  loveth  A.  |j  33.  so  love  his  wife,  even  as  A.

'.  1.20.  and  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  to  A.

1 15.  triumphing  over  them  in  A.

F/iess.  2. 4.  sitteth,  shewing  A.  that  he  is  God
vim.  2.  6.  who  gave  A.  a  ransom  for  all
'.2. 14.  who  gave  A.  for  us,  to  purify  to  A.

II.  he  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  A.
b.  1.  3.  when  he  had  by  A.  purged  oui  sins

14.  he  also  A.  likewise'  took  part  of  the  same
8.  in  that  he  A.  hafti  suffered,  being  tempted

2.  for  that  he  A.  also  is  compassed  with  infirmity
:.  as  for  the  people,  so  also  for  A.  to  offer  for  sins
.  no  man  taketh  this  honour  to  A.  but  he  that
>.  Christ  glorified  not  A.  to  be  made  an  high-priest

13.  he  sw'are  by  A.  ||  7.  27.  when  he  offered  up  A.
26.  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  sacrifice  ot  A.
>et.  2. 23.  but  committed  A.  to  him  that  jHdgeth
John 2.  6.  ought  A.  to  wralk,  even  as  he  walked

3.  hath  this  hope,  purifieth  A.  even  as  he  is  pure
.  10.  he  that  believeth  hath  the  witness  in  A.

John  10.  nor  doth  he  A.  receive  the  brethren
?v.  19. 12.  had  a  name  that  no  man  knew  but  A.

I.  3.  God  A.  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God

See  Bowed,  Hide
HIN

as  a  liquid  measure  of  the  Hebrews  ;  it  was  the
sixth  part  of  a  Bath,  and  held  one  gallon  and  two
Dints.

rod.  29. 40.  with  the  fourth  part  of  an  A.  of  oil
0.  24.  take  also  unto  thee  of  oil-olive  an  A.
ev.  I§.  36.  a  just  ephah  and  A.  shall  ye  have

3.13.  the  drink  offering  shall  be  of  wine,  the  fourth

part  of  an  A.  of  oil  ,  Num.  15.  4.  1  28. 14
uni.  15.  5.  the  fourth  part  of  an  A.  of  wine
6.  the  third  part  of  an  A.tof  oil  ||  9.  half  an  A
zek.  4.  11.  srialt  drink  sixth  part  of  an  A.  of  water

5.  24.  an  A.  of  oil  for  an  ephah,  46.  5, 7>  11.

6. 14.  third  part  of  an  A.  of  oil  to  temper  with

HIND,  S.

en.  49.  21.  Naphtali  is  a  A.  let  loose,  he  giveth
Sam.  22,  34.  he  maketh  my  feet  like  A.  feet,  and
setteth  me  on  high  places,  Ps.  18.  33.  Hah.  3. 19.
■A  39. 1 .  or  canst  thou  mark  when  the  A.  do  calve  t
‘s.  29.  9.  the  voice  of  Lord  maketh  the  A.  to  calve
’rot.  5.  19.  let  her  be  as  the  loving  A.  and  roe
ant.  2.  7.  1  charge  you  by  the  A.  of  the  field,  3.  5.
\er.  14.  5.  the  A.  calved  in  the  field,  and  forsook  it
HINDER.

en.  24.  56.  A.  me  not,  seeing  the  I.,  hath  prospered
•«»'.  22.16.  letnothing  A.  thee  from  coming  tome
<<eh.  4.  8.  to  come  and  fight,  and  A.  the  building
'b  9. 12.  behold,  he  taketh  away,  who  can  A.  him  ?

II.  10.  if  he  cut  off,  and  shut  up,  who  can  A.  him  t


Acts  8.  36.  what  doth  A.  me  to  be  baptized  ? .

1  Cor.  9.  12.  lest  we  should  A.  the  gospel  of  Christ
Qal  5  7. who  did  A.  you,  that  shouldnotobey  truth  ?
HINDERED.

Ezra  6.  8.  expences  be  given,  that  they  be  not  A.

Luke  11.  52.  and  them  that  were  entering  in,  ye  A.
Rom.  15.  22.  have  been  much  A.  from  coming  to  you
1  Thess.  2.  18.  we  would  have  come,  but  Satan  A.

1  Pet.  3. 7.  as  heirs  of  life,  that  your  prayers  be  not  A.
HINDER  1V1U.

Isa  14.  6.  he  that  ruled  is  persecuted,  and  none  A.
HINDER  end.

o  Sam.  2. 23.  Abner  smote  him  with  A.  end  of  spear
HIN  DERMOST,  or  HINDMOST.

Gen.  33.  2.  and  he  put  Rachel  and  Joseph  A.

Num.  2.  31.  they  shall  go  A.  with  their  standards
Deut.  25.  18.  he  met  thee,  and  smote  the  A.  of  thee
Josh.  10. 19.  pursue,  and  smite  the  A.  of  them
Jer.  50. 12.  the  A.  of  the  nations  shall  be  a  wildern.
HINDER  part.

Joel.  2.  20.  and  his  A.  part  toward  the  utmost  sea
Mark  4.  38.  Jesus  was  in  the  A.  part  of  the  ship
Acts  27.41.  the  h.part.  was  broken  with  waves
HINDER  parts.

1  Kings  7 .  25.  their  A.  parts  were  inward ,  2  Chr.  4.  4.
Psal.  78. 66.  he  smote  his  enemies  in  the  A.  parts
HINDER

Zech.  14.  8.  and  half  of  them  toward  the  A.  sea
HINGES.

1  Kings  7.  50.  and  the  A.  of  gold  for  doors  of  house
Prov.  26. 14.  as  the  door  turneth  upon  his  A.

HIP.

Judg.  15.  8.  he  smote  them  A.  and  thigh  with  slaugh.
HIRE,  Substantive.

Gen.  30. 18.  given  me  my  A.  f  called  his  name  an  A.

32.  amongthe  goats,  and  of  such  shall  be  my  A.

33.  when  it  shall  come  for  my  A.  before  thy  face
31.  8.  if  he  said,  the  ring  straked  shall  be  thy  A.

Exod.  22.  15.  if  an  hired  thing,  it  came  for  his  A.

Deut.  23.  18.  thou  shalt  not  bring  the  A.  ot  a  whore

24.  15.  at  his  day  thou  shalt  give  him  his  A.

1  Kings  5.  6.  to  thee  will  1  give  A.  for  thy  servants
Isa.  23.  17.  she  shall  turn  to  her  A.  and  commit

18.  and  her  A.  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord
Ezek.  16.  31.  not  as  an  harlot  in  that  thou  scornest  A.

41.  and  thou  also  shalt  give  no  A.  any  more
29.  t  20.  I  have  given  him  Egypt  for  his  A.

Mic.  1. 7.  for  she  gathered  R  of  the  A.  of  an  harlot,
and  they  shall  return  to  the  A.  of  an  harlot
3.  11.  and  the  priests  thereof  teach  for  A.

Zech.  8. 10.  there  was  no  A.  for  man,  any  A.  for  beast
Mat.  20.  8.  give  them  their  A.  beginning  from  last
Luke  10.  7.  for  the  labourer  is  worthy  ot  his  A.

Jam.  5.  4.  behold,  the  A.  of  the  labourers  is  kept  back
HIRE.

Isa.  46. 6.  they  A. a  goldsmith,  and  he  maketh  it  a  god
Mat.  20. 1.  went  out  to  A.  labourers  into  his  vineyard
HIRED.

Gen.  30. 16. 1  have  A.  thee  with  my  son’s  mandrakes
Exod.  22.  15.  if  it  be  an  A.  thing  it  came  for  his  hire
Lev.  19.  13.  the  wages  of  him  that  is  A.  not  abide
Deut.  23.  4.  they  A.  against  thee  Balaam,  Neh.  13. 2.
Judg.  9.  4.  wherewith  Abimelech  A.  vain  persons
18.  4.  Micah  hath  A.  me,  and  I  am  his  priest

1  Sam.  2.  5.  that  were  full,  have  A.  out  themselves

2  Sam.  10.  6.  Ammon  A.  the  Syrians,  1  Chr.  19.  7-
2  Kings  7.  6.  the  king  of  Israel  hath  A.  against  us
2  Chron.  24.  12.  A.  masons  and  carpenters  to  repair

25.  6.  Amaziah  A.  100,000  mighty  men  of  valour
Ezra  4.  5.  A.  counsellors  against  them  to  frustrate
Neh.  6.  12.  Tobiah  and  Safiballat  had  A.  him,  13.

Isa.  7.  20.  shall  Lord  shave  with  a  razor  that  is  A.
Jer.  46.  21.  her  A.  men  are  like  fatted  bullocks
H os.  8.  9.  are  gone  up,  Ephraim  hath  A.  lovers

10.  yea,  though  they  have  A.  among  the  nations
Mat.  20.  7-  they  say,  because  no  man  hath  A.  us
9.  when  they  came  that  were  A.  ab.  eleventh  hour
Acts  28.  30.  Paul  dwelt  two  years  in  bis  own  A.  hou.
HIRED  servant.

Exod.  12.  45.  an  A.  serv.  not  eat  thereof.  Lev.  22.  10.
Lev.  25.  6.  the  sabbath  shall  be  meat  for  thy  A.  serv.
40.  but  as  an  A.  servant  he  shall  be  with  thee  _

50.  according  to  the  timeofan  A.  serv.  shall  it  be
53.  as  a  yearly  A.  servant  shall  he  be  with  him
Deut.  15. 18.  hath  been  worth  a  double  A.  servant
24.  14.  thou  shalt  not  oppress  an  A.  servant
HIRED  servants.

Mark  1.  20.  left  Zebedee  in  the  ship  with  h.serv.
Luke  15.  17.  how  many  A.  serv.  have  bread  enough
19.  make  me  as  one  of  thy  A.  servants
HIRELING.

It  is  commanded  in  the  law,  that  the  hireling  should
he  paid  as  soon  as  his  work  is  over.  Lev.  19.  13.
The  wages  of  him  that  is  hired  shall  not  abide
with  thee  all  night  until  the  morning ;  because
his  urgent  necessities  require  it  for  present  sub¬
sistence.  An  hireling’s  day  or  year,  is  a  kind  of
proverb ,  signifying  a  full  year,  without  abating
any  thing  of  it.  Are  not  his  days  like  the  days
of  an  hireling  5  Job  7.  1.  The  days  of  man  are
like  those  of  an  hireling ;  as  nothing  is  deducted
from  them,  so  nothing  is  added  to  them.  find  in
Job  14.6.  Till  he  shall  accomplish  as  an  hireling
his  day  ;  to  the  time  of  his  death,  which  he  waits
for  as  the  hireling  for  the  end  of  the  day.  See
Isa.  16.  14.  I  21.  16.  In  John  10.  12,  13.  the
hireling  is  set  in  opposition  to  the  true  shepherd ;
the  first  neglects  the  sheep,  and  aims  only  at  Ins
own  advantage  j  the  second  loves  and  guides  them
carefully.  The  hirelings  whom  the  father  oj
the  family,  that  is,  God,  sends  into  his  vine¬
yard,  are  the  prophets  and  apostles,  Jews  and
Christians;  the  second  succeeded  the  first,  and
all  receive  their  reward  when  their  work  is  done,
Mat.  20.  1—16.  ,  ,  ,

Job  7.1.  are  not  his  days  like  the  days  of  an  A.  ?

2.  as  an  A.  looketh  for  the  reward  ot  lus  work
14.  6.  till  he  shall  accomplish  as  an  A.  Ins  day
Isa.  16. 14.  in  three  years  as  the  years  ot  an  A.  21.  16.
Mai.  3.  5.  witness  against  those  that  oppress  the  A.
John  10.  12.  he  that  is  an  A.  and  not  the  shepherd
13.  the  A.  fleeth,  because  he  is  anA.andcarethnot


IIIREST.

Ezek.  16.  33.  thou  A.  them,  that  they  may  come
II I R ES.

Mic  1  7.  all  the  A.  thereof  shall  be  burnt  with  fire
HIS.

Gen.  38.  9.  Onan  knew  the  seed  should  not  be  A.
Exod.  21.  34.  and  the  dead  beast  shall  be  A.

22.  0.  which  another  challengeth  to  be  A.

J.ev.  27.  15.  add  the  fifth  part,  and  it  shall  be  A.
Num.  5.  10.  a  man’s  hallowed  things  shall  be  A.

16.  5.  to  morrow  the  Lord  will  shew  who  are  A.

23.  10.  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  A.
Deut.  21.  17-  the  right  of  the  first-born  is  A.

2  Sam.  16.  18.  A.  will  l  be,  with  him  will  I  abide

1  Kings  2.  15.  for  it  was  A.  from  the  Lord
Kings  15.25.  a  captain  of  A.  conspired  ag.  him

Esth.  4.  11.  is  one  law  ot  A.  to  put  hint  to  death
Job  12.  16.  the  deceived  and  the  deceiver  are  A.

18.  15.  in  his  tabernacle,  because  it  is  none  of  A.
Psal.  30.  4.  sing  unto  the  Lord,  all  ye  saints  ot  A.
95.  4.  the  strength  of  the  hills  is  A.  also
103.  21.  ye  ministers  of  A.  that  do  his  pleasure
Can:.  2.  16.  my  beloved  is  mine,  and  1  am  A.

Ezek.  16. 15.  on  every  one  that  passeth  by,  A.  it  was
46.  17.  then  it  shall  be  A.  to  the  year  of  liberty
Dan.  2.  20.  blessed  be  G.  wisdom  and  might  are  A.
Chad.  14.  to  cut  off  those  of  A.  that  did  escape,  nor
shouldest  have  deliver,  up  those  ot  A.  that  remain
Hub.  2.  6.  woe  to  him  increaseth  that  which  is  not  A.
John  7. 16.  doctrine  is  not  mine,  but  A.  that  sent  me
Acts  16.  33.  was  baptized,  he  and  all  A.  straightway
Rom.  8. 9.  if  any  have  not  the  Spirit,  he  is  none  of  n.

2  Tim.  2.19.  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  A.
Ileb.  4. 10.  hath  ceased  from  works,  as  G.  did  from  A.

11ISS.

To  hiss,  is  a  kind  of  insult  and  contempt.  1  Kings
9.  8.  All  they,  who  shall  see  the  destruction  of  this
temple,  shall  be  astonished,  and  shall  hiss,  and
say,  why  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  unto  this  land,
and  to  this  house  ?  And  Job,  speaking  of  the  wicked
under  calamities,  says,  that  they  shall  clap  their
hands  at  him,  and  shall  hiss  him  out  of  his  place.
Job  27  .  23.  And  in  Jer.  19.  8.  1  will  make  this
city  desolate  and  an  hissing ;  every  one  that
passeth  thereby  shall  be  astonished,  and  hiss,  be¬
cause  of  all  the  plagues  thereof  ?  I  will  make  this

city  the  subject  of  ridicule  and  scorn.

To  hiss,  to  call  any  one  with  hissing,  is  a  mark  of
power  and  authority .  The  Lord  says,  that  in  his
anger  he  will  hiss,  and  call  the  enemy  against
Jerusalem.  Isa.  5.  26.  He  will  hiss  unto  them
from  the  end  of  the  earth.  He  will  bring  them
with  an  hiss  from  the  very  extremities  of  the  earth.
And  in  Isa.  7.  18.  The  Lord  shall  hiss  for  the
fly,  and  shall  bring  it  to  him,  that  is  in  the  ut¬
termost  part  of  the  rivers  ot  Egypt,  for  the
bee  that  is  in  the  land  of  Assyria.  The  fly  and
the  bee,  which  God  will  bring  thus  with  a  hiss,
are  the  kings  of  Egypt  and  Assyria:  they  shall
come  with  their  troops  into  the  territories  of
Israel,  and  shall  disperse  themselves  over  the
whole  country.  Theodoret,  writing  upon  Isaiah,
remarks,  that  in  Syria,  and  Palestine,  they  who
looked  after  bees  drew  them  out  of  their  hives,  car¬
ried  them  into  the  fields,  and  brought  them  back
again  with  the  sound  of  a  flute  and  the  noise  of
hissing.  7.tc\vav\nh,  speaking  of  the  return  from,
the  Babylonish  captivity,  says,  that  the  Lord  will
gather  them,  as  it  were  with  an  hiss,  and  bring
them  back  into  their  country,  Zech.  10.  8.  Which
shows  the  ease  and  authority  with  which  he  will
perform  this  great  work.

Kings  9.8.  and  at  this  house  every  one  shall  A


Job  27.  23.  men  shall  A.  him  out  ot  his  place
Isa.  5. 26.  he  will  A.  to  them  from  end  of  the  earth
7.  18.  the  Lord  shall  A.  for  the  fly  in  Fgypt
Jer.  19. 8.  passeth  thereby  shall  A.  49. 17-  I  50. 13.
Lam.  2.  15.  they  A.  at  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem
16.  thy  enemies  A.  and  gnash  the  teeth  against  thee
Ezek.  27  .  36.  the  merchants  shall  A.  at  thee
Zeph.  2. 15.  every  one  that  passeth  by  her  shall  A.
Zech.  10.  8.  1  will  A.  for  them  and  gather  them
HISSING.

2  Chron.  29.  8.  and  he  hath  delivered  them  to  A.
Jer.  18.  16.  to  make  their  land  a  perpetual  A.

19.  8.  1  will  make  this  city  desolate  and  an  A.

25.  9.  and  I  will  make  them  an  A.  18. 1  29.  18.

51.  37.  Babylon  shall  be  an  A.  without  inhabitant
Mic.  6. 16.  should  make  inhabitants  thereof  an  r..
HIT.

1  Sam.  31. 3.  and  the  archers  A.  him,  1  Chron.  10.  3.
HITHER.

Gen.  45.  5.  now  be  not  angry  that  ye  sold  me  A.

8.  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  A.  but  God

13.  ye  shall  haste  and  bring  down  my  father  A.
Exod.  3.  5.  draw  not  nigh  A.  put  oft  thy  shoes
Josh.  2.  2.  behold,  there  came  men  in  A.  to  night

18.  6.  ye  shall  bring  the  description  A.  to  me
Judg.  18.  3.  they  said  to  him,  who  brought  thee  A.  ?
19. 12.  we  will  not  turn  aside  A.  into  the  city

1  Sam.  13.  9.  bring  A.  a  burnt-offering  to  me

14.  18.  and  Saul  said,  bring  A.  the  ark  of  God
34.  bring  me  A.  every  man  his  ox  and  his  sheep
36.  the  priest  said,  let  us  draw  near  A.  unto  God

15.  32.  bring  A.  A  gag  ||  17-28.  why  earnest  thou  A.
23.  9.  said  to  Abiathar,  bring  A.  the  ephod,  30.  7 -

2  Sam.  1.10.  I  have  brought  them  A.  unto  my  lord

1  Kings  22.  9.  hasten  A.  Micaiah  the  son  of  lmlah

2  Kings  2.  8.  Jordan  divided  A.  and  thither,  14.

2  Chron.  28.  13.  ye  shall  not  bring  in  captives  A.
Ezra  4.  2.  king  of  Assur,  which  brought  us  up  A.
Psal.  73.  10.  therefore  his  people  return  A.

81.  2.  take  a  psalm,  and  bring  A.  the  tinibrel
Prov.  9.  4.  whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in  A.  16.
Isa .  57.  3.  draw  near  A.  ye  sons  of  the  sorceress
Mat.  14.  18.  he  said,  bring  them  A.  to  me
17. 17.  Jesus  said,  bring  him  A.  to  me,  Luke  9;  41.
22.  12.  friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  A.  not  having
Luke  14.  21.  bring  in  A.  the  poor  and  the  maimed
15.  23.  bring  A.  the  fatted  calf  and  kill  it
19.  27.  bring  A.  and  slay  them  before  me
30.  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  loose  him,  bring  him  A.

.  -233


.  H  O  L


H  O  L


HOL


John  6.  2  they  said,  "Rabbi,  when  earnest  thou  h.  7
20.  27.  reach  h.  thy  finger,  reach  h.  thy  hand
Acts  9.  21.  that  carne  h.  for  that  intent,  that  he
10.  32.  call  h.  Simon,  whose  surname  is  Peter
19.  37-  ye  have  brought  h.  these  men,  which  are
See  Come.

HITHERTO.

Exod.  7-  16.  behold,  h.  thou  wouldest  not  hear
Num.  14. 1 19.  as  thou  hast  forgiven  this  people  h.
Josh.  17-  14.  as  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  A.

Judg.  16.  13.  h.  thou  hast  mocked  me,  and  told  lies

1  Sam.  1.  16.  for  out  of  my  grief  have  I  spoken  A.

7.  12.  and  saying,  h.  hath  the  Lord  helped  us

2  Sam.  7- 18.  thou  hast  brought  me  h.  1  C 'hr.  17. 16.

15.  34.  as  I  have  been  thy  father’s  servant  h.

1  Chron.  9.  18.  who  h.  waited  in  the  king's  gate
12.  29-  h.  the  greatest  part  kept  the  ward
Job  38.  11.  h.  shalt  thou  corng,  but  no  further
Psal.  71. 17-  A.  have  I  declared  thy  wondrous  works
Isa  .18. 2.  a  people  terrible  from  their  beginning  A.  7.
John  5.  17-  my  Father  worketh  It.  and  I  work

16.  24.  h.  have  ye  asked  nothing  in  my  name
ltom.  1.  13.  I  purposed  to  come,"  but  was  let  h.

1  Cor.  3.  2.  for  h.  ye  were  not  able  to  bear  it

HO.

Ruth  4.  1.  to  whom  he  said,  ho  such  a  one,  sit  down
Isa.  55.  1.  ho  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye
Zeeli.  2.  6.  ho,  ho,  come  forth,  flee  from  the  land
HOAR,  IIOARY,  See  Frost,  Hairs,  Head.
HOARY.

Job  41.  32.  one  would  think  the  deep  to  be  h.
HOISED.

Acts  27.  40.  they  h.  up  the  main-sail  to  the  wind
rIOLD,  Substantive.

Judg.  9.  46.  they  entered  into  a  li.  of  the  god  Berith
49.  they  put  them  to  the  h.  and  set  the  It.  on  fire
l  Sam.  22.  4.  Dav.  in  h.  24.  22.  2  Sam.  5. 17-  |  23. 14.
5.  abide  not  in  the  h.  depart  and  get  thee  into  land

1  Chr.  12.  16.  there  came  of  Judah  to  h.  to  David
Acts  4.  3.  and  put  them  in  h.  unto  the  next  day
Rev.  18.  2.  is  become  the  h.  of  every  foul  spirit

See  Strong.

HOLD.

Gen.  21.  18.  lift  up  the  lad,  h.  him  in  thine  hand
Exod.  5. 1.  that  they  may  h.  a  feast  to  me  in  wildern.

9.  2.  refuse  to  let  them  go,  and  wilt  A.  them  still  ?

10.  9.  for  we  must  h.  a  feast  unfo  the  Lord

20.  7.  Lord  will  not  A.  him  guiltless,  Deut.  5.  11.
Deut.  22.  f  25.  if  the  man  take  strong  h.  of  her
Ruth  3.  15.  he  said,  bring  the  vail,  and  h.  it

2  Sam.  2.  22.  how  should  I  h.  up  my  face  to  Joab
6.  6.  Uzzah  put  forth  his  hand  to  ark  of  God,  and

took  h.  of  it,  oxen  shook  it,  1  Chron.  13.  9.

1  Rings  2.  9.  now  therefore  h.  him  not  guiltless
Esth.  4.  11.  the  king  shall  h.  out  the  golden  sceptre
Job  6.  24.  teach  me,  and  I  will  A.  my  tongue

9.  28.  I  know  that  thou  wilt  not  A.  me  innocent
13.  19.  if  I  h.  my  tongue,  I  shall  give  up  the  ghost

17.  9.  the  righteous  also  shall  li.  on  his  way

41.  26.  the  spear,  dart,  the  habergeon  cannot  h
Psal.  17.  5.  h.  up  my  goings  in  thy  paths

119.  53.  horror  hath  taken  h.  upon  me,  because
117.  h.  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe
139.  10.  and  thy  right  hand  shall  h.  me
Prov.  31.  19.  and  her  hands  h.  the  distaff
Cant.  3.  8.  they  all  h.  swords,  being  expert  in  war
Isa%  41.  13.  I  the  Lord  will  h.  thy  right  hand

42.  6.  and  I  will  h.  thine  hand,  and  keep  thee
Jer.  2.  13.  hewed  broken  cisterns,  can  h.  no  water

8.  21.  astonishment  hath  taken  h.  on  me
50.  42.  they  shall  h.  the  bow  and  the  lance

43.  anguish  took  li.  of  him,  and  pangs  as  of  worn.
Ezek.  30.  21.  to  make  it  strong  to  h.  the  sword
41.  6.  that  they  might  have  h.  they  had  not  h.

Amos  6.  10.  then  shall  he  say,  li.  thy  tongue
Zcch.  11.  5.  slay  them,  and  h.  themselves  not  guilty
Mat.  6.  24.  e  se  he  will  h.  to  the  one,  Luke  16.  13

21.  26.  for  all  h.  John  as  a  prophet
Mark  7.  4.  other  things  they  have  received  to  h.

8.  ye  h.  the  tradition  of  men,  as  washing  of  pots
Rom-  1,  18.  who  h.  the  truth  in  unrighteousness
{  «*/•  2l  ~9‘  fec,eiv,e  hlm>  and  h.  such  in  reputation

2  lhess.  2.  15.  h.  the  traditions  ye  have  been  taught
Heb.  3. 14.  if  we  h.  the  beginning  of  our  confidence
Rev.  2. 14.  hast  them  that  h.  the  doctrine  of  Balaam

15.  hast  them  that  h.  doctrine  of  the  N  icolaitanes
See  Caught.

HOLD  fast.

Job  8. 15.  he  shall  h.  it  fast,  but  it  shall  not  endure
27.  6.  my  righteousness  I  h.fast,  I  will  not  let  it  go
,  theV  " ■  fast  deceit,  they  refuse  to  return
1  lhess.  5.  21.  prove  all  things,  h.fast  that  is  good
~  ljm-  L  13;  b-  fast  the  form  of  sound  words  which
Heb.  3. 6.  it  we  h.fast  the  confid.  and  the  rejoicing
4.  14.  let  us  h.  fast  our  profession,  10.  23.

Rev.  2.  25.  that  ye  have  already  h.fast  till  I  come
3.  3.  h.fast  and  repent  ||  11.  h.  fast  which  thou  hast
>  D


HOLD  peace.

Efod.  14. 14.  Lord  shall  fight,  ye  shall  li.  your  peace
IS um..  30.  4.  if  her  father  h.  Ins  peace  at  her
14.  if  her  husband  altogether  h.  his  peace  at  her
Itidg.  18.  19.  A.  thy  peace,  lay  hand  on  thy  mouth
2  Sam.  13.  20.  h.  thy  peace,  my  sister,  he  is  brother
~Jkvngs  y  3.  he  said,  1  know  it,  h.  you  your  peace,  5.
<•  ,  day  °f  good  tidings,  and  we  li.  our  peace
Til,  ■'d',  saying>  /e  your  peace,  the  day  is  holy
Jeo  11.  3.  should  thy  lies  make  men  h.  their  peace?
ik  , tlat  ye  WOldd  altogether  A.  your  peace
oo  o,  y°ur  Pea,'e,  let  me  alone  that  I  may  speak
ok  '^1  ‘  weH>  A.  thy  peace  and  I  will  speak
r,  "  “-  thy  peace,  and  1  will  teach  thee  wisdom


-Y  mm  i  vym  tec _  _  _ _ _

Psal.  8.3.  1.  O  G.  h.  not  thy  p.  be  not  still,  109.  1.
Isa.  6-.  L  for  /ion’s  sake  will  1  not  h.  my  peace


f  ,  .  .  -  -  . . .  "111  A  AAV7L  fC.  LllJ  pCUCC

A'  which  shall  never  li.  their  peace  day  nor  night
64-  1  -.  wilt  thou  A.  thy  peace  and  afflict  us  sore  ?

,  J9.  lam  pained  at  heart,  I  cannot  h.  my  p.

Pea<;e  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord
Mat.  20.  31.  multitude  rebuked  them,  because  they
,r  their  peace,  Mark  10.  48.  Luke  18.39.

Mark  1 .  25  A  thy  p.  come  out  of  him,  Luke  4.  35.
Luke  14.  40.  li  they  should  A.  their  peace  the  stones
Acts  12.  1 1 .  beckoning  to  them  to  A.  their  peace

234  1


Acts  18.  9.  be  not  afraid,  but  speak,  and  A.  not  thy  p

1  Cor.  14.  30.  to  another,  let  the  first  A.  his  peace
See  Take.

HOLDEN.

2  Kings  23.  22.  there  was  not  A.  such  a  passover,  23
Job  36.  8.  if  they  be  A.  in  cords  of  affliction
Psal.  18.  35.  and  thy  right  hand  hath  A.  me  up

71.  6.  by  thee  have  I  been  A.  up  from  the  womb
73.  23.  thou  hast  A.  me  up  by  thy  right  hand
Prov.  5. 22.  and  shall  be  A.  with  the  cords  of  his  sins
Isa.  42.  14.  1  have  long  A.  my  peac-e  and  been  still
45. 1.  whose  right  hand  I  have  A.  to  subdue  nations
Luke  24. 16.  eyes  were  A.  they  should  not  know  him
Acts  2.  24.  it  was  not  possible  he  should  be  A.  of  it
Rom.  14.  4.  yea,  he  shall  be  A.  up,  for  God  is  able
H  OLDEST.

Esth.  4.  14.  if  thou  altogether  A.  thy  peace  this  time
Job  13.  24.  wherefore  A.  thou  me  for  thine  enemy?
Psal.  77.  4.  thou  A.  my  ejres  waking,  I  am  troubled
Jer.  49.  16.  O  thou  that  A.  the  height  of  the  hill
Hab.  1.  13.  A.  thy  tong,  when  the  wicked  devoureth
Rev.  2.  13.  thou  A.  fast  my  name,  hast  not  denied
HOLDETH.

Job  2.  3.  and  still  he  A.  fast  his  integrity
26.  9.  he  A.  back  the  face  of  his  throne,  and  spread
Psal.  66.  9.  bless  God  who  A.  our  soul  in  life
Prov.  11.  12.  a  man  of  understanding  A.  his  peace
17-  28.  a  fool  when  he  A.  his  peace  is  counted  wise
llan.  10.  21.  and  none  A.  with  me  but  Michael
Amos  1.  5.  I  will  cut  off  him  that  A.  the  sceptre,  8
Rev.  2. 1.  that  A.  the  seven  stars  in  his  right  hand
HOLDING.

Isa.  33.  15.  that  shaketh  his  hands  from  A.  of  bribes
Jer.  6.  11.  I  am  weary  with  A.  in,  I  will  pour  fury
Mark  J.  3.  eat  not,  A.  the  tradition  of  the  elders
Phil.  2. 16.  A.  forth  the  word  of  life,  that  I  may
Col.  2.  19.  not  A.  the  head,  from  which  the  body

1  Tim.  1.  19.  A.  faith  and  a  good  conscience
3.  9.  A.  the  mystery  of  faith  in  a  pure  conscience
lit.  1.  9.  A.  fast  faithful  word,  as  hath  been  taught
Rev.  7.  l.  I  saw  four  angels  A.  the  four  winds

HOLDS.

Jer.  51.  30.  they  have  remained  in  their  A.

Ezek.  19.  9.  and  they  brought  him  into  A.

See  Strong.

HOLE.

Exod.  28.  32.  there  shall  be  an  A.  in  the  top  of  it

2  Kings  12.  9.  Jehoiada  bored  a  A.  in  the  lid  of  it
Cant.  5.  4.  put  in  his  hand  by  the  A.  of  the  door
Isa.  11. 8.  suck,  child  shall  play  on  the  A.  of  the  asp
51.  l.  look  to  A.  of  the  pit  whence  ye  are  digged

Jer.  13.  4.  and  hide  it  there  in  a  A.  of  the  rock
Ezek.  8.  7.  when  I  looked,  behold  a  A.  in  the  wall
Jam.  3.  f  11.  a  fountain  send  at  same  A.  sweet  water
„  HOLES.

Gen.  40.  t  16.  I  had  baskets  full  of  A.  on  my  head
1 Sam.  14. 11.  the  Hebrews  come  forth  out  of  the  A.
Isa.  2.  19.  they  shall  go  into  A.  of  the  rocks,  7.  19.
42.  22.  they  are  all  of  them  snared  in  A.  are  hid
Jer.  16.  16.  hunt  them  out  of  the  A.  of  the  rocks
48.  28.  maketh  her  nest  in  sides  of  the  A.  mouth
Mic.  7.  17.  they  shall  not  move  out  of  their  A.

Nah.  2. 12.  the  lion  filled  his  A.  with  prey,  and  dens
Hag.  1.  6.  earneth  wages  to  put  it  in  a  bag  with  A
Zech.  14. 12.  their  eyes  shall  consume  in  their  A.
Mat.  8.  20.  Jesus  saith,  the  foxes  have  A.  Luke  9.  58
_  HOLIER.

Isa.  65.  5.  come  not  near,  for  I  am  A.  than  thou
HOLIEST.

Heb.  9.  3.  the  tabernacle  which  is  called  the  A.

8.  the  way  into  the  A.  was  not  yet  made  manifest
10.  19.  to  enter  into  the  A.  by  the  blood  of  Jesus
IIO  LILY.

1  Thess.  2.  10.  ye  are  witnesses  how  A.  we  behaved
„  HOLINESS.

Exod.  15.  11.  who  is  like  thee,  glorious  in  A.  ?

28.  36.  A.  to  the  L.  35.  +  2.  1  39.  30.  Zech.  14.  20,  21 .

1  Chr.  16.  29.  come  before  the  Lord,  worship  the

Lord  in  the  beauty  of  A.  Psal.  29.  2.  |  96.  9.

2  Chr .  8. 1 11.  Solom.  said,  because  the  places  are  A.
20.  21.  singers,  that  should  praise  the  beauty  of  A.
31.  18.  in  office  they  sanctified  themselves  in  A.

Psal.  30.  4.  at  the  remembrance  of  his  A.  97.  12.
47.8.  God  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  A.

48. 1.  greatly  to  be  praised  in  the  mountain  of  his  A.
60.  6._God  hath  spoken  in  his  A.  108.  7.

89.  35.  once  have  I  sworn  by  my  A.  I  will  not  lie
93.  5.  A.  becometh  thine  house,  O  Lord,  for  ever
110. 3.  thy  peopl  shall  be  willing,  in  beauties  of  A
Isa.  23.  18.  and  her  hire  shall  be  A.  to  the  Lord
35.  8.  and  it  shall  be  called  the  way  of  A.

62.  9.  they  shall  drink  it  in  the  courts  of  my  A

63.  15.  behold  from  habitation  of  thy  A.  and  glory
18.  the  people  of  thy  A.  have  possessed  it

Jer.  2.  3.  Israel  was  A.  to  the  L.  and  the  first-fruits
23.  9.  and  because  of  the  words  of  his  A.

31.  23.  the  Lord  bless  thee,  ()  mountain  of  A.

Amos  4.  2.  the  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  his  A.

Chad.  17.  but  upon  mount  Zion  there  shall  be  A.

Mai.  2.  11.  Judah  hath  profaned  the  A.  of  the  Lord
Luke  1.75.  might  serve  him  in  A.  and  righteousness
Acts  3. 12.  as  though  by  our  A.  made  this  man  walk
Rom.  1.  4.  with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  A.

6.  19.  yield  members  servants  to  right,  unto  A
22.  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  A.  and  the  end  life
2  Cor.  7.  1.  perfecting  A.  in  the  fear  of  God
Lph.  4.  24.  new  man  created  in  l  ighteousn.  and  A.

1  l hess.  3.  13.  stablish  your  hearts  unblameab.  in  A.

4.  7.  hath  not  called  us  to  uncleanness,  but  to  A
1  1/m.  2.  15.  it  they  continue  in  faith  and  A.

Tit.  2.  3.  that  they  be  in  behaviour  as  becometh  A.
Heb.  12.  10.  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  his  A.

14.  follow  peace  with  men,  and  A.  without  which
HOLLOW.

Gen.  32.  25.  he  touched  the  A.  of  his  thigh,  32
Exod.  27.  8.  shalt  make  the  altar  A.  with  bds.  38.  t.
Lev.  14.  37.  if  the  plague  be  in  walls  with  A.  strakes
Judg.  15.  19.  God  clave  an  A.  place  in  the  jaw
Isa.  40.  12.  who  measured  waters  in  A.  of  his  hand
Jer.  52.  21.  concerning  the  pillar,  it  was  A.
IJOLPEN.

Psal.  83.  8.  they  have  A.  the  children  of  Lot


Psal.  86.  17.  because  thou,  Lord,  hast  A.  me
Isa.  31. 3.  and  he  that  is  A.  shall  fall  down
Dan.  11.  34.  they  shall  be  A.  with  a  little  help
Luke  1.  54.  hath  A.  his  servant  lsr.  in  remem  bra  m
HOLY.  ;

Holiness.  True  holiness  consists  in  a  conformity
the  nature  and  will  of  God,  whereby  a  saint  isd
Anguished  from  the  unrenewed  world,  and  is  not  a  >
tuated  by  their  principles  and  precepts,  nor  govern
by  their  maxims  and  customs.  There  are  diff'ere
degrees  of  holiness  in  the  Saints,  but  sincerity
inseparable  from  the  being  of  it.  All  gold ,  as  «
observes,  is  not  refined  to  the  same  degree  andheio
of  purity  ;  but  true  gold,  though  in  the  lowest  d'
gree  of  fineness,  will  endure  the  furnace  and  t,
touchstone,  and  by  that  trial  is  discerned  fro
counterfeit  metal.  The  Holy  Spirit,  in  renew u '
a  man,  infuses  an  universal  habit  of  holiness  tin
is,  comprehensive  of  all  the  variety  of  graces' to  1
exercised  in  the  life  of  a  Christian.  Gal.  5  <>,
23.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  pear,
long-suffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith, meet
ness,  temperance.  See  Sanctify.

Holy  is  applied,  I.  To  God  the  lather,  Son,  an
Spirit,  who  is  infinitely  holy  above  all  creature,
and  is  called  by  way  of  emphasis,  The  Holy  O.vt
All  the  holiness  and  perfection  that  creatures  0
or  shall  enjoy  and  possess  to  eternity,  is  derive
from  the  immeasurable  abyss  of  God's  holines
Jot  he  is  the  fountain  of  all  holiness  and  purity
II.  To  his  saints  who  are  holy,  [1]  By  separate
and  choice,  1  Pet.  2.  9.  [2]  By  the  imputation  &
Christ  s  holiness  or  righteousness  to  them,  Ezek
16.  14.  2  Cor.  5.  21.  [3]  By  partaking  of  a  hoi
principle  of  grace,  whereby  the  soul  is  renewed  r
holiness  by  degrees,  till  it  attains  a  perfection  0
-Heb.  12.  23.  III.  To  angels.  Mat.  25.  3 i
IV.  lo  persons  and  things  dedicated  to  Goa
Exod.  30.  35. 1  31.  14.  Lev.  16.  4.

The  prophets  call  the  Lord,  The  Holy  One  of  Is
rael,  as  if  the  name  of  Holy  were  synonymou
with  that  of  God.  They  provoked  the  Hob
One  of  Israel  to  anger,  Isa.  1.  4.  They  shal
stay  upon  the  Lord,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel
Isa.  10. 20.  And  in  Isa.  29- 19.  The  poor  amon,
men  shall  rejoice  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel
l  he  Messiah  in  like  manner  is  called  the  Hob
tt11?’  Hsal.  16.  10.  Thou  wilt  not  suffer  tnin,
Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  And  in  Luke  4
34.  1  know  thee  who  thou  art,  the  Holy  One  0
Ood.  So  in  Luke  1.  35.  That  holy  thing  whief
shall  be  born  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Soi
or  God.  Christ  is  called  simply  the  Holy  One
Acts  3.  14.  Holy  is  likewise  the  common  epithe
given  to  the  third  person  of  the  glorious  Trinity
Holy  Ghost.

The  Israelites  are  often  called  holy  in  scripture,  be
cause  they  were  the  Lord's,  who  sanctified  them
they  professed  the  true  religion,  were  called  it
holiness,  which  they  were  to  endeavour  to  acquire
and  which  many  in  reality  did  attain  to  undei
the  old  law.  Exod.  19.  6.  Ye  shall  be  an  hoi v
nation.  See  Exod.  22.31.  Lev.  11.  44,45.  Eum

Christians  are  still  more  particularly  declared  holy
lhey  having  received  the  earnests  of  the  Holy
Spirit  in  a  more  plentiful  and  perfect  manner
than  were  enjoyed  under  the  law.  In  the  /lets
and  m  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  Christians  are  gene¬
rally  described  under  the  name  of  Saints.  Acts
9-  13,  32,  41.  Lord,  1  have  heard  by  manv  of
this  man.  how  much  evil  lie  hath  done  to' thy
saints.  St.  Peter  came  down  to  the  saints  which
dwelt  in  Lydda ;  he  raised  Tabitha  J'rom  the  dead,
and  presented  her  to  the  saints.  St.  Paul  directs
his  Epistle  to  the  Romans  thus.  To  the  beloved
of  God,  called  to  be  saints,  Rom.  1.  7.

Holy  place  is  put  for  the  holy  of  holies,  or  the
most  holy  place.  Exod.  28.  29.  Aaron  shall  bear
tlie  names  of  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  breast¬
plate  of  judgment  upon  his  heart,  when  he  goeth
in  unto  the  holy  place.  Sometimes  it  is  put  for
the  court  of  the  priests.  Lev.  10.  18.  Behold,
the  blood  of  it  was  not  brought  in  within  the
holy  place ;  ye  should  indeed  have  eaten  it  in
the  holy  place  ;  the  court  of  the  priests  is  called
holy,  compared  with  the  court  .of  the  people ;  as
Ezek.  42.  14.  The  priests  shall  not  go  out  of
the  holy  place  into  the  outer  court.  It  is  also ,
taken  jor  the  whole  temple.  Acts  6.  13.  This
man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blasphemous  word®
against  this  holy  place  and  the  law.  And  some¬
times  for  heaven  itself,  Isa.  57.  15.  I  dwell
in  the  high  and  holy  place  ;  so  in  Heb.  9, 12  :
N  either  by  the  blood  of  goafs  and  calves,  but
by  his  own  blood  he  entered  in  once  into  the
holy  place,

Exod.  3. 5.  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  A.  ground
16.  23.  to-morrow  is  the  rest  of  the  A.  sabbath

19.  6.  ye  shall  be  to  me  a  A.  nation,  1  Pet.  2.  9.

20.  8.  remember  the  sabbath  day  to  keep  it  A.

-8.  88.  Israel  shall  hallow  in  all  their  h.  gifts

29.  6.  and  put  the  h.  crown  upon  the  mitre
33.  because  they  are  A.  ||  34.  because  it  is  A,

30.  25.  make  it  an  oil  of  A.  ointment  compound

32.  it  is  A.  and  it  shall  be  A.  unto  you

35.  perfume  tempered  together,  pure  and  A.

31.  14.  keep  the  sabbath,  tor  it  is  A.  unto  you,  15.
Eev.  8.  9.  and  he  put  upon  Aaron  the  A.  crown

10.10.  ye  may  putdifference  between  A.  and  unholy
16.  4.  he  shall  put  on  the  A.  linen  coat

33.  lie  shall  make  atonement  for  the  A.  sanctuary

19.  2.  lor  I  the  Lord  your  God  am  A.  21.8.

20.  7.  be  ye  A.  |,  21.  7-  for  be  is  A.  unto  bis  God
27.  14.  a  man  sanctify  bis  house  to  be  A.  to  the  I..

30.  the  tithe  of  the  land  is  A.  unto  the  Lord
Num.  5. 17.  and  the  priest  shall  take  A.  water

15.  40.  that  ye  may  remember,  and  be  A.  to  your  G

16.  3.  seeing  all  the  congregation  arc  A.  every  one
5.  the  Lord  will  shew  who  are  his,  and  who'is  h.

18. 17.  thou  shalt  not  redeem  them,  they  are  h.

31.  6.  sent  Phinehas  with  the  A.  instruments


HOL


HOL

i m  °  2.  for  there  is  none  A.  as  the  Lord
‘  5  ‘anil  the  vessels  of  the  young  men  are  A.
i  uios 8.  4-  they  brought  up  the  ark  and  the  taber¬
nacle,  and  all  the  A.  vessels,  2  C/mm.  5.  5.

,  in(j.tA.  «.).  1  perceive  this  is  an  A.  man  of  God
i  hr.  22.  19.  bring  the  A.  vessels  into  house  ot  God
1  1  above  all  that  1  have  prepared  for  the  A.  house
.  hr  on.  23.  6.  they  shall  go  in,  for  they  are  A.

*  A  said  to  the  l.evites  which  were  A.  to  the  I.d.

put  the  A.  ark  into  the  house  Solomon  built
[  but  the  other  A.  offerings  sod  they  in  pots
a  8.  28.  ye  are  A.  to  the  l.ord,  vessels  are  A.  also
'  2.  tile  //.'seed  mingled  themselves  with  people
h  o.  14.  madest  known  unto  them  thy  A.  sabbath
‘ ,j  2o.  ti.  he  will  hear  him  from  his//,  heayen
3  thou  art  A.  O  thou  that  inhabitest  praises
O.  when  I  lift  my  hands  towards  thy  A.  oracle
o  preserve  my  soul,  for  1  am  A.  O  God,  save

1.  his  A.  arm  hath  gotten  him  the  victory
’  5.  worship  at  his  footstool,  for  he  is  A.

.exalt  the  Lord,  and  worship  at  his //.lull
j.  42.  for  he  remembered  his  A.  promise
)  17.  the  Lord  is  h.  in  all  his  works
)».9.  It),  the  knowledge  of  the  A.  is  understanding
.  25.  to  man,  who  devoureth  that  which  is  A.

3.  nor  have  I  the  knowledge  of  the  A.

.  4.  3.  remainethin  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  A.

3.  one  cried  A.  A.  A.  is  the  Lord  of  hosts

3.  the  A.  seed  shall  be  the  substance  thereof
.13,  shall  worship  in  the  //.mountain  at  .1  erusalem
’  29.  a  sone,  as  when  a  A.  solemnity  is  kept

.  10.  the  Lord  hath  made  bare  his  A.  arm
.  1.3.  call  sabbath,  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  honourable

10.  thy  A.  cities  are  a  wilderness,  Zion  a  wilder,
i.  our  A.  and  beautiful  house  is  burnt  up
.  11.  15.  and  the  A.  flesh  is  passed  from  thee
ek.  22.26. put  no  difference  between  //.and  profane
38. 1  will  increase  them  as  the  //.  (lock

13.  they  be  A.  chambers  where  priests  eat

4.  there  lay  their  garments,  for  they  are  A.

.  J9.  and  lay  them  in  the  A.  chambers

'3.  shall  teach  difference  between//,  and  profane
..  1.  shall  offer  an  A.  portion  of  the  land,  4.
against  the  oblation  of  A.  portion,  7.  I  48.  18.

i.  19.  into  the  A.  chambers  of  the  priests

j.  10.  for  the  priests  shall  be  this//,  oblation

,4.  not  sell  first-fruits,  for  it  is  A.  unto  the  Lord

10.  shall  offer  the  A.  oblation  four-square,  21.

m.  4.8.  but  Daniel  came  in  before  me,  in  whom
is  the  spirit  of  the  A.  gods,  9, 18.  1  5.  11.

.  28.  his  heart  shall  be  against  the  A.  covenant
>0.  indignation  against  the  A.  covenant,  intelli¬
gence  with  them  that  forsake  the  A.  covenant
ig.  2. 12.  if  one  bear  A.  flesh,  and  with  his  skirt
ntch  bread,  or  pottage, or  wine, or  oil, shall  it  be  h.?
c/i.  2.  12.  l.ord  shall  inherit  J  udah  in  the  A.  land

13.  Lord  is  raised  up  out  of  his  A.  habitation
at.  7.  6.  give  not  that  which  is  A.  unto  the  dogs
j.  31.  shall  come  and  all  the  A.  angels  with  him
ark  6.  20.  knowing  that  he  was  a  just  man  and  A.

.  38.  cometh  in  glory  with  h.  angels,  Luke  9-  26.
rke  1.  70.  by  the  mouth  of  A.  prophets,  Acts  3.  21.
J2.  and  to  remember  his  A.  covenant

.  23.  every  male  shall  be  called  A.  to  the  Lord
hn  17. 11.//.  l  ath,  keep  those  thou  hast  given  me
rts  4. 27.  against  thy //.  child  Jesus,  whom  thou
30.  wonders  may  be  done  by  name  of  thy  h.  child
.  33.  the  place  where  thou  standest  is  A.  ground
0.  22.  was  warned  from  God  by  an  A.  angel
font.  1 . 2.  which  he  had  promised  in  the  //.scriptures
.  12.  the  commandment  is  A.  just,  and  good
1.  16.  if  t  he  first-fruit  be //.  if  the  root  be  A.

2. 1 .  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  A.  sacrifice  to  G.

6. 16.  salute  one  another  with  an  A.  kiss,  1  Cor.  16.

20.  2  Cor.  13.  12.  1  Thess.  5.  26.  1  Pet.  5.  14.
Cor.  3. 17.  the  temple  of  God  is//,  which  temple
.  14.  but  now  are  they  A.  II  34.  that  she  may  be  A.
p/i.  1.4.  we  should  be//,  and  without  blame,  5.  27.
9/.  1.22.  to  present  you  A.  and  unblameable
.  12.  put  on,  as  the  elect  of  God,  A.  and  beloved
Thess.  5.27-tiiis  epistle  be  read  to  .all  the  //.brethren
Tim.  2.  8.  lifting  up  A.  hands  without  wrath
Tim.  1.  9.  who  hath  called  us  with  an  A.  calling
>.  15.  thou  hast  known  A.  scriptures  able  to  make
it.  1.  8.  a  bishop  must  be  sober,  A.  temperate
'eh.  3.  1.  A.  brethr.  partakers  of  heavenly  calling
'.  26.  such  an  high-priest  became  us,  who  is  h.

Pet.  1. 15.  so  be  ye  A.  in  all  conversation,  16.

:.5.  an//,  priesthood  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices
3.  5.  the  A.  women  also  who  trusted  in  God
Pet.  1.  18.  when  we  were  with  him  in  A.  mount

21.  but  h.  men  spake  as  moved  by  Holy  Ghost
tj.  21.  than  to  turn  from  the  A.  commandment
3.  2.  the  words  spoken  before  by  the  A.  prophets

11.  what  persons  to  be  in  all  A.  conversation
! ev .  3.  7.  write  these  things,  saith  he  that  is  A.

1. 8.  saying,  h.  h.  h.  Ld.  God  Almighty ,  which  was
%  10.  cried,  saying,  how  long,  O  Lord,  //.and  true

14.  10.  be  tormented  in  presence  of  the  //.angels

15.  4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee?  for  thou  art  A.

18. 20.  rejoice  over  her,  3re  h.  apostles  and  prophets
20. 6.7/.  is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection
21. 10.  and  he  shewed  me  the  A.  Jerusalem
•22.  6.  Lord  God  of  the//,  prophets  sent  his  angel
If.  and  he  that  is  h.  let  him  be  A.  still
See  Convocation.

HOLY  day.

■rod.  35.  2.  the  seventh  shall  be  an  A.  day
\eh.3.  9.  this  day  is  A.  unto  the  Lord,  10,11.

'0.  31.  not  buy  it  of  them  on  sabbath  or  A.  day
’jc/.  42.  4.  with  a  multitude  that  kept  A.  day
sa.  58.13.  from  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  A.  day
■ol.  2. 16.  let  no  man  judge  you  in  respect  of  an  //.  d.
See  Garments.

HOLY  Ghost.

dat.  1. 18.  she  was  found  with  child  of  the  II.  Ghost

20.  what  is  conceived  in  her  is  of  the  11.  Ghost
3. 11.  shall  baptize  you  with  LI. Ghost  and  with  fire,
Mark  1.  8.  Luke  3.  16.  John  1.  33.  Acts  1.  5,

12.  31.  blasphemy  against  the  II.  Ghost  shall  not
he  forgiven  unto  men,  Mark 3.  29.  Luke  12.  10.

32.  whosoever  speaketh  against  the  II.  Ghost


Mat. 28. 19. baptize  in  nameof  Father, Son,  and  II. G.
Mark  12. 36.  David  said  by  the  II.  Ghost,  /lets  1. 16.

13.  11.  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  II.  Ghost
Luke  1. 15.  John  shall  be  filled  with  the  II.  Ghost

35.  the  JI.  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee
41.  and  Elisabeth  was  filled  with  the  II.  Ghost
67.  his  father  Zacharias  was  filled  with  II.  Ghost
2.25.  name  was  Simeon,  and  II. Ghost  was  upon  him
26.  and  it  was  revealed  unto  him  by  the  II.  Ghost

3.  22.  the  II.  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily  shape
4. 1.  Jesus  being  full  of  the  H.  Ghost  returned
12. 12.  H.  Ghost  shall  teach  you  in  the  same  hour

John  7.  39.  for  the  IL  Ghost  was  not  yet  given

14.  26.  but  the  Comforter,  who  is  the  II.  Ghost
20.22.  he  saith,  receive  ye  the  H.  G.  Acts  2.  38.

Acts  1.  2.  after  that  he  through  the  II.  G.  had  given

8.  after  that  the  II.  Ghost  is  come  upon  you
2.4.  they  were  all  filled  with  the  II.  Ghost.  4.  31.

33.  having  received  the  promise  ot  the  II.  Ghost

4.  8.  Peter,  filled  with  the  II.  G.  said  unto  them

5.  3.  Satan  filled  thy  heart  to  lie  to  the  II.  Ghost
32.  we  are  his  witnesses,  so  is  also  the  II.  Ghost

6.  3.  look  out  men  full  of  the  11.  G.  and  wisdom

5.  they  chose  Stephen,  a  man  full  of  the  II.  G.

7.  51.  ye  stiff-necked,  ye  always  resist  the  II.  G.
55.  he  being  full  of  II.  G.  looked  up  to  heaven

8.  15.  prayed  that  they  miaht  receive  the  II.  G.

17.  hands  on  them,  and  they  received  the  H.  G.

18.  when  Simon  saw  that  the  II.  G.  was  given

19.  on  whom  1  lay  bands,  he  may  receive  H.  G.

9. 17.  thou  mightest  be  filled  with  the  II.  Ghost
31.  walking  in  the  comfort  of  the  11.  Ghost

10.  38.  how  God  anointed  Jesus  with  the  II.  G.

44.  II.  G.  fell  on  all  which  heard  the  word

45.  on  Gentiles  was  poured  the  gift  of  the  II.  G.

47.  which  have  received  the  II.  G.  as  well  as  we

11.  15.  11.  G.  fell  on  them  as  on  us  at  beginning
16.  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with  the  H.  Ghost
24.  Barnabas,  full  of  the  II.  Ghost  and  faith

13.  2.  the  II.  G.  said,  separate  Barnabas  and  Saul
4.  being  sent  forth  by  the  II.  Ghost,  departed

9.  Paul,  filled  with  the  II.  G.  set  his  eyes  on  him
52.  the  disciples  were  filled  with  the  H.  Ghost

15.  8.  giving  them  the  II.  Ghost  as  he  did  unlo  us
28.  it  seemed  good  to  the  II.  Ghost,  and  to  us

16. 6.  wiere  forbidden  of  the  II.  G.  to  preach  in  Asia

19.  2.  have  ye  received  the  II.  Ghost?  we  have  not

heard  whether  there  be  any  11.  Ghost

6.  laid  hands  on  them,  the  II.  G.  came  on  them

20.  23.  save  that  the  11.  G.  witnesseth  in  every  city

28.  over  which  II.  G.  hath  made  you  overseers

21.  11.  thus  saith  the  H.  Ghost,  so  shall  the  Jew’s
28.25.  well  spake  the  II.  G.  by  Lsaias  the  prophet
Horn.  5. 5.  love  of  God  shed  in  hearts  by  the  11.  G.

9. 1.  conscience  bearing  me  witness  in  the  II.  Gh.

14. 17.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  joy  in  the  H.  Ghost
15. 13.  abound  in  hope  through  power  of  the  H.  G.

16.  acceptable,  being  sanctified  by  the  II.  Ghost

1  Cor.  2.  13.  but  in  words  which  the  11.  G.  teacheth
6. 19.  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  H.  Ghost

12. 3.  say  that  Jesus  is  l.ord,  but  by  the  II.  Ghost

2  Cor.  6.  6.  by  kindness,  by  the  II.  Ghost,  by  love
13. 14.  the  communion  of  the  II.  G.  be  with  you

1  Thess.  1.  5.  for  our  gospel  came  in  the  II.  Ghost
6.  received  the  word  w  ith  joy  of  the  11.  Ghost

2  Tim.  1. 14.  that  good  thing  keep  by  the  II.  Ghost
Tit.  3.6.  he  saved'us  by  the  renewing  of  the  11.  G.
II eh.  <2  A.  bearing  witness  with  gifts  of  die  II.  Ghost

3. 7.  as  the  H.  Ghost  saith,  to-day  if  ye  will  hear
6.  4.  and  were  made  partakers  of  the  II.  Ghost
9.  8.  the  II.  Ghost  this  signifying,  that  the  way
10. 15.  whereof  the  H.  Ghost  is  a  witness  to  us

1  Pet.  1.12.  with  the  H.  G.  sent  down  from  heaven

2  Pet.  1. 21.  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  II.  G.
1  John  5. 7.  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  II.  Gh.
Jude  20.  but  ye,  beloved,  praying  in  the  H.  Ghost

. lee  God,  Habitation,  Hill.

Most  HOLY.

Exod.  26.  33.  between  the  holy  place  and  the  most  h.
34.  on  ark  of  the  testimony  in  the  most  h.  place

29.  37.  and  it  shall  be  an  altar  most  h.  40. 10.

30.  10.  it  is  most  li.  ||  29.  that  they  may  be  most  li.
36.  the  perfume  shall  be  to  you  most  h.

Lev.  2.  3.  the  remnant  of  the  meat  offering  shall  he
Aaron’s,  it  is  most  h.  10.  !  6.  17-1  10. 12.

6.  25.  the  sin  offering  is  most  h.  29. 1.10.  17-

7.  1.  the  trespass  offering  is  most  h.  6. 1  14.  13.

21.  22.  eat  bread  of  God,  both  of  most  h.  and  holy
24.  9.  the  cakes  of  fine  flour  are  most  h.  to  him
27.28.  every  devoted  thing  is  most  h.  to  the  Lord
JSvm.  4.  4.  this  shall  be  service  about  mosth.  things

19.  thus  do.  when  they  approach  the  most  h.  things
18. 9.  the  offering  they  render  to  me  shall  be  m.  h.

10.  in  the  most  h.  place  shalt  thou  eat  it
1  Kings  6.  16.  he  built  them  for  the  most  h.  place
7.50."  Solomon  made  vessels  for  the  most  h.  place

8.  6.  brought  the  ark  unto  m.  h.  place,  2  Chr.  5.  7.

1  Chr  on.  6.  49.  Aaron  and  sens  for  work  of  most  h.

23. 13.  Aaron  separated  to  sanctify  most  h.  things

2  Chron.  3.  8.  Solomon  made  the  most  h.  house
10.  in  the  most  h.  house  he  made  two  cherubims

4.  22.  the  inner  doors  thereof  for  the  most  h.  place

31. 14.  and  Kore  to  distribute  the  most  h.  things
Ezra  2.  63.  not  eat  of  the  most  h.  things,  Neh.  7.  65.
Ezek.  43.  12.  the  whole  limit  shall  be  most  h.

44.  13.  shall  not  come  near  in  the  most  h.  place

45. 3.  in  it  shall  be  the  sanctuary  and  most  h.  place

48.  12.  this  oblation  shall  be  a  thing  most  h.

IJnn.  Q.  24.  seventy  weeks  to  anoint  the  most  h.
Has.  11.  +  12.  Judah  is  faithful  with  the  most  A.
Jude  20.  building  yourselves  on  your  mosth.  faith

HOI  ,Y  "mountain.

Psal.  87.  1.  his  foundation  is  in  the  A.  mountains
Isa.  11.  9.  nor  destroy  in  my  A.  mountain-,  65.  25.
56.7.  even  them  will  l  bring  to  my//,  mountain
57.  13.  and  he  shall  inherit  my  h.  mountain
65. 11.  ye  are  they  that  forget  my  h.  mountain
66.  20.  on  mules  and  swift  beasts  to  my  A.  mount.
Ezek.  20.  40.  in  my  A.  mountain  they  shall  serve  me

28. 14.  thou  wast  upon  the  A.  mountain  ot  God
Van.  9. 16.  let  thy  anger  be  turned  from  thy  A.  m.

20.  presenting  supplication  for  the  A.  mountain


HOL

Van.  11 . 45.  plant  tabernacles  in  glorious  A.  mount.
Joel  2.  1.  sound  an  alarm  in  my  //.  mountain

3. 17.  1  am  the  Lord,  dwelling  in  Zion  my  A.  monn.
Chad.  16.  for  as  ye  have  drunk  on  my  A.  mountain
Zeph.  3. 11.  no  more  haughty,  because  of  A.  mount.
Zech.  8.  3.  mountain  of  the  Lord  called  the  //.  mount.
HOLY  name.

Lev.  20.  3.  seed  to  Molech,  to  profane  my  //.  name

22.  2.  and  that  they  profane  not  my  //.  name
32.  neither  shall  ye  profane  my  //.  name
1  Chron.  16. 10.  glory  ye  in  his  //.  name,  Ps.  105.  3
35.  we  give  thanks  to  thy  h.  name,  Psal.  106.  47.

29.  16.  to  build  thee  an  house  for  thy  //.  name
Psal.  33.  21.  because  we  trusted  in  his  A.  name
99.  3.  praise  thy  terrible  name,  for  it  is  A.

103.  1.  bless  the  Lord,  bless  his  A.  name,  145.  21.

111.  9.  A.  and  reverend  ik  his  name,  Luke  1.  49-
Isa,  57.  15.  saith  the  lofty  One,  whose  name  is  A.
Ezek.  20.  39.  but  pollute  you  my  A.  name  no  more
36.  20.  they  profaned  my  A.  name  when  they  said

21 .  but  I  had  pity  for  mine  A.  name

22.  not  for  your  sakes,  but  for  my  A.  name's  sake

39.  7. 1  will  make  my  A.  name  known  in  lsr.  1  will

not  let  them  pollute  my  A.  name  any  more
25.  and  I  will  be  jealous  for  my  A.  name
43.  7.  my  A.  name  shall  Israel  no  more  defile
8.  they  have  defiled  my  A.  n.  by  their  abominat.
Amos  2. 7.  go  in  to  same  maid,  to  profane  my  A.  //.
HOLY  One.

Vent.  33.  8.  Thummim  and  Urim  be  with  thy  A.  O.
Job  6.  10.  not  concealed  the  words  of  the  A.  One
Ps.  16. 10.  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  nor  suffer  thine
A.  One  to  see  corruption,  Acts  2.  27. 1  13.  35.
89.  19.  then  thou  spakestin  vision  to  thy  A.  One
Isa.  10. 17.  and  his  A.  One  shall  be  for  a  flame
29.  23.  they  shall  sanctify  the  A.  One  of  Jacob

40.  25.  to  whom  shall  I  be  equal  ?  saith  the  A.  One
43.  15.  1  am  the  Lord  your  A.  One,  the  Creator
49.  7.  thus  saith  the  Bedeemer  of  lsr.  his  A.  One

Van.  4. 13.  an  A.  One  came  down  from  heaven,  23.
llos.  11.  9.  for  l  am  the  A.  One  in  the  midst  of  thee
Iluh.  1. 12.  art  thou  not  from  everlast.  O  L.  my  A.  O.

3.  3.  the  A.  One  came  from  mount  Paran
Mark  1 .24.  man  with  unclean  spir.  said,  I  know  thee
who  thou  art,  the  A.  One  of  God,  Luke  4.  34.
Acts  3.  14.  but  ye  denied  the  A.  One  and  the  Just

1  John  2.  20.  ye  have  an  unction  from  the  A.  One

HOLY  One  of  Israel.

2  Kings  1 9. 22.  thou  hast  exalted  thy  voice,  and  lifted

thy  eyes  against  the  A.  One  of  lsr.  Isa.  37.  23.
Psal.  71.22.  to  thee  will  I  sing,  O  thou  A.  One  of  lsr.
78.  41.  yea,  they  limited  the  A.  One  of  Israel
89. 18.  and  the  A.  One  of  Israel  is  our  king
Isa.  1.  4.  they  have  provoked  the  A.  One  of  Israel

5. 19.  let  counsel  of  the  A.  One  of  Israel  draw  nigb
24.  and  despised  the  word  of  the  A.  one  of  Israel

10.20.  shall  stay  on  the  Lord,  the  A.  One  of  Israel
12.  6.  great  is  the  A.  One  of  Israel  in  midst  of  thee
17.  7.  nis  eyes  shall  have  respect  to  A.  One  of  lsr.

29.  19.  tbe  poor  shall  rejoice  in  the  A.  One  of  lsr.

30.  11.  cause  the  A.  One  of  Israel  to  cease  from  us
12.  thus  saith  the  A.  One  of  Israel,  15.

31.  1.  they  look  not  unto  the  A.  One  of  Israel

41.  14.  saith  thy  Bedeemer,  the  A.  One  of  Israel

16.  and  thou  shalt  glory  in  the  A.  One  of  Israel
20.  and  the  A.  One  of  Israel  hath  created  it

43.  3.  I  am  the  Ld.  the  A.  One  of  lsr.  thy  Saviour
14.  thus  saith  your  P»edeemer,  the  A.  One  of  lsr.
45.  11.  the  Ld.  the  A.  One  of  Israel,  and  his  Maker
47.  4.  l.ord  of  hosts  is  his  name,  the  A.  One  of  Isr.%

48. 17.  saith  thy  Redeemer,  the  A.  One  of  lsr.  54. 5.
49.  7.  the  Redeemer///  Israel,  and  his  A.  One

55.  5.  nations  run  unto  thee,  for  the  A.  One  of  lsr.
60.  9.  bring  their  gold  to  the  A.  One  of  Israel
14.  shall  call  thee,  the  Zion  of  the  A.  One  of  lsr.
Jer.  50.  29.  Babylon  proud  ag.  the  A.  One  oj  lsr.
51.5.  land  filled  with  sin  against  the  A.  One  of  lsr.
Ezek.  39.  7.  that  1  am  the  Lord,  the  A.  One  in  lsr.
HOLY  ones.

Van.  4. 17.  the  demand  by  the  word  of  the  A.  ones
HOLY  oil.

Exod.  30.  25.  it  shall  be  an  A.  anointing  oil,  31.

37. 29.  and  be  made  the  A.  anointing  oil
Num.  35.  25.  the  high-priest  was  anointed  with  A.  oil
Psal.  89.  20.  with  my  A.  oil  have  I  anointed  him
HOLY  people.

Veut.  7. 6.  thou  art  an  A.  peo.  to  the  Lord,  14.  2, 21 .

26. 19.  that  thou  mayest  be  an  A.  people  to  the  Ld.

28.  9.  L.  shall  establish  thee  an  A.  people  to  himselt
Isa.  62.  12.  they  shall  call  them,  the  A.  people
Van.  8.  24.  he  shall  prosper,  and  destroy  the  A.  peo.

12.  7.  to  scatter  the  power  of  the  A.  people
HOLY  place.

Exod.  28.  29.  when  he  goeth  in  unto  the  A.  place,  35.
43.  come  near  to  minister  in  the  A.  place,  29.  30.

29.  31.  thou  shalt  seeth  his  flesh  in  the  A.  place
31. 11.  may  make  sweet  incense  for  the  A.  place
35.  19.  to  do  service  in  the  A.  place,  39. 1,  41.

38.  24.  the  gold  in  all  the  work  of  the  A.  place

Lev.  6.  16.  with  unleavened  bread  it  shall  be  eaten
in  the  A.  place,  26. 1  7.  6. 1  10.  13. 1  24.  9'.
27.  thou  shalt  wash  that  in  the  A.  place
30.  brought  to  reconcile  withal  in  the  A.  place

10. 17.  have  ye  not  eaten  sin  offering  in  the  A.  place?
18.  blood  was  not  brought  in  within  the  A.  place

14.  13.  shall  slay  the  burnt  offering  in  the  A.  place
16.2.  that  he  come  not  at  all  times  into  the  h.  place
3.  thus  shall  Aaron  come  into  the  A  place

16.  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  h.  place  ■

17.  goeth  to  make  atonement  in  the  A. place,  27.

20.  hath  made  an  end  of  reconciling  the  A.  place

23.  he  put  on  when  he  went  into  the  A.  place

24.  shall  wash  his  flesh  with  water  in  the  A.  place
Josh.  5. 15.  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is  A.

1  Kings 8. 8.  the  staves  were  seen  out  in  the  A.  place
10.  priests  come  out  of  the  A.  place,  2  Chr.  5.  11.

1  Chron.  23.  32.  keep  the  charge  of  the  A.  place

2  Chron.  29.  5.  carry  filthiness  out  of  the  A.  place
7.  nor  offered  burnt  offerings  in  the  A.  place

30.  27.  prayer  came  up  to  his  A.  dwelling-p/zr/e
35.  5.  stand  in  the  A.  place  according  to  divisions

Ezra  9.  8.  and  to  give  us  a  nail  in  las  A.  place

235


HOM


HON


HON


Psal.  24.  3.  and  who  shall  stand  in  his  h.  place  /
40.  4.  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  />.  place
68.  17.  among  them  as  in  Sinai,  in  the  //.  place
Keel.  8.  10.  who  had  gone  from  the  place  of  the  //.
Isa.  57.  15.  1  dwell  in  the  high  and  h.  place
Kzek.  4).  4.  he  said  to  me,  this  is  the  most  //.  place

42.  13.  the  place  is  h.  ||  14.  not  go  out  of  the  h.  place
45.  4.  it  shall  be  an  h.  place  for  the  sanctuary

Mat.  24. 15.  ye  see  the  abomination  stand  in  //.  place
Acts  6.  13.  blasphemous  words  against  this  h.  place

21.  28.  this  man  hath  polluted  this  h.  place
lleb.  9.  12.  Christ  entered  in  once  into  the  h.  place

25.  the  high  priest  entered  every  year  into  h.  place

HOLY  places.

2  Chron.  8. 11.  because  the  places  are  It.  wbereunto
Psal.  68.  35.  thou  art  terrible  out  of  thy  h.  places
Ezek.  7.  24.  and  their  h.  places  shall  be  defiled
21.  2,  and  drop  thy  word  toward  the  h.  places
lleb.  9.  24.  Christ  is  not  entered  into  h.  places  made
Shall  be  HOLY.

Exod.  22.  31.  and  ye  shall  be  h.  men  unto  me
29.  37.  whatsoever  toucheth  the  altar  shall  be  h.
30. 29.  whatsoever  toucheth  them  s.  be  h.  Lev.  6. 18.
32.  it  is  holy,  and  it  shall  be  h.  unto  you,  37.

40.  9.  shalt  anoint  the  tabernacle,  and  it  shall  be  h.
Lev.  6.  27.  shall  touch  the  flesh  thereof  shalt  be  h.
11.  44.  ye  s.  be  h.  for  1  am  holy,  45.  1 19. 2.  1  20.  26.

19.  24.  fruit  thereof  shall  be  h.  to  praise  the  Lord

21.  6.  the  priests  shall  be  h.  unto  their  God

23.  20.  they  shall  be  h.  to  the  Lord  for  the  priest
25.  12.  it  is  the  jubilee,  it  shall  be  h.  unto  you
27.  9.  that  any  man  giveth  to  the  I,ord  shall  be  h.

10.  then  the  exchange  thereof  shall  be  h.  33.

21.  in  the  jubilee  it  shall  be  h.  to  the  Lord
32.  the  tenth  shall  be  h.  unto  the  Lord

Num.  6.  5.  the  Nazarite  shall  he  h.  unto  the  T.ord

16.  7-  the  man  whom  Lord  doth  choose  he  shall  be  h.
18. 10.  every  male  shall  eat  it,  it  shall  be  h.  unto  thee

Deut.  23.  14.  therefore  shall  thy  cample h.

Jer.  31.  40.  the  gate  towards  the  east  shall  be  h.
Ezek.  45. 1.  the  holy  portion  shall  be  h.  with  borders
Joel  3. 17. 1  dwell  in  Zion,  then  shall  Jerusalem  be  h.
HOLY  Spirit.

Psal.  51.  11.  and  take  not  thy  h.  Spirit  from  me
Isa.  63.  10.  they  rebelled  and  vexed  his  h.  Spirit

11.  where  is  he  that  put  his  h.  Spirit  w  ithin  him  ?
Luke  11.  13.  your  heavenly  Father  give  the//.  Spirit
Eph.  1.  13.  sealed  with  that  //.  Spirit  of  promise

4.  30.  grieve  not  the  h.  Spirit  of  God,  w  hereby

1  'These.  4.  8.  who  hath  given  unto  us  his  h.  spirit
HOLY  temple.

Psal. 5. 7. 1  w’ill  worship  tow'ard  thy  h.  temple,  138.2.
11.4.  the  T.ord  is  in  his  h.  temple,  his  eyes  behold
65.  4.  be  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  thy  h.  tern.
79.  1.  thy  h.  temple  have  they  defiled,  they  laid
Jonah  2.  4.  I  w  ill  look  again  toward  thy  h.  temple

7.  my  prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  to  thy  h.  temple
Mic.  1.  2.  the  Lord  from  his  h.  temple  be  witness
llab.  2.  20.  but  the  Lord  is  in  his  h.  temple
Eph.  2.  21.  groweth  to  an  h.  temple  in  the  Lord
HOLY  thing.

Lev.  22.  10.  no  stranger  shall  eat  of  the  //.  thing

14.  if  a  man  eat  of  the  h.  thing  unwittingly
27.  23.  thy  estimation  as  an  h.  thing  to  the  Lord

Num.  4.  15.  but  they  shall  not  touch  any  h.  thing
Ezek.  48.  12.  oblation  be  to  them  a  thing  most  //.
Luke  1.  35.  therefore  that  h.  thing  born  of  thee
HOLY  things.

E.rod.  28.  38.  Aaron  may  bear  the  iniquity  of  h.  t.
Lev.  5. 15.  sin  thro’  ignorance  in  the  h.  things  of  L.

22.  2.  separate  themselves  from  the  h.  things  of  Isr.

3.  whosoever  lie  be  that  goeth  unto  the  it.  things

4.  not  eat  of  the  //.  things  till  he  be  clean,  6,  12.

7-  be  clean,  and  shall  afterward  eat  of  the  h.  th.

15.  they  shall  not  profane  the  h.  things  of  Israel

16.  to  bear  iniquity,  wdieti  they  eat  h.  things
Num.  4.  20.  not  go  in  to  see,  when  //.  t.  are  covered

5.  9.  every  offering  of  h.  things  shall  be  his,  18. 19.

18.  32.  neither  shall  ye  pollute  the  h.  things
Dent.  12.  26.  thy  h.  things  take  and  go  to  the  place
1  Chroti.  23.  28.  their  office  was  in  purifying  h.  th.
£  C '/iron.  31.  6.  they  brought  in  the  tithe  of//,  things
Neh.  10.  33.  we  made  ordinances  for  the  h.  things

1-2.  47.  they  sanctified  the  //.  things  to  the  Levities
Ezek.  20.  40.  there  will  1  require  your//,  things
22.  8.  thou  hast  despised  mine  //.  things

26.  her  priests  have  profaned  my  //.  things

44.  8.  ye  have  not  kept  the  charge  of  my  //.  things

13.  shall  not  come  near  to  any  of  my  //.  things
1  Cor.  9.  13.  they  who  minister  about  //.  things
lleb.  8.  t  2.  an  high  priest,  a  minister  of//,  things
HOME.

Gen.  39.  16.  laid  up  garment  till  her  lord  came  //.

43.  16.  bring  these  men  //.  slay  and  make  ready
Exod.  9.  19.  man  and  beast  not  brought  //.  shall  die
Deut.  21. 12.  then  thou  shalt  bring  her  //.  to  thy  hou.

24.  5.  but  he  shall  be  free  at  h.  one  year

Josh.  2.  18.  bring  all  thy  father’s  household  //.  to  thee
Jvdg.  11.  9.  if  ye  bring  me  //.  again  to  fight

19.  9.  get  on  your  way,  that  thou  mayest  go  //.
Puth  1.  21.  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  //,  empty

1  Sam.  2.  20.  and  they  went  unto  their  own  //.

6.7.  and  bring  their  calves  //.  from  them

10.  and  the  men  shut  up  their  calves  at  //.

10.  26.  and  Saul  also  went  h.  toGibeah.  24.  22.

18.  2.  let  him  go  no  more  //.  to  his  father’s  house

2  Sam.  13.  7.  then  David  sent  //.  to  Tamar,  saying

14.  13.  the  king  doth  not  fetch  //.  his  banished

17.  2.3.  Ahithophel  gat  him  //.  to  his  house

1  Kings  5. 14.  a  month  in  Lebanon,  two  months  at  //.

13.  7.  come  //.  with  me  and  refresh  thyself,  15.

2  Kings  14.  10.  and  tarry  at  //.  2  Chron.  25.  19.

1  Chron.  13.  12.  bring  the  ark  of  God  //.  to  me

13.  so  David  brought  not  the  ark  //.  to  himself
■2  Chron.  25.  10.  Amaziah  separated  the  army  of
Ephr.  to  go  //.  they  returned  //.  in  great  anger
Esth.  5. 10.  when  Hainan  came  //.  called  his  friends
Job  39.  12.  believe  that  he  will  bring  //.  thy  seed
Psal.  68.  12.  she  that  tarried  at  h.  divided  the  spoil
.Prov.  7.  19.  the  good  man  is  not  at  h.  he  is  gone

20.  and  he  will  come  //.  at  the  day  appointed
Eccl.  12.  5.  because  man  goeth  to  Ins  long  //.

236


Jer.  6.  t  2.  likened  Zion  to  a  woman  dwelling  at  a.
39.  14.  that  Gedaliah  should  carry  him  //.

Lam.  1.20.  abroad  the  sword,  at  //.  there  is  as  death
llab.  2.  5.  he  is  a  proud  man,  neither  keepeth  at//.
Hag.  1.  9.  when  ye  brought  it  //.  1  did  blow  upon  it
Mat.  8.  6.  my  servant  lieth  at  h.  sick  of  the  palsy
Mark o.  19-  go  //.  to  thy  friends  and  tell  them
Luke 9.61.  letfirstbid  them  farewell  which  are  at  //.

15.  6.  when  he  cometh  //.  he  calleth  his  friends
John  16.  +  32.  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own  //.
19.27.  thatdisciple  took  her  to  his  own  //.

20.  10.  the  disciples  went  away  to  their  own  b.
Acts  2.  t  46.  contin.in  temple  breaking  bread  at  //.
21. 6.  we  took  ship,  and  they  returned  //.  again

1  Cor.  11.  34.  if  any  man  hunger  let  him  eat.  at  //.

14.  35.  let  them  ask  their  husbands  at  //.

2  Cor.  5.  6.  that  whilst  we  are  at  //.  in  the  body

1  Ttm.  5.  4.  let  them  learn  to  shew  piety  at  //.

Tit.  2.  5.  to  be  discreet,  chaste,  keepers  at  //.

HOM  V.-born.

Exod.  12.  49.  one  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  h.-born
Lev.  18.  9-  thy  sister  whether  born  at  //.  or  abroad
Jer.  2. 14.  is  Israel  a  servant  ?  is  he  a  h.-born  slave  ?
HOMER

JVas  a  measure  of  capacity  in  use  among  the
Hebrews,  containing  six  pints  very  nearly.  It
was  the  tenth  part  of  the  Ephah,  and  teas  the
measure  of  manna  which  God  appointed  for  every
Israelite,  Exod.  16.  16,  36.  See  I’.PHAH.

Lev.  27. 16.  an  //.  of  barley-seed  at  fifty  shekels
Isa.  5.  10.  the  seed  of  an  h.  shall  yield  an  ephah
Ezek.  45.  11.  the  measure  shall  be  after  the  //.

13.  the  sixth  part  of  an  ephah  of  an  h.  of  wheat

14.  tenth  part  of  a  bath,  for  ten  baths  are  an  //.
IIos.  3.  2.  1  bought  her  for  an  //.  and  half  an  //.

HONEST.

Luke  8.  15.  which  in  an  //.  and  good  heart,  having
Acts  6.  3.  look  out  among  you  seven  men  of  //.  report
Pom.  12. 17-  provide  things  h.  insight  of  all  men

2  Cor.  8.21.  provid.  //.things  in  sight  of  L.  and  men

1.3.  7.  but  that  ye  shotdd  do  that  which  is  //.

Phil.  4. 8.  whatsoever  things  are  //.just,  pure,  lovely
Tit.  3.  t  14.  let  ours  learn  to  profess  //.  trades

1  Pet.  2. 12.  having  our  conversation//,  am.  Gentiles
HONESTLY.

Pom.  1.3.  13.  let  us  walk  h.  as  in  the  day,  not  in  riot.
1  Thess.  4.  12.  may  walk  h.  toward  them  without
lleb.  13.18.  conscience,  in  all  things  willing  to  live//.
HONESTY.

1  Tim.  2.  2.  may  lead  peaceable  life  in  godli.  and  h.

HONOUR,

Or  to  honour,  in  scripture  style,  is  taken  not  only
for  the  inward  or  outward  respect  which  people
have  and  pay  to  persons  who  are  superior  to  them  ;
and  to  whom  they  owe  particular  marks  of  defer¬
ence  and  distinction :  but  likewise  for  real  ser¬
vices  which  are  due  to  them.  Exod.  20.  12,
Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother.  This  pre¬
cept  requires,  not  only  that  we  should  shew  our
parents  respect  and  deference,  but  likewise  that
we  should  assist  and  relieve  them,  and  perform  such
services  for  them  as  they  may  stand  in  need  of;
as  this  precept  is  explained  by  out  Saviour  ;  Mat.

15.  4,  5,  6.  Honour  is  likewise  taken  in  the  same
sense  in  1  Tim.  5.  3,  17.  Honour  widows  that
are  widows  indeed.  Not  only  respect t  but  also
relieve  them.  Let  elders  that  rule  well  be  counted
worthy  of  double  honour.  Let  them  have  a
liberal  maintenance.  Honour  is  taken  for  a  re¬
compense  or  reward,  Nuin.  24.  11.  1  thought  to
promote  thee  unto  great  honour,  but  lo,  the  Lord
hath  kept  thee  back  from  honour;  that  is,  hath
deprived  thee  of  the  reward  I  designed  for  thee.
By  honour  is  also  understood  that  adoration
which  is  due  to  God  only.  Psal.  29.  2.  Give  unto
the  T.ord  the  honour  due  unto  his  name.  So  in
Mai.  1.  6.  If  then  I  be  a  father,  where  is  mine
honour?  And  in  1  Tim.  1.  17.  Unto  the  only
wise  God  be  honour  and  dory.  It  is  put  for  an
honourable  function,  or  office,  such  as  was  that  of
the  holy  priesthood  under  the  law,  Heb.  5.  4.  No
man  taketh  this  honour,  this  honourable  office,
unto  himself,  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as
was  Aaron.  And  for  those  great  blessings  and
enjoyments  which  are  bestowed  on  the  saints  in
heaven.  Rom.  2.  10,  Glory,  honour,  and  peace
to  every  man  that  worketh  good.

Gen.  49.  6.  to  their  assembly,  my  //.  be  not  united
Exod.  8.  +  9.  Moses  said,  have  this  //.  over  me

14.  17.  and  I  will  get  me  //.  upon  Pharaoh

18.  when  I  have  gotten  me  //.  upon  Pharaoh
Num.  22.  17.  I  will  promote  thee  unto  great  //.  37.
24.  11.  the  Lord  hath  kept  thee  back  from  //.

27.  20.  thou  shalt  put  some  of  thine  //.  upon  him
Deut.  26.  19.  make  thee  high  above  all  nations  in  //.
Judg.  4.  9.  the  journey  shall  not  be  for  thine  //.

13. 17.  thy  sayings  come  to  pass,  we  may  do  thee  h.

2  Sam.  6.  22.  of  them  shall  1  be  had  in  //.

1  Kings  3.  13.  T  have  also  given  thee  riches  and  //.

1  Chr.  16.  27.  glory  and  //.  are  in  his  presence

17-  18.  what  can  Dav.  say  more  for  //.  of  thy  serv.
29.  12.  both  riches  and  //.  come  of  thee

28.  David  died  in  old  age,  full  of  riches  and  //.

2  Chr.  1.  11.  thou  hast  not  asked  riches  or  li.

12.  I  will  give  thee  riches,  and  wealth,  and  h.

17.  5.  Jehoshaphat  had  //.  in  abundance,  18.  1.

26.  18.  nor  shall  it  be  for  thy  //.  from  the  Lord
32.  27*  Hezekiah  had  much  riches  and  //.

.33.  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  did  him  //.

Esth.  1.  4.  to  shew  the  //.  of  his  excellent  majesty
20.  all  wives  shall  give  to  their  husbands  h.

6.  3.  what  //.  hath  been  done  Mordecai  for  this?
t  6.  the  man  in  whose  //.  the  kingdelighteth

8.  16.  the  Jews  ha/Fliaht  and  gladness,  joy  and  //.
Job  14.  21.  his  sons  come  to  //.  he  knoweth  it  not
Psal.  7.  5.  let  the  enemy  lay  mine  //.  in  the  dust
8.  5.  thou  hast  crowned  him  with  //.  lleb.  2.  7,  9.
21. 5.  h.  and  majesty  hast  thou  laid  upon  him
26.  8.  I  loved  the  place  where  thine  //.  dw’elleth

29.  +  2.  give  unto  the  Lord  the  //.  of  his  name
49.  12.  nevertheless  man  being  in  //.  abideth  not

20.  man  that  is  in  //.  and'understandeth  not


Psal.  66.  2.  sing  forth  the  //.  of  his  name,  make
71.  8.  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy  b.  alt  the  '
96.  6.  //.  and  majesty  are  before  him,  strength  :
104.  1.  thou  art  clothed  with  //.  and  majesty
112.  9.  his  horn  shall  be  exalted  with  //.

145.  5.  1  will  speak  of  the  //.  of  thy  majesty
149.  9.  this  //.  have  all  his  saints,  praise  the  Lc
Prov.  3.  16.  and  in  her  left  hand  are  riches  and

4.8.  exalt  her,  and  she  shall  bring  thee  to  h.

5.  9.  lest  thou  give  thine  //.  to  others,  thy  year.
8.  18.  riches  and  //.  are  with  tne,  durable  riche

11.  16.  a  gracious  woman  retaineth  h.

14.  28.  in  the  multitude  of  people  is  the  king’s//.

15.  33.  and  before  //.  is  humility,  18.  12.

20.  3.  it  is  an  //.  for  a  man  to  cease  from  strife

21.  21.  he  that  followeth  mercy,  findeth  //.

22.  4.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  are  riches  and  h

25.  2.  the  //.  of  kings  is  to  search  out  a  matter

26. 1.  so  //.  is  not  seemly  for  a  fool

8.  so  is  he  that  giveth  //.  to  a  fool

29.  23.  //.  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit
.31.  25.  strength  and  //.  are  her  clothing
Eccl.  6.  2.  a  man  to  whom  God  hath  given  h.

10. 1.  so  folly  him  that  is  in  reputation  for//,
Jer.  33. 9-  be  to  me  an  //.  before  all  nations  of  ei
Dan.  2.  6.  ye  shall  receive  rewards  and  great/

4.  .30.  that  T  have  built  for  the  //.  of  my  majest
36.  mine  //.and  brightness  returned  unto  me

5. 18.  O  king,  God  gave  thy  father  glory  and  <
11.  21.  they  shall  not  give  the  //.  of  the  kingdo,
Mai.  1.  6.  if  then  1  be  a  father,  where  is  mine  / '
Mat.  13.  57.  Jesus  said,  a  prophet  is  not  withou
save  in  his  own  country,  Mark  6.  4.  J
4.  44.

John  5.  41.  1  receive  not  //.  from  men

44.  who  receive  //.  one  of  another,  and  seek  no

8.  54.  if  I  honour  myself,  my  h.  is  nothing
Pom.  2.  7.  in  well  doing  seek  for  glory  and  h.

10.  but  //.  to  every  man  that  w  orketh  good

9.  21.  of  the  same  lump  to  make  one  vessel  to  /
12. 10.  kindly  affectioned ,  in  /;.  preferring  one  a

1.3.  7-  render  therefore  //.  to  whom  //.  is  due

1  Cor.  12.  23.  we  bestow  more  abundant  h.  24.

2  Cor.  6.  8.  by  //.  and  dishonour,  by  evil  report
Col.  2. 23.  not  in  any  //.  to  the  satisfying  of  the  fl
1  Thess.  4.  4.  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in

1  Tim.  1.  17.  to  the  only  wise  God  be  h.  and  gl
5. 17.  let  elders  be  counted  worthy  of  double  //,

6. 1.  count  their  own  masters  worthy  of  all  h,

16.  to  whom  be  //.  and  power  everlasting

2  Tim.  2.  20.  vessels,  some  to  //.  some  to  disnon.L
Heb.  3. 3.  who  builder),  hath  more  //.  than  the  ho

5.  4.  no  man  taketh  this  //.  to  himself,  but  he  cal

1  Pet.  1.7.  might  be  found  to  praise,  //.  and  glc
2.  +  7-  unto  you  that  believe  he  is  an  //.

3. 7.  giving  //.  to  the  wife  as  to  the  weaker  vess

2  Pet.  1. 17.  he  received  from  God  the  Father  h.
Rev.  4.  9.  w’hen  those  I/easts  give  glory  and  h.

11.  thou  art  worthy  to  receive  glory  and  h.5.

5. 13.  //.  power,  and  might  be  to  him,  7. 12.  1 19

19.  7.  let  us  be  glad,  rejoice,  and  give  //.  to  hirr

21.  24.  kings  bring  their  glory  and  //.  to  it,  26.

HONOURS.

Acts  28. 10.  who  also  honoured  us  with  many  h
HONOUR,  Verb.

Exod.  20. 12.//.  thy  father  and  thy  moth.  Deut.  5.

Mat.  15.  4. 1  19.  19.  Mark  7.  10. 1 10.
Luke  18.  20.  Eph.  6.  2.

Lev.  19.  15.  shalt  not  //.  the  person  of  themigh
32.  thou  shalt  //.  the  face  ot  the  old  man  '
Judg.  9-  9.  wherewith  by  me  they  //.  God  and  r;

1  Sam.  2.  30.  Ld.  saith,  for  them  that  //.  me  I  will

15.  30.  yet  //.  me  now,  1  pray  thee,  before  eldej

2  Sam.  io.  .3.  thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  //.

father,  that  he  sent  to  thee,  1  Chron.  ip
Esth.  6.  6.  whom  the  king  delighteth  to  //.  7, 9,
Psal.  91. 15. 1  will  deliver  him'and  h.  him
Prov.  .3. 9.  h.  the  L.  with  thy  substance  and  first-
Isa.  29. 13.  this  people  with  their  lips  do  //.me
43.  20.  the  beast  of  the  field  shall  //.  me

58. 13.  and  shalt  h.  him,  not  doing  thine  own  w
Dan.  4.37.  T  extol  and  //.  the  King  of  heaven

11.  38.  in  his  estate  shall  he  h.  the  God  of  force

god  whom  his  fathers  knew  not,  shall  h
Mat.  15.  6.  and  //.  not  his  father  or  his  mother
John  5.  23.  that  all  men  should  //.  Son  as  they  h.

8.  49.  but  1  //.  myr  Father,  and  ye  dishonour  m
54.  if  1  //.  myself,  my  //.  is  nothing

12.  26.  if  any  serve  me,  him  will  my  Father  h
1  Tim.  5.  3.  //.  widows  that  are  widow’s  indeed
1  Pet.  2. 17.  h.  all  men,  fear  God.  h.  the  king

HONOURABLE.

Gen.  34.  19.  Shechem  w’as  more  h.  than  all  hou
Num.  22.  15.  Balak  sent  princes  more  h.  thant

1  Sam.  9. 6.  there  is  in  the  city  a  man  of  God,

he  is  an  //.  man,  all  he  saith  cometh  to  1

22. 14.  faithful  as  David,  who  is  //.  in  thy  hou;.

2  Sam.  23. 19.  was  he  not  most  //.  of  three  ?  there:;

he  was  their  captain,  1  Chron.  II.

23.  wTas  more  //.  than  the  thirty,  but  attained  il
2  Kings  5.  1.  now  Naaman  w’as  h.  with  his  111a
1  Chron.  4.  9.  Jabez  was  more  //.  than  his  brethi

II. 25.  behold,  w  as  //.  among  thirty,  attained  r
Job  22.  8.  had  the  earth,  and  the  //.  man  dwelt  i
Psal.  45.  9.  kings’  daughters  among  thy  //.  won

III.  3.  his  w’ork  is  //.  and  glorious

Isa.  .3.  3.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  //.  man
5.  the  base  shall  behave  proudly  against  the
5.  13.  and  their  h.  men  are  famished

9.  15.  the  ancient  and  //.  he  is  the  head

23.8.  whose  traffickers  are  the  //.  of  the  earth

9.  bring  into  contempt  all  the  //.  of  the  earth
42.  21.  he  will  magnify  the  law,  and  make  it

4.3.  4.  thou  hast  been  //.  ||  58.  13.  holy  of  the  L,
Nah.  3. 10.  and  they  cast  lots  for  her  //.  men
Mark  15.  4.3.  Joseph  of  Arimathea  an  //.  counst ?
Luke  14.  8.  lest  a  more  //.  man  be  bidden  ot  hmj
Acts  13.  50.  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  h.  women

17.  12.  also  of  //.  w  omen  not  a  few  believed
1  Cor.  4. 10.  we  are  weak ,  butye  are  strong,  ye  a  ■

12.  2.3.  those  members  which  we  think  less  h.
Heb.  13.  4.  marriage  is  //.  and  the  bed  undefile


H  O  O


H  O  P


H  O  R


HONOURED.

;  tl.  14.  4-  1  "'ill  he  h-  on  Pharaoh  and  his  host
i  i3.'  ib.  lie  that  regarde th  reproof  shall  be  h.

IB.  he  that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  //.

]  43.  23.  nor  hast  thou  //.  me  with  thy  sacrifices
j  ,  . 8.  all  that  //.  her,  despise  her,  they  have  seen

<2.  the  faces  of  the  elders  were  not  n.

2 1*4.  34.  1  praised  and  h.  him  that  liveth  for  ever
•  v'cti.  Uh  who  also  //.  us  with  many  honours
i  r~V'  26.  or  one  member  be  //.  all  rejoice  with  it
1  ION  OU  REST.

i  m  °.  29.  and  h.  thy  sons  above  me,  to  make  fat
1  '  HONOURET1I.

} l.  15.  4.  but  he  //.  them  that  fear  the  Lord
lv.  12.  9-  is  better  than  he  that  //.  himself

31.  but  he  that  //.  him  hath  mercy  on  the  poor
' 1 . 6.  a  son  //.  his  father,  where  is  my  honour  ?

"  15.  8.  and  //.  me  with  their  lips,  Mark  6.
j  i  5.  23.  he  that  h.  not  the  Son,  //.  not  the  l  ather
>4.  it  is  my  Father  that  //.  me,  of  whom  ye  say
HO  N  L\ .

i  s  are  some  of  the  smallest  creatures  that  fly,  and
e  produce  of  them  is  the  sweetest  thing  in  the
irld.  The  scripture,  describing  a  troop  of  enemies
issuing  with  obstinacy  and  warmth ,  males  use  of
e  similitude  of  bees.  Deut.  1.  44.  '4  he  Amorites
ased  you  as  bees.  And  in  Psal.  118.  12.  They
mpassed  me  about  like  bees.  As  to  honey,
od  did.not  permit  any  to  be  offered  to  him  upon
s  altar.  Lev.  2.  11.  Ye  shall  burn  no  leaven,
>r  any  honey,  in  any  offering  of  the  Lord  made
r  fire.  There  are  many  reasons  given,  for  the
pediency  of  this  law  ;  such  as,  that  honey  does
it  agree  well  with  other  things,  which  are  offered
the  way  of  sacrifice,  that  it  makes  bread  sour,
id  is  not  good  with  roast  meat  ;  or  because  bees
e  insects  which  are  judged  to  be  unclean,  Lev.

„  23.  Or  because  honey  is  the  symbol  of  carnal
easures ;  or,  lastly,  to  keep  at  a  distance  from
e  customs  of  the  heathens,  who  were  used  to  offer
>ney  in  their  sacrifices.

f  at  the  same  time  that  God  forbids  any  honey
be  offered  to  him  in  sacrifice,  he  commands  the
rst-fruits  of  it  to  be  presented  to  him.  Lev.  2.  12.
s  tor  t«he  oblation  of  the  tirst-fruits,  ye  shall
f’er  them  unto  the  Lord;  but  these  first-fruits
id  offerings  were  designed  for  the  support  and
\ tstenance  of  the  priests,  and  were  not  offered  upon
e  altar.  The  Rabbins,  by  the  word  honey  in
e  above-cited  place,  understand  not  only  the
iney  of  bees,  but  likewise  the  honey  of  dates,  or
e  fruit  of  the  palm-tree,  or  the  dates  themselves,
om  which  honey  is  extracted.

expressions  of  scripture  which  import  so  fre-
lent/y  that  Palestine  was  a  laud  flowing  with
ilk  and  honey,  are  a  good  proof  that  honey  was
rmer/y  very  common  in  that  country.  Moses
>ys,  that  the  Lord  made  his  people  to  suck  honey
it  of  the  rock,  and  oil  out  of  the  flinty  rock,
>eut.  32.  13.  Honey  ran  upon  the  ground  in  the
rest,  where  Jonathan  dipped  the  end  of  his  staff
i  this  liquor,  and  conveyed  it  to  his  mouth,  1  Satn.
1.25,26,  27.  John  the  Baptist  fed  upon  wild
mey,  which  was  to  be  found  in  the  rocks  up  and
twn  the  country,  or  in  hollow  trees,  Mat.  3.  4.
hildrtn  were  fed  with  milk,  cream,  and  honey.
>a.  7. 15.  Butter  and  honey  shall  he  eat,  that  he
lay  know'  to  refuse  the  evil,  and  choose  the  good.
ins  was  the  sweetest  and  most  delicious  thing
hich  was  then  known  before  the  invention  and
reparation  of  sugar,  and  therefore  things  that  are
veet,  pleasant,  and  agreeable,  are  in  scripture
impared  to  it.  As  the  word  of  God,  Psal.  119.
)3.  Wisdom,  Prov.  24.  13,  14.  God  complains  of
Jerusalem  for  offering  that  bread,  oil,  and  honey

>  idols,  which  he  had  given  to  the  inhabitants
hereof  for  their  nourishment,  Ezek.  16.  13,  19.
hid  Solomon  observes,  that  too  great  a  quantity
f  honey  is  hurtful  to  the  stomach,  and  creates  a
i athing ,  Prov.  25.  16.

n.  43. 11.  carry  a  little  h.  spices,  myrrh,  nuts
id.  16. 31.  taste  of  it  was  like  waters  made  with  h.
».2.  11.  ye  shall  burn  no  leaven,  nor  any  h.
ut.  8.8.  a  land  of  oil-olive  and  h.  2  Kings  18.  32.

.  13.  he  made  him  to  suck  h.  out  of  the  rock
Jg.  14. 8.  there  w'as  h.  in  carcase  of  the  lion,  9.

8.  what  sweeter  than  h./  what  stronger  than  lion?
am.  14.  25.  and  there  was  h.  upon  the  ground

6.  h.  dropped  ||  29.  1  tasted  a  little  h.  43.
am.  17.  29.  brought  h.  and  butter  to  David
kings  14.  3.  take  a  cruse  of  h.  and  go  to  him
hron.  31.  5.  Israel  brought  the  first-fruits  of  h.
'20. 17.  he  shall  not  see  the  brooks  of  h.  and  but.
al.  19.  10.  judgment  sweeter  than  h.  119. 103.

.  16.  with  h.  out  of  the  rock  have  satisfied  thee
ov.  24. 13.  my  son,  eat//.  because  it  is  good, 25. 16.
>•  27.  it  is  not  good  to  eat  much  h.
nt.  4.  11.  h.  and  milk  are  under  thy  tongue

1.  I  have  eaten  my  honey  comb  with  my  h.

'.7. 15.  but.  and  h.  shall  he  eat,  that  he  may  know

2.  for  butter  and  h.  shall  every  one  eat  that  is  left
'.  41.8.  we  have  treasures  of  h.  in  the  field

ek.  3. 3.  it  w'as  in  my  mouth  as  h.  for  sweetness

1.  13.  thou  didst  eat  fine  flour,  h.  and  oil,  19.

'.  17.  Judah  traded  in  h.  and  balm  with  Tyrus
at.  3. 4.  John  the  Baptist’s  raiment  of  camel’s  hair,
and  his  meat  w  as  locusts  and  wild  h.  Mark  1.  6.

10.  9.  but  it  shall  be  in  thy  mouth  sw  eet  as  h.
•0.  and  it  w  as  in  my  mouth  sw'eet  as  h.

See  Flowkth,  Flawing.

>  HON  left -comb.

10m.  14.  27.  put  forth  rod  and  dipt  it  in  a  h.-cornb
‘al.  19. 10.  sweeter  also  than  honey  and  h.-comb
ov.  5.  3.  the  lips  of  a  strange  woman  drop  as  h.-c.
).  24.  pleasant  words  are  as  an  h.-comb,  sweet

4.  13.  eat  the  h.-comb  which  is  sw  eet  to  thy  taste
i-~.  the  full  soul  loatheth  an  h.-comb
o:M.U.  thy  lips,  O  my  spouse,  drop  as  an  h.-comb
1.1  have  eaten  my  h.-comb  with  my  honey
Re  24. 42.  they  gave  him  a  piece  of  an  h.-comb
HOODS.

a.  3. 23.  I  will  take  away  the  h.  and  the  vails


HOOF.

Exod.  10.  26.  there  shall  not  an  h,  be  left  behind
Lev.  11.  3.  whatever  parteth  h.  and  is  cloven-footed

4.  of  them  that  divide  the  h.  but  divideth  not  h.

5.  hut  divideth  not  the  h.  6.  Deut.  14.  7.

7.  the  swine,  tho’  he  divide  the  h.  Deut.  14. 8.
HOOFS.

Judg.  5.  22.  then  wrere  the  horse  h.  broken
Psal.  69.  31.  please  Lord  better  than  an  o.\  with  h.
Isa.  5.  28.  their  horses’  h.  shall  be  counted  like  flint
Jer.  47.  3.  at  the  noise  of  the  stamping  of  the  h.
Ezek.  26. 11.  with  h.  of  horses  shall  tread  thy  streets

32.  13.  nor  shall  the  li.  of  beasts  trouble  them
Mic.  4.  13.  1  will  make  thy  h.  brass,  and  shall  beat
HOOK.

2  Kings  19-28. 1  will  put  my  h.  in  thynose,  Isa. 37.29.
Job  4i.  1.  canst  thou  draw  leviathan  with  an  it.?  2.
Mat.  17.  27.  go,  and  cast  an  li.  and  take  up  a  fish
HOOKS.

Exod.  26.  32.  their  h.  shall  be  of  gold,  37.. I  36.  36.
27-  10-  the  h.  of  the  pillars  shall  be  of  silver,  and
their  fillets  of  silver,  11, 17.  138.10, 11,  12,  17,  19.
Isa.  2.  4.  their  spears  into  pruning  h.  Mic.  4.  3.

18.  5.  he  shall  cut  off  the  sprigs  with  pruning  h.
Ezek.  29.  4.  but  I  will  put  h.  in  thy  jaw  s,  38.  4.

40.  43.  and  within  were  h.  an  hand  broad
Joel  3.  10.  beat  your  pruning  h.  into  spears
Amos  4.  2.  that  he  will  take  you  aw'ay  w  ith  h.
HOPE.

Christian  hope  is  a  firm  expectation  of  all  promised
good  things,  so  far  as  they  may  be  for  God's
glory  and  our  good,  but  especially  of  eternal
salvation  and  happiness  in  heaven,  where  we
shall  be  conformed  to  the  Son  of  God ;  which
hope  is  founded  on  the  grace,  blood,  righteous¬
ness,  and  intercession  of  Christ,  and  the  earnest
of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  hearts,  and  the  un¬
changeable  truth  and  almighty  power  of  God,
which  always  second  his  word.

This  hope  is  distinguished  from  worldly  hopes,  (1)
By  the  excellency  of  the  object,  which  is  an  eternal
state  of  glory  and  joy  ;  whereas  -worldly  hopes  are
terminated  on  empty  vanishing  things,  gilded  over
with  the  thin  appearance  of  good.  (2)  By  the  sta¬
bility  of  its  foundation,  namely,  God's  unchange¬
able  truth,  and  almighty  power.  God  cannot  lie,
and  consequently  neither  deceive  our  faith,  nor
disappoint  our  hopes ;  and  he  can  do  all  things,
which  the  apostle  makes  the  ground  of  his  confi¬
dence.  2  Tim.  1.  12.  I  know  whom  I  have  be¬
lieved,  and  l  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to
keep  that  which  1  have  committed  to  him  against
that  day.  But  worldly  hopes  are  always  uncer¬
tain:  There  is  so  much  of  impotence  or  deceit  in
all  the  means  used  to  obtain  human  desires,  that
the  success  is  doubtful.  (3)  Divine  hope  is  distin¬
guished  from  carnal  presumption,  by  its  inseparable
effect,  it  has  a  cleansing  efficacy.  1  John  3.  3.
Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth
himself,  even  as  he  is  pure.  He  endeavours  to  shun
all  sin,  and  to  be  perfecting  holiness.  He  purifies
himself  by  the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  from
whom  the  spiritual  life,  and  all  the  operations  of
it,  do  proceed.  But  vain  and  groundless  hopes  are
inspirations  of  wind,  loose  and  ineffective.

The  hope  of  Israel,  is  the  Messiah,  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  Acts  28.  20.  For  the  hope  of  Israel  I  am
bound  with  this  chain.  Christ  is  so  called  in  re¬
spect  of  the  fathers ,  who  looked  for  his  promised
coming.  Some  by  this  understand  the  belief  of  the
resurrection.  Christ  is  called  our  hope  ;  that  is,
the  only  foundation  we  have  to  build  our  hope  of
heaven,  or  any  good  thing,  upon,  1  Tint.  1.1.
Hope  is  taken  for  that  eternal  salvation,  which
is  the  object  or  end  of  our  hope.  'Lit.  2.  13.  Look¬
ing  for  that  blessed  hope.  The  Lord  is  called  the
hope  of  his  people,  Jer.  14.  8.  He  is  that  God
in  whom  alone  they  hope  for  help  ;  and  their  hope
shall  not  be  confounded  :  On  the  contrary,  the  hope
of  the  ungodly  shall  perish,  Prov.  10.  28.  1 11.  7.
their  hope  shall  be  without  effect:  or  they  shall
live  and  die  without  hope.  Hope  deferred  maketh
the  heart  sick  :  delays  in  obtaining  that  good,
which  a  man  passionately  desires  and  hopes  for,
make  the  heart  sad  and  sorrowful ;  but  -when  any
one  possesses  what  he  desires,  his  soul  is  comforted
and  revived,  Prov.  13.  12.  My  flesh  shall  rest  in
hope,  Psal.  16.  9.  My  body  shall  quietly  and
sweetly  rest  in  the  grave,  in  confident  assurance
of  its  resurrection  to  a  blessed  and  immortal  life.
Abraham  against  hope  believed  in  hope,  when
being  advanced  in  years,  God  promised  him  a
son,  Rom.  4.  18.  lie  confidently  believed  God's
promise  that  he  should  have  a  son,  against  all
grounds  of  hope,  when  it  was  most  unlikely  in  a
tray  of  nature  and  reason.  1  he  prisoners  of  hope,
Zech.  9.  12.  are  the  Israelites,  who  were  captives
in  Babylon,  but  were  in  hopes  of  deliverance.
Ur,  ye  prisoners  of  hope,  ye  who,  though  captives
to  sin  and  Satan,  yet  have  good  grounds  to  hope
for  deliverance :  turn  ye  to  the  strong  hold,  re¬
pent,  believe,  and  apply  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
your  only  help  and  refuge.

Puth  1. 12.  if  1  should  say,  I  have  h.  if  I  should  have
Ezra  10.  2.  there  is  //.  in  Israel  concerning  this
Job  4.  6.  is  not  this  thy  fear,  confidence,  thy  It.  ?

5.  16.  poor  hath  h.  and  iniquity  stopped)  her  mouth

7.  6.  my  days  are  spent  without  it.

8.  1.3.  and  the  hypocrite's  h.  shall  perish,  14.

11.  18.  thou  shalt  be  secure,  because  there  is  h.

20.  their  h.  shall  be  as  the  giving  up  of  the  ghost
14.  7.  for  there  is  h.  of  a  tree  if  it  be  cut  down
19.  and  thou  destroyest  the  h.  of  man
27.  8.  what  is  h.  of  hypocrite  tho’  lie  hath  gained  ?
41.9.  behold,  the  h.  of  him  is  in  vain
Psal.  78.  7.  that  they  might  set  their  h.  in  God
146. 5.  happy  is  he  whose  h.  is  in  the  Lord  his  God
Prov.  10. 28.  the  h.  of  the  righteous  shall  be  gladness
11.  7.  and  the  h.  of  unjust  men  perisheth

13.  12.  //.  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick

14.  32.  but  the  righteous  hath  h.  in  his  death
19.  18.  chasten  thy  son  while  there  is  h.


Prov.  26. 12.  is  more  //.  of  a  fool  than  of  him,  29.  20.
Eccl.  9.  4.  to  him  who  is  joined  to  living,  there  is  //.
Isa.  57.  10.  there  is  no  h.  Jer.  2.  25.  1  18.  12.

Jer.  14.  8.  O  thou  h.  of  Israel,  the  Saviour,  17.  13.

17.  7.  blessed  is  the  man  whose  h.  the  Lord  is
31.  17.  there  is//,  in  the  end,  saith  the  Lord
50.  7.  even  the  Lord,  the  //.  of  their  fathers
Lam.  3.21.  this  I  recall  to  my  mind,  theref.  have  I  //.

29.  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  //.
Ezek.  19.  5.  when  she  saw  that  her  //.  wa3  lost
37. 11.  behold,  they  say ,  our  bones  dried,  our  h.  lost
Ilos.  2.  15.  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  h.

Joel  3.  16.  the  Lord  will  be  the  //.  of  his  people
Zech.  9. 12.  turn  to  the  strong  hold  ye  prisoners  of//.
Acts  16. 19.  w'hen  saw  the  h.  of  their  gains  was  gone

23.  6.  of  the  //.  and  resurrection  of  the  dead

24.  15.  I  have  //.  toward  G.  which  they  also  allow

26.  6.  now'  I  am  judged  for  the  //.  of  the  promise
7.  for  which  //.  sake,  I  am  accused  of  the  Jew's

27.  20.  all  //.  that  we  should  be  saved  was  gone

28.  20.  for  //.  of  Israel  I  am  bound  with  this  chain
Rom.  5.  4.  patience,  experience  ;  experience,  //.

5.  h.  maketh  not  ashamed,  because  love,  of  God
8.  24.  for  we  are  saved  by  //.  but  h.  seen  is  not  //.
15.  4.  that  we  through  patience  might  have  //.

13.  that  ye  may  abound  in  //.  thro’  the  H.  Ghost

1  Cor.  9.  10.  that  he  should  be  partaker  of  his  //.

13.  13.  now  abideth  faith,  //.  charity,  these  three

15.  19.  if  in  this  life  only  we  have  //.  in  Christ

2  Cor.  1.  7.  and  our  //.  of  you  is  stedfast,  knowing
3. 12.  seeing  that  we  have  such  //.  we  use  plainness
10.  15.  having  //.  when  your  faith  is  increased

Gal.  5.  5.  for  we  thro’  the  Spirit  wait  for  h.  of  right.
Eph.  1.  18.  may  know  what  is  the  //.  of  his  calling

2.  12.  having  no  //.  and  without  God  in  the  world
4.  4.  one  Spirit,  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  //.

Col.  1.  5.  for  the  //.  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven
23.  be  not  moved  away  from  the  //.  of  the  gospel
27.  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  //.  of  glory

1  Thess.  1.  3.  your  patience  of  //.  in  our  Lord  Jesus
2. 19.  for  what  is  our  //.  or  joy  ?  are  not  even  ye

4.  13.  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  w'ho  have  no  //.

5.  8.  and  for  an  helmet  the  //.  of  salvation

2  Thess.  2. 16.  who  hath  given  us  good  h.  thro’  grace
1  Tim.  1.  1.  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  our  h.

Tit.  2. 13.  looking  for  that  blessed  //.  and  appearing

3.  7.  made  heirs  according  to  the  //.  of  eternal  life
Iieb.  3.  6.  rejoicing  of  the  //.  firm  to  the  end

6.  11.  to  the  full  assurance  of//,  unto  the  end

18.  who  have  fled  to  lay  hold  on  h.  set  before  us

19.  w  hich  //.  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul

7.  19.  but  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  h.  did

1  Pet.  1.3,  who  hath  begotten  us  again  to  a  lively  h.

21.  that  your  faith  and  h.  might  be  in  God

3.  15.  thatasketh  a  reason  of  the  //.  that  is  in  you
1  John  3.  3.  every  man  that  hath  this  //.  in  him
In  HOPE.

Psal.  16.  9.  my  flesh  shall  rest  in  h.  Acts  2.  26.
Rom.  4.  18.  who  against  hope  believed  in  h.

5.  2.  and  rejoice  in  h.  of  the  glory  of  God

8.  20.  of  him  who  hath  subjected  the  same  in  h.

12.  12.  rejoicing  in  h.  patient  in  tribulation

15. 13.  thatye  may  abound  in  h.  thro’  Holy  Ghost
1  Cor.  9.10.  that  ploweth  in  h.  that  thresheth  in  h.
Tit.  1.  2.  in  h.  of  eternal  life  which  God  promised
My  HOPE.

Job  17.  15.  and  where  is  now  my  h.  ?  as  for  my  h.
19.  10.  and  my  h.  hath  lie  removed  like  a  tree
31.  24.  if  I  have  made  gold  my  h.  or  have  said
Psal.  39.7.  Lord,  what  wait  I  for'  my  h.  is  in  thee
71.  5.  for  thou  art  my  h.  O  I.ord  God,  Jer.  17-  17*.
119.  116.  and  let  me  not  be  ashamed  of  my  h.
Lam.  3.  18.  and  my  h.  is  perished  from  the  Lord
Phil.  1.  20.  accord,  to  my  h.  that  in  nothing  1  shall
HOPE,  Kerb.

Job  6.  11.  what  is  my  strength,  that  I  should  h.  ?
Psal.  22. 9.  thou  didst  make  me  h.  when  1  was  upon
31.  24.  be  of  courage,  all  ye  that  h.  in  the  Lord

33.  18.  upon  them  that  //.  in  his  mercy,  147- 11.

22.  thy  mercy  be  on  us,  according  as  wre  //.  in  thee
38.  15.  for  in  thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  //.  thou  wilt  hear
42.  5.  why  cast  dowm  ?  //.  thou  in  God,  11.  |  43.  5.
71.  14.  but  I  will  //.  continually,  and  praise  thee
119.  49.  word  on  which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  //.

81.  my  soul  faint.  1  //.  in  thy  word,  114.  1 139.  5.
130.  7.  let  Israel  //.  in  the  Lord,  131.  3.

Isa.  38.  18.  they  in  the  pit  cannot  //.  for  thy  truth
Lam.  3.  24.  my  portion,  therefore  will  I  //.  in  him
26.  it  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  //.  and  wait
Ezek.  13.  6.  and  they  have  made  others  to  //

Luke  6.  34.  if  lend  to  them  of  whom  ye  //.  to  receive
Acts  26.  7.  to  which  promise  our  tribes  //.  to  come
Rom.  8.  24.  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  //.  for?

25.  if  we  //.  for  that  w  e  see  not,  then  do  we  wait
Phil.  2. 23.  him  I  //.  to  send  presently .  soon  as  I  see

1  Pet.  1.  13.  wherefore  be  sober,'  and  //.  to  the  end

HOPED.

Esth.  9.  1.  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  h.  to  have  po\\  er
Job  6.  20.  they  were  confounded  because  they  had  //.
Psal.  119.43.  for  I  have  //.  in  thy  judgments
74.  because  I  have  //.  in  thy  word,  147-
166.  Lord,  I  have  //.  for  thy  salvation
Jer.  3.  23.  in  vain  is  salvation  //.  for  from  the  hills
Luke  23.  8.  he  //.  to  have  seen  some  miracle  done
Acts  24.  26-  he  h.  money  should  have  been  given

2  Cor.  8.  5.  and  this  they  did,  not  as  we  h.

Iieb.  11.  1.  faith  is  the  substance  of  things  //.  for

HOPE  I  II.

1  Cor.  13.7.  charity  //.  all  things,  endureth  all  thing:
HOPING.

Luke  6.35.  do  good,  and  lend,  //.  for  nothing  again
1  Tim.  3.  14.  1  write,  //.  to  come  unto  thee  shortly
HORN.

The  principal  defence  and  greatest  strength  of
horned  beasts  consist  in  their  horns  ;  and  the
scripture  mentions  the  horn  as  the  symbol  of
strength.  Moses  compares  Joseph  to  a  young
bullock,  and  says,  that  his  horns  are  like  the
horns  of  unicorns ;  that  is,  his  strength  and
power  shall  be  very  great.  Deut.  33.  17.  And
in  Psal.  132.  17.  1  will  make  the  horn  of
David  to  bud  ;  I  will  make  his  power  mid  glory


H  O  R


H  O  R


HO  R


to  flourish  and  increase,  I  will  cut  off  the  horns
of  the  wicked,  Psal.  75.  10.  So  in  .ler.  48.  25.
'the  horn  of  Moab  is  cut  off.  In  Psal.  44.  5,
a  victory  over  enemies  is  expressed  by  these
words  1  Ihrough  thee  we  will  push  down  our
enemies:  in  Hebrew,  we  will  smite  with  the
horn,  ice  will  subdue,  destroy,  and  disperse  them,
as  a  bull  disperses  every  thing  that  comes  before
him  with  his  horns.

Horn  signifies  likewise  glory,  honour,  brightness,
and  rays.  1  Sam.  2.  1,  Mine  horn  is  exalted  in
the  Lord;  my  glory  is  advanced  and  manifested ;
God  hath  loaded  me  with  honour.  Job  says,  1
have  defiled  my  horn  in  the  dust:  I  have  parted
with  all  my  glory  and  dignity,  and  been  contented
to  lie  in  the  dust.  Job  16.  15.  'The  Psalmist
says,  1  said  to  the  wicked,  lift  not  up  the  horn ;
Do  not  carry  yourselves  either  arrogantly,  boast¬
ing  of  your  own  strength,  or  scornfully  and  ma¬
liciously  towards  me,  Psal.  75.  4.  In  llab.  3.  4,
it  is  said,  God  came  from  Par  an,  and  his
brightness  was  as  the  light,  and  he  had  horns
coming  out  of  his  hand,  or,  beams  and  rays  of
light,  that  is,  glorious  manifestations  of  his  power
in  these  his  acts.  Ur,  according  to  others,  having
his  hands  armed  with  flaming  darts,  and  fiery
arrows.

Kingdoms  and  great  powers  are  often  described  by
the  word  horns.  It  is  thus  Daniel  represents  the
power  of  the  Persians,  of  the  Greeks,  of  Syria
and  Egypt.  He  represents  Darius  and  Alexander
like  a  goat  and  a  ram  running  violently  at  each
other  with  their  horns,  Dan.  8.  3,  5,  6.  The
Hebrews,  by  the  word  horn,  sometimes  understood
an  eminence,  an  angle,  a  corner.  Isa.  5.  1.  My
w'ell-beloved  hath  a  vineyard  in  a  very  fruitful
hill,  Heb.  in  the  horn  of  the  son  of  oil  :  my  be¬
loved  has  a  vineyard  situated  on  an  eminence,  or
on  the  corner  of  a  rich  and  fertile  mountain.
The  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings  were
eminences  or  spires  at  the  four  corners  of  it,
which  were  not  only  for  ornament,  but  also  for
use,  either  to  keep  things  put  upon  them  from
falling,  or  that  beasts  to  be  offered  might  be  bound
to  them,  as  ihe  Psalmist  seems  to  insinuate,
Psal.  118.  27.  T\s  the  ancients  frequently  made
use  of  horns  to  hold  liquors,  the  vessels  wherein
oil  was  pvt,  and  perfumes,  are  called  often  horns,
whether  they  really  were  of  horn,  or  of  any  other
matter.  Fill  thine  horn  with  oil ,  says  the  Lord
to  Samuel,  and  go  anoint  David  king,  1  Sam.
16. 1.

Exod.  21. 29.  if  ox  were  wont  to  push  with  his  h.

1  Sam.  2. 1.  Hannah  said,  mine//.  is  exalted  in  the

Lord

10.  and  he  shall  exalt  the  li.  of  his  anointed

16.  1.  fill  thine  h.  with  oil,  go,  1  will  send  thee

13.  Samuel  took  the  h.  of  oil,  and  anointed  him

2  Sam.  22.  3.  the  h.  of  my  salvation,  Psal.  18.  2.

1  Kings  1.  39.  Zadok  the  priest  took  an  h.  of  oil

1  Chr.  25.  5.  in  the  words  of  God,  to  lift  up  the  h.
Job  16. 15.  1  have  defiled  my  li.  in  the  dust
Psal.  75.  4.  to  the  wicked,  lift  not  up  the  h.  5.

89.  17.  and  in  thy  favour  our  h.  shall  be  exalted

24.  and  in  my  name  shall  his  h.  be  exalted
92.  10.  my  h.  shalt  thou  exalt  like  h.  of  an  unicorn
112.  9.  his  h.  shall  be  exalted  with  honour
132.  17.  1  will  make  the  //.of  David  to  bud
148.  14.  he  alsoexalteth  the  h.  of  his  people
Jer.  48.  25.  the  //.  ofMoab  is  cutoff,  and  his  arm
Lam.  2.  3.  he  hath  cutoff  all  the  //.of  Israel

17.  he  hath  set  up  the  h.  of  thine  adversaries
Ezek.  29.  21.  1  will  cause  the  h.  of  Israel  to  bud
Dan.  7.  8.  among  them  a  little  h.  in  this  h.  20.

11.  of  the  great  words  which  the  h.  spake

21.  the  same  h.  made  -war  with  the  saints

8.  5.  the  goat  had  a  notable  //.  between  his  eyes

8.  8.  when  he  was  strong  great  //.  was  broken

9.  out  of  one  of  them  came  forth  a  little  //.

21.  the  great  //.  that  is  between  his  eyes

Ah'c.4.13.  for  I  will  make  thy  h.  iron, and  hoofs  brass
Zech.  1.  21.  which  lift  up  their  h.  over  the  land
Luke  1.  69.  hath  raised  up  an  h.  of  salvation  for  us
HORNS.

Gen.  22.  13.  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket  by  his  h.
Exod.  27.  2.  make  the  h.  of  it  on  the  four  corners,  his
h.  shall  be  of  the  same,  30.2.  1  37-  25.  |  38.  2.

29.  12.  and  put  of  the  blood  on  the  h.  of  the  altar.

Lev.  4. 7,  18, 25,  30,34. 1  8.  15.  1  9.  9.  I  16.  18.

30.  3.  with  pure  gold  shalt  overlay  the  h.  37.  26.

10.  make  an  atonement  on  h.  of  it  once  a  year
Deut.  3.3. 17.  his  h.  are  like  the  h.  of  unicorns

1  Kings  2.  28.  Joab  caught  hold  on  the  h.  of  the  altar
22. 11.  Zedekiah  made  A.  of  iron,  2  C '/iron.  18.  10.
Psal.  22.  21.  hast  heard  me  from  the  h.  of  unicorns
69.  31.  than  a  bullock  that  hath  h.  and  hoofs
75.  10.  all  the  h.  of  the  wicked  will  I  cut  off,  but
the  //.  of  the  righteous  shall  be  exalted
118.  27.  bind  the  sacrifice  to  the  h.  of  the  altar
Ezek.  27.  15.  the}’  brought  for  a  present  h.  of  ivory
34.  21.  ye  pushed  all  the  diseased  with  your  h.
43.  15.  from  the  altar  and  upwards  shall  be  four//.
Dan.  7.  7-  behold  a  fourth  beast  had  ten  h.  20.

8.  I  considered  the  //.  three  h.  were  plucked  up
24.  the  ten  h.  are  ten  kings  that  shall  arise

8.  3.  the  ram  had  two  h.  the  two  //.  were  high

6.  the  he-goat  came  to  the  ram  which  had  two  //.

7.  and  he  smote  the  ram,  and  brake  his  two  h.

20.  two  //.  are  the  kings  of  Media  and  Persia
Amos  6.  13.  have  we  not  taken//,  by  our  strength  ?
Hab.  3.  4.  he  had  h.  coming  out  of  his  hand
Zech.  1.  18.  then  1  saw',  and  behold,  four//.

19.  these  the  //.  which  have  scattered  Judah,  21.

21.  are  come  to  cast  out  the  //.  of  the  Gentiles
Rev.  5.  6.  in  midst  stood  a  Lamb  having  seven  //.

12.  3.  a  red  dragon,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  h.
13. 1.  a  beast  having  ten  //.  and  on  his  //.  ten  crowns

11.  another  beast  had  two  //.  like  a  lamb
17-  3.  a  scarlet-coloured  beast  having  ten  //.

7.  the  beast  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and  fen  h.

12.  the  ten  h.  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings,  16.

See  Hams.

238


HORDED.

Hornets  are  a  sort  of  strong  flies  writ 1  ihe  Lord
used  as  instruments  to  plague  the  enemies  of  his
people.  'They  are  of  themselves  very  troublesome
and  mischievous ;  but  those  the  Lord  made  use
of  were,  it  is  thought,  like  the  flies  wherewith
he  plagued  Egypt,  of  an  extraordinary  bigness
and  perniciousness.  It  is  said,  they  live  as  the
wasps,  that  they  have  a  king  or  captain,  and
pestilent  stings  as  bees,  and  that  if  twenty-se¬
ven  of  them  sting  man  or  beast,  it  is  certain
death  to  either.  Nor  is  it  strange  that  such
creatures  did  drive  out  the  Canaanites  from  their
habitations ;  for  many  heathen  writers  give  in¬
stances  of  some  people  driven  from  their  seats
by  frogs,  others  by  mice,  others  by  bees  and
wasps  ;  of  which  see  Herodotus,  Diodorus,  Pliny,
/Elian,  Justin,  $c.  And  it  is  said,  that  “  a
“  Christian  city,  being  besieged  by  Sapores,  king
“  of  Persia,  was  delivered  by  hornets  ;  for  the
“  elephants  and  beasts  being  stung  by  them,  waxed
“  unruly,  and  so  the  whole  army  fled."

Dent.  7.  20.  the  Lord  will  send  the  h.  among  them
Josh.  24. 12.  1  sent  the  h.  before  you,  which  drave
HORNETS.

Exod.  23.  28.  I  will  send  //.  before  thee,  which  drive
HORRIBLE.

Psal.  1 1 .  6.  on  the  wicked  he  shall  rain  a  //.  tempest
40.  2.  he  brought  me  up  also  out  of  a  h.  pit
Jer.  5.  30.  a  h.  thing  is  committed  in  the  land

18. 13.  the  virgin  of  Israel  hath  done  a  //.  thing
23.  14.  1  have  seen  in  the  prophets  a  //.  thing

llos.  6. 10. 1  have  seen  a  h.  thing  in  house  of  Israel
HORRIBLY.

Jer.  2. 12.  be  h.  afraid ,  O  ye  heavens,  at  this,  saith  L.
Ezek.  32. 10.  their  kings  shall  be  //.  afraid  for  thee
HORROR.

Gen.  15. 12.  a  //.  of  great  darkness  fell  on  Abram
Job  18.  +20.  they  that  went  before  laid  hold  on  h.
Psal.  55.  5.  and  h.  hath  overwhelmed  me
119.  53.  //.  hath  taken  hold  on  me,  because
Ezek. 7. 18.//.  shall  cover  them,  and  shame  on  all  faces
HORSE

Is  a  very  common  beast,  and  very  well  known  in
these  countries ;  but  very  rare  among  the  He¬
brews  till  Solomon’s  time.  Before  him  we  find
no  horsemen  mentioned  in  the  armies  of  Israel.
God  forbids  the  kings  of  his  people  to  keep  many
horses,  Deut.  17.  16.  Hereby  God  would  pre¬
vent  oppression  and  tyranny,  and  the  imposition
of  unnecessary  burdens  and  taxes  upon  his  peo¬
ple  ;  as  also  carnal  confidence  in  the  kings,  which
by  this  means  would  be  promoted.  As  to  Psal.  20.
7.  Some  trust  in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses.
By  this  God  would  likewise  prevent  their  having
commerce  with  Egypt,  which  was  famous  for
horses.  David  having  won  a  great  battle  against
Hadadezer  king  of  Zobah,  took  seventeen  hun¬
dred  horses,  and  lamed  all  belonging  to  the  cha¬
riots  of  war,  reserving  only  an  hundred  chariots,
2  Sam.  8.  4.  The  Judges  and  Princes  of  Israel
used  generally  to  ride  on  mules,  or  asses.

Solomon  is  the  first  king  of  Judah  who  had  a
great  number  of  horses,  and  he  kept  them  rather
for  pomp  than  J'or  war.  He  had  forty  thousand
stalls  of  horses  for  his  chariots,  and  twelve  thou¬
sand  horsemen  distributed  in  his  fortified  places,
1  Kings  4.  26.  He  had  his  horses  from  Egypt,
1  Rings  10.  28.  although  ihe  Lord  had  forbidden
the  king  of  the  Hebrews  to  multiply  horses,  and
that  in  order  to  prevent  the  Israelites  having
commerce  with  the  Egyptians,  lest  they  should
be  infected  with  their  idolatry,  and  their  other
wickednesses,  Deut.  17.  16.

Horsiss  consecrated  to  the  Sun.  In  2  Kings  23.
11.  it  is  said,  that  Josiah  took  away  the  horses
which  the  kings  of  Judah,  his  predecessors,  had
given  to  the  sun.  It  is  known,  that  the  sun  was
worshipped  over  all  the  east,  arid  that  the  horse,
the  swiftest  of  tame  beasts,  was  consecrated  to
this  deity,  who  was  represented  as  riding  in  a
chariot  drawn  by  the  most  beautiful  and  swiftest
horses  in  the  world,  and  performing  every  day  his
journey  from  east  to  west,  in  order  to  communi¬
cate  his  light  to  mankind.

Some  are  of  opinion,  that  these  horses  were  sacri¬
ficed  to  the  sun :  Others,  that  every  morning
they  were  put  to  the  chariots  dedicated  to  the
sun,  whereof  there  is  mention  made  in  the  same
passage,  and  that  the  king,  or  some  of  his  officers,
got  up  and  rode  to  meet  the  sun  h.  its  rising,  as
far  as  from  the  eastern  gate  of  the  temple  to  the
suburbs  of  Jerusalem.  Xenophon  testifies  that
both  these  were  the  customs  of  the  Persians  and
Armenians:  He  describes  a  solemn  sacrifice  of
horses,  which  was  made  with  ceremony  to  the
sun:  they  were  crH  of  the  finest,  and  were  led  with
a  white  chariot,  crownpd,  and  consecrated  to  the
same  god.  Lastly,  others  are  of  opinion,  that
these  horses  were  of  wood,  stone,  or  metal,  erected
in  the  temple  in  honour  of  the  sun.

Gen.  49. 17.  an  adder  in  path  that  biteth  the  //.  heels
Exod.  15.21.  the  //.  and  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  sea
Judg.  5.  22.  then  were  h.  hoofs  broken  by  prancing
1  Kings  10.  29.  a  h.  for  150  shekels,  2  Citron.  1.  17.

20.  20.  Benhadad  king  escaped  on  //.  with  horsemen

25.  number  an  army  like  the  army  lost,  //.  for  //.
Esth.  6.  8.  let  the  h.  the  king  rideth  on  be  brought

9.  let  this  h.  be  delivered  to  one  of  the  princes

10.  take  the  apparel  and  //.  as  thou  hast  said

11.  then  took  Haman  the  apparel  and  the  h.

Job  39.  18.  she  scorneth  the  //.  and  his  rider

19.  hast  thou  given  //.strength  ?  hast  thou  clothed
Psal.  32.  9.  be  ye  not  as  the  //.  or  as  the  mule
33.  17.  an  //.  is  a  vain  thing  for  safety
76. 6.  the  chariot  and  //.  are  cast  into  a  dead  sleep
147- 10.  he  delighteth  not  in  the  strength  of  the  //.
Prov.  21.  31 .  the  //,  is  prepared  against  day  of  battle

26.  3.  a  whip  for  the  It.  a  rod  for  the  fool’s  back
Isa.  43. 17.  which  bringeth  forth  the  chariot  and  //.

63. 13.  that  led  them  thro’. the  deep,  as  a  h-
Jer.  8.  6.  as  the  h.  rusheth  into  the  battle


Jer.  51.  21.  with  thee  will  1  break  in  pieces^.
Amos  2. 15.  nor  shall  he  that  rideth  //.  deliver  hii ,
Zech.  1.  8. .and  behold,  a  man  riding  upon  are/'

9.  10.  and  1  will  cut  off'  the  //.  from  Jerusalem

10.  3.  hath  made  them  as  his  goodly  h.  in  battl

12.  4.  1  will  smite  every  //.  with  blindness

14.  15.  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  the  h.  of  the  rr

Rev.  6.2.  and  l  saw  and  behold  white  //.  19.  iji

4.  a  red  //.  ||  5.  a  black  //.  1!  8.  behold,  a  pale
14.  20.  and  blood  came  even  to  the  //.  bridles
19.  19.  to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  th

21.  slain  with  the  sword  of  him  that  sat  on  th
HORSEBACK.

2  Kings  9. 18.  there  went  one  on  //.  to  meet  Jeh,

19.  then  he  sent  out  a  second  on  h.  which  can  .
Esth.  6.  9.  and  bring  him  on  h.  through  thecib

11.  Haman  brought  him  on  //.  through  the  citfi

8.  10.  and  Mordecai  sent  letters  by  posts  on  h

HORSE-GATE.

2  Chr.  23. 15.  when  she  was  come  to  entering  of /.
Neb.  3. 28.  from  above  the  h.-g.  repaired  the  pri<
Jer.  31.  40.  the  fields  to  the  comer  of  the  //.-»«
HORSES.

Gen.  47. 17-  Joseph  gave  bread  in  exchange  fo:
Exod.  9.  3.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  the  h.
Deut.  17.  16.  but  he  shall  not  multiply  h.  to  ii
self,  to  the  end  that  he  should  multipl

1  Kings  4.  28.  barley  also  and  straw  for  the  h'
10.25.  they  brought  h.  and  mules,  2  Chr  on.  9.
28.  Sol.  hacl  //.  out  of  Egypt,  2  Chr.  1. 16, 17. ;  g.

18.  5.  may  find  grass  to  save  the  //.  and  mules  a

22.  4.  and  my  //.  are  as  thy  //.  2  Kings  3. 7.

2  Kings  2. 11.  there  appeared  //.  of  fire,  and  pai |

5.  9.  .Naaman  came  with  his  //.  and  his  ctrario;

7.  7.  they  left  their  h.  and  tied  for  their  life
10.  but  //.  tied  II  13.  some  take  five  of  the  //.

9.  33.  Jezebel's  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  //.
14.  20.  brought  Amaziah  on  //.  2  Chron.  25.  28,
18.23.  I  will  deliver  thee  2000  A.  Isa.  36.8.

23.  11  Josiah  took  away  the  //.  given  to  the  sui:
Ezra  2.66.  their  //.  were  736,  Neh.  7.  68.

Eccl.  10.  7.  1  have  seen  servants  on  //.and  prii .
Isa.  2.  7.  their  land  is  also  full  of  //.  and  chark|

5.  28.  their  //.  hoofs  shall  be  counted  liketiiivt

30. 16.  but  ye  said,  no,  for  we  will  flee  upon  h

31.  1.  and  stay  on  //.  and  trust  in  chariots

3.  and  their  //.  are  flesh,  and  not  spirit
Jer.  4.  13.  his  //.  are  swifter  than  eagles

5.  8.  they  were  as  fed  //.  in  the  morning

6.  23.  they  ride  on  //.  set  in  array  as  men  for  r

8. 16.  the  snorting  of  his  //.  was  heard  from  L)

12.  5.  then  how  canst  thou  contend  with  //.  ?

46.  4.  harness  the  //.  and  get  up,  ye  horsemen

47.  3.  noise  of  the  stamping  of  the  hoots  of  his

50.  42.  and  they  shall  ride  upon  //.  put  in  am

51.  27-  cause  the  //.  to  come  up  as  caterpillars
Ezek.  17. 15.  that  they  might  give  him  //.and  pe<

23.  6.  young  men,  horsemen  riding  on  //.  12.  j

20.  and  whose  issue  is  like  the  issue  of  //.

23.  renowned,  all  of  them  riding  on  //.  38.15

26.  10.  because  of  the  abundance  of  his  //.

27.  14.  Togarmah  traded  in  thy  fairs  with//.
38.4.  I  will  bring  thee  forth,  and  all  thy  army

llos.  1.  7-  1  will  not  save  them  by  battle  nor  //.
14.  3.  Ashur  shall  not  save,  we  will  not  ridec.
Joel  2.  4.  as  the  appearance  of  //.  and  horseme
Amos  4.  10.  and  1  have  taken  away  your  //.

6. 12.  shall  //.  run  upon  the  rock  ?  will  one  ph
Mic.  5.  10.  that  l  will  cutoff  thy //.  out  of  thee
Hab.  1.  8.  their  //.  also  are  swifter  than  the  leop<

3.  8.  that  thou  didst  ride  on  thy  h.  and  chariot:

15.  thou  didst  walk  through  the  sea  with  thy
Hag.  2.  22.  1  will  overthrow  the  //.  and  riders
Zech.  1.8.  and  behind  him  there  were  red  //.

6.  2.  in  first  chariot  red  //.  in  the  second  biacl
3.  in  third  white  //.in  fourth  chariot  bay  h.

6.  the  black  //.  go  forth  into  the  north  countr

10.  5.  the  riders  on  //.  shall  be  confounded
14.  20.  on  bells  of  //.  Holiness  to  the  Lot

Jam.  3.  3.  behold,  we  put  bits  in  the  //.  mouth:
Rev.  9. 7.  the  locusts  were  like  //.  prepared  to  b  i

17.  1  saw  the  //.  the  heads  of  //.  as  heads  of  lit

18. 13.  no  man  buyeth  the  merchandise  of//.

19.  14.  the  armies  followed  him  upon  white  h

18.  that  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  kings  and  h.

See  Chariots.
HORSELEECH.

Prov.  30. 15.  the  //» hath  two  daughters,  crying.  -
HORSEMAN.

2  Kings  9.  17-  Joram  said,  take  an  h.  send  to  n :
Nah.  3.  3.  //.  lifteth  up  the  bright  sword  and  s]
HORSEMEN.

Gen.  50.  9.  there  went  with  Joseph  chariots  ai  .
Exod.  14.  9.  the  //.  of  Pharaoh  pursued  after  th
17.  1  will  get  me  honour  on  Pharaoh  and  hi
15. 19.  Pharaoh  and  //.  went  into  sea.  Josh.  21

1  Sam.  8.  11.  he  will  take  your  sons  to  be  his.

13.  5.  the  Philist.  gathered  6000  //.  against  Isra

2  Sam.  1.  6.  lo,  the  //.  followed  hard  after  him

8.  4.  and  David  took  from  Hadadezer  700  h.
10. 18.  David  slew  40,000  //.  smote  Shobach

1  Kings  1.  5.  Adonijah  prepared  chariots  and

4.  26.  Solomon  had  12,000  //.  10.  26.

9.  19.  Solomon  had  cities  of  store  for  his  char  -)

and  cities  for  his  //.  22.  2  CJir, .8.  ■

20.  20.  Ben-hadad  escaped  on  an  horse  with  hp

2  Kings  2. 12.  the  chariot  of  Isr.  and  the  A.  ther

13.  7.  nor  did  he  leave  to  Jehoahaz  but  fifty  '

14.  Joash  said,  O  my  father,  the  h.  of. Israel jj
18.  24.  put  thy  trust  in  Egypt  for  chariots  and
2  Chron.  12.  3.  Shishak  came  up  with  60, 000  b

16.  8.  the  Ethiopians  a  huge  host  with  many  /
Ezra  8.  22.  was  ashamed  to  ask  soldiers  h.  to  h
Neh.  2. 9.  now  king  had  sent  captains  and//,  wit
Isa.  21.  7.  he  saw  a  chariot  with  a  couple  or /■

22. 7.  the  A.  shall  set  themselves  in  array  aiuie;

28.  28.  because  he  will  not  bruise  it  with  his  h
31.  1.  and  trust  in  //.  because  they  are  very  st  t,
36.  9.  how  wilt  thou  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  f  .;

Jer.  4.  29.  whole  city  shall  flee  for  the  noise  or  t  *•
46.  4.  get  up,  ye  //.  and  stand  with  your  hem
Ezek.  23.  6.  all  of  them  '/.  riding  on  horses,  l<j


HO  S


HOU


i  _  o(K  j'  bring  Nebuchadnezzar  against  Tyrus

•with  A.

thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  noise  of  the  A.

14.  they  of  I  ogannah  traded  in  fairs  with  A.

4.  Gog  I  will  bring  thee  forth,  horses  and  A.

I  .  11.  40.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come  with  A.

!  .  1. 7.  1  will  not  save  them  by  horses,  nor  by  A.
J  ‘2. 4.  appearance  of  horses,  as  A.  so  shall  they  run
J  7*1. 8.  their  A.  shall  spread  themselves,  and  their
A.  shall  come  from  far,  shall  fly  as  the  eagle
L  23.  ‘23.  make  ready  A.  threescore  and  ten
.  on  morrow  they  left  the  A.  to  go  with  him
7  0  16.  the  number  of  the  army  of  A.  were
HOSANNA

j  n  Hebrew  word,  which  signifies,  Save  I  beseech
■“  ,u.  It  is  a  form  of  acclamation,  of  blessing,  or
thing  one  well.  Thus  at  our  Saviour' s  entrance
to  Jerusalem,  when  the  people  cried,  Hosanna
the  Son  of  David;  their  meaning  was,  Lord
eserve  this  Son  or  David;  this  king:  heap
■mirs  arid  blessings  on  him.  The  word  is  found
JIat.  21.  9,  15.  Mark  11.  9,  10.  John  12.  13.
HOSEN.

r  ■  3  21.  these  men  were  bound  in  their  h.  and  hats
HOSPITALITY

ifies  love  to  strangers,  expressed  in  entertaining
d  using  them  kindly,  Rom.  12.  13.  It  has  a l-
Lyf  been  very  much  in  esteem  among  civilized
yple.  The  Scripture  furnishes  us  with  several
imples  of  hospitality  exercised  by  the  patriarchs.
Draham  received  three  angels,  and  earnestly  in-
led  them,  and  served  them  himself ;  while  Sarah
f  wife  took  care  to  make  ready  provisions  for  his
ests,  Gen.  18.  2,  3,  &e.  Lot  waited  at  the  city-
te  to  receive  such  guests  as’ might  come  thither,
;n.  19.  L  2,  &c.  St.  Paul  makes  use  of  Abra¬
m's  and  Lot’s  example  to  encourage  the  faithful,
d  persuade  them  to  the  exercise  of  hospitality,
ying,  that  they  who  have  practised  it,  have  had
e  honour  of  receiving  angels  under  the  form  of
>n,  Heb.  13.2.

3  apostles  Peter  and  Paul,  who  abounded  with  the
irit  of  their  Master,  with  great  carerecommend-
hospitality  to  the  faithful.  1  Pet.  4.  9.  Use
spitality  one  to  another  without  grudging.
nd  St.  Paul  recommends  this  duty,  particularly
such  as  are  overseers  in  the  church  of  God,  1  Tim.

2.  Our  Saviour  tells  his  apostles,  Mat.  10.  40,

.  He  that  receiveth  you  receiveth  me :  And
tosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of  these
tie  ones,  a  cup  of  cold  water  only,  he  shall  in
i  wise  lose  his  reward.  And  in  Mat.  25.  41, 43,

.  at  the  day  of  judgment  he  will  say  to  the  wicked,
epart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  tire ;
was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  in.  In  as
uch  as  ye  aid  it  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  these,
Is  did  it  not  to  me.

i  primitive  Christians  made  one  principal  part  of
eir  duty  to  consist  in  the  exercise  of  hospitality  ;
id  they  were  so  exact  in  the  discharge  of  it  that
e  very  heathens  admired  them  for  it.  They  were
spitable  to  all  strangers,  but  chiefly  to  those  that
’.re  of  the  same  faith  and  communion.  Believers
arce  ever  went  without  letters  of  communion,
'licit  testified  the  purity  of  their  faith;  this
is  sufficient  to  procure  them  reception  in  all
ose  places  where  the  name  of  J  esus  Christ  was
town.

in.  12. 13.  distributing,  given  to  h.  1  Tim.  3.  2.

-  1.  8.  but  a  lover  of  A.  a  lover  of  good  men
1  et.  4.  9.  use  h.  one  to  another  without  grudging
HOST.

j  e  10. 35.  he  took  two  pence,  and  gave  them  to  h.
-Os.16.23.  Gaius  mine  A. and  of  church  saluteth  you
HOST.

(:i.  2. 1.  the  earth  was  finished,  and  all  h.  of  them

22.  Phichol  the  chief  captain  of  his  h.  32.

2.  Jacob  saw  them,  he  said,  this  is  God’s  h.
id.  14.  4.  I  will  be  honoured  on  all  his  h.  17.

h  Lord  looked  to  h.  of  Egyptians  thro’  pillar  of
fire  and  of  cloud,  and  troubled  the  h.  ot  Egypt.

1.  the  waters  covered  all  the  h.  of  Pharaoh

13.  in  morning  the  dew  lay  round  about  the  h.
.  'ii.  2. 4.  and  his  h.  and  those  that  were  numbered

of  them,  6,  8,  11,  13,  15, 19,  21.  23.

3.  all  that  entered  into  the  h.  to  do  the  work

14.  over  the  A.  of  Judah  ||  15.  the  h.  of  Issachar
Lover  A.  of  Zebulun  ||  18.  Reuben  ||  19.  Simeon

14.  Moses  was  wroth  with  the  o dicers  of  the  h.

5.  the  officers  of  the  h.  came  near  to  Moses

j  it.  2. 14.  the  men  of  war  were  wasted  from  the  h.

1.  to  destroy  them  from  among  h.  till  consumed
.  9.  when  the  h.  goeth  forth  against  enemies

Si.  1.  11.  pass  thro’  the  h.  and  command  the  peo.

2.  after  three  days  the  officers  went  thro’  the  h.
14.  as  captain  ot  the  h.  of  the  Lord  am  I  come
9.  and  came  again  to  Joshua  to  the  A.  at  Shi  loir

Sg.  4.  2.  the  captain  of  whose  It.  was  Sisera
i.  and  all  the  A.  of  Sisera  fell  on  the  sword

8.  tlie  A.  of  Midian  was  beneatli  in  the  valley
.  God  said,  arise,  get  thee  down  unto  the  h.  10.

3.  a  cake  or  bread  tumbled  into  the  h.  of  Midian

1.  and  all  the  A.  ran,  and  cried,  and  fled

11.  Gideon  went  up  and  smote  the  h.  the  h.  sec.

2.  Gideon  pursued  and  discomfited  all  the  h.
tm.  11.  u.  Satll  came  into  the  h.  in  the  morning

•  15.  there  was  trembling  in  the  h.  in  the  field
J.  the  noise  of  the  h.  went  on  and  increased

U.  the  captain  of  Saul’S  h.  was  Abner  son  of  N  er
.  20.  Dav.  came  as  the  h.  was  going  forth  to  fight

•  5.  when  Saul  saw  the  h.  of  the  Philistines

Ld.  shall  deliver  the  h.  of  Isr.  to  Philistines
.  6.  thy  going  and  coming  in  with  me  in  h.  is  good
■  tm.  5.  24.  L.  shall  smite  the  h.  of  the  Philistines
i  9.  when  Toi  king  of  llamath  heard  that  David
ad  smitten  all  the  h.  of  lladadezer,  1  Chr.  18.  9.

•  18.  Syrians  fled,  Dav.  smote  Shobach  the  cap¬
tain  ot  their  h.  who  died  there,  1  Citron.  19.  18.

•  25.  Absalom  made  Amasa  captain  of  the  h.

•  13.  if  thou  be  not  captain  of  h.  in  room  of  Joab

23.  Joab  was  over  all  the  h.  1  Citron.  18.  15.
It*,  these  three  brake  thro-  the  h.  1  Chr.  11.  18


1  Kings  2.  32.  Abner  the  son  of  Nercapt.  of  the  h.

of  Tsr.  and  Amasa  captain  of  the  It.  of  Judah
35.  the  king  put  Benaiah  over-  the  It.  4.  4.

16.  16.  Israel  made  Omri  captain  of  the  h.  king

20.  1.  Benhadad  gathered  all  his  h.  together

22.  34.  turn  thy  hand  and  carry  me  out  of  the  h.

2  Kings  3.  9.  there  was  no  water  for  the  A.  and  cattle

4. 13.  wouldest  be  spoken  for  to  the  capt.  of  the  h.  ?

6. 14.  therefore  sent  lie  horses  and  great  h.  to  Dothan

24.  Benhadad  gathered  his  h.  and  went  up

7.  4.  come  and  let  us  fall  unto  the  It.  of  the  Syrians

6.  Lord  made  the  It.  to  hear  the  noise  of  a  great  h.

9.  5.  behold  the  captains  of  the  h.  were  sitting

18.  17.  Sennacherib  seat  a  great  h.  against  .Terns.

25.  1.  Nebuchadnezzar  came  and  his  h.  against

J  erusalem

19.  the  principal  scribe  of  the  It.  .Ter.  52.  25.

1  Citron.  9-  19.  their  fathers  over  the  It.  of  the  Lord

12.  22.  till  it  was  a  great  h.  like  the  h.  of  God
27-  3.  was  the  chief  of  all  the  captains  of  the  h.

2  Citron.  14.  9.  against  them  Zerah  came  with  an  h.
16.  7.  not  relied,  therefore  the  It.  of  Syria  escaped

8.  were  not  the  Ethiopians  and  Lubims  a  huge  h.  ?

18.  33.  turn  thy  hand  and  cany  me  out  of  the  h.

24.  24.  tlie  Ld.  delivered  a  great  h.  into  their  hand

26.  11.  Uzziah  had  an  It.  of  fighting  men  for  war
28.  9.  Oded  went  out  before  the  h.  and  said,  behold
Ps.  27.  3.  though  an  h.  should  encamp  against  me
33.  6.  all  h.  of  them  made  by  breath  of  thy  mouth

16.  no  king  is  saved  by  tlie  multitude  of  an  h.
136.  15.  but  overthrew  Pharaoh  and  h.  in  Red  sea
Isa.  13.  4.  Lord  of  hosts  mustereth  the  h.  of  battle
24.  21.  Lord  shall  punish  the  It.  of  the  high  ones
40.  26.  that  bringeth  out  their  h.  by  number
45.  12.  and  all  tneir  h.  have  I  commanded
Jer.  51.  3.  spare  not,  destroy  ye  utterly  all  her  h.
Ezek.  1. 24.  the  voice  of  speech,  as  the  noise  of  an  It.
Dan.  8.  10.  and  it  cast  down  some  of  the  A.

11 .  he  magnified  himself  to  the  prince  of  the  A.

12.  an  h.  was  given  him  against  the  daily  sacrifice

13.  to  give  the  h.  to  be  trodden  under  toot
Obad.  20.  the  captivity  of  this  h.  shall  possess  that
Luke  2. 13.  multitude  of  the  heavenly  It.  praising  G.

See  Heaven.

HOSTAGES.

2  Kings  14.  14.  Jehoash  took  all  the  gold  and  silver
and  h.  and  returned  to  Samaria,  2  Chr.  25.  24.
HOSTS.

Gen.  32.12.  he  called  the  name  of  that  place,  two  h.
Exod.  12.  41.  the  h.  of  Lord  went  out  of  Egypt
Josh.  10.  5.  the  kings  of  Canaan  and  all  their  A.  11.4.
Judg.  8.  10.  Zeba  and  Zalmunna  with  their  h.

1  Kings  15.  20.  Benhadad  sent  the  captains  of  the  h.
Psal.  103.  21.  bless  ye  the  Lord,  all  ye  his  It.

108.  11.  wilt  not  thou,  O  God,  go  forth  with  h.  ?
148.  2.  praise  ye  him,  all  his  angels,  all  his  h.

Jer.  3.  19.  a  goodly  heritage  of  the  h.  of  nations
See  God,  Lord.

HOT.

Exod.  16.  21.  when  the  sun  waxed  h.  it  melted
J.ev :  13.  24.  any  flesh,  whereof  there  is  a  h.  burning
Dent.  9. 19. 1  was  afraid  of  anger  and  A.  displeasure

19.  6.  lest  the  avenger  pursue,  while  his  heart  is  h.
Josh.  9. 12.  this  our  bread  we  took  h.  for  provision
Judg.  2. 14.  anger  of  Lord  was  h.  against  Israel,  and

he  delivered  to  the  spoilers,  20.  1  3.  8.  |  10.  7.
6.  39.  Gideon  said,  let  not  thine  anger  be  It.  ag.  me

9.  t  30.  when  Zabul  heard  Gaal,  his  anger  was  h.
1  Sam.  11.  9.  Ivy  the  sun  be  h.  ye  shall  have  help

21.  6.  put  A.  bread  in  day  when  it  was  taken  away
1  Kings  +  26.  for  her  bowels  were  h.  upon  her  son
Neh.  7.  3.  let  not  gates  be  opened  till  the  sun  be  h.
Job  6.  17.  when  if  is  h.  they  are  consumed

Psal.  6. 1.  neither  chasten  in  thy  /(.displeasure,  38. 1.
39.  3.  my  heart  was  h.  within  me,  while  musing
78.  48.  he  gave  their  flocks  to  h.  thunderbplts
85.  t  3.  hast  turned  thine  anger  from  waxing  h.
Prov.6. 28.  can  one  go  upon  /(.coals  and  not  be  burnt  ?
Ezek.  24. 11.  that  the  brass  of  it  may  be  h.  and  burn
Dan.  3.  22.  because  the  furnace  was  exceeding  h.
Hos.  7.  7.  they  are  all  h.  as  an  oven,  and  devoured

1  Tim.  4.  2.  their  conscience  seared  with  a  h.  iron
Rev.  3.  15.  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither

cold  nor  A.  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  h.  16.
See  Wax,  Verb.

HOTLY.

Gen.  31.  36.  that  thou  hast  so  h.  pursued  after  me
HOTTEST.

2  Sam.  11.  15.  set  Uriah  in  forefront  of  the  h.  battle

HOUGH.

Josh.  11.  6.  the  Lord  said,  thou  shalt  It.  their  horses
HOUGHED.

Josh.  11.  9.  A.  their  horses,  burnt  chariots  with  fire
2  Sam.  8.  4.  and  David  A.  all  the  chariot  horses
HOUR.

The  ancient  Hebrews  did  not  divide  the  day  by
hours :  The  day  was  divided  into  four  parts,
morning,  high  day  or  noon,  the  first  evening,
and  the  last  evening  ;  and  the  night  was  divided
into  three  parts,  night,  mid-night ,  and  the  morn¬
ing-watch.  But  after-wards,  when  the  Jews  came
to  be  under  the  Romans,  they  followed  them  in
dividing  the  night  into  four  parts,  which  they
called  watches,  because  they  relieved  their  cen-
tinels  every  three  hours.  Thus  in  Mat.  14.  25.
it  is  said,  that  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,
Jesus  went  to  his  disciples,  walking  on  the  sea;
that  is,  about  three  hours  before  the  rising  of  the
sun.

In  the  books  of  the  New '  Testament  we  see  clearly
the  day  divided  into  twelve  equal  hours,  after
the  manner  of  the  Greeks  and  Bomans,  Mat.

20.  1,  2,  3,  &c.  John  11.  9.  These  hours  were
equal  to  each  other,  but  unequal  with  respect  to
the  different  seasons.  The  twelve  hours  of  the
longest  days  in  summer  were  much  longer  than
those  of  the  shortest  days  in  winter.  The  first  hour
was  that  which  followed  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and
was  answerable  to  our  six  o'clock  in  the  morning
in  the  equinox  ;  and  to  other  times  in  proportion
to  the  length  or  shortness  of  the  days.  The  third
hour  was  answerable  to  nine  o'  clock  of  the  morning


HOU


in  the  equinox;  the  sixth  at  all  limes  to  noon,  ar.d

soon.

Dan.  4. 19.  then  Daniel  was  astonied  for  one  h.
Mat.  9.  22.  woman  was  made  whole  from  that  A.
15. 28.  her  daughtermade  whole  from  that  very  h.
17.  18.  the  child  was  cured  from  that  very  h.

20.  3.  he  went  out  about  the  third  h.  and  saw
5.  about  the  sixth  and  ninth  A.  H  6.  the  eleventh  h.
12.  saying,  these  last  have  wrought  but  one  h.

24.  36.  that  h.  knoweth  no  man,  42.  Mark  13.  32.

44.  such  an  h.  as  ye  think  not,  50.  Luke  12.  40, 46

25.  13.  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  h.

26.  40.  could  ye  not  watch  one  h.  ?  Mark  14.  37.

45.  the  A.  is  at  hand,  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed

27.  45.  from  the  sixth  h.  was  darkness  over  the  land

to  the  ninth  h.  Mark  15.  33.  Luke  23.  44.

46.  about  the  ninth  h.  Jesus  cried,  Mark  15.  34.
Mark  13. 11.  whatsoever  shall  be  given  you  in  that  h.

14.  35.  that  if  possible  the  h.  might  pass  from  him

15.  25.  it  was  the  third  h.  and  they  crucified  him
Luke  10. 21.  in  that  A.  Jes.  rejoiced  in  spiritandsaid

12.  39.  had  known  what  A.  tlie  thief  would  come

22.  14.  and  when  the  A.  was  come,  he  sat  down
53.  but  this  is  your  A.  and  the  power  of  darkness
59.  about  the  space  of  one  A.  after  another  affirmed

John  1.  39.  abode  that  day,  for  it  was  about  tentli  A.

2.  4.  Jesus  saith,  woman,  mine  A.  is  not  yet  come

4.  6.  Jesus  sat,  it  was  abouttlie  sixtli  A.  19.  14.

21.  woman,  believe  me,  the  A.  cometh,  23.

52.  then  inquired  he  the  A.  when  he  began  to
amend,  yesterday  at  seventh  A.  the  fever  left  him

5.  25.  the" A.  is  coming,  and  now  is,  28. 1  16.  32.

7.  30.  because  his  A.  was  not  yet  come,  8.  20.

12. 23.  the  A.  is  come,  Son  should  be  glorified,  17.  l .

27.  my  soul  is  troubled,  Father,  save  me  from  this
A.  for  this  cause  came  I  to  this  A.
13. 1.  when  Jesus  knew  that  his  A.  was  come

16.  21.  woman  hath  sorrow,  because  her  A.  is  come

19.  27.  from  that  A.  that  disciple  took  her  home
Acts  2.  15.  not  drunken,  seeing  it  is  third  A.  of  day

3.  1.  at  the  A.  of  prayer  being  the  ninth  A.

10.  3.  he  saw  about  the  ninth  A.  an  angel  coming

9.  Peter  went  up  co  pray  about  the  sixth  A.

30.  four  days  ago  1  was  fasting  until  this  A.

23.  23.  make  ready  at  the  third  A.  of  the  night

1  Cor.  4. 11.  to  this  present  A.  both  hunger  ana  thirst

8.  7.  some  with  conscience  of  the  idol  unto  this  A.

15.  30.  and  why  stand  we  in  jeopardy  every  A.  /

Gal.  2.  5.  to  whom  we  gave  place,  no  not  for  an  A.
Rev.  3.  3.  not  know  what  A.  1  will  come  upon  thee

10.  I  will  keep  thee  from  the  A.  of  temptation

8.  1.  there  was  silence  about  the  space  of  half  an  A.

9. 15.  which  were  prepared  for  an  A.  and  a  day
14.  7.  fear  God,  for  the  A.  of  his  judgment  is  come

17.  12.  but  receive  power  as  kings  one  A.  with  beast

18.  10.  for  in  one  A.  is  thy  judgment  come
17.  in  one  A.  so  great  riches  is  come  to  nought

19.  that  great  city  in  one  A.  is  she  made  desolate

Same  HOUR.

Dan.  3.  6.  the  same  h.  be  cast  into  the  furnace,  15.

4.  33.  the  same  A.  was  the  thing  fulfilled  on  N  ebuc.

5.  5.  in  the  same  A.  came  forth  fingers,  and  wrote
Mat.  8.  13.  his  servant  was  healed  the  same  A.

10. 19.  it  shall  be  given  you  the  same  A.  Luke  12. 12.
26.  55.  in  the  same  A.  said  Jesus  to  the  multitude
Luke  7.  21.  that  same  h.  cured  many  of  their  plagues

20.  19.  scribes  same  A.  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him
24.33.  they  rose  up  tlie  same  A.  returned  to  Jerusal.

John  4. 53.  the  father  knew  that  it  was  at  the  same  A.
Acts  16.  18.  and  he  came  out  the  same  A.

33.  he  took  them  same  A.  of  the  night  and  washed

22.  13.  and  the  same  A.  I  looked  up  upon  him
Rev.  11. 13.  th  esameh.  was  there  a  great  earthquake

HOURS.

John  11.  9.  are  there  not  twelve  A.  in  the  day  ?

Acts  5. 7.  wife  came  in  about  space  of  three  A.  after

19.  34.  all  cried  about  two  A.  great  is  Diana  of  Eph.

HOUSE


Signifies,  (1)  A  place  to  dwell  in,  Gen.  19.  3.  (2)
The  household,  or  persons  dwelling  in  the  house.
Acts  10.  2.  Cornelius  feared  God  with  all  his
house,  with  all  his  family.  So  in  Heb.  11.  7.
Noah  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  bouse.
And  in  many  other  places.  (3)  Kindred,  stock,  or
lineage,  2  Sam.  7-  18.  What  is  my  house,  that
thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto  ?  And  Luke  1.  27.
Gabriel  was  sent  to  a  virgin  espoused  to  Joseph,
of  the  house  of  David,  of  the  lineage  or  family  of
David.  (4)  Wealth,  riches,  or  estates.  Mat.  23.
14.  Ye  devour  widows’  houses  ;  ye  consume  their
estates.  (5)  The  grave,  or  a  sepulchre.  Job  30,
23.  I  know  that  thou  wilt  bring  me  to  the  house
appointed  for  all  living.  And  Isa.  14.  18.
Everjr  one  in  his  own  house.  (6)  One's  family
affairs  and  concerns.  2  Kings  20.  1.  Set  thine
house  in  order.  (7)  This  frail,  corruptible,  mor¬
tal  body,  wherein  the  soul  lodges  for  a  time.  2
Cor.  5.  1.  If  our  earthly  house  of  this  taberna¬
cle  were  dissolved  ;  if  our  bodily  frame  of  nature
were  taken  to  pieces  by  death.  (8)  The  church
among  the  Jews.  Heb.  3.  2.  Moses  was  faith¬
ful  in  all  his  house.  He  ordered  all  things
in  the  Jewish  church  according  to  the  command
of  God.

Our  Saviour,  in  John  14.  2.  calls  heaven  his
Father’s  house,  in  which  there  are  maiiy  man¬
sions,  wherein  saints  and  blessed  spirits  shall
dwell  with  God  for  ever  in  immortal  glory.  The
church  of  God  is  called  his  house.  1  Tim.  3.  i5.
That  thou  mavest  know  how  to  behave  thyself
in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  church  of  the
living  God  ;  a  people  in  and  among  whom  he
dwelleth.  And  in  Heb.  3.  6.  But  Christ  as  a
Son  over  his  own  house,  whose  house  are  we.
Believers  are  set  apart  from  profane  uses,  and
dedicated  to  the  service  of  God  ;  among  whom  he
manifests  his  gracious  presence  by  his  Spirit.  The
tabernacle  is  also  called  the  house  of  God,  Judg.
18.  31.  as  also  the  temple,  2  Chron.  5.  14.  Per¬
sons  are  said  to  join  house  to  house,  when  they
watch  all  opportunities  to  dispossess  others  bp  an$
means  whatsoever,  and  to  engross  all  to  them

239


HOU


H  O  U


HOU


stives.  Isa.  5.  8.  "Woe  unto  them  that  join  house
to  house.  Egypt  was  the  house  of  bondage  ;  here
the  people  of  Israel  were  in  great  bondage  and
slavery,  Deut.  5.  6.

Gen.  iy.  I.  men  of  Sodom  compassed  the  h.  round

24.  27.  Ld.  led  me  to  the  h.  of  my  master’s  brethren
31.  1  have  prepared  the  h.  and  room  tor  camels

28.  C.  go  to  the  h.  of  Bethuel,  thy  mother’s  father

39.  5.  Lord  blessed  the  Egyptian's  h.  for  Joseph’s

Sake

45.  2.  the  Egjrptians  and  the  h.  of  Pharaoh  heard
Exod.  8.3.  frogs  shall  come  into  the/*,  of  thy  servants

12. 3.  a  lamb  according  to  the  h.  of  their  fathers
30.  was  not  an  h.  where  there  was  not  one  dead
46.  thou  shalt  not  carry  of  the  flesh  out  of  the  h.

13.  3.  remember  day  ye  came  out  from  Egypt,  out

of  the  h.  of  bondage,  14.  Deut.  5.  6. 1  6. 12.

20.  17.  shalt  not  covet  neighbour’s  h.  Deut.  5.  21.
Lev.  14.  36.  priestshall  command  they  empty  the  h.

14.  38.  priest  shall  go  out  of  the  h.  and  shut  up

45.  lie  shall  break  down  the  h.  and  mortar  of  h.

46.  he  that  goeth  into  the  /*.  shall  be  unclean
49.  he  shall  take  to  cleanse  the  h.  two  birds

25.  30.  h.  sold  in  walled  city,  not  go  out  in  jubilee
Num.  30. 10.  and  it  she  vowed  in  her  husband’s  h.
Deut.  7.  8.  redeemed  you  out  of  the  h.  of  bondmen

8. 14.  which  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,

from  the  h.  of  bondage,  13.  5,  10  Josh.  24.

17.  Judy.  6.  8.  Jer.  34.  13.  Mic.  6.  4.

25. 10.  the  /*.  or  him  that  hath  his  shoe  loosed
Josh.  2. 15.  for  her  h.  was  upon  the  town  wall
Judy.  8.  .35.  nether  shewed  kind.  to/*,  of  Jerubbaal

9.  6.  all  the  /*.  of  INI i  1  lo  made  Abimelech  king

20.  let  fire  come  from  /*.  of  Millo,  and  devour

10.  9.  Ammon  fought  against  the  /*.  of  Ephraim

16.  26.  that  1  may  feel  pillars  w  hereon  /*.  standeth

27.  the  /*.  was  full  of  men  ||  30.  /*.  fell  on  the  lords
17-  5.  Micah  had  an  /*.  of  gods,  made  an  ephod

18.  13.  and  they  came  unto  the  /*.  of  Micah

19.  18.  there  is  no  man  that  receiveth  me  to  /*.

22.  the  sons  of  Belial  beset  the  h.  round,  20.  5.

1  Sam.  .3. 14.  therefore  l  have  sworn  unto  a.  of  Eli

5.  2.  they  brought  the  ark  into  the  /*.  of  L)agon

7.  1.  and  brought  the  ark  into  the  /*.  of  Abinadab

9. 18.  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  where  the  seer's  /*.  is
25.  3.  Mahal  was  churlish,  and  of  the  /*.  of  Caleb

28.  the  Ld.  will  certainly  make  my  lord  a  sure  /*.

2  Sam. 3.1.  long  war  betw.  /*.  of  Saul  and  /*.  of  David

8.  do  shew  kindness  to  the  /*.  of  Saul  thy  father

29.  let  there  not  fail  from  the  /*.  of  Joab  one

4.  5.  came  to  /*.  of  Ishbosheth,  who  lay  on  bed  at

5.  8.  the  lame  and  blind  shall  not  come  into  the  h.

6. 11.  the  Ld.  blessed  the  /*.  of  Obed-edom,  David
brought  the  ark  from  his  /*.  12.  1  Citron.  13. 14.

7-  6.  1  have  not  dwelt  in  any  /*.  1  Citron.  17.  5.

11.  Lord  telleth  thee,  he  will  make  thee  an  h.

29.  to  bless  the  It.  of  thy  servant,  1  Citron.  17.  27.

9.  1.  is  there  any  that  is  left  of  the  /*.  of  Saul  ?

12.  8.  and  I  gave  thee  thy  master's  /*.  and  wives

13.  7-  go  now  to  thy  brother  Amnon’s  /*.  and  dress

16.  5.  came  a  man  of  the  family  of  the  /*.  of  Saul

1  Kings  2.  24.  who  made  me  an/i.  as  he  promised
27.  which  he  spake  concerning  the  It.  of  Eli

6.  22.  and  the  whole  It.  he  overlaid  with  gold

9.  25.  he  burnt  incense,  so  Solomon  finished  the  h.

11. 18.  they  came  to  Pharaoh,  who  gave  him  an  h.
12.  31.  Jeroboam  made  an  /*.  of  his  high  places

14.  10.  1  will  bring  an  evil  on  the  /*.  of  Jerob.  14.

15.  29.  Baasha  smote  all  the  h.  of  Jeroboam

16. 11.  Zimri  slew  all  the  /*.  of  Baasha,  he  left  none

17.  15.  she,  and  he,  and  her  /*.  did  eat  many  days

21.  22.  1  will  make  thy  /*.  like  the  /*.  of  Jeroboam

2  Kings  8.  3.  to  cry  to  the  king  for  her  It.  and  land

18.  as  did  the  It.  of  Ahab,  27. 2  Clvon.  21.6.  |  22. 4.

9.  8.  for  the  whole  It.  of  Ahab  shall  perish

10.  3.  look  out  the  best,  fight  for  your  master’s  h.

21.  /*.  of  Baal  was  full  from  one  end  to  another
27.  and  they  made  the  /*.  of  Baal  a  draught  /*.

12.  12.  for  all  that  was  laid  out  for  /*.  to  repair  it

20.  13.  IJezekiah  shewed  them  /*.  of  his  precious

things,  all  the  /*.  of  his  armour,  Isa.  39.  2.

23.  27.  b.  of  which  I  said,  my  name  shall  lie  there

25.  9.  every  great  man’s  /*.  he  burnt  with  fire

1  C/tr.  2.  54.  sons  of  Salma  ;  Ataroth  the  h.  of  Joab

26.  15.  and  to  his  sons,  the  /*.  of  Asuppim

2  C 'hr.  7-  L  glory  of  L.  filled  the  /*.  Ezek.  43.  4,  5.

12.  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  /*.  of  sacrifice

22.  9.  so  the  It.  of  Ahaziah  had  no  power  to  keep
35.  21.  but  against  the  It.  wherewith  I  have  war

Ezra  5. 8.  that  we  went  to  the  /*.  of  the  great  God

6.3.  let  the  /*.  be  builded,  the  place  where  offered
Kelt.  2.  8.  and  for  the  /*.  which  1  shall  enter  into
Esth.  2.  3.  gather  all  the  virgins  to  the  It.  of  women

8.  1.  king  did  give  the  h.  of  Daman  to  Esther,  7.
Job  1.  13.  drinking  wine  in  eldest  brother’s  h.  18.

19.  a  wind  came  and  smote  the  comers  of  the  /*.

20.  19.  hath  taken  away  a  It.  which  he  builded  not

21.  28.  for  ye  say,  where  is  the  h.  of  the  prince  ?

30.  23.  and  to  the  /*.  appointed  for  all  living

38.  20.  thou  shouldest  know  paths  to  the  It.  thereof

39.  6.  whose  /*.  i  have  made  the  wilderness

Ps.  31. 2.  my  rock  be  for  a  It.  of  defence  to  save  me
84.  3.  yea,  the  sparrow  hath  found  an  h.

104.  17.  as  for  the  stork,  fir-trees  are  her  /*.

Prov.  2. 18.  her  /*.  inclineth  to  death,  paths  to  dead

7.  8.  the  young  man  went  the  way  to  her  /*.

1 1.  loud  and  stubborn,  her  feet  abide  not  in  her  It.

27.  her  /*.  is  the  way  to  hell,  going  to  death

9. 1.  wisdom  hath  builded  her  h.  hath  hewn  pillars

12.  7.  but  the  h.  of  the  righteous  shall  stand

14. 11.  the  h.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  overthrown

15.  25.  the  Lord  will  destroy  the  /*.  of  the  proud
17- 1.  than  an  h.  full  of  sacrifices  with  strife

19. 14.  /*.  and  riches  are  the  inheritance  of  fathers

21.  9.  is  better  to  dwell  in  corner  of  /*.  top,  25.  24.

12.  righteous  wisely  considereth  the  It.  of  wicked

24.  3.  thro’  wisdom  is  an  It.  built  and  established

25.  17.  withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbour’s  It.
27 . 10.  nor  go  into  brother’s  /*.  in  day  of  calamity

Eccl.  7  •  2.  to  go  to  /*.  of  mourning,  than  /*.  of  feasting

10.  18.  thro’  idlen.  of  hands  the  It.  droppeth  thro’
12.  3.  when  the  keepers  of  the  h.  shall  trembl®


Cant.  1. 17-  the  beams  or  our  h.  are  cedar,  and  raft.

2.4.  brought  me  to  the  banqueting  A.  his  banner

3.  4.  till  1  had  brought  him  into  my  mother's  /*.

8.  2.  1  would  bring  thee  into  my  mother’s  h.

Isa.  5.  8.  woe  to  them  that  join  /*.  to  /*.  field  to  field

6.  4.  and  the  /*.  was  filled  with  smoke

14.  17-  that  opened  not  the  h.  of  his  prisoners

23.  1.  so  that  there  is  no  /*.  ||  24.  10.  every  It.  shut

31.  2.  he  will  arise  against  the  /*.  of  evil  doers
60.  7.  and  1  will  glorify  the  h.  of  my  glory
64.  11.  our  holy  and  beautiful  /*.  is  burned  up

Jer.  16.  5.  enter  not  into  the  It.  of  mourning

8.  thou  shalt  not  go  into  h.  of  feasting  with  them
21.  11.  touching  the  /*.  of  the  king  of  .1  udah,  22. 1.

35.2.  go  to  the  It.  of  the  Rechabites  and  speak

37.  20.  not  to  return  to  /*.  of  Jonathan,  38.  26.
Ezek.  2.5.  for  they  are  a  rebellious/*,  jet  shall  know

a  prophet  been  among  them,  3.  9,  26,  27.  I  12.  3.

8.  be  not  thou  rebellious  like  that  rebellious/*.

9.  7.  he  said  to  them,  defile  the  It.  go  ye  forth
12.  2.  thou  dwellest  in  the  midst  of  a  rebellious  It.

25.  in  your  days,  O  rebellious  /*.  will  1  say

17. 12.  say  now  to  the  rebellious  /*.  know  ye  not

24.  3.  and  utter  a  parable  to  the  rebellious  h.

43.  11.  if  ashamed,  shew  them  the  form  of  the  It.

12.  this  is  the  law  of  /*.  on  the  top  of  mountain

45.  20.  so  shall  ye  reconcile  the  h.

Dan.  1.2.  which  he  carried  to  the  It.  of  his  god
Hos.  1.4.  avenge  blood  of  Jezreel  on  the  h.  of  Jehu
Amos  1.  4.  I  will  send  a  fire  into  the  /*.  of  I  lazael

5.  that  holdeth  the  sceptre  from  the  /*.  of  Eden

3. 15.  1  will  smite  the  winter  /*.  with  summer  It.

5. 19.  or  went  into  /*.  and  leaned  his  hand  on  wall

6. 11.  he  will  smite  the  great  /*.  and  the  little  It.
7.9.  I  wid  rise  against /*.  of  Jeroboam  with  sword

16.  drop  not  thy  word  against  the  It.  of  Isaac
Obad.  18.  the  It.  of  Esau  shall  be  for  stubble
Mic.  3. 12.  Jerus.  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain
of  the  It.  shall  be  as  high  places  of  the  forest

4.  2.  let  us  go  up  to  the  It.  of  the  God  of  Jacob

6.  16.  all  the  works  of  the  /*.  of  Ahab  are  kept

Kali.  1.14.  out  of  the  /*.  of  thy  gods  will  1  cut  off
Zech.  5.  4.  it  shall  enter  into  the  /*.  of  the  thief,  into
the  h.  of  him  that  sweareth  falsely  by  my  name

12. 12.  the  family  of  the  /*.  of  Mathan  apart
Mat.  7.  25.  and  beat  upon  that  /*.  27.  Luke  6.  48.

10.  12.  and  when  ye  come  into  an  /*.  salute  it

13.  if/*,  be  worthy ,  letyour  peaee  come,  Luke  10.5.
12.  25.  every  /*.  divided  against  itself,  Mark  3.  25.

29.  how  enter  into  a  strong  man’s  It.  Mark  3.  27.
20.  11.  murmured  against  the  good  man  of  the  /*.

23.  38.  your  /*.  is  left  to  you  desolate,  l.uke  13.  25.

24.  43.  If  the  good  man  of  the  /*.  had  known  in  what

watch  the  thief  would  come,  Luke  12.  39.
Mark  3.  25.  a  /*.  divided  agst.  itself,  that  It.  cannot

10.  29.  that  hath  left  It.  or  brethren  for  my  sake

14.  14.  Master  saith,  where  is  the  guest-chamber?
say  ye  to  the  good  man  of  the  (t.  Luke  111.  11.

Luke  10.  7.  in  that  ft.  remain,  go  not  from  /*.  to  /*.
.38.  named  Martha,  received  him  into  her/*.

15.  8.  doth  not  light  candle  and  sweep  /*.  and  seek
John  12.  3.  It.  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  ointment
Acts  2.2.  a  sound  from  heaven  filled  all  the/*.

46.  breaking  bread  from  /*.  to  /*.  did  eat  their
5. 42.  in  everyr  /*.  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  .1 .

10.  6.  Simon  a  tanner,  whose  /*.  is  by  the  sea  side

11.  12.  and  we  entered  into  the  man’s  /*.

12.  12.  he  came  to  the  /*.  of  Mary.motherof  John
17.5.  but  the  Jews  assaulted  the  /*.  of  Jason

18.  7.  whose  /(.joined  hard  to  the  synagogue
19. 16.  they  tied  out  of  that  /*.  naked  and  wounded

20.  20.  1  taught  you  publicly,  and  from  /*.  to  /*.

21.  8.  entered  into  the  /*.  of  Philip  the  evangelist
Rom.  16.  5.  gl  eet  the  church  in  their  It.  1  Cor.  16.  19.

1  Cor.  1. 11.  by  them  which  are  of  the  /*.  of  Chloe

16. 15.  ye  know  the  /*.  of  Stephanas  the  first-fruits

2  Cor.  5.1.  if  earthly  h.  be  dissolved,  we  have  an  /*.

2.  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon  with  /*.  from  heaven

1  Tim  . 5. 1.3.  wandering  about  from  It.  to  /i.and  tattlers

14.  that  the  younger  women  guide  the  It.

2  Tim.  1 . 16.  Lord  give  mercy  to  /*.  of  Onesiphor'us

2. 20.  in  a  great  h.  there  are  vessels  of  gold  and

[silver

lieb.  3.  3.  he  who  built  the  h.  more  honour  than  h.

4.  for  every  /*.  is  built  by  some  man,  he  that  built

6.  whose  h.  are  we,  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence
2  John  10.  receive  him  not  into  your  It.  nor  bid  him
See  Aaron,  Born,  Build  or  Built,  Chief,

David,  Door,  Dwell.

HOUSE  joined  with  father.

Gen.  12.  1.  Lord  said,  get  thee  from  thy  father's  h.

20. 13.  when  God  caused  to  wander  from  father's  /*.
24.  7-  God,  which  took  me  from  my  father's  /*.

38.  thou  shalt  go  to  my'  f.'s  /*.  and  take  a  wife

40.  shalt  take  a  wife  for  my  son  of  my  father's  h.

31 . 14.  is  there  any  portion  for  us  in  our  father's  /*.  ?

38.  11.  remain  a  widow  at  thy  father's  h.  till  She-

lah  be  grown,  Tamar  went  and  dwelt  in
her  father's  /*.

41.  51.  God  hath  made  me  forget  my  father's  /*.

46.  31.  my  brethren  and  father's  It.  are  come  to  me
50.  22.  Joseph  dwelt  in  Egypt,  he  and  his  f.'s  h.
Exod.  12.  3.  a  lamb,  according  to  /*.  of  their  fathers
Lev.  22.13.  if  she  is  returned  to  her  father's  It.
Num.  1. 2.  take  sum  of  Israel  by  /*.  of  their  fathers,

with  number  of  their  names,  18, 20,  22,  24.
4.  there  shall  be  a  man  of  every  tribe,  every  one
head  of  the  h.  of  his  fathers,  44.  Josh.  22.  14.
45.  that  were  numbered  by  the  ft.  of  their  fathers
2.  2.  every  man  pitch  with  ensign  of  their  f.'s  h.

3. 15.  number  of  the  children  of  Levi  after  the  It.  of

their  fathers,  by  their  families  20. 1  4.  46.
4. 38.  Gershon  ||  42.  Merari  after  /*.  of  their  fathers

17. 2.  according  to  /*.  of  their  f.'s  twelve  rods,  3.

18. 1.  thou  and  f.'s  h.  bear  iniquity  of  sanctuary

30.  3.  woman  vow  a  vow,  being  in  her  father's  /*.  16.

34. 14.  Reuben,  Gad,  according  to  the  h.  of  their  /.
Dent.  22. 21.  to  play  the  whore  in  her  father's  h.
Josh.  2. 12.  ye  will  shew  kindness  to  my  father' s  h.
Judy.  6.  15.  and  I  am  the  least  in  my  father's  It.

9.  18.  and  ye  are  risen  up  against  my  father's  It.

11.  2.  thou  shalt  not  inherit  in  our  fathet's  /*.


Judy.  14.15.  lest  we  burn  thee  and  thy  f.'s  h.  with  fire

16.  31.  all  the/*,  of  his  father  came  and  buried  him

19.  2.  his  concubine  went  to  his  father's  h.

3.  and  she  brought  him  into  her  father's  h.

1  Sam.  2.  27.  did  l  plainly  appear  to/*.  (JWty  father

30.  I  said  the  /*.  of  thy/,  should  walk  before  me

9.  20.  is  it  not  on  thee,  and  on  all  thy  father's  it  J

17.  25.  king  will  make  his  father's  h.  free  in  Israel

18.  2.  let  him  go  no  more  home  to  his  father's  h.

22.  11.  the  king  sent  to  call  all  his  father's  h.

16.  thou  and  all  thy  father's  h.  shall  die

24.  21.  wilt  not  destroy  my  name  out  of  father's  h.

2  Sam.  3.  29.  let  it  rest  on  Joab  and  all  his  f.'s  /*.

14.  9.  the  iniquity  be  on  me,  and  on  my  father's  It,

19.  28.  all  of  my  father's  /*.  were  but  dead  men  ’  |
24.  17.  let  thy  hand,  1  pray  thee,  be  against  me  and

against  my  father's  h.  1  Citron.  21. 17.

1  Kings  2. 31.  take  innocent  blood  from  me  and/,  h.

18. 18.  thou  and  father's  h.  have  troubled  Israel

1  Citron.  2.  55.  Hemath  father  of  the  /*.  of  Rechai)

4.  38.  the  /*.  of  their  fathers  increased  greatly

5.  15.  Alti  son  of  Abdiel,  son  of  Guni,  chief  of  the

house  of  their  father's  It.  24. 1  7.  2,  7,  9,  40,

7.  4.  with  them  after  the  /*.  of  fathers  were  bands

9.  9.  chief  in  the  h.  of  their  fathers,  13.  12.  30.

12.  28.  of  Zadok,  his  fath.'sh.  twenty-two  captains

28. 4.  God  chose  me  before  the  /*.  of  my  father

2  Citron.  21. 13.  slain  thy  brethren  of  thy  father's  It.
Ezra  2. 59.  could  not  shew  thei r  father's  ft.  Neh.  1.6.

10.  16.  chief  of  the  h.  of  their  father  examined
Neh.  1.  6.  both  1  and  my  father's  It.  have  sinned
Esth.  4. 14.  thou  and  thy  father's  /*.  shall  be  destroy.
Psal.  45. 10.  forget  thy  people  and  thy  father's  /*.
Isa.  3.  6.  take  hold  of  his  brother  of/*,  of  his  father

7-  17.  bring  on  thy  f.’s  h.  days  that  have  not  come

22.  23.  shall  be  for  glorious  throne  to  his  father’s  /*.
24.  hang  on  him  all  the  glory  of  his  father's  h.
Jer.  12.6.  the/*,  of  thy  father  dealt  treacherously
Luke  16.  27.  I  pray  thee,  send  him  to  my  father's  Its
John  2.  16.  make  not  my  Father's  /*.  an  house  of

merchandise

14.  2.  in  my  Father's  /*.  are  many  mansions
Acts  7.20.  Moses  was  nourished  m  his  father's  h.
HOUSE  of  God.

Gen.  28. 17.  this  is  none  other  but  the  /*.  of  God

22.  and  this  stone  which  1  set  shall  be  God  sh.
Josh .-9.  23.  from  being  drawers  of  water  for/*.  ofC,
Judg.  18.  31.  all  the  time  /*.  of  God  was  in  Shiloh

20.  18.  Israel  arose  and  went  up  to  the  /*.  of  Gctl

26.  all  the  people  came  unto  the  /*.  of  God,  21.  2.

31 .  high  way  of  which  one  goeth  up  to  /*.  of  God

1  Chr.  9.  11.  Azariah  ruler  of  /*.  ofG.  Neh.  11.11.

24. 5.  the  governors  of/*,  of  G.  were  sons  of  Eleazar

2  Chr.  5.  14.  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  /*.  of  God1
22.  12.  he  was  with  them  hid  in  /*.  of  G.  six  years
24.  13.  and  they  set  the  /*.  of  God  in  his  state

33.  7.  Manasseh  set  a  carved  image  in  the  /*.  of  God
36.  19.  they  burnt  the  /*.  of  God  and  brake  the  wall
Ezra  5.  8.  we  went  to  the  /*.  of  the  great  God

15.  let  the/*,  of  God  be  builded  in  his  place,  6.7.
7-  20.  what  more  shall  be  needful  for  the  /*.  of  God?

23.  let  it  be  done  for  the/*,  of  the  God  of  heaven
Neh.  6.  10.  let  us  meet  in  /*.  of  God  in  the  temple

13.  11.  then  1  said,  why  is  the  /*.  of  God  forsaken?
Psal.  42.  4.  1  went  with  them  to  the  /*.  of  God,  55. 14.
52.  8.  1  am  like  a  green  olive-tree  in  the  It.  of  God

84. 10.  1  had  rather  be  door-keeper  in  h.  of  God
Eccl.  5.  1.  keep  thy  footwhentnou  goestto  h.ofG.
Isa.  2. 3.  come,  let  us  go  up  to  the  /*.  of  G.  Mic. 4.1.
Hos.  9.  8.  the  prophet  is  hated  in  the  /*.  of  God
Joel  1. 13.  drink-offering  withholden  from  /*.  of  God

16.  joy  and  gladness  cut  off  from  the  /*.  of  God
Zech.  7.2.  when  they  had  sent  to  h.ofG.  men  to  pray
Mat  12.4.  how  he  entered  into  the  /*.  of  God,  and

did  eat  the  shew-bread,  Mark  2.  26.  Luke  6.  4.

1  Tim.  3. 15.  how  to  behave  thyself  in  the  /*.  of  God
Heb.  10.  21. having  an  H  igh-Priest  over  the  ft,  vfGl
1  Pet.  4.  17.  judgment  must  begin  at  the  /*.  of  G.  '
His  HOUSE.

Gen.  12. 17.  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  and  his  h.

17.  27.  all  the  men  of  his  /*.  were  circumcised

39.  4.  and  he  made  him  overseer  over  his  h.  5.

45.  8.  hath  made  nie  lord  of  all  his  h.  Acts  7. 10

Lev.  16.  6.  and  make  an  atonement  for  his  h.  lr

27.  14.  and  when  a  man  shall  sanctify  his  It.

15.  if  he  that  sanctified  it  will  redeem  his  h.  >,
Num.  22. 18.  if  Balak  would  give  me  his  h.  full  of  sil¬
ver  and  gold,  I  cannot  go  beyond  word  of  L.  24. 13,
Deut.  20.  5.  let  him  go  and  return  to  his  It.  6, 7,  8.

24.  1.  then  let  him  send  her  out  of  his  h.  _  J

10.  thou  shalt  not  go  into  his  h.  to  fetch  hispltdgf

Judg.  8.  27.  which  thing  became  a  snare  to  his  it.

9.  16.  if  dealt  well  with  Jerubbaal  and  his  h.  19.

1  Sam.  3.  12.  which  T  have  spoken  concerning  his  Id

13.  I  told,  that  I  will  judge  his  /*.  for  ever  _

7. 17.  his  return  was  to  Ramah,  forthere  was  las  /*■

25.  1.  Israel  buried  Samuel  in  his  /*.  at  Ramah

2  Sam.  6. 1 9.  the  people  departed  every  one  to  his  /*.

21.  which  chose  me  before  thy  father  and  his  h.

7.  1.  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  king  sat  in  his  it.

25.  hast  spoken  concerning  his  h.  1  Citron.  17-  -3-

11.  9.  but  Uriah  went  not  down  to  his  h.  10, 13.

27.  David  fetched  her  to  his  It.  became  his  wife

19. 11.  why  last  to  bring  the  king  back  to  his  It.  I

21. 1.  it  is  for  Saul  and  his  bloody  /(.because he  slew,

4.  have  no  silver  nor  gold  of  Saul,  nor  of  his  b.

1  Kings  2.33.on  his  h.  there  shall  be  peace  from  Lore

7. 1.  Solomon  was  building,  and  finished  all  his  /*

12.  24.  return  everv  man  to  his  h.  for  thing  is  front
me,  22.  17.  1  Chr.  16.  43.  2  Chr.  11.  4. 1 18-  ff

13.  19.  did  eat  bread  in  his  h.  and  drank  water

16.  7.  came  the  sword  against  Baasha  and  his  h.

20.  43.  king  of  Israel  went  to  his  /*.  heavy,  21.  4-

2  Kings  6.  32.  Elisha  sat  in  his  h.  and  elders  with  Inn
20.  13.  nothing  in  his  h.  IJezekiah  shewed  not

1  Citron.  7.  23.  because  it  went  evil  with  his  h.

10.  6.  Saul,  his  sons,  and  all  his  /*.  died  together

13.  14.  tlie  ark  remained  in  his  h.  three  months

2  Chr.  24. 16.  had  done  good  toward  God  and  b/s  n
Ezra  6.  11.  let  his  h.  be  made  a  dunghill  tor  tins
Neh.  3.  28.  every  one  repaired  over-acainst  Ins  h.

5. 13.  so  God  shake  out  every  man  from  his  h  ,


H  O  U


H  O  U


HOU


i.  7.  3.  and  every  one  to  be  over-against  his  h.
1. 10.  hast  not  thou  made  an  hedge  about  his  A.  ?

10.  lie  shall  return  no  more  to  his  A.

15.  he  shall  lean  011  his  h.  it  shall  not  stand
28.  the  increase  ot'  his  A.  shall  depart

21.  ter  what  pleasure  hath  he  in  his  h.  after  him'
18.  he  buildeth  his  h.  as  a  moth,  as  a  booth

,  l.  40.  16.  when  the  glory  of  his  A.  is  increased
>.21.  he  made  him  Lord  of  his  h.  and  ruler
;.  3.  wealth  and  riches  shall  be  in  his  A.
v.  6.  31 .  give  the  substance  of  his  h.  Cant.  8.  7 .

13.  evil  shall  not  depart  from  his  A.

23.  34.  I  will  even  punish  that  man  and  his  A.
j  .  2.  2.  so  they  oppress  a  man  and  his  h.
j  l.  2.  9.  coveretli  an  evil  covetousness  to  his  A.
t  h.  5. 4.  it  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  A.
j  (.  12.  29.  then  he  will  spoil  his  A.  Mark  3.  27-
17.  to  take  any  thing  out  of  his  h.  Mark  13.  15.

.  not  have  suffered  his  A.  to  be  broken  up
j  e  8.  41.  besought  that  he  would  come  into  his  h.

14.  this  man  went  sown  to  his  A.  justified

„  1  4.  53.  and  himself  believed  and  his  whole  A.
i  s  10.  2.  one  that  feared  God,  with  all  his  A.

.  was  warned  to  send  for  thee  into  his  A.

13.  shewed  how  he  had  seen  an  angel  in  his  A.

32.  they  spake  to  him  and  to  all  in  his  h.

.  when  t-he  jailer  brought  them  into  his  A.  he  re¬
joiced,  believing  in  God  with  all  his h.  18.  8.
t  4. 15.  salute  the  church  which  is  in  his  A.

J  .  3.  2.  Moses  was  faithful  in  all  his  A.  5.

7.  Moah  prepared  an  ark  for  the  saving  of  hish.

HOUSE  of  Jacob.

(  .  46.  27.  all  the  souls  of  A.  of  Jacob  were  seventy'
j  d.  19.  3.  thus  shalt  thou  say  to  the  A.  of  Jacob
i  1. 114.1.  A.  of  J.  from  people  of  strange  language
j  2.  5.  O  A.  of  Jacob,  let  us  walk  in  light  of  Lord
thou  hasfcforsaken  thy  people,  the  A.  of  Jacob
IT.  Lord  that  hideth  his  face  from  A.  of  Jacob

20.  such  as  are  escaped  of  the  A.  of  Jacob
l.  and  they  shall  cleave  to  the  A.  of  Jacob

22.  thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  A.  of  Jacob

3.  hearken  unto  me,  O  A.  of  Jacob  and  Israel
1.  hear  ye  this,  O  A.  of  Jacob,  which  are  called

I.  spare  not,  shew  the  A.  of  Jacob  their  sins

jj  2.  4.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  O  A.  of  Jacob

20.  declare  this  in  the  A.  of  Jacob,  publish  it
ik.  20.  5.  1  lifted  up  my  hand  to  the  A.  of  Jacob
i  M  3. 13.  hear  ye,  and  testify  in  the  A.  of  Jacob

1.  1  will  not  utterly  destroy  the  A.  of  Jacob

( d.  17.  the  A.  of  Jacob  shall  possess  possessions
.  A.  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  tire
l  .  2. 7-  O  thou  that  art  named  the  A.  of  Jacob
).  hear  this,  I  pray,  ye  heads  of  the  A.  of  Jacob
j  e  1.  33.  he  shall  reign  over  the  A.  of  Jacob
HOUSE  of  Joseph.

i  .  43.  17.  he  brought  the  men  into  Joseph's  A.

1  •.  18. 5.  the  A.  of  Joseph  shall  abide  in  their  coast

ii.  1.  22.  the  A.  of  Joseph  went  up  against  Bethel

.  the  A.  of  Joseph  sent  to  descry  Bethel
■.  yet  the  hand  of  the  A.  of  Joseph  prevailed

2  m.  19.  20.  am  come  first  of  all  the  A.  of  Joseph
1  ’ays  11. 28.  ruler  over  the  charge  of  A.  of  Joseph
.  is  5.  6.  lest  he  break  out  like  fire  in  A.  of  Joseph
(  d.  18.  and  the  A.  of  Joseph  shall  be  a  flame

i  it.  10.  6.  and  I  will  save  the  A.  of  Joseph
HOUSE  of  Israel.

j  .  10.  6.  let  A.  of  Israel  bewail  the  burning

3.  what  man  soever  there  be  of  the  A.  of  Israel
that  killeth  an  ox  or  lamb,  8.  10.1  22.  18.
n.  20. 29.  all  the  A.  of  Israel  mourned  for  Aaron

1  m.  7.  2.  the  A.  of  Israel  lamented  after  the  Lord

2  m.  1.  12.  they  mourned  for  the  A.  of  Israel
>.  all  the  A.  of  Israel  played  before  the  Lord

.  David  and  the  A.  of  Israel  brought  up  the  ark

8.  I  gave  thee  the  A.  of  Israel  and  Judah

3.  to-day  shall  A.  of  Israel  restore  the  kingdom

! 1  nys  20.  31.  kings  of  A.  of  lsr.  are  merciful  kings
i  l.  98.3.  remembered  his  truth  toward  A.  of  Israel
'.  12.  he  will  bless  us,  he  will  bless  A.  of  Israel
.  >.  19.  bless  ye  the  Lord,  O  A.  of  lsr.  bless  Lord
1  5. 7-  the  vineyard  of  the  lx>rd  is  the  A.  of  Israel

2.  the  A.  of  Israel  shall  possess  them  in  the  land
.3.  the  remnant  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  hearken  to  me

7.  the  great  goodness  toward  the  A.  of  Israel
J  2.  4.  hear,  all  the  families  of  the  A.  of  Israel

.  as  a  thief,  so  is  the  A.  of  Israel  ashamed

8.  the  house  of  Judah  shall  walk  with  A.  of  lsr.

•  you  dealt  treacherously,  O  A.  of  Israel,  5.  11.

26.  all  the  A.  of  lsr.  are  uncircumcised  in  heart

10.  the  A.  of  Israel  have  broken  my  covenant

.  pronounced  evil  for  evil,  of  thoA.  of  Israel

II.  caused  to  cleave  to  me  the  whole  A.  of  lsr.

8.  the  Lord  liveth,  who  led  the  A.  of  Israel

27.  1  will  sow  the  A.  of  Israel  with  seed  of  man
.  1  will  make  new  covenant  with  A.  of  Israel,  33.

14.  perform  that  1  promised  to  the  A.  of  Israel

13.  as  the  A.  of  Israel  was  ashamed  of  Beth-el

”•3.1.  eat  this  roll,  and  go,  speak  to  A.  of  Israel,
17-  2. 1  20.  27  ,  30. 1  24.  21.  I  33.  10.  I  36.  22.
go,  get  thee  unto  the  A.  of  Israel,  and  speak
but  thou  art  sent  to  the  A.  of  Israel
the  A.  of  lsr.  will  not  hearken  to  me,  for  all  the
A.  of  Israel  are  impudent  and  hard-hearted
.  1  made  thee  a  watchman  to  A.  of  Israel,  33.  7.
i.  this  shall  be  a  sign  to  the  A.  of  Israel
and  lav  the  iniquity  ot  the  A.  of  Israel  upon  it
thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  of  Israel

•  a  fire  shall  come  forth  into  the  A.  of  Israel

1.  the  evil  abominations  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  8.  6.

'  0-  all  the  idols  of  the  A.  of  Israel  are  pourtrayed
.  seventy  men  of  the  ancients  of  A.  of  Israel,  12.

'•  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  of  Israel  is  exceeding
B  ,  .  great

5.  thus  have  ye  said,  O  A.  of  Israel,  for  I  know

•  and  all  the  h.of  Israel  wholly  are  they

9.  hath  not  the  A.  of  Israel  said,  27-  I  18.  29-
-.nor  any  more  divination  within  the  A.  of  Israel
5.  nor  made  up  the  hedge  for  the  A.  of  Israel
written  in  the  writing  of  the  A.  of  Israel

4.  every  one  of  A.  of  1.  that  setteth  up  idols, 7.
that  the  A.  of  Israel  may  go  no  more  astray

0.  nor  lift  his  eyes  to  the  idols  of  A.  of  lsr.  15.


Ezek.  18.  25.  hear,  O  A.  of  lsr.  is  not  my  way  equal  ?

30.  therefore  1  will  judge  you,  O  A.  of  Israel

31.  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  A.  of  Israel ?  33.  11.

20.  13.  but  the  A.  of  Israel  rebelled  against  me

39.  as  tor  you,  O  A.  of  lsr.  go  ye,  serve  ye  every

one  his  idols,  if  ye  will  not  hearken  to  me

40.  there  shall  all  the  A.  of  Israel  serve  me

44.  according  to  your  corrupt  doings,  O  A.  of  lsr.
22.  18.  the  A.  of  Israel  is  to  me  become  dross

28.  24.  110  more  a  pricking  briar  to  the  A.  of  Israel
25.  when  1  shall  have  gathered  the  A.  of  Israel

29.  6.  have  been  a  staff  of  a  reed  to  the  A.  of  Israel

16.  shall  be  no  more  the  confidence  of  A.  of  Israel

21.  1  will  cause  the  horn  of  the  A.  of  Israel  to  but!
34.  30.  that  they,  even  the  A.  of  lsr.  are  my  people

36.  10.  and  1  will  multiply  all  the  A.  of  Israel
17-  when  the  A.  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  own  land

21.  my  holy  name  which  the  A.  of  Israel  profaned

22.  1  do  not  this  for  your  sakes,  O  A.  of  Israel

32.  be  ashamed  for  your  ways,  O  A.  of  Israel
37.  1  will  for  this  be  inquired  of  by  the  A.  of  lsr.

37.  11.  these  bones  are  the  whole  A.  of  Israel

16.  write  on  it,  for  the  A.  of  Israel  his  companions

39.  12.  seven  months  shall  A.  of  Israel  be  burying

22.  the  A.  of  Israel  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord

23.  that  the  A.  of  Israel  went  into  captivity

25.  1  will  have  mercy  on  the  whole  A.  of  Israel

29.  I  have  poured  out  my  Spirit  on  the  A.  of  lsr.

40.  4.  declare  all  that  thou  seestto  the  A.  of  Israel
43. 10.  son  of  man,  shew  the  house  to  A.  of  Israel
44.  6.  say  to  the  rebellious,  even  to  the  A.  of  Israel

12.  and  caused  the  A.  of  lsr.  to  fall  into  iniquity

22.  shall  take  maidens  of  the  seed  of  the  A.  of  lsr.
45.6.  possession  shall  be  for  the  whole  A.  of  Israel

8.  the  rest  of  the  land  shall  they  give  to  A.  of  lsr.

17.  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  A.  of  Israel
Hos.  1.  4.  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  A.  of  lsr.

6.  I  will  no  more  have  mercy  on  the  A.  of  Israel

5.  1.  and  hearken,  ye  A.  of  Israel,  and  give  ear

6.  10.  have  seen  an  horrible  thing  in  A.  of  Israel

11.  12.  A.  of  lsr.  compasseth  me  about  with  deceit
Amos  5.  3.  the  city  shall  leave  ten  to  the  A.  of  lsr.

4.  saith  the  Lord  to  the  A.  of  Israel,  seek  ye  me
25.  have  ye  offered  sacrifices  40  years,  ( )  A.  of  Is.  ?

6.  1.  chief  of  nations,  to  whom  the  A.  of  lsr.  came

14.  1  will  raise  against  you  a  nation,  O  A.  of  lsr.

7.  10.  hath  conspired  against  thee  in  the  A.  of  lsr.

9.  9.  1  will  sift  the  A.  of  Israel  among  all  nations

Mic.  1.  5.  for  the  sins  of  the  A.  of  Israel  is  all  this

3.  1.  hear,  ye  princes  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  9.

Zech.  8.  13.  that  as  ye  were  a  curse,  O  A.  of  lsr.
Mat.  10.  6.  go  to  lost  sheep  of  the  A.  of  Israel,  15.  24.
Acts  2.  36.  let  all  the  A.  of  Israel  know  assuredly

7-  42.  O  A.  of  Israel,  have  ye  offered  to  me  beasts  ?
Heb.  8.  8.  make  a  new  covenant  with  A.  of  lsr.  10.
HOUSE  of  Judah.

2  Sam.  2.  4.  the  men  of  Judah  came  and  anointed
David  king  over  A.  of  Judah,  7,11.  1  Chr.  28.  4.

12.  8.  1  gave  thee  the  A.  of  Judah  and  of  Israel

1  Kings  12.  21.  he  assembled  all  the  A.  of  Judah

23.  speak  to  all  the  A.  of  Judah  and  Benjamin

2  Kings  19-  30.  the  remnant  that  is  escaped  of  the  A.
of  Judah  shall  take  root,  and  bear  fruit,  Isa.  37.31.

2  Chr.  19.  11.  Zebadiah  the  ruler  of  the  A.  of  Judah
Neh.  4.  16.  the  rulers  were  behind  the  A.  of  Judah
Isa.  22.  21.  he  shall  he  a  father  to  the'A.  of  Judah
Jer.  3.  18.  A.  of  Judah  shall  walk  with  house  of  lsr.

5.  11.  the  A.  of  Judah  hath  dealt  treacherously

11.  10.  the  A.  of  Judah  hath  broken  my  covenant

17.  for  evil  of  the  A.  of  Judah  that  they  have  done

12.  14.  I  will  pluck  A.  of  Judah  from  among  them

13.  11.  I  caused  to  cleave  tome  the  A.  of  Judah
31.  27.  I  will  sow  the  A.  of  Judah  with  seed  of  man

31.  1  will  make  a  new  covenant,  with  A.  of  Judah

33.  14.  perform  that  good  I  promised  to  A.  of  Judah
36.  3.  it  may  be  A.  of  Judah  will  hear  all  the  evil

Ezek.  4.  6.  bear  the  iniquity  of  A.  of  Judah  forty  days

8.  17-  is  it  a  light  thing  to  the  A.  of  Judah  ?

9.  9-  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  of  Judah  is  great

25.  3.  Ammonites  said,  aha,  against  the  h.of  Jud.
8.  the  A.  of  Judah  is  like  to  all  the  heathen
12.  Edom  hath  dealt  against  the  A.  of  Judah
Hos.  1.  7.  but  l  will  have  mercy  upon  the  A.  of  Jud.
5.  12.  I  will  be  to  the  A.  of  Judah  as  rottenness

14.  1  will  be  as  a  voung  lion  to  the  A.  of  Judah
Zeph.  2.  7-  coast  shall  be  for  remnant  of  A.  of  Judah
Zech.  8.  13.  as  ye  were  a  curse,  O  A.  of  Judah

15.  1  have  thought  to  do  well  to  the  A.  of  Judah
19.  the  fast  shall  be  to  A.  of  Judah  joy  and  gladness

10.  3.  for  the  Lord  hath  visited  the  A.  of  Judah

6.  and  I  will  strengthen  the  A.  of  Judah

12.  4.  I  will  open  mine  eyes  unto  the  A.  of  Judah
Heb. V>.  8. 1  will  make  new  covenant  with  A.  of  Judah
King's  HOUSE.

2  Sam.  11.  2.  David  walked  on  roof  of  the  king's  A.
8.  and  Uriah  departed  out  of  the  Eng's  A.

15.  35.  what  thou  shalt  hear  out  of  the  king's  A.

1  Kings  9.  l.when  Solomon  had  finished  the  king's  A.

14.  26.  he  took  away  the  treasure  of  the  king's  A.

15.  18.  2  Kings  16.  8.  2  Chr.  12.  9.  I  25.  24.

16.  18.  Zimri  burnt  the  king's  A.  over  him  with  fire

2  Kings  7.  11.  they  told  it  to  the  king's  h.  within

25.  9.  he  burnt  the  king's  A.  Jer.  39.  8.  I  52. 13.

2  Chr.  23.  5.  a  third  part  shall  beat  the  king's  h.

26.  21.  Jotham  his  son  was  over  the  king's  A.

28.  21 .  took  away  a  portion  out  of  the  A .  of  t  he  king
Ezra  6.  4.  let  expences  be  given  out  of  the  king's  A.
Esth.  2.  9.  gave  her  seven  maidens  out  of  king's  A.

4.  13.  think  not  thou  shalt  escape  in  the  king's  A.

9.  4.  for  Mordecai  was  great  in  the  king's  A.

Hos.  5.  1.  and  give  ye  ear,  O  A.  of  the  k.

HOUSE  of  Levi.

Exod.  2. 1.  and  there  went  a  man  of  the  A.  of  Levi
Num.  17.  8.  rod  of  Aaron  for  A.  of  Levi  was  budded
Psal.  135.  20.  bless  the  Lord,  O  A.  of  Levi
Zech.  12.  13.  the  family  of  the  A.  of  Levi  apart
In  the  HOUSE.

Gen.  27. 15.  she  took  raiment  of  Esau  that  were  in  A.

34.  29.  they  spoiled  even  all  that  was  in  the  h.

39.  5.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  was  on  all  in  the  A.

8.  my  master  wotteth  not  what  is  with  me  in  the  A.
45. 16.  the  fame  thereof  washeird  in  Pharaoh’s  A.


Exod.  12.  46.  in  one  A.  shall  the  nassover  be  eaten
Lev.  14.  34.  I  put  the  plague  of  leprosy  in  a  h.  35.

43.  if  plague  come  again  and  break  out  in  the  h.

44.  behold,  if  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  A.

47.  he  that  lieth,  that  eateth  in  the  A.  shall  wash

48.  behold,  the  plague  hath  not  spread  in  the  h.
Josh.  2.  19.  whoso  with  thee  in  the  h.  his  blood  on  us

6.  17.  Rahab  live,  all  that  are  with  her  in  the  A.
Judg.  17.  4.  and  they  were  in  the  A.  of  Micah,  12.
lluth  1.  9-  may  find  rest,  each  in  A.  of  her  husband
2.  7-  until  now,  that  she  tarried  a  little  in  the  A.

1  Sam.  28.  24.  the  woman  had  a  fat  calf  in  the  A.
31.  9.  sent  to  publish  it  in  the  A.  of  their  idols

10.  they  put  his  armour  in  the  A.  of  Ashtaroth

1  Kings  3,  17.  1  and  this  woman  dwell  in  one  A.
and  I  was  delivered  of  a  child  with  her  in  the  A.

6.  7.  there  was  not  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  A.

14.  13.  is  found  some  good  i n  the  h.  of  Jeroboam

16.  9.  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  A.  of  Arza

2  Kings  4.  2.  tell  me  what  hast  thou  in  the  A.  ?  thine

handmaid  hath  not  any  thing  in  the  A.

35.  he  returned,  and  walked  in  the  A.  to  and  fro

5.  18.  leaneth  on  my  hand,  bow  in  A.  of  Rimmon

24.  he  took  them,  and  bestowed  them  in  the  A.

19.  37.  worshipping  in  A.  of  N  isroch,  Isa.  37'.  38.

21.  7  •  Manasseh  set  a  graven  image  in  the  A.

2  Chr.  36.  17.  slew  young  men  in  the  A.  of  sanctua.
Ezra  1.  7-  and  had  put  them  in  the  A.  of  his  gods

6.  1.  search  was  made  in  the  h.  of  the  rolls  where
Esth.  7.  8.  will  he  force  the  queen  also  in  the  h.?

9.  behold,  the  gallows  standeth  in  h.  of  Human
Psal.  68.  t  6.  God  setteth  the  solitary  in  a  A.

119.  54.  been  my  songs  in  the  A.  of  my  pilgrimage
Prov.  3.  33.  curse  of  Lord  is  in  the  A.  of  the  wicked

5.  10.  thy  fabours  be  in  the  A.  of  a  stranger

7.  11.  she  is  loud,  her  feet  abide  not  in  her  A.

15.  6.  in  the  A.  of  the  righteous  is  much  treasure
Eccl.  7.  4.  the  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  A.  of  mourn¬
ing  ;  but  the  heart  of  fools  is  in  the  A.  of  mirth

Isa.  44. 13.  maketh  idol  that  it  may  remain  in  the  h
Jer.  7.  30.  set  their  abominations  in  the  A.  32.  34.
34.  15.  ye  made  a  covenant  before  me  in  the  A.

37. 15.  put  him  in  the  A.  of  Jonathan  the  scribe
Amos  6.  9.  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  one  A.

Mic.  1.  10.  in  the  A.  of  Aphrah  roll  thyself  in  dust

6.  10.  treasures  of  wickedness  in- the  A.  of  wicked
Zech.  13.  6.  1  was  wounded  in  the  A.  of  my  friends
Mat.  5.  15.  giveth  light  unto  all  that  are  in  the  h.
Mark  2.  1.  and  it  was  noised  that  he  was  in  the  h.

9.  33.  being  in  the  A.  he  asked  them  what  was  it

10.  10.  in  the  A.  his  disciples  asked  of  the  matter

14.  3.  being  in  Bethany,  in  the  A.  of  Simon  the  leper
LukeS.  27-  nor  abode  in  any  A.  but  in  the  tombs
John  8.  35.  the  servant  abideth  not  in  the  A.

11.  20.  Martha  met  him,  Mary  sat  still  in  the  A.
Acts9.  11.  inquire  in  the  A.  of  Judas  for  one  Saul

10.  32.  Peter  is  lodged  in  the  A.  of  Simon  a  tanner

HOUSE,  joined  with  Lord.

Exod.  23.  19.  the  first-fruits  thou  shalt  bring  into
the  A.  of  the  Lord,  31.  26.  Neh.  10.  35.
Dent.  23.  18.  not  bring  price  of  a  dog  into  A.  of  Ld.
Josh.  6.  24.  put  into  the  treasury  of  A.  of  the  Lord
Judg.  19.  18.  I  am  now  going  to  the  A.  of  the  Lord

1  Sam.  1.  7.  when  she  went  up  to  the  A.  of  the  Lord
24.  Hannah  brought  him  unto  the  A.  of  the  Lord,

2  Kings  12.  4,  9, 13.  I  22.  4.  2  Chron.  34.  14.

2  Sam.  12.  20.  then  David  came  into  A.  of  the  Ld.

1  Kings  3.  1.  made  an  end  of  building  the  A.  of  L.

6.  37.  was  the  foundation  of  the  A.  of  the  Lord.

laid,  2  Chron.  8.  16.  Ezra  3.  11.  Zech.  8.  9.
7-  40.  the  work  he  made  for  the  A.  of  the  Lord,
45,  51.  2  Chron.  4.  16.  I  5.  1.  |  24.  14.

8.  10.  that  the  cloud  filled  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  11.

2  Chron.  5.  13. 1  7-  2.  Ezek.  44.  4.
63.  so  Israel  dedicated  the  A.  of  the  Lord

10.  5.  he  went  up  unto  the  A.  ot  Loid,  2  Chr.  9.  4.

2  Kings  11 .  3.  he  was  hid  in. the  A.  of  Lord  six  years
4.  he  took  an  oath  of  them  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord

15.  let  her  not  be  slain  in  A.  of  L.  2  Chr.  23. 14.

18.  appointed  officers  over  A.  of  L.  £  Chr.  23.  18.

19.  they  brought  from  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  23.  6.

12.  10.  found  in  A.  of  the  L.  14. 14.  |  16.  8. 1  18. 15.

1 1 .  had  the  oversight  of  the  A.  of  the  Lord

16.  trespass-money  was  not  brought  into  A.  of  L.

16.  18.  the  king’s  entry,  turned  he  from  A.  of  I.d.

2  Kings  20.  5.  third  day'  shalt  go  up  unto  A.  of  lard

8.  what  sign  Lord  will  heal  me,  and  that  I  shall

go  up  to  the  A.  of  the  L.  Isa.  38.  22.

23.  2.  read  woros  of  the  covenant  which  were
found  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  24.  2  Chron.  34.
17,30.

7.  houses  ot  Sodomites  that  were  by  A.  of  the  L.

11.  the  horses  at  entering  in  of  the  A.  of  the  L.

25.  9.  and  he  burnt  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  Jer.  52.  13.

1  Chr.  6.  31.  service  of  song  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord

22.  1.  then  David  said,  this  is  the  A.  of  the  L.

11.  now,  my  son,  build  the  A.  of  the  Lord  thy  G.

14.  have  prepared  tor  the  A.  of  the  Lord

23.  4.  to  set  forward  the  work  of  the  A., of  the  L.

26.  12.  porters,  to  minister  in  the  A.  of  the  L.

2  Chron.  8.  16.  so  the  A.  of  the  Lord  was  perfected

26.  21.  for  he  was  cut  off  from  A.  of  L.  Joel  1.  9.
29.  5.  ye  Levites,  sanctify  the  A.  of  the  I,.

15.  they  came  to  cleanse  the  A.  of  the  Lord

33.  15.  Manasseh  took  the  idol  out  of  A.  of  Lord

34.  15.  I  found  the  book  of  the  law  in  A.  of  Lord

36.  14.  the  priests  polluted  the  A.  of  the  Lord
Ezra  7.  27.  to  beautify  A.  of  the  lard  in  Jerusalem
Psal.  23.  6.  I  will  dwell  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord  forever

27.  4.  that  I  may  dwell  in  the  A.  of  Lord  all  my  life
92.  13.  those  that  be  planted  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord
116. 19.  I  will  pay  my  vows  in  courts  of  Lord's  A.
118.  26.  we  have  blessed  you  outof  the  A.  of  Lord
122.  1.  when  they'  said  ,  let  us  go  into  A.  of  the  L.

9.  because  of  the  A.  of  Lord  1  will  seek  thy  good
134.  1.  ye  that  stand  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  135.  2.

Isa.  2.  2.  mountain  of  the  Lord's  A.  be  established
in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  Mic.  4. 1.

37.  14.  Ilezekiah  went  up  unto  the  A.  of  the  Lord
Jer.  17.  26.  sacrifices  of  praise  to  the  A.  of  the  Lord

20. 1.  Pashur  was  governor  in  the  A.  of  the  lard
2.  the  high  gate,  which  was  by  A.  of  the  Lord

1C  94 1


H  O  U


H  O  U


H  O  U


Jer.  26.  2.  which  come  to  worship  in  the  Lord  s  A.

7.’  speaking  these  words  in  the  A.  ot  the  Lord. ,

28.  1.  Hananiah  spake  to  me  in  the  A.  ot  the  Lord

5.  the  people  that  stood  in  the  A.  ot  the  Lord,

29/26.  ye  should  be  officers  in  the  A.  or  the  Lord
35.  2.  bring  the  Kechabites  into  the  A.  or  the  Lord
36.5.  1  am  shut  up,  1  cannot  go  into  A.  ot  Lord

6.  read  in  the  Lord's  A.  upon  the  fasting-day

38. 14.  the  third  entry  that  is  in  the  A.  ot  the  Lord
41.  5.  to  bring  them  to  the  A.  of  the  Lord
51.  51.  are  come  into  the  sanctuaries  ot  Lord  s  n.

Lam. 2.7 .  they  have  madeanoise  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord
Hag.  1. 2.  the  time  that  the  Lord's  A.  should  be  built
See  Court,  Door,  Gate,  Treasures,  v  es-

Mine,  or  my  HOUSE.

Gen.  15.  2.  the  steward  of  my  h.  is  this  Eliezer

3.  and  lo,  one  born  in  my  h.  is  mine  heir
34.  30.  and  1  shall  be  destroyed,  1  and  my  A.

41. 40.  thou  shalt  be  over  my  h.  and  according  to
Num.  12. 7.  Moses  not  so,  who  is  faith  .mall  mine  h.
Devt.  26.  13.  the  hallowed  things  out  ot  mine  h.

Josh  24. 15.  as  for  me  and  my  h.  we  will  serve  l  ord
Judy.  11.  31.  cometh  forth  of  the  doors  of  my  A.

19  23.  seeing  this  man  c  ome  into  m.  h.  do  not  thus

1  Sam.  20. 15.  not  cut  off  thy  kindness  from  my  h.

21.  15.  shall  this  fellow  come  into  my  h.?

2  Sam.  7.  18.  who  am  1 ,  and  w  hat  is  my  h.  tbat_thou

hast  brought  me  hitherto  ?  1  Chron.  17..  16.

11. 11.  shall  1  then  go  into  mine  h.  to  eat  and  drink  r
23.  5.  tho’  my  A.  be  not  so  with  God,  yet  he  hath

1  Kings  21.  2.  give  it  me,  because  it  is  near  to  my  h.

2  Kings  20.  15.  all  things  that  are  in  mine  h.  have

they  seen,  nothing  have  1  not  shewn  them,
Isa.  39.  4.

1  Chron.  17. 14. 1  will  settle  him  in  mine  h.  for  ever
Job  17.13.  if  l  wait,  the  grave  is  mine  h.  1  have  made
Psal.  101. 2. 1  will  walk  in  my  h.  with  a  perfect  heart

132. 3.  I  will  not  come  into  the  tabernacle  ot  my  h.
Prov.  7.  6.  at  the  window  of  my  h.  1  looked  through
Jsa.  3.  7.  in  my  h.  is  neither  bread  nor  clothing
56.  5.  unto  them  will  1  give  in  mine  h.  a  name

7.  I  will  make  them  joyful  in  my  li.  of  prayer,
mine  h.  shall  be  called  an  h.  ot  prayer  tor  all
people,  Mat.  21.  13.  Mark  11.  17-  Luke  19.  46.

Jer.  11. 15.  what  hath  my  beloved  to  do  in  mine  h.  ?

12.  7.  I  have  forsaken  mine  h.  1  left  mine  heritage
23.  11.  in  my  h.  have  1  found  their  wickedness
Ezek.  8.  1.  as  1  sat  in  mine  h.  and  elders  before  me
23.  39.  thus  have  they  done  in  midst  ot  mine  h.

44.  7.  in  my  sanctuary  to  pollute  it,  even  my  h.
Dan.  4.  4.  1  Nebuchadnezzar  was  at  rest  in  mine  h.
Hos.  9.  15.  I  will  drive  them  out  of  mine  h.

Hag.  1.  9.  why  r  because  of  mine  h.  that  is  waste
Zech.  3.7.  then  thou  shalt  also  judge  my  h.  and  keep
9.  8.  1  will  encamp  about  mine  h.  for  the  army
Mai.  3.  10.  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  h.

Mat.  12.  44.  1  will  return  into  my  h.  Luke  11.  24.
Luke  9.  61.  let  me  bid  them  farewell  at  my  h.

14.  23.  compel  them,  that  my  h.  may  be  filled
Acts  10.  30.  at  the  ninth  hour  1  prayed  in  my  h.

16. 15.  saying,  come  into  my  h.  and  abide  there

Own  HOUSE.

Gen.  14. 14.  armed  his  servants  born  in  his  own  h.

30.  30.  when  shall  I  provide  for  mine  ownh.  also
Dent.  22.  2.  thou  shalt  bring  it  unto  thine  ownh.
Josh.  20.  6.  shall  return  and  come  unto  his  own  h.
Judy.  8.  29.  Jerubbaal  went  and  dwelt  in  his  own  h.

2  Sam.  4.  11.  slain  a  righteous  person  in  his  own  h.
12.  11.  raise  evil  against  thee  out  of  thy  ownh.

14.  24.  let  him  turn  to  his  own  h.  and  not  see  my

face,  so  Absalom  returned  to  his  own  h.
19.30.  the  king  is  come  again  in  peace  to  hisiww  h.

1  Kings  2.  34.  Joab  buried  in  his  own  h.  in  wildern.

3.  1.  he  had  made  an  end  of  building  his  own  h.

7.  1.  ScJomon  was  building  his  own  h.  13  years
9.  15.  Solomon  raised  a  levy  to  build  his  own  h.

12. 16.  see  to  thine  own  h.  David,  2  Chron.  10.  16.

14. 12.  arise  therefore,  get  thee  into  thine  own  h.

2  Kings  21.  18.  Manasseh  slept  with  his  fathers,

was  buried  in  the  garden  ot  his  own  h
2  Chron.  33.  20.

23.  slew  the  king  in  his  own  h.  2  Chron.  33.  24.

2  C'Ar.  7.  11.  came  in  his  heart  to  make  in  his  own  h.

8.  1.  at  the  end  of  twenty  years,  wherein  Solomon

had  built  the  house  ot  the  l.ord  and  his  crew  A.
Esth.  1.  22.  every  man  should  bear  rule  in  his  own  h.
Prov.  11.  29.  he’  that  troubleth  his  own  A.  shall

15.  27.  that  is  greedy  of  gain  troubleth  his  own  A.
Isa.  14. 18.  lie  in  glory,  every  one  in  his  own  A.
Mic.  7  ■  6.  a  man’s  enemies  are  the  men  of  his  own  h.
Hag.  1.  9.  and  ye  run  every  man  unto  his  own  A.
Mat.  13.  57.  Jesus  said  to  them,  a  prophet  is  not

without  honour,  save  in  his  own  h.  Mark  6.  4
Luke  1.  23.  he  departed  to  his  own  h.  5.  25.

56.  and  Mary  returned  to  her  own  h.

5.  29.  Levi  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own  A.

8.  39.  return  to  thy  0.  A.  and  shew  how  great  things
John  7.  53.  and  every  man  went  unto  his  ownh.
.Acts  28.  30.  Paul  dwelt  two  years  in  his  own  h.

1  Tim.  3.  4.  a  bishop,  one  that  ruleth  well  his  own  h
5.  for  if  a  man  know  not  how  to  rule  his  own  A,

5.  8.  and  especially  for  those  of  his  own  A.

Heb.  3.  6.  hut  Christ  as  a  Son  over  his  own  h.

This  HOUSE.

Gen.  39.  9.  there  is  none  greater  in  this  h.  than  I.
40.  14.  think  on  me,  ami  bring  me  out  of  this  h.

1  Kings  6. 12.  concerning  this  h.  thou  art  building
8.  27.  how  much  less  this  h.  that  1  have  buildea

29.  eyes  be  opened  toward  this h.  2  Chron.  6.  20.

31.  before  thine  altar  in  this  A.  2  Chron.  6.  22.

33.  shall  confess  thy  name,  pray  and  make  sup
plication  to  thee  in  this  h.  42.  2  C'Ar.  6.  24,  32
38.  and  spread  forth  his  hands  towards  this  A.

0.  3.  1  have  hallowed  this  A.  2  Chron.  7.  16,  20.

8.  at  this  A.  every  one  shall  hiss,  2  Chron.  7.  21.

2  Kings  21.7- 1.  A.  which  1  have  chosen,  2  Chr.  33. 7
2  Chron.  20.  9.  if  when  evil  cometh  upon  us  we  stand

before  this  A.  for  thy  name  is  in  this  h.
Ezra  3.  12,  the  foundation  oij/ns  h.  was  laid  before

5. 12.  N  ebuchadnezzar  who  destroyed  this  h.

1  6.  15.  this  A.  was  finished  on  third  day  of  Adar
2-12


l


1


Jer.  7.  10.  and  come  and  stand  before  me  in  this  A.

1 1 .  is  this  A.  become  a  den  of  robbers  in  your  eyes
14.  therefore  will  I  do  to  this  A.  as  to  Shiloh

22.4.  then  shall  there  enter  in  by  the  gates  of  t.  A.

5.  that  this  h.  shall  become  a  desolation
26.  6.  tlien  will  1  make  this  A.  like  Shiloh
9.  saying,  this  A.  shall  be  like  Shiloh

12.  the  Lord  sent  me  to  prophesy  against  this  A.
Hag.  1.  4.  to  dwell  in  houses,  and  this  A.  lie  waste.'

2.  3.  who  is  left  that  saw  this  A.  in  her  first  glory  .'

7.  1  will  fill  this  A.  with  glory,  saith  the  Lord
0.  the  glory  of  this  latter  A.  greater  than  former
Zech.  4.  9.  Zerubb.  laid  the  foundation  of  this  h.
Luke  10.  5.  ve  enter,  first  say,  peace  be  to  this  A.

19.  9.  Jesus  said,  this  day  is  salv.  come  to  this  A.
Thine,  or  thy  HOUSE.

Gen.  7-  1.  come  thou  and  all  thy  A.  into  the  ark
31.  41.  thus  have  1  been  twenty  years  in  thy  A.

Erod.  8.  3.  frogs  shall  go  up  and  come  into  thine  A.
Nvm.  18.  11.  every  one  that  is  clean  in  thy  A.  13.
Deut.  6.  7.  talk  when  thou  sittest  in  thine  h.  11. 19.

9.  shalt  write  them  on  the  posts  of  thy  A.  11. 20.

7.  26.  nor  shalt  bring  an  abomination  into  thine  A.

15.  16.  because  he  loveth  thee  and  thine  h.

21.  12.  then  thou  shalt  bring  her  home  to  thine  h.

13.  shall  remain  in  thine  h.  and  bewail  her  father

22.  8.  that  thou  bring  not  blood  upon  thine  A.

25.  14.  shalt  not  have  in  thine  h.  divers  measures

26.  11.  good  thing  God  given  to  thee  and  thine  h.
Josh.  2.  3.  bring  men  which  are  entered  into  thine  A.

19.  whosoever  shall  go  out  of  the  doors  of  thy  A.
Judy.  12.  1.  we  will  burn  thine  A.  on  thee  with  tire

19.  22  bring  forth  the  man  that  came  into  thine  h
luth  4.  11.  make  woman  that  is  come  into  thine  h.

12.  and  let  thy  A.  be  like  the  house  of  Pharez
Sam.  2.  30.  that  thy  A.  should  walk  before  me
31.  there  shall  not  be  an  old  man  in  thine  A.

33.  the  incr.  of  thine  A.  shall  die  in  flower  of  age
.36.  every  one  in  thine  A.  shall  crouch  to  him
!2.  14.  as  David,  who  is  honourable  in  thine  A.

25.  6.  peace  be  to  thine  h.  and  to  all  thou  hast
35.  David  said  to  her,  go  up  in  peace  to  thine  h.
Sam.  7.  16.  thine  h.  shall  be  established  for  ever

11.  8.  go  down  to  thy  A.  and  wash  thy  feet

10.  whv  then  didst  not  thou  go  down  to  thine  A.  ?

12.  10.  the  sword  shall  never  depart  from  thine  A.

14.  8.  the  king  said,  go  to  thine  A.  1  Kings  1.  53.
Kings  13.  8.  if  thou  wilt  give  me  half  thine  A.

18.  bring  him  back  with  thee  into  thine  A.

16.  3.  make  thy  A.  like  the  h.  of  Jeroboam,  21.  22.

20.  6.  my  servants,  they  shall  search  thine  h.

Kings  20. 1.  set  thine  A.  in  order,  Isa.  38.  1.

15.  what  have  they  seen  in  thine  A.  ?  Isa.  39.  4.

17.  all  in  thine  h.  shall  be  carried,  Isa.  39.  6.

Pc.  5.  7.  1  will  come  to  t.  A.  in  multit.  of  thy  mercy

26.  8.  1  have  loved  the  habitation  of  thy  A.

.36.  8.  they  shall  be  satisfied  with  fatness  of  thy  A.
50.  9.  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  h.

65.  4.  we  shall  be  satisfied  with  goodness  of  thy  A.

66.  13.  1  will  go  into  thy  A.  with  burnt  offerings
69.  9.  zeal  of  thine  A.  hath  eaten  me  up,  John 2. 17.
93. 5.  holiness  becometh  thine  h.  O  Lord,  for  ever
128.  3.  wife  shall  be  as  a  fruitful  vine  by  sides  of

thine  h

Isa.  58. 7.  bring  the  poor  that  are  cast  out  to  thy  h.
Jer.  38.  17.  go  forth,  thou  shalt  live,  and  thine  h.
Ezek.  3.  24.  Spirit  said,  shut  thyself  within  thine  A
44.  30.  may  cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in  thine  A.
Hah.  2.  10.  thou  hast  consulted  shame  to  thy  A.

Mat.  9.  6.  arise,  go  to  t.  A.  Mark  2.  1 1 .  Luke  5.  24.
26.  18.  I  will  keep  the  passover  at  thy  h.

Luke  7.  44.  T  entered  t.  A.  thou  gavest  me  no  water

19.  5.  come  down,  for  to-dav  I  must  abide  at  thy  h.
Jets  11. 14.  thou  and  all  thy  A.  shall  be  saved,  16.  31.
Philem.  2.  to  the  church  in  thy  A.  grace  to  you

See  Tops.

HOUSES.

Gen.  42. 19.  go,  carry  corn  for  the  famine  of  your  A.
Exod.  1.  2i.  midwives  feared  God,  he  made  them  A.
6.  14.  these  be  the  heads  ot  their  fathers’  A.

8.  9.  to  destroy  the  frogs  from  thee  and  thy  A.  11.
13.  and  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  A.  and  the  fields
21.  I  will  send  swarms  of  flies  into  thy  A.  24.

9.  20.  he  made  his  servants  and  cattle  flee  into  the  A

10.  6.  the  locusts  shall  fill  thv  A.  and  the  A.  of  all
thy  servants,  and  the  A.  of  all  the  Egyptians

12.7.  strike  it  on  the  upper  door-posts  of  the  A.

13.  blood  be  for  a  token  upon  the  A.  where  you  are
15.  ye  shall  put  away  leaven  out  of  your  A.

19.  there  shall  be  no  leaven  found  in  your  A.

23.  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  come  in  to  your  A.
27.  who  passed  over  and  delivered  our  A.  in  Egypt

Lev.  25. 31 .  the  A.  of  vil lages  be  counted  as  the  fields
32.  the  A.  of  the  cities  of  their  possession,  33.
Num.  4.  22.  sum  of  Gershon  thro’  A.  their  fathers,  40.

16.  32.  the  earth  swallowed  them  up  and  their  A.

17.  6.  for  each  prince,  according  to  their  fathers’  A.
32. 18.  we  will  not  return  unto  our  A.  till  Israel
Deut.  6.  11.  to  give  thee  A.  full  of  all  good  things
8.  12.  when  hast  built  goodly  A.  and  dwelt  therein

19.  1.  dwellest  in  their  cities  and  A.  Neh.  9.  25.
Josh.  9.  12.  we  took  hot  provision  out  of  our  A.
Judg.  18.  14.  do  ye  know  that  there  is  in  these  A.  ?

22.  the  men  that  were  in  the  A.  near  to  Micah’s

1  Kings  13.  32.  he  cried  against  the  A.  of  high  places

20.  6.  they  shall  search  the  A.  of  thy  servants

2  Kings  17.  29.  put  them  in  the  A.  of  the  high  places
32.  which  sacrificed  in  the  A.  of  the  high  places

23.7.  he  brake  down  the  A.  of  the  Sodomites
19.  the  A.  of  the  high  places  Josiah  took  away


25.  9.  he  burntall  the  A.  of  Jerusalem,  Jer.  52. 13.


1  Chron.  15. 1.  David  make  A.  in  the  city  of  David

28.  11.  David  gave  to  Solom.  the  pattern  of  the  A.

29.  4.  to  overlay  the  walls  of  the  A.  withal

2  Chron.  34.  11  /to  buy  timber  to  floor  the  A.

35.  4.  and  prepare  yourselves  by  A.  of  your  fathers
Neh.  4. 14.  figbt  for  your  wives  and  your  A.

5.3.  some  said,  we  have  mortgaged  our  lands  and  A.
11.  restore  to  them  their  vineyards  and  A.

7.4.  butthe  people  are  few,  and  A.  not  budded
10.  34.  we  cast  lots  after  the  A.  of  our  fathers

Job  1.  4.  bis  sons  went  and  feasted  in  their  A.


Job  3. 15.  with  princes,  who  filled  their  A.  with  silver

4.  19.  much  less  in  them  that  dwell  in  A.cf  day
15.  28.  he  dwellethinA.  which  no  man  inhabiteth  1

21.  9.  their  A.  are  safe  from  fear,  nor  is  the  rod  ofG.

22.  18.  yet  he  filled  their  A.  with  good  things

24.  16.  in  the  dark  they  dig  through  A.  which  they
Psal.  49.  11.  that  their  A.  shall  continue  for  ever
83.  12.  let  us  take  the  A.  of  God  in  possession
Prov.  1.  13.  we  shall  fill  our  A.  with  spoil

30.  26.  yet  make  they  their  A.  in  the  rocks
Eccl.  2.  4.  1  budded  me  A.  I  planted  me  vineyards
Isa.  3. 14.  the  spoil  of  the  poor  is  in  your  A.

5.  9.  of  a  truth,  many  A.  shall  be  desolate,  6.  11.

8.  14.  for  a  rock  of  offence  to  both  the  A.  of  Israel

13.  16.  their  A.  be  spoiled,  their  wives  ravished

21.  their  A.  shall  be  full  of  doleful  creatures
22.  the  wild  beasts  shall  cry  in  their  desolate  A,

15.  3.  on  the  tops  of  their  A.  every  one  shall  howl  ■
22.  10.  ye  have  numbered  the  A.  of  Jerusalem,  aiat

the  "A  have  ye  broken  down  to  fortify  the  wall

32.  13.  yea,  upon  all  the  A.  of  joy  in  the  joyouscify
65.  21.  they  shall  build  A.  and  inhabit  them  \
Jer.  5.  7.  and  assembled  by  troops  in  the  harlot’s  A.

27.  as  cage  is  full  of  birds,  are  their  A.  full  of  dec,

6.  12.  and  their  A.  shall  be  turned  unto  others

18.  22.  let  a  cry  be  heard  from  their  A.

19.  13.  tbe  A.  of  Jerusalem  and  the  A.  of  the  king*
of  Judah  shall  be  defiled  as  the  place  of  Tophei,

29.  5.  build  ye  A.  and  dwell  in  them,  28.

32.  15.  A.  and  fields  shall  be  possessed  in  this  lane
29.  A.  on  whose  roofs  they  offered  incense  to  Baal

33.  4.  concerning  A.  of  this  city,  and  A.  of  kings
39.  8.  they  burnt  the  A.  of  the  people  with  tire

43. 12.  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  A.  of  gods  of  Egypt,  13,

Lam.  5.  2.  our  A.  are  turned  to  aliens,  we  are  orphans
Ezek.  7.  24.  the  heathen  shall  possess  their  A.

11.3.  which  say,  it  is  not  near,  let  us  build  A.

16.  41.  they  shall  burn  thine  A.  with  fire,  23.  47.
26.  12.  ancl  they  shall  destroy  thy  pleasant  A.

28.  26.  they  shall  build  A.  and  plant  vineyards
33.  30.  talking  against  thee  in  the  doors  of  the  A.
45.  4.  the  holy  portion  shall  be  a  place  for  their  A.

Dan.  2.  5.  and  your  A.  shall  be  made  a  dunghill
3.  29.  and  their  A.  shall  be  made  a  dunghill
Hos.  11.  11.  1  will  place  them  in  their  A.  saith  Lord
Joel 2.  9.  thejT  shall  climb  up  upon  the  A.  shall  ente,
Amos  3. 15.  will  smite  winter  and  summer-house,  A
of  ivory  shall  perish,  great  A.  shall  have  an  end
Mic.  1.  14.  the  A.  ofAclazib  shall  be  a  lie  to  kings
2.  2.  and  they  covet  A.  and  take  them  away

9.  the  women  ve  cast  out  from  their  pleasant  A.
Zeph.  1.  9.  which  fill  their  master’s  A.  with  violence

13.  their  A.  shall  become  a  desolation,  they  shal
build  A.  but  not  inhabit  them,  plant  vineyard:

2.  7.  in  the  A.  of  Ashkelon  shall  they  lie  down
Hag.  1.  4.  is  time  for  you  to  dwell  in  yo.  ceiled  A.
Zech.  14. 2.  A.  shall  be  rifled,  and  the  worn,  ravishei
Mat.  11.  8.  they  that  wear  soft  cloth. are  in  kings’ L
19.  29.  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  A.  or  wife
23. 14.  dev.  widows’  A.  Mark  12.  40.  Luke  20.  47.
Mark  8.  3.  if  send  them  away  fasting  to  their  own  l
Luke  16.  4.  that  they  may  receive  me  into  their  I.
Acts  4.  34.  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  A.  sold
1  Cor.  11.  22.  have  ye  not  A.  to  eat  and  drink  in?

1  'Jim.  3.  12.  deacons  ruling  their  own  A.  well

2  Tim.  3.  6. of  this  sortare  they  which  creep  intoA
Tit.  1  11.  who  subvert  whole  A.  teaching  things

HOUSEHOLD,  or  HOUSEHOLDS.

Gen.  18.  19.  he  will  command  his  A.  after  him
35.  2.  Jacob  said  to  his  A.  put  away  strange  gods
42.  .3.3.  take  food  for  the  famine  of  your  A.  be  gor
45.  11.  lest  thou  and  thy  A.  come  to  poverty
18.  take  your  father  and  your  A.  and  come  tom
47.  12.  Joseph  nourished  his  father’s  A.  with  area
24.  four  parts  shall  be  for  food  for  your  A.

Exod.  1. 1.  every  man  and  his  A.  came  with  Jacot
12.  4.  if  the  A.  be  too  little  for  the  lamb
Lev.  16. 17.  till  he  have  made  an  atonem.  for  his  -
18.31.  ye  shall  eat  it  in  every  place, and  your,
Deut.  6.  22.  the  Lord  shewed  wonders  upon  all  his
1 1.  6.  the  earth  swallowed  them  and  their  A.

14.  26.  thou  shalt  rejoice,  thou  and  thy  A.

15.  20.  thou  shalt  eat  it  before  L.  thou  and  thy  A
Josh.  2.  18.  bring  all  thy  father’s  A.  home  to  tnee

6.  25.  saved  Rahab,  her  father’s  A.  and  all  she  h<

7.  14.  and  the  family  shall  come  by  A.

18.  and  he  brought  his  A.  man  by  man  (  I
Judg.  6.  27.  so  it  was,  bee.  he  feared  his  father’s  A

18.  25.  thou  lose  thy  life,  with  the  lives  ot  thy  A.

1  Sam.  25.  17.  evil  is  determined  against  his  A.

27.  3.  every  man  with  his  A.  2  Sam.Q..  3.

2  Sam.  6.  11.  the  Lord  blessed  him  and  all  his  A.

20.  then  David  returned  to  bless  his  A.

15.  16.  and  the  king  went  forth  and  all  his  A.

16.  2.  the  asses  be  for  the  kind’s  A.  to  ride  on

17.  23.  put  his  A.  in  order  and  hanged  himself

19.  18.  a  ferry-boat  to  carry  over  the  king’s  A.

41.  why  have  Judah  brought  the  king  and  his/

1  Kings  4.  6.  and  Abishai  was  over  the  A.

7.  which  provided  victuals  for  the  king  ami  his
5.  9.  shall  do  my  desire,  in  giving  food  for  my
11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  wheat  for  food  to  his
11. 20.  and  Genubath  was  in  Pharaoh’s  A..  ,

2  Kings  7.  9.  that  we  may  go  and  tell  the  king  s  h
8. 1.  go  and  thine  A.  to  sojourn  where  thou  cans!

18.  18.  there  came  out  to  them  Eliakimsonot  II
kiah  who  was  over  the  A.  19.  2.  Isa.  36. 22.  I  37-

1  Chr.  24.  6.  one  principal  A.  being  taken  for  lile*|
Job  1.  3.  three  thousand  camels  and  a  great  A.
Prov.  27.  27.  have  goats’ milk  for  food  of  thy  A.

31.  15.  she  riseth  and  giveth  meat  to  her  A.

21.  she  is  not  afraid  of  the  snow  for  her  A,
all  her  A.  are  clothed  with  scarl

27.  she  looKeth  well  to  the  ways  of  her  A.

Mat.  10.  25.  much  more  shall  they  call  them  of  his
36.  a  man’s  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own  A.

24.  45.  hath  made  ruler  over  his  A.  Luke  12.  4^
Acts  16.  15.  when  she  was  baptized  and  her  A.  J
Rom  AQ.  10.  salute  them  which  are  of  Aristobulus
11.  greet  them  that  be  of  the  A.  of  Narcissus
1  Cor.  1.  16.  I  baptized  also  the  A.  of  Stephanas
Gal.  6.  10.  to  them  who  are  of  the  A.  of  taith


H  O  W


HOW


H  ()  W


ph.  2.  19.  no  more  strangers,  but  of  the  4.  of  God
'kil.  4.22.  chiefly  they  that  are  of  Cesar's  4
Tim.  4.  19-  salute  the  4.  of  Onesiphorus
HOUSEHOLDER.

Mat.  13.27.  so  the  servants  of  the  4.  came  and  said
52.  is  like  untoa  man  that  is  an  4.  CO.  1.

Cl.  33.  there  was  a  certain  4.  planted  a  vineyard
H0USEI1O I ,  D-servants .
lets  10.  7-  Cornelius  called  two  of  his  h.-servants
HOUSEHOLD-#^.

ien.  31.  37.  what  hast  thou  found  of  all  thy  It. -stuff.'
\eli .  13.8.  1  cast  out  all  the  h.stuff  of  1  obiah
HOW.

Ien.  C6.  9-. and  4.  sai  1st  thou,  she  is  mv  sister  ?

C7.  CO.  4.  is  it  thou  hast  found  it  so  quickly  ?

28.  17.  .lacob  said,  4.  dreadful  is  this  place
39.  9.  4.  then  ran  1  do  this  great  wickedness
14.  8.  4.  then  should  we  steal  out  of  thy  lord's  h.

16.  what  shall  we  speak  ?  4.  shall  we  clear  ourselv.
31.  4.  shall  1  so  to  my  father,  lad  not  with  me  .
"sod.  2.  18.  4.  Is  it  hat  ye  are  c  ome  so  soon  to-day

5.  12.  4.  then  sh-.ll  Pharaoh  hear  me  of  unrircum
30.  and  4.  shall  Pharaoh  hearken  unto  me  r
18.8.  Moses  told  4.  the  Lord  delivered  them

19.  4.  ye  have  seen  4.  I  bare  you,  Dent.  1.  31.
Ivion.  10.  31. 4.  we  are  to  encamp  in  the  wilderness
23.  8.4. shall  1  curse  G.  not  cursed  ?4.  shall  I  defy

24.5.  4.  goodly  are  thy  tents,  O  Jacob,  and  tabern.
>evt.  1.  12.  4.  can  L  myself  bear  your  cumbrance  r
i.  17.  if  thoushalt  say,  4.  can  1  dispossess  them  ?

1 1. 6.  4.  the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed
12.  30.  4.  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods  ?

25.  18.  4.  he  met  thee  by  the  way  and  smote  thee

29.  16.  ye  know  4.  we  have  dwelt  in  Egypt,  and
4.  we  came  through  nations  which  ye  passed  by

12.  30.  4.  should  one  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  put
oth.  9.  7-  4 .  shall  we  make  a  league  with  j-ou  t
\udg.  13.  12.  4.  shall  we  order  the  child,  4.  do  to  him'

6.  15.  she  said,  4.  canst  thou  sav,  1  love  thee  ?

20.  3.  they  said,  tell  us,  4.  was  this  wickedness

21.  7-  4.  do  for  wives  tor  them  that  remain  ?  16.
'nth  3.  18.  till  thou  know  4.  the  matter  will  fall
Sam.  10.  27.  said,  4.  shall  this  man  save  us  ?

4.  29-  see  4.  mine  eves  have  been  enlightened
6.  C.  4.  can  1  go  ?  if  Saul  hear  he  will  kill  me
Sam.  1.  4.  4.  went  the  matter,  1  pray  thee,  tell  me

5.  4.  knowest  thou  that  Saul  and  Jonath.  be  dead  ?
19.  4.  are  the  mighty  fallen  !  25,  27.

1.  7.  4.  Joab  did,  4.  the  people  did,  and  4.  the  war
2. 18.  4.  then  will  he  vex  himself,  if  we  tell  him
Kings  3.  7.  1  know  not  4.  to  go  out  or  come  in

2.  6.  4.  do  you  advise,  that  I  may  answer  people
4.  19.  4.  Jeroboam  warred,  and  4.  he  reigned

8. 13.  4.  I  hid  an  hundred  men  of  Lord’s  prophets
'0.  “•  and  see  4.  the  man  seeketh  mischief


Kings  5.  7-  4.  he  seeketh  a  quarrel  against  me
0.  4.  two  kings  stood  not,  4.  then  shall  we  stand  '

7.  28.  taught  them  4.  they  should  fear  the  Lord

8.  24.  4.  then  wilt  thou  turn  away  r  Isa.  .36.  9.

9. 25.  heard  long  ago,  4.  I  have  done  it,  Isa.  .37.  26.
20.  3.  4.  1  have  walked  before  thee,  Isa.  .38.  3.  ~
Iflhron.  20.  11.  behold,  1  say,  4.  they  reward  us

3. 19.  his  prayer,  and  4.  God  was  entreated  of  him
'eh.  2. 17.  ye  see  4.Jerusal.  lieth  W'aste,  gates  burnt
sth.  2.  11.  Mordecai  walked,  to  know  4.  Esther  did
.6.  4.  can  1  endure  to  see  evil  that  shall  come
•b  9-  2.  but  4.  should  a  man  be  just  with  God  ?

2.  13.  and  thou  sayest,  4.  doth  God  know  ?

6.2.  4.  hast  thou  helped  him  that  is  without  power!

h.  savest  thou  arm  that  hath  no  strength !
14.  but  4.  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him  !
sal.  11.  l.  4.  say  ye  to  my  soul,  flee  as  a  bird
4.  2.  4.  thou  didst  drive  out  heathen,  4.  afflict
6.  3.  say  to  God,  4.  terrible  art  thou  in  thy  works
3.11.4.  doth G.  know? ||89.  47.  4. short  my  time
4.  1.  4.  amiable  are  thy  tabernacles,  O  Lord
94.  24.  O  Lord,  4.  manifold  are  thy  works

Ini9/'  0  /t%  *ove  1  th>-  law>  is  my  meditation
103.  4.  sweet  are  thy  words  unto  my  taste
159.  consider  4.  1  love  thy  precepts,  quicken  me
4.  he  sware  unto  the  Lord  and  vowed


32.


39.  17.  4.  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me!
rov.  15.  23.  a  word  in  due  season,  4.  good  is  it !

0.  1.3.  there  is  a  generation,  O  4.  lofty  their  eyes

10.  15.  he  knoweth  not  4.  to  go  to  the  city'

1.  5.  knowest  not  4.  the  bo>'es  grow  in  the  womb
,n*-  L  10. 4.  fair  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  spouse,  7.  6

•  3.  I  have  put  ofl  my  coat,  4.  shall  l  put  it  on?

•  1.  4.  beautiful  are  thy  feet  with  shoes,  O  daugh.

“•  12.  4.  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  Lucifer

0.  o.  shall  say  in  that  day,  and  4.  shall  we  escape  ?
i.  11.  tor  4.  should  my  name  be  polluted  ?

>.  4.  1  should  know  4.  to  speak  a  w  ord  in  season
'•  (  .  4.  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  him,  Horn.  10.  15
|ri *•  p-  4.  canst  thou  say,  l  am  not  polluted  ?
ffl.  1  said,  4. shall  1  putthee  among  the  children?

1 .4.  shall  1  pardon ||  8.  8.  4.  do  ye  say  ;  48.  14.

"•  are  we  spoiled  2 1|  15.  5.  to  ask  4.  thou  doest?
'•  ,ca.°  ‘f  be  quiet,  seeing  the  Lord  hath  given

'•  ‘3.  4.  is  the  hammer  ot  the  whole  earth  cut  ?

"l  <Ptl‘ the  sit  solitary  as  a  w  idow  ?

1  in  v  '  ■  W('a^  *s  thy  heart,  saith  the  Lord

;  1,  „  Pine  away  in  sins,  4.  should  we  live  ?
Ilii!1'  4.  shall  1  give  thee  up,  Ephraim?  4.

' /1  u.  .eei  4.  make  thee  as  Admah  and  Zeboim?

,  1- ,lb..  4.  do  the  beasts  groan  ?  herds  of  cattle
o  ,  lev?s  ?ame  t0  thee,  4.  art  thou  cut  off
ill  o'*  1  jIS  s  ie  i,econie  desolat.  place  for  beasts
v  77  3;4-  do  you  see  it  now  ?  is  it  not  as  nothing?

'  <•  4-  8' eat  is  bis  goodness  and  his  beauty  !
;•  y  ”  V  )•  light  be  darkn.  4.  great  is  that  dark'n.

1  , 1  tll0u  5ay  to  thy  brother,  let  me  pull

,  J  e  know  4.  to  give  good  gifts,  Lithe  11.  13
'  ,,  ,  ,,e  1,0  thought  4.  or  what  ye  shall  sneak
.14.4  they  might  destr.  him,  Mark  3.6.1  if.  i8.

,  T  bis  kingdom  stand  ?  Luke  11.  18.

*11  a41'  ^e*ng  evil,  speak  good  things  ?

'  ,  is 't  that  ye  do  not  underst.  that  I  spake

o,7’  1  mink  ye  r  if  a  man  have  an  hundr.  sheep
10  SO<’n  ls  '*le  tig-tree  withered  away
.-  "•  P'nest  thou  in  hither  not  having  a'  garm.

->•  it  call  him  Ld.  4.  is  he  f  is  son  ?  Luke  <20.  44.


MW.  2.3.  33,4.  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  hell  ?
26.  54.  4.  then  shall  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled  ?
Mark  2.  16.  4.  is  it  that  he  eateth  with  sinners  ?
26.  4.  he  went  into  the  house  of  God,  Luke  6.  4

4.  27.  the  seed  should  grow  up,  he  knoweth  not  4.
40.  he  said,  4.  is  it  t hut.  ye  have  no  faith?

10.  2.3.  4.  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter

14.  1.  sought  4.  they  might  take  him  by  craft

11.  sought  4.  he  might  betray  him,  Luke  22.  4.

1 . nke  1 . 34.  4.  shall  this  be,  seeing  1  know  not  a  man

2.  49.  4.  is  it  that  ye  sought  me  r  wist  ye  not  that  1

8.  18.  take  heed  4.  ye  hear  ||  10.  26.  4.  readest  thou

12.  50.  and  4.  am  1  straitened  till  it  be  accomplis.
56.  4.  is  it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time  .'

16.  2.  he  said,  4.  is  it  that  l  hear  this  of  thee  ?

24.  6.  remember  4.  he  spake  unto  you  in  Galilee

35.  4.  he  was  known  of  them  in  breaking  bread
John  3.  4.  4.  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  old  ?

9.  4.  can  these  things  be  ?  |i  5.  44.  4.  can  ye  believe

5.  47.  it  not  his  writing,  4.  belie'e  my  words?

6.  52.  4.  can  this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat?

7.  15.  saying,  4.  knoweth  this  man  letters?

9-  10.  4.  were  thy  eyes  opened  ?  ||  26.  4.  opened  eyes

11.  .36.  4.  loved  him  ||  14.5. 4.  can  we  know  the  way

14.  22.  4.  is  it  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself  to  us  r

Acts  4.  21.  finding  noth.  4.  they  might  punish  them

5.  9.  4.  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together  to  tempt

7.  25.  4.  God  by  his  hand  would  deliver  them

8.  .31 .  4.  can  I ,  except  some  man  should  guide  rne  ?
9.27.  told,  4.  lie  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  way

10.  38.  4.  G.  anointed  Jesusof  Naz.  with  Holy  G.

11.  1.3.  shewed  4.  he  had  seen  an  angel  in  his  house

14.  27.  4.  he  had  opened  the  door  of  faith

15.  36.  let  us  go  again,  and  see  4.  they  do
20.  20.  4.  kept  back  nothing  that  was  profitable

35.  4.  so  labouring,  ye  ought  to  support  the  weak
Rom.  3.  6.  for  then  4.  shall  God  judge  the  world  '

6.  2.  4.  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  longer  therein

7.  18.  4.  to  perform  what  is  good,  1  find  not

8.  32.  4.  shal  1  he  not  with  him  Freely  give  al  1  things  ?

10.  14.  4.  shall  they  call  ?  4.  shall  believe  ?  4.  hear
11.2.  4.  he  maketh  intercession  to  G.  against  lsr.

33.  4.  unsearchable  his  judgments,  and  w  ays  past

1  Cor.  3.  10.  take  heed  4.  he  buildeth  thereupon
7-  32.  unmarried  careth  4.  he  may  please  the  Lord

33.  that  is  mar.  careth  4.  he  may  please  Ills  wife

34.  she  careth  4.  she  may  please  her  husband

14.  7.  4.  shall  it  be  known  what  is  piped  or  harped  ?

9.  4.  shall  it  be  known  wfflat  is  spoken  ?

15.  12.  4.  say  some  that  there  is  no  resurrection  ?
.35.  some  man  w  ill  say,  4.  are  the  dead  raised  up

2  Cor.  7. 15.  4.  with  tear  and  trembling  received  him
8.  2.  4.  that  in  a  great  trial  of  affliction  their  joy

13.  5.  know  ye  not  4.  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  you

Cal.  4.  9.  4.  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  elements?

6.  11.  j’e  see  4.  large  a  letter  1  have  written  to  you
Eph.  6.  21.  but  that  ye  also  may  know  4.  I  do
Phil.  2.  23.  so  soon  as  I  shall  see4.  it  will  go  with  me
4. 12. 1  know  4.  to  be  abased,  and  know  4.  to  abound
Col.  4.  6.  that  ye  may  know  4.  ye  ought  to  answer

1  Thess.  1. 9.  and  4.  ye  turned  to  G.  from  idols  to

2.  10.  4.  holily  we  behaved  ourselves  among  you

11.  4.  we  exhorted  you  ||  4.  1.  4.  ye  ought  to  walk
4.  4.  should  know  4.  to  possess  his  vessel  in  honour

2  Thess.  .3. 7.  for  you  know  4.  ye  ought  to  follow  us
l  Tim.  3.  5.  for  it  a  man  know  not  4.  to  rule  his  own

house,  4.  shall  he  take  care  of  the  church  of  God  ?

15.  mayest  know  4.  thou  oughtest  to  behave
Heb.  2.  3.  4.  shall  we  escape  if  we  neg  lect  so  great  sa.

7.  4.  now  conside’’  4.  great  this  man  was,  to  whom
Jam.  2.  24.  ye  see  4.  that  by  works  a  man  is  justified

.3.  5.  behold  4.  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth
Pet.  2.  9.  the  Lord  knoweth  4.  to  deliver  the  godly
1  John  .3.  17.  4.  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?

4.  20.  4.  can  be  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?
Jude  5.  4.  that  the  Lord  having  saved  the  people
Rev.  2.  2.  4.  thou  canst  not  bear  them  who  are  evil

3.  3.  remember  4.  thou  hast  received  and  heard
Pee  Do.

HOW  long.

Exod.  10.  3.  4.  long  wilt  refuse  to  humble  thyself?

7.  4.  long  shall  this  man  be  a  snare  unto  us?

16.  28.  4.  long  refuse  to  keep  my  commandments?
Xum.  14.  11.  4.  long  will  this  people  provoke  me?

4.  long  will  it  be  ere  they  believe  me  ?
27.  4.  long  shall  I  bear  with  this  evil  congregation
Josh.  18.  3.  4.  long  are  ye  slack  to  goto  possess  land  ?

1  Sam.  1. 14.  F.li  said,  4.  long  wilt  thou  be  drunken?

16.  1.  4. 1.  wilt  thou  mourn  for  Saul,  seeing  1  have

2  Sam.  19.  34.  Barzillai  said,  4.  long  have  1  to  live  ?

1  h  ings  18. 21 . 4.  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?
Neh.  2.  6.  king  said,  for  4.  1.  shall  thy  journey  be  ?
Job  7.  19.  4.  long  wilt  thou  not  depart  from  me?

8.  2.  4.  long  wilt  thou  speak  ?  4.  long  shall  words

of  thy  mouth  be  like  a  strong  wind  ?

18.  2.  4.  long  will  it  be  ere  you  make  end  of  words  ?

19.  2.  4.  long  will  ve  vex  my  soul  anti  break  me  ?
Psal.  4.  2.  4.  1.  will  ye  turn  my  glory  into  shame  ?

4.  /.  will  ye  love  vanity,  and  seek  after  leasing
6.  .3.  my  soul  is  vexed  ;  but  thou,  O  Lord,  4.  long  ?
13.  1.  4.  long  wilt  thou  forget  me,  O  I.d.  for  ever  ?

2.  4.  long  shall  1  take  counsel  in  my  soul  ?  4.  long
shall  my  enemy  be  exalted  over  me  ?

35.  17.  Ld.  4.  1.  wilt  thou  look  on  ?  rescue  my  soul
62.  3.  4.  long  will  ye  imagine  mischief  against  man  ?
74.  9.  nor  is  there  any  among  us  that  knoweth  4. 1.

10.  O  God,  4.  /.  shall  the  adversary  reproach  ?

79.  5.  4.  long  wilt  thou  be  angry  for  ever?  80.  4.

82.  2.  4. 1.  wilt  judge  unjustly  and  accept  persons  ?

89.  46.  4. 1.  Lord,  wilt  thou  hide  thyself  ?  for  ever  ?

90.  13.  return,  O  Lord,  4.  long?  let  it  repent  thee
94.  .3.  render  a  reward  to  the  proud,  l  ord,  4.  long

shall  the  wicked,  4.  long  shall  wicked  triumph  ?

4.  4.  long  shall  they  utter  and  speak  hard  things?
Prov.  1.  22.  4.  long  simple  ones,  will  love  simplicity
6.  9-  4. 1.  wilt  thou  sleep,  O  sluggard  ?  when  arise
Isa.  6.  11.  then  said  1,  Lord,  4.  long?  he  answered
Jer.  4.  14.  4.  1.  shall  vain  thoughts  lodge  in  thee  ?


Jer .  47.  6.  O  sw'ord  of  the  L.,  4.  long  ere  thou  be  quiet
Dan.  8.  1.3.  4.  long  shal  I  be  vision  of  daily  sacrifice  ?

12.  6.  4.  long  shall  it  be  to  end  of  these  wonders.'
JIos.8. 5. 4.  long  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  innocency?
nab.  1.  2.  4.  long  shall  1  cry,  and  thou  wilt  not  hear  ?
2.  6.  woe  to  him  increaseth  what  not  his,  4.  long?
Aceh.  1.12.  4.  long  w  i  1 1  thou  not  have  mercy  on  Jer.
Mat.  17.  I?.  4.  /.  shall  1  be  witli  30U,  4.  1.  suffer
you,  bring  him  me,  Mark  9.  19.  Luke  9.  41.
Mark  9.  21.  4.  long  is  it  ago  since  this  came  to  him  ?
John  10.  24.  4.  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt?
Rev.  6. 10.  4.  long,  O  L.  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not
HOW  many.

Job  13.  23.  4.  many  are  mine  iniquities  and  sins  ?
Psal.  119.84.  4.  many  are  the  days  of  thy  servants  ?
Mat.  15.  34.  4.  m.  loaves  have  ye  ?  Mark  6.  38.  |  8.  5.

16.  9.  4.  m.  baskets  ye  took  up?  Mark  8.  19,  20.
Mark  15.  4.  4.  many  tilings  they  witness  against  thee
Luke  15.  17.  4,  hired  servts.  of  my  father’s  have
2  lim.  1.  18.  in  4.  many  things  he  ministered  to  me
HOW

1  Kings  22. 16


21.  4.  long  shall  1  see  standard,  and  hear  trump.  ?
12.  4.  4.  long  shall  land  mourn  and  herbs  wither?
23.  26.  4.  /.  shall  this  be  in  the  heart  of  prophets?
47.  5.  baldness  on  Gaza,  4.  long  wilt  cut  thyself?


many  times.

4.  m.  times  shall  1  adjure  thee,  thou
tell  nothing  but  what  is  true?  2  Chrun.  18. 15.
HOW  much.

2  A  mgs  5.  13.  4.  much  rather  when  he  saith,  wash
Ezra  7.  22.  and  salt  w  ithout  prescribing  4.  much
Prvv.16.  16. 4.  much  better  is  it  to  get  wisd.  than  gold
Cant.  4.  10.  4.  much  better  is  thy  love  than  wine
Mat.  12.  12.  4.  much  is  a  man  better  than  a  sheep
Luke  16.  5.  4.  »/«c4owest  thou  to  my  lord?  7.

19.  15.  4.  much  every  man  hath  gained  by  trading
Acts  9. 13.  4.  much  evil  he  hath  done  thy  saints  at  Jer.
Jleb.H.fj.  by  4.  much  he  is  Mediator  of  better  coven.
10.  29.  of  4.  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye
Lev.  18.  7.  4.  much  she  hath  glorified  herself
HOW  much  less.

1  Kings  8.  27.  heaven  cannot  contain  thee,  4.  much
less  this  house  which  I  have  built,  2  Chr.  6. 18.
Q  C’hron.  32.  15.  4.  much  less  shall  your  God  deliver
J“b 4. 19. 4.  much  less  in  them  dwell  in  houses  of  clay
9.14.  4.  much  /c.u  shail  l  answer  him,  choose  words

25.6. 4.  much  less  is  man  that  is  w  orm  and  son  of  man

34. 19.4.  much  less  to  him  that  accepted)  not  persons
Lzek.  15.  5.  4.  much  less  shall  it  be  meet  for  work

HOW  much  more.

Dent.  31.  27.  and  4.  much  more  after  my  death  ?

1  Sam.  14.  .30.  4.  much  were  if  people  had  eaten  freely
23.  3.  4.  much  more  then  if  we  come  to  Keilah

2  Sam.  4.11. 4.  m.  more  when  wicked  men  have  slain
16.  11.  4.  much  more  now  may  this  Benjamite  do  it  ?

Job  15.  16.  4.  much  in.  abominable  and  filthy  isman  }
Prov.  15.  11.  4.  much  more  then  the  hearts'of  men?
19.  7^  4.  m.  more  do  his  friends  go  far  from  him  ?
21. 27.  4.  much  more  when  with  a  wicked  mind
Lfek.  14.  21.  4.  m.  more  when  send  sore  judgments  ?
Mat.  7. 11.4.  m.more  shall  your  heavenly  Father
gi  ve  good  things  to  them  that  ask  ?  Luke  11.  13.

10.  25.  4.  m.  more  shall  call  them  of  his  household  ?
Luke  12.  24.  4.  m.  m.  are  ye  better  than  the  fowls  ?

28.  4.  m.  more  w  ill  clothe  you,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?
Rom.  11.  12.  4.  much  more  their  fulness  ?

24.  4.  m.  more  these  which  be  natural  branches?
\si  °-i'  *'■  much  more  things  that  pertain  to  life  ?
/  hilem.  16.  a  brother  to  me,  4.  rn.  more  to  thee?

HOW  oft,  often.

Job  21.  17 .  4.  oft  is  the  cand  le  of  the  wdeked  put  out  ?

»  L-oft  cometh  their  destruction  upon  them  ?
Psal. 78.  40.  4.  e/?did  they  piovokehim  in  wiidern.
Mat.  18. 21.  4.  oft  shall  my  brothersin  againstme.'
23.  .37.  O  Jerusalem,  4.  often  would  I  have  gathered
thy  children  as  a  hen  her  chickens,  Luke  13.  34.

.  UOWBE1T.

Judg.  4.  17.  4.  Sisera  fled  on  his  feet  to  tent  of Mael

11.  28.  4.  the  king  of  Ammonites  hearkened  not

16.  22.  4.  the  hair  of  his  head  began  to  grow  again
18.  29.  4.  the  name  of  the  city  was  Laish  at  first
21 . 18.  4.  we  may  not  give  them  wives  of  our  daugh.
Ruth  3.  12.  4.  there  is  a  kinsman  nearer  than  l

1  Sam.  8.  9-  4.  yet  protest  solemnly'  unto  them

2  Sam.  2.  23.  4.  Asahel  refused  to  turn  aside

12.  14.  4.  because  by  this  deed  hast  given  occasion

13.  14.  4.  he  would  not  hearken  unto  her  voice

25.  4.  he  would  not  go,  but  blessed  him

23.  19.  4.  he  attained  not  first  three,  1  Chr.  11.  21.

1  kings 2.  15.  4.  the  kingdom  is  turned  about

10.  7.  4.  I  believed  not  the  words,  2  Chron.  9.  6.

11.  13.  4.  1  will  not  rend  all  the  kingdom,  34.

22.  1  have  lacked  nothing,  4.  let  me  go  in  any  wise

.  A  mgs  3.  25.  4.  slingers  went  about  it  and  smote  it
8.  10.  4.  Lord  shewed  me,  that  he  shall  surely  die
10.  29.  4.  from  sins  of  Jeroboam  Jehu  turned  not

12.  13.  4.  there  w  ere  not  made  for  house  bowls

14.  4.  4.  high  places  were  not  taken  away,  as  yet
people  did  sacrifice,  15.  35.  2  Chr.  20.  33.

17.  29.  4.  every  nation  made  gods  of  their  own

40.4.  they  did  not  hearken,  but  did  after  their
22.  7.  4.  there  was  no  reckoning  made  with  them

1  Chr.  28.  4.  4.  the  Lord  God  ot  Israel  chose  me

2  Chr.  18.  34.  4.  the  king  of  lsr.  stayed  himself  up

24.  5.  4.  the  Levites  hastened  it  not'

2.  4.  he  entered  not  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord

32.  .31. 4.  in  the  business  of  ambassadors,  G.  left  him
IS  eh.  9.  33.  4.  thou  art  just  in  all  brought  on  us

13.  2.  4.  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing
Job  30.  24.  4.  he  will  not  stretch  out  his  hand

Isa.  10.  7.  4.  he  meaneth  not  so,  nor  thinketh  so
Jer.  44.  4.  4.  1  sent  to  you  all  my  servants,  prophets
Mat.  17.  21.  4.  this  kind  goeth  notout  but  by  praver
Markb.  19.  4.  Jesus  suffered  him  not,  but  saith  to  him
7.  7-  4.  in  vain  do  they  worship  me,  teaching
John  6.  23.  4.  there  came  boats  from  Tiberias
7-  13.  4.  no  man  spake  openly  of  him  for  fear
27.  4.  w'e  know  this  man  whence  he  is
11.13.  if  he  sleep,  do  well,  4.  Jesus  spake  of  his

16.  13.  4.  w  hen  he  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come
Acts  4.  4.  4.  many  who  heard  the  word  believed
7.  48.  4.  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not  in  temples

14.  20.  4.  he  rose  up  and  came  into  the  city

17.  34.  4.  certain  men  clave  to  him  and  believed

27.  26.  4.  we  must  be  cast  upon  a  certain  island

28.  6.  4.  they  looked  when  he  should  have  sw  ollen
1  Cor.  2.  6.  4.  we  speak  wisdom  among  the  perfect

K  2  243


H  U  M


HUN


HUN


j  Cor.  8. 7.  A.  there  is  not  in  every  man  that  knowl.

14.  2.  A.  in  the  ~ pirit  he  speaketh  mysteries

20.  A.  in  malice  he  children,  in  understanding,  men
J5.  46.  A.  that  was  not  first  which  is  spiritual
2  Ccr.ll .  21 .  A.  wherein  soever  anv  is  bold,  1  am  also
Cal.  4.  8.  A.  when  ye  knew  not  God  ye  did  service

1  Tim.  1.  16.  A.  tor  this  cause  l  obtained  mercy
Heh.  3. 16.  A.  not  all  that  came  out  of  Egypt  by  Mos.

HOWL.

ha.  13.  6.  A.  ye.  for  the  dav  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand
14.  31.  A.  O  gate  ||  15.  2.  Moab  shall  A.  3.  1  16.7.
23.  1.  A.  ye  ships  of  1  arshish,  for  it  is  laid  waste
6.  pass  over  to  1  arshish,  A.  ye  inhabitants  of  isle
52.  5.  make  them  to  A.  ||  65.  14.  A.  for  vexation
Jer.  4.  8.  lament  and  A.  48.  20.  I|25.  34.  A.  ye  shep.

47.  2.  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  shall  A.

48.  31 .  1  will  A.  for  Moab  ||  39.  they  shall  A.

49.  3.  A.  O  Heshbon  ||51.  8.  A.  for  Babylon
Ezek.  21.  12.  cry  and  A.  son  of  man,  for  it  shall  be

30.  2.  prophesy  and  say,  A.  ye,  woe  worth  the  day
Joel  1.  5.  A.  ye  drinkers  ||  11.  A.  ye  vine-dressers
13.  lament  and  A.  ye  ministers  of  the  altar
MicA.8.  therefore  1  will  wail  and  A.  will  gostripped
Zeph.  1. 11.  A.  ye  inhabitants  of  Maktesh
Zee  A.  11.  2.  A.  fir-tfee,  A.  O  ye  oaks  of  Bashan
Jam.  5.  1.  go  to,  now,  ye  rich  men.  weep  and  A.
HOWLED.

Hos.7A4.  not  cried  tome,  when  they  A.  on  their  beds
HOWLING.

ha.  15.8.  A.  thereof  is  gone  to  Eglaim  and  Beer-elim
Jer.  25.  36.  an  A.  of  principal  of  the  flock  be  heard
Zeph.  1. 10.  there  shall  be  an  A.  from  the  second  gate
Zech.  11.  3.  there  is  a  voice  of  the  A.  ol  the  shepherds
HOWLING.

Dent.  32. 10.  he  found  him  in  the  waste  A.  wilderness
HOW  LINGS.

Amos  8.  3.  songs  of  the  temple  shall  be  A.  in  that  day
HUGE.

2  Chron.  16.  8.  the  Ethiopians  and  Lubims  a  A.  host

HUMBLE.

Humility  is  a  most  excellent  grace  of  the  spirit,  evi¬
dences  the  subject  of  it  to  be  a  child  of  Cod,  and  is
accompanied  with  contentment,  peace,  and  submis¬
sion  to  the  will  of  God.  The  sense  of  the  weakness
of  our  understanding,  which  is  the  eject  oj  humi¬
lity,  is  a  temper  of  soul  that  prepares  it  for  faith  :
partly,  as  it  puts  us  on  a  serious  consideration  of
those  things  which  are  revealed  to  us  in  the  word  ;
partly,  as  it  stops  all  curious  inquiries  into  those
things  which  are  unsearchable  ;  and  principally ,  as
it  graciously  entitles  to  the  promise,  God  giveth
grace  to  the  humble,  1  Pet.  5.  5.  This  our  . Sa¬
viour  makes  a  necessary  qualification  in  all  those
who  shall  enter  into  his  kingdom.  Mat.  18.  3.  Ex¬
cept  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  chil¬
dren,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  And  since  pride  arises  out  of  ignorance,
the  gospel,  to  cause  in  us  a  lowly  sense  of  our  un¬
worthiness,  discovers  the  sinfulness,  nakediiess,  and
misery  of  the  human  nature,  divested  of  its  primi¬
tive  righteousness.  We  have  the  example  of  our
Saviour,  in  whom  there  is  an  union  of  all  divine
and  human  perfections,  debasing  himself  to  the
form  of  a  servant,  to  instruct  us  to  be  meek  and
lowly.  Mat.  11.  29.  Learn  of  me,  for  1  am  meek
and  lowly.  Humility  is  put  for  an  humble ,  de¬
lected,  and  low  estate.  Luke  1.  48.  He  hath  re¬
garded  the  low  estate  of  his  handmaiden  ;  in
Greek,  rarreivuicriv,  the  humility.

To  humble  signifies  to  afflict,  to  prove ,  to  try,  Deut.
8.  2.  God  led  thee  in  the  wilderness  to  humble
thee.  To  humble  a  woman,  is  to  lie  with  her,  to
rob  her  of  her  honour.  Deut.  21.  14.  Thou  shalt
not  make  merchandise  of  her,  because  thou  hast
humbled  her.  And  in  Ezek.22. 10.  In  thee  have
they  humbled  her  that  was  set  apart  for  pollu¬
tion  :  they  came  near  a  woman  at  a  certain  par¬
ticular  time  when  the  laic  forbids  it.

Job  22.  29-  and  he  shall  save  the  A.  person
Psal.  9.  12.  he  forgetteth  not  the  cry  of  the  A.

10.  12.  arise,  O  Lord,  O  God,  forget  not  the  A.

17.  Lord,  thou  hast  heard  the  desire  of  the  A.

34.  2.  the  A.  shall  hear  thereof  and  be  glad
69.  32.  the  A.  shall  see  this  and  be  glad
Prov.  16. 19.  better  be  of  a  A.  spirit  with  the  lowly
29.  23.  but  honour  shall  uphold  the  A.  in  spirit
Isa.  57.  15.  with  him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and
A.  spirit,  to  revive  spirit  of  A.  and  heart  of
contrite

Jam.  4.  6.  but  giveth  grace  to  the  A.  1  Pet.  5.  5.
HUMBLE.

Exod.  10.  3.  how  long  wilt  thou  refuse  to  A.  thyself?
Deut.  8.  2.  to  A.  thee  and  to  prove  thee,  16.

Judg.  19.  24.  A.  ye  them,  and  do  with  them  as  seem.

2  Chr.  7- 14.  my  people  shall  A.  themsel.  and  pray
34.  27.  because  thou  didst  A.  thyselt  before  God
Prov.  6.  3.  go,  A.  thyself,  and  make  sure  thy  friend
Jer.  13. 18.  say  to  the  king,  A.  yourselves,  sit  down
Mat.  18.  4.  whosoever  shall  A.  himself,  23. 12.

2  Cor.  12.  21.  my  God  will  A.  me  among  you
Jam.  4.  10.  A.  yourselves  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

1  Pet.  5.  6.  A.  yourselves  under  mighty  hand  of  God

HUMBLED.

Lev.  26.  41.  if  their  uncircumcised  hearts  be  A.
Deut.  8.  3.  he  A.  thee  and  suffered  thee  to  hunger

21.  14.  not  sell  her,  because  thou  hast  A.  her,  22.  29.

22.  24.  because  he  hath  A.  his  neighbour's  wife

2  Kings  22. 19.  because  hast  A.  thyself  before  the  Ld.
2  Chr.  12.  6.  the  princes  and  the  king  A.  themselves

7.  when  the  I.ord  saw  that  they  A.  themselves
12.  when  he  A.  himself,  wrath  turned  from  him
30. 11.  divers  of  Asher  and  Zebulun  A.  themselves

32.  26.  Hezekiah  A.  hims.  for  the  pride  pf  his  heart

33.  12.  Manasseh  A.  himself  greatly  before  God
19.  he  set  up  graven  images  before  he  was  A.

2.3.  Amon  A.  not  himself  before  the  Lord,  as  Ma¬
nasseh  his  father  A.  himself,  trespassed  niore

36.  12.  Zedekiah  A.  not  himself  before  Jeremiah
Psal.  35.  13.  as  for  me,  I  A.  my  soul  with  fasting
Isa.  2. 11.  the  lofty  looks  of  man  shall  be  A.

5.  15.  mighty  man  shall  be  A.  eyes  of  the  loftv  be  A.
19.  33.  high  hewn  down,  and  the  baughtv  shall  be  A.

244


Jtr  44.  10.  they  are  not  A.  e'en  to  this  day
Lam.  3.20.  my  soul  hath  in  remembrance  and  is  A.
Ezek.  22.  10.  in  thee  have  they  A.  her  set  apart
11.  and  another  in  thee  hath  A.  his  sister
Dan.  5.  22.  thou  his  son  hast  not  A.  thine  heart
PAf/.2.8.he  A.  himself  and  became  obedient  to  death
HUMBLEDST.

2  Chron.  34.  27.  because  thou  A.  thyself  before  me
HUMBLETH.

1  Kings  21.  29.  how  Ahab  A.  because  he  A.  himself
Psal.  10. 10.  he  croucheth  and  A.  himself,  that  poor
113.6.  who  A.  himself  to  behold  things  in  heaven

Isa.  2. 9.  mean  man  boweth,  the  great  man  A.  himself
Luke  14. 11.  he  that  A.  hims.  shall  be  exalted,  18.  14.
HUM  BEEN  ESS.

Col.  3. 12.  put  on  kindness,  A.  of  mind,  meekness
HUMBLY.

2  Sam.  16.  4.  T  A.  beseech  thee  that  T  may  find  grace
Mic.  6.  8.  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  A.  with  thy  G.

HUMILIATION.

Acts  8.  33.  in  his  A.  his  judgment  was  taken  away
HUMILITY.

Prov.  15.  33.  and  before  honour  is  A.  18.  12.

22.  4.  by  A.  are  riches,  and  honour,  and  life
Acts  20.  19.  serving  the  Lord  with  all  A.  of  mind
Col.  2. 18.  let  no  man  beguile  you  in  a  voluntary  h.

23.  have  a  shew  of  wisdom  in  will-worship  and  A.

1  Pet.  5. 5.  be  subject  one  to  another,  clothed  with  A.

H u N dr ed-ko i.d.  See  Fold.
HUNDRED.

Gen.  11.  10.  Shem  was  an  A.  years  old  and  begat

17.  17.  shall  a  child  be  born  to  him  that  is  a  A.

years  old,  and  shall  Sarah  bear.'  21.  5.
Pom.  4.  19.

.33.  19.  Jacob  bought  for  an  A.  pieces,  Josh.  24.  32.
Exod.  27.  9.  hangings  A.  cubits  long,  11.  I  38.  9, 11.

18.  the  length  of  the  court  shall  be  an  A.  cubits
38.  27.  an  A.'sockets  were  cast  of  the  A.  talents
Lev.  26.  8.  five  shall  chase  a  A.  and  a  A.  put  to  flight
Dent.  22. 19.  shall  amerce  him  in  A.  shekels  of  silv.
Judg.  7.19.  so  Gideon  and  the  A.  men  with  him  came
20. 10.  we  will  take  ten  of  an  A.  an  A.  of  a  1000
35.  Israel  destroyed  of  Benjm.  25,000  and  an  A.

1  Sam.  18.  25.  but  an  A.  foreskins,  2  Sam.  3.  14.

25.  18.  an  A.  clusters  of  raisins,  2  Sam.  16.  1.

2  Sam.  8.  4.  reserved  for  an  A.  chariots,  1  Chr.  18.  4.

1  Kings  4. 2.3.  Solom.  provision  for  one  day  A.  sheep
7.  2.  length  of  the  house  of  the  forest  an  A.  cubits

18.  4.  Obadiah  took  an  A.  proph.  and  hid  them,  1.3.

2  Kings  4.  4.3.  what  should  l  set  this  bet.  an  A.  men  r

23.  33.  Pharaoh-necho  put  Jehoahaz  in  bands,

and  put  land  to  a  tribute  of  an  A.  talents,

2  Chron.  36.  .3.

1  Chron.  12.  14.  one  of  the  least  was  over  an  A.

25.  children  of  Simeon  seven  thousand  and  one  A.

21.  3.  I.ord  make  his  people  an  A.  times  so  many

2  Chron.  .3. 16.  Solomon  made  an  A.  pomegranates
4.  8.  and  he  made  an  A.  basins  of  gold

25.  6.  he  hired  also  men  for  an  A.  talents  of  silver
9.  what  shall  we  do  for  the  A.  talents  I  have  given
27.  5.  Ammon  gave  Jotham  an  A.  talents  of  silver
29.  32.  the  congregation  brought  an  A.  rams
Ezra  2.  69.  they  gave  one  A.  priests’  garments

6.  17.  and  offered  at  the  dedication  an  A.  bullocks

7.  22.  let  it  be  dope  to  an  A.  talents  of  silver,  an

A.  measures  of  wheat  and  wine,  and  an  A.
baths  of  oil

8.  26.  silver  vessels  an  A.  talents  of  gold,  an  A.  talts.
Neh.  5. 11.  restore  to  them  the  A.  part  of  the  money
Prov.  17*  19.  more  than  an  A.  stripes  into  a  fool
Eccl.  6.3.  if  a  man  beget  an  A.  childr.  and  live  years

8. 12.  tho’  sinner  do  evil  A.  times,  days  be  prolong.
l  a.  65.  20.  for  the  child  shall  die  an  A.  years
old,  but  the  sinner  being  an  A.  years  old
shall  be  accursed

Ezek.  40. 19.  he  measured  an  A.  cubits  eastward
23.  he  measured  from  gate  to  gate  an  A.  cubits,  27.
47.  the  court  an  A.  cubits  long,  an  A.  cubits  broad
41 . 13.  so  he  measured  the  house  an  h.  cubits  long

14.  of  the  separate  place  toward  east,  an  A.  cubits

15.  the  galleries  on  one  side  and  other,  an  A.  cubits
42.  8.  and  lo,  before  the  temple  were  an  A.  cubits

Amos  5.  3.  city  that  went  out  by  a  1000,  shall
leave  an  A.  that  which  went  forth  by  an  A.
shall  leave  ten.

Mat.  18.  12.  if  a  man  have  an  A.  sheep,  Luke  15.  4.

28.  went  and  found  one  who  owed  him  an  A.  pence
Luke  16.  6.  and  he  said,  an  A.  measures  of  oil
7.  how  much  owest  thou  ?  an  A.  meas.  of  wheat
John  19.  39.  mixt.  of  myrrh  and  aloes  an  A.  weight
One  HUNDRED  and  five.

Gen.  5. 6.  Seth  lived  one  A.  and  five  years,  beg.  Enos
One  HUNDRED  and  ten.

Gen.  50.  22.  Joseph  lived  one  A.  and  ten  years,  26.
Josh.  24. 29.  Josh,  died  an  A.  ten  years  old,  Judg. 2.8.
Ezra  8.  12.  with  lohanan  an  A.  and  ten  males
One  HUNDRED  and  twelve.

1  Chr.  15. 10.  of  the  sons  of  Uzziel  an  A.  and  twelve
Ezra  2.  18.  the  children  of  Jorah,  an  A.  and  twelve
Neh.  7.  24.  the  children  of  Hariph,  an  A.  and  twelve
One  HUNDRED  and  nineteen.

Gen.  11.25.  Nahor  lived  after  beg.Terah  A.  nineteen
One  HUNDRED  and  twenty.

Gen.  6.  3.  yet  his  days  shall  be  A.  and  twenty  years
Num.  7.  86.  gold  of  spoons  was  an  A.  and  twenty

[shekels

Dent.  31 . 2.  I  am  an  A.  and  twenty  years  old  this  day
34.7.  Moses  an  A.  and  twenty  years  old  when  he  died
1  Kings  10.  10.  she  gave  king  an  A.  and  twenty
talents  of  gold,  spices,  and  precious  stones,
2  Chron.  9-  9.

1  Chron.  15.  5.  Uriel  and  brethren  an  A.  and  twenty

2  Chron.  3.  4.  height  of  porch  an  A.  and  twenty  cubits
5. 12.  with  them  an  A.  and  twenty  priests,  sounding

Dan.  6. 1.  to  set  over  kingdom  an  A.  and  tw.  princes
Acts  1. 15.  number  of  names  were  about  an  A.  and  t.

One  Hundred  twenty-two.

Ezra  2.  27.  men  of  Michmash,  A.  tw.-two,  Neh.  7. 31.

One  HUNDRED  twenty-three.

Num.  33.  39.  Aaron  A.  tw. -three  years  when  he  died
Ezra  2.  21.  the  children  of  Beth  lehem  went  up  out
of  captivitv  an  A.  twenty  and  three.  Neh.  7.  32.


One  HUNDRED  twenty-seven.

Gen.  2.3. 1.  Sarah  was  an  A.  t tv. -seven  years,  and  died
Esth.  1.1.  this  is  Ahasuerus  who  reigned  over  an
A.  and  twenty-seven  provinces,  8.  9.  I  9.30.
One  HUNDRED  twenty-eight.

Ezra  2.  23.  men  of  Anathoth  A.  tw. -eight,  Neh.  7.27 ,
41.  the  children  of  Asaph  an  A.  twenty-eight
Neh.  11. 14.  their  brethren  an  A.  and  twenty-eiqht
One  HUNDRED  thirty.

Gen.  5.  3.  Adam  lived  A.  thirty  years,  and  begatsoa
47.  9.  years  of  tny  pilgrimage  are  an  A.  and  thirty
Num. 7. 13.  weight  thereof  was  a  A.  t.  shekels,  19,25.
85.  each  charger  weighing  an  A.  thirty  shekels

1  Chr.  15.  7.  Joel  and  brethren  an  A.  and  thirty

2  Chr.  24.  15.  Jehoiada  was  an  A.  t.  years  old

One  HUN  DR  ED  thirty-three.

Exod.  6. 18.  years  of  life  of  Ivohath  an  A.  thirty-three
One  HUNDRED  thirty-seven.

Gen.  25. 17.  life  of  Ishmael  an  A.  and  t. -seven  years
Exod.  6.16.  the  years  of  Levi  were  A. and  thirty-seven
20.  the  years  of  Amram  were  an  A.  thirty-seven
One  HUNDRED  thirty-eight.

Neh.  7.  45.  the  children  of  Shobai  of  AXev.h.th.-eiqht
One  IIUNDR  ED  thirty-nine.

Ezra2.  42.  children  of  Shobai  in  all  an  A.  thirty-nine
One  H  UN  D  R  Ell  forty.

Job  42.  16.  after  this  lived  Job  an  A.  forty  years
One  IIU  N  DRED  forty-four.

Rev.  21.  17.  measured  the  wall  an  h.f.-f.  cubits
One  HUNDRED  forty-seven.

Gen.  47.  28.  whole  age  of  Jacob  an  h.  forty-seven  y.

Om  HUNDRED  forty-eight.

Neh.  7.  44.  singers,  the  children  ot  Asaph  A./,  eight
One  HUNDRED  fifty.

Gen.  7.  24.  waters  prevailed  an  A.  fifty  days,  8.  .3
1  Kings  10.  29.  a  chariot  went  out  of  Egypt,  and
an  horse  for  an  A.  and  fifty  shekels,  2  Chr.
1.  17.

1  Chr.  8.  40.  Ulam’ssons  and  sons’  sons  an  A.  fifty
Ezra8.  3.  were  reckoned  of  males,  an  A.  and  /.

Neh.  5.  17.  there  were  at  my  table  an  h.f.  Jews
One  HUN  D  R ED  fifty-three.

John  21. 11.  drew'  the  net  L  11  of  fishes  an  h.f.-t.

One  HUN  DR  F.D  fifty-six.

Ezra  2.  30.  the  children  of  Magbish,  anA.  f.-six
One  HUNDRED  sixty.

Ezra  8.  10.  Shelomith,  and  with  him  A.  sixty  malt3
One  HUNDRED  sixty-two.

Gen.  5. 18.  Jared  lived  h.  s.-two  years,  begat  Enter.

One  HUNDRED  seventy-two.

Neh.  11. 19.  the  porters  and  brethren  A.  seventy-t  ie
One  HUNDRED  seventy-five.

Gen.  25.  7-  Abraham’s  life  was  an  A.  seventy-five
One  HUNDRED  eighty.

Gen.  35.  28.  the  days  of  1  saac  an  A.  and  eighty  years
Esth.  1.  4.  Ahasuerus  feast  for  an  A.  and  eighty  days
One  II  LIN  D  R  ED  eighty-two.

Gen.  5.  28.  Lantech  lived  A.  eig.-two  and  begat  Noah
One  HUNDRED  eighty-seven.

Gen.  5.  25. Methuselah  lit  ed  A.  eig. -seven  begat  Lam.

One  HUN  D  R  ED  eighty-eight .

Neh.  7.  26.  the  men  of  Beth-lehem  an  A.  eighty-eight
HUNDRED  thousand.

Num.  2.  9.  all  numbered  in  ludah  were  an  h.  thovs.
16.  numbered  in  the  camp  of  Reuben  an  A.  thins.

1  Kings  20. 29.  slew  of  the  Syrians  A.  t/wiis.  footmen

2  Kings  3.  4.  IVIesha  king  of  Moab  rendei  ed  to  king

of  Israel  an  A.  thous.  lambs,  an  A.  thous.  rams

1  Chr.  S.  21.  took  from  Hagarites  an  A.  thous.  men
21.5.  of  Israel  a  thousand  thousand  and  A.  thous.

22. 14.  for  house  of  l  ord  A.  thous.  talents  of  gold
29.  7-  and  gave  an  A.  thousand  talents  of  iron

2  Chr.  25.  6  lie  hired  an  A.  thousand  men  of  valour
HUNDRED  eight  thousand  and  an  1 1  UNDR1.I'.
Num.  2.  24.  numbered  of  camp  of  Ephraim,  108,100 «

An  11  LIN  DR  ED  twenty  thousand.

Judg.  8.  10.  there  fell  of  the  Midianites  120,000
1  Kings  8.  63.  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  of  an  h.

and  twenty  thousand  sheep,  2  Chron.  7.  5.

1  CAr.12.37.of  Reuben,  Gad,  and  Manasseh, 120, 000

2  Chr.  28.  6.  Pekah  slew  in  J  udah  in  one  day  120,0001
Jonah  4. 11.  in  N  ineveh  were  about  120,000  persons

An  HUNDRED  forty-four  thousand.

Rev.  7.  4.  were  sealed  144,000  of  all  the  tribesoflsi

14.  1.  with  him  144,00X3,  having  his  Father’s  name
3.  no  man  could  learn  that  song  but  the  144,000

An  II UN  DU  EL)  fifty  thousand.

2  Chron.  2.  17-  strangers  that  were  in  the  land  ot
Israel  were  found  an  A.  fifty  thousand-
An  HUNDRED  eighty  thousand.

1  Kings  12.  21.  with  Benjamin  180,000,  2  Chr.  11. 1.

2  Chr.  17.  18.  with  Jehozabad  were  180,000,  tor  v  at

An  HUNDRED  eighty -five  thousand.

2  Kings  19.  35.  that  night  the  angel  of  the  born
smote  of  the  Assyrians,  185,000,  Isa.  >7.3o.
Two  HUNDRED.

Gen.  11. 23.  Serug  lived  aft.  begat  N  ahor  two  A.years

32. 14.  two  A.  she-goats,  and  two  h.  ewes  for  Isau
Josh.  7.  21.  Achan  saw'  two  A.  shekels  of  silver
Judg.  17.  4.  his  mother  took  two  h.  shekelsot  silver

1  Sam.  18.27-  David  slew' of  the  Ph ilist.  two  h.  men
25.  13.  twoh.  abode  by  the  stuff,  30.  10,  21.

18.  Abigail  took  two  h.  loaves,  two  A.cakesot  nss

2  Sam.  14.  26.  Absalom  w  eighed  hair  two  A.  shek-iS

15.  1 1.  with  Absalom  went  two  A.  men  out  ot  .lerus

16.  1.  Ziba  brought  David  two  A.  loaves  ot  bread

1  Kings  7.  20.  the  pomegranates  were  two >A.  in  ro"?
10.  16.  Solomon  made  two  A.  targets,  2  Chr.  9-  15-

2  Chron.  29.  32.  for  burnt  offerings  taw  A.  Jambs
Ezra  2.  65.  were  among  them  two  A.  singing

6.  17.  and  offered  at  the  dedication  two  A.  rams
Cant.  8.  12.  those  that  keep  the  fruit  thereof  two  a
Ezek.  45. 15.  yre  shall  offer  one  lamb  out  of  two  It.
John  6.  7.  two  A.  pennyworth  is  not  sufficient
Acts  23.  23.  he  called,  saying,  make  ready  two  n.
soldiers  to  go  to  C  esarea,  and  spearmen  two  n
Two  HUN  DRED  five.

Gen.  11.  32.  the  days  of  Terah  wrer  etwo  A.Jficyeat

Tiro  Hundred  seven.

Gen.  11.  21.  Reu  lived  two  h.  seven  years  and  been
Two  HUNDRED  nine.

Gen.  11.  19.  Peleg  lived  two  A.  nine  years  anil  bega


HUN


HUN


HUN


Two  HUNDRED  twelve,
hron.  9.  22.  porters  in  the  gates  were  two  A.  twelve
Two  I1UNDR ED  eighteen.

■a  8.  9.  with  Obadiah  two  h.  eighteen  males
Two  HUNDRED  twenty.

•a  8.  20.  tor  service  of  Invites  two  h.  tw.  Nethin.

Two  HUNDRED  twenty-three,
a  2.  28.  men  of  Beth  el  and  Ai  two  h.  tw.-three
Two  HUNDRED  thirty-two.
ings  20. 15.  of  princes  of  provinces  two  h.  th.-two
Two  HUNDRED  forty-two.

11.  13.  chief  of  the  fathers  two  h.  forty  two
Two  HUNDRED  forty-five,
a  2.  66.  their  mules  two  h.  and  forty-five

h.  7.  67.  had  two  h.  45  singing  men  and  women

i.  their  mules  two  h.  and  forty-five

Two  HUN  DRED  fifty.

>d.  30.  23.  take  thou  to  thee  of  cinnamon  two  h.
and  fifty,  of  calamus  two  h.  and  fifty  shekels

m.  16.  2.  two  h.  and  fifty  princes  of  the  assembly
?.  and  bring  ye  before  L.  two  h.  and  fifty  censers
5.  a  tire  consumed  the  two  h.  and  fifty  men
hron.  8.  10.  two  h.  and  fifty  that  bare  rule

•k.  48. 17.  suburbs  toward  north  two  h.  fifty
Two  HUNDRED  seventy-six.
s  27  -  37.  in  all  the  ship  two  h.  seventy-six  souls
Two  HUNDRED  eighty-four.
i.  11.18.  Levitesinthe  holy  city  two  h.  eighty-f.

Two  HUNDRED  eighty-eight,
hr.  25.  7-  all  cunning  in  songs  two  h.  eighty-eight
Two  H  U  N  D  RED  fifty  thousand,
hr.  5.  21.  took  away  of  sheep  two  h.  fifty  thous.
Three  HUN  DR  ED.

u  5.  22.  Enoch  walked  with  God  three  h.  years
and  begat  sons  and  daughters
15.  the  length  of  the  ark  shall  be  three  h.  cubits

22.  he  gave  Benjamin  three  h.  pieces  of  silver

g. ’i.  6.  the  number  that  lapped  were  three  h.  men
and  he  retained  those  three  h.  men

l.  the  three  h.  men  that  were  with  him  were  faint
26.  Israel  by  the  coast  of  Arnon  three  h.  years

4.  Samson  went  and  caught  three  h.  foxes

rm.  21. 16.  whose  spear  weighed  three  h.  shekels

18.  Abishai  Joab’s  brother  lifted  up  his  spear
rainst  jAree  h.  and  slew  them,  1  Chr.  11.  11,20.
mgs  10. 17.  he  made  three  h.  shields  of  beat,  gold

3.  Solomon  had  three  h.  concubines
ings  18.  14.  appointed  tp  Hezek.  three  h.  talents
ir.  9. 16.  th.  h.  shekels  of  gold  went  to  one  shield

9.  Zera  came  against  Asa  with  th.  h.  chariots

8.  gave  to  priests  for  passover-offer.  th.  /(.oxen
a  8.  5.  with  Shechaniah  three  h.  males

h.  9.  15.  the  Jews  slew  three  h.  men  at  Shushan
1  12.  5.  this  ointment  sold  for  three  h.  pence

Three  HUNDRED  eighteen.

'.  14. 14.  Abram  went  with  th.  h.  eight,  servants
Three  HUNDRED  twenty,
a  2.  32.  the  children  of  Harim  th.  h.  and  twenty
..  7.35.  the  children  of  Harim  th.  h.  and  twenty
Three  HUNDRED  twenty-three,
a  2.  17-  the  children  of  Bezai  323,  Neh.  7.  23.
Three  HUNDRED  twenty-eight.

l. 7.22.  childr.  of  Hashum  three  h.  twenty-eiaht

Three  HUNDRED  forty-five,
a  2.  34.  children  of  Jericho  345,  Neh.  7.  36.
Three  HUNDRED  fifty.

9.  28.  Noah  lived  after  flood  th.  h.  fifty  years

Three  HUNDRED  sixty.

<m.  2.  31.  so  that  of  Israel  th.  h.  sixty  men  died
Three  HUNDRED  sixty-five.

.  5. 23.  Enoch’s  days  were  th.  h.  sixty-five  years
'Three  HUNDRED  seventy-two.
a  2.  4.  the  childr.  of  Shephatiah  372,  Neh.  7.  9.

Three  HUNDRED  ninety,
k.  4.  5.  according  to  number  of  days,  th.  h.  n.  9.
Three  HUNDRED  thousand.

n.  31.  36.  of  them  that  went  out  to  war  300,000
rm.  11. 8.  Israel  were  300,000,  2  Chron.  14.  8.
hron.  17.  14.  with  Adnah  mighty  men  300,000

5.  found  Judah  and  Benjamin  to  be  300,000
/tree  HUNDRED  thousand  seven  thousand

five  HUNDRED.

hron.  26.  13.  Uzziah  had  an  army  of  307,500
three  HUNDRED  and  thirty  thousand
seven  thousand  five  HUNDRED.
n.  31.  43.  now  the  half  that  pertained  unto  the
congregation  was  337,500  sheep
Four  El  UN  D  RED.

.  15.  13.  afflict  them  four  h.  years,  filets  7.  6.

15.  land  is  worth  four  h.  shekels  of  silver,  16.

6.  E.sau  cometh  to  thee  with  four  h.  men,  33. 1.
1-  21.  12.  found  four  h.  virgins  of  Jabesh-gi lead

m.  22.  2.  were  with  Dav .  four  h.  25. 13.  I  .30.  10.
17.  save  four  h.  young  men  on  camels  that  fled
ings  7.  42.  four  A.  pomegranates  for  net-works

19.  and  the  prophets  of  the  groves  four  h.

6.  Ahab  gathered  of  the  prophets  about  four  h.
and  said,  shall  I  go  ag.  Ramoth  !  2  Chr.  18.  5.
ings  14.  13.  Jehoash  came  and  brake  down  the
wall  of  Jeru.  four  h.  cubits,  2  Chi .  25.  2.3.
■ft  6.  17.  offered  at  dedication  of  house/,  h.  lambs
>  5. 36.  to  whom  about  four  h.  joined  themselves
Four  HUNDRED  and  three.

{.11.1 3.  Arphaxad  lived/,  h.  th.  years,  and  begat
'.  Salah  lived  after  he  begat  Eber  403  years
lour  HUNDRED  and  ten.
a  1. 10.  silver  basins  of  a  second  sort  four  h.  ten
Jour  HUNDRED  and  twenty,
nos 9. 28.  they  fetched  from  thence  gold,  420  tal.

Four  HUNDRED  thirty.
t.  11.  17.  Eber  lived  4.30  years  and  begat  sons
d.  12.  40.  sojourning  in  Egypt  430  years,  41.

.  3. 17.  the  law  which  was  430  years  after  cannot
Four  HUNDRED  thirty- five,
a  2.  67.  their  camels  were  435,  Neh.  7.  69.

Four  HUNDRED  and  fifty,
mgs  18.  19.  gather  the  prophets  of  Baal  450,  22.

'  13.  20.  gave  judges  about  four  h.  fifty  years
Four  HUNDRED  fifty-four,
a  2.  15.  the  children  of  Adin  four  h.  fifty-four
Four  HUNDRED  sixty-eight.

'■  U  6.  all  the  sons  of  Perez  were  468  men


Four  HU  N  DR  ED  eighty.

1  Kings  6.  1.  in  480  years  Solomon  began  to  build

Four  HUNDRED  thousand.

Jndg.  20.  2.  Israel  besides  Benjamin  400,000,  17.

2  Chr.  13.  .3.  set  the  battle  in  array  with  4(X>,000  men

Four  El  UN  D  RED  seventy  thousand.

1  Chr.  21.  5.  J  udah  was  470, 000  that  drew  the  sword

Five  E1UNDRED.

Gen.5.32.  Noah  was  five  h.  years  old  and  begat  Shem
11.  11.  Shem  lived  after  five  h.  years  and  begat
Exod.  .30.  23.  take  of  pure  myrrh  five  h.  shekels
24.  of  cassia.A".  h.  shekels  after  shekel  of  sanctuary
Num.  31.  28.  levy  one  soul  of  five  h.  for  the  Lord

2  Chron.  35.  9.  for  passover-offerings  five  h.  oxen
Esth.  9.  6.  Jews  slew  at  Shushan  five  h.  men,  12.
Job  l.  3.  five  h.  yoke  of  oxen,  five  h.  she-asses
Ezek.  42. 16.  he  measur.  five  It.  reeds,  17,  18,  19,20.

45. 2.  of  this  there  shall  be  for  the  sanctuary  five  h.

in  length,  with  five  h.  in  breadth,  square  round
Luke  7.  41.  the  one  owed  fi.  h.  pence,  the  other  fifty
1  Cor.  15.  6.  was  seen  of  above  Ate  h.  brethr.  at  once
Five  HUN  DRED  and  thirty.

Neh.  7. 70.  gave  five  h.  and  thirty  priests’  garments
Five  HUNDRED  and  fifty.

1  Kings  9.  23.  five  h.  and  fifty  bare  rule  over  people

Five  H UN  D  R  ED  thousand.

2  Sam.  24.  9.  the  men  of  Judah  were  5(X>,000  men
2  Chr.  13.  17.  there  were  slain  of  Israel  500, OOOmen

Six  HUNDRED.

Gen.  7.  6.  N oah  six  h.  years  old  when  flood  came,  11.
Exod.  14.7.  Phar.  took  six  h.  chariots  to  pursue  Isr.
Judg.  3.  .31.  Shamgar  slew  with  an  ox  goad  six  h.
18. 11.  Danitessent  out  of  Eshtaol  sixh.  16,  17.

20.  47.  six  h.  Benjamites  fled  to  rock  Rimmon

1  Sain.  13. 15.  Saul  numbered  the  people  six  A.  14.  2.
17.  7-  Goliath’s  spear  head  weighed  six  h.  shekels

23.  1.3.  Dav.  and  his  men  about  six  h.  27-  2. 1  30.  9.

2  Sam.  15.  18.  all  the  Gittites  were  six  h.  men

1  Kings  10. 16.  Solomon  made  targets,  six  h.  shekels
of  gold  went  to  one  target,  2  Chron.  9.  15,
29.  a  chariot  went  for  six  h.  shekels,  2  Chr.  1.  17.

1  Chron.  21.  25.  David  gave  Oman  six  h.  shekels

2  Chr.  .3. 8.  overlaid  house  with  gold  to  six  A.  talents
29.  3.3.  the  consecrated  things  were  six  A.  oxen

Six  El  U  N  D  R  ED  twenty-one.

Ezra  2. 26.  child,  of  Ramah  six  h.  tw.  one,  Neh.  7.30.

Six  HUNDRED  twenty-three.

Ezra2.  11  .the  children  of  Behai,  six  h.  twenty-three
Six  HUN  DRED  twenty-eight.

Neh.  7. 16.  the  children  of  Bebai,  six  A.  twenty-eight
Six  HUNDRED  forty-two.

Ezra  2.  10.  the  children  of  hani,  six  h.  forty- two
Neh.  7.  62.  the  children  of  Nekoda,.sLr  h.  forty-two
Six  HUNDRED  forty-eight.

Neh.  7/15.  the  children  of  Binnui,  six  h.  forty-eight
Six  HUN  DRED  and  fifty.

Ezra  8.  26.  weighed  to  their  hand  six  h.  fifty  talents
Six  HUN  DRED  fifty-two.

Ezra  2.  60.  the  children  of  Nekoua,  six  h.  fifty-two
Neh.  7.  10.  the  children  of  Arah,  six  h.  and  fifty-two
Six  EJ  UN  DRED  sixty-six.

1  Kings  10. 14.  gold  to  Sol .  in  year  six  h.  sixty-six  tal.
Ezra  2.  13.  children  of  Adonikam,  six  h.  sixty-six
Rev.  13.  18.  and  his  number  is  six  h.  and  sixty-six
Six  HUN  DRED  sixty-seven.

Neh.  7.  18.  children  of  Adonikam,  sixh.  sixty -seven
Six  El  UN  DRED  seventy-five.

Num.  .31. 37-  Lord’s  trib.  of  sheep  was  six  h.  sev.five
Six  HUNDRED  ninety.

1  Chron.  9.  6.  Jeuel  and  brethren  were  six  h.  ninety

Six  HUN  DRED  thousand.

Exod.  12.37.  Israel  journeyed  about  600,000  on  foot
38.  26.  a  bekah  for  every  man  for  600.000  men
Num.  1.  46.  all  that  were  numbered  were  600,000
11.  21.  Moses  said,  the  people  are  600,(XX)  footmen
Six  HUN  DRED  seventy-five  thousand.

Num.  31.  32.  the  rest  of  the  prey  was  675,000  sheep
Seven  HUNDRED.

Judg.  20. 15.  of  Gibeah  v/ttrosev.  h.  chosen  men,  16.

2  Sam.  8. 4.  David  took  from  him  sev .  h.  horsemen
10.18.  Dav.  slew  men  of  sev.  h.  chariots  of  Syrians

1  Kings  11.  3.  Solom.  had  seven  h.  wives,  princesses

2  Kings  3.  26.  the  king  of  Moab  took  seven  h.  men
2  Chr.  15.  11.  they  offered  to  the  Lord  seven  h.  oxen

Seven  1IUND R  F,D  twenty  one.

Neh.  7.  37.  children  of  Lod,  Hadid,  Ono,  721.

Seven  HUN  DRED  twenty-five.

Ezra  2.  33.  children  of  Lod,  Hadid,  Ono,  725
Seven  H  U  N  D  R  ED  thirty  six.

Ezra  2.66.  their  horses  were  736,  Neh.  7.  68.

Seven  HUN  DR  ED  forty-three.

Ezra  2.  25.  the  children  of  hirjath-arim,  743
Seven  El  UN  DRED  forty-five.

Jer.  52.  30.  took  away  captive  of  the  Jews  745
Seven  El  UN  DRED  sixty.

Ezra  2.  9.  the  children  of  Zaccai760,  Neh.  7. 14.

Seven  HUNDRED  seventy -five.

Ezra  2.  5.  the  children  of  Arah,  seven  h.  seventy-five
Seven  H  U  N  DRED  seventy-seven.

Gen.  5.  31.  all  the  days  of  Lamech  were  777  years
Seven  II  U  N  D  R  EI)  eighty-two.

Gen.  5.26.  Methusal.  lived  782  years,  begat  I.amech
Eight  HUNDRED.

Gen.  5.  4.  Adam  after  he  begat  Seth  lived  800  years
19.  Jared  after  he  begat  Enoch  lived  800  years
2  Sam.  23.  8.  he  lifted  up  his  spear  against  800
Eight  HUN  I)  R  EE)  seven.

Gen.  5.  7-  Seth  lived  atter  he  begat  E'.nos  807  years
Eight  HUN  DRED  fifteen.

Gen.  5.  10.  Enos  after  he  begat  Cainan  815  years
Eight  H  UN  D  R  ED  twenty-two.

Neh.  11.  12.  their  brethren  that  did  work  were  822
Eight  HUNDRED  thirty.

Gen.  5. 16.  Mahalaleel  after  he  begat  Jared  830  yrs.

Eight  HUN  L)R  ED  thirty-two.

Jer.  52.  29.  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  captive  832
Eight  HUN  DRED  forty.

Gen.  5.  13.  Cainan  after  he  begat  Mahalaleel  840
Eight  HUN  DRED  forty- five.

Neh.  7.  13.  the  children  of  Zattu  were  845
Eight  HUN  DR  ED  ninety-five.

Gen  5. 1".  all  the  days  of  Mahalaleel  were  895  yrs.


Nine  HUNDRED.

Judg.  4.  3.  Jabin  had  nine  h.  chariots  of  iron,  13.

"Sine  HUNDRED  five.

Gen.  5.  11.  all  the  days  of  Enos  were  905  years
Nine  11  UN  DRED  ten.

Gen.  5.  14.  all  the  days  of  Cainan  910  years
Nine  HUNDRED  twelve.

Gen.  5.  8.  all  the  days  of  Seth  were  912  years
Nine  IIUNDR ED  twenty  eight.

Neh.  11.8.  and  after  him  Gabbai,  .sallai,  928
Nine  H  U N  D R  BID  thirty.

Gen.  5.  5.  all  days  that  Adam  lived  were  930years
Nine  HUNDRED  forty -five.

Ezra  2.  8.  the  children  of  Zattu  945
Nine  HUN  DUET)  fifty.

Gen.  9.  29.  all  the  days  of  Noah  were  950  years
Nine  HUNDRED  fifty-six.

1  Chron.  9.  9.  brethren  according  to  generations  956
Nine  NUN  DRED  sixty-two.

Gen.  5.  20.  all  the  days  of  Jared  were  962  years
Nine  E1UN  DRED  sixty -nine .

Gen.  5.  27.  the  daysof  Mathuselah  were  969  years
Nine  El  UN  DRED  seventy  three.

Ezra  2.  36.  the  children  of  Jedaiah  973,  Neh.  7.  39.
E1UN  DREDS.

Exod.  18.  21.  be  rulersof //.and  tens,  25.  Dent.  1.  15.
Num.  .31.  14.  Moses  was  wroth  with  captains  over  h.
54.  Moses  took  the  gold  of  the  captains  of  h.

1  Sam.  22.7.  will  son  of  Jesse  make  you  captains  of  h.
29.  2.  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  passed  on  by  h.

2  Sam.  18.  1.  David  set  captains  of  h.  over  them
4.  the  king  stood,  all  the  people  came  out  by  h.

2  A  vugs  1 1.4.  J  ehoiada  sent  and  set  the  rulers  over  h.

10.  to  captains  over  h.  did  the  priest  give  spears
and  shields  that  were  in  the  temp.  2  Chr.  23.  9.

1  Chr.  13.  1.  David  consulted  with  the  captains  of  A.

26.  26.  which  the  captains  over  h.  had  dedicated
28. 1.  David  assembled  the  captains  over  the  h.

29.  6.  then  the  captains  of  li.  offered  willingly

2  Chr.  23. 1.  Jehoiada  took  captains  of  A.  into  cov.
25.  5.  Amaziah  made  them  captains  over  h.

Mark  6.  40.  they  sat  down  in  ranks  by  h.  and  fifties
H  UNGER,  Substantive.

Exod.  16.  3.  to  kill  this  whole  assembly  with  h.
Dent.  28.  48.  thou  shalt  serve  thine  enemies  in  A.

.32.  24.  they  shall  be  burnt  with  A.  and  devoured
Neh.  9. 15.  thou  gavest  bread  from  heav.  for  their  h c
Fsal.  34. 10.  the  young  lions  do  lack  and  suffer  h.
Prov.  19. 15.  and  an  idle  soul  shall  suffer  h.

Jer.  38.  9.  he  is  like  to  die  for  h.  where  he  is
42.  14.  weshall  see  no  war,  nor  have  A.  of  bread
Lam.  2.  19.  that  faint  for  A.  in  the  top  of  every  street
4.  9.  are  better  than  they  that  be  slain  with  A.
Ezek.  34.  29.  they  shall  be  no  more  consum.  with  A.
Luke  15. 17 .  have  bread  enough,  and  1  perish  with  A.
2  Cor.  11.  27.  1  have  been  in  A.  and  thirst,  in  fastings
Rev.  6.  8.  and  power  was  given  them  to  kill  with  A.
HUNGER,  Verb.

Dent.  8.  .3.  he  suffered  thee  to  A.  and  fed  with  manna
Isa.  49. 10.  they  shall  not  A.  nor  thirst,  nor  sun  srnite
Mat.  5.  6.  blessed  are  they  that  A.  Luke  6.  21.

Luke  6.  25.  woe  to  you  who  are  full,  for  ye  shall  A,
John  6.  35.  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  A.
Rom.  12.  20.  therefore  if  thine  enemy  A.  feed  him
1  Cor.  4.  11.  we  both  A.  and  thirst,  and  are  naked

11.  34.  and  if  any  man  A.  let  him  eat  at  home
Rev.  7. 16.  they  shall  A.  no  more,  neither  thirst

HUNGER- bitten.

Job  18. 12.  his  strength  shall  be  h.-bit.  destruction
HUNGERED.

Mat.  4.2.  he  was  afterwards  an  A.  Luke  4.  2.

12.  1.  his  disci  p.  were  an  A.  and  began  to  pluck  ears
3.  what  David  did  when  he  was  an  A.  Mark  2.  25.

21. 18.  now  as  he  returned  into  the  city  he  A.

25.  35.  for  I  was  an  A.  and  ye  gave  me  meat
37.  L.  when  saw  we  thee  an  A.  and  fed  thee  ?  44.
42.  for  I  was  an  A.  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat
Luke  6.  3.  what  David  dief  when  himself  was  an  A
HUNGRY.

1  Sam.  2.  5.  and  they  that  were  A.  ceased

2  Sam.  17.  29.  the  people  is  A.  weary,  and  thirsty
2  Kings 7-  12.  they  know  that  we  be  A.  therefore
Job  5.  5.  whose  harvest  the  A.  eateth  up  and  taketh  it

22.  7.  thou  hast  withholden  bread  from  the  A.

24.  10.  they  take  away  the  sheaf  from  the  A.

Psal.  50.  12.  if  I  were  A.  I  would  not  tell  thee

107.  5.  A.  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in  them

9.  for  he  filleth  the  A.  soul  with  goodness
36.  and  there  he  maketh  the  A.  to  dwell

146.  7-  hope  is  in  T.ord  who  giveth  food  to  the  A.
Prov.  6.  .30.  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is  A.

25.  21.  if  thine  enemy  be  A.  give  him  bread  to  eat

27.  7-  to  the  A.  soul  every  bitter  thing  is  sweet
Isa.  8.  21.  they  shall  pass  thro’  it,  hardly  bestead

and  A.  when  they  shall  be  A.  they  shall  tiet
themselves

9.  20.  he  shall  snatch  on  the  right  hand,  and  be  A.
29.  8.  it  shall  even  be  as  when  a  A.  man  dreametfi
32.  6.  to  make  empty'  the  soul  of  the  A.

44.  12.  yea,  he  is  A.  and  his  strength  faileth
58.  7.  is  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  A.  f

10.  and  if  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the  A.

65.  13.  my  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be  A.
Ezek.  18.  7.  hath  given  his  bread  to  the  A.  J6.

Mark  11. 12. when  were  come  from  Bethany  he  was  A.
Luke  1.5.3.  he  hath  tilled  the//,  with  good  things
Acts  10. 10.  Peter  became  very  A.  would  have  eaten.

1  Cor.  11.  21.  one  is  A.  and  another  is  drunken
Phil.  4. 12.  1  know  how  to  be  full  and  to  be  A.
HUNT.

Hunting  has  been  called  a  kind  of  an  apprentice¬
ship  to  war,  and  an  imitation  of  it.  Nimrod
was  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord,  Gen.

10.  9.  Some  think  he  did  good  with  his  hunt¬
ing,  served  his  country  by  ridding  it  of  the
wild  beasts  which  did  infest  it,  and  so  msinn
ated  himself  into  the  affections  of  his  neigh¬
bours,  and  got  to  he  their  prince.  Others  think,
under  pretence  of  hunting,  he  gathered  men
under  his  command,  and  by  their  help  estab¬
lished  a  tyrannical  and  absolute  power  over
men :  He  was  a  mighty  hunter ;  that  is,  he  was

245


HUS


HYP


H  U  K


a  violent  invader  of  hts  neighbours  rights  and
properties ,  and  a  persecutor  oj  innocent  men  ,
carrying  all  before  him,  and  endeavouring  to
make  all  his  own  by  force  and  violence.

The  prophets  sometimes  express  war  under  the
name  of  hunting.  Jer.  16.  16.  1  will  send  ior
many  hunters,  and  they  shall  hunt  them  horn
every  mountain,  and  trom  every  mil,  and  out
of  the  holes  ot  the  rocks,  he  speaks  oj  the
Chaldeans  oi  Persians,  who  took  the  .lews.,  and
held  them  under  their  dominion .  Some  are  ot
opinion,  that  the  hunters  mentioned  by  Jeremiah
are  the  Persians,  who  set  the  Hebrews  at  liberty,
and,  in  a  more  e  'evated  sense,  the  Apostles,  who
were  as  hunters,  that  endeavoured  to  take  men
with  their  preaching.  Micah  complains  that  eve/ y
one  lays  ambuscades  for  his  neighbour ,  ana  that
one  brother  hunts  after  another  to  destroy  him.
Mic.  7.  2.  They  all  lie  in  wait  tor  blood,
they*  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  a  net.
Ezekiel  inveighs  against  the  false  prophetesses,
who  place  cushions  under  the  elbows  of  sinners,
thereby  promising  them  ease  and  security,  while
really  they  were  spreading  a  net  as  hunters  do,
to  catch  the  prey  and  devour  it,  Ezek.  13.

18.  20

Gen.  27.  t  3.  now  therefore  go  h.  me  some  venison

5.  Esau  went  to  field  to  h.  venison,  and
1  Sam.  26.  20.  as  when  one  doth  h.  a  partridge
Job  38.  39.  wilt  thou  h.  the  prey  for  the  lion  t
Ps.  HO.  1 1. evil  shall  h.  violent  man  to  overth.  him
Prov.  6.26.  the  adulteress  will  h.  for  the  precious  life
Jer.  16.  16.  they  shall  h.  them  from  every  mountain
Lam.  4. 18.  they  h.  our  steps  that  we  cannot  go
Ezek.  13.  18.  will  ye  h.  the  souls  ot  my  people  r
20.  pillows  wherewith  ye  there  h.  the  souls
Mic.  7.  2.  they  h.  every  man  his  brother  with  a  net
HUNTED.

Gen.  27.  +  33.  where  is  he  that  hath  h.  venison  ?

Ezek.  13.  21.  shall  be  no  more  in  your  hand  to  be  h.
HUNTER,  S.

Gen.  10.  9.  he  was  a  mighty  h.  before  the  Ld.  w’here-
fore  it  is  said,  even  as  Nimrod  the  mighty  A.

25.  27.  Esau  was  a  cunning  h.  a  man  of  the  held
Prov.  6.5.  deliver  as  a  roe  from  the  hand  ot  the  h.
Jer.  16.  16.  and  after  will  1  send  for  many  h.

11  UNTEST.

I  Sam.  24.  11.  yet  thou  h.  my  soul  to  take  it
Job  10. 16.  thou  h.  me  as  a  tierce  lion,  again  she  west
HUNTETH.

Lev.  17.  13.  which  h.  and  catcheth  any  beast
HUNTING.

Gen.  27.  30.  that  Esau  his  brother  came  in  from  A.
J‘rov.  12.  27.  roasteth  not  that  which  he  took  in  h.

HURL.  .  ,

Num.  35. 20.  if  A.  at  him  by  lying  in  wait  that  he  die
HURLEl'H.  ,t.  ,

Job  27.  21.  and  as  a  storm  h.  him  out  of  his  place
HURLING.

1  Chr.  12. 2.  could  use  right  hand  and  left  in  h.  stones
11  U  RT,  Substantive.

Gen.  4.  23.  for  1  have  slain  a  young  man  to  my  A.

26.  29.  make  a  covenant,  that  thou  wilt  do  us  no  A.
31.  29.  it  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  you  h.

./e,s4.24.20. if  forsake,  then  will  he  turn  and  do  you  h.

1  Sam.  20.  21.  there  is  peace  to  thee,  and  no  h.

24.  9.  saying,  behold,  David  seeketh  thy  h.

2  Sam.  18.  32.  that  rise  to  do  h.  be  as  that  voung  man
2  Kings  14. 10.  for  why  shouldestthpu  meddle  to  thy

h.  that  thou  shouldest  fall  ?  2  Chron.  25.  19.
Ezra  4.  22.  w  hy  damage  grow  to  the  h.  ot  kings  r
Esth.  9.  2.  to  lay  hands  on  such  as  sought  their  h.
Psal.  15.  4.  thatsweareth  to  his  h.  and  changeth  not
35.  4.  brought  to  confusion  that  devise  my  h.  70.  2.
26.  let  them  be  ashamed  that  rejoice  at  my  h.

38.  12.  seek  my  h.  speak  mischievous  things  ag.  me
41.  7.  against  me  do  they  devise  my  h.

71.  13.  be  covered  with  reproach  that  seek  my  h.
24.  they  are  brought  to  shame  that  seek  my  h.
Eccl.  5.  1.3.  riches  kept  for  the  owners  to  their  h.

8.  9.  one  man  ruleth  over  another  to  his  own  h.
Jer.  6.14.  have  healed  h.  of  my  people  slightly  ,8.11.

7.  6.  neither  walk  after  other  gods  to  your  h.

8.  21.  for  the  h.  of  my  people  am  1  h.  1  am  black
10.  19.  w'oe  is  me  for  my  h.  my  wound  is  grievous

24.  9.  will  deliver  them  to  be  removed  for  their  A.

25.  6.  provoke  me  not,  and  1  will  do  you  no  A.

7.  that  ye  might  provoke  me  to  your  own  A.

38.  4.  seeketh  not  welfare  of  this  people,  but  the  A.
Dan.  3.  25.  they  have  no  A.  ||  6. 22. 1  have  done  no  A.

6.  23.  and  no  manner  of  A.  was  found  upon  him
Acts  27.10.  that  this  voyage  will  be  with  A.l  perceive
HURT  ,  participle.

Exod.  22.  10.  if  a  beast  be  A.  no  man  seeing  it
14.  if  it  be  A.  and  die  the  owner  thereof  not  w  ith  it
1  Sam.  25.  15.  the  men  were  good  and  we  w  ere  not  A.
£<■<7.10.9. whoso  removeth  stones  shall  be  A.  therew.
Jer.  8.  21.  for  the  h.  of  my  people  am  1  A.  1  am  black
Rev.  2. 11.  overcomes, shall  not  be  A.  ot  second  death
HURT,  Verb.

Gen.  31.  7.  but  God  suffered  him  not  to  A.  me
Exod.  21 . 22.  if  men  strive  and  A.  woman  with  child
.35.  if  one  man's  ox  A.  another’s  that  die,  shall  sell
Mum.  16.  15.  neither  have  1  A.  one  ot  them
1  Sam.  25.  7.  thy  shepherds  with  us,  we  A.  them  not
Job  .35.  8.  thy  wickedness  may  A.  a  man  as  thou  art
Psal.  105.  18.  whose  feet  A.  with  fetters,  laid  in  iron
Isa,  11.9.  they  shal  l  not  A.  nor  destroy  in  al  1  my  holy
mountain,  earth  full  of  knowledgeot  Lord, 65. 25.
27-  3.  lest  any  A.  it,  1  will  keep  it  night  and  day
Dan.  6.  22.  that  the  lions  have  not  A.  me
Mark  16. 18.  any  deadly  thing,  it  shall  not  A.  them
Luke  A.  .35.  thedevil  came  out  of  him,  and  A. him  not
10.  19.  and  nothing  shall  by  any  means  A.  you
Acts  18.  10.  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  A.  thee
Rev.  6.  6.  see  thou  A.  not  the  oil  and  the  wine

7.  2.  to  whom  it  was  given  to  A.  earth  and  sea
3.  saying,  A.  not  the  earth,  neither  the  sea

9.  4.  they  should  not  A.  the  grass  of  the  earth

10.  and  their  power  was  to  A.  men  five  months

19.  and  had  heads,  and  with  them  they  do  A.

11  5  if  any  A.  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  mouth

246


HURTFUL.

Ezra  4.  15.  shalt  find  that  this  city  is  A.  to  kings
Ps.  144.  10.  who  delivereth  David  from  the  A.  sword
1  Tim.  6.  9.  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  A.  lusts
HU  RUNG.

1  Sam.  25.  31.  Lord  who  hath  kept  me  from  A.  thee
HUSBAND.

Gen.  20.  +  3.  dead  man,  for  she  is  married  to  a  A.

Exod.  4.  25.  surely  a  bloody  A.  art  thou  to  me,  26.

21.  22.  as  the  woman’s  A.  will  lay  upon  him
Lev.  19.  20.  that  is  betrothed  to  a  A.  Deut.  22.2.3.

21.  .3.  his  sister  who  had  hath  no  A.  Ezek.  44.  25.

Num.  .30.  6.  if  she  had  at  all  an  A.  when  she  vowed
Deut.  22.  22.  lying  with  a  woman  married  to  a  A.

24.  3.  and  if  the  latter  A.  hate  her  or  die
4.  her  former  A.  may  not  take  her  again  to  wife

25.  5.  and  perform  the  duty  of  a  A.  brother  to  her
28.  56.  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  A.  of  her  bosom

Judg.  20.  4.  the  A.  of  the  woman  slain,  answered
Ruth\.  .3.  Llimelech,  Naomi's  A.  died,  she  was  left

12.  I  am  too  old  to  have  an  A.  if  1  should  have  a  A.
Jer.  6.  11.  the  A.  with  the  wife  shall  be  taken

31.  .32.  although  1  was  a  A.  to  them,  saith  the  Ix>rd
Joel'  1.  8.  girded  with  sackcloth  for  A.  of  her  youth
Mat.  1.  16.  and  Jacob  begat  Joseph  the  A.  ot  Mary
Luke  2.  36.  she  had  lived  with  a  A.  seven  years
John  4.  17.  1  have  no  A.  hast  well  said,  1  have  no  A.
Rom.1.  2.  if  A.  be  dead,  she  is  loosed  from  her  A.  3.

1  Cor.  7.  3.  let  the  A.  render  to  the  wife  due  bene¬

volence,  and  likewise  also  the  wife  to  the  A.

4.  also  the  A.  hath  not  power  of  his  own  body

11.  and  let  not  the  A.  put  away  his  wife

13.  the  woman  who  hath  a  A.  that  believeth  not

14.  unbelieving  A.  is  sanctified  by  the  wife,  and

unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by  the  A.

2  Cor.  11.2.  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  one  A.

Gal.  4.  27.  more  children  than  she  who  hath  a  A.

Eph.  5.  23.  the  A.  is  head  of  wife,  as  Christ  of  church
1  Tim.  3.  2.  bishop  be  blameless,  A.  of'one  wife,  7  it.

Her  HUSBAND.  [1.6.

Gen.  .3.  6.  Eve  did  eat  of  the  fruit,  and  gave  to  her  A.
16.  .3.  Sarai  Abram’s  wife  gave  Hagar  to  A.  A.  Abr.
Lev.  21.  7.  not  take  a  woman  put  away  from  her  A.
Num.  5.  1.3.  if  it  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  her  A.

27.  if  she  have  done  trespass  against  her  A.

29.  when  one  goeth  aside  to  another  instead  of  A.  A.
30.  7.  and  A.  A.  heard  it,  and  held  his  peace,  11,14.

8.  if  her  A.  disallow  her  on  the  day  he  heard  it
10.  and  it  she  vowed  in  her  h .  house  or  bound

12.  if  her  A.  hath  utterly  made  them  void  on  day
1.3.  her  A.  may  establish  it,  or  may  make  it  void

Deut.  21.  13.  thou  shalt  go  in  unto  her,  and  be  her  A.
*25.  5.  her  A.  brother  shall  go  in  unto  her,  and  take
31.  the  wife  draweth  near  to  deliver  her  A.

Judg.  13.  6.  then  the  woman  came  and  told  her  A.

9.  but  Manoah  her  A.  was  not  with  her

10.  the  woman  made  haste,  and  shewed  her  h.

19.  3.  her  A.  arose  and  went  after  her,  to  speak

Ruth  1.  5.  Naomi  left  of  her  two  sons  and  her  A.

9.  find  rest  each  of  you  in  the  house  of  her  A.

2.  1 .  N  aomi  had  kinsman  of  her  A.  a  man  of  wealth

1  Sam.  1.8.  then  said  Elkanah  her  A.  to  her,  23.

22.  she  said  unto  her  A.  1  will  not  go  up  till  child

2. 19.  when  she  came  up  with  herh.  to  other  sacrifice
4.  19.  she  heard  that  her  father  and  her  A.  were  dead

21.  because  of  her  h.  ||  25.  19.  she  told  not  her  A.

2  Sam.  3. 15.  Ish-bosheth  sent  and  took  her  from  A.  A.
16.  her  A.  went  with  her  along  weeping  behind  her

11.  26.  when  the  wife  of  Uriah  heard  that  her  A.

was  dead,  she  mourned  for  her  A.

2  Kings  4.9.  she  said  to  her  A.  behold,  now  I  perceive
14.  verily  she  hath  no  child,  and.  her  A.  isold

22.  she  called  unto  her  A.  and  said,  send  me  one
Prov.  12.  4.  a  virtuous  wife  is  a  crown  to  net  A.

31.  11.  the  heart  of  her  A.  doth  safely  trust  in  her

23.  her  A.  is  known  in  the  gates  among  the  elders
28.  her  A.  also  riseth  up,  and  he  praiseth  her

Jer.  3.  20.  surely,  as  a  wife  departeth  from  her  A.
Ezek.  16.  32.  who  taketh  strangers  instead  ot  her  A.

45.  that  loatheth  her  A.  and  her  children,  thou  art
Hos.  2.  2.  she  is  not  my  wife,  neither  am  l  her  A
Mat.  1.19.  now  Joseph  her  A.  being  a  just  man
Mark  10.  12.  if  a  woman  shall  put  away  her  A.

1  uke  16.  18.  whoso  marrieth  her  put  away  from  A.  A.
Acts  5.  10.  and  carrying  her  forth,  buried  her  by

her  h.

Rom.1.  2.  isbound  by  law  to  A.  A.  so  long  as  he  liveth
3.  i f  her  A.  be  dead,  she  is  free  from  that  law

1  Cor.  7.  2.  and  let  every  woman  have  her  own  A.

10.  let  not  the  wife  depart  from  her  A.

1 1 .  let  her  remain  unmar.  or  be  reconciled  to  her  A.
34.  is  married,  careth  how  she  may  please  her  A.
39.  is  bound  by  the  law  as  long  as  her  A.  liveth

Eph.  5.  .33.  and  the  wife  see  that  she  reverence  her  A.
Rev.  21.  2.  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  A.
My  HUSBAND.

Gen.  29.  32.  now  therefore  my  h.  will  love  me
34.  now  this  time  will  my  h.  be  joined  to  me
30. 15.  is  it  small  matter  that  thou  hast  taken  my  h.f
18.  because  1  have  given  my  maiden  to  my  A.

20.  Leah  said,  now  will  my  A.  dwell  with  me
Deut.  25.7.  my  A.  brother  refuseth  to  raise  a  name

2  Sam.  14.  5.  am  a  widow,  myh.  isdead,2  KingsA.  1.
7.  shall  not  leave  to  my  A.  a  name  on  the  earth

Hos.  2.7.  shall  sav,  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  A
+  16.  in  that  dav  thou  shalt  call  me  my  h.

Thy  HUSBAND.

Gen.  3. 16.  thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy  h.  he  shall  rule
Num.  5. 19.  with  another  instead  of  thy  A.  20.

Judg.  14. 15.  thevsaid  to  Samson’s  wife,  entice  thy  h.
Ruth  2.  11.  done  to  thy  mother  since  death  of  thy  h.

2  Kings  4. 26.  and  say  to  her,  is  it  well  with  thy  h  ?
Isa.  54.  5.  thy  Maker  is  thy  A.  the  Lord  is  his  name
John  4. 16.  uro  call  thy  h.  ||  18.  he  is  not  thy  A.

Acts  5.  9.  the  feet  of  them  that  have  burled  thy  A.

1  Cor  7  16.  knowest  whether  thou  shalt  save  thy  A.
HUSBANDMAN.

Gen.  9. 20.  Noah  began  to  be  an  A.  and  plant,  vmey
Jer.  51.  23.  with  thee  will  1  break  in  pieces  the  A.
Amos  5.  16.  alas  !  they  shall  call  the  A.  to  mourning
Zech.  1.3.  5.  he  shall  say,  1  am  no  prophet,  1  am  a  A.
John  15.  1  1  am  the  true  vine,  my  l  ather  is  the  A.


2  Tim. 2. 6.  the  A.  that  laboureth  must  he  first  partak
Jam.  5.  7.  A.  waiteth  for  the  precious  iiuitof  eaith
HUSBANDMEN.

2  Kings  25.  12.  he  left  of  the  poor  to  be  A.  Jer.  52. 16.
2  Chron.  26.  10.  Uzziah  had  A.  also  in  Carmel
Jer.  .31.  24.  and  there  shall  dwell  in  Judah  itself  A.
Joel  1.  11.  be  ashamed,  t)  ye  A.  howl,  ()  vine-dress.
Mat.  21.33.  he  let  it  out  to  A.  Mark  12.  2.  Luke2Q.().
.34.  sent  his  servants  to  A.  Mark  12.  2.  Luke  20. 10.
.38.  when  A.  saw  the  son,  Mark  12.  7.  Luke  20. 14.
4;).  when  he  cometh,  what  will  he  do  to  those  h.f
41.  he  will  let  out  his  vineyard  to  other  A.

Mark  12.  2.  he  might  receive  from  the  A.  of  the  fruit

9.  !«.e  will  come  and  destroy  the  A.  and  give  viney.
HUSBANDRY.

2  CAr.  26.  10.  Uzziah  had  husnandmen,  for  love'*  »
Job  1.  +  3.  Job  had  a  very  great  A.

1  Cor.  ,3.  9.  ye  are  God’s  A.  ye  are  God  s  building
HUSBANDS.

Ruth  1.11.  are  there  more  sons,  they  may  be  your  h.f
1.3.  would  ye  stay  for  them  trom  having  A.  f
Esth.  1. 17.  so  they  shall  despise  their  A.  in  their  eyes

20.  the  wives  shall  give  to  their  A.  honour
Jer.  29.  6.  and  give  your  daughters  to  A.

Ezek.  16.  45.  which  loathed  their  A.  and  their  child


Ui.cn..  1U.  1 .  >»  1 1  iv.  1  i  iuuuiom  - -

John  4. 18.  thou  hast  had  five  A.  he  not  thy  husband
1  Cor.  14.  35.  let  them  ask  their  A.  at  home


1  Uv/  •  1  i  •  Jet*  ICt  ewi*  vi  'ii  •

Eph.  5.  22.  wives,  submit  yourselves  to  your  A.  24.
25.  A.  love  vour  wives,  even  as  Christ  also  loved
the  church,  and  gave  himself  tor  it,  Col.  .3.  19.
Col.  3.  18.  wives,  submit  yourselves  to  your  own  A.

1  J  im.  3.  12.  let  the  deacons  be  the  A.  of  one  wife
Tit.  2.  4.  teach  young  women  to  love  their  A.

5.  to  be  chaste,  obedient  to  their  own  A.

1  Pet.  3. 1.  ye  wives,  be  in  subjection  to  your  own  A.
7.  ye  A.  dwell  with  them  according  to  knowledge

HUSK,  S.

Num.  6.  4.  from  the  kernels  even  to  the  A.

2  Kings 4.  42.  brought  full  ears  of  corn  in  A.  thereof
Luke  15. 16.  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly  with  A.

HYMN,  S.

Mat.  26.  30.  when  they  toad  sung  an  A.  Mark  14.  26
Eph.  5.  19.  speaking  to  yourseLes  in  psalms  and  A.
Col.  3. 16.  admonishing  one  another  in  psalms  and  A.
HYPOCRISY

Comes  from  the  Greek,  {nroKptms  ■  It  is  a  coun¬
terfeiting  religion  and  virtue  ;  an  affectation  of
the  name,  joined  with  a  disaffection  to  the  thing ;
or,  the  having  a  form  of  godliness  with  deny¬
ing  the  power  of  it.  Thus  he  is  a  hypocrite  who
feigns  to  be  what  he  is  not,  who  puts  on  a  false
perSon,  like  the  actors  in  tragedies  and  come¬
dies.  Our  Saviour  frequently  accused  the  Phari¬
sees  of  hypocrisy,  Mat. 23.  13,  14,  #c.  Vieir
character  is  drawn  out  in  that  chapter ;  as,  (1)
They  say  and  do  not,  verse  3.  their  practice  was
not  agreeable  to  their  doctrine,  and  therefore  their
example  was  not  to  be  imitated  ;  for  they  imjmed
many  strict  injunctions,  over  and  above  what  the
law  required,  and  severely  exacted  obedience  thereto
from  others,  but  did  not  ohserve  the  least  part
thereof  themselves,  verse  4.  (2)  What  good  things
they  did,  were  only  for  ostentation,  to  be  seen  oj
men,  verse  5.  (3)  They  ambitiously  affected

titles,  vain  applause,  and  the  precedency  at  enter¬
tainments,  verse  6—12.  (4)  They  hid  their  cry¬
ing  sins  under  the  colourable  appearance  of  vir¬
tues,  hnd  pretended  to  holiness,  that  they  might
sin  with  less  suspicion  and  more  security,  verse
14.  These  our  Saviour  compares  to  whited  sepul
chres,  that  within  contain  sordid  dust  and  rotten
ness,  verses  27  ,  28.  (5)  They  were  exact  in  light
matters,  they  tithed  mint  arid  cummin,  m
neglected  substantial  duties :  l  hey  were  zeawii
in  the  outward  parts  of  religious  worship ,  am
neglected  righteousness  and  mercy,  thinking  t<
compensate  their  defects  in  the  duties  of  one  table
by  strictly  observing  the  duties  of  the  other,  verse*
23,  24.  (6)  They  studied  rather  an  externa

purity,  than  the  inward  purity  of  the  heart,  yers<
25.  (7)  These  hypocritical  Scribes  and  Pharisee
pretended  a  great  deal  of  respect  to  the  ancwi
prophets,  and  to  disallow  what  their  fathers  did [t,
them,  and  yet  were  as  ready  to  practise  the  Itk
themselves  to  Christ  and  his  apostles,  verses  A
30,  31.  (8)  Hypocrites  pray  to  God  only  inth
time  of  sickness  and  danger,  when  by  their  a.nnc


tions  they  are  driven  to  it ,  but  shew  no  loie  t


livuo  tney  w/ c.  m  "7  "  --7  - -

prayer  or  delight  in  God  in  time  of  prosperity
Job  27.  8,  9,  10.  (9)  They  judged  and  censure,
others  severely  for  smaller  faults,  being  in  tn
mean  time  themselves  guilty  oj  greater  crimes
Mat.  7.  5.  (10)  They  were  more  for  uutwar
ceremonies  and  human  traditions  than  Jor  th
true  and  spiritual  worship  of  God,  Mat.  12.  1  >  -
7.  1  15.  2,  7,  8,  9.  (ID  Ki  worldly  affairs  the.,
were  quick-sighted,  not  so  in  spiritual  and  he<.
ven/y  things,  Mark  3.  4.  (12)  Hypocrites  t
public  calamities  are  fearful,  Isa.  33.  14.

This  sin  of  hypocrisy  is  difficultly  cured,  tn  that  t
is  not  easily  discovered  by  men,  and  does  notes
pose  to  shame,  but  is  subservient  to  many  came,
ends  Men  cannot  dive  into  the  hearts  0)  other,
an  t  cannot  discern  between  the  paint  of  hy  pools,
and  the  life  of  holiness.  Hypocrisy  also ’  turn
the  means  of  salvation  into  poison;  Jor  the  jn-
quent  exercise  of  religious  duties,  which  is  tn
means  to  sanctify  others,  confirms  and  harder,
hypocrites.  .

Tne  effectual  means  to  cure  it,  is  a  stedfast  hem
of  the  pure  and  all-seeing  eye  of  God ;  uho  set
sin  wherever  it  is,  and  wilt  bring  it  into  jndgmeu.
A  hypocrite  may  hide  bis  sin  from  the  eyes  <
others,  and  sometimes  from  his  own  conscience,  h>
can  never  impose  upon  God.  The  stedjast  ben-,
of  this  truth  will  cause  frequent  and  solemn  though
of  God,  as  our  Inspector  and  Judge:  Our  o<m<”
makes  use  of  it  as  an  argument  against  njp<
crisy .  Luke  12.  1,  2,  3.  Beware  ye  ot  the  lea  -  e
of  the  Pharisees,  which  is  hypocrisy,  l  or  t  ie
is  nothing  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealet
neither  hid  that  shall  not  be  known,  <vc


T


I  D  O


J  A  S


ha.  SC.  6.  his  heart  will  work  iniquity,  to  practise  h.
Mat.  23.  28.  within  ye  are  full  of  h.  and  iniquity
Mark  12.  15.  he  knowing  their  /;.  said  unto  them
Luke  12.1.  beware  ot  leaven  of  Pharisees, which  is  li.
J  Tim.  4.2.  speaking  lies  in  h.  their  conscience  seared
fa>«.3.17."  lsdoin  trom  above  is  pure  and  without  4.
HYPOCRISIES.

1  Pet.  2.  1.  wherefore  laying  aside  all  malice  and  4.
HYPOCRITE.

Job  b.  13.  and  the  4.  hope  shall  perish
1.3.  15.  for  an  4.  shall  not  come  before  him
17.  8.  the  innocent  shall  stir  up  himself  against  4.
20.  5.  and  the  joy  ot  the  4.  is  but  fora  moment
27-  8.  what  is  the  hope  of  the  4.  tho’  he  hath  sained
.34.30.  that  the  4.  reign  not,  lest  the  people  be  snared
Prov.  11.  9-  an  4.  with  his  mouth  destroy,  neighbour
ha.  9. 17.  for  every  one  is  an  4.  and  an  evil  doer
Mat.  7.  5.  thou  4.  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  eye
Luke  6.  42.  thou  4.  cast  beam  out  of  thy  own  eye
13. 15.  thou  4.  doth  not  each  one  loose  his  ox  ?

HYPOCRITES,
f fob  15.  34.  the  congregation  of  4.  shall  be  desolate
36.  13.  but  the  4.  in  heart  heap  up  wrath
j'.ifl.  33.  14.  fearfulness  hath  surprised  the  4.

Mat.  6.  2.  do  not  sound  a  trumpet,  as  the  4.  do

5.  when  thou  prayest,  thou  shalt  not  be  as  4.  are
16.  moreover,  when  ye  fast,  be  not  as  the  4.

15.  7.  ye  4.  well  did  Esaias  prophesy,  Mark  7.  6.

16.  3.  O  ye  4.  ye  can  discern  the  face  of  sky,  but
can  ye  not  discern  the  signs  of  times  ?  Luke  12.  56

22.  18.  but  Jesus  said,  why  tempt  ye  me,  ye  4.  ?
,23. 13.  woe  unto  you,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  4.  ye
shut  up  kingd.  against  men,  14,  15, 23, 25,  27,  29
24.  51.  shall  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  4.
uke  11.  44.  woe  untoyou,  scribes  and  Pharisees,  4.

:  .  HYPOCRITICAL.

*4.  35. 16.  with  4.  mockers  in  feasts,  they  gnashed
sa.  10.  6.  1  will  send  him  against  an  4.  nation

1,  HYSSOP
s  an  kerb  very  generally  known,  and  in  Hebrew
called  Lsob.  It  was  commonly  made  use  of  in
purification  instead  of  a  sprinkler:  Thus  God
I  commanded  the  Hebrews,  when  they  came  out  of

Fgypt,  to  take  a  bunch  of  hyssop,  to  dip  it  in
the  blood  oj  the  Paschal  lamb,  and  sprinkle  the
lintel  and  two  side-posts  with  it,  Exod.  12.  22
i  Sometimes  they  added  a  little  wool  to  it,  of  a  scarlet
i  colour .  So  in  the  purification  of  leper  % ,  they
dipped  a  bunch  composed  of  hyssop,  the  branches
of  cedar,  and  red  wool,  in  water,  mingled  with  the
blood  of  a  bird,  and  with  it  sprinkled  the  leper.  Lev
14.  4,  &c.

avid  alludes  to  these  ceremonial  purifications
Psal.  51. 7.  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  1  shall  be
clean  :  that  is.  As  lepers  and  other  unclean  persons
ur e  by  thy  appointment  purified  by  the  use  of  hyssop
and  other  things,  so  do  thou  cleanse  me,  a  most
leprous  and  polluted  creature,  by  thy  grace ,  and  by
the  virtue  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  is  represent
td  and  signified  by  those  ceremonial  usages.
yssop  is  a  shrub,  which  shoots  out  abundance  of
sutlers  from  one  root  only:  it  is  as  hard  as  any
'arge  wood,  and  grows  about  a  foot  and  a  halt
high.  At  particular  distances  on  both  sides  of  its
stock  it  pushes  out  longish  leaves,  which  are  hard,
odoriferous,  warm,  and  a  little  bitter  to  the  taste,
the  blossom  of  it  appears  at  the  top  of  the  stem,  of
in  azure  colour,  and  like  an  ear  of  corn.  There  are
'•co  sorts  of  it,  the  garden,  and  mountain  hyssop.

It  is  very  probable  that  hyssop  grows  to  a  very
r,eaiie 'ght  in  .1  udea.-micg  it  issaid  inthe  gospel,
nut  the  soldiers  having  filled  a  spunge  with  vinegar ,
hey  put  it  upon  a  stick  of  hyssop,  and  presented
t  to  our  Rav tour  s  mouth,  who  was  then  upon  the
ross,  John  19.  29.

°d\»'  22;  take  a  bunch  of  4.  and  dip  it

v-  H.  4.  take  cedar- wood, scarlet,  and  4.  6,  49,51

2.  shall  cleanse  the  house  with  the  4.  and  scarlet
<m.  19.6,  shall  cast  4.  into  the  midst  of  the  burning

6.  a  clean  person  shall  take  4.  and  flip  it  in  water
\nigs  4.33.  from  the  cedar -tree  even  unto  the  4

ol .  7  purge  me  with  4.  and  I  shall  be  clean
‘a  Lhey  hi  led,  a  spunge,  and  put  it  on  4.

o*  J.  19.  he  took  blood  with  //.  and  sprinkled

people


i.

'  referred  (1)  To  God,  to  set  forth,  [1]  The  dig-
ity  oj  his  person,  Psal.  81.  10.  Isa.  45.  5.  6.  [2]

!L07'lt  %ouer,  and  might,  Gen.  17.  1.  [3]  His
ternal  and  unchangeable  being  m  himself,  Exod.

!4J  *he  certainty  of  his  promises  and
ireatenings,  Exod.  6.  2.  Num.  14.  35.  til)  To
It  f Before  his  manifestation  in

4  S hnl-  2-  E  When  manifested,  Mark

-V^  inLnoe  7°  the  Ghost,

3  n’hT  <  v>  “e  church.  Cant.  2.  16.  |
■ev  oo  n  loA  ‘e,  9<!?.d  anoeB,  Luke  1.  19.  I  2.  10.
9  ivtoT  V  '  0  evt?  ant>els,  1  Kings  22.  21,

f,}  1  H  1,1  men  and  women,  denoting,  [  I  ]  Their

»  *  V-  ?•  1°*  [2]  The  certainty  of  what
>Poken,  Gal.  5.  2.  Philem.  ]y.  [3]  The

L!ntiS  °J  ■  t  ie  yPeaker  to  perform  his  duty,  or
7u\7fnj?ned  hlm’  Mic-  3.  8.  Mat.  21.  30.
11  H  “e  cr€atnres >  Num.  22.  30.  Judg.  9.

In  VLfcW  b do  blin"  a  hood  on  earth

Vi  r  l  ii  b  establish  my  covenant  with  you
in  ci,  it  ,  destroyed,  I  and  my  house'

.  snail  /.  thy  moth,  and  brethr.  come  to  bow  r
o  »tChl  ■  lS  not’  H,1d  L  whither  shall  /  g or
,  J’ ol  „e  none  greater  in  this  house  than  /

«7  f  ’*•  "[ho  am  /,  that  /should  goto  Pharaoh  i
"U  L*eous,  7  and  my  people  are  wicked

VV k  b  hehold  1,  will  harden  the  hearts
f  Jr,~'  ,a,her-in-law  Jethro  am  come  to  thee


f.  r  ‘“-law  leuiio  am  come  to  tne

1  '’««!’  1”'  /.have  given  with  him  Aholiab
ii'Vin  1  e,Vfin  b  wfdl  chastise  you  for  your  sins
j,,'-  -  ■  behold  /.have  taken  the  lev.  18.  6

'■  11  ■  ,Jilflons  n  ore  than  I,  how  can  1  disposs.


Deut.  32. 3 9.1,  even  I,  am  he,  there  is  no  G. with  me
Josh.  14.7 .forty  y’ears  old  was  /  when  Moses  sent  me
Judy .  5.3.  I , even  I,  will  sing  to  the  Lord  God  of  Isr.
__7 .till  /  Deborah  arose,  that  /arose  mother  in  Isr.
7-  18.  when  7  blow,  I  and  all  that  are  with  me
JE  37.  may  bewail  my  virginity,  7  and  my  fellows
*2.  2.  /  and  my  people  were  at  strife  with  Amnion
-0.  4.  /  came  to  Gibeah,  1  and  my  concubine

1  A«w.2t.  17.  he  said, thou  art  more  righteous  than  /

2  6<?w.  3.  28.  /and  my  kingd.  are  guiltless  before  L.
13.  /,  whither  shall  /cause  my  shame  to  go  ?

1  A  mgs  1 . 21.  /  and  son  Solom.  be  counted  offenders
111- 22.  /.even  1,  only  remain  a  prophet,  19. 10,  i  t.
1  Ghr .  29. 14.  who  am  /,  what  my  peop.  2  Chr.  2.  6. '
‘l  Chr.  32.  1.3.  what /and  fathers  nave  done  to  peo.
Ezra7.2\.  /.even  1  Artaxerxes,  make  a  decree
fieh.  5.  15.  but  so  did  not  7,  because  of  fear  of  G.
Lsth.  4.  16.  /  also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  likewise
Job  1.  15. 1  only  am  escaped  to  tell  thee,  16,  17, 19.

15.  6.  thy  own  mouth  condemneth  thee,  and  not  /
34.  3.3.  whether  thou  refuse  or  choose,  and  not  I

Ms.  61.  2.  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  /
142.  6.  persecutors,  for  they  are  stronger  than  /
Eccl.  2.  25.  who  can  hasten  hereunto  more  than  I?
Gant.  2.  1.  7am  the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  lily  of  vail.
6.  3.  /  am  my  beloved’s,  7- 10.  ||  8.  10.  /am  a  wall
csa.  8. 18.  /and  child.  L.  hath  given  me,  lleb.  2.  13.
41.  4.  1  the  Lord  the  first,  1  am  lie,  43.  11,25.

10,  /  am  with  thee,  for  /  am  thy  God,  43.  5.

44. 6.  / am  the  first,  /am  the  last,  48. 12.  Rev.  1. 17.
7.  who  as  I  shall  call,  and  shall  declare  it  f

45. 12.  I,  even  my  hands  have  stretched  out  heav.
46.  4.  even  to  your  old  age  1  am  he,  I  have  made

9.  /  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else,  /  am  God

48.  15.  I,  even  /  have  spoken,  7  have  called  him

16.  from  time  that  it  was,  there  am  /,  Mat.  18.  20.

49.  5.  yet  shall  7  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the  L.

51.  12.  7,  even  7  am  he,  52.  6.  ||  52.  6.’behold,  it  is  I
o5.  5.  stand  by  thyself,  for  7  am  holier  than  thou
00 ’  1'  b  was  deceived,  thou  art  stronger  than  7

23.  39.  behold  7,  even  7,  will  utterly  forget  you
co  u  ,8-  behold  7,  even  7,  am  against  thee
oY  11  u.  b  even  vvdl  bring  asword  upon  you
34. 11.  beh.  7,  even  7,  will  search  sheep  and  seek

20.  1,  even  7,  will  judge  between  fat  catt.  and  lean
44.  28.  1  am  their  inherit.  /  am  their  possession
JJan.  8. 15.  when  7,  even  7  Dan.  had  seen  the  vision
Hos.  5.  14.  /,  even  /,  will  tear,  7  will  take  away
flag.  1. 13.  Haggai  spoke,  7am  with  you,  saith  I.ord
f-cch.  1.  In.  for  7  w-as  but  little  displeased,  they  help
Mai.  1.  13.  should  7  accept  of  your  hands  'saith  Ld.
Mat.  3.  11.  after  me  is  mightier  than  7,  Mark  1  7'
14. 27-  it  is  7,  be  not  afraid,  Mark  6.  50.  John  6.  20!

16. 13.  whom  do  men  say  that  7  the  Son  of  man  am  ?
18.  20.  two  or  three,  there  am  7  in  midst  of  them
-4.  5.  many  shall  come  in  name,  saying,  /  am  Chr
26.  22.  every  one  began  to  say,  Lord,  is  it  I?

Mark  14.  29-  tho’  all  shall  be  offended, yet  will  not  1
Luke  2.  48.  thy  father  and  7  sought  thee  sorrowin0,

*E  ' 19-  if  7  by  Beelzeb.  castout  devils,  by  wliom  3o
20.  if  7  with  the  finger  of  God  cast  out  devils
21.8.  shail  come  in  my  name, saying,  /  am  Christ

22.  2(.  but  /  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth
24.  39.  that  it  is  I  myselt,  handle  me  and  see

John  1  20.  he  confessed,  /  am  not  the  Christ,  3  28
33.  /  knew  him  not  ||  4.  26.  7  that  speak  am  he
Jo.  i  am  not  alone,  but  /and  Fatn.  that  sent  me

23.  /  am  trom  above,  /  am  not  of  this  world
28.  shall  knowthat  7amhe,  7do  nothing  of  myself
58.  Jesus  said,  verily,  before  Abraham  was,  7am

10.  30.  I  and  my  Father  are  one
38.  the  Father  in  me,  and  /  in  him,  17.  21.  |  15.  5.

Jo’  ?2’  b  I be  UP.  will  draw  all  men  to
13.  14.  it  /  then  your  Ld.  and  Master  have  washed
14. 20.  /  in  my  Path.  ||  15.  4.  abide  in  me,  /  in  you
*8.  / go  to  bath,  for  my  Father  is greater  than  /

17.  23.  /  m  them,  26.  ||  25.  but  /  have  known  thee

18.  35.  Pilate  answered,  am  /  a  Jew?

Acts  11. 17.  what  was  /.that  /could  withstand  God?

22.  28.  /  obtained  this  freedom  ;  I  was  free  born
Rom.  7.  17.  it  is  no  more  /,  but  sin  dwell,  in  me  20

1  Cor.  1.12.  /am  of  Paul,  /of  Apollos./ofC  hr’.JTl

2.  1.  and  /  brethren  when  /  came  to  you  declaring

3.  1.  and  /,  brethr.  could  not  speak  to  you  as  to  sp.

7.  7.  /  would  that  all  men  were  even  as  /  myself

8.  if  they  abide  even  as  / 1|  10.  yet  not  I,  but  Lord
9-  6.  or  I  only  and  Barnabas,  have  not  we  power
2b.  /  therefore  so  run,  so  fight  /,  not  as  one  that

11.  1 .  be  ye  followers  ofme.evenas  7am  of  Christ

15.  10.  by  the  grace  of  G.  /am  what  /am.yetnot  /

11.  whether  it  were  /or  they, so  we  preached

16. 10.  forheworkeththe  work  of  Christ,  even  as  /

2  Cor.  11.  22.  are  they  Hebrews  ?  so  am  /

23.  I  am  more  II  29.  who  is  offended,  /  burn  not  >
Gal.  2.  19.  /  thro’  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law,  that  7

20.  /  live,  yet  not  7,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me

4.  12.  brethren  be  as  7  am,  for  7am  as  ye  are

5.  11.  /,  brethren,  if  /  yet  preach  circumcision

6.  14.  that  I  should  glory  in  cross,  and  7  to  world
Rph.  1.15.  7also,  after  /  heard  of  your  faith  in  Jesus
4.  1.  7  therefore,  prisoner  of  the  I.ord,  beseech  you

1  Pet.  1.  16.  it  is  written,  he  ye  holy,  for  7  am  holy

2  John  1.  whom  /  love  in  the  truth,  and  not  /  only
Rev.  1.  8.  7  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  bginn.  and  end
3.  19.  as  many  as  7  love.  7  rebuke  and  chasten

21.  as  7  also  overcame  ||  21.  2.  7  John  saw,  22  8
22.  9.  see  thou  doit  not,  7am  thv  fellow  servant'

16.  7  Jesus  have  sent  my  angel  to  testify  these
things,  7  am  the  root  and  offspring  of  David

JACINTH.

Rev.  9.  17-  having  breast  plates  of  fire, /.and  brimst.

21.  20.  the  eleventh  foundation  of  the  city  was  a  i
JAILER.

Acts  16.  23.  charging  the  to  keep  them  safely
JANG  El  NG.

I  Tim.  1.  6.  having  swerved,  turned  aside  to  vain
JASPER.

Exod.l 8.  20.  the  fourth  row  an  onyx  and  a,/'.  39.  13.
Lzek.  28.  13.  topaz,  the  diamond  and./',  thv  covering
Lev.  4.  3.  he  that  sat,  was  to  look  upon  like  a  j.

21.  11.  her  light  was  like  to  a  j.  stone,  clear  as
18.  building  ot  the  wall  of  city  was  of./.


Rev.  21.  19.  with  prec.  stones,  the  first  found,  was  1
JAVELIN.

Num.  25.  7.  and  Phinehastook  a  j.  in  his  hand
1  Ram.  18.  10.  there  was  a  j.  in  Saul’s  hand,  19.  9.
11.  Saul  cast  the/,  for  he  said,  1  will  smite  Dav.

19.  10.  he  smote  the  j.  into  the  wall,  David  fled
JAW.

Judg.  15. 19.  but  God  clave  an  hollow  place  in  the  j.
Job  41.  2.  canst  thou  bore  his  j.  thro’  with  a  thorn  .
JAW-BONE.

Judg.  15.  15.  Samson  found  a  new  j.-bonecfi  an  ass
15.  16.  with  the  j.-bone  of  an  ass  have  1  slain
17  •  he  cast  away  the  j.-bone  out  of  his  hand
JAWS.

Job  29. 17.  and  I  brake  the  j.  of  the  wicked
Psal.  22.  15.  and  my  tongue  cleaveth  to  my,/.

Isa.  30. 28.  thereshall  be  a  bridle  in  j.  of  the  people
Hos.  ll.  4,  as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke  on  their  j.
JAW-TEETH.

Prov.  30.  14.  and  their  j. -teeth  as  knives  to  devour
ICE,  6’eeYCE.
o-  ^DLE

Signifies  [1]  One  who  is  slothful  or  lazy,  Exod.  5.
8,  17.  [2]  One  that  would  work ,  but  is  not  em¬
ployed  or  hired,  Mat.  20.  3,  6.  [3]  Unprofitable,
not  tending  to  edification,  Mat.  12.  36.

Exod.  5.  8.  for  they  be  i.  therefore  they  cry
17 .  but  he  said,  ye.  are  i.  ye  are  i.  ye  say,  let  us  go
Pfov.  19. 15.  and  an  i.  soul  shall  suffer  hunger
Mat.  12.  .36.  that  every  i.  word  men  shall  speak

20.  3.  he  saw  others  standing  i.  in  market-place,  6.
Luke  24.  11.  and  their  words  Seemed  as  i.  tales
1  1  ini.  5. 13.  withal  they  learn  to  be  i.  and  not  only  i.
„  IDLENESS.

Prov.  31.  27.  she  eateth  not  the  bread  of  i.

Eccl.  10.  18.  through  i.  the  house  dropped]  through
Ezek.  16.  49.  and  abundance  of  i.  was  in  her
IDOLATER.

1  Cor .  5.  11.  if  any  called  a  brother  be  an  i.  not  to  eat
Eph.  5.  5.  who  is  an  i.  hath  any  inheritance  in  kingd.
IDOLATERS.

l_Cor.  5.  10.\et  not  altogeth.  with  the  covetous  or  i..

6.  9.  i.  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God
10.  7-  neither  be  ye  i.  as  were  some  of  them

Lev.  21.  8.  but  1.  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake
22.  15.  without  are  murderers  and  i.  and  all  iiars
,  IDOLATRY

Signifies,  [1]  The  superstitious  worship  which  is
given  to  idols  or  false  gods,  Acts  17.  16.  1  Cor.
10.  7 .  [2]  The  making  of  any  image  or  likeness
oj  God  or  any  creature  for  a  religious  end,  Deut.
5.  8.  Gal.  5.  20.  [3]  All  human  inventions

thrust  into  the  worship  of  God,  Deut.  12.  .32.
[4]  The  setting  of  the  heart  inordinately  upon  any
creature,  Phil.  3.  19.  [5]  An  inordinate  love  to,
amd  distrustful  care  for,  the  things  of  the  world,
Col.  3.  5.

1  Sam.  15.  23.  stubbornness  is  as  iniquity  and  i.

Acts  17. 16.  when  he  saw  the  city  wholly  given  to  1.

1  Got.  10.  14.  my  dearly  beloved,  flee  from  j.

Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  ot  the  flesh  are  i.  witchcraft
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  covetousness,  which  is  i.
IDOLATRIES.

1  Pet.  4.  3.  when  he  walked  in  abominable  i.

IDOLATROUS.

2  Kings  23.  5.  Josiah  put  down  the  i.  priests

^  ,  IDOL.

Aech.  11. 17.  woe  to  the  1.  shepherd  that  leaveth  fioct
.  .  IDOL

Signifies,  [1]  An  image  or  statue  representing  some
false  deity,  2  Cor.  6.  16.  [2]  Any  thing  too  much
and  sinfully  indulged,  1  John  5.  21.  [31  Devils,
Isa.  19.  3.  1  Cor.  10.  21.  ’

1  Kings  15.  13.  she  made  an  i.  in  grove,  2  Chr.  15. 16
'  G '/iron.  33.  7-  he  set  the  i.  in  the  house  of  God
la.  he  took  the  ».  out  of  the  house  of  the  I  ord
Isa.  48.  5.  lest  thoushouldst  say,  my  i.  hath  done
60.  3.  he  that  burneth  incense  as  it  he  blessed  an  i.
Jer.  22.  28.  is  this  man  Coniah  a  despised  broken  i.
Acts  7 .  41.  made  a  calf  and  offered  sacrifice  to  the  i.

1  Cor.  8. 4.  we  know  an  i.  is  nothing  in  world,  10.  19."

7.  some  with  conscience  of  the  i.  to  this  hour  eat  ii

r  IDOLS.

bfv-lb  4-.  ft,rn  ye  not  unto  i.  ||  26. 1 .  shal  1  make  no  i.

-0.  30.  will  cast  your  carcases  on  carcases  ofyour  i.
Deut.  JJ.  17.  ye  have  seen  their  i.  wood  and  stone

1  Ram.  31.  9.  to  publish  it  in  the  house  of  their  i
ln,n?s  lb  L2-.- ,sa  removed  the  i.  his  father  made

21.  .6.  Ahabdid  very  abominable  in  following  i
<2  kings  17.  12.  for  they  served  i.  2  Chr  mi.  24.  18.

21.  11.  Manasseh  hath  made  J  udah  to  sin  with  his  i
21.  Anion  served  the  i.  that  his  father  sen  ed
23.  24.  the  1.  that  were  spied  in  the  land  of  Judah
lE/inm.lO.  9.  to  carry  tidings  to  their  i.  and  people
lb-  26.  for  all  the  gods  of  the  people  are  i.

2  L hr.  15.8.  Asa  put  away  abominable  7.  out  of  lud
34.  7.  Josiah  cut  down  all  the  i.  in  the  land  of  Isr.

I  sal.  96.  o.  for  all  the  gods  of  the  nations  are  i

97 i .  confounded,  they  that  boast  themselves  of  i.
ft-b-  3b.  they  serv.  their  i.  that  were  snare  to  them
38.  whom  they  sacrificed  to  the  i.  of  Canaan
llo.  4.  their  1.  are  silver  and  gold,  135.  15.

Isa.  2.  8.  their  land  is  full  of  i.  worship  work  of  ha
18.  and  the  i.  he  shall  utterly  abolish
20.  shall  cast  away  his  i.  of  stiver  and  gold  31.  7
10.  10.  as  my  hand  hath  found  kingdoms  of  the  *  *

11.  to  Samaria  and  her  i.  so  do  to  .lerus.  and  her  »’

}■  *•  of  Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  his  presence
srictll  seek  to  the  2.  and  to  the  charmers
hd.  jo.  the  maker*  ot  1.  shal!  p-o  to  contusion


1  4.1  •  •  n  v-uiiiuoiou

46.  1.  their  were  on  the  beasts  and  on  the  cattle
57.  o.  inflaming  yourselves  with  /.  under  green  tree
**  are  confounded,  her  images  broken
land  ot  images,  and  they  are  mad  upon  their  *
Ezek.  6. 4.  cast  your  slain  men  before  your  i  5  13*
6.  alt  laid  waste, your  7.  may  be  broken  and  cease

9.  with  their  eyes  which  go  a  whoring  after  their  i

L3.  wfiere  they  did  offer  sweet  savour  to  all  th.  i.
V‘,  1(J-  ^aw  ,l,e  *•  of  Israel  pourtrayed  on  wall
14.  3.  these  men  set  up  their  i.  in  their  heart  4  7

5.  they  are  estranged  from  me  through  their’ ».*

6.  repent,  and  turn  yourselves  from  your  i

247  '


IF


1SL


IMA


Ezek.  16.  36.  and  with  all  the  i.  of  thy  abominations

18. 6.  nor  hath  lift  up  his  eyes  to  the  t.  ot  Israel,  15.

12.  oppressed  the  poor,  hath  lift  up  his  eyes  to  .

20. 7.  defile  not  yourselves  with  the  a.  ot  Egypt,  18.

8.  nor  did  they  forsake  the  a.  of  Egypt,  I

16.  polluted  my  sabb.  for  their  heart  went  after  a.

24.  polluted  sabb.  their  eyes  went  after  father  s  a.

31.  ye  pollute  yourselves  with  all  your  *•  e'’en

unto  this  day,  22.  4.  I  -3.  7,  30,  37-
39.  but  pollute  ye  my  holy  name  no  more  with  a.

22.  3.  the  city  maketh  a.  against  herself  to  defile
23  39.  when  they  had  slain  their  children  to  their  a.

49.  and  ye  shall  bear  the  sins  of  your  a.  l  am  L.

30  13. 1  will  destroy  a.  and  will  cause  their  images
33*.  25.  and  ye  lift  up  your  eyes  towards  your  a.

36.  18.  for  their  i.  wherewith  they  polluted  it

25.  from  all  your  a.  will  I  cleanse  you,  37,  23.

44. 10.  which  went  astray  from  me  after  their  a.

12.  because  they  minister,  to  them  betoie  then  a.
Hos.  4.  17.  Ephraim  is  joined  to  a.  let  him  alone
8.  4.  of  their  silv.  and  gold  have  they  made  them  a.

13  °.  have  made  a.  according  to  their  understand.

14!  8.  what  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  a.

Mic.  1.  7-  and  all  the  a.  thereof  will  l  lay  desolate
Hab.  2. 18.  maker  trusteth  therein  to  make  dumb  a.

Ze pb.  1.  +  3.  1  will  consume  a.  with  the  wicked
Zech.  10. 2.  for  the  a.  have  spoken  vanity ,  and  <tivin.

13.  2.  I  will  cut  off  names  of  the  a.  outot  the  land
Acts  15.  20.  they  abstain  from  pollutions  ot  a.

29.  abstain  from  meats  offered  to  a.  21.  25.

17.  t  16.  when  he  saw  the  city  full  ot  a.

Rom.  2.  22.  thou  that  abhorrest  a.  dost  thou  commit

1  Cor.  8.  1.  as  touching  things  offered  to  *.  4,  10.

1 10.  19,  28.  Rev.  2.  14-20.

12. 2.  were  Gentiles  carried  away  to  these  dumb  a.

2  Cor.  6. 16.  what  agreement  temple  ot  God  with  i.r
1  These.  1.  9.  how  ye  turned  to  God  from  a.

1  John  5.  21.  children  aeep  yourselves  from  a.

Rev  9. 20.  not  worship  devils  and  a.  ot  gold  and  sit.

JEALOUS.  .  ,

Exod.  20.  5.  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  aj.God,

34.  14.  Deut.  4.  24.  15-9-1  6.  15.  Josh.JA.  19-
AW  5.  14.  and  he  be  of  his  wife  14,  +  30.

1  Kmos\9.  10.  I  have  been  j.  tor  the  L.  ot  hosts,  14.
Ezek.  39.  25.  and  will  be./,  for  my  holy  name
Joel 2.  18.  then  will  the  Lord  bey.  for  his  land
Nah.  1.  2.  God  is  y.  and  the  Lord  revengeUi
Zech.  1.  14. 1  am  3.  for  Jerus.  H  8.  2.  was  1.  for  Zion

2  Cot  11. 2.  for  I  am  j.  over  you  with  godly  jealousy

JEALOUSY

Signifies,  [1]  Suspicion  between  married  persons  of
their  fidelity  one  to  another,  Num.  5.  14.  L— J
An  earnest  desire  and  concern  for  the  we/Jare
of  others,  joined  with  some  degree  oj  fear  of  them,

2  Cor.  11.  2.  [3]  The  hot  displeasure  and  indig¬
nation  of  God,  Psal.  79.  5.  1  Cor.  10.  22.

Num.  5. 14.  the  spirit  of  j.  come  upon  him,  14,  +  30.

15.  for  it  is  an  offering  ofy.  andot  memorial,  18.
25.  then  priest  shall  take.;,  offering  from  woman

25.  11.  that  1  consumed  not  Israel  in  my.;.

Deut.  29.  20.  his j.  shall  smoke  against  that  man
32.  16.  they  provoked  him  toy.  1  Kings  14.  22.

21.  have  moved  me  toy.  I  will  move  them  toy.
Psal.  78.  58.  they  moved  him  to  j.  with  images
79.  5.  how  long,  Lord,  shall  thy  j.  burn  like  fire  .
Prov.  6.  34.  for  ;,  is  the  rage  ot  man,  he  will  not  spare
27.  +  4.  but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  j.  ?
Cant.S.O.j.  is  cruel  as  the  grave,  the  coals  thereof  are
Isa.  42.  13.  he  shall  stir  up,;,  like  a  man  ot  war
E*ek  8.  3.  where  was  the  seat  of  the. image  ofy.  ?

5.  behold  at  gate  of  altar  this  image  of  j.  in  entry

16.  38.  and  1  will  give  thee  blood  in  fury  and  y .

42.  my  ;.  shall  depart  from  thee  and  will  be  quiet

23. 25.  1  will  set  my  j.  against  thee,  they  shall  deal
36.  5.  in  the  fire  ofy.  have  1  spoken,  6.  I  38.  19.
Zeph.  1. 18.  whose  land  devoured  by  fire  ot  hisy .  3. 8.
Zech  1.14.  I  am  jealous  for  Zion  with  great.;.  8.2.
Rom.  10.  19.  Moses  saith,  will  provoke  you  toy.

11. 11.  salvation  to  Gentiles,  to  provoke  them  toy.

1  Cor.  10.  22.  do  we  provoke  the  Lord  toy.  ?

2  Cor.  11.  2.  for  1  am  lealous  over  you  with  godly  y  .

JEALOUSIES.

Num  5.  29.  this  is  law  ofy.  when  a  wife  goeth  aside
JEOPARDED.

Judo.  5. 18.  were  people  thaty.  their  lives  unto  death
JEOPARDY.

2  Sam.  23. 17.  went  in  i.  of  their  lives,  1  Chr.  11. 19.

1  Chr.  12.  19.  he  will  fall  to  Saul,  to  j.  ot  our  heads
Luke  8. 23.  ship  was  filled  with  water,  they  were  iny.

1  Cor.  15.  30.  and  why  stand  we  in  y.  every  hour  t
J  ESTING.

Evh.  5.  4.  nor  filthiness,  nory.  not  convenient
JEWEL

Signifies,  [1]  A  precious  and  costly  ornament,  Gen.

24.  53.  [2]  God's  children,  Mai.  3.  17*

Prov.  11.  22.  as  ay.  of  gold  in  a  swine’s  snout
20.  15.  but  the  lips  of  knowledge  are  a  precious.;.
Ezek.  16. 12.  1  put  ay  .  on  thy  forehead,  and  ear-rings
JEWELS.  .

Gen.  24.  53.  the  servant  brought  forth  y.  ot  silver
Exod.  3.  22.  shall  borrow  y.  of  gold,  11.  2. 1  12.  35.
35.  22.  they  brought  ally,  of  gold,  Num.  31.  50.
Num.  31.  51.  took  the  gold,  even  all  wrought  y.

1  Sam.  6.  8.  and  put  they,  of  gold  in  a  cotter,  15.

2  Citron.  20.  25.  they  four,  riches  and  precious  y.

32.  27.  made  treasuries  for  all  manner  pleasant;.

Job  28.  17.  the  exchange  of  it  shall  not  be  for  y.  ot
Cant.  1.  10.  thy  cheeks  are  comely  with  rows  of  y.
7.  1.  the  joints  of  thy  thighs  are  like  y.

Isa.  61.  10.  as  a  bride  adorneth  herself  with  her  y.
Ezek.  16. 17 .  hast  taken  thy  3.  of  my  gold  and  silver
39.  and  they  shall  take  thy  fair  y.  23.  26.

Hos.  2.  13.  she  decked  herself  with  ear-rings  and y.
Mai.  3. 17 .  they  shall  he  mine,  when  1  make  up  myy.
IF

Signifies,  m  Surety,  N  urn.  14.  +  23.  [2]  Whether
or  no,  Gen.  8.  8.  [3]  When,  Judg.  21.  21.  John
12.  32.  It  denotes,  (1)  A  condition,  Deut.  28.
15.  Luke  9.  23.  (2)  A  supposition,  Rom.  4.  2.
1  Pet.  3.  17.  (3)  A  reason  of  a  matter,  Eph.
4  21.

Gen.  25.  22.  she  said,  if  it  be  so,  why  am  I  thus  l

248


Gen.  31. 8.  if  he  said  thus  ||  34. 15.  if  ye  be  as  we  be
43  11.  if  it  must  be  so  now,  take  ot  the  best  fruits
Josh  14. 12.  if  so  be  the  Lord  will  be  with  me

1  Sam.  14.  9.  if  they  say  to  us,  tarry  till  we  come
20.  7.  a/ he  say  thus,  it  is  well,  2  Sam. ,15.  20.

2  Kings’!.  4. a/ we  say,  a/' we  sit  here if  they  kill  us

10.  6.  a/ ye  be  mine,  if  ye  will  hearken  to  my  voice
Job  9.  29.  if  I  be  wicked,  10. 15.  ||  24. 25.  ij  it  be  not  so
Psal.  7.  3.  if  1  have  done  this,  if  there  be  miguity
Jer.  27.  18.  if  they  be  prophets,  tf  the  word  or.  Lord

51.  8.  take  balm  for  her  pain,  if  so  be  may  be  heal.
Dan.  3.  17.  if  it  be  so,  our  Gpd  is  able  todeliver  us
4  27.  aTitmay  be  a  lengthening ot  thy  tranquillity
Hos.  8.  7-  if  so  be  it  yield,  strangers  shallswall.  it  up
Mat.  4.  3.  if  thou  be  the  Son  ot  God,  command  that
these  stones  be  made  bread,  27-  40.  Luke  4.  3.

14.  28.  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  to  thee  on  water
2L  43.  let  him  deliver  him,  if  he  will  have  him

Mark  1.  40.  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean

11.  32  if  we  shall  say,  of  men,  they  feared  people
Luke  23.  35.  if  he  be  Christ,  39.  John  10.  24.

John  1.  25.  if  thou  be  not  Elias,  nor  that  prophet

15.  18.  if  the  world  hate  you,  1  John  3.  13.

19. 12.  Jews  cried  out,  if  thou  let  this  man  go

Acts  5.  39-  if  it  be  of  God  ye  cannot  overthrow  it
1  Cor.  15. 19.  a/in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Chr.
Gal.  4. 7.  if  a  son,  then  an  heir  ot  God  thro  Christ
Phil.  2. 1.  if  any  consolation,  if  any  comfort  ot  love
1  Heb.  3.  +  11.  if  they  shall  enter  into  rest,  4.  3,  5.

1  John  2. 19.  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they  would
IF  not.

Gen.  18. 21.  if  not  I  will  know  ||  24. 49.  if  n.  tell  me
Exod.  32.  32.  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray  .out  of  thy  book
Judg.  9. 15.  ifn.  let  fire  come  out  of  the  bramble,  20.

1  Sam.  2. 16.  and  if  not,  1  will  take  it  by  force
6.  9.  if  not,  then  we  shall  know  it  is  not  his  hand

2  Sam.  13.  26.  if  not,  1  pray  thee,  let  Amnon  go
17.  6.  shall  we  do  after  his  say.  <  if  not  speak  thou

2  Kings  2.  10.  but  if  not,  it  shall  not  be  so
Job  9.  24.  if  not,  where,  and  who  is  he  ?

33.33.  if  not,  hearken  untome,  hold  thy  peace
Dan.  3.  18.  but  if  not,  be  it  known  to  thee,  O  king
Zech  11.  12.  give  me  my  price  ;  ij  not,  forbear
Luke  10.  6.  but  if  not ,  it  shall  turn  to  you  again
13.  9.  if  not,  after  that  thou  shalt  cut  it  down
See  Were.

IF  now.

Gen.  18.  3.  if  now  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight
24.  42.  O  God,  if now  thou  do  prosper  my  way
49.  if  now  you  will  deal  kindly  with  me
33. 10.  Jacob  said,  if  now  I  have  found  grace  in  thy
sight,  47.  29.  Exod.  34.  9-  Judg.  0.  1< .

1  Cor.  4.7.  ifn.  thou  didst  receive  it,  why  dost  glory .

IGNOMINY.  .

Prov.  18. 3.  cometh  contempt,  and  with  a.  reproach
IGNORANCE

Signifies,  [1]  Want  of  the  true  knowledge  of  trod
and  of  heavenly  things,  Eph.  4.  18.  C2J  Unbelief,
which  follows  ignorance,  1  Pet.  1.  14.  \3]  Error ,
imprudence,  or  surprise,  Lev.  4.  2,  13.  L4J  Idola¬
try,  Acts  17  •  30.  .

Lev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  shall  sin  thro  1.  agamst  any  com¬
mandment,  5.  15.  Num.  15.  24,  27, 28,  29.
13.  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  sin  thro  a.

22.  when  a  ruler  hath  done  somewhat  thiough  1.

27.  if  any  of  the  common  people  sin  through  1.
Num.  15.  25.  it  shall  be  forgiven  the  .  tor  it  is  a.
Acts  3.  if.  1  wot  that  thro’  1.  ye  did  it,  as  your  rulers
17.  30.  and  the  times  of  this  i.  God  winked  at
Eph.  4. 18.  being  alienated  thro’  the  a.  that  is  in  them
1  Pet.  1.  14.  according  to  the  former  lusts  in  vour  1.

2.  15.  that  ye  may  put  to  silence  1.  ot  mulish  men
IGNORANT

Signifies,  [lj  One  that  wants  understanding ,  Isa.  06.

10.  [2]  One  that  is  not  in  a  capacity  to  know  one  s
condition,  or  deliver  from  troubles,  Isa.  63.  10.
[31  Without  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  Acts
17.  23.  [4],  One  sinning  unwittingly ,  not  knowing
that  the  Christian  religion  was  the  true  religion,

1  Tim.  1.  13.  [5]  One  that  has  not  been  trained
up  in  schools  of  polite  learning,  nor  attained  his
knowledge  by  the  ordinary  way  of  learning  it  jrom
men.  Acts  4.  13.  [6]  One  not  rightly  conceiving
or  apprehending ,  Rom.  10.  3.  [7]  One  t'lat  sinneth
for  want  of  the  knowledge  of  his  duty,  and  through
inconsideration,  Heb.  5.  2.

Psal.  73. 22.  so  foolish  was  I  and  1. 1  was  as  a  beast
Isa.  56.  10.  they  are  all  i.  they  are  all  dumb  dogs
63.  16.  thou  art  our  fathei ,  tho’  Abraham  be  1.  ot  us
Acts  4.  13.  and  perceived  that  they  were  1.  men
Rom.  1. 13.  now  I  would  not  have  you  a.  brethren,

1  Cor.  10.  1.  1 12.  1.  2  Cor.  1.  8.  1  Thess.  4.  13.
10. 3.  they  being  1.  of  God’s  righteous,  going  about

11.  25.  that  ye  should  be  i.  of  this  mystery

1  Cor.  14.  38.  if  any  man  be  i.  let  him  be  1.

2  Cor.  2.  11.  for  we  are  not ».  of  Satan’s  devices
Heb.  5.  2.  who  can  have  compassion  on  the  1.

2  Pet.  3.  5.  for  this  they  willingly  are  1.  ot

8.  but,  beloved,  be  not  i.  of  this  one  thing
IGNORANTLY.

Num.  15. 28.  priests  atone  for  the  soul  that  smneth  1 .
Deut.  19. 4.  the  case,  whoso  killeth  his  neighbour  1.
Acts  17. 23.  whom  therefore  ye  i.  worship  1  declare
1  Tim.  1. 13.  had  mercy,  because  I  did  it  1.  in  unbel.
ISLAND.

Job  22.  30.  he  shall  deliver  the  i.  of  the  innocent
Isa.  34.  14.  shall  meet  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  a.
Acts  27. 16.  and  running  under  a  certain  «.  Clauda
26.  howbeit,  we  must  be  cast  on  a  certain  1.

28.  1.  they  knew  that  the  1.  was  called  Melita
7.  were  possessions  of  the  chief  man  of  the  a.

9.  others  who  had  diseases  in  the  1.  were  healed-
Rev.  6.  14.  every  i.  was  moved  out  of  its  place

16  20  every  1.  tied  away,  mountains  not  found
ISLANDS.  .  .

Isa  11. 11.  to  receive  his  people  from  the »  ot  the  sea
13.22.  wild  beasts  of  the  ».  shall  cry  in  tneir  houses

41.  1.  keep  silence  before  me,  O  *.  and  let  people

42.  12.  and  declare  the  Lord’s  praise  in  the  1.

15.  1  will  make  the  rivers  i.  and  dry  up  the  pools

59.  18.  to  the  1.  he  will  repay  recompence
jer.  50.  39.  wild  beasts  ot  the  *.  shall  dw'ell  there


ISLE.

Isa.  20.  6.  the  inhabitants  of  the  i.  say  in  that  day
23  2.  be  still,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  *.

6  pass  over  to  Tarshish,  howl,  inhabitants  of  1.
Acts  13.  6.  they  had  gone  through  the  *.  to  Paphos
28.  11.  in  a  ship  which  had  wintered  in  the  i.

]}/,,  i’q  1  John  was  m  the  1.  that  is  called  Patinos
ISLES.

G  10. 5. by  these  were  the  i.  ofthe  Gentiles  divided

Esth  10.  1.  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  on  the  1.

Psal  72.  10.  the  kings  of  the  i.  shall  bring  presents
97.  i  let  the  multitude  of  the  1.  be  glad  thereof
Isa  24  15.  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  t.  ot  the  sea
40."  15.  he  taketh  up  the  i.  as  a  very  little  thing
41. 5.  the  i.  saw  it  and  feared,  the  ends  of  the  earth
42.  4.  and  the  i.  shall  wait  tor  his  law
10  the  i.  and  the  inhabit,  thereof  sing  his  praise  !
49.  1.  listen,  O  i.  unto  me,  and  hearken  ye  people
51.  5  the  i.  shall  wait  upon  me  and  trust,  60.  9.

66. 19.  the  i.  afar  off  that  have  not  heard  my  fame
Jer.  2.  10.  for  pass  over  the  i.  of  Chittim,  and  see

25.  22.  the  kings  of  the  i.  shall  drink  after  them
31.  10.  hear  and  declare  it  in  the  i.  afar  off

Ezek.  26.  15.  shall  not  i.  shake  at  sound  of  thy  tall  t

26.  18.  the  i.  tremble,  the  i.  shall  be  troubled

27.  3.  who  art  a  merchant  of  the  people  tor  many  i.

6.  benches  of  ivory,  brought  out  or  a.  of  Chittim

7.  blue  and  purple  from  the  i.  of  Elisha

15.  many  i.  were  the  merchandise  ot  thy  hand
35.  inhabitants 'of  the  1.  shall  be  astonished  atthe*
39  6.  among  them  that  dwell  carelessly  in  the  t.
Dan.  11.  18.  after  this  he  shall  turn  his  face  to  the ;  r
Zeph.  2.  11.  all  the  i.  of  heathen  shall  worship  hm;

Gen.  41.  3.  kine  came  up  /-favoured,  4, 19,  20.  21
43.  6.  why  dealt  ye  so  i.  with  me  as  to  tell  the  man
Deut  '.  15.  21.  hath  any  i.  blemish  thou  shalt  not  offei.
Job  20.  26.  it  shall  go  i.  with  him  that  is  left
Psal.  106.  32.  it  went  i.  with  Moses  tor  their  salcei
Isa  3.  11.  woe  to  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  i.  with  hin
Jer.  40.  4.  if  it  seem  i.  to  thee  to  come  with  me
Joel  2.  20.  his  stink  and  his  t.  savour  shall  come  ui
Mic.  3.  4.  they  behaved  themsel  ves  i.  in  their  doing
Rom.  13.  10.  love  worketh  no  i.  to  his  neighbour
I LL  favouredness.

Deut.  17.  l.not  sacrifice  goat  wherein  i.-favourednei
ILLUMINATED.

Heb.  10. 32.  after  ye  were  1.  ye  endured  a  great  tigh’.
IMAGE

Signifies,  [1  ]  A  representation  or  likeness  of  a  pe>
son  or  thing,  1  Sam.  19-  13.  Mat.  22.  20.  (‘.j
Any  shape  or  picture  representing  God,  or  an
creature,  made  for  the  sake  of  divine  worship
Exod.  20.  4.  [3]  Our  resemblance  of  God 1

righteousness  and,  holiness,  Gen.  1.  26.  [4]  Ot
likeness  to  God  in  respect  of  dominion  and  pow
1  Cor.  11.7.  [5]  An  essential,  substantial,  tea
and  adequate  resemblance  of  the  personof  anothe
Col.  1. 15.  Heb.  1.  3.  It  is  taken,  [1]  Essentially
as  Christ  is  the  image  of  his  Rather,  Heb.  1.
[2]  Accidentally,  or  respecting  qualities f  spiritu,,
and  heavenly ,  Gen.  1.  26,  27-  [3]  hjXistentiall\
for  the  substance  of  the  things  zv hereof  they  <
images.  1  Cor.  15.  49.  Heb.  10.  1.  [4]  \lyti
cally.  Rev.  13.  14,  15.  I  14.  9,  11.  [5]  Bm
tentatively ,  1  Cor.  11.  7;  [6]  Civilly  y  M^t.  *
20.  [7]  Imaginarily ,  as  in  apparitions ,  Job  4. 1
18]  figuratively,  for  the  transitory  felicity  ai
glory  of  the  wicked,  Psal.  73.  20.  [9]  Idolatrw
ly,  2  Kings  17-10,  16.  .

Gen.  1.  26.  let  us  make  man  in  our  *.27.1  9.  0.

5.  3.  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  1.  after  his  a.
Lev.  26.  1.  nor  rear  up  a  standing  1.  Deut.  16.  2!

1  Sam.  19. 13.  Michal  took  an  i.  and  laid  it  in  be
16.  behold  there  was  an  i.  in  the  bed  with  pale

2  Kings  3.  2.  for  Jehoram  put  away  the  1.  ot  Ba


.  /  \  it  a  /  o  **  •  1  v/  *  ,r  vi.v.  — *  *  -  r  a

10.  27 .  they  brake  down  the  i.  and  house  ot  8<u
2  Chr.  33.7.  Manasseh  set  carved  *  .in  the  house  of'


Job  4.  16.  an  i.  was  before  mine  eyes  was  silence
Psal.  39.  +  6.  surely  every  man  walketh  in  an  a.
73.  20.  when  thou  awakest,  shalt  despise  their  t
Ezek.  8.  3.  there  was  the  seat  of  the  i.  of  jealousy,
Dan.  2.  31.  behold,  a  great  i.  stood  betore  thee
35.  stone  that  smote  a.  became  a  great  mountai

3.  1.  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  made  an  t.  ot  gq
5.  fall  down  and  worship  the  golden  a.  10,  Id

Hos.  3.  4.  Isr.  shall  abide  many  day3  without  at
Mat.  22.  20.  whose  is  this  1.? Mark  12. Ib.Lukew.
Acts  10.  35.  of  the  i.  which  fell  down  trom  Jupi
Rom.  1.23.  and  changed  the  glory  of  G.  into  ai  -
8. 29.  to  be  conformed  to  the  a.  of  his  Son
11.  4.  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee  to  a.  or  8ai

1  Cor.  11.7.  forasmuch  as  he  is  the  a.  and  glory  ot
15.  49.  and  as  weTiave  borne  the  i.  of  the  earth

2  Cor.  3. 18.  and  changed  into  the  same  a.  from  gl<

4.  4.  of  Christ,  who  is  the  a.  of  God,  Col.  1.  15.1
Col.  3.  10.  after  the  a.  of  him  that  created  him
Heb.  1.  3.  by  his  Son,  the  express  i.  of  his  pers<

10.  1.  a  shadow,  not  the  very  a.  ofthe  things
Rev.  13. 14.  that  they  should  make  an  a.  to  the  be.
15.  had  power  to  give  life  unto  the  i.ot  the  be

14.  9.  if  any  man  worship  the  beast  and  his  a.
11.  they  have  no  rest,  who  worsh.  beastanam

15.  2.  that  have  gotten  victory  over  beast  and  m.
16.2.  grievous  sore  fell  on  them  that  worshi  ppe'
19*.  20.  he  deceived  them  that  worshipped  his  1
20!  4.  who  had  not  worshipped  the  beast  nor  in

See  Graven.

I  MAGE-?w<rC  .  .  1

2  Citron.  3.  10.  he  made  two  cherubims  ot  a.-w>'
Molten  IMAGE.

Deut.  9.  12.  they  have  made  them  a  molten  a.
Judg.  17.  3.  the  silver  for  my  son  to  make  a  moiu  ■
Psal.  106. 19.  made  a  calf  and  worshipped  molt.  ■
Jer.  10.  14.  for  his  molten  i.  is  falsehood,  01.
Hab.  2. 18.  what  profiteth  the  graven  and  mouei
IMAGES.  t  ,  .  J

Gen.  31. 19.  Rachel  had  stolen  her  father  sa.  a
35.  Laban  searched  but  found  not  the  a.  .
Exod.  23.  24.  thou  shalt  overthrow  and  quite  u.

down  their  i.  34. 13.  Deut.’!.  b.  A » m.  •
Lev.  26. 30. 1  will  cut  down  your  1.  and  cast  care


I  M  P


IN  C


I  N  C


.Tawa.6.5.  ye  shall  make «. of  your  emerods  and  mice

11.  they  laid  the  i.  of  then-  emerods  on  the  cart
Sa/n.5.  Cl.  there  they  left  their  i.  David  burnt  them
Kings  14.  y.  hast  made  molten  a.  to  provoke  me

23.  they  also  built  them  hii*h  places,  a.  and  groves
Kings  10.26.  they  brought  i.  out  of  house  of  Baal

1.  18.  «.  brake  they  in  pieces,  18.  4. 1  23.  14.

10.  set  up  i.  ||  16.  they  made  them  molten  i.

3.  24.  Josiah  put  away  a.  that  were  spied  in  land
Chron.  14.  3.  and  Asa  broke  down  the  i.  5.

|S.  17.  .lehoiada  brake  i.  ||  31.  1.  Uezekiah  brake  i.

3.  2.  Ahaz  made  also  molten  a.  for  Baalim

I.  22.  for  Amon  sacrificed  to  all  the  carved  a.

4.  3.  Josiah  cut  down  the  carved  and  molten*.  4.

a.  17.  8.  he  shall  not  look  to  groves  or  i.

J.  u.  the  groves  and  i.  shall  not  stand  up

X  £2.  ye  shall  detile  the  ornaments  of  molten  i.
L.  29.  their  molten  i.  are  wind  and  confusion

r.  43.  13.  he  shall  break  the  i.  of  Beth  shemesh

b.  2.  idols  confounded,  her  i.  are  broken  in  pieces
reF.6.4.  altars  desolate,  and  your  a. shall  be  broken
\  idols  broken,  and  that  your  i.  may  be  cut  down
.  20.  but  they  made  the  a.  of  their  abominations
,3. 17.  taken  gold,  and  madest  to  thyself  i.  of  men
1.  21.  tlie  king  of  Babylon  consulted  with  i.

|S.  14.  the  a.  of  the  Chaldeans  pourtrayed
3. 13.  1  will  cause  their  i,  to  cease  out  of  Noph
os.  10. 1.  increas.  altars,  they  have  made  goodly  i.

1.  shall  break  down  their  altars,  spoil  their  a."

3.  2.  they  have  made  their  molten  i.  of  silver
■nos  5.  26.  ye  have  borne  the  tabernacle  of  your  i.
ic.5.  13.  tny  graven  and  standing  i.  will  1  cut  off

IMAGERY.

:ek.  8.  12.  every  man  in  the  chamber  of  his  i.
IMAGINE.

b  6. 26.  do  ye  a.  to  reprove  words  and  speeches  ?
jl.  27.  the  devices  ye  wrongfully  a.  against  me
ml.  2.  1.  why  do  the  people  i.  a  vain  thing  r
3.  12.  they  seek  my  hurt  and  i.  deceits  all  day  long

2.  3.  how  long  will  ye  a.  mischief  against  me  :

K>.  2.  which  i.  miscn.  in  their  heart,  are  for  war
■ov.  12. 20.  deceit  is  in  the  heart  of  them  that  a.  evil
is.  7.  15.  yet  do  they  a.  mischief  against  me

ih.  ].  9.  what  do  ye  a.  against  the  Lord  t

ch, 7. 10.  let  none  a.  evil  against  neighbour,  8.  17.

■ts  4. 25.  wny  do  the  people  a.  vain  things  i

:  .  IMAGINATION

unifies,  [1]  The  first  ideas,  purposes,  and  motions

/  the  soul,  Gen.  6.  5.  [2]  Stubbornness,  Deut,

19.  +  19.  Jer.  27.  t  17*  [3]  Corrupt  reasonings,

!  Cor.  10.  t  5.

ai.  6.5.  every  a.  of  his  heart  was  evil  continually

21.  the  a.  ot  man’s  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth

rHt.  29-  19-  though  1  walk  in  the  i.  of  mine  heart
..  21.  for  I  know  their  a.  l  Citron.  28.  9.

Viron.  29.  18.  keep  this  for  ever  in  the  a.  of  heart
23. 17.  say  to  every  one  walketh  aft.  a.  of  his  h.
'■kt  1. 51.  scattered  the  proud  in  a.  of  their  hearts
IMAGINATIONS.

Ihr.  28.  9.  L.  understands  all  the  a.  of  thoughts
al,  81.  +  12.  I  gave  them  up  to  the  hardness  of  a.
ov.  6.  18.  an  heart  that  deviseth  wicked  i.

m.  3.  60.  thou  hast  seen  all  their  a.  against  me
>1.  thou  hast  heard  all  their  a.  against  me

•m.  1. 21.  but  became  vain  in  their  a.  heai  tdarken.
lor.  10. 5.  casting  down  a.  that  exalt,  against  God
See  Heart.

IMAGINED.

n.  11. 6.  nothing  restrained,  which  they  have  a.

.  10.2.  let  them  be  taken  in  devices  they  have  a.

.  11.  intended  evils,  they  a.  mischievous  device

IMAGINED!!.

ih.  1. 11.  there  is  one  that  a.  evil  against  the  Lord
IMMEDIATELY.


.4.  22.  they  a.  left  the  ship  and  followed  him
:  3.a.  his  leprosy  was  cleans.  Mark!. 42.  Luke  5.13
34.  a.  received  sight,  Mark  10.  52.  Luke  18.  43
>•74.  a.  the  cock  crew,  Luke  22.  60.  John  18.  27
irk] .  12.  a.  the  Spirit  driveth  him  into  wilderness
11.  he  lifted  her  up,  and  i.  the  fever  left  her
15.  Satan  cometli  a.  and  taketh  away  the  word
7-  when  affliction  ariseth,  a.  they  are  offended
ke  1.  64.  Zacharias,  his  mouth  was  opened  a.

49.  a.  it  fell  ||8.44.  a.  her  issue  of  blood  staunchec
P- 13.  a.  she  was  made  straight  and  glorified  floe
'•  11.  that  the  kingdom  of  God  should  a.  appear
m  0.  9  and  a.  the  man  was  made  whole
ts  9.  34.  Eneas  arose  a.  ||  10.  33.  1  sent  a.  to  thef
p.  23.  a.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him
1.  €6.  and  a.  all  the  doors  were  opened
d.  1.  16.  a.  I  conferred  not  with  flesh  anti  blood
P.  4.  2.  and  a.  1  was  in  the  Spirit,  and  behold
!  IMMORTAL

'mhes,  [1]  One  who  ts  simply  and  every  way
ruorruptihle,  without  possibility  of  perishing  oi
yrng,  1  lim.  1.  17.  [2]  That  which  being

nee  dead  shall  rise  again,  never  to  die  more ,
Eor.  15.  53.  [3]  The  consummate  glory

•nd  eternal  blessedness  of  the  saints  in  heaven .

torn.  2.  7.

im.  1.  17.  now  to  the  King  eternal,  a.  invisible
IMMORTALITY.

'!”•  , 7 *  tolhem  who  seek  for  1.  eternal  life
I5'  5Varul  this  mortal  must  put  on  a.

'  when  this  mortal  shall  have  put  on  a.
tim.  6.  16.  who  only  hath  a.  dwelling  in  the  light
1  tm.  l.  lo.  who  brought  a.  to  light  thro’  the  gospel
IMMUTABLE.

18-  that  by  two  a.  things,  in  which  it  was
IMMUTABILITY.

’  •  o.  17.  the  a.  of  his  counsel,  confirmed  it
,,  „  by  an  oath

.  IMPART.

*e  iii  tWi?  f0a,s>  let  him  a.  to  him  that  hath  none
’it.  1. 11.  that  1  may  a.  to  you  some  spiritual  gift
„  IMPARTED.

•  17.  nor  hath  he  a.  to  her  understanding
<«'#.2.8.  we  were  willing  to  have  a.  our  own  sou  Is

„  impediment.

7  *  7.  32.  they  bring  one  that  had  i.  in  his  speech

mORt.  impenitent.

’"•x.o.thou,  after  thva.  heart,  treasurest  up  wrath


IMPERIOUS.

Ezek.  16.  30.  the  work  of  an  a.  whorish  woman

IMPLACABLE.

Rom.  1.31.  without  natural  affection,  a.  unmerciful
IMPLEAD.

Acts  19.  38.  the  law  is  open,  let  them  a.  one  another

IMPORT  UN  El  V.

Luke  11.  8.  because  of  his  a.  he  will  rise  and  give  him
IMPOSE.

Ezra  7.  24.  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  a.  toll  upon  them
IMPOSED.

Heb. 9.10.  stood  only  in  carnal  ordinances  i.  on  them
IMPOSSIBLE.

Mat.  17.  20.  and  nothing  shall  be  a.  unto  you
19.  26.  with  men  is  a.  Mark  10.  27.  Luke  18.  27.
Luke  1.  37.  for  with  God  nothing  shall  be  a.  18.27.
17. 1.  he  said,  it  is  a.  but  that  offences  will  come
Heb. 6. 4.  it  is  a.  for  those  who  were  once  enlightened
18.  in  which  it  was  a.  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have
11.  6.  but  without  faith  it  is  a.  to  please  God
IMPOTENT.

John  5.  3.  in  these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  i.  folk
Acts  4.  9.  of  the  good  deed  done  to  the  a.  man
14.  8.  there  sat  a  man  at  Lystra  a.  in  his  feet
IMPOVERISH.

Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  a.  thy  fenced  cities  thou  trust.
IMPOVERISHED.

Judg.  6. 6.  Isr.  was  greatly  a.  because  of  Midianites
Psal.  106.  +43.  they  were  i.  for  their  iniquity
Isa.  40.  20.  he  that  is  so  i,  chooseth  a  tree  will  not  rot
Mai.  1.4.  whereas  Edom  saith,  we  are  a.  but  will  ret.
IMPRISONED.

Acts  22.  19.  they  know  that  1  a.  and  beat  them
IMPRISONMENT.

Ezra  7.  26.  whether  it  be  to  death,  banishment,  or  i.
Heb.  11.  36.  others  had  trial  of  mockings,  bonds,  a.
IMPRISONMENTS.

2  Cor.  6.  5.  approving  ourselves  in  stripes,  in  a.
IMPUDENT.

Prov.  7.  13.  and  with  an  a.  face  she  said  to  him
Ezek.  2.  4  for  they  are  a.  children,  and  stiff-hearted

3.  7.  the  house  of  Israel  are  a.  and  hard-hearted

IMPUTE

Signifies,  [1]  Free/y  to  account  nr  ascribe  to  a  person
that  which  he  himself  hath  not,  or  did  not,  Rom.

4.  22.  [2]  To  lay  to  one's  charge,  2  Sam.  19.  19.
[3]  To  be  held  guilty.  Lev.  17.  4.  [4]  To  suspect,
1  Sam.  22. 15.

1  Sam.  22. 15.  let  not  king  i.  any  thing  to  his  servant

2  Sam.  19. 19.  let  not  my  Lord  a.  iniquity  to  me
Rom.  4.8.  blessed,  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  a.  sin

IMPUTED.

L.ev.7. 18.  nor  shall  it  be  a.  to  him  that  ofieretb  it
17.  4.  blood  shall  be  a.  to  that  man,  he  shed  blood
Rom.  4. 11.  that  righteousn.  might  be  1.  to  them  also

22.  therefore  it  was  a.  to  him  for  righteousness,
23.  Jam.  2.  23.  Gal.  3.  t  6.

24.  for  us  also,  to  whom  it  shall  be  a.  if  we  believe

5.  13.  but  sin  is  not  a.  when  there  is  no  law
1MPUTETH.

Psal.  32. 2.  blessed  to  whom  the  L.  a.  not  iniquity
Rom.  4. 6.  to  whom  G.  a.  righteousn.  without  works
IMPUTING.

Hah.  1. 11.  he  shall  pass  over,  a.  his  powerto  his  god
2  Cor. 5. 19.  G.  in  Chr.  not  a.  their  trespasses  to  them
IN

Signifies,  [1]  By  or  through,  John  17.  10.  Gal.  3.  8.
[2]  Out  of,  Exod.  31.  4.  [3]  With,  or  together
with.  Mat.  16.  27.  [4J  As,  Mat.  10.  41.  [51

From,  Col.  3.  16.  [6]  Before,  John  1.  1.  [7]

Upon,  John  14.  1.  [8]  After,  Mark  13.  24.  com¬
pared  with  Mat.  24.  29.

Gen.  7.  16.  Noah  in  the  ark,  and  the  L.  shut  him  in
John  14.  10.  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  11,  20.

See  Him,  We,  T  hee,  Them,  Us,  You.
INASMUCH.

Deut.  19.  6.  a.  as  he  hated  him  not  in  time  past
Ruth  3.  10.  a.  as  thou  followedst  not  young  men
Mat.  25. 40.  a.  as  have  done  it  to  one  of  least  of  these

45.  a.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  these

INCENSE

Signifies,  [1]  A  rich  perfume  used  in  sacrifices,
Fixed.  37  -  29.  [2]  The  merits  of  Christ's  death.
Rev.  8.  3.

Exod.  30.8.  shall  burn  a  perpetual  a.  before  the  L.
9.  ye  shall  offer  no  strange  a.  thereon,  nor  sacrifice
37.29.  he  made  the  pure  a.  of  sweet  spices
40.  5.  shalt  set  the  altar  of  gold  for  a.  before  the  ark
Lev.  10.  1.  each  took  his  censer,  and  put  a.  thereon
16.  13.  he  shall  put  a.  on  the  fire  before  the  Lord
Num.  7.  14.  one  spoon  of  ten  shekels  full  of  a.  86.
16.  7.  put  a.  in  them  before  the  L.  to  morrow,  17.

35.  a  tire  consumed  the  250  men  that  offered  a.

46.  Moses  said  to  Aaron,  put  on  a.  and  go  quickly

47.  he  put  on  a.  and  made  an  atonem.  For  people
Deut.  33. 10.  they  shall  put  a.  bef.  thee,  and  sacrifi.

2  Chron.  30.  14.  the  altars  of  a.  took  they  away

34.  25.  forsaken  me,  and  burned  a.  to  other  gods
Psal.  66.  15.  1  will  offer  to  thee  the  a.  of  rams
141.  2.  let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  thee  as  a.
Isa.  1. 13.  no  oblations,  a.  is  an  abomination  to  me
43.  23.  1  have  not  wearied  thee  with  a.

60.  6.  shall  bring  gold  and  a.  and  shew  forth  praises

65.  3.  sacrificeth  and  burneth  a.  on  altars  of  brick

66.  3.  he  that  burneth  a.  as  if  he  blessed  an  idol
Jer.  6. 20.  why  cometh  there  to  me  a.  from  Sheba  ?

11.  12.  and  cry  to  the  gods  to  whom  they  offer  i.

17.  to  proyoke  me  to  anger,  in  offering  a.  to  Baal
41. 5.  offerings  and  a.  in  their  hand  to  bring  them

48.  35.  and  him  that  burneth  a.  to  his  gods
Ezek.  8.  11.  arid  a  thick  cloud  of  a.  went  up
16.  18.  thou  hast  set  mine  oil  and  a.  before  them

23.  41.  whereupon  thou  hast  set  mine  a.  and  oil
Mai.  1. 11.  in  every  place  a.  shall  be  offered  to  my
Luke  1 .10.  people  were  praying  without  at  time  of  a'.
Rev.  5.  +8.  having  harps,  and  golden  vials  full  of  a.
8.  3.  there  was  given  to  him  much  a.  to  offer

4.  the  smoke  of  thy  a.  ascended  up  before  God

See  Altar,  Burn,  Burnt.

Sweet  INCENSE.

Exod.  25.  6.  spices  for  sweet  i.  35. 8, 28.  Num.  4. 16.

31. 11.  to  make  oil  and  sweet  i.  for  the  holy  place


Exod. 39.38.  they  brought  the  oil  and  sweet  a.  to  Moses
Lev.  16.  12.  Aaron  took  a  censer,  hands  full  of  sw.  a.
INCENSED.

Isa.  41. 11.  all  they  that  were  a.  ag.  thee  be  ashamed
45.  24.  all  that  are  a.  against  him  shall  be  ashamed
IN  CHANTER.

Deut.  18. 10.  there  shall  not  be  found  an  a.  or  a  witch
IN  CHANTERS.

Jer.  27. 9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  dreamers  nor  a
IN  CHANTMENTS.

Exod.  7. 11.  magicians  did  so  with  a.  22.  1 8.  7,  18.
Lev.  19.  26.  nor  shall  ye  use  a.  nor  observe  times*
Num.  23.23.  there  is  no  1.  against  Jacob,  nor  divinat
24. 1.  Balaam  went  not  to  seek  fora,  but  set  his  face*
2  Kings  17. 17.  Isr.  used  divinat.  and  i.  and  did  evil
21.  6.  Manasseh  used  a.  2  Chron.  33.  6.

Reel.  10. 11.  surely  the  serpent  will  bite  without  a.
Isa.  47.  9.  and  for  the  great  abundance  of  thine  a.

12.  stand  now  with  thine  a.  and  thy  sorceries

INCLINE.

Josh.  24. 23.  a.  your  heart  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel
1 Kings  Q.  58.  that  he  may  a.  our  hea.  to  keep  his  law
Psal.  78. 1.  a.  your  ears  to  the  words  of  my  mouth
119.  36.  a.  my  heart  unto  thy  testimoni.  not  to  cov.
141.  4.  a.  not  my  heart  to  any  evil  thing
See  Ear.

T  INCLINED.

Judg.  9. 3.  and  their  hearts  a.  to  follow  Abimelech
Ps.  40. 1.  L.  i.  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry,  116.  2.
119. 112.  1  have  a.  mine  heart  to  perform  thy  stat.
Prov.  5. 13.  nor  a.  mine  ear  to  them  who  instruct,  me
Jer. 7.  24.  nor  a.  ear,  26. 1  11. 8.  I  17.  23.  |  34.  14

25.  4.  but  ye  have  not  a.  your  ear,  35.  15. 1  44*  5
1NCLINF2TH.

Prov.  2. 18.  her  house  a.  to  death,  and  paths  to  dead
INCLOSE.

Cant.  8.  9.  if  she  be  a  door,  we  will  i.  her  with  cedar
IN  CLOSED.

Exod.  39.  6.  onyx-stone  a.  in  ouches  of  gold,  13.
Judg.  20.  43.  Israel  a.  the  Benjamites  round  about
Ps.  17. 10.  they  are  a.  in  their  own  fat.  speak  proudly
22. 16.  the  assembly  of  the  wicked  have  i.  me
Cant.  4.  12.  a  garden  a.  is  my  sister,  my  spouse
Lam.  3.  9.  he  hath  i.  my  ways  with  hewn  stone
Luke  5. 6.  they  a.  great  multit.  of  fishes,  net  brake
1 N  CLOS1 N  GS.

Exod.  28. 20.  stones  shall  be  set  in  gold  in  a.  39  13
INCONTINENCE.

1  Cor.  7.  5.  that  Satan  tempt  you  not  for  vour  a

INCONTINENT'.

2  Tim.  3.  3.  without  natural  affection,  a.  fierce

INCORRUPTIBLE.

Rom.  1.  23.  and  changed  the  glory  of  the  a.  God
1  Cor.  9.  25.  we  do  it  to  obtain  an  i.  crown
15.  52.  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  a.  we  changed
1  Pet.  1.  4.  begotten  us  to  an  inheritance  a.  undefiled
23.  being  born  ot  a.  seed,  by  the  word  of  God
.  IN  CORRUPTION.

1  Cor.  ?5.  42.  it  is  sown  in  corrupt,  it  is  raised  in  a
50.  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  a.

53.  for  this  corruptible  must  put  on  a.

54.  so  when  this  corruptible  shall  have  put  on  a.

INCREASE

Signifies,  [1]  The  profit  which  cometh  of  the  earth
and  of  cattle,  Deut.  7.  13. 1  32.  13.  Prov.  14.  4.
[2]  rlo  grow,  advance,  or  improve.  Col.  1.  10.  1
lhess.  3.  12.  [3]  To  be  of  more  esteem  and  au¬

thority,  John  3.  30.  [4]  To  swell  up,  Gen.  7.  17.
[5]  To  recruit,  or  reinforce,  Judg.  0.  20.  [6]  To
multiply,  1  Chron.  27  -  23.  [7]  To  aggravate  or
make  greater,  Ezra  10.  10.  [8]  To  strengthen  and
enlarge,  Luke  17.  5.  [9]  To  make  profitable  and
fruitful,  1  Cor.  3.  6,  7.

INCREASE,  Substantive.

Lev.  19.  25.  that  it  may  yield  you  the  a.  thereof
25.7-  for  thy  cattle  shall  all  the  a.  thereof  be  meat

36.  take  thou  no  usury  of  him  or  a.  but  fear  God

37.  not  money  for  usury,  lend  him  victuals  for  a.
26.4.  the  land  shall  yield  her  a.  and  trees  of  field

20.  your  land  shall  not  yield  her  i.  or  trees  of  field
Num.  18.  30.  as  the  a.  of  the  threshing  floor
32.  14.  risen  up  in  father’s  stead  an  a.  of  sinful  men
Deut.  7. 13. 1  will  also  bless  the  a.  of  thy  kine,  28. 4.
14. 22.  thou  shalt  truly  tithe  all  the  a.  of  thy  seed  ’
28.  shall  bring  forth  all  tithe  of  the  a.  same  vear

16. 15.  the  Lord  thy  G.  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thy  a.
28.  18.  cursed  shall  be  the  a.  of  thy  kine,  51.

1  Sam.  2. 33.  i.  of  thy  house  shall  die  in  flower  of  age
Neh.  9.  37.  it  yieldeth  much  a.  to  the  kings  over  us
Job  20.  £8.  the  a.  of  his  house  shall  depart,  and  good*
31.  12.  it  is  a  fire  would  root  out  all  mine  i.

Psal.  67 •  6.  earth  shall  yield  her  a.  and  God  bless  us
78.  46.  he  gave  also  their  a.  to  the  caterpillar

85. 12.  what  is  good,  and  our  land  shall  yield  her  a.
Prov.  14. 4.  but  much  a.  is  by  the  strength  of  the  ox

18.  20.  and  with  the  a.  of  his  lips  he  shall  be  filled
Eccl.  5. 10.  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  a.  this  is  vanity
Isa.  9. 7.  of  the  a.  of  his  government  shall  be  no  end
Jer.  2.  3.  first-fruits  of  his  a.  was  holiness  to  the  Lord
Ezek.  18.  8.  not  usury,  nor  hath  taken  any  a.  17.

13.  he  hath  given  on  usury,  and  taken  a.  22. 12.

34.  27.  tree  yield  fruit,  and  earth  shall  yield  her  a„.

Zech.  8.  12.  and  the  ground  shall  give  her  a.

1  Cor.  3.  6.  I  have  planted,  but  God  gave  the  i  7
Eph.  4.  16.  maketh  a.  of  the  body  to  edifying  in  love
Col.  2. 19.  all  the  body  increased!  -with  the  a.  of  God
INCREASE,  Verb.

Lev.  25. 16.  by  years  thou  shalt  a.  the  price  thereof
Dent.  6.  3.  hear,  O  Israel,  that  ye  may  a.  mightily
7.  22.  not  at  once,  lest  beasts  of  the  field  a.  on  thee
Judg.  9.29.  he  said,  a.  thy  army,  and  come  out
1  Chr.  27.  23.  he  would  a.  Israel  like  to  the  stars
Ezra  10. 10.  taken  strange  wives  to  i.  trespass  of  Isr.
Job  8.7-tho  small,  yetthy  lat.  end  should  greatly’  a.
Psal.  44.  12.  dost  not  a.  thy  wealth  by  their  price
62. 10.  if  riches  a.  set  not  your  heart  upon  them
71.  21.  thou  shalt  a.  my  greatness,  and  comfort

73.12.  wno  prosper  in  the  world,  they’  a.  in  riches
115.  14.  the  Lord  shall  a.  vou  more  and  more
Prov.  1.  5.  a  wise  man  wifi  a.  learning,  9.  9.

22. 16.  he  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  a.  his  riches
28.  28.  but  when  they  perish,  the  righteous  a.

249


IN  D


I  N  F


I  N  H


Eccl.  5. 1 1 .  goods  i.  they  are  increased  that  eat  them

6.  11.  there  be  many  things  that  i.  vanity
Isa.  29.  19.  the  meek  shalT  i.  their  joy  in  the  Lord
5*.  9.  and  didst  «.  thy  perfumes  and  didst  send
Ezek.  5.  16.  1  will  t.  the  famine  on  you  and  break
36.  29.  1  will  i.  it,  and  lay  no  famine  on  you
3*.  1  will  i.  them  with  men  like  a  flock
Dan.  11.  39.  whom  he  shall  i.  with  glory
lion.  4.  10.  they  commit  whoredom,  and  shall  not  i.
Zech.  10.  8.  they  shall  as  they  have  increased
Luke  1“.  5.  the  apostles  said,  Lord,  i.  our  faith
John  3.  30.  he  must  i.  but  l  must  decrease
2  Cor.  9.  10.  and  i.  the  fruits  of  your  righteousness

1  Thess.  3.  12.  the  Lord  make  you  to  i.  in  love

4.  10.  we  beseech  3’ou,  that  ye  i.  more  and  more

2  Tim.  2.  16.  they  will  i.  to  more  ungodliness

INCREASED.

Gen.  7.  17.  the  waters  i.  and  bare  up  the  ark,  18.

30.  30.  it  was  little  thou  hadst,  and  it  is  now  i.

43.  Jacob  i.  ||  Exod.  1.7.  Israel  i.  abundantly
Exod.  23.  30.  till  thou  be  2.  and  inherit  the  land

1  Sam.  14.  19.  the  noise  in  the  host  went  on  and  i.

2  .Sam.  15.  12.  the  people  i.  with  Absalom

1  Kings  22.  35.  the  battle  i.  that  day,  2  Chr.  18.  34.

1  Chron.  4.  38.  the  house  of  their  fathers  i.  greatly
Ezra  9.  6.  for  our  iniquities  are  i.  over  our  head
Psal.  3.  1.  how  are  they  i.  that  trouble  me

4.  7.  in  the  time  that  their  corn  and  wine  i.

49.  16.  when  the  glory  of  his  house  is  i.

105.  24.  and  he  i.  his  people  greatly

Prov.  9.  11.  the  years  of  thy  life  shall  be  i.

Eccl.  2.  9.  I  i.  more  than  all  before  me

5.  11.  goods  increase,  they  are  i.  that  eat  them
Isa.  9.  3.  multiplied  the  nation,  and  not  i.  the  joy

26.  15.  thou  hast  i.  the  nation,  O  l  ord
Jer.  5.  6.  and  their  backslid ings  are  i.

15.  8.  their  widows  are  i.  above  the  sand  of  the  seas

29.  6.  take  wives,  that  ye  may  be  i.  there

30. 14.  wounded  thee,  because  thy  sins  were  i.  15.
Lam.  2.  5.  hath  i.  in  daughter  of  Judah  mourning
Ezek.  16.  26.  and  hast  i.  thy  whoredoms,  23.  14.

28.  5.  by  thy  great  wisdom  hast  thou  i.  thy  riches
Dan.  12.  4.  many  run,  and  knowledge  shall  be  2.
Hot.  4.  7.  as  they  were  2.  so  they  sinned  against  me
10. 1.  according  to  the  fruit,  he  hath  i.  the  altars
Zech.  10.  8.  they  shall  increase,  as  they  have  i.
Mark  4.8.  other  did  yield  fruit,  that  sprang  up  and  *.
Lnlce  2.  52.  Jesus  i.  in  wisdom  and  stature
Acts  6.  7.  and  the  word  of  God  i.  and  the  number

9.  22.  but  Saul  i.  the  more  in  strength

16.  5.  the  churches  i.  in  number  daily

-2  Cor.  10.  15.  but  having  hope  when  your  faith  is  i.
llev.  3.  17.  sayest,  l  am  rich,  and  i.  with  goods
INCREASES!-,

Job  10.  17.  and  i.  thine  indignation  upon  me
INCREASE!  IL

Job  10.  16.  my  affliction  2.  ||  12.  23.  he  i.  nations
Psal.  74.  23.  the  tumult  of  those  2.  continually
Prov.  11.  24.  there  is  that  scattereth,  and  yet  i.

23  .  28.  she  i.  the  transgressors  among  men

24.  5.  a  man  of  knowledge  i.  strength
28.  8.  he  that  by  unjust  gain  2.  his  substance
29. 16.  when  wicked  are  multiplied,  transgression  i.
Eccl.  1.  18.  he  that  i.  knowledge,  i.  sorrow
Isq.  40. 29.  to  them  that  have  no  might,  he  i.  strength
Hos.  12.  1.  he  daily  i.  lies  and  desolation
Hab.  2.  6.  woe  to  him  that  i.  that  which  is  not  his
Col.  2. 19.  the  body  i.  with  the  increase  of  God
INCREASING,

Col.  1.  10.  and  t.  in  the  knowledge  of  God
INCREDIBLE.

Acts  26.  8.  why  thought  i.  God  should  raise  dead  ?
INCURABLE.

2  Chr.  21.  18.  Lord  smote  him  with  an  i.  disease
Job  34.  6.  my  wound  is  i.  without  transgression
Jer.  15.  18.  why  is  my  wound  i.  whiclYrefuseth

30.  12.  thy  bruise  is  i.  ||  15.  thy  sorrow  is  i.

Mic.  1.  9.  for  her  wound  is  i.  it  is  come  to  Judah

INDEBTED.

Lnke  11.  4.  we  forgive  every  one  that  is  i.  to  us
INDEED.

Gen.  17.  19.  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  a  son  i.

20.  12.  yet  i.  she  is  my  sister,  she  is  daughter
37-  8.  shall  thou  i.  reign  over  11s,  shalt  thou  2.  ?

10.  shall  1,  thy  mother,  and  brethren  i.  come
40.  15.  for  i.  I  was  stolen  away  out  of  the  land
Exod.  19.  5.  if  you  will  obey  my  voice  2.  23.  22.
Lev.  10.  18.  ye  should  i.  have  eaten  it  in  holy  place
Num.  12.  2.  hath  the  Ld.  2.  spoken  only  by  Moses  t

21.  2.  if  thou  wilt  i.  deliver  this  people

22.  37.  am  l  not  able  i.  to  promote  thee  to  honour  ?
Dent.  2.  15.  2.  the  hand  of  the  L.  was  against  them

21.  16.  son  of  the  hated,  which  is  i.  the  first-born

Josh.  I.  20.  2.  1  have  sinned  against  the  Lord
1  Sam.  1.  11.  if  thou  wilt  i.  look  on  the  affliction

1  Kings  8.  27.  God  i.  dwell  on  earth,  2  Chr.  6.  18.

2  Kings  14.  10.  thou  hast  i.  smitten  Edom

1  Chron.  4.  10.  O  that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  i.

21.  17.  it  is  I  that  have  sinned  and  done  evil  i.

Job  19.  4.  and  be  it  i.  that  1  have  erred
Psal.  58.  1.  do  ye  i.  speak  righteousness,  O  congre.
ha.  6.  9.  hear  ye  i.  see  ye  2.  but  perceive  not
Jer.  22.  4.  for  if  ye  do  this  thing  i.  then  rUngs
Mat.  3.  11.  1  2'.  baptize,  Mark  1.  8.  Luke  3.  16.
Mark  11.  32.  men  counted  that  he  was  a  prophet  i.
Luke  23.  41.  we  2.  justly  |1  24.  34.  Lord  is  risen  i.
John  1.  47.  behold  an  Israelite  i.  in  whom  no  guile

4.  42.  that  this  is  i.  the  Christ,  the  Saviour

6.  55.  my  flesh  is  meat  i.  my  blood  is  drink  2.

7.  26.  do  the  rulers  know  i.  that  this  is  very  Christ  ?

8.  31.  if  ye  continue,  then  are  ye  my  disciples  i.
36.  if  the  Son  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  i.

Acts  4.  16.  for  that  i.  a  notable  miracle  been  done
Rom.  8.  7-  not  subject  to  the  law,  neither  2.  can  be

14.  20.  all  things  i.  are  pure,  but  it  is  evil  for  that

2  Cor.  11.  1.  you  could  bear,  and  i.  bear  with  me
Phil.  1.  15.  some  i.  preach  Christ,  even  of  envy

3.  1.  to  write  to  you  to  me  i.  is  r  ot  grievous
Col.  2.  23.  which  things  i.  have  a  tiew  of  wisdom
1  Ihess.  4.  10.  2.  ye  do  it  towards  ',.1  the  brethren
1  Tim.  5.  3.  honour  widows  that  j.;e  widows  i.

5.  she  that  is  a  widow  i.  and  desolate,  16.

250


1  Pet.  2. 4.  disallowed  i.  of  men,  but  chosen  of  God

See  En deavour.
INDIGNATION

Signifies,  [1]  Wrath ,  anger,  Neh.  4.  1.  Esth.  5.  9.
12]  Envy,  Acts  5.  17-  [3]  The  judgments  of  God,
or  the  dreadful  effects  of  his  anger,  Isa.  26.  20.
[4]  Messages  of  wrath,  Jer.  15.  17.  [5]  A  holy
displeasure  against  one's  self  for  sin,  accompanied
with  a  fear  of  falling  into  temptations,  so  as  to  be
overcome  by  them,  2  Cor.  7-  11.

2  Kings?).  27-  there  was  great  2.  against  Israel
Neh.  4. 1.  Sanballat  took  great  i.  mocked  the  Jews
Esth.  5.  9.  Daman  was  full  of  2".  against  Mordecai
Job  5.  t  2.  and  i.  slayeth  the  silly  one

10.  17-  and  there  increasest  thine  i.  upon  me
Psal.  69.  24.  pour  out  thy  i.  on  them,  and  let  none
78.  49.  he  cast  on  them  wrath,  2.  and  trouble
102. 10.  because  of  thine  i.  and  thy  wrath
ha.  10.  5.  and  the  staff  in  their  hand  is  mine  t.

25.  for  yet  a  little  while,  and  the  i.  shall  cease
13.  5.  Lord,  and  weapons,  of  his  2.  Jer.  50. 25.

26.  20.  hide  thyself  till  the  i.  be  overpast
30.  27.  his  lips  are  full  of  2.  his  tongue  as  fire

30.  with  the  i.  of  his  anger,  and  with  the  flame
34.  2.  for  the  2.  of  the  Lord  is  on  all  nations
66.  14.  2.  shall  be  knowm  towards  his  enemies

Jer.  10.  10.  nations  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  his  2.

15.  17.  for  thou  hast  filled  me  with  i.

Lam.  2.  6.  hath  despised  in  2.  of  his  anger  the  king
Ezek.  21.  31.  I  will  pour  out  mine  2.  upon  thee

22.  24.  the  land  not  rained  on  in  the  day  of  his  2.

31.  therefore  I  poured  out  mine  2.  on  them
Dan.  11.  30.  and  have  i.  against  the  holy  covenant
Mic.  7.  9.  I  will  bear  the  i.  of  the  Lord

Nah.  1.  6.  who  can  stand  before  his  i.  ?  .  ,

Hab.  3.  12.  thou  didst  march  through  the  land  in  1.
Zech.  1.  12.  thou  hast  had  2.  these  seventy  years
Mai.  1.  4.  people  against  whom  the  Lord  hath  2.

I  at.  20.  24.  they  were  moved  with  i.  against  two
26.  8.  they  had  i.  saying,  to  what  purpose  is  this
Luke  1.3.  14.  ruler  of  synagogue  answered  with  2.
Acts 5.  17.  and  they  were  filled  with  2.

Rom.  2.  8.  but  obey  unrighteousness,  2.  wrath
2  Cor.  7.  11.  yea  what  i.l  yea  what  fear!

Heb.  10.  27.  a  fearful  looking  for  of  fiery  2.

Rev  14.  10.  poured  out  into  the  cup  of  his  2.
INDITING.

Psal.  45. 1.  my  heart  is  i.  a  good  matter
INDUSTRIOUS.

1  Kings  11.  28.  seeing  the  young  man  that  he  was  1.
INEXCUSABLE.

Rom.  2.  1.  therefore  thou  art  2.  O  mail,  that  judgest
1NEALLI  BEE.

Acts  1.  3.  he  shewed  himself  by  many  2.  proofs
1  N  EA M  V.

Prov.  25.  10.  and  thine  i.  turn  not  away
Ezek.  36.  3.  and  ye  are  an  i.  of  the  people
INFAMOUS.

Ezek.  22.  5.  the3’ shall  mock  thee  which  art  2.
INFANT.

1  Sam.  15.  3.  slay  man,  worwan,  i.  and  suckling
Isa.  65.  20.  shall  be  no  more  thence  an  2.  of  days

INFANTS.

Job  3.  16.  or  as  i.  which  never  saw  light
Hos.  13.  16.  their  i.  shall  bedashed  in  pieces
Luke  18.  15.  and  they  brought  also  i.  to  him
INFERIOR.

Job  12.  3.  understanding  I  am  not  2.  to  you,  13.  2.
Dan.  2.  39.  shall  arise  another  kingdom  i.  to  thee

2  Cor.  12.  13.  w  hat  were  ye  2.  to  other  churches
Heb.  2.  +7.  madest  him  little  2.  to  the  angels

IN  FIDEL.

2  Cor.  6.  15.  hath  he  that  believeth  with  an  2.  ?

1  Tim.  5.  8.  denied  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  i.

INFINITE.

Job  22.  5.  and  are  not  thine  iniquities  2".  ?

Psal.  147.  5.  great  is  Lord,  his  understanding  is  2".
Nah.  2.  f  9.  take  the  spoil  of  their  i.  store
3.  9.  and  Egypt  were  her  strength,  and  it  was  i.
INFIRMITY

Signifies,  [1]  Sickness,  or  feebleness  of  body,  1  Tim.

5.  2.3.  [2]  Afflictions,  reproaches,  and  persecutions,
2  Cor.  12.  10.  [3]  Spiritual  weakness,  and  dejects
in  grace,  Rom.  6.  19.  I  8.  26.  [4]  Failings  and
mistakes,  either  through  ignorance  or  weakness,
Rom.  15.  1.

Lev.  12.  2.  the  days  of  separation  for  her  2.

Psal.  77-  10.  1  said,  this  is  mine  i.  but  I  will
Prov.  18.  14.  the  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  2".
Luke  13.  11.  a  woman  which  had  a  spirit  ot'  i.

12.  woman,  thou  art  loosed  from  thine  2.

John  5.  5.  w  hich  had  an  i.  thirty-eight  years
Rom.  6.  19.  because  of  the  2.  of  your  flesh
Gal.  4.  13.  ye  know  how  through  2.  1  preached
Ileb.  5.  2.  for  lie  himself  also  is  compassed  with  2.
7.28.  the  law  maketh  high-priests  which  have  2.
IN  FI  RM  FITES.

Mat.  8.  17.  himself  took  our  2.  and  bare  our
Luke  5. 15.  came  to  be  healed  by  him  of  their  i.

7.  21.  in  that  hour  he  cured  many  of  their  2".  8.  2.
Rom.  8.  26  the  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  2.

15.  1.  strong  ought  to  bear  the  i.  of  the  wreak

2  Cor.  11. 39.  of  the  things  which  concern  mine  2.
12.  5.  of  myself  I  glory  not,  but  in  mine  i.  9.

10.  therefore  1  take  pleasure  in  mine  i.

1  Tim.  5.  23.  use  a  little  wine  for  thine  often  i.
Ileb.  4. 15.  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  2".

IN  FLAM  E.

Isa.  5.  11.  wroe  to  those  continue  till  wine  i.  them
IN  FLAM  l  NG.

Isa.  57.  5.  i.  yourselves  with  idols  under  every  tree
IN  FLAMMA  HON.

Lev.  13.  28.  for  it  is  an  2.  of  the  burning
Dent.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  an  2.
IN  FLIC  I  ED.

2  Cor.  2.  6.  punishment  w'hich  was  t.  of  many

INFLUENCES.

Job  38.  31.  canst  thou  bind  the  i.  of  Pleiades  ?

IN  FOLDING.

Ezek.  1.4.  a  fire  2.  itself,  and  a  brightness
INFORM.

Dent.  17. 10.  according  to  all  that  they  2.  thee


INFORMED.

Dan  9.  22.  2.  me,  and  talked  with  me,  and  said
Acts  21.  21.  are  2.  of  thee  that  thou  tr  chest,  24.

24.  1.  2.  the  governor  against  Paul,  lo.  2,  15.
INGA'l  BERING.

Exod.  23.  16.  feast  of  the  2.  in  the  end  of  the  vear
INGRAFTED.

Jam.  1.  21.  and  receive  with  meekness  the  2.  word
INHABIT.

Num.  35.  34.  defile  not  the  land  which  ye  shall  1.
Prov.  10.  30.  the  wicked  shall  not  2.  the  earth
Isa.  42.  11.  the  villages  that  Kedar  doth  2.

65.  21.  they  shall  build  houses  and  2.  them

22.  they  shall  not  build,  and  another  2.

Jer.  17.  6.  but  shall  2.  the  parched  places

48.  18.  thou  daughter,  that  dost  i.  Dibon
Ezek.  33.  24.  they  that  2.  those  wastes  of  Israel
Amos  9.  14.  shall  build  the  waste  cities  and  i.  then
Zeph.  1.  13.  shall  build  houses,  but  not  2.  them
INHABITANT.  _

Isa.  5.  9.  many  houses  great  and  fair  without  2.

6.  11.  till  the  cities  be  wasted  without  2.

9.  9.  Ephraim  and  the  i.  of  Samaria  shall  know
12.  6.  cry  out  and  shout,  thou  2.  of  Zion

20.  6.  the  2.  of  this  isle  shall  say  in  that  day

24.  17.  the  pit  and  snare  are  on  thee,  O  2.  of  cart!
33.  24.  the  2.  shall  not  say,  l  am  sick

Jer.  2.  15.  his  cities  arc  burned  without  2.

4.  7-  thy  cities  shall  be  laid  waste  without  an  2)

9.  H.|  26.  9. 1  33.  10.  |  34.22

10.  17.  gather  thy  wares,  O  2.  of  the  fortress

21.  13.  2.  of  the  valley  |122.  23.  2.  of  Lebanon
44.  22.  your  land  is  a  curse  without  an  2.

46.  19.  waste  and  desolate,  without  i.  51.  29,  37.

48.  19.  O  2.  of  Aroer  11  43.  O  i.  of  Moab

51.  35.  be  upon  Babylon,  shall  the  2.  of  Zion  3ay
Amos  1.  5.  I  will  cutoff  the  i.  from  plain  of  Aven

8.  and  l  will  cutoff  the  2.  from  Ashdod
Mic.  1. 11.  pass  away  2.  of  Saphir,  2.  of  Zaanan

12.  the  2.  of  M arotli  waited  carefully  for  good  <

13.  Othou  2.  of  Lachish,  bind  the  chariot

15.  will  bring  an  heir  to  thee,  O  2-.  of  Mareshahi
Zeph.  2.  5.  I  will  destroy,  that  there  shall  be  no  2
3.  6.  their  cities  destroyed,  so  that  there  is  none  1
IN  HABITANTS.

Gen.  19.  25.  he  overthrew  all  the  2.  of  the  cities
Exod.  15.  14.  shall  take  hold  of  the  2.  of  Palestina
15.  all  the  2.  of  Canaan  shall  melt  away
Lev.  18.  25.  the  land  itself  vomiteth  outlier  2.

25.  10.  shall  proclaim  liberty  to  all  the  2.  thereof
Num.  13.  32.  is  a  land  that  eateth  up  the  2.  thereo
Dent.  13.  13.  have  withdrawn  the  i.  of  their  city

15.  thou  shalt  surely  smite  the  2.  of  that  city
Josh.  2.  24.  even  the  i.  of  the  country  do  faint

11.  19.  that  made  peace,  save  the  2.  of  Gibeon  1

17.  12.  could  not  drive  out  the  2.  Judg.  1.  19,27.
Judg.  2.  2.  make  no  league  with  the  2.  of  this  land

5.  7.  the  2.  of  the  villages  ceased  till  1  arose

23.  curse  ye  bitterly  the  2".  thereof

10.  18.  be  head  over  all  the  i.  ofGilead,  11.  8.

21.  9.  were  none  of  the  i.  of  Jabesh-gilead  there

10.  go  and  smite  the  2.  of  Jabesh  gilead

Ruth  4. 4.  saying,  buy  it  before  the  2.  and  elders

1  Kings  17.  1.  Elijah  who  was  of  the  2.  of  Gilead

2  Kings  19.  26.  their  2.  were  of  small  power

1  Chron.  9.2.  first  2.  that  dwelt  in  their  possession

2  Chron.  20.  23.  stood  against  the  2.  of  mount  Seir ,
Job  26.  5.  are  formed  from  under  the  i.  thereof
Psal.  33.  8.  all  the  i.  of  world  stand  in  awe  of  hit

14.  he  looketh  on  all  the  i.  of  the  earth

49.  1.  hear  this,  give  ear,  all  ye  i.  of  the  world
75.  3.  the  earth  and  all  the  i.  thereof  are  dissolve
Isa.  10. 13.  pul  down  the  i.  like  a  valiant  man

18.  3.  all  ye  i.  of  the  world,  see  ye,  when  he

23.  2.  be  still,  ye  i.  of  the  isle,  thou  whom,  6.

24.  1.  and  scattereth  abroad  the  i.  thereof

5.  the  earth  is  defiled  under  the  i.  thereof

6.  therefore  the  2.  of  the  earth  are  burned

26.  9.  the  i.  of  the  world  will  learn  righteousnesi
18.  nor  have  the  2.  of  the  world  fallen

38. 11.  behold  man  no  more  with  the  i.  of  the  worl

40.  22.  the  2.  thereof  are  as  grasshoppers

42. 10.  isles  and  i.  sing  to  the  Ixtrd  a  new  song

11.  let  the  2".  of  ther<;ck  sing,  let  them  shout
49.  19.  land  too  narrow  by  reason  of  the  2.

Jer.  13.  13.  I  will  fill  the  1.  with  drunkenness

19.  12.  thus  will  1  do  to  the  i.  thereof

21.  6.  1  will  smite  the  i.  of  this  city,  man  and  bea

23.  14.  as  Sodom,  and  the  i.  thereof  as  Gomorrai

25.  29.  for  a  sword  upon  the  i.  thereof.  50.  35.

26. 15.  ye  shall  brihg  innocent  blood  on  the  i.

49.  8.  turn  back,  dwell  deep,  G  2.  of  Dedan,  30.
50.34.  tlie  Lord  will  disquiet  the  2.  of  Babylon
51.  35.  and  my  blood  upon  the  i.  of  Chaldea
Lam.  4. 12.  i.  of  the  world  would  not  have  believt
Ezek.  29.  6.  i.  of  Egypt  shall  know  l  am  the  I.on
Dan.  4.  35.  i.  of  the  earth  are  reputed  as  nothing
Mic.  6.  12.  tiie  i.  thereof  have  spoken  lies

16.  that  I  should  make  the  i.  thereof  an  hissing
Zech.  8.  20.  there  shall  come  the  2.  of  many  citie.;

21.  the  i.  of  one  city  shall  go  lo  another
Rev.  17.  2.  the  i.  of  the  earth  have  been  made  drut
See  Jerusalem.

INHABITANTS  of  the  land.  .  (

Gen.  34.30.  to  make  me  to  stink  among  the  2.  of
Exod.  23.  31 . 1  will  deliv.  the  i.  of  l.  into  your  ham
34.  12.  lest  thou  make  a  coven,  with  2.  of  land,  D
Num.  32. 17.  dwell  in  cities  because  of  the  i.  if  la>
33.  52.  shall  drive  out  the  i.  of  l.  55.  2  Chr.  20.  7
Josh.  2.  9.  all  the  i.  of  the  land  faint  because  of  yc

7.  9.  all  the  i.  of  land  shall  hear  of  it  andenviroi

9.  24.  to  destroy  all  the  i.  of  the  land  from  bet.  yoi
1  Sam.  27. 8.  these  nations  were  of  old  the  i.  of  lav .

1  Chr.  22.  18.  he  hath  given  i.  of  /.  into  my  hand
Jer.  1.  14.  an  evil  shall  break  forth  on  all  the  2.  of

10.  18.  behold,  I  will  fling  out  the  i.  ofl.  atom
47.  2.  men  shall  cry,  and'allthe  2.  of  l.  shall  hoy
Hos.  4.  1.  Lord  hath'  a  controversy  with  the  2,  of-
Joel  2.  1.  let  all  the  i.  of  the  l.  tremble  for  the  dav:
Zech.  11.  6.  for  I  will  no  more  pity  the  2.  of  the  L,

INHABITED.

Exod.  16.  35.  eat  manna,  till  they  came  to  a  land


I  N  H


I  N  I


I  N  I


>v.  16.22.  goat  bear  their  iniquities  to  a  land  not  a.
24.  1  6.  came  to  the  nether  land  newly  i.

а.  13.  20.  it  shall  never  be  i.  nor  dwelt  in

t.  26.  thou  shalt  be  a.  ||  45.  18.  formed  it  to  be  a.

4. 3.  and  make  the  desolate  cities  to  be  a.
r,  6.  8.  lest  1  make  thee  a  land  not  i.
j,  6.  shall  inhabit  in  a  salt  land  and  not a.

2.  6.  I  will  make  thee  cities  which  are  not  a.

5. 26.  afterward  it  shall  be  a.  as  in  the  days  of  old
X  13.  it  shall  not  be  a.  ||  39.  no  more  a.  for  ever
xk.  12.  20.  the  cities  that  are  a.  shall  be  laid  waste

5.  20.  when  l  shall  set  thee,  that  thou  be  not  a.

9.  11.  nor  shall  it  be  a.  forty  years

б.  10.  the  cities  shall  be  a.  and  the  wastes  builded

8.  12.  upon  the  desolate  places  that  are  now  a.
ich.  2.  4.  Jerusalem  be  i.  as  towns  without  walls
.  5.  from  Gaza,  and  Ashkelon  shall  not  be  ».

2.  6.  Jerusalem  shall  be  i.  again  in  her  place
4. 10.  it  shall  be  lifted  upland  i.  in  her  place
11,  no  destruction,  but  Jerus.  shall  be  safely  i.
IM  HA  BITERS.

er.  8.  13.  saying,  woe,  woe,  woe,  to  a.  of  the  earth
2.  12.  woe  to  the  a.  of  the  earth  and  of  the  sea
INHABITESI'.

sal."2 2.  3.  O,  thou  that a.  the  praises  of  Israel
IN  HABI  IE  l  II.

i A  15.  28.  he  dwelleth  in  houses  which  no  man  a.
■a.  37.  15.  thus  saith  the  lofty  One  that  a.  eternity
INHABITING.

sal.  74.  14.  be  meat  to  the  people  a.  the  w  ilderness
1NI1ER1 1


gnifies,  [1]  To  possess  by  right  of  inheritance
or  succession,  Deut.  21.  16.  [2]  To  subdue  by

grace ,  and  gain  to  the  church  of  Christ,  Psal.
82.  8.  Isa.  51.  3.  [3]  To  come  into,  Luke  18.
18.  1  Cor.  6.  9.  [4]  To  be  led  away  with,

Jer.  16.  19.

en.  15.  8.  whereby  shall  1  know  that  1  shall  a.  it?

sod.  32.  13.  and  they  shall  i.  it  for  ever

um.  18.  24.  1  have  given  it  to  the  Levites  to  a.

6.  55.  accord,  to  the.  names  of  tribes  they  shall  i,
2.  19.  we  will  not  a.  on  yonder  side  Jordan

eut.  1.  38.  for  he  shall  cause  Israel  to  a.  it
2.  19.  which  the  Lord  God  givetk  you  to  a.

I.  16.  he  maketh  his  sons  to  a.  what  he  hath

idg.  11.  2.  thou  shalt  not  a.  in  our  father  s  house
Sam.  2.  8.  to  make  them  i.  the  throne  of  glory
sal.  25.  13.  and  his  seed  si  all  a.  the  earth

7.  9.  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  i.  the  earth

II.  but  the  meek  shall  a.  the  earth,  Mat.  5.  5.

■22.  such  as  be  blessed  of  him  shall  a.  the  earth
>9.  36.  the  seed  also  of  his  servants  shall  i.  it

.2.  8.  arise,  O  God,  for  thou  shalt  a.  all  nations
rov.  3.  35.  the  wise  shall  a.  glory,  but  shame
i.  21.  cause  those  who  love  me  to  a.  substance
1.  29.  troubleth  his  own  house,  shall  a.  the  wind
4.  18.  the  simple  a.  folly,  but  the  prudent
a.  49.8.  to  cause  to  a.  the  desolate  heritages

4.  3.  and  thy  seed  shall  a.  the  Gentiles

»5.  9.  and  mine  elect  shall  a.  it,  and  my  servants
! r .  12.  14.  1  have  caused  my  people  Israel  to  a.

9.  1.  why  then  doth  their  king  a.  Gad  J
zek.  7.  t  24.  they  shall  a.  tl.eir  holy  places
7.  14.  ye  shall  a.  it,  one  as  well  as  another
ech.  2.  12.  the  Lord  shall  a.  Judah  his  portion
lat.  19. 29.  and  shall  a.  everlasting  life

15.  34.  come  a.  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you
lark  10.  17.  i.  eternal  life,  Luke  10.  25.  I  18.  18.
Cor.  6.  9.  unrighteous  not  a.  the  kingdom  of  God

10.  neither  shall  extortioners  a.  Gal.  5.  21.

5.  50.  flesh  and  blood  cannot  a.  the  kingdom  of

God,  nor  delft  corruption  a.  incorruption
leb.6.  12.  who  thro.sjft  faith  a.  the  promises
Pet.  3.  9.  are  called,  that  ye  should  a.  a  blessing
er.21.7.  he  that  overcometh  shall  a.  all  things
l  N  H  E  R  1  1’  land.


en.  15.  7.  to  give  thee  this  land  to  a.  it

18.  4.  that  thou  mayest  a.  land  wherein  a  stranger
ev,  20.  24.  1  have  said,  ye  shall  a.  their  land
um.  34.  13.  this  is  the  land  ye  shall  a.  by  lot
>eut.  2.  31.  possess,  that  thou  mayest  a.  his  land
6.  20.  a.  the  land  the  Lord  giveth  thee,  19.  3.

'sal.  37  .  29.  the  righteous  shall  a.  the  land
34.  and  he  shall  exalt  thee  to  a.  the  land
>a.  60.  21.  they  shall  a.  the  land  for  ever
■tek.  47.  13.  border,  whereby  ye  shall  a.  the  land
INHERITANCE

ignifies,  [1]  An  estate,  whether  come  by  succession,
or  donation,  Num.26.  54.  Prov.  13.  22.  [2]  Those
whom  God  chooseth  as  his  peculiar  people,  Psal.  28.

9.  1  94.  14.  [3]  The  land  of  Canaan,  Psal.  79.  1.
[4  l  he  nations  that  should  become  the  subjects  of
Christ's  kingdom,  and  be  governed  and  saved  by
him,  Psal.  2.  8.  [5]  The  kingdom  of  heaven,  1

Pet.  1.  4.  [6]  Hereditary,  Deut.  4.  20.  [7]  Pos¬
session,  Num.  34.2.

■e».  31.  14.  is  there  any  portion  or  a.  for  us  ?

18.  6.  after  the  name  of  their  brethren  in  their  i.
■rod,  15.  17.  plant  them  in  mountain  of  thine  a.
ev,  25.  46.  for  ever  take  them  as  an  a.  for  ever
■  uaaa.  16.  14.  or  given  us  a.  of  fields  or  vineyards
18.  20.  have  no  a.  for  I  am  thy  part  and  thine  a.

-7  8.  shall  cause  his  a.  to  pass  to  his  daughters
9.  a.  to  brethren  ||  10.  a.  to  father’s  brethren

19.  our  a.  is  fallen  on  this  side,  32.  1  34.  15.

14.  18.  take  one  prince,  to  divide  the  land  by  a.

Jo.  3.  and  shall  be  put  to  the  a.  of  the  tribe,  4.

9.  nor  i.  remove  from  one  tribe  to  another
4.20.  a  people  of  i.  as  ye  are  this  day
”0.  destroy  not  thine  a.  ||  29.  they  are  thy  a.

42.  9.  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  a.

°*'f  13.  14.  sacrifices  of  Lord  their  a.  18.  7.

33.  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  wfas  their  a.

7;  2.  by  lot  was  their  a.  Psal.  78.  55.

14.  Hebron  therefore  became  tlie  a.  of  Caleb
■7.  6.  daughters  of  Manasseh  had  a.  among  sons

28.  every  man  to  his  a.  Judg.  2.  6. 1  21.  24.

,0;  21.  17.  must  be  an  a.  for  them  that  escaped
\uth\.  6.  cannot  redeem  a.  lest  mar  mine  own  a.

10.  1.  hath  anointed  thee  captain  over  his  a.
.0.  19.  troni  abiding  in  the  a.  of  the  l  ord
oam.  20.  1.  nor  i.  in  son  of  Jesse,  1  Kings  12. 16.


2  Sam.  21.  3.  that  ye  may  bless  the  a-,  of  the  Lord

1  Kings  8.  51.  they  be  thy  people  and  thy  a.  53.

21.  3.  give  the  a.  of  my  fathers  to  thee,  4.

2  Kings  21.  It.  will  forsake  the  remnant  of  mine  i.
1  Citron.  16.  18.  land  of  Canaan,  the  lot  of  your  a.
Neh.  11.  20.  in  all  cities,  every  one  in  his  a.

Job  31.  2.  what  a.  of  the  Almighty  from  on  high  ?
Psal.  16.  5.  the  Lord  is  the  portion  of  mine  a.

28.  9.  bless  thine  a.  ||  S3.  12.  chosen  for  his  a.

37.  18.  and  their  i.  shall  be  for  ever

47.  4.  he  shall  choose  our  a.  for  us

68.  9.  w  hereby  thou  didst  confirm  thine  a.

74.  2.  the  rod  of  thine  a.  thou  hast  redeemed

78.  62.  and  was  wroth  with  his  i.

71.  he  brought  him  to  feed  Israel  his  a.

79.  1.  O  God,  the  heathen  are  come  into  thine  a.

94. 14.  not  cast  off,  neither  will  he  forsake  his  a.

105.  11.  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  lot  of  your  a.

106.  5.  that  1  may  glory  w  ith  thine  a.

40.  insomuch,  that  he  abhorred  his  own  a.

Prov.  13.  22.  a  good  man  leaveth  an  a.  to  children

17.  2.  shall  have  part  of  the  a.  among  the  brethren

19.  14.  house  and  riches  are  the  a.  ot  fathers

20.  21.  an  i.  may  be  gotten  hastily  at  the  beginning
Eccl.  7.  11.  wisdom  is  good  with  an  a.

Isa.  19.  25.  blessed  be  Israel  mine  a.

47.  6.  1  have  polluted  mine  a.  and  given  them
63.  17.  for  thy  servants’  sake,  the  tribes  of  thine  a.
Jer.  10.  16.  Israel  is  the  rod  of  his  a.  51.  19.

32.  8.  for  right  of  a.  is  thine,  redemption  is  thine
Lam.  5.  2.  our  i.  is  turned  to  strangers,  our  houses
Ezek.  36. 12.  shall  possess  thee,  thou  shalt  be  their  a.
44.  28.  it  shall  be  unto  them  for  an  a.  I  am  their  a.

46.  16.  the  a.  thereof  shall  be  his  son’s,  17.

18.  shall  not  take  of  the  people’s  a.  by  oppression

47.  22.  they  shall  have  a.  with  you  among  tribes,  23.
Mat.  21.  38.  kill  him,  and  let  us  seize  on  his  a.
Mark  12.  7.  and  the  a.  shall  be  ours,  Luke  20.  14.

/  nke  12.  13.  speak,  that  he  divide  the  i.  with  me
Jets  20.  32.  to  give  you  an  a.  among  all  sanctified

26.  18.  and  a.  among  them  sanc  tified  by  faith  in  me
Gal.  3.  18.  if  the  a.  be  of  the  law,  it  is  no  more
Eph.  1. 11.  in  whom  also  we  have  obtained  an  i.

14.  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  i.  till  1  exemption
.18.  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  his  a.  in  the  saints
5  5.  hath  any  a.  in  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  and  God
Col.  1.  12.  to  te  partakers  of  the  a.  of  the  saints

3.  21.  and  ye  shall  receive  the  reward  of  the  a.
lleb.  1.4.  as  he  hath  by  a.  obtained  a  name
9.  15.  might  receive  the  promise  of  eternal  a.

1  Pet,  1.  4.  begotten  us  to  an  i.  incorruptible
For  INHERITANCE.

Exod.  34. 9.  pardon  our  sin,  and  take  us  for  thine  a.
Num.  18.  21.  all  the  tenth  in  Israel  for  an  i,  26.

26.  53.  the  land  shall  he  divided  for  an  a.  33.  54.  |
34.  2. 1  36.  2.  Deut.  4.  21,  38.  1  15.  4.  |  19.

10.  Josh.  13.  6,  7,  32. 1  14.  1.  1  19.  49,  51.
Ezek.  45.  1.  1  47.  22.  I  48.  29.

Deut.  20.  16.  the  Lord  doth  give  thee  for  an  i.  2).

23.  |  24.  4.  1  25.  19.  1  26.  1.  Josh.  11.  23.  |
13.  6.  1  14.  13.  1  Kings  8.  36.  2  Chron.  6.

27.  Jer.  3.  18.

1  Chr.  28.  8.  leave  \tfor  an  i.for  children,  Ezra  9- 12.
Psal.  2.  8.  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thy  a.
Ezek.  33.  24.  the  land  is  given  us  for  an  a.

44.  28.  it  shall  be  to  them  for  an  1.  I  am  their
47.  14.  this  land  shall  fall  unto  you  for  an  i,

Ueb.  11.8.  which  he  should  after  receive  for  an  a.

No  or  none  INHERITANCE.

Num.  18.  20.  thou  shalt  have  no  i.  23,  24.  |  26.  62.

Deut.  10.  9.1  14.  27,  29. 1  18.  1,  2.  Josh.
13.  14,  33.  |  14.  3.

2  Chron.  10. 16.  we  have  wo  a.  in  the  son  of  Jesse
Acts  7.  5.  and  he  gave  him  none  i,  in  it

INHERITANCES.

Josh.  19.  51.  these  are  the  a.  Joshua  divided  by  lot
INHERITED.

Num.  32.  18.  we  will  not  return  till  Israel  have  i.
Josh.  14.  1.  children  of  Israel  a.  the  land  of  Canaan
Psal.  105.  44.  they  i.  the  labour  of  the  people
Jer.  16.  19-  surely  our  fathers  have  a.  lies
Ezek.  33.  24.  Abraham  was  one,  ami  he  a.  the  land
Heb.  12.  17.  when  he  would  have  i.  the  blessing
INHERITEfH.

Num.  35.8.  according  to  his  inheriting  which  he  i.
INHERITOR.

Isa.  65.  9.  out  of  Judah  an  a.  of  my  mountains
See  Enjoy,  Enjoin.

INIQUITY

Signifies,  [1]  .Saw  and  wickedness  in  general.  Mat.
7.  23.  [2]  Original  corruption,  Psal.  51.  5.  [3]
Punishment  for  sin,  Gen.  19.  15.  Lev.  5.  1.

Gen.  15.  16.  the  a.  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full

19. 15.  lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  a.  of  the  city

44. 16.  God  hath  found  out  the  i.  of  thy  servants
Exod.  20.  5.  visiting  t-he  i.  of  the  fathers  upon  the

children,  34.  7.  Num.  14.  18.  Deut.  5.  9.
34.  7.  forgiving  a.  and  transgression,  Num.  14. 18.
9.  go  amongst  us,  and  pardon  our  a.  and  our  sin
I.ev.  18.  25.  therefore  1  do  visit  the  i.  thereof
Num..  5.  15.  an  offering  bringing  i.  to  remembrance

31.  then  shall  the  man  be  guiltless  from  i.

14.  19.  pardon,  I  pray  thee,  the  eye  of  this  people

23.  21.  he  hath  not  beheld  a.  in  Jacob,  nor  seen
Deut.  19.  15.  nor  rise  up  against  a  man  for  any  a.

32.  4.  he  is  a  God  of  truth  and  without  a.  just

Josh.  22.  17-  is  the  a.  of  Peor  too  little  for  us  ?

1  Sam.  3.  13.  judge  for  the  i.  which  he  knoweth
14.  the  a.  ot  Eli’s  house  shall  not  be  purged

15.  23.  and  stubboi  nness  is  as  t.  and  idolatry

20.  8.  if  there  be  in  me  a.  slay  me  thyself
25.  24.  upon  me  let  this  a.  be,  2  Sam.  14.  9

2  Sam.  14.  32.  if  there  be  a.  in  me,  let  him  kill  me
19.  19.  let  not  my  Lord  impute  i.  to  me

24.  10.  to  take  away  a.  of  thy  servant,  1  Chron.

21.8.

2  Chr.  19.  7-  f°r  there  is  no  i.  with  Lord  our  God
Job  4.  8.  they  that  plow  a.  reap  the  same
5.  16.  the  poor  hath  hope,  and  a.  stoppeth  her  mouth
6. 29.  return,  I  pray  you,  let  it  not  be  a.  return

30.  is  there  a.  in  my  tonsjue?  cannot  my  taste

11.  6.  God  exacteth  less  than  thine  a.  deserveth


•

Job  11. 14.  if  a.  be  in  thy  hand,  put  it  far  away

15.  5.  for  thy  mouth  uttereth  thine  a.

16.  filthy  is  man  which  drinketh  a.  like  water

22.  23.  thou  shalt  put  away  a.  far  from  thy  tabern.

31.  11.  it  is  an  a.  to  be  punished  by  judges,  28.

33.  9.  I  am  innocent,  nor  is  there  a.  in  me

34.  32.  if  1  have  done  a.  1  will  do  no  more

36.  10.  he  commandeth  that  they  return  from  i.

21.  take  heed,  regard  not  a.  for  this  hast  chosen

23.  or  who  can  say,  thou  hast  wrought  a.  ?

Psal.  7 .  3.  O  Lord,  if  there  be  a.  in  my  hands
14.  behold,  he  travaileth  with  a.  anil  com  eived
10.  t7.  under  his  tongue  is  mischief  and  a.

32.2.  blessed  to  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  i.

5.  and  thou  forgavest  the  a.  of  my  sin
36.  3.  the  words  of  his  mouth  are  a.  and  deceit

39.  11.  when  thou  dost  correct  man  for  a.

41.  6.  his  heart  gathereth  a.  to  itself

49.  5.  when  the  1.  of  my  heels  shall  compass  me
51. 5.  behold  l  was  shapen  in  a.  and  in  sin  mother
53. 1 .  they  are  corrupt,  and  have  done  abominable  a.

55.  3.  they  casta,  upon  me,  and  in  wrath  hate  me

56.  7.  shall  they  escape  by  i.f  cast  down,  ()  God

66. 18.  if  1  regard  a.  in  my  heart.  Lord  not  hear  mi
85.  2.  thou  hast  forgiven  the  a.  of  thy  people

94.  20.  throne  of  a.  have  fellowship  with  thee
107  .  42.  and  all  a.  shall  stop  her  mouth
109.  14.  let  the  i.  of  his  fathers  be  remembered
119.  3.  they  also  do  no  i.  they  walk  in  his  ways
133.  let  not  any  a.  have  dominion  over  me
125.  3.  lest  they  put  forth  their  hands  to  a.

Prov.  16.  6.  by  mercy  and  truth  a.  is  purged

19.  28.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  devoureth  a.

22.  8.  he  that  soweth  a.  shall  reap  vanity
Eccl.  3.  16.  place  of  rightepusness  that  a.  was  there
Isa.  1. 4.  a  people  laden  with  a.  a  seed  of  evil  doers
13.  it  is  a.  even  the  solemn  meeting

5.  18.  woe  to  them  that  draw  a.  with  cords

6.  7.  thine  a.  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin  purged
14.  21.  prepare  for  the  a.  of  their  fathers

22.  14.  this  i.  shall  not  be  purged  from  you

27.  9.  by  this  shall  the  a.  of  Jacob  be  purged

29.  20.  and  all  that  watch  for  a.  are  cut  off

30.  13.  this  a.  shall  be  to  you  as  a  breach

40.  2.  cry  unto  her,  her  i.  is  pardoned

53.  6.  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  i.  of  us  all

57.  17.  for  the  a.  of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth
59.  3.  for  your  fingers  are  defiled  with  i.

4.  bring  torth  i.  ||  6.  their  works  are  works  of  a".

7.  their  thoughts  are  thoughts  of  a.  wasting
61.  9.  be  not  wroth,  nor  remember  a.  for  ever
Jer.  2.5.  what  i.  have  your  fathers  found  in  me

22.  thine  a.  is  marked  before  me,  saith  the  l.ord

3.  13.  only  acknowledge  thine  a.  that  thou  hast

13.22.  for  the  greatness  of  thine  i.  are  thy  skirts-
14.  20.  we  acknowledge  the  i.  of  our  fathers

16. 10.  what  is  our  a.  ||  17-  a.  hid  from  mine  eyes
30.  14.  for  multitude  of  thine  a.  15.  Hos.  Q.  7.

32.  18.  recompensest  i.  of  fathers  into  the  bosom

50.  20.  the  a.  of  Israel  be  sought  for,  and  none

51.  6.  flee  out  of  Babylon,  be  not  cut  off  in  her  a,
Lam.  2.  14.  they  have  not  discovered  thine  i.

4.  6.  for  the  punishment  of  the  a.  of  my  people
22.  the  punishment  of  thine  a.  is  accomplished,

he  will  \isit  thine  i,  O  daughter  ot  Edom
Ezek.  4.  4.  lay  a.  of  the  house  of  Israel  upon  it

7.  13.  nor  strengthen  himself  in  the  a.  of  his  life

9.  9-  the  i.  of  the  house  of  Israel  is  great

16.  49.  this  was  the  a.  of  thy  sister  Sodom
18.  8.  that  hath  withdrawn  his  hand  from  a.

17.  he  shall  not  die  for  the  a.  of  his  father
30.  repent,  so  i.  shall  not  be  your  ruin

21. 23.  he  will  call  to  remembrance  your  a.  24.

25.  when  i.  shall  have  an  end,  29-  1  35.  5.

28.  15.  wast  perfect,  till  a.  was  found  in  thee

18.  defiled  thy  sanctuaries  by  i.  of  thy  traffic
44.  12.  caused  the  house  of  Israel  to  fall  into  i.
Dan.  9.  24.  to  make  reconciliation  for  i.

Hos.  7.  1.  the  a.  of  Ephraim  was  discovered

10.  9.  against  children  of  a.  J|  13.  ye  reaped  i.

12. 8.  find  no  a.  in  me  ||  11.  is  there  a.  in  Gilead  ?

13.  12.  the  a.  of  Ephraim  is  bound  up,  his  sin  hid

14.  1.  return,  for  thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  a.

2.  take  away  all  a.  and  receive  us  graciously

Mic.  2.  1.  woe  to  them  that  devise  a.  on  their  beds
3.  10.  they  build  up  Jerusalem  with  a.

7-  18.  who  is  a  God  like  to  thee,  that  pardoneth  i.f
Hab.  1.  3.  why  dost  thou  shew  me  i.  and  cause  me
13.  of  purer  eyes,  and  thou  canst  not  look  on  a.
2.  12.  woe  to  him  that  established!  a  city  by  2.
Zeph.  3.  5.  the  just  l.ord,  he  will  not  do'  a.

13.  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  do  1.

Zech.  3.  4.  1  have  caused  thine  a.  to  pass  from  the*
9.  I  will  remove  the  a.  of  that  land  in  one  day
Mai.  2. 6.  and  a.  was  not  found  in  his  lips,  he  walked
in  peace,  and  did  turn  many  away  from  a.
Mat.  13.  41.  they  shall  gather  them  whiefi  do  i.

23.  28.  within  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  a.

24.  12.  because  i.  shall  abound,  love  shall  wax  <  old
Acts  1. 18.  purchased  a  field  with  the  reward  of  i.

8.  23.  for  1  perceive  thou  art  in  the  bond  of  a.
Pom.  6. 19.  your  members  servants  to  1.  unto  i.

1  Cor.  13.  6.  rejoiceth  not  in  i.  but  in  the  truth

2  Thess.  2. 7-  the  mystery  of  /.  doth  already  work
2  Tim.  2. 19.  that  nameth  Christ,  depart  from  a.
Tit.  2.  14.  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  a.
Ileb.  1.  9.  and  thou  hast  hated  a.  therefore  God
Jam.  3.  6.  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  a  world  of  a.

See  Bear,  Commit,  Committed.

His  IN  IQUITY.

Num.  15.  31.  his  1.  shall  he  upon  him

Josh.  22.  20.  that  man  perished  not  alone  in  his  a

Job  20.  27.  the  heavens  shall  reveal  his  i.

21. 19.  God  layeth  up  his  a.  for  his  children
Psal.  36.  2.  until  his  1.  be  found  to  be  hateful
Jer. 31.  .30.  die  for  h.  i.  Ezek.  3.18, 19.  17-16.  |  28.26.
Ezek.  14.7.  the  stumbling  block  of  his  ».  14.

18.  18.  even  he  shall  die  in  his  i.  33.  8,  9.

33.  6.  he  is  taken  away  in  his  i.  hut  his  blood
2  Pet.  2. 16.  Balaam  was  rebuked  for  his  a.

Mine  INIQUITY.

Gen.  4. 1 13.  mine  a.  is  greater  than  mav  be  forgiven

251


1  N  1


INS


I  NT


1  Sam.  SO.  1.  what  is  mine  i.  and  what  is  my  sin  ?

2  Sam.  22.  24. 1  kept  tny  self  from  mine  i.  Ps.  18. 23.
Job  7.  21.  why  dost  thou  not  take  ■»«'!''  mine  i.  ?

10.  6.  that  thou  inquirest  after  mine  *.

14.  thou  wilt  not  acquit  me  from  mine  i.

14.  17.  sealed  in  a  bag,  thou  se west  up  mine  i.

31.  33.  if  I  covered,  by  hiding  mine  i.  in  my  bosom
Psal.  25. 11.  ()  Lord,  pardon  mine  i.  for  it  is  great

31. 10.  my  strength  faileth  because  of  mine  i

32.  5.  ana  mine  i.  have  1  not  hid,  I  said

38.  18.  for  I  will  declare  mine  i.  I  will  be  sorry  for
51.  2.  wash  me  throughly  from  mine  i.  cleanse

Their  I  N  I  QUIT  Y.

Lev.  26.  39.  left  of  you,  shall  pine  away  in  their  i.

40.  if  they  confess  their  i.  and  the  iniquity  of  fath.

41.  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  i.  43.

Neh.  4.  5.  and  cover  not  their  i.  let  not  their  sin  be
Psal  69.  27.  add  iniquity  unto  their  i.  and  let  them

78.  38.  he  forgave  their  i.  |l  89. 32.  I  will  visit  their  t.
94.  23.  he  shall  bring  upon  them  their  i.

106.  43.  they  were  brought  low'  for  their  i.

Jsa.  13.  11.  I  will  punish  the  wicked  for  their  i.

26.  21.  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  earth  for  th.  i.

33.  24.  the  people  shall  be  forgiven  their  i.

Jer.  14.  10.  n£  will  now  remember  their  i.

16.  18-  and  hrst,  he  will  recompense  their  t.

18.  23.  forgive  not  their  i.  nor  blot  out  their  sin

25.  12.  that  I  will  punish  that  nation  for  their  i.

31.  34.  all  know  me,  for  I  will  forgive  their  i.

33.  8.  1  will  cleanse  them  from  all  their  i.

36.  3.  that  I  may  forgive  their  i.  and  sin
31.  I  will  punish  his  servants  for  their  i.

Ezek.  4.  5.  1  have  laid  on  thee  the  years  of  their  i.

17.  they  may  consume  away  for  their  i.
f.  19.  the  stumbling-block  of  their  i.  14.  3.

’14.  10.  they  shall  bear  the  punishment  of  their  i.
29. 16.  which  bringeth  their  i.  to  remembrance

39.  23.  Israel  went  into  captivity  for  their  i.

Pos.  4.  8.  and  they  set  their  heart  on  their  i.

5.  5.  shall  Israel  and  Ephraim  fall  in  their  i.

9.  9.  he  will  remember  their  i.  he  will  visit  sins
Work  INIQUITY.

Psal.  141.  4.  to  practise  works  with  men  that  work  i.
Isa.  31.  2.  against  the  help  of  them  that  work  i.

32.  6.  his  heart,  will  work  i.  to  practise  hypocrisy
Pos.  6.  8.  Gilead  is  a  city  of  them  that  work  1.

Mat.  7.  23.  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  i.

Workers  of  INIQUITY.

Job  31.  3.  a  strange  punishment  to  the  workers  of  i.

34.  8.  which  goeth  in  company  with  the  work,  of  i.

22.  where  the  workers  of  i.  may  hide  themselves

Ps.  5.5.  foolish  shall  not  stand,  thou  hatestall  w.  of  i.

6.  8.  depart  from  me  all  ye  work,  of  1.  Luke  13.  27.
14.  4.  have  all  the  work,  of  i.  no  knowledge  ?  53.  4.
28.  3.  draw  me  not  away  with  the  workers  of  i.
36.12.  there  are  the  w.  of  i.  fallen,  they  are  castdown

37.  1.  nor  be  thou  envious  against  the  workers  of  i.
59.  2.  deliver  me  from  the  work,  of  1.  and  save  me
64.  2.  from  the  insurrection  of  the  workers  of  i.

92.  7-  and  when  all  the  workers  of  i.  do  flourish

9.  all  the  workers  of  i.  shall  be  scattered

94.  4.  and  all  the  workers  of  i.  boast  themselves

16.  or  who  will  stand  up  for  me  against  the  w.  of  i.
125.  5.  lead  them  forth  with  the  workers  of  i.

141.  9.  keep  me  from  the  gins  of  the  workers  of  i-
Prov.  10.  29.  destruction  shall  be  to  w.  of  i.  21.  15.
INIQUITIES.

Lev.  16.  21.  confess  over  the  goat  all  the  i.

26.  39.  in  the  i.  of  their  fathers  shall  they  pine
Ezra  9.  6.  our  i.  are  increased  over  our  head

7.  for  our  1.  have  we,  our  kings,  been  delivered
13.  thou  hast  punished  us  less  than  our  t.  deserve

Neh.  9.  2.  Israel  confessed  the  i.  of  their  fathers
Job  13.  23.  how  many  are  mine  i.  and  sins
26.  thou  makest  me  to  possess  the  i.  of  my  youth
22.  5.  thy  wickedness  great,  and  thine  i.  infinite
Psal.  38.  4.  and  mine  i.  are  gone  over  my  head

40.  12.  mine  i.  have  taken  hold  on  me

31.  9.  hide  thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot  out  all  i.
64.  6.  they  search  out  i.  ||  65.  3.  i.  prevail  against
79.  8.  remember  not  against  us  former  i.

90. 8.  hast  set  our  i.  before  thee,  our  secret  sins
103.  3.  bless  the  Lord,  who  forgiveth  all  thine  *.

10.  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  i.

130.  3.  if  thou,  L.  shouldest  mark  i.  who  stand  ?

8.  and  he  shall  redeem  Israel  from  all  his  i.
Prov.  5.  22.  his  own  i.  shall  take  the  wicked  himself
Isa.  43.  24.  thou  hast  wearied  me  with  thine  i.

53.  5.  but  he  was  bruised  for  our  i.

59.  12.  and  as  for  our  i.  we  know  them
64.  6.  our  i.  like  the  wind  have  taken  us  away

7.  thou  hast  consumed  us  because  of  our  i.

Jer.  11. 10.  turned  back  to  i.  of  their  forefathers
14.  7.  O  Lord,  though  our  i.  testify  against  us
Lam.  4. 13.  for  i.  of  her  priests  that  shed  blood
Ezek.  28.  18.  by  the  multitude  of  thine  i.  defiled
Dan.  4.  27.  break  off  thine  i.  by  shewing  mercy
9. 13.  that  we  might  turn  from  our  i.  and  underst.
16.  for  our  sins,  and  for  the  i.  of  our  fathers
Mic.  7.  19.  he  will  turn,  he  will  subdue  our  2.
Pets  3.  26.  to  bless  in  turning  every  one  from  his  i.
Pom.  4.  7-  blessed  are  they  whose  i.  are  forgiven
Rev.  18.  5.  for  God  hath  remembered  her  2.

Their  INIQUITIES.

Lev.  16.  22.  the  goat  shall  bear  on  him  all  their  i.
Psal.  107.  17.  fools  because  of  their  i.  are  afflicted
Isa.  53.  11.  justify  many,  for  he  shall  bear  their  i.
Jer.  33.  8.  and  I  will  pardon  all  their  i.  whereby
Lam.  5.7.  our  fathers  sinned,  we  have  borne  their  i.
Ezek.  32.  27.  but  their  i.  shall  be  on  their  bones
43.  10.  that  they  may  be  ashamed  of  their  i.

Peb.  8. 12.  their  i.  will  I  remember  no  more,  10. 17.
Your  INIQUITIES.

Num.  14.  34.  forty  years  shall  ye  bear  your  1.

Isa.  50.  1.  for  your  i.  have  you  sold  yourselves
59.  2.  your  i.  separated  between  you  and  your  God
65. 7-  your  i.  1  will  recompense,  and  iniq.  of  fathers
Jer.  5.  25.  your  i.  have  turned  away  these  things
Ezek.  24.  23.  ye  shall  pine  away  for  your  i.

36.  31.  and  shall  loathe  yourselves  for  your  i.

33.  I  shall  have  cleansed  you  from  all  your  i.
Amos  3.  2.  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  i.
•2.Y2


INJURED.

Gal.  4.  12.  I  am  as  ye  are,  ye  have  not  t.  me  at  all
INJURIOUS.

1  Tim.  1.  13.  who  was  before  a  persecutor  and  1.

INJUSTICE.

Job  16.  17.  not  for  i.  in  my  hands,  my  prayer  pure
INK.

Jer.  36.  18.  1  wrote  them  with  i.  in  the  book

2  Cor.  3.  S.  written  not  with  i.  but  the  Spirit

2  John  12.  1  would  not  write  w  ith  i.  3  John  13.
INK-HORN.

Ezek.  9. 2.  with  a  writer’s  i.  by  his  side,  3,  11.

INN.

Gen.  42.  27.  to  give  his  ass  provender  in  the  i.

43.  21.  when  we  came  to  the  i.  we  opened  our  sacks
Exod.  4.  24.  by  the  way  in  the  i.  the  Lord  met  him
Luke  2. 7.  there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  1.

10.  34.  brought  him  to  an  i.  and  took  care  of  him
INNER.

1  Kings  6.  27.  he  setthecherubims  in  the  i.  house
1  Chron.  28.  11.  gave  patterns  of  the  i.  parlours
Esth.A.  11.  shall  come  to  the  king  into  the  i.  court
5. 1.  Esther  stood  in  the  i.  court  of  the  house
Ezek.  10.  3.  and  the  cloud  filled  the  i.  court

42.  15.  he  made  an  end  of  measuring  the  i.  house
46.  1.  the  gate  of  the  i.  court  shall  be  shut  six  days
Acts  16.  24.  who  thrust  them  into  the  i.  prison
Eph.  3. 16.  strengthened  with  might  in  the  1.  man
< See  Chamber.

INNERMOST.

Prov.  18.  8.  into  the  i.  parts  of  the  belly,  26.  22.
INNOCENCY.

Gen.  20.  5.  in  the  i.  of  my  hands  have  I  done  this
Psal.  26-  6. 1  will  wash  my'  hands  in  i.  so  compass
73.  13.  in  vain  I  have  washed  my  hands  in  *.

Dan.  6.  22.  before  him  i.  was  found  in  me
Pos .  8. 5.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  to  i.  ?
INNOCENT.

Exod.  23. 7.  the  ».  and  the  righteous  slay  thou  not
Deut.  27  .  25.  that  taketh  reward  to  slay  the  i.

1  Sam.  14.  +41.  Saul  said  to  the  Lord,  shew  the  ».
Job  4.  7.  remember,  whoever  perished  being  1.  ?

9.  23.  he  will  laugh  at  the  trial  of  the  i.

28.  but  I  know  that  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  i.

17.  8.  the  i.  shall  stir  up  against  the  hypocrite
22. 19.  and  the  i.  laugh  them  to  scorn
30.  he  shall  deliver  the  island  of  the  *.

27.  17.  and  the  i.  shall  divide  the  silver

33.  9.  hast  said,  I  am  i.  nor  is  iniauity  in  me
Psal.  10.  8.  in  secret  places  doth  ne  murder  the  *.

15.  5.  nor  taketh  reward  against  the  i.

19.  13.  1  shall  be  t.  from  the  great  transgression
Prov.  1. 11.  if  they  s^y ,  let  us  lurk  privily  for  the  i.
6. 29.  whosoever  toucheth  her  shall  not  be  i.

28.  20.  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  1.

Jer.  2.  35.  yet  thou  sayest,  because  I  am  i.

Mat.  27.24.  I  am  i.  of  the  blood  of  this  person

See  Blood.

INNOCENTS.

Jer.  2.  34.  is  found  the  blood  of  the  poor  i.

19.  4.  have  filled  this  place  with  the  blood  of «.
INNUMERABLE.

Job  21.  33.  after  him,  as  there  are  i.  before  him
Psal.  40.  12.  i.  evils  have  compassed  me  about
104.  25.  sea,  wherein  are  things  creeping  i.

Jer.  46.  23.  more  than  grasshoppers,  and  are  1.
Luke  12.  1.  an  i.  multitude  gathered  together
Peb.  11. 12.  as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea-shore  ».
12.  22.  ye  are  come  to  an  i.  company  of  angels
INORDINATE.

Ezek.  23. 11.  she  was  the  more  corrupt  in  her  i.  love
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  fornication,  i.  affection
INQUISITION.

Deut.  19.  18.  the  judges  shall  make  diligent  t.
Esth.  2.  2.3.  when  i.  was  made  of  the  matter
Psal.  9.  12.  when  he  maketh  1.  for  blood
IN  SCR  IPTION.

Acts  17. 23. 1  found  an  altar  with  this  1.

INSIDE.

1  Kings  6.  15.  covered  the  walls  on  1.  with  wood

INSPIRATION.

Job  32.  8.  i.  of  Almighty  giveth  understanding

2  Tim.  3. 16.  all  scripture  is  given  by  «.  of  God

INSTANT

Signifies,  [1]  A  short  moment  of  time ,  Isa.  29.  5.

[2]  'Jo  be  very  eager ,  or  pressing,  Luke  23.  23.

[3]  To  set  about  any  thing  with  care  and  dili¬
gence,  Acts  26.  7.  .

Isa.  29.  5.  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  i.  suddenly
30.  13.  whose  breaking  cometh  suddenly'  at  an  t.
Jer.  18.  7-  at  what  i.  1  speak  concerning,  9.

Luke  2.  38.  she  coming  in  that  i.  gave  thanks

23.  23.  and  they  w’ere  i.  with  loud  voices
Acts  12.  +  5.  i.  prayer  was  made  of  the  church
Rom.  12.  12.  patient,  continuing  i.  in  prayer
2  Tim.  4.  2.  preach  the  word,  be  i.  in  season,  out  of
INSTANTLY.

Luke  7.  4.  they  besought  him  i.  saying
Acts  26.  7.  our  twelve  tribes  i.  serving  God
INSTRUCT

Signifies,  To  train  up,  or  teach,  Psal.  32.  8;  We
are  instructed  by,  [1]  God,  Deut.  4.  36.  Isa.
28.  26.  [2]  Christ  is  a  prophet,  who  teaches

inwardly,  and  spiritually.  Acts  3.  22.  [3]  The
Spirit,  Neh.  9.  20.  [4]  The  church.  Cant.  8.  2.
[5]  Ministers,  Dan.  11.  33.  2  Tim.  2.  25.  [6]
The  law,  Rom.  2.  18.  [7]  ' The  scriptures,  2  Tim.
3.  16.  [8]  Corrections,  Jer.  31.  19.  [9]  The

godly.  Job  4.  3.  Acts  18.  25.  [10]  The  wicked,
Prov.  24.  32.

Dent.  4.  36.  made  thee  hear,  that  he  might  ».  thee
Neh.  9.  20.  thou  gavest  thy  good  Spirit  to  «.  them
Job  40.  2.  shall  he  that  contendeth  i.  him  ?

Psal.  16.  7.  my  reins  also  i.  me  in  night-seasons
32.8.  I  will  1.  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the  way
Cant.  8.  2.  in  my  mother’s  house,  who  will  i.  me
Jsa.  28.  26.  his 'God  doth  i.  him  to  discretion
Dan.  11.  3.3.  they  that  understand  shall  i.  many
1  Cor.  2.  16.  the  mind  of  Lord,  that  he  may  t.  him
INSTRUCTED.

Gen.  14.  +14.  Abraham  armed  his  i.  servants
Deut  32.  10.  the  led  him  about,  he  i.  him


2  Kings  12. 2.  wherein  Jetioiada  the  priest  1.  him

1  Chron.  15.  22.  Chenaniah  i.  about  the  song
25.  7.  tl.at  were  i.  in  the  songs  of  the  Lord

2  Chron.  3.  3.  Solomon  was  i.  for  the  building
Job  4.  3.  behold  thou  hast  i.  many,  and  hast
Psal.  2.  10.  be  i.  ye  judges  of  the  earth

Prov.  5.  13.  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that  «.  m«
21.  11.  the  wise  is  1.  he  receiveth  knowledge
Isa  8.  11.  the  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  and  i.  me
40.  14.  who  i.  him,  and  taught  him  the  path
Jer.  6.  8.  be  i.  O  Jerusalem,  lest  my  soul  depart

31.  19.  after  that  1  was  i.  I  smote  on  my  thigh
Mat.  13.  52.  every  scribe  who  is  i.  to  the  kingdoi

14.  8.  and  she,  being  before  i.  of  her  mother
l.uke  1.  4.  of  tilings  wherein  thou  hast  been  i.
Acts  18.  25.  this  man  was  i.  in  the  way  of  the  Ld
Pom.  2.  18.  knowest  his  will,  being  i.  out  of  law!
Phil.  4.  12.  every  where,  ana  in  all  things,  I  am

INST*  UCTING.

2  Tim.  2.  25.  i.  those  that  oppose  themselves
1NSI  RUCIOR.

Gen.  4.  22.  Tubal-Cain,  an  i.  of  every  artificer
Rom.  2.  20.  an  i.  of  the  foolish,  a  teacher  of  b&b'
INSTRUCTORS.

1  Cor.  4.  15.  though  ye  have  10,000  1.  in  Christ,  ve

INSTRUCTION.

Job  33.  16.  he  openeth  the  ears,  and  sealeth  2.
Psal.  50.  17.  seeing  thou  hatest  1.  and  casteth  tnjj
Prov.  1.  2.  to  know  wisdom  and  i.  to  perceive

3.  to  receive  the  i.  of  wisdom,  justice,  and  judgn

7.  but  fools  despise  wisdom  and  1.  15.  5.

8.  my  son,  hear  the  2.  of  thy  father,  4. 1.

4.  13.  take  fast  hold  of  i.  let  her  not  go,  keep  her

5.  12.  how  have  I  hated  i.  and  my  heart  despise*
23.  he  shall  die  without  i.  and  snail  go  astray

6.  23.  and  reproofs  of  i.  are  the  way  of  life

8.  10.  receive  my  i.  ||  33.  hear  2.  and  be  wise

9.  9.  give  *.  to  a  wise  man  and  he  will  be  wiser

10.  17.  he  is  in  the  way  of  life  that  keepeth  2.

12.  1.  whoso  loveth  ».  loveth  knowledge

13. 1.  a  wise  son  heareth  his  father’s  ».

18.  shame  shall  be  to  him  that  refuseth  i.

15.  32.  he  that  refuseth  i.  despiseth  his  own  soui
33.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  i.  of  wisdom

16.  22.  but  the  i.  of  fools  is  folly

19.  20.  hear  counsel,  and  receive  1.  that  thou

27.  cease  to  hear  the  i.  that  causeth  to  err

23.  12.  apply  thy  heart  to  i.  and  thine  ears
23.  buy  the  truth,  also  i.  and  understanding

24.  32.  1  looked  upon  it  and  received  i.

Jer.  17.  23.  they  might  not  hear,  nor  receive  1.

32.  33.  they  have  not  hearkened  to  receive  i.

35.  13.  will  ye  not  receive  i.  to  hearken  to  my

Ezek.  5. 15.  it  shall  be  a  reproach,  a  taunt,  an  i.
Zeph.  3.  7.  I  said,  surely  thou  wilt  receive  1.

2  Tim.  3. 16.  all  scripture  is  profitable  for  2.

INSTRUMENT.

Num  .  35. 16.  if  he  smite  him  with  an  i.  of  iron
Ps.  33.  2.  sing  to  him  with  an  i.  of  ten  strings,  92.
71.  +  22.  1  will  praise  with  the  2.  of  psaltery
144.  9. 1  will  sing  a  new  song,  O  God,  on  an  ».
Isa.  28.  27.  fitches  not  threshed  with  a  threshing

41.  15. 1  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  threshing  t
54. 16.  that  bringeth  forth  an  i.  for  his  work
Ezek.  33. 32.  song  of  one  that  can  play  on  an  1
INSTRUMENTS.

Gen.  49.  5.  i.  of  cruelty  are  in  their  habitations
Exod.  25.  9.  the  pattern  of  all  the  i .  thereof
Num.  3.  8.  shall  keep  all  the  i.  of  the  tabernacle
4. 12.  they  shall  take  all  the  i.  of  ministry

7.  1.  sanctified  all  the  i.  J|  31.  6.  with  the  holy  1.
1  Sam.  8.  12.  to  make  i.  of  war,  and  i.  of  chariot*

18.  6.  to  meet  king  Saul  with  i.  of  music
1  Kings  19.  21.  boiled  their  flesh  with  i.  of  oxen

1  Chron.  9.  29.  to  oversee  all  the  i.  of  the  sanctus

16.  42.  make  a  sound  with  musical  i.  of  God

2  Chron.  30.  21.  singing  with  loud  i.  to  the  Lord
Neh.  12.  36.  Hanani  with  the  musical  i.  of  Dav
Psal.  7.  13.  hath  prepared  for  him  the  1.  of  deal

68.  25.  the  players  on  «.  followed  after
87.  7.  as  the  players  on  i.  shall  be  there
150.  4.  praise  him  with  stringed  i.  and  organs
Eccl.  2.8.  as  musical  i.  and  mat  of  all  sorts
Isa.  22.  +  24.  hang  on  him  all  the  1.  of  viols
32.  7.  the  i.  also  of  the  churl  are  evil

38.  20.  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  the  stringed  «
Jer.  46.  +  19.  make  tftee  2.  of  captivity
Ezek.  12.  +  3.  prepare  thee  t.  for  removing
16.  +  39.  shall  take  i.  of  thy  ornament,  2.3.  120
Dan.  6. 18.  nor  i.  of  music  brought  before  him  i
Amosl.  3.  threshed  Gilead  with  threshing  i.  of  ii
6.  5.  and  invent  to  themselves  i.  of  music
Pab.  3.  19.  to  the  chief  singer  on  rny  stringed  «.
Zech.  11. 15.  take  thee  i.  of  a  foolish  shepherd
Rom.  6. 13.  nor  yield  members  i.  of  unrighteously
members  as  i.  of  righteousness  to  G;
INSURRECTION.

Ezra  4. 19.  this  city  hath  made  i.  against  kings  ;
Psal.  64. 2.  from  the  1.  of  the  workers  of  iniquitj
Mark  15.  7 ■  lay  bound  with  them  that  had  niadt
who  had  committed  murder  in  th<-
Acts  18.  12.  the  Jews  made  i.  with  one  accord
INTANGLE


Signifies,  To  perplex.  This  may  be,  [1]  Corporeal;
£xod.  14.  3.  [2]  Verbally,  Mat.  22.  .15.  [3]  CA
monially.  Gal.  5. 1.  [4]  Worldly,  2  I  im.  2.  4.
Spiritually,  to  return  to,  and  continue  in,  sin:
Pet.  2.  20.  .  .  „

Mat.  22.  15.  how  they  might  *.  him  in  his  talk
IN  TANG  LED.

Exod.  14.  3.  Pharaoh  will  say ,  they  are  1.  in  the  la
Gal.  5. 1.  be  not  i.  again  with  the  yoke  of  bond  a?
2  Pet.  2.  20.  they  are  again  i.  therein  and  overco 1
1NTAN  GLETH.

2  Tim.  2.  4.  ».  himself  with  the  affairs  of  this  lit
INTEGRITY.

Gen.  20. 5.  in  i.  of  my  heart  I  have  done  this
6.  I  know  thou  didst  this  in  the  i.  of  thy  heart
1  Kings  9.  4.  as  David  thy  father  walked  in  «•
Job  2.  3.  and  still  he  holdeth  fast  his  i.  .  T

9.  his  wife  said,  dost  thou  still  retain  thine  #.  '
27.  5.  1  will  not  remove  my  i.  from  me


1  N1


l  N  W


JOU


A  31.  6  be  weighed,  that  God  may  know  my  a.
al  7.  8.  according  to  my  a.  that  is  in  me
i  2J U-t  a.  and  uprightness  preserve  me
i.  i  walked  in  my  a.  |l  11.  1  will  walk  in  a.
i  1C.  as  tor  me,  thou  upholdestme  in  my  ».

S  7?!  he  fed  them  according  to  a.  of  his  heart
ar.  il.  3.  the  a.  of  the  upright  shall  guide  them
.)  i.  better  is  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  i.

V  7  iust  man  walketh  in  his  a.  children  blessed
INI  ELLIGEN  CE.

ii.  30.  a.  with  them  that  forsake  covenant
INTEND.

sh  22.  33.  did  not*,  to  go  up  against  them
'7jr<m.  28.  13.  ye  a.  to  add  more  to  our  sins
l(s  5.  28.  ye  a.  to  bring  this  man’s  blood  on  us
:!=)  what  ye  a.  to  do  as  touching  these  men
INTENDED.

ial  oi.  ii.  for  they  a.  evil  against  thee
INTENDESi’.

rod  2.  14.  t.  thou  to  kill  me,  as  the  Egyptian
INTENDING.

uke  14.  28.  which  of  you  a.  to  build  a  tower
as  12.  4.  a.  after  Easter  to  bring  him  forth
♦  20.  Herod  a.  war  with  them  of  Tyre  and  Sidon
0*13.  sailed  to  Assos,  there  a.  to  take  in  Paul
IN  TEN  P.

Sam.  17.  14.  to  the  a.  the  Lord  might  bring  evil
Kings  10.  19.  to  a.  he  might  destroy  worshippers
Chnm.  16.  1.  to  the  a.  he  might  let  none  go  out
zek.  40.  4.  to  the  a.  that  1  might  shew  them
'an.  4.  17-  to  the  a.  that  the  living  may  know
<hn  11. 15.  not  there  to  the  a.  ye  may  believe

3.  28.  for  what  a.  he  spake  this  unto  him
i  ts  9.  21.  and  came  hither  for  that  i.

0.  29.  1  ask  for  what  a.  ye  have  sent  for  me.

Cor.  10.  6.  to  the  a.  we  should  not  lust  after
ah.  3. 10.  to  the  a.  that  now  to  the  principalities
1NTENIS.

;r.  30.  24.  till  he  have  performed  a.  of  his  heart
'eh.  4. 12.  is  a  discerner  of  the  a.  of  the  heart
INTERCESSION

gmfies,  A  pleading  or  entreating  in  behalf  of
another ,  Jerem.  7.  16.  It  is  spoken,  (l)  Of  the
intercession  of  Christ,  Isa.  53.  12.  Ileb.  7.  25.
Which  he  performs,  [1]  By  appearing  for  us  be¬
fore  the  Father,  Heb.  9.  24.  [2]  By  presenting  the
merit  of  his  sacnfice  once  offered,  Heb.  10.  12,  14.

[3]  By  declaring  his  will,  that  such  and  such  bless¬
ings  may  be  bestowed  on  the  elect,  lleb.  10.  10.

[4]  By  the  Father's  consenting  and  agreeing  to  this
will  of  his  Bon,  John  11.  42.  (ID  Of  the  Holy
Ghost  in  God's  children,  Rom.  8.  26.  (Ill)  Of
men  interceding ,  [1]  For  temporal  blessings,  Jer.
7.16.  [2]  For  spiritual  blessings,  1  Tim.  2.  1.
(IV)  Of  Elias,  who  complained  against  the  ten
tribes,  who  were  generally  become  idolaters,  Rom.
11.  2.

ta.  53. 12.  and  made  a.  for  the  transgressors
er.  7.  16.  neither  lift  up  cry,  nor  make  a.  to  me
27. 18.  let  them  now  make  a.  to  the  Lord
56.  25.  Elnathan  and  Gemariah  had  made  a.
iota.  8.  26.  but  the  Spirit  maketh  a.  for  us,  27,  34.

11.  2.  how  he  maketh  a.  to  God  against  Israel
leb.  7.  25.  he  ever  liveth  to  make  a.  for  them
INTERCESSIONS.

Tim.  2. 1.  that  prayers  and  a.  be  made  for  all  men
INTERCESSOR.

sa.  59.  16.  he  wondered  that  there  was  no  a.
INTERMEDDLE.

3rov.  14.  10.  a  stranger  doth  not  a.  with  his  joy
INTERMEDDLE JH.

3rev.  18.  1.  seeketli  and  a.  with  all  wisdom
INTERMISSION.

Mm.  3.  49.  mine  eye  ceaseth  not  without  any  i.
INTERPRET.

Gen,  41.  8.  none  that  could  a.  them  to  Pharaoh

12.  to  each  according  to  his  dream  he  did  a.

Cor.  12.  30.  do  all  a.  I  ||  14.  5.  except  lie  a.

14.  13.  pray  that  he  may  a.  II  27-  let  one  a.
INTERPRETATION

ignifies,  [1]  A  translation,  or  turning  from  one
language  into  another,  1  Cor.  12.  10.  [2]  The
gift  of  expounding  visions  and  dreams,  Gen.  40. 8.
[3]  Exposition,  or  shewing  the  sense  and  import  of
any  thing,  2  Pet.  1.  20.

>en.  4q.  5.  each  according  to  a.  of  dream,  41.  11.

12.  this  is  the  a.  of  it,  18.  Dan.  4.  24.  |  5.  26.

r  16.  when  the  baker  saw  that  the  a.  was  good
f  ig.  7.  15.  when  Gideon  heard  the  a.  thereof
Jrov.  1.  6.  to  understand  a  proverb  and  the  a.
dan.  2.  4.  and  we  shall  shew  the  a.  7,  36.

45.  the  dream  is  certain,  and  the  i.  thereof  sure

4.  19.  and  the  a.  thereof  be  to  thy  enemies

5.  12.  he  will  shew  the  a.  ||  15.  not  shew  the  a.
7-16.  and  made  me  to  know  the  a.  of  the  things
ohn  1.  42.  Cephas,  which  is  by  a.  a  stone

9.  7.  in  the  pool  of  Siloam,  which  is  by  a.  sent
lets  9.  36.  named  Tabitha,  by  a.  is  called  Dorcas

13.  8.  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  so  is  his  name  by  a.
Bor.  12.  10.  to  another  the  a.  of  tongues

14.  26.  every  one  of  you  hath  an  a.

fcb.  7.  2.  being  by  a.  king  of  righteousness
:  Pet.  l.  20.  no  prophecy  is  of  any  private  a.

INTERPRETATIONS.

>«n.  40.  8.  Joseph  said,  do  not  a.  belong  to  God  ?
Can.  5.  16.  I  have  heard  that  thou  canst  make  a.
INTERPRETED.

40.  22.  as  Joseph  had  a.  to  them,  41.  13.

■sra  4.  7.  written  and  a.  in  the  Syrian  tongue
1/  i1,  w*1ich  being  a.  is,  God  with  us
'dark  5.  41.  which  is,  being  a.  damsel,  arise

15.  22.  which  is,  being  a.  the  place  of  a  skull

34.  a.  my  God,  my  God,  why  hast  forsaken  me
I'hn  1.38.  being  a.  raster  ||  41.  a.  the  Christ
icts  4.  36.  is,  being  a.  the.  son  of  consolation
1NTERPR E 1  ER,  S.

■ssi.  40.  8.  we  dreamed,  and  there  is  no  i.  of  it
23.  tor  Joseph  spake  to  them  by  an  a.
c hron.  32.  f  31.  howbeit  in  the  business  of  a.

35.  23.  there  be  an  a.  one  among  a  thousand
,  43.  t27-  and  thy  a.  have  transgressed

■  Oor.  14.  28.  but  if  there  be  no  a.  let  him  keep


INTERPRETING.

Dan.  5.  12.  a.  of  dreams  was  found  in  Daniel
1 N i REA T

Signifies,  [lj  To  supplicate  or  pray  to,  Exod.  8.  8.
Judg.  13.  8.  [2]  To  intercede,  or  speak  in  one's
behalf,  Gen.  23.  8.  1  Sam.  2.  25._  [3]  To


enteitam,  or  use  kindly,  Gen.  12.  16.  [4

urge,  or  press  earnestly,  Ruth  1.  16.  [5
hear,  grant,  or  accept  of,  Gen.  25.  21.  [6.


To

To

To


eek,  Prov.  19.  6.  [7]  To  give  good  words,  1

Cor.  4.  13.

Gen.  23.8.  a.  for  me  to  Ephron  the  son  of  Zoar
Exod.  8.  8.  then  Pharaoh  called  for  Moses,  and
said,  a.  the  Lord,  28.  1  9-.  28. 1  10.  17.
9.  when  shall  l  a.  for  thee  ||  29.  I  will  a.  Lord
Ruth  1.  16.  Ruth  said,  a.  me  not  to  leave  thee

1  Bam.  2.  25.  if  a  man  sin,  who  shall  a.  for  him  ?
Kings  13.  6.  a.  the  face  of  the  Lord  thy  God

Job  11. 1 19.  yea,  many  shall  a.  thy  face
Psal.  45.  12.  among  the  people,  shall  a.  thy  favour
Prov.  19.  6.  many  will  a.  the  favour  of  the  prince
Jer.  15. 11.  I  will  cause  the  enemy  to  a.  thee  well
Acts  7.  6.  and  should  a.  them  evil  400  years
Cor.  4. 13.  being  defamed,  we  a.  we  are  made
Phil.  4.  3.  I  a.  thee  also,  true  yoke-fellow
Tim.  5. 1.  rebuke  not,  but  a.  him  as  a  tather
IN  TREATED.

Gen.  12.  16.  he  a.  Abraham  well  for  her  sake
25.  21.  Isaac  a.  for  his  wife,  Lord  was  a.  of  him
Excd.  5.  22.  why  hast  thou  so  evil  a.  this  people  ?

8.  30.  Moses  went  out  and  a.  the  Lord,  10.  18.
Deut.  26.  6.  and  the  Egyptians  evil  a.  us
Judg.  13.8.  then  Manoan  a.  the  Lord,  and  said.

2  Bam.  21.  14.  after  that  God  was  a.  for  the  land
24.  25.  Lord  was  a.  for  the  land,  the  plague

[stayed

.  Citron.  5.  20.  they  cried  and  he  was  a.  of  them
2  Citron.  33.  13.  Manasseh  prayed,  and  God  was  i.
Ezra  8.  23.  we  besought  God,  and  he  was  a.  of  us
Job  19.  16.  I  called,  1  a.  him  with  my  mouth
17.  too’  I  a.  for  the  children's  sake  of  my  body
Psal.  119.  58.  1  i.  thy  favour  with  my  whole  heart
Isa.  19.  22.  he  shall  be  a.  of  them  and  heal  them
Mat.  22.6.  and  a.  them  spitefully,  Luke  18.  32.
Luke  15.  28.  then  came  his  father  out,  and  a.  him
20. 11.  a.  him  shamefully  ,  and  sent  him  away
Acts  7.  19.  the  same  evil  a.  our  fathers
27-  3.  and  Julius  courteously  a.  Paul
These.  2.  2.  after  that  we  were  shamefully  a.

Deb.  12.  19.  i.  the  word  should  not  be  spoken
Jam.  3. 17.  wisdom  from  above  is  easy  to  be  a.

1  NT  REA  LET  If.

Job  24.  21.  he  evil  a.  the  barren  that  beareth  not
INTREATIES.

Prov.  18.  23.  the  poor  useth  a.  but  the  rich
2  Cor. 8.  4.  praying  us  with  much  a.  that  we  receive
INTRUDING.

Col.  2. 18.  a.  into  those  things  he  hath  not  seen
IN  VAl)E.

2  Chr.  20. 10.  whom  thou  wouldest  not  let  Israel  a.
llab.  3.  16.  he  will  a.  them  with  his  troops
INVADED.

1  Sam.  23.  27-  the  Philistines  have  a.  the  land
27.  8.  David  and  his  men  a.  the  Geshurites
30. 1.  the  Amalekites  a.  the  south,  and  Ziklag

2  Kings  13.  20.  a  band  of  Moabites  a.  the  land
2  Chrun.  28. 18.  the  Philistines  had  a.  the  cities

INVASION.

1  Bam.  30.  14.  we  made  an  a.  on  the  south
INVENT.

Amos  6.  5.  a.  instruments  of  music,  like  David
INVENTED.

2  Chron.  26. 15.  made  engines  a.  by  cunning  men

IN  VEN  LIONS

Signify,  [1]  Contrivances,  Prov.  8.  12.  [2]  Sinful
practices,  Psal.  99.  8.  [3]  Idolatrous  acts,  Psal.

106.  29,  39-  [4]  New  ways  of  making  oneself

more  Wise  and  happy  than  God  has  made  him,
Eecl .  7.  29.

Psal.  99.  8.  thou  tookest  vengeance  of  their  a.

106.  29.  provoked  him  to  anger  with  their  a.

39.  and  went  a  whoring  with  their  own  a.

Prov.  8.  12.  and  find  out  knowledge  of  witty  a.
Eccl.  7.  29.  but  they  have  sought  out  many  a.
INVENTORS.

Rom.  1.  30.  i.  of  evil  things,  disobedient  to  parents
INVISIBLE.

Rom.  1.  20.  the  a.  things  of  him  are  clearly  seen
Col.  1.  15.  who  is  the  image  of  the  a.  God

16.  that  are  in  heaven  and  earth,  visible  and  a.

1  dj'im.  1.  17.  now  to  the  King  immortal,  a.

Heb.  11.  27.  he  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  i.
INVITED.

1  Sam.  9.  24.  since  1  said,  1  have  a.  the  peopls

2  Bam.  13.  23.  Absalom  a.  all  the  king’s  sons
Esth.  5. 12.  to-morrow  am  1  a.  to  her  with  the  king

INWARD.

Gen.  41.  +  21.  when  they  had  come  to  the  i.  parts
Lev.  13.  55.  shalt  burn  it  in  the  fire,  it  is  fret  a.

1  Kings  7.  25.  and  all  their  hinder  parts  were  a.

17. 1  21.  this  child’s  soul  come  into  his  a.  parts

2  Chron.  3.  13.  they  stood  and  their  faces  were  a'.
Job  19.  19.  all  my  i.  friends  abhorred  me

38.  36.  who  hath  put  wisdom  in  the  i.  parts
Psal.  5.  9.  their  a.  part  is  very  wickedness
49.  11.  their  i.  thought  is,  that  their  houses
51.  6.  behold,  thou  desirest  truth  in  the  i.  parts
62.  +  4.  but  they  curse  in  their  a.  parts
64.  6.  a.  thought  of  every  one  of  them  is  deep
Pray.  20. 27.  searching  all  the  a.  parts  of  the  belly-
30.  so  do  stripes  the  a.  parts  of  the  belly
Isa.  16.11.  my  a.  parts  sound  for  Kir-haresh
Jer.  31.  33.  I  will  put  my  law  in  their  a.  parts
Mark  6.T19.  Herodias  had  an  a.  grudge  against  him
Luke  11.  39.  your  a.  part  is  full  of  ravening
Rom.  7.  22.  1  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  i.  man
2  Cor.  4. 16.  yet  the  a.  mail  is  renewed  day  by  day
7. 15.  his  a.  affection  is  more  abundant  to  you
INWARDLY.

Psal.  62.  4.  they  bless  with  their  mouth,  butcur-.e  i.
Mat.  7.  15.  but  i.  they  are  ravening  wolves
Rom.  2.  29.  but  he  is  a  Jew  who  is  one  a


INWARDS.

Exod.  29.  13.  the  fat  that  covereth  the  i.  22.  Lev.  3.

3,9,  14. 1  4.  8. 1  7-  3.  I  9.  19.

17.  thou  shalt  wash  the  a.  Lev.  1.  9,  13.  1  9.  14.
Lev.  4.  11.  his  i.  and  dung  burn  in  a  clean  place

8.  16.  the  fat  on  the  a.  Moses  burnt  on  the  altar
21.  and  he  washed  the  i.  and  the  legs  with  water

JOIN

Signifies,  [1]  To  knit,  or  unite  together.  Job  41.  17.

[2]  To  make  leagues  and  alliances,  Dan.  11.  6.

[3]  To  go  dose  to.  Acts  8.  29.  [4]  To  be  numbered,
or  reckoned  with,  Job  3.  6.  It  is  spoken,  (1)  /1j«-
terially,  of  things,  Isa.  5.  8.  (11)  Personally,  as
[1]  In  marriage,  Eph.  5.  31.  [2]  In  affinity,  2
Chron.  18.  1.  [3[  In  aiding  or  assisting,  Exod.  1.
10.  [4]  In  battle  ',  army  against  army,  1  Sam.  4.  2.

1  Kings  20.  29-  (HD  Mentally,  1  Cor.  1. 10.  [4]
Carnally,  1  Cor.  6.  16.  [VJ  ldulatruus/y,  Hos.4.

17.  [6]  Spiritually,  Jer.  50.  5.  1  Cor.  6.  17.

Exod.  1.  10.  lest  they.;',  to  our  enemies,  and  fight
2  Chrcn.  20.  35.  did  Jehoshaphaty.  with  Ahaziah
Ezra  9.  14.  and  j.  in  affinity  with  the  people
Prov.  11.  21.  hand  j.  in  hand,  the  wicked,  16.  5.

Isa.  5.  8.  woe  to  them  that  j.  house  to  house

9.  11.  the  Lord  shall  j.  his  enemies  together

56.  6.  sons  of  stranger  that  j.  themselves  to  Lord
Jer.  50.  5.  come,  let  us  J.  ourselves  to  the  Lord
Ezek.  37. 17.  j.  them  one  to  another  into  one  stick
Dan.  11.6.  they  shall  j.  in  the  end  of  years
Acts  5. 13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  j.  himself

8.  29.  go  near  and  j.  thyself  to  this  chariot

9.  26.  Saul  assayed  to  ;'.  himself  to  the  disciples

JOINED.

Gen.  14.  3.  all  these  kings  were  j.  together  in  vale
8.  they.;',  battle  with  them  in  the  vale  of  Siddim
29.  34.  this  time  will  my  husband  bey.  to  me
Num.  18.  2.  thy  brethren  of  Levi  be  j.  to  thee,  4.

1  saw.  4.  2.  when  they  j.  battle,  Israel  was  smitten

1  Kings  20.  29.  in  the  seventh  day  the  battle  was  j.

2  Chron.  18.  1.  Jehoshaphaty.  affinity  with  Ahab
20.  36.  he  j.  with  Ahaziah  to  make  ships,  37.

Ezra  4.  12.  set  up  walls,  and  j.  the  foundations
Neh.  4.  6.  all  the  wall  was.;',  together  unto  halt
Esth.  9.27.  all  thaty.  should  keep  Purim
Job  3. 6.  let  it  not  bey.  to  the  days  ot  the  year
41.  17.  Leviathan's  scales  are  y.  one  to  another
23.  the  Hakes  of  his  fiesh  are  j.  together
Psal.  83.  8.  Assur  also  isy.  with  them
Eccl.  9.  4.  to  him  that  isy.  to  all  the  living  is  hope
Isa.  13. 15.  every  one  j.  to  them  shall  fall  by  sword
14.  1.  and  the  strangers  shall  bey.  with  them
20.  thou  shaltnot.be.;'.  with  them  in  burial
56.  3.  nor  him  that  hathy'.  to  the  Lord  speak
Ezek.  1.  9.  their  wings  werey.  one  to  another
46. 22.  there  were  courts y.  of  forty  cubits  long
IIos.  4.  17.  Ephraim  isy.  to  idols,  let  him  alone
Zech.  2.  11.  many  nations  shall  bey  to  the  Lord
Mat.  19.  6.  what  God  hathy.  together,  Mark  10.  9.
Luke  15.  15.  he  went  andy.  himself  to  a  citizen
Acts  5.  36.  about  four  hundred/,  themselves

18.  7.  whose  house  j.  hard  to  the  synagogue

1  Cor.  1. 10.  that  ye  be  perfectly  j.  in  the  same  nnnd

6.  16.  he  which  isy.  to  an  harlot  is  one  body-
17.  he  that  isy.  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit
Eph.  4.  16.  the  whole  body  fitly  j.  together
5.  31.  and  shall  bey.  to  his  wife,  and  they  two
Bee  Baal-Peor.

JOINING,  S.

1  Chron.  22.  3.  David  prepared  iron  for  they.

2  Chron.  3. 12.  j.  to  the  wing  of  the  other  cherub

JOINT.

Gen.  32.  25.  hollow  of  Jacob’s  thigh  was  out  of  y.
Psal.  22. 14.  and  all  my  bones  are  out  ofy.

Prov.  25. 19.  confidence  is  like  a  foot  out  ofy.

Eph.  4.  16.  by  that  which  every  y.  supplieth
JOINTS.

1  Kings  22.  34.  smote  the  king  of  Israel  between  the
j.  of  the  harness,  2.  Chron.  18.  33.
Cant.  7.  1.  they,  of  thy  thighs  are  like  jewels
Dan.  5.  6.  that  the  j.  of  his  loins  were  loosed
Col.  2. 19.  all  the  body-  by  j.  knit  together
Heb.  4. 12.  to  dividing  asunder  ofy.  and  marrow
JOINT-/iea;\f.

Rom.  8. 17.  heirs  of  God,  and  j. -heirs  with  Christ
JOT.

Mat.  5.  18.  one  y.  or  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass
JOURNEY.

Gen.  24.  21.  the  Lord  had  made  hisy.  prosperous
29.  1.  Jacob  went  on  hisy.  and  came  to  the  east
31.  23.  Laban  pursued  after  him  seven  days’  J.

33. 12.  let  us  take  oury.  ||  46.  1.  Israel  took  hisy.
Exod.  13.  20.  they  took  theiry.  from  Succoth
16. 1.  Israelites  took  theiry.  from  Elim
Num.  9. 10.  be  in  a y.  yet  shall  keep  the  passover

13.  is  notin  ay.  and  t'orbeareth  to  keep  passover
10.  13.  they  first  took  theiry.  according  to  the
Deut.  1.  2.  there  are  eleven  days’ y.  from  Iloreb
10.  11.  arise,  take  thy y.  before  the  people
Josh.  9.  11.  take  victuals  with  you  foryoury.

13.  become  old,  by  reason  of  the  very  longy.
Judg.  4.  9.  they,  thou  takest  is  not  for  thy  honour

1  Bam.  15. 18.  and  the  Lord  sent  thee  on  ay.

2  Bam.  11.  10.  earnest  thou  not  from  thy  j.  ?

1  Kings  18.  27.  or  he.  is  in  a.;'.  II 19.  7-  the  f  is  great

2  Kings  3.  y.  retched  a  compass  ot  seven  days’  y.
Neh.  2.  6.  for  how  long  shall  thyy.  be  r

Prov.  7.19.  the  good  man  is  gone  a  longy.

Mat.  10.  10.  nor  scrip  for  your  y.  nor  two  coats
Mark  6.  8.  take  nothing  for  their.,;'.  Luke  9.  3.
Luke  11.6.  a  friend  of  mine  in  hisy.  is  come  to  me
15.  13.  the  younger  took  his.;',  into  a  far  country
John  4.  6.  Jesus  wearied  with  his  j.  sat  thus
Rom.  1. 10.  1  might  have  a  prosperousy.  to  come
15.  24.  for  1  trust  to  see  you  in  my  y.

1  Cor.  16.  6.  that  ye  may  bring  me  on  my  j.

Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Zenas  and  A  polios  on  their  j.

3  John  6.  whom  if  thou  bring  forward  on  theiry.

Days'  JO  URN  EY.

Num.  11.  31.  the  quails  fall  a  day's  j.  on  this  side
1  Kings  19. 4.  himself  went  a  day's  j.  into  wildern
Jonah  3.  4.  began  to  enter  city  a  day's  j.  and  cried
Luke  2.  44.  went  a  day's  j.  among  their  acquaint.


JOY


JOY


Acts  1.  11.  is  from  Jerusalem  a  sabbath  'ay's  j.

See  three  Days.

JOURNEYED.

Gen.  11.  2.  that  as  they  /.  they  found  a  plain

12.  9.  Abram  j.  going  on  toward  the  south,  20.  1.

13.  11.  Lot/,  east  ||  33.  17.  Jacob  J.  to  Suc.coth
35.  5.  Israel  /.  toward  Bethel,  and  the  terror

16.  /.  from  Bethel  |l  21.  J.  to  the  tower  of  Edar
Exod.  40.  t  36.  when  cloud  was  taken  up,  Israel  /.

37.  cloud  not  taken  up,  they  /.  not,  Num.  9.  21.
Num.  9.  17.  after  that  the  children  of  Israel  /.  18.

19.  kept  the  charge  of  the  1  ord,  and  /.  not

20.  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  /.  23.
12.  15.  /.  not  till  Miriam  was  brought  in  again

Judg.  17.  8.  came  to  the  house  of  Micah  as  he  /.
Acts  9.  3.  as  Saul he  came  near  to  Damascus

7.  the  men  which  /.  with  him  stood,  26.  13.
JOURNEYING.

Gen.  12.  t  9.  Abram  in  going  and  J.  toward
Num.  10.  2.  make  trumpets  for/.  of  the  camps

29.  wre  are  J.  to  the  place  of  which  Lord  said
Luke  13.  22.  and  as  he  was  /.  towards  Jerusalem
2  Cor.  11.  26.  in  7.  often,  in  perils  of  waters
JOURN  BY  1NGS.

Num.  10.  28.  thus  were  the  J.  of  Israel's  armies
JO  URN  EYS.

Gen.  13.  3.  Abram  went  on  his  j.  from  the  south
Exod.  17. 1.  j.  according  to  the  commandment

40.  36.  taken  up,  they  went  on  in /.  Nvm.  10.  12.
38.  the  cloud  was  on  tabernacle  thro’  all  their  /.

Num.  10.  6.  they  shall  blow  an  alarm  for  their  /.
33.  1.  these  are  the  J.  of  Israel  with  armies,  2.
JOY

Signifies,  [1]  An  agreeable  and  sweet  affection  of
the  soul,  arising  from  some  present  or  hoped  for
good,  1  Chron.  12.  40.  [2]  l'he  delight  and  sa
tisfaction  of  the  reasonable  soul  in  its  union  with
God  in  Christ,  as  the  greatest  and  highest  good,
■with  an  actual  rejoicing  in  what  is  for  his  honour
and  glory.  Gal.  5.  22.  [3]  That  joyful  and

glorious  state,  unto  which  Christ  himself  should
attain  after  his  sufferings,  and  which  he  will
communicate  to  all  who  believe  in  him,  Ileb.
12.  2.  [4]  That  free,  gracious,  and  liberal  re¬
ward,  which  God  will  bestow  on  the  righteous  in
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Mat.  25.  21,  23.  [5]
The  matter  or  cause  of  joy,  1  Thess.  2.  20.  [6]
Songs  of  thanksgiving  and  praise,  Psal.  42.  4.
It  is,  (1)  Natural,  Prov.  23.  24.  Ecd.  2.  10.
(2)  Worldly,  Job  29.  13.  Isa.  9.  3.  (3)  Hypo¬
critical,  Job  20.  5.  Mat.  13.  20.  (4)  Ungodly,
Prov.  15.  21.  Hos.  9.  1.  (5)  Mired,  worldly,
and  spiritual,  1  Chron.  12.  40.  Luke  10.  17.
(6)  Heavenly,  Mat.  25.  21,  23.  Luke  15.  7.

10.  (7)  Spiritual,  Psal.  51.  12.  Itom.  14.  17.
JOY,  Substantive.

1  Sam.  18.  6.  came  out  to  meet  king  Saul  with  j.

1  Chron.  12.  40.  for  there  was  j.  in  Israel

15.  16.  singers,  by  lifring  up  the  voice  with  j.

25.  went  to  bring  the  ark  of  the  covenant  with  j.
29.  17.  now  have  I  seen  with  j.  the  people  offer

2  Chron.  20.  27.  to  go  again  to  Jerusalem  with  j.
Ezra  3.  13.  not  discern  noise  of  the  shout  of  j.

6.  16.  dedication  of  the  house  of  God  with  j.

22.  and  kept  the  feast  seven  days  with  j.

Neh.  8.  10.  the,/,  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength

12.  43.  the  j.  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  afar  off
t  44.  for  the  j.  of  Judah  and  Levites  which
Esth.  8.  16.  the  Jews  had  light,  J.  and  honour
9.  22.  turned  to  them  from  sorrow  to  j.  they
should  make  them  days  of  feasting  and  j.
Job  8.  19.  behold,  this  is  the,/,  of  his  way
t  21.  till  he  fill  thy  lips  with  shouting  for./.

20.  5.  the  j.  of  the  hypocrite  is  but  for  a  moment

29.  13.  I  caused  the  widow’s  heart  to  sing  for,;.
33.  26.  and  he  will  see  his  face  with  j.

41.  22.  and  sorrow  is  turned  into,/,  before  him
Psal.  16.  11.  in  thy  presence  is  fulness  of/.

27.  6.  offer  in  his  tabernacles  sacrifices  of  j.

30.  5.  but  j.  cometh  in  the  morning

42.  4.  1  went  with  the  voice  of  J.  and  praise

43.  4.  then  will  I  go  to  God  iny  exceeding  j.

48.  2.  the,/,  of  the  whole  earth  is  mount  Zion

51.  12.  restore  to  me  the  j.  of  thy  salvation
65.  t  12.  the  little  hills  are  girded  with  ./.

67.  4.  let  the  nations  be  glad  and  sing  for  j.

105.  43.  he  brought  forth  his  people  with  j.

126.  5.  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  J.

137.  6.  if  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief,;.

Prov.  12.  20.  but  to  the  counsellors  of  peace  is  j.

14.  10.  a  stranger  not  intermeddle  with  his./.

15.  21.  folly  is  j.  to  him  destitute  of  wisdom

23.  a  man  hath  j.  by  the  answer  of  his  mouth

17.  21.  and  the  father  of  a  fool  hath  no  j.

21.  15.  it  is  j.  to  the  just  to  do  judgment

23.  -24.  who  begettetli  a  wise  child  shall  have  j.
Eccl.  2.  10.  1  withheld  not  my  heart  from  j,

26.  God  giveth  him  wisdom,  knowledge,  and.;.

5.  20.  God  answered  him  in  the ,/.  of  his  heart
9.  7-  go  thy  way,  eat  thy  bread  with  j.

Jsa.  9.  3.  not  increased  the /.  according  to  the  j.

17.  Lord  shall  have  no  j.  in  their  young  men
12.  3.  with  j.  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  wells
16. 10.  j.  is  taken  out  of  the  plentiful  field

24.  8  .j.  of  the  harp  ceaseth  ||  11.  j.  is  darkened
29.  19.  the  meek  shall  increase  their  /.  in  Lord
32. 13.  on  all  houses  of .7. ,11 14.  a./,  ot'  wild  asses

1  35.  2.  and  rejoice  even  with ,/.  and  singing

10.  with  everlasting  j.  on  their  heads,  51.  11.

52.  9.  break  forth  into  j.  ||  55.  12.  go  out  with  j.

60.  15.  I  will  make  thee  a  j.  of  many  generations

61.  3.  to  give  them  the  oil  of  j.  for  mourning

7.  everlasting,/,  shall  be  unto  them

65.  14.  my  servants  shall  sing  for.;,  of  heart

18.  for  behold,  I  create  her  people  a  j.

66.  5.  but  he  shall  appear  to  your  j.

10.  rejoice  for  j.  with  her,  afl  ye  that  mourn
Jer.  15. 16.  the  word  wras  to  me  the  j.  Of  my  heart

31.  13.,  1  wdll  turn  their  mourning  into  J.

33.  9.  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  of  J.  a  praise

11.  again  there  shall  be  heard  the  voice  of  j.

.  48.  27-  since  thou  spakest,  thou  skippedst  for./.

254


Jer.  48.  33.  j.  is  taken  from  the  plentiful  field
49.  25.  the  city  of  praise,  the  city  of  my  j.

Lam.  2. 15.  the  city,  the  j.  of  the  whole  earth

5.  15.  the  ./,  of  our  heart  is  ceased,  our  dance
Ezek.  24.  25.  take  from  them  the./,  of  their  glory

36.  5.  appointed,  with  the  j.  of  all  their  heart
Hos.  9. 1  -  rejoice  not,  O  Israel,  for  j.  as  other  people
Joel  1.  12.  because  /.  is  withered  away  from  men
Zeph.  3.  17.  he  will  rejoice  over  thee  with./.

Mat.  13.  20.  anon  with,;,  receiveth  it,  Luke  8. 13.

44.  for  J.  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all  he.hath

25.  21.  enter  thou  into  the./,  of  thy  Lord,  23.

Luke  1.  44.  the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for./.

6.  23.  rejoice  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap  for  j.

10.  17.  the  seventy  returned  again  with,/.

15.  7-  ./•  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that
10.  there  is  j.  in  the  presence  of  the  angels

24.  41.  while  they  yet  believed  not  for,;.

John  3.  29.  this  my  j.  therefore  is  fulfilled

15.  11.  1  have  spoken  to  you,  that  my  j.  might  re¬

main  in  you,  and  that  your  ./.  might  be  full

16.  20.  your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into./.

21.  for  /.  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world

22.  and  your  j.  no  man  taketh  from  you

24.  ye  shall  receive,  that  your./,  may  be  full

17.  13.  might  have  my  /.  fulfilled  in  themselves
Acts  2.  28.  make  me  full  of  J.  with  thy  countenance

13.  52.  disciples  tilled  wdth  j.  and  the  Holy  Ghost
20.  24.  that  t  might  finish  my  course  with  j.

Rom.  14.  17.  kingdom  of  God  is./,  in  the  II.  Ghost
15.  13.  God  fill  you  with  all  J.  in  believing

32.  may  come  to  you  with  j.  by  the  will  of  God
2  Cor.  1.  24.  but  we  are  helpers  of  your  j.

2.  3.  that  my  j.  is  the,/,  of  you  all

7.  13.  the  more  joyed  w'e  for  the/,  of  Titus

8.  2.  the  abundance  of  their  ./,  abounded  to  riches
Gal.  5.  22.  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,/,  peace
Rhil.  1.  4.  in  prayer,  making  request  with/.

25.  abide  for  your  furtherance  and/,  of  faith

2.  2.  fulfil  ye  my/.  |J  4.  1.  my/,  and  crown

1  Thess.  1.  6.  received  the  word  with/,  of  Holy  G.

2. 19.  what  is  our  hope  or/.  ||  20.  ye  are  our/.

3.  9.  for  the/,  wherewith  we  joy  before  Godi

2  Tim.  1.  4.  that  I  may  be  tilled  with /.

Philern.  20.  let  me  have/,  of  thee  in  the  Lord
Heb.  12.  2.  who  for  the/,  that  was  set  before  him

13.  17.  they  may  do  it  with/,  and  not  with  grief
Jam.  1.  2.  count  it/,  when  ye  fall  into  temptation

4.  9.  and  your  /.  be  turned  into  heaviness
1  Ret.  1.  8.  ye  rejoice  with/,  unspeakable

4.  13.  ye  may  be  glad  also  with  exceeding/.

1  John  1.  4.  that  your/,  may  be  full,  2  John  12.

3  John  4.  1  have  no  greater./,  than  to  hear  that  my
Jude2A.  to  present  you  faultless  with  exceeding  j.

See  Gladness.

Great  JOY.

1  Kings  1.  40.  the  people  rejoiced  wdth  great  j.

1  Chr.  29.  9-  Da\id  the  king  rejoiced  with  great  j.

2  Chr.  30.  26.  so  there  was  great  j.  in  Jerusalem
Neh.  12.  43.  G.  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great  j.
Mat.  2.  10.  saw  the  star,  they  rejoiced  with  y-eat  j.

28.8.  went  from  sepulchre  with  fear  and  g.eat  j.
Luke  2.  10.  1  bring  you  good  tidings  ot' great  j.

24.  52.  they  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great  j.
Acts  8.  8.  and  there  was  great  j.  in  that  city
15.  3.  they  caused  great  j.  to  all  the  brethren
Philern."!.  for  we  have  great  j.  in  thy  love
Shout,  or  shouted  for  JOY.

Ezra  3.  12.  and  many  shouted  aloud  for  j.

Job  38.  7-  and  ail  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  j.
Psal.  5. 11.  let  those  that  put  their  trust  in  thee  re¬
joice  ;  let  them  ever  shout  for  j.  35.  27.
32.  11.  shout  for  j.  all  ye  that  are  upright  in  heart

65.  13.  the  valleys  shout  for  j.  they  also  sing
132.  9.  and  let  thy  saints  shout  for  j.  16.

JOY,  Verb.

Psal.  21. 1.  the  king  shall  /.  in  thy  strength
Isa.  9.  3.  they,/,  before  thee  according  to  the  joy

65. 19.  I  will  rejoice  and /.  in  my  people
Hab.  3. 18.  1  w  ill  7.  in  the  God  of  my  salvation
Zeph.  3.  17-  he  will  7.  over  thee  with  singing
Rom.  5. 1 1.  but  we  also/,  in  G.  thro’  our  Lord  Jesus
Phil.  2.  17.  yea,  I/,  and  rejoice  with  you  all

18.  for  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  /.  and  rejoice

1  Thess.  3. 9.  for  all  the  joy  wherewith  we  /.  for  you

JOYED.

2  Cor.  7. 13.  the  more  j.  we  for  the  joy  of  Titus

JOYFUL.

1  Kings  8.  66.  they  went  to  their  tents/,  and  glad
Ezra  6.  22.  for  the  lord  hath  made  them/.

Esth.  5.  9.  then  Daman  went  forth  that  day/.  .
Job  3.  7.  let  no/,  voice  come  therein
Ps.  5.  11.  letthem  that  love  thy  name  be/,  in  thee
35.  9.  and  my  soul  shall  be  /.  in  the  Lord
63.  5.  my  mouth  shall  praise  thee  with/,  lips

66.  1.  make  a/,  noise  to  God,  all  ye  lands
81.1.  make  a/,  noise  to  the  God  of  Jacob

89. 15.  blessed  is  the  people  that  know  the/,  sound
95.  1.  make  a  /.  noise  to  the  rock  of  our  salvation

2.  a/,  noise  to  him  with  psalms,  98.  4.  I  1(X).  1.
98.  6.  make  a/,  noise  before  the  Lord  the  king

8.  let  the  lulls  be/,  together  before  the  Lord
113.  9.  the  barren  to  be  a  /.  mother  of  children
149.  2.  let  the  children  of  Zion  be./,  in  their  king

5.  let  the  saints  be  /.  in  glory  ;  let  them  sing
Eccl.  7 •  U.  in  the  day  of  prosperity  be  ,/.  but  in
Isa.  49. 13.  sing,  O  heavens,  and  be/.  O  earth
56.  7-  I  w  ill  make  them  j.  in  my  house  of  prayer
61.  10.  my  soul  shall  be/,  in  my  God

2  Cor.  7.4.  1  am  exceeding/,  in  all  our  tribulation

JOYFULLY.

Eccl.  9.  9-  live/,  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lovest
Luke  19. 6.  Zaccheuscamedownand  received  him/.
Heb.  10.  34.  ye  took  .7.  the  spoiling  of  your  goods
JOYFULNESS.

Deut.  28.  47.  because  servedst  not  the  Tord  with  /.
Col.  1. 11.  strengthened  to  lons-suflering  with  1.
JOYING.

Col.  2.  5.  absent,  yet  am  1  with  you  in  the  spirit,/.
JOYOUS.

Isa.  22.  2.  thou  art  full  of  stirs,  a/,  city

23.  7.  is  this  your /.  city,  whose  antiquity  is


1  s

Isa.  32.  13.  on  all  the  houses  of  joy  in  the/,  city
Heb.  12.  11.  no  chastening  seemeth  to  be
IRON

Signifies,  [1]  The  metal  so  called,  Deut.  3.  H.  [2'
An  axe,  Isa.  10.  34.  [3]  Insensible  hardness,

Tim,  4.  2.  [4]  Hard,  dry,  mid  barren ,  like  iron
Deut.  28.  23.  [5]  Unbendable,  Isa.  48.  4.  [6
Mighty  and  irresistible  power ,  Psal.  2.  9.  [7
Fitters,  or  chains,  Psal.  I07.  10.  [8j  It  denote;
strength,  Dan.  2.  33,  41.

IRON,  Substantive.

Num.  35.  16.  smite  him  with  an  instrument  of ».
Deut.  3.  11.  Og’s  bedstead  was  a  bedstead  of/.

4.  20.  Lord  brought  you  cut  of  the  a.  furnace
out  of  Egypt,  1  Kings  8.  51.  Jer.  11.  4

8.  9.  a  land  whose  stones  are  i.  and  out  of  hills

28.  23.  the  earth  that  is  under  thee  shall  be  i.i

48.  put  a  yoke  of  a.  on  thy  neck,  Jer.  28. 14.
Josh.  8.  31 .  altar  of  stones,  over  wdiich  no  man  lift  t

17.  16.  Uanaanites  have  chariots  of  i.  Judg.  1.
Judg.  4.  3.  had  nine  hundred  chariots  of  i.  13.  )

1  Sam.  17.  7.  his  spear  weighed  CO.'shekels  of  1.

2  Sari.  12.  31.  under  harrows  of  i.  1  Chron.  20.  3.
23.  7.  but  the  man  must  be  fenced  w  ith  i.

1  Kings  6.  7-  nor  any  tool  of  i.  heard  in  the  house

22.  1 1 .  Zedekiah  made  him  horns  of  a.  2  Chr.  18.10}

2  Kings  6.  6.  and  the  i.  did  swim

1  Chron.  22.  3.  David  prepared  a.  in  abundance

29.  2.  I  prepared  a.  for  the  things  of  a.  7.

Job  28.  2.  a.  is  taken  out  of  the  earth,  and  brass

40.  18.  behemoth's  bones  are  like  bars  of  a.

41.  27.  he  esteemeth  a.  as  straw,  brass  as  wood
Psal.  2.  9.  thou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod  of  »,

105.  18.  whose  feet  they  hurt,  he  was  laid  in  a.
I07.  10.  being  bound  in  a.  ||  16.  cut  bars  of  a.

149.  8.  to  bind  their  nobles  wdth  fetters  of  a.
Prov.  27.  17-  *.  sharpeneth  a.  so  a  man  his  friend  ■
Eccl.  10.  10.  if  the  a.  be  blunt,  and  he  do  not  whet
Isa.  10.  34.  cut  down  thickets  of  the  forest  with  a.

45.  2.  I  will  cut  asunder  the  bars  of  a.

60.  17.  fora.  I  will  bring  silver,  for  stones  i.

Jer.  15. 12.  shall  a.  break  the  northern  a.  and  steel  ?
17.  1.  the  sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  a  pen  of  aj
28.  13.  thou  shalt  make  for  them  yokes  of  a.
Ezek.  4.  3.  take  an  a.  pan,  and  set  It  for  a  wall  of  a

27.  12.  Tarshish  was  thy  merchant  with  a.

19.  Dan  and  Javan  occupied  with  bright  a.

Han.  2.  33.  his  legs  of  a.  feet  part  a.  34,  41,  42.

35.  then  w'as  the  a.  and  clay  broken  in  pieces
40.  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  a.

7.  19.  the  fourth  beast,  whose  teeth  were  of  a.
Amos  1.  3.  thresh  Gilead  w  ith  instruments  of  a.  ,
Mic.  4.  13.  for  1  will  make  thy  horn  a.  and  hoofs]

1  Tim.  4.  2.  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  a.
Rev.  2.  27.  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  a.  12. 5.  1 19.  15.

9.  9.  and  they  had  as  it  were  breast-plates  of  a.

See  Brass.

IRON.

Heut.  27.  5.  shalt  not  lift  up  any  i.  tool  on  them  i
Josh.  17.  18.  tho’  they  have  a.  chariots,  and  bestron
Job  19.  24.  that  they  were  graven  with  an  a.  pen

20.  24.  he  shall  flee  from  the  a',  weapon
Isa.  48.  4.  thy  neck  is  an  a.  sinew,  thy  brow  brass
Jer.  1.  18.  1  have  made  thee  this  day  an  a.  pillar
Ezek.  4.  3.  take  thou  unto  thee  an  i.  pan
Dan.  7.  7.  it  had  great  a.  teeth,  it  devoured
Acts  12.  It),  they  came  to  the  a.  gate  that  leads
IRONS.

Job  41.  7.  canst  thou  fill  his  skin  with  barbed  a’.?
IS

Signifies,  [1]  The  existence  of  a  person,  or  thing*
1  Cor.  8.  4.  Heb.  11.6.  [2]  Represents,  Exod

12.  11.  Mat.  26.  26,  28.  [3]  Leads  or  bring

unto }  Rom.  6.  23.  |  7-  7-  [4]  Ought  to  be,  2

let  it  be,  Heb.  13.  4.  [5]  Causeth,  deservett
Rom.  8.  6.

Job  11.  6.  that  they  are  double  to  that  which  is
Luke  10.  22.  who  the  son  is,  and  who  the  Father  ,
John  1.  47.  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guil

3.  6.  born  of  flesh  is  flesh,  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit

13.  but  the  Son  of  man  which  is  in  heaven
29-  he  that  hath  the  bride  as  the  bridegroom

4.  23.  but  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  as

7.  27.  no  man  knoweth  whence  he  is

8.  47.  he  that  is  of  God  ||  18.  .?7  •  that  is  of  the  trutj

9.  29.  w'».  know  not  from  w  hence  he  as,  30.

Acts  4.  24.  made  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  them  as

17.  19.  w  hat  new  doctrine  whereof  thou  speakest  j
Eph.  5.17-  understanding  what  the  will  of  Lord  a

2  Thess.  2.  4.  above  all  that  is  called  God,  cr  th«

is  worshipped,  shewing  himself  that  he  is  Go
1  Tim.  4.  8.  having  promise  of  life  that  now  is
Heb.  11.  6.  must  believe  he  is,  and  as  a  re  warder
1  John  3.  2.  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  as

3.  as  he  as  pure  ||  4.  sin  is  the  transgression  of  lar
Rev.  1.  4.  which  is,  w  as,  and  is  to  come,  8. 1  4.  8.'
17.  8.  behold  the  beast  that  was,  is  not,  yet  as

10.  and  one  is  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come
See  Better,  Ch  r ist.  Clean,  Dead,  Ephr  au$'
Fool,  Good,  Right.

IS  it.

Gen.  19.  20.  this  city  near,  is  it  not  a  little  one  ?
32.  29.  w  herefore  is  it  thou  askest  after  my  name*

42.  14.  that  is  it  that  I  spake  to  you,  ye  are  spies'.

49.  28.  this  is  it  that  their  fathers  spake  to  them  '
Exod.  2.  18.  how  is  it  that  you  are  come  so  soon  j

20.  why  as  it  that  ye  have  left  the  man  ?

5.  22.  Moses  said,  why  is  it  that  thou  hast  sent
32.  18.  neither  is  it  the  voice  of  them  that  cry
.33.  16.  as  it  not  in  that  thou  goest  with  us?

Deut.  3.  11.  is  it  not  in  Rabbath  of  Ammon  ?

30. 11.  nor  is  it  far  off  ||  13.  nor  as  it  beyond  the  se

Judg.  14.  15.  to  take  that  we  have,  as  it  not  so  ?

1  Sam.  9.  20.  as  it  noton  thee,  and  on  father’s  house

10.  1.  is  it  not  because  the  Lord  hath  anointed  j
12.  17.  is  it  not  wheat-harvest  'O-day  '  l  w  ill  call

2  Kings  1.  3.  is  it  not  because  no  God  in  Tsr.  6,  lfj

4.  26.  as  it  well  with  thee,  as  it  well  with  husbaii"

9.  17-  and  let  him  say,  as  it  peace,  18,  19.  22.

20. 19.  as  it  not  good,  if  peace  be  in  my  days

1  Chr.  21.  17.  as  it  not  1  that  commanded  the  peopl
Jobl 0.3.  as  it  good,  13.  9.  II 15.  23.  saying,  where  as  tj


IS


IS


IT


rtb  22.  3.  is  it  any  pleasure  to  the  Almighty  that
Prov.  15.  23.  a  word  in  due  season,  how  good  is  it !
ha.  j.  13.  is  it  a  small  thing  for  you  to  weary  men

20."  17 .  is  it  not  vet  a  very  little  while,  and  Lebanon
$6.‘  is  i{  not  lie  whose  high  places  and  altars

5.  is  it  such  a  fast  that  l  have  chosen  ?

7!  is  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry  ?

Jer.  10.  5.  neither  also  is  it  in  them  to  do  good

I,  am.  1.  12.  is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  r
Dan.  3. 14.  is  it  true,  O  Shadrach,  Meshach  ?
AmosZ.  11.  is  it  not  even  thus,  O  children  of  Israel  ?
Vic.  1.5.  transgression  of  Jacob, is  it  not  Samaria  ?

1.  is  it  not  for  you  to  know  judgment  .'
hub.  2. 13.  is  it  not  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  that  people
llag.  2.  3.  is  it  not  in  your  eyes  as  nothing
A’c/i  5.  6-  w  hat  is  it  ?  Mat.  26.  62.  Mark •  14.  60.

Acts  10.  4.  1 21.  22.  2  Cor.  12. 13.  Fph.  4.  9.
Mai.  1.  8.  is  it  not  e*  il  ||  3.  14.  what  profit  is  it
}dat.  12. 10.  is  it  lawful  to  heal  on,  Luke  14.  3.

16.  1 1.  how  is  it  ye  do  not  understand,  Mark  8.  21.

19.  3.  is  it  law  ful  to  put  away  his  wife,  Mark  10.  2.

20.  15.  is  it  not  lawtul  for  me  to  do  what  l  will
22. 17.  is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  or  not  ?

Mark  12.  14.  Luke  20.  22.
26. 22.  began  to  say,  Lord,  is  it  1  ?  25.  Mark  14. 19.
62.  what  is  it  which  these  witness,  Mark  14.  60.
Mark  2.  9.  whether  is  it  easier  to  say,  thy  sins
16.  how  is  it  that  he  eateth  with  publicans

3.  4.  is  it  lawful  to  do  good  on  sabbath,  Luke 6.  9.
4. 40.  he  said,  how  is  it  that  you  have  no  faith  ?

9. 21.  how  long  is  it  ago  since  this  came  to  him  ?

10. 24.  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches

II.  17.  saying  to  them,  is  it  not  written,  John  10.  34.
Luke  2.  49.  he  said  to  them,  how  is  it  ye  sought  me

12. 56.  how  is  it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time  ?

16. 2.  how  is  it  that  f  hear  this  of  thee  .'

22.  64.  prophesy,  who  is  it  that  smote  thee  ?

John  4.  9.  how  is  it  thou  being  a  .1  ew  askest  of  me  ?

14.  22.  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself  ?
Acts  5.  9.  how  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together

22.25.  is  it  lawful  for  you  to  scourge  a  Roman
1  Cor.  6. 5.  is  it  so,  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man

9. 11.  is  it  a  great  matter  if  w'e  reap  your  carnal

10.  16.  is  it  not  the  communion  of  blcod  of  Christ

12.  15.  is  it  therefore  not  of  the  body,  16.

14.  26.  how  is  ifevery  qne  of  you  hath  a  psalm
1  Pet.  2.  20.  what  glory  is  it  if  when  ye  be  buffeted
>1  John  4.  3.  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  world
It  IS.

Gen.  31. 29.  it  is  in  the  power  of  my  hand  to  do  hurt

41. 16.  and  Joseph  answered,  it  is  not  in  me
Xum.  13.  18.  go  up  and  see  the  land  what  it  is
Deut.  31.  8.  he  it  is  that  doth  go  before  thee

1  Sam.  3.  18.  it  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  seems

2  Sam.  13.  35.  so  it  is,  Job  5.  27.  Luke  12.  54.

21.  1.  it  is  for  Saul  and  for  his  bloody  house

2  Kings  10.  15.  is  thine  heart  right  as  my  heart?  it  is

1  Chr.  6.  10.  he  it  is  that  executeth  the  priest's  office

21. 17.  even  l  it  is  that  have  sinned,  and  done  evil

2  Chron.  5.  9.  and  there  it  is  unto  this  day

Job  26.  3.  how  hast  thou  declared  the  thing  as  it  is
Ps.  39.  4.  to  know  the  measured  my  days  what  it  is
Jer.  30.  7.  it  is  eve.n  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble
Lam .  3.  22.  it  is  of  Lord’s  mercies  not  consumed
Ezek.  21.  27.  till  he  come  whose  right  it  is
Mat.  6. 10.  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven
14. 27.  of  good  cheer,  it  is  1,  be  not  afraid,  John  6.20.
16.7-  it  is  because  we  have  no  bread,  Mat  k  8.  16.
John  1.  27.  he  it  is  who  coming  after  me  is  preferred
1.  22.  not  because  it  is  of  Moses,  but  the  fathers

13.  26.  he  it  is  to  whom  l  shall  give  a  sop

14.  21.  hath  commandments,  he  it  is  that  loveth
Acts  12.  15.  then  said  they,  it  is  h is  angel

1  Cor.  3.  13.  try  every  man’s  work,  of  what  sort  it  is

11.  14.  that  it  a  man  have  long  hair  it  is  a  shame

15.  if  a  woman  have  long  hair  it  is  a  glory  to  her

2  Cor.  5.  13.  it  is  to  God,  or  if  we  be  sober  it  is  for
Gal.  4.  29.  but  as  then,  even  so  it  id  now

Col.  1.  6.  is  come  to  you,  as  it  is  in  all  the  world
2  Thess.  3.  1.  be  glorified,  even  as  it  is  with  you
See  Behold,  Better,  Good,  Written.

IS  not.

Gen.  .37 .30.  the  child  is  not  ||  42. 13.  and  one  is  not,  32.
42.  36.  and  Jacob  said,  Joseph  is  not.  Simeon  is  not

44.5.  isnot  this  it  in  which  my  lord  drinketh  ?
i'.rod.  4. 14.  is 7M  Aaron  the  Levite  thy  brother?

14.  12.  isnot  this  the  word  that  we  did  tell  thee  ?
hum.  12.  7.  my  servant  Moses  is  not  so,  who  is

16.  40.  is  not  of  seed  of  Aaron,  come  near  to  offer

23.  19.  God  isnot  a  man  that  he  should  lie
Deut.  11.  10.  the  land  is  not  as  the  land  of  Egypt
29.  15.  also  with  him  that  is  not  here  this  day

31.  17.  because  our  God  is  not  amongst  us

32.  6.  id  not  he  thy  Father  that  bought  thee  ?

31.  tor  their  rock  is  not  as  our  rock

34.  is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  me  ?

Judg.A.  14.  is  not  the  Lord  gone  out  before  thee  ?

19.  12.  a  city  that  is  not  of  the  children  of  Israel
sAam.  15.29.  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  should  repent
-0. 37.  he  cried,  is  not  the  arrow  beyond  thee  ?

21.  11.  is  not  this  David  king  of  the  land  ?  29-  3,  5.

-  oam.  11.  3.  is  not  this  Bathsheba  wife  of  Uriah  ?

14. 19.  is  not  the  band  of  Joab  with  thee  in  this
yL  21.  and  Joab  said,  the  matter  is  not  so

23;  17.  isnot  this  the  blood  of  the  men  that  wrent
‘  kings  8.  4 1 .  stranger  that  is  not  of  I  sr.  2  Chr.  6. 32.

*  kings 6.  19.  this  is  not  the  way,  nor  this  the  city

-  ts  n'H  the  sound  of  his  master’s  feet  behind  .

48.  is  not  the  Lord  your  God  with  you
* Chron.  25.  7.  tor  the  Lord  is  not  with  Israel
il'  46-  which  is  not  according  to  the  law
Job  4.  6.  is  not  this  thy  fear,  thy  confidence
oi  help  in  me  ||  9.  .32.  he  is  not  a  man  as

21. 16.  lo,  their  good  is  not  in  their  hand

22. 5.  if  not  thy  wickedness  great  and  infinite  ?

12.  ts  not  God  in  the  height  of  heaven  :

n_- 8-  behold,  I  go  forward,  but  lie  is  not  there
M  ■  19.  the  1  ich  man  openetli  his  eyes,  and  he  is  not
7'  ■  t°r  the  good  man  is  not  at  home,  he  is
5.  wilt  thou  set  thy  eyes  on  that  which  is  not
(.  eat,  saitli  he,  but  his  heart  is  not  with  thee
tfc‘.  9.  11.  1  saw  the  race  is  not  to  the  swift


Isa.  10.  9.  if  not  Calno,  is  not  Hamath,  isnot  Samar.

17.  14.  and  behold,  before  the  morning  lie  is  not
55.  2.  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread

Jer.  5.  13.  and  the  word  is  not  in  the  prophets

8. 19.  isnot  the  Lord  in  Zion,  isnot  her  King  in  her

10.  16.  the  portion  of  Jacob  isnot  like  them,  51. 19.
23.  1  know  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself

23.29.  isnot  my  word  like  as  a  fire.saith  the  Lord
38.  5.  the  king  is  not  he  that  can  do  any  tiling

49.  10.  and  Esau  if  not  II 51. 9.  but  she  if  not  healed
Ezek.  18. 25.  ye  say  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal,
if  not  my  way  equal  ?  29.  |  33.  17,  20.
Dim.  2.  11.  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not  with  tiesh

35.  as  for  me,  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me

4.  30.  is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  1  have  built
Hos.  2.  2.  for  she  isnot  my  wife,  nor  l  her  husband
Mic.  2.  10.  arise,  depart,  for  this  is  not  vour  rest

3.  11.  yet  will  they  say,  is  not  the  Lord  among  us
Hah.  2.  4.  his  soul  which  is  lifted  up  is  not  upright
Zech.  3.  2.  is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  lire  ?
Mat.  13. 55.  is  not  this  the  carpenter’s  son,  if  not  his
20.2.3  on  my  left,  is  not  mine  to  give,  Mark  10.  40.

22.  32.  God  if  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the
living,  Mark  12.27.  Luke  20.  .38.

24. 6.  come  to  pass,  but  the  end  is  not  ye  t,  Luke  21.9.
28.  6.  he  if  not  here  for  he  is  risen,  Luke  24.  6.

LjUke  6.  40.  the  disciple  isnot  above  his  master

22.  27.  if  not  he  thatsitteth  at  meat  greater
John  3.  18.  lie  that  believeth  is  not  condemned
5. 31 .  my  witness  is  not  true  ||  9.  16.  this  man  is  not

11.  4.  Jesus  said,  this  sickness  is  not  unto  death
14.  24.  the  word  which  you  hear  is  nut  mine,  7*  16.

18.  36.  my  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world

Rum.  2.  28.  lie  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  one  outwardly
29.  whose  praise  is  not  of  men  but  of  God
3.29  is  not  he  also  of  the  Gentiles,  yes,  of  Gentiles

8.  24.  but  hope  that  is  seen  is  not  hope

14.  17.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink

23.  for  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin

1  Cur.  4.  20.  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word

6.  1.3.  now  the  body  is  not  for  fornication

7.  15.  a  brother  or  sister  is  not  under  bondage

11.  8.  for  the  man  isnot  of  the  woman,  but  the

20.  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord’s  supper

12.  14.  for  the  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many

13.  4.  charity  envieth  not,  is  not  puffed  up

15.  .39.  all  flesh  isnot  the  same  flesh,  but  there  is
58.  that  your  labour  isnot  in  vain  in  the  Lord

Gal.  1.  7.  which  is  not  another,  but  some  trouble  you
11.  the  gospel  preached  by  me  is  not  after  man
.3.  12.  law  if  not  of  faith  f|  20.  is  not  a  mediator  of  one
6.  7-  be  not  deceived,  God  is  not  mocked
Phil.  .3.  1.  to  write  the  same  to  me  is  not  grievous
Heb.  6.  10.  for  God  is  not  unrighteous,  to  forget

2  Pet.  .3.  9.  the  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his

1  John  1.8.  the  truth  isti.  in  us,  2. 4.  ||  1.  10.  word  isn.
2.  15.  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him

16.  is  not  of  the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world
.3.  10.  doth  not  righteousness,  is  not  of  God,  4.  .3,  6.

5.  16.  if  brother  sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death
Rev.  17.  8.  beast  thou  sawest,  was,  and  is  not,  11.

It  IS  not.

Gen.  2.  18.  it  is  not  good,  Prov.  18.  5. 1  25.  27.  I  28.

21.  Hos.  8.  6.  Mat.  19.  10.

31.  5.  that  it  is  not  towards  me  as  before

41.  16.  it  is  not  in  me,  God  shall  give  an  answer
Exod.  8.  26.  and  Moses  said,  it  is  not  meet  so  to  do
Deut.  32.  47.  for  it  is  not  a  vain  thing  for  you

1  Sam.  6.9.  shall  know  it  isnot  his  hand  that  smote
20.  2.  Jonathan  said,  God  forbid,  it  is  not  so

Ezra  5.  16.  been  in  building,  yet  it  is  not  finished
Job  9.  35.  1  would  speak,  but  it  is  not  so  with  me

28. 14.  it  is  not  in  me,  the  seasaith,  it  is  not  with  me

35. 15.  but  now  because  it  is  not  so,  be  hath  visited
Prov.  31.  4.  it  is  not  for  kings,  O  Lemuel,  to  drink
Jer.  5. 12.  it  isnot  he  ||  10. 23.  it  isnot  in  man  to  direct
Ezek.  11.3.  which  say,  it  is  not  near,  let  us  build
Mat.  10.  20.  for  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit

13. 11.  to  you  it  is  given,  but  to  them  it  is  not  given

14.  4.  it  is  not  law.  to  have  her,  27-  6.  Mark  6.  18.

15.26.  it  is  not  meet  to  take  children’s,  Mark  7. 27.
18.  14.  even  so  it  is  not  the  will  of  your  Father

Acts  1. 7-  it  is  riot  for  you  to  know  the  times

6.  2.  it  is  not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the  word
22.  22.  for  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live

25.  16.  it  is  not  the  mariner  of  the  Romans
Rom.  9.  16.  so  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth

2  Cor.  12.  1.  it  is  not  expedient  for  me  to  glory

IS  there.

Gen.  .31.  14.  is  there  yet  any  portion  or  inheritance
Deut.  3.  24.  what  God  is  there  in  heaven  or  earth
4. 7.  what  nation  is  there  so  great,  who  hath  God, ‘8.
5.  26.  who  is  there  of  all  flesh  that  hath  heard

20.  5.  what  man  is  there  that  hath  built,  7>  8.

32.  28.  nor  is  there  any  understanding  in  them
Judy.  4. 20.  is  there  any  man  II 14.  3.  is  there  never  a

21.  5.  who  if  there  among  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  8.

1  Sam.  2. 2.  neither  if  there  any  rock  like  our  God
17.  29.  and  David  said,  is  there  not  a  cause  ?

2  Sam.  7.22.  nor  is  t.  any  God  besides  thee,2.va.44. 8.

9.  1.  if  there  any  that  is  left  of  Saul’s  house,  3.

1  KingsZI.  7.  is  there  not  here  a  prophet  of  the  Lord

besides  ?  2  Kings  .3.  11.  2  Chron.  18.  6.

2  Chr.  20.  6.  in  thy  hand  is  t.  not  power  and  might  ?

36.  23.  who  is  t.  among  you  his  people  ?  Ezra  1.  3.
Neh.  6.  11.  and  who  is  there  being  as  1  am  would  go
Job  6.  30.  is  there  iniquity  in  my  tongue,  33.  9.

15.  11.  is  there  any  secret  thing  with  thee?

Psal.  30.  9.  what  profit  is  t.  in  my  filood  when  1  go
Prov.  17-  16.  if  there  a  price  in  the  hand  of  a  fool
Eccl.  1. 10.  is  there  any  thing  whereof  it  may  be  said
5.  11.  what  good  is  there  to  the  owners  thereof
Isa.  2.7-  nor  is  there  any  end  of  their  treasures,  nor
is  there  any  end  of  their  chariots
44.  19.  nor  if  there  knowledge  to  say,  1  have  burnt
20.  nor  say,  is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  ?
Jer.  8.  22.  is  t.  no  halm  in  Gilead,  ist.  no  physician
32.  27.  1  am  I x>rd ,  is  t.  any  thing  too  hard’for  me
.37.  17-  asked  him,  is  there  any  word  from  the  Lord
Hos.  12. 11.  if  there  iniquity  in  Gilead,  3urely  vanity
Amos6. 10.  if  Kyet  any  with  thee, ye  shall  say,  no'
Mat.  7.  9.  what  man  is  there  of  you,  whom  if  iiisson


Acts  4. 12,  nor  is  the  re  salvation  in  any  other,  for  no
Rom.  3.  1.  what  profit  is  there  of  circumcision  ?

9.  14.  if  there  unrighteousness  with  God  ?

There  IS..

Lev.  14.  35.  there  is  as  it  were  a  plague  in  the  house
Num.  11.  6.  there  is  nothing  at  all  besides  manna
Deut.  32.  39.  I  am  he,  and  there  is  no  god  with  me
Judg.  19.  19.  yet  there  is  both  straw  and  provender

21. 19.  there  is  a  feast  of  the  Lord  in  Shiloh
1  Sam.  14.  6.  for  there  is  no  restraint  to  the  Lord

17.  46.  may  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  Israel
20.  .3.  there  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death
21.  then  come  thou,  for  there  if  peace  to  thee
1  Kings  5.  4.  there  is  neither  adversary  nor  evil

8.  23.  t.  is  no  God  like  thee  in  heaven,  2  Chr.  6.  14.

46.  there  is  no  man  that  sinneth  not,  2  Chr.  6.  36.
14.  2.  behold  there  is  Aliijah  the  prophet  who  told

1  Kings  22.8. t.  is  yet  one  man.Micaiah  son  of  I  tnlah

2  Kings 5.  8.  he  shall  know  t.  is  a  prophet  in  Israel
Ezra  10.2.  yet  there  is  hope  in  Israel,  Job  1 L.  18.
Estb.  .3.  8.  there  if  a  certain  people  scattered

Job  19.  29.  that  ye  may  know  there  is  a  judgment

22.  29-  then  thouslialt  say,  there  is  lifting  up
.32.  8.  but  there  is  a  spirit  in  man,  the  inspiration
Psal.  14.  1.  the  fool  hath  said,  there  is  no  G.  53.  1.

19.  11.  in  keeping  them  there  is  great  reward
34.  9.  there  is  no  want  to  them  that  fear  him

46.  4.  there  is  a  river  whose  streams  make  glad
58.  11.  verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous
68.  27.  there  is  little  Benjamin  with  their  ruler
146.  3.  put  not  trust  in  man,  in  whom  t.  is  no  he.  p

Prov.  11.  24.  there  is  that  scattered),  yet  increased)

13.  7-  there  is  that  maketh  himself  rich,  yet  hath

14.  9.  but  among  the  righteous  there  is  favour
12.  t.  is  a  way  thatseemeth  right toatnan,  16.25.

23.  in  all  labour  th.  is  profit  ||  2.3.  18.  th.  if  an  end

.30.  11.  there  is  a  generation  that  curseth,  12, 1.3,  14.
Eccl.  3.  1.  to  every  thing  th.  is  a  season,  and  a  time

7.  15.  there  is  a  just  man,  there  is  a  wicked  man

8.  4.  where  the  word  of  a  king  is,  there  is  power

16.  there  is  that  neither  day  nor  night  seeth  sleep

9.  2.  there  is  one  event  ||  4.  for  to  him  there  if  hope
Isa.  4.3.  11.  and  besides  me  there  is  no  Saviour

44.  6.  and  beside  me  there  it  no  God,  8.  1  45.  5.

47.  1.  t.  is  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the  Chaldeans

48.  22.  t.  is  no  peace  to  wicked,  57.  21.  Jer.  6.  14.

50.  2.  because  t.  is  no  water  ||  5.3.  2.  t.  is  no  beauty
57.  10.  saidst  not,  t.  is  no  hope,  Jer.  2.  25.  |  18.  12.

Jer.  .31.  17.  t.  is  hope  in  thy  end  ||  .37.  17-  he  said,  t.  is
Ezek.  22.  25.  there  is  a  conspiracy  of  her  prophets
.32.  24.  th.  is  Elam  ||  29.  there  is  Edom,  her  kings
.34.  5.  were  scattered,  because  Mere  is  no  shepherd
Dan.  2.  28.  there  is  a  God  that  revealeth  secrets
5.  11.  there  is  a  man  in  thy  kingdom  in  whom  is
Hos.  4.  1.  because  there  is  no  truth  nor  mercy
Nah.  .3.  19.  t.  is  no  healing  of  thy  bruise,  thy  wound
Mat.  22.  2.3.  die  Saddueees,  who  say,  there  is  no
resurrection,  Mark  12.  18.  1  Cor.  15.  12.
Mark  10.  18.  there  is  none  good  but  one,  that  is  God
Luke  14.  22.  and  yet  t.  is  room||  15.  10.  t.  if  joy  in
John  8.  44.  because  there  is  no  truth  in  him
11.  10.  he  stumbleth,  because  t.  is  no  light  in  him
1  Cor.  3.  3.  there  is  among  you  envying  and  strife
5.  1.  it  is  reported  there  is  fornication  among  you
8.  6.  but  to  us  there  is  but  one  God,  the  Father

15.  44.  t.  is  a  natural  body,  t.  is  a  spiritual  body
Gal.  5.  23.  temperance,  against  such  there  if  no  law
Col.  .3.  25.  and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons

1  John  4. 18.  there  is  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfect  love
5.  16.  there.is  a  sin  unto  death,  1  do  not  say  he  shall

17.  and  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death

See  None,  One.

There  IS  not.

Gen.  47.  18.  there  is  not  ought  left  in  sight  of  my  lord

2  Sam.  1.3.  30.  slain  the  king’s  sons,  th.  is  not  one  left

1  Kings  5.  6.  th.  isn.  among  us  that  can  skill  to  hew

2  Kings  1.  3.  not  because  there  is  not  a  God  in

Israel,  6.

19.  3.  to  birth,  and  th.  is  not  strength  to  bring  forth
Job  41.33.  upon  earth  there  is  not  his  like
Eccl.  4.8.  there  is  one  alone,  and  there  is  not  second
Cant.  6.  6.  and  there  if  not  one  barren  among  them
Luke  7.  28.  there  is  not  a  greater  prophet  than  John

1  Cor.  6.  5.  that  there  is  not  a  wise  man  amongst  you
8.  7-  there  is  not  in  every  man  that  knowledge

ISLAIx  D,  Ate.  See'  alter  IGNORANTLY.

ISSUE

Signifies,  [1]  A  passage,  wag,  or  outlet,  Psal.  68.  20.
[2]  Children  or  posterity,  Gen.  48.  6.  [3]  A  flux
or  running.  Lev.  12.  7.  [4]  Seed,  Ezek.  23.  20,

[5]  To  spring  or  proceed  from,  2  Kings  20.  18.

[6]  To  flow,  Ezek.  47.  8.  [7]  To  come  forth  has¬
tily  and  violently,  Josh.  8.  22.

ISSUE,  Substantive «

Gen.  48.  6.  thy  i.  which  thou  begettest  after  them
Lev.  12.  7*  the  i.  of  her  blood,  15.  25.  Mat.  9.  20.

Mark  5.  25.  Luke  8.  43,  44.
15.  2.  running  i.  3.  I  22.  4.  ||  15.  8.  hath  the’i.  28.

2  Sam.  .3.  29.  from  the  houseof  Joab,  one  hath  an  i.
Isa.  22.  24.  shall  hang  on  him  the  offspring  and  t
Ezek.  2.3. 2o.  whose  i.  is  like  the  i.  of  horses

Mat.  22.  25.  having  no  i.  left  his  wife
ISSUE.

2  Kings  20.  18.  thy  sons  that  1.  from  thee,  Isa.  39. '7
Ezek.  47.  8.  these  waters  i.  toward  the  east  country
ISSUED.

Josh.  8.  22.  other  1.  out  of  the  city  against  them
Job  .38.  8.  break  forth  as  if  it  1.  out  of  the  womb
Ezek.  47.  1.  waters  1.  from  under  the  threshold
12.  because  their  waters  1.  out  of  the  sanctuary
Dan.  7.  10.  a  fiery  stream  i.  and  came  forth
Rev.  9. 17.  and  out  of  their  mouths  i.  fire,  18.
ISSUES.

Psal.  68.  20.  to  God  belong  the  i.  from  death
Prov.  4. 23.  keep  heart,  for  out  of  it  are  the  i.  of  life
IT.

Prov.  4.  2.3.  keep  heart,  for  out  of  it  are  issues  of  life
Isa.  6.  1.3.  i.i  it  shall  be  a  tenth,  and  it  shall  return
7. 7.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  it  shall  not  stand
11.  10.  to  it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek,  and  his  rest
.30.  21.  a  word,  saying,  this  is  the  way,  walk  in  it

51.  9.  ai  t  thou  not  it  that  hath  cut  Itahab?

25.5


J  U  D


JUD


JL'D


tsa.  51. 10.  art  thou  not  it  which  hath  dried  the  sea  ?
See  Better,  Good,  Written,  b  e  l,  f  .
ITCH.

Deut. 18.  27.  the  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  i.
ITCHING.

2  Tim.  4.  3.  shall  they  heap  teachers  having  i.  ears
JUDGE

Signifies,  [1]  To  try  and  determine  a  cause,  Exod.

18.  13.  1  Cor.  6.  2.  [2]  Rightly  to  understand

and  discern,  1  t  or.  2.  15.  [3]  To  censure  rash¬
ly,  Mat.  7.  1.  1  Cor.  4.  3.  [4]  To  proceed

against.  Acts  24.  6.  [5]  To  esteem  or  reckon.
Acts  16.  15.  [6]  To  rule  and  govern ,  Psal.  67.

4.  Heb.  10.  30.  [71  To  punish,  Ezek.  7.  3,  8.
Heb.  13.  4.  It  is  spoken,  (1)  Of  God,  Gen.  18.

25.  Heb.  12.  23.  (II)  Of  Christ,  Acts  10.  42.
(Ill)  Of  men  called  gods,  Psal.  82.  1,  6.  [1]
Ordinary,  Deut.  1.  16.  [2]  Extraordinary,  Judg.

2.  18,  19.  „  „

JUDGE,  Substantive.

Gen.  18.  25.  shall  not  the  J.  of  all  the  earth  do  right

19.9.  this  one  fellow  came,  and  will  needs  be  a  ).
Exod.  2.  14.  made  thee  a  ).  over  us,  Acts  7  .  27  ,  35.
Deut.  17.  9.  come  to  the  ).  that  shall  be  in  those  days

12.  the  man  that  will  not  hearken  to  the.;.

25.  2.  that  the  J.  shall  cause  him  to  lie  down
Judg.  2.  18.  then  the  Lord  was  with  the).

19.  the),  was  dead,  they  corrupted  themselves

11.  27.  the  Lord  the  J.  be),  this  day  between

1  Sam.  2.  25.  if  a  man  sin,  the),  shall  judge  him

2  Sam.  15.  4.  Absalom  said,  O  that  I  were  made  j.
Job  9.  15.  I  would  make  supplication  to  my  ).

23.  7.  I  should  be  delivered  for  ever  from  my).
31.28.  an  iniquity  to  be  punished  by  the).

Psal.  7.  t  11.  God  is  a  righteous),  and  is  angry

50.  6.  heavens  declare,  for  God  is),  himself,  selah
68.  5.  a  ),  of  the  widows  ||  75.  7-  God  is  the  ).

94.  2.  lift  up  thyself,  thou  J.  of  the  earth,  render
Jsa.  3.  2.  doth  take  away  from  Jerusalem  the).
Amos  2.  3.  1  will  cutoff  the),  from  the  midst  thereof
Mic.  5. 1.  they  shall  smite  the),  of  Israel  with  a  rod

7.  3.  prince  asketh,  and  the),  asketh  for  a  reward
Mat.  5.  25.  the  adversary  deliver  thee  to  the),  the

).  deliver  thee  to  the  officer,  Luke  12.  58.
Duke  12. 14.  man,  who  made  me  a),  over  you  ?

18.  2.  saying,  there  was  in  a  city,  a),  feared  not  G.

6.  the  Lord  said,  hear  what  the  unjust),  saith

Acts  10.  42.  of  God  to  be  the  j.  of  quick  and  dead

18. 15.  for  I  will  be  no ).  of  such  matters

24.  10.  hast  been  of  many  years  a),  of  this  nation
2  Tim.  4.8.  the  Lord  the  righteous),  shall  give  me
Heb.  12.  23.  ye  are  come  to  God  the  J.  of  all
Jam.  4.  11.  thou  art  not  a  doer  of  the  law,  but  a).

5.9.  behold,  the  J.  standeth  before  the  door
JUDGE,  Verb,  applied  to  Goto  and  Christ.

Gen.  16. 5.).  between  me  and  thee,  1  Sam.  24. 12,15.
31.  53.  the  God  of  their  father  i.  betwixt  us
Exod.  5. 21.  they  said,  the  Lord  look  on  you  and  ).
Deut.  32.  36.  for  the  Lord  shall),  his  people,  Psal.

50.  4.  1  135.  14.  Heb.  10.  30.
1  Sam.  2.  10.  the  Lord  shall ).  the  ends  of  the  earth

24.  +  15.  the  Lord),  me  out  of  thy  hand
1  Kings 8.  32.  hear  and),  thy  servants,  2  Chr.  6.  23.

1  CAr.16.33.  cometh  to),  the  earth,  Ps.  96. 13.  I  98.9.

2  Chron.  20.  12.  O  our  God,  wilt  thou  not),  them  ?
Job  22. 13.  sayest,  can  he  ).  through  the  dark  cloud  ?
Psal.  7.  8.  the  Lord  shall  ).  the  people  righteously,

9.  8. 1  50.  4.  1  96. 10.

,  10.  18.  ).  the  fatherless  and  poor,  82.  +3.  Isa.  11.4.

26.  1.).  me,  O  Lord,  7.  8.  [35.  24.  |  43.  1.  |  54. 1.

Lam.  3.  59.

82.  8.  arise,  O  God,),  the  earth  :  thou  shalt  inherit
96.  13.  he  shall  ).  the  world  with  righteousness,

98.9.  Acts  17.31.

110.  6.  he  shall),  among  the  heathen
Eccl.  3.  17.  God  shall  ).  the  righteous  and  wicked
Isa.  2.  4.  and  he  shall),  among  the  nations
3. 13.  the  Lord  standeth  to  ).  the  people
11. 3.  he  shall  not),  after  the  sight  of  his  eyes

51.  5.  and  mine  arm  shall  ).  the  people

Ezek.  7.  3.  and  will),  thee  according  to  thy  ways

34.  17- behold  I  ).  between  cattle  and  cattle
Joel  3.  12.  there  will  I  sit  to),  the  heathen
Mic.  4.  3.  he  shall ).  among  many  people
John  5.  30.  as  I  hear  I  ).  my  judgment  is  just

8. 15.  I  ).  no  man  ||  16.  and  yet  if  1  ).

26.  I  have  many  things  to  say  and  to),  of  you

12.  47.  I  )•  him  not,  l  came  not  to),  the  world
Rom.  2.^16.  when  God  shall),  the  secrets  of  men

3.  6.  for  then  how  shall  God  ).  the  world  ?

2  Tim.  4. 1.  who  shall  ).  quick  and  dead,  1  Pet.  4. 5.
Heb.  13.  4.  whoremongers  and  adulterers  G.  will  j.
Rev.  6.  10.  dost  thou  not),  and  avenge  our  blood

19.  11.  in  righteousness  he  doth),  and  make  war

See  further,  I  will  Judge.

JUDGE,  applied  tc  Man,  or  other  things.
Gen.  31.  37.  that  they  may),  betwixt  us  both
49.  16.  Dan  shall  ).  his  people  as  one  of  the  tribes
Exod.  18.  13.  that  Moses  sat  to),  the  people
16.  they  come,  I).  between  one  and  another

22.  but  every  small  matter  they  shall  ).

Lev.  19.  15.  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  ).  thy
1  neighbour,  Deut.  1.  16.  1  16.  18.

“Hum.  35. 24.  the  congregation  ).  between  the  slaver
Dent.  25.  1.  come,  that  the  judges  mav).  them
1  Sam.  2.  25.  if  a  man  sin,  the  judge  shall  j.  him

8.  5.  thou  art  old,  make  us  a  king  to),  us,  6.  20.

1  Kings  3.  9.  give  an  understanding  heart  to),  who
is  able  to),  this  great  people  7  2  Chron.  1.  10.

7.  7-  a  porch  for  the  throne  where  he  might).

Chron.  1.  11.  that  thou  mayest).  my  people
19.  6.  for  ye),  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord
Ezra  7-  25.  set  judges  which  may  ).  all  the  people
**«*/.  58. 1.  do  ye),  uprightly,  O  ye  sons  of  men  '.
72.  2.  he  shall),  thy  people  with  righteousness

4.  he  shall  ).  the  poor  of  the  people,  Prov.  31.  9.
82.  2.  how  long  will  ye),  unjustly,  and  accept
Jsa.  1.  17.).  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  widow

23.  they),  not  the  fatherless,  Jer.  5.  28.

5.  3. ).  \  pray  you  betwixt  me  and  my  vineyard
Jer.  21.  t  12.).  judgment,  Zech.  7.  +  9. 1  8.  +  16.
Ezek.  20.  4.  wilt  thou),  them,  son  of  man?  22.  2.


Ezek.  23.  24.  and  they  shall),  thee,  45. 1  24.  14.

36.  son  of  man,  wilt).  Aholah  and  Aholibah  ?
44.  24.  they  shall  it  according  to  my  judgments
Obad.  21.  saviours  come  to),  the  mount  of  Esau
Mic.  3.  11.  the  heads  thereof  J.  for  reward
Zech.  3.  7-  then  thou  shalt  also),  my  house
Mat.  7.  1.  )•  not  that  ve  be  not  judged

2.  for  with  what  judgment  ye).  Luke  5.  37-
Luke  12.  57.  yea,  and  why  ).  ye  not  what  is  right  ?
John  7.  24.).  not  according  to  the  appearance  .but

).  righteous  judgment

51.  doth  our  law),  anj7  man  before  it  hear

8.  15.  ye  j.  after  flesh  ||  12.  48.  same  shall),  him
18.  31.  talce  and  j.  him  according  to  your  law
Acts  4.  19.  j.  ye  (|  13.  46.).  yourselves  unworthy

23.  3.  for  sittestthou  to),  me  after  the  law  ?

Rom.  2. 27.  uncircumcision  if  it  fulfil  the  law,),  thee

14. 1 1.  not  to  ).  his  doubtful  thoughts

3. ).  him  that  eateth  |1  10.  why),  thy  brother

13.  let  us  not),  one  another,  but),  this  rather

1  Cor.  4.  3.  1 ).  not  myself,  ||  5.).  not,  before  time

5.  12.  what  have  I  to  do  to  ).  them  that  are  with¬

out,  do  ye  not),  them  that  are  within  ?

6.  2.  do  ye  not  know  the  saints  shall  ).  the  world  ?

3.  know  ye  not  that  we  shall  ).  angels  ?

4.  set  them  to  j.  who  are  least  esteemed  in  church

5.  shall  be  able  to  ).  between  his  brethren

10.  15.).  ye  what  1  say,  ||  11.  13.).  in  yourselves

11.  31.  for  if  we  would  ).  ourselves,  we  should

14.  29.  let  the  prophets  speak,  and  the  other).

2  Cor.  5. 14.  because  we  thus),  that  if  one  died
Col.  2.  16.  let  no  man  therefore),  you  in  meat
Jam.  4.  11.  but  if  thou),  the  law,  thou  art  not

I  will  JUDGE.

1  Sam.  3. 13. 1  told  that  1  willj.  his  house  for  ever
Psal.  75.  2.  when  shall  receive,  1  will  j.  uprightly
Ezek.  7. 3.  — ).  according  to  thy  ways,  8. 27-  II  33. 20.

11.  10.  I  will  j.  you  in  the  border  of  Israel,  11.

16.  38.  I  will  j.  thee  as  women  that  break  wedlock

18.  30.  therefore  1  will  j.  you,  O  house  of  Israel

21.  30.  1  will  j.  thee  in  the  place  where  thou  wast

34.  20.  I,  even  J,  will  j.  between  fat  cattle,  22.

Will  /  JUDGE.

Gen.  15. 14.  the  nation  they  shall  serve  — ).  Acts  7. 7.
Luke  19.  22.  out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  j.  thee
JUDGED.

Gen.  30.  6.  God  hath  ).  me  and  heard  my  voice
Exod.  18.  26. ).  the  people,  small  matter  they  ).
Judg.  3.  10.  Othniel ).  ||  4.  4.  Deborah  ).  Israel
10.  2.  Tola).  ||  3.  Jair).  ||  12.  7-  Jephthah).

12.  8.  Ibzan).  ||  11.  Elon  j.  ||  14.  Abdon).  Israel

15.  20.  Samson).  Israel  twenty  years,  i6.  31.
Ruth  1.  +  1.  when  judges),  there  was  a  famine

1  Sam.  4. 18.  Eli).  ||  7.  6.  Samuel).  Israel,  15, 16, 17.

2  Sam.  18.  1 19.  the  Lord  ),  him  from  his  enemies

1  Kings  3.  28.  heard  the  judgment  the  king  had).

2  Kings  23.  22.  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that).
Psal.  9.  19.  let  the  heathen  be  ).  in  thy  sight

37.  33.  not  condemn  him  when  he  is).

109.  7.  when  he  shall  be  ).  let  him  be  condemned
Jer.  22.  16.  he),  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy
Ezek.  16.  38.  as  women  that  shed  blood  are

52.  thou  also  who  hast),  thy  sisters,  ben  shame
28.  23.  and  the  wounded  shall  be),  in  I

35.  11.  make  myself  known,  when  I  ha  ,  j .  thee

36.  19.  according  to  their  doings  1 ).  them
Dan.  9. 12.  and  against  our  judges  that),  us
Mat.  7. 1.  that  ye  be  not ).  ||  2.  shall  be  ).  Luke6.  37.
Lukej.  43.  he  said  to  him,  thou  hast  rightly  j.

John  16.  11.  the  prince  of  this  world  is ).

Acts  16.  15.  if  ye  have  ).  me  to  be  faithful

24.  6.  we  would  have),  according  to  our  law

25.  9.  there  be),  of  these  things  before  me,  20.

10.  Paul  said,  I  stand,  where  I  ought  to  be).

26.  6.  and  am  j.  for  the  hope  of  the  promise
Rom.  2. 12.  shall  be),  by  the  law,  Jam.  2.  12.

3.  4.  thou  mightest  overcome  when  thou  art).

7.  why  yet  am  1  also),  as  a  sinner  ?

1  Cor.  2.  15.  yet  he  himself  is),  of  no  man

4.  3.  a  small  thing  that  l  should  be  ).  of  you
5.3.  I  have),  already,  as  though  I  were  present

6.  2.  and  if  the  world  shall  be),  by  you

10.  29.  for  why  is  my  liberty  ).  of  another  man’s
11. 31.  if  we  would  judge  we  should  not  be).

32.  when  we  are  ).  we  are  chastened  of  the  Lord
14.  24.  he  is  convinced  of  all,  he  is  ),  of  all
Heb.  11.  11.  because  she),  him  faithful  who  had
1  Pet.  4.  6.  they  might  be  j\  according  to  men
Rev.  11.  18.  time  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  be  ).

16.  5.  art  righteous  because  thou  hast),  thus

19.  2.  righteous,  for  he  hath),  the  great  whore

20.  12.  the  dead  were  ).  out  of  those  things

13.  were),  every  man  according  to  his  works

JUDG  ES.

Exod.  21.  6.  his  master  shall  bring  him  to  the).

22.  and  he  shall  pay  as  the),  determine

22.  8.  then  the  master  shall  be  brought  to  the  j.

9.  the  cause  of  both  shall  come  before  the).

t  28.  thou  shalt  not  revile  the).

Nnm.15.  5.  Moses  said  to  the),  slay  each  his  men
Deut.  1.  16.  I  charged  your),  at  that  time,  saying
16.  18.  .7.  shalt  thou  make  in  all  thy  gates
19. 17.  both  the  men  shall  stand  before  priests  and).
18.  the),  shall  make  diligent  inquisition
21.2.  thv  elders  and  thy  7.  shall  come  forth

25.  1.  they  come  that  the),  may  ludge  them
32.  31.  even  our  enemies  themselves  being  ).

Josh.  8.  33.  their ;.  stood  on  this  side  the.  ark

23.  2.  Joshua  called  for  their  heads  and  ).  24.  1.
Judg.  2. 16.  the  Lord  raised  up ./'.  who  delivered,  18.

17-  they  would  not  hearken  to  their).

Ruth  1.  1.  when  the),  ruled  a  famine  was

1  Sam.  8.  1.  he  made  his  sons),  over  Israel,  2.

2  Sam.  7.11.  1  commanded  ).  to  be  over  my  people
2  Kings  23. 22.  from  the  days  of  the),  that  judged

1  Chr.  Y> .  6.  spake  1  a  word  to  any  of  the).  10.

23.  4.  ai.d  six  thousand  were  officers  and  ).

26.  29.  Chenaniah  and  his  sons  were  for).

2  Chron.  1.  2.  then  Solomon  spake  to  the).

19.  5.  he  set),  in  the  land  ||  6.  said  to  the).

Ezra  7.  25.  set),  which  may  judge  the  people

10.  14.  and  with  them  the  ).  ot  every  city


Job  9.  24.  he  covereth  the  face  of  the  ).  therec*

12.  17.  and  he  maketh  the),  fools

31.  11.  it  is  an  iniquity  to  be  punished  by  the ).
Psal.  2.  10.  be  instructed  ye),  of  the  earth
109.  +  31.  to  save  him  from  the),  of  his  soul
141.  6.  when),  are  overthrown  in  stony  places
'  148.  11.  princes,  and  all),  of  the  earth
Prov.  8. 16.  by  me  princes  rule,  and  all),  of  ear
Jsa.  1.  26.  I  will  restore  thy),  as  at  the  first
40.  23.  he  maketh  the),  of  tne  earth  as  vanity
Dan.  3.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  sent  to  gather  the  j.

9.  12.  his  words  against  our  ).  that  judged  us
Hos.  7.7.  and  they  have  devoured  their ).

13.  10.  where  are  thy  ).  of  whom  thou  saidst
Zeph.  3.  3.  her),  are  evening  wolves,  they  gnait  j
Mat.  12.  27.  they  shall  be  your).  Luke  11.  19.
Acts  13.  20.  and  after  that  he  gave  to  them  ).
Jam.  2.  4.  and  are  become  ).  of  evil  thoughts

JUDGEST.

Psal.  51.  4.  thou  mightest  be  clear  when  thou  ).
Jer.  11.  20.  Lord  of  hosts,  that),  righteously
Rom.  2.  1.  O  man,  whosoever  thou  art  that).

3.  O  man,  that),  them  which  do  such  things

14.  4.  who  art  thou  that ).  another  man’s  servan
Jam.  4.  12.  who  art  thou  that),  another

JUDGETH.


Job  21.  22.  seeing  he  ).  those  that  were  high
36.  31.  for  by  them  ).  he  the  people
Psal.  7.  11.  God),  the  righteous,  is  angry  with  j
58.  11.  verily  he  is  a  God  that),  in  the  earth


82. 1.  in  congregation  of  mighty,  he  j.  among  go
Prov.  29.  14.  the  king  that  faithfully),  the  poor


John  5.  22.  for  the  Lather),  no  man,  but  hath

8.  50.  there  is  one  that).  ||  12.  48.  one  that),  hir
1  Cor.  2.  15.  he  that  is  spiritual),  all  things

4.  4.  but  he  that),  me  is  the  Lord

5.  13.  but  them  that  are  without,  God).

Jam.  4.  11.  he  that),  his  brother,),  the  law

1  Pet.  1.  17.  who  without  respect  of  persons.;.

2.  23.  but  committed  himselt  to  him  that).
Rev.  18.  8.  for  strong  is  the  Lord  that),  her
JUDGING.


Gen.  30.  4  6.  Rachel  called  his  name,).

2  Kings  15.  5.  ).  the  people  of  the  land,  2  Chr.  26.5
Psal.  9.  4.  thou  sattest  in  the  throne),  right
Isa.  16.  5.  he  shall  sit),  and  seeking  judgment
Mat.  19.  28.  ).  the  twelve  tribes,  Luke  22.  30.
JUDGMENT


Signifies,  [1]  The  sentence,  or  decision  of  a  judg
1  Kings  3.  28.  [2J  The  spirit  of  wisdom  and  pi
dence,  enabling  to  know  and  discern  right  fra
wrong,  and  good  from  evil,  Psal.  72. 1.  [3]  Tha
remarkable  punishments,  which  God  inflicts  up\
people  for  their  sins  and  transgressions,  Prov,  ]
29.  Ezek.  30. 14.  [4]  The  spiritual  government
the  world,  which  is  committed  by  God  the  Path
to  Christ  the  Mediator,  and  which  he  manag
with  a  pefect  rectitude  and  equity,  John  5.  22. 1
39.  [5]  Those  afflictions  and  chastisements  whi
God  brings  upon  his  children  for  their  trial  a,
instruction,  1  Pet.  4.  17.  [6]  God's  merciful  m
deration  in  chastising  his  people,  Jer.  10.  24.  [
The  solemn  action  and  trial  at  the  great  and  la
day,  Eccl.  12.  14.  Jude  6.  [8]  The  rightech

statutes  and  commandments  of  God,  Psal.  119.
20.  [9]  The  punishment  inflicted  on  Christ  J
our  sins,  Isa.  53.  8.  [10]  The  doctrine  of  the  gc
pel,  or  God's  word,  Mat.  12.  18.  Psal.  119.  7,  £

[11]  Justice  and  equity,  Isa.  1.  17.  Luke  11.  4

[12]  The  deliverance  and  vindication  of  mankin

from  the  power  and  tyranny  of  the  devil,  J  ohn  1
31.  [13]  God's  decrees  and  purposes  concernit
nations  or  persons,  Rom.  11.  33.  [14]  The  se

fence  of  damnation  upon  the  wicked,  and  of  absol
tion  in  favour  of  the  godly,  Jude  15.  [15]  Cow
of  judgment.  Mat.  5.  21.  [16]  Differences  ai

controversies  to  be  decided,  1  Cor.  6.  4.  [17] .Se
timent,  or  opinion ,  1  Cor.  1.  10.  [18]  Advice,
Cor.  7.  25.  [19]  The  gospel,  or  kingdom  of  grac
Mat.  12.  20.


Gen.  30.  t  21.  Leah  called  her  name).

Exod.  12.  12.  against  the  gods  I  will  execute).
21. 31 .  according  to  this  ).  be  it  done  to  him

23.  2.  to  decline  after  many,  to  wrest ).  6.

28. 15.  thou  shalt  make  the”  breast-plate  of).

29.  Aaron  bear  names  in  breast-plate  of).  30.
Num.  27.  11.  to  Israel  a  statute  of).  35.  29.

21.  after  the),  of  Urim  before  the  Lord  .  |
Deut.  1.  17.  not  afraid  of  man,  for  the),  is  God’s

10.  18.  he  doth  execute  the  ).  of  the  fatherless

16.  18.  they  shall  judge  the  people  with  just).  <
19.  not  wrest).  ||  17.  11.  according  to  the).

17.  9.  they  shall  shew  thee  the  sentence  of).

24. 17.  thou  shalt  not  pervert  the  ).  of  the  strangi
25. 1.  be  a  controversy,  and  they  come  unto  ).  j

27.  19.  cursed  be  he  that  perverteth).  of  strangi
32.  4.  for  all  his  ways  are).;  a  God  of  truth

41.  if  my  hand  take  hold  on).  I  will  render  |
Josh.  20.  6.  stand  before  the  congregation  for  j.
Judg.  4.  5.  Israel  came  up  to  Deborah  for  ,

1  Sam.  8.  3.  his  sons  took  bribes  and  perverted  ). I

2  Sam.  8.  15.  David  executed).  1  Chron.  18.  14.

15.  2.  when  any  man  came  to  the  king  for).  6.

1  Kings  3.  11.  hast  asked  understanding  to  discern

28.  all  Israel  heard  of  the),  the  king  judged

7.  7-  the  porch  ot  j.  ,]  20.  40.  so  shall  tl.y  j.  be

2  Kings  25.  6.  took  tne  king  and  gave  .;,  upon  hn
2  Chron.  19.  8.  chief  of  fathers  for  ).  of  the  Lord

20.  9.  when  evil  cometh  on  us  as  the  sword,  ).

22.  8.  when  Jehu  was  executing),  on  Ahab

24.  24.  so  they  executed  j.  against  Joash
Ezra  7-  26.  let),  be  executed  speedily  on  him
Esth.  1.  13.  towards  all  that  knew  law7  and).

Job  8.  3.  doth  God  pervert),  or  pervert  justice .

9.  19.  if  I  speak  of).  ||  19-  7-  but  there  is  no  j.
19.29-  that  ye  may  know  there  is  a).

32.  9-  neither  do  the  aged  understand  ).

34.  4.  let  us  choose  to  us),  know  what  is  good
12.  neither  will  the  Almighty  pervert).

35.  14.  yet),  is  before  him,  trust  in  him  .

36.  17.  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  ).  of  the  wicked,  j

and  justice  take  hold  on  tnt


.1  U  j)


J  U  D


JUS


•sal.  7.  6.  awake  for  me  to  the  /.  thou  hast  comm.
).  he  hath  prepared  his  throne  for  /.

8.  shall  minister  j.  to  the  people  in  righteousness
!6.  the  Lord  is  known  by  the  /.  he  executeth

ri.  5.  he  Iovetli  righteousness  and.;'.  37.  28.

;*.6.  he  shall  bring  forth  thy/.  as  the  noon-day
30.  and  his  tongue  talketh  of  /.

•».  2.  and  he  shall  judge  thv  poor  with  /.

'6.8.  thou  didst  cause.;,  to  be  heard  from  heaven
0.  when  God  arose  to  /.  to  save  the  meek  of  the

earth

to.  14.  justice  and  /.  are  the  habitation,  97.  2.

>4.  15.  but/.  shall  return  to  righteousness
>9.  4.  the  king’s  strength  also  Iovetli  /.  thou  exe-
cutest  j.  and  righteousness  in  Jacob
01.  1.  Twill  sing  of  mercy  ami.;',  to  thee,  O  Lord
03.6.  Lord  executeth  /.  tor  the  oppressed,  146.  7.
06.  3.  blessed  are  they  that  keep  .;'.

30.  then  Phinehas  stood  up  and  executed  ;'.

11.  7.  the  works  of  his  hands  are  verity  and  /.

12.  +  5.  he  will  guide  his  affairs  with.;'.

19.  66.  teach  me  good.;',  and  knowledge

121.  1  have  done.;',  and  justice  :  leave  me  not
149.  O  Lord,  quicken  me  according  to  thy  ;'.

22.  5.  for  there  are  set  thrones  of  /.

49.  9.  to  execute  upon  them  the.;',  written
rov.  1. 3.  to  receive  the  instruction  of  wisdom  and  /.
.8.  he  keepeth  the  paths  of/',  and  preserveth

9.  then  shalt  thou  understand  J.  and  equity
.  20.  1  lead  in  the  midst  of  the  paths  of;'.'

3.  23.  there  is  that  is  destroyed  for  want  of  /.

7.  23.  taketh  a  gift  to  pervert  the  ways  of  /.

9.  28.  an  ungodly  witness  scorneth  /.

0.8.  a  king  thatsitteth  in  the  throne  of  /.

8.5.  evil  men  understand  not/.  but  they  that  seek
9.  4.  the  king  by  /.  established!  the  land

26.  every  man’s  /.  cometh  from  the  Lord

1.5.  nor  pervert  the.;',  of  any  of  the  afflicted
ccl.  3.  16.  I  saw  under  the  sun  the  place  of;'.

.  8.  if  thou  seest  violent  perverting  of  j.  and
,  .  justice

.  5.  and  a  wise  man  discerneth  both  time  and  ;'.

6.  because  to  every  purpose  there  is  time  and  j.

а.  1.  17-  seek.;'.  ||  21.  it  was  full  of  /.

27.  Zion  shall  be  redeemed  with  /.

.4.  shall  have  purged  Jerusalem  by  the  spirit  of;'.

.  7.  and  looked  for  /.  ||  16.  5.  seeking  j.

.7.  and  to  establish  it  with  J.  and  with  justice
0.  2.  to  turn  aside  the  needy  from  /.

б.  3.  execute  J.  Jer.  21.  12.  1 22.  3.  Ezek.  18.  8. 1

,  .  .  .  .  45.  9.  Zech.  7.  9.  1  8.  12.

8.  6.  for  a  spirit  of.;.  |  17.  1  will  lay  /.  to  the  line
0.  18.  will  have  mercy,  for  the  Lord  is  a  God  of/.
2. 16.  then  /.  shall  dwell  in  the  wilderness

3.  5.  Lord  hath  filled  Zion  with.;',  and  righteousn.

4.  5.  and  upon  the  people  of  my  curse  to  /.

0. 14.  and  who  taught  him  in  the  path  of  J.  ?

1. 1.  let  us  come  near  together  to  ;'.

2. 1.  he  shall  bring  forth  /.  to  the  Gentiles

3.  he  shall  bring  forth  /.  unto  truth

4.  he  shall  not  fail,  till  he  have  set/.  in  the  earth

3. 8.  he  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  ;'.

6.  1.  keep  ye  J.  and  do  justice,  Hos.  12.  6.

9.  8.  and  there  is  no  .;',  in  their  goings

9.  therefore  is  /.  far  from  us.  neither  doth  justice
11.  we  look  for  /.  but  there  is  none

14.  /'.  is  turned  away  backward,  and  justice

15.  it  displeased  him  that  there  was  no  J.

1.  8. 1  the  Lord  love  J.  I  hate  robbery

r.  5.  1.  if  there  be  any  that  executeth  ;'.

4.  they  know  not  the of  their  God ,  8.  7.

5.  they  have  known  the  J.  of  their  God

•  5.  if  ye  thoroughly  execute/,  between  a  man
.  24.  which  exercise .;'.  and  righteousness  in  earth

3.  24.  correct  me,  but  with,;',  not  in  thine  anger
1.  12.  execute,;'  in  the  morning,  and  deliver  liim
1.  5. branch  shall  execute/,  in  the  earth,  33.  15.

5.  + 11.  the/,  of  death  is  for  this  man
L  5.  to  Riblah,  where  he  gave.;',  upon  him,  52. 9.

!.  21.  and  /.  is  come  upon  the  plain  country

17.  thus  far  is  the  /.  of  Moab

■*.  12.  they  whose/,  was  not  to  drink  of  tne  cup

1.9.  forsake  her,  for  her/,  reacheth  unto  heaven
•ye.  23.10.  for  they  had  executed/,  on  her

-4. 1  will  set/,  before  them,  they  shall  judge
in.  4.37.  king  of  heaven,  all  whose  ways  are  ;'.
.10./.  was  set  ||  26.  but  the  /.  shall  sit
.2.;,  was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  most  High
w.5. 1.  giveye.ear,  for/,  is  toward  you
)-4.  thus/,  springeth  upas  hemlock  in  the  field
vos  5.  7.  ye  who  turn/,  into  wormwood
>1  [ov,e  the  good,  and  establish/,  in  the  gate
•’•J ®ut  let/,  run  down  as  waters  and  righteousn.
l-.tor  ye  have  turned/,  into  gall
>c.  3.  1.  is  it  not  to  know/.  ||  8.  I  am  full  of/,
'•that  abhor  j.  ||  7.  9.  and  execute  /.  for  me

4.  law  is  slacked,/,  doth  never  go  forth
■  their  J.  shall  proceed  of  themselves
*-•  0  Lord,  thou  hast  ordained  them  for/.

P'(.  2.  3.  all  ye  which  have  wrought  his  j.

5.  every  morning  doth  he  bring/,  to  light
2. 17. yet  ve  say,  where  is  the  God  of/.  ?
it'  5.  21.  shall  be  in  danger  of  the /.  22.

•  ■with  what  J.  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged
;•  •*¥•  he  shall  shew.;,  to  the  Gentiles

I1’ •  till  he  send  forth  J.  unto  victory

•  23.  and  have  omitted/,  mercy,  and  faith
,}*•  42.  and  pass  over/,  and  the  love  of  God

h  T?"  ^ut  ^ath  committed  all/,  to  the  Son
'•hath  given  him  authority  to  execute/,  also
■10  r0t  to  aPPearance,  but  judge  righteous/.

;  for/-  ]  am  come  into  this  world
:  q  •  now  is  the/,  of  this  world,  now  shall
.’•“•he  will  reprove  the  world  of/.  11.

,  f0"-  33.  m  his  humiliation  his/,  was  taken  away
z.  he  reasoned  of/.  Felix  trembled
Vf0- -he  Jews  desiring  to  have/,  against  him
‘l.  l  aul  appealed  to  the/,  of  Augustus
!?•  +  *8.  G.  gave  them  over  to  a  mind  void  of/.

who  knowing  the/,  of  God,  that  they  which
.  ',yar?  sure  that  the/,  of  G.  is  according  to  truth
tmnkest  that  thou  shalt  escape  the/,  of  God  ?


Bern.  2.  5.  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  /.  of  God

3.  t  19.  world  may  be  subject  to  the  /.  of  God
5.  16.  tor  the/,  was  by  one  to  condemnation

18./.  came  on  all  men  to  condemnation

1  Cor.  1.  10.  but  be  joined  together  in  the  same/.

4.  3.  that  I  should  be  judged  of  man’s  ;.

11.  +  29.  eateth  and  drinketh/.  to  himself

t  34.  that  ye  come  not  together  to/.

2  Thess.  1.  5.  token  of  the  righteous  ;.  of  God

1  Tim.  5.  24.  some  sins  are  open,  going  before  to/.

2  Tim.  3.  +  8.  men  of  no/,  concerning  the  faith
Tit.  1.  t  16.  to  every  good  work  void  of/.

Heb.  6.  2.  and  of  eternal  /.  ||  9.  27.  after'  this  the  /.
10.  27.  but  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of/.

Jam.  2.  13.  he  shall  have  /.  without  mercy  that
shewed  no  mercy,  and  mercy  rejoiceth  against/.
3.  f  1.  knowing  we  shall  receive  greater/.

1  Pet.  4.  17.  that/,  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God

2  Pet.  2. 3.  whose/,  lingereth  not  ||  4.  reserved  to/.
Jude  6.  to/,  of  the  great  day  ||  15.  to  execute/.
Rev.  14.  7-  fear  God,  for  the  hour  of  his/,  is  come

17.  1.  will  shew  thee  the/,  of  the  great  whore

18.  10.  alas,  alas,  for  in  one  hour  is  thy/,  come

20.  4.  they  sat  on  them,  and  /.  was  given  to  them

See  Bear,  Day.

Do  JUDGMENT.

Gen.  18.  19.  to  do  justice  and  /.  1  Kings  10.  9.

Prov.  21.  3.  Jer.  22.  15.

1  Rings  3.  28.  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him  to  do  j.

2  Chron.  9.  8.  set  over  them  to  do  justice  and  /.
Prov.  21.  7-  because  they  refuse  to  do  j.

15.  it  is  joy  to  the  just  to  do  j.  but  destruction
Jer.  51.  47.  I  will  do  j.  on  the  graven  images
52.  I  will  do  j.  on  her  graven  images
Ezek.  18.  t  5.  if  a  man  do  j.  and  justice,  33.  +  14.
JUDGMENT -W/.

John  18.  28.  then  they  led  Jesus  to  the  hall  of  ;'.

they  themselves  went  not  into  the  j.-hall
33.  then  Pilate  entered  into  the  j.-hall  again

19.  9.  went  into  the  j.-hall,  and  saith  to  J  esus
Acts  23.  35.  to  be  kept  in  Herod's  j.-hall.

In  JUDGMENT.

Lei.  19.  15.  do  no  unrighteousness  in  j.  35.

Num.  35.  12.  stand  before  the  congregation  inj.
Dent.  1.  17.  ye  shall  not  respect  persons  inj.

17-  8.  if  there  arise  a  matter  too  hard  for  thee  in  ;'.
Judg.  5.  10.  ye  that  sit  inj.  and  walk  by  the  way
2  Chron.  19.  6.  for  the  Lord,  who  is  with  you  inj.
Job  9.  32.  and  we  should  come  together  inj.

37.  23.  he  is  excellent  in  power  and  inj.

Psal.  1.  5.  the  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in  j.

25.  9.  the  meek  will  he  guide  inj.  and  teach
Prov.  16.  10.  his  mouth  transgresseth  not  inj.

18.  5.  not  good  to  overthrowthe  righteous  in  j.

24.  23.  not  good  to  have  respect  of  persons  in  j.
Isa.  5. 16.  but  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  exalted  inj.

28.  6.  him  that  sitteth  inj.  |1  7.  they  stumble  in  j.
32.  1.  behold  princes  shall  rule  inj.

f  7-  when  he  speaketh  against  the  poor  inj.

54. 17.  every  tongue  that  shall  rise  against  thee  in  j.
Jer.  4.  2.  the  Lord  liveth  in  righteousness  and  inj.
49.  t  19.  who  will  convent  me  inj.  ?

Ezek.  44.  24.  in  controversy  they  stand  in  j.

Hos.  2.  19.  I  will  betroth  thee  to  me  inj.

5.  11.  Ephraim  is  oppressed  and  broken  inj.

Mai.  3.  5.  and  I  will  come  near  to  you  in  j.

Mat.  12.  41.  the  men  of  Nineveh  shall  rise  inj.

42.  queen  of  south  shall  rise  inj.  Luke  11.  31,32.
Phil.  1.  9.  I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  in
Into  JUDGMENT.

Job  14.  3.  and  bringest  me  into  j.  with  thee
22.  4.  will  he  reprove,  will  he  enter  with  thee  into 3.

34.  23.  that  he  should  enter  into  j.  with  God
Psal.  143.  2.  enter  not  into  j.  with  thy  servant
Eccl.  11.9.  for  these  God  will  bring  thee  into  ;'.

12.  14.  God  shall  bring  every  work  into  j.

Isa.  3.  14.  Lord  will  enter  into  j.  with  ancients

My  JUDGMENT.

Job  27.  2.  who  hath  taken  away  my  j.  34.  5.

29.  14.  my  j.  was  as  a  robe  and  a  diadem

40.  8.  wilt  thou  also  disannul  my  j?  wilt  thou
Psal.  9.  +.4.  for  thou  hast  made  my  j,

35.  23.  stir  up  thyself,  and  awake  to  my  j.

Isa.  40.  27.  my  j.  is  passed  over  from  my  God
49.  4.  yet  surely  my  j.  is  with  the  I.ord

51.  4.  1  will  make  my  j.  to  rest  for  a  lightof  people
Ezek.  39.  21.  all  the  heathen  shall  see  my  j.

John  5.  30.  and  my  j.  is  just  ||  8.  16.  my  j.  is  true

1  Cor.  7.  25.  yet  1  give  my  j.  ||  40.  happier  in  myj.

JUDGMEN  T-seat.

Mat.  27.  19.  he  was  set  down  on  j.-s.  John  19.  13.
Acts  18.  12.  the  Jews  brought  him  to  the  j. -seat

16.  and  he  drave  them  from  the  j. -seat

17.  the  Greeks  beat  Sosthenes  before  th ej.-seat

25.  10.  I  stand  at  Cesar’s  j.-seat  11 17-  I  sat  on  j. -seat
Rom.  14.  10.  stand  before  J.-j.  of  Christ,  2  Cor.  5. 10.
Jam.  2.  6.  rich  men  draw  you  before  the  j. -seats

.  JUDGMENTS.

Exod.  6.  6.  I  will  redeem  you  with  great/.  7.  4.

21.  1.  these  are  the  ;,  thou  shalt  set  before  them
24.  3.  and  Moses  told  the  people  all  the/.

Num.  33.  4.  on  their  gods  trie  Lord  executed  /.

35.  24.  shall  judge  according  to  these/.

36.  13.  these  are  the  j.  which  the  Lord  commanded
Dent.  7.  12.  if  ye  hearken  to  these/,  and  keep  them

33.  10.  they  shall  teach  Jacob  thy/,  and  law

21.  he  executed  the/,  of  the  I.ord  with  Israel

2  Sam.  22.  23.  his/,  were  before  me,  Psal.  18.  22.

1  Chron.  16. 12.  remem.  /.  of  his  mouth,  Ps.  105.  5.

14.  his/,  are  in  all  the  earth,  Psal.  105.  7.

Neb.  9.  29.  but  sinned  against  thy/.

Psal.  10.  5.  thy  /.  are  far  above  out  of  sight
19.  9.  the/,  of  the  I.ord  are  true  and  righteous
36.  6.  thy  /.  are  a  great  deep  ;  O  L.  thou  preservest
48. 11.  let  Judah  be  glad  because  of  thy  /.

72.  1.  give  the  king  thy/.  O  God,  and  righteousn.
97-  8.  Judah  rejoiced,  because  of  thy  /.  O  Lord
119.  7-  when  1  have  learned  thy  righteous/.

13.  with  my  lips  I  declared  all  the  /.  of  thy  mouth

20.  for  the  longing  that  it  hath  unto  thy  j.

30.  thy  /.  have  I  laid  before  me
39.  turn  away  my  reproach,  for  thy/,  are  good


Psal.  119. 43. 1  hoped  in  thy/.  ||  52. 1  rememb.  thy/.
62.  give  thanks,  because  of  thy  righteous  j.  164.
75.  I  know,  O  Lord,  that  thy/,  are  right
102.  1  have  not  departed  from  thy  j.

106. 1  have  sworn  that  1  will  keepthy  righteous/,.
108.  teach  me  thy  j.  ||  120.  I  am  afraid  of  thy  /.
137.  righteous  art  thou,  and  upright  are  thy  j.
156.  O  Lord,  quicken  me  according  to  thy/.

160.  every  one  of  thy  righteous/,  endureth
175.  let  my  soul  live,  and  let  thy/,  help  me
147.  20.  his/,  they  have  not  known  them
Prov.  19.  29./.  are  prepared  for  scorners,  stripes
Isa.  26.  8.  in  the  way  of  thy/,  we  waited  for  thee
9.  for  when  thy/,  are  in  the  earth,  inhabitants
Jer.  4.  t  12.  nor  will  l  utter,;,  against  them
12.  1.  yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy/.

Ezek.  5. 7-  nordone  according  to  the/,  ot  the  nations
8.  execute/,  in  the  midst  of  thee,  10.  15. 1  11.  9.

7.  f  27.  writn  their/,  will  I  judge  them

16.  41.  execute/,  on  thee  in  sight  of  women
23.  24.  they  shall  judge  thee  according  to  their/.

25.  11.  and  1  will  execute  ;'.  on  Moab

28.  26.  executed/,  on  all  those  that  despise  them
30.  14.  1  will  execute/,  in  No
19.  thus  will  I  execute/,  in  Egypt
34.  16.  1  will  destroy,  1  will  feed  them  with/.
Dan.  9.  5.  we  sinned  by  departing  from  thy/.

Hos.  6.  5.  thy/,  are  as  the  light  that  goeth  forth
Zeph.  3.  15.  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  thy/.

Rom.  11.33.  how  unsearchable  are  his  ;'.  and  ways
1  Cor.  6.  4.  if  ye  have/,  of  things  of  this  life
Rev.  15.  4.  for  thy/,  are  made  manifest
16.7-  true  and  righteous  are  thy/.  IQ.  2.

My  JUDGMEN TS.

Lev.  18.  4.  ye  shall  do  myj.  I  am  the  Lord

5.  ye  shall  therefore  keep  myj.  25.  18.

26.  15.  if  your  soul  abhor  my  j.  so  that  ye  do  no!
43.  because,  even  because  they  despised  myj.

1  Chron.  28.  7-  if  ye  be  constant  to  do  myj.

Psal.  89.  30.  if  his  children  walk  not  in  myj.

Jer.  l.  16.  I  will  utter  myj.  against  them
Ezek.  5.  6.  she  changed  myj.  into  wickedness
5.  7.  neither  have  kept  myj.  nor  done
14.  21.  when  I  send  my  four  sore  /,  on  Jerusalem
36.  27.  and  ye  shall  keep  my  j.  and  do  them
44.  24.  they  shall  judge  it  according  to  myj.

Statutes  and  JUDGMENTS.

Lev.  18.  5.  keep  my  statutes  and  my  /.  26.  |  20.  22.

Dent.  7-  11.  |  11.  1. 1  26.  16,  17-  1  30.  16
1  Kings  2.  3. 1  8.  58.  |  9.  4.  |  11.  33.

19.  37.  ye  shall  observe  all  my  statutes  and  /,

Dent.  11.  32.  |  12.  1.  2  Chron.  7  17.
26.  46.  these  are  the  st.  and  j.  L.  made.  Dent.  4.  45.
Deut.  4.  1.  hearken  to  st.  and  j.  which  1  teach,  5.  1.
5.  1  taught  you  st.  andj.  ||  8.  hath  st.  and  ),  so  right.

14.  commanded  to  teach  st.  andj.  6.  1.  Ezra  7.  10.

5.  31.  I  will  speak  the  stat.  and  j.  thou  shalt  teach
6. 20.  thy  son  asketh  thee,  what  mean  the  st.  and  j..

8.  11 .  forget  L.  in  npt  keep,  his  st.  and  j.  Neh.  1 . 7.

1  Kings  6.  12.  walk  in  mv  stat.  and  execute  my  /.

1  Chron.  22. 13.  if  thou  takest  heed  to  fulfil  st.  andj .

2  Chr.  19. 10.  what  cause  shall  come  betw.  st.  and  j
Neh.  9.  13.  and  thou  gavest  them  right  stat.  andj

10.29.  entered  into  a  curse,  to  do  all  his  st.  and  j.
Psal.  147.  19.  he  sheweth  his  stat.  and  j.  to  Israel
Ezek.  5.  6.  for  they  refused  my  /.  and  my  statutes
11.  12.  for  ye  have  not  walked  in  my  statutes ,
nor  executed  my/.  20.  13,  16,  21.
18.  9.  walked  in  my  st.  and  j.  17.  |  20.  19.  I  37.  24.

20.  11.  give  them  my  statutes ,  and  shewed  my/.

18.  not  in  stat.  of  lathers,  nor  observe  their/.

25.  gave  them  stat.  not  good,  and  j.  whereby

Mai.  4.  4.  remember  ye  law  of  Mos.  wither,  andj.
JUICE.

Cant.  8. 2.  to  drink  wine  of  the  ;'.  of  my  pomegranate
JUMPING.

Neh.  3.  2.  the  noise  of  horses  and  the  /.  chariots
JUNIPER.

1  Kings  19.  4.  Elijah  came  and  sat  under  a/,  tree,  5.
Job  30.  4.  who  cut  up  j.  roots  for  their  meat
Psal.  120.  4.  arrows  of  the  mighty  with  coals  of
IVORY.

1  Kings  10. 18.  king  made  a  throne  of  i.  2  Chr.  9. 17.
22.  bringing  gold,  silver,  and  i.  2  Chron.  9.  21.

22.  39.  and  the  i.  house  which  Ahab  made
Psal.  45.  8.  out  of  the  i.  places,  whereby  they  made
Cant.  5.  14.  his  belly  is  as  bright  i.  overlaid  with
7.  4.  thy  neck  is  as  a  tower  of  i.  thine  eyes
Ezek.  27.  6.  the  Ashurites  made  thy  benches  of  i.

15.  they  brought  thee  for  a  present  horns  of  i.
Amos  3.  15.  and  the  houses  of  i.  shall  perish

6.  4.  that  lie  upon  beds  of  i.  and  stretch  themselves
Rev.  18. 12.  for  no  man  buyeth  vessels  of  i.

JURISDICTION.

1  Kings  8.  t  37-  besiege  in  the  land  of  their/.

Luke  23.7.  as  he  knew  that  he  belonged  to  Herod’s  1.
JUST

Signifies,  [1]  One  who  is  upright  and  sincere  in  his
actions  and  dealings  with  others,  Luke  23.  50.  [2]
The  great  Creator,  who  is  essentially  just  and
righteous,  and  the  fountain  of  justice.  Deut.  32.  4.
[3]  One  who  is  exceeding  faithful,  keeping  his
word  and  promise,  1  John  i.  9.  [4]  One  who  in

his  life  and  death  answered  the  perfect  justice  of
the  law  of  God,  1  Pet.  3.  18.  [5)  One  who  is
righteous  by  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteous¬
ness,  Rom. 1.  17.  [6]  (.hie  who  is  not  truly  con¬
vinced  of  his  own  sinfulness ,  and  is  only  righteous
in  his  own  opinion,  Luke  18.  9.  [71  One  that  is
good-natured,  mild,  and  indulgent.  Mat.  1.  19.
[8]  One  of  a  charitable,  liberal  disposition,  Psal,

37  .  26.

Gew.6.9.  Noah  wasa/.man,  and  perfect,  and  walked
Lev.  19.  36.  balances,  /.  weights,  a  /.  ephah,
and  a/,  hin  shall  ye  have,  Deut.  25.  15.
Ezek.  15.  10.

DeutAO.  18.  they  shall  judge  peo.  with/,  judgments
20.  that  is  altogether/,  shalt  thou  follow
32.  4.  a  God  without  iniquity,/,  and  right  is  he
2 Sam.  23.  3.  he  that  ruletn  over  men  must  be/.

Neh.  9.  33.  thou  art/,  in  all  that  is  brought  on  us
Job  4.  17.  shall  mortal  man  be  more  /.  than  God  1*

257


K  E  E


Xj  S


K


EE


Job  9.  2.  but  how  should  man  be  j.  with  God  ?

12.  4.  the  j.  upright  man  is  laughed  to  scorn
2?.  17-  he  may  prepare  it,  but  they,  shall  put  it  on
38.  12.  behold,  in  this  thou  art  not./.

Psal.  7.  9.  let  wickedness  end,  but  establish  they.

37.  12.  the  wicked  plotteth  against  the  y  .

Prov.  3.  33.  but  he  blesseth  the  habitation  ot  the  y.

4.  18.  the  path  ot  they,  is  as  the  shining  light
9. 9.  teach  a  j.  man,  and  he  will  increase  in  learning

10.  6.  blessings  are  upon  the  head  ot  they.

7.  the  memory'  ot'  they,  is  blessed

20.  the  tongue  of  they,  is  as  choice  silver
31.  the  mouth  of  the  j.  bringeth  forth  wisdom

11.  1.  but  ay.  weight  is  his  delight  .....

9.  but  through  knowledge  shall  they,  be  delivered

12.  13.  but  the  j.  shall  come  out  ot  trouble

21.  there  shall  no  evil  happen  to  they.

13.  22.  the  wealth  of  the  sinner  is  laid  up  tor  the  y.

16.  11.  ay.  weight  and  balance  are  the  Lord's

17.  15.  iie  that  eondemneth  they,  is  abomination

26.  also  to  punish  the  j.  is  not  good

18.  17.  he  that  is  first  in  his  own  cause  seemeth  j.

20.  7-  the  j.  man  walketh  in  his  integrity

21.  15.  it  is  a  joy  to  they,  to  do  judgment
24.  16.  ay.  man  falleth  seven  times  and  riseth  again
29.  10.  hate  the  upright,  but  they,  seek  his  soul

27.  an  unjust  man  is  an  abomination  to  the  j.

E cel.  7.  15.  there  is  ay.  man  that  perisbeth  in  his

20.  not  ay.  man  upon  earth  that  sinneth  not

8.  14.  there  bey.  men  to  whom  it  happeneth
Isa.  26.  7.  the  way  of  they,  is  uprightness,  thou

most  upright  dost  weigh  the  path  of  they.
29.  21.  turn  aside  they,  for  a  thing  of  nought
45.  21.  1  the  Lord,  ay.  God,  and  a  Saviour
49.  +  24.  or  the  captivity  of  they,  delivered
Lam.  4.  13.  that  have  shed  the  blood  of  the  j.  in  her
Ezek.  18.  5.  but  if  a  man  be  j.  and  do  that  is  right

9.  he  is  j.  he  shall  surely  live,  saith  the  Lord  God
Hus.  14.  9.  ways  of  Lord  right, y.  shall  walk  1:1  them
Amos  5.  12.  they  afflict  they,  they  take  a  bribe
Hab.  2.  4.  but  the  j.  shall  live  by  faith,  Rom.  1. 17.

Gal.  3.  11.  Heb.  10.  38.
feph.  3.  5.  the  j.  Lord  is  in  the  midst  thereof
Leek.  9.  9.  he  is  j.  and  having  salvation,  lowly
Mat.  1.  19.  Joseph  her  husband,  being  ay.  man

5.  45.  and  sendeth  rain  on  the,;,  and  on  unjust

13.  49.  and  sever  the  wicked  from  among  they.

27.  19.  have  nothing  to  do  with  that./.  man

24.  1  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this./.  person
Mark  6.  20.  knowing  that  he  was  ay.  man  and  holy
Luke  1.  17.  the  disobedient  to  the  wisdom  of  they.

2.  25.  Simeon  was./.  and  devout,  waiting  tor

14.  14.  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  they.

15.  7.  more  than  over  ninety  and  nine./.  persons
20.  20.  spies  which  should  feign  themselves  j.

23.  50.  Joseph  of  Arimathea  was  a  good  man  and y.
Jo/m  5.  30.  as  I  hear  l  judge,  and  my  judgment  isy.
Acts  10.  22.  Cornelius  the  centurion,  ay.  man

24.  15.  shall  be  resurrection  both  of  j.  and  unjust
Horn.  2. 13.  for  not  the  hearers  of  the  law  arey.

3.  8.  whose  damnation  isy.  ||  26.  he  might  bey.

7.  12.  and  the  commandment  holy,./,  and  geod
Phil.  4.  8.  finally,  whatsoever  things  arey.  pure
•Col.  4.  1.  ghe  servants  that  which  isy.  and  equal
Tit.  1.  8.  a  bishop  must  bey.  holy,  temperate
Heb.  2.  2.  received  ay.  recom pence  of  reward

12.  23.  and  to  the  spirits  ofy.  men  made  perfect
Jam.  5.  6.  ye  have  condemned  and  killed  they.

1  Pet.  3.  18.  Christ  suffered,  they,  for  the  unjust

2  Pet.  2.7.  delivered  y.  Lot,  vexed  with  conversation

1  John  1.9.  if  we  confess,  lie  isy.  to  forgive  us  our  sins
Rev.  15.  3.  y.  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King

Most  JUST.

Job  34. 17.  wilt  thou  condemn  him  that  is  most  j.  ?
JUST  One.

Arts  3.  14.  ye  denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  J.  One

7.  52.  shewed  before  of  the  coming  of  the  J.  One

22. 14.  shouldest  know  his  will,  and  see  that  J.  One

JUSTICE

Is,  (1)  That  essential  perfection  in  God,  whereby  he
is  infinitely  righteous  and  just,  both  in  his  nature,
and  in  all  his  proceedings  with  his  creatures,
Psal.  89.  14.  (II)  That  political  virtue  which
renders  to  every  man  his  due,  and  is,  [1]  Dis¬
tributive,  which  concerns  princes,  magistrates ,  &c.
Job  29.  14.  [2]  Commutative,  which  concerns
a/l  persons  in  their  dealings  one  with  another,
Gen.  18.  19.

Men.  18.  19.  keep  way  of  L.  to  doy.  and  judgment
Deut.  16.  t  20.  what  isy.  shalt  thou  follow
33.  21.  he  executeth  the  j.  of  Lord  and  judgments

2  Sant.  8.  15.  David  executed  y.  1  Chron.  18.  14.

15.  4.  O  that  I  were  made  judge,  1  would  doy.

Job  8.  3.  or  doth  the  Almighty  pervert y. ?

31.  t6.  let  him  weigh  me  in  the  balance  of  J.

36.  17.  judgment  andy.  take  hold  on  thee

37.  23.  is  excellent  in  plenty  ofy.  will  not  afflict
Psal.  82.  3.  do  j.  to  the  afflicted  and  needy

89. 14.  j.  and  judgment  are  habitation  ofthy  throne
119.  121.  1  have  done  judgment  andy.  leave  me  not

Proo.  1.  3.  to  receive  the  instruction  ofy.  and  equity

8.  15.  by  me  kings  reign,  and  princes  decree  j.
Reel.  5.  8.  if  thou  seest  the  perverting  ofy.

Isa.  9.  7.  to  establish  his  throne  withy,  and  judgtn.
56.  i.  keep  ye  judgment,  and  doy.  for  my.  salvation

58.  2.  they  ask  of  me  the  ordinances  ofy.

59.  4.  none  calleth  for  j.  ||  9.  nor  doth./,  overtake  us

14.  /.  standeth  afar  off,  truth  is  fallen  in  the  str.

Jer.  23. 5.  shall  execute  judgment  and  j.  in  the  earth
31.  23.  Lord  bless  thee,  O  habitation  ofy.

50.  7.  sinned  against  the  Lord,  the  habitation  of  j.
Lzek.  45.  9.  O  princes,  execute  judgment  andy.

See  Do  Judgment,  before.
JUSTIFICATION

Signifies,  A  gracious  act  of  God,  whereby  he  par¬
dons  and  accepts  of  sinners  on  the  account  of
Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  them,  and  re¬
ceived  by  faith,  Rom.  5.  16,  18.  Our  justification
was,  [1]  Confirmed  and  ratified  by  the  resurrection
of  Christ,  Rom.  4.  25.  [2]  And  it  is  manifested
by  the  good  works  of  believers.  Jam.  2.  21,  24,  25.
See  Sanctify.

258


Rom.  4.  25.  Christ  was  raised  again  for  our  j.

5.  16.  but  the  free  gift  is  of  many  offences  toy.

18  the  free  gift  came  on  all  men  toy.  of  life
JUSTIFY

Signifies,  [1]  To  absolve  or  declare  one  innocent,
Prov.  17.  15.  [21  To  absolve  and  acquit  a

sinner  from  the  guilt  and  punishment  of  sin,
through  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness,
Rom.  3.  28. 1  5.  9.  [3]  To  declare  another  to  be
less  guilty  than  ourselves,  Ezek.  16.  51.  [4]  1°

acknowledge  a  thing  or  person  to  be  just,  Mat.

11.  19.  Luke  7.  35.  [5]  To  prove  and  mani¬

fest  one's  self  to  be  in  a  justified  jrsti?,.  J  am.

2  21.  It  is  fourfold,  [1]  Falsely  and  tain-
glorious/y,  Luke  10.  29.  i  10.  15.  [2]  Politi¬
cally,  Deut.  25.  1.  Isa.  5.  23.  [3]  Legally,

Rom.  3.  20.  Gal.  2.  16.  [4]  Evangelically,

Rom.  5.  1.  rl  his  is  said  to  be,  [1]  By  Christ,
Gal.  2.  16.  [2]  By  grace  freely,  Rom.  3.  24.

Tit.  3.  7.  [3]  By  faith.  Gal.  3.  8.  [4]  By

his  blood,  Rom.  5.  9.  [5]  By  his  knowledge,

Isa.  53.  11.  ,

Exod.  23.  7.  for  1  will  noty.  the  wicked
Deut.  25.  1.  then  they  shall  y.  the  righteous
Job  9.  20.  if  1  j.  myself,  my  own  mouth  shall  cond.
27.  5.  God  forbid  that  l  should  j.  you
33.  32.  answer  me,  speak,  for  1  desire  toy.  thee
Isa.  5.  23.  which  j.  the  wicked  for  reward
53. 11.  by  knowl.  shall  my  righteous  serv. y.  many
Luke  10.29.  he,  willing  toy.  himself, said  to  Jesus
16.  15.  ye  are  they  which  j.  yourselves  before  men
Rom.  3.  30.  one  God  shall  j.  circumcision  by  faith
Gal.  3.  8.  foreseeing  that  God  would  j.  the  heathen
JUSTIFIED.

Job  11.  2.  should  a  man  full  of  talk  be  /.  ?

13.  18.  behold  now,  l  know  that  l  shall  bey.

25.  4.  how  then  can  man  bey.  with  G.  or  be  clean  ?
32.  2.  because  hey.  himself  rather  than  God
Psal.  51.  4.  thou  mightest  be./,  when  thou  speakest
143.  2.  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  living  bey.

Isa.  43.  9.  they  may  bey.  II  26.  thou  mayest  bey.
45.  25.  in  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  bey.
Jer.  3.  11.  the  backsliding  Israel  hath  j.  herselt
Ezek.  16.  51.  j.  thy  sisters  in  all  abominations,  52.
Dan.  8.  t  14.  then  shall  the  sanctuary  bey.

Mat.  11. 19.  wisdom  isy.  of  her  children,  Luke  7.35.

12.  37.  for  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  bey.

Luke  7.  29.  all  the  people  and  publicans  y.  God  t

18.  14.  this  man  went  downy,  rather  than  the  other
Acts  13.  39.  all  that  believe  arey.  from  all  things
from  which  ye  could  not  bey.  by  the  law
Rom.  2.  13.  but  the  doers  of  the  law  shall  bey.

3.  4.  that  thou  mightest  bey.  in  thy  sayings
20.  there  shall  no  flesh  bey.  ill  bis  sight
24.  being  j.  freely  by  his  grate,  Tit.  3.  7.

28.  a  man  isy.  by  faith,  5.  1.  Gal.  2.  16.  |  3

4.  2.  if  Abraham  were,/,  by  works,  he  hath

5.  1.  being  j.  by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God
9.  being  now  j.  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be  saved

8.  30.  and  whom  he  j.  them  he  also  glorified
1  Cor.  4.  4.  1  know  nothing,  yet  am  l  not  hereby  j.

6.  11.  ye  are  j.  in  the  naihe  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Gal.  2.  16.  a  man  is  noty.  by  the  works  of  law,  3. 11.

5.  4.  whosoever  of  you  is  j.  by  law,  ye  are  fallen
1  Tim.  3. 16.  G.  manifest  in  the  flesh,  j.  in  the  Spirit
Jam.  2.21 .  was  not  Abraham  our  fathery.  by  works  ?

24.  ye  see  how  that  by  works  a  man  isy.

25.  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  j.  by  works  ?

JUS  1'IFIER.

Rom.  3.  26.  they,  of  him  who  believeth  in  Jesus
JUSTIF1ETH.

Prov.  17. 15.  he  thaty.  the  wicked  is  abomination
Isa.  50.8.  he  is  near  thaty.  who  will  contend  with  me
Rom.  4.  5.  but  believeth  on  him  thaty. the  ungodly
8.  33.  to  the  charge  of  God’s  elect  r  it  is  God  that  j
JUSTIFYING.

1  Kings  8.  32.  and  j.  the  righteous,  2  Chron.  6.  23.
JUSTLE.

Nah.  2.  4.  the  chariots  shall  j.  one  against  another
JUSTLY.

Mic.  6. 8.  what  doth  the  Lord  require  but  to  do  j.  ?
Luke  23.  41.  we  indeed,/,  tor  we  receive  the  reward
1  Then.  2. 10.  how  holily  andy.  we  behaved


l*v.  25. 18.  ye  shall  k.  my  judgments  and  do  them
Sum.  6.  24.  the  Lord  bless  thee  and  k.  thee

9.  3.  in  the  fourteenth  day  at  even  ye  shall  X.  it

11.  day  of  second  month  at  even  they  shall  k.  it
18.  7.  thou  and  thy  sons  shall  k.  your  priests'  ottic
29.  12.  ve  shall  k.  a  feast  to  the  Lord  seven  days
36.7.  shall  A.  himself  to  the  inheritance  of  tribe,  0
Deut.  4.  6.  k.  therefore  and  do  them,  5. 1.

7.  8.  because  the  Ld.  loved  you,  would  k.  the  oaf

12.  if  ye  k.  them,  the  Lord  shall  k.  the  coveuan

16.  10.  thou  shalt  k.  the  feast  of  weeks  to  the  Lori
15.  shalt  A.  a  solemn  feast  to  the  Lord  thy  God!

17.  19.  may  learn  to  A.  all  the  words  ol  this  law
9.  then  k.  thee  from  every  wicked  thing

23.  that  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  lips  thou  shalt ,!
29.  9.  A.  therefore  the  words  of  this  covenant
Josh.  6.  18.  A.  yourselves  from  the  accursed  thing!

10.  18.  and  set  men  by  the  cave  for  to  A.  them
23.  6.  to  A.  all  that  is  written  in  the  law  of  Mose

Jvdg.  2.  22.  whether  they  will  A.  the  way  of  Lord
Ruth  2.21.  thou  shalt  A.  fast  by  my  young  men
1  Bam.  2.  9.  he  will  A.  the  feet  or  his  saints
1.  Eleazar  his  son,  to  A.  the  ark  of  the  Lord


(•


24.


K.


KAB.

2  Kings  6.  25.  a  A.  of  doves’  dung  sold  for  five  pieces
KEEP

Signifies,  [1]  To  retain  or  hold  fast,  2  Tim.  1.  14.
[2]  To  remember,  Luke  2.  51.  [3]  To  defend

and  protect,  Psal.  127.  1-  [4]  To  observe  and

practise,  Psal.  119.  4.  Acts  16.  4.  [5]  To  save

or  deliver,  John  17.  15.  [6J  To  celebrate,  Mat
26.  18.  [7]  To  perform  fully  and  perfectly ,  Mat

19.  17.

Gen.  2.  15.  Lord  put  him  in  the  garden  of  Eden

to  A.  it

18.  19.  and  they  shall  A.  the  way  of  the  Lord
28.  15.  and  behold  1  am  with  thee  to  A.  thee,  20.
30.  31.  1  will  again  feed  and  A.  thy  flock
33.  9.  my  brother,  A.  that  thou  hast  to  thyselt
41.  35.  and  let  them  k.  food  iti  the  cities
Exod.  6.  5.  whom  the  Egyptians  A.  in  bondage

12.  6.  shall  A.  it  till  the  fourteenth  day  of  month
14.  ye  shall  A.  it  a  feast  to  the  Lord  through  your

generations,  23.  15. 1  34.  18.  Lev.  23.  41.
25.  that  ye  shall  A.  this  service,  13.  5.

47.  and  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  A.  it

13.  10.  thou  shalt  A.  this  ordinance  in  his  season

20.  8.  remember  the  sabbath  day  to  A.  it  holy,  31.

13,  14,  16.  Dent.  5.  12,  15.

22.  7.  if  a  man  deliver  money  or  stuff'  to  A.  10.

23.  7.  A.  thee  far  front  a  false  matter

14.  three  times  shalt  thou  A.  a  feast  to  me
20.  I  send  an  angel  to  A.  thee  in  the  way
Lev.  6.  2.  and  lie  in  that  delivered  him  to  A.  4.

18.  4.  ye  shall  A.  my  ordinances,  1  am  the  Lord,

30. 1  22.  9.  Ezek.  11;  20.

19.  3.  shall  A.  my  sabbaths,  30.  |  26.  2.  Isa.  56.  4.
23.  39.  shall  A.  a  feast  seven  days.  2  Chr.  30.  13.


2  Sam,  15.  16-  the  king  left  ten  women  which  we
concubines  to  A.  the  house,  16.  21. 1  20.  J

18.  18.  I  have  no  sou  to  A.  my  name  in  rememf!
1  Kings  8.  25.  A.  with  thy  servant  Day.  2  Chr.  6. 1

20.  39.  brought  a  man  to  me  and  said,  A.  this

1  Chr.  4.  10.  that  thou  wouldest  A.  me  from  evil  |

12.  33.  fifty  thousand,  Which  could  A.  rank,  38.

22.  12.  that  thou  mayest  A.  the  law  of  the  Lord  !

29.  18.  A.  this  for  ever  in  the  imagination  of  heaa

2  Chron.  22.  9.  had  no  power  to  A.  still  the  kmgdoi

28.  10.  yep  rpose  to  A.  under  the  children  ofJudi

30.  3.  for  they  could  not  A.  it  at  that  time

23.  assembly  took  counsel  to  A.  other  seven  day
Ezra  8.  29.  watch  and  A.  them  till  ye  weigh  them
Seh.  12.  27.  to  A.  the  dedication  with  gladness  :

13.  22.  that  the  Levites  should  A.  the  gates
Esth.  3.  8.  nor  A.  they  the  king’s  laws

9.  27.  that  they  would  A.  those  two  clays  of  Pur
Job  14.  13.  O  that  thou  wouldest  A.  me  secret  til
20.  13.  though  he  A.  it  still  within  his  mouth
Psal.  12.  7.  thou  shalt  A.  them,  O  Lord,  31.  20.
17.  8.  A.  me  as  the  apple  of  the  eye,  hide  me

19.  13.  A.  back  also  from  presumptuous  sins
25.20.  O  A.  my  soul,  and  deliver  me,  1  trust  i
.34.  13.  A.  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips
.37.  34.  and  A.  his  way  |l39.  1.  1  will  A.  my  mod
89.  28.  my  mercy  will  1  A.  for  him  for  ever

91.  11.  his  angels  charge,  to  A.  thee  in  all  thy  wd
103.  9.  nor  chide,  nor  will  he  A.  his  auger  tor  et

105.  45.  they  might  observe  and  A.  his  laws

106.  3.  blessed  are  they  that  A.  judgment

113.  9.  lie  maketh  the  barren  woman  to  A.  housi
119.  2.  blessed  are  they  that  A.  his  testimonies

4.  thou  hast  commanded  us  to  A.  thy  precepts,
17.  that  1  may  live  and  A.  thy  word,  101.

3.3.  teach  me,  and  1  shall  A.  it  to  the  end

.34.  give  understanding,  1  shall  A.  thy  law,  44
57.  O  Lord,  1  have  said,  that  1  would  A.  thy  wo,
63.  1  am  a  companion  of  them  that  A.  thy  precej
69.  I  will  A.  thy  precepts  with  my  heart,  134.
88.  1  will  A.  the  testimony  ofthy  mouth
100.  I  understand,  Decause  1  A.  thy  precepts
106.  1  will  A.  thy  righteous  judgments
129.  wonderful,  therefore  doth  my  soul  A.  ther
1.36.  down  my  eyes,  because  they  A.  not  thy  L
146.  save  me,  and  1  shall  A.  thy  testimonies
127.  1.  except  the  Lord  A.  the  city  the  watchni

140.  4.  A.  me  from  the  hands  of  the  wicked

141.  3.  O  I^ord,  A.  the  door  of  my  lips

9.  A.  me  from  the  snares  they  have  laid  for  ml
Prov.  2.  11.  understanding  shall  A.  thee

20.  thou  mayest  A.  the  paths  of  the  righteous
.3.  21.  my  sou,  A.  sound  wisdom  and  disci etioi

26.  Lord  shall  A.  thy  foot  from  being  taken

4.  6.  love  wisdom,  and  she  shall  A.  thee

1.3.  A.  instruction,  let  her  not  go,  forshe  is  thy  , !

21.  A.  my'  sayings  in  the  midst  of  thy'heait  J

23.  A.  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  i
5.2.  and'thatihy  lips  may;  A.  knowledge

6.  22.  when  thou  steepest  it  shall  A.  thee

24.  to  A.  thee  from  the  evil  woman

7.  l.my  son.A.iny  words,  and  lay  up  my  comm;-

5.  they  may  A.  thee  from  the  strange  woman

8.  32.  "for  blessed  are  they  that  A.  my  way  s

22.  5.  he  that  doth  A.  his  soul  shall  be  far  fioni  tli

18.  it  is  pleasant  if  thou  A.  them  within  thee
24. 1 19.  A.  not  company  with  the  wicked
28.  4.  such  as  A.  the  law  contend  with  them
Feel.  3.  6.  there  is  a  time  to  A.  and  to  cast  aw;

5.  1.  A.  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the  house
Cant.  8.  12.  that  A.  the  fruit  thereof,  two  hundi
Isa.  26.  .3.  thou  wilt  A.  him  in  perfect  peace

27.3.  1  the  lord  do  A.  it,  1  will  A.  it  night  and,:
42.  6.  1  the  Lord  have  called  thee,  1  will  A.  L

4.3.  6.  X.  not  back  ||56. 1.  A.  ye  judgment
Jer.  3.  5.  will  he  A.  his  anger  to  the  end  ?

12.  and  1  will  not  A.  anger  forever  I

.31.  10.  and  A.  him  as  a  shepherd  doth  his  flocl
42.  4.  I  will  A.  nothing  back  from  you
Ezek.  20.  19.  A.  my  judgments  and  do  them,  3t|?
4.3. 11.  that  they  may  A.  the  whole  form  thereoj
Hus.  12.  6.  A.  mercy  and  judgment,  wait  on  (><<
Mic.  6.  t  16.  he  doth  much  A.  statutes  of  Omri;

7.  5.  the  A.  the  doors  of  thy  mouth  from  her  tl
Sah.  1.  15.  A.  thy  feasts  ||  2.  1.  A.  the  munition,
Zech.  3.  7.  then  thou  shalt  also  A.  my  courts

1.3.  5.  man  taught  me  to  A.  cattle  from  my  you

14.  16.  and  to  A.  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  18,

Mai.  2.7.  for  the  priests’  lips  should  A.  know  led
Mark  7.  9.  that  ye  may  A.  your  own  tradition
Luke  4.  10.  he  shall  give  his  angels  charge  to  A.

8.  15.  they  who  having  heard  the  word  A.  it
11. 28.  blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  word  ano,^

19.  4.3.  thy  enemies  snail  A.  thee  in  on  every  ■'
John  8.51.  if  A.  my  saying  shall  neverseedeatl

55.  but  1  know  him,  and  A.  his  say  ing
12.  25.  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world  shall

14.  23.  if  a  man  love  me  he  will  A.  my  words

15.  20.  if  kept  my  saying,  they  will  A.  yours  a


K  E  E


REP


K  E  R


. hn  17.  11  k.  thro’  thy  name  ||  15.  k.  from  evil
cts  5.  3.  and  to  k.  back  part  of  the  price  of  land
0.  28.  for  a  man  that  is  a  .lew  to  k.  company
>2.  4.  and  delivered  him  to  soldiers  to  k.  him

5.  5.  to  command  them  to  k.  the  law  of  Moses
24.  ye  must  he  circumcised,  and  k.  the  law

29.  from  which  if  ye  k.  yourselves,  ye  do  well

6.  4.  they  delivered  them  the  decrees  for  to  k.

23.  charging  the  jailer  to  k.  them  safely

8.  21.  I  must  by  all  means  k.  this  feast  in  .lerus.
'1.  25.  k.  themselves  from  things  offered  to  idols

4.  2.3.  he  commanded  a  centurion  to  k.  Paul

om.  2.  25.  circumcision  prohteth,  if  thou  k.  the  law
26.  if  uncircumcision  k.  the  righteousness  of  law
Cor.  5.  8.  let  us  k.  the  teast  ||  11.  not  k.  company
.  37.  decreed  that  he  will  k.  his  virgin,  doeth  well
■.  27.  I  k.  under  my  body  and  bring  it  into  subj.

l. 2.  that  ye  k.  the  ordinances,  as  1  delivered  them

5.  2.  if  ye  k.  in  memory  what  1  preached  to  you
Cor.  11.  9.  kept  myself,  and  so  will  1  k.  myself
al.  6.  13.  neither  do  circumcised  k.  the  law

ph.  4.  3.  endeavouring  to  k.  the  unity  of  the  Spirit
hit.  4.  7.  the  peace  of  God  shall  k.  your  hearts
Thess.  3. 3.  who  shal  1  establish  and  k.  you  from  evil
Tim.  5.  22.  nor  partaker  of  sins,  k.  thyself  pure
.  20.  k.  that  which  is  committed  to  thy  trust
Tim.  1.  12.  able  to  k.  that  1  committed  to  him

14.  good  thin"  committed  to  thee  k.  by  Holy  G.
tm.  1.  27.  and  to  X:.  himself  unspotted  from  world
.  10.  for  whosoever  shall  k.  the  whole  law

John  5.  21.  children,  X-.  yourselves  from  idols
de  21.  k.  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  looking

24.  to  him  that  is  able  to  k.  you  from  falling

tv.  1.  3.  blessed  are  they  that  hear  and  k.  those  th.

.  10.  I  will  k.  thee  from  the  hour  of  temptation

2.  9.  of  them  who  k.  the  sayings  of  this  book
KEEP  alive.

m.  6.  19.  bring  into  the  ark  to  k.  them  alive,  20.

3.  to  k.  seed  alive  on  the  face  of  all  the  earth

•on.  31. 18.  women,  children  k.  alive  for  yourselves
<am.  8. 2.  he  measured  with  one  full  line  to  k.  alive
al.2Q.  29.  and  none  can  k.  alive  his  own  soul
?.  19.  to  deliver  and  X-.  them  alive  in  famine
,1.  2.  the  Lord  will  preserve  him  and  k.  him  alive
KEEP  charge.

v.  8.  35.  and  k.  the  charge  of  the  L.  1  Kings  2.  3.
tm.  1.  53.  Levites  k.  charge  of  the  tabei  nacle  of
testimony,  18.  4.  I  31.  30.  1  Chron.  23.  32.

7.  they  shall  k.  his  c.  8.  26.  1 18.  3.  Dent.  1 1.  l.
they  snail  k.  the  charge  of  the  children  of  Israel
!.  k.  c.  of  the  sanctuary,  18.  5.  I  Chron.  23.  32.
tk.  44.  16.  to  minister  tome,  and  k.  my  charge
ch  3.  7.  if  thou  wilt  k.  my  charge  then  shalt  judge

KEEP  commandments.

od.  16.  28.  how  long  refuse  ye  to  k.  my  command.

).  6.  shewing  mercy  to  them  that  k.  my  com¬
mandments,  Deut.  5.  10.  1  7.  9.  Dan.  9.  4.
v.  22.  31.  therefore  shall  ye  k.  my  commandments
and  do  them.  Dent.  4.  40.  |  6.  17.  17.  n.

1.  3.  if  ye  k.  my  commandments.  Dent.  11.  22.

I  19.  9.  I  28.  9.  I  30.  10.  1  Kings  3.  14.
nt.  4.  2.  that  ye  may  k.  the  c.  of  the  Lord
29.  O  that  they  would  fear  me  and  k.  my  c.

2.  know  whether  thou  wouldest  k.  his  command.

•  thou  shalt  k.  the  command.  11.  1,  8. 1  13.  4,  18.

l.  1.3.  doth  Lord  require  him  to  k.  c.  27. 1.  |  30.  16.

’.  17.  thou  hast  avouched  the  Lord  to  k.  his  c.

8.  Lord  avouched  thee,  that  thou  shouldest  k.  c.

•.  45.  because  thou  hearkenedst  not  to  k.  his  c.

h.  22.  5.  take  heed  to  k.  c.  to  cleave  to  him
tings  2. 3.  keep  the  charge  of  the  Lord  to  k.  his  c.

12.  k.  my  c.  2  Kings  17.  13.  Prov.  4.  4.  j  7.  2.

58.  that  he  may  incline  our  hearts  to  k.  his  c.

L  let  your  heart  be  perfect  to  k.  his  command.

C.  if  ye  will  not  k.  my  c.  I  will  cut  off  Israel
38.  if  thou  wilt  k.  my  c.  Neh.  1.  9.  John  15.  10.
a«gj23.  3.  made  a  covenant  to  k.  c.  2  Chr.  34.  31.
'hr.  28.  8.  k.  and  seek  for  all  the  c.  of  the  Lord
'•  ,19.  give  to  Solomon  a  perfect  heart  to  k.  thy  c.
78. 7.  not  forget  the  works  of  God,  but  k.  his  c.

9.  60.  I  made  haste  and  delayed  not  to  k.  thy  c.

15.  depart  ye  evil  doers,  for  1  will  k.  c.  of  my  G.
ov.  3. 1.  forget  not  my  law,  let  thy  heart  k.  my  c.

20.  my  son,  k.  thy  father's  c.  forsake  not  the  law

8-  2.  1  counsel  thee  to  k.  the  king’s  command.

■  13.  fear  God  and  k.  hisc.  this  is  the  whole  duty
.'t.  19.  17. if  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  k.  the  c.

n-  15.  if  ye  love  me,  k.  my  commandments
im.  6.  14.  that  thou  k.  this  c.  without  spot
00  'Y5' we  know  that  we  know  him  if  we  k.  his  c.
W’hat  we  ask  wre  receive,  because  we  k.  his  c.

1  •  -en  love  God  and  k .  his  command .

•  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  Xr.  his  com.
v-  12. 17.  make  war  with  her  seed  which  k.  c.

•  12.  nere  are  they  which  k.  the  c.  of  God

See  Covenant.

,  KEEP  passover.

m.  12.  48.  when  a  stranger  will  k.  p.  to  I.ord,  let

his  males  he  circumcised,  then  let  him  k.  p.
m-  9.  2.  let  the  children  of  lrsael  k.  passover  in
its  season,  4.  Dent.  16.  1.  2  Kings  23.  21.
iC°n  un°t  th epass.  ||  10.  yet  he  shall  k.pass.

'■  a‘L the  ordinances  of  passover  they  shall  Xr.  it
’•  and  forbeareth  to  k.  the  pass,  that  soul  cut  off
/  o  stranger  will  k.  th e  passover  to  the  Lord
‘ci’  come  to  k.  the  p.  to  the  God  of  Israel
"  ,aKen  counsel,  to  k.  pass,  in  the  second  month

10.  all  the  service  was  prepared  to  k.  passover
t.  nor  did  all  the  kings  of  Israel  k.  sucli  a  pass.

'  "0. 18.  *ay  to  him,  I  will  k.  pass,  at  thy  house
,  K  E'EP  silence.

'L  19.  who  said,  k.  silence,  and  all  went  out
43.  2*..  k.  not  silence,  83.  1.  ||  50.  3.  come  and
7  .  not  k.  silence

jii  i3  *irne  *°  ^ •  silence  and  a  time  to  speak
’1  ,  •  *’*•  before  me,  O  islands,  and  let  people

■  6  *•  not  r.  1|  65.  6.  behold,  I  will  not  k.  s.

*• the  elders  of  daughter  of  Zion  k.  silence
5.  13.  the  prudent  shall  k.  silence  in  that  time
1 , 'n  his  temple,  let  the  earth  k.  silence
!  ,  *‘*•28.  let  him  k.  st/ence  in  the  church

•  let  your  women  k.  silence  in  the  churches


1  .  KEEP  statutes.

Exod.  15.  26.  if  thou  wilt  k.  all  his  statvtes.  Dent.
,  -o  ,  .  „  »■  ln-  t  Kings  9.  4.  |  11.  38.

Lev.  18.  5.  you  shall  k.  my  statutes  and  judgments,
r,  .  26-  j  ly-  1  20-  22.  Ezek.  44.  24.

Dene.  4.  40.  thou  shalt  k.  therefore  Ins  sta.  26.  16.
6.  2.  that  thou  mightest  fear  Lord  to  k.  his  statutes
26.  17 .  thou  hast  avouched  the  Lord  to  k.  his  seat.
28.  45.  thou  hearkenedst  not  to  k.  his  statutes

1  A  mgs  11.  33.  not  walked  in  my  ways  to  k.  my  seat
Ps.  119.  5.  that  my  ways  were  directed  to  k.  thy  st\

8.  I  will  X-.  thy  seat,  forsake  me  not  utterly,  145.
Ezek.  18.  21.  if  the  wicked  will  turn  and  k.  my  seat.
KEEPER.

Gen.  4.  2.  Abel  was  a  k.  of  sheep  ||  9.  my  brother’s  X-.
39.  21.  Lord  gave  Joseph  favour  in  sight  of  the  k.

22.  the  X-.  of  lhe  prison  committed  to  Joseph

23.  the  X-.  ot  the  prison  looked  not  to  any  thing
t  Sam.  17.  20.  David  left  the  sheep  w  ith  a  k.

22.  David  left  his  carriage  in  the  hand  of  the  k.
28.  2.  I  will  make  the  k.  of  mine  head  for  ever

2  Kings  22.  14.  X\  of  the  wardrobe,  2  Chr.  34.  22.
Neh.  2.  8.  Asaph  the  k.  of  the  king’s  forest

3.  29.  after  him  Shemaiah  k.  of  the  east  gate
Esth.  2.  3.  custody  of  Hege  k.  of  women,  8,  15.

Job  27.  18.  and  as  a  booth  that  the  k.  makefh
Psal.  121.  5.  Lord  is  thy  k.  the  Lord  is  thy  shade
Cant.  1.  6.  they  made  me  the  k.  of  the  vinevards
*  35.  4.  M  aaseiah  the  son  ot  Shal  I  uni  Jc,  ot  the  door
Acts  16.  27.  and  the  k .  of  the  prison  awaking
36.  the  X-.  ot  the  prison  told  this  saying  to  Paul
.i9.  t  35.  the  city  of  the  Ephesians  is  a  temple  k
KEEPERS.

2  Kings  11.  5.  a  third  part  shall  he  k.  of  'the  watch
1  Chron.  9.  19.  k.  of  the  gates  of  the  tabernacle
Eccl.  12.  3.  when  theXr.  of  the  house  tremble
Cant.  5.  7.  the  k.  took  away  my  vail  from  me

8.  11.  Solomon  let  out  the  vineyard  to  X:.

Jer.  4. 17.  asL  of  the  field  are  they  against  her
Ezek.  40.  45.  k.  of  charge  of  house,  46.  |  44.  8,  14.
Mat.  28.  4.  for  tear  of  him  the  X-.  did  shake
Acts  5.  23.  the  X\  standing  before  the  doors
12. 6.  k.  kept  the  prison  ||  19.  Herod  examined  the  k.
1  it.  2.  5.  to  be  discreet,  chaste,  Xr.  at  home,  good
See  Door.

KEEPEST.

1  Kings  8.  23.  w'ho  k.  covenant  and  mercy  with  thy
servants,  2  Chron.  6.  14.  Neh.  9.  32.
Acts  21.  24.  thou  w  alkest  orderly  and  k.  the  law
KEEPE1I1.

Exod.  21. 18.  and  he  died  not,  but  k.  his  bed
Dent.  7.  9.  faithful  G.  which  k.  covenant,  Neh.  1.  5.

1  Sam.  16. 11.  and  behold  he  k.  the  shtep
Job  33.  18.  he  k.  back  his  soul  from  the  pit
Psal.  34.  20.  he  k.  all  his  bones,  none  is  broken
121.  3.  he  that  k.  thee  will  not  slumber,  4.

146.  6.  Lord  God,  which  k.  truth  for  ever
Prov.  2.  8.  he  k.  the  paths  of  judgment

10.  17.  he  is  in  the  way  of  life  that  k.  instruction

13.  3.  he  that  k.  his  mouth  k.  his  life,  21.  23.

6.  righteousness  Xr.  him  upright  in  the  way

16. 17 .  that  k.  his  way  perserveth  his  soul,  19.  16.

19.  8.  he  that  k.  understanding  shall  find  good
24.  12.  that  k.  thy  soul,  doth  not  he  know

27.  18.  whoso  k.  the  fig  tiee  shall  eat  fruit

28.  7.  wdioso  k.  the  law  is  a  wise  son,  but  he

29.  3.  that  k.  company  with  harlots,  spendeth

11.  but  a  w  ise  man  k.  it  in  till  afterwards

18.  but  he  that  k.  the  law,  happy  is  he

Eccl.  8.  5.  k.  the  commandments  shall  feel  no  evil
Isa.  26.  2.  that  nation  which  k.  truth  may  enter  in
56.  2.  that  k.  the  sabbath  from  polluting  it,  and  k.

his  hand  from  doing  any  evil,  6.
Jer .  48. 10.  cursed  be  he  that  X-.  back  his  sw'ord
Lam.  3.  28.  he  sitteth  alone  and  k.  silence
Hab.  2.  5.  he  is  a  proud  man,  neither  k.  at  home
Luke  11.  21.  when  a  strong  man  armed  k.  his  palace
John  7.  19.  and  yet  none  of  you  k.  the  law
9-  16.  is  not  of  God,  because  he  k.  not  the  sabbath

14.  21.  that  hath  my  commandments  and  k.  them
24.  he  that  loveth  me  not,  k.  not  my  sayings

1  John  2.  4.  that  saith.  1  know  him,  and  X-.  not
5.  whoso  k.  his  word,  in  him  is  love,  3.  24.

5.  18.  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  k.  himself
Lev.  2.  26.  he  that  overcometh  and  k.  my  w'orks
16.  15.  blessed  is  he  that  k.  his  garments,  lest  he
22.7.  blessed  is  he  that  k.  the  sayings  of  this  book
KEEPING.

Exod.  34.  7.  the  Lord  God  k.  mercy  for  thousands
Num.  3.  28.  Xr.  the  charge  of  the  sanctuary,  38.

Deut.  8. 11.  forget  not  God,  in  not  Xr.  his  commands
1  Sam.  25.  16.  while  we  were  with  them  X-.  sheep
1  Chron.  12.  +  36.  of  Asher  k.  rank,  forty  thousand
Neh.  12.  25.  were  porters  k.  the  ward  at  the  gates
Psal.  19.  11.  and  in  X-.  of  them  is  great  reward
Prov.  4.  +  23.  keep  thy  heart  above  al  1  k.  out  of  it
Ezek.  17.  14.  by  k.  of  his  covenant  it  might  stand
Dan.  9.  4.  O  Lord  the  great  God,  X-.  covenant
Luke  2.  8.  there  were  shepherds  k.  watch  by  night
1  Cot.  7.  19.  but  k.  the  commandments  of  God
lleh.  4.  +  9.  there  remaineth  a  Xr.  of  a  sabbath
1  Pet.  4.  19.  commit  the  k.  of  tlieir  souls  to  him
KEPT.

Gen.  26.  5.  Abraham  k.  my  charge  and  my  laws
29.  9.  Rachel  came  with  sheep,  for  she  X-.  them
39.  9.  neither  hath  he  X-.  back  any  thing  from  me
42. 16.  send  one,  and  ye  shall  be  k.  in  prison
Exod.  3.  1.  now  Moses  k.  the  fiock  of  Jethro

16.  23.  lay  up  for  you,  to  be  k.  till  the  morning
32.  pot  of  manna  to  be  k.  for  generations,  33,  34.

21.  29.  if  the  owner  hath  not  k.  him  in,  36.

Num.  5.  13.  and  it  be  k.  close,  and  she  be  defiled
9.  5.  they  k.  the  passover  ||  7.  why  are  we  k.  back

19.  then  Israel  k.  the  charge  of  the  Lord,  23.

17.  10.  bring  Aaron’s  rod  to  be  k.  for  a  token

19.  9.  water  of  separation  k.  for  the  congregation
24.  11.  Lord  hath  X\  thee  back  from  honour
31.  47.  which  X-.  the  charge  of  the  tabernacle
Deut.  32.  10.  he  k.  them  as  the  apple  of  his  eye
33.  9-  they  observed  thy  word,  k.  thy  covenant
Josh.  5.  10.  Israel  k.  the  passover  in  Gilgal
14.  10.  the  Lord  hath  k.  me  alive  these  45  years


Josh.  22.  2.  you  have  k.  all  that  Moses  commanded

3.  have  k.  the  charge  of  commandment  of  Lord
Keith  2.  23.  so  she  X-.  fast  by  the  maidens  of  Bo.iz

1  Sam.  9.  24.  to  this  time  it  hath  I  een  k.  for  thee
13. 13.  hast  not  k.  the  commandment  of  Lord  14

17.  34.  David  said,  thy  servantXa  his  father  s  sheep

21.  4.  have  k.  themselves  at  least  from  women
25. 21 .  David  said,  surely  in  vain  have  I  k.  all  that

33.  blessed  be  thou  who  hast  X-.  me  this  day

34.  the  Lord  God  hath  k.  me  from  evil,  39
26.  15.  why  hast  thou  not  k.  thy  lord  the  king  ?

16.  because  ye  have  notX-.  your  master,  the  Lord’®

2  Sam.  13.  34.  the  young  man  that  k.  the  watch

22.  22.  1  have  k.  the  w'ays  of  the  Lord,  Ps.  18.  21.
24.  I  have  k.  myself  from  iniquity,  Psal.  18*.  23^
44.  thou  hast  k.  me  to  be  head  of  the  heathen

1  Kings  2.  43.  v  hy  hast  thou  not  k.  the  oath  of  L.
3.  6.  thou  hast  k.  for  him  this  great  kindness

8.  24.  who  hast  X-.  with  thy  servant  David  my  father

that  thou  promisedst  him,  2  Chron.  6.  15*.
11. 10.  Solomon  k.  not  that  the  Lord  commanded

11.  and  thou  hast  notX-.  my  covenant  and  statutes
34.  because  David  Xr.  my  commandments,  14.  8.

13.  21.  man  of  God  from  Judah  not  k.  commandm.
20.  t7.  1  k.  not  back  silver  and  gold  from  him

2  Kings  1 7 .  19.  Judah  X\  not  the  commandments

18.  6.  Ilezekiah  k.  the  commandments  of  the.  Lord

1  Chron.  10.  13.  the  word  of  the  Lord  Saul  k.  not
12. 1.  while  David  k.  himself  close  because  of  Sauk

2  Chron.  7.  8.  Solomon  k.  the  feast  seven  days

9.  for  they  k.  the  dedication  of  the  altar  seven  days.

30.  21.  k.  teast  of  unleavened  bread,  Ezra  6.  22.

23.  and  they  k.  other  seven  days  with  gladness

34.  21.  because  our  fathers  have  not  Xr.  tne  word

35.  1.  Josiahand  Israel  k.  the  passover,  17,  19

18.  there  was  no  passover  like  to  that  k.  in  Israel
Ezra  3.  4.  they  Xr.  also  the  feast  of  tabernacles

6.  16.  k.  the  dedication  of  this  house  with  joy

19.  the  children  of  the  captivity  X\  the  passover
Neh.  1.  7.  wre  have  not  k.  the  commandments

8.  18.  and  they  Xr.  the  feast  seven  days

9.  34.  nor  our  priests  nor  our  fathers  k.  thy  law
Esth.  9.  28.  that  these  days  of  Purim  should  be  k
Job  23.  11.  his  ways  have  I  k.  and  not  declined

28.  21.  and  Xr.  close  from  the  fowls  of  the  air
Ps.  17.  4.  I  have  k.  me  from  paths  of  the  destroy  e*
30.  3.  hast  X'.  me  alive  ||  42.  4.  that  k.  holy  day
78.  10.  they  k.  not  the  covenant  of  God
56.  they  tempted  God,  and  Xr.  not  his  testimonie®
99.  7-  they  Xr.  his  testimonies  and  the  ordinance
119.  22.  tor  I  have  k.  thy  testimonies,  I67.

55.  1  have  k.  thy  law  |‘  56.  I  k.  thy  precepts,  168
67.  now  have  1  k.  thy  word  ||  158.  k.  not  thy  word
Eccl.  2. 10.  what  my  eyes  desired  1  k.  not  from  them
5.  13.  riches  Xr.  for  the  owners  thereof  to  their  hurt
Cant.  1.  6.  but  my  own  vineyard  have  I  not  k.

Isa.  30.  29.  a  song  as  w  hen  a  holy  solemnity  is  k.
Jer.  16.  11.  not  k.  my  laws  J|  35. 18.  k.  his  precept®
Ezek.  5.  7-  nor  have  Xr.  my  judgments,  20.  21.

18.  9.  hath  k.  my  judgments  ||  19.  Xr.  my  statutes
44.  8.  ye  have  not  X-.  the  charge  of  my  holy  things

15.  that  X-.  the  charge  of  my  sanctuary,  48.  11.
Dan.  5.  19.  whom  he  would,  he  k.  alive,  he  set  up

7.  28.  but  I  k.  the  matter  in  my  heart

llos.  12. 12.  Israel  served  fora  wife,  and  k.  sheep
Amos  1.  11.  and  Edom  k.  his  wrath  for  ever

2.  4.  Judah  hath  notX-.  his  commandments
Mic.  6.  16.  for  the  statutes  of  Omri  are  Xr.

Mai.  2.  9.  according  as  ye  have  not  k.  my  ways,  3. 7.

3.  14.  what  profit  that  we  have  k.  his  ordinance
Mat.  8.  33.  and  they  that  k.  the  swine  fled,  and  told

13.  35.  will  utter  things  which  have  been  k.  secret

14.  6.  but  when  Herod’s  birth  day  was  X-.

19. 20.  these  have  1  L  from  my  youth,  Luke  18.  21.
Mark  4. 22.  nor  was  any  thing  k.  secret,  but  that  i9

9.  10.  and  they  k.  that  saying,  Lul e  9.  36.

I.uke  2.  19.  Mary  k.  these  things  in  her  heart,  51.

8.  29.  and  lie  was  X\  bound  with  chains,  in  fetters

19.  20.  thy  pound,  which  I  have  k.  in  a  napkin
John  2.  10.  but  thou  hast  k.  the  good  wine  till  now

12.  7.  against  day  of  my  burying  hath  she  k.  this

15.  10.  as  I  have  Xr.  my  father's  commandments

20.  if  they  have  Xr.  my  saying,  they  will  keep

yours.

17.  6.  thine  they  were,  and  have  k.  thy  word

12.  k.  in  thy  name,  those  thou  gavest  me  1  have  k.

18.  16.  and  spake  to  her  that  X\  the  door

17.  then  saith  thedamsel  that  k.  the  door  to  Peter
Acts  5.  2.  sold,  and  k.  back  part  of  the  price
7.  53.  who  received  the  law',  and  have  not  X-.  it

9.  33.  Eneas  had  Xr.  his  bed  eight  years,  was  sick
12.  5.  Peter  was  Xr.  in  prison  H  6.  k.  the  prison

20.  20.  I  k.  back  nothing  profitable  to  you

22.  20.  and  k.  the  raiment  of  them  that  slew  him

23.  35.  and  he  commanded  him  to  be  k.  25.  21.

25.  4.  Festus  answered  that  Paul  should  be  k.

27. 43.  the  centurion  Xr.  them  from  their  purpose
28.  16.  Paul  dwelt  with  a  soldier  that  k.  him

Rom.  16.  25.  mystery  k.  secret  since  the  world  began
2  Cor.  11.  9.  I  k.  myself  from  being  burdensome
32.  the  governor  x.  the  city  with  a  gaiTison
Gal.  3.23.  before  faith  came,  w'e  were  k.  under  law
2  Tim.  4. 7.  have  finished  my  course,  I  k.  the  faith
Ileb.  11.  28.  through  faith  Moses  k.  the  passover
Jam.  5. 4.  the  hire  that  is  Xr.  back  by  fraud,  crieth

1  Pet.  1.  5.  who  are  X-.  by  the  power  of  G.  thro'  faith

2  Pet.  3.7.  w'hich  by  the  same  word  are  k.  in  store
Jude  6.  the  angels  which  k.  not  their  first  estate
Rev.  3.8.  hast  k.  my  word,  and  not  denied  my  name

10.  because  thou  hast  k.  the  word  of  my  patience

KEPT  silence.

Job  29. 21.  men  gave  ear,  and  X-.  sil.  at  my  counsei

31.  34.  did  1  fear  a  great  multitude,  that  I  Xr.  sil.
Psal.  32.  3.  when  I  X-.  silence,  my  bones  waxeil  old
50.  21.  these  things  hast  thou  done,  and  I  X-.  silence
Acts  15.  12.  then  all  the  multitude  Xr.  silence
22.  2.  that  he  spake  1 1  ebrew,  they  Xr.  the  more  sil.
KERCHIEFS.

Ezek.  13.18.  makeX-.  on  head  of  everystature  to  hunl

21.  your  X-.  also  will  1  tear,  and  deliver  my  people

KERNELS.

Num.  6.  4.  eat  nothing  from  the  Xr.  even  to  the  husk

259


K  I  L


K  1  L


KIN


KETTLE.

*  Sam.  2. 14.  priest's  servant  struck  into  the  k.  or  pot
K  E  Y

Signifies,  [1]  An  instrument  to  open  a  lock,  Judg.

3.  25.  [2]  The  gift  and  ability  to  interpret

the  scripture ,  whereby  an  entrance  is  made  to
the  knowledge  thereof,  Luke  11.  52.  [3]  I  he
whole  administration  of  the  Gospel  with  rejer-
ence  both  to  the  publication  of  its  doctrine,  and
the  dispensing  the  ordinances  of  it,  Mat.  16.  19-
It  is  an  emblem  of  government  and  power,  Isa.
22.  22.

Judg.  3.’ 25.  therefore  they  took  a  k.  and  opened
Jsa.  22.  22.  the  k.  of  house  of  David  lay  on  Eliakim
Luke  11.  52.  ye  have  taken  away  the  k.  of  knowledge
Rev.  3.7.  saith  he  that  hath  the  k.  of  David
9. 1.  to  him  was  given  the  k.  of  bottomless  pit,  20. 1.
ivEYS.

Mat.  16.  19.  I  will  give  the  k.  of  kingdom  of  heaven
R*v  1  18.  and  have  the  k.  of  hell  and  of  death
KICK.

t  Ham.  2.  29.  wherefore  k.  ye  at  my  sacrifice  ?

Acts  9. 5.  it  is  hard  to  X-.  against  the  pricks,  26. 14.
KICKED.

Deut.  32.  15.  but  Jeshurun  waxed  fat  and  k.

KID.

Gen.  37.  31.  Joseph’s  brethren  killed  a  k.  of  the  goats

38.  17.  I  will  send  thee  a  k.  from  the  tipck
Exod.  23. 19.  thou  shalt  not  see  the  k.  in  his  mother’s
milk,  34.  26.  Deut.  14.  21.
Lev.  4.  23.  he  shall  bring  his  offering,  a  k.  ot  the
goats,  28.  1  9.  3.  Ezek.  43.  22.  |  45.  23.

5.  6.  bring  a  lamb  or  a  k.  for  a  sin  offering

23.  19.  then  ye  shall  sacrifice  one  k.  of  the  goats,
Rum.  7-  16,  22,  28.  I  15.  24.  1  28.  15,  30.

|  29.  5,  11,  16,  19,  25.  Ezek.  45.  j  15.

Num.  15.  11.  thus  shall  it  be  done  for  a  lamb  ora*.
Judg.  6.  19.  Gideon  went  and  made  ready  a  k.

13.  19.  so  Manoah  took  a  k.  with  a  meat-offering

14.  6.  Samson  rent  lion  as  a  k.  nothing  in  his  hand

15.  1.  Samson  visited  his  wife  with  a  k.  and  said
1  Sam.  16.  20.  Jesse  took  an  ass  laden,  and  a  k.

Isa.  11. 6.  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the  k.
Luke  15.  29.  and  yet  thou  never  gavest  me  a  k.

KIDS.

Gen.  27.  9.  fetch  me  from  thence  two  k.  of  goats

16.  she  put  the  skins  of  the  k.  on  his  hands
Lev.  16.  5.  he  shall  take  two  k.  of  the  goats
Numl.  87.  the  k.  of  the  goats  for  sin  offering  twelve
1  Sam.  10.  3.  one  carrying  three  k.  another  bread
1  Kings  20.  27.  pitched  like  two  little  flocks  ot  k.
g  Chron.  35.7.  Josiah  gave  lambs  and  k.  for  offerings
Cant.  1.  8.  feed  thy  k.  beside  the  shepherds’  tents
KIDNEYS

S  enify,  [1]  Those  natural  parts  of  the  body  in  man
or  beast,  Lev.  3.  4.  [2]  The  kernels  of  wheat,
Deut.  32.  14.  [3]  The  innermost  affections  and

desires,  Psal.  16. 7-

Fxod.  29. 13.  thou  shalt  take  the  two  k.  and  burn
22.  Lev.  3.4,  10,  15.  I  4.9.  17.4.  |  8.  16,  25.
Lev.  9.  10.  but  fat  and  k.  burn  on  the  altar,  19.
Deut.  32.  14.  rams,  with  the  fat  of k.  of  wheat
Isa.  34.  6.  the  swrord  of  Lord,  with  fat  ot  k.  ot  rams
KILL

Is  spoken.  (I)  Of  God,  who  has  many  ways  to
deprive  of  life,  Lam.  2.  21.  (II)  Of  man.  [1]
Lawfully,  when  a  malefactor  is  put  to  death  by
the  sentence  of  a  magistrate,  Deut.  13.  9.  [2]
Unlawfully,  2  Sam.  13.  28.  1  Kings  21.  19.
(Ill)  Of  wrath,  which  kills  men,  either  as  it
preys  upon  their  spirits,  and  wasteth  them  in¬
wardly  ;  or,  as  it  prompts  them  to  such  rash,
furious,  and  wicked  actions,  as  may  procure
their  death  ;  or,  as  it  provoketh  God  to  cut  them
off,  Job  5.  2.  (IV)  Of  the  desire  of  the  sloth¬
ful,  which  erposeth  him  to  extreme  want,  and
so  to  death  :  or  puts  him  upon  such  wicked  courses
to  supply  his  wants,  as  bring  him.  to  an  untimely
death,  Prov.  21.  25.  (V)  Of  the  letter,  that  is,

the  law  which  is  said  to  kill,  because  it  accus-
eth,  condemneth,  and  denounceth  the  wrath  of
God  against  men,  for  not  doing  their  duty,  but
gives  no  strength  for  the  doing  of  it,  2  Cor.

&en.  4.  15.  lest  any  finding  Cain,  should  k.  him
12.  12.  they  will  k.  me,  but  will  save  thee  alive
26!  7.  lest  the  men  of  the  place  should  k.  me
27.  42.  doth  comfort  himself,  purposing  to  k.  thee
37.  21.  Reuben  heard  and  said,  let  us  not  k.  him
43.  t  16.  bring  these  men  home,  k.  a  killing
Exod.  1.  16.  if  it  be  a  son,  then  ye  shall  k.  him

2.  14.  intendest  thou  to  k.  me  ?  Acts  7.  28

4.  24.  the  Lord  met  him,  and  sought  to  k.  him
12.  6.  the  congregation  of  Israel  shall  k.  it,  21.

16.  3.  to  k.  this  whole  assembly  with  hunger

17.  3.  to  k.  us  and  our  children  with  thirst

20.  13.  thou  shalt  not  k.  Deut.  5.  17.  Mat.  5.  21.

Rom.  13.  9.

22. 1.  if  a  man  steal  an  ox  or  sheep,  and  k.  it

24.  and  I  will  k.  you  with  the  sword

29.  11.  k.  bullock  before  the  Lord,  Lev.  1. 5. 1  4. 4.
20.  then  shalt  k.  the  ram,  and  take  ot  his  blooa
Lev.  1.  11.  shall  k.  it  on  the  side  ot  the  altar,  16.  15.

3.  2.  and  k.  it  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle
8.  he  shall  k.  it  before  the  tabernacle,  13.

4.  24.  he  shall  k.  it  in  the  place  where  they  k.

33.  where  they  k.  the  burnt-offering,  7-  2.

14.  13.  where  he  shall/!,  the  sin  offering,  16.  11.

25.  he  shall  k.  the  lamb  of  the  trespass  offering
50.  and  he  shall  k.  the  one  of  the  birds

20.  4.  giveth  his  seed  to  Molech,  and  k.  him  not
16.  thou  shalt  k.  the  woman  and  the  beast
22.  28.  whether  cow  or  ewe,  ye  shall  not  k.  it
Num.  11.  15.  if  thou  deal  thus  with  me,  k.  me
14.  15.  if  thou  k.  all  this  people  as  one  man
16.  13.  hast  brought  us  to  k.  us  in  the  wilderness
22.  29.  were  a  sword,  for  now  would  1  k.  thee
31.  17.  now  k.  every  male  among  the  little  ones,
(.  every  woman  that  hath  known  man
35.  27.  and  the  revenger  of  blood  k.  the  slayer
Deut.  4.  42.  who  should  k.  his  neighbor  unawares
L2.  15.  thou  mayest  k.  and  eat  flesh  in  thy  gates
260


Deut.  12.  21.  then  thou  shalt  k.  of  thy  herd  and  flock
13.  9.  but  thou  shalt  surely  k.  him,  thine  hand
16.  +  5.  not  k.  the  passover  within  thy  gates
32.  39. 1  k.  and  I  make  alive,  I  wound  and  I  heal
Judg.  9.  +  24.  which  strengthened  his  hands  to  k.

13.  23.  if  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  k.  us,  would  not
15. 13.  saying,  surely  we  will  not  k.  thee

16.  2.  morning,  when  it  is  day,  we  shall  k.  him

20.  31.  they  began  to  k.  as  at  other  times,  39.

1  Sam.  16.  2.  if  Saul  hear  it,  he  will  k.  me

17.  9.  if  he  be  able  to  k.  me,  then  we  will  serve

19. 1.  to  all  his  servants,  that  they  should  k.  David
2.  saying,  Saul  my  father  seeketh  to  k.  thee

17.  w hy  should  1  k.  thee  ||  24.  10.  bade  me  k.  thee
30.  15.  swear  thou  wilt  neither  k.  me,  nor  deliver

2  Sam.  13.  28.  I  say,  smite  Ainnon,  then  k.  him

14.  7.  that  we  may  k.  him,  for  life  of  his  brother
32.  if  any  iniquity  be  in  me,  let  him  k.  me

21.  4.  nor  for  us  shalt  thou  k.  any  man  in  Israel

1  Kings  11.  40.  Solc-mon  sought  to  k.  Jeroboam
12.  27.  and  they  shall  k.  me,  and  go  again  to  Rehob.

2  Kings  5.  7.  am  1  a  God,  to  k.  and  make  alive  t
7.  4.  and  if  they  k.  us,  we  shall  but  die

11.  15.  him  that  followeth  her  k.  with  the  sword
2  Chron.  35.  6.  k.  the  passover,  sanctity  yourselves
Esth.  3. 13.  letters  were  sent  by  posts  to  k.  all  Jews
7.  t  4.  are  sold,  that  they  should  destroy  and  k.
Eccl.  3.  3.  a  time  to  k.  and  a  time  to  heal
Isa.  14.  30.  and  I  will  k.  thy  root  with  famine
29  1.  add  ye  year  to  year,  let  them  k.  sacrifices
Ezek.  34.  3.  ye  k.  them  that  are  ted,  but  feed  not
Mat.  5.  21.  who  shall  k.  shall  be  in  danger  otjudgm.
10.  28.  fear  not  them  which  k.  the  body ,  Luke  12.  4.
17.  23.  and  they  shall  k.  him,  Mark  9. 31. 1  10.  34.

21.  38.  this  is  the  heir,  come  let  us  k.  him,  Mark

12.  7.  Luke  20.  14.

23.  34.  and  some  of  them  ye  shall  k.  and  crucify
24. 9.  then  shall  they  deliv.  you  up,  and  shall  k.  you
26.  4.  they  might  take  Jesus  by  subtilty  and  k.  him
Mark  3.  4.  is  it  lawful  to  save  life,  or  to  k.  ?

10.  19.  do  not  k.  Luke  18.  20.  Jam.  2.  11.

Luke  13.  31.  depart  hence,  for  llerod  will  k.  thee

15.  23.  and  bring  hither  the  fatted  calf  and  k.  it

22. 2.  the  priests  and  scribes  sought  how  to  k.  him
John  5.  18.  Jews  sought  the  more  to  k.  him,  7*  1.

7. 19.  keepeth  the  law,  why  go  ye  about  to  k.  me  ?

20.  thou  hast  a  devil,  who  goeth  about  to  k.  thee  r

25.  is  not  this  he  whom  they  seek  to  k.  ?

8. 22.  will  he  k.  himself?  ||  37.  ye  seek  to  k.  me,  40.

10.  10.  the  thief  cometh  not  but  to  steal  and  k.
Acts  9. 23.  the  Jews  took  counsel  to  k.  Paul,  26.  21.

24.  watched  the  gates  day  and  night  to  k.  him
10. 13.  came  a  voice  to  him,  rise,  Peter,  k.  and  eat
21.  31.  as  they  went  about  to  k.  him,  tidings
23. 15.  we,  ere  he  come  near,  are  ready  to  X-.  him
25.  3.  laying  wait  in  the  way  to  k.  him
27.42.  the  soldiers’  counsel  was  to  k.  the  prisoners
Jam.  2. 11.  if  thou  commitno  adultery,  yet  it  thou  k.

4  2.  ye  k.  and  desire  to  have,  and  cannot  obtain
Rev.  2.  23.  and  l  will  k.  her  children  with  death
6.  4.  and  that  they  should  k.  one  another

8.  power  was  given  them  to  k.  with  the  sword
9.  5.  it  was  given  that  they  should  not  k.  them

11.  7.  the  beast  shall  overcome  them  and  k.  them

KILLED.

Gen.  31.  t  54.  then  Jacob  k.  beasts  on  the  mpunt
37.  31.  they  took  Joseph’s  coat,  and  k.  a  kid
Exod.  21.  29.  the  beast  hath  k.  a  man  or  woman
Lev.  4. 15.  the  bullock  shall  be  k.  before  the  Lord
6.  25.  in  the  place  where  the  burnt  9ft ering  is  k.

shall  the  sin  offering  be  k.  before  the  I  <ord
8. 19.  the  ram  he  k.  ||  14.  5.  one  of  the  birds  be  k.
14.  6.  shall  dip  them  in  the  blood  ot  the  bird  k.
Rum.  16.  41.  ye  have  k.  the  people  ot  the  Lord
31.  19.  whosoever  hath  k.  any  person,  purify

1  Sam.  24.  11.  the  skirt  of  thy  robe,  and  k.  thee  not

25. 11.  take  my  flesh  1  have  k.  ror  my  shearers

28.  24.  the  woman  hasted  and  k.  the  calf

2  Sam.  12.  9.  thou  hast/:.  Uriah  with  the  sword

21.  17.  Abishai  smote  the  Philistine  and  k.  him

1  Kings  16.  7.  like  Jeroboam,  and  because  he  k.  him

10.  Zimri  went  and  smote  Ela,  and  k.  him
21.  19.  hast  thou  k.  and  also  taken  possession  ?

2  Kings  15.  25.  Pekah  k.  Pekahiah,  and  reigned

1  Chron.  19. 18.  David  k.  Shophach  the  captain

2  Chron.  18. 2.  Ahab  k.  sheep  and  oxen  in  abundance

26.  3.  he  slew  those  that  had  k.  the  king  his  father

29.  22.  so  they  k.  the  bullocks,  rams,  lambs
24.  the  priests  k.  them  and  made  reconciliation

30.  15.  k.  the  passover,  35.  1,  11.  Ezra  6.  20.

Psal.  44.  22.  for  thy  sake  are  we  k.  all  the  day  long
Prov.  9.  2.  hath  k.  her  beasts,  mingled  her  wine
Lam.  2.  21.  thou  hast  k.  and  not  pitied
Mat.  16.  21.  k.  and  raised  again,  Marks.  31. 19.  31.

21.  35.  beat  one,  and  k.  another,  Mark  12.  5.

22.  4.  my  oxen  and  my  tatlings  are  k.  all  things

23.  31.  are  children  ot  them  that  k.  the  prophets
Mark  6.  19.  and  llerodias  would  have  k.  him

12.  8.  k.  him  and  cast  him  out  ot  the  vineyard

14.  12.  the  first  day,  when  they  k.  the  passover
Luke  11.  47.  and  your  fathers  k.  them,  48.

12. 5.  after  he  hath  k.  hath  power  to  cast  into  hell

15.  27.  thy  father  hath  k.  the  fatted  calf,  30.

22.  7.  the  day  when  the  passover  must  be  k.

Acts 3. 15.  k.  the  Prince  of  life  ||  12.2.  he  k.  James
16.27.  he  drew  his  sword,  and  w  ould  ha\  e  k.  himself

23.12.  not  eat  nor  drink  till  they  had  k.  Paul
27.  taken  of  the  Jews,  and  should  have  been  k.

Rom.  8.  36.  for  thy  sake  we  are  k.  all  the  day  long

11.  3.  Lord,  they  have  k.  thy  prophets,  and  digged
2  Cor.  6.  9.  as  dying  we  live,  as  chastened  and  not  k.
1  Thess.  2. 15.  who  k.  the  Lord  Jesus  and  prophets
Jam.  5.  6.  ye  have  condemned  and  k.  the  just
Rev.  6.  11.  brethren  who  should  be  k.  as  they  were

9.  18.  by  these  three  w  as  the  third  part  of  men  k.
20.  the  rest  which  were  not  k.  by  these  plagues

11.5.  if  any  hurt  him  he  must  in  this  manner  be  A:.
13. 10.  killeth  with  sword,  must  be  k.  with  sword

15.  not  worship  image  of  the  beast,  should  be  k.
KILLEDST.

Exod.  2.  14.  to  kill  me,  as  thou  k.  the  Egyptian
1  Sam.  24.  18.  forasmuch  as  thou  k.  me  not


KILLEST.

Mat.  23.  37.  that  X.  the  ^roj^hets,  Luke  13.  34.

Lev.  17.  3.  who  k.  an  ox,  goat  in  the  camp,  or  k.  c
24.  17.  he  that  k.  any  man  shall  surely  be  put

death,  21.  Rum.  35.  3

18.  he  that  k.  a  beast,  shall  make  it  good,  21.
Rum.  35. 11.  the  slayer  may  flee,  who  k.  any  pers<
unawares,  15.  Deut.  19.  4.  Josh.  20.  3,

1  Sam.  2.  6.  the  Lord  k.  and  maketh  alive
17.  25.  man  who  k.  him,  king  will  enrich,  26,  27
Job  5.  2.  for  w  rath  k.  the  foolish  man
24.  14.  the  murderer  k.  the  poor  and  needy
Prov.  21.  25.  the  desire  of  the  slothful  k.  him
Isa.  66.  3.  he  that  k.  an  ox,  as  if  he  slew  a  man  -


John  J6.  2.  who  k.  you,  think  he  doeth  Godservif,
2  Cor.  3.  6.  for  the  letter  k.  the  Spirit  giveth  life  i


~Rev.  13.  10.  he  that  k.  with  sword  must  be  Lillet.
KILLING.

Gen.  43.  1 16.  bring  these  men  home,  kill  a  k.
Judg.  9.  24.  which  aided  him  in  k.  his  brethren  ,
2  Chr.  30.  17.  the  Levites  had  charge  ot  k.  passovj
Psal.  42.  t  10.  as  with  a  k.  mine  enemies  repioa*
Prov.  9.  t  2.  wisdom  hath  killed  her  k.

Isa.  22.  13.  slaying  oxen,  and  k.  sheep,  eating  fit
Hos.  4. 2.  by  swearing,  lying,  k.  and  stealing
Mark  12.  5.  sent  others,  beating  some,  and  k.  son
KIN .

Lev.  18.  6.  none  shall  approach  to  any  near  of  k

20.  19.  for  he  uncovereth  his  near  k.

21.  2.  for  his  k.  that  is  near,  he  may  be  defiled
25.  25.  if  any  of  his  k.  come  to  redeem  it,  49.

Ruth  2.  20.  N  aomi  said,  the  man  is  near  of  k.  to  1
2  Sam.  19.  42.  the  king  is  near  of  k.  to  us
Mark  6.  4.  a  prophet  is  not,  but  among  his  own  X
KIND,  Substantive.

Gen.  1.  11.  fruit-tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  k.  lj
12.  herb  yielding  seed  after  his  k.  and  the  tree  1
21.  the  waters  brought  forth  abundantly  after  th,j
k.  and  every  winged  fowl  after  his  i

24.  earth,  and  beast  of  earth  after  their  k.  j

25.  God  made  the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  k\
6. 20.  of  fowls  after  their  k.  and  of  cattle  after  the

k.  every  creeping  thing  after  his.
7. 14.  beast,  cattle,  and  fowl,  after  their  k.

Lev.  11.  14.  in  abomination,  vulture,  kite,  ravdj
hawk  after  his  k.  15,  16, 19.  Deut.  14.  !

29.  the  weasel,  mouse,  and  tortoise  after  his  X-.j
19. 19.  not  let  thy  cattle  gender  with  a  diverse  X

1  Chron.  28.  14.  for  all  instruments  of  every  k.
Reh.  13.  20.  sellers  of  all  k.  of  ware,  lodged
Eccl.  2.  5.  1  planted  trees  of  all  k.  of  fruits
Ezek.  27.  12.  the  multitude  of  all  k.  of  riches  i
Mat.  13.  47.  like  a  net,  and  gathered  of  every  k,
17.  21.  X.  goeth  notout  but  by  prayer,  Mark  9.'

1  Cor.  15.  39.  there  is  one  k.  of  flesh  of  men  i
Jam.  1.  18.  that  we  should  be  aX.  of  first-fruits

3.  7.  for  every  k.  of  beasts  and  birds  is  tamed  I
KIND.

2  Chron.  10.  7.  saying,  if  thou  be  k.  to  this  peoph
Luke  6.  35.  God  is  k.  to  the  unthankful  and  evil

1  Cor.  13.  4.  charity  suffereth  long  and  is  k.

Eph.  4.  32.  be  k.  one  to  another,  tender-hearted

KINDS.

Gen.  8. 19.  whatsoever  creepeth  after  their  k.

2  Chron.  16.  14.  filled  with  divers  k.  of  spices
Jer.  15.  3.  1  will  appoint  over  them  tour  k.
Ezek.  47. 10.  their  fish  shall  be  according  to  then!
Dan.  3.  5.  dulcimer,  and  all  k.  ot  music,?,  10- 1

1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  divers  k.  ot  tongues
14.  10.  there  are,  it  may  be,  so  many  X:.  of  void

KINDLE.

Prov.  26.  21.  a  contentious  man  to  k.  strife
Isa.  9.  18.  it  shall  X-.  in  the  thickets  of  the  forest
10.  16.  k.  a  burning  like  the  burning  of  fire

30.  33.  the  breath  of  the  Lord  doth  k.  it
43.  2.  nor  shall  the  flame  Xr.  upon  thee

Jer.  33.  18.  never  want  a  man  to  k.  meat-often
Obad.  18.  fire  and  flame  shall  k.  in  them
KINDLED.

Gen.  39.  19.  Potiphar’s  wrath  was  k.

Lev.  10.  6.  bewail  the  burning  the  Lord  hath  A.
Rum.  11.  33.  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  was  k.  Di¬
ll.  17.  2  Kings  22.  13,  17.  Psal.  ICO.

2  Sam.  22.  9.  coals  were  k.  by  it,  Psal.  18.  8.

Job  19.  11.  he  hath  also  k.  his  wrath  against  me  ;

32.  2.  then  was  X\  the  wrath  of  Elihu,  against  >
w  as  his  wrath  X.  because  he  justified  hull
3.  against  his  three  friends  was  his  wrath  k.o.
42.  7.  my  wrath  is  k.  against  thee,  and  friends
Psal.  2.  12.  when  his  w  rath  is  k.  but  a  little
124.  3.  when  their  wrath  is  k.  against  us
Isa.  50.  11.  walk  in  the  sparks  that  ye  have  X.
Jer.  44.  6.  wrath  was  k.  in  the  cities  of  Judah
Ezek.  20.  48.  shall  see,  that  I  the  Lord  have  k.  1
Ilos.  11.  8.  my  repentings  are  k.  together
Luke  12.  49.  what  w  ill  1,  if  it  be  already  k.

See  Anger,  Fire.

KIND  LETH .

Job  41.  21.  his  breath  k.  coals,  a  flame  goeth
Isa.  44.  15.  yea,  he  k.  it,  and  baketh  bread
Jam.  3.  5.  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  k.

KINDLY.  „

Gen.  24.  49.  if  you  will  deal  k.  with  me,  4< .  zv
34.  3.  Shechem  spake  k.  to  the  damsel
50.  21.  Joseph  spake  k.  to  his  brethren
Josh.  2. 14.  that  we  w  ill  deal  X.  and  truly  with  t-
Ruth  1.  8.  the  Lord  deal  k.  with  you,  as  ye  de

1  Sam.  20.  8.  thou  shalt  deal  k.  w  ith  thy  serval

2  Kings  25.  28.  spake  k.  to  Jehoiachin,  Jer.  5-.  •
Rom.  12.  10.  be  k.  affectioned  one  to  another

KINDNESS.  4  m

Gen.  20.  13.  this  is  thy  X.  thou  shalt  shew  to  m<
21.  23.  according  to  the  k.  1  have  done  to  tnee
24. 12.  O  Lord,  shew  k.  to  my  master  Abranan
14.  know  that  thou  hast  shewed  k.  to  my  mas

39.  t  21.  the  Lord  extended  k.  to  Joseph

40.  14.  think  on  me,  and  shew  k.  1  pray  thee
Josh.  2.  12.  swear,  since  1  have  shewed  you  *•  :

ye  will  also  shew  k.  to  my  fathei  s  h<  ,
Judo.  8.  35.  nor  shew-ed  k.  to  the  house  of  ■,«ruVl '
Ruth  2.  20.  not  left  off  his  k.  to  living  and  dead


K  I  N


K  I  N


uih  3.  10.  thou  hast  showed  more  X.  in  latter  end
Ssm.  15.  6.  ye  shewed  k.  to  Israel  when  they  came
;0. 14.  thou  shalt  shew  me  the  k.  of  the  Lord

15.  thou  shalt  not  cut  off  thy  k.  from  my  house
Sam.  2.  5.  ye  have  shewed  this  k.  unto  your  lord

6.  now  Lord  shew  k.  to  you,  I  also  will  requite

you  this  k.  because  ye  have  done  this  thing
!.  8.  against  Judah  shew  k.  to  the  house  of  Saul
).  l.  that  I  may  shew  him  k.  for  Jonathan’s  sake

3.  any,  that  I  may  shew  the  k.  of  God  to  him

7.  1  will  surely  shew  thee  k.  for  Jonathan’s  sake
0.  2.  1  will  shew  k.  to  Hanun  son  of  Nahash,  as

his  father  shewed  k.  to  me,  1  Chron.  19.  2.

6.  17.  Absalom  said,  is  this  thy  k.  to  thy  friend  r
Kings  2. 7.  but  shew  k.  to  the  sons  of  Barzillai

I.  6.  thou  hast  kept  for  David  this  great  k.

Chr.  24. 22.  Joash  remembered  not  k.  of  Jehoiada
Teh.  9- 17-  hut  thou  art  a  God  gracious,  of  great  k.
sth.  2.  9.  and  the  maiden  obtained  k.  of  him
f  17.  she  obtained  k.  more  than  all  the  virgins
‘sal.  31.  21.  he  hath  shewed  me  his  marvellous  k.
.17.  2.  for  his  merciful  k.  is  great  toward  us

19.  76.  let  thy  merciful  k.  be  for  my  comfort
,41.  5.  let  the  righteous  smite  me,  it  shall  be  a  k.
'ror.  19. 22.  the  desire  of  a  man  is  his  k.  and  a  poor

II.  26.  and  in  her  tongue  is  the  law  of  k.

ta.  54.  8.  with  everlasting  k.  w  ill  I  have  mercy  on

10.  but  my  k.  shall  not  depart  from  thee
>7.  +  1.  men  of  k.  taken  away,  none  considering
tr.  2.  2.  I  remember  thee,  tne  k.  of  thy  youth
f os.  6. 1 4.  vour  k.  as  a  morning  cloud  and  early  dew
lel  2. 13.  for  he  is  gracious,  of  great  k.  Jonah  4.  2.
\cts  28.2.  the  barbarous  peop.  shewed  us  no  little  k.
Cor.  6.  6.  by  pureness,  by  long  suffering,  by  k.
ph.  2.  7-  in  his  k.  toward  us  through  Christ  Jesus
ol.S.  12.  put  on  k.  humbleness  of  mind,  meekness
Tim.  5.  f  4.  let  them  learn  to  shew  k.  at  home
'it.  3.  4.  after  the  k.  of  God  our  Saviour  appeared
Pet.  1.  7.  to  godliness  brotherly  k.  to  k.  charity
Lu-m^-KINDNESS.

'sal.  17.  7-  shew  thy  marvellous  loving-k.  92.  2.

!6.  3.  thy  l.-k.  is  before  mine  eyes,  I  have  walked
(6.  7.  how  excellent  is  thy  loving-k.  O  God !

10.  0  continue  thy  loving-k.  to  them  that  know

10.  10.  I  have  not  concealed  thy  lov.-k.  and  truth

11.  let  thy  loving-k.  continually  preserve  me

12.  8.  yet  the  Lord  will  command  his  loving-k.

18.  9.  we  have  thought  of  thy  loving-k.  O  God

>1. 1.  have  mercy  on  me  according  to  thy  loving-k.
S3.  3.  because  thy  lovitig-k.  is  better  than  life
>9. 16.  hear  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  loving-k.  is  good
18. 11.  shall  thy  lov.-k.  be  declared  in  the  grave  ?

19.  33.  my  lov.-k.  will  I  not  utterly  take  from  him
)2.  2.  to  shew  forth  thy  loving-k.  in  the  morning
:03. 4.  who  crowneth  thee  with  lov.-k.  and  mercies
107.  43.  they  shall  understand  lov.-k.  of  the  Lord
il9.  88.  quicken  me  after  thy  loving-k.  159.

149.  hear  my  voice  according  to  thy  loving-k.

.38.  2.  I  will  praise  thy  name  for  thy  loving-k.

43.  8.  cause  me  to  hear  thy  loving-k.  in  the  morn.
st.  9.  24.  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving-k.
.6. 5.  I  have  taken  away  my  peace,  even  loving-k.

11.  3.  therefore  with  loving-k.  have  I  drawn  thee

12.  18.  thou  shewest  loving-k.  unto  thousands
Its.  2.  19.  I  will  betroth  thee  to  me  in  loving-k.

Lomw^-KIN  DN  ESSES.

'sal.  25.  6.  remember  Ld.  thy  mercies  and  loving-k.
19.  49.  Lord,  where  are  thy  former  loving-k.  ?

> a.  63.  7-  I  will  mention  the  loving-k.  of  the  Lord,
according  to  the  multitude  of  his  loving-k.
KINDRED.

en.  12. 1.  God  said,  get  thee  from  thy  k.  Acts  7.  3.
U.  4.  go  to  k.  and  take  a  wife  to  my  son,  38.  40.

7.  Lord  who  took  me  from  my  k.  shall  send

41.  when  thou  comest  to  my  k.  if  they  give  not
>1.  3.  the  Lord  said,  return'to  thy  X.  13. 1  32.  9.

13.  7.  the  man  asked  us  straitly  of  our  X.

>um.  10.  30.  I  will  depart  to  my  own  land  and  k.
°-'h.  6.  23.  and  they  brought  out  all  her  k.
uth  2.  3.  Boaz  was  of  the  k.  of  Elimelech,  3.  2.
Chron.  12.  29.  of  Benjamin  the  k.  of  Saul  3000
■sth.  2.  10.  Esther  shewed  not  her  people  or  k.  20.

I.  6.  how  endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my  k.
oh  32.  2.  the  wrath  of  Elihu,  of  the  k.  of  Ram.
tek.  11.  15.  men  of  thy  k.  said,  get  far  from  the  L.
■tike  1.  61.  none  of  thy  k.  called  by  this  name

to  4.  6.  as  were  of  the  k.  of  the  nigh  priest
’•  13.  Joseph’s  k.  was  made  known  to  Pharaoh

14.  called  his  father  Jacob  to  him  and  all  his  k.
19.  the  same  dealt  subtilly  with  our  X.

J, m.  5.  t  8.  provide  not  for  those  of  his  own  k.

9.  redeemed  us  out  of  every  X.  and  tongue
t4.  6.  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  to  every  k.
m  KINDREDS.

y*.  16.  28.  give  to  the  I.ord,  ye  k.  Psal.  96.  7.

27.  all  k.  of  nations  shall  worship  bef.  thee
to  3.  25.  shall  all  the  k.  of  the  earth  be  blessed
to  1.7.  and  all  X.  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because
aK*tot  multitude  of  all  k.  stood  before  throne
}*•  '•  of  *•  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days

13.  7.  and  power  was  given  him  over  all  k.

.  ,  KINE

s  tasen,  [1]  Properly,  for  cows,  Deut.  7-  13.  [2]
figuratively,  for  the  proud,  wealthy,  and  potent
rulers  of  Israel,  Amos  4.  1.

«  15.  forty  k.  ten  bulls,  a  Present  to  Esau
it.  1.  there  came  up  seven  well-favoured  k.  18.
o«S*uen  other  k-  came  «ut  of  the  river,  4,  19,  20.
-o.  the  seven  good  k.  are  seven  years
'  t,’e  seven  thin  ill-favoured  k.  are  seven  years
x>  1  Vi  •  he  will  bless  the  increase  of  thy  k.

, '  4-  blessed  shall  be  the  increase  of  thy  X.
i,  cun>ed  shall  be  the  increase  of  thy  k.

10  '1 ,  l  sha11  n°f  leave  the  increase  of  thy  k.

-.  14.  butter  of  k.  milk  of  sheep,  fat  of  lambs
irw  X4  '*'°  milch  k.  and  tie  the  X.

•?"  II 12.  the  X.  took  the  straight  way

clave  the  wood  of  cart,  and  offered  the  k.

29.  butter,  and  cheese  of  k.  for  David
ms  1-  bear  this  word,  ye  k.  of  Bashan
.  .  KING

«mnes>,  J  sovereign  prince,  or  chief  ruler  in  a


kingdom,  Prov.  8. 15.  It  is  applied,  [1]  To  God,
the  si.preme  Euler  and  Governor  of  the  world,
Psal.  44.  4.  [2]  To  Christ,  the  King  and  Headof
his  church,  Psal.  2.  6.  |  45.  1.  [3]  To  all  real

Christians  who  are  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  glory,
and  are  enabled  to  war  against,  and  at  last  to  con¬
quer,  sin,  Satan ,  and  all  their  spiritual  enemies,
Rev.  1.  6.  [4]  To  the  devil.  Rev.  9.  11.

Gen.  14.  18.  Mechizedeck  k.  of  Salem,  Heb.  7.  1.

36.  31.  kings  that  reigned  in  Edom,  before  there

reigned  any  k.  over  Israel,  1  Chron.  1.43.
Exod.  1.  8.  there  arose  up  a  new  k.  over  Egypt
Num.  23.  21.  the  shout  of  a  k.  is  among  them
£4.  7.  and  his  k.  shall  be  higher  than  A  gag
Deut.  17. 14.  shalt  say,  I  will  setaX.  over  me

15.  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  set  him  X.  over  thee

28.  36.  Ld.  snail  bring  thee  and  thy  X.  to  a  nation

33.  5.  and  he  was  X.  in  Jeshurun  when  the  heads

Judg.  8. 18.  each  resembled  the  children  of  a  X.

9.  8.  the  trees  went  to  anoint  a  X.  over  them

17.  6.  in  those  days  no  X.  in  Israel,  but  every
man  did  right  in  his  own  eyes,  18.  1. 1  19.  1.

I  21.  25.

1  Sam ..  2.  10.  Lord  shall  give  strength  to  his  X.

8.  5.  go  make  us  a  X.  to  judge  us  like  the  nations

6.  give  us  a  X.  ||  9.  shew  the  manner  of  the  X.  11.

18.  ye  shall  cry  out  on  that  day  because  of  your  X.

19.  we  will  have  aX.  ||  22.  and  make  them  a  X.

20.  that  our  X.  may  judge  us,  and  go  before  us

10.  19.  ye  said  unto  him,  nay,  but  set  a  X.  over  us

24.  the  people  shouted,  and  said,  God  save  the  X.

2  Sam.  16.  16.  2  Kings  11.  12.  2  Chr.  23. 11.

12.  1.  behold,  I  have  made  a  X.  over  you

2.  and  now  behold,  the  X.  walketh  before  you

12.  ye  said  unto  me,  nay,  but  a  X.  shall  reign
over  us,  when  the  Lord  your  God  was  your  X.

13.  behold  the  X.  whom  ye  have  chosen

17.  that  your  wickedness  is  great  in  asking  a  X.

19.  have  added  to  our  sins  this  evil,  to  ask  us  a  X.

25.  ye  shall  be  consumed,  both  you  and  your  X.

15.  1.  the  Lord  sent  me  to  anoint  thee  to  be  X.

23.  he  hath  rejected  thee  from  being  X.  26.

16.  1.  I  have  provided  me  a  X.  among  his  sons

19.  4.  let  not  the  X.  sin  against  his  servant  David

20.  5.  I  should  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  X.  at  meat
22.  15.  let  not  the  X.  impute  any  thing  to  hisserv.

24.  20.  I  know  that  thou  shalt  surely  be  X.

25.  36.  Nabal  held  a  feast  like  the  feast  of  a  k.

29.  8.  against  the  enemies  of  my  lord  the  X.

2  Sam.  2.  9.  lie  made  Ish-bosheth  X.  over  Gilead

3.  36.  what  the  X.  did,  pleased  all  the  people

37.  that  it  was  not  of  the  X.  to  slay  Abner

5.  12.  the  Lord  had  established  him  X.  over  Israel

11.8.  there  followed  him  a  mess  of  meat  from  X.

12.7.  thussaith  Lord,  I  anointed  thee  X.  over  Isr.

13.  13.  therefore  I  pray  thee,  speak  to  the  X.

14.  9.  and  the  X.  and  his  throne  be  guiltless

17.  as  an  angel  of  G.  so  is  my  Lord  the  X.  19.  27.

15.  2.  that  had  a  controversy,  came  to  the  X.

3.  there  is  none  deputed  of  the  X.  to  hear  thee
19-  abide  with  the  X.  for  thou  art  a  stranger

21.  in  what  place  my  lord  the  X.  shall  be

16.  9.  why  should  this  dead  dog  curse  the  X.  ?

17.  2.  people  shall  flee,  I  will  smite  the  X.  only

18.  13.  there  is  no  matter  hid  from  the  X.

19.  9.  the  X.  saved  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies
11.  the  speech  of  all  Israel  is  come  to  the  X.

19.  that  the  X.  should  take  it  to  his  heart

22.  I  know  that  I  am  this  day  X.  over  Israel
28.  what  right  have  I  to  cry  any  more  to  the  X.  ?

42.  because  the  X.  is  near  of  kin  to  us

43.  and  said,  we  have  ten  parts  in  the  X.

22.  51.  he  is  the  tower  of  salvation  for  his  X.

24.  23.  these  did  Araunah  as  a  X.  give  to  the  X.

1  Kings  1 . 5.  then  Adonijah  said,  I  will  be  X.

35.  for  Solomon  shall  be  X.  in  my  stead

2.  18.  well,  I  will  speak  for  thee  to  the  X.

38.  as  the  X.  hath  said,  so  will  thy  servant  do

3.  7.  hast  made  thy  servant  X.  instead  of  David
22.  thus  the  women  spake  before  the  X.

28.  Israel  heard  the  judgment  the  X.  judged

8.  62.  the  X.  and  all  Israel  offered  sacrifice

10.  3.  there  was  not  any  thing  hid  from  the  X.

1L  26.  Jeroboam  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the  X.
37.  thou  shalt  reign  and  shalt  be  X.  over  Israel

14.  2.  Ahijah,  who  told  me  I  should  be  X.

14.  the  Lord  shall  raise  him  up  a  X.  over  Israel
16. 16.  Zimri  conspired  and  hath  slain  the  X.

21.  10.  thou  didst  blaspheme  God  and  the  X.

22. 13.  prophets  declare  good  to  the  X.  2  Chr.  18. 12.
47;  there  was  then  no  X.  in  Edom,  a  deputy  wasX.

2  Kings  1.11.0  man  of  God,  X. said,  comedown,  9,

4.  13.  wouldest  thou  be  spoken  for  to  the  X.  ?

7.  2.  then  a  lord  on  whose  hand  the  X.  leaned

8.  3.  she  went  to  cry  to  the  X.  for  her  house
13.  the  Lord  hath  shewed  that  thou  shalt  be  X.

20.  Edom  revolted,  made  a  X.  over  themselves
10.  5.  sent,  saying,  we  will  not  make  any  X.

11 . 8.  and  be  with  the  X.  as  he  goeth  out  and  cometh

17.  Jehoiada  made  a  covenant  between  the  Lord
and  the  X.  between  the  X.  also  and  the  people

14.  5.  had  slain  the  X.  his  father,  2  Chron.  25.  3.

22.  9.  brought  the  X.  word,  20.  2  Chron.  34. 16,  28.
10.  Shaphan  read  it  before  the  X.  2  Chron.  34.  18.

25.  6.  they  took  the  X.  and  brought  him,  Jer.  52.  9.

1  Chron.  4.  23.  they  dwelt  with  the  X.  for  his  work
24.  6.  Shemaiah  wrote  them  before  the  X.

29.20.  bowed  and  worshipped  the  I.ord  and  the  X.

2  Chron.  2.  1 1.  he  hath  made  thee  X.  over  them,  9.  8.

10.  15.  so  the  X.  hearkened  not  to  the  people

11.  22.  for  he  thought  to  make  him  X.

24.  21.  they  stoned  him  at  the  command  of  the  X.

25.  16.  art  thou  made  of  the  X.  counsel  ?  forbear
Ezra  4.  12.  be  it  known  to  the  X.  that,  13.  1  5.  8.

6.  10.  and  pray  for  the  life  of  X.  and  sons

7.  26.  who  will  not  dp  the  law  of  the  X.

27-  which,  hath  put  in  the  X.  heart  to  beautify

8.  22.  to  require  of  the  X.  a  band  of  soldiers
Neh.  1.11.  tor  I  was  the  X.  cup-bearer

2.  19.  what  do  ye  ?  will  ye  rebel  against  the  k.?

6.  6.  mayest  be  their  X.  according  to  these  words

7.  to  preach,  saying,  there  is  a  X.  in  Judah


KIN

Neh.  13.  26.  yet  among  many  nations  was  there  n«
X.  like  him,  God  made  him  X.  overall  Israel
Esth.  4. 16.  so  will  1  go  in  unto  the  X.  if  I  perish

6.  6.  whom  the  X.  delighteth  to  honour,  7.

7.  8.  as  the  word  went  out  of  the  X.  mouth

9.  for  Mordecai,  who  had  spoken  good  for  the  X.
Job  15.  24.  shall  prevail,  as  a  X.  ready  to  the  battle

18.  14.  it  shall  bring  him  to  the  X.  of  terrors

29.  25.  I  sat  chief,  and  dwelt  as  a  X.  in  the  army

34.  18.  is  it  fit  to  say  to  the  X.  thou  art  wicked  -1
41.  34.  he  is  a  X.  over  all  the  children  of  pride
Psal.  2.  6.  I  set  my  X.  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion

5.  2.  hearken  to  my  cry,  my  X.  and  my  God,  84.  3.

10.  16.  the  Lord  is  X.  for  ever  and  ever,  29. 10.

18.  50.  great  deliverance  giveth  he  to  his  X.

20..9.  let  the  X.  hear  us  when  we  call

21.  1.  the  X.  shall  joy  in  thy  strength,  O  Lord

7.  for  the  X.  trusteth  in  the  L.  and  not  be  moved
24.  7.  and  the  X.  of  glory  shall  come  in,  9.

8.  who  is  X.  of  glory  ?  the  Lord  strong  and  mighty

10.  the  Lord  ofhosts  he  is  the  X.  of  glory

33. 16.  no  X.  saved  by  the  multitude  of  an  host

44.  4.  art  my  X.  O  God,  command  deliverances

45.  1.  of  the  things  I  have  made  touching  the  X.

11.  so  shall  the  X.  greatly  desire  thy  beauty
14.  she  shall  be  brought  to  the  X.  in  raiment

47.  6.  sing  praises  to  our  X.  ||  7.  God  is  the  X.

61.  6.  thou  wilt  prolong  the  X.  life  and  years
63.  11.  but  the  X.  shall  rejoice  in  God,  every  one
68.  24.  they  have  seen  the  goings  of  my  God,  my  X
72.  1.  give  the  X.  thy  judgments,  O  God
74.  12.  God  is  my  X.  of  old,  working  salvation

89. 18.  the  holy  One  of  Israel  is  our  X.

98.  6.  make  a  joyful  noise  before  the  Lord  the  X.

99.  4.  the  X.  strength  also  loveth  judgment

lu5.  20.  the  X.  sent  and  loosed  him,  let  him  go  free
149.  2.  let  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  X.
Pro v.  14.  28.  in  multitude  of  people  is  the  X.  honour

35.  the  X.  favour  is  toward  a  wise  servant
20.  28.  mercy  and  truth  preserve  the  X.

22.  11.  for  grace  of  his  lips,  the  X.  shall  be  his  friend

24.  21.  my  son,  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  X.

25.  5.  take  away  the  wicked  from  before  the  X.

30.  27.  the  locusts  have  no  X.  yet  go  they  forth

31.  and  a  X.  against  whom  there  is  no  rising  up

Eccl.  2. 12.  w  hat  can  the  man  do  that  cometh  after  X.
5.  9.  the  X.  himself  is  served  by  the  field

8.  4.  where  the  word  of  a  X.  is,  there  is  power

10.  16.  woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  X.  is  a  child
17-  blessed  when  thy  X.  is  the  son  of  no  les

20.  curse  not  the  X.  no,  not  in  thy  thought
Cant.  1.  4.  theX.  brought  me  into  his  chamber

12.  while  the  X.  sitteth  at  his  table,  my  spikenard
3. 11.  behold  X.  Solomon  with  the  crown

7.5.  the  X.  is  held  in  the  galleries

Isa.  6.  5.  mine  eyes  have  seen  theX.  the  L.  ofhosts

7.  6.  let  us  set  a  X.  in  the  midst  of  it,  son  of  1  abeal

8.  21.  curse  their  X.  and  their  God,  and  look  up

19.  4.  and  a  fierce  X.  shall  rule  over  them
23. 15.  according  to  the  days  of  one  X.

30.  33.  for  Tophet,  yea,  fi  r  the  X.  it  is  prepared

32.  1.  behold,  a X.  shali  reign  in  righteousness

33.  17.  thine  eyes  shall  see  the  X.  in  his  beauty
22.  the  Lord  isourX.  he  will  3ave  us

41.  21.  bring  your  reasons,  saith  the  X.  of  Jacob
43.  15. 1  am  the  Creator  of  Israel  your  X.

57.  9.  and  thou  wentest  to  the  X.  with  ointment
Jer.  4.  9.  that  the  heart  of  the  X.  shall  perish
8.  19.  is  not  the  L.  in  Zion  ?  is  not  her*.  in  her  ?

10.  10.  the  Lord  is  the  true  God,  an  everlasting  X.

13. 18.  say  to  the  X.  and  queen,  humble  yourselves

23.5.  a  X.  shall  reign  and  prosper  and  execute
29. 1(7.  thus  saith  the  1  ord,  of  the  X.  that  sitteth
38.  5.  for  the  X.  is  not  he  that  can  do  any  thing

25.  declare  what  hast  said  to  the  X.  the  X.  to  thee

46.  18.  as  I  live,  sallli  tne  k.  whose  name  is  me

Lord  of  hosts,  48.  15.  I  51  57.
49.  1.  why  doth  their  X.  inherit  Gad  and  dwell  in
38.  I  will  destroy  from  thence  the  X.  and  princes
Lam.  2.6.  the  Lord  hath  despised  the  X.  and  priest
Ezek.  7.  27.  the  X.  shall  mourn,  and  the  princ  e
17-  12.  hath  taken  theX.  and  princes  iheieof

13.  hath  taken  of  the  X.  seed  and  made  a  covenant

16.  where  the  X.  dwelleth  that  made  him  X.

26.7.  I  will  bring  a  X.  of  kings  from  the  north
37  .  22.  and  one  X. shall  be  X.  to  them  all,  24.

Dan.  2.  10.  there  is  no  X.  asked  such  things  at  any

11.  there  is  none  that  can  shew  it  before  the  X.

24.  bring  me  in  before  the  X.  and  I  will  shew  the  X.

3.  13.  they  brought  these  men  before  the  X.

4.  24.  decree  which  is  come  upon  my  lord  the  X.

31.  while  the  word  was  in  the  X.  mouth

37. 1  praise,  extol,  and  honour  the  X.  of  heaven

5.  5.  tne  X.  saw  the  part  of  the  hand  that  wrote
6.6.  the  princes  assembled  together  to  the  X.

8.  23.  a  X.  of  fierce  countenance  shall  stand  up
11  -  3.  and  a.  mighty  X.  shall  stand  up  to  rule

36.  the  X.  shall  do„according  to  his  will

Hos.  3.  4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  a  X.
5.  Israel  shall  seek  the  Lord,  and  David  their  X.
5.  13.  then  Ephraim  sent  to  X.  Jareb,  10.6.

7.  3.  they  malce  the  X.  glad  with  their  wickedness
5.  in  the  day  of  our  X.  princes  made  him  sick

10.  3.  we  have  no  X.  what  then  should  a  X.  do  ;
7.herX.  is  cut  off,  as  the  foam  upon  the  water

11.  5.  but  the  Assyrian  shall  be  his  X.  because
13.  10.  I  will  be  thyX.  give  me  a  X.  and  princes

11.  I  gave  thee  a  X.  in  mine  anger  and  took  him
Amos  1 .  15.  and  their  X.  shall  go  into  captivity
7- 13.  for  it  is  the  X.  chapel,  the  X.  court
Mic.  2. 13.  and  their  X.  shall  pass  before  them

4.  9.  why  dost  thou  cry  •  is  there  no  X.  in  thee  ?
Zech.  9.  5.  and  theX.  shall  perish  from  Gaza

9.  behold  thy  X.  cometh  to  thee,  Mat.  21.  5.

11.  6.  will  deliver  every  one  into  the  hand  of  his  X.

14. 9.  the  Lord  shall  be  X.  over  all  the  earth
16.  every  one  shall  even  go  up  to  worship  the  X.  17.
Mat.  18.  23.  kingdom  likened  to  a  certain  X.  22.  2.

22.  11.  when  the  X.  came  in  to  see  the  guests
Mark  6.  25.  she  came  with  haste  to  the  X  and  asked
Luke  14. 31 .  what  X.  goeth  to  war  against  another  X.
19-  38.  blessed  be  the  X.  that  cometh  in  name  of  L.

261


K  1  N


K  I  N


K  I  N


Liu t-g  23.  2.  saying,  that  he  himself  is  Christ,  a  X.
John  6.15.  to  make  him  a  k.  ||  12.  15.  thy  k.  cometh

18.  37.  Pilate  said  to  him,  art  thou  a  X.  then  ?

19. 12.  whosoever  maketh  himself  a  k.  speaketh  a g.

14.  Pilate  saith  to  the  .lews,  behold  your  k.

15. 'shall  l  crucify  your  k.  ?  have  no  k.  but  Cesar
Acts  7.18.  till  another  k.  arose,  who  knew  not  Joseph

13.  21.  afterward  they  desired  a  k.  and  God  gave
17-  7-  saying,  that  there  is  another  k.  one  Jesus

26.  26.  for  the  k.  knoweth  of  these  things
l  Tim.  1.  17.  now  to  the  k.  eternal,  immortal

6.  15.  who  is  the  k.  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords
lleh.  11.  2.3.  not  afraid  of  the  k.  commandment

27.  Moses  not  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  k.

1  Pet.  2.13.  whether  to  the  k.  as  supreme,  or  govern.

17.  honour  all  men,  fear  God,  honour  the  k.

Rev.  9.  11.  they  had  a  k.  over  them,  the  angel

15.  3.  just  are  thy  ways,  thou  K.  ot  saints

17.  14.  he  is  Lord  of  lords,  K.  of  kings,  19.  16.
KING  of  the  Amorite*,  See  Sihon.

KING  of  Assyria.

2  Kings  15.  19.  Pul  the  k.  of  Assy,  came  agst.  land
20.  Menahem  exacted  money  to  give  k.  of  Assy.

16.  18.  turned  he  from  house  of  Lord  to  k.  of  Assy.

17.6.  in  ninth  year  of  HosheaX.  of  A.  took  Samaria
18. 11.  k.  of  Assy,  did  carry  away  Israel  to  Assy.

19.  speak,  thus  saith  great  king  the  k.  of  Assyria
3.3.  delivered  his  land  out  of  hand  of  X.  of  Assyria

19. 32.  saith  L.  concerning  k.  of  Assyria,  Isa.  : 37.33.
Ezra  6.  22.  turned  the  heart  ot  k.  of  Assy,  to  them
Isa.  7. 17.  Lord  shall  bring  upon  thee  the  k.  of  Assy.

20.  shall  shave  by  k.  of  Assyria  the  head  and  hair
Jer.  50.  17-  first  the  k.  oj  Assyria  hath  devoured  him

18.  I  will  punish  Baby,  as  l  punished  k.  of  Ass.
Nah.  3.18.  thy  shepherds  slumber,  O  k. of  A. thy  nob.

See  Bashan,  Babylon,  David.

KING  of  Egypt.

Exod.  1.  17.  midwdves  did  not  as  k.  of  Egypt  comm.

3.  19.  I  am  sure  the  k.  of  Egypt  wifi  not  let  you  go
6. 13.  the  L.  gave  them  a  charge  to  the  k.  of  Egypt
2  Kings  24. 7.  the  k.  of  E.  came  not  again  any  more,
had  taken  all  that  pertained  to  the  k.  of  Egypt
2  Chr.  12.  2.  k.  of  Eg.  came  up  against  Jerusalem
36.  3.  the  k.  of  Egypt  put  him  down  at  Jerusalem

4.  the  k.  of  Egypt  made  Eliakim  his  brother  king
Isa.  36.6.  so  is  the  k.  of  Egypt  to  all  that  trust  in  him

See  Pharaoh.

See  Great,  House,  Jews.

KING  of  Israel.

1  Sam.  24. 14.  after  whom  is  the  k.  of  Isr.  come  out
26.  20.  for  the  k.  of  Isr.  is  come  out  to  seek  a  flea

2  Sam.  6.  20.  how  glorious  was  the  k.  of  Israel  to-day

1  KingsZO.  31.  let  11s,  l  pray  thee,  go  out  to  k.  of  Isr.

22.  31.  fight  not,  save  only  with  the  k.  of  Israel

32.  they  said,  surely  it  is  X.  of  Israel,  2  Chr.  18.  31.

2  Kings  6.  11.  shew  me  which  of  us  is  for  k.  of  Israel

16. 7.  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  X.  of  Israel

2  Chr.  18.  30.  fight  ye  not,  save  only  with  k.  of  Israel
32.  captains  perceived  that  it  was  not  k.  of  Israel
35.  3.  son  of  David  X.  of  Isr.  did  build,  Ezra  5. 11.
Seh.  13.  26.  did  not  Solomon  k.  of  Isr.  sin  by  these
Isa.  44.  6.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  k.  of  Israel
Ilos.  10. 15.  in  a  morning  shall  the  k.  of  Is.  be  cut  off
Zeph.  3. 15.  the  k.  of  Israel  is  in  the  midst  of  thee
Mat.  27.42.  if  he  be  k.  let  him  descend,  Mark  15.  32.
John  1.  49.  thou  art  k.of  Is.  |1  12. 13:  blessed  is  X.  of  I.
KING  of  Judah.

2  Kings  8.  16.  .Tehoshaphat  being  then  k.  of  Judah
22.  18.  but  to  k.  of  Judah  which  sent  you  to  inquire
2  Chron'.M.  26.  and  as  for  k.  of  Judah  who  sent  you
35.  21.  what  have  1  to  do  with  thee,  thou  k.  of  Jud.
Jer.  34.  4.  hear  the  word  of  the  Ld.  O  k.  of  Judah

37. 7.  thus  shall  ye  say  to  k.  of  Judah  who  scut  you

KING  of  Moah.

Sum.  23.7.  Balak  X.  of  Moah  brought  me  from  Aram
Josh.  24.  9.  the  X.  of  Moah  warred  against  Israel
Judg.  3. 14.  Israel  served  Eglon  the  X.  of  M.  18  years

11. 17.  Israel  in  like  manner  sent  to  the  X.  of  Moah

25.  art  thou  any  thing  better  than  Balak  X.  of  M.  ?

1  Sam.  12.  9.  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  X.  of  Moah

22.  4.  David  brought  father  and  mother  to  X.  of  M.

2  Kings  3. 4.  and  Mesha  X.  of  M.  was  a  sheep-master

5.  the  X.  of  Moah  rebelled  against  Israel,  7.

26.  when  the  X.  of  M.  saw  the  battle  was  too  sore
Jer.  27.  3.  send  bonds  and  yokes  to  the  X.  of  Moah

O  KING.

1  Sam.  17.  55.  Abner  said,  Ok.  1  cannot  tell

23.  20.  now,  therefore,  O  X.  come  down

26.  17.  my  lord,  O  X.  2  Sam.  14.  9,  22.  1 16.  4.

|  19.  26.  1  Kings  1.  13,  20,  24.  1  20.  4.
2  Kings  6.  12,  26.  I  8.  5.

2  Sam.  14.  4.  ihe  woman  of  Tekoah  said,  help,  O  X.

15.  34.  if  thou  say,  1  will  be  thy  servant,  O  X.

2  Citron.  25.  7.  Ok.  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go
Psal.  145.  1.  I  will  extol  thee,  my  God,  Ok.

Jer.  10.  7-  who  would  not  fear  thee,  ()  X.  of  nations  ?
Dan.  2.  4.  O  k.  live  for  ever,  3.  9.  f5.10.  r6.  2i.

29.  as  for  thee,  O  k.  H  31.  thou,  O  X.  sawest  an  image
37.  thou,  O  X.  art  a  king  of  kings,  for  God  hath*

3.  10.  thou.  Ok.  hast  made  a  decree,  that  every  man

17.  he  will  deliver  us  out  of  thy  hand,  Ok.

18.  be  it  known  to  thee,  O  X.  |l  24.  true,  O  X.

4.  22.  it  is  thou,  O  k.  ||  27.  O  X.  let  my  counsel  be
31.  saying;  O  X.  Nebuchadnez.  to  thee  it  is  spoken

5. 18.  0  thou  X.  the  most  high  God  gave  thy  father

6.  7.  shall  ask  a  petition  save  of  thee,  Ok.

8.  now,  O  X.  establish  the  decree,  and  sign  it
13.  regardeth  not  thee,  O  X.  H  15.  know,  O  k.

22.  also  before  thee,  O  X.  have  I  done  no  hurt
Acts  26. 13.  at  mid-day,  OX.  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light

19.  whereupon,  O  X.  I  was  not  disobedient

KING  of  Persia.

Ezra  A.  3.  as  Cyrus,  X.  of  Persia  hath  commanded  us

5.  even  till  the  reign  of  Darius  X.  of  Persia

7 .  Bishlam  wrote  unto  Artaxerxes  X.  of  Per.  6. 14.
9. 9.  extended  mercy  to  us  in  sight  of  the  X.  of  Per.
See  Cyrus.

KING  of  Syria.

1  n  ings 20. 20.  Benhadad  X.  of  S.  escaped  on  a  horse
22.  the  X.  of  Syria  will  come  up  against  thee

2  Kings  5.  1.  Naaman  captain  of  host  of  X.  Syria
8. 7-  X.  of  S.  was  sick  ||  9.  X  of  S.  hath  sent  me  to  thee

262


2  Kings  13. 4.  because  the  X.  of  Syria  oppressed  them
7.  for  the  X.  of  Syria  had  destroyed  them
16.  7*  save  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  X.  of  Syria
2  Chr .  16.  7.  because  thou  hastrelied  on  X.  of  Syria,
the  host  of  the  X.  of  S.  is  escaped  out  of  thy  hand
See  Benhadad,  IIazael,  Rezin.

KING  of  Tyre.

2  Sam.  5.  1 1.  Hiram  X.  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to
David,  and  they  built  him  an  house,  1  Chr.  14. 1.

1  Kings  5. 1.  the  l.  of  Tyre  sent  seivants  to  Solomon
9. 11.  Iliram the  k.of  Tyre  had  furnished  Solomon

2  Chr.  2.  3.  Solomon  sent  to  Huram  the  X.  of  Tyre
11.  Huram  the  X.  of  Tyre  answered  in  writing

KINGS.


Gen.  17.  6.  X.  shall  come  out  of  thee,  16.  1  35.  11.

36.  3*1 .  these  are  the  X.  that  reigned  in  Edom
Nurn.  31.  8.  and  they  slew  the  X.  of  Midian
Deut.  3.  21.  the  Lord  hath  done  to  these  two  X.

7.  24.  he  shall  deliver  their  X.  into  thy  hand
Josh,  10.  5.  five  X.  of  Amorit.es  gathered  together

16.  these  five  X.  fled  ||  22.  bring  out  those  five  X.

24.  come  near,  put  your  feet  on  necks  of  these  X.

40.  so  Joshua  smote  all  their  X.  11. 17.

12.  24.  all  these  X.  thirty  and  one

Judg.  1.  7-  seventy  X.  having  their  thumbs  cut  off

5.  3.  hear,  O  ye  X.  ||  19.  the  X.  came  and  fought
2  Sam.  11. 1.  the  time  when  X.  go  forth  to  battle

1  Kings  3.  13.  there  shall  not  be  any  among  the  X.

like  thee,  10.  23.  2  Chun.  1.  12.  ]  9.22.

4.  24.  Solomon  overall  the  X.  on  this  side  the  river

20.  1.  Benhadad  and  thirty-two  X.  with  him
2Kings  3.  10.  hath  called  these  three  X.  together

23.  this  is  blood,  the  X.  are  surely  slain
7.  6.  hath  hired  against  us  the  X.  of  the  Hittites

10.  4.  behold,  two  X.  stood  not  before  him

1  Chr.  16.  21.  he  reproved  X.  for  them,  Ps.  105. 14.

2  Chr.  9.  23.  all  X.  sought  the  presence  of  Solomon

21.  20.  but  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  X.  24.  25.

26.  23.  in  field  of  the  burial  which  belonged  to  X.
Ezra  4.  13.  shah  endamage  the  revenue  of  the  X.

15.  this  city  hath  been  hurtful  to  X.  and  provinces

19.  this  city  hath  made  insurrection  against  X.

20.  there  have  been  mighty  X.  over  Jerusalem

6.  12.  God  destroy  X.  that  snail  alter  this  house

7.  12.  Artaxerxes  king  of  X.  to  Ezra  the  priest
9-7  •  our  X.  and  priests  have  been  deliver.  Seh.QAA.

Neh.  9.  32.  trouble  seem  little  to  us  and  our  X.

34.  nor  have  our  X.  or  princes  kept  thy  law
Job  3.  14.  had  l  been  at  rest  with  X.  and  counsellors

12. 18.  he  looseth  the  bond  of  X.  and  girdeth
36.  7.  but  with  X.  are  they  on  the  throne
Psal.  2.  2.  X.  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  Acts  A. ‘Hi.

10.  be  wise,  theretore,  O  ye  X.  be  instructed
45.  9.  X.  daughters  among  thy  honourable  women

48.  4.  lo,  the  X.  were  assembled,  they  passed  by
68.  12.  X.  of  armies  did  flee  apace,  she  that  tarried

14.  when  the  Almighty  scattered  X.  in  it
29.  shall  X.  bring  presents  to  thee
72.  11.  yea,  all  X.  shall  fall  down  before  him
“6. 12.  he  is  terrible  to  the  X.  of  the  earth
89.  27.  make  him  higher  than  the  X.  of  the  earth
102. 15.  the  X.ot  the  earth  shall  fear  thy  glory
110.  5.  he  shall  strike  thro’  X.  in  the  day  of  wrath
119.  46.  I  will  speak  of  thy  testimonies  before  X.

135.  10.  smote  gieat  nations,  and  slew  mighty  X.

136.  17.  to  him  which  smote  great  X.  18.

138. 4.  an  X.  ot  the  earth  shall  praise  thee,  148.  11.
144.  10.  it  is  he  thatgiveth  salvation  to  X.

149.  8.  to  bind  their  X.  with  chains,  their  nobles
Prov.  8.15.  by  me  l  -<m,  and  princes  decree  justice

16.  12.  an  abomina-*--  or  X.  to  commit  wickedness

13.  righteous  lips  are  the  delight  of  X.

22.  29.,  the  diligent  in  business  shall  stand  before  X.

25.  2.  it  is  the  honour  ot  X;  to  search  a  matter

3.  and  the  heart  of  X.  is  unsearchable
30i  28.  and  the  spider  is  in  X.  palaces

31.  3.  nor  thy  ways  to  that  which  destroyeth  X.

4.  it  is  not  toi  X.  ()  Lemuel,  to  drink  wine
Eccl.  2.  8.  gold  and  the  peculiar  treasure  of  X.

Isa.  7. 16.  the  lard  shall  be  forsaken  of  both  her  X.

10.  8.  are  not  m3  princes  altogether  X. !

14.  9.  it  hath  raised  all  the  X.  of  the  nations

18.  all  the  X.  of  the  nations  lie  in  glory

19.  11.  how  say  ye,  I  am  the  son  of  ancient  X.
24.21.  L.  shall  punish  the  X.  of  the  earth  on  earth

41.  2.  who  raised  up  and  made  him  ruler  over  X.

45.  1.  1  will  loose  the  loins  of  X.  to  open  gates

49.  7-  X.  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  shall  worship

23.  X.  shall  be  thy  nursing  fathers  and  queens
,52.  15.  the  X.  shall  shut  their  mouths  at  him
60.  3.  and  X.  to  the  brightness  of  thy  rising

10.  and  their  X.  shall  minister  to  thee

11.  thy  gates  open,  that  their  X.  may*  be  brought

16.  thou  shalt  also  suck  the  breast  of  X.

62.  2.  and  all  X.  shall  see  thy  glory

Jer.  2.  26.  they,  their  X.  and  princes  ashamed
13. 13.  even  X.  that  sit  upon  David's  throne
1*,.25.  shall  enter  into  the  gates  of  this  city,  X.

22.  4." a.  sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David
25.  18.  lffjgde  Judah  and  X.  drink  of  the  cup
22.  X.  of  I  yr'ps  II  24.  all  the  X.  of  Arabia
25.  the  X.  of  Zijnri  l|  26.  all  the  X.  of  the  north

32.  32.  to 'provoke  me  to  anger,  they,  their  X.

34.  5.  and  with  the  burnings  ot  former  X.  bef.  thee
44.  17.  as  we,  our  X.  .and  princes  to  burn  incense
21  your  X.  and  prif2ces  burnt  incense  in  Judah

46.  25.  I  will  punish  ti>eir  X.  and  their  gods

49.  3.  fortheirX.  shall  go\mto  captivity,  and  priests

50.  41.  many  X.  shall  be  raised  up  from  the  earth

51.  11.  Lord  raised  up  the  °t  the  Medes
Lam.  4. 12.  X.  of  the  earth  wtyuld  not  have  believed
Ezek.  27.  35.  their  X.  shall  by  sore  afraid,  o2.  10.

28.  17.  I  will  lay  thee  before'-*-  ^hold  thee
32.  29.  there  is  Edom,  her  X,- and  all  her  princes
4.3.  7-  their  X.  shall  no  more  (defile  my  holy  name
Dan.  2.  21.  he  removeth  X.  and',s®nem  up  X.

44.  in  the  days  of  these  X.  shall s.et  UP  a  hmgd.
47-  of  a  truth  it  is,  that  your  GdP  IS  a  1-9,  9‘  *•

7.  17-  the  four  great  beasts  are  fou:r  X.  shall  ans?

24.  the  ten  horns  are  ten  X.  shall  subdue  three  X.
9-  6.  which  spakt  in  thy;  name  to  oufr  *•  9ur  Pr.mces

8.  to  our  X.  and  princes  belongs  con  tusion  ot  tace


Dan.  10.  13.  I  remained  there  with  the  X.  of  Pern

11.  2.  stand  up  three  X.  ||  27-  both  these  X.  hearts
llos.  7.7.  are  hot  as  an  oven,  all  their  X.  are  fallt

8.  4.  they  have  set  up  X.  but  not  by  me
Hah.  1.  10.  they  shall  scoff  at  X.  and  princes
Mat.  10.  18.  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governor
and  X.  for  my  s.-.ke,  Mark  13.  9.  Luke  21. 15

11.8.  they  tl^tt  wear  soft  clothing  are  in  X.  houses

17.  25.  ot  w horn  do  the  X.  of  the  earth  take  custom
Luke  10.  24.  prophets  and  X.  have  desired  to  see

22.  25.  X.  of  Gentiles  exercise  lordship  over  them
Acts  9. 15.  a  chosen  vessel  to  bear  my  name  before  X;
1  Cor.  4.  8.  ye  have  reigned  as  X.  without  us

1  Tim.  2.  2.  that  prayers  be  made  for  X.  and  for  ah
6.  15.  King  of  X.  Lord  of  lords,  Rev.  17. 14.  i  19. 161
Ileb.~l.\.  Abraham  returned  from  slaughter  of  the  X
Rev.  1.5.  Jes.  Christ  the  prince  ot  the  X.  of  the  ea;  t;
6.  hath  made  usX.  and  priests  unto  God,  5.  10.
6.  15.  the  X.  of  the  earth  hid  themselves  in  the  dens
10. 11.  thou  must  prophesy  again  before  X.

16.  12.  the  way  of  the  X,  of  east  might  be  preparer

14.  spirits  which  go  forth  to  the  X.  of  the  earth

17.  2.  with  whom  X.  of  earth  committed  fornlcatioj

10.  there  are  seven  X.  five  are  fallen,  and  one  is  1

12.  are  ten  X.  which  receive  power  as  X.  with  beast)

18.  that  great  city  which  reigneth  over  X.  of  earth!

18.  3.  X.  of  the  earth  have  committed  fornicatiouj

9.  X.  of  earth  who  shall  bewail  her  and  lament

19.  18.  that  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  X.  and  captain;

19.  X.  of  the  earth  gathered  to  make  war  against1

21.  24.  the  X.  of  the  earth  do  bring  their  glory

KINGS  of  the  Amorites.  [24.  la
Dent.  4.47.  two  X.  of  A.  31.  4.  Josh.  2.  10.  1  9. 10.  |
Josh.  5.  1.  came  to  pass,  when  all  X.  of  .dm.  heard
10. 5.  therefore  five  X.  of  Am.  gathered  together,  6.
See  Bouk,  Gr eat.

K  INGS  of  Israel.

1  Kings  14. 19.  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chronicle

of  the  X.  of  Israel,  15.  31.  |  16.  5,  14,20,27
I  22.  39.  2  Kings  1.  18.  1  10.  34. 1  13.  8,  12
I  14.  15,  28. 1  15.  11,  15,  21,  26,  31.

16.33.  Ahah  provoked  L.  more  than  all  k.of  lsr\

20.  31.  we  heard  that  X.  of  Isr.  are  merciful  kings'

2  Kings  8.  18.  Jehoram  walked  in  way  of  k.of  hi)

13.  13.  Joash  was  buried  with  the  k.of  Isr.  14.  It

14.  29.  Jeroboam  slept  with  his  fathers  X.  of  lsrat
16.  3.  Ahaz  walked  in  the  way  of  the  X.  of  lsrae
17. 2.  Hosliea  did  evil,  but  not  .as  the  X.  of  Israel  I

8.  Israel  walked  in  the  statutes  of  the  X.  of  lsrat

23.  19.  Josiah  took  away  houses  the  X.  of  Isr.  mad

22.  not  such  a  passover  in  the  days  of  the  X.  of  1st

1  Chr.  9.  1.  were  written  in  the  book  of  X.  of  lsrat

and  J  utlah,  2  Chron.  16.  11.  |  25.  26. 1  27.  7- 1  2fi

26.  1  32.  32.  |  33.  18.

2  Chron.  20.  34.  in  book  of  Jehu  who  is  mentione

in  the  book  of  the  k.  of  Isr.  35.  27. 1  36. 1
28.  27.  Ahaz  was  not  brought  into  sep. of  X.  of  hr:
Mic.  1. 14.  houses  of  Achzib  shall  be  a  lie  to  X.  of  1
K  INGS  of  Judah.

1  Sam.  27-  6.  Zikiag  pertained  to  the  X.  of  Judah

1  Kings  14.  29.  actsof  Rehoboam  in  the  book  of  tf

Chronicles  of  the  X.  of  Judah,  15.  7,  23.  1  22.  41;
2  Kings  8.  23.  |  15.  6,  36.  1  16.  19. 1  20.  20.  |  21
17,25.123.28.124.5.

2  Kings  12.  18.  hallowed  things  the  X.  of  Judah  ha'

dedicated,  19.  written  in  the  book  of  the  Chn
nicies  of  the  X.  of  Judah,  14. 18.  2  Chron.  25.  2f
1  28.  26.  1  32.  32.  1  35.  27.  I  36.  8.

18.  5.  there  was  none  like  him  of  all  the  X.  of  Judo

23.  5.  Josiah  put  down  priesls  X.  of  Judah  oniainej

11.  took  horses  X.  of  Judah  had  given  to  the  sun

12.  beat  down  altars  which  X.  of  Judah  had  mad
22.  not  such  a  passover  in  all  days  of  X.  of  Jiida

2  Chr.  34.  11.  to  floor  houses  X.  of  Judah  destroyed
Isa.  1. 1.  the  vision  of  Isaiah  in  day  sot  the  k.ofjul
Jer.  1. 18.  1  have  made  an  iron  pillar  against  X.  of .)
8. 1.  they  shall  bring  out  bones  of  the  X.  of  Judah  \

17. 19.  stand  in  gate,  whereby  X.  of  Judah,  come  ii

20.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  X.  of  Jud.  19.

19. 4.  burnt  incense  to  gods  X.  of  J.  have  not  know

13.  the  houses  of  the  X.  of  Judah  shall  be  detilei

20.  5.  treasures  of  X.  of  Judah  will  l  give  to  etleu

33. 4.  concerning  houses  of  X.  of  Judah  thrown  d<>w
44.  9.  have  ye  forgotten  wickedness  of-X.  of  Judah
Hos.  1. 1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  llosi

•  in  the  days  of  the  X.  of  Judah,  Mic.  1.

See  KINGS  of  Israel.
KINGDOM


■ignifies,  [1]  One  or  more  countries  subject  to  a  ki/i
Deut.  3.  4.  [2]  Sovereignty ,  or  universal  donanm
1  Chr.  29.  11.  Psal.  22.  28.  1 103.  19.  [3]  Heave:
Mat.  26.  29.  2  d  im.  4. 18.  [4]  A  right  to  he  km
1  Sam.  20.  31.  [5]  Government,  or  supreme  a
ministration,  1  Sam.  18.  8.  There  is,  (I)  2)
kingdom  of  God,  [1]  Of  his  power,  Psal.  145.  lj
13.  Dan.  4.  3.  [2]  Of  his  grace ,  Mat.  4.  23.  I
10,  33.  [3]  Of  las  glory,  Luke  22.  16.  1  Cor. ;

9.  (ID  Of  Christ,  Mat.  16.  28.  Col.  1. 13.  (Ilj
Of  heaven,  signifying,  [lj  The  state  of  the  chut
under  the  gospel,  or  the  kingdom  of  the  Messia
wherein  great  spiritual  blessings  and  privtlet.
were  to  he  bestowed,  Mat.  3.  2.  [2]  The  tint
church,  which  is  heavenly,  and  prepares  Jor  i
kingdom  of  glory.  Mat.  5.  19,  20.1  1-3-  J7-  u
The  state  of  the  church  or  gospel  in  the  world ,
of  grace  in  the  soul,  which  should  increase ,  no  two
standing  its  small  appearance  atjirst,  Mat.  13...
Or,  for  grace  in  the  heart,  Luke  17-  2L  (4J  l
place  of  eternal  happiness  and  glory,  Mat.  5.  I
(IV)  Of  priests,  Exod.  19-  6.  1  Pet.  2.9-  O'
men,  Dan.  5.  21.  .  .  ,

Exod.  19.  6.  and  ye  shall  be  to  me  a  X.  of  priest:
Sum.  32.  33.  Moses  gave  to  Gad,  Reuben,  and  A


3.  13.  Josh.  13. 12,  21,  27, 30.

Deut.  3.  4.  took  the  X.  of  Og  in  Bashan  sixty  citier

1  Sam.  10.  16.  of  the  matter  of  X.  he  told  him  not

25.  then  Samuel  told  the  manner  ot  the  X.

11.  14.  renevr  the  X.  there  (1 14.  47-  Saul  took  k.

15.  28.  Lord  hath  rent  the  X.  o*  Israel,  28.  17.
18.  8.  and  what  can  he  have  more  but  the  X  .

2  Sam.  3. 10.  to  translate  the  X.  from  house  of  ba


K  I  N


K  I  N


K  N  E


Sam.  16.  3.  Israel  shall  restore  me  *.  of  my  father

8.  hath  delivered  the  *.  into  hand  of  Absalom
Kings  2.  15.  thou  knowest  that  the  *.  was  mine
i*2.  ask  for  him  the  *.  for  he  is  my  elder  brother
,0. 2*.  not  the  like  made  in  anv  *.  2  Chron.  9.  19.
il.  li.  1  will  surely  rend  the  *.  from  thee,  31.  35.

13.  I  will  not  rend  away  all  the  k.  34.

li.  cl.  to  brin?  k.  again  to  Rehoboam,  C  C/ir.  11. 1.

26.  now  shall  k.  return  again  to  house  of  David
111.  8.  I  rent  the  k.  away  from  the  house  of  David

,8.  10.  no  k.  where  my  lord  hath  not  sent  to  seek
.’1.  dost  thou  now  govern  the  k.  of  Israel ;

Kings  14.  5.  as  soon  as  the  k.  was  confirmed
i5.  19.  with  him,  to  confirm  the  k.  in  his  hand
Chr.  10.  14.  and  turned  the*,  to  David,  12.23.

16.20.  from  one  *.  to  another  people,  Ps.  105.  1.3.
’0.  11.  all  in  heaven  and  earth  is  thine,  thine  is

the  k.  O  Lord,  Psal.  22.28.  Mat.  6.  13.
Chr.  13.  8.  think  to  withstand  the  *.  of  the  Lord

14.  5.  and  the  *.  was  quiet  before  him

*1. 3.  the  k.  gave  he  to  Jehoram  the  first-born

4.  Jehoram  was  risen  up  to  the  k.  of  his  father
>2.9.  Ahaziah  had  no  power  to  keep  still  the  *.

$.  21.  for  a  sin-oiFering  for  the  k.  and  Judah
52. 15.  for  no  god  of  any  nation  or  k.  was  able
/eh.  9 •  35.  for  they  have  not  served  thee  in  their  k.
]sth.  1.  14.  seven  princes  which  sat  first  in  the  *.

i.  14.  thou  art  come  to  the  k.  for  such  a  time

j.  3.  it  shall  be  given  to  the  half  of  the  k.  6.  |  7.  2.
fa.  19-  2.  they  snail  fight,  k.  against  k.  Mat.  24.

Mark  13.  8.  Luke  21. 10.

54. 12.  they  shall  call  the  nobles  thereof  to  the  *.
jO.  12.  the  k.  that  will  not  serve  thee,  Jer.  27. 8.

•r.  18.  7-  I  speak  concerning  a  k.  to  destroy  it

9.  concerning  a  *.  to  build  and  to  plant  it

am.  2.  2.  he  hath  polluted  the  k.  and  the  princes
'.tek.  16.  13.  and  thou  didst  prosper  into  a  k.

7. 14.  that  the  k.  might  be  base,  and  not  lift  itself
!9. 14.  and  they  shall  be  there  a  base  k.

)an.  2.  37.  the  God  of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a  k.
44.  in  their  days  shall  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  k.
1. 17.  the  Most  High  ruleth  in  the  *.  of  men,  25.  32.
31.  0  king,  the  *.  is  departed  from  thee
).  4.  no  fault  against  Daniel  concerning  the  k.

'.  18.  the  saints  shall  take  the  k.  and  possess  the  k.
22.  the  time  came  that  the  saints  possessed  the  *.

27.  the  Most  High,  whose  *.  is  an  everlasting  *.

11.21.  they  shall  not  give  the  honour  of  the  *.  *

I  os.  1.  4.  and  will  cause  to  cease  the  k.  of  Israel

’ mos  9-  8.  the  eyes  of  the  L.  are  upon  the  sinful  k.
had.  21.  and  the  k.  shall  be  the  Lord’s
lie.  4.8.  k.  shall  come  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusal.
!at.  4.  23.  the  gospel  of  the  k.  9.  35.  I  24.  14.

5;  12.  the  children  of  the  *.  shall  be  cast  out
.2.  25.  every  k.  divided  against  itself  is  brought  to
desolation.  Mark  3.  24.  Luke  11. 17.
.3.  38.  the  good  seed  are  the  children  of  the  k.

43.  shall  shine  as  the  sun  in  the  *.  of  their  father

25.  34.  inherit  the  k.  prepared  for  you  from  the

26.  29.  till  1  drink  it  new  in  my  Father’s*.

lark  11.  10.  blessed  be  the  *.  of  our  father  David
■uke  12.  32.  Father’s  good  pleasure  to  give  you  *.
19.  12.  a  nobleman  went  to  receive  for  himself  a  *

15.  he  was  returned,  having  received  the  *.

22.29.  I  appoint  unto  you  a  *.  as  my  Father
Ictr  1.  6.  wilt  thou  restore  again  the  *.  to  Israel
Cor.  15.24.  when  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the  *.
ol.  1.  13.  hath  translated  us  into  the  *.  of  his  Son
leb.  12. 28.  wherefore  we  receiving  a  *.  that  cannot
(iw.2.5.  heirs  of  the  *.  which  he  hath  promised
Pet.  1.  11.  an  entrance  ministered  into  everlast.  *.
'ev.  1.9.  companion  in  the  *.  and  patience  of  Jesus

17. 12.  ten  kings,  which  have  received  no  *.  as  yet

17.  to  agree,  and  give  their  *.  to  the  beast

See  Establish,  Established,  Throne.
KINGDOM  of  God.

Iat.6.33.  but  seek  ye  first  the  *.  of  G.  Luke  12.  31.
2. 28.  *.  of  G.  is  come  unto,  Luke  10.  9,  1 1 .  |  1 1 .20.
i9. 24  through  eye  of  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man
to  enter  into  *.  of  G.  Mark  10.  23.  Luke  18,  24.
21. 31.  the  harlots  go  into  the  *.  of  G.  before  you
43.  the  *.  of  God  shall  be  taken  from  ypu
lark  l.  14.  preaching  *.  of  God,  Acts  8.  12.  1  20.

.  ,  25.128.31.

15.  the  *.  of  God  is  at  hand,  repent  and  believe

l.  1 1.  to  know  the  mystery  of  *.  of  G.  Luke  8.  10.
26.  and  he  said,  so  is  the  *.  of  G.  as  if  a  man  cast
30.  whereunto  shall  liken  *.  of  G .?  [.uke  13. 18. 20.
)■  1.  till  they  have  seen  *.  of  G.  come  with  power
47.  better  to  enter  into  the  *.  of  G.  with  one  eye

10. 14.  children,  for  of  such  is  *.  cfG.  Luke  18.  16.
15.  whoso  shall  not  receive  *.  of  G.  Luke  18. 17.

24.  how  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in  riches  to

enter  into  the  *.  of  God,  25.  Luke  18.  25.
!*•  34.  he  said,  thou  art  not  far  from  the  *.  of  God
■4.  25.  till  that  day  l  drink  it  new  in  the  *.  of  G.
15.43.  which  waited  for  the  *.  of  G.  Luke  23.  51.
■uke  4.  43.  I  must  preach  the  *.  of  G.  to  other  cities
’•  «>•  blessed  be  ye  poor,  for  yours  is  the  *.  of  G.

'  ■  -8.  that  is  least  in  the  *.  of  G.  is  greater  than  he
h  1.  preaching  and  shewing  glad  tidings  of  *.  vf  G.

Hnd  he  sent  them  to  preach  the  *.  of  God,  60.
H-  received  them,  and  spake  to  them  of  *.  of  G.
-!•  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they  see  *.  of  G.

*nd  looking  back,  is  fit  for  the  *.  of  God
‘■’•  28.  ye  shall  see  all  the  prophets  in  the  *.  of  G.
-9.  and  they  shall  Sit  down  in  the  *.  of  God
*0.  blessed,  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  *.  of  G.
7  o  smce  toat  Fime  the  k.  of  God  is  preached
00  wa5  demanded  when  *.  of  G.  should  come

m.  the  *.  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation

111  r , behold,  the  *.  of  God  is  within  you

,1  *9-  left  wife  or  children  for  the  *.  of  G.  sake
U.ll.  they  thought  that  *.  of  G.  should  appear
know  ye  that  the  *.  of  G.  is  nigh  at  hand
,  •  If.  nor  eat  till  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  *.  of  God
■ "1  not  drink  until  the  *.  of  G.  shall  come
-'m  3.  3.  except  man  be  born  again,  cannot  see  *.

,  ■ 1,0111  of  water,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  *.  of  G.
fiol  'Vhl,n6s  pertaining  to  *.  of  G.  8.  12.  |  19.  8.
ph  m  ,oro  nmc'h  tribulation  enter  into  *.  of  God
he  23.  to  whom  he  expounded,  and  testif.  *.  of  G.


R<mi.  14.  17.  for  the  *.  of  G.  is  not  meat  and  drink

1  Cor .  4.  20.  the  *.  of  G.  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power

6.  9.  the  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the  *.  of  G.

10.  nor  extortioners  inherit  *.  of  G.  Gal.  5.  21.

5.  5*

15.  50.  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  *.  of  G.
Col.  4.  11.  my  fellow-workers  uatothe  *.  of  God

2  /  hess.  l.  5.  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  *.  ofG
Rev.  12.  10.  now  is  come  the  *.  of  our  God

KINGDOM  of  heaven.

Mat.  3.  2.  repent,  for  *.  ofh.  is  at  hand,  4. 17.  |  10. 7

5.  3.  blessed  are  poor  in  spirit,  theirs  is  *.  ofh.  10.

19.  shall  be  called  least  in  k.ofh.  great  in  *.  ofh.

20.  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  *.  of  heaven,  18.  3

7.  21.  not  that  saith,  Lord,  shall  enter  k.of  h.

8.  11.  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham  in  *.  of  h.

11.  11.  he  that  is  least  in  *.  of  h.  is  greater  than  he

12.  *.  oj  h.  suffer,  violence,  violent  take  it  by  force

13.  11.  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the*,  of  heaven

24.  the  *.  of  h.  is  like,  31.  33,  44,  45,  47,  52,  |  18.
„  2.3.  |  20.  l.-l  22.2.1  25.  1,  14.

16.  19.  I  wdl  give  to  thee  the  keys  of*,  of  heaven

18.  1.  who  is  the  greatest  in  the  *.  of  heaven,  4.

23.  13.  for  ye  shut  up  the  *.  of  h.  against  men

His  KINGDOM.

Gen.  10,  10.  and  the  beginning  of  his  *.  was  Babel
Num.  24.  7.  and  his  k.  shall  be  exalted
De^it.  17.  18.  hesitteth  on  the  throne  of  his  k.

20.  that  he  may  prolong  his  days  in  his  *

2  Sam.  5.  12.  perceived  that  he  had  exalted  his  k.

1  Chron.  11.  10.  strengthened  with  him  in  his  k.

14. 2.  tor  his  k.  was  lift  up  on  high  for  Israel

2  Chr.  1.  1.  Solomon  was  strengthened  in  his  k.

2.  1.  determined  to  build  a  house  for  his  k.  12.

33.  13.  brought  him  again  to  Jerusalem  into  his  k.
Psal.  103.  19.  and  his  k.  ruleth  over  all

145.  12.  and  the  glorious  majesty  of  his  k.

Eecl.  4.  14.  whereas  he  that  is  born  in  his  k.

Isa.  9-  7-  upon  his  k.  to  order  and  establish  it
Dan.  4.  3.  the  high  God,  his  k.  is  an  everlasting  k.
34.  his  k.  from  generation  togener.  6.  26.  I  7.  14.
11.  4.  his  k.  shall  be  broken  and  plucked  up

9.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  come  info  his  k.
Mat.  12.  26.  how  shall  his  k.  stand  ?  Luke  11.  18.

13.  41.  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  k.  all  things
16.  28.  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  his  k.
Luke  1.  33.  and  of  his  k.  there  shall  be  no  end

1  1'hess.  2. 12.  who  hath  called  you  to  h.  k.  and  glory

2  Tim. 4.  l.who  shall  judge  at  his  appearing  and /n  *.
Rev.  16.  10.  and  his  k.  was  full  of  darkness

My  KINGDOM.

Gen.  20.  9-  hast  brought  on  me  and  my  *.  a  great  sin
2  Sam.  3.  28.  I  and  my  k.  are  guiltless  before  the  L.
1  Chron.  17.  14.  1  will  settle  him  in  rnyk.  for  ever
Dan.  4.  36.  and  for  the  glory  of  my  k.  in  my  k.

6.  26.  in  every  dominion  of  my  *.  men  tremble
Mark  6.  23.  I  will  give  it,  to  the  half  of  my  *.

Luke  22.  30.  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my  k.
John  18.  36.  Jesus  said,  my  k.  is  not  of  this  world,

if  my  k.  were,  but  now  my  k.  is  not  from  hence
Thy  KINGDOM.’

1  Sam.  1.3.  14.  but  now  thy  k.  shall  not  continue
Ps.  45.  6.  sceptre  of  t.  k.  a  right  sceptre,  lleb.  1,  8.
145.  11.  they  shall  speak  of  the  glory  of  thy  k.

13.  thy  k.  is  an  everl.  kingd.  thy  domin.  endureth
Dan.  4.  26.  thy  k.  shall  be  sure  to  thee,  after  that
5.  11.  there  is  a  man  in  thy  k.  ||26.G.  numb,  thy  k.

28.  thy  k.  is  divided  to  the  Medes  and  Persians
Mat. 6.  10.  thy  k.  come,  thy  will  be  done,  Luke  11. 2.
20.  21 .  and  the  other  on  the  left  in  thy  k.

Luke  23.  42.  rememb.  me  when  thou  comest  to  thy  k.
KINGDOMS.

Deut.  .3.  21.  so  shall  the  L.  do  to  all  the  *.  whither
28.  25.  be  removed  into  all  the  *.  of  the  earth
Josh.  11.  10.  Hazor  was  the  head  of  all  those  *.

1  Sam.  10.  18.  I  delivered  you  out  of  hand  of  all  *.

1  Kings  4. 21 .  Solomon  reigned  over  all*,  from  river

2  Kings  19.  15.  the  God  of  all  the  *.  of  the  earth

19.  that  all  the  *.  may  know,  Isa.  .37  .  20.

1  Chron.  29.  30.  times  that  went  over  all  the  *.

2  Chron.  12.  8.  they  may  know  the  Service  of  the  *.
17-  10.  the  fear  of  the’I.ord  fell  on  the  *.  20.  29.

20.  6.  thou  rulestover  all  the  *.  of  the  heathen

36.  23.  all  *.  hath  the  Lord  given  me,  Ezra  1.  2.
Neh.  9.  22.  thou  gavest  them  *.  and  nations
Psal.  46.  6.  the  heathen  raged,  the  *.  were  moved
68.  .32.  sing  unto  God,  ye  *.  of  the  earth

79.  6.  thy  wrath  on  the’*,  that  have  not  ealled-
102.  22.  the  *.  are  gathered  to  serve  the  Lord
1.35.  11.  who  smote  all  the  *.  of  Canaan
Isa.  10.  10.  as  my  hand  hath  found  the  *.  of  idols

13.  4.  the  noise  of  the  *.  of  nations  gathered
19.  Babylon  die  glory  of  *.  as  Sodom,  47.  5.

14.  16.  is  this  the  man  that  did  shake  *.  ?

23.  11 .  he  shook  the  *.  ||  .37. 16.  God  of  all  *.

Jer.  1.  10.  and  over  the  *.  I  have  set  thee  ,

10.  7.  and  in  all  their  *.  none  like  thee

15.  4.  tojie  removed  into  all  *.  24.  9. 1  .34. 17.
25.26.  all  the*,  of  the  world  shall  drink

28.  8.  the  prophets  prophesied  against  great  *.

29.  18.  I  will  make  them  a  terror  to  all  *.

34.  1.  all  the  *.  fought  against  Jerusalem

49.  28.  concerning  Kedar  and  the*,  of  Hazor
51.20.  and  with  thee  will  1  destroy  *,

27.  call  together  against  her  the  *.  of  Ararat
Ezek.  29.  15.  it  shall  be  the  basest  of  the  *.

37.  22.  nor  shall  they  be  divided  into  two  *.

Dan.  2.  44.  and  it  shall  consume  all  these  *.

7.  2.3.  which  -shall  be  diverse  from  all  *.

8.  22.  four  *.  shall  stand  up  out  of  the  nation
Amos  6.  2.  go  to  Gath  ;  be  they  better  than  these  *.  ?
Nah.  3.  5.  and  I  will  shew  the  *.  thy  shame
Zeph.  3.  8.  that  I  may  assemble  the*,  to  pour  on
Hag.  2.  22.  I  will  overthrow  the  throne  of  *.  and

1  will  destroy  the  strength  of  the  *.  of  the  heathen
Mat.  4.8.  shewed  him  allthe  *.  of  world,  Luke  4. 5.
Heb.  11.  33.  who  through  faith  subdued  *.  wrought
Rev.  11. 15.  *.  of  this  world  become  *.  of  the  Lord
KINGLY.

Dan.  5.  20.  he  was  deposed  from  his  *.  throne
KINSFOLK.

Job  19.  14.  my  *.  have  failed  and  forgotten  me


Lw*?2.4Lsought  Jesus  amongtheir  *.  and  acquaint
KINSFOLKS.

1  Kings  1 6.  11.  Zimri  left  none  of  Baasha’s  *.

2  Kings  10.  11.  Jehu  slew  Ahab’s  *.  and  priests

-  Luke  21.  16.  ye  shall  be  betrayed  by  *.  and  friend*
KINSMAN.

Num.  5.  8.  if  the  man  have  no  *.  to  recompense
27.  11.  ye  shall  give  his  inheritance  to  his  *.

Deut.  25.  t  5.  her  husband’s  next  *.  shall  go  in
t  7-  if  a  man  like  not  to  take  his  next  *.  wife
Ruth  2.  1.  Naomi  had  a  *.  his  name  was  Boaz

3.  9.  thou  art  a  near  *.  ||  12.  a  *.  nearer  than  1

1.3.  if  he  will  perform  to  thee  the  part  of  a  *.
well ;  if  not,  1  will  do  the  partot  a  *.  to  thee

4.  1.  behold  the  *.  of  whom  Boaz  spake,  came  by
6.  the  *.  said,  I  cannot  redeem  it  for  myself

8.  the  *.  said  unto  Boaz,  buy  it  for  thee

14.  hath  not  left  thee  this  day  without  a  *.

John  18.  26.  being  his  k.  whose  ear  Peter  cut  off
Rom.  16.  11.  salute  llerodion  my  *.  greet  them
KINSMEN.

Ruth  2.  20.  the  man  is  near  of  kin,  one  of  our  next  *.
1  Chron.  15. 1 5.  Uriel  and  his  *.  two  hundred  twenty
Psal.  38.  11.  my  lovers  and  *.  stood  afar  off
Mark  3.  +21.  when  *.  heard,  they  went  to  lay  hold
Luke  14.  12.  call  not  friends,  brethren,  nor  *.

Acts  10.  24.  Cornelius  had  called  together  bis  *.
Rom.  9.  3.  accursed,  for  my  *.  according  to  the  flesh

16.  7.  salute  my  *.  |j  21.  thy  *.  salute  you
KINSWOMAN.

Lev.  18. 12.  father’s  sister,  she  is  my  father's  near  *.

13.  mother’s  sister,  she  is  thy  mother’s  near  *.
Prov.  7.  4.  and  call  understanding  thy  *.

KINSWOMEN.

Lev.  18. 17.  not  uncover,  for  they  archer  near  *.

I  hey  are  signs,  [1]  Of  reverence  and  subjection  to  a
superior,  1  Sam.  10.  1.  1  Kings  19.  18.  [2]  Of
spiritual  submission  and  adoration  to  Christ,  Psal.

2. 12.  [3]  Of  love  and  affection,  Gen.  27  .  26,  27.
1  Sam.  20.  41.  [4]  OJ  idolatrous  reverence  and
adoration,  Hos.  13.  2.  They  are,  [1]  Traitorous,
such  as  Joab's  to  Amasa,  when  he  kissed  him  and
slew  him,  and  Judas's  to  Christ,  when  he  kissed
him  and  betrayed  him,  2  Sam.  20.  9.  Mat.  26.  49.
[2]  Hypocritical,  2  Sam.  15.  5.  [3]  Idolatrous,
1  Kings  19.  18.^  [4]  Carnal  arid  whorish,  Prov.  7.
13.  [5]  Spiritual,  those  sensible,  familiar,  and

frequent  discoveries  of  Christ's  love  communicated
to  his  church  by  his  word  and  Spirit.  Cant.  1. 2.  |  8.
1.  [6]  Holy,  proceeding  from,  and  a  pledge  of,
Christian  and  holy  love.  Rom.  16.  16.  1  Cor.
16.  20.

KISS,  ES.

Prov.  27.  6.  but  the  *.  of  an  enemy  are  deceitful
Cant.  1.2.  let  him  *.  me  with  the  *.  of  his  mouth
[.uke  7-  45.  thou  gavest  me  no  *.  but  this  woman
22.  48.  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  *.  ?
Rom.  16.  16.  salute  one  another  with  an  holy  *.

1  Cor.  16.  20.  greet  with  an  holy  *.  2  Cor.  1.3.  12.

1  1'hess.  5.  26.  greet  the  brethren  with  an  holy  k.

1  Pet.  5. 14.  greet  ye  one  another  with  a  *.  of  charity

KISS.

Gen.  27  .  26.  come  near  now  and  *.  me,  my  son
31.  28.  not  suffered  me  to  *.  my  sons  and  daughters
41.  +  40.  at  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  *.

2  Sam.  20.  9.  Joabtook  Amasa  by  the  beard  to  k.

1  Kings  19.  20.  let  me  *.  my  father  and  mother
Psal.  2. 12.  *.  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry  and  ye  perish
Prov.  24.  26.  every  man  shall  *.  ids'  lips  that  gives
Cant.  1.  2.  let  him  *.  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth
8.  1.  1  would  *.  thee,  yet  1  should  not  be  despised
Hos.  1.3.  2.  let  men  that  sacrifice  *.  the  calves
Mat.  26.  48.  give  a  sign,  saying,  whomsoever  I  *.

the  same  is  he|  hold  him  fast,  Mark  14.  44.
Luke  7-  45.  this  woman  hath  not  ceased  to  *.  my  feet
22.  47.  Judas  drew  near  to  Jesus  to  *.  him
KISSED.

Gen.  27  .  27.  and  Jacob  came  near  and  *.  him
29. 11.  and  Jacob  *.  Rachel  and  wept

13.  Laban  *.  Jacob  ||  .33.  4.  Esau  *.  Jacob

31.  55.  and  Laban  *.  his  sons  and  his  daughters
45.  15.  moreover  Joseph  *.  all  his  brethren
48.  10.  Jacob  *.  and  embraced  Joseph’s  sons
50.  1.  Joseph  fell  on  his  father’s  face  and  *.  him
Exod.  4.  27-  Aaion  met  Moses  in  mount  and  *.  him

18.  7-  Moses  met  his  father-in  law  and  *.  him
Ruth  1.9.  N  aomi  *.  her  daughters-in  law,  they  wept

14.  and  Orpah  *.  her  mother-in  law,  but  Ruth

1  iSVm.10.  1.  Samuel  poured  oil  and  *.  Saul
20.  41.  Jonathan  and  David  *.  cue  another

2  Sam.  14.  33.  he  bowed,  and  the  king  *.  Absalom

15.  5.  Absalom  *.  any  man  that  came  nigh  to  him

19.  39.  the  king  *.  Barzillai,  and  blessed  him

1  Kings  19.  18.  every  mouth  which  hath  not*,  him
Job  .31.  27-  or  my  mouth  hath  *.  my  hand
Psal.  85.  10.  righteousness  and  peace  *.  each  other
Prov.  7.  13.  so  she  caught  him  and  *.  him
Ezek.  3.  + 1.3.  wings  of  creatures  *.  one  another
Mat.  26.  49.  hail  Master,  and  *.  him.  Mark  14.  45.
Luke  7-  38.  Mary  *.  his  feet  and  anointed  them

15.  20.  his  father  fell  on  his  neck  and  *.  him
Acts  20.  37.  they  fell  on  Paul’s  neck  and  *.  him
KITE.

Lev.  11. 14.  the  *.  after  his  kind  unci.  Dent.  14. 13.
KN  FAD.

Gen.  18.  6.  *.  it,  and  make  cakes  on  the  hearth
Jer.  7.  18.  and  the  women  *.  their  dough
KNEADED.

1  Sam.  28.  24.  W'oman  at  Endor  took  flour  and  *.  it

2  Sam.  1.3.  8.  Tamar  took  flour  *.  and  made  cakes
Hos.  7.  4.  the  baker  *.  the  dough  till  it  be  leavened

KNEADING.

Exod.  8.  3.  frogs  shall  come  into  thy  *.-troughs
12.  34.  their  *. -troughs  being  bound  up  in  clothes
KNEL

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  which  joins  the
leg  and  thigh  together,  Judg.  7.  5.  [2]  The  body,
Psal.  109-24.  [3]  Persons,  Job  4.  4.  Heb.  12.  12.
To  bow  the  KNEE  signifies,  [1]  To  worship,
1  Kings  19.  18.  Rom.  11. 4.  [2]  To  pray,  Eph.  3.
14.  [3]  To  be  in  subjection,  Phil.  2.  10.

263


K  N  h


KNO


KNO


Gen.  41.43.  they  cried  before  him.  bow  the  k.

Isa.  45.  23.  that  unto  me  every  k.  shall  bovy,  every
tongue  shall  swear,  Rom.  14.  11.  Phil.  2.  10.
Mat.  27-  29.  bowed  the  k.  before  him
Rom.  11.  4.  who  have  not  bowed  the  k.  to  Baal
KN  RES.

Gen.  30.  3.  my  maid  Bilhah  shall  bear  on  my  k.

48.  12.  Joseoh  brought  them  out  from  betw.  his  k.

50.  23.  children  were  brought  up  on-Joseph’s  k.
Dev.  28.  35.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  in  the  k.
Judy.  7.  5.  that  boweth  down  on  his  k.  to  drink,  6.

16.  19.  and  she  made  Samson  sleep  on  her  k.

1  Kings  8.  54.  Solom.  arose  from  kneeling  on  his  k.

18.  42.  Elijah  put  his  face  between  his  k.

19.  18.  all  the  k.  which  have  not  bowed  to  Baal

2  Kings  1.  13.  third  capt.  fell  on  his  k.  before  Elijah

4.  20.  he  sat  on  his  mother’s  k.  till  noon,  and  died

2  Chron.  6.  13.  Solomon  kneeled  down  on  his  k.
Ezra  9.  5.  I  fell  on  my  k.  and  spread  my  hands
Job  3.  12.  why  did  the  k.  prevent  me,  or  breasts
4.  4.  and  thou  hast  strengthened  the  feeble  k.

Ps.  109.  24.  my  k.  are  weak  thro’  fasting,  my  flesh
Isa.  35.  3.  weak  hands,  and  confirm  the  feeble  k.

66.  12.  ye  shall  suck  and  be  dandled  on  her  k.
Ezek.  f.  17.  all  k.  shall  be.  weak  as  water,  21. 7-
47.  4.  he  measured,  the  waters  were  to  the  k.

Dan.  5.  6.  his  k.  smote  one  against  another

6. 10.  kneeled  on  k.  three  times  a  day,  and  prayed
10.  10.  behold  an  hand  set  me  upon  my  k.

Nah.  2.  10.  she  is  empty,  and  the  k.  smite  together
Mark  15.  19.  bowing  their  k.  worshipped  him
Luke  5. 8.  Simon  Peter  fell  down  at  Jesus’  k.

Eph.  3.  14.  for  this  cause  1  bow  my  k.  to  the  Father
Heb.  12. 12.  lift  u-p  hands  that  hang  down,  feeble  k.
KNEEL.

Gen.  24.  11.  he  made  his  camels  k.  down  by  a  well
Psal.  95.  6.  let  us  k.  before  the  Lord  our  Maker
KNEELED.

2  Chron.  6.  13.  Solomon  k.  down  on  his  knees
Dan.  6.  10.  Dan.  k.  three  times  a  day  on  his  knees
Luke  22.  41.  and  Jesus  k.  down  and  prayed
Acts  7.  60.  Stephen  k.  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice
9.40.  Pet.  k.  and  prayed  20.36.  Paul  k.  and  prayed

21.  5.  and  we  k.  down  on  the  shore,  and  prayed

KNEELING.

1  Kings  8. 54.  Solomon  rose  up  from  k.  on  his  knees
Mat.  17.  14.  a  man  k.  to  him,  saying,  Mark  10.  17.
Mark  1. 40.  there  came  a  leper  k.  down  to  him
KNEW.

Gen.  4.  1.  Adam  k.  Eve  his  wife,  she  conceived,  25.

17.  Cain  k.  wife  ||  38.  26.  Judah  k.  her  no  more
Judy.  11.  39.  Jephthah’s  daughter  k.  no  man

19.  25.  they  k.  her  and  abused  her  all  the  night
1  Sam.  1.  19.  El kanan  L  Hannah  his  wife

1  Kings  1.  4.  she  was  fair,  but  the  king  k.  her  not
Mat.  1.  25.  Joseph  k.  her  not,  till  she  brought  forth
KNEW.

Gen.  3.  7.  Adam  and  Eve  k.  that  they  were  naked

9.  24.  Noah  k.  what  his  younger  son  had  done

37.  33.  Jacob  k.  it,  and  said,  it  is  my  son’s  coat

38.  9.  Onan  k.  the  seed  should  not  be  his
42.  7.  Joseph  saw  and  k.  his  brethren,  8.

Num.  24. 16.  and  k.  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High
Deut.  9.  24.  been  rebellious  from  the  day  I  k.  you
34.  10.  a  prophet  whom  the  Lord  k.  face  to  face
Judy.  3.  2.  such  as  before  k.  nothing  thereof
13.  21.  Manoah  k.  that  he  was  an  angel  of  God

18.  3.  they  k.  the  voice  of  the  young  man

1  Sam.  3.  20.  all  Israel  k.  Samuel  was  a  prophet

18.  28.  Saul  k.  that  the  Lord  was  with  David

20.  9.  for  if  I  k.  then  would  1  not  tell  thee

33.  Jonathan  k.  that  it  was  determined  by  Saul

39.  only  David  and  Jonathan  k.  the  matter

22.  15.  tor  the  servant  k.  nothing  of  all  this

17.  slay  the  priests,  because  they  k.  when  he  fled
22.  David  said  to  Abiathar,  1  k.  it  that  day

23. 9.  David  k.  that  Saul  secretly  practised  against

26.  17.  Saul  k.  David’s  voice,  and  said,  is  this  thy

2  Sam.  11.  16.  where  he  k.  that  valiant  men  were

1  Kings  18.  7.  Obadiah  k.  Elijah,  and  fell  on  his  face

2  Chr.  33.  13.  then  Manasseh  k.  the  Lord  was  God
Esth.  1.  13.  manner  to  all  that  k.  law  and  judgment
Jo'>  23.  3.  O  that  I  k.  where  1  might  find  him !

Isa.  48.  4.  because  I  k.  that  thou  art  obstinate

7.  lest  thou  shouldest  say,  behold  I  k.  them

8.  I  k.  that  thou  wouldest  deal  very  treacherously
Jer.  1.  5.  before  I  formed  thee,  I  k.  thee

32.  8.  then  1  k.  this  was  the  word  of  the  Lord
41.  4.  he  had  slain  Gedaliah,  and  no  man  k.  it

44. 15.  men  which  k.  their  wives  had  burnt  incense
Ezek.  10.  20.  I  k.  that  they  were  the  cherubitns

19.  7.  and  he  k.  their  desolate  palaces,  laid  waste
Dan.  5.  21.  till  he  k.  that  the  Most  High  ruled

6.  10.  when  Daniel  k.  the  writing  was  signed
Jonah  4.  2.  I  k.  that  thou  art  a  gracious  God
Zech.  11. 11.  k.  that  it  was  the  word  of  the  Lord
Mat.  7.  23.  I  will  profess  I  never  k.  you

12. 15.  when  Jesus  k.  he  withdrew  himself
25.  Jesus  k.  their  thoughts,  Luke  6.  8.

25.  24.  I  k.  thee,  that  thou  art  an  hard  man

27.  18.  he  k.  that  for  envy  they  had  delivered
Mark  1.  34.  not  to  speak  because  they  k.  him

6.  54.  out  of  the  ship,  straightway  they  k.  him

12.  12.  k.  he  had  spoken  the  parable  against  them
Luke  4.  41.  the  devils,  for  they  k.  that  he  was  Christ

12.  47.  thatservant  which  k.  his  lord’s  will

18.  34.  nor  k.  they  the  things  that  were  spoken
24.  31.  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  they  k.  him

John  2.  9.  but  the  servants  k.  whence  it  was

24.  not  commit  himself,  because  he  lc.  all  men

25.  any  testify,  for  he  k.  what  was  in  man

4.  53.  the  father  k.  it  was  at  the  same  hour

5.  6.  Jesus  k.  he  had  been  long  in  that  case

6.  6.  for  he  himself  k.  what  he  would  do
61.  Jesus  k.  that  his  disciples  murmured

64.  Jesus  k.  from  the  beginning  who  believed  not
11.  42.  I  k.  that  thou  hearest  me  always
57.  that  if  any  man  k.  w  here  he  were,  to  shew  it

13.  1.  when  Jesus  k.  that  his  hour  was  come
11.  for  he  k.  who  should  betray  him

28.  no  man  at  the  table  k.  for  what  intent
16.  19.  Jesus  k.  that  they  were  desirous  to  ask

264


John  18. 2.  Judas  which  betrayed  him  k.  the  place
Acts  3.  10.  k.  that  it  was  he  that  sat  for  alms
9.  30.  which  w  hen  the  brethren  k.  they  brought  _

12. 14.  when  Rhoda  k.  Peter’s  voice  she  opened
16.  3.  they  k.  all  that  his  father  was  a  Greek

19.  34.  but  when  they  k.  that  he  was  a  Jew
22.  29.  afraid  after  he  k.  that  he  was  a  Roman

26.5.  which  k.  me  from  the  beginning,  a  Pharisee

28.  1.  then  they  k.  the  island  was  called  Melita
Rom.  1.  21.  because  that  when  they  k.  God

1  Cor.  2.8.  which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world  k.

2  Cor.  5.  21.  he  made  him  to  be  sin,  who  k.  no  sin

12.  2.  1  it.  a  man  in  Christ  above  14  years  ago,  3.
Col.  1. 6.  in  you  since  ye  k.  the  grace  of  God  in  truth

2.  1.  I  would  you  k.  what  great  conflict  I  have
Jude  5.  put  in  remembrance,  tho’  ye  once  k.  this
Rev.  19.  12.  he  had  a  name  written  that  no  man  k.
KNEW  not.

Gen.  28.  16.  Lord  is  in  this  place,  and  I  k.  it  not
31.32.  Jacob  k.  not  that  Rachel  had  stolen  them
38.  16.  Judah  k.  not  she  was  his  daughter-in-law

39. 6.  he  k.  not  aught  he  had  ||  42. 8.  but  they  k.  n.  him
Exod.  1 . 8.  there  arose  a  new  king  which  k.  n.  Joseph
Num.  22.  34.  I  k.  not  that  thou  stoodest  in  the  way
Deut.  8.  16.  with  manna  which  thy  fathers  k.  not

29.  26.  served  gods  which  thy  fathers  k.  not,  32. 17-
Judy.  2.  10.  a  generation  w'hich  k.  not  the  Lord

13.  16.  Manoah  k.  not  that  he  was  an  angel

14.  4.  his  father  k.  not  that  it  was  of  the  Lord

20.  34.  Benjamin  k.  not  that  evil  was  near

1  Sam.  2.  12.  now  the  sons  of  Eli  k.  not  the  Lord
14.  3.  the  people  k.  not  that  Jonathan  was  gone
20.  39.  the  lad  k.  not  any  thing,  only  Jonathan

2  Sam.  3. 26.  sent  after  Abner,  but  David  k.  it  not
11.  20.  k.  ye  not  they  would  shoot  from  the  wall  ?
15. 11.  they  went  in  simplicity,  and  k.  not  any  thing

18.  29.  I  saw  a  tumult,  but  I  k.  not  what  it  was
22.  44.  a  people  which  I  k.  not  shall  serve  me

2  Kings  4.  39.  gathered  gourds  for  they  k.  them  not
Neh.  2.  16.  the  rulers  k.  not  whither  I  went
Job  2.  12.  Job’s  friends  k.  him  not,  and  wept
29.  16.  the  cause  which  I  k.  not  I  searched  out
42.  3.  things  which  1  k.  not  too  wonderful  for  me
Psal.  35.  11.  they  laid  to  my  charge  things  1  k.  not
15.  abjects  gathered  against  me,  and  I  k.  it  not
73. 1 22.  so  foolish  was  I,  and  k.  not,  I  was  a  beast
Prov.  23.  t  35.  they  have  beaten  me,  and  I  k.  it  not
24.  12.  if  thou  sayest,  behold,  we  k.  it  not
Isa.  42.16. 1  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  they  k.  not
25.  it  hath  set  him  on  fire,  yet  he  k.  not
55.  5.  and  nations  that  k.  not  thee,  shall  run  to  thee
Jer.  2.  8.  and  they  that  handle  the  law  k.  me  not
11. 19.  I  k.  not  that  they  had  devised  devices
44.  3.  went  to  serve  other  gods  whom  they  k.  not
Dan.  11. 38.  honour  a  god  whom  his  fathers  k.  not
Hos.  8.  4.  they  have  made  princes  and  I  k.  it  not

11.  3.  but  they  k.  not  that  I  healed  them
Zech.  7.  14.  among  nations  whom  they  k.  not
Mat.  17. 12.  Elias  is  come,  and  they  k.  him  not

24.  39.  k.  not  till  the  flood  came  and  took  them
Luke  2.  43.  Joseph  and  his  mother  k.  not  of  it

12.  48.  that  X-.  not  and  did  commit  things  worthy
John  1. 10.  the  world  k.  him  not  ||  31.  I  k.  him  not,  33.

2.  9.  when  the  governor  k.  not  whence  it  was
20.  9.  for  as  yet  they  k.  not  the  scriptures  that  he
14.  and  k.  run  that  it  was  Jesus,  21.  4.

Acts  13.  27.  for  they,  because  they  k.  him  not

19.  32.  the  more  part  k.  not  wherefore  they  came
27.  39.  when  it  was  day,  they  k.  not  the  land

1  Cor.  1.21. the  world  by  wisdom  k.not  God, it  pleased
Gal.  4.  8.  howbeit,  then  when  ye  k.  not  God,  ye  did
1  John  3. 1.  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  k.  himreor
KNEWEST.

Deut.  8. 3.  he  fed  thee  with  manna,  which  thou  k.  not
Ruth  2. 11.  art  come  to  a  people  which  thou  k.  not
Neh.  9. 10.  thou  k.  that  they  dealt  proudly  against
Psal.  142.  3.  then  thou  k.  my  path  in  the  way
Isa.  48.  8.  thou  heardest  not,  yea,  thou  k.  not
Dan.  5.  22.  not  humbled  thy  heart,  thou  k.  all  this
Mat.  25.  26.  thou  k.  I  reaped  where,  Luke  19.  22.
Luke  19.  44.  thou  k.  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation
John  4.  10.  if  thou  k.  the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is
KNIFE.

Gen.  22.6.  Abraham  took  the  k.  in  his  hand,  10.
Exod.  4.  +25.  then  Zipporah  took  a  sharp  k.

Judy.  19.  29.  took  a  k.  and  laid  hold  on  his  concub.
Prov.  23.  2.  and  put  a  k.  to  thy  throat,  if  given  to
Ezek.  5.  1.  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  sharp  k.

2.  take  a  third  part,  and  smite  about  it  with  a  k.

KNIVES.

Josh.  5.  2.  make  thee  sharp  k.  and  circumcise

3.  Joshua  made  him  sharp  k.  and  circumcised

1  Kings  18. 28.  they  cut  themsel.  with  k.  and  lancets
Ezra  i.  9.  nine  and  twenty  k.  Cyrus  brought
Prov.  30. 14.  their  jaw-teeth  as  k.  to  devour  the  poor
Ezek.  21.  t  21.  the  king  of  Babylon  made  bright  k.

Knit.

Judy.  20.  11.  Israel  were  k.  together  as  one  man
1  Sam.  18. 1.  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  k.  to  David
1  Chr.  12. 17.  if  come,  my  heart  shall  be  k.  to  you
10. 11.  1  saw  a  sheet  k.  at  the  four  corners
Col.  2.  2.  their  hearts  being  k.  together  in  love
19.  body  k.  togeth.  increaseth  with  increase  of  G.
KNOCK

Signifies,  [11  To  beat,  hit,  or  strike  upon,  Acts  12.
13,  16.  [2]  To  pray  with  fervency,  constancy,

and  importunity.  Mat.  7-  8.  Luke  11.  10.  [3]
Christ  calling  and.  inviting  us  by  his  word,  pro¬
vidence,  and  Spirit,  to  admit  him  into  our  hearts,
and  receive  him  by  faith  and  love.  Cant.  5.  2.
Rev.  3.  20.

Mat.  7.  7.  k.  and  it  shall  be  opened,  Luke  11.  9.
Luke  13.  25.  ye  begin  to  k.  at  the  door,  saying,  open
Rev.  3. 20.  behold,  1  stand  at  the  door  anil  k.  if  any
KNOCKED.

Acts  12. 13.  and  as  Peter  k.  at  the  door  of  the  gate
KNOCKETH.

Cant.  5.  2.  it  is  voice  of  my  belov.  that  k.  open  to  me
Mat.  7.  8.  to  him  that  k.  shall  be  opened,  Luke  11. 10.
Luke  12.  36.  when  he  cometh  and  k.  they  may  open
KNOCKING.

Acts  12. 16.  Peter  contin.  k.  and  when  they  saw  him


KNOP,  S.

Exod.  25.  31.  his  k.  and  his  flowers,  34.  36.)  37. ;
33.  with  a  k.  and  flower  in  one  branch,  ,37.  19.'

36.  and  k.  branches  of  the  same,  37.  17,  20,  22.:
1  Kings  6. 18.  cedar  carved  with  k.  and  open  flow*

7.  24.  were  k.  compassing  it,  k.  cast  into  two  ro
Amos  9.  t  1.  he  said,  smite  the  k.  of  the  door
Zeph.  2.  +  14.  the  bittern  shall  lodge  in  k.  of  it

KNOW

Signifies,  [1]  To  understand  or  perceive,  Ruth  3.1

[2]  To  approve  of,  love,  and  delight  in,  Psal.  1.

[3]  To  cherish  and  take  care  of,  John  10.  27.  [

To  have  the  experience  of,  Gen.  3.  5. 1  22.  12.  [
To  possess,  or  have  it  in  one's  power,  Psal.  50. 1
[6]  Lawfully  to  use  the  marriage-bed,  Gen.  4.
17-  [7]  To  consider  and  ponder  seriously,  Ps;
90.  11.  [8]  To  believe  upon  undoubted  testimon ;
John  4.  22. 1  11.  24.  [9]  To  have  a  bare  specut
the  knowledge,  Luke  12.  47.  [10]  To  commit  t
sin  against  nature,  Gen.  19.  5.  Judg.  19.  22.  [1
To  be  fully  persuaded,  Judg.  6.  37- 1  18.  5.  []
To  have  a  vain  and  groundless  assurance,  J  ud
17-  13.  [13]  To  discern  and  find  out.  Mat.
16.  [14]  To  teach  and  excite  men  to  kn\

thoroughly  and  practically,  Prov.  1.  2.  [15]  1
hear  or  be  informed  of,  Acts  22.  24.  [16]  !;

acknowledge  persons  with  due  respect,  so  as
perform  our  duty  to  them,  1  Tbess.  5.  12.  [1|
To  choose,  Amos  3.  2.  [18]  To  commit ,  or  ha\
2  Cor.  5.  21.  [19]  To  take  particular  notice  <
Gen.  39.  6.

Gen.  3.  5.  God  doth  k.  your  eyes  shall  be  openeo
22.  man  is  become  as  one  of  us,  to  k.  good  and  evjj

15. 13.  said  to  A  bram ,  k.  thy  seed  shall  be  a  Strang

18.  21.  1  will  go  down  and  see,  and  if  not,  1  will
30.  7.  if  thou  restore  her  not,  k.  thou  shalt  die  !

Exod.  18.  16.  1  make  them  k.  the  statutes  of  Godi

33.  12.  hast  not  let  me  k.  whom  thou  wilt  send  :
Num.  14.  31.  they  shall  k.  the  land  ye  have  despisj
Deut.  4.  39.  k.  this  day  and  considerit,  11.  2.

8.  2.  to  prove  thee  and  k.  what  was  in  thy  hear

3.  nor  did  thy  father  k.  he  might  make  thee  X-. 1

13.  3.  proveth  you,  to  k.  whether  ye  love  the  Lo
Josh.  4.  22.  then  ye  shall  let  your  children  k.

22.  22.  the  Lord  knoweth,  and  Israel  he  shall  k
Judg.  3.  4.  to  k.  whether  they  would  hearken  to
Ruth  3.  11.  city  of  my  people  doth  k.  thou  art
14.  she  rose  up  before  one  could  k.  another

18.  sitstill,my  daughter,  till  Ihou  X\how  matte

1  Sam.  17.  47.  and  all  this  assembly  shall  k.  the  Lo:

20.  3.  he  saith,  let  not  Jonathan  k.  this,  lest  griev;

21.  2.  let  no  man  k.  any  thing  of  the  business
24. 11.  k.  and  see  that  there  is  no  evil  in  me
25.  17.  therefore  k.  and  consider  what  thou
28.  1.  Achish  said  to  David,  k.  assuredly  that

2.  surely  thou  shalt  k.  what  thy  servant  can  d

2  Sam.  3.  25.  to  k.  thy  going  out,  to  k.  all  thou  dot

7.  21.  done  these  things  to  make  thy  servants.  thij

14.  20.  to  k.  all  things  that  are  in  the  earth

19.  20.  thy  servant  doth  k.  that  I  have  sinned

1  Kings  8.  38.  k.  every  man  the  plague,  2  Chr.  6.  i

2  Kings  5.  8.  he  shall  k.  that  there  is  a  prophet  in  I,

7.  12.  they  k.  that  we  be  hungry,  therefore

10. 10.  k.  now  that  there  shall  fall  nothing  of  v/of

1  Chr.  12.  32.  Issachar,  to  k.  what  Isr.  ought  to  1
28.  9.  m3'  son,  k.  thou  the  God  of  thy  father

2  Chr.  13.  5.  ought  ye  not  to  k.  that  the  Lord  ga
Ezra  4.  15.  k.  that  this  city  is  a  rebellious  city  1

7.  25.  all  such  as  k.  the  laws  of  thy  God  and  tea
Esth.  2.  11.  Mordecai  walked  to  k.  how  Esther  <j

4.  5.  to  k.  what  it  was,  and  why  it  was

11.  people  k.  whosoever  shall  come  to  the  king
Job  5.  24.  thou  shalt  k.  thy  tabernacle  in  peace  ;
25.  thou  shalt  k.  that  thy  seed  shall  be  great
27.  hear  it,  and  k.  thou  it  for  thy  good

7.  10.  nor  shall  his  place  k.  him  any  more

8.  9.  we  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  k.  nothing
11.6.  k.  therefore  that  God  exacteth  less  than  th)

8.  it  is  deeper  than  hell,  what  canst  thou  k.  ?
13.  23.  make  me  to  k.  my  transgression  and  sir

19.  6.  k.  now  that  God  hath  overthrown  me

21.  19.  God  rewardeth  him,  and  he  shall  k.  it

22. 13.  and  thou  sayest,  how  doth  God  k.

24. 1.  do  they  that  k.  him  not  see  his  days  '

17.  if  one  k.  them,  they  are  in  terrors  of  shadow

34.  4.  let  us  k.  among  ourselves  what  is  good  ;■

37.  15.  dost  thou  k.  when  God  disposed  them

16.  dost  thou  k.  the  balancings  of  the  clouds  ;

38.  12.  and  caused  the  day-spring  to  k.  his  pla<
20.  that  thou  shouldest  k.  the  paths  to  the  non

Psal.  4.  3.  but  k.  the  Lord  hath  set  apart  the  go<

9. 10.  they  that  k.  thy  name  put  their  trust  in  t
36.  10.  continue  thy  loving-kindness  to  them  k.it

39.  4.  Lord,  make  me  to  k.  mine  end,  and  meas
46.  10.  be  still,  and  k.  that  I  am  God,  I  will  b

51.  6.  in  hidden  part  thou  shalt  make  me  to  k.
59.  13.  and  let  them  k.  that  God  ruleth  in  Jac(
73.  11.  how  doth  God  k.  ||  16.  I  thought  to  k.
87.  4.  I  will  mention  Babylon  to  them  that  k.  '
89.  15.  blessed  are  they  that  k.  the  joyful  soun!
103.  16.  the  place  thereof  shall  k.  it  no  more
l?o,  23.  k.  my  heart,  try  me,  and  k.  my  thoug

142.  4.  there  was  no  man  that  would  k.  me  !

143.  8.  cause  me  k.  the  way  wherein  I  should  wti
Prov.  1.  2.  to  k.  wisdom  and  instruction,  to  percr

4.  1.  hear,  and  attend  to  k.  understanding

10.  32.  the  lips  of  righteous  k.  what  is  accepts
27.  23.  be  thou  diligent  to  k.  the  state  of  thy  fit:

Eccl.  1.  17.  and  I  gave  my  heart  t<?  k.  wisdom  1
7.  25.  I  applied  my  heart  to  k.  wisdom  and  fQ
8.16.  when  I  applied  my  heart  to  k.  wisdom  ain't

17.  tho’  a  wise  man  think  to  k.  it  yet  notabh

9.  5.  the  living  k.  they  shall  die,  but  the  oead

11.  9.  but  k.  that  Goa  will  bring  thee  to  mdgn*
Isa.  7.  16.  for  before  the  child  shall  k.  to  refuse

9.  9.  and  all  the  people  shall  k.  even  Ephraim
19.  21.  the  Egyptians  shall  k.  the  Lord  in  that
41.  20.  that  they  may  see  and  k.  and  consider

22.  that  we  may  k.  the  latter  end  of  them

49.  26.  all  flesh  shall  k.  that  1  am  thy  Saviour

50.  4.  should  k.  how  to  speak  in  season  to  wea:

52.  6.  therefore  my  people  shall  k.  my  name


KNO


KNO


KNO


1.  56. 2-  they  seek  me,  and  delight  to  X.  my  ways

t.  lti.  thou  shalt  k.  that  I  the  Lord  am  thy  Saviour
r.  2. 19.  k.  and  see  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  to  forsake
::1.  see  thy  way  in  valley,  k.  what  thou  hast  done

18.  k.  O  congregation,  what  is  among  them

6.  thro’  deceit  they  refuse  to  k.  me,  saith  Lord

15.  X..that  for  thy  sake  I  have  suffered  rebuke
j.  21.  1  will  cause  them  to  k.  my  hand  and  my
might,  and  they  shall  k.  that  my  name  is  the  L.

9. the  heart  is  deceitful,  who  can  k.  it'

2.  16.  was  not  this  to  k.  me  ?  saitli  the  Lord

7. 1  will  give  them  an  heart  to  k.  me

!.  34.  k.  the  L.  for  they  shall  all  k.  me,  Heb.  8. 11.
5,  19-  go,  hide  thee,  let  no  man  k.  w  here  ye  be
5.  24.  he  said,  let  no  man  X.  of  these  words
).  15.  slay  Ishmaeland  no  man  shall  k.  it

1.  28.  Judah  shall  k.  w  hose  words  shall  stand
-,ek.  2. 5.  k.  that  there  hath  been  a  prophet.  33.  33.

13.  shall  k.  1  the  Lord  hath  spoken  in  my  zeal

3. 2.  Jerus.  to  k.  her  abomination,  20.  4.  |  22.  t2.
).  t  11.  and  made  them  to  X.  my  judgments

>.  14.  and  they  shall  k.  my  vengeance,  saith  Lord
1. 19.  all  that  X.  thee  shalt  be  astonished  at  thee

t.  30.  thus  shall  they  k.  that  1  am  with  them

28.  and  the  heathen  shall  X.  39.  23.

in. 2. 21.givestkuowl.  to  them  who  k.  understand.

25.  till  thou  k.  that  the  Most  High  ruleth,  32.
,16.  and  made  me  k.  the  interpretation

19.  I  would  k.  the  truth  of  the  fourth  beast
,  19.  1  will  make  thee  k.  what  shall  be

25.  k.  therefore  and  understand,  that  from

L.  32.  people  that  k.  their  God  shall  be  strong

is.  2.  20.  thou  shalt  k.  the  Lord  ||  9.  7-  shall  k.  it

1.  4.  and  thou  shalt  k.  no  God  but  me

i.  g.  who  is  prudent,  and  he  shall  k.  them

ic.  3.  1.  is  it  not  for  you  to  k.  judgment  ?

ch.  2. 11.  thou  shalt  k.  that  the  Lord  sent  me,  4.  9.

al.  2.  4.  and  ye  shall  k.  that  I  have  sent  this

at. 6.3.  let  not  thy  left  hand  k.  what  thy  right  doeth

11.  if  ye  k.  how  to  give  good  gifts,  Luke  11.  13.
30.  see  no  man  k.  it,  Mark  5.  43.  1  7.  24.  1  9.  30.
(.  ll.dt  is  given  to  you  to  k.  Mark  4. 11.  Luke's.  10.
\.  33.  k.  desolat.  is  near,  Mark  13.  29.  Luke  21 . 20.

3.  but  k.  this,  if  the  goodman,  Luke  12.  39.
hn  4. 42.  we  k.  that  this  is  indeed  the  Christ

17.  if  any  do  his  will,  he  shall  k.  of  the  doctrine
!6.  do  the  rulers  k.  indeed  ||  51.  k.  what  he  doeth
).  4.  the  sheep  follow  him,  for  they  k.  his  voice

4.  I  k.  my  Sheep  ||  13.  7-  thou  shalt  k.  hereafter
1.  35.  by  this  shall  all  men  k.  ye  are  my  disciples

I.  21.  ask  them,  behold,  they  k.  what  1  said

ts  1.7.  it  is  not  for  you  to  k.  the  times  or  seasons

36.  let  all  the  house  of  lsr.  k.  assuredly  that  God

J.  14.  shouldest  k.  his  will  and  see  that  Just  One

9.  they  k.  I  imprisoned  them  that  believed  on  thee

1.  4.  my  manner  of  life  from  my  youth  k.  all  Jews
<m.  7. 1-  I  speak  to  them  that  k.  the  law

).  19.  but  I  say'  did  not  Israel  k.  ?  first  Moses
'or.  2.  14.  neither  can  he  k.  them,  because  they  are

2.  heknoweth  nothing  as  he  ought  to  k.

1. 3.  but  I  would  have  you  k.  that  the  head  is  Chr.
>/i.  3. 19.  and  to  k.  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth
Thess.  3.  5.  for  this  cause  I  sent  to  k.  your  faith

4.  every  one  should  k.  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in

12.  to  k.  them  who  labour  among  you,  and  are
Tim.  4.  3.  of  them  which  believe  and  k.  the  truth
rim.  3.  1.  this  k.  also  that  in  the  last  days  perilous

l.  1. 16.  they  profess  that  they  k.  God, but  in  works

m.  2.  20.  but  wilt  thou  k.  O  vain  man,  that

20.  let  him  k.  he  which  converteth  a  sinner

de  10.  but  w'hat  they  k.  naturally,  as  brute  beasts
•v.  2. 23.  all  the  churches  shall  k.  that  I  am  he  who

9. 1  will  make  them  to  k.  that  I  have  loved  thee
dee  Certain,  Certainly,  Certainty.

I  KKOW.

u.  12. 11.  now  I  k.  that  thou  art  a  fair  woman
>.  8.  whereby  shall  1  k.  that  1  shall  inherit  it?

J.  19.  I  k.  that  he  will  command  his  children

).  6.  1  k.  thou  didst  this  in  integrity  of  thy  heart
■■  12.  fo'  now'  I  k.  that  thou  fearest  God
L  14.  thereby  shall  I  k.  that  thou  hast  shew'ed

5.  19.  Ids  father  said,  1  k.  it,  my  son.  1  k.  it
<xt.  3.  7.  the  Lord  said,  I  k.  their  sorrows

14.  Aaron  thy  brother  I.  k.  he  can  speak  well
30.  1  k.  that  ye  will  not  yet  fear  the  Lord  God

i.  11.  I  k.  the  Lord  is  greater  than  all  gods
i.  12.  yet  thou  hast  said,  I  k.  thee  by  name,  17.

w.  31.  21.  I  k.  their  imagination  even  now
’7-  tor  I  k.  thy  rebellion  and  thy  stiff  neck

.’9.  Ik.  that  after  my  death  ye  will  utterly  corrupt

2. 9._i  X.  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  land
dy.  6.  37.  then  shall  I k.  that  thou  wilt  save
’•  13.  now  k.  I  that  the  Lord  will  do  me  good
iam-  17.  28.7X.thy  pride  and  naughtmessof  heart
).  30.  do  not  I  k.  thou  hast  chosen  son  of  J  esse  ?

.’.  3.  rill  Ik.  what  God  will  do  for  me
t.  20.  7  k.  well  that  thou  shalt  surely  be  king

1. 9.  I  k.  that  thou  ait  good  in  my  sight,  as  angel
\in0r  2.  3.  yea  I  k.  it,  hold  you  your  peace,  5.

I  k.  that  there  is  no  God  in  earth,  but  in  Israel
1  ~^I  k.  the  evil  that  thou  wilt  do  to  Israel
£  ...  I  k.  thy  abode  and  going  out,  Isa.  37.  28.
■'bron.  29.  17.  1.  k.  that  thou  triest  the  heart
bron.  25.  16.  I  k.  that  God  hath  determined
vi)  r  i  **  *s  ?°  °*  a  truth,  but  how  should
d  k.  thou  wilt  not  hold  me  innocent
i  o'  lhin?s  hid,  I  k.  that  this  is  with  thee
".batye  know,  the  same  do  Ik.  also,  not  infer.
s  o-  r?  "*  ^  1  shall  be  justified

;•  that  my  Redeemer  liveth  and  shall  stand

•  *L  /  k.  your  thoughts  and  devices  ye  imagine
,  tor  7  k.  that  thou  wilt  bring  me  to  death

k.  that  thou  canst  do  every  thing
.  •  o.  I  k.  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  anointed
V  I!'  fhis  7  k.  that  thou  favourest  me
1'  J.L  I  L  all  the  fowls  of  the  mountains
lo  k-  for  God  is  for  me

3.V  sr  ^  Lord,  that  thy  judgments  are  right
jo  °r  *  L  ^le  Lord  >s  great  and  above  all  gods
~  /  *  *  i  Lord  will  maintain  the  cause
jV*  ?•,  12.  I  k.  that  there  is  no  goo<l  in  them

4.  I  k.  that  whatsoever  God  doeth,  it  shall  be  for


Eccl.  8. 12.  7  k.  it  shall  be  well  with  them  that  fear  G.
Isa.  47.  8.  nor  shall  l  k.  the  loss  of  children
50.  7-  and  1  X .  that  1  shall  not  be  ashamed
66.  18.  7  X.  their  w’orks  and  their  thoughts
Jer.  10.  23.  7  X'.  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself

1 1.  18.  Lord  hath  given  me  knowledge,  and  1  k.  it

29.  11.  for  7  X.  the  thoughts  that  1  think

23.  7  k.  and  am  a  witness,  saitli  the  Lord
48.  30.  7  k.  his  wrath,  saith  the  Lord,  it  shall

Ezek.  11.  5.  7  k.  things  that  come  into  your  mind
Dan.  2.  9.  therefore  tell  me  the  dream,  and  I  shall  k.
Ilos.  5.  3.  I  k.  Lphraim,  and  Israel  is  net  hid

13.  5.  7  did  X.  thee  in  the  wilderness

Amos  5.  12.  7  k.  your  manifold  transgressions
Jonah  1.  12.  7  k.  that  for  my  sake  this  tempest  is
Mat.  28.  5.  fear  not  ye,  7  k.  that  ye  seek  Jesus
Mark  1.  24.  1  k.  thee  who  thou  art,  Luke  4.  34.
Luke  1.  18.  whereby  shall  7  X-.  this,  for  1  am  old
John  4.  25.  7  k.  that  Messias  cometh,  called  Christ

5.  42.  but  7  k.  you  ||  8. 14.  7  k.  whence  1  came

8.  37.  7  k.  that  ye  are  Abraham’s  seed
55.  but  7  X.  him  ||  9.  25.  one  thing  7  X.

10.  15.  as  Lather  knoweth  me,  so  7  X.  the  Father
27.  and  7  X.  my  sheep,  and  they  follow  me

11.  22.  7  X.  that  what  thou  wilt  ask  of  God

24.  Martha  said,  7  X.  that  he  shall  rise  again

12.  50.  7  X.  his  commandment  is  life  everlasting
13. 18.  1  speak  not  of  all,  1  k.  whom  I  have  chosen

Acts  12.  11.  now  7  X.  of  a  surety  that  the  Lord  sent

19.  15.  Jesus  7  X.  and  Paul  1  k.  but  who  are  ye  ?

20.  25.  7  X.  that  ye  shall  see  my  face  no  more
29.  7  X.  this,  that  after  my  departing,  wolves

24.  22.  7  will  X.  the  uttermost  of  your  matter

26.  3.  because  7  X.  thee  to  be  expert  in  customs

27.  king  Agrippa,  7  X.  that  thou  believest

Rom.  7.  18.  7  X.  that  in  me  dwelleth  no  good  thing

1  Cor.  4.  4.  for  7  X.  nothing  by  myself,  yet  am  1  not
13. 12.  now  7 X.  in  part,  then  shall  7  X.  as  I  am  kno.

2  Cor.  9.  2.  7  X.  the  forwardness  of  your  mind
Phi.  l.  19.  7  X.  this  shall  turn  to  mv  salvation

25.  7  X.  that  1  shall  abide  with  you  all,  and  contin.
2.  19.  be  of  good  comfort,  when  1  k.  you)-  estate

4.  12.  7  X.  how  to  be  abased,  1  k.  how  to  abound
2  Tim.  1.  12.  for  7  X.  whom  I  have  believed

1  John  2.  4.  lie  that  saitli,  7  X.  him,  and  keepeth
Rev.  2.  2.  7  X.  thy  works,  9.  13,  19. 1  3.  1,  8,  15.

2.  9.  7  X.  the  blasphemy  of  them,  who  say
KNOW  not ,  or  not  KNOW.

Gen.  4. 9.  Lord  said,  where  is  Abel  r  he  said,  I  k.not

27.  2.  I  am  old,  I  X.  not  the  day  of  my  death
Lxod.  5.  2.  I  X.  not  the  I  ord,  nor  will  1  let  Israel  go

10.  26.  we  X.  not  with  what  we  must  serve  the  Lord
Vent.  22.  2.  or  if  thou  X.  him  not,  then  bring  it
1  Sam.  3.  7-  now  Samuel  did  not  yet  X.  the  Lord

25.  11.  take  my  bread,  give  to  men  whom  I  X.  not  ?

1  Kings  3.  7-  1  X.  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  in

18.  12.  the  Spirit  shall  carry  thee  whither  1  X.  not

2  Kings  17.  26.  they  X.  not  the  manner  of  G.  of  land
■Ezra  7.  25.  and  teach  ye  them  that  X.  them  not
Neh.  4.  11.  they  shall  not  k.  nor  see,  till  we  come
Job  9.  21 .  though  perfect,  yet  would  I  not  k.  my  soul

15.  9.  what  knowest  thou  that  we  X.  not?

21.  29.  and  do  ye  not  k.  their  tokens  ?

24.  13.  they  X.  not  the  ways  thereof,  nor  abide  in

16.  they  digin  the  dark,  they  X.  not  the  light
32.  22.  for  I  X.  not  to  give  flattering  titles
36.  26.  God  is  great,  and  we  X.  him  not
Psal.  7L  15.  for  1  X.  not  the  numbers  thereof
82.  5.  the}’  X.  not,  neither  will  they  understand
94.  10.  he  that  teacheth  man,  shall  not  he  X.  ?

101.  4.  I  will  not  k.  a  wicked  person
Prov.  4. 19.  they  X.  not  at  what  they  stumble

5.  6.  ways  are  moveable,  that  thou  canst  not  k.  them

24.  12.  doth  not  he  X.  it,  and  shall  not  he  render

25.  8.  lest  thou  X.  not  what  to  do  in  the  end

29.  7-  but  the  wicked  regardeth  not  to  X.  it

30.  18.  yea,  there  are  four  things  which  I  X.  not
Eccl.  9.  5.  but  the  dead  X.  not  any  thing

Cant.  1 .  8.  if  thou  X.  not,  O  fairest  among  women
Isa.  1.  3.  but  Israel  doth  not  k.  nor  consider
43.  19.  shall  ye  rwt  X.  it  ?  ||  44.  8.  1  X.  not  any

47.  11.  thou  shalt  not  X.  from  whence  it  ariseth

48.  6.  even  hidden  things,  and  thou  didst  not  k.  them
59.  8.  way  of  peace  they  X.  not,  shall  not  k.  peace

Jer.  5.  4.  tor  they  X.  not  the  way  of  the  Lord

7.9.  will  ye  walk  after  other  gods,  whom  ye  X.  not?
8.7.  but  my  peopleX.  not  thejudgments  of  the  Lord

9.  3.  and  they  X.  not  me,  saith  the  Lord

10.  25.  thy  fury  on  the  heathen  that  X.  thee  not

14.  18.  go  about  into  a  land  that  they  X.  not,  22.  28.
Ezek.  38.  14.  dwelleth  safely,  shalt  thou  not  k.  it?
lies.  2.  8.  she  did  not  k.  thaJt  I  gave  her  corn,  wine
Amos  3. 10.  for  they  X.  not  to  do  right,  saith  the  L.
Mic.  4.  12.  they  X.  not  the  thoughts  of  the  Lord
Mat.  25.  12.  verily  I  say  unto  you,  1  X.  you  not

26.  70.  Peter  said,  I  X.  not  what  thou  sayest
Mat.  26. 72.  then  began  he  to  curse  and  sw'ear,  say¬
ing,  I  X.  not  the  man,  74.  Mark  14.  68,71.

Mark  10.  38.  Jesus  said,  ye  X.  not  what  ye  ask

12.  24.  ye  err,  because  ye  X.  not  the  scriptures
Luke  1.  34.  how  shall  this  be,  seeing  1  X.  not  a  man

13.  25.  he  shall  say,  1  X.  not  whence  you  are,  27.

22.  57.  denied  him,  saying,  woman,  1  X.  him  not
60.  Peter  said,  man,  1  X.  not  what  thou  sayest

23.  34.  forgive  them,  they  X.  not  what  they  do

24.  16.  eyes  liolden,  that  they  should  not  X.  him
John  1. 26.  standeth  one  among  you  w  hom  ye  X.  not

8.  55.  if  1  should  say,  1  X.  him  not,  1  should  lie

9.  12.  the  blind  man  said,  I  X.  not,  25.

21.  or  who  hath  opened  his  eyes,  we  X.  not
29.  for  this  fellow,  we  X.  not  from  whence  he  is

10.  5.  for  they  X.  not  the  voice  of  strangers

14.  5.  Lord,  we  X.  not  whither  thou  goest

15.  21.  because  they  X.  not  him  that  sent  me

20. 2.  we  X.  n.  H 13. 1  X.  not  where  they  have  lain  him
Acts  21.  .34.  and  when  he  could  not  k.  the  certainty
Rom.  8.  26.  for  we  X.  not  what  w>e  should  pray  for
1  Cor.  1. 16.  I  X.  not  whether  1  baptized  any  other
2.  2.  I  determined  not  to  X.  any  thing  among  you
14.  11.  if  I  X.  not  the  meaning  of  the  voice

1  Thess.  4.  5.  as  the  Gentiles  which  X.  not  God

2  Thess.  1. 8.  vengeance  on  them  that  X.  not  God


1  Tim.  3.  5.  if  a  man  X.  not  how  to  rule  his  house
Jude  10.  these  speak  evil  of  things  they  X.  not
Rev.  3.  3.  thou  shalt  not  k.  what  hour  I  will  come
See,  LeKNOW.

KNOW  that  1  am  the  I. ord.

Exod.  6,  7-  ye  shall  X.  that  1  am  the  Lord,  16.  12.
1  Kings  20.  28.  Ezek.  6.  7,  13.  |  7.  4,  9.  I  11.  10,
12.112.  20.113.  9,  14,  21,  23.|14.  8-  1  15.  7.
|  20.  38,  42,  44. 1  23.  49. 1  24.  24.  |  25.  5. 1  35.  9
I  36.  11.  |37-  6,  13.  Joel  3.  17.

7-  5.  and  the  Egyptians  shall  X.  t.  Iam  L.  14. 4, 18
17.  thou  shalt  k.  1  am  L.  1  Kings  20.  13.  Isa.  49
23.  Ezek.  16.  62.  |  22.  16.  I  25.  7-  I  35.  4,  12.

8.  22.  to  end  that  thou  rnayest  X.  that  Iam  the  Lord

10.  2.  that  ye  may  X.  t.  I  am  L.  .31. 13.  Lzek.  20.  20
29.  46.  they  shall  X.  that  1  am  the  Lord,  Lzek.  6.  10

14.  |  7.  27.  I  12.  15,  16. 1  24.  27. 1  25.  11,  17- 1  26

6. 1  28.  22,  23.  24,  26.  I  29-  9,  16,  21.1  30.  8,  19,

25,  26.  I  32.  15.  |  33.  29. 1  34.  27. 1  35.  15. 1  36.  38.
I  38.  23.  |  39.  6,  28.

Deut.  29.  6.  that  ye  might  X.  that  I  am  the  Lord
Jer.  24.  7.  1  will  give  them  an  heart  to  X.  I  am  Ld.
Ezek.  20. 12.  my  sabbat.  that  they  might  k.IamL. 26.

36.  23.  and  the  heathen  shall  X.  I  am  the  L.  39.  7.
39.  22.  tiie  house  of  Israel  shall  X.  that  lam  the  L.

May,  rnayest,  or  might  KNOW.

Exod.  8. 10.  thou  rnayest  X.  there  is  none  like  G.  9.14.
9. 29.  that  thou  rnayest  k.  that  the  earth  is  the  Lord’s

11.  7.  ye  may  k.  the  Lord  doth  put  a  difference
33.  5.  that  1  may  k.  what  to  do  to  thee

13.  shew  me  thy  way,  that  I  may  X.  thee
Lev.  23.  43.  that  your  generations  may  X.  that
Num.  22.  19.  that  1  may  X.  what  the  Lord  will  say
Dent.  4.  35.  that  thou  mightest  k.  that  the  L.  he  is  G.
Josh.  3. 4.  ye  may  k.  the  way  by  which  ye  should  go

7 .  they  may  k.  that  as  1  was  with  Moses,  so  1  will
4.  24.  ail  people  might  k.  the  hand  of  the  Lord

Judg.  3.  2.  that  Israel  might  k.  to  teach  them  war

18.  5.  we  may  k.  whether  our  way  be  prosperous
Ruth  4.  4.  if  not,  then  tell  me,  that  1  may  k.

1  Sam.  17.  46.  that  all  the  earth  may  k.  there  is  a  G,

in  Israel,  1  Kings 8.  43,  60.  2  Kings  19.  19.

2  Sam.  24.  2.  that  I  may  k.  the  number  of  the  peop.

1  A  ings  18.  37.  this  people  may  k.  that  thou  art  God

2  Chron.  6.  33.  that  all  people  may  k.  thy  name,
and  may  X.  that  this  house  is  called  by  thy  name

12.  8.  his  servants,  that  they  may  k.  my  service
Job  19.  29.  that  ye  may  k.  there  is  a  judgment

31.  6.  be  weighed,  that  God  may  k.  my  integrity
37-7-  that  all  men  may  X.  his  work
Psal. 9.  20.  nations  may  X.  themselves  to  be  but  men
39.  4.  measure  of  days,  that  may  k.  how  frail  1  am
78.  6.  that  the  generation  to  come  might  k.  them
83.  18.  that  men  may  k.  that  thou  art  the  Most  High
109.  27.  that  they  may  k.  that  this  is  thy  hand
119.  125.  that  I  may  X.  thy  testimonies
Isa.  5.  19.  let  counsel  draw  nigh  that  we  may  X.  it
7 . 15.  that  he  may  k.  to  refuse  the  evil

37 .  20.  that  all  may  X.  that  thou  art  the  Lord
41.  23.  that  we  may  X.  ye  are  gods,  yea,  do  good

26.  who  hath  declared,  that  we  may  k.  and  before

43.  10.  ye  may  X.  and  believe  me,  and  understand
45.  3.  that  thou  rnayest  k.  that  I  am  the  G.  of  lsr.

6.  that  they  may  X.  from  the  rising  of  the  sun
Jer.  6.  27.  that  thou  rnayest  k.  and  try  their  way

44.  29.  that  ve  may  k.  that  my  words  shall  stand
Ezek.  21.  5.  all  flesh  may  k.  I  have  drawn  m3'  sword

38.  16.  against  the  land,  that  heathen  may  k.  me
Dan.  2.  30.  mightest  k.  the  thoughts  of  thy  heart
4.  17.  to  the  intent  that  the  living  may  X.

Jonah  1.  7.  come,  let  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may  k.
Mic.  6.  5.  ye  may  k.  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord
Mat.  9.  6.  but  that  ye  may  k.  that  the  Son  of  man
hath  power  to  forgive,  Mark  2.  10.  Luke  5.  24.
John  10.  38.  ye  may  k.  and  believe  the  Path,  is  in  me

14.  31.  that  the  world  may  k.  I  love  Fath.  17.  23.

17.  3.  that  they  might  k.  thee  the  only  true  God

19.  4.  that  ye  may  k.  that  1  find  no  fault  in  him
Acts  17.  19.  may  we  X.  what  this  new  doctrine  is  '

21.  24.  all  may  k.  that  those  things  are  nothing

1  Cor.  2. 12.  wre  might  X.  the  things  given  us  of  God

2  Cor.  2.  4.  that  ye  might  k.  the  love  I  have  to  you

9.  that  I  might  X.  the  proof  of  you,  whether  }Te  be
Eph.  1.  18.  that  ye  may  X.  the  hope  of  his  calling

6.  22.  whom  1  sent,  that  ye  might  X.  our  affairs"
Phil.  3.  10.  that  1  may  k.  him,  and  the  power  of  his
Col.  4.  6.  that  ye  may  X.  how  to  answer  evety  man

8.  whom  1  sent,  that  he  might  k.  your  estate

1  Tim.  3.  15.  thou  may  X.  how  thou  oughtest  to  beh.

1  John  5.  13.  that  ye  may  X.  ye  have  eternal  life

20.  given  us,  that  we  may  k.  him  that  is  true
We  KNOW,  or  KNOW  we.

Gen.  29.  5.  know  ye  Laban  ?  they  said,  we  X.  him
Deut.  18.  21.  if  thou  say,  how  shall  vie  X.  the  word

1  Sam.  6.  9.  then  shall  we  X.  it  is  not  his  hand

2  (  hr.  20.  12.  we  have  no  might,  nor  X.  ire  what  to  do
Job  36.  26.  behold,  God  is  great,  and  we  X.  him  not
Isa.  59.  12.  as  for  our  iniquities,  we  X.  them

Ilos.  6.  3.  then  shall  we  X.  if  we  follow  on  to  know
8.  2.  Israel  shall  cry  tome,  my  God.  we  k.  thee
Mat.  22.  16.  we  X.  thou  art  true,  ana  teachest  the
way  of  God,  Mark  12.  14.  Luke  (20.  21.
John  3. 2.  we  k.  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God

11.  verily  1  say  to  thee,  we  speak  thatzredoX.

4.  22.  we  k.  what  we  worship  ;  for  salvation  is  of

6.  42.  Jesus,  whose  father  and  mother  we  k.  ?

7-  27.  howbeit,  we  k.  whence  this  man  is

8.  52.  now  we  k.  that  thou  hast  a  devil

9.  20.  we  k.  that  this  is  our  son  who  was  blind
24.  said  to  him,  we  k.  that  this  man  is  a  sinner
29.  we  X.  that  God  spake  to  Moses,  as  for  this
31.  now  we  X.  that  God  heareth  not  sinners

14.  5.  Thomas  saith  to  him,  Ld.  we  X.  not  whithe,
thou  goest.  ana  how  can  we  a.  the  way  t

21.  24.  ana  we  k.  that  ms  testimony  is  true
Acts  17.  20.  we  would  X.  what  these  things  mean

28.  22.  we  X.  it  is  every  where  spoken  against
Rom.  3.  19.  we  k.  that  what  things  the  law  saith

7.  14.  for  we  X.  that  the  law  is  spiritual,  but  1  am

8.  22.  we  k.  the  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travail.
28.  we  k.  that  all  things  work  together  for  good

1  Cor.  8.  1.  we  k.  that  we  all  have  knowledge

265


KNO


K  N  O


KN  O


1  Cor.  8. 4.  we  k.  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world

13.  9.  for  we  k.  in  part,  and  prophesy  in  part

2  Cor.  5.  1.  for  we  k.  that  if  our  earthly  house

16.  k.  ire  no  man  after  the  flesh,  k.  ice  him  no  more
1  Tim.  1.  8.  but  we  k.  that  the  law  is  good
Ileb.  10.  30.  for  we  k.  him  that  hath  said,  vengeance
1  John  2. 3.  hereby  we  k.  that  wek.  him,  if  we  Keep

5.  hereby  k.  we  that  we  are  in  him

18.  whereby  we  k.  that  it  is  the  last  time

3.  2.  but  we  k.  that  when  he  shall  appear

14.  we  k.  that  we  have  passed  from  death  to  life

19.  hereby  we  k.  that  we  are  of  the  truth

24.  hereby  we  k.  that  he  abideth  in  us

4.  6.  hereby  k.  we  the  spirit  of  truth  and  error

13.  hereby  k.  we  that  we  dwell  in  him

5.  2.  by  this  we  k.  we  love  the  children  of  God

15.  and  if  we  k.  that  he  heareth  us,  we  k.  that  we

have  the  petitions  that  we  desired  of  him

18.  we  k.  whosoever  is  born  of  God,  sinneth  not

19.  we  k.  that  we  are  of  God,  aird  the  world  lieth

20.  and  we  k.  that  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  an
understanding,  that  we  may  k.  him  that  is  true

Ye  KNOW,  or  KNOW  ye.

Gen.  29.  5.  he  said,  k.  ye  Laban  the  son  of  Nahor  ?

31.  6.  ye  k.  that  with  all  my  power  1  served  your
44.  27-  ve  k.  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  sons
Exod.  16.  6.  at  even  ye  shall  k.  the  Lord  brought

23.  9.  ye  k.  the  heart  of  a  stranger,  seeing  ye  were
Num.  14.  34.  ye  shall  k.  my  breach  of  promise

16.  28.  ye  shall  k.  that  the  Lord  hath  sent  me
Josh.  3. 10.  ye  shall  k.  the  living  God  is  among  you

23  14.  and  ye  k.  in  all  your  hearts  and  souls
Judy.  18. 14.  ye  k.  there  is  in  these  houses  an  ephod

1  Kings  92,.  3.  k.ye  that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  ours?

2  Kings  9. 1 1  .ye  k.  the  man  and  his  communication
Job  13.  2.  what  ye  k.  the  same  do  I  know

Psal.  100. 3.  k.  ye  that  the  Lord  he  is  God,  he  made
Isa.  51.  7-  hearken,  ye  that  k.  righteousness
Jer.  26. 15.  k.ye  for  certain,  if  ye  put  me  to  death
48.  17.  all  ye  that  k.  his  name,  say,  how  is
Ezek.  14.  23.  ye  shall  k.  that  I  have  not  done

17.  21.  ye  shall  k.  1  the  Lord  have  spoken,  37.  14.
Joel  2.  27.  ye  shall  k.  that  1  am  in  midst  of  Israel
Zech.  2.  9.  ye  shall  k.  the  Lord  hath  sent  me,  6. 15.
Mat.  7. 16.  ye  shall  k.  them  by  their  fruits,  20.

20.  25.  ye  k.  princes  of  the  Gentiles,  Mark  10.  42.

24. 32 .ye  k.  summer  nigh,  Mark  1.3.  28.  Luke  21.30.
25. 13.  watch,  for  ye  k.  neither  day  nor  hour
Mark  4. 13.  he  said  to  them,  k.  ye  not  this  parable  ?
Luke  21. 31.  k.  ye  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  nigh
John  7.  28.  ye  both  k.  me,  and  know  whence  1  am

8. 28.  ye  shall  k.  I  am  he  ||  32.  ye  shall  k.  the  truth

11.  49.  /.  ye  nothing  ||  13.  12.  k.  ye  what  1  have

[done

13. 17.  ifyek.  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  do  them

14.  4.  whither  I  go  ye  k.  and  the  way  ye  k.

7.  from  henceforth  ye  k.  him,  and  have  seen,  17.
20.  ye  shall  k.  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  you  in  me

15.  18.  ye  k.  that  it  hated  me  before  it  hated  you
Acts  2.  22.  man  approved,  as  ye  yourselves  also  k.

10.28.  ye  k.  how  that  it  is  unlawful  for  a  .lew
15.7-  brethren,  ye  k.  how  that  a  good  while  ago

19.  25.  ye  k.  that  by  this  craft  we  have  our  wealth

20.  18.  ye  k.  from  the  first  day  that  I  came

1  Cor.  12.  2.  ye  k.  that  ye  were  Gentiles,  carried

15.  58.  ye  k.  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord

16.  15.  brethren,  ye  k.  the  house  of  Stephanas

2  Cor.  8.  9.  ye  k.  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ

13.  6.  I  trust  ye  shall  k.  we  are  not  reprobates

Gal.  3.  7-  k.  ye  that  they  which  are  of  faith

4.  13.  ye  k.  how  through  infirmities  I  preached
Eph.  5.  5.  for  this  ye  k.  that  no  whoremonger
Phil.  2.  22.  ye  k.  the  proof  of  him,  that  as  a  son

1  Thess.  1.  5.  as  ye  k.  what  manner  of  men  we  were

2.  2.  and  were  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye  k.

5.  nor  used  we  flattering  words,  as  ye  k.

11.  ye  k.  how  we  exhorted  and  comforted

3.4.  even  as  it  came  to  pass,  and  ye  k.

4.  2.  ye  k.  what  commandments  we  gave  by  Lord

2  T/iiss.  2.  6.  and  now  ye  k.  what  withholdeth
lieb.  12. 17-  ye  k.  when  he  would  have  inherited

13.  23.  k.  ye  that  our  brother  Timothy  is  set  at

1  Pet.  1.  18.  ye  k.  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  with

2  Pet.  1. 12.  put  you  in  remembrance,  tho’ye  k.  them

3.  17.  seeing  ye  k.  these  things  before,  beware

1  John  2.  20.  ye  k.  all  things  ||  21.  because  ye  k.  it
29.  if  ye  k.  he  is  righteous,  ye  k.  that  every  one

3.  5.  ye  k.  he  was  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins

15.  ye  k.  no  murderer  hath  eternal  life  in  him

4.  2.  hereby  k.  ye  the  Spirit  of  God,  eiery  spirit

3  John  12.  and  ye  k.  that  our  record  is  true

Ye  KNOW  not,  or  KNOW  ye  not.

2  Sam.  3.  38.  k.  ye  not  that  there  is  a  prince  fallen
2  Chr.  32. 13.  k.  ye  not  what  I  and  my  fathers  have
Job  21.  29.  have  not  asked,  do  ye  not  k.  their  tokens
Ezek.  17. 12.  k.  ye  not  what  these  things  mean  ?
Mat.  20.  22.  Jesus  said,  ye  k.  not  what  ye  ask

24.  42.  ye  k.  not  what  hour  your  Lord  doth  come
Mark  4.  13.  he  said  to  them,  k.  ye  not  this  parable  ?

12.  24.  ye  err,  because  ye  k.  not  the  scriptures

13.  33.  watch,  for  ye  k.  not  when  the  time  is,  35.
Luke  9.  55.  ye  k.  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  be  of
John  1.  26.  standeth  one  among  you,  whom  ye  k.  not

4.22.  ye  worshipye  k.  not  what  ||  32.  meat  ye  k.  not  of

7.  28.  he  that  sent  me  is  true,  whom  ye  k.  not

8.  19.  ye  neither  k.  me  nor  my  Father

9.  30.  that  ye  k.  not  from  whence  he  is,  and  yet
1 iom.  6.  3.  k.  ye  not  that  so  many  as  were  baptized

16.  k.  ye  not  that  to  whom  ye  yield  servants
7-  1.  k.ye  not,  brethren,  for  1  speak  to  them  that

1  Cor.  3. 16.  k.  ye  not  ye  are  temple  of  G.  6.  15, 19.

5.  6.  k.  ye  not  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  lump

6.  2.  do  ye  not  k.  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?

3.  k.  ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels  ?

9-  k.  ye  not,  the  unrighteous -snail  not  inherit
16.  k.  ye  not,  that  he  which  is  joined  to  an  harlot
9.  13.  do  ye  not  k.  that  they  which  minister
24.  k.ye  not,  that  they  which  run  in  a  race,  run  all

2  Cor.  13. 5.  k.  ye  not  yourselves,  that  J  esus  is  in  vou
Jam.  4.  4.  k.  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  the  world

14.  ye  k.  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow
1  John  2. 21.  not  written,  because  ye  k.  not  the  truth
266


K  NOWEST.

Gen.  30.  26.  thou  k.  my  service  that  I  have  done
29.  thou  k,  how  1  have  served  thee,  and  thy  cattle
47.  6.  and  if  thou  k.  any  man  of  activity  among
Exod.  10.  7.  k.  thou  not  that  Egypt  is  destroyed

32.  22.  thou  k.  the  people  are  set  on  mischief
Num.  10.  31.  for  thou  i.  how  we  are  to  encamp

20.  14.  thou  k.  the  travel  that  hath  befallen
Dent.  7.  15.  the  diseases  of  Egypt,  which  thou  k.

9.  2.  the  children  of  the  Anakims,  whom  thou  k.
28.  33.  a  nation  thou  k.  not,  shall  eat  up
Josh.  14.  6.  thou  k.  the  thing  that  the  Lord  sai  l
Judg.  15.  11.  k.  thou  not  the  Philistines  are  rulers
1  Sam.  28.9.  woman  said,  thou  k.  what  Saul  hath  done
2 Sam.  1.5.  how/-.  thou  that  Saul  and  Jonath.  be  dead

2.  26.  k.  thou  not  that  it  will  be  bitterness  in  end  ?

3.  25.  thou  k.  Abner  the  son  of  Ner,  that  he  came
7.20.  thou,  Lord,  k.  thy  servant,  1  Chron.  17.  18.

17.  8.  for,  said  Hushai,  thou  k.  thy  father

1  Kings  1.  18.  my  lord  the  king,  thou  k.  it  not

2.  5.  thou  k.  also  what  Joab  did  to  me

9.  thou  k.  what  thou  oughtest  to  do  to  him

15.  thou  k.  that  the  kingdom  was  mine
44.  thou  k.  all  the  wickedness  thou  didst  to  David

8.  39.  whose  heart  thou  k.  thou  only  k.  2  Chr.  6.  30.

2  Kings  2.  3.  k.  thou  the  Ld.  will  take  thy  master,  5.
4. 1.  thou  k.  that  thy  servant  did  fear  trie  Lord

Job  10.  7.  thou  k.  that  1  am  not  wicked

15.  9.  what  k.  thou  that  we  know  not  ?'

20.  4.  k.  thou  not  this  of  old,  since  man  was
34.  33.  therefore  speak  what  thou  k.

38. 5.  who  hath  laid  measures  of  earth,  if  thou  k.  ?

18.  breadth  of  the  earth,  declare,  if  thou  k.  it  all

21.  k.  thou  it,  because  thou  wast  then  born?

33.  k.  thou  the  ordinances  of  heaven  ?

39.  1.  k.  thou  when  the  wild  goats  bring  forth,  2.
Psal.  40. 9-  not  refrained,  O  La.  thou  k.  Jer.  15.  15.
69.  5.  O  God,  thou  k.  my  foolishness
139.  2.  thou  k.  my  down  sitting  and  up-rising

4.  lo,  O  Lord,  thou  k.  it  altogether

Prov.  27.  1.  thou  k.  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth
Eccl.  11.  2.  thou  /-.  not  what  evil  shall  be

5.  as  thou  k.  not  what  is  the  way  of  the  Spirit,

even  so  thou  k.  not  the  works  of  God

6.  for  thou  k.  not  whether  shall  prosper

Isa.  55.  5.  thou  shalt  call  a  nation  that  thou  k.  not
Jer.  5.  15.  a  nation  whose  language  thou  k.  not

12.  3.  but  thou,  O  Lord,  k.  me,  thou  hast  seen  me
15.14.  into  a  land  which  thou  k.  not,  17.  4.

17. 16.  nor  have  I  desired  the  woeful  day,  thou  k.

18.  23.  thou  k.  all  their  counsel  to  slay  me

33.  3.  1  will  shew  thee  things  which  thou  k.  not
Ezek.  37-3.  and  I  answered,  O  Lord  God,  thou  k.
Dan.  10. 20.  said,  k.  thou  wherefore  1  come  to  thee
Zech.  4.  5.  angel  said,  k.  thou  not  what  these  be,  13.
Mat.  15. 12.  k.  thou  that  the  Pharisees  were  offended
Mark  10.  19.  thou  k.  commandments,  Luke  18.  20.
Luke  22.  34.  shall  thrice  deny  that  thou  k.  me
John  1.  48.  Nathanael  said,  whence  k.  thou  me  ?

3.  10.  art  thou  a  master,  and  /-.  not  these  things  ?

13.  7.  Jesus  said,  what  I  do,  thou  k.  not  now

16.  30.  we  are  sure  thou  k.  all  things,  21.  17.

19.  10.  k.  thou  not  1  have  power  to  crucify

21.  15.  yea,  Lord,  thou  k.  that  I  love  thee,  16.

Acts  1.  24.  thou  which  k.  the  hearts  of  all  men

25.  10.  I  have  done  no  wrong,  as  thou  very  well  k.
Horn.  2.  18.  k.  his  will,  and  approvest  the  things

1  Cor.  7. 16.  what  k.  thou,  O  wife,  k.  thou,  O  man  ?

2  Tim.  1. 15.  thou  k.  that  all  they  in  Asia  be  turned

18.  how  he  ministered  to  me,  thou  k.  very  well
Rev.  3.  17  -  and  k.  not  that  thou  art  wretched,  blind

7.  14.  and  I  said  unto  him,  sir,  thou  k.

KNOWETH.

Gen.  33.  13.  my  lord  k.  the  children  are  tender
Lev.  5.  3.  when  he  k.  of  it,  he  shall  be  guilty,  4.
Deut.  2.  7-  he  k.  thy  walking  thro’  this  wilderness

34.  6.  no  man  k.  of  Moses’  sepulchre  to  this  day
Josh.  22.  22.  the  Lord  God  of  gods,  he  k.  and  Israel

1  Sam.  3. 13.  Eli’s  house  for  the  iniquity  which  he  k.

20.  3.  thy  father  certainly  k.  that  l  found  grace
23.  17.  and  that  also  Saul  my  father  k.

2  Sam.  14.  22.  thy  servant  k.  that  I  found  grace

17.  10.  all  Israel  k.  thy  father  is  a  mighty  man
Job  11. 11.  he  k.  vain  men,  he  seeth  wdekedness

15. 23.  he  k.  the  day  of  darkness  is  ready  at  his  hand
23.  10.  but  he  k.  the  w7ay  that  1  take
28.  7-  there  is  a  path  which  no  fowl  k.

23.  God  understandeth  and  k.  the  place  thereof

34.  25.  therefore  he  k.  their  works  and  overturned!
Psal.  1.  6.  the  Lord  k.  the  way  of  the  righteous

37. 18.  the  Ixird  /.  the  days  of  the  upright

44.  21.  for  he  k.  the  secrets  of  the  heart

74.  9.  nor  is  there  any  among  ns  that  k.  how  long

94.  11.  Lord  k.  the  thoughts  of  man  are  vanity

103.  14.  he  k.  our  frame,  remembereth  we  are  dust

104.19.  moon  for  seasons,  the  sun  k.  his  going  down

138.  6.  but  the  proud  he  k.  afar  off

139.  14.  thy  works,  and  that  my  soul  k.  right  well
Prov.  9. 13.  foolish  woman  is  simple  and  /-.nothing

14.  10.  the  heart  k.  his  own  bitterness,  and  stranger
Eccl.  6. 8.  the  poor,  that  k.  to  walk  before  the  living

7.  22.  thine  own  heart  k.  thou  hast  cursed  others

9.  1.  no  man  k.  either  love  or  hatred  by  all  that
Isa.  1.  3.  the  ox  k.  hisovmer,  the  ass  his  master’s  crib
Jer.  8.  7 .  the  stork  k.  her  appointed  times,  and  turtle

9.  24.  glory,  that  he  understandeth  and  k.  me
Dan.  2.  22.  he  k.  what  is  in  the  darkness,  and  light
Nah.  1.  7.  Lord  is  good,  he  k.  them  that  trust  in  him
Zeph.  3.  5.  he  faileth  not,  but  the  unjust /.  no  shame
Mat.  6.  8.  your  Father  k.  what  things  ye  need

32.  k.  ye  have  need  of  all  these  things,  Luke  12.  30.
11.27.  no  man  k.  the  Son  but  the  father,  nor  any
k.  the  Father  save  the  Son,  Luke  10.  22.

24.  36.  of  that  day  k.  no  man,  Mark  13.  32.

Luke  16.  15.  ye  justify,  but  God  k.  your  hearts
John  7.  15.  saying,  how7  k.  thisman  letters  ?

27.  when  Christ  cometh.,  no  man/-,  whence  he  is

10.  15. as  the  Father/-,  me  ||  14.  17.  nor  k.  him

19.  35.  he  saw  it,  and  he  k.  that  he  saith  true
Acts  15.  8.  God  which  k.  the  hearts  bare  witness

26.  26.  for  the  king  k.  of  these  things  before  whom
Rom.  8.  27.  he  k.  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit


1  Cor.  2.  11.  for  what  man  k.  the  things  of  a  inaj

even  so  the  things  of  God  k.  no  man  but  Spir

8.  2.  if  any  man  think  he  k.  any  thing,  he  k.  nothit

2  Cor.  11.  11.  because  I  love  you  not  ?  God  /-.

31 .  God  k.  I  lie  not  l|  12.  2. 1  cannot  tell,  God  L

2  'Jim.  2.  19.  the  Lord  k.  them  that  are  his
Jam.  4.  17.  to  him  that  k.  to  do  good,  and  doeth  m
2  Pet.  2.  9.  the  Lord  k.  how  to  deliver  the  godly  j
1  John  3.  20.  and  k.  all  things  ||  4.  6.  he  that  /-.  God

4.  7.  he  that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  k.  God
Rev.  2.  17.  a  new  name  written,  which  no  man  t

12. 12.  because  he  k.  that  he  hath  but  a  short  time'
Who  KNOWETH,  or  KNOWETH  not.

1  Kings  1. 11.  doth  reign,  and  Dav.  our  Ld.  k.  it  n  >
Esth.  4. 14.  who  k.  whether  thou  art  come  to  kingi,
Job  12.  3.  yea,  who  k.  not  such  things  as  these  ?  ;

9.  who  k.  not  in  all  these,  that  the  hand  of  Lor*

14.  21.  his  sons  come  to  honour,  he  k.  it  not

18.  21.  this  is  the  place  of  him  that  k.  not  God
28.  13.  man  /-.  not  the  price  thereof,  nor  is  it  founi

35.  15.  he  hath  visited  in  anger,  yet  he  k.  it  not
Ps.  39.  6.  riches,  and  k.  not  w  ho  shall  gather  thei
90.  11.  who  k.  the  power  of  thine  anger  ?

92.6.  a  brutish  man  k.  not,  nor  a  fool  understand  th-
Prov.  7.  23.  and  k.  not  that  it  is  for  his  life

9.  18.  but  he  k.  not  that  the  dead  are  theie
24.  22.  and  who  k.  the  ruin  of  them  both  ?

Eccl.  2.  19.  who  k.  whether  he  be  wise  or  a  fool

3.  21 .  who  k.  the  spirit  of  man  that  goeth  upward

6.  12.  for  who  k.  what  is  gopd  for  man  in  life

8.  1.  who  /-.  the  interpretation  of  a  thing  ?

7.  for  he  k.  not  that  which  shall  be

9.  12.  for  man  also  k.  not  his  time,  as  the  fishes!

10.  15.  because  he  k.  not  how  to  go  to  the  city
Isa.  29.  15.  and  they  say,  who  seeth  us,  who  k.  us  i
Hos.  7.  9.  gray  hairs  here  and  there,  yet  he  k.  not]
Joel  2.  14.  who  k.  if  he  will  return  and  repent
Mark  4.  27.  and  seed  should  grow  up,  he  k.  not  ho
John  7.  49.  but  this  people,  who  k.  not  the  law  i

12.  35.  walketh  in  darkness,  k.  not  whither  he  goej

15.  15.  the  servant  k.  not  what  his  lord  doeth
Acts  19.  35.  what  man  that  k.  not  that  Ephesians!
1  John  2. 11.  w7alketh  in  darkness,  k.  not  whither  go

3. 1.  therefore  the  world  /-.us  not,  it  knew  him  hi

4.  8.  he  that  loveth  not,  /-.  not  God,  for  God  is  lo’j

KNOWING.

Gen.  3.5.  ye  shall  be  as  gods,  k.  good  and  evil
43.  t  7.  k.  could  we  know  he  would  say,  bring  |

1  Kings  2.  32.  slew  them,  my  father  David  not  /-.

2  Chron.  2.  t  12.  to  David  a  wise  son,  k.  prudenc
Mat.  9.  4.  Jesus  k.  their  thoughts,  I.uke  11.  17.

22.  29.  ye  err,  not  k.  the  scriptures  nor  powerof  (!
Mark  5.  30.  Jesus  immediately  k.  in  himself  virtu
33.  but  the  woman  k.  what  was  done  in  her

6.  20.  feared  John,  k.  that  he  was  a  just  man

12.  15.  but  he  k.  their  hypocrisy,  said  to  them  1
Luke  8.  53.  they  laughed,  k.  that  she  was  dead

9.  33.  and  one  for  Elias,  not  k.  what  he  said
John  13.  3.  Jesus  k.  the  father  had  given  all  thin ;
18. 4.  Jesus/-,  all  things  that  should  come  upon  hi;

19.  28.  Jesus  k.  that  all  things  v7ere  accomplished

21. 12.  none  durst  ask  him,  k.  that  it  was  the  I  .oil
Acts  2.  30.  /-.  that  God  had  sworn  with  an  oath  ;

5.  7.  his  wife  not  k.  what  was  done,  came  in
18.  25.  he  taught,  k.  only  the  baptism  of  John

20.  22.  not  k.  the  things  that  shall  befall  me  theij
Rom.  1.  32.  who  k.  the  judgment  of  God  that  the!

2.  4.  not  k.  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  theJ

5.  3.  k.  that  tribulation  worketh  patience

6.  6.  /.  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  hi
9.  k.  Chr.  being  raised  from  dead,  dieth  no  moi

13.  11.  k.  the  time,  now  it  is  high  time  to  awake ;
2  Cor.  1.7 .  k.  that  as  ye  are  partakers  of  sufferinj

4.  14.  k.  that  he  w  hich  raised  the  Lord  Jesus

5.  6.  k.  that  w7hilst  we  are  at  home  in  the  body  ;

11.  k.  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  wre  persuade  men

Gal.  2.  16.  /.  that  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  la
Eph.  6.  8.  k.  that  whatsoever  good  any  man  doeth
9.  k.  that  your  master  is  in  heaven,  Col.  4.1.
Phil.  1. 17.  k.  that  I  am  set  for  defence  of  gospe!
Col.  3.  24.  /.  that  of  the  L.  ye  shall  receive  rewar
1  Thess.  1.  4.  k.  beloved,  your  election  of  God  .

1  Tim.  1.9.  k.  this,  that  tne  law  is  made  for  lawla

6.  4.  is  proud,  /-.  nothing,  but  doting  about questing

2  Tim.  2.  23.  questions,  k.  that  they  do  genderstrii

3.  14.  k.  of  whom  thou  hast  learned  them
Tit.  3.  11.  k.  that  he  that  is  such,  is  subverted
Philem.  21.  k.  that  thou  wilt  do  more  than  1  saw
Heb.  10.  34.  k.  ye  have  in  heaven  a  better  substan

11.  8.  he  went  out,  not  k.  whither  he  went
Jam.  1.3.  k.  this,  that  the  trying  of  your  faith

3.  1.  k.  we  shall  receive  greater  condemnation

1  Pet.  3. 9.  blessing,  /.  that  ye  are  thereunto  calle*

5.  9.  k.  the  same  afflictions  are  accomplished  in

2  Pet.  1. 14.  k.  that  shortly  1  must  put  oft  thistabej

20.  k.  this,  that  no  prophecy  of  scripture  is  of

3.  3.  k.  that  there  shall  come  scoffers  in  last  daj
KNOWLEDGE

Signifies,  [1J  The  essential  and  infinite  understar
ing  of  God,  by  which  he  knows  every  thing  in  »
most  perfect  manner,  1  Sam.  2.  3.  [2]  A  hi
understanding  of  divine  truths,  without  faith
Christ,  and  love  to  our  Christian  brethren,  1  C

8.  1.  [3]  A  right  understanding  and  concept ..
of  spiritual  things,  2  Cor.  6.  6.  [4]  That  kv<
ledge  of  God's  will,  and  of  the  way  of  s ah at)
which  is  in  Christ  in  its  highest  perfection,  a
which  by  him  is  revealed  to  his  people,  and  1
printed  on  their  minds  and  hearts  by  his  qfWj
so  as  to  produce  faith,  love,  and  obedience,  Isa
11.  [5]  Christian  prudence  and  holy  expenei
in  the  ways  of  God,  2  Cor.  8.7-  2  Pet.  1.  5.  6.  j
That  imperfect  knowledge  of  divine  things  wh]
we  have  in  this  world,  1  Cor.  13.  8.  17]  J  he  {
of  interpreting  dreams,  Dan.  5.  12.  It  is  11]  r
tural,  that  knowledge  which  men  have  by  the  In
of  nature,  Rom.  1.  21,  28.  Jude  10.  [2]  A|
ncial,  such  as  is  bestowed  on  men  for  devts
curious  and  excellent  pieces  of  workmanship,  E-v
35.  31.  [3]  Legal,  namely,  that  knowledge  oj  \
guilt  and  danger  which  were  taught  by  the
Rom.  3.  20. 1  7.  7.  [4]  Evangelical,  such  is  ti


KNO


KNO


LAB


tnowledge  of  Christ,  and  of  salvation  through
am,  which  the  gospel  acquaints  us  with,  2  Cor.

!.  14.

’?/.  2.  9.  and  the  tree  of  k.  or  good  and  evil,  17.
rod.  'll.  3.  I  have  tilled  Bezaleel  in  k.  35.  31.

: .  4  23.  or  if  his  sin  come  to  his  k.  28.

,m.  24.  16.  and  knew  the  k.  of  the  most  High
ah  2.  10.  tliat  thou  shouldest  take  k.  of  me
4.  blessed  be  he  that  did  take  k.  of  thee
<am.  2.  3.  for  the  Lord  is  a  Cod  of  k.

23.  see,  take  k.  of  all  the  lurking  places
lings  9-  27-  shipmen  that  had  k.  of  sea,  2  Chr.  8. 18.
•/iron.  1.  10.  give  me  k.  that  1  may  go  out

1.  hut  hast  asked  k.  ||  12.  k.  is  granted  thee

h.  10.  28.  every  one  having  k.  separated
>  15.  2.  should  a  wise  man  utter  vain  k.  ?

14.  for  we  desire  not  the  k.  of  thy  ways

2.  shall  any  teach  God  k.  seeing  he  judgeth
!.  3.  and  my  lips  shall  utter  k.  clearly

..  2.  give  ear  unto  me,  ye  that  have  k.

i. 3.  1  will  fetch  my  k.  from  afar,  and  will  ascribe
.  he  that  is  perfect  in  k.  is  with  thee,  37.  16.

al.  19-  2.  and  night  unto  night  sheweth  k.

11.  and  is  there  k.  in  the  Most  High  >

..  10.  he  that  teacheth  man  k.  shall  not  he  know  t
9.  66.  teach  me  good  judgment  and  k.

9.  6.  such  k,  is  too  wonderful  for  me
4.  3.  what  is  man  that  thou  takest  k.  of  him  ?
o v.  1.  4.  to  give  the  young  man  k.  and  discretion
.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  k.

2.  fools  hate  k.  ||  2.  3.  if  thou  criest  after  k.

9.  for  that  they  hated  k.  and  did  not  choose

6.  out  of  his  mouth  cometh  k.  and  understanding
0.  and  when  k.  is  pleasant  to  thy  soul

20.  by  his  k.  the  depths  are  broken  up
2.  and  that  thy  lips  may  keep  k.

9.  they  are  right  to  them  tliat  find  k.

0.  k.  rather  than  gold  ||  12.  and  find  out  k.

10.  and  the  k.  of  the  Holy  is  understanding
14.  wise  men  lay  up  k.  but  the  foolish

.  9.  but  through  k.  shall  the  just  be  delivered
.  1.  whoso  loveth  instruction  loveth  k.

(.  a  prudent  man  concealeth  k.  but  fools
i.  16.  every  prudent  man  dealeth  with  k.

.  6.  k.  is  easy  to  him  that  understandeth
thou  oerceivest  not  in  him  the  lips  of  k.

8.  but  the  prudent  are  crowned  with  k.
i.  2.  the  tongue  of  the  wise  useth  k.  aright
.  the  lips  of  the  wise  disperse  k.

4.  the  heart  that  hath  understanding  seeketh  k.

.  27-  he  that  hath  k.  spareth  his  words
.  15.  the  heart  of  the  prudent  getteth  k.  and  the
ear  of  the  wise  seeketh  k.
25.  reprove,  and  he  will  understand  k.

7.  cease,  my  son,  to  err  from  the  words  of  k.

.  15.  the  lips  of  k.  are  a  precious  jewel

.  11.  when  the  w  ise  is  instructed,  he  receiveth  k.

.  12.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  preserve  k,

7.  and  apply  thine  heart  unto  my  k.

0.  written  excellent  things  in  counsels  and  k.

.  12.  and  apply  thine  ears  to  the  words  of  k.

.  4.  by  k.  shall  the  chambers  be  filled  with  riches
yea,  a  man  of  k.  increaseth  strength
4.  so  shall  the  k.  of  wisdom  be  to  thy  soul
.  2.  by  a  man  of  k.  the  state  shall  be  prolonged
.  3.  nor  learned  wisdom,  nor  have  the  C  of  Holy
cl.  1.  16.  yea,  my  heart  had  exper  ience  of  k.

8.  tie  that  increaseth  k.  increaseth  sorrow

21  for  there  in  a  man  w  hose  labour  is  in  k.

6.  God  giveth  to  a  man  wisdom,  k.  and  joy
12.  hut  the  excellency  of  k .  is  that  wisdom  giveth
10.  nor  k.  in  the  grave,  whither  thou  goest

■  9.  ttie  preacher  still  taught  the  people  k.

•  8.  4.  for  before  the  child  shall  have  k.  to  cry
2.  the  spirit  of  k.  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord

.  9.  whom  shall  he  teach  k.  ?  them  that  are  wean.
4.  the  heart  of  the  rash  shall  understand  k.

.6.  wisdom  and  k.  shall  be  stability  of  thy  times

■  14.  who  taught  him  k.  ||  44.  19.  nor  is  there  k.

■  25.  arrd  maketh  their  k.  foolish

•  10.  thy  wisdom  and  thyr  k.  hath  perverted  thee
.  1 1.  by  h is  k.  my  righteous  servant  justify  many

■  3.  15.  pastors,  which  shall  feed  you  with  k.

.  14.  every  man  is  brutish  in  his  k.  every  founder
.  18.  the  Lord  hath  given  me  k.  of  it

•  17 .  every  man  is  brutish  by  his  k.  every  founder
n.  1.  4.  children  well  favoured  and  cunning  in  k.

?.  God  gave  them  k.  |l  2.  21.  he  giveth  k.  to  them
12.  excellent  spirit  and  k.  were  found  in  Daniel

•  4.  many  run  to  and  fro,  and  k.  shall  be  increased

s.  4. 6.  my  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  k.  be¬

cause  thou  hast  rejected  k.  I  will  reject  thee
"•  2.  14.  the  earth  filled  with  the  k.  of  the  Lord
'*•  '■  7 •  for  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  k.

t.  14._35.  the  men  of  that  place  had  k.  of  him
**  L  <7.  to  give  k.  of  salvat.  by  remission  of  sins

■  5-.  ye  have  taken  awTay  the  key  of  k.

'*  4.  13.  they  marvelled  and  took  k.  of  them

•  <2.  having  more  perfect  k.  of  that  way

did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  k.
v0.  which  hast  the  form  of  k •  and  of  truth
*0.  no  flesh  justified,  for  by  law  is  the  k.  of  sin
-.  they  have  a  zeal,  but  not  according  to  k.

14.  that  ve  also  are  filled  with  all  k.  able  to
1  •  5.  are  enriched  in  all  utterance  and  ail  k.
i  "e  know  that  we  all  have  k.  k.  puffeth  up

■  '“ow  be  it  there  is  not  in  every  man  that  k.

■  '■  any  man  see  thee  which  hast  k.  sit  at  meat
i.  through  thy  k.  shall  thy  weak  brother  perish

•  „  h>  another  the  word  of  k,  by  the  same  Spirit
‘-.though  understand  all  mysteries  and  all  k.

•  Whether  there  be  k.  it  shall  vanish  away

0.  except  l  speak  to  you  by  revelation  or  k.

'!r\ '■  f  L  maketh  manifest  the  savour  of  his  k.

to  give  the  light  of  the  k.  of  the  glory  of  God
2-  f'ureness,  by  k.  by  long-sufiering,  by  kind.

'  a!)0uud  in  faith,  utterance,  and  k.

}  i  ,2u£h  l  be  rude  in  speech,  y  et  not  in  k.

•  LI  '•  may  give  you  wisdom  in  the  k.  of  him
i.  when  ye  read,  ye  may  understand  my  k.

*  i|  v®  °i  Christ  w  hich  passeth  k.
t  j.  till  vve  come  iu  the  unity  of  the  k,  of  the  Son


Phil.  1.  9.  that  your  love  may  abound  more  in  k.

3.  8.  1  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  k.  of  Christ
Col.  1.9.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  the  k.  of  his  will

2.  3.  in  whom  are  hid  the  treasures  of  wisd.  and  k.

3.  10.  put  on  the  new  man  which  is  renewed  in  k.

1  Tim.  2.  4.  all  men  to  come  to  the  k.  of  the  truth

2  Tim.  3.  7.  never  able  to  come  to  the  k.  of  the  truth
lleb.  10.  26.  if  we  sin  after  we  have  received  the  k.
Jam.  3.  13.  who  is  a  wise  man,  and  endued  with  k.?

1  Pet. 3. 7.  husbands  dwell  with  them  according  to  k.

2  Pet.  1.  3.  thro’  the  k.  of  him  that  hath  called  us

5.  add  to  virtue  k.  and  to  k.  temperance

8.  nor  unfruitful  in  the  k.  of  our  Lord  .les.  Christ
3.  18.  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  k.  of  our  Lord  Jesus
KNOWLEDGE  of  God.

Prov.  2.  5.  then  shalt  thou  find  the  k.  of  God
Hus.  4.  1.  there  is  no  truth,  nor  k.  of  God  in  the  land

6.  6.  desired  the  k.  of  God  more  than  burnt  offerings
Rom.  11.  33.  the  riches  both  of  wisdom,  and  k.  ofG.

1  Cor.  15.  34.  for  some  have  not  the  k.  of  God

2  Cor.  10.  5.  high  thing  exalteth  itself  against  k.ofG.
Col.  1.  10.  and  increasing  in  the  k.  of  God

2  Pet.  1.  2.  peace  be  multiplied,  thro’  the  k.  of  God
KNOWLEDGE  of  the  Lord.

2  Chron.  30.  22.  that  taught  the  good  k.  of  the  Lord
Isa.  11.  9.  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  k.  of  the  Lord
2  Pet.  2.  20.  escaped  pollutions  thro’  the  k.  of  the  L.
No  KNOWLEDGE.

Dent.  1.  39.  your  childr.  which  in  that  day  had  no  k.
Psal.  1 1.  4.  nave  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  k.  53.  4.
l  a.  5.  13.  gone  into  captiv.  because  they'  have  no  k.
45.  20.  they  have  no  k.  that  set  up  their  images
58.  3.  we  afflicted  our  soul,  and  thou  takest  no  k.
Jer.  4.  22.  but  to  do  good,  they  have  no  k.

Without  KNOWLEDGE.

Num.  15.  24.  committed  without  k.  of  the  congregat.
Job  34.  ,35.  Job  hath  spoken  without  k.  and  wisdom

35.  16.  he  multiplied!  words  without  k.

36.  12.  shall  perish  by  sword,  and  die  without  k.

38.  2.  darkeneth  counsel  by  wrnrds  without  k.  42.  3.
Prov.  19.  2.  it  is  not  good  that  the  soul  be  without  k.

KNOWN.

Gen.  24.  16.  was  a  virgin,  nor  had  any  man  k.  her
Exod.  2.  14.  Moses  said,  surely  this  thing  is  k.

21.  36.  if  it  be  k.  that  the  ox  hath  used  to  push
33.  16.  for  wherein  shall  it  be  k.  here  that  l  and
Lev.  4.  14.  when  the  sin  they  have  sinned  is  k.

5.  1.  is  a  witness  whether  lie  hath  seen  or  k.  of  it
Num.  31.  17-  kill  every  woman  that  hath  k.  man
Deut.  1.  13.  take  wise  men,  and  k.  among  tribes,  15.

21.  1.  and  it  be  not  k.  who  hath  slain  him

Josh.  24.  31.  and  which  had  k.  the  works  of  the  Ld.

1  Sam.  6.  3.  and  it  shall  be  k.  to  you  why  his  hand
1  Kings  18.  36.  let  it  be  k.  that  thou  art  God  in  Isr.
Ezra  4.  12.  be  it  k.  to  the  king,  13. 1  5.  8.

Neh.  4.  15.  when  enemies  heard  that  it  was  k.  to  us
F.sth.  2.  22.  the  thing  was  k.  to  Mordecai  who  told  it
Psal.  9.  16.  the  Lord  is  k.  by  the  judgment  which
31.  7-  thou  hast  k.  my  soul  in  adversities
48.  3.  God  is  k.  in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge
67.  2.  that  thy  way  may  be  k.  on  earth,  thy  health
69.  19- thou  hast  k.  my  reproach  and  my  sname

76.  1.  in  ludah  is  God  k.  his  name  is  great  in  Isr.

77.  19.  thy  way  in  the  sea,  thy  footsteps  are  not  k.

78.  3.  sayings  of  old,  which  w  e  have  heard  and  lc.

79.  10.  let  him  be  k.  among  the  heath,  incur  sight
88.  12.  shall  thy  wonders  be  k.  in  the  dark  t

91.  14.  set  him  on  high,  because  he  hath  k.  my  name
119-  79-  those  that  have  k.  thy  testimonies
152.  1  have  L.  orold  thou  hast  found,  them  forever
139.  1.0  Lord,  thou  hast  searched  me,  and  k.  me
Prov.  10.  9-  but  he  tliat  pervert,  his  ways  shall  be  k.

12.  16.  a  fool’s  wrath  is  presently  k.  but  a  prudent
20.  11.  a  child  is  k.  by  his  doings  whether  his  w  ork
31.  23.  her  husband  is  k.  in  the  gates,  when  he  sitt.
Eccl.  5.  3.  a  fool’s  voice  is  k.  by  multitude  of  words

6.  10.  and  it  is  k.  that  it  is  man,  nor  may  contend
Isa.  12.  5.  excellent  things,  this  is  k.  in  all  the  earth

19.  21.  and  the  Lord  shall  be  k.  to  Egypt

61. 9.  their  seed  shall  be  k.  among  the  Gentiles
66. 14.  hand  of  the  Lord  shall  beL  to  his  servants

Jer.  5.  5.  for  they  have  k.  the  way  of  the  Lord
28.  9.  then  shall  prophet  be  k.  the  Lord  sent  him
Ezek.  36.  32.  saith  the  Lord  God,  be  it  k.  to  you,
Acts  4.  10. 1  13.  38.  1  28.  28.
38.  23.  1  will  be  k.  in  the  eyes  of  many  nations
Dan.  3.  18.  bat  if  not,  be  it  it.  to  thee,  O  king

4.  26.  after  thou  shalt  have  k.  the  heavens  rule
Amos  3. 2.  you  only  have  I  k.  of  all  familiesof  earth
Zech.  14.  7.  a  day  which  shall  be  k.  to  the  Lord
Mat.  12.  7-  but  if  ye  had  k.  what  this  meant

33.  the  tree  is  k.  by  his  fruit,  Luke  6.  44.

24.  43.  if  the  good  man  of  house  had  k.  Luke  12. 39.
Luke  7.39.  if  he  were  a  prophet,  he  would  have  /t.
19.  42.  saying,  if  thou  hadst  k.  in  this  thy  day
24.  35.  how'  lie  was  k.  of  them  in  breaking  of  bread
John  7.  4.  he  himself  seeketh  to  be  k.  openly
8.  19.  nor  know  me  nor  my  Father,  if  ye  had  k.  me
ye  should  have  k.  my  Father  also,  14.  7.

10.  14.  1  know  my  sheep,  and  am  k.  of  mine

17.  7.  now  they  have  k.  ||  8.  and  have  k.  surely

25.  I  have  k.  thee,  these  have  k.  that  thou  sent  me

18.  15.  that  disciple  which  wasL.  to  high-priest,  16.
Acts  1.  19.  and  it  was/h  to  all  dwellers  at  Jerus.

2.  14.  be  this  k.  unto  you,  and  hearken  to  my  words
9.24.  but  their  laying  await  was  k.  of  Saul

42.  it  was  k.  throughout  all  Joppa  many  believed
15.  18.  k.  unto  God  are  all  his  works  from  beginn.

19.  17.  this  was  k.  to  all  the  Jews  and  Greeks

22.  30.  he  would  have  k.  the  certainty,  23.  28.

Rom.  1.  19.  because  that  which  may  be  k.  of  God

11.  34.  who  hath  k.  the  mind  of  Lord,  1  Cor.  2.  16.

1  Cor.  2.  8.  for  had  they  k.  it  H  8.  3.  same  is  k.  of  him

13.  12.  then  shall  I  know,  even  as  l  also  am  k.

14.  7.  how  shall  it  be  k.  what  is  piped  or  harped
9.  how  shall  it  be  k.  what  is  spoken  r

2  Cor.  3.  2.  are  our  epistle  k.  and  read  of  all  men

5.  16.  though  we  have  k.  Christ  after  the  flesh

6.9.  as  unknown  and  yet  well  k.  as  dying  and
Gal .  4,  9.  after  ye  have  k.  God  or  are  k.  of  God
Eph.  3.  10.  might  be  k.  by  church  the  wisd.  of  God
Phil.  4.  5.  let  your  moderation  be  k.  to  all  men


2  Tim.  3.  10.  thou  hast  fully  k.  my  doctrine

15.  from  a  child  thou  hast  k.  the  holy  scriptures

4.  17.  that  by  me  the  preaching  might  be  tally  k.

1  John  2.  13.  I  w'rite,  because  ye  have  k.  him,  14.

4.  16.  w'e  have  k.  and  believed  the  love  God  hath

2  John  1.  1,  and  all  them  that  have  k.  the  truth

Made  or  modest  KNOWN.

Gen.  45. 1.  tvhile  Joseph  made  himself  k.  to  brethren
A  eh.  9.  14.  and  modest  k.  to  them  thy  holy  sabbath
Psal.  98.  2.  the  Lord  hath  made  k,  his  salvation
103.  7.  he  made  k.  his  ways  to  Moses,  his  acts
Prov.  14.  33.  that  which  is  in  the  midst  of  fools  is  rn.k.

22.  19.  i  have  made  L.  to  thee  this  day,  even  to  tliee
Ezek.  20.  5.  and  made  myself  k.  to  them,  9.

Dan.  2.  15.  then  Arioch  made  the  thing  k.  to  Daniel
17.  Daniel  made  the  thing  k.  to  llananiah

23.  hast  ma.  k.  to  me,  ma.  k.  to  us  the  king’s  matter
t  28.  a  God  in  heaven  hath  made  k.  to  the  king
45.  the  great  God  hath  made  k.  to  the  king
Flos. 5.  9. Lave  I  made  k.  that  which  shall  surely  be
Luke  2.  15.  which  the  Lord  hath  made  k.  to  us
17.  had  seen  it,  they  made  k.  abroad  the  saying
John  15.  15.  all  that  I  heard,  1  have  made  k.  to  you
Acts  2.28.  thou  hast  made  k.  to  me  the  wavs  of  life

7.  13.  at  the  second  time  Joseph  was  made  k.  to  his
breth.  and  Joseph's  kindred  made  k.  to  Pharaoh
Rom.  16.  26.  m.  k.  to  all  nations  for  obedience  of  f.
Eph.  1.  9.  having  m.  k.  to  us  the  mystery  of  his  will

3.  3.  howr  by  revelation  he  m.  k.  to  me  the  mystery
Phil.  4.  6.  let  vour  requests  be  made  k.  to  God
2  Pet.  1.  16.  when  we  ma.  k.  the  coming  of  our  Ld
Make  KNOWN.

Num.  12.  6.  1  will  make  myself  k.  to  him  in  a  vision
1  -Saw. 28.15.  thou  mayest  m.  k.  to  me  what  1  shall  do

1  Chr.  16.  8.  m.  k.  his  deeds  among  people,  Ps.  ’05. 1.
17-  19.  in  making  k.  all  these  great  things

Psal.  78.  5.  that  they  should  make  them  k.

89.  1.  with  my  mouth  will  1  make  k.  thy  faithfuln.
li  6.  8.  that  he  might  make  k.  his  mighty  power
145.  12.  to  make  k.  to  sons  of  men  Ins  mighty  acts
Prov.  1.  23.  1  will  make  k.  my  words  to  you
Isa.  38.  19.  the  father  to  children  shall  m.  k.  thy  truth
64.  2.  to  make  thy  name  k.  to  thy  adversaries
Ezek.  35.  11.  I  will  make  mvselt  k.  among  them
39.  7-  so  will  1  make  my  holy  name  k.  in  Israel
Don.  2.  25.  found  a  man  that  will  make  k.  to  the  king

26.  art  thou  able  to  make  k.  to  me  the  dream  '<

28.  but  the  Lord  maketh  k.  to  the  king,  29.

30.  shall  make  k.  the  interpretation,  5.  15,  16,  17.
Hah.  3. 2.  O  Lord,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  k.
Rom.  9.  22.  God  willing  to  make  his  power  k.

23.  that  he  might  make  k.  the  riches  of  his  glory
Eph.  6.  19.  to  make  k.  the  mystery  of  the  gospel

21.  Tychicus  shall  make  k.  to  you  all  things
Col.  1.  27.  to  whom  G.  will  m.  lc.  what  is  the  riches

4. 9.  they  shall  make  k.  to  you  all  things  done  here

Aot  KNOWN.

Gen.  19.8.  1  have  two  daughters  which  have  not  k.

man,  A’imw.  31.  18,35.  Judg.  21.12.

41.  21.  it  could  not  be  k.  they  had  eaten  them

31.  and  the  plenty  shall  not  be  k.  in  the  land
Exod.  6.  3.  by  my  name  Jehovah  was  l  not  k.
Deut.  11.2.  with  children  whicn  have  not  k.  31.  13.

28.  to  go  after  gods  which  ye  have  not  k.  13.  6, 13.
28.  36.  neither  thou  nor  thy  fathers  have  k.  64.
Judg.  3.  1.  as  many  as  had  not  k.  the  wars  of  Canaan

16.  9.  brake  the  withs,  so  his  strength  was  not  k.
Ruth  3.  3.  but  make  not  thyself  k.  to  the  man
14.  let  it  not  be  k.  that  a  woman  came  in

2  Sam.  17.  19.  spread  corn,  and  the  thing  was  not  k.

1  Kings  14.  2.  be  not  k.  to  be  the  wife  ol  Jeroboam
Ps.  18.  43.  people  whom  1  have  not  k.  shall  serve  me
77.  19.  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  thv  footsteps  are  not  k.
79.  6.  pour  wrath  on  heathen  that  have  not  k.  thee
95.  10.  and  they  have  not  k.  my  ways,  Heh.  3.  10.
147.  20.  thy  judgments,  they  have  not  k.  them

Eccl.  6. 5.  he  hath  not  seen  the  sun,  nor  k.  any  thing
Isa.  40.  21.  have  ye  not  k.  ?  ||  28.  hast  thou  not  k.'I

42.  16.  lead  them  in  paths  that  they  have  not  k.

44. 18.  they  have  not  k.  nor  understood,  he  hath  shut
45.  4.  I  surnamed  thee,  tho’  thou  hast  hot  k.  me,  5.

Jer.  4.  22.  my  people  is  foolish,  they  have  not  k.  me
Ezek.  32.  9.  into  countries  which  tnou  hast  not  k.
Dan.  2.  5.  if  ye  will  not  make  k.  the  dream,  9.

4.  7-  they  did  not  make  k.  to  me  interpretation,  5. 8.
Hos.  5.  4.  and  they  have  not  k.  the  Lord
Nah.  3.  17.  their  place  is  not  k.  where  they  are
Mat.  10.  26.  fear  them  not.  for  there  is  nothing  hid
that  shall  not  be  k.  Luke  8.  17.  1  12.  2.

12.  16.  they  should  not  make  him  k  Mark  3.  12.
Luke  24.  18.  a  stranger,  and  hast  not  k.  these  things
John  8.55.  yet  ye  have  not  k.  him,  but  1  know  him

14.9.  so  long  time,  and  yet  hast  thou  n.  k.  me,  Philip
16.  3.  because  they  have  not  k.  the  Father  nor  me
17.25.  O  righteous  Fath.  the  world  hath  n.  k.  thee

Rom.  3.  17.  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  k.

7.7-1  had  not  k.  sin  but  by  the  law,  l  nad  n.  k.  lust
Eph.  3.  5.  which  in  other  ages  was  not  made  k.

2  Pet.  2.  21.  been  better  not  k.  way  of  righteousness
1  John  3.  6.  the  sinner  hath  not  seen  nor  k.  him
Rev.  2.24.  which  have  not  lc.  the  depths  of  Satan

L.

LABOUR

Signifies,  [1]  Diligent  care  and  pains,  Prov.  14.  23.
Eccl.  1.  3.  [2]  The  increase  and  fruit  of  labour ,
Exod.  23.  16.  Eccl.  2.  10.  [3]  The  pangs  of  a  wo¬
man  in  child  birth,  Gen.  35.  16,  17.  [4]  The  work
done  or  performed  bp  labour,  Eccl.  2.  11.  [5]  All
evils  both  of  sin  and  misery,  particularly  those  of
persecution,  P  ev.  14.  13.  [6]  'lb  endeavour  ear¬
nestly,  Isa.  22  4.  Ileb.  4.  11.  [7]  To  journey  or
travel,  Josh.  7-  3.  [8]  To  perform  Christian  offices,
Rom.  16.  6.  [9]  Diligently  and  carefully  to  dis¬
charge  pastoral  duties,  1  I  im.  5.  17.

LA BOUR,  Substantive.

Gen.  31.  42.  God  hath  seen  the  l.  of  my  hands
35.  16.  Rachel  travailed  and  had  hard  /.  17.

Deut.  26. 7.  the  Lord  heard,  and  looked  on  our  l.

Neh.  5.  13.  so  God  shake  oute'fy  man  from  his  l

267


LAB


L  A  D


LAM


J»b  5.  +  7.  yet  man  is  horn  to  /.  as  sparks  fly  upward
3y.  11.  or  wilt  thou  leave  thy  /.  to  him
16.  her  /.  is  in  vain  without  tear
Psal.  73.  + 16.  to  know,  it  was  /.  in  mine  eyes
78.  46.  he  gave  their  /.  to  the  locust

90. 10.  yet  is  their  strength  /.  and  sorrow,  soon  cut

104.  23.  man  goeth  to  his  /.  till  the  evening

105.  44.  they  inherited  the  /.  of  the  people
107.  12.  he  brought  down  their  heart  with  /.

109.  11.  let  tlie  stranger  spoil  his  /.

128.  2.  thou  shalt  eat  the  /.  of  thy  hands

Prov.  10.  16.  the  /.  of  the  righteous  tendeth  to  life

13.  11.  he  that  gathereth  by  /.  shall  increase

14.  23.  in  all  /.  there  is  profit,  but  the  talk  ot  lips
Peel.  1.  3.  what  profit  hath  a  man  of  all  his  /.

8.  all  things  are  full  oil.  man  cannot  utter  it

2. 10.  rejoiced  in  all  my  l.  my  portion  ot  all  my  l.

18.  yea,  1  hated  all  myr  l.  which  1  had  taken

19.  yet  shall  he  have  rule  over  all  mv  l.

20.  to  cause  my  heart  to  despair  ot  the  l.  1  took

21.  for  there  is  a  man  whose  l.  is  in  wisdom

22.  what  hath  man  or  all  his  /.  under  the  sun?

24.  make  his  soul  enjoy  good  in  /.  3.  13. 1  5.  18.

4. 8.  vet  there  is  no  end  ot  all  his  l.  nor  eye  satisfied

9.  because  they  have  a  good  reward  for  their  l.

5.  15.  nothing  of  his  /.  which  he  may  carry  away

19.  to  rejoice  in  his  l.  this  is  the  gift  ot  God

6.  7.  all  the  l.  of  man  is  for  his  mouth,  and  yet

8.  15.  for  that  shall  abide  with  him  of  his  l.

9.  9.  that  is  thy  portion  in  thy  /.  under  the  sun

10.  15.  the  l.  of  the  foolish  wearieth  every  one
Isa.  45.  14.  the  l.  of  Egypt  shall  come  over  to  thee

55.  2.  why  spend  your  /.  for  that  which  satisfi.  not  ?
Jer.  3.  24."  shame  devoured  the  l.  ot'  our  fathers

20.  18.  wherefore  came  1  out  ot  the  womb  to  see  l.
Ezek.  23.  29.  thev  shall  take  away  all  thy  l.

20.  20.  I  have  given  him  the  land  of  E.gy  pt  for  his  /.
Hab.  3.  17.  though  the  l.  of  the  olive  should  fail
Hag.  1.  11.  a  drought  on  all  the  l.  of  the  hands
John  4.  38.  to  reap  that  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  l.
Rom.  16. 6.  greet  Mary,  who  bestowed  much  l.  on  us
1  Cor.  3. 8.  every  man'shall  receive  accord,  to  his  /.

15.  58.  you  know  that  your  l.  is  not  in  vain
G<r/.4.11.I  am  afraid  of  you, lest  1  bestowed  /.in  vain
Phil.  1.  22.  if  1  live  in  the  flesh,  this  is  fruit  of  my  l.

2.  25.  Epaphroditus,  my  companion  in  /.  brother

1  J’/ie-M. 1.3. remembering  your  /.of  love, and  patience

2. 9.  for  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  /.  and  travail
3.5.  tempter  have  tempted  you,  and  our  /.  be  in  vain

2  Thess.  3.  8.  but  wrought  with  /.  and  travail  night
Heb.  6. 10.  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  /.  of  love
Rev.  2.  2.  1  know  thy  wi  rks,  and  l.  and  patience

LABOUR,  Verb.

Exod.  5.  9.  more  work,  that  tney  may  /.  therein

20.  9.  six  days  shalt  thou  /.  Dent.  5.  13.

Josh.  7.3.  make  not  all  the  people  to  l.  thither

24.  13.  given  you  a  land,  for  which  he  did  not  l.
Neh.  4. 22.  may  be  a  guard  to  us.  and  /.  on  the  day
'oh  9.  29.  if  1  be  wicked,  why  then  /.  1  in  vain  ?
Psal.  127. 1.  except  the  Lord' build  they  /.  in  vain
144.  14.  that  our  oxen  may  be  strong  to  /.

Prov.  21.  25.  the  slothful,  his  hands  refuse  to  /.

23.  4.  /.  not  to  be  rich,  cease  from  thy  own  wisdom
Reel.  4.  8.  nor  saith  he,  for  whom  do  1  /.  ?

8.  17.  because  tho’  a  man  /.  to  seek  it  out,  not  find  it
Isa.  22.  4.  I  will  weep  bitterly,  /.  not  to  comfort  me
65.  23.  they  shall  not  /.  in  vain,  nor  bring  forth
Jer.  51.  58.  and  the  people  shall  /.  in  vain
Lam.  5. 5.  under  persecution  we  /.  and  have  no  rest
Mic.  4. 10.  be  in  pain,  and  /.  to  bring  forth,  O  Zion
Hab.  2.  13.  that  the  people  should  /.  in  the  fire
Mat.  11. 28.  come  to  me  all  ye  that  /.  and  are  laden
John  6.  27.  /.  not  for  the  meat  that  perisheth
Rom.  16.  12.  and  Tryphosa,  who  l.  in  the  Lord

1  Cor.  4.  12.  and  /.  working  with  our  own  hands

2  Cor.  5.  6  wherefore  we  /.  to  be  accepted  of  him
Eph.  4.  28.  but  rather  /.  working  with  his  hands
Col.  1 . 29.  whereunto  1  also  /.  striving  according  to
1  Thess.  5. 12.  to  know  them  which  /.  among  you

1  Tint.  4. 10.  therefore  we  both  /.  and  suffer  reproach

5.  17.  especially  they  that  /.  in  word  and  doctrine
Heb.  4. 1 1.  let  us  /.  therefore  to  enter  into  that  rest
LABOURED.

Nc h.  4.  21.  so  we  /.  in  the  work,  and  held  the  spears
Job  20. 18.  that  which  he  /.  for,  shall  he  restore
Eccl.  2.  11.  1  looked  on  the  labour  I  had  /.  to  do

19.  have  rule  overall  my  labour  wherein  I  have  l.

21.  yet  to  a  man  that  hath  not  /.  therein

22.  of  the  vexation  of  his  heart  wherein  he  hath  l.

5. 16.  what  profit  hath  he  that  hath  /.  for  the  wind  ?
Isa.  47-  12.  with  thy  sorceries  wherein  thou  hast/.

15.  shall  they  be  to  thee  with  whom  thou  hast  /.
49.  4.  1  said,  1  have  /.  in  vain,  spent  my  strength
62.  8.  stranger  not  drink,  for  which  thou  hast  /.
Van.  6.  14.  then  the  king  /.  to  deliver  Daniel
Jonah  4. 10.  the  gourd  for  which  thou  hast  not  /.
John  4.  38.  other  men  l.  and  ye  are  entered  into  their
Rom.  16. 12.  salute  Persis,  who  /.  much  in  the  I.ord
1  Cor.  15. 10.  but  1  /.  more  abundantly  than  they  all
Phil.  2.  16.  that  1  have  not  run  nor  /.  in  vain

4.  3.  help  those  that  l.  with  me  in  the  gospel
Rev.  2.  3.  hast  borne,  and  for  my  name’s  sake  /.
LABOURER.

Luke  10.  7.  for  the  /.  is  worthy  of  his  hire
1  Tim.  5.  18.  the  /.  is  worthy  of  his  rev'ard
LABOURERS.

Mat.  9.  37.  harvest  plenteous,  but  /.  few,  Lvke  10. 2.
38.  pray  the  Lord  that  he  will  send  l.  Lvke  10.  2.

20.  1.  went  out  early  to  hire  /.  into  his  vineyard
2.  when  he  bad  agreed  with  the  /.  ||  8.  call  (he  /.

1  Cor.  3.  9-  for  we  are  /.  together  with  God
Jam.  5.  4.  behold  the  hire  of  the  /.  that  reaped
LABOURETH.

Prov.  16.  26.  he  that  /.  /.  for  himself
Eccl.  3.  9.  what  profit  in  that  wherein  he  /.  ?

1  Cor.  16. 16.  submit  to  every  one  that  helpeth  and  /.

2  Tim.  2.  6.  the  husbandman  that  /.  must  be  first

LABOUR  IMG.

Eccl.  5.  12.  the  sleep  of  a  /.  man  is  sweet
Rets  20.  35.  so  /.  ye  ought  to  support  the  weak
Col.  4.  12.  always  /.  for  you  in  prayer,  that  ye
1  Thess.  2.  9.  /.  night  and  day  we  pleached  to  you
268


LABOURS.

Exod.  23.  16.  the  first-fruits  ot  thy  l.  when  thou  hast
gathered  in  thy  /.  out  of  the  held
Deut.  28.  33.  and  all  thy  /.  shall  a  nation  eat  up
Prov.  5.  10.  and  thy  /.  be  in  the  house  of  a  stranger
Isa.  58.  3.  in  day  of  your  fast  you  exact  all  your  /.

Jer  20.  5.  1  will  deliv  er  all  their  /.  to  their  enemies
Has.  12.  8.  in  my  /.  shall  they  find  no  iniquity  in  me
Hag.  2.  17.  1  smote  you  in  all  the  /.  of  your  hands
John  4.  38.  and  ye  are  entered  into  their  /.

2  Cor.  6. 5.  in  tumults,  in  /.  in  watchings,  in  tastings

10.  15.  not  boasting  of  other  men’s  /.

11.  23.  in  /.  moreabund.  in  stripes  above  measure
Rev.  14.  13.  that  they  ^rnay  rest  from  their  /.

Exod.  28.28.  shall  bind  the  breast-plate  with  /.  of  blue
37.  and  thou  shalt  put  it  on  a  blue  /.

39.  31.  and  they  tied  to  it  a  /.  of  blue  to  fasten  it
LACK,  Substantive.

Gen,  18.  28.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  tor  l.  of  five  .

Exod.  16. 18.  that  gathered  little  had  no  /.  2  Cor.8.15.
Job  4.  11.  the  old  lion  perisheth  tor  /.  of  prey
38.  41.  when  his  young  ones  wander  for  /.  of  meat
Has.  4. 6.  my  peo.  are  destroyed  for  /.  of  knowledge
Phil.  2.  30.  his  life  to  supply  your  /.  of  service

1  Thess.  4.  12.  and  that  ye  may  have  /.  of  nothing

LACK,  Verb.

Gen.  18.  28.  if  there  shall  /.  five  of  the  fifty
Dent.  8.  9.  thou  shalt  not  /.  any  thing  in  it
Psal.  34. 10.  the  voung  lions  do  /.  and  suffer  hunger
Prov.  28.  27.  that  giveth  to  the  poor  shall  not  /.

Eccl.  9.  8.  and  let  thy  head  /.  no  ointment
Mat.  19.  20.  these  things  have  1  kept,  what  /.  I  vet .
Jam.  1  5.  if  any  of  you  /.  wisdom,  let  him  ask  ot  God
LACKED.

Dent.  2.  7.  Ld.  been  with  thee,  thou  hast  /.  nothing

2  Sam.  2.  30.  there  /.  of  David’s  serv.  nineteen  men
1  Kings  4.  27.  officers  provided  victual,  they  /.  noth.

11.  22.  but  what  hast  thou  /.  with  me'

Neh.  9.  21.  thou  didst  sustain  them,  they  /.  nothing
Lvke  8.  6.  it  withered  away,  because  it  /.  moisture

22.  35.  1  sent  you  without  purse,  /.  ye  any  thing  r
Acts  4.  34.  nor  was  there  any  among  them  that  /.

1  Cor.  12.24.  given  more  honour  to  that  part  which  /.
Phil.  4.  10.  ye  were  careful,  but  /.  opportunity

LACKEST.

Mark  10.  21.  but  one  thing  thou  /.  Lvke  18.  22.
LACKETH.

Nnm.  31.  49.  and  there  /.  not  one  man  of  us

2  Sam.  3.  29.  let  there  not  fail  one  that  /.  bread
Prov.  6.  32.  committeth  adultery,  /.  understanding

12.  9.  than  he  that  honoured)  himself,  and  /.  bread
2  Pet.  1.  9.  but  he  that  /.  these  things  is  blind

LACKIMG.

Lev.  2.  13.  nor  shalt  thou  suffer  salt  to  be  /.

22.  23.  not  offer  a  lamb  that  hath  any  thing  /.

Jvdg.  21.  3.  that  there  should  be  one  tribe  /.  in  Israel
1  Sam.  30.  19.  and  there  was  nothing  /.  to  them
Jer  23.  4.  they  shall  fear  no  more,  nor  shall  be  /.

1  Cor.  16.  17.  for  that  which  was  /.  they  supplied

2  Cor.  11.9.  v’hat  was  /.  tome  the  brethren  supplied
1  Thess.  3.  10.  might  perfect  what  is  /.  in  your  taith

LAD,  8,

Signifies,  A  boy ,  or  one  young  in  years,  Gen.  21.
12,  17.  It  is  applied,  [1]  'To  one  who  was  seven¬
teen  years  old,  Gen.  37-  2.  [2]  1o  a  married
man,  Gen.  43.  8.  compared  with  46.  21.  [3]
To  a  servant,  1  Sam.  20.  36.

Gen.  21.  12.  let  it  not  be  grievous  because  of  the  l.

17.  and  God  heard  the  voice  of  the  /.

18.  arise,  lift  up  the  /.  11 19.  she  gave  the  l.  drink
20.  God  was  with  the  /.  and  he  grew  and  dwelt

22.  5.  I  and  the  /.  will  go  yonder  and  worship
12.  he  said,  lay  not  thine  nand  upon  the  /.

37.  2.  the  /.  was  with  the  sons  of  Bilhah
43.  8.  send  the  /.  with  me,  and  we  will  arise  and  go
44  22.  we  said,  the  /.  cannot  leave  his  father
30.  my  father,  and  the  /.  be  not  with  us.  31,  34.

his  life  is  bound  up  in  the  /.  life

32.  thv  servant  became  surety  for  the  /.

33.  abide  instead  of  the  /.  let  the  /.  go  up
48.  16.  the  Angel  who  redeemed  me,  bless  the  /.

Jvdg.  16.  26.  Samson  said  to  the  /.  that  held  him

1  Sam.  20.  21.  and  behold  I  will  send  a  /.  saying,  go

36.  .lonathan  said  to  the  /.  run,  as  the  /.  ran

37.  .lonathan  cried  after  the  /.  make  speed,  38.

39.  but  the  /.  knew  not  any  thing,  only  David

40.  Jonathan  gave  his  artillery  to  his  /.

2  Sam.  17.  18.  a  /.  saw  them  and  told  Absalom
John  6.  9.  there  is  a  /.  here  hath  five  barley  loaves

LADDER.

Gen  28.  12.  Jacob  dreamed,  and  behold  a  /.  set  up
LADE

Signifies,  [1]  To  lay  on  a  burden,  Meh.  4.  17 J
13.  15.  [2]  To  oppress,  1  Kings  12.  11.  [3]  To
impose  the  performance  of  unnecessary  traditions,
or  strict  injunctions,  over  and  above  what  the
law  requires,  I.uke  11.  46.  [4]  To  be  burdened
not  with  the  sense,  but  with  the  guilt  and  bond¬
age,  of  sin ,  Isa.  1.  4.  [5]  To  be  sensible  of  and
mourn  under  the  burden  of  sin,  Mat.  11.  28.

'lhat  ladeth  himself  with  thick  clay,  Hab.  2.
6.  that  burdens  and  defiles  himself  with  amassed
treasures,  gotten  by  extortion  and  oppression.

Gen.  45.  17 .  /.  your  beasts  and  go  to  land  of  Canaan
Lev.  22.  +  16.  /.  themselves  with  the  iniquity
1  Kings  12.  11.  my  father  did  /.  you  with  a  yoke
Luke  11.  46.  for  ye  /.  men  with  grievous  burdens
'  LADED.

Gen.  42.  26.  they  /.  their  asses  with  the  corn,  44. 13.
Neh.  4.  17.  those  that  /.  wrought  in  the  work
Acts  °8.  10.  they  /.  us  with  such  things  as  necessary
LA DEM.

Gew.45.23.  sent  ten  asses  /.  with  good  things  of  Egypt

1  Sam.  16.  20.  Jesse  took  an  ass  ..  with  bread
Jsa.  1.4.  a  people  /.  with  iniquity,  seed  of  evil  ooers
Mat.  11.28.  come,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  /.

2  Tim.  3.  6.  silly  women,  /.  with  sins,  led  away  with
LADETIL

Hab.  2.  6.  woe  to  him  that  /.  himself  with  thick  clay
LAD1MG.

Neh.  13.  15.  1  saw  some  on  the  sabbath  /.  asses


LAD1MG.

Acts  27. 10.  much  damage  not  only  of  l.  and  ship
LADY.

Isa.  47.  5.  shall  no  more  be  called  a/,  of  kingdom!

7.  and  thou  saidst,  I  shall  be  a  /.  for  ever

2  John  1.  the  elder  to  the  elect  l.  and  her  childrei

5.  now  1  beseech,  thee,  l.  that  we  love  one  anothe
LADIES.

Jvdg.  5. 29.  wise  /.  answered  her.  yea,  she  returne
Esth.  1. 18.  likewise  shall  l.  of  Persia  and  Media  sa
LAID,  see  after  Lay.

LAKE

Signifies,  [1]  A  large  place  full  of  water  encamp  as.'
ed  with  land,  Luke  5.  1,  2.  [2]  Hell,  Rev.  M
20.  1  20.  10.

Luke  5.  1.  Jesus  stood  by  the  L  ot  Gennesaret
2.  and  saw  two  ships  standing  by  the/.

8.  22.  let  us  go  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  /.

23.  there  came  down  a  storm  of  w  ind  on  the  '..
33.  herd  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place  into  1

Rev.  19.  20.  these  both  were  cast  into  a  /.  of  fire  ;

20. 10.  devil  was  cast  into  /.  of  fire  and  brimstoii!

14.  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  /.  of  fire

15.  was  not  found  in  the  book  of  life,  cast  into

21.  8.  murderers  have  their  part  in  the  /.  bui  noth

LAMB

Signifies,  A  sheep  under  a  year  old.  of  a  meet
gentle,  and  tractable  nature ,  which  is  useful  ff
food  and  clothing,  and  under  the  law  was  % tsedfi
sacrifice,  particularly  in  the  passoier,  Gen.  21

28.  Exod.  12.  3,  5.  Prov.  27.  26.  To  which  ai<
compared,  [1]  Christ  Jesus,  who  was  typified  /j
the  lamb  in  the  passover,  and  became  a  sacri/tj
for  sin,  John  1.  29.  Rev.  5.  6.  8.  [2j  All  err
Christians,  who  are  humble ,  meek,  and  tractabl\
Isa.  11.6.  John  21.  15.  [3]  An  innocent,  no  fie
sue,  and  harmless  teacher,  who  had  done  nothin
to  merit  the  cruelty  and  barbarity  of  his  enemia
and  was  as  ignorant  of  their  inhuman  devic
against  him,  as  a  lamb  is  of  the  design  of  such  j
lead  it  to  the  slaughter,  Jer.  11.  19.  [4]  A  man.
wije,  2  Sam.  12.  3,  4.  [5]  Antichrist,  who  by  /ij
pardons  and  indulgences  presumptuously  aSsunA
the  power  and  prerogative  of  Christ  Jesus  the  Lari
,J  Gid,  Rev.  1.3.  11.

Gen.  22.  7.  but  where  is  the  /.  tor  a  burnt-offering

8.  mv  son,  God  will  provide  himself  a  /.

Exod.  12.3.  they  shall  take  to  them  every  man  a/.  2

5.  your  /.  shall  be  without  blemish,  a  male

13.  13.  an  ass  shalt  thou  redeem  with  a  /.  34.  2(|

29.  39.  one  /.  thou  shalt  offer  in  the  morning,  a^
the  other  /.  shalt  offer  at  evening,  41.  Num.  28.

40.  with  a  /.  a  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled,  fin
28.  21,  29.  I  29.  4,  10,

Lev.  3.  7.  if  he  offer  i  /.  4.  32.  1  5.  6.  I  22.  23. 1  23. '

4.  35.  he  shall  take  away  the  fat,  as  the  fat  ot  a

5.  7.  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a  l.  12.  8.

9.  3.  take  a  /.  of  the  first  sear  without  blemisj

14. 1<  .  Sum.  6.  12.  I  7.  15.  S

14.  12.  the  priest  shall  take  the  /.  and  offer  him
13.  Slav  the  /.  25.  ||  24.  /.  of  trespass-offering  j

17.  3.  that  killeth  an  ox,  or  a  /.  or  goat  in  the  carj
23.  12.  shall  offer  a  /.  without  blemish
Num.  6. 14.  he  shall  offer  one  he-/,  of  first  year  to
burnt-offering,  ewe-/,  of  first  year  for  a  sm-off

15.  5.  shalt  prepare  with  the  sacrifice  for  one  to

11.  thus  done  for  one  /.  28.  7>  18, 14.  Ezek.  46. ;

1  Sam.  7.  9.  Samuel  off  ered  a  sucking  /.  to  the  Ld
17.  34.  there  came  a  lion  and  bear  and  took  a  4

2  Sam.  12.  4.  took  the  poor  man’s  /.  and  dressec

6.  and  he  shall  restore  the  /.  four  fold

Isa.  11.  6.  the  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  /.  j

16.  1.  send  ye  the  /.  to  the  ruler  of  the  land
53.7.  was  brought  as  /.  to  the  slaughter,  Jer.  11.

65.  25.  the  wolf  and  the  /.  shall  feed  together  |

66.  3.  that  sacrificeth  a  /.  as  if  he  cut  off  dog’s  n
Ezek.  45.  15.  one  /.  out  of  flock  forapeace-ofter|

46.  13.  a  /.  of  the  first  year  thou  shalt  prepare  '
Hos.  4. 16.  Ld.  will  feed  them  as  /.  in  a  large  pit
John  1.  29.  behold  /.  of  God  that  takes  away  sin,
Acts  8.  32.  like  a  /.  dumb  before  the  shearer
1  Pet.  1.  19.  as  of  a  /.  without  blemish  and  spo
Rev.  5.  6.  in  the  midst  of  the  eldeis  stood  a  /.  sit
8.  the  four  beasts  fell  down  before  the  /.

12.  saying,  worthy  is  the  /.  that  was  slain

13.  honour,  glory,  and  power,  be  to  the/,  tore;'

6.  1.  1  saw  when  the  /.  opened  one  of  the  seal?

16.  and  hide  us  from  the  wrath  of  the  /.  that ;

7.  9.  a  great  multitude  stood  before  /.  clothed

10.  saying,  salvation  to  our  God  and  to  the  /.

14.  and  made  tb“m  white  in  the  blood  o!  the  1

17.  for  the  /.  shall  feed  and  lead  them  to  fount*
12.  11.  they  overcame  him  by  the  blood  of  the!
13.8.  the  /.  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  w«

11.  he  had  two  horns  like  a  /.  and  spake  as  drs
14.1.  1  looked,  and  lo,  a  /.  stood  on  the  mount  |

4.  these  are  they  that  follow  the  /.  wbithersol

10.  tormented  in  the  presence  of  angels  and  tf

15.  3.  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  and  songof  tj*

17.  14.  war  with  the  /.  and  the  /.  shall  overco*
19. 7 .  for  the  marriage  of  the  /.  is  come,  and  his  |
9.  that  are  called  to  the  marriasre-supper  ot  t#

21.  9-  1  w’ill  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  /.  wife
14.  the  names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  /. .

22.  God  Almighty  and  the  /.  are  the  temple  j

23.  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  /.  is  light  then
27.  but  they  who  are  written  in  the  /.  book  of

22.  1 .  proceeding  out  of  throne  of  God  and  ot  ;:
LAMBS.

Gen.  30.  40.  and  Jacob  did  separate  the  /.

33.  t  19.  Jacob  bought  it  for  100  /.  Josh.  24.  t  ■
Num.  7.87.  rams  tw  elve,  /.  of  the  first  year  tv
88.  sixty  /.  II  29.  13.  fourteen  /•  17.  20,  23.  ,
29.18.  drink  offerings  for  the  bullocks,  /.  ann ,
Dent.  32.  14.  milk  of  sheep,  with  tat  of  /.and  ,

1  Sam.  15.  9.  but  Saul  spared  the  best  of  the  4

2  Kings  3.  4  Moab  rendered  to  Israel  lOO.Ot.Oj

1  Chron.  29.  21 .  they  offered  to  the  L.  a  thousa ,

2  Chron.  29.  22.  priests  killed  /.  and  sprinkler!  I.1
32.  the  number  of  burnt-offerings  two  hur,d.

35.  7.  Josiah  gave  to  the  people  /.  and  kids
Ezra  7.  17.  thaf  thou  mayest  buy  speedily  l


LAM


LAN


LAN


nl.  37.  20.  the  wicked  shall  be  as  the  fat  of  /.

4. 4.  mountains  skipped,  little  hills  skipped  like  /.
ye  little  hills  that  skipped  like  /.
ov.  27.  26.  /.  are  for  thy  clothing,  and  goats
1.  1.  11.  1  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  /.  or  goafs

17.  then  shall  the  /.  feed  after  their  manner

t.  6.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  filled  with  blood  of/.

1. 11.  he  shall  gather  the  /.  with  his  arm,  carry
-.51.  40.  I  will  bring  them  like  /.  to  slaughter
ek.  27.  21.  Arabia  occupied  with  thee  in  /.

1.  18.  ye  shall  drink  the  blood  of  /.  and  rams

l.  4.  in  the  sabbath  six  /.  ||  6.  in  new  moons  six  /.

.  and  meat-offering  for  the  /.  as  able  to  give,  7.
nos  6.  4.  and  eat  the  /.  out  of  the  flock,  and  calves
ke  10.  3.  1  send  you  forth  as  /.  among  wolves
tn  21.  15.  Jesus  saith  to  Peter,  feed  my  /.

l  ive  LAMBS.
w.7.  V l.fivel.  of  the  first  year,  23,29,  35,41,47.
■Seven  LAMBS.

n.  21 . 28.  Abraham  set  seven  ewe-/,  by  themselves
9.  what  mean  these  seven  ewe-/,  set  by  themselves
0.  these  seven  ewe-/,  thou  shalttake  af  my  hand

23.  18.  ye  shall  offer  with  the  bread  seven  /.

m.  28.  11.  ye  shall  offer  seven  l.  of  the  first  year

without  spot,  19.  27.  I  29.  2,  8,  36.

l.  a  tenth  deal  throughout  seven  l.  29.  |  29.  4,  lo.
hr.  29.  21.  they  brought  seven  /.  for  a  sin-offer

Two  LAMBS.
d.  29.  38.  two  l.  of  the  first  year  offer,  Num.  28.  3.
!>.  14.  10.  on  the  eighth  day  he  shall  take  two  l.

.  19-  then  ye  shall  sacrifice  two  /.  of  the  first  year

m.  28. 9.  and  on  the  sabbath  two  /.  of  the  first  year

LAME

nifies.  One  that  is  maimed  or  enfeebled  in  his
mbs,  Prov.  26.  7.  And  is  taken,  (1.)  Corporally,
nd  that  either  by  accident  or  birth,  2  Sam.  4.  4.
iCts  3.  2.  (II.)  Figuratively,  [1]  For  idols,  2
am.  5.  6.  [2]  The  weakest  or  meanest,  Isa.  33.

5.  (III.)  Spiritually,  for  such  as  are  halting  in
teir  minds  between  two  opinions,  Heb.  12.  13.
'.21.18.  a  blind  or  /.  man  shall  not  approach
it.  15.  21.  if  it  be  /.  thou  shaltnot  sacrifice  it
mi.  4.  4.  Jonath.  had  a  son  /.  of  his  feet,  9.  3,  13.

6.  e<cept  thou  take  away  the  blind  and  the  /.
whosoever  smiteth  the  /.  and  the  blind
26.  that  I  may  ride,  because  thy  servant  is  /.

29.  15.  1  was  eyes  to  the  blind,  feet  to  the  /.

•v.  26.  7-  the  legs  of  the  /.  are  not  equal,  so  is

•  33.2.3.  then  is  prey  divided,  the  /.  take  the  prey
6.  then  shall  the  /.  man  leap  as  an  hart
31.  8.  bring  with  them  the  blind  and  the  /.

1.8.  it  ye  offer  the  /.  for  sacrifice,  is  it  not  evil  ?

l.  and  ye  brought  that  which  was  torn  and  /.

Ml.  5.  the/,  walk,  15.  31.  1  21.  14.  Luke"!.  22.

•e  14.  13.  call  the  poor,  the  /.  and  the  blind
f  3.  2.  a  certain  man,  /.  from  womb,  was  carried
.  and  as  the  /.  man  held  Peter  and  John
'.many  with  palsies  and  that  were  /.  were  healed
k  12. 13.  lest  the  /.  be  turned  out  of  the  way

LAMENT.

•  7.11.40.  the  daughters  of  Israel  went  yearly  to  /.

•  3-  26.  and  her  gates  shall  /.  nnd  mo'urn
8.  the  fishers  also  shall  mourn  and  /.

12.  they  shall  /.  for  the  teats  and  pleasant  fields

4.  8.  tor  this  /.  and  howl,  for  the  anger  of  Lord

5.  neither  go  to  /.  nor  bemoan  them,  6.

18.  they  shall  not/,  for  him,  saying,  ah.  Lord
0.  they  will  /.  thee,  saying,  ah,  Lord
3.  ye  daughters  of  Kabbah,  /.  and  run

2.  8.  he  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall  to  /.

, y t •  32.  thevshal  1  /  over  1  yrus,  saying,  what
16.  the  daughters  of  the  nations  shall  /.  her
1.  8.  /.  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth
‘  yourselves,  and  /.  ye  priests,  howl

•  2.  4.  /.  with  a  doleful  lamentation  and  song
‘  Jo  ®Ve"!y  1  sa>’>  ye  sha11  weep  and  /.

.  18.  9.  the  kings  of  the  earth  shall  /.  Babylon

c  LAMENTED.

m.  6. 19.  people  /.  because  the  Lord  had  smitten
.all  the  house  of  Israel  /.  after  the  Lord
l.  all  the  Israelites  /.  Samuel,  28.  3.

David  l-  over  Saul  and  Jonathan
v>.  the  king  /.  over  Abner  and  said
'"’”■35.  25.  and  Jeremiah  /.  for  Josiah
lb.  4.  they  shall  die  and  not  he  /.  25.  33.

’  o-J’nJ'  we  mourned  to  you,butye  have  not/.
e  ‘3-  2<  •  and  a  great  company  of  people  /.Jesus
LAMENTABLE.

l-  6-  20.  the  king  cried  with  a  /.  voice  to  David

lamentation

nnes,  [1]  Mourning,  bemoaning,  and  bewailino,

•  3* •  |*>.  [2]  ■Songs  of  lamentation,  2  Chron.

‘-3J  -Such  dreadful  judgments  as  would
use  most  bitter  lamentation,  Ezek.  2.  10.  [4]

or  ff  a  book,  the  subject  whereof  is  lament  a-

">2  Chron.  35.  25.

;  5o-  !0.  there  they  mourned  with  a  sore  1.

'n‘J  ■ '7 ■  and  David  lamented  with  this  /.
r  o’-  '  ?,nd  their  widows  made  no  /.

0.  20.  wallow  thyself  in  ashes,  make  bitter  /.

,  and  take  up  a  /.  on  the  high  places

•  tor  the  habitations  of  wilderness  a  /.
and  teach  every  one  her  neighbour  I.

•w  Kal?ah  l-  and  weeping,  Mat.  2.  18.

'ei  sha|l  he  !■  generally  on  the  tops
T  *■  -h0™  hath  increased  mourning  and  /.

\r.  ?•  take  thou  up  a  /.  for  the  princes
17  *i IS  a  ■  and  shall  be  for  a  /.

10  .  3  lad  ,ahe  up  a  /.  for  Tyrus,  27.  2,  32.

o  „  take  up  a  /.  upon  the  king  of  Tyrus
-.son  of  man  take  up  a  /.  for  Pharaoh,  16.

a  against  you,  ()  house  of  Israel

11  an  1  t a  -nUC  1  as  *lre  shiltul  of  /.  to  wailing
'Mnd  I  wjH  turn  all  your  songs  into  /.

'  o„‘  an(,1  lament  with  a  doleful  /.

o.  ..  and  made  great  /.  over  Stephen

LAMENTATIONS.

”■  do.  25.  the  singers  spake  of  Josiah  in  their
!  o  m  '.',and  behold,  they  are  written  in  the  /.

•  ■«••  JU.  there  was  wnften  therein  /.  mourning

ifies,  [11  A  light  made  with  oil  in  a  proper


vessel,  l  Sam.  3.  3.  [2]  A  sincere  profession  of
religion,  flowing  from  an  inward  principle  of  holi¬
ness,  Mat.  25.  4.  [3]  A.  form  of  godliness,  without
saving  faith  and  true  repentance.  Mat.  25.  3.  [4]
A  son,  or  successor,  who  preserves  one  name  and
memory  from  being  extinguished  and  forgotten,  1
Kings  15  4.  Psal.  132.  17-  [5]  Outward  pros¬
perity,  Prov.  13.  9.120.  20.  It  is  spoken,  [11
Of  Ood,  who  enlightens,  directs,  and  comforts  his
people,  2  Sam.  22.  29.  [2]  Of  his  word,  which
affords  direction  and  comfort  in  all  doubts,  dijfi
cutties,  and  distresses,  Psal.  119-  105.

Gen.  15. 17.  a  burning  /.  that  passed  between  pieces
Exod.  27.  20.  to  cause  the  /.  to  burn  always

1  Sam.  3. 3.  ere  /.  went  out,  Samuel  was  laid  to  sleep

2  Sam.  21. 1 17.  that  thou  quench  not  the  /.  of  Israel
22.  29.  thou  art  my  /.  O  Lord,  Lord  will  lighten

l  Kings  11.  +36.  David  my  servant  may  have  a  /
15.  4.  for  David’s  sake  Ood  gave  him  a  /.  in  Jerus.
Job  12.  5.  is  as  a  /.  despised  in  the  thought  of  him
18.  +  6.  wicked  man’s  /.  put  out,  21.  +  17.

29.  +  3.  when  his  /.shined  on  my  head
Psal.  18.  +  28.  for  thou  wilt  light  my  /.

119.  105.  thy  word  is  a  /.  to  my  feet,  and  a  light
132.  17.  I  have  ordained  a  /.  tor  mine  anointed
Prov.  6. 23.  for  commandment  is  a  /.  the  law  is  lieht
13.  9.  the  /.of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out
20.  20.  whocurseth  his  father,  his  /.  shall  be  put  out

.  .  the  spirit  of  man  is  the  /.  of  the  Lord

Isa.  62.  1.  salvation  thereof  as  a  l.  that  burneth
Rev.  8. 10.  a  great  star  burning  as  it  were  a  /.
LAMP.\

Exod.  25.  37.  they  shall  light  the  /.  thereof,  40.  4.

30.  7.  when  he  dresseth  the  /.  burn  incense  on  it
8.  when  Aaron  lighteth  the  /.  at  even,  burn  incense

35.  14.  and  his  /.  with  the  oil  for  the  light
39.  37.  and  they  brought  the  /.  to  Moses
40. 25.  he  lighted  the  l.  before  the  L.  Num.  8.  2,  3.
Lev.  24.  2.  /.  to  burn  continually,  2  Chron.  13.  11,

4.  order  the  /.  ||  Num.  4.  9.  and  cover  his  /.

Jndg.  7.  16.  he  put  /.  within  the.  pitchers
20.  and  held  the  /.  in  their  left  hand,  and  trumpets
1  h  mgs  7. 49.  he  made  /.  of  gold,  2  Chr.  4.  20,  21 .
Job  41. 19.  out  of  his  mouth  go  burning  /.  and  sparks
Ezek.  1.  13.  was  like  the  appearance  of  /.

Dan.  10.  6.  body  like  beryl,  and  his  eyes  as  /.  of  fire
Mat.  25.  1.  ten  virgins  which  took  their  /.  3.  4.

7.  those  virgins  arose,  and  trimmed  their  /.

8.  give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  /.  are  gone  out
Seven  LAMPS.

Exod .  25.  37 •  thou  shalt  make  the  seven  l.  thereof
37.  23.  he  made  his  seven  l.  of  pure  gold
Num.  8.  2.  the  seven  l.  shall  give  light  over-against
Zech.  4.  2.  and  behold  a  candlestick  and  seven  l.
Rev.  4.  5.  there  were  seven  l.  of  fire  burning  before
LANCE.

Jer.  50.  42.  they  that  hold  the  /.  are  cruel,  will  not
LANCETS.

1  Kings  18.  28.  cut  themselves  with  /.  till  blood
o-  c  LAND

Signifies  [1]  The  whole  continent  of  the  earth,  as
distinguished  from  sea.  Mat.  23.  15.  [2]  One  par¬
ticular  country,  Mat.  9.  26.  [3]  Arable  ground,
Cen.  26.  12.  [4]  The  inhabitants  of  a  country,
Isa.  37.  11.  [5]  A  certain  possession,  2  Sam.  19
29.  Acts  4.  37.

Gen.  2.  12.  and  the  gold  of  that  /.  is  good

10. 11.  out  of  that  /.  went  forth  Ashur
12. 1.  get  thee  into  a  l.  1  will  shew  thee,  Acts 7,  3.

13.  6.  and  the  /.  was  not  able  to  bear  them

9.  is  not  the  whole  /.  before  thee,  separate
17.8.  1  will  give  thee  and  seed  the  /.  28.  13.  |  35. 12.
20.  15.  behold,  my  /.  is  before  thee,  dwell  where
24,  37.  of  the  Canaanite,  in  whose  /.  I  dwell

26.12.  Isaac  sowed  in  that  /.  and  received  in  year
47.  20.  bought  the /.  so  the  /.  became  Pharaolfs


47.  _ _ _ _

22.  only  the  /.  of  the  priests  bought  he  not
Exod.  8.  24.  tbe  l.  was  corrupted  by  the  flies

10.  15.  so  that  the  /.  was  darkened,  and  they  eat

20. 12.  that  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  /.

Lev.  16.  22.  goat  bear  iniquities  into  /.  not  inhabited

18.  25.  and  the  /.  is  defiled,  therefore,  27,

28.  that  the  /.  spue  not  you  out  also,  20.  22.

25.  2.  then  shall  the  /.  keep  a  sabbath,  26.  34.

23.  the  /.  shall  not  be  sold,  for  the  /.  is  mine

26.  4.  the  /.  shall  yield  her  increase,  25.  19.

38.  the  /.  of  vour  enemies  shall  eat  you  up

42.  and  1  will  remember  the  /.

43.  the  /.  also  shall  be  left  of  them,  and  enjoy
JSum.  13.  18.  see  the  /.  what  it  is,  and  the  people

32.  the  /.  is  a  /.  that  eateth  up  the  inhabitants

14.  23.  surely  they  shall  not  see  the  /.  I  sware  to

24.  my  servant  Caleb  will  1  bring  to  the  /.

15.  2.  when  ye  be  come  into  the  /.  of  your  habita¬

tion,  18.  Deut.  17.  14.  1 18.  9.  |  26.  1.
21.  34.  delivered  into  thy  hand  his  l.  Deut.  3.  2.
32. 4.  the  country  the  Lord  smote  is  a  /.  for  cattle
35.  33.  for  blood  defileth  the  /.  and  the  /.  cannot
Deut.  1.  36.  to  him  will  I  give  the  /.  he  hath
2.  20.  that  was  accounted  a  /.  of  giants,  3.  13.

8.8.  a  /.  of  wheat,  and  barley,  and  vines
9.  /.  wherein  eat  bread,  /.  whose  stones  are  iron
9.  28.  was  not  able  to  bring  them  into  the  /.

10. 7.  to  Jotbath,  a  /.  of  rivers  of  waters

11.  12.  a  /.  which  the  Lord  thy  God  careth  for
29. 23.  the  whole  /.  thereof  is  brimstone  and  salt

28.  cast  them  into  another  /.  as  at  this  day
32. 10.  he  found  him  in  a  desert  /.  and  in  wilderness
43.  he  will  be  merciful  to  his  l.  and  people

33.  13.  he  said,  blessed  of  the  Lord  he  his  /.

34.  1.  and  the  Lord  shewed  him  all  the  /.

Josh.  2.  1.  sent  two  men,  saying,  go  view  the  /.

9.  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  /.  21.  43.

11.  16.  Joshua  took  all  that  /.  the  hills,  23.

14.  15.  and  the  /.  had  rest  from  war

24. 13.  given  you  a  /.  for  which  ye  did  not  labour
Judg.  3.  11.  the  /.  had  rest  forty  years,  5.  31.

30.  and  the  /.  had  rest  fourscore  years
11. 12.  thou  art  come  to  fight  against  me  in  my  /
18.  10.  when  ye  go  ye  shall  coine  to  a  large  /

30.  till  the  day  of  the  captivity  of  the  /.

1  Sam.  14.  29.  my  father  hath  troubled  the  Z


1  Sam.  21.11.  is  not  this  David  the  king  of  the  l.f

2  Sam.  3.12.  Abner  sent,  saying,  whose  is  the  /.  ?
9.  7-  I  will  restore  thee  all  the  /.  of  Saul
21. 14.  God  was  entreated  for  the  /.  24.  25.

1  Kings  9.  13.  and  he  called  them  the  /.of  CabiA.
11.  18.  appointed  him  victuals  and  gave  him  /.

2  Kings  8.  3.  went  to  cry  to  the  king  for  her  /.

6.  since  the  day  that  she  left  the  /.  even  till  now

17.  26.  the  manner  of  the  God  of  the  /.  27.

18.  32.  take  you  to/,  of  corn  and  wine,  Isa.  36.  17
33.  any  god  delivered  his  /.  Isa.  36.  18.

21.  8.  move  any  more  out  of  the  /.  2  Chr.  33.  8.
24.  7.  the  king  of  Egypt  came  no  more  out  of  his  l
25. 12.  left  of  the  poor  of  the  /.  Jer.  52.  16.

1  Chron.  4.  40.  and  the  /.  was  wide,  and  quiet
'4  7 •  21.  men  of  Gath,  who  were  born  in  that  /.

2  Chron."!.  20.  1  will  pluck  them  up  out  of  my  /.
14.  7.  make  walls,  while  the  /,  is  yet  before  us
34.  8.  when  he  had  purged  the  /.  and  the  house

Ezra  9. 12.  that  ye  may  eat  the  good  of/.  Isa.  1.  19.
Neh.  5.  16.  work  ot  wall,  nor  bought  we  any  l.

9.  36.  fi  r  the  /.  behold  we  are  servants  in  it
Job  31 . 38.  it  my  /.  cry  against  me,  or  furrows

S7 .  13.  whether  tor  correction,  or  his  /.  or  mercy
39.  6.  and  the  barren  /.  his  dwellings
Psal.  10.  16.  the  heathen  are  perished  out  of  his  /
42.  6.  remember  thee  from  the/,  of  Iordan
44.  3.  tor  they  got  not  the  /.  in  possession
52.  5.  and  root  thee  out  of  the  /.  of  the  livin'*

80.  9.  to  take  deep  root,  and  it  filled  the  l.  "

101.  6.  mine  eyes  shall  be  on  the  faithful’of  the  /
8.1  will  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the/.

105.  16.  he  called  for  a  famine  on  the  /.

3o.  the  /.  brought  forth  frogs  in  abundance

106.  24.  yea,  they  despised  the  pleasant  /.

38.  and  the/,  was  polluted  with  blood

107.  34.  he  turneth  the  fruitful  /.  into  barrenness-
143.  6.  my  soul  thirsts  after  thee  as  a  thirsty  /.

10.  lead  me  into  uf  1.  ot  uprightness
Prov.  12. 11.  that  tilleth  his/,  shall  be  satisfied,  28.19.
28.  2.  tor  the  transgression  of  a/,  many  princes

Eccl.  10.16.  woe  to  thee,  O  /.  when  thy  king  is  a  child'
17 .  blessed  art  thou,  O  /.  when  thy  king  is  son
Isa.  5.  30.  if  one  look  unto  the  /.  behold  sorrow

7.  16.  the  /.  that  thou  abhorrest  shall  be  forsakei
24.  because  all  /.  shall  become  briers  and  thorns

9.  1.  /.  of  Zebulun,  /.  ofNaphtali,  Mat.  4.  15

19.  through  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  is  /  darkened

13.  5.  they  come  to  destroy  the  whole  l.

14.  25.  1  will  break  the  Assyrian  in  my  /.

18.  1.  woe  to  the  /.  shadowing  with  wings  !

2.  whose  /.  the  rivers  have  spoiled,  7.

19.  24.  shall  be  a  blessing  in  the  midst  of  the  /

21.  1.  cometh  from  the  desert,  from  a  terrible  /.

23.  1.  from  the  /.  of  Chittim  it  is  revealed

24.  3.  the  /.  shall  be  utterly  emptied  and  spoiled

11.  joy  is  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  l.  is  gone
30.  6.  into  the  /.  ot  trouble  and  anguish
32.  2.  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  /

13.  on  the  /.  of  my  people  shall  come  thorns
33. 17.  and  behold  the  /.  that  is  very  far  off

34.  9.  the/,  thereof  shall  become  burning  pitch

35.  7.  and  the  thirsty  /.  springs  of  water
49.  12.  and  lo,  these  from  the  /.  of  Sinim

19.  the  /.  of  thy  destruction  be  too  narrow
53.8.  fie  was  cut  off  out  of  the  /.  of  the  livin'*

Jer.  1.  18.  an  iron  pillar  against  the  whole  L

2.  2.  wentest  after  me,  in  a  /.  that  was  not  sown.

6.  led  us  through  a  /.  of  deserts,  a  l.  of  drought

7.  when  he  entered,  ye  defiled  my  /.  3.  9.

15.  the  young  lions  made  his  /.  w'aste

3.  19.  how  shall  I  give  thee  a  pleasant  /.  ?

4.  20.  the  whole  /.  is  spoiled,  suddenly  are

5.  19.  serve  strangers  in  a  /.  that  is  not.  yours

6.  8.  lest  I  make  thee  a  l.  not  inhabited

8.  16.  the  whole  /.  trembled  at  the  sound
9. 12.  for  w  hat  the  /.  perisheth  and  is  burnt

19.  because  we  have  forsaken  the  /.

11.  19.  let  us  cut  him  off'  from  the  /.  of  the  living

12.  4.  how  long  shall  the  /.  mourn,  herbs  wither  -

12.  from  one  end  of  the  /.  even  to  the  other

15.  1  will  bi  in»  again  every  man  to  his  /.

16.  15.  brought  Israel  from  /.  of  the  north,  31.  16
18.  because  they  have  defiled  my/,  they  filled

17. 6.  inhabit  wilderness  in  a  salt  /"  not  inhabited
22.27.  to  the  /.  whereunto  they  desire  to  return

23.  lo.  is  profaneness  gone  forth  into  the  /.

25.  13.  1  will  bring  on  that  I.  all  my  w  ords
27.  7*  till  the  very  time  of  his  /.  come

40.  4.  behold,  all  the  /.  is  before  thee

46.  12.  thy  shame,  and  thy  cry  hath  filled  the  /.

50. 18. 1  will  punish  the  king  of  Babylon  anil  his  /.

38.  for  it  is  the  /.  ot  graven  images,  they  are  mad
51.  43.  a  dry  /.  a  /.  wherein  no  man  dwelh-tii
47.  her  whole  1.  shall  be  confounded
Ezek.  7.  23.  for  the  /.  is  full  of  bloody  crimes-

8.  17.  they  have  filled  the  /.  with  violence

9.  9.  and  the  /.  is  full  of  blood,  and  the  city
14.  13.  w'hen  the  /.  sinneth  against  me

17.  bring  a  sword  on  /.  ||  19.  a  pestilence  into  /.
17-5.  he  took  also  ot  the  seed  ot  the/,  and  planted

13.  he  hath  taken  the  mighty  of  the  /.

21.  19-  both  shall  come  fortl/out  of  one  /.

22.  24.  thou  art  the  /.  is  not  cleansed  nor  rained  on
^30.  should  stand  in  the  gap  before  me  for  the  /.

32.  4.  then  will  I  leave  thee  upon  the  /.  I  will  cast

33.  2.  when  1  bring  the  sword  upon  a  /.

3.  if  when  he  seeth  the  sword  come  upon  the  /.

24.  the  /.  is  given  us  for  inheritance

36.  5.  have  appointed  my  /.  into  their  possession

13.  thou  l.  devourest  up  men,  and  hast  bereaved

38.  9.  thou  shalt  be  like  a  cloud  to  cover  the  /  16
11.  I  will  go  up  to  the  /.  of  unwalled  villages

16.  and  1  will  bring  thee  against  my  /.

39.  12.  that  they  may  cleanse  the  If
16.  thus  shall  they  cleanse  the /.

47.  15.  and  this  shall  be  the  border  of  the  /.

Dan.  11.  lb.  he  shall  stand  in  the  glorious  /.  41.
i/<«.  4.  3.  therefore  shall  the  /.  mourn  and  languish
Joel  ^ .  6.  for  a  nation  is  come  up  upon  my  /.  strong

2.  3.  the  /.  is  as  the  garden  of  Eden  before  them

18.  then  will  the  lord  he  jealous  for  his/.

269


LAN


LAS


LAN


Jocl2.2 1  tear  not,  O  /.  be  glad  l|  3. 2.  and  parted  my  /.

A, nos  5.  2.  she  is  forsaken  upon  her  /..there  is  none

7.  10.  the  /.  is  not  able  to  beai  all  his  words
8  4.  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  /.  to  tail

8.  shall  not  the  /.  tremble  for  this  ?  .  ,

o  5.  the  Lord  ( >od  ot  hosts  is  he  that  toucheth  the  /.
Zeph.  1.  2.  I  consume  all  things  from  on  the/.

18.  whole  /.  shall  be  devoured  by  tire  ot  jealousy
3  19.  1  will  get  them  praise  and  tame  m  every  l.
Zech.  'l.  6.  ho,  ho,  tiee  horn  the  /.  ot  the  north
3  q  1  will  remove  the  iniquity  ot  that  /.  in  one
9!  16.  of  a  crown  lifted  up,  as  an  ensign  upon  his  /.

12.  12.  the  /.  Shall  mourn,  every  family  apart

13.  2.  and  the  unclean  spirit  to  pass  out  of  the /.

8  in  all  the  /.  two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  oil

14  10.  all  the  /.  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain
Alai.  3.  12.  for  ye  shall  be  a  delightsome  /.

Alat.  9.  26.  fame  hereof  went  abroad  into  all  that  /.

10  15.  more  tolerable  tor  the  /.  ot  Sodom,  11.  -4.

15  ye  compass  sea  and  /.  to  make  one  proselyte
27.  45.  was  darkness  over  al  1  the  /.  Mark  15.  33
Atari  6. 47.  ship  was  in  the  sea,  and  he  alone  on  the  /.
Luke  14.  35.  neither  tit  for  the  /.  nor  dunghill

15  14.  there  arose  a  great  famine  m  that  /.

John  6.  21.  immediately  the  ship  was  at  the/.

°1  11  Peter  drew  the  net  to  /.  full  ot  great  fishes
Acts  4.' 37.  having  /.  sold  it,  and  brought  the  money
5.8.  tell  me  whether  ye  sold  the  /.  tor  so  much
27.  39.  when  it  was  day,  they  knew  not  the  /.

43.  cast  themselves  into  the  sea,  and  get  to  /.

44.  that  they  escaped  all  safe  to  /.
bee  Benjamin,  Chaldeans,  Canaan,  Dark¬
ness,  Desolate,  Divide,  Divided.

Dry  LAN  D.

Den.  1. 9.  let  dry  l.  appear  ||  10.  called  dry  l.  earth
7.  22.  of  all  that  was  in  the  dry  /.  died
Exod.  4.  9.  take  and  pour  water  on  the  dry  /.  and  the
waters  shall  become  blood  on  the  dry  l.

14.  21.  and  the  Lord  made  the  sea  dry  /.

29.  Israel  walked  on  dry  /.  ||  15. 19.  A eh.  9. 1 1  •

Josh.  4.  18.  the  priests'  feet  were  lifted  up  on  dry  /.

22.  Israel  came  over  this  Iordan  on  dry  l.

Psal.  63.  1.  my  flesh  longeth  tor  thee  in  a  dry  /.

66.  6.  he  turned  the  sea  into  dry  l.

68.  6.  but  the  rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  /.

95.  5.  sea  is  his,  and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  /.

Isa.  41.  18.  I  will  make  dry  l.  springs  of  water
Jer.  50.  12.  hindermostot  nations  shall  be  a  dry  l.

51.  43.  her  cities  are  a  dry  1.  and  wilderness
Dos.  2.  3.  lest  1  set  her  as  a  dry  /.  and  slay  her
Jonah  1.  9.  1  fear  God,  who  made  the  sea  and  dry  l.

2.  10.  the  fish  vomited  out  Jonah  on  the  dry  l.

Hag.  2.  6.  and  I  will  shake  the  sea  and  dry  l.

Deb  11.  29.  they  passed  the  Bed  sea  as  by  dry  l.
bee  Dwell,  Egypt,  Good.

In  the  LAN  D.

Gen.  13.  7.  and  the  Canaanite  dwelt  then  in  the  l.
26.22.  and  we  shall  be  fruitful  in  the  l.

41.  31.  the  plenty  shall  not  be  known  in  the  l.

42.  34.  1  shall  know,  and  ye  shall  tramck  in  the  l.

47.  4.  for  to  sojourn  in  the  l.  are  we  come

Exod.  8. 25.  go  ye.,  sacrifice  to  your  God  in  the  l.

9  5  to-morrow  the  Lord  shall  do  this  thing  in  the  l.
14.  3.  he  will  say,  they  are  entangled  in  the  l.

Lev.  26.  6.  and  L  will  give  peace  m  the  /  and  ye
Deut.  4.  14.  that  ye  may  do  them  in  1. 1.  whither  ye  go

5.  16.  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee  in  the  l.

11.9.  that  you  may  prolong  days  in  t.l.  21. 1  25.15.
25.  19.  God  hath  given  thee  rest  mthel.

28.  8.  he  shall  bless  thee  in  the  l.  11.  I  30.  16.

31.  13.  fear  the  Lord  as  long  as  ye  live  in  the  l.

Judo.  18.  7.  and  there,  was  no  magistrate  in  thel.

1  3am.  23.  23.  and  if  he  be  in  the  l.  1  will  search

2  bam.  15.  4.  O  that  1  were  made  judge  mthel.

1  Kings  8.  37.  if  there  be  famine  in  the  /.  2  Chr.  6. 28.

2  Chr.  6.  31.  fear  thee  so  long  as  they  live  in  the  /.

19.  5.  and  Jehoshaphat  set  judges  m  the  /.

32.  31.  inquire  of  the  wonder  that  was  done  in  the  L.
Job  28.  13.  nor  is  it  found  in  the  l.  of  the  living
Psal.  27. 13.  goodness  of  the  L.  in  the  l.  ot  the  living

35.  20.  they  devise  deceitful  matter  in  the  /.

74. 8.  they  "burnt  the  synagogues  of  God  in  the  l.
116.  9.  1  will  walk  before  the  Lord  in  the  l.  of

[the  living

142.  5.  thou  art  my  portion  in  the  l.  ot  the  living
Isa.  7.  22.  for  honey  shall  every  one  eat  in  the  l.

26. 10.  in  the  l.  of  uprightness  he  will  deal  unjustly
38.  11.  I  shall  not  see  the  L.  in  the  l.  of  the  living

Ezek.  20.  40.  shall  all  of  them  in  the  I.  serve  me
26.  20.  1  shall  set  glory  in  thel.  of  the  living
32.  23.  caused  terror  in  the  l.  of  the  living,  24.  32.
37.  22.  I  will  make  them  one  nation  in  thel.

45.  8.  in  the  l.  shall  be  his  possession  in  Israel
Dos.  4.  1.  because  there  is  no  truth  in  thel.

Zech.  11.  16.  1  will  raise  up  a  Shepherd  in  thel.
Luke  21.  23.  there  shall  be  great  distress  m  the  /.
Deb.  11.9.  by  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  l.  of  promise
bee  Inhabitants,  Inherit,  Israel,  J udah
Our  LAN  D.

Gd7t.47.19.buv  us  and  0./.  for  bread,  and  we  and  0. 1.
Psal.  85.  12.  and  our  l.  shall  yield  her  increase
Cant.  2.  12.  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  l.
AJic.  5.  5^  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  our  l.

6.  he  shall  deliver  us  when  he  cometh  into  our  l
Oum  LA  N  D.

L’joi/.  18.27.  lethro  went  into  his  oirtt/.  Num.  10.  30.

1  Kings  10.6.  atrue  report  1  heard  in  my  l.2Chr.9.5

2  Kings  17.  2.3.  Israel  carried  out  ot  their  own  l.

18.  .32.  take  you  to  a  land  likeyour  own  l.  La.36.17.

19.  7.  and  he  shall  return  to  his  own  /.

2  Chr.  32. 21.  he  returned  with  shame  to  his  own  l.
La.  13.  14.  and  flee  every  one  to  his  own  l.

14.  1.  choose  Israel,  and  set  them  in  their  own  l.
37.  7.  and  fall  by  the  sword  in  his  own  /.

Jer.  23.8.  they  shall  dwell  in  their  -own  l.  27.  11.
37.  7.  return  to  Egypt,  into  their  ownl.  42.  12.

50.  16.  they  shall  flee  every  one  to  his  own  l.
Ezek.  34.  13.  1  will  bring  them  into  their  own  l.

36.  24.  I  37.  14,  21.  139.  28.
36.  17.  when  Israel  dwelt  in  their  ownl.

Amos  7.  11.  Israel  led  captive  out  of  their  own  l.
bee  People,  Possess,  Possession,  Strange.
270


Their  LAND,  S.

Gen  47  .  22.  wherefore  the  priests  sold  not  their  /.
Lev'.  2H.’24.  but  l  said.yeshall  inherit  their  l .

Num.  18.  20.  Aaron  had  no  inheritance  in  their  l.
Dent.  2.  5.  for  l  will  not  give  you  of  their  l.  9.

4.  38.  bring  thee,  and  give  thee  their  l.  Judg.  o.  9.
29.  8.  we  took  their  l.  and  gave  it,  Josh.  10.  42.

28.  and  the  Lord  rooted  them  out  ot  their  l.

1  Kings  8.  48.  return  and  pray  to  thee  to  ward  their  l.

2  Chron.  7.  14.  forgive  their  sin  and  heal  their  l.
Psal.  105.  32.  he  gave  them  flaming  tire  m  their  l.
135. 12.  and  gave  their  l.  tor  an  heritage,  136.  21.

Isa  0  7.  their  l.  is  full  of  silver  and  horses
8’  their  l.  also  is  full  of  idols,  they  worship
34.  7.  their  l.  shall  be  soaked  with  blood
Jer  1°  14.  behold,  l  will  pluck  them  out  of  their  l.
16.'  15.  1  will  bring  them  again  nito  iAeir  /.

51 . 5.  not  forsaken,  tho  their  l.  was  tilled  v  ith  sin
Ezek.  34.  27.  and  they  shall  be  sate  in  thevr  l.

39.  26.  when  they  dwelt  safely  in  their  l.  and
Amos  9. 15.  and  l  will  plant  them  on  their  l.

This  LAN  D.

Gen.  12.  7.  the  Lord  said,  unto  thy  seed  1  will  give
this  l.  15.  18. 1  24.  7. 1  48.  4.  Exod.  32.  13.
28.  15.  I  will  bring  thee  again  into  this  l.

31  13  <ret  thee  out  from  this  l.  and  return  to  land
5o!  24*  and  God  will  bring  you  out  of  this  l.  .
Num.  14. 3.  why  hath  the  Lord  brought  us  unto  this  l.
8.  then  he  will  bring  us  into  this  /.  and  give  it
32.  5.  let  this  l.  be  given  to  thy  servants
22.  this  /.  shall  be  your  possession  berore  the  Ld
.34.  2.  this  l.  shall  fall  to  you,  13.  Josh.  13.  2.
Deut.  4.  22.  but  1  must  die  in  this  l.  and  not  go  over
26.  9.  and  he  hath  given  us  this  l.  Josh.  1.  13.

29  24  wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  thus  to  this
/.  ?  27.  1  Kings  9-  8.  2  Chron.  7 .  21.
Judg.  2.  2.  no  league  with  the  inhabitants  of  this  l.
2  Kings  18.  25.  Ld.  said,  go  up  ag.  this  l.  Isa.  .36. 10.
2  Chron.  .30.  9.  they  shall  come  again  into  this  l.
Jer.  14. 15.  say,  the  sword  shall  not  be  in  this  l.

16.  .3.  their  fathers  that  begat  them  in  this  l.

6.  both  great  and  small  shall  die  111  this  l
13.  therefore  1  will  cast  you  out  ot  this  /.

22.  12.  and  he  shall  see  this  l.  no  more
2L  6.  and  1  will  bring  them  again  to  this  l.

25.  9.  and  I  will  bring  them  against  this  l.

11.  and  this  whole  /.  shall  be  a  desolation

26.  20.  a  man  who  prophesied  against  this  l.

32  15  houses  shall  be  possessed  again  in  this  l.

41.  and  1  will  plant  them  in  this  /.  assuredly

36.  29.  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  destroy  this  l.

37.  19.  shall  not  come  against  you,  nor  this  l.

4°  10  if  ye  will  abide  in  this  l.  1  will  build  you

13.  if  ye  say,  we  will  not  dwell  in  this  l.

45.  4.  1  will  pluck  up  even  this  whole  /


i  win  jjiuvia  y’~***: —  . -

E?ek  11  15.  to  us  is  this  l.  given  in  possession
47.  i4.  this  l.  shall  fall  unto  you  tor  inheritance


48.  29.  this  is  the  /.  which  ye  shall  divide
Act  si  4.  he  removed  him  into  this  l.  wherein
Thy  LAND.

Eiod.  23.  10.  Six  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  /.

26.  nothing  shall  cast  their  young  in  thy  l.

33.  they  shall  not  dwell  in  thy  l.  lest  they
34.  24.  nor  shall  any  man  desire  thy  l.

Num.  21.  22.  Israel  said,  let  me  pass  through  thy  /.

Deut.  2.  27.  Judg.  11.  17>  19.
Deut.  7.  13.  he  will  bless  the  fruit  of  thy  l.

21.  23.  bury  him,  that  thy  l.  be  not  defiled
28.  12.  to  give  the  rain  to  thy  l.  in  his  season
18.  cursed  shall  be  the  fruit  of  thy  /.  42.

2  bam.  7.  2.3.  and  to  do  great  things  tor  thy  l.

24.  13.  shall  famine  come  to  thee  in  thy  l.  ?

Psal.  85.  1.  thou  hast  been  favourable  to  thy  l.

Isa.  8.  8.  his  w  ings  shall  fill  the  breadth  ot  thy  l.

14.  20.  because  thou  hast  destroyed  thy  l.

2.3.  10.  pass  through  thy  I.  as  a  river,  O  t  arshish
60.  18.  violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  l.

62.  4.  nor  shall  thy  /.  be  termed  desolate  ;  the  Lord
delighteth  in  thee,  and  thy  l.  shall  be  mairied
Ezek.  .32.  8.  and  l  will  set  darkness  upon  thy  /.
Arnos  7.  17.  and  thy  I.  shall  be  divided  by  line
A lie.  5.  11.  1  will  cut  off  the  cities  ot  thy  /.

Nah.  3.  13.  the  gates  of  thy  I.  shall  be  set  wide  open
Your  LAN  D.

Gen.  47  .  23.  1  have  bought  you  and  your  l.  this  day
Lev.  19.  9.  when  ye  reap  the  harvest  of  your  l.  23.22.

25.  45.  children,  which  they  begat  in  your  /.

26.  5.  ye  shall  eat,  and  dwell  in  your  /.  sately
6.  nor  shall  the  sword  go  through  your  l.

20.  for  your  l.  shall  not  yield  her  increase
Num.  10.  9.  if  you  go  to  w  ar  in  your  /.  then  blow

22.  13.  get  \w\o  your  /.  ||  34.  12.  tjiis  shall  be  your  l.
Deut.  11.  14.  give  vou  the  rain  of  your  /.  in  season

1  bam.  6.  5.  he  will  lighten  his  hand  from  off  your  l .
Jer.  5.  19.  and  have  served  strange  gods  m  your  l.

27.  10.  prophesy,  to  remove  you  tar  from  your  l.

44  22.  therefore  is  your  l.  a  desolation  and  astonish.

LAN  DED.

Acts  18.  22.  when  we  had  /.  at  Cesarea^

21.  3.  and  sailed  into  Syria,  and  /.  at  Tyre

LANDING.

Acts  28.  12.  /.  at  Syracuse  we  tarried  three  days
LA  N  D -mark.

Deut.  19.  14.  thou  shalt  not  remove  thy  neighbour  s
/.-mark,  Prov.  22.  28.  I  23.  10.
27. 17.  cursed  that  removeth  neighbour’s  l.-mark
LAND -marks.

Job  24.  2.  some  remove  the  l.-marks,  and  take  away
LANDS.

Gert.  41.  54.  and  the  dearth  was  in  all  /.  57-
47.  18.  not  ought  left  but  our  bodies  and  /.

22.  wherefore  they  sold  not  their  /.

Judg.  11.  13.  restore  those  /.  again  peaceablv

2  Kings  19.  11.  thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings  ot
Assyria  have  done  to  all  /.  Isa.  37-11.

1  Chron.  14.  17.  the  fame  of  David  went  into  all  /.

2  Chron.  1.3.  9.  priests  after  the  manner  of  other  /.
17.  10.  fear  fell  on  all  the  /.  round  about
.32.  17.  as  the  gods  of  other  /.  have  not  delivered

Ezra  9.  1.  have  not  separated  from  the  people  of  /.

2.  have  mingled  w  ith  the  people  ot  those  /.  11.
Neh.  5.  3.  some  said,  we  have  mortgaged  our  /.  4.


Neh.  5.  5.  for  other  men  have  our  /.  and  vineyar
11.  restore  1  pray  you,  this  day  their  /.

10.  28.  that  had  separated  from  the  people  ot  the
Psal.  49.  11.  they  call  their  /.  after  their  own  11am
66.  i.  make  a  joyful  noise  all  ye  /.  100.  1.

105  44.  and  gave  them  the  /.  ot  the  heathen
106*  27  lifted  his  hand,  to  scatter  them  in  the  /
107’  3.  fathered  them  out  of  the  /.  from  east
Jer.  16.  15.  that  brought  up  Israel  from  /.  whith,
07.  8,  have  given  all  these  /.  to  Nebuchadnezzai
Ezek  20. 6  into  a  land  which  is  the  glory  of  all  /.  ]
39.  27.  gathered  them  out  of  their  enemies’  /.
Alat.  19.  29.  hath  forsaken  houses,  /.  Mark  10.  2{
Mark  10.  30.  shall  receive  an  hundred  fold,  /
Acts  4.  34.  as  many  as  were  possessors  ot  /.  sold;

LAN  ES.  ]

Luke  14.  21.  go  out  quickly  into  the  /.  of  the  city
LA  N  G  U  AG  E

Signifies,  [1]  A  set  of  words  which  a  particuh
nation  or  people  make  use  oj  to  express  the
thoughts,  2  Kings  18.  26.  [2]  lhe  Hebf

tongue,  Gen.  11.  I,  6.

Shall  speak  the  language  of  Canaan,  Isa.  19.
bhall  make  profession  of  the  true  religion,  and
come  members  of  the  gospel  church.

1  will  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  language,  Ley
3  9.  I  will  renew  them  by  my  bpirit  and  g.
them  a  pure  way  of  worshipping  me  in  pray
and  praises,  as  the  Jruit  and  issue  oj  a  put  if

Gen*\\.  1.  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  /.and  spec

6.  the  people  is  one,  and  they  haye  all  one  /.

7  00  dow  n,  and  there  confound  then  /.  9-

2  Kings  18.  26.  speak  in  the  Syrian  /.  Isa.  36.  11
28.  Eab-shakeh  cried  in  the  Jews  /.  Isa.  36.  1

Neh  13  24.  their  children  could  not  speak  111  i
Jews’  /.  but  according  to  the  /.  of  each  peo;'
Esth.  1. 22.  to  every  people  after  their  /.  3. 12. 1  8>
Psal  19  3  no  /.  where  their  voice  is  not  heard
81  5  where  1  heard  a  /.  that  1  understood  not
114.  1.  house  of  Jacob  from  a  people  ot  strang/
Isa.  19.  18.  five  cities  speak  the  /.  ot  C  anaan
Jer,  5.  15.  a  nation,  whose  /.  thou  knowest  not
Ezek.  3.  5.  not  sent  to  a  people  ot  hard  /.6.

Dan  3.29.  I  decree,  every  /.  that  speaketh  am
Zeph.  3.  9.  1  will  turn  to  the  people  a  pure  /.  1
Acts  2  6  every  man  heard  them  speak  m  his  ow ,
LANGUAGES.

Dan.  3.  4.  to  you,  O  people,  nations,  and  /.

7.  all  /.  fell  down  and  worshipped  the  image
4.1.  Nebuchadnezzar  to  all  /.  1(6.  25.  Darius  to  a
5.  19.  all  /.  trembled  and  feared  before  him

7.  14.  all  people,  nations,  and  /.  should  serve
Zech  8  23.  ten  men  out  ot  all  /.  shall  take  hoi

LANGUISH.  .  |

Isa.  16.  8.  for  the  fields  of  lleshbon  /.  and  vine
19.  8.  and  they  that  spread  nets  on  waters  sha
24.  4.  the  haughty  people  ol  the  earth  do  /.  !

Jer.  14.  2.  sates  ot  Judah  /.  and  are  black  to  groj
Dos.  4.  3.  every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shal
LANGUISHED.

Lam  2.  8.  rampart  and  wall  to  lament,  /.  togei
LANGU1SIIETH.

]sa  °4  4.  the  world  /.  and  fadeth  away
7.  the  vine  /.  11  .33.  9-  the  earth  mourneth  and,
Jer  15  9.  she  that  hath  born  seven  /.  given  upgs
Joe'l  1.  10.  the  oil  /.  11  12.  the  fig-tree  /

Nah.  1.  4.  Bashan  /.  and  Carmel,  the  flower  /.
LANGUISHING.

Psal  41.3.  Lord  will  strengthen  him  on  the  Dtd  i
LANTERNS.

John  18.  3.  Judas  cometh  with  /.  and  torches

2  Kings  4.  39.  and  gathered  wild  gourds,  his /i

Neh.  5.  13.  1  shook  my  /.  and  said,  so  God  sM
Prov  16.  33.  the  lot  is  cast  into  the  /.  but  dispos!
LAPPED.

Judg.  7.  6.  the  number  that  /.  were  three  huncl
7.  the  Lord  said,  by  them  that/.  1  will  save1

Judg.  7.  5.  every  one  that  /.  of  the  water  as  a  c
LAPWING,  bee  Bat.
LARGE.

Gen.  34.  21.  the  land,  behold  it  is  /.enough  tor
Exod.  .3.  8.  to  bring  them  into  a  good  and  /.  }
Judg.  18.  10.  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  come  into  a  1
<2  bam.  22.  20.  he  brought  me  into  /.  place,  l  s.
Neh.  4. 19.  1  said  to  people,  the  work  is  great.
7.4.  the  city  w^s  /.  and  great-,  but  the  pe°FJe.

9.  35.  have  not  served  thee  in  the  t.  and  lat  1
Psal.  31. 8.  thou  hast  set  my  teet  in  a  /.  roon
118.5.  Lord  answered  me,  and  set  me  in  a  /
119.  t  45.  1  w  ill  walk  at  /.  tor  1  seek  thy  pref
Isa.  22.  18.  he  will  toss  thee  into  a  /.  country
30.2.3.  in  that  day  shall  thy  cattle  feed  in  /.  pas

33.  1  ophet  is  ordained,  he  made  it  deep  an
Jer  22.  14.  that  saith,  1  will  build  /.  chambei
Ezek.  23.  32.  drink  of  thy  sister's  cup  deep  a
Dos.  4.16.  Ld.  w  ill  feed  them  as  a  lamb  m  a/.
Mat  28.  12.  they  gave/,  money  to  the  soldie
Mark  14. 15.  will  shew  a  /.  upper  room.  Luke
Gal.  6.  1L  ye  see  how  /.  a  letter  1  have  writ
Lev  16.  the  length  is  as  /.  as  the  breadtli
LARGENESS.  (

1  Kings  4.  29.  God  gave  Solomon  /.  of  heart-
LASCIVIOUSNESS.

Alarkl.  22.  out  of  the  heart  of  men  proceed  f

2  Cor.  12.  21.  and  have  not  repented  ot  the  {.
Gal.  5.  19-  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manitejj
Eph.  4.  19.  who  have  given  themselves  over  [
\  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  /.  lusts,  exces
Jude  4.  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into  /.

LAST.

Gen.  49.  19.  hot  Gad  shall  overcome  at  the  1
Num.  23.  10.  and  let  my  /.  end  be  like  bis  L
2  bam.  19.  11.  why  are  ye  I.  to  bring  the  k .1 n„
2.3  1  now  these  be  the  /.  words  ot

1  Chron.  23.  27.  for  by  the  l.  words  of  Uavjq
29  29  now  the  acts  of  David  the  kin?,  hist

2  Chron.  9.  29-  the  ads  of  Solomon  first  ano-
12.  15.  of  Rehoboam  first  and  /.  II  lb»  D*  01

20.  34.  the  acts  of  Jehoshaphat  first  ana  i .


LA  U


LAW


L  A  W


Chron.^5.  26.  the  acts  of  Amaziah  first  and  /.
6.  22.  of  Uzziah  first  and  /.  |l  28.  26.  of  Ahaz
'  ■“ J — 1 c-st  and  / . :


5.  27.  Josiah’s  deeds  first  and  /.  are  written
-ra8. 13.  and  ot  the  /.  sons  of  Adonikam
rA.8. 18.  troi»i  the  first  day  to  the  /.  he  read
ruv.  5.  11.  and  thou  mourn  at  the  /.  when  thy

l. 32.  at  the  /.  itbiteth  like  aserpent.  and  stingeth
a. 41.4.  1  the  Lord,  the  first,  and  with  the  /.  41.6.

I  48. 12.  Lev.  1 .  11,  17  |  2.  8.  I  22.  13
r.  12.  4.  they  said,  he  shall  not  see  our  /.  end
4.17-  at  /.  Nebuchadnezzar  hath  broken  his  bones

m.  1.  9-  she  remembereth  not  her  /.  end
an.  4.  8.  at  the  /.  Daniel  came  in  before  me
.  3.  but  one  was  higher,  and  the  higher  came  up  /.

19.  make  thee  know  what  shall  be  in  the  /.  end
mos  9.  1.  I  will  slay  the  /.  of  them  with  sword
at.  12.45.  /.  state  of  that  man  is  worse,  Luke  1 1 .26.
I  30.  many  that  are  first  shall  be  /.  and  the  /.

first,  20.  16.  Mark  10.  31.  Luke  13.  30.
5.8.  beginning  from  the  /.  to  the  first

12.  these  /.  have  wrought  but  one  hour
14.  1  will  give  to  this  /.  even  as  unto  thee
1.37.  Lot  all  he  sent  his  son, saying,  Mark  12.  6.

1.  27-  and  l.  ot  all  the  woman  died  also,  in  re¬
surrection  whose  wife  ?  Mark  12.  22.  Luke  20. 32
i.  GO.  at  the  /.  came  two  false  witnesses
’.  64.  the  /.  error  shall  be  worse  than  the  first
ark9.  35.  if  desire  to  be  first,  the  same  shall  be  l
ike  12.  59.  till  thou  hast  paid  the  /.  mite
hn  8.  9.  beginning  at  the  eldest,  even  to  the  l.

'or.  4.  9.  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles  /.

1.  8.  and  l.  of  all  lie  was  seen  of  me  also

6.  the  /.  enemy  is  death  ||  45.  the  l.  Adam

2.  all  be  changed  in  a  moment,  at  the  /.  trump
tl.  4.  10.  at  /.  your  care  of  me  flourished  again
v.  2.  19.  the  /.  works  to  be  more  than  the  first
1. 1.  seven  angels,  having  the  seven  l.  plagues
.  9.  seven  vials  full  of  the  seven  /.  plagues

,  .  LAS  T  day,  days,

nifies,  [11  The  eighth  and  great  day  of  the  feast
f  tabernacles ,  wherein  there  used  to  be  the  great¬
er  assemblies,  John  7.  37.  [2]  The  day  ofjudg-
ient,  John  11.  24.  |  12.  48.  [3]  From  the  time  of
'brists  first  coming  to  his  second,  Acts  2.  17.
leb.  1.  2


n.  49. 1.  which  shall  befall  you  in  the  1.  days
.  2.2. come  to  pass  in  i. days,  Mic.  4. 1.  Acts^.lj.


•n  6.  39.  should  raise  it  up  at  the  l.  day ,  40,  44,  54.
37.  in  the  /.  day,  the  great  day  of  the  feast
.  24.  I  know  that  he  shall  rise  again  at  the  l.  day
,  48.  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  l.  day
im.  3.  1.  in  l.  days  perilous  times  shall  come
h.  1.  2.  hath  spoken  in  these  /.  days  by  his  Son

n.5.  3.  ye  have  heaped  treasure  for  tlie  l.  days
'et.  3.  3.  there  shall  cpme  in  the  1.  days  scoffers
LAST  time,  times.

et.  1.  5.  ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  l.  time
).  but  was  manifest  in  these  l.  times  for  you
'hn  2. 18.  little  children,  it  is  the  l.  time,  are  many
ntichrists,  whereby  we  know  that  it  is  the  l.  time
e  18.  told  there  should  be  mockers  in  the  /  time
LASTED.

'!>.  14. 17.  and  she  wept  while  the  feast  l.

LASTING.

«.  33.  15.  for  the  precious  things  of  the  /.  hills

LATCH  ET.

.  5.  27.  nor  the  /.  of  their  shoes  be  broken
rk  1.  7.  the  l.  ot  whose  shoes,  Luke  3. 16.

LATE.

/.  127.  2.  it  is  in  vain  for  you  to  sit  up  l.

"•  2. 8.  of  I.  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy
•'til.  8.  the  Jews  of  /.  sought  to  stone  thee
LATELY.

*18.  2.  found  Aquila  a  Jew  l.  come  from  Italy
LATIN.

re  23. 38.  written  in  Hebrew  and  l.  John  19. 20,

LATTER.

<?.  4. 8.  they  will  believe  the  voice  of  the  l.  sign
(Ml.  14.  will  give  yon  the  first  rain,  and  l.  rain

3.  and  if  her  l.  husband  hate  her  or  die
•  19.25.  my  Redeemer  shall  stand  at  the  l.  day

23.  they  opened  their  mouth,  as  for  the  1.  rain
r.  16. 15.  his  favour  is  as  a  cloud  of  the  /.  rain

20.  that  thou  mayest  be  wise  in  the  l.  end
3. 3.  and  there  hath  been  no  1.  rain

24.  both  the  former  and  /.  rain  in  his  season
■■  38.  8.  in  the  /.  years  thou  shalt  come

4.8.23.  in  the  l.  time  of  their  kingdom
29.  but  it  shall  not  be  as  the  former  or  the  l.

.  6.  3.  he  shall  come  as  the  /.  and  former  rain
-_23.  and  the  l.  rain  in  the  first  month
n~.  l.  in  the  beginning  of  the  /.  growth
!•  2.  9.  the  glory  of  the  /.  house  shall  be  greater
'•  10.  1.  ask  ye  rain  in  the  time  of  the  l.  rain
>n.  4.  1.  that  in  the  l.  times  some  shall  depart
■See  Days,  End.
r  .  LATTICE.

7.  5.28.  Si3era|s  mpther  cried  though  the  l.

'ags  1. 2.  Ahaziah  fell  down  through  the  l.

t  O  1 1  r  l. «  ...lb. _  L  ! _ _  .1  g  ii  1.1  >


t.  2.  9.  shewing  himself  through  the  l.

„  .  LAUD.

'■  lo.  11.  praise  the  Ld.  and  /.  him,  all  ye  people
,  LAVER.

'•  30.  18.  thou  shalt  also  make  a  /.  of  brass
the  /.  and  his  foot,  31.  9.  I  35. 16.  I  39.  39.

”•  *J6  made  the  l.  of  brass,  and  the  foot  brass
<•  thou  shalt  set  the  l.  ||  30.  and  he  set  the  l.

•  and  thou  shalt  anoint  the  l.  and  his  foot
8. 11.  he  anointed  both  the  l.  and  his  foot
ngs  1 . 30.  under  the  l.  were  undersetters  molten

•  ever>’  '■  was  forty  baths,  and  every  l.  was
ags  10. 17.  and  king  Ahaz  removed  the  l.

LAVERS.

'Vi  7.38.  then  made  he  ten  /.  of  brass
and  lhram  made  the  /.and  the  shovels

•  and  the  ten  /.  on  the  bases,  2  Chron.  4.  6, 14.

-  r  rr  LAUGH

uies,  11 1  In  rejoice  greatly  in  a  blessing  pro-
,'*£>  °f.  already  conferred,  Gen.  J7.  17-  I  21.  6.

In  ntvtmr*  j  ..1 ,  i1  .1  c  to  .  /-


ner,  Luke  6.  25.  [5]  To  carry  oneself  familiarly
and  pleasantly  towards  another.  Job  29.  24
At  destruction  and  famine  thou  shalt  laugh,  Job  5.
22.  I hou  shalt  rejoice,  that  by  God's  watchful
and  gracious  providence  thou  hast  been  secured
from  them,  when  others  are  destroyed  thereby .
Gen.  18.  13.  wherefore  did  Sarah  l.  saying
15.  and  he  said,  nay,  but  thou  didst  l.

21.  6.  God  hath  made  me  to  l.  all  will  /.  with  me
Job 5.  22.  at  destruction  and  famine  thou  shalt  /.

9.  23.  he  will  l.  at  the  trial  of  the  innocent

22.  19.  and  the  innocent  l.  them  to  scorn
Psal.  2.  4.  he  thatsitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  /.

22. 7.  all  they  that  see  me  /.  me  to  scorn
37. 13.  the  Lord  shall  /.  at  him,  for  lie  seeth
52.  6.  the  righteous  also  shall  /.  at  him

59.8.  hut  thou,  O  Lord,  shalt  l.  at  them
80.  6.  and  our  enemies  1.  among  themselves
Prov.  1.  26.  1  also  will  /.  at  your  calamity
29.  9.  whether  he  rage  or  /.  there  is  no  rest

Lccl.  3.  4.  a  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  /.

Luke  6.  21.  blessed  are  ye  that  weep,  ye  shall  /.

25.  woe  unto  you  that  /.  now,  ye  shall  weep
^  LAUGHED.

Gen.  17.  17-  Abraham  1. 1|  18.  12.  Sarah  I.  in  herself
18.  15.  then  Sarah  denied,  saving,  1  /.  not
2  Kings ,19.  21.  daughter  of  Zion  hath  l.  Isa.  37.  22.

2  Chron.  30.  10.  they  /.  them  to  scorn,  and  mocked
2. 19.  they  l.  us  to  scorn,  and  despised  us
Job  12.  4.  the  just  and  upright  man  is  /.  toscorn
29.  24.  it  1  l.  on  them,  they  believed  net
Ezek.  23.  32.  thou  shalt  be  l.  toscorn.  and  had
Mat.  9.  24.  they  l.  to  scorn,  Mark 5. 40.  Luke 8.  53.
TI  LA  UGH  ETH.

Job  41.  29.  he  l.  at  the  shaking  of  a  spear
.  LAUGHING.

Job  8.  21.  till  he  fill  thy  mouth  with  /.  and  thy  lips
„  LAUGHTER.

Psal.  126.  2.  then  was  our  mouth  filled  with  /.

Prov.  14. 13.  even  in  /.  the  heart  is  sorrowful
Eccl.  2.2.  I  said  of  l.  it  is  mad,  and  of  mirth
7.  3.  sorrow  is  better  than  /.  ||  6.  so  is  /.  of  the  fool
Jam.  4.  9.  let  your  l.  be  turned  to  mourning
_  LAVISH.

Isa.  46.  6.  they  /.  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and  weigh
LAUNCH.

Luke  5.  4.  lie  said  to  Simon,  /.  out  into  the  deep
LAUNCHED.

Luke 8.  22.  let  us  go  over,  and  they  /.  forth
Acts  21. 1.  that  after  we  had  l.  27.  2,  4.

LA  W

Signifies,  [1]  A  rule  directing  and  obliging  a
rational  creature  in  moral  and  religious  actions,
Prov.  28.  4.  [2]  That  which  often  hath  the  force
°J  governing  and  over-ruling  our  actions  in  our
present  imperfect  state,  Rom.  7.  23,  25.  [3]  The
whole  doctrine  of  the  word  delivered  by  God  to  bis
church,  Psal.  1.2.  1  19.  7-  [4]  The  decalogue,
or  ten  moral  precepts,  Rom.  2.  25.  I  7.  7.  [5]
The  second  table  of  the  law,  Rom.  13.  8.  [6]
The  precepts  of  God,  moral,  ceremonial,  and
judicial,  John  1.17.  [7]  The  principles  of  rea¬
son,  or  the  law  oj  nature  written  in  man's  heart,
Rom.  2.  14.  [8]  The  old  testament,  John  10.  34.

.  15.  25.  1  Cor.  14.  21.  [9]  The  doctrine  of  the
gospel,  which  no  less  obliges  men  to  the  belief
and  practice  of  it.  than  the  law  did,  Isa.  2.  3.

I  42.  4.  Rom.  3.  27.  [10]  The  works  com¬
manded  by  the  law,  Gal.  3.  11.  [11]  A  strict
and  precise  observation  of  the  law,  Phil.  3.  5.
[12]  The  covenant  that  God  made  with  the  Jews',
with  all  the  constitution  of  worship  thereto  be¬
longing,  Heb.  10.  1.

Gen.  47.  26.  Joseph  made  it  a  /.  over  the  land
Exod.  12.  49.  one  /.  to  him  that  is  home-born  and
to  the  stranger,  Lev.  24.  22.  Num.  15.  16,  29.

24.  12.  I  will  give  thee  a/,  and  commandment
Dent.  17. 11.  according  to  the  sentence  of  the  l.

33.  2.  from  his  right  hand  went  a  fiery  l.  for  them

4.  Moses  commanded  us  a  /.  even  the  inheritance
Josh.  1.  7.  mayest  obs.  to  do  according  to  all  the  /.

8.  32.  wrote  on  the  stones  a  copy  of  the  /.  of  Mos.

34.  afterward  he  read  all  the  words  of  the  /.

22.  5.  take  heed  to  the  l.  2  Kings  17.  13,  37.  |  o\,  8
2  k  ings  17.  34.  nor  do  after  the  l.  and  commandmen:

23.  24.  that  he  might  perform  the  words  of  the  /.

25.  according  to  all  the  /.  of  Moses

1  Chron.  16.  17.  hath  confirmed  to  Jacob  for  a  /.

22.  12.  that  thou  mayest  keep  the  /.  of  God

2  Chron.  14.  4.  commanded  Judah  to  do  the  /.

19.  10.  between/,  and  commandment,  statutes

30.  16.  stood  in  their  place  according  to/,  of  Moses

31.  21.  Hezekiah  did  in  every  work,  and  in  the  /,

33.  8.  take  heed  to  do  according  to  tlie  whole  /.

34.  19.  when  Josiah  heard  the  words  of  the  /.

Ezra  7.  6.  he  was  a  ready  scribe  in  the  /.  12.  21.

14.  to  inquire  according  to  the  /.  of  thy  God

26.  will  not  do  the  /.  of  Godand  /.  of  the  king
10.  3.  and  let  it  be  done  according  to  the  /.

Keh.  8.2.  and  Ezra  the  priest  brought  the  /.  before
7.  Levites  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  /.

9.  people  wept  when  they  heard  the  words  of  /.

13.  were  gathered  together  to  understand  the  /.


!  '/V.  j '  .  *  ^  .V w  »  vjcij.  -if*  if.  I  <*1.  V.

‘  ■  "tstrvst ,  or  doubt  of,  the  fulfilment  of  a

Len.  18.  12.  [3]  l'o  receive  comfort  and
‘  6.  21.  [4]  jo  be  merry  in  a  sinful  man-


13.  were  gathered  u,„

10.  28.  haa  separated  themselves  to  /.  of  God
29.  entered  into  an  oath  to  w-alk  in  God’s  /.

12.  44.  to  gather  into  them  the  portions  of  the  /.

13.  3.  when  they  had  heard  the  /.they  separated
Esth.  1.8.  the  drinking  was  according  to  the/.

15.  what  do  tothe  queen  Vashti  according  tp  the  /.
4.  11.  there  is  one  l.  of  his  to  put  him  to  death

16.  1  w  ill  go  in,  which  is  not  according  to  the  /.
Job  22.22.  receive  the  /.  from  his  mouth,  lay  up
Psal.  1.  2.  in  his  l.  he  meditates  day  and  night
37.  31.  the  /.  of  his  God  is  in  his  heart

78.  5.  for  he  appointed  a  /.  in  Israel,  which  he
10.  and  they  refused  to  walk  in  his  /.

81.  4.  this  was  a  /.  of  the  God  of  Jacob
94.  20.  which  frameth  mischief  by  a  /.

105.  10.  and  confirmed  the  same  to  Jacob  for  a  /.
119.  72.  the  /.  of  thy  mouth  is  better  than  gold
Prov.  1.  8.  forsake  not  the  /.  of  thy  mother,  6.  20.

6.  23.  commandment  is  a  lamp,  and  the  /.  is  light


Prov.  13. 14.  the  /.  of  the  wise  is  a  fountain  of  lil/>

28.  4.  they  that  forsake  the  /.  praise  the  wicked,

but  such  as  keep  the  /.  contend  with  them
7.  whoso  keepeth  the  t.  is  a  w-ise  son
9.  he  that  turns  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  L

29.  18.  but  he  that  keepeth  the  /.  happy  is  he
31.  5.  lest  they  drink  and  forget  the  l.

26.  and  in  her  tongue  is  the  /.  of  kindness
Isa.  1.  10.  and  give  ear  to  the  /.  of  our  God

2.  3.  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  /.  Mic.  4.  2.

8.  16.  seal  the  /.  I|  20.  to  the  /.  and  the  testimony
42.  4.  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  his  /.

21.  the  Lord  will  magnify  the/,  and  make  it
24.  neither  were  they  obedient  to  his/.

51.  4.  for  a  /.  shall  proceed  from  me
Jer.  2.  8.  they  that  handle  the  /.  knew  me  not

18.  18.  the  /.  shall  not  perish  from  the  priest
32.11.  evidence  was  sealed  accord,  to  /.  and  custom

44.  23.  ye  have  not  obeyed,  nor  walked  in  his  l.
Lam.  2.  9.  the  /.  is  no  more,  prophets  find  no  vision
Ezek.  7.  26.  the  /.  shall  perish  from  the  priests
Dan  6.  5.  except  concerning  the  /.  of  his  God

12.  true  according  to  the  /.  of  the  Medes,  15.

IIos.  4.  6.  thou  hast  forgotten  the  /.  of  thy  God
Dub.  1.  4.  therefore  the  /.  is  slacked,  and  iudgment
Aeph.  3.  4.  her  priests  have  done  violence  to  the  l.
Dag.  2.  11.  ask  now  the  priests  concerning  the  /.

<•  12.  lest  they  should  hear  the  /.  and  words
Mai.  2.  6.  the  /.  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth

7.  and  they  should  seek  the  /.  at  his  mouth

8.  ye  have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the  /.

9-  not  kept  my  ways,  but  have  been  partial  in  the  K

4.  4.  remember  the  /.  of  Moses  my  servant
Mat.  5.  17.  think  not  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  /.

18.  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  /.

40.  and  if  any  man  will  sue  thee  at  the  /.

11.  13.  the/,  prophesied  till  John,  Luke  16.  16.

12.  5%have  ye  not  read  in  the  /.  how  that  on

22.  36.  which  is  the  great  commandment  in  /.

40.  on  these  two  commandments  hang  all  the  /.

23.  23.  have  omitted  the  weightier  matfers  of  the  /.
Luke  2.  27.  to  do  for  him  after  the  custom  of  the  /.

5.  17.  there  were  doctors  of  the  /.  sitting  by

16.  17.  than  for  one  tittle  of  the  /.  to  fail

John  1.  17.  for  the  /.  was  given  by  Moses,  but  grace

45.  him  of  whom  Moses  in  the  /.  did  write

7.  19.  did  not  Moses  give  you  the  /.  and  yet  none

of  you  keepeth  the  /.  why  go  ye  to  kill  me  ?

23.  that  the  /.  of  Moses  should  not  be  broken
49.  people  whq  knoweth  not  the  l.  are  cursed
51.  cloth  our  /.  judge  any  man  before  it  hear  him?

8.  5.  now  Moses  in  the  /.  commanded  us

10.  34.  is  it  not  written  in  your  /.  ye  are  gods  ?

12.  34.  we  have  heard  out  of  tlie  /.  that  Christ
15.  25.  might  be  fulfilled  what  is  written  in  their
18.  31.  and  judge  him  according  to  your  /.

19.7.  we  have  a  /.  and  by  our  l.  he  ought  to  die

Acts  5.  34.  then  stood  up  Gamaliel,  a  doctor  of  the  i.

6.  13.  to  speak  blasphemous  w  ords  against  the  /.

7.  53.  who  have  received  the  /.  by  angels

13.  15.  after  reading  of  the  1.  and’prophets

39.  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  /.  of  Moses
15.  5.  to  command  them  to  keep  the  /.  of  Moses

24.  ye  must  be  circumcised  and  keep  the  /.

18.  13.  men  to  worship  God  contrary  to  the  /.

15.  but  if  it  be  a  question  of  your  /.  look  ye  to  ii

19.  38.  the  /.  is  open  ||  21.  20.  zealous  of  the  /.

21.  24.  but  that  thou  thyself  keepest  the  /.

28.  this  is  the  man  that  teacheth  against  the  /.

22.  3.  taught  according  to  the  manner  of  the  /.

12.  Ananias  a  devout  man  according  to  the  /.

23.  3.  for  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  after  the  /.  and
commandest  me  to  be  smitten  contrary  to  the  /.

24.  6.  and  would  have  judged  according  to  our  /.

25.  8.  nor  against  the  /.  of  the  Jews,  nor  temple
28.  23.  persuading  them  out  of  the  /.  and  prophets

Horn.  2.  12.  sinned  in  the  /.  shall  be  judged  by  the  /.

13.  not  the  hearers  of  the  l.  are  just  before  God

14.  when  the  G  entiles  which  have  not  the  /.  do  by
nature  tilings  contained  in  the  /.  these  having
not  the  /.  are  a  /.  unto  themselves

15.  which  shew  the  work  of  the  /.  written  in

17.  thou  art  called  a  Jew,  and  restest  in  the  /

18.  knowest,  being  instructed  out  of  the  /.

20.  which  hast  the  form  of  the  truth  in  the  l.

23.  thou  that  makest  thy  boast  of  the  /.  through
breaking  the  /.  dishonourest  thou  God  ?

25.  circumcision  verily  profiteth  if  thou  keep

the  /.  but  if  thou  be  a  breaker  of  the  l.

26.  therefore  if  keep  the  righteousness  of  the  /.

27.  uncircumcision,  if  it  fulfil  the  /.judge  thee

who  by  circumcision  dost  transgress  the  /.

3.  19-  we  know  what  things  soever  the  L  saith

20.  by  the  deeds  of  /.  no  liesh  be  justified,  for  by
the  /,  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,  28.  Gal.  2.  16.

21.  the  righteousness  of  G.  is  witnessed  by  the  L
27.  by  what  /.  excluded  ?  by  the  /.  of  faith

31.  do  we  make  void  the  /.  ?  we  establish  the  /.

4.  13.  for  the  promise  was  not  through  the  /.

14.  for  if  they  which  are  of  the  /.  be  heirs

15.  the  /.  worketh  wrath,  for  where  no  /.  is

16.  he  sure,  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the  l.

5.  13.  for  until  the  /.  sin  was  in  the  world,  but  sin

is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no  l.

20.  the  /.  entered,  that  the  offence  might  abound

7.  1.  1  speak  to  them  which  know  the  /.  the  l.
hath  dominion  over  a  man  as  long  as  he  livetb

2.  the  woman  is  bound  by  the  /.  to  her  husband  ;
if  he  be  dead,  she  is  loosed  from  the  /.  3.

4.  ye  also  are  become  dead  to  the  /.  by  Christ

5.  tlie  motions  of  sins  which  were  by  the  /.

6.  but  now  we  are  delivered  from  the  /.

7.  is  the  /.  sin  J  1  had  not  known  sin  but  by  /.  nor

lust,  except  /.  had  said,  thou  shalt  not  covet

8.  for  without  the  /.  sin  was  dead

12.  the  /.  is  holy,  and  commandment  holy,  just
14.  the  /.  is  spiritual  ||  16.  the  /.  is  good,  1  Tim.  1 . 8.

21.  1  find  then  a  /.  ||  22.  1  delight  in  the  /.  of  God
23.  1  see  another  /.  warring  against  the  /.  of  my

mind,  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  /.  of  sin
25.  with  mind  I  serve  /.  of  God,  flesh,  /.  of  sin

8.  2.  the  /.  of  life  made  me  free  from  the  /.  of  sin

271


LAW


LA  Y


LAW


Horn.  8.  3.  fur  what  the  l.  could  not  do,  in  that  weak

4.  the  righteousness  of  the  /.  might  be  fulfilled
7’.  the  carnal  mind  is  not  subject  to  the  /.  of  God

■Q  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  giving  of  the  /.

31.  Israel  followed  after  the  /.  of  righteousness

32.  because  they  sought  it  by  the  works  of  the  /.

10.  4.  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  /.  for  righteousness

5.  describes  the  righteousness  w  hich  is  of  the  /.

13.  8.  he  that  loveth  another,  hath  fulfilled  the  /.

10.  therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  /.

1  Cor.  6.1.  dare  any  of  you  go  to  /.before  the  unjust .

6.  but  brother  goeth  to  /.  with  brother

7.  because  ye  go  to  /.  one  with  another  ,

7. 39.  wife  is  bound  by  the  /.  as  long  as  hei  husband

9.  8.  or  saith  not  the  /.  the  same  also  r

14.  34.  to  be  under  obedience,  as  also  saith  the  1.

15.  56.  of  death  is  sin,  and  strength  of  sin  is  the  /.
Gal.  2. 16.  man  is  not  justified  by  the  worksot  the  /.

19. 1  thro’  the  l.  am  dead  to  the  /.  that  1  might  live

21.  for  if  righteousness  come  by  the  /.  then
3.2.  received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  /. .

5.  miracles,  doeth  he  it  by  the  works  of  the  /.  /

10.  as  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  /.

11.  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  /.  is  evident

12.  and  the  /.  is  not  of  faith,  but  the  man

13.  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  /.

17.  the  covenant  in  Christ,  the  /.  cannot  disannul

18.  if  the  inheritance  be  of  the  l.  not  of  promise

19.  wherefore  then  serveth  the  /.  ?  it  was  added
21.  is  the  /.  then  against  the  promises  <  it  a  /.  had

been  given,  righteousness  had  been  by  the  /.

24.  the/,  was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Chr

4.  21.  tell  me,  do  ye  not  hear  the  l.'l

5.  3.  that  he  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  /.

4.  for  whosoever  ot  you  are  justified  by  the  /.

14.  all  the  /.  is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  even  in  this

23.  temperance,  against  such  there  is  110  /.

6.  2.  bear  ye,  and  so  fulfil  the  /.  of  dinst
13.  nor  themselves  keep  the  /.  but  desire  to  have

Eph.  2.  15.  having  abolished  in  his  flesh  the  /.

Phil.  3.  5.  as  touching  the  /.  a  Pharisee

6.  touching  the  righteousness  in  the  /.  blameless

9.  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  of  the  /.

1  Tim.  1.7.  desiring  to  be  teachers  ot  the  /.

9.  the  /.  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man
Tit.  3.  9.  but  avoid  contentions  about  the  /.
tleb.  7.  5.  to  take  tithes  of  people  according  to  the  /,

11.  for  under  it  the  people  received  the  /.

12.  there  is  made  of  necessity  a  change  of  the  /.

16.  not  after  the  /.  of  a  carnal  commandment
19.  for  the  /.  made  nothing  perfect,  but  bringing

28.  the  /.  maketh  men  high-priests,  but  the  word

of  the  oath  which  was  since  the  /.  maketh  Son

8.  4.  there  are  priests  offer  gifts  according  to  the  /.

9.  19.  when  Moses  had  spoken  according  to  the  /.

22.  all  things  are  by  the.  /.  purged  with  blood

10.  1.  the  /.  having  a  shadow  of  good  things

28.  he  that  despised  Moses’  /.  died  without  mercy
Jam.  1.  25.  whoso  looketh  into  perfect /.  ot  liberty
2.  8.  if  ye  fulfil  the  royal  /.  ye  do  well

9.  and  are  convinced  of  tiie  ..  as  transgressors

10.  for  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  /.

11.  if  thou  kill,  thou  art  a  transgressor  of  the  /.

12.  they  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  /.  of  liberty
4.  11.  thatspeaketh  evil  of  the  /.  and  judgeth  the  /.

1  John  3.  4.  whosoever  committed]  sin  transgressed!

also  the  /.  for  sin  is  the  transgression  ot  the  /.
See  Book.

LAW  of  the  Lord.

Exod.  13.  9.  that  the  Lord's  l.  may  be  in  thy  mouth

2  Kings  10.  31.  .1  ehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  m  l.oj  L.

*L  Chron.  12.  1.  Rehoboam  forsook  /.  of  L.  and  lsr.

31.  4.  that  they  might  be  encouraged  in  the  /.  of  L.
35.26.  Josiah’s  goodness  according  to  /.  of  L.

Ezra  7.  10.  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  /.  of  Lord
Psal.  1. 2.  Ins  delight  is  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord,  and  in

his  law

19.  7.  the  /.  of  the  L.  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul
119. 1.  blessed  are  they  who  walk  in  the  /.  of  the  L.
Isa.  5.  24.  because  they  have  cast  away  the/,  of  L.

30.  9.  children  that  will  not  hear  the  /.  of  the  Lord
Jer.  8. 8.  how  do  ye  say,  the  /.  of  the  Lord  is  with  us
Amos  2. 4.  because  they  have  despised  the  /.  of  the  L.
Luke  2.  39.  had  performed  according  to  the  /.  of  L.

My  LAW.

Exod.  16.  4.  whether  they  will  walk  in  my  l.  or  no
2  Chron.  6. 16.  so  that  thy  children  walk  in  my  l.
Psal.  78.  1.  give  ear,  O  my  people,  to  my  l.  incline
89.  30.  if  his  children  forsake  my  l.  and  walk
Prov.  3. 1.  my  son,  forget  not  my  l.  but  keep
4. 2.  forsake  not  my  /.  [|  7.  2.  keep  my  l.  as  the  apple
Isa.  51.  7.  the  people  in  whose  heart  is  my  l.

Jer.  6.  19.  they  have  not  hearkened  unto  my  l
9.  13.  because  they  have  forsaken  my  l.

16.11.  have  forsaken  me,  and  have  not  kept  my  l.

26.  4.  if  ye  will  not  hearken  to  walk  in  my  l.

31.  33.  1  will  put  my  l.  in  their  inward  parts
44.  10.  nor  have  they  feared  nor  walked  in  my  l.

Ezek.  22.  26.  her  priests  have  violated  my  l.

Hos.  8.  1.  because  thev  trespassed  against  my  l.

12.  have  written  to  him  the  great  things  ol  my  l.
This  LAW.

Lev.  14.  2.  this  shall  be  the  /.  of  leper  in  cleansing
ISlum.  5. 30.  the  priest  shall  execute  on  her  this  l.
19.  2.  this  is  the  ordinance  of  the  /.  31.  21.

Deut.  1. 5.  began  Moses  to  declare  this  /.  saying
4. 8.  all  this  l.  whicli  1  set  before  you  this  day
17. 18.  he  shall  write  him  a  copy  of  this  l.  in  a  690k
19.  he  may  learn  to  keep  all  the  w  ords  of  this  l.

27.  3.  shall  write  on  them  the  words  of  this  l.  8.

26.  cursed  that  confirmeth  not  the  words  of  this  l.

28.  58.  if  thou  wilt  not  observe  the  words  of  this  l.

29.  29.  that  we  may  do  all  the  w'ordsof  this  l .  31.12.

31.  9.  Moses  wrote  this  1. 1|  11.  thou  shalt  read  this  l.

24.  of  writing  the  words  of  this  l.  in  a  book

32.  46.  your  children  to  do  the  words  of  this  l.

This  is  the  LAW.

Lev.  6.  9.  this  is  the  l.  of  the  burnt  offering,  7.  3 J.

14.  this  is  the  /.of  meat  offering  H  25.  of  sin  offering
7.1.  this  is  the  l.  of  the  trespass  offering,  it  is  holy

11 .  46.  this  is  the  l.  of  the  beasts  and  of  the  fow  1

12.  7.  t.  is  the  l.  of  her  that  hath  bo*  «  male  and  tern

272


Lev.  13. 59.  this  is  the  l.  ot  plague  of  lepr.  14.32,57.

14.  54.  this  is  the  /.  for  all  manner  ot  plag.  ot  scall

15.  32.  this  is  the  l.  of  him  that  hath  an  issue
] Sum.  5.  29.  this  is  the  l.  of  jealousies,  when  a  wife

6. 13.  this  is  the  l.  of  the  fs’azarite,  when  days,  21.

19  14.  this  is  the  l.  when  a  man  dieth  in  a  tent
DeutAAI.  this  is  the  l.  which  Moses  set  before  Israel
Ezek  A3. \2. this  is  the  /.of  the  house, on  top  of  mount.
Mat.  7. 12.  do  to  them,  for  this  is  the  l.  and  prophets
Thy  LAW.

Deut.  33.  10.  they  shall  teach  Israel  thy  l.

A  eh.  9.  26.  they  cast  thy  /.  behind  their  backs
29.  that  thou  mightest  bring  them  again  to  thy  /.

34.  nor  our  kings,  nor  our  princes  kept  thy  l.

Psal.  40.  8.  yea,  thy  l.  is  within  my  heart
94.  12.  chastenest,  and  teachest  him  out  ot  thy  /.

119  18.  behold  wondrous  things  out  ot  thy  /.

29.  the  way  of  ly  ing,  and  grant  me  thy  /.graciously
34.  give  me  understanding,  and  1  shall  keep  thy  /.

44.  so  shall  1  keep  thy  l.  continually  tor  ever
51.  yet  have  1  not  declined  from  thy  l.

53.  because  of  the  wicked  that  forsake  thy  l.

55.  1  remembered  thy  name,  and  kept  thy  l.

61.  have  robbed  me,  but  1  have  not  forgotten  thy  l.

70.  their  heart  is  fat,  but  1  delight  in  thy  l.

77.  1  may  live,  for  thy  l.  is  my  delight,  92, 174.

85.  the  proud  digged  pits  ;  which  are  not  after  1. 1.
97.  O  how  1  love  1. 1. 1|  109.  yet  do  1  not  forget  1. 1.
113.  butf.  /.  do  1  love,  163.  H  126.  made  void  1. 1.
136.  waters  rundown,  because  they  keep  not  f.  /.
142.  and  thy  l.  is  the  truth  ||  150.  are  tar  from  thy  l.
165.  great  peace  have  they  who  love  thy  l.

Jer.  32.  23.  they  obeyed  not,  nor  walked  in  thy  l.
Dan.  9.  11.  all' Israel  have  transgressed  thy  l.

Under  the  LAW.

Pom.  3. 19.  it  saith  to  them  that  are  under  the  l.

6.  14.  for  ye  are  not  under  the  l.  but  under  grace
15.  shall  we  sin  because  we  are  not  under  the  l.'l

1  Cor.  9. 20.  to  them  that  are  under  the  /.  as  under  the

l.  that  I  might  gain  them  that  are  under  the  l.
21.  not  without  law  to  God,  but  under  l.  to  Christ
Gal.  3.23.  we  were  kept  under  the  l.  (|  4.  4.  made  u.l.

4.  5.  sent  his  Son  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  l.

21.  tell  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  l.

Gal.  5. 18.  if  ye  be  led  by  Spirit,  are  not  under  the  1

Without  LAW.

2  Chron.  15.  3.  a  long  season,  Israel  hath  been  w.  1.
Rom.  2. 12.  as  many  as  sinned  without  l.  perish  w.  1.

3.  21.  the  righteousness  ot  God  10. 1.  is  manifested
7  8.  for  w.  1.  sin  was  dead  ||  9.  I  was  alive  to.  /.  once
1  Cor.  9. 21.  that  are  w.  1.  as  w.  1.  being  notw.  /.  to  G.
Written  in  the  LA  W .

1  Kinus  2.  3.  as  it  is  written  in  the  l.  of  Moses,

2  Chron.  23.  18.  1  25.  4.  I  31.  3.  Ezra  3.  2.
Neh.  10.  34,  36.  Dan.  9.  13.  Luke  2.  23.

]  Chron.  16.  40.  do  according  to  all  vi.  1. 2  Chr.  35.  26.
Keh.  8  14.  and  they  found  writ,  in  the  l.  that  Israel
Dan.  9. 11.  and  the  oath  that  is  writ,  in  /.of  Moses
Luke  10.  26.  what  is  writ,  in  the  l.  how  readest  thou  P
24.  44.  all  must  be  fulfilled,  which  were  writ,  in  l.
Acts  24. 14.  believing  all  things  that  are  writ,  in  l.

1  Cor.  9.  9.  it  is  w.  1. 1|  14.  21.  in  the  l.  it  is  written
LAWS.

Gen.  26.  5.  Abraham  kept  my  statutes  and  my  /.
Exod.  16.  28.  how  long  refuse  ye  to  keep  my  /.  ?

18.  16.  I  do  make  them  know  the  /.  ot  God
20.  thou  shalt  teach  them  ordinances  and  /.

Lev.  26.  46.  these  are  the  /.  which  the  Lord  made
Ezra  7.  25.  all  such  as  know  the  /.  ot  thy  God
Neh.  9. 13.  earnest  down,  thou  gavest  them  true  /.

14.  and  commandedst  them  statutes  and  /.

Esth.  1. 19.  to  be  written  among  the  /.  of  the  Persians
3.  8.  a  certain  people,  their  /.  are  diverse  from  all
people,  neither  keep  they  the  king  s  /.
Psal.  105.  45.  that  they  might  keep  his  /.

Isa.  24.  5.  because  they  have  transgressed  the  /.
Ezek  43.  11.  shew  them  all  the  /.  thereof
44.  5.  hear  all  the  /.  li  24.  they  shall  keep  my  /.

Dan.  7.  25.  and  think  to  change  times  and  /.

9  10.  nor  have  we  obeyed  to  walk  in  his  /.
lleh.  8. 10.  1  will  put  my  /.  into  their  mind
10.  16.  I  will  put  my  /.  into  their  hearts
LAWFUL.

Ezra  7.  24.  shall  not  be  /.  to  impose  toll  on  them
Isa.  49.  24.  shall  the  /.  captive  be  delivered  .'

Ezek.  18.  5.  do  that  which  is  /.  21.  27-  I  33.  14, 19.

19.  the  son  hath  done  that  which  is  /.  33.  16.

Mat.  12. 2.  do  what  is  not  /.  Mark  2.  24.  Luke  6.  2.
4.  was  not  /.  for  him  to  eat,  Mark  2.  26.  Luke  6.  4.
10  they  asked  him,  is  it  /.  to  heal  on  the  sabbath
days  J  12.  Mark  3.  4.  Luke  6.  9.  I  14.  3.
14.  4.  it  is  not  /,  for  thee  to  have  her,  Mark  6.  18.

19. 3.  is  it/,  for  man  to  put  away  wife  ?  Mark  10.  2.

22.  17.  tell  us,  is  it  /.  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar  or
not  ?  Mark  12.  14.  Luke  20.  22.

27.  6.  it  is  not  /.  to  put  them  in  the  treasury
John  5.  10.  it  is  not  /.  for  thee  to  carry  thy  bed

18.  31.  it  is  not  /.  for  us  to  put  any  man  to  death
Acts  16. 21.  teacii  customs  which  are  not  /.  to  receive

19.  39.  it  shall  be  determined  in  a  /.  assembly
22.  25.  is  it  /.  for  you  to  scourge  a  Roman  r

1  Cor.  6. 12.  all  things  are  /.  to  me,  /.  for  me,  10.  23.

2  Cor  12.  4.  which  is  not  /.  for  a  man  to  utter
LAWFULLY.

1  Tim.  1.8.  the  law  is  good,  it  a  man  use  it  /.

0  Tim  0  5.  yet  is  not  crowned,  except  he  strive /.
LAW  G1  VEIL

Gen.  49.  10.  nor  a  /.  from  between  his  feet
Num.  21. 18.  digged  the  well  by  direction  of  the  /.
Deut.  33.  21.  in  a  portion  of  the  /.  was  he  seated
Psal.  6 0.  7.  Gilead  is  mine,  Judah  is  my  /.  108.  8.
Isa.  33.  22.  the  Lord  is  our  /.  and  our  king
Jam  4  12.  there  is  one  /.  who  is  able  to  save
LAWLESS.

1  Tim  1.  9.  the  law  is  for  the  /.  and  disobedient
LAWYER.

Mat.  22. 35.  one  that  was  a  /.  asked  him,  Luke  10.  25.
Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Zenas  the  /.  and  A  polios
LAWYERS.

Luke  7.  30.  the  I.  rejected  the  counsel  of  God
11.  45.  then  answered  one  of  the  /.  and  said
46.  woe  unto  you,  /.  52. ||  14. 3.  Jesus  spake  to  /.


LAY,  as  with  a  woman
Gen.  19.  33.  the  first-born  /.  with  her  fatliei ,  34,  So.

30.  16.  and  Jacob  /.  with  Leah  that  night
34.  2.  Shechem  /.  with  Dinah  and  defiled  her
35!  22.  Reuben  went  and  /.  with  Bilhah
Dent.  22.  22.  man  that  /.  with  woman,  both  shall  di
25.  the  man  only  that  /.  with  her  shall  die


LU.  U1C  lltrtlA  null-  VI1V

29.  the  man  that  /.  with  hei'  give  hit y  shekels
1  Sam.  2.  22.  Eli  heard  they  /.  with  the  women


2  Sam.  11.  4.  she  came,  and  he  /.  with  her,  12.24.

13.  14.  Amnon  forced  Tamar  and  /.  with  her
Ezek.  23.  8.  for  in  her  youth  they  /.  with  her
LA  I  .

Exod.  5.  8.  the  tale  of  bricks  ye  shall  /.  upon  then!
16.  13.  the  dew  /.  round  about  the  host,  14.
21,22.  as  woman’s  husband  will  /.  upon  him
22!  25.  neither  shalt  thou  /.  upon  him  usury
Lev.  1.  7-  and  /.  the  wood  in  order  on  the  fire
8.  the  priests  shall  /.  the  parts  in  order,  12.

2.  15.  thou  shalt  /.  the  frankincense  thereon
o!  12.  and  /.  the  burnt-offering  in  order  upon  it  „
Num.  12. 11-  alas,  my  Lord,  /.  not  the  sin  upon  uf
Deut.  7.  15.  but  will  /.  them  on  them  that  hate  the

11.  25.  shall  /.  the  fear  of  you  upon  all  the  land  ;
21.  8.  /.  not  innocent  blood  to  thy  people  Israel  1
Josh.  2.  +  1.  they  came  to  Rahab’s  nouse,  and/,  then
8.  2.  /.  thee  an  ambush  for  the  city  behind  it
Judg.  16.  3.  Samson  /.  till  midnight,  and  arose
Ruth  3.  8.  and  behold,  a  woman  /.  at  his  feet

1  Sam.  3.  15.  and  Samuel  /.  till  the  morning

11.  2.  and  /.  it  for  a  reproach  on  all  Israel

25.  +  25.  let  not  my  lord  /.  it  to  his  heart

2o!  5.  Saul  /.  in  the  trench,  people  about  him.  7.1

2  Sam.  4.  5.  lsh-bosheth,  who  /.  on  a  bed  at  noon!

12.  3.  ewe  lamb  eat  of  his  meat,  and  /.  in  his  bosoi!
16.  David  /.  all  night  on  the  earth,  13.  31.

1  Kings  13.  31.  /.  my  bones  beside  his  bones

18.  23.  /.  it  on  w  ood  and  put  110  fire  under

19. "  5.  and  as  he  /.  and  slept  under  a  juniper  tree
21.  27.  Ahab  fasted  and  /.  in  sackcloth

2  Kings  4.  34.  he  went  up  and  /.  upon  the  child  [

10.  8.  /.  ye  them  in  two  heaps  at  the  gate


£  Chr.  30.  21.  long  as  she  /.  desolate,  she  keptsau-
Esth.  4.  3.  many  /.  in  sackcloth  and  ashes


M  .  .J.  ISlCklSJ  •> .  li*

Job  29.  19.  the  dew  /.  all  night  upon  my  branch
34.  23.  he  will  not  /.  on  man  more  than  right
Psal.  7.  5.  let  him  /.  mine  honour  in  the  dust
38.  12.  thev  that  seek  my  life,  /.  snares  for  me
84.  3.  found  a  nest,  where  she  may  /.  her  young
Eccl.  7.  2.  and  the  living  will  /.  it  to  heart
Isa.  5.  8.  woe  to  them  that  /.  field  to  field

10.  +  6.  give  them  charge  to  /.  them  a  treading
13.  9.  to 7.  the  land  desolate,  Ezek.  .3.3.  28.

11.  I  will  /.  low  the  haughtiness  ot  the  terrible  j
22.  22.  key  of  house  of  David  /.  on  his  shoulder
25.  12.  and  the  fortress  shall  he  /.  low'

28.  16.  behold,  I  will  /.  in  Zion  a  tried  stone

17.  judgment  will  1  /.  to  the  line,  and  righteous

29.  21.  that  /.  a  snare  for  him  that  reprovetli

30.  32.  the  staff  which  the  Lord  shall  /.  on  him
34.  15.  there  shall  the  great  owl  /.  and  hatch
38.  21.  a  lump  of  figs,  and  /.  it  for  a  plaister
47.  7.  so  thou  didst  not  /.  these  things  to  thy  hea
54.  11.  1  w  ill  /.  thy  stones  with  tair  colours

Jer.  6.  21.  1  will  /.  stumbling-block,  Ezek.  3.  20.:
Ezek.  4.  1.  take  thee  a  tile,  and  /.  it  before  thee
2.  /.  siege  against  it,  3.  |l  8.  /.  bands  on  thee
4.  /.  tiie  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel  upon  1
25. 14.  I  will  /.  my  vengeance  on  Edom,  17-
28 ".  17.  I  will  /.  thee  before  kings  to  behold  thee:

32.  5.  I  will  /.  thy  flesh  on  the  mountains,  and  t
36’.  29.  and  I  w  ill  /.  no  famine  upon  you
34.  the  land  shall  be  tilled,  whereas  it/,  desol^
37.  6.  I  will  /.  sinews  upon  you  and  bring  ties!
42.  13.  there  /.  the  most  holy  things,  14. 1  44. 19.
Jonah  1.  14.  O  l.ord,  /.  noton  us  innocent  blood
Mic.  1.7.  the  idols  thereof  will  I  /.  desolate
Mai.  2.  2.  if  ye  will  not  /.  it  to  heart,  I  will  sen
curse  upon  you  ;  because  ye  do  not  /.  it  to  lie1
Mat.  8.  20.  hath  not  where  to  /.  his  head,  Luke9.\

23.  4.  bind,  and  /.  them  on  men’s  shoulders
28.  6.  come,  seethe  place  where  the  Lord  /.
Mark  2.  4.  the  bed  w  herein  the  sick  ot  the  palsy
Luke  19. 44.  and  shall  l.  thee  even  with  the  grou
John  5.  3.  in  these  /.  impotent  folk,  blind,  halt

11.  38.  it  was  a  cave,  and  a  stone  /.  upon  it
Acts  7.  60.  Lord,  /.  not  this  sin  to  their  charge

15.  28.  to  /.  on  you  no  greater  burden  than  tin-,
27.  20.  and  no  small  tempest  /.  on  us,  all  hope
Rom.  8.  33.  /.  any  thing  to  the  charge  ot  God  s  e  -
9.  33.  behold,  1  /.  in  Zion  a  stumbling-stone
1  Cor.  16.  2.  let  every  one  /.  by  him  111  store

TT  1  /-»  t  1  .1 _ I  - OtlH  t


Ileb.  12.  L  let  us  /.  aside  every  weight,  and  the  1

r  .  1  _ C _ 1  «  oil  LltRmnCZ


Jam.  1.  21.  wherefore  /.  apart  all  filthiness
1  Pet.  2.  6.  1  /.  in  Zion  a  chief  corner-stone
See  Foundation.

LAY  down.

Gen.  19. 4.  before  they  /.  d.  men  of  Sodom  comp  •

33.  and  Lot  perceived  not  when  she  /.  down,  3.
28. 11.  Jacob  /.  down  in  that  place  to  sleep
Num.  24.  9.  couched,  he  /.  d.  as  a  lion,  as  a  yo  j
Judg.  5.  27.  he  /.  down  at  her  feet,  he  bowed,  he
Hath  3.  4.  uncover  his  feet,  and  /.  thee  down

1  Sam.  3.  5.  lie  down,  and  Samuel  went  anu  /.
19.  24.  Saul  /.  down  naked  all  that  day  and  n

2  Sam.  13.  5.  Jonadabsaid,  /.  thee  down  on  tny
6.  so  Amnon  /.  down  and  made  lnmselt  sick

1  Kings  14.  +  20.  Jeroboam  /.  down  with  Ins  tatn.
Job  17.  3.  /.  down  now,  put  me  in  surety  with  tn
Psal.  4.  8.  1  will  /.  me  down  in  peace  and  sleet
104.  22.  young  lions  l.  them  down  in  their  den
Reek.  19.  2.  thy  mother  /.  down  among  lions
Imos  2.  8.  thev  /.  themselves  down  on  clothes
Mat.  9.  t  36.  because  they  were  tired  and  /.  am.
John  10.  15.  and  1  /.  down  my  life  tor  my  sheep

18.  1  /.  it  d.  of  myself,  I  have  power  to  /.it
13.  37.  1  will  /.  down  my  life  tor  thy  sake,  .85.
15.  13.  that  a  man  /.  down  his  life  tor  his  fnn
1  John  3. 16.  we  ought  to  l.  d.  our  lives  for  the  1
LAY  hand.  .

Gen.  22.  12.  he  said,  /.  not  thy  hand  011  the  la<
37.  22.  shed  no  blood,  /.  no  hand  upon  Josepi-


L  A  I


LAI


LEA


rod.  7  A.  that  1  may/,  my  hand  upon  Egypt
,ev.  3.  ‘2.  /.  his  hand  on  the  hea<l  ot  his  offering,  8.
13.  /.  his  hand  on  the’head  of  the  goat,  4.  24.

|  (.  4.  he  shall  /.  his  hand  on  the  bullock’s  head,  15.
29.  he  shall  /.  his  hand  on  the  siu-uuering,  33.
urn.  2".  18.  the  Lord  said,  /.  thy  hand  on  Joshua
ndg-  18.  19.  /.  thy  hand  upon  thy  mouth,  and  go
an.  2.  21.  and  sought  to  /.  hand  on  the  king
),  2.  to  /.  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt
>4  9.  33.  any  days  man  to  /.  his  hand  on  us  both
;i.5.  mark  me,  and  /.  your  hand  upon  your  mouth
(0. 4.  shall  l  answ.  I  will  /.  my  hand  on  my  mouth

l.  8.  /.  thy  hand  upon  him,  remember  the  battle
rov.  .‘50.  32.  if  thou  thought  evil,  /.  hand  on  mouth
ra.  11. 14.  they  shall  /.  their  hand  on  Edom

lie.  7.  16.  they  shall  /.  their  hand  on  their  mouth
tat.  9.  18.  come,  and  l.  thy  hand,  on  her
1  -  A  Y  hands.

ev.  16. 21 .  Aaron  shall  /.  both  his  hands  on  the  goat
'4. 14.  all  that  heard  him  l.  their  hands  on  head
'um.  8- 12.  the  Levites  l.  their  A.  on  the  bullocks
'eh.  13. 21 .  if  ye  do  so  again,  l  will  /..  hands  on  you
sth.  3.  6.  he  thought  scorn  to  /.  h.  on  Mordec.  alone
lot.  21. 46.  they  sought  to  /.  h.  on  him,  Luke  20. 19.
lark  5.  23.  come  and  /.  thy  hands  on  her

6. 18.  /.  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they  shall  recover
uke  21. 12.  they  shall  /.  hands  on  you,  and  persec.
cts 8. 19-  on  whomsoever  I  l.h.  he  may  receive
Tim.  5.  22.  1.  hands  suddenly  on  no  man,  nor  be

LAY  hold.

lent.  21. 19.  then  shall  his  father  /.  hold  on  him
;  ,2.  28.  and  /.  hold  on  her,  and  lie  with  her
'Sam.  2.21.  /.  thee  hold  on  one  of  the  young  men
Kings  13. 4.  put  forth  his  hand,  saying,  /.  h.  on  him
rov.  3. 18.  a  tree  of  life  to  them  that  /.  hold  on  her
!  eel.  2.  3.  and  1  sought  to  /.  h.  on  folly,  till  I  might
■a.  5.  29.  they  shall  roar,  and  /.  hold  on  the  prey
■r.  6. 23.  they  shall  /.  hold  on  bow  and  spear
ech.  14. 13.  every  one  shall  /.  h.  on  his  neighbour
fat.  12.  11.  will  he  not  /.  h.  on  it,  and  lift  it  out  i
1 ark  3.  21.  his  friends  went  out  to  /.  hold  on  him
2.12.  they  sought  to  /.  hold  on  him*  but  feared
Tim.  6. 12.  /.  hold  on  eternal  life,  whereunto,  19.
eh.  6. 18.  to  /.  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us
LAY  up.

m.  41.  35.  /.  up  corn  under  the  hand  of  Pharaoh
rod.  16.  23.  /.  up  manna  for  you  till  the  morning
33.  /.  up  a  potof  manna  to  be  kept  for  generations
um.  17.  4.  shall  /.  them  up  in  the  tabernacle

9. 9.  /.  them  up  without  the  camp  in  a  clean  place
eut.  11. 18.  /.  up  these  my  words  in  your  heart
4.  28.  and  shall  /.  it  up  within  thy  gates
'A22.22.  and  l.up  his  words  in  thy  heart

24.  then  shalt  /.  up  gold  as  dust  and  stones
rov.  7. 1. 1.  up  my  commandments  with  thee
0. 14.  wise  men  /.  up  knowledge,  but  the  foolish
'at:  6. 19.  /.  not  up  for  you  treasures  on  earth

20.  /.  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven
:  Cor.  12. 14.  children  not  to  /.  up  for  the  parents
LAY  wait.

zra  8.  31.  delivered  us  from  such  as  l.  in  wait
sal.  71. 10.  that  /.  wait  for  my  soul  take  counsel
rov,  1.  11.  let  us  /.  wait  for  blood,  let  us  lurk

18.  and  they  /.  wait  for  their  own  blood,  and  lurk
4.  15.  /.  not  wait  against  the  righteous
r.  5.26.  they  /.  wait  as  he  that  setteth  snares
LAY  waste.

Kings  19. 25.  that  shouldest  be  to  /.  w.  Isa.  37. 26.
a.  5.  6.  I  will  /.  it  waste,  it  shall  not  be  pruned
zeA.35.  4.  1  will  /.  thy  cities  waste,  thou  shalt
LA  1 D.

en.  9.  23.  and  /.  it  on  both  their  shoulders
2.  6.  Abraham  took  wood,  and  /.  it  on  Isaac
0.  41.  Jacob  /.  the  rods  before  the  cattle

8. 19.  she  went  away,  and  /.  by  her  veil  from  her

3.14.  right  hand,  and  /.  it  on  Ephraim’s  head
!°d.  2. 3.  she  /.  it  in  the  flags  by  the  river

9.  let  more  work  be  /.  on  the  men
1.  30.  he  shall  give  whatsoever  is  /.  on  him
eut. 26.  6.  the  Egyptians  /.on  us  hard  bondage’
str.  2.  6.  with  stalks  of  Max  she  had  /.  in  order
.  23.  they  took  and  /.  them  out  before  the  Lord
dg.  9.  24.  their  blood  be  /.on  Abimelech

16.  took  the  child,  and  /.  it  in  her  bosom
•>amA8. 17.  /.  a  great  heap  of  stones  on  Absalom
\tnos  3.  20.  she  arose  and  took  my  sou,  and  l.  it  in
Iter  bosom,  and  /.her  dead  child  in  my  bosom
'  ■  31 .  an  oath  be  /.  on  him  to  cause,  2  Citron.  6. 22.

’•  29.  the  prophet  /.  the  carcase  on  the  ass

50.  he  l.  Ins  carcase  in  his  own  grave

'■19.  he  carried  him  up,  and  /.  him  on  his  own  bed

h-tngs  4.  21.  she  went,  and  /.  him  on  the  bed

•  »5.  the  Lord  /.  this  burden  on  him

};  J •  ail(i  they  took  and  /.  it  on  the  boil
Y  ,0'  Moses  /.  on  Israel  in  the  wilderness

•  i  a  **'  v,*lere  they  /.  the  meat  offerings

2.  and  my  calamity  /.  in  the  balances
p  JO.  the  snare  is  /.  for  him  in  the  ground
5. 0.  or  who  /.  the  corner-stone  thereof
al-  21.  5.  honour  and  majesty  hast  /.  on  him
:  *•  ’•  Pull  rue  out  of  the  net  they  have  /.  for  me
,•  J4-  hke  sheep  they  are  /.  in  the  grave
-•  9.  to  be  /.  in  the  balance,  they  are  vanity
’•  L  they  have  /.  Jerusalem  on  neaps
1  in  i°u  ^,as*  /•  me  in  the  lowest  pit
;  I  have  /.  help  upon  one  that  is  mighty
in'  q,  ,et  9urt  with  fetters,  he  was  /.  in  iron
in  ’Vu  t  ly.  Judgments  have  I  /.  before  me
in  t  J  wicked  have  /.  a  snare  for  me,  141.  9.

10  o’  ,.0u  *1Hst  /.  thine  hand  upon  me
• ’’they  have  privily  /.  a  snare  for  me
l%  ”•  7-  and  he  /.  it  upon  my  mouth,  and  said
;•  f3- *t  burned  him,  yet  /.  it  not  to  heart,  57. 11.
o.  thou  hast  very  heavily  /.  thy  yoke

•  the  lord  /.  on  him  the  iniquity  of  11s  all
on  ’  have/,  a  snare  for  thee,  ()  Babylon

•  a-  l9-  b.e  thou  /.  with  the  uncircumcised
k  "49-  JJ'hen  1  have  l.  the  land  most  desolate
>.  12.  hast  spoken,  saying,  they  are  /.  desolate

,  drew  them,  and  1  /.meat  unto  them
‘  17.  the  garners  are  /.  desolate,  the  barns

lot  2.  8.  on  clothes  /.  to  pledge  by  every  altar


Obad.  7.  they  have  /.  a  wound  under  thee
Jonah  3.  6.  he  arose  and  l.  his  robe  from  hnn
Mic.  5.  1.  now  gather,  he  hath  /.  siege  against  us
Hah.  2.  19.  it  is/,  over  with  gold  and  silver
Hag.  2.  15.  from  before  a  stone  was  /.  on  a  stone
Zech.  3.  9.  behold  the  stone  that  1  have  /.

7.  14.  for  they  /.  the  pleasant  land  desolate
Mat.  3.  10.  now  the  axe  is  /.  to  the  root,  Luke  3.  9.
27.  60.  he  /.it  in  his  own  new  tomb,  and  rolled
Mark  7.  30.  and  her  daughter/,  on  the  bed

15.  47.  and  Mary  beheld  where  he  was  /.

16.  6.  behold  the  place  where  they  /.  him
Luke  2.  7.  her  first-born  and  /.  him  in  a  manger

16.  20.  Lazarus  was  /.  at  his  gate  full  of  sores
23, 53.  wherein  never  man  before  was  /.  John  19.  41.
John  11.  34.  and  said,  where  have  ye  /.  him  ?

13.4.  /.  aside  his  garments  and  took  a  towel

19.  42.  there  /.  they  Jesus  therefore,  because

20.  2.  we  know  not  where  they  have  /.him,  13,
Acts  3.  2.  whom  they  /.  at  the  gate  of  the  temple

4.  37 .  and  /.  the  money  at  the  apostles’  feet,  5.  2.

5. 15.  /.  them  on  beds  and  couches,  that  at  least

9.  37.  when  washed,  they  /.  her  in  an  upper  chamb.
13.  36.  David  was  /.  to  his  fathers,  and  saw  corrupt.

23.  29.  nothing  /.  to  his  charge  worthy  of  death

25.  7-  /•  many  complaints  they  could  not  prove
16.  concerning  the  cl  ime  /.  aaainst  him

1  Cor.  9. 16.  necessity  is  /.  upon  me,  woe  to  me

2  Tim.  4. 16.  1  pray  it  be  not  /.  to  their  charge

See  Foundation.

LAID  down.

Josh.  2.  8.  before  they  were  /.  down,  she  came  up

4.  8.  carried  them,  and  /.  them  down  there

Ruth  3.7.  Ruth  uncovered  his  feet  and  /.  her  down

1  Ham.  3.  2.  Eli  was  /.  down  ||  3.  Sam.  /.  down  to  sleep

2  Ham.  13.  8._  Amnon  was  /.  down,  and  she  took  flour
1  Kings  19.  6.  Elijah  did  eat,  and  /.  him  down  again

21.  4.  Ahabcame  and  /.  him  down  on  his  bed
Psal.  3.  5.  I  /.  me  down  and  slept,  1  awaked
Isa.  14.  8.  since  thou  art  /.  d.  110  feller  is  come  up
Luke  19.  22.  taking  up  that  I  /.  not  d.  and  reaping
Acts  4.  35.  and  /.  them  down  at  the  apostles’  feet

7.  58.  the  witnesses  /.  d.  their  clothes  at  a  young
Rom.  16.  4.  who  tor  my  life  /.  down  their  necks

1  John  3. 16.  because  he  /.  down  his  life  for  us

LA  I D  hand.

Exod.  24.  11.  and  on  the  nobles  he  /.  not  his  hand

2  Sam.  13.  19.  Tamar  l.  her  h.  on  her  head,  crying
Lsth.  8.7.  because  he  /.  his  handoa  the  Jews

9.  10.  but  they  l.  nottheii  h.  on  the  spoil,  15,  16.
Job  29-  9.  the  princes  /.  tneir  hand  on  their  mouth
Psal.  139.  5.  thou  hast  /.  thine  hand  upon  me
Ezek.  39.  21.  roy  hand  that  1  have  /.  on  them
Rev.  1.  17.  he/,  his  right  hand  upon  me,  saying
LA  I  D  hands.

Lev.  8.  14.  Aaron  and  his  sons  /.their  h.  on,  18.22.
Num.  27. 23.  Moses  /.  his  h.  on  Joshua,  Deut.  34.  9.
2  Kings  11. 16.  and  they  l.  hands  on  her,  2  Chr.  23. 15.
2  Chr .  29.  23.  they  /.  their  hands  on  the  he-goats
Chad.  13.  nor  have  /.  hands  on  their  substance
Mat.  18.  28.  he  /.  hands -and  took  him  by  the  throat

19. 15.  and  he  l.  his  hands  on  them,  and  departed

26.  50.  they  came  and  /.  h.  on  Jesus,  Mark  14.  46.
Mark  6.  5.  save  that  he  l.  hands  on  a  few  sick  folk
Luke  4.  40.  he  /.  hisAawrf.?  on  every  one  of  them

13.  13.  he  /.  his  hands  on  her,  she  was  made  straight
John 7.  30.  but  no  man  /.  hands  on  him,  44.  I  8.  20.
Acts  4.  3.  and  they  l.  hands  on  the  apostles,  5. 18.

6.  6.  had  prayed,  they  /.  hands  on  the  deacons

8.  17.  then  /.  they  their  hands  on  them,  and  they
13.3.  they  /.  their  hands  on  Paul  and  Barnabas
19.  6.  and  when  Paul  had  l.  his  hands  on  them

21.  27.  stirred  up  the  people,  and  l.  hands  on  Paul
28.  8.  Paul  /.  hands  on  Publius’  father,  and  healed

LAID  hold.

Gen.  19. 16.  the  men  l.  h.  on  Lot’s  hand  and  his  wife’s
Judg.  19. 29. took  a  knife,  and  /.  hold  on  his  concubine

1  Sam.  15. 27.  Saul  /.  h.  on  Samuel’s  skirt,  and  it  rent

2  C/u  on.  7.  22.  /.  hold  on  other  gods  and  worshipped
Job  18.  1 20.  they  that  went  before  l.  hold  on  horror
Mat.  14.  3.  Herod  had  /.  hold  on  John,  Mark  6. 17.

26.  55.  /.  no  h.  on  me  ||  57-  /.  h.  on  Jes.  Mark  14. 51.
Luke  23.  26.  they  /.  hold  on  one  Simon  a  Cyrenian
Rev.  20.  2.  he  /.  hold  on  the  dragon,  and  bound  him
LAID  up.

Gen.  39.  16.  and  she  /.  up  his  garment  by  her
41.  48.  Joseph  /.  up  food  in  the  cities
Exod.  16.  24.  they  l.  it  up  till  the  morning,  as  Moses
34.  Aaron  l.  up  the  pot  of  manna  to  be  kept
Rum.  17.  7.  Moses  /.  up  the  rods  before  the  Lord
Deut.  32.  34.  is  not  this  /.  up  in  store  with  me  i

1  Sam.  10.  25.  Samuel  /.  it  up  before  the  Lord
21.  12.  David  /.  up  these  words  in  his  heart

2  Kings  20.  17-  which  thy  fathers  /.  up  in  store
Ezra  6.  1.  where  treasures  were  /.  Kg  in  Babylon
Job  23  t  12.  1  have  /.  up  the  words  of  his  mouth
Psal.  31.  19.  thou  hast  /.  Kg  for  them  that  fear  thee
Prov.  13.  22.  wealth  of  sinners  is  /.  up  for  the  just
Cant.  7.  13.  fruits  which  1  have  /.  up  for  thee
Isa.  10.  28.  at  Michmash  he  /.  up  his  carriages

15.7.  that  /.  up  shall  they  cwrry  away  to  the  brook
23.  18.  her  hire  shall  not  be  treasured  or  /.  up
39.  6.  which  fathers  /.  up  be  carried  to  Babylon
Jer.  ,36.  20.  they  /.  up  the  roll  in  the  chamber
Euke  1.  66.  all  /.  them  up  in  their  hearts,  saying
12.  19.  soul,  thou  hast  much  goods  /.  up  for  years
19.  20.  thv  pound  1  have  kept  /.  up  in  a  napkin
Col.  1.  5.  ror  the  hope  which  is  /.  up  for  you
2  Tim.  4.  8.  is  /.  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness
LAID  wait.

Judg.  9.  34.  and  they  /.  wait  against  Shechem
16.  2.  they  /.  wait  all  night  for  Samson  in  the  gate
1  Sam.  15.  2.  Amalek  /.  wait  for  him  in  the  way

5.  and  Saul  came  and  l.  wait  in  the  valley

Job  31.  9.  or  it  I  have  /.  wait  at  my  neighbour’s  door
Lam.  4.  19.  they  /.  wait  for  us  ;n  the  wilderness
Acts  20.  3.  when  the  Jews  /.  wait  for  him,  23.  30.

LA  I D  waste.

Psal.  79.  7*  for  they  /.  waste  his  dwelling-place
Zs«.15.1.  Ar  and  Kir  /.  waste  ||  23.1.  'Pyre.it  is  l. waste
23. 14.  howl,  ye  ships,  your  strength  is  l.  waste
37.  18.  the  kings  of  Assyria/,  waste  all  the  nations


Isa.  64.  11 .  and  all  pleasant  things  are  t.  waste
Jer.  4.  7-  thy  cities  shall  he  /.  waste  without  an  in
habitant,  Ezek.  6.  6.  |  12.  20.  1 19.  7. 1  29. 12.
27. 17.  wherefore  should  this  city  be  /.  waste  ?
Ezek.  26. 2.  1  shall  be  replenished  now  she  is  /.  waste
Joel  1.  7 •  I-  my  vine  waste,  and  barked  my  tig-tree
Amos  7.9.  the  sanctuaries  of  Isr.  shall  be  /.  waste
Nuh.  3.  7.  all  shall  flee  and  say,  N ineveh  is/,  waste
Mai.  1.  3.  i  /.  his  heritage  waste  for  dragons

lai  Best.

Psal.  66.  11.  thou  /.  affliction  on  our  loins
Luke  19.  21.  thou  takest  up  that  thou/,  not  down
LAIN.

John  20.  12.  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  /.
LAYEST.

Num.  11 .  11 .  thou  /.  the  burden  of  this  people  on  me
1  Sam.  28.  9.  wherefore  /.  thou  a  snare  for  my  life  ?
LAYETH.

Job  21. 19.  God  /.  up  his  iniquity  for  his  children

24.  12.  soul  crieth  out,  yet  God  /.  not  folly  to  them
41. 26.  the  sword  of  him  that  /.  at  him  cannot  hold
Psal.  33.  7.  he  /.  up  the  depth  in  store-houses

104.  3.  he  /.  the  beams  of  nis  chambers  in  waters
Prov.  2.  7-  he  /.  up  wisdom  for  the  righteous

13. 16.  deals  with  knowledge,  but  a  fool  /.open  folly
26.  24.  dissembleth,  and  /.  up  deceit  with  him

31.  19.  she  /.  her  hands  to  the  spindle,  her  hands
Isa.  26.  5.  the  lofty  city  he  /.  low  to  the  ground

56.  2.  blessed  is  the  man  that  /.  hold  on  it

57. 1.  righteous  perisheth,  and  no  man/,  it  to  heart
Jer.  9.  8.  in  heart  he  /.  wait  ||  12.  11.  /.  it  to  heart
Zech.  12.  1.  Lord  /.  the  foundation  of  the  earth
Luke  12.  21.  so  is  he  that  /.  up  treasure  for  himself
15. 5.  found,  he  /.  it  on  his  shoulders  rejoicing
LAYING.

Num.  35.  20.  or  hurl  at  him  by  /.  wait,  that  he  die

22.  have  cast  on  him  any  thing  without  /.  wait
Psal.  64.  5.  they  commune  of  /.  snares  privily
Mark  7.  8.  for  /.  aside  the  commandment  of  God
Luke  11.  54.  /.  wait  for  him,  and  seeking  to  catch
Acts  8.  18.  that  through  /.  on  of  the  apostles’  hands

9.  24.  but  their  /.  wait  was  known  ot  Saul

23.  16.  Paul’s  kinsmen  heard  of  their  /.  in  wait

25,  3.  send  for  him,  /.  wait  in  the  way  to  kill  him
1  Tim.  4. 14.  with  l.  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery

6. 19.  /.  up  in  store  a  good  foundation  tor  time  to
Heb.  6.  1.  not  /.  again  the  foundation  of  repentance
2.  of  doctrine  of  baptisms,  and  of  /.  on  of  hands
1  Pet.  2. 1.  /.  aside  all  malice,  guile,  and  hypocrisies
LEAD.

Exod.  15. 10.  they  sank  as  /.  in  the  mighty  waters
Num.  31.  22.  and  the  /.  that  may  abide  the  fire
Job  19.  24.  that  they  were  graven  with  iron  and  /.
Jer.  6.  29.  the  /.  is  consumed  of  the  fire
Ezek.  22.  18.  they  are  /.  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace
20.  as  they  gather  /.  so  will  I  gather  you  in  anger
27. 12.  with  iron,  tin,  and  /.  Tarshish  traded  in  fairs
Zech.  5.  7.  behold,  there  was  lifted  up  a  talent  of  /.
8.  he  cast  the  weight  of  /.  on  the  mouth  thereof
LEAD

Signifies,  [1]  To  guide  or  conduct,  Psal.  31.  3. 1  139.
10.  [2]  To  live,  1  Tim.  2.  2.  [3]  To  govern  or  di¬
rect,  Rom.  8.  14.  [4]  To  seduce ,  2  Tim.  3.  6.  [5]
To  walk,  Prov.  8.  t  20.

Gen.  33.  14.  I  will  /.  on  softly  as  the  cattle
Exod.  13.  21.  a  pillar  of  cloud  to  /.  them  the  way

32.  34.  r.ow  go.  /.  the  people  to  the  place
Num.  27.  17-  which  may  /.  them  out  and  bring
Deut  A.  27.  whither  the  Lord  shall  /.  you,  28.  37.

20.  9.  they  shall  make  captains  to  /.  the  people
32.  12.  so  the  Lord  alone  did  /.  him,  there  was
Judg.  5.  12.  arise,  Barak,  /.  thy  captivity  captive

1  Sam.  30.  22.  they  may  /.  them  away  and  depart

2  Chron.  30.  9.  find  compassion  before  them  that  1
Neh.  9.  19.  the  pillar  of  cloud  to  l.  them  in  the  wa>
Psal.  5.  8.  /.  me,  O  Lord,  in  thy  righteousness

25.  5.  /.  me  in  thy  truth  ||  27.  11. 1.  in  a  plain  path

31.  3.  for  thy  name's  sake  l.  me  and  guide  me
43.  3.  send  thy  light  and  truth,  let  them  /.  me

60.  9.  who  -will  /.  me  into  Edom  ?  108.  10.

61.  2.  /.  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I
125.  5.  /.  them  forth  with  the  workers  of  iniquity
139.  10.  even  there  shall  thine  hand  /.  me

24.  and  /.  me  in  the  way  everlasting
143.  10.  /.  me  into  the  land  of  uprightness

Prov.  6.  22.  when  thou  goest,  it  shall  /.  thee
8.  20.  I  /.  in  the  way  of  righteousness
Cant.  8.  2.  I  would  /.  thee  to  my  mother’s  house
Isa.  3. 12.  they  that  /.  thee  cause  thee  to  err
11.  6.  and  a  little  child  shall  /.  them
20.  4.  the  king  of  Assyria/.  Egyptians  prisoners
40.  11.  he  shall  gently  /.  those  that  are  with  young
42.  16.  I  will  /.  them  in  paths  not  known
49.  10.  that  hath  mercy  on  them,  shall  /.  them

57.  18.  I  will  /.  him,  and  restore  comforts
63.  14.  so  didst  thou  /.  thy  people  to  make

Jer.  31.  9.  with  supplications  wdl  I  /.  them

32.  5.  and  he  shall  /.  Zedekiah  to  Babylon
Nah.  2.  7-  her  maids  /.  her,  as  with  voice  of  doves
Mat,  6.  13.  /.  us  not  into  temptation,  Luke  11.  4.

15.  14.  if  the  blind  /.  the  blind,  Luke  6.  39.

Mark  13.  11.  when  they  shall  /.  you  and  deliver  up
14.  44.  take  him  and  /.  him  away  safely
Luke  13.  15.  loose  his  ox  and  /.  him  to  watering
Acts  13.  11.  he  went  about  seeking  some  to  /.  him
1  Cor.  9.  5.  have  we  not  power  to?,  about  a  sister  <

1  Tim.  2.  2.  we  may  /.  a  quiet  life  in  godliness

2  Tim.  3.  6.  /.  captive  silly  women  laden  with  sins
Heb.  8.  9.  to  /.  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt
Rev.  7.  17.  the  Lamb  shall  feed  and  /.  them

LEADER.

1  Chr.  12.27.  Jehoiada  was  /.  of  the  Aaromtes
13. 1.  David  consulted  with  captains  and  every  /

Isa.  55.  4. 1  have  given  him  a  /.  to  the  people
LEADERS.

2  Chron.  32.  21.  Lord  sent  an  angel  which  cut  eff  /.
Isa.  9.  16.  the  /.  of  this  people  cause  them  to  err

14.  +  9.  itstirreth  up  all  the  /.  of  the  earth
Ezek.  4.  +  2.  set  chief  /.  against  it  round  about
Mat.  15.  14.  they  be  blind  /.  of  the  blind
DEADEST.

Psal.  80.  1.  thou  that  /.  Joseph  like  a  flock

L  273


LEA


LEA


LEA


and


LEADETH.

1  Sam.  13.  17-  turned  to  the  way  that  l.  to  Ophrah
Job  12.  17.  he  l-  counsellors  away  spoiled

19.  he  l.  princes  away  spoiled,  and  overthrowcth
-t23.  he  enlargeth  the  nations  and  l.  in
Tsai.  23.  2.  he  l.  me  beside  the  still  waters
3.  he  l.  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness
Prov.  16. 29.1.  him  into  the  way  that  is  not  good
Jsa.  48.  17.  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  which  l.  thee
Mat.  7.  13.  wide  is  the  way  that  l.  to  destruction

14.  narrow  is  the  way  that  l .  to  life,  lew  find  it
Mark  9.  2.  Jesus  l.  them  into  an  high  mountain
John  10.  3.  he  calletli  his  sheep  and  l.  them
Acts  12.  10.  the  iron  gate  that  l.  into  the  city
Rom  2  4  the  goodness  of  God  l.  to  repentance
Rev.  13.  10.  he  that  l.  shall  go  into  captivity

LEAF.

Signifies,  [1]  The  product  or  clothing  of  trees
plants,  Gen.  8.  11.  [2]  An  evidence  of  grace,

Psal.  1.  3.  [3]  A  form  of  godliness,  or  a  bare
profession  of  Christianity,  without  the  fruit  of
righteousness,  Mat.  21.  19.  [4]  'lhe  least  cause

of  fear,  Lev.  26.  36.

The  leaves  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations,
Rev.  22.  2.  Grace  from  Christ,  the  tree  of  life,
heals  his  people  whom  he  chooses  out  of  all  nations,
and  gives  them  perfect  freedom  from  all  spiritual
7'  diseases.

Gen.  8.  11.  andlo,  in  her  mouth  was  an  olive  l.

Lev.  26.  36.  sound  of  a  shaken  l.  shall  chase  them
Job  13.  25.  wilt  thou  break  a  l.  driven  to  and  fro  ?

Psal.  1.  3.  his  l  also  shall  not  wither,  shall  prosper
Jsa.  1.  30.  shall  be  as  an  oak,  whose  l.  fadeth
34.  4.  their  host  fall  as  a i.  II  64.  6.  we  fade  as  at.

Jer.  8. 13.  there  shall  be  no  grapes,  the  /.  shall  fade
17  8.  but  her  l.  shall  be  green,  and  not  be  careful
Ezek.  47.  12. 1.  shall  not  fade,  the  l.  for  medicine
LEAVES.

Gen.  3.  7.  they  sewed  tig  l.  and  made  aprons
Isa.  6.  13.  as  an  oak,  when  they  cast  their  /.

Jer.  36.  23.  when  Jehudi  read  three  or  tour  l.

Ezek.  17.  9.  it  shall  wither  in  all  the  l.  ot  her  spring
Dan.  4. 12. 1.  thereof  fair,  21.  ||  14.  shake  off  his  /.

Mat.  21.  19.  nothing  thereon  but  l.  Mark  11.  13.

24.  32.  his  branch  putteth  forth  l.  Mark  13.  28.

Rev.  22.  2.  the  l.  were  for  the  healing  ot  the  nations
LEAVES  for  doors.

1  Kings  6.  +  32.  the  I.  of  the  doors  were  of  oli  ve  trees
34.  the  two  /.  of  the  one  door  were  folding
Ezek.  41.  24.  doors  had  two  /.  apiece,  two  l.  tor  one
LEAGUE.

Josh.  9.  6.  make  therefore  a  l.  with  us,  11.

15.  Joshua  made. a  l.  with  the  Gibeomtes,  16.
Judg.  2.  2.  make  no  l.  with  the  inhabitants  ot  land

1  Sam.  22.  8.  my  son  hath  made  a  l.  with  David

2  Sam.  5.  3.  king  David  made  a  l.  with  them
4  Kings  5.  12.  Hiram  and  Solomon  made  a  /.

15.  19.  there  is  a  l.  between  me  and  thee
2  Chron.  16.  3.  go  break,  thy  /.  with  Paasha  king  of
Joh  5.  23.  shalt  be  in  l.  with  the  stones  ot  the  held
Ezek.  30.  5.  men  of  the  land  that  is  in  /.  shall  tall
Dan  11.23.  after  the  l.  he  shall  work  deceitfully

LEAN.

Gen.  41.  3.  kine  came  out  of  the  river  /.-fleshed,  19.

4.  the  /.-fleshed  eat  up  the  seven  fat  kine,  20.
Num.  13.  20.  w  hat  the  land  is,  whether  fat  or  l.

2  Sam.  13.  4.  why  art  thou  being  the  king’s  son  /.

Jsa.  17.  4.  the  fatness  of  his  flesh  shall  w-ax  /.

Ezek.  34.  20.  1  will  judge  between  fat  cattle  and  /.
Zeph.  2. 1 11.  Lord  make  l.  the  gods  of  the  earth
LEANNESS.

Job  16.  8.  my  /.  rising  up  in  me,  beareth  witness
Ps.  106.  15.  gave  request,  but  sent  /.  into  their  soul
Jsa.  10.  16.  Lord  shall  send  among  his  fat  ones  /.
24.  16.  but  1  said,  my  /.  my  /.  woe  unto  me
Mic,  6. 1 10.  the  measure  of  l.  is  abominable
LEAN

Signifies,  [1]  To  incline  or  rest  against,  Judg.  16
26.  [2]  To  trust  or  depend  upon,  2  Kings  18.  21
[3]  Spiritually  by  faith  and  love  to  cleave  to  and
rely  upon.  Cant.  8.  5.

Judg.  16.  26.  tha*  I  may  /.  on  the  pillars
2  Kings  18.  21.  on  which  if  a  man  /.  Isa.  36.  6.

Job  8.  15.  shall  /.  on  his  house,  but  it  shall  not  stand
Prov.  3.  5.  /.  not  to  thine  own  understanding
Mic.  3.  11.  yet  will  they  /.  011  the  Lord,  and  say
LEANED.

Judg.  16.  t29.  the  middle  pillars  on  which  he  /.

2  Sam.  1.  6.  behold,  Saul  /.  upon  his  spear
2  Kings  j.  2.  then  a  lord,  on  whose  hand  the  king  /.

2  Chron.  32.  t  8. people  /.  on  the  words  of  Hezekiah
Ezek.  29.  7.  when  they  /.  on  thee,  thou  brakest
Amos  5. 19.  /.  his  hand  on  wall,  a  serpent  bit  him
John  21.  20.  who  also  /.  on  his  breast  at  supper
LEANETH.

Num.  21. 1 15.  brooks  /.  on  the  border  of  Moab
2  Sam.  3.  29.  not  fail  one  that  /.  on  a  staff
2  Kings  5. 18.  /.  011  my  hand  in  the  house  ot  Rimm.
LEANING.

Cant.  8.  5.  that  cometli  up  /.  on  her  beloved
John  13.  23.  now  there  was  /.  on  Jesus’  bosom
Deb.  11. 21.  Jacob  worshipped,  l.  on  top  of  his  staff
LEAP

Signifies,  [1]  To  skip,  or  jump  to  and  fro.  Acts  3.  8.
1  14.  10.  [2]  To  come  violently  and  suddenly

upon.  Acts  19.  16.  [3]  To  rejoice  and  be  glad,
Isa.  35.  6.

Gen.  31. 12.  all  the  rams  which  /.  on  the  cattle
Lev.  11.  21.  have  legs  to  /.  withal  upon  the  earth
Detit.  33.  22.  and  of  Dan,  he  shall  /.  from  Baslian
Job  41.  19.  burning  lamps,  and  sparks  ot  fire  /.  out
Psal.  68.  16.  why  I  ye,  ye  high  hills,  this  is  the  lull
Jsa.  35.6.  then  shall  trie  lame  man  /.  as  an  hart
Joel  2.  5.  like  the  noise  of  chariots  shall  they  /.
Zeph.  1.9-  shall  punish  those  that  /.  on  the  threshold
Euke  6.  23.  rejoice  ye  in  that  day,  and  /.  tor  joy
LEAPED.

Gen.  31.  10.  the  rams  which  /.  upon  the  cattle
2  Sam.  22. 30.  by  my  God,  I /.  over  a  wall,  Ps.  18.29.
1  Kings  18.  26.  they  /.  upon  the  altar  which  was
Euke  1.  41.  the  babe  /.  in  her  womb  for  joy,  44.
JLcts  14.  10.  stand  upright,  and  he  /.  and  walked

274


Acts  19. 16.


he  in  whom  evil  spirit  was,  /.  on  them
LEAPING.

2  Sam.  6.  16.  Michal  saw  David  /.  and  dancing
Cant.  2.  8.  behold  he  cometh  /.  on  the  mountains
Acts  3.  8.  and  he  /.  up,  stood  and  walked,  entered
LEA  RN

Signifies,  [1]  To  receive  instruction,  1  Cor.  14.  31.

!  Tim.  2.  11.  [2]  To  imitate.  Mat.  11.  29-  [33
To  take  heed,  1  lim.  1.  20.  [4]  j'o  know,  or  hear
one's  opinion,  or  sentiment  concerning  any  thing,
Gal.  3.  2.  [5]  To  practise,  Psal.  Ic6.  35.

No  man  could  learn  that  song.  Rev.  ^14.  3.
None  of  the  antichristian  party  could  join  in
this  pure  gospel-worship ;  they  could  not  learn
to  ascribe  power,  riches,  wisdom,  honour,  glory,
and  blessing  to  Jesus  Christ  alone ;  but  gave
Christ's  honour  and  glory  to  the  Virgin  Mary,
angels,  saints,  4'C.  „  .

Dent.  4.  10.  that  they  may  /.  to  fear  me,  14.  23.

5.  1.  that  ye  may  /.  them,  and  keep  and  do  them

17.  19.  he  shall  read  therein,  that  he  may  /.  to  tear

18.  9.  thou  shalt  not  /.  to  do  after  the  abominations
31 .  12.  they  may  hear,  and  /.  and  feai  the  Lord

13.  that  their  children  may  /.  to  fear  the  Lord
Psal.  119.  71.  that  l  might/,  thy  statutes,  73.

Prov.  22.  25.  lest  thou  l.  his  ways  and  get  a  snare
Isa.  1.  17.  /.  to  do  well,  seek  judgment,  relieve
2.4.  neither  shall  they  l.  war  any  more,  Mic.  4.  3.

26.  9.  the  inhabitants  of  world  shall  /.  righteousness

10.  yet  will  not  the  wicked  /.  righteousness
29.  24.  they  that  murmured  shall  /.  doctrine

Jer.  10.  2.  /.  not  the  way  of  the  heathen
12. 16.  if  they  will  diligently  /.  ways  ot  my  people
Mat.  9.  13.  but  go  and  /.  what  that  meaneth

11.  29.  /.  of  me,  for  L  am  meek  and  lowly
24.  32.  1.  a  parable  of  the  tig-tree.  Mark  13.28.

1  Cor.  4.  6.  that  ye  might  /.  in  us  not  to  think
14.  31 .  may  all  prophesy  one  by  one,  that  all  may  /.
35.  if  they  will  /.  any  thing,  let  them  ask
Gal.  3.  2.  this  would  1  l.  of  you,  received  ye  Spirit

1  Tim.  1.  20.  that  they  may  /.  not  to  blaspheme

2. 11.  let  the  woman  /.  in  silence  with  all  subjection
5.  4.  let  them  /.  first  to  shew  piety  at  home
13.  and  w  ithal  they  /.  to  be  idle,  wandering  about
Tit.  3.  14.  let  ours  /.  to  maintain  good  works
Rev.  14.  3.  no  man  could  /.  that  song  but  144,000
LEARNED.

Gen.  30.  27.  tarry,  for  1  have  /.  by  experience
Ps.  106.  35.  among  the  heathen,  and  /.  their  works
119.7.  when  1  shall  have  /.  thy  righteous  judgments
Prov.  30.3.  1  neither/,  wisdom,  nor  have  know  ledge
Isa.  29.  11.  which  men  deliver  to  one  that  is/.

12.  to  him  that  is  not  /.  he  saith,  1  am  not  /.

50.  4.  the  Lord  God  hath  given  me  the  tongue  ot
the  /.  he  wakeneth  mine  ear  to  hear  as^  the  /.
Ezek.  19.  3.  it  /.  to  catch  the  prey,  it  devoured,  6.
John  6.  45.  every  man  that  hath  /.  of  the  Father
7.  15.  knoweth  this  man  letters,  having  never  /.
Acts  7.  22.  Moses  was  /.  in  all  the  wisdom  of  Egypt
Rom.  16.  17.  contrary  to  the  doctrine  ye  have  l.
Eph.  4.  20.  but  ye  have  not  so  /.  Christ
Phil.  4.  9.  those  things  ye  have  /.  and  heard,  do

11.  I  have  /.  in  every  state  to  be  content

Col.  1.  7-  as  ye  /.  of  Epaphras  our  tellow-servant

2  Tim.  3.  14.  but  continue  thou  in  the  things  thou

hast  /.  knowing  of  whom  thou  hast  /.  them
Ileb.  5.  8.  though  he  were  a  son, yet/,  he  obedience
LEARNING.

Prov.  1.  5.  a  wise  man  will  hear  and  increase  l.

9.  9.  teach  a  just  man,  and  he  will  increase  in  /.

16.  21.  the  sweetness  of  the  lips  increaseth  /.

23.  the  heart  of  the  w use  addeth  /.  to  his  lips
Dan.  1.4.  whom  they  might  teach  /.of  the  Chaldeans

17.  God  gave  them  skill  in  all  /.  and  wisdom
Acts 26.24.  Festus  said,  much  /.  doth  make  thee  mad
Rom.  15.  4.  for  things  w’ere  written  for  our  /.

2  Tim.  3.7.  ever  /.  and  never  able  to  come  to  truth
LEASING.

Psal.  4.  2.  how  long  will  ye  seek  after  /.  ?

5.  6.  thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  speak  /.

LEAST

Signifies,  [1]  The  smallest  quantity,  Num.  11.  32.
[2]  Most  humble  and  louly,  Luke  9-  48.  [3]  lhe
meanest  person,  or  one  of  the  least  judgment,  skill,
and  experience,  Judg.  6.  15.

Called  least  in  the  kingdom  ot  heaven,  Mat.  5.  19.
H hall  be  of  little  or  no  valve  and  esteem  in  the
church  of  God,  and  without  true  repentance,  shall
never  come  into  the  kingdom  of  glory .

Gen.  32.  10.  not  worthy  of  the  /.  of  the  mercies
Num .  11.  32.  that  gathered  /.  gathered  ten  homers
Judg.  6.  15.  I  am  the  /.  in  my  father’s  house

1  Sam.  9.  21.  my  family,  the  /.  ot  all  families

2  Kings  18.  24.  one  captain  of  /.  of  master’s  servants
Jer.  49.  20.  /.  of  flock  shall  draw  them,  50.  45.
Amos  9.  9.  not  the  /.  grain  fall  upon  the  earth
Mat.  2. 6.  art  not  the  7.  among  the  princes  of  J  udah

5.  19.  shall  break  one  of  these  /.  commandments,


Mark  5.  13.  [2J  To  depart  from,  John  J6.
[3]  j'o  bid  farewell  to.  Acts  18.  18.  [4]  Nit  !
dwell  or  live  with,  Mat.  19.  5.  [5]  To  lay  dou\
Mat.  5.  24.

LEAVE,  Substantive.  I

Num.  22.  13.  for  the  Lord  refuseth  to  give  me  /.

1  Sam.  20.  6.  David  earnestly  asked  /.  of  me,  28
Neh.  13.  6.  after  certain  days  obtain.  1  /.  of  the  k.
Mark  5.  13.  and  forthwith  Jesus  gave  them  /.
John  19.  38.  Pilate  gave  him  /.  to  take  away  hot!
Acts  18.  18.  Paul  took  his  /.  ot  the  brethren

21  6.  when  we  had  taken  our  /.  one  of  another  :

2  C01 .  C.  13.  taking  my  /.  1  went  to  Macedonia

LEAVE.

Gen.  2.  24.  shall  a  man  l.  father  and  mot.  and  cleat
to  his  wife,  Mat.  19.  5.  Mark  10.7-  Eph.  5.  p
33.  15.  let  me  /.  with  thee  some  ot  the  folk
42.  33.  1.  one  of  your  brethren  here  with  me
44.  22.  the  lad  cannot  /.  his  father,  if  he  /.  him  j
Exud.  16.  19.  let  no  man  /.  manna  till  the  inonii.j
23.  t  5.  cease  to  /.  thy  business,  thou  shalt  /.  it

11.  what  they  /.  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eali
Lev.  7.  15.  not  /.  any  of  the  peace  offering,  22.  3j

16.  23.  shall  put  off  garments  and  /.  them  there

19.  10.  thou  shalt  /.  them  for  the  poor,  23.  22.  I

Num.  9.  12.  /.  none  of  the  passover  till  morning  j

10.  31*  and  he  said,  /.  us  not,  l  pray  thee
32.  15.  will  yet  again  /.  them  in  the  wilde. aess
Deut.  28. 51.  shall  not/,  thee  either  corn,  wi»e,o,  4
54.  the  remnant  of  children  which  he  shall  /.  j
Josh.  4.  3.  and  /.  them  in  the  lodging  place
Judg.  9.  9.  the  olive  said,  should  1  /.  my  fatness  I

13.  vine  said,  should  1  /.  my  wine,  which cheenl
Ruth  1.  16.  Ruth  said,  entreat  me  not  to  /.  thee  j

1  Sam.  9.  5.  lest  my  father  /.  caring  for  the  a»se:

14.  36.  Saul  said,  let  us  not  t.  a  man  of  them
25.  22.  if  1  /.  of  ail  that  pertain  to  him

2  Sam.  14.  7.  shall  not  /.  to  my  husband  a  name

1  Kings  8.  57.  let  him  not  /.  us  nor  forsake  us  1

2  Kings  A.  43.  they  shall  eat  and  shall  /.  thereot
13.  7.  nor  did  he  /.  of  the  people  but  fifty  horsem

1  Chron.  28.  8.  may  possess  this  good  land,  ami  l
Ezra  9.  8.  grace  from  L.  to  /.  us  a  remnant  to  escw

12.  7.  it  for  an  inheritance  to  your  children  for  e\
Neh.  4.  t  2.  the  Jews,  will  they  /.  to  themselves!

5.  10.  1  pray  you  let  us  /.  oft  this  usury

6.  3.  why  should  the  work  cease  whilst  1  /.it? I
10.  31.  that  we  would  /.  the  seventh  year

Job  39.  11.  or  wilt  thou  /.  thy  labour  to  him  ;
Ps.  16. 10.  thou  wilt  not/,  my  soul  in  hell,  Aetsi.l

17.  14.  they  /.  their  substance  to  their  babes

27.  9.  thou  hast  been  my  help,  /.  me  not,  119. 1
49.  10.  they  die  and  /.  their  wealth  to  others
141.  8.  O  God,  my  trust,  l.  not  my  soul  destit.'

Prov.  2.  13.  who  /.  the  paths  of  uprightness
17.  14.  /.  off  contention,  before  it  be  meddled  w
Eccl.  2. 18.  because  1  should  /.  it  to  the  man  aftn


shall  be  called  /.  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven


21.  yet  shall  he  l.  it  for  his  portion
10.  4.  if  ruler  rise  up  against  thee,  /.


10.  4.  if  ruler  rise  up  against  tnee,  l.  not  thy  pli
Isa.  10.  3.  and  where  w  ill  ye  /.  your  glory  <

65.  15.  and  ye  shall  /.  your  name  for  a  curse  1
Jer.  9.  2.  I  might  /.  my  people,  and  go  Irom  thl
14.  9.  O  Lord,  we  are  called  by  thy  name,  /.  us  s

17.  'll.  riches,  he  shall  l.  them  in  midst  ot  his  dJ

18.  14.  will  a  man  /.  the  snow  of  Lebanon
44.  7.  child  and  suckling,  to  /.  you  none  to  rein

48.  28.  /.  the  cities,  and  dwell  in  the  rock

49.  9.  would  they  not  /.  some  gleaning-grapes

11.  /.  thy  fathei  less  children,  l  will  preserve  th;

Ezek.  16.  39.  and  /.  thee  naked  and  bare,  23.  29
39.  2.  will  turn  thee,  and  /.  but  a  sixth  part  ot  t
Dan.  4.  15.  /.  the  stump  of  his  root,  23,  26.

Hot.  12.  14.  therefore  shall  he  /.  his  blood  upon  I
Joell.  14.  will  return,  and  /.  a  blessing  behind  h
Amos  5.  3.  shall  /.  an  hundred,  shall  /.  ten  to  Isi

7.  ye,  who  /.  off  righteousness  in  the  earth
Obad.  5.  grape  gatherers,  would  they  iK.  t  /.  gray'
Mai.  4. 1.  that  i  t  shall  /.  them  neither  root  nor  bra
Mat.  5.  24.  /.  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar  I
18.12.  doth  he  not  /.  the  ninety  and  nine,  Luke  la
23.  23.  to  have  done,  and  not  to  /.  other  uncoil
Mark  12.  19.  and  /.  his  wife,  and  /.  no  children  1
I.uke  19.  44.  they  shall  not  /.  in  thee  one  stone
John  14.  27.  my  peace  1  /.  with  you,  peace  1  g.j
16.  28.  1  /.  the  world  and  go  to  the  t  ather
32.  ye  shall  /.  me  alone,  yet  1  am  not  alone,  heij.
Acts  6.  2.  it  is  not  reason  we  should  /.  the  worn
Cor  7.  13.  to  dwell  with  her,  let  her  not  /.  nil
Heb.  13.  5.  I  will  never  /.  thee  nor  forsake  tliel
Rev.  11.  2.  the  court  /.  out,  and  measure  it  not!

I  will,  or  will  I  LEAVE.

1  Kings  19. 1 18.  yet  1  will  l.  seven  thousand  111  .


11.  11.  John  Baptist,  he  that  is  /.  in  the  kingdom

of  heaven,  is  greater  than  he,  Luke  7.  28.
13.  32.  which  indeed  is  the  /.  of  all  seeds
25.  40.  as  ye  have  done  it  to  the  /.  of  these,  45.
Luke  9.  48.  he  that  is  /.  among  you,  the  same  shall

12.  26.  if  ye  be  not  able  to  do  that  which  is  /.

16.  10.  he  that  is  faithful  in  the  /.  unjust  in  /.

1  Cor.  6.  4.  set  them  to  judge  who  are  /.  esteemed
15.  9.  for  1  am  the  /.  of  the  apostles,  not  meet
Eph.  3.  8.  who  am  less  than  the  l.  of  all  saints
See  Grkatest.

At  the  LEAST.

Gen.  24.  55.  damsel  abide  with  us,  at  the  /.  ten  days
Judg.  3.  2.  at  the  l.  such  as  before  knew  nothing

1  Sam.  21.  4.  if  kept  themselves  at  l.  from  women
Luke  19.  42.  hadst  known  at  l.  in  this  thy  day
Acts  5.  15.  that  at  the  /.  the  shadow  ot  Peter  passing

LEATHER.

2  Kings  1.8.  an  hairy  man,  girt  with  a  girdle  of  /.

LEATHERN.

Mat.  3.  4.  John  had  a  /.  girdle  about  his  loins
LEAVE

Signifies,  [1]  Licence  or  permission,  Num.  22.  13.


Job  9.  27.  if  1  say,  I  will  l.  off  my  heaviness  1
10. 1. 1  will  l.  my  complaint  on  myself,  I  willsrt
Ezek.  6.  8.  yet  Iw.  1.  arem.  ||  12. 16.  but  Iw.  1.  a  1

_  _  1  r  •»»  7  it _ _ lYMI  ?


22.  20  and  I  will  l.  you  there  and  melt  you
29.  5.  7  will  l.  thee  thrown  into  the  wilderness
32.  4.  then  I  will  l.  thee  upon  the  land  and  raj
Zeph.  3. 12. 1  will  l.  in  midst  of  thee  a  poor  pe|
I  will  not  LEAVE.

Gen.  28.  15.  I  will  not  l.  thee  until  I  have  done  P
2  Kings  2.  2.  as  the  LJiveth,  I  w.  not  l.  thee.  41.

4.  he  said,  as  thy  soul  liveth,  7  will  not  l.  the*
Ps.  37. 3.3.  L.  J  w.  n.  1.  him  in  his  hand,  nor  conn®
Ter.  30.11.  7  w.  n.  1.  thee  together  unpunished, ,40  ^
John  14.  18.  1  w.  n.  1.  you  comfortless,  1  will  c¥
LEAVED.

Jsa.  45.  1.  to  open  before  him  the  two  /.  gates  j
LEAVETH.  .  .

Job  39.  14.  the  ostrich  /.  her  egg3  in  the  eartn  j
Prov.  13.  22.  a  good  man  /.  an  inheritance  to

28.  3.  is  like  a  sweeping  rain  which  7.  no  too  1
Zech.  11. 17.  woe  to  the  idol  shepherd,  that  /. .the
Mat.  4.  11.  then  the  devil  /.  him,  and  behold
John  10.  12.  the  hireling  /.  the  sheep  and  fleet
LEAVEN

Signifies,  A  piece  of  dough  salted  and  kouni
ferment  and  relish  a  mass  of  dough  for  "  ,
II os.  7.  4.  1  Cor.  5.  6.  To  which  are  compa'
[1]  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  was  i
successful  in  converting  many  sinners,  1 1 M
33.  [2]  j'he  erroneous  doctrines,  and  *■**


LEF


LEF


LEN


practices  of  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees ;  the
corrupt  y losses  of  the  law,  the  doctrine  of  traditions,
invented  and  promoted  by  the  former  ,  and  that
poisonous  doctrine  of  the  mortality  of  the  soul,
strenuously  maintained  by  the  latter  /'which,  like
leaven ,  are  not  only  of  a  sour,  but  also  of  a  con¬
tagions  and  infectious  nature,  and  suited  to  men
ol  atheistical  hearts  and  lives,  Mat.  16.  6,  1C.  [3'
Notorious  scandalous  sinners,  who  infect  and  cast
a  blot  upon  a  church,  1  Cor.  5.  6.

!  ri<d:  12.  J5.  ye  shall  put  away  l.  seven  days,  19.
13.  7-  neither  shall  be  l.  seen  in  all  thy  quarters
34. 25  not  otter  the  blood  ot'  my  sacrifice  with  l.
rev.  2.  11.  no  meat  ottering  shall  be  made  with  /.

6.  17-  it  shall  not  be  baken  with  /.  1  have  given
]  i.  12.  take  and  eat  the  meat  offering  without  l.
23. 17.  be  of  fine  Hour,  they  shall  be  baken  with  /.
Imos  4.  5.  otter  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  with  l.
It 'at.  13. 33.  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  l.  Luke  13. 21.

16.  6.  Jesus  said,  beware  of  the  l.  of  the  Pharisees,
and  of  the  tSadducees,  11.  Mark  8. 15.  Luke  12.1.
12.  hade  them  not  beware  of  the  l.  of  bread

( 'or.  5.6.  little  l.  leaveneth  the  whole  lump, (.»«/.  5.9.

7.  purge  out  therefore  the  old  l.  that  ye  may  be

8.  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  /.  or  of  mal  ice

LEAVENED.

'ted.  12.  15.  for  whosoever  eateth  l.  bread,  19.

20.  ye  shall  eat  nothing  /.  in  all  your  habitations
34.  people  took  their  dough  before  it  was  l.  39.
.13.  3.  there  shall  110  /.  bread  be  eaten,  7.

/<>!■.  7. 4.  alter  he  hath  kneaded  the  dough  till  it  be  A
dot.  13.  33.  till  the  whole  was  /.  Luke  13.  21.

See  Bread.

LEAVEN  ETH.

Cor.  5. 6.  a  little  leaven  l.  the  wnole  lump,  Gal.  5.9.
LEAVING.

lot.  4. 13.  Jesus  l.  Nazareth, dwelt  in  Capernaum
nke  10.  30.  thieves  departed,  /.  him  halt  dead
>om.  1.27.  men  /.  the  natural  use  of  the  woman
kb.  6.  1.  A  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ
Pet.  2.21.  Christ  suffered  for  us,/,  us  an  example
LED.

•  en.  14.  I  14.  he  /.  forth  his  trained  servants
124.  27.  1  being  in  the  way,  the  Lord  /.  me
48.  blessed  the  Lord,  who  had  A  mein  right  way

17.  +  17-  he  A  them  with  bread  for  that  year

rod.  3.  1.  Moses  /.  the  Hock  to  hack  side  of  desert
13.  17.  God  /.  them  not  thro’  the  land  of  Philistines

18.  hut  God  A  them  about  thro’  the  wilderness
15.  13.  thou  in  mercy  hast  A  forth  the  people
kut.  8. 2.  the  way  which  the  L.  A  thee  forty  years
15.  who  /.  thee  through  that  great  wilderness

’9.  5.  1  have  A  you  forty  j’ears  in  the  wilderness
12.  10.  he  /.  him  about,  he  instructed  him
s/t.  24. 3.  I  /.  him  through  all  the  land  of  Canaan
h  mgs  ik.  AS.  enemies,  which  A  them  away  captive
kings  6.  19-  but  Elisha  A  them  to  Samaria
■  Chr.  20.  1.  Joab  A  forth  the  power  of  1  he  army
Citron.  25.  11.  and  Amaziah  /.  forth  his  people
'sal.  78.  14.  in  the  day  he  A  them  with  a  cloud
53.  he  A  them  on  safely,  so  that  they  feared  not
116.  9.  so  he  A  them  thro’  the  depths  as  thro’  a
wilderness,  136.  16.  La.  63. 13.
07.  7-  he  A  them  forth  by  the  right  way
'rov.  4. 11.  1  have  A  thee  in  right  paths

a.  9.  16.  they  that  are  A  of  them  are  destroyed
8.  21.  they  thirsted  not  when  they  /.  them  thro’

■3.  12.  for  ye  shall  be  A  forth  with  peace

12.  that/,  them  by  the  right  hand  of  Moses
r;2. 6.  where  is  the  Ld.  that  A  us  thro'  wilderness
1*.  hath  forsaken  God,  when  he  /.  thee  by  the  way
2. 12.  shall  die  in  the  place  whither  they  have  /.  him
8.8.  the  Lord  liveth  which  /.  the  house  of  Israel
am.  3.  2.  he  hath  /.  me  into  darkness,  not  light
wk.  17.  12.  and  A  them  with  him  to  Babylon
■'  28.  who  caused  them  to  be  A  into  captivity
.7.  2.  A  me  about  to  the  outer  gate  eastward
mos  2. 10.  also  1  /.  you  40  years  thro’  the  wildern.

.  11.  Israel  shall  surely  be  /.  captive  out  of  land
a  i.  2.  7.  and  Iluzzah  shall  be  /.  away  captive
ac_ 4.  1.  then  was  Jesus  /.  of  the  Spirit,  Luke  A.  1.

b.  57.  they  /.  him  to  Caiaphas  the  high-priest,

-  „  Mark  14.  53.  Luke  22.  54.  John  15.  13.

1.  ..  tlrey  /.  him  to  Pont.  Pilate  the  governor  31

.  Mark  15. 16,  20.  Luke  22.  54.  John  18.  13.
arkB.  23.  he  took  the  blind  man  and  A  him  out
10  the^  Jesus  to  the  brow  of  the  hill
'  •  -V  t*>ey  shall  be  /.  away  captive  into  all  nations
-■  ob.  and  /.  him  into  their  council,  saying
the  whole  multitude  A  him  to  Pilate
.two  other  malefactors  were  /.  with  him
1.  00.  he  /.  them  out  as  far  as  Bethany
bn  18.  28.  they  A  Jesus  unto  the  hallof  judgment
32.  he  was  A  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter
1. 8.  they  /.  Saul  by  the  hand  to  Damascus,  22.  11.

L  •><  •  as  Paul  was  to  be  A  into  the  castle

8.  11.  as  mdny  as  are  /.  by  the  Spirit  of  God


^12.2  carried  away  to  idols, even  as  ye  were  /.
o  but  if 'ye  be  A  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are


i"  q  ,  ..  ^  uic  opu  ii|  %  c  tilt:

1-  >  w°men,  A  away  with  divers  lusts
-  beware,  lest  ve  also  being  /.  away  with

'  :k<


the  error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  stedfastness
r,  LEDDEST.

am.  5.  ..  wast  he  that/,  out  Israel,  1  Chr.  11.2

1 p111^  '


^•77-20.  thou  /.  thy  people  likea  flock
ci  au'l  A  into  the  wilderness  four  thousand


men  that  were  murderers
m  LEDGES.

•VT  V  -B-,the  borders  were  between  the  A
!;'•  Uie  A  alal  borders  thereof  were  of  ihesame
’  •  on  the  plates  ot  the  /.  he  graved  cherubims
LEEKS.

<'"•11.  5.  we  remember  the  A  and  the  onions
0.  LEES.

!’  'f;  b- a  'east  of  wine  on  the  A  well  refined
\  ,•  and  Moab  hath  settled  on  his  A
'<■  1.  K.  I  will  punish  men  settled  on  their  A

"JL8,  be  had  /.communing  with  Abraham
"ho  hath  not  A  destitute  my  master
3o.  his  name  Judah,  and  A  bearing,  30.  9.


Gen.  32.  8.  then  the  other  company  which  is  A
39.  6.  he  A  all  that  he  had  in  Joseph’s  hand
12.  he  /.  his  garment  in  her  hand,  13,  15,  18.

41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  corn  till  he  A  numbering
44.  12.  at  the  eldest,  and  /.  at  the  youngest
47.  18.  not  enough  /.  hut  our  bodies  and  lands
50.  8.  their  little  ones  A  they  in  Goshen
Ezod.  2.  20.  why  is  it  that  ye  have  /.  the  man  ?

9.  21.  A  his  servants  and  his  cattle  in  the  field

10.  12.  eat  every  herb,  all  that  the  hail  /.  15.

26.  there  shall  not  an  hoof  be  /.  behind
16.  20.  hut  some  of  them  /.  of  it  till  morning
34.  25.  nor  sacrifice  of  passover  be  A  (ill  morning
Lev.  2.  10.  that  which  is  /.  of  the  meat  offering

10.  12.  and  to  Ithamar.  his  sons  that  were  A

26.  39.  they  that  are  A  of  you  shall  pine  away
43.  the  land  also  shall  be  A  of  them  and  enjoy

hum.  26.  65.  there  was  not  A  a  man  of  them,  Josh.

8.  17.  Judg.  4.  16.  llos.  9.  12.
Deut.  2  34.  we  utterly  destroyed,  we  A  none  to  re
main,  Josh.  10.  33,  37,  39,  40.  |  11. 8,  11,  14.

4.  27.  ye  shall  be  /.  few  in  number  among  the
.  ,  heathen,  28.  62.  La.  24.  6.  Jer.  42.  2.

7.  20.  till  they  that  are  /.  be  destroyed
28.  55.  he  hath  nothing  /.  him  in  the  siege
32. 36.  power  gone,  and  there  is  none  shut  up  or  A

Josh.  6.  23.  and  /.  them  without  the  camp  of  Israel

8.  17.  they  /.  the  city  open,  and  pursued  Israel

11.  15.  he  /.  nothing  undone  of  all  commanded

22.  there  was  none  of  the  Anakims  A  in  the  land
22.  3.  ye  have  not  /.  your  brethren  to  this  day

Judg.  2.  21.  of  nations  which  Joshua  A  when  he  died

23.  therefore  the  Lord  l.  those  nations,  3.  1.

6.  4.  /.  no  sustenance  for  Israel,  neither  sheep

9.  5.  yet  Jotham  the  youngest  son  was  A
Ruth  1.  3.  and  she  was  /.  and  her  two  sons,  5.

18.  was  minded  to  go,  then  she  /.  speaking  to  her

2.  11.  how  thou  hast  /.  thy  father  and  mother
14.  Ruth  did  eat  and  was  sufficed,  and  /.

4. 14.  Lord  not  /.  thee  this  day  without  kinsman

1  Sam.  2.  36.  every  one  that  is  /.  in  thy  house

5.  4.  only  the  stump  of  Dagon  was  A' to  him

9.  24.  that  which  is  /.  set  it  before  thee  and  eat

10.  2.  thy  father  hath  /.  the  care  of  the  asses

11.  11.  so  that  two  of  them  were  not  /.  together
17  20.  David  rose  up  and  /.  the  sheep  with  a  keeper
22.  David  /.  his  carriage  in  the  hand  of  a  keeper

25.  34.  not  been  /.  any  that  pisseth  against  the  wall

27.  9.  David  /.  neither  man  nor  woman  alive

2  Sam.  5.  21.  and  there  thej’  A  their  images
9.  1.  is  there  yet  any  /.  of  the  house  of  Saul  ?

13.  30.  the  king’s  sons,  there  is  not  one  of  them  A

14.  7.  so  they  shall  quench  my  coal  which  is  /.

15.  16.  the  king  A  ten  concubines,  16.  21.

17;  12.  there  shall  not  be  /.  so  much  as  one

1  A  mgs  9.21.  their  children  that  were  A  2  Chr.  8.  8.

14.  10.  cutoffhim  that  is  shut  up  and  /.  2  Kings  9. 8.

15.  29.  he  A  not  Jeroboam  any  that  breathed

16.  11.  lie  A  Baasha  not  one  that  pisseth  against

17.  17-  sickness  that  there  was  no  breath  /.  in  him
19. 3.  and  A  his  servant  there  ||  10.  I  only  am  /.

18.  yet  1  have  /.  me  7000  |[  20.  he  /.  oxen  and  ran

2  Rings  4.  44.  and  they  did  eat  and  /.  thereof

7.  7.  they  arose  and  /.  tents  l|  13.  all  that  are  A

8.  6.  since  the  da}7  she  A  the  land  even  until  now
10. 11.  Jehu  slew  all,  till  he  /.  him  none  remaining

21 .  so  that  there  was  not  a  man  A  that  came  not
14.  26.  for  there  was  not  any  A  nor  any  helper
17.  16.  they  /.  the  commandments  of  the  Lord

19.  4.  this  prayer  for  remnant  that  are  A  Isa.  37.  4.

20.  17.  nothing  shall  be  A  saith  the  Lord
25.  12.  A  of  poor  of' the  land,  Jer.  39.  10.  |  52. 16.

1  Chron.  13  2.  send  to  our  brethren  that  are  /.

2  Chron.  11.  14.  for  the  Levites  l,  their  suburbs
12.  5.  1  have  also  l.  you  in  the  hand  of  Shishak

21.  17.  so  that  there  was  never  a  son  /.  him
24.  18.  and  they  A  the  house  of  the  Lord  God

25.  for  they  A  Joash  in  great  diseases
31. 10.  we  had  enough  to  eat,  and  have  /.  plenty
32.  .31.  God  A  him  to  try  him,  that  he  might  know
34.  21.  go,  inquire  for  them  that  are  A  in  Israel

Neh,  1.2.  1  asked  concerning  the  Jews  which  had  A

3.  the  remnant  that  are  A  are  in  great  affliction
6. 1.  the  wall  that  there  was  no  breach  A  therein

Job  20.  21.  there  shall  none  of  his  meat  be  A

26.  it  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  A  in  his  tabern.
Psal.  106.  11.  there  was  not  one  of  them  A

Prov.  29. 15.  a  child  /.  to  himself  bringeth  to  shame
Isa.  1.  8.  Zion  is  /.  as  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard

9.  except  Lord  had  A  us  a  remnant,  Rom.  9.  29.

4.  3.  he  that  is  A  in  Zion  shall  be  called  holy

7. 22.  butter  and  honey  shall  every  one  eat  that  is  A

10.  14.  as  one  gathereth  eggs  that  are  /.

11.  16.  a  high-way  for  the  remnant  that  shall  be  l.

17.  6.  yet  gleaning-grapes  shall  be  A  in  it
24. 12.  m  the  city  is  /.  desolation,  and  the  gate

30.  17.  till  j7e  be.  /.  as  a  beacon  on  a  mountain

39.  6.  nothing  shall  he  A  saith  the  Lord
Jer.  12.7.  1  /.  my  heritage  ||  31.2.  A  of  the  sword

49.  25.  how  is  the  city  ot  praise  not  /.  the  city  of  joy

50.  26.  destroy  her,  let  nothing  of  her  be  /.

Ezek.  14.  22.  behold,  therein  shall  be  A  a  remnant
23.  8.  nor  A  her  whoredoms  brought,  from  Egvpt

31.  12.  strangers  have  cut  him  off  and  have  A  Iiim
I>an.  2.  44.  the  kingd.  shall  not  be  /.  to  other  people
Joel  1. 4.  what  the  palmer -worm  A  the  locust  hath  /
Hag.  2. 3.  who  is  /.  that  saw  this  house  in  her  glory  ?
Zech.  13.  8.  the  third  part  shall  he  /.  therein
Mat.  4.  20.  /.  their  nets  ||  22.  they  /.  their  ships
8.  15.  he  touched  her,  and  fever  /.  her,  Mark  1.  .31.

15.  37.  took  up  of  the  meat  that  was  /.  Mark  8.  8.

22.  25.  he  A  his  wife  to  his  brother,  Mark  12.20.

23.  38.  your  house  is  /.  unto  you  desolate

24.  2.  tntre  shall  not  be  A  one  stone  upon  another,

Mark  13.  2.  Luke  21.  6

40.  one  taken,  other  A  41.  Luke  17.  34,  35,  36.

26.  44.  Jesus  A  them,  and  prayed  the  third  time
Mark  10.  28.  we  have  /.  all  and  followed  thee

29.  no  man  that  hath  /.  house,  Luke  18.  28,  29.

12.  22.  and  the  seven  had  her,  and  /.  no  seed
J.uke5.  28.  he  A  all,  rose  up,  and  followed  him
10.  40.  that  my  sistei  hath  A  me  to  serve  alone


John  4.  28.  the  woman  (hen  A  her  water-pot
52.  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  /.  him
Acts  2.  31 .  ot  Christ,  that  his  soul  was  not  A  in  hel!
14.  17.  he  /.  not  himself  without  witness

21.  32.  when  saw  captain,  they  /.  heating  of  Paul
24.  27.  and  Felix  /.  Paul  bound,  25.  14.

1  Thess.  3.1.  we  thought  good  to  be  /.  at  Athens  alone

2  I'tm.  4.  13.  the  cloak  that  1  /.  at  Troas  bring
20.  Trophimus  have  1  /.sick  at  Miletum

Tit.  1.  5.  for  this  cause  A  I  thee  at  Crete
lleb.  2.8.  he  A  nothing  that  is  not  put  under
4.  1 .  let  us  fear,  lest  a  promise  being  /.  of  entering
Jude  6.  the  angels  which  /.  their  own  habitation
Rev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast  /.  thy  first  love
■see  Alone.

„  ,  LEFT  off.

Gen.  11.8.  and  (hey  A  off  (o  build  the  city
17-  22.  A  off  talking  with  him,  and  God  went  lip
R  uth  2.  20.  who  hath  not  /.  off  his  kindness

1  Rings  15.  21.  Baasha  /.  off  building,  2  Chr.  16.  5.
’n  32- 15.  answered  no  more,  they  A  off  speaking
/  sal.  36.  3.  he  hath  /.  off  to  be  wise  and  to  do  good
Jer.  38.  27 .  so  they  /.  off  speaking  with  him

44. 18.  since  we  /.  off  to  burn  incense  to  the  queen
Hos.  4.  10.  because  they  have  /.  off  to  take  heed
LEF L  corner.

2  Rings  11.  11.  guard  stood  to  the  A  c.  about  king
See  HAND.

r  J  .  lfft-iianded.

Judg.  3.  15.  raised  F.hud  a  Benjamite,  a  man  l.-han.
20.  16.  were  seven  hundred  chosen  men  l.-handed
LF  E 1  pillar.

1  R  mgs  7.  21.  lie  set  up  the  /.  pit,  and  called  it  Boaz
LEFT  side.

1  A  mgs  7.  39.  five  bases  on  the  A  side  of  the  house
49.  five  candlesticks  on  the  l.side  before

2  Chr.  23.  10.  with  his  weapon  from  right  to  A  side
Ezek.  1.  10.  they  had  the  face  of  an  ox  on  the  /.  side
4.  4.  he  also  on  thy  /.  side,  and  lay  the  iniquity

Zech.  4.  3.  other  olive  tree  upon  /.  side  thereof,  11.

c.  LEG

Signifies,  [1]  Properly,  the  limbs  or  parts  of  an  ani¬
mal,  which  are  the  instruments  of  local  motion,
and  the  supporters  of  the  body,  Exod.  12.  9.  1
Sam.  17.  6.  [2]  Figuratively,  strength,  Psal.

147.  10.

His  legs  are  as  pillars  of  marble,  Cant.  5. 15.  The
dispensations  of  his  providence  are  wisely  and
skiful/y  contrived:  or,  it  may  denote,  the  firm¬
ness  and  stability  of  Christ’s  kingdom,  in  spite
of  all  opposition.

Isa.  47.  2.  make  bale  the  A  uncover  the  thigh
_  LEGS.

Exod.  12.  9.  hut  roas'  with  fire  his  head  and  l.

29.  17.  wash  the  inw7ards  and  his  A  Lev.  9. 14.

Lev.  4.  11.  the  skin,  his  head,  and  his  A  burn
8.  21.  he  washed  the  inwards  and  A  in  water
11. 21.  which  have  /.  above  their  feet,  these  eat
Deut.  28.  35.  he  shall  smite  thee  in  the  knees  and  A
l  Ram.  17.6.  he  had  greaves  of  brass  upon  his  A
Is.  147.  10.  hetaketh  no  pleasure  in  the/,  of  a  man
Prov.  26.  7.  the  /.  of  the  tame  are  not  equal
Cant.  5.  15.  his  A  are  as  pillars  of  marble
La.  3.  20.  the  Ld.  will  take  away  the  ornaments  of  l
Dan.  2.  33.  his  /.  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron
Amos  3.  12.  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion  two  A
John  19.  31.  they  besought  their  /.  might  be  broken

32.  the  soldiers  came  and  brake  the  /.  of  the  first

33.  and  saw  he  was  dead,  they  brake  not  his  A

LEISURE.

Mark  6.  31,  and  they  had  no  A  so  much  as  to  eat
LEND.

Exod.  22.  25.  if  thou  A  money  to  any,  thou  shalt
Lev.  25.  37-  not  /.  him  thy  victuals  for  increase
Deut.  15.  6.  and  thou  shalt  /.  to  many  nations
8.  thou  shalt  surely  /.  him  sufficient  for  his  need

23.  19.  thou  shalt  not  /.  upon  usury  to  thy  brothel
20.  to  a  stranger  thou  mayest  /.  upon  usury

24.  10.  when  thou  dost  A  thy  brother  anv  thing
11.  the  man  to  whom  thou  dost  /.  shall  1  ring

28.12.*thou  shalt  I.  to  many  nations,  and  not  borrow
44.  he  shall  A  to  thee,  thou  shalt  not  A  to  him
Luke  6.  34.  if  ye  A  them  of  whom  ve  hope  to  receive,
sinners  also  A  sinners,  to  receive  as  much  again
35.  but  love  ye  your  enemies,  do  good  and  L

11.5.  and  say  to  him,  friend,  A  me  three  loaves

LENDER.

Prov.  22.  7.  the  borrower  is  servant  to  the  A
La.  24.  2.  as  with  the  /.  so  with  the  borrower
LEN  DE  I  H.

Deut  15. 2.  every  creditor  that  /.  aught  to  neiphbom
/  sal.  37.  26.  he  is  ever  merciful,  and  /.  seed  blessed

112.5.  a  good  man  sheweth  favour  and  /.  will  guide
Prov.  19.  17-  he  that  hath  pity  on  the  poor,  /.  to  L.

22.  t  7-  the  borrower  is  servant  to  the  man  that  /.

^  .  LENGTH.

Gen.  13. 17.  arise,  walk  thro’  the  land  in  the  /.  of  it
Deut.  30.  20.  he, is  thy  life,  and  the  /.  of  thy  days
Job  12.  12.  and  in  A  of  days,  understanding
Psal.  21.  4.  even  /.  of  days  for  ever  and  ever

23.  f  6.  dwell  in  the  house  of  Lord  to  /.  of  days
91.  1 16.  with  /.  of  days  will  T  satisfy

Prov.  3.  2.  for  /.  of  days  shall  they  add  to  thee
16.  A  ot  days  is  in  her  right  hand,  riches
Zech,  2.  2.  and  to  see  what  is  the  A  thereof
5.  2.  the  A  of  the  roll  is  twenty  cubits
Fph.  3. 18.  be  able  to  comprehend  /.  of  love  of  Christ
Rev.  21. 16.  and  the  /.  as  large  as  the  breadth
At  LENGTH.

Ps.  36.  +10.  O  draw  out  at  l.  thy  loving-kindness  !
Prov.  29.  21.  shall  have  him  become  his  son  at  l.
Rom.  1. 10.  if  now  at  A  1  may  have  a  journey
1 ENGTHEN.

1  Rings  3. 14.  walk  as  David,  then  will  I  A  thy  days
Isa,  54.  2.  A  thy  cords,  and  strengthen  thy  stakes
LENGTHEN  ED.

Deut.  25.  15.  that  thy  days  may  be  A  in  the  land
LENGTHENING.

Dan.  4.. 27.  if  it  may  be  a  A  of  thy  tranquillity
LENT.

Exod.  12.  36.  they  A  to  them  such  as  thev  required
Dent.  Sit.  19.  usury  of  any  thing  that  is  /Ion  usury

L  2  275


LES


LET


LEV


)  Sam.  1.  58.  I  /.  him  to  the  Lord,  he  shall  be  /.

2.  50.  tor  tne  loan  winch  is  /.  to  the  Lord
Jer.  15. 10. 1  have  not  /.  on  usury  nor  have  men  /.  me
LEN  TILES.

Gen.  25.  34.  when  Jacob  gave  Esau  pottage  or  /.

2  Sam.  23. 11.  there  was  a  piece  of  ground  lull  or  /.

See  Beans.

LEOPAKD  .

Is  a  wild  beast,  called  by  some  a  libbard  ;  it  is  full
of  spots,  also  exceeding  swift,  subtle,  and  fierce,
enraged  against  men,  and  of  such  a  sweet  savoiir
that  it  allures  other  beasts  to  it j  by  which
means  they  are  caught  and  devoured,  Hos.  13.  7.
Hab.  1.  8.  io  which  are  compared,  [1]  Anti¬
christ,  with  his  followers  and  adherents.  Rev.  13.

2.  [2]  Men  of  a  fierce  untractable  disposition ,

lS(l.  11.  6.  ,  ,o  —  _  /TO

Can  the  leopard  change  his  spots  ?  &c.  Jer.  13.  23.

It  is  as  much  labour  in  vavn  to  endeavour  to  re¬
claim  these  Jews,  who  by  their  continual  customary
sinning  have  inured  themselves  to  wicked  prac¬
tices,  as  to  use  means  to  take  out  the  natural  spots
of  a  leopard.  ,  ,  .  ,

Isa.  11.  6.  the  l.  shall  lie  down  with  the  kid
Jer.  5.  6.  a  l.  shall  watch  over  their  cities

13.  23.  or  can  the  l.  change  his  spots  ?

Van.  7.  6.  1  beheld,  and  io,  another  like  a  l.

Hos.  1.3.  7.  therefore  I  will  be  to  them  as  a  l.

Rev.  13.  2.  and  the  beast  was  like  to  a  l.

LEOPARDS.

Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  mountains  of  the  l.

Hab.  1.  8.  their  horses  are  swifter  than  l.

LEPER.

Lev.  13.  45.  and  the  l.  in  whom  the  plague  is

14.  2.  this  shall  be  the  law  of  the  l.  in  the  day

3.  behold,  if  the  leprosy  be  healed  in  the  l.

22.  4.  what  man  of  the  seed  of  Aaron  is  a  l.

Hum.  5.  2.  they  put  out  of  the  camp  every  l.

2  Sam.  3.  29.  from  the  house  of  Joab,  one  that  is  a  l.

2  Kings  5.  1.  Fiaaman  was  a  l.  ||  11.  recover  the  /.

27.  went  from  his  presence  a  /.  as  white  as  snow

15.  5.  Azariah  was  a  l.  to  the  day  of  his  death
2  Chron.  26.  21.  and  Uzziah  the  king  was  a  l.

23.  they  buried  him,  for  they  said,  he  is  a  l.

Mat.  8.  2.  and  behold,  there  came  a  l.  Mark  1.  40.

26.  6.  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  l.  Mark  14.  3.
LEPERS.

2  Kings  7.  8.  when  the  l.  came  to  the  uttermost  part
Mat.  10.  8.  heal  the  sick,  cleanse  l.  raise  the  dead

11.  5.  the  lame  walk,  the  /.  are  cleansed,  Luke 7.  22.
Luke  4.  27.  many  /.  were  in  Israel  in  time  of  Eliseus

17.  12.  there  met  him  ten  men  that  were  l.
LEPROSY.

Lev.  13. 2.  and  it  be  in  the  skin  like  the  plague  of  l.

3.  it  is  a  plague  of  l.  8, 11,  15,  25,  27,  30,  42,  49.

9.  when  the  plague  of  l.  is  in  a  man,  then  he  shal  I

12.  if  a  /.  break  out  ||  13.  if  the  l.  covered  his  flesh
43.  as  the  l.  appeareth  in  the  skin  of  the  flesh
47.  the  garment  that  the  plague  of/,  is  in
59.  this  is  the  law  of  the  plag.  of  /.  14.  54,55,  57-
14.  3.  if  the  plague  of  /.  be  healed  in  the  leper

7.  shall  sprinkle  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed  trom  l.
32.  the  law  of  him  in  whom  is  the  plague  of  /.
Veut.  24.  8.  take  heed  in  the  plague  of  /.  to  observe
2  Kings  5.  3.  for  he  would  recover  him  of  his  /.  7.

6.  that  thou  mayest  recover  him  of  his  /.

27.  the  l.  of  iN  aaman  shall  cleave  unto  thee
2  Chron.  26.  19.  the  l.  rose  up  in  his  forehead
Mat. 8. 3.  his  /.  was  cleansed,  Mark  1.42.  Luke 5.13.
Luke  5.  12.  behold,  a  man  full  of  /.  besought  him
See  Fretting.

LEPROUS.

Exod.  4.  6.  behold,  his  hand  was  1.  as  snow
Lev.  13.  44.  he  is  a  /.  man,  he  is  unclean
Num.  12.  10.  Miriam  became  l.  behold  she  was  l.

2  Kings  7.  3.  there  were  four  /.  men  at  the  gate
2  Chron.  26.  20.  and  Uzziah  was  /.  in  his  forehead
LESS

Signifies,  [1]  A  smaller  quantity,  Exod.  16. 17-  [2]
Hot  in  proportion  to,  Ezra  9- 13.  [3]  An  inferior,
Heb.  7-  7-

Gen.  32.  t  10.  I  am  /.  than  least  of  all  the  mercies
Exod.  16.  17.  and  gathered  some  more,  some  /.

30. 15.  the  poor  snail  not  give  /.  than  half  a  shekel
Hum.  22.  18.  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Ld.  to  do  /.
26.  54.  to  few  thou  shalt  give  /.  inheritance,  33.  54.

1  Sam.  22.  15.  thy  servant  knew  nothing  l.  or  more
25.  36.  Abigail  told  him  nothing  /.  or  more
Ezra  9.13.  Dunished  us  /.  than  our  iniquities  deserve
Job  11.  6.  God  exacteth  /.  than  iniquity  deserveth
Prov.  17.  7.  much  l.  do  lying  lips  a  prince
19.  IO.  much  l.  for  a  servant  to  rule  over  princes
Isa.  40.  17.  all  nations  are  counted  l.  than  nothing
Mark  4.  31.  when  it  is  sown  is/,  than  all  seeds
15.  40.  Mary  the  mother  of  James  the  /.

1  Cor.  8.  t  8.  nor  if  we  eat  not,  have  we  the  /.

12.  23.  those  members  we  think  /.  honourable

2  Cor.  12.  15.  the  more  1  love,  the  /.  1  am  loved
Eph.  3.  8.  who  am/,  than  the  least  of  all  saints
Phil.  2.  28.  and  that  I  may  be  the  /.  sorrowful
Heb.  7. 7.  the  /.  is  blessed  of  better  without  contrad.

LESSER.

Gen.  1.  16.  made  the  /.  light  to  rule  the  night
Isa.  7.  25.  and  for  the  treading  of  /.  cattle
Ezek.  16.  t  46.  thy  sister  /.  than  thou  is  Sodom
43.  14.  from  the  /.  settle  to  the  greater  settle
LEST.

Gen.  3.  3.  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  /.  ye  die,  Lev.

10.  6,  7,  9.  Hum.  18.  32

11.  4.  /.  we  be  scattered  abroad  on  the  earth
14.  23.  /.  thou  say,  1  have  made  Abram  rich
19.  15.  /.  thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  of  city
19.  /.  I  die,  26.  9.  U 32. 11.  /.  he  come  and  smite  me
38. 11.  /.  he  die,  as  nis  breth.  did,  Veut.  20.  5,  6,  7.
23.  let  her  take  it  to  her,  /.  we  be  ashamed
45.  11.  /.  thou  and  thy  household  come  to  poverty
Exod.  5.  3.  go.  /.  he  fall  on  us  with  pestilence

13.  17.  /.  peradventure  the  people  repent  in  war

19.  21.  /.  they  break  through  to  the  Lord  to  gaze
22.  sanctify,  /.  the  Lord  break  forth  upon  them

20.  19.  let  not  God  speak  with  us,  /.  we  die

33.  3.  1  will  not  go,  /.  I  consume  thee  in  the  way

276


Hum.  4. 20.  shall  not  go  in  to  see,  /.  they  die,  18.  22.
Veut.  11.  17.  /.  ye  perish  quickly  from  off  the  land

24.  15.  /.  he  cry* against  thee  to  Lord,  and  it  be  sin

25.  3. 1.  if  he  should  exceed  and  beat  him  above  these
Josh.  9.  20.  let  them  live,  /.  wrath  be  upon  us

24.  27.  shall  be  a  witness,  /.  ye  deny  your  God
Judg.  7.  2.  /.  Israel  vaunt  themselves  against  me

1  Sam.  20.  3.  let  him  not  know,  /.  he  be  grieved

2  Sam.  12.  28.  /.  1  take  the  city,  and  it  be  called
Job  36.  18.  /.  he  take  thee  away  with  his  stroke

42.  8.  /.  1  deal  with  you  after  your  folly
Ps.  2. 12.  kiss  the  Son  /.  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish
13.  3.  lighten  mine  eyes,/.  I  sleep  the  sleep  of  death
50.  22.  consider  this,  /.  I  tear  you  in  pieces
91.  12.  /.  thou  dash  thy  foot,  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4. 11.
lu6.  23.  Moses  stood,  /.  he  should  destroy  them
140.  8.  grant  not,  /.  they  exalt  themselves
143.  7.  /.  i  be  like  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit
Prov.  9.  8.  reprove  not  a  scorner,  /.  he  hate  thee
20.  13.  love  not  sleep,  /.  thou  come  to  poverty
22.  25.  /.  thou  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare

24.  18.  /.  the  Lord  see  it,  and  it  displease  him

25.  8.  /.  thou  know  not  what  to  do  in  the  end
10.  /.  he  that  heareth  it,  put  thee  to  shame
17.  /.  he  be  weary  of  thee,  and  so  hate  thee

26.  4.  answer  not  a  fool,  /.  thou  also  be  like  unto  him
30.  6.  add  not  to  his  words,  /.  he  reprove  thee

9.  /.  1  be  full  and  deny  thee,  or  /.  1  be  poor
Isa.  6.  10.  /.  they  see  with  their  eyes,  Acts  28.  27.

27.  3.  /.  any  hurt  it,  1  will  keep  it  night  and  day

28.  22.  not  mockers,  /.  your  bands  be  made  strong


48.  5.  /.  thou  shouldest  say,  my  idol  hath  done
Jer.  1.  17.  be  not  dismayed,  /.  L  confound  thee
4.  4.  /.  my  fury  come  forth  like  fire,  21.  12.

6.  8.  be  instructed,  /.  my  soul  depart  from  thee
37.  20.  cause  me  not  to  return,  /.  I  die  there
Hos.  2.  3.  /.  1  strip  her  naked,  and  set  her  as  in  day
Amos  5.  6.  seek  the  Lord,  /.  he  break  out  like  fire
Zech.  7 . 12.  as  an  adamant,  /.  they  should  hear  the  1.
Mai.  4.  6.  /.  1  come  and  smite  the  earth  with  a  curse
Mat.  17.  27.  /.  we  should  offend,  go  to  the  sea
25.  9.  /.  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you
Mark  13.  5.  take  heed,  /.  any  man  deceive  you
36.  /.  coming  suddenly,  he  find  you  sleeping
14.  38.  watch  and  pray,  /.  ye  enter  into  temptation
Luke  8.  12.  /.  they  should  believe  and  be  saved
21.  34.  /.  your  hearts  overcharged  with  surfeiting
John  5.  14.  sin  no  more,  /.  a  worse  thing  come  to  thee
18.  28.  they  went  out  /.  they  should  be  defiled
Acts  5.  39.  /.  ye  be  found  to  fight  against  God
13.  40.  beware  therefore,  /.  that  come  upon  you
Rom.  11.  21.  take  heed,  /.  he  spare  not  thee,  44.

1  Cor.  9.  12.  /.  we  hinder  the  gospel  of  Christ
10.  12.  let  him  that  standeth  take  heed  /.  he  fall

2  Cor.  2.  11.  /.  Satan  should  get  advantage  of  us
12.  7.  /.  I  should  be  exalted  above  measure

Gal.  2.  2.  /.  by  any  means  1  should  run  in  vain
6.  1.  considering  thyself,  /.  thou  also  be  tempted
Eph.  2.  9.  not  of  works,  /.  any  man  should  boast
Col.  2. 4.  /.  any  man  beguile  you  with  enticing  words
3.  21.  provoke  not  children,  /.  they  be  discouraged

1  Tim.  3.  6.  /.  being  lifted  up  with  pride  he  fall  into
Heb.  2.  1.  /.  at  any  time  we  should  let  them  slip

3.  12.  /.  there  be  in  any  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief
13.  /.  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  sin

4.  11.  /.  any  man  fall  after  the  same  example
12.  3.  /.  ye  be  weary  and  faint  in  your  minds

13.  /.  what  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the  way
15.  /.  any  man  tail  of  the  grace  of  God

Jam.  5.  9.  grudge  not,  /.  ye  be  condemned

12.  swear  not,  /.  ye  fall  into  condemnation

2  Pet.  3.  17.  beware,  /.  ye  also  being  led  away
Rev.  16.  15.  keepeth  his  garments,  /.  he  walk  naked

LET.

Gen.  49. 21.  U aphtali  is  a  hind  l.  loose,  goodly  words
Exod.  3. 19.  king  of  Egv.  will  not  /.  you  go,  4.21.  I  7.
14.  |  8.  32.  1  9.  7, 17,  35.  |  10.  20,  27.  I  11.  10.
20.  my  wonders,  and  after  that  he  will  /.  you  go
5. 1.  /.  mv  peo.  go,  7- 16.  I  8. 1, 20.  1  9. 1, 13.  |  10.  3.

4.  why  do  ye  /.  the  people  from  their  wrnrks  ?

8.  28.  Thar,  said,  I  will  /.  you  go,  9.  28. 1  13.  17.

14.  5.  why  have  we  /.  Israel  go  trom  serving
18.  27.  and  Moses  /.  his  father-in-law  depart
21.  8.  then  shall  he  /.  her  be  redeemed

26.  he  shall  /.  him  go  free  for  his  eye,  27.

23. 11.  seventh  year  thou  shalt  /.  it  rest  and  lie.  still
33.  12.  hast  not  /.  me  know  whom  thou  wilt  send

Lev.  14.  7.  and  shall  /.  the  living  bird  loose

18.  21.  not  /.  seed  pass  through  the  fire  to  Molech

19.  19.  not  /.  cattle  gender  with  a  diverse  kind
Vent.  15.  12.  thou  shalt  /.  him  go  free  from  thee

13.  thou  shalt  not  /.  him  go  away  empty
Josh.  10.  28.  and  all  therein,  he  /.none  remain,  30.
24.  28.  so  Joshua  /.  the  people  depart  every  man
Judg.  1.  25.  they  /.  the  man  go  and  his  family

1  Sam.  18.  2.  Saul  would  /.  him  go  no  more  home

2  Sam.  11.  12.  to-morrow  I  will  /.  thee  depart

13.  6.  1  pray  thee,  /.  Tamar  my  sister  come

1  Kings  18.  40.  Elijah  said,  /.  none  ot  them  escape

2  Chron.  20. 10.  thou  wouldest  not  /.  Israel  invade
Esth.  5.  12.  queen  did  /.  no  man  come  in  but  myself
Job  6.  9.  even  that  he  would  /.  loose  his  hand

27.  6.  mv  righteousness  I  w  ill  not  /.  it  go
Psal.  69. 6.  /.  not  those  that  wait  on  thee  be  ashamed,

/.  not  those  that  seek  thee  be  confounded
109.  6.  and  /.  Satan  stand  at  his  right  hand
119. 10.  /.  me  not  wander  from  thy  commandments
Cant.  3.  4.  I  held  him,  and  would  not  /.  him  go
8.  11.  he  /.  out  the  vineyard  to  keepers
Isa.  43.  13.  1  will  work,  and  who  shall  /.  it ?

Jer.  27.  11.  those  will  I  /.  remain  in  the  land
Ezek.  39.  7-  I  will  not/,  them  pollute  my  name
Mat.  21.  33.  a  householder  planted  a  vineyard
and  /.  it  out  to  husbandmen,  Mark  12.  1.
Luke  20.  9-

Luke  22.  68-  ye  will  not  answer  me  nor  /.  me  go
John  19.  12.  the  Jews  cried,  if  thou  /.  this  man  go
Acts  27.  15.  ship  could  not  bear  up,  we  /.  her  drive
Rom.  1.  13.  to  come  to  you,  but  was  /.  hitherto
2  These.  2.  7.  only  he  who  now  letteth,  will  /.

Heb.  2.  1.  lest  at  any  time  we  should  /.  them  slip
See  Alone.


LET  down.

Gen  24.  14.  /.  down  thy  pitcher,  I  pray  thee,  18, 46.
Exod.  17.  11.  when  he  l.d.  his  hands, Amalek  prevai.'
Josh.  2.  15.  then  Kahab/.  them  down  by  a  cord,  lfl

1  Sam.  19. 12.  Michal  /.  David  d.  through  a  windov

2  Kings  13.21.  and  when  the  man  w  as  l.dvwn
Jer.  38.  6.  they  /.  duun  Jeremiah  with  cords
Ezek.  1 .  24.  they  stood  they  /.  down  their  wings,  2;
Mark  2.  4.  they  /.  down  the  bed  wherein,  Luke  5.  L
Luke  5.  4.  and  /.  down  your  nets  for  a  draught

5.  at  thy  word  1  will  /.  down  the  net

Acts 9.  25.  and  /.  him  d.  in  a  basket,  2  Cor.  11.  33.
10.  11.  /.  d.  to  the  earth  j|  27.  30.  had  /.  d.  the  boat
LEr  LED.

Hum.  22.  t  16.  be  not  thou  /.  from  coming.

LET l ER

Signifies,  [1]  An  epistle  sent  by  one  person  1
another,  2  Sam.  11.  14.  [2]  A  proclamation

Esth.  3.  13.  [3]  Learning,  or  the  knowledge  t]
the  mysterious  sense  and  meaning  of  the  law  0
God,  John  7.  15-  [4]  The  outward  ceremony  <\
circumcision,  without  the  inward  grace  signifk
thereby,  Rom.  2.  29.  15]  The  legal  dispense

tion,  which  consisted  chiefly  in  a  multitude  c
carnal  ordinances,  and  where  they  had  the  Lett  a
of  the  command,  without  strength  to  obey,  Kotr|

7.  6.  2  Cor.  3. 6.

2  Sam.  11. 14.  David  wrote  a  /.  to  Joab  and  sent
2  Kings  5.  5.  I  will  send  a  /.  to  the  king  of  lsrae

6.  now  when  this  /.  is  come  to  thee,  behold
10.  2.  now  as  soon  as  this  l.  cometh  to  thee
19.  14.  1 1  ezekiah  received  the  /.  Isa.  37.  14.

Ezra  4.  7.  the  /.  was  written  in  the  Syrian  tongu,1

8.  Rehum  wrote  a  /.  against  Jerusalem

7.  11.  now  this  is  the  copy  of  the  /.  5.  6,  7.

Heh.  2.  8.  a  /.  to  Asaph  the  keeper  of  the  forest

6.  5. sent  tome  with  an  open  t.  in  his  hand
Esth.  9.  29.  wrote  to  confirm  this  /.  of  Purini


Jer.  29. 1.  the  vyordsof  the  /.  that  Jeremiah  sent
29.  Zephaniah  priest  read  this  /.  in  the  ears  of  Jej
Acts  23.  25.  Claudius  wrote  a  /.  to  Felix  in  this  I
34.  when  the  governor  had  read  the  /.  he  asked  <
Rom.  2.  27.  who  by  the  /.  dost  transgress  the  law
29.  circumcision  of  the  heart,  not  in  the  l.

7.  6.  we  should  serve,  notin  the  oldness  of  the  l:
2  Cor.  3.  6.  ministers  not  of  the  /.  but  of  the  Spiri
7.  8.  tho’  I  made  you  sorry  with  /.  I  do  notrepe
Gal.  6.  11.  ye  see  now  large  a  /.  1  have  written  !
2  Thess.  2.  2.  be  not  soon  shaken  by'  word  or  by  ,
Heb.  13.  22.  1  have  written  a  /.  to  you  in  few  wor
LE  TIERS.

Kings  21.  8.  Jezebel  wrote  /.  in  Ahab's  name,

:  Kings  10.  1.  Jehu  wrote  /.  and  sent  to  Samaria;
20.  12.  king  of  Babylon  sent  /.  to  1 1  ezekiah
2  Chron.  30.  1.  H ezekiah  wrote  /.  also  to  Ephrai
6.  so  the  posts  went  with  the  /.  from  the  king  i
32.  17.  Sennacherib  wrote  /.  to  rail  on  God  of  I:


Heh.  2.  7.  let  /  be  given  me  to  the  governors
6. 17.  sent  /.  to  Tobiah,  and  /.  came  to  them
19.  and  Tobiah  sent  /.  to  put  me  in  fear
Esth.  1.22.  Ahasuerus  sent  /.  to  the  provinces
3.  13.  the  l.  were  sent  by  posts  to  provinc  es,  8. :

8. 5.  to  reverse  /.devised  by  H  aman  to  destroy  Je

9.  20.  Mordecai  sent  /.  to  all  the  Jews.  30.

Jer.  29.  25.  because  thou  hast  sent  /.  in  thy  namci
Luke  23.  38.  was  written  in  /.  of  Hebrew,  this  n
John'l.  15.  how  knoweth  this  man  /.  having  nev.
Acts  9.  2.  and  desired  of  him  /.  to  Damascus

15.  23.  the  apostles  wrote  l.  after  this  manner  i

22. 5.  from  whom  also  I  received  /.  to  the  bretbrd
28.  21.  we  neither  received  /.  out  of  Judea

1  Cor.  16.  3.  whom  ye  shall  approve  by  your  l.

2  Cor.  3.  1.  nor  need  we  /.  of  commendation

10.  9.  mavnot  seem  as  if  I  would  terrify  you  by

10.  for  his  /.  are  weighty  and  powerful,  but  hi!

11.  such  as  we  are  in  word,  by  /.  when  absent

LET  1  ESI.

Job  15. 13.  1.  such  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth
41.  1 .  or  his  tongue  with  a  cord  thou  /.  down  ?
Luke  2.  29.  Lord,  now  /.  thou  thy  servant  ciepar
LETTETH.  !

2  Kings  10.  24.  he  that  /.  him  go,  his  life  be  for


Prov.  17.  14.  strife  is  as  when  one  /.  out  water  1


2  Thess.  2.  7.  only  he  thatnow  /.  will  let  until  ta!!
LET  !  I1SG.


Exod.  8.  29.  deal  deceitfully  in  not  /.  the  people
LEV1A  l  HAN  .


Job  3.  +  8.  who  are  ready  to  raise  up  a  /.

41.  1.  canst  thou  draw  out  /.  with  an  hook?
Psal.  74.  14.  thou  breakest  the  beads  of  /.  in  piq
104.  26.  there  is  that  l.  thou  hast  made  to  play  1
Isa. ‘ft.  1.  shall  punish  /.  even  /.  that  crooked  serf!
LEV1TE.

Exod.  4. 14.  is  not  Aaron  the  /.  thy  brother  f  |
Veut.  12.  12.  rejoice  ye  before  the  Lord  your  L
and  the  1. 18. 1 16. 11.  14. 1  2b.  1L

14.  29.  and  the  /.  shall  come  and  eat,  2b.  12.  1

18.  6!  if  a  l.  come  from  any  of  thy  gates
Judg .  17.  7.  a  young  man  a  /.  9.  U  10.  so  the  /.  wen

11.  the  /.  was  content  to  dwell  with  the  man

12.  Micah  consecrated  the  /.  ||  13.  a  /.  to  my  |»(

18.  3.  they  knew  the  voice  of  the  young  man  ti<

19.  1.  there  was  a  certain  /.  sojourning  on  moil

20.  4.  the  /.  said,  I  came  into  Gibeah  of  Benia?
2  Chr.  20.  14.  on  Jahaziel  the  /.  came  the  Bp"-.11;

31.  12.  Cononiah  the/,  over  the  dedicated  tmr
14.  Kore  the  /.  over  the  free-will  offerings
Ezra  10.  15.  Shabbethai  the  /.  helped  them
Luke  10.  32.  likewise  a  /.  came  and  looked  on  :
Acts  4.  36.  Barnabas  a  /.  having  land,  sold  it
I.T'VITES.


33.  the  cities  of  the  /.  are  their  possession
Hum.  1.  47.  but  the  /.  were  not  numbered.

50.  slralt  appoint  the  /.  over  the  tabernacle  \

51.  the  /.  shall  take  it  down  ||  53.  the  /.  shall
3.  9.  and  thou  shalt  give  the  /.  unto  Aaron

12.  I  have  taken  the  /.  the  /.  shall  be  mine
39.  all  that  were  numbered  of  the  l.  4-40.
41.  and  thou  shalt  take  the  /.  for  me.  4a  ■  »■


(


LIB


LIE


LI  F


\um.  "•  5.  and  thou  sbalt  give  waggons  unto  the  /

4.6.  take  the  /.  from  Israel  and  cleanse  them
0.  bring  the  /.  before  the  tabernacle,  10.

11.  Aaron  shall  offer  the  /.  before  the  Lord

15.  then  after  that  shall  the  /.  go  in  22.

24.  this  is  it  that  beloneetb  unto  the  /.

26.  thus  shalt  thou  do  to  the  /.  touching  their

18. 6.  1  have  taken  the  /.  to  do  service,  23.

24.  the  tithes  l  have  given  to  the  /.  to  inherit

15. 2.  that  they  give  to  the  /.  cities  round,  8.

>eut.  18. 7-  minister,  as  his  brethren  the  /.  do
osh.  14.  3.  to  the  /.  he  gave  none  inheritance
11.  3.  Israel  gave  these  cities  to  the  /.  8.

41.  all  the  cities  of  the  /.  were  forty-eight
Sam.  6.  15.  the  /.  took  down  the  ark’  of  the  lord
Sam.  15.  24.  Zadok  and  the  /.  were  with  him
Chron.  15.  15.  the  children  of  the  /.  bare  the  ark

26.  when  God  helped  the  /.  that  bare  the  ark
!4.  6.  one  of  the  /.  wrote  them  before  the  king
Chron.  5. 12.  the  /.  which  were  singers  stood,  7.  6.
11. 14.  the  /.  left  their  suburbs  and  possession

13. 9.  have  ye  not  cast  out  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  /.

9. 11.  also  the  /.  shall  be  officers  before  you

13.  6.  the  /.  shall  compass  the  king  round  about,  7.

14.  5.  howbeit,  the  /.  hastened  it  not

19.  5.  hear  me,  ye  l.  sanctify  now  yourselves
(0.  22.  Hezekiah  spake  comfortably  to  the  /.

14. 13.  of  the  /.  there  were  scribes  and  officers

15.3.  .losiah  said  to  the  /.  which  taught  Israel

9.  the  chief  of  the  /.  gave  to  the  /.  500  oxen
14.  therefore  the  /.  prepared  for  themselves,  15.
zra  6.  18.  they  set  the  /.  in  their  courses

'eh.  3.  17.  after  him  repaired  the  /.  Rehum

1.7.  the  /.  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  law
ll.the  /.  stilled  the  people,  saying.hold  your  peace

1.  22.  the  overseer  of  the  /.  was  Uzzi

2.  27.  at.  the  dedication  they  sought  the  /.

3.  10.  the  portions  of  the  /.  had 'not  been  given
them,  for  the  /.  were  fled  every  one  to  his  field

29.  they  have  defiled  the  priesthood  of  the  /.

.’ r .  33.  22.  I  will  multiply  the  /.  that  minister
zek.  44.  10.  the  /.  that  are  gone  shall  bear  iniquity

8. 11.  went  not  astray  when  the  /.  went  astray

Priests  and  LEV1TES.

'evt.  17.  9.  thou  shalt  come  to  p.  and  l.  and  judge

4.8.  to  do  all  that  the  priests  and  l.  shall  teach
»h.  3.  3.  when  ye  see  the  p.  and  l.  bearing  the  ark
Kings  8.  4.  p.  and  l.  brought  up  the  ark  of  the  Ld.
Chron.  23.  4.  p.  and  l.  shall  be  porters  of  the  doors
9.  34.  p.  and  l.  were  more  upright  in  heart  than

0. 15.  priests  and  l.  were  ashamed,  and  sanctified

21.  /.  and  the  priests  praised  the  Lord  day  by  day

27.  then  the  priests  and  l.  blessed  the  people

1.9.  Hezekiah  questioned  with  the  priests  and  l.

5.  8.  his  princes  gave  willingly  toth epriests  and l.
zra  2.  70.  so  priests  and  l.  dwelt  in  their  cities
.20.  for  the  priests  and  l.  were  purified  together
.7.  there  went  up  of  the  priests  and  l.  and  singers
.  1.  the  p.  and  l.  have  not  separated  themselves
0. 5.  Ezra  arose  and  made  the  p.  and  l.  to  swear
eh.  9.  38.  our  princes,  l.  and  priests ,  seal  to  it

0.  34.  we  cast  lots  -Among priests  and  l.  and  people
2. 30.  the  p.  and  l.  purified  themselves  and  the  wall
44.  .ludah  rejoiced  for  the  p.  and  l.  that  waited
a.  66.  21.  I  will  take  of  them  for  priests  and  l.
r.  33.  18.  priests  and  l.  not  want  a  man  to  offer
21.  and  with  the  l.  the  priests  my  ministers
zek.  44. 15.  but  the  p.  and  l.  that  kept  the  charge
hn  1. 19.  when  the  lews  sent  p.  and  l.  to  ask  him
.  LEV  ITI  CAL.

eh.  7. 11.  if  perfection  were  by  the  l.  priesthood
LEVY,  Substantive.

Kings  5.  13.  Solomon  raised  a  l.  of  300,000  men
14.  and  Adoniram  was  over  the  l.

■  15.  this  is  the  reason  of  the  l.  Solomon  raised
LEVY,  Verb.

nm.  31.  28.  and  l.  a  tribute  to  the  Lord
Kings  9.  21.  upon  those  did  Solomon  /.  a  tribute
LEWD.

zek.  16.  27.  which  are  ashamed  of  thy  l.  way
3.  44.  so  went  they  in,  as  unto  the  l.  woman
cts  17.  5.  Jews  took  l.  fellows  of  the  baser  sort
,  LEWDLY.

zek.  22.  11.  another  hath  l.  defiled  his  daughter
LEWDNESS.

‘dg.  20.  6.  they  have  committed  l.  in  Israel
t.  11.  15.  she  hath  wrought  l.  with  many
3.  27.  I  have  seen  the  /.  of  thy  whoredom
ko  '  anc*  shalt  not  commit  this  l.

58.  thou  hast  borne  thy  l.  and  abominations
-■  9.  in  the  midst  of  thee  they  commit  l.

* 1 L  by  /.  hath  defiled  his  daughter-in  law
3.21.  calledst  to  remembrance  the  l.  of  thy  youth

27.  thus  will  I  make  thy  l.  to  cease,  48.’
ok  J?e  discovered,  noth  thy  l.  and  whoredom
35.  therefore  bear  thou  also  thy  l.  and  whoredom
49.  and  the}'  shall  recompense  your  l.  on  .you

4. 13.  m  thy  filthiness  is  l.  because  I  purged  thee
os.  2.  10.  and  now  will  1  discover  her  l.  in  si^ht

•  9.  priests  murder  in  way,  they  commit  l.  "
cts  18.  14.  if  it  were  a  matter  of  wrong  or  l.

LIAR,  see  Lyar.

LIBERAL.

25-  the  l.  soul  shall  be  made  fat

n.  32.  5.  the  vile  person  shall  not  be  called  /.

o.  the  l.  deviseth  /.  things,  and  by  /.  things
"or‘  ^3.  they  glorify  G.  for  your  /.  distribution

„  „  liberality.

r?T‘  3.  to  bring  your  /.  to  Jerusalem
{y0T- 8-  2.  abounded  to  the  riches  of  their  l.

,  ,  liberally.

15.  14.  thou  shalt  furnish  him  /.  out  of
'm‘  o.  ask  of  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  /.

-  „  ,  .  ,  libertines.

•  tt  0.  9.  which  is  called  the  synagogue  of  the  /.

..  LIBERTY

gnihes,  [1]  A  power  which  a  person  has  to  do  or
loroear  any  particular  action,  1  Cor.  7.  39.  [2]
freedom  from  any  servitude  or  bondage.  Lev.  25.

1 3-  23.  [3]  Freedom  from  tne  curse

A  the  moral  lazv,  and  from  the  servitude  of  the
c*rem,m,al  law.  Gal.  5.  1.  [4]  Full  and  perfect


deliverance  from  all  miseries  whatsoever,  Rom.  8.
21.  [5]  A  power  or  freedom  in  using  things  in¬
different,  1  Cor.  8.  9.  1  10.  29.  [6]  Freedom  from
the  veil  of  ignorance  and  spiritual  blindness,  the
yoke  of  the  law,  and  the  slavery  of  sin,  2  Cor.
3.  17.

lev.  25. 10.  ye  shall  proclaim  /.  through  all  the  land
Psal.  119.  45.  and  1  will  walk  at  l.  tdi  l  seek
Isa.  61.  1.  he  sent  me  to  proclaim  /.  to  the  captives
Jer.  34.  8.  made  a  covenant  to  proclaim  /.  to  them

15.  done  right  in  my  sight,  in  proclaiming  /.

16.  his  servant  whom  he  had  set  at  /.  to  return

17.  ye  have  not  hearkened  to  me  in  proclaiming /.

I  proclaim  a  l.  for  you  to  famine,  to  sword
Ezek.  46.  17.  it  shall  be  his  to  the  year  of  /.

Luke  4. 18.  to  set  at  /.  them  that  are  bruised
Acts  24.  23.  to  keep  Paul,  and  let  him  have  /.

26.  .32.  this  man  might  have  been  set  at  /.

27. 3.  and  gave  him  /.  to  go  to  his  friends  ,
Rom.  8.  21.  from  bondage  into  the  glorious  l.

1  Cor.  7.  39.  she  is  at  /.  to  marry  whom  she  will
8.  9.  take  heed  lest  this  /.  of  yours  become

10.  29.  for  why  is  my  /.  judged  of  another
2 Cor.  .3. 17.  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is/.
Gal.  2.  4.  who  came  in  privily,  to  spy  out  our  /.

5.  1.  stand  fast  in  the  /.  wherewith  Christ  made
13.  ye  have  been  called  to  /.  use  not  your  /.

Heb.  10.  1 19.  having/,  to  enter  the  holiest

13.  23.  that  our  brother  Timothy  is  set  at  /.

Jam.  1.  25.  whoso  looketh  into  the  law  of  /.

2.  12.  that  shall  be  judged  by'  the  law  of  /.

1  Pet.  2.  16.  as  free,  and  not  using  /.  for  a  cloak

2  Pet.  2.  19.  while  they  promise  them  /.  they

LICE.

Exod. 8.  16.  the  dust  became  /.  through  all  Egypt

17.  smote  dust,  it  became  /.  in  man  and  beast

18.  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchantments  to
bring  forth  /.  so  there  were  /.  upon  man  and  beast

Psal.  105.  31.  there  came  /.  in  all  their  coasts
„  LICENCE.

Acts  21.  40.  and  when  he  had  given  Paul  /.

25. 16.  till  the  accused  have  /.  to  answer  for  himself
LICK.

Num.  22.  4.  now  shall  this  company  /.  up  all  around
1  Kings  21. 19.  shall  dogs  /.  thy  blood,  even  thine
Psal.  72.  9.  and  his  enemies  shall  /.  the  dust
Isa.  49.  23.  and  shall  /.  up  the  dust  of  thy  feet
Mic.  7.  17.  they  shall  /.  the  dust  like  a  serpent
LICKED.

1  Kings  18.  .38.  fire  /.  up  the  water  in  the  trench

21. 19.  where  dogs  /.  the  blood  of  Naboth

22.  38.  and  the  dogs  /.  up  his  blood  and  washed
Luke  16.  21.  the  dogs  came  and  /.  his  sores
LICKE'i  H.

Hum .  22.  4.  shall  lick  up  all,  as  the  ox  /.up  grass

LID.

2  Kings  12.  9.  and  bored  a  hole  in  the  /.  of  it

LIE.

Gen.  19.  32.  drink  wine,  and  we  will  /.  with  him
34.  and  go  thou  in,  and  /.  with  him
.30.  15.  therefore  he  shall  /.  with  thee  to  night
39.  7.  she  said,  come  /.  with  me,  12.  2  Sam.  1.3. 11.

14.  he  came  in  unto  me  to  /.  with  me

Exod.  22.  16.  if  a  man  /.  with  a  maid  not  betrothed
Lev.  15.18.  woman  with  whom  man  shall  /.with  seed

24.  if  any  man  /.  with  her  at  all,  he  is  unclean

18. 20.  not  /.  carnally  with  thy  neighbour’s  wife
22.  shalt  not  /.  with’rnankind  H  23.  nor  /.  with  beast

20.  12.  and  if  a  man  /.  with  his  daughter-in-law

1.3.  if  /.  with  mankind  ||  15.  if  /.  with  a  beast
18.  if  a  man  /.  with  a  woman  having  her  sickness
20.  if  a  man/,  with  his  uncle’s  wife,  he  hath

Num.  5.  13.  if  a  man  /.  with  her,  and  it  be  hid  from
Deut. ,22. 2.3.  and  a  man  find  her,  and  /.  with  her

25.  if  the  man  force  her,  and  /.  with  her

28.  if  find  a  damsel  not  betrothed,  and  /.  with  her
28.  30.  betroth  a  wife,  and  another  /.  with  her
2  Sam.  11.  11.  shall  1  then  go  to  /.  with  my  wife  ?
Cant.  1.  1.3.  he  shall  /.  all  night  betwixt  my  breasts
LIE.

Gen.  47.  30.  I  will  /.  with  my  fathers,  not  in  F.gvpt
Exod.  2.3.  11.  thou  shalt  let  the  ground  /.  still
Dent.  29.  20.  all  the  curses  in  this  book  shall  /.on  him
Josh.  8.  9.  and  they'  went  to  /.  in  ambush,  12.

Judg.  19.  20.  let  all  thy  wants  /.  on  me,  only  lodge
Ruth  3. 4.  thou  shalt  mark  the  place  where  he  shall  /.

1  Kings  1.  2.  and  let  her  /.  in  thy  bosom,  that  king
Psal.  Tt  ;  4.  I  /.  among  them  that  are  set  on  fire
88.  5.  like  the  slain  that  /.  in  the  grave
Eccl.- 4.  11.  if  two  /.  together  they'  have  heat
Isa.  1.3.  21.  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  /.  there
14.  18.  all  the  kings  of  the  nations  /.  in  glorv
51.  20.  thy  sons  /.  at  the  head  of  all  the  streets
Lam.  2.  21.  the  young  and  old  /.  on  the  ground
Ezek.  4.  4.  /.  thou  also  upon  thy  left  side'  and  lay

6.  /.  again  on  thy  right  side  ||  9.  shalt  /.  390  days
31.  18.  shalt  /.  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircumcised
.32.  21.  they  /.  uncircumciied,  slain  bv  sword,  30.

27.  and  they  shall  not  /.  with  the  mighty

28.  /.  with  the  slain  |l  29.  /.  with  uncircumcised
34.  14.  there  shall  they'  /.  in  a  good  fold

Joel  1.  1.3.  come,  /.  all  night  in  sackcloth
Amos  6.  4.  that  /.  on  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch
John  5.  6.  when  Jesus  saw  him  /.  he  saith  to  him

20.6.  Simon  Peter  seeth  the  linen  clothes  /.

■  LI  E  down.

Lev.  18.  2.3.  before  a  beast,  to  /.  down  thereto,  20.  16.

26.  6.  ye  shall  l.d.  and  none  shall  make  you  afraid
Num.  2.3.24.  Israel  shall  not/,  rfeawtill  heeat  prev
Deut.  25.  2.  judge  cause  him  to  l.down  and  beaten
.31.  +  16.  thou  shalt  l.down  with  thy  fathers
Ruth  .3.  7-  Boaz  went  to  /.  down  at  the  end  of  heap
13.  tarry  this  night,  /.  down  until  the  morning

1  Sam.  3. 5.  Eli  said,  I  called  not,  /.  down  again,  6, 9.

2  Sam.  11.  13.  at  even  he  went  to  /.  down  on  his  bed
Job  7-  4.  when  I  /.  down  I  say,  when  shall  I  arise

11.  19.  thou  shalt  /.  d.  and  none  make  thee  afraid
20.  11.  which  shall  /.  down  with  him  in  the  dust
21. 26.  they  shall  /.  down  alike  in  the  dust
27-  19-  the  rich  man  shall  /.  d.  bur  not  be  gathered
Psal.  23.  2.  he  maketh  me  /.  down  in  green  pastures
Prov.  3. 24  thou  shalt  /.  down  and  thy  sleep  be  sweet


Isa.  11.  6.  the  leopard  shall  /.  down  with  the  kid

7.  their  young  ones  shall  /.  down  together
14.  30.  and  the  neeuy  shall  /.  down  in  safety
17.  2.  they  shall  be  for  flocks  which  shall  /.  down

27.  10.  there  shall  the  calf  feed  and  /.  down

4.3.  17.  the  army  and  the  power  shall  /.  d.  together
50.  11.  this  ye  have,  ye  shall  /.  down  in  sorrow

65.  10.  shall  be  a  place  for  the  herds  to  /.  down  in
Jer.  3.  25.  we  l.down  in  our  shame  and  Confusion
3.3. 12.  shepherds  causing  their  flocks  to  /.  down
50.  +6.  have  forgotten  their  place  to  /.  down  in
Ezek.  34. 15.  and  1  will  cause  them  to  /.  down
Ilos.  2. 18.  I  will  make  them  to  /.  down  safely
Zeph.  2.  7-  they  shall  /.  down  in  the  evening
14.  flocks  shall  /.  down  11 15.  for  beasts  to  /.  down  in
.3. 1.3.  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  feed  and  /.  down
LIE  in  wait.

Erod.  21. 1.3.  if  a  man  /.  not  in  wait,  but  God  deliver
Deut.  19. 1 1.  if  a  man  hate  his  neighbour,  and  /.  in  w.
Josh ,  8.  4.  ye  shall  l.  in  wait  against  the  city
Judg.  9.  32.  up  by  night,  and  /.  in  wait  in  the  field

21.  20.  saying,  go  and  /.  in  wait  in  the  vineyards

1  Sa m.  22.  8.  haststirred  upmy  servant  to  /.  in  w.  13.
Job  .38.  40.  and  abide  in  the  covert  to  /.  in  wait
Psal.  59.  3.  for  lo,  they  /.  in  wait  for  my  soul
Prov.  12.  6.  the  words  of  the  wicked  are  to  /.  in  wait
Dos.  7.6.  heart  like  an  oven,  whiles  they  /.  in' wait
Mic.  7.  2.  they  all  /.  in  wait  for  blood,  they  hunt
Acts 23.  21.  there  /.  in  w.  for  him  more  than  40  men
Eph.  4. 14.  whereby  they  /.  in  wait  to  deceive  me

LIE  waste.

Isa.  33.  8.  the  high-ways  /.  waste\\3k.  10.  it  shall  /.  w.
Hag.  1. 4.  to  dwell  in  houses,  and  this  house  /.  waste
LIEN,  or  LAIN.

Gen.  26. 10.  one  might  have  /.  with  thy  wife
Num.  5.  19.  if  no  man  have  /.  with  thee,  be  free
20.  but  if  some  man  have  /.  with  thee  beside  thy
Judg.  21.  11.  destroy  every  woman  that  hath  /.

Job  3.  13.  for  now  should  I  have  /.  still
Psal.  68.  13.  though  ye  have  /.  among  the  pots,  yet
Jer.  3.  2.  see  where  thou  hast  not  been  /.  with
John  11. 17.  he  had  /.  in  the  grave  four  days
LIERS  in  wait.

Josh.  8.  14.  he  wist  not  that  there  were  /.  in  u  nit
Judg.  9.  25.  the.  men  of  Shechem  set  /.  in  w.  for  him

16.  12.  there  were  /.  in  wait  abiding  in  the  chamber
20.  29-  Israel  set  /.  in  wait  round  about  Gibeali

3.3.  the  /.  in  w.  came  forth  H  .37.  /■  hasted  and  rush.
36.  they  trusted  to  the  /.  in  wait  which  thev  set

Jer.  51.  +  12.  prepare  /.  in  wait  against  Babylon
LI  EST.

Gen.  28.  1.3.  the  land  whereon  thou  /.  T  will  give
Deut.  6.  7.  when  thou  /.  down  and  risest  up,  11.  19;
Josh.  7.  10.  up,  wherefore  /.  thou  on  thv  face  '
Prov.  3.  24.  when  thou  /.  down  shalt  not  be  afraid
LIETH.

Gen.  4.  7.  if  thou  doest  not  well,  sin  /.  at  the  door  ,
49.  25.  bless  blessings  of  the  deep  that  /.  under
Lev.  14.  47.  he  that  7.  in  the  house  shall  wash
15.  4.  every  bed  whereon  he  /.  is  unclean

20.  every  thing  that  she  /.  on  is  unclean.  26.

24.  all  the  bed  whereon  he  /.  shall  be  unclean.  33.
26.  34.  sabbaths,  as  long  as  it  /.  desolate,  35.

4.3.  the  land  enjoy  sabbaths,  while  she  /.  desolate
Judg.  16.  5.  see  wherein  his  great  strength  /.

6.  tell  me  wherein  thy  great  strength  /.  15.

Job  40.  21.  he  /.  under  the  shady  trees,  in  covert
Psal.  41.  8.  now  that  he  1.  he  shall  rise  no  more
88.  7-  thy  wrath  /.  hard  on  me,  thou  hast  afflicted
Mat.  8.  6.  my  servant  /.  at  home  sick  of  the  palsy
Mark  5.  2.3.  my  daughter  /.  at  the  point  of  death
Rom.  12.  18.  as  much  as  /.  m  you,  live  peaceably
1  John  5.  19.  the  whole  wojjo'/.  in  wickedness
LIETH  down.

Ruth  3.  4.  it  shall  be  when  he  /.  Awrc.mark  the  place
Job  14. 12.  so  man  /.  down,  and  riseth  nottill  heavens
Prov.  23.  34.  as  he  that  /.  down  in  the  midst  of  the  sea
LIETH  in  wait.

Psal.  10.  9.  he  /.  in  w.  secretly  as  a  lion.  /.  in  w.  to
Prov.  7. 12.  and  she  /.  in  wait  at  every  corner

23.  28.  she  also  /.  in  wait  as  for  a  prev
LIETII  waste.

Neh.  2.  3.  the  place  of  my  father’s  sepulchres  /.  re,

17.  then  said  I,  you  see  how  Jerusalem  /.  waste

LTETH.as  with  a  woman.

Exod.  22.  19.  whoso  /.  with  beast  surely  put  to  death
Lev.  19.  20.  whoso  /.  carnally  with  a  bond-maid
20.  11.  the  man  that  /.  with  his  father’s  wife

1.3.  lie  with  mankind  as  he  /.  with  a  woman
Deut.  27.20.  cursed  he  he  that  /.  with  father’s  wife  •

21.  /.  with  beast  ||  22.  sister  ||  2.3.  mother-in-law
Mic.  7.  5.  thy  mouth  from  her  that  /.  in  thy  bosom

LIEUTENANTS.

Ezra  8.  36.  they  deliver,  the  king’s  commissions  to  /.
Esth.  .3.  12.  Hainan  had  commanded  the  king’s  /.

8.  9.  Mordecai  had  commanded  to  the  /.

9.  3.  all  the  rulers  and  /.  helped  the  Jews

LIFE

Signifies,  [1]  That  space  of  time  which  passes  he
tueen  the  birth  and  death  of  any  person,  Psal,
17.  14.  Prov.  3.  2.  [2]  A  power  to  more,  and  do
the  actions  if  life.  Job  3.  20.  Eccl.  2.  ’7.  [3]  A
spiritual,  supernatural,  and  heavenly  life,  where¬
by  we  live  to  God,  and  enjoy  peace  with  him,
which  also  is  the  way  to  eternal  life,  Rom.  8.  6.
Col.  .3.  .3.  [4]  That  eternal  happiness,  glory ,  and
blessedness,  which  the  saints  enjoy  in  heaven,  Rom.

5.  17.  [5]  That  quickening  and  strengthening

power  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  supports  be¬
lievers  sunder  afflictions  and  sufferings,  so  that
they  are  not  overwhelmed  and  conquered  by  them,

2  Cor.  4.  10.  [6]  Christ's  resurrection  and  in¬
tercession,  Rom.  5.  10.  [7]  The  appetite,  or  sto¬
mach,  Job  3.3.  20.  [8]  The  nourishment ,  or  sup¬
port  of  life,  Deut.  20.  19.  [9]  Blessings  pertain¬
ing  to  this  life,  1  Tim.  4.  8.  [10]  This  world.
Luke  8.  14.  jlll  Conversation,  Acts  26.  4.  It
is  spoken,  [1]  Of  Christ,  who  is  the  fountain
of  natural,  spiritual,  and  eternal  life,  who  has
promised  eternal  life  to  his  people,  purchased  and
prepared  it  for  them  :  and  who  prepares  them  for
it,  and  will  actually  bestow  it  upon  them.  Join:

277


LIF


LIF


L  I  F


1.  4.  U 1.  55.  Col.  3.  4.  [2]  Of  the  doctrine  of
the  gospel,  which  poi'its  out  the  way  to  eternal
life,  John  6.  63.  [3]  Of  the  blood,  which,  with
the  spirits  contained  in  it,  is  the  seat  and  suppor  t  oj

life,  Gen.  9. 4.  .  .  ,  ,  ,,  ,

Gen.  1.  20.  the  moving  creature  that  hath  l.

30  and  to  every  thing  wherein  there  is  l.

2.  7.  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  or/.

9.  the  tree  of  /.  in  the  midst  ot  the  garden,  .3.


3.  24.  cherubims  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  ot  /.
6. 1".  to  destroy  all  wherein  is  the  breath  i


U.  1  ( .  hj  u van yjy  V'*  *“ 1 '. ■  6 '  i"  ' ?'

9.  4.  flesh  with  the  l.  shall  ye  not  eat,  Lev.  w.  14.

5.  of  everv  man  will  I  require  the  l.  of  man

18.  10.  I  will  return  according  to  the  time  ot  /.  14.

23.  1.  these  were  the  years  of  the/,  ot  Sarah
25  7  the  years  of  Abraham's  /.  II  17-  lshmael  s  /.

4<C  15.  by  the  /.  of  Pharaoh,  ye  shall  not  go,  lb.

45.  5.  God  did  send  me  before  to  preserve  /.

47  9.  not  attained  to  the  years  of  /.  of  my  fathers
Exod.  6.  16.  the  years  of  the  l.  of  Levi  were  137-

18.  years  of  the  /.  of  Kohath  ||  20.  /.  of  Amram
21.23.  shalt  give  l.  for  /.  Lev.  24.  +  18.  Lieut.  19.  21.
Lev.  17.  11.  for  the  I.  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood
18.  18.  besides  the  other  in  her  l.  time

24.  +  17.  lie  that  smiteth  /.  of  man,  Dent.  19. +  6, 11.
Peut.  12.  23.  blood  is  the  l.  not  eat  /.  with  flesh

20.  19.  for  the  tree  of  the  field  is  man’s  l.

24.  6.  for  he  taketh  a  man  s  /.  to  pledge

30.  15.  1  have  set  before  thee  l.  19-  Jer.  21.  8.

32.  47.  it  is  not  a  vain  thing,  because  it  is  your  /.
Josh.  2. 14.  the  men  answered,  our  l.  for  yours

1  Sam.  25.  29.  shall  be  bound  up  in  the  bundle  of  /.

2  Sam.  14.  7 .  for  the  /.  of  his  brother  whom  he  slew
t  1 4.  because  God  hath  not  taken  away  his  /.

15.  21.  whether  in  death  or  /.  there  will  1  be

1  Kings  3. 11.  hast  not  asked  for  thyself  long  /.  nor

asked  the  /.  of  thine  enemies,  2  Chr.  1.11.

2  Kings  4. 16.  time  of  1.  thou  shalt  embrace  a  son,  17 .

7.  7.  left  the  camp  as  it  was,  and  fled  for  their  l.
Ezra  6.  10.  they  may  pray  for  the  /.  of  the  king
Esth.  8.  11.  granted  the  .lews  to  stand  for  their  l.

Job  3  20.  why  is  l.  given  to  the  bitter  in  soul  ?

10.  12.  thou  hast  granted  me/,  and  favour
12.  +  10.  in  whose  hand  is  the  /.of  every  thing
24.  22.  he  riseth  up,  and  no  man  is  sure  of  /.

31.  39.  or  the  owners  thereof  to  lose  their/.

33.  4.  the  breath  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  me  /

36.  6.  he  preserveth  not  the  /.  of  the  wicked

14.  and  their  /.  is  among  the  unclean
38.  I  39.  wilt  thou  fill  the  /.  of  the  young  lions  r
Psal.  16.  11.  thou  wilt  shew  me  the  path  of  /.

21.  4.  he  asked  /.  of  thee,  thou  gavest  him
30.  5.  in  his  favour  is  /.  weeping  may  endure

34.  12.  whatman  is  he  that  de  sir  eth  /.  ?

36.  9.  for  with  thee  is  the  fountain  of  /.

61. 6.  thou  wilt  prolong  the  king’s  /.

63.  3.  thy  loving-kindness  is  better  than  /.

66.  9.  bless  God,  who  holdeth  our  soul  in  /.

78.  5 ).  but  gave  their  /.  over  to  the  pestilence
91.16.  with  long  /.  will  1  satisfy  him
133.  3.  the  blessing,  even  /.  for  evermore

'Prov.  1.19.  which  taketh  away  the  /.  ot  the  owners

2.  19.  nor  take  they  hold  of  the  paths  of  /.

3.  2.  long  /.  and  peace  shall  they  add  to  thee
t  18.  she  is  a  tree  of  /.  to  them  that  lay  hold  on  her

22.  so  shall  they  be  /.  to  thy  soul

4.  22.  for  they  are  /.  to  those  that  find  them

23.  keep  thy  heart,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  /.

5.  6.  lest  thou  shoul  lest  ponder  the  path  of  /.

6.  23.  reproofs  of  instruction  are  the  way  of  l.

26.  adulteress  will  hunt  for  the  precious  /.

8.  35.  whoso  findethme  findeth  /.  and  shall  obtain

10.  11.  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  is  a  well  of  /.

1*.  is  in  the  wav  of  I.  that  keepeth  instruction

11.  3i.  the  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  tree  of  /.

12.  10.  righteous  regardeth  the  /.  of  his  beast
28.  in  the  way  of  righteousness  is  /.  and  no  death

J3,  8.  the  ransom  of  a  man’s  /.  are  his  riches
1  12.  when  desire  cometh,  it  is  a  tree  of  /.

14.  the  law  of  the  wise  is  a  fountain  of  /.

14.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  /.

30.  a  sound  heart  is  the  /.  of  the  flesh,  but  envy

15.  4.  a  wholesome  tongue  is  a  tree  of  /.

24.  the  way  of  /.  is  above  to  the  wise

31  heareth  reproof  of  /.  abideth  among  the  wise

16.  15.  in  the  light  of  the  king’s  countenance  is  l.
22.  understanding  is  a  well  spring  of  /.  to  him
18.  21.  death  and  /.  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue
21. 21.  lie  that  followeth  mercy,  findeth  /.

22  4  by  humility  are  riches,  honour,  and  /.

27.  t  27.  goats’-milk  for  /. for  thy  maidens

31.  12.  she  will  do  him  good  all  the  days  of  her  /.
Eccl.  2.  3  good  they  should  do  all  the  days  of  their  /.

17.  therefore  1  hated  l.  |1  7-  12.  wisdom  giveth  /.

9.  +  9.  enjoy  /.  with  the  wife  whom  thou  lovest  .
tsa.  38.  16.  in  all  these  thin.s  is  the  /.  of  my  spirit

20.  we  will  sing  songs  all  the  days  of  our  /.

57.  10.  thou  hast  found  the  /.  of  thy  hand
Jer.  8.  3.  and  death  shall  be  chosen  rather  than  /.

21.  7.  hands  of  them  that  seek  their  /.  .34.  20,21.

8.  1  set  before  you  the  way  of  /.  and  of  death
49.  37.  1  will  cause  Elam  to  be  dismayed  before

their  enemies,  before  them  that  seek  their/.
Jam.  2. 19.  lift  upthy  hands  for  the/,  of  thychildr.
Ezek.  1.  +  20.  spirit  of  /.  in  wheels,  +  21.  1  10.  +  17.

7.  +  13.  though  their  /.  was  yet  among  the  living
1.3.  22.  should  not  return  by  promising  him  /.

33.  15.  if  the  wicked  walk  in  the  statutes  of  /.
Dan.  7.  +  12.  a  prolonging  in  /.  was  given  them
Jonah  1.  14.  let  us  not  perish  for  this  man  s  /.

Mai.  2.  5.  my  covenant  was  with  him  of  /.

Mat.  2.  20.  are  dead  which  sought  the  child  s  /.

.3.  t  8.  bring  fruit  meet  for  amendment  of  /.

6.  25.  take  no  thought  for  your  /.  Luke  12.  22.

18.  8.  to  enter  into  /.  halt  or  maimed,  Mark  9.  43.

9.  better  to  enter  into  /.  with  one  eye,  Mark  9.  45.

19.  17.  if  wilt  enter  into  /.  keep  the  commandments
Mark  3.  4.  is  it  lawful  to  save  I.  or  to  kill.  Luke  6. 9.
Luke  1.  75.  in  holiness  all  the  days  of  our  /.

12.  15.  for  a  man's  /.  consistetli  not  in  abundance
23.  the  /.  more  than  meat,  the  body  than  raiment
John  1.  4.  in  him  was  /.  and  the  /.  was  light  of  men

278


John  3.  36.  that  believeth  not  tiie  Son,  shall  not  see  /.

5.  26.  for  as  the  Father  hath  /.  in  himself,  sp  hath

he  given  to  the  Son  to  have  /.  in  himself
29.  have  done  good,  to  the  resurrection  of  /.

40.  will  not  come  to  me  that  might  have  /.  10.  10.

6.  .3.3.  giveth  /.  unto  world  ||  .35.  1  am  bread  of/.  48.

51.  which  1  will  give  for  the  /.  of  the  world
53.  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  /.  in  you
63.  the  words  that  1  speak  to  you,  they  are  /.

8.  12.  not  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  /.

11  25.  1  am  the  resurrection  and  the  /.  14.  6.

20.  31 .  believing  ye  might  have  /.  through  Ins  name
Acts  2.  28.  hast  made  known  to  me  the  ways  ot  /.

3.  15.  and  killed  the  Prince  of  /.  whom  God  raised
17.  25.  seeing  he  giveth  to  all  /.  and  breath

26  4.  the  manner  of  /.  Lorn  my  youth,  dews  know

27  .  22.  there  shall  be  no  loss  of  any  man  s  i.  .

Rom.  5.  17.  shall  reign  in  /.  by  one,  Jesus  Christ

18.  came  on  all  men  to  justification  of  /.

6;  4  even  so  we  should  walk  in  newness  ot  /.

8.  2.  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  /.  in  Christ  Jesus

6.  to  be  spiritually  minded  is  /.  and  peace
10.  the  Spirit  is  /.  because  of  righteousness
.38.  1  am  persuaded  that  neither  death  nor  /.

11.  15.  the  receiving  them  be,  but  /.  from  the  dead

1  Cor.  3.  22.  the  world,  or  /.  or  death,  all  are  yours
14.  7.  even  things  without  /.  giving  sound

2  Cor.  1.  8.  insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  /.

2.  16.  to  the  other  the  savour  of  /.  unto  /.

3.  6.  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth  /

4.  10.  that  the  /.  of  Jesus  might  be  manifested
ft.  death  worketh  in  us,  but  /.  in  you

5.  4.  that  mortality  might  be  swallowed  up  of  /.

Gal.  2.  20.  the  /.  which  l  now  live  in  the  flesh

.3.  21.  a  law  given  which  could  have  given  /.

Eph  4.  18.  being  alienated  from  the  /.of  God
Phil  1.  20.  whether  it  be  by  /.  or  by  death  .

2.  16.  holding  forth  word  of  /.  that  1  may  rejoice
Col.  3.  .3.  and'your  /.  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God

4.  when  Christ  who  is  our  /.  shall  appear

1  Tim.  2.  2.  we  may  lead  a  peaceable  /.  in  all  godlin.

4.  8.  having  the  promise  of  the  /.  that  now  is

2  Tim  1  1  according  to  the  promise  of  /.  in  Christ
10.  and  hath  brought/,  to  light  by  the  gospel

3.  10.  thou  hast  fully  known  my  manner  ot  /.

Ueh.  2. 15.  were  all  their  /.  time  subject  to  bondage

7.  .8.  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  /

16.  who  is  made  after  the  power  of  an  endless  /,

Jam  1.  12.  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  /.

4  14.  for  what  is  your  /.  ?  it  is  even  a  vapour

1  Pet  3.  7.  as  being  heirs  together  ot  the  grace  ot  /.

10.  for  he  that  will  love  /.  and  see  good  days

4.  .3.  for  the  time  past  of  our  /.  may  suffice  us

2  Pet.  1.  3.  hath  given  us  all  things  pertaining  to  /.

1  John  1.1.  our  hands  have  handled  the  word  of  /.

2.  for  the  /.  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it
2  16  the  pride  of  /.  is  not  of  the  Fath.  but  ot  world
5’  12  he  that  hath  the  Son  hath  /.  and  he  that  hath
not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  /.

16.  he  shall  give  him  /.  for  them  that  sin  not
Rev.  2.  7.  to  him  will  1  give  to  eat  ot  the  tree  of  /.

10.  be  faithful,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  /.

8.  9.  third  part  of  the  creatures  that  had  /.  died

11.  11.  the  Spirit  of  /.  from  God  entered  into  them
13.  15.  he  had  power  to  give  /.  to  the  beast

21.  6.  1  will  give  to  thirsty  of  the  water  ot  /.  freely

22.  1.  lie  shewed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  /.

2.  the  tree  of  /.  bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits
14.  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  /.

17.  let  him  take  the  water  of  /.  freely
tee  Boor,  Eternal,  Everlasting.

llis  LIFE.

Gen.  44.  30.  seeing  his  l.  is  bound  up  in  the  lad  s  life
Exod.  21.  .30.  he  shall  give  for  the  ransom  of  his  l.
Dent.  17.  19.  shall  read  therein  all  the  days  of  his  l.
Josh.  4.  14.  thev  feared  him  all  the  days  of  his  I.
Judy.  9.  17.  for  my  father  adventured  his  /.  far
16.'  30.  more  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  l.

1  Sam.  10.  5.  he  did  put  his  l.  in  his  hand,  and  slew

2.3.  15.  saw'  that  Saul  was  come  out  to  seek  his  l.
<2~Sam.  18.  18.  Absalom  in  his  /.-time  had  taken

1  Kings  2  2.3.  if  not  spoken  this  word  against  his  l.

19.  3  when  he  saw  that,  he  arose  and  went  for  his  l.

+  4.  Elijah  sat  doum,  and  requested  for  his  /,

20.  .39.  then  shall  thy  life  be  tor  his  l.  42.  .

2  Kings  10.  24.  his  l.  shall  be  for  the  life  of  him
Neh.  6.  11.  would  go  into  the  temple  to  save  his  l.
Esth  7  7  T I  am  an  stood  to  make  request  tor  his  l.
Job  2.  4.  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  l.

6.  behold,  he  is  in  thy  hand,  but  save  his  l.

33.  18.  and  his  l.  from  perishing  by  the  sword
20.  his  /.  abhorreth  bread  ||  22.  his  l  to  destroyers

28.  he  will  deliver,  and  his  l.  shall  see  the  light
Psal.  49. 1 18.  though  in  his  l.  he  blessed  his  soul
Prov.  7.  2.3.  and  knoweth  not  that  it  is  for  his  1.

1.3.  3.  he  that  keepeth  his  mouth,  keepeth  his  l.  _
Eccl  3. 12.  for  a  man  to  rejoice  and  do  good  in  his  l.

7  15  there  is  a  wicked  man  that  prolongeth  hts  l.
8*  15.’  shall  abide  of  hie  labours  all  the  days  of  Am  /.
Isa.  15.  4.  Moab,  his  l.  shall  be  grievous  to  him
Jer.  21.  9.  his  l.  shall  be  to  him  for  a  prey,  38.  2.

44.  30.  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  his  l.

Ezek.  3.  18.  nor  speakest  to  -warn,  to  save  his  l.

7.  13.  nor  strengthen  himself  in  iniquity'  of  his  l.
36  10.  shall  tremble,  every  man  tor  his  l.  _

Amos  2.  t  14.  nor  shall  the  mighty  deliver  his  l
Mat  10.  39.  he  that  findeth  hts  l.  shall  lose  it ;  he
that  loseth  his  /.  shall  find  it,  16.  25.  Mark
8.  35.  Luke  9.  24. 1  17-  3.3.  John  12.  25.

20  28.  to  give  h.  1.  aransom  for  many,  Mark  10.  45.
Luke  14.  26.  yea,  and' hate  not  his  own  /.also
John  10.  11.  good  Shepherd  giveth  his  /.  for  sheep
15  13.  that  a  man  lay  down  his  l.  for  his  friends
Acts  8.  33.  for  his  l.  is  taken  from  the  earth
20.  10.  trouble  not  yourselves,  his  l.  is  in  him
Rom.  5. 10.  much  more  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  /.
Phil.  2.  30.  not  regarding  his  l.  to  supply  your  lack
1  John  3. 16.  love  of  G.  because  he  laid  down  his  l.
See  Days.

My  LIFE.

Gen  19  19.  mercy  thou  hast  shewed  in  saving  myl.
27 .  46.  I  am  weary  of  my  l.  what  good  shall  my  l.  do


Gen.  32.30.  my  l.  is  preserved  ||  48.15.  fed  me  all  my
Mum.  2.3. 1 10.  let  my  l.  die  the  death  of  righteous
Jt/dg.  12. 3.  I  put  my  l.  in  my  hands,  and  passed  ove

1  Sam.  18. 18.  what  is  my  l.  or  my  father  s  family

20.  1.  what  is  my  sin,  that  he  seeketh  myl.?

22.  2.3.  he  that  seeketh  my  l.  seeketh  thy  life
26.  24.  so  that  my  l.  be  much  set  by  in  the  eyes

28.  9.  wherefore  layest  thou  a  snare  for  my  l.  ?

21.  I  put  my  I.  in  my  nand,  and  hearkened  to  ,

2  Sam.  1.  9.  because  my  l.  is  yet  whole  in  me

16.  11.  behold,  my  son  of  my  bowels  seeketh  my  /.
18.  13.  have  wrought  falsehood  against  my  l.

10.  +  34.  how  many  days  are  the  years  of  my  l.

1  Kings  19.  4.  it  is  enough,  now,  take  away  my  /.

10.  they  seek  my  l.  to  take  it  away,  14.  Rom.  U.fJ

2  Kings  1.  13.  let  my  /.  be  precious  in  thy  sight,  14. i
Esth.  7.  3.  let  my  l.  be  given  me  at  my  petition
Job  6.  11.  my  end  that  1  should  prolong  myl.

7.  7.  O  remember  that  my  l.  is  but  wind


|  |  1  Cl  l*  vl  1 1L/C I  LIJCH.  ^  *  **'

15.  mv  soul  chooseth  death  rather  than  myl,
9.21.  tho’  1  were  perfect,  yet  1  would  despise  1

1  rv  -t  _  nn..1  in  „TnnM7  Ap  II  1  I  Tltl  II  luO  n


my


10.  1.  my  soul  is  weary  of  my  l.  I  will  leave
13.  14.  wherefore  do  1  put  my  l.  in  my  hand  ?
Psal. 7.  5.  let  him  tread  down  my  l.  on  the  earth
23.  6.  mercy  shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  l'\

26.  9.  gather  not  my  l.  with  bloody  men

27.  i.  the  Lord  is  the  strength  ot  my  l.  of  whom
4.  dwell  in  the  house  of  the'  T.ord  all  days  of  my  ,

31.  10.  my  l.  is  spent  wdth  grtef  and  sighing
1.3.  they  devised  to  take  away  my  l.

38.  12.  that  seek  after  my  l.  lay  snares  for  me
42.  8.  and  my  prayer  to  the  God  of  my  l.

64.  1.  preserve  my  l.  from  fear  ol  the  enemy
88.  .3.  and  my  l.  draweth  nigh  to  the  grave

14.3.  .3.  he  hath  smitten  my  /.  to  the  ground
Isa.  38.  12.  1  have  cut  off  like  a  weaver  myl
Lam.  .3.  53.  they  cut  off  my  l.  in  the  dungeon

58.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  redeemed  my  l.

Jonah  2.  6.  hast  brought  up  my  l.  from  corruptioi
4.  3.  O  Lord,  take,  I  beseech  thee,  my  l.  from  ni
John  10.  15.  and  1  lay  down  my  l.  for  the  sheep
17.  my  Fath.  loveth  me,  because  I  lay  down  my

1.3.  37.  Lord,  I  will  lay  down  my  l.  for  thy  sak
Acts  20.  24.  nor  count  I  my  l.  dear  to  myself

This  LIFE.

Psal.  17. 14.  men  w'hich  have  their  portion  in  this
Eccl.  6. 12.  knoweth  w  hat  is  good  for  a  man  in  thi.
Q  9.  that  is  thy  portion  in  this  l.  and  in  labour
Luke  8.  14.  are  choked  with  the  cares  of  this  l.
21 . 34.  hearts  overcharged  with  the  cares  of  this  l'
Acts  5.  20.  go,  speak  all  the  words  of  this  l.

1  Cor.  6.  3.  much  more  things  that  pertain  to  this .
4.  have  judgment  of  things  pertaining  to  this  l

15. 19.  if  in  this  l.  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ

2  Tim.  2. 4.  ent*igleth  himself  with  affairs  of  thi


£  J  ////.  Cll  1  <*1 1  ICUI  lliwwvii  .

1  John  5. 11.  eternal  life,  and  this  l.  is  in  his  feoi
Thy  LI  FE.

Gen.  19. 17.  escape  for  thy  l.  look  not  behind  thee

47. 1 8.  how  many  are  the  days  ot  the  years  of  thy
Exod.  4. 19.  the  men  are  dead  which  sought  thy
Dent.  28.  66.  and  thy  l.  shall  hang  in  doubt  hef.

thee,  and  thou  shalt  have  no  assurance  of  th.
Judg.  18.  25.  they  run  on  thee,  and  thou  lose  thy
Ruth  4. 15.  he  shall  be  to  thee  a  restorer  of  thy  1

1  Sam.  19.  11.  if  thou  save  not  thy  l.  to-night

22.  23.  lie  that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh  thy  l.

26  24.  as  1. 1.  w’as  much  set  by  this  day ,  so  my  1

2  Sam.  4.8.  the  head  of  thine  enemy  that  sought  th

19.  5.  thy  servants  which  this  day  saved  thy  l.

1  Kings  1. 12.  come  that  thou  mayest  save  thy  l

19.  2.  if  l  make  not  thy  l.  as  the  life  of  one  of  th

20.  31.  go  out,  peradventure  he  will  save  thy  /.
3Q. -if  he  be  missing  thy  l.  be  for  his  life,  42.

Psal.  103. 4.  who  redeemeth  thy  l.  from  destrocta
Prov.  4.10.  and  the  years  of  /.  /.shall  be  many,  9

13.  let  her  not  go,  keep  ner,  for  she  is  thy  /.

9  11  and  the  years  of  thy  /.  shall  be  inn ease
Isa.  43.  4.  therefore  will  1  give  people  for  thy
Jer.  4.  30.  thy  lovers,  they  will  seek  thy  .

11.  21.  of  the  men  that  seek  thy  l.  22.  25. 1  38.  F

39. 18.  thy  l.  shall  be  for  a  prey  to  thee,  45.  5.j
J.uke  16.  25.  thou  in  thy  l.  receivedst  good  thing
John  13.  38.  wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  l.  for  my  sak

To  1,1  FE.

2  Kings  8. 1.  whose  son  he  had  restored  to  l.b.
Prov.  10. 16.  the  labour  of  the  righteous  tendetn

11. 19.  as  righteousness  tendeth  tol.  so  that  pursi

19.  23.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  tendeth  to  l.

Mat.  7.  14.  narrow  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to 1
John  5. 24.  but  is  passed  from  death  to  1. 1  John  .5.
Acts  11. 18.  G.to  Gentiles  granted  repentance  U
Rom.  7.  10.  the  commandment  ordained  to  I.
lieb.  11.  35.  women  received  their  dead  raised  t

Signifies,  [1]  To  raise  or  heave  up,J Gen.  37- >
[2]  To  put  to  death,  or  crucify,  John  ».«>.;

32.  To  Lift  up  the  eyes,  signifies,  U  J  /'
red  and  make  known  our  desires  to  God  by  pro  1
with  hope  and  expectation  of  a  gracious  ans  -
Psal.  121.  1. 1  12.3.  1.  [2]  To  behold,  contempt
and  consider  with  wonder  and  admiration,  is
40.  26.  To  Lift  up  the  head,  signifies,  [1
restore  a  person  to  hts  former  dignity,  nen

~  [2]  To  recover  former  strength  and  cou)  ^

„„  as  to  oppress  others,  Judg.  8.  28.  L-jJ  •
joice  and  be  glad,  Luke  21.  28.  [4]  Jo  ,

vanced  above  others,  and  obtain  a  compiei -  1
torv  over  them,  Psal.  27-  6.  To  Li  ft  up  the  h#
’  ’nifies,  [1]  To  swear,  or  by  oath  to  confiry
ng,  Gen.  14.  22.  [2]  To  bless,  Lev.. 9.  ...
was  an  usual  posture  in  blessing,  «  huhde> !
both  the  place  whence  the  blessing  was  e  pt
and  an  earnest  desire  for  obtaining  it.  L-

pray ,  Psal.  28.  2.  [4]  Jo  rise  in  rebellion,  -
18.  28.  I  20.  21.  [5]  To  oppress,  th™at**>  <
or  wrong  any  manner  of  way ,  .Ion  .51.  J
shake  off  sloth,  and  heartily  to  engage  m  our  |

Heb.  42.  12.  /■,  ,  t..i  ocr

Thou  shalt  lift  up  thy  face  unto  (>0.1,  .^  --
Thou  shalt  look  up  to  him  by  me. dj itatw  f
prayer,  not  with  horror  and  grief,  but  witn  rf
fulness,  confidence,  and  comfort .


sigr
thing,


L  I  F


L  I  G


;  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  Psal.  24.  7
All  ye  true  members  of  the  church,  raise  up
/out  he (i i  ts  and  souls y  which  ave  oj  a?i  evevlastinq
,nd  immortal  nature,  from  all  earthly  things
vid  set  them  open  for  the  reception  of  Christ  the
h  my  of  glory.

tth  litt  up  iris  heel  against  me,  Psal.  41.  9.
Hath  behaved  himself  insolently ,  cotite mptuously
md  injuriously  towards  me.  It  is  a  phrase  tak  en
rom  an  unruly  horse,  who  hicks  at  him  that  owns
rid Jeeds  him.

t  not  up  the  horn,  Psal.  75.  4.  Carry  not  your-
elves  arrogantly,  scornfully,  or  maliciously  to-
ard  me  or  any  oj  Cod's  people.
t  up  thy  feet,  Psal.  74.3.  Come  speedily  to  our
e/p,  and  for  our  deliverance.

M  UP  oneself  in  height,  that  is,  to  grow  proud
nso/ent,  and  oppressive,  Ezek.  3).  lo.
n.  7. 17.  the  ark  was  /.  up  above  the  earth
.18.  /.up  the  lad,  and  hold  him  in  thine  hand
.  t  1.  then  Jacob  l.  up  his  feet  and  came
.  28.  they  l.  up  Joseph  out  of  the  pit
.  13.  Pharaoh  shall  l.  up  thine  head,  19.

UP  tlle  r°d  ant*  smote  waters,  14.  16
'  \  VP  a  i?.01  on  il  (hou  hast  polluted

m.  6.26.  Lord/,  up  his  countenance  upon  thee
'  wherefore  then  /.ye  up  yourselves '

'  24i  at!d  {•  “P  Inniself  as  a  young  lion
vr  22.  4.  shall  help  him  to  l.  them  up  again
.0-  not  /.  up  an  iron  tool  on  them,  Josh.  8.  31.


up


,  1()  ,i  ‘  i  r\  11  Clll>  UVo/l,  O.

.  I®*  fj’6  sof.es  of  the  priests’  feet  were  /.

rAV,V’uUp,the  ciothes  that are  on  his  feet
im.  23.  8.  he  /.  up  his  spear  against  SCO
(.  he  /.  up  Ins  spear  against  300,  1  Chr.  11  11
mgs  9.  32.  he  /.  up  his  face  to  the  window
jk /.  up  thy  prayer  for  the  remnant,  Isa.  37.  4
/.up i  the  head  of  Jehoiachin  king  of  Judah
'iron  Qj.  5.  all  these  were  to  /.  up  the  horn
?  *•+  ?•  ’et ‘he  men  of  the  place  /.  him  up
-•  [  _lu.r  t0  l-  uP,fny  face  to  thee,  my  God
Mie  sons  of  burning  coal  l.  up  to  fly
15  if  righteous,  yet  will  I  not  /.  up  mv  head
15.  then  shalt  thou  l.  up  thy  face,  22.  26
/.  4.  6.  /.  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance  on  us
).  arise,  O  Lord,  m  thine  anger,  l.  up  thyself
V  ,UP  your  heads,  O  ve  gates,  be  l.  ye  doors,  9.

1.  to  thee,  O  Lord,  I  /.my sou  1,86'.  4.  I  143  A
-•  hear  my  voice  when  1  l.  up  my  hands
teed  them  also,  and  /.  them  up  for  ever

9.  hath  /.  up  his  heel  against  me,  John  13.  18

3. <.  up  thy  feet  to  the  perpetual  desolations

4.  and  to  the  wicked,  /.  not  up  the  horn,  5.

3.  the  floods  have  l.  up  their  waves

2.  /.  up  thyself,  thou  .judge  of  the  earth
.  7.  therefore  shall  he  l.  up  the  head
.4.  10.  if  they  fall,  the  one  will  /.  up  his  fellow

af«a  n°l  /•  UP  sword  against  nation ,
ther  shall  they  learn  war  any  more,  Mic.  4.  3
O.he  will  l  up  an  ensign  to  the  nations
I5' f®  lfQ  *ja?  sh°}lki  l:  »P  itself  as  if  no  wood
cn'cif’n  '/  v13  P  lus  staff  against  thee
so  shall  /.  it  up  after  the  manner  of  Egypt

f  UP  * ’banner  upon  the  high  mountain

o\h»  T  A  l  rnS/’  n0'v  Wl11  1  L  UP  myself

in  /h  adc?ha  a,stantlard  against  him

10.  t.  up  a  standard  tor  the  people,  Jer  50  +  2

,ilp;  "or  (•  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them,  1L  ie
4«  shall  UP  a  shout  against  thee
o’  i]-,‘e.t  us  /.  up  our  heart  with  our  hands
,  8.  3.  spirit  /.  me  up  between  the  earth,  l  j.  i

'  aSd  o7ht  nSl  L *ts?  V  UP.  but  stand
‘i  ",  A1  (’ up  tlle  buckler  against  thee
1.  -1.  so  that  no  man  did  /.  up  his  head  which
up  their  horn  over  land  of.)  udah  to  scatter  it

I%i\nr!ll  lhe  K0t  {•  on  the  sabbath  ;

h  3,V  t0°k  ber  by  the  hand,  and  /.  her  up
13. 11  and  coiTld  in  no  wise  /.  up  herself
4  nuw;  heads,  y.°ur  redemption  draweth
4„  10.  humble  yourselves,  and  he  shall  l.  up
Kee  Eyes.  ^

,  .  no  T  LIFT  hand  or  hands.
wwi  J  .aue  L  up  mine  hand  to  the  Lord
432  40  l‘/t  leeShaU,n0nlan  L  UP  b's  hand
lo’  {S'  }  LVy/‘-  and  sa>'  I  Kve  for  ever
whin  I  /  1  th  ne  h,and!  1Jrget  not  the  humble
’  1  win  /  n,liP  hatJd-  to'vard  thine  oracle

•  1  'vlll  l  UD  TT1V  hn'Hstv  in


o  IQ  /  ■*“  ::  nunu  vu  me  uentiies

O  lo,f  P!hy  h?nds  inwards  him  for  the  life
” 12’  wherefore  /.  up  the  h.  that  hang  down

is  j  tt  Lli<  1  v°iee.

n0;.™  Ilagar  /.  up  her  voice  and  wept
j  in  /nSt  !uOU  UP  *by  voice  to  the  clouds
£v  shPa|  h7  °  daughter  of  Gallim
>  uifthw  ■'  UP.  6leir  voice,  shall  sing
he  shil7nnf!feWlth  siren "|b,  lift  it  up
thi  'i?  tcry  nor  1  up  bis  voice
i  me  w  ilderness  and  cities  /.  up  their  voice
%  watchmen  shall  /.  up  the  voice
‘V  rrtren0l’/'  uplby  voice  like  a  trumpet
’1  22  m’/  d  {-UP  thy  voice  in  Bashan
•  '..to  t.  up  the  voice  with  shouting

ini),  lifted.

Abraham^  UP  ^  eyes  and  beheId  Jordan
p  his  eyes  and  looked,  22.  13.

and  Li  Uli  '/°1Ce  '?y.  18.  as  I  /.  up  my  voice
'  j™ia,c°b  l:  UP  bis  voice  and  wept
Phar  niwP  hls  eyes  saw  in  a  dream,  33.  1.
§2  l,P  the  head  ot  the  butler

4  l  '  llP  bis  .hand  towards  the  people

Moses  /  congregation  /.up  their  voice

14  th/n  thPv- n'S  ’^'J  ?nd  Slll0,e  ,he  rot'k
that  hi«  ,  th>  heaitbe  /.up  and  thou  rerget

■  4  ih?nhthart  be  I10.1'  a  j0ve  bis  brethren
P  tl^eir  vnirtangn  0t  Lord  spake,  the  people
»  the"  /.n  nd  YePt,  21  •  2.  1  .'Sam.  11.  4.
thanw  '  uP.the,r  ^eads  no  more
9.  (Jr pah  andSii0I*he;and  cried, hearken  to  me
24  i6Pandn<!  {|U/b  “R  vo,ce  and  wept,  14
0.  and  Saul  /.  up  his  voice  and  wept


I  &/m. 30.4. David  md  people  /.up  voice,  2  Sam  .3.32
A?;  V'n  »  sons  came  and/,  up  their  voice
To’  To*  Lb^ba  bam  l-  up  his  hand  against  king
^ 10  *  hIoo  hast  ..  up  on  h i li

o  KhZ?*  Vv  Jcr0jb?K  m  i,  uy>  hand  ag»»nst  kin«r.  27.
T  r/nnt  \4i  1P*  and  tim.'e  Heart  hath  /.  thee  up
l  Chon  14  2.  his  kingdom  was  /.  up  on  high

'■n  "k  h*  H*  as  trumpeters  and  singers  /.  up  voice
17.  6  his  heart  was  /.  up  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord

26.  16.  heart  was  /.up  to  destruction,  32.  25
Job !-•  they  l.  up  their  voice  and  wept

oi  fo2V  tny  calamity  /.  up  in  the  balances
orf1'  *t  1  have  /.  up  my  hand  against  the  fatherless
p'y;  nr /.up  myself  when  evil  found  him

on  k  '4'  4'  Thn  bath  not /.  up  his  soul  unto  vanity

27.  6.  now  shall  my  head  be  /.  up  above  J

30.  1.  extol  thee,  tor  thou  hast  /.  me  up,  102  10
74.  5.  as  lie  /.  up  axes  upon  the  thick  trees
o’rt*  ;*  o^tbat  bate  thee  have  /.  up  the  head
;;T3- tbe  noods  have  l  up  their  voice,  O  Lord

Prt  or,  he  Lup  his  hand  against  them

P/ov.Qt).  +  7.  the  legs  of  the  lame  are  /.  up
30.  13.  lofty  ey°s,  and  their  eyelids  are  l.  up
Isa.  2. 12.  day  o  the  I  ord  on  every  one  that  is  /.  up
13.  on  cedars  that  are  /.  ||  14.  mountains  /.up
6.  1  the  Lord  sitting  on  a  throne  high  and  /.  up

30'  llo?^n  A  i'il?d  1S  l'  up  they  will  not  see
52*  If5'  there  shall  be  on  every  /.  up  hill  rivers
37.  23.  against  whom  hast  thou  /.  up  thine  eyes  ?
Jer.  51.  9.  her  judgment  is  l.  up  to  the  skies
00  19-,  creatures  were  /.  up  from  the  earth

20.  the  wheels  were  /.  up,  21.  1  10.  17

AAV16  Tpirit/*  rne,uP  and  took  nie  away

10.  16.  cherubnns /.  up  their  wings,  19  I  11  do
-f:  5‘ and  L  up  my  hand  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  6.
oq  ‘  ru^ue  hand  in  the  wilderness,  23

28.  when  1  brought  into  the  land  for  the  which  I
OQ  O  k  p  mine  baiicl  to  give  it  to  them,  42.  I  47  14
"«*  ?*  because  thine  heart  is  /.  up,  5, 17.  |  31  10

S-12  haSvf'wthe  Iordu  1  have /.’up  mine  hand
V  ba'e  I  /.  up  my  hand  against  them

23  hlf,  heart  was /.  up  and  hardened

■7  A  cM-  up  thyself  against  the  Lord
7.  4.  the  first  beast  was  /.  up  from  the  earth
o.  j.  uien  1  l.  up  mine  eyes  and  saw  in  ^

¥,*r, •  5-  9-  tbine  band  shall  be  /.  uponadversaiies
t  Ti,  ’  l?ls  so,ul  'cbichis  /  up  is  not  upright
3.  10.  the  deep  /  up  his  hands  on  high
dlech.  5.  7.  behold,  there  was  /.  up  a  talent  of  lead
tbjfy /*  up  the  ephah  between  the  earth
ibe  5s  the  stones  of  a  crown,  /.  up
}fc  10  I  n  Iand  ?ha11  ^  /■  up  and  inhabited
Kq  ah„?ei1«Ve  /  VP  ,he  tace  a-ainst  my  law
rtlpt'  tk'  A  J  u-/*  h,m  up.  and  he  arose
,,  ®  6-  ~°-  be/,  up  his  eyes  on  his  disciples
It  fl*  a  ccrfain  woman/,  up  her  voice  and  said
It.  13.  ten  lepers  /.  up  their  voices  and  said
ft  52*  f  t  ,e/-  UP  his  hands  and  blessed  them
J°hn  3.  14.  and  as  Moses  /.up  the  serpent  in  the
wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  l  un
totter  n  hre  L  uP/he  Son  of  man  ‘  "P
be  "0  UP’  2VI  I  draw  all  men  to  me
/1^o  HStD  l0UVSo11 1  ma-n  must  be  /.  up
4 fOd2'/4'  u.P  b'S  voice  and  said  to  them

14  n  /  "Ptne’'-'  VOIC<;  t0.G°d  with  one  accord

22  22  irnf  thenr/VnnefShI-  the  Speech  Lycaonia
.  ,tllfcn  I-  up  their  voices  and  sad  awav

P  P!“,'n3’5  ,  est  being  /.  up  with  pride  he  fall  *
Bev’  10-  5-  theangeW.  up  his  hand  to  heaven

Psal.  3.  3.  my  S101'^^!  A  up  of  mine  head

P>W<9  Tj  ^thaf  /"  m€  "P  f9  tbe  ?v,nd.  Ibou  causest
10  m’i  l"  at  {•  me  up  from  the  gates  of  death
18.  48. /.above  those  that  rise  up  against  me
Prov.  2. 3.  and  /.  up  Invoice  tor  understanding

Deut.  24.  +  15.  he  is  poor,  and  l.  his  soul  to  it
1  Sam.  27.  the  Lord  bringeth  low,  and  /.up  8
tCAT’,Z5’  th.lne  heart  /.  thee  up  to  boast
tta  1  itt ‘ a 4 . ( iln e  t h e  ostrich  /.  up  herself
113  7°I;  2;5'„w,nd  whtch  /.  up  the  waves  thereof
ill'  !l  L  fhe  ueedy  out  of  the  dunghill
ft  .lh^Lord  L  up  the  meek,  he  casteth  wicked
Ter'  518'  3'  Th  *?  ,W  len  ,hie  L  VP  an  ensign  on  mount

feh.  8.  6.  answered,  amen,  with  /  ud  their  hanrlo
-P  an^o  tb°u  shalt  ay,  thereTs /.’e7phandS
A '-1 41. 2./.  up  of  my  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice
t'°Vo  o~*  bast  done  foolishly  in  /.  up  thyself

33'  3  at  /  n nSof  hv,°,lVnt  "P  liI‘e  the  L  “P  Asmoke
,  rp  at /•  lIP  ot  thyself  nations  are  scattered

1  Tim.  2. 8.  men  Pray£v«g  where,  /.  up  holy  hands

Gen.  44.  3.  as  soon  as  the  morning  was  /  thempn
Jndg.  19.  26.  fell  at  doorofthe  housTtlll  it  wa™  /
\taT\  '  i3i6*  and  s?od  them  till  the  morning  /  ‘
mTJ'o13?'  1l*  even  l  -  u'r'bt  shall  be  /.  about  me
y  *fi  ‘f.1,  when  morning  is  /.  they  practise  it
£ech.  14.7.  that  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  /

x-  ,  light.

°ur  “V1  ^“tbeth  this  /.  bread

o  t0T  4  17  *  im  .1S  easy ,  and  my  burden  is  /.

'  L or.  4.  17.  oui  /.  affliction  worketli  for  us  a  far

JydA'  9‘  j'  Abhnelech  hired  vain  and  /.  persons
Zeph.  3.  4.  her  prophets  are  /.  and  treacherous
n  c  ^  LIGHT.

-  Sam.  18.  Asahel  waW.  of  foot  as  a  wild  roe

ttltolt6-  cursed  that  setteth  /.  bv  his  father
/vAw'r!’im1/hee  /key  set  /.  by  father  and  mother
Mat.  5.  but  made /  of  if,  and  went  their  ways
,  „  LIGHT  thing.

1  Sam.  18.  23.  seemeih  it  a  /.  thing  to  be  the  king’s  son
1  Kings  16.  31.  as  if  it  had  beeif  a  /.  thng  fof  him


LI  G

2  A1?*'  t 1B'  ‘f  but  a  /.  thing  in  the  sight  of  the  L.
20.  !0.  it  is  n  l.  thing  tor  the  shadow  to  go  down
Astf.49.0.  a  /.  thing  that  thou  shouidest  be  my  servant
Kzek.  8. 17.  is  it  a  /.  ^they  comm.t  abo7inaUo,,s

Signifies,  [1]  The  sensation  which  arises  from  be¬
holding  any  bright  object,  Exod.  10.  23.  |  14
I/O, J be  *un  and  moon,  which  are  the  springs' 0]
light,  Gen.  1.  16.  [3]  A  son  or  successor,  who
keeps  one  s  name  and  memory  from  being  extin
gms bed,  1  Kings  11.  36.  2  Chron.  21.  7  Ul  1
window,  1  Kings  7-  4,  5.  [5]  Joy,  comfort,  and
Jehcity,  Esth.  8.  16.  Psal.  97-  11.  [6]  The  ap¬

pearance  of  the  day,  Job  24.  1  4.  [7]  True  sai  ing
knowledge ,  Isa.  8.  CO.  [8]  Happiness  and  pros-
peruy,  Isa.  58.  8.  [9]  Support,  cornjurt,  and  de¬
liverance,  Mic.  7-  8.  [10]  The  gospel,  which  is

the  means  oj  spiritual  comfort,  Slat.  4.  16.  fill
1  he  understanding  or  judgment.  Mat.  6.  23.  1 1  is
spoken,  [1]  Ot  God,  who  is  a  Being  of  infinite
roi tie' l  truth,  holiness ,  purity,  Jc.  1  John  1.  5.
t~J  ,/  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  fountain  and  author
oj  all  knowledge,  both  natural  and  .spiritual,  Luke
do,in  /•  9-. ,  C3]  Of  the  word  of  God,  which
conduits  and  guides  Christians  in  this  world,  and
Points  out  the  way  to  eternal  happiness,  Psal.  1 19
10o.  „  Pet.  1-  19.  [4]  Of  John  the  Baptist,  who
er™inA¥Jor  ns  knowledge  and  zeal,  John  5.
30.  L5J  Ot  the  apostles,  or  ministers  of  the  gos¬
pel,  who  assist  others,  and  direct  them  to  Chust
and  salvation,  Mat.  5.  14  [6]  Of  true  Christians.

who  are  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  Hod,  and

\T\Tchtic°TieJalini  knowledge  of  God  and  Christ,
Luke  16.  8.  Eph.  5.  8.  [7]  Of  good  kings,  b<  th
Jor  their  splendour,  and  the  counsel  and  comfort
mat  their  peojle  have  from  them,  2  Sam.  21  17
the  light  of  my  countenance  they  cast  not.
down,  Job  29.  24.  They  were  very  careful  not
to  abuse  my  smiles,  and  to  give  me  no  occasion
then  1196  V‘V  countenance  or  carriage  towards

Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  See.  A  Tat.  5.
lo.  Let  your  gifts  and  graces  be  so  apparent
to  others  in  your  doctrines  and  lives,  that  thru
may  be  brought  to  own,  and  believe  in,  the  erne
Hod,  and  look  on  you  at  bis  true  and  faithful
servants.  J  J

GSVdGodlaid,,  let  there  be  /  and  there  was  L
4.  God  saw  the  /.  ||  5.  God  called  the  /■  day
er  /.  the  lesser  /.  to  rule  the  night


16.  the  greater ..  me  icosei  t.  lu  ruieim

2;LIsrae  had  /.  in  their  dwellings
T  P'dar.gave  /  by  night  to  these
^5.  6.  this  is  the  offering,  oil  for  the  /.  27.  20.  |  35.

Num.  4.  16.  to  Eleazar  pertainetlroil^for  the  / '"  "

o  taW‘  n?’ 10*  aLnd  as  soon  as  5  e  have/,  depart
~A?-,‘L  /7il,Kat  th0iu  Quench  not  the  /.  of  Israel
^3.  4.  he  shall  be  as  the  /.  ot  the  mornhi®'

1 1  A  7  n  against  /•  in  three  ranks,  5.

A  „’+ ,>at,/)avid  my  servant  may  have  a/,
o  in8'  +  3’  Frra  re.a/ trom  the  /.  till  mid-day
Al9«n^PA  ,a^  0t  b,re  by  night  to  shew-  them  /.
Lsth  8.  16.. the  Jews  had  /.  joy  and  gladness
Job  3.  4.  neither  let  the  /.  slime  upon  it
ip  for  /.  but  ha\  e  none

10.  1  had  been  as  infants  which  never  saw  /

20.  wherefore  is  /.  given  to  him  in  ntiserv,  2.3
ia+o18*  V°ir  ln  bis  angels  in  whom  he  putV
o*  00  Y1^101'/ under,  where  (he  /.  is  as  darkness
bringeth  out  to  /.  the  shadow  of. death
10  e  ,i.y  fi'°Pe  m  the  dark  without  /.

]?-  ^ e/-  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out

00  iff  ’  s,halJ  be  dark  in  his  tabernacle
04'  ri'  ?ud  f  ie  '  ?bail  slime  on  thy  waj  s
1 't  .1  tbe>’  a/e  of  those  that  rebel  against  the  /

/■  ',he  rnnrderer  rising  with  the  /.  killeth  ‘  '

46-3mamed  in  the  day-time,  they  know  not  the  *
00'  fi  !!d  upon  whom  doth  not  his  /.  arise  -
ff  yhf-t  nug  fhat  is  hid  bringeth  he  to  /.

A  f'11  deliver,  and  his  life  shall  see  the  /

36°'3n  hei<  Ifnlltened  Wlth  ,he  l-  of  the  living'

33o  3P*;  beheld  he  spreadeth  his  I.  upon  it

37'+^ Uh  Crud!  covered,  /.  and  cornmandeth
3 1 .  t  3.  he  directefh  his  /.  to  the  ends  of  the  eat  th
r  11.  he  scattereth  the  cloud  of  his  /
if’  and  caused  the  /.  of  his  cloud  to  shine
3»4'i  *  ?  See  H0t  the  bright  /.  in  the  clouds
3  o  1whli.°n?  tfle  WK'ked  their  /.  is  withholden

4f 4-4 ^at^elhpa?tidlThichhscattereth

38'  foh/  otTi! it"  ' F b  'I hy' 'lig h teo u sn ess  as  /.

40  19  ie°  hn  "  oAS  15  TTT  lt  is  «0,le  from  me
71  iX*  fil  f  u  1  F°»  they  shal1  never  see  /.

78  14'  in  i  naf/  Prepared  the  /.  an<l  the  sun
18.  14.  and  all  the  night  with  a  /.  ot'  fire

mi  k  S  sown  tor  the  righteous,  and  Madness

6  23  fkifh 1  16  Path  0f, ,he  Just  is  as  the  shiniim  '
m'o'  or  Jbe  commandment  is  a  lamp,  the  law  h  /

fjfl  ('  t’KrswwJSd  plm»wS  si”

10.  ie  sun  dHrJrne.J^he  muon  .hall ^ not  cause

sun  VZ/of  S°Ca  iha11  &  as‘d-e  L  <J:  u
sun,  the  <.  of  the  sen  as  the  /.  of  seven  d

2  79


LI  K


LiG


LI  K


Isa  51.  4.  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  /.  to  people
50  9.  we  wait  for  /.  but  behold  obscurity
60*  19.  the  Lord  shall  be  to  thee  an  everlasting  /.

Jer  4  23.  I  beheld  the  heavens,  and  they  had  no/.

25  i6.  1  will  take  from  them  the  /.  of  the  candle
31. 35.  the  Lord  giveth  the  sun  tor  a  l.  by  day ,  and
ordinances  of  the  moon  and  stars  tor  /-by  night
Ezek  32.  t  8.  the  /.  ot  the  /.  I  will  make  dark
Van.  2.  22.  and  the  /.  dwelleth  with  linn

5.  11.  /.  and  understanding  found  in  Daniel,  14.

Hos  6  5.  thy  judgments  as  /.  that  goeth  forth
Mic.  7 !  9.  tlie  Lord  will  bring  me  forth  to  the  /.

Hab  3  4.  and  his  brightness  was  as  the  l.

11. '  at  the  /.  of  thine  arrows  they  went
Zevh  3  5.  every  morning  bring  judgment  to  /.

Zech  14.  6.  in  that  day  the  /.  shall  not  be  clear
Mat; 4. 16.  to  them  that  sat  in  death,  /..is  sprung  up

5  i4  ye  are  the  /.  of  the  world  ||  15.  it  giyetli  /.
ifi  let  vour  /.  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  see
fi  22  the  /.  of  body  is  the  eye,  it  eye  single,  thy
~whole  body  shall  be  full  of  /.  Luke  11.  34,  36.

17  2.  and  his  raiment  was  white  as  the  /.

Luke  2.32.  a/,  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory
8.  16.  they  which  enter  in  may  see  the  /.  11.  33.

16  8  of  this  world  are  wiser  than  the  children  ot  I.
John  i.  4.  in  him  was  life,  and  life  was  the  /.  of  men
7  the  same  came  to  bear  witness  or  that  /.  8.
o  that  was  the  true  /.  which  lighteth  every  man
3.  19.  condemnation,  that  /.  is  come  into  the  world

20.  every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the  l.

21.  but  he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  /.

5.  35.  he  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  /.  and  ye

were  willing  to  rejoice,  tor  a  season  in  his  l.

8.  12.  Jesus  saying,  I  am  the  /.of  the  world,  9.5.
he  that  tolloweth  me  shall  have  the  /  of  life

11  9  he  stumbleth  not,  because  he  seeth  the /.

10.  he  stumbleth,  because  there  is  no  /.  in  him

12.  35.  yet  a  little  while  is  the  /.  with  you
36.  while  ve  have  the  /.  believe  in  the  /.  that  ye
46. 1  am  come  a  /.  into  the  world,  that  whosoever

Act  's  9  3.  there  shined  about  him  a  /.  from  heaven
J2.  7.  a  /.  shined  in  the  prison,  and  he  smote
^,3.  47.  1  have  set  thee  to  be  a  /.  to  the  Gentiles
16!  29.  then  he  called  for  a  /.  and  sprang  in
2°  6.  there  shone  a  great  /.  round  about  me
0  thev  that  were  with  me  saw  indeed  the  /.

11.  when  l  could  not  see  for  the  glory  ot  that  /.

26. 13.  at  mid-day,  O  king,  1  saw'  in  the  way  a  /.

23.  should  shew  /.  to  the  people  and  Gentiles
Rom.  2.  19-  a  /.  of  them  which  are  in  darkness

13.  12.  and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  ot  /.

1  Cor' 4.  5.  who  will  bring  to  /.  hidden  things

2  Cor.  4.  4.  lest  the  /.  of  the  gospel  should  shine

6.  who  commanded  /.  to  shine  out  ot  darkness

11.  14.  Satan  is  transformed  into  an  angel  ot  /.

Evh.  5.  8.  but  now  are  ye  /.  walk  as  children  ot /.

13.  all  things  that  are  reproved  are  made  manifest
by  the  /.  whatsoever  doth  make  manifest  is  /.
Col.  1. 12.  meet  for  inheritance  ot  me  saints  ml.

1  Thess.  5.  5.  ye  are  all  children  ot  the  /.  and  day

1  Tim.  6.  16.  dwelling  in  /.  no  man  can  approach

2  Ttnt.l.  10.  who  brought  life  and  immortality  to  /.

1  Pet.  2.  9.  who  called  you  into  his  marvellous  /.
o  pei .  1.19.  take  heed,  as  to  a  /.  shining  in  dark  place

1  John  i.  5.  God  is  /.  and  in  him  is  no  darkness
Rev  18.  23.  the  /.  of  a  candle  shall  shine  no  more

21. 11.  her  /.  was  like  a  stone  most  precious
£3.  glory  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  /.  thei  eor
*  22.  5 •  they  need  not  /.  ot  the  sun,  the  Lord  giveth  /.

Countenance,  Dabknkss.

Give  LIGHT.

Gen.  1. 15.  and  let  them  be  to  give  l.  on  the  earth

17.  and  God  set  the  stars  to  give  l.  on  the  earth
Exod.  13.  21.  in  a  pillar  of  fire  to  give  them  /.

£5.37.  the  lamps  may  g.  1.  over  against  it,  Aim.  8.-.

2  Kings  8. 19.  he  promised  to  g.  him  a  /.  2  Lhr.ll.l.
Neh.  9. 12.  to  g.  them  /.  in  the  way  they  should  go
Psal.  105.  39.  and  fire  to  give  /.  in  the  night  .

Isa.  13.  10.  the  stars  ot  heaven  shall  not  give  their  /.

42.  6.  1  will  g.  thee  for  a  /.  to  the  Gentiles,  49.  6.

60. 19.  nor  shall  the  moon  g.  1.  to  thee,  Ezek.  32. 7.
Mat.  5.  15.  it  g.  1.  to  all  in, the  house  Luke  11. 36.

2  Cor  4.  6.  to  give  the  /.  ot  the  knowledge  ot  God
Evh.  5. 14.  awake,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  /.
in  the  L1GH  1 .

Psal.  56. 13.  that  1  may  walk  in  the  Lot  the  living
Isa  2  5.  come,  let  us  walk  m  the  l.  ot  the  Loid
50  11.  walk  in  the  l.  of  your  fire,  and  in  the  sparks
John  12.  36.  while  ye  have  the  light,  believe  in  the  l.

1  John  1.  7.  but  if  we  walk  in  the  l.  as  he  is  in  the  1.

2.  9.  he  that  saith  he  is  in  l.  and  hateth  his  brother
*10."  that  loveth  his  brother,  abideth  in  the  /.

Rev  °1  °4.  nations  that  are  saved  shall  walk  m  /.
Thy  LIGHT.

Psal.  36.  9-  and  in  thy  l.  shall  we  see  light
43  3  O  send  out  thy  /.  and  thy  truth,  let  them  lead
J,«.  58.  8.  then  shall  thy  l.  break  forth  as  morning
10.  then  shall  thy  l.  rise  in  obscurity ,  and  thy  dark.

60  1 .  arise,  shine,  for  thy  l.  is  come,  the  glory
3  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  I.  and  kings
19  the  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  /.  by  day

20.  for  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  everlasting  /.

LI GH  1  ,  LI ).

Exod.  25.  37.  and  they  shall  /.  the  lamps,  40.  4.

40.  25.  he  /.  the  lamps  before  the  Lord,  A urn.  8.  3.
Psal.  18. 28.  for  thou  wilt  /.  my  candle,  L.  enlighten
Mat  .  5. 15.  nor  do  men  /.  a  candle,  and  put  it  under
Luke  8.  16.  no  man,  when  he  hath  /.  a  candle,  11. 3.5.
15.  8.  doth  not  l.  a  candle,  and  sweep  the  house
Rev  7  16.  nor  shall  the  sun  L  on  them,  nor  heat
y  IGHT

Ruth  2. 3.  her  hap  was  to  /.  on  a  partof  Boaz’  field
LIGH I .

o  Sam  17.  12.  and  we  will  /.  on  him  as  the  dew

LIGHTED.  _  .

Gen  24. 64.  when  she  saw  Isaac,  she  /.  oft  the  camel
Josh.  15.  18.  and  she  /.  off  her  ass.  Judo. .  1. .14.
Judy.  4.  15.  Sisera  /.  off  his  chariot  and  fled

1  Sam.  25.  23.  Abigail  hasted  and  /.  oft  the  ass

2  Kings  5.  21.  Naaman  /.  down  from  the  chariot

LIGHTED.  ,  .  ,

Gen  °8  11-  lacob /.  on  a  certain  place,  and  tarried

280


2  Kings  10. 15.  Jehu  /.^on^.Iehonadab  son  of  Itechab

Isa  9.  8.  sent  a  word  to  Jacob  and  it  /.  on  Israel
LIGH  1  EN .

2  Sam.  22.  29.  the  Lord  will  /.  my  darkness
Ezra  9.  8.  that  our  God  may  /.  our  eyes  and  give
Psal.  13.  3.  /.  mine  eyes,  lest  1  sleep  the  sleep
Luke  2.  32.  a  light  to  /.  the  Gentiles  and  the  gloiy
Rev.  21.  23.  had  no  sun,  the  glory  ot  God  did  /.  it
LIGHTEN.

1  Sam.  6.  5.  peradventure  he  will  /.  his  hand
Jonah  1.  5.  cast  wares  into  the  sea,  to  /.  it  of  them
LIGHTER.  _

1  Kings  12.  4.  make  thou  yoke  /.  9. 10.  2  CJtr. .10. 10.
Psal.  62.  9.  they  are  altogether  /.  than  vanity
Isa.  49.  t  6.  art  thou  /.  than  to  be  my  servant ,

Ezek.  8. 1 17-  any  thing  /.  than  to  commit  abommat.

Lightest.

Num.  8.  2.  say  to  him,  when  thou  /.  the  lamps

Exod.  30.  8.  and  when  Aaron  /.  the  lamps  at  even
|  John  1. 9.  that  was  the  true  hglit  winch  /.  every  man

Deut.  19.  5.  axe-head  s'lippeth  and  i.  on  his  neighb.

lighting.

Isa.  30.  30.  Lord  shall  shew  the  /.  down  of  his  arm
Mat.  3. 16.  descending  like  a  dove,  and  /.  on  him
LIGHTLY.

Gen.  26.  10.  one  might  /.  have  lien  with  thy  wile
Isa  9.  1.  when  at  first  he  /.  afflicted  the  land
Jer.  4.  24.  1  beheld,  and  all  the  bills  moved  /.

Mark  9.  39.  do  a  miracle,  can  /.  speak  evil  ot  me
See  Esteemed.

LIGHTENED.  ,  .

Psal.  34.5.  they  looked  to  him  and  were  /,  and  faces
77.  18.  the  lightnings  /.  the  world,  earth  trembled
Rev.  18.  1.  the  earth  was  l.  with  his  glory
See  Enlightened.

LIGHTENED.

Acts  27. 18.  being  tossed, ^nextday  they  /.  ship,  38.

Jer.  3. 9.  thro’  /.  of  her  whoredoms  she  defiled  land
23.'  32!  tell  them  cause  my  people  to  err  by  their  /.
o  Cor.  1. 17.  when  1  was  thus  minded,  did  1  use  l.l
LIGHTEN  ETH.

Prov.  29.  13.  the  Lord  /.  both  their  eyes
Luke  I?.  24.  for  as  lightning  that  /.  outot  one  part
LIGHTNING.

2  Sam.  22.  15.  he  sent  /.  and  discomfited  them
Job  28.26.  when  he  made  a  way  tor  the  /.of  thunder

37. 3.  he  directeth  his  /.  to  the  ends  ot  the  earth
38.25.  who  divided  a  way  for  the  l.  ot  thunder
Psal.  144.  6.  cast  forth  /.  and  scatter  them
Ezek.  1.  13.  and  out  ot  the  tire  went  forth  /.

14.  living  creatures  ran  as  the  appearance  or  /.
Dan.  10.  6.  and  his  face  as  the  appearance  ot  /.

Nah.  3.  +  3.  horsemen  lifted  up  /.  pt  the  spear
Zech.  9.  14.  his  arrow  shall  go  forth  as  the  /.

Mat.  24. 27.  as  /.  cometh  out  ot  the  east,  Luke  17.24.

28. 3.  his  countenance  was  as  /.  his  raiment  white
Luke  10. 18.  1  beheld  Satan  as  /.  fall  from  heaven

LIGHTNINGS.

Exod.  19. 16.  thunders,  /.  and  thick  cloud  on  mount
oq  ig,  an  the  people  saw  the  /.  and  noise  ot  trump.
Job  38.  35.  canst  thou  send  /.  that  they  mav  go  f
Psal.  18.  14.  he  shot  out  /.  and  discomfited  them
77. 18.  /.  lighted  the  world,  earth  trembled,  97-  4.

78  t48  he  gave  their  cattle  to  hail  and  flocks  to  /.
135.7.  he  maketh  /.  for  the  rain,  he  brmgeth  wind
Jer.  10.  13.  he  maketh  /.  with  rain,  51.  16.

Nah  2  4.  the  chariots  shall  run  like  the  /.

Zech.  10.  +  1.  so  the  Lord  shall  make  /.  .

Rev.  4.  5.  out  of  the  throne  proceeded  /.  th underlies
8.  5.  there  were  voices,  thundenngs,  and  /.  1 1.  19.

16  18.  there  were  /.  and  a  great  earthquake
LIGHTS.  t

Gen.  1. 14.  let  there  be  /.  in  the  firmament  of  heaven

15.  and  let  them  be  for  /.  in  the  firmament

16.  God  made  two  great  /.  greater  to  rule  the  day
1  Kings  6.  4.  he  made  windows  ot  narrow  t.

Psal.  136.7.  to  him  that  made  great  /.  for  his  mercy
Ezek.  32.  8.  all  the  bright  /.  will  l  make  dark
Luke  12.  35.  let  your  loins  be  girded,  your  /.  burn.
Acts  20. 8.  there  were  many  /.  in  the  upper  chamber
Phil  2  15.  among  whom  ye  shine  as/,  in  the  worm
Jam.  1.  1?.  cometh  down  from  the  lather  ot  l.

L1GN- ALOES.

Num.  24. 6.  as  trees  of/,  which  the  Ld.  hath  planted
L1GURE.

Exod  28. 19.  the  third  row  a  l.  an  agate,  39.  1—
LIKE.

Gen.  13.  10.  Sodom  was  /.  the  land  °f  Egypt
Exod.  15.  11.  who  is  /.  unto  thee  Deut.  3,3.  -9.

1  Kings  8. 23.  2  Chr.  b.  14.  Psal.  35. 10.  1  1 1.  19.
16.  31.  manna  was  /.  coriander-seed,  white
24. 17.  the  glory  ot  the  Lord  was  /.  devouring  hie
30.  32.  nor  shall  ye  make  any  ointment /.  it

33.  whosoever  compounded)  any  /-it*  38.

34.  of  each  shall  there  be  a  /.  weight
34. 1.  hew  two  tables  /.  to  the  first,  4.  Deut. 10.  1,  3.
Num.  23.  10.  and  let  my  last  end  be  /.  his
Deut.  4.  32.  or  any  thing  that  hath  been  heard  /.  it
7.  26.  lest  thou  be  a  cursed  thing  /.  it
17. 14.  set  king  over  me  /.  all  nations,  1  Sam.  8.  5,-0.
18!  8.  they  shall  have  /.  portions  to  eat

15.  prophet -J thy  brethren  /.  me,  Acts  3.  1  <  -37  •

18.  1  will  raise  a  prophet  from  brethren /.  to  thee

29.  23.  /.  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomonati
34  10.  there  arose  not  a  prophet  /.  to  Moses
Josh.  10.  14.  no  day  /.  that  before  or  after  it
Judy.  13.  6.  his  countenance  /.  an  angel  ot  God

16.  12.  he  brake  them  from  his  arms  /.  a  thieaa
17.  1  shall  become  weak  and  /.  any  other  man  ^

Ruth  2. 13.  tho’  I  be  not  /.  to  one  ot  thy  handmaidens
4.11.  Lord  make  the  woman  /.  Rachel  and  /.  Lean
12.  let  thy  house  be  /.  the  house  of  Pharez

1  Sam.  2.  2.  nor  is  there  any  rock  /.  °ur  God
4. 9.  he  strong,  quit  yourselves  /.  men,  1  Cor  iom.5.
17 . 7.  the  staff  ot  his  spear  was/,  a  weaver  s  beam
25.  36.  Nabal  held  a  feast  l.  the  teast  ot  a  km_

26  15.  a  valiant  man,  and  who  is  /.  to  thee  in  Isr.

2  Sam  7.9 .  /.  ti  the* name  ot  the  great  men


2  Sam.  7. 23.  one  nation  in  earth  is  /.  thy  people  Is

22.  34.  he  maketh  my  feet  /.  hinds’  feet

1  Kings  3. 12.  none  l.  thee  bef.  notarise  /.thee,  ] !
10.  20.  there  was  not  the  /.  made  in  any  kingdoi

12.  32.  Jeroboam  ordained  a  feast/,  that  in  .1  ud
Id'.  3!/.  the  house  of  Jerob.  7.  |  21. 22. 2  Kings  9.  >1

18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  little  cloud  /.  a  man’s  ban,
20.  25.  number  thee  an  army  /.  the  army  thou  h

27.  pitched  before  them  /.  two  little  Hocks  of  ki

22. 13.  word  /.  word  of  one  of  those,  2  Chr.  Ifi.  j;

2  Kings  3.  2.  but  not  /.  his  father  and  /.  his  moth
5.  14.  his  flesh  came  again  /.  flesh  of  a  little  child!
9'  9  and  /.  the  house  of  Baasha  sonot  Ahijali

13.  7.  had  made  them  /.  dust  by  threshing

14.  3.  yet  not  /.  David  his  tath.  16.  2.  2  Chr.  28.
17. 15.  the  L.  charged  they  should  not  do  /.  them


i  {  .  1  O  .  INC  J  - - - - 1

18.  32.  take  you  to  a  land  /.your own,  Isa,  36.  Ti
23.  25.  /.  to  him  was  there  no  king.  Nek.  13.26

J  .  ,  *  .-ty,  _ _ l,nr,S  1  flm  »-*  AC  t  A  f  /  ’  A>1


- - - -  --  -

1  C /iron.  12.  22.  a  great  host  /.  the  host  of  God
2?.  23.  would  increase  Israel  /.  the  stars  of  heav

2  Chr.  1.9.  over  a  people,  /.the  dust  of  the  eartlj
~21  19.  no  burning  for  nim  /.  burning  of  fathers!

30.7.  be  not  ye  /.  your  fathers  and  your  bretluc
33!  2'.  /.  to  the  abominations  of  the  heathen

35!  18.  there  was  no  passover  /.  to  that  in  Israeli
Job  5.  26.  to  grave  l.  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  n
10. 10.  hast  thou  not  curdled  me  /.  cheese  i

11.  12.  though  man  be  born/,  awild  ass’scolt

12.  25.  he  maketh  them  to  stagger  /.  a  drunken  iv

13.  12.  your  remembrances  are  /.  to  ashes

14!  2.  he  cometh  forth  /.  a  flower  and  is  cut  dow
15. 16.  filthy  is' man,  who  drinketh  iniquity  /.wa,
lb!  14.  he  runneth  upon  me  /.a giant

20.  7.  he  shall  perish  for  ever  /.  his  own  dung

21.  11.  they  send  their  little  ones  /.  a  flock  i

34.7.  Whatman  is  /.  Job,  whodrinketh  scOrninl
36.  22.  God  exalteth  by  power,  whoteacheth  /.hi1
38.  3.  gii'd  up  now  thy  loins  /.  a  man,  40.  7.

40*  9.  fiast  thou  an  arm  /.  God,  or  canst  th undti

41.  33.  on  earth  there  is  not  his  /.  who  is  made
42  8.  ye  have  not  spoken  right  /.  my  servant .!
Ps.  1.  3.  he  shall  be  /.  a  tree  planted  by  the  riv<

4  ungodly  are  not  so,  but  are  /.  the  chaff

7.  2.  lest  he  tearmv  soul  l.  a  lion,  rending  it
17. 12,  /.  as  a  lion  that  is  greedy  of  his  prey

22.  14.  1  am  poured  out  /.  water,  my  heart/.  \
28. 1 .  1  become  /.  them  that  go  down  to  the  pit
31.  12.  I  am  forgotten,  lam  /.  a  broken  vesseii


OL,  XhZ>,  1  am  iw*  - - - -  Z  -l

36.  6.  thy  righteousness  is  /.  the  great  mountain

37.  2.  they  shall  be  soon  cut  down  /.  grass


I  /  .  ZL,  LI  1^  J  0110.1 1  own  -  --  *  O  -

35.  and  spreading  himself  /.  a  green  bay-tree
39. 11.  thou  makest  his  beauty  to  consume  /.liji
44.  11.  thou  hast  given  us  /.  sheep  for  meat
49.  12.  man  is  /.  the  beasts  that  perish,  20.

52  °.  thy  tongue  is  /.  a  sharp  razor  working

8.  but  1  am  /.  a  green  olive-tree  in  the  housed
55.  6.  O  that  1  had  wings  /.  a  dove,  1  would

58.  4.  /.  the  poison  of  a  serpent,  /.  the  deat  add

59.  6.  they  make  a  noise  /.  a  dog,  they  go,  14.
64.  3.  who  whet  their  tongue  /.  a  sword

72.  6.  he  shall  come  down  /.  rain  on  the  grass;

73.  5.  nor  are  they  plagued  /.  other  men

77.  20.  thou  leddestthy  people  /.  attoex,  |8.  a
78.57.  they  dealt  unfaithfully  /.  their  fathers  I

79.  3.  their  blood  have  shed  /.  water  round  Jen

80.  10.  the  boughs  thereof /.  the  good/y  cedar:

82.  7.  but  shall  die  /.men,  and  fall  /.  oneotprr

83.  13.  O  my  God,  make  them  /.  a  wheel

89.  8.  a  strong  Lord  /.  to  thee,  113.  5.  Mic.  < .  |
92.  12.  the  righteous  shall  flourish  /.  the  pr
tree,  he  shall  grow  /.  a  cedar  in  Leb.'

102.  4.  my  heart  is  smitten,  withered  /.  grass!
6  l  am  /.  a  pelican,  /.  an  owl  ot  the  desert  ,
26.  all  of  them  shall  wax  old  /.  a  garment

103.  13.  /.  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  1

104.  2.  who  stretchest  out  the  heavens  /.  a  cur:

105.  41.  they  ran  in  the


e  dry  places  /.  a  river

107!  27.  they  reel  and  stagger  /.  a  drunken  9


109.  18.  /.  water,  /.  oil  let  it  come  into  his  bo
115.  8.  they  that  make  them  are  /.  to  them,  l.'f
126.  1.  captivity  of  Zion,  we  were  /.  themuri

143.  7.  lest  l  be  /.  them  that  go  down  to  tnej

144.  4.  man  is  /.  to  vanity,  his  days  as  a  shad
147.  16.  he  giveth  snow  /.  wool,  hoar  trost /.  ap
Prov.  18.  19.  their  contentions  /.  the  bars  ot  a  <f
20.  5.  counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  is  /.  deep

23.  32.  it  biteth  /.  a  serpent,  stingeth  /.  an  act

25.  19.  in  an  unfaithful  man  is  /.  a  broxen
28.  /.  a  city  broken  down,  and  without  wall

26.  4.  answer  not  a  tool,  lest  thou  be  /.  to  till
Cant.  2.  9.  my  beloved  is  /.  a  roe  or  young  h,

17.  turn,  my  beloved,  and  be  thou /.  a  ioe,

3  6  who  is  this  that  cometh  /.  pillars  ot  smq

4  2  thy  teeth  are  /.  a  flock  ot  sheep  even  sin

3.  thy  lips/,  scarlet,  temples  /.  a  pomegranl

4.  thy  neck  is  l.  the  tower  ot  David  for  aint
5  thy  two  breasts  are  /.  two  young  roes,  7-

5. 13.  his  lips  /.  lilies  dropping.sweet  myrrh  I
6  12.  my  soul  made  me  /.  chariots  ot  Ammif
7!  1.  the  joints  of  thy  thighs  are  /.  jewels
2.  thy  navel  is  L  a  goblet,  thy  belly  is  /.  f

4.  eyes  ||  5.  bead,  hair  ||7-  stature  /.  a  pain
8.  and  the  smell  of  thy  nose  /.  apples
Isa.  1.  9.  should  have  been  /.  Gomorrah  Rome

18.  tho’  your  sins  be  red  /.  crimson, shall  lie  a-
ID.  13.  put  down  the  inhabitants/,  a  valiant
11.  7.  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  /.the  ox

16.  and  shall  be  an  highway,  /.as  it  was  to
14  10.  they  shall  say ,  art  thou  become  /.  to

14.  lw  ill  ascend,  f  will  be  /.  the  Mos

19.  thou  art  cast  out/,  an  abominable  bi*c
lb!  11 .  my  bowels  shall  sound  /.an  harp  tor  >

19.  16.  in  that  day  shall  Egypt  be  /.  unt •

20.  3.  /.  as  my  servant  Isaiah  hath  walkcl ^n  ^

00  18  will  toss  thee  /.  a  ball  into  <i  F

26.  17.  /.  a  woman  with  ehilil  thatdraweth|
30.  33.  breath  of  the  I  Did  /.  a  stream  ofb'1*
33. 9.  Sharon  is  /.  a  wilderness,  Bashan  aud
38.  12.  1  have  cut  off/,  a  weaver  my  life

14.  /.  a  crane  or  swallow  so  did  chatte  t

42.  14.  now  will  1  cry  1.  a  travailin, .  ®

46. 5. to  whom  will  ye  compare  methatwei


L  1  K


LIO


.  57.  20.  the  wicked  are  /.  the  troubled  sea

1.  spare  not,  lift  up  ihy  voice  /.  a  trumpet
l.  be  /.  a  watered  garden,  and  /.aspring

10.  we  grope  for  the  wail  /.the  blind

we  roar  all  /.  bears,  and  mourn  sore  /.  doves
),  when  the  enemy  shall  come  in  /.  a  Hood

2.  /.  him  that  treadeth  in  the  wine-fat

6.  our  iniquities  /.  wind  have  taken  us  awa>

12.  1  wilL  extend  peace  to  her  /.  a  river
4.  4.  lest  my  fury  come  forth  /.  fire,  21.  12.

19.  /.  as  ye  have  forsaken  me,  and  served  gods

16.  the  portion  of  Jacob  is  not  /.  them

19.  1  was  /.  a  lamb  brought  to  the  slaughter
6.  for  he  shall  be  /.  the  heath  in  the  desert
29.  is  not  my  word  /.  fire,  and  /.a  hammer?

6.  then  will  l  make  this  house  /.  Shiloh,  9.

i.  saying,  Zion  shall  be  plowed  /.  a  field
l.  22.  make  thee  /.  Zedekiah  and  /.  Ahab
32.  were  added  besides  to  them  many  /.  words

9.  he  is  /.  to  die  with  hunger  where  he  is

20.  Egypt  is  /.  a  very  fair  heifer,  but  destruct.
6.  flee,  he  /.  the  heath  in  the  wilderness

1.  be  /.  dove  ||  49.  19.  shall  come  /.  a  lion,  50.‘44.
19.  who  is  /.  me,  who  will  appoint  ?

19-  the  portion  of  J  acob  is  not  /.  them

k.  5.  9.  whereto  I  will  not  do  any  more  the  /.

11.  /.  as  1  have  done,  so  shall  it  be  done  them

10.  and  doth  the  /.  to  any  of  these  things

8.  the  house  of  Judah  is  /.  to  all  the  heathen

2.  whom  art  thou  /.  in  thy  greatness,  18.
not  any  tree  was  /.  to  him  in  his  beauty

25.  in  the  seventh  month  shall  he  do  the  /.

».  3. 25.  the  form  of  the  fourth  is  /.  the  Son  of  G .
!1.  his  heart  was  made  /.  the  beasts,  /.  oxen
.3.  one  /.  the  Son  of  man  came  with  clouds
.  4.  9-  and  there  shall  be  /.  people,  /.  priest  ■

10.  the  princes  /.  them  that  remove  the  bound

’.  but  they  /.  men  have  transgressed  the  coven.
8. 1  am  /.  a  green  fir-tree,  from  me  is  fruit
,  2. 2.  there  hath  not  been  ever  the  /.  nor  shall  be
os  5.  6.  lest  he  break  out  /.  fire  in  Joseph
).  and  invent  instruments  of  music  /.  David
,  4.  1.  6.  /.  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  thought  to  do
6.  nake  the  governors  of  Judah  /.a  hearth
.  3.16.  the  Spirit  descending  /.  a  dove,  and  light¬
ing  on  him,  Mark  1. 10.  Luke  3.  22.  John  1.  32.
5.  be  not  ye  therefore  /.  unto  them
'.  was  not  arrayed  /.  one  of  these,  Luke  12.  27.
16. /.  childr.  sitting  in  the  market,  Luke  7.  32.

13.  it  was  restored  whole  /.  as  the  other
31.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  /.  to  a  grain  of
mustard  seed,  Mark  4.  31.  Luke  13.  19.

.  kingdom  of  heaven  is  Z.  leaven,  Luke  13.  21.

.  is  /.  to  a  treasure  |[  45.  is  /.  to  a  merchant
.  is  /.  to  a  net  ||  52.  is  /.  an  householder,  20.  1.

2.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  /.  to  a  certain  king
.  and  the  second  is  /.  to  .it,  Mark  12.  31.

27.  for  ye  are  l.  to  whited  sepulchres

3.  his  countenance  was  /.  lightning,  and  raiment
e  6.47.  1  will  shew  you  to  wlioni  he  is  /.

11.  and  to  what  are  they  /.  ?  ||  32.  are  /.  childr.
18.  he  said,  to  what  is  the  kingdom  of  God  /.  ?

1  7.  46.  answered,  never  man  spake  /.  this  man
>5.  I  shall  be  a  liar  /.  unto  you,  but  1  know

).  some,  this  is  he,  others  said,  he  is  /.  him
r  8.  32.  /.  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  shearer
17-  forasmuch  as  God  gave  them  the  /.  gift
15.  we  also  are  men  of  /.  passions  with  you

29-  not  to  think  the  Godhead  is  /.  gold  or  silver
25.  with  the  workmen  of  /.  occupation

l.  1.  23.  an  image  made  /.  to  corruptible  man
i.  /.  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead

-.  3.  21.  fashioned  /.  unto  his  glorious  body
ess.  2. 14.  suffered  l.  things  of  your  countrymen
.  2. 17.  it  behoved  him  to  be  made  /.  his  brethren
5.  was  in  all  points  tempted  /.  as  we  are
.  but  made  l.  to  the  Son  of  God,  abides  a  priest
.1.6.  that  wavereth  is  /.  a  wave  of  the  sea
.  he  is  l.  a  man  beholding  his  natural  face
7-  Elias  was  a.  man  subject  to  /.  passions
it.  3.  21.  /.  figure  whereunto  baptism  save  us
’t.  1. 1.  have  obtained  /.  precious  faith  with  us
hn  3.  2.  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  /.  him
.  1.  13.  one  /.  the  Son  of  man,  clothed,  14. 14.

4.  worshipped,  saying,  who  is  /.  to  the  beast  ?

.  he  had  two  horns  /.  a  lamb,  and  he  spake  as
13.  1  saw  three  unclean  spirits  /.  frogs  come
18.  saying,  what  city  is  /.  to  this  great  city  ?

LIKE  manner.

f.  7.11.  did  in  /.  man.  with  their  enchantments
11.  in  /.  man.  thou  shalt  deal  with  thy  vineyard
t.  22.  3.  in  /.  manner  shalt  thou  do  with  Ins  ass

i.ll.  17.  in  l.  manner  they  sent  to  king  of  Moab

m.  19. 24.  he  prophesied  before  Samuel  in  l.  ma.

.  6. 5.  Sanballat  sent  in  l.  manner  the  fifth  time
51. 6.  that  dwell  there  shall  die  in  /.  manner

k  13.  29.  ye,  in  /.  man.  when  ye  see  these  things
E  e  6. 23..  in  l.  man.  did  their  fathers  to  prophets
31.  third  took  her,  in  /.  man.  the  seventh  also

1. 11.  shall  so  come  in  l.  man.  as  ye  have  seen
m-  2. 9.  in  /.  m.  that  women  adorn  themselves
f  7.  in  /.  man.  giving  themselves  to  fornication
LIKE-MINDED.

*•  5.  5.  the  God  of  patience  grant  you  to  be  /.  m.

2.  2.  that  ye  be  /.  m.  ||  20. 1  have  no  man  l.  m.

‘  None  LIKE.

*•  8.  10.  there  is  none  l.  the  Lord  our  G.  9.  14.

Dent.  3.3.  26.  2  Sam.  7.  22.  1  Chron.  17.  20.
■4.  none  l.  the  hail  ||  11.  6.  none  1.  cry  of  Egypt
w.  10.  24.  none  l.  Saul  among  all  the  people

9.  David  said,  there  is  none  l.  that,  give  it  me
'ngs?>.  12.  there  was  n.  1.  Sol.  j(  21.  25.  n.  1.  Ahab

18.5.  so  that  after  there  was  n.  1.  Hezekiah
1.8.  that  there  is  none  l.  him  in  the  earth,  2.  3.

»6. 8.  among  the  gods  n.  1.  to  thee,  Jer.  10. 6, 7.
46.  9-  tor  l  am  God,  and  there  is  none  l.  me

30- 7.  alas,  that  day  is  great,  so  that  none  l.  it
L  19.  among  all  was  found  none  l.  Daniel

,  AmcALIKE.

r-l“-  14.  considereth,  and  doeth  not  such  l.

V  • 8.  many  other  such  l.  things  ye  do,  13.

5.  21.  envyings,  drunkenness,  and  such  /.


L  1  L

LIKE.

Dent.  25.  7.  if  the  man  /.  not  to  take  her,  8.

Horn.  1.  28.  even  as  they  did  not  /.  to  retain  God
LIKED.

1  Chr.  28.  4.  among  the  sons  of  my  father  he  /.  rm
LIKEN.

Isa.  40.  18.  to  whom  then  will  ve/.  God  ?  25.  |  46.  5.
Lam.  2.  13.  what  thing  shall  I  /.  to  thee  ?

Mat.  7.  24.  and  doeth' them,  1  will  /.  him  to  a  man
11.  16.  whereto  /.  this  generation,  Luke  7.  31.
Mark  4.  30.  whereunto  t.  the  kingdom,  Luke  13  <>0
LIKENED.

Ps.  89.  6.  who  among  the  sons  can  be  l.  to  Lord  ?
Jer.  6. 2.  I  have  /.  the  daughter  of  Zion  to  a  comely
Mat.  7.  26.  shall  be  /.  to  a  foolish  man  who  built
13.  24.  kingdom  of  heaven  is  /.  18.  23.  I  25.  1.

LI  KEN  ESS

Signifies,  [1]  The  external  visible  form  or  represent¬
ation  of  a  thing ,  Ezek.  1.  5.  [2]  An  image  repre¬
senting  a  person  or  thing,  Deut.  4. 12,  15.  Isa.  40.
18.  [3]  A  true  arid  real  resemblance  between  one
person  and  another,  Gen.  5.  3.

Gen.  1.  26.  let  us  make  man  after  our  /.  5.  1.

5.  3.  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  /.

Exod.  20.  4.  not  make  the  /.  of  any  thing
Dent.  4.  16.  lest  ye  make  a  graven  image,  the  /.  of
,  male  or  female,  1?,  18,  23,  25.  I  5.  8.

Psal.  17.  t  12.  /.  of  him  is  as  a  lion  that  desireth

17.  15.  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  awake  with  thy  /.
Isa.  13.  +  4.  /.  of  great  people  gathered  together
40.  18.  or  what  /.  will  ye  compare  to  him  ?

Ezek.  1.  5.  came  the  /.  of  four  living  creatures

10.  as  for  the  /.  of  their  faces,  10.  22.

13.  /.  of  lamps  ||  16.  they  four  had  one  /.  10.  10.

22.  the  /.  of  the  firmament  was  as  crystal

26.  /.  of  a  throne,  10.  1.  |  8.  2.  lo,  a/,  as  of  fire
28.  this  was  the  /.  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord
10.  21.  and  the  /.  of  the  hands  of  a  man
19.  +  10.  thy  mother  is  like  a  vine  in  thy  l.

Acts  14.  11.  gods  are  come  down  in  the  /.  of  men
Rom.  6.  5.  if  we  have  been  planted  in  the  /.  of  his
death,  we  shall  be  also  in  the  /.  of  his  resurrection
8.  3.  God  sending  his  Son  in  the  /.  of  sinful  flesh
Phil.  2.  7.  and  was  made  «n  the  /.  of  men
LIKETH.

Deut.  23.  16.  he  shall  dwell  where  it  /.  him  best
Esth.  8.  8.  write  ye  also  for  the  Jews  as  it  /.  you
Amos  4.  5.  for  this  /.  you,  O  children  of  Israel
LIKING.

Job  39.  4.  their  37oung  ones  are  in  good  l.  grow  ud
LIKING.

Dan.  1. 10.  why  should  he  see  your  faces  worse  /.

LIKEWISE.

Exod.  22.  30.  /.  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  oxen
Deut.  12.  30.  serve  their  gods,  even  so  will  I  do  /.
15.  17.  to  thy  maid  servant  thou  shalt  do  /.

22.  3.  to  thy  brother’s  lost  goods  shalt  thou  do  /.
Judg.  7.  17.  he  said  to  them,  look  on  me,  and  do  /.
\Sam.  19. 21.  sent  messengers,  and  they  prophesied  /.

31.  5.  fell  /.  on  bis  sword,  and  died  with  him
2  Sam.  17.  5.  and  let  us  hear  /.  what  he  saith
1  Kings  11.  8.  and  /.  did  he  for  all  his  strange  wives
1  Chron.  19.  15.  /.  fled  before  Abishai  his  brother

23.  30.  to  praise  every  morning  and  /.  at  even
Reh.  5.  10.  I  /.  might  exact  of  them  money
Esth.  4.  16.  I  also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  l.
Psal.  49.  10.  /.  the  fool  and  brutish  person  perish
52.  5.  God  shall  /.  destroy  thee  for  ever

Eccl.  7.  22.  knowest  thou  thys.  /.  hast  cursed  others
Nah.  1.  12.  though  they  be  quiet  and  /.  many,  yet
Mat.  17.  12.  /.  shall  also  Son  of  man  suffer  of  them

18.  35.  so  /.  shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  to  you

20.  5.  he  went  about  the  sixth  hour,  and  did  /.

10.  they  /.  received  every  man  a  penny

21.  30.  he  came  to  the  second  and  said  /.

36.  other  servants,  and  they  did  unto  them  /.

22.  26.  /.  the  second  and  third  died,  Mark  12.  21.

24.  33.  so  /.  when  ye  see  these  things,  Luke  21.  31.

25.  17.  /.  he  that  had  received  two  talents

26.  35.  /.  also  said  all  his  disciples,  Mark  14.  31.

27.  41.  /.  the  chief  priests  mocked,  Mark  15.  31.
Luke  2.  38.  and  she  gave  thanks  /.  to  the  Lord

3. 11.  let  him  do  /.  ||  6.  31.  do  ye  also  to  them  /.

10.  37.  go  and  do  /.  H  13.  3.  ye  shall  /.  perish,  5.

14.  33.  /.  who  forsaketh  not  all  that  he  hath

15.  7.  /.  joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one,  10.

16.  25.  /.  Lazarus  received  evil  things,  but.  now

17.  10.  so  /.  when  ye  shall  have  done  all  things
22.  20.  /.  also  the  cup  after  supper,  saying

John  5. 19.  what  he  doeth,  these  also  doeth  the  Son  /.
Acts  3.  24.  prophets  have  /.  foretold  of  these  days
Rom.  1.  27.  /.  the  men  leaving  the  natural  use

6.  11.  /.  reckon  yourselves  to  be  dead  to  sin
8.  26.  /.  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities
1  Cor.  7-  3.  and  /.  also  the  wife  to  the  husband
Gal.  2.  13.  other  Jews  dissembled  /.  with  him
1  Tim.  5. 25.  /.  the  good  works  of  some  are  manifest
Tit.  2.  6.  young  men  /.  exhort  to  be  sober-minded
Heb.  2.  14.  he  also  himself  /.  took  part  of  the  same
1  Pet.  4.  1.  arm  yourselves  /.  with  the  same  mind
Jude  8.  /.  these  filthy  dreamers  defile  the  flesh
Rev.  8.  12.  the  day  shone  not,  and  the  night  /.
LIKE  wise.

Mat.  21.  24.  I  in  /.  wise  will  tell  by  what  authority
•  LILY

Signifies,  The  beautiful,  fragrant,  and  medicinal
flower  so  called.  Mat.  6.  28.  lo  which  are  com¬
pared,  [1]  Christ,  who  is  refreshing  and  beautiful
to  true  believers.  Cant.  2.  1.  [2]  His  church  and
people,  Cant.  2.  2,  16.

Cant.  2. 1. 1  am  the  rose  of  Sharon,  and  l.  of  valleys
2.  as  the  /.  among  thorns,  so  is  my  love  among
Hos.  14. 5.  Israel  shall  grow  as  the  /.  and  cast  forth
LILIES.

1  Kings’!.  26.  wrought  with  flowers  of  /.  2  Chr.  4.  5.
Cant.  2.  16.  my  beloved  feedeth  among  the  /.  6.  3.

4.  5.  like  two  young  roes  which  feed  among  the  /.

5.  13.  his  lips  like  /.  dropping  sweet  myrrh
7-  2.  thy  belly  is  like  wheat  set  about  with  /.

Mat. 6. 28.consid.the  /.  how  they  grow,  Luke\1. 27.
LI  LY  work.

1  Kings  7. 19.  the  chapiters  were  of /.  w.  in  the  porch


1  A  in.  7.  22.  and  on  the  top  of  the  pillars  was  l.  work
LIM  E.

Isa.  33. 12.  the  people  shall  be  as  the  burnings  of,.
Amos  2.  1.  he  burned  bones  of  king  of  Edom  to  /
LIMIT.

Ezek.  4.3.  12.  the  /.  thereof  shall  be  most  holy
LIMITED.

Psal.  78.  41.  they  /.  the  Holy  One  of  Israel
LIMITETH.

Heb.  4. 7.  again,  he  /.  a  certain  day,  saving,  to-dav
.  .  LINE  '

Signifies,  [1]  A  cord  or  instrument  to  measure  any
thing  by,  1  Kings  7.  15,  23.  [2]  Direction  or  De¬
struction  given  us  by  any  thing,  Psalm  19.  4,  [3]
A  portion  measured  by  line,  Psalm  16.  6.  [4]
The  doctrine  of  the  word  briefly  and  plainly  de¬
livered,  Isa.  28.  10,  13.  [5]  Judgment  and  de¬

struction  laid  along  upon  some  place  or  person  as
it  were  by  line,  2  Kings  21.  13.  [6]  A  building  or
edifice  made  by  line,  Zech.  1.  16.

Josh.  2. 18.  bind  this  /.  of  scarlet  thread  in  window
21.  she  bound  the  scarlet  /.  in  the  window
2  Sam.  8.  2.  he  measured  Moab  with  a/,  with  one  /.

1  A  mgs  7.15.  and  a  /.  of  twelve  cubits  did  com  pass
23.  a  /.  of  thirty  cubits  did  compass,  2  Chr.  4.  2.

2 Kings  21. 13.  stretch  over  Jerusalem  /.of  Samaria
Job  38.  5.  or  who  hath  stretched  the  /.  on  the  earth  -
Psal.  19.  4.  their  /.  is  gone  through  all  the  earth
78.  55.  he  divided  them  an  inheritance  by  /.

Isa.  18.  +  2.  a  nation  of  /.  /.  and  treading  under  foot
28. 10.  for  /.  must  be  upon  /.  /.  upon  /.  13.

17.  judgment  also  will  I  lay  to  the  /.  and  right
34.  11.  shall  stretch  out  on  it  the  /.  of  confusion
17.  his  hand  hath  divided  it  to  them  by  /.

44.  13.  he  marketh  it  out  with  a  /.  he  fitteth  it
Jer.  31.  39.  the  measuring  /.  shall  yet  go  forth
Lam.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  stretched  out  a  /.

Ezek.  40.  3.  a  man  that  had  the  /.  of  flax  in  his  hand
47.  3.  the  man  that  had  the  /.  went  eastward
Amos  7. 17.  thy  land  shall  be  divided  by  /.  and  die
Zech.  1.  16.  a  /.  shall  be  stretched  on  Jerusalem
2.  1.  a  man  with  a  measuring  /.  in  his  hand

2  Cor.  10.  16.  not  to  boast  in  another  man’s  /.

LINEAGE.

Luke  2.  4.  because  he  was  of  the  /.  of  David
LIN  ES.

2  Sam.  8.  2.  with  two  /.  measured  he  to  put  to  death
Psal.  16.  6.  the  /.  are  fallen  in  pleasant  places
LINGERED.

Gen.  19.  16.  while  Lot  /.  the  men  laid  hold  on  hand
43.  10.  except  we  had  /.  surely  we  had  returned
LIN  GEE  ETH.

2  Pet.  2.  3.  whose  judgment  of  a  long  time  /.  not
LINEN.

Exod.  28.  42.  thou  shalt  make  them  /.  breeches
Lev.  6.  10.  put  on  /.  garment  and  /.  breeches  16.  4.
13.  47.  whether  woollen  or/,  garment,  48,52,  59.

16.  23.  Aaron  shall  put  off  the  /.  garments

32.  /.  clothes  and  /.  garments,  Ezek.  44.  17, 18.  .

1  Sam.  2. 18.  Samuel  fninistered  with  a  /.  ephod

22.  18.  slew  85  persons  that  did  wear  a  /.  ephod

2  Sam.  6.  14.  David  was  girded  with  a  /.  ephod

1  Kings  10.  28.  Solomon  had  /.  yarn  brought,  the-
merchants  received  the  /.  yarn.  2  Chron.  1.  16.
Jer.  13.  1.  get  thee  a/,  girdle,  put  it  on  thy  loins
Mat.  27.  59.  wrapped  it  in  a/,  cloth,  John  19.  40.
Mark  14.  51.  a  /.  cloth  cast  about  his  naked  body
52.  and  he  left  the  /.  cloth  and  fled  naked
Luke  24.  12.  Peter  beheld  the  /.  clothes,  John  20.  6.
John  20.  5.  John  saw  the  /.  clothes,  yet  went  not  in
LINEN.

Lev.  19.  19.  nor  shall  a  garment  mingled  of  l.  and
woollen  come  upon  thee,  Deut.Q 2.  II.

1  Chron.  15.  27.  David  had  on  him  an  ephod  of  /.
Mark  15.  46.  wrapped  him  in  the  /.  Luke  23.  53.
Rev.  15.  6.  seven  angels  clothed  in  pure  and  white  /.
See  Fine.

LINTEL.

Exod.  12.  22.  and  strike  the  /.  and  two  side-posts

23.  when  he  seeth  blood  on  the  /.  he  will  pass

1  Kings  6.  31.  the  /.  and  side-posts  were  a  fifth  part
Amos  9.  1.  smite  the  /.  that  the  posts  may  shake
LINTELS.

Zeph.  2.  14.  bittern  shall  lodge  in  the  upper/,  of  it
LION

Ts  taken,  properly,  for  the  most  courageous  and
generous  of  all  wild  beasts,  an  emblem  of  strength
and  valour.  Job  38.  39.  Prov.  28. 1.  To  which  are
compared,  [lj  Christ  Jesus,  the  great,  mighty,
and  invincible  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  who  con¬
quers  and  leads  captive  his  own  and  his  people's
enemies,  Rev.  5.  5.  [2]  The- tribe  of  Judah  and
its  kings,  who  were  valiant,  courageous,  and  ter¬
rible  to  their  enemies,  and  made  a  prey  of  them,
Gen.  49.  9.  [3]  The  devil,  who,  like  a  fierce  and
hungry  lion,  seeks  all  opportunities  and  advan¬
tages  to  insnare  and  destroy  mankind,  1  Pet.  5.  8.

[4]  Tyrants  and  violent  oppressors,  2  Tim.  4.

17.  [5]  Enemies  and  evils  of  every  kind,  Psal.
91.  13.  [6]  Some  pretended  difficulties  and  hin-
derances  to  divert  one  from  his  duty,  Prov.
22.  13.

Gen.  49.  9.  Judah  couched  as  a  /.  who  shall  rouse
Num.  24.  9.  Israel  lay  down  as  a  /.  as  a  great/.

Deut.  33.  20.  Gad  dwelleth  as  a  /.  and  tearetb
Judg.  14.  8.  he  turned  to  see  the  carcase  of  /.  there
was  a  swarm  of  bees  and  honey  in  carcase  of  l.

18.  the  men  said,  what  is  stronger  than  a  /.  ?

1  Sam.  17.  34.  there  came  a  /.  and  took  a  lamb

2  Sam.  if.  10.  whose  heart  is  as  the  heart  of  a  /.

23. 20.  slew  a  /.  in  the  midst  of  a  pit,  1  Chr.  11. 22.

1  Kings  13.  24.  when  gone,  a  /.  met  him  by  the  way
and  slew  him,  the  /.  also  stood  by  thecarcase

25.  men  saw  the  /.  standing  by  the  carcase,  28.

26.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  him  to  the  /.

20.  36.  as  soon  as  thou  art  departed  from  me,  a  /,
shall  slay  thee  ;  a  /.  found  him  and  slew  him
Job  4.  10.  the  roaring  of  the  /.  voice  of  the  fierce  1.

10.  16.  thou  huntest  me  as  a  fierce  /.

28.  8.  nor  the  fierce  /.  passed  by  it

38.  39.  wilt  thou  hunt  the  prey  for  the  /.  *

Psal.  7.  2.  lest  he  tear  my  sou’  like  a  /.  rending

281


LIP


LIT


LIP


Psal.  10.  9.  he  lieth  in  wait  secretly  as  a  /.

17.  12.  like  a  l.  that  is  greedy  of  his  prey
22.  13.  they  gaped  on  me  as  a  roaring  /.

91.  13.  thou  shalt  tread  on  the  /.  and  adder
prov.  19. 12.  the  king’s  wrath  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  /.

20.  2.  the  fear  of  a  king  is  as  the  roaring  ot  a  /.

22. 13.  the  slothful  saith,  there  is  a  /.  in  the  way

26.  13.  there  is  a  /.  in  the  way,  a  /.  in  the  street
28. 1.  but  the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  /.

30.  30.  a  /.  which  is  strongest  among  beasts

Ecct.  9.  4.  a  living  dog  is  better  than  a  dead  t.

Isa.  5.  29.  their  roaring  shall  be  like  a  /.  shall  roar

11.  7.  the  /.  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox,  65.  25.

€1.  8.  he  cried,  a  /.  my  lord,  1  stand  on  watch
29  1 1.  woe  to  the  /.  of  God,  city  where  Dav.  dwelt
35.  9.  no  /.  shall  be  there,  nor  ravenous  beast

38. 13.  as  a  /.  so  will  he  break  all  my  bqnes
e,"  2.  30.  hath  devoured  your  prophets  like  a  l.

4.  7.  the  /.  is  come  up  from  his  thicket

a  /.out  of  the  forest  shall  slay  them
lx.  8.  my  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  /.  in  the  forest
25!  38.  he  hath  forsaken  his  covert  as  the  /.

49.  19.  behold,  he  shall  come  up  like  a  /.  50.  44.
l.ant.  3.  10.  he  was  to  me  as  a  /.  in  secret  places
Ezek.  1.  10.  and  the  face  of  a  /.  on  the  right  side

10.  14.  and  the  third  was  the  face  of  a  /.

22.  25.  a  conspiracy  of  prophets  like  a  roaring  /.

Van.  7.  4.  the  first  was  like  a  /.  and  had  wings
Vos.  5.  14.  for  I  will  be  to  Ephraim  as  a  /.

11.  10.  he  shall  roar  like  a  /.  when  he  shall  roar
13.7. 1  will  be  to  them  as  a  /.  ||  8.  1  will  devour  as  a/.

Joel  1.  6.  teeth  of  a  l.  cheek-teeth  of  a  great  /.

Amos  3.  4.  will  a  /.  roar  wdien  he  hath  no  prey  ?

8.  the  l.  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear  r

12.  as  shepherd  taketh  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  /.
Mic,  5.  8.  the  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  as  a  /.

Vah.  2.12.  /.  did  tear  in  pieces  enough  for  his  whelps
2  Tim.  4.  1“.  1  was  delivered  outof  mouth  of  the  /.

1  Pet.  5.  8.  the  devil  as  a  roaring  /.  walketh  about
Pen.  4.  7.  and  the  first  beast  was  like  a  /.

5.  5.  the  /.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  hath  prevailed

10.  3.  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  when  a  /.  roareth

13.  2.  and  his  mouth  as  the  mouth  of  a  /.

See  Bear.

LION-LIKE.

2 Sam.  23.20.  slew  two  /.-/.  men  of  Moab,  lCAr.11.22.
Old  LION.

Gen.  49.  9.  as  an  old  l.  who  shall  rouse  him  up  ?

Job  4.  11.  the  oldl.  perisheth  for  lack  of  prey
Jsa.  30.  6.  from  whence  come  the  young  and  old  l.?
Nah.  2.  11.  where  the  lion,  even  the  old  l.  walked
Young  LION.

Num.  23.  24.  and  shall  lift  up  himself  as  a  young  l.
Judg.  14.  5.  behold,  a  young l.  roared  against  him
Psal.  17.  12.  as  it  were  a  young  l.  lurking  in  secret
91.  13.  the  young  l.  shalt  thou  trample  under  feet
Isa.  11.  6.  the  calf  and  young  l.  lie  down  together

31.  4.  like  as  the  young  l.  roaring  on  his  prey
Ezek.  19.  3.  it  became  a  it'.  /.  and  learned  to  catch,  6.

5.  tiien  she  took  another,  and  made  him  a  young  l.

32.  2.  thou  art  like  a  young  l.  of  the  nations

41.  19.  faceof  a  young  l.  was  towards  the  palm  tree
llos.  5.14.  1  will  be  as  a  y.  /.to  the  house  of  Judah
Amos  3.  4.  will  h  young  l.  cry  outof  his  den,  if  taken?
Mic.  5. 8.  as  a  young  l.  among  the  flocks  of  sheep
LION  ESS.

Ezek.  19.  2.  and  say,  what  is  thy  mother?  a  /.
LIONESSES.

Nah.  2.  12.  the  lion  strangled  for  his  /.  and  filled
LIONS.

2  Sam.  1. 23.  Saul  and  Jonathan  stronger  than  /.

1  Kings  7.  2Q.  on  the  borders  were  /.  beneath  the  /.
36.  he  graved  cherubims.  /.  and  palm-trees

10.  19.  two  /.  stood  beside  the  stays,  2  Chr.  9.  18.
20.  twelve  l.  stood  on  the  one  side,  2  Chr.  9.  19.

2  Kings  17.  25.  the  Lord  sent  /.  among  fhem

26.  therefore  he  hath  sent  /.  among  them

1  Chron.  12.  8.  whose  faces  were  like  faces  of  /.
Psal.  22.  21.  save  me  from  the  /.  mouth  for  thou
35.  17.  Lord,  rescue  my  darling  from  the  /.

57.  4.  my  soul  is  among  /.  1  lie  even  among  them
Cant.  4. 8.  look  from  top  of  Amana,  from  the  /.  dens
Jsa.  15.  9.  /.  upon  him  that  escapeth  of  Moab
Jer.  50.  17.  the  /.  have  driven  Israel  away
51.  38.  they  shall  roar  together  like  /.

Ezek.  19.2.  a  lioness,  she  lay  down  among  /.

6.  he  went  up  and  down  among  the  /.

Van.  6.  24.  and  the  /.  had  the  mastery  of  them

27.  who  delivered  Daniel  from  the  power  of  the  /.
Nah.  2.  11.  where  is  the  dwelling  of  the  /.  ?

Zeph.  3.  3.  her  princes  within  are  roaring  /.

lleb.  11.  33.  through  faith  stopped  the  mouths  of  l.
Pee.  9.  8.  their  teeth  were  as  the  teeth  of  /.

17.  the  heads  of  the  horses  were  as  the  heads  of  l.
See  Den.

LION’S  whelp,  whelps.

Gen.  49.  9.  Judah  is  /.  whelp,  from  the  prey,  my  son
Vent.  33.  22.  Dan  is  a  /.  whelp,  he  shall  leap  from
Job  4.  11.  the  stout  /.  whelps  are  scattered  abroad

28.  8.  the  l.  whelps  have  not  trodden  it,  nor  fierce
Jer.  51.  38.  shall  roar,  they  shall  yell  as  /.  whelps

Young  LIONS.

Job  4.  10.  the  teeth  of  the  young  l.  are  broken
38.  39.  wilt  thou  fill  the  appetite  of  the  young  l.  ?
Psal.  34.  10.  the  young  l.  do  lack  and  sutler  hunger
58.  6.  break  out  the  great  teeth  of  the  young  l.

104.  21.  the  young  l.  roar  after  their  prey
Isa.  5. 29.  they  shall  roar  like  young  /.  and  lay  hold
Jer.  2.  15.  the  young  l.  roared  upon  him  and  yelled
Ezek.  19.  2.  she  nourished  her  whelps  among  y.  1.
38.  13.  with  all  the  young  l.  shall  say  to  thee
Nah.  2.11.  where  is  the  feeding- place  of  the  young  l.?

13.  and  the  sword  shall  devour  thy  young  l.

Zech.  11. 3.  there  is  a  voice  of  the  roaring  of  young  l
LIP

Signifies,  Cl]  The  upper  and  nether  part  of  the
mouth.  Lev.  13.  45.  [2]  Words,  or  impatient

and  unbecoming  expressions,  Job  2.  10.  ^  [3]  Lan¬
guage  or  speech,  Gen.  11.  +  1.  [4]  The  mouth,

together  with  an  ability  and  liberty  to  speak  to
God's  honour,  and  sing  to  his  praise,  Psal.  51.
15.  [5]  The  tongue,  Prov.  10.  19.  Isa.  28.  11.

282


and  profession  of  religion,


[6]  Cut  card  devotion
Isa.  29.  13.

Gen  11.  f  1.  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  /.

Lev.  13.45.  he  shall  put  a  covering  on  his  /.

Judg.  7.  t  22.  host  tied  to  the  /.  of  Abel-meholah

1  kings  9.  126.  in  Ezion-geber  on  /.  ot  the  Bed  sea

2  Kings  2.  l  13.  Elisha  stood  by  the  /.of  Jordan
Psal.  22.  7 .  they  shoot  out  the  /.  they  shake  the  head
Prov.  12.  19.  the  /.  of  truth  shall  be  established
Ezek.  36.  1  3.  made  to  come  on  the  /.  of  the  tongue
Mic.  3.  t  7.  they  shall  cover  the  upper  /.

LIPS.

Exod.  6.  12.  who  am  of  uncircumcised  /.  30.

Num.  30.  6.  or  uttered  ought  out  of  her  /.  8,  12.

1  Sam.  1. 13.  spake  in  her  heart,  only  her  /.  moved

2  Kings  18. 120.  they  are  but  words  ot  /.  Isa.  36. 1 5.
Psal.  12.  2.  with  flattering  /.  do  they  speak

3.  the  Lord  shall  cut  off  all  flattering  /.

4.  our  /.  are  our  own,  who  is  lord  over  us  ?

17. 1.  my  prayer  thatgoeth  not  out  of  feigned  /.

31. 18.  let  the  lying  /.  be  put  to  silence,  which  speak
59.  7.  behold,  swords  are  in  their  /.  who  doth  hear  ?

12.  for  the  words  of  their  /.  let  them  betaken
63.  5.  my  mouth  shall  praise  thee  with  joyful  l.

120.  2.  deliver  my  soul,  O  Lord,  from  lying  /.

110.  3 .‘adders’  poison  is  under  their  /.

9.  let  the  mischief  of  their  own  /.  cover  them
Prov.  4.  24.  and  perverse  /.  nut  far  from  thee
5.  3.  /.  of  a  strange  woman  drop  as  an  honey  comb
7.  21.  with  flattering  of  her  /.  she  forced  him
10.  13.  in  the  /.  of  him  that  hath  understanding
18.  he  that  hideth  hatred  with  lying  /.  is  a  fool
21.  the  /.  of  the  righteous  feed  many,  but  fools
32.  the  /.  of  righteous  know  what  is  acceptable
12.  22.  lying  /.  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord
IE  3.  but  the  /.  of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them
7.  when  perceivest  notin  him  the  /.ot  knowledge
23.  the  talk  of  the  /.  tendeth  only  to  penury

15.  7.  the  /.  of  the  wise  disperse  knowledge

16.  10.  a  divine  sentence  is  in  the  /.  of  the  king

13.  righteous  /.  are  the  delight  of  kings

21.  the  sweetness  of  the  /.  increaseth  learning

17.  4.  a  wicked  doer  giveth  heed  to  false  /.

7.  much  less  do  lying  /.  become  a  prince

18.  6.  a  fool’s  /.  enter  into  contention

20.  15.  the  /.  of  knowledge  are  a  precious  jewel
24.  2.  and  their  /.  talk  of  mischief
26.  23.  burning  /.  are  like  a  potsherd  covered
Eccl.  10.  12.  the  /.  of  a  fool  will  swallow  himself
Cant.  7.  9.  causing  the  /.  of  those  asleep  to  speak
Isa.  6.  5.  woe  is  me,  I  am  undone,  a  manof  unclean
/.  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  ot  unclean  l.

28.  11.  for  with  stammering  l.  will  he  speak

29.  13.  this  people  with  their /.  do  honour  me
57. 19.  1  create  the  fruit  of  the  /.  peace  to  him
59.  3.  your  /.  have  spoken  lies,  your  tongue

I, am.  3.  62.  the  /.  of  those  that  rose  against  me
Ezek.  24.  22.  ye  shall  not  c6ver  your  /.  nor  eat
36.  3.  ye  are  taken  up  in  the  /.  of  talkers
Has.  14.  2.  so  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  /.
Mic.  3.7.  they  shall  cover  their  /.  no  answer  of  God
Mai.  2.  7.  the  priest’s  /.  should  keep  knowledge
Mat.  15.  8.  honoured!  me  with  their  /.  Mark"!.  6.
Pom.  3.  13.  the  poison  of  asps  is  under  their  /,

1  Cor.  14.  21.  with  other  /.  will  1  speak  to  this
lleb.  13. 15.  the  fruit  of  our  /.  giving  thanks
His  LIPS.

Lev.  5.  4.  pronouncing  with  his  l.  to  do  evil
Job  2.  10.  in  all  this  did  not  Job  sin  with  his  l.

11.  5.  O  that  God  would  open  his  l.  against  thee

23.  12.  nor  gone  back  from  commandment  ot  his  l.
Psal.  21.  2.  not  withholden  the  request  of  his  l.

106.  33.  so  that  he  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  l.
Prov.  10.  19.  he  that  refraineth  his  l.  is  wise

12.  13.  wicked  is  snared  by  transgression  of  his  l.

13.  3.  openeth  wide  his  l.  shall  have  destruction
16.  23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  addeth  learning  to  his  l.

27.  and  in  his  l.  there  is  as  a  burning  fire

30.  moving  his  l.  he  bringeth  evil  to  pass
17. 28.  shutteth  his  l.  is  a  man  of  understanding
18.  7.  and  his  l.  are  the  snare  of  his  soul

20.  with  the  increase  of  his  l.  shall  he  be  filled
19. 1.  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  hisl.  and  is  a  fool
20.  19.  with  him  that  flattereth  with  his  l.

22. 1 1.  for  grace  of  his  l.  the  king  will  be  his  friend

24.  26.  shall  kiss  his  l.  that  gives  a  right  answer

26.  24.  he  that  hateth  dissembleth  with  his  l.

Cant.  5.  13.  his  l.  like  lilies  dropping  myrrh
Isa.  11.  4.  with  breath  of  Am  /.  shall  he  slay  wicked

30.  27.  his  l.  are  full  of  indignation,  and  his  tongue
Mai.  2.  6.  and  iniquity  was' not  found  in  his  l.

1  Pet.  3.  10.  and  his  /.  that  they  speak  no  guile
My  LIPS.

Job  13. 6.  hear  now,  hearken  to  the  pleading  of  my  l.
16.  5.  moving  of  my  l.  should  assuage  your  grief

27.  4.  my  l.  shall  not  speak  wickedness

32.  20.  1  will  speak,  1  will  open  my  /.  and  answer

33.  3.  and  my  l.  shall  utter  knowledge  clearly
Psal.  16.4.  nor  take  up  their  names  into  my  l.

40.  9.  lo,  I  have  not  refrained  my  l.  O  Lord
51 .  lS.open  thou  my  1. 1!  63.  3.  my  l.  shall  praise  thee
66.  14.  1  will  pav  vows,  which  my  l.  have  uttered
71.23.  my  l.  shall  greatly  rejoice  when  1  sing
89.  34.  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  ot  my  l.
119.  13.  with  my  l.  have  I  declared  thy  judgments

171.  my  l.  shall  utter  thy  praise,  when  hast  taught
141.  .3.  O  Lord,  keep  the  door  of  my  l.

Prov.  8. 6.  the  opening  of  my  l.  shall  be  right  things
7.  wickedness  is  an  abomination  to  my  l.

Jer.  17.  16.  that  which  came  out  of  my  /.was  right
Dan.  10.  16.  one  like  the  sons  of  men  touched  my  l.
Hab.  3.  16.  I  heard,  my  l.  quivered  at  the  voice
Thy  LIPS.

Dent.  23.  23.  that  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  1.  perform

2  Kings  19.28.1  will  put  my  bridle  in  thy  l. Isa. 37.29
Job  8.  21.  till  he  fill  thy  1.  with  rejoicing

15.  6.  yea,  thy  own  /.  testify  against  thee
Ps.  17.  4.  by  the  word  of  thy  l.  I  have  kept  me  from

31.  13.  keep  My  /.from  speaking  guile
45.  2.  grace  is  poured  into  My  /.therefore  G. blessed
Prov.  5.  2.  and  that  thy  l.  may  keep  knowledge
22.  18.  they  shall  withal  be  fitted  in  thy  l.


Prov.  23. 16.  rejoice  when  thy  l.  speak  right  thing.
24.  28.  deceive  not  with  thy  l.  say  not,  1  will  do  s
27.  2.  let  another  praise  thee,  and  not  thy  own  /.
Cant.  4.  .3.  thy  l.  are  like  a  thread  of  scarlet

11.  thy  l.  O  my  spouse,  drop  as  the  honey-conib
Isa.  6.  7.  and  sad,  lo,  this  hath  touched  thy  l.  .
Ezek  24.  17.  cover  not  thy  l.  and  eat  not  bread

LIQUOR.

Num.  6.  3.  nor  shall  he  drink  any  /.  of  grapes
Cant.  7.  2.  a  round  goblet,  which  wanteth  not  /,
LIQUORS.

Exod  22.  29.  nor  delay  to  offer  the  first  of  thy  /.  .
LISTED.

Mat  17.  12.  done  to  him  whatsoever  /.  Mark  9.  lot

LISTEN.

Isa  49  1.  /.  O  isles,  unto  me,  and  hearken  from  la;
LISTETH.

John  3.  8.  the  wdnd  bloweth  where  it  /.  thou  hearesf
Jam.  3.  4.  the  ships,  whithersoever  the  governor  /.
LITTERS.

Isa.  66. 20.  shall  bring  your  breth.  in  chariots  and
LITTLE

Signifies,  [1]  A  small  quantity,  Exod.  16.  l£j
1  Sam.  14.  29.  [2]  Lew  in  number,  Exod.  12.  4
Luke  12.  32.  [3]  Light,  or  of  small  accouiiA

Josh.  22.  17.  [4]  Modest,  humble,  and  sub  no'
site,  1  Sam.  9.  21.1  15.  17.  [5]  A  short  way  cj
time,  2  Sam.  16.  1.  Job  10.  20.  [6]  Weak,  Luk

12.  28.  [7]  Young ,  Gen.  45.  19.  Esth.  3.  13.  [8
Low,  Luke  19.  3.

Gen.  18.  4.  let  a  /.  water,  I  pray  you,  be  fetched
24.  17.  let  me  drink  a  /.  water  of  thy  pitcher
.30.  .30.  it  was  but  /.  thou  hadst  before  1  came
35.  16.  there  was  but  a  /.  way  to  Ephrath,  48.  7
4.3.  2.  buy  us  a  l.  food,  44.25.  ||  11.  /.  balm,  /.  hone
Exod.  12.  4.  if  the  household  be  too  /.  for  the  laml
16. 18.  he  that  gathered  /.  had  no  lack,  2  Cor.  8. 1.
23.  30.  by  l.  and  /.  1  will  drive  them  out,  Deut. 7.2l
Deut.  28.  38.  carry  much  out,  and  gather  but  /.  in
Josh.  19.  17.  coast  of  Dan  went  out  too  /.  tor  then;
22.  17.  is  the  iniquity  of  Peor  too  /.  for  us
Judg.  4.19.  give  me  /.  water  to  drink,  1  Kings  17. 1
Puth  2.  f.  that  she  tarried  a  /.  in  the  house
1  Sam.  2.  19.  his  mother  made  him  a  /.  coat

14.  29.  because  1  tasted  a  /.  ot  this  honey,  4.3.

15  17.  when  thou  wast  /.  in  thine  own  sight
22.  +  15.  knew  nothing  of  all  this,  /.  or  great
iSam.  12.  .3.  had  nothing,  save  one/,  ewe  lamb
*  8.  if  that  had  been  too  /.  I  would  have  given  sue
19.  36.  thy  servant  will  go  a  /.  way  over  Jordat
1  Kings  8.61.  because  the  brasen  altar  w  as  too  /.
12. 10.  my  /.  finger  thicker  than,  2  Chron.  10. 10.
17.12.  and  a  l.  oil  in  a  cruse  ||  13.  make  a  /.  cake

18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  /.  cloud  like  a  man’s  ham


20.  27.  Israel  pitched  like  two  /.  flocks  of  kids


2  Kings  5.  2.  had  brought  awmy  captive  a  /.  maid
10.  18.  Ahab  served  Baal  a  /.  but  Jehu  much
Ezra  9.  8.  for  a  /.  space,  give  us  a  /.  reviling
Neh.  9.  32.  let  not  all  the  trouble  seem  /.

Job  4.  12.  and  my  ear  received  a  /.  thereof
10.  20.  cease  then,  that  1  may  take  comfort  a  /.
26.  14.  but  how  /.  a  portion  is  heard  of  him !

.36.  2.  suffer  me  a  /.  and  1  will  shew  thee
Psal.  2.  12.  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  /.

8. 5.  made  him  a  /.  low'er  than  the  angels,  lleb.  2.
.37.  16.  a  /.  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is  better  1
42.  t  6.  I  will  remember  thee  from  the  /.  hill
65.  12.  the  /.  hills  rejoice  on  every  side
68.  27.  there  is  /.  Benjamin,  with  their  ruler
72.  .3.  and  the  /.  hills  by  righteousness
114.  4.  and  the  /.  hills  skipped  like  lambs,  6.  ;
Prov.  6. 10.  a/,  sleep,  /. slumber,  a /.  folding, 24..
10.  20.  the  heart  of  the  wicked  is  /.  worth  .

15.  16.  better  is  a  /.  w  ith  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ,

16.  8.  better  is  a  /.  with  righteousness,  than  grea
.30.  24.  four  things  that  are  /.  on  the  earth
Eccl.  5.  12.  is  sweet,  whether  he  eat  /.  or  much

9.  14.  there  w?as  a  /.  city,  and  few  men  in  it

10.  1.  so  a  /.  folly  him  that  is  in  reputation

12.  t  3.  the  grinders  fail  because  they  grind  /.

Cant.  2.  15.  take  us  the  foxes,  the  /.  foxes
.3.  4.  was  but  a  /.  that  1  passed  from  them
8.  8.  we  have  a  /.  sister,  and  she  hath  no  breast-
Isa.  26.  20.  hide  thyself  for  a  /.  moment  till  indig
28. 10.  line  upon  line,  here  a  /.  and  there  a  /.  13.
40.  15.  he  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  /.  thing
54.  8.  in  a  /.  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee
Jer.  .30.  +  18.  city  shall  be  built  on  her  own  /.  h|
Ezek.  11.  16.  1  will  be  to  them  a  /.  sanctuary  |
16.  47.  but  as  if  that  were  a  very  /.  thing
31.  4.  and  sent  out  her  /.  rivers  to  the  trees  s
Dan.  7.  8.  there  came  up  another  /.  horn,  8.  9.;

11.  .34.  they  shall  be  holpen  with  a  /.  heip
Vos.  8.  10.  thev  shall  sorrow  a  /.  for  the  burne
Amos  6.  11.  he  will  smite  the  /.  house  with  clef
Mic.  5.  2.  though  /.  among  the  thousands  of  Jud
Ilag.  1.6.  ye  have  sown  much,  and  bring  in  /.

9.  ye  looked  for  much,  and  lo,  it  came  to  /.
Zech.  1.  15.  for  I  was  but  a  /.  displeased
Mat.  6.  30.  shall  he  not  much  more  clothe  you
ye  of  /.  faith  ?  8.  26.  1  16.  8.  Luke  XU

14.  31.  O  thou  of  /.  faith,  why  didst  thou  doir

15.  34.  they  said,  seven,  and  a  few  /.  fishes
26.  .39.  he  went  a  /.  further,  Mark  1.  19. 1  14.  3s

Mark  5.23.  my  /.  daughter  lieth  at  point  of  deal
Luke 7.  47.  to  w  hom  /.  is  forgiven,  the  same  lover

12.  .32.  fear  not,  /.  flock  j|  19. .3.  he  was  /.  of  stajB

19.  17.  thou  hast  been  faithful  in  a  very  /.

John  6.  7.  that  every  one  of  them  may  take  a  .
Acts  5.  34.  to  put  the  apostles  forth  a  /.  space!
20.12.  young  man  alive, and  were  not  a  /.  comtofc
28.2.  the  barbarians  shewed  us  no  /.  kindness

1  Cor.  5.  6.  a/,  leaven  leaveneth  the  lump,

2  Cor.  11.1.  could  bear  with  me  a  /.  in  my  too

16.  receive  me,  that  1  may  boast  myself  a  U

Eph.  .3. 1  3.  as  I  wrote  a  /.  before  in  few’  worm

1  Tim.  4.  8.  bodily  exercise  profiteth  l.  but  god!!  '
5  2.3.  use  a  /.  wine  foi  thy  stomach  s  sake
lleb.  2.  9.  who  was  made  a  /.  low'er  than  tlie^m
Jam.  3.  5.  tongue  is  a  /.  member,  a  /.  fire  kint

4. 14.  life,  a  vapour  that  appeareth  for  a  /•  tn

2  Pet.  2. 1 18.  those  who  were  for  a  l.  escaped


1


LI  Y

•v.  3.  8.  thou  hast  a  /.  strength,  and  bust  kept
.  ll.  rest  a  /.  season  j|  20.  3.  be  loosed  a  /.  season
ee  Book,  Chambers,  Child,  Children.
Ll  1  I’LE  one,  or  ones.

•».  19.  20.  Lot  said,  it  is  a  /.  one,  is  it  not  a  l.  one  ?

1.  29.  all  their  /.  ones  took  thev  captive

>.  8.  we  may  live,  both  we,  and  thou,  and  our  l.  o.
L  20.  w  e  have  a  /.  one,  and  his  brother  is  dead
' ).  19.  take  waggons  out  of  Egypt  for  your  /.  ones
}.  5.  carried  their  /.  o.  ||  47.  24.  tood  for  your  1.  o.
if,  t  12.  with  bread  according  to  their  /.  ones
X  8.  only  their  /.  ones  left  they  in  Goshen
,’i.  fear  not,  1  will  nourish  you  and  your  /.  ones
rod.  10.  10.  I  will  let  you  go  and  your  l.  ones,  24.
am.  14.  31.  but  your  /.  ones,  them  will  1  bring
!.  9.  took  women  of  Midian  captives  and  /.  ones

17.  therefore  kill  every  male  among  the  l.  ones

2.  16.  we  will  build  cities  for  our  l.  ones

17.  our/.  shall  dwell  in  the  fenced  cities,  26.
cut.  2.  34.  we  destroyed  men,  women,  and  /.  ones
).  14.  but  the  women  and  /.  ones  take  to  thyself
sh.  8. 35.  Joshua  read  before  the  women  and  /,  ones
dg.  18.  21.  so  they  put  the  /.  ones  before  them
>«//’.  15.  22.  Ittai  passed  over  and  all  the  l.  ones
'hr.  20.  13.  Judah  stood  before  Lord  and  l.  ones
1.  18.  and  to  the  genealogy  of  all  their  /.  ones
ra  8.  21.  to  seek  a  right  w  ay  for  our  l.  ones
th.  8.  11.  to  cause  to  perish  /.  ones  and  women
121.11.  they  send  forth  their  l.  ones  like  a  dock
al.  137.  9.  that  dasheth  thy  l.  ones  ag.  the  stones
1.  60.  22.  a  /.  one  shall  become  a  thousand

14.  3.  their  nobles  sent  their  /.  ones  to  the  pit
l.  4.  her  /.  ones  have  caused  a  cry  to  be  heard
ch.  13.  7-  and  I  will  turn  my  hand  on  the  l.  ones
it.  10.  42.  give  to  drink  to  one  of  these  /.  ones
t.  6.  who  should  offend  oneofthese  l.o.  Mark*). AH.
0.  take  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these  /.  s.
4.  that  one  ot  these  l.  ones  should  perish
ke  17.  2.  than  that  he  offend  one  of  these  l.  ones
LITTLE  while.

hr.  12.  t  7.  therefore  I  will  grant  them  a  /.  while
'24.  24.  they  are  exalted  for  a/,  w.  but  are  gone
al.  37.  10.  yet  a  l.  zv.  and  the  wicked  shall  not  be
1. 10. 25.  yet  a  l.  w.  and  the  indignation  shall  cease
1.  17.  is  it  not  yet  a  very  l.  while,  and  Lebanon
.  18.  thy  people  have  possessed  it  but  a  l.  while
'.  51.  33.  yet  a  l.  w.  and  her  harvest  shall  come
•s.  1.  4.  yet  a  /.  while  and  I  will  avenge  the  blood
<g.  2.  6.  a  l.  while  and  I  will  shake  the  heavens
ke  22.  58.  and  after  a  l.  while  another  saw  him
in  7-  33.  yet  a  l.  w.  and  I  am  with  you,  13.  33.

.  35.  yet  a  l.  while  is  the  light  with  you,  walk
.  19.  a  l.  while,  and  the  world  seeth  me  no  more
.  16.  again  a  /.  while,  and  ye  shall  see  me,  17,  ig.

I  go  to  Father  a  l.  while  and  ye  shall  not  see  me
8.  a  l.  while  ;  we  cannot  tell  what  he  saith
!>•  2.  *  7.  thou  madest  him  a  /.  w.  inferior  to  angels
.  37.  for  yet  a  /.  while,  and  he  that  shall  come
LIVE.

od.  21.  35.  then  they  shall  sell  the  /.  ox
•  6.  6.  a  seraphim,  having  a  /.  coal  in  his  hand
See  Goat.

live

nines,  [1]  To  move  and  do  the  actions  of  life,

■  en.  45.  3.  [2]  To  he  in  health,  or  ,0  he  re-
wered  from  sickness,  John  4.  50.  [3]  To  pre-
’rie  alive,  Gen.  42.  2.  [4]  To  have  a  mainte-
ance  for  this  life,  1  Cor.  9.  13.  [5]  Faithfully
1  serve  God,  to  have  a  share  in  his  favour  and
ractous  covenant,  Gen.  17.  18.  [6]  To  enjoy
vnmunum  with  God,  Psal.  69.  32.  [ 7 J  To  enjoy
ernal  life  in  heaven,  John  14.  19.  [8]  I'o  be
'eatly  comforted,  Psal.  22.  26.  It  is  taken,  (1)
naturally,  Gen.  9.  3.  John  4.  50.  (2)  Morally,
;.C,S  23.  1.  |  26.  5.  (3)  Spiritually,  to  live  a  life
Jaith  in  Christ,  to  the  glory  of  God's  fiee
-w*,  Gal.  2.  19,  20.  2  '1  im.  3.  12.  (4)  IVicked-
2  Pet.  2.  6.  (51  Eternally,  John  6.  51,  58.


om.  6.  8.


live  after  the  flesh,  Horn.  8.  13.  To  lead  such
course  of  life  as  is  agreeable  to  corrupt  nature  ;
bestow  all  our  time  and  pains  in  the  service  of
■'f  flesh,  and  so  make  provision  only  for  a  present

le.

n  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every
■  ?  a.  C‘  L  L  Though  men  live  ordina¬

ry  by  usual  and  common  food,  yet  God's  power
not  restrained ;  he  can  uphold  the  life  of  man
hen  that  is  wanting,  as  he  supported  the  Israel-
es  with  manna;  yea,  by  his  power  and  will
"y>  without  any  means  at  all,  if  he  so  pleases  :

therefore  men  ought  not  absolutely  to  rest
’’on  the  means,  and  without  warrant  run  to  an
traordtnary  course  for  supply,  but  trust  in  God,
id  leave  him  to  provide  as  he  pleases.
i-i  q'  22’  Jes*  *ake  °f  free  of  life,  and  /.  for  ever
13.  and  my  soul  shall  l.  because  of  thee

18.  O  that  Ishmael  might  /.  before  thee  !

let  me  escape,  and  my  soul  shall  /.

7.  he  shall  pray  for  thee,  and  thou  slialt  l.

"j*  oy  sword  shalt  thou  /.  ami  serve  thy  brethr.
,0  ai  modest  thy  goods,  let  him  not  /.

18.  Joseph  said,  this  do,  and  /.  for  I  fear  God
;•*  Jp1  Joseph,  doth  my  father  yet  /.  f
on  r  ’  u  11  a  daughter,  then  she  shall  l.

10  ‘2r  ,e.re  shall  no  man  see  me  and  /.

•  18.  5.  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  l.  in  them,  I
am  the  lord,  Neh.  9.  29.  Ezek.  20.  11,  13,  21.
"hen  he  looketh  upon  serpent,  shall  /.
alas,  w  ho  shall  l.  when  God  doetli  this  ?
t  "j-li  -  n'ay  lear  n,e  all  the  days  they  shall  /.

.  did  ever  people  hear,  as  thou  hast,  and  l.  ?

1  .11  rv  eVery  word  of  the  Lord  doth  man  l.

V  r  ,  e ‘lays  that  ye  /.  on  the  earth
0.  lie  shall  flee  to  one  of  these  cities  and  /.

,ea™  to  fear  L.  as  long  as  ye  /.  1  Kings  8. 40.
4U«  L  and  not  die.  men  not  be  few

y  <•  or,ly  Hahab  harlot  shall  /.  and  her  house
J-  Josh,  made  a  league  with  them  to  let  them  l.

■  we  will  let  them  l.  lest  wrath  be  on  us,  21.

T-'  10- ,+  24*  sal(1>  let  the  king  L  2  Sam.  16.  +  16.
A,n0*  1. 1  25.  2  Kings  11.  f  12.  2  Chron.  23. 1 11 .


L  1  V

1  Sam.  20. 14.  not  only  while  I  /.  shew  me  kindness

2  Kings  4. 7.  l.  thou  and  thy  children  of  the  rest^

7.  4.  if  they  save  us  alive,  we  shall  /.

2  Chron.  6.  31.  walk  in  thy  ways  so  long  as  they  /
Job  7.  t  8.  thine  eyes  are  on  me,  I  can  /.  no  longer

14.  14.  if  a  man  die,  shall  he  l.  again  ?  all  days

21.  7.  w’herefore  do  the  wicked  l.  become  old  >

Ps.  22.  26.  praise  Lord,  your  heart  shall  l.  for  ever
49.  9.  that  lie  should  still  /.  and  not  see  corruption
63.4.  thus  w  ill  I  bless  thee  while  I  /.  lift  up  hands
69.  32.  your  hearts  shall  l.  that  seek  Cod  1

72.  15.  he  shall  /.  ||  118.  17.  1  shall  not  die,  but  l
119.  144.  give  me  understanding,  and  1  shall  l.
17.5.  let  my  soul  l.  and  it  shall  praise  thee
146.  2.  while  I  /.  will  I  praise  the  Lord
Prov.  4.  4.  keep  my  commandments,  and  /.  7.  2.

9.  6.  forsake  foolish  and  /.  go  in  way  of  understand.

15.  27.  but  he  that  hateth  gifts  shall  /.

Eccl.6.  3.  if  a  man  /.  many  years,  6.  I  11.  8.

9.  3.  madness  is  in  their  heart  w'hile  they  /.

9.  /•  joyfully  with  the  wife  whom  thou  Invest
Isa.  26. 19.  thy  dead  men  shall  /.  together  with  my
38. 16.  O  Ld.  by  these  things  men  l.  make  me  to  /.
55.  3.  come  to  tne,  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  /.

Jer.  21.  9.  to  Chaldeans  shall  l.  27.  12, 17.  I  38. 2,  17
38.  20.  obey,  1  pray  thee,  and  thy  soul  shall  /.
Lam.  4.  20.  we  said,  under  his  shadow  we  shall  /.
EseE  3.  21.  he  shall  surely  /.  18.  9, 17.  1  33. 13, 15, 16.
la  6.  1  said,  when  thou  wast  in  thy  blood,  l.

18.  19-  kept  my  statutes  shall  l.  21, 22.  |  20.  11, 25.
24.  shall  he  /.  ||  32.  turn  yourselves  and  /.  33.  li.

33. 10.  if  our  sins  be  on  us,  how  should  we  then  /.  ?

19.  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  /.
37.  3.  he  said,  son  of  man,  can  these  bones  /.  ?

5.  cause  breath  to  enter  you,  and  y  e  shall  l.  6, 14.
47.  9.  every  thing  which  Iiveth  and  moveth  shall  l.

every  thing  shall  l.  whither  the  river  cometh
Has.  6.  2.  he  will  revive  us,  we  shall  l.  in  his  sight
Amos  5.  4.  saith  the  Lord,  seek  me,  and  ye  shall/.  6.
Jonah  4.  3.  it  is  better  for  me  to  die  than  to  /.  8.
Hab.  2.  4.  the  just  shall  /.  by  his  faith,  Rom.  1. 17.
Zech.  10.9.  they  shall  /.  with  their  <  hildren  and  turn
Mat.  4. 4.  man  shall  not  /.  by  bread  alone,  Luke  4. 4.

9.  18.  lay  hand  on  her,  and  she  shall  /.  Mark  5.  23."
I.uke  7.  25.  they  which  /.  delicately  are  in  courts

10.  28.  he  said  to  him,  this  do,  and  thou  shalt  /.

20.  38.  he  is  not  a  God  of  dead,  for  all  /.  unto  him

John  5.  25.  dead  hear  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  /.
6.57.  as  living  Father  sent  me,  and  1  /.  bv  Father,
so  he  that  eateth  me,  even  he  shall  /.  by  me
11. 25.  believeth,  tho’  he  w  ere  dead,  yet  shall  he  /.
14.  19.  because  I  /.  ye  shall  /.  also
Acts  17.  28.  for  in  him  we  /.  and  move,  and  have
22.  22.  for  it  is  not  lit  that  he  should  /.

Rom.  6.  2.  that  are  dead  to  sin,  /.  any  longer  therein

8.  we  believ  e  that  w.e  shall  also  /.  w  ith  him
8.  12.  w  e  are  debtors,  not  to  l.  after  the  flesh

13.  if  ye  /.  after  the  flesh,  ye  shall  die,  if  ye  thro’
the  Spirit  mortify  deeds  of  the  body,  ye  shall  /.

10.  5.  doetli  these  things  shall  l.  by  them,  Gal.  3. 12.

12.  18.  if  possible,  /.  peaceably  with  all  men

14.  8.  for  whether  we  l.  we  /.  to  the  Lord  ;  w  hether
wre  /.  therefore,  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord’s

1  Cor.  9.  13.  they  /.  of  the  things  of  the  temple

14.  they  who  preach  sospel  should  /.  of  gospel

2  Cor.  A.  11.  for  we  which  /.  are  delivered  to  death
6.  9.  as  dying,  and  behold,  we  /.  as  chastened

7-  3.  ye  are  in  our  hearts  to  die  and  /.  with  you

13.  4.  we  shall  /.  with  him  by  the  power  of  God

11.  brethren,  be  of  one  mind,  /.  in  peace

Gal.  2. 14.  why  compellest  the  Gentiles  to  /.as  Jews

19.  dead  to  the  law,  that  I  might  /.  unto  God

20.  I  /.  yet  not  I ,  but  Christ  Iiveth  in  me,  the  life

I  now  /.  in  flesh,  1  /.  by  faith  of  Son  of  God
3.  11.  the  just  shall  /.  by  faith,  Heb.  10.  38.

5.  25.  if  we  /.  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  walk  in  the  Spirit
Phil.  1.21.  for  me  to  /.  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain

22.  if  I  /.  in  the  flesh,  this  is  the  fruit  of  my  labour

1  Thess.  3. 8.  for  now  w  e  /.  if  ye  stand  fast  in  Lord
5.  10.  died,  that  we  should  /.  together  with  him

2  Tim.  2.  11.  if  dead,  we  shall  also  /.  with  him

3.  12.  all  that  will  /.  godly  shall  suffer  persecution
Tit.  2.  12.  teaching  us  that  we  should  /.  soberly
Heb.  12.9.  be  in  subjection  to  Father  of  spirits  and  /.

13.  18.  in  all  things  w  illing  to  /.  honestly
Jam.  4.  15.  if  the  Lord  will  we  shall  /.  and  do  this

1  Pet.  2.24.  that  we  should  /.  to  righteousness

4.  2.  that  he  should  no  longer  l.  in  the  flesh

6.  but  /.  according  to  God  in  the  Spirit

2  Pet.  2.  6.  an  ensample  to  those  that  /.  ungodly
18.  those  that  escaped  from  them  who  l.  in  error

1  John  4.  9.  sent  his  Son,  that  we  might  /.  thro’  him
Rev.  13.  14.  beast  which  had  the  wound  and  did  /.

See  For  Ever.

As  1  LIVE.

Num.  14.21.  as  truly  a s  1 1.  earth  shall  be  filled,  28.
Job  27.  6.  so  long  as  1  /.  Psal.  104.  33.  |  116.  2.

Isa.  49. 18.  as  1  /.  saith  the  Lord,  Jer.  22.  24.  Ezek.

5.  11.  1  14.  16,  18,  20.  1  16.  48.  |  17.  16,  19.

I  18.  3.  I  20.  3,  33.  I  33.  11,  27.  1  34.  8.  1  35.

6,  11.  Zeph.  2.  9.  Rom.  14.  11.

Jer.  46. 18.  as  1 1.  saith  the  king,  surely  as  Tabor

May,  might,  or  rnayest  LIVE.

Gen.  42.  2.  that  we  m.  /.and  not  die,  43.  8.  I  47.  19.
Lev.  25.  35.  relieve  him  that  he  may  l.  with  thee
36.  take  no  usury,  that  thy  brother  may  l.

Num.  4. 19.  but  thus  do  to  them  that  they  may  l.
Deut.A.  l.do  to  them,  ye  m.  1.  5.  33.  |  8. 1.  I  30.6,16.
42.  that  fleeing  to  one  of  these  cities  he  might  l.

16.  20.  what  is  just  follow,  that  thou  rnayest  l.

30.  19.  choose  life,  that  thou  and  thy  seed  may  l.

2  Sam.  12.  22.  gracious  to  me,  that  the  child  may  l.

2  Kings  18.  32.  to  a  land  of  bread,  that  you  may  l.
Esth.  4.  11.  hold  out  the  sceptre,  that  he  may  l.

Psal.  119.  17.  deal  bountifully,  that  1  may  l.  ,

77-  let  thy  mercies  come  to  me,  that  I  may  /.

116.  uphold  me  according  to  thy  word,  that  I  m.  1.
Jer.  35.  7.  dwell  in  tents,  that  ye  may  l.  many  days
Ezek.  37.  9.  breathe  on  these  slain,  that  they  may  l.
Amos 5.  14.  seek  good,  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  l.
Eph.  6.  3.  and  thou  rnayest  l.  long  on  the  earth


L  I  V

Not  LIVE.

Exod.  19-  13.  that  touch  the  mountain  shall  not  l.
22.  18.  thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to  l.

Deut.  8. 3.  man  doth  not  l.  by  bread  only,  but  by  the
word  of  the  Lord,  Mat.  4.  4.  Luke  4.  4.
2  Sam.  1.  10.  for  l  was  sure  that  he  could  not  l.

2  Kings  10. 19.  w hosoever  is  wanting  he  shall  not  l.
20. 1.  set  house  in  order,  thou  shalt  not  l.  Isa.  38.  1.
Job  7.  16.  I  loath  it,  1  would  tter  /.  always
Psal.  55.  23.  the  wicked  shall  not  l.  halt  their  days
Isa.  26.  14.  they  are  dead,  they  shall  not  l.

Ezek.  13.  19.  to  save  the  souls  that  should  not  /.

18.  13.  shall  he  then  live?  he  shall  not  l.

Zech.  13.  3.  shall  say  to  him,  thou  shalt  not  l.

Luke  12.  t  29.  /.  not  in  careful  suspense

Acts  7.  19.  cast  out  children,  that  they  might  not  l.

25.  24.  crying,  that  he  ought  not  to/,  any  longei
28.  4._yet  vengeance  suftereth  not  to  /.

2  Cor.  5. 15.  they  should  not  /.  to  themselves,  but  him
^  LiyED.

Gen.  25.  6.  from  Tsaac  his  son,  while  he  yet  /.

47.  28.  Jacob  /.  hi  the  land  of  Egypt  17  vears
Num.  14.  38.  but  Joshua  and  Caleb  /.  still
21.  9.  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass  he  /.
ueut.  5.  26.  that  heard  the  v  oice  of  God  and  /.

2  Sam.  19.  6.  if  Absalom  had  /.  and  we  had  died

1  Kings  12.  6.  the  old  men  that  stood  before  Solomon

his  lather  while  he  yet  /.  2  Chron.  10.  6.

2  Kings  14.  17.  Amaziah  /.  after  the  death  of  Je

hoash  fifteen  years,  2  Chron.  25.  25.
Psal .  49.  18.  while  he  /.  he  blessed  his  soul
Ezek .  37.  10.  breath  came  into  them,  and  they  /.
Luke  2.  36.  she  had  /.  with  a  husband  seven  years
Acts 23.  1.  1  have  /.  in  all  good  conscience  before  G.

26.  5.  after  the  sect  of  our  religion  1  /.  a  Phai  isee
Col.  3.  7.  ye  walked  sometime,  when  ye  /.  in  them
Jam.  5.  5.  ye  have  /.  in  pleasure  on  the  earth
Rev.  18.  7-  how  much  she  hath  /.  deliciously,  9.

20.  4.  they  /.  with  Christ  ||  5.  the  rest  /.  not  again
LIVELY.

Exod.  1.  19.  because  the  Hebrew  women  are/.
Psal.  38.  19.  but  m3’  enemies  are  /.  and  are  strong
Acts  7.  38.  who  received  the  l.  oracles  to  give  to  us

1  Pet.  1.  3.  who  hath  begotten  us  again  to  a  /.  hope

2.  5.  ye,  as  /.  stones,  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house

LIVER.

Exod.  29.  13.  the  caul  above  the  /.  22.  Lev.  3.  4,
„  10,  15.  ;  4.  9.  I  7.  4.  I  8.  16,  25.  1  9.  10,  19.

Prov.  7.  23.  till  a  dart  strike  through  Ids  /.

Lam.  2.  11.  my  /.  is  poured  upon  the  earth
Ezek.  21.  21.  he  consulted,  he  looked  in  the  l.

See  Caul.

LIVES.

Gen.  9.  5.  surely  your  blood  of  your  /.  will  I  require
45.  7.  to  save  your  /.  by  a  great  deliverance

47.  25.  thou  hast  saved  our  /.  let  us  find  grace
Exod.  1.  14.  they’  made  their  /  bitter  witlfbondage
Josh.  2.  13.  and  deliver  our  l.  from  death

9.  24.  therefore  we  were  sore  afraid  of  our  /.

Judg.  5.  18.  were  a  people  that  jeoparded  their  /.

18.  25.  thou  lose  thy  .’.re  with  /.  of  thy  household

2  Sam.  1.  23.  Saul  and  Jonathan  lov  ely  in  their  /.

19.  5.  who  saved  /.  of  thy  sons,  w  ives,  and  concu.
23.  17.  that  went  in  jeopardy  of  their/.  1  (  hr.  11.  19.

Esth.  9.  16.  other  Jews  gathered  and  stood  for  their  /.
Prov.  1.  18.  they  lurk  privily  for  their  ow  n  /.

Jer.  19.  7.  fall  by'  them  which  seek  their  /.  46.  26.

9.  they  that  seek  their  /.  shall  straiten  them

48.  6.  flee,  save  your  /.  be  like  the  heath  in  wildern.
Lam.  5.  9.  we  gat  our  bread  with  the  peril  of  our  /.
Dan.  7.  12.  their  /.  were  prolonged  for  a  season
Luke  9.56.  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  destroy  men’s  /.
Acts  15.26.  men  that  have  hazarded  their  /.  for  our

27.  10.  t‘  s  voyage  will  be  with  damage  of  our  /.

1  John  3.  16.  to  lay  down  our  l.  for  the  brethren
Rev.  12.  11.  they  loved  not  their  /.  to  the  death

LI  VEST.

Deut.  12.  19-  forsake  not  the  Levite  as  long  as  thou  /.
Gal.  2.  14.  if  thou  being  a  Jew  /.  after  the  manner
Rev.  3. 1.  hast  a  name  that  thou  /.  and  art  dead
LIVETH.

Gen.  9.  every  thing  that  /.  shall  he  meat  for  you

16.  t  14.  the  well  of  him  that  /.  and  seeth  me
Deut.  5.  24.  that  God  doth  talk  with  man,  and  he  /.

1  Sam.  1.  28.  have  lent  him  to  the  L.  as  long  as  he  /.

20.  31.  for  as  long  as  son  of  Jesse  /.on  the  ground
25.  6.  thus  shall  say  to  him  that  /.  in  prosperity

2  Sam.  2.  2J.  as  Clod  /.  unless  thou  hadst  spoken

15.  21.  as  my  lord  the  king/,  surely  in  what  place
22.  47.  the  Lord/,  blessed  be  my  rock,  Ps.  18.  46.

1  Kings  3.  23.  one  saith,  this  is  my  son  that  /.

17.  23.  and  Elijah  said,  see  thy  son  /.

Job  19.  25.  for  1  know  that  my  Redeemer  l.

27.  2.  as  G.  /.  who  hath  taken  away  my  judgment
Psal.  89-48.  what  man  that  l.  and  shall  not  see  death?
Jer.  4.  2.  thou  shalt  swear,  the  Lord  l.  in  truth
5.  2.  tho’  they  say,  the  Lord  l.  they  sw  ear  falsely
12.  16.  to  swear  by  my  name,  the  Lord  l.  as  they

16.  14.  no  more  be  said,  the  Lord  /.  15. 1  23.  7,  8.

44.  26.  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  the  Lord  /.
Ezek.  47.  9.  every  thing  that  l.  and  moveth  shall  live
Has.  4. 15.  nor  go  ye  up,  nor  swear,  the  Lord  /.
Amos  8.  14.  they  that  swear,  and  say,  thy  God,  O

Dan,'  /.  and  the  manner  or  Peer-sheba  /.
John  4. 50.  Jesus  said,  go  thy  way,  thy  son  /.  51 , 53.

11. 26.  whosoever  /.  and  believeth  in  me  never  die
Rom.  6.  10.  hut  in  that  he  /.  he  /.  to  God
7.1.  law  hath  dominion  overman  as  long  as  he  /.  2.

3.  so  if  while  her  husband  /.  she  be  married
14.  7-  for  none  of  us  /.  or  dieth  to  himself

1  Cor.  7-  39.  the  w  ife  is  bound  as  long  as  her  hush.  /.

2  Cor.  1.3.  4.  yet  he  /.  by  the  power  of  God
Gal.  2.  20.  I  live,  yet  not  1 ,  but  Christ  /.  in  me

1  Tim.  5.  6.  that  /.  in  pleasure  is  dead  w  hile  she  /.
Heb.  7.8.  of  whom  it  is  witnessed  that  he  /.

25.  seeing  he  ever  /.  to  make  intercession  for  them
9.  17.  testament  is  of  no  strength  while  testator  /.
Rev.  1. 18.  I  am  he  that  /.  and  was  dead,  behold
See  For  EVER.

As  the  Lord  LIVETH.

Judg.  8. 19.  as  the  L.  1.  if  ye  have  saved  them  alive
Ruth  3. 13. 1  will  do  the  part  of  kinsman,  as  the  L.  1.

283


L  O  J


LO


LUC


1  Sam.  14.  3y.  for  as  the  L.  1.  tho’  it  be  in  Jonathan
45.  as  the  Lard  l.  19.  6. 1  20.  21.  I  25.  26.  26.  10,

16.  |  28. 10.  I  29.  6.  2  Sam.  4. 9- 1  12.  o.  1  14. 11.

1  Kings  1.  29.

20.  3.  as  iitv  Lard  /.  there  is  but  a  step  between  me

25.  34.  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  /.  who  kept  me

2  Sam.  15.  21.  as  the  L.  1.  and  as  my  lord  the  king  /.

1  Kings  2. 24.  as  the  Lord  l.  2  Kings  5.  20.  2  Lhron.

18.  13.  Jer.  38.  16.

17-  1.  as  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  /.  18.  15.

12.  as  the  Lord  thy  God  /.  18.  10.  .  „

2  Kings  2.  2.  as  L.  1. and  thy  soul  liveth,  4. 6. 1  4.  30.

3.  14.  as  L.  of  hosts  /.  before  whom  L  stand,  5.  lb.

As  thy  soul  id  V  E  I  11 .

1  Sam  A.  26.  ass.  1.  1  am  woman  who  stood  praying
17.55.  Abner  said,  as  thy  s.  1.  O  king,  1  cannot  tell
20.  3.  as  s.  1.  there  is  but  one  ste  p  betw .  me  and  death

25.  26.  as  thy  soul  l.  seeing  L.  hath  withholden  thee

2  Sam.  11.  11.  as  thy  soul  l.  I  will  not  do  this  thing

14.  19.  as  soul l.  none  can  turn  to  right  or  left  hand

2  KinasH.H.  as  s.  1. 1  will  not  leave  thee,  so  they  went
y  LIVING

Signifies,  [1]  One  who  is  alivf,  or  enjoys  life,

1  Kings  3.  22.  [2]  Never  dry ,  hut  always  spring¬
ing  and  running.  Cant.  4.  15.  [3 ]  Christ  risen
from  the  dead,  Luke  24.  5.  [4]  1  he  godly,  de¬
parted  this  li*e,  Mat.  22.  32.  [5]  Spiritual,  Rom.

12.  1.  [6]  'That  which  procureth  and  bnngeth

to  life  spiritual  and  eternal,  Heb.  10.  20.  1  Pet.

2.  4.  [7]  A  persons  wealth,  goods,  or  estate,  Luke

15.  12.

Man  became  a  living  soul,  Gen.  2.  7-  lifeless
body  zvas  endued  with  a  soul,  iv  he  re  by  he  became  a
living  rational  creature.  .  .

Living  water,  John  4.  10.17,.  38-  1  he  Spirit  of

God  and  his  grace,  which  will  never  fail,  but  en¬
dure  to  eternal  life.  .

Gen.  1.  28.  have  dominion  over  every  /.  tiling

2.  7.  man  bee.  a  l.  soul  11 3.  20.  Eve,  mother  of  all  /.

6.  19.  and  of  every  l.  thing  of  all  flesh,  two

7.  4.  and  every  /.  substance  1  will  destroy
23.  and  every  /.  substance  was  destroyed

8.  1.  God  remembered  Noah  and  every  /.  thing
21.  I  will  not  smite  any  more  every  thing  l.

26.  t  19.  and  found  there  a  well  of  /.water
Lev.  11.  10.  of  any  /.  thing  which  is  m  the  water

13. 1 10.  if  there  be  a  quickening  of  /.flesh

14.  6.  as  for  the  /.  bird  he  shall  take  it,  7 •_  o3.

20.  25.  not  make  abominable  by  any  /.  thing
NumAd.  48.  he  stood  between  the  dead  and  the  /.

19.  1 17.  for  unclean  /.  water  shall  be  given
Ruth  2.  20.  hath  not  left  off  his  kindness  to  the  /.

2  Sam.  20.  3.  they  were  shut  up  /.  in  widowhood
1  Kings  3.  22.  the  /.  is  my  son,  the  dead  thy  son,  23.

25.  divide  the  /.  child  in  two,  and  give  halt  to  one

26.  whose  the  /.child  was,  give  her  the /.child

27.  then  the  king  said,  give  her  the  /.  child

Job  12.  10.  in  whose  hand  is  soul  of  every  /.  thing

28.  13.  nor  is  it  found  in  the  land  of  the  /.

21.  seeing  it  is  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  /.

30.  23.  and  to  the  house  appointed  for  all  /.

33.  30.  to  be  enlightened  with  light  of  l.

Ps.  27. 13.  to  see  goodness  of  the  Lord  in  land  ot  /.
38.  t  19.  for  mine  enemies  being  /.  are  strong
52.  5.  and  root  thee  out  of  the  land  ot  the  l.

56.  13.  that  I  may  walk  in  the  light  of  the  /.

58.  9.  shall  take  them  away  both  /.  and  in  wrath
69.  28.  let  them  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  ot  the  /.
116.  9.  walk  before  the  Lord  in  the  land  ot  the  /.

142.  5.  thou  art  my  portion  in  the  land  ot  the  /.

143.  2.  in  thy  sight  shall  no  man  /.  be  justified
145.  16.  thou  satisfiest  the  desire  of  every  /.  thing

Reel.  4.  2.  dead,  more  than  the  /.  whicli  are  alive

15.  1  considered  all  the  /.  under  the  sun

6.  8.  poor,  that  knoweth  to  walk  before  the  /.

7.  2.  end  of  all  men,  and  the  /.  will  lay  it  to  heart
9  4.  that  is  joined  to  all  the  /.  a  /.  dog  is  better

5.  for  the  /.  know  that  they  shall  die,  but  dead
Cant.  4. 15.  a  well  of  /.  water,  streams  from  Lebanon
Isa.  4.  3.  that  is  written  among  the  /.  in  Jerusalem

8.  19.  seek  to  their  God  for  the  /.  to  the  dead

19. 1 10.  be  broken  that  make  ponds  of  /.  things
38.  11.  not  see  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  /.

19.  the  /.  the  /.  he  shall  praise  thee,  as  1  do
53.  8.  he  was  cutoff  out  of  the  land  ot  the  /.

57. 1 10.  thou  hast  found  the  /.  ot  thy  hand

Jer  2. 13.  forsaken  fountain  of  /.  waters,  17. 13.

1 1  19.  let  us  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  /.
Lam.  3.  39.  wherefore  doth  a  /.  man  complain  ?
Ezek.  7.  +  13.  though  his  life  be  yet  among  the  /.

26.  20.  1  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  /.

32  23  all  of  them  slain,  which  caused  terror  in
the  land  of  the  /.  24,  25,  26,  27  ,  32.
Van.  2. 30.  any  wisdom  that  1  have  more  than  any  /.
4.  17.  to  the  intent  that  the/,  may  know
Lech.  14.  8.  /.  waters  shall  go  out  from  Jerusalem
Mai  00  3°.  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but
of  the  /.  Mark  12.  27.  Luke  20.  38.
Mark  12.44.  she  cast  in  all  she  had,  even  all  her  /.
Luke  8. 43.  woman  had  spent  all  her  /.  On  physicians

15.  12.  and  he  divided  unto  them  his  /.

13.  there  wasted  his  substance  with  riotous  ..  30.
£4.  5.  why  seek  ye  the  /.  among  the  dead  ?

John  4.  10.  he  would  have  given  thee  /.  water?

11.  from  whence  hast  thou  that  /.  water  ?

6.  51.  1  am  the  /.  bread  wkich  came  down  from
57.  as  the  /.  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  1  live

7.  38.  out  of  his  belly  shall  how  rivers  ot  /.  water
Rom.  12. 1.  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  /.sacrifice

14.  9.  that  he  might  be  Lord  both  ot  dead  and  /.

1  Cor.  15.  45.  the  first  man  Adam  was  made  a  /,  soul
Col.  2.  20.  /.  in  the  world,  are  ye  subject  to  ordinan.
Tit.  3.  3.  /.  in  malice,  envy,  and  hating  one  another
Heb.  10.  20.  boldness  to  enter  by  a  new  and  /.  way
1  Pet.  2.  4.  to  whom  coming  as  to  a/,  stone,  chosen
Rev.  7.  17.  the  Lamb  shall  lead  them  to /.  fountains

16.  3.  and  every  /.  soul  died  in  the  sea

See  Bird,  Creature,  God.
LIZARD.

lev  11.  30.  the  /.  snail,  and  mole  unclean  to  you
LO

Dootes,  [1]  Matter  of  attention  and  considera-

284


non.  Isa.  25.  9.  Luke  13.  16.  [2]  Readiness,

Psal.  40.  7.  [3]  Certainty  and  affirmation,  Lzek.

30.  9.  [4]  Demonstration  of  a  thing  present,

Gen.  £9.

Gen.  18.  10.  /.  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  have  a  son
29.  7.  /.  it  is  yet  high  day,  water  ye  the  sheep
50.  5.  /.  1  die  ||  Exod.  19.  9.  /.  1  come  in  a  cloud
Num.  14.  40.  /.  we  be  here,  and  will  go  up  to  place
24.  11.  /.  the  Lord  hath  kept  thee  from  honour

1  Sam.  14. 4.3. 1  did  but  taste  honey ,  and  /.  1  must  die

2  Sam.  24. 17 .  /.  1  have  sinned  and  done  wickedly
Job  9.  19.  if  I  speak  of  strength,  /.  he  is  strong
Psal.  37  .  36.  he  passed  away,  and  /.  he  was  not

40. 7.  /.  I  come  il  132.  6.  /.  we  heard  it  at  Ephratah
52.  7.  /.  the  man  that  made  not  God  his  strength
73.  27.  /.  they  that  are  tar  from  thee  shall  perish
92.  9.  /.  thine  enemies,  for  L  thine  enemies  perish
Keel.  7.  29.  /.  this  only  have  1  found,  that  God  made
Cant.  2.  1 1.  /.  the  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  ovei
Isa.  25.  9.  /.  this  is  our  God,  we  have  waited  tor  him
Jer.  4.  23.  the  earth,  and  /.  it  was  without  form

25.  1  beheld,  and  /.  there  was  no  man,  birds  tied
8.  8.  /.  certainly  in  vain  made  he  it,  pen  in  vain
25  29.  for  /.  1  begin  to  bring  evil  on  the  city
Lzek.  17.  18.  when  /.  he  had  given  him  his  hand
30.  9.  for  /.  it  cometh  H  .33.  33.  /.  it  will  come
Hos  9. 6.  for  /.  they  are  gone,  because  of  destruction
Amos  4.  2.  that  /.  the  days  shall  come  upon  you
Hag  1 . 9.  ye  looked  for  much,  and  /.  it  came  to  little
Mat.  3.  16.  and  /.  the  heavens  were  opened
24  23.  /.  here  is  Christ,  or  there,  believe  it  not

28.7.  /.  1  have  told  you  ||  20.  /.  I  am  with  you
Luke  13.  16.  Satan  bound,  /.  these  eighteen  years

23. 15.  /.  nothing  worthy  of  death  is  done  to  Inin
Acts  1.3.  46.  unworthy,  /.  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles
Heb.  10. 7-  /.  1  come  to^to  thy  will,  O  God,  9.

Psal.  144. 1 14.  that  our  oxen  may  be  /.  with  flesh
Isa  46. 1.  on  the  cattle  your  carriages  were  heavy  /,
LOADETH.

Psal.  68.  19.  Lord,  who  daily  /.  us  with  benefits
LOAF.

Exod.  29. 23.  one  /.  of  bread,  one  cake  ot  oiled  bread
1  Chr.  16.  3.  David  dealt  to  every  one  a  /.  of  bread
Mark  8.  14.  neither  had  they  more  than  one  /.

LO  A  N .

1  Sam.  2.  20.  for  the  /.  which  is  lent  to  the  Lord
LOATH,  see  Lothe.

LOAVES.

1  Sam.  17.  17.  take  ten  /.  and  run  to  the  camp
25.  18.  Abigail  made  haste  and  took  200  /.

1  Kings  14.  3.  take  with  thee  ten  /.  and  cracknels

2  Kings  4.  42.  a  man  brought  the  man  ot  God  20  l.
Mat.  14.  17.  they  say,  we  have  here,  but  five  /.

19.  and  he  took  the  five  /.  Mark  6.  .38.  Luke  9.  13.

15.  34.  said,  how  many  /.  have  ye  ?  Mark 6. 38. 1  8.5.
36.  he  took  the  seven  /.  and  the  fishes,  Mar  kb.  6.

16.  9.  nor  remember  the  five  /.  ot  the  50O0

10.  nor  the  seven  /.  ot  the  4000,  and  how  many
Mark  6.  44.  they  that  did  eat  of  the  /.  were  5000
52  they  considered  not  the  miracle  ot  the  /.

Luke  11.  5.  say  to  him,  friend,  lend  me  three  /.

John  6.  9.  a  lad  here  who  hath  five  barley  l.

1 1  J  esus  took  the  /.  and  distributed  to  the  disciples
13'.  with  the  fragments  of  the  five  barley  /.

26  because  ye  did  eat  ot  the  /.  and  were  filled
See  Bread.

Wave  LOAVES.

Lev.  23.  17.  shall  bring  two  w.  1.  of  two  tenth  deals

Lock.

( 'ant.  5.  5.  dropping  myrrh  on  the  handles  of  the  /.
LOCK.

Ezek.  8.  3.  and  he  took  me  by  a  /.  ot  my  head
LOCKS.

Num.  6.  5.  let  the  /.  of  the  hair  of  his  head  grow
Judo  16  13  if  thou  weavest  the  seven /.  ot  my  head
19.  she  caused  him  to  shave  oft  the  seven  /.

Neh.  .3.  3.  set  up  doors,  and  /.  thereof,  6, 13,  14, 15.
Cant.  4.  1.  thou  hast  doves’  eyes  within  thy  /.

3  like  a  piece  of  pomegranate  within  thy  /.

5.  2.  my  /.  are  filled  with  the  drops  ot  the  night
11.  his  /.  are  bushy,  and  black  as  a  raven

6.  7.  a  pomegranate  are  thy  temples  within  thy  /.
La.  47.  2.  uncover  thy  /.  make  bare  the  leg
Ezek.  44.  2u.  nor  suffer  their  /.  to  grow  long

See  Bars.

LOCKED.

Judy.  3.  23.  Ehud  shut  the  doors  and  /.  them
24.  behold,  the  doors  of  the  parlour  were  /.
LOCUST

Signifies,  [1]  A  certain  vile  insect.  Iheir  na¬
ture  is  to  be  many  together,  therefore  vast  mul¬
titudes  are  resembled  by  them,  Nah.  3.  15.  In
Arabia,  and  other  countries  that  are  infested
by  them,  they  come  in  vast  numbers  upon  their
corn  when  ripe,  and  what  they  do  not  eat  they
infect  with  their  touch  and  the  moisture  coming
from  them  y  and  afterwards  dying  m  gi  eat  num¬
bers,  they  poison  the  air,  and  cause  a  pestilence.
God  plagued  the  Egyptians,  by  sending  swarms
of  them  into  their  land,  Exod.  10.  14.  [2]  Either
a  large  sort  of  grasshoppers,  or  a  kind  of  green
herb,  Lev.  11.  22.  Mat.  3.  4.  [3]  Authors,

or  teachers  of  false  doctrine,  who  infect  others
by  distilling  their  poisonous  doctrines  into  them,
Rev.  9.  3  .  ..„  ,

Exod.  10. 19.  there  remained  notone  /.  in  all  Egypt
Lev.  11. 22.  /.  after  his  kind,  and  bald  /.  ye  may  eat
Deut.  28.  42.  all  thy  trees  shall  the  /.  consume

1  Kings  8.  37-  if  there  be  in  the  land  /.  2  Chr.  6.  28.
Psal.  78.  46.  he  gave  also  their  labour  to  the  /.

109.  23.  1  am  tossed  up  and  down  as  the  /.

Joel  1.  4.  hath  the  /.  eaten,  and  that  which  /.  left
2  25  1  will  restore  the  years  that  the  /.  hath  eaten
'  '  LOCUSTS.  .  .

Exod.  10  4.  behold,  to  morrow  1  will  bring  /.
li  stretch  out  thy  hand  over  Egypt  for  the  /.

13.  in  the  morning  the  east  wind  brought  the  f.

14.  no  such  /.  (I  19.  the  west  wind  took  away  the  /.
Deut.  28.  38.  for  the  /.  shall  consume  it

2  Chron.  7  ■  13.  if  1  command  the  /.  to  devour
Psal.  105.34.  he  spake,  and  /.  came,  and  caterpillars


Prov.  30.  27.  the  /.  have  no  king,  ye  go  by  bands
Isa.  33.  4.  as  the  running  to  and  fro  ot  /.  shall  he  ru
Nah.  3.  15.  make  thyself  many  as  the  /.

17.  thy  crowned  are  as  the  /.  and  thy  captains
Mat.  3.  4.  his  meat  was  /.  and  wild  honey,  Mark  1 .(!
Rev.  9.  3.  there  came  out  of  the  smoke  /.  on  the  earij


7.  shapes  of  /.  were  like  to  horses  tor  battle
LODGE.


Isa.  1. 8.  the  daughter  of  Zion  is  leftas  a  /.  in  garde
LOIDGE.


Gen.  24. 23.  is  there  room  in  the  house  for  us  to  /.  if
25.  we  have  provender  enough,  and  room  to  /.  ij
Num.  22.  8.  he  said  to  them,  /.  here  this  night
Josh.  4.  3.  in  the  place  where  ye  shall  /.  this  nigi
Judy.  19.  9-  /.  here,  that  thy  heart  may  be  merry  |
13.  to  /.  in  Gibeah  or  in  Ramah,  15.  1  20.  4.

20  the  old  man  said,  only  /.  not  in  the  street
Ruth  1.  16.  where  thou  lodgest  1  will  /

2  Sam.  17.  8.  thy  father  will  not  /.  with  the  peopli

16.  /.  not  this' night  in  the  plains  of  the  wilderue
Neh  4.  22.  -let  every  one  /.within  Jerusalem
13.  21  I  said,  why  /.  ye  about  the  wall  ?

Job  17.  *2.  doth  not  my  eye  /.  in  their  provocatioi
24.  7.  they  cause  the  naked  to /.  without  olotlnJ
31. 32.  the  stranger  did  not  /.  in  the  street
Psal.  25.  4  13.  his  soul  shall  /.  in  goodness
91.  t  1.  snail  /.  under  the  shadow  ot  the  Almigh
Cant.  7. 11. come,  my  beloved, let  us/,  in  the  village

r  AA  '  *t-. ..  Arcihi-J  chall  VP  /


j  .  ll.VyUtnV  j  .  A  1  •  1  11  /

Isa.  21. 13.  in  the  torest  in  Arabia  shall  ye  l.
65.4.  an<i  /.  in  monuments,  and  eat  swine’


s  ties


Jer  4  14.  how  long  shall  vam  thoughts  /.  in  the,
Zeph.  2.  14.  the  beasts  shall  /.  in  the  upper  lintel:
Mat.  13.  32.  so  that  birds  of  the  air  come  and  I.

the  branches  thereof,  Mark  4.
Arts  21  16  brought  Mnason  with  whom  we  shouk
LODGED.

Gen.  32. 13.  Jacob  /.  there  that  same  night
21.  and  himself  /.  that  night  in  the  company
Josh. HA.  the  spies  came  into  an  harlot  s  house,  anc,

3.  1.  to  Iordan,  he  and  all  Israel,  and  /.  there

4.  8.  carried  them  over  to  the  place  where  thej
6  11  they  came  into  the  camp,  and  /.  in  the  cai

8.  9.  but  Joshua  /.  that  night  among  the  people

Judg.  18.  2.  came  to  house  of  Micah,  they  /.  theu
19.  4.  so  they  did  eat  and  drink,  and  /.  there
7  urged  him,  therefore  he  /.  there  again
1  Kings  19.  9-  came  into  a  cave,  and  /.  there
1  Chr.  9.  27.  they  /.  round  about  the  house  of  G
Neh.  13.  20.  the  merchants  /.  without  Jerusalem!
isa.l.  21.  righteousness/,  in  it,  but  now  murder,
Mat.  21.  17.  he  went  to  Bethany  and  /.  there
Acts  10  18.  asked  whether  Simon  were  /.  there
23.  then  called  he  them  in,  and  /.  them
28.  7.  Publius  /.  us  three  days  courteously
1  Tim.  5. 10.  if  she  have  /.  strangers,  it  she  washd
LODGES1.

Ruth  1.  16.  Ruth  said,  where  thou  /.  1  will  lodg
1 ODGE1H.

Acts  10.  6.  he  /.  with  one  Simon  a  tanner
LODGING.

Josh.  4  3.  twelve  stones,  and  leave  them  in  the
Judg.  19.  15.  no  man  took  them  to  his  house  to  j
Isa.  10.29.  they  have  taken  up  their  /.  at  Geba
Jer.  9.  2.  that  l  had  in  the  wilderness  a  /.  place
Acts  28.  23.  there  came  many  to  him  into  his  l.-
Philem.  22.  but  withal  prepare  me  also  a  /.
LODGINGS.

0  Kings  19.  23. 1  will  enter  into  the  /.of  his  bore
LOFT.

1  Kings  17. 19.  he  took  him  and  carried  him  into,
Acts  20.  9.  Eutychus  fell  down  from  the  third
LO FT Y .

Psal.  131.  1.  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eye
Prov.  30. 13.  a  generation,  O  how  /.  are  their  ej;
Isa.  2.  11.  the  /.looks  of  man  shall  behumblecl,5;
12.  the  day  of  the  Lord  be  on  every  one  that
26.  5.  the  /.  city  he  layeth  low  to  the  ground
57.  7.  011  a  /.  mountain  hast  thou  set  thy  bed

15.  thus  saith  the  high  and  /.  One,  that  inhabit
LOFTILY.

Psal.  73.  8.  they  are  corrupt,  they  speak  /.
LOFTINESS.

Isa.  2.  17.  the  /.  of  man  shall  be  bowed  down  <
jer  48  29.  we  heard  the  pride  of  Moab,  his/.
LOG.

Lev.  14.  10.  the  priest  shall  take  a.  /.of  oil,  12,1
15.  shall  take  some  of  the  /.  of  oil,  and  pour  :
21.  if  he  be  poor,  then  he  shall  take  a  /.  of  oil:
LOINS

Signify,  [1]  The  lower  parts  of  the  back,  v a
waist,  Exod.  28.  42.  [2]  The  whole  man.  Jot

20.  Psal.  66.  11.  .  J  „  ,

Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  1  Pet.  1.  id.
your  minds  be  intent  upon,  ready,  and  pi epare*
your  spiritual  work,  restrained  from  all  t
thoughts,  cares,  affections,  and  lusts,  which  1
entangle,  detain,  and  hinder  them,  or  make  ■
unfit  for  it.  It  is  an  allusion  to  the  custom  el
Oriental  nations,  who  wearing  long  loose  gff?\
were  wont  to  gird  them  about  their  loins,  that
might  not  hinder  them  in  their  travelling
working,  1  Kings  18.  46.  2  Kings  4.  29.  R  ■
also  have  a  special  respect  to  the  like  rite  us<
the  passover  when  the  Israelites  were  just  >•
to  enter  upon  their  journey  and  march  0;
Egypt,  Exod.  12.11.  ...  ,

Gen.  35.  11.  and  kings  shall  come  out  ot  thy  1
37.  34.  and  Jacob  put  sackcloth  upon  Ins  r.
46.  26.  the  souls  which  came  out  of  his  /.  Exod .
Exod.  12.  11.  ye  shall  eat  it,  with  your  /.  gird
28.  42.  breeches  reach  from  the  /.  unto  the  thi
Deut.  33.  11. smite  through  the  /.of  them  that
2  Sam.  20. 8.  a  girdle  with  a  sword  fastened  on  ■

1  Kings  2.5.  put  the  blood  in  the  girdle  about
8.  19.  son  shall  come  forth  of  thy  /.  2  G/'Wt-  o
12.  10  thicker  than  my  father’s  /.  2  Chr. 10.

18.  46.  Elijah  girded  up  his  /.  and  ran  before  f
20.  31.  let  us,  1  pray,  put  sackcloth  on  our*

32.  so  they  girded  sackcloth  on  their  /.  and  o

2  Kings  1 . 8.  was  an  hairy  man,  and  girt  w fid  •
of  leather  about  his  /.  Mat.  3.  4.  Mark

4.  29.  gird  up  th v  /.  9. 1.  Job  38.  3.  I  40.  7 •  oer.  ■


LO  N


LOO


LOO


ek.  4.  +  18.  had  each  his  sword  girded  on  ms  /.
h  12.  18.  tie  girdeth  the  /.  of  kings  with  a  girdle

1.  CO.  if  his  /.  have  not  blessed  me
i).  16.  lo,  now  his  strength  is  in  his  /.

<al.  38. 7-  mv  /.  are  tilled  with  a  loathsome  disease
f).  11.  thou  laidest  affliction  upon  our  l.

).  23.  and  make  their  l.  continually  to  shake
ruv.  30.  +  31 .  a  horse  girt  in  the  /.  and  a  king
I.  17.  she  girdeth  her  /.  with  strength
a.b.  27.  neither  shall  the  girdle  of  their  /.  he  loosed
1.  5.  righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his  /.

>.  2.  loose  the  sackcloth  from  off  thy  /.  put  off

I.  3.  therefore  are  my  /.  tilled  with  (lain

1 2.  11-  make  bare,  gird  sackcloth  upon  your  /.

5. 1.  1  will  loose  the  /.  of  kings  to  open  before
r.  13.  1.  get  a  linen  girdle  and  put  it  upon  thy  /.

II.  as  the  girdle  c.eaveth  to  the  /.  of  a  man
0.  6.  see  every  man  with  his  hands  on  his  l.

3.  37.  and  upon  the  /.  shall  be  sackcloth

\ek.  1.27-  from  the  appearance  of  his  /.  upward
.  2.  from  his  /.  downward,  fire ;  from  his  /.  upward
.  t  2.  with  a  writer’s  inkhorn  on  his  /.

1. 6.  sigh  with  the  breaking  of  thy  /.  and  bitterness
3.  15.  girded  with  girdles  upon  their  /.

j.  7.  thou  madest  all  their  /.  to  be  at  a  stand

l.  18.  they  shall  have  linen  breeches  on  their  l.
i.  4.  he  measured,  the  waters  were  to  the  l.
an.  5.  8.  so  the  joints  of  his  l.  were  loosed

[1.5.  whose  l.  were  girded  with  fine  gold  of  Uphaz
moi8.  10.  I  will  bring  sackcloth  on  your  /.
ah.  2.  1.  make  thy  /.  strong  ||  10.  pam  is  in  all  /.
ike  12.  35.  let  your  l.  be  gilded  about,  and  lights
cts  2.  30.  that  of  his  l.  he  would  raise  up  Christ
ih.  6.  14.  having  your  /.  girt  about  with  truth
eh.  7.  5.  tho’  they  came  out  of  the  /.  of  Abraham
10.  for  he  was  yet  in  the  /.  of  his  father
Pet.  1.  13.  wherefore  gird  up  the  l.  of  your  mind
LONG

unities,  [1]  Of  great  extent  in  length ,  Ezek.  31.
5.  [2]  To  love  greatly ,  Gen.  34.  8.  [3]  To
hirst,  2  Sam.  23.  15.  [4]  To  desire  very  ear-
• testly ,  .lob  3.  21.  Thus  do,  [1]  Such  as  are
neatly  afflicted  for  death,  .lob  3.  21.  [2]  The
'at her  after  the  son,  2  Sam.  13.  39.  [3]  The
absent  for  his  native  place,  Gen.  31.  30.  [4]
The  godly  after  God's  word,  Psal.  119.  40,  131,
174.  [5]  The  faithful  teacher  after  his  flock,
Phil.  2.  26.  [6]  Saints  after  saints,  Rom.  1.  11.
Phil.  1.  8.

m.  48. 15.  G.  who  fed  me  all  my  life  1.  to  this  day
rod.  19.  13.  when  the  trumpet  soundeth  l.  19.

D.  12.  that  thy  days  may  be  l.  on  the  land
um.  9. 19.  when  the  cloud  tarried  /.  on  tabernacle
tut.  1.  6.  ye  dwelt  l.  enough  in  this  mount,  2.  3.
25.  and  shalt  have  remained  l.  in  the  land
1.  24.  and  if  the  way  be  too  l.  for  thee
).  6.  and  overtake  him,  because  the  way  is  l.

3.  59.  make  great  plagues  and  of  l.  continuance
sh.  6.  5.  when  they  make  a  l.  blast  with  the  horn
.  13.  are  old,  by  reason  of  the  very  l.  journey
1.  7-  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  l.  season
lam.  3.  1.  there  was  l.  war  between  house  of  Saul
'lings  3. 11.  and  hastnotasked  /.  life,  2  Chr.  1. 11.
Ihr.  15.  3.  for  a  l.  season  Israel  was  without  God
'.  91.  16.  with  l.  life  will  1  satisfy  him
5. 10.  forty  year's  l.  was  I  grieved  with  this  genera.

20. 6.  my  soul  l.  dwelt  with  him  that  hateth  peace
29.  3.  the  plowers  made  /.  their  furrows

13.  3.  to  dwell,  as  those  that  have  been  l.  dead
'ov.  3.  2.  and  l.  life  shall  they  add  to  thee

19.  the  good  man  is  gone  a  l.  journey
?.  30.  they  that  tarry  /.  at  the  wine,  that  go

3. 15.  by  l.  forbearing  is  a  prince  persuaded
cl.  12.  5.  because  man  goeth  to  his  l.  home
1. 65.22.  my  elect  shal  1 1.  enjoy  work  of  their  hands
r.  29.  28.  this  captivity  is  l.  build  ye  houses
nw.2.20.  shall  women  eat  their  children  of  span  l.?
■ek.  17.  3.  a  great  eagle  l.  winged,  full  of  feathers
l.  5.  his  branches  became  l.  because  of  waters

l.  20.  nor  shave,  nor  suffer  their  locks  to  grow  l.

m.  10.  1.  but  the  time  appointed  was  l.

<s.  13. 13.  not  stay  l.  in  the  place  of  breaking  forth
at.  11.  21.  repented  l.  ago  in  sackcloth  and  ashes
>.  14.  ye  devour  widows’  houses,  and  for  pretence
make  l.  prayers,  Mark  12.  40.  Luke  20.  47.
a'k  12.  38.  who  go  in  l.  clothing,  Luke  20.  46.

).5.  sitting  clothed  in  a  l.  white  garment
wG8.  7-  avenge,  though  he  bear  l.  with  them
>•  8.  tor  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  of  a  /.  season
*20.  9.  as  Paul  was  l.  preaching,  he  sunk  with
.  14.  not/,  afterthere  arose  a  tempest  Euroclydon
but  after  l.  abstinence  Paul  stood  in  midst  of
ft-  11.  14.  if  a  man  have  l.  hair,  it  is  a  shame
15.  it  a  woman  have  l.  hair,  it  is  a  glory  to  her
:’h-  6.  3.  that  thou  mayest  live  l.  on  the  earth
ltm.3.  15.  if  1  tarry  I.  that  thou  mayest  know
m-  5.  7.  the  husbandman  hath  l.  patience  for  it
ike  Ago.

As  LONG  as.

)?•  18. 19.  as  l.  as  she  is  put  apart  for  uncleanness
>•  34.  enjoy  sabbaths,  as  l.  as  it  lieth  desolate,  35.
,m-  9.  18.  as  l.  as  the  cloud  abode,  they  rested
rui-  12. 19-  torsake  not  the  Levite  as  /.  as  thou  liv.

•  •  -3.  fear  th£  I  ord  as  l.  as  you  live  in  the  land
',em.  1.  28.  lent  to  the  Lord,  as  l.  as  he  liveth
;•  31.  as  l.  as  son  of  Jesse  liveth  on  the  ground
•15  any  thing  as  l.  as  w'e  were  conversant
o\  't>'  -  as  as  sou?bt  the  L.  he  prospered
ns  1.  as  she  lay  desolate  she  kept  sabbath
”•,72-  5.  tear  thee  as  l.  as  sun  and  moon  endure
7-  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  l.  as  the  sun
c  o  t  1  smo  to  the  Lord  as  l.  as  I  live
h- 2-  1  will  cal!  upon  him  as  /.  as  I  iiv«j

11‘  as  a-  they, anil  as  broad  as  they
,  •  9. 15.  as /.  as  bridegr.  is  with  them,  Mark 2. 19.
,n  To.  as  l.  as  1  am  in  the  world,  1  am  the  light
?”•  7.  1.  doniinion  over  a  man  as  /.  as  lie  liveth
or.  1 . 39.  wife  is  bound  as  l.  as  her  husband  liveth
/'  ,  Ihe  heir,  as  l.  as  he  is  a  child,  differeth  not
et.S.o.  whose  daughters  ye  are  as  /.  as  ve  do  well
et.  1.  13.  as  l.  as  I  am  in  this  tabernacle
See  Cubits,  Day,  Hour.


So  LONG.

.mdg.  5.  28.  why  is  his  chariot  so  l.  in  coining  ?
1*!>Vm».29.8.  what  found  in  thy  servant,  so  t.  as  1  have
2  Kings  9. 22.  so  l.  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  motn„’-
2  Citron.  6.  31.  they  may  fear  thee  so  l.  as  they  live
Estli.  5.  13.  so  l.  as  1  see  Mordecai  sitting  at  the  gate
Job  27.  6.  shall  not  reproach  me  so  l.  as  I  live
Psal.  72.  7.  peace  so  l.  as  the  moon  endureth
Luke  1.  21.  and  marvelled  that  he  tarried  so  l.
Rom.  7.  2.  bound  to  her  husband  so  l.  as  he  liveth
Tied.  4.  7.  to-day,  after  so  l.  a  time,  as  it  is  said
LONG  time.

Gen.  26.  8.  when  he  had  been  there  a  l.  time
Num.  20.  15.  and  we  have  dwelt  in  Egypt  a  l,  time
Deut.  20. 19.  when  thou  shalt  besiege  a  city  a  /.  time
Josh.  11. 18.  Joshua  made  war  a  l.  time  with  kings
23.  1.  a  /.  time  after  that  Joshua  waxed  old

1  Sam.  7.  2.  while  the  ark  abode  the  time  was  l.

2  Sam.  14.  2.  as  a  woman  that  had  l.  time  mourned
2  Chron.  30.  5.  for  they  had  not  done  it  of  a  l.  time
Isa.  42.14.  1  have  l.  time  holden  my  peace,  been  still
Lam.  5.  20.  forget  us,  and  forsake  us  so  /.  time
Mat.  25. 19.  after  a  l.  time  the  lord  of  those  servants

corneth  and  reckoneth  with  them,  I.uke  20.  9.
Luke  8.  27.  a  certain  man  which  had  devils  /.  time
20.  9.  a  man  went  into  a  far  country  for  a  l.  time
John  5. 6.  knew  that  he  had  been  a  l.  time  in  that  case
14.  9.  have  1  been  so  l.  time  with  you,  and  yet
Acts  8. 11.  because  of  l.  time  he  had  bewitched  them
14.  3.  1.  time  abode  they  with  the  disciples,  28.

2  Pet.  2.  3.  w'hose  judgment  of  /.  time  lingereth  not
LON G  while.

Acts  20.  11.  he  talked  a  l.  while  till  break  of  day
LONG.

Job  3.  21.  which  l.  for  death,  but  it  corneth  not
6. 8.  O  that  God  would  grant  me  tiling  that  1 1.  for !
Rom.  1.  11.  for  I  l.  to  see  you,  that  1  may  impart
2  Cor.  9. 14.  and  by  their  prayer  which  l.  after  you
Phil.  1.  8.  how  greatly  I  l.  after  you  all  in  bowels
TONG ED.

2  Sam.  13.  39.  David  l.  to  go  forth  unto  Absalom
23. 15.  David  /.  and  said.  1  >  that  one,  1  Chr.  11. 17.
Psal.  119.40.  behold,  I  have  l.  after  thy  precepts
131.  tor  1  l.  for  thy  commandments
174.  I  have  l.  for  thy  salvation,  O  Lord
Phil.  2.  26.  for  he  l.  after  you  all  II  4.  1.  and  l.  for
LONGEDST.

Gen.  31.  30.  thou  sore  /.  after  thy  father’s  house
LONGER.

Exod.  2.  3.  when  she  could  no  /.  hide  him
9.  28.  I  will  let  you  go,  and  ye  shall  stay  no  /.
Judg.  2.  14.  could  not  any  l.  stand  before  enemies
2  Sam.  20.  5.  he  tarried  l.  than  the  set  time
2  Kings  6.  33.  should  1  wait  for  the  Lord  any  l.  ?
Job  7.  +8.  thine  eyes  are  on  me,  I  can  live  no  l.

11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  l.  than  the  earth
Jer.  44.  22.  so  that  the  Lord  could  no  l.  bear
Luke  16.  2.  for  thou  mayest  be  no  l.  steward
Acts  18.  20.  w  hen  thej’  desired  him  to  tarry  l.

25.  24.  crying,  that  lie  ought  not  to  live  any  l.
Rom.  6.  2.  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  /.  therein
Gal.  3.  25.  we  are  no  l.  under  a  school-master
1  These.  3. 1.  when  we  could  no  /.  forbear,  5.

1  Tim.  5.  23.  drink  no  /.  water,  but  use  a  little  wine

1  Pet.  4. 2.  that  he  no  I.  live  the  rest  of  his  time
Rev.  10.  6.  that  there  should  be  time  no  l.

LONGETH.

Gen.  34.  8.  my  son  Shechem  /.  for  your  daughter
Deut.  12.  20.  because  thy  soul  l.  to  eat  flesh
Psal.  63.  1.  my  flesh  /.  for  thee  in  a  dry  land
84.  2.  my  soul  l.  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord
LONGING.

Deut.  28.  32.  thine  eyes  shall  fail  with  l.  for  them
Psal.  107.  9.  for  he  satisfieth  the  /.  soul
119.  20.  my  soul  breaketh  for  the  l.  that  it  hath
LONG  -suffering .

Exod.  34.  6.  Lord  God  merciful  and  gracious,  /.-
suffering,  Num.  14.  18.  Psal.  86.  15.  2  Pet.  3.  9.
Jer.  15.  15.  O  Lord  take  me  not  away  in  thy  /.  suff.
Rom.  2.  4.  ordespisest  thou  riches  of  his  l.-suffer.

9.  22.  endured  with  much  l.-suffer.  vessels  of  wrath

2  Cor.  6.  6.  by  knowledge,  by  l.  suffer,  by  kindness
Gal.  5.  22.  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  l.-suffering
L’.ph.  4.  2.  with  l.-suffering ,  forbearing  one  another
Col.  1. 11.  strengthened  to  all  l.-suff.  with  joyfulness

3. 12.  put  on, as  electof  God,  meekness,  l.-suffer.

1  Tim.  1.  16.  that  in  me  Christ  might  shew  all  l.-s.

2  Tim.  3. 10.  thou  hast  fully  known  my  faith,  l.-suff.
4.  2.  rebuke,  exhort  with  all  l.-suffer.  and  doctrine

1  Pet.  3. 20.  when  l.-suffering  of  God  waited  in  days

2  Pet.  3. 15.  the  l. -suffering  of  our  Lord  is  salvation

LOOK,  S.

Psal.  18.  27.  but  thou  wilt  bring  down  high  l.

101.  5.  that  hath  a  high  l.  1  will  not  suffer
Prov.  6.  17-  the  Lord  hateth  a  proud  /.  a  lying
21.  4.  a  high  l.  and  proud  heart  is  sin
Isa.  2.  11.  the  lofty  /.  of  man  shall  be  humbled

10.  12.  1  will  punish  the  glory  of  his  high  l.

Ezek.  2.  6.  nor  be  dismayed  at  their  l.  3.  9.

Dan.  7.20.  whose  l.  was  more  stout  than  his  fellows

LOOK

Signifies,  [1]  To  behold  or  see,  Deut.  28.  32.
[2]  To  consider  or  take  particular  notice  of,
l  ev.  13.  5.  [3]  To  expect  or  wait  for,  Jer.  13.

16.  Mat.  11.  3.  [4]  To  believe  and  trust  in,

Isa.  45.  22.

Gen.  13. 14. 1.  from  the  place  where  thou  art
15.  5.  I.  towards  heaven,  and  tell  the  stars
19.  17-  escape  for  thy  life,  l.  not  behind  thee

40.  7-  wherefore  /.  ye  so  sadly  to-day  ?

41.  33.  now  let  Pharaoh  /.  out  a  man  discreet

42.  1.  Jacob  said,  why  /.  ye  one  upon  another?
Exod.  10.  10.  1.  to  it ;  for  evil  is  before  you

25.  20.  and  their  faces  shall  /.one  to  another
40.  1.  that  thou  make  them  after  their  pattern
Lev.  13.  39.  then  the  priest  shall  /.  if  the  spots
53.  if  the  priest  shall  /.  and  heboid,  56.

14.  3.  then  the  priest  shall  /.  if  the  plague,  39,  44.
Deut.  9.  27. 1.  not  to  the  stubbornness  of  this  people
28.  32.  thine  eyes  shall  l.  and  fail  with  longing
1  Sam.  16.  12.  David  was  ruddy,  and  goodly  to/,  to
17. 18  l.  how  brethren  fare,  and  take  pledge


1  Kings  18.  43.  go  up  now,/,  toward  the  sea

2  Kings  3.  14.  1  would  not  /.  toward  thee,  nor  see
6.  32.  /.  when  messenger  corneth,  shut  the  door

9.  2.  1.  out  there,  Jehu,  and  go  in,  make  him  rise

10.  3.  /•  even  out  best  and  meetestot  master’s  sons
x3.  1.  there  be  none  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord

14.  8.  come,  let  us  /.  one  another  in  the  face
1  Chron.  A.  17.  the  God  of  our  fathers  /.  thereon
Job  3.  9.  let  it  /.  for  light,  but  have  none
5.  +  1.  to  which  of  the  saints  wilt  thou  /.  ?

20.21.  therefore  shall  no  man  /.  for  his  goods

21. +  5.  1.  unto  me  and  be  astonished,  lay  your  hand
35.  5.  /.  to  heavens  and  see,  and  behold  the  clouds
Ps.  5.  3.  1  will  direct  my  Drayei  to  thee,  and  /.  up
40.  12.  iniquities  so  that  1  am  not  able  to  /.  up
123.  2.  as  the  eyes  of  servants  to  their  masters
Prov.  4.  25.  let  thine  eyes  /.  right  on,  and  eye-lid*
27-  23.  to  know  thy  flocks,  and  /.  well  to  thy  herds
EccL  12.  3.  that  /.  out  at  the  windows  be  darkened
Cant.  4.  8. 1.  from  top  of  Amana,  Shenir,  Hermon
Isa.  5.  30.  if  one  /.  unto  the  land,  behold  darkness
8.  17.  1  will  wait  on  the  Lord.  1  will  /.  for  him

21.  shall  curse  their  kingand  God,  and  l.  upward

22.  they  shall  l.  unto  earth,  and  behold  trouble

17.  7.  Rt  that  day  shall  a  man  /.  to  his  Maker

8.  he  shall  not  /.  to  the  altars,  work  of  his  hands
22.  4.  1.  away  from  me,  I  will  weep  bitterly
8.  thou  didst  /.  in  that  day  to  the  armour
31.  1.  they  /.  not  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel
42. 18.  hear,  ye  deaf,  l.  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  see

45.  22.  1.  unto  me.  and  be  saved,  all  ends  of  earth
51.  1.  /.to  the  rock  whence  ye  are  hewn

2.  /.  to  Abraham  your  father,  and  to  Sarah

56. 11.  they  all  l.  to  their  own  way  for  gain
59.  11.  we  /.  for  judgment,  but  there  is  none
66.  2.  but  to  this  man  will  1  /.  that  is  poor

Jer.  13.  t6.  and  while  ye  l.  for  light,  he  turn  it

39. 12.  take  and  l.  well  to  him,  do  him  no  harm
40.  4.  come  with  me,  and  1  w  ill  /.  well  to  thee

46.  5.  their  mighty  ones  are  fled,  and  l.  not  back

47.  3.  the  fathers  shall  not  l.  back  to  their  children
Ezek.  2.3.  15.  all  of  them  princes  to  /.  us  to  Babylon

29.  16.  iniquity  to  remembrance  when  they  /.

Dos.  3.  1.  who  l.  to  other  gods,  and  love  wine
Jonah  2.  4.  1  will  /.  again  towards  thy  holy  temple
Mic.  7.  7.  therefore  will  1  /.  to  the  Lord,  will  wait
Nab.  2.  8.  stand,  stand,  but  none  shall  l.  back
Mat.  11.  3.  or  do  we  l.  for  another  ?  Luke  J.  19,  20.
Mark  8.  25.  put  hands  on  eyes,  and  made  him  /.  up
Luke  21.  28.  when  these  things  begin,  then  l.  up
Jo/m 7  52.  search  and  /.  for  outof  Galilee  no  prophet
Acts  6.  3.  /.  ye  out  seven  men  of  honest  report

18. 15.  if  it  be  a  question  of  words,  /.  ye  to  it

1  Cor.  16.  11.  I  /.  for  him  with  the  brethren

2  Cor.  3.  13.  Israel  could  notstedfastly  l.  to  the  end

4.  18.  while  we  /.  at  things  which  are  seen
Phil.  3.  20.  from  whence  we  /.  for  the  Saviour
Deb.  9.  28.  to  them  that  l.  for  him  shall  he  appear

1  Pet.  1.  12.  which  the  angels  desire  to  l.  into

2  Pet.  3. 13.  nevertheless  w'e  /.  for  new  heavens
14.  seeing  ye  l.  for  such  things,  be  diligent  that

2  John  8.  1.  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not
Rev.  5.  3.  and  no  man  was  able  to  /.  thereon
4.  found  worthy  to  read  the  hook,  nor  /.  thereon
LOOK  down.

Deut.  26.  15.  1.  aown  from  thy  holy  habitation
Psal.  80. 14.  1.  down,  behold,  and  visit  this  vine
85.  11.  righteousness  shall  l.  down  from  heaven
Isa.  63.  15.  /.  down  from  heaven,  and  behold  from
Lam.  3.  50.  till  I..  /.  down,  and  behold  from  heaven
LOOK  on,  or  upon.

Gen.  9.16.  bow  shall  be  in  cloud,  and  I  will  /.  upon  it
12.  11.  I  know  thou  art  a  fair  woman  to  /.  upon
24.  16.  Rebekah  was  very  fair  to  l.  upon,  26.  7.
Exod.  3.  6.  Moses  was  afraid  to  /.  upon  God

5.  21.  the  Lord  l.  upon  you,  and  judge,  because
39.  43.  and  Moses  did  /.  upon  all  the  work

Lev.  13.  3.  the  priest  shall  /.  on  the  plague  in  the  skin
of  the  flesh,  21,  25,26,  31,  32,  34,  43,  50.

3.  the  priest  shall  l.  imhim,  5,  6,  27  ,  36.

14.  48.  the  priest  shall  l.  upon  it,  and  behold

Num.  15.  39.  for  a  fringe,  that  ye  may  /.  upon  it
Judg.  7.  17.  Gideon  said,  l.  on  me,  and  do  likew  ise

1  Sam.  I.11.  if  thou  wilt  indeed  /.on  the  affliction
16.  7.  1.  not  on  his  countenance  or  stature

2  Sam.  9.8.  shouldest  l.  upon  such  a  dead  dog  as  I  am
11.2.  the  woman  was  very  beautiful  to  /.  upon
16.  12.  it  may  be  the  l  ord  will  l.  on  my  affliction

2  Chr.  24.  22.  he  said,  Lord,  l.  upon  it,  and  require  it
Esth.  1.  11.  Vashti  the  queen  was  fair  to  l.  on
Job  6.  28.  now,  therefore,  be  content,  /.  upon  me

40. 12. 1.  on  every  one  that  is  proud,  and  bring  low
Psal.  22.  17.  my  bones  stare  and  /.  upon  me

25. 18. 1.  upon  mine  affliction  and  my  pain,  forgive
35.  17.  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou  l.on?  rescue
84.  9.  and  l.  upon  the  face  of  thine  Anointed

119. 132.  1.  thou  upon  me,  and  be  merciful  to  me
142.  t  4.  1.  on  the  right  hand,  and  see
Prov.  4.  25.  let  thine  eyes  l.  right  on,  and  eye-lids

23.  31.  /.  not  thou  upon  the  wine  when  it  is  red
Cant.  1.  6.  /.  not  upon  me  because  1  am  black

6.  13.  return,  return,  that  we  may  l.  upon  thee
Isa.  14.  16.  that  see  thee,  shall  narrowly  /.  upon  thee

33. 20. 1.  upon  Zion  ||  51.  6.  /.  upon  the  earth  beneath
66.  24.  go  forth  and  /.  upon  the  carcases  of  the  men

Mic.  4. 11.  he  defiled,  and  let  our  eye  /.  upon  Zion
Nah.  3.  7-  that  /.  upon  thee,  shall  flee  from  thee
Dab.  1.  13.  of  purer  eyes  than  to  /.  upon  iniquity

2. 15.  that  thou  mayest  /.  upon  their  nakedness
Zech.  12.  10.  shall  /.  upon  me  whom  they  pierced
Luke  9.  38.  master,  I  beseech  thee,  l.  upon  my  son
John  4.  35.  lift  up  your  eyes,  and  l.upon  the  fields
19.  37-  they  shall  /.  upon  him  whom  they  pierced
Acts  3.  4.  Peter  and  John  said,  /.  on  us,  12.

2  Cor.  10. 7-  /•  upon  things  after  outward  appearance
Phil.  2.  4.  /.  not  every  man  on  his  own  things
Rev.  4.  3.  he  that  sat  was  to  /.  upon  like  a  jasper
LOOKED.

Gen.  6.  12.  God  /.  on  the  earth,  and  it  was  corrupt

18.  16.  the  men  rose  up,  and  l.  toward  Sodom

19.  26.  his  wife  /.  hack  ||  26.  8.  1.  out  at  a  window
29.  32.  the  Lord  hath  l.  upon  my  affliction

S?85


LOO


LOR


LOR


&en.  .39. 23.  keeper  of  the  prison  /.  not  to  any  thing
40.  6.  Joseph  I.  on  them,  behold  they  were  sad
Exod.  2.  11.  Moses  went  and  /.  on  their  burdens

12.  he  /.  this  way  and  that  way ,  and  saw  no  man

25.  and  God  /.  upon  the  children  of  Israel

4.  31.  Lord  had  /.  on  their  affliction,  Deut.  26.  7.

14.  24.  the  Lord  /.  on  the  host  of  the  Egyptians
16. 10.  that  they  /.  toward  the  wilderness

33.  8.  the  people  /.  after  Moses  till  he  was  gone
Num.  12.  10.  Aaron  /.  on  Miriam,  she  was  leprous

16.  42.  that  they  /.  towards  the  tabernacle
24.  20.  he  /.  on  Amalek,  he  took  up  his  parable

21.  /.  on  the  lvenites,  and  took  up  his  parable
Josh.  8.  20.  when  the  men  of  Ai  /.  behind  them
Judy.  5.  28.  the  mother  of  Sisera  /.  out  at  a  window

6.  14.  the  Lord  /.  upon  him,  and  said,  go  in  might

13.  19.  and  Manoah  and  his  wife  /.  on,  20.

20.  40.  the  Benjamites  /.  behind  them,  and  behold

1  Sam.  6.  19.  because  they  had  /.  into  the  ark

9.  16.  I  have  /.  on  my  people,  because  cry  came  to

14.  16.  the  watchmen  of  Saul  /.  and  behold

16.  6.  when  they  were  come,  he  /.  on  Eliab

17.  42.  the  Philistine  /.  about,  and  saw'  David

24. 8.  Saul  /.  behind  him,  David  stood,  2  Sam.  1.  7-

2  Sam.  2.  20.  Abner  /.  behind  him  and  said

6. 16.  Michal  /.  through  a  w  indow,  and  saw  David

22.  42.  they  /.  but  there  was  uone  to  save

1  Kings  18.  43.  Elijah's  servant  went  up  and  /.

2  Kings  2.  24.  Elisha  turned  back  and  l.  on  them

6.  30.  the  people  /.  and  behold  he  had  sackcloth

9.  30.  Jezebel  painted,  and  l.  out  at  a  window

14.  11.  1.  one  another  in  the  face  at  Heth-shemesh
2  Chron.  13.  14.  when  Judah  l.  back,  the  battle

26.  20.  1.  on  him,  and  behold  he  was  leprous
Esth.  2.  15.  favour  in  the  sight  of  all  who  l.  on  her
Job  6.  19.  the  troops  of  l’ema  l.  Sheba  waited
Psal.  14.  2.  the  Lord  l.  to  see  if  any  did  understand

34.  5.  they  /.  to  him,  and  w  ere  lightened
53.  2.  Goa  l.  down  on  the  children  of  men
102.  19.  he  hath  l.  down  from  his  sanctuary
109.  25.  when  they  l.  they  shaked  their  heads

Cant.  1.  6.  because  the  sun  hath  l.  on  me
Isa.  5.  2.  he  l.  that  it  should  bring  forth  grapes

7.  he  l.  for  judgment,  but  behold  oppression

22.  11.  but  ye  have  not  l.  to  the  maker  thereof
64.  3.  didst  terrible  things  which  we  l.  not  for

Jer.  8.  15.  we  l.  for  peace,  no  good  came,  14.  19.
Lam.  2.  16.  certainly  this  is  the  day  that  we  l.  for
Ezek.  10.  11.  whither  the  head  l.  they  followed
16.  +  4.  wast  not  washed  when  1 1.  upon  thee,  8.

21.  21.  he  consulted  with  images,  he  /.  in  the  liver
Dan.  1. 13.  let  our  countenances  he  l.  on  before  thee
Obad.  12.  not  have  l.  on  the  day  of  thy  brother

13.  thou  shouldest  not  have  l.  on  their  affliction
Hag.  1.  9.  ye  /.  for  much,  and  lo  it  came  to  little
Mark  3.  5.  when  he  l.  round  about,  5.  32.  1  10.  23.

6.  41.  he  l.  up  to  heaven,  and  blessed  and  brake

8.  24.  he  /.  and  said,  1  see  men  as  trees  walking
16.  4.  when  they  l.  they  saw  the  stone  rolled
Luke  1.  25.  /.  on  me,  to  takeaway  my  reproach
2.  38.  spake  to  all  that  l.  for  redemption  in  Jerusa.

10.  32.  likewise  a  Levite  Came  and  /.  on  him

22.  61.  the  I/>rd  turned,  and  /.  upon  Peter
John  13.  22.  then  the  disciples  l.  one  on  another
Acts  1.  10.  while  they  l.  stedfastly  toward  heaven

28.6.  after  they  had  /.  a  great  while  and  saw  no
Heb.  11.  10.  for  he  /.  for  a  city  which  hath  foundat.

1  John  1. 1.  that  which  we  have  l.  upon,  declare  we
LOOKED,  with  eyes.

Gen. 33. 1.  Jacob  lifted  uphise^/ei  and  l.  Esau  came
37.  25.  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  and  l.  and  behold
Dan.  10.  5.  then  l  lifted  up  mine  eyes'  l.  and  behold
Zech.  2. 1.  Zechariah  lifted  his  eyes  and/.  5.  9.  1  6.  1.

I  LOOKED.

Gen.  16.  13.  have  1  also  here  /.  after  him  thatseeth
Deut.  9.  16.  1 1.  and  behold  ye  had  sinned
Job  30.  26.  when  1 1.  for  good,  then  evil  came
Psal.  69.  20.  and  1 1.  for  some  to  take  pity,  but
142.  4.  1  l.  on  my  right  hand,  and  beheld
Prov.  7.  6.  at  the  window,  1 1.  through  my  casement
24.  32.  1 1.  upon  it,  and  received  instruction
Eccl.  2.  11.  1 1.  on  all  the  works  that  my  hands
Isa.  5.  4.  II.  it  should  bring  forth  grapes,  it  brought
63.  5.  and  1  l.  and  there  was  none  to  help,  I  wond.
Ezek.  1.4. 11.  and  behold, 2.9.  I  8.7.  1  10.  1,9.  1  44.4.
Dan.  12.  5.  then  I  Daniel  /.  and  behold  there  stood
Zech.  4.  2.  1  have  l.  and  behold  a  candlestick
Acts  22.  13.  and  the  same  hour  1 1.  up  upon  him
Rev.  4.  1.  1  l.  and  behold,  6.  8.  1  14. 1,  14. 1  15.  5.
LOOKEST.

Job  13.  27.  thou  /.  narrowly  to  all  my  paths
Hab.  1.  13.  why  l.  on  them  that  deal  treacherously  ?
LOOKED  II.

Lev.  13.  12.  if  leprosy  cover  wheresoever  prieit  /.
Num.  21.  8.  when  he  /.  on  the  serpent,  he  shall  live
20.  Pisgah,  which  l.  toward  Jeshimon,  23.  28.

1  Sam.  16.  7-  nian  l.  on  the  outward  appearance
Job  7.  2.  as  an  hireling  l.  for  the  reward  of  wont

28.  24.  for  he  /.  to  the  ends  of  the  earth
33.  27.  he  /.  on  men,  and  if  any  say,  l  have  sinned
Psal.  33.  13.  the  Lord/,  from  heaven,  he  beholdeth
14.  he  l.  on  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world
104.  32.  he  l.  on  the  earth,  and  it  trembleth
Prov.  14.  15.  the  prudent  l.  well  to  his  goings

31.  27.  she  I.  well  to  the  ways  of  her  household
Cant.  2.  9.  behold,  he  /.  forth  at  the  window

6.  10.  who  is  she  that  /.  forth  as  the  morning  ?

7.  4.  as  the  tower  which  l.  toward  Damascus
Isa.  28.  4.  when  he  that  /.  upon  it  seeth  it
Ezek.  8.  3.  the  door  that  l.  toward  the  north

11. 1.  the  gate  which  l.  eastward,  40.  6,  22.  I  43.  1.

|  44.  1.  I  16.  1,  12.  1  47.  2.
40.  20.  gate  of  the  court  that  /.  toward  the  north
Mat.  5.  28.  whosoever  /.  on  a  woman  to  lust  after
24.  50.  lord  come  when  /.  not  for  him,  Luke  12.  46.
Jam.  1.  25.  whoso  /.  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty
LOOKING.

1  Kings  7.  25.  three  oxen  l.  toward  the  north

1  Chr.  15.  29.  Michal  /.out  at  a  window,  saw  Dav.

2  Chron.  4.  4.  three  oxen  /.  toward  the  south
Isa.  38.  14.  mine  eyes  fail  with  /.  upward

Mat.  14. 19.  /.  up  to  heaven,  he  blessed,  Luke  9.  16.

286


Mark  7.  34.  and  /.  up  to  heaven,  he  sighed
15.  40.  there  were  also  women  /.  on  afar  off
Luke  6.  10.  /.  round  about  upon  them  all,  he  said
9.  62.  and  /.  back,  is  fit  tor  the  kingdom  of  God
21.  26.  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  /.  after
John  1.  36.  John  /.  on  Jes.  saith,  behold  the  Lamb

20.  5.  /.  in,  saw  linen  clothes  lying,  yet  went  not  in
Acts  6.  15.  /.  stedfastly  on  him,  saw  his  face  as  it

2.3.  21.  are  they  ready,  /.  for  a  promise  irom  thee
Tie.  2.  1.3.  /.  for  that  blessed  hope  and  appearing
Heb.  10.  27.  but  a  certain  fearful  /.  for  of  judgment
12.  2.  /.  unto  Jesus  the  author  and  finisher  of  faith

15.  /.  diligently,  lest  any  fail  of  the  grace  of  God
2  Pet.  3.  12.  /.  for  the  coming  of  the  day  ot  God
Jude  21.  /.  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ

LOOKING-GLASS.

Job  37. 18.  spread  out  the  sky  as  a  molten  /.  glass
LOO  K  l  N  G-G  L  A  SS  ES .

Exod.  .38.  8.  made  laver  and  foot  of  l.-g lass,  oi  worn.
LOOPS.

Exod.  26.  4.  thou  snalt  make  /.  of  blue,  5.

5.  /.  shalt  thou  make,  10.  II  11.  put  taches  in  the  /.
36.  11.  made  /.  ot  blue  H 12.  fifty  /.  made  he,  17.
LOOS  E.

Gen.  49.  21.  Naphtali  is  a  hind  let  /.  giveth  gopdly
Lev.  14.  7.  let  the  living  bird  /.  into  the  open  field
Job  6.  9.  that  he  would  let  /.  his  hand  and  cut  me  off
.30.  11.  they  have  let  /.  the  bridle  before  me
Isa.  14.  t  17.  did  not  let  prisoners  /.  homeward
Dan.  3.  25.  lo  1  see  four  men  /.  walking  in  the  fire
LOOSE,  Verb,

Signifies,  [1]  To  unbind,  John  11.  44.  [2]  Jo

open,  Rev.  5.  2,  [3]  To  put  off.  Josh.  5.  15.  [4]
To  remit  and  absolve.  Mat.  l6.  19.  [5]  To  set  at
liberty,  Psal.  105.  20.  [6]  To  set  sail,  Acts  13.
13.  1  27.  21.

Deut.  25.  9.  and  /.  his  shoe  from  oft  his  foot
Josh.  5.  15.  /.  thy  shoe  from  off  thy  toot,  for
Job  38.  31.  canst  thou  /.  the  bands  of  Orion
Psal.  102.  20.  to  /.  those  that  are  appointed  to  death
Isa.  20.  2.  go  and  /.  the  sackcloth  from  thy  loins
45.  1.  I  will  /.  the  loins  of  kings,  to  open  gates
52.  2.  O  Jerusalem,  /.  thyself  from  the  bands
58.  6.  to  /.‘the  bands  of  wickedness,  to  undo  burd.
Jer.  40.  4.  and  now  behold  1  /.  thee  this  day
Mat.  16.  19.  w  hatsoever  ye  /.  on  earth,  18.  18.

21.  2.  ve  shall  find  an  ass  tied  and  colt,  /.  and
bring  them  to  me,  Mark  11.2,  4.  Lule  19.  30.

Luke  19.  31.  if  any  man  ask,  why  do  ye  /.  him  l  33.
John  11.  44.  Jesus  said,  /.  him,  and  let  him  go
Acts  1.3.  25.  shoes  of  his  feet  1  am  not  worthy  to  /.
24.  26.  money  have  been  given,  that  he  might/.
Rev.  5.  2.  who  is  worthy  to  /.  the  seals  thereof
5.  hath  prevailed  to  /.  the  seven  seals  thereof?

9.  14.  /.  the  four  angels  hound  in  Euphrates
LOOSED.

Exod.  28.28.  thatthe  breast-plate  be  not  /.  .39.  21.
Deut.  25.  10.  the  house  of  him  that  hath  his  shoe  /.
Judy.  15. 14.  his  bands  /.  from  off  his  hands
Job  .30.  11.  because  he  /.  my  cord  and  afflicted  me
.39.  5.  who  hath  /.  the  bands  of  the  wild  ass  ?

Psal.  105.  20.  the  king  sent  and  /.  him,  let  him  go
116.  16.  I  am  thy  servant,  thou  hast  /.  my  bands
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  ever  the  silver  cord  be  /.  or  bowd
Isa.  5.  27.  nor  shall  the  girdle  of  their  loins  be  /.

33.2.3.  thy  tacklings  are  /.  they  could  not  spread
51.  14.  captive  exile  hasteneth  that  he  may  be  /.

Jer.  6.  t  8.  lest  my  soul  be  /.  from  thee
Ezek.  2.3.  t  17.  and  her  mind  w-as  /.  from  them
Dan.  5.  6.  so  that  the  joints  of  his  loins  were  /.

Mat.  16.  19-  be  /.  on  earth,  /.  in  heaven,  18.  18.

18.  27.  was  moved  with  compassion,  and  /.  him
Mark  7.  .35.  the  string  of  bis  tongue  was  /.  Luke 1. 64.
Luke  13.  12.  woman,  thou  art  /.  from  thy  infirmity
16.  ought  not  this  daughter  to  be  /.  on  sabbath  ?
Acts 2.  24.  raised  up,  having  /.  the  pains  of  death

1.3.  1.3.  when  Paul  and  company  /.  from  Paphos

16.  26.  and  every  one's  bands  were  /.

22.  30.  on  the  morrow  he  /.  him  from  his  bands
27.  21.  have  hearkened,  and  not  have/,  from  Crete

40.  /.  the  rudder-bands,  and  hoised  up  the  sail
Rom.  7-  2.  if  the  husband  be  dead,  she  is  /.  from

1  Cor.  7-27-  art  thou  /.  from  wife  ?  seek  not  a  w  ife
Rev.  9.  15.  the  four  angels  were  /.  which  w  ere
20.  3.  after  that  he  must  be  /.  a  little  season,  7’.

LOOSE! H.

2  Sam.  22.  +  .33.  God  my  strength,  and  he  /.  my  way
Job  IQ.  18.  he  /.  the  bond  of  kings,  and  girdeth

t  21.  he  /.  the  girdle  of  the  strong
Ps.  146.7.  food  to  hungry,  the  L. /.  the  prisoners
LOOS  I N  G.

Mark  11.5.  said  to  them,  what  do  you  /.  the  colt?
lake  19.  3.3.  as  they  were  /.  the  colt,  the  owners
Acts  16.  11.  therefore  /.  from  I  roas,  we  came
27.  1.3.  /.  thence,  they  sailed  close  by  Crete
LOP.

Isa.  10.33.  behold  the  Lord  shall/,  the  bough
LORD

Is,  (I)  A  word  of  authority,  signifying  a  ruler  or
governor ;  and  is  applied,  to  the  three  Divine
Persons,  ID  To  the  lather,  Gen.  2.  4.  [2]  to  the
Son,  Psal.  110.  1.  Col.  3.  24.  [3]  To  the  Holy
Spirit,  2  Thess.  3.  5.  Because  they  support  and
uphold  the  kingdom  of  nature,  grace ,  and  glory,
Deut.  33.  27.  Heb.  1.3.  [4j  To  kings,  Gen.  40. 1.
2  Sam.  19.  19,  20.  [5]  To  princes  and  nobles,

Gen.  42.  10,  .30.  Dan.  4.  36.  [6]  'To  tyrants,
Isa.  26.  13.  1  Pet.  5.  3.  (ID  A  word  of  reverence
and  respect,  and  is  applied,  [1]  To  an  husband
Gen.  18.  12.  [2]  To  a  master ,  John  15.  15


To  prophets,  1  Kings  18.  7-.  2  Kings  2.19.


[-3

[4]


To  persons  of  worth  and  merit,  Gen.  24.  18.

Gen.  18.  14.  is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the  L.?

24.  40.  the  L.  before  whom  1  walk  will  send
26.  28.  we  saw  certainly  the  L.  was  with  thee
28.  21.  1  come  again,  then  shall  the  L.  be  my  God
39.  2.  and  the  L.  was  with  Joseph,  21,  23.

Exod.  5.  2.  who  is  the  L.  that  I  should  obey  him  ?

8.  24.  and  the  L.did  so,  and  there  came  flies

9.  29.  the  earth  is  the  L.  Psal.  24. 1.  1  Cor.  10.  26

10.  10.  the  L.  be  so  with  you,  as  1  will  let  you  go
13.  8.  because  of  that  w  hich  the  L.  did  to  me


Exod.  13.12.  every  firstl.  of  beast  the  male  shall  be  E
.30.  37.  it  shall  be  unto  thee  holy  for  the  L.

32.  26.  who  is  on  the  L.  side,  let  him  come  to  me

34.  14.  for  L.  whose  name  is  jealous,  is  a  jealous  G,
Lev.  3.  16.  food  of  the  offering,  all  the  fat  is  the  L.

16.8.  Aaron  shall  cast  one  lot  for  the  L.  25. 4. 1  2?.  2
Num.  14.  14.  they  heard  that  thou,  L.  art  ainonj
this  people,  that  thou,  L.  art  seen  face  to  face

43.  therefore  the  L.  will  not  be  with  you

18.  6.  to  you  they  are  given  as  a  gift  for  the  L.

22.  19.  that  I  may  know  what  the  L.  w  ill  bay

23.  26.  all  that  the  L.  speaketh  that  must  1  do

24.  11.  the  L.  hath  kept  thee  back  from  honour
.31.  50.  we  have  brought  an  oblation  for  the
.32.  12.  they  have  followed  the  L.  Deut.  1.  36.

Deut.  .3.  21.  so  shall  the  L.  do  to  all  kingdoms
4. 35. "know  thatthe  L.  he  is  G.  39.  I  Kings  18.  .39.  I

5.  5.  I  stood  between  the  L.  and  you  at  that  tnu*i

10.  14.  behold  the  heaven  of  heavens  is  the  L.

17.  and  L.  of  lords  a  greatG.  a  mighty,  a  terrible

29.  2.  ye  have  seen  all  that  the  L.  did  in  Egj  pt

4.  yet  the  L.  hath  not  given  you  an  heart  to  j
24.  wherefore  hath  the  L.  done  thus  to  this  lands

1  Kings  9.  8.  2  Chron.  7.  21, j

31.  4.  L.  shall  do  to  them  as  he  did  to  Sihon

32.  6.  do  ye  thus  requite  the  L.  O  foolish  people
.30.  to  flight,  except  the  L.  had  shut  them  up  j

.33.  29.  happy  art  thou,  O  people,  saved  by  the  L, i
Josh.  2.  12.  swear  unto  me  by  the  L.  1  Sam.  24.  21.  j
.3.  11.  even  the  L.  of  all  the  earth  passeth  over,  1.3.  j

10.  25.  thus  shall  the  L.  do  to  all  your  enemies
14.  12.  if  so  be  the  L.  will  be  with  me,  then

Judy.  1.  19.  the  L.  was  with  Judah,  and  he  drave

22.  and  the  L.  w’as  with  the  house  of  Joseph

2.  10.  arose  a  generation  which  knew  not  the  L  j
4.  14.  is  not  the  L.  gone  out  before  thee  ?

6.  13.  if  the  L.  be  w  ith  us,  why  is  this  befallen  us  j

11.  31.  cometh  to  meet  me  shall  surely  be  ttie  L.

17.  13.  now  know  1  that  the  L.  will  do  me  good
Ruth  1.  17.  L.  do  so  to  me  and  more,  1  Sam.  20. 13.
2.4.  the  L.  be  w  ith  you,  2  Chr.  20. 17 .  2  Thess.  .3.  Ifil

1  Sam.  2. 2.  there  is  none  holy  as  the  L.  for  tbe:e  isj

8.  for  the  pillars  of  the  earth  are  the  L.

3. 18.  it  is  the  L.  let  him  do  whatseeins,  John  21. 7 1

19.  Samuel  grew,  and  the  L.  was  with  him,  181

12,  14.  2  Kings  18.  7-  1  Chron.  9.  Col

12.  16.  this  great  thing  which  the  L.  will  do
17. 37-  the  L.  be  with  thee,  20. 13.  1  Chr.  22. 11,  lb.

20.  23.  the  [..  be  between  thee  and  me,  42.

2  Sam.  7.  24.  L.  art  become  their  G.  1  Chr.  17.  22.  j
10. 12.  L.  do  whatseemeth  him  good,  1  Chr.  19. 13

1  Kings  18. 21.  if  the  L.  be  God,  follow  him,  if  1  aal

2  Kings  6.  27.  if  the  L.  do  not  help,  whence  shall  1  !

33.  what  shall  l  wait  for  the  L.  any  longer  ?

10.  16.  come  with  me  and  see  my  zeal  for  the  L.

18.  25.  am  1  now  come  without  the  L.  Isa.  .36.  10)

1  Chr.  16. 25.  for  great  is  the  L.  Psal.  48.  1.  1  145.  .3.
17.  26.  and  now,  L.  thou  art  G.  and  hast  promised

21.  24.  not  take  that  which  is  thine  for  the  L.

2  Chr.  19.  6.  ye  judge  not  for  man,  but  for  the  L.

11.  and  the  L.  shall  be  with  the  good

3.3.  1.3.  Manasseh  knew  that  the  L.  was  God
Neh.  9.  6.  even  that  thou  art  L.  alone,  Isa.  ,37. 20. 1
Psal.  4.  .3.  know  the  L.  hath  set  apart  the  godly  1

3.3.  12.  blessed  is  the  nation,  whose  God  is  the  L„

35.  10.  my  bones  say,  L.  who  is  like  unto  thee?  .
45.  11.  for  he  is  thy  L.  worship  thou  him

66. 18.  if  I  regard  iniquity,  the  I.,  will  not  heat  ip<
86.  5.  for  thou  L.  art  good,  ready  to  forgive

92.  8.  thou  L.  art  most  high  for  ever,  97.  9.

100.  3.  know  ye  that  the  L.  he  is  God,  he  made  uSi
109.  21.  do  thou  for  me,  O  God  the  L.  140.  7-

27.  they  may  know  that  thou  L.  hast  done  it
116.  5.  gracious  is  the  L.  and  righteous
118.  23.  this  is  the  L.  doing  ||  27.  Gnd  is  the  L.  ,
124.  1.  if  it  had  not  been  the  L.  who  was  on,  2.  |

1.30.3.  if  thou  L.  shouldest  mark  iniquity,  who  statu
132.  5.  till  1  find  out  a  place  for  the  L.

Prov.  24.  18.  lest  the  L.  see  it,  and  it  displease  himj

30.  9.  lest  I  deny  thee,  and  say,  who  is  the  LA  ;
Isa.  10.  20.  but  shall  stay  upon  the  L.  the  holy  om

19.  21.  and  the  L.  shall  be  known  to  Egypt

3.3.  21.  the  L.  will  be  to  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers
42.  24.  did  not  the  L.  he  against  whom  w  e  sinned-

44.  23.  sing,  O  heavens,  for  the  L.  hath  done  it
52.  12.  the  L.  will  go  bcf.  you,  your  rereward

Jer.  2.  6.  where  is  the  L.  that  brought  us,  8.

5.  10.  her  battlements,  for  they  are  not  the

8. 19.  is  not  the  L.  in  Zion  ?  is  not  her  King  in  her  9
16.  21.  they  shall  know  that  my  name  is  the  L.
21.  2.  if  so  be  that  the  L.  will  deal  w  ith  us

23.  6.  called,  the  L.  our  Righteousness,  33.  10.

31.  34.  saying,  know  the  L.  Heb.  8.  11.

50.  7.  even  the  L.  the  hope  of  their  fathers

51. 50.  remember  the  L.  afar  off,  let  Jerusalem  ,
Lam.  3.  .31.  for  the  L.  will  not  cast  off  for  ever
50.  till  the  L.  lookdown.and  behedd  from  heave#
Ezek.  .35.  10.  possess  it,  whereas  the  L.  was  thera
Dan.  2.  47.  truth  it  is,  your  God  is  a  L.  ot  kings'.

9.  17.  cause  thy  face  to  shine  for  the  L.  sake  j
llos.  2.  20.  betroth  thee,  and  thou  shalt  know  the  1

5.  4.  and  they  have  not  knowm  the  L.  J

11.  10.  they  shall  walk  after  the  L.’he  shall  roai

12.  14.  his  reproach  shall  his  L.  return  to  him  <
Joel  2.  21.  fear  not,  for  the  L.  will  do  great  tlnncv
Arnos  3.  6.  he  evil  in  the  city,  and  L.  hath  not  doij

5.  14.  and  so  the  L.  shall  be  with  you
Obad.  21.  and  the  kingdom  shall  be  the  L.

Mic.  2.  13.  and  the  L.  on  the  head  of  them

.3.  11.  lean  011  the  L.  and  say,  is  not  the  L.  anion*
4.  7.  the  L.  shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  ^101

6.  8.  and  what  doth  the  L.  require  ot  thee  f
Zeph.  1.  5.  that  swear  by  the  L.  and  by  lUalvliam
Zech.  9.  1.  when  eyes  ot  man  shall  be  toward  tne

14.  the  L.  shall  be  seen  over  them
14.  3.  then  shall  the  L.  go  forth  and  fight  acain
9.  in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  L.  his  name  011
Mat.  7.21.  not  every  one  that  saith,  L.  L.  shall  eni;

into  the  kingdom,  22.  22,  44.  Luke  1 -
8.2.  L.  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make,  Luteo.J-
25.  L.  save  us  ||  9.  28.  they  said,  yea,  L.  13. oJ  •
14.  30.  L.  save  me  15.  25.  saying,  L.  l*e‘P  !


LOR


LOR


LOR


Mat.  15.  27.  she  said,  truth  L  ||  25. 11.  L.  L.  open  fo
Cl.  H.  L.  hath  need  of,  Mark  11.  3.  Luke  ly.  31, 34.

22.  43.  he  saith  to  him,  how  then  doth  David  call
him  L.  ?  45.  Mark  12.  37.  Luke  20.  44.

24.  42.  ve  know  not  what  hour  your  L.  will  come
4i).  whom  his  shall  find  so  doing,  Luke  12.  43.
5-'.  the  L.  or  that  servant  shall  come,  Luke  12. 46.

25.  21.  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  L.

37.  /..  when  saw  we  thee  an  hungered  i  44

26.  22.  L.  isit  1  '1(28.6.  the  place  where  the  L.  lay
■1 1 111k  2. 28.  Son  ot  man  is  L.  of  sabbath,  Luke  6.  5.
5. 19.  how  great  things  the  L.  hath  done  for  thee
0. 24.  L.  1  believe,  help  thou,  John  9.  38.  |  11.2?.
U>.  51.  L.  that  l  may  receive  my  sight,  Mat.  20. 33.

16.  20.  preached,  the  L.  working  with  them
'.uke  1.  17-  to  make  ready  a  people  for  the  L.

25.  thus  L.  dealt  with  me.  to  take  my  reproach

2.  11.  born  a  Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the  L.

;  6. 46.  why  call  ye  me  L.  L.  and  do  not  what  1  say  ?
9. 57.  a  man  said  to  him,  L.  1  will  follow  thee,  61.
11. 1.  L.  teach  us  to  pray ,  as  .John  taught  his  discip.

13.8.  L.  let  it  alone  this  year,  till  1  dig  about  it

14.  21.  that  servant  shewed  his  L.  these  things
17.5.  apostles  said  unto  the  L.  increase  our  faith
37 .  where  L.  ?  |j  2.3. 42.  L.  remember  me  when  thou

i  24.  31.  saying,  the  L.  is  risen  indeed,  and  appeared
VA«6.  68.  L.  to  whom  shall  we  go,  thou  hast  life
;  8.  1 1 .  no  man  L.  ||  9.  36.  who  is  the  L.  that  1  might
11.  .34.  they  said  to  him,  L.  come  and  see

13.  13.  ye  call  me  Master  and  L.  and  say  wrell
25.  /,.  who  is  it '  |[  20.  25.  w'e  have  seen  the  L.

20.  2.  they  have  taken  the  L.  out  of  the  sepulchre
(21.  12.  none  durst  ask  him,  knowing  it  was  the  L.

21.  Peter  saith,  L.  what  shall  this  man  do  '
his  2.36.  whom  ye  crucified,  both  L.  and  Christ
4.24.  /..thou  art  C .  ||  29.  now  L.  behold  threatenings
Q.  5.  and  he  said,  w'ho  art  thou  L.  ?  26.  15.

Id. 4. and  said,  what  is  it,  L.  ||  14.  not  so,  L.  11 . 8.

10.  36.  peace  by  Jesus  Christ,  he  is  L.  of  all

22.  10.  and  1  said,  what  shall  I  do,  L,  ?

Uom.  9-  28.  because  a  short  work  will  the  L.  make

10.  12.  for  the  same  L.  over  all  is  rich  unto  all

14.9.  that  he  might  be  L.  of  the  dead  and  living
Cor.  2.  8.  not  have  crucified  the  L.  of  glory

1 3.  5.  even  as  the  L.  gave  to  every  man
4.  4.  but  he  that  judgeth  me  i6  the  L.

19.  1  will  come  to  you,  if  the  L.  will,  Jam.  4.  15.
13.  but  for  the  L.  ||  7.10.  yet  not  1,  but  the  L.

,12. 5.  differences  of  administrations,  butthesame  L.

15.  47.  second  man  is  the  L.  fr'btn  heaven
i  Cor.  5.  8.  and  to  be  present  with  the  L.

11.  17.  I  speak  it  not  after  the  L.  but  as  it  were
■phA.b.  one  (I  5.  29.  even  as  the  L.  the  church
’hil.  2. 11.  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  L.

4.  5.  moderation  be  known,  the  L.  is  at  hand
These.  4.  17-  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  L.

Tim.  6.  15.  the  King  of  kings,  and  L.  of  lords
Tim.  2.  22.  with  them  that  call  on  the  L.

5.  11.  out  of  them  all  the  L.  delivered  me

4.  8.  which  the  L.  shall  give  me  at  that  day

17.  notwithstanding  the  L.  stood  with  me

kb.  2. 3.  which  at  first  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  L.

1. 11.  saying,  know  the  L.  for  all  shall  know
am.  5.  15.  and  the  L.  shall  raise  the  sick  up
Pet.  3.8.  one  day  is  with. the  L.  as  a  thousand
ude  9.  Michael  said,  the  L.  rebuke  thee
11.8.  where  also  our  L.  was  crucified
15.  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  L.  and  his  C.
17. 14.  overcome,  for  he  is  L.  of  lords,  19.  16.
Against  the  LORD.

■md.  10. 1C.  I  have  sinned  against  the  L.  your  God,
j  Josh.  7.  20.  2  Sam.  12.  13.

J6.7.  that  hehearethyour  murmurings  ag.  the  L.  8.
■ev.  5.19.  have  trespassed  ag.  1. 1..  Num. 5. 6.  |  .31.16.
>.2.  if  a  soul  commit  trespass  against  the  L.
nm.  14.  9.  only  rebel  not  against  the  J,.  Josh.  22.19.
jib.  11.  are  gathered  together  against  the  L.  27.  3.

Psal.  2.  2.  Acts  4.  26.
M.7.  have  sinned,  for  we  have  spoken  ag.  the  L.

■b.  9  company  of  Korah,  when  they  strove  ag.  t.  L.

12. 23.  ye  liav  e  sinned  ag.  the  L.  Jer.  40. 3.  |  44.  23.
'<W.  1.4 1  .have  sinn.  ag  the  L.  1  Sam.  ~ .  6.  Jer.  8. 14.

>  T.  ye  have  been  rebellious  ag.  the  L.  24.  |  31. 27.

3.  +5.  because  he  hath  spoken  revolt  against  the  L.
'■h.  22.  16.  that  ye  might  rebel  this  day  ag.  the  L.

18.  it  will  be,  seeing  ye  rebel  this  day  ag.  the  L.

22.  or  if  in  transgression  ag.  the  L.  save  us  not
29.  God  forbid  we  should  rebel  against  the  L.

31.  have  not  committed  this  trespass  ag.  the  L.
sam.  2.25.  if  a  man  sin  ag.  t.  L.  who  shall  en'reat

2.23.  sin  against  the  L.  in  ceasing  to  pray  for  you

4.  33.  behold,  the  people  sin  against  the  L.  in  that
34.  slay  them  here  and  eat,  and  sin  not  ag.  the  /,.
Kings  17.  7.  Israel  had  sinned  ag.  the  L.  their  God
9.  did  secretly  things  not  right  against  the  L.  God

(  'hr.  10. 13.  transgression  he  committed  ag.  the  L.
Phr.  12.2.  because  they  had  transgressed  ag.  the  L.

9.  10.  warn  them  that  they  trespass  not  ag.  the  L.

'8.  13.  whereas  we  have  offended  already  ag.the  L.

19.  Aliaz  transgressed  sore  against  the  L.

22.  in  distress  did  he  trespass  yet  more  ag.  the  L.
;al-  ~.  2.  rulers  take  counsel  ag.  the  /,.  and"  Anoint.
or.  19.3.  and  his  heart  fretteth  against  the  L.

I. 30.  there  is  no  wisdom  nor  counsel  ag.  the  L.

«•  3.  8.  because  their  doings  are  against  the  L.

>2.6.  will  work  inigu:fy  to  utter  error  ag.  the  L.
PVT  in  transgressing  and  lying  against  the  I,.
r.28. 16.  hast  taught  rebellion  ag.  the  L.  29.  32.

8  .b.  tor  he  magnified  himself  against  the  L.  42.

V;  because  they  have  sinned  against  the  L.

against  Baby  I.  she  hath  sinned  ag.  the  L.  29.

-4-  because  thou  hast  striven  ag.  the  L.  Zeph.  1.  17.
(«n.5  2.3.  but  hast  lifted  up  thy  self  against  the  L.

"s-  *}•  7.  they  have  dealt  treacherously  ag.  the  L.
'•^•"1'atdoye  imagineag.  the  L.  he  will  make

I I .  there  is  one  that  imagined)  evi  I  against  the  L.

See  Liveth,  Anointed,  Appeared.

„  _T.  Before  the  LORD.

9.  N  imrod  was  a  mighty  hunter  hef.  the  L.
,'***•  well  watered,  hef.  the  L.  destroyed  Sodom
u  M?ein  ot  ^0'*-  were  sinners  b.  the  /..'exceedingly
8-  .v.  tut  Abraham  stood  yet  b.  the  L.  and  said


Gen.  27.  7.  that  I  may  eat  and  bless  thee  b.  the  L.
Exod.  16.  9.  say  to  congregation,  come  near  b.  the  L.
33.  lay  it  up  b.  the  L.  to  be  kept,  1  Sam.  10.  25.
23.  17.  three  times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  appear
before  the  L.  34.  24.  Dent.  16.  16.  1  Sam.  1.22.

27.  21.  Aarooshall  order  the  lamps  b.  the  E.  40.  25.

28.  12.  Aaron  shall  bear  their  names  hef.  the  L.
29.  for  a  memorial  b.  the  L.  30.  16.  Sum.  31. 54.

Lev.  4  6.  sprinkle  seven  times  b.  the  /,.  17.  |  14. 16, 27!

9.  24.  there  came  a  fire  out  from  before  the  L."
10.2.  went  out  fire,  and  they  died  b.  the  L.  Num.lt  A.

Sum.  5.  16.  bring  her  near,  set  her  b.  the  L.  18,  30."

10.  9.  ye  shall  be  remembered  b.  the  L.  your  God

18.  19.  it  is  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever  6.  the  L.

25.  4.  and  hang  them  up  b.  the  L.  against  the  sun
27.  5.  Moses  brought  their  cause  before  the  L.

Dent.  9.  18.  and  I  tell  down  before  the  L.  forty  days
12.  18.  hut  thou  must  eat  them  before  the  L.  thy  God

18.7.  his  brethren  which  stand  there  before  the  L..

19.  17.  the  controversy  is,  shall  stand  before  the  L.
Josh.  6.  26.  cursed  be  the  man  b.  the  L.  that  buildeth
Judg.  11.  11.  uttered  his  words  bef.  the  L.  in  Mizpeh

18.  6.  before  the  L.  is  your  way  wherein  ye  go

20.  26.  all  the  people  sat  there  b.  the  L.  2  Sam.  7.  18.

3  Sam.  2. 17.  sin  of  the  men  was  very  great  h.  the  L.

12.  3.  here  1  am,  witness  against  me  before  the  L.
7.  that  1  may  reason  with  you  before  the  L.

21.7.  was  there  that  day  detained  b.  the  L.

26.  19.  but  if  they  be  men,  cursed  be  they  b.  the  L.
2  Sam.  6.  2t.  it  was  b.  the  L.  which  chose  me  before

21.  9.  and  they  hanged  them  in  the  hill  b.  the  L.

2  A  ings  19.14.  Hezekiah  spread  it  b.  the  /,.  Isa. 37.14.

1  Chron.  22.  18.  and  the  land  is  subdued  b.  the  L.
29.  22.  and  did  eat  and  drink  b.  the  L.  with  gladness
Psal.  96.  13.  b.  the  L.  for  he  cometh  to  judge,  98.  9.
109.  15.  let  them  be  before  the  L.  continually
116.9.  I  will  walk  bef.  the  L.  in  the  land  of  living

Prov.  15.  11.  hell  and  destruction  are  before  the  L.
I'd-  2.3.  18.  shall  be  for  them  that  dwell  hef.  the  L.
Jer.  36.  7-  present  their  supplications  before  the  L.
Ezek.  44.  3.  shall  sit  in  it  to  eat  broad  before  the  L.
Dan.  9.  1.3.  yet  made  we  not  our  prayer  bef.  the  L.
Mic.  6.  6.  wherewith  shall  1  come  b.  the  L.  and  bow
Zech.  2.  13.  be  silent,  O  all  flesh,  bef.  the  L.  for  he

7.  2.  and  their  men  to  pray  bef.  the  /,.  8.  21,  22.
Mai.  3.  14.  we  have  walked  mournfully  b.  the  ~L.

2  Tim.  2. 14.  charging  them  h.  the  L.  that  they  strive
2  Pet.  2.  11.  bring  no  railing  accusation  hef.  the  L.
See  Bless,  Blessed,  Called,  Cast  Out,

Chosen,  Choose,  Commanded,  Fear,
Feared,  Rejoice.

From  the  LOR  D.

Gen.  4. 1. 1  have  gotten  a  man/.  L.  ||  19.  24.  fire/.  L.
24.  50.  Laban  said,  the  thing  proceeded)  /.  the  L.
Sum.  11.  31.  and  there  went  forth  a  wind /.  the  L.

16.  35.  there  came  out  a  fire /.  the  L.  and  consumed
46.  there  is  wrath  gone  out  /.  the  L.  the  plague

1  Sam.  16. 14.  evil  spirit /.  the  L.  troubled  him,  19.  9.
26;  12.  a  deep  sleep/,  the  L.  was  fallen  on  them
1  Kings  2.  15.  it  was  his/.  L.  1133.  shall  be  peace/.  L.
Psal.  24.  5.  he  shall  receive  the  blessing  fr.  the  L.
109.  20.  reward  of  mine  adversaries  from  the  L.
121.  2.  my  help  cometh /.  the  L.  who  made  heaven
Prov.  16.  1 .  and  the  answer  of  the  tongue  is/,  the  L.

19.  14.  and  a  prudent  wife  is  from  the  L.

29.  26.  but  every  man's  judgment  cometh  /.  the  L.
Isa.  29.  15.  seek  to  hide  their  counsel  from  the  L.
40.  27.  why  sayest  thou,  my  way  is  hid  f.  the  L.
Jer.  7.  1.  the  word  that  came  to  Jeremiah/,  the  L
11.  1.  |  18.  1.  I  21.  1.  |26.  1.  I  27.  l.|  30.  1.  l'
32.  1.  |  34.  1,  8.  12.  1  35.  1.  I  36.  1.  [40.  1.

17.  5.  cursed  whose  heart  departed)  from  the  L.

37.  17-  the  king  asked,  is  there  any  word/,  the  L.
49. 14.  1  have  heard  a  rumour/,  the  L.  an  ambas.
Lam.  2.  9.  her  prophets  find  no  vision  from  the  L.

3.  18.  my  strength  and  hope  is  perished/,  the  L.
Ezek.  11.  15.  Jerusalem  said,  get  ye  far  fr.  the  L.

33.  30.  hear  what  is  the  word  that  cometh  fr.  the  1..
Hos.  1.  2.  committed  whoredom,  departing/,  the  L.
Obad.  1.  we  have  heard  a  rumoui  /.  the  L.  arise
Mic.  1.  12.  but  evil  came  down /.  the  L.  to  the  gate
5.  7-  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  as  a  dew/,  the  L.

Zeph.  1.  6.  and  them  that  are  turned  back  /.  the  L.
Zech.  14.  13.  tumult  /.  the  L.  shall  be  among  them
L.uke  1.  45.  things  which  were  told  her  from  the  /..

2  Cor.  5.  6.  in  the  body  we  are  absent  from  the  L.
See  Give,  Given.

LOUD  God.

Gen.  9.  26.  he  said,  blessed  be  the  L.  God  of  Shem

15.  2.  Abram  said,  L.  God  what  wilt  thou  give  me

8.  L.  God,  whereby  shall  1  know  I  shall  inherit
24.27-  blessed  be  the  /,.  G.  of  my  master  Abraham
28.  13.  1  am  the  L.  Go  1  of  Abraham  thy  father
Exod.  32.  27.  the  L.  God  of  Israel,  Josh.' 9  18,  19

I  10.  40,  42.  I  13.  14,  33.  |  14.  14.’

34.  6.  the  Lord,  the  L.  God  merciful  and  gracious
Josh.  7.  7.  Joshua  said,  alas,  ()  /..  God ,  wherefore

22.  22.  the  L.  God  of  gods,  the  L.  God  of  gods
24.  what  have  ye  to  do  with  the  L.  God  of  Israel 5
24.  2.  the  L.  God  of  Israel,  Judg.  4.  6.  |  5.  3,  5.

|  11.  21,  23.  121.  3.  Bv th  2.  12.  1  Sam.  2.  30
I  14.  41.  |  20.  12.  |  23.  10., I  25.  32,  34.  1  Kings
1.  30.  1  Chron.  23.  25.  I  24.  19.

Judg.  6.  22.  Gideon  said,  alas,  O  L.  God,  because

16.  28.  O  L.  God,  remember  me  only  this  once

1  Sam.  6.20. who  is  able  to  stand  bef.  this  holy  L.  G .?

2  Sam.  5.  10.  and  the  L.  God  of  hosts  was  with  him
7. 18.  who  am  1,0  J i.  God,  and  what  is  my  house  ?

19-  and  is  this  the  manner  of  man,  O  1,.  God  f

20.  for  thou,  L.  God,  knowest  thy  servant

22.  wherefore  thou  art  great,  O  L.  G,,  none  like

1  Kings  1.  36.  the  /,.  G.  of  my  lord  the  king  say  so
48.  the  king  said,  blessed  be  the  L.  God  of  Israel

8.  15.  1  Chron.  16.  36.  I  29.  10.
14.  13  found  some  good  thing  toward  the  L.  God

17.  1.  Elijah  said,  as  the  L.  God  of  Israel  liveth

18.  37.  may  know  thou  art  I..  G.  ||  2  Kings  19.  19.

2  Kings  2.  14.  and  said,  where  is  L.  God  (if  Elijah  ?

1  Chr.  17.  17.  state  of  a  man  of  high  degree,  O  L.  G.

2  Chr.  13.  12.  fight  ye  not  against  L.  God  of  fathers
24.  18.  they  left  the  house  of  the  L.  God  of  fathers
26.  18.  nor  shall  it  be  for  thy  honour  from  L.  God


2  Chr.  3C.  16  his  servants  spake  more  against  L.  G .
Neh.  9.  7-  tiiou  art  the  L.  God,  didst  choose  Abram
Psal.  31.  5.  hast  redeemed  me,  U  L.  God  of  truth
41 . 13.  blessed  be  L.  God  of  Isr.  from  everlasting
to  everlasting,  72.  18. 1  106.  48.  Luke  1.  68.
68.  18.  that  the  L.  God  might  dwell  among  them
71.5.  thou  art  my  hope,  O  L.  G.  thou  art  my  trust
8t.  11.  for  L.  G.  isasun  and  shield,  will  give  grace
85.  8.  1  will  hear  what  the  L.  God  will  speak
La.  28.  22.  for  1  have  heard  from  the  /,.  G.  of  hosts
50.  7-  for  the  L.  God  will  help  me,  therefore, 9.
65.  15.  for  L.  G.  shall  slay  thee,  and  call  servants
Jer.  44.  26.  not  named,  saying,  the  L.  God  liveth
Ezek.  5.  11.  as  1  live,  saith  the  L.  God,  14.  16.

13.  9.  know  l  am  the  L.  God,  23.  49.  |  24.  24.

16.  19.  and  thus  it  was,  saith  the  L.  God

23.  woe,  woe  unto  thee,  saith  the  L.  God
18.  30.  according  to  his  ways,  saith  the  L.  God

21.  7.  be  brought  to  pass,  saith  the  L.  God
13.  it  shall  be  no  more,  saith  the  L.  God

22.  12.  and  hast  forgotten  me,  saith  the  L.  God
29.  20.  because  they  wrought  for  me,  saith  L.  G.
34.31.  and  1  am  your  God,  saith  the  L.  God

36.  23.  know  that  1  am  the  Lord,  saith  the  L,  God
32.  not  for  your  sakes  00  1  this,  saith  the  L.  God

37.  3.  and  1  answered,  O  L.  God,  thou  knowest
39.  5.  for  l  have  spoken  it,  saith  the  L.  God ,  23.

0  .  ,  34.  1  26.  14.  |28.  10.

8.  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  saith  the  L.  God
43.  27-  I  will  accept  you  saith  the  L.  God
Dan.  9.  3.  1  set  my  face  unto  the  L.  God,  to  seek
Hos.  12.  5.  even  L.  God  of  hosts  is  his  memorial
Amos  1. 8.  a  rerun.  of  Phil,  shall  perish,  saith  L.G

3.  7.  L.  God  will  do  nothing,  but  he  revealeth

8.  the  L.  G.  hath  spoken,  who  can  but  prophesy  *.

4.  5.  for  this  liketh  you,  saith  the  L.  God

9.  5.  L.  God  of  hosts  is  he  that  toucheth  the  land
Mic.  1.  2.  let  the  L.  God  he  witness  against  you
flab.  3. 19.  the  L.  God  is  my  strength,  he  will  make
1  Pet.  3.  15.  sanctify  the  1..  God  in  your  hearts
Lev.  4.  8.  holy,  holy,  L.  G.  Almighty,  11. 17  |  16.7.
15.  3.  marvellous  are  thy  works,  L.  G.  Almighty
18.  8.  for  strong  is  the  L.  God  who  judgeth  her
19-  6.  for  the  L.  God  omnipotent  reigneth

21.  22.  the  L.  God  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple

22.  5.  for  the  L.  God  giveth  them  light

See  Ah,  Fathers.

LO  R  D  his  God.

Exod.  32. 11.  Moses  besought  the  L.  his  G .  and  said
Lev.  4.  22.  the  commandments  of  the  L.  his  God
Num.  23.  21.  the  L.  his  God  is  with  him,  the  shout
Dent.  17. 19-  that  he  may  learn  to  fear  the  L.  his  G.
18.  7-  be  shall  minister  in  name  of  the  L.  his  G.

1  Sam.  30.  6.  David  encouraged  hints,  in  L.  his  God

1  Kings  5.  3.  an  house  unto  the  name  of  L.  his  G.
11.  4.  heart  was  not  perfect  with  L.  his  G.  15.  3.
15.  4.  did  the  L.  Ins  G.  give  him  a  lamp  in  Jerusal.

2  Kings  16.  2.  not  right  in  the  sight  of  the  L.  his  G  .

2  Chr.  1.1.  the  l,.  li.  G.  was  with  him,  and  magnified

14.  2.  good  and  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  L.  his  God
11.  Asa  cried  unto  the  L.  his  God,  and  said

15.  9-  when  they  saw  that  L.  his  G.  was  with  him
26  16.  Uzziah  transgressed  against  the  L.  his  G.

27.  6.  Jotham  prepared  his  ways  before  L.  his  G.

28.  5.  L.  his  G.  delivered  Ahaz  into  hands  of  Syria
31.  20.  Hezekiah  wrought  right  before  L.  his  God

3.3.  12.  Manasseh  in  affliction  besought  L.  his  God
34.  8.  Josiah  sent  to  repair  the  house  of  L.  his  G.

36.  5.  Jehoiakim  did  evil  in  sight  of  L.  his  G.  12.

23.  the  L.  his  G.  be  with  him,  and  let  him  go  up
Ezra  7.6.  accord,  to  hand  of  the  L.  his  G.  upon  him
Ps.  146.  5.  happy  lie  whose  hope  is  in  the  L.  his  G.
Jonah  2.  1.  then  Jonah  prayed  to  the  L.  his  G.out
Mic.  5. 4.  feed  in  majesty  of  the  name  of  L.  his  G.

LORD  my  God.

Num.  22.  18.  not  go  beyond  the  word  of  L.my  G.
Dent.  4.  5.  even  as  the  L.  my  God  commanded  me

18.  16.  not  hear  again  the  voice  of  the  L.  my  Crod

26.  14.  have  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  L.  my  God
Josh.  14.  8.  but  I  wholly  followed  the  L.  my  God
2  Sam.  24.  24.  1  off  er  burnt  offerings  to  the  L.  my  G.

1  Kings  3.7.0  1.  my  G.  8.  28.  |  17-20,  21. 1  Chron.

21.  17-  2  Chron.  6.  19.  Psal.  7.  1,  3.  |  13.  3.

I  30.  2, 12. 1  35.  24.  |  38.  15.  [  40.  5.  |  86.  12.

I  109.  26.  Jonah  2.  6.  Hah.  1.  12.

5. 4.  the  L.  my  G.  hath  given  me  rest  on  every  side

5.  1  purpose  to  build  an  house  unto  the  name  of

the  L.  my  God,  1  Chron.  22.  7  •  2  Chron.  2.  4.
Ezra  7. 28.  as  the  hand  of  the  L.  my  G.  was  upon  me

9.  5.  and  1  spread  out  my  hands  to  the  L.  my  God
Ps.  18.  28.  the  L.  my  God  will  enlighten  my  darkn.
Jer.  31.  18.  turn  thou  me.  for  thou  art  E.  my  God
l )an.  9.  4.  I  prayed  unto  the  L.  my  God,  and  said

20.  while  l  was  present,  rny  supplic.  bef.  L.m.  G.
Zech.  11.4.  thus  saith  the  L.  my  God,  feed  the  flock
14.  5.  and  the  L.  my  G.  shall  come,  and  all  saints
LORD  our  God.

Exod.  3.  18.  sacrifice  to  L.  G.  5.  3.  1  8.  27.  1  10.  25.

8.  10.  there  is  none  like  to  L.  our  God,  Ps.  113.5.

10.  26.  thereof  must  we  take  to  serve  the  L.  our  G.
Dent.  1.  6.  the  L.  our  Gorfspake  unto  us  in  Horeb

19.  we  went  through  all  that  wilderness,  as  the

L.  our  God  commanded  us,  41 .  |  6.  20.

20.  which  L.  our  G.  doth  give  unto  us.  25.  |  2.  29.

2.  33.  L.  our  God  delivered  him  before  us,  36.  |  3. 3.

37.  nor  unto  whatsoever  L.  our  God  forbade  us

4.  7.  so  nigh  to  them  as  L.  our  G.  is  in  all  tilings

5.  2.  L.  our  G.  made  a  covenant  with  us  in  Horeb

24.  the  L.  our  God  hath  shewed  us  his  glory

25.  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  L.  our  God  any  more

27.  go  and  hear  all  that  the  L.  our  G.  shall  say

6.  4.  O  Israel,  L.  our  God  isone  Lord.  Mark  12.  29

24.  to  fear  /..  our  G.  ||  25.  to  do  before  L.  our  G

29.  15.  that  sfandeth  this  day  before  the  E.  our  G.

29.  the  secret  things  belong  to  the  L.  our  God
Josh.  18.  6.  cast  lots  tor  you  before  the  L.  our  God
22. 19.  an  altar,  beside  the  al'ar  of  L.  our  God,  29.

24.  17.  L,  or  '  God,  be  it  is  that  brought  us  up  out  of

24.  the  people  said,  the  L.  our  God  will  we  serve
Judg.  1 1. 24.  whomsoever  L.  our  G.  shall  drive  out
1  Sam. 7. 8.  cease  not  to  cry  to  the  L.  our  G.  for  us
1  Kings  8.  57.  L.  our  G.  be  with  us,  as  with  father*

287


i<


LOR


LOR


LOR

1  Kings  8.  59.  let  these  ray  words  be  nigh  L  our G.

2  Kinps  IB.  22.  but  it'  ye  say ,  we  trust  in  L.our  God
19.  19.  O  L.  our  God,  save  thou  usoutot  his  hand

1  C 'hron.  13.  2.  and  that  it  be  of  L.  our  G.  let  us  send
15. 13.  the  L.  our  G.  made  a  breach  on  us,  tor  that
lb".  1*4.  he  is  L.our  G.  his  judgments,  Psal.  105.7 •
29.  16.  O  L.  our  God,  2  C/iron.  14.  11.  1  sal.  99.  8.

1  106.  47.  ha.  26.  13.  1  37.20.  Jer.  14.  22. /law.

9.  15.

2  Cn  'ron.  13.  11.  we  keep  the  charge  of  the  L.our  G.

14. 7.  because  we  have  sought  the  L.  our  God

19.  7.  there  is  no  iniquity  with  the  L.  our  God
32.  B.  but  with  us  is  the  L.  our  God  to  help  us

11.  L.  our  God  shall  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand
Ezra  9. 8.  grace  hath  been  shewed  from  the  L.  our  G.
Psal.  20.  7.  will  remeinb.  the  name  of  the  L.  our  G.
90.  17.  iet  the  beauty  of  the  L.  our  God  be  on  us
94!  23.  yea,  the  L.  our  God  shall  cut  them  off
99  5  exalt  ye  the  L.our  G.  and  worship  at  his,  9.

9. '  for  the  L.  G.  is  holy  ||  105. 7.  for  he  is  the  L.  G.
122.  9.  because  of  the  house  of  the  L.  our  G.

IQS.  2.  so  our  eyes  wait  on  the  L.  our  God

Jer.  3. 22.  wecome  tothee,  for  thou  art  the  L.  our G.

23.  in  the  L.  our  God  is  the  salvation  of  Israel

25.  we  have  sinned  against  the  L.  our  God,  we  and
fathers,  and  have  not  obeyed  voice  of  L.  our  G .

5.  19.  wherefore  doth  the  L.  our  God  these  things  t

24.  let  us  now  fear  the  L.  our  God  that  giveth  rain
8.  14.  for  the  L.  our  God  hath  put  us  to  silence

16.  10.  sin  we  have  committed  ag.  the  L.  our  God

26.  16.  hath  spoken  to  us  in  the  name  of  L.  our  G.
31 . 6.  arise,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Zion,  to  the  L.  our  G.
37.  3.  saying,  pray  now  to  L.  our  G.  tor  us,  42. 20.
42.  6.  we  will  obey  the  voice  of  the  L.  our  God
43. 2.  the  L.  our  G.  hath  not  sent  thee  to  say,  go  not

50.  28.  to  declare  the  vengeance  of  the  L.  our  G  .

51.  10.  let  us  declare  in  Zion  the  work  of  L.  our  G.
Dan.  9.  9.  to  the  L.  our  G.  belong  mercies,  tho’  we

10.  nor  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  ot  the  L.  our  G .

14.  for  the  L.  our  G.  is  righteous  in  all  his  works

Mic.  4.  5.  we  will  walk  in  the  name  ot  the  L.  our  G.

7. 17.  they  shall  be  afraid  of  the  L.  our  God
Acts  2.  39.  as  many  as  the  L.  our  God  shall  call
Rev.  19. 1.  glory,  honour,  and  power  to  the  L.our  G.

LORD  their  God.

Exod.  10.  7.  serve  L.  t.  G.  2  Chr.  34.  33.  Jer.  30.  9.
29.  46.  they  shall  know  that  1  am  the  L.  their  God,
Ezek.  28.  26.  |  34.  30.  I  39.  22,  28.
Lev. 26. 44.  break  covenant,  l  am  L.  t.  G.  Zech.  10. 6.
Judg. 3. 7.  forgat L.  t.  G.  8.  34. 1  Sam.  12.  9.  Jer.  3. 21.

1  Kings  9. 9.  because  they  forsook  L.  t.  G.  Jer.  22.  9.

2  Kings  17.  7.  Israel  had  sinned  against  the  L.t.  G.
9.  that  were  not  right  against,  the  L.  their  God

14.  fathers,  that  did  not  believe  in  the  L.  their  G.
16.  they  left  all  the  commandments  of  the  L.  t.  G.

19.  Judah  kept  not  commandments  of  the  L.t.  G.
18.  12.  obeyed  not  voice  of  the  L.  t.  G.  Jer.  7.  28.

2  Chron.  31.  6.  were  consecrated  to  the  L.  their  God

33. 17.  did  sacritice  unto  the  L.  their  God  only
Jer.  43.  1.  spake  all  the  words  of  the  L.  their  God

for  which  the  L.  their  God  had  sent  him  to  them
50. 4.  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  L.  t.  G.  Dos.  3.  5.
Hos.  1.  7.  and  l  will  save  them  by  the  L.  their  God
7. 10.  and  they  do  not  return  to  the  L.  their  God
Hag.  1.12.  people  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  L.  their  G.
Zech.  9. 16.  the  L.  t.  G.  shall  save  them  in  that  day
Jjuke  1. 16.  and  many  shall  he  turn  to  the  L.  their  G.
LORD  thy  God.

Exod.  20.  2.  I  am  the  L.  thy  God,  Psal.  81.10.  Isa.

51.  15.  Hos.  12.  9. 1  13.  4.
5.  for  T  the  L.  thy  G.  am  a  jealous  God,  Dent.  5. 9.
Deut.  2.  7.  the  L.  thy  God  hath  been  with  thee
4.  24.  the  L.  t.  G.  is  a  consuming  tire,  a  jealous  G.
31 .  for  the  L.  thy  God  is  a  merciful  God
7.9.  know  therefore  that  the  L.  thy  God ,  he  is  God

21.  for  the  L.  thy  God  is  among  you,  23. 14.

8.  5.  as  a  man  his  son,  so  the  L.t.  G .  chasteneth  thee

12.  31.  thou  shalt  not  do  so  to  the  L.  thy  God

20.  1.  for  the  L.thy  God  is  with  thee  who  brought

26.  5.  and  thou  shalt  say  before  the  L.  thy  God,  13.
28. 58.  mayest  fear  this  fearful  name,  the  L.  thy  G

Josh.  1. 9.  be  strong,  for  the  L.  thy  God  is  with  thee

17.  only  the  L.  t'ty  G.  be  with  thee  as  with  IVlose:
2  Sam.  14. 17 .  therefore  the  L.  t.  G.  will  be  with  thei


loses
1  thee

24.  23.  Araunah  said,  the  L.  thy  God  accept  thee
1  Kings  13.  6.  entreat  now  the  face  of  the  L.  thy  G.
17.12.  as  the  L.t.  G.  liv.  I  have  not  a  cake,  18. 10.
Isa.  43.  3.  1  am  the  L.  t.  G.the  holy  One  of  Israel
55.  5.  shall  run  to  thee,  because  of  the  L.  thy  God
Jer.  42.  2.  pray  for  us  to  the  L.  thy  G.  even  for  this
3.  that  the  L.  t.  G.  may  shew  us  the  way  wherein
Mic.  7. 10.  which  said  tome,  where  is  the  L.  thy  G.  ?
Zeph.  3.  if.  the  L.  thy  G.  in  midst  of  thee  is  mighty
Mat.  4. 7.  thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  L.  t.  G  .Luke  4. 12.
LORD  your  God.

Lev.  19.  2.  ye  shall  be  holy,  for  I  L.  y.  G.  am  holy
Deut.  1.  10.  L.  y.  G.  hath  multiplied  you  as  stars
30.  the  L.  your  God  he  shall  tight  for  you,  3.  22.

6. 16.  ye  shall  not  tempt  theL.  y.  G.  as  in  Massah
10.  17.  the  L.y.  G.  is  God  of  gods,  Lord  of  lords
20.  4.  the  L.your  God  is  he  that  goeth  with  you
Josh.  2. 11.  the  L.your  God  is  God  in  heaven  above
28. 3.  the  L.  y.  G.  is  he  that  hath  fought  for  you,  10.

1  Sam.  12.  12.  when  the  L.  your  God  was  your  king

2  Kings  17-  39.  but  the  L.your  God  ye  shall  fear

1  Chr.  22.  18.  is  not  the  L.  your  God  with  you  '

2  Chron.  20.  20.  believe  in  the/,,  your  G.  so  shall  ye
Jer. 42.  20.  ye  dissembled,  when  ye  sent  me  to  L.  G.
Joel  3.  17.  so  shall  ye  know  that  1  am  the  L.your  G.
Acts  3. 22.  a  prophet  shall  the  L.  your  G.  raise,  7-  37.

See,  1  am  the  Lo  it  U  your  God.

LO  R  D  of  hosts.

1  Sam.  1. 11.  O  L.  of  hosts,  Psal.  59.  5.  1  84. 1 , 3,  12.

2  Sam.  7-  27.  Jer.  11.  20.  I  20. 12.

2  Sam.  6.  2.  called  by  the  name  of  the  L.  of  hosts
7.  26.  saying,  the  L.  of  hosts  is  God  over  Israel

1  Kin.  18. 15.  Klijah  said,  as  L.  h.  liveth,  2  Kin.  3. 14.

2  Kings  19.  31.  the  zeal  of  the  L.  of  hosts  shall  do

this,  Isa.  9.  7.  !  37.  32.
1  Chr.  11.  9.  greater,  for  the  L.  of  h.  was  with  him
17.24.  the  L.  cj  n.  God  of  Israel",  even  a  G.  to  I«r.
ps.  24. 10.  the  L.  of  hosts  he  is  the  King  of  glory

2b8


Ps.  46.7.  the  L.  ofh.  is  with  us,  11.  ||  48.8.  in  city  L.h.  |
Isa.  1.24.  therefore  saith  the  L-ord,  the  L.  of  hosts
2. 12.  the  day  of  the  L.  of  hosts  shall  be  on  the  proud

6.  3.  and  one  said,  holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  L.  of  hosts
5.  mime  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  L.  of  hosts

8.  13.  sanctify  the  L.  of  hosts  himself,  let  him  be
14.  27.  tor  the  L.  of  lusts  hath  purposed  it.  23.  9.

19.  18.  five  cities  shall  swear  to  the  L.  of  hosts
47.  4.  L.  of  hosts  is  his  name,  48.  2. 1  51.  15. 1  54.  5.

Jer.  10.  16.  1  31.  35.  I  32.  18.  I  50.  34.  1  51.  19.
Jer.  46.  18.  king,  whose  name  is  the  L.  of  h.  48.  15.

25.  L.  of  hosts  saith,  l  will  punish  the  multitude
Dab.  2. 13.  is  it  not  of  the  L.oj  hosts  that  the  people
Hag.  2.  4.  work,  for  1  am  with  you,  saith  L.  of  hosts
Zech.  1.6.  like  as  the  L.of  hosts  thought  to  do  to  us
2. 9.  shall  know  that  the  L.  of  h.  sent  me, 11.  |  4. 9.

7.  12.  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  L.  of  hosts

13.  they  cried,  1  would  not  hear,  saith  the  L.  of  h.

8-  21.  let  us  go  to  pray,  and  to  seek  the  L.  of  host*

22.  many  people  shall  come  to  seek  the  L.  of  hosts
14.  16.  go  up  to  worship  the  King,  L.  cf  hosts,  17.

21.  every  pot  shall  be  holiness  unto  the  L.  of  h.
Mai.  1.  14.  for  l  am  a  great  King,  saith  L.  of  h.

See,  Saith  the  Lord.

I  the  LORD.

Lev.  19. 2.  for  1 1.  L.  your  G.  am  holy,  20.26. 1  21 .8.

21.  15.  for  I  t.  L.  do  sanctity  him,  23.  1  22.  9,  16.
Num. 14. 35. 1 L.  have  said  it, l  willdoit,EzeL21.17.
Isa.  27.  3.  1 1.  L.  do  keep  it,  1  will  water  it  every

41.  4.  I  the  L.  the  first,  and  with  the  last  1  am  he
17.  when  the  needy  seek,  1 1.  L.  will  hear  them

42.  6.  1  the  L.  have  called  thee  in  righteousness
45.  3.  that  I  the  L.  which  call  thee  by  thy  name

7.  1 1.  L.  do  all  these  things  ||  8.  I  t.  L.  created  it

19.  1  the  L.  speak  righteousness,  I  declare  things

21.  have  not  I  the  L.  and  there  is  no  God  else

60.  16.  shalt  know  that  /  the  L.  am  thy  Saviour

22.  1  the  L.  will  hasten  it  in  his  time

61.  8.  for  7  the  L.  love  judgment,  1  hate  robbery
Jer.  17.  10.  1 1.  L.  search  the  heart,  and  try  reins
Ezek.  5.  13.  1 1.  L.  have  spoken  it,  15,  17. 1  17-  21.

|  21.  32.  1  22.  14.  I  24.  14.  1  26.  14.  I  30.  12

14.  4.  1  the  L.  will  answer  him  that  cometh,  7.

9.  I  the  L.  have  deceived  that  prophet

17.  24.  /  L.  have  brought  down,  1  L,.  have  done  it

20.  48.  all  shall  see  that  /  the  L.  have  kindled  it

21.  5.  that  1  the  L.  have  drawn  forth  my  sword
34.  24.  1  t.  L.  will  be  their  G.  David  their  prince

30.  know  that  I  the  L.  their  God  am  with  them

36.  36.  that  1  the  L.  do  build,  1  the  L.  will  do  it

37.  14.  know  that  1  the  L.  have  performed  it

28.  shall  know  that  Z  the  L.  do  sanctity  Israel

1  am  the  LORD.

Gen.  15. 7.  I  am  the  L.  that  brought  thee  out  of  Ur
Exod.  6.  2.  1  am  the  L.  6,8,  29.  I  12.  12.  Lev.  18.  5,

6,  21.  Num.  3.  13.  Isa.  43.  11,  15.

20.  2.  I  L.  thy  G.  who  brought  thee  out  of  Egypt
Lev.  22.  32.  I  L.  which  hallow  you,  that  brought
Isa.  42.8. 1 L.  that  is  my  name  ||  44.5.  shall  say  ,1 L.
Jer.  9.  24.  glory,  that  he  knoweth  that  7  am  the  L.

32.  27.  behold,  7  am  the  L.  the  God  of  all  flesh
Mai.  3.  6.  for  I  am  the  L.  I  change  not,  therefore
See  Know.

1  am  the  LORD  your  God.

Exod.  6.  7>  ye  shall  know  that  7  am  L.  y.  G.  16. 12.
Lev.  11.  44.  I  am  the  L.  your  God,  18.  30.  1  19-  3.

I  20.  7.  I  23.  22.  Judg.  6.  10.  Ezek.  20.  5,  7,
19,  20.  Joel  2.  27.

LORD  Jesus,  see  Jesus.

In  the  LORD.

Gen.  15.  6.  he  believed  in  the  L.  and  he  counted  it
Josh.  22. 25.  Reuben,  Gad,  ye  have  no  part  in  L.  27 .

1  Sam.  2. 1.  my  heart  rejoiceth  in  L.  is  exalted  in  L.
Psal.  4.  5.  offer  sacrifice,  end  put  your  trust  in  t.  /..

11. 1.  in  the  L.  put  1  my  trust,  26.  1.  |  31.  6.  1  7-3-  28.
31.24.  all  ye  that  hope  in  L.  [|  32. 11.  be  glad  in  L.

34.  2.  my  soul  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  L.

35.  9.  my  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  the  L.

37.  4.  delight  also  thyself  in  the  L.  Isa.  58.  14.

7.  rest  in  t.  L.  ||  56.  10.  in  t.  L.  will  I  praise  his  w.
64. 10.  the  righteous  shall  be  glad  in  the  L.  104.  34.
Prov.  3.  5.  trust  in  the  L.  with  all  thine  heart

29.  25.  putteth  his  trust  in  the  L.  shall  be  safe
Isa.  26.4.  in  the  L.  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength

29.  19.  the  meek  shall  increase  their  joy  in  the  L.
45.  17.  but  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  the  L.

24.  in  the  L.  have  l  righteousness  and  strength

25.  in  the  L.  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified
Jer.  .3.  23.  in  the  L.  is  the  salvation  of  Israel
Zeph.  3.  2.  she  trusted  not  in  the  L.  drew  not  near
Zech.  12.  5.  Jerusalem  shall  bemystrength  mthe  L.
Acts  9-  42.  itwas  known,  and  many  believed  in  t.  L.

14.  .3.  they  abode-,  speaking  boldly  in  the  L.

Mo.  16.2.  ye  receive  her  inL.  ||8.  great  Amplias  inL.

12.  salute  Persis,  who  laboured  much  in  the  L.

13.  sal  up-  Rufus,  chosen  in  the  L.  and  his  mother
22.  I  Tertius  who  wrote  this  salute  you  in  the  L.

\Cor.  1 .  .31.  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  L.  2  Cvr.10.17-
4. 17.  and  faithful  in  the  L.  \\  7-  22.  called  in  the  L.
7.  39.  be  married  to  whom  she  will,  only  in  the  L.

9. 1.  am  1  not  an  apostle,  are  not  ye  my  work  in  L.
2.  the  seal  of  my  apostleship  are  ye  in  the  L.

11.  11.  nor  the  woman  without  the  man  in  the  L.

15.  58.  that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  1..
Eph.  2.  21.  groweth  to  an  holy  temple  in  the  L.

4.  17.  and  testify  in  L.  ||  5.  8.  now  are  ye  light  in  L.
6.  1.  children  obey  your  parents  in  the  L.  tor  this
10.  finally,  my  brethren,  be  strong  in  the  L.

21.  Tychicus  a  faithful  minister  in  the  L.

Phil.  1.  14.  brethren  in  the  L.  waxing  confident
2.  24.  I  trust  in  the  I,.  1  .-hall  come  to  you  shortly
29.  receive  him  therefore  m  the  L.  with  gladness

4. 1.  my  brethren, stand  fast  mthe  L.  1  Thess.  3.  8
2.  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  L.

10.  but  1  rejoiced  in  the  L.  greatly,  that  at  last

Col.  3.  18.  submit  to  your  own  husbands  in  the  L.
4.  7.  Tychicus  who  is  a  fellow-servant  in  the  L.
17.  ministry  which  thou  hast  received  in  the  L.

1  Thess.  5.  12.  know  them  which  are  over  you  in  L.

2  Thess.  3.4.  we  have  confidence  in  the  /..  touching
Philem.  16.  to  thee,  both  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  L.

20.  joy  of  thee  in  t.  L.  refresh  my  bowels  inthe  L.


Rev.  14. 13  blessed  a  e  the  dead  which  die  in  the
See  Rejoice,  Irust.

LORD  is.

Gen.  28.  16.  surely  the  L.  is  in  this  place
Exod. 9.27.  the  L.  if  righteous,  I  wicked,  2  Chr.  12.6.

15.  2.  the  L.  is  my  strength  and  song,  he  is  tnv  G.  j
3.  the  L.  is  n  man  of  war,  the  L.  is  his  name

18.  11.  1  know  that  L.  is  greater  than  all  gods
Mum.  14.  9.  the  L.  is  with  us,  fear  them  not
18.  the  L.  is  long-suffering,  of  great,  Nah.  1.  3.

42.  go  not  up,  for  the  L.  is  not  among  you
16.3.  are  holy  every  one,  and  the  L.  is  among  them  ‘
Deut.  10.  9.  the  L.  is  his  inheritance,  according
18.  2.  the  L.  is  their  inheritance,  as  he  said
Josh.  22.  .34.  shall  be  a  w  itness,  that  L.  is  God
!udg.  6. 12.  and  said,  the  L.  is  with  thee,  Luke  1.  28.  1

1  Sam.  2.  3.  for  the  L.  is  a  God  of  knowledge

16.  18.  the  L.  is  with  David,  2  Sam.  7.3.

28.  16.  seeing  the  L.  is  departed  from  thee

2  Sam.  22.  2.  he  said,  the  L.  is  my  rock,  Ps.  18.  2.  :

1  Kings  8.  60.  people  may  know  that  the  L.  is  God
20.  28.  Syrians  said,  the  L.  is  the  God  of  the  hills

2  Chron.  1.3.  10.  but  as  for  us,  the  L.  is  our  God

15.  2.  the  L.  is  with  you  while  ye  be  with  him
Psal.  9. 16.  L.  is  known  by  the  judgment  which  h«  ;

10. 16.  the  L.  is  king  for  ever  and  ever

11.  4.  the  L.  is  in  his  holy  temple,  his  eyes  behold

14.  6.  counsel  of  poor,  because  the  L.  is  his  refuge

16.  5.  the  L  is  the  portion  of  mine  inheritance
23. 1.  the  L.  is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want

27.  1.  the  L.  is  my  light  and  my  salvation,  the  L.  ,

is  the  strength  ot  tny  life,  of  whom  be  afraid

28.  7.  the  L.  is  my  strength  and  shield,  118. 14.

8.  L.  is  their  strength,  and  he  is  saving  strength

34. 8.  O  taste  and  see  that  the  L.  is  good,  blessed  ts  i
47.  2.  for  the.  L.  most  high  is  terrible,  a  great  king

89.18.  the  L.  is  our  defence  and  Holy  One  our  king

92.  15.  to  shew  that  L.  is  upright,  he  is  my  rock  i

93.  1.  the  L.  is  clothed  with  strength,  wherewith

94.  22.  but  the  L.  is  my  defence  and  my  rock

95.  3.  the  L.  is  a  great  God,  -96.  4  |  99. 2.  |  135.  5.!
100.  5.  the  L.  is  good,  34.  8. 1  135.  3.  1  145.  9.  Jer.l

33.  11.  Lam.  3.  25.  Nah.  1. 7.:

103. 8.  L.  is  merciful  and  gracious,  111.4.  1 145.8.  i
113.  4.  the  L.  is  high  1)  118.  6.  the  L.  is  on  my  sidul
121.  5.  the  L.  is  thy  keeper,  the  L.  is  thy  shade  i
125.  2.  so  the  L.  is  round  about  his  people

129.  4.  L.  is  right.  145. 17-  Lam.  1.  18.  Dan.  9.14.
145.  18.  the  L.  is  nigh  to  all  them  that  call  on  him
Prov.  15.  29.  the  /,.  ts  far  from  the  wicked

22.  2.  the  L.  is  the  maker  of  them  all
Isa.  30.  18.  for  the  L.  is  a  God  of  judgment
33.  5.  the  L.  is  exalted  ||  22.  L.  is  our  judge,  our
42.  21.  L.  is  w'ell  pleased  for  his  rightepusness
Jer.  10.  10.  the  L.  *f  the  true  God,  the  living  God
17.7.  whose  hope  the  L.  if  ||  20.11.  the  L.is  with  mi
Lam.  3.  24.  the  L.  is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul
Ezek.  48.  35.  the  name  of  the  city,  the  L.  is  there
Amos  5.8.  maketh  the  stars,  the  L.  is  hisname,9.6
Dab.  2.  20.  but  the  L.  is  in  his  holy  temple
Zeph.  3.  5.  the  just  L.  is  in  the  midst  thereof,  15.
Zech.  10.  5.  they  shall  fight  because  L.  is  with  then

13.  9.  and  they  shall  say,  the  L.  is  my  God
Luke  24.  34.  the  L.  is  risen  indeed,  and  appeared
2  Cor.  3.  17.  now  the  L.  is  that  Spirit,  and  where
Phil.  4.  5.  moderation  be  known,  the  L.  is  at  lian<

1  Thess.  4.  6.  the  L.  is  the  avenger  ot  all  such

2  Thess.  3.  3.  but  the  L.  is  faithful,  who  shall  kee]
Heh.  13.  6.  the  L.  is  mv  helper,  1  will  not  fear
Jam.  5. 11.  L.  if  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy,

1  Pet.  2.3.  if  ye  have  tasted  that  the  L.is  gracioui

2  Pet. 3. 9.  the"/.,  if  not  slack  concerning  his  promis.
See  Made.

My  LORD.

Gen.  19.  18.  Lot  said  unto  him,  oh,  not  so,  my  L.
Exod.  4. 10.  Moses  said,0  my  L.  I  am  not  eloquen
13.  O  my  L.  send  by  hand  of  whom  thou  wilt  sen
Num.  14.  17.  now  let  the  power  of  my  L.  be  great
Josh. 5. 14.  he  said,  what  saith  my  L.  to  his  servant
Judg .  6. 13.  O  my  L.  if  the  L.  be  with  us,  why  is  th
15.  O  my  L.  wherewith  shall  I  save  Israel  t
13.  8.  O  my  L.  let  the  man  of  G.  come  again  tor
Psal.  16.  2.  thou  hast  said  to  the  L.  thou  art  my  L
35.  23.  stir  up  thyself, my  God,  my  L.  John  20.  21
110.  1.  the  L.  said  to  my  L.  Mat.  22.44.  Mark  l<j
36.  Luke  20.  42.  Acts  2.  3
Isa.  21.8.  my  L.  I  stand  on  the  watch-tower
49. 14.  but  Zion  saith,  my  L.  hath  forgotten  me
Dan.  10.  16.  O  my  L.  by  the  vision  my  sorrows

17.  can  the  servant  ot  my  L.  talk  with  this  my  L.:

19.  and  1  said,  let  my  L.  speak,  for  thou  hast

12.  8.  O  my  L.  what  shall  be  end  of  these  things
Zech.  1.  9.  then  said  1,0  my  L.  what  are  these  '  -
4.  |  6.  4.  ||  4.  5.  no,  my  L.  1
Luke  1.  43.  that  the  mother  of  my  L.  should  conn;
John  20.  13.  because  they  have  taken  away  my  L
Phil.  3.  8.  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  L.
U  LORD.

Gen.  49.  18.  I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  0  1
Exod  15. 11.  who  is  like  to  thee,  O  L.  among  god)
Num.  10.  36.  return,  O  L.  unto  Israel,  Psal.  6.4
Deut.  26.  10.  which  thou,  O  L.  hast  given  me
Josh.  7 .8.  V  L.  what  shall  I  say,  Israel  turneth
Judy  5.  31.  so  let  all  thy  enemies  perish,  OL.

2  Sam.  15.  31.  O  L.  turn  counsel  ot  Ahithophe!

22.  29.  thou  art  my  lamp,  U  L.  and  lord  will

23.  17.  be  it  far  from  me,  O  L.  that  1  should
1  Chron.  17.  20.  O  L.  there  is  none  like  thee

29.  11.  thine,  O  L.  is  the  greatness,  thine,  O  L
>  Chr.  14.  11.  help  us,  O.  L.  our  G.  O  L.  thou 1  ?•


Psal.  3.  7-  arise,  0  L.  save  me  || 5.  8.  lead  me,  0

6.  2.  ()  L.  heal  me  11  3.  but  thou,  G.  L.  how  Ion

7.  6.  arise,  O  L.  9.  19.  1  10.  12.  I  17- 13.

8.  judge  me,  O  L.  accord,  to  my  righteous.  26
8.1.  O  L.  our  I,.  9.  II 9. 1. 1  will  praise  thee,  O
9.  13.  have  mercy  upon  me,  O  L.  consider'  1
double,  31.  9.  I  86.  3.  1 123.’
18.  1.  I  will  love  thee,  O  L.  my  strength,  19-  H
22.  19.  be  not  thou  far  from  me,  V  L.  35.  22.
27.  7.  hear,  O  L.  30.  10. 1  39.  12. 1  69. 16. 1  w
1 102. 1.  1 119. 145.

31.  14.  I  trusted  in  thee,G  L.  1  said


140.


LOR


L  O  R


L  O  R


;al.  86.  8.  among  the  gods  none  like  to  thee,  ()  L.

11.  teach  me  thy  way,  O  L.  1  walk,  25.  4.  |  27- 11.

15.1.  not  unto  us,0  L.not  unto  us,  but  to  thy  name
il*.  151.  thou  art  near,  (J  L.  thy  commands  truth

13. 1.  hear  my  prayer  O  L.  7.  Isa.  37.17.  Daw. 9. 19.

!  i,  25.  1.  O  L.  thou  art  my  God,  1  will  exalt  thee
I  ?.  16.  thou,  ()  L.  art  our  bath,  our  Redeem.  64.  8.

r.  10.  6.  V  L.  thou  art  great  ||  11.  5.  so  be  it,  U  L.

;  j.3.  but  thou,  O  L.  knowestme,  thou  hast  seen

1.  9.  yet  thou,  O  L.  art  in  the  midst  of  us

1 .  13.  O  L.  the  hope  ot'  Israel,  all  that  forsake

14.  heal  me,  O  1..  and  1  shall  be  healed,  save  me
I  jm.  1.  11.  see,  (J  L.  and  consider  l  am  vile,  2.  20.

.  19.  thou,  O  L.  remainest  forever,  thy  throne

21.  turn  us  unto  thee,  u  L.  we  shall  be  turned
nah  1.  14.  we  beseech  thee,  U  L.  we  beseech  thee
ib.  1. 12.  O  L.  thou  hast  ordained  them  forjudgm.
.2 .  O  L.  revive  thy  work  in  midst  of  the  years
at.  15.  ^2.  O  L.  thou  Son  of  David,  2o.  30,  31.
ike  5.  8.  depart,  for  1  am  a  sinful  man,  U  L.

iv.  4.  11.  thou  art  worthy,  O  L.  to  receive  glory
.  10.  saying,  how  long,  U  L.  holy  and  true
I ).  4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee,  U  L.  and  elorify
!  i.  5.  O  L.  which  art,  and  wast,  and  shalt  be
See  Lord  (rod.

Of  the  LORD.

ah.  11.20.  for  it  was  of  the  L.  to  harden  hearts
Sam.  1.  20.  because  l  have  asked  him  of  the  L.

.  21.  he  rehearsed  them  in  the  ears  of  the  L.

i.  21.  Saul  said,  blessed  be  ye  of  L.  2  Sam.  2.  5.
Sam.  12.25.  his  name  Jedidiah  because  of  the  L.
Kings  15.  29.  according  to  the  saying  of  the  L.
Kings  6.  33.  he  said,  behold  this  evil  is  of  the  L.

.  8.  meet  the  man  of  G.  and  enquire  of  L.  by  him
).  17.  according  to  the  saying  of  the  L.  to  Elijah
; hr .  18. 7.  one  man,  by  whom  we  may  enquire  - L.
4.21.  go,  enquire  of  the  L.  for  me,  and  for  Israel
sal.  91.  2.  I  will  say  of  the  L.  he  is  my  refuge
rov.  16.  33.  but  the  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  L.

3.  24.  man’s  goings  are  -L.  ||21.  31.  safety  is  of  L.
a.  49. 7.  worship  because  of  the  L.  that  is  faithful

1 1.  9.  O  arm  of  the  L.  awake  as  in  ancient  days
r.  21.  2.  enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  L.  for  us
im.  3. 22.  it  is  -  L.  mercies  we  are  not  consumed
nah  2.  9.  pay  that  I  vowed,  salvation  is  of  the  L.
■ts  21.  14.  ceased,  saying,  the  will  of  L.  be  done
Jor.  11.  23.  I  have  received  of  the  L.  that  which
■or.  2.  12.  and  a  door  was  opened  to  me  of  the  L.
th.  6.  8.  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  L.

l.  3. 24.  knowing  that  of  the  L.  ye  receive  reward
Tim.  1.  18.  grant  that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  L.

m.  1.  7.  that  he  shall  receive  any  thing  of  the  L.
11.  and  ye  have  seen  the  end  of  the  L.

Pet.  3.  15.  long-suffering  of  the  L.  is  salvation
See  Angel.

Anger  of  the  LORD.

tod  A.  14.  anger  of  the  L.  was  kindled  ag.  Moses
urn.  11.  10.  anger  of  the  L.  was  kindled  against
Israel,  25.  3.  Josh.  7.  1.  Judg.  2.  14,  20.  I  3.  8.

1  10.  7.  2  Sam..  24.  1.2  Kings  13.  3.  Isa.  5.  25.
>m.  12. 9.  -  L.  kindled  against  Aaron  and  Miriam

1.  4.  that  the  fierce  an.  of  L.  may  be  turned  away

2.  14.  to  augment  yet  the  an.  of  the  L.  toward  isr.
tut.  6.  15.  lest  the  aw.  of  the  L.  be  kindled  ag.  thee
,4.  so  will  anger  of  the  L.  be  kindled  against  you

4. 20.  then  the  an.  of  L.  shall  smoke  ag.  that  man
27.  anger  of  the  L.  was  kindled  against  this  land
>//.  23.  16.  the  anger  of  the  L.  be  kindled  ag.  you
•lam.  6.7.  -  L.  kindled  against  Uzzah,  1  Chr.  13.10.
Kings  24.  20.  thro’  -  L.  it  came  to  pass,  Jer.  52.  3.
Jhr.  25.  15.  a.  of  the  L.  kindled  against  Amaziah
r.  4. 8.  fierce  a.  of  L.  is  not  turned  back  from  us

2.  13.  ashamed  because  of  the  fierce  a.  of  the  L.

1.20.  anger  of  the  L.  shall  not  return  till,  30.  24.
1.45.  deliver  every  man  his  soul  from  a.  of  the  L.
im.  2.22.  so  that  in  day  of  L.  anger  none  escaped

.  16.  the  anger  of  the  L.  hath  divided  them

ph.  2.  2.  before  the  fierce  a.  of  L.  come  upon  you

1.  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid  in  the  day  of  the

anger  of  the  L.

e  Commandment,  CongregatIon,  Coun-
sel.Day,  Eyes,  Face,  Fear,  Feast, Glory,
Hand,  House,  Knowledge,  Law.

Month  of  the  LORD.

tut.  8.  3.  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  mouth  of  L.
sh.  9. 14.  and  asked  not  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  L.
Kings  13.  21.  thou  hast  disobeyed  the  mouth  of  L.
a.  1. 20.  for  the  mouth  of  L.  hath  spoken  it,  40.  5.

I  58.  14.  Jer.  9.  12.  Mtc.  4.  4.

2.  2.  by  a  new  name,  which  the  -  L.  shall  name
r.  23. 16.  and  they  speak  notout  of  mouth  of  t.  L.

Name  of  the  LO  R  D.

tn.  12.  8.  Abraham  called  on  the  name  of  the  L.

5.  13.  she  called  the  name  of  L.  that  spake  to  her
5.  25.  Isaac  called  on  n.  of  L.  and  pitched  there
tod.  20.  7.  shalt  not  take  -  L.  in  vain,  Dent.  5.  11.

3. 19.  I  will  proclaim  n.  of  the  L.  before  thee

4.  5.  and  the  Lord  proclaimed  w.  of  the  L.

’-v.  24.  11.  woman’s  son  blasphemed  the  -  L.  16.
tut.  18.  5.  to  stand  to  minister  in  w.  of  the  L.  7.

22.  when  a  prophet  speaketh  in  the  n.  of  the  L.

1.  5,  them  hath  God  chosen  to  bless  in  w.  of  the  L.

8. 10.  see  that  thou  art  called  by  the  n.  of the  L.

2.  3.  because  l  will  publish  name  of  the  L.  ascribe
c*.  9. 9.  thy  servants  are  come  beca.  of  n.  of  the  L.
Sam.  17 .  45.  l  come  to  thee  in  w.  of  the  L.  of  hosts
0. 42.  we  have  sworn  both  of  us  in  name  of  the  L.
Sam.  6.  2.  whose  name  is  called  by  the  n.  of  the  L.
18.  blessed  the  people  in  the  n.  of  L.  1  Chr.  16.  2.
Kings  3.  2.  no  house  built  to  the  name  of  the

Lord,  5.3,  5.  |  8.  17,  20.  1  Chron.  22.  7,  19.

2  Chron.  2.  1,  4. 1  6. 10.

2-  L  queen  of  Sheba  heard  concerning  name  of  L.

8.  32.  Elijah  built  an  altar  in  the  name  of  the  L
2.  16.  that  which  is  true  inn.  L.  2  Chron.  18.  15.
KingsZ.  24.  and  Elisha  cursed  them  inn.  of  the  I,,
■hr.  24. 19.  which  he  spake  in  n.  L.  2.  Chr.  33.  18.

0  1.  21.  blessed  be  the  n.  of  the  I..  Psal.  113.2.

7*  17 .  I  will  sing  praises  ton.  of  L.  most  high
<•  hut  we  will  remember  n.  of  the  L.  our  God
2*.  ^5.  so  the  heathen  shall  fear  the  n.  of  the  L,
i.1  to  declare  n.of  the  L.  in  Zion,  and  ms  praise  '


Ps.  113.1.  praise  the  -  L.  135. 1. 1 148. 5.13.Je«22. 26.

3.  from  rising  of  sun  the  L.  name  is  to  be  praised
116.  4.  then  called  1  on  n.  of  JL.  O  Lord,  deliver
118. 10.  but  in  the  -  L.  will  l  destroy  them,  11,  12.
26.  blessed  be  he  that  cometh  in  the  n.  of  the  L.
122.  4.  to  give  thanks  unto  the  name  of  the  L.
124.8.  our  help  is  in  n.  of  the  L.  who  made  heaven
129.  8.  they  which  go  by  say,  we  bless  you  in  -  L.
Prov.  18.  10.  the  -  L:  is  a  strong  tower,  the  righteous
Isa.  18.  7*  to  the  place  ot  the  na.  of  the  E.  of  hosts

24. 15.  glorify  the  name  of  the  L.  in  the  isles  of  sea
30.  27.  the  na.  of  l,.  cometh  from  far,  burning  with
48.  1.  which  swear  by  na.  of  L.  and  make  mention
50.  10.  let  him  trust  in  n.  of  the  L.  and  stay  on  God
56.  6.  and  to  love  the  na.  of  L.  to  be  his  servants

59.  19.  so  shall  they  fear  the  name  of  JL.  from  west

60.  9.  to  bring  their  silver  and  gold  to  name  of  t.  L.
Jer.  3.  17.  all  nations  gathered  to  name  of  the  Lord

11.21.  saying,  prophesy  not  in  the  name  of  the  L.

26.  9-  why  hast  thou  prophesied  in  the  name  of  L.

16.  he  hath  spoken  to  us  in  the  name  of  L.  44. 16.

20.  Urijah  that  prophesied  in  the  name  of  the  L.

Amos  6.  10.  we  may  not  make  mention  of  n.  of  t.  L.
Mic.  4.  5.  we  will  walk  in  n.  of  L.  for  ever  and  ever

5.  4.  ye  shall  feed  in  the  majesty  of  the  n.  of  the  L.
Zeph.  3. 12.  and  they  shall  trust  in  name  of  the  L.
Zech.  13.  3.  thou  speakest  lies  in  the  name  of  the  L.
Mat.  21.  9.  blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of

the  L.  23.  39.  Mark :  11.  9,  10.  Luke  13.  35.  |
19.  38.  John  12.  1.3.

Acts  9.  29.  and  he  spake  boldly  in  n.  of  the  L.  Jesus
10. 48.  commanded  them  to  be  baptized  inra.  of  L.
19.  13.  to  call  over  them  the  n.  of  L.  Jesus,  saying

17.  and  the  n.  of  the  L.  Jesus  was  magnified

21.  13.  for  1  am  ready  to  die  for  the  n.  of  L.  Jesus

22. 16.  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  n.  of  L.
2  Thess.  1. 12.  that  the  n.  if  L.  Jes.  may  be  glorified

3.  6.  we  command  you  in  the  n.  of  L.  Jesus  Christ
Jam.  5.  10.  prophets,  who  have  spoken  in  n.  of  L.

14.  anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  L.

See  Caul,  Offerings.

Prophet  and  prophets  of  the  LORD.

1  Sam.  3. 20.  Samuel  established  to  be  a  p.  of  the  L.

1  Kings  18.  4.  when  Jezebel  cut  off  the.p.  of  the  L.
13.  Jezebel  slew  the  -  L.  || 22.  I  only  remain  a-  L.

22.  7.  is  there  not  here  a  graph.  of  the  L.  to  inquire

of  him  1  2  Kings  3.  11.  2  Chron.  18.  6.

2  Chr.  28.  9.  a  -  L.  was  there,  whose  name  was  Oded

6’ee  Saeaoth,  Sabbath.

Servant,  servants  of  the  LO  It  D.

Dent.  34.  5.  Moses  the  ?.  of  t.  L.  died  there  in  Moab
Josh.  1.  1.  after  the  death  of  Moses  the.?,  of  the  L.
13.  which  Moses  the  servant  of  the  L.  commanded,
8.  31,  33. 1  11.  12.  1  22.  2,  5.  2  Kings  18.  12.

15.  which  Moses  the  servant  of  the  L.  gave  you,

12.  6.  1  13.  8.  I  18.  7.  I  22.  4.
12.  6.  them  did  Moses  th a  servant  of  the  L.  smite
14.  7.  when  Moses  the  s.  of  L.  sent  me  from  lvadesh
24.  29.  Joshua  son  of  N  u'n  the  -  L.  died,  Judg.  2.  8.
2  Kings  9.  7-  avenge  the.  blood  of  alt  the  servts.  of  L.
10.  23.  see  there  be  here  none  of  the  servants  of  L.
2  Chr.  1.  3.  tabernacle  Moses  the  ’j.  of  the  L.  made
24.  6.  according  to  commandment  of  Moses  the  -  L.
Psal.  113. 1.  praise  the  Ld.  praise,  O  ye  -  L.  135. 1.

134. 1.  behold,  bless  ye  the  Lord,  O  all  ye ser.  of  L.
Isa.  42.  19.  who  is  blind  or  deaf  as  the  L.  servant

54. 17.  this  is  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  L.
2  Tim.  2.  24.  and  the  serv.of  the  L.  mustnot  strive

Sight  of  the  LO  R  D.

Gen.  38.7.  Er  was  wicked  in  j.  of  L.  and  he  slew  him
j Lev.  10.  19.  should  have  been  accepted  in  sight  of  L.
Deut.  6.  18.  do  that  which  is  good  in  s.  of  L.  12.  28.

12.  25.  do  what  is  right  in  sight  of  the  L.  21.  9.
2  Kings  12.  2.  |  14.  3.  I  15.  3,  24.'  1  18.  3.  I  22.  2.
2  Chron.  20.  32.  I  24.  2.  I  25.  2. 1  26.  4.  1  27  .  2. 1
29.  2.  I  34.  2.

1  Sam.  12.  17-  wickedness  is  great  ye  have  done  in

the  sight  of  L.  1  Kings  21.  25.  2  Kings  21.6.

2  Kings  3. 18.  this  is  but  a  light  thing  in  sight  of  L.

16.  2.  did  not  what  was  right  in  -  L.  2  Chron.  28.  1.
Psal.  116. 15.  precious  in  -  L.  is  death  of  his  saints
Mai.  2.  17.  ye  say,  he  that  doth  evil,  is  good  in- X.
Luke  1. 15.  for  he  shall  be  great  in  the  sight  of  L.

2  Cor.  8.  21.  not  only  in  the  s.  of  the  L.  but  of  men
Jam.  4.  10.  humble  yourselves  m  the  sight  of  the  L.
See  Evil.

Spirit  of  the  LORD.

Judg .  ,3. 10.  5.  of  L.  came  on  Othniel,  and  he  judged

6.  34.  of  L.  cameon  Gideon  H 11.  29.  on  Jephtha

13.  25.  -  L.  began  to  move  Sams.  14.  6,  19.  1  15. 14.

1  Sam.  10. 6.  -  L.  will  come  on  Saul  ||  16.  13.  on  Dav.
16.  14.  but  the  Spirit  of  the  L.  departed  from  Saul

2  Sam.  23.  2.  -  L.  spake  by  me,  his  word  was  in

1  Kings  18.  12.  Spirit  of  the  L.  shall  carry  thee

whither  1  know  not
22.  24.  which  way  went  the  Sp.  of  the  L.  from  me
to  speak  unto  thee  r  2  Chron.  18.  23.

2  Kings  2. 16.  lest  the  6’.  of  the  L.  hath  taken  him  up
2  Chr.  20. 14.  on  Jahaziel  came  S.  of  L.  in  midst
Isa.  11.  2.  -  L.  shall  rest  upon  him,  Spiritof  wisd.

40.  7-  -  L.  bloweth  upon  it  l|  13.  hath  directed  -  L.
59.  19.  the  Spirit  of  the  L.  shall  lift  up  a  standard

61.  1.  -  L.  is  upon  me,  because  the  Ld.  Luke  4.  18.
63.  14.  Spir.  of  L.  caused  him  forest,  so  didstthou
Esek.  11.5.  -  L.  fell  upon  me  1|  37-  1.  carried  in  -  L.
Mic.  2.  7-  G  house  of  lac.  is  the  £.  of  L.  straitened

3.  8.  but  truly  l  am  full  of  power  by  the  S.  of  the  L.

Acts  5.9.  how  is  it  ye  have  agreed  to  tern  pt  5.  of  L.
8.  39.  when  come  up,  the  -  L.  caught  away  Philip
2  Cor.  3.  17.  where  the  S’,  of  t.  L.  is,  there  is  liberty

18.  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spi.  of  L.

temple  of  the  LORD.

1  Sam.  1.  9.  Eli  sat  on  a  seat  by  a  post  of  the  t.  of  L.

3.  3.  and  ere  the  lamp  of  God  went  out  in  the  -  L.

2  Kings  11. 13.  she  came  to  the  people  into  t.  of  L.
18.  16.  Ilezekiahcut  gold  off  from  doors  of  t.  of  L.
23.4.  bring  out  of  the  -  L.  vessels  made  for  Raal
24.  13.  all  vessels  Solomon  had  made  in  the  t.  of  L.

2  Chr.  26.  16.  Uzziah  went  in  t.  of  Jj.  to  burninc.

27.  2.  Jotham  entered  not  into  the  temple  of  the  L.
°Q. 16.  took  away  uneieaimess  round  in  t.  of  the  L.

EzraS.  6.  foundation  ot'tr.e  t.  of  L.  was  not  yet  laid


Ezra  3. 10.  laid  foundation  of  t.  of  the  L.  Hap.  2.  1&.
Jer.  7.4.  saying,  the  t.  of  L.  the  t.  of  L.  are  these
24.  1.  basket  of  figs  were  set  before  the  t.  of  the  L.
Ezek.  8.  16.  at  the  door  of  the  t.  of  I..  were  25  men
with  their  backs  toward  -  L.  and  faces  to  east
Hag.  2. 15.  consider  before  a  stone  was  laid  in  -  L.
Zech.  6. 12.  and  he  shall  build  the  t.  of  the  L.  13, 15.

14.  crown  shall  be  for  a  memorial  in  temple  of  L.
Luke  1.  9.  when  Zacharias  went  into  the  t.  of  L.
Koice  of  the  LOR  D.

Dent.  30. 8.  and  obey  voice  of  L.  Jer.  26. 13.  1  38. 20.
Josh.  5.  6.  because  they  obeyed  not  the  v.  of  L.  1  Ham.
28.  18.  1  Kings  20.  36.  Jer.  3.  25.  |  7.  28.  |  42.
13,  21.  1  43.  4,  7.  I  44.  23.  Dan.  9.  10.

1  Sum.  15. 19.  wherefore  didstthou  not  obey  v.  of  L.

20.  Saul  said,  yea,  1  have  obeyed  the  v.  of  the  L.
22.  and  sacrifices,  as  in  obeying  the  voice  of  the  L.

Psal.  29.  3.  the  voice  of  the  L.  is  upon  the  waters

4.  the  v.  of  the  L.  is  powerful,  full  of  majesty,  5.

7.  the  voice  of  the  L.  divideth  the  flames  of  hre

8.  the  v.  of  L.  shaketh  the  wilderness  of  Kadesh

9.  the  voice  of  the  i..  maketh  the  hinds  to  calve
106. 25.  they  hearkened  not  to  the  voice  of  the  L.

Isa.  6. 8.  I  heard  the  v.  of  the  L.  saying,  who  will  go-
30.  31.  thro’  v.  of  the  L.  shall  Assyrians  be  beaten
66.  6.  a  voice  vj  the  L.  that  rendereth  recom pence
Jer  Ad.  6.  we  will  obey  the  v.  of  the  L.  our  God  thaS
it  may  be  well  with  us  when  we  obey  the  z;.  of  L.
Mic.  6.  9.  the  L.  voice  crieth  unto  the  city
Hag.  1.  12.  reinnantof  the  people  obeyed  v.oftheL .
Zech.  6. 15.  if  ye  will  diligently  obey  the  v.  of  the  L.
Acts  7. 31.  the  v.  of  the  L.  came  to  Moses,  saying
Way  of  the  LORD.

Gen.  18. 19.  command  his  household  tokeep  w.  of  L.
Judg.d.  22.  whether  they  will  keep  the  w.  of  the  L.

2  Kings  21. 22.  Anion  walked  not  in  the  w.  of  the  L.
Psal.  1 19. 1.  bless,  are  they  who  walk  in  w.  of  the  L.
Prov.  10.  29.  the  of  the  L.  is  strength  to  the  upright
Isa.  40.  3.  prepare  ye  the  10.  of  the  L.  make

straight,  Mat.  3.  3.  Mark'l.  3.  Luke  3.  4.
Jer.  5.  4.  are  foolish,  they  know  not  way  of  the  L ^

5.  great  men,  for  they  have  known  way  of  the  L.
Ezek.  18.  25.  the  w.  L.  is  not  equal.  29. 1  33.  17. 20.
John  1.  23.  one  crying,  make  straight  way  of  the  L.
Acts  18. 25.  Apollos  was  instructed  in  way  of  the  L.

Ways  of  the  LORD.

2  Sam.  22. 22.  for  1  have  kept  the  w.  of  L.  Ps.  18. 21.
2  Chr.  17.  6.  Jehoshaphat  was  lifted  up  in  w.  of  L.
Psal.  138.  5.  yea,  they  shall  sing  in  the  w.  of  the.  L.
Hos.  14.  9.  for  the  w.  of  the  L.  are  right,  and  the  just
Acts  13. 10.  cease  to  pervert  the  right  w.  of  the  L.
Word  of  the  LORD.

Exod.  9.  20.  he  that  feared  the  w.  of  the  L.  amongst

21.  and  he  that  regarded  not  the  w  of  the  L.  left
Num.  3.  16.  according  to  the  word  of  the  L.  51.

I  4.  45.  1  36.  5.  Deut.  34.  5.  Josh.  8.  27.  j  19.
50.  I  22.  9.  1  Kings  12.  24.  I  13.  26.  1  14.  18.  |
16.  12,  34. 1  17.  5.  16.  |  22.  38.  2  Kings  1.  17.

I  4.  44.  17.  16.  |9.  26.  I  14.  25.

15. 31.  because  he  hath  despised  the  word  of  the  L.

22. 18.  1  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  L.  my  God
Deut.  5. 5.  at  that  time  to  shew  you  the  word  of  L.

1  Sam.  3.  1.  the  w.  of  L.  was  precious  in  those  days
7.  nor  was  word  of  the  L.  yet  revealed  to  Samuel

15. 23.  because  thou  hast  rejected  the  w.  of  L.  26.

2  Sam.  22. 31.  the  word  of  _L.  is  tried,  Psal.  18.  30.

1  Kings  2.  27.  might  fulfil  w.  of  t.  L.  2  Chr.  36.  21.

12.24.  they  hearkened  therefore  to  the  word  of  t ha

L.  and  returned,  2  Chron.  11.  4.  Jer.  37.  2.
13. 1.  came  a  man  of  God  by  w.  of  L.  to  Beth  el
2.  he  cried  against  the  altar  in  tne  word  of  the  L.

5.  the  sign  the  man  of  God  had  given  by  w.  of  L.
9.  so  it  was  charged  me  by  w.  of  L.  saying

18.  angel  spake  by  w.  of  L.  saying,  bring  him  back
26.  the  man  who  was  disobedient  unto  the  w.  of  L .
32.  for  the  saying  he  cried  by  the  word  of  the  L.

14.  18.  they  buried  him  according  to  the  w.  of  I
17.  24.  and  that  w.  of  the  L.  in  my  mouth  is  truth-
20.  35.  prophet  said  in  w.  of  L.  smite  me,  I  pray  •
22.5.  enquire,  I  pray  thee,  at  a;,  of  L.  2  Chr.  18.  4.

2  Kings  3.  12.  Jehoshaphat  said,  w.  of  LAs  with  him

9.  36.  this  is  w.  of  L.  H  15.  12.  this  was  the  to.  of  L.

10.  10.  fal1  to  the  earth  nothing  of  the  word  of  L.

20. 19.  llezek.  said,  good  is  the  w.  of  L.  Isa.  39. 8i
23.  16.  according  to  the  word  of  the  L.  24.  2.

1  Chron.  11.  3,  10.  |  12.  23. 1  15‘.  15.  Jer.  13.  2.

1  32.  8.  Jonah  3.  3.

1  Chron.  10. 13.  committed  even  against  w.  of  the  L .

2  Chr.  30. 12.  to  do  commandm.  of  king  by  w.  of  L.
34.  21.  our  fathers  have  not  kept  the  w.  of  the  L.
36.22.  thatw.e/  L.  might  beaccomp.  Ezra  1.  1.
Psal.  33.  4.  for  the  w.  of  'L.  is  right,  and  his  works

6.  by  w.  of  L.  were  heavens  made,  and  all  host

105. 19.  till  his  word  came,  the  w.  of  L.  tried  him
Isa.  2.  3.  and  the  w.  of  L.  from  .lerus.  Mic.  4.  2.

28.  13.  the  w.  of  L.  was  to  them  precept  on  precept

Jer.  2.  31.  O  generation,  see  ye  the  word  of  the  L.

6. 10.  the  w.  of  the  L.  is  to  them  a  reproach,  20.  8.

8.  9.  lo,  they  have  rejected  the  word  of  L.  and  what
17.  15.  behold,  thevsay  to  me,  where  is  the  w.  of  L.
25. 3.  to  this  day  the  w.  of  L.  hath  come  unto  me
27- 18.  if  the  w.  of  L.  be  with  them,  let  them  make
32.  8.  then  l  Knew  that  this  was  the  word  of  the  L.

Hos.  1.  2.  the  w.  of  L.  that  came  to  Hosea  son  of
Amos  8.  12.  they  shall  wander  to  seek  the  w.  of  L.
Zeph.  2.  5.  the  w.  of  the  L.  is  against  you.  O  Canaan.
Zech.  4.  6.  this  is  w.  of  the  L.  to  Xerubbabel,  saying

9.  1.  the  burden  of  the  word  of  the  L.  in  the  land  ot

Hadrach  and  Damascus,  12.  1.  Mai.  1.  1.
11. 11.  poor  of  the  flock  knew  that  it  was  w.  of  L.
Luke  22. 61.  Peter  remembered  tv.  of  L.  Acts  1 1 .  16.
ActsS.  25.  they  had  testified,  and  .had  preached  the
word  of  the  L.  13.  49.  I  To.  35,  36.  I  16.  32.
13.  48.  and  glorified  the  word  of  the  L.

19.  10.  heard  the  word  of  the  L.  Jesus

1  Thess.  1.  8.  for  from  you  sounded  out  the  w.  of  L
4.  15.  for  this  we  say  to  you  by  the  word  of  the  L.

2  Thess.  3. 1.  that  the  w.  of  L.  may  have  free  course
1  Pet.  1.  25.  but  the  word  of  L.  eudureth  for  ever

Words  of  the  LORD.

Exod.  24. 3.  Moses  tola  peo.  all  w.  of  JL.  Nun.  jl.  24.
4.  and  Moses  wrate  all  the  w.  of  L.  and  rose  up

2R9


LOR


LOR


LOR


Josh.  24. 27.  this  stone  heard  all  the  words  of  the  L.

1  Sam.  8.  40.  Samuel  told  the  people  words  of  the  L.

15.  1.  hearken  thou  to  the  voice  of  the  w.  of  the  L.

2  Chr.  29. 15.  came  by  w.  of  L.  to  cleanse  the  house
Psal.  12.  6.  words  of  the  L.  are  pure  words,  as  silver
Jer.  36.  4.  Baruch  wrote  all  w.  of  L.  from  mouth  of'

6.  read  in  the  roll  thou  hast  written  w.  of  L.  8.

11.  had  heard  out  of  the  hook  all  the  ui.  of  the  L.

Amos  8. 11.  but  a  famine  of  hearing  the  w.  of  the  L.
See  Came,  Hear.

Work  of  the  LORD.

Exod.  34. 10.  all  the  people  shall  see  the  w.  of  the  L.
Isa.  5.  12.  they  regard  not  the  zc.  of  L.  nor  consider
Jer.  48.  10.  cursed  that  doeth  the  w.  of  L.  deceitfully
50.  25.  this  is  the  w.  of  L.  ||  51.  10.  declare  the  w.  of  L.

1  Cor.  15.  58.  always  abounding  in  the  w.  of  the  L.

16.  10.  for  he  worketh  the  w.  of  the  L.  as  l  also  do

Works  of  the  LORD.

.Josh.  24.  31.  which  had  known  all  the  w.  of  the  L.
Judy.  2.  7.  which  had  seen  all  the  great  w.  of  the  L.
Psal.  28.  5.  because  they  regard  not  the  w.  of  the  L.
46. 8.  come,  behold  the  w.  of  the  L.  what  desolations
77.  11.  1  will  remember  the  w.  of  L.  thy  wonders
107.  24.  these  see  the  w.  of  the  L.  and  his  wonders
111.  2. the  w.  of  L.  are  great  ||  118. 17 .  declare  w.  of  L.
Wrath  of  the  LORD.

Num.  11.  33.  ere  it  was  chewed  w.  of  L.  was  kindl.
Dent.  11.  17.  then  the  L.w.  be  kindled  against  you

2  Kings  22. 13.  for  great  is  the  w.  of  L.  2  Chr.  34  21.

2  Chron.  12.  12.  the  w.of  L.  turned  from  him,  luat

29.  8.  the  w.  of  L.  was  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem
32.  26.  so  that  the  w.  of  the  L.  came  not  upon  them
36.  16.  until  w.  of  the'  L.  arose  against  his  people
Psal.  106.  40.  therefore  was  wrath  of  the  L.  kindled
Jsa  9. 19.  thro’  the  w.  of  the  L.  is  the  land  darkened

13.  13.  the  earth  shall' remove  in  the  w.  of  the  L,.
Jer.  50.  13.  because  of  1 v.  of  the  L.  not  be  inhabited
Ezek. I. 19.  their  silver  and  gold  shall  not  be  able  to

deliver  them  in  day  of  w.  of  the  L.  Zeph.  1. 18.
See  PRA ISE.

LORD  said.

■Gen.  8.  21.  the  L.  said  in  his  heart,  I  will  not  curse
Exod.  7.  13.  he  hearkened  not  as  the  L.  said ,  22.  |

8. 15,  19.  Deut.  9.  3.  Judg.  2. 15. 1  6.  27-
16.  23.  this  is  that  which  the  L.  said,  to  morrow
24.  3.  Moses  told  them  all  the  words  the  L.  said

7.  all  that  the  L.  said  we  will  do,  Num.  32.  31.
Nnm.  10.29.  journeying  to  place  of  which  L.  said

16.  40.  as  the  L.  said  to  him  by  the  hand  of  Moses
26.  65.  the  L.  had  said,  they  shall  surely  die

Deut.  31.  3.  as  the  L.  hath  s.  Josh.  1 4.  12.  Joel  2.  32.
Josh.  11.  23.  according  to  all  the  L.  said  to  Moses

14.  6.  thou  knowest  the  thing  that  the  L.  said

1  Sam.  3.  17.  what  is  the  thing  that  L.  said  to  thee

15.  16.  tell  thee  what  the  L.  said  to  me  this  night
24.  4.  behold,  the  day  of  which  the  L.  said  to  thee

2  Sam.  16. 10.  bee.  the  L.said  to  him,  curse  David

1  Kings  8.  12.  L.  said  he  would  dwell,  2  Chr.  6.  1.
11.  2.  nations,  concerning  which  L.  said  to  Israel

2  Kings  14.  27-  L.  said  not  that  he  would  blot  out

17.  12.  whereof  the  L.  had  said,  ye  shall  not  do
21. 4.  of  which  L.  said  in  Jerusal.  7. 2  Chr.  33.  4.

24.  13.  Solomon  had  made  in  temple  as  the  L.said

Psal.  2. 7.  the  L.  hath  said  unto  me,  thou  art  my  Son
110.  1.  the  L.  said  unto  my  Lord,  Mat.  22.  44.

Mark  12.  36.  Luke  20.  42.  Acts  2.  34.
Isa.  7.  3.  then  said  the  L.  8.  3.  Ezek.  44.  2.  IIos.

3.  1.  Jonah  4.  10.  Luke  20.  13.

18.  4.  for  so  L.  said  unto  me,  I  will  take  my  rest
21 .  16.  thus  hath  L.  said  unto  me,  Jer.  4.  27. 1  6.  6.

29. 13.  wherefore  L.  said,  forasmuch  as  this  people
Ezek.  21. 17.  cause  my  fury  rest,  1  the  L.  have  said
Mat.  25.  21.  his  L.  said  unto  him,  well  done,  2.3.
Acts  9.  10.  to  him  said  the  L.  in  a  vision,  Ananias

11.  16.  I  remembered  the  word  of  L.  how  he  said
Saith  the  LORD.

Eiod.  4.  22.  thus  saith  the  I,.  5.  1. 1  7-  17. 1  Sam.  2.

27.  2  Sam.  12.  11.  I  24.  12.
Num.  24.  13.  what  the  L.  saith,  that  will  1  speak
■Josh.  7.  13.  thus  saith  the  L.  God  of  Israel,  24.  2.

Judg.  6.  8.  2  Sam.  12.  7.

!  Sam.  2.  30.  but  now  the  L.  saith,  be  it  far  from  me
15.  2.  thus  saith  the  L.  of  hosts,  2  Sam.  7.  8.  1  Chron.

17.  7.  Jer.  6.  9.J  7-  3,  21.

1  Kings  22.  1 1.  what  the  L.  saith,  that  will  1  speak
Isa.  22. 14.  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged,  saith  the  L.

God  of  hosts,  Jer.  5.  14.  |  35. 17- 1.  49.  5. 1  50.  31 .
33. 10.  now  will  l  rise  j.  t.  L.  now  will  I,  Ps.  12.  5.
49.  5.  now  s.  the  L.  that  formed  me  from  the  womb
54.  10.  be  removed, .?.  t.  L.  that  hath  mercy  on  thee
Jer.  1.8.  for  1  am  with  thee,  saith  the  L.  19.  I  30. 11.
2. 19.  and  that  my  fear  is  not  in  thee,  saith  the  L.

3. 1.  plaved  the  harlot,  yet  return  unto  me,  ,?.  the  L,

4.  1.  if  thou  wilt  return,  s.  the  L.  return  unto  me

5.  22.  fear  ye  not  me,  s.  L.  ||7-11. 1  have  seen  it,  s.L.
9.  3.  from  evil  to  evil,  they  know  not  me,  s.  the  L.
22. 16  was  not  this  to  know  me  ?  saith  the  L.

23.  23.  am  1  a  G.  at  hand,  s.  the  L.  and  not  afar  off  ?
24.  can  any  hide,  that  1  shall  not  see  him,  s.  the  L.
33.  what  burden  ?  1  will  even  forsake  you,  .?.  the  L.
27.  15.  for  I  have  not  sent  him,  s.  the  L.  yet  they
29.  9.  they  prophesy,  1  have  notsent  them, .?.  the  L.
Ezek.  13.  6.  L.  s.  and  the  Lord  hath  notsentthem,  7.
8. 1  am  against  you,  s.  L.  I!  16. 19-  thus  it  was,  s.  L.

21. 13.  even  the  rod,  it  shall  be  no  more,  s.  thplj. G.
34.  31 .  ye  my  flock  are  men,  and  l  am  your  G.  s.  L.
39.  8.  behold,  it  is  come,  and  it  is  done,  s.  the  L.  G.
43.27.  and  1  will  accept  you,  saith  the  L.  God

Amos  2.  11.  is  it  not  even  thus,  O  lsr. 3  saith  the  L.
4.  5.  this  likethyou,?.  t.  L.  ||7.  3.  shall  not  be,  s.  L.
9.12.aie  called  by  my  name,  s.  the  L.  that  doeth  this
Mic.  6.  1 .  hear  ye  now  what  the  L.  saith,  arise  thou
Nah.  2. 13.  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  s.  the  L.  3. 5.
J&eph.  3.8.  therefore  wait  ye  upon  me,  saith  the  L.
Hag.  1.9.  why?  s.  L.  of  hosts  II  13.1  am  with  you,  s.  L.
Zech.  2.  5.  for  1 ,  s .  the  L.  will  be  to  her  a  wall  of  fire
4.6.  not  fey  might  or  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  s.  t.  L.
Mai.  L  2.  I  have  loved  you,  saith  the  L.  yet  ye  say

13.  Should  I  accept  this  of  your  hand,  saith  the  L.

14.  for  1  am  a  great  king,.?<z»/(  the  L.  of  hosts
3. 5.  that  oppress,  and  fear  not  me,  s.  t.  L.  of  hosts

10.  and  prove  me  now  herewith,  s.  the  L.  of  hosts
290


Mai.  3. 17.  and  theyT  shall  be  mine,  s.  the  L.  of  hosts

4.  3.  in  tlie day  that  l  shall  do  this,.?,  t.  L,.  ot  hosts
Acts  15.  17.  saith  the  L.  who  doeth  all  these  things
Rom.  12. 19.  vengeance  is  mine,  1  will  repay  s.  1. 1,.

1 C or.  14. 21. they  wil  1  not  hear  me  for  all  this,  s.  the  L.

2  Cor.  6.  17.  come  out  and  be  ye  separate,  s.  the  L.
Deb.  8.  9.  and  I  regarded  them  not,  saith  the  L.

10.  30.  who  hath  said,  I  will  recompense,  .?.  the  L.

Rev.  1. 8.  1  am  the  Beeinning  and  Ending,  s.  the  L.
See  Live,  Saved.

LORD  joined  with  seek.

Dent.  4.  29.  if  from  thence  thou  shalt  seek  the  L.

1  Chron.  16. 10.  heart  rejoice,  that  seek  L.  Ps.  105. 3.

11.  seek  the  L.  and  his  strength,  Psal.  105.  4.

22. 19.  set  your  heart  to  seek  the  L.  2  Chron.  11.16.

2  Chron.  12. 14.  prepared  not  his  heart  to  seek  the  L.

14.  4.  and  commanded  Judah  to  seek  the  L.  God

15.  12.  they  entered  into  a  covenant  to  seek  the  L.
13.  that  whosoever  would  not  seek  the  L.  God

20.  3.  Jehoshaphat  set  himself  to  seek  the  L.

4. out  of  the  cities  of  Judah  they  came  to  seek  L.
Ezra  6. 21.  were  come  to  seek  the  L.  God  of  Israel
Psal.  22.  26.  they  shall  praise  the  L.  that  seek  him
34. 10.  they  tha tseek  the  L.  shall  not  want  any  good
Prov.  28.  5.  they  that  seek  L.  understand  all  things
Isa.  9. 13.  neithei  do  they  seek  L.  31. 1.  Flos.  7- 10.

51.  1.  hearken  to  me,  ye  that  seek  the  L.  look  to
55.  6.  seek  ye  the  L.  while  he  may  be  found
Jer.  50. 4.  they  shall  go  and  seek  the  L.  their  God
llos.  3  5.  shall  return  and  seek  the  L.  their  God

5.  6.  they  slial  1  go  with  their  herds  to  seek  the  L.

10.  12.  for  it  is  time  to  seek  the  L.  till  he  come

Amos  5.6.  seek  the  L.  and  ye  shall  live,  lest  he  break
Zeph.  2. 3.  seek  ye  the  L.  all  ye  meek  ot  the  earth
Zech.  8.  21 .  saying,  let  us  go  to  seek  the  L.  of  hosts
22.  many  people  shall  come  to  seek  the  L.

Mai.  3.1.  the  L.  whom  ye  seek  shall  suddenly  come
Acts  15. 17. that  the  residue  of  men  might  seek  the  L.
17.27.  that  they  should  seek  the  L.  it  haply  might
LORD  joined  with  sent.

Gen.  3.  23.  the  L.  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden
19. 13.  we  will  destroy,  the  L.sent  us  to  destroy  it
Exod.  4. 28.  told  all  the  words  of  L.  who  had  sent  him

7.  16.  the  L.  God  of  the  Hebrews  sent  me  to  thee
9.  23.  and  L.  sent  thunder  and  hail  on  Egypt
Num.  16.  28.  ye  shall  know  that  the-L.  hath  sent  me
29.  if  die  common  death,  then  I,,  hath  not  sent

20. 16.  and  when  we  cried,  the  L.  sent  an  angel

21.  6.  the  L.  sent  fiery  serpents  among  the  people
Deut.  9.  23.  when  L.  sent  you  trom  hadesh-barnea
34.  11.  in  all  wonders  which  the  L.  sent  him  to  do

Judg.  6.  8.  that  the  L.  sent  a  prophet  unto  Israel

1  Sam.  1C. 8.  then  the  L.  sent  Moses  and  Aaron

11.  and  the  L.  s.  Jerubbaalli  18.  the  L.  s.  thunder

15.1.  the  L.  sent  me  to  anoint  thee  king  over  Israel

18.  the  L.  sent  thee  on  a  journey,  and  said,  go

20.  I  have  gone  the  way  which  the  L.  sent  me
20.22.  go  thy  way,  the  L.  hath  sent  thee  away

2  Sam.  12. 1.  the  L.  s.  *N  athan  to  David,  and  he  came

24. 15.  L.  sent  pestilence  on  Israel,  1  Chr.  21. 14.

2  Kings  2. 2.  tarry,  for  the  L.  hath  sent  me  to  Bethel

4.  L.  hath  sent  me  to  Jericho  1|6.  L.  s.  meto  Jordan

17.25.  therefore  the  L.  sent  lions  among  them

24.  2.  the  L.  sent  against  him  bands  of  the  Chaldees
2  Chron.  32. 21.  the  L.  sent  an  angel,  who  cut  off
Isa.  Q.8.  the  L.  sent  a  word  into  Jacob,  and  it  lighted
Jer.  19. 14.  whither  the  L.sent  him  to  prophesy

25.  4.  and  the  L.  hath  sent  to  you  all  his  servants

17.  nations  to  drink  to  whom  the  L.  had  sent  me

26.  12.  L.  sent  me  to  prophesy  acst.  this  house,  15.

28.  9.  be  known  that  the  L.  hath  truly  sent  him

15.  hear  Hananiah,  the  L.  hath  not  sent  thee
F.zek.  13.  6.  Lord  saith,  and  the  L.  hath  not  .?.  them
Jonah  1.4.  the  L.  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea
Hag.  1. 12.  obeyed,  as  the  their  God  had  sent  him
Zech.  1 . 10.  whom  the  L.  hath  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro
2.  9.  know  L.  of  hosts  hath  s.  me,  11.  1  4.  9. 1  6.  15.

7.  12.  lest  hear  the  words  which  the  L.  hath  sent
Acts  9.17.  Saul,  the  L.  Jesus  hath  sent  me,  that  thou
12. 11.  now  know  I  that  the  L.  hath  sent  his  angel
Serve  the  LORD.

Exod.  10.7.  men  go,  that  they  may  s.the  L.  their  G.

8.  Phar.  said,  go  s.  the  L.  yourG.  11.24.  |  12.  31.
26.  for  thereof  must  we  take  to  serve  the  L.  our

God,  we  know  not  with  what  we  must  s.  the  L.

23.25.  ye  shall,  serve  the  L.  your  God,  ye  shall  bless
Deut.  10. 12.  to  j.  the  L.  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart
Josh.  24.  14.  therefore  fear  and  serve  the  L.

15.  if  it  seem  evil  unto you  to  s.  the  L.  choose  you

18.  therefore  will  we. s.  the  I,,  he  is  our  God,  21 . 24.

19.  Joshua  said,  ye  cannot.?,  the  L.  for  he  is  holy

22.  that  ye  have  chosen  you  the  L.  to  serve  him

1  Sam.  12.  20.  but.?e/re  the  L.  with  all  your  heart

2  Sam.  15.  8.  will  bring  me  again,  then  1  will  s.  t.  L.
2  Chron.  .30. 8.  but  yield,  and  .?.  t.  L.  yourG.  35.  3.

33. 16.  and  commanded  Judah  to  .?.  the  L.  34.  33.
Ps.  2. 11..?.  t.  L.  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembl.

100.  2.  serve  the  L.  with  gladness  and  come  be-

[fore  his  presence

102.22.  and  the  kingdoms  gathered  to  serve  the  L.
Col.  3. 24.  receive  reward,  for  ye  serve  the  L.  Christ
See  Shewed,  Smite.

LORD  spake.

Gen.  16. 13.  called  the  name  of  L.  that  spake  to  her
Lev.  10.  3.  this  is  it  that  the  L.  spake,. saying,  I  will
Num.  3. 1 .  in  the  day  the  L.  spake  with  Moses,  9.  1.
5.4.  as  the  L.  spake  unto  Moses,  so  did  Israel

21. 16.  that  is  the  well  whereof  L.  spake  to  Moses
Deut.  4.  12.  L.  spake  to  you  out  of  the  midst  of  fire

15.  ye  saw  no  similitude  in  the  day  the  L.  spake

5.  22.  these  words  the  L.  spake  to  your  assembly

9.  10.  written  all  the  words  which  the  L.  spake

10.  4.  the  ten  commandments  which  the  L.  spake
Josh.  14. 10.  since  the  L.  spake  this  word  to  Moses

12.  this  mountain  whereof  L.  spake  in  that  day
1  Sam.  16.  4.  Samuel  did  that  which  the  L.  spake

1  Kings  2.4.  L.  may  continue  his  word  which  he  sp.

27.  fulfil  the  won!  of  the  L.  which  he  spake
5.  5.  as  the  L.  spake  to  David  my  father,  saying
8.  20.  L.  hath  performed  word  he  s.  2  Kings  10.10.

12. 15.  perform  his  saying  the  L.  s.  2  Chr.  iO.  15.

13.  26.  according  to  the  word  of  the  L.  which  he


spake,  14.  18.  1  16.  12,  34.  1  17.  16.  |  22.  38.

2  Kings  10  10.  1  24.  2.

1  Kings  15.  29.  according  to  the  saying  of  L.  which  :

he  spake  by  his  servant  Ahijah,  2  kings  10.  17.
21.  23.  and  of  Jezebel  also  spake  the  L.  saying

2  Kings  9.  36.  this  is  the  word  of  L.  which  he  spake
15.  12.  the  word  of  the  L.  which  he  spake  to  Jehu
21.  10.  the  I..  spake  by  his  servants  the  prophets

1  Chron.  21.  9.  L.  spake  unto  Gad,  Da.  seer,  saying

2  Chron.  33. 10.  L.  spake  to  Manasseh  and  his  peop.
Isa.  7.  10.  moreover,  the  L.  spake  again  to  Ahaz
8.  5.  the  L.  spake  also  unto  me  again,  saying

11.  for  the  L.  spake  thus  to  me  with  a  strong  hand
20.  2.  at  the  same  time  spake  the  L.  by  Isaiah
Jer.  30.  4.  these  are  the  words  that  the  L.  spake

50.  1.  the  word  that  the  L.  spake  against  Babylon

51.  12.  for  the  L.  hath  done  that  which  he  spake
Jonah  2.  10.  the  L.  spake  unto  the  fish,  it  vomited  1
Acts  18.  9.  then?pa£e  the  L.  to  Paul  in  the  night

LORD,  joined  with  spoken.

Gen.  12.  4.  Abram  departed  as  the  I,,  had  spoken,
21.  1.  I  24.  51.  Exod.  9.  12,  35.  Dent.  6.  19.
Exod.  4. 30.  Moses  spake  the  words  the  L.  had  spoken
19.8.and  said, all  thatthe  L.  hath  spoken  will  wedo
34.  32.  gave  in  commandment  all  the  I,,  had  spoken j
Lev.  10.  11.  teach  the  statutes  the  L.  hath  spoken  I;
Num.  1.  48.  for  L.  had  ?.  to  Moses,  saying,  15. 22.  !
10.  2<9.  the  L.  hath  spoken  good  concerning  Israel
12.  2.  hath  the  L.  indeed  spoken  only  by  Moses  ;  1
23. 17.  Balak  said  to  him,  what  hath  the  L.  spoken?
Deut.  18.  21.  word  which  L.  hath  not  spoken,  22.
Josh.  21.  45.  failed  not  ought  which  L.  had  spoken

1  Sam.  25.  30.  L.  have  done  the  good  he  hath  spoken'

2  Sam.  3.  18.  now  then  do  it,  for  the  L.  hath  spoken
7.  29.  it  may  continue,  for  thou,  O  L.  hath  spokenit
1  Kings  13.  3.  this  is  the  sign  which  L.  hath  spoken

14.  11.  for  the  L.  hath  spoken  it,  Isa.  21.  17.  I  22.

25. 1  24.  3. 1  25.  8.  Joel  3.  8.  Chad.  18.


Job  42.  7.  after  the  L.  had  spoken  these  words  to  Job
Psal.  50. 1.  the  L.  hath  spoken,  and  called  the  earth
Isa.  31 .  4.  for  thus  hath  the  L.  spoken  to  me,  like  as]
38.  7.  L.  will  do  this  thing  that  he  hath  spoken
Jer.  9.  12.  to  whom  the  mouth  of  the  L.  hath  spoken

13. 15.  give  ear,  be  not  proud,  for  the  L.  hath  spoken

23.  35.  and  ye  shall  say,  what  hath  L.  spoken,  37.
27.  13.  as  the  L.  hath  spoken  against  the  nation
48.  8.  shall  be  destroyed,  as  the  L.  hath  spoken
Ezek.  5.  13.  I  the  L.  have  spoken  it,  15,  17- 1  17
21,  24.  1  21.  32.  !  22.  14.  |  24.  14.  |  26.  14. 1  30.

12.  1  34.  24.  !  36.  36.  I  37.  14.

22.  28.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  when-the  L.  hath  not  ?
26.  5.  for  I  have  spoken  it,  saith  L.  28.  10. 1  39.  5:
Amos  3.  1.  hear  this  word  that  the  L.  hath  spoken
8.  the  L.  G.  hath  spoken,  who  can  but  prophesy
Mic.  4.  4.  the  mouth  of  the  L.  of  hosts  hath  spoken  1
Mat.  1. 22.  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  of  the  L.  2. 15.
Mark  16.  19.  so  then  after  the  L.  had  spoken  to  then
Acts  9.  27.  had  seen  the  L.  and  that  he  had  spoken
Heb.  2.  3.  at  the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  L
To  or  unto  the  LORD.  ]

Gen.  14.22.  I  have  lift  upmy  hands  to  L.  most  high
18.  27.  1  have  taken  on  me  to  speak  to  the  L.  31. j


Psal.  13.  6.  |  30.  4.  1  68.  32.  1  95.  1.  I  96.  II
2.  1  98.  1,  5. 1  104.  33.  1  147.  7-  1  149.  1.  Isa
12.  5.  1  42.  10.  Jer.  20.  13.

16.  25.  for  to-day  is  a  sab.  to  the  L.  35.  2.  Lev. 25. 2

22.  20.  he  that  sacrificeth  save  unto  the  L.  omy
30.  10.  it  is  most  holy  unto  the  L.  31.  15.  Lev.  23

20. 1  27.  21,  30,  32.  Nnm.  6.  8.  Ezra  8.  28;
Num.  21.  7-  said,  pray  to  L.  Jer.  29.  7-  Acts  8.24

29.  39.  these  things  ye  shall  do  to  the  L.  in  feasts1
Dent.  12.  31.  thou  shalt  not  do  so  to  the  L.  thy  God
Judg.  11 . 35.  1  have  opened  my  mouth  to  the  L.  3£

17.  3.  1  had  wholly  dedicated  the  silver  to  the  L

21.  8.  that  came  not  up  to  the  L.  to  Mizpeh

1  Sam.  1 . 10.  Hannah  prayed  to  the  L.  and  weptsor
8.  6.  displeased  Samuel,  and  he  prayed  to  the  I.

14.  6.  there  is  no  restraint  to  the  L.  to  save  by  man.

2  Sam.  21.  6.  will  hang  them  up  to  the  L.  in  Gibea

1  Kings  2.  27.  Abiatlrar  from  being  priest  to  the  If

2  Kings.  4.  3.3.  Elisha  shut  door,  prayed  to  L.  6.  It

18.  6.  I  lezekiah  clave  to  L.  and  kept  his  command'

20.  2.  Ilezekiah  turned  his  face  unto  the  wall,  an ;

prayed  to  L.  2  Chr.  32.  24.  Isa.  37.  15.  I  38.  t

23.  23.  this  passover  holden  to  the  L.  in  Jerusalem

1  Chron.  11.18.  not  drink  it,  but  poured  it  out  to  L
16.8.  give  thanks  to  L.  call  on  his  name,  41.  Ps.  92.1

2  Chr.  13. 11.  they  burn  to  L.  morning  and  evemn

24.  9.  to  bring  to  the  L.  the  collection  that  Moses

30.  8.  but  yield  yourselves  to  the  L.  and  serve  mr
Psal.  3.  8.  salvation  belongeth  to  the  L.  thy  blessin
18.  41.  they  cried  unto  the  L.  but  he  answered  n(
30.  8.  and  to  the  L.  I  made  supplication,  142. 1J
89.  6.  who  can  be  compared  to  L.  be  likened  to  L.
116.  12.  what  shall  I  render  to  the  L.  tor  benefits]
140.  6.  I  said  to  1


Prov.  3.  32.  a’-omi


the  L.  thou  art  my  God,  hear  voic
uination  to  the  L.  11. 1,  20.  1 12.2'.


I  15.  8,  9,  26.  1  16.  5. 1  17-  15.  I  20.  10,  2L
16.  3.  commit  thy  works  to  L.  |1 19. 17*  lendetb  to  1
Isa.  19.  21.  shall  vow  avow  to  the  L.  and  perform

22.  they  shall  return  even  to  the  L.  he  shall  nef
23. 18.  shall  be  holiness  to  L.  Jer.  2.  3.  Zech.  14.  0

55.  13.  it  shall  be  to  the  L.  for  a  name,  for  a  sig

56.  3.  that  hath  joined  himself  to  the  L.  6.

58.  5.  wilt  thou  call  this  an  acceptable  day  to  the  l
Jer.  32.  16.  Jeremiah  prayed  to  the  L.  saying
IIos.  4.  10.  they  have  left  ofif  to  take  heed  tv  the  l
Jonah  4.  2.  Jonah  prayed  to  the  L.  and  said  J
Mic.  4.  13.  1  will  consecrate  their  gain  unto  the  t
and  their  substance  unto  the  L.  of  the  whole  eart
7.  7*  therefore  1  will  look  to  the  L.  1  will  wait  tc
Zech.  14.  7.  one  day,  which  shall  be  knowm to  the A
Mat.  5.  33.  but  shalt  perform  to  the  L.  thine  oati
Luke  2.  22.  brought  him  to  present  him  to  the  L-

23.  every  male  shall  be  called  holy  to  the  L.
Acts  5.  14'.  believers  were  the  more  added  to  the  i

1 1.  23.  exhorted  that  they  would  cleave  to  the  L

13.  2.  as  theyr  ministered  unto  the  L.  and  tastea
14. 23.  had  prayed,  they  commended  them  to  the  J


LOR


LOT


LO  V


lets  16.  15.  if  ye  have  judged  me  faithful  to  the  L.
Horn.  14.  6.  regardeth  it  to  the  L.  eateth  to  the  L.

8.  w  hether  w  e  live,  weii  veto  the  /..  vvedi  etotheL.
'  Cor.  8.  5.  but  first  gave  their  own  selves  to  the  L.
Kph.  5.  10.  proving  what  is  acceptable  to  the  L.

22.  submit  yourselves,  as  to  the  6.  ?.  Col.  3. 23.
See  Cry, Cried,  Give,  Ti  rn.

LORD,  as  applied  to  man.

~!en.  18.  12.  after  1  am  old.rny  i.  being  old  also

23. 1 1 .  nay,  my  /.  hear  me  ||  15.  my  /.  hearken  to  me

24.  18.  drink,  my  l.  and  she  hasted  and  let  down

27.  29.  be  /.  over  thy  brethren,  let  thy  mother’s

37.  Isaac  answered,  1  have  made  him.  thy  /.

31.  35.  Rac  hel  said,  let  it  not  displease  my  /.

32.  4.  saying,  thus  shall  ye  speak  to  my  l.  Esau

5.  1  have  sent  to  tell  tny  /.  that  1  may  find  grace

18.  shall  say,  it  is  a  present  sent  to  my  /.  I  sau

39.  16.  laid  up  his  garment,  until  his /.  came  home
.» 0 .  1.  had  offended  their  l.  the  king  of  Egypt
42.  10.  nay,  my  l.  but  to  buy  food  are  we  come

30.  the  man  vyho  is  the  l.  of  the  land,  33.

44.  5.  is  not  this  it,  in  w  hich  my  /.  drinketh  :

8.  should  we  steal  out  of  thy  l.  house  silver  or  gold

9.  and  we  also  will  be  my  /.  bondmen

24.  we  came  up,  we  told  lum  the  w  ords  of  my  l.

45.  8.  and  he  hath  made  me  l.  of  all  his  house

9.  God  hath  made  me /.  of  all  Egypt,  come  down
47.  18.  we  will  not  hide  it  from  my  l.  how  that  there
is  nothing  left  in  sight  of  my  /.  hut  our
’■'rod.  32.  22.  let  not  the  anger  of  my  /.wax  hot
\nm.  11.  28.  and  said,  my  /.  Moses  forbid  them

12.  11.  my  /.  1  beseech  thee,  lay  not  sin  on  us

32. 25.  servants  do  as  my  /.  commandeth,  27.

.36.  2.  the  Lord  commanded  my  /.  to  give  land
'udff.  3.  25.  their  l.  was  fallen  down  dead  on  earth

4.  18.  turn  in,  my  /.  turn  in  to  me,  fear  not

19.26.  the  woman  fell  down  where  her/,  was

27.  and  her/,  rose  up  in  the  morning  and  opened
hah  2.  13.  let  me  find  favour  in  thy  sight,  my  /.

.Sam.  1.  15.  my  /.  1  am  of  a  sorrowful  spirit
26.  0  my  /.  as  thy  soul  liveth,  my  /.  I  am  w  oman

22. 12.  and  he  answered,  here  1  am,  my  /.

24.8.  and  cried  after  Saul,  say ing,  my  /.  the  king

25.  24.  on  me,  my  /.  on  me  let  this  iniquity  be

25.  let  not  my  /.  regard  this  man  of  Pelial

26.  they  that  seek  evil  to  my  /.  be  as  N  abal
2*.  it  be  given  to  young  men  that  follow  my  /.

31.  when  the  Lord  shall  have  dealt  w  ith  my  /.

26.  15.  why  hast  thou  not  kept  thy  /.  the  king  ?

17.  David  said,  it  is  my  voice,  my  /.  O  king

18.  why  doth  my/,  thus  pursue  after  his  servant '

29.  8.  that  may  not  fight  against  enemies  of  my  /.
Sam.  1.  10.  and  brought  them  hither  to  my  /.

3.21.  I  will  gather  all  Israel  to  my  /.  the  king

9. 11.  according  to  all  that  my  /.  hath  commanded

11.9.  Uriah  slept  with  all  the  servants  of  his  /.

13.  32.  let  not  my  /.  suppose  they  have  slain

14.  12.  let  thine  handmaid  speak”  to  my  /.

17.  as  an  angel  of  God,  so  is  my  /.  the  king

19.  none  can  turn  from  aught  my  /.  hath  spoken

20.  my  /.  is  wise  according  to  wisdom  of  an  angel

16.  9.  why  should  this  dead  dog  curse  my  /.  king
18.  31.  and  Cushisaid,  tidings,  my  /.  the  king

in.  19.  let  not  my/,  impute  iniquity  to  me,  the  day
my  /.  the  king  w  ent  out  of  Jerusalem
20.  l  am  come,  the  first  to  go  down  to  meet  my  /.

30.  forasmuch  as  my  /.  is  come  again  in  peace

35.  l  ea  burden  to  my  /.  ||  37.  go  over  with  my  /.
20.  6.  take  thou  thy  /.  sen  ants,  and  pursue  after
24.  3.  that  the  eyes  of  my  /•  the  king  may  see  it,

but  why  doth  my  /.  eliglit  in  this  thir.g  ?
22.  let  my  /.  take  and  offer  up  what  seemeth  good
hrngs  1.  2.  that  my  /.  the  king  may  get  heat
‘2?.  is  this  thing  done  by  my  /."the  king  ?

36.  the  Lord  God  of  my  /.  the  king  say  so  too

37.  as  the  l.ord  hath  been  with  my  /.  the  king
2.  38.  as  my  /.  the  king  hath  said,  so  will  1  do

i.  17-  O  my  /.  1  and  this  w  oman  dw  ell  in  one  house
26.  O  my  /.  gh  e  her  the  living  child,  not  slav  it

11.23.  who  tied  from  his  /.  Hadadezei  kirjrof
18.  7-  Obadiah  said,  art  thou  that  my  /.  Elijah  ?

13.  was  it  not  told  my  /.  what  1  did,  wnen  Jezebel

14.  go  tell  thy  /.  behold  Elijah  is  here,  he  slay
20.  4.  my  /.  1  am  thine,  and  all  that  I  have

9.  tell  my  /.  all  thou  didst  send  for,  1  w  ill  do
A  mgs  2.  19.  the  situation  is  pleasant  as  my  /.  seeth

l.  16.  nay,  my  /.  do  not  lie  to  thine  handmaid

28.  did  1  desire  a  son  of  my  /.  /  did  1  not  say

5.  3.  would  God  my  /.  were  with  the  prophet
_4.  rne  went  in  and  told  his  /.  saying,  thus  said
'•  12,  and  one  of  his  serv  ants  said,  none,  my  /.

26.  a  woman  cried,  sav  ing,  help  my  /.  O  king
i.2.  then  a  /.  on  whose  hand  the  king  leaned,  17.
3-5.  my  /.  O  king,  this  is  the  womam  and  her  son

12.  and  Ilazael  said,  why  weepeth  my  /.  /
h  11.  Jehu  came  forth  to  the  servants  of  his  /.

18.23.  now,  I  pray  thee,  give  pledges  to  my  /.
yhr.  2.  14.  with  the  cunning  men  of  1113’  /.  David
fra  R'.  3.  according  to  the  counsel  of  my  /.

■>«/.  12.  4.  our  lips  are  our  own,  w  ho  is /.  over  us?
er.  22.  18.  saying,  ah  l.  or  ah  his  glory,  34.  5.

’■  •  20.  therefore  hear  now,  I  pray  thee,  my  /.
xi.  9.  my  /.  the  king,  these  men  have  done  ev  il
ain.  1  10.  said  to  Daniel,  I  fear  my  /.  the  king
p  ]0.  there  is  no  king  nor/,  that  asked  such  things
*•'9.  my  /.  the  dream  be  to  them  that  hate  th.ee
.4.  decree  which  is  come  upon  my  /.  the  king
.10;  24.  nor  is  the  servant  above  his  /.

'6.  it  is  enough  that  the  servant  be  as  his  /.

/.  have  patience  with  me, and  1  will  pay
pu  tney  came  and  told  their  /.  all  that  was  done
'4  48.  my  /.  dela^eth  his  coming,  Luke  12.  45.
i*re  1 '•  36.  and  ye  like  men  that  wait  for  their  /.

m,  3.  my  /.  taketh  away  from  me  the  stewardship
0.  so  he  called  his  /.  debtors  to  him,  and  said  to

the  first,  how'  much  owest  thou  to  my  L?
°nn  15.  15.  the  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  /.

orv  1  .,  ,  doth

,‘0.  I  said,  the  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  /.

.  /  -5. 26.  1  have  no  certain  thing  to  write  to  my  /.
/»’  o  a  ■  rs  no’  froni  »  servant,  though  /.  of  all
1  ot.  3.  6.  Sarah  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  /.


rses


LOR  DS.

Gen.  19.2.  he  Said,  behold  now  my  /.  turn  in
Num.  21.  28.  consumed  /.  of  high  places  of  Arnon
Dent.  10.  17.  is  Lord  of  /.  1  Tim.  6.  15.  Ter.  17. 14.
Josh.  13.  3.  five  /.  of  the  Philistines,  'Judy.  3.  3.
Judy.  16.  5.  /.  of  the  Philistines  came  up  to  her
30.  and  the  house  fell  upon  the/,  and  people
1  Sam.  5.  8.  they  gathered  /.  of  the  Philistines,  11.

6.  4.  one  plague  was  on  you  all,  and  on  your  /.

12.  the  /.  of  the  Philistines  went  after  them
7.7.  the/,  of  the  Philistines  went  up  against  Israel

29.  2.  the  /.  passed  on  by  hundreds  and  thousands

6.  nevertheless,  the  /.  favour  thee  not

7.  return,  go  in  peace,  that  thou  displease  not  the
Ezra  8.  25.  1  weighed  the  offering  which  /.  offeree.
La.  16.  8.  the  /.  of 'he  heathen  have  broken  plants
26.  13.  other  /.  have  had  dominion  over  us

Jn  -2.  31.  wherefore  say  my  people,  we  are  /.  f
Ezek.  23.  23.  great  /.  renow  ned,  all  1  iding  on  ho.
Dan.  4.  36.  my  counsellors  and  /.  sought  to  me

5.  1.  made  a  great  feast  to  a  thousand  of  his  /.

23.  thou  and  thy  /.  ha'  e  drunk  wine  in  them

6.  17.  the  king  sealed  with  his  own  and  signet  of/.
Mark  6.21.  that  Herod  made  a  supper  to  his  /.

1  Cor.  8.  5.  as  there  be  gods  many,  and  /.  many
1  Vet.  5.  3.  nor  as  being  /.  ov  er  God’s  heritage
LORDSHIP.

Mark  10.  42.  kings  of  Gent,  exercise  /.  L.uke  22.  25
LOSE.

Judy.  18.  25.  run  on  thee,  and  thou  /.  thv  life

1  Kings  18.  5.mules  alive,  that  we/,  not  all  the  beasts
Ji  b  31.  39.  or  have  caused  the  ow  ners  /.  their  life
Prov.  23.  8.  shalt  vomit  up,  and  /.  thy  sweet  words
F.ccl.  .3.  6.  there  is  a  time  to  get,  and  a  time  to  /.
Mat.  10.  39.  he  that  findeth  his  life  shall  /.  it,  j6.

25.  Mark  8.  35.  Lul e  9.  24.
42.  he  shall  in  no  wise  /.  his  reward,  Maik  9.  41.

16.  26.  and  /.  his  own  soul,  Marks.  36.  Luke  Q.  2o!
Luke  15.  4.  it  he  /.one  sheep  ||  8.  if  she  /.  cne  piece

17-  33.  whosoever  shall  /.  his  life  shall  preserve  it
John  6.  39.  the  Father’s  will  I  should  /.  nothing
12.  25.  he  that  loveth  his  life  shall  /.  it

2  John  8.  look  to  yourselves,  we  /.  not  those  things

T.OSETH.

Mat.  10.  39.  and  he  that  /.  his  life  for  my  sake
LOSS.

Gen.  31.  39.  that  which  was  torn,  1  bart  the  /.  of  it
Erod.  21  19.  only  he  shall  pay  for  the  /.  of  time
La.  47.  8.  nor  shall  1  know  the  /.  of  children

9.  come  in  one  day  /.  of  children  and  widowhood
Acts  IT .  21.  and  have  gained  this  harm  and  l.

22.  there  shall  be  no  /.of any  man's  life
1  Cor.  3.  15.  if  work  be  burned  he  shall  suffer  /.
Phil.  3.7.  what  gain,  those  1  counted  /.  for  Christ

8.  yea,  doubtless,  and  1  count  all  things  but/,  for
Christ,  for  whom  1  suffered  the  /.  of  all  things

LOST,  Passively.

Exod.  22.  9.  for  any  manner  of  /.  thing,  Deut.  22.  3.
Lev.  6.  3.  or  have  found  that  which  was  /.

4.  he  shall  restore  the  /.  thing  he  found
Num.  6.  12.  the  days  that  were  before  shall  be  /.

1  Sam.  9.  3.  the  asses  of  Kish,  Saul’s  father,  were/.

20.  as  for  thine  asses  that  were  /.  they  are  found
Psal.  119.  176.  1  have  gone  astray  like  a  /.  sheep
Jer.  50.  6.  my  people  hath  been  /.  sheep,  shepherds
Ezek.  19.  5.  when  she  saw  that  her  hope  was  /.

34.4.  nor  have  ye  sought  that  which  was  /.

16.  1  w  ill  seek  that  which  was  /.  and  bring  again
37.  11.  they  say,  our  hope  is  /.  we  are  cut  off'
Mat.  10.  6.  but  go  rather  to  the  /.  sheep  of  Israel

15.  24.  1  am  not  sent  but  to  the/,  sheepof  Israel
18. 11.  Son  is  come  to  save  what  was /.  l.uke  19.  10.

Luke  15.4.  go  afterthat  which  is  /.  till  he  find  it
6.  for  1  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  /.

24,  this  my  son  was  /.  ||  32.  thy  brother  w  as  /.
John  6.  12.  gather  up  fragments  that  nothing  be  /.

17.  12.  none  of  them  is  /.  but  the  son  of  perdition

2  Cor.  4.  3.  our  gospel  is  hid,  to  them  that  are  /.

LOS  T,  At  tii  ely.

Deut.  22.  3.  with  any  thing  of  thy  brother’s  he  hath  /.

1  Kings  20.  25.  number  army  like  that  thou  hast  l.
Isa.  49.  20.  after  th.ou  hast  /.  the  other  shall  say

21.  seeing  1  have  /.  my  children,  and  am  desolate
Mat.  5.  13.  if  salt  /.  savour,  Maik9.  50.  L  uke  14.  34.
L.uke  15.  9.  1  have  found  the  piece  which  I  hau  /.
John  18.  9.  of  them  thou  gavest  me,  1  have  /.  none

LOT

Signifies,  [1]  Any  thing  cast  or  drawn  in  order  to
determine  any  matter  in  debate,  Trov.  18.  18.
[2]  That  which  falls  out  by  lot  to  be  one's  projer
share,  portion,  or  inheritance.  Josh.  15.  1.  I  16.
1.  [3]  Habitations  or  persons,  Psal.  125.  3.  [4]
Punishment,  Isa.  17.  14.  [5]  Order,  a  vise,  or
turn,  T  uke  1.  9.  ff6]  Fellowship,  Acts  8.  21.  [7]
The  objeit  of  one's  worship  and  trust,  Isa.  57.  6.
Lots  were  used,  [1]  To  find  out  a  per  si  n,  1  Sam.
14.41.  Jonah  1.  7-  [2]  To  divide  lands ,  Num.  26.
55,  56.  [3]  To  choose  a  church  officer.  Acts  1.26.
[4]  To  order  and  regulate  the  courses  of  men  in
office,  1  Chron.  24.  5.  I  25.  8.  [5]  To  decide  a
controversy,  Psal.  22.  18.

Eev.  16.  8.  one  /.  for  Ed.  other  for  scape  goat,  9, 10.
Num.  26.  55.  land  shall  he  divid.  by  /.  Lzek.  48.  29.

33.  54.  he  shall  divide  the  land  by  /.  for  an  inhe¬

ritance,  36.  2.  Josh.  13.  6.  Ezek.  47.  22.

34.  13.  this  is  the  land  ye  shall  inherit  by  /.

Deut.  32.  9.  Jacob  is  the  /.  of  his  inheritance
Josh.  15.  1.  this  was  the  /.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah

16.  1.  the  /.  of  Joseph  ||  17.  1.  vvas  a  /.  for  Manasseh
17-  14.  why  hast  thou  given  me  but  one  /.  1

17.  thou  shalt  not  have  one  /.  only,  but  mountain

18.  11.  the  /.  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  came  up
19. 1.  and  the  second  /.  came  forth  to  Simeon

10.  the  third  /.  came  for  the  children  of  Zebulun
17.  the  fourth  /.  came  out  to  issachar

24.  fifth  /.  to  Asher  ||  32.  sixth  /.  to  N  aphtali
40.  the  seventh  /.  came  for  the  tribe  of  Dan
21.  4.  /.  for  families  of  Kohathites,  1  Chron.  6.  54.
6.  Gershon  had  by  /.  ||8.  gave  by  /.  to  the  T.evites
Judy.  1.  3.  come  up  with  me  into  my  /.  to  fight  aga.

Canaanites,  likewise  go  with  thee  into  thy  /.
20.  9.  we  w  ill  go  up  by  /.  aga.  it,  and  take  ten  men


1  Sam.  14. 41.  Saul  said  to  God,  give  a  perfect  t.

1  Chron.  6.  63.  to  sons  of  Merari  were  given  by  l.
16.  18.  to  thee  will  1  give  the  land  of  C  anaan,  the
/.  of  your  inheritance,  Psal.  105. 11 .

24.  5.  to  thee  they  were  divided  by/,  one  sort  with)

7.  now  the  first  /.  came  forth  to  Jehoiarib

25.  9.  now  the  first  /.  came  forth  for  Asaph
Esth.  3.  7-  they  cast  Pur,  that  is  /.  before  Daman
Psal.  16.  5.  portion  of  cup,  thou  maintainest  my  /.
125.  3.  shall  not  rest  on  the  /.  of  the  righteous

Prov.  I.  14.  cast  in  thy  /.  among  us,  let  us  all  hava

16.  33.  /.  is  cast  into  lap,  disposing  of  the  Lord

18.  18.  the  /.  causeth  contentions  to  cease

Isa.  17.  14.  this  is  the  /.  of  them  that  rob  us
34.  17.  and  he  hath  cast  the  /.  for  them
57.  6.  the  smooth  stones  of  the  stream  are  thy  /.
Jer.  13.  25.  this  is  thy  /.  from  me,  saith  the  Lord
Ezek.  24.  6.  bring  it  out,  let  no  /.  fall  upon  it
Dan.  12.  1.3.  shalt  stand  in  thy  /.  at  end  of  the  days
Mic.  2. 5.  shalt  have  none  that  shall  cast  a  cord  by '  1.
Luke  1.  9.  his  /.  was  to  burn  incense  w  hen  he  went
Acts  1.  26.  the  /.  tell  on  Matthias,  was  numbered

8.  21.  thou  hast  no  /.  or  part  in  this  matter
13.  19.  he  divided  their  land  to  them  by  /.

LOIS.

1  Sam.  14.42.  cast  /.  between  me  and  Jonath.  my  son,

1  Chron.  24.  31.  these  cast  /.  over  against  brethren
Mat.  27.  35.  parted  garments  casting  /.  Mark  15.  2‘L.
Acts  1.  26.  gave  forth  their  /.  lot  f  11  on  Matthias

See  Cast.

LOTHE.

Exod.  7.  18.  Egypt  shall  /.  to  drink  of  the  river
Job  -1.  16.  I  /.  it,  1  would  not  live  alway
Ezek.  6.  9.  shall  /.  themselves  for  evils  have  done
20.  43.  ye  shall  /.  yourselves  in  your  own  sight
36.  31.  ye  shall  /.  yourselves  for  sour  iniquities
LO  l  HED.

Jer.  14.  19.  hath  thy  soul  /.  Zion?  why  hast  thou
Zech.  11.8.  my  soul /.  them,  their  soul  abhorred  me
LOl  11  ETH.

Num.  21.  5. and  our  soul  /.  this  light  bread
Prov.  27-  7-  the  full  soul  /.  an  honey -comb
Lzek.  16.  45.  /.  her  husband  and  her  children
LOl  11 1  NG.

Ezek.  16. 5.  thou  wast  cast  out  to  the  /.  of  thy  person,
LOl  I  ISO  ME.

Num.  11.  20.  even  a  whole  month,  till  it  be/,  to  you.
Job  7.  5.  my  skin  is  broken  and  become  /.

Psal.  38.7-  my  loins  are  tilled  with  a  /.  disease
l,rov.  13. 5.  a  w icked  man  is  /.  and  cometh  to  shame
LOUD.

2  Chron.  30.  21.  sing  ing  w  ith  /.  instruments  to  I.ord>
Ezra  3.  13.  the  people  shouted  with  a  /.  shout
Neh.  12.  42.  the  singers  sang/,  with  Jezrahiah
Esth.  4.  1.  and  Mordecai  cried  with  a  /.  cry
Psal.  33.3.  sing  to  him,  play  skilfully  with  a  /.  noise-
98.  4.  make  a  /.  noise  and  rejoice  and  sing  praise-
150.  5.  praise  hint  cn  /.  cymbals,  praise  him

Prov.  7.  11.  she  is  /.  and  stubborn,  her  feetabide  not
Rev.  14. 18.  another  angel  cried  w  ith  a  /.  cry  to  him
LOUD,  joined  with  voice.

Gen.  39.  14.  he  came  to  me,  I  cried  with  a  /.  voice
Exod.  19.  16.  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  exceeding  /.
Deut.  27.  14.  the  I.evites  shall  speak  with  a  /.  voice
2  Sam.  15.  23.  all  the  country  wept  with  a  /.  voice

1  Kings  8.  55.  he  blessed  congregation  with  a  /.  voice

2  Chron.  15. 14.  they  sware  to  the  I  d.  with  a/,  voice

20.  19.  to  praise  Lord  with  a/,  voice,  Luke  19.37.
Ezra  3.  12.  many  w  ept  with  a/,  voice,  many  shouted

10.  12.  the  congregation  answered  with  a  /.  voice
Prov.  27.  14.  he  hlesseth  his  friend  with  a  /.  voice
Ezek.  8.  18.  and  though  they  cry  w  ith  a  /.  voice

9.  1.  he  cried  with  a  /.  voice,  saying,  cause  them
Luke  1.  42.  she  spake  out  with  a  /.  voice,  and  said

8. 28.  unclean  spirit  cried  with  a  /.  voice.  Acts  8.  7.

17.  15.  turned  back  and  with  a  /.  v.  glorified  God
Acts  14. 10.  said  with  a  /.  voice  stand  upright  on  feet

26.  24.  Eestus  said  w  ith  a  /.  v.  Paul,  thou  art  beside
Lev.  5.2.  a  strong  angel  proclaiming  w  ith  a  /.  voice

12.  many  angels  saying  with  a,/,  voice,  worthy  is-
8.  13.  angel  saying  with  a /_.  v.  woe,  woe,  14.  7,9,15,
12.  10.  and  1  heard  a  /.  voice  saying  in  heaven
LOUD  voices.

Luke  23.23.  and  they  w  ere  instant  with  /.  voices
LOUDER.

Exod.  19.  19.  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  waxed /.  and /,
LO\E

Signifies,  [1]  A  natural  passion,  inclining  us  to  de¬
light  in  an  object,  Gen.  29.  20.  [2]  A  _ gracious

principle  or  habit  wrought  in  the  soul  by  God,
which  inclines  us  to  delight  in,  esteem,  and  earnest¬
ly  desire  to  enjoy  an  interest  in  God's  favour,  and
communion  with  him  as  our  chief  good,  portion,
and  happiness,  and  the  fountain  of  all  perfection
and  excellency  ;  and  which  likewise  disposes  us  to
do  good  to  alk,  especially  to  such  as  resemble  God  cm
holiness,  and  bear  his  image,  1  John  4.  19,  21.  [3]
The  effect  of  love,  John  15.  13.  [4]  The  person,
beloved ,  Cant.  2.  2,  7.  [5]  True  friendship  or
kindness,  Prov.  15.  17.  Love  is,  (I)  Natural,
which  is  either,  lawful,  Psal.  34.  12.  or  unlawful,
John  12.  25.  2  4  im.  3.  2.  (II)  Conjugal,  which'
is,  [1]  Divine,  that  is  God's  love  to  his  peop/er
which  is  inexpressible,  John  3.  16.  Inconceivable,
Eph.  3.  19.  Everlasting,  Jer.  31.  3.  Sovereign,
Deut.  7-  8.  Free  and  undeserved,  Dos.  14.  4.
Immutable,  John  13.  1.  Complacential,  Prov.  8.

31.  Boundless  and  infinite,  1  John  4.  16.  [2]
Human,  such  is  that  between  a  husband  and  wife
lawfully  joined  in  wedlock,  Gen.  24.  67.  F.ph.  5.
25.  [3]  Idolatrous,  such  is  that  love  uhuh  idolatirs
have  for  idols  and  strange  gods,  Jer.  2.  25.  |  8.  2.
(Ill)  Parental  and  filial,  Gen.  22.  2.  |  44.  20.  1
45.  11.  (IV)  Spiritual,  as,  [1]  The  love  of  God
towards  his  children,  John  17.  23.  Rom.  5.  5,
8.  [2]  Their  love  to  God,  Psal.  116.  1.  1

John  4.  19.  [3]  CJ'  Christ,  to  his  church,  Eph.

3.  19.  I  5.  2.  [4]  To  some  particular  persons,

John  2.  2.  Gal.  2.  20.  [5]  The  love  of  be¬

lievers  towards  Christ,  Cant.  1.  4,  7-  John.

21.  15.  [6]  To  one  another,  John  15.  17.

Col.  1.  4.  [7]  Of  pastors  towards  their  people ,

291


L  O  V


LOV


LOV


1  Cor.  16.  24.  2  Cor.  2.  4.  [8]  Of  hearers

to  their  teachers,  2  Cor.  8.  7,  8.  1  lliess.  5.

13.  Tit.  3.  15.  (V.)  Carnal,  2  Sam.  13.  4.

Prov.  7.  18.  (VI.)  Wicked,  2  Chron.  19.  2.

Rev.  22.  15.  ,

Gen.  29.  20.  a  few  days  for  the  K  he  had  to  her

1  Sam.  20.  t  17.  to  swear  by  his  l.  towards  him

2  Sam.  1.  26.  wonderful,  passing  the  l.  of  women

13.  15.  the  hatred  was  greater  than  the  /.  he  had

Prov.  5.  19.  be  thou  ravished  always  with  her  /.

7i  18.  let  us  take  our  till  of  l.  till  the  morning
10. 12.  hatred  stirreth  up  strifes,  but  l.  covereth  sins
15. 17.  better  is  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  l.  is,  than

17. 9.  he  that  covereth  a  transgression  seeketh  l.
27.5.  open  rebuke  is  better  than  secret  /.

Eccl.  9.  1 .  no  man  knoweth  either  l.  or  hatred

6.  also  their  l.  and  hatred  is  now  perished
Cant.  2.  4.  and  his  banner  over  me  was  /.

5.  comfort  me  with  apples,  tor  1  am  sick  ot  l.  5.  8.

'3  10.  the  midst  thereof  being  paved  with  /.

7.  6.  how  pleasant  art.  thou,  O  l.  for  delights  !

8. 6. 1.  is  strong  as  death,  jealousy  is  cruel  as  grave

7.  many  waters  cannot  quench  l.  it  a  man  would

give  all  iiis  subs,  for  l.  it  would  be  contemned
Jer.  2.2.  I  remember  thee,  the  l.  of  thy  espousals
33.  why  trimmest  thou  thy  way  to  seek  l.  ?

12.  t  7.  1  have  given  the  l.  of  my  soul  to  enemy
31.3.  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  /.

Ezek.  16.  8.  behold,  thy  time  was  the  time  of  '

23. 11.  she  was  more  corrupt  in  her  inordinate  t.

17.  the  Babylonians  came  to  her  into  bed  ot  l.

33.  31.  with  their  mouth  they  shew  much  l.

Dan.  1.  9.  brought  Daniel  into  tender  /.  with  prince
Bos.  3. 1.  according  to  the  l.  of  Lord  toward  Israel

11.  4.  1  drew  them  with  bands  of  l.  and  cords
Mat.  24.  12.  the  l.  of  many  shall  wax  cold
John  13.  35.  if  ye  have  l.  one  to  another

15. 13.  greater  /.  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  he  lay
17.  26.  the  l.  wherewith  thou  hast  loved  me
Rom. 8.  35.  who  shall  separate  11s  from  l.  ot  Christ  r

12.  9.  let  /.  be  without  dissimulation

10.  be  kindly  affectioned  with  brotherly  /.

13.  10.  1.  worketh  no  ill,  therefore  /.  is  fulfilling

15.  30.  1  beseech  you  for  the  l.  of  the  Spirit

2  Cor.  2.  4.  that  you  may  know  the  l.  1  have  to  you

8.  that  ye  wrould  confirm  your  l.  toward  him

5.  14.  for  the  l.  of  Christ  constraineth  us

6.  6.  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  l.  unfeigned
8.  8.  and  to  prove  the  sincerity  of  your  l.

24.  shew  to  the  churches  the  proof  of  your  l.

13.  11.  and  the  God  of  l.  shall  be  with  you
Gal.  5.  6.  but  faith  which  worketh  by  l.

13.  but  brethren,  by  l.  serve  one  another
22.  but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  /.  joy,  peace
Eph.  1.  15.  after  1  heard  of  your  l.  to  all  the  saints
3. 19.  to  know  the  l.  of  Christ,  passeth  knowledge
6.  23.  and  /.  with  faith,  from  God  the  Father
Phil.  1.  9.  this  1  pray,  that  your  l.  may  abound
17.  but  the  other  ot  l.  doth  preach  Christ

2.  1.  if  there  be  therefore  any  comfort  of  l.

2.  that  ye  be  like-minded,  having  the  same  l.

Col.  1. 4.  and  of  the  l.  which  ye  have  to  all  the  saints

8.  who  declared  to  us  your  l.  in  the  Spirit

1  These.  1.  3.  remembering  your  labour  of  /.

4.  9.  touching  brotherly  /.  ye  need  not  that  1  write

5.  8.  putting  on  breast- plate  of  faith  and  /.

2  These.  2. 10.  they  received  not  the  l.  of  the  truth

1  Tim.  1.  14.  exceeding  abundant  with  faith  and  l.

6.  10.  the  l.  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil

11.  follow  after  righteousness,  1.  patience

2  Tim.  1.7.  not  given  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  l.
Philem.  9.  yet  for  /.  sake  1  rather  beseech  thee
Heb.  6.  10.  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  l.

10.  24.  to  provoke  unto  /.  and  to  good  works

13. 1.  let  brotherly  l.  continue,  entertain  strangers
1  Pet.  1.  22.  to  unfeigned  l.  of  the  brethren

1  John  2.  15.  the  I.  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him

3. 1.  behold  what  manner  of  l.  the  Father  hath
'  4.7-  let  us  love  one  another,  for  l.  is  of  God

8.  God  is  1. 1!  10.  herein  is  l.  not  that  we  loved  God
,  16.  known  the  l:  that  God  hath  to  us,  God  is  l.

17.  herein  isour  l.  made  perfect,  to  have  boldness

18.  there  is  no  fear  in  l.  perfect  l.  casteth  out  fear

2  John  6.  this  is  l.  that  we  walk  after  his  commandm.
Jude  2.  mercy  to  you,  peace  and  /.  be  multiplied
Rev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  l.

LOVE  of  God.

Luke  11.42.  ye  pass  over  judgment  and  the  /.  of  God
John  5. 42.  1  know  that  ye  have  not  l.  of  God  in  you
Rom. 5.5.  because  /.of  G.  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts
8. 39.  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  l.  of  God
2  Cor.  13. 14.  the  l.  of  G.  be  with  you  all,  amen
2  Thess.  3.  5.  direct  your  hearts  into  the  /.  of  God
Tit.  3.  4.  after  the  kindness  and  l.  of  God  appeared
1  John  2.  5.  in  him  verily  is  the  l.  of  God  perfected

3.  16.  hereby  perceive  we  l.  of  G.  because  he  laid
17.  how  dwelleth  the  l.  of  God  in  him  ?

4.  9.  in  this  was  manifested  the  l.  of  God  towards  us

5.  3.  this  is  l.  of  God  that  we  keep  his  commandm.
Jude  21.  keep  yourselves  in  the  l.  of  God,  looking  tor

His  LOVE.

Deut.  7-7-  Lord  did  not  set  his  l.  upon  you,  because
Psal.  91.  14.  because  he  hath  set  his  l.  upon  me
Isa.  63. 9.  in  his  l.  and  in  his  pity  he  redeemed  them
Zeph.  3.  17.  he  will  rest  in  his  l.  he  will  joy  over
John  15. 10. 1  kept  commandments,  and  abide  in  h.  I
Rom.  5.  8.  but  God  commended  his  l.  toward  us
1  John  4. 12.  if  love  one  another  his  l.  is  perfected
In  LOVE.

1  Kings  11.  2.  Solomon  clave  unto  these  m  l.

Isa.  38. 17 -hast  ini.  to  my  soul  delivered  it  from  pit

1  Cor.  4.21.  shall  I  come  to  you  with  a  rod  or  in  l.  *

2  Cor.  8. 7-  as  ye  abound  in  your  l.  to  us,  see  that
Eph.  1.4.weshould  be  without  blame  before  him  in  l

3. 17.  that  ye  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  l.

4.  2.  in  meekness,  forbearing  one  another  in  l.

15.  but  speaking  the  truth  in  l.  may  grow  up  to

16.  maketh  increase  to  the  edifying  of  itself  in  l.

.  5.  2.  walk  in  l.  as  Christ  hath  loved  us.and  given
C<»/.2.2.  hearts  be  comforted,  being  knit  together  in  l.
1  Thess.  3.  12.  the  Lord  make  you  to  increase  i-n  l.

5.  13.  esteem  them  highly  in  l.  for  work’s  sake

292


2  Tim.  1.  13.  in  faith  and  l.  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus

1  John  4.  16.  he  thatdwelleth  in  l.  dwelleth  in  God
18.  no  fear  in  l.  that  feareth  not  made  perfect  ml.

2  John  3.  J  esus  the  Son  of  the  Father  in  truth  and  l.

My  LOVE.

Psal.  109.  4.  f6r  my  l.  they  are  my  adversaries
5.  they  have  rewarded  me  hatred  for  my  l.

Cant.  1.9.  I  have  compared  thee,  O  my  l.  to  horses
15.  behold,  thou  art  fair,  my  l.  thou  art  fair,  4.  1.
2.  2.  as  lily,  so  is  my  l.  among  the  daughters
7.  nor  awake  my  l.  till  he  please,  3.  5.  1  8.  4.

10.  rise  up,m.  /.  13. 1!  5.2.  open  to  me,  m.  /.my  dove
4.  7.  art  all  fair,  my  l.  there  is  no  spot  in  thee
6.  4.  thou  art  beautiful,  O  my  l.  as  '1  irzah
John  15.  9.  continue  ye  in  my  l.  II 10.  abide  in  my  l.

1  Cor.  16.  24.  my  l.  be  with  you  all,  in  Christ  Jesus

Thy  LOVE.  .

2  Sam.  1.  26.  thy  l.  was  wonderful,  passing  the  love
Cant.  1.  2.  for  thy  l.  is  better  than  wine,  4.,  10.

4.  we  will  remember  thy  l.  more  than  wine
4.  10.  how'  fair  is  thy  l.  my  sister,  my  spouse
Philem.  5.  hearingof  thy  l.  and  faith  towards  Jesus
we  have  irreat  joy  and  consolation  in  thy  /.


Rev.  2.  4.  because  thou  hast,  left  thy  first  l.

LOVE,  Verb.

Lev.  19.  18.  thou  shalt  l.  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,
34.  Mat.  19.  19.  I  22.  39.  Mark  12.  31.
Deut.  6.  5.  thou  shalt  l.  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all
thy  heart,  10.  12.  I  11.  1,  13, '22.  |  19-  9. 1  30.  6.

7.  9.  he  is  God,  the  faithful  God,  which  keepeth

covenant  with  them  that  l.  him,  Dan.  9.  4.

13.  he  will  /.  thee,  bless  thee,  and  multiply  thee

10. 15.  Lord  had  a  delight  in  thy  fathers  to  l.  them
19. 1.  therefore  the  stranger,  for  ye  were  strangers

13.  3.  to  know  whether  ye  l.  the  Lord  your  God

30. 16.  in  that  1  command  thee  to/.  Lord  thy  God
20.  that  thou  mayest  /.  the  1..  and  obey  his  voice

Josh.  22.  5.  take  heed  to  /.  the  L.  your  God,  23. 11.
Judg.  5.  31.  let  them  that  /.  him  be  as  the  sun

1  Sam.  18.  22.  and  all  the  king’s  servants  /.  thee

2  Chr.  19.  2.  shouldest  thou  /.  them  that  hate  Lord  ?
Neb.  1. 5.  God  keepeth  mercy  for  them  that  /.  him
Psal.  4.  2.  O  ye  sons,  how  long  will  ye  /.  vanity  ?

5. 11.  let  them  that  /.  thy  name  be  joyful  m  thee
18.  1.  1  will  /.  thee,  O  Lord,  my  strength
31.  23.  O  /.  the  Imrd,  all  ye  saints,  Lord  preserves
40.  16.  let  such  as  /.  thy  salvation  say,  70.  4.

69.  36.  they  that  /.  his  name  shall  dwell  there
97.  10.  ye  that  /.  the  Lord  hate  evil,  he  preserves
1 19.  132.  usest  to  do  to  those  that  /.  thy  name
165.  great  peace  have  they  who  /.  thy  law
122.  6!  they  shall  prosper  that  /.  thee
145.  20.  the  Lord  preserveth  them  that  /.  him
Prov.  1 .22.  how  long,  ye  simple,  will  ye  /.  simplicity.
4.  6.  /.  wisdom,  and  she  shall  keep  thee

8.  36.  all  they  that  hate  me,  /.  death

9.  8.  rebuke  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  /.  thee
16.  13.  kings  /.  him  that  speaketh  right
18.  21.  they  that  /.  it  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof

Eccl.  3.  8.  a  time  to  /.  and  a  time  to  hate
Cant.  1.  3.  therefore  do  the  virgins  /.  thee

4.  thy  love  more  than  wine,  the  upright  /.  thee
Isa.  56.  6  to  serve  and  /.  the  name  of  the  Lord

61.  8.  I  the  Lord  /.judgment,  l  hate  robbery
66.  10.  be  glad  with  Jerusalem  all  ye  that  /.  her
Jer.  5.  31.  and  my  people  /.  to  have  it  so
Bos.  3. 1.  /.  a  woman  beloved,  /.  flagons  ot  wine
4. 18.  her  rulers  with  shame,  do  /.  give  ye
9.  15.  drive  them  out,  I  will  /.  them  no  more

14.  4.  I  will  /.  them  freely,  for  mine  anger  turned
Amos  4.  +  5.  publish  ve  free-oflferings,  so  ye  /.

5.  15.  hate  the  evil,  and  /.  the  good,  establish
Mic.  3.  2.  who  hate  the  good,  and  /.  the  evil

6.  8.  but  to  /.  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly
Zech.  8.  17.  /.no  false  oath  ||  19-  l.  the  truth
Mat.  5.  43.  it  hath  been  said,  /.  thy  neighbour^

44.  but  I  say,  /.  your  enemies,  Luke  6.  27,  35.

46.  if  ye  /.  them  which  /.  you,  Luke  6.  32.

6.  5.  they  /.  to  pray  standing  in  the  synagogues
24.  hate  the  one,  and  /.  the  other,  Luke  16.  13.

22.  37.  thou  shalt  /.  the  I.ord  thy  God  with  all  thy
heart,  Mark  12.  30,  33.  Luke  10.  27.

23.  6.  and  l.  the  uppermost  rooms  at  feasts
Mark  12.  38.  scribes  who  /.  to  go  in  long  clothing
Luke  7.  42.  which  of  them  will  /.  him  most

11.  43.  ye  /.  greetings  in  the  markets,  20.  46.

John  14.  21.  I  will  /.  him,  and  manifest  myself
23.  if  a  man  /.  me,  my  Father  will  /.  him
15. 12.  commandment  that  ye  /.  one  another,  17
19.  if  were  of  world,  the  world  would  /.  his  own
Rom.  8.  28.  all  things  work  for  good  to  them  /.  God
13.  8.  owe  nothing  to  any,  but  to  /.  one  another
9.  in  this  saving',  thou  shalt  /.  thy  neighbour  as
thyself.  Gal.  5.  14.  Jam.  2.  8.
1  Cor.  2.  9.  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  /.  him
8.  3.  if  any  man  /.  God,  the  same  is  known  of  him
Eph.  5.  25.  hush.  /.  your  wives  as  Christ  loved  the
church,  and  gave  himself,  28,  33.  Col.  3.  19
6  24.  grace  be  with  all  them  that  /.  our  Lord  Jesus

1  Thess.  4.  9.  ye  are  taught  of  God  to  /.  one  another

2  Tim.  4.  8.  but  to  all  them  that/,  his  appearing
Tit.  2.  4.  teach  young  women  to  /.  their  husbands
3.  15.  greet  them  that  /.  us  in  the  faith

Jam.  1.  12.  Lord  promised  to  them  that  /.  him,  2.  5.
1  Pet.  1.  8.  whom  having  not  seen  ye  /.  in  whom

22.  see  ye  l.  one  another  with  a  pure  heart

2.  17.  honour  all  men,  /.the  brotherhood

3.  8.  /.  as  brethren  |1  10.  he  that  will  /.  life

1  John  2. 15.  /.  not  the  world,  it  any  man  /.  the  world

3.  11.  message  ve  heard  from  the  beginning  that,  we

should  /.  one  another,  4.  7,  H.  2  John  5
14.  from  death  to  life,  because  we  /.  the  brethren

23.  /.  one  another,  as  he  gave  commandment

4.  12.  if  we  /.  one  another, 1 '  od  dwelleth  in  us

19.  we  /.  him,  because  first  loved  us

20.  how  can  he  /.  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?

21  he  who  loveth  God,  /.  his  brother  also

5.  2.  we  /.  the  children  of  God  when  we  /.  God

I  LOVE.

Gen.  27.  4.  make  me  savoury  meat,  such  as  1  /.
Exod.  21 . 5.  if  servant  shall  say,  1 1.  my  master
Judy.  16. 15.  how  canstthou  say,  II.  thee,  when


2  Sam.  13.4. 1 1.  Tamar  my  brother  Absalom’s  siste-
Psal.  116.  1 .11.  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  hearo
119.  97.  O  how  II.  thy  law  ||  113.  thy  law  I  /.  11)3
119.  therefore  1  l.  thy  testimonies
127.  therefore  /  /.  thy  commands  above  gold
159.  consider  how  7  /.  thy  precepts,  quicken  me
167.  thy  testimonies  1.  I  exceedingly
Prov.  8.  17.  I  /■  them  that  love  me,  and  those  that
John  14.  31.  world  may  know  that  1 1.  the  Father  .
21.  15.  Lord,  thou  knowest  that  7  /.  thee,  16,  17.

2  Cor.  12.  15.  though  the  more  1  /.you,  the  less  i  be

1  John  4.  20.  if  a  man  say,  7  /.  God,  and  hatetli

2  John  1.  whom  7  /.  in  the  truth,  3  John  1.

Rev.  3.  19.  as  many  as  1  l.  I  rebuke  and  chasten

LOVE  me.

Gen.  29.  32.  now  therefore  my  husband  will  /.  me
Exod.  20.6.  shewing  mercy  to  them  /.  me,  Deut. 5.10.
Prov. 8.17.  I  love  them  that  /.  me,  and  those  that  seek
21.  cause  those  that  /.  me  to  inherit  substance
Jc/iw8.42.  if  God  were  your  Father  you  would/,  me

10.  17.  therefore  doth  my  Father  /.  me,  because

14.  15.  if  ye  /.  me,  keep  my  commandments

23.  if  a  man  /.  me,  he  will  keep  my  words
LOVE  710 1.

Prov.  20. 13.  /.  norsleep,  lest  thou  come  to  poverty

1  Cor.  16.  22.  if  any  man  /.  not  the  L.  J  esus  Christ

2  Cor.  11. 11.  because  1  /.  you  not  ?  God  knoweth
l/o/m  2.15.  /.  not  the  world  ||  3. 18.  let  us  not  /.in  word

LOVED.

Gen.  24.  67.  Isaac  took  Rebekah  to  wife,  and  /.her
25.  28.  Isaac/.  Esau,  but  Rebekah  /.  Jacob
27.  14.  his  mother  made  such  as  his  father  /.

29.  18.  Jacob  /.  Rachel  more  than  Leah,  30,

34.  3.  Shechem  /.  Dinah,  and  spake  kindlv  to  her
37.  3.  lsr.  /.  Joseph  more  than  all  his  children,  4.
Deut.  4.  37.  and  because  he  /.  thy  fathers,  therefore
*.  8.  but  because  the  Lord  /.  you,  23.  5. 1  33.  3.
Judg.  16.  4.  Samson  /.  a  worn,  in  the  valley  of  Sorek

1  Sam.  1.  5.  Elkanah  /.  Hannah  ||16.  21.  Saul/.  Dav.
18.  1.  Jonathan  /.  Dav.  as  his  own  soul,  3.  1  20.  17.

16.  Israel  and  Judah  /.  David,  because  he  went
20.  and  Miclial,  Saul’s  daughter,  /.  David

2  Sam.  12.24.  Lord  /.  Solomon,  and  he  sent  Nathan

13.  1.  Amnon,  the  son  of  David,  /.  Tamar

15.  hatred  greater  than  love  wherewith  he  /.  her

1  Kings  3.  3.  Solomon  /.  the  L.  walking  in  statutes

10.9.  because  the  Lord  /.  Israel,  2  Chron.  9.8.

11.  1.  king  Solomon  /.  many  strange  women

2  Chron.  2.  11.  the  Ix>rd  /.  his  people,  Isa.  48.  14,
11. 21.  Rehoboam  /.  Maacah  above  all  his  wives

26. 10.  Uzziah  had  husbandmen,  he  /.  husbandry
Esth.  2.  17.  the  king  /.  Esther  above  all  the  women
Job  19. 19.  they  whom  1  /.  are  turned  against  me
Psal.  47.  4.  the  excellency  of  Jacob  whom  he  /.

78.  68.  but  chose  the  mount  Zion  which  he  /.

109.  17.  as  he  /.  cursing,  so  let  it  come  to  him

Isa.  38.  1 17.  but  thou  hast  /.  me  from  the  pit
Jer.  8.  2.  all  the  host  of  heaven  whom  they  have  /.

14.  10.  thus  have  they  l.  to  wander,  they  have  not
Esek.  16.37.  I  wiH  gather  all  them  that  thou  hast  /.
Bos.  9.  1.  thou  hast  /.  a  reward  on  every  corn  floor

10.  their  abominations  were  according  as  they  /.

11.1.  when  Israel  was  a  child,  then  l  /.  him
Mai.  1.  2.  yet  ye  say,  wherein  hast  thou  /.  usr
2.  11.  Judah  profaned  holiness  of  Lord  which  lie/.
Mark  10.  21.  then  Jesus  beholding  him,  /.  him
Luke 7.  47.  many  sins  are  forgiven,  for  she/,  much
John  3.  16.  God  so  /.  the  world  ||  19.  /.  darkness

11.  5.  Jesus  /.  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  Lazarus
36.  then  said  the  Jews,  behold  how  he  /.  him

12.  43.  for  they  /.  praise  of  men  more  than  praise

13.  1.  having  l.  his  own,  he  /.  them  to  the  end
23.  disciple  whom  Jesus  /.  19.26. 1  20.2. 1  21.7.20.1

14.  21.  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  /.  cf  my  Father,
28.  if  ye  /.me,  ye  would  rejoice, because  1  go  to  my

15.  9.  as  the  Father  /.  me,  so  have  1  /.  you
16. 27.  Father  himself  loveth  you,  because  ye  /.  me>

17.  23.  and  hast  /.  them,  as  thou  hast  /.  me
26.1ove  wherewdth  thou  hast  /.  me,  may  be  in  them

Rom08.3"i.  more  than  conquerors  thro’  him  that  /.  us
2  Cor.  12. 15.  the  more  1  love  you,  the  less  I  be  /.
Gal.  2.  20.  who  /.  me,  and  gave  himself  tor  me
Eph.  2.  4.  for  his  great  love  wherewith  he  /.  us
5. 2.  as  Christ  also  /.  us  ||  25.  Christ  /.  the  church
2  Thess.  2.  16.  God  our  Father,  which  hath  /.  us
2  Tim.  4.  10.  Demas  having  /.  this  present  world
Heb.  1.  9.  bast  /.  righteousness,  and  hated  iniquity
2  Pet.  2. 15.  Balaam  /.  the  wages  of  unrighteousness

1  John  4.  10.  not  that  we  /.  God,  but  that  he  /.  us
11.  if  God  so  /.  us  ||  19.  because  he  first/,  us

Rev.  1. 5.  to  him  that  /.  us  and  washed  us  from  sun;

12.  11.  they  /.  not  their  lives  to  the  death
7  have  LOVED.

Psal.  26.  8.  7  have  l.  the  habitation  of  thy  house
119.47.  delight  in  thy  commands  which  7  h.  1.  4h
Isa.  43.  4.  7  have  l.  thee,  therefore  will  I  give  met;
Jer. 2.25.  7  have  l.  strangers,  and  after  them  will  1  g
31.  3.  7  have  l.  thee  with  an  everlasting  love  (
Mai.  1.2. 7  have  /.  you,  yet  ye  say,  wherein  hast  mov
John  13.  34.  as  I  have  l.  you,  that  ye  also  love.  G  1-

15.  9.  as  the  Father  loved  me,  so  7  have  l.  you
Rom.  9. 13.  as  it  is  written,  Jacob  7  have  l.  but  Esa
Rev.  3.  9.  1  will  make  them  know  that  I  have!  the
LOV  ED  ST.

Isa.  57.  8.  thou  /.  their  bed  where  thou  sawest  it
John  17.24.  thou  /,  me  before  foundation  ot  wort
LOVELY.  .  .

2  Sam.  1. 23.  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  /.  in  their  lrv<
Cant.  5.16.  he  is  altogether  1.0  daughters  of  Jerusa
Ezek.  33.  32.  thou  art  to  them  as  a  very  /.  song
Phil.  4.  8.  whatsoever  things  are  /.  think  on  tlies*

LOV  FR.

1  Kings  5. 1.  for  Hiram  was  ever  a  /.  of  David
P.

Tit


Jer.  3.  1.  thou  hast  played  the  harlot  with  many  ,
4.  30.  thy  /.  will  despise  thee,  they  will  seek Any
22.  20.  go  up  and  cry,  for  all  thy  /.  are  destroys
22.  thy  /.  shall  go  into  captivity,  shalt  be  asnan
30.  14.  all  thy  /.  have  forgotten  thee,  they  sees


L  O  W


L  US


LIE


m.  1.2.  among  all  her  /.  hath  none  tp  comfort  her
ij.  I  called  tor  my  /.  but  they  deceived  me
,  'k.  1(3-  S3,  thou  gi vest  thy  gifts  to  all  thy  /.
o.  thy  nakedness  discovered  with  thy  /.  and  idols
7*.  1  will  gather  thy  /.  ||  23.  5.  doted  on  her  /.

1.  O.  1  have  delivered  her  into  the  hand  of  her  l.

2.  behold,  1  will  raise  up  thy  /.  against  thee
2.5.  I  "ill  go  after  mv  l.  ji7.  shall  follow  her  /.

1 1*  I  will  discover  her  lewdnessin  the  sight  of  /.
2.  these  rewards  that  my  l.  have  given  me
3*  an<i  she  went  after  her  /.  and  forgat  me
9.  are  gone  up  to  Assyria,  Ephraim  hath  hired  /.
ft m.  3.  2.  for  men  shall  be  l.  of  their  own  selves
i  heady,  l.  of  pleasures  more  than/,  of  God
LOVES.

•07..  7 ;  18  come,  let  us  solace  ourselves  with  /.

, it.  7.  12.  there  will  I  give  thee  my  /.

LOVEST.


?».  22.  2.  take  thine  only  son  Isaac  whom  thou  /.
/hi.  14.  16.  thou  dost  but  hate  me,  and  /.me  not
, am.  19. 6.  in  that  thou  /.  thine  enemies,  and  hatest
al.  45.  7-  thou  /.  righteousness,  therefore  God  thy

2.  3.  thou  /.  evil  more  than  good,  and  lying

l.thou  /.  all  devouring  words,  O  thou  deceitful
cl.  9.  9.  live  joyfully  with  the  wife  whom  thou/.
hn  11.3.  behold,  he  whom  thou  /.  is  sick

1.  15.  Simon,  son  of  .lonas. /.  thou  me?  16.  17-

LOVETH.

in.  27.  9.  make  meat  for  thy  father,  such  as  he  /.

4.  20.  a  child,  a  little  one,  and  his  father  /.  him
cut.  10. 18.  Lord  /.  the  stranger  in  giving  him  food

5.  16.  1  will  not  go  away  because  he  /.  thee
nth  A.  15.  for  thy  daughter-in-law  who  /.  thee
sal.  11.  5.  and  him  that  /.  violence  his  soul  liateth
7.  for  the  righteous  Lord  /.  righteousness,  33.  5.

4.  12.  what  man  is  he  that  /.  many  days  <

7.  28.  for  the  Lord  /.judgment,  99.  4.

7. 2.  the  Ld.  /.  gates  of  Zion  more  than  dwellings
19.140.  word  is  very  pure,  therefore  thy  serv.  /.
46.8.  Lord  openeth  trie  eyes,  Ld.  /.  the  righteous
rep. 3.  12.  for  whom  the  Lord  /.  he  correcteth

2.  1. whoso/,  instruction,  /.  knowledge

3.  24.  but  he  that  /.  him,  chasteneth  him  betimes

5.  9.  he  /.  him  that  followeth  after  righteousness

12.  a  seorner  /.  not  one  that  reproveth  him

7. 17.  a  friend  /.  at  all  times,  and  a  brother  is  horn
19.  /.  transgression  that  /.  strife,  he  that  exalteth

9.  8.  lie  that  getteth  wisdom  /.  his  own  soul

1.  17.  he  that 7.  pleasure,  he  that  /.  wine  and  oil

2.  11.  he  that  /.  pureness  of  heart,  the  king  his

9.  3.  whoso  /.  wisdom  rejoice.th  his  father

ccl.  5.  10.  he  that  /.  silver,  he  that  /.  abundance
ant.  1.  7-  tell  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  /.  where
.  1.  by  nightonmy  bed  1  sought  him  whom  soul  /.

2.  d  will  arise  and  seek  him  whom  my  soul  /.

3.  to  whom  1  said,  saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  l.?

4.  1  found  him  whom  my  soul  /.  1  held  him

1 a.  1. 23.  every  one  /.gifts  and  follows  after  rewards
los.  10.  11.  Ephraim  as  heifer  /.  to  tread  out  corn
2. 7.  he  is  a  merchant,  he  /.  to  oppress
l at.  10.  37.  that  /.  father  or  mother,  he  that  /.  son
uke 7.  5.  he  /.  our  nation |1  47.  the  same/,  little
35.  the  Father  /.  the  Son,  hath  given,  5.  20.
:2. 25.  he  that  /.  his  life  shall  lose  it

i4.  21.  that  hath  my  commandments,  he  it  is  that  /.
me,  and  he  that/,  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Fath.

24.  he  that  /.  me  not,  keepeth  not  my  sayings
6. 27.  the  Father  himself  l.  you,  because  loved  me
’om.  13.  8.  he  that  /.  another  hath  fulfilled  the  law
Cor.  9.7-  01  of  necessity,  for  G- /.a  cheerful  giver
,ph.  5.  28.  he  that  /.  his  wife,  /.  himself
lei.  12.  6.  for  whom  the  Lord  /.  he  chasteneth
John  2. 10.  he  that  /.  his  brother,  abideth  in  light

5.  10.  he  that  /.  not  brother,  is  not  of  God

14./.  not  his  brother,  abideth  in  death,  4.  8,  20.

1.  7.  every  one  that/,  is  born  of  God,  and  knows  G.
21.  that  he  who  /.  God,  /.  his  brother  also
3.1.  that  /.  him  that  begat,/,  him  that  is  begotten
John  9.  Iliotrephes  /.  to  have  the  pre-eminence
lev.  22.  15.  and  whosoever  /.  and  maketh  a  lie
LOV1MG.


Ham.  19.  t  6.  by  /.  thine  enemies,  hating  friends
*rov.  5.  19.  let  her  be  as  the  /.  hind  and  pleasant  roe
22.  1.  and  /.  favour  rather  than  silver  and  gold
sa.  56. 10.  sleeping,  lying  down,  /.  to  slumber
See  Kindness, Kindnesses.


LOW.


lent.  28.  43.  and  thou  shalt  come  down  very  /.
udg.  1. 19.  the  Canaanite  that  dwelt  in  /.countries
Ham. .2.  7-  the  Lord  bringeth  /.  and  lifteth  up
Chron.  9. 27.  as  sycamore-trees  in  the  /.  plains
26.  10.  Uzziah  had  much  cattle  in  the  /.  country

28.  18.  Philistines  invaded  cities  of  the  /.  country
oh  5.  11.  to  set  up  on  high  those  that  be  /.

22.  +  29.  he  shall  save  him  that  hath  /.  eyes

40. 12.  look  on  every  one  proud,  and  bring  him  /.
Jsal.  49.  2.  both  high  and  /.  rich  and  poor  together
62.  9.  surely  men  of  /.  degree  are  vanity
136.23.  who  remembered  us  in  our  /.  estate
irov.  29.  23.  a  man’s  pride  shall  bring  him  /.

-ccl.  10.  6.  and  the  rich  sit  in  /.  place
12.  4.  when  the  sound  of  the  grinding  is  /.

13. 11.  1  will  lay  /.  the  haughtiness  of  terrible

25.  12.  the  high  fort  of  thy  walls  shall  he  lay  /.

26.  5.  the  lofty  city  he  layeth  it  /.  to  the  ground
29.4.  thy  speech  shall  be  /.  out  of  the  dust

32. 19.  and  the  city  shall  be  /.  in  a  /.  place

■am.  3.  55.  1  called  on  thy  name  out  of/,  dungeon
-sek.  17.  6.  it  became  aspreading  vine  of  /.  stature
24.  trees  shall  know  that  1  have  exalted  the  /.  tree
21.26.  exalt  him  that  is  /.  abase  him  that  is  high

26. 20.  shall  set  thee  in  the  /.  parts  of  the  earth

29.  t  14.  and  they  shall  be  there  a  /.  kingdom
■uke  1.  48.  he  regarded  /.  estate  of  his  handmaiden

32.  he  hath  exalted  them  of  /.  degree

j«>n.  12.  16.  but  condescend  to  men  of/,  estate

1.  9.  let  the  brother  of  /.  degree  rejoice

10.  but  the  rich  in  that  he  is  made  /.

See  Brought.

LOW  EH  parts  of  the  earth
signify,  [1]  T/te  valleys,  Isa.  44.  23.  [2]  The

state  oj  the  dead ,  Psal.  63.  9.  [3]  The  mother's


■womb,  Psal.  139.  15.  [4]  The  earth,  as  the  lowest
part  of  the  visible  world,  or  the  grave  and  state  of
the  dead,  Eph.  4.  9.

LOWER.

Gen.  6. 16.  with  /.  second  and  third  stories  make  ark
Lev.  13.  20.  if  rising  be  in  sight  /.  than  the  skin
21.  and  if  it  be  no  /.  than  the  skin,  26.

Neh.  4.  13.  therefore  1  set  in  the  /.  places  the  people
Job  12.  t  3.  1  fall  not  /.  than  you
Psal.  8.  5.  made  him  little  /.  than  angels,  Heb.  2.7, 9.
63.  9.  shall  go  into  the  /.  parts  of  the  earth
Prov.  25.  7.  shouldest  be  put  /.  in  presence  of  prince
Isa.  22.  9.  ye  gathered  the  waters  of  the  /.  pool
44.  23.  sing,  O  heavens,  shout  ye  /.  parts  of'  earth
Ezek.  43.  14.  from  the  bottom  even  to  the  /.  settle
Eph.  4.  9-  that  he  descended  first  into  the  /.  parts
LOWEST.

Dent.  32.  22.  and  shall  burn  to  the  /.  hell.

1  Kings  12.  31.  made  priests  /.  13.  33. 2  Kings  17. 32.
Psal.  86. 13.  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the  /.  hell
88.  6.  thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  /.  pit,  in  darkness
139.  15.  curiously  wrought  in  the  /.  parts  of  earth
Ezek.  41.  7-  and  so  increased  from  the  /.  chamber
42.  6.  the  building  was  straitened  more  than  the  /.
Luke  14.  9.  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take  /.  room

10.  but  go  and  sit  down  in  the  /.  room

LOWE  111.

Job  6.  5.  wild  ass  brav,  or  /.  the  ox  over  his  fodder  ?
LOW  IMG.

1  Sam.  6.  12.  the  kine  went  along  the  high-way  /.

15.  14.  what  meaneth  then  the  /.  of  the  oxen  ?

LOWLY.

Psal.  138.  6.  Lord  high,  yet  hath  he  respect  to  /.
Prov.  3.  34.  the  scorners,  but  he  giveth  grace  to  /.

11.  2.  then  cometh  shame,  but  with  /.  is  wisdom

16.  19-  better  to  be  of  humble  spirit  with  the  /.
Zech.  9.  9.  he  is  just,  /.  and  riding  on  an  ass
Mat.  11.  29.  learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  /.

LOW  LIM  ESS.

Eph.  4.  2.  that  ye  walk  with  all  /.  and  meekness
Phil.  2.  3.  but  in  /.  of  mind,  let  each  esteem  other
LOW  R  IMG.

Mat.  16.  3.  foul  weather,  for  the  sky'  is  red  and  /.
LUCRE.

1  Sam.  8.  3.  Samuel’s  sons  turned  after  /.  took  bribes
1  Tim.  3.  3.  a  bishop  not  greedy  of  filthy  /.  8.

Tit.  1.  7.  a  bishop  must  not  be  given  to  filthy  /.

11.  teaching  things  they  ought  not  for  filthy  /.

1  Pet.  5.  2.  feed  flock  not  for  filthy  /.  but  ready  mind

LUKEWARM.

Rev.  3.  16.  so  then  because  thou  art  /.

LUMP.

2  Kings  20.  7.  take  a  /.  of  figs  and  lay,  Isa.  38.  21.
Bom.  9.  21.  of  the  same  /.  one  vessel  to  honour

11.  16.  if  the  first  fruit  be  holy  the  /.  is  holy
1  Cor.  5.  6.  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  /.  Gal.  5.  9.
7.  purge  out  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new  /.
LUMPS.

1  Sam.  25.  t  18.  Abigail  took  100  /.  of  raisins
LUMATIC.

Mat.  4.  24.  and  those  which  were  /.  he  healed

17.  15.  Lord  have  mercy  on  my  son,  for  he  is  /.

LURK.

Prov.  1.  11.  come,  let  us  /.  privily  for  the  innocent

18.  they  /.  privily  for  their  own  lives
LURK1MG.

1  Sam.  23.  23.  take  knowledge  of  all  the  /.  places
Psal.  10.  8.  he  sitteth  in  the  /.  places  of  the  villages

17. 12.  as  it  were  a  young  lion  /.  in  secret  places

LUST

Sign  es,  [1]  Concupiscence,  or  unlawful  carnal
passion  and  desire,  1  Pet.  2.  11.  2  Pet.  2.  10.  [2]
That  original  corruption  which  inclines  man  to
sin  and  evil,  .lam.  1.  14,  15.  2  Pet.  1.4.  [3]  The
desiring  of  lawful  things  to  support  and  satisfy
nature,  Deut.  12.  15,  20,  21.  [4]  The  coveting
things  forbidden,  1  Cor.  10.  6.  [5]  Corrupt  and
inordinate  desires  and  affections,  1  Pet.  4.  2.

The  Spirit  lusteth  against  the  flesh,  Gal.  5.  17;  The
Spirit  of  God  stirs  up  motions  and  desires  in  the
saints  contrary  to  those  of  the  flesh,  or  unrenewed
part  in  man,  and  inclines  them  to  desire  and
endeavour  the  utter  destruction  of  it.

Exod.  15.  9.  my  /.  shall  be  satisfied  on  them
Num.  11.  t  4.  the  mixed  multitude  lusted  a  /.

+  34.  he  called  the  place  the  graves  of  /.

33.  +  16.  and  they  pitched  at  the  grave  of  /.

Ps.  78.’  18.  tempted  God  by  asking  meat  for  their  /.

30.  they  were  not  estranged  from  their  /.

81.  12.  I  gave  them  up  to  their  own  hearts’  /.
Rom.  1.  27.  burned  in  their  /.  one  toward  another
7.  7.  1  had  not  known  /.  except  the  law  had  said
Gal.  5. 16.  walk  in  Spirit,  ye  shall  not  fulfil  /.  of  flesh

1  Thess.  4.  5.  not  in  /.  of  concupiscence  as  Gentiles
Jam.  1.  14.  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  of  his  own  /.

15.  when  /.  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin

2  Pet.  1 .4.  escaped  corruption  that  is  in  world  thro’  /.

2.  10.  that  walk  after  flesh  in  the  /.  of  uncleanness

1  John  2.  16.  the  /.  of  the  flesh,  the  /.  of  the  eye

17.  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  /.  thereof
LUST,  Verb.

Prov.  6.  25.  /.  not  after  her  beauty  in  thy  heart
Mat.  5. 28.  whoso  looketh  on  a  woman  to  /.  after  her
1  Cor.  10.  6.  not  /.after  evil  things  as  they  also  lusted
Jam.  4.  2.  ye  /.  and  have  not,  ye  kill  and  desire  to
LUSTED.

Sum.  11.  34.  there  they  buried  the  people  that  /.
Ps.  106. 14.  but  they  /.exceedingly  in  the  wilderness
1  Cor.  10.  6.  we  should  not  lust  as  they  also  /.

Rev.  18.  14.  fruits  thy  soul  /.  after  are  departed
LUSTETH.

Deut.  12. 15.  what  thy  soul  /.  after,  20,  21.  I  14.  26.
(lal.  5. 17.  the  flesh  /.  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spi.
Jam.  4.  5.  the  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  /.  to  envy
LUST  I  MG.

Num.  11.  4.  and  the  mixed  multitude  fell  a  /.
LUSTS.

Mark  4.  19.  the  /.  of  other  things  choke  the  word
John  8.  44.  and  the  /.  of  your  father  ye  will  do
Rom.  1.  24.  God  gave  them  up  to  uncleanness  thro’  /.

6. 12.  that  you  should  obey  "it  in  the  /.  thereof

13.  14.  make  no  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  /.


Gal. 5. 24.  that  are  Christ’s  have  crucified  flesh  with/
Eph.  2.  3.  had  our  conversation  in  the  /.  of  the  flesh

4.  22.  vvhich  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  /.

1  Tim.  6. 9.  will  be  rich  fall  into  foolish  and  hurtful  /.

2  Tim.  2.  22.  flee  youthful  /.  but  follow  righteousn.

3.  6.  lead  captive  silly  women  led  away  w  ith  /.

4.  3.  after  their  own  /.  shall  they  heap  teachers
Tit.  2.  12.  teaching  us  that  denying  worldly  /.

3.  3.  were  disobedient,  serving  divers  /.  and  pleas.
Jam.  4.  1.  come  they  not  hence,  even  of  your  /.  f

3.  ye  ask  that  ye  may  consume  b  on  void-  /,

1  Pet.  1. 14.  not  fashioning  according  to  former  /.

2.  11.  beseech  you  abstain  from  fleshly  /.  that  war

4.  2.  that  he  no  longer  should  live  to  the  /.  of  men

3.  when  we  walked  in  lasciviousness,  /.  excess  of

2  Pet.  2.  18.  they  allure  through  the  /.  of  the  flesh

3.  3.  shall  come  scoflers,  walking  after  their  own  /.
Jude  16.  murmurers,  complainers,  walking  after  /.

18.  who  should  walk  after  their  own  ungodly  /.

LUSTY.

Judg.  3.  29.  they  slew  of  Moab  10,000  men,  all  /.
LYAR,  or  LIAR.

Job  24.  25.  if  it  be  not  so,  who  will  make  me  a  /.  ?
Prov.  17.  4.  a/,  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty  tongue

19.  22.  and  a  poor  man  is  better  than  a  /.

30.  6.  lest  he  reprove  thee,  and  thou  be  found  a  /.
Jer.  15.  18.  wilt  thou  be  altogether  to  me  as  a  /.
John  8.  44.  for  he  is  a  /.  and  the  father  of  it
55.  if  1  say,  1  know  him  not,  I  shall  be  a  /.  like  to
Rom.  3.  4.  let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  /.

1  John  1.  10.  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make  him  a/.

2.  4.  keepeth  not  his  commandments  is  a  /.  4.  20.
22,  who  is  a  /.  but  he  that  denieth  .1  esus  is  Christ

5.  10.  that  believeth  not  God,  hath  made  him  a  /

LIARS.

Deut.  33.  29.  thine  enemies  shall  be  found  /.to  thee
Psal.  116.  11. 1  said  in  my  haste,  all  men  are  /.

Isa.  44.  25.  that  frustrateth  the  tokens  of  the  /.

Jer.  50.  36.  a  sword  is  upon  the  /.  they  shall  dote
1  Tim.  1. 10.  law  is  made  for  /.  for  perjured  persons
Tit.  1. 12. said,  the  Cretians  are  alway  /.  evil  beasts
Rev.  2.  2.  hast  tried  them,  and  hast  found  them  /.
21.8.  all  /.  shall  have  their  part  in  lake  that  burns
LYE,  or  LIE.

Lev.  6.2.  if  a  soul  /.  to  his  neighbour  in  that

19. 11.  ye  shall  not  steal,  nor  /.  one  to  another
Num.  23.  19.  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  /.

1  Sam.  15.29.  Strength  of  Isr.  will  not /.  nor  repent

2  Kings  A.  16.  my  lord,  do  not  /.  to  thy  handmaid
Job  6. 28.  look  on  me,  for  it  is  evident  to  you  if  l  /.

34.  6.  should  1  /.  against  my  right,  my  wound  is
Psal.  89.  35.  once  sworn  that  1  will  not  /.  to  David
Prov.  14.  5.  a  faithful  witness  will  not  /.  but  a  false
Isa.  63. 8.  they  are  ir.y  people,  child,  that  will  not/.
Mic.  2. 11.  if  a  man  walking  in  falsehood  do  /.

Ilab.  2.  3.  at  the  end  it  shall  speak  and  not  /.

Acts  5.  3.  why  hath  Satan  filled  thy  heart  to  /.  ?
Rom.  9. 1.  I  sa y  truth  in  Chr.  I  /.  not,  1  Tim.  2.  7.
2  Cor.  11.  31.  Father  ot  our  Lord  knoweth  I  /.  not
Gal.  1.  20.  which.  I  wrote  to  you,  behold  I  /.  not
Col.  3.  9.  /•  not  one  to  anoth.  seeing  ye  have  putoff
Tit.  1.  2.  God  that  cannot  /.  promised,  Heb.  6. 18.
Jam.  3.  14.  glory  not,  /.  not  against  the  trutli
1  John  1.6.  if  we  say,  we  have  fellowship  with  him,
and  walk  in  darkness,  we  /.  and  do  not  the  truth
Rev.  3.  9.  which  say  they  are  Jews,  but  do  /.
LIED.

1  Kings  13.  18.  I  am  a  prophet,  but  he  /.  unto  him
Psal.  78.  36.  they  /.  unto  him  with  their  tongues
Isa.  57. 11-  of  whom  been  afraid,  that  thou  hast  /.
Acts  5.  4.  thou  hast  not  /.  unto  men,  but  unto  God

LIETH.

Lev.  6.  3.  found  that  was  lost,  and  /.  concerning  it
LIE,  Substantive.

Signifies,  [1]  A  falsity  or  untruth,  Judg.  16.  10.  [2J
f  alse  doctrine,  1  John  2.  21.  [3]  An  image,  or
idolatrous  representation  of  God,  Rom.  1.  25.
Psal.  62.  9.  and  men  of  high  degree  are  a  /.

119.  69.  the  proud  have  forged  a/,  against  me
Isa.  44.  20.  is  there  not  a  /.  in  my  right  hand  ?

Jer.  27.  10.  they  prophesy  a  /.  to  you  to  remove
^ou  from  vour  land,  14,  15,  16. 1  29.  +  9,  21.

28.  la.  thou  makest  this  people  to  trust  in  a  /.

29.  31.  and  he  caused  you  to  trust  in  a  /.

37.  +  14.  then  said  Jeremiah,  it  is  a/.

Ezek.  21.  29.  whilst  they  divine  a  /.to  thee
Mic.  1. 14.  houses  of  Achzib  shall  be  a  /.  to  kings
Zech.  10.  2.  for  the  diviners  have  seen  a  /.  and  told
John  8.  44.  when  he  speaketh  a  /.  he  speaketh  of
Rum.  1. 25.  who  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  /.

3.  7.  hath  more  abounded  thro’  my  /.  to  his  glory

2  Thess.  2.  11.  delusion,  that  they  should  believe  a/.
1  John  2.  21.  ye  know  that  no  /.  is  of  the  truth

27.  anointing  teach,  you  of  all  things,  and  is  no  /.
Rev.  21.  27.  neither  whatsoever  maketh  a  /.

22.  15.  without  are  whosoever  lov.  and  mak.  a  /.
LIES.

Judg.  16.  10.  behold,  thou  hast  told  me  /.  13.

Job  11.  3.  should  thy  /.  make  men  hold  their  peace  /
13.4.  ye  are  forgers  of/,  physicians  of  no  value
Psal.  40.  4.  respecteth  not  such  as  turn  aside  to  /.

58.  3.  wicked  are  estrang.  and  go  astray,  speak  /.
62.  4.  they  delight  in  /.  they  curse  inwardly

63. 11.  the  mouth  that  speaketh  /.  shall  be  stopped
101.  7.  that  telleth  /.  shall  not  tarry  in  my  sight

Prov.  6. 19.  L.  hates  a  false  witness  that  speaketh  /.

14.  5.  but  a  false  witness  will  utter  /.

25.  but  a  deceitful  witness  speaketh  /.

19.  5.  and  he  that  speaketh  /.  shall  not  escape
9.  and  he  that  speaketh  /.  shall  perish

29.  12.  if  a  ruler  hearken  to  /.  his  servants  wicked

30.  8.  remove  far  from  me  vanity  and  /.

Isa.  9. 15.  the  prophet  that  teacheth  /.  he  is  the  tail

16.  6.  the  pride  of  Moab,  but  his  /.  shall  not  be  so

28.  15.  for  we  have  made  /.  our  refuge

17.  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  /.

59.  3.  your  lips  have  spoken  /  your  tongue  hath

4.  they  trust  in  vanity,  and  speak  /.

Jer.  9.  3.  they  bend  their  tongues  like  their  bow  for  i.

5.  they  have  taught  their  tongue  to  speak  /.

14.  14.  the  prophets  prophesy  l.  23.  25,  26.

16.  19.  surely  our  fathers  have  inlierited  /.

293


INI  A  D


M  A  D


MAD


jer.  20.  6.  to  whom  thou  hast  prophesied  /.  vanity

23.  14.  they  commit  adultery,  and  walk  in  /.

32.  cause  my  peo.  to  err  by  their  /.  and  lightness
48.  30.  shall  not  be  so,  his  /.  shall  not  so  effect  it
Ezek.  13.  8.  ye  have  spoken  vanity  and  seen  /.

9.  mine  hadd  be  upon  the  prophets  that  divine  /.

19.  by  your  lying  to  my  people  that  hear  your  /.

22.  with  /.  ye  have  made  the  righteous  sad

22.  28.  divining  /.  unto  them,  saying,  thus  saith  L.

24.  12.  she  hath  wearied  herselt  with  /.

Dan.  11.  27.  they  shall  speak  /.  at  one  table  _

Hos.  7.  3.  they  make  the  princes  glad  with  their  /.

13.  tho’  redeemed,  yet  they  have  spoken  /.  ag.  me

10.  13.  ye  have  eaten  the  fruit  of  /.  because  thou

11.12.  F.phraim  compasseth  me  about  with  /.  and
the  house  of  Isr.  with  deceit,  but  Judah  faithful

1°  1  he  daily  increaseth  /.  and  desolation
Amos  2.  4.  and  their  /.  caused  them  to  err
Mic  6  12.  the  inhabitants  thereof  have  spoken  /.
Nah.  3.  1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  it  is  full  of  /.

I  lab.  2. 18.  the  molten  image,  and  a  teacher  of  l.
Zeph.  3.  13.  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  not  speak  l.
Zech.  13.  3.  thou  speakest  l.  in  the  name  of  the  Ld.

1  Tim  A.  2.  speak.  I .  in  hypocrisy,  having  conscience

LY  1NG.

Psal.  31.  6.  I  have  hated  them  that  regard  l.  vani¬
ties,  but  1  trust  in  the  I  ord

18.  let  the  l.  lips  be  put  to  silence,  that  speak  things
52.  3.  thou  lovest  I.  rather  than  righteousness

59.  12.  and  for  cursing  and  l.  which  they  speak
109.  2.  they  have  spoken  against  me  with  l.  tongue

119.  29.  remove  from  me  the  way  of  /.  and  grant
163.  1  hate  and  abhor  l.  but  thy  law  do  I  love

120.  2.  deliver  my  soul,  O  Lord,  from  l.  lips
Prov.  6. 17-  the  Lord  hateth  a  proud  look,  a  /,  tongue

10  18.  he  that  hideth  hatred  with  /.  lips  is  a  tool

12.  19.  but  a  l.  tongue  is  but  for  a  moment

22.  /.  lips  are  abomination  to  the  Lord

13. 5.  a  righteous  man  hateth  I.  but  a  wicked  man  is

loathsome,  and  cometh  to  shame

17.  7.  much  less  do  l.  lips  become  a  prince

21. 6.  getting  of  treasures  by  a  l.  tongue  is  vanity

26.  28.  a  /.  tongue  hatetli  those  afflicted  by  it

_7.<«.30.  9.  that  this  is  a  rebellious  people,  /.children

32.7.  he  deviseth  wicked  devices  with  /.  words

59. 13.  in  transgressing  and  /.  against  the  1  ord
Jer.  7. 4.  trust  ye  notin  /.  words,  saying,  temple  of  L.

8.  behold,  ye  trust  in  /.  words  that  cannot  profit

20.  23.  because  have  spoken  /.  words  in  my  name
Ezek.  13.  6.  they  ha'  e  seen  vanity  and  /.  divination

7.  have  ye  not  spoken  a  /.  divination

19.  by  your  /.  to  my  people  that  hear  your  lies
Dan.  2. 9.  ye  have  prepared  I.  words  to  speak  before
Hos  A.  2.  by  swearing,  /.  and  killing,  they  break  out
Jonah  2.  8. 'they  that  observe  /.  vanities  forsake
Eph.  4.  25.  putting  away  /.  speak  truth,  forsake

2  Thess.  2.  9.  whose  coming  is  with  /.  wonders

LYING  spirit.

1  Kings  22.  22.  1  will  be  a/,  spirit  in  the  mouth  of  all
his  prophets,  2  ('/iron.  18.  21.

23.  Ld.  hath  put  a  l.  s.  in  prophets,  2  Chron.  18. 22.

LYING.

Gen.  34.7.  wrought  folly  in/,  with  Tacob’s  daughter
Num.  31. 17.  kill  woman  that  hath  known  man  by  /.

18.  all  that  have  not  known  man  by  /.  with  him,
keep  alive  for  yourselves,  Judg.  21.  12.

31.  35.  women  had  not  known  man  by  /.  with  him
Dent.  22.22.  if  a  man  be  found  /.  with  a  woman
Judg.  21. 1 11.  destroy  that  knoweth  /.  with  man
LYING.

Gen.  29.  2.  there  were  three  flocks  of  sheep  /.  by  it
Exod.  23.  5.  the  ass  of  him  that  hateth  thee,  /.

Deut.  21.  1.  if  one  be  found  slain,  /.  in  the  field
Psal.  139.  3.  thou  compassest  my  path  and  /.  down
]sa.  56.  10.  sleeping,  /.  down,  loving  to  slumber
Mat.  9. 2.  brought  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  /.  on  bed
Mark  5.  40.  he  entereth  in  w  here  the  damsel  was  /.
Luke  2. 12.  ye  shall  find  the  babe  /.  in  a  manger.  16.
John  13.  25.  he  then  /.  on  .Tesus’  breast  saith

20.5.  he  saw  the  linen  clothes  /.  yet  went  not  in

7.  and  the  napkin  not  /.  with  the  linen  clothes
LYING  in  wait.

Josh.  8.  +  1.3.  there  /.  in  wait  on  urest  side  of  the  city
Judg.  9.  .35.  and  Abimelech  rose  up  from  /.  in  wait
16. 9.  now  there  were  men  /.  in  wait  in  the  chain b.
Lam.  3. 10.  he  was  to  me  as  a  bear  /.  in  wait,  as  lion
Acts  20. 19.  which  befel  me  by  the  /.  in  w.  of  .lews
23. 16.  when  Paul’s  kinsmen  heard  of  their  /.  in  w.

M.

MAD

Signifies,  [1]  One  distracted,  or  deprived  of  reason,
Acts  26.  24.  1  Cor.  14.  23.  [2]  One  dissem¬

bling  madness ,  and  behaving  himself  foolishly,
1  Sam.  21.  13.  [3]  One  furious  with  raging  zeal
in  persecuting ,  Acts  26.  11.  [4]  One  whose

mind  is  so  troubled  and  perplexed,  that  he  knows
not  what  to  do,  but  acts  irregularly  and  extra¬
vagantly,  Deut.  28.  34.  F.ccl.  7-  7-  Jer.  25.
16.  [5]  One  who  is  infatuated,  or  impetuous

and  violent  in  his  desires  after  idols  and  vanity,
Jer.  50.  38.  [6]  Foolish,  deceitful,  and  lying,

Dos.  9.  7.  „  ,  .

Deut.  28.  34.  shalt  be  m.  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes

1  Sam.  21.  13.  and  David  feigned  himself  m.

14.  Achish  said  to  his  servants,  you  see  man  is  m.

2  Kings  9. 11.  wherefore  came  this  m.  fellow'  to  thee?
Psal.  102.  8.  they  that  are  m.  against  me  are  sworn
Eccl.  2. 2.  I  said  of  laughter  it  is  m.  of  mirth,  what

7.  7.  surely  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  m.
Isa.  44.  25.  and  that  maketh  diviners  m.

59.  +  15.  he  that  departeth  from  evil  is  accounted  m.
Jer.  25.  16.  they  shall  drink,  be  moved,  and  be  m.

29.  26.  for  every  man  that  is  m.  put  him  in  prison

50.  38.  and  they  are  m.  upon  their  idols

51.  7.  of  her  wine,  therefore  the  nations  are  m.
Hos.  9.7.  the  proph.  is  a  fool,  the  spiritual  man  ism.
John  10. 20.  hath  devil  and  is  m.  why  hear  ye  him  ?
Acts  12. 15.  and  they  said  to  Rhoda,  thou  art  m.

26  11.  and  being  exceedingly  m.  against  them

294


Acts  26. 24.  Paul,  much  learning  doth  make  thee  m.

25.  but  he  said,  1  am  not  m.  most  noble  Festus
1  Cor.  14.  23.  will  they  not  say  that  ye  are  m.  ?
MADE.

Exod.  2. 14.  who  m.  thee  prince  over  us  ?  ActsJ.  27-

4.  11.  L.  said  to  him,  who  hath  m.  man's  mouth?

9. 20.  m.  his  servants  and  cattle  flee  into  the  houses

32.  4.  after  he  had  m.  it  a  molten  calf,  they  said
25.  Aaron  had  m.  them  naked  to  their  shame
31.  and  have  m.  them  gods  of  gold,  Hos.  8.  4.

39.  42.  so  the  children  of  Israel  m.  all  the  work
Num.  20. 5.  why  have  ye  m.  us  to  come  from  Egypt '
Deut.  9.  21.  I  took  your  sin  and  calf  which  he  had  m.
Josh.  8. 15.  Joshua  and  lsr.  m.  as  if  they  were  beaten

9.  4.  went  and  m.  as  if  they  had  been  ambassadors

14.  8.  they  m.  the  heart  of  the  people  melt

22.  28.  the  pattern  of  the  altar  which  our  fathers  m.
Judg.  16.  19.  she  m.  Samson  sleep  upon  her  knees
25.  Samson  m.  the  Philistines  sport,  27.

18.  24.  ye  have  taken  away  the  gods  which  1  m.

1  Sam.  3.  13.  his  sons  m.  theins.  vile,  restrained  not

8.  1.  that  Samuel  m.  his  sons  judges  over  Israel

12.  1.  behold,  I  have  m.  a  king  over  you

15.  17.  wast  thou  not  m.  the  head  of  Israel?

3.3.  as  thy  sword  hath  m.  women  childless

27. 10.  Achish  said,  whither  have  ye  m.road  to-day

2  Sam.  13.  6.  Amnon  lay  down  and  m.  himself  sick

1  Kings  12.  .32.  sacrificing  to  calves  that  he  had  m.

15.  12.  he  removed  all  idols  which  his  fathers  rn.

13.  she  had  m.  an  idol  in  a  grove,  2  Chr.  15.  16.

20.  34.  shalt  make  streets  as  my  father  m.  in  Sama.

2  Kings  11.  12.  they  m.  him  king  and  anointed  him

16.  11.  as  Ahaz  sent,  so  Urijah  the  priest  m.  it

1  Chr.  26.  10.  yet  his  father  m.  him  the  chief

2  Chr.  25.  16.  art  thou  m.  of  the  king’s  counsel  ?

28.  19.  for  Ahaz m.  Judah  naked  and  transgressed

33.  7.  set  the  idol  he  nad  m.  in  the  house  of  God

34.  33.  Josiah  m.  all  present  to  serve  the  I  ord
Ezra  5.  14.  Shesh-bazzar  whom  he  m.  governor
Neh.  4.  9.  we  m.  our  prayer  unto  our  God

Esth.  2.  17.  Ahasuerus  m.  her  queen  inst.  of  Vashti
Q.  17.  they  m.  it  day  of  feasting  and  gladness,  18.

Job  15.  7.  or  wast  thou  m.  before  the  hills  ?

Psal.  7.  15.  he  m.  a  pit,  and  is  fallen  into  pit  he  m.

9.  15.  the  heathen  are  sunk  into  the  pit  they  m.

52.  7.  this  is  the  man  that  m.  not  God  his  strength
Eccl.  2.  4.  I  m.  me  ereat  works,  I  budded  houses

5.  I  m.  me  gardens  ||  6.  I  m.  me  pools  of  water
Cant.  1.  6.  they  m.  me  the  keeper  of  the  vineyards

3.  10.  he  m.  the  pillars  of  silver,  bottom  of  gold

6.  12.  my  soul  m.  me  like  chariots  of  Amminadib
Isa.  2.  8.  that,  which  their  own  fingers  have  m.

14.  16.  is  this  the  man  that  m.  earth  to  tremble  ?

28.  15.  for  we  have  m.  lies  our  refuge,  and  falseh.
29. 16.  shall  work  say  of  him  thatwi.  it,  he  m.  me  not
31.  7.  which  your  hands  have  m.  unto  you  for  a  sin

40.  t  14.  and  who  m.  him  understand;

59.  t  2.  your  sins  have  m.  him  hide  his  face

8.  they  have  m.  them  crooked  paths

Jer.  10.  11.  the  gods  that  have  not  m.  the  heavens
12.  10.  have  m.  my  pleasant  portion  a  wilderness
18.  4.  the  vessel  that  he  m.  was  marred  in  the  hand
of  the  potter,  so  he  m.  it  again  another  vessel

37.  15.  for  they  had  m.  that  the  prison
41. 9.  which  Asa  the  king  had  m.  for  fear  of  Paasha
51.  34.  Nebuchadnezzar  m.  mean  empty  vessel
Ezek.  13.  22.  ye  m.  the  heart  of  the  righteous  sad

17.  16.  where  the  king  dwelleth  that  m.  him  king

20.  28.  there  also  they  m.  their  sweet  savour

21.  24.  ye  have  m.  your  iniquity  to  be  remembertd
31.  4.  waters  m.  him  great,  deep  set  him  upon  high

Dan.  5.  11.  thy  father  ~m.  master  of  the  magicians

9.  13.  yetw.  we  not  our  prayer  before  the  Lord
Hos.  2.  t  8.  silver  wherewith  they’ m.  Paal

7.  5.  the  princes  have  m.  him  sick  with  wine

8.  6.  the  workman  m.  it,  therefore  it  is  not  God
Amos  5.  26.  the  god  which  ye  m.  to  yourselves
Zech.  7.  +  11.  but  they  m.  their  ears  heavy

12.  vea,  they  m.  their  hearts  as  an  adamant
Mat.  9.  22.  daughter,  thy  faith  hath  m.  thee  whole,
Mark  5.  34. 1  10.  52.  Luke  8,  48.  I  17.  19.

15.  6.  have  m.  commandment  of  G.  ot  none  effect

21.  13.  called  the  house  of  prayer,  but  ye  have  m.  it

a  den  of  thieves,  Mark  11.  17.  Luke  19.  46.

25.  16.  traded  and  m.  them  other  five  talents
Luke  12.  14.  man,  who  m.  me  a  judge  over  you  ?
Acts  3.  16.  and  his  name  hath  m.  this  man  Strong

8.  3.  as  for  Saul,  he  m.  havock  of  the  church

23.  1.3.  more  than  forty  who  had  m.  this  conspiracy

27.  40.  they  hoised  sail,  and  m.  toward  shore
Horn.  8.  2.  hath  m.  free  from  law  of  sin  and  death
1  Tim.  1.  19.  concerning  faith  have  m.  shipwreck
Heb.  7.  19.  for  the  law  m.  nothing  perfect

1  John  5.  10.  he  that  believeth  not,  hath  m.  G.  a  liar
Rev.  7.  14.  m.  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb

14.  8.  she  m.  all  nations  drink  of  the  wine

See  Covenant,  End,  Fire.

MADE,  meant  of  God,  Lord,  Christ.

Gen.  1.  7.  God  m.  the  firmament  and  divided

16.  in.  two  great  lights,  he  m.  stars,  Ps.  136.  7,  9.
25.  God  m.  the  beast  of  the  earth  after  his  kind
.31.  God  saw  every  thing  that  he  had  m.  was  good

2.  2.  God  rested  from  all  his  works  he  had  in.

4.  God  m.  the  earth  and  heavens,  Exod.  20.  11.
1  31.  17.  Psal.  146.  6.  Isa.  45.  18.  Jer.  10.  12.

9.  m.  to  grow  every  tree  ||  22.  m.  he  a  woman

5.  1.  in  the  likeness  of  God  m.  he  him,  9.  6.

6.  6.  it  repented  the  Lord  he  had  m.  man,  7.

8.  1.  God  m.  a  wind  to  pass  over  the  earth

21.  6.  and  Sarah  said,  God  hath  m.  me  to  laugh

24.  21.  the  Lord  had  m.  his  journey  prosperous

26.  22.  now  the  Lord  hath  m.  room  for  us

39.  3.  the  Lord  m.  all  Joseph  did  to  prosper,  23.

41.  51.  God  hath  m.  me  to  forget  all  my  toil
45.  8.  God  hath  m.  me  a  father  to  Pharaoh

9.  God  hath  m.  me  Lord  of  all  Egypt
Exod.  1.  21.  the  mid  wives  feared  God,  he  m.  houses
14.  21.  and  the  Lord  m.  the  sea  dry  land
Lev.  23.  4.3.  I  m.  Israel  to  dwell  in  booths
26. 13. 1  am  L.  your  G.  and  I  have  m.  you  go  uprig.
Num.  32. 13.  he  m.  them  wander  in  the  wilderness
Deut.  2.  30.  for  the  Lord  m.  his  heart  obstinate


Deut.  4.  36.  out  of  hear,  he  m.  thee  to  hear  his  voice
ID.  22.  the  Lord  hath  m.  thee  as  the  stars
11.4.  how  he  m.  the  water  of  the  R  ed  sea  to  overfi.
26.  19.  thee  above  all  nations  which  he  hath  m.

32.  6.  hath  he  not  m.  thee,  and  established  thee

13.  hew.  him  ride,  m.  him  suck  honey  out  of  rock
15.  then  he  forsook  God  which  m.  him,  and  rock

Josh.  22.25.  the  Lord  m.  Jordan  border  betw  een  us
Judg.  5.  13.  he  m.  him  have  dominion  over  mighty

21.  15.  the  Lord  had  m.  a  breach  in  the  tribes

1  Sam.  12.  8.  and  m.  them  dwell  in  this  place

15.  35.  the  Ld.  repented  that  he  had  m.  Saul  king

2  Sam.  6.8.  because  the  Lord  had  m.  a  breach  upon

22.  12.  he  m.  darkness  pavilions  round  about  him  i
.36.  thy  gentleness  hath  m.me  great,  Psal.  18.35.

1  Kings  2.  24.  w  ho  hath  m.  me  a  house  as  promised

10.  9.  the  Lord  loved  Israel,  therefore  he  m.  thee
king,  14.  7  -  I  16.  2.  2  Chr.  ].  u.

1  Chr.  16.  26.  but  the  Lord  m.  the  heavens,  Neh.y.

6.  Psal.  33.  6.  |  96.5.  I  121.2.1  124.8.1  131.3.

2  Chron.  20.  27.  the  Lord  had  m.  them  to  rejoice
26.  5.  he  sought  the  1  ord,  God  m.  him  to  prosper
Ezra  6.  22.  Lord  had  m.  them  joyful,  Neh.  12.  43.
Job  10.  8.  thy  hands  have  m.  me  and  fashioned  me

16.  7.  he  hath  m.  me  weary,  thou  hast  m.  desolate

17.  6.  he  hath  m.  me  a  by-word  of  the  people

28.  26.  when  he  m.  a  decree  for  the  rain,  and  a  way

31.  15.  did  not  he  that  m.  me  in  the  womb  make

33.  4.  the  Spirit  of  God  m.  me,  and  gave  me  life
40. 19.  he  that  m.  him  can  make  his  sword  approach
Psal.  30. 1.  hast  not  rn.  my  foes  to  rejoice  over  me
46.  8.  w  hat  desolations  he  hath  m.  in  the  earth
95.  5.  the  sea  is  his  and  he  m.  it  H  103.  he  m.  us
105.  28.  1m  sent  darkness,  and  m.  it  dark

118.  24.  this  is  the  day  the  Lord  hath  m.  wil  1  reioice

119.  73.  thy  hands  have  m.  me  and  fashioned  me

136.5.  that  by  w’isdom  w.the  heavens,  Acts  14.  15.

14.  and  m.  Israel  to  pass  through  the  midst  of  it

148.  6.  he  hath  rn.  a  decree  which  shall  not  pass  |

149.  2.  let  Israel  rejoice  in  him  that  m.  him
Prov .  16.  4.  the  Lord  m.  all  things  for  himself
20.  12.  the  Lord  hath  m.  even  both  of  them
Eccl.  3. 11 .  he  hath  m.  every  thing  beautiful  in  time

7.  29.  I  found  that  God  hath  m.  man  upright
Isa.  27.  11.  he  that  m.  them  will  not  have  mercy

30.  33.  he  hath  m.  Tophet  deep  and  large

44.  2.  thus  saith  the  l  ord  that  m.  and  formed  thee
53.  12.  he  m.  intercession  for  the  transgressors
66.  2.  all  these  things  hath  mine  hand  m.

Jer.  8.  8.  lo,  certainly  in  vain  m.  he  it

29.  26.  the  Lord  m.  thee  priest  instead  of  Jehoiava

32.  20.  and  hast  m.  thee  a  name  as  at  this  day

38.  16.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  that  m.  us  this  soul
Lam.  1.13.  he  hath  m.me  desolate  and  taint,  3. 11.,

14.  the  Lord  hath  m.  my  strength  to  fall

3.  4.  my  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  m.  old

7. hath  m.  my  chain  heavy  ||  9 .m.  my  paths  crooked

15.  he  hath  m.  me  drunken  with  wormwood
Ezek.  31.  16.  I  m.  nations  to  shake  at  the  sound
Jonah  1. 9.  I  fear  God  who  hath  m.  sea  and  dry  land
Zeph.  3.  6.  I  m.  their  streets  waste,  none  passeth
Mat.  19.  4.  he  m.  them  male  and  female,  Mark  10. 6.
Luke  11 . 40.  did  not  he  that  m.  that  which  is  w ithout
John  1.  3.  without  him  was  not  any  thing  m.

4.  1.  Jesus  m.  more  disciples  ||  46. he  m.  waterwune

5.  11.  he  that  m.  me  whole  said,  take  up  thy  bed
9.  6.  he  spat  and  m.  clay  of  the  spittle,  11.  14.

19.  7.  because  he  m.  himself  the  Son  of  God
Acts  2.  36.  know  that  God  hath  m.  that  same  Jesus

15.  7.  ye  know  that  God  m.  choice  among  us  I
17.24.  G.  that  m.  the  w'orld  and  all  things  therein:
26.  hath  m.  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men

20.  28.  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  m.  you  overseers

1  Cor.  1.  20.  m.  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  world

2  Cor.  3.6.  hath  m.  us  able  ministersof  New  Testam.

5.  21.  hath  m.  him  to  be  sin  for  11s  who  knew  no  sir.
Gal.  5.  1.  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  m.  us  tret
Eph.  1.  6.  he  hath  m.  us  accepted  in  the  Reloved
2.  6.  God  hath  m.  us  sittogether  in  heavenly  place!

14.  he  is  our  peace  who  hath  m.  both  one
Phil.  2.  7.  but  m.  himself  of  no  reputation
Col.  1.  12.  who  hath  m.  us  meet  to  be  partakers
2.  15.  he  m.  a  shew  of  thevn  openly,  triumphing
Heb.  1.  2.  by  whom  also  he  m.  the  worlds

6.  13.  for  when  God  m.  promise  to  Abraham
Rev.  1.  6.  and  hath  m.  us  kings  and  priests  to  Goo,

14.  7.  and  worship  him  that  m.  heaven  and  earth.

1  have,  or  have  I  MADE.

Gen.  7.  4.  destroy  every  living  substance  I  hare  m
14.  23.  lest  thou  say,  I  have  m.  Abram  rich  j

17.5.  a  father  of  nations  have  Im.  thee,  llom.  4. 17
27.37.  Isaac  said,  behold,  I  have  m.  him  thy  lord
Exod.  7.  1.  see  I  have  m.  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh
QSam.T.9.  1  hare  m,  thee  a  great  name,  1  Chr.  17 - 8
1  Kings  8.  59.  wherewith  1  have  m.  supplication
1  Chr.  29.  19.  for  the  which  I  have  m.  provision
Ezra  6.  11.  I  Darius  have  m.  a  decree,  12.

Job  17.  13.  7  have  m.  my  bed  in  the  darkness

31.  24.  if  1  have  m.  gold  my  hope,  or  have  said

39.  6.  whose  house  J  have  m.  the  wilderness
Psal.  45.  1.  I  will  speak  of  things  which  7  harem
Prov.  20.  9.  who  can  say,  7  have  m.  my  heart  clear
Isa.  16.  10.  7  have  m.  their  shouting  to  cease

21.  2.  the  sighing  thereof  have  I  m.  to  cease

43.  7.  1  have  formed  him, yea,  7  havem.  him,  46.4
45. 12.  7  h.  m.  the  earth,  and  creat.  man,  Jer.  27-  5
57.  16.  and  the  souls  which  7  have  m.  should  tan
Jer.  1.  18.  behold  I  havem.  thee  a  defenced  city
49.  10.  but  7  have  m.  Esau  bare,  and  uncovered
Ezek.  3.  8.  behold,  1  have  m.  thy  face  strong,  9.
17.  7  have  m.  thee  a  W’atchmanto  house  ot  Israe
13.  22. ye  made  heart  sad,  whom  7  have  not  m.vto-

17.  24.  and  7  have  m.  the  dry  tree  to  flourish

22.  4.  therefore  have  I  m.  thee  a  reproach

29.  3.  my  river  is  mine,  7  have  m.  it  for  myself,  .
31.  9.  Ih.  m.  him  fair  by  multitude  of  his  hrancne
Dan.  3.  15.  worship  the  image  which  1  have  m.
Amos  4. 10.  7  have  m.  the  stink  of  camps  to  come  ui
Chad.  2.  7  have  m.  thee  small  among  the
Mai.  2.  9-  therefore  have  1  m.  you  conteiiytmie
John  7. 23.  because  7  h.  m.  a  man  every  whit  wnoi
1  Cor.  9.  19.  yet  have  1  m.  myself  servant  to  an


M  A  D


M  A  I)


M  A  I


Thou  hirst  MADE.

rod.  15.  1”.  plant  them  in  the  place  which  th.  h.  m.
jo.  36.  when  thou  hast  m .  an  atonement  for  it
>>/(.  2.  17-  this  oath  which  thou  h.  m.  us  swear,  CO.
Kings  3.7.  t.  h.  in.  thy  servant  king  instead  of  Dav.
L).  3.  1  have  heard  thy  supplication  that  thou  h.  m.
Kings  19.  15.  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  thou  hast  m.

heaven  and  earth,  Isa.  37.  16.  Jer.  32.  17.
Chr.  22. 8.  word  came,  saying,  th.  h.  m.  great  wars
oh  1.  10.  t.  h.  m.  an  hedge  about  him  and  his  house

i0.  9.  remember  that  thou  hast  m.  me.  as  t he  clay
16.  7.  thou  hast  m.  desolate  all  my  company
■sal  8.  5.  thou  hast  in.  him  little  lower  than  angels

18.  43.  thou  hast  m.  me  the  head  of  the  heathen

21.  6.  thou  hast  m.  him  most  blessed  for  ever

10.  *.  thou  hast  m.  my  mountain  to  stand  strong
1).  5.  behold,  thouh.  m.  my  days  as  a  hand  breadth

|  )j.  2.  t.  h.  m.  the  earth  to  tremble,  thou  hast  broken

3.  thou  hast  m.  us  drink  the  wine  of  astonishment
l\.  17.  thou  hast  m.  summer  and  winter
;6.  9.  all  nations  whom  thou  hast  m.  shall  worship
^8.8.  thou  hast  rn.  mean  abomination  to  them

19.  42.  thou  hast  m.  all  his  enemies  to  rejoice

44.  t.  h.  m.  his  glory  to  cease,  and  cast  his  throne
47.  wherefore  hast  thou  m.  all  men  in  vain  3
;  91.  9.  because  thou  hast  m.  the  Lord  thy  habitation
.42.  4.  thou,  I.d.  hast  m.  me  glad  through  thy  work
104.  21.  thy  works,  in  wisdom  hast  thou  m.  them  all
26.  Leviathan,  whom  thou  hast  m.  to  play’  therein
119.  98.  thou  hastm.  me  wiser  than  mine  enemies
sa.  25.  2.  for  thou  hast  in.  of  a  city  an  heap,  a  ruin

43.21.  but  thou  hast  m.  me  to  serve  with  thy  sins
63.  17.  Ld.  why  th.  h.  m.  usto  err  from  thy  ways?
er.  2. 28.  but  where  are  thy  gods  that  t.  h.  in.  thee  ?

14.  22.  we  wait  on  thee,  for  t.  h.  in.  all  these  things
jim.  3.  45.  t.  h.  m.  us  as  the  offscouring  and  refuse
Zzek.  13.  5.  nor  hast  t.  m.  up  the  hedge  in  the  house
16.  24.  thou  h.  in.  thee  an  high  placein  every  street
25.  thou  hast  m.  thy  beauty  to  be  abhorred

22.  4.  hast  defiled  in  thy  idols  which  thou  hast  m.
13.  at  thy  dishonest  gain  which  t.  h.  m.  and  blood

Uat.  20.1 2. but  one  hour,  and  t./i.w.them  equal  to  us
lorn.  9-  20.  thing  formed  say,  why  A.  t.  m.  me  thus
lev.  5. 10.  t.  h.  m.  us  to  our  God  lungs  and  pries's
MADE  haste.

>tn  24.  46.  Rebekah  m.  h.  and  letdown  her  pitcher
43.  .‘to.  Joseph  m.  h.  |[  Exod.  34. 8.  Moses  in.  haste
'udg.  13.  10.  Manoah’swife  m.  haste  and  ran
Sam.  23.  26.  David  in.  A.||  25. 18.  Abigail  m.  haste
Sam.  4.  4.  as  Mephibosheth's  nurse  m.  haste  to  flee
W.  119.  60.  I  m. haste,  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy
.uke  19.6.  Zaccheus™.  haste  and  came  down
See  Israel,  Sin,  Known.

MADE  manifest.

.uke  8. 17.  nothing  secret  that  shall  not  be  m.manif.
"ohn  1.  31.  but  that  he  should  be  m.  manif.  tolsrael

3. 21 .  to  the  light,  that  his  deeds  may  b Em.  manif.

9.  3.  the  works  of  G.  should  be  m.  manif.  in  him
lom.  10.  20.  I  was  m.  m.  to  them  that  asked  not
16.  26.  but  now  is  m.  man.  to  all  nations  for  obed.
Cor.  3.  13.  every  man's  work  shall  be  m.  manif.

1 1.  19.  that  they 'which  are  approved  may  be  m.  m.
14.  25.  thus  are  the  secrets  of  his  hearts,  manif.
Cor.  4.  10.  life  of  Jesus  should  be  m.  manif.  11.

11.  6.  we  have  been  throughly  m.  m.  among  you
■pit.  5.  13.  are  approved  are  m.  m.  by  the  light
'ol.  1 .  26.  but  now  is  m.  manifest  to  his  saints

Tim.  1. 10.  now  m.  m.  by  the  appearing  of  Ch.
feb.  9.  8.  way  into  the  holiest  was  not  yet  m.  m.
John  2. 19-  went  out  that  they  might  be  m.  manif.
lev.  15.  4.  for  thy  judgments  are  m.  manifest
MADE  peace.

’osh.  9.  15.  and  Joshua  m.  peace  with  them,  10. 1 . 4.
11.19.  there  was  not  a  city  that  m. p.  with  Israel
Sam.  10.  19.  when  the  servants  of  Hadarezer
were  smitten,  they’  m.  peace  with  Israel,  1
Chron.  19.  19.

Kings  22.44.  Jehoshaphat  m.  peace  with  Israel
MADE  ready.

ien.  43.25.  they  m.  r.  the  present  against  noon
46.  29.  Joseph  m.  ready  \ns  chariot  to  meet  Israel
rod,  14.  6.  Pharaoh  m.  ready  his  chariot,  and  took
udg.  6. 19.  and  Gideon  went  in  and  m.  ready  a  kid
13.  15.  Manoah  said,  till  we  have  m.  ready  a  kid
Kings  6.7.  m.  r.  before  it  was  brought  thither
Kings  9  21.  and  Joram’s  chariot  was  m.  ready
Chron.  28.  2.  and  had  m.  ready  for  the  building
Chron.  .35. 14.  afterward  they  m.  r.  for  themselves
'sal.  7.  12.  he  hath  bent  his  bow  and  m.  it  ready
los.  7.6.  they  have  m.  r.  their  heart  like  an  oven
1/at.  26.  19.  the  disciples  m.  ready  the  passover.

Mark  14. 16.  Luke  22.  1.3.
lets  10.  10.  -while  they  m.  r.  Peter  fell  into  a  trance
Cor.  10.  16.  boast  of  things  m.  ready  to  our  hand
lev.  19.  7-  and  his  wife  hath  m.  herself  ready
MADE  speed.

Kings  12. 18.  Rehoboam  m.  s.  to  get,  2  Chr.  10.  18.
MADE  void.

'•um.  30.  12.  if  her  husband  hath  utterly  m.  void
’sal.  89.  39.  thou  hast  m.  v.  covenant  of  thy'  serv.
119. 126.  time  to  work,  for  they  have  m.  v.  thy  law
lom.  4. 14.  for  if  they  of  law  be  heirs,  faith  is  m.  v.
MADE,  passively.

■  en.  49.  24.  the  arms  of  his  hands  were  m.  strong
■ev.  22.  5.  whereby  he  may  m.  be  unclean
Jim.  4.  26.  they  shall  bear  all  that  is  m.  for  them
'•  4.  he  shall  eat  nothing  that  is  m.  of  the  vine-tree
kings  8.  38.  what  supplication  be  m.  2  Chr.  6.  29.

'  hr .  6.  40.  ears  attend  to  prayer  m.  in  this  place
zra  5.  17.  let  there  be  search  m.  in  king’s  house
0.  1.  and  search  was  m.  in  the  house  of  the  rolls
11.  let  his  house  be  m.  a  dunghill  for  this
sth.  5. 14.  let  a  gallows  be  m.  of  fifty  cubits  high
"hi.  3.  I  am  m.  to  possess  months  of  vanity
41. 33.  not  his  like  on  earth,  w  ho  is  m.  without  fear
,  '“'•49.  16.  be  not  afraid  when  one  is  m.  rich
139.  14.  1  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  m.
rov.  15.  19.  the  way  of  the  righteous  is  m.  plain
;!•  11-  scorner  is  punished,  the  simple  is  m.  wise
.0.^5.  that  pntteth  trust  in  the  L.  shall  be  m.  fat
fct-  }■  15.  what  is  crooked  cannotbe  m.  straight
•  3.  tor  by  sadness  of  count,  the  heart  is  m.  better


Eccl.  10.  19.  a  feast  is  m.  for  laughter,  wine  makes
Isa.  51. 12.  the  son  of  man,  which  shall  be  m.  as  grass
66.  8.  shall  earth  be  m.  to  bring  forth  in  one  day
Jer.  19.  1!.  a  vessel  that  cannot  be  m.  whole  again

20.  8.  the  word  of  the  Lord  w'as  m.  a  reproach
Dan.  5.  21.  his  heart  was  m.  like  the  beasts
Mat.  4.  3.  command  that  these  stones  be  m.  bread

9.  16.  and  the  rent  is  m.  worse,  Mark  2.  21.

18.  25.  all  to  be  sold,  and  payment  to  be  m.

23.  15.  when  he  is™.  ye  make  him  twofold  more
25.  6.  and  at  midnight  there  was  aery  in.  behold
27.  24.  but  that  rather  a  tumult  was  m
64.  command  that  the  sepulchre  be  in.  sure
Mark  2.  27.  he  said,  the  sabbath  was  m.  for  man
Luke  14.  12.  lest  a  recompence  be  in.  thee

23.  12.  same  day  Pilate  and  Ilerod  were  m.  friends
John  l.  3.  all  things  were  in.  by  him,  and  without

him  was  not  any'  thing  m.  that  was  m.

10.  was  in  the  world,  the  world  was  m.  by  him
14.  the  Word  was  m.  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us

2.  9.  ruler  had  tasted  the  water  that  was  m.  wine

5.  6.  wilt  thou  be  m.  whole  ?  ||  14.  art  m.  whole

8.  33.  ye  shall  be  m.  free  ||  9.  39.  might  be  in.  blind
17. 23.  that  they  may  be  m.  perfect  in  one

Acts  4.  35.  distribution  was  m.  to  every  man  as  need
12. 5.  but  prayer  wasm.  without  ceasing  for  Peter

13.  32.  promise  which  was  m.  to  our  fathers,  26.  6.

16.  13.  we  went  where  prayer  was  wont  to  be  m.

19.  26.  they  he  no  gods  which  are  m.  with  hands
Rom.  1.  3.  Jesus  who  was  m.  of  the  seed  of  David

20.  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  m.

2.  25.  thy  circumcision  is  m.  uncircumcision

5.  19.  many  were  m.  sinners,  many  w.  righteous

6.  18.  being  m.  free  from  sin,  ye  became,  22.

7.  13.  was  then  that  which  is  good,  m.  death  to  me  ?

9.  +  22.  vessels  of  wrath  m.  up  to  destruction

29.  we  had  been  m.  like  to  Sodom  and  Gomorrha

10.  10.  with  the  mouth  confession  is  m.  to  salvation

11.  9.  let  their  table  be  m.  a  snare  and  a  trap

14.  21.  nor  any  thing  whereby  thy  broth,  is  m.  weak

1  Cor.  1.  17.  lest  cross  of  Chr.  be  m  of  none  effect

30.  are  in  Christ,  who  of  God  is  m.  to  us  wisdom

4.  9.  for  we  are  m.  a  spectacle  to  the  world  to  ang.
13.  we  are  m.  as  filth  of  world  and  offscouring

9.  22,  I  am  m.  all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  might
12. 13.  have  been  all  m.  to  drink  into  one  Spirit

15.  22.  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  m.  alive

45.  it  is  written,  the  first  man  Adam  was  m.  a  living
soul,  last  Adam  was  m.  a  quickening  spirit

2  Cor.  3.  10.  for  even  that  which  was  m.  glorious

5.  1.  an  house  not  m.  with  hands,  eternal  in  heav.

21.  might  be  m.  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him

12.  9.  my  strength  is  m.  perfect  in  weakness
Gal.  3.  3.  are  ye  now  m.  perfect  by  the  flesh  ?

13.  Christ  redeemed  us,  being  m.  a  curse  for  us

16.  to  Abrah.  and  his  seed  were  the  promises  m.

19.  seed  should  come,  to  whom  promise  was  m.
4.4.  sent  his  Son,  w.  of  a  woman,™,  under  law

Eph.  2.  11.  the  circumcision  in  the  flesh  m.  by'  hands
13.  were  far  off,  are  ™.nigh  by  the  blood  of  Chr.

3.  7.  whereof  1  was  m.  a  minister,  Col.  1.  23,  25.
Phil.  2.  7.  and  was  m.  in  the  likeness  of  men

3.  10.  being  m.  conformable  to  his  death
GV.  1 .  20.  having  m.  peace  thro’  the  blood  of  his  cross
2. 11.  with  the  circumcision  m.  without  hands
1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  not  m.  for  a  righteous  man
2. 1.  and  giving  of  thanks  be  m.  for  all  men
Tit.  3.7.  justified  by  his  grace,  we  should  be™,  heirs
Heb.  1.  4.  being  m.  so  much  better  than  the  angels

2.  17.  it  behoved  him  to  be  m.  like  to  his  brethren

3.  14.  forweare  m.  partakersof  Christ,  if  we  hold
5.  5.  Christ  glorified  not  hims.  to  be™,  high-priest

9.  being™,  perfect,  he  became  the  Author  of  salv.
7.  3.  m.  like  to  the  Son  of  God,  abideth  a  priest

12.  there  is  m.  of  necessity  a  change  of  the  law

16.  ™.  not  after  law  of  a  carnal  commandment

20.  as  not  without  an  oath  he  was™,  priest

21.  for  those  priests  were  m.  without  an  oath

22.  Jesus  was  w.  a  surety  of  a  better  testament

9.  2.  there  was  tabernacle  m.  wherein  was  candlest.

11.  a  perfect  tabernacle  not  rn.  with  hands

24.  not  entered  into  holy  places  w.  with  hands

10.  3.  there  is  a  remembrance  m.  of  sins  every  year

13.  expecting  till  his  enemies  be  m.  his  footstool

33.  partly  whilst  ye  were  m.  a  gazing-stock

11.  3.  were  not  m.  of  things  which  do  appear

34.  who  out  of  weakness  were  m.  strong

40.  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  w.  perfect

12.  23.  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  m.  perfect
Jam.  1.  10.  but  the  rich,  in  that  he  is  m.  low

2.  22.  and  by  works  was  faith  m.  perfect

3.  9.  which  are  m.  after  the  similitude  of  God

1  Pet.  2.  7-  the  same  is  m.  head  of  the  corner

2  Pet.  2.  12.  but  these  m.  to  be  taken  and  destroyed
Rev.  8.  11.  waters,  because  they  were  m.  bitter

17.  2.  been  m.  drunk  with  wine  of  her  fornication

MADEST.

Psal.  8.  6.  thou  m.  him  to  have  dominion  over  works
80.  15.  visit  the  branch  that  thou  m.  strong  for  thys.

17.  son  of  man,  whom  thou  m.  strong  for  thyself
Ezek.  16. 17.  and  m.  to  thyself  images  of  men*

29.  7-  thou  ™.  all  their  loins  to  be  at  a  stand
Jonah  A.  10.  neither  m.  it  grow,  which  came  up
Acts 21. 38.  art  not  that  Egyptian  which  m.  uproar
Heb.  2.  7-  thou™,  him  a  little  lower  than  the  angels
MAD  man.

1  Sam.  21. 15.  brought  this  fellow  to  play'  the  m.  man
Prov.  26. 18.  as  a  m.  man  who  easteth  firebrands
M  A  D  m  it,

1  Sam.  21 . 15.  have  Lneed  of  m.  men  that  ye  have
Jer.  48.  2.  O  m.  men  the  sword  shall  pursue  you

MADN  ESS.

Dent.  28.  28.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  w.

2  Kings  9.  t  20.  like  Jehu,  for  lie  driveth  in  m.
Eccl.  1. 17-  I  gave  my  heart  to  know  wisdom  and  m.

2.  12.  I  turned  myself  to  behold  wisdom  and  in.

7.  25.  to  know  the"  wickedness  of  folly,  and  w.

9.  3.  ™.  is  in  their  heart,  while  they  live

10.  13.  the  end  of  his  talk  is  mischievous  m.
Zech.VZ.  4. 1  will  smite  every  horse  and  rider  with™.
Luke  6.  11.  and  they  were  filled  with  m.

2  Pet.  2  16.  dumb  ass  forbade  the  ™.  of  the  prophet


MAGICIAN.

Dan.  2.  10.  that  asked  such  things  at  any  m.
MAGICIANS.

Gen.  41. 8.  Pharaoh  sent  and  called  for  the  w.

24.  1  told  this  to  the  in.  but  none  could  declare
Exod.  7.  11.  the  m.  of  Egypt  did  so  in  like  manner

with  their  enchantments,  22.  |  8.  7,  18
8. 19.  the™,  said  to  Pharaoh,  this  is  the  finger  of  G
9.  11.  the  m.  could  not  stand  before  Moses
Daw. 1.20.  he  found  them  ten  times  better  than  all  m.
2.  2.  then  the  king  commanded  to  call  the  w.

27.  the  secret  cannot  the  m.  shew  to  the  king

4.  7.  then  came  in  the  w.  but  did  not  make  known

9.  O  Belteshazzar,  master  of  the  m.  tell  me

5.  11.  whom  thy  father  made  master  of  the  m.

MAGISTRATE.

Judg.  18.  7.  and  there  was  no  m.  in  the  land
Luke  12.  58.  when  thou  goest  to  the  m.  give  diligence
MAGISTRATES.

Ezra  7.  25.  set  m.  and  judges,  who  may  judge
Luke  12.  11.  when  they  bring  you  to  the  m.

Acts  16.  20.  they  brought  Paul  and  Silas  to  the  m

22.  and  the  m.  commanded  to  beat  them

35.  the  ™.  sent  the  Serjeants,  saying,  36.

38.  the  serjeants  told  these  words  to  the  m.

Tit.  3. 1.  put  them  in  mind  to  obey  m.  and  be  read -
MAGNIFICAT.

1  Chron.  22.  5.  the  house  must  be  exceeding  m.

MAGNIFICENCE.

Acts  19.  27.  and  her  ™.  should  be  destroyed
MAGNIFY

Signifies,  [1]  To  declare  and  show  forth  one’s  great
ness  and  glory,  Luke  1.  46.  [2]  To  increase  one
esteem,  reputation,  and  authority ,  Josh.  3  7  1  4

14.  1  Chron.  29.  25.

Josh.  3. 7.  Lord  said,  this  day  will  I  begin  to  m.  thee
Job  7. 17..  what  is  man  that  thou  shouldest  m.  him  3
19.  5.  if  indeed  ye  will  m.  yourselves  against  me
36.24.  remember  that  thou  in.  his  work  men  behold
Psal.  34.  3.  O  m.  the  Lord  with  me,  let  us  exalt
.35.  26.  clothed  with  shame  that  m.  themselv.  ag.  me
38.  16.  my  foot  slippeth  they  m.  themselv.  ag.  me
55.  12.  that  did  m.  himself  against  me
69.  30.  and  will  ™.  him  with  thanksgiving
Isa.  10. 15.  or  saw  w.  itself  ag.  him  that  shaketh  it

42.21.  he  will  ™.  the  law  and  make  it  honourable
Ezek.  38.  23.  thus  will  I  w.  myself,  and  sanctify
Dan.  8.  25.  and  he  shall  ™.  himself  in  his  heart

11.  .36.  the  king  shall  m.  himself  above  every  god

.37.  for  he  shall  w.  himself  above  all
Zech.  12.  7-  that  they  m.  not  themselves  ag.  Judah
Luke  1.  46.  Mary  said,  my  soul  doth  m.  the  I.oni
Acts  10. 46.  heard  him  speak  with  tongues,  and  ™.G.
Rom.  11. 13.  1  am  an  apostle,  1  ™.  mine  office
MAGNIFIED.

Gen.  19.  19.  behold,  thou  hast  w.  thy  mercy
Josh.  4.14.  the  Lord  m.  Joshua  in  the  sight  of  Israel

2  Sam.  7.  26.  let  thv  name  be  m.  1  Chron.  17.  24.

1  Chr.  29.  25.  and  the  Lord  m.  Solomon,  2  Chr  A.  1.

2  Chron.  32.  23.  Tlezekiah  was  m.  in  sight  of  all
Psal.  .35.  27.  let  them  say,  let  the  Lord  be  m.

40.  16.  say  continually,  the  Lord  be  m.  70.  4.

138.  2.  thou  hast  in.  thy  word  above  all  thy  name

Jer.  48.  26.  for  he  m.  himself  against  the  Lord,  42.

Ezek.  .35.  +  1.3.  Dan.  8.  11.
Lam  A.  9.  behold,  for  the  enemy  hath  m.  himself
Zeph.  2.  8  and  w.  themselves  against  their  border

10.  ™.  themselves  against  people  of  the  L.

Mai.  1.  5.  Lord  will  be  ™.  from  tne  border  of  Israel
Acts  5.  1.3.  but  the  people  in.  them

19-  17.  and  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  m.
Phil.  1.20.  Chr.  be  m,  in  my  body  by  life  or  death
MAID.

Gen,  16.  2.  T  pray  thee  go  in  unto  my  m.  TTagar

6.  behold,  thy  m.  is  in  thy  hand,  do  to  her  as  pleas.

8.  Ilag^ar,  Sarai’s  m.  whence  earnest  thou  ?

29.  24.  Laban  gave  Zilpah  his  m.  to  Leah
29.  Laban  gave  Billiah  to  be  Rachel’s  m.

30.  .3.  behold  my  m.  Rilhah,  go  in  unto  her

7.  Rachel’s  m.  conceived  ||  9.  gave  Zilpah  her  m.
10.  Zilpah,  Leah’s  m.  bare  Jacob  a  son,  12.

Exod.  2. 5.  when  she  saw  ark,  she  sent  her™,  to  fetch

8.  the  m.  went  and  called  the  child’s  mother

21.  20.  if  a  man  smite  his  m.  with  a  rod
26.  or  the  eye  of  his  m.  that  it  perish

22.  16.  if  a  man  entice  a  m.  not  betrothed

Lev.  25.  6.  the  sabb.  of  land  shall  be  meat  for  thy  w.
Dent.  22. 14.  I  came  to  her,  1  found  her  not  a  m.  17.

2  Kings 5.  2.  had  brought  away  captive  a  little  m.

4.  thus  and  thus  said  the  w.  that  is  of  Israel
Esth.  2.  7.  and  the  m,  was  fair  and  beautiful
Job  .31.  1.  why  then  should  I  think  on  a  m.?

Prov.  .30.  19.  and  the  way  of  a  man  with  a  w.

Isa. 24. 2.  it  shall  be  as  with  m.  so  with  her  mistress
Jer.  2.  32.  can  a  m.  forget  her  ornaments  ?

51.22.  1  will  break  the  young  man  and  the  m,
Amos  2.  7.  a  man  and  his  father  go  in  to  the  same  m.
Mat.  9.  24.  give  place,  for  the  th.  is  not  dead

25.  he  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  the  m.  arose
26.71.  anoth.  ™.  saw  him,  Mark  14.69.  Luke  22.56
Luke  8.  54.  and  he  called,  saying,  in.  arise

MAIDS.

Esth.  2.  9.  he  preferred  her  and  her  m.  to  best  place
Job  19.  15.  my™,  count  me  for  a  stranger
Lam.  5. 11.  they  ravished  the  m.  in  cities  of  Judah
Ezek.  9.  6.  slay  utterly  both  m.  and  little  children
Nah,  2. 7-  her  m.  shall  lead  her  with  voice  of  doves
Zech.  9. 17.  make  young  men  cheerful,  new  wine  m.
M  A 1 1) -child.

Lev.  12.5.  if  she  bear  a  m.  -child  unclean  two  weeks
MAIDEN.

Gen.  30.  18.  I  have  given  my  m.  to  my  husband
Judg.  19.  24.  behold,"  here  is  my  daughter  a  m.

2  Chron.  .36. 17-  no  compassion  on  young  man  or  m.
Esth.  2.  13.  thus  came  every  in.  to  the  king
Psal.  12.3.  2.  as  the  eyes  of  a  m.  to  her  mistress
LukeS.  51.  he  suffered  father  and  mother  of  the™.
MAIDENS.

Exod.  2.  5.  her  m.  walked  along  by  the  river
Ruth  2.  8.  but  abide  here  fast  by  my  m.

22.  it  is  good  that  thou  go  out  witfi  his  m.

23.  so  she  kept  fast  by  the  m.  of  Boaz

295


M  A  K


Sam.  9.  11.  thev  found  m.  going  to  draw  water
Esth.  4.  16.  1  anti  my  m.  will  fast  likewise
Job  41.  5.  wilt  thou  bind  him  for  thy  m.  I
Psal.  78.  63.  their  m.  were  not  given  to  marriage
148.  12.  young  men  and  m.  praise  the  Lord
Prov.  9.  3.  she4  hath  sent  forth  her  m.  she  cneth

27.  27.  and  for  the  maintenance  for  thy  m.

31.  15.  and  shegiveth  a  portion  to  her  m.

E cel.  2.  7.  I  got  me  servants  and  m.  and  had  sery.
Ezek.  44.  22.  they  shall  take  m.  of  seed  of  Israel
Luke  12.  45.  shall  begin  to  beat  men-servants  and  m.

'  MA1D-SE11VANT.

Exod.  11.  5.  even  to  the  tirst  born  of  the .m.-servant
20  10.  thy  m.-serv.  shall  do  no  work,  Deut.  5.  14.

17.  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour’s  wife,  nor  m.-s.

21.  7.  if  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a  m.-servant

27.  if  he  smite  out  his  m. -servant' .1  tooth,  he  shall
32.  if  an  ox  push  a  m.-s.  he  shall  give  30  shekels
Deut.  5.  14.  that  thy  m.-s.  may  rest  as  well  as  thou
21.  neither  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbour’s  m.-s.

12.  18.  eat  them,  thou  and  thy  m.-serv.  16. 11,  14.

15.  17.  to  thy  m.-servant  thou  shalt  do  likewise
Judy.  9.  18.  made  Abimelech  son  of  his  m.-s.  king
Job  31.  13.  if  I  end  despise  the  cause  of  my  m.-s.

Jer.  34.  9.  let  man-servant  and  m.-s.  go  free,  10.

M  A  I D-S  E  K  V  A  N  TS .

Gen.  12. 16.  Abram  had  m.-s.  and  she-asses,  24.  35.

20. 17.  God  healed  Abimelech’s  wife  and  m.-s.

30*.  43.  Jacob  had  much  cattle  and  m. -servants
31.  33.  Laban  entered  into  the  two  m.-s.  tents
Deut.  12.  12.  ye  shall  rejoice,  ye  and  your  m.-s.

1  Sam.  8.  16.  and  he  shall  take  your  m.-servants

2  Sam.  6.  22.  of  the  m.-s.  shall  1  be  had  in  honour
2  Kinas  5. 26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  m.-servants  ?

MAJESTY

Signifies,  [1]  The  infinite  dignity  and  glory  of  God ,
Psal.  104.  1.  Jude  25.  [2]  The  pomp,  splendour,
and  grandeur  of  earthly  princes,  Esth.  1.  4.

1  Chron.  29. 11.  thine,  O  Lord,  is  the  power  and  m.

25.  and  bestowed  upon  him  such  royal  m.

Esth.  1.  4.  when  he  shewed  the  honour  of  his  m.

Job  37.  22.  with  God  is  terrible  m.

40.  10.  deck  thyself  now  with  m.  and  excellency
Psal.  21.  5.  honour  and  m.  hast  thou  laid  on  him

29.  4.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  full  of  m.

45.  3.  with  thy  glory  and  m.  ||  4.  in  thy  m.  ride
93.  l.the  Lord  reigneth,  he  is  clothed  with  m.

96.  6.  honour  and  m.  are  before  him

104. 1.  thou  art  clothed  with  honour  and  m.

145.  5.  1  will  speak  of  the  honour  of  thy  m.

12.  tomake  known  the  glorious  m.  of  his  kingdom
Isa.  2.  10.  hide  thee  for  the  glory  of  his  m.  19,  21

24. 14.  they  shall  sing  for  the  m.  of  the  Lord

26.  10.  and  will  not  behold  the  m.  of  the  Lqrd
Ezek.  7.20.  as  for  beauty  of  ornament,  he  set  it  in  m.
Dan.  4.  30.  that  l  built  for  the  honour  ot  my  m.

36.  and  excellent  m.  was  added  unto  me

5.  18.  God  gave  Nebuchadnezzar  thy  father  m.

19.  for  the  m.  he  gave  him,  all  people  trembled
Mtc.  5.  4.  feed  in  m.  of  the  name  of  Lord  his  God
Heb.  1.3.  he  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  m.  8. 1

2  Pet.  1. 16.  but  were  eye-witnesses  of  his  m.

Jude  25.  to  the  only  wise  (tod  be  glory  and  m.  .

MAIL.

1  Sam.  17.  5.  he  was  armed  with  a  coat  of  m  38.
MAIMED.

Lev.  22. 22.  blind  or  m.  ye  shall  not  offer  to  the  Ld
Mat.  15.  30.  having  with  them  those  that  were  m.

31.  wondered  wlfen  they  saw  the  m.  to  be  whole

18.  8.  better  to  enter  into  life  m.  Mark  9.  43.

Luke  14.  13.  when  thou  makest  a  feast,  call  the  m.

21.  bring  in  hither  the  poor  and  m.  halt  and  blind
MAIN.

Arts 97. 40.  they  hoised  up  the  w.-sail  to  the  wind
MAINTAIN

Signifies,  [1]  To  uphold  and  preserve,  Psal.  16.  5.
[21  To  repair,  1  Chron.  26.  27.  compared  with  2
Kings  12.  5.  [3]  To  plead,  Psal.  140.  12.  [4]  To
profess  and  piactise,  l  it.  3.  8, 14.  [5]  To  prove  or
argue.  Job  13.  +  15.  [6]  To  make,  Psal.  9.  +4.

1  Kings 8.  45.  m.  their  cause,  49,  59.  2  Chr.  6.  35, 39
1  Chron.  26.  27.  they  dedicate  to  m.  the  house  of  L.
Job  13. 15.  but  1  will  m.  mineown  ways  before  him
Pi.  140.  12.  Lord  will  m.  the  cause  of  the  afflicted
Tit.  3.8.  might  be  careful  to  m.  good  works
14.  let  ours  also  learn  to  m.  good  works  tor  uses
MAINTAIN  ED.

Psal.  9.  4.  for  thou  hast  m.  my  right  and  my  cause
MAINTAIN  EST.

Psal.  16. 5.  Lord  is  my  portion,  and  thou  m.  my  lot
MAINTENANCE.

Ezra  4. 14.  because  we  have  m.  from  the  king
Prov.  27.  27.  and  for  the  m.  for  thy  maidens
MAKE

Signifies,  [1]  To  create,  frame,  or  fashion,  Gen.  1

31.  Exod.  32.  1.  Isa.  45.  9.  [2]  To  choose,  or
bring  that  to  be  which  was  not  so  before,  1  Sam.

12.  22.  [3]  To  call  one  to  a  new  vocation,  and  fit
and  qualify  him  for  the  same ,  Mat.  4.  19.  [4]  To
ordain  and  appoint.  Acts  26.  16.  [5]  To  turn.
Psal.  41.  +  3.  [6],  To  build,  Ezra  5.  +  5.  [7]  To
change  one  thing  into  another,  John  2.  9.  [help

Gen.  1.  26.  let  us  m.  man  |1  2. 18.  1  will  m.  him  an

3.  6.  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  m.  one  wise
21.  m.  coats  of  skins  ||  6.  14.  m.  thee  an  ark

11 . 3.  let  us  m.  brick  ||  4.  let  us  m.  us  a  name

12.  2.  1  will  m.  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and  1  will

bless  thee,  21.  18.  146.  3.  Exod.  32.  10.

4.  let  us  m.  us  a  name,  lest  w’e  be  scattered

13.  16. 1  will  m.  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  earth
17.  6.  1  will  m.  thee  exceeding  fruitful,  48.  4.

17.  20.  I  will  m.  Ishmael  fruitful,  1  will  m.

19.  32.  let  us  m.  our  father  drink  wine,  34.

26.  4.  I  will  m.  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven
27/4.  Isa.  said,  m.me  savoury  meat,  such  as  1  love

28. 3.  G.  A  Imighty  bless  thee,  and  m.thee  fruitful

32.  12.  I  will  m.  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  sea
34. 9.  m.  ye  marriages  with  us,  and  give  daughters

30.  ye  m.  me  to  stink  among  the  inhabitants
35.  1.  go  to  Beth-el.  and  m.  there  an  altar  to  God
3.  1  will  m.  there  an  altar  urrto  God
40.  14.  and  m.  mention  of  me  to  Pharaoh

"296


M  A  K

Gen.  47.  6.  in  best  of  the  land  m.  thy  father  to  dw.
48.  20.  God  m.  thee  as  Ephraim  and  Manasseh
Exod.  5. 16.  no  straw  given,  they  say  to  us,  m.  brick
’2.  4.  shall  m.  your  count  for  the  lamb
lb.  16.  I  do  m.  them  know  the  statutes  of  God
20.  4.  thou  shalt  not  m.  unto  thee  any  graven  image,
or  likeness,  Lev.  if).  1.  Deut.  5.  8.

23.  ve  shall  not  m.  with  me  gods  of  silver

24.  an  altar  of  earth  shalt  thou  m.  unto  me

25.  if  thou  wilt  m.  me  an  altar  of  stones

22.  3.  for  he  should  m.  full  restitution,  5,  6,  12.

23.  13.  m.  no  mention  of  other  gods,  Josh.  23.  7.
27.  I  will  m.  enemies  turn  their  backs  to  thee
3.3!  shall  notdwell,  lest  they  m.  theesin  against  me

25.  8.  m.  me  a  sanctuary  |1  9.  so  shall  ye  m.  it
28.  2.  thou  shalt  m.  holy  garments  tor  Aaron,  4.

4.  these  are  the  garments  which  they  shall  m.

40.  for  Aaron’s  sons  thou  shalt  m.  coats,  girdles
42.  thou  shalt  m.  them  linen  breeches
30  1.  thou  shalt  m.  him  an  altar  of  shittim-wood

25.  thou  shalt  m.  it  an  oil  ot  holy  ointment

37.  as  to  perfume,  you  shall  not  m.  like  to  it
31.  6.  that  they  m.  all  that  I  commanded,  35.  10.
32. 1.  up,  m.  us  gods  to  go  before  us,  23.  Acts  7.  40.

10.  1  will  m.  of  thee  a  great  nation
33  19.  1  will  m.  mv  goodness  pass  before  thee
34*  16.  and  m.  thy  sons  go  a  whoring  after  their  gods
17.  thou  shalt  not  m.  molten  gods,  Lev.  19.  4.

36.  6.  neither  man  nor  woman  m.  any  more
Lev.  5.  16.  he  shall  m.  amends  for  the  harm  done

11.  4.3.  not  m.  yourselves  abominable,  20.  25.

19.  28.  not  m.  any  cuttings  in  your  flesh  for  dead
21.  5.  thev  shall  not  m.  baldness,  Deut.  14.  1.

26.  9.  I  will  m.  you  fruitful,  and  multiply  you
19.  I  will  m.  your  heaven  as  iron,  earth  as  brass
22.  beasts,  which  shall  m.  you  few  in  number

27.  2.  when  a  man  shall  m.  a  singular  vow
Num.  5.  21.  the  L.  m.  thee  a  curse,  m.  thy  thigh  rot

6.  7.  he  shall  not  m.  himself  unclean  for  his  father
25.  the  Lord  m.  his  face  to  shine  upon  thee
8.  7.  let  them  wash,  and  s©  m.  themselves  clean
14.  4.  let  us  m.  a  captain,  and  return  to  Egypt

12.  1  will  m.  of  thee  a  greater  nation  than  they

16.  13.  except  thou  m.  thyself  a  prince  over  us
30.  if  the  Lord  m.  a  new  thing  and  the  earth  open

38.  let  them  m.  them  broad  plates  for  the  altar

17.  5.  I  will  m.  to  cease  from  me  the  murmurings
21.  8.  m.  thee  a  fiery  serpent,  and  set  it  on  a  pole

30.  8.  he  shall  m.  her  vow  of  none  effect

31.  23.  ye  shall  m.  it  go  through  fire  and  water
Dent.  1.11.  Lord  m.  you  a  thousand  times  more

13.  and  I  will  m.  them  rulers  over  you
4.  10.  I  w  ill  m.  them  hear  my  words  to  fear  me


16.  lest  ve  m.  you  a  graven  image,  23.

7.  3.  nor  shalt  thou  m.  marriages  with  them

8.  3.  m.  thee  know  that  man  liveth  not  by  bread
20.  11.  if  it  m.  thee  answer  of  peace,  and  open  to

12.  if  it  will  m.  no  peace  with  thee,  but  war
26.  19.  to  m.  thee  high  above  all  nations  he  made
28.  11.  the  Lord  shall  m.  thee  plenteous,  30.  9.

13.  Lord  shall  m.  thee  the  head,  and  not  the  tail
32.  26.  m.  the  remembrance  of  them  to  cease

39.  1  kill,  and  1  m.  alive,  1  wound,  and  I  heal
Josh.  1.  8.  thou  shalt  m.  thy  way  prosperous

6.  18.  lest  ye  m.  yourselves  accursed,  and  m.  the

eamp  of  Israel  a  curse,  and  trouble  it

7.  19.  and  m.  confession  to  him,  Ezra  10.  11.

22.  25.  so  shall  your  children  m.  our  child,  cease

23.  12.  and  shall  m.  marriages  with  them
Jvdg.  16.  25.  Samson,  that  he  may  m.  us  sport
Buth  4.  11.  L.  m.  the  woman  like  Rachel  and  Leah

1  Sam.  1.  6.  provoked  her  sore,  to  m.  her  tret
2.  8.  and  to  m.  them  inherit  the  throne  ot  glory

24.  ye  m.  the  Lord’s  people  to  transgress
29.  to  m.  yourselves  fat  with  chiefest  offerings
6.  5.  ye  shall  m.  images  of  your  emerods

7.  m.  anew  cart  H  8.  5.  m.  us  a  king  to  judge  us

8.  22.  hearken  to  them,  and  m.  them  a  king
12.  22.  L.  will  not  forsake,  because  it  hath  pleased

the  Lord  to  m.  you  his  people,  1  Chron.  17.  22
25.  28.  the  Ixird  will  m.  my  lord  a  sure  house

28.  2.  1  will  m.  thee  keeper  of  mine  head  tor  ever

29.  4.  m.  thh  fellow  return  that  he  may  eo  again

2  Sam.  7.  11  at  he  will  m.  thee  an  house
21.  hast  d(  1  *>ese  things,  to  m.  thy  servant  know
23.  to  m.  hii  .  name  ||  13.  5.  and  m.  thyself  sick

15.  20.  should  I  m.  thee  go  up  and  down  with  us?
23.  5.  all  mv  desire,  though  he  m.  it  not  to  grow

1  Kings  1.  37.  m.  his  throne  greater  than  David’s
47.  God  m.  the  name  of  Solomon  better  than

2.  42.  did  I  not  m.  thee  to  swear  by  the  Lord

8.  29.  mayest  hearken  to  the  prayer  which  thy  ser

vant  shall  m.  toward  this  place,  2  Chr.  6.  21.
33.  shall  confess  thy  name,  pray,  and  m.  suppli
cation  to  thee  in  this  house,  47-  2  Chron.  6.  24.

11.  34.  1  will  m.  him  prince  all  the  days  of  his  life

12.  9.  m.  the  yoke  lighter.  10.  2  Chron.  10.  10.

16.  3.  I  will  m.  thy  house  like  the  house  of  Jero¬

boam  the  son  of  Nebat,  21. 22.  2  Kings  9.  9.

17.  13.  and  after  m.  for  thee  and  for  thy  son
19.  2.  if  m.  not  thy  life  as  the  life  of  one  of  them

2  Kings  A.  10.  let  us  m.  a  little  chamber  on  the  wall

5.  7.  am  1  God  to  kill  and  to  m.  alive  ?

6.  2.  let  us  m.  a  place,  where  we  may  dwell

7.  2.  if  Lord  would  m.  windows  in  heaven,  19.

9.  2.  m.  him  arise  up,  and  anoint  him  king

10.  5.  we  will  not  m.  any  king,  do  that  is  good

18.  .31.  m.  an  agreement  with  me,  Isa.  36.  16.
21.8.  nor  will  I  m.  feet  of  Israel  move  any  more
23.  10.  that  no  man  might  m.  his  son  or  daughter  to

pass  through  the  fire  to  Molech,  Ezek.  20.  .31.


1  Chron.  11. 10.  all  Israel  to  m.  him  king,  12.  31,  38.
17.  21.  tow.  thee  a  nameofgreatn.  and  terribleness
21.  3.  Lord  m.  his  people  100  times  so  many  more

28.  4.  he  liked  me  to  m.  me  king  over  Israel

29.  12.  O  Lord,  in  thine  hand  it  is  to  m.  great

2  Chr.  7.  20.  will  m.  it  a  proverb  among  all  nations
11.  22.  for  he  thought  to  m.  him  king
25.  8.  God  shall  m.  thee  fall  before  the  enemy
Ezra  6.8.  1  m.  a  decree  what  ye  s  all  do,  7.  13,  21.
Neh.  8. 15.  fetch  branches  of  thick  trees  to  m.  booths
Esth.  4.  8.  go  in  to  the  king  to  m.  supplication  to  him


M  A  K

Esth.  7.  7.  Daman  stood  up  to  m.  request  for  his  life

9.  22.  they  should  m.  them  days  of  feasting  anu  joy
job  5  18.  "he  woundeth  and  his  hands  m.  whole

8.  5.  m.  thy  supplication  to  the  Almighty,  22.  2*.

9.  30.  and  if  1  m.  my  hands  never  so  clean

11.  3.  should  thy  lies  m.  men  hold  their  peace  '

13.  23.  m.  me  to  know  my  transgression  and  sin
19!  3.  that,  ye  m.  yourselves  strange  to  me
24.  25.  if  it  be  not  so  now,  who  v  ill  m.  me  a  liar?

31.  15.  did  not  he  thatmade  me  in  womb  m.  him  -

34.  29.  he  giveth  quietness,  who  then  can  m. trouble  ?

35.  9.  they  m.  the  oppressed  to  cry,  they  cry  out
40. 10.  can  m.  his  sword  to  approach  to  him

41.  3.  will  he  m.  many  supplications  to  thee  ?

Psal.  5.  8.  m.  thy  way  straight  before  my  face
+  10.  m.  them  guilty,  O  God,  let  them  tall

6.  6.  all  the  night  m.  I  my  bed  to  sw  im

20.  +3.  the  Lord  m.  fat  thy  burnt  sacrifice
21 . 9.  thou  shalt  m.  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in  anzer

12.  therefore  thou  shalt  m.  them  turn  their  back

22.  9.  thou  didst  m.  me  hope  when  on  breasts

25  t  14.  he  will  m.  them  know  his  covenant
31.  16.  m.  thy  face  shine  on  thy  servant,  119.  135.
34.  2.  my  soul  shall  m.  her  boast  in  the  Lord
39.  4.  Lord,  m.  me  to  know  mine  end  and  days
8.  m.  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  foolish
40. 17.  m.  no  tarrying, 70.5.  ||  41. 3. will  m.all  his  bed

45.  17.  1  will  m.  thy  name  to  be  remembered

46.  4.  the  streams  shall  m.  glad  the  city  of  God

51.  6.  in  hidden  part  shalt  m.  me  know  wisdom

8.  m.  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness,  that  the  bones
57.  1.  of  thy  wings,  will  I  m.  my  refuge.  61.  +  4.
66.  2.  sing  forth  his  name,  m.  his  praise  glorious
8.  ye  people,  m.  the  voice  of  his  praise  to  be  heard

83.  2.  for  lo,  thine  enemies  m.  a  tumult
11.  m.  their  nobles  like  Oreb  and  Zeeb

13.  O  my  God.  m.  them  like  a  wheel

84.  6.  through  the  valley  of  Baca,  m.  it  a  well
89. 27.  also  1  will  m.  him  my  first-born

29.  his  seed  also  will  1  m.  to  endure  tor  ever

90. 15.  m.  us  glad,  according  to  the  days  afflicted
110.  1.  until  1  m.  thine  enemies  thy  footstool,

Mat.  22.  44.  Mark  12.  36.  Luke  20.  43.
Acts  2.  35.  Heb.  1.  13.

115.8.  thev  that  m.  them  are  like  unto  them,  135. 18.
119.  ‘jj.m'.me  to  understand  the  way  ofthy  precepts
35.  m.  me  go  in  the  path  of  thy  commandments
132.  17.  there  will  1  m.  the  horn  of  David  to  bud
137.  +  7.  m.  bare  even  to  the  foundation
139.  8.  if  1  m.  my  bed  in  hell,  thou  art  there
142. 1.  to  the  Lord  did  l  m.  my  supplication
Prov.  6.  3.  go  humble  thyself,  and  m.  sure  thy  friend

14.  9.  fools  m.  a  mock  at  sin,  but  among  righteous
20.  18.  and  with  good  advice  m.  war

25.  it  is  a  snare  after  vows  to  m.  enquiry  _

22.  91.  that  1  might  m.  thee  know  the  certainty

24.  m.  no  friendship  with  an  argry  man

23.  5.  for  riches  certainly  m.  themselves  wings

27.  11.  my  son,  be  wise,  and  m.  my  heart  glad

30.  26.  yet  m.  they  their  houses  in  the  rocks
Eccl.  7.  13.  who  can  m.  that  straight  which  he  _

16.  not  right,  over-much,  nor  m.  thyself  over-wise
Isa.  1. 15.  when  ye  m.  many  prayers,  1  will  not  heal
16.  wash  you.  m.you  clean  ||  3. 7 •  m.  me  not  a  ruler

6.  10.  m .  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  ears  heavy

7.  6.  and  let  us  m.  a  breach  therein  for  us  -
t  11.  m.  thy  petition  deep,  or  in  the  height  ab®ve

10.  23.  the  J.ord  of  hosts  shall  m.  a  consumption

11.  3.  and  shall  m.  him  of  quick  understanding

15.  and  shall  m.  men  go  over  dry  shod

12.  4.  m.  mention  that  his  name  is  exalted
1.3.12.  1  will  m.  a  man  more  precimis  than  gold

16.  3.  m.  thy  shadow  as  the  night  in  noon-day

25.  6.  Lord  m.  to  all  people  a  feast  of  tat  things

27. 5.  that  he  may  tn.  peace  “with  me,  and  he  shall

28.  9.  whom  shall  hew.  to  understand  doctrine  :

29.  21.  that  m.  a  man  an  offender  tor  a  word

32.  6.  to  m.  empty  the  soul  of  the  hungry
38.  16.  so  wilt  thou  recover  me  and  m.  me  live

40.  3.  m.  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our
God,  Mat.  3.  3.  Mark  1.  .3.  Lube  3.  4,

41.  18.  I  will  m.  the  wilderness  a  pool  of  water

42.  15.  I  will  m.  the  rivers  islands,  dry  up  pools

16.  I  will  m.  darkness  light  before  them

21.  he  will  magnify  and  m.  the  law  honourable

43.  19.  1  will  e\  eu  m.  a  w  ay  in  the  wilderness

44.  9.  they  that  tn.  a  graven  image  are  vanity

45.  2.  and  m.  the  crooked  places  straight
7.  I  w,  peace  and  create  evil ,  1  the  L.  do  all  thmgi
+  13.  and  l  will  m.  straight  all  his  ways

14.  they  shall  m.  supplication  to  thee

46.5. to  whom  will  ye  w.me  equal,  and  compare  mi

47.  2.  m.  bare  the  leg,  uncover  the  thigh,  passover

48. 15.  and  he  shall  m.  his  w  ay  prosperous

49.  11.  and  I  will  m.  all  my  mountains  a  way

50.  2.  behold  1  m.  the  rivers  a  wilderness

51.  4.  1  will  m.  my  judgments  to  rest  fora  light

52.  5.  they  that  rule  over  them,  m.  them  to  howl

53.  10.  when  thou  shalt  m.  his  soul  an  offering

54.  12.  1  will  m.  thy  windows  of  agates,  thy  gate;

56.  7.  I  will  m.  them  joyful  in  my  house  of  pra^e

57.  4.  against  whom  m.  ye  a  wide  mouth  ?

58.  4.  to  m.  your  voice  to  be  heard  on  high

11.  and  the  l  ord  shall  m.  fat  thy  bones
60.  13.  1  will  m.  the  place  of  my  feet  glorious

15. 1  will  m.  thee  an  eternal  excellency

17.  1  will  m.  also  thy  officers  peace  and  exactor

62.  7.  till  he  m.  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth

63.  6.  and  1  will  m.  them  drunk  in  my  fury

12.  the  water  to  m.  himself  an  everlasting  name

14.  lead  thy  people  to  m.  thyself  a  glorious  earn

64.  2.  to  m.  thy  name  known  to  thy  adversaries
66.22.  as  new  earth  which  I  will  m.  shall  teniat

Jer.  4.  30.  in  vain  shalt  thou  m.  thyself  fair

5.  14.  I  will  ra.  my  words  in  thy  mouth  fire

6.  26.  m.  thee  mourning,  as  for  an  only  son
7. 16.  nor  m.  intercession  to  me  for  this  people
9. 11. 1  will  tn.  Jerusalem  heaps  and  den  of  dragot
13.  16.  he  turn  it,  and  m.  it  gross  darkness

15.  20.  I  will  m.  thee  a  fenced  brasen  wal
16. 20.  shall  a  man  m.  gods  to  himself,  and  no  g°'

18.  4.  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  tom.  it


M  AK


M  AK


MAL


er.  19.  7-  1  will  m.  void  counsel  of  Judah  and  Jeru.
12.  1  will  even  rn.  this  city  as  Tophet
jo,  4.  I  will  m.  thee  a  terror  to  thyself
22.  6.  yet  surely  1  will  m.  thee  a  wilderness

23.16.  hearken  not  to  the  prophets, .they  in.  you  vain
■26.  6.  then  will  1  in.  this  house  like  Shiloh

27 .2. in.  thee  bonds  and  yokes,  put  them  on  thy  neck

18.  let  them  now  m.  intercession  to  the  Lord
29.  17-  behold,  l  will  m.  them  like  vile  figs
22.  the  Lord  in.  thee  like  Zedekiah  and  Ahab

54. 17.  1  will  m.  you  be  removed  into  all  kingdoms
14.  19.  did  we  m.  her  cakes  to  worship  her  ?

18. 26.  m. ye  him  drunken,  for  he  magnified  himself
49.  15.  I  will  m.  thee  small  among  the  heathen
jh  25.  I  will  m.  thee  a  burnt  mountain
36.  and  m.  her  springs  dry  J|  39-  m.  them  drunken
57.  I  will  m.  drunk  Tier  princes  and  wise  men
'.am.  3.  f  21.  this  I  m.  to  return  to  my  heart
t'.zek.  4.  9.  m.  bread  thereof  ||  7-  23.  m.  a  chain
14.8. 1  will  m.  him  a  sign  and  a  proverb,  and  cut  off

16.  42.  I  will  711.  my  fury  towaid  thee  to  rest
18.  31.  and  m.  you  a  new  heart,  and  anew  spirit

21.  10.  it  is  furbished,  should  we  then  in.  mirth  ?
t  27.  perverted,  perverted,  perverted  will  I  m.  it

22.  30.  sought  a  man  that  should  in.  up  the  hedge

24.  17.  m.  no  mourning  for  the  dead,  bind  the  tire
26.  4.  and  m.  her  like  the  top  oi  a  rock,  14.

21.  I  will  m.  thee  a  '.error,  thou  shalt  be  no  more
32.  7.  I  will  m.  the  stars  thereof  dark,  8.

34.  26.  and  1  will  m.  them  and  places  a  blessing
37.  19.  m.  them  one  stick,  shall  be  one  in  my  hand

22.  1  will  m.  them  one  nation  in  the  land

44.  14.  I  will  m.  them  keepers  of  charge  of  house
)an.  4.  25.  shall  in.  thee  to  eat  grass  as  oxen,  32.

8. 16.  m.  this  man  to  understand  the  vision,  10.  14.
9.24.  seventy  weeks  to  m.  reconciliation  for  iniqui.

11.  35.  some  shall  fall  to  in.  them  white

44.  he  shall  go  utterly  to  purge  and  m.  away  many
ios.  2. 3.  lest  1  m.  her  as  a  wilderness,  and  slay  her
6.  I  will  in.  a  wall,  that  she  shall  not  find  her  path
18.  and  I  will  m.  them  to  lie  down  safely

7.  3.  they  in.  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness

10.  11.  1  will  in.  Ephraim  ride,  Judah  shall  plow
11.8.  how  shall  m.  thee  as  Adma.  set  thee  as  Zeboim

12.  9.  I  will  yet  m.  thee  dwell  in  tabernacles

oel  2.  19.  nor  will  I  m.  you  a  reproach  any  more
intos  8.  4.  even  to  m.  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail
9.14.  they  shall  m.  gardens,  and  eat  fruit  of  them
1 lie.  3.  5.  the  prophets  that  m.  my  people  err

4.  7-  I  will  m.  her  that  halted  a  remnant

6.  13.  therefore  1  will  m.  thee  sick  in  smiting  thee
Vah.  1.  14.  1  will  m.  thy  grave,  for  thou  art  vile
3.  6.  I  will  cast  filth  on  thee,  and  m.  thee  vile
15 .in.  thyself  many  as  the  canker-worm,  or  locusts
lab. 2.2.  write  the  vision.and  in.  it  plain  upon  tables
3.  19.  he  will  m.  my  feet  like  hinds’  feet
leph.  1.  18.  for  he  shall  m.  even  a  speedy  riddance
3.  20.  for  I  will  m.  you  a  name  and  a  praise
lag.  2.  23.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  m.  thee  a  signet
Tech.  10. 1.  so  the  Lord  shall  in.  bright  clouds
12.  2.  I  will  m.  Jerusalem  a  cup  or  trembling
3.  in  that  day  will  I  in.  Jerus.  a  burdensome  stone
1/a/.  2.  15.  did  not  he  m.  one  ?  yet  had  the  residue

3. 17.  in  that  day  when  I«.  up  'my  jewels

Mat.  1.  19.  not  willing  to  m.  her  a  public  example
4. 19.  I  will  m.  you  fishers  of  men,  Mark  1 .  17.

5.  36.  thou  canst  not  m.  one  hair  white  or  black

8.  2.  behold,  a  leper  said,  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou

canst  m.  me  clean,  Mark  1.  40.  Luke  5.  12.

12.  33.  m.  the  tree  good,  m.  the  tree  corrupt

17.  4.  Peter  said.  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  let  us  m.  here

three  tabernacles,  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33.

23.  14.  for  pretence  m.  long  prayers,  Mark  12.40.
15.  to  m.  one  proselyte,  and  when  he  is  made
25.  ye  m.  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup,  Luke  11.  39.

25.  21.  I  will  m.  thee  ruler  over  many  things
27-  65.  go  your  way,  in.  it  as  sure  as  ye  can
Mark  5.  39.  why  in.  ye  this  ado  and  weep  ?

Luke  5.34.  can  ye  m.  children  of  bride-chamber  fast?

11.  40.  did  he  not  m.  that  which  is  within  also  ?

14.  18.  all  with  one  consent  began  to  m.  excuse

15.  19.  m.  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants

16.  9.  m.  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness

1.  23.  in.  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord
2. 16.  m.  not  my  Father’s  house  house  of  merchand.
6  15.  and  take  him  by  force  to  m.  him  a  king

8.  32.  know  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  m.  you  free
36.  if  the  Son  m.  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed
10.  24.  how  long  dost  thou  m.  us  to  doubt  ?

14.  23.  we  will  come  and  m.  our  abode  with  him
lets  2.  28.  m.  me  full  of  joy  with  thy  countenance

9.  34.  Peter  said  to  him?  arise  and  m.  thy  bed
2o.  16.  to  m.  thee  a  minister  and  a  witness

24.  Paul,  much  learning  doth  in.  thee  mad
Rom.  3.  3.  m.  the  faith  of  God  without  effect
31.  do  we  then  m.  void  the  law  through  faith  ?
9.21.  power  to  in.  one  vessel  unto  honour
28.  snort  work  will  the  Lord  m.  on  the  earth

13.  14.  and  m.  not  provision  for  the  flesh
14.4.  for  God  is  able  to  m.  him  stand

19.  follow  the  things  which  m.  for  peace

26.  to  m.  a  certain  contribution  for  the  poor
jl  Lor.  6.  15.  and  m.  them  the  members  of  a  harlot
8  13.  if  meat  m.  my  brother  to  offend
*0. 13.  with  temptation  also  ni.  a  way  to  escape
-  y°.r •  2.  2.  if  1  m.  you  sorry,  who  then  maketh  glad  ?
9.  5.  and  in.  up  beforehand  your  bounty

8.  and  God  is  able  to  m.  all  grace  abound

12.  17.  did  I  m.  gain  of  you  by  any  of  them  ?

,  a '■  2.  18.  I  m.  myself  a  transgressor

?•  tlia.t  it  should  m.  the  promise  of  none  effect
^0.  12.  as  many  as  desire  to  m.  a  fair  shew  in  flesh
:  P‘-  2.  15.  to  in.  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man
12.  the  Lord  m.  you  to  increase  in  love
■  !.,  ess •  3. 9.  butto  in.  ourselves  an  ensample  toyou
lm-  3.  15.  are  able  to  in.  thee  wise  to  salvation
11  a  m’  *u^  Pro°f  of  thy  ministry
‘tek.  2.  W).  to  m.  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  perf.
17.  to  w.  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people
•V  s’  "e  ever  .liveth  to  m.  intercession  for  them
u  1  m'  things  according  to  pattern  shewed

9.  9.  could  not  m.  him  that  did  service  perfect


Heb.  10.  1.  m.  the  comers  thereunto  peifect

12.  13.  and  m.  straight  paths  for  your  feet

13. 21 .  m.  you  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  do  will
Jam.  3.  18.  is  sown  in  peace,  of  them  that  m.  peace

1  Pet.  5. 10.  the  God  of  all  grace  m.  you  perfect

2  Pet.  1.  10.  in.  your  calling  and  election  sure

1  John  1.  10.  we  m.  him  a  liar,  his  word  is  not  in  us
Rev.  3.  9.  1  will  m.  them  worship  before  thy  feet

12.  I  will  m.  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God

10.  9.  eat  it,  and  it  shall  m.  thy  belly  bitter

11.  7.  shall  in.  war  against  them,  and  overcome

12.  17.  went  to  in.  war  with  the  remnant  other  seed

13.  4.  saying,  who  is  able  to  in.  war  with  him  ?

14.  that  they  should  m.  an  image  to  the  beast

19.  11.  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  m.  war

21.  5.  behold,  1  in.  all  things  new.

See  Afraid,  Atonement,  Covenant,  Deso¬
late,  Desolation,  End,  Fire,  Good.
MAKE  haste.

Deut.  32.  35.  the  things  that  come  on  them  m.  haste
Judg.  9.  48.  and  said,  in.  haste  and  do  as  1  have  done

1  Sam.  9. 12.  behold,  he  is  before  you,  m.  haste  now

2  Chron.  35. 21.  for  God  commanded  me  to  in  .  haste
Esth.5.5.  king  said,  cause  Haman  to  m.  haste ,  6. 10.
Job  20.  2.  cause  me  to  answer,  for  this  \  in.  haste
Psal.  38. 22.  m.  haste  to  help  me,  O  Jxnd,  my  sal¬
vation,  40.  13.  I  70.  1. 1  71.  12.

70. 5.  I  am  poor  and  needy,  m.  haste  unto  me, 141.1.
Prov.  1. 16.  they  in.  haste  to  shed  blood,  Isa.  59.  7-
Cant.  8. 14.  m.  haste,  my  beloved,  and  be  like  a  roe
Isa.  28. 16.  he  that  believeth  shall  not  in.  haste

49. 17.  thy  children  shall  m.  haste ,  thy  destroyers
Jer.  9.  18.  let  them  m.  haste,  and  take  up  a  wailing
Nah.  2. 5.  they  shalt  m.  haste  to  the  wall  thereof
Luke  19. 5. he  said.Zaccheus,  in. haste  and  comedown
hfrfr22.18.///.  haste  and  getquickly  out  of  Jerusalem
See  Known.

MAKE  manifest.

1  Cor.  4. 5.  will  m.  manifest  the  counsels  of  the  heart
Eph.  5.  13.  whatsoever  doth  m.  manifest  is  light
Col.  4.  4.  that  1  rpay  m.  it  manifest  as  1  ought

See  Mention,  Foise.

MAKE  ready.

Gen.  18.  6.  m.  ready  three  measures  of  fine  meal
43. 16.  m.  ready,  for  these  men  shall  dine  with  me

2  Kings  9. 21 .  and  Joratn  said,  m.  r.  and  he  went  out
Psal.  11.  2.  they  m.  ready  their  arrow  on  the  string-

21.  12.  when  thou  shalt  m.  ready  thine  arrows
Ezek.  7. 14.  they  have  blown  the  trumpet  to  in.  ready
Mark  14.  15.  there  m.  ready  for  us,  Luke  22.  12.
Luke  1.  17.  to  m.  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the

[Lord

17. 8.  rather  say,  m.  ready,  wherewith  T  may  sup
Acts  23.  23.  m.  ready  200  soldiers  to  go  to  Cesarea

MAKE  speed.

1  Sam.  20.  38.  he  cried,  m.  speed,  haste,  stay  not

2  Sam.  15. 14.  m.  speed  to  depart,  lest  he  overtake
Isa.  5. 19.  that  say,  let  him  m.  speed  and  hasten

MAKE  waste.

Lev.  26.  31.  I  will  m.  you r  cities  waste,  and  bring
Isa.  42.  15.  I  will  m.  waste  mountains  and  hills
Ezek.  5. 14.  moreover,  I  will  m.  Jerusalem  waste
29.  10. 1  will  m.  land  of  Egypt  utterly  waste,  30. 12.

MAKER,  or  MAKERS.

Job  4.  17.  shall  a  man  be  more  pure  than  his  M. ?

32.22.  in  so  doing  my  M.  will  soon  take  me  away

35. 10.  but  none  saith,  where  is  God  my  M.  ?

36.  3.  T  will  ascribe  righteousness  to  my  M.

Psal.  95.  6.  let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  M.
Prov.  14.31.  oppressed)  the  poor,  reproacheth  his  M.

17.5.  whoso  mocketh  the  poor  reproacheth  his  M.
22. 2.  rich  and  poor,  the  1  x>rd  is  the  m.  of  them  all

Isa.  1.  31.  and  the  in.  of  it  as  a  spark
17.  7-  at  that  day  shall  a  man  look  to  his  AT.

22.  11.  ye  have  not  looked  to  the  in.  thereof

33.  +  22.  the  Lord  is  our  statute  in.  he  will  save  us
45.  9-  woe  to  him  that  striveth  with  his  M.

11.  thus  saith  the  holy  One  of  Israel  and  his  M.
16.  they  shall  go  to  confusion  that  are  m.  of  idols
51. 13.  forgettest  the  Lord  thy  m.  that  stretched  out

54.5.  thy  M.  is  thy  husband,  and  thy  Redeemer
Jer.  3.3.  2.  thus  saith  the  lx>rd  the  m.  thereof
Has.  8.  14.  for  Israel  hath  forgotten  his  M.

Hah.  2.  18.  what  profiteth  the  graven  image  that  the
m.  hath  graven,  m.  of  his  work  trustetn  therein  ?
Heb.  11. 10.  tor  a  city,  whose  builder  and  m.  is  God
MAKEST,

Judg.  18.  3.  and  what  in.  thou  in  this  place  ?

Job  1.3. 26.  m.  me  possess  the  iniquities  of  my  youth
22.  3.  is  it  gain  to  him  that  thou  in.  thy  ways  perfect?
Psal.  4.  8.  thou  only  m.  me  to  dwell  in  safety

39. 11.  thou  m.  his  beauty  to  consume  as  a  moth
44.  10.  thou  m.  us  to  turn  back  from  the  enemy

13.  thou  m.  us  a  reproach  to  our  neighbours

14.  thou  m.  us  a  by-word  among  the  heathen

65. 8.  thou  m.  the  outgoings  of  morning  to  rejoice
10.  thou  m.  the  earth  soft  with  showers

80.  6.  thou  m.  us  a  strife  to  our  neighbours
104.  20.  thou  m.  darkness,  and  it  is  night
144.  3.  what  is  man,  that  thou  m.  account  of  him  ?
Cant.  1.  7.  where  thou  m.  thy  flock  to  rest  at  noon
Isa.  45.  9.  to  him  that  fashioneth  it,  what  m.  thou  ?
Jer.  22.  23.  O  Lebanon,  that  in.  thy  nest  in  cedars
28*  15.  thou  m.  this  people  to  trust  in  a  lie
Ezek.  16.  31.  thou  m.  thy  high  place  in  every  street
Hah.  1. 14.  and  m.  men  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea

2. 15.  puttest  thy  bottle  to  him,  and  m.  him  drunken
Luke  14.  12.  when  thou  in.  a  dinner  or  a  supper

1.3.  but  when  thou  m.  a  feast,  call  the  poor
John  8.  53.  proph.  are  dead,  whom  in.  thou  thyself?
10.  33.  because  thou  being  a  man  iru  thyself  God
Rom.  2. 17.  art  cal  led  a  Jew,  and  m.  thy  boast  of  God

23.  thou  that  in.  thy  boast  of  the  law
MAKETH.

Exod.  4. 11.  or  who  m.  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or  blind  ?
Lev.  7.  7.  the  priest  that  m.  atonement  clean,  14. 1J.

17. 11.  it  is  the  blood  that  m.  au  atonement
Deut.  18. 10.  that  m.  his  son  to  pass  through  the  fire

20.  20.  against  the  city  that  m.  war  with  thee

21.  16.  when  he  m.  his  sons  to  inherit  what  he  hath

24.  7-  rn.  merchandise  of  him,  or  selleth  him

27. 15.  cursed  be  the  man  that  m.  any  graven  image


Deut.  27. 18.  cursed  be  he  that///.  blind  to  wander
29.  12.  oath  which  the  Lord  m.  with  thee  this  day

1  Sam.  2.6.  the  Lord  kiiieth  and  in.  alive

7.  the  Lord  in.  poor  and  in.  rich,  he  bringeth  low

2  Sam.  22.  33.  God  m.  my  way  perfect,  Ps.  18.  32.

22.  34.  he  m.  my  feet  like  hinds’  feet,  Psal.  18.  33.
Job  5. 18.  for  he  m.  sore,  and  bindeth  up,  he  wounds

9.  9.  Lord  m.  Arcturus,  Orion,  and  Pleiades

12.  17.  he  in.  the  judges  fools  ||  25.  he  m.  to  staggei

15.  27.  he  m.  collops  of  fat  on  his  flanks
2.3.  16.  God  m.  my  heart  soft,  and  troubleth  me

25.  2.  he  m.  peace  in  his  high  places
27.  18.  and  as  a  booth  that  the  keeper  m.

35.  11.  who  m.  us  wiser  than  the  fowls  of  heaven
36.27.  for  he  ///.small  the  drops  of  water,  they  pour
41.  31.  he  m.  the  deep  to  boil  like  a  pot
32.  he  m.  a  path  to  shine  after  him
Psal.  9. 12.  when  he  in.  inquisition  for  blood

23.  2.  he  in.  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures
29.  9.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  m.  the  hinds  to  calve
33. 10.  he  m.  the  devices  of  people  of  none  effect
40.  4.  blessed  is  the  man  that  m.  the  Ld.  his  trust
46.  9-  he  m.  wars  to  cease  to  the  end  of  the  earth
104.  3.  who  m.  the  clouds  his  chariot,  who  walketh

4.  who  m.  his  angels  spirits,  Heb.  1.  7.

15.  and  wine  that  in.  glad  the  heart  of  man
107.  t  25.  and  rn.  the  stormy  wind  to  stand

29.  he  m.  the  storm  a  calm,  the  waters  are  still
36.  and  there  he  m.  the  hungry  to  dwell

41 .  and  m.  him  families  like  a  flock
113.  9.  he  m.  the  barren  woman  to  keep  house
135.  7-  he  m.  lightnings  for  rain,  brings  the  wind
147.  8.  who  m.  grass  to  grow  on  the  mountains
14.  he  m.  peace  in  thy  borders,  and  filleth  thee
Prov.  10.  1.  a  wise  son  m.  a  glad  father,  15.  20.

4.  but  the  hand  of  the  diligent  m.  rich
22.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  m.  rich

12.  4.  she  that  in.  ashamed  is  as  rottenness  in  bones
25.  heaviness  in  the  heart  of  a  man  m.  it  to  stoop.

but  a  good  word  m.  it  glad

13.  7-  that  m.  himself  rich,  yet  hath  nothing,  there

is  that  m.  himself  poor,  yet  hath  great  riches
12.  hope  deferred  ///.  the  heart  sick,  when  desire
15.  13.  a  merry  heart  in.  a  cheerful  countenance

30.  and  a  good  report  in.  the  bones  fat

16. 7.  he  m.  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him
+  23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  m.  wise  nis  mouth
18.  16.  a  man’s  gift  m.  room  for  him,  and  brings
19. 4.  wealth  in.  many  friends,  but  poor  is  separated

31.22.  she  ///.  herself  coverings  of  tapestry

24.  she  m.  fine  linen,  and  selleth  it,  and  girdles
Eccl.  3. 1 1.  no  man  can  find  out  the  work  that  G.  in.

7.  7.  surely  oppression  m.  a  wise  man  mad

8.  1.  a  man’s  wisdom  in.  his  face  to  shine

11.  5.  thou  knowest  not  works  of  God,  who  m.  all
Isa.  24.  1.  behold,  the  I-ord  m.  the  earth  empty
40.  2.3.  he  m.  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  vanity
43.  16.  saith  the  Lord,  which  in.  a  way  in  the  sea

44. 15.  he  m.  a  god,  and  worshippeth  it, 17- 1  46.  6.

24.  I  am  the  1  ,ord  that  m.  all  things

25.  he  in.  diviners  mad  59. 15.  m.  himself  a  prey
55.  10.  watereth  earth,  and  m.  it  bring  forth

Jer.  10.  13.  he///,  lightnings  with  rain,  51.  16.

17.  5.  cursed  be  the  man  that  m.  flesh  his  arm
29.  26.  every  man  that  in.  himself  a  prophet,  27-
Ezek.  22.  3.  and  m.  idols  against  herself  to  defile
Dan.  6.  13.  but  m.  his  petition  three  times  a  day
11.  31.  place  abomination  that  in.  desolate,  12. 11.
Amos  4.  13.  that  m.  the  morning  darkness

5.8.  seek  him  that  m.  the  seven  stars  and  Orion
Nah.  1.  4.  he  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  m.  it  dry
Mat.  5.  45.  he  m.  his  sun  rise  on  the  evil  and  good
Mark7. 37.  h  am.  both  deaf  to  hear,  and  dumb  speak
John  19.  12.  whosoever  m.  himself  a  king,  speaketh
Acts  9.  34.  Eneas,  Jesus  Christ  in.  thee  whole
Rom.  5.  5.  hope  m.  not  ashamed,  because  love  of  G.
8.  26.  the  Spirit///,  intercession  for  us,  27,34.

11.  2.  he  m.  intercession  to  God  against  Israel

1  Cor.  4.  7-  who  rn.  thee  to  differ  from  another  ?

2  Cor.  2.  2.  who  is  he  that  m  .  me  glad  but  the  same  ?

14.  m.  manifest  the  savour  of  his  knowledge  by  us

Gal.  2.  6.  whatsoever  they  were,  it  m.  no  matter
Eph.  4.  16.  m.  increase  of  the  body  to  the  edifying
Heb.  7. 28.  for  the  law  m.  men  high-priests,  but  the
word  of  the  oath  since  the  law  in.  the  Son
Rev.  13.  1.3.  he  in.  fire  come  down  from  heaven
21.  27-  nor  whatsoever  m.  a  lie,  22. 15.

M  A  K  ET  H  haste.

Prov.  28.  20.  that  m.  haste  to  be  rich,  not  innocent
MAKING.

2  Chron.  30.  22.  in.  confession  to  the  Lord  God
Ps.  19.  7.  testimony  of  Lord  is  sure,  rn.  wise  simple
Eccl.  12.  12.  of  in.  many  books  there  is  no  end
Isa.  3. 16.  walking  and  in.  a  tinkling  with  their  feet
Jer.  20.  15.  that  brought  tidings,  m.  him  very  glad
Amos  8.  5.  m.  ephah  small,  and  the  shekel  great
Mark  7.  13.  m.  the  word  of  God  of  none  effect
John  5.  18.  in.  himself  equal  with  God
2  Cor.  6.  10.  as  poor,  yet  in.  many  rich
Eph.lAG.  1  cease  not  to  give  thanks  for  you,  ///.men¬
tion  of  you  in  my  prayers,  1  Thess.  1.  2.  Philem.  4.
2.  15.  one  new  man,  so  m.  peace,  Cel.  1.  +  20.

5.  19.  m.  melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord  [joy
Phil.  1. 4.  in  every  prayer  for  you,  in.  request  with
2  Pet.  2.  6.  in.  them  an  ensample  unto  those  that
Jude  22.  of  some  have  compassion,  in.  a  difference
MAKING.

Ezek.  27.  16.  multitude  of  the  wares  of  thy  m.  18.

MALE.

Gen.  17.  23.  every  in.  circumcised,  34. 15.  22,  24.
Exod.  12.  5.  for  the  passover  a  in.  of  the  first  year

13.  12.  the  m.  shall  be  the  Lord’s,  34. 19.  Luke 2. 23.
Lev.  1.  3.  a m.  without  blemish,  10. 1  4.  23.  1  22.  19.
7.  6.  every  m.  among  the  priests  shall  eat  thereof
27.  3.  thy  estimation  shall  lie  of  the  in.  5,6,  7*
Num.  1 .  2.  every  m.  by  their  polls  from  20  years  old
20.  every  m.  from  20  years  old  and  upward

3. 15.  every  m.  from  a  month  old  and  upward
.31.  17.  now  kill  every  m.  among  the  little  ones
Deut.  20.  13.  thou  shalt  smite  every  m.  thereof
Judg.  21. 11.  ye  shall  utterly  destroy  every  m.

1  Kings  11.15.  he  had  smitten  every  m.  in  Edom,  16.

297


M  A  N


M  A  N


M  A  N


Jer.  30.  +6.  see  if  a  m.  doth  travail  with  child
Ezek.  16.  1 17.  makest  to  thyself  images  of  a  m.
Mai.  1.  14.  which  hath  in  his  Hock  a  rn.

See  Female.
MALE-CHILDREN.

Josh.  17.  2.  these  were  the  m.-chitdren  of  Manasseh
MALEFACTOR.

John  18.  30.  if  he  vvere  not  a  m.  we  would  uot
MALEFACTORS.

Luke  23.  32.  there  were  two  m.  led  with  him
33.  there  they  crucified  him,  and  the  w .

39.  one  of  the  m.  railed  on  him,  saying

MALES.

Gen.  34.  25.  Simeon  and  Levi  slew  all  the  m.

Exod.  12.  48.  let  all  his  w.  he  circumcised

13.  15.  I  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  all  being  m.

23.  17.  three  times  in  the  year  all  thy  m.  shall

appear  before  the  Lord  God,  Dent.  16.  16.
Lev.  6.  18.  all  the  m.  of  Aaron  shall  eat  of  it,  29.
Num.  3.  22.  according  to  the  number  of  all  m.  from
a  month  old  and  upward,  28,  34. 1  26.  62.

40.  number  all  the  first  born  of  the  m.  43.

31.7-  warred  against  Midianites,  and  slew  the  m.
Dent.  15.  19.  all  firstling  rn.  sanctify  to  the  Lord
Josh.  5.  4.  the  m.  that  came  out  of  Egypt  died

2  Chron.  31. 16.  beside  their  genealogy  of  m.

19.  to  give  portions  to  all  the  m.  among  priests
Ezra  8.  3.  were  reckoned  by  genealogy  of  the  rn.
MALICE.

1  Cor.  5.  8.  keep  the  feast,  not  with  leaven  of  m.

14.  20.  howbeit  in  m.  be  ye  children

Eph.  4.  31.  be  put  away  from  you  with  all  m.

Col.  3.  8.  but  now  ye  also  put  oft'  all  these,  rn.

Tit.  3.  3.  sometimes  living  in  m.  and  envy,  hateful
1  Pet.  2.  1.  wherefore,  laying  aside  all  m.  and  guile
MALICIOUS.

3  John  10.  prating  against  us  with  m.  words

MALICIOUSNESS.

Rom.  1.  29.  being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  m.
1  Pet.  2.  16.  not  using  liberty  for  a  cloke  of  rn.
MALIGNITY.

Rom.  1.  29.  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  m.
MALLOWS.

Job  30.  4.  who  cut  up  m.  by  the  bushes  for  meat
MAN.

Man  was,  in  his  original  state,  a  very  noble  and
exalted  creature ;  being  placed  as  the  head  and
lord  of  this  world,  having  all  the  creatures  in  sub¬
jection  to  him.  The  powers  and  operations  of  his
mind  were  extensive }  capacious,  and  perfect  ;  capa¬
ble  of  contemplating  upon  the  works  of  God
with  pleasure  and  delight,  and  of  performing  his
will  without  the  least  deviation.  But  by  sin¬
ning  against  his  Creator,  his  mind  is  vitiated,
corrupted,  and  debased ;  and  he  is  in  a  ruined,
lost,  miserable,  and  wretched  state:  Hence  it  is
asked,  What  is  man?  Psal.  8.  4.  'The  Hebrew
word  for  man  is  Enosh  ;  that  is,  sorry,  wretched,
and  incurably  sick,  to  denote  his  condition  in  his
apostasy  from  God.

Man  is  pvt  for,  [1]  The  body,  2  Cor.  4.  16.  [2]  The
sins  and  corruptions  of  human  nature,  Eph.  4.  22.
[3]  Strong,  valiant,  1  Cor.  16.  13.  [4]  A  magis¬
trate,  Gen.  9.6.  [5]  Trail,  weak,  Psal.  9.  20.  [6]
The  church,  Eph.  2.  15.  [7]  A  strong  believer,
Eph.  4.  13.  [8]  An  angel,  Acts  1.  10.  [9]  The
Lord  Jesus,  Gen.  32.  24.  Mark  15.  39.  [10]  God
the  Father,  Exod.  15.  3.  Luke  15.  11.

To  make  of  twain  one  new  man,  Eph.  2.  15.  To
unite  Jews  and  Gentiles ,  who  formerly  were  at
variance,  into  one  church,  or  body,  joining  together
m  a  new  way  of  gospel-worship.

The  gospel  is  not  after  man,  Gal.  1.  11.  It  is  no
human  invention,  or  fiction,  neither  doth  it  depend
upon  human  authority,  but  is  immediately  revealed
by  God.

1  speak  after  the  manner  of  men,  Gal.  3.  15.  1
make  use  of  a  comparison  taken  from  the  custom
of  men  in  their  civil  affairs.

A  man  of  God,  2  Tim.  3.  17.  One  that  is  guided  by
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  devoted  to  his  service  in  a
special  manner.

The  inward  man,  Rom.  7.  22.  The  new  man,  the
regenerate  part  within  nie,  or  the  principle  of  grace
in  the  heart.

The  natural  man,  1  Cor.  2.  14.  The  unrenewed
person,  one  that  has  no  principle  of  grace  in  the
heart,  though  he  be  endued  with  the  most  exquisite
natural  accomplishments,  and  has  improved  his
reason  to  the  highest  pitch.

Gen.  1.  26.  God  said,  let  us  make  m.  in  our  image,
after  our  likeness,  27. 1  9.  6.

2.  7.  the  Lord  G.  formed  m.  of  the  dust  of  ground

18.  it  is  not  good  that  m.  should  be  alone

25.  they  were  both  naked,  the  m.  and  his  wife

3.  22.  behold,  the  m.  is  become  as  one  of  us

6.  3.  my  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  m.

7.  I  will  destroy  rn.  whom  1  have  created

8.  21.  1  will  not  curse  the  giound  for  m.  sake

9.  6.  m.  blood,  by  m.  shall  his  blood  be  shed

.  19.  8.  who  have  not  known  m.  Num.  31.  35.

20.7.  restore  the  m.  his  wife,  he  is  a  prophet

24.  21.  the  m.  wondering  at  her  held  his  peace
29.  Laban  ran  out  to  the  rn.  to  the  well

65.  what  rn.  is  this  that  walketh  in  the  field  ?

29.  19.  better  than  1  should  give  her  to  another  m.
38.  25.  by  the  m.  whose  these  are,  am  I  with  child
43. 13.  take  your  brother,  arise,  go  again  to  the  rn.
44.  17.  the  m.  in  whose  hand  the  cup  is  found

Exod.  2.  20.  why  is  it  that  ye  have  left  the  m.  ?

21.  Moses  was  content  to  dwell  with  the.  m.

4.  11.  the  Lord  said,  who  hath  made  m.  mouth  ?

30.  32.  upon  m.  flesh  shall  it  not  be  poured
32.  1.  thew.  that  brought  us  out  of  Egypt,  23.

Lev?  17.  4.  blood  shall  be  imputed  to  that  m.  and
thatm.  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  the  people
Num.  5.  15.  then  shall  the  rn.  bring  his  wife  to  priest
o.  13.  but  the  m.  that  is  clean,  and  not  in  a  journey

12.  3.  the  m.  Moses  was  very  meek  above  all  men

15.  35.  thew.  shall  be  put  to  death,  Deut.  22.  25.

16.  7.  the  m.  whom  the  Lord  doth  choose,  be  holy

,  19.  20.  but  m.  that  shall  be  unclean  and  shall  not

298


Deut.  4.  32.  since  the  day  that  God  created  rn.

5.  24.  God  doth  talk  with  m.  and  he  liveth

8.  3.  make  thee  know  that  rn.  doth  not  live  by  bread
only,  but  by  every  word.  Mat.  4.  4.  Luke  4.4.

20.  19.  for  the  tree  of  the  field  is  w.  life

Josh.  7.  14.  and  they  shall  come  m.  by  rn.  17, 18.
Judg.  1.  25.  but  they  let  go  the  m.  and  all  his  family

4.  22.  1  will  shew  thee  the  m.  whom  thou  seekest

8.  21.  for  as  the  m.  is,  so  is  his  strength

9.  9.  wherewith  by  me  they  honour  God  and  rn.

13.  my  wine  which  cheereth  God  and  m.

10.  18.  what  m.  w  ill  fight  against  Ammon  ?

13.  10.  the  m.  hath  appeared  that  came  to  me

11.  art  thou  the  rn.  spakest  to  the  w  oman  ?

16.  7.  I  shall  be  weak,  and  as  another  m.  11,  17-

19.  22.  bring  forth  the  m.  that  came  into  thy  house

28.  then  the  m.  took  her  on  an  ass  and  rose
Ruth  1.  2.  the  name  of  the  rn.  was  Elimelech,  2. 19.

3.  18.  for  the  rn.  will  not  be  in  rest,  till  he  hath  finish.

1  Sam.  2. 33.  the  w.  of  thine  whom  1  shall  not  cut  off

4.  14.  the  m.  came  in  hastily,  and  told  Eli

9.  6.  a  m.  of  God,  and  he  is  an  honourable  m.

17.  behold  the  m.  whom  l  spake  to  thee  of

10.  22.  if  the  m.  should  yet  come  thither

16.  7.  for  the  Lord  seeth  not  as  m.  seeth

17.  26.  what  be  done  to  the  rn.  that  killeth  him  ?

21.  14.  lo,ye  see  the  rn.  is  mad,  wherefore  then

2  Sam.  12.  5.  David’s  anger  kindled  against  the  m.

said  to  Nathan,  m.  who  did  this  shall  surely  die

7.  Nathan  said  to  David,  thou  art  the  m.

16  7  come  out,  come  out,  thou  bloody  m.  8.

17.  3.  the  m.  thou  seekest  is  as  if  all  returned
21.5.  rn.  that  consumed  us,  and  devised  against  us
23.  1.  the  rn.  who  was  raised  up  on  high

1  Kings  20.  20.  and  they  slew  every  one  his  rn.

2  Kings  5.  26.  when  m.  turned  again  to  meet  thee

6.  19.  I  will  bring  you  to  the  m.  whom  ye  seek
9.  11.  ye  know  the  m.  and  his  communication

22.  15."  tell  the  rn.  that  sent  you,  2  Chr.  34.  23.

1  Chr.  23.  3.  the  L.evites  w.  by  m.  were  .38,000
29.  1.  the  palace  is  not  for  m.  but  for  the  I..  God

2  Chron.  14.  11.  let  not  m.  prevail  against  thee

19.  6.  for  ye  judge  not  for  m.  but  for  the  Lord
Esth.  6.  6.  whatshall  be  done  to  the  rn.  whom,  7. 9.

7.  t  6.  the  m.  adversary  is  this  wicked  Hainan
Job  4. 17. shall  m.  be  more  just  than  God  ?

5.  7*  yet  m.  is  born  to  trouble,  as  sparks  fly  upwards
17.  nappy  is  the  m.  whom  God  correcteth

7. 1.  is  there  not  an  appointed  time  for  m.  on  earth  ?
17.  what  is  m.  that  thou  shouldest  magnify  him  ?

15.  14.  Psal.  8.  4.  |  144.  3.  Deb.  2.  6.

9.  2.  but  how  should  m.  be  just  with  God  ?

10.  4.  eyes  of  flesh  ?  or  seest  thou  as  m.  seeth  ?

5.  are  thy  days  as  days  of  rn.  ?  years  as  rn.  days  ?

11.  12.  vain  m.  w  ould  be  wise,  tno’ m.  be  born  like

14.  1.  m.  that  is  born  of  a  woman  is  of  few  days

10.  m.  dieth  and  wasteth  away,  rn.  giveth  up  ghost

12.  so  m.  lieth  down,  and  riseth  not  till  heavens

15.  7.  art  thou  the  first  w.  that  was  born  ?

14.  what  is  rn.  that  he  should  be  clean  :

16.  how  much  more_  abominable  and  filthy  is  m.

20.  4.  since  rn.  was  first  placed  on  the  earth

21.  4.  as  forme  is  my  complaint  to  m.  ?

25.  4.  how  then  can  m.  bejustified  with  God?

6.  how  much  less  w.  that  is  a  w  orm,  and  son  of  m.
32. 8.  there  is  a  spirit  in  m.  inspiration  of  Almighty

13.  God  thrusteth  him  down,  not  m.

33.  12.  I  answer,  that  God  is  greater  than  m.

14.  God  speaketh,  yet  m.  perceiveth  it  not

17.  he  opens  the  ears  of  men,  that  he  may  with¬
draw  m.  from  purpose,  and  hide  pride  from  m.

23.  if  a  messenger,  to  shew  to  m.  his  uprightness

29.  these  things  worketh  God  often  w  ith  m.

34.  7.  what  m.  is  like  Job,  whodrinketh  scorning  ?
14.  if  he  set  his  heart  upon  w.  if  he  gather  to  hims.
23.  for  he  will  not  lay  on  m.  more  than  right

Psal.  9.  19.  arise,  O  Lord,  let  not  rn.  prevail
10.  18.  that  the  m.  of  earth  may  no  more  oppress

25.  12.  what  m.  is  he  thatfeareth  the  ford?

.34.  12.  w  hat  m.  is  he  thatdesireth  life  ?

.39.  11.  when  thou  dost  correct  m.  for  iniquity
49. 12.  m.  being  in  honour  abideth  not,  20.

56.  11.  1  w  ill  not  be  afraid  what  m.  can  do  to  me
68.  t  18.  thou  hast  received  gifts  in  the  rn.

78.25.  m.  did  eat  angels’  food,  he  sent  them  meat
80.  17.  thy  hand  be  on  the  m.  of  thy  right  hand
89.48.  what  m.  is  he  that  liveth,  and  not  see  death  ?
90.  3.  thou  turnest  m.  to  destruction,  and  sayest
94.  10.  that  teacheth  m.  knowl.  shall  not  he  know  ?

103.  15.  as  for  m.  his  days  are  as  grass,  as  a  fiower

104.  23.  m.  goeth  forth  to  his  work  and  labour
118.  6.  1  will  not  fear  what  rn.  can  do  to  me

8.  better  trust  in  Lord,  than  put  confidence  in  m.
120.  +  7.1  am  a  m.  of  peace,  they  are  for  war
144.  4.  m.  is  like  to  vanity,  his  days  as  a  shadow

Prov.  2.  12.  from  m.  that  speaketh  froward  things

6.  11.  and  thy  want  come  as  an  armed  m.  24.  34.

16.  1 .  the  preparations  of  the  heart  in  m.

20.  24.  rn.  goings  are  of  the  Lord,  how  can  a  m.

26.  19.  so  is  the  m.  that  deceiveth  his  neighbour
Eccl.  1.  8.  things  full  of  labour,  m.  cannot  utter  it
2.  12.  what  can  the  m.  do  that  cometh  after  king?

22.  for  what  hath  rn.  of  all  his  labour  ?

6.  10.  is  named,  and  it  is  known  that  it  is  m.

1 1.  what  is  m.  better  ?  ||  12.  what  is  good  for  m.  ?

12.  5.  because  m.  goeth  to  his  long  home

Isa.  2. 22.  cease  from  w.  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostr.
38.  11.  I  said,  I  shall  behold  m.  no  more
40.  1 13.  or  being  the  m.  of  his  counsel  hath  taught
46.  11.  the  rn.  that  executeth  my  counsel
Jer.  10.  23.  it  is  not  in  m.  to  direct  his  steps
[.am.  3.  1.  I  am  the  m.  that  hath  seen  affliction
Ezek.  4.  15.  I  have  given  cows’  dung  for  m.  dung

18.  8.  hath  executedjudgment  between  m.  and  m.
Dan.  4.  16.  let  his  heart  be  changed  from  m.

•10. 19.  said,  O  m.  greatly  beloved,  fear  not
Hos.  11.  9.  for  1  am  God,  and  not  m.  the  holy  One
Amos  4.  13.  and  declared)  to  m.  what  is  his  thought
Mic.  5.  7.  that  tarrieth  not  for  m.  nor  waiteth
6.  8.  he  hath  shewred  thee,  O  m.  what  is  good

9.  the  m.  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy  name

Hub.  1. 13.  the  wicked  devoureth  m.  more  righteous


Zeph.  1.3.  I  will  cut  off  the  rn.  from  the  land
Zech.  6.  12.  the  m.  whose  name  is  the  Branch
13.  5.  for  m.  taught  me  tp  keep  cattle  from  youth

7.  awake,  O  sword,  against  rn.  that  is  my  fellow
Mai.  2.  12.  Lord  will  cutoff  the  m.  that  doeth  this
Mat.  7.  9.  what  m.  is  there  of  you ,  if  his  son  ask  bread

will  give  him  a  stone  ?  12.  11.  Luke  15.  4,
15.  18.  from  the  heart,  and  they  defile  the  m.

19.  6.  let  not  w.  put  asunder,  Mark  10.  9.

26.  72.  he  denied,  1  do  not  know  the  rn.  74.

Mark  2. 27.  sabbath  was  made  for  w.  not  m.  forsabb.

11.2.  shall  find  a  colt  tied,  whereon  never  m.  sat  "
Luke  5.  20.  he  said,  m.  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee

12.  14.  m.  who  made  me  a  judge  over  you?

18.  4.  though  l  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  rn.

22.  58.  thou  art  of  them,  Peter  said,  m.  I  am  not
60.  Peter  said,  m.  1  know  not  what  thou  sayest

23.  6.  he  asked,  whether  the  m.  was  a  Galilean?
53.  wherein  never  rn.  was  laid,  John  10.  41.

John  2.  25.  for  he  knew  what  was  in  m.

5.  12.  w  hat  rn  is  that  which  said  unto  thee
34.  but  1  received  not  testimony  from  m.

15.  24.  the  works  w  hich  none  other  m.  did

19.  5.  Pilate  said  unto  them,  behold  the  m.

Acts  4.  22.  for  the  rn.  was  above  forty  years  old

8.  31.  how  can  I ,  except  some  m.  should  guide  me?

34.  eunuch  said,  of  himself,  or  of  some  other  rn.  ?  |
19.  16.  the  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was

35.  what  m.  is  there  that  knoweth  not  how  that
21.  11.  so  shall  bind  the  m.  that  owneth  this  girdle
23.  .30.  how  the  Jews  laid  wait  for  the  m.

25. 22.  Agrippa  said,  l  would  also  hear  the  m.  mys.
Rom.  2. 1.  inexcusable,  O  m.  ||  3.  thinkest  thou,  O  m,
7.  22.  I  delight  in  law  of  God  after  the  inward  m.
24.  O  wretched  m.  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliv.  me  >

9.  20.  but  O  rn.  who  art  thou  that  repliest  ag.  God  ?]

10.  5.  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  the  m.  who  doeth  j

these  things  shall  live  by  them,  Gal.  3.  12.

10.  with  the  heart  rn.  believeth  unto  righteousness

1  Cor.  2.  11.  w  hat  m.  knoweth  the  things  of  a  rn. !

7.  16.  how  knowest  thou,  O  m.  whether  thou

10.  13.  no  temptation  but  such  as  is  common  to  rn,

11.  3.  and  the  head  of  the  woman  is  the  m.

8.  m.  is  not  of  the  woman  ||  9.  but  worn,  for  the  m.

11.  nor  is  the  m.  without  the  woman,  nor  the

woman  without  the  rn.  in  the  Lord

12.  even  so  is  the  m.  also  by  fhe  woman

15.  21.  since  by  rn.  came  death,  by  m.  came  resurr.ij
45.  the  first  m.  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul
47.  the  first  m.  is  of  the  earth,  earthy  ;  the  second
m.  is  the  Lord  from  heaver.

2  Cor.  4.  16.  but  though  our  outw'ard  m.  perish,  y  et

the  inward  m.  is  renewed  day  by  day  j
Gal.  1.  1.  an  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  m.  ’

11.  the  gospel  1  preached  is  not  after  m.

F.ph.  2.  15.  for  to  make  of  twain  one  new  m.

3.  16.  with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  m.

4.  24.  that  ye  put  on  new  m.  created  in  righteousn.
Col.  3. 10.  have  put  on  the  new  rn.  which  is  renewed
1  lhess.4.8.  despiseth  not  rn.  but  God,  w  ho  hath  given.
1  Tim.  2.  5.  between  God  and  men,  the  m.  C.  lesus

12.  woman  not  to  usurp  authority  over  the  m.
Tit.  3.  4.  love  ofG.  our  Saviour  toward  rn.  appeared
Ileb.  3.  4.  for  every  house  is  built  by  some  m.

8.  2.  the  tabernacle  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not  in.

13.  6.  I  will  not  fear  what  w.  shall  do  to  me
Jam.  1. 8.  a  double-minded  rn.  is  unstable  in  his  ways

2.  20.  wilt  thou  know,  O  vain  rn.  that  faith

1  Pet.  3.  4.  let  it  be  the  hidden  m.  of  the  heart
A  MAN.

Gen.  2.  5.  there  was  not  a  rn.  to  till  the  ground
24.  therefore  shall  a  m.  leave  his  father  and  mo¬
ther,  Mat.  19.  5.  Mark  10.  7-  Eph.  5.  31.
4.  1.  1  have  gotten  a  rn.  from  the  Lord
23.  for  I  have  slain  a  m.  to  my'  wounding
11.  +3.  a  m.  said  to  his  neighbour,  let  us  burn
13.  16.  if  a  m.  can  number  the  dust  of  the  earth

19.  31.  there  is  not  a  m.  to  come  in  unto  us

20.  3.  thou  art  a  dead  man,  for  she  is  a  m.  wife

25.  27.  Esau  a  cunning  hunter,  a  m.  of  the  held

32.  24.  there  wrestled  a  m.  w  ith  him  till  breaking  j
41.33.  let  Pharaoh  look  out  a  m.  discreet  and  v.  ise

38.  a  m.  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  is
44.15.  wotyenotsuch  aw. as  I  can  certainly  divine
49.  6.  for  in  their  anger  they  slew  a  rn.

Exod.  2.  +  14.  he  said,  who  made  thee  a  m.  a  prince
18.  t  16.  1  judge  between  a  m.  and  his  fellow

33.  11.  face  to  face,  as  aw.  speaketh  to  his  friend
Lev.  13.  9.  w  hen  the  plague  of  leprosy  is  in  a  rn.

18.  5.  my  judgments,  which  if  a  m,  do  he  shail  live 'i

in  them,  Neh.  9.  29.  Ezek.  20.  11,  13,  21.
24. 10.  and  a  m.  of  Israel  strove  together  in  the  camp
20.  as  he  hath  caused  a  blemish  in  a  rn.

27.  28.  no  devoted  thing  a  rn.  shall  devote
Num.  1.  4.  there  shall  be  a  m.  of  every  tribe

13.  2.  of  every  tribe  shall  ye  send  a  rn.

15.  32.  they  tound  a  m.  that  gathered  sticks

19.  14.  this  is  the  law  when  a  rn.  dieth  in  a  tent
23. 19.  G.  is  not  a  w.  that  he  should  lie,  1  Sam.  15. 29.

26.  64.  among  these  there  was  not  a  rn.  o£  them
65.  there  was  not  left  a  rn.  save  Caleb  and  Joshua

27.  16.  set  a  m.  over  the  congregation

18.  take  thee  Joshua,  a  m.  in  whom  is  the  Spirit
Deut.  1.  31.  Lord  bare  thee,  as  a  w.  doth  his  son

3.  11.  the  breadth  of  it,  after  the  cubit  of  a  m.

8.  5.  consider,  that  as  a  w.  chasteneth  his  son  ,

19.  15.  one  witness  shall  not  rise  against  a  m.

Josh.  3.  12.  take  ye  out  of  every  tribe  a  m.  4.  2,  4.

5. 13.  there  stood  a  m.  over  against  him  with  sword
10.  8.  there  shall  not  a  m.  of  them  stand  before  thee
14.  the  Lord  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  a  w.

14.  15.  which  Arba  was  a  great  w.  among  Anakims

21.  44.  stood  not  a  m.  of  all  their  enemies  before
Judg.  1.  24.  the  spies  saw  a  rn.  come  out  of  the  city

3.  29.  escaped  not  a  m.  II  4.  16.  was  not  a  m.  left
7.  .3.  there  was  a  rn.  that  told  a  dream  to  his  fellow
14.  save  the  sword  of  Gideon  a  m.  of  Israel

10.  1.  Tola  a  m.  of  Issachar  ||  16. 19.  she  called  aw.
Ruth  4.  7.  a  m.  plucked  oft"  his  shoe  and  gave  it  .

1  Sam.  9.  16.  I  w  ill  send  thee  a  m.  out  of  Benjamin

11.  13.  there  shall  not  a  rn.  be  put  to  death
13.  14.  the  Lord  hath  sought  him  a  m.


i


;

M  A  N '

sV7»i.  14.  36.  and  let  us  not  leave  a  to.  of  them
>.  16.  to  seek  out  a  m.  who  is  a  cunning  player

17.  provide  me  a  to.  that  can  play  well,  bring  liim

8.  choose  you  a  to.  for  you,  let  him  come

i0.  give  men  to.  that  we  may  tight  together
).  17-  he  is  such  that  a  to.  cannot  speak  to  him
>.  17.  and  there  escaped  not  a  m.  of  them
ST?™.  3.  34.  as  n  to.  falleth  before  wicked  men

18.  Abner  a  great  to.  is  fallen  this  day  in  Israel
■>.  23.  as  tf  a  w.  inquired  at  the  oracle  of  God

\  i.  t  CO.  thou  shalt  not  be  a  to.  of  tidings

I.  1.  there  happened  to  be  there  a  to.  of  Belial
Kings  C.  C.  be  strong,  and  shew  thyself  a  to.

1.  not  fail  thee  n.  to.  on  the  throne,  8.  C5.
j  }.  30.  a  to.  turned  aside,  and  brought  a  to.  tome
tC.  a  to.  whom  I  appointed  to  destruction
Kings  1.  6.  there  came  a  to.  to  meet  us,  and  said
4C.  there  came  a  to.  from  Baal  shalisha
V  21.  there  was  not  a  m.  left  that  came  not

1.  21.  as  they  were  burying  a  to.  they  spied
'Jhron.  22.  9.  a  son  born,  who  shall  be  a  rn.  of  rest
Jhron.  6. 16.  there  shall  not  fail  thee  a  to.  7.  18.

<•/,.  2.  10.  come  am.  to  seek  the  welfare  of  Israel

11.  I  said,  should  such  a  m.  as  I  flee  ?
h  2.  4.  all  that  a  to.  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life
.  23.  wdiy  is  light  given  to  a  m.  whose  way
.  47-  shall  a  m.  be  more  pure  than  his  Maker  ?

.  32.  he  is  not  a  rn,  as  1  am,  that  l  should  answer

1. 2.  and  should  a  m.  full  of  talk  be  justified  ?

2.  14.  he  shutteth  up  a  to.  ||  14.  14.  if  a  m.  die

5.  21.  O  that  one  might  plead  fora  m.  with  God,
as  a  to.  pleadeth  for  his  neighbour

2.  2.  can  a  m.  be  profitable  to  G .  as  he  that  is  wise  ?
4. 29.  whether  done  against  a  nation  or  a  m.

5.8.  thy  wickedness  may  hurt  a  to.  as  thou  art

7.  20.  if  a  m.  speak  he  shall  be  swallowed  up

3.  3.  eird  up  now  thy  loins  like  a  m.  40.  7.
ml.  38.  14.  I  was  as  a  to.  that  heareth  not
5.  13.  but  it  was  thou  a  «.  mine  equal

2.  3.  how  long  will  ye  imagine  mischief  ag.  a  to.  ?

4.  5.  a  m.  was  famous  according  as  he  lifted  up
4.  4.  1  am  a s  a  m.  that  hatli  no  strength

15.  17.  he  sent  a  m.  before  them,  even  Joseph
47.  10.  he  taketh  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  m.
rov.  3.  30.  strive  not  with  a  m.  without  cause
34.  for  jealousy  is  the  rage  of  a  m.

4.  12.  a  way  that  seemeth  right  to  am  16.  25.

5.  2.  all  ways  of  a  m.  are  clean  in  his  own  eyes

1 .  when  a  to.  ways  please  the  Lord  he  maketh
).  24.  how  can  a  m.  understand  his  own  way  ?

4.2.  if  thou  be  a  to.  given  to  appetite

).  21.  so  a  contentious  m.  to  kindle  strife

1. 8.  so  is  a  m.  that  wandereth  from  his  place
21.  as  the  furnace,  so  is  a  to.  to  his  praise

4. 12.  but  when  the  wicked  rise  a  m.  is  hidden
23.  he  that  rebuketh  a  m.  shall  find  more  favour
+  1  .am.  of  reproofs  ||.  f  4.  a  m.  of  oblations
20.  seest  thou  a  m.  that  is  hasty  in  words  ?

•cl.  2. 21.  there  is  a  m.  whose  labour  is  in  wisdom
ind  knowledge,  yet  to  a  m.  that  hath  not  labour.

26.  God  giveth  to  a  m.  that  is  good  in  his  sight
.  4.  for  this  a  m.  is  envied  of  his  neighbour

2.  a  m.  to  whom  God  hath  given  riches

12.  who  can  tell  a  m.  what  shall  be  after  him  ?

l.  14.  a  to.  cannot  tell  what  shall  be  after  him

I. 8.  if  am.  live  many  years,  and  rejoice  in  them
tut.  8.  7.  if  am.  would  give  all  his  substance

a.  6.  5.  because  I  am  a  m.  of  unclean  lips
4.  12.  1  will  make  a  m.  more  precious  than  gold

J.  ?.  at  that  day  shall  a  to.  look  to  his  maker
4.  20.  than  that  a.  m.  can  stretch  himself  on  it
).  21.  that  make  a  to.  an  offender  for  a  word

2. 2.  a  m.  shall  be  an  hiding-place  from  the  wind

1.  3.  and  1  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  m.

4. 3.  he  is  a  to.  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  gr.

4.  5.  a  day  for  a  m.  to  afflict  his  soul  ?

5.  3.  he  that  killeth  an  ox,  is  as  if  he  slew  a  m.
t.  4.  29.  forsaken,  and  not  a  m.  dwell  therein

.  1.  seek  in  broad  places,  if  ye  can  find  a  m.

4.  9.  why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  m.  astonied  ?

5.  10.  that  thou  hast  borne  me  a  m.  of  strife
5.20.  shall  a  m.  make  gods  to  himself  and  no  gods  ?

2.  30.  a  rn.  that  shall  not  prosper  in  his  days

4.  9. 1  am  like  a  to.  whom  wine  hath  overcome
1.  6.  see  whether  a  to.’  doth  travail  with  child  ?

1.  22.  a  woman  shall  compass  a  m.

4. 17.  David  shall  never  want  a  m.  to  sit  on  throne
[8.  nor  shall  the  priests  want  a  to.  before  me

5.  19.  Jonadab shall  not  want  a  m.  to  stand  bef.  me
X  42.  every  man  put  in  array  like  a  to.  to  battle
™..3.  26.  it  is  good  for  a  m.  to  hope  and  wait

27 ■  it  is  good  for  a  m.  that  he  bear  the  yoke
49.  complain,  a  m.  for  the  punishment  of  his  sins
■ek.  22.  30.  1  sought  for  a  to.  among  them
4. 2.  yet  thou  art  a  to.  and  not  God,  9.

4.  2.  if  the  people  of  the  land  take  a  m.

to.  2.  10.  not  a  m.  on  earth  that  can  shew

25.  I  have  found  a  m.  of  the  captives  of  Judah

II.  there  is  a  m.  in  thy  kingdom  in  wliom

4.  stand  as  a  717.  and  a  m.  heart  was  given  to  it

■  t  23.  I  am  come,  for  thou  art  am.  of  desires
’•  1L  he  said,  O  Daniel,  a  to.  greatly  beloved
os-  6.  9.  as  troops  of  robbers  wait  for  a  m.

■  12.  that  there  shall  not  be  a  to.  left,  woe  to  them
1-  4.  1  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  w.  with  bands
mos  2.  7..  a  to.  and  his  father  go  in  to  one  maid

19.  as  if  a  to.  did  flee  4'rom  a  lion,  and  a  bear
>c.  2.  2.  oppress  a  to.  and  his  house,  even  a  m.

•  1.  it  am.  walking  in  spirit  and  falsehood
.  6.  a  to.  enemies  are  the  men  of  his  own  house,
the  daughter  against  her  mother,  Mat.  10.  36.

3. 17.  as  a  to.  spareth  his  own  son  that  serv.  him
^•8.  9.  1  am  a  to.  under  authority,  Luke  7.  8.

->•  \ a  J  am  come  P°  set  a  m‘  at  variance
'■12.  how  much  is  a  to.  better  than  a  sheep  ?

13.  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  to.

1 L  cometh  out  of  the  mouth  defileth  a  to.

unwashen hands  defileth  not  a  to.

,s.  it  lawful  for  a  to.  to  put  away-,  Mark  10. 2.
y  ~L  if  a  to.  die,  having  no  c  hildren
’•  m.  be  said,  go  into  the  city,  to  such  a  w.  and
say  to  him,  MarkU.  13.  Luke  22.  10.


M  A  N

Luke  1 . 34.  how  shall  this  be,  seeing  I  know  not  a  to.

5.  8.  depart,  for  1  am  a  sinful  to.  O  Lord

13.  19.  which  a  to.  took  and  cast  into  his  garden
19.  7-  to  be  guest  with  a  to.  that  is  a  sinner

John  1.6.  there  was  a  w.  sent  from  G.  named  John
30.  after  me  comelh  a  to.  who  is  preferred  bef.  me

3.  3.  except  a  to.  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see,  5.

4.  how  can  a  to.  be  born  when  he  is  old  ?

27.  a  to.  can  receive  nothing,  except  given  him

4.  29.  come,  see  a  to.  which  told  me  all  things
7-  23.  angry,  because  1  have  made  a  to.  whole

8.  40.  a  w.  that  hath  told  you  the  truth

9.  11.  a  to.  that  is  called  Jesus  made  clay
16.  how  can  am.  a  sinner,  do  such  miracles

10.  33.  thou  being  a  to.  makest  thyself  God

14.  23.  if  a  to.  love  me,  he  will  keep  my

16.  21.  for  joy  that  a  to.  is  born  into  the  world
Acts  2.  22.  Jesus,  a  to.  approved  of  God  among  you
10.26.  stand  up,  l  myself  also  am  a  to.

13.  22.  1  found  David,  a  to.  after  mine  own  heart
41.  not  believe,  though  a  to.  declare  it  to  you
16.  9.  there  stood  a  to.  of  Macedonia,  prayed  him
21. 39.  1  am  a  to.  who  am  a  Jew  of  '1  arsus
Rom.  2.  21.  that  preachest  a  to.  should  not  steal
22.  sayest.  a  to.  should  not  commit  adultery

3.  5.  I  speak  as  a  w.  ||  7. 1.  dominion  over  a  to.

1  Cor.  4.  1.  let  a  to.  so  account  of  us  as  ministers

2.  it  is  required,  that  a  to.  be  found  faithful

6. 18.  every  sin  that  a  TO.doeth  is  without  the  body

7.  1.  it  is  good  for  a  w.  not  to  touch  a  woman
26.  1  say  that  it  is  good  for  a  to.  so  to  be

9.  8.  say  l  these  things  as  a  to.  or  saith  not  law  ?

11.  7-  a  to.  indeed  ought  not  to  cover  his  head
14.  if  a  to.  have  long  hair?  it  is  a  shame

28.  but  let  a  to.  examine  hims.  and  so  let  him  eat

I. 3.  11.  but  when  became  a  to.  1  put  away  childish

2  Cor.  2.6.  sufficient  to  such  a  to.  is  this  punishment

8.  12.  it  is  accepted  according  to  that  am.  hath

II.  20.  if  a  to.  bring  you  into  bondage,  if  a  m.  smite

12.  2.  1  knew  a  to.  in  Chr.  caught  up  to  heaven,  3.

4.  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  to.  to  utter
Gal.  2. 16.  a  to.  is  not  justified  by  works  of  the  law

6.  1.  brethren,  if  a  to.  be  overtaken  in  a  fault

3.  if  a  w.  think  himself  to  be  something
Phil.  2.8.  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  to.

1  Tim.  1.8.  the  law  is  good,  if  a  to.  use  it  lawfully

3.  1.  if  a  to.  desire  the  office  of  a  bishop

5.  if  a  w.  know  not  how  to  rule  his  house

2  Tim.  2.  5.  if  a  to.  also  strive  for  masteries
21.  if  a  to.  therefore  purge  himself

Tit.  3.  10.  a  to.  that  is  a  heretic,  reject
Jam.  1.  23.  he  is  like  a  to.  beholding  his  face
2.  2.  if  there  come  a  to.  with  a  gold  ring
14.  what  profit,  though  a  rn.  say,  he  hath  faith
18.  a  to.  may  say,  thou  hast  faith,  1  have  works
24.  ye  see  how  that  by  works  a  to.  is  justified

5.  17.  Elias  was  a  m.  subject  to  like  passions  as  we

1  Pet.  2. 19.  if  a  w.  for  conscience  loward  God

2  Pet.  2.  19.  for  of  whom  a  to.  is  overcome

1  John  4.  20.  if  a  to.  say,  1  love  God,  and  hateth
Rev.  4.  7-  the  third  beast  had  a  face  as  a  w.

9. 5.  as  torment  of  a  scorpion,  when  hestriketh  am.
A  certain  MAN.

Gen.  37. 15.  a  certain  rn.  found  him,  and  asked  him

2  Sam.  18. 10  a  c.  to.  saw  it,  and  told  Joab,  and  said
1  King. f  22.  34.  a  c.  to.  drew  bow  at  vent.  2  CAr.18.33.
Mat.  21 . 28.  a  certain  m.  had  two  sons,  Luke  15.  11.
Luke  10.  30.  a  certain  m.  went  down  from  Jerusalem

12. 16.  the  ground  of  a  certain  rich  to.  brought  forth

I. 3. 6.  a  c.  w.  had  a  fig-tree  planted  in  his  vineyard

14. 16.  a  c.  to.  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade  many
16.  1.  there  was  a  certain  to.  which  had  a  steward

18.  35.  a  c.  blind  to.  sat  by  the  way -side  begging

19.  12.  a  certain  noble-TO.  went  into  a  far  country
20. 9.  a  certain  w.  planted  a  vineyard,  and  let  it  oiit

John  4.46.  a  c.  noble-w.  whose  son  was  sick  at  Cap.

II.  1.  now  a  c.  to.  was  sick,  named  Lazar,  of  Betha.
Acts  3.2  .a  certain  to.  lame  from  his  mother’s  womb

5. 1.  a  certain  rn.  named  Ananias,  sold  a  possession

8.  9.  a  certain  to.  called  Simeon,  who  used  sorcery

9.  3.3.  and  there  he  found  a  certain  to.  named  F.neas

10.1.  there  wasa  c.m.  in  Cesarea called  Cornelius

14.8.  there  sat  a  c.  to.  at  Lystra,  impotent  in  his  feet
18.  7-  entered  into  a  certain  to.  house  named  Justus
19.24.  a  certain  to.  named  Demetrius, a  silver-smith
25. 14.  there  is  a  certain  to.  left  in  bonds  by  Felix

Any  MAN.

Gen.  24.  16.  a  virgin,  nor  had  anym.  known  her
4~.6.  if  thou  knowest  any  to.  of  activity  among  them
Exod.  24.  14.  if  any  to.  have  any  matters  to  do
34.  3.  nor  let  any  to.  be  seen  through  all  the  mount
24.  nor  shall  any  to.  desire  thy  land,  when  go  up
Lev.  15.  2.  when  anym.  hath  a  running  issue
16.  if  any  to.  seed  of  copulation  go  out  from  him
24.  if  any  to.  lie  with  her  at  all,  he  shall  be  unclean

24. 17.  that  killeth  a.m.  shall  surely  be  put  to  death
Num.5.  10.  whatsoever  any  to.  giveth  the  priest

12.  if  any  w.  wife  go  aside,  and  commit  a  trespass

6.  9.  if  any  to.  die  very  suddenly  by  him

19-  11.  that  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any  to.  13.

21.9.  if  a  serpent  had  bitten  any  to.  when  beheld
Deut. 1 9.1 1 .  if  a. to.  hate  his  neighbour  and  smite  him

16.  if  false  witness  rise  up  against  any  rn.  to  testify
22.8.  blood  on  thy  house,  if  any  to.  fall  from  thence

23. 10.  there  be  any  to.  among  you  that  is  not  clean
Josh.  1.5.  shall  not  anym.  be  able  to  stand  bef.  thee

2.  11.  nor  did  there  remain  courage  in  anym.
Judg.  4.  20.  if  any  rn.  enquire,  is  there  any  to.  here  ?

16. 17.  1  shall  become  weak  and  be  like  a.  other  to.

18.  7-  and  had  no  business  with  anym.  28.

1  Sam.  2.  13.  that  when  anym.  offered  sacrifice
16.  if  any  m.  said,  fail  not  to  burn  the  fat

12.  4.  nor  hast  thou  taken  aught  at  any  to.  hand

2  Sam.  15.  2.  when  any  m.  that  had  a  controversy
5.  it  was  so,  that  when  any  to.  came  nigh  to  him

19.  22.  shall  any  m.  be  put  to  death  this  day  in  lsr.
21.  4.  nor  for  us  shalt  thou  kill  anym.  in  Israel

1  Kings 8. 31.  if  any  to.  trespass  against  his  neighb.
38.  supplication  be  made  b}-  any  to.  2  Chron.  6.  29.

2  Kings  4. 29.  if  thou  meet  ariy  rn.  salute  him  not
2  Chr.  6. 5.  nor  choose  1  any  to.  ruler  over  Israel
Neh  9.  12.  nor  told  I  any  to.  whatG.  put  in  my  heart


M  A  N

Job  32.  2i  let  me  not  accept  any  to.  person
Prov.  30.  2.  surely  I  am  more  brutish  than  any  to.
Isa.  52. 14.  his  visage  was  more  marred  than  any  to.
Jer.  44.  26.  no  more  named  in  mouth  of  any  to.
Ezek. 9.6.  come  not  near  any  to.  on  whom  is  the  mark
Dan.  6.  7.  shall  ask  a  petition  of  any  god  or  to.  12.
Mat.  5.40.  if  any  to.  sue  thee  at  law,  and  take  thy  coat

11.  27.  nor  know,  any  to.  the  Fattier,  save  the  Son

12.  19.  nor  shall  any  to.  hear  his  voice  in  the  streets
16.  24.  if  any  to.  will  come  after  me,  Luke  9.  23.

21.  3.  if  any  to.  say  ought  to  you,  say,  the  Lord  hath

need  of  him,  Mark  11.  3.  Luke  19.  31.
22. 16.  art  true,  nor  carest  thou  for  anym.  for  thou

46.  nor  durst  any  to.  from  that  day  ask  questions
24. 23.  if  anym.  say,  lo  here  is  Christ,  Mlark  13.  21.
Mark  1.41.  see  thou  say  nothing  to  any  m.  but  go

4.  23.  if  any  to.  hath  ears  to  hear,  7.  16.  Rev.  13.  9.

5.  4.  neither  could  anym.  tame  him

9.  30.  he  would  not  that  any  to.  should  know  it
35.  if  any  to.  desire  to  be  first,  the  same  shall  be  last

13.  5.  take  heed,  lest  any  to.  deceive  you

16. 8.  nor  said  any  thing  to  any  to.  they  were  afraid
Luke  14.  8.  when  tliou  art  bidden  of  any  m.  to  a  wed.

26.  if  any  to.  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  father

19.  8.  if  1  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  m.

20.  28.  if  any  to.  brother  die,  having  a  wife
John  4.  33.  hath  any  to.  brought  him  ought  to  eat  r

6.  46.  not  that  any  to.  hath  seen  the  Father

51.  if  any  to.  eat  of  this  bread  he  shall  live  for  eve
7. 17.  if  any  to.  do  his  will  he  shall  know  of  doc  trim
37.  if  anym.  thirst,  let  him  come  to  me  and  drinl
51.  doth  our  law  judge  any  to.  before  it  hear  him

8.  33.  and  we  were  never  in  bondage  to  any  to.

9.  22.  if  any  to.  did  confess  that  he  was  Christ

31.  if  any  to.  be  a  worshipper  of  God,  him  he  heai

32.  that  any  m.  opened  the  eyes  of  one  born  blino

10.  9.  by  me  if  any  to.  enter  in,  he  shall  be  saved
28.  nor  shall  any  to.  pluck  them  out  of  mv  hand

11.  9.  if  any  w.  walk  in  the  day,  he  stumbleth  not
5~i.\iany  to.  knew  where  he  were,  he  should  shew  it

12.  26.  if  any  to.  serve  me,  let  him  follow  me

47.  if  any  to.  hear  my  words  and  believe  not
16.  30.  needest  not  that  any  to.  should  ask  thee

18.  31.  it  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  put  any  to.  to  deatl
Acts  10.  28.  not  call  any  to.  commoner  unclean

47.  can  anym.  forbid  water,  these  be  not  baptized'

19.  38.  if  have  a  matter  against  any  to.  law  is  open

24.  12.  neither  found  me  disputing  with  any  to.

25.  16.  not  manner  of  Romans  to  deliver  any  to.
27.  22.  shall  be  no  loss  of  any  to.  life  among  you

Rom.  8.  9.  if  any  to.  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ

1  Cor.  3.  12.  if  any  to.  build  on  this  foundation
14.ifawy  to. work  abidell  15.  if  any  to. work  be  burnt
17-  if  any  m.  defile  the  temple  of  God  him  destroy

18.  if  any  to.  among  you  seemeth  to  be  wise

5. 1 1 .  if  any  to.  that  is  called  a  brother  be  a  fornicat.

7.  18.  is  any  to.  called,  being  circumcised  ?

8.  2.  if  any  to.  think  that  he  knoweth  any  thing

3.  if  any  to.  love  G.  ||  11.  34.  if  any  m.  hung,  let  him
10.  if  any  to.  see  thee  which  hast  knowledge

9.  15.  that  any  to.  should  make  my  glorying  void

10.  28.  if  any  rn.  say  that  this  is  offered

11.  16.  but  if  any  to.  seem  to  be  contentious

14.  27.  if  any  m.  speak  in  an  unknown  tongue

37.  if  anym.  think  himself  to  be  a  prophet

38.  if  any  to.  be  ignorant,  let  him  be  ignorant
16.22.  if  any  m.  love  not  the  L.  Jesus,  let  him  be

2  Cor.  5.  17.  if  any  to.  be  in  C.  he  is  a  new  creature
10.7.  if  any  to.  trust  to  himself  that  he  is  Christ’s

12.  6.  lest  any  to.  should  think  of  me  above  what
Gal.  1.9.  if  any  to.  preach  any  other  gospel
Eph.  2.  9.  not  of  works,  lest  any  rn.  should  boast

6.8.  know,  that  whatsoever  good  thing  any  to.  doeth
Col.  2.  4.  lest  any  to.  should  beguile  you  with  words

8.  beware  lest  any  to.  spoil  j’ou  thro’  philosophy
3.  13.  if  any  rn.  have  a  quarrel  against  any

1  Thess.  5.  15.  that  none  render  evil  for  evil  to  a.  to.

2  Thess.  3.  8.  nor  did  eat  any  to.  bread  for  nought

14.  if  any  m.  obey  not  our  word,  note  that  man

1  Tim.  6.  3.  if  any  to.  teach  otherwise  and  consent
IJeh.  4.  11.  lest  any  m.  fall  after  the  same  example
10. 38.  but  if  any  to,  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have

12.  15.  lest  any  to.  fail  of  the  grace  of  God
Jam.  1. 13.  G.  cannot  be  tempted,  nor  tempteth  a.  to.

26.  if  any  to.  among  you  seem  to  be  religious
3.  2.  if  any  m.  offend  not  in  word,  he  is  perfect

1  Pet.  4. 1 1.  if  a.  m.  speak,  let  him  speak  as  oracles
16.  yet  if  a.  to.  suffer  as  Christian,  not  be  ashamed
1  John  2. 1.  if  any  to.  sin,  we  have  an  advocate

15.  if  anym.  love  the  world,  the  love  of  Father
27-  and  ye  need  not  that  any  to.  teach  you

5.  16.  if  any  m.  see  his  brother  sin  not  unto  death
Rev.  3.  20.  if  any  m.  hear  my  voice,  and  open  door
11 .  5.  if  any  to.  will  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth
14.  9.  if  any  to.  worship  the  beast  and  his  imag»

22.  18.  if  any  m.  shall  add  to  these  things

19.  if  any  to.  shall  take  away  from  the  words

See  Beast,  Blessed,  Cursed.

M  A  N  -child.

Gen.  17. 10.  every  m.-child shall  be  circumcised,  12.

14.  the  uncircumcised  m.-child  shall  be  cut  off
Lev.  12.  2.  if  a  woman  have  born  a  m.-child,  then
1  Sam,  1.11.  if  wilt  give  to  thy  handmaid  a  tn. -child
Job  3.  3.  let  the  night  perish  wherein  it  was  said,
there  is  a  m.-child  conceived,  Jer.  20.  15.
Tsa.  66.7.  she  was  delivered  of  a  m.-child.  Rev.  12. 5.
Rev.  12. 13.  persecuted  worn,  brought  forth  a  m.-ch.
See  Each.

Every  MAN.

Gen.  7. 21.  all  flesh  died  on  earth,  and  every  to.

9.  5.  at  hand  of  cv.  to.  brother  require  life  of  man
16.  12.  his  hand  be  ag.  every  to.  and  every  m.  hand
42.  25.  to  restore  every  to.  money  into  his  sack
35.  benold,  ev.  to.  money  was  in  his  sack,  43.  21.

44. 11.  then  they  took  down  every  to.  his  sack  ■

13.  and  laded  every  to.  his  ass,  and  returned

45.  1.  Joseph  cried,  cause  e.  to.  to  go  out  from  m«
47.  20.  the  Egyptians  sold  every  to.  his  field
Exod.  1 .  1.  e.  w.  and  his  household  came  with  Jacol
7.  12.  for  they  cast  down  every  to.  his  rod

11.2.  let  every  to.  !*>rrow  of  his  neighbour  jewels ,

12.3.  they  shall  take  to  them  every  to.  a  lamb

299


MAN


MAN


MAN


ExodAQ.  4.  e.  m.  accord,  to  his  eating,  16.16.  |  18. 21.

16.  save  that  which  every  m.  must  eat,  that  only

16.  29.  abide  ye  e.  m.  in  his  place,  let  no  man  go

25. 2.  of  every  m.  that  givetn  it  willingly  .

30.  12.  shall  give  every  m.  a  ransom  for  his  soul

32.  27.  put  every  m.  a  sword  by  his  side,  slay  every
m.  his  brother,  e.  tn.  his  companion  and  neigh.

33.  8.  stood  every  m.  at  his  tent-door  and  looked

10.  they  worshipped  every  rn.  in  his  tent-door

36.  4.  came  every  m.  from  his  work  that  they  made
38.  26.  a  bekah  for  every  m.  that  is,  half  a  shekel
Lev.  19.  3.  fear  every  m.  his  mother  and  father
25.  10*.  ye  shall  return  every  m.  to  his  family,  13.
Nnm.  1.52.  pitch  every  m.  by  his  standard,  2.  2, 17-

5.  10.  every  m.  hallowed  things  shall  be  Ins

7.  5.  give  to  every  m.  according  to  his  service

16.  17.  take  every  m.  his  censer,  and  put  incense  in

18.  they  took  e.  m.  his  censer  and  put  fire  in  them

17.2.  write  thou  every  nt.  name  on  his  rod
0.  they  looked  and  took  every  m.  his  rod

31.53.  men  of  war  had  taken  spoil  e.  m.  for  hims.
.32-  18.  Israel  inherited  every  in.  his  inheritance

27.  servants  will  passover  every  m.  armed,  29.
Dent.  1.  16.  judge  righteously  between  every  m.

3.  20.  shall  ye  return  every  m.  to  his  possession

12.  8.  not  do  every  m.  what  is  right  in  his  eyes
16. 17.  every  m.  shall  give  as  he  is  able

24.  16.  nor  children  for  fathers,  every  m.  shall  die
for  his  own  sin,  2  Kings  14.  6. 2  Chron.  25.  4.
Josh.  4.  5.  take  up  every  m.  of  vou  a  stone

6.  5.  ascend  every  m.  straight  before  him,  20.

24.  28.  every  rn.  to  his  inheritance.  Judg.  2.  6.

Judg.  5.  30.  divided  to  every  m.  a  damsel  or  two

7.  7.  let  other  people  go  every  m.  unto  his  place,  8.
16.  and  he  put  a  trumpet  in  every  m.  hand

22.  sete.  m.  sword  ag.  his  fellow,  1  Sam.  14.  20.

8.  24.  would  give  me  every  m.  his  ear-rings,  25.

9.  49.  the  people  cut  down  every  tn.  his  bough

17.  6.  e.  m.  did  what  was  right  in  his  eyes.  21. 25.
21.  21.  catch  you  e.  m.  his  wife  of  the  daughters

24.  every  m.  to  his  tribe,  e.  m.  to  his  inheritance

1  Sam.  4.  10.  and  they  fled  every  m.  into  his  tent
8.22.  Samuel  said /go  ye  every  m.  into  his  city

14.  34.  bring  hither  e.  m.  his  ox.  e.  m.  his  sheep

25.  10.  that  break  away  e.  m.  from  his  master

13.  David  said,  gird  you  on  every  nt.  his  sword

26.  23.  the  Lord  render  to  every  nt.  his  righteous¬

ness  and  his  faithfulness.  2  Chr.  6.  30.
30.  6.  grieved  every  tn.  for  his  sons  and  daughters
22.  save  to  every  m.  his  wife  and  children

2  Sam.  13.9.  and  they  went  out  e.  m.  from  him

29.  every  m.  gat  him  upon  his  mule,  and  fled

15.  4.  that  every  m.  w'hich  hath  any  suit  or  cause

30.  covered  e.  m.  his  head,  and  they  went  up

19.  8.  for  Israer  hath  fled  every  m.  to  his  tent

20.  1.  Sheba  said,  every  m.  to  his  tents.  O  Israel

1  Kings  4.  25.  dwelt  safely  every  m.  under  his  vine

8.  38.  which  shall  know'  e.  m.  the  plague  of  heart
39.  hear,  forgive,  and  do,  and  give  to  every  in.

according  to  his  w'avs.  Job  .34. 11.  Jer.  17.  10.

10.  25.  brought  e.  m.  his'  present,  2  Chr.  9.24.

12.  24.  not  go  up,  return  e.  m.  to  his  house,  for  this

thing  is  from  me,  22.  17<  36.  2  Chr.  11.  4.
20.  24.  take  the  kings  every  m.  out  of  his  place

2  Kings  6.  2.  let  us  go  and  take  thence  e.  m.  a  beam

11.  8.  every  m.  with  his  weapons  in  his  hand

14.  12.  Judah  fled  every  m.  to  their  tents

18.  31.  and  then  eat  ye  every  m.  of  his  own  vine
Neh.  5. 13.  so  God  shakeout  e.  m.  from  his  house
Esth.  1.8.  do  according  to  every  m.  pleasure

22.  every  tn.  should  bear  rule  in  his  own  house
Job  21.  33.  and  every  m.  shall  draw  after  him
37.  7.  he  sealeth  up  the  hand  of  every  m.  that
Ps.  39.  5.  every  m.  at  his  best  state  is  vanity,  11.

6.  surely  every  m.  walketh  in  a  vain  show
62.  12.  to  thee,  O  Lord,  mercy,  for  thou  renderest
to  every  m.  according  to  his  work,  Prov.  24.  12.
Pror.  19.  6.  every  m.  is  a  friend  to  him  that  giveth

24.  26.  ev.  m.  shall  kiss  his  lips  that  giveth  right  ans.
29.26.  every  m.  judgment  cometh  from  the  Lord
Isa.  9.  20.  eat  every  m.  the  flesh  of  his  own  arm

13.  7-  therefore  every  m.  heart  shall  melt

31.  7.  in  that  day  every  m.  shall  cast  away  his  idols
Jer.  10.  14.  every  m.  is  brutish  in  knowledge,  51.  17.

26.  3.  turn  ev.  m.  from  his  evil  w'ay,  .35. 15. 1  36.  3.
29.  26.  for  every  m.  that  is  mad,  and  maketh  hims.

31.  34.  teach  no  more  ev.  tn.  his  neigh.  Heb.  8.  11.

34.  15.  in  proclaiming  liberty  ev.mAo  his  neigh.  17.
37.  10.  they  should  rise  up  every  m.  in  his  tent
51.  45.  go  out  and  deliver  ye  every  m.  his  soul
Ezek.  8.  11.  with  every  tn.  his  censer  in  his  hand

12.  every  m.  in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery

9.  1.  even  every  m.  with  his  destroying  weapon,  2.
20.  7-  cast  away  every  m.  abominations  of  his  eyes

8.  they  did  not  every  m.  cast  away  abominations

32.  10  every  m.  shall  tremble  for  his  own  life
46.  18.  not  scattered  every  tn.  from  his  possession
Dan.  3. 10.  ev.tn.  that  shall  hear  the  sound  fall  down

6.  12.  that  every  m.  that  shall  ask  a  petition

Jonah  1.  5.  the  mariners  cried  every  tn.  to  his  god
Mtc.  4.  4.  they  shall  sit  every  m.  under  his  vine
7-  2.  they  hunt  every  m.  his  brother  with  a  net
Hag.  1.  9.  and  ye  run  every  m.  to  his  own  house
Zech.  3.  10.  call  every  m.  his  neighb.  under  the  vine
8.  4.  every  m.  with  his  staff  in  his  hand  for  age

16.  speak  every  m.  truth  to  his  neighb.  Eph.  4.  25.
Mai.  2.  10.  why  do  we  deal  treacherously  every  tn.  ?
Mat.  16.  27.  the  Son  of  man  shall  reward  every  tn.

according  to  his  works,  Rom.  2.  6.  Rev.  22.  12.
20.  9  they  received  every  m.  a  penny,  10.

25.  15.  he  gave  to  every  tn.  according  to  his  ability
Mark  8. 25.ne  was  restored , and  saw  every  tn.  clearly

1.3.  34.  and  gave  to  e.  m.  his  work,  and  commanded

15.  24.  casting  lots  what  every  m.  should  take
Luke  6.  30.  give  to  every  m.  that  asketh  of  thee

16.  16.  is  preached,  and  every  m.  pressethinto  it

19.  15.  how  much  every  m.  had  gained  by  trading
John  1.  9.  the  true  light,  which  lighteth  every  m.

2.  10.  ev.  tn.  atbeginning  doth  set  forth  good  wine
6.  45.  e.  m.  that  hath  heard  and  learned  of  Father
16.  .32.  ye  shall  be  scattered  every  m.  to  his  own
Acts  2. 8.  how  hear  we  every  m.  in  our  own  tongue  ?

300


Acts  2.  45.  parted  to  all  men,  as  e.  m.  had  need,  4. 35.

11.  29.  e.  tn.  determined  to  send  relief  to  brethren
Rom.  2.  10.  peace  to  every  in.  that  worketh  good

3.  4.  yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  m.  a  liar

12.  3.  as  God  dealt  to  every  m.  the  measure  of  faith

14.  5.  let  e.  nt.  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind

1  Cor.  3.  5.  even  as  the  1  .ord  gave  to  every  nt.  7.  17-
13.  every  m.  work  shall  be  made  manifest

4.  5.  then  shall  every  in.  have  praise  of  God

7. 2.  nevertheless,  let  every  m.  have  his  own  wife

7.  but  every  m.  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God
20.  let  every  m.  abide  in  the  same  calling,  24.

8.  7-  there  is  not  in  every  m.  that  knowledge

10.  24.  but  let  every  m.  seek  another's  wealth

11.  3.  know  that  the  head  of  every  in.  is  Christ

12.  7.  Spirit  is  given  to  every  tn.  to  profit  withal

15.  23.  but  every  tn.  in  his  order,  Christ  first  fruits

2  Cor.  4.  2.  commend,  ourselves  to  e.  in.  conscience
Gal.  5.  3.  I  testify  again  to  e.  tn.  that  is  circumcised

6.  4.  let  every  m.  prove  his  own  work,  then  shall

5.  for  every  m.  shall  bear  his  own  burden
Phil.  2.  4.  look  not  every  m.  on  his  own  things
Col.  1.28.  whom  we  preach,  teaching  every  m.  in  all

wisdom  to  present  every  rn.  perfect  in  Christ  ,les.
4.  6.  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every  m.
Heb.  2.  9.  that  he  should  taste  death  for  every  tn.
Jam.  1. 14.  but  every  m.  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn

19.  let  every  m.  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak

1  Pet.  1.  17.  who.iudgeth  according  toggery  tn.  work

3.  15.  to  give  a  reason  to  e.  m.  that  asketh  of  hope

4.  10.  as  every  tn.  hath  received  the  gift,  even  so

1  John  3.  .3.  e.  tn.  that  hath  this  hope  in  him,  purifies
Rev.  20.  13.  judged  e.  m.  according  to  their  works
22. 18.  for  I  testify  to  e.  tn.  that  heareth  the  words
See  Evil,  Foolish.

MAN  of  God.

Dent.  33. 1.  Moses  the  tn.  of  God,  Josh.  14.  6.

Judg.  13.  6.  woman  told,  say.  a  m.of  G.  came  to  me

8.  let  the  m.  of  G.  come  again  to  us,  and  teach  us
1  Sam.  2.  27.  there  came  a  tn.  of  G.  to  Eli,  and  said

9.  6.  behold  now  there  is  in  this  city  a  m.  of  God

7.  there  is  not  a  present  to  bring  the  tn.  of  God

8.  that  will  I  give  to  the  m.  of  God  to  tell  us

1  Kings  12.  22.  word  came  to  Shemaiah  the  tn.  of  G.

13.  1.  and  there  came  a  m.  of  God  out  of  Judah

26.  it  is  the  m.  of  God  who  was  disobedient

17.  18.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  m.  of  God?

24.  now  by  this  I  know  that  thou  art  a  m.  of  God
20.  28.  there  came  a  tn.  of  G.  and  spake  to  Aliab

2  Kings  1.  9.  thou  m.  gfG.  king  said,  comedown,  11.

I. 3.  O  m.  of  G.  I  pray  thee,  let  my  life  be  precious

4.  7-  she  came  and  told  m.  of  G.  ||  9.  this  is  tn.  of  G.

16.  thou  in.  of  God,  do  not  lie  to  thine  handmaid
22.  that  I  may  run  to  m.  of  God,  and  come  again

25.  she  came  unto  the  m.  of  God  to  Carmel,  27.

40.  O  thou  tn.  of  God,  there  is  death  in  the  pot
42.  brought  the  m.  of  God  bread,  of  first-fruits

5. 14.  dipped,  according  to  the  saying  of  m.  of  God

20.  Gehazi,  servant  of  Elisha,  the  m.  of  God,  8.  4.

6.  10.  sent  to  place  which  the  m.  of  God  told  him

15.  when  the  servant  of  the  tn.  of  God  was  risen

7.  2.  a  lord  answered  the  m.  of  God  and  said,  19.

17.  people  trod  on  him  as  the  m.  of  God  said,  18.

8.  2.  the  woman  did  after  the  saying  of  m.  of  God

7.  m.  of  God  is  come  hither  ||  11.  the  m.  of  God  wept

8.  take  a  present  and  go  meet  the  m.  of  God

13.  19.  and  the  m.  of  God  was  wroth  with  him
23.  16.  according  to  the  word  which  the  m.  of  God

17-  it  is  the  sepulchre  of  m.  of  God  which  came

1  Chr.  23. 14.  Moses  m.  of  G.  2  Chr.  30. 16.  Ezra  3. 2.

2  Chron.  8.  14.  David  the  m.  of  God,  Neh.  12. 24,  36.

25.  7.  but  there  came  a  tn.  of  God  to  Amaziah

9.  the  m.  ofG.  answered,  the  Lord  is  able  to  give
Jer.  35.  4.  Ilanan  the  son  of  Igdaliah  a  tn.  of  God

1  Tim.  6.  11.  but  thou,  O  m.  of  G.  flee  these  things

2  Tim.  .3.  17.  that  the  tn.  of  God  may  be  perfect

See  Good.

Mighty  MAN.

Judg.  6.  12.  the  Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  m.

II.  1.  now  Jephthah  was  a  mighty  m.  of  valour
Ruth  2.1.  N  aomi  had  a  kinsman  a  migh.  m.  of  wealth
1  Sam.  9. 1.  Kish  a  Benjamite,  a  migh.  m.  of  power

16. 18.  David  m.  m.  and  man  of  war,  2  Sam.  17. 10.

1  Kings  11.  28.  the  man  Jeroboatn  was  a  migh.  m.

2  Kings  5. 1.  Naaman  wasalso  a  mighty  m.  in  valour

1  Chr.  12.  4.  Ismaiah  a  mighty  m.  among  the  thirty

2  Chr.  17. 17.  of  Benjarn.  Eliadaa  mighty  rn.  of  valour

28. 7.  Zichri,  a  migh.  m.  of  Ephraim,  slew  Maaseiah
Job  22.  8.  as  for  the  mighty  m.  he  had  the  earth
Ps.  33.  16.  a  mighty  m.  is  not  delivered  by  strength
52.  1 .  why  boastest  thou  in  mischief,  O  mighty  m.
78.  65.  then  the  Lord  awaked  like  a  mighty  m.

127.  4.  as  arrows  are  in  the  hand  of  a  mighty  m.

J  a.  3.  2.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  mighty  m.

5.  15.  and  the  mighty  m.  shall  be  humbled

31. 8.  shall  fall  with  the  sword,  not  of  a  mighty  m.
42.  13.  the  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty  m

Jer.  9.  2.3.  nor  let  the  mighty  tn.  glory  in  his  might

14.  9.  shouldest  be  as  a  mighty  tn.  that  cannot  save
46.  h.nor  mighty  m.  escape  ||  12.  mighty  m.  stumbled

Zeph.  1.  14.  the  mighty  in.  shall  cry  there  bitterly
Zech.  9. 13.  have  made  thee  as  sword  of  a  mighty  m.

10.  7.  they  of  Ephraim  shall  be  like  a  mighty  m.

No  MAN.

Gen.  31.  50.  no  m.  is  with  us,  see,  God  is  witness

41.  44.  without  thee  shall  tiom.  lift  his  hand

45.  1.  stood  no  m.  while  Joseph  made  hims.  known
Exod.  2.  12.  and  when  he  saw  that  there  was  no  m.

16.  19.  let  no  m.  leave  of  it  till  the  morning

29.  let  no  m.  go  out  of  his  place  on  the  seventh  day
22.  10.  be  hurt  or  driven  away,  no  m.  seeing  it

33.  4.  no  rn.  did  put  on  him  His  ornaments
20.  for  there  shall  no  tn.  see  me  anti  live

34.  3.  and  no  m.  shall  come  up  with  thee

Lev.  16.  17-  there  shall  be  no  m.  in  the.  tabernacle

21.  21.  no  m.  that  hath  a  blemish  shall  come  nigh

27.  26.  no  m.  shall  sanctify  it,  it  is  the  Lord’s
Nnm.  5. 19.  if  no  m.  hath  lain  with  thee,  be  thou  free
Devt.  7.  24.  no  m.  able  to  stand  before  thee,  11.  25.

28.  29-  oppressed,  and  no  m.  shall  save  thee,  68.
34.  6.  but  no  m.  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre

Josh.  23.  9.  no  m.  hath  been  able  to  stand  before  you


Judg.  11. 39.  Jephthah’s  daughter  knew  no  m.

19.  15.  no  in.  that  took  them  to  his  house,  18.

21. 12.  voung  virgins  that  had  known  no  m.

1  Sam.  2'.  9.  tor  by  strength  shall  no  m.  prevail

11.  .3.  and  then  if  there  be  nnm.  to  save  us

17.  32.  iet  no  in.  heart  fail  because  or  him

21.  2.  let  no  m.  know  any  thing  of  the  business

26.  12.  and  no  m.  saw  nor  knew  it,  nor  awaked

2  Sam.  15.  3.  no  m.  deputed  of  the  king  to  hear  thee

1  Kings  8.  46.  is  no  in.  that  sinneth  not,  2  Chr.fi.%.

2  Kings 7. 5.  behold,  there  was  nom.  in  camp,  10.

23.  18.  let  him  alone,  let  no  m.  move  his  bones

1  Chr.  16.  21.  he  suffered  no  in.  to  do  them  wrong,
he  reproved  kines  for  their  sakes,  Ps.  105.  11.
Esth  5.  12.  queen  did  let  no  m.  come  in  with  king
8. 8  may  no  m.  reverse  ||  9. 2 .no  in.  could  withstand
Job  II.  .3.  shall  no  m.  make  thee  ashamed'

15.  28.  in  houses  which  nom.  inha.biteth

20.  21.  therefore  shall  wow.  look  for  his  goods

24.  22.  he  riseth,  and  nom.  is  sure  of  his  life
.38.  26.  where  nom.  is,  wherein  there  is  nom.

Ps.  22. 6. 1  am  a  worm,  and  no  m.  a  reproach  of  men

142. 4.  there  was  wo  m.  Isa.  41. 28.  1  59. 16.  Jer.  4.25.

14.3.  2.  in  thy  sight  shall  nom.  be  justified
Prov.  1 . 24. 1  stretched  my  hand ,  and  no  m.  regarded

28.  1.  the  wicked  flee  when  no  in.  pursueth

if.  shall  flee  to  the  pit,  let  nom.  stay  him
Eccl.  8.  8.  no  m.  hath  power  over  the  spirit
9.  1.  worn,  knoweth  either  love  or  hatred
15.  nom.  remembered  that  same  poor  man
Isa.  9.  19.  no  m.  shall  spare  his  brother
24. 10.  no  m.  may  come  in  ||  3.3. 8.  he  regardeth  no  *«.
50.  2.  wherefore  when  I  came,  was  there  nom.

57.  1.  and  nom.  layeth  it  to  heart,  Jer.  12.  11.

60.  15.  so  that  no  m.  went  through  thee
Jer.  2.  6.  and  where  wo  m.  dwelt  ||  8.  6.  no  m.  repent.

22.  30.  for  no  m.  of  his  seed  shall  prosper
.30.  if.  this  is  Zion,  whom  nom.  seeketh  aftei
36. 19.  go  hide,  and  let  no  m.  know  where  ve  be
38.24.  Zedekiah  said,  let  worn,  know  of  these  words

40. 15.  and  no  m.  shall  know  it  ||  41. 4.  wo  m.  knew  it
44.  2.  and  nom.  dwelleth  therein,  51.  4.3.

49.  18.  worn,  shall  abide  there,  .3.3.  I  50.  40.

Lam.  4.  4.  ask  bread,  and  no  m.  breaketh  it  to  them
Ezek.  14. 15.  that  no  m.  may  pass  thro’  for  the  beasts
44.  2.  worn,  shall  enter  in  by  this  gate
Hos.  4.  4.  yet  let  no  rn.  strive  or  reprove  another
Nah.  3. 18.  is  scattered,  and  no  m.  gathereth  them
Zeph.  3.  6.  so  that  there  is  nom.  none  inhabitant
Zech.  1.  21.  so  that  worn,  did  lift  up  his  head

7.  14.  that  no  m.  passed  through  nor  returned
Mat.  6. 24.  no  m.  can  serve  two  masters,  Luke  16. 1.3

8.4.  tell  no  m.  16. 20.  Mark  7.  36.  Luke  5. 14.  |  9. 21
9.  30.  Jesus  charged  them,  saying,  see  that  no  tn

know  it,  Mark  5.  43.  |  7.  24.  |  8.  30.  I  9.  9
11. 27.  no  m.  know'eth  Son  but  Father,  Luke  10.22
17.  8.  they  saw  nom.  save  Jesus  only
9.  tell  the  vision  to  no  m.  till  the  Son  be  risen
22.  46.  no  m.  was  able  to  answer  him  a  word

2.3.  9.  call  nom.  father  on  the  earth

24.  36.  that  day  and  hour  know,  no  m.  Mark  1.3. 32
Mark  10.  29.  no  in.  that  hath  left  house,  Luke  )8.  29

11.  14.  nom.  eat  fruit  of  thee  hereafter  for  ever

12.  14.  we  know  that  thou  carest  for  nom.

Luke  3. 14.  do  violence  to  no  m.  ||  10. 4.  salute  no m.

15. 16.  with  the  husks,  and  no  m.  gave  unto  him
John  1.  18.  no  m.  hath  seen  God,  1  John  4.  12.

3.  2.  nom.  can  do  these  miracles,  except  God  be

13.  nom.  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven

5.  22.  for  the  Father  judgeth  no  m.  but  hath

6.  44.  no  m.  can  come  to  me,  except  Fath.  draw, 65

7.  30.  but  no  m.  laid  hands  on  him,  44. 1  8.  20.

8.  11.  she  said,  nom.  Lord  ||  15.  1  judge  mm.

9.  4.  the  night  cometh  when  no  m.  can  work

10.  18.  nom.  taketh  it  from  me,  I  lay  it  down

29.  no  m.  is  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  my  Father1

13.  28.  no  m.  at  the  table  knew  why  he  spake  this

14.  6.  no  m.  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by  me

15.  13.  greater  love  hath  nom.  than  this

16.  22.  and  your  joy  no  m.  taketh  from  you
Acts  1.  20.  and  let  no  m.  dwell  therein

4.  17.  that  they  speak  to  nom.  in  this  name

5.  13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  m.  join  himself  _

23.  we  had  opened,  we  found  nom.  within

9.  7.  hearing  a  voice,  but  seeing  no  m.  8.

18. 10.  no  m.  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee
28.31.  preaching  king,  of  G.  no  m.  forbidding  him

Rom.  12.  17-  recompense  to  nom.  evil  for  evil
13. 8.  owe  no  m.  any  thing,  but  to  love  one  another

14.  7.  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  m.  dieth  to  himself
13.  that  no  m. put  a  stumbling-block  in  his  way

1  Cor.  2.  11.  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  m.

15.  yet  he  himself  is  judged  of  no  m.

3.11.  for  other  foundation  can  no  m.  lay  than  is  lai

18.  let  nom.  deceive  himself,  21.

10.  24.  letwo  m.  seek  his  own,  butanother's  wealtr

2  Cor.  5. 16.  henceforth  know  we  no  in.  after  the  ties
7.  2.  we  have  wronged  no  m.  have  corrupted  no

Gal.  2.  6.  God  accepteth  nom.  person
.3.  11.  but  that  nom.  is  justified  by  the  law
Eph.  5.  6.  let  no  m.  deceive  you,  2  Thess.  2.  3.

29.  for  nom.  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh
Phil.  2.  20.  for  1  have  no  m.  like-minded,  who  wil
Col.  2.  18.  let  nom.  beguile  you  of  your  reward
1  Thess.  4.  6.  that  no  m.  go  beyond  his  brother  in  an

1  Tim.  5.  22.  lay  hands  suddenly  on  nom.

2  Tim.  4. 16.  at  my  first  answer  no  m.  stood  with  rn
Tit.  3.  2.  put  them  in  mind,  to  speak  evil  of  nom
Heb.  5.  4.  nom.  taketh  this  honour  to  himself

7.  13.  of  which  no  m.  gave  attendance  at  the  alta
12.  14.  without  which  no  m.  shall  see  the  Lord
Jam.  1.  13.  let  no  m.  say  when  lie  is  tempted
3.  8.  the  tongue  can  no  m.  tame,  it  is  unruly
1  John  3.  7-  little  children,  let  nom.  deceive  vou
Rev.  2.  17.  a  new  name,  which  nom.  knoweth
3.  ~  he  that  shutteth,  and  no  tn.  openeth

8.  and  no  in.  can  shut  it  ||  11.  no  m.  take  thy  crow:
5.  3.  and  no  m.  was  able  to  open  the  book,  4.

7.  9.  and  multitude  which  wo  m.  could  number
13. 17.  that  no  m.  might  buy  or  sell,  save  lie  that

14. 3.  no  m.  could  learn  that  song  but  the  redeem*;

15.  8.  no  m.  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple  j

.1


MAN


M  A  N


MAN


fpp.18.11.  nom.buyeth  their  merchandise  any  more

19.  12.  he  had  a  name  written,  that  no  m.  knew
Of  MAN.

len.  9.  5.  at  the  hand  of  rn.  will  I  require  life  of  m.
rod.  13.  13.  all  the  first  tan  n  ofm.  Sum.  18.  15.
lent.  i.  17-  yt  shall  not  tie  atraid  ot  the  race  of  m.
Sam.  7.  19.  is  this  the  manner  of  m.  O  Lord  God  ?

24.  14.  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  m.  1  Chron.  21.  13.
Kings  1.7.  whatmanner  of  m.  was  he  which  came
'.  10.  there  was  no  man  there,  nor  voice  of  m.
oAlO.  5.  are  thy  days  as  the  days  ofm.?  '

14. 19-  thou  destroy est  the  hope  of  rn.

,sal.  60.  11.  for  vain  is  the  heip  of  m.  108.  12.

76.  10.  the  wrath  ofm.  shall  praise  thee
'tov.  5.  21.  the  ways  of  rn.  are  before  the  Turd

5.  +  26.  the  woman  oj  a  m.  will  hunt  for  life

18.  14.  the  spirit  ofm.  will  sustain  his  infirmjty
L9.  11.  the  discretion  of  m.  deferreth  his  anger

22.  the  desire  of  m.  is  his  kindness

27. 19.  so  the  heart  of  m.  answereth  to  man
29.  25.  the  fear  of  m.  bringeth  a  snare

JO.  2.  and  have  not  the  understanding  of  m.

19.  and  the  way  of  a  m.  with  a  maid

,ccl.  6.  7-  all  the  labour  of  rn.  is  for  his  mouth

I.  6.  the  misery  of  m.  is  great  upon  him

12.  13.  for  this  is  the  whoie  duty  ofm.

sa.  22.  1 17-  will  carry  thee  with  captivity  of  a  m.

14. 13.  he  marketh  with  compass,  he  maketh  it  after
the  figure  of  m.  according  to  the  beauty  of  a  rn.

51.  12.  that  thou  shouldest  be  afraid  of  a  m.

er.  10.  23.  I  know  the  wav  of  m.  is  not  in  himself

.am.  3.  35.  to  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  m.

'.zek.  1.  10.  they  four  had  the  face  of  a  m.  10.  14.

’9. 11.  no  foot  of  m.  shall  pass  through  it

12. 13.  neither  shall  the  foot  of  m.  trouble  them
Ian.  8.  15.  stood  as  the  appearance  of  a  m.  10.  18.
ech.  9-  1.  when  eyes  of  a  m.  shall  be  toward  Lord
12.  1.  who  formeth  the  spirit  of  m.  within  him

I at.  8.  27.  whatmanner  of  m.  is  this,  that  the  winds
and  sea  obey  him  ?  Mark  A.  41.  Luke  8.  25.

9.  10.  if  the  case  of  m.  be  so  with  his  wife
lark  5.  8.  he  said,  come  out  of  the  m.  Luke  8.  29.
>hn  1.  13.  nor  of  the  will  of  rn.  but  of  God
’.  25.  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  rn.
cts  12.  22.  it  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  not  of  a  m.

om.  2.  9.. upon  every  soul  ofm.  that  doeth  evil
.  6.  David  describeth  the  blessedness  o/the  m.

Cor.  2.  9-  neither  hath  entered  into  the  heart  ofm.

II.  what  man  knoweth  the  things  of  a  m.  save  th*
spirit  of  m.  which  is  in  him,  so  Spirit  things  of  God
.  3.  should  be  judged  of  vou,  or  of  m.  judgment
1.7*  but  the  woman  is  tne  glory  of  the  m.

8.  but  the  woman  is  of  the  m.  12.
al.  1.  12.  for  l  neither  received  it  of  m.

on.  1.  20.  the  wrath  ofm.  worketh  hot  righteousn
24.  forgetteth  what  manner  of  m.  he  was

Pet.  1.  24.  all  the  glory  ofm.  as  the  flower  of  grass
Pet.  1. 21.  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  m.
ev.  13.  18.  for  it  is  the  number  e/a  m.

1.  17.  according  to  the  measure  of  a  m.

See  Old.

One  MAN.

en.  42. 11.  we  are  all  one  m.  sons,  we  are  true,  13.
rod.  16.  22.  they  gathered  two  homers  for  one  m.

1.  .35. ) forte  m.  ox  hurt  another’s  that  he  die
nm.  14.  15.  if  thou  kill  this  people  as  one  m.

6. 22.  shall  one  m.  sin.  and  wilt  thou  be  wroth  ?

1.  49.  and  there  lacketh  not  one  m.  of  us
sh.  23.  10.  one  m.  shall  chase  a  thousand
dg.  6. 16.  smite  the  Midianitesas  one  rn.

3. 19.  to  be  a  priest  to  the  house  of  one  m.

0.  L  tile  congregation  was  gathered  as  one  m.

5.  all  the  people  arose  as  one  m.  saying
''am.  2.  25.  if  one  m.  sin  against  another
Sam.  19.  14.  even  as  the  heart  of  one  m.
kings  22.  8.  there  is  yet  one  m.M  icaiah.2  Chr.  18.7.
•raX  1.  gathered  together  as  one  m.  Ne/t.  8.  1.
b  13.  9.  as  orient,  mocketh  another, do  ye  mock
cl.  7.  28.  one  m.  among  a  thousand  have  1  found
.  9.  wherein  one  m.  ruleth  over  another
a.  4.  1.  seven  women  shall  take  hold  of  one  m.

■ek.  9.  2.  one  m.  was  clothed  with  linen

'mil. 50. one  m.  shall  die  for  the  people,  18.  14.

mi.  5. 12.  as  by  one  m.  sin  entered  into  the  world

15.  the  gift  by  grace,  which  is  bv  one  m.  Jesus

17.  if  bv  one  m.  offence  death  reigned  by  one
19-^as  by  one  m.  disobedience  many  were  sinners
L.5.  one  m.  esteemeth  one  day  above  another

I tm.  5.  9.  having  been  the  wife  of  one  m.

See  Poor,  Rich,  Righteous.

Son  of  M  A  N .

'tm.  23.  19.  nor  son  of  m.  that  he  should  repent
b  25.  6.  and  the  son  of  m.  which  is  a  worm
5.  8.  righteousness  may  profit  the  son  of  m.
al-8.  4.  and  sonofm.  that  thou  visit.  him,i/<?5.2.6.

*•  17.  and  on  son  of  m.  whom  thou  madest  strong
14.  3.  or  son  of  m.i hat  thou  mak est  account  of  him

16.  3.  put  not  your  trust  in  the  son  of  m.

?•  51.  12.  be  not  afraid  of  the  son  of  m.  which
|  ^  2.  blessed  is  the  son  of  m.  that  layeth  hold  on  it
r- 49. 18.  nor  shall  .wn  «/ 771.  dwell  in  it, 33.  I  50.40.

I  •  43.  neither  doth  any  son  ofm.  pass  thereby
|j ek.  8.  15.  hast  thou  seen  this,  O  son  of  m.  17.

'  •  6^ sigh  therefore,  thou  son  of  m.  with  bitterness
rn.“.  13.  behold,  one  like  the  Sonofm.  came  with
the  clouds  of  heaven.  Rev.  1.  13. 1  14.  14.
at- ?-20.  Son  0/771. hath  not  where  to  lay.i.tute  9.58.

6.  know  that  the  Son  of  m.  hath  power  on  earth

to  forgive  sins,  Mark  2.  10.  Luke  5.  24.

'•  not  gone  over,  till  the  Son  of  m.  be  come
V  ‘^*on  °f  m-  o?01®  eating,  Luke  7.  34.

-.8.  for  the  Son  of  m.  is  Lord  even  of  the  sabbath,

.  Mark  2.  28.  Luke  6.  5.

whosoever  speaketh  against  Son  of  m.  Luke

12.  10.

/•  so shall  Son  of  m.  be  three  days  and  nights
•  '7-  that  soweth  good  seed  is  the  Son  of  m.

'  e  °f m-  shall  send  forth  his  angels

13.  whom  do  men  say  that  I ,  the  S.  of  m.  am  ?

^ 9.  until  the  Sonofm.  be  risen  ag»in  Mark  9.  9.
the  S.  of  m.  shall  be  betrayed,  2-  18. 1  26  2,

45  Mark  14.  41  Luke  9.  44.


Mat.  24. 27-  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
„  m-  be,  37  ,  39.  Luke  17.  26.

30.  shall  see  5.  of  m.  com.  Mark  13.  26.  Luke 21.27
44.  hour  ye  think  not  5.  ofm.  cometh.  Luke  12. 40.

25.  3l.  when  tne  Son  of  rn.  shall  come  !n  his  glorv

26.  24.  the  5.  of  m.  goeth,  Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22
Marks.  38.  of  him  shall  the  ton  ofm.  be  ashamed

when  he  cometh  in  glory  of  the  Father
9.  12.  and  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  m.

31.  the  Sonofm.  is  delivered,  10.  33.  Luke  24.  7.

13.  34.  Son  of  m.  is  as  a  man  taking  a  far  journey
Luke  6.  22.  reproach  you  for  the  ton  of  m.  sake

9.  22.  the  Son  of  rn.  must  suffer  many  things.  26.
56.  the  S.  of  77i.  is  not  come  to  destroy  men's  lives

11.  30.  so  shall  Son  of  m.  be  to  this  generat.  17.  24.

12.  8.  him  shall  the  Sonof  m.  confess  before  angels

17.  22.  desire  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  rn.

18.  8.  when  the  S.  of  m.  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith

19.  10.  the  S.  of  m.  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  lost

21.  36.  be  worthy  to  stand  before  the  Son  ofm.

22.  48.  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  m.  witli  a  kiss  ?
John  1.  51.  ascending  and  descending  on  Son  of  m.

3.  13.  even  the  Son  ofm.  which  is  in  heaveD

14.  even  so  must  the  Son  of  m.  be  lifted  up

5.  27 .  given  authority,  because  he  is  the  tion  of  m.

6.  27.  which  the  Son  ofm.  shall  give  unto  you
53.  except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  ofm.

62.  what,  and  it  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  m..  ascend
8.  28.  when  ye  have  lift  up  the  Son  of  m.  then  shall

12.  23.  that  the  Son  of  m.  should  be  glorified

34.  of  m.  must  be  lifted  up,  who  is  this  S.  ofm.?

13.  31.  Jesus  said,  now  is  the  Son  of  m.  glorified
Acts  7. 56. 1  see  the  5.  oj  m.  standing  on  right  hand

See  Son.

_  „  That  MAN.

"f®*  17*  ?,ven  *•  shall  I'e  cut  off  from  his  peo
20.  3.  1  will  set  my  face  against  t.  rn.  5.  Ezek.  14  8
i\um.  9.  13.  brought  not  otter,  r.  rn.  shall  bear  his  sin
Dent.  17.  o.  stone  that  m.  or  woman  till  they  die  1°

22.  18.  elders  shall  take  that  rn.  and  chastise  him*'

25.  9.  answer  and  say,  so  shall  it  be  done  to  that  m.
~9.  A),  his  jealousy  shall  smoke  against  that  rn

Josh  22.  20.  that  m.  perisheth  not  alone  in  iniquity
Jot)  1.  1.  and  that  m.  was  perfect  and  upright
/  sat.  37  .  37.  for  the  end  ot  that  m.  is  peace

40.  4.  blessed  is  that  m.  who  maketh  Lord  his  trust
87.  5.  lie  said,  this  and  that  m.  was  born  in  her
r/ov.  2b.  21.  for  bread  that  m,  will  transgress
Jer.  20.  16.  let  that  m.  be  as  cities  Lord  overthrew

23.  34.  I  will  even  punish  that  m.  and  his  house
Mat^  12.45.  last  state  of  t.  rn.  is  worse,  Luke  11.26.

18.  7.  woe  to  that  m.  by  whom  the  offence  cometh
A).  24.  woe  to  that  m.  bv  whom  the  Son  of  man  is

betrayed,  Mark  14.  21.  Luke  22.  22
good  were  it  for  that  rn.  if  tie  had  not  been  born
27.  19.  have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  Mat  just  777.
Acts  17.  31.  by  that  m.  whom  he  hath  ordained
Rom.  14.  20.  evil  for  t.  m.  who  eateth  with  offence
2  I hess.  2.  3.  t.  m.  of  sin  be  revealed,  son  ot  perdit.

3.  14.  note  that  771.  and  have  no  company  with  him
Jam.  1.  7.  let  not  that  rn.  think  he  shall  receive
This  MAN.

Gen.  24.  58.  wilt  thou  go  with  this  m.  ?  I  will  go

26.  11.  lie  that  toucheth  this  rn.  or  his  wife
Exod.  10.  7.  how  long  shall  t.  m.  be  a  snare  to  us  *
Ueut.  22.  16.  1  gave  my  daughter  to  this  rn.  to  wife
Judg.tj.  23.  seeing  this  m.  is  cone  to  my  house

24.  but  to  this  m.  do  not  so  vne  a  thing

1  Sam.  1.  3.  this  m.  went  up  yearly  to  worship
10.27.  but  they  said,  how  shall  tin  sm.  save  us  l
17 •  25.  have  you  seen  this  m.  that  is  come  up  '

25^  25.  let  not  my  lord  regard  this  m.  of  1  eiial

1  Rings  20.  7.  see  how  this  rn.  seeketh  mischief

39.  brought  a  man  to  me,  and  said,  keep  this  m.

2  Rings  5. 7.  thism.  sends  to  me  to  recover  a  man
JVc/i.  1. 11.  grant  him  mercy  in  sight  of  this  m.

Esth.  9.  4.  for  this  rn.  Mordecai  waxed  greater  and
Job  1.  3.  this  77i.  was  the  greatest  of  the  men  of  east
Psal.  52.  7*  lo,  this  rn.  niade  not  God  his  strength
87-  4.  shall  be  said,  this  m.  was  born  there,  5,  6.

Isa.  14.  16.  is  this  the  771.  that  made  earth  tremble  ?

66.  2.  but  to  this  m.  will  1  look,  even  to  him
Jer.  22.  28.  is  t.  m.  Coniah  a  despised  broken  idol  ?
30.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  write  ye  thism.  childless

26.  11.  saying,  this  m.  is  worthy  to  die,  16.

38.  4.  the  princes  said,  let  this  rn.  be  put  to  death,

this  77t.  seeketh  not  the  welfare  of  this  people
Dan.  8.  16.  make  this  m.  understand  the  vision
Jonah  1.  14.  let  us  not  perish  for  this  m.  life
Mic.  5.  5.  this  m.  shall  he  the  peace  when  Assyrian
Mat.  8.  9.  1  say  to  t.  m.  go,  and  he  goeth,  to  another
9.  3.  scribes  said,  this  m.  blasphemeth,  Mark  2. 7.

13.  54.  whence  had  this  m.  this  wisdom  r  Mark  6.  2.

27.  47.  some  said,  this  m.  calleth  for  Elias
Mark  14.  71.  1  know  not  this  m.  of  whom  ye  speak

15.  39.  truly  thi s  m.  was  the  Son  of  God
Luke  7 .  39.  this  m.  if  he  were  a  prophet,  would  have

14.  9.  come  and  say  to  thee,  give  this  m.  place
30.  saying,  this  m.  began  to  build  and  was  not  able

15.  2.  thism.  receive,  sinners,  and  eateth  with  them

18. 14. 1  tell  you,  thism.  went  down  justified  rather

19.  14.  we  will  not  have  this  rn.  to  reign  over  us
22.  56.  and  said,  this  m.  was  also  with  him

23. 4. 1  find  no  fault  in  t.  m.  14.  ||  18.  away  with  t.  m.

41.  but  this  77! .  hath  done  nothing  amiss
52.  this  77!.  went  to  Pilate  and  begged  the  body

John  6.  52.  how  can  this  rn.  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat  ?

7. 15.  how  knoweth  this  m.  letters,  having  never
27-  howbeit,  we  know  this  m.  whence  he  is

46.  answered,  never  man  spake  like  this  r n.

9.  2.  Master,  who  did  sin,  this  m.  or  his  parents  ?

3.  neither  hath  this  m.  sinned,  nor  his  parents

16.  thism.  is  not  of  G.  he  keepeth  not  the  sabbath
24.  praise  God,  we  know  that  this  m.  is  a  sinner
33.  Vi  thism.  were  not  of  G.  he  could  do  nothing

10.  41.  all  that  John  spake  of  this  m.  were  true

11.  37.  could  not  this  rn.  which  opened  the  eyes  of
blind,  caused  that  this  rn.  should  not  have  died  ?

47.  what  do  we  ?  for  this  m.  doeth  many  miracles
18. 17.  art  not  thou  one  of  this  rn.  disciples :

29.  what  accusation  bring  ye  against  this  m.  ?

40.  not  this  77!.  but  Barabbas,  now  he  was  a  robber


John  19.  12.  if  let  this  m.  go,  art  not  Cassar’s  friend

21.  21.  Peter  saith,  and  what  shall  this  m.  do  r
Actsl.  18.  now  this  m .  purchased  a  field  with  reward

3.  12.  as  though  we  had  made  this  m.  to  walk,  16.

4.  10.  even  by  him  ooth  this  m.  stand  whole

5.  28.  ana  intend  to  bring  this  >n.  blood  upon  us

37.  after  t/ns  rn.  rose  up  Judas  of  Galilee

6.  13.  this  m.  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blasphemous

8.  10.  saying,  this  m.  is  the  great  power  of  God

9.  13.  1  heard  of  this  rn.  how  much  evil  hath  done
13.  23.  of  thism.  seed  hath  God  raised  Jesus

38.  thro’ t.  777.  is  preached  to  you  forgiven,  of  sins

18.  25.  this  77!.  was  instructed  in  way  of  the  Lord

21.  28.  this  is  the  m.  that  teacheth  all  men  ag.  law

22.  26.  t.  77!.  is  a  Roman  H  23.  9.  find  no  evil  in  t.  m.

23.  27.  this  77/.  was  taken  of  the  Jews,  and  should  '

24.  5.  for  we  ha\e  found  this  rn.  a  pestilent  fellow

25.  5.  accuse  this  m.  if  there  be  any  wickedness
24.  ye  see  this  m.  about  whom  Jewsdealt  with  me

26.  31.  this  rn.  doeth  nothing  worthy  of  death

32.  this  m.  might  have  peen  set  at  liberty

28.  4.  no  doubt  this  m.  is  a  murderer,  vengeance
Heb.  3.3.  thism.  was  counted  worthy  of  more  glorv
7  4.  now  considei  how  great  this  m.  was,  to  whom
24.  but  this  m.  because  he  continueth  ever

8.  3.  that  thism.  have  somewhat  also  to  offer

10.  12.  this  m.  after  h^  had  offered  one  sacrifice
Jam.  1.  25.  this  rn.  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed

26.  but  deceiveth,  this  rn.  religion  is  vain

See  Understanding.

MAN  of  war.

Exod.  15.  3.  the  Lord  is  a  t?i.  of  w.  T.ord  is  his  name
Josh.  17. 1.  Machir,  son  of  M  anasseh,  w  as  a  m.  of  w.

1  Sam.  16.  18.  David  a  m.  of  war,  2  Earn.  17.

1  Chr  on.  28  3,.

17.  33.  Gohah  was  a  m.  of  war  from  his  youth
Isa.  3.  2.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  in.  of  war
42.  13.  he  shall  stir  up  jealousy  like  a  rn.  of  war
_  Wicked  MAN.

Dent.  25.  2.  if  the  wicked  m.  be  worthy  to  be  beate.
Job  15.  20.  the  wicked  m.  travaileth  with  pain

20.  29.  the  portion  of  a  wicked  m.  from  God,  27.  13.
Psal.  109.  6.  set  tliou  a  wicked  m.  over  him

Prov.  6. 12.  a  wicked  m.  walketh  with  froward  mouth

9.  7.  he  that  rebuketh  a  wicked  m.  getteth  a  blot
11.7-  when  a  wicked  rn.  dieth,  his  expectation

13.  5.  a  wicked  m.  is  loathsome,  and  cometh  to
17.  23.  &  wicked  m.  taketh  a  gift  out  of  the  bosom

21.  29.  wicked  77!.  hardeneth  bis  face,  but  the  upright
24. 15.  lay  not  wait,  O  wicked  rn.  against  dwelling

Eccl.  7. 15.  a  wicked  m.  that  prolonged)  his  days
Ezek.  3.  18.  the  same  wicked  rn.  shall  die  in  iniquity
18^24.  and  doth  that  which  the  wicked  m.  Goeth

27.  when  a  wicked  m.  turneth  from  his  wickedness

33.  8.  when  1  say  to  wicked,  O  w.  m.  thou  shall
surely  die,  that  wicked  m.  shall  die  in  his  iniquity

Wise  MAN.

Gen.  41.  33.  look  out  a  m.  discreet  and  wise,  set  him
1  A  ings‘2.  9.  Solomon  was  w.  rn.  and  knew  what  to  do
1  Chron.  27.  32.  Jonathan  David’s  uncle,  was  a w.  m:.
Job  15.  2.  should  a  wise  m.  utter  vain  knowledge  ?■

17.  10.  I  cannot  find  one  wise  m.  among  you

34.  34.  and  let  a  wise  m.  hearken  to  me
Prov.  1.  5.  a  wise  m.  will  hear  and  increase
9.  8.  rebuke  a  wise  m.  and  he  will  love  thee

9.  give  instruction  to  a  wise  m.  he  will  be  wiser

14.  16.  a  wise  m.  feareth,  and  departeth  from  evil'

16. 14.  a  wise  m.  will  pacify  the  wrath  of  a  king
17.  10.  a  reproof  entereth  more  into  a  wise  m.

21.  22.  a  wise  m.  scaleth  the  city  of  the  mighty
26  12.  seest  thou  a  m.  wise  in  his  own  conceit,  t
29.  9.  if  a  wisem.  contendeth  with  a  foolish  man,

11.  but  a  wise  m.  keepeth  it  in  till  afterwards
Eccl.  2.  14.  the  wise  m.  eyes  are  in  his  head

16.  and  how  dieth  the  wisem.  ?  as  the  fool

19.  whether  he  shall  be  wise  m.  or  a  fool  ?

7.  7-  surely  oppression  maketh  a  wise  m.  mad-
8. 1.  who  is  as  the  wise  m.  and  who  knoweth
5.  a  wisem.  heart  discerneth  time  and  judgment"

17.  though  a  wise  m.  think  to  know  it,  yet  not  aide

9.  15.  now  there  was  found  in  it  a  poor  wise  m.

10.  2.  a  wise  m.  heart  is  at  his  right  hand

12.  the  words  of  a  wise  m.  mouth  are  gracious
Jer.  9.  12.  who  is  the  wise  m.  that  may  understand  *

23.  let  not  the  wise  m.  glory  in  his  wisdom
Mat.  7.  24.  I  will  liken  him  to  a  wise  m.  who  built
1  Cor.  6.  5.  that  there  is  not  a  wise  m.  amongst  you
Jam.  3. 13.  who  is  a  wise  m.  endued  with  knowledge
MAN  .joined  with  Woman.

Gen. 3.  12.  the  m  said.the7c.  whom  thou  gavest  me

20.  3.  dead  m.  for  th ewom.  thou  hast  is  man’s  wifa
Exod.  35.29.  every  rn.  and  worn,  whose  heart  made
36.  6.  let  no  m.  nor  woman  make  any  more  work
Lev.  13.  29.  if  a  m.  or  woman  have  the  plague
38.  if  m.  or  woman  have  in  the  skin  bright  spots

15.  18.  the  woman  also  with  whom  the  m.  shall  lie
33.  that  hath  an  issue  of  the  77!.  and  woman

20.  18.  if  777.  lie  with  a  woman  having  her  sickness
27.  a  777.  or  woman  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit
Num.  5.  6.  when  m.  or  woman  shall  commit  any  sin

6.  2.  when  either  m.  or  worn,  shall  separate  thems.

31.  17-  killawT!.  that  hath  known  m.  Judg.  21.  11.

Dent.  17.  2.  m.  orwem.  that  hath  wrought  wickedm.

5.  bring  forth  that  m.  or  woman,  and  stone  then)

22.  5.  the  woman  shall  not  wear  that  pertained)  to
a  m.  nor  shall  m.  put  on  a  woman's  garment

22.  if  a  m.  be  found  lying  with  a  woman,  both  the

m.  that  lay  with  the  woman,  and  the  woman.
29.  18.  lest  there  should  be  among  you,  777.  or  worn.
Josh.  6.  21.  utterly  destroyed  both  in.  and  woman
1  Sam.  15.  3.  but  slay  both  m.  woman,  and  infant
27.  9.  David  left  neither  m.  nor  woman  alive,  11.

1  Chr.  16.  3.  he  dealt  both  to  77?.  and  woman  a  loaf

2  Chr.  15.  13.  not  seek  Lord,  m.  or  worn,  shall  die
Esth.  4.  11.  whether  m.  ox  woman  come  to  the  king
Jer.  44.  7.  to  cut  off  from  you,  m.  woman  and  child-

51.  22.  I  will  break  in  pieces  m.  and  wornan
1  Cor.  11.  3.  and  the  head  of  the  woman  is  the  m.

7.  but  the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  m.

8.  the  in.  is  not  ot  the  worn,  but  woman  of  the  m,.

11.  nor  is  the  m.  without  the  woman  in  the  Lord

12.  as  worn,  is  of  the  m.  so  is  the  m.  bv  the  worn.

301


M  A  N


M  A  N


M  A  S


1  Tim.  5.  16.  if  any  m.  or  woman  have  widows
Young  MAN.

Gen.  4.  23.  T  have  slain  a  young  m.  to  my  hurt

18.  7.  Abraham  gave  it  to  a  young  m.  to  dress  it
3 1.  19.  the  young  m.  deferred  not  to  do  the  thing
41.  12.  there  was  with  us  a  young  m.  an  Hebrew
Exod.  33.  11.  Joshua  a  young  m.  departed  not  out
Num.  11.  27.  and  there  rnnyonng  m.  and  told  Moses
Dent.  32.  25.  destroy  both  the  young  m.  and  virgin
Judg.  8. 14.  caught  a  young  m.  ot  the  men  ot  Succoth
9. 54.  Abimelech  called  hastily  to  the  young  m.  and
his  young  m.  thrust  him  through,  and  he  died

17.  7.  there  was  a  young  m.  ot  Bethlehem- 1  udan
12.  the  young  m.  became  his  priest,  and  was  in

18.  3.  knew  the  voice  of  the  young  m.  the  Levite

1  Ham.  9.  2.  Saul  was  a  choice  young  m.  and  goodly

14.  l.  Jonathan  said  to  the  young  m.  that  bare

17. 58.  and  Saul  said,  whose  son  art  thou,  young  m.  ?
20.  22.  but  if  1  say  thus  to  the  young  m.  behold
30.  13.  he  said  to  David,  I  am  young  m.  ot  Egypt
•2  Ham.  1.  5..  David  said  to  the  young  m.  that  told,  13
14.  21.  go  bring  the  young  m.  Absalom  again
18.  5.  deal  gently  for  my  sake  with  the  young  m.
29.  king  said,  is  the  young  m.  Absalom  sate  .  3.

■  32.  the  enemies  of  my  lord  be  as  that  young  m.  is
4  Kings  11.28.  Solomon  seeingyewn^  m.  industrious

2  Kings  6.  17-  Lord  opened  the  eyes  ot  the  young  m.
9.4.  so  the  young  m .  even  young  m.  went  to  Kamotn

1  C/ir.  12.  28.  and  Zadok,  a  young  m.  mighty  in  val.

2  Chr.  36.  17.  and  had  no  compassion  on  young  m.
Psal.  119.  9.  wherewith  shall  y.  m.  cleanse  his  way
Prov.  1.4.  to  young  m.  knowledge  and  discretion

7.  7.  I  discerned  a  young  m.  void  ot  understanding
Eccl.  11.  9.  rejoice,  O  young  m.  in  thy  youth
Isa.  62.  5.  for  as  young  m.  marrieth  a  virgin
Jer.  5i.  22.  break  in  pieces  the  young  m.  and  maid
Zech.  2.  4.  said  to  me,  run,  speak  to  this  young  m
Mat.  19.  20.  the  young  m.  said,  all  these  have  1  kept
Mark  i4.  51.  there  followed  him  a  certain  young  m.
16.  5.  they  saw  a  young  m.  sitting  on  the  right  side
Luke  7.  14.  he  said,  young  m.  1  say  to  thee,  arise
Acts  7. 58.  they  laid  their  clothes  at  a  young  m.  feet
20.  9.  sat  in  a  window  a  young  m.  named  Butychus
12.  and  they  brought  the  young  m.  alive  _

23.  17.  bring  this  young  m.  to  the  chiet  captain,  18.
22.  the  chief  captain  then  let  the  young  rn.  depart
MANDRAKES

Is  a  kind  of  plant,  whose  root  at  some  distance  from  Us
upper  part  is  generally  divided  into  two  branches,
which  is  the  reason  that  this  root  had  something  of
the  figure  of  a  man,  whose  two  thighs  are  repre
seated  by  the  two  branches.  It  is  said  some
times  to  stupify,  and  cause  plirensy ;  some  call
■it  a  provocative,  and  that  therefore  it  was  used
in  philtres ;  and  that  this  was  the  reason  why
Rachel  so  earnestly  desired  to  obtain  them  from
Leah,  she  being  very  desirous  of  having  children.
There  are  two  sorts  of  Mandrakes;  the  female,
whose  leaves  are  of  a  very  disagreeable  scent :
and  the  male,  whose  scent  is  said  to  be  very
pleasant  and  agreeable.  It  is  reported,  that  in
the  province  of  Pekin  in  China,  there  is  a  kind  of
Mandrake  so  valuable,  that  a  pound  of  that  root
is  worth  thrice  its  weight  in  silver:  for  they  say
it  so  wonderfully  restores  the  sinking  spirits  oj
dying  persons,  that  there  is  often  time  for  the
use  of  other  means,  and  thereby  recovering  them
to  life  and  health.  Those  Mandrakes  which
Reuben  brought  home  to  his  mother ,  are  by  some
called  Violets,  by  others  Lilies,  or  Jessamin,  by
others  Citrons.  Some  reckon  them  to  be  such
agreeable  flowers  of  the  field,  wherewith  children
were  pleased ;  Reuben  that  gathered  them  being
then  only  about  five  or  six  years  of  age.

Gen.  30.  14.  Reuben  found  m.  give  me  of  thy  m.

15.  wouldest  thou  take  away  my  son’s  m.  also  ?
therefore  he  shall  lie  with  thee  for  thy  son’s  m.

16.  1  have  hired  thee  with  my  son’s  m.

Cant.  7.  13.  m.  give  a  smell,  and  at  our  gates  are
MANGER.

Luke  2. 7.  laid  him  in  a  m.  I!  12.  shall  find  him  in  a  rn
16.  and  they  found  the  babe  lying  inaw
MAN  I  FES  1’,  Actively,  Passively.

Eccl.  3.  18.  that  God  might  m.  them,  and  that
John  14.  21.  love  him,  and  m.  myself  to  him
.  22.  m.  thyself  to  us,  and  not  to  the  world  ?


Acts  4.  16.  the  miracle  is  m.  to  all  at  Jerusalem
Rom.  1. 19.  what  may  be  known  of  G.  is  m.  in  them

1  Cor.  4.  5.  who  will  make  m.  counsels  of  hearts
15.  27.  it  is  m.  that  he  is  excepted  which  did

2  Cor.  2.  14.  makes  m.  the  savour  of  his  knowledge
Gal.  5.  19.  now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  rn.

Phil.  1.  13.  so  that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  m
Col.  4.  4.  that  1  may  make  it  rn.  as  1  ought
2  Thess.  1.  5.  a  rn.  token  of  righteous  judgm.ofGod

1  Tim.  3.  16.  God  was  m.  in  the  flesh,  justified

5.  25.  the  good  works  of  some  are  m.  beforehand

2  Tim.  3.  9.  their  body  shall  be  m.  to  all  men
lieh.  4.  13.  there  is  no  creature  that  is  not  m.

1  Pet.  1.  20.  but  was  m.  in  these  last  times  for  you
1  John  3.  10.  in  this  the  children  of  God  are  m

Hee  Made.

MANIFESTATION.

Rom.  8.  19.  waiteth  for  the  m.  of  the  sons  of  God

man


1  Cor.  12.  7.  the  m.  of  the  Sp.  is  given  to  every  ms

2  Cor.  4.  2.  but  by  rn.  of  the  truth  commending

MANIFESTED.


Mark  4. 22.  for  nothing  is  hid  which  shall  not  be  m.
John  2. 11.  miracles  did  Jesus,  and  m.  forth  his  glory

17.  6.  I  have  m.  thy  name  unto  the  men  which
Rom.  3.  21.  but  the  righteousness  of  God  is  m
Tit.  1.  3.  but  hath  in  due  time  m.  his  word

1  John  1.  2.  the  life  was  m.  and  we  have  seen  it

3.  5.  that  he  was  m.  to  take  away  our  sins

8.  tor  this  purpose  woe  the  Son  of  God  m.

4.  9.  in  this  was  m.  the  love  of  God  toward  us

MANIFESTLY.

2  Cor.  3. 3.  are  m.  declared  to  be  the  epistle  of  Christ

MANIFOLD.

Kelt.  9- 19.  in  thy  m.  mercies  forsookest  them  not
27.  according  to  m.  mercies  gavest  them  saviours
Psal.  104.  24.  O  Lord,  how  m.  are  thy  works

302


Amos  5. 12.  1  know  your  m.  transgressions  and  sins
Luke  18.  30.  who  shall  not  receive  m.  more
Eph.  3.  10.  might  be  known  the  m.  wisdom  of  God
\  Pet.  1.  6. lye  are  in  heaviness,  thro’ m.  temptations
4. 10.  as  good  stewards  of  the  rn.  grace  of  God
MANKIND.

Lev.  18.22.  shall  not  lie  with  m.  as  with  woman  kind
20.  13.  if  a  man  lie  with  a  rn.  as  with  a  woman
Job  12.  10.  in  whose  hand  is  the  breath  of  all  m.

1  Tim .  1.  10.  the  law  for  them  that  defile  with  m.
Jam.  3.  7.  is  tamed,  and  hath  been  tamed  ot  m.

MANNA,  ,  f.f.

That  delicious  food  wherewith  God  fed  the  children
of  Israel  in  the  deserts  of  Arabia,  during  their
continuance  there  for  forty  years,  from  their  eighth
encampment  in  the  wilderness  0}  Sin.  It  was  a
little  grain,  white  like  hoar  frost,  round,  and  oj
the  bigness  of  c  "-lander-seed.  It  fell  every  morn¬
ing  upon  the  dew,  and  when  the  dew  was  exhaled
by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  the  Manna  appeared  alone
lying  upon  the  rocks  or  the  sand.  Exodus  16.  14.
Num.  11.  7.  It  fell  every  day,  except  on  the
sabbath,  and  this  only  about  the  camp  of  the
Israelites,  Exod.  16.  5.  It  fell  in  so  great  quan¬
tities  during  the  whole  Jorty  years  oj  their
journey  in  the  wilderness,  that  it  was  sufficient
to  feed  the  whole  multitude  of  above  a  million
of  souls  ;  every  one  of  whom  gathered  the  quan¬
tity  of  an  homer  for  his  share  every  day,  which
is  about  three  quarts  of  English  measure.  It
maintained  this  vast  multitude,  and  yet  none  of
them  found  any  inconvenience  from  the  constant
eating  of  it.  Every  sixth  day  there  fell  a  double
quantity  of  it  ;  and  though  it  putrified  when  it  was
kept  any  other  day,  yet  on  the  sabbath  it  suffered
no  such  alteration.  And  the  same  Manna  that  7vas
melted  by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  when  it  was  left  m  the
field,  was  of  so  hard  a  consistence  when  it  was
brought  into  their  tents,  that  it  was  used  to  be  beaten
in  mortars,  and  would  even  endure  the  fire,  was
baked  in  pans,  made  into  paste,  and  so  into  cakes,
Num.  11.  8.  It  is  called,  Angels  food,  Psal.  78.
25.  which  may  insinuate,  either  that  it  was  made
and  prepared  by  their  ministry ;  or  that  angels
themselves,  if  they  had  need  of  any  food,  could  not
have  any  that  was  more  agreeable  than  Manna
was  ;  it  being  of  a  heavenly  original,  and  oj  sin
gular  vigour  and  efficacy  for  preserving  and  nourish
ing  those  who  used  it  according  to  God  s  appoint
nient :  Or,  as  it  is  in  the  margin,  every  one  did
eat  the  bread  of  the  mighty  ;  that  is,  even  the
common  Israelites  fed  upon  it  as  delicious  food ,  as
the  greatest  nobles  and  princes  did.

To  eat  of  the  hidden  Manna,  Rev.  2.  17-  Jo
partake  of  Christ,  and  those  comforts  and  bless¬
ings  which  flow  from  him  :  It  is  spoken  in  allu¬
sion  to  that  bread  wherewith  God  fed  the  Israel¬
ites,  which  was  a  type  of  Christ,  who  is  the  bread
of  eternal  life,  and  was  the  true  bread  which  came
down  from  heaven  to  give  life  to  the  world,  John

6.  32,  33  35.

Exod'  16.  15.  they  said  one  to  another,  it  is  m.

33.  take  a  pot,  and  put  an  homer  full  of  m.  therein
35.  and  Israel  did  eat  m.  forty  years
Num.  11.  6.  there  is  nothing  besides  this  m.

7.  the  m.  was  as  coriander ’seed,  and  the  colour

9.  when  the  dew  fell  on  camp  the  rn.  fell  on  it
Deut.  8.  3.  he  suffered  thee  to  hunger,  and  fed  thee

with  m.  16.  Neh.  9.  20.  Psal.  78.  24
Josh.  5.12.  the  m.  ceased,  they  had  w.no  more
John  6.  31.  our  fathers  did  entrn.  in  the  desert,  49.

58.  not  as  your  fathers  did  eat  m.  and  are  dead
lieb.  9.  4.  wherein  was  the  golden  pot  that  had  m.
Rev.  2.  17.  to  him  will  1  give  toeatofthe  hidden  m.
MANNER

Signifies,  [1]  Custom,  practice,  or  fashion,  1  Sam.

8.  9,  11.  Ezek.  11.  12.  [2]  Sinful  behaviour,

and  rebellious  conduct ,  Acts  13.  18.  [3]  Ue-

portment  and  carriage  in  word  and  deed,  1  Cor.
15.  33.  [4]  Ways  and  means,  Heb.  1.  1.  [5]

Kinder  sort,  Exod.  12.  16.  [6]  Order  or  rank.
Josh.  6. ’  15.  [7]  The  way  of  service  or  worship,
2  Kings  17.26,  27.  .  .  „  .  .  ,

Gen.  25.  23.  two  m.  of  people  shall  be  separated
40.  17.  was  of  all  m.  of  bake  meats  for  Pharaoh
Exod.  1. 14.  made  their  lives  bitter  in  all  m.  of  set  vice
12. 16.  no  m.  of  work  shall  be  done  in  them

22.  9.  all  m.  of  trespass,  any  m.  of  lost  thing
31.  3.  in  wisdom,  and  in  all  m.  ot  workmanship,

5.  |  35.  31,  33,  35.  1  36. 1.  1  Chron.  28.  21.
Lev.  5. 10.  burnt  offering  accord,  to  m.  Num.  9. 14.

7.  23.  shall  eat  no  m.  of  fat  of  ox  or  sheep

26.  ye  shall  eat  no  m.  of  blood,  27.  I  17- 10,  14.

14.  54.  the  law  for  all  m.  of  the  plague  ot  leprosy

23.  31.  ye  shall  do  no  m.of  work, it  shall  be  a  statute

24.  22.  ye  shall  have  one  m.  of  law,  Num.  15.  16.
Num.  5.  13.  neither  she  be  taken  with  the  m.

15.  24.  and  his  drink-offering  according  to  the  m
28.  18.  ye  shall  do  no  m.  of  servile  work
Deut.  4.  15.  for  ye  saw  no  in.  ot  similitude  in  TIoreb

15.  2.  and  this  is  the  m.  of  the  release
27. 21.  cursed  be  he  that  lieth  with  any  m.  of  beast
Judg.  6.  t  26.  built  an  altar  in  an  orderly  m.

8.  18.  what  m.  of  men  were  they  ye  slew  at  I  abor  ?
Ruth  4.  7.  now  this  was  the  m.  in  former  time

1  Ham.  8.  9.  and  shew  them  the  rn.  of  the  king,  11.

10.  25.  Samuel  told  the  people  the  m.  of  the  kingd.
21.5.  and  the  bread  is  in  m.  common

27.  11.  and  so  will  be  his  m.  all  the  while

2  Ham.  7.  19.  is  this  the  m.  of  man,  O  Lord  God  ?

2  Kings  1.7.  what  m.  of  man  was  lie  who  told  you  ?

11.  14.  the  king  stood  by  a  pillar,  as  the  m.  wa*

17.  26.  know  not  the  rn.  of  the  God  of  the  land

27.  let  him  teach  them  the  m.  of  God  of  the  land
1  Chron.  23.  29.  for  all  m.  of  measure  and  size
Esth.  1.  13.  for  so  was  the  king’s  m.  towards  all
Psal.  107.  18.  their  soul  abhorreth  all  rn.  of  meat
144.  13.  garners  be  full,  affording  all  m.  of  store
Cant.  7.  13.  at  our  gates  are  all  m.  of  pleasant  fruits
Isa.  5.  17.  then  the  lambs  shall  feed  after  their  rn.
Jer.  22.  21 .  this  hath  been  thy  m.  from  thy  youth
Van.  6.  23.  and  no  m.  of  hurt  was  found  on  him


4mos  8.  14.  and  the  m.  of  Beer-sheba  liveth
Mat.  4.  23.  and  healing  all  rn.  ot  sickness,  10.  1.

5.  11.  shall  say  all  m.  of  evil  against  you  falsely

8.  27.  what  m.  of  man  is  this,  that  the  winds  ano

the  sea  obey  him  ?  iSiark  4.  41.  Luke  8.  25.
12.  31.  all  m.  of  sin  shall  be  forgiven  to  men
Mark  13.  1.  see  what  m.  of  stones  are  here
Luke  1.  29.  what  m.  of  salutation  this  should  be
66.  saving,  what  m.  ot  child  shall  this  be \

7.  39.  having  known  what  m.  ot  woman  this  is

9.  55.  ye  know  not  what  m.  of  spirit  ye  are  of
11. 42.  ye  tithe  mint,  rue,  and  all  rn.  of  herbs
24  17.  what  m.  of  communications  are  these  ;

jo/in  7!  36.  what  rn.  of  saying  is  this  that  he  said

19.  40.  as  the  m.  of  the  Jews  is  to  bury

Acts  17.  2.  Paul,  as  his  m.  was,  went  in  to  them

20.  18.  ye  know  after  what  m.  I  have  been  with
go"  3.  taught  according  to  the  perfect  m.  of  the  law  I
25'  '16.  it 'is  not  m.  of  Romans  to  deliver  any  toilie
26.  4.  my  m.  of  life  from  m  v  youth,  know  Jews

Rom  '.  7.  8.  wrought  in  me  all  m.  ot  concupiscence
2  Cor.  7.  9.  ve  were  made  sorry  after  a  godly  m.

1  Thess.  1. 5".  as  ye  know  what  m.  of  men  we  were
9  what  m.  of  entering  in  we  had  unto  you

2  Tim.  3.  10.  but  thou  hast  known  my  m.  of  life
Jleb.  10.  25.  assembling,  as  the  m.  of  some  is
Jam  1.  24.  forgetteth  what  m.  of  man  he  was

1  Pet.  1.11.  what  m.  of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ
15  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  m.  ot  conversation

2  Pet.  3.  11.  what  m.  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be

1  John  3.  1.  behold  what  m.  ot  love  the  l'ather
Rev  11.5.  he  must  in  this  m.  be  killed

02  o  tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve  m.  of  fruits
After  the  M  A  N  N  ER.

Gen.  18. 1 1 .  to  be  with  Sarah  after  the  m,  of  women
19  31  to  come  in  to  us  after  the  m.  of  all  the  earth!
40  13.  aft.  the  former  rn.  when  thou  wast  his  butler'
F.x'od  21.  9.  deal  with  her  after  the  m.  ot  daughters
finni  29  18.  according  to  the  number,  after  the  in.
Josh.  6.  i5.  compassed  the  city  after  the  sarnem.
Judg.  18.7.  careless,  after  them,  of  the  Zidonians
j  tSam  17 . 30.  he  turned  and  spake  after  the  same  m

2  Kings  17 . 33.  a.  the  m.  of  the  nations,  2  C hr.  13.  9
"Neh  6  4.  and  l  answered  them  after  the  samew.
Isa.  10.  24.  after  the  rn.  of  Egypt,  26.  Amos  4.  10.
Ezek  20.  30.  polluted  after  the  rn.  ot  your  fathers!
23  15.  after  the  m.  of  the  Babylonians  of  Chaldea!

45  at.  rn.  of  adulteresses,  and  a.  t.  rn.  of  womei
John  2'.  6.  after  the  m.  of  the  purifying  of  the  Jew
Acts  15.  1.  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  rn.  of  Mose
Rom  6  19.  I  speak  after  the  rn.  of  men,  1  Cor.  ts

32.  Gal.  3.  15‘

1  Cor.  11.  25.  after  the  same  m.  also  he  took  thecuf
Gal.  2. 14.  being  a  Jew,  livest  a.  the  rn.  ot  the  Genii
After  this  MANNER.

Gen  18. 25.  that  be  far  from  thee  to  do  after  this  n
39  19  saying,  after  this  m.  did  thy  servant  to  m]
45!  23.’  to  his  father  he  sent  after  this  m  ten  asse
Num  28  24.  after  this  rn.  ye  shall  offer  daily
2 Ham  17  6.  Ahithophel  hath  spoken  after  thism
Jer  13  9.  after  thism.  will  l  mar  the  pride  otJuda
Mat.  6.  9.  aft.  this  rn.  therefore  pray  ye,  Our  Fat  nj
1  Cor  7  7.  one  after  this  m.  and  another  after  tin
1  Pet.  3.  5.  after  thism.  in  old  time,  women  truste
See  Like.

On  this  MANNER.  j

Gen  32.19.  saying,  on  this  m.  shall  ye  speak  to  Esa

1  Ham.  18.  24.  told  Saul,  saying,  on  th.  m.  spake  I

2  Ham.  15.  6.  on  this  m.  did  Absalom  to  all  Israel

1  Kings  22.  20.  one  said  on  this  m.  2  Chron.  18.

2  Chr.  32. 15.  let  not  Hezek.  persuade  youonthisi
MANN  ERS.

Lev  20.  23.  shall  not  walk  in  the  m.  of  the  nation
2  Kings  17-  34.  they  do  after  the  former  m.

Ezek.  11.  12.  have  done  after  the  rn.  ot  the  heatln
Acts  13.  18.  fortv  years  suffered  he  their  m.

1  Cor.  15.  33.  evil  communications  corrupt  good  /
Heb.  1.  1.  God  in  divers  m.  spake  in  time  past
MAN  servant.

Exod.  20.10.  not  do  work,  thy  rn.  servant,  Dent. 5.1

17.  not  covet  thy  neighbour  s  m.  serv.  I  Jut.  5.  4
21 . 27.  anil  if  he  smite  out  his  m.  servant  s  tooth

32.  if  the  ox  shall  push  a  m.  servant,  he  snail  gtT
Deut.  12.  18.  must  eat  them,  thou  and  thy  m.  ser  I
16.  11.  shalt  rejoice,  thou  and  thy  rn.  servant,  1
Job  31.13.  if  1  did  despise  the  cause  ot  my  m.  senai
Jer  34.9.  every  man  let  his  rn  servant  go  tree,  1
MANSION  S.

John  14.  2.  in  my  Father’s  house  are  many  m.
MAN  -slayer.

Rom.  35. 6.  six  cities  ye  shall  appoint  tor  m.-slam

12.  that  the  m.-slayer  die  not,  till  he  stand  Detc
MAE -slayers.

1  Tim.  1.  9.  that  the  law  was  made  for  m.-slaya-
MANTLE.

Judg.  4.  18.  Jael  covered  Sisera  with  a  rn.  |
1  .Sam.  28.  14.  an  old  man,  and  covered  with  a

1  Kings  19.  13.  Elijah  wrapped  his  face  in  Ins  w,

19.  and  Elijah  cast  his  rn.  upon  Elisha  1

2  Kings  2.  8.  Elijah  took  his  m.  and  smote  the  watt

13.  i.lishafook  Elijah’s  m.  that  tell  from  him,
Ez'a  9.  3.  and  when  1  heard  this,  1  rent  my  »*•;
Job  1.  20.  then  lob  arose  and  rent  his  m.

2.  12.  and  they  rent  every  one  his  m.

Psal.  109.  29.  with  their  confusion,  as  with  a  m.t
MANTLES.

Isa.  3.  22.  T  will  take  away  the  w.and  wimpe
Dan.  3.  f  21.  these  men  were  bound  in  their  m.

MANY  .

Signifies,  [1]  A  gMat  number,  Judg.  9.  40.  W  -
rnankmd,  Rom.  5.  19.  [3]  The  elect  or  Mr*-

only.  Mat.  26.  28.  Rom.  5.  19.  [4]  fill  the  v
godly  that  perish.  Mat.  7.  13.  [;>  Gmrf,  £

18.  +  *'>.  [6]  Very  often,  Tsai.  78.  38.  [<]  •  '

life,  II os.  3.  3.  [8]  A  long  time,  lies,  d-^-,


Gen.  17.  L  my  covenant  is  with  thee,  thou  shah  bj
father  of  m.  nations,  5.  Rom.  4.  1 1 .  .
37.  3.  he  made  him  a  coat  ot  m.  colours,  *  j


_ _  I  \rt  •  WivM.-i  -  .

Exod.  19.  21.  they  gaze,  and  ot'  tlle.'n  Pe‘‘;!|
Num.  10.36.  when  the  ark  rested.  *Nloses  ^  ‘'
turn,  O  Lord,  to  the  m.  thousands  of  is  •
13.  18.  and  see  whether  they  be  tew  or  m .


;


M  A  N


M  A  R


M  A  R


urn.  26.  54.  to  m.  thou  shalt  give  more  inheritance
.56.  the  possession  be  divided  between  m.  and  tew
<5. 8.  from  them  that  have  m.  cities,  shall  give  m.
hut.  7.  1.  hath  cast  out  m.  nations  before  thee

5.  6.  thou  shalt.  lend  to  m.  nations,  28.  1C.

II.  17  and  m.  evils  shall  befall  them,  Cl.

■  A.  11.4.  with  horses  and  chariots  very  m.

■tdg.  9-  40.  rn.  were  overthrown  and  wounded

6.  C4.  the  destroyer  which  slew  m.  of  us
Sam.  C.  5.  she  that  hath  m.  children  is  feeble

4.  6.  no  restraint  to  the  Lord  to  save  by  m.  or  few
Sam.  C4.  +  14.  for  his  mercies  are  rn.

Kings 4.  CO.  Judah  and  Israel  were  m.  as  the  sand
.  47.  unweighed,  because  they  wete  exceeding  m.
8.  C5.  and  dress  it  first,  for  ye  are  m.

Kings  9.  22.  and  her  witchcrafts  are  so  m.

\  Chron.  23. 17-  the  sons  of  Rehabiah  w  ere  very  m.
8.  5.  j’or  the  Lord  hath  given  me  m.  sons
Chron.  11.  23.  Rehoboam  desired  m.  wives

4.  11.  nothing  with  thee  to  help  with  m.  or  few
0. 17-  there  wereyn.  in  congregation  not  sanctified

18.  m.  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  not  cleansed
:ra  10.  13.  we  are  m.  that  have  transgressed

eh.  5.  2.  we,  our  sons  and  our  daughters  are  m.

.  18.  there  were  m.  in  Judah  sworn  to  Tobiah
.2.  he  was  faithful,  and  feared  God  above  m.

3.  26.  among  rn.  nations  was  no  king  like  him
Uh.  4.  3.  and  m.  la}’  in  sackcloth  and  ashes

h  4.  3.  behold,  thou  hast  instructed  rn.

1.  19.  yea,  m.  shall  make  suit  unto  thee

sal.  3.  1.  rn.  are  they  that  rise  up  against  me

2.  there  be  rn.  that  say  of  my  soul,  4.  6.

5.  19.  consider  mine  enemies,  they  are  rn.  56.  2.

I.  13.  for  L  have  heard  the  slander  of  m.

•2.  10.  m.  sorrows  shall  be  to  the  wicked

4.  19.  m.  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous

7.  16.  is  better  than  the  riches  of  m.  wicked

0. 3.  m.  shall  see  it  and  fear,  and  trust  in  the  Lord
5. 18.  he  delivered,  for  there  were  m.  with  me
1. 7. 1  am  as  a  wonder  to  m.  thou  art  my  refuge

19.  157-  m.  are  my  persecutors  and  enemies
<ov.  4.  10.  and  the  years  of  thy  life  shall  be  rn.

.  26.  for  she  hath  cast  down  rn.  wounded

,5.  21.  the  lips  of  the  righteous  feed  rn.
l.'CO.  but  the  rich  hath  rn.  friends
.1.  4.  wealth  maketh  m.  friends,  but  the  poor
J  i.  2.  for  transgression  m.  are  the  princes  thereof
■  27.  he  that  hideth  his  eyes,  shall  have  rn.  a  curse
cl.  11.8.  the  days  of  darkness  shall  be  rn.
i.  31.  1.  and  trust  in  chariots  because  they  are  m.

1.  11.  by  his  knowledge  shall  he  justify  m.

2.  he  bare  the  sin  of  m.  and  made  intercession
16.  and  the  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  rn.

■r.  5.  6.  because  their  transgressions  are  rn.

I.  7-  for  our  ba:  ks  la  lings  are  rn.  we  sinned
t.  2.  pray  for  us,  for  we  are  left  but  few  of  rn.

>.  16.  he  made  m.  to  fall,  one  fell  on  another
\m.  1. 22.  for  my  sighs  are  m.  my  heart  is  faint
ek.  33.  24.  but  we  are  rn.  the  land  is  given  us
in.  8.  25.  and  by  peace  shall  destroy  rn.

1.  14.  there  shall  m.  stand  up  against  the  king

I. 3.  they  that  understand  shall  instruct  m.

4.  to  destroy  and  utterly  to  make  away  rn.

.’.  2.  m.  that  sleep  in  the  dust  shall  awake

.  m.  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and  know  ledge  be
■s.  8.  1 1.  Ephraim  hath  made  m.  altars  to  sin
1.  12.  though  they  be  quiet,  and  likewise  m.

\  ch.  8. 20.  there  shall  come  inhabitants  of  rn.  cities
il.  2.  6.  but  did  turn  m.  away  from  iniquity
f‘t.“.  13.  and  m.  there  be  that  go  in  thereat

2.  rn.  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord

II.  m.  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west
i.  58.  he  did  not  m.  mighty  works  there

1.  30.  rn.  that  are  first  shall  be  last,  Mark  10.  .31.

’.  16.  tor  rn.  be  called,  but  few  chosen,  22.  14.

.  5.  for  m.  shall  come  in  my  name  and  shall
.  deceive  rn.  Mark  13.  6.  Luke  21,  8.

2.  iniquity  abound,  the  love  of  rn.  shall  wax  cold
’•28.  blood  shed  for  m.  ||  27 .  53.  they  appear  to  rn.
irk  5.  9.  name  is  l  egion,  for  w  e  are  m.  Luke  8.  .30.
ke  i.  16.  rn.  shall  he  turn  to  the  Lord  their  God
34.  this  child  tor  the  fall  and  rising  of  m.  in  Isr.
25.  rn.  widows,  ||  27-  m.  lepers  were  in  Is’ael
l.jind  devils  also  came  out  of  rn.  crying  out
47-  her  sins  which  are  m.  are  forgiven

.  16.  certain  man  made  great  supper,  and  bade  rn.

,n  6.  9.  but  what  are  they  among  so  m.  ?

0.  m.  therefore  of  his  disciples  said,  66.

'.  41.  and  m.  resorted  to  him,  and  said

•  11.  tor  all  so  m.  the  net  was  not  broken
ts  9.  13.  1  hav  e  heard  by  rn.  of  this  man

.  12.  where  m.  were  gathered  together
19.  m.  brought  their  books  and  burnt  them
.  10.  m.  qf  the  saints  did  I  shut  up  in  prison
>n.  5. 15.  it  thro’  the  offence  of  one  m.  be  dead,  the
gitt  by  grace  of  Jesus  C.  hath  abounded  to  rn.
were  made  sinners,  m.  be  made  righteous

■  5.  so  we,  being  m.  are  one  body  in  Christ
i.sbe  hath  been  a  succourer  of  m.  and  of  mvself

vr-  not  m-  wi  not  rn.  mighty  are  (  ailed
lt>.. yet  have  ye  not  m.  fathers,  for  in  C.  Jesus

5.  as  there  be  gods  rn.  and  lords  m.

■'O.  but  with  rn.  God  was  not  well  pleased
>•  being  m.  are  one  bread,  and  one  body

3.  but  the  profit  of  m.  that  they  may  be  sav  ed

•  30.  for  this  cause  m.  are  weak  and  rn.  sleep

•  14.  tlie  body  is  nut  one  member,  but  rn.

■  9.  great  door,  and  there  are  m.  adversaries

I'-  11 '  that  tllaI'ks  may  be  given  by  rn.
b.  this  punishment  was  inflicted  of  rn.

••we  are  not  as  m.  which  corrupt  the  word

15.  thro’  thanksgiving  of  m.  redound  to  glory
o' a®,P°or>  >’et  making  m.  rich,  having  nothing
..  and  yoilr  zeal  hath  provoked  v  ery  m.

•  G.  and  profited  above  m.  my  equals
10.  he  saith  not,  and  to  seeds,  as  of  rn.

10  "  m'  ^lvtb.  waxing  confident  by  my  bonds

walk  of  whom  1  have  told  you  often

•  10-  *o  bringing  rn.  sons  to  glory,  to  make
'o' A  •  Roly  were  rn.  priests
'  10  iris*  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  rn.

K.  sprang  ot  one  so  rn.  as  the  stars  of  tlie  sky


Jam.  3.  1.  my  brethren,  be  not  rn.  masters
2  2.  2.  m.  shall  follow  pernicious  ways

1  John  2.  18.  even  now  are  there  rn.  antichrists

4.  1.  because  rn.  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into
/liter  MANY.

Exod.  23.  2.  speak  in  a  cause  to  decline  after  rn.

As  MANY  as.

Exod.  35.  22.  and  as  m.  as  were  willing-hearted
Judg.  3.  1.  as  rn.  as  had  not  known  all  the  wars

2  Sam.  2.  23.  as  m.as  came  to  the  place  stood  still
2  C/tr.  29.  31.  as  rn.  as  were  of  free  heart  brought
Mat.  22.  9.  as  m.  as  ye  find  bid  to  the  marriage

10.  and  gathered  together  as  rn.  as  they  found
Mark  6.  56.  as  m.  as  touched  him  were  made  whole
Luke  11.  8.  will  rise  and  give  as  m .  as  he  needeth
John  1.  12.  but  as  rn.  as  received  him,  to  them  gave
17 •  2.  give  eternal  life  to  «£  m.  as  hast  given  him
Acts  2.  39.  even  to  as  m.  as  the  Lord  shall  call
3.  24.  as  m.  as  have  spoken  have  also  foretold

5.  11.  tear  came  on  as  rn.  as  heard  these  tilings'
36.  who  was  slain,  and  as  rn.  as  obeyed  him,  37.

10.  45.  were  astonished,  as  m.as  came  with  Peter
13.  4R.  asm.  as  were  ordained  to  life  believed
Rom.  2.  12.  as  m.  as  have  sinned  without  law,  and
as  m.  as  have  sinned  in  the  law,  shall  be  judged
8.  14.  for  asm.  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God
Gal.  3.  10.  asm.  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law

6.  12.  as  m.  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  shew  in  the  flesh
16.  and  as  rn.  as  walk  according  to  this  rule

Phil-  3.  15.  as  rn.  as  be  perfect  be  thus  minded
Col.  2.  1.  and  for  as  rn.  as  have  not  seen  my  face
1  Tim.  6. 1.  as  rn.  servants  as  are  under  the  yoke
Rev.  2.  24.  but  to  as  m.  as  have  not  this  doctrine

3.  19.  as  m.  as  I  love  l  rebuke  and  chasten

13. 15.  cause  that  as  m.  as  would  not  worship  beast
See  Believed,  Days,  How.

MANY  people.

Exod.  5.  5.  behold,  the  people  of  the  land  now  are  m.
Dent.  2.  21.  people  great  and  rn.  and  tall  as  Anakitns
Judg.  7.2.  the  people  are  too  rn.  for  me  ||  4.  yet  too  m.
1  Sam.  6.  19-  the  Lord  had  smitten  m.  of  the  people
2 '.  Sam.  1.  4.  and  m.of  Ihe.  people  are  fallen  and  dead
Rfra  10.  13.  but  the  people  are  m.  and  time  of  rain
Lsth.  8.  17.  rn.  people  of  land  became  Jews  for  fear
Isa.  2.  3.  rn.  people  shall  go  and  say,  come  let  us  go

4.  he  shall  judge  and  rebuke  m.  people

17.  12.  woe  to  the  multitude  of  rn.  people  which
Ezek.  3.  6.  not  to  m.  people  of  a  strange  speech
17.  9-  shall  wither  without  m.  people  to  pluck  it
32.  9.  1  will  also  vex  the  hearts  ot'  rn. people  when
10.  1  will  make  m.  people  amazed  at  thee
38.  9.  thou,  thy  hands,  and  m. people  with  thee,  15.
MicA.ti.  he  shall  judge  among  m. people,  and  rebuke
13.  and  thou  shalt  beat  in  pieces  m.  people

5.  7-  renin,  of  Jacob  shall  be  in  midst  ot  m.  people
Zech.i\.22.  m.  people  shall  come  and  seek  the  Lord
Rev.  10.  11.  thou  must  prophesy  before  rn.  people

MANY  things.

Job  16.  2.  Job  said.  1  have  heard  m.  such  things
23.  14.  and  rn.  such  things  are  with  him
Eccl.  6.  11.  there  be  m.  things  that  increase  vanity
Isa.  42.  20.  seeing  rn.  things,  but  observest  not
Mat.  13.  3.  he  spake  rn.  things  to  them  in  parables

16.  21.  and  suffer  rn.  things  of  the  elders  and  chief
priests,  Mark  8.  31.  1  9.  12.  Luke  9.  22.  1  17.  25.

25.  21.  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  m.  things,  23.
27. 13.  Pilate  saith,  hearest  thou  not  how  m.  things
they  witness  against  thee  ?  Mark  15.  4.
19.  [  have  suffered  rn.  things  this  day  in  a  dream
Mark  5.  26.  suffered  m.  things  of  many  physicians

6.  20.  he  did  m.  things,  and  heard  him  gladl  v

7.  4.  rn.  things  there  be,  as  washing  of  cups,  8,  13.
15.  3.  chief  priests  accused  him  of  m.  things

Luke  10.  41.  thou  art  troubled  about  rn.  things
11.  53.  to  provoke  him  to  speak  of  rn.  things
JohnS.  26.  1  have  m.  things  to  say,  and  judge,  16. 12.
21.  25.  there  are  m.  other  things  which  Jesus  did
Acts  26.  9.  that  t  ought  to  do  rn.  things  contrary
2  Cor.  8.  22.  we  have  proved  diligent  in  rn.  things
Gal.  3.  4.  ha\  e  ye  suffered  so  rn.  things  in  vain  P
2  Tim.  1.  18.  in  how  rn.  things  he  ministered  to  me
Heb.  5.  11.  of  whom  we  have  rn.  things  to  say
Jam.  3.  2.  for  in  m.  things  we  offend  all
2  John  12.  having  m.  things  to  write  to  you,  3  John
MANY  a  time.  [13.

Ps.  78.  38.  yea,  rn.  a  time  turned  fie  his  anger  away
129.  1.  m.  a  time  have  they  afflicted  me,  2.

MANY  times.

1  K  ings  22.  16.  how  rn.  times  shall  I  adjure  thee  ?
Neh.  9.  28.  rn.  times  didst  deliver  them,  Ps.  106.  43.
See  Waters.

•  MANY  years ,

Lev.  25.  51.  if  there  be  yet  rn.  years  behind
Ezra  5.  1 1 .  the  house  that  was  builded  rn.  years  ago
Neh.  9.  30.  yet  m.  years  didst  thou  forbear  them
Eccl.  6.  3.  if  a  man  beget  children,  and  live  m.  years
11. 8.  if  a  man  live  m.  years,  and  rejoice  in  them  all
Isa.  32.  10.  m.  days  and  years  shall  ye  be  troubled
Ezek.  38.  17.  prophets,  which  prophesied  rn.  years
Zech."(.  3.  weep,  as  I  have  done  these  so  m.  years
Luke  12.  19.  thou  hast  goods  laid  up  for  rn.  years
15.  29.  he  said,  lo,  these  m. years  do  1  serve  thee
Acts  24.  10.  thou  hast  been  ot' m.  years  a  judge

17.  now  after  m.  years  I  came  to  bring  alms
Rom.  15.  23.  a  great  desire  rn.  years  to  come  to  you

MAR.

Lev.  19.  27-  nor  m  .  the  corners  of  thy  beard
Ruth  4.  6.  lest  I  m.  mine  own  inheritance

1  Sam.  6.  5.  images  of  your  mice  that  m.  the  land

2  Kings  3.  19.  and  m.  every  good  piece  of  land
Job  30.  13.  they  m.  my  path,  they  set  forward
Jer.  13.9.  thus  will  I  m.  the  pride  of  Judah

MARRED.

Isa.  52.  14.  his  visage  was  so  m.  more  than  any  man
Jer.  13.  7-  girdle  was  rn.  ||  18.  4.  the  vessel  was  rn.
Nah.  2.  2.  emptied,  and  m.  their  vine-branches
Mark  2.  22.  wine  spilled,  anil  the  bottles  will  be  rn.
MARAN-ATHA

Signifies,  ['he  Lord  comes,  or,  The  Lord  is  come.

It  was  a  form  of  threatening ,  cursing,  or  ana¬
thematizing  among  the  Jews,  1  Cor.  i6.  22.  If
any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be


anathema,  Maran-atha,  that  is,  Let  him  be  ac¬
cursed  in,  or  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord.  Most
commentators  say,  that  the  Maran-atha  is  the
greatest  of  all  anathemas  among  the  Jews,  as  if
the  apostle  Paul  had  said.  May  he  be  devoted  to
the  greatest  of  evils,  and  to  the  utmost  severity
ot  God’s  judgments  ;  may  the  Lord  come  quickly
to  take  vengeance  on  him.  Others  say,  that  the
word  may  be  understood  in  an  absolute  sense  ;
Let  him  be  anathema :  The  Lord  is  come,  the
Messiah  has  appeared,  evil  to  him  that  receives
him  not ;  the  apostle  particularly  applying  him¬
self  to  the  unbelieving  Jews.

MARBLE.

1  Chron.  29.2.  I  have  prepared  m.  in  abundance
Esth.  1.  6.  fastened  to  silver  rings  and  pillarsof  m
pavement  of  red,  blue,  white,  and  black  m.
Cant.  5. 15.  his  legs  are  as  pillars  of  m.  set  on  sockets
Rev.  18.  12.  the  vessels  of  rn.  no  man  buyetli
_  MARCH.

Psal.  68.  7.  when  thou  didst  m.  thro’  the  wilderness
Isa.  27.  t4.  set  briars,  I  would  rn.  against  them
Jer.  46.  22.  for  they  shall  m.  with  an  army
Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  m.  every  one  on  his  ways
Hub.  1.  6.  which  shall  m.  thro’  the  breadth  of  the  land

3.  12.  thou  didst  m.  through  tlie  land  in  indignation.

MARCHED.

Exod.  14.  10.  behold,  the  Egyptians  m.  after  them
MARCH  EDST.

Judg.  5.  4.  when  thou  rn.  the  earth  trembled
MARK,  Substantive.

Gen.  4.  15.  the  Lord  set  a  m.  upon  Cain,  lest  any

1  Sam.  20.  20.  I  will  shoot,  as  though  I  shot  at  a  rn.
Job  7.  20.  why  hast  thou  set  me  as  a  m.  against

thee  ?  16.  12.  Lam.  3.  12.
Ezek.  9.  4.  set  a  m.  on  the  men  that  sigh  and  cry

6.  come  not  near  any  man  on  whom  is  the  m.

Phil.  3.  14.  I  press  toward  the  rn.  for  the  prize
Rev.  13.  16.  he  caused  all  to  receive  a  m.

17.  none  might  buy,  save  he  that  had  the  rn.

14.  9.  if  any  man  receive  his  m.  in  his  forehead
11.  have  no  rest,  whosoever  receiveth  his  m.

15.  2.  got  victory  over  his  image,  and  over  his  m.

16.  2.  sore  on  them  that  had  the  m.  of  the  beast

19.  20.  he  deceived  them  that  received  m.  of  beast

20.  4.  nor  received  his  m.  they  lived  with  Christ

MARK,  Verb.

Ruth  3.  4.  thou  shalt  rn.  the  place  where  he  shall  lie

2  Sam.  13.  28.  m.  when  Amnon’s  heart  is  merry
1  Kings 20.  7.  rn.  how  this  man  seeketh  mischief

22.  the  prophet  said,m.  and  see  what  thou  doest
Joh  18.2.  m.  and  afterwards  we  will  speak

21.  5.  m.  me  and  be  astonished,  and  lay  your  hand
33.  31.  rn.  well,  O  Job,  hearken  to  me,  1  will  speak
39.  1.  canst  thou  m.  when  the  hinds  do  calve  r
Psal.  37.  37.  m.  the  perfect  man,  his  end  is  peace
48.  13.  m.  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  her  palaces
56.  6.  they  m.  my  steps,  when  they  wait  for  my  son.
130.  3.  it  thou,  Lord,  shouldest  m.  iniquities

Ezek.  44.  5.  m.  well,  m.  the  entering  of  the  house
Rom.  16.  17.  m.  them  who  cause  divisions,  avoid
Phil.  3.  17.  m.  them  who  walk  so,  as  ye  have  us
MARKED.

1  Sam .  1.  12.  as  she  prayed,  Eli  m.  her  mouth
Joh  22.  15.  hast  thou  m.  the  old  way  which  wicked
24.  16.  which  they  had  m.  in  the  day  time
Jer.  2.  22.  yet  thine  iniquity  is  m .  before  me

23.  18.  who  hath  m.  his  word  and  heard  it
Luke  14.  7  when  he  m.  how  they  chose  rooms
MARKS.

Lev.  19.  28.  ye  shall  not  print  any  m.  upon  you
Gal.  6.  17.  1  bear  in  my  body  the  rn.  of  the  Lord
MARKEST.

Job  10.  14.  if  1  sin,  then  thou  m.  wilt  not  acquit
MARKET  II.

Job  33.  11.  my  feet  in  stocks,  he  m.  all  my  paths
Isa.  44.  13.  the  carpenter  rn.  it  out  with  the  compass
MARKET.

Ezek.  27.  13.  they  traded  in  thy  m.  17,  19,  25.

Mat.  20.  3.  he  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  m .
Mark  7.  4.  and  when  they  come  from  the  m.

12.  38.  and  love  salutations  in  the  rn.  place
Luke  7-  32.  like  children  sitting  in  the  m.  place
John  5.  2.  there  a  pool  at  Jerusa.  by  the  sheep  rn.
Actsld.  19.  and  drew  them  into  the  rn.  place

17.  17.  he  disputed  in  the  m.  daily  with  them
MARKETS.

Mat.  11.  16.  like  children  sitting  in  the  m.

23.  7.  love  greetings  in  the  m.  Luke  11. 43.  |  20. 46.

MARRIAGE

Signifies,  [1]  A  civil  contract,  by  which  a  man  and
a  woman  are  joined  together,  which  was  instituted
by  God  for  the  prevention  of  uncleanness,  the
propagation  of  mankind,  and  that  the  parties  so
contracting  might  be  mutual  helps  and  comforts
to  one  another,  Gen.  2.  18,  22,  23.  John  2.  1.  I
Cor.  7-  .2.  Ileb.  13.  4.  [2]  That  marriage  cove¬
nant  which  is  between  God  and  his  church,  evert
the  covenant  of  grace,  wherein  God  graciously,
promises  to  be  the  God  of  his  people,  and  to  forgive
and  sanctify  them  through  the  merits  of  Jesus
Christ  and  the  influences  of  his  Spirit,  and  so
make  them  a  willing  people  to  himself,  Isa.  54.  5,
Jer.  3.  14.  Ilos.  2.  19,  20.  The  union  between
husband  and  wife  is  so  near,  that  thereby  is  repre
sented  the  mystical  union,  the  sacred  and  spiritual
marriage  of  Christ  with  his  church,  Eph.  5.  30
31 , 32.

Exod.  21.  10.  her  duty  of  m.  shall  he  not  diminish
Psal.  78.  63.  their  maidens  were  not  given  to  m.

Mat.  22.  2.  a  king  who  made  a  rn.  for  his  son

4.  come  to  the  m.  ||  9.  all  ye  find,  bid  to  the  m.

30.  in  the  resurrection  not  given  in  m.  but  as  the

angels  in  heaven,  Mark  12.  25.  Luke  20.  35.

24.  38.  given  in  m.  until  the  day  that  Noe  entered

25.  10.  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  rn.
Luke  17.  27.  they  eat,  they  were  given  in  m.  20.  34.
John  2.  1.  thetie  was  a  rn.  in  Cana  of  Galilee

2.  Jesus  was  called  and  his  disciples  to  the  m.

1  Cor.  7.  38.  he  that  giveth  her  in  m.  doeth  well,
but  he  that  giveth  her  not  in  m.  doeth  better
Heb.  13.  4.  m.  is  honourable  in  all,  and  the  bed

303


MAR


M  AS


M  AT


Mev.  19.  .  *or  the  m.  of  the  Lamb  is  come

9.  blessed  that  are  called  to  the  m.  sapper  of  Lamb

MAKR1AGES.

Gen.  34.  9.  and  make  ye  m.  with  us,  and  give
Dent.  7.  3.  neither  shalt  thou  make  m.  with  them
Josh.  23.  12.  else  if  he  shall  make  m.  with  them
MARRY.

■Gen.  38.  8.  go  in  to  thy  brother’s  wife,  and  m.  her
Num.  36.  6.  let  them  in.  to  whom  they  think  best,
only  to  family  of  their  father’s  tribe  shall  they  nt.
Dent.  25.  5.  the  wife  of  dead  shall  not  m.  without
Isa.  62.  5.  so  shall  thy  sons  m.  thee,  as  bridegroom
Mat.  5.  32.  whosoever  shall  m.  her  that  is  divorced
committeth  adultery,  19.  9.  Mark  10.  11.

19.  10.  if  the  case  be  so,  it  is  not  good  to  m.

•22.  24.  his  brother  shall  m.  his  wile  and  raise  seed
30.  in  the  resurrection  they  neither  m.  nor  are
given  in  marriage,  Mark  12.  25.  Luke  20.  35.

1  Cor.  7.  9.  but  if  they  cannot  contain,  let  them  m.

for  it  is  better  to  m.  than  to  burn

28.  if  thou  m.  if  a  virgin  m.  she  hath  not  sinned
36.  do  what  he  will  he  sinneth  not,  let  them  m.

1  Tim.  4.  3.  forbidding  to  in.  and  commanding  to
5. 11.  they  have  begun  to  wax  wanton,  they  will  m.

14.  that  the  younger  women  in.  bear  children
MARRIED.

Gen.  19. 14.  Lot  spake  to  them  that  m.  his  daughters

20.  t  3.  for  the  woman  is  m.  to  a  husband
Exod.  21.  3.  if  m.  his  wife  shall  go  out  with  him
Lev.  22.  12.  if  m.  to  a  stranger,  she  may  not  eat
Num.  12. 1.  the  Ethiopian  woman  whom  he  had  m.

36.  3.  if  they  be  m.  to  the  sons  of  other  tribes
11.  were  m.  to  their  father’s  brothers’  sons
Deut.  22.  22.  if  a  man  found  lying  with  a  woman  rn.

1  Chron.  2.  21.  whom  he  in.  when  sixty  years  old

2  Chron.  13.  21.  Abijah  m.  fourteen  wives
Neh.  13.  23.  Jews  that  had  m.  wives  of  Ashdod
Prov.  30.  23.  an  odious  woman  when  she  is  in.

Isa.  54.  1.  more  children  of  desolate  than  of  m.

62.  4.  Lord  delighteth  in  thee,  thy  land  shall  be  in.

Jer.  3.  14.  turn.  O  children,  for  I  am  in.  to  you
Mai.  2.  11.  hath  rn.  the  daughter  of  a  strange  god
Mat.  22.  25.  the  first  when  he  had  m.  deceased
Mark  6.  17.  Philip’s  wife,  for  he  had  rn.  her

10.  12.  be  in.  to  another,  committeth  adultery
Luke  14.  20.  I  have  m.  a  wife,  and  cannot  come

17.  27.  they  did  eat,  they  drank,  they  in.  wives
Porn.  7.  3.  if  while  her  husband  liveth  she  be  in.

4.  become  dead,  that  ye  should  be  in.  to  another
l  Cor.  7.  10.  to  the  in.  1  command,  yet  not  1

33.  he  that  is  in.  |!  34.  she  that  is  in.  caret h  for
39.  to  be  in.  to  whom  she  will,  only  in  the  Lord
MARR1ETH.

Isa.  62.  5.  as  a  young  man  m.  a  virgin,  so  shall
Mat.  19.  9.  and  whoso  m.  her  who  is  put  away,
doth  commit  adultery',  Luke  16.  18.
MARRYING.

Neh.  13.  27.  do  this  great  evil  in  in.  strange  wives
Mat.  24.  38.  they  were  m.  and  giving  in  marriage
MARINERS.

Ezek.  27.  8-  the  inhabitants  of  Zidon  were  thy  in.

9.  the  ships  of  the  sea  with  their  in.  were  in  thee

27.  thy  m.  shall  fall  into  the  midst  of  the  seas

29.  the  rn.  shall  come  down  from  their  ships

Jonah  1.  5.  then  the  in.  were  afraid,  and  cried
MAR1SHES.

Ezek.  47. 11.  miry  places  and  in.  shall  not  be  healed
MAR  ROW

Signifies,  A  soft  oily  substance,  contained  in  the
hollow  of  bones,  Job  21.  24.  To  which  are  com¬
pared,  [1]  The  delicate,  strengthening,  and  com¬
forting  provisions .  which  God  has  made  for  his
church  and  people  in  the  gospel  and  his  ordi¬
nances  here ,  but  especially  in  heaven  hereajter,
Psal.  63.  5.  Isa.  25.  6.  [2]  The  most  secret

thoughts  of  the  heart,  Ileb.  4.  12.

Job  21.  24.  ins  bones  are  moistened  with  m.

Psal.  63.  5.  my  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  with  rn.
66. 1 15.  I  will  otter  burnt  sacrifices  of  in.

Prov.  3.  8.  it  shall  be  health  and  m.  to  thy  bones
Isa.  25.  6.  Lord  make  a  feast  of  fat  things  full  of  in.
Ileb.  4.  12.  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  joints  and  in.
MART.

Isa.  23.  3.  Tyre,  and  she  is  a  m.  of  nations
MARTYR.

Acts  22.  20.  the  blood  of  thy  in.  Stephen  was  shed
Reo.H.  13.  wherein  Antipas  was  my  faithful  in.
MARTYRS.

Rev.  17.  6.  woman  -drunken  with  blood  of  m.  of  J.
MARVEL.

2  Cor.  11. 14.  no  m.  for  Satan  himself  is  transformed
MARVEL.

Eccl.  5.  8.  if  thou  seest,  m.  not  at  the  matter
Mark  5.  20.  he  began  to  publish,  and  all  men  did  in.
John  3.  7.  rn.  not  that  1  said,  ye  must  be  born  again

5.  20.  shew  him  greater  works,  that  ye  may  m.

28.  rn.  not  at  this”  U  7. 21.  done  one  v'ork,  and  yem.
Acts  3. 12.  men  of  Israel,  why  m.  ye  at  this  ?

Gal.  1.  6.  1  in.  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed  from

1  John  3.  13.  in.  not  if  the  world  hate  you

Rev.  17. 7.  the  angel  said,  wherefore  didst  thou  rn.  ?
MARVELLED.

Gen.  43.  33.  and  the  men  in.  one  at  another
Psal.  48.  5.  they  saw  it,  and  so  they  m.  they  hasted
Mat.  8.  10.  when  Jesus  heard  it,  be  rn.  and  said
27.  the  men  m.  [|  9.  8.  in.  anil  glorified  God,  33.

21.  20.  when  the  disciples  saw  it,  they  m.  saying

22.  22.  they'  rn.  at  him,  Mark  12.  17.  Luke  HO.  26.
27.  14.  that  the  governor  m.  Mark  15.  5,  44.

Mark  6.  6.  he  m.  because  of  their  unbelief
Luke  1.  21 .  the  people  rn.  that  he  tarried  so  long
63.  saying,  his  name  is  John,  and  they  in.  all
2.  33.  Joseph  and  his  mother  in.  at  those  things
7.  9.  when  Jesus  heard  these  things  he  in.  at  him

11.  38.  and  when  the  Pharisee  saw  it,  he  m.

John  4.27.  thediscipleswi.  he  talked  with  the  woman
7.  15.  Jews  in.  how  knoweth  this  man  letters  r
Acts  2.  7.  rn.  saying,  are  not  these  Galileans  ?

4.  13.  they  rn.  and  took  knowledge  of  them
MARVELLOUS.

2  5 'am.  13.  +  2.  it  was  m.  in  the  eyes  of  Amncn
Job  5.  9.  who  doeth  rn  things  without  uumbei

304


Job  10.  16.  thou  shewest  thyself  m.  upon  tuc
Psal.  17.  7-  shew  thy  rn.  loving-kindness
31.  21.  he  hath  shewed  me  his  rn.  kindness
78. 12.  m.  things  did  he  in  the  sight  of  their  fathers
98.  1.  O  sing  to  Lord,  for  he  hath  done  m.  things
118.  23.  this  is  the  Lord’s  doing,  it  is  m.  in  our
eyes,  Mat.  21.  42.  Mark  12.  11.
Dan.  11.  36.  shall  speak  nt.  things  ag.  God  of  gods
Mic.  7.15.  will  1  shew  unto  him  rn.  things
Zech.  8.  6.  if  it  be  m.  should  it  be  m.  in  mine  eyes  r
John  9.  30.  herein  is  a  in.  thing,  that  ye  know  Mot
1  Pet.  2.9.  called  you  out  of  darkn.  into  his  m.  light
Rev.  15.  1.  another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and  in.
MARVELLOUS  work.

Isa.  29. 14.  behold,  1  will  proceed  to  do  a  m.  work
MARVELLOUS  works.

1  Chr.  16.  12.  remember  his  rn.  works,  Ps.  105.  5.

24.  declare  his  in.  works  among  all  nations

Psal.  9.  1.  I  will  shew  forth  all  thy  m.  works
139. 14.  great  and  in.  are  thy  works.  Rev.  15.  3.
MARVELLOUSLY.

2  Chr.  26.  15.  he  was  m.  helped  till  he  was  strong
Job  37.  5.  God  thundereth  in.  with  his  voice
Hab.  1.  5.  behold,  and  regard,  and  wonder  m.

MARVELS.

Exod.  34.  10.  I  will  do  m.  such  as  have  not  been
MASONS.

2  Sam.  5. 11.  Hiram  sent  to  David  m.  1  Chr.  14. 1.

2  Kings  12. 12.  they  gave  money  to  m.  and  hewers

of  stone,  22.  6.  Ezra  3.  7.

1  Chron.  22.  2.  he  set  in.  to  hew  wrought  stones

2  Chron.  24. 12.  they  hired  m.  to  repair  the  house

MAST,  S.

Prov.  23.  34.  as  he  that  lieth  on  the  top  of  a  m.

Isa.  30.  t  17.  left  as  a  in.  on  the  top  of  a  hill
33.  23.  they  could  not  well  strengthen  their  m.
Ezek.  27. 5.  taken  cedars  from  Lebanon  to  make  in.
MASTER

Is  a  title  applied,  [1]  To  Christ,  who  is  the  chief
Lawgiver,  and  'Teacher,  who  only  can  teach  pow¬
erfully  and  inwardly,  and  in  matters  of  Jaith
and  worship  is  only  to  be  followed,  Mat.  23.  8,
10.  [2]  To  preachers  and  ministers  of  the  word,
Eccl.  12.  11.  [3]  To  such  as  teach  or  educate

disciples  or  scholars,  Luke  6.  40.  [4]  To  such
as  have  rule  over  servants,  Eph.  6.  5.  [5]  To
such  as  ambitiously  affect  vain  applause,  or  pre¬
cedency  and  superiority  above  others,  Mat.  23.
10.  [6]  To  such  as  judge,  censure,  or  reprove

others  rashly,  without  ground;  rigidly,  above  the
merits  of  the  cause  ;  uncharitably ,  aggravating
their  faults,  and  wresting  things  to  the  worst  sense  ;
or  magisterially,  out  of  a  spirit  of  pride,  ambi¬
tion,  or  contradiction.  Jam.  3. 1.

Gen.  39.20.  Joseph’s  m.  put  him  in  prison
Exod.  21.8.  if  she  pleased  nother  m.  who  betrothed
32.  shall  give  to  their  in.  thirty  shekels  of  silver
22.  8.  the  in.  of  the  house  shall  be  broughtto  judges
Deut.  15. 1 2.  every  m.  of  the  lending  of  his  hand
Judg.  19.  22.  and  spake  to  the  m.  of  the  house
23.  the  in.  of  the  house  went  out  unto  them

1  Sam.  25. 14. David  sent  messengers  to  salute  our  m.
17.  for  evil  is  determined  against  our  in.

26. 16.  because  you  have  not  kept  your  in.

2  Sam.  2.7.  foryour  m.  Saul  is  dead  and  the  house

1  Kings  22.  17.  these  have  now.  2  Chron.  18.  16.

2  Kings  6.  5.  he  cried,  alas  m.  for  it  was  borrowed

22.  they  may  eat  and  drink,  and  go  to  their  m.

23.  sent  them  away,  and  they  went  to  their  rn.

10.  2.  seeing  your  m.  sons  are  with  you

3.  look  out  the  best  of  your  m.  sons,  and  set  him

6.  take  the  heads  of  your  m.  sons,  and  come
19.  6.  thus  shall  ye  say  to  your  m.  Isa.  37.  6.

1  Chron.  15.  27.  and  Cnenauiah,  m.  of  the  song
Eccl.  10.  t  11.  a  m.  of  the  tongue  is  no  better
Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  the  servant,  so  with  his  m.

50.  t  8.  who  is  the  m.  of  my  cause,  let  him  come
Dan.  1.  3.  the  king  spake  to  the  m.  of  the  eunuchs
4.  9.  O  Belteshazzar,  m.  of  the  magicians,  5.  11.
Mai.  1.  6.  and  if  I  lie  am.  where  is  my  fear  ?

2. 12.  the  Lord  will  cut  off  the  m.  and  the  scholar
Mat.  8. 19.  m.  1  will  follow  thee  whithers.  thou  goest
9. 11. why  eateth  your  w.with  publicans  and  sinners

10.  25.  if  they  have  called  the  m.  Beelzebub

12.  38.  m.  we  would  see  a  sign  from  thee

15.  27.  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  nt.  table
17.  24.  diey  said,  doth  not  your  rn.  pay  tribute  ?

22. 16.  rn.  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  Mark  12.  14.
23.  8.  for  one  is  your  in.  even  Christ,  10.

26.  18.  the  in.  salth,  my  time  is  at  hand
25.  m.  is  it  1  ?  ||49.  hail  nt.  and  kissed,  MarklA.  45.
Mark 5.  35.  why  troublest  thou  the  m.  any  more  t
9.  5.  m.  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,  Luke  9.  33.

10. 17-  good  m.  what  shall  1  do  ?  Luke  10.  25.

13.  35.  for  ye  know  not  when  the  m.  cometh
Luke  3. 12.  the  publicans  said,  m.  what  shall  we  do  ?

7.  40.  w.say  on  ||  8.  24.  saying,  m.  we  perish

8.  49.  thy  daughter  is  dead  ;  trouble  not  the  m.

13.  25.  when  once  the  in.  of  the  house  is  risen

John  3. 10.  art  thou  a  in.  in  Israel,  and  knowest  not

11.  28.  the  in.  is  come  and  calleth  for  thee
13.  13.  ye  call  me  rn.  and  ye  say  well,  for  so  1  am

14.  if  I  then  your  m.  have  washed  your  feet
Acts  27. 11-  the  centurion  believed  the  m.  of  the  ship
Eph.  6.  9.  knowing  your  nt.  is  in  heaven,  Col.  4. 1.

2  Tim.  2.  21.  vessel  sanctified  and  meet  for  the  in.  use
His  MASTER.

Gen.  24.  9.  put  his  hand  under  the  thigh  of  his  m.

10.  took  ten  camels  of  his  m.  goods  of  his  m.

39.  2.  Joseph  was  in  house  of  hism.  the  Egyptian
i9.  when  hism.  heard  the  words  of  his  wife
Exod.  21.  4.  if  his  m.  have  given  him  a  wife
6.  his  in.  shall  bore  his  ear  through  with  an  awl
Deut.  23. 15.  thou  shalt  not  deliver  to  his  in.  the  ser¬
vant  which  is  escaped  from  his  m.  unto  thee
Judg.  19.  11.  the  servant  said  to  his  rn.  let  us  lodge

1  Sam.  20.  38. gathered  the  arrows  and  came  to  his  m.
25.  10.  servants  break  away  every  one  fiiom  his  rn.
29.  4.  wherewith  should  reconcile  himself  to  his  m.

2  Kings  5.  1 .  N  aaman  was  a  great  man  with  his  m.
25.  Gehazi  went  in,  and  stood  before  his  in.

6.  32.  is  not  the  sound  of  his  m.  feet  behind  him  ?


2  Kings  8.  14.  Hazael  departed  and  came  to  his  in

9.  31.  she  said,  had  Zimri  peace,  who  slew  his  in.
19.  4.  his  rn.  hath  sent  to  reproach  God,  Isa.  37. 4

1  Chron.  12.  19-  saying,  he  will  fall  to  his  m.  Sau
Job  3. 19.  and  the  servant  is  tree  from  his  m.

Prov.  27. 18.  so  he  that  waiteth  on  his  rn.  shall  be

30.  10.  accuse  not  aserv.  to  hism.  lest  he  curse  the,
Isa.  1.  3.  and  the  ass  knoweth  his  m.  crib
Mai.  1.  6.  and  a  servant  honoured)  his  m.

Mat.  10.24.  the  disciple  is  not  above  h.  m.  Luke  6.4c
25.  it  is  enough  that  the  disciple  be  a a  hism.
Luke  6.  40.  every  one  perfect  shall  be  as  hism.
Rom.  14.  4.  to  his  own  in.  he  staudedi  or  falletli
My  MASTER.

Gen.  24.  12.  O  Lord  God  of  my  in.  Abraham  shew
kindness  to  my  in.  Abraham,  27.42,  4jjj

14.  know  that  thou  hast  shewed  kindness  to  my  m
35.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  my  in.  greatly

44.  whom  the  Lord  hath  appointed  for  my  m.  soi]
49.  if  you  will  deal  truly  and  kindly  with  mym
54.  and  he  said,  send  me  away  to  rny  m.  56.

65.  and  the  servant  had  said,  it  is  my  m.

39.  8.  behold,  my  in.  wotteth  not  what  is  with  mi
Exod.  21.  5.  if  the  servant  shall  say,  1  love  my  m

1  Sam.  24.  6.  God  forbid  I  should  do  this  to  my  nt
30.  13.  my  rn.  left  me  because  l  fell  sick

15.  nor  deliver  me  into  the  hands  of  my  m.

2  Kings  b.  18.  rny  m.  goeth  into  the  house  of  Rimmoj!
20.  my  rn.  hath  spared  N  aaman  this  Syrian

22.  rny  m.  hath  sent  me,  saying,  behold

6.  15.  and  he  said,  alas,  my  m.  how  shall  we  do  '

10.  9.  behold,  1  conspired  against  mym.  and  slew

18.  24.  how  then  wilt  thou  turn  away  one  captaii

of  the  least  of  my  m.  servants,  Isa.  36.  y
27.  hath  rny  m.  sent  me  to  thy  master  ?  Isa.  36.  12
Isa.  36.  8.  give  pledges,  I  pray  thee,  to  my  m.
Thy  MASTER.

Gen.  24.  51.  and  let  her  be  thy  m.  son’s  wife

1  Sam.  29.  10.  rise  up  early  with  thy  m.  servants  ,

2  Sam.  9. 9.  1  give  t.  rn.  son  all  that  pertained  to  Sau

12.  8.  1  gave  thee,  thy  rn.  house,  thy  m.  wives

16.  3.  the  king  said,  where  is  thy  m.  son  <

2  Kings  2.3.  Lord  will  take  away  thy  m.  to-day, ;

16.  let  them  go,  we  pray  thee,  and  seek  thym.
9.  7.  thou  shalt  smite  the  house  of  Ahab  thy  m.
18.  27.  niy  master  sent  rue  to  thy  m.  and  to  thee

MAS 4  YA\-builder.

1  Cor.  3.10.  as  wise  m.-builder  1  have  laid  fouudatio
MASTERS.

Exod.  21. 4.  the  wife  and  her  children  shall  be  herw
Psal.  123.  2.  as  the  eyes  of  servants  look  to  their  if.
Prov.  25. 13.  for  he  refresheth  the  soul  of  his  m.
Eccl.  12.  11.  as  nails  fastened  by  m.  of  asseivbliej
Jer.  27.  4.  and  command  them  to  say  to  their  m.
Amos  4.  1.  which  say  to  their  m.  let  us  drink
Zeph.  1.  9.  who  fill  their  m.  houses  with  violence
Mat.  6.  24.  no  man  can  serve  two  m.  luke  16.  13
23. 10.  neither  be  ye  called  m.  one  is  your  mastt
Acts  16.  16.  who  brought  her  w.much  gain

19.  her  w.saw  the  hope  of  their  gains  was  goni
Eph.  6.5.  servants,  be  obedient  to  them  that  are  voi

m.  Col.  3.  22.  Tit.  2.  9.  1  Pet.  ‘I.  l;

9.  ye  m.  do  the  same  things  to  them,  Col.  4.  1.

1  Tim.  6.  1.  count  their  m.  worthy  of  all  honour

2.  that  have  believing  m.  let  them  not  despise
Jam.  3.  1.  brethren,  be  not  many  m.  knowing
MASTERY.

Exod.  32.  18.  the  voice  of  them  that  shout  foi  m.
Dan.  6.  24.  and  the  lions  had  the  m.  of  them

1  Cor.  9.  25.  that  striveth  for  the  m.  is  temperate

MASTERIES.

2  Tim.  2.  5.  if  a  man  also  strive  for  rn.  not  crown*

MALE.

Isa.  34. 15.  vultures  be  gath.  every  one  with  her  1.
16.  not  one  shall  fail,  none  shall  want  her  in.
MATRIX.

Exod.  13. 12.  set  apart  to  Lord  all  that  open  in.  1
34.19-  all  that  openeth  the  m.  is  mine
Num.  3. 12.  instead  of  the  first-born  that  open  the  1
18.  15.  every  thing  that  openeth  the  m.  is  thine
"MAT!  EH.

Gen.  24. 9.  and  sware  to  him  concerning  that  m.
30.  15.  is  it  a  small  m.  that  thou  hast  taken
Exod.  5.  t  13.  fulfil  a  m.  of  a  day  in  his  day

18. 16.  when  they  have  a  m.  they  come  to  me
22.  it  shall  be  that  every  great  m.  they  shall  brij

to  thee,  but  every  small  m.  they  shall  jud
26.  but  every  small  m.  they  judged  themselves

23.  7.  keep  thee  far  from  a  false  m.

Num.  16.  49.  them  that  died  about  the  m.  of  Kor
25.  18.  beguiled  you  in  in.  of  Peor,  in  m.  or  Co^

31. 16.  to  commit  trespass  in  the  rn.  of  Peor
Deut.  17-  8.  if  there  arise  a  m.  too  hard  for  thee

19.15.  at  mouth  of  three  witnesses  m.  be  establish
24. 1 1.  he  hath  found  a  m.  of  nakedness  in  her
Judg.  19.  +  24  do  not  the  m.  of  this  folly  .
Ruth  3.18.  till  thou  know'  how  the  m.  will  fall  f

1  Sam.  10. 16.  of  the  m.  of  the  kingdom  he  told  1

20.  23.  touching  the  w.thou  and  1  have  spokec!
39.  only  Jonathan  and  David  knew  the  rn.

2  Sam.  1.  4.  how  went  the  rn.?  I  pray  thee  tell

18.  13.  there  is  no  m.  niu  from  the  king

20.  18.  they  ended  the  m.  ||  21.  the  nt.  is  not  so
1  Kings  8.  59.  at  all  times  as  the  m.  shall  requi

15.  5.  save  in  the  m.  of  Uriah  the  Ilittite

1  Chr.  26.  32.  for  every  m.  pertaining  to  Goo
27. 1.  their  officers  that  served  the  king  in  any

2  Chr.  8. 15.  departed  not  from  command  many;

19.  +  6.  who  is  with  you  in  the  m.  of  judgment)

24.  5.  see  ye  hasten  the  rn.  they  hastened  not
Ezra  5.  5.  to  cease,  till  the  m.  came  to  Darius

10.  16.  and  sat  down  to  examine  the  m.

Neh.  6.  13.  they  might  have  m.  for  evil  report
Esth.  2.  23.  when  inquisition  wras  made  of  the  ■>
Job  19.  28.  seeing  the  root  of  the  m.  is  found  in

32.  18.  1  will  answer,  for  1  am  full  of  m.

Psal.  45.1.  my  heart  is  inditing  a  good  m.

64.5.  they  encourage  themselves  in  an  evil  m.
Prov.  11.  13.  a  faithful  spirit  concealeth  the  m

16.  20.  that  handleth  a  rn.  wisely  shall  tmd  so*

17.  9.  that  repeateth  a  in.  separateth  very  tneii;

18.  13.  that  answereth  a  m.  before  he  hearetn


M  A  Y


M  E


'r0v.  25. 2.  the  honour  of  kings  is  to  search  out  a  m.
'cel.  5.8.  it  seest  oppression,  marvel  not  at  the  m
10.  20.  that  which  hath  wings  shall  tell  the  m.

12. 13.  let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  m.

er.  7. 1 22.  concerning  the  m.  of  burnt  offerings
58.  27-  for  the  tn.  was  not  perceived
>2. +34.  the  tn.  of  a  day  in  his  day,  till  death
zek.  9. 11.  he  that  had  the  inkhorn,  reported  the  m,
id.  20.  is  this  of  thy  whoredoms  a  small  tn.?

>an.  2. 10.  not  a  man  can  shew  the  king’s  tn.

23.  thou  hast  made  known  to  us  the  king’s  m.

.  28.  hitherto  is  the  end  of  the  m.  1  kept  the  tn.

).  23.  understand  the  tn.  and  consider  the  vision
lark  1.  45.  and  began  to  blaze  abroad  the  m.

0. 10.  his  disciples  asked  him  again  of  the  same  tn.
cts  11. 4.  Peter  rehearsed  the  tn.  from  beginning
5.6.  the  elders  came  to  consider  of  this  tn.

8. 14.  Gallio  said,  if  it  were  a  tn.  of  wrong
9.  .‘18.  it  Demetrius  have  a  tn.  against  any
4.  22.  1  will  know  the  uttermost  of  your  tn.

Cor.  6. 1.  dare  any  of  you  having  a  tn.  go  to  law  >
Cor.  9.  5.  same  might  be  ready  as  a  tn.  of  bounty
al.  2. 6.  whatsoever  it  were,  it  maketh  no  m.
Thess.  4.  6.  that  no  man  defraud  brother  in  any  m.
xm.  3.  5.  how  great  a  tn.  a  little  fire  kindleth  !

This  MATTER.

cut.  3. 26.  L.  said ,  speak  no  more  to  me  of  this  m.

2. 26.  as  a  man  slayeth  his  neighbour,  so  is  this  m.
Sam.  30. 24.  who  will  hearken'to  you  in  this  m.  ?
Sam.  19.  42.  wherefore  be  ye  angry  for  this  tn.  ?
zra  5. 5.  Darius  returned  answer  concerning  t.  tn.

17.  send  his  pleasure  to  us  concerning  this  m.

0.  4.  arise,  for  this  m.  belongeth  to  thee
9.  the  people  sat  trembling  because  of  this  m.

15.  Jonathan,  Asahel,  were  employed  about  t.m.
tth.  9.  26.  they  had  seen  concerning  this  tn.
an.  1.  14.  Melzar  consented  to  them  in  this  tn.

,  16.  we  are  not  careful  to  answer  thee  in  this  m
.  17.  this  tn.  is  by  the  decree  of  the  watchers
■ts  8.  21.  thou  hast  neither  part  nor  lot  in  tliism
J. 32.  we  will  hear  thee  again  of  t.  tn.  others  said
'.or.  7. 11.  ye  approved  yourselves  clear  in  this  m.
M  A  1  1  E  K  S .

■od.  24.  14.  if  any  have  tn.  let  him  come  to  them
tut.  16. 1 19.  a  gift  perverteth  the  m.  of  righteous
t.  8.  if  arise  tn.  of  controversy  too  hard  for  thee
> am.  16.  18.  a  son  of  Jesse  that  is  prudent  in  m.
<am.  11.  19.  hast  made  an  end  of  telling  the  m
>.  3.  Absalom  said,  see  thy  tn.  are  good  and  ri«ht
I.  29.  why  speakest  thou  any  more  of  thy  tn  ?
hr-  l1*  -Amariah  chief  priest  over  you  in'™,
ot  the  Lord,  and  Zebadiah  for  all  the  kind’s  tn
'/i.  6. 1 19.  and  they  uttered  my  m.  to  Tobiah
.  24.  Pethahiah  in  all  m.  concerning  the  people
th.  3.4.  whether  Mordecai’s  tn.  would  stand

31.  the  m.  of  the  fastings,  and  their  cry,  32.
i  33.  13.  he  giveth  not  account  of  his  tn.
al.  35.  20.  thus  devise  deceitful  tn.  against  them
'•  +  3.  tn.  of  iniquities  prevail  against  me

1. 1.  nor  do  I  exercise  myself  in  great  m
er.22.tl2.  he overthroweth  the  m.of  transgressor
'•  +  20.  seest  thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  m  ?
n.  1.  20.  in  m.  of  wisdom  he  found  them  better

1.  he  wrote  the  dream,  and  told  the  sum  of  the  m.
it.  23.23.  and  have  omitted  the  weightier  m

ts  18.  15.  for  I  will  be  no  judge  of  such  m
-  ™  ,f  yf  e,nclulfe  any  thing  concerning  other  m.
.20.  and  there  be  judged  of  these  m.
or.  6. 2.  are  ye  unworthy  to  judge  the  smal  lest  tn.
et.  4. 15.  or  as  ayb^s^ody^in  other  men’s  tn.

im.  13.  20.  to  sharpen  every  man  his  axe  and  tn.

•  7.  25.  on  all  hills  shall  be  digged  with  the  tn

MATTOCKS.

rm.  13.  21.  yet  they  had  a  file  for  the  m
iron.  34.  6.  thus  did  Josiah  with  their  m
MAUL.

>v.  25. 18.  that  beareth  false  witness,  is  a  tn.
MAW.

it.  18.  3.  to  the  priest  two  cheeks  and  the  tn
MAY.

2°.;  seei-nr  T  P°  whither  I  tn.  return  thou
'} iiS-  sa1^*  I  but  touch  his  garment
if  thls,cup  not  pass  away  from  me
>•  7.  9.  and  as  I  m.  so  say,  Levi  paid  tithes
.  MAY  he.

1. 12. 13.  that  it  tn.  he  well  with  me  for  thy  sake

2.  it  m.  he  that  I  may  obtain  children
3-9.  that  the  Lord’s  law  tn.  be  in  thy  mouth
that  Ins  fear  m.  he  before  your  face

•  n.  34.  of  all  meat  which  tn.  be  eaten
mu  7^  sister  a  virgin  he  m.  he  defiled

•  in  ",  “  m-  be  an  holy  convocation

m  *i.1I’Ahey  m ‘  bef0T  a  memorial  before  God
ot.  that  the  possession  tn.  be  ours
tt.  5.  33.  may  live,  and  that  it  tn.  be  well  with
you,  6.  3, 18.  |  22.  7.  Ruth  3. 1.  Jer.  7.  23.

3  u  ?’•  b e  ‘°  ^,ee  a  God  as  he  hath  said
i'oo  m  tllere  for  a  witness  against

that  it  m.  he  for  a  witness  between
oV  It'  6'  lt,m'  be  the  I,ord  will  work  for  us

21.  she  ™.  a  snare,  Philistines  tn.  he  ag.  him
be  that  the  king  will  perform

mot  itTl  be  T/°?d  TiIIJ05k  on  my  affliction
xrT,  thy  God  Wl11  hear,  Isa.  37. 4.
n  o  j«  '  M  -  that  it  tn.  he  before  thee  for  ever
1  V;.'  “  ,  y<:  m •  be  strong,  and  eat  the  good

•  o.  it  tn.  be  that  my  sons  have  sinned


e  ‘a  .  ^  ‘tUU  “ctl  lilt

/  Si  '  be  that  my  sons  have  sinned
4  m.J  1  con.s"me  them,  that  they  tn.  not  he
io  *1  .  e  m ■  be  no  more  in  remembrance  •

■  jjf.  that  our  sons  m.  he  as  plants  grown  up
•  that  our  garners  m.  he  full,  affording  store
'So  ,nUr,L°xen,  be  strong  to  labour
/1  'in9'  ^at  thy  trust  m.  he  in  the  Lord
in  n  ♦uVl)^Ie0‘  .‘t be  said,  see  this  is  new
d  that  it  tn.  he  tor  the  time  to  come
c  ,  rd  waiteth  that  he  m.  be  gracious

11  10  Z*n-be  I,ke  II  60-  21  •  1  m.  be  glorified
.3  •  ‘hat  his  name  tn.  he  no  more  remembered

it  1  E  fif  the  ^use  °f  Judah  will  hear
6  tha*  ey  T1  Pfesent  their  supplication
•  at  it  m.  be  well  with  us  when  we  obey


Jer.  51.  8.  take  balm,  if  so  be  she  m.  be  healed
Lam.  3.  29.  mouth  in  dust,  if  so  be  there  tn.  he  hope
Ezek.  12.  3.  it  m.  be  they  will  consider,  though  they
14.  11.  that  they  tn.  he  my  people,  and  1  their  God
dlan.  4.  27.  it  m.  be  a  lengthening  of  tranquillity
Has.  8.  4.  they  made  idols',  that  they  tn.  be  cut  off
Amos  5.  15.  it  tn.  he  the  Lord  will  be  gracious
Z«p/i.  2.  3.  it  tn.  be  ye  shall  he  hid  in  the  day
Mat.  5.  45.  that  ye  m.  he  children  of  your  Lather
6.  4.  that  thine  alms  m.  be  in  secret,  and  thy  Father
Luke  20.  13.  it  m.  he  they  will  reverence  him
14.  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance  tn.  he  ours
John  12.  36.  that  ye  m.  be  the  children  of  light
14.  3.  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  tn.  he  ..Iso
17-  11.  that  they  m.  be  one,  as  we  are  one,  21.  22.
26.  that  the  love  tn.  be  in  them,  and  I  in  them
Rom.  1.  t  20.  that  they  m.  he  without  excuse

1  Cor.  3. 18.  that  he  tn.  be  wise  ||5.  7-  yem.  be  new  lu
7-  34.  that  she  m.  be  holy  in  body  and  spirit

14.  10.  there  are,  it  m.  he,  so  many  kind  of  voices

15.  28.  Son  be  subject,  that  God  m.  be  all  in  all

16.  6.  and  it  m.  be  that  1  will  winter  with  you
10.  see  that  he  m.  be  with  you  without  fear

2  Cor.  4. 7.  the  excellency  of  the  power  m.  be  of  God

8.  11.  so  there  m.  be  a  performance  also  out  of  that
14.  that  your  abundance  m.  be  a  supply  for  want

9.  3.  that,  as  I  said,  you  m.  he  ready
Lph.  6.  3.  that  it  m.  be  well  with  thee,  and  thou
Phil.  2.  15.  that  ye  m.  be  blameless  and  harmless

19.  that  I  tn.  be  of  good  comfort  when  I  know
28.  and  that  I  m.  he  the  less  sorrowful

1  Tim.  5.  7-  give  charge  that  they  tn.  be  blameless

2  lim.  3.  17.  that  the  man  of  God  tn.  be  perfect
Tit.  1.  13.  that  they  m.  be  found  in  the  faith
Jam.  1.  4.  that  ye  tn.  be  perfect  and  entire

MAYEST.

Acts  8.37.  if  thoubelievest  with  all  thy  heart  thouw?
M AYES' V  he.

Gen.  28.  3.  that  thou  m.  be  a  multitude  of  people
'*+•  31.  thou  m.  he  to  us  instead  of  eyes
Deitt.  26.  19.  and  that  thou  m.  be  an  holy  people
JSeh.  6.  6.  buildest,  that  thou  m.  be  their  king
Job  40.  8.  condemn  me,  that  thou  m.  be  justified
/  sal.  130.  4.  forgiveness,  that  thou  m.  be  feared
Isa.  23.  16.  singsongs,  that  thou  m.  be  remembered

49.  6.  that  thou  tn.  he  my  salvation  to  end  of  earth
Jer.  4.  14.  wash  thy  heart,  that  thou  m.  he  saved

30.  13.  none  to  plead,  that  thou  tn.  be  bound  up
Luke  16.  2.  for  thou  m.  be  no  longer  steward
ME.

Gen.  3.  13.  the  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  T  did  eat

22.  +  1.  and  he  said,  behold  me,  +7,  +  11.  Isa. 65. 1.

41.  10.  put  in  ward  both  me  and  the  chief  baker
13.  me  he  restored,  and  him  he  hanged

42.  36.  me  have  ye  bereaved  of  my  children
Erod.  9.  14.  there  is  none  like  me  in  all  the  earth

1  Sam.  8.  7-  not  thee,  but  they  have  rejected  me

2  Sam.  18.  29.  when  Joab  sent  me  thy  servant
1  Kings  1.  26.  but  me,  even  me  thy  servant,  not

Isa.  57  •  8.  hast  discovered  thyself  to  another  than  me
Jer.  17. 18.  bedismayed,  but  letnot  me  be  dismayed

50.  44.  who  like  me,  and  who  will  appoint  me  time  '
Ilf's.  13.  4.  and  thou  shalt  know  no  God  but  me
Mat.  10.  37-  loveth  father  and  mother  more  than  me

40.  he  that  receiveth  you  receiveth  me,  and  he
that  receiveth  me,  Mark  9.  37.  John  13.  20.
19.  17-  why  callest  thou  me  good  ?  Luke  18.  1 9  ~

26.11.  we  ye  have  not  al  ways,  Mark  14.7.  John'.  2.8.
Luke  10.  16.  that  desp.  me,  desp.  him  that  sent  me
John  5.  46.  believed  Moses,  ye  would  have  bel.  me

7.  7-  the  world  cannot  hate  you,  but  me  it  hateth

8.  19.  ye  neither  know  me,  nor  my  Father
10.  38.  though  ye  believe  not  me,  believe  the  works

14.  9.  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  Philip  ?

15.  23.  he  that  hateth  me  hateth  my  Father
24.  have  seen  and  hated  both  me  and  my  Father

16.  3.  they  have  not  known  the  Father  nor  me

17.  5.  O  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thyself

18.  21.  why  askestthou  me?  ask  them  who  heard  me

23.  but  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  me?

19. 11.  he  that  delivered  me  to  thee  hath  greater  sin
21. 15.  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me  ?  16, 17.

Acts  9.  4.  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  22.  7.

1  Cor.  15.  32.  what  advantageth  it  me,  if  the  dead
Above  ME.

1  Sam.  2.  29.  and  honourest  thy  sons  above  me
About  ME.

Deut.  17.  14.  like  the  nations  that  are  about  me
Job  10.  t  8.  thine  hands  took  pains  about  me
29.  5.  when  my  children  were  about  me
Psal.  3.  +  3.  but  thou,  O  Lord,  art  a  shield  about  me
88.  L7.  they  came  round  about  me  daily  like  water
139.  11.  even  the  night  shall  be  light  about  me
Jonah  2.  6.  the  earth  with  her  bars  was  about  me
Acts  22. 6.  there  shone  a  great  light  about  me,  26. 13
After  ME.

Gen.  31.  36.  thou  hast  so  hotly  pursued  after  me
Judg.  3.  28.  he  said  unto  them,  follow  after  me
1  Sam.  14. 12.  said  to  armour-bearer,  come  after  me
24.  21.  that  thou  wilt  not  cut  off  my  seed  after  me
1  Kings  1. 13.  Solomon  shall  reign  after  me,  17,  30.

24.  hast  said,  Adonijah  shall  reign  after  me
Eccl.  2.  18.  unto  the  man  that  shall  be  after  me

■  Jsa.  43.  10.  neither  shall  there  be  after  me
Jer.  2.  2.  when  wentest  after  me  in  the  wilderness
Mat.  3.  11.  he  that  cometh  after  me  is  mightier
than  I,  Mark  1.  7-  John  1.  15,  27,  30.

10.  38.  he  that  followeth  not  after  me,  Luke  14.  27
16. 24.  that  will  come  a.  me,  Mark  8.  34.  Luke  9.  23.
Acts  13.  25.  there  cometh  one  after  me  whose  shoes
Rom.  10.  20.  manifest  to  them  that  asked  not  a.  me
Against  ME.

Gen.  20.  6.  I  withheld  thee  from  sinning  against  me
42.  36.  all  these  things  are  against  me
50.  20.  but  as  for  3  011,  3^e  thought  evil  against  me
Erod.  23.  33.  lest  they  make  thee  sin  against  me
32.  33.  whoso  hath  sinned  against  me  him  wil  1  I  blot
Lev.  26.  40.  which  they  trespassed  against  me
Nvm.  14.  27.  congregation  which  murmur  a.  me,  29.

35.  that  are  gathered  together  against  me
22.  5.  abide  over  ag.  me  ||  34.  thou  stoodest  ag.  me


M  E

Deut.  32.  51.  because  ye  trespassed  against  me  at
Menbah,  Lzek.  17.  20.  |  20.  27,  38. 1  39.  23,  26.
Judg.  0.  39.  let  not  thine  anger  be  hot  against  me
7-  2.  lest  Israel  vaunt  themselves  against  me
11. 27 .  but  thou  doest  me  wrong  to  war  against  me
Kuth  1. 13.  hand  of  the  Lord  is  gone  out  against  me
t  16.  be  not  against  me  to  leave  thee,  or  to  return

1  >aw.  12.  3.  w  itness  against  me  before  the  Lord
17 •  35.  when  he  arose  ag.  me,  1  caught  him  by  beard

22.  8.  that  all  of  you  have  conspired  against  me,  13.

26.  19.  it  the  Ix>rd  hath  stirred  thee  up  against  me

2  Sam .  24.  17.  let  thy  hand,  I  pray  thee,  bea^.  me
~  Kings  5.  7.  see  how  he  seeketh  a  quarrel  ag.  me
Job  10.  17.  thou  renewest  thy  witnesses  against  me

13.  26.  thou  writest  bitter  things  against  me
16.  8.  w  ith  wrinkles,  which  is  a  witness  against  me
W.  19.  they  whom  1  loved  are  turned  against  me

23.  6.  will  he  plead  against  me  with  his  great  power
30.21.  with  thy  hand  thou  opposes!  thyself  ag.me

!"-Y  lan(l  cry  against  me,  or  the  furrows
33.10.  behold,  he  findeth  occasions  against  me
Rj<al.  3.  1.  are  many  that  rise  up  ag.  trie,  18.  39,  48.
-2.  +  13.  they  opened  their  mouths  against  me

2 7.  12.  false  witnesses  are  risen  up  ag.me,  54.  3.
35.  21.  they  opened  their  mouth  wide  against  me

‘£9\  rne  <  0  they  devlse  "iy  hurt,  whisper  ag.me
10^.  B.  they  are  mad  ag.  mey  they  are  sworn  ag.  me
119.  23.  princes  also  did  sit  and  speak  against  me
riov.  8.  ot).  but  he  that  sinneth  ag.  me  wrongeth
Isa.  1.2.  have  rehell.  ag.  me,  Ezek'.Q.  3.  |  20.  8,13,21.
Jer.  12.  8.  it  crieth  out  against  me,  therefore  I  hated
Lam.  5.  3.  surely,  ag.  me  he  is  turned,  he  turneth
60.  hast  seen  all  their  imaginations  against  me
H os.  4. 7.  as  they  increased,  so  they  sinned  ag.  me
7-  13.  they  transgressed  ag.  me,  spoken  lies  ag.  me

14.  and  they  assemble  and  rebel  against  me

15.  yet  do  they  imagine  mischief  against  me
Mic.  6.  3.  O  my  people,  testify  against  me
7.  8.  rejoice  not  against  me,  ()  mine  enemv
Mai.  3.  13.  your  words  have  been  stout  against  me
Mat.  12.30.  that  is  not  with  me  isap.me,  Lwfoll.23.

18.  21.  how  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me?'
John  13.  18.  hath  lift  up  his  heel  against  me

19.  11.  couldest  have  no  power  at  all  against  me

Acts  24.  19.  and  object,  if  they  had  aught  ag.  me
n  .  At  ME.

Psnf.  118.  13.  thou  hast  thrust  sore  at  me  to  fall
John  7.  23.  are  ye  angry  at  me  because  1  made  a  man

Before  ME.

Gen.  6.  13.  the  end  of  all  flesh  is  come  before  me
7.  1.  tor  thee  have  1  seen  righteous  before  me
17-  1.  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect,  1  Sam.

30.  1  Kings  2.  4.  |  8.  25.  I  9.  4.  2  Chron.  7.  17.
27.  +  20.  because  thy  God  brought  it  before  me
40.  9.  in  my  dream,  behold  a  vine  w  as  before  me
Exod.  20. 3.  shalt  have  no  other  gods  b.  me,  Deut.  5.7 .
23. 15.  none  shall  appear  before  me  empty,  34.  20.
Nnm.  22.  32.  because  thy  way  is  perverse  before  me

1  Sam.  9.  19.  go  up  before  we  to  the  high  place

10.  8.  and  thou  shalt  go  down  before  me  to  Gilgal

16.  22.  let  David,  I  pray  thee,  stand  before  me
25.  19.  go  on  before  me,  behold  l  come  after  you

2  Sam.  22.23.  for  all  his  judgments  were  before  me,

„.  Psal.  18. 22.  1119.  30.

1  Kings  8.  25.  as  thou  hast  w-alked  b.  me,  2  Chr.  6.16.

11.  36.  David  may  have  a  light  before  me  in  Jerus.
21.  29.  how  Ahab  humbleth  himself  before  me

2  Kings  22.  19.  bee.  hath  wept  h.  me,  2  Chr.  34.  27.
Ezra  4.  18.  letter  hath  been  plainly  read  before  me
Neh.  5.  15.  former  governors  that  were  before  me
Esth.  7.  8.  will  he  force  the  queen  also  before  me  ?
Job  41.  10.  who  then  is  able  to  stand  before  me?

Psal.  16.  8.  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me
23.  5.  thou  preparest  a  table  before  me  in  presence
38.  17.  my  sorrow  is  continually  before  me

39. 1.  keep  my  mouth  while  the  wicked  is  before  me
50.  8.  offerings  to  have  been  continually  before  me
51 .3.  my  transgressions  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me
89.  36.  his  throne  shall  endure  as  the  sun  before  me
Eccl.  1.16.  then  all  that  have  been  before  me,  2.  7, 9.
Cant.  8.  12.  my  vineyard  which  is  mine,  is  before  me
Isa.  1.  12.  when  ye  come  to  appear  before  me,  who

41.  1.  keep  silence  before  me,  O  islands
43.10.  b.  me  there  was  no  god  formed,  norafter
49.  16.  behold  thy  walls  are  continually  before  me
57.  16.  for  the  spirit  should  fail  before  me

65.  6.  behold,  it  is  written  before  me,  I  will  not

66.  22.  shall  remain  before  me,  saith  the  Lord
Jer.  2.  22.  yet  thine  iniquity  is  marked  before  me

6.  7.  before  me  continually  is  grief  and  wmunds

7.  10.  and  come  and  stand  before  me  in  this  house
15.  1.  tho’  Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before  me, yet

19.  if  thou  return,  thou  shalt  stand  before  me

28.  8.  prophets  that  have  been  before  me  and  thee

32.  30.  for  Israel  have  only  done  evil  before  me

33.  18.  priests  shall  not  want  a  man  b.  me,  35.  19.

34. 15.  ye  had  made  a  covenant  b.  me  in  the  house
49.  19.  shepherd  that  will  stand  before  me,  50.  44.

Ezek.  8.  1.  and  the  elders  of  J udah  sat  before  me

14. 1.  then  the  elders  of  Israel  sat  before  me,  20. 1.

36. 17.  their  way  was  before  me  as  the  uncleanness'

44.  15.  and  they  shall  stand  before  me  to  offer

Dan.  4.  8.  at  the  last  Daniel  came  in  before  me
Jonah  1.  2.  their  wickedness  is  come  up  before  me
Hab.  1.  3.  spoiling  and  violence  are  before  me
Hag.  2.  14.  so  is  this  people  and  nation  before  me
Mai.  3. 1.  shall  prepare  the  way  b.  me.  Mat.  11. 10.
Luke  19.  27-  bring  hither  and  slay  them  before  me
John  1.15.  preferred  b.  me,  for  he  was  b.  me,  27.  30.

5. 7. 1  am  coming,  another  steppeth  down  before  me
10.  8.  all  that  ever  came  before  me  are  robbers
Acts  25.  9.  there  be  judged  of  these  things  bef.  me
Rom.  16.  7.  who  also  were  in  Christ  before  me
Gal.  1. 17.  to  them  which  were  apostles  before  me
Behind  M  E.

2  Kings  9.  18.  Jehu  said,  turn  thee  behind  me,  19;
Ezek.  3.  12.  I  heard  behind  me  a  voice  of  rushing
Mat.  16.  23.  get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,  thou  art  an
offence  unto  me,  Mark  8.  33.  Luke  4.  8.
Beside,  besides  ME.

1  Kings  3.  20.  she  arose  and  took  my  son  f»om  b.  m.

Lsa.  43. 11.  bes.  me  the'e  is  no  Saviour,  IDs.  13.  4.

306


M  E


M  E


M  E


/f  a  44.6.  and  besides  me  thert  lsnoGod,45.  5,  6, Cl.

47 .’8.  that  sayest,  1  am,  and  none  else  hes.  me,  10.
Between  ME.

lien.  9.  1C.  covenant  l  make  betw.  me  and  you,  13.

15.  that  is  betw.  me  and  every  living  creature,  17-

13.  8.  let  there  be  no  strife  between  me  and  thee

16.  5.  L.  judge  betw.  me  and  thee,  1  Sam.  24.  1-,  15.

17.  2. 1  make  my  coven,  b.  me  and  thee,  7 >10.  1 !.

23.  15.  w  hat  is  that  bet.  me  and  thee  ?  bury  thy  dead

31.  44.  let  it  be  fora  witness  betw.  me  and  thee,  48.

49.  Lord  watch  between  me  and  thee  when  absent

50.  see,  God  is  witness  between  me  and  thee  .

Exod.  31.  13.  my  sabbath  ye  shall  keep  for  it  is  a

sign  between  me  and  you,  1/.  E~ek.  20.  1.,  20.

I  Sam  14.  42.  cast  lots  between  me  and  Jonathan
20.  3.  there  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death

42.  have  sworn,  saying.  Lord  be  b.  me  and  thee
Kings  15. 19.  is  a  league  b.  me  and  thee,  hr.  10. 3.

Isa.  5. 3.  judge,  I  pray  you ,  bet.  me  and  my  vineyard
E'-ek  43.  8.  and  the  wall  betu  ten  me  and  them
By  ME.  .

Gen  48. 7.  Rachel  died  by  me  in  the  land  ot  C  anaan
Exod.  33.  21.  behold,  there  is  a  place  by  me
Num.  20.  18.  Edom  said,  thou  shait  not  pass  by  me
Deut.  5.  31.  as  for  thee,  stand  thou  here  by  me
Judg.9.  9.  wherewith  by  we  they  honour  God

1  Sam.  28.  17.  Lord  hath  done,  as  he  spake  by  me

2  Sam.  23.  2.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  SP»“.® /S'

1  Kings  22.  28.  Lord  not  spoken  by  me,  2  C  hr.  18.  27.
Ezra  4.  t  19.  by  me  a  decree  is  set,  and  it  is  found
6.  t  8.  by  me  a  decree  is  made,  Dan.  3.  t  29.

Neh.  4. 18.  he  that  sounded  the  trumpet  was  by  me
Job  9. 11.  lo,  he  goeth  by  me,  and  1  see  him  not
Prov.  8. 15.  by  me  kings  reign  \\  16.  by  me  princes  rule

9. 11.  by  me  thy  days  shall  be  multiplied
Isa.  46. 3. which  are  borne  by  me \\  54.15.  but  not  by  me
El  os.  8.  4.  they  have  set  up  kings,  but  not by  me
Mat.  15.  5.  mightest  be  profited  by  me,  Mark  7-  1L
John  6.57.  that  eateth  me,  even  he  shall  live  by  me

10.  9.  I  am  the  door,  by  me  if  any  man  enter  in

14.  6.  no  man  cometh  to  the  l  ather  out  by  tub

Arts  27.  23.  an  angel  stood  by  me  this  night
Bom.  15.  18.  which  Christ  hath  wrought  by  me

2  Cor.  1. 19.  Son  of  God  preached  by  me  was  not  yea
2.  2.  but  the  same  w  hicli  is  made  sorry  by  me

2  Tim.  4.  17.  that  by  me  preaching  might  be  known
Concerneth ,  concerning  ME.

Josh.  14.  6.  Lord  said  to  Moses  cone,  me  and  thee
1  Kings  2.  4.  L.  continue  his  word  he  spake  cone,  me
°2  8.  for  he  doth  not  prophesy  good  cone.  me,  18.
Psal.  138.8.  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  cone,  me
Ezek.  14. 7.  cometh  to  a  prophet  to  inquire  cone,  me
Luke  22.  37.  for  the  things  concern,  me  have  an  end
24  44  which  are  written  in  the  Psalms  cone,  me
Acts  22.  18.  not  receive  thy  testimony  concern,  me
For  M  E.

Gen.  23.8.  entreat  for  me  to  Fphron,  Exod.  8.  28.

27.  36.  hast  thou  not  reserved  a  blessing  Jor  me  ?

3  '.  31.  if  thou  wilt  do  this  thing  for  me
33.  so  shall  my  righteousness  answer  for  me
50.  5.  in  my  grave  which  l  have  digged  for  me
Exod.  2.  9.  take  this  child  and  nurse  it  Jor  me
Num.  3.  41.  thou  shait  take  the  Levites  for  me

11.  14.  not  able,  because  it  is  too  heavy  for  me
22.  6.  for  they  are  too  mighty  for  me

Deut.  31.  19.  this  song  may  he  a  witness  for  me
JosJi.  24.  15.  as  for  me  and  my  house  we  will  serve  L.
Jitdg.  7.  2.  people  are  too  many  Jor  me  to  give
11.  37.  she  said,  let  this  thing  be  done  Jor  me

14.  2.  now  therefore  get  her  for  me  to  wite,  3.

19.  19.  there  is  bread  and  wine  also  for  me

1  Sam.  12.  23.  as  for  me,  1  Chron.  22.  7.  28  2.1  -?•

17.  Job  21. 4.  Psal.  5.  7- 1  17- J5;  1  35.  13

18.  n.  only  be  thou  valiant  for  me,  and  tight
22.  3.  till  1  know  what  God  will  do  for  me
,  8.  there  is  none  of  you  that  is  sorry  Jor  me
27.  1.  nothing  better  for  me  than  to  escape

2  Sam.  3.  39.  sons  of  Zeruiah  be  too  hard  for  me
7.  5.  shait  thou  build  an  house  for  me  to  dwell  in

10. 11.  if  Syrians  be  too  strong  Jor  me,  1  t hr.  19. 1-

14.  32.  good  for  me  to  have  been  there  still

15.  34.  thenmayest  thou  for  me  defeat  counsel

22.  18.  they  were  too  strong  for  me,  Psal.  18.  17-
+  48. God  giveth  avengement forme,  Psal.  18. +  47.

1  Kings  13. 6.  pray  for  me,  that  my  hand  be  restored
17  12.  may  go  in  and  dress  it  Jor  me  and  my  son
«  Kings  4.  24.  drive,  slack  not  thy  riding, Jar  we

16.  15.  the  brazen  altar  be  tor  me  to  inquire  by
22. 13.  inquire  of  the  Lord  for  me, ‘l  Chron.  34.21.
Neh.  5.  18.  which  was  prepared  for  me  daily
Job  17.  1.  the  graves  are  ready  for  me

23.  14.  performeth  the  thing  appointed  Jar  me
29.  23.  they  waited  for  me  as  tor  the  rain
42.  3.  1  uttered  things  too  wonderful  for  me

Psal.  3.3.  thou,  O  Lord,  art  a  shield [for  me
7. 6.  awake  forme  ||  56. 9.  this  1  know,  for  G .  is  for  me
31.  4.  the  net  they  have  laid  privily  for  me,  35.  7.

1  119.  110.  1  140.  5.  I  141.  9.1  142.3.
41,  12.  as  for  me,  55.  16.  1  69-  13.  Isa.  59.  21.  Jer.
17  16.  1  26.  14. 1  40.  10.  Ezek.  9.  10.  Dan.  2.
30. 1  7-  28.  |  10.  17-.  ,  „  ,  .  ,

57.  2.  to  God,  that  performeth  all  things  for  me
61.  3.  for  thou  hast  been  a  shelter  for  me
73. 16.  to  know  this,  it  was  too  painful  for  me
94.  16.  rise  up  for  me,  who  will  stand  up  Jor  me.
109.  21.  but  do  thou  for  me,  O  God  the  Lord
119.71.  good  /.  me  11 85.  the  proud  digged  pits/,  me
95.  the  wicked  have  waited  for  me  to  destroy  me
131.  1.  or  in  things  too  high  for  me
139.  6.  such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me
Prov.  30.  8.  feed  me  with  food  convenient  Jor  me
18.  there  be  three  things  too  wonderful  for  me
Isa.  38.  14.  1  am  oppressed ,  undertake  for  me
44.  7.  and  who  shall  set  it  in  order for  me  ?

49.  20.  the  place  is  too  strait/or  me,  give  place
23.  they  snail  not  be  ashamed  that  wait  Jor  me
60.  9.  surely  the  isles  shall  wait  for  me
65.  1.  I  am  sought  of  them  that  asked  not  forme
Jer.  29. 13.  search  for  me  with  all  your  heart

32.  27.  is  there  any  thing  too  hard  for  me  ?

Ezek.  29.  20.  because  they  wrought  for  me
Has.  3.  3.  thou  shait  abide  for  me  manv  days

306


Jonah  4.  3.  better  for  me  to  die  than  to  live,  8.

Mic.  7.  9.  until  he  execute  judgment  Jor  me
Zech.  9.  1.3.  when  I  have  bent  Judah  for  me
Mat.  17.  27.  that  take  and  give  for  me  and  thee
Luke  23.  28.  weep  not  Jor  me,  but  for  yoursel  ves
Acts  8.  24.  Simon  said,  pray  ye  to  the  Lord  Jor  me
10.  29.  for  what  intent  ye  have  sent  forme  _

Rom.  15.  30.  strive  in  your  prayers  to  God  j  or  me

1  Cor.  6.  12.  all  things  are  lawful  for  me,  10.  23.

9.  15.  it  were  better  for  me  to  die,  than  that

Gal.  2.20.  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me
Eph.  6. 19.  and  f.  we, that  utterance  may  be  given  me

2  Tim.  4.  8.  laid  up  for  we  a  crown  of  righteousness

t rom  ME.

Gen.  13.  9.  separate  thyself,.!  pray  thee,  Jrom  me
22.  12.  hast  not  withheld  thineonly  son  Jrom  me
31  27.  wherefore  didst  thou  steal  away  from  me.

31  wouldest  take  by  force  thy  daugufers  Jrom  me

39.  9.  nor  hath  he  kept  back  any  thing  from  me

44.  28.  the  one  went  out  from  me,  and  he  is  torn
29.  if  ye  take  this  also  from  me,  ye  shall  bring

45.  1.  cause  every  man  to  go  out  from  me

Exod.  10.  28.  get  thee  from  me,  see  my  face  no  more
Josh. '7. 19.  tell  me,  hide  it  not  front  me,  1  Sam.  3.  17.
Judg.  16.  17-  then  my  strength  will go  from  me
1  Sam.  20.  2.why  should  my  l  ath.hide  this/row  me?
<2  Sam,  13.  9.  Amnon  said,  have  out  all  men  from  me

17.  put  this  woman  out/,  me  ||  20.  20.  tar  be  it/ .  me

1  Kings  12.  24.  return,  for  this  thing  is  Jrom  me
22  04,  went  Spirit  of  Lord  Jrom  me,  2  Chr.  18.  23.

2  Kings  4.  27.  and  the  Lord  hath  hid  it  from  me

18.  14.  saving,  I  ha\e  offended,  return  Jrom  me
Neh.  13.  28.  therefore  1  chased  him  from  me

Job  6.  13.  and  is  wisdom  driven  quite  from  me?

9.  34.  let  him  take  his  rod  away  from  me
13.  21.  withdraw  thine  hand  far  Jrom  me

19.  13  he  hath  put  my  brethren  far  from  me
21.  16.  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  is  tar  from  me
07  5.  1  will  not  remove  mine  integrity  from  me
Pv  13.  l.  how  long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  from  me?

18  22  I  did  not  put  away  his  statutes  Jrom  me
35.  22.  thou  hast  seen,  O  Lord,  be  not  far  from  me
38.  10.  light  of  mine  eyes,  it  is  gone  Jrom  me
39  10.  remove  thy  stroke  away  from  me

40.  11.  withhold  not  thy  tender  mercies  from  me
51.  11.  and  take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me
66.  20.  nor  hath  turned  his  mercy  from  me

88.  14.  Lord,  why  hidest  thou  thy  face  from  me?
102. 2  hide  not  thy  face  from  me  in  trouble,  143.  7.
119  19.  hide  not  thy  commandments  from  m,e
Cant.  5.  7.  the  keepers  took  away  my  vail  from  me
6.  5.  turn  away  thine  eyes  from me,  for  they,  have
Isa.  22.  4.  look  away  from  me,  l  will  weep  bitterly
38.  12.  mine  age  is  removed  from  me  as  a  tent
51.  4.  give  ear,  for  a  law  shall  proceed  from  me
Jer.  2.  35.  surely  his  anger  shall  turn  from  me
3.  19.  and  shall  not  turn  away  from  me
13.  25.  this  is  the  portion  of  thy  measures  from  me
38.  14. 1  will  ask  thee,  hide  nothing/row  me
51.  53.  from  me  shall  spoilers  come  unto  her
Ezek.  3.  17.  and  give  them  warning/rew  me,  33.  7.


14.  5.  because  they  are  all  estranged  from  me
7  every  one  that  separateth  himselt/rew  me
11.  that  Judah  may  go  no  more  astray  Jrom  me
44.  10.  went  astray  from  me  after  their  idols
15.  when  children  of  Israel  went  astray  from  me
Van.  2.  5.  the  king  said,  the  thing  is  gone  from  me.  8.
llos.5.  3.  I  know  Ephraim,  Israel  is  not  hid  Jrom  me
7.  13.  woe  unto  them,  for  they  have  tied /row  me
11.  7.  my  people  are  bent  to  backsliding  Jrom  me
14.8.  like  a  fir-tree,  from  me  is  thy  fruit  found
Amos 5.  23.  take  away  fr<  m  me  the  noise  of  songs
Mat.  26.  39.  O  my  l  ather,  if  it  be  possible,  et  this
cup  pass  from  me.  Mark  14.  36.  Luke  22.  22.
42.  if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  me
Luke  16.  3.  my  lord  taketh  from  we  the  stewardship
John  10.  18.  no  man  taketh  it  from  me,  1  lay  it  down
2  Tun.  1.  15.  all  in  Asia  be  turned  away  Jrom  me
See  Depart,  Departed.

In  ME.

Gen.  41.  16.  Joseph  answered,  it  is  not  inme

1  Sam.  20.  8.  if  there  be  iniquity  in  me,  2  Sam.  14.  32.

2  Sam.  1.  9.  because  my  life  is  yet  whole  in  me
22.20.  because  he  delighted  inme,  Psal.  18.  19.

Job  6.  13.  is  not  mj  help  in  me  ?  is  w  isdom  driven?

19.  28.  the  root  of  the  matter  is  found  in  me
23.  6.  no,  but  he  would  put  strength  in  me
27.3.  all  the  while  my  breath  is  in  me
28.  14.  the  depth saith,  it  is  not  in  me
33.  9.  1  am  clean,  nor  is  there  iniquity  inme
Psal.  7.8.  according  to  mine  integrity  in  me

38.  2.  for  thine  arrows  stic  k  fast  in  me

42.  4.  when  I  remember,  I  pour  out  my  soul  in  me
5.  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  inme?

139.  24.  see  if  there  be  any  w  icked  way  in  me
Cant.  5.  +  4.  and  my  bowels  were  moved  in  me
Isa.  27.  4.  fury  is  not  in  me,  who  would  set  briars
57.  13.  that  putteth  trust  in  me  shall  possess  land
Jer.  2.  5.  what  iniquity  have  fathers  found  tn  me?

39.  18.  because  thou  hast  put  thy  trust  mme
49.  11.  and  let  thy  widows  trust  in  me

Lam.  3.  20.  my  soul  is  humbled  inme

Dan.  6.  22.  before  him  innocency  w'as  found  in  me

10.  8.  there  remained  no  strength  in  me,  17.

Eos.  12.  8.  they  shall  find  none  iniquity  in  me

13. 19.  hast  destroyed  thyself,  but  in  me  is  thy  help
Mat.  11.  6.  shall  not  be  offended  in  me,  Euke  7-  23.
18.  6.  little  ones  which  believe  in  me,  Mark9.  42.
LukeVl.  37.  must  jet  be  accomplished  in  me
John  6.  56.  he  dwelleth  inme,  and  1  in  him

11.  25.  he  that  belie' eth  m  me  shall  live,  26.

14. 1.  believe  also  inme  |i  20. you  in  we, and  1  in  you

10.  bul  the  Father  that  dwelleth  in  me
30.  prince  cometh,  and  hath  nothing  mme

15.  2.  every  branch  in  me  |!  4.  abide  in  me

5.  he  that  abideth  in  me  ||  7-  if  ye  abide  in  me

6.  if  a  man  abide  not  in  me  he  is  cast  forth

16. ' .33.  spoken,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace

17.  21  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  1  in  thee
23.  1  in  them,  and  thoiww  me,  that  they  may

Lets  24.  20.  if  they  have  found  any  evil  doing  in  me
26. 18.  which  are  sanctified  by  faith  that  is  in  me


Acts  28.  18.  there  was  no  cause  ot  death  m  r»t
liom.  1. 15. as  much  as  in  me  is,  I  am  ready  to  preach

7.8.  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of  concupisi  ence
13.  sin  working  death  inme  by  what  is  good

17.  no  more  1,  but  sin  that  dw  elleth  in  me,  20.

18.  1  know  that  tn  me  dwelleth  no  good  thing
2  Cor.  1 1.  10.  as  the  truth  of  (.  hrist  is  inme

*13.  3.  sincere  seek  a  proof  oft  hrist  speaking  in  me
Gal.  L  16.  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Sen  inme
24.  and  they  glorified  God  in  me
2  8  the  same  was  mighty  in  me  towards  Gentiles
20.'  yet  not  l,  hut  Christ  liveth  inme
Phil.  1.  30.  having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw
in  me,  and  now  hear  to  be  in  me
4.  9.  the  things  ye  have  heard  and  seen  mme  do
Col.  1 . 29.  working  which  worketh  in  me  mightily
1  Tim  1.  16.  that  inme  C  hrist  Jesus  might  shew
CJ"M  E.

Gen.  20.  13.  say  of  me,  he  is  my  brother
32.  20.  peradventure  he  w  ill  accept  of  me
Judg.  9.  54.  men  say  not  of  me  a  woman  slew  him
Ruth  2.  10.  thou  shouldest  take  knowledge  of  me

1  .Sam.  27.  1.  Saul  shall  despair  of  me  to  seek  me
28.  16.  w  herefore  then  dost  thou  ask  of  me  ?

2  Chron.  11.4.  return,  for  this  thing  is  done  of  r«t
Job  42.  7.  not  spoken  of  me  the  thing  that  is  right
Psal.  2.8.  ask  of  me,  and  1  shall  give  thee  the  heathem

40.  7.  in  thy  book  it  is  written  of  me,  Ileb.  lu.  7.

41.  5.  mine  enemies  speak  evil  of  me

60.8.  Philistia,  triumph  thou  because  ofme>

81  11.  and  Israel  would  none  of  me

Isa.  30.  1.  but  doth  not  take  counsel  of  me

38. 12.  from  day ,  w  ilt  thou  make  an  end  oj  me,  13.

43.  22.  thou  hast  been  weary  of  me,  C)  Israel

44.  21.  thou  shait  not  he  forgotten  of  me

45.  +  24.  surelv  be  shall  say  of  me,  in  the  I  ord
54.  17.  and  their  righteousness  of  me,  saith  the  Lord
58.  2.  they  ask  of  me  the  ordinances  of  justice

Jer.  10.  20.  my  children  arc  gone  forth  oj  me
37.  7.  say  to  the  king  that  sent  you  to  enquire  rj  mt
Ezek.  20.  3.  and  say,  are  ye  come  to  enquire  of  me  ?

4Q.  they  say  of  me,  doth  he  not  speak  parables  r
Mat.  10.37.more  than  me,  is  notyvorthv  of  me,  37.38..

11.  29.  and  learn  of  me,  for  1  am  meek  and  low  ly
26.  .31.  be  offended,  because  of  me,  Mark  14.  27.

ik/a/vl  8.38.  whoso  shall  be  ashamed  of  me,  Luke  9. 26,
9.  39.  that  can  lightly  speak  evil  of  me
L.ukeQ,  46.  1  perceive  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of  me
22.  19.  saying,  this  do  in  remembrance  oj  me
Jc/m  4.  9.  thou  being  a  Jeyv,  askest  drink  oj  me
5.32.  another  that  beareth  vvitness  of  me,  .37.

.39.  and  they  are  they  w  hich  testify  oj  me

46.  have  believed  me,  for  Moses  wrote  oj  me

12.  .30.  this  voice  came  not  because  oj  me

15.  26.  the  Comforter  come,  be  shall  testify  oj  me
18.  .34.  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  of  me?

Acts  1.4.  yvait  for  the  promise  ye  have  heard  </  me
2.3. 11.  as  thou  hast  testified  oj  me  in  Jerusalem  ^

1  Cor.  4. 16.  be  ye  followers  of  me,  11.1.  Phil.  3. 1*.
11.  24.  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me,  25.

15.  8.  last  of  all  be  yvas  seen  ‘f  me  also

16.  21.  the  salutation  oj  me  Paul,  Col.  4.  18.

2  Cor  12.  6.  lest  any  should  think  oj  me  above  tlta

w  hie h  be  seeth  me  or  hearelh  oj  m
Gal.  1. 11.  that  gospel  which  is  preached  oj  me
Phil.  4.  10.  your  car  e,of  me  hath  flemished
2  Tim.  1.  8.  the  testimony  of  me  Ids  prisoner

13.  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  ij  me
2.  2.  things  that  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  commit
Heb.  10.  34.  he  had  compassion  of  me  in  my  bonds
Cn  ME,  or  upon  ME.

Gen.  18. 27.  T  have  taken  upon  me  to  speak  to  L.  .0 .
20.  9.  that  thou  hast  brought  on  me  a  great  sm
27  12. 1  shall  bring  a  curse  upon  me,  not  a  blesstnfl
13  upon  me  be  thy  curse,  my  son,  only  obey  me
31.  35.  for  the  custom  ot  women  is  upon  me

40. 14.  think  on  me  when  it  shall  be  well  with  time
Judo.  15.  12.  ye  will  not  fall  upon  me  yourselves

19.  20.  howsoever,  let  all  thy  wants  he  upon  me

1  Sam.  13. 12.  Philistines  will  come  down  upon  me
25. 24.  upon  me.  my  lord,  upon  me.  let  this  miqui  '

2  Sam.  14.  9.  the  iniquity  be  on  me,  and  father  s  nou*
1  Kings  2.  i5.  that  all  Israel  set  their  faces  on  me
1  Chron.  21. 17.  let  thy  hand,  1  pray  thee,  be  an  me

28. 19.  understand  in  writing  by  Ins  hand  upon  »
Ezra  7.  28.  hand  of  the  Lord  upon  me,  A  eh.  .  8.  ■
Neh.  5.  19.  think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good
Job  3.  25.  which  1  greatly  feared  is  com e  upon  me

4. 1 4.  fear  came  up.  me  II 6. 28.  be  content, look  up  1

7.8.  thine  eyes  are  upon  me,  and  1  am  not
10.  16.  thou  shewest  thyself  marvellous  upon  me

16.  14.  he  runneth  upon  me  like  a  giant

19.  21.  have  pity  upon  me,  O  ye  my  friends

Psal.  4. 1.  have  mercy  upon  me,  6. 2.  9-  13-

1  27.  7.  1  30. 10.  |  31.  9.  I  ol.  I-  I  80.
22.  17.  tell  my  bones,  they  look  and  stare  upon mr

32.  4.  lor  day  and  night  thy  hand  was  heavy  up.
40.  17.  I  am  poor,  yet  the  Lord  thinketb  upon
55.  3.  they  cast  iniquity  upon  me,  and  hate  me

56. 12.  thy  vows  are  upon  me,  I  will  render  pra..

91. 14.  because  he  hath  set  his  love  upon  me
15.  he  shall  call  up.  me  [I  119. 132.  look  thou  up.  >

139.  5.  and  thou  hast  laid  thine  hand  upon  me
Cant.  1 . 6.  look  not  upon  me,  sun  hath  looked  wg'
Isa.  4.3.  22.  thou  hast  not  called  upon  me, ,  U  -’***'

51.5.  the  isles  shall  wait  upon  me,  and  shall
61.  1.  Spirit  of  the  L.  God  is  upon  me,  Luke 4.  u

Jer.  13. 22.  w  herefore  come  these  things  upon  me
15.  +  16.  for  thy  name  is  called  upon  me,  C  1  0;

I. am.  .3.  53.  and  they  have  cast  a  stone  uponv e
Ezek.  3. 14.  the  hand  of  the  I  .ord  was  strong  up.
22.  was  there  up.  me  ||  8. 1.  hand  fell  there  up.  ■

11.5.  the  Spirit  of  the  I  ord  tell  upon  me,  aim  sm

33.  22.  the  hand  of  L.  was  upon  me,  37.  !  •

Zepx.  3. 8.  therefore  wait  ye  upon  me  until  me  n
Zech.  6. 8.  then  cried  he  upon  me  and  spake  un  c

11.  11.  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  g

12. 10.  they  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  P1

Mat.  15.22.  have  m+my  uponme.tbon  '

Mark  10.  47,  48.  Cuke

26. 10.  wrought  a  good  work  upon  me,  Man
Euke  1.  25.  in  the  days  wherein  he  looked  <n


M  E


M  E  A


M  E


John  6.  35.  lie  that  belie veth  on  me,  47.  |  7.  38;  1 12.

.  .  •  44.  46.  1  14.  12.

16.  0  ot  siu,  because  they  believe  not  on  me
17.01  who  shall  believe  on  me  through  their  word
Acts  8.  24.  that  none  ol  those  things  come  upon  me
Horn.  15.  3.  that  reproached  thee  tell  on  me
1  Cor  0.  16.  tor  necessity  is  laid  upon  me
;  2  Cor.  11.  28.  that  which  cometh  upon  me  dailv
12.  Q.  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  me
Phil.  2.  27.  but  God  had  mercy  on  me  also
Rev.  1.  17.  he  laid  his  right  hand  upon  me,  saving
.'See  Call.

Over  M  E.

Erod.  8.  9-  Moses  said  to  Pharaoh,  "lory  over  me
Dent.  1/.  14.  shalt  say,  1  will  set  aLing  over  me
Job  7.  12.  that  thou  settest  a  watch  over  me
Csal.  13.  2.  shall  mine  enemy  be  exalted  over  me

19.  13.  let  them  not  have  dom.  over  me,  119.  133.

25.  2.  let  not  mine  enemies  triumph  over  me

41.  11.  mine  enemy  doth  not  triumph  over  me

42.  7-  thy  waves  and  billows  are  gone  over  me
60.  +  8.  Philistia,  triumph  thou  over  me

88.  16.  thy  tierce  wrath  goeth  over  me
.'ant.  2.  4.  and  his  banner  over  me  was  love
Tonah  2.  3.  thy  billows  and  waves  passed  over  me
I  To,  or  unto  ME.

Jen.  4.  10.  thy  brother's  blood  crieth  unto  me

15.  3.  behold,  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed

20.  5.  said  he  not  u.  me  |l  21.  237  swear  u.  me  by  G,
24.  30.  saying,  thus  spake  the  man  unto  me

26.  27.  wherefore  come  ye  to  me,  seeing  ye  hate

27.  20.  because  the  1  ord  hath  brought  it  to  me

29.  25.  what  is  this  thou  hast  done  unto  me  ?

31.  9.  thus  God  hath  given  them  to  me

.32. 9.  L.  which  saidst  vnt <•  me.  return  to  thy  country
34.  11.  what  ye  shall  say  unto  me,  I  will  give,  12.
40.  14.  shew  kindness,  1'  pra.  ‘hee,  unto  me
46.  31.  ana  my  father’s  house  are  come  unto  me
■'.rod.  3.  9.  the  crv  of  child,  of  lsr.  is  come  unto  me
4.  25.  surely  a  bloody  husband  art  thou  to  me
5. 1.  may  hold  a  feast  unto  me  in  the  wilderness
6.  7.  and  I  will  take  you  to  me  for  a  people
12.  children  ot  Israel  have  not  hearkened  untome
13.  2.  sanctity  unto  me  all  the  first-born

14. 15.  wherefore  criest  thou  unto  me  ?  speak  to  Is.

18. 16.  when  they  have  a  matter,  they  come  unto  me

19.  5.  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me

fi.  ye  shall  be  unto  me  n  kingdom  of  priests
22.  23.  and  they  cry  at  all  unto  me.  1  will  hear,  27.
29.  first-born  of  thy  sons  shalt  thou  give  unto  me
31.  and  ye  shall  be  holy  men  unto  me,  nor  eat

28.  1.  that  he  may  minister  unto  me,  3.  |  29.  1. 1

30.  30. 1  40.  13.  Jer.  33.  22.  Ezek.  43  19.
32.20.  let  him  come  v.  me  ||  33.  12.  thou  sayestw.  me
34.  2.  present  thyself  there  to  me  in  the  mount
.ev.  25.  55.  for  unto  me  Israel  are  servants
)eut.  18.  15.  of  bretli.  like  u.  me.  Acts  3.  22.  1  7.  .37.

32.  35.  to  me  belongeth  vengeance  and  reccmpence
udg.  11.  7.  why  are  ye  come  unto  me  now,  when
15.  11.  as  they  did  u.  me,  so  have  1  done  to  them
*7.  10.  and  be  unto  me  a  father  and  a  priest

\uth  1.  17.  the  Lord  do  so  to  me  and  more  also,

,,  2  Sam.  3.  35.  |  19.  13.  1  Kings  2.  23.

■Sam.  9.  16.  because  their  cry  is  come  unto  me  -
lo.  3.  anoint  unto  me  him  whom  1  name  unto  thee

18.  8.  and  to  me  they  ascribed  but  thousands
Sam.  1.  20.  very  pleasant  hast  thou  been  untome
2.  23.  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not  return  to  me

lo.  4.  that  every  man  might  come  unto  me
A  mgs  2.  5.  thou  knowest  what  Joah  did  to  me

19.  2.  so  let  the  gods  do  to  me  and  more,  20.  10.

I  -2*  .14.  what  Lord  saitli  unto  me  that  will  1  speak

A  nigs  5.  7 .  send  un.  me  to  recov.  a  man  of  leprosi
8.  let  Inm  come  now  to  me  ||  6.  31.  G.  do  so  to  m
I ' *  thus  and  thus  spake  he  to  me ,  saying
a).  6.  and  come  to  me  to  .lezreel  by  to-morrow
.2.  15.  tell  man  that  sent  you  to  me,  2  Chr.  34.  23
(  '<r°n.  13.  12.  how  bring  ark  of  God  home  to  me
Lnron.  18.  1”.  he  would  not  prophesv  good  u.  m ,
■zra  7.  28.  and  hath  extended  mercy  unto  me
1.4.  then  were  assembled  unto  me  every  one  that
'  j  •  L  9.  but  it  ye  turn  un.  me  and  keep  my  com
:  >0  3.  25.  that  which  1  was  afraid  of  is  come  unto  m,
.3.  and  wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me
only  do  not  two  things  u.  me,  then  not  hid(
gave  ear  It  40-  7.  declare  u.  me,  42.  4
-  J,ln^s  a,fe  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  place;
,1-d.  D  It.  incline  thme  ear  u.  me,  31.  2.  |  102.  2
;?•  16.  turn  thee  un.  me  ||  28.  1.  be  not  silent  to  mi
■0.  11.  be  merciful  unto  me,  41.  4,  10. 1  56.  1.  |  57
,  1.  186.  3.  |  119.  58,  1.32

to.  1.  ne  inclined  un.  me  and  heard  my  cry,  77  1
’n  4'  fear  what  flesh  can  do  unto  me

1.  not  be  afraid  what  man  can  do  unto  me,  1 18.  6
,y  0*.  lsr.aeJ,’  if thou  wilt  hearken  unto  me

J5e  snail  crv  unto  me,  thou  art  my  father
>0  1  1  when  wilt  thou  come  un.  me?  I  will  wall
~y  V,  1  was  glad  when  they  said  un.  me,  let  us  gr
. ,  If.  how  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me
I,1' ,1  cry  unto  thee,  make  haste  unto  mt
whoso  hearkeneth  unto  me  shall  dwel
■  /  o'  do,so  t0  hlm  as  he  hath  done  to  me

cl;  y  15-  as  to  fool,  so  it  happeneth  even  to  me
,  *•  13:  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  bel.  un.  me,  14
'<•  i.  13.  incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me
H.  your  new  moons,  they  are  a  trouble  unto  me
11.  ne  calleth  to  me  out  ot  Seir,  watchman
*•  *’a  anu  it  shall  be  unto  me  as  Ariel
!=•  ix  return  unto  me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee
00  ook  v ■  me>  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends
£an t0-  me  e,very  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue
8.  nnne  adversary,  let  him  come  near  to  me
L  9.  tor  this  is  as  the  waters  of  Noah  unto  me
<0.  0.  come  not  near  to  me,  1  am  holier  than  thou
1 '  11  *u  .  .?u  w'!f  return,  return  O  Israel  unto  mt
a  o'-  they  shall  cry  unto  me,  I  will  not  heai
a  Vi  *f.ne  heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  lion,  9.

V  ia'ti  at  '  rnight  be  urto  me  for  a  people
ia  ?7;i.  w'as  un‘°  me  the  joy  of  mine  hearl

thou  be  altogether  unto  me  as  a  liar  ?
i°  are  all  of  them  unto  me  as  Sodom

31  •  tllls  city  hath  been  to  me  a  provocation


Jer.  .33.  9.  it  shall  be  to  me  a  name  of  joy,  a  praise

49.  4.  that  trusted, saying,  who  shall  come  unto  me
51.35.  tlie  violence  done  to  me  be  upon  Babylon
Jj/j/n.  1.  Cl.  and  they  shall  be  like  >  me

22.  and  do  to  them  as  thou  hast  done  unto  me
Ezek.  16.  20.  tin  sons  whom  thou  hast  bom  unto  me

22.  18.  the  house  ot  Israel  is  to  me  become  dross

23.  .38.  moreover  this  they  have  done  unto  me
26.  2.  aha,  she  is  broken,  she  is  turned  unto  me

44.  1.3.  to  do  the  office  of  a  priest  unto  me

15.  they  shall  come  near  to  me  to  minister  unto  me
Dan.  2.  30.  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me
4.  .36.  my  reason  returned  u.  me.  lords  sought  u.  me
tJos.  2.  19.  1  will  betroth  thee  unto  met' or  ever,  20.
23.  and  1  will  sow  tier  unto  me  in  the  earth
.3.  2.  so  I  bought  her  to  me  for  fifteen  pieces
4.  6.  reject  thee,  thou  shalt  be  no  priest  to  me
7-7-  there  is  none  among  them  that  calleth  unto  me
14.  the}-  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  hearts

8.  2.  lsr.  shall  cry  unto  me,  my  God,  we  know  thee
Amos  9.  7.  are  ye  not  as  Ethiopians  unto  me?

Mic.  5.  2.  out  of  thee  shall  come  forth  unto  me

7.8.  when  in  darkness,  L. shall  be  a  light  unto  me
Ilah.  2.  1.1  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  say  u.  me
ring.  2.  17-  I  smote  you,  yet  ye  turned  not  to  me
Zech.  1 .  3.  turn  ye  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts
7.  5.  did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me,  even  to  me  ?

Mat.  3. 14.  baptized  of  thee, and  comest  thou  to  me?
7.  22.  many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord

11.  28.  come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are
14. 18.  bring  them  to  me,  17. 17.  |  21.  2.  Mark  9. 19.
19-  14.  forbid  them  not  to  come  un.  me,  Mark  10. 14.
25^  36.  and  ye  came  u.  me  ||  40.  ye  have  done  it  u.  me

45.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  these,  ye  did  it  not  to  me
28.  18.  all  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven

Luke  1.  38.  let  it  be  unto  me  according  tothv  word
4.  6.  all  this  power,  for  that  is  delivered  urno  me
6.  47.  whoso  cometh  to  me,  and  heareth,  14.  26.

10.  22.  all  things  are  delivered  to  me  of  my  Lather
1?.  13.  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner

John  5.  40.  3’e  will  not  come  to  me  to  have  life

6.  .35.  he  that  cometh  tome  shall  never  hunger,  37.

44.  no  man  can  come  to  me  except  Lath,  draw,  65.

45.  hath  learned  of  the  Father  cometh  unto  me

7-  37 .  if  any  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink

12.  32.  it  lifted  up,  1  will  draw  all  men  unto  me

50.  even  as  the  Father  said  unto  me,  so  1  speak
19.  10.  Pilate  said,  speakest  thou  not  unto  me?

Acts  1.  8.  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me
2.  28.  hast  made  known  untome  the  ways  of  life

9.  15.  go  thy  way,  for  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  me

11.  5.  a  vessel  descend,  and  it  came  even  to  me
26.  14.  I  heard  a  voice  speaking  unto  me,  saying

liom.~ .  13.  was  that  which  is  good  made  death  u.  me  ?

12.  .3.  through  the  grace  given  un.  me,  1  Cor.  3. 10.

1  Cor.  6.  12.  all  tilings  are  lawful  unto  me,  but  all
9.  15.  that  it  should  be  so  done  unto  me

16.  woe  is  unto  me  if  1  preach  not  the  gospel

17.  dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  committed  un.me
14.  11.  and  he  shall  be  a  barbarian  unto  me

16.  9.  an  effectual  door  is  open.  un.  me,  2  Cor.  2. 12.

2  Cor.  11.  9.  for  that  which  was  lacking  to  me
(rat.  2. 6.  what  they  were,  it  maketh  no  matter  to  me
4.  15.  plucked  out  eyes,  and  have  given  them  to  me

Eph.  .3.  8.  unto  me  who  am  less  than  least  of  all  saints
Phil.  1.  21.  for  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  to  die  is  gain
3. 1.  to  me  indeed  is  not  grievous,  but  for  you  safe

7.  but  what  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  counted
Co  LA.  11.  which  have  been  a  comfort  unto  me

2  jim.  4.  8.  not  to  me  only  ||  11.  is  profitable  to  me
Philem.  11.  but  now  profitable  to  thee  and  to  me
16.  especially  to  me  H 19.  thou  owest  to  me  thyself
Heb.  10.  30.  vengeance  belongeth  unto  me,  saith  Ld.

13.  6.  1  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto  me

Toward  M  E.

Gen.  31.  5.  countenance  is  not  toward  me  -as  before
Psal.  86. 13.  for  great  is  thy  mere}’  toward  me
116. 12.  render  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me
Cant.  7.10.  I  am  my  Beloved's,  his  desire  is  tow.  me
Isa.  29.  13.  their  fear  toward  me  is  taught  by  men
63.  15.  and  the  sounding  of  thy  bowels  and  mer-

cies  toward  me

Dan.  A.  2.  that  the  high  God  hath  wrought  tow.  me
2  Cor.  7.7.  he  told  us  your  fervent  mind  toward  me
Phil.  2.  30.  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me
Under  ME.

2  Sam.  22. 37.  enlarged  my  steps  u.  me,  Psal.  18. 36.
40.  thou  hast  subdued  under  me,  Psal.  18.  39.

48.  bringeth  down  the  people  und.  me,  Ps.  18.  47.
Neh.  2.  14.  for  the  beast  that  was  tinder  me  to  pass
Psal.  144.  2.  who  subdueth  my  people  under  me
Mat.  8.  9.  having  soldiers  under  me,  Luke  7.  8.

With  ME.

Gen.  12. 13.  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  for  thy  sake
28.  20.  if  G.  will  be  w.  me  and  keep  me,  Josh.  14. 12.

30.  29.  thou  knowest  how  thy  cattle  was  with  me

31.  5.  the  God  of  my  father  hath  been  with  me
32.  discern  thou  what  is  thine  with  me,  and  take

39.  7-  and  she  said,  lie  with  me,  12, 14.  2  Sam.  13. 11.
43.  8.  send  lad  with  me  ||  44.  .34.  lad  be  not  with  me
Erod.  17.  2.  why  chide  ye  with  me,  why  tempt  Ld. ?
20.  2.3.  ye  shall  not  make  with  me  gocls  of  silver
33. 15.  if  thy  presence  go  not  with  me,  carry  us  not
Lev.  26.  t  21.  if  ye  walk  at  all  adventures  with  me
Num.  11.  15.  if  thou  deal  thus  with  me,  kill  me
Deut.  32.  34.  is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  with  me?

.39.  that  1 .  even  1 ,  am  he,  and  there  is  no  G.  w.  me
Josh.  8.  5.  1  and  all  the  people  that  are  with  me
Judy.  4.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go  with  me  then  1  will  go
7.  18.  I  and  all  that  are  with  me,  then  blow  ye
11.  12.  saving,  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  me?

16.  15.  1  love  thee,  when  thy  heart  is  not  with  me

17.  2.  behold,  the  silv.  is  with  me ||  10.  dwell  with  me
Ruth  1.  8.  as  ye  have  dealt  w.  me  ||  11.  why  go  w.  me

1  Sam.  9,.  19.  go  up,  for  ye  shall  eat  with  me  to-day
17.  9.  if  he  be  able  to  fight  with  me  and  to  kill  me

22.  23.  but  with  me  thou  shalt  be  in  safeguard
24.  18.  how  that  thou  hast  dealt  well  with  me

28.  19.  to-morrow  shalt  thou  and  thy  sons  be  w.  me

2  Sam.  19.  25.  wherefore  wentest  not  thou  with  me  ?
.33.  1  will  feed  thee  with  me  in  Jerusalem

23.  5.  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant


1  Chr.  4.  10.  that  thine  hand  might  be  with  me

2  C hr.  2. 3.  even  so  deal  to.  me  |i  7 .  are  w.  me  in  J  udan
ho.  21.  from  meddling  with  God,  who  is  with  me

Job  9.  35.  and  not  fear,  but  it  is  not  so  with  me
2.3.  t  10.  but  tie  knoweth  the  way  that  is  with  me

28.  14.  and  the  sea  Saith,  it  is  not  with  me

29.  _5.  when  the  Almighty  was  yet  with  me

*  *»•  7  A.  that  was  at  peace  w.  me  II  23.  thou  art  iv,me
42.  8.  in  the  night  li is  song  shall  he  with  me
50.  5.  those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me
Ml.  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  are  with  me
55.  18.  lie  delivered,  for  there  were  many  with  me
101.  6.  the  faithful,  that  they  may  dwell  with  me
119.  98.  thy  commands,  for  they  are  ever  with  me
l  rov.  8.  18.  riches  and  hon.  are  w.  me,  yea,  durable
<  ’ant.  A.  8.  come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my  spouse
Ea.  2| .  5.  and  he  shall  make  peace  with  me
50.  8.  who  will  contend  with  me,  let  us  stand
63.  .3.  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me
Jer.  20.  11.  the  Lord  is  with  me  as  a  mighty  one
2b.  14.  do  with  me  as  seeineth  good  and  meet  to  you
Dun.  10.  21.  none  hohleth  with  me  but  Michael
//<«.  2.  7 •  for  then  it  was  better  with  me  than  now
Joel ’3.  4.  yea,  and  what  have  ye  to  do  with  me?
Mai.  2.  6.  he  walked  with  me  in  peace  and  equity
Mat.  12.  30.  he  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me,  he
r  that  gathereth  not  with  me,  Luke  11.  23.
18.  A).  Lord,  have  patience  with  me,  1  will  pay,  29.
^  .  st  not  thou  ctgree  with  7ite  for  h  penny  ?
38.  said,  tarry  ye  here,  and  watch  with  mey  40.
L.uke  11.7*  and  my  children  are  with  me  in  bed
15.  6.  saying,  rejoice  with  me,  9.  Phil.  2.  18.

31.  son,  thou  art  ever  with  me  ||22. 21.  with  me  on

22.  28.  ye  are  they  whicli  have  continued  with  me
~:3.  43.  to  day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise

John  8.  29.  he  that  sent  me  is  with  me,  the  Father
13.  8.  if  1  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  nopartzwr/i  me
18.  he  that  eateth  bread  with  me  hath  lifted  up

15.  27.  have  been  with  me  from  the  beginning

16.  .32.  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  with  me
1*.  24.  that  they  also  be  with  me  where  1  am

Acts  9.0.  34.  ministered  to  them  that  were  with  me
22.  9.  they  that  were  with  me  saw  the  light,  11.
Rom.  7. 21. 1  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  me
15.  30.  strive  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  God

1  Cur.  4.  3.  but  with  me  it  is  a  very  small  thing

15.  10.  but  the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  me

16.  4.  if  it  be  meet  that  1  go,  they  shall  go  with  me

2  Cor.  1.  17.  that  with  me  there  should  be  yea,  yea
Phil.  1. 1  7.  ye  are  all  partakers  with  me  of  grace
2.  22.  he  hath  served  with  me  in  the  gospel

23.  so  soon  as  1  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with  me
4.  3.  women,  who  laboured  with  me  in  the  gospel
15.  no  church  communicated  with  me  but  ye  only

2  Tim.  A.  11.  only  Lukeisza.wie  H  16.  nonestood  w.m.

17.  the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened  me
Philem.  13.  whom  1  would  have  retained  with  me
Rev.  3.  4.  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  white,  for  they

20.  will  come  and  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  rne

21.  will  1  grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne

22. 12.  I  come  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me
Within  ME.

Job  6.  4.  the  arrow:sof  the  Almighty  are  within  me
19.  27.  though  my  reins  be  consumed  within  me
.32.  18.  the  spirit  within  me  constraineth  me
Psal.  39.  3.  heart  was  hot  within  me,  while  musing
42.  6.  ()  my  God,  my  soul  is  cast  down  within  me
11.  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  A3.  5.

51.  10.  O  God,  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me
94.  19.  in  the  multitude  of  my  thoughts  within  me
103. 1.  and  all  that  is  within  me  bless  his  holy  name
142.  3.  spirit  was  overwhelmed  within  me,  143.  4.
Isa.  26.  9.  w  ith  my  spirit  within  me  will  1  seek  thee
Jer.  23.  9.  my  heart  within  me  is  broken  because  of
Lam.  1. 20.  my  heart  is  turned  within  me,  llus.  11,8.
Jonah  2.  7-  when  my  soul  fainted  within  me
Without  M  E.

Isa.  10.  4.  without  me  they  shall  bow  down  under
John  15.  5.  for  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing
MEADOW,

Gen.  41. 2.  came  out  of  a  river,  and  they  fed  in  a  m.
MEADOWS.

Judg.  20. 33.  came  even  out  of  the  m.  of  Gibeah
MEALTIME.

Ruth  2. 14.  at  m.-time.  come  thou  hither  and  eat
MEAL.

Num.  5. 15.  the  tenth  part  of  an  epbah  of  barley  m.

2  Kings  4.  41.  bring  m.  and  cast  it  into  the  pot

1  Chron.  12.  40.  they  that  were  nigh  brought  m.

Isa.  47. 2.  take  the  millstones,  and  grind  m.  uncover
IIos.  8.  7*  it  ha.th  no  stalk,  the  bud  shall  yield  no  m.

See  Barrel,  Measures.

MEAN  ,  Verb.

Gen.  21.  29:  what  m.  these  seven  ewe-lambs  ?

Erod.  12.  26.  what  m.  ye  by  this  service  ?

Deut.  6. 20.  thy  son  asketh  what  m.  the  testimonies  ?
Josh.  4.  6.  ask,  what  m.  ye  by  these  stones?  21.

Isa.  3.  15.  what  m.  ye  that  ye  beat  my  people  ?

Ezek.  17.  12.  know  ye  not  what  these  things  m.

18.  2.  what  m.  ye,  that  ye  use  this  proverb  ?

Mark  9.  10.  what  the  rising  from  the  dead  should  » ••
Acts  10. 17.  doubted  what  this  vision  should  m.

17.  20.  we  would  know  what  these  things  m.

21.  1.3.  what  m.  ye  to  weep  and  break  my  heart

2  Cor.  8.  13.  I  rn.  not  that  other  men  be  eased

MEAN,  Adjective.

Prov.  22.  29.  he  shall  not  stand  before  m.  men
Isa.  2.  9.  tlu  m.  man  boweth  down,  the  great  man
5.  15.  and  toe  m.  man  shall  be  brought  down
31.  8.  the  sword  not  of  a  m.  man  shall  devour
Acts  21. 39.  who  am  a  citizen  of  no  m.  city
Rom.  12.  +  16.  but  condescend  to  m.  things
MEAN  time.

Luke  12. 1.  m.  time  when  were  gathered  a  multitude
MEAN  while.

1  Kings  18.  45.  m.  while  the  heaven  was  black  with
John  4.  .31.  in  the  m.  while  his  disciples  prayed  him
Rom.  2. 15.  their  thoughts  the  m.  while  accusing
MEANS.

Erod.  34.  7.  will  by  no  m.  clear  guilty,  Num.  14.  18
Judg.  5.  22.  broken  by  the  m.  of  the  prancings
16.  5.  by  what  m,  we  may  Drevail  against  him

m  2  307


M  E  A


M  E  A


M  E  D


1  Sam.  1 4. 14.  yet  doth  he  devise  rn.  that  his  banished
1  Kings  20. 39.  if  by  any  m.  he  be  missing,  then
Esra  4.  16.  by  this m.  thou  slialt  have  no  portion
Psal.  49.  7-  none  can  by  any  in.  redeem  his  brother
Prov.  6.  26.  for  by  m.  of  a  whorish  woman  a  man
Jer.  5.  31.  and  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  m.

Mai.  1.  9.  this  hath,  been  by  your  rn.

Mat.  5.  26.  thou  shalt  by  no  m.  come  out  thence
Luke  5.  18.  they  sought  m.  to  bring  him  in

10.  19-  and  nothing  shall  by  any  m.  hurt  you
John  9.  21.  by  what  m.  he  now  seeth  we  know  not
Acts  4.  9.  if  be  examined  by  what  m.  he  is  whole

18.  21.  1  must  by  all  m.  keep  this  feast  in  Jerusalem
27.12.  if  by  any  m.  they  might  attain  to  Phenice
Rom.  1.  10.  if  by  any  m.  I  might  have  o  journey

11.  14.  by  anv  m.  I  may  provoke  to  emulation

1  Cor.  8.  9.  take  heed,  lest  by  any  m.  this  liberty

9.  22.  that  1  might  by  all  m.  save  some

27.  lest  by  anv  m.  when  l  have  preached  to  others

2  Cor.  1.  11.  by  in.  of  many,  thanks  may  be  given
4.  +  8.  vet  not  altogether  without  m.

11.3.  I' fear,  lest  by  any  m.  as  the  serpent
Gal.  2.  2.  lest  by  any  m.  1  should  run  in  vain
Phil.  3.  11.  if  by  any  m.  1  attain  to  the  resurrection

1  Thess.  3.5.  lest  by  some  m.  the  tempter  tempted

2  Thess.  2.  3.  let  no  man  deceive  you  by  any  m.

3.  16.  G.  of  peace  give  you  peace  always  by  all  m.

Heb.  9.  15.  that  by  m.  of  death  they  who  are  called
Rev.  13.  14.  deceiveth  them  by  m.  of  those  miracles
MEAN  ES  1’.

Gen.  83.  8.  what  m.  thou  by  all  this  drove  T  met  ?

2  Sam.  16.  2.  what  m.  thou  by  these ?  Ezek.  37.  18.
Jonah  1.6.  whatwi.  thou,  O  sleeper,  arise, call  on  G.
MEAN'ETH.

Deut.  29.  24.  what  m.  the  heat  of  this  great  anger  t
1  Sam.  4.  6.  what  m.  the  noise  of  this  shout?  14.

15.  14.  what  m.  then  this  bleating  of  the  sheep  ?
Isa.  10.  7.  howbeit  lie  m.  not  so,  nor  doth  think  so
Mat.  9.  13.  but  go  ye,  and  learn  what  that  m.

12.  7.  but  if  ye  had  known  what  this  m.

Acts  2.  12.  saying  one  to  another,  what  m.  this  ?
MEAN  ING.

Dan.  8.  15.  when  I  Daniel  had  sought  for  the  rn.

1  Cor.  14.  11.  if  I  know  not  the  m.  of  the  voice
MEANING.

Acts  27.  2.  we  launched,  m.  to  sail  by  coasts  of  Asia
MEANT.

Gen.  50.  20.  but  God  m.  it  to  good,  to  bring  to  pass
Luke  15.  26.  and  asked  what  these  things  rn.

18.  36.  hearing  multitude  pass  by,  asked  what  it  m.
MEASURE

Signifies,  [1]  Some  certain  vessel  fixed  and  agreed
upon,  whereby  to  estimate  the  quantity  or  capacity
of  things,  Prov.  20.  10.  Mic.  6.  10.  [2]  The
height,  breadth,  and  length  of  the  thing  measured,
Ezek.  40.  10.  [3]  A  stinted  portion  or  allowance,
Ezek.  4.  11.  [4]  The  period  or  end  of  one's  life,
Psal.  39.  4.  [5]  Moderation,  Jer.  30.  11.1  46.  28.
[6]  Limit,  or  boundary,  Jer.  51 .  13.  [7]  A  certain
proportion,  resemblance,  or  degree,  Eph.  4.  1.3.
[8]  To  take  the  dimensions  of  land,  cities,  build¬
ings,  &c.  Num.  35.  5.  Ezek.  40.  5.  [9]  To  repay,
or  reward,  Isa.  65.  7*

Exod.  26.  2.  the  curtains  shall  have  one  m.  8.

Lev.  19.  35.  ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  m.
Deut.  25.15.  and  a  just  m.  shalt  thou  have

1  Kings  6.  25.  cubits  one  m.  ||  7-  37-  bases  had  one  m.

2  Kings  j.  1  a»2.of  fine  flour  sold  forashek.  16, 18.

1  Chr.  11.  t  23.  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  man  of  m.
Neh.  3.  +  11.  Malchijah  repaired  the  second  m.

Job  11.  9.  the  m.  thereofis  longer  than  the  earth

28.  25.  and  he  weigheth  the  waters  by  m.

Psal.  39.  4.  make  me  to  know  the  m.  of  my  days

80.  5.  thou  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  m.
Isa.  5.  14.  hell  opened  her  mouth  without  m.

27.  8.  in  m.  when  it  shooteth  forth,  wilt  debate
40. 12.  comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  m.
Jer.  30.  11.  but  l  will  correct  thee  in  m.  46.  28.

51.  13.  the  end  is  come,  and  rn.  of  thy  covetousness
Ezek.  4.  11.  thou  shalt  drink  water  by  m.  16.

Mic.  6.  10.  and  scant  m.  that  is  abominable
Mat.  7.  2.  with  what  m.  you  mete,  it  shall  be
measured  to  you  again,  Mark  4.14.  Luke  6.  38.
23.  32.  fill  ye  up  then  the  rn.  of  your  fathers
Mark  6.  51.  and  they  were  amazed  beyond  m.

7.  37.  and  were  beyond  m.  astonished,  10.  26.
Luke  6.  38.  good  rn.  pressed  down  and  shaken
John  3.  34.  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  m.

Rom.  12.  3.  as  God  dealt  to  every  man  the  m.

2  Cor.  1.  8.  that  were  pressed  out  of  rn.

10.  13.  we  will  not  boast  of  things  without  our  m.

but  according  to  the  m.  of  the  rule,  14, 15.

11.  23.  in  stripes  above  m.  in  prisons  frequent

12.7.  and  lest  I  should  be  exalted  above  m.

Gal.  1. 13.  beyond  in.  I  persecuted  the  church
Eph.  4.  7.  according  to  the  m.  of  the  gift  of  Christ

13.  to  the  m.  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ

16.  the  effectual  working  in  the  m.  of  every  part
Rev.  6.  6.  a  voice  saying,  a  m.  of  wheat  for  a  penny
21.17-  according  to  the  m.  of  a  man,  that  is
MEASURE,  Verb.

Num.  35.  5.  ye  shall  rn.  from  without  the  city
Deut.  21.  2.  they  shall  m.  to  their  cities  round  about
Isa.  65.7.  I  will m.  their  former  work  into  bosom
Ezek.  43.  10.  and  let  them  m.  the  pattern
Zech.  2.  2.  a  measuring-line  to  rn.  Jerusalem
Rev.  11.  1.  rise  and  m.  the  temple  of  God
2.  the  court  without  leave  out  and  m.  not
21.  15.  he  had  a  golden  reed  to  m.  the  city
MEASURED.

Ruth.  3.  15.  hem.  six  measures  of  barley
2  Sam.  8.  2.  m.  with  a  line,  with  two  lines  m.  he
1  Kings  17.  t  21.  he  m.  himself  on  the  child
Job  7.  t  4.  I  say,  when  shall  the  evening  be  m.  ?
Isa.  40.  12.  who  m.  waters  in  hollow  of  his  hand  ?
Jer.  31.  37.  if  heaven  above  can  be  m.

33.  22.  as  the  sand  of  the  sea  cannot  be  rn.

Ezek.  40.  5.  he  m.  the  breadth  of  the  building
6.  m.  the  threshold  118.  he  m.  also  the  porch,  9.
11.  hem.  the  entry  ]|  13.  m.  the  gate  ||  24.  posts
41.  5.  m.  the  wall  (1  13.  he  m.  the  house
15.  he  m.  the  length  of  the  building

308


Ezek.  42.  16.  he  m.  east  side  with  a  measuring  reed

17.  he  m.  north  side  ||  18.  south  1|  19.  west  side

47.  3.  and  he  m.  a  thousand  cubits,  4.

IIos.  1.10.  shall  be  as  sand  of  sea  which  cannot  be  m.
Hah.  3.6.  he  stood  and  m.  the  earth,  he  beheld
Mar.  7. 2.  with  what  measure  you  mete  itshall  hew.

to  you  again,  Mark  4.  24.  Luke  6.  38.
Rev.  21. 16.  he  m.  the  city  ||  17.  he  m.  the  wall
MEASURES.

Gen.  18.  6.  make  ready  three  m.  of  fine  meal
Deut.  25.  14.  thou  shalt  not  have  divers  rn.

1  Sam.  25. 18.  Abigail  took  five  m.  of  parched  corn
1  Kings  4.  22.  Solomon’s  provision  for  one  day  was
thirty  m.  of  flour,  and  sixty  m.  ot  meal
5. 11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  thousand  rn.  of
wheat,  and  twenty  m.  of  pure  oil,  2  Chron.  2. 10.

7.  9.  according  to  the  m.  of  hewed  stones,  11.

18.  32.  as  great  as  would  contain  two  m.  ot  seed

1  Chron.  23.  29.  for  all  manner  of  m.  and  sizes
Ezra  7.  22.  it  be  done  to  an  hundred  m.  of  wheat
Job  38.  5.  who  hath  laid  the  m.  thereof,  if  knowest ;
Prov.  20. 10.  divers  m.  are  like  abomination  to  Lord
Jer.  13.  25.  this  is  the  portion  of  thy  m.

Ezek.  40.  24.  the  arches  according  to  these  m.  29.

28.  he  measured  gate  according  to  these  m.  32.

43.  13.  and  these  are  the  m.  of  the  altar

48.  16.  these  are  the  m.  of  the  profane  place
Hag.  2.  16.  to  an  heap  of  20  m.  there  were  but  ten
Mat.  13.  33.  hid  in  three  m.  of  meal,  Luke  1.3.  21.
Luke  16.  6.  and  he  said,  an  hundred  m.  of  oil

7.  how  much  owest  ?  he  said,  an  hund.  m.  of  wheat
See  Barley.

MEASURING.

Jer.  31.  39.  the  m.  line  shall  yet  go  forth  on  Gareb
Ezek.  40.  3.  there  was  a  man  with  a  m.  reed,  5.

42.  15.  now  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  rn.

16.  he  measured  with  a  m.  reed,  17,  18,  19.

Zech.  2.  1.  a  man  with  a  rn.  line  in  his  hand

2  Cor.  10.  12.  they  m.  themselves  by  themselves

MEAT

Signifies,  [1]  Provisions  of  any  sort  for  bodily
nourishment,  Luke  24.  41.  [2]  Jesus  Christ  cru¬
cified,  who,  being  applied  by  faith,  is  the  true
and  real  food  which  nourisheth  the  soul  to  eternal
life,  John  6.  55.  [3]  Spiritual  comfort,  that  is
sweeter,  more  pleasant  and  delightful,  than  food,
John  4.  32,  34.  [4]  The  table  whereon  meat  is

set,  Luke  22.  27.  [5]  The  product  and  fruits  of
the  field  which  should  be  for  food,  Joel  1.  16.
Hab.  3.  17.  [6]  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  or

mysteries  of  religion,  Heb.  5. 14.  [7]  Ceremonial
ordinances,  Heb.  13.  9.

Gen.  1.  29.  to  you  it  shall  be  for  m.

30.  to  every  beast  1  have  given  every  herb  for  m.

9.  3.  every  moving  thing  shall  be  m.  for  you

27.  4.  make  me  savoury  m.  such  as  I  love,  7- .

31.  Esau  also  made  savoury  m.  and  brought  it
45.  23.  bread  and  m.  for  his  father  by  the  way
Lev.  11.  34.  of  all  m.  which  may  be  eaten,  that

22. 11.  that  is  born  in  his  house,  shall  eat  of  his  m.
13.  she  shall  eat  of  her  father’s  rn.

25. 6.  the  sabbath  of  the  land  shall  be  m.  for  you,  7.
Deut.  2.  6.  ye  shall  buy  in.  of  them  for  money

28.  thou  shalt  sell  me  m.  for  money  to  eat
20.  20.  thou  shalt  destroy  trees  not  for  m.

28.  +  30.  and  shalt  not  use  it  as  a  common  m.

Judy.  1.  7.  kinss  gathered  their  m.  under  my  table

14. 14.  out  of  the  eater  came  forth  m.  and  out  ot

1  Sam.  20.  5.  not  fail  to  sit  with  the  king  at  rn.

34.  Jonathan  did  eat  no  m.  the  second  day

2  Sam.  3. 35.  the  people  came  to  cause  Dav.  to  eat  rn.

1 1.8.  there  followed  him  a  mess  of  rn.  from  the  king

12.  3.  it  did  eat  of  his  own  m.and  drank  of  his  cup

13.  5.  let  Tamar  dress  the  m.  in  my  sight

1  Kings  10.  5.  she  saw  the  m.  of  his  table,  2  Chr.  9.  4.

19.  8'.  he  went  in  strength  of  that  m.  forty  days
1  Chron.  12.  40  they  that  were  nigh  brought  rn.
Ezra  3.  7.  they  gave  m.  and  drink  to  them  of  Zidon
Job  3.  +  24.  for  my  sighing  cometh  before  my  m.

6.  7.  things  my  soul  refused,  are  as  my  sorrowful  rn.
12.  11.  doth  not  the  mouth  taste  his  m.  ?

20.  14.  yet  his  m.  in  his  bowels  is  turned

21.  there  shall  none  of  his  m.  be  left

30.  4.  who  cut  juniper  roots  for  their  m.

33.  20.  and  his  soul  abhorreth  dainty  m.

34.  3.  the  ear  trieth  words,  as  the  mouth  tasteth  m.
36.  31.  he  giveth  m.  in  abundance

38.  41.  cry  to  God,  they  wander  for  lack  of  m.

Psal.  42.  3.  my  tears  have  been  my  m.  day  and  night
44.  11.  thou  hast  given  us  like  sheep  for  m.

59.  15.  let  them  wander  up  and  down  for  rn.

69.  21.  they  gave  me  also  gall  for  my  m.

74.  14.  thou  gavest  him  to  be  rn.  to  the  people
78.  18.  tempted  God  by  asking  m.  for  their  lust
25.  he  sent  them  m.  to  the  full
30.  but  while  their  m.  was  yet  in  their  mouths
104.  21.  the  young  lions  seek  their  rn.  from  God
27.  thou  mayest  give  them  their  m.  in  due  season
107.  18.  their  soul  abhorreth  all  manner  of  m.
111.5.  he  hath  given  m.  to  them  that  fear  him
145.  15.  thou  givest  them  m.  in  due  season
Prov.  6.  8.  the  ant  provideth  her  m.  in  the  summer
23.  3.  his  dainties,  for  they  are  deceitful  m.

30.  22.  and  a  fool  when  he  is  filled  with  m.

25.  yet  they  prepare  their  m.  in  the  summer

31.  15.  she  riseth  and  giveth  rn.  to  her  household
Isa.  9.  +  5.  this  shall  be  with  burning  and  rn.  of  fire

62. 8.  no  more  give  thv  corn  lo  be  m.  for  enemies
65.  25.  and  dust  shall  be  the  serpent’s  rn.

[.am.  1.11.  have  given  their  pleasant  things  for  m.

19.  mine  elders  died  while  they  sought  their  m.

4.  10.  sodden  their  children,  they  were  their  m.
Ezek.  4.  10.  and  thy  m.  shall  be  by  weight
16. 19.  my  m.  which  1  gave  thee,  thou  hast  set  it
25.  +7.  1  will  deliver  thee  for  m.  to  the  heathen

29.  5.  I  have  given  thee  for  m.  to  beasts,  34.  5,  8.
34.  10.  that  they  may  not  be  m.  for  them

47.  12.  on  bank  shall  grow  trees  for  m.  fruit  for  m.
Dan.  1.8.  would  not  defile  himself  with  the  king’s  m.

10.  king  who  hath  appointed  your  rn.  and  drink
4.  12.  the  fruit  much,  and  in  it  was  m.  for  all,  21.

11.  26.  they  that  feed  of  his  m.  shall  destroy  him


Hos.  11.4.  and  1  laid  m.  unto  them
Joel  1 .  16.  is  not  the  m.  cut  off  before  our  eyes
Hab.  1.  16.  because  their  portion  is  fat,  m.  plenteous  !
3.  17.  although  the  fields  shall  yield  no  rn.  the  flock  :
Dag.  2.  12.  if  one  do  touch  any  m.  shall  it  be  holy  |
Mai.  1.  12.  in  that  ye  say,  his  in.  is  contemptible
3.  10.  bring  all  the  tithes,  that  there  may  be  m.
Mat.  3.  4.  and  his  m.  was  locusts  and  wild  honey
6.  25.  is  not  the  life  more  than  m.  ?  luke  12.  23.

9. 10.  as  Jesus  sat  at  m.  in  the  house,  26. 7-  Mark".  ,

15.  I  14.  3.  116.  14.  Luke  24.  30.  |
10.  10.  for  the  workman  is  worthy  of  his  m.

14.  9.  for  them  which  sat  with  him  at  rn.

15.  37.  and  they  took  up  of  the  broken  m.  Mark  8.8.  I

24.  45.  to  give  them  rn.  in  due  season,  Luke  12. 42.  f

25.  35.  1  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  in.

42.  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  m,

Luke  3.  11.  he  that  hath  m.  let  him  do  likewise

8.  55.  and  he  commanded  to  give  herpn.

9. 13.  except  weshould  go  and  buy  rn.  for  this  peop.  ,

14. 10.  worship  in  presence  of  them  that  sit  at  m.
17.  7.  will  say  to  his  servant,  sit  down  to  m.

22.  27.  whether  greater,  he  that  sitteth  at  m
24.  41.  he  said,  have  ye  here  any  rn.  ?  John  21. 5.
John  4.  8.  the  disciples  were  gone  to  buy  rn.

32.  I  have  m.  to  eat  that  ve  know  hot  of
34.  my  m.  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me
6.  27.  labour  not  for  the  m.  which  perisheth,  hut
for  that  m.  which  enduretb  to  everlasting  life
55.  for  my  flesh  is  m.  indeed,  my  blood  is  drink
Acts  2.  46.  they  did  eat  their  m.  with  gladness

9.  19.  when  he  had  received  m.  be  was  strengthened

16.  34.  the  jailor  set  m.  before  them  and  rejoiced

27.  33.  Paul  besought  them  all  to  take  m.  31.

36.  were  of  good  cheer,  and  they  also  took  some  rn.

Rom.  14.  15.  if  thy  brother  be  grieved  with  thy  m.
destroy  not  him  with  thy  m.  for  whom  Christ  died
17.  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  m.  and  drink
20.  for  rn.  destroy  not  the  work  of  G Ad

1  Cor.  3.  2. 1  have  fed  you  with  milk,  and  not  with  m.
8.  8.  but  m.  commendeth  us  not  to  God

10.  if  any  man  see  thee  sit  at  m.  in  idol’s  temple

13.  if  m.  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no

10.  3.  and  did  eat  the  same  spiritual  m.

Col.  2.  16.  let  no  man  judge  you  in  m.  or  drink
Heb.  5. 12.  such  as  have  need  of  milk,  not  of  strong  rn.

14.  but  strong  m.  belongeth  to  them  ot  full  age

12.  16.  who  for  one  morsel  of  m.  sold  his  birth  right

See  Fowls.

M  EAT  offering.

Exod.  29.  41 .  according  to  m.  offering  of  the  morning
30.  9.  shall  offer  no  m.  offering  on  altar  of  incense
40.  29.  on  altar  of  burnt  offering  offered  m.  offering
Lev.  2.  1.  when  any  will  offer  a  rn.  off.  4,  5,  7,  14.
3.  remnant  of  m.  off.  shall  be  Aaron’s,  10.  I  5. 13.

6.  14.  this  is  the  law  of  the  m.  offering,  7-  37.

14.  10.  three  tenth  deals  of  flour  for  a  m.  offering
Num.  4.  16.  to  Eleazar  pertaineth  daily  m.  offering

7.  13.  mingled  with  oil  tor  rn.  off.  19. 1  28.  12,  13.  ;

15.  6.  for  m.  off.  two  tenth  deals  of  flour,  28.  9, 12.

28.  8.  as  the  m.  offering  of  the  morning,  offer  it
26.  when  ye  bring  a  new  m.  offering  to  the  I.ordj

29.  6.  besides  his  m.  off.  and  burnt  off.  22,  25.  34.
Josh.  22.  23.  if  altar  to  offer  rn.  offering  save  ns  not
Judg.  6.  +  18.  depart  not,  till  I  bring  my  m.  offering

13.  19.  Manoah  took  a  kid  with  a  rn.  offering
23.  not  have  received  a  rn.  offering  at  our  hands

2  Kings  3.  20.  when  the  rn.  off.  was  offered,  behold,
1  Chr.  21.  23.  wheat  for  the  rn.  offering  I  give  it  all
Neh.  10.  33.  for  continual  m.  off.  and  burnt  offer.
Isa.  57.  6.  to  them  hast  thou  offered  a  m.  offering
Ezek.  42.  13.  there  shall  they  lay  the  m.  offering

44.  29.  they  shall  eat  the  rn.  offering  and  sin  offer.

45.  17.  he  shall  prepare  the  rn.  offering,  24.

25.  shall  do  the  like  according  to  the  rn.  offering

46.  5.  tbe  m.  offering  shall  be  an  ephah  for  a  ram
7.  a  m.  offering  and  an  ephah  for  a  bullock,  11.

15.  thus  shall  they  prepare  the  rn.  offering  and  oil
Joel  1.  9.  the  m.  off.  and  the  drink  off.  is  cut  oft

13.  the  rn.  offering  and  drink  offer,  is  withholden
2. 14.  leave  a  blessing,  even  a  rn.  off.  to  our  God
MEA  T  offerings.

Num.  29. 39.  these  ye  shall  do  for  your  rn.  offerings
Josh.  22.  29.  turn  to  build  an  altar  for  m.  offerings
1  Kings  8.  64.  there  Solomon  offered  rn.  off.  altar
was  too  little  to  receive  rn.  offerings,  2  Chr.  7-  7-
Ezra  7.  17.  buy  speedily  lambs  with  their  m,  ofier.:,
Neh.  13.  5.  chamber,  where  they  laid  their  m.  off.
Jer.  17.  26.  come  from  Judah  to  bring  rn.  offerings:
33. 18.  Levites  not  want  a  man  to  kindle  m.  offer.
Ezek.  45. 17.  be  the  prince’s  part  to  give  rn.  offer.  1
Amos 5.  22.  tho’  ye  offer  m.  off.  I  will  not  accept  you
MEATS.

Prov.  23.  6.  neither  desire  thou  hisdaintv  m.

Mark  7.  19.  into  the  draught,  purging  all  rrt.

Acts  15.  29.  abstain  from  rn.  offered  to  idols
Rom.  14. +  23.  that  putteth  a  difference  in  rn.

1  Cor.  6.  13.  rn.  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for  m.

1  Tim.  4.  3.  to  abstain  from  m.  God  hath  created
Ileb.  9.  10.  which  stood  only  in  m.  and  drinks
13  9.  the  heart  be  established  with  grace,  not  m.
MEDDLE.


Deut.  2.  5.  rn.  not  with  them  of  mount  Seir
19.  m.  not  with  the  children  of  Ammon
2  Kings  14.  10.  why  m.  to  thy  hurt?  2  Chr.  25. 19-
Prov.  20.  19.  m.  not  with  him  that  flattereth
°4  21.  m.  not  with  them  that  are  given  to  change
MEDDLED.

Prov.  17. 14.  leave  off  contention  before  it  be  m.  with
MEDDLETII.

Prov.  26. 17.  that  m.  with  strife  not  belonging  to  nins
MEDDLING.  .

2  Chron.  35.  21.  forbear  thee  from  m.  with  God
Prov.  20.  3.  but  every  fool  will  be  rn.

MEDIATOR  J

Signifies,  A  person  that  manages,  or  transacts,  oe
tween  two  contending  parties,  in  order  to  reconcile
them,  Gal.  3.  20.  And  is  applied,  [1]  to  JeiU
Christ,  who  is  the  only  peace- maker  and mtercesso.
between  God  and  men,  1  1  ini.  2.  5.  [2]  To  Most'
who  came  between  the  Lord  and  his  people-  to  ae
clare  unto  them  his  word.  Deut.  5.  5.  Gal.  i •


M  E  E


M  E  N


Jal.3. 10.  was  ordained  by  angels  in  (he  hand  of  m.

20.  a  m.  is  not  a  m.  of  one,  but  God  is  one
.  Tim.  2.  5.  but  one  m.  between  God  and  men,  Jesus
lleb.  8.  6.  he  is  the  m.  of  a  better  covenant
0.  ];>.  for  this  cause  he  is  m.  of  the  new  testament

12.  24.  and  to  Jesus  the  rn.  of  the  new  covenant
MEDICIN  11.

Prov.  3.  t  8.  it  shall  be  m.  to  thy  navel  and  marrow

17.  22.  a merrv  heart  dqeth  good  like  a  m.

20.  t  30.  the  blueness  of  a  wound  is  a  purging  m
Ezek.  47.  12.  the  leaf  thereof  shall  be  for  m.

MEDICI  NES.

Ter.  30. 13.  thou  hast  no  healing  m.

46.  11.  in  vain  shalt  thou  use  many  m.  not  be  cured
MEDITATE.

■'Jen.  24.  63.  Isaac  went  out  to m.  in  the  field
Tosh.  1.  8.  thou  shait  m.  therein  day  and  night
Tudg.  5.  t  10.  m,  ye  that  ride  on  white  asses
Psal.  1.  2.  in  his  law  doth  he  m.  day  and  night
2.  t  l.and  why  do  the  people  m.  a  vain  thing?

63.  6.  and  m.  on  thee  m  the  night  watches

77.12.  L  will  m.  also  of  all  thy  work
119-  15.  I  will  m.  in  thy  precepts,  78.

23.  did  m.  in  thy  statutes  ||  48.  1  will  m.  in  statutes

148.  night-watches,  that  1  might  m.  in  thy  word
143.  5.  I  m.  on  all  thy  works,  I  muse  on  the  work
Tsa.  33. 18.  thine  heart  shall  m.  terror,  where  scribe
LnkeQ  1.  14.  not  to  m.  before,  what  ye  shall  answer

Tim.  4.  15.  m.  upon  these  things,  give  thyself
MEDVI’ATIOS.

Sam.  1.  + 16.  out  of  the  abundance  of  my  m.

Psal.  5.  1 .  give  ear  to  my  words,  consider  my  m,
19- 14.  let  the  m.  of  my  heart  be  acceptable

49. 3.  the  m.  of  my  heart  shall  be  of  understanding
90.  +  9.  we  spend  our  years  as  a  m.

104.  34.  my  m,  of  him  ihall  be  sweet,  be  glad  in  Ld.
119.  97-  1  love  thy  law,  it  is  my  m.  all  the  day
99.  than  teachers,  for  thy  testimonies  are  my  m.
MEEK.

\um.  12.3.  now  the  man  Moses  was  very  m.

Psal.  22.  26.  the  m.  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied

25.  9.  the  m.  will  he  guide  in  judgment

37. 11-  but  the  m.  shall  inherit  the" earth

69.  t  32.  the  m.  shall  see  this  and  be  glad

76.  9.  God  arose  to  save  all  the  m.  of  the  earth

147.  6.  the  Lord  lifteth  up  the  m,  he  casteth  down

149.  4.  he  will  beautify  the  m.  with  salvation
Tsa.  11.4.  reprove  with  equity,  for  the  m.  of  earth
29. 19.  the  rn.  shall  increase  their  joy  in  the  Lord
61.  1.  anointed  to  preach  good  tidings  to  the  m.
hnos  2.  7*  that  turn  aside  the  way  of  the  m.

ieph.  2.  3.  seek  ye  the  l.ord,  all  ye  m.  of  the  earth
Mat.  5.  5.  blessed  are  the  m.  11.  29.  for  I  am  m ,

21.  5.  behold,  thy  king  cometh  to  thee  m .

Pet.  3.  4.  the  ornament  of  a  m.  and  quiet  spirit
MEEKNESS

'ignifies,  [1]  A  temper  of  mind  that  is  not  easily
provoked,  and  suffers  injuries  without  desire  of
revenge,  and  quietly  submits  to  the  will  of  God,
Col.  3.  12.  [2]  A  humble  submissive  frame  of
spirit,  ready  to  receive  and  entertain  the  truths  of
God ,  Jam.  1.  21.

°sal.  18.  +  35.  with  thy  m.  thou  hast  multiplied  me

45.4.  ride  prosperously,  because  of  truth  and  m.
'.eph.  2.  3.  seek  righteousness,  seek  m.  shall  be  hid

Cor.  4.  21.  shall  l  come  in  the  spirit  of  m.  ?

Cor.  10. 1.  I  beseech  you  by  the  m.  of  Christ
lal.  5.  23.  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  m.  temperance
6. 1.  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  rn.

■ph.  4.  2.  that  ye  walk  with  all  lowliness  and  m.
ol.  3.  12.  put  on  therefore  m.  long-suffering
Tim.  6.  11.  follow  after  faith,  love,  patience,  m.
fjim.  2.  25.  in  m.  instructing  those  that  oppose
’it.  3.  2.  but  gentle,  shewing  all  m.  to  all  men
’am.  1.  21.  receive  with  m.  the  ingrafted  word
3. 13.  let  him  shew  his  works  with  m.  of  wisdom
t  Pet.  3. 15.  to  give  a  reason  of  your  hope  with  m.
n  .  MEET.

jen.  2,  18.  I  will  make  an  help  m.  for  him
20.  there  was  not  found  an  help  m.  for  Adam
Erorf.  8.  26.  Moses  said,  it  is  not  m.  so  to  do
Deut.  3.  18.  ye  pass  over,  all  that  are  m.  for  war
Tudg.  5.  30.  m.  for  the  necks  of  them  that  take
Ezra  4. 14.  it  was  not  rn.  to  see  the  king’s  dishonour
lob  34-  31.  surely  it  is  m.  to  be  said  to  God
°rov.  11.  24.  that  withholdeth  more  than  is  m.
rer.  26.  14.  do  with  me  as  seemeth  m.  to  you

27.5.  have  given  earth  to  whom  it  seemed  m. to  me
Esel.  15.  4.  is  it  m.  for  any  work  ?  ||  5  m.  for  no  work
Mat.  3.  8.  bring  forth  fruits  m.  for  repentance

r15.  26.  not  m.  to  take  children’s  bread,  Mark  7. 27.
ftke  15.  32.  it  was  m.  we  should  make  merry
lets  26.  20.  and  do  works  m.  for  repentance
vom.l.27.  receiving  that  recompence  which  was  m.
Cor.  15.  9.  that  am  not  rn.  to  be  called  an  apostle

10.  4.  it  it  be  m.  that  I  go  also,  they  shall  go
/'*/.  1.  7.  even  as  it  is  m.  for  me  to  think  this
ua  mac*e  usw.to  be  partakers  of  inherit.

k  hess.  l.  3.  bound  to  thank  G.  for  you  as  it  is  m.

,  2. 21.  he  shall  be  vessel  m.  for  master’s  use

let),  b.  7.  herbs  m.  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed
■ret.  1.  13.  yea,  I  think  m.  to  stir  you  up
,  MEET.

;«.14.17.  kmg  of  Sodom  went  out  to  m.  him
*  1  V  -(/braham  saw  them,  and  ran  to  m.  them
•7  Lot  seeing  them  rose  up  to  m.  them
'ji  17.  the  servant  ran  to  m.  Rebekah,  and  said
''batman  is  this  that  walketh  to  m.  us  ?

«  -Vaban  ran  to  m.  Jacob,  and  embraced  him
30’  c  l  went  out  to  m.  Jacob,  and  said
,r  b.  thy  brother  Esau  cometh  to  m.  thee,  33.  4.

■  •  -V;  Joseph  went  up  to  m.  Israel  his  Father
-w.  4.  14.  behold,  Aaron  cometh  forth  to  m.  thee
10  ir  saic*,  go  into  the  wilderness  to  m.  Moses
*"•  | -  Moses  went  out  to  m.  his  father-in-law
,^•^7.  brought  forth  the  people  to  m.  with  God
i  ,  |"ou  m’  thine  enemy  s  ox  going  astray
‘A.  there  I  will  m.  with  thee,  and  commune
,r  thee,  29.  42,  43. 1  30.  6,  36.  Num.  17.  4.

22>  3b;  Balak  went  out  to  m.  Balaam
‘is  .  l  entur?  the  Lord  will  come  to  m.  me

10.  stand  here,  while  I  m.  the  Lord  yonder


MEL

Num. 31 . 13.  went  forth  to  m.  them  without  the  camp
Josh.  2.  16.  Rahab  said,  lest  the  pursuers  m.  you

9.  11.  take  victuals  with  you,  and  go  to  m.  them
Judg.  4.  18.  Jael  went  out  to  rn.  Sisera,  22.

6.  35.  to  Zebulun,  and  they  came  up  to  rn.  Gideon

11.  31.  whatever  cometh  out  of  the  doors  tow.  me
34.  his  daughter  came  to  m.  him  with  dances
19.  3.  father  ot  the  damsel  rejoiced  to  m.  him
Ruth  2.  22.  that  they  m.  thee  not  in  any  other  field

1  Sam.  10.  3.  and  there  shall  m.  thee  three  men

5.  thou  shalt  m.  a  company  of  prophets  coming

13.  10.  Saul  went  to  m.  Samuel  to  salute  him

15. 12.  when  Samuel  rose  up  early  tow.  Saul

17.  48.  the  Philistine  drew  nigh  to  w.  David

18.  6.  the  women  came  to  m.  Saul  with  tabrets
25.  32.  Lord  which  sent  thee  this  day  to  w.  me
30.  21.  men  went  to  w.  David  and  to  m.  people

2  Sam.  6.  20.  Michal  came  out  to  m.  David

10.  5.  David  sent  to  w.  the  men,  1  Chron.  19.  5.
15.  32.  Hushai  the  Archite  came  to  w.  him

19.  15.  Judah  ||  24.  Mephibosheth  to  w.  king

1  Kings  2.  8.  Shimei  came  down  to  m.  me  at  Jordan
19.  Solomon  rose  up  to  w.  Bath-sheba  his  mother

18. 16.  Obadiah  went  to  w.  Ahab,  to  w.  Elijah

21.  18.  arise,  go  down  to  w.  Ahab  king  of  Israel

2  Kings  1.  3.  go  up  to  w.  messengers  of  king  of  Sam.

6.  there  came  a  man  to  m.  us,  and  said  to  us

7.  what  manner  of  man  came  up  to  w.  you  ?

2.  15.  the  sons  of  the  prophets  came  tow.  Elisha
4.26.  run  now,  I  pray  thee.  tow.  her,  and  say
29.  if  thou  w.  any  man,  salute  him  not
5.  21.  he  lighted  from  the  chariot  to  w.  him,  26.

8.  8.  go  m.  the  man  of  God  |  9.  Hazael  went  to  w.

9.  17-  take  an  horseman,  and  send  to  w.  them

18.  there  went  one  on  horseback  to  w.  him

10.  15.  he  lighted  on  Jonadab  coming  to  w.  him
1.6. 10.  Ahaz  went  to  w.  the  king  of  Assyria

Neh.  6.  2.  let  us  m.  together  in  the  plain,  10.

Job  5. 14.  they  w.  with  darkness  in  the  day-time
39.  21.  the  horse  goeth  on  to  m.  the  armed  men
Prov.  7.  15.  therefore  came  I  forth  to  w.  thee

17.12.  let  a  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps  w.  a  man

22.  2.  the  rich  and  poor  w.  together,  the  Lord  is

29. 13.  the  poor  and  deceitful  man  w.  together
Isa.  7.  3.  go  torth  to  w.  Ahaz,  thou,  and  thy  son

14.  9.  hell  is  moved  for  thee  to  w.  thee  at  thy  com.

34. 14.  the  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  also  w.
47.  3.  vengeance,  and  I  will  not  w.  thee  as  a  man

Jer.  41.  6.  and  Ishmael  went  forth  to  w.  them
51.  31.  one  post  and  messenger  run  to  w.  another
Hos.  13. 8. 1  will  w.  them  as  affear  bereav.  of  whelps
Amos  4.  12.  prepare  to  m.  thy  God,  O  Israel
Zech.  2.  3.  another  angel  went  out  to  m.  him
Mat.  8.  34.  the  whole  city  came  out  to  m.  Jesus
25.  1 .  and  went  forth  to  m.  the  bridegroom
6.  the  bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye  out  to  m.  him
Mark  14.  13.  there  shall  w.  you  a  man,  Luke 22. 10.
Luke  14.  31.  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to  w.  him
John  12.  13.  people  went  forth  to  w.  him,  and  cried
Acts  28. 15.  they  came  to  w.  us  as  far  as  Appii-forum

1  Thess.  4. 17.  in  the  clouds  to  m.  the  L.  in  the  air

MEETEST.

2  Kings  10.  3.  look  out  the  m.  of  your  master’s  sons
Isa.  64.  5.  thou  w.  him  that  rejoic.  and  works  right.

MEETETH.

Gen.  32.  17.  when  Esau  my  brother  rn.  thee
Nurn.35.  l9.  shall  slay  murderer  when  he  m.  him,21
MEETING.

Num.  24.  1 1.  went  not  to  the  w.  of  enchantments

1  Sam.  21.  1.  Ahimelech  was  afraid  at  m.  of  David
Isa.  1. 13.  it  is  iniquity,  even  the  solemn  m.

MELODY.

Isa.  23. 16.  make  sweet  w.  sing  many  songs
51.  3.  joy  shall  be  found  therein,  the  voice  of  rn.
Amos  5.  23.  I  will  not  hear  the  m.  of  thy  viols
Eph.  5.  19.  making  rn.  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord
MELONS.

Num.  11.  5.  we  remember  the  w.  and  the  onions
MELT

Signifies,  [1]  To  make  hard  bodies  liquid  or  finid,
Lzek.  22.  22.  [2]  To  waste  and  be  diminished,  1
Sam.  14.  16.  [3]  To  faint  and  be  discouraged.
Josh.  2. 11.  2  Sam.  17. 10.

Exod.  15.  15.  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  shall  w.
Deut.  20.  f  8.  return,  lest  his  brethren’s  heart  w.
Josh ,  2.  t  9.  the  inhabitants  w.  because  of  you

11.  when  we  heard  these  things,  our  hearts  did  m.
14.  8.  my  brethren  made  the  heart  of  the  people  m.

~  Sam.  17.  10.  is  as  heart  of  a  lion,  shall  utterly  m.
Psal.  39.  +  11.  thou  makesthis  beauty  tow.  away
58.  7-  let  them  m.  away  as  waters  which  run
112.  10.  he  shall  gnash  with  his  teeth,  and  m.  away
Isa.  13.  7.  every  man's  heart  shall  m.  Ezek.  21.  7

19.  1.  the  heart  of  Egypt  shall  m.  in  midst  of  it
Jer.  9.  7.  behold,  I  will  m.  them,  and  try  them
Ezek.  22.^20.  to  m,  it,  I  will  leave  you  there  w.you
Amos  9.  o.  the  L.  toucheth  the  land,  and  it  shall  m.
13.  and  all  the  hills  shall  m.  Nah.  1.  5.

2  Pet.  3.  10.  and  the  elements  shall  rn.  with  heat,  12.

MELTED.

Exod.  16.  21.  when  the  sun  waxed  hot  it  m.

Deut.  1.  t  28.  our  brethren  have  m.  our  heart
Josh,  5.  1.  their  heart  m,  ||  7.  5.  hearts  of  Israel  m.
Judg.  5.  5.  the  mountains  m.  before  the  Lord

1  Sam.  14.  16.  behold,  the  multitude  w.away

2  Kings  22.  t  9.  thy  servants  have  rn.  the  money
Psal.  22.  14.  my  heart  is  m.  in  midst  of  my  bowels
46.  6.  he  uttered  his  voice,  and  the  earth  w.

97.  5.  the  hills  m.  like  wax  H107.  26.  their  soul  m.
Isa.  34.  3.  mountains  shall  be  m.  with  their  blood
64.  t  7  •  hast  m.  us,  -because  of  our  iniquities
Jer. 49. +  23.  Damascus,  Ilamath, and  Arpad.arew.
Ezek.  22.  21.  ye  shall  be  m.  in  the  midst  thereof

22.  as  silver  is  m.  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace
MELTETH.

JobG.  +  14.  to  him  that  m.  pity  be  shewed
Psal.  58.  8.  as  a  snail  whicn  m.  let  them  pass  away
68.  2.  as  wax  m.  so  let  wicked  perish  at  presence
119.  28.  my  soul  m.  for  heaviness,  strengthen  me
147.  18.  he  sendeth  out  his  word  and  rn.  them
Isa.  40. 19.  the  workman  m.  a  graven  image
Jer.  6.  29.  bellows  burnt,  the  founder  m.  In  vain


Nah.  2. 10.  the  heart  of  Nineveh  in.  the  knees  smite
M  ELI  1 N  G.

Isa.  64.  2.  as  when  the  rn.  fire  burneth,  the  fire
MEMBERS

Signifies,  [1]  Any  part  of  a  natural  body,  1  Cor.  12.
12,  26.  [2]  All  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  together
with  the  parts  of  the  body,  Rom.  6.  13,  19.  [3]
The  unreneu  ed  part  of  man,  which  is  like  a  body
consisting  of  many  members,  and  putteth  forth  it¬
self  chiefly  in  and  by  the  members  of  the  body,
Rom.  7-  23.  [4]  Every  sensual  and  sinful  affec¬
tion,  Col.  3.  5.  [5]  Christian  or  gospel  believers
in  the  church,  which  is  Christ's  mystical  body,
Eph.  4.  25.  I  5.  30.  [6]  Thoughts,  Job  17.  +7.

1  Cor.  12.  14.  the  body  is  not  one  m.  but  many
19.  if  they  were  all  one  rn.  where  were  the  body?

26.  whether  one  m.  suffer,  one  w.  be  honoured
Jam.  3.  5.  even  so  the  tongue  is  a  little  rn.

M  EMBERS.

Dent.  23.  1.  he  that  hath  his  privy  m.  cutoff
Job  17.  7-  and  all  my  m.  are  as  a  shadow
Psal.  139.  16.  in  thy  book  all  my  rn.  were  written
Mat.  5.  29.  that  one  of  thy  rn.  should  perish,  30.
Rom,  6.  13.  neither  yield  your  rn.  instruments

19.  as  ye  yielded  your  m.  servants  to  sin
7-  5.  the  motions  of  sins  did  work  in  our  m.

23.  I  see  another  law  in  my  m.  warring;  ;V.o
captivity  to  the  law  of  sin,  which  is  in  my  m.

12.  4.  tor  as  we  have  many  m.  in  one  body,  and  all
m.  have  not  the  same  office
5.  we  are  every  one  m.  one  of  another
l  Cor.  6.  15.  know  ye  not,  your  bodies  are  the  m.  or
Christ  ?  shall  1  then  take  the  m.  of  Christ  ?
12. 12.  the  body  hath  many  m.  all  rn.  are  one  body
18.  but  now  hath  God  set  the  m.  in  the  body

20.  but  now  are  they  many  rn.  yet  one  body

22.  much  more  those  rn.  whieffseem  more  feeble

25.  but  that  the  m.  should  have  the  same  care

26.  one  member  suffer,  all  the  rn.  suffer  with  it

27.  ye  are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  m.  in  particular
Eph.  4.  25.  for  we  are  m.  one  of  another

5.  30.  we  are  m.  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh  and  bones
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  your  m.  which  are  on  the  earth
Jam.  3.  6.  so  is  the  tongue  among  our  m,  that  it
4.  1.  even  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  rn.
MEMORIAL.

Exod.  3. 15.  this  is  my  m.  unto  all  generations

12.  14.  this  day  shall  be  to  you  for  a  m.

13.  9-  it  shall  be  for  a  m.  between  thine  eyes

17.  14.  write  this  for  a  m.  in  a  book,  and  rehearse

28.  12.  for  stones  of  m.  to  the  children  of  Israel

29.  for  a  m.  before  the  Lord  continually7,  39.  7.

30.  16.  the  atonement  money  may  be  for  a  m.
Lev.  2.  2.  the  priest  shall  burn  the  m.  of  it  on  the

altar,  9.  16.  1  5.  12.  1  6.  15.  Num.  5.  26.

23.  24.  a  rn.  of  blowing  trumpets,  Num.  10.  10.

24.  7-  put  pure  frankincense  on  the  bread  for  a  m.
Num.  5.  15.  for  it  is  an  offering  of  m.  of  iniquity

18.  priest  put  the  offering  off  rn.  in  her  hands
16.  40.  took  brasen  censers  to  be  a  m.  to  Israel

31.  54.  took  the  gold  of  the  captains  for  a  m.

Josh.  4. 7.  and  these  stones  shrill  be  for  a  rn.

Neh.  2.  20.  you  have  no  portion  nor  rn,  in  Jetusalem
Esth.  9.  28.  nor  them,  of  them  perish  from  their  seed
Psal.  9.  6.  their  m.  is  perished  with  them
30.  f  4.  at  the  m.  of  his  holiness,  97.  t  12.

135.  13.  and  thy  m.  throughout  all  generations
Isa.  66.  t  3.  he  that  maketh  a  m.  as  if  he  blessed
Hos.  12.  5.  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  Lord  is  his  m.

14.  t  7.  the  rn,  thereof  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon
Zech.  6.  14.  crowns  be  for  a  m.  in  the  temple  of  L.
Mat.  26. 13.  this  be  told  for  a  m.  of  her,  Mark  14.  9.
Acts  10.  4.  prayers  and  alms  are  come  up  for  a  m

.  MEMORY

Signifies,  [1]  That  faculty  of  the  mind,  whereby  it
retains  or  recollects  the  images  and  remembrance
oj  the  things  we  have  seen,  imagined,  or  understood,
1  Cor.  15.  2.  [2]  Memorial,  name, or  report,  Prov
10.  7.  Isa.  26. 14.

Psal.  109. 15.  that  he  may  cut  off  the  m.  of  them
145.  7-  they  shall  utter  the  m.  of  thy  great  goodness
Prov.  10.^7.  the  m.  of  the  just  is  blessed
Eccl.  9.  5.  for  the  m.  of  them  is  forgotten
Isa.  26.  14.  and  made  all  their  m.  to  perish
1  Cor.  15.  2.  if  ye  keep  in  m.  what  I  preached  to  you
MEN.

Gen.  4.  26.  then  began  m.  to  call  on  the  name  of  L
6. 1.  when  m.  began  to  multiply  on  the  earth

18.  2.  he  looked,  and  lo,  three  m.  stood  by  him
19-  4.  the  m.  of  the  city,  m.  of  Sodom  compassed

a.  where  are  m.  which  came  in  to  thee  this  nmht J
8.  only  to  these  m.  do  nothing  |1 11.  smote  the°w.

32.  28.  power  with  God  and  m.  and  hast  prevailed
34.  21.  these  m,  are  peaceable  with  us,  let  them

22.  only  herein  will  the  m.  consent  to  us
4f-  11.  we  are  true  ?«.  31.  ||  43. 16.  bring  m.  home
44.  4.  Joseph  said,  up,  follow  after  the  rn.

46.  32.  m.  are  shepherds,  for  their  trade  to  feed  catt.
Exod.  1.  17.  but  saved  the  m.  children  alive,  18.

10.  11.  go  now,  ye  that  are  m.  and  serve  the  Lord

34.  23.  thrice  in  the  year  shall  m.  children  apoear
Num.  1.  17.  Moses  and  Aaron  took  these  m.

13.  32.  all  the  people  are  m,  of  great  stature

14.  37.  those  m.  that  did  bring  evil  report  on  land
16.  14.  wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of  these  m,  1

29.  if  these  m.  die  the  common  death  of  all  men
22.  9.  God  said,  what  m.  are  these  with  thee  >

35.  the  angel  said  to  Balaam,  go  with  the  m

25.  5.  slay  ye  every  one  his  m.  that  were  joined

no^  one  these  m.  shall  see  good  land

26.  make  remembrance  to  cease  from  among

33.  6.  let  Reuben  live,  let  not  his  m.  be  few
Josh.  2.  2.  there  came  m.  in  hither  to-night  of  Israel

3.  bring  forth  the  m.  that  are  come,  1  Sam  11
Judg.  6.  27.  because  he  feared  the  m.  of  the  citv  *

8.  8.  the  m.  ot  Penuel  answered  as  m.  of  Succoth

15.  should  give  bread  to  thy  m.  that  are  wearv

9.  54.  that  m.  say  not  of  me,  a  woman  slew  him

16.  9.  there  were  m.  lying  in  wait  in  the  chamber
20.  13.  now  therefore  deliver  us  the  m.  of  Belial

1  V,  '  >vas  ln  ta^our  with  the  l  ord  and  m.

1 33.  all  the  increase  of  thine  house  shall  die  m

309  *


M  E  N


M  E  N


MEN


1  Sant.  5.  9.  he  smote  the  in.  of  city, small  and  great
12.  m.  that  died  not  w  ere  smitten  with  emerods


/fit  lildt  UivT'l  liWl  **•  ,  ,

24. 9.  llavid  said,  wherefore  hearest  thou  /n.  words.

25.  15.  but  the  in.  were  very  good  unto  us
2  Sam.  3.  39.  these  m.  the  sons  ot  Zeruiah  too  hard
10  12.  and  let  us  play  the  to.  tor  our  people  _

1,*  28.  w  ere  but  dead  m.  before  my  lord  the  king

23.  3.  he  that  ruleth  over  m.  must  be  just

20.  slew  two  lion  like  m.  of  Moab,  1  t 'hr.  11.  22.

1  Kings  10.  8.  happy  thy  in.  that  hear  thy  wisdom

20.  17-  there  are  m.  come  out  ot  Samaria

33.  now  the  in.  did  diligently  observe  whether

2  Kings  6.  20.  Lord,  open  the  eves  ot  these  in.  to  see
12.  15.  they  reckoned  not  with  m.  ot  the  money
17.  30.  the  in.  of  Babylon  made  Succoth-benoth,

m  of  Cuth,  Nergal,  m.  of  Hamath,  Ashima


John  5.  41.  I  receive  not  honour  from  m.

17. 6.  1  have  manifested  thy  name  to  the  to. .

Acts  1. 21.  of  these  to.  which  have  companied  with  us

2. 15.  others  said,  these  m.  are  full  ot  new  wine

4. 16.  saying,  what  shall  we  do  to  these  to.?

5.  4.  thou  hast  not  lied  unto  to.  but  unto  God

25.  the  m.  ye  put  in  prison  are  in  the  temple
29.  we  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  in.

35.  what  ye  intend  to  do,  as  touching  there  m.
38.  1  say  unto  you,  refrain  from  these  to.

10.  19.  the  Spirit  said,  behold  three  m.  seek  thee
14.  15.  we  also  are  in.  ot  like  passions  with  you


15.  26.  m.  that  hazarded  their  lives  tor  Jesus


18.


07,  ilath  he  not  sent  me  to  the  m.  which  sit  on


the  wall  to  eat  their  own  dung  ?  Isa.  36.  12.

20  14  said  to  him,  what  said  these  m.  ?  Isa.  39.  3.

1  Chron.  11.  19.  shall  1  drink  the  blood  of  these  to.?

16.  31.  let  111.  say  among  the  nations,  Lord  reigns
19!  5.  for  the  m.  were  greatly  ashamed

2  Chron.  6.  18.  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  to.?
28. 15.  tile  in.  expressed  by  name  took  the  captives

34.  12.  and  the  to.  did  the  work  faithfully

Ezra  1.  4.  let  in.  of  his  place  help  him  with  silver

4.  21.  give  commandment  to  cause  these  to.  cease
6.  8.  1  decree  that  expences  be  given  to  these  m

Eeh.  4.  23.  nor  m.  of  the  guard  which  followed

5.  5.  other  in.  have  our  lauds  and  vineyards
Job  4.  13.  when  deep  sleep  falleth  on  m.  33.  15.

19.  t  19-  the  m.  of  my  secret  abhorred  me
28.  4.  are  dried  up,  they  are  gone  away  from  m.

31.  31.  if  the  in.  of  my  tabernacle  said  not
37. 24.  in.  do  therefore  fear  him,  he  respeeteth  not

Tsai.  9. 20.  they  may  know'  themselves  to  be  but  in.

17.  14.  from  ni.  which  are  thy  hand,  from  m.

49. 18.  to.  will  praise  thee  when  thou  doest  well
62.9.  m.  of  low  degree  are  vanity,  to.  of  high  a  lie

68. 18.  ascended,  thou  hast  received  gifts  for  m.

72.  17.  and  in.  shall  be  blessed  in  him,  all  nations

73.  5.  they  are  not  in  trouble  as  other  in.  neithei

are  they  plagued  like  other  in
82.  ?.  ye  are  gods,  but  ye  shall  die  like  m.

8.3.  18.  that  m.  may  know  that  thou  art  over  all
107.  8.  O  that  to.  would  praise  the  Lord,  15,  21,  31.
119.  t  24.  thy  testimonies  are  the  m.  of  my  counsel
124.  2.  on  our  side,  when  to.  rose  up  against  us
145.  6.  in.  shall  speak  of  the  might  of  thy  acts

prov.  6.  30.  to.  do  not  despise  a  thief,  it  he  steal
8.  4.  to  you,  O  to.  1  call  ||  16.6.  to.  depart  from  evil

20.  6.  most  to.  proclaim  each  his  ow  n  goodness
25.  1.  which  the  to.  of  llezekiah  copied  out

27.  so  for  to.  to  search  their  own  glory,  not  glory
28.  28.  when  the  wicked  rise,  to.  hide  themselves
Eccl.  3.  14.  God  doeth  it  that  to.  should  fear  him
Isa.  3.  25.  thy  «.  shall  fall  by  the  sword,  thy  mighty

6.  12.  and  the  Lord  have  removed  to.  far  aw'ay
7. 13.  is  it  a  small  thing  for  you  to  weary  in.  ?

31.  3.  now  the  Egyptians  are  to.  and  not  God
38.  16.  O  Lord,  by  these  things  to.  live

4.3.  4.  therefore  will  I  give  to.  for  thee,  and  people

45.  24.  even  to  him  shall  to.  come,  and  all  incensed

46.  8.  remember  this,  and  shew' y  ourselves  to.

60.  11.  that  111.  may  bring  to  thee  the  forces

61.  6.  to.  shall  call  you  the  ministers  of  our  God
64.  4.  to.  have  not  heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  ear

Jer.  5.  26.  they  set  a  trap,  they  catch  to.

6. 2.3.  horses  set  in  array ,  as  to.  for  war  against  thee
9. 10.  neithei-  can  w.  hear  the  voice  of  the  cattle
*8.  21.  and  let  their  to.  be  put  to  death

34. 18.  1  will  give  the  to.  that  transgr.  my  covenant
38.  9.  these  to.  havedone  evil  to  prophet  Jeremiah
40.  8.  then  came  to  Gedaliah  they  and  their  to

47.  2.  then  the  to.  shall  cry  and  shall  howl
49.  28.  arise  ye,  and  spoil  the  w.  ot  the  east
51. 14.  surely  1  will  fill  thee  w  ith  to.  as  w  ith  caterp.

Lam.  2.  15.  that  to.  call  the  perfection  of  beauty
Ezek.  11.  2.  these  are  the  to.  that  devise  mischief
14.  .3.  these  to.  set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart
14.  tho’  these  three  to.  Noah,  Daniel,  Job,  16,  18
23.  40.  that  ye  have  sent  for  in.  to  come  from  far
£5.  4.  1  will  deliver  thee  to  the  to.  of  the  east,  10.

34.  31.  ye,  my  flock  of  my  pasture,  are  to.  1  God

35.  8.  1  will  fill  his  mountains  with  his  slain  in.

36.  10.  1  will  multiply  to.  upon  you,  37.

Van.  3. 12.  these  to.  have  not  regarded  thee

22.  fire  slew  those  to.  that  took  up  Shadrach
27.  saw  these  to.  on  whose  bodies  fire  had  no

power

4.  25.  that  they  shall  drive  thee  from  to.  .32.

6.5.  then  said  these  to.  we  shall  not  find  occasion
26.  that  to.  fear  before  the  God  of  Daniel
Has.  6.  7.  but  they  like  to.  transgressed  the  covenant
(i bad.  7.  to.  that  were  at  peace  deceived  thee
t  7.  the  to.  of  thy  peace  have  deceived  thee
Mic.  2.8.  that  pass  securely,  as  to.  averse  from  war
,  6.  man’s  enemies  are  trie  to.  of  his  own  house


|  ,  ()•  11  lull  3  CllCllllCO  ell  t  me  //►•  w*  1110  v  ••  iiuuoc

Hah.  1.  14.  and  makest  to.  as  tne  fishes  of  the  sea
Zech.  3.  8.  thy  fellows,  they  are  to.  wondered  at

7.2.  had  sent  their  to.  to  pray  before  the  Lord
11.6.  but  lo,  1  will  deliver  the  to.  every  one

Mat.  5.  16.  let  your  light  so  shine  before  in.

19.  and  shall  teach  to.  so,  shall  be  called  the  least
6. 1.  take  heed  you  do  not  your  alms  before  to.

16.  their  faces,  that  they  may  appear  to  to.  to  fast
18.  anoint,  that  thou  appear  not  unto  in.  to  fast
7.  12.  whatsoever  ye  would  that  to.  should  do  to
you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them,  Luke  6.  31.
9.  £.  God  who  had  given  such  power  to  to.

30.  32.  shall  confess  me  before  to.  Luke  12.  8.

.3.3.  whoso  shall  deny  me  before  to.  Luke  12.  9.

1.3.  25.  but  while  to.  slept,  his  enemy  came

16.  1.3.  whom  do  m.  say  that  I  am  t  Mark  8.  27.
23.  28.  outwardly  ye  appear  righteous  to  to.

Mark  8.24.  and  said,  1  see  to.  as  trees  walking
30.  27.  with  to.  it  is  impossible,  Luke  18.  27-
Luke  2. 14.  peace  on  earth,  good  will  toward  to.

5.  10.  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  to.

11.  31  shall  rise  up  with  the  to.  of  this  generation

12.  48  to  whom  in.  have  committed  much


f8.  11.  1  thank  thee,  1  am  not  as  other  to.  are


16.  17.  these  to.  are  the  servants  ot  most  high  God
35.  sent  the  seneants,  saying,  let  those  to.  go

19.  .37.  for  ye  have  brought  hither  these  to.

20.  30.  also  of  yourselves  shall  to.  arise,  speaking
24.  16.  conscience  void  of  offence  toward  G.  and  in.

Rom.  1.27  .to.  with  to.  working  which  is  unseemly

12. 16.  but  condescend  to  to.  ot  low  estate

1  Cor.  4. 9.  we  are  made  a  spectacle  to  angels  and  to.

14.  2.  for  he  speaketh  not  to  to.  but  to  God

20.  not  children,  but  in  understanding  be  to.

21  with  in.  of  other  tongues  and  lips  will  1  speak

2  Cor.  5. 11.  the  tenor  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  to.

8.  1.3.  for  1  mean  not  that  other  w.  be  eased
Gal.  1. 10. do  1  now  persuade  to.  ?  or  seek  pleaseTO.?
Eph.  4.8.  he  led  captive,  and  gave  gifts  to  to.

5. 28.  so  ought  to.  to  love  their  wives  as  their  own
6.  7.  as  to  the  Lord  and  not  to  to.  Col.  3.  2.3.

1  Thess.  2.  4.  we  speak  not  as  pleasing  to.  but  God

1  Tim.  2.8.  1  w  ill  that  to.  pray  every  where

2  Tim.  3.2.  to.  shall  be  lovers  ot  themselves,  proud
Heb.  5.  1.  every  high  priest  taken  from  among  to.

6. 16.  for  to.  verily  swear  by  the  greater,  an  oath
7.8.  and  here  to.  that  die  receive  tithes

9.  27.  a*  it  is  appointed  unto  in.  once  to  die
12.  23.  to  the  spirits  of  just  to.  made  perfect

Jam.  3.  9.  therewith  curse  we  to.  which  are  made

1  Pet.  4. 6.  might  be  judged  according  to  w.  in  flesh

2  Pet.  1. 21.  but  holy  to.  of  God  spake  as  moved
Jude  4.  for  there  are  certain  to.  crept  in  unawares
Rev.  9. 4.  but  only  those  to.  which  have  not  the  seal

10.  their  power  was  to  hurt  to.  five  months
14.  4.  these  were  redeemed  from  among  to.

16  18.  such  as  was  not  since  to.  were  on  the  earth
21  3  behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  to.

All  MEN.

Gen.  17. 27 .  all  the  to.  of  his  house  were  circumcised
Exod.  4.  19.  all  the  in.  are  dead  which  sought  thy  life
Nurn.  16. 29.  if  these  die  the  common  death  ot  all  to.
Veut.  4.  3.  all  the  to.  that  followed  Baal-peor
2  Sant.  13. 9.  A  muon  said,  have  out  all  m.  from  me
1  Kings  A.  31.  for  Solomon  was  wiser  than  all  to.

Job  37.7.  that  all  to.  may  know  his  work
Psal.  64.  9.  all  in.  shall  fear,  and  shall  declare
89  .  47.  wherefore  hast  thou  made  allm.  in  vain  ?
116.  11.  1  said  in  my  haste,  allm.  are  liars
Eccl.  7 .  2.  for  that  is  the  end  of  all  to.  and  living
Jer.  42.  17 .  so  with  all  the  to.  that  set  their  faces
Zech.  8. 10.  1  set  all  in .  every  one  ag.  his  neighbour
Mat.  10.22.  and  ye  shall  he  hated  ot  allm.  for  my
name’s  sake,  Mark  13.  13.  Luke  21.  17-
19  11  all  to.  cannot  receive  this  saying,  save  they
og  33  tho’  allm.  shall  be  offended,  yet  will  not  l
Mark  1.  37.  all  in.  seek  thee  11  5.  20.  all  m.  did  marvel
11.32.  allm.  counted  John  a  prophet  indeed
Luke  6. 26.  w  oe  toyou  when  all  m.  speak  well  ofyou

I. 3.  4.  were  sinners  above  all  to.  that  dwelt  in

[Jerusalem

John  1.7.  that  all  to.  through  him  might  believe
2. 24.  not  commit  himself,  because  lie  knew  all  to.

,3!  26.  the  same  baptizeth,  and  allm.  come  to  him
5'  23'.  that  allm.  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as

II. 48.  if  we  let  alone,  allm.  will  believe  on  him
12  32. 1  lifted  up  from  earth,  will  draw  a.  to.  to  me
13*.  35.  by  this  shall  all  to.  know  ye  are  my  disciples

Acts  1. 24.  Lord,  who  knowest  the  hearts  of  all  m.

4.  21.  all  to.  glorified  God  for  w-bat  was  done
17.  30.  but  now  commandeth  all  to.  to  repent
31.  whereof  he  hath  given  assurance  to  all  to.

19.  7.  and  a  /  the  to.  were  about  twelve
19.  and  burned  their  books  before  all  to.

20.  26.  that  1  am  pure  from  blood  of  all  to.

22. 15.  for  thou  shalt  be  his  witness  to  all  in.

Rom.  5. 12.  and  so  death  passed  upon  all  to.  for  all

18.  judgment  came  on  all  in.  to  condemnation,
the  free  gift  came  on  all  to.  to  justification
12. 17-  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  m.

18.  if  it  be  possible,  live  peaceably  with  all  to.

16.  19.  your  obedience  is  come  abroad  to  allm.

1  Cor.  7.7.  1  would  that  allm.  were  even  as  1
9. 19.  for  tho’  1  be  free  fiom  all  to.  yet  servt.  to  all

22.  1  am  made  all  things  to  allm.  may  save  some
10.  33.  even  as  I  please  all  to.  in  all  things
15.  19.  we  are  of  all  to.  most  miserable

2  Cor.  3.2.  our  epistle  know  n  and  read  of  all  m.
Gal.  6.  10.  let  us  do*  good  to  all  to.  especially  to

household  of  faith
Eph.  2.  9.  to  make  all  to.  see  what  is  the  fellowship
Phil.  4.  5.  let  your  moderation  be  know  n  to  all  in.

1  Thess.  2. 15.  please  not  G.  and  contrary  to  all  in.

.3.  12.  make  vou  to  abound  in  love  toward  all  to.

5  14.  support  weak,  be  patient  toward  allm.

15.  but  ever  follow  that  which  is  good  to  allm.

2  Thess.  3.  2.  for  all  to.  have  not  faith

1  Tim.  2.1.  that  giving  of  thanks  be  made  for  all  to.
4.  who  will  have  allm.  to  be  saved  and  to  come

4. 10.  we  trust  in  God,  w-ho  is  Saviour  of  all to.

2  Tim.  2.  24.  but  be  gentle  to  all  to.  apt  to  teach

3.  9.  for  their  folly  shall  be  made  manifest  to  all  to.

4.  16.  no  man  stood  with  me,  but  all  w.  forsook  me
Tit.  2. 11.  the  grace  of  God  hath  appeared  to  allm.
3.2.  be  gentle,  shew-ing  all  meekness  to  all  to.

iieb.  12.  14-  follow  peace  with  all  to.  and  holiness
Jam.  l'&.  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  allm.
1  Pet.  2. 17.  honour  all  to.  love  the  brotherhood
.3  John  12.  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  allm.
See  Brethren,  Chi  ef,  C  hosen,  Evil,  Great
In  MEN.

1  Cor.  3.  21.  therefore  let  no  man  glory  in  to.

See  Israel,  .1  ldah.


Like  MEN.  .

1  Sam.  4.  9.  quit  yourselves  like  to.  1  Cor.  16.  13.
Psal.  82.  7.  ye  are  gods,  but  ye  shall  die  like  to.

Hos.  6.7.  but  they  /.  to.  have  transgressed  covenant
Luke  12.  .36.  yourselves  like  to.  that  w  ait  for  their  L.
Mighty  MEN.

Gen.  6.  4.  in.  to.  which  w  ere  of  old,  men  of  renown
Exod.  15.  15.  to.  to.  of  Moab  trembling  shall  take
Josh.  1.  14.  the  mighty  to.  of  valour  shall  pass  ov*

6.  2.  1  have  given  thee  Jericho  and  the  mighty  m.

8.  3.  Joshua  chose  out  thirty  thousand  mighty  m.

10.  2.  all  the  to.  of  Gibeon  were  mighty

7.  ascended  from  Gilgal  with  to.  to.  ot  valour

1  Sam.  2.  4.  the  bows  of  the  mighty  to.  were  broken

2  Sam.  10.  7.  when  David  heard  of  it  he  sent  Joab
and  all  the  host  of  the  to.  to.  20.  7-  1  Chron.  19. 8.

16.  6.  mighty  in.  were  on  his  right  hand  and  left
17.8.  and  his  to.  that  they  be  mighty  and  chafed
2.3.  8.  these  be  names  of  the  mighty  to.  David  had

9.  Eleazar  one  of  the  three  to.  to.  with  David
16.  tlie  three  mighty  to.  brake  thro  the  host,  17.

22.  Benaiah  had  the  name  among  three  to.  to.

1  Kings  1.  8.  the  mighty  to.  were  not  with  Adonijab

10.  the  mighty  to.  and  Solomon  he  called  not

:  Kings  15.  20.  exacted  of  all  mighty  to.  of  wealth

24.  14.  he  carried  away  all  the  w.  to.  of  valour

1  Chron.  5.  24.  were  to.  to.  of  valour,  7. 7,  9, 11,40.

8.  40.  the  sons  of  Ulam  were  mighty  to.  of  valour

1 1.  10.  these  also  are  the  chief  of  the  to.  to.  11.

12.  1.  they  were  among  the  mighty  to.  helpers

21.  were  all  to.  to.  of  valour,  25,  30. 1  26.  6,  31.

29.  24.  to.  to.  submitted  themselves  to  Solomon

2  Chron.  13.  3.  Jeroboam  set  battle  against  Abijah,

being  mighty  to.  of  valour,  14.  8.1  17- 13,  14,  16.

25.  6.  Amaziah  hired  an  hundred  thousand  m.  in.
32.  3.  llezekiah  took  counsel  with  his  mighty  m.

21.  an  angel  cut  off  all  the  mighty  in.  of  valour
Keh.  11. 14.  and  their  brethren  mighty  to.  of  valour
Job  .34.  24.  he  shall  break  in  pieces  mighty  to.
£cc/.7.19.  wisdom  strengthened)  more  than  ten  m.tn.
Cant.  4.  4.  hang  bucklers,  all  shields  of  mighty  m.
Isa.  21. 17.  mighty  to.  of  Kedar  shall  be  diminished
Jer.  5.  16.  an  open  sepulchre,  they  are  all  m  m.

26.  21.  Jehoiakim  the  king,  with  all  Ins  mighty  m,
41.  16.  Johanan  recovered  the  mighty  to.  of  w-ar
46.  9.  let  w.  to.  come  forth  ||  48.  14.  we  are  to.  to.

48.  41 .  hearts  of  to.  to.  of  Moab,  as  heart  of  W'oman

49.  22.  heart  of  mighty  m.  ot  Edom  shall  be  as

50.  36.  a  sword  is  upon  her  to.  to.  and  they  shall

51.  30.  to.  w.  of  Babylon  have  forborne  to  fight

56.  her  m.  in.  are  taken,  their  bows  are  broken

57.  I  will  make  drunk  her  captains  and  to.  to.
Lam.  1.  15.  Lord  bath  trodden  under  foot  my  to.  to.
Ezek.  .39.  20.  be  filled  at  my  table  with  mighty  m.
Dan.  3.  20.  commanded  to.  to.  to  bind  Shadrach
LIos.  10. 13.  trust  in  the  multitude  ot  thy  mighty  m
Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  run  like  mighty  to.  and  climb

.3.  9.  prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty  to.

Obad.  9.  thy  to.  w.  O  'Leman,  shall  be  dismayed
Nah.  2.  3.  the  shield  of  his  mighty  to.  is  made  red
Zech.  10.  5.  they  shall  be  as  mighty  m.  that  tread
Rev.  6. 15.  mighty  m.  hide  themselves  in  the  dens
19  18.  that  y  e  may  eat  the  flesh  of  mighty  m.

Of  M  EN .

Gen.  6.  2.  sons  of  God  saw  the  daughters  of  m.

4.  the  sons  of  God  came  in  to  the  daughters  of  to.
Lev.  27  .  29.  none  devoted  of  m.  shall  be  redeemed
Kum.  18.  15.  whether  it  be  of  in.  or  beasts,  be  tnme
31.  11.  took  all  the  prey  both  of  in.  and  beasts
Judy.  8. 18.  what  manner  of  to.  were  they  ye  slew.

1  Sam.  1.  t  11.  give  tp  thy  handmaid  a  seed  of  to.
10.  26.  there  went  with  him  a  band  of  m.

2  Sam.  7. 14.  1  will  chasten  him  with  the  rod  of  m.
2  Kings  13.  21.  behold  they  spied  a  band  of  in.

23.  14.  he  filled  their  places  with  the  bones 0}  m.

1  Chr.  5.  21.  they  took  away  of  to.  ten  thousand

2  Chr.  22.  1.  the  band  of  to.  had  slain  all  the  eldest
Job  7.  20.  what  shall  I  do,  O  thou  Preserver  of  m.l

.31  t  .33.  if  1  covered  after  the  manner  of  m.

33.  16.  then  he  openeth  the  ears  of  to.  and  sealetli
Psal.  17.  4.  concerning  the  works  of  to.  _

22.  6.  but  1  am  a  reproach  of  to.  and  despised
Isa.  2.  11.  the  haughtiness  of  to.  shall  be  bowed  down
17.  the  haughtiness  of  to.  shall  be  made  low
29.  13.  their  fear  is  taught  by  the  precept  oj  in.
44.  11.  and  the  workmen,  they  are  of  to.

51.  7.  fear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  in.  nor  be  straw
53.  3.  he  is  despised  and  rejected  of  to.  a  mano
Jer,  9.  22.  carcases  of  ni,  shall  tall  as  dung  on  neicl
33.  5.  to  fill  them  with  the  dead  bodies  oj  in.
Ezek.  16.  17.  and  madest  to  thyselt  images  oj  m.

24.  17.  and  eat  not  the  bread  of  m.  22.

27.  1.3.  they  traded  the  persons  of  in.  in  unarm
36.  12.  thou  shalt  no  more  bereave  them  of  in.

.38.  the  waste  cities  be  filled  w  ith  flocks  of  m.
Dan.  2.  43.  they  shall  mingle  with  the  seed  of  m.

4  17.  the  living  may  know  that  the  Most  J 1 U,*
ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  in.  25,  32. 1  5.  -1
and  setteth  up  over  it  the  basest  of  to.

Mic.  2.  12.  by  reason  of  multitude  of  to.  Zech.  ..  -1
Mat.  4.  19.  and  1  will  make  you  fishers  ot  to.

5  13.  to  be  cast  out  and  trodden  under  toot  oj  to,
6.  2,  they  may  have  glory  c/to  li  5 v  seen  of  m .J-  5


UJ  J  III  •  |t  v/ •  ./  .

10.  17.  beware  </ TO. II  19. 12.  made  eunuchs  otm-
15.9.  for  doctrines,  commandm.  of  to.  Mark!  1
16.  2.3.  but  the  things  that  be  of  m.  Mark  8.  so-
17  22.  shall  be  betraved  into  the  hands  oj  j

Mark  9.  31.  Luke  9.  44.124.  1


21.  25.  was  John's  baptism  of  heaven  or  ofi


:l.  VO.  W  iib  JUIlll  b  LidlAnm  ui  **^”  *'-**'•  *'  .  t

26.  if  we  sav  of  m.  Mark  11.  30,  3<>.  LukeQ0.  4,t

22.  16.  regardest  not  persons  ef  to.  Ma>\  >-•  ”•!
2.3.  7.  Jove  to  be  called  of  to.  Habbt,  Babbi
Mark  7.  21.  out  of  the  heait  of  to.  proceed  evil
John  1.  4.  and  the  life  was  the  light  oj  m.

12.  4.3.  they  loved  the  praise  of  to.  more  mail
18.  3.  Judas  having  received  a  band  oj  m.

Acts  5.  36.  to  whom  a  number  e/  to.  -|0,!‘e<‘

38.  if  this  work  be  ofm.  it  will  come  to  nou„nt

14.  11.  the  gods  are  come  down  in  likeness/  •

15.  17.  the  residue  of  m.  might  seek  after  Goa
17  12.  honourable  women,  and  of  m.  not  a  iew

Rom.  1.  18.  against  all  unrighteousness  "I  m


310


M  E  N


\t  E  N


MER


lorn.  2.  1ft.  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  m.
29.  whose  praise  is  not  of  m.  but  of  Ciod
6.  19.  1  speak  after  the  manner  <f  m.  because

14.  18.  thatserveth  Christ  is  approved  <fm.

Cor.  2.  f>.  faith  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  m

4.  6.  yc  might  learn  in  us  not  to  think  of  m.

:  7.  23.  ve  a-o  bought,  be  not  the  servants  of  m.

1 13.1.  though  1  speak  with  tongues  of  m.  and  angels

15.  32.  if  after  the  manner  of  m.  1  have  fouulit'
Cor.  8.  fl.  honest  things  in  the  sight  of  m.
ial.\.  1.  Paul  an  apostle,  not  of  m.  but  by  Christ

3.  15.  brethien,  1  speak  after  the  manner  ofm.
ph.  4.  14.  wind  of  doctrine,  by  sleight  of  m.
fiil.  2.  7-  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  m.

■ol.  2.  8.  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  m.

22.  after  commandments  and  doctrines  of  m.
Thess.  1.  5.  ye  know  what  manner  of  m.  we  were

2.6.  nor  of  m.  sought  we  glory,  neither  of  you
13.  ye  received  it  not  as  the  word  of  m.

Tim.  6. 5.  disputingse/  m.  of  corrupt  minds
"it.  1. 14.  commandments  of  m.  that  turn  from  truth
Pet.  2.  4.  disallowed  indeed  ofm.  but  chosen  of  G.
15.  may  put  to  silence  ignorance  of  foolish  m.

4.  2.  he  should  no  longer  live  to  the  lusts  of  m.
John  5.  9.  if  we  receive  (he  witness  ofm.
lev,  9.  7-  their  faces  were  as  the  faces  of  m.

15.  prepared  to  slay  the  third  part</m.  18.

11. 13.  in  the  earthquake  were  slain  ofm.  7000
13.  13.  maketh  fire  come  dow  n  in  sight  of  m.

18. 13.  merchandise  of  slaves  and  souls  of  m.

See  Chi  lor  ex.

Sons  of  Men.

V.  4.  2.  O  ye  s.  of  m.  how  long  will  ye  turn,  58. 1

11.  19.  that  trust  in  thee  before  the  sons  of  m.

13.  13.  the  Lord  beholdeth  all  the  sons  ofm.

>7.  4.  1  lie  among  the  sons  of  m.  whose  teeth  are
145. 12.  to  make  known  to  s.  of  m.  his  mighty  acts
’rov.  8.  31.  and  my  delights  were  with  the  .f.  of  m.
'cel.  1. 13.  travail  God  hath  given  to  the  sons  of  m.
1. 3.  might  see  what  was  that  good  for  sons  ofm.

8.  and  1  gat  me  the  delights  of  the  sons  of  men

I.  ip.  travail  which  God  hath  given  to  sons  of  m.

18.  I  said  concerning  the  estate  of  the  sons  of  m

19.  tor  that  w;hich  befalleth  the  sons  of  m.

!•  11-  heart  of  sons  ofm.  set  in  them  to  do  evil

J.  3.  also  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  m.  is  full  of  evil

12.  so  are  the  sons  of  m.  snared  in  an  evil  time
a.  52.  14.  and  his  form  more  than  the  sons  of  m.
?r.  32. 19.  thine  eyes  are  open  upon  the  sons  of  m.
'an.  5.  21.  and  he  w'as  driven  from  the  sons  ofm
0.  16.  one  like  the  similitude  of  the  sons  of  rn.

12.  joy  is  withered  away  from  the  sons  of  m.
he.  5. 7 .  tarrieth  not,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of  m.
lark  3.  28.  all  sins  shall  be  forgiven  to  sons  ofm.
ph.  3.  5.  which  w  as  not  made  known  to  sons  of  m.
Rich,  Righteous, Singing.

cn.  12.  16.  Abram  had  m.-s.  and  maid  servants
0.  14.  Abimelech  gave  m.-servants  to  Abraham
4.35.  God  hath  given  my  master  m.-s.  and  gold
!0. 43.  Jacob  had  m.-s.  and  camels,  and  asses,  32. 5
sod.  21.  7.  she  shall  not  go  out  as  m.-servants  do
'eut.  12.  12.  rejoice  before  Lord,  ye  and  m.-serv.
Sam.  8.  16.  the  king  will  take  you  m.-servants
Kings  5.  26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  m-servants?
uke  12.  45.  and  shall  begin  to  beat  the  m.-servants
See  Two.

r  MEN  of  War.

um.  31.  49.  servants  have  taken  sum  of  m.  of  tear
eut.  2.  14.  till  all  the  generation  of  the  m.  of  war
came  out  of  Egypt  were  consumed,  16.  Josh.  5.6
sh.  6.  3.  ye  shall  compass  the  city,  ye  m.  of  war
tag.  20. 17.  drew  sword,  all  these  were  m.  of  war
Sam.  18.  5.  and  Saul  set  him  over  the  m.  of  war
Kings  9.  22.  hut  they  were  m.  of  war,  and  the
v  ,  cLief  of  his  captains,  2  Chron.  8.  9.
Kings 25.  4.  and  all  the  m.  of  war  fled,  Jer.  52. 7.
19.  took  an  officer  set  over  m.  of  war,  Jer.  52.  25.
ifo  T  Gadites  m.  of  war  came  to  David

all  these  rn.  of  war  came  to  Hebron  to  make
>  1  o13-  3.  Abijah  set  battle  in  array  with  m.  ofw.
1.  13.  and  the  m.of  war  were  in  Jerusalem
r.  38.  4.  thus  he  weakeneth  the  hands  of  m.  of  war
.3.  slew  m.  of  war  ||  51.  32.  m.  of  w.  are  affrighted
■■ Johanan  took  the  m.  of  war  and  the  women
t.  26.  all  the  m.  of  war  shall  be  cut  off,  50.  30.

»  •  ??*  ,10-  ttie>'  of  Phut  w ere  thy  m.  of  war
'••Jr1  “y®.  of  war  that  are  in  thee  shall  fall
1.  20.  shall  be  filled  at  my  table  with  m.  of  war
e*2.  7.  they  shall  climb  the  wall  like  m.  of  war

,L,'not,,T,,he  mr  ^raw  near- let  them  come
23.11.  Herod  with  his  m. ofw. set  himatnought
MEN,  joined  with  wicked.

’n.  13. 13.  but  the  m.  of  Sodom  w  ere  wicked
im.  16. 26.  depart  from  tents  of  these  wicked  m
am.  30.  22.  then  answered  all  the  wicked  m.

*”}•  3.  34.  as  a  man  falleth  before  wicked  m.
i'oo  'it  'uuch  more  when  wicked  m.  have  slain
0"  marked  old  way  that  w.  m.  have  trodden
a.  and  w  hich  walketh  with  wicked  m.
t*.  he  striketh  them  as  wicked  m.  in  open  sight
0.  because  of  his  answers  for  wicked  rn.

.  there  be  w.  m.  to  whom  it  happeneth

,7  7>.TLam°?,g  "Jy  People  are  found  wicked  m.
M;/4-4L  will  miserably  destroy  those  wicked  m.
ness.  A.  2.  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  w.  m.
Wise  MEN.

Pharaoh  caHed  for  all  w.m.  Exod.’!.  11
,0  ..’he  vise  m.  that  wrought  the  work
If.  take  ye  wise  m.  and  understanding

I  took,  the  chief  of  your  tribes,  wise  m.

'  king  said  to  wise  m.  that  knew  the  times
tnen  said  llaman's  wise  m.  and  Zeresh
o  k  ‘  which  w-.w.have  told  from  their  fathers
i)far  my  w-ords,  O  ye  wise  m.  and  give  ear
tO-  he  seeth  that  wise  m.  die,  and  the  fool
.JO;  14?  vise  m.  lay  up  knowledge,  but  foolish
’«  v  »  .at  walketh  with  wise  m.  shall  be  w  ise
•  o.  out  wise  m.  turn  away  wrath
‘10  ^?e  wor(ts  of  wise  m.  are  heard  in  quiet

I I  "'here  are  thy  wise  m.  let  them  tell
4.  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  rn.  shall  perish


Isa.  44.  25.  that  turneth  wise  m.  backward
Jer.  8.  9.  the  wise  m.  are  ashamed  ana  dismayed
10.  7-  as  among  all  the  wise  m.  of  the  nations

50.  35.  sword  is  upon  Babylon,  and  on  her  wise  m.

51.  57.  and  I  will  make  drunken  her  wise  m.

Ezek.  27.  8.  thy  wise  m.  O  Jyrus,  w»ere  thy  pilots

9.  and  the  wise  m.  thereof  w-ere  thy  calkers
Dan.  2.  12.  to  destroy  all  the  wise  m.  of  Babylon
27.  cannot  the  wise  rn.  shew  unto  the  king

4.  6.  I  made  a  decree  to  bring  in  all  the  wise  m.

5.  7-  Belshazzar  the  king  spake  to  the  wise  m.
Okad.  8.  even  destroy  the  wise  m.  out  of  Edom
Mat.  2.  1.  came  wise  m.  from  the  east  to  Jerusalem

7.  llerod,  when  he  had  privily  called  the  wise  m.
16.  was  mocked  of  wise  m.  [|23.  34.  1  send  wise  m.

1  Cor.  1.  26.  not  many  wise  m.  not  noble,  are  called
10.  15.  speak  as  to  wise  m.  judge  ye  w  hat  I  say

M  EN ,  joined  with  women.

Exod.  35.  22.  both  m.  and  women  brought  bracelets
Deut.  2.  34.  we  utterly  destroyed  the  m.  and  women,
and  little  ones,  of  every  city,  Josh.  8.  25.
Judg.  9.  49.  died  about  a  thousand  m.  and  women
51.  and  thither  fled  all  the  m.  and  women
16.  27.  now  the  house  was  full  of  m.  and  women,
were  upon  the  roof  about  3000  m.  and  women

2  Sam.  6.  19.  he  dealt  as  well  to  the  women  as  m.
Neh.  8.  2.  brought  the  law-  before  in.  and  women,  3.
Jer.  44.  20.  Jeremiah  said  to  the  m.  and  women
Acts  5.  14.  were  added  to  Lord  both  w.  and  women

8.  3.  Saul,  haling  rn.  and  women,  committed  them
12.  they  were  baptized,  both  rn.  and  women

9.  2.  w  hether  m.  or  w.  he  might  bring  them  bound

22.  4.  delivering  into  prison  both  m.  and  women
Men,  Women,  and  Children.  See  Children

Ye  MEN.

Judg.  9.  7.  hearken  unto  me,  ye  m.  of  Shechem
Job  34.  10.  hearken,  ye  rn.  of  understanding
Acts  1. 11.  yem.  of  Galilee  [|  2.  14.  ye  m.  of  Judea
5.  35.  ye  m.  of  Israel  ||  17.  22.  ye  m.  of  Athens

13.  15.  ye  m.  and  brethren,  if  ye  have  any  word
19.  35.  ye  m.  of  Ephesus,  what  man  is  there

Young  MEN.

Gen.  14.  24.  that  w  hich  the  young  m.  have  eaten
Exod.  24. 5.  Moses  sent  young  rn.  w  hich  offered  burnt
Num.  11.  28.  Joshua  one  of  the  young  m.  answered
Josh.  6.  23.  (he  young  rn.  that  were  spies  went  in
Judg.  14.  10.  for  so  used  the  young  m.  to  do
Ruth  2.  9.  have  1  not  charged  the  young  m.  that
3.  10.  inasmuch  as  thou  followedst  not  young  m.

1  Sam.  2.  17.  the  sin  of  the  young  rn.  was  very  great
8.  16.  he  will  take  your  goodliest  young  m.

21.  4.  if  the  young  m.  kept  themselves  from  women

5.  and  the  vessels  of  the  young  m.  are  holy
25.  8.  ask  thy  young  m.  and  they  will  shew  thee
25.  thine  handmaid  saw  not  the  young  m.

-6.  22.  let  one  of  the  young  ot.  come  over  and  fetch

30.  17.  save  400  young  m.  w  hich  rode  on  camels

2  Sam.  1.  15.  and  David  called  one  of  the  young  m.
2.  14.  let  the  young  m.  arise  and  play  before  us

21.  and  lay  thee  hold  on  one  of  the  young  m.

13.  32.  not  suppose  they  have  slain  all  the  young  m.
18.  15.  and  ten  young  m.  that  bare  Joab's  armour

1  Kings  12.  8.  Rehoboam  consulted  w  ith  young  m.

14.  spake  after  counsel  of  y.  in.  2  Chron.  10.  8,  14.
20-14.  by  young  m.  of  the  princes  of  the  provinces

2  Kings  4.  22.  send,  I  pray  thee,  one  of  the  young  m.
5.  22.  there  be  come  two  yiung  rn.  of  the  prophets

8.  12.  their  young  m.  wilt  thou  slay  with  the  sw  ord
2  Chron.  36.  17 .  who  slew  their  young  m.  with  sword
Job  1.  19.  it  fell  upon  the  young  m.  they  are  dead

29.  8.  the  young  m.  saw  me,  and  hid  themselves
Psal.  78.  63.  the  fire  consumed  their  young  m.

148.  12.  praise  the  I.ord,  young  m.  and  maidens
Prov.  20.  29.  the  glory  of  young  m.  is  their  strength
Isa.  9.  17.  Lord  shall  have  no  joy  in  their  young  m.

13.  18.  their  bows  also  shall  dash  young  rn.  to  pieces

23.  4.  neither  do  1  nourish  up  young  rn.  nor  virgins

31.  8.  and  his  young  m.  shall  be  discomfited
40.  30.  and  the  young  m.  shall  utterly  fall
42.  +  22.  spoiled  in  snaring  all  the  young  m.  of

Jer.  6.  11.  1  will  pour  fury  on  assembly  of  y.  m.

9.  21.  to  cut  off  the  young  m.  from  the  streets
11.  22.  the  young  m.  shall  die  by  the  sword
15.  8.  I  brought  against  the  mother  of  the  y.  m.

18.  21.  let  their  young  m.  be  slain  by  the  sword
31.  13.  both  young  m.  and  old  rejoice  together

48.  15.  his  chosen  young  m.  are  gone  to  slaughter

49.  26.  her  young  m.  shall  fall  in  her  streets

50.  30.  therefore  shall  her  y.  m.  fall  in  the  streets

51.  3.  spare  ye  not  her  young  m.  destroy  utterly
Lam.  1.  15.  called  an  assembly  to  crush  myj/.  m.

18.  my  virgins  and  y.  ot.  are  gone  into  captivity
2.  21.  the  young  m.  and  old  lie  on  the  ground
5. 13.  they  took  the  young  m.  to  grind,  children  fell

14.  the  young  m.  have  ceased  from  their  music
Ezek.  23.  6.  all  of  them  desirable  young  m.  12,  23.

30.  17.  young  m.  of  Aven  shall  fall  by  the  sword
Joel  2.  28.  your  y.  m.  shall  see  visions,  Acts  2.  17.
Amos  2.  11.  and  of  your  young  m.  for  Nazarites
4.  10.  your  young  m.  have  1  slain  with  the  sword
8.  13.  and  your  young  m.  shall  faint  for  thirst
Yech.  9.  17.  corn  shall  make  the  young  rn.  cheerful
Mark  14.  51.  and  the  young  m.  laid  hold  on  him
Acts  5.  6.  and  the  young  m.  arose,  w  ound  him  up

10.  the  young  rn.  came  in  and  found  her  dead
J  it.  2.  6.  young  rn.  likewise  exhort  to  be  sober

1  John  2.  13.  1  write  to  you,  young  rn.  because,  14.

MEN  D.

2  Chr.  24. 12.  brass  to  m.  the  house  of  the  Lord
34.  10.  they  gave  it  to  workmen  to  m.  the  house

MENDING.

Mat.  4.  21.  with  Zebedee  rn.  their  nets,  Mark  1.19.

M  EN  -pleasers.

Eph.  6.  6.  not  with  eye-service,  as  m.-p.  Col.  3.  22.

M  EN -stealers.

1  rim,  1. 10.  the  law  is  made  for  m. -stealers,  for  liars
MENSTRUOUS.

Isa.  30.22.  thou  shaltcast  them  away  as  a  m.  cloth
Lam.  1 . 17  .Jerusalem  is  as  a  m.  woman  among  them
Ezek.  18.  6.  neither  bath  come  near  to  a  m.  w;oman
MENTION.

Gen.  40.  14.  and  make  w.of  me  unto  Pharaoh


Exod.  23.  13.  make  no  rn.  of  other  gods,  Josh.  23.  ^

1  Sam.  4.  18.  when  he  made  m.  of  the  ark  of  Gou
Job  28.  18.  no  m.  shall  be  made  of  coral  or  pearls
Psal.  71.  16.  I  will  make  m.  of  thy  righteousness
87-  4.  1  will  make  rn.  of  Rahab  and  Babylon
Isa.  12.  4.  make  m.  that  his  name  is  exalted

19.  17-  that  maketh  m.  thereof  shall  be  afraid

26.  13.  by  thee  only  we  will  make  ot.  ofthynamf

48.  1.  and  make  m.  of  the  God  of  Israel,  but  not

49.  1.  from  bowels  hath  he  made  m.  of  my  name
62.  6.  ye  that  make  m.  of  the  Lord,  keep  not  silence

Jer.  4.  16.  make  ye  m.  to  nations, publish  agst.Jerus.

20.  9.  L  will  not  make  rn.  of  him,  nor  speak  more
Amos  6.  10.  we  may  not  make  rn.  of  name  of  Lord
Rom.  1.9.  without  ceasing  1  make  m.  of  you  always

in  my  prayers,  Eph.  1.  16.  1  Thess.  1.  2.
Phil.  1.  t  3.  1  thank  my  God  on  every  m.  of  you
Philem.  4.  making  m.  of  thee  always  in  my  prayers
Ileb.  11.  22.  Joseph  made  ot.  of  the  departing  ot  Isr
MENTION.

Isa.  63.  7-  J  will  m.  the  loving  kindnesses  of  the  L.
Jer.  23.  36.  burden  of  the  Lord  shall  ye  m.  no  more
MENTIONED.

Josh.  21.  9.  these  cities,  which  are  m.  by  name

1  Chron.  4.  38.  these  m.  by  name  were  princes

2  Chron.  20.  31.  Jehu  is  w..  in  the  book  of  the  kings
Ezek.  16.  56.  for  thy  sister  Sodom  was  not  m.

18.  22.  his  transgressions  shall  not  be  m.  to  him
24.  alibis  righteousness  shall  not  be  m.

33.  16.  none  of  his  sins  shall  be  m.  unto  him
MERCHANDISE.

Dent.  21.  14.  thou  shalt  not  make  m,  of  her
24.  7.  stealing  his  brethren,  and  maketh  m.  of  him
Prov.  3.  14.  m.  of  it  is  better  than  the  m.  of  gold
31.  18.  she  perceiveth  that  her  m.  is  good
Isa.  23.  18.  ner  m.  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord
45.  14.  the  ot.  of  Ethiopia  shall  come  over  to  thee
Jer.  14.  t  18.  priest  make  m.  against  a  land
Ezek.  26.  12.  they  shall  make  a  prey  of  thy  m.

27.  9.  the  ships  were  in  thee  to  occupy  thy  ot.

15.  many  isles  were  the  ot.  of  thy  hands

28. 16.  by  the  multitude  of  thy  rn.  they  have  filled
Mat.  22.  5.  one  to  his  farm,  another  to  his  ot.

John  2. 16. make  not  my  Father’s  house  a  house  of  ot
2  Pet.  2.  3.  with  feigned  words  make  m.  of  you
Rev.  18.  11.  no  man  buyeth  their  rn.  any  more
12.  the  rn.  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  of  pearlt
.  MERCHANT.

Gen.  23.  16.  silver  current  money  with  the  ot\-
.37.  28.  then  there  passed  by  Midianites  w.-men  •

1  Kings  10.  15.  besides  that  he  had  of  the  w.-men
Prov.  31.  14.  she  is  like  the  rn.  ships,  she  brings
24.  maketh  linen,  and  delivereth  girdles  to  thew.
Cant.  3.  6.  pertumed  with  all  powders  of  the  ot.
Isa.  23.  11.  a  commandment  against  the  ot.  city
Ezek.  27-  3  which  art  a  ot.  of  the  people  for  isles
12.  Tarshish  W'as  thy  ot.  by  reason  ofmultitude

16.  Syria  ||  18.  Damascus,  ||  20.  Dedan  was  ot.
nos.  12.  7-  he  is  a  ot.  balances  of  deceit  in  his  hand
Zeph.  1.  11.  for  all  the  ot.  people  are  cutdown
Mat.  13.  45.  like  a  m.-man  seeking  goodly  pearls

MERCHANTS.

1  Kings  10. 15.  and  of  the  traffic  of  spice  ot.

28.  the  king’s  w.  received  linen  yarn,  2  Chr.  1.  16,.
fl  Chron.  9.  14.  besides  that  w  hich  m.  brought
Neh.  3.  32.  repaired  the  goldsmiths  and  the  w„

13.  20.  so  the  m.  lodged  without  Jerusalem
Job  41.  6.  shall  they  puithim  among  the  m.?

Isa.  23.  2.  w  hom  the  ot.  of  Zidon  replenished
8.  the  crowning  city,  whose  ot.  are  princes
47.  15.  even  thy  ot.  they  shall  wander  every  one
Ezek.  17.  4.  cropt  the  twigs,  he  set  it  in  a  city  of  rn .
27 •  13.  Javan,  1  ubal.and  Meshech,  were  thy  ot..
15.  Dedan  ||  17.  Judah  and  Israel  thy  w.

21.  in  these  were  thy  ot.  ||  22.  ot.  of  Slieba,  23-
24.  these  were  thy  ot.  in  all  sorts  of  things
36.  ot.  shall  hiss  at  thee  ||  38.  13.  ot.  ofTarshisPr

Rah.  3.  16.  hast  multiplied  thy  ot.  above  the  stars'
l\€i\  18.  3.  for  the  m.  ot  the  earth  are  waxen  rich
11.  the  ot.  of  the  earth  shall  weep  over  her
23.  for  thy  rn.  were  the  great  men  of  the  earth
0.  MERCY

Signifies,  [1]  That  essential  perfection  in  God
whereby  he  pities  and  relieves  the  miseries  of
his  creatures,  Psal.  100.  5.  Tit.  3.  5.  [2]

Grace,  which  flows  from  mercy  as  its  fountain,
Jude  v.  [3]  Eternal  life  and  happiness  in -
heaven,  which  is  the  chief  fruit  of  mercy,  2
Iim.  1.  18.  [4]  All  the  blessings  and  benefits,
whether  bodily  or  spiritual,  which  proceed  from
the  mercy  of  God,  Psal.  106.  7.  |  119.  41.
[5]  That  pity  and  compassion  which  one  man
shews  towards  another  Pi  at  is  in  misery,  Luke
10.  37.  [6]  Clemency  and  bounty,  Prov.  20.  28..
[7J  All  onties  of  charity  towards  our  neighbour.
May.  13.  [8]  Pretended  acts  of  mercy,  Prov..

Gen.  24.  27.  not  left  destitute  my  master  of  m .  truth
43.  14.  and  God  give  you  ot.  before  the  man
Ef°d.  34.7.  keeping  ot.  for  thousands,  Dan.  9.  4.
Rum.  14.  18.  the  Lord  is  long-suffering  and  of  great
ot.  forgiving  iniquity,  Psal.  103.  11.  1 145.  8.
Dent.  1. 9-  who  keepelh  covenant  and  ot.  12.

2  ■Sam.  7.  15.  but  my  in.  shall  not  depart  from  him
1  Chron.  17.  13.  Psal.  89.  24’
15.  20.  return  thou,  ot.  and  truth  be  with  thee
1  Kings  8.  23.  who  keepest  covenant  and  ot.  with
,  „  thy  servants,  Neh.  1.5.  |  9.  32

1  Chron.  16.  34.  his  ot.  endureth  for  ever  41*

2  Chron.  5.  13.  |  7.  3  6.  |  20.  21.  Ezra
3.  11  Psal.  1(6.1.  f  107.  1.  |  118.  1
I  136. 1.  to  the  end,  Jer.  33.  li.

Ezra.  7.  28.  hath  extended  in.  to  me  before  the  kino
9.  9.  extended  ot.  to  us  in  sight  of  the  kings  of  Persia
1.  1L  grant  him  ot.  in  th«  sight  of  this  man
Jib  37.  13.  w'hether  for  correction  or  for  m.

Djal.  21.  7-  and  through  the  ot.  of  the  Most  High
23.  6.  surely  goodness  and  w.  shall  follow  me
.5. 10.  all  tlie  paths  of  the  1  ord  are  rn,  and  truth
10-  that  trusts  in  I  d.n, .  shall  compass  him  about
33.  1 5.  the  earth  is  full  of  thew.  of  the  Lord
18.  the  eye  of  Lord  .o  on  them  that  hope  in  his  m

311


MER


MES


MER


pxal  52. 8.  1  trust  in  the  m.  of  G  :d  for  ever  and  ever
57,  3.  God  shall  send  forth  his  m.  and  truth
59*.  10.  the  God  of  my  m.  shall  prevent  me,  17 •

61.  7.  O  prepare  m.  and  truth  which  may  preser  e

62.  12.  also  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  belongeth  rn.

66.  20.  which  hath  not  turned  his  rn.  from  me
77.  8.  is  his  m.  clean  gone  for  ever  .  doth  rn.  fail  _

85. 10.  rn.  and  truth  are  met  together,  righteousness
86.  5.  thou,  Lord,  art  plenteous  in  ni,  15. 1  103.  8.

89.  2.  1  said,  rn.  shall  be  built  up  for  ever

14  m.  and  truth  shall  go  before  thy  face
28.  my  m.  will  1  keep  for  him  tor  evermore
98.  3.  lie  hath  remembered  his  rn.  toward  Israel

100.  5.  the  Lord  is  good,  his  m.  is  everlasting

101.  1.  I  will  sing  of  rn.  and  judgment,  to  thee
103.  17.  the  rn.  of  the  Lord  is  from  everlasting
109  12.  let  there  be  none  to  extend  rn  to  him
130  7  with  the  Lord  there  is  m.  and  redemption
144  +  2  Lord  is  my  rn.  and  my  fortress,  and  tower
147*  11.  takes  pleasure  in  those  that  hope  in  his  rn.

Prov  3.  3.  let  not  rn.  and  truth  forsake  thee
14  21.  he  that  hath  rn.  on  the  poor,  happy  is  he

22.  m.  and  truth  shall  be  to  them  that  devise  good
31.  he  that  honoureth  God  hath  m.ovt  the  poor

16.  6.  by  m.  and  truth  iniquity  is  purged  .

20.  28.  rn.  and  truth  preserve  the  king,  and  his
throne  is  upholden  by  rn.  Isa.  10.  5.

21  21.  he  that  followeth  after  m.  findeth  life
Isa.  49. 10.  he  that  hath  rn.  on  them  shall  lead  them
54.  10.  saith  the  Lord  that  hath  m.  on  thee
60.  10.  but  in  my  favour  have  I  had  m.  on  thee
Jer.  6.  23.  they  are  cruel,  and  have  no  rn.

Hos.  1.  t  6.  call  her  name,  not  having  obtained  m.
o%  1 1,  say  to  brethren  and  sisters,  having  obtain,  rn.

4.  1.  because  there  is  no  truth,  nor  m.  in  the  land
6.  +  4.  for  your  rn.  is  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  dew
6.  for  I  desired  m.  and  not  sacrifice  .  _

10.  12.  reap  in  rn.  \\  12.6.  keep  m. and  wait  onG.

14.  3.  for  in  thee  the  fatherless  findeth  m.

Jonah  2.  8.  they  forsake  their  own  m.

Mic.  6.  8.  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  m  .

7. 18.  retains  not  anger,  because  he  delighteth  in  m.

20  thou  wilt  perform  the  m.  to  Abraham
Hah.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  in  wrath  remember  m.

Mat.  5.  7.  blessed  are  the  merciful,  shall  obtain  m.

23.  23.  and  h*ve  omitted  judgment  and  m.

Luke  1.  50.  his  m.  is  on  them  that  tear  him

54.  holpen  Israel  in  remembrai.ee  of  his  rn.

72.  to  perform  the  m.  promised  to  our  lathers
78.  by  remission  through  the  tender  m.  ot  our  Or.
Rom.  9.  23.  the  riches  of  his  glory  on  vessels  of  m.

11.  30.  have  now  obtained  m.  thro  their  unbelief
31.  that  through  your  rn.  they  also  may  obtain  m.

15.  9.  that  Gentiles  might  glorify  God  tor  his  rn.

1  Cor.  7.  25.  that  hath  obtained  rn.  to  be  faithful

2  Cor.  4. 1.  as  we  have  received  m.  we  faint  not
Gal.  6.  16.  peace  be  on  them,  and  m.  and  on  Israel
Evh.  2.  4.  God  who  is  rich  in  rn.  hath  quickened  us
Phil.  2.  27.  was  nigh  to  death,  but  G.  had  m.  on  him
1  Tim.  1.2 .m.  and  peace  from  God  our  rather,  and

J.  Christ  our  L.  2  Tim.  1.2.  Tit.  1.  4.  2  John  3.

13.  but  I  obtained  m.  because  I  did  it  ignorantly

16.  howbeit,  for  this  cause  I  obtained  m.

o  Tim.  1.16.  L.  give  rn.  to  the  house  of  Onesiphorus
18.  that  he  may  find  m.  of  the  Lord  in  that  day
Tit.  3.  5.  but  according  to  his  m.  he  saved  us
Heb.  4.  16.  that  we  may  obtain  rn.  and  find  grace
10  28  he  that  despised  Moses’  law  died  without  m.
Jam.  2. 13.  he  shall  have  judgment  without  rn.  that
shewed  no  m.  and  rn.  rejoiceth  against  judgment
3. 17.  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is  full  of  m.

5  11.  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender  m.

1  Pet  1.  3.  accord,  to  his  abundant  m.  hath  begotten
2.10.  had  not  obtained  m.  but  now  have  obtained  m.
Jude  2.  m.  to  you,  peace  and  love  be  multiplied
21  looking  for  the  m.  of  Lord  .1  esus  to  eternal  life
Have  MERCY.

Psal.  4. 1.  have  m.  upon  me,  6.  2.  |  9.  13.  |  25.  16.

I  27.  7.  I  30.  10. 1  31.  9. 1  51.  1.  I  86.  16.

102.  13.  shalt  h.  m.  on  Zion  ||  123.  2.  h.  m.  on  us,  3.
Prov.  28. 13.  whoso  forsake th  his  sins  shall  have  m.
Isa. 9. 17-  neither  h.  m.  on  their  fatherless  and  widows

14.  1.  for  Lord  will  have  rn.  on  .lacob,  and  choose
27.  11.  he  that  made  them  will  not  have  rn.  on  them
30.  18.  be  exalted,  that  he  may  have  m.  on  you
49.  13.  for  God  will  havern.  upon  his  afflicted

54. 8.  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I  h.  rn.  on  thee
55.7.  let  him  return,  and  he  will  have  m.  on  him
Jer.  13.  14.  nor  have  rn.  but  destroy  them,  21.  7 •

30.  18.  and  1  will  have  m.  on  his  dwelling-places
31  20.  I  will  surely  have  rn.  on  him,  33.  26.  Ezek.

39.  25.  Hos.  1.  7. 1  2.  23.
42.  12.  that  he  may  havem.  on  you,  and  cause  you
Hos  1 .  6.  no  more  h.  m.  on  the  house  of  Israel,  2.  4.
Zech.  1.12.  O  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou  not  have  m.
10.6.  I  will  bring  them  again,  for  1  h.  rn.  upon  them
Mat.' 9.  13.1  will  have  m.  and  not  sacrifice,  12.  7-
27'  thou  Son  of  David,  have  m.  on  me,  15.  22.

1  20.  30,  31.  Mark  10.  47,  48.  Luke  18.  38,  39.

17.  15.  Lord,  have  rn.  on  my  son,  for  he  is  lunatic
Luke  16.  24.  father  Abraham,  h.  m.  on  me,  and  send

17.  13.  they  said,  Jesus,  Master,  have  m.  on  us
Rom.  9.  15.  I  will  have  m.  on  whom  1  will  h.  m.  18.
11  32.  all  in  unbelief,  that  he  might  have  m.  on  ail
MERCY,  joined  with  shew,  shewed,
sheweth,  shewing.

Gen.  39.21.  L.  was  with  Joseph,  and  shewed  him  m.
Exod.  20.  6.  shewing  rn.  to  thousands,  Deut.  5.  10.
33.  19.  1  will  shew  rn.  on  whom  1  will  shew  m.
Deut. 7. <2.  shalt  make  no  covenant,  nor  shew  them  m.
13. 17.  that  the  Lord  may  turn  and  shew  thee  m.
Judg.  1.24.  shew  us  city,  and  we  will  shew  thee  m.
2  Sam.  22. 51.  sheweth  m.  to  his  anointed,  Ps.  18.  50.

1  Kings  3.  6.  Solomon  said,  thou  hast  shewed  to  thy

servant  David,  my  father,  great  m.  2  Chron.  1. 8.

2  Chron.  6. 14.  and  shewest  m.  to  thy  servants
Psal.  37. 21.  but  the  righteous  sheweth  m.  and  giveth

85.7.  shew  us  thy  m.  O  Lord,  and  grant  thy  sal  vat.
109.  16.  because  he  remembered  not  to  shew  m.
Isa.  47.6.  and  thou  didst  shew  them  now.

Jer.  50.  42.  they  are  cruel,  and  will  not  shew  m.
Van.  4.  27.  bre'ak  off  thy  sins,  by  shewing  rn.

312


Zech.  7.  9.  execute  true  judgment,  and  shew  rn.

Luke  1.  58.  how  the  Lord  shewed  great  m.  on  her
10.  37.  and  he  said,  he  that  shewed  m.  on  him
Horn.  9.  16.  not  that  runs,  but  ot  God  that  sheweth  rn.

12.  8.  he  that  sheweth  rn.  with  cheerfulness

Jam  2  13.  judgment  without  m.  that  hath  shewed
jam.  *  j  e  ^  MERCY  [no  m.

Gen.  19.  19.  and  thou  hast  magnified  thy  m.  to  me
Exod.  15.  13.  in  thy  rn.  hast  led  forth  the  people
Num.  14.  19.  according  to  the  greatness  ol  thy  rn.

Neh.  13.  22.  spare  me  according  to  thy  m.

Psal.  5.  7.  into  thy  house,  in  multitude  of  thy  rn.

6.  4.  return,  O  L.  save  me  tor  thy  m.  sake,  31. 10.

13.  5.  l  have  trusted  in  t.  rn.  my  heartshall  rejoice
25.  7.  according  to  thy  m.  remember  thou  me
31.  7.  1  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  thy  m.  tor  thou
3:L  22.  let  thy  m.  O  Lord,  be  upon  us,  as  we  hope
36.  5.  thy  rn.  O  Lord,  is  in  the  heavens
44.  26.  arise,  and  redeem  us,  for  thyrn.  sake
57  10.  for  thy  rn.  is  great  unto  the  heavens
59*.  16.  I  will  sing  aloud  of  thy  m.  in  the  morning
69!  13.  in  the  multitude  of  thy  rn.  hear  me
85.7.  shew  us  thy  m.  O  L.  II 86.  13.  great  is  thy  m.

90.  14.  O  satisfy  us  early  with  thy  in.  to  rejoice
94. 18.  my  foot  slippeth,  thym.  O  Lord,  held  me  up
108.  4.  for  thy  rn.  is  great  above  the  heavens
109.21.  because  thy  m.  is  good,  deliver  thou  me

06  O  Lord  my  God,  save  me  according  to  thy  m.

115  1.  for  thy  rn.  and  for  thy  truth’s  sake
119  64.  the  earth,  O  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  m.

124.  deal  witli  thy  servant  according  to  thy  rn.

138  8.  thy  m.  endureth  tor  ever,  forsake  not
143  12  and  of  thy  rn.  cut  off  mine  enemies
MERCIES.

Gen.  32.  10.  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  thy  m
2  Sam.  24.  14.  for  his  rn.  are  great,  1  Chron.  2L.13.

2  C/ir.  6.  42.  remember  the  m .  of  David  thy  servant
Neh.  9. 19.  in  thy  manifold  m.  forsookest  them  not
27.  according  to  thy  m.  thou  gavest  them  saviours
°8  many  times  didst  deliver  according  to  thy  m.

3l]  for  thy  m.  thou  didst  not  consume  them
Ps.  51. 1.  according  to  thy  m.  blot  out  my  transgr.

69. 13.  in  the  multitude  of  thy  rn.  hear  me
16.  turn  unto  me,  according  to  thy  tender  m.

89.  1.  I  will  sing  of  the  m.  of  the  Lord  tor  ever
106. 7.  they  remembered  not  multitude  ot  thv  m.

45.  he  repented  according  to  multitude  of  his  rn.
119.  41.  let  thy  m.  come  also  to  me,  O  Lord
Isa.  54.7-  with  great  rn.  will  1  gather  thee
55.  3.  even  the  sure  rn.  of  David,  Acts  13.  34.

63.  7.  he  bestowed  on  them  according  to  his  m.

15.  where  is  thv  zeal  and  thy  rn.  towards  me  r
Jer.  16.  5.  I  have  taken  away  my  rn.  from  this  peop.
42. 12.  will  shew  rn.  to  you  that  he  may  have  mercy
Lam~.  3.  22.  it  is  of  Lord’s  m.  we  are  not  consumed
32.  have  compassion  according  to  mult,  of  his  rn.
Dan.  2.  18.  would  desire  m.  concerning  this  secret
9.  9.  to  the  L.  our  God  belong  rn.  and  forgivenesses
18.  not  for  our  righteousness,  but  thy  great  m.

Hos.  2.  19-  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  rn.

Zed  1 .  16.  I  am  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  rn.
Rom.  12.  1.  I  beseech  you  by  the  m.  of  God
2  Cor.  1.  3.  the  Father  of  rn.  and  God  of  all  comfort
Phil  ‘2.’  1.  if  there  be  any  fellowship,  any  bowels

[of  m.

Col  3  12.  put  on  therefore  bowels  of  m.  kindness
Tender  MERCIES.

Ps.  25.  6.  remember,  O  Lord,  thy  tender,  rn.  51.  1.
40.  11.  withhold  not  thy  tender  m.  from  me
77.  9.  hath  he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender  m.

79.  8.  let  thy  tender  rn.  speedily  prevent  us
103.  4.  bless  L.  who  crowneth  thee  with  tender  m.
119.  77-  let  thy  tender  m.  come  untome,  that  1  may
156.  great  are  thy  tender  rn.  O  Lord,  quicken  me
145.  9.  his  tender  rn.  are  over  all  his  works
Prov  12  10.  the  tender  m.  of  the  wicked  are  cruel
MERCIFUL.

Gen.  19. 16.  the  Lord  being  rn.  unto  Lot
Exod.  34.  6.  proclaimed  Lord  God  m.  and  gracious
Deut.  21.  8.  be  rn.  O  Lord,  to  thy  people  Israel
32.  43.  and  will  be  ?n.  to  his  land  and  people
o  Sam  22  26.  with  the  m.  thou  wilt  shew  thyselt
m.  with  upright  thyself  upright,  Psal.  18.  25.

1  Kings  20.  31.  heard  that  kings  ot  lsr.  are  m.  kings

2  Chron.  30.  9.  Lord  your  God  is  gracious  and  rn.
Neh.  9. 17.  art  G.  ready  to  pardon,  gracious  and  m.
Psal  °6. 11.  redeem  me,  and  be  rn.  to  me,  41.  4, 10.

|  56.  L|  57.  1.  I  86.  3.  I  119.  58,  132.
37  .  26.  the  righteous  is  ever  m.  and  lendeth
59*.  5.  be  not  rn.  to  any  wicked  transgressors
67.1.  G .  be  m.  to  us,  and  bless  us,  and  cause  his  face
103.  8.  Lord  is  m.  and  gracious,  slow  to  anger
117.  2.  for  his  m.  kindness  is  great  toward  us
119.76.  let  thy  rn.  kindness  be  tor  my  comfort
Prov.  11. 17  •  the  rn.  man  doeth  good  to  his  own  soul
Isa.  57. 1.  rn.  men  are  taken  away,  none  considering
Jer.  3.  12.  return,  for  I  am  rn.  saith  the  Lord
Joel  2. 13.  he  is  gracious  and  m.  slow  to  anger
Jonah  4.  2.  for  1  knew  that  thou  art  a  m.  God
Mat.  5.  7  •  blessed  are  the  m.  they  shall  obtain  mercy
Luke  6.  36.  be  ye  rn.  as  your  father  also  is  rn.

18.  13.  publican  saying,  God  be  m.  to  me  a  sinner
Heb  2  17-  that  he  might  be  a  rn.  High-priest
8  1  will  be  m.  to  their  unrighteousness

See  God.

MERCY-SEAT,

Or  Propitiatory,  was  the  covering  of  the  ark  0}  the
covenant,  or  of  the  holy  chest,  in  which  the  tables
of  the  law  were  deposited  :  this  cover  was  of  gold,
and  at  its  two  ends  were  fixed  the  two  cherubirns  oj
the  same  metal,  which  by  their  wings  extended  Jor-
ward,  seemed  to  form  a  throne  for  the  majesty  oj
God,  who  in  Scripture  is  represented  as  sitting  be¬
tween  the  cherubirns ,  Psal.  80. 1.  and  the  ark  itself
was  as  it  were  his  footstool.  It  was  an  eminent
type  of  Christ,  who  by  his  atonement  covered  our
sins,  and  bore  the  curse  for  us;  standing  between
God  and  the  curse  of  the  law  for  our  sakes,  that
God  might  look  on  the  law  through  Christ,  as  Jut-
filled  by  him  on  our  behalf.  Gal.  3. 10,  13.  Hence
Christ  is  called  the  Propitiation,  Rom.  3.  25.
Exod.  25. 17.  and  thou  shalt  make  a  m.-seat  ot  gold


Exod.  25. 20.  cherub,  cov.  m.-s.  with  wings,  Heb. 9. 5
22  I  will  commune  with  thee  from  above  m.-seat
"'between  the  cherubirns,  Lev.  16.  2.  Num.  7.  89.  :
26.  34.  shalt  put  the  m.-seat  upon  the  ark,  40.  20.
37.  6.  and  he  made  the  m.-seat  of  pure  gold
Lev.  16. 13.  cloud  of  incense  may  cover  the  m.-seat
1  Chr.  28. 11.  David  gave  Solom.  pattern  of  m.-seai
MERRY.

Gen.  43.  34.  they  drank  and  were  m.  with  him
Judg.  9.  27.  they  trode  the  grapes,  and  made  rn.

16.  25*.  their  hearts  were  rn.  they  said,  call  Samsoi.  ■
19  6  tarry  all  night,  and  let  thine  heart  be  rn.

9.  lodge  here,  that  thine  heart  may  be  rn.

22.  now  as  they  were  making  their  hearts  m.
Ruth  3  7  and  when  Boaz  his  heart  was  rn.  he  wem  t

1  Ham.  25.  36.  Nabal’s  heart  was  rn.  within  him

2  Sam.  13.  28.  mark  when  Amnon’s  heart  is  rn.

1  Kings  4.  20.  Judah  and  Israel  were  making  m.

°1  7  arise,  eat  bread,  and  let  thine  heart  be  m.

2  Chr.  7.  10.  he  sent  the  people  away  m.  in  heart
Esth  1  10.  when  the  heart  of  the  king  was  rn.
Prov.  15. 13.  m.  heart  maketh  cheerful  countenance  j

15.  he  that  is  of  a  m.  heart  hath  a  continual  feast

17.  22.  a  m.  heart  doeth  good  like  a  medicine
Ecc/  h  15.  hath  nothing  better  than  to  eat  and  be  rn.  \

9.  7'.  and  drink  thy  wine  with  a  rn.  heart

10.  19.  feast  made  for  laughter,  wine  maketh  m.
Isa.  24.7.  vine  languished,  all  the  m.  hearted  dosigh  j
ler  30  19.  the  voice  of  them  that  make  m.

*3l’.  4.  in  the  dances  of  them  that  make  rn.

Luke  12.  19.  take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  w.

15.  23.  let  us  eat  and  be  m.  24.  !  29.  I  might  be  m,  I
30  it  was  meet  we  should  make  m.  and  be  glad  '
Jam.  5.  13.  is  any  m.?  let  him  .sing  psalms
Rev  11.  10.  shall  rejoice  over  them  and  make  m
MERRILY.

Esth.  5.  14.  then  go  thou  in  m.  with  the  king
MESSAGE.

Judg.  3.  20.  Ehud  said-  I  have  a  rn.  from  G.  to  thee
1  Kings  20.  12.  when  Benhadad  had  heard  this  »/..!
Prov  26.  6.  he  that  sendeth  a  rn.  by  fool  cutfeth  off
Hag.  1.  13.  then  spake  tlaggai  in  the  Lord’s  m.
Luke  19.  14.  his  citizens  sent  a  m.  after  him  •

1  John  1.  5.  this  is  the  m.  which  we  have  heard,  3. 11,
MESSENGER

Signifies,  One  who  carries  messages  between  party
and  party,  Gen.  32.  3.  150.  16.  It  is  applied.

[1]  To  Christ  Jesus,  called  the  Messenger  oil
the  covenant,  Mai.  3.  1.  Who,  though  he  fit,
one  with  the  Father,  yet  humbled  himself  Joi‘
our  sakes,  to  be  as  a  messenger  from  his  la,
ther,  to  declare  his  will  to  us,  to  confirm  the
covenant  of  grace  by  his  death,  to  revea,  tin.
salvation,  with  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Spin
to  work  true  faith  and  repentance  in  our  hearts  \

[2]  To  prophets  or  teachers,  who  are  appointee *
by  God  to  declare  his  will  and  commands  to  In.
people,  Job  33.  23.  Mai.  2.  7-  I  3.  1.  [3]  lo  am
bassadors  sent  by  one  prince  to  another,  2  King;,

16.  7.  [4]  To  spies,  or  such  as  privily  searej ;

into  the  state  of  places  or  affairs.  Josh.  6.  1?
Jam.  2.  25.  [5]  To  any  dreadful  pumshmeu j
which  God  inflicts  upon  the  wicked  for  their  sins
Prov.  17.  11.  —  ,  .

Gen.  50.  16.  they  sent  a  m.  to  Joseph,  saynng
Judg.  2.  1 1.  a  m.  of  the  Lord  came  from  Gilgal

1  Sam.  4.  17.  and  the  m.  said,  Israel  is  fled

2  Sam.  15.  13.  there  came  a  rn.  to  David,  saying

1  Kings  19.  2.  then  Jezebel  sent  a  m.  to  Elijah
22  13.  the  rn.  went  to  call  Micaiah,  2  Chron. ,18.  !

2  Kings  6.  32.  but  ere  the  m.  came  to  him,  when  tin
rn.  cometh,  shut  the  door,  hold  him  tad

9.  18.  the  rn.  came  to  them,  but.  cometh  notagan..
Job  l.  14.  there  came  a  m.  to  Job,  and  said
33.  23.  if  there  beam,  an  interpreter  of  a  thousan
Prov.  13.  17.  a  wicked  rn.  falleth  into  mischief

17.  11.  a  cruel  m.  shall  be  sent  against  him
25.  13.  so  is  a  faithful  m.  to  them  that  send  him  |

Isa.  42. 19.  who  is  blind  or  deaf,  as  my  rn.  that  1  sent
Jer  51.  31.  one  m.  shall  run  to  meet  another
Ezek.  23.  40.  to  whom  a  m.  was  sent,  they  came
Hag.  1.  13.  then  spake  Haggai,  the  Lord  s  m.
Mai.  2.  7.  for  he  is  the  rn.  ot  the  Lord  of  hosts
3  1.  1  will  send  my  m.  even  the  rn.  of  the  cov;

nant.  Mat.  11.  10.  Mark  1.  2.  Luke  ,.  f
2  Cor.  12-  7.  the  m.  of  Satan,  to  buffet  me,  lest  J
Phil  °  25  mv  companion  in  labour,  but  your  r,:
MESSENGERS..

Gen.  32.  3.  Jacob  sent  m.  before  him  to  Esau
AYwi.20.14.  Moses  sent  rn.  from  Kadesh,  Dent... .

21.  21.  Israel  sent™.  unto  Sihon,  saying

22.  5.  Balak  sent  m.  to  Balaam,  the  son  ot  Bern

24.  12.  spake  I  not  also  to  thy  rn.  sent  to  me  '
Josh.  6.  17.  Rahab  hid  the  m.  that  we  sent,  -5.

7.  22.  so  Joshua  sent  m.  to  A  chan  s  tent
Judg.  6.  35.  Gideon  sent  m.  through  Manasseh  |
11. 12.  Jephthah  sent  m.  to  the  king  of  Ammon,  1

1  Sam.  11.  4.  then  came  the  rn.  to  Gibeahof  haul
16. 19.  Saul  sent  rn.  to  Jesse,  and  said,  send  Itev
19.  11.  Saul  sent  rn.  to  David,  14,  15,  20,  21.

25.  14.  David  sent  m.  to  salute  our  master
4 {.  Abigail  went  after  the  m.  of  David

2  Sam.  2.  5.  David  sent™,  to  Jabesh-gilead
3.  12.  Abner  sent  m.  to  David  on  his  behalf

14.  David  sent  m.  to  Ish-bosheth,  Saul  s  son

26.  Joab  sent  m.  after  Abner,  which  brought
5.  11.  Hiram  sent  rn.  to  David,  1  Chron.  14.  l • J

11.  4.  David  sent  m.  to  Bathsheba,  and  took  n

12.  27.  Joab  sent  rn.  to  David,  and  said,  I  torn- (

1  Kings  20. 2.  Benhadad  sent  m.  to  A  nab,  king  or

2  Kings  1. 3.  go  up  to  meet  the  rn.  of  Ahazian

16.  forasmuch  as  sent  m.  to  inquire  ot  Baal-zw

14.  8.  then  Amaziahsent  rn.  to  Jehoasb  km„o  .

16.  7.  so  Aliaz  sent  rn.  to  'l  iglath  pileser  kmg

17.  4.  Iloshea  had  sent  rn.  to  So,  king  ot  k„y  I
19.  9.  Sennacherib  sent  rn.  to  Hezekiah,  lsa.-nj

23.  by  thy  rn.  hast  thou  reproached  the  1.01

1  Chron.  19.  2.  David  sent  rn.  to  comfort  ",

2  Chron.  36. 15.  the  Lord  sent  to  them  by  n  s  w  ,
16.  but  they  mocked  the  rn.  of  God,  and  «’esp

Prov.  16.  14.  the  wrath  of  a  king  is  as  m.  <’t  m*.
Isa  14  32.  what  shall  one  answer  rn.  ol  the  n<u  -


MID


M  I  D


M  I  G


rsa,  18.  C.  go  ve  swift  m.  to  nation  scattered  and  peel .
•13.  t7-  behold,  their  w.  shall  cry  without
37. 14.  Hezekiah  received  letter  from  wi.and  read  it
44.  26.  and  performed!  the  counsel  of  his  m.

57.  Q.  and  thou  didst  send  thy  rn.  afar  off
er.  27-  3.  send  by  the  hand  of  the  m.  which  come
'.sek.  23.  16.  sent  tn.  unto  them  into  Chaldea
1 30.9.  in  that  day  shall  tn.  go  forth  from  me  in  ships
|w»A.  2. 13.  the  voice  of  thy  m.  be  no  more  heard
tike  7.  24.  and  when  the  rn.  of  John  were  gone
52.  and  sent  tn.  before  his  face,  they  went
Cor.  8.  23.  they  are  the  m.  of  the  churches

am.  2. 25.  by  works,  when  Rahab  had  received  m

MESS,  or  MESSES.
len.  43.  34.  Joseph  took  and  sent  m.  to  them,  but
Benjamin’s  m.  five  times  so  much  as  theirs
Sam.  11. 8.  there  followed  Uriah  a  m.  from  the  king
MESSIAH

ianifies.  Anointed.  It  is  applied  principally ,
and  by  way  of  eminence ,  to  that  sovereign  De¬
liverer,  who  was  expected,  by  the  Jews,  and  whom
they  vainly  expect  even  to  this  day,  since  he  is
already  come  at  the  appointed  time.  They  used
\  to  anoint  kings,  high  priests,  and  sometimes  pro¬
phets.  Saul,  David,  Solomon,  and  Joash,  re¬
ceived  the  royal  unction  :  Aaron  and  his  sons  re¬
ceived  the  sacerdotal;  and  Elisha,  the  disciple
of  Elijah,  received  the  prophetic  unction,  at  least
God  ordered  Elijah  to  give  it,  1  Kings  19.  16.
and  therefore  the  name  Messiah,  or  Anointed,  is
given  to  the  kings ,  1  Sam.  12.  3,  5.  and  also
to  the  patriarchs  or  prophets,  1  Chron.  16.  22.
Psal.  105.  15.  But  this  name  chiefly  belongs
to  Jesus  Qhrist,  by  way  of  excellence,  who  was
the  object  of  the  desire  and  of  the  expectation
of  the  saints.  Hannah,  the  mother  of  Samuel,
plainly  alludes  to  Jesus  Christ,  when  at  the
end  of  her  hymn,  and  at  a  time  when  there
was  no  king  in  Israel,  she  says.  The  Lord  shall
give  strength  to  his  King,  and  exalt  the  horn
of  his  Anointed,  1  Sam.  2.  10.  See  also  Psal.

2.  2. 1  45.  7.  Dan.  9.  25,  26.  It  is  not  found
any  where,  that  Jesus  Christ  ever  received  any
sensible  unction ;  or  that  the  apostles  anointed
the  faithful  with  any  particular  or  external  oil
or  ointment.  The  unction  that  the  prophets
and  the  apostles  speak  of,  when  Jesus  Christ
or  his  disciples  are  understood,  is  the  spiritual
and  internal  unction  of  grace  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  of  which  the  outward  and  sensible  unction,
with  which  they  anciently  anointed  kings,  priests,
and  prophets,  was  but  the  figure  and  symbol.

an.  9.  25.  from  the  commandment  to  build

Jerusalem,  unto  the  M.  the  Prince  shall

be  seven  weeks

26.  and  after  62  weeks  shall  \J.  be  cut  off
hn  1.  41.  we  have  found  the  M.  which  is  Christ
.25.  the  woman  saith,  1  know  that  M.  cometh
MET.

en.  32. 1.  and  the  angel  of  God  m.  him

3.8.  what  meanest  thou  by  this  drove  I  m.  ?
rod.. 3. 18.  the  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  m.

with  us,  let  us  go  to  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  5.  3.

.  24.  the  Lord  m.  him,  and  sought  to  kill  him
27-  Aaron  went  and  m.  Moses  in  the  mount
.  20.  they  m.  Moses  and  Aaron  who  stood  in  way
um.  23. 4.  God  m.  Balaam,  and  said  to  him,  16/
tut.  23.4.  because  they  m.  you  not,  Neh.  13.  2.

5. 18.  Amalek  m.  thee  by  way,  and  smote  feeble
sh.  11.  5.  and  when  all  these  kings  were  m.

\am.  10.  lo.  a  company  of  prophets  tn.  Saul
i.  20.  behold,  Abigail  rn.  David  and  his  men
'am.  16. 1.  Ziba  m.  David  with  asses  saddled

3.9.  Absalom  m.  the  servants  of  David
lings  13.  24.  when  he  was  gone,  a  lion  m.  him
i.  7.  Elijah  m.  Obadiah,  and  he  knew  him
lings  9.  21.  Joram  and  Ahaziah  m.  Jehu
;).  13.  Jehu  m.  with  the  brethren  of  Ahaziah

i  4.  + 14.  fear  m.  me  that  made  my  bones  shake
at.  85. 10.  mercy  and  truth  are  m.  together
ov.  7.  10.  behold,  there  m.  him  a  woman
nos  5.  19.  flee  from  a  lion,  and  a  bear  m.  him
it.  8. 28.  there  m.  him  two  possessed  with  devils
1.  9.  behold,  Jesus  m.  them,  saying,  all  hail
irk  11.  4.  in  a  place  where  two  ways  m.

"■ke  9.  37.  much  people  m.  him,  John  12.  18.

:  •  12.  there  m.  him  ten  men  that  were  lepers
>n  11.  20.  then  Martha  went  and  m.  him,  30.
ts  10.  25.  Cornelius  m.  him,  and  fell  down
>.  16.  a  certain  damsel  possessed  m.  us
'.  17.  he  disputed  with  them  that  m.  with  him
4J.  falling  into  a  place  where  two  seas  m.

7- 1.  who  w.  Abraham  returning  from  slaught.

■TIC  r'jrhor’o  I nihnn  1\  T  .  .1  U  .1  ^ L  i ...


.  MIDDLEMOST.

Ezek.  42.  5.  higher  than  the  tn.  of  the  building,  6.
MIDNIGHT.

Exod.  11.  4.  atm.  will  I  go  into  the  midst  of  Egypt

12.  29.  at  m.  the  Lord  smote  the  first-born
Judg .  16.  3.  Samson  lay  till  m.  and  arose  at  m.
Ruth  3.  8.  at  m.  the  man  was  afraid,  and  turned
1  A  iugs  3.  20.  she  arose  at  m.  and  took  my  son
Job  34.  20.  the  people  shall  be  troubled  at  m.

Psal.  119.  62.  at  m.  I  will  rise  to  give  thanks
Mat.  25.  6.  at  m.  there  was  a  cry  made,  behold
Mark  13.  35.  whether  he  shall  come  at  even,  or  m.
Luke  11.5.  shall  go  to  him  at  m.  and  say,  lend  me
Acts  16.  25.  and  atm.  Paul  and  Silas  prayed

20.  7.  Paul  continued  his  speech  till  m.

MIDST

Signifies,  [1]  That  part  which  is  equally  distant
from  the  extremes,  or  the  centre  of  a  circle  or
sphere,  Num.  35.  5.  Luke  23.  45.  [2]  Among,
Deut.  18.  15.  Mat.  10.  16.  [3]  The  thickest  of
a  throng,  Luke  4.  30.  [4]  The  most  open  or
public  place,  Deut.  13.  16.  [5]  The  most  con¬

venient  place,  Deut.  19.  2.  [6]  The  deepest  part.
Josh.  3.  17.

Exod.  14.  16.  shall  go  on  dry  ground  through  m.of
sea,  Num.  33.  8.  Neh.  9.  11.  Psal.  136.  14.
23.  25.  1  will  take  sickness  from  the  m.  of  thee
Deut.  4.  11.  the  mountain  burnt  to  the  m.  of  heaven

13.  5.  shalt.  put  evil  away  from  the  rn.  of  thee
18.  15.  thy  God  will  raise  a  Prophet  from  m.  of  thee

1  Kings  8.  51.  from  the  m.  of  the  furnace  of  iron

2  Chr.  32.  4.  brook  that  ran  thro’  the  m.  of  the  land
Cant.  3.  10.  them,  thereof  being  paved  with  love
Isa.  4.  4.  purged  blood  from  the  m.  of  Jerusalem
30.  28.  breath  shall  reac  h  to  the  m.  of  the  neck
58.  9.  take  away  from  the  m.  of  thee  the  yoke

Jer.  30.  21. the  governor  proceed  from  the  m.  of  them
48.  45.  a  flame  shall  come  from  the  m.  of  Sihon
Ezek.  9.  4.  go  through  the  m.  of  the  city  and  set
11.  23.  the  glory  of  Lord  went  up  from  m.  of  citv

14.  8.  I  will  cut  him  off  from  m.  of  my  people,  9.

+  16.  though  these  three  were  in  the  m.  of  it

15.  4.  the  m.  of  it  is  burnt,  is  it  meet  for  work  ?

28.  16.  have  filled  the  m.  of  thee  with  violence
18.  I  will  bring  forth  a  fire  from  the  m.  of  thee

Dan.  3.  26.  came  forth  of  the  m.  of  the  fire
Amos.  2.  3. 1  will  cut  off  judge  from  the  m.  thereof
Luke  A.  30.  but  he  passing  through  the  m.  of  them
John  7.14.  about  the  m.  of  the  feast  Jesus  went
8.  59.  going  thro’  the  m.  of  them,  so  passed  by
Rev.  8. 13.  an  angel  flying  through  the  m.  of  heaven
In  the  M I DST.

Gen.  1.  6.  be  a  firmament,  in  the  m.  of  heaven
2.  9.  the  tree  oflife  in  them,  of  the  garden,  3.  3.

15.  10.  and  Abram  divided  them  in  the  m.

Exod.  3.  20.  wonders  I  will  do  in  the  m.  thereof
8.  22.  I  am  the  Lord  in  the  m.  of  the  earth
14.  27.  overthrew  Egyptians  in  the  m.  of  the  sea

29.  walked  on  dry  land  in  the  m.  of  the  sea,  15. 19.
33.  3.  for  I  will  not  go  up  in  the  tn.  of  thee,  lest

Lev.  16.  16.  in  them,  of  their  uncleanness
Num.  2.17.  tabernacle  set  forward  in  the  m.  of  camp
5.  3.  defile  not  the  camps  in  the  rn.  whereof  I  dwell
35.  5.  and  the  city  shall  be  in  the  m.  Ezek.  48.  15
Deut.  11.  3.  acts  which  he  did  in  the  m.  of  Egypt"

6.  swallowed  them  up  in  the  tn.  of  all  Israel


•b.


1 0.  in  his  father’s  loins,  when  Melchisedec  m.  him
METE.

od.  16. 18.  when  they  did  m.  it  with  an  homer
al.  60.6.  I  will  m.  out  valley  of  Succoth,  108.  7.
it.  7.  2.  with  what  measure  ye  rn.  it  shall  be  mea¬
sured  to  you  again,  Mark  4.  24.  Luke  6.  38.
M  ETED.

18. 2.  go  to  a  nation  m.  out,  trodden  down,  7.

•  12.  and  m.  out  heaven  with  a  span

METE-YARD.

0. 19.  35.  ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  tn.
MICE.

im.  6.  4.  five  golden  m.  according  to  number,  18.

■  ye  shall  make  images  of  your  emerods  and  m.
MID-DAY.

■mgs  18.  29.  when  rn.  was  past,  Elijah  said
'’ok  **'  rea^  therein  from  morning  to  m.  before
-■f  *6.  13.  at  m.  O  king,  I  saw  in  the  way  a  light
MIDDLE.

'g.  7-19.  Gideon  came  in  beginning  of  m.  watch
“},ere  come  people  by  the  m.  of  the  land

•  29.  Samson  took  hold  of  the  two  m.  pillars
mi.  25.  29.  sling  out,  as  out  of  the  m.  of  a  sling

10.  4.  cut  off  their  garments  in  the  m.
mgs  8.64. the  kingdid  hallow  m.  court,  2  Chr. 7 .7.
ings29A.  afore  Isaiah  gone  into  the  m.  court
;y9.  3.  all  the  princes  sat  in  the  m.  gate
1  o'  as  were  awheel  in  the  m.  of  a  wheel
'•  —  14  broken  down  the  m.  wall  of  partition


19.  2.  separate  three  cities  in  the  m.  of  thy  land
23.  14.  God  walketh  in  the  m.  of  thy  camp

Josh.  3.  17.  priests  stood  firm  inm.  of  Jordan,  4. 10

4.  9.  set  up  twelve  stones  in  the  rn.  of  Jordan

7.  13.  there  is  an  accursed  thing  in  the  m,  of  thee

21.  they  are  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  m.  of  my  tent

1  Sam.  16.  13.  anointed  him  in  them,  of  brethren

2  Sam.  18.  14.  he  was  yet  alive  in  the  m.  of  the  oak
23.  12.  but  he  stood  in  the  m.  of  the  ground

20.  slew  a  lion  in  the  rn.  of  a  pit  in  time  of  snow
R  ings  6.20. behold,  they  were  in  the  m.  of  Samaria

5  Chron.  19.  4.  and  cut  off  their  garments  in  the  m
Neh.  4.  11.  nor  see,  till  we  come  in  the  m.  among
Job  1.  +  6.  Satan  came  also  in  the  m.  of  them

20.  1 13.  though  he  keep  sin  in  the  m.  of  his  palate
Psal.  22.  14.  it  is  melted  in  them,  of  my  bowels

22.  I  will  declare  thy  name,  in  them,  of  the  con¬
gregation  will  l  praise  thee,  Heb.  2.  12.

40.  +8.  yea,  thy  law  is  in  the  m.  of  my  bowels  ~
46.  5.  G.  is  in  the  m.  of  her,  she  shall  not  be  moved
55.  10.  mischief  in  the  m.  ||  11.  wickedness  inthem.
74.  4.  enemies  roar  in  the  tn.  of  thy  congregation  '
_12.  working  salvation  in  the  tn.  o’fthe  earth
78.  28.  and  he  let  it  fall  in  the  m.  of  their  camp
102.  24.  take  me  not  away  in  the  m.  of  my  days
110.2.  rule  thou  in  the  tn.  of  thine  enemies
116. 19.  pay  vows  in  the  m.of  thee,  O  Jerusalem
138.  7  •  though  1  walk  in  them,  of  trouble,  thou  wilt
Prov.  4.21.  keep  them  in  the  tn.  of  thine  heart

5.  14.  I  was  in  all  evil  in  the  m.  of  the  congregation

8.  20.  I  lead  in  the  m.of  the  paths  of  judgment
14.  33.  that  which  is  in  the  tn.  of  fools  is  folly
23.  34.  as  he  that  lieth  down  in  them,  of  the  sea
30. 19-  the  way  of  a  ship  in  the  rn.  of  the  sea

Isa.Jj.  2.  and  1  built  a  tower  in  the  m.  of  it

6.  5.  I  dwell  in  the  m.  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips
12.  be  a  great  forsakingm  the  m.  of  the  land

7-  6.  set  a  king  in  the  m.  of  it,  the  son  of  i  abeal
12.6.great  is  the  Holy  One  in  t.  m.of  thee,  Plus.  11.9.

16.  3.  as  the  night  tn  the  m.  of  the  noon  day
19.  24.  even  a  blessing  in  the  m.  of  the  land
41. 18.  I  will  open  fountains  in  them,  of  thee

Jer.  6.  6.  she  is  wholly  oppression  in  the  m.  of  her

9.  6.  thine  habitation  is  in  the  m.  of  deceit

14.9.  thou,  O  Lord,  art  in  the  m.  of  us,  leave  us  not

17.  11.  he  shall  leave  them  inthem.  of  his  days
37.  12.  to  separate  himself  in  the  rn.  of  the  people

Lam.  4. 13.  shed  blood  of  the  just  in  the  m.  of  her
Ezek.  5.  5.  I  have  set  it  in  the  m.  of  the  nations

8.  I  will  execute  judgment  in  the  m,  of  thee
6.  7-  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  m.  of  you,  11.  7.
17.16.  in  the  rn.  of  Babylon  he  shall  die

22.  3.  the  city  sheddeth  blood  in  the  m.  of  it

21.  and  ye  snail  be  melted  in  the  m.  thereof

22.  as  silver  is  melted  inthe  m.  of  the  furnace
25.  they  have  made  many  widows  in  t.  m.  thereof


Ezek. 22. 27-  princes  in  them,  thereof  are  like  wolves
23.  39.  thus  have  they  done  in  the  m.  of  my  house
26.  5.  for  spreading  of  nets  in  the  m.  of  the  sea

28.  22.  O  Zidon,  I  will  be  glorified  in  the  m.of  thee

36.  23.  which  ye  have  profaned  in  the  m.  of  them

37.  26.  will  set  my  sanctuary  in  the  m.  of  them
28.  when  my  sanctuary  shall  be  in  the  m.  of  them

43.  7.  where  I  will  dwell  in  the  tn.  of  Israel,  9.
46.  10.  and  the  prince  in  the  m.  shall  go  in
Dan.  3.  25.  four  men  walking  in  the  rn.  of  the  fire

9.  27.  in  the  m.  of  the  week,  oblation  shall  cease
II os.  5.  4.  spirit  of  whoredoms  is  in  the  m.  of  them
Joel  2.  27.  ye  shall  know  I  am  in  the  m.  of  Israel
Amos  7.  10.  conspired  in  the  m.  of  the  house  of  lsrl.
Mic.  5.  7-  remnant  be  in  the  rn.  of  many  people,  8.

6.  14.  thy  casting  down  shall  be  in  the  m.  of  thee
Nah.  3.  13.  thy  people  in  the  m.  of  thee  are  women
Hah,  3.  2.  in  the  m.  of  the  years  revive  thy  work
Zeph.  2.  14.  flocks  shall  lie  down  in  the  m.  of  her

3.  5.  just  Lord  is  in  the  m.  thereof,  will  not  do
12.  1  will  leave  in  the  m.  of  thee  a  poor  people
15.  king  of  Isr.  the  Lord  is  in  the  m.  of  thee,  17.

Zecli.  2.  5.  I  will  be  the  glory  in  the  m.  of  her

10.  rejoice,  for  I  will  dwell  in  the  m.  of  thee,  11

5.  4.  the  curse  shall  remain  in  the  m.  of  his  house

7.  a  woman  that  sitteth  in  the  m.  of  the  epbah

8.3.  and  will  dwell  in  the  m.of  Jerusalem,  8.

14.  4.  the  mount  of  olives  shall  cleave  in  the  m.

Mat.  10.  16.  I  send  you  as  sheep  in  them,  of  wolves
14.  24.  ship  was  in  the  m.  of  the  sea,  Mark  6.  4?.

18.  2.  set  a  little  child  in  the  m.  of  them,  Mark  9.  36.

20.  are  gathered,  there  am  I  in  the  tn.  of  them

Luke  2.  46.  found  him  sitting  in  the  rn.  of  the  doctors

6.  8.  rise,  and  stand  forth  in  the  m.  and  he  arose

21.  21.  letthem  which  are  in  the  m.  of  it  depart

23.  45.  the  vail  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  them.

24.  36.  Jesus  himself  stood  in  t.rn.  John  20. 19,26.
John  8.  3.  and  when  they  had  set  her  in  the  m.  9.

19.  18.  on  either  side  one,  and  Jesus  in  the  m.
Actsl.  15.  Peter  stood  up  in  the  tn.  of  the  disciples

18.  Judas  falling  burst  asunder  in  the  m.

17.  22.  then  Paul  stood  up  in  the  tn.  of  Mars’  hill
Phil.  2. 15.  blameless  in  the  m.  of  a  crooked  generat.
Rev.  1.  13.  in  the  rn.  of  the  seven  candlesticks,  2. 1.
2.  7 •  which  is  in  the  m.  of  the  Paradise  of  God

4.  6.  and  in  the  m.  of  the  throne  were  four  beasts

5. 6.  lo,  in  the  m.  of  the  throne  stood  a  Lamb,  7. 17.
Into  the  MIDST.

Exod.  14.  22.  Israel  went  into  the  rn.  of  the  sea
24.  18.  and  Moses  went  into  the  m.  of  the  cloud

33.  5.  I  wild  come  into  the  m,  of  thee  and  consume
A  um .  16.  47.  Aaron  ran  into  them,  of  congregation
I  Rings  22.  35.  blood  ran  into  the  m.  of  the  chariot
Esth.  4. 1.  Mordec.  went  into  the  m.  of  city  and  cried
‘  J.  46. 2.  tho’  mountains  be  carried  into  the  rn.  of  sea

57.6.  into  the  m.  whereof  they  are  fallen  themsel.
Jer.  21.4.1  will  assemble  them  into  t.rn.  of  this  citv

51.  63.  cast  it  into  the  m.  of  the  river  Euphrates  *
Ezek.  5.  4.  cast  them  into  the  m.  of  the  fire  and  burn

22. 19.  I  will  gather  you  into  the  m.  of  Jerusalem
Dan.  3.  6.  shall  be  cast  into  the  m.  of  a  fiery  furnace
Zech.  5.  8.  and  he  cast  it  into  them,  of  the  ephah
Out  of  the  MIDST.

Gen.  19.  29.  sent  Lot  out  of  the  tn,  of  the  overthrow
Exod.  3.  2.  angel  appeared  out  of  the  m.  of  a  bush
4.  God  called  to  him  out  of  the  in.  of  bush,  24.  16-
Deut.  4.  12.  the  Lord  spake  unto  you  out  of  the  m.

.  .  ,  .  .  °1  the  fire,  15,  33,  36.  |  5.  4,~22,  24.

34.  to  take  lnm  a  nation  out  of  the  m.  of  another
Josh.  4.  3.  take  out  of  t.  m.  of  Jordan  twelve  stones,  8.

7.  23.  and  they  took  them  out  of  the  m.  of  the  tent
Isa.  24.  18.  and  he  that  cometh  out  of  them,  of  pit
52.11.  depart,  go  0.  of  m.  of  her,  Jer.  50.  8. 1  51 . 6, 45
Ejek.  11.  7  I  will  bring  you  forth  out  of  them,  of  it

29.  4.  I  will  bring  thee  out  of  the  rn.  of  thy  rivers

52.  21.  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  the  rn.  of  hell
Amos  6.  4.  that  eat  calves  out  of  the  m.  of  the  stall
Mic.  5.  10.  I  will  cutoff  horses  out  of  the  m.  of  thee

13  images  ||  14.  pluck  up  groves  out  of  m.  bf  thee
Zeph.  3.  1 1.  then  1  will  take  away  out  oft.  rn.  of  thee
MIDWIFE.

Gen.  35.  17.  the  m.  said  unto  Rachel,  fear  not

38.  28.  the  m.  bound  on  his  hand  a  scarlet  thread
Exod.  1.  16.  he  said,  when  ye  do  the  office  of  a  m.
MIDWIVES.

Exod.  1.  17.  but  the  rn.  feared  God,  and  dkl  not,  21.

19.  are  delivered  ere  the  m.  come  unto  them

20.  therefore  God  dealt  well  with  the  m.

M  1GIIT,  Substantive.

Gy«.  49.  3.  Reuben,  thou  art  my  first-born,  my  m,
Num.  14.  13.  broughtest  up  this  people  in  thy  m.
Dent.  3.  24.  that  can  do  according  to  thy  m.

6.  5.  thou  shalt  loye  thy  God  with  all  thy  m.

8.  17.  the  m.  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  wealth
28.32.  there  shall  be  no  m.  in  thine  hand
Judg.  5.  .31.  as  the  sungoeth  forth  in  his  tn.

6.  14.  go  in  this  thy  m.  ||  16.  30.  bowed  witL  his  m.

2  Sam.  6.  14.  David  danced  with  all  his  m.

1  Kings _15.  2.3.  the  acts  of  Asa  and  all  his  m.

16.  5.  Baasha  his  m.  ||  27.  Omri  and  his  rn.

22.  45.  Jehoshaphat  and  his  m  that  he  shewed

•  R  tugs  10.  .34.  Jehu  his  rn.  )|  13.  8.  Jehoahaz  his  m.

1.3.  12.  Joash  l|  14.  15.  acts  of  Jehoash  and  his  m.

14.  28.  Jeroboam  ||  20.  20.  Hezekiah  and  his  m.

23.  25.  Josiah  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  m.

24.  16.  the  king  brought  captive  all  the  men  of  m.

1  Chron.  12.  8.  men  of  m.  came  to  David  to  the  hold
29.  2.  I  prepared  for  the  house  with  all  my  m.

12.  in  thine  hand  is  power  and  m.  2  Chron.  20.  6.

30.  the  acts  of  David  with  his  reign  and  m.

2  Chr.  20.  12.  we  have  no  rn.  against  this  company
Esth.  10.  2.  acts  of  Ahasuerus.  his  power  and  m.

Psal.  76.  5.  none  of  the  men  of  rn.  found  their  hands
89.  f  13.  thou  hast  an  arm  with  m.  strong  is

145.  6.  men  shall  speak  of  the  m.  of  thy  acts
Dfov.  24.  t  5.  a  man  ot  knowledge  strengthened!  m.
Led.  9.  10.  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  rn.
Isa.  .3.  +  25.  and  thy  m.  shall  fall  in  the  war

11.  2.  the  spirit  ot  counsel  and  m.  shall  rest  on  him

3.3.  13.  ye  that  are  near,  acknowledge  my  m.

40.  26.  calleth  them  by  the  greatness  of  his  m.

29.  to  them  that  hav»  no  m.  he  increased)  strength

313


MIN


M  I  G


M  1  L


T«r.  Q.  23.  nor  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  to.

10.  6.  tliou  art  great,  and  thy  name  is  great  in  to.
16.  Cl.  behold,  1  will  cause  them  to  know  my  to.
49.  35.  1  will  break  the  chief  ot  their  to.

51 . 30.  their  to.  hath  failed,  they  became  as  women
Ezek.  3C.  30.  they  are  ashamed  of  theii  to.

Dan.  2. 20.  blessed  be  G .  for  wisdom  and  to.  are  his


Jan.  1Z.  1U.  mt.-jacu  .........

23.  I  thank  thee,  O  God,  who  hast_given  me  w.
3.  f  4.  he  cried  with  m.  4. 1 14. 1  5.  +7.


4.  30.  that  !  have  built  by  the  to.  of  my  power
Mic.  3.8.  truly  i  am  full  of  judgment  and  ot  m.

7  16.  nations  shall  be  confounded  at  all  their  to.

Zech.  4.  6.  not  by  to.  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit
Evh.  1. 1  19.  the'  working  ot  the  to.  ot  his  power
21.  far  above  all  in.  power,  and  dominion

3.  16.  to  be  strengthened  with  to.  Col.  1.  11. .

6. 10.  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  power  of  his  m.

2  ret.  2. 11.  whereas  angels  that  are  greater  in  to.

Rev  7  12.  glory  and  to. be  unto  our  God  tor  ever
MIG  HI  be.

Gen.  30. 34.  1  would  it  m.  be  according  to  thy  word
Exod.  36.  18.  to  couple  the  tent,  that  it  in.  he  one
39.  21.  that  it  to.  he  above  the  curious  girdle
Lev.  26.  45.  brought  forth  that  1  m.  be  their  God
Dent. 5.  29.  fear  me,  that  it  m.  be  well  with  them
1  Sam.  18.' 27.  that  he  m.  be  the  king's  son-in-law

1  Kings  8.  16.  that  mv  name  m.  be  put  therein

2  Kings  7-  2.  would  make  windows,  m.  this  thing  be
15.  Id.  gave  silver,  that  his  hand  m.  be  with  him

2  Chron.  6.  5.  an  house,  that  mv  name  m.  be  there,  6.
Psal.  78.  8.  in.  not  be  as  their  fathers,  a  stubborn
Jer.  13.  11.  that  they  m.  be  unto  me  a  people
Ezek.  17. 8.  in  good  soil,  that  it  in.  be  a  goodl  v  vine
36.  3.  that  ye  m.  be  a  possession  to  the  heathen
6  +  5  that  thy  judgments  m.  he  as  the  light
Mai  2  4  tnat  my  covenant  m.be  with  Levi
Mark  5. 18.  prav.  that  he  m  be  with  him,  Luke 8.  38.
Luke  8. 0.  asked,  saving,  what  m.  this  parable  be  '

John  15.  11.  and  that  your 'joy  fit.  be ■full
Rom.  4. 11.  m.  be  the  father  ot  them  that  believe
16.  that  it  m.  be  of  grace  ||  14.  9™-  be  Lord  or  dead
2  Thess.  3.  8.  m.  not  be  chargeable  to  any  ot  you
Philem.  8.  though  1  m.be  much  bold  in  Lhrist
Lieb.  2. 17.  that  lie  m.  be  a  merciful  High- Priest
12  10.  that  we  m.  be  partakers  ot  his  holiness
1  Pet.  1.  21.  that  your  faith  and  hope  m.  be  in  God
See  Fulfilled.

MIGHTY.  „  _

Gen.  10.  9.  he  was  a  m.  hunter  before  the  Lord

18.18.  Abraham  shall  become  a  gi eat  and  m.  nation
23.  6.  hear  us,  thou  art  a  m.  prince  amongst  us
Exod.  1.7.  the  children  of  Israel  waxed  m.  20.

9. 28.  that  there  be  no  more  to.  thundenngs  and  hail
JO.  19.  the  Lord  turned  a  in.  strong  west  wind
15.  10.  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  m.  waters

Lev.  10.  15*.  nor  shall  honour  the  person  ot  the  m.
Rum.  22.  6.  curse  this  people,  for  they  are  too  m.

Dent.  4.3*.  he  brought  thee  out  with  in.  power,  9.29.
7.23.  shall  destroy  them  with  a  m.  destruction

26.5.  became  there  a  great  nation,  in.  and  |iopulous
Judg.  5.  13.  L.  made  me  have  dominion  over  the  rn.

23  thev  came  not  to  help  of  the  L.  against  the  m.

1  Sam.  P.  8.  out  of  the  hand  of  these  m.  gods

2  Sam.  1.  19.  how  are  the  to.  fallen!  25.

21.  the  shield  of  the  m.  is  vilely  cast  away

22.  from  the  blood  of  the  slain,  from  tat  ot  the  m.

2  Kings  24.  15.  the  in.  of  the  land  carried  he  captive

1  Chron.  1.  10.  IS  imrod  wras  m.  ||  12.  28.  Zadok  to.

27.  6.  Benaiah  was  m.  ||  2  Chron.  13. 21 .  Abijah  m.

2  Chron.  26. 1 3.  army  that  made  war  with  in.  power

27.6.  so  Jotham  became  in.  because  he  prepared
Ezra.  4.  20.  there  have  been  m.  kings  over  Jerusalem

7. 28.  hath  extended  mercy  to  me  before  m.  princes
Keh.  3. 16.  Nehemiah  repaired  to  the  house  of  the  to.

9  11.  thou  threwest  a  stone  in  the  m.  waters
Job  5.  15.  but  he  savetli  the  poor  from  the  m.

6.  23.  or  redeem  me  from  the  hand  of  the  in.?

9.  4.  he  is  wise  in  heart,  and  m.  in  strength

12. 19.  he  leadeth  princes,  and  lie  overthroweth  m.

21.  he  weakeneth  the  strength  of  the  m.

21. 7.  wherefore  are  the  wicked  m.  in  power
24.  22.  he  draweth  also  the  m.  with  his  power

34.20.  the  m.  shall  be  taken  away  without  hand
35. 9.  they  cry  out  by  reason  of  the  arm  ot  the  m.

41.  25.  he  raiseth  himself,  the  m.  are  afraid
Psal.  24.8.  Lord  strong  and  m.  Lord  m.  in  battle

29.  1.  give  to  the  Lord,  O  ye  m.  glory  and  strength
45.  3.  gird  thy  sword  on  thy  thigh,  O  most  m.

59.  3.  for  lo,  the  m.  are  gat'hered  against  me

68.  33.  doth  send  out  his  voice,  and  that  a  in.  voice

69.  4.  being  mine  enemies  wrongfully  are  to.

74.  15.  thou  driedst  up  m.  rivers,  the  day  is  thine
82. 1.  God  standeth  in  the  congregation  of  the  to.
89.  6.  who  among  sons  m.  can  be  likened  to  Lord

13.  thou  hast  a  m.  arm,  strong  is  thy  hand
19.  1  have  laid  help  upon  one  that  is  to.

50.  I  bear  in  my  bosom  the  reproach  of  the  to.

93.  4.  the  Lord  is  mightier  than  the  m.  waves  of  sea
103. 1  20.  bless  the  Lord,  ye  angels  m.  in  strength
106.8.  that  he  might  make  his  m.  power  known
112.  2.  his  seed  shall  be  m.  upon  the  earth
120.  4.  sharp  arrows  of  the  m.  with  coals  of  juniper
135. 10.  who  smote  great  nations,  and  slew  m.  kings
Prov.  16.  32.  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  in.

18.  18.  the  lot  parteth  between  the  to.

21.  22.  a  wise  man  scaleth  the  city  of  the  to.

23. 11.  their  Redeemer  is  m.  shall  plead  their  cause
Isa.  3.  25.  and  thy  in.  shall  fall  in  the  war
5.  22.  woe  to  them  that  are  m.  to  drink  wine

11.  15.  with  his  m.  wind  shall  he  shake  his  hand
1*.  12.  a  rushing  like  the  rushing  of  m.  waters

22.  17.  will  carry  thee  awray  with  a  nt.  captivity
49.  24.  shall  the  prey  be  taken  from  the  in.  ?

63.  1.  1  that  speak  in  righteousness,  to.  to  save

Jer.  5.  15.  it  is  a  m.  and  an  ancient  nation,  a  nation

32.  19.  great  in  counsel  and  m.  in  work

33.  3.  and  1  will  shew  thee  great  and  m.  things
Ezek.  17.  13.  he  hath  also  taken  the  to.  of  the  land

32.  12.  by  the  swords  of  the  m.  will  I  make  thee  fall
21.  the  strong  among  the  in.  shall  speak  to  him
27.  they  shall  not  lie  with  the  m.  that  are  fallen
38  15.  thou  shalt  come  with  a  great  and  rn.  army

314


Esek.  .39. 18.  J'e  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  m.  and  drink
Dan.  4'  3.  how  great  and  m.  are  his  wonders  .

8  24.  his  power  shall  be  m.  but  not  by  his  own  pow.

11  3.  a  m.  king  shall  stand  up  that  shall  rule

25.  shall  be  stir,  up  with  a  very  great  and  in.  army
Amos  2.  14.  neither  shall  the  m.  deliver  himself
2.  16.  he  tbat  is  courageous  among  the  m.  shall  flee
5.  12.  I  know  your  m.  sins  ||  24.  as  a  m.  stream
Jonah  1.  4.  there  was  a  m.  tempest  in  the  sea
Zech.  11. 2.  howl,  because  the  m.  are  spoiled
Mat.  1 1 .  20.  where  most  of  his  m.  works  were  done
21  if  the  m.  works  which  were  done  in  you,  23.

13.  54.  whence  hath  this  man  these  m.  works  ?

58  he  did  not  many  m.  works  there,  Mark  6.  5.

14  0  this  is  John  the  Baptist,  therefore  to.  works
do  shew  forth  themselves  in  him,  Mark 6.  14.
Mark  6.  2.  m .  works  are  wrought  by  his  hand
Luke  1.  44.  he  that  is  m.  hath  done  great  things
52.  he  hath  put  down  the  m.  from  their  seats

9  43,  they  were  amazed  at  the  in.  power  ot  God
i5.  14.  there  arose  a  in.  famine  in  that  land
19.  37.  praised  God  for  the  m.  works  they  had  seen
°4  19  who  was  a  projihet  m.  in  deed  and  word

Arts  2.2.  sound  from  heaven  as  of  a  rushing  m.  wind
7.  22.  Moses  was  to.  in  words  and  in  deeds
18  °4  A  polios  was  m.  in  the  scriptures
Rom  15  14.  the  Gentiles  obedient  through  to.  signs

1  Cor  1  26  not  many  m.  not  many  noble,  are  called

27.  God  hath  chosen  weak,  to  confound  things  to.
a  ~Qor  10  4.  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  m.  thro  G

13  3  which  to  you  is  not  weak,  but  m.  in  you
Gal.  2. 8.  the  same  was  m.  in  me  toward  the  Gentiles
Evh  1  19  according  to  the  working  ot  his  m.  power

2  Thess.  1 . 7 .  .1  esus  shall  be  reveal .  with  his  m.  angels
Rev  6.  13.  when  she  is  shaken  of  a  m.  wind

10  1.  1  saw  another  m.  angel  come  down,  18.  21.

16*  18.  so  m.  an  earthquake  and  so  great  .

18. 10.  that  to.  city  ||  19.  6.  voice  of  m.  thundenngs

See  Acts,  (ion,  Hand.  Man,  Men.
MIGHTY  one.

Gen.  10. 8.  N  imrod  began  to  be  a  w.  one  in  the  earth
Isa  1  24  therefore  saith  Lord,  Lord  of  hosts,  the
m.  one  of  Israel,  30.  29.  I  49.  26.  I  60.  16
10.  34.  and  Lebanon  shall  tall  by  a  m.  one

28.  2.  behold,  the  1  ord  hath  a  to.  and  strong  one
Jer  20  11.  the  Lord  is  with  me  as  a  m.  terrible  one
Ezek.  31. 11.  have  delivered  him  into  hand  ot  m.  one

MIGHTY  ones.

Exod  15. t 11.  who  is  like  to  thee  among  the  m.ones?
Jitdg.  5.  22.  broken  bv  pransing  of  their  m.  ones
Isa.  id.  3.  I  have  called  my  in.  ones  for  mine  anger
Jer.  46.  5.  their  m.  ones  are  beaten  down  and  fled
Joel  .3  11  thither  cause  thy  in.  ones  to  come  down
MlGiniEH.

Gen  26  16.  for  thou  art  much  m.  than  we
Exod.  1.  9.  the  children  of  Israel  are  in.  than  sve
Nvm  14  12  a  greater  nation  and  m.  than  they
Dent.  4.  38.  17.  1.  I  9.  1,  14.  I  11.  23.
Psal.  93.  4.  the  Lord  on  high  is  w.  than  many  waters
Eccl.  6.  10.  neither  contend  with  him  that  is  m.

Mat.  3. 11.  1  baptize  with  water,  but  he  that  cometh
after  me  is  m.  than  1,  Mark  1.7*  Euke  3.  16.
MIG  HUES.

1  Chron.  11.  12.  Eleazar  was  one  of  the  three  m.

10.  these  things  did  these  three  m.

04  Benaiah  had  a  name  among  the  three  m.
MIGHTILY.

Dent.  6.  3.  observe  to  do  it,  that  ye  may  increase  m.
Judg.  4.  3.  Jabin  m.  oppressed  Israel  twenty  years
14.  6.  the  Spirit  of  I..  came  m.  on  Samson,  15.  14.

1  Sam.  14.  +  48.  Saul  wrought  in.  and  smote  Amalek
Isa.  10.  t  34.  and  I  ebanon  shall  tall  to.

42.  t  13.  the  1  ord  shall  behave  himself  m.  ,

Jer.  25.  30.  the  Lord  shall  m.  roar  on  his  habitation
Jonah  3.  8.  let  man  and  beast  cry  m.  unto  God
Nah.  2.  1.  watch  the  way,  fortify  thy  power  m.

Acts  18.  28.  for  he  in.  convinced  the  Jews
19.  20.  so  in.  grew  the  word  of  God,  and  prevailed
Col.  1.  29.  his  working,  which  worketh  in  me  w.

Rev  18  2.  he  cried  to.  saying,  Babylon  is  fallen
MILCIL

Gen.  32.  15.  thirty  m.  camels  with  their  colts
1  Sam.  6.  7-  make  a  new  cart,  take  two  rn.  kine,  10.
MILDEW,  See  Blasting
MILE.

Mat.  5.  41.  shall  compel  thee  to  go  a  m.  go  twain
M  1  LK

Signifies,  A  liquid  food  which  we  have  from  cows,

'  Sc.  wherewith  babes  and  children  are  chiefly
nourished,  Gen.  18.  8.  Isa.  28.  9.  1  o  which  are

compared,  [1]  The  weakest  spiritual  food,  or  the
most  plain  and  easy  truths  oj  the  gospel,  whereby
young  converts  are  nourished  and  edified,  1  L  or.

3.  2.  Heb.  5.  12.  1  Pet.  2.  2.  [2]  Sweet,  agreeable,
and  edifying  speech,  Cant.  4.  11.  [3]_  The  graces,
services ,  and  obedience  of  the  godly ,  Cant.  o.  1.

A  land  flowing  'with  milk  and  honey,  Josh.  5.  6.

A  country  of  extraordinary  fertility,  affording  all
things  necessary  for  the  support  and  comfort  of  life.
Wine  and  milk,  Isa.  55.  1.  All  sorts  of  spiritual
blessings  and  privileges.

Gen.  18.  8.  and  Abraham  took  butter  and  m.

49.  12.  and  his  teeth  shall  be  white  with  m.

Deut.  32.  14.  butter  of  kine  and  m.  of  sheep
Judg.  4.  19.  Jael  opened  a  bottle  ot  m.  and  gave
5.  25.  he  asked  water,  and  she  gave  him  m.

Job  10.  10.  hast  thou  not  poured  nie  out  as  to,  ?

21.  24.  his  breasts  are  full  of  m.  his  bones  moistened
Prov.  27.  27.  tliou  shalt  have  goats'  to,  tor  food
.30.  33.  the  churning  of  m.  bringeth  forth  butter
Cant.  4.  11.  honey  and  m.  are  under  thy  tongue
5.  1.  I  have  drunk  my  wine  with  my  m.

12.  his  eyes  washed  with  in.  and  fitly  set
Isa.  7.  22.  for  abundance  of  m.  that  they  shall  give
28.  9.’ them  that  are  weaned  from  the  m.

55.  1.  come,  buy  wine  and  m.  w  ithout  money
60  16.  thou  shalt  suck  the  m.  of  the  Gentiles
Lam  4.  7.  her  Nazarites  were  whiter  than  to.

F.zek.  25.  4.  shall  eat  thy  fruit,  and  drink  thy  m.
Joel  3.  18.  the  hills  shall  flow  w ith  nt.  and  rivers
1  Cor.  3.  2. 1  have  fed  you  with  m.  and  not  with  meat
9.  7.  who  feedeth  a  flock  .  anil  eateth  not  ot  the  m.  ?


Heb.  5.  12.  ye  are  become  such  as  have  need  of  in.  ?

13,"  for  every  one  that  useth  m.  is  a  babe
1  Pet.  2. 2.  ne  w-born  babes  desire  sincere  to.  of  word
See  Flowing.

MILK.

T<a.  60.  11.  that  ye  may  m.  out,  and  be  delighted
M 1  LL,  8.

Exod.  11.5.  the  maid-servant  that  is  behind  the  m.
Rum.  11.  8.  the  people  ground  the  manna  in  m.
Mat  24  41.  two  women  shall  be  grinding  at  the  m.
MILLET.

Ezek  4.  9.  take  lentiles,  m.  and  make  bread
MILLIONS.

Gen  24.  60.  be  thou  mother  of  thousands  of  m,
MILLSTONE.

Dent.  24.  6.  no  man  shall  take  the  m.  to  pledge
Judg.  9. 53.  a  woman  cast  a  piece  of  m,  2  Sam.  1 1. 21.
jof>  41.  24.  heart  as  hard  as  a  piece  ot  the  nether  to.
Mat.  18.  6.  it  were  better  that  a  m.  were  hanged
about  his  neck,  Mark  9.  42.  Luke  17.  2.
Rev.  18.  21.  an  angel  took  up  a  stone  like  a  great  m.
2°'  the  sound  of  a  m.  shall  be  heard  no  more
MILLSTONES.

Isa.  47.  2.  take  the  m.  and  grind  meal,  uncover
Jer.  25.  10.  1  will  take  away  the  sound  of  the  in.
MINCING.

Isa.  3.  16.  wanton  eyes,  walking  and  m.  as  they  go
MIND

Signifies,  [1]  The  understanding,  or  judgment,  where¬
by  we  distinguish  between  good  and  evil,  lawful  and
unlawful,  2  Cor.  3.  14.  'lit.  1.  15.  [2]  Vie  rege-


1  Pet.  o.  2.  Lyj  AP ection,  cvcia  i<.  n.

Who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  1  Cor.  2.
16.  What  natural,  carnal  man  hath  been  taught
by  the  Spirit,  the  will,  counsel,  and  purpose  of  Cod,
and  the  divine  mysteries  of  man  s  salvation  ?

But  we  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  1  Cor.  2. 16.  Rut
we  who  are  endued  with  the  Spirit,  have  an  experi¬
mental  knowledge  of  God's  will,  and  of  spiritual
divine  things,  revealed  to  us  by  the  Spirit,  who  is
our  teacher,  and  knows  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  re¬
veals  it  to  us,  John  16. 1.3.  1  Cor.  2.  10.

MIND,  Substantive.

Gen.  26.  35.  which  were  a  grief  of  m.  to  Isaac
Lev.  24.  12.  the  m.  ot  the  L.  might  be  shewed  them
Deut.  18.6.  and  come  with  all  the  desire  of  hisw.

28.  65.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  sorrow  of  to.

30.  1.  shalt  call  them  to  to.  among  the  nations

1  Chron.  28.  9.  and  serve  him  w  ith  a  w  illing  w.
Neh.  4.  6.  for  the  people  had  a  to.  to  work
Job  2.3.  1.3.  but  he  is  of  one  to.  w  ho  can  turn  him  ?
Psal.  31.  12.  am  forgotten,  as  a  dead  man  outot  m
Prov.  21.  27.  lie  bringeth  it  with  a  wicked  to.

29.  11.  a  fool  uttereth  all  his  w.  but  a  wise  man
Isa.  26.  3.  keep  in  peace,  whose  to.  is  stayed  ontlief

46.  8.  bring  it  again  to  .to.  O  ye  transgressors
65.  17.  and  the  former  shall  not  come  into  to.

Jer.  3. 16.  the  ark  of  covenant  shall  not  come  to  m.
22.  +  27.  the  land  whereunto  they  lilt  their  in.

44.  21.  and  came  it  not  into  his  to.  ?  ,

Dan.  5.  20.  when  his  w.  was  hardened  in  pride
Hah.  1.  11.  then  shall  his  w.  change,  and  he  shall
Mark  5.  15.  sitting  in  his  right  to.  Luke  8.  35.

14.  72.  Peter  called  to  to.  the  words  of  Jesus
Luke  1.  29.  Mary  cast  in  her  m,  what  salutation

12.  29.  neither  be  ve  of  doubtful  w.  ,

Acts  2.  +  6.  the  multitude  were  troubled  in  to.


jC  IS  1  v«  1 1 1  v.  11 1  U  1 11  luci  v  .  1  *  '|

12.  +  20-  Herod  bore  an  hostile  to.  against  Jyr?

17  11.  they  received  word  with  all  readiness  ot  mi


20  19.  serving  the  Lord  with  humility  ot  to.
Rom.  1.  28.  God  gave  them  up  to  a  reprobate  to.

7.  25.  so  then,  with  the  to.  1  serve  the  law  ot  uoc

8.  7.  the  carnal  to.  is  enmity  against  God
27.  he  know'eth  w  hat  is  the  to.  oj  the  Spirit

11.  34.  who  hath  known  the  to.  ot  the  Lord  .

12.  16.  be  of  the  same  to.  one  toward  another

14.  5.  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  to

15.  6.  that  ve  may  with  one  to.  glqnfy  God

1  Cor.  1.  10.  ye  he'  joined  together  in  the  same  m.
2.  16.  for  who  hath  known  the  to.  ot  the  Lora I  t,

instruct  him  r  but  we  have  the  to.  ot  Cnri.

2  Cor.  7.7.  when  he  told  us  your  fervent  to,  tow.m

8. 12.  for  if  there  he  first  a  willing  to,  it  isacceptec

13.  11.  brethren,  be  of  one  to.  Phil.  1.  -7- 1  2-
Eph.  2.  3.  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  m«

4.  17.  as  other  Gentiles  walk  in  vanity  or  their?
Phil.  2.  3.  in  lowliness  of  m.  let  each  esteem  otm

5.  let  this  to.  be  in  you  which  was  in  Clinst  Jesi

4.  2.  that  they  be  of  the  same  to.  in  the  Loro
Col.  2.  18.  vainly  puffed  up  by  bis  fleshly  to.

3. 12.  put  on  kindness,  humbleness  of  TO.meekiie
o  Thess.  2.  2.  that  they  be  not  soon  shaken  m  to.

0  Tim.  1.7.  God  hath  given  us  the  spirit  °ls°l,,n<?
Tit.  1.  15.  but  their  to.  and  conscience  is  denied

3  1.  put  them  in  to.  to  he  subject  to  poweis
Heb.  8.  10.  1  will  put  my  laws  into  their  to.

12.  t  17.  he  found  no  way  to  change  his  to.

1  Pet.  3.  8.  he  ye  all  of  one  to,  having  compassio
4. 1.  arm  vourselves  likewise  with  the  same  to.

5.  2.  not  tor  filthy  lucre,  but  ot  a  ready  to.

Rev.  17.  9.  here  is  the  w.  which  hath  wisdom

13.  these  have  one  to.  and  shall  give  their  po
See  Alienated.

Mine  or  my  MIN'D.  .  .

Num.  16.  28.  I  have  not  done  them  of  TOineown
°4  13  1  cannot  do  good  or  had  of  mine  ow  n
l  Sam.  2.  35.  according  to  that  which  is  in  wy  to,
1  Chron.  22.  ’.  it  was  in  my  to.  to  build  an  house
Isa.  21.  +  4.  my  to.  wandered,  tearfulness
Jer.  15. 1.  my  m.  could  not  be  tow  ard  this  peof

19.  5.  neither  came  it  into  my  m.  32.  35.

Iain.  3.  21.  this  1  recall  to  my  m.  theretoie  .101
Rom.  7. 23.  another  law  warring  ag.  lawot  my

Thy  MIND.  ,

1  Sam.  9.  20.  set  not  thy  m.  on  asses,  they  are

20.  t  4.  say  what  is  thy  to.  and  l  wi_  do  «


M  1  N


M  I  R


M  I  N


■A  .14.  33.  should  it  he  according  to  thy  m.
zek.  38. 10.  same  time  shall  things  come  into  thy  m.
'an.Q.  29.  O  king,  thy  thoughts  came  into  thy  m.
'at.°fl.  .37 •  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy. God  with
all  thy  m.  Mark  1C.  30.  Luke  10.  27.
hlem.  14.  without  thy  m.  would  1  do  nothing
Your  MIN  1).

rn.2.3.  8.  if  it  he  your  m.  1  should  bury  my  dead
r.  51. 50.  and  let  Jerusalem  come  into  your  m.
-.ek.  11.5.  1  know- the  things  that  come  into  your  m.
0.  32.  and  that  which  cometh  into  your  m.

>m.  12.  2.  he  transformed  by  renewing  of  your  m.
Cor.  8.  19.  and  declaration  of  your  ready  m.

.  2.  for  1  know'  the  forwardness  o f  your  m.
oh.  4.  2.3.  and  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  ymr  m.
<1. 1.  21.  that  were  sometimes  enemies  in  your  m.

.  +  2.  set  pour  m.  on  things  above,  not  on  things
Pet.  1.  13.  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  m.  be  sober
MIND,  V erh.

om.  8.5.  that  are  after  flesh,  in.  things  of  the  flesh

2.  16.  m.  not  high  things,  but  condescend  to  men
hi/.  3.  Ifl.  nevertheless  let  us  m.  the  same  thin<*

19.  for  many  walk,  who  m.  earthly  things
MINDED.

nth  1.  18.  she  was  stedfastly  m.  to  go  with  her
Chron.  24.  4.  .loash  W'as  m.  to  repair  the  house
:ra  7.  1.3.  which  are  m.  of  their  own  free  will
at.  1. 19.  Joseph  was  m.  to  put  her  away  privily
>m.  8.  6.  for  to  be  carnall  y  m.  is  death,  but  to  be
_  spiritually  m.  is  life  and  peace

l.  20.  be  not  Inghm.  but  fear

>.  5.  grant  you  to  be  like  m.  one  toward  another
for.  1.  15.  in  this  confidence  1  was  m.  to  come

7.  wdien  I  was  thus  w.did  1  use  lightness

il.  5.  10.  that  you  will  be  no  otherwise  m.

iil.  2.  2.  that  ye  be  like  m.  having  the  same  love
10.  no  man  like  m.  w'ho  will  care  for  your  state
15.  let  us,  as  many  as  be  perfect,  be  thus  m.  if  in
any  thing  ye  be  otherwise  m.  God  will  reveal
Chess.  5.  14. brethren,  comfort  the  feeble  m.
lirn.  6.  17.  charge  that  the  rich  be  not  highm.
r>m.  : 3.  4.  for  men  shall  be  headv,  highm.
t.  2.  6  young  men  exhort  to  be' sober  m.

m.  1.8.a  double-™,  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways

8.  and  purify  your  hearts,  ye  double  m.

MINDFUL.

''hrou.  16. 15.  be  ye  m.  always  of  his  covenant
h.  9.  17-  our  fathers  were  not  m.  of  thv  w  onders
(il.  8. 4 .  w’hat  is  man,  that  thou  art  m.  ofhim,  and
the  son  of  man  that  thou  visitest  him  J  Ileb.  2.  6.

1.  5.  he  will  ever  be  in.  of  his  covenant
5. 12.  the  Lord  hath  been  m.  of  us,  he  will  bless  us
•.17.  10.  not  been  m.  of  the  rock  of  thy  strength
"im.  1.  4.  being  m.  of  thy  fears,  to  be  filled
h.  11.  15.  it  they  had  been  m.  of  that  country
V/.3.  2.  that  ye  may  be  m.  of  the  wmrds  spoken
MINDS.

fg.  19.  30.  consider  of  it,  and  speak  vour  m.
am.  17.  8.  and  they  be  chafed  in  their  m.

-ings  9.  15.  if  it  be  your  m.  let  none  go  forth
°.k.  24.  25.  that  whereupon  they  set  their  m.

.5.  with  despiteful  m.  to  cast  it  ont  for  a  prey
ts  14.  2.  and  made  their  m.  evil  affected
.  6.  they  changed  their  m.  said  he  was  a  god
’or.  3.  14.  but  their  m.  w'ere  blinded,  veil  untaken

4.  the  god  of  this  wmrld  hath  blinded  the  m.
.3.soyour  m .should  be  corrupted  from  simplicity
"•  4*  7  •  the  peace  of  God  shall  keep  vour  m.

im.  6.  5.  men  of  corrupt  m.  2  Tim.  3.  8.

h.  10.  16.  and  in  their  m.  will  I  write  them

3.  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  m.
et.3. 1.  1  stirupyour  pure  w.bv  wav  of  rememb.

Minding.

’s  20.  13.  Paul  m.  himself  to  go  afoot
|  MINE.

28.  +  1.  surely  there  is  a  m.  for  silver
MINE.

*..31.  43.  and  all  that  thou  seest  is  m.
o.  are  m.  as  Reuben  and  Simeon  shall  be  m
■rf.  13.  2.  sanctify  to  me  all  the  first-born,  both'of
man  and  beast,  it  is  m.  .34.  19.  Num.  3.  1.3

5.  for  all  the  earth  is  m.  Psal.  50.  12.

•  26.  that  ye  should  be  m.  Isa.  4.3.  1.

-3.  the  land  is  m.  for  ye  are  strangers

T-  «  the  Levites  shall  be  m.  45.  |  8.  14.
l(.  the  first-born  of  children  of  Israel  are  m.

. 30.  Absalom  said,  see,Joab’sfield  is  near™.
\ngs  *.15.  knowest  that  the  kingdom  was  m.

'*1  ne'ther  m.  nor  thine,  divide  it
thy  silver,  and  gold,  and  wives,  are  m.

ti-ifye  will  be  m.  and  if  ye  will  hearken
/ t  ,tsoev'er  1S  under  heaven  is  m.
'/.ULSS.  I  kept  myself  from  m.  iniquity
10.  for  every  beast  of  the  forest  is  m.

._aiid  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  are  m.

!  •0°',.ead  1S  ?n(t  Manasseh  is  m.  108.  8.

/'  o  j'  counsv  is  m.  and  sound  wisdom

•  10.  my  beloved  is  m.  and  I  am  his,  6.3.
l;\my  V|neyard,  which  is  m.  is  before  me

A  ™hose  «rord  shall  stand,  m.  or  theirs
i  V  v8-,  sware  to  thee,  thou  becamest  m.

1'  j0*.?*  a"  souls  are  m.  soul  of  son  is  m,

.  and  they  were  m.  ||  5.  when  she  was  in.

35-  J0.  these  countries  be  m.

]'  r  YJe  silver  is  m.  and  the  gold  is  m.

/  1'  ey  shall  be  m.  saith  the  Lord
heLri*kmhearetfl  sayings  of  w.and  doeth  them
oTCtAthe?e  sayings  of  m.  and  doeth  them  not
mt  to  sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left
el/  tof?lve.’  it  shall  be  given,  Mark  10.  to!

,0  :  ,a  tnend  ofw.  in  his  journey  is  come
tt'2:  desi's. saith,  m.  hour  is  not  vet  come

"i  I:?c,nJne  ,.s.n,ot  m-  il  10.  1 4.  am  know  n  of  m.

-  .  the  w  ord  which  ye  hear  is  not  m.

.  i  1  .shall  recei ve  of  m.  and  shew  it  you
10 '.  ii1D-s  t*lat  **.le  Father  hath  are  m.'

1  10,0'  are  thine,  and  thine  are  m.

,  -•  vengeance  is  m.  I  will  repay,  saith  T  d.

•  4.  in  every  praver  of  m.  making  request
^  on  j  51  IN G LF.

RlY  t  me,n pf strength  tow.  strong  drink

•  »>e  JiOra  shall  m.  his  enemies  together


T.[a  'vi,L”?v  Egyptians  with  Egyptians

Dan.  43.  they  shall  m%  with  (he  seed  of  men

mingled.

Lxod.  9.  24.  there  was  fire  w.  with  the  hail
Lev.  19.  19.  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with  w.  seed
Lara  9. 2.  holy  seed  have  w.  themselves  with  people
J<)6  24.  t  6.  tney  reap  every  one  his  w.  corn
Psai.  102.  9.  and  w.  my  drink  with  weeping
106.  35.  but  w  ere  w.  among  the  heathen
Prov.  9.  2.  killed  her  beasts,  she  hath  w.4ier  wine
5.  and  drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  m.

Isa.  19.  14.  the  Lord  hath  m.  a  perverse  spirit
Jer.  25.  20.  give  the  cup  to  all  the  w.  people,  24.
50.  37.  a  sword  on  all  the  m.  people,  Kzek.  .30.  5.
Mat.  27.  34.  they  gave  him  vinegar  m.  with  gall
Mark  15.  23.  they  gave  him  w  ine  w.  with  myrrh
Luke  1.3.  1.  wdiose  blood  Pilate  had  w.  with  saerifi.
1  ®'T~‘  *'lere  followed  hail  and  fire  w.  with  blood

15.  2. 1  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  m.  with  fire
MIN  LSH,  ED.

Lrod.  5.  19.  ye  shall  not  m.  ought  of  your  task
Psal.  107.  39.  again  they  are  w.  and  brought  low
MINISTER

oignmes,  Une  who  serves,  traits  on,  or  attends  an¬
other,  Lxod.  24.  1.3.  1  Kings  10.  5.  It  is  a  word
applied,  [1]  To  Christ,  who  ts  called ,  A  Minister
ot  the  sanctuary,  Heh.  8.  2.  that  is.  Christ  being
now  gone  into  heaven,  typified  hy  the  holy  of
holies,  he  does  there  minister,  or  execute  the  re¬
mainder  of  his  office  in  his  human  nature ,  hy  pre¬
senting  the  merit  of  his  sacrifice,  as  the  high-
priest  brought  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering  into  the
most  holy  place  once  a  year,  Exod.  30.  10.  Lev.

16.  15.  [2]  To  such  as  are  appointed  to  attend  the
service  of  <Jod  in  his  church,  to  dispense  and  give
forth,  faithfully  and  wisely ,  the  word,  sacraments,
and  other  holy  things,  1  Cor.  4.  1.  [3]  To  mag  is-
trates,  who  are  God's  officers  and  deputies  to
punish  such  as  transgress  his  law,  and  to  defend
the  good,  Rom.  13.  6.  [4]  To  the  holy  angels,
who  are  always  ready  to  execute  the  commands  of
Gotl,  Psal.  104.  4.

Erod.  24.  13.  Moses  rose  up,  and  his  m.  Joshua
•Josh.  1.  1.  the  Lord  spake  to  Joshua,  Moses’ m.

-  hings 6.  +  15.  when  the  m.  of  Elisha  was  risen
Mat.  20.  26.  let  him  be  your  m.  Mark  10.  43.

Luke  4.  20.  be  gave  the  book  again  to  the  m.
nJs  i3’  'J'  an(^  they  had  also  John  to  their  m.

•X).  16.  to  make  thee  a  m.  and  a  witness
Pom.  13.  4.  for  he  is  the  m.  of  God  to  thee,  6.

15.  8.  C  hrist  w'as  a  m.  ot  the  circumcision
16.  I  should  be  the  m.  ot  Jesus  to  the  Gentiles

Gal.  2. 17 .  is  Christ  the  m.  of  sin  ?  God  forbid
Lph  .3.  7.  whereof  I  w'as  made  a  m.  Col.  1.  23,  25.
6.  21.  lychicus,  a  faithful  m.  of  the.  I.d.  Cot.  4.  7.
Co/.  1.  7.  Epaphras,  who  is  for  you  a  faithful  m.

1  Jhess.  3. _2.  1  imothy  our  brother  and  m.  of  God
Kj.m’  4-  6.  thou  shalt  be  a  good  m.  of  Christ
lleb.  8.  2.  a  m.  of  the  sanctuary  and  tabernacle
_  MINISTER.

Lxod.  28.1.  that  he  may  m.  tome  in  the  priest’s  office,
3,4,  41.  |  29.  1,  44.  |  30.  30.  |  31.  10.  |  35.  19.

I  39.  41.  |  40.  1.3,  15.

35.  and  it  shall  be  upon  Aaron  tom.

43.  when  they  come  to  altar  to  m.  29.  30. !  30.  20.
_^9.  44.  I  will  sanctify  Aaron  to  m.  to  me
Lf  v.  7.  35.  in  the  day 'he  presented  them  to  m.

16.  32.  whom  he  shall  consecrate  to  m.  Num.  3.  3.
J\um.  8.  26.  but  shall  m.  with  their  brethren
L)eut.  10. 8.  separated  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  m.  to  him
18.  5.  to  stand  to  m.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  7.

-I.  5.  for  thy  God  hath  chosen  them  to  m.

1  Sam.  2.  11.  the  child  did  m.  to  the  Lord  before  Eli
1  Kings  8.  11.  so  that  the  priest  could  not  stand  to
1  rsr  m‘  hecause  of  the  cloud,  2  Chron.  5.  14

1  Chron.  15.  2.  chosen  to  m.  before  him  forever
23.  13.  to  m.  and  to  give  thanks,  2  Chron.  .31.  2.

2  Chron.  13.  10.  piiests  which  m.  are  the  sons  of

n  ,  „  „  ,  ,  ,,  ,  Aaron

Psal.  9.  8.  he  shall  m.  judgment  to  the  people
Isa.  60.  7.  the  rams  of  Nebaioth  shall  m.  to  thee

10.  and  their  kings  shall  m.  to  thee

Jer.  33.22.  I  will  multiply  the  Levites  that  m.

Lzek.  40.  46.  which  come  near  to  m.  44.  15,  16.

44.  11.  they  shall  stand  before  them  to  m.

Mat .  20.  28.  to  be  ministeredto,  but  to  m.  Mark  10.45
25.  44.  naked,  or  sick,  and  did  not  m.  to  thee  J
Acts  24.  23.  nor  forbid  his  acquaintance  to  m.  to  him
horn.  15.  25.  but  now  1  go  to  m.  to  the  saints
27.  their  duty  is  to  m.  to  them  in  carnal  things
1  Cor.  9. 13.  they  which  m.  about  holy  things,  live  of
2 Lor.  9. 10.  both  m.  bread  for  your  food,  and  multip.

4.  thftt  it  may  m,  grace  to  the  hearers
1  Lim.  1.  4.  which  m.  questions  rather  than  edifying
Ileb.  1.  14.  angels  sent  tom.  to  heirs  of  sal  vation
6.  10.  ye  have  ministered  to  the  saints,  and  do  m
1  Pet.  1.  12.  but  to  us  they  did  m.  the  things
4. 10.  even  so  m.  the  same  one  to  another,  as  good

11.  it  any  man  m.  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability

MINISTERED.

At/m.  3.  4.  Eleazar  and  Ithamar  m.  Dent.  10.  6.

1  Sam.  2.  18.  but  Samuel  m.  before  the  Lord,  3.1.

2  Sam.  13.  17.  Arnnon  called  his  servant  that  m.

1  Kings  1.  4.  Abishag  m.  to  king  David,  15.
lffi  21,  Elisha  w  ent  after  Elijah,  and  m.  to  him

2  Kings ■  25.  14.  they  took  away  the  pots,  snuffers,
and  all  the  vessels  wherew  ith  they  m.  Jer.  52.  18.

Ezek.  44.  12.  they  m.  to  them  before  their  idols"

Dan.  7. 10.  thousand  thousands  m.  unto  him
Mat.  4.  11.  angels  came  and  m.  to  him,  Mark  1 . 13.

8.  15.  she  rose  and  m.  unto  them,  Mark  1.  .31.

Luke  8.  3.  which  m.  to  him  of  their  substance
Acts  13.  2.  as  they  m.  and  fasted,  the  Spirit  said
20.  34.  these  hands  have  m.  to  my  necessities
~.Lpj.  3.  3.  declared  the  epistle  of  Christ  m.  by  us
Phil.  2.  25.  and  be  that  m.  to  my  wants
CoJ.  2.  19.  having  nourishment  m.  increaseth  with

1  fim.  3.  +  1.3.  that  have  m.  the  office  of  deacon

2  Tim.  1.  18.  in  how  many  things  he  m.  unto  me
Philem.  13.  that  in  thy  stead  he  might  have  m.
neb.  6.  10.  that  ye  have  m.  to  the  saints,  and  do
2  Pet.  1.  11.  tor  so  an  entrance  shall  be  m.  to  you


MTNISTERETH.

2  Cor.  9.  10.  now  he  that  m.  seed  to  the  sowmr
Gal.  3.  5.  he  that  m.  to  you  the  Spirit,  doeth  he  it
MINISTERING.

1  Chron.  9.  28.  had  the  char-re  of  the  m.  vessels
Ezek.  44.  11.  at  the  gates  of  house,  m.  to  the  house
Mat.  27.  55.  many  women  followed  Jesus  m.  to  hint
Pom.  12.  7-  let  us  wait  on  m.  ||  15.  16.  m.  the  gospe

2  Cor.  8.  4.  and  take  on  us  the  m.  to  the  saints

9.  1.  forastouchingm.tothesaints.itissuperfluoiv
neb.  1.  14.  are  they  not  all  m.  spirits,  sent  minister

10.  11.  every  priest  standeth  daily  m.  and  offering
MINISTERS.

1  K  ings  10.  5.  the  attendance  of  his  m.  2  Chron.  9.  4
Ezraj.  24.  not  lawful  to  impose  toll  on  m.  of  house

8.  17.  that  they  should  bring  unto  us  m.  for  house
Psal.  103.  21.  ye  m.  of  his  that  do  his  pleasure

104.  4.  who  maketh  his  m.  a  flaming  fire,  If  eh.  1. 7
Isa.  61.  6.  men  shall  call  you  the  m.  of  our  God
Jer.  33.  21.  then  may  also  my  covenant  be  broken
with  David  my  servant,  and  with  my  m
Lzek.  44.  11.  they  shall  be  m.  in  my  sanctuary
45.  4.  holy  portion  for  the  m.  of  the  sanctuary
Joel  1.  9.  the  Lord’s  m.  mourn  t|  13.  howl  ye  m.

2.  17.  m.  w>eep  between  the  porch  and  the  altar
Luke  l.  2.  which  from  beginning  were  m.  of  wmrd
Korn.  13.  6.  they  are  God’s  m.  attending  continually

1  Lor.  .3.  5.  but  m.  by  whom  ye  believed,  as  Lord

4.  1.  so  account  of  us  as  of  the  m.  of  Christ

2  Cor .  3.  6.  who  made  us  able  m.  of  the  new  testa

6.  4.  approving  ourselves  as  the  m.  of  God

11.  15.  therefore  it  is  no  great  thing,  if  his  m.  also

be  transformed  as  the  m.  of  righteousness
23.  are  they  m.  of  Christ  ?  1  ain  more,  in  labours
Ml  NISI  RATI  ON.

Luke  1.  23.  as  soon  as  the  days  of  his  m.  were  *md.
Acts  6. 1  .their  widows  were  neglected  in  the  daily  m
2  Cor .3.7.  but  it  the  m.  of  death  was  glorious
8.  the  m.  of  the  Spirit  be  rather  glorious  ?  9.

9.  13.  whiles  hy  the  experiment  of  this  m.

MINISTRY.

Num.  4.  12.  shall  take  all  the  instruments  of  the  m
47  every  one  that  came  to  do  the  service  of  the  m.
2  Chron.  7.  6.  when  David  praised  by  their  m.

IIos.  12.  10.  have  used  similitudes  by  m.  of  proph.
Acts  ].  17.  for  he  had  obtained  part  of  this  m.

25.  that  may  take  part  of  this  m.  and  apostleship
6.  4.  but  we  will  give  ourselves  to  m.  of  the  word

12.  25.  returned,  when  they  had  fulfilled  their  m.

20.  24.  so  that  1  might  finish  my  course,  and  m.

21.  19.  what  things  God  had  wrought  by  his  m.
Pom.  12.  7-  or  m.  let  11s  wait  on  our  ministering

1  Cor.  16. 15.  addicted  themselves  to  the  m.  of  saints

2  Cor.  4.  1.  seeing  we  have  this  m.  we  faint  not

5.  18.  hath  given  to  11s  the  m.  of  reconciliation

6.  3.  giving  no  offence,  that  the  in.  be  not  blamt-J
Lph.  4.  12.  for  work  of  the  m.  for  edifying  the  boor-*

*  17*  take  heed  to  the  m.  thou  hast  received

1  7m.  1.  12.  putting  me  into  the  m.  who  was  before

2  dim.  4.  5.  watch  thou,  make  full  proof  of  thy  m.
IL  lor  he  is  profitable  to  me  for  the  m.

Ileb.  8.6.  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  excellent  m.
9.  21.  he  sprinkled  with  blood  the  vessels  of  the  m
MINSTREL,  S.

* Kings  3. 15.  hut now  bring  me  a  m.  when  m.  played
Mat.  9.  23.  when  Jesus  saw  the  m.  and  the  peonle
MINT.  F  F

Mat.  23.  23.  ye  pay  tithe  of  m.  anise,  and  cummin
Luke  11,  42.  ye  tithe  m.  and  all  manner  of  herbs
MIRACLE

Is  a  supernatural  operation  performed  alone  hy  the
power  of  God,  John  .3.  2.  I  9.  16.  Acts  2.  22.  |
15.  12.  Our  Saviour  confirmed  the  doctrine  which
he  taught  hy  a  train  of  incontestable  miracles:
they  were  so  great  in  their  nature,  so  real  and
solid  m  their  proof,  so  divine  in  the  manner  of
performing  them,  ly  the  power  of  his  will ;  so  holy
in  their  end,  to  confirm  a  doctrine  most  becoming
the  wisdom  and  other  glorious  attributes  of  God,
and  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  prophecies  con¬
cerning  the  Messiah,  whose  coming  was  foretold
to  he  with  miraculous  healing  benefits  ;  that  there
was  the  greatest  assurance,  that  none  without  the
omnipotent  hand  of  God  could  do  them.  The
magicians  performed  divers  wonders  in  Egypt
hut  they  were  outdone  hy  Moses,  to  convince  the
spectators,  that  he  was  sent  from  a  power  infi¬
nitely  superior  to  that  of  evil  spirits.  Real  mira¬
cles  that  are  contrary  to  the  order,  and  exceed jhe
power  of  nature,  can  only  he  produced  hy  creatine
power,  and  are  wrought  to  give  credit  to  those
who  are  sent  from  God ;  and  when.  God  permits
false  miracles  to  he  done  hy  seducers,  that  would
thereby  obtain  authority  and  credit  among  men
the  deception  is  not  invincible  ;  for  it  is  foretold
expressly,  to  give  vs  warning,  that  the  man  of  sin
shall  come  with  lying  wonders  after  the  working
o  2  1  hess.  2.  9.  hut  the  heavenly  doctrine

of  the  gospel  has  been  confirmed  hy  real  miracles
incomparably  greater  than  all  the  strange  thing's
done  to  give  credit  to  doctrines  opposed  to  it.

Exod.  7.  9.  when  Pharaoh  shall  speak,  saying,

2  Chron.  32.  +  24.  and  he  wrought  a  m.  for  hiitT
Mark  6.  52.  they  considered  not  the  m.  of  the  loaves

9.  .39.  no  man  which  shall  do  a  m.  in  my  name
Luke  2.3.  8.  hoped  to  have  seen  some  in.  done  by  him
John  4.  54.  this  is  the  second  m.  that  Jesus  did

10.  41.  many  resorted  ar.l  said,  John  did  no  m.

Acts  4.  16.  a  notable  in.  hath  been  done  by  them

22.  above  forty  years  on  whom  this  m.  was  wrought

MIRACLES.  c

AW  14.  22.  which  have  seen  m.  which  1  have  done
Dent.  11.3.  your  children,  that  have  not  seen  his  m.

29.  3.  thine  eyes  have  seen  those  signs  and  great  m
Jvdg.  6.  13.  where  be  all  bis  m.  our  fathers  told  us
John”.  11.  this  beginning  of  m.  did  .fesus  in  Cana

23.  many  believed,  when  they  saw  the  m  he  did

3.  2.  no  man  can  do  these  in.  except  G.  he  with  him

6.  2.  a  mult  it.  followed  him,  because  they  saw  liisru
^C6.  }’e  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  tFie  m,

7.  31.  will  he  do  more  m.  than  this  man  doeth  .

315


MIS


M  O  C


MON


John  9. 16.  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  such  m.  ?

11.  47-  "  hat  do  we  ?  for  this  man  doetli  many  in.

12.  37.  though  he  had  done  so  many  ot.  bet.  them
Acts  2. 22.  a  man  approved  of  God  by  ot,  and  signs

6.  8.  Stephen  did  great  ot.  among  the  people
8.  6.  hearing  and  seeing  the.  ot.  which  he  did

13.  wondered,  beholding  the  w.  which  were  done
15. 12.  declaring  what  ot.  God  had  wrought
19. 11.  God  wrought  special  ot.  by  hands  of  Paul
1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  the  working  of  in.

28.  after  that  in.  ||  29.  are  all  workers  of  ot. .

Gal.  3.  5.  he  that  worketh  ot.  doeth  he  it  by  works
lleb.  2. 4.  God  also  bearing  them  witness  with  ot.
liev  13  14.  deceiveth  them  by  the  means  of  those  ot.
16. 14.  for  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils  working  ot.

19. 20.  the  false  prophet  that  wrought  ot.  before  him
MIRE

Signifies,  Mud  or  dirt  trodden  underfoot,  2Sam.22.43.
lie  hath  cast  me  into  the  mire,  Job  30.  19.  He
hath  made  me  contemptible,  filthy,  and  loathsome,
by  reason  of  my  sores,  my  whole  body  being  a  kina
of  mire  in  regard  oj  the  filth  breaking  forth  in  all

its  parts.  ,  ,  ,  ,,

The  sow  that  was  washed  turned  to  her  wallow¬
ing  in  the  mire,  2  Pet.  2.  22..  As  swine  that
naturally  love  the  dirt  and  mire,  if  sometimes
they  be  washed  from  it,  yet  still  retaining  their
former  dispositions,  return  to  it  again:  So  like¬
wise  these  persons  here  mentioned,  however  they
be  washed  from  the  pollutions  oj  the  world,  and
by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  brought  off  from
their  former  sinful  courses,  and  brought  to  a  pro¬
fession  of  holiness ;  yet  still  retaining  their  old
nature  and  corrupt  dispositions,  they  are  easily
prevailed  upon  and  enticed,  and  they  relapse  into
their  former  abominations.

2  Sam.  22.  43.  1  did  stamp  them  as  m.  of  the  street,
and  spread  them  abroad,  Isa.  10.  6.  Mic.  7 . 10.
Job  8.  11.  can  the  rush  grow  up  without  m.r
30. 19.  he  hath  cast  me  into  the  ot.  1  am  like  dust
38.  +  38.  when  the  dust  is  turned  into  m.

41.  30.  he  spreadeth  sharp- pointed  things  on  the  m.
Psal.  69.  2.  I  sink  in  deep  ot.  where  is'no  standing

14.  deliver  me  out  of  the  m.  let  me  not  sink
Isa.  57.  20.  whose  waters  cast  up  ot.  and  dirt
Jer.  38.  6.  in  the  dungeon  was  no  water,  but  m.

22.  thy  feet  are  sunk  in  the  m.  and  turned
Zech.  9.  3.  and  fine  gold  as  the  m.  ot  the  streets

10.  5.  which  tread  their  enemies  in  in.  ot  the  streets
°  Pet  2.  22.  the  sow  to  her  wallowing  in  the  in.
MIRY.

Psal.  40.  2.  he  brought  me  out  of  the  in.  clay
Ezek.  47.  11.  the  m.  places  shall  not  be  healed
Dan.  2. 41.  thou  sawest  iron  mixed  with  m.  clay,  43.
MIRTH.

Gen.  31.  27.  1  might  have  sent  thee  away  with  in.
Neh.  8. 12.  the  people  went  away  to  make  great  m.
Job  21.  +  13.  they  spend  their  days  in  m.

Psal.  137.  3.  they  that  wasted  us  desired  of  us  m.
Prov.  14.  13.  and  the  end  of  that  in.  is  heaviness
Eccl.  2.  1.  1  said,  go  to,  I  will  prove  thee  with  m.
2.  I  said  of  m.  what  doeth  it  t

7.  4.  the  heart  of  fools  is  in  the  house  of  m.

8. 15.  then  I  commended  ot.  because  a  man  hath
Isa.  24.  8.  m.  of  tabrets,  the  joy  of  the  harp  ceaseth

11.  joy  is  darkened,  the  m.  of  the  land  is  gone
Jer.  I.  34.  I  will  cause  to  cease  the  voice  of  ot.  from
Judah  and  Jerusalem,  16.  9.1  25. 10.  Hos. .2.  11.
Ezek  21  10.  it  is  furbished,  should  we  then  make  m.?
MISCARRY  TNG.

Hos.  9. 14.  give  them  a  m.  womb  and  dry  breasts
MISCHIEF.  „  „

Gen.  42.  4.  for  he  said,  lest  some  m.  befall  him
38.  if  m.  befall  him  by  the  way  ye  go  in,  44  29.
Exod.  21. 22.  her  fruit  depart,  and  yet  no  ot,  follow

32.  12.  for  m.  did  he  bring  them  out  to  slay  them
22.  thou  knowest  the  people  that  are  set  on  in.

1  Sam.  23.  9.  David  knew  that  Saul  practised  in.

2  Sam.  16.  8.  behold,  thou  art  taken  in  thy  in.

1  Kings  11.  25.  besides  the  in.  that  Iladad  did
20.  7.  mark  and  see  how  this  man  seeketh  ot.

2  Kings  7.  9.  if  we  tarry,  some  m.  will  befall  us
Neh.  6.  2.  but  they  thought  to  do  me  in.

Esth.8.3. Esther  besought  to  put  away  ot.  of  Hanian
Job  15.  35.  they  conceive  in.  and  bring  forth  vanity
Pc  7 . 14  he  conceived  m.  brought  forth  talsehoo<


JPs.  7. 14.  he  conceived  m.  brought  forth  falsehood
16.  his  in.  shall  return  upon  his  own  head
10.  7.  under  his  tongue  is  m.  and  vanity


1U.  /.  Uliuei  1U3  10  .

14.  thou  beholdest  m.  and  spite,  to  requite  it
26. 10.  in  whose  hands  is  ot.  their  hand  is  full
28.  3.  which  speak  peace,  but  in.  is  in  their  hearts
36.  4.  the  wicked  deviseth  m.  upon  Ins  bed
52. 1.  why  boastest  thyself  in  m.  O  mighty  man  r
55.  10.  in.  and  sorrow  are  in  the  midst  ot  it
62.  3.  how  long  will  ye  imagine  in.  ag.  a  man  ?

94.  20.  the  throne,  which  frameth  in.  by  a  law'

119.  150.  they  draw  nigh  that  follow  after  m.

140.  9.  let  the  in.  of  their  own  lips  cover  them
Prov.  4. 16.  sleep  not,  except  they  have  done  in.

6.  14.  he  deviseth  m.  continually,  he  sowetli
18.  feet  that  be  swift  in  running  to  m.

10.  23.  it  is  as  sport  to  a  fool  to  do  in.

11.  27.  he  that  seeketh  in.  it  shall  conu  to  him

12.  21.  but  the  wicked  shall  be  filled  with  m.

13.  17.  a  wicked  messenger  falleth  into  ot.

17.  20.  that  hath  a  perverse  tongue  falleth  into  m.
24.  2.  their  heart  studieth  and  their  lips  talk  ot  in.

16.  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  into  m.  28.  14.

J.sfl.  47.  11.  therefore  in.  shall  fall  upon  thee
59.  4.  they  trust  in  vanity,  they  conceive  m.
Ezek-1.  26.  in.  shall  come  upon  m.  and  rumour
11.  2.  said  he,  these  are  the  men  that  devise  ot,
Dan.  11.27.  both  these  kings’  hearts  shall  be  todoOT.
Hos.  7. 15.  yet  do  they  imagine  m.  against  me
Mic.  7. 1 3.  the  great  man  uttereth  the  m.  of  his  soul
Acts  13. 10.  O  full  of  all  in.  thou  child  ot  the  devil
MISCHIEFS.

Deut.  32.  23.  I  will  heap  ot.  on  them,  1  will  speud
Psal.  52.  2.  thy  tongue  deviseth  in.  like  a  razor
140.  2.  w'hich  imagine  m.  in  their  heart
MISCHIEVOUS.

Psal.  21-  H.  they  imagined  a  m.  device,  not  able  to

316


Ps.  38.  12.  they  that  seek  my  hurt,  speak  m.  things
Prov.  24.  8.  lie  shall  be  called  a  m.  person
Eccl.  10.  13.  the  end  of  his  talk  is  in.  madness
Ezek.  38.  +  10.  thou  shalt  conceive  a  m.  purpose
Mic  7.  3.  the  great  man  uttereth  his  ot.  desire
MISERABLE.

Job  16.  2.  Job  said,  m.  comforters  are  ye  all
1  Cor.  15.  19.  we  are  of  all  men  most  in.

Rev.  3.  17.  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  m.
MISERABLY.

Mat  21.  41.  he  will  in.  destroy  those  wicked  men
MISERY.  ,  .

Judg.  10. 16.  his  sou.  was  grieved  for  the  w. of  Israel
Job  3.  20.  why  is  light  given  to  him  that  is  in  m.T
11.  16.  because  thou  shalt  forget  thy  m.

Prov.  31.  7.  drink,  and  remember  his  in.  no  more
Eccl.  8.  6.  the  m.  of  a  man  is  great  on  him
Lam.  3. 19.  remembering  mine  affliction  and  m.

Rom.  3.  16.  destruction  and  m.  are  in  their  ways
MISERIES.  .

Lam.  1.7.  Jerusalem  remembered  in  days  ot  her  m.
Jam  5  1.  howl  for  your  w.  that  shall  come  on  you

MISS.

Judg.  20.  16.  sling  at  an  hair-breadth  ana  not  m.

1  Sam.  20.  6.  if  thy  father  at  all  m.  me,  then  say
MISSED.

1  Sam.  20.  18.  thou  shalt  be  m.  tthy  seat  will  be  m.

25.  15.  neither  m.  any  thing  as  long  as  conversant
21  nothing  was  m.  of  all  that  pertained  to  him
MISSING.

1  Sam.  25.  7.  neither  W'as  there  ought  m.  unto  them
1  Kings  20.  39. if  by  any  means  he  be  m. then  thy  life

MIST.

Gen.  2.  6.  but  there  went  up  a  in.  from  the  earth
Acts  13. 11.  immediately  there  tell  on  him  a  m.
n  pet  o  i7  to  whom  the  m.  of  darkness  is  reserved
'  ‘  MISTRESS.  ,

Gen.  16.  4.  Sarah  her  in.  was  despised  in  her  eyes
8.  I  flee  from  my  m.  Sarai  II  9.  return  to  thy  in.

1  Kings  17-  17.  son  of  the  in.  ot  the  house  tell  sick

2  Kings 5.  3.  said  to  her  in.  would  G.my  lord  were
Psal  123.  2.  as  eyes  of  a  maiden  to  hand  ot  her  m.
Prov  30.  23.  and  handmaid  that  is  heir  to  her  m.

Isa.  24.  2.  shall  be  as  with  the  maid  so  with  her  ot.
Nah  3  4.  in.  of  witchcrafts,  that  selleth  nations

MISUSED.

0  Chr  36.  16.  but  they  despised  and  m.  his  prophets
MITE,  S.

Mark  12.  42.  a  widow  threw'  in  two  m.  Luke  21.  2
Luke  12.  59.  till  thou  hast  paid  the  very  lastw.

Ml'l  RE.

Exod.  28.  4.  they  shall  make  a  m.  39.  I  39.  28.

37.  a  blue  lace  upon  the  m.  39.  31.

09  6  and  thou  shalt  put  the  in.  upon  his  head

Lev.  8.  9.  lie  put  also  the  holy  crown  on  the  m.

16.  4.  with  the  linen  in.  shall  he  be  attired
Zech.  3.  5.  a  fair  ot.  on  his  head,  so  they  seta  fair  ot
MIXED.

Exod.  12.  38.  a  in.  multitude  went  up  with  them
Num  1 1  4.  the  m.  multitude  fell  a  lusting
ffel 1. 13.3.  they  separated  from  Isr.all  ot.  multitude
Prov.  23.  30.  they  that  go  to  seek  in.  wine
Isa  1.  22.  thy  silver  is  dross,  thy  wine  m.  with  water
Dan.  2.  41.  thou  sawest  the  iron  ot.  with  miry  clay
Hos.  7.  8.  Ephraim  ot.  himself  among  the  people
lleb  4  2  not  being  ot.  with  faith  in  them  heard  it
'  '  MIXTURE.

Exod.  8.  t  21.  I  will  send  a  ot.  of  noisome  beasts
12.  +38.  a  great  in.  went  up  also  whip  them
Psal.  75.  8.  there  is  a  cup,  wine  red,  it  is  full  ot  m
John  19.  39.  there  came  also  Nicodemus,  and
brought  a  w.  of  myrrh  and  aloes
Rev  14  10  is  poured  out  without  ot.  into  the  cup
MOCK.

Prov.  14.  9.  fools  make  a  ot.  at  sin  ;  but  among
MOCK

Signifies,  [1]  To  deride,  scoff,  or  laugh  at,  2
Chron.  30.  10.  [2]  To  speak  merrily,  or  in

jest,  Gen.  19.  14.'  [3]  To  deceive  one  s  expec¬

tation,  by  'departing  from  wonted  obedience,
Num.  22.  29.  [4]  To  beguile  with  words,  Judg.
16.  10,  13.  [5]  To  ravish,  force,  or  abuse,  Gen.
39.  17.

Gen.  39.  14.  he  brought  in  an  Hebrew  to  ot.  us,  17  •

1  Sam.  31.  +  4.  lest  these  uncircumcised  come  and
thrust  me  through,  and  ot.  me,  1  Chron.  10.  +  4.
Job  13.  9.  as  one  that  mocketh,  do  ye  so  ot.  lnm
21.  3.  and  after  that  1  have  spoken,  in.  011
Prov.  1.26.  1  will  ot  when  j  our  fear  cometh
Jer.  9.+  5.  they  will  ot.  every  one  his  neighbour

38.  19.  lest  they  deliver  me,  and  they  ot.  me
Lam.  1.  7.  the  adversary  did  in.  at  her  sabbaths
Ezek.  22.5.shall  w.thee  who  art  infamous  and  vexed
Mat.  20. 19.  shall  deliver  him  to  Gentiles  to  ot.  lnm
Mark  10.  34.  they  shall  ot.  him  and  scourge  him
Luke  14.  29.  lest  they  that  behold,  begin  to  ot.  him

MOCKED.

Gen.  19. 14.  he  seemed  as  one  that  ot.  to  his  sons
Num.  22.  29.  Balaam  said,  because  thou  hastw.  me
Judg.  16.  10.  hast  w.  me,  and  told  me  lies,  13.  15.

1  Kings  18.  27.  at  noon,  Elijah  m.  them,  and  said
o  Kings  2.  23.  little  children  out  of  the  city  m.  Elisha

2  Chron.  30.  10.  they  laughed  them  to  scorn  and  ot.
36.  16.  but  they  w.  the  messengers  of  God

Neh.  4.1.  Sanballat  was  wroth,  and  in.  the  Jews
Job  12.  4.  1  am  as  one  in.  of  his  neighbour
Mat.  2.  16.  when  Herod  saw'  thathewaSOT.be  was
°7.  29.  they  bowed  the  knee  and  ot.  31.  Mark
‘  15.  20.

Luke  18.  32.  shall  bew.  and  spitefully  entreated

22.  63.  and  the  men  that  held  Jesus  ot.  him

23.  11.  Ilerod  in.  him  36.  the  soldiers  also  ot.  him
Acts  17.  32.  w  hen  heard  of  the  resurrection,  some  ot.
Gal.  6.  7.  be  not  deceived,  God  is  not  ot.

MOCKER.

Prov.  20.  1.  wine  is  a  ot.  strong  drink  is  raging
MOCKERS.

Job  17.  2.  are  there  not  ot.  with  me  ?  and  doth  not
Psal.  35.  16.  with  hypocritical  w.  in  feasts
Isa.  28.  22.  be  not  ot.  lest  bands  be  made  strong
Jer.  15.  17.  1  sat  not  in  the  assembly  of  m.

Jude  18.  there  should  I  e  ot.  in  the  latter  times


MOCKEST.

Job  11.  3.  when  thou  ot.  shall  no  man  make  asham.  ■

,  MOCKETH.

Job  13.  9.  as  one  ot.  another,  do  ye  so  mock  him  ?

39.  22.  he  ot.  at  fear,  and  is  not  affrighted
Prov.  17.  5-  who  ot.  poor  reproachetn  his  Maker
30. 17.  eye  that  in.  at  his  father,  eagles  shall  eat  it
Jer  20.7.  I  am  a  derision,  every  one  in.  me
MOCKING.

Gen.  21.  9.  and  Sarah  saw  the  son  of  Hagar  in.
Mat.  27.  41.  the  chief  priests  ot.  Mark  15.  31.

Acts  2.  13.  others  ot.  said,  these  men  are  full
MOCKING.

.Ezek  22.  4.  therefore  I  made  thee  a  ot.  to  all
MOCK  IN  GS.

Heb.  11. 36.  others  had  trial  of  cruel  ot.

MODERATE.

1  Cor  10.  +  13.  no  temptation  but  such  as  is  ot.
MODERATING.

Evh  6  +9.  ye  masters,  do  the  same,  ot.  threatening
MODERATION.

Phil.  4.  5.  letyour  ot.  be  known  to  all  men
MODERATELY.

Joel  2.  23.  he  hath  given  you  the  former  rain  w.
MODEST.

1  Tim.  2. 9.  women  adorn  themselves  in  ot.  apparel
MOE,  See  More.

MOIST.

Num.  6.  3.  nor  shall  he  eat  ot.  grapes,  or  dried
MOlS'l  EN  ED.

Job  21.  24.  and  his  bones  are  in.  with  marrow
MOISTURE.

Ps.  32. 4.  my  m.  is  turned  into  drought  of  summer
Luke 8.  6.  it  withered  away,  because  it  lacked  ot.
MOLE.

Lev.  11.  30.  lizard,  snail,  and  in.  are  unclean
MOLES,  See  Bats.
MOLLIFIED.  .

Isa.  1.  6.  neither  bound  up,  nor  ot.  with  ointment
MOLTEN.

Exod.  32.  4.  he  fashioned  it  after  he  had  made  a  in.

calf,  8.  Deut.  9.  12,  16.  Neh.  9. 18.
34.  17.  shalt  make  thee  no  in.  gods,  Lev.  19.  4.

1  Kings  7.  16.  he  made  two  chapiters  ot  ot.  brass
23.  lie  made  a  ot.  sea  ||  30.  undersetters  ot,

33.  their  felloes  and  their  spokes  were  all  ot.

Job  28.  2.  and  brass  is  ot.  out  of  the  stpne


37. 18.  sky  is  strong,  and  as  a  ot.  looking-glass


Ezek.  24.  11.  the  filthiness  of  it  may  be  ot.  in  it
Mic.  1.  4.  the  mountains  shall  be  ot.  under  him
Nah.  2.  +  6.  the  palace  of  Nineveh  shall  bem.

See  Image.

MOMENT.

Exod.  33.5.  will  come  into  the  midst  of  thee  in  aw.
Num.  16.  21.  that  1  may  consume  them  in  a  in.  45.
Ezra  9.  +  8.  for  a  in.  grace  hath  been  shewed
Job  7.  18.  that  thou  shouldesttry  him  every  m.

20.  5.  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite  is  but  tor  a  in.

21.  13.  and  in  a  ot.  they  go  down  to  the  grave

34.  20.  in  a  ot.  shall  they  die,  people  be  troubled

Psal.  30.  5.  for  his  anger  endureth  but  a  in.

73.  19.  the  wicked  brought  into  desolat.  as  in  a  m.
Prov.  12.  19.  a  lying  tongue  is  but  for  a  in.

Isa.  26.  20.  hide  thyself.as  it  were  for  a  ot.

27.  3.  I  the  L.  do  keep  it,  1  will  water  it  every  in ,
47.  9.  but  these  two  things  shall  come  in  a  ot.

54.  7.  for  a  small  ot.  have  1  forsaken  thee

8.  I  hid  my  face  from  thee  for  a  ot.  but  with
Jer.  4.  20.  my  tents  spoiled,  and  my  curtains  in  aw,
Lam.  4.  6.  Sodom  that  was  overthrown  in  a  m.
Ezek.  26.  16.  and  shall  tremble  at  every  ot.  .32. 10.  1
Luke  4, 5.  devil  shew,  the  kingdoms  of  world  in  a  m

1  Cor.  15.  52.  we  shall  all  be  changed  in  a  ot.

2  Cor  4.  17.  our  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  m,

MONEY.  .  .

Gen.  23.  9.  give  it  for  as  much  ot.  as  it  is  worth

13.  1  will  give  thee  ot.  for  the  field,  take  it
31.  15.  and  lie  hath  quite  devoured  also  our  m.
42.  25.  Joseph  command,  to  restore  every  in  an  s  m

27.  he  espied  his  ot.||  28.  ray  ot.  is  restored
43. 12.  and  take  double  ot.  in  your  hand,  15.

23.  peace  be  to  you,  fear  not,  1  had  your  m.

44.  1.  and  put  every  man’s  in.  in  his  sack  s  mouth
47’.  14.  Joseph  gathered  all  the  w.  in  Egypt

15.  for  in.  faileth  ||  18.  how  that  our  ot.  is  spent
Exod.  21.  11.  she  shall  go  out  tree  without  ot.

21.  for  he  is  his  ot.  |]  35.  and  divide  the  in.

30.  if  there  be  laid  on  him  a  sum  of  m.  then  lie
22  7-  if  a  man  deliver  to  his  neighbour  ot.  to  kee
25.  if  thou  lend  in.  to  any  of  my  people
30. 16.  thou  shalt  take  the  atonement  in.  ot  Israel
Lev.  25.  37.  not  give  him  in.  on  usury,  Deut.  2 o.  19
Num.  3.  49.  and  Moses  took  the  redemption  w.
Deut.  2.  6.  ye  shall  buy  meat  and  water  tor  m.  -o

14.  25.  turn  it  into  ot.  ||  26.  shalt  bestow  that  in.
21.  14.  thou  shalt  not  sell  her  at  all  for  ot.

Judg.  5.  19.  they  fought,  they  took  no  gain  of  w

16.  18.  lords  of  Philistines  brought  ot.  to  Hainan

17.  4.  yet  he  restored  the  ot.  to  his  mother
1  Kings  21.  2.  1  will  give  thee  the  worth  of  it  m  n
0  Kings  5.  26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  in.  and  oxen

12.  4.  all  the  in.  of  the  dedicated  things  brought
12.  7.  now  therefore  receive  no  more  ot,  8.  l
10.  they  saw  there  was  much  ot.  in  the  chest,  an
told  tire  ot.  that  was  found,  2  Chron.  24.1,,
16.  the  trespass  ot.  and  sin  in.  was  not  brought

15.  20.  Menahem  exacted  the  w.of  Israel
23.  35.  Jehoiakim  gav  e  ot.  to  Pharaoh

Ezra  3.  7.  gave  in.  also  to  masons  and  carpenter!
7.  17.  buy  speedily  with  this  ot.  bullocks,  ranis
Neh.  5.  4.  we  have  borrowed  ot.  for  the  king
10. 1  and  my  servants  might  exact  of  them  in.
Esth.  4.  7.  of  the  sum  of  ot.  Hainan  had  promise
Job  31.  39.  if  l  have  eaten  the  fruits  without  in.
42.  11.  every  man  also  gave  him  a  piece  ot  in.
Psal.  15.  5.  he  that  putteth  not  out  his  ot.  to  usu
Prov.  7.20.  he  hath  taken  a  bag  of  ot.  with  him
Eccl.  7.  12.  for  wisdom  and  in.  is  a  defence
10  10.  wine  makes  merry,  butw.  answers  all  thin
Isa  52.  3.  ye  shall  be  redeemed  without  ot.

55.  1.  he  that  hath - - -

2.  wherefore


shall  be  redeemed  without  ot.
hath  hoot,  come,  buy  without  ot-.
!  spend  ye  ot.  for  what  is  not  breac


MON

er.  52.  9.  I  weighed  him  the  m.  17  shekels,  10.

44.  men  shall  buy  fields  fur  tn.  and  subscribe
am.  5.  4.  we  have  drunken  our  water  for  m.
i die.  3.  11.  the  prophets  thereof  divine  for  tn.

'tat.  1".  24.  they  that  received  the  tribute  m.  came

27.  thou  shalt  find  a  piece  of  m.  that  take  and  give
!  22.  19.  why  tempt  ye  me  r  shew  me  the  tribute  m.
25.  lb-  digged  in  the  earth,  and  hid  his  lord’s  m.

27.  thou  oughtest  therefore  to  have  put  my  m.  to
the  exchangers,  and  at  my  comine,  Luke  19.23.

28.  12.  they  gave  large//.*,  to  the  soldiers

15.  so  they  tc<  k  m.  and  did  as  they  w  ere  taught
'■'lark  6.  8.  they  tal  <  now.  in  their  purse,  Luke  9.3.

12.  41.  the  people  cast  m.  into  the  treasury
II.  11.  and  promised  to  give  him  m.  Luke  22.  5.
lent  4.  37- brought  the  m.  and  laid  it  at  apostles’  feet
i.  18.  Simon  the  sorcerer  offered  them  m.

20.  but  Peter  said,  thy  tn.  perish  with  thee
24.  26.  he  hoped  that  m.  should  have  been  given
Tim.  6.  10.  the  love  of  m.  is  the  root  of  all  evil
See  Bought.
MONEY-CHANGERS.
lat.  21.  12.  Jesus  overthrew  tables  of  m. -changers,
and  seats  of  them  that  sold  doves,  Mark  11.  15.
\ohn  2. 14.  Jesus  found  in  temple  in. -changers  sitting
15.  he  poured  out  m.-chang.  overthrew  their  tables
MONSTERS.

.am.  4.  3.  even  the  sea  m.  draw  out  the  breast
MONTH.

'he  Hebrews  had  their  Sacred  and  Civil  year  ;  the
former  for  the  celebration  of  their  feasts  and  re¬
ligious  ceremonies,  which  began  with  the  month
Nisan,  or  March  ;  the  latter  for  the  ordering  of
their  political  or  civil  affairs,  which  began  in  1  isiT,
or  September.  The  ancient  Hebrews  had  no  par¬
ticular  names  to  express  their  Months  ;  they  said,
the  first,  second,  third,  and  so  on.  In  Exod.  13.  4.
we  find  Moses  makes  mention  i  f  the  month  A  bib,
or  the  month  of  the  young  ears  of  corn,  or  of  the
new  fruits,  which  is  probably  the  name  that  the
Egyptians  gave  to  the  month  which  the  Hebrews
ajterwards  called  N  isan,  and  which  was  the  first
of  the  holy  year  ;  every  where  else  Moses  marks
out  the  months  only  by  their  order  of  succession,
which  method  is  continued  in  the  books  of  Joshua,
Judges,  and  Samuel.  Under  Solomon,  1  Kings
o.  1.  we  read  of  the  month  Zif,  which  is  the  second
month  of  the  holy  year,  and  which  answers  to  that
which  afterwards  had  the  name  of  Jiar,  or  April.
In  the  same  chapter,  verse  38.  we  read  of  the
month  Bui,  which  is  the  eighth  of  the  holy  year,
and  answers  to  Marchesvan,  er  October.  Lastly,
in  1  Kings  8.  2.  we  read  of  he  month  Ethanim,
which  answers  to  Tisri,  or  the  seventh  of  the  holy
year.  'The  critics  are  not  agreed  about  the  origin
of  these  names  of  the  months,  or  from  whom  they
were  borrowed.  Rut  after  the  captivity  of  Baby¬
lon.  the  11  ebrews  took  the  names  of  the  months,
as  they  found  them  among  the  Chaldeans  and  Per¬
sians,  among  whom  they  had  lived  so  long  a  time.
Here  follow  the  names  of  'these  months,  and  the
order  in  which  they  follow  one  another.
he  names  of  the  Hebrew  months,  according  to  the
order  of  the  holy  year.


1.  Nisan,

March.

2.  Jjar,

U

April.

3.  Sivan,

c

May.

4.  '1  hammuz,

June.

5.  Ab,

July.

6.  Elul;

•  !

August.

7.  Tisri,

8.  Marchesvan,

September.

<V

October.

9.  Chisleu,

£

tr

November.

10.  1  hebet,

December.

11.  Sebat,

12.  Adar,

<

January.
j  lebruary.

he  names  and  order  of  the  months  in  the  Civil  year
are  the  same  as  in  the  preceding  table,  only  begin¬
ning  the  year  with  lisri,  or  September,  and  end¬
ing  with  Elul,  or  August.

fit  first  they  measured  their  months  according
to  the  sun,  and  then  every  month  consisted  of  thirty
days,  which  appears  by  the  enumeration  of  the  days
the  flood  was  upon  the  earth,  namely,  a  hundred
1  and  fifty  days,  which  made  five  months,  Gen. 7. 11.

18.  4.  But  after  they  came  out  of  Egypt,  they
measured  their  months  by  the  course  of  the  moon,
and  then  the  first  month  was  of  thirty  days,  the
'f Pi  tv-entfi  nine,  and  so  on  alternately  :  That
which  had  thirty  days  was  called  a  full  or  complete
| month:  and  that  which  had  but  twenty-nine  days
>■«'  called  incomplete-  or  deficient.  The  new  moon
always  the  beginning  of  the  month,  and  that
day  they  called  Neomenia,  new  Moon,  or  new
Month.

When  it  is  said,  that  the  Hebrew  months  an-
’l''effd  to  ours,  that  N  isan,  for  example,  answ  ered
'■o  March,  it  must  be  understood  with  some  lati¬
tude  :  for  the  lunar  months  can  never  be  reduced
exactly  to  solar  ones.  'The  ternal  equinox  falls  in
toe  month  of  March,  according  to  the  course  of  the
far  year.  But  in  the  lunar  year,  the  new'  moon
"  Jail  tn  the  month  of  March,  and  the  full  moon
m  the  month  of  April.  Sothat  the  Hebrew  months
nill  commonly  answer  to  two  of  our  months,  and
Partake  of  both.

The  twelve  lunar  months  making  hut  three  hun-
1  ria  and  fifty -four  days,  and  six  hours,  the  Jewish
\l  ar  ''Pas  short  of  the  Roman  by  twelve  days.  But
•rfCj^rr  ^ie  e(l'uLtoctial  points  again,  from  which
nis  difference  of  the  solar  and  lunar  year  would
fparate  the  new  moon  of  the  first  month,  the  Jews
•  ok  care  every  three  years  to  intercalate  a  thir¬
teenth  month  into  their  year,  which  they  called
'  e-adar,  or  the  second  Adar  :  And  by  this  means
!en  lvnar  year  equalled  the  solar :  because  in
firty  mx  months,  according  to  the  sun,  there  would
' f  seven  according  to  the  moon.

j  i  i  Iacob  ab°de  w  ith  Laban  space  of  a  m.
JJ  “*•  tins  day  came  ye  out  in  the  tn.  A  bib


M  O  N*

Exod.  <23. 15.  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  in  thew.Abib
34.  18.  for  in  the  m.  A  bib  thou  earnest  out  from
.Egypt,  .34. 18.  Deut.  16.  1.  Josh.  5.  10.
Lev.  27.  6.  it  it  be  from  a  m.  old  to  five  years
Num.  3.  15.  number  of  the  children  of  Levi,  every
male  from  a  m.  old,  22,  28,  34,  39,  40, 43. 1  26.  62.
9.  22.  or  a  m.  or  year  that  the  cloud  tarried
11.  20.  ye  shall  eat  flesh,  even  a  whole  m.  21
18.  16.  from  a  ///.old  shalt  thou  redeem
28.  14.  the  burnt  offering  of  every  m.  29.  6.

Den(.  21.  13.  remain  in  thine  house  a  full  m.

1  Kings  4.  7.  each  man  his  tn.  made  provision,  27.

5.  14.  a  m.  they  were  in  Lebanon,  two  at  home

6.  37.  in  the  tn.  Zif  ||  38.  in  the  tn.  Bui

8.  2.  feast  in  tn.  Ethanim  j|  Neh.  1. 1.  in  m.  Chisleu
Neh.  2.  1.  in  m.  Nisan,  Esth.  3.  7.  |l  6.  15.  tn.  Elul
Esth.  9-  15.  Jews  gathered  in  tn.  Adar,  17,  19,  21.

£2.  m.  which  was  turned  from  sorrow  to  joy
Jer.  2.  24.  in  her  m.  they  shall  find  her
Hos.  5.  7-  now  shall  a  m.  devourthem  with  portions
Zech.  11.8.  three  shepherds  I  cut  off  in  one  tn.
Lev.  9. 15.  which  were  prepared  for  a  day  and  a  m.
22. 2.  the  tree  of  life  yielded  her  fruit  every  tn.

See  First.

Second  MONTH.

Gen.  7.11.  in  second  m.  the  fountains  were  broken  up
8. 14.  and  in  the  second  m.  was  the  earth  dried
Exod.  16. 1  .  came  to  the  wildern.  of  Sin  in  second  m.
Num.  1.  1.  in  second  m.  take  sum  of  the  congregation
9-  11.  on  sec.  m.  shall  keep  passover,  2  Chr.  30.  2.
10. 11.  on  sec.  m.  cloud  was  taken  up  from  tabern.

1  Kings  6.  1.  sec.  m.  Sol.  began  to  build, 2  Chr.  3.  2.

1  Chron.  27. 4.  over  the  course  o t  sec.  m.  was  Dodai
Ezra  3. 8.  in  second  rn.  began  Zerubbabel  to  appoint
Third  MONTH.

Exod.  19. 1  •  in  third  in.  came  into  wilderness  of  Sinai

1  Chr.  27.  5.  third  captain  for  third  tn.  was  Benaiah

2  Chr.  15.  10.  gathered  at  Jerusalem  in  the  t  hit  dm.
31. 7.  in  third  m.  they  began  to  lay  the  foundation

Esth.  8.  9-  the  king's  scribes  were  called  in  third m.
Ezek.  31.  1.  in  th.  m.  word  of  I.ord  came  to  Ezekiel
Fourth  MONTH.

2  Kings  25.  3.  in  the  fourth  m.  the  famine  prevailed
1  Chr.  27.7.  fourth  captain  for  fourth  m.  w  as  Asahel
Jer.  39.  2.  in  the  fourth  tn.  the  city  was  broken  up
52.  6.  in  fourth  tn.  the  famine  was  sore  in  the  city
Ezek.  1.  1.  in  fourth  m.  Ezekiel  saw  visions  of  God
Zech.  8.  19.  the  fast  of  the  fourth  rn.  shall  be  joy
See  Fifth.

Sixth  MON  TH.

1  Chr.  27.  9.  the  sixth  captain  for  sixth  m.  was  Ira
Ezek.  8.1.  in  sixth  m.  the  elders  of  .1  ud.  sat  before  me
Hag.  1 .  1 .  in  sixth  //?,.  word  of  Lord  came  by  1 1  aggai
15.  in  sixth  tn.  they  did  work  in  house  of  the  L.
Luke  1.  26.  in  sixth  tn.  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent
36.  this  is  sixth  m.  with  her  that  was  called  barren
See  Seventh.

Eighth  MONTH.

Zech.  1. 1.  in  eighth  m.  came  the  word  to  Zecbariah
Ninth  MONTH.

Ezra  10.  9-  in  the  ninth  m.  the  peoplesat  trembling
Jer.  36.  9.  in  the  ninth  m.  they  proclaimed  a  fast
22.  the  king  sat  in  winter  house  in  the  ninth  m.
Hag.  2.  It),  in  ninth  in.  came  word  of  L.  by  Haggai
18.  even  from  the  ninth  m.  consider  it
Zech.  7. 1.  the  word  came  to  Zechariah  in  ninth  m.
Tenth  MONTH.

Gen.  8.  5.  the  waters  decreased  until  the  tenth  m.
Ezra  10.  16.  and  sat  down  in  tenth  m.  to  examine
Esth.  2. 16.  Esther  was  taken  to  the  king  in  tenth  m.
Jer.  39-  1.  tenth  m.  came  N  eb.  against  Jerusal.  52. 4.
Ezek.  24. 1 .  in  tenth  m.  came  word  of  E.  to  me,  29.  1.
33.  21.  in  tile  tenth  m.  one  that  had  escaped  told  me
Eleventh  MONTH.

Dent.  1.  3.  in  the  eleventh  m.  Moses  spake  to  Israel
Zech.  1.7.  in  elev.  m.  came  the  word  to  Zechariah
Twelfth  MONTH.

Esth.  3.  7-  cast  lots  before  Hainan  to  the  twelfth  m.

13.  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  tv  el.  rn.  8.  12.  j  9.  1.
Jer.  52.  31.  in  twelfth  tn.  Evil  merodach  lifted  head
Ezek.  32. 1.  in  twelfth  m.  the  word  of  L.  came  to  me

This  MON  1  IE

Exod.  12.2.  this  m.  shall  be  the  beginningof  months
3.  this  rn.  they  shall  take  every  man  a  lamb

13.  5.  keep  this  service  in  thism.  Num.  9.3. 1  28. 17.
Nvrn.29.~i.  on  tenth  day  of  t.  m.  an  holy  convocation
Neh.  9.  1.  this  m.  Israel  assembled  with  fasting

MONTHLY.

Isa.  47.  13.  let  th tm.  prognosticators  stand  up
MONTHS.

Num.  10.10.  in  beginnings  of  your  m.  blow  trumpets

28.  11.  in  beginnings  of  m.  offer  a  burnt  offering

14.  this  is  the  burnt-offering  through  the  rn.

Judg.  11.  37-  let  me  alone  two  m.  that  I  may  bewail

39.  at  the  end  of  two  m.  she  returned  to  Jephtliah

19.  2.  his  concubine  was  with  her  father  four  m.

20.  47.  and  abode  in  the  rock  Rimmon  four  m.

1  Sam.  6.1.  ark  was  in  conn,  of  Philistines  sei  en  m.
27-7-  Dav.  was  with  Philistines  a  year  and  four  m.

2  Sam.  2.  11.  David  reigned  in  Hebron  over  Judah

seven  years  and  six  m.  5.  5.  1  Chron.  3.  4.

6.  11.  the  ark  was  with  Obed-edorn  three  m.

24.  8.  they  came  to  Jerusalem  at  the  end  of  nine  m.

1  Kings  5.  14.  and  two  m.  they  were  at  home
IE  16.  for  six  m.  did  Joab  remain  in  Edom

2  Kings  15.8.  Zachariah  reigned  over  Israel  six  tn.

1  Chr.  27.  1.  month  by  month  thro’  the  m.  ofthe  year
Esth.  2.12.  after  she  had  been  twelve  m.  purified,  six

m.  with  oil  of  myrrh,  six  m.  witli  sweet  odours
Job  3.6.  let  it  not  come  into  the  number  of  the  tn.

7.  3.  so  am  I  made  to  possess  m.  of  vanity

14.  5.  the  number  of  his  m.  are  with  thee
21. 21.  when  the  number  of  his  m.  is  cut  off

29.  2.  O  that  1  were  as  in  tn.  past,  as  in  the  da3*s
39.  2.  canst  thou  number  the  m.  that  they  fulfil r*

Ezek.  39.12.  seven  m.  Israel  shall  he  burying  of  Gog
14.  after  the  end  of  seven  m.  shall  they  search
47.  12.  shall  bring  new  fruit  according  to  his  m.
Dan.  4.  29.  at  the  end  of  twelve  m.  N  ebuch.  walked
Luke  1.24.  Elizabeth  conceiv.  and  hid  herself  five  rn.

4.  25.  many  widows  in  days  of  Elias,  when  heaven
was  shut  up  three  years  and  six  m.  Jam.  5.  17.


M  O  R

John  4.  35.  are  yet  four  m.  then  cometh  harvest
Acts  18. 11.  Paul  continued  there  a  year  and  six  m.
Gal.  4.  10.  ve  observe  days,  and  m.  and  times
Lev.  9.  5.  they  shall  he  tormented  five  m.  10.

11.  2.  holy  city  they  tread  under  foot  forty-two  tn.
13. 5.  power  was  given  him  to  continue  forty-two  m.

See  Three.

MONUMENTS.

Isa.  65.  4.  a  provok.  people  which  lodge  in  the  tn.
MOON

Is  a  secondary  planet,  which  attends  on  the  earth
to  give  light  by  night,  and  which  furnishes  the
fruits  of  the  earth  with  the  moisture  and  juices
that  nourish  them,  Gen.  1.  16.  Deut.  33.  14.  Jer.
31.  35.  To  which  are  compared,  [1]  The  church
of  God,  because  of  her  splendour  and  brightness,
which  she  derives  from  Christ,  the  Sun  of  right¬
eousness,  as  the  moon  does  her  light  from  the  sun  ;
and  withal  to  intimate  that  the  church,  like  the
moon,  may  have  her  eclipses,  and  be  in  darkness
for  a  time.  Cant.  6.  10.  [2]  'The  world,  and  all
earthly  things,  because  of  their  changeableness
and  uncertainty ,  Rev.  12.  1.

Deut.  33.  14.  precious  things  put  forth  by  the  m.
Josh.  10.  12.  stand,  thou  tn.  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon
Judg.fi.  +  21.  took  ornaments  from  them  like  tn.
Job  25.  5.  behold  the  m.  and  it  shineth  not
Hsal.  8.  3.  when  1  consider  the  m.  thou  ordained
72.  7.  and  peace  so  long  as  the  m.  enduieth
89.  37.  it  shall  be  established  for  ever  as  the  tn.
104.  19.  he  appointeth  the  m.  for  seasons
Eccl.  12.  2.  while  the  sun,  m.  or  stars,  be  not  darken.
Cant.  6.  10.  fair  as  m.  clear  as  the  sun,  and  terrible
Isa.  3.  18.  and  their  round  tires  like  the  rn.

Lee  Sun.

New  MOON.

1  Sam.  20.  5.  behold,  to-morrow  is  the  new  m.  18.

2  Kings  4.  23.  it  is  neither  new  m.  nor  sabbath
Psal.  81.  3.  blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  new  m.
Proi’.  J.  +  20.  and  will  come  home  at  the  new  rn.
Isa.  66.  23.  that  from  one  new  in.  to  another
Ezek.  46.  1.  in  the  day  of  new  m.  it  shall  be  opened

6.  in  the  day  of  new  m.  offer  a  young  bullock
Amos  8.  5.  saying,  when  will  the  new  m.  be  gone  ?
Col.  2.  16.  no  man  judge  you  in  respect  of  the  new  m.
New  MOONS.

1  Chron.  23.  31.  to  offer  burnt  sacrifices  in  the  new
m.  2  Chron.  2.  4.  I  31.  3.  Ezra  3.  5.  Neh.
10.  33.  Ezek.  46.  3.

Isa.  1.  13.  newm.  and  sabbaths  I  cannot  away  with
14.  your  new  tn.  and  feasts  my  soul  hateth
Ezek.  45.  17 .  and  drink  offerings  in  the  new  tn
Hos.  2.  11.  1  will  cause  to  cease  her  new  m
„  MORE.

Gen.  29.  30.  Jacob  loved  Rachel  m.  than  Leah

36.  7 •  riches  tn.  than  that  they  might  dwell  together

37.  3.  Israel  loved  Joseph  m.  than  all  his  children
5.  and  his  brethren  hated  him  yet  the  m.  8.

Exod.  1.  9.  the  children  of  Israel"  are  tn.  than  we

12.  the  m.  they  afflicted  them,  the  m.  they  grew
5.  9.  let  there  m.  work  be  laid  upon  the  men

9.  34.  Pharaoh  sinned  yet  m.  and  hardened  his  heart
11.  1.  yet  will  I  bring  one  plague  m.  on  Pharaoh
16.  17.  they  gathered  some  m.  some  less
30.  15.  the  rich  shall  not  give  m.  nor  poor  less
Lev.  6.  5.  and  shall  add  the  fifth  part  m.  thereto
13.  5.  priest  shall  shut  him  seven  days  m.  33,  54.

26.  18.  I  will  punish  you  seven  times  m.  21.

Num.  3.  46.  first-born  which  are  m.  than  Levites
22.  15.  sent  again  princes  tn.  honourable  than  they

18.  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord,  to  do  less  or  rn.

19.  1  may  know  what  the  Lord  will  say  to  me  m.
26.  54.  to  many  thou  shalt  give  the  m.  33.  54.

Dent.  1.  IE  the  L.  make  you  a  thousand  times  rn.

7.  7-. Lord  did  not  set  h-is  love  on  you,  because  m.
17.  if  thou  say,  nations  are  m.  than  I,  20.  1.

19.  9.  then  shalt  thou  add  three  cities  in.  for  thee
Josh.  10.  11.  they  were  m.  which  died  with  hail
Judg.  2.  19-  they  corrupted  themselves  in.  than

16.  .30.  m.  than  they  which  he  slew  in  his  life
18.  24.  ye  are  gone  away,  and  what  have  I  tn.?
Luth  1.  17.  Ruth  said,  the  l  ord  do  so  to  me  and
m.  also,  1  Sam.  14.  44.  2  Sam.  3.  35.  I  19.  13.

3.  10.  thou  hast  shewed  /w..kincln.  in  the  latter  end

1  Sam.  3.  17.  God  do  so  to  thee  and  tn.  also

18.  8.  what  can  ye  have  m.  but  (lie  kingdom  -

20.  13.  the  Lord  do  so  and  much  m.  to  Jonathan

22.  15.  thy  servant  knew  nothing  lessor  m.

24.  17.  he  said,  thou  art  rn.  righteous  than  1

25.  22.  so  and  m.  do  God  to  the  enemies  of  David
36.  she  told  him  nothing  less  or  tn.  until  morning

2  Sam.  3.  9;  so  do  God  to  Abner,  and  tn.  also

5.  13.  David  took  him  m.  concubines  and  w  ives

6.  22.  and  I  will  yet  be  m.  vile  than  thus

7.  20.  and  what  can  David  say  tn.  unto  thee  J

19.  43.  we  have  also  m.  right  in  David  than  ye

1  Kings  2.23.  God  doso,  tn.  also,  20. 10. 2  Kings  6.31.
16.  33.  Ahab  did  m.  to  provoke  God  to  anger
19^2.  so  let  the  gods  do  to  me,  and  m.  also

2  Kings 4.  6.  he  said,  there  is  not  a  vessel  m.

6.  16.  m.  than  they  that  be  with  them,  2  Chr.  32.  7.

21.  9.  Manasseh  seduced  them  to  do  m.  evil

1  Chron.  21.  3.  Lord  make  his  people  so  many  tn.

24.  4.  and  there  were  m.  chief  men  found

2  Chron.  10.  11.  I  will  put  m.  to  3*our  yoke

20.  25.  found  tn.  spoil  than  they  could  cany  away

25.  9.  the  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  m.  than  this

28.  13.  ye  intend  to  add  m.  to  our  sins  and  trespass

22.  Ar.az  did  trespass  yet  m.  against  the  Lord

29.  31.  the  1  evites  were  tn.  upright  in  heart

32.  16.  his  servants  spake  m.  against  the  Lord

33.  23.  but  Anion  tiespassed  tn.  and  m.

Ezra  7.  20.  whatsoever  m.  shall  be  needful
Neh.  13.  18.  yet  ye  bring  tn.  wrath  upftn  Israel
Esth.  2.  17.  Esther  obtained  favour  tn.  than  all
6.  6.  delight  to  do  honour m.  than  to  myself?

Job  3.  21.  and  dig  for  it/».  than  hid  treasures

23.  12.  his  words  m.  than  my  necessary  food

34.  19.  nor  regardeth  the  rich  m.  than  the  poor

23.  for  he  will  not  lay  on  man  m.  than  right

35.  2.  saidst,  my  righteousness  is  tn.  than  God's
11.  who  teaeheth  us  m.  than  the  beasts  of  earth

317


k


M  O  11


MOR

Job  42. 12.  Lord  blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  m.  than
J’s.  1.  7.  m.  than  when  their  corn  and  wine  increas.

19.  10.  m.  to  be  desired  are  they  than  gold

40.5.  thy  thoughts  are  tn.  than  can  be  numbered

12.  iniquities  are  m.  than  hairs  of  mine  head
52.  3.  thou  lovest  evil  m.  than  good,  and  lying
69.  4.  that  hate  me  are  m.  than  hairs  of  mine  head
71.  14.  and  1  will  yet  praise  thee  m.  and  m.

73.  7.  they  have  m.  than  heart  could  wish
78.  17.  and  they  sinned  yet  in.  against  him
87.  2.  gates  of  Zion  m.  than  all  dwellings  of  Jacob
115.  14.  the  Lord  shall  increase  you  m.  and  m.

119.  99.  I  have  771.  understanding  than  my  teachers
100.  I  understand  m.  than  the  ancients
130.  6  m.  than  they  that  watch  tor  the  morning
Prov.  3.  15.  wisdom  is  in.  precious  than  rubies

4.  18.  that  shineth  m.  and  in.  to  the  perfect  day

11.  24.  there  is  that  withholdeth  m.  than  is  meet

17.  10.  a  reproof  entereth  m.  into  a  wise  man
26.  12.  there  isw.  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him,  29.  20.
Eccl.  2.  9.  I  increased  m.  than  all  before  me

16.  there  is  no  remembrance  of  wise  m.  than  fool

25.  or  who  can  hasten  hereunto  m.  than  1  ?

4.  2.  the  dead  in.  than  the  living  that  are  yet  alive

5.  1.  and  be  m.  ready  to  hear  than  to  give  sacrifice
Cant.  1.  4.  we  will  remember  thy  love  m.  than  wine

5.  9.  what  is  thy  beloved  m.  than  another  t  9.

Isa.  5.  4.  what  could  been  done  in.  to  my  vineyard  ?

9.  1.  afterward  did  m.  grievously  afflict  her

15.  9.  for  I  will  bring  m.  upon  Dimon,  lions
52. 14.  his  visage  so  marred  tn.  than  any  man
54.  1.  for  m.  are  the  children  of  the  desolate  than

Jer.  3. 11.  Israel  justified  herself  m.  than  Judah
46.  23.  because  they  are  m.  than  the  grasshoppers
Ezek.  5.6.  changed  my  judgments  into  wicked,  m.

7.  because  he  multiplied  m.  than  the  nations

16.  47.  thou  wast  corrupted  m.  than  they  in  all  thy

ways,  51,  52. 1  23.  11.
Pan.  2.  30.  not  for  any  wisdom  that  1  have  m.  than
3.  19.  they  should  heat  the  furnace  seven  times  tn.

11.  8.  he  shall  continue  in.  years  than  the  king
llos.  6.  6.  knowledge  of  God  m.  than  burnt  offering

13.  2.  now  they  sin  m.  and  m.  and  have  made  idols
Jonah  1.  +  11.  the  sea  grew  in.  and  in.  tempestuous
Hab.  1. 13.  wicked  devouretli  man  w.  righteous  than

2.  t  16.  art  filled  m.  with  shame  than  glory
Mat.  5.  37.  what  isw.  than  these  cometh  of  evil

47.  brethren  only,  what  do  you  m.  than  others?

6.  25.  is  not  the  life  m.  than  meat  ?  Luke  12.  23.

10.  31.  of  rn.  value  than  many  sparrows,  Luke  12.7.
37.  he  that  loveth  father  or  mother  m.  than  me

11.  9.  I  say  unto  you,  and  m.  than  a  prophet

'  12.45.  taketh  seven  spirits  m.  wicked  than  himself

13.  12.  and  he  shall  have  m.  abundance

18.  13.  he  reioiceth  ni. 'of  that  sheep  than  of  99

16.  then  take  with  thee  one  or  two  m.

20.  10.  they  supposed  they  should  have  received  m.
31.  but  they  cried  the  in.  have  mercy  on  us,  27.  23.

Mark  10.  48. 1  15.  1 1.  Luke  18.  39.

26.  53.  give  me  m.  than  twelve  legions  ot  angels
Mark  A.  24.  to  you  that  hear  shall  m.  be  given

7.  36.  the  m.  he  charged  them,  so  much  the  m.

12.  43.  poor  widow  cast  in  m.  than  all,  Luke  21.  3.

14.  5.  the  ointment  might  have  been  sold  for  m.
Luke  10.  35.  what  thouspendest  m.  1  will  repay

12.  48.  committed  much,  of  him  they  will  ask  in.

18.  30.  who  shall  not  receive  manifold  m.

John  4.41.  many  m.  believed,  because  of  his  word
5.  18.  the  lews  sought  the  m.  to  kill  him

7.  31.  will  he  do  m.  miracles  than  these  ?

12.  43.  they  loved  the  praise  of  men  m.  than
15.2.  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  m.  fruit

21.  15.  Simon,  lovest  thou  me  m.  than  these  r
Acts  4. 19.  to  hearken  to  you  rn.  than  to  God

5.  14.  believers  were  the  m.  added  to  the  Lord

9.  22.  but  Saul  increased  the  m.  in  strength

19.  32.  them,  part  knew  not  why  they  came

20.  35.  it  is  m.  blessed  to  give,  than  to  receive
23.  13.  there  were  m.  than  forty  w  ho  conspired,  21.
27-  11.  believed  the  master  m.  than  Paul

j tom.  1 . 25.  who  served  the  creature  m.  than  Creatoi

3.  7-  if  the  truth  of  God  hath  m.  abounded

8.  37.  in  all  these  we  are  tn.  than  conquerois

1  Cor.  8.  +8.  neither  if  we  eat,  have  we  the  tn.

9. 19.  myself  servant  to  all,  that  1  might  gain  them.
14.  18.  f  speak  with  tongues  w.than  you  all

2  Cor.  7. 7.  so  1  rejoiced  the  m.  ||  10. 8.  I  boast  the  m.

11.  23.  1  am  m.  in  prisons  tn.  frequent,  in  deaths  oft
Cal.  4.  27.  the  desolate  hath  many  m.  children
Phil.  1 . 9.  love  may  abound  m.  and  tn.  1  ThessA.  10.

3.  4.  if  he  might  trust  in  the  tlesh,  I  tn.

1  These.  4.  1.  in  pleasing  God,  abound  m.  and  tn.

2  Tim.  3.  4.  lovers  of  pleasure  m.  than  lovers  of  God
Philem.  21.  that  thou  wilt  also  do  tn.  than  1  say
lleb.  11.  32.  what  shall  1  say  m.  time  would  fail

12.  25.  much  m.  shall  not  we  escape,  if  we  turn
26.  v  et  once  w.  1  shake  not  the  earth  only,  27.

Jam.  4.  6.  he.giveth  m.  grace,  Nvherefore  he  saith
2  Pet.  1.  19.  we  have  a  m.  sure  word  of  prophecy
Rev.  2.  19.  and  the  last  to  be  m.  than*the  first

9.  12.  behold,  there  come  two  woes  in.  hereafter

See  Abundantly.

Any  MORE.

Gen.  8.  12.  the  dove  returned  not  again  anym.

21.  I  will  not  curse  the  ground  any  m.  9.  11.

17.  5.  nor  shall  thy  name  any  m.  be  called  Abram

35.  10.  not  any  in.  be  called  Jacob,  but  Israel

Exod.  8.  29.  let  not  Pharaoh  deal  deceitfully  anym.

9.  29.  neither  shall  there  be  any  m.  hail

11.6.  nor  shall  there  a  cry  be  like  it  any  m.

36.6.  let  neither  man  nor  woman  make  any  rn.
l.ev.  27.  20.  it  shall  not  be  redeemed  any  m.

Kum.  18.  5.  that  there  be  no  wrath  any  m.  on  Israel
Pent.  5.  25.  if  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Ld.  any  in.

18.  16.  neither  let  me  see  this  great  fire  any  m.
Josh.  5.  12.  neither  had  Israel  manna  any  in.

7.  12.  neither  will  1  be  with  you  any  in.

Ruth  1.  11.  are  there  any  tn.  sons  in  my  womb  ?

1  Sam.  27.  1.  Saul  shall  despair  to  seek  me  any  m.

2  Sam.  7  •  10.  norchildren  of  wickedn.  afflict  any  in.

10.  19.  feared  to  help  Ammon  any  m.  1  Chr.  19.  19:
"VJ.  29.  w  hy  speakest  thou  any  m.  of  thy  matters  r

VS


M  O  R

2  Kings  21.8.  neither  will  l  make  the  feet  of  Israel
move  any  m.  out  of  the  land,  2  Chr.  33.  8.
Job  7.  10.  nor  shall  his  place  know  him  any  m.  20.  9.
34.31.  it  is  meet  to  say,  1  will  notoflend  any  in.
Eccl.  9.  5.  neither  have  they  any  m.  a  reward
Isa.  1.  5.  why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  m.  ?

2.  4.  nor  shall  they  learn  war  any  m.  Mic.  4.  3.

30. 20.  nor  shall  thy  teachers  be  removed  any  m.

62.  4.  nor  shall  thy  land  he  termed  desolate  anym.

Jer.?,.  16.  neither  shall  that  be.  done  any  in.

17.  nor  walk  any  m.  after  imagination  ot  heart

10. 20.  there  is  none  to  stretch  forth  my  tent  any  tn.

20.  9.  1  said,  1  will  not  speak  any  in.  in  his  name
22.  11.  he  shall  not  return  thither  any  m.

30.  no  man  shall  prosper,  ruling  any  tn.  in  J udali
31. 12.  thev  shall  not  sorrow  any  m.  at  all
40.  it  shall  not  be  thrown  dowm  any  m.  for  ever
34. 10.  should  not  serve  themselves  of  them  any  m.
Ezek.  5.  9.  whereunto  1  will  not  do  any  m.  the  like
12.  28.  none  of  my  words  be  prolonged  any  m.

16.  41.  thou  also  shalt  give  no  hire  anym.

63.  thou  mayest  ne  er  open  thy  mouth  any  tn.

21.  5.  my  sword  shall  not  return  any  in.

2.3.  27.  thou  shalt  not  remember  Egypt  any  m.

24.  13.  not  be  purged  from  thv  filthiness  any  m.

27.  36.  be  a  terror,  and  never  shalt  be  any  m.  28. 19.
29.  15.  neither  shall  it  exalt  itself  any  m.

.32. 1 .3.  nor  foot  of  man  trouble  them  any  m.  37  .  23.

39.  28.  but  1  have  left  none  of  them  any  in.  there
29.  nor  will  1  hide  my  face  any  tn.  from  them
flos.  1 1.  3.  nor  say  any  m.  to  the  work  of  our  hands

8.  what  have  l  to  do  any  m.  with  idols  ?

Joel  3. 17.  no  strangers  pass  through  her  any  m.
Amos  7.  8.  1  will  not  again  pass  by  them  a.  m.  8.  2.

13.  but  prophesy  not  again  any  m.  at  Beth  el
Zeph.  .3.  15.  thou  shalt  not  see  evil  any  m.

Mat.  22.  46.  nor  durst  any  ask  him  any  m.  questions
Mark  8.  14.  they  had  not  any  in.  than  one  loaf

9.  8.  they  saw’  no  man  any  in.  save  Jesus  only
Luke  20.  36.  neither  can  they  die  any  m.  for  they

22.  16.  I  Nvill  not  eat  any  in.  thereof,  until  it  be
Rom.  14.  13.  let  us  not  judge  one  another  any  tn.
lleb.  12. 19.  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  them  a.  tn.
Rev.  7.  16.  neither  shall  they  thirst  any  m.

12.  8.  nor  was  their  place  in  heaven  found  any  m.

18.  11.  no  man  buyeth  her  merchandise  any  m.

21.  4.  neither  shall  there  be  any  rn.  pain

No  MORE.

Gen.  9.  15.  the  waters  shall  no  m.  become  a  flood
.32.  28.  thv  name  shall  be  called  no  m.  Jacob
38.  26.  arid  Judah  knew  her  again  no  m.

44.  2.3.  ye  shall  see  my  face  no  in.  Exod.  10.  28.
Exod.  5.  7.  ye  shall  no  m.  give  the  people  straw

10.  29.  he  said,  l  will  see  thy  face  again  no  m.

14.  13.  ye  shall  see  them  again  no  tn.  for  ever
Lev.  17-7.  shall  no  in.  offer  their  sacrifices  to  devils
Kum.  8. 25.  from  age  of  fifty  they  shall  serve  no  m.
Deut.  .3.  26.  speak  no  m.  to  me  of  this  matter
5.22.  these  words  the  Lord  spake,  and  added  no  in.
10.  16.  circumcise,  and  be  no  m.  stiff-necked

1.3.  11.  shall  do  no  m.  such  wickedness,  17.  13.

17.  16.  henceforth  return  no  m.  that  way

28.  68.  thou  shalt  see  it  no  m.  again,  ana  be  sold
31.2.  I  am  120  years,  l  can  nom.  go  out  and  come  in
Josh.  23. 1.3.  God  will  no  m.  drive  out  these  nations
Judy.  8.  28.  so  they  lifted  up  their  heads  no  m.

10.  13.  wherefore  1  will  deliver  you  no  m.

1  Sam.  1.  18.  her  countenance  was  no  m.  sad
2.  3.  talk  no  m.  so  exceeding  proudly

7.  1.3.  they  came  no  tn.  into  the  coast  of  Israel

15.  .35.  and  Samuel  came  no  m.  to  see  Saul

18.  2.  let  him  go  nom.  home  to  his  father’s  house

26.  21.  return, "for  l  will  no  m.  do  thee  harm

27.  4.  and  he  sought  no  m.  again  for  him

28.  15.  and  answereth  me  no  m.  by  prophets

2  Sam.  2.  28.  and  pursued  after  Israel  no  in.

7.  10.  I  will  plant  Israel,  that  they  may  dwell  in  a
place  of  their  own,  and  move  no  m.  1  Chr.  17.  9.
21.17.  thou  shalt  go  no  m.  out.  with  us  to  battle

1  Kings  10. 5.  there  was  no  m.  spirit  in  her,  2  Chr. 9.4.

2  Kings  2.  12.  and  Elisha  saw  Elijah  no  m.

6.  2.3.  the  bands  of  Syria  came  no  m.  into  the  land

9.  .35.  they  found  no  m.  of  her  than  the  skull

1  Chron.  23.  26.  shall  no  in.  carry  the  tabernacle
Kelt.  2. 17.  let  us  build,  that  we  be  no  m.  a  reproach

1.3.  21.  they  came  no  in.  on  the  sabbath
Esth.  1.  19.  Vashti  come  no  m.  before  the  king

2.  14.  she  came  no  rn.  in  to  the  king,  except
Job  7.  7.  mine  eyes  shall  no  m.  see  good
8.  shall  see  me  no  m.  ||  9.  shall  come  up  no  m.

10.  he  shall  return  no  in.  to  his  house
14.  12.  man  riseth  not,  till  the  heavens  be  no  m.
20.  9.  the  e  re  that  saw  him  shall  see  him  no  m.
24.  20.  he  shall  be  no  m.  remembered
32. 15.  they  were  amazed,  they  answered  no  in.  16.
.34.  32.  if  l  have  done  iniquity,  l  will  do  no  m.

41.  8  remember  the  battle,  do  no  m.

Psal.  10. 18.  that  man  of  earth  may  no  m.  oppress
39.  1.3.  spare  me,  before  1  go  hence,  and  be  no  in.
41.  8.  now  that  he  lieth,  he  shall  rise  up  no  m.

74.  9.  see  not  signs,  there  is  no  in.  any  prophet
77.  7.  will  he  cast  off,  and  be  favourable  no  in.

83.  4.  that  name  of  lsr.  be  no  in.  in  remembrance
88.  5.  the  slain  whom  thou  rememberest  no  m.

10.3.  16.  the  place  thereof  shall  know  it  no  in.

104.  .35.  and  let  the  wicked  be  no  m.

Prov.  10. 25.  as  the  whirlwind,  so  is  the  wicked  no  m.
.31.7.  and  remember  his  misery  no  m.

EcelA.  1.3.  kina,  'vho  will  no  rn.  be  admonished
Isa.  1.  13.  bring  no  in.  vain  oblat.  incense  abomin.

10.  20.  shall  no  m.  stay  on  him  that  smote  them
19.  7.  shall  wither,  be  driven  away,  and  be  no  m.

2.3.  10.  there  is  no  rn.  strength  ||  12.  no  m.  rejoice
26.  21.  the  earth  shall  no  in.  cover  her  slain
30.  19.  shalt  weep  nom.  |l  .38.  11.  behold  man  no  tn.
32.  5.  the  vile  person  shall  be  no  m.  called  liberal
47.  1.  thou  shalt  no  in.  be  called  tender  and  delic.

5.  shalt  no  in.  be  called  the  lady  of  kingdoms

51.  22.  thou  shalt  no  in.  drink  it  again

52.  1.  no  m.  come  into  the  uncircumcised
60.  18.  violence  shall  no  in.  be  heard  in  thy  land

19.  the  sun  shall  be  no  m.  thy  light  bv  day


Isa.  60.  20.  thy  sun  shall  nom.  go  dovn,  nor  mnnn
62!  4.  thou  shalt  no  m.  be  termed  Forsaken

8. 1  will  no  m.  give  thy  corn  to  thine  enemies

65.  19.  the  voice  of  weeping  shall  be  no  m.  heard
20.  there  shall  be  no  m.  thence  an  infant  of  days
Jer.  2.  31.  've  are  lords,  we  wil  1  come  nom.  to  thee
.3. 16.  they  shall  say  no  m.  the  ark  of  the  covenant
7.  32.  it  shall  no  tn.  be  called  Tophet,  19.  6.

11.  19.  that  his  name  may  be  no  m.  remembered
lfi’.  14.  shall  be  no  m.  said,  the  Lord  liveth,  23.  7.

22.  10.  shall  return  no  tn.  ||  12.  see  this  land  no  m.
2.3.  4.  they  shall  fear  no  m.  nor  be  dismayed

36.  the  burden  of  the  L.  shall  ye  mention  non?.

25.  27.  fall,  and  rise  no  m.  because  of  the  sworr:

3l‘  34!  and  thev  shall  teach  no  m.  every  man  his

neighbour,  and  1  will  remember  their  sin  no  m.
33.  24.  thev  should  be  no  m.  a  nation  before  them

42.  18.  and  ye  shall  see  this  place  no  m.

44.  26.  my  name  shall  be  no  m.  named  in  Egypt

49. 7.  thus  saith  Lord,  is  wisdom  no  n?.  in  Teman  ?
50.  39.  it  shall  no  m.  be  inhabited  for  ever

Lam.  2.  9.  law  is  non?,  her  prophets  find  no  vision
4.  22.  he  will  no  m.  carry  thee  away  into  captivity
Ezek.  12.  24.  there  shall’ be  no  tn.  any  vain  vision
25. "and  mv  word  shall  be  no  m.  prolonged
13. 15.  the  wall  is  no  m.  ||  14.  11.  go  no  m.  astray
21.  and  they  shall  be  no  tn.  in  your  hand

23.  therefore  ye  shall  see  no  m.  vanity
16.  42.  1  will  be  quiet,  and  will  be  no  m.  angry

19.  9.  that  his  voice  should  be  no  m.  heard

20.  39.  but  pollute  ye  my  holy  name  no  m.

21.  13.  it  shall  be  no  m.  saith  the  Lord,  27.

.32.  thou  shalt  be  no  m.  remembered,  L.  spoken  it

24.  27.  and  thou  shalt  speak,  and  be  no  m.  dumb
26. 14.  thou  shalt  be  no  m.  built  ||  21.  shall  be  no  m
28., 24.  there  shall  be  no  tn.  a  pricking  briar  to  lsr
20.  15.  they  shall  no  tn.  rule  over  the  nations

16.  shall  be  no  in.  the  confidence  of  Israel
30.  13.  there  shall  be  no  m.  a  prince  of  Egypt
.34.  22.  and  thev  shall  be  no  in.  a  prey,  28.  29.

.36.  14.  therefore  thou  shalt  devour  men  no  m ,

37.  22.  and  they  shall  be  no  m.  two  nations

43.  7.  my  name  shall  house  of  Israel  no  m.  defile

45.  8.  my  princes  shall  no  m .  oppress  my  people
Ues.  1.  6.  I  will  no  m.  have  mercy  upon  Israel

2.  16.  and  thou  shalt  call  me  no  w.  Baali

17.  thev  shall  nom.  be  remembered  by  their  nam*

9. 15. 1  will  drive  them  out,  I  will  love  them  no  m
Joel  2.  19.  I  Nvill  no  »?.  make  you  a  reproach
Amos  5.  2.  the  virgin  is  fallen,  she  shall  no  m.  rise

9.  15.  they  shall  no  m.  be  pulled  out  of  their  land
Mic.  5.  12.  thou  shalt  have  no  m.  soothsayers

13.  thou  shalt  no  tn.  vvorship  work  of  thine  hands-
Nah.  1.  12.  1  will  afflict  thee  no  m.  saith  the  Lord

14.  a  command  that  no  in.  of  thy  name  be  sown

15.  the  wicked  shall  no  in.  pass  through  thee

2. 13.  voice  of  thv  messengers  shall  no  m.  be  heard
Zeph.  3.  11.  and  thou  shalt  no  m.  be  haughty
Zech.  11.  6.  1  will  no  in.  pity  the  inhabitants

1.3.  2.  and  they  shall  no  m.  be  remembered
14.  11.  there  shall  be  no  m.  utter  destruction
21.  be  no  m.  the  Canaanite  in  the  house  ot  Lord
Mat.  19. 6.  they  are  no  m.  twain,  but  one,  Mark\0.8.
Mark  7.  12.  and  ye  suffer  him  no  m.  to  do  ought

9.  25.  come  out  of  him,  and  enter  no  m.  into  turn

14.  25.  I  will  drink  no  in.  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine
Luke  3. 13.  exact  no  m.  than  that  is  appointed  •

9. 13.  we  have  no  m.  but  five  loaves  and  tvvo  fishes

12.  4.  after  that  have  no  m.  that  they  can  do

John  5.  14.  thou  art  made  whole,  sin  no  m.  8.  11.

6.  66.  many  went  back,  and  walked  no  m.  with  him
14. 19.  a  li’ttle  while  the  world  seeth  me  no  m.

15.  4.  no  m.  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me

16.  10.  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me  no  m.

21.  she  remembereth  no  m.  the  anguish,  for  joy

25.  when  l  shall  nom.  speak  in  parables

17. 11.  now  1  am  no  m.  in  the  world,  but  these  are
Acts  8.  39. that  the  eunuch  saw  him  non?.

I. 3.  31.  now  nom.  to  return  to  corruption

20.  25.  1  know  that  ye  shall  see  my  face  no  m.  .38.
Rom.  6.  9.  diet!)  no  in.  death  hath  no  in.  dominion
7. 17.  now  then  it  is  no  m.  1  that  do  it,  but  sin.  COi

II.  6.  it  is  no  tn.  of  works,  else  grace  is  no  m.  grace,.

but  if  it  be  of  works,  grace  is  no  in.  grace
2  Cor.  5.  16.  yet  henceforth  know  we  him  no  in.
Gal.  3.  18.  if  of  the  law,  it  is  no  m.  of  promise

4.  7.  thou  art  no  m.  a  servant,  but  a  son
Eph.  2. 19.  ye  are  now.  strangers  and  foreigners
4.  14.  we  be  no  m.  children  tossed  to  and  tro
28.  let  him  that  stole  steal  no  m.  but  labour
lleb.  8. 12.  their  iniq.  I  will  remember  no  m.  10. 17-

10.  2.  should  have  no  m.  conscience  of  sins

18.  there  is  no  tn.  offering  for  sin.  26.

Rev.  3.  12.  he  that  overcometh  shall  go  no  m.  out
7. 16.  shall  hunger  no  in.  neither  thirst  any  more

18.  14.  thou  shall  find  them  no  m.  at  all

22.  musicians  shall  be  heard  no  m.  in  thee.  2.3.

20.  .3.  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  nom.

21.  1.  no  rn.  sea  ||  4.  no  in.  death  ||  22.  3.  no  in.  rursps
Much  MORE.

Exod.  36.  5.  the  people  I  ring  much  tn.  than  enough
Prov.  1 1. 31.  much  m.  the  wicked  and  the  sinner
Isa.  56.  12.  as  this  day,  and  much  in.  abundant
Mat.  6.  30.  shall  he  not  much  m.  clothe  you  f
Luke  5.  15.  so  much  w.went  a  fame  ot  him  abroad

7.  26.  I  say  unto  you,  and  much  m.  than  a  propner
Rom.  5.  9.  much  m.  being  now  justified  by  Ins  brnod

10.  much  m.  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved

17.  much  in.  they  that  receive  abundance  ot  grace
20.  where  sin  abounded,  grace  much  m.  abound

2  Cor.  3.  9.  much  m.  doth  ministration  of  nghteousn.

11.  much  in.  that  which  remaineth  is  glorious
8  22.  but  no  w  we  have  proved  much  m.  diligent
Phil.  1.  14.  are  much  m.  bold  to  speak  thereof
2.  12.  have  obeyed,  now  much  m.  in  my  absence
Heb.  10. 25.  so  much  rn.  as  you  see  day  approat  nin0

12.  25.  much  m.  shall  not  we  escape,  it  ve  turn
1  Pet  1.7.  being  much  m.  precious  than  of  goal
MOREOVER.  ,

Psal.  10.  ll.  m.  by  them  is  thy  servant  warned
Isa.  39. 8.  be  said,’  m.  there  shall  he  peace  and  tru.a
Ezek.  16.29.  thou  hast  m.  multiplied  tornicatr-u


MOR


MOR


MOT


'tch.  5.  6.  m.  this  is  their  resemblance  through  earth
ub.  11.  tlo.  of  mockiugs,  m.  of  bonds  and  imprison.
MORNING

lenities,  [1]  The  bey  inning  of  the  day,  or  the  time
of  the  sun's  rising,  Mark  16.  2.  Luke  21.  1.  ^2]
The  one  part  of  a  natural  day,  Gen.  1.  5.  The
evening  and  the  morning  make  the  day,  according
to  Moses,  because  the  ancient  Hebrews  began  their
day  in  the  evening.  [3]  The  general  resurrection,
when  tht  dead  shall  be  raised,  Psal.  49.  14.  Death
being  called  the  night,  John  9.  4.  and  compared  to
sleep,  John  11.  11.  that  day  is  Jitly  compared  to
the  morning,  when  men  awake  out  of  sleep,  and
enter  upon  that  everlasting  day.  [i]  Early  or
seasonably,  Psal.  5.  3.  [5]  Unseasonably,  Reel.
10.  16.  [6]  Suddenly,  or  quickly,  or  in  a  short
tune,  Psal.  30.  5.  [7]  Daily,  Psal.  73.  14.  [8J
The  light,  Joel  2.  2.

i  ings  of  the  morning,  Psal.  13d.  d.  denote  a  rapid
flight  ;  there  being  no  motion  ice  know  of  so  rapid
as  the  diffusion  of  the  beams  of  the  sun  at  the
breaking  of  the  day.

if't.ld.15.  when  the  in.  arose,  the  angel  hastened  Lot
.’4.  54.  Abraham  and  servants  rose  up  in  the  m.

16.  31.  they  rose  betimes  in  the  m.  and  sware
Td.  25.  that  in  the  m.  behold  it  was  Leah
32.  +  24.  wrestled  with  him  till  ascending  of  the  m.
to.  6.  Joseph  came  into  them  in  the  m.  were  sad
4-y.  27-  in  the  rn.  he  shall  devour  the  prey
.rod.  7.. 15.  get  thee  to  Pharaoh  in  the  m.

10.  13.  in  the  w.-the  east  wind  brought  locusts
14.  Q7;  the  sea  returned  to  his  strength  in  the  m.

16. 7-  in  the  rn.  ye  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord
8.  shall  give  you  in  the  rn.  bread  to  the  full,  12.
13.  in  the  m.  the  dew  lay  round  about  the  host

2d.  3d.  one  lamb  thou  shalt  offer  in  rn.  Num.  28.  4.
41.  according  to  the  meat  offering  of  the  m.

34.  2.  be  ready  in  the  m.  and  come  up  in  the  m.

25.  nor  shall  the  passover  be  left  to  the  m.
lev.  6.  d.  the  burning  on  the  altai  all  night  to  the  m.
\um.  d.  21.  the  cloud  was  taken  up  in  the  m.

22.21.  Balaam  rose  in  the  m.  and  saddled  his  ass, 22.
Jeut.  28.  67-  in  the  rn.  would  God  it  were  even
Judg.  6.31.  lethim  be  put  todeath  whilst  it  is  yet  m.

16.  2.  in  the  m.  when  it  is  day,  we  shall  kill  him
Id.  27.  her  lord  rose  in  the  m.  and  opened  the  doors
2U.  Id.  the  children  of  Israel  rose  up  in  the  m.

Ham.  13.  t  4.  why  art  thou  lean  rn.  by  m.  ?

23.  4.  and  he  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the  m.  when

the  sun  risetli,  even  a  rn.  without  clouds
24. 11 .  for  when  David  was  up  in  the  m.  word  came
Kings  3.  21.  when  l  had  considered  it  in  the  m.
18.  26.  and  called  on  name  of  baal  from  m.  to  noon
Seh.  4.  21.  some  laboured  from  rn.  till  stars  appear
8.  3  he  read  therein  from  rn.  to  mid-day
i '»h  3.  t  9.  nor  let  it  see  the  eye  lids  of  the  m.

7. 21.  thou  shalt  seek  me  iu  the  m.  hut  1  shall  not  be

11.  17.  thou  shalt  shine  forth,  and  be  as  the  rn.

24.  17-  for  the  m.  is  to  them  as  the  shadow  of  death
38.  12.  hast  thou  commanded  the  m.  since  thy  days
41.  18.  his  eyes  are  like  eyelids  of  the  m.

Psal.  5.  3.  my  voice  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  m.  O  Ld.

in  the  rn.  will  1  direct  my  prayer  to  thee
3u.  5.  weeping  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  m.
46.  t  5.  God  shall  help  her  when  the  m.  appeareth

49.  14.  shall  have  dominion  over  them  in  the  m.

59.  16.  1  will  sing  of  thy  mercy  in  the  m.

8b.  13.  in  the  m.  shall  my  prayer  prevent  thee
90.  5.  in  tlie  rn.  they  are  like  grass  which  grows  up
6.  in  the  m.  it  tioui  ishetli  and  groweth  up
119.  147.  1  prevented  the  dawning  of  the  m.

130.  6.  waits  more  than  they  that  watch  for  the  m.
13y.  9.  if  1  take  the  wings  of  the  rn.  and  dwell
143.  8.  to  hear  thy  loving-kindness  in  the  m.

Lie  1. 10.16. thy  king,  a  child  and  princes  eat  in  the  m.

11.  6.  in  m.  sow  tny  seed,  and  in  the  evening
Jaw.  6.  10.  who  is  she  that  looketh  forth  as  the  m.

I >a.  14. 12.  how  art  fallen,  t)  Lucifer,  son  of  the  m.  !

17.  14.  and  behold,  before  the  m.  he  is  not
21.  12.  the  watchman  said,  the  m.  coineth

28.  iy.  tor  m.  by  rn.  sliall  it  passover,  by  day  and  n.

50.  4.  he  wakeneth  m.  by  rn.  he  wakeneth  my  ear
58.  8.  then  sliall  thy  light  bleak  forth  as  the  m.

Ic'.  5. 8.  they  were  as  fed  horses  in  the  rn.  every  one

20.  16.  and  let  him  hear  the  cry  iu  the  rn.

21.  12.  execute  judgment  in  the  m.  and  deliver
L-.ek.  7.7.  the  rn.  is  come  on  thee,  O  thou  that  dw  ell.

•  lo.  the  rn.  is  gone  forth,  the  rod  hath  blossomed

12.  8.  in  the  rn.  came  the  word  of  the  Lord

24.  18.  1  spake  to  the  people  in  the  rn.  at  even  my
wife  died,  1  did  in  the  rn.  as  1  was  commanded
33. 22.  opened  my  mouth  until  came  to  me  in  the  rn.
ilos.  6.  3.  his  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  rn.

_4.  for  your  goodness  is  as  a  rn.  cloud,  as  early  dew
7-  6.  iu  the  m.  it  burneth  as  a  flaming  tire
10.  15.  iu  a  m.  shall  the  king  of  Israel  be  cut  off
Del  2.  2. as  the  m.  spread  upon  the  mountains
Amos  4.  13.  that  maketh  the  //i.darkn.  and  treadeth
5.  8.  and  turneth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  m.
Dnah  4.  7.  God  prepared  a  worm  w  hen  the  m.  rose
st  '  *•  ".hen  the  m.  is  light,  they  practise  it
blot.  16.  3.  in  the  rn.  it  will  he  foul  weather
27.  1.  when  rn.  was  come,  the  elders  took  counsel
Mark  H.  20.  in  the  rn.  as  they  passed  by,  they  saw

13.  35.  watch,  or  at  the  cock  crow  ing,  or  iu  rn.

Early  in  the  MORN  IN’G.
t’fn.  19.27.  Abrah.  gat  up  early  in  m.  21. 14.  |  22.  3.
20.  8.  therefore  Abimelech  rose  early  in  the  rn.

2d*  Id*  Jacob  rose  up  early  in  m.  and  set  up  a  pillar
31.  55.  Laban  rose  early  in  rn.  kissed  sons,  daught.
Exod. 8.20.  Lai.  said,  rise  upear/y  in  m.  stand.  9.  13.
24.  4.  Moses  rose  early  rn  rn.  built  an  altar,  34.  4.
Josh.  3.  1.  Josh,  rose  early  In  in.  6.  12.  1  7-  16.  1  8.  10.
■Jodg .  6.  28.  the  men  of  the  city  rose  early  in  the  rn.

30.  Gid.  rose  ear.  in  rn.  ||  19.  5.  Levite  ear.  in  m.  8.
1  Hum.  l.  19.  thev  rose  up  early  in  the  rn.  29.  11.
2  &*/ifr4  3,22.1  19.35.  2  Chr.  20.20.  Isa.  3?.  36.
‘2.  Sam.  rose  early  mm.  ||  17;20.  Dav.  ear.  in  rn.
29*  10.  wherefore  rise  \i\r  early  in  m.  and  depart
Job  1.  5.  Job  rose  up  early  in  the  rn.  and  offered
;  n'V  ^*  14*  blessetli  his  friend,  rising  early  in  m.
sa.o.  ii,  woe  to  them  that  rise  early  in  rn.  to  follow

\


Isa.  3*.  36.  arose  e.  in  m.  they  were  all  dead  corpses
Dan.  6.  19.  then  king  Darius  rose  very  early  hi  rn.
Mat.  20.  1.  who  went  early  in  m.  to  hire  labourers
Mark  16.  2.  early  in  m.  came  to  sepulchre,  Luke  24.1 .
Luke  21.  38.  the  people  came  early  in  m.  John  8.  2.
Acts  5.  21.  they  entered  into  the  temple  early  him.
See  Evening.

Every  MORNING.

Exod.  16.  21.  and  they  gathered  manna  every  m.

30.  7.  shalt  burn  thereon  sweet  incense  every  m.
36.  3.  brought  unto  him  free  offerings  every  rn.
Lev.  6.  12.  the  priest  sliall  burn  w  ood  on  it  every  m.

1  Chr.  9.  27.  opening  every  m.  pertaineth  to  porters
23.  30.  to  stand  every  m.  to  thank  and  praise  Lord

2  Chron.  13.  11.  they  burn  to  the  1  ord  every  m.

Job  7.  18.  that  thou  shouldest  visit  him  every  m.
Psal.  73.  14.  and  1  have  been  chastened  every  m.
Isa.  33.  2.  O  Lord,  be  thou  our  arm  every  m.

Lam.  3.  23.  the  Lord’s  mercies  are  new'  every  m.
Ezek.  46.  13.  thou  shalt  prepare  a  lamb  every  rn.

14.  meat  off.  every  m.  ||  15.  every  m.  a  burnt  off.
Amos  4.  4.  and  bring  your  sacrifices  every  m.

Zeph.  3.  5.  every  rn.  doth  he  bring  judgment  to  light

Until  the  MORNING.

Exod.  12. 10.  let  nothing  of  it  remain  until  the  m.  16.
19.  1  23.  18. 1  29.  34.  Lev.  7.  15.  Nnrn.  9.  12.

22.  none  of  you  shall  go  out  at  the  door  u.  t.  m.
16.  20.  but  some  of  them  left  of  it  until  the  m.

23.  lay  up  for  you  to  he  kept  until  the  m.

Lev.  19.  13.  the  w  ages  shall  not  abide  until  the  m.
Deut.  16.  4.  nor  any  of  the  flesh  remain  until  the  m.
Judg.  19.  25.  they  abused  her  all  night  until  the  m.
liuthS.  13.  lie  down  u.  the  rn.  ||  14.  she  lay  u.  t.  m.

1  Sam.  3.  15.  and  Samuel  lay  u.  t.  rn.  and  opened
19.  2.  therefore  take  heed  to  thyself  until  the  m.

2  Kings  10.  8.  lay  heads  of  kings  in  two  heaps  u.  m.
Prov.  7*  18.  let  us  take  our  fill  of  love  until  the  m.
Isa.  38.  13.  1  reckoned  until  the  rn.  that  as  a  lion

MORNING  light.

1  Sam.  14.  36.  and  let  us  spoil  them  until  m.  light
25.  22.  all  that  pertain  to  him  by  m.  light

36.  Abigail  told  him  nothing  until  m.  light

2  Sam.  17.  22.  they  passed  over  Jordan  by  m.  light
2  Kings  7*  9.  they  said,  if  we  tarry  until  rn.  light

See  Clou d.

MORNING  star  and  stars.

Jo .?  38.  7*  "hen  m.  stars  sang  together,  sons  of  God
Rev.  2.  28.  and  1  will  give  him  the  m.  star
22.  16.  1  Jesus  am  the  bright  and  rn.  star
MORNING  watch.

Exod.  14.  24.  in  m.  watch  the  Lord  said  to  Moses
1  Sam.  11. 11.  came  into  middle  of  host  in  m.  watch
MORROW.

Gen.  30.  +  33.  my  righteousness  answer  for  me  to  m.
Exod.  8.  23.  to  rn.  shall  this  sign  be,  the  Lord  did  so

9.  5.  to  rn.  the  Lord  sliall  do  this  thing  in  the  land

6.  the  Lord  did  that  thing,  on  the  m.  cattle  died

13.  +  14.  asketh  thee  to  m.  Deut.  6.  t  20.  Josh.  4.  t  6.
16.  23.  to .m.  is  the  rest  of  the  holy  sabbath  to  Lord

19.  10.  go,  and  sanctify  them  to  day  and  to  m.

32.  5.  Aaron  said,  to  m.  is  a  feast  to  the  Lord

Lev.  7. 16.  on  m.  the  remainder  shall  be  eaten,  19.  6.

22.  30.  ye  shall  leave  none  of  it  till  the  m.

23.  11.  on  m.  after  sabbath  priest  shall  wave  it

15.  ye  shall  count  from  the  m.  after  the  sabbath
2 Sum.  11.  18.  say  thou  to  the  people,  sanctify  your¬
selves  against  to  rn.  ye  shall  eat,  Josh.  7.  13.

16.  5.  to  m.  the  Lord  w  ill  shew  who  are  his

16.  he  thou,  they  and  Aaron  to  rn.  before  Lord
41.  on  the  m.  the  congregation  murmured

Josh.  3.  5.  to  rn.  Lord  will  do  wonders  among  you
5.  12.  manna  ceased  on  the  m.  after  they  had  eaten

22.  18.  to  m.  he  will  be  wroth  w  ith  congregation

i  24.  to  m.your  children  might  speak  to  our  child.
Judg.  19.  9.  to  m.  get  you  early  on  your  way

20.  28.  go  up,  for  tow.  1  will  deliver  them

1  Sam.  11.  9.  to  m.  by  that  time  the  sun  be  hot,

20.  5.  behold,  to  rn.  is  the  new  moon,  18.

28.  19-  tow.  shalt  thou  and  thy  sons  he  with  me

1  Kings  <20.  6.  1  will  send  my  servants  to  thee  to  rn.

2  Kings  6.28.  thy  son  to  day ,  we  w  ill  eat  my  son  to  rn.

7.  1.  tow.  a  measure  of  fine  flour  be  sold  for  a

shekel

8.  15.  on  the  w.  he  took  a  thick  cloth,  and  dipt

10.  6.  come  to  me  to  Jezreel  by  to  w.  this  time

2  Chron.  20. 16.  to  m.  go  ye  down  against  them,  17.
Esth.  5.  8.  1  will  do  to  w.  as  the  king  hath  said
12.  to  w.  am  1  invited  to  her  with  the  king
Prov. 3. 28.  to  rn.  1  will  give, when  thou  hast  it  by  thee
27.  1.  boast  not  thyself  to  m.  thou  knowest  not
Isa.  22. 13.  let  us  eat,  for  to  w.  we  die,  1  Cor.  15.  32.
56.  12.  and  to  m.  shall  be  as  this  day,  much  more
Zeph.  3.  3.  they  gnaw  not  the  bones  till  the  m.
Mat.  6.  30.  tow.  is  cast  into  the  oven,  Luke  12.  28.
34.  take  therefore  no  thought  for  the  w.  for  the
w.  shall  take  thought  for  the  tilings  of  itself
Luke  13.  32.  and  I  do  cures  to  day,  and  to  w.

33.  nevertheless,  1  must  walk  to  day’  and  to  m.
Acts  20.  7-  Paul  preached  ;  ready  to  depart  on  w.  t
25.  22.  to  m.  said  he,  thou  shalt  hear  him
Jam.  A.  13.  to  day  or  to  w.  we  will  go  into  such  a  city
14.  whereas,  ye  know’  not  what  shall  be  on  the  w.
MORSEL.

Gen.  18.  5.  I  will  fetch  a  w.  of  bread,  comfort  ye
Judg.  19.  5.. comfort  thine  heart  with  a  w.  of  bread
Ruth  2. 14.  eat  bread,  and  dip  thy  m.  in  the  vinegar
2  Sam.  12.  +  3.  it  did  eat  of  his  own  rn.  and  drank
Job  31.  17-  or  have  eaten  my  w.  myself  alone
Prov.  17- 1-  better  is  a  dry  w.  and  quietness  therewith

23.  8.  the  w.  thou  hast  eaten  shalt  thou  vomit  up
John  13.  +  26.  he  it  is  to  whom  1  shall  give  a  m.
lleb.  12.  16.  who  for  one  rn.  sold  his  birth-right

See  Bread.

MORSELS.

Psal.  147.  17*  he  casteth  forth  his  ice  like  m.

MOR  PAL.

2  Chron.  14.  +  1 ! .  let  not  w.  man  prevail  against  thee
Job  4.  17.  shall  w.  man  be  more  just  than  God
Rom.  6.  12.  let  not  sin  reign  in  your  m.  body
8. 11.  shall  also  quicken  your  rn.  bodies  by  his  Spirit

1  Cor.  15.  53.  this  w.  must  put  on  immortality,  54.

2  Cor.  4. 11.  life  of  Jesus  he  manifest  in  our  m.  flesh


MORTALITY.

°  Cor.  5.  4.  that  m.  might  be  swallowed  up  of  life
MORTALLY.

Dent.  19. 11.  and  smite  his  neighbour  m.  that  he  die
MORIAH.

Gen.  11.3.  brick  for  stone,  and  slime  had  they  for  w.
Exod.  1.  14.  they  made  them  serve  in  w.  and  brick
Lev.  14.  42.  shall  take  other  w.  and  plaster  the  house-
45.  and  shall  break  down  the  m.  of  the  house
Isa.  41.  25.  he  shall  come  upon  princes  asupon  w.
Ezek.  13.  10.  one  built  a  wall,  and  lo  others  daubed
it  with  untempered  w.  11,  14, 15.  |  22.  28
A  'ah.  3.  14.  go  into  (lay,  and  tread  the  m.

MO  R’IA  R.

Num.  11.  8.  ground  it  in  mills,  or  beat  it  in  a  m.
Prov.  27.  22.  tho’  thou  shouldest  bray  a  fool  in  a  m.
MOR  1GAGED.

A Teh.  5.  3.  some  also  said,  we  have  m.  our  lands
MORTIFY.

Rom.  8.  13.  but  if  yew.  deeds  of  body  ye  shall  live
Col.  3.  5.  m.  your  members  which  are  on  the  earth
MOST.

Prov.  20.  6.  w.nien  proclaim  every  one  his  goodness
Mat.  1 1. 20.  w  herein  w.  of  mighty  works  were  done
Luke  7-  42.  which  of  them  will  love  him  w.  ?

43.  1  suppose  that  he  to  whom  he  forgave  w.
Acts  20.  38.  sorrowing  m.  of all  for  words  hespake

1  Cor.  14.  27-  let  it  be  by  two,  or  at  m.  by  three

MOTE.

Mat.  7.  3.  why  beholdest  thou  m.  that  is  in  thy  bro¬
ther’s  eye,  but  not  beam  in  thy  own  ?  Luke 6.  41.

4.  let  me  pull  out  the  rn.  out  of  thine  eye

5.  first  cast,  and  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  cast
out  the  w.  out  of  thy  brother’s  eye,  Luke6.  42.

MOTH

Signifies,  [1]  A  sort  of  fly  which  eats  cloth.  Job  4.

19.  I  13.  28.  [2]  Some  secret  curse  and  judgment
from  God,  Isa.  50.  9.

Job  4. 19.  in  them  which  are  crushed  before  the  m.
27.  18.  he  buildetli  his  house  as  a  w.  and  booth
Psal.  39. 11 .  thou  makest  his  beauty  consume  like  w.
Isa.  50.  9.  the  rn.  shall  eat  them  up,  51.  8.

Ilos.  5.  12.  therefore  will  1  be  to  Ephraim  as  a  w.
Mat.  6. 19.  treasures,  where  w.and  rust  doth  corrupt

20.  where  neither  m.  non  ust  corrupt,  Luke  12.  33.

MOTH-EATEN.

Job  13.  28.  consumeth  as  garment  that  is  m. -eaten
Jam.  5.  2.  riches  corrupted,  your  garments  m. -eaten
MO 1 HER

Signifies,  [1]  A  woman  who  has  brought  forth  a
child,  Exod.  2.  8.  [2]  The  dam  of  the  beast,

Exod.  23.  19.  It  is  applied,  [1]  To  the  true
church,  in  which  true  gospel  believers  are  begotten
to,  and  nourished  vp  in,  the  faith ,  by  the  dispensa¬
tion  of  the  word  and  ordinances.  Gal.  4.  26.  It  is
said  to  be  from  above,  because  its  original  it
from  heaven,  and  its  members  have  their  conver¬
sation  there,  Phil.  3.  20.  [2]  To  a  valiant  woman
cf  whom  God  made  use  to  deliver  his  people,  to
instruct  and  take  care  of  them  with  a  tender
affection,  Judg.  5.  7*  [3]  To  matrons  or  aged

women,  to  whom  we  ought  to  carry  ourselves  re¬
spectfully,  because  of  their  age,  as  dutiful  chil¬
dren  do  to  their  mothers,  1  Tim.  5.  2.  [4]  To  all
true  believers  who  are  more  dear  and  near  to
Christ,  than  the  nearest  relations  are  to  any  per¬
son,  Mat.  12.  49,  50.  [5]  To  one  who  tenders  and
loves  another,  as  a  mother  does  her  son,  Rom.
16.  13.  [6]  To  a  female  superior,  whether  a

mother,  mother-in-law,  one  advanced  in  age,  a
teacher  or  governess,  Exod.  20.  12.  [7]  To  the

kingdom  of  Judah,  the  city  cf  Jerusalem,  or  the
family  of  David,  Ezek.  19.  2,  10.  [8]  To  a  me¬
tropolis,  or  the  capital  city  of  a  country  or  of  a
tribe,  2  Sam. 20.  19.

Gen.  3.  20.  because  she  was  the  m.  of  all  living
17. 16.  I  w  ill  bless  her,  she  shall  be  a  m.  of  nations
24.  28.  the  damsel  told  them  of  her  m.  house
53.  he  gave  to  her  brother  and  m.  precious  things
60.  be  thou  the  m.  of  thousands  ot  millions
32.  11.  lest  lie  smite  the  w.  with  the  children
Exod.  2.  8.  the  maid  went  and  called  the  child’s  w.
Lev.  20.14.  to  take  a  wife  and  her  m.  is  wickedness
Judg.  5.  7-  till  that  1  Deborah  arose  a  m.  in  Israel
28.  the  rn.  of  Sisera  looked  out  at  a  window
Ruth  1.  8.  go,  return  each  to  her  m.  house

2  Ham.  17.  25.  Abigail,  sister  to  Zeruiah,  Joab’sw.

20.  19.  thou  seekestto  destroy  a  m.  in  Israel

1  Kings  2. 19.  caused  a  seat  to  be  set  for  the  king's  w.
3.  27.  give  her  the  child,  she  is  the  m.  thereof

2  Kings  24.  15.  he  carried  away  the  king’s  m.

Psal.  113.  9.  and  to  be  a  joyful  rn.  of  children
Prov.  30.  11.  a  generation  doth  not  bless  their  w.
Cant.  6.  9.  my  dove,  she  is  the  only  one  of  her  m,
Isa.  50. 1.  where  is  the  bill  of  your  rn.  divorce  5
Jer.  50.  12.  j  our  w.  shall  be  sore  confounded
Ezek.  16.  44.  as  is  the  w.  so  is  the  daughter

45.  your  m.  was  an  1 1  ittite,  father  an  Amorite

21.  i  21.  king  stood  at  the  w.  of  the  way

23.  2.  were  two  women  the  daughters  of  one  m.
Ilos.  2.  2.  plead  with  your  m.  for  she  is  not  my  wife

5.  for  their  m.  hath  played  the  harlot
10.  14.  m.  was  dashed  in  pieces  upon  her  children
Mic.  7.  6.  daughter  riseth  upagainst  her  m.  a  man’s
enemies  of  nis  house,  Mat.  10.35.  Luke  12.  53.
Mat.  8.  14.  saw  Peter’s  wife’s  m.  sick,  Luke  4.  38.
14.  8.  she  being  before  instructed  of  her  m.

11.  and  she  brought  it  to  her  m.  Mark  6.  28.

19. 12.  eunuchs  were  so  born  from  their  m.  womb
20.  20.  then  came  the  m.  of  Zebedee’s  children
Luke  1. 43.  the  m.  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  me  i
John  2.  1.  the  m.  of  Jesus  was  there,  Acts  1.  14.
Acts  12. 12.hecameto  house  of  Mary  m.  of  John
Gal.  4.  26.  Jerusalem  which  is  the  m.  of  us  all
Rev.  17-  5.  the  m.  of  harlots  and  abominations
See  Father.

II is  MOTHER.

Gen.  21.  21.  his  m,  took  him  a  wife  out  of  Egypt

24.  67-  Isaac  brought  Rebekah  into  his»/.  Sarah's
tent,  and  was  comforted  after  the  death  of  his  m,

27. 14.  Jacob  went  and  brought  them  to  his  m.

30.  14.  Reuben  brought  mandrakes  to  his  m.

319


MOV


M  O  U


M  O  U


Gen.  4.3.  29.  he  saw  his  brother  Benjamin,  A is  m.  son
44. 20.  he  alone  is  left  of  A.  m.  his  father  loves  him
Exod.  23. 19.  thou  shalt  not  seethe  the  kid  in  his  m.

milk,  34.  26.  Deut.  14.  21.
Lev.  20. 17*  shall  take  his  m.  daughter  and  see  her
24. 11.  hism.  name  was  Shelomith,  tribe  of  Dan
JVw m.  12. 12.  when  he  eometh  out  of  hism.  womb
Deut.  27-  22.  that  lieth  with  the  daughter  of  hism.
Judg.  9.  1.  Abimelech  went  to  his  m.  brethren

17.  2.  he  said  to  his  m.  H  3.  he  restored  it  to  his  m.

1  Sam.  2.  19.  his  m.  made  him  a  little  coat

1  Kings  1.  6.  and  his  m.  bare  him  after  Absalom

15. 13.  hism.  he  removed  from  being  queen

17.  23.  Elijah  delivered  him  to  his  m.  and  said

22.  52.  Ahaziah  walked  in  the  way  of  his  m.

2  Kings 4. 19.  he  said  to  a  lad,  carry  him  to  hism.

1  Chron.  4.  9.  his  m.  called  his  name  Jabez

2  Chr.  22. 3.  hism.  was  his  counsellor  to  do  wickedly
Psal.  35.  14.  as  one  that  mourneth  for  his  m.

109.  14.  let  not  the  sin  of' Am  m.  be  blotted  out
131.  2.  as  a  child  that  is  weaned  of  hism.

Prov.  10. 1.  a  foolish  son  is  the  heaviness  of  his  m.

15.  20.  but  a  foolish  man  despiseth  his  m.

29.  15.  a  child  left  bringeth  his  m,  to  shame

31.  1.  the  prophecy  that  hism.  taught  him
Eccl.  5. 15.  as  he  came  forth  of  his  m.  womb,  naked
Cant.  3. 11.  crown  wherewith  his  m.  crowned  him
Isa.  66.  13.  as  one  whom  hism.  comforteth
Mat.  1.  18.  when  his  m.  was  espoused  to  Joseph

2. 13.  take  the  young  child  and  his  m.  and  flee,  20.

12.  46.  Am  m.  stood  w  ithout,  Mark  3.  31.  Luke  8. 19.
13.55.  carpenter's  son,  is  not  his  m.  called  Mary  ?

Luke  1.15.  tilled  with  Holy  Ghost  from  his  in.  womb
60.  hism.  said,  he  shall  be  called  John
2.43.  but  Joseph  and  hism.  knew  not  of  it
51.  but  his  m.  kept  these  sayings  in  her  heart

7.  12.  the  only  son  of  his  rn.  and  she  was  a  widow
15.  he  sat  up,  and  he  delivered  him  to  hism.
John  3.4.  can  he  enter  second  time  into  his  m.  womb?

19.  25.  hism.  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus

26.  when  Jesus  saw  hism.  he  saith  to  hism.

Acts  3. 2.  certain  man  lame  from  his  m.  womb,  14. 8.
Rom.  16.  13.  salute  Rufus  and  hism.  and  mine
MOTHER -m-to.

Deut.  27-  23.  cursed  be  that  lieth  with  his  m.-in-law
Ruth  1.  14.  and  (Jrpah  kissed  her  m.-in-law

2.  11.  all  that  thou  hast  done  to  thy  m.-in-law

23.  and  Ruth  dwelt  with  her  m.-m-law

3.  6.  according  to  all  that  her  m.-in-law  bade  her
17.  for  he  said,  go  not  empty  to  thy  m.-in-law

Mic.  7.  6.  the  daughter-in-law  riseth  up  against  the
m.-in-law.  Mat.  10.  .‘35.  Luke  12.  53.
My  MOTHER.

Gen.  20. 12.  sue  is  not  the  daughter  of  my  m.

Judg.  8.  19.  my  brethren,  even  the  sons  of  my  m.

16. 17.  I  have  been  a  N  azarite  from  my  m.  womb
1  Kings  2.20.  the  king  said  to  her,  ask  on,  my  m.
Job  1.  21.  naked  came  1  out  of  mym.  womb

3. 10.  it  shut  not  up  the  doors  of  my  m.  womb
17.  14.  I  have  said  to  the  worm,  thou  art  my  m.

31. 18.  and  I  have  guided  her  from  my  m.  womb
Psal.  22. 9.  make  me  hope,  when  on  my  m.  breasts

10.  thou  art  my  God  from  mym.  belly
51.  5.  anil  in  sin  did  mym.  conceive  me
69.  8.  I  am  become  an  alien  to  my  rn.  children
71. 6.  thou  art  he  that  took  me  out  of  my  m.  bowels
139- 13.  thou  hast  covered  me  in  my  m.  womb
Prov.  4.  3.  tender  and  beloved  in  the  sight  of  my  m.
Cant.  1.  6.  my  m.  chi  Idren  were  angry  with  me
3.  4.  until  1  had  brought  him  to  mym.  house

8. 1.  my  brother  that  sucked  the  breasts  of  my  m.

2.  and  I  would  bring  thee  into  my  m.  house

Isa.  49.1.  from  the  bowels  of  my  m.  he  made  mention
Jer.  15. 10.  woe  is  me  my  m.  that  thou  hast  borne  me

20.  14.  let  not  the  day  wherein  my  m.  bare  me

17.  or  that  mym.  might  have  been  m3'  grave
Mat.  12. 48.  Jesus  said,  who  is  my  m.  ?  Mark  3.  33.

49.  behold  my  m.  and  my  brethren,  Mark  3.  34.
Luke  8.  21.  mym.  and  my  brethren  are  these
Gal.  1 .15.  God,  who  separated  me  from  wj/m.womb
Thy  MOTHER.

Gen.  27. 29  and  let  thy  m.  sons  bow  down  to  thee
37.  10.  shall  1  and  thy  m.  come  to  bow  to  thee  ?
Lev.  18.7-  nakedness  of  thy  m.  shalt  thou  not  uncover

9.  not  uncover  nakedness  of  daughter  of  thy  m.

13.  not  uncover  naked,  of  sister  of  thy  m.  20.  19.

Deut.  13.  6.  brother,  the  son  of  thy  m.  entice  thee

1  .Saw. 15.3.3.  so  shall  thym.  be  childless  among  worn.
20.30.  to  the  confusion  of  thym.  nakedness

2  Kings  9.  22.  as  whoredoms  of  thy  m.  are  so  many
J’sal.  50.  20.  thou  slanderest  thine  own  m.  son
Prov.  1.  8.  and  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  m.  6.  20.

23.  22.  and  despise  not  thy  m.  when  she  is  old
Cant.  8.  5.  there  thym.  brought  thee  forth
Jer. 22.  26.  cast  thee  out,  and  thy  m.  that  bare  thee
Ezek.  16. 3.  thy  father  an  Amorite,  thy  m.  an  Hittite
45.  thou  art  thy  m.  daughter  that  loatheth  herhusb.

19.  2.  and  say,  what  is  thym.?  a  lioness

10.  thy  m.  is  like  a  vine  in  thy  blood,  planted
Hos.  4.  5.  thou  shalt  fall,  and  1  will  destroy  thy  m.
Mat.  12.  47.  one  said  to  him,  behold  thym.  and  thy

brethren,  Mark  3.32.  Luke  8.20.  John  1 9.  27.
2  Tim.  1.  5.  faith,  which  dwelt  in  thym.  Eunice
MOTHERS.

La.  49.  23.  and  queens  shall  be  thy  nursing  m.

Jer.  16.  3.  saith  the  Lord,  concerning  their  m.
Lam.  2.  12.  they  say  to  their  m,  where  is  corn  and
wine?  soul  was  poured  out  into  their  m.  bosom

5.  3.  we  are  fatherless,  our  m.  are  as  widows
Mark  10.  30.  receive  an  hundred  fold, sisters,  m.

1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  made  for  murderers  of  m.

5.2.  but  entreat  the  elder  women  as  m.  the  younger

MOTIONS.

Rom.  7.  5.  the  m.  of  sins  did  work  in  our  members
MOVE

Signifies,  [1]  To  stir  out  of  a  place,  2  Kings  21.

8.  [2]  To  provoke,  Deut.  32.  21.  [3]  To  per¬
suade,  Josh.  15.  18.  [4]  To  excite,  enable,  and

strengthen,  Judg.  13.  25.  [5]  To  set  or  raise  up,
Job  40.  +  17.  [6]  To  tremble  and  shake,  Psal.

18.  7-  [7]  To  touch,  Mat.  23.  4.  [8]  To  deter,  nr
discourage  one  from  doing  a  thing.  Acts  20.  24.


[9]  To  be  sensibly  affected  both  with  wonder  at,
and  compassion  towards,  a  person  under  affliction,
Ruth  1.  19.

Exod.  11.7.  not  a  dog  m.  his  tongue  against  man
L,ev.  11 .  10.  of  all  that  m.  in  the  waters
Deut.  23.  25.  not  m.  a  sickle  into  neighbour’s  corn
.32.  21.  and  I  will  m.  them  to  jealousy  with  those
Judg.  13.  25  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  began  to  m.  him
2Sam.7  .\Q.  may  dwell  and  m.  no  more,  2 Kings2\.8.
2  Kings  5.  +  11.  he  will  m.  his  hand  up  and  down

23.  18.  let  him  alone,  let  no  man  m.  Ins  bones
Jer.  10.  4.  they  fasten  it  with  nails  that  it  m.  not
Amos  9.  t  9-  1  will  cause  to  m.  the  house  of  Israel
Mic. 7. 17.  they  sh.  m.  outof  their  holes  like  worms
Mat.  23.4,  they  themselves  will  not  m.  them
Acts  17.  28.  for  in  him  we  live,  m.  have  our  being

20.  24.  none  of  these  things  m.  me,  nor  count  1
MOVEABLE.

Prov.  5.  6.  her  ways  are  m.  canst  not  know  them
MOVED.

Gen.  1. 2.  the  Spirit  of  God  m.  on  face  of  the  waters
7*  21.  all  flesh  died  that  m.  on  the  earth,  of  fowl
Deut.  32.  21.  they  have  m.  me  to  jealousy  with  that
Josh.  10.  21.  none  m.  his  tongue  against  Israel
15.  18.  m.  him  to  ask  of  father  a  field,  Judg.  1.  14.
Ruth  1.  19.  that  all  the  city  was  m.  about  them

1  Sam.  1 . 13.  she  spake  in  her  heart,  only  her  li  ps  m.

2  Sam.  18.  33.  the  king  was  much  m.  and  wept
22.  8.  the  foundations  of  heaven  m.  and  shook

24. 1.  he  m.  David  against  them,  to  say,  go  number

1  Chron.  16.  30.  fear  before  him,  the  world  shall  be

stable,  that  it  be  not  m.  Psal.  93.  1. 1  96.  10.
17.  9.  they  shall  dwell,  and  shall  be  m.  no  more

2  Chron.  18.  31.  God  m.  them  to  depart  from  him
Ezra  4.  15.  they  have  m.  sedition  of  old  time
Esth.  5. 9.  Hainan  saw  that  Mordecai  m.  not  for  him
Job  37.  1.  at  this  my  heart  is  m.  out  of  his  place

41. 2.3.  the  flakes  of  his  flesh,  they  cannot  be  m.
Psal.  10.  6.  1  shall  not  be  m.  16.  8.  1  30.  6.  1  62.  2,  6.

13.  4.  those  that  trouble  me  rejoice  when  I  am  m.

15. 5.  he  that  doeth  these  things  shall  never  be  m.

17.  t  5.  hold  up,  that  my  footsteps  be  notw.

18.  7*  foundations  of  the  hills  m.  and  were  shaken
21. 7.  the  kingtrusteth  in  Lord,  and  shall  not  be  m.
46.  5.  she  shall  not  be  rn.  God  shall  help  her

6.  the  heathen  raged,  the  kingdoms  were  m.

55.  22.  he  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be  m.
66.  9.  and  sutfereth  not  our  feet  to  be  m.

68.  8.  Sinai  was  m.  at  the  presence  of  God

78.  58.  they  m.  him  to  jealousy  witli  graven  images

82.  +  5.  the  foundations  of  the  earth  are  m.

99.  1.  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  be  m.

112.  6.  surelv  he  shall  not  be  m.  for  ever
121.  3.  he  will  not  suffer  thy  foot  to  be  m.

Prov.  12. 3.  the  root  of  the  righteous  shall  not  be  m.
Cant.  5.  4.  and  my  bowels  were  m.  for  him
Isa.  6.  4.  the  posts  of  thedoor  m.  at  the  voice  of  him

7.  2.  his  heart  was  m.  as  trees  are  m.  with  wind
10.  14.  ami  there  was  none  that  m.  the  wing

14.  9.  hell  front  beneath  is  m.  for  thee  to  meet  thee

19. 1.  the  idols  of  Egypt  shall  be  m.  at  his  presence

24.  19-  earth  is  broken  down,  and  m.  exceedingly
40.  20.  a  graven  image  that  shall  not  be  m.  41.  7.

Jer.  4.  24.  they  trembled,  andallthe  hills m.  lightly

25.  16.  they  shall  drink,  and  be  m.  and  be  ntad
46.  7-  whose  waters  are  m.  as  the  rivers,  8.

49.21.  the  earth  is  m.  at  the  noise  of  Edom’s  fall
50.  46.  at  the  taking  of  Babylon  the  earth  is  m.
Dan.  8.  7-  he  was  in,  with  c'holer  against  him

10.  t  10.  touched  me,  which  m.  me  on  my  knees
11.11.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  m.  with  choler
Mat.  9.  36.  he  was  m.  with  compassion  on  them,  14.

14.  1  18.  27-  Mark  1.  41.  1  6.  34.

20.  24.  were  m,  with  indignation  against  brethren

21.  10.  all  the  city  was  m.  saying,  who  is  this?
Mark  15.  11.  but  the  chief  priests  m,  the  people
Acts  2.  25.  on  ray  right  hand,  that  l  should  not  be  m.
7.  9.  patriarchs,  m.  with  envy, sold  Jos.  into  Egypt

17.5.  but  the  Jews  m.  with  envy, took  lewd  fellows

21.  30.  the  city  wasw.  and  people  ran  together

Col.  1.  2.3.  be  not  m.  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel

1  The'ss.  .3.  3.  that  no  man  be  m.  by  these  afflictions
Ileb.  11.  7.  Noah,  m,  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark

12.  28.  we  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  m.

2  Pet.  1.  21.  they  spake  as  m.  by  the  Holy  Ghost
Rev. 6.14.  every  mountain  and  island  m.  outof  place

MOVERS  T.

Job  2.  .3.  tho'  thou  m.  me  against  him  without  cause
Jer.  48.  +  27.  since  thou  spakest,  thou  m,  thyself
MOVER.

Acts  24.  5.  have  found  this  fellow  a  m.  of  sedition
MOVE  I  II.

Gen.  1.21.  God  created  every  living  creature  thatw.
28.  dominion  over  every  thing  that  m.  on  earth

9.  2.  the  fear  of  you  shall  be  on  all  that  m.  on  earth
Lev.  11.  46.  this  is  the  law  of  every  creature  that  m.
20.  t  25.  abominable  by  any  thing  that  m.

Job  40.  17-  Behemoth  m.  his  tail  like  a  cedar
Psal.  69.  34.  let  every  thing  that  m.  praise  him
Prov.  23.  31.  noton  wine  when  it  m.  itself  aright
*  Ezek.  4“  9.  that  m.  whithersoever  the  rivers  come
MOVING.

Gen.  1.  20.  let  the  waters  bring  forth  m.  creatures
9.  3.  every  m.  thing  shall  be  meat  for  you
Prov.  16.30.  m.  his  lips,  he  bringeth  evil  to  pass
Ilab.  1.  +  14.  makest  men  as  the  m.  things,  no  ruler
M O  V  I  NG,  Subs t anti ve.

Job  16.  5.  the  m.  of  my  lips  should  assuage  grief
John  5.3.  blind,  waiting  for  the  m.  of  the  water
MOULDY.

Josh.  9. 5.  the  bread  of  provision  was  dry  and  m.  12.
MOUNT,  1  NG.

Job  20.  6.  though  his  excellency  m.  up  to  the  heavens

39.  27-  doth  the  eagle  m.  up  at  thy  command  ?
Psal.  107.  26.  they  m.  up  to  heaven,  they  go  down
Isa.  9.18.  they  shall  m.  upas  the  lifting  up  of  smoke

15.  5.  by  thew.  up  of  Luhith  shall  they  go  up

40.  31.  they  shall  m.  up  with  wings,  as  eagles
Jer.  51.  53.  though  Babylon  should  m.  up  to  heaven
Ezek.  10. 16.  when  the  cherubims  lift  up  to  m.  up,  19.

MOUNT.

Gen,  31. 54.  Jacob  offered  rjtr/'.fice  „n  the  m.


Exod.  18.  5.  where  he  encamped  at  the  m.  of  Goo

19.  12.  whoso  toucheth  the  m.  shall  be  put  to  death
14.  Moses  went  down  from  the  m.  32. 15.  |  ,34  go1

16.  a  thick  cloud  upon  the  rn.  24.  15.

18.  m.  Sinai  on  a  smoke  ||  23.  bounds  about  the  m

24.  10.  the  glory  of  the  I.ord  abode  upon  m.  Sinai

17.  was  like  devouring  fire  on  the  top  of  m.

.31.  18.  the  Lord  gave  Moses  on  m.  Sinai  two  tables

32.  19.  and  Moses  brake  them  beneath  the  m.

31.2.  and  come  up  in  the  morning  to  m.  Sinai
3.  nor  let  any  man  be  seen  through  all  the  m.
Num.  10.  33.  they  departed  from  the  m.  of  the  Lorn

20.  22.  f  rom  Kadesh,  and  came  unto  m.  I  lor

25.  bring  up  to  m.  Uor  ||  28.  Aaron  died  in  m.  llor
34.  7.  you  shall  point  out  for  youw.  llor
Deut.  1.  6.  ye  have  dwelt  long  enough  in  this  rn.

7-  turn  you,  and  go  to  the  m.  of  the  Amorites
9. 15.  1  came  down,  and  the  m.  burned  with  firt
27.  13.  and  these  shall  stand  upon  m.  Ebal

32.  49.  get  thee  to  m.  Nebo,  which  is  in  Moab

33.  2.  the  Lord  shined  forth  from  m.  Paran
Judg.  4.  6.  go  and  draw  tow  ards  m.  Tabor

7-  3.  let  him  depart  early  from  m.  Gilead
9.  48.  Abimelech  gat  him  up  to  m.  Zalmon
2  Sam.  15.  .30.  David  went  up  by  the  ascent  of  m.
32.  the  top  of  the  m.  w  here  he  worshipped  God

1  Kings  19.  8.  Elijah  went  to  Uoreb,  the  m.  of  God

11.  go  and  stand  on  the  m.  before  the  Lord

2  Kings  23. 1.3.  on  right  T  end  the  m.  of  corruption
Neh.  8.  15.  go  to  the  m.  and  fetch  olive  branches

9.  13.  thou  earnest  down  also  on  m.  Sinai
Cant.  4. 1.  is  as  a  flock  of  coats  from  m.  Gilead
Isa.  10.  32.  the  m.  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  16.1.

14. 1.3.  I  will  sit  on  the  m.  of  the  congregation
27.  13.  shall  worship  in  the  holy  m.  at  Jerusalem
29.  3.  and  will  lay  siege  against  thee  with  a  m.
Jer.  6.  6.  hew  ye  down  trees,  and  cast  a  m.  against
Jerusalem,  Ezek.  4.  2.  |  21. 22.  |  26.  8.
Dan.  11. 15.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  cast  up  a  »,.
Chad.  8.  even  destroy  understanding  out  of  m.  Esau

21.  saviours  shall  come  to  judge  the  m.  of  Esau
I lab.  3.  3.  and  the  Holy  One  from  m.  Paran
Acts  7.  .30.  there  appeared  in  wilderness  of  m.  Sinai
Gal.  4.  24.  the  one  from  the  rn.  Sinai,  which  is  Agar

25.  for  this  Agar  is  m.  Sinai  in  Arabia

Deb.  12.  18.  not  come  to  the  m.  might  be  touched
See  Carmel,  Gerizim.

Before  the  MOUNT.

Exod.  19.  2.  and  there  Israel  camped  before  the  m,

34.  3.  neither  let  the  flocks  feed  before  the  m.

See  Ephraim.

In,  or  into  the  MOUNT.

Gen.  22.  14.  in  the  m.  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen
31. 23.  and  they  overtook  Jacob  in  the  m,  Gilead
54.  they  did  eat,  and  tarried  all  night  in  them.
Exod.  4.  27-  he  went  and  met  him  in  the  m.  of  God

19.  12.  take  heed  ye  go  not  up  into  the  m.  or

24.  12.  L.  said  to  Moses,  come  into  m.  Deut.  10. 1,
13.  Moses  went  up  into  the  m.  of  God,  15,  18.

18.  Moses  wras  in  the  m.  forty  days  and  forty

nights,  Deut.  9.  9.  1 10.  10.

25.  40.  look  thou  make  them  after  their  pattern
shewed  thee  in  the  m.  26.  30. 1  27-8.  Heh.  8.  5.

Num.  27.  12.  get  thee  up  into  m.  Abarim,  and  see
Deut.  32.  50.  die  in  the  m.  as  Aaron  died  in  m.  llor
Josh.  8-  30.  Joshua  built  an  altar  to  l  ord  in  m.  Ebal
2  Kings  23.  16.  Josiah  spied  the  sepulchres  in  the  rn.
2  Chr.  .3.  1 .  to  build  the  house  of  Lord  in  m.  Moriah
Isa.  28.21  for  the  L.  shall  rise  upas  in  m.  Perazini
Acts  7 ■  38.  the  angel  who  spake  to  him  in  m.  Sinai
2  Pet.  1. 18.  when  we  w  ere  with  him  in  the  holy  in.
See  Gilboa.

‘  MOUN  T  of  Olives.

Zech.  14.  4..  his  feet  shall  stand  on  the  m.  of  Okies,
the  m.  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof
Mat.  21. 1 .  they  were  come  to  m.  of  01.  Luke  19-  29.
24.  .3.  and  as  he  sat  upon  m.  of  Olives,  Mark  13.3.

26.  .30.  and  when  he  had  sung  an  hymn,  they  went
out  into  m.  of  Olives,  Mark  14.  26.  Luke  22.39.

Luke  19.  37.  he  was  at  the  descent  of  m.  of  Olives
21 . 37.  at  night  he  went  out,  and  abode  in  m.  of  01.
John  8.  1.  Jesus  went  unto  the  m.  of  Olives
Acts  1. 12.  then  they  returned  front  the  m,  of  Olives
See  Seir,  Zion.

MOUNTS.  ./■

Jer.  32.  24.  the  m.  are  come  to  the  city  to  take  it
33.  4.  the  houses  which  are  thrown  down  by  the  m.
Ezek.  17. 17-  nor  make  for  him,  by  casting  up  m.
MOUNTAIN  '

Signifies  [1]  A  vast  heap  of  earth  raised  to  a  great
height,  either  by  nature  or  art,  Prov.  8.  25.  [2]
The  church  of  God,  whereof  the  temple  built  on
mount  Sion  was  a  type,  Isa.  2.  2.  [3]  The  idola¬
trous  inhabitants  of  the  mountains,  Ezek.  6.  2.
[4]  Places  of  power  and  authority  in  a  kingdom,
Amos  4.  1.  [5]  High  places,  whereon  idols  were
worshipped ,  Isa.  57.  7-  Ezek.  18.  6.  [6j  Such

powerful  obstacles  as  hinder  the  progress  of  the
gospel,  Isa.  40.  4.  |  49.  11.  [7]  Idols  that  were

worshipped  in  mountains,  or  high  places,  Jer.  3.

2.3.  [8]  The  most  lofty  and  powerful  enemies,

Isa.  41.  15.

A  Catalogue  of  the  most  famous  mountains  men¬
tioned  in  Scripture.

Mount  Amalek,  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  Judg.

12.  15.

Mount  Calvary,  whereon  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  wat
crucified,  north-west  from  Jerusalem,  Luke  23.  33.

Mount  Carmel,  near  the  Mediterranean  sea.  be¬
tween  Dora  and  Ptolemais,  Josh.  19.  26.

Mount  Ebal,  near  to  Geriziin,  Josh.  8.  30.

The  mountain  of  Engedi,  near  the  Dead  sea,  Josh.

15.  62.

Mount  Gnash  in  tribe  of  Ephraim,  Josh.  24.  3C
Mount  Gilboa,  to  the  south  of  the  valley  of  Israel,
2  Sam.  1. 21 .

Mount  Gilead,  beyond  Jordan,  Gen.  31.  21, 28,
Mount  Geriziin,  whereon  was  afterwards  the  tem¬
ple  of  the  Samaritans,  Judg.  9.7-

Mount  liermon,  beyond  Jordan.  Josh.  11.3.
Mount  Hor,  in  Idumea,  Num.  30.  22.


M  O  U

Mount  Iloreb,  near  to  Sinai,  in  Arabia  Petrrea,
cut.  1.2.

Mi  unt  T  ebanon,  which  separate *  Syria  from
destine,  Dent.  3.  25.

Mount  Moriah,  where  the  temple  was  built,  2
iron.  3.  1.

Mount  N  ebo,  part  of  the  mountains  of  Abarim,
??//?.  32.  3.

The  mount  of  Olives,  which  stood  to  the  east  of
rusalem,  and  was  parted  from  the  city  only  by
»  brook  Kidron,  and  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.
was  otherwise  called.  The  mount  of  Corruption,
Kings  23.  13.  because  on  it  Solomon  built  high
ices  to  the  gods  of  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites,
f  of  complaisance  to  his  idolatrous  wives,  natives
these  nations,  1  Kings  11.  1.  7.  It  was  from  this
untain  our  Saviour  ascended  into  heaven,  Acts
12.

Mount  of  Paran,  in  Arabia  Petiasa,  Gen.  14.  6.
ut.  1.1..

Mount  Pisgah,  beyond  Jordan,  in  the  country  of
iab,  Num.  21.  20.  Dent.  31.  1.

Mount  Seir,  in  Idumea,  Gen.  14.  6.

Mount  Sinai,  in  Arabia  Petrasa,  Exod.  19.  2.
nit.  33. 2.

Mount  Sion,  near  to  mount  Moriah,  2  Sam.  5.  7.
Mount  Tabor,  in  the  lower  Galilee,  to  the  north
the  great  plain,  .1  udg.  4.  6.
n.  14. 10.  and  they  that  remained  fled  to  the  m.

'.  17.  escape  to  the  m.  ||  19.  1  cannot  escape  to  m.
od.  3. 1.  and  came  to  the  m.  of  G.  even  to  Horeb

2.  people  from  Egypt,  shall  serve  G.  on  this  m.

.  3.  the  Lord  called  to  him  out  of  the  m.  saying

.  18.  all  the  people  saw  the  m.  smoking
m.  14.  40.  they  gat  them  up  into  top  of  the  m.
ut.  1.  20.  ye  are  come  to  the  m.  of  the  Amorites

3.  ye  have  compassed  this  m.  long  enough

25.  let  me  see  that  goodly  m.  and  "Lebanon
11.  the  m.  burnt  with  fire  to  heaven,  5.  23.

.  19.  they  shall  call  the  people  to  the  m.

4.2.  16.  get  ye  to  the  m.  and  hide  yourselves
.  16.  Joshua  took  the  plain  and  the  m.  of  Israel
12.  give  me  this  m.  ||  17. 18.  the  m.  shall  be  thine
g.  1.  19.  he  drave  out  the  inhabitants  of  the  m
1.  Amorites  forced  children  of  Dan  into  the  m.
tm.  17.  3.  the  Philistines  stood  on  a  m.  on  the
one  side,  and  Israel  stood  on  aw.  on  other  side

26.  Saul  went  on  this  side  of  the  m.  and  David
and  his  men  on  that  side  of  the  m.


MOU


. . —  ■  ■  '  > 1  *  v,  1  1 1 1  c  //{ ,

mgs  2.  16.  the  Spirit  hath  cast  him  on  some  in

17.  the  m .  was  full  ofhorses  and  chariots
14.  18. surely  the  w.  falling  cometh  to  nought
1. 11.  1.  how  say  ye,  fiee  as  a  bird  to  your ’m.  ?
7.  thou  hast  made  my  m.  to  stand  strong
54.  brought  to  this  w.  his  rig  ht  hand  purchased
2.2.  the  w.  of  T,.  house  established,  TMic.  4.  1
let  us  go  up  to  the  m.  of  the  Lord,  Mic.  4.  2.

17.  until  ye  be  left  as  a  beacon  on  the  top  of  a  w

.  as  when  one  goeth  with  a  pipe  to  w.  of  Lord

4.  every  m.  shall  be  made  low,  Luke  3.  5.

16.  16.  they  shall  hunt  them  from  every  m.
3.0  my  w.in  the  field,  I  will  give  thy  substance

18.  Zion  plowed  like  a  field,  and  the  m.  of  the
house  as  high  places  of  the  forest,  Mic.  3.  12.

6.  my  people  have  gone  from  w.  to  hill

25.  1  am  against  theetj  O  destroying  m.  saitb
the  Lord,  and  I  will  make  thee  a  burnt  m.
(.5.  18.  our  eyes  are  dim,  because  ofw.  of  Zion
.  11.  2.3.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  stood  on  the  w.
16.  I  will  cast  thee  as  profane  out  ofw.  ofGod
12.  this  is  the  law  of  the  house  on  top  of  the  m

5.  Hariel,  the  m.  ofGod,  shall  be  four  cubits
.  2.  35.  and  the  stone  became  a  great  m.

the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  w.  without  hands

7.  12.  he  shall  come  to  thee  from  m.  to  m.
.1.8.  go  up  tow.  bring  wood  and  build  house
.4.7.  who  art  thou,  O  great  w.  before  Zerubb

.  be  called  the  m.  of  the  Lord,  the  holy  m.

4.  hall  ofw.  shall  remove  towards  the  north

•  5.  1.  and  seeing  the  multitudes,  he  went  up
into  a  w.  14.  23.  |  15.  29.  Mark  3.  13.  I  6  46
Luke  6.  12. 1  9.  28.  John  6.  3,  15.

.  when  he  was  come  down  from  the  m.

1.  Jesus  bringeth  them  into  an  high  w.  apart
and  as  they  came  down  from  the  m.  Mark  9.  9.
it  ye  have  faith,  as  a  grain  of  mustard,  shall
>' to  this//?,  remove  hence,  21.  21.  Mark  11.  23.
’6.  went  into  a  w.  where  Jesus  had  appointed

8.  32.  an  herd  of  many  swine  feeding  on  m.

12.  20.  if  so  much  as  a  beast  touch  the  m.

6. 14.  every  m.  and  island  were  removed  from
.  as  it  were  a  great  w.  burning  with  fire
High  MOUNTAIN.
i\S.  ‘ift  >’e  UP  a  banner  upon  the  high  m.
y- mere  shall  be  upon  every  high  m.  rivers

4.  O  Zion,  get  thee  up  info  the  high  m.

1.  on  a  lofty  and  high  m.  hast  thou  set  thy  bed

5.  6.  Israel  is  gone  up  u|)on  every  high  m.
U.22.  and  1  will  plant  it  on  a  high  m.

.'.he  brought  me,  ann  set  me  on  a  very  high  w.

4. 8.  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an  exceeding
y.  and  sheweth  kingdoms  of  world,  Luke  4.  5.

1.  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  James,  and  John,  and
bringeth  into  an  high  m.  apart,  Mark  9.  2.
2..  10.  he  carried  me  in  the  Spirit  to  high  m.
See  Holy.

In  the,  or  in  this  M  OUNTA  IN.

is  1-  t  went  fr?m  ^oar>apd  dwelt  in  the  m.

•  7 -Plant  them  in  the  m.  of  thine  inheritance

•  J7.  Moses  said  unto  them, go  up  into  the  m.

' 9  1  £? ,  ”’ee  UP  tn  this  m .  A  barim ,  to  N ebo

,  • ’  V?  b'ew  a  trumpet  in  the  m.  of  Ephraim
?*  n"  4’-  Uavid  remained  in  a  m.  of  Ziph

1  7;  Solomon  told  80,000  to  hew  in  the  m.
,^°*L  God  is  to  be  praised  in  the.  w.  of  holiness
■).  o.  in  this  m.  shall  the  Lord  make  a  feast
>e  will  destroy  in  this  m.  the  face  of  covering
sba*t  the  hand  of  the  Lord  rest
]i. 23.  in  them,  of  Israel  I  will  plant  it
4-  ye  kine,  that  are  in  the  rn.  of  Samaria
oe  to  them  that  trust  in  the  w.  of  Samaria
20.  our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  m.


John  A.  21.  neither  in  this  m.  nor  Jerusalem,  worship
t  ™  MOUNTAINS.  (the  Father
Gen.  7.  20.  m  were  cover.  |]  8.  4.  ark  rested  on  the  m.
8.  5.  in  tenth  month  tops  of  the  m.  were  seen
Num.  33.  48.  they  departed  from  the  m.  of  Abarim
Deut.  Yl.  2.  ye  shall  destroy  places  on  the  high  m
Josh.  11.  21.  Joshuacutoff  the  Anakims  from  them
Judg.  5.  5.  the  m.  melted  from  before  the  Lord
11.  37.  that  I  may  go  up  and  down  on  the  m
38.  she  bewailed  her  virginity  on  the  w
2  Sam.  1.  21.  ye  m.  of  Gilboa.'let  there  be  no  dew
1  hmgs  19.  11.  a  great  and  strong  wind  rent  t  ie  m

1  Chron.  12.  8.  were  as  swift  as  the  roes  on  the  m

2  Chr.  18.  16.  I  did  see  all  Isr.  scattered  on  the  rn
Job  9.  5.  which  removeth  the  m.  and  they  know  not

28.  9.  he  overturneth  the  m.  by  the  roots
40.  20.  surely  the  m.  bring  him  forth  food
Psal.  36.  6.  thy  righteousness  is  like  the  great  m
46.  2.  tho’  the  m.  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea
3.  though  them,  shake  with  the  swelling  thereof
65.  6.  by  his  strength  setteth  fast  the  m.

72.  3.  the  m.  shall  bring  peace  to  the  people
76.  4.  thou  art  more  glorious  than  the  m.  of  prev
83. 14.  as  the  flames  setteth  the  m.  on  fire
90.  2.  before  the  rn.  were  brought  forth
104.  6.  the  waters  stood  above  the  m.

8.  they  go  up  by  the  m.  down  by  the  valleys
114. 4.  m.  skipped  like  rams,  little  hills  as  lambs,  6
125.  2.  as  the  m.  are  round  about  Jerusalem
133.  3.  as  the  dew  that  descended  on  the  m.

144.  5.  touch  the  m.  and  they  shall  smoke'

147.  8.  who  maketh  grass  to  grow  on  the  m.

148.  9.  m.  and  all  hills  praise  the  Lord

Prov.  8.  25.  before  the  m.  were  settled,  before  the

r  ,  a  O  K  V  m  U  hiIls,  was  1  brought  forth
l ant.  2.  8.  behold,  he  cometh  leaping  on  the  m.

17.  turn,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe  oiTthe  m.  8.  14
4.  8.  look  from  Amana  and  the  m.  of  the  leopards
Isa.  2.  14.  the  day  of  the  Lord  shall  be  on  hDh  m
14.  25.  and  on  my  m.  tread  him  under  foot  °

18.  3.  when  he  litteth  up  an  ensign  on  the  m,

34.  3.  the  m.  shall  be  melted  with  their  blood'

40.  12.  who  hath  weighed  the  m.  in  scales

41.  15.  thou  shalt  thresh  them,  and  beat  small
42. 15.  and  1  will  make  waste  m.  and  hills

44.  23.  break  forth  into  singing,  ye  m.  49.  13.

49.  11.  and  1  will  make  all  my  m.  a  way
52.7.  how  beautiful  on  the  m.  are  feet,  \ah.  1,  15
54.  10.  for  the  m.  shall  depart,  the  hills  be  removed'
55. 12.  m.  shall  break  forth  before  you  into  singing

64.  1.  they/?,  might  Now  down  at  thy  presence^  3*

65.  7.  which  have  burnt  incense  on  the  m.

9.  will  bring  out  of  Judah  an  inheritor  of  my  m.
Jer.  4.  24.  I  beheld  the  m.  and  they  trembled

9.  10.  forthe  m.  will  1  take  up  a  weeping

13.  16.  before  your  feet  stumble  on  the  dark  m  j
17-  26.  shall  come  from  the  m.  bringing  offerings
31.  5.  shall  plant  vines  on  the  m.  of  Samaria  °

46.  18.  as  Tabor  among  the  m.  so  shall  ye  come

50.  6.  they  have  turned  them  away  on  the  m.

Lam.  4.  19.  our  peisecutors  pursued  us  on  the  m.
Ezek.  6.  2.  set  thy  face  toward  the  m.  of  Israel

3.  and  say,  ye  m.of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  Ld

7.  16.  they  shall  be  on  the  rn.  like  doves  of  valleys

18.  6.  and  hath  not  eaten  upon  the  m.  15.

11.  but  hath  eaten  on  the  m.  and  defiled

19.  9.  his  voice  should  no  more  be  heard  on  the  m.

22.  9.  and  in  thee  they  eat  upon  the  m.

31.  12.  upon  the  m.  his  branches  are  fallen

32.  5.  I  will  lay  thy  flesh  on  the  m.  and  fill  valleys
3.3.  28.  the  m.  of  Israel  shall  be  desolate
.34.  6.  my  sheep  wandered  through  all  the  m.

13. 1  will  feed  them  on  the  rrt.  of  Israel,  14.

I  .35.  8.  1  will  fill  his  m.  with  his  slain  men

12.  which  thou  hast  spoken  against  the  //?.  of  Israel

36.1.  prophesy  unto  the  m.  of  Israel,  and  sav,  sent.

of  Israel,  hear  the  word  of  the  Ford,  4!

8.  but  ve,  O  rn.  of  Isr.  shall  shoot  forth  branches
.37.22.  1  will  make  one  nation  on  the  m.  of  Israel
38.  8.  and  is  gathered  out  against  the  m.  of  Israel

20.  and  the  m.  shall  be  thrown  down

21. 1  will  call  a  sword  against  him  thro"  all  my  m.

39.2.  and  1  will  bring  thee  on  the  in.  of  Israel

4.  thou  shalt  fall  on  the  m.  of  Israel,  and  all  bands
17.  even  a  great  sacrifice  on  the  m.  of  Israel

Joel  2.  2.  as  the  morning  spread  upon  the  m.

3.  18.  that  the  m.  shall  drop  down  new  wine
Amos  1.  t  13.  because  they  divided  the  m.

3.  9.  assemble  yourselves  on  the  m.  of  Samaria
4. 1.3.  he  that  formeth  the  m.the  Lord  is  his  name
9.  13.  and  the  //?.  shall  drop  sweet  wine
Mic.  1.  4.  the  //?.  shall  be  molten  under  him
6. 1.  arise,  contend  thou  before  the  m.  let  the  hills
2.  hear  ye,  O  ye  m.  the  Lord  s  controversy
Nah.  1. 5.  the  m.  quake  at  him,  the  hills  melt
3.  18.  thy  people  is  scattered  on  the  m.  no  man
lJab.  .3.6.  the  everlasting m.  were  scattered,  the  hills

10.  them,  saw  thee,  and  they  trembled
Hag.  1.11.  1  called  for  a  drought  on  the//?.

Zech.  6.  1.  four  chariots  between  the //?.  of  brass
Mai.  1.3.  I  hated  Esau,  and  laid  his  m.  waste
Mat.  18.  12.  and  goeth  into  the  rn.  and  seeketh
24.  16.  let  them  which  be  in  Judea  flee  into  the//?.

1  Cor.  1.3.  2.  all  faith,  so  that  1  could  remove  rn.

Lev.  16.  20.  every  island,  and  the  m.  were  not  found
17.  9.  the  seven  heads  are  seven  //?.  on  which
In  the  MOUNTAINS.

Exod.  32. 12.  bring  them  out  to  slay  them  in  the  m.

A um.  .33. 47.  pitched  in  t.  rn.  of  Abarim,  before  Nebo
Dent.  2.  37.  thou  earnest  not  to  the  cities  in  the  m.
Josh.  10.  6.  the  kings  that  dwell  in  t.  m.  are  gathered
Judg. 6.2.  1  srael  made  them  dens  in  the  m.  and  caves
1  Sam.  26.  20.  as  one  doth  hunt  a  partridge  in  them.

1  Kings  5.  15.  eighty  thousand  hewers  in  the  m.

2  Chr.  21.  11.  he  made  high  places  in  m.  of  Judah
26.  10.  Uzziah  had  vine  dressers  in  the  m.

Isa.  13.  4.  the  noise  of  a  multitude,  in  the  m.  like
Mark  5.  5.  night  and  day  he  was  in  the  m.  and  tombs
Hah.  11.  38.  they  wandered  in  deserts  and  in  the  //?.

Of  the  MOUNTAINS.

Gen.  8.  5.  tops  of  the  m.  were  seen  in  the  tenth  month
22.  2  oflei  him  on  oneol  in.  I  will  teli  thee  of


MOU

num'  &  LBalak  brought  me  out  of  m.  of  the  east
Deut.  32.  22.  set  on  fire  the  foundations  of  the  /??.
33.  15.  for  the  chief  things  of  the  ancient  m.

Judg.  9.  25.  set  liers  in  wait  for  him  in  top  of  the  m
3b.  there  come  people  down  from  the  top  of  the  in.
thou  seest  the  shadow  of  the  m.  as  it  they  were  men
2 'A  m.  19.23.  1  am  come  up  to  height  ofm.  Isa.  37  24

an  tliey  arVv,et  with  ‘be  showers  of  the  m.
39.  8.  the  range  of  the  m.  is  ms  pasture
'If'  ^0-  1J-  }  know  all  the  fowls  of  the  m.  and  beast#
(-•  lb.  shall  be  an  handful  of  corn  on  top  of  the  m
/  rov.  27.  25.  and  herbs  of  the  in  are  gathered
Isa.  2.  2.  shall  be  established  in  top  ofm.  Mic.  4.  1.
‘7.  13.  and  shall  be  chased  as  the  chaff  of  the  ,,.

18.  6.  they  shall  be  left  to  the  fowls  of  them.

42.  11.  let  them  shout  from  the  top  of  the  m.

-  3-  23-  hoped  for  from  the  multitude  of  the  *«.
3y  44.  shall  take  witnesses  in  the  cities  of  the  m.
33.  13  in  citi  -s  </  the  /??.  shall  flocks  passagan:
Eftk.  6.  1.3.  their  slain  shall  be  in  the  tops  of  the  in.

<  •  7.  and  not  the  sounding  again  of  the  m.

4.  13.  they  sacrifice  on  the  tops  of  them.

" f el  f •  3- like  the  noise  of  chariots  on  tops  1  /  them.
Jonah  2.  6.  I  went  down  to  the  bottom  of  the
Zee/?.  i4.  5.  and  ye  shall  flee  to  the  valley  oj  them.
Eev.  6.  15.  hid  themselves  in  the  rocks  of  the  m
To  the  MOUNTAINS.

(-ant.  4.  6.  I  will  get  me  to  the  in.  of  myrrh
Isa .  22.  5.  it  is  a  day  of  trouble  and  crying  to  them,
one  b;  ‘nUS  sai'b  “)e  L.  to  the  in.  and  hills,  36.  1.
32.  6.  1  will  water  with  thy  blood  even  to  the  m.

3b.  1.  son  of  man,  prophesy  to  them,  of  Israel,  6.
"os.10.  k*  and  they  shall  say  to  them .  cover  us
i  1  there  was  nigh  to  the  m.  a  herd  of  swine
J.5.  14.  that  be  in  Judea  flee  to  the  m.  Lute  21  "1
Euke  23.  30,  begin  to  say  to  m.  fall  on  us,  Rev.  6  lfr
MOURN.  '

Gen.  23.  2.  Abraham  came  to  m.  for  Sarah
1  Sam.  16.  1.  how  long  wilt  thou  //?.  for  Saul  ?

7  N??//?.  3.  31.  rend  clothes,  and  m.  before  Abner
i  a^s  VK29'  °,lc*  Pr9Pbet  came  into  the  city  to  m.
14.  13.  all  Israel  shall  m.  for  him,  and  burv  him
/i  A  ‘b  9.  this  day  is  holy  to  the  Lord,  m.  not
Job  11.  he  made  an  appointment  to  /??.  with  him
o.  11.  that  those  which  m.  may  be  exalted  to  safety
14.  22.  and  his  soul  within  him  shall  in.

Psal.  55.  2. 1  //?  in  my  complaint,  and  make  a  noise
b.  11.  and  thou  rn.  at  the  last,  when  thy  flesh-
-9.  2.  when  the  wicked  bearrule,  the  people  m
Eccl.  3.  4.  a  time  to  m.  and  a  time  to  dance
Isa.  3.  26.  and  her  gates  shall  lament  and  m.

16.  7.  for  foundations  of  Kir-liareseth  shall  ye  m

19.  8.  fishers  shall  m.  ||  .38.  14.  I  did  //?.  as  a  do  e
59.  11.  we  roar  like  bears,  we  //?.  sore  like  doves
61.  2.  he  hath  sent  me  to  comfort  all  that  //?.

3.  to  appoint  them  that//?,  in  Zion  beauty  for  ashes
66.  10.  rejoice  tor  joy,  all  ye  that  rn.  for  her
Jer.  4.  28.  tor  this  shall  earth  //?.  and  heavens  black
12.  4.  h«w  long  shall  tiie  land  m.  herbs  wither?

48.  31.  my  heart  shall  in.  for  men  of  Kir-hereseth
Earn  1.4.  ways  of  Zion  do  //?.  because  none  come


Lzejc.  7.  12.  the  time  is  come,  let  not  the  seller  ?u.
27.  the  king  shall  m.  and  the  prince  be  clothed  '
24.  16.  yet  neither  shalt  thou  //?.  nor  w'eep
23.  ye  shall  pine  away  and  //?.  one  towards  another
31.  15.  1  caused  Lebanon  to  //?.  for  him
Hos.  4.3.  therefore  shall  the  land  //?.  and  languish
10.  5.  for  the  people  shall  m.  over  Samaria  °

Joel  1.  t>.  the  priests,  the  Lord's  ministers,//?.
Amos  1.2.  the  habitations  of  the  shepherds  shall  m

8.  8.  and  everyone  //?.  that  dwelleth  therein,  9.  5!
Zech.  12.10.  and  shall  m.  for  him  as  one  mourneth

12.  and  the  land  shall  rn.  everv  family  apart
Mat.  5.  4.  hlesseil  are  they  that  in.  for  they  shall

9.  15.  can  the  children  of  the  bride-chamber  ?/?.  z
24.  30.  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  m.

I . uke  6.  25.  woe  to  you  that  laugh,  for  ye  shall  m .
Jam.  4.  9.  be  afflicted,  and  m.  and  weep

Rev.  18.  11.  the  merchants  shall  weep  and  m
MOU  UN  ED.

Gen.  .37.  34.  Jacob  //?.  for  his  son  many  days
50.  .3.  Egyptians  in.  for  Jacob  seventy  days,  10.
Exod.  33.  4.  and  when  the  people  heard  these  evil
__  tidings,  they  m.  Num.  14.  39.

Num.  20.  29-  the  congregation  //?.  for  Aaron

1  Sam.  15.  35.  nevertheless  Samuel  m.  for  Saul

2  Sam.  1.  12.  and  they  m.  for  Saul  and  Jonathan

II. 26.  Bath-sheba  m.  for  Uriah  her  husband

1-3.  .37.  David  m.  for  his  son  Absalom  every  day
14.  2.  as  one  that  had  long  time  //?.  for  the  dead
1  Kings  1.3.  30.  and  they  rn.  over  the  man  ofGod
14. 18.  all  Israel  in.  for  Jeroboam’s  son

1  Chron.  7.  22.  Ephraim  their  father  m.  many  day#

2  Chron.  35.  24.  and  all  Judah  //?.  for  Josiah
Ezra  10.  6.  lie  rn.  for  the  transgression  of  them
Neh.  1.  4.  1  sat  down  and  //?.  certain  days

Zech.  7.  5.  when  ye  ni.  and  fasted,  did  ye  fast  to  me J
Mat.  11.  17.  and  saying,  we  have  rn.  unto  you,  and
ye  have  not  lamented,  Euke  j.  32.
Mark  16. 10.  and  she  told  them  as  tliey  m.  and  wept

1  Cor.  5.  2.  are  puffed  up,  and  have  not  rather  rn.

MOURN  EH.

2  Sam.  14.  2.  I  pray  thee,  feign  thyself  to  be  a  rn,

MOURNERS.

Job  29.  25.  I  dwelt  as  one  that  comforteth  the  m.
Eccl.  12.  5.  and  the  m.  go  about  the  streets
Isa.  57- 18. 1  will  restore  comforts  tohim  and  his  m
Hos.  9.  4.  sacrifices  shall  be  to  them  as  bread  of  rn,
MOURNETH.

2  Sam.  19.  1.  behold,  the  king  m.  for  Absaiom
Psal.  35. 14. 1  bowed  as  one  that//?,  for  Ids  motliei
88.  9.  mine  eye  //?.  by  reason  of  affliction
Isa.  24.  4.  the  earth  rn.  .3.3.  9.  117-  the  new  wine  m,
Jer.  12. 11.  my  vineyard  being  desolate  //?.  to  me
14.2.  Judah  m.  and  the  mates  thereof  languish
23.  10.  for  because  of  swearing  the  land  m.

Joet  1 . 10.  the  land  m.  tor  the  corn  is  wasted
Zech.  12. 10.  as  one  that  m.  for  his  first-horn
MOURNFULLY.

Mai.  3.  14.  what  profit  that  we  have  walked  m.
MOURNING

Signifies,  [1]  A  godly  sorrow  for  our  own,  or  /»

321


MOU


M  O  U


M  O  U


the  sms  of  others.  Mat.  5.  4.  [2j  A  moderate  sor¬
row  and  concern  for  the  afflictions  and  worldly
losses  that  befall  ourselves  or  others ,  Gen.  23.  1.  I
50  3  [31  Exceeding  great  and  most  grievous

lamentation ,  Mat.  24.  .30.  [4]  Judgments  and

calamities,  which  should  cause  most  bitter  mourn¬
ing,  Ezek.  2.  10.  .  ,  ,  .  c  ■  j

The  Hebrews,  at  the  death  of  their  near  friends  and
relations,  used  great  signs  of  griej  and  mourning.

They  wept,  tore  their  clothes,  smote  their  breasts,
fasted,  and  lay  upon  the  ground,  and  went  barejoot.

The  time  of  mourning  was  commonly  seven  days  ;

■but  sometimes  this  was  lengthened  or  shortened,
according  to  the  state  or  circumstances  in  which
they  found  themselves:  the  mourning  Jor  Saul
lasted  but  seven  days,  1  Sam.  31 .  1.3.  but  those  for
Moses  and  Aaron  were  prolonged  to  thirty  days,
■Num  20.  20.  Dent.  34.  8.  J  he  whole  time  of
their  mourning ,  the  near  relations  oj  the  deceased
continued  sitting  in  their  houses,  and  ate  upon  the
around ;  the  food  they  took  was  thought  unclean,
and  even  themselves  were  judged  impure.  1  heir
sacrifices  shall  be  to  them  as  the  bread  of  mourn-
-ers,  alt  that  eat  thereof  shall  be  polluted,  I! os.  9.

4.  Their  faces  were  covered,  and  for  all  that  time
they  could  not  apply  themselves  to  any  labour.
They  did  not  dress  themselves,  nor  make  their  beds,
nor  uncover  their  heads,  nor  shave  themselves,  nor
cut  their  nails,  nor  saluted  any  body.

•Gen.  27.  41.  thedaysof  m.  for  my  father  are  at  hand

50.  4.  and  when  the  clays  of  his  m.  were  past

10.  he  made  a  m.  for  his  father  Jacob  seven  days
1L  the  Canaanites  saw  the  m.  this  is  a  grievous  m.

Deut  °6.  14.  I  have  not  eaten  thereof  in  my  ®,

34.  8.  so  the  days  of  m.  for  Moses  were  ended
B  Sam.  11.  27.  when  the  m.  was  past  David  sent

19.  2.  the  victory  that  day  was  turned  into  ra.

Esth.  4.  3.  there  was  great  ot.  among  the  Jews
9.  22.  was  turned  to  them  trom  m.  into  a  good  day
Job  3.  8.  who  are  ready  to  raise  up  their  m.

30.  31.  my  harp  also  is  turned  to  m.  and  my  organ
Psal.  30.  11.  thou  hast  turned  my  m.  into  dancing
Eccl.  7.  2.  it  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of  ot.

4  the  heart  of  the  wise  is  in  the  house  of  w.

Isa.  22.  12.  in  that  day  the  Lord  did  call  tow.

51.  11.  and  sorrow  and  m.  shall  flee  away
■60.  20.  and  the  days  of  thy  m.  shall  be  ended
61.  3.  to  give  to  them  the  oil  of  joy  tor  m.

Jer.  6.  26.  make  thee  ot.  as  for  an  only  son
16.  5.  enter  not  into  the  house  pf  ot.  neither  go
31. 13.  for  1  will  turn  their  m.  into  joy
Lam.  2.  5.  increased  in  the  daughter  ot  Judah  m.

5.  15.  joy  is  ceased,  our  dance  is  turned  into  ot.
Ezek.1.  10.  was  written  lamentations,  m.  and  woe

24.  17.  no  m.  for  the  dead  [I  31.  15.  1  caused  a  m,
Joel  2  12.  turn  ye  to  me  with  weeping  and  m.

Amos  5. 16.  they  shall  call  the  husbandmen  to  ot
8  10  and  1  will  turn  your  feasts  into  m.  and  1
will  make  it  as  the  m.  of  an  only  son
Mic.  1. 11.  came  not  forth  in  the  m.  of  Betlyezel
Zecli.XI.W.m.  in  Jerusalem,  as  ot.  of  Hadadnmmon
Mat  A.  18.  was  heard  great  m.  ltachel  weeping
2  Cor.  7.  7.  when  he  told  us  your  desire,  your  m.
Jam.  4.  9.  let  your  laughter  be  turned  into  ot.

Rev  18.  8.  in  one  day  death  and  m.  and  famine
MOURNING.

Gen.  37.  35.  will  go  down  to  the  grave  to  my  son  m.

2  Sam.  14.  2.  I  pray  thee,  put  on  m.  apparel
Esth.  6.  12.  but  Hainan  hasted  to  his  house  m.

Job  30.  28.  1  went  m.  without  the  sun,  1  stood  up
Psal.  38.6.  1  am  troubled,  I  go  m.  all  day  long
42. 9.  why  go  1  m.  bee.  of  oppression  of  enemy ,  43.2.
Jer.  9.  17.  consider  ye,  and  call  for  the  m.  women
16  7-  in  m.  to  comfort  them  for  the  dead
Ezek.  7.  16.  all  of  them  m.  for  their  iniquities
Pan.  10.  2.  in  those  days  1  Daniel  was  m.  3  weeks
Mic.  1.8.  1  will  make  a  ot.  as  the  owls
MOUSE.

Lev.  11.  29.  the  weasel  and  m.  shall  be  unclean
Isa.  66.  17.  eating  the  abomination,  and  the  m.
MOUTH

Signifies  [1]  The  part  of  the  body  so  called,  which
is  an  instrument  of  speech,  Psal.  115.  5. 1  135.  17.
[21  Speech,  or  words  uttered  by  the  month,  Job  19-
16.  Psal.  73.  9.  Isa.  49.2.  [3]  Just  desires  and
necessities,  Psal.  103.  5.  [4]  7  he  palate.  Job  12.

11.  [5]  The  throat.  Psalm  149.  +  6.  [6]  A  door,
Daniel  3.  t  26.  [7  j  Freedom  and  boldness  of  speech,
Luke  21.  15.  [8]  Boasting,  Judg.  9-  38.  [9]

Reproaches  and  calumnies,  Job  5.  15.  [10]  A  tes¬
timony,  Deut.  17.  6.

If  ray  mouth  hath  kissed  my  hand,  Job  31.  27-
This  was  a  mark  or  token  of  worship  and  adoration,

1  Kings  19.  18.  IIos.  13.  2.  and  when  the  idols
were  out  of  the  reach  of  idolaters,  that  they  could
not  kiss  them,  they  used  to  kiss  their  hands,  and
as  it  were  to  throw  kisses  at  them:  Job  here  in¬
sinuates,  that  he  had  used  no  such  idolatrous  prac¬
tice,  while  he  beheld  the  sun  or  moon.  I  o  ask
counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  Josh.  9.  14.  is
to  consult  him.  They  set  their  mouth  against  the
heavens.  Psal.  73.  9.  They  speak  arrogantly,
insolently,  and  without  the  fear  of  God;  they  bid
■defiance  both  to  God  and  man,  blaspheming  God  s
■name,  denying  or  deriding  his  providence,  reviling
his  servants,  i|r.  God  appoints,  that  his  law  may
be  always  in  the  mouth  of  his  people,  Josh.  1.8.
•that  is,  That  the  Israelites  may  commune  fre¬
quently  with  one  another  about  it,  and  that  the
sentence  which  should  come  out  of  their  mouth,
■might  in  all  things  be  given  according  to  that
rule.  Moses  tells  us,  that  God  opened  the  mouth
of  Balaam's  ass,  Num .  22.  28.  He  made  her
speak  to  her  master,  and  reason  the  matter  with
■him  for  a  time.  Out  ot  the  abundance  of  the
heart  the  mouth  speaketh,  Mat.  12.  34.  Men  s
discourses  are  the  echo  of  the  sentiments  of  their
hearts  ;  your  speech  bewrays  the  wickedness  of  your
hearts.  Not  that  which  goeth  into  the  mouth
•defileth  a  man,  Mat.  15.  11.  It  is  neither  meat
nor  drink  that  makes  a  man  unclean  in  the  sight
of  God.

322


Gen  8  11.  and  lo,  in  her  m.  was  an  olive  leaf
24.  57.  call  the  damsel,  and  inquire  at  her  ot.

29  2  and  a  great  stone  was  upon  the  well  s  ot.

.3.  they  rolled  the  stone  from  the  well  s  m.  10.

31.  +  26.  slew  11  amor  with  the  ot.  of  the  swonl

42.  27.  his  money  was  in  his  sack’s  m.  43.  12,  21.

43.  f  7.  we  told  according  to  the  m.  of  these  words
45. 1 21.  gave  waggons,  according  to  ot.  ot  Pharaoh
Exod  4.  11.  Lord  said,  who  hath  made  man  s  w. .

16.  even  he  shall  be  to  thee  instead  of  a  m.

Num.  12.  8.  with  him  will  1  speak  m, .to  m.

16.  30.  the  earth  open  her  m.  and  swallow  them  up
23!  5.  the  l  ord  put  a  word  in  Balaam  s  ot.

35.  30.  whoso  kills  any  person,  shall  be  put  to  death

by  the  tn,  of  witnesses,  Dent •  If.  o.  I  19.  lo«
Josh.  9.  t  2.  they  gathered  together  with  one  m
10.  18.  roll  great  stones  on  the  m.  of  the  cave,  ft .

2°  open  m.  of  cave,  and  bring  out  the  tive  kings

1  Sam.  1.  12.  as  she  prayed,  Eli  marked  her  m.

2  Sam.  14.  3.  so  Joab  put  the  words  in  her  ot.  19.

17.  19.  she  spread  a  covering  over  the  well  sm.

1  Kings  19.  18.  every  m.  that  hath  not  kissed  him
22.  13.  the  words  of  the  prophets  declare  good  to

the  king  with  one  m.  2  C '/iron.  18.  +  12.

22.  I  will  go  forth  and  be  a  lying  spirit  m  the  w.

of  his  prophets,  23.  2  Chron.  18.  21,  22.

2  Kings  10.  +  21.  ivas  so  full,  that  they  stood  m.  to  m.

21.  t  16.  till  he  filled  Jerusalem  from  m.  to  ot.

2  Chron.  35.  22.  heark.  not  to  N  echo  from  tn.  ot  God

36  21.  to  fulfil  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  m.  ot
Jeremiah,  22.  Ezra  1.  1.
Esth.  7.  8.  as  the  word  went  out  of  the  king’s  m.

Job  5. 16.  poor  hath  hope,  iniquity  stoppeth  her  m.

12.  11.  doth  not  the  m.  taste  his  m.  i  34.  3.

32  5.  there  was  no  answer  in  the  m.  ot  these  men
Psal.  8.  2.  outof  m.  of  babes  hast  ordained  strength

22.  21.  save  me  from  the  lion’s  m.  for  thou  heardest
32.  9.  whose  m.  must  be  held  in  with  Git  and  bridle

37.  30.  the  m.  of  the  righteous  speaketh  wisdom

38.  14.  and  in  whose  ot.  are  no  reproofs
63.  11.  but  ot.  that  speaketh  lies  shall  be  stopped
69.  15.  let  not  the  pit  shut  her  m.  upon  me
I07.  42.  and  all  iniquity  shall  stqp  her  m.

109.  2.  m.  of  wicked,  ot.  of  deceitful  are  opened
126.  2.  then  was  our  m.  filled  with  laughter
141.  7.  our  bones  are  scattered  at  the  grave  s  ot.

144.  8.  whose  ot.  speaketh  vanity,  11.

Prov.  4.  24.  put  away  trom  thee  a  troward  m,

5.  .3.  and  her  ot.  is  smoother  than  oil

6.  12.  wicked  man  walketh  with  fro  ward l  ot.  10.  32.

8.  13.  proud,  and  the  troward  w.  do  1  hate
10  6  violence  covereth  the  w.  or  the  wicked,  11.

14.  the  m.  of  the  foolish  is  near  destruction
31.  the  ot.  of  the  just  bringeth  forth  wisdom

11.  if.  the  city  is  overthrown  by  ot.  ot  the  wicked

12.  6.  the  ot.  of  the  upright  shall  deliver  them

14.  3.  in  the  tn.  of  the  foolish  is  a  rod  ot  pnde

15.  2.  the  m.  of  fools  poureth  out  foolishness
14.  the  ot.  of  fools  feedeth  on  foolishness
28.  the  ot.  of  the  wicked  poureth  out  evil  things

18.  4.  the  words  of  a  man’s  ot.  are  as  deep  waters
7.  a  fool’s  w.  is  his  destruction,  and  Ins  lips

19.  28.  the  ot.  of  the  wicked  devoureth  iniquity
22.  14.  the  ot.  of  a  strange  woman  is  a  deep  pit
26!  7.  so  is  a  parable  in  the  ot.  of  tools,  9.

28.  and  a  flattering  ot.  worketh  ruin
30.  20.  she  eateth,  and  wipeth  her  w.  and  saitn
Eccl.  10.  12.  words  of  a  wise  man’s  ot.  are  gracious
Pa.  9.  12.  they  shall  devour  Israel  with  open  m

17.  an  evil  doer,  and  every  ot.  speaketh  tolly
57.  4.  against  whom  make  ye  a  wide  m.  ?

59.  21.  my  Spirit  not  depart  out  of  ot.  of  thy  seed

Jer.  32.  4.  shall  speak  with  him  ot.  to  ot.  34.  3.

36. 4.  Baruch  wrote  from  w.of  Jerem.  27 , 32.  1  45. 1
44.  17.  what  thing  goeth  forth  out  ot  our  ot.

26  no  more  named  in  ot.  of  any  rnan  of  Judah
Lam.  3.  38.  outof  the  ot.  of  Most  High  proceedeth
Ezek.  21.  22.  to  open  the  ot.  in  the  slaughter

29.  21.  I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the  w.

Dan.  3.  26.  came  near  to  the  ot.  of  the  furnace

4.  31.  while  the  word  was  in  the  king  sot.

6. 17.  a  stone  brought,  and  laid  on  the  ot.  of  the  den
7.  5.  it  had  three  ribs  in  w.  ot  it  between  teeth
8.  there  was  a  ot.  speaking  great  things,  20.

Has.  2.  17.  take  the  names  of  Baalim  out  of  her  ot.
Amos  3.  12.  as  a  shepherd  taketh  outot  the  ot.

Nab.  .3.  12.  shall  even  fall  into  the  ot.  ot  the  eater
Zecli.  5.  8.  cast  the  weight  of  lead  on  the  ot.  of  it
Mat.  4.  4.  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  w.  ot  God
12.  34.  abundance  of  the  heart  the  ot.  speaketh
15  11.  what  goeth  into  the  ot.  defileth  not

18.  16.  that  in  the  ot.  of  two  or  three  witnesses
every  word  may  he  established,  2  Cor.  13.  1.

21.  16.  outof  the  m.  of  babes  hast  perfected  praise
Luke  1.  70.  as  he  spake  by  m.  of  his  holy  prophets
21.  15.  for  1  will  pive  you  a  m.  and  wisdom
Acts  1.  16.  Holy  Ghostspakeby  w.  of  David,  4.  25.

3  18.  God  shewed  by  ot.  of  all  his  prophets,  21.

15.  27.  who  shall  tell  you  the  same  things  by  ot.

23.  2.  commanded  them  to  smite  him  on  the  w.
Rom.  3. 14.  whose  ot.  is  full  of  cursing  and  bittern.
19.  that  every  ot.  may  be  stopped,  and  all  world
10.  10.  with  the  ot.  confession  is  made  to  salvation
15.  6.  that  ye  may  with  one  ot.  glorify  God

1  Cor.  Q.  Q.  thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  w.  ot  the  ox

2  Tim.  4.  17-  I  was  delivered  out  of  ot.  ot  the  lion
Jam.  3.  10.  outof  the  same  ot.  proceedeth  blessing
Rev.  13.  5.  given  to  him  a  ot.  speaking  blasphemies

16  1.3  the  spirits  came  out  of  ot.  of  the  dragon

His  MOUTH.  .  .

Gen.  25.  +  28.  loved  Fsau,  for  venison  was  in  hism.
Exod.  4. 15.  put  words  in  his  ot.  1  will  be  with  Ins  m.
Num.  23.  16.  God  put  a  word  in  hism.  and  said,  go
30  2  accord,  to  all  that  proceedeth  outot  his  ot.
Deut.  18.  18.  and  1  will  put  my  words  in  his  ot.

1  Sam.  14.  26.  but  no  ot.  put  his  hand  to  his  ot.  27.

17  35  1  went  and  delivered  it  out  ot  his  m.

2  Sam.  17.  +  5.  and  let  us  hear  what  is  in  Ins  m.

18.  25.  if  he  be  alone,  there  is  tidings  inAw  ot.

22.  9.  and  fire  out  of  his  ot.  devoured,  Psal.  18.  8.

1  Kings  8.  15.  spake  with  his  ot.  to  Dav.  2  C/ir.6.  1.

2  Kings  4.  34.  and  he  put  his  m.  on  his  m.


1  Chr.  16.  12.  remember  the  judgments  of  hism.
Job  15.  30.  by  the  breath  of  Mr  ot.  he  shall  goaway

20.  12.  though  wickedness  be  sweet  in  his  m.

*13.  though  fie  keep  it  still  within  his  m.

22.22.  receive,  1  pray  thee,  the  law  from  his  tn.
23.  12.  1  have  esteemed  the  words  of  his  m.  more

37.  2.  and  the  sound  that  goeth  out  of  hism.

40!  23.  that  he  can  draw  i  p  Jordan  into  his  m.

4l!  19.  outof  his  ot.  go  burning  lamps  and  sparks

21 .  and  a  flame  goeth  out  ot  his  ot.

Psal.  10  7 .his  ot.  is  full  of  cursing  and  deceit
33.  6.  trie  host  of  them  made  by  breath  of  his  m.  f
36.  3.  the  words  of  his  m.  are  iniquity  and  deceit

38.  13.  as  a  dumb  man  that  openeth  not  his  m.

5o'  21.  words  of  hism.  are  smoother  than  butter  1
105.  5.  remember  the  judgments  of  his  m.

Prov.  2.  6.  out  of  his  ot.  cometh  knowledge
11.9.  hypocrite  with  hism.  destroveth  neighbour

12.  14.  satisfied  with  good  by  the  fruit  of  fo  m.

13.  2.  a  man  shall  eat  good  by  the  fruit  of  his  m,
3.  he  that  keepeth  his  ot.  keepeth  his  life

15.  23.  a  man  hath  ioy  by  the  answer  ot  hism.

16.  10.  his  m.  transgresseth  not  in  judgment
23.  the  heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  his  m.

26.  for  himself,  for  his  ot.  craveth  it  ot  him

18  6.  and  his  m.  calleth  for  strokes

20  shall  be  satisfied  with  the  fruit  of  his  m.

19  24.  will  not  so  much  as  bring  it  to  his  tn.  26.  15.
20.  17.  but  hism.  shall  be  filled  with  gravel

21  23.  whoso  keepeth  his  m.  keepeth  lnssoul
Eccl.  6.  7.  all  the  labourof  a  man  is  for  his  m.

10.  13.  beginning  of  words  of  his  m.  is  foolishness
Cant.  1.  2.rlet  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  m.
5  16.  his  w.  is  most  sweet,  this  is  my  beloved
Isa.  11.  4.  smite  the  earth  w-ith  the  rod  of  his  m.

53.  9.  neither  was  any  deceit  in  Ins  ot.

Jer.  9.  8.  one  speaketh  peaceably  with  hism.

20.  and  let  your  ear  receive  the  word  ot  his  m.
36  17. how  didst  thou  write  all  these  wordsat  his  m
51  44  bring  out  of  his  ot.  that  which  heswallowec
Lam.  1.  t  18.  for  1  have  rebelled  against  his  m.  !

3  29.  be  putteth  his  m.  in  the  dust,  it  so  be  there
4’  4.  the  tonsue  cleaveth  to  the  roof  ot  his  m.

Zech  9.  7.  I  will  take  away  his  blood  outot  hum
Mai  2.  6.  the  law  of  truth  was  in  his  m.

7.  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  m.

Luke  1.  64.  and  his  m.  was  opened  immediately  I

4  22.  gracious  words  proceeded  out  ot  his  m.

6.  45.  of  the  abundance  of  heart  his  m.  speaketh
11. 54.  seeking  to  catch  somew;hat  out  of  his  m  !
22  71.  ourselves  have  heard  ot  his  own  m.

John  10.  20.  tilled  a  spunge  and  put  it  to  hum.
Acts  22.  14.  and  shouldest  hear  the  voice  ot  his  m,
2  Thess.  2.  8.  shall  consume  w  ith  the  spirit  os  ins  wj
1  Pet.  2.  22.  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  m.  J
Rev.  i  .l'fi'oiit  of  his  tn.  went  a  sharp  sword,!  9.15,2
1°  15  the  serpent  cast  outot  hism.  water
16.  the  flood  which  the  dragon  cast  outot  his  m
13.  2.  and  his  tn.  was  as  the  mouth  ot  a  non
See  Loud.

My  MOUTH.

Gen.  45.  12.  that  it  is  my  m.  that  speaketh  to  you  ■
Num  22.  38.  the  wordG.  putteth  in  my  ot.23.  15
Vent'.  32.  1.  hear,  O  earth,  the  words  ot  my  m.

1  Sam  2.  1.  my  ot.  is  enlarged  over  mine  enemie
Job  7.  11.  therefore  1  will  not  refrain  my  m.

9.  20.  mine  own  w.  shall  condemn  me
16.  5.  1  would  strengthen  you  with  my  m.

10  16.  1  entreated  my  servant  with  my  m.

23.  4.  1  w  ould  fill  my  ot.  with  arguments
31.  27.  or  my  m.  hath  kissed  my  hand
30.  neither  have  1  suffered  my  m.  to  sin

33.  2.  behold  my  tongue  hath  spoken  in  my  m.
40.  4.  1  am  vile,  1  will  lay  my  hand  upon n:y  »:
Ps.  17.  3.  purposed  that  mym.  shall  not  transgi't

19.  14.  let  the  words  of  my  m.  be  acceptable

34.  1.  his  praise  shall  continually  be  111  my  m.

39.  1.  1  said,  1  will  keep  my  tn.  with  a  buule
40. 3.  he  hath  put  a  new'  sons  in  my  ot.  even  prais
49.  3.  hear  this,  my  ot.  shall  speak  of  wisdom
51.  15.  and  my  ot.  shall  shew  forth  thy  praise
54.2.  hear  and  give  ear  to  the  words  ot  mym.
63.5.  my  w.  shall  praise  thee  w  ith  joyful  lips
66.  14.  mym.  hath  spoken  when  1  was  lniroutm

17. 1  cried  to  him  with  my  ot.  he  w  as  extolled!
71.8.  let  mym.  be  filled  with  thy  praise

15.  mym.  shall  shew  forth  thy  righteousness  j
78. 1.  incline  your  ears  to  the  w  ords  ot  my  »•

2. 1  will  open  my  m.  in  a  parable,  J
89.  1 .  with  my  ot.  will  l  make  known  thy  faitntu
109.  30.  1  will  greatly  praise  the  l  ord  with  my
119.  43.  take  not  the  word  of  truth  out  of  my  >'

103.  thy  w'ordsare  sw  eeter  than  honey  to  my
108.  accept  the  free-will  offerings  ot  mym.
137.  6.  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  too!  ot  my  >
141.  3.  seta  w'atch,  o  1  ,ord,  before  mym.
145.21.  my  ot. shall  speak  the  praise  ot  the  Lorj
Prov.  4.  5.  nor  decline  trom  the  w'ordsot  mym.  I

7.  24.  O  children,  attend  to  the  words  ot  mym

8.  7-  for  my  m.  shall  speak  truth,  and  wicicei
8.  the  words  of  my  m.  are  in  righteousness

Isa.  6.  7.  and  he  laid  the  coal  on  my  tn.  and  sai
30.  2  go  to  Egypt,  and  have  not  asked  at  my  ’■  ■
34.  16.  for  my  m.  it  hath  commanded
45.  23.  word  is  gone  out  of  my  ot.  in  nghteoun

48.  3.  the  former  things  went  forth  out  ot  my

49.  2.  he  hath  made  my  ot.  like  a  sharp  sw<

55.  1 1.  so  shall  my  word  he  that  goeth  out  ot  »<!\-

Jer  1.0  I  d.  put  torth  his  hand  and  touched  ».
15. 19.  shalt  be  as  my  m.  ||  36.  6.  written  from
Ezek.  3.  3.  it  was  in  my  m.  like  honey  to!  sw  eei
17.  therefore  hear  the  word  at  my  m. .•»■>•  <•

4.  14.  nor  came  there  abominable  flesh  11.10  nm
Van.  10.  3.  neither  came  flesh  nor  w me  m  W
Dos.  6.  5.  1  have  slain  them  by  the  words  ot  m
Mat.  13.  35.  1  will  open  my  ot.  in  parables
Acts  11.8.  hath  at  any  time  entered  into  my  ,
15.  7.  the  Gentiles  bv  my  m.  should  hear  me
V.ph.  6.  19.  praying  that  1  may  open  wy"-1
Rev.  2.  16.  1  w  ill  fight  with  the  sword  ot  »l  ■
3.16  nor  cold  nnrhot,  l  will  spue  thee  out 0.  >/.  •
10.  10.  the  book  was  in  my  tn.  sweet  as  i"  '*  •


M  O  U


M  U  C


M  U  L


AlOJTlI  with  opened.

.  4. 11 .  earth  open,  her  ot.  to  receive  broth,  blood
<>.  16. 32.  the  earth  opened  her  m.  and  swallowed
them  up,  and  their  houses,  26.  10.  Deui.  11.6.
28.  Lord  opened  the  ot.  of  the  ass,  and  she  said
11.  35.  1  have  opened  my  «.  to  the  Lord,  36.


•  *  v  •  VV  I  lit,  LlUl  tl  )  .JU,

J.  1.  opened  Job  his  ot.  and  cursed  his  day
23.  and  they  opened  their  m.  wide,  Psal.  35.  21.

2.  1  pray,  hear,  behold  now  I  have  open,  my  m.

•  39.  9.  1  was  dumb,  l  opened  not  my  m.  because
,2.  ot.  o t  the  deceitful  are  opened  against  me

.  131.  1  opened  my  ot.  and  panted,  for  1  longed

5. 14.  hell  hath  opened  her  m.  without  measure
14.  there  was  none  that  opened  ot.  or  peeped

7 .  he  was  oppressed,  yet  he  opened  not  his  in.

.  3. 2. 1  open,  my  m.  and  he  caused  me  to  eat  it
7-  thy  ot.  bee.  to  him  which  is  escaped,  33. 22.

.  10. 16.  then.I  opened  my  ot.  and  spake,  and  said
.  5. 2.  he  opened  his/w.  and  taught  them,  saving
27-  when  thou  hast  opened  his  m.  thou  shaft  find
;  1.64.  his  m. was  opened  immediately ,  and  spake
8. 32.  like  a  lamb  dumb,  so  opened  he  not  his  ot.
Philip  opened m.  |J  10.  34.  Peter  opened  m.  said
.  6.  11.  O  Corinthians,  our  ot.  is  opened  to  you

12. 16.  earth  opened  her  ot.  and  helped  woman

3.  he  opened  his  ot.  in  blasphemy  against  God

MOUTH  with  openeth.

■  38.  13.  as  a  dumb  man  that  openeth  not  his  ot.
.24.7-  a  tool  openeth  not  his  m.  in  the  gate

26.  she  openeth  her  ot.  with  wisdom

Their  MOUTH.

.  21.  +  5.  by  their  ot.  every  controversy  be  tried
.  7. 6.  lapped,  putting  their  hand  to  their  m.

8.  t  17.  1  sent  them,  and  put  words  in  theii  m.
9. 20.  withheldest  not  thy  manna  from  their  in.
1.  15.  but  he  saveth  the  poor  from  their  in.

10.  they  have  gaped  upon  me  with  their  m.

).  the  princes  laid  their  hand  on  their  m.
their  tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  their  in.

•  5.  9;  there  is  no  faithfulness  in  their  m,

10.  with  their  ot.  they  speak  proudly

13.  their  posterity  delight  in  their  m.
i.  break  their  teeth,  O  G.  in  their  m.  break  out
f •  behold  they  belch  out  with  their  in.

for  the  sin  ot  their  m.  and  words  of  their  lips
.  they  bless  with  their  m.  but  curse  inwardly
).  they  set  their  ot.  against  the  heavens

6.  they  did  (latter  him  with  their  m.  and  lied
6.  let  the  high  praises  of  God  be  in  their  in.

•9. 13.  this  people  draw  near  me  with  their  m.

'•  28.  and  truth  is  cut  off  from  their  m.

.  thou  art  near  in  their  ot.  far  from  their  reins

2. 16.  enemies  have  open,  their  m.  against  thee
33.  31.  with  their  ot.  they  shew  much  love
0.  L  will  deliver  my  flock  from  their  m.

6. 12.  their  tongue  is  deceitful  in  their  in.

.  they  shall  lay  their  hand  011  their  m.

3. 13.  nor  a  deceitful  tongue  found  in  their  m

14.  12.  tongue  shall  consume  away  in  their  ot.
15. 8.  this  peop.  drawethnii-h  tome  with  th.  in.
10.  their  in.  speaketh  great  swelling  words

9.  19.  their  power  is  in  their  ot.  and  tails
.  it  any  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of  th.  m

•  and  111  their  in.  was  found  no  guile

Thy  MOUTH.

4. 12.  I  will  be  with  thym.  and  teach  thee,  15.

.  that  the  Lord’s  law  may  be  in  thy  m.

3.  make  no  mention  of  other  gods  out  of  thy  m.
23.  23.  keep  that  hast  promised  with  thy  m.

4.  word  is  nigh  to  thee,  in  thy  m.  Rom.  10.  8.

1.  8.  book  of  the  law  not  depart  out  of  thy  m

9.  38.  then  said  Zebul,  where  is  now  thy  m.  ?
it  thou  hast  opened  thy  m.  to  the  Lord

9.  lay  thine  hand  upon  thy  m.  Prov.  30.  32.

•  1.  16.  thy  m.  hath  testified  against  thee  ”
gi  8.  24.  thou  spakest  with  thy  m.  2  Chr.  6  15
4.  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy  m.  is  truth

words  ot  thy  m.  be  like  a  strong  wind
nil  he  fill  thym.  with  laughing,  and  thy  lips
tor  thy  m.  uttereth  thine  iniquity
nue  own  m.  condemneth  thee,  and  not  I

-  ^dest  such  w  ords  go  out  of  thy  m

h.  behold,  1  am  according  to  thym.

27.  doth  the  eagle  mount  up  by  thy  m.?
oO.  16.  shouldest  take  my  covenant  in  thy  in.
hou  givest  thy  in.  to  evif  ||  81.  10.  open  thy  m.

).  who  satisfieth  thy  m.  with  good  things
*:’•  have  declared  all  the  judments  of  thy  ni
;"e  ‘aw  of  thym.  is  better  to  me  than  gold
>0  shah  1  keep  the  testimony  of  thy  m.

*•  o  fn  ‘)e<|r  the  \vords  of  thy  m.

0.  ..  thou  art  snared  with  the  words  of  thy  m.
let  another  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own  m.
open  thy  m.  tor  the  dumb,  in  the  cause  of  all
?e“  t!‘V  w- .MJdge  righteously,  and  plead  cause

i. -.  be  not  rash  with  thy  m.  to  utter  any  thing

-  nY  C  l^  m‘  Cltuse  thy  flesh  to  sin
1.9.  the  roof  of  thym.  like  the  best  wine

•  10.  1  nave  put  my  words  in  thym.Jer.  1.  9
.  which  I  put  in  thy  m.  not  depart  out  of  t.  m.

H.  1  will  make  my  words  in  thym.  fire

-  |  open  thy  m.  and  eat  that  1  give  thee
niiue  thy  tongue  clea\e  to  roof  of  thy  m.
w  ill  open  thy  in.  and  th.ou  slialt  say  to  them

was  not  mentioned  by  thym.
thou  may  est  never  open  thy  m.  any  more

•  l.  set  the  trumpet  to  thy  m.  he  shall  come

doors  of  thy  m.  from  her  that  lieth
in  n'  .5>utoi.  thine  own  in.  will  1  judge  thee
no  -V  <i?  nt53  V1**1  lhv  m ■  the  Lord  Jesus
•  J.  it  shall  be  m  thym.  sweet  as  lionev
ot  .  Your  MOUTH.
o'  9  i  ,  ^ "hich  proceeded  out  of  your  in.
-•>.  let  not  arrogancy  come  out  of  your  m.

is  ioHlu  lne’  aflcl  lil>’  >'our  hand,  on  your  m.
o.  13.  thus  with  your  m.  ye  have  boasted
°r'i  ‘he  wine  is  cut  off  from  your  in.

■  '-9.  let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed
utot  your  m.  but  what  is  edifying,  Col.  3  8

•  mouths.

Yi.  ,  "  nte  t,li5  sonS>  Pllt  if  in  their  m.
i  ht  forgotten  <  ut  ot  m.  of  their  seed


I  Sam.  13.  f  21.  yet  they  had  a  file  with  m.

Psal.  22.  13.  they  gaped  upon  me  with  their  in.
78.  30.  while  their  meat  was  yet  in  their  m.

115.  5.  they  have  ot.  but  they  speak  not,  135.  16
135.  17.  neither  is  there  any  breath  in  their  in.

Isa.  41.  t  15.  a  new  threshing  instrument  having  m.
52.  15.  the  kings  shall  shut  their  m.  at  him
Jer.  44.  25.  ye  and  wives  have  spoken  with  your  m.
Lam.  3.  46.  our  enemies  opened  their  m.  against  us
Dan.  6.  22.  my  God  hath  shut  the  lions’  m.

Mtc.  .3.  5.  and  he  that  putteth  not  into  their  m.
lit.  1.  11.  deceivers,  whose  m.  must  be  stopped
lleb.  11.  .33.  who  stopped  the  ot.  of  lions
Jam.  .3.  .3.  behold,  we  put  bits  in  the  horses’  ot.
Rev.  9. 17.  Out  of  their  ot.  issued  tire  and  smoke,  18.
MOWER.

Psal.  129.  7-  wherewith  the  w.filleth  not  bis  hand
MOWINGS.

Amos  7.  1,  the  latter  growth  after  the  king’s  m.
MOWN.

Psal.  72.  6.  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  m.  grass
„  MUCH.

Gen.  26. 16.  for  thou  art  in.  mightier  than  we
Exod.  12.  42.  it  is  a  night  to  be  in.  observed

16.  18.  he  that  gathered  m.  2  Cor.  8.  15.

Lev.  13.  7.  if  the  scab  spread  m.  abroad,  22.  27,  .35.
Num.  21.4.  soul  ot  the  people  was  m.  discouraged
Ueut.  28.  .38.  shall  carry  m.  seed  out  into  the  field
dnsh.  22.  8.  return  with  in.  riches  to  your  tents
Ruth  1.  13.  it  grieveth  me  m.  for  your  sakes
1  Sam.  14.  30.  had  there  been  a  ot.  greater  slaughter

18.  .30.  so  that  his  name  was  m.  set  by

19.  2.  but  Jonathan  delighted  m.  in  David
26.  24.  as  thy  life  was  m.  set  by  this  day,  so  let

m>'  be  m.  set  by  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord

1  Kings  4.  29.  Solom.  had  understand,  exceeding  m.

2  Kings  10.  18.  but  Jehu  shall  serve  him  m.

21.6.  Ahab  wrought  ot.  wickedness  in  sight  of  Ld

2  Chron.  27.  3.  on  the  wall  of  Ophel  he  built  m.

33.  6.  Manasseh  wrought  m.  evil  in  sight  of  Lord
Lzra  10.  13.  and  it  is  a  time  of  m.  rain,  not  able
Y eh.  9.  37.  ltyieldeth  m.  increase  unto  the  kings
Job  5.  t  25.  know  that  thy  seed  shall  be  in.

31.  25.  because  mine  hand  had  gotten  m.

Psal.  19.  t  1.3.  shall  be  innocent  from  m.  transgress.
129.  t  1.  m.  have  they  afflicted  me  from  my  youth
Trov.  17.  7-  ot.  less  do  lying  lips  become  a  prince
19.  10.  ot.  less  for  a  servant  to  have  rule  over
Led.  5.1°  sleep  is  sweet,  whether  he  eat  little  or  m.

17.  he  bath  ot.  sorrow  and  wrath  with  sickness
9.  18.  but  pne  sinner  destroyed!  m.  good

Jer.  2.  22.  for  though  thou  take  thee  ot.  sope
Lzek.  23.  32.  contained)  w.  ||  .33.  .31.  shew  m.  love
Dan.  4.  12.  and  the  fruit  thereof  was  ot.  21.

Mic.  6.  +  16.  doth  in.  keep  the  statutes  of  Omri
Hay.  1.  6.  ye  have  sown  ot.  ||  9.  ye  looked  for  in.
Mat.  6.  26.  are  ye  not  ot.  better  than  they  ?

26.  9.  this  ointment  might  have  been  sold  for  ot.
Mark  4.5.  where  it  had  not  in.  earth,  Mat.  1.3.  5
Luke  1.  t  28.  hail,  thou  that  art  ot.  graced
7-47.  her  many  sins  are  forgiven,  for  she  loved  m
12.  48.  for  to  whom  ot.  is  given,  of  him  shall  m
be  required,  to  whom  men  have  committed  ot.
16.  10.  he  that  is  faithful  also  in  m .  is  unjust  in  m
John  12.  24.  it  bringeth  forth  ot.  fruit,  15.  5.

14.  30.  hereafter  I  will  not  tallow,  with  you
Acts  16.  16.  which  brought  her  masters  m.  gain
18.  27.  who  helped  them  ot.  which  had  believed
26.24.  1-estus  said,  m.  learning  doth  make  thee  mad
Rom.  3.  2.  ot.  every  way  ||  16.  12.  laboured  ot.  in  L.

2  C'o, r.  2.  4.  out  of  m.  affliction  1  wrote  to  vou
Heb.  12.  9.  w.  rather  .be  in  subjection  and  live
25.  ot.  more  shall  not  we  escape,  it  we  turn  away
Jam.  5.  16.  the  prayer  of  the  righteous  availed  ot.
Rev.  5.  4.  1  wept  ot.  because  no  man  was  found
As  MUCH.

Gen.  23.  9.  give  it  for  as  m.  money  as  it  is  worth

43.  34.  mess  was  five  times  as  ot.  as  any  of  theirs

44.  1.  fill  sacks  with  food  as  w.  as  they  can  carry
Lxod.  16.5.  twice  as  ot.  as  they  gather  daily,  22.

Lee.  (.  10.  Aaron  s  sons  have  one  as  m.  as  another
Josh.  17.  14.  ter  as  m.  as  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me

1  Sam.  2.  16.  then  take  as  ot.  as  thy  soul  desireth

2  Chron.  2.  16.  cut  wood  as  m.  as  thou  shall  need
Job  42.  10.  the  Ld.  g aye  Job  twice  as  ot.  as  he  had
Us.  119.  14.  joy  in  testimonies,  as  m.  as  in  all  riches
Luke  6.  34.  sinners  lend,  to  receive  as  m.  attain
John  6. 11.  likewise  of  fishes  asm.  as  they  would
Rom.  1.  15.  as  ot.  as  in  me  is,  I  am  ready  to  preach

11.  13.  in  asm.  as  1  am  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles

12.  18.  asm.  as  lieth  in  you,  live  peaceably  with  all
P'“‘.  L  7.  in  asm.  as  both  in  bonds,  and  in  defence
lleb.  3.  3.  in  as  m.  as  he  who  huilded  the  house
7.  20.  in  as  m.  as  not  without  an  oath  was  priest

1  c  ' 'iM3-  *n  as  m •  as>'e  Hre  partakers  of  sufferings
c>ee  flow  rnvchy  IIow  much  /ess,  How  much

more ,  Much  More,  Propue.

So  MUCH.

Exod.  14.  28.  remained  not  so  ot.  as  one  of  them
30.  2.3.  and  of  sweet  cinnamon  half  so  ot.

Lfv.  14.  21.  if  lie  be  poor  and  cannot  get  so  m.

Deut.  2.  5.  not  give  you  so  in.  as  a  foot-breadth

2  Sam.  14.  25.  none  to  he  so  m.  praised  as  Absalom
17-  12.  there  shall  not  he  left  so  m.  as  one

2  Chron.  20.  25.  in  gathering  the  spoil,  it  was  so  w.
Prov.  19.  24.  will  not  so  w.  as  bring  it  to  his  mouth
25.  16.  eat  so  m.  as  is  sufficient  for  thee,  lest  filled

w‘'y  gaddest  thou  so  ot.  to  change  thy  way?
Mol.  .3. 1.3.  what  have  we  spoken  so  m.  against  thee  ?
Mat.  15.  33.  whence  should  we  have  so  in.  bread  ?
Mark  2.  2.  was  no  room,  no  not  so  ot.  as  about  door
3.  20.  so  that  they  could  not  so  ot.  as  eat,  6.  .31.

7 •  36.  so  ot.  more  a  great  deal  they  published  it
Luke  5.  15.  so  ot.  the  more  went  there  a  fame  abroad

6.  3.  have  ye  not  read  so  m.  as  this  what  David  did  ?

18.  13.  would  not  lilt  up  so  ot.  as  his  eyes  to  heaven
39.  he  cried  so  ot.  the  more,  have  mercy  on  me

Acts  5.8.  if  ve  sold  it  for  so  in.  she  said,  yea,  for  so  ot.

7.  5.  no  inheritance,  not  so  m.  as  to  set  his  foot  on

19.  2.  not  so  in.  as  heard  whether  ai  y  Holy  Ghost

1  Cor .  5.  1_.  not  so  m.  as  named  among  the  Gentiles

2  Cor.  9.  t  5.  bount)  hath  been  so  ot.  spoken  of  before.


Ueb.  1.  4.  being  made  so  in.  better  than  flic  angel*
7-  22.  by  so  ot.  Jesus  made  surety  of  better  testam

10.  25.  and  so  m.  more,  as  ye  see  day  approachino
12.  20.  it  so  ot.  as  a  beast  touch  the  mountain
Rev.  18.  7 .  so  m.  torment  and  sorrow  give  her
Too  MUCH.

Exod.  36.  7.  the  stuff'  was  sufficient,  and  too  ot.
Num.  16.3.  said  to  them, ye  take  loom,  upon  vou  T.
Josh.  19.  9.  part  of  children  of  Judah  was  too  ml
1  Kings  12.  28.  too  ot.  for  you  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem
Esth.  1.  18.  thus  shall  there  arise  too  ot.  contemnt
Very  MUCH.

Gen.  41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  corn  as  sand,  very  m.
Exod.  12.  38.  very  ot.  cattle  went  up  with  them
Josh.  13.  1.  remaineth  verym.  land  to  be  possessed
22.  8.  return  with  very  ot.  cattle,  very  m.  raiment

1  Kings  10.2.  queen  of  Sheba  came  with  very  m.  gold

2  Kings.  21.  16.  Manasseh  shed  innoc.  blood,  very  ot.

o  / ,,  ■  8.  from  Chun  brought  David  very  m.  brass

2  Chron. 14.  1.3.  they  carried  away  very  w.  spoil

32.  29.  tor  God  hath  given  him  substance  very  in.

30.14.  the  priests  and  people  transgressed  verym „
Psal.  119. 107.  I  am  afflicted  very  m.  quicken  me
Jer.  40.  12.  and  gathered  summer-fruits  verum.

.  MUFFLERS.

Isa.  3.  19.  I  will  take  away  the  chains,  the  ot.
MULBERRY -trees.

2  oam.  5.  23.  thou  shalt  not  go  up,  but  come  upon,
them  over-against  the  m.-trees,  1  Chron.  14.  14.
24.  when  thou  hearest  the  sound  in  tops  of  the  m  -
r,  o.  .  t/eesl then  bestir  Myself,  1  Chron.  14.  15.
Ps.  84.  t  6.  who  passing  thro  the  valley  of  m.-trees

^  Sam.  13.  29.  every  man  gat  him  upon  his  ot.

18.  9.  Absalom  rode  on  a  m.  the  m.  went  away
r»  llLdS  **  cause  Solom.  to  ride  on  my  m.  38.  44*.
jP.vtf/.  3C.  9.  be  not  as  the  horse  or  m.  which  have
Z.ech.  14.15.  so  shall  be  plague  of  the  horse,  of  the  m.
MULES.

Gen.  36.  24.  Anah  that  found  ot.  in  the  wilderness

1  Kings  4.  +  28.  they  brought  barley  for  the  ot.

10.  25.  brought  w.  a  rate  year  by  year,  2  Chr.  9. 24.
18.  5.  we  may  find  grass  to  save  the  ot.  alive

2  K  ings 5.  17.  be  given  to  thy  servant  two  ot.  burdea
I  C  /iron.  12.  40.  brought  bread  on  camels  and  on  m.
Ezra  2.66.  their  ot.  were  245,  Neh.  7.  68.

Esth.  8.  10.  he  sent  letters  by  riders  on  ot.  14.

Isa.  66.  20.  they  shall  bring’ your  brethren  on  ot.
Ezek.  27. 14. 1  ogarmah  traded  in  thy  fairs  with  m
„  MULTIPLY.

Gen.  1.  22.  be  fruitf.  and  ot.  28.  |  8. 17.  I  9.  7.  1  35. 11.
.3.  16.  I  will  ot.  thy  sorrow  and  conception

9’en  began  tc  ot.  on  the  face  of  the  earth
16.10.  1  will  m.  Hagar’s  seed  exceedingly,  17. 20..
17-  2.  and  1  will  m.  thee  exceedingly,  48*  4
22.  17-1  will  ot.  thy  seed,  26.  4,  24.  lleb.  6.  14.

28.  3.  God  Almighty  bless  thee,  and  ot.  thee
Exod.  1.10.  fetus  deal  wisely  with  them,  lest  they  in.

7.  3.  1  will  ot.  my  signs  and  wonders  in  Egvpt
2.3.  29.  lest  the  beast  of  the  field  ot.  against  thee
30.  t  15.  the  rich  shall  not  ot.  half  a  shekel

32.  1.3.  to  whom  thou  saidst,  1  will  m.  your  seed

r  YY’  ;Yy'  [)eut-  7-  ‘3.  |  13.  17. 1  £8.  63.  |  30.  3.
Lev.  11.  +  42.  whatsoever  doth  ot.  feet,  not  eat
A  wot.  26.  t54.  to  many  ot.  his  inheritance,  33.  +  54
Deut.  8.  1.  that  ye  may  live  and  ot.  and  go  in  30  16-
17^  16.  the  king  shalT  not  ot.  horses  to  himself"

17.  neither  shall  he  ot.  wives,  nor  silver,  and  gold
2  Sam.  14.  f  ll,  revengers  do  not  w.  to  destroy

1  Chron.  4.27.  neither  did  all  their  family  m.

Job  29.  18.  1  shall  ot.  my  days  as  the  sand

Isa.  1. 1  15.  when  ye  ot.  prayer,  1  will  not  hear
55.  f  7 .  return  to  God,  for  he  will  ot.  to  pardon
Jer.  30.  19.  I  will  m.  them,  they  shall  not  be  few

33.  22.  so  will  I  ot.  the  seed  ot  David  my  servant
Lzek.  16.  7.  1  have  caused  thee  to  ot.  as  the  bud

36.  10.  I  vvill  ot  men  j|  11.  m.  man  and  beast
30.  1  will  ot.  the  fruit  of  the  tree,  and  increase

37.  2f).  and  l  will  place  them  and  m.  them
Amos 4.4.  come  to  Bethel,  at  Gilgal  ?nt  transgression

2  Cor.  9.  10.  and  ot.  your  seed  sown,  and  in<  rease

MULTIPLIED.

Gen.  47.  27.  Israel  grew  and  in.  Exod.  1.  7,  20
Exod.  1.  12.  the  more  afflicted,  they  ot.  and  grew

11.  9.  that  my  wonders  may  be  ot.  in  Egypt
Deut.  1. 10.  the  Lord  your  God  hath  m.  vou

8.  13.  thy  gold  is  m.  and  all  that  thou  hast  is  in.

11.  21.  that  your  days  may  be  ot.  in  the  land

Josh.  24.  3.  I  ot.  his  seed,  and  gave  him  Isaac
Judg.  16.  +  24.  our  enemy,  ivho  ot.  our  slain

1  Sam.  1.  t  12.  as  she  ot.  to  pray,  Eli  marked

2  Sam.  22.  +36.  and  thy  gentleness  hath  ot.  me

1  Chron.  5.  9 .  because  their  cattle  were  ot.  in  Gilead

2  Chron .  33.  t  23.  but  Amon  m.  trespass
Neh.  6.  +  17-  the  nobles  ot.  letters  to  Tobiah
Job  17. 14.  if  his  children  be  ot.  it  is  for  sword

35.  6.  it  thy  transgressions  be  ot.  what  doest  to  him  ?
Psal.  16.  4.  their  sorrows  shall  be  ot.  that  hasten

38.  19.  they  that  hate  me  wrongfully  are  ot.

107.  38.  he  blesselh  them,  so  that  they  are  m.

Prov.  9.  11.  for  by  me  thy  days  shalfbe  ot.

29. 16._wl)en  wicked  are  w.  transgression  increaseth
Isa.  9.  3.  thou  Hast  ot.  the  nation,  and  not  increased
59.  12.  for  our  transgressions  are  ot.  before  thee
Jer.  .3.  16.  w hen  ye  be  ot.  they  shall  say  no  more
46.  +  16.^he  ot.  the  taller,  one  fell  on  another
Ezek.  5.  7.  ye  ot.  more  than  the  nations  about  you

11.  6.  ye  have  ot.  your  slain  in  thiscitv
16.  25.  thou  hast  in.  thy  whoredoms,  2.3.  19.

29.  ot.  fornication  ||  51 .  ot.  abominations

21. 15.  that  their  heart  may  faint,  and  ruins  be  ot.

31.  5.  his  boughs  were  in.  ||  35.  13.  m.  your  words
Dan.  4.  1.  peace  be  ot.  to  you,  6.  25.  1  Pet.  1.  2.  2
r,  .  „  ,  ,  Pet.  1 . 2.  Jude  2.

Uos.  2.  8.  did  not  know  that  I  ot.  her  silver  and  gold

8.  14.  and  J udah  hath  ot.  fenced  cities

12. 10.  I  have  ot.  visions,  and  used  similitudes
Nah.  3. 16.  thou  hast  ot.  thy  merchants  above  star»
Acts  6.  1.  when  the  number  of  disciples  was  m.  7.

7.  17-  the  people  grew  and  ot.  in  Egypt

9.  31.  walking  in  the  tear  of  the  Lord  were  ot.

12.  24.  hut  the  word  of  God  grew  and  ot.

323


MUR


M  V  S


MUL


MULTIPLIEDST.

\7eh.  0.  23.  their  children  also  m.  thou  as  the  stars
MU  LT1PL1ETH.

Job  9.  17.  he  m.  my  wounds  without  cause

34.  37.  he  m.  his  words  against  God

35.  16.  he  m.  words  without  knowledge

Reel.  10. 1 14.  a  tool  also  m.  words,  man  cannot  tell
MULTIPLY  IMG.

Gen.  22.  17-  in  m.  1  will  multiply,  Heb.  6.  14.
MULTITUDE

Signifies,  [1]  A  great  company  or  number  of  persons
or  things,  Gen.  30.  30.1  48.  4.  [2]  1  he  common
people ,  Mat.  9.  33.  [3]  The  whole  assembly ,  both
common  people  arid  senators,  Acts  23.  7.  LT)  l  he
churchy  or  a  company  oj  the  faithful ,  Acts  15.  1^,

22. (21.  22.  [5]  Great  .store ,  or  plenty t  .ler.  10.

13.  [6]  Much  variety ,  Eccl.5.  3,7-  L7J  Infinite,
Psal.  51 .  1.

Gen  16. 10.  not  numbered  for  m.  32. 12. 1  Kings  3. 8.
17.  1 4.  thou  sha.lt  be  a  father  of  m.  of  nations

28.  3.  God  Almighty  make  thee  a  m.  ot  people

30.  30.  and  it  is  now  increased  unto  a  m.

48.  4.  1  will  make  of  thee  a  m .  of  people,  16.  19.
Exod.  12.  38.  a  mixed  m.  went  up  also  with  them

23.  2.  thou  shalt  not  follow  a  m.  to  do  evil
Lev.  25.  16.  according  to  the  m.  of  years  increase
Num.  11.  4.  and  the  mixed  rn.  fell  a  lusting
Deut.  1.  10.  behold,  ye  are  this  day  as  the  stars  tor

m.  10.  22.  1  28.  62.  Heb.  11.  12.
Josh.  11.  4.  as  sand  on  sea-shore  for  m.  Judg.  7-  12.

1  Sam.  13.  5.  2  Sam.  17-  11.  1  Kings  4.20.
Judg.  6.  5.  Midianites  as  grasshoppers  for  m.  7.  12.

1  Sam.  14. 16.  behold,  the  m.  melted  away

2  Sam.  6.  19.  he  dealt  among  the  whole  m.  of  Israel

1  Kingsi.  +47.  un weighed  for  the  exceeding  m.

8.  5.  and  oxen  that  could  not  be  told  for  m.

2  Kings  7.  13.  they  are  as  all  the  m.  that  are  left

19.  23.  hast  said,  with  the  m.  of  my  chariots  I  am

come  up  to  the  sides  of  Lebanon,  Isa.  37.  24.
2  Ckron.  1.  9.  overa  people  like  the  dust  tor  m.

14.  11.  in  thy  name  we  go  against  this  m.

20.  24.  and  behold,  the  m.  were  dead  bodies
30.  18.  for  a  m.  had  not  cleansed  themselves

32.  7.  be  not  afraid  of  all  the  m.  with  him

JMeh.  13.  3.  they  separated  from  Israel  the  mixed  m
+  22.  spare  me,  according  to  m.  of  thy  mercy
Esth.5.  11.  Hainan  told  of  the  m.  of  his  children

10.  3.  Mordecai  accepted  of  the  m.  of  brethren
Job  4.  f  14.  made  the  m.  of  my  bones  to  shake
11.2.  should  not  the  m.  of  words  be  answered?

32.7.  and  m.  of  years  should  teach  wisdom

35.  9.  by  reason  of  the  m.  of  oppressions  they  make

39.7.  he  scorneth  the  m.  of  the  city ,  nor  regardeth
Psal.  5.7-  I  wiH  come  in  the  m.  of  thy  mercy

10.  cast  them  out  in  m.  of  their  transgressions

33.  16.  there  is  no  king  saved  by  the  m.  ot  an  host
42.  4.  I  had  gone  with  the  m.  to  the  house  of  God
49.  6.  that  boast  themselves  in  m.  of  their  riches
51.  1.  according  to  the  m.  of  thy  mercies  blot  out

68.  30.  rebuke  the  m.  of  bulls,  with  calves

69.  13.  O  God,  in  the  m.  of  thy  mercy,  hear  me  !

16.  turn  to  me,  according  to  m.  of  thy  mercies
74.  19.  deliver  me  not  to  the  m.  of  the  wicked
94.  19.  in  the  m.  of  my  thoughts  within  me
106.  7.  they  remembered  not  m.  of  thy  mercies

45.  and  repented,  according  to  m.  of  his  mercies
109.  30.  1  will  praise  him  among  the  m.

Prov.  10.  19.  in  Ihe  m.  of  words  wanteth  not  sin

11.  14.  in  the  m.  of  counsellors  is  safety,  24.  6.

14.  28.  in  the  m.  of  people  is  the  king’s  honour

15.  22.  in  m.  of  counsellors  they  are  established
20.  15.  there  is  gold,  and  a  m.  of  rubies

Eccl.  5.  3.  for  adreain  cometh  through  the  m.  pf  busi¬
ness,  a  fool’s  voice  is  known  by  the  m.  of  words
7.  in  the  m.  of  dreams  there  are  divers  vanities
Isa.  1.  11.  to  what  purpose  is  the  m.  of  sacrifices  ?
5. 13.  and  their  m.  dried  up  with  thirst
14.  their  m.  and  pomp  shall  descend  into  hell

17.  12.  woe  to  m.  ot  many  people  which  make  noise

29.  8.  so  m.  of  nations  be  that  fight  against  Zion

31.  4.  when  m.  of  shepherds  is  called  against  him
47.  9.  shall  come  on  thee  for  m.  of  thy  sorceries

12.  stand  now  with  the  m.  of  thy  sorceries

13.  thou  art  wearied  in  the  m.  of  thy  counsels
60.  6.  the  m.  of  camels  shall  cover  thee


Eph.  4.  +  8.  he  ascended,  he  led  a  m.  of  captives
Jam.  5.  20.  shall  save  a  soul  from  death,  and  shall


hide  a  in.  of  sins
1  Pet.  4.  8.  for  charity  shall  cover  the  m.  of  sins


Isa.  29.
Nah.  2.


63.  7.  according  to  m.  of  his  loving-kindnesses
+  15.  the  m.  ot  thy  bowels,  are  they  restrained  ?


16.


Jer.  10.  13.  is  a  m.  of  waters  in  heavens,  51
12.  6.  yea,  they  have  called  a  m.  after  thee
30. 14.  I  have  wounded  thee  for  m.  of  thine  iniquity

46.  25.  behold,  1  will  punish  the  m.  of  Mo
Lam.  1.  5.  afflicted  her,  for  m.  of- her  transgressions

3.  32.  compassion  according  to  in.  of  his  mercies
Ezelc.  7.  12.  wrath  is  on  all  the  m.  thereof,  14.

13.  for  the  vision  is  touching  the  whole  m.  thereof

14.  4.  answer  him  according  to  the  m.  of  his  idols
27.  12.  by  reason  of  the  m.  of  riches,  18.  33.

16.  by  reason  of  the  m.  of  the  wares,  18.
t\.  18.  this  is  Pharaoh  and  all  his  m.  32.  32.

32.  24.  Elam  and  her  m.  ||  26.  Tubal  and  all  her  m.
39. 11.  they  shall  bury  Gog,  and  all  his  m.

Dan.  10.  6.' voice  of  his  words  like  the  voice  of  a  m.
11.  13.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  set  forth  a  in.
Bos.  9.  7.  days  of  recom pence,  for  m.  of  thine  iniq.
10.  13.  thou  didst  trust  in  the  m.  of  mighty  men
y. ah.  3.  3.  there  is  a  m.  of  slain,  they  stumble

4.  because  of  the  m.  of  the  whoredoms  of  harlot
Zech.  8.  t  4.  with  his  staff  for  in.  of  days
Mat.  14.  5.  put  to  death,  he  feared  the  m.  21.  46.

15.  32.  1  have  compassion  on  the  m.  Mark  8.  2.
Mark 5.  31.seestthe  m.  thronging  thee,  Luke  8.  45.
Luke  2. 13.  there  was  with  the  angel  a  m.  of  the  host

22.  1.  were  gathered  together  ah  innumerable  m.
£2.  6.  to  betray  him  in  the  absence  of  the  m.

47.  and  while  he  yet  spake,  behold,  hot.

23. 1.  whole  m.  of  them  arose,  and  led  him  to  Pilate
John  5.  13.  a  m.  being  present  in  that  place

21.  6.  not  able  to  draw  it  for  the  m.  of  fishes
Acts  4.  32.  the  m.  that  believed  were  of  one  heart
6.  5.  ann  the  saj’ing  pleased  the  whole  in.

16.  22.  the  m.  rose  up  together  against  them
21.  22.  the  m.  must  needs  come  together

324


See  Great
MULTITUDES.

Esek.  32.  20.  draw  her  and  all  her  m.

Joel  3.  14.  m.m.  in  the  valley  of  decision
Mat.  9.  33.  the  dumb  spake  ;  and  the  m.  marvelled
36.  when  he  saw  the  m.  he  was  moved
21.  9.  the  m.  cried,  saying,  Hosanna  to  Son  ot  D.
Acts  5.  14.  in.  were  added  both  ot  men  and  women
13.  45.  Jews  saw  m.  they  were  filled  with  envy
Rev.  17.  15.  the  waters  are  m.  and  nations
See  Great.

MUNITION.

7.  all  that  fight  against  her  and 1  her  m.

1.  keep  the  m.  watch  the  way,  fortify
MUM  THOMS.

Isa.  33.  16.  his  defence  shall  be  the  m.  of  rocks
Dan.  11.  +  15.  the  king  shall  take  the  city  ot  in.

+  38  in  his  estate  he  will  honour  the  God  ot  m.

+  39.  tiius  shall  he  do  in  the  fortresses  ot  in.
MURDER

Signifies,  [1]  The  taking  away  of  a  man's  life  un¬
lawfully,  Mark  15.  7-  [2]  All  cruelty  in  thought,
word,  or  deed.  Mat.  19.  18.  1  John  3.  15.

Voluntary  murder  was  always  punished  with  death,
but  involuntary  or  accidental  murder,  among
the  Hebrews,  was  only  punished  by  banishment
Cities  of  refuge  lucre  appointed  for  involuntary
manslaughter ,  whither  they  might  retire ,  and
continue  in  safety ,  till  the  death  oj  the  high
priest ;  then  the  offender  was  at  liberty  to  return
to  his  own  city,  and  his  own  house,  ij  he  pleased.
But  as  for  the  voluntary  murderer,  he  was  put
to  death  without  any  remission,  and  the  kinsmen
of  the  murdered  person  might  kill  him  with  im-
punity :  money  could  not  redeem  his  life  j  he  was
dragged  away ,  even  from  the  altar ,  if  he  had
taken  refuge  there.  Mum.  35.  27>  28,  31.  Die
ceremony  used  by  the  Israelites,  when  a  dead  body
was  found  in  the  fields  slain  by  a  mui del  er  un
known,  as  it  is  recorded ,  Deut.  21.  from  verse
to  9.  may  inform  us  what  idea  they  had  of  the
heinousness  of  murder,  and  how  much  horror  they
conceived  at  this  crime ;  and  also  the  Jear  they
were  in,  that  God  might  take  vengeance  Jor  it  on
the  whole  country ;  and  oj  the  pollution  that  the
country  was  supposed  to  contract ,  by  the  blood  that
was  spilt  in  it,  unless  it  were  expiated,  or  revenged
upon  him  that  was  the  occasion  oj  it,  ij  he  could
by  any  means  be  discovered.

Psal.  10.  8.  in  secret  doth  he  m.  the  innocent
04.  6.  they  slay  the  widow,  and  in.  the  fatherless
jer.  7.  9.  will  ye  steal,  m.  and  commit  adultery  i
Dos.  6.  9.  so  pi  iests  in.  in  the  way  by  consent
MURDER.

Mat.  19.  18.  Jesus  said,  thou  shalt  do  no  m.

Mark  15.  7.  one  Barabhas,  who  had  committed  m.
Luke  23.  19.  and  for  m.  was  cast  into  prison,  25.
Rom.  1.  20.  full  of  envy,  m.  debate,  deceit

MURDERER.  ,  ,  „

Num.  35. 16.  if  he  smite  him  he  is  a  m.  the  m.  shall
surely  be  put  to  death,  17.  18,  21.
19.  the  revenger  of  blood  shall  slay  the  in.  21.

30  m  shall  be  put  to  death  by  mouth  of  witnesses
31.  shall  take  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  ot  a  m.

2  Kings  6.  32.  see  how  this  son  of  in.  hath  sent  to  take
Job  24  14  m.  rising  with  the  light,  killeth  the  poor
IIos.  o’.  1.3!  Ephraim  bring  forth  his  children  to  the  m.
John  8.  44.  he  was  a  m.  from  the  beginning
Acts  3.  14.  ye  desired  a  w.  to  be  granted  to  you
28  4.  they  said,  no  doubt  this  man  is  a  m.

1  Pet  4.  15.  but  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  m.

1  John  3.  15.  whoso  hateth  his  brother  is  a  m  ye

know  that  no  m.  hath  eternal  lite  abiding  in  him
MURDERERS.

2  Kings  14.  6.  the  children  of  the  m.  he  slew  not
~Isa.  1.  21.  righteousness  lodged  in  it,  but  now  m,
Jer.  4.  31.  for  my  soul  is  wearied,  because  of  in.
Mat.  22.  7.  he  sent  forth  and  destroyed  those  m.
Acts  7.  52.  of  whom  ye  have  been  now  the  m.

21.  .38.  and  leddest  out  4000  men  that  were  in.

1  Tim.  1.  9.  law  made  for  tit.  ot  fathers  and  mothers
Rev.  21.  8.  in.  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake
2°  15  for  without  are  whoremongers  and  m.

MURDERS.

Mat.  15. 19.  out  of  the  heart  proceed  m.  Mar*  7.  21.
Gal.  5.  21.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  envyings,  m.
Rev.  9  21.  nor  repented  they  qf  their  m.  nor  tornica
MURMUR

Signifies,  To  repine  at  or  complain  of  some  wrong
pretended  to  have  been  received,  Exod.  16.  2.  St.
Paul  forbids  all  murmuring,  which  was  so  fatal  to
the  Israelites  that  murmured  in  the  wilderness,

1  Cor.  10.  10.  and  for  which  God  punished  them
severely.  They  murmured  at  the  Graves  ot  Lust
and  God  sent  them  quails  for  food;  but  hardly
was  this  meat  out  oj  their  mouths,  before  the  wiath
of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  them,  and  he
destroyed  three  and  twenty  thousand  of  them
Mum.  11.  33,  .34.  Psal.  78.  30,  31.  lhey  mur¬
mured  again  after  the  return  of  the  spies  that
were  sent  to  search  out  and  view  the  pi omised
land ;  and  God  punished  them  by  depriving  them
of  the  happiness  oj  ever  seeing  that  land,  and
condemned  them  to  die  m  the  wilderness,  Mum,
14.  29,  30.  They  were  again  punished  for  mur¬
muring,  by  the  fiery  serpents  that  God  sent
among  them,  which  killed  a  great  number  of
them,  Mum.  21.  4,  5,  6.  The  murmuring  of
Miriam  the  sister  of  Moses ,  was  chastised  by  a
leprosy  that  seized  her  whole  body,  and  obliged
her  to  abide  seven  days  without  the  camp,  ripm.
12.  1,  2,  10,  15.  And  the  murmuring  and  re¬
bellion  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  was
punished  in  a  still  more  terrible  manner,  the
earth  opening  and  swallowing  up  the  authors  of
the  sedition,  and  J>re  consuming  their  accom¬
plices,  Mum.  16.  3,  31,  32,  35.

Exod.  16.  7.  what  are  we.  that  ye  m.  against  us?


IW.  16.8. Lord  heareth  murmur,  ye  m.  Num.UjJJ
Num.  14.  36.  the  spies  made  the  congregation  to  in.

16.  11.  what  is  Aaron,  that  ye  m.  against  him  j

17.  5.  of  Israel,  whereby  they  m.  against  you
Lam.  3.  +  .39.  wherefore  doth  a  living  man  m.  ?
John  6.  43.  Jesus  said,  m.  not  among  yourselves

1  Cor.  10.  10.  neither  m.  as  some  of  them  murmured
MURMURED.

Exod.  15.  24.  the  people  in.  against  Moses,  17.  3.
16.  2.  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  m.  against
Moses  and  Aaron,  Num.  14.2.  |  16.41.
Num.  14.  29.  from  twenty  years  old,  which  havem.
Deut.  1.  27.  and  ye  m.  in  your  tents,  and  said
Josh.  9.  18.  all  the  congregation  m.  against  princes
Psal.  106.  25.  they  believed  not,  but  m.  in  their  tents
Isa.  29.  24.  they  that  in.  shall  learn  doctrine
iViat.20.il  .when  they  had  received  a  penny,  they  m.
Mark  14.  5.  and  they  m.  against  her
Luke  5.  30.  but  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  m.

15.  2.* they  in.  saying,  this  man  receiveth  sinners
19.  7.  m.  that  he  was  gone  to  be  guest  to  Zaccheus
John  6.  41.  the  Jews,  in.  at  him,  because  hesaid
61.  he  knew  that  his  disciples  m.  at  it
7.  .32.  the  Pharisees  heard  that  the  people  m.

1  Cor.  10.  10.  neither  murmur  as  some  of  them  m
MURMURERS.

Jude  16. these  are  m.complainers, walking  afterlusts
MURMUR1MG.

John  7. 12.  there  was  much  in.  among  the  people
Acts  6. 1.  a  in.  of  Grecians  against  the  Hebrews
MURMUR1MGS.

Exod.  16.  7.  he  heareth  your  m.  8,  9, 12.  Num.  14. 27.

8.  your  m.  are  not  against  us,  but  the  Lord
Num.  17.  5.  I  will  make  to  cease  the  in.  of  Israel
10.  thou  shalt  quite  take  away  their  in.  front  me
Phil.  2.  14.  do  all  things  without  m.  and  disputing-
MURRAIN.

Exod.  9.  3. therefore  there  shall  be  a  very  grievous  rn
Psal.  78.  +  50.  he  gave  their  beasts  to  the  in.
MUSE.

Psal.  143.  5.  I  m.  on  the  work  of  thy  hands
MUSED.

Luke  3.  15.  all  men  m.  in  their  hearts  of  John

MUSING.

Psal.  39.  .3.  while  I  was  m.  the  fire  burned
MUSICAL.

1  Chron.  16.  42.  with  m.  instruments  of  God
Neh.  12.  36.  -with  the  in.  instruments  ot  David
Eccl.  2.  8.  as  m.  instruments,  and  that  of  all  soi  l
MUSICIANS.

Rev  18.22.  voice  of  m.  shall  be  heard  no  more  in  the
MUSIC.

1  Sam.  18.6.  women  came  to  meet  king  Saul  with®

1  C 'hr.  15.  16.  to  be  the  singers  with  instruments d.
m.  2  Chron.  5.  13.  I  23.  1.3.  i  34.  T.’

2  Chr.  7.  6.  Levites  with  instruments  of  m.

Led.  12.  4.  daughters  of  in.  shall  be  brought  low
Lam.  3.  63.  sittihg  and  rising,  l  am  their  m.

5.  14.  young  men  have  ceased  from  their  in.
Dan.  .3.  5.  when  ye  hear  all  kinds  of  m.  7.  10,  15

6.  18.  neither  were  instruments  ot  in.  brought
Amos.  6. 5.  that  invent  instruments  of  m.  like  Davi
Luke  15.  25.  his  elder  son  heard  m.  and  dancing

MUST

Denotes,  (1)  A  necessity  of  that  thing  to  which  it :
applied,  Heb.  9.  16.  [1]  Of  a  good  thing,  1

respect  either  i  f  God's  commandment  or  pronnst
Mark  9.  11.  Rom.  13.5.  [2]  Of  moral  evd,  t
sin,  in  respect  of  God's  permission  of  it,  man
propension  to  it,  and  Satan's  suggestions  f  1
Mat.  18.  7.  (ID  A  duty,  and  that  which  oug,
to  be,  2  J  im.  2.  6.  .

Gen.24.5.m.  I  needs  bring  thy  son  again  tothe.ani

29.  26.  it  in.  not  be  so  done  in  our  country

30.  16.  thou  m.  come  in  to  me  ||  43. 11.  if  itm.be  s
Lev.  11.  32.  it  m.  be  put  in  water,  so  be  cleans*

23.  6.  seven  days  ye  in.  eat  unleavened  bread
Num.  6.  21.  so  he  m.  do  after  the  law  of  separatio


20. 10.  in.  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  rock  ‘
23.  12.  m.  1  not  take  heed  to  speak  that  the  Lon
26.  all  that  the  Lord  speaketh  that  I  in.  do
Deut.  1.  22.  bring  us  word  by  what  way  we  m.  g1
4.  22.  I  m.  die  in  this  land,  I  m.  not  go  over
12. 18.  thou  m.  eat  them  before  the  Lord  thy  (>oi
31.  14.  thy  days  approach  that  thou  in.  die
Josh.  3.  4.  may  know  the  way  by  which  ye  in
Judg.  13.  16.  thou  in.  offer  it  to  the  Lord

21.  17.  there  m.  be  an  inheritance  for  them

1  Sam.  14.  43.  I  did  but  taste  a  little,  and  lo  I  m.

2  Sam.  23.  3.  he  thatruleth  over  men  w.  be  just

7.  that  shall  touch  them  in.  be  fenced  with  iro
1  Kings  18.  27.  he  sleepeth,  and  in.  lie  awaked
Ezra  10.  12.  as  thou  hast  said,  so  in.  we  do
Jer.  10.5.  they  in.  needs  be  borne,  they  cannot
Mat.  26.  54.  scriptures  he  fulfilled,  that  thus  it  w
Mark  2.  22.  else  the  bottles  will  be  mai  red,  but  m

wine  m.  be  put  into  new  bottles,  Luke  3-

8.  31.  Son  of  man  m.  suffer  many  things,  9.1-
9. 11.  why  say  the  scribes  that  Elias  in.  first  com

13.  7.  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars,  be  ve not tro

hied,  for  such  things  in.  be,  Luke  -L
10.  gospel  m.  first  be  published  among  all  nam
Luke  2.  49.  1  m.  he  about  my  Father  s  business
4.  43.  1  in.  preach  kingdom  of  God,  for  1  am  sf

14.  18.  1  bought  ground,  and  in.  go  ami  see  it
19.5.  Zaccheus,  to-day  L  m.  abide  at  thv  house

22.  7.  the  day  when  the  passover  m.  be  killed
.37.  the  things  written  in.  be  accomplished.  .4

2.3.  17.  he  in.  release  one  to  them  at  the  least
24  7-  Son  of  man  m.  be  delivered  to  sinful  me
John  .3.7.  marvel  not  1  said,  yew.  be  born  emm
14.  the  serpent,  so  m.  the  Sonof  man  be  In  leu
.30.  he  in.  increase,  but  1  m.  decrease  .

4.  4.  and  he  m.  needs  go  through  Samaiia
24.  G.  is  a  Spirit,  in.  worship  him  in  s[  nit.  tn

9.  4.  I  in.  work  the  works  of  him  that  sen.  "  t

10.  16.  other  sheep  I  have,  them  also  1  «.  "Iln
20.  9.  knew  not  he  m.  rise  again  from  me  (  .

Acts  1.  16.  this  scripture  m.  have  been  tm"-
22.  m.  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness  wim
4.  12.  none  other  name  whereby  we  m.  "e  sa
9.  6.  it  shall  be  told  thee  what  thou  m.  90

;


M  Y  S


N  A  K


N  A  M


•ts  14.22. we  m.  thro’  much  tribulat.  enter  kingdom

i.  24.  ye  m.  be  circumcised  and  keep  the  law

5.  30.  said,  sirs,  what  m.  I  do  to  be  saved
-S.  21.  1  m.  by  all  means  keep  this  least  in  .Terus.
i.  22.  the  multitude  m.  needs  come  together
i.  11.  so  m.  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Home
'.24.  tear  not,  thou  m.  be  brought  before  Caesar
26.  howbeit  we  m.  be  cast  on  a  certain  island
)i».  13.  5.  wherefore  ye  m.  needs  be  subject
lor.  5. 10.  then  m.  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  world

1.  10.  there  tn.  also  be  heresies  among  you

5.  25.  for  he  tn.  reign  till  he  hath  put  under
'or. 5. 10.  for  we  tn.  all  appear  before  the  judgm.
1. 30.  if  I  tn.  needs  glory,  1  will  glory  of  things
Vim.  3.2.  a  bishop  then  m  be  blameless,  Tit.  1.  7.

2.  he  m.  have  a  good  report  of  them  without

(.  likewise  tn.  deacons  be  grave,  not  double  tong.
Vim.  2.6. husbandman  m.  be  first  partaker  of  fruit,

24.  the  servant  of  the  Lord  m.  not  strive
•;b.  4.  6.  it  remaineth  that  some  m.  enter  therein
16.  there  tn.  be  the  death  of  the  testator
1 .  6.  he  that  cometh  to  God,  m.  believe  that  he  is
i.  17.  they  watch,  as  they  that  m.  give  account
tv.  4. 1.  shew  thee  things  which  m.  be  hereafter
1. 5.  if  any  be  hurt  he  in.  in  this  manner  be  killed
).  3.  after  that  he  m.  be  loosed  a  little  season

l.  6.  to  shew  things  which  m.  shortly  be  done

MUSTARD-SEED;  see  Grain.
MUSTERED.

lings  25.  19.  took  the  scribe  which  m.  Jer.  52. 25.
MUSTEREl'H.

i.  13.  4.  the  Lord  m.  the  host  of  the  battle
MUTTER.

7.  8.  19.  to  wizards  that  peep,  and  that  tn

3.  +7-  for  Kirhareseth  shall  ye  m.

MUTTERED.

i.  59.  3.  your  tongue  hath  m.  perverseness
MUTUAL.

m.  ...  12.  I  may  be  comforted  by  the  tn.  faith

MUZZLE.

’,ut  25.4.  thou  shalt  not  m.  the  ox  when  he  tread-
etli  out  the  corn.  1  Cor.  9.  9.  1  Tim.  5. 18.
MYRRH.

•n.  37.  25.  Ishmaelites  came  bearing  balm  and  tn.
i.  11.  carry  down  the  man  a  present,  m.  nuts
od.  30.  23.  of  pure  m.  five  hundred  shekels
th.  2.  12.  to  wit,  six  months  with  oil  of  tn.
al.  45.8.  th}r  garments  smell  of  tn.  aloes  and  cassia
■ov.7. 17-  1  have  perfumed  my  bed  with  m.
nt.  1.  13.  a  bundle  of  m.  is  my  beloved  to  me

6.  perfumed  with  tn.  and  frankincense

6.  I  will  get  me  to  the  mountain  of  m.  and  aloes

4.  m.  and  aloes  with  all  the  chief  spices
1.  1  have  gathered  my  m.  with  my  spice

i.  my  hands  dropped  with  tn.  fingers  with  sweet  tn.

3.  his  lips  like  lilies,  droppingsweet-smellingm.
24.2.11.  they  presented  to  him  gifts,  gold  and  tn.
irk  15.  23.  to  drink  wine  mingled  with  tn.
hn  19.  39.  brought  a  mixture  of  m.  and  aioes
MYRTLE.

’■h.  8. 15.  go  forth  and  fetch  tn.  olive  branches
1.  41.  19.  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  m.

>.  13.  instead  of  brier  shall  come  the  m.  tree
MYRTLE-TREES.

ch.  1.  8.  and  he  stood  among  the  tn.  10.  11.
MYSTERY.

e  word  signifies,  a  secret,  a  mystery  being  a
king  kept  secret  and  hid  from  our  understanding,
HI  it  be  revealed  to  us.  1  Cor.  2.  7.  We  speak
he  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even  the  hid¬
den  wisdom.  Mysteries  are  said  to  be  of  two
arts :  one  sort  are  such  as  would  never  have  been
noun  without  revelation  ;  but  when  revealed,
■lag  be  in  a  good  measure  explained  and  under-
tood.  Such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  satisfaction  of
-hrist,  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  of  the
orgiven'ess  of  sins  for  the  sake  of  Christ’s  suf-
erings,  and  of  eternal  life  in  a  future  world.
Vhe  other  sort  of  mysteries  are  those,  which  when
evealed  to  us,  we  know  the  existence,  or  reality
nd  certainty  of  them,  but  cannot  comprehend  the
tanner  and  mode  how  they  are.  These  are  the
nystery  of  the  blessed  Trinity,  and  the  mystery
f  the  incarnation  of  Christ ;  or  the  union  of  the
1  vine  and  human  natures  in  one  person.  The
ailing  of  the  Gentiles,  which  was  hid  and  kept
ecret  for  many  ages,  is  called  a  mystery,  Rom.
6.  25.  Col.  1.  26,  27-  The  spiritual  union  he-
ween  Christ  and  his  church  is  called  a  mystery,
ecause  it  exceeds  human  understanding ,  and  is
evealed  only  to  the  children  of  God,  Eph.  5.  32.
lark  4.  11.  The  gospel  is  called  the  mystery  of
odliness,  l  Tim.  3.  16.

e  prophecies  concerning  the  person,  the  coming,
he  characters,  the  death  and  passion,  of  the  Mes-
iah ,  are  to  be  found  in  a  multitude  of  places  in
he  Old  Testament,  but  after  a  figurative  and
mysterious  manner.  The  actions,  the  words,  the
■  !Je  of  the  prophets  were  a  continual  and  general
rophecy,  which  was  concealed  from  the  eyes  of
■  «  people,  and  sometimes  from  the  prophets  t hem-
elves,  and  was  not  explained  or  discovered,  till
Iter  the  birth  and  death  of  Christ ;  and  these  mys-
enes  were  dispensed  in  so  wonderful  a  method,
nd  by  so  wise  a  providence,  that  the  first  served
'  a  foundation  for  the  second,  and  the  succeeding
ave  new  light  to  those  that  went  before.  They
■ill  improved  in  clearness  and  evidence,  and  the
io/y  Ghost  dispensed  them  by  measure,  and  in
ne  degrees ^  Daniel  is  more  explicit  than  the
rophets  before  him;  Ilaggai,  Zechariah,  and
lalachi,  speak  of  the  coming,  of  the  death,  and
I  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  call-
'!<!  °f  the  Gentiles,  after  a  more  plain  and  dis-
'nct  manner  than  the  other  prophets  before  them.

*  mysteries  of  the  Christian  religion,  ts  that  of
,e  blessed  Trinity,  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  his
,/postatical  union  with  his  human  nature,  his
nraculous  birth,  his  death,  resurrection,  and
fcension,  the  predestination,  and  reprobation  of
en  ;  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  manner
1  its  operation  in  our  hearts ;  the  resurrection


of  the  dead,  with  all  the  other  mysteries  revealed
to  us  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  are
the  objects  of  the  faith  of  all  true  Christians  ;  and
the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  and  these  tenets  of  Chris¬
tianity  were  called  mysteries,  not  only  because
they  were  secrets  which  would  not  have  been  known,
if  the  Hon  of  God,  and  his  Holy  Spirit,  had  not  re¬
vealed  them  to  believers,  but  also  because  they  were
not  revealed  indifferently  to  every  body.  The
command  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  his  apostles
was  in  this  case  put  in  practice,  Give  not  that
which  is  holy  unto  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your
pearls  before  swine,  Mat.  7.  6.  They  preached
the  gospel  only  to  those  who  seriously  desired  to  be
instructed  in  it ;  nor  did  they  presently  discover
to  them,  all  the  mysteries  of  religion ;  but  in
proportion  as  they  became  capable  to  receive
them.

Mark  4. 11.  to  you  given  to  know  the  m.  of  kingdom
Horn.  11.  25.  that  ye  should  be  ignorant  of  this  m.

16.  25.  according  to  the  revelation  of  the  m.

1  Cor.  2.  7-  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  m.

15.  51. 1  shew  you  a  m.  we  shall  not  all  sleep

Eph.  1.  9.  made  known  to  us  the  m.  of  his  will

3.  3.  how  that  he  made  known  to  me  the  m.

4.  understand  my  knowledge  in  the  m.  of  Christ

9.  make  all  see  what  is  the  fellowship  of  the  m.

5.  32.  this  is  a  great  m.  but  I  speak  of  Christ
6. 19.  may  open  my  mouth  boldly,  to  make  known
the  m.  of  the  gospel,  Col,  1.  26,  27.  1  4.  3.
Col.  2.  2.  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  m.  of  God

2  Thess.  2.7-  the  m.  of  iniquity  doth  already  work
1  Tim.  3.  9.  holding  m.  of  faith  in  pure  Conscience

16.  great  is  m.  of  godliness,  God  was  manifest

in  flesh

Rev.  1.  20.  the  m.  of  the  seven  stars  thou  sawest

10.  7-  the  m.  of  God  should  be  finished,  as  declared

17.  5.  m.  Babylon  the  great  ||  7.  m.  of  the  woman

MYSTERIES.

Mat.  13.  1 1 .  it  is  given  to  you  to  know  the  m.  of  the
kingdom,  but  to  them  not  given,  Luke  8.  10.
1  Cor.  4. 1.  and  as  stewards  of  the  m.  of  God

13.  2.  and  flip’  1  understand  all  m.  and  knowledge

14.  2.  howbeit,  in  the  Spirit  he  speaketli  m.

N.

NAIL.

Lev.  1. 1  15.  shall  pinch  otf  his  head  with  the  n.
Judg.  4.  21.  Jael  took  a  n.  of  tent,  and  smote  then.

22.  Sisera  lay  dead,  the  n.  was  in  his  temples

5.  26.  she  put  her  hand  to  the  n.  and  hammer
Ezra  9.  8.  to  give  us  a  n.  in  his  holy  place
Isa.  22.  23.  I  will  fasten  him  as  a  n.  in  a  sure  place

25.  shall  the  n.  that  is  fastened  be  removed
Zech.  10.  4.  of  him  came  the  n.  the  battle-bow
NAILS.

Deut. 21.12.  she  shall  shave  her  head,  and  pare  hern.

1  Chron.  22.  3.  prepared  iron  in  abundance  for  n.

2  Chron.  3.  9-  the  weight  of  the  n.  was  fifty  shekels
Eccl.  12. 11.  n.  fastened  by  the  masters  of  assemblies
Isa.  41. 7-  he  fastened  his  idol  with  n.  Jer.  10.  4.
Dan.  4.  33.  his  n.  were  grown  like  bird’s  claws

7.  19.  the  fourth  beast,  whose  n.  were  of  brass
John  20.  25.  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  n.

.  NAILING.

Col.  2. 14.  he  took  it  out  of  the  way,  n.  it  to  his  cross
NAKED

Signifies,  [1]  One  altogether  unclothed  or  uncovered,
Gen.  2.  25.  I  3.  7-  [2.]  Such  as  have  but  few

clothes  on,  having  put  off  the  greatest  part  of  them,

1  Sam.  19.  24.  John  21.  7.  [3]  One  void  of  grace,
that  is  not  clothed  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ,
and  so  is  exposed  to  the  wrath  of  God  for  his  sins,
Rev.  3.  17;  [4]  Such  as  had  heinously  sinned  and
were  deprived  of  the  favour  and  protection  of
God,  and  so  might  be  easily  surprised  by  their
enemies,  Exod.  32.  25.  [5]  One  destitute  of

all  worldly  goods.  Job  1.  21.  [6]  That  which  is

discovered,  known,  and  manifest.  Job  26.  6.  Heb.

4.  13.

The  nakedness  of  a  land,  Gen.  42.  9.  The  weak
and  ruined  parts  of  it,  where  the  country  lies  most
open  and  exposed  to  danger,  and  may  most  easily  be
assaulted  or  surprised.

To  uncover  the  nakedness  of  any  one,  denotes  a
shameful  and  unlawful  conjunction,  or  an  incestu¬
ous  marriage.  Lev.  20.  19.

The  nakedness  of  Adam  and  Eve  was  unknown  to
them  before  they  sinned,  Gen.  2.  25.  They  were
riot  ashamed  at  it,  because  concupiscence  and
irregular  desires  had  not  yet  made  the  flesh  rebel
against  the  spirit ;  and  their  nakedness  excited  no
disorder  in  their  imaginations,  nor  any  thing  that
was  irregular  or  contrary  to  reason.  They  were
exempt  from  whatever  indecency  might  happen
among  us,  upon  the  occasion  of  the  nakedness  of
the  body.

Gen.  2.  25.  they  were  n.  and  were  not  ashamed
3.  7-  and  they  knew  that  they  were  n.  10,  11.

Exod.  32.  25.  when  Moses  saw  that  the  people
were  n.  for  Aaron  had  made  them  n.  to
their  shame

Lev.  20.  t  18.  he  hath  made  n.  her  fountain

1  Sam.  19.  24.  Saul  laydown  n.  all  that  day

2  Chron.  28.  15.  with  the  spoil  clothed  all  the  n.

19.  Ahaz  made  Judah  n.  and  transgressed  ag.  Ld.

Job  1.  21.  Job  said,  n.  came  I  out  of  my  mother’s
womb,  and  n.  shall  1  return  thither
22.  6.  thou  hast  stripped  the  n.  of  their  clothing
24.  7.  they  cause  the  n.  to  lodge  without,  10.

26.  6.  hell  is  n.  before  him  and  destruction
Prov. 29.  + 18.  where  no  vision,  the  people  is  made  n.
Eccl.  5. 15.  n.  shall  he  return,  to  go  as  he  came
Isa.  22.  +  6.  and  Kir  made  n.  the  shield
58.  7-  when  thou  seest  the  n.  that  thou  cover  him
Jer.  48.  t  6.  be  like  a  n.  tree  in  the  wilderness
51.  t  58.  the  walls  of  Babylon  shall  be  made  n.
Lam.  4.  21.  O  Edom,  thou  shalt  make  thyself  n.
Ezek.  18.  7.  if  he  hath  covered  the  n.  16.

Hos.  2.  3.  lest  I  strip  her  n.  and  set  her  as  in  the  day


Amos  2.  16.  shall  flee  away  n.  in  that  day,  saith  L-
Mic.  1. 8.  therefore  I  will  wail,  will  go  strip,  and  n

11.  pass  ye  away,  having  thy  shame  n.

5.  +  6.  shall  waste  with  her  own  n.  swords
llab.  3.  9.  thy  bow  was  made  quite  n.  according
Mat.  25. 36.  I  was  n.  and  ye  clothed  me  not,  43.

38.  when  saw  we  thee  n.  and  clothed  thee  r  44.
Mark  14. 51.  having  a  linen  cloth  about  his  n.  body
52.  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  from  them  n.
John  21.7.  Peter  was  n.  and  cast  himself  into  the  sea
Acts  19. 16.  they  fled  out  of  that  house  n.  wounded

1  Cor.  4. 11.  to  this  present  hour  we  are  n.

2  Cor.  5.  3.  being  clothed,  we  shall  not  be  found  n.
lleb.  4.  13.  but  all  things  are  n.  to  the  eyes  of  him
Jam.  2.  15.  if  a  brother  or  sister  be  n.  and  destitute
Rev.  3. 17.  miserable,  poor,  and  blind,  and  n.

16.  15.  keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  n.

17.  16.  and  shall  make  her  desolate  and  n.  and  eat

See  Bare.

NAKEDNESS.

Gen.  9.  22.  and  Ham  saw  the  n.  of  his  father

23.  and  covered  n.  they  saw  not  their  father’s  n.

42.  9.  to  see  the  n.  of  the  land  ye  are  come,  12.
Exod.  20.  26.  that  thy  n.  be  not  discovered  thereon

28.  42.  shalt  make  linen  breeches  to  cover  their  n.
Lev.  18.  6.  none  of  you  shall  uncover  their  n.

7.  the  n.  of  father  or  mother,  8.  11,  15.  |  20.  11.

9.  the  n.  of  thy  sister  ||  10.  n.  of  thy  son’s  daughter

11.  n.  of  father’s  wife’s  daughter  shalt  not  uncovei

12.  n.  of  father’s  sister  II 13.  mother’s  sister,  20. 19.
14.  father’s  brother  ||  15.  n.  of  daughter-in-law

16.  n.  of  thy  brother’s  wife,  it  is  thy  brother's  n.

17.  n.  of  a  woman  and  her  daughter  not  uncover
19-  n.  of  a  woman  as  long  as  put  apart,  20. 18.

20.  17.  and  see  his  sister’s  n.  and  she  see  his  n.

20.  uncovered  his  uncle’s  n.  ||  21.  brother's  n.

Deut.  23.  +  14.  camp  be  holy,  that  he  see  now.  in  thee

24.  1 1.  if  found  matter  of  n.  in  her,  write  a  bill

28.  48.  shalt  serve  thine  enemies  in  n.  and  want

1  Sam.  20.  30.  to  the  confusion  of  thy  mother’s  n.
Isa.  20.  t  4.  buttocks  uncovered  to  the  n.  of  Egypt

47.  3.  thy  n.  shall  be  uncovered,  yea,  thy  shame
Lam.  1.  8.  because  they  have  seen  her  n.

Ezek.  16.  8.  I  covered  thy  n.  yea.  I  sware  to  thee
36.  thy  n.  discovered  thro’  thy  whoredoms,  23. 18.
16.  37.  and  will  discover  thy  n.  to  them

22.  10.  in  thee  they  discovered  their  father's  n.

23.  10.  these  discovered  her  n.  and  slew  her

29.  the  n.  of  thy  whoredom  shall  be  discovered
Hos.  2.  9.  my  wool  and  flax  given  to  cover  her  n.
Nah.  3.  5.  and  I  will  shew  the  nations  thy  n.

Ilab.  2.  15.  that  thou  mayest  look  on  their  n.

Rom.  8. 35.  shall  n.  separate  us  from  love  of  God  ?

2  Cor.  11. 27.  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  n.

Rev.  3.  18.  that  the  shame  of  thy  n.  do  not  appear

NAME

Is  referred  (I)  To  God,  and  signifies,  any  thing
whereby  his  nature  and  will  is  made  better  known
to  us,  as,  [1]  His  titles,  Exod.  3.  13,  14. 1  6.  3.
[2]  His  attributes,  or  properties,  Exod.  33.  19.  I
34.  6,  7;  1  Tim.  6.  1.  [3]  His  will  and  purpose
concerning  salvation  by  Christ,  John  17.  6,  26.

[4]  His  help  and  assistance,  1  Sam.  17.  45.  Psal.
44.  5.  [5]  His  honour,  renown,  and  glory,  Psal.
76. 1.  [6]  His  word,  Psal.  5.  11.  Acts  9.  15.  [7]
His  grace,  mercy,  and  love  to  sinners,  in  sending
Christ  into  the  world  to  save  them,  Psal.  22.  22.
John  17.  26.  [8]  His  wisdom,  power,  and  good¬
ness,  as  displayed  in  the  works  of  creation  and
providence ,  Psal.  8.  1,  9.  [9]  His  grace,  power,
and  providence,  Psal.  20.  1,  7-  [40]  His  worship  .
and  service,  1  Kings  5.  5.  Mai.  1.  6.  [11]  God
himself,  Psal.  29.  2.  1 34.  3.1  61.  5.  (II)  To
Christ,  and  signities,  [1]  His  deity  and  perfec¬
tions,  that  which  he  really  is,  and  is  acknowledged
to  be,  lsa.  9.  6.  Mat.  1.  23.  Rev.  19.  13.  His
name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  the  mighty  God  ;
that  is,  he  is  wonderful,  he  is  the  mighty  God.

[2]  His  authority  and  commission,  Mat.  7.  22.
Acts  4.  7-  [3]  The  preaching,  or  professing  of
his  gospel.  Mat.  10.  22. 1  19.  29.  Rev.  2.  13.

[4]  His  advancement  above  all  principality  and
power,  to  the  highest  degree  of  glory,  honour,  ma¬
jesty,  and  dominion,  Phil.  2.  9.  compared  with
Eph.  1.  20,  21.  (Ill)  To  man,  and  signifies,

[1]  That  particular  name  by  which  any  person
is  called,  Luke  1.  60,  63.  [2]  The  whole  per¬
son,  Luke  10.  20.  Rev.  3.  4.  [3]  Reputation

or  character,  whether  good  or  evil,  Deut.  22.  14.
Prov.  22.  1.  [4]  Honour,  glory,  and  renown,

Deut.  26.  19.  Zeph.  3.  20.  [5]  An  appearance
and  shew  of  religion  in  the  opinion  of  men.  Rev.

3.  1.  [6]  The  memory,  or  remembrance,  Deut.

29.  20.  [7]  Posterity,  or  issue,  Deut.  25.  7.

Isa.  66.  22.  [8]  lame  or  renown,  2  Chron.  26.

8.  15.

To  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  Exod.  20.7.,  To
swear  falsely,  or  without  occasion,  and  to  mingle
the  name,  of  God  in  our  discourses,  or  our  oaths,
either  falsely,  or  rashly,  or  wantonly,  or  unneces-
sa/ily,  or  presumptuously .  God  forbids  to  make
mention  of  the  names  of  other  gods,  Exod.  23. 13.
He  would  not  so  much  as  have  them  named,  or
their  names  pronounced .  The  gods  of  the  heathen
are  nothing  at  all,  therefore  the  Israelites  were  to
shew  nothing  but  contempt  for  them :  they  hardly
ever  pronounced  the  name  Baal,  they  disfigured
it,  for  example,  by  saying ,  Mephibosheth,  or  Me-
riboshelh,  instead  of  Mephibaal,  or  Meribaal;
where  Bosheth  signifies  something  shameful,  or
contemptible.

To  give  a  name,  is  a  token  of  command  and  au¬
thority.  The  father  gives  names  to  his  children
and  slaves.  It  is  said,  that  Adam  gave  a  name
to  his  wife,  and  to  all  the  animals,  and  that  the
name  he  gave  them  became  their  true  name.  God
changed  the  name  of  Abram,  Jacob,  and  Sarai;
which  expresses  his  absolute  dominion  over  all
men,  and  his  particular  benevolence  towards  those
whom  he  receives  more  especially  into  the  num¬
ber  of  his  own  :  hence  it  was  that  he  gave  a  xame,
even  before  their  birth,  to  some  persons  whom


N  A  M


NAM


NAM


he  appointed  for  great  purposes,  and  who  belonged
to  hvm  in  a  particular  manner  ;  such  as  to  Jedi-
dial),  or  Solomon,  son  of  David ;  to  the  Messiah,
to  John  the  Baptist,  Sc.

To  know  any  one  by  his  name,  1  know  thee  by  name,
Exod.  33. 12.  expresses  a  distinction,  a  friendship,
a  particular  familiarity.  It  is  spoken  perhaps  in
allusion  to  the  manner  of  the  kings  oj  the  east,  who
had  very  little  conversation  w.th  their  subjects ;
they  saw  them  but  seldom,  and  hardly  ever  ap¬
peared  in  public  :  so  that  when  they  knew  any  one
of  their  servants  by  name ,  when  they  vouchsafed  to
speak  to  them,  to  call  them,  and  to  admit  them  into
their  presence ,  it  was  esteemed  as  a  very  great
mark  of  favour.

Gen.  2.  19.  what  Adam  called,  that  wasn.  thereof

4.  1?.  call  the  n.  of  the  city  after  the  n.  of  his  son

5.  2.  lie  blessed  them,  and  called  their  n.  Adam
11.  4.  let  us  make  us  a  n.  lest  we  be  scattered
19.  22.  therefore  the  n,  of  the  city  is  /oar

28.  19.  the  n.  of  the  city  was  Luz  at  the  first
48.  6.  shall  be  called  after  the  n.  of  their  brethren
Exod.  34. 14.  the  Lord,  whose  n.  is  Jealous,  is  jealous
Lev.  18.  21.  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  n.  of  thy
God,  saith  the  Lord,  19.  12.  I  21.  C.  I  22.  2,  32.
Num.  11.  26.  n.  of  one  Eldad,  of  the  other  Medad
17.  2.  write  thou  every  man's  n.  upon  his  rod
25.  14.  the  n.  of  the  Israelite  that  was  slain
15.  n.  of  Midianitish  woman  slain  was  Cozbi

27.  4.  why  should  n.  of  our  father  be  done  away  ?
32.  42.  and  called  it  Nobah,  after  his  own  n.

JJeut.’l .24.  shalt  destroy  their  n.  from  under  heaven
9.  14.  and  blot  out  their  n.  from  under  heaven

22.  14.  bring  up  an  evil  n.  on  her,  and  say

19.  he  hath  brought  up  an  evil  n.  on  a  virgin

25.  6.  first  born  shall  succeed  in  n.  of  his  brother
7-  to  raise  up  to  his  brother  a  n.  in  Israel

26.  19.  to  make  thee  high  in  n.  and  in  honour

28.  58.  thou  mayest  fear  this  glorious  and  fearful  n.
Josh.  23.  7-  nor  make  mention  of  w.  of  their  gods
Ruth  2.  19.  man’s  n.  with  whom  1  wrought  is  Boaz

4.  5.  to  raise  up  the  n.  of  the  dead,  10.

17.  the  women  her  neighbours  gave  it  a  n.

1  Ham.  25.  3.  the  n.  of  the  man  was  Nabal

9.  they  spake  to  IS  abal  in  the  n.  of  David

2  Sam.  6.  2.  whose  n.  is  called  by  the  n.  of  the  Lord

7.  9.  1  have  made  thee  a  great  n.  like  the  n.  of  the

great  men  in  the  earth,  1  Chron.  17-  8.
23.  God  redeemed  to  make  him  aw.  1  Chr.  17.  21.

8.  13.  David  gat  him  aw.  when  he  returned

14.  7-  shall  not  leave  to  my  husband  neither  w.  nor

23.  18.  Abishai  had  the  w.  among  three

22.  these  things  did  Benaiah,  and  had  the  n.  among
three  mighty  men,  1  Chron.  11.  20,  24.

1  Kings  1.  47.  God  make  the  w.  of  Solomon  better

than  thy  w.  and  his  throne  greater  than  thy
14.  21.  chose  to  put  his  w.  there,  2  Chron.  12.  13.

18.  24.  call  ye  on  the  w.  of  your  gods,  25.

21.  8.  so  Jezebel  wrote  letters  in  Ahab’s  w.

2  Kings  14.  27-  w  ould  not  blot  out  the  w.  of  Israel
Lira  2.  61.  and  was  called  after  their  w.  Neh.  7. 63.

5.  1.  prophesied  in  the  w.  of  the  God  of  Israel
Neh.  9.  7.  and  gavest  him  the  w.  of  Abraham

10.  so  didst  thou  get  thee  a  w.  as  it  is  this  day
Lsth.  2.  22.Esthercertified  the  king  in  Mordecai’s  w.

8.  8.  wmite  ye  also  for  the  Jews  in  the  king’s  n.

Job  18.  17.  he  shall  have  no  w.  in  the  street
30.  t  8.  they  W'ere  children  of  men  and  of  no  n.
Psal.  9.  5.  thou  hast  put  out  their  w.  for  ever

20.  1.  the  w.  of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee

■  5.  in  the  w.  of  God  we  will  set  up  our  banners

44.  20.  if  we  have  forgotten  the  w.  of  our  God
69.  30.  I  will  praise  the  w.  of  God  with  a  song
83.  4.  the  w.  of  Israel  be  no  more  in  remembrance
18.  whose  w.  alone  is  Jehovah,  art  most  high
99.  3.  let  them  praise  thy  great  w.  for  it  is  holy
109.  13.  and  let  their  w.  be  blotted  out
113.  3.  the  Lord's  w.  is  to  be  praised
Prov.  10.  7-  but  the  w.  of  the  w  icked  shall  rot
18.  10.  the  w.  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower

22.  1.  a  good  w.  is  rather  to  be  chosen  than  riches
30.  9.  lest  I  take  the  w.  of  my  God  in  vain

Lccl.  7.  1.  a  good  n.  better  than  precious  ointment
Isa.  14.  22.  1  will  cut  off  from  Babylon  the  w.

55.  13.  it  shall  be  to  the  Lord  for  a  n.  for  a  sign

56.  5.  1  will  give  them  a  w.  an  everlasting  w.

57. 15.  whose  w.  is  holy  |l  62.  2.  called  by  a  new  w.
63.  12.  to  make  himself  an  everlasting  w.

14.  lead  thy  people,  to  make  thyself  a  glorious  w.

65.  15.  ye  shall  leave  vour  n.  tor  a  curse  to  my

chosen,  and  call  his  servants  by  another  w.

66.  22.  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  n.  remain
Jer.  13.  11.  that  they  might  be  to  me  for  a  w.  33.  9.

32.  20.  which  hast  made  thee  a  w.  Dan.  9.  t  15.

33.  16.  this  is  the  w.  wherewith  she  shall  be  called
46.  18.  as  1  live,  saith  the  King,  whose  w.  is  the

Lord  of  hosts,  48.  15.  |  51.  57.
Ezek.  20.  29.  and  the  w.  thereof  is  called  Bamah

22.  f  5.  mock  thee  which  art  polluted  of  w.

23.  1 10.  and  she  became  a  w.  among  women

24.  2.  son  of  man,  write  thee  the  n.  of  the  day
48.  35.  the  w.  of  the  city  shall  be,  1  he  Lord  is  there

Dan.  2. 20.  blessed  be  the  w.  of  God  for  ever  and  ever

4.  8.  Daniel  came,  according  to  the  w.  of  my  God
Tlos.  1.  6.  God  said  to  him,  call  her  w.  Lo-ruhamah

2. 17.  they  shall  no  more  be  remembered  by  their  w.
Amos  5.  27*  saith  Lord,  whose  n.  is  the  God  of  hosts
Mic.  4.  5.  for  all  people  walk  every  one  in  the  n.  of
his  god,  we  will  walk  in  the  n.  of  our  God
Zeph.  1.  4.  1  will  cut  off  the  n.  of  the  Chemarims
3.  20.  I  will  make  you  a  n.  and  a  praise
Zech.  6. 12.  the  man  whose  n.  is  the  Branch
lilat.  10.  41.  receiveth  prophet  in  the  n.  of  a  prophet,
a  righteous  man  in  n.  of  a  righteous  man
42.  shall  give  a  cup  of  water  only  in  n.  of  disciple
28.  19.  baptizing  them  in  the  n.  of  the  Lather
Luke  1.  61.  none  of  thy7  kindred  is  called  by  this  n.
63.  and  he  wrote,  saying,  his  n.  is  John
6.22.  blessed,  when  shall  cast  out  yourw.  as  evil
John  1 . 6.  a  man  sent  from  God ,  whose  n.  was  John
3. 18.  not  believed  in  the  n.  of  the  only  begotten

5.  43.  I  am  come  in  my  Father's  n.  and  ye  receive


John  10.  25.  the  works  that  I  do  in  my  Father  s  n.
Acts  2.  38.  be  baptized  in  the  n.  of  the  Lord  Jesus

3.  6.  in  the  n.  of  Jesus  Christ,  rise  up  and  walk

4.  7.  by  what  power  or  n.  have  ye  done  this  ?

12.  there  is  none  other  n.  under  heaven  given

17.  speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  n.  18.

30.  that  wonders  may  be  done  by  the  n.  of  Jesus

5.  28.  that  you  should  not  teach  in  this  n.  40.

8.  12.  preaching,  concerning  the  n.  of  Jesus

9.  21.  that  destroyed  them  that  called  on  this  n.

27.  he  had  preached  boldly  in  the  n.  of  Jesus

15.  26.  have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  n.  of  Jesus

16.  18.  said,  in  the  n.  of  Jesus  come  out  ot  her
19.  5.  they  were  baptized  in  the  n.  of  Jesus

26.  9.  to  do  contrary  to  the  n.  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth
Rom.  2.  24.  for  the  n.  of  God  is  blasphemed
1  Cor.  1.  13.  were  ye  baptized  in  the  n.  of  Paul  ?

5.  4.  in  the  n.  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  Fph.  5.  20.

6.  11.  are  justified  in  the  n.  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Eph.  1.  21.  far  above  every  n.  that  is  named
Phil.  2.  9.  hath  given  him  a  n.  above  every  n.

10.  at  the  n.  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow
Col.  3. 17.  do  all  in  the  n.  of  the  Lord  Jesus

1  Tim.  6. 1.  that  the  n.  of  God  be  not  blasphemed

2  Tim.  2. 19.  the  n.  of  Christ,  depart  from  iniquity
fdeb.  1.  4.  he  hath  obtained  a  more  excellent  n.
Jam.  2.  7-  do  not  they  blaspheme  that  worthy  n.  ?

1  Pet.  4.  14.  if  reproached  for  the  n.  of  Christ

1  John  3.  23.  should  believe  on  n.  of  his  Son,  5. 13.
Rev.  2.  17.  a  n.  written,  which  no  man  knoweth
3.  1.  thou  hast  a  n.  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead

12.  1  will  write  on  him  the  n.  of  my  God

8.  11.  the  n.  of  the  star  is  called  Wormwood

9.  11.  whose  n.  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  is  Abaddon

13.  1.  and  on  his  heads  the  n.  of  blasphemy

14.  1.  his  Father’s  n.  written  in  their  foreheads

16.  9.  and  men  blasphemed  the  n.  of  God

17.  5.  on  her  forehead  was  a  n.  written,  Mystery

19.  12.  a  n.  written  no  man  knew  but  himself
i6.  on  his  thigh  a  n.  written,  King  of  kings

See  Called.

By  NAME,  or  by  the  NAME.

Exod.  6.  3.  I  appeared  by  the  n.  of  God  Almighty

31.  2.  I  have  called  by  n.  Bezaleel,  35.  30.

33.  12.  yet  thou  hast  said,  I  know  thee  by  n.  17.
Num.  4.  32.  by  n.  ye  shall  reckon  the  instruments
Josh.  21.  9.  they  gave  these  cities  mentioned  by  n.

1  Sam.  17.  23.  Philistine  of  Gath,  Goliath  by  n.

2  Sam.  20.  21.  Sheba,  son  of  Bichri  by  n.  hath  lifted
1  Kings  13.  2.  a  child  shall  he  born,  Josiah  by  n.

1  Chr.  4.  41.  these  written  by  n.  came  and  smote
12. 31 .  expressed  by  n.  16.  41. 2  Chr.  28.  15.  1  31. 19.
Esth.  2.  14.  except  that  she  were  called  by  n.

Isa.  44.  5.  shall  call  himself  by  the  n.  of  Jacob,  and
surname  himself  by  the  n.  of  Israel,  48.  1.
45.  3.  1  the  lord  which  call  thee  by  thy  n.

John  10.  3.  and  he  ealleth  his  own  sheep  by  n.

Acts  4.  10.  by  the  n.  of  Jesus  this  man  is  whole
1  Cor.  1.  10.  I  beseech  you  by  the  n.  of  our  I.ord

3  John  14.  our  friends  salute  thee,  greet  friends  by  n.

See  Expressed.

His  NAME.

Exod.  3.  13.  shall  say,  what  is  his  n.  ?  Prov.  30.  4.

15.  3.  the  Ld.  is  his  n.  Jer.  33.  2.  Amos  5.  8.  I  9.  6.

20.  7.  guiltless  thattaketh  hisn.  in  vain,  Deut.  5. 11.

28.  21.  every  stone  with  his  n.  shall  they  be,  39.  14.
Deut.  3.  14.  Jair  called  them  after  his  own  n.

6.  13.  shalt  serve  him,  and  shalt  swear  by  his  n.

10.  8.  to  bless  in  his  n.  to  this  day,  1  Chr.  23.  13.

12.  5.  the  Lord  your  God  shall  choose  to  put  his
n.  there,  21.  1  Kings  14.  21.  2  Chron.  12.  13.

11.  shall  choose  to  cause  his  n.  to  dwell  there
14.  23.  choose  to  place  hisn.  there,  16.6,11.  |  26.  2.

24.  the  Lord  shall  choose  to  set  his  n.  there

25.  6.  that  his  n.  be  not  put  out  of  Israel
10.  and  his  n.  shall  be  called  in  Israel

29.  20.  L.  shall  blot  out  his  n.  from  under  heaven
Judg.  13.  6.  1  asked  not,  neither  told  he  me  his  n.
Ruth  4.  14.  that  his  n.  may  be  famous  in  Israel

1  Sam.  12.  22.  for  his  n.  sake,  Psal.  23.  3.  I  106.  8.

1  John  2.  12.  3  John  7.

18.  30.  so  that  his  n.  was  much  set  by

25.  25.  as  his  n.  is,  so  is  he,  Nabal  is  his  n.

1  Chr.  16.  8.  give  thanks  to  Lord,  call  upon  his  n.
make  known  his  deeds,  Ps.  105.  1.  Isa.  12.  4.
29.  give  the  glory  due  to  his  n.  Ps.  29.  2.  |  96.  8.
Ezra  6.  12.  God  tfiat  caused  his  n.  dwell  there
Psal.  34.  3.  let  us  exalt  his  n.  together,  66.  2.

41.  5.  when  shall  he  die  and  his  n.  perish  ?

68.  4.  that  rideth  on  the  heavens  by  his  n.  JaH

69.  36.  they  that  love  his  n.  shall  dwell  therein
72.  17-  his  n.  shall  endure  for  ever,  as  long  as  sun

19.  and  blessed  be  his  glorious  n.  for  ever
76.  1 .  his  n.  is  great  in  Isr.  ||  96.  2.  bless  his  n.  100. 4.
99.  6.  Samuel  among  them  that  call  on  his  n.

111.  9.  holy  and  reverend  is  hisn.

135.  3.  sing  praises  to  his  n.  for  it  is  pleasant

148.  13.  praise  his  n.  for  his  n.  alone  is  excellent

149.  3.  let  them  praise  his  n.  in  the  dance

Prov.  21.  24.  proud  and  haughty  scorner  is  his  n.
Eccl.  6.  4.  his  n.  shall  be  covered  with  darkness
Isa.  7-  14.  shall  call  his  n.  Immanuel,  Mat.  1.  23.
9.  6.  and  his  n.  shall  be  called,  Wonderful

12.  4.  make  mention  that  his  n.  is  exalted

47.  4.  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  n.  the  Iloly  One  of
Israel,  48.  2.  I  51.  15.  I  54.  5.  Jer.  10.  16.  1  31.
35.  |  32.  18.  |  50.  34.  I  51.  19.

48.  19.  his  n.  should  not  have  been  cut  off
Jer.  11.  19.  hisn.  may  be  no  more  remembered

20.  9.  I  will  not  speak  any  more  in  his  n.

23.  6.  this  is  his  n.  whereby  he  shall  be  called
48.  17.  all  3’e  that  know  hisn.  say,  how  is  staff

Amos  4.  13.  the  Lord,  the  God  of  hosts  is  his  n.
Zech.  10.  12.  they  shall  w  alk  up  and  down  in  hisn.
14.  9.  in  that  day  shall  be  one  I.ord,  and  his  n.  one
Mai.  3.  16.  for  them  that  thought  on  his  n.  a  book
Mat.  1.  23.  shalt  call  his  n.  Jes.  Luke  1.  31.  I  2.  21.
12.  21.  in  his  n.  shall  the  Gentiles  trust
Mark  6.  14.  for  his  n.  was  spread  abroad
Luke  1.  13.  and  thou  shalt  call  hisn.  John

24.  47.  remissionof  sins  should  be  preached  in  hisn.
John  1.  12.  even  to  them  that  believe  on  his  n.


John  2.  23.  many  believed  in  hisn.  when  they  saw
5.  43.  if  another  shall  come  in  his  own  n.

20.  31.  that  believing  ye  might  have  life  thro’  bun.
Acts  3. 16.  his  n.  through  faith  in  his  n.  hath  made

5.  41.  they  w7ere  counted  worthy  to  suffer  for  Ins  n.
10.  43.  thro’  his  n.  shall  receive  remission  of  sins

13.  8.  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  for  so  is  his  n.

15.  14.  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  hisn.

Rom.  1.  5.  to  the  faith  among  all  nations  for  his  n.
Heb.  6.  10.  of  love  which  ye  shewed  towards  his  r...

13.  15.  let  us  offer  praise,  giving  thanks  to  hisn.
Rev.  3.  5.  not  blot  out  his  n.  but  will  confess  hisn.

6.  8.  and  hisn.  that  sat  on  him  was  Death

9.  11.  in  the  Greek  tongue  hath  hisn.  ApoIlvOn
13'.  6.  to  blaspheme  hisn.  ||  17 .  number  of  h.  n~lR  2.

14.  11.  whosoever  receiveth  the  mark  of  hisn.

22.  4.  and  his  n.  shall  be  in  their  foreheads

See  Holy,  Lord.

My  NAME.

Gen.  32.  29.  why  is  it  that  thou  dost  ask  after  my  n.  I
48.  16.  let  my  n.  be  named  on  them,  let  them  grow
Exod.  3.  15.  this  is  my  n.  for  ever,  and  my  memorial
9.  16.  raised  thee  up,  that  my  n.  may  be  declare;!
20.  24.  -where  1  record  myn.  I  will  come  unto  thee

23.  21.  provoke  him  not,  for  my  n.  is  in  him
Lev.  19-  12.  ye  shall  not  swear  by  my  n.  falsely

20.  3.  his  seed  unto  Molech,  to  profane  my  holy  n.
Num.  6.27.  put  myn.  on  the  children  of  Israel
Deut.  18. 19.  which  he  shall  3peak  in  my  n.  20.
Judg.  13.  18.  why  askest  thou  thus  after  my  n.  ?

1  Sam.  24.  21.  swear  thou  wilt  not  destroy  my  n,

25.  5.  and  go  to  Nabal,  and  greet  him  in  my  n.

2  Sam.  7.  13.  he  shall  build  an  house  for  myn

1  Kings  5.  5.  i  8.  18,  19.  1  Chron.  22.  10,
12.  28.  lest  the  city  be  called  after  my  m.

18. 18.  1  have  no  son  to  keep  my  n.  in  remembrance
1  Kings  8. 16.  that  my  n.  might  be  therein,  29.  1  11.

36.  2  Kings 21.  4,  7-  2  Chron.  6.  5,  6.)

7.  16.  1  33.  4,  7-

9- 7-  this  house  which  t  have  hallowed  for  my  n.

1  Chr.  22.8.  shall  not  build  an  house  to  my  n.  28, 3.

2  Chr.  6.  8.  in  heart  to  build  an  house  for  my  n.

9.  Solomon  shall  build  the  house  for  my  n.

7.  20.  this  house  which  1  have  sanctified  for  my  n.
Neh.  1.9.  1  have  chosen  to  set  my  n.  there,  Jer.  7  !2.
Psal.  89.  24.  in  my  n.  shall  his  horn  be  exalted
91.  14.  because  he  hath  know'n  my  w.

Isa.  29.23.  they  shall  sanctify  my  n.  and  fear

41.  25.  from  rising  of  the  sun  shall  he  call  on  my  n.

42.  8.  I  am  the  Lord,  that  is  my  n.  and  my  glory

48.  9.  for  my  n.  sake  will  1  defer  mine  anger
11  for  how  should  myn.  he  polluted?

49.  1.  hath  he  made  mention  of  my  n.

52.  5.  my  n.  continually  every  day  is  blasphemed
6.  therefore  my  people  shall  know  my  n.

66.  5.  brethren  that  cast  you  out  for  my  n.  sake
Jer.  14.  14.  they  prophesy  lies  in  my  n.  15. 1  23.25.

16.  21.  they  shall  know  that  my  n.  is  the  Ix>rd

23.  27-  they  think  to  cause  my  people  to  forget  my
n.  as  their  fathers  have  forgotten  my  n.  for  Baal

27. 15.  they  prophesy  a  lie  in  myn.  29.  9,  21,  23.

34. 16.  but  ye  turned  and  polluted  myn.

44.  26.  sworn  by  my  great  n.  my  n.  no  more  named
Ezek.  20.  9.  but  I  wrought  for  my  n.  14.  22,  44.

36  .  23.  and  l  will  sanctify  my  great  n.

Zech.  13.  9.  they  shall  call  on  my  n.  1  will  hear
Mai.  1.  6.  to  you,  O  priests,  that  despise  my  n.

11.  for  my  n.  shall  be  great  among  Gentiles,  and
in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  to  myn.

14.  my  n.  is  dreadful  among  the  heathen
2.  2.  lay  it  to  heart,  to  give  glory  unto  my  n.

5.  he  teared  me,  and  was  afraid  before  myn.

4.  2.  to  you  that  fear  my  n.  shall  the  sun  of  right.
Mat.  10.  22.  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men  for  myn.

sake,  24.  9.  Mark  1.3.  13.  Luke  Pi.

18.  5.  rec.  a  child  in  my  n.,Mark  9.  37.  Luke  9.  48.
20.  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  myn.

19.  29.  that  hath  forsaken  Ironses  for  my  n.  sake

24.  5.  for  many  shall  come  in  my  n.  and  shall  de¬

ceive  many,  Mark  13.  6.  Luke  21. 8.
Mark  5.  9.  he  answered,  saying,  my  n.  is  Legion
9.  39.  no  man  which  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my  n.
41 .  give  you  a  cu p  of  water  to  drink  in  my  n.

16.  17.  in  my  n.  shall  they7  cast  out  devils
Luke  21.  12.  brought  before  rulers  for  myn.  sake
John  14.  13.  -whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  n.  that

will  I  do,  14.  1  15.  16.  |  16.  23,  24.  26.

26.  the  Comforter  whom  he  will  send  in  my  n.

15.  21.  these  things  will  they  do  for  my  n.  sake
Acts  9. 15.  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  to  bear  my  n.

16.  great  things  he  must  suffer  for  my  n.  sake

15.  If.  the  Gentiles  upon  whom  my  n.  is  called
Rom.  9. 17.  and  that  my  n.  might  be  declared

1  Cor.  1. 15.  lest  any  say,  1  baptized  in  mine  own  n.
Rev.  2.  3.  and  for  myn.  sake  hast  laboured

13.  thou  holdest  fast  my  n.  and  hast  not  denied
3. 8.  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied  my  n.

See  Called.

Thy  NAME.

Gen.  12.  2.  I  will  bless  thee,  and  make  thy  n.  great

17.  5.  thy  n.  Abram,  but  thyn.  shall  be  Abraham^
32. 27.  said  to  him,  w  hat  is  thy  n.  ?  29.  Judg.  13. 17.

28.  he  said,  thy  n.  shall  be  no  more  called  Jacob,

but  Israel,  35. 10.  1  Kings  18.  31.
Exod.  5.  23.  since  came  to  Pharaoh  to  speak  in  thy  n.
Josh.  7.  9.  what  wilt  thou  do  to  thy  great  n.  ?

2  Sam.  7.  26.  let  thy  n.  be  magnified  for  ever
22.  50.  I  will  sing  praise  to  thy  n.  Psal.  9.  2.  I

18.  49.  1  61.  8.  I  66.4.  I  92. 1
1  Kings  1  17-  name  of  Solomon  better  than  thy  n.

8.  33.  turn  and  confess  thy  n.  2  Chron.  6.  24,  26.

41 .  but  cometh  for  thy  n.  sake,  2  Chron  6.  32.

42.  for  they  shall  hear  of  thy  great  n.

43.  that  all  people  of  the  earth  may  know  thy  «

this  house  is  called  by  thyn.  2  Chr.  0.  33

44.  house  1  built  for  thy  n.  48.  2  Chr.  6.  34,  38.

1  Chron.  17.  24.  thy  n.  may  be  magnified  (nr  ever

29.  13.  we  thank  and  praise  thyn.  Psal.  44.  8.

2  Chr.  6.  20.  that  thou  wouldest  put  thyn.  there

14.  11.  in  thy  n.  we  go  against  this  multitude

20.  8.  have  built  thee  a  sanctuary  for  thy  n.

9.  before  this  house,  for  thy  n.  is  in  this  house


NAM


NAT


N  AT


h.  1.  11.  servants,  who  desire  to  fear  thy  n.

5.  blessed  be  thy  glorious  n.  which  is  exalted

11.  5. 11.  let  them  that  love  thy  n.  be  joyful

1.  how  excellent  is  thy  n.  in  all  the  earth  !  9.
10.  they  that  know  thy  n.  will  trust  in  thee
.  22.  1  w  ill  declare  thy  ?i.  to  brethren,  Ileh.  2. 12.
.  11.  tor  thy  n.  sake  pardon  mine  iniquity
.  3.  for  thy  n.  sake  lead  me  and  guide  me
.5.  through  thy  n.  will  we  tread  them  under
1“.  I  will  make  thy  n.  to  be  remembered
.  10.  according  to  thy  n.  so  is  thy  praise
,0.  1  will  wait  on  thy  n.  ||  54. 1.  save  me  by  thy  n.
.  5.  given  the  heritage  ot  those  that  fear  thy  n.

.  4.  will  bless,  1  will  lift  up  my  hands  in  thy  n.
.7. they  have  defiled  the  dwelling-place  of  thyn.
0.  shall  the  enemy  blaspheme  thy  n.  for  ever?
3.  the  foolish  people  have  blasphemed  thy  n.

1.  iet  the  poor  and  needy  praise  thy  n.

.  1.  for  that  thy  n.  is  near  thy  works  declare
.  0.  that  have  not  called  on  thy  n.  Jer.  10.  25.
.help  us,  O  G.  of  salvation,  for  the  glory  of  thy
n.  and  purge  away  our  sins  for  thy  n.  sake
.18.  quicken  us,  and  we  will  call  upon  thy  74.

.  16.  that  they  may  seek  thy  n.  O  Lord
.  9.  all  nations  shall  come  and  glorify  thy  n.  12.

1.  teach  me,  unite  my  heart  to  fear  thy  n.

.  12.  Ilermon  shall  rejoice  in  thy  n.  16.

9.  21.  do  thou  for  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  n.  sake
5.  1.  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thyn.  give  glory
9.  55.  I  have  remembered  thy  n.  in  the  night

12.  as  thou  usest  to  do  to  those  that  love  thy  n.

5.  13.  thy  ?i.  O  Lord,  endureth  for  ever

8. 2.  I  will  praise  thy  n.  for  thy  loving-kindness,
thou  hast  magnified  thy  word  above  all  thy  n.
9.  20.  and  thine  enemies  take  thy  n.  in  vain
0. 13.  the  righteous  shall  give  thanks  to  thy  n.

2.  *•  out  of  prison,  that  1  may  praise  thy  n.

1.  11.  quicken  me,  0  Lord,  for  thy  n.  sake
5. 1.  1  will  bless  thyn.  foi  ever  and  ever,  2.

.  and  1  will  praise  thy  n.  for  ever,  Isa.  25. 1.
it.  1.  3.  thy  7i.  is  as  ointment  poured  torth
.  26.  8.  the  desire  of  our  soul  is  to  thy  n.

3.  by  thee  we  will  make  mention  of  thy  71.

.  16.  O  Lord,  thy  n.  is  from  everlasting

.  2.  maxe  thy  n.  known  to  thine  adversaries
,  there  is  none  that  calleth  on  thy  71.

.  10. 6.  thou  art  great  and  thy  71.  is  great  in  might
.  16.  the  Lord  calleth  thy  71.  a  green  olive-tree
.  7.  do  thou  it  for  thy  n.  sake,  we  have  sinned

l.  do  not  abhor  us  for  thy  71.  sake,  remember

.  25.  sent  letters  in  thy  n.  to  all  people  at  .lerus.

m.  3. 55.  1  called  upon  thyn.  out  of  the  dungeon

n.  9. 6.  the  prophets  spake  in  thy  71.  to  our  kings
c.  6.  9.  and  the  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy  71.
h.  1.  14.  that  no  more  of  thy  n.  be  sown

/.  1.6.  wherein  have  we  despised  thy  n.  ?
t.  6.  9.  hallowed  be  thy  71.  Lttke  11.2.

22.  in  thy  n.  have  we  not  cast  out  devils
■rk  5. 9.  he  asked  him,  what  is  thy  71.  ?  Luke  8.  30.
38.  casting  out  devils  in  thy  71.  Luke  9.  49.
ke  10.  17.  the  devils  are  subject  through  thy  n.
n  12.  28.  Path,  glorify  thy  n.  then  came  a  voice
.6.  I  have  manifested  thy  71.  to  the  men,  26.

1.  holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own,  n.  12.
ts  9. 14.  authority  to  bind  all  that  call  on  thy  n.
m.  15.  9.  1  will  confess,  and  sing  unto  thy  71.

v.  11. 18.  give  reward  to  them  that  fear  thy  71.

.  4.  who  shall  not  fear  and  glorify  thy  n.  ?

See  Cali, ed.

NAME,  Verb.

7771. 16. 3.  thou  shalt  anoint  to  me  him  whom  1  n.

.  8.  bring  him  up  whom  I  shall  n.  unto  thee
.62.2.  v'hich  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  shall  n.
NAMED,  ETI1.

7i.  23. 16.  Abrah.  weighed  silver  which  he  had  n.

.  36.  he  said,  is  not  he  rightly  m.  .lacob  ?

.  16.  and  let  my  name  be  74.  on  them

am.  A.  21.  she  n.  the  child  1-chabod,  saying
'.mgs  17. 34.  the  children  of  .lac.  whom  he  71.  Isr.
hro7i.(H.  14.  Moses’  sons  71.  of  the  tribe  of  Levi
:l.  6.  10.  what  hath  been,  is  n.  already

.  61.  6.  ye  shall  be  n.  the  priests  of  the  Lord
.  44.  26.  mv  name  shall  no  more  be  ti.  in  mouth
10s  6.  1.  which  are  ».  chief  of  the  nations
c.  2. 7.  O  thou  that  art  74.  of  the  house  of  Jacob
ke  2.21.  Jesus  was  so  n.  of  the  angel  before  cone.

.  13.  he  chose  twelve,  whom  he  74.  apostles

m.  15.  20.  to  preach,  not  where  Christ  was  n.
or.  5. 1.  such  fornication  not  71.  among  Gentiles
h.  1.  21.  fat*  above  every  name  that  is  n .

15.  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  n.

3.  covetousness,  let  it  not  be  once  71.  among  you
im.  2. 19.  let  every  one  that  71.  the  name  of"  Chr.
NAMELY.

cl.  5.  13.  sore  evil,  74.  riches  kept  for  the  owners

•  7-  20.  Lord  shave  with  a  razor,  n.  by  Assyria
irk  12.  31.  the  second  is  like,  74.  this,  shalt  love

NAM  ES.

n.  2. 20.  Adam  gave  71.  to  all  cattle,  and  to  fowl

•  18.  called  their  n.  after  n.  his  father  called  them
od.  23.  13.  be  circumspect  and  make  no  mention

of  the  71.  of  other  gods,  Deut.  12.  3.
>•9.  grave  on  them  the  n.  of  children  of  1st.  21.

2.  Aaron  shall  bear  their  n.  before  the  Lord,  29.
’>n.  1.  2.  the  number  of  their  71.  by  their  poll

.  the  ».  of  the  men  that  shall  stand  with  you
43.  numb,  of  n.  of  the  Levites  from  a  month  old
'•  16.  toe  ti.  of  the  men  which  Moses  sent  to  spy’

•  17. 7i.  of  men  which  shall  divide  the  land

am.  23.8.  the  n.  of  mighty  men  whom  David  had
ra  5.  4.  what  are  their  n .  who  make  this  building
al.  16.  4.  nor  take  up  their  n.  into  my  lips
!*  11.  they  call  their  lands  after  their  own  n.

7.  4.  the  stars  he  calleth  them  by  w.  Isa.  40.  26.
(k.  2^.  4.  the  71.  of  them  were  Aholah  the  elder
,J.2.  17.  for  1  will  take  away  the  n.  of  Baalim
eh.  13. 2.  cut  off  the  71.  of  the  idols  out  of  the  land
«10.20.  rejoice,  your  n.  are  written  in  heaven
ts  1. 15.  the  number  of  the  n.  together  were  120
'•15.  if  it  be  a  question  of  words  and  n.  look  to  it
'it-  4.  3.  whose  ti.  are  in  the  book  of  life
v.  3. 4.  thou  hast  a  few  n.  in  Sardis,  not  defiled


Rev.  11. 4 13.  were  slain  71.  of  men  seven  thousand

13.  +  1.  and  on  his  heads  the  n.  of  blasphemy

8.  whose  n.  are  not  written  in  book,  17.  8.

17.  3.  I  saw  a  woman  full  of  n.  of  blasphemy

21.  12.  71.  written  thereon,  n.  of  the  twelv  e  tfibes

14.  in  them  the  71.  of  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb

NAPKIN.

Luke  19.  20.  thy  pound  which  1  have  kept  in  a  n.
Joint  11.  44.  his  face  was  bound  about  with  a  n.

20.  7-  the  n.  that  was  about  his  head  not  lying
NARD.

Mark.  14.  t  3.  a  woman  having  a  box  of  pure  71.
NARROW.

Num.  22.  26.  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a  n.  way
Josh.  17. 15.  cut  down,  if  mount  Ephraim  be  too  74.
1  Kings6.4.  for  house  he  made  windows  of  71.  lights
Prov.  23.  27.  and  a  strange  woman  is  a  w.  pit

24.  +  10.  if  thou  faint,  thy  strength  is  71.

Isa.  49.19.  the  land  of  thy  destruction  shall  be  too  74.
Mat.  7.  14.  71.  is  the  wav  which  leadeth  to  life
NAB  ROW  ED.

1  Kings  6.  6.  in  wall  of  house  made  n.  rests  round

NARROWER.

Isa.  28.  20.  the  covering n.  than  he  can  wrap  himself
NARROWLY.

Job  13.  27.  thou  lookest  n.  to  all  my  paths
Isa.  14. 16.  that  see  thee,  shati  n.  look  upon  thee
NATION

Signifies,  [1]  All  the  mhabitants  of  a  particular
comitry,  Deut.  4.  34.  [2]  A  country  or  king¬

dom,  Exod.  34.  10.  Rev.  7.  9.  [3]  Countrymen,
natives  of  the  same  stock.  Acts  26.  4.  [4]  The

father,  head,  and  original  'of  a  7iation  or  people,
Gen.  25.  23.  [5]  The  heathen  or  Gentiles,  Isa.
55.  5.

Gen.  15. 14.  and  also  that  n.  they'  serve  will  1  judge

20.  4.  Lord,  wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteous  n.7

21.  13.  of  the  bond-woman  I  will  make  a  n.

35.  11.  a  n.  and  kings  shall  come  of  thee

Exod.  9.  24.  in  all  Egypt,  since  it  became  a  n.

19.  6.  ve  shall  be  unto  me  an  holy  n.  1  Pet.  2.  9.

21.  8.  to  sell  her  to  a  strange  n.  have  no  power

33.  13.  and  consider  that  this  74.  is  thy  people

34.  10.  have  not  been  done  in  any  n.  do  with  thee
Lev.  18.  26.  nor  any  of  your  ?4.  commit  abominations

20.  23.  shall  not  walk  in  the  manners  of  the  n.
Am/w.14.12.  1  will  make  of  thee  agreat  n.  l)evt.  9.14.
Deut.  4.  34.  or  hath  God  assayed  to  take  him  a  n.

from  the  midst  of  another  n.  by  wonders  '
28.  33.  the  fruit  of  thy  land  shall  aw/eatup

36.  the  Lord  shall  bring  thee  and  thy  king  to  aw.

49.  Lord  shall  bring  aw.  against  thee  from  far

50.  a  w.  of  fierce  countenance  shall  not  regard
32.  28.  are  a  n.  void  of  counsel,  no  understanding

2  Sam.  7.  23.  w  hat  w.  like  thy  people  ?  1  Chr.  17.  21 .

1  Kings  18.  10. there  is  now.  whither  my'  Lord  hath

not  sent  to  seek  thee,  he  took  an  oath  of  that  w.

2  Kings  17.  29-  every  w.  made  gods  of  their  own

1  Chr.  16.  20.  and  when  they  went  from  n.  to  w.

2  Chr.  15.  6.  n.  was  destroyed  of  w.  and  city  of  city
32.  15.  no  god  of  any  w.  or  kingdom  was  able

Job  34.  29.  it  be  done  against  a  n.  or  a  man  only
Ps.  33.  12.  blessed  is  the  w.  whose  God  is  the  Lord

4.3.  1.  OGod  plead  my  cause  against  an  ungodly  w.
83.  4.  come,  let  us  cut  them  off  from  being  aw.

105.  13.  they  went  from  one  m.  to  another

1C6.  5.  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  gladness  of  thy  w.
147.  20.  he  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  w.

Prov.  14.  .34.  righteousness  exalteth  a  w.  but  sin  is
Isa.  1.  4.  ah  sinful  w.  a  people  laden  with  iniquity

2. 4.  w.  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  w.  Mic.  4.  3.

9.  3.  thou  hast  multiplied  tbew.  not  increased  joy

10.  6.  1  will  send  him  against  an  hypocritical  w.

14.  32.  what  answer  the  messengers  of  the  n.?

18.  2.  go,  ye  swift  messengers,  to  a  w.  scattered  and

peeled,  a  w.  meted  out  and  tiodden  down,  7.

26.  2.  open  that  the  righteous  n  may  enter  in

15.  thou  hast  increased  the  w.  O  Lord,  the  71.

49.  7-  saith  the  Lord  to  him  whom  thew.  abhorreth

51.  4.  hearken  and  give  ear  to  me,  O  my  w.

55.5.  thou  shalt  call  a  w.  thou  knowest  not

58.  2.  seek  me,  as  a  n.  that  did  righteousness
60.  12.  the  74.  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish

22.  and  a  small  one  shall  become  a  strong  w.

65.  l.aw.  that  was  not  called  by  my  name

66.  8.  or  shall  a  n.  be  born  at  once?

Jer.  2.  11.  hath  aw.  changed  their  gods?

5.  9.  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  w.  29.  1  9.  9.

15.  1  will  bring  aw.  on  you  from  far,  (3  house  of
Israel,  it  is  a  mighty  w.  it  is  an  ancient  w.

7.  28.  a  71.  that  obeyeth  not  the  voice  of  the  lord
12.  17.  I  w  ill  utterly  pluck  up  and  destroy  that  74.
18.  7;  speak  concerning  a  w.  to  pluck  it  up',  9.

8.  if  thatw.  against  whom  1  have  pronounced

25.  12.  punish  that  w.  for  their  iniquity,  27.  8.

.32.  behold,  evil  shall  go  forth  from  71.  to  w.

27. 8.  w.  which  will  not  serve  Nebuchadnezzar,  13.
31.36.  then  Israel  cease  from  being  a 74.  33.24.

48.  2.  let  us  cut  off  Moab  from  being  a  w.

49.  31.  arise,  get  you  up  to  the  wealthy  n.-

.36.  shall  be  no  w.  whither  Elam  shall  not  come

50.  3.  out  of  the  north  cometh  a  7 1.  against  her
Lam.  4. 17. have  W'atched  fora74.  that  could  notsave
Ezek.  2.  .3.  1  send  thee  to  Isr.'-el,  a  rebellious  74.

.37.  22.  I  will  make  them  one  n.  in  the  land
Dan.  8.  22.  four  kingd.  shall  stand  up  out  of  the  74.
12.  1.  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since  was  a  74.

Joel  1.  6.  for  a  n.  is  come  up  upon  my  land
AmosO.  14.  behold,  1  will  raise  up  against  you  aw.
MicA.7.  1  will  make  her  that  was  cast  otf  a  strong  74.
Hah.  1. 6.  the  Chaldeans,  that  bitter  and  hasty  74.
Zeph.  2. 1.  gather  together,  O  n.  not  desired
5.  woe  to  the  w.  of  the  Cherethites
Hag.  2.  14.  so  is  this  people  and  74.  before  me
Mai.  3.  9.  even  this  whole  7 4.  have  robbed  me
Mat.  21.  43.  the  kingdom  of  God  given  to  a  n.

24.  7-  w.  shall  rise  ag.  74.  Mark  13.  8.  I.uke  21. 10.
Luke  7.  5.  for  he  loveth  our  w.  and  hath  built  us
23.2.  we  found  this  fellow  perverting  thew.

Joint  11. 48.  the  Romans  shall  come  and  take  our  74.

50.  one  man  die,  that  the  whole  w.  perish  not

51.  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that  n.


Joint  11.  52.  and  not  for  that  n.  only,  but  that  als®
18.  35.  thine  own  w.  hath  delivered  thee  to  me
Acts  2.  5.  Jews,  devout  men  out  of  every  n.

7.  7.  the  71.  to  whom  they  shall  be  in  bondage

10.  22.  of  good  report  among  all  the  w.  of  the  Jews
28.  it  is  unlawful  to  come  to  one  of  another  74.

35.  but  in  every  w.  he  that  feareth  him

24.  2.  that  very  worthy  deeds  are  done  to  this  74.
10.  1  know  that  thou  hast  been  a  judge  to  this  w.

17.  I  came  to  bring  alms  to  my  w.  and  offerings

26.  4.  my  life  was  at  first  among  mine  own  n.

28.  19-  not  that  1  had  aught  to  accuse  my  w.  of

Gal.  1.  14.  profited  above  my  equals  in  my  own  n,
Phil.  2.  15.  in  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  34.
Rev.  5.  9.  thou  hast  redeemed  us  out  of  every  74

14.  6.  having  the  gospel  to  preach  to  every  74.

See  Foolish.

NATIONS.

Gen.  10.  32.  and  by  these  were  the  n.  divided

14.  1.  Tidal  king  of  w.  made  war  with  Bera,  9-
17-4.  shalt  be  a  father  of  many  74.  5.  Rom.  4. 17, 18,
6.  and  1  will  make  n.  of  thee,  .35.  11.  I  48.  19.

16.  I  will  bless  Sarah,  she  shall  be  a  mother  of  n.

25.  23.  the  Lord  said,  two  n.  are  in  thy  womb
27  .  29.  and  let  w.  bow  down  to  thee

Exod.  .34.  24.  1  will  cast  out  thew.  before  thee,  and
enlarge  thy  borders,  Deut.  4.  38.  |  7.  22.  18.  20.
Lev.  18.  24.  the  n.  are  defiled  ||  28.  as  it  spued  out  74,
Num.  2.3.  9-  and  shall  not  be  reckoned  among  the  7t.

24.  8.  Israel  shall  eat  up  the  71.  his  enemies

20.  Amalek  was  the  first  of  the  7 4.  but  latter  end
Deut.  2.  25.  I  will  put  the  fear  of  thee  on  the  74.

4.  6.  this  is  your  wisdom  in  sight  of  the  w.

27.  Lord  shall  scatter  you  among  the  74.  Neh.  1.8.
7-  1.  Lord  hath  cast  out  many  w.  before  thee

9.  1.  to  possess  w.  greater  than  thyself,  11.  23.

12.  29.  when  God  shall  cut  off  the  74.  19.  1.

15.  6.  thou  shalt  lend  to  many  w.  28.  12.

28.  1.  the  Lord  will  set  thee  on  high  above  all  w.
32.  8.  Most  High  divided  to  the  w.  their  inheritance

43.  rejoice,  O  ye  w.  w  ith  his  people,  he  will  avenge
Judg.  2.  23.  therefore  the  Lord  left  those  n.

2  Sam.  7.  2.3.  which  thou  redeemedst  from  the  74.

1  Kings  1 1 . 2.  of  the  w.  concerning  w  hich  the  L.  said

2  Kings  17.  3.3.  served  gods  after  tlfe  manner  of  74.

18.  33.  hath  any  of  the  gods  of  the  74.  delivered,

19.  12.  2  Chron.  32.  13,  14.  Isa.  .36.  18.

1  Chr.  16.  31.  say  among  the  w.  the  I.ord  reigneth
17-  21.  by  driving  out  7 4.  from  before  thy'  people

2  Chr.  1.3.  9.  niade  priests  after  the  manner  of  74.
Kelt.  13.  26.  among  many '74.  was  no  king  like  him
Job  12.  2.3.  he  increaseth  the  n.  he  enlargeth  the  n,
Psal.  9.  20.  that  the  w.  may  know  themselves

22.  27.  all  the  kindreds  of  w.  shall  worship  thee

28.  the  Lord  is  governor  among  the.  n.

47.  3.  he  shall  subdue  the  w.  under  our  feet
57.  9.  I  will  sin°  to  thee  among  the  n.  108.  3.

66. 7-' his  eyes  beuold  the  74.  |[  67-  4.  letthe  74.  be  glad
96.  5.  for  all  the  gods  of  the  74 .  are  idols
106.  27.  to  overthrow  their  seed  among  the  n.

.34.  they  did  not  destroy  the  w.  Lord  commanded
Prov.  24.  24.  the  people  curse,  74.  shall  abhor  him
Isa.  2.  4.  and  he  shall  judge  among  the  n.

5.  26.  he  will  lift  up  an  ensign  to  the  n.  from  far

10.  7-  it  is  in  his  heart  to  cut  off  n.  not  a  few

11.  12.  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  w.

14.  6.  he  that  ruled  the  w.  in  anger,  is  peisecuted

12.  how  cut  down,  which  didst  weaken  the  n.

18.  all  the  kings  of  the  w.  lie  in  glory

2.3.  3.  the  seed  of  Sihor,  she  is  a  mart  of  w.

.3.3.  3.  at  the  lifting  up  the  n.  were  scattered
.34.  1.  come  near,  ye  w.  to  hear,  Jer.  31.  10.

40.  15.  behold,  the  n.  are  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket

52.  15.  so  shall  he  sprinkle  many  w.

55.  5.  71.  that  knew  not  thee,  shall  run  to  thee
60.  12.  yea,  those  w.  shall  be  utterly  wasted
64.  2.  that  the  w.  may  tremble  at  thy  presence
66.  19-  1  will  send  those  that  escape  to  the  n.

Jer.  1.  5.  and  ordained  thee  a  prophet  to  the  74,

10.  see,  1  have  this  day  set  thee  over  the  w.

4.  2.  7i.  shall  bless  themselves  in  him,  and  glory’

16.  make  ye  mention  to  w.  publish  against  Jerusa.

6.  18.  therefore  hear  ye  n.  and  know,  31.  10.

10.  7.  who  would  not  fear  thee,  O  King  of  74.  ?

10.  the  74.  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  his  indignatioa

22.  8.  man.v  71.  shall  pass  by  this  city,  and  say-

25.  14.  71.  shall  serve  themselves  of  them,  27.  7*

.31.  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  w  ith  the  74.

46.  12.  the  7i.  have  heard  of  thy  shame,  they  cry

50.  2.  declare  ye  among  the  n.  Babylon  is  taken
12.  hindermost  of  the  n.  shall  be  a  wilderness
46.  and  the  cry  is  heard  among  the  n.

51.  7- the  74.  have  drunken  of  her  wine,  n.  aremai

20.  with  thee  will  I  break  in  pieces  the  74.

27.  prepare  the  74.  against  her,  call  together
41.  Babylon  is  an  astonishment  among  the  n.

44.  the  74.  shall  not  flow  together  any  more

I. am.  1.1.  the  city  that  was  great  among  the  n.
Ezek.  5.  6.  into  wickedness,  more  than  the  n.  7

14.  1  will  make  thee  a  reproach  among  the  n.

6.  8.  the  remnant  shall  escape  among  the  n.

9.  that  escape  shall  remember  me  among  the  7».

12.  15.  when  I  shall  scatter  them  among  the  74.

19.  4.  the  74.  also  heard  of  him,  he  was  taken

8.  then  the  n.  set  against  him  on  every  side

26.  3. 1  w  ill  cause  many  7 4.  to  come  against  thee

5.  and  it  shall  become  a  spoil  to  the  ?4.

28.  7.  behold, therefore,  1  will  bringstrangers  upon
thee,  theteriible  of  the  74.  30.  11.  I  .31.  12.
29. 12.  T  will  scatter  Egyptians  among  7 1.  30.  23.

15.  that  they  shall  no  more  rule  over  the  74.

31.  16.  1  made  n.  shake  at  the  sound  of  his  fall

32.  2.  thou  art  like  a  lion  of  the  71.  as  a  whale

16.  the  daughters  of  the  n.  shall  lament  her,  18.

.35.  10.  thou  hast  said,  these  two  74.  shall  be  mine

36.  13.  thou  land  hast  bereaved  thy  74.

37.  22.  and  they  shall  be  no  more  two  71.

38.  8.  it  is  brought  forth  out  of  the  n.  12.

23.  1  will  be  known  in  the  eyes  of  many  n.

.39.  27-  and  am  sanctified  in  the  sight  ot  many  n.
llos.  8. 10.  though  they  have  hired  among  the  74.

9.  17.  they  shall  be  wanderers  among  the  74.

3‘27


NAT


N  A  U


N  E  A


Joel 3.2.  whom  they  have  scattered  among  the  n.
Amos  6.  1.  woe  to  them  which  are  named  chief  ot  w.
Mu.  4.  2.  many  w.  shall  come  and  say,  let  us  go
3,  he  shall  rehuke  strong  w.  afar  off,  and  beat

11.  now  also  many  w.  are  gathered  against  thee

7  16.  the  w.  shall  see,  be  confounded  at  their  might
Nah.  3.  4.  that  selleth  n.  through  her  whoredoms

5.  I  will  shew  the  n.  thy  nakedness  and  shame
Bah.  1. 17.  shall  they  notspare  continually  toslay  w.

2.  8.  because  thou  hast  spoiled  many  n.

3.  6.  he  beheld,  and  drove  asunder  the  n.

Zeph.  3.  6. 1  have  cut  off  the  n.  their  towers  desolate

8.  for  my  determination  is  to  gather  the  w.

Zech.  2. 11.  many  n.  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord

8  22  and  strong  w.  shall  come  to  seek  the  Lord
23.  take  hold  out  of  all  the  languages  of  the  w.

Luke  12.  30.  these  things  do  the  n.  seek  after
21.  25.  and  upon  the  earth  shall  be  distress  of  n.
Acts  13.  19.  when  he  had  destr.  seven  n.  in  Chanaan
Lev.  2.  26.  to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  n.

10.  11.  thou  must  prophesy  before  many  n.

11.  9.  n.  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days

18.  and  the  n.  were  angry,  thy  wrath  is  come

13.  7.  and  power  was  given  him  over  all  n.

16.  19.  cities  of  the  n.  fell  ||  17-  15.  waters  are  n.

20.  3.  that  he  should  deceive  the  n.  no  more

21.  24.  the  ?i.  of  them  which  are  saved  shall  walk
26.  they  shall  bring  the  honour  of  the  n.  into  it

22.  2.  the  leaves  were  for  the  healing  of  the  n.

See  Great.

All  NATIONS.

Deut.  4.  19.  which  the  Lord  bath  divided  to  all  7i.
26.  19.  and  to  make  thee  high  above  all  n.  28. 1.

28.  37.  shall  become  a  by-word  among  all  n.

1  Kings  4.  31.  his  fame  was  in  all  71.  round  about

1  Citron.  14.  17.  brought  the  fear  of  David  on  all  n.

16.  24.  declare  his  marvellous  works  among  all  n.

2  Chr.  32.  23.  llezekiah  magnified  in  sight  of  all  71.
Psal.  67.  2.  thy  saving  health  among  alln.

72.  11.  kings  tail  down,  alln.  shall  serve  him

17.  men  blessed  in  him.  all  n.  shall  call  him  blessed
82.  8.  arise,  O  God,  for  thou  'halt  inherit  all  n.

86.  9.  alln.  shall  come  and  worship  before  thee
113.  4.  L.  is  high  above  all  71.  gi-  .ry  above  heaven

117.  1.  praise  the  l  ord,  all  ye  71.  praise  him

118.  10.  alln.  compassed  me  about,  but  in  name
Isa.  2.  2.  and  all  n.  shall  flow  unto  it

25.  7.  he  will  destroy  the  vail  that  is  over  all  n.

34.  2.  the  indignation  of  the  Lord  is  on  all  n.

40.  17.  all  71.  before  hinrare  as  nothing,  and  vanity

66.18.  1  will  gather  all  n.  and  languages,  Joel 3.  2.
20.  they  shall  bring  your  brethren  out  of  all  n.

Jer.  27.f.  and  all  w.  shall  serve  him,  Dan.  ~.  14.
Amos  9.  9.  1  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among  a.  n.
.Bah.  2.  5.  but  gathereth  to  him  all  n.  and  people
Bag.  2.7.  1  will  shake  all  71.  and  the  desire  of  all  71.

shall  come  ,  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with  glory
Zech.  14.  2.  1  will  gather  alln.  against  Jerusalem

19.  the  punishment  of  all  n.  that  come  not  up
Mai.  3.  12.  and  all  71.  shall  call  you  blessed

Mat.  24.  9.  ye  shall  be  hated  ot  all  n.  for  my  sake

14.  this  gospel  of  kingdom  shall  be  preached  to
alln.  Mark  13.  10.  Luke 24.  47.  Rom.  16.  26.
25.  32.  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  n.

28. 19.  go  ye,  and  teach  all  n.  baptizing  them
Mark  11.  17.  be  called  of  all  71.  the  house  of  prayer
Luke  21.  24.  shall  be  led  away  captive  into  all  71.
Acts  14. 16.  who  suffered  alln.  to  walk  in  their  ways

17.  26.  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  n.  of  men
Rom.  1.  5.  for  obedience  to  the  faith  among  all  n.

16.  26.  made  known  to  all  n.  for  obedience  of  faith
Gal.  3.  8.  saying,  in  thee  shall  all  n.  be  blessed
Rev.  7.  9.  a  multitude  of  all n.  stood  before  throne

12.  5.  a  man-child,  who  was  to  rule  all n.  with  a  rod

14.  8.  she  made  all  n.  drink  of  the  w  ine,  18.  3.

15.  4.  for  all  n.  shall  come  and  worship  before  thee

18.  23.  for  by  thy  sorceries  were  a1/  71.  deceived

All  the  NATIONS.

Gen.  18. 18.  all  t.  n.  of  earth  be  blessed.  22. 18. 1  26. 4.
Deut.  14.  2.  chosen  above  all  the  n.  on  earth
17. 14.  set  a  king  over  me,  as  all  t.  it.  1  Sam.  8.  5,  20.
30.  1.  thou  shalt  call  them  to  mind  among  all  t.  n.

3.  the  Lord  will  gather  thee  from  all  the  n.

Psal.  9.  17.  into  hell,  and  all  the  n.  that  forget  God
Isa.  14.  26.  hand  that  is  stretched  out  on  all  the  n.
29.  7.  the  multitude  of  all  the  n.  that  fight,  8.

37.  18.  laid  waste  all  the  n.  and  their  countries
43.  9.  let  all  the  n.  be  gathered  together,  and  let

52. 10.  L.  made  bare  his  holy  arm  in  eyes  of  all  t.  n.

61.11.  cause  praise  to  spring  forth  before  all  the  71.
Jer.  3.  17.  and  all  the  71.  shall  be  gathered  unto  it

25.  13.  Jeremiah  prophesied  against  all  the  n.

15.  cause  all  11.  to  drink  it  ||  17.  madew//?i.  drink

26.  6.  make  this  city  a  curse  to  all  t.  n.  of  the  earth
29.  14.  I  will  gather  you  from  all  then,  and  places

18.  a  reproach  among  all  t.  n.  of  the  earth,  44.  8.
33.  9.  name  of  joy  and  honour  before  all  the  n.

46.  28.  for  I  will'make  a  full  end  of  all  the  n.
Zech.  7 .  14.  but  1  scattered  then,  among  all  then.

12.  9.  destroy  all  the  n.  that  come  against  Jerusal.
14.  16.  left  of  all  the  n.  that  came  against  Jerusal.
These  NATIONS.

Deut.  7.  17.  if  thou  say,  these  n.  are  more  than  I

9.  4.  for  wickedness  of  these  n.  Lord  doth  drive,  5.
11 . 23.  then  will  the  Lord  drive  out  all  these  n.

12.  30.  saying,  how  did  these  n.  serve  their  gods

18.  14.  these  n.  hearkened  to  observers  of  times

20.  15.  thus  do  to  the  cities  which  are  not  of  t.  n.
28.  65.  among  these  71. .shalt  thou  find  no  ease
29. 18.  lest  any  amongyou  serve  the  gods  of  t.  n.
31.  3.  the  Lord  will  destroy  these  71.  before  thee

Josh.  23.  3.  seen  what  the  Lord  hath  done  to  t.  n.

4.  I  have  divided  to  you  by  lot  t.  71.  that  remain
7.  that  ye  come  not  among  these  n.  that  remain

12.  if  ye  cleave  to  the  remnant  of  these  n.

13.  God  will  no  more  drive  out  any  of  these  n.
Judg.  3.  1.  these  n.  the  l  ord  left  to  prove  Israel

2  Kings  17.  41.  so  t.  71.  feared  L.  and  served  images
Jer.  9.  26.  for  all  these  n.  are  uncircumcised
25.  9.  bring  them  against  these  n.  round  about
11.  these  7i.  shall  serve  the  king  of  Babylon
28.  14.  I  have  put  yoke  of  iron  on  neck  of  these  n.

328


NATIVE.

Jer.  22.  10.  he  shall  no  more  see  his  n.  country
NATIVITY.

Gen.  11.  28.  Haran  died  in  the  land  of  his  71.

Ruth  2.  11.  how  thou  hast  left  the  land  ot  thy  n.

Jer.  46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  the  land  of  our  n.

Ezek.  16.  3.  thy  n.  is  of  the  land  of  Canaan
4.  as  for  thy  71.  in  the  day  thou  wast  born
21.  30.  I  will  judge,  thee  in  the  land  of  thy  71.

23. 15.  the  manner  of  Chaldea,  the  land  ot  their  n.
NATURE

Signifies,  [1]  The  natural  method  and  course  of
things  established  in  the  world  by  God  its
Creator ,  Rom.  1.  26,  27..  [2]  Reason,  or  the
light  implanted  in  the  mind ,  Rom.  2.  14.  [3]
birth,  or  statural  descent.  Gal.  2.  15.  [4]

Common  sense,  and  the  custom  of  all  natigns,  1
Cor.  11.  14.  [5J  Substance,  or  essence,  Heb.  2.
16.  [6]  Cur  corrupt  and  sinful  estate  by  our

birth,  being  naturally  inclined  to  all  sorts  of
evil,  Eph.  2.  3.  [7]  Roly  and  divine  quali¬
ties  and  dispositions,  which  express  and  resemble
the  perfections  of  God,  2  Pet.  1.  4.  [8]  In  truth
and  very  deed.  Gal.  4.  8.

A  natural  body,  1  Cor.  15.  44.  A  body  which  has
nothing  but  what  its  soul  can  bestow  upon  it  in
a  natural  way,  which  is  maintained  in  life  by
natural  and  ordinary  means,  as  meat,  drink,  sleep,
Ac.  and  is  subject  to  natural  affections  and  oper¬
ation,  as  generation,  augmentation,  motion,  &;c.
A  spiritual  body,  ibid.  Spiritual,  not  as  to  the
substance  of  it,  but  in  respect  of  the  qualities  and
coriditions  of  it  ;  a  body  that  is  beautiful,  incor¬
ruptible,  free  from  infirmities,  not  subject  to
hunger  or  thirst,  or  injuries  from  cold,  heat,  S^c.
not  using  meat ,  drink,  clothes,  physic  ;  but  free,
active,  and  nimble,  as  spirits ;  it  is  likewise  a
spiritual  body,  as  it  is  perfectly  subject  to  the
Spirit  of  God,  without  any  rebellious  motions  ;  it
is  immediately  supported  by  the  Spirit,  without
any  corporeal  means  ;  and  does  most  wonderfully
contribute  to  the  most  lively ,  divine,  and  enlarged
vital  operations  of  the  soul  herself.

The  natural  man,  1  Cor.  2.  14.  The  unrenewed
person;  one  that  hath  nothing  but  a  principle  of
reason,  though  he  be  one  of  the  most  exquisite
natural  accomplishments ,  and  has  improved  his
reason  to  the  highest  pitch.

Tom.  1.  26.  women  did  change  to  that  against  n.

2.  14.  do  by  11.  the  things  contained  in  the  law
27-  shall  not  uncircumcision  by  n.  judge  thee  t

11.  24.  if  thou  wert  cutout  of  the-olive-tree,  which
is  wild  by  n.  and  wert  grafted  contrary  to  n.

1  Cor.  1!.  14.  doth  not  even  n.  itself  teach  you  ?
Gal.  2.  15.  who  are  Jews  by  71.  and  not  sinners  of

4.  8.  did  service  unto  them,  w  hich  by  n.  are  no  gods
Eph.  2.  3.  and  were  by  n.  children  of  wrath
Heb.  2.  16.  he  took  not  on  him  the  n.  of  angels
Jam.  3.  6.  tongue  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  n.

+  7.  ri.  of  beasts  hath  been  tamed  by  n.  ot  men

2  Pet.  1.  4.  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the  divine  n.

NA  JURAL.

Deut.  34.  7-  eyTe  not  dim,  nor  his  n.  force  abated
Rom.  1.26.  e'en  women  did  change  the  n.  use

27.  also  men  leaving  the  n.  use  of  the  woman
31.  without  71.  affeciion,  2  Tim.  3.  3.

11.  21.  if  God  spared  not  the  n.  branches,  24.

1  Cor.  2.  14. 71.  man  receiveth  not  things  of  Sp.  of  G.
15.  44.  it  is  sown  a  n.  body,  there  is  a  n.  body

46.  but  that  which  is  n.  was  first,  and  afterward
Jam.  1.  23.  a  man  beholding  hisw.  face  in  a  glass

3.  1 15.  this  wisdom  is  earthly,  n.  devilish

2  Pet.  2.  12.  these  as  n.  brute  beasts  speak  evil

NATURALLY.

Phil.  2.  20.  who  will  n.  care  for  your  state
Jude  10.  but  what  they  know  n.  as  brute  beasts
NAVEL.

Judg.  9.  +  37.  come  down  by  the  n.  of  the  land
Job  40.  16.  his  force  is  in  the  n.  of  his  belly
Prov.  3.8.  itshall  be  health  to  thy  n.  and  marrow
Cant.  7.  2.  thy  n.  is  like  a  round  goblet
Ezek.  16.  4.  when  thou  wast  born,  thy  n.  was  not  cut
N  A  V  ES.

1  Kmgs  7.  33.  their  n.  and  spokes  were  all  molten

NAUGHT,  or  NOUGHT.

Gen  29.  15.  shou  blest  thou  theref.  serve  me  torn.?
Deut.  13.  17.  shall  cleave  n.  of  the  cursed  thing
15.  9.  thy  poor  brother,  and  thou  givest  him  n.

28.  63.  the  Lord  will  rejoice  to  bring  you  to  n.

2  Kings  2.  19.  the  city  is  pleasant,  but  the  water  n.
Neh.  4.  15.  God  brought  their  counsel  to  ri.

Job  1.  9.  Satan  said,  doth  Job  fear  God  for  n.  ?

8.  22.  the  place  of  the  wicked  shall  come  to  n.

14.  18.  surely  the  mountain  falling cometh  ton.
22.  6.  hast  taken  a  pledge  from  thy  brother  torn.
Psal.  3.3.  10.  Lord  bringeth  counsel  of  heathen  to  n.
44. 12.  thou  sellest  thy  people  for  n.

Prov.  1.  25.  but  ye  have  set  at  n.all  my  counsel
20.  14.  it  is  71.  it  is  n.  saith  the  buyer
Isa.  8. 10.  take  counsel,  it  shall  come  to  n.

29.  20.  for  the  terrible  one  is  brought  to  n.

21.  that  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  n.

41.  12.  they  shall  be  as  nothing,  as  a  thing  of  n.
24.  ye  are  of  nothing,  and  your  work  of  n.

49.  4. 1  have  spent  my  strength  for  n.  and  in  vain
52. 3.  saith  the  Lord,  ye  have  "sold  yourselves  forn.
5.  that  my  people  is  taken  away  for  n.

Jer.  14. 14.  a  false  vision,  and  a  thing  of  n.

Amos  5.  5.  and  Beth  el  shall  come  to  n.

6.  13.  ye  which  rejoice  in  a  thing  of  n.  who  say
Mai.  1 .  10.  who  is  there,  would  shut  the  doors  for  n.  ?

neither  do  ye  kindle  fire  on  mine  altar  for  n.
Mark  9. 12.  must,  suffer,  and  beset  at  n.  Luke  23. 11.
Acts  4.11.  this  is  the  stone  set  at  n.  of  you  builders
5.  36.  all  were  scattered  and  brought  tow.

38.  if  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will  come  to  n.

19.  27.  our  craft  is  in  danger  to  be  set  at  n.

Rom.  14.  10.  why  dost  thou  set  at  n.  thy  brother  ?

1  Cor.  1.  28.  to  bring  to  n.  things  that  are
2.  6.  the  wisdom  of  this  world  that  cometh  to  n.

2  These.  3.  8.  nor  did  we  eat  any  man’s  bread  for  n.
lie  v.  18. 17.  in  one  hour  so  great  riches  come  tow.


NAUGHTY.

Prov.  6. 12.  a  n.  person  walketh  with  frowaru  mout

17.  4.  and  a  liar  giveth  ear  to  a  n.  tongue
Jer.  24.  2.  the  other  basket  had  very  n.  tigs

NAUGHTINESS.  [heai

1  Sam.  17.  28.  1  know  thy  pride,  and  the  n.  of  th
Prov.  11.6.  transgressors  be  taken  in  their  own  n.
Jam.  1.  21.  lay  apartall  filthin.  and  superfluity  of  1
NAVY.

1  Kings  9. 26.  Solom.  made  aw.  of  ships  in  Ezion-;
27.  Hiram  sent  in  the  n.  his  servants,  shipmen

10.  11.  then,  of  Hiram  brought  gold  from  Ophir

22.  king  Solomon  had  at  sea  a  w.  of  1  arshish
NAY.

1  Kings  2. 17.  speak,  for  he  will  not  say  thee  n.
20.  say  me  notw.  for  I  will  not  say  thee  n.

Mat.  5. 37.  but  let  your  communication  be  yea,  ye;

71.  11.  more  cometh  ot  evil,  Jam.  5.  ]<
Luke  12.  51.  1  tell  you  w.  but  rather  division

13.  3.  1  tell  you  w.  but  except  ye  repent, 5.

16.  30.  and  he  said,  n.  father  Abraham,  but  if  one
Acts  16.  37.  n.  verily,  but  let  them  come  and  fetct
Rom.  3.  27.  by  law  of  works  (  n.  but  by  law  of  fait
9. 20.  71.  but  O  man,  who  art  thou  that  repliest  r

2  Cor.  1.  17.  with  me  there  should  be  yea,  yea,  n.-,

18.  our  word  toward  you  was  not  yea  and  n.

19.  the  Son  of  God  Jesus  Christ  was  not  yea ,n

NAZA  RITE

Denotes,  A  man  or  woman  who  engaged  themselz,
by  a  vow  to  abstain  from  wine  and  all  intoxicattr.
liquors  ;  to  let  their  hair  grow  without  cutting,  1
shaving  ;  not  to  enter  into  any  house  that  was  po
luted  by  having  a  dead  corpse  in  it,  nor  to  be  pr
sent  at  any  funeral :  and  if  arty  one  should  ha.
died  very  suddenly  in  their  presence,  they  begt
again  the  whole  ceremony  of  their  cimsecration  at.
Nazaritesliip,  which  ceremony  lasted  generally  tig
days.  When  the  time  of  their  Nazaritesliip  was  a
complished,  the  priest  brought  the  person  to  the  do
of  the  tabernacle  ;  who  there  off ered  to  the  Lord
he-lamb  for  a  burnt  offering,  a  she-lamb  for  an  e
piatory  sacrifice ,  and  a  ram  for  a  peace  offer  ini,
by  which  sacrifices  they  not  only  gave  thanks
God  who  had  givesi  them  grace  to  make,  and  •
some  measure  to  keep,  such  a  vow  ;  but  also  co
fessed  and  bewailed  their  frailties  and  rnisca
riages,  notwithstanding  the  strictness  of  their  v 0.
and  all  the  diligence  and  care  they  could  use,  ai
consequently  acknowledged  their  need  of  the  gra
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  true  Nazarite.  Aft
these  sacrifices  were  offered  to  the  Lord,  the  prtei
or  some  other,  shaved  the  head  of  the  Nazarite
the  door  of  the  tabernacle  ;  which  was  done
publicly,  that  it  might  be  known  that  his  vow  w
ended,  and  therefore  he  was  at  liberty  as  to  the
things  from  which  he  had  restrained  himself  J
a  season,  otherwise  some  might  have  been  sea
dalized  at  his  liberty  ;  after  which  his  hair  tv
burnt,  being  thrown  upon  the  five  on  which  the  fie
of  the  peace  offering  was  boiled ;  then  the  prit
put  into  the  hands  of  the  N  azarite  the  shoulder
the  ram  boiled,  with  a  loaf  and  a  cake,  which  t
N  azarite  returning  into  the  hands  of  the  priest,
offered  them  to  the  Lord,  lifting  them  up  in  t
presence  of  the  Nazarite  :  and  from  this  time
might  again  drink  wine,  his  Nazaritesliip  her
now  accomplished.  _  5

Some  obliged  themselves  only  for  a  time,  as  thi
mentioned  in  Num.  6.  13.  others  for  their  relit
life,  as  Samson,  John  the  Baptist,  Ac.  Judg.  J

17.  Luke  1.15.  Their  principal  design  was  to  ,
quester  themselves  in  a  great  part  from  worldly  e
ployments  and  enjoyments,  that  they  might  iseyt
themselves  to  the  service  of  God.  Nazarite  sigi
fies,  sanctified,  or  consecrated.

Num.  6.  2.  a  vow  of  aw.  to  separate  themselves
13.  and  tni*  is  the  law  of  the  n.  when,  21.

18.  the  w.  shall  shave  the  head  of  his  separator

19.  and  shall  put  them  on  the  hands  of  the  n.

20.  and  after  that  ihe  w.  may  drink  wine
Judg.  13.  5.  the  child  shall  be  a  w.  to  God,  J.  1  16.

NAZA  KITES.

Lam.  4. 7.  her  w.  purer  than  snow,  whiter  thanm
Amos  2. 11.  1  raised  up  of  youi  young  men  for  .
12.  but  ye  gave  the  n.  wine  to  drink,  and  proph
NEAR.  .  ,

Gen.  19. 20.  this  city  is  w.  to  flee  to,  it  is  a  nttleo
27-  22.  Jacob  went  w.  to  Isaac  his  father
25.  bring  itw.  he  brought  it  w.  and  he  did  eat
29.  10.  Jacob  went  w.  and  rolled  the  stone

45. 10.  thou  shalt  be  n.  to  me,  thou  and  thy  childr

48. 10.  he  brought  them  n.  and  kissed  them
Exod.  13.17.  the  land  of  Philistines,  altho’  thatwas
Lev.  18.  6.  not  approach  to  any  that  is  w.  ot  km

12.  she  is  thy  father’s  w.  kinswoman

13.  for  she  is  thy  mother’s  w.  kinswoman,  17-

20.  19.  for  he  uncovereth  his  w.  kin  t

21.  2.  but  for  his  kin  n.  to  him  he  may  be  oetilf
Num.  3.  6.  bring  the  tribe  of  Levi  w.  and  presen

5.  16.  bring  her  n.  and  set  her  before  the  Lord

16.  9.  to  bring  you  w.  to  himself,  10.

17. 13.  whoso  cometh  w.  the  tabernacle  shall  dn
26.3.  Moses  spake  in  plains  of  Moab,  n.  Jencln
Deut.  5.  27.  go  thou  n.  and  hear  all  God  shall  si
16.  21.  not  plant  a  grove  of  trees  w.  altar  of  Lor
Judg.  18.  22.  the  men  w.  Micah’s  house  gathered

20.  34.  they  knew'  not  that  evil  was  n.  them
Ruth  2. 20.  the  man  is  w.  of  kin  to  us.  next  Kinsn’

3.  9.  spread  skirt,  for  thou  art  a  n.  kinsman,  1-
2  tram.  14. 30.  see,  Joab's  field  is  n.  mine,  set  on  1
19  42.  because  the  king  is  n.  of  kin  to  us
1  Kings  8.  46.  land  of  enemy  far  or  n.  2  Chr.  •>.

21.  2.  thy  vineyard,  because  it  is  w.  to  my  hop
Job  41. 16.  one  is  so  11.  another,  no  air  can  come
Psal.  22.  11.  for  trouble  is  n,  |1  75. 1.  thy  name  if

119.  151.  thou  art  n.  O  Lord,  thy  comm,  are  tn
148.  14.  the  horn  of  Israel,  a  people  n.  to  him
Prov.  7-  8.  passing  through  the  street,  w.  her  con
10.  14.  but  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  n.  destruc.

27.10.  better  is  a  neighbour  that  is  w.  than  a  l",lf
Isa.  33.  13.  ye  that  are  n.  acknowledge  my  nn«

45.  21.  tell  ye,  and  bring  them  w.  yea.  let  then.


NEC


NEE


lN  E  1


j.  46. 13.  I  bring  n.  my  righteousness,  not  fa.-  off

l. 8.  he  is  n,  that  justiheth  me,  who  will  contend  ?
.5.  my  righteousness  is  n.  my  salvation

).  6.  call  upon  the.  Lord  while  he  is  n.

>.  l.  my  salvation  isn.  to  come,  and  my  lighteous.
’.  19.  peace  be  to  him  that  is  n.  saith  the  Lord
-.  12.2.  thou  art  n.  in  their  mouth,  and  far

1.  26.  all  kings  of  the  north  far  and  n.  shall  drink
■m.  4. 18.  our  end  is  w.  our  days  are  fulfilled
ek.  6.  12.  he  that  is  n.  shall  fall  by  the  sword

7.  the  time  is  come,  the  day  of  trouble  is  n.  30.  3.

.  3.  who  say,  it  is  not  n.  let  us  build  houses

'.  5.  those  that  be  n.  and  far  shall  mock  thee
in.  9.  7-  contusion  belongs  to  Israel  that  are  n.
ad.  15.  the  day  of  ihe  Lord  is  n.  Zech.  l.  ],4.
it.  24.  33.  know  that  it  is  n.  even  at  the  doors
irk  13.  28.  ye  know  that  summer  is  n.

WlO.  24.  Cornelius  called  together  his  n.  friends
See  Came,  Come,  Draw,  Drew.
NEARER.

i th  3.  12.  howbeit,  there  is  a  kinsman  n.  than  I

m.  13. 11.  our  salvation  n.  than  when  we  believed

NECESSARY.

>23. 12.  I  esteemed  his  words  more  than  n.  food
ts  13.  46.  was  n.  the  word  first  be  spoken  to  you
..28.  to  lay  no  greater  burden  than  these  n.  things
.  10.  they  laded  us  with  such  things  as  were  n.
or.  12.22.  the  member  s  which  seem  feeble  are  n.
'or.  9. 5.  1  thought  it  n.  to  exhort  the  brethren
il.  2.  25.  I  supposed  it  n.  to  send  Epaphras
’.3.  14.  to  maintain  good  works  for  n.  uses
3.9. 23.  n.  patterns  should  be  purified  with  these
NECESSITY

nifies,  [1]  The  state  of  a  thing  that  must  needs
e,  when  it  is  contrary  to  its  very  nature  and
rinciples  to  he  otherwise,  Heb.  9.  16.  [2]

Poverty,  or  want  of  temporal  good  things,  Rom.

2.  13.  [3]  Force  or  constraint,  2  Cor.  9.  7.

?  word  necessary,  or  such  as  are  equivalent  to
,  as  must,  must  needs,  do  not  always  denote
n  absolute  necessity,  but  a  necessity  of  decency  ;
r  of  duty,  or  merely  something  useful  and  ad-
mtageous  ;  as  for  example,  Luke  14.  18.  1  have
aught  a  piece  of  ground,  and  1  must  needs  go
ad  see  it;  that  is.  It  is  convenient  that  1  go
nd  see  it.  _  Rom.  13.  5.  Ye  must  needs  be  sub¬
set  ;  that  is,  it  is  your  duty,  as  well  as  interest,

>  to  be.  And,  Luke  23.  17.  Of  necessity  he
lust  release  one  at  the  feast ;  that  is,  it  has
’■en  a  custom  observed  among  us  for  a  long  time,
•id  it  is  proper  to  have  it  continued.

Te 23. 17.  for  of  n.  he  must  release  one  at  the  feast

n.  12.  13.  distributing  to  the  n.  of  saints

■  >r.  7.  37.  having  no  n.  and  hath  so  decreed
16.  forn.  is  laid  upon  me,  yea,  woe  is  to  me

■  f.  9. 7-  so  let  him  give,  not  grudgingly ,  or  of  n.

' l .  4. 16.  ye  sent  once  and  again  to  my  n.

•lem.  14.  not  be  as  it  were  of  n.  but  willingly

S.  7- 12.  there  is  made  of  n.  a  change  of  the  law

3.  it  is  of  n.  this  man  have  somewhat  to  offer
16.  there  must  of  n.  be  the  death  of  the  testator

NECESSITIES.


s  20.  34.  these  hands  have  ministered  to  my  n.
‘  it.  6.  4.  as  the  ministers  of  God  in  n.

10.  I  take  pleasure  in  n.  in  persecutions
NECK

'  nfies,  [1]  That  part  of  the  body  between  the  head
id  shoulders,  Gen.  27.  16.  [2]  The  head,  Deut.
4.  [3]  The  whole  man,  Deut.  28.  48.  Jer.  27.
D.  [4]  The  heart,  Neh.  9.  29.  Prov.  29.  1.
J  The  hand  or  body,  Neh.  3.  5.

C.  27 . 16.  put  the  skins  on  the  smooth  of  his  n.

>.  thou  shalt  break  the  yoke  from  off  thy  n.

4.  Esau  fell  on  his  n.  and  kissed  him

42.  Pharaoh  put  a  gold  chain  about  Joseph’s  n.

T  .  ,  Ezek  16,  11.  Dan.  5.  7,  16,  29.
14.  Joseph  fell  on  Benjamin  s  n.  and  wept
29.  he  tell  on  Jacob’s  n.  he  wept  on  his  n.

8.  thy  hand  shall  be  on  the  n.  of  thine  enemies
-  d. 13. 13.  if  not  redeem  it,  break  his  n.  34.  20.

J  •  6.  8.  and  wring  off  his  head  from  his  n.

■“*•  21.4.  strike  off  the  heifer’s  n.  in  the  valley
48.  he  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon  thy  n.
fm.  4.  18.  and  his  n.  brake,  and  he  died

*  'TOn- 29. 1 6.  our  fathers  have  given  the  n.

13.  Zedekiah  stiffened  his  n.  hardened  his  heart
^■9-29.  hardened  their  n.  and  would  not  hear

*  16. 26.  he  runneth  on  him,  even  on  his  n.

12.  he  hath  taken  me  by  the  n.  and  shaken  me
19- hast  thou  clothed  his  n.  with  thunder  ?

• ,n  his  w.  remaineth  strength,  and  sorrow
‘  (6. 5.  lift  not  up,  speak  not  with  a  stiff  n.

J  b  i  l  s8aU  be  chains  about  thy  n.
i.  bind  them  about  thy  n.  write  them,  6.  21.

.  so  shall  they  be  life  and  grace  to  thy  n.

!■  1/  1°-  thy,  n,.  is  comely  with  chains  of  gold
».  thy  n.  is  like  the  tower  of  David

ravished  my  heart  with  one  chain  of  thy  n.

*•  “jy  *•  is  a  tower  of  ivory,  thine  eyes
J  cm  l-  e  shall  reach  even  to  the  n.
ob  l  £°ke  shall  be  taken  from  off  thy  n.

28.  shall  reach  to  the  midst  of  the  n.

4-  thy  n.  is  an  iron  sinew,  thy  brow  brass
T  |c°se  thyself  from  the  bands  of  thy  n.
oLl:i,at.Sa(Tlfi,ceth-  “  **  he  cut  off  a  dog’s  n.

*  if  V  -  turned  the  hinder  part  of  the  n.  to  me
i’-  Dut  they  obeyed  not,  made  tlieir  n.  stiff

f  taee  yokes,  and  put  them  on  thy  n.
will  not  putw.  under  yoke  of  king  of  Babvl.  1 1 .

I  r.  yoke  from  off  Jeremiah’s  n.  12.
t  v.e,,P'lt  yoke  on  the  n.  of  these  nations
fin  break  his  yoke  from  off  thy  n.
i*loah  hath  turned  the  n.  with  shame
j  i  i  Vi'  *5^  transgressions  are  come  upon  my  n.
I,,1' ,.ut  1  Passed  over  on  her  fair  n.

*  •  .  13- discovering  the  foundation  to  tile  n.

■  i».  o.  it  were  better  that  a  millstone  were
j  ,  ,r'«edahout  his  n.  Mark  9.  42.  Luke  17.  2.

, ,  i s  in  ”ls  lather  fell  on  his  n.  and  kissed  him
•«  ‘  PPt,a  yo*46  °H  the  n.  of  the  disciples

•R.  they  tell  on  Paul’s  n.  and  kissed  him
&ee  Harden.


NECKS.

Josh.  7.  t  8.  when  Israel  turneth  their  n.

10.  24.  put  your  feet  on  the  n.  of  these  kings
Judg .  5.  30.  tor  the  n.  ot  them  that  take  the  spoil

8.  21.  ornaments  that  were  on  their  camel’s  n.  26.
2  Sam.  22.  41 .  given  me  n.  of  enemies,  Psal.  18.  40.
ZChrtm.  30\ 1  8-  harden  not  your  n.  as  your  fathers
Feh.  3.  5.  the  nobles  put  not  their  n.  to  the  work
Isa.  3.  16.  and  walk  with  stretched-forth  n.

Jer.  27. 12.  bring  your  n.  under  yoke  of  Babylon
Lam.  5.  5.  our  n.  are  under  persecution,  we  labour
Ezek.  21.  29.  to  bring  thee  on  the  n.  of  the  slain
Mic.  2.  3.  from  which  ye  shall  not  remove  your  n.
Rom.  16.  4.  who  tor  my  life  laid  down  their  own  n.
NECROMANCER.

Deut.  18. 11.  there  shall  not  be  found  amongyouan.
NEED.

Deut.  15.  8.  thou  shalt  lend  him  sufficient  for  his  n.

1  Sam. ‘A.  15.  have  1  n.  of  madmen,  that  ye  brought

2  Chron.  2.  16.  cut  wood  as  much  as  thou  shalt  n.

20.  17.  ye  shall  not  n.  to  tight  in  this  battle
Ezra  6.  9.  and  let  what  they  have  n.  of  be  given
Prov.  31.  11.  so  he  shall  have  no  n.  of  spoil
Mat.  3.  14.  1  have  n.  to  be  baptized  of  thee

6.  8.  for  your  father  knoweth  what  things  ye  have

n.  of  before  ye  ask  him,  32.  Luke  12.  30.

9.  12.  they  that  be  whole  n.  not  a  physician,  but

they  that  are  sick,  Mark  2.  17.  Luke  5.  31.

14.  16.  they  n.  not  depart,  give  ye  them  to  eat

21.  3.  the  Lord  hath  n.  of  them,  and  he  will  send

them,  Mark  11.  3.  Luke  19.  31, 34.
26.  65.  the  high  priest  said,  what  further  n.  have
we  ot  witnesses  ?  Mark  14.  63.  Luke  22.  71 .
Mark  2.  25.  read  what  David  did  when  he  had  n.
Luke  9.  11.  and  healed  them  that  had  n.  of  healing

15.  7.  over  just  persons  which  n.  no  repentance
John  13.  29.  buy  those  things  we  have  n.  of

Acts  2.  45.  parted  them  as  every  man  had  n.  4.  35.
Rom.  16.  2.  that  ye  assist  her  in  what  she  hath  n.

1  Cor.  7.  36.  if  n.  so  require,  let  him  do  what  he  will
12.  21.  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  1  have  no  n.  of  thee

24.  for  our  comely  parts  have  no  n.  but  God

2  Cor.  3.  l.orw.  we  epistles  of  commendation  to  vOU  ?
Phil.  4.  12.  1  know  how  to  abound  and  to  suffer  n.

19.  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  n.  by  Christ  J.

1  lhess.  1.  8.  so  that  we  n.  not  to  speak  any  thing

4.  9.  of  brotherly  love  ye  n.  not  that  I  write

5.  1.  ot  the  times  ye  have  no  n.  that  l  write
Heb.  4.  16.  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  n.

5. 12.  n.  one  teach  you,  such  as  have  n.  of  milk

7.  11.  what  n.  that  another  priest  should  rise

10.  36.  for  ye  have  n.  of  patience,  that  after

1  Pet.  1.  6.  though  now,  if  n.  be,  ye  are  in  heaviness

1  John  2.  27.  ye  n.  not  that  any  man  teach  you

3. 17.  whoso  had  gpods,  and  see  his  brother  have  n.
Rev.  3.  17.  I  am  rich,  and  have  n.  of  nothing

21.  23.  the  city  hath  no  n.  of  sun  or  moon

22.  5.  and  they  n.  no  candle,  nor  light  of  the  sun

NEEDED.

John  2.  25.  he  n.  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man
Acts  17.  25.  as  tho’  he  n.  any  thing,  seeing  he  gives
NEEDESI  ,  ETH.

Gen.  33. 15.  Jacob  said,  what  n.  it,  let  me  find  grace
I.uke  11.8.  he  will  give  him  as  many  as  he  n.

John  13.  10.  is  wasned,  n.  not  save  to  wash  his  feet
16.  30.  and  n.  not  that  any  man  should  ask  thee
Eph.  4.  28.  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  n.

2  Tim.  2.  15.  a  workman  that  n.  not  to  be  ashamed
Heb.  7.  27.  who  n.  not  daily  to  offer  up  sacrifice

NEEDFUL.

Ezra  7.  20.  shall  be  n.  for  the  house  of  thy  God
Luke  10.  42.  one  thing  is  n.  and  Mary  hath  chosen
Acts  15.  5.  that  it  was  n.  to  circumcise  them
Phil.  1.  24.  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  n.  for  you
Jam.  2.  16.  these  things  which  are  n.  for  the  body
Jude  3.  beloved,  it  was  n.  for  me  to  write  to  you
NEEDLE.


Mat.  19.  24.  it  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through
the  eye  of  a  n.  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  25
NEEDLE-WORK.

Exod.  26.  36.  thou  shalt  make  an  hanging  wrought
with  n.  27.  16.  |  36.  37- 1  38.  18.
28.  39.  thou  shalt  make  the  girdle  of  n.  39.  29.
Judg.  5.  30.  to  Sisera,  a  prey  of  divers  colours  of  n.
Psal.  45.  14.  she  shall  be  brought  in  raiment  of  n.
NEEDS.

Gen.  17.  13.  he  must  n.  be  circumcised
19.  9.  they  said,  this  one  fellow  will  n.  be  a  judge
24.  5.  must  1  n.  bring  thy  son  again  to  the  land  ?
31.  30.  and  now  though  thou  wouldest  n.  be  gone
2  Sam.  14.  14.  we  must  n.  die,  and  are  as  water

spilt  on  the  ground
Jer.  10.  5.  mustw.  be  born,  because  they  cannot  go
Mat.  18.  7.  it  must  n.  be  that  offences  come
Mark  13.  7.  for  such  things  must  n.  be,  and  not  yet
Luke  14. 18.  bought  ground,  and  I  must  n.  go  and  see
John  4.  4.  and  he  must  n.  go  through  Samaria
Arts  1. 16.  this  scripture  must  n.  have  been  fulfilled
17.  3.  that  Christ  must  n.  have  suffered
21.  22.  the  multitude  mustw.  come  together
Rom.  13.  5.  wherefore  ye  must  n.  be  subject

1  Cor.  5.  10.  then  must  ye  n.  go  out  of  the  world

2  Cor.  11.  30.  if  1  must  n.  glory,  I  will  glory

N  EEDY.


Deut.  15.  11.  thou  shalt  open  thy  hand  to  the  w.
24.  14.  an  hired  servant  that  is  poor  and  w.

Job  24.  4.  they  turn  the  n.  out  of  the  way
14.  the  murderer  killeth  the  poor  and  w.

Psal.  9.  18.  the  n.  shall  not  alway  be  forgotten
12.  5.  for  the  sighing  of  the  n.  now  will  I  arise
35.  10.  which  rieliverest  the  poor  and  w.  72.  4, 13.
37.  14.  have  bent  their  bow  to  cast  down  the  w.
40.  17.  I  am  poor  and  n.  make  no  tarrying,  70.  5.
72.  12.  for  he  shall  deliver  the  n.  82.  4.

13.  he  shall  spare  the  poor  and  w.  save  the  n.

74.  21.  let  the  poor  and  n.  praise  thy  name
82.  3.  do  justice  to  the  afflicted  and  n.

4.  deliver  the  poor  and  w.  rid  from  the  wicked
86.  1.  hear  me,  for  1  am  poor  and  n.  109.  22.

109. 16.  but  persecuted  the  poor  and  n.  man
113.  7-  lie  lirteth  the  w.  out  of  the  dunghill
Prov.  30. 14.  devour  the  n.  from  among  men


Prov.  31.  9.  and  plead  the  cause  ot  the  poor  anu  w.

20.  she  reacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the  w.

Isa.  10.  2.  to  turn  aside  the  w.  from  judgment

14.  30.  and  the  n.  shall  lie  down  in  safety

25.  4.  been  a  strength  to  the  n.  in  his  distress

26.  6.  the  steps  of  the  w.  shall  tread  it  down
32.7.  even  when  the  n.  speaketh  right

41.  17.  when  the  poor  and  n.  seek  water
Jer.  5.  28.  and  the  right  of  w.  do  they  not  judge
22.  16.  he  judged  the  cause  of  the  poor  andw.
Ezek.  16.  49.  nor  strengthen  the  hands  of  them
18.  12.  he  hath  oppressed  the  poor  and  n.

22.  29.  the  people  have  vexed  the  poor  and  n.
Amos  4.  1.  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  which  crush  the  n.

8.  4.  hear  this,  O  ye  that  swallow  up  the  n.

6.  that  we  may  buy  the  n.  fora  pair  of  shoes
N  EESED.  or  SNEEZED.

2  Rings  4.  35.  the  child  w.  seven  times,  and  opened
_  .  N EES1NGS.

Job  41.  18.  by  his  n.  a  light  doth  shine,  his  eyes
.NEGLECT.

Mat.  18.  17.  and  if  he  shall  w.  to  hear  them,  tell  it
to  the  church,  but  if  he  w.  to  hear  the  church

1  I  im.  4. 14.  w.  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee

Heb.  2. 3.  how  shall  escape,  if  w.  so  great  salvation  ?
NEGLECTED.

Acts  6.  1.  their  widows  were  w.  in  the  ministration
NEGLECTING.

Col.  2.  23.  n.  the  body,  not  in  any  honour  to  the
N  EG  L 1 G  EN  T.

2  Ear.  29.  11.  my  sons,  be  not  now  w.  for  Lord

2  Pet.  1. 12.  not  be  n.  to  put  you  in  remembrance
..  NEIGHBOUR

Signifies,  [1]  One  who  dwells  or  is  seated  near  to
another,  2  Kings  4.  3.  [2]  Every  man,  to  whom

we  have  an  opportunity  of  doing  good.  Mat.  22.
39.  [3]  A  fellow-labourer ,  of  one  and  the  same
people.  Acts  7.  27.  [4]  One  who  does  us  good,
and  w/m  pities  and  relieves  us  in  distress,  though
at  a  distance  from  us,  I.uke  10.  36.  [5]  One  that
stands  in  need  of  help,  Prov.  3.  28.  [6]  A  friend.
Job  16.  t  21.

At  the  time  of  our  Saviour,  the  Pharisees  had  re¬
strained  the  word  Neighbour  to  signify  those  of
their  own  nation  only,  or  their  own  friends  ;  being
of  opinion,  that  to  hate  their  enemy  was  not  for¬
bidden  by  their  law :  but  our  Saviour  informed
them,  that  the  whole  world  were  their  neighbours  ,
that  they  ought  not  to  do  to  another  what  they  would
not  have  done  to  themselves  ;  and  that  this  charity
ought  to  be  extended  even  to  their  enemies.  Mat
5.  43.  Luke  10.  29,  &c.

Exod.  3.  22.  every  woman  borrow  of  her  n.  11.  2.

1  Sam.  15.  28.  and  hath  given  it  to  a  n.  of  thine
Prov.  27  •  10.  better  is  a  n.  that  is  near,  than  a  brother
Jer.  6.  21.  the  n.  and  his  friends  shall  perish

9.  20.  and  teach  every  one  her  n.  lamentation
Luke  10.  36.  was  n.  to  him  that  fell  among  thieves
NEIGHBOUR,  Adjective.

Jer.  49.  18.  as  in  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Go
morrah  and  the  n.  cities  thereof,  50.  40.
His  NEIGHBOUR.

Exod.  12.  4.  let  him  and  his n.  take  a  lamb
21. 14.  but  if  a  man  come  on  his  n.  to  slay  him
22.  7.  if  a  man  deliver  to  his  n.  money  or  stuff
8.  whether  he  put  his  hand  to  his  n.  goods,  11.

10.  if  a  man  delivei  to  his  n.  an  ass  or  ox

14.  if  borrow  ought  of  his  n.  and  it  be  hurt  or  die
32.  27 .  go  through  the  camp,  slay  every  man  his  n.
Lev.  6.  2.  and  lie  unto  or  hath  deceived  his  n.

20.  10.  he  that  committeth  adultery  with  his  n.
wife,  shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  Deut. 22.  24.

24.  19.  and  if  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  n.

Deut.  4.  42.  which  should  kill  his  n.  unawares,  19.4.

15.  2.  every  creditor  that  lendeth  aught  to  his  n.

he  shall  not  exact  of  his  n.  or  his  brother
19. 11.  if  any  hate  his  n.  and  lie  in  wait  for  him
22.  26.  a  man  riseth  against  his  n.  and  slayeth  him

27.  17.  cursed  be  he  that  removeth  his  n.  land-mark
24.  cursed  be  he  thatsmiteth  his  n.  secretlv
Ruth  4.  7.  man 1  plucked  off  his  shoe,  and  gave'to  A.n.

1  Rings  8.  31.  if  a  man  trespass  ag.  his  n.  an  oath

2  Chr.  6. 22.  if  a  man  sin  against  his  n.  and  an  oath
Job  12.  4.  I  am  as  one  mocked  of  his  n.

16.  21.  plead  with  G.  as  a  man  pleadeth  for  his  n.
Psal.  12.  2.  they  speak  vanity  each  with  his  n.

15.  3.  nordoeth  evil  to  his  n.  taketh  up  a  reproach
101.5.  whoso  privily  slandereth  hisn.  will  cut  ofl

Prov.  6.  29.  so  he  that  goeth  into  his  n.  wife

11.  9.  an  hypocrite  with  his  mouth  destroyeth  his  n,

12.  who  is  void  of  wisdom  despiseth  his  n.  14.  21.

12.  26.  the  righteous  is  more  excellent  than  his  n.

14.  20.  the  poor  is  hated  even  of  hisn.

16.  29.  a  violent  man  enticeth  his  n.  and  leadeth

18.  17-  but  Air  n.  cometh  and  searcheth  him

19.  4.  but  the  poor  is  separated  from  hisn.

21.  10.  his  ti.  findeth  no  favour  in  his  eyes

25.  18.  man  thatbeareth  false  witness  against  Air  n.

26.  19-  so  is  the  man  that  deceived)  hisn.

29.  5.  that  flattereth  his  n.  spread,  a  net  for  his  feet
Eccl.  4.  4.  that  for  this  a  man  is  envied  of  his  71.

Isa.  3.  5.  shall  he  oppressed  every  one  by  his  n.

19.  2.  they  shall  fight  every  one  against  his  n.

41. 6.  they  helped  every  one  hisn.  and  said
Jer.  5.  8.  every  one  neighed  after  his  n.  wife

7.  5.  execute  judgment  between  a  man  and  Air  »

9.  4.  take  ye  need  every  one  of  his  71.  trust  not

5.  and  they  will  deceive  every  one  his  n.

8.  speak  peaceably  to  his  n.  with  his  mouth
22. 8.  they  shall  say  every  man  to  his  n.  23.  35.

13.  that  useth  Air  n.  service  without  wages
Jer.  23.  27-  dreams  they  tell  every  one  to  his  n.

30.  that  steal  my  word,  every  one  from  his  n.

31 . 34.  teach  no  more  every  man  his  n.  Heb.  8. 11.

34.  15.  in  proclaiming  libeity  to  his  n.  1?.

Ezek.  18.  6.  neither  hath  defiled  his  n.  wife,  15.

11 .  hath  defiled  his  n.  wife,  22.  11.  1  33.  26.

Hab.  2.  15.  woe  to  him  thatgiveth  his  n.  drink
Zech.  3.10.shall  call  every  man  Air  n.  under  the  vine

8.  10.  for  I  set  all  men,  everyone  against  his  n.

16.  speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  to  hisn.

17.  let  none  ot  you  imagine  evil  against  Air  n.

329


NEW


NET


NEV


Mark  1C.  33.  and  to  love  his  n.  as  himself,  is  more
sicts~.  27.  he  that  did  h is  n.  wrong,  thrust  him
Rom.  13.  10.  love  worketh  no  evil  to  hisn.

lo.  C.  let  every  one  please  his  ».  for  Ins  good
Evh.  4.  C5.  speak  every  man  truth  with  his  n.

My  Tv  K lO  11  BO U  R.

Job  31.  9.  or  if  1  have  laid  wait  at  my  n.  door
Luke  10.  C9.  but  he  said  to  .1  esus,  w  ho  is  my  n.  !

Thy  Is  EIGHEOUR.

Exod.  CO.  If),  thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness
aaainst  thy  n.  Dent .  o.  20.

22.  C6.  if  thou  take  thy  n.  raiment  to  pledge
Lev.  18.  20.  shaltnot  lie  carnally  with  thyn  \yite

19.  13.  thou  shalt  not  defraud  thy  n.  nor  rob  him

15.  in  righteousness  shalt  thou  judge  thy  n.

16.  nor  shalt  thou  stand  against  the  blood  of  thy  n.

17.  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  n.

18.  but  thou  shalt  love  thy  n.  as  thyselt  _

£5.  14.  if  sell  to,  or  buyest  ought  ot  thy  n.  lo.

Deut.  5.  Cl.  thou  shalt  not  desire  or  covet  thy  n.  wile

19.  14.  thou  shalt  not  remove  thy  n.  land  mark

23.  24.  when  thou  comest  into  thy  n.  vineyard

1  Sam.  28.  17.  rent  kingdom,  and  given  it  to  thy  n.

2  Sam.  12.  11.  take  wives,  and  give  them  to  thy  n.
Prov.  3.  28.  say  not  to  thy  n.  go,  and  come  again

29.  devise  not  evil  against  thy  n.  seeing  he  dwells

24.  28.  be  not  witness  against  thy  n.  without  cause

25.  8.  when  thy  n.  hath  put  thee  to  shame

9.  debate  thy  cause  with  thy  n.  himselt
17.  withdraw  thy  foot  from  thy  n.  house

Mat.  5.  43.  thou  shalt  love  thy  n.  19.  19- 1  22.  39.
Mark  12.  31.  Luke  10.  27.  Rom.  13.  9-  Gal.

5.  14.  Jam.  2.  8.

NEIGHBOURS.

Josh.  9. 16.  they  heard  that  they  were  their  n.

Ruth  4.  17.  the  women  her  n.  gave  it  a  name
2  Kings  4.  3.  go  borrow  vessels  abroad  ot  all  thy  n.
Psal.  28.  3.  who  speak  peace  to  their  n.  but  mischiet
31.  11.  1  was  a  reproach  among  all  my  n.

44.  13.  thou  inakest  us  a  reproach  to  our».

79.  4.  we  are  become  a  reproach  to  our  n.

12.  render  to  our  n.  seven  fold  into  their  bosom

80.  6.  thou  makest  us  a  strife  to  our  n.

89.  41.  spoil  him  he  is  a  reproach  to  his  n.

Jer.  12.  14.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  again,  all  my  evil  n.
29. 23.  have  committed  adultery  with  their  n.  wives
49.  10.  his  seed  is  spoiled  and  his  v.  and  he  is  not
Ezek.  16.  26.  commit  fornication  with  Egypt,  thy  n.

22.  12.  thou  hast  gained  of  thy  n.  by  extortion

23.  5.  she  doted  on  the  Assyrians  her  n.  12.

Luke  1.  58.  her  n.  and  her  cousins  heard  how  Lord

14.  12.  when  makest  asupper.call  not  thy  rich  n.

15.  6.  he  calieth  together  his  friends  and  n.  9.

John  9.8.  n.  and  they  who  before  had  seen  him  blind

NEIGH  ID.

Jer.  5.  8.  every  one  n.  after  his  neighbour’s  wife
NEIGHING.

Jer.  8. 16.  land  trembled  at  the  w.of  his  strong  ones
N  E1GH1NGS.

Jer,  13.  27. 1  have  seen  thine  adulteries  and  n.

NEITHER.

Gen.  3.  3.  the  tree,  ».  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die
1  Kings  22. 31.  fight  n.  with  small  nor  great,  but  with
Mat.  21.  27.  n.  fell  1  you  by  what  authority  I  do
NEPHEW.

Job  18.  19.  he  shall  neither  have  son  nor  n.

Isa.  14.  22.  L  will  cut  off  from  Babylon  son  and  n.
NEPHEWS.

Judo.  12.  14.  Abdon  had  forty  sons  and  thirty  n
1  Tim.  5.  4.  if  any  widow  have  children  orn.

N  ESI’

Signifies,  [1]  A  little  lodgment  in  which  birds  hatch
and  breed  their  young,  Psal.  84.  3.  [2]  l he  birds
in  the  nest,  Deut.  32.  11.  Isa.  10.  14.  [3]  A  very
high  habitation,  seemingly  secure,  and  without  dis¬
turbance,  Obad.  4.  EJab.  2.  9.

Num.  24.  21.  and  thou  puttest  thy  n.  in  a  rock
Deut.  22.  6.  if  a  bird’s  n.  chance  to  be  before  thee

32. 11.  as  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  n.

Job  29.  18.  then  1  said,  1  shall  die  in  my  n.

39. 27.  doth  eagle  at  thy  command  make  n.  on  high  f
Psal.  84.  3.  the  swallow  hath  found  a  n.  for  herself
Prov.  27.  8.  as  a  bird  that  wandereth  from  her  n.
Jsa.  10.  14.  hath  found  as  n.  the  riches  ot  the  people

16.  2.  as  a  wandering  bird  cast  out  of  the  n.

34.  15.  there  shall  the  great  owl  make  her  n.

Jer.  22.  23.  that  makest  thy  n.  in  the  cedars

48. 28.  the  dove  makes  her  n.  in  the  sides  of  ho.es

49. 16.  tho’  thou  make  thy  n.  as  high  as  the  eagle

Obad.  4.  though  thou  set  thy  n.  among  the  stars
Hab.  2.  9.  that  he  may  set  his  n.  on  high
N  ESTS.

Gen.  6.  t  14.  n.  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark
Psal.  104.  17.  where.the  birds  make  their  n.

Ezek.  31.  6.  all  the  fowls  of  heaven  made  their  n.
Mat.  8. 20.  and  the  birds  of  the  air  have  n.  Luke  9. 58.
N  ET

Signifies,  [1]  An  instrument  for  catching  fish,
oirds,  or  wild  beasts,  Isa.  51.  20.  Mat.  4.  18.  [2]
Artificial  work  wrought  like  a  r,et,  1  Kings  7 •  1.7 •
[3]  Mischief  cunningly  devised,  Psal.  9.  15.  Mic.

7.  2.  [4]  A  fo-tress,  Prov.  12.  t  12.  [5]  Inex¬
tricable  difficulties.  Job  18.  8.  [6]  Trying  afflic¬
tions,  wherewith  God  chastiseth  his  people,  Job
19.  6.

They  sacrifice  unto  their  net,  Hab.  1.  16.  They
ascribe  the  praise  of  their  victories  and  acquired
glory  to  their  own  contrivances,  diligence,  and
power  ;  as  if  the  fisherman  should  make  his  net  his
god,  and  offer  sacrifices  thereto,  because  it  had
enclosed  a  good  draught  of  fishes.

Job  18.  8.  he  is  cast  into  aw.  by  his  own  feet
19.  6.  God  hath  compassed  mt  with  his  w.

Psal.  9.  15.  in  the  n.  they  hid,  is  their  foot  taken

10.  9.  when  he  draweth  him  into  his  n.

25.15.  he  shall  pluck  my  feet  out  of  the  n.  31.  4.

35.  7.  they  have  hid  for  me  their  n.  in  a  pit

8.  let  his  n.  that  he  hath  hid  catch  himself
57.  6.  they  have  prepared  a  n.  for  my  steps
66.  11.  thou  broughtest  us  into  the  n.

140.  5.  they  have  spread  a  n.  by  the  way-side
Prov.  1.  17-  surely  in  vain  the  n.  is  spread  in  sight

,  330


Prov.  12.  12.  the  wicked  desireth  the  w.  of  evil  men
29.  5.  a  man  that  flat tereth  spreadeth  a  n.

Reel.  9.  12.  as  the  fishes  are  taken  in  an  evil  n.

Isa.  51.  20.  thy  sons  lie,  as  a  wild  bull  in  a  n.
l^am.  1.  13.  he  hath  spread  a  n.  for  my  teet
Ezek.  12. 13.  my  n.  will  I  spread  on  him,  17-  20.

19.  8.  the  nations  shall  spread  their  n.  over  him
32  ?.  1  w'ill  spread  out  my  n.  over  thee
Hos.  5.  1.  ye  have  been  a  n.  spread  upon  1  abor
7. 12.  when  they  go,  I  will  spread  my  n.  upon  them
Mic.  7.  2.  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  a  n.

Hab.  1.  15.  they  catch  them  in  their  n.

16  therefore  they  sacrifice  to  their  n.  and  burn
17.  shall  they  therefore  empty  their  n.?

Mat.  4.  18.  casting  n.  into  the  sea,  Mark  1.  lb.

13  4“  the  kingdom  ot  heaven  is  like  a  w.  cast
Luke  5.  5.  at  thy  word  1  will  let  down  the  n.

6.  a  ereat  multitude  ot  fishes,  and  their  w.  brake
John  21.  6.  cast  the  n.  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship
8.  came  in  a  ship,  dragging  the  n.  with  the  fishes
11.  drew  the  n.  to  land,  yet  was  not  the  n.  broken
NET'S.

1  Kings  7.  17.  n.  of  checker-work  and  wreaths
Psal.  141.  10.  let  the  wicked  fall  into  their  own  n.
Eecl.  7.  26.  the  woman  whose  heart  is  snares  and  n.
Jsa.  19'.  8.  they  that  spread  n.  shall  languish
Ezek.  26.  5.  spreading  of  n.  in  the  midst  ot  the  sea
14.  it  shall  be  a  place  to  spread  n.  Ml,  47.  10.  .
Mat.  4.  21.  he  saw  James  and  John  mending  their
n.  and  he  called  them,  Mark  1.  19.  Luke  5.  2.
Mark  1.  18.  they  forsook  theirw.  and  followed  him
Luke  5.  4.  and  let  down  yourw.  for  a  draught
N  ET  HEll.

Exod.  19. 17.  they  stood  at  the  n.  part  of  the  mount
Deut.  24.  6.  no  man  shal  1  take  n.  millstone  to  pledge
Josh.  15.  19.  and  he  gave  her  the  upper  springs
and  the  w.  springs,  Judg.  1.  15.

1  Kings  9. 17.  and  Solomon  built  Gezer  and  Beth-
horon  the  n.  1  Chron.  7.  24.
Job  41.24.  his  heart  hard  as  a  piece  of  n.  millstone
Ezek.  31. 14.  they  are  delivered  to  death  to  n.  parts
16.  shall  be  comforted  in  the  n.  parts  ot  the  earth

18.  shalt  be  brought  down  to  n.  parts  of  the  earth
32.  18.  cast  them  down  to  the  n.  parts  of  the  earth

24  Elam  gone  down  to  the  n.  parts  of  the  earth
NETHERMOST.

1  Kings  6.  6.  the  n.  chamber  was  five  cubits  broad
NETTLES.

Job  30.  7.  under  the  n.  they  were  gathered  together
Prov.  24.  31.  and  n.  had  covered  the  face  thereof
Isa.  34.  13.  n.  and  brambles  in  the  fortresses  thereof
Hos  9.6.  n.  shall  possess  the  pleasant  places  forsilv.
Zevh.  2.  9.  surely  Moab  shall  be  the  breeding  of  n.

v  NET-WORK.

Exod.  27.  4.  shalt  make  a  grate  of  n.  of  brass,  38.  4.

1  Kings  7.  18.  two  rows  round  about  on»,  42.

Jer.  52.  22.  with  n.  on  the  chapiters  round  about
23  all  the  pomegranates  on  n.  were  an  hundred
NET- WORKS.

1  Kings  7.  41.  the  two  n.  upon  the  chapiters
42.  four  hundred  pomegranates  for  the  two  n.

Isa.  .3.  +  18.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  n.

19.  9.  they  that  weave  n.  shall  be  confounded
NEVER.

Gen.  41.  19.  kine,  such  as  1  n.  saw  in  all  Egypt
Lev.  6.  13.  the  fire  on  the  altar  shall  n.  go  out
Xvm.  19.  2.  a  red  heifer,  upon  which  n.  came  yoke
Deut.  15.  11.  the  poor  shall  n.  cease  out  ot  the  land
Judg.  2.  1.  I  will  n.  break  my  covenant  with  you

14.  .3.  is  there  n.  a  woman  among  all  my  people  ?

16  7  with  seven  green  withs  that  were  n.  dried

11.  if  bind  with  new  ropes  that  n.  were  occupied
26«w.l2.10.the  sword  shall  n.  depart  from  thy  house

2  Chron.  18.7.  be  »•  prophesied  good  unto  me
21.  17.  there  was  n.  a  son  left  him,  save  Jehoahaz

Job  .3.  16.  as  infants  which  n.  saw  light
9.  30.  and  if  I  make  my  hands  n.  so  clean
21.  25.  another  n.  eateth  with  pleasure
Psal.  10.  6.  hath  said,  for  1  shall  n.  be  in  adversity

11.  he  hideth  his  face,  he  will  n.  see  it

15.  5.  he  that  doeth  these  things  shall  n.  be  moved

30.  6.  in  prosperity  1  said,  I  shall  n.  be  moved

31.  1.  in  thee  do  I  trust,  let  me  n.  be  ashamed
49.  19.  shall  go  up  to  fathers;  they  shall  n.  see
55.22.  Lord  willw. suffer  therighteousto be  moved
71.  1.  O  Lord,  let  me  n.  be  put  to  confusion
119.93.  1  will  n.  forget  thy  precepts,  for  with  them

Prov.  10.  30.  the  righteous  shall  n.  be  removed
27  .  20.  hell  and  destruction  are  n.  full,  so  the  eyes

of  a  man  are  n.  satisfied
30.  15.  there  are  three  things  that  are  n.  satisfied
Isa.  13.  20.  Babylon  n.  be  inhabited  nor  dwelt  in
14.  20.  the  seed  of  evil  doers  shall  n.  be  renowned
25.  2.  to  be  no  city,  it  shall  n.  be  built
56. 11.  are  greedy  dogs  which  can  n.  have  enough
62.  6.  watcLmen  that  shall  n.  hold  their  peace
6.3. 19.  we  are  thine,  thou  n.  barest  rule  over  them
Jer.  20.  11.  their  confusion  shall  n.  be  forgotten
33.  17.  David  shall  n.  want  a  man  to  sit  on  throne
Ezek.  16.  63.  and  v.  open  thy  mouth  any  more
06.  01.  Tyrus  shall  n.  be  found  again,  saith  Lord
27.  36.  a  terror  and  n.  shalt  be  any  more,  28.  19.
Dan.  2.  44.  a  kingdom  that  shall  n.  be  destroyed

12.  1.  there  shalfbe  trouble,  such  asn.  was
Joel  2.  26.  and  my  people  shall  n.  be  ashamed,  27.
Amos  8.  7.  I  will  n.  forget  any  of  their  works

14.  even  they  shall  fall  and n.  rise  up  again
Hab.  1.  4.  and  judgment  doth  n.  go  forth
Mat.  7.  23.  I  will  profess  unto  them  I  n.  knew  you
9.  33.  saying,  it  was  n.  so  seen  in  Israel
21. 16.  Jesus  aith,  have  yew.  read,  out  ot  the  mouth
of  babes  hast  perfected  praise,  42.  Mark  2.  25.
26.  33.  Peter  said,  yet  will  1  n.  be  offended
27. 14.  and  he  answered  him  to  n.  a  word
Mark  2.  12.  saying,  we  n.  saw  it  on  this  fashion
3. 29.  shall  blaspheme  ag.  Holy  Ghost,  hath  n.  forg.
9.  43.  into  fire  that  n.  shall  be  quenched,  45.

11.2.  colt  tied,  whereon  n.  man  sat,  Luke  19.  30.
14.  21.  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  n.  been  born
L.uke  15.  29.  yet  thou  n.  gavestme  a  kid  to  make
23.  29.  blessed  are  the  wombs  that  n.  bare
53.  wherein  w.  man  before  was  laid,  John  19.  41.


John  4. 14.  who  drinks  of  water  1  give,  shall  n.  thirs:

6.  35.  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  n.  hunger,  anc

lie  diat  believeth. on  me  shall  n.  thirs

7.  15.  how  knoweth  this  man,  having  n.  learned  ?
46.  the  officers  said,  w.  man  spake  like  this  man

8.  3.3.  and  we  were  w.  in  bondage  to  any

51.  he  shall  n.  see  death,  52.  |  10.  28.  1 11.  26.

I. 3.  8.  Peter  saith,  thou  shalt  w.  wash  my  feet
Acts  10.  14.  1  have  w.  eaten  any  thing  common

II. 8.  being  a  cripple,  who  n.  had  walked

1  Cor.  13. 8.  charity  n.  faileth,  but  whether  prophec

2  Tim.  3.  7.  n .  able  to  come  to  knowledge  of  trnt!
Heb.  10.  1.  canw.  with  those  sacrifices  make  perfec

11.  the  same  sacrifices  which  can  n.  take  away  sin
1.3  5.  I  will  n.  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee
2  Pet.  1.  10.  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  n.  fall
NEVER  so.

Psal.  58.  5.  to  charmers,  charming  n.  so  w  isely
N  EV  ER  so  much.

Gen.  34. 12.  ask  me  n.  so  m.  dowry ,  and  I  will  giv
NEVERTHELESS.

Exod.  .32.  34.  n.  in  the  day  when  I  visit,  I  will  vis
Lev.  11.  4.  n.  these  ye  shall  not  eat,  Deut.  14.  7.

36.  n.  a  fountain  or  pit  shall  be  clean
Num.  13.  28.  n.  the  people  be  strong  that  dwell
14.  44.  n.  the  ark  ot  the  covenant  departed  not

18. 15.  n.  the  first  born  of  man  shalt  thou  redeem

24.  22.  n.  the  Kenite  shall  be  wasted,  until  Asshi
.31.  23.  n.  it  shall  be  purified  with  water  of  separa
Deut.  23.  5.  n.  the  L.  thy  God  would  not  hearke,
Josh.  13.  13.  n.  children  of  Isr.  expelled  not  Geshu

14.  8.  n.  my  brethren  that  went  up  w  ith  me
Judg.  1.  33.  n.  the  inhabitants  of  Beth-shetnesn

2.  16.  n.  the  Lord  raised  up  judges  to  deliver  the

1  Sam. 8. 19.  n.  the  people  refused  to  obey  Sarr.u

15.  35.  to  see  Saul,  re.  Samuel  mourned  for  Saul

20.  £6.  n.  Saul  spake  not  any  thing  that  day
29.  6.  said  to  David,  n.  the  lords  tavour  thee  no

2  Sam.  5.  7.  n.  David  took  the  strong  hold  of  Zio

17.  18.  n.  a  lad  saw  them,  and  told  Absalom
23.  16.  n.  he  would  not  drink  thereof,  poured  00

1  Kings  8. 19.  n.  thou  shalt  not  build  the.  house
15.  4.  n.  for  David’s  sake  did  the  Lord  give

14.  n.  Asa  his  heart  was  perfect  with  the  Lord
23.  71.  in  his  old  age  he  was  diseased  in  his  fee1

22.  43.  n.  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away

2  Kings  2.  10.  n.  if  thou  see  me  when  1  am  takei

3.  3.  n.  he  cleaved  to  the  sins  of  Jeroboam
13.  6.  n.  they  departed  not  from  the  sins  ot  Jero

23.  9.  n.  the  priests  of  the  high  places  can, e  not

1  Chron.  11.  5.  n.  David  took  thecastleot  Zion

21.  4.  n.  the  king’s  word  prevailed  agains'  Joal

2  Chron.  12.  8.  n.  they  shall  be  his  servants

15. 17.  n.  the  heart  of  Asa  was  perfect  all  his  da;
19.  3.  n.  there  are  good  things  found  in  thee

30. 11.  n.  divers  or  Asher  humbled  themselves

33. 17.  n.  the  people  did  sacrifice  in  the  high  pla
35.  22.  n.  Josiah  would  not  turn  from  him
Neh.  4. 9.  n.  we  made  our  prayer  to  our  God

9.  26.  n.  they  were  disobed.  and  rebelled  ag.  t!
31.  n.  for  thy  mercies’  sake  thou  didst  notconsu
1.3.  26.  n.  him  did  outlandish  women  cause  to  si
Esth.  5.  10.  n.  Haman  refrained  himself
Psal.  31.  22.  n.  thou  heardest  my  supplication

49. 12.  n.  man  being  in  honour,  abideth  not
73.  2.3.  n.  1  am  continually  with  thee,  hast  hoh
78.  .36.  n.  they  did  flatter  him  with  their  mouth
89.  .38.  n.  my  loving-kindness  not  take  from  Inn
106.  8.  n.  he  saved  them  for  his  name’s  sake

44.  n.  he  regarded  their  affliction,  heard  their  c
Prov.  19.  21.  n.  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  shall  st
Eecl.  9.  16.  n.  the  poor  man's  wisdom  is  despisi
Isa.  9.  1.  n.  the  dimness  shall  not  be  such  as  wa
Jer.  5.  18.  n.  in  those  days  1  will  make  a  full  en

26.  24.  n.  the  hand  of  Ahikam  was  with  Jerem
28.  7 .  n.  hear  thou  this  word  that  I  speak  in  thy  1
36.25.  n.  Elnathan  and  Delaiah  made  intercess:
Ezek.  3.  21.  n.  if  thou  warn  the  righteous  man
16.60.  n.  I  will  remember  my  covenant  with

20.  17.  n.  mine  eye  spared  them  from  destroy

22.  n.  I  withdrew  my  hand,  and  wrought  for
33.  9.  n.  if  thou  warn  the  wicked  ot  his  way
Dan.  4. 15.  n.  leave  the  stump  of  his  roots  in  eai
Jonah  1. 13.  n.  the  men  rowed  hard  to  bring  to  I
Mat.  14.  9.  n.  for  the  oath’s  sake  he  commander
26.  39.  from  me,  n.  not  as  1  will,  but  as  thou  \
64.  n.  hereafter  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  (
Mark  14.  36.  n.  not  what  1  will,  L.uke  22. 42.
Luke  5.  5.  n.  at  thy  word  I  will  let  down  the  r
13.  3.3.  71.  1  must  walk  to-dav  and  to-morrow
18.8.  n.  when  Son  of  man  cometh  shall  he  find
John  11.  15.  Lazarus  is  dead,  n.  let  us  go  to  hi

12.  42. 71.  among  the  chief  rulers  many  believe
16.7.  n.  1  tell  you  the  truth,  it  is  expedient  tor

Acts  14.  17.  n.  he  left  not  himself  without  witn
27. 11.  re.  the  centurion  believed  the  master  ot  s
Rom.  5.  14.  n.  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  ,3.

15. 15.  ti.  I  have  written  more  boldly  to  you

1  Cor.  7. 2.  n.  to  avoid  fornicat.  let  every  man  I
28. 71.  such  shall  have  trouble  in  the  flesh

37.  71.  he  that  standeth  stedfast  in  his  heait

9.  12.  71.  we  have  not  used  this  power

11.  11. 11.  neither  is  the  man  without  the  worn;

2  Cor.  3.  16.  n.  when  it  shall  turn  to  the  Lord
7. 6.  n.  G.  that  comfcrteth  those  that  are  cast  1

12.  16.  n.  being  crafty',  1  caught  you  with  gc
Gal.  2.  20.  n.  1  live,  yet  not  1,  but  Christ  in

4.  30.  n.  what  saith  scripture,  cast  put  bond-i
Eph.  5.33.  n.  let  every  man  so  love  his  wire  as  1
Phil.  1.  24.  n.  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  mpie  ne<
3.  16.  n.  whereto  we  have  already  attained
2  Tim.  1.  12.  n.  I  am  not  ashamed,  tor  1  know  v
2.  19.  n.  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sun
IJeb.  12.  11.  n.  it  yieldeth  peaceable  fruit  ot
2  Pet.  3. 13.  n.  we  look  for  new  heavens  and  1
Rev.  2.  4.  n.  1  have  somewhat  against  thee

Signifies,  [1]  That  which  is  fresh,  or  of  late
Josh  9.  1.3.  [2]  That  which  was  neier  «

wornbefle, 1  Kings  11.  29.  [3]  That  * hick
traordivary  and  unusual ,  Num.  lj>*  L  i


sraurainaiy  ana  «#*<**<*<«*,  ^  -  -

who  is  regenerated)  and  endued  with  new  Q


N  I  G


N  I  N


N  I  G


ten!  apprehensions  and  inclinations,  2  Cor.  5.  17.
(ial.  6.  15.  [5]  Strange  and  unknown,  51  ark  16.
17.  [6]  Another,  Exod.  1.  H.
rod.  1.  8.  there  arose  up  a  n.  kin?  over  Egypt
rp. 23. 16.  olipran.  meat  offering,  Anm  °H  °6
>.  10.  shall  brill®  forth  the  old,  because  of  the  re.
urn.  16.  30.  but  if  the  l.ord  make  a  n.  thing
tut.  20. 5.  what  man  hath  built  a  n.  house,  22.  8.
t.  5.  when  taken  a  n.  wife,  he  shall  not  go  to  war
17.  they  sacrificed  to  devils,  to  n.  gods
sh.  0.  13.  and  these  bottles  of  wine  were  n.
dg.  5.  8.  they  chose  n.  gods,  then  was  war  i-n  gates
>.  13.  they  bound  him  with  n.  cords,  16.  11,  12.
am.  6.7.  make  a  n.  cart,  and  take  two  kine~

‘am.  6.  3.  set  the  ark  on  a  n.  cart,  1  Chron.  13  7
.  16.  he  bein®  girded  with  a  n.  sword  thought
sings  11.29.  Jeroboam  clad  with  a  «.  garment
W.  A  hi.iah  caught  the  n.  garment,  and  rent  it
\ings  2.  20.  bring  a  n.  cruse,  and  put  salt  therein
'hron.  20.  5.  I ehoshaphat  stood  in  the  n.  court
>  32.  19.  it  is  ready  to  burst  like  n.  bottles
al.  33.  3.  sing  to  him  a  n.  song,  96.  1.  |  98.  1.

,  I  144.  9.  I  149.  1.  ha.  42.  10.

►  1.3.  he  hath  put  a  n.  song  in  my  mouth, even  praise
cl.  1.  9.  there  is  no  n.  thing  under  the  sun
0.  is  any  thing  whereof  may  be  said,  this  is  n  *
nt.  7.  1.3.  are  all  pleasant  fruits,  n.  and  old
42.  9.  behold,  n.  things  do  I  declare,  48.  6.

.  19.  behold,  1  will  do  a  n.  thing,  make  a  way
.  2.  and  thou  shalt  be  called  by  a  n.  name
.  17.  1  create  n.  heavens  and  a  n.  earth,  66  °2
.  26. 10.  the  n.  gate  of  the  Lord's  house,  36.  10.'

.  22.  the  L.  hath  created  a  ?i.  thini?  in  the  earth
m.  3. 23.  the  Lord's  mercies  are  n.  every  morning
’k.  11- 19.  1  will  put  aw.  spirit  within  you,  36. 26.
.31.  and  make  you  a  n.  heart  and  a"w.  spirit'

.  12.  trees  which  shall  bring  forth  n.  fruit
•t.  9.  16.  no  man  putteth  a  piece  of  w  clotn  to
an  old  garment,  Mark  2.  21.  Luke  5  .36
,.  but  they  put  n.  wine  into  n.  bottles,  ami  both
.  are  preserved,  Mark  2  22.  Luke  5.  38
52.  bringeth  out  of  his  treasure  things  n.  and  old
.  28.  tor  this  is  my  blood  of  the  n.  testament
,  ,,  Mark  14.  24.  Luke  22.  20.  1  Cor.  11. 25!

?.  until  I  drink  it  n.  with  you,  Mark  14.  25.

.  60.  Joseph  laid  the  body  in  his  own  n.  to'mb
.  rk  1.  27.  saying,  what  re.  doctrine  is  this  3
17.  they  shall  speak  with  n.  tongues
.n  13.  34.  a  n .  commandment  I  give  unto  you
41.  a  n.  sepulchre,  wherein  was  never  man  laid
- f  17. 19;  may  we  know  what  this  w.  doctrine  is  3
.  but  either  to  tell  or  to  hear  some  n.  thin®
:w.5.J.  purge  out,  that  ye  may  he  a  n.  lump
5  >r.  3. 6.  made  us  able  ministers  of  the  n.  testament
if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  n,  creature  ;

,  ,  behold,  all  things  are  become  n

<  0. 15.  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  n.  creature
.1.2. 15.  ot  twain,  one  n.  man,  so  making  peace
.4.  and  that  ye  put  on  the  n.  man.  Col.  3  10
he  1S  tlle  Merl*ator  of  the  n.  testament

20.  by  a  n.  and  living  way  hath  consecrated
jet.  2. 2.  as  n.  born  babes  desire  the  milk  of  word
-  et.  3. 13.  we  look  for  n.  heavens  and  a  w.  earth
1  «w  2.  , .  1  write  no  n.  commandment  unto  you
a  n.  commandment  1  write  unto  you
hn 5.jiot  as  though  1  wrote  an.  commandment
•1.2. 17. n..  name  wmitten,  which  no  man  knoweth
.2.  w.  Jerusalem,  21.2.  ||  .3. 12.  write  my  «.  name
4.  and  they  sun®  a  n.  son®,  saying,  14.  3.

L  •  saw  a  n.  heaven  and  a  n.  earth
he  said,  behold,  1  make  all  things  n.

See  Covenant,  Moon.

NEW  Wine.

f  •  1°-  39.  shall  bring  offering  of  the  n.  wine
5- prepar.  a  chamber  where  the  n.  wine  was  laid
.  brought  tithe  of  n.  wine  unto  the  treasuries
;  •  IP;  thy  presses  shall  burst  out  with  w.  wine
j  e  ?• wtne.  mourneth,  the  vine  languisheth
+ -6.  drunken  with  their  blood  as  with  n.  wine
b.  as  the  n.  wine  is  found  in  the  cluster
,  *’  y,ne  and  n-  u'*ne  take  away  the  heart

I  k  1  e  n-  wme  shall  fail  in  her

®  1. 5.  the  n.wine  is  cut  off  ||  ]0.  n.  wine  is  dried  up
8.  mountains  shall  drop  n.  wine,  Amos  9.  +  1.3
?,•  1-  ll-  1  called  for  a  drought  on  the  n.  wine

Ini-!?'  w,ne  sha11  make  the  maids  cheerful
1  17.  do  men  put  n.  wine  into  old  bottles  but

,  “?to  nevY  bottles,  Mark  2.  22.  Luke  5.  37.

■  2. 13.  others  said,  these  men  are  full  of  n.  wine

l  .  NEWS.

,  25-  so  is  good  n.  from  a  far  country

.  NEWLY.

J  •  sacrificed  to  new  gods  that  came  n.  up

5  o.19'ihey  had  but  n-  set  the  watch
1  VV  ?• they  came  to  the  land  n.  inhabited
m-  3.  t  6.  not  one  n.  come  to  the  faith
,  .  „  NEWNESS.

-.V- 4-  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  n.  of  life
•  mat  we  should  serve  in  re.  of  spirit,  not  oldness
(  11  01  o  N  EXT.

'iSa[ahshal1  bear  at  this  settimew.  year
1 1'  11  on1.  and  his  neighbour  n.  take  a  lamb

II  l,  Lsl?od  UP  tbe  n.  day  and  gathered
l/rio  ,  ?lve  inheritance  to  his  kinsman  n.

1  ‘e  wbich  is  n.  to  the  slain  man
ae  elders  of  the  city  n.  to  the  slain  man
l  „J:r  kinsman  shall  take  her  to  wife


Iho  oa  .u  Klnsman  shall  take  her  to  wife

1  nj'oo  nia,n. 15  one  °f  our  ra-  kinsmen

i-  ri  '.-thou  king,  and  l  shall  be  n.  to  thee

2  rL  of  -  ^n°te  them  to  the  evening  of  n.  day
L  m  o'  If  E*kanah  that  was  n.  to  the  king

J .1  a'J •  yIordecai  was  n.  to  king  Ahasnerus
/  07  Ao  \ .worn?  the,  ”•  <KV  smote  the  gourd
l  ill  Vk  e n.-j  ay  that  followed  the  preparation
J  loo  iu  sa,( ,et  us  so  into  tlle  n-  towns
z  A,  ,1  e  71 '  day  John  seeth  Jesus  coming
'fi  tl'L ',eL  Put  them  in  hold  unto  the  n.  day
40  thofik  ay  M°ses  shewed  himself  to  them
lhat  these  words  he  prearhed  n.  sabbath,  44.
lo,  ,  r  ..  .  NIGH.

49  '  ►khiS-S1Sterrai  ymgm  that  is  n.  to  him
J-  any  that  is  n.  of  kin  may  redeem  him


Amw.  24.  17.  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not  n.  a  star
k>evt.  4. 7  .  what  nation,  who  hath  God  so  n.  to  them  3
<.0  n  P!1,.!ce  thee  to  gods  of  the  people  n.  to  thee
22.  2.  it  thv  brother  be  not  re.  unto  thee

30.  14.  the  word  is  n.  unto  thee,  Rom.  10  8
2  Sam.  11.  20.  wherefore  approached  ye  so  n.  *  21.

\  Kings Q.  59.  let  these  my  words  be  n.  to  the  I  ord
real  31.  18.  L.  is  n.  them  who  are  of  broken  heart
85.  9.  his  salvation  is  n.  them  that  fear  him
145.  18.  the  Lord  is  n.  to  all  that  call  on  him

Joel  2.  1.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  n.  at  hand
Mat.  24.  .32.  ye  know  that  summer  is  n.  Luke  21  30
Mark  13.  29.  know  that  it  is  n.  even  at  the  doors
Luke  21.  Q0.  know  that  the  desolation  thereof  is  n.
28.  look  up,  for  your  redemption  draweth  n.

31 .  know  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  n.  at  hand
John  6.  4.  and  the  passover.  a  feast  of  Jews,  was  n

1 1 . 55.  the  Jews'  passover  was  n.  at  hand
19.  42.  for  the  sepulchre  was  n.  at  hand
Lph.  2.  13.  ye  are  made  n.  by  the  blood  of  Christ
17.  came  and  preached  peace  to  them  that  were  n.
rii’2"  tor  he  was  sick,  n.  unto  death,  .30.
tleb.6. 8.  is  rejected,  is  n.  unto  cursing,  to  be  burned
See  Came,  Draw.
c-  N  IG  HT

Signifies,  [1]  That  time  while  the  sun  is  absent  and
below  our  horizon,  Exod.  12.  .30,  .31.  Matt.  27.
64.  [2]  Suddenly  and  unexpectedly ,  Isa.  15.  1.
j'r6,,12'  PJ  A  tlme  °f  ignorance  and  unbe-
lief,  Rom.  1.3.  12.  [4]  A  tversity  and  affliction,
Isa.  21.  12.  [5]  Death,  John  9.  4.

Den.  1.5.  the  Hsrhtday,  and  thedarkness  he  called  n.
14.  let  there  be  Hunts,  to  divide  the  day  from  n.
16.  he  made  the  lesser  li®ht  to  rule  the  n.

19.  2.  tarry  all  n.  Anm.  22.  19.  Judg.  19.  6,  9.

5.  where  are  men  which  came  in  to  thee  this  n  ?
.33.  they  made  him  drink  wine  that  n.  .34,  .35

24.  54.  tarried  all  n.  28.  11.  |  .31.  54.  |  32.  1.3,  21.

26.  24.  the  Ixird  appeared  to  Isaac  the  same  n.

30.  15.  Rachel  said,  he  shall  lie  with  thee  to  n.  16.
I?’  **'  (|ceamed  each  man  his  dream  in  one  n.  41. 11.
46.  2.  God  spake  to  Israel  in  visions  of  the  n  '

49.  27.  and  at  n.  he  shall  divide  the  spoil

Lxod .12.  8.  eat  the  Hesh  in  that  n.  roast  with  fire
12.  I  will  pass  through  the  land  of  Egypt  this  n.
42.  it  is  a  n.  to  be  much  observed  to  the  Lord,

.  *  a  *?  tl,at  n ■  of  the  E.  to  be  observed  of  Israel
14.  20.  the  one  came  not  near  the  other  all  n.

Lev.  6.  9.  the  burning  on  the  altar  all  n.

19.  13.  the  wages  shall  not  abide  with  thee  all  n.
Sum.  11.  32.  tne  people  stood  up  all  that  n.

aa'  o'  ?nd  the  PeoP'e  wept  that  n.  and  murmured
22.  8.  he  said  to  them,  lodge  hsre  this  n.  19.

20.  God  came  to  Balaam  at  n.  and  said  to  him
ok-  \  t,1ere  s,ia"  no  *eav-  bread  remain  all  n.

yl- 23.  his  body  shall  not  remain  all  n.  on  the  tree
Josh.  2.  2.  there  came  men  in  hither  to  n.  of  Israel
Judg.  6.  40.  G.  did  so  that  n.  for  it  was  dry  on  fleece

16.  2.  laid  wait  for  him  all  n.  and  were  quiet  all  n
19.  10.  but  the  man  would  not  tarry  that  n.

25.  and  abused  her  all  the  n.  until  the  morning

o  ^  l'  '  should  have  an  husband  also  to'V

3.  2.  behold,  Boaz  winnoweth  barley  to  n.

1  Sam.  15.  11.  and  Samuel  cried  to  the  Lord  all  n.
16.  tell  what  the  Lord  hath  said  to  me  this  n.

19.  10.  and  David  fled  and  escaped  that  n.

11.  say  in®,  if  thou  save  not  thy  life  to  n.

28.  25.  Saul  rose  up  and  went  away  that  n.

3L  12.  the  men  of  Jabesh  went  all  n.  and  took

2  Sam.  2.  29.  Abner  and  his  men  walked  all  n.

32.  Joab  and  his  men  went  all  n.  and  came

4.  7.  and  gat  them  a  wav  through  the  plain  all  n
12.  16.  David  went  and  lay  all  n.  on  the  earth

17.  1  -  1  will  arise  and  pursue  after  David  this  n
16.  saying,  lodge  not  this  n.  in  the  plain

19.  7*  there  will  not  tarry  one  with  thee  this  n.

2  K  ings  19.  35.  that  n.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote
2  G hron.  1.  7*  that  n.  did  God  appear  to  Solomon
Lst/i.  6.  1.  on  that  n.  could  not  the  king  sleep
Job  3.  3.  let  the  n.  perish  in  which  it  was  said
7.  let  that  n.  be  solitary  H  4. 13.  the  visions  of  the  n.

(.  4.  when  shall  1  arise,  and  the  n.  be  gone3

29.  19.  and  the  dew  lay  all  n.  on  my  branch

30.  +  3.  for  want  and  famine  they  were  dark  asn.
36.  20.  desire  not  the  n.  when  people  are  cut  off
Psal.  6.  6.  all  the  n.  make  I  my  bed  to  swim

19.  2.  and  n.  unto  n.  sheweth  knowledge

30.  5.  weeping  may  endure  for  a  n.  but  joy

59.  t  15.  if  they  be  not  satisfied  they  will  stay  all  n.
78. 14.  he  led  them  all  n.  with  a  light  of  fire
92.  2.  to  shew  forth  thy  faithfulness  every  n.

104.  20.  thou  makest  darkness,  and  it  is  n.

139.  11.  even  the  n.  shall  be  light  about  me
Prov.  7.  9.  passing  in  the  black  and  dark  n.

31.  15.  she  ariseth  also  while  it  is  yet  n.

Cant.  1.  13.  he  shall  lie  all  n.  between  my  breasts

5.  2.  and  my  locks  with  the  drops  of  the  n.

Isa.  5.  11.  continue  until  n.  till  wine  inflame  them

16.  3.  take  counsel,  make  thy  shadow  as  the  n.

21.  4.  the  n.  of  my  pleasure  he  turned  into  fear

t  8.  and  I  am  set  in  nvy  ward  every  n.

11.  watchman,  what  of  the  n.  ?  what  of  the  n.?

12.  the  morning  cometh,  and  also  the  n.

29.  7-  shall  be  as  a  dream  of  a  n.  vision

Jer.  14.  8.  that  turneth  aside  to  tarry  for  a  n.

Dan.  2.  19.  the  secret  was  revealed  in  a  n.  vision

5.  30.  in  that  n.  was  Belshazzar  the  king  slain

6.  18.  then  the  king  passed  the  n.  fasting
Hos.  7-  6.  their  baker  sleepeth  all  tbs  n.

JoelX.  13.  howl,  come,  lie  all  n.  in  sackcloth
Amos  5.  8.  that  maketh  the  day  dark  with  n.

Jonah  4.  10.  which  came  up  in  a  n.  perished  in  a  n.
Mic.  3.  6.  therefore  n.  shall  be  to  you,  shall  be  dark
Mat.  14.  25.  in  the  fourth  watch  of  n.  Jesus  went

to  them  walking  on  the  sea,  Mark  6.  48.
26.  31.  then  Jesus  saith  to  them,  all  ye  shall  be
offended  because  of  me  this  n.  Mark  14.  2".
34.  this  n.  before  cock-crow,  thou  shalt  deny  me
Luke  5.  5.  we  have  toiled  all  n.  and  taken  nothing
6.  12.  he  continued  all  n.  in  prayer  to  God
12.  20.  this  n.  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee

17.  34.  in  that  n.  two  shall  be  in  one  bed


Luke  Cl.  3".  at  n.  he  went  out  and  abode  in  mount
John  9.  4.  the  n.  cometh  when  no  man  can  work
13.  30.  he  immediately  went  out.  and  it  was  n.

21.3.  and  thatn.  they  caught  nothing

Acts  12 . 6.  the  same  n.  Peter  was  sleeping,  bound
16.  33.  he  took  them  the  same  hour  of  the  n.

2.3.  ll.  the  n.  following  the  Lord  stood  by  h'im

2.3.  make  ready  soldiers  at  third  hour  of  there.

2".  23.  stood  by  me  this  re.  the  angel  of  God
Rom.  13.  12.  the  n.  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand
1  Cor.  j  i.  the  same  re.  in  which  he  was  betrayed

1  l’hess.  5.  5. we  are  not  of  there,  nor  of  daikness
Lev.  21.  25.  there  shall  be  no  re.  there,  22.  5.

By  NIGHT.

Gen.  20.  ,3.  God  came  to  Abimelech  in  a  dream  by  re.
.31.  24.  God  came  to  Laban  in  a  dream  by  re.

39.  whether  stolen  by  day,  or  stolen  by  re.

40.  the  drought  cons’umed  me.  and  the  frost  by  re.
Ifod.  12.  31.  he  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron  by  re.

13.  21.  the  Lord  went  before  them  by  re.  in  a  pillar
of  fire,  22. 1  14.  20.  I  40.  .38.  A  eh.  9.  12.
A  re/re.  9  16.  and  the  appearance  of  tire  by  re.

21.  whether  cloud  was  taken  up  by  day  or  by  n.
Deut.  1.  ,33.  in  fire  by  re.  to  shew  you  the  wav
16.  1.  God  brought  you  forth  out  of  Egypt  by  n

2.3.  10.  by  uncleanness  thatchanceth  him  by  re.
Josh.  8.  3.  and  Joshua  sent  thein  away  by  n
Judg.  6.  27.  and  so  it  was  that  he  did  it  by  n
9.  32.  up  by  re.  thou  and  thy  people  with  thee
20.  5.  and  beset  the  house  round  about  by  n

14.  36.  go  down  after  the  Philistines  by  n

26.7.  David  and  Abishai  came  to  the  people  by  re.

28.8.  Sa  1  came  to  the  woman  by  re.  and  said

2  Sam.  21.  10.  nor  the  beasts  of  the  field  by  n

1  Kings  3.  5.  Ld .  appeared  to  Sol .  by  n.  2  Chr.  7.12.

2  Kings  6.  14.  came  by  re.  and  compassed  the'citv'

8.  21.  rose  by  n.  and  smote  Edomites,  2  Chr.  21  9
25.  4.  all  the  men  of  war  fled  by  n.  Jer.  52.  ’7 '

Psal.  91-  5.  thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  terror  by  re.

121. 6.  nor  shall  the  moon  smite  thee  byn.

1.34.  1.  that  by  n.  stand  in  the  house  of  the  Lord
1.36.  9.  moon  and  stars  to  rule  by  re.  Jer.  31  35
Prov.  .31.  18.  her  candle  goeth  not  out  byn.

Cant.  .3.  1  .byn.  on  my  bed  1  sought  him  whom
Isa.  4.  5.  the  shining  of  a  flaming  fire  by  re.

Jer.  6.  5.  let  us  go  by  n.  and  destroy  her  palaces
39.  4.  they  fled,  and  went  forth  out  of  the  city  by  n
49.  9.  if  thieves  by  re.  they  will  destroy  till  hai  e
Don.  7.  2.  I  saw  in  my  vision  byn.  and  behold
Ubad.5.  if  thieves  came  to  thee,  if  robbers  by  re. would
they  not  have  stolen  till  they  had  enou®h  3
Mat. 2. 14.  took  the  younsr'child  and  his  mother  by  n
27.64.  lest  his  disciples  come  by  n.  and  steal,  28.13.
Luke  2.  8.  keeping  watch  over  their  flock  by  re.

John  .3.  2.  N  icodemus  came  to  Jesus  by  re.  19  .39
Acts  5.  19.  the  angel  by  n.  opened  the  prison-doors

9.  25.  they  took  Paul  by  re.  and  let  him  down
17.  10.  sent  away  Paul  and  Silas  by  n.  to  Berea

See  Day.

In  the  NIGHT.

Exod.  12. 30.  Pharaoh  and  his  servants  rose  in  the  re.
Aiim.  11.9.  when  the  dew  fell  on  the  camp  in  the  n

1  Kings  3.  19.  and  this  woman’s  child  died  in  the  re.

2  A  mgs  7.  12.  and  the  king  arose  in  the  n.  and  said
A  eh.  2.  12.  I  arose  in  then.  ||  15. 1  went  up  in  the  re.
4.  22.  that  in  the  re.  they  may  be  a  guard  to  us

6.  10.  yea.  m  the  re.  will  they  come  to  slay  thee
Job  5.  14.  and  grope  in  the  noon  day,  as  in  the  n.
24.  14.  in  the  re.  the  murderer  is  as  a  thief
27.20.  a  tempest  stealeth  him  away  in  the  re.

34.  25.  and  he  overturneth  them  in  the  re.

35.  10.  where  is  God,  who  giveth  songs  in  the  re.  *
Psal.  16.  7-  my  reins  instruct  me  in  the  re.  seasons
17.  3.  thou  hast  visited  me  in  the  n.  and  tried  me

22.  2.  1  cry  in  then,  season,  and  am  not  silent

42.  8.  and  in  the  re.  his  song  shall  be  with  me
77.2.  my  sore  ran  in  then,  and  ceased  not

6.  I  call  to  remembrance  my  song  in  the  re.

90.  4.  a  thousand  years  are  but  as  a  watch  in  the  re.
105.  39.  he  spread  a  fire  to  give  light  in  the  re.
119.55.  I  have  remembered  thy  nam 0  in  then.
Eccl.  2.  23.  his  heart  taketh  not' rest  in  then.

Cant.  .3.  8.  hath  his  sword  because  of  fear  in  the  re,
Isa.  15.1.  in  then.Ar  and  Kir  of  Moab  is  laid  waste
26.  9.  with  my  soul  have  I  desired  thee  in  the  re.
30.  29-  ye  shall  have  a  song  as  in  the  n.

59.  10.  we  stumble  at  noon-day  as  in  then.

Jer.  .36.  30.  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  re.  to  the  frost
I.am.  1.  2.  she  weep.sore  in  the  re.  ||  2.1 9.cry  out  in  re.
Hos  4.  5.  the  prophet  shall  fall  with  thee  in  the  re.
John  11.  10.  if  a  man  walk  in  the  n.  hestumbleth
Acts  16.  9.  a  vision  appeared  toPaul  in  then.  18.  9.

1  Thess.  5.2.dav  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  n.2  Pet. 3.10.

7 . they  that  sleep,  sleep  in  the  to. are  drunk. in  the  re.

NIGHTS.

Gen. 7.  4. 1  will  cause  it  rain  forty  davs,  forty  re.  12.
Job  7-  3.  wearisome  re.  are  appointed  tome
Isa.  21.  8.  and  I  am  set  in  my  ward  whole  re.

See  Days.

v  NIGHT/irea'L

Lev.  11 . 16.  owl  and  re.  ve  shall  not  eat,  Deut.  14. 15.
NIGH  Y-watches.

Psal.  6.3.  6.  when  I  meditate  on  thee  in  the  n.-w.

119.  148.  mine  eyes  prevent  the  n.-w.  to  meditate
NINE.

Anm.  29.  26.  on  fifth  day  re.  bullocks,  two  rams
34.  13.  which  the  Lord  commanded  to  ®ive  to  the  re.

tribes  and  half  tribe,  Josh.  1.3.  7.  1  14.  2.
Deut.  3.  11.  Og’s  bedstead  was  re.  cubits  in  length

2  Sam.  24. 8.  Joab  came  to  .Terns,  at  end  of  w. months
A 'eh.  11.  1.  and  re.  parts  to  dwell  in  other  cities
Luke  17.  17.  ten  cleansed,  but  where  are  the  re.  ?

See  Hundred.

NINETEEN.

2  Sam.  2. 30.  there  lacked  of  David’s  servants  re.  men
NIN  ETEEN  TIL

2  Kings  25.  8.  in  the  re.  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar  tfie
house  of  the  Lord  was  burnt,  Jer.  52.  12.

.  NINETY.

Gen.  5.  9.  Enos  lived  re.  years,  and  becat  Cainau
17.  1“  •  shall  Sarah,  that  is  re.  years  old,  bear.3
Fzek.  41.  12.  the  length  of  the  building  re.  cubit*

331


NOB


N  O


N  O


NINETY-FIVE.

Ezra  2.  20.  the  children  of  Gibbar  n.-five
Neh.  7.  25.  the  children  of^Gibeon  n.-Jive

Ezra  8.  35.  offered  for  all  Israel  n.-six  rams
ter  52.  23.  were  n.-six  pomegranates  on  a  side
NINETY-EIGHT.

1  Sam.  4.  15.  now  Eli  was  n.-eight  years  old
Ezra  2. 16.  the

Gen  17  1.  Abram  was  n.-nine  years  old, L.  appeared

24.  was  n.-nine  years  old  when  he  was  circumcised
Mat.4Q  i~.  doth  he  not  leave  the  n.-nine,  and  seeketh
that  which  is  gone  astray  <  13.  Lukelb.  4,7.

Lev  25  22.  ye  shall  eat  of  old  fruit  till  the  w.  year
oKinas  17.  6.  inn.  of  Hosh.  Samaria  taken, 18.  10.

2  05  i  in  then,  year  of  Zedekiah,  Nebuchadnezzar

'  came  up,  Jer.  39.  1.  I  52.

1  Chr.  12.  12.  Elzabad  the n.  captain ot  theGadites
24  11.  then,  lot  came  forth  to  Jeshuah
07'  12!  71.  captain  for  the  n.  month  was  Abiezer
7 Mat.  20.  5.  he  went  out  about  the  sixth  and  n.  hour
27.  45.  from  sixth  hour  there  was  darkness  over¬
all  the  land  unto  the  n.  hour,  Mark  15.  33

46.  n.  hour  Jesus  gave  up  the  ghost,  Mark  15.  34
Acts  3.  1.  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  being  then,  hour

10.  3.  Cornelius  saw  a  vision  about  then,  hour,  3U.
Lev  °1  «‘0  then,  foundation  was  a  topaz

See  Day,  Month.

NITRE.  .  .  .

Prov. 25. 20.  as  vinegar  upon  n.  so  is  he  singing  songs
Jer.  2. 22.  though  thou  wash  thee  with  n.  and  soap

Gen  13  8.  let  there  be  no  strife  betw.  me  and  thee

15.  3.  behold,  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed
26*.  29.  be  an  oath  that  thou  wilt  do  us  no  hurt
37.  22.  shed  no  blood,  and  lay  no  hand  upon  him
38".  21.  there  was  no  harlot  in  this  place,  22.

40.  8.  no  interpreter  |)42. 11.  we  are  no  spies,  31, 34.

47.  4  thy  servants  have  no  pasture,  Lam.  1.  o.
Exod.b.  16.  is  no  straw  given  to  thy  servants,  18

8.  22.  that  no  swarms  ot  flies  shall  be  there
12.  16.  no  work  shall  be  done.  Lev.  16.  29. 1  -3.  3,

7,  21,  28,  31.  Num.  29.  1.  Dent.  16.8.

19.  seven  days  no  leaven  shall  be  found,  13.  3,  7*

14.  11.  because  there  were  no  graves  in  Egypt

16. 18.  he  that  gathered  little  had  no  lack

21.  22.  hurt  a  woman,  and  no  mischief  follow
2°  2  there  shall  no  blood  be  shed  for  him
23!  8.  thou  shalt  take  no  gift,  gift  blindeth  the  wise

32.  thou  shalt  make  no  covenant  with  them

30.  9.  ye  shall  offer  no  strange  incense  thereon

12.  that  there  be  no  plague  amongst  them

34. 14.  for  thou  shalt  worship  no  other  god
17.  thou  shalt  make  thee  no  molten  gods

35.  3.  ye  shall  kindle  no  lire  in  your  habitations
Lev.  2.  11.  ye  shall  burn  ro  leaven  in  any  offering

5.  11.  put  no  oil  upon  it  117- 23.  ye  shall  eat  no  tat
7.  26.  ye  shall  eat  no  manner  ot  blood,  17. 1~>  IT
12.  4.  ye  shall  touch  no  hallowed  thing
13  21. and  there  be  no  white  hairs  therein,  26.

31.  no  black  hair  l|  32.  there  be  no  yellow  hair

19. 15.  do  no  unrighteousness  in  judgment,  35.

20.  14.  that  there  be  no  wickedness  among  you

22.  13.  but  there  shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof

21.  there  shall  be  no  blemish  therein

25.  31.  the  houses  which  have  no  walls  round  about
36.  take  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase  .

26. 1.  ye  shall  make  you  no  idols  nor  graven  image
27.  28.  no  devoted  thing  shall  be  sold  or  redeem.
Num.  5. 8.if  the  man  have  no  kinsman  to  recompense

13.  and  there  be  no  witness  against  her

6.  3.  and  shall  drink  no  vinegar  ot  wine

5.  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head

6.  he  shall  come  at  no  dead  body  .

16.  40.  that  no  stranger  come  near  to  offer  incense

26.  33.  Zelophehad  had  no  sons,  but  daughters,  27.

3,  4;  Josh.  17.  3.  1  Chron.  23.  22. 1  24.  28.

27.  8.  if  a  man  die  and  have  no  son  then  cause

9.  and  if  he  have  no  daughter,  ye  shall  give

17.  congregation  of  Lord  be  not  as  sheep  that

have  no  shepherd,  Ezek.  34.  5.  Mat.  9.  36.
35.  31.  no  satisfaction  for  the  life  of  a  murderer,  32
Dent.  4.  12.  ye  heard,  but  saw  no  similitude,  15

7.  16.  thine  eye  shall  have  no  pity  on  them

10.  9.  Levi  hath  no  part  with  his  brethren,  14.  27,

29.  I  18.  1.  Josh.  14.  4. 1  18.  7
15. 4.  when  there  shall  be  no  poor  among  you

20.  12.  if  it  will  make  no  peace  with  thee

28.  32.  there  shall  be  no  might  in  thy  hand
65.  among  these  nations  thou  shalt  find  no  ease

32.  20.  they  are  children  in  whom  is  no  faith
Josh.  10.  14.  there  was  no  day  like  that  before

22.  25.  ye  have  no  partin  the  Lord,  27.
xudg.  17-  6.  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,  18. 1. 1  21. 2d.

18.  7.  there  was  no  magistrate  ||  28.  no  deliverer
10.  where  there  is  no  want  of  any  thing,  19.  19.

1  Sam.  2.  24.  for  it  is  no  good  report  that  I  hear
3.  1.  word  was  precious,  there  was  no  open  vision

21.  9.  take  it,  for  there  is  no  other,  save  that  here

2  Sam.  12.  6.  shall  restore,  because  he  had  no  pity

13. 12.  nosuch  thing  ought  to  be  done  in  Israel

15.  26.  if  he  say,  I  have  no  delight  in  thee

18.  18.  I  have  no  son  to  keep  my  name  in  remembr.
20.  1.  Sheba  said,  we  have  no  part  in  David

1  Kings  8.  23.  there  is  no  God  like  thee  in  heaven

22.  18.  he  would  prophesy  no  good  concerning  me

2  Kings  1. 16.  is  it  not  because  there  is  no  God  in  Isr.
17.  because  Afiaziah  had  no  son

10.  31.  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law

1  Chron.  2.  34.  now  Sheshan  had  no  sons,  but  daugh.

16.  22.  do  my  prophets  no  harm,  Psal.  105.  15.

2  Chron.  18. 16.  that  have  no  shepherd,  Zech.  10.  2

19.  7 -  there  is  no  iniquity  with  the  Lord

20. 12.  we  have  no  might  against  this  company
'21.  19.  his  people  made  no  burning  tor  him

35. 18.  there  was  no  passover  like  to  that
36.  16.  they  mocked  till  there  was  no  remedy

Ezra  9;  14.  so  that  there  should  be  no  remnant
Neh.  2.  20.  ye  have  no  portion  in  Jerusalem
13.  26.  there  was  no  king  like  Solomon
822


Job  4.  18.  he  put  no  trust  in  his  servants
5  19  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee
9'  25.  see  no  good  ||  10. 18.  that  no  eye  had  seen  me

12.  14.  he  shutteth,  and  there  can  be  no  opening
24.  causetn  to  wander  where  there  is  no  way

13.  4.  ye  ar“  all  physicians  of  no  value
\b.  18.  O  eau  .  let  my  cry  have  no  place
18  17  he  shall  have  no  name  in  the  street
19-.  16. 1  called  my  servant,  he  gave  me?w  answer
°4  15.  no  eye  shall  see  me  I!  30.  13.  have  no  helper
Psal.  3.  2.  there  is  no  help  for  him  in  God
32.  2.  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile
31  0  there  is  no  want  to  them  that  fear  him
36.  1.  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes
53!  b.  they  were  in  fear  where  no  fear  was
55.  1*9.  because  they  have  no  changes
84.  11.  no  good  will  he  withhold  from  them
9L  10.  there  shall  no  evil  befall  thee
qo  15.  there  is  no  unrighteousness  in  him
119  3.  they  do  no  iniquity,  they  walk  in  his  ways
14b!  3.  son  of  man,  in  whom  there  is  no  help  .

Prov.  12.  21.  there  shall  no  evil  happen  to  the  just
17.  16.  to  get  wisdom,  seeing  he  hath  no  heart  to  it
2l!  30.  there  is  no  wisdom  against  the  Lord
EcclAA.  were  oppressed,  and  they  had  no  comforter
9.  10.  for  there  is  no  work  in  the  grave
Cant.  4.  7.  my  love,  there  is  no  spot  in  thee
8.8.  we  have  a  little  sister,  and  she  hath  no  breasts
Isa  1  6.  there  is  no  soundness  in  it,  but  wounds
5  8  join  field  to  field,  till  there  be  no  place
8.  20.  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them
o'.  7.  of  his  government  there  shall  be  no  end
34.  16.  no  one  of  these  shall  tail,  none  shall  want
40.  29.  and  to  them  that  have  no  might
43!  11.  and  besides  me  there  is  no  Saviour
48  22.  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked,  57-  21.

50. 10.  that  walketh  in  darkness,  and  hath  no  light
53.  2.  he  hath  no  form,  nor  comeliness,  nor  beauty
54  17  no  weapon  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper
55!  1.  and  he  that  hath  no  money,  come  ye,  buy
57.  10.  thou  saidst  not,  there  is  no  hope,  Jer.  2. 2D.

59.  8.  there  is  nojudgment  in  their  goings
16  he  wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor
Jer.2.  11.  changed  their  gods,  which  are  yet  no  gods
30.~vour  children  received  no  correction
6.  14-  peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace,  8.  11.

23.  they  are  cruel,  and  have  no  mercy
8.15.  we  looked  for  peace,  but  no  goodcame,J4. 19
10. 14.  and  there  is  no  breath  in  them,  51.  17.

22.  28.  a  vessel  wherein  is  no  pleasure,  48.  38.

2 5!  6.  provoke  me  not,  1  will  do  you  no  hurt
39. 12.  do  him  no  harm  ||  42.  14.  shall  see  no  war
48  8  spoiler  shall  come,  and  no  city  shall  escape
49!  1.  hath  Israel  no  sons  ?  hath  he  no  heir  ?

Lam.  1.  9.  she  came  down,  she  had  no  comforter
Ezek.  13.  10.  peace,  and  there  was  no  peace,  16.

18.  32.  I  have  no  pleasure  in  death  ot  him,  33.  11.

29*.  18.  yet  had  he  no  wages,  nor  his  army
Dan.  3. 29.  because  there  is  no  other  god  can  deliver
Hos  4.  1.  because  there  is  no  truth  nor  mercy
6.  reject  thee,  that  thou  shalt  be  no  priest  to  me
10.  3.  now  they  shall  say,  we  have  no  king
Amos  7. 14.  I  was  no  prophet,  neither  prophet  s  son
Mic  3.7.  their  lips,  tor  there  is  no  answer  of  God
4  9.  why  dost  thou  cry  out?  is  there  no  king  in  theer
Nah.  3.  19.  there  is  no  healing  of  thy  bruise
Hah.  1.  14.  as  the  creeping  things  that  have  no  ruler
Zevii  3.  5.  but  the  unjust  knoweth  no  shame
Zech  8.  17.  love  no  false  oath  \[  9.  8.  no  oppressor
Mai.  1.  10.  1  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith  the  L.
Mat  5.  20.  ve  shall  in  no  case  enter  into  heaven
°6  thou  shalt  by  no  means  come  out  thence
6*  34.  take  therefore  no  thought  tor  the  morrow,
10.  19.  Mark  13.  11.  Luke  12.  11,  22.

22  23  which  say  that  there  is  no  resurrection,
Mark  12  18.  Acts  23.  8.  1  Cor.  15  12,  13.
Mark  13.  20.  shortened  those  days,  no  flesh  be  saved
Luke  15.7.  just  persons,,  which  need  wo  repentance
23.4. 1  find  no  fault  in  him,  14.  John  18.  38. 1  19  4,6.
John  4  17.  I  have  no  husband  II  6. 53.  ye  have  no  life
7  52  search,  for  out  of  Galilee  anseth  no  prophet
9!  41.’  if  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no  sin
11  10.  he  stumbleth,  because  there  is  no  light  in  him
13. 8.  if  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  mo
15  22.  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  their  sin
19'.  15-.  priests  answered,  we  have  no  king  but  Cesar
Acts  15.  9-  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them
18  15.  for  1  will  be  no  judge  of  such  matters
2l!  25.  written  that  they  observe  no  such  thing
25.  10.  to  the  Jews  have  1  done  no  wrong
og  2  the  people  shewed  us  no  little  kindness
Ron.  3.  22.  all  that  believe,  for  there  is  no  difference
4  15  for  where  no  law  is,  no  transgression
b.  13.  sin  is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no  law
7'.  18.  that  in  my  flesh  dwelleth  no  good  thing
10.  19.  to  jealousy  by  them  that  are  no  people
13  10  love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour

1  Cor.  1.  29.  that  no  flesh  glory  in  his  presence
4.  11.  and  have  no  certain  dwelling  place
8.  13.  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth
10.  13.  there  hath  no  temptation  taken  you  but  such
11. 16.  we  have  no  such  custom,  nor  the  churches
12*  21.  1  have  no  need  of  thee  ||  13.  2.  no  chanty
14*.  28.  if  there  be  no  interpreter,  let  lum  keep

2  Cor .  5.  21.  made  him  sin  tor  us,  who  knew  no  sin
6.  3.  giving  no  offence  in  any  thing,  that  ministry
13.  7.  now  1  pray  to  God  that  ye  do  no  evil

Gal.  5.  23.  meekness,  against  such  there  >s  no  law
Eph.  5.11.  have  no  fellowsh.  with  works  of  darkness
Phil.  2.  7.  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation
3  3  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh

1  Thess  4.  13.  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope

2  Thess.  3. 14.  and  have  no  company  with  him
o  Tim  3.  9.  but  they  shall  proceed  no  further
~Ileb  6.  13.  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater

8  7  no  place  have  been  sought  for  the  secpnd
9.  22.  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission
10  38  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him
12!  11."  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  joyous
17  for  he  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though  he
13. *14.  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,  but  seek
Jam.  1.  17.  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  nor  shad.


1  Pet  2.  22.  who  did  no  sin,  nor  was  guile  found

2  Pet.  1. 20.  no  prophecy  of  private  interpretatic
1  John  1.  5.  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all

8  if  we  say,  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselv
3.  5.  in  him  is  no  sin,  ||4. 18.  there  is  no  fear  in  lo.

3  John  4.  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear
Rev  14.  5.  in  their  mouth  was  found  no  guile

17  12.  which  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet
18*.  7.  I  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow
°0*  11.  and  there  was  found  no  place  for  them
«1  22.  no  temple  therein  ||  23.  no  need  of  the  su
~25.  no  night  there,  they  need  no  candle,  22.  5.
See  Bread,  Child,  Children,  Inheritanc
Knowledge,  Man,  Power.

No  RAIN.

n eut  11.  17.  he  shut  up  the  heaven,  that  there
no  rain,  1  Kings  8.  35.  2  Chron.  6.  26. 1 7. 1

1  Kings  17. 7.  there  had  been  no  ram  in  the  land,  J,

14.

Isa.  5.  6.  clouds,  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it
jer.  3.  3.  and  there  hath  been  no  latter  rain
Zech.  14.  17.  even  upon  them  there  shall  be  no  ra
18.  and  if  Egypt  that  have  no  rain  come  not
NO  rest.

Gen.  8.  9.  but  the  dove  found  no  rest  for  her  foo
Job  30. 17.  and  my  sipews  take  no  rest
Prov.  29.  9.  whether  he  rage  or  laugh  mere  is  no
Isa.  23.  12.  there  also  shalt  thou  have no  rest
62. 7.  and  give  him  no  r.  till  he  establish  Jerusah
Jer.  45.  3.  I  fainted  in  sighing,  and  find  no  rest
Lam.  1.  3.  among  the  heathen  she  findeth  no  rest
2.  18.  give  thyself  no  rest  ||  5.  5.  we  have  no  res

2  Cor.  2.  13.  1  had  no  rest  in  my  spirit  ,  because

7.  5.  when  come  into  Macedonia,  our  flesh  had  m

Rev.  14.  11.  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night
NO  strength.

1  Sam.  28. 20.  and  there  was  no  strength  in  Saul
Job  26.  2.  how  savest  thou  arm  that  hath  nostren
Psal.  88.  4.  I  am  as  a  man  that  hath  no  strengti
Dan.  10.  8.  and  there  remained  no  str.  in  me,  1’
16  are  turned  on  me,  1  have  retained  nostren
Heb  9.  17.  otherwise  it  is  ot  no  strength  at  all
See  Water,  Wrath.

NO,  Adverb.

Exod.  3.  19.  not  let  you  go,  no,  not  by  mighty  h
16.  4.  whether  walk  in  my  law,  or  no.  Vent.  8
Judg.  4.  20.  is  any  man  here,  thou  shalt  say,  m
15  i.3.  no,  but  we  will  bind  thee,  and  deliver  1
1  Sam.  1.  15.  no,  my  lord,  1  am  of  a  sorrowful  s

20. 15.  no,  not  when  the  Lord  hath  cut  off  ener
Job  23.  6.  no,  but  he  would  put  strength  inn.e

36. 19.  no,  not  gold,  nor  the  forces  ot  strength
Psal.  14.  3.  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one,  53.  3.
Eccl.  10.  20.  curse  not  king,  no,  not  in  thy  the,
Isa.  30.  16.  no,  for  we  will  flee  upon  horses
Jer.  2.  25.  no,  for  I  have  loved  strangers,  alter  t
42.  14.  no,  but  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  Eg
Amos  6. 10.  is  there  any  with  thee  ?  he  shall  saj
Hag  2. 12.  the  priests  answered  and  said,  no
Zech.  4.  5.  knowest  what  these  be,  I  said,  no,  1
Mat.  8.  10.  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Isr.  Luke
24.  21.  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be
36.  no,  not  the  angels,  but  my  l-ather  only
Mark 2 .2.  no  room,  no  not  so  much  as  about  the
5  3.  no  man  could  bind  him,  no,  not  with  chi
Luke  20.  22.  for  us  to  give  tribute  to  Cesar,  or

23.  15.  no,  nor  yet  Herod  ;  for  l  sent  you  to  I
John  1. 21.  art  thou  that  prophet  ?  he  said,  no
9  25.  whether  he  be  a  sinner  or  no,  1  know  no
21.  5.  have  ye  any  meat  ?  they  answered,  no
Acts  7. 5.  no,  not  so  much  as  to  set  his  foot  on
Rom.  3.  9.  are  we  better  than  they  r  no,  in  no

10.  there  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one,  12.

1  Cor.  5.  11.  with  such  a  one,  no,  not  to  eat

6.  5.  no,  not  one  that  shall  be  able  to  judge  net
Gal.  2.  5.  place  by  subjection,  no,  not  tor  an  l
N  O  where.

1  Sam.  10.  It.  when  we  saw  that  they  were  no
idee  More,  Wise.

NOBLE

Signifies,  [1]  A  person  honourable,  either  by  Ins
or  merit,  Neh.  6.  17-  Acts  24.  3.  [2]  Such  ,
of  a  more  tractable  disposition,  of  a  more  exet
divine,  commendable  temper  than  others,  A (

11.  [3]  Valiant  ones,  Nah.  3.  1 18.  [4]  A  cot
or  ruler,  John  4.  +  46.

Ezra  4.  10.  whom  the  n.  Asnapper  bi ought  0
Esth.  6.  9.  one  of  the  king’s  mostn.  princes
Jer.  2.  21.  1  had  planted  thee  an.  vine
Luke.  19.  12.  an.  man  went  into  a  tar  countr
John  4.  46.  there  was  a  n.  man  whose  son  wa
49.  n.  man  saith,  sir,  come  down  ere  my  cm
Acts  17. 11.  the  Bereans  more  n.  than  1  hessaa
°4  3.  we  accept  it  always,  most  n.  lelix,  -
1  Cor.  1.  26.  how  that  not  many  n.  are  caliec
NOBLES.

Exod.  24. 11.  on  the  n.  of  Israel  he  laid  not  hi
Num.  21.  18.  the  n.  of  the  people  digged  it
Judg.  5. 13.  dominion  over  the  n.  among  tne

1  Kings  21.  8.  Jezebel  sent  letters  to  then,  in  1

2  Chron.  23.  20.  Jehoiada  took  the  n.  of  the
Neh.  2.  16.  nor  had  I  as  yet  told  it  to  the  n.

3.  5.  the  n.  put  not  their  necks  to  the  work

5.  7.  and  I  rebuked  the  n.  and  the  rulers

6.  17.  the  n.  of  Judah  sent  letters  to  1  obiah

7.  5.  God  put  into  mine  heart  to  gather  the
10.  29.  they  clave  to  their  brethren,  their  / .
13  17.  1  contended  with  the  n.  of  Judan

Job  29. 10.  the  n.  held  their  peace
Psal.  83. 11.  make  their  n.  like  Oreb ^ani IZe
149.  8.  to  bind  their  n.  with  fetters  of  iron
Prov.  8.  16.  by  me  princes  rule,  andn.an  J
Eccl.  10.  17.  when  thy  king  is  the  son  of  n.

T,a  13  c.  they  may  go  into  the  gates  of  he

*34!  12.  they  shall  call  the  n,  to  the  km5:'/^1
43. 14.  and  have  brought  down  all  then  •
Jer.  14.  3.  the  n.  sent  their  little >nes to  tl  e

27. 20.  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  captive  w.

30.  21.  and  their  n.  shall  be  of  them  sell
39.  6.  the  king  ot  Babylon  slew  all  the  »•
Jonah  3.7.  by  the.  decree  of  the  king  an  It
Nah.  3. 18.  Assyria,  thy  n.  shall  dwell  id


NON


NON


N  O  R


NOTSE.

tod.  CO.  in.  people  heard  the?/,  of  the  trumpet
;C.  1?.  he  said,  there  is  a  n.  of  war  in  the  camp
l«.  hut  the  7i.  of  them  that  sin"  do  1  hear
■sh.  f>.  10.  je  shall  not  shout  nor  make  any  n.
<dg.  5.  11.  are  delivered  from  the  n.  of  archers
Sam.  4.6.  what  meaneth  the  ?/.  of  this  shout 3  14

4.  19.  the  7i.  in  the  host  of  Philistines  increased
Kings  1.  41.  wherefore  is  this  7i.  of  the  city  !

45.  this  is  the  ?/,  that  ye  have  heard
8.441.  there  is  a  ti.  of  abundance  of  rain
Kings  7.  6.  the  ?/.  of  chariots,  and  a  ?/.  of  horses
1. 13.  Athaliah  heard  ?/.  of  guard,  2  Chron.  23. 12
Chron.  15.  28.  making  a  ti.  with  psalteries'

:ra  3. 13.  not  discern  ?/.  ofjoy,  from  ?/.  of  weeping
b  36.  29-  any  understand  the  n.  of  his  tabernacle
S3,  the  ?i.  thereof  sheweth  concerning  it
?.  2.  hear  attentively  the  ti.  of  his  voice
■ al .  33.3.  play  skilfully  with  a  loud  ?/.

13.  +2.  he  brought  me  up  out  of  a  pit  of  n.

?.  T.oeep  calleth  at  the  ?/.  of  thy  waterspouts

5.  C.  I  mourn  in  my  complaint,  and  make  an.

).  6.  they  make  a  ti.  like  a  dog,  14.

i.  7-  "ho  stilleth  the  n  of  the  seas,  v.  of  waves
6. 1.  make  a  joyful?/,  to  God,  all  ye  lands,  81.1

.  t  l  •  .  L9-5-  5;  I  98.  4,  6.  I  100.  1.

i.  4.  the  Lord  is  mightier  than  the  n.  of  waters
/.  9. 5.  for  every  battle  is  with  confused  n.
i.  4.  tlie  n.  of  a  multitude  in  the  mountains,  a
tumultuous  n.  of  the  kingdoms  of  nations
!.  11.  the  n.  of  thy  viols  is  brought  down
.  12.  which  make  a  ?/.  like  the  n.  of  the  seas
.  8.  the?/,  of  them  that  rejoice  endeth

8.  he  who  fleeth  from  the  n.  of  fear

».  5.  thou  shalt  bringdown  the?/,  of  strangers
i.  6.  shall  be  visited  of  the  Lord  with  great  n
.  4.  nor  abase  himself  for  the  n.  of  them
.  3.  at  the  n.  of  the  tumult  the  people  fled
.  +5.  the  n.  of  sea  shall  be  turned  toward  thee
.  6.  a  voice  of  n.  from  the  city  and  temple
.  4. 19.  my  heart  maketh  a  ?/.  in  me

9.  the  city  shall  flee  for  the  ?/.  of  horsemen
.  22.  behold,  the?/,  of  the  bruit  is  come
.16.  with  the  n.  of  great  tumult  he  kindled
.31.  a  n.  shall  come  to  the  ends  of  the  earth
.  17-  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt  is  but  a  ?/.

.  3.  at  the  ?/.  of  the  stamping  of  his  horses
.  21.  the  earth  is  moved  at  the  ?/.  of  their  fall,  at
the  cry  the  ?/.  was  heard  in  the  Red  sea
.  46.  at  the  ?/.  of  taking  of  Pabylon
55.  a  n.  of  them  voice  is  uttered
//.  2.  7.  the  enemy  made  ?/.  in  house  of  the  I  ord
k.  1.  24.  when  they  went,  I  heard  the  ?/.  of  their
0  win?s;Jlke  the  ?/.  of  great  waters,  43.  2.
13.  the?/.,  of  the  wheels,  the  n.  of  a  great  rushing
/.  the  land  was  desolate  by  the  ?/.  of  his  roaring

10.  thy  walls  shall  shake  at  the  n.  of  horsemen
’•  1  "ill  cause  the  //.of  my  songs  to  cease
7.  and  as  I  prophesied,  there  was  a  n.

•  2.  5.  like  the  ?/.  of  chariots,  like  the  n.  of  fire
*os  5.  23.  take  from  me  the  ?/.  of  thy  son«s

Vo2\they  sh?U  make  a  great?/.,  by  reason
:':3:  2,VthA  n‘  of  a  wlllP>  ».  of  rattling  wheels
'?•  L  10-  the?/,  of  a  cry  from  the  fish-gate
9. 15.  they  shall  drink  and  make  a  n.

9.  23.  he  saw  the  people  making  a  n.
tg.3.  10.  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  great  n
J  •  6.  1.  1  heard  as  it  were  the  n.  of  thunder
.  NOISED.

f-,6*  27 •  Joshua,  his  fame  was  n.  thro’  the  country
'  ,  •  J-  ^  ,'"as  n •  ^hat  he  was  in  the  house
-e  l.  65.  all  these  sayings  were  //,  abroad
-  f  2.  6.  now  when  this  was  ?/.  abroad
1  .  NOISOME.

421.  T  will  send  a  mixture  of  n.  beasts
,  V  • +  t°-  ?-,Jv?e,4s  gr°"'  instead  of  barley
1 V  *  sbalJ  deliver  fhee  from  the  n.  pestilence

/  irVifii  n  1  s(Vld  tlle  sword  and  ?/.  beast
1  10. 2.  tell  a  n.  and  grievous  sore  on  the  men
(  90  ,  ,  NONE.

1 )  \  o  lid  <hls  is  ”•  other  but  the  house  of  God
od 1  T  •,? •  of  y°u  shall  go  out  at  the  door
.0.  1  will  put  n.  of  these  diseases  upon  thee
-0.  on  the  seventh  day,  in  it  there  shall  be  ?/.

<  9S0u1  wTent  t°  gather,  and  they  found  n.

3.  shalt  have  n.  other  gods  before  me,  Dent.  5.7.
r  shall  appear  before  me  empty,  34.  «o
: ,  ■  ”•  ?ha11  approach  to  any  near  of  kin

o/Vn?rfiSika  n‘  be  defiled  for  the  dead
:  ■  Shall  leave  n.  of  it  until  morrow,  Num.  9.12.

:-0-  sod  it  the  man  have  n.  to  redeem  it
'0.  shall  he  down,  and  n.  shall  make  you  afraid
\  ®  shall  flee  when  n.  pursueth,  36,  37.

. '■<  •  9.  but  to  the  sons  of  Kohath  he  gave  n
r  ,3  \  .that  came  out  of  Egypt  shall  see  the  land
“  ’  2‘  34',"’e  destroyed,  and  left  n.  to  remain,

■  ■;  „  -I,3,  3;  Josh,-  8-  22.  |  10.  28,  30,  33.  |  11.  8.

;  5.  "ill  put  n.  of  the  diseases  of  Egypt  on  you

Sha11  be  eiven’  and  n.  to  rescue
r  thou  shalt  have  n.  assurance  of  thy  life

c  went  out  of  Jericho,  n.  came  in

•  4-  n.  of  you  be  freed  from  being  bond-men
/  91  «^i0Ved  hls  tongue  against  any  of  Israel

[  O  V  ueIeCame  ?•  ,t0  the  f'amP  from  Jabesh

1  2-  the/?  is  n.  holy  as  the  Lord

>  '  t»-ofh,s  words  fall  to  the  ground
l  12;  be"'are  that?/  touch  the  young  man
?•  were  or  silver,  2  Chron.  9.  90.

:  Proclamation,  ?/.  was  exempted

7  hi  t6pnS ,the  T,ord  Uvetfi,  1  will  receive  ?/.
tV  n’  ,d  Elisha  tells  the  king  of  Israel
•  and  there  shall  be  ?/.  to  bury  Jezebel
1  ,rtl?  or  escape  out  of  the  city,  10.  25.

‘fL  i  Je,llu  left  Ahab  ?/.  remaining
’onl(PtK  P  leiS  04  P,aal,  let  n.  be  wanting

•  is  o  be  ni  of  the  servants  of  God  there
I  Z:  ,•  M -ought  to  carry  ark  of  G .  but  I.evites

t|  hemioK»i*OUr’sllch  as  M-  °tthe  kings  had
n-  go  out  or  come  in  to  Asa
i^hat  w-  ,s  able  to  withstand  thee
i  (Q  y  e,r.e  dead  bodies  fallen,  ?/.  escaped
hich  was  unclean  should  enter  in


Ezra  8.  15.  T  found  there  ?/.  of  the  sons  of  T  evi

11  P-  ,1S  put  °fr  °ur  clothes,  saving  that

Est'i.  1.  8.  drinking  according  to  law,  n.  did  compel
r  \'A  enter  the  king’s  gate  in  sackcloth

9  « down,  and  n.  spake  a  word  to  him
3.  9.  let  it  look  for  light  but  have  n
11. 19.  shall  lie  down,  and  //.shall  m'ake  thee  afraid
™  ‘  A?  bis  jnbernacle,  because  it  is  ?/.  of  his
20.  21.  there  shall  n.  of  his  meat  be  left

29.  12.  delivered  him  that  had  ?/..  to  help  him
35.  10.  but  n.  saith,  where  is  God  my  Maker5

12.  there  they  cry,  but  ?/.  giveth  answer
Ks.  10.  15.  seek  out  his  wickedness  till  thou  find  n
22.  29.  and  n.  can  keep  alive  his  own  soul
25.  3.  let  ti.  that  wait  on  thee  be  ashamed
34.  22.  «.  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  desolate
37.  31.  law  in  his  heart,  ?/.  of  his  steps  shall  slide

49.  7.  ti.  of  them  can  redeem  his  brother

50.  22.  lest  I  tear  you,  and  there  be?/,  to  deliver
69.  20.  1  looked  for  comforters,  but  found  u.

J25.  and  let  ?i.  dwell  in  their  tents
76.  5. 71.  of  the  men  of  might  found  their  hands
81.  11.  not  hearken,  Israel  would  ?/.  of  me
109.  12.  let  there  be  ?/.  to  extend  mercy  to  him

Frov.  1. 25.  and  ye  would  n.  of  my  reproof

30.  they  would  ?/.  of  my  counsel,  they  despised

2.  19.  n.  that  go  unto  her  return  again' nor  take

3.  31.  envy  not,  and  choose  ».  of  his  "  ays
Lam  4.  2.  bear  twins,  and  n  is  barren  among  them
i.w.  1. 31.  they  shall  burn  and  ?/.  shall  quench  them
5.  27.  ti.  shall  be  weary,  n.  shall  slumber

29.  carry  it  away  safe,  and  ?/.  shall  deliver  it
14.  6.  he  is  persecuted,  and  ?/.  hindereth

31.  n.  shall  be  alone  in  his  appointed  times
17.  2.  ti.  shall  make  them  afraid,  Zeph  3  13

22.  22.  he  shall  open,  and  n.  shall  *mt,  n.  o’pen
34. 10.  n.  shall  pass  through  it  for  ever  and  ever

1  they  shrill  cnlj  the  nobles  but  it.  shall  he  there
16.  no  one  shall  fail,  n.  shall  want  her  mate
42.  22.  n.  delivereth,  and  ?/.  saith,  restore
44.  19.  n.  consulereth  in  his  heart,  nor  is  there
4/.  8.  that  sayest,  I  am,  and  ?/.  else  besides  me,  10.
10.  n.  seeth  me,  ||  15.  ?/.  shall  save  thee
57.  1.  n.  considering  that  righteous  is  taken  away

59.  4.  71.  calleth  for  justice,  nor  pleadeth  for  truth

60.  4.  because  when  I  called,  ?/.  did  answer
der.  4.  4.  and  burn,  that  ?/.  can  quench  it,  21.  12.

/.  33.  foi  the  beasts,  and  ?/.  shall  fray  them  away
9.  10.  burnt  up, so  that  ?/.  can  pass  through  them
In  l!1/  i,,e  a  wilderness  that  n.  passeth  through
22.  shad  faH  as  dung  and  n.  shall  gather  them

13.  19.  cities  shall  be  shut,  and  ?/.  shall  open  them

14.  lo.  cast  out,  and  shall  have  ?/.  to  bury  them

23.  14.  that  ti.  doth  return  from  his  wickedness
30.  10.  and  ?/.  shall  make  him  afraid,  46.  27.

34.  9.  that  71.  should  serve  himself  of  them

10.  that  n.  should  serve  themselves  of  them

9A  n'P  day  the>’  drink  ?/.  but  obey  father’s

36.  30.  shall  have  ?/.  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  David
42.  17.  n.  shall  remain  or  escape

44.  14.  n.  shall  return,  hut  such  as  escape

48.  33.  ti.  shall  tread  with  shouting,  no  shouting

49.  5.  ».  shall  gather  up  him  that  wandereth

50.  3.  land  desolate,  and  n.  shall  dwell  therein
9.  their  arrows,  ?/.  shall  return  in  vain

20.  iniquity  sought  for,  and  there  shall  be  n
29.  camp  against  it,  let  w.  thereof  escape

c'i2, Jn  Proud  ska-'  and  ti.  shall  raise  him  up

51.  62.  that  7i.  shall  remain  in  it,  Ezefc.  7.  11.

Lam.  1.  2.  she  hath  ?/.  to  comfort  her,  17.

4.  because  ?/.  come  to  the  solemn  feasts
7.  when  her  people  fell,  and  n.  did  help  her

21.  heard  that  1  sigh,  there  is  ?/.  to  comfort  me
Lzek.  7.  14.  but  ?/.  goeth  to  the  battle

25.  they  shall  seek  peace,  and  there  shall  be  n.

12.  28.  n.  of  my  words  shall  be  prolonged  any  more
16.  34.  ?/.  followeth  thee  to  commit  whoredoms
18.  7-  hath  spoiled  n.  by  violence,  given  bread
22.  30.  I  sought  for  a  man,  but  I  found  n.

33.  16.  ti.  of  his  sins  shall  be  mentioned  to  him
28.  mountains  desolate,  that  ?/.  shall  pass  through

34.  6.  and  n.  did  search  or  seek  after  them
28.  shall  dwell  safely,  and  ?i.  shall  make  them

™  J  afraid,  39.  26.  Mic.  4.  4.  Na/i.  2.  11.

39.  ^8.  and  have  left?/,  of  them  any  more  there
L>an._  1.  19.  71.  found  like  Daniel  among  them  all

4.  3o.  ?/.  stay  hand,  or  say  to  him,  what  doest  thou  ?

8.  2/ .  astonished  at  the  vision,  butw.  understood  it
*].  16.  n.  shall  stand  before  him,  he  shall  stand

45.  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  n.  shall  help  him
12. 10.  n.  of  the  w  icked  sh.  understand,  but  the  wise

Hos.  2. 10.  //.shall  deliverheroutofmy  hands, 5.  ]4.

11.  7-  thou°h  they  called,  ?/.  at  all  w  ould  exalt  him
Joel  2.  27.  I  am  the  Lord  your  God,  and  ?/.  else
Amos  5.  6.  there  be  n.  to  quench  it  in  Bethel
Mic.  2.  5.  shalt  have  n.  that  shall  cast  a  cord  by  lot

3.  11.  they  will  say,  n.  evil  can  come  upon  us

5.  8.  he  teareth  in  pieces,  and  n.  can  deliver
ISah  2.  8.  they  cry,  stand,  but  n.  shall  look  back
Zech.  7.  10.  let  ?/.  of  you  imagine  evil,  8.  17.

Klal.  2.  15.  let?/,  deal  treacherously  against  the  wife
Mat.  12.  43.  unclean  spirit  walketh  thro’  dry  places

■  seek'ng  rest  and  findeth?/.  Liile  11. 24.

26.  60.  witnesses  came,  yet  found  ?/.  Mark  14.  55.
Euke '3.  11.  let  him  impart  to  him  that  hath  n.

4.  26.  to  ti  .of  them  was  Elias  sent,  save  to  Sarepta
27.?/.  ot  them  was  cleansed  save  Naamanthe  Syr.

J4.  24.  71.  of  them  shall  taste  of  my  supper
18.  19.  n.  is  good,  save  one,  that  is  God
John  7.  19.  and  yet  ?/.  of  you  keepeth  the  law
15.  24.  if  1  had  not  done  the  works  ?/..  other  did

17.  12.  ti.  is  lost  but  the  son  of  perdition

18.  9.  of  them  thou  gavest  me,  1  have  lost?/.

Acts  3.  6.  Peter  said,  silver  and  gold  have  I  n.

8.  16.  for  as  yet  he  was  fallen  on  ?/.  of  them
24.  pray,  that  ?/.  of  these  things  come  on  me
11.  19.  preaching  the  word  to  ?/.  but  to  the  Jews
18.  17.  Gallio  cared  for  ?/.  of  these  things
20.  24.  hut  71.  of  these  things  move  me
24.  23.  he  should  forbid  ?/.  of  his  acquaintance
-;5.  11.  it  there  be  n.  of  these  things  they  accuse
26.  22.  saying  ?/.  other  than  the  prophets  did  say


Eom.8.  9.  if  any  have  not  the  Spirit,  he  is  n.  of  his
, IN  7-  n.  ot  us  Iivetli,  and?/,  dieth  to  himself
k  Cor.  1.  14.  I  thank  God,  I  baptized  n.  of  you
Z’  8- whom  ti.  of  the  princes  of  this  world  knew

o'  ilhe/r,uat  bave  ,%vives£.be  as  dio’  they  had?/.

9.  15.  but  I  have  used  n.  of  these  tilings

10.  32/ give  71.  offence  to  the  Jews  nor  Gentiles
14.  10.  and  ?z.of  them  is  without  signification

Cal  1.  19.  but  other  of  the  apostles  saw  I  n
1  Jhess.  5.  15.  see  that?/,  render  evil  for  evil
1  Jim.  5.  14.  give  ?/.  occasion  to  the  adversary
r >et.  4.  15.  let  n,  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer
Lev.  2.  10.  fear  ?/.  of  these  things  thou  shalt  suffer
See  Effect,  Like.

There  is  NONE.

Cen.  39.  9.  there  is  n.  greater  in  this  house  than  ]

4L  15.  ancj  there  is  n.  that  can  interpret  it
39.  there  is  n.  so  discreet  and  wise  as  thou  art
|  Dent.  4.  35.  the  Lord  is  God,  there  is  n.  else,  39
l  lUTigsZ.  60.  Isa.  45.  5,  6,  14,  18.  22.  I  46.  9.
Mark  12.  32.

Etith  4.  4.  for  there  is  ti.  to  redeem  it  besides  thee
00  V  2-  -ere  is.n-  as  die  L.  there  is  n.  besides
TZZ-  there  ts  n.  sheweth  me,  there  is  n.  that  is  sorry
rtiA. ,  ■  days  are  as  a  shadow-,  there  isn.  abiding
Job  10.  /  .there  is  n.  that  can  deliver,  Ps.  7.2. 1  71  11
Psal.  14.  1.  they  are  corrupt,  there  is  ?/.  that  doeth
00  F  _  ..  .gcod,  3.  |53.  1,3.  Rom.  3.12
iv  ,  Sophie  is  near,  for  there  is  n.  to  help
73.  25.  there  isn.  on  earth  I  desire  beside  thee
o'-  4V  ^-.when  the  needy  seek  water,  there  isn.
‘20.  there  is  n.  sheweth,  there  isn.  that  declareth
4.i.  13.  there  is  n.  that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand
51.  18.  and  there  is  n.  to  guide  her  among  her  sons
59.  11.  we  look  for  judgment,  but  there  is  n
6t.  7.  and  there  is  n.  that  calleth  on  thy  name
Jer.  10.  20.  there  is  n.  to  stretch  forth  my  tent
30.  13.  there  is  ?/.  to  plead  thy  cause,  that  thou
Lam.  5. 8.  there  is  n.  that  doth  deliver  us  from  hand
Van.  10.  21 .  there  is  n.  that  holdeth  with  me  in  these
Hos.  7.  7.  there  is  71.  of  them  that  calleth  on  me
Amos  o.  2.  she  is  forsaken,  there  is  71.  to  raise  her  up
Tjlc:  7-  2.  there  is  ?/.  upright  among  men,  they  all  lie
Zeph,  15.  that  said,  1  am,  and  there  isn.  besides  me
1.  6.  ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  7i.  warm
Mat.  19.  17.  there  is  ?/.  good  but  one,  that  is  God,

tit  i  o,  .  ,  Mark  10.  18.

Mark  12.  31.  there  isn.  other  commandment  greater
Luke  1.  61.  there  is  n.  ot  thy  kindred  that  is  called
Acts  4.12.  there  is  n.  other  name  under  heaven  given
Horn.  3. 10.  there  is  n.  righteous,  no,  not  one

11.  there  isn.  understandeth,///m?  ?.??/.  seeketh  G.

1  Cor .  8.  4.  and  there  is  n.  other  God  but  one

sim  NONE,

Gen.  39. 11.  there  was  n.  of  men  of  the  house  within
41.  8.  there  was  n.  that  could  interpret  them
24.  but  there  was  n.  that  could  declare  it  to  me
Turn.  21.  35.  until  there  was  n.  left  him  alive
Vent.  22.  27.  damsel  cried,  and  there  wasn.  to  save

2  &am.  14.  g.  they  strove,  and  th.  wasn.  to  part  them
nn\nVe  ra\  n- t0  1  e  so  much  Praised  as  Absalom

42.  looked,  but  there  was  v.  to  save,  Psal  A  8.41.

1  A/?/yvl2.  20.  there  wasn.  that  followed  the  house
of  Dav.  but  tribe  of  Judah  only,  2  Kings  f7.  18.
69.  20.  looked  some  to  have  pity ,  but  there  was  n.
(9^3.  shed  their  blood,  and  there  icas  7i.  to  bury  therr.
107-  12.  they  fell  down,  and  there  was  n.  to  help
139.  16.  when  as  yet  there  wasn.  of  them
Isa.  10.  14.  there  wasn.  moved  the  wing  or  peeped
dO.  2.  when  I  called,  there  was  n.  to  answer
63.  3.  I  have  trodden  the  wine  press  alone,  and  of
the  people  there  was  ?/.  with  me,  1  will  tread
5.  and  1  wondered  that  there  was  n.  to  uphold
Van.  8.  7-  there  was  n.  that  could  deliver  the  ram
,,  NOON

Signifies,  [1]  The  mid  day  between  mornina  and
night,  1  Kings  18.  26,27.  Psal.  55. 17.  [2]  A  time
cf  clear  light ,  .lob  5.  14.  [3]  Clearly  and.  mani -
Jest/y,  Psal.  37-  6.  [4]  Without  delay ,  or  fear,
Jer.  6.  4.  j  15.  8.  [5]  A  time  of  great  prosperity
and  imaginary  security,  Amos '8.  9.

Jell  me  where  thou  makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at
noon,  Cant.  1.  7.  Discover  to  me  by  thy  word  and
Spirit,  which  are  those  assemblies  where  thou  art
present ,  arid  to  whom  thou  affordest  comfort  and
refreshing  under  scorching  persecutions  arid  trials,
it  is  spoken  in  allusion  to  the  custom  of  shepherds
m  hot  countries,  who,  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  used
to  carry  their  flocks  into  shadowy  places.

Gen.  43.  16.  these  men  shall  dine  with  me  at  n.

25.  the  present  against  Joseph  came  at  n.

Judg.  19.  8.  and  they  tarried  until  after  ?/.

2  Sam.  4.  5.  Tsh-bosheth,  who  lay  on  a  bed  at  n.

1  Kings  18.  26.  they  called  on  Baal  even  until  n.

27.  at  n.  Elijah  mocked  them,  and  said,  cry  aloud

20. 16.  he  numbered  them,  and  they  went  out  at  n.

2  a  nigs  4.  20.  he  sat  on  her  knees  till  n.  and  died
Psal.  55. 17-  at?/,  will  1  pray,  and  he  shall  hear
Cant.  1.  7.  thou  makest  thy  flock  to  rest  at  n.

Jer.  6.  4.  prepare  war,  arise,  let  us  go  up  at  n.

Amos  8.  9.  I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  n.

Acts  22.  6.  about?/,  there  shone  great  light  round  me

NOON-Azj/.

Deut.  28.  29.  thou  shalt  grope  at  n.-day  as  the  blind'

Job  5.  14.  they  grope  in  the  n.-day  as  in  the  night

11. 17.  thine  age  shall  be  clearer  than  the  n.-day
Psal.  37.  6.  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  as  n.-day

91.  6.  for  the  destruction  that  wasteth  at  n.-day
Isa.  16.  3.  shadow  as  the  night,  in  midst  of  n.-day
58. 10.  thy  darkness  shall  be  as  the  n.-day
59.  10.  we  stumble  at  n.-day  as  in  the  night
Jer.  15.  8.  I  have  brought  a  spoiler  at  n.-day
Zeph.  2.  4.  they  shall  drive  out  Ashdod  at  ?/.  day
N  OON -tide.

Jer.  20.  16.  let  him  hear  the  shouting  at?/  -tide
NORTH.

Gen.  28.  14.  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  ?/

1  A  mgs  7. 25.  a  molten  sea  stood  upon  twelve  oxen
three  oxen  looking  toward  the  ?/.  2  Chron  4  4*
\Chren  9.  24.  the  poi  fers  were  toward  the  ?/.'

Job  M.  1 .  he  stretcheth  out  the  ?/.  ever  empty  place
37.  9.  and  cold  cometh  out  of  the  n.

333


NOT


NOT


NOS


fob  37  22.  fair  weather  cometh  out  of  the  re.  with  G .  is
Psal.  48.2.  on  the  sides  of  ti.  the  city  ot  great  Kina'

«Q  12.  re.  and  south,  thou  hast  created  them
Ec'cl.  1.  6.  the  wind  turneth  about  to  the  n.

11.3.  if  the  tree  fall  toward  the  n.  there  it  shall  be

7. a'  i*4.  13.  1  will  sit  in  the  sides  of  the  re»

43  6  1  will  say  to  the  n.  give  up ;  and  to  the  south
Jer.  V.  13.  the  pot  s  face  is  toward  the  n.

14.  out  of  7i.  an  evil  break  forth,  4.  6.]  46.  -0

15.  all  the  families  of  the  kingdoms  ot  the  n.

3  1°  go  and  proclaim  these  words  toward  the  re

i8.  shall  come  together  out  ot  the  land  of  the  n.

6  1  for  evil  appeareth  out  ot  the  re.  and  great
po  o  wn;ch  led  Israel  out  of  the  ».  country,  31.8.

25  9*  1  will  send  and  take  all  the  families  ot  the  re.
or.  all  the  kings  ot  the  re.  far  and  near,  shall  drink
46  6  they  shall  stumble  and  tall  toward  the  re.

10  Ld.  of  hosts  hath  a  sacrifice  m  the  re.  country
°4  she  shall  be  delivered  to  the  people  ot  the  n.

47 .  2.  behold ,  waters  rise  up  out  ot  the  re.

50  3  out  of  the  w.  cometh  up  a  nation  against  tier
Ezei.'l.  4.  behold,  a  whirlwind  came  out  ot  the  re.

«  5  so  1  lifted  up  mine  eyes  the  way  toward  then.

14  toward  the  w.  sat  women  weeping  for  1 amrauz

20  *47.  all  faces  from  south  to  re.  shall  be  burnt
21.  4.  all  flesh  from  south  to  re.  will  1  cut  ott
3°  30  the  princes  of  the  n.  all  ol  them  be  there
40  44.  having  the  prospect  toward  the  n.  46-
41*  ll*  one  door  was  toward  the  re.  42.  4.

4«  1  brought  into  court  and  building  toward  the  n.

4.  their  doors  7,.  I|  11.  chambers  toward  the  re.  13
46.  19-  the  holy  chambers  looked  toward  the  n.

48  10.  for  priests  be  this  holy  oblation  toward  n
17 .  the  suburbs  of  the  city  shal.  ne  toward  the  ti.
Dan.  11.6.  of  south  shall  come  to  the  king  of  the  ti.

8.  continue  more  yeais  than  the  king  of  the  re.

11.  shall  come  and  fight  with  the  king  of  the  »

13  for  the  king  of  the  n.  shall  return  and  set  torth
15*.  the  king  ot  the  ti.  shall  cast  up  a  mount,  40.

44.  but  tidings  out  ot  the  re.  shall  trouble  mm

Zeph  2. 13.  lie  will  stretch  his  hand  against  the  re
Zech  6.  6.  black  horses  go  into  the  re.  country
8  have  quieted  my  spirit  in  the  n.  country

14  4  the  mountain  shall  remove  toward  the  n.

*“■  n.  is.  Thu'IT

P,.L  107.  3.  and  south,

Isa.  14.  31.  for  there  shall  come  from  the  re.  a  smoke
41.25.  1  raised  up  one  from  the  n.  he  shall  come
Jer  4.6.  1  will  bring  evil  from  the  n.  and  great  de
struct  ion,  6.  22.  |  10.  22.  150.  9,  41. 1  51.  48.
Ezek  26  7.  I  will  bring  a  king  of  kings  from  the  re.

•  30.  2. 1  will  cause  thee  to  come  up  from  the  re.  parts
Amos  8  12  they  shall  wander  from  the  n.  to  the  east
Zech.  2.  6.  and  flee  from  the  land  of  the  n.  _
Euke  13.  29.  come  from  the  n.  and  sit  down  in  kmgd.
Is  ORTI1  border.

Num  .34.  7.  and  this  shall  be  your  n.  border,  9
NORTH  quarter.

Josh.  15.  5.  .1  udah’s  border  in  re.  quarter  was  from  sea
Ezek.  38.  6.  Togarmah  of  n.  quarter  and  Ins  bands
NORTH  side.

Ezod  26.  20.  tabernacle  on  the  n.  side  twenty  boards
35.  thou  shalt  put  the  table  on  the  n.  side


Num.  11.  20.  eat  till  it  come  out  at  your  n.

2  Sam.  22.  9.  went  a  smoke  ot  his  n.  sal.  18.  8.

16  the  blast  of  the  breath  ot  his  n.  I  sal.  18.  10.
Job  4.  9-  by  breath  of  Ids  re.  they  are  consumed
27.  3.  and  the  Spirit  of  Gpd  is  in  my  n.

30*  20  the  glory  of  his  n.  is  terrible
41*  20.'  out  of  his  ti.  goeth  smoke,  as  out  of  a  pot
Isa.  2.  22.  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in  ills  n.
Lam.  4.  20.  the  breath  of  our  n.  was  taken
Amos  4.10.  stink  of  your  camps  to  come  mtoyourw.
NO  L


Is  a  particle  of  denying,  [1]  Absotoely,  Exod •  20.
13,  17-  [2]  Conditionally,  Gal.  5.  21.  [3J  Lorn


27. 'll.  for  n.  side  hangings  of  1(X)  cubits,  38.  11.

«  ^  n  »  iL  .  _ _ _ _  (Inn  (iKol  I  Kfl  All  W  f  Jd


Num.  2.  25.  the  camp  of  Dan  shall  be  on  the  n.  side
Josh.  8.  11.  people  ot  war  pitched  on  then,  side  of  Ai
Judy.  7.1.  Midianites  were  on  the  re.  side  of  them
21  19.  there  is  a  feast  on  the  n.  side  ot  Beth-el
2  Kings  16.  14.  put  brasen  altar  on  n.  side  ot  altar
Ezek.  42.  17.  he  measured  the  re.  side  500  reeds
48  30.  the  goings  out  of  the  city  on  the  n.  side
NORTHERN.

Jer.  15.  12.  break  the  re.  iron,  and  the  steel
Joel  2.  20.  1  will  remove  from  you  the  n.  army
NORTHWARD.

Gen.  13.  14.  look  n.  and  eastward,  Pent.  3.  27.
Exod.  40.  22.  tabernacle  n.  without  the  vail
Lev.  1.  11.  kill  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar  n.

Pent.  2.  3.  ye  compassed  mountain,  turn  you  n.

1  Sam.  14.  5.  front  of  one  rock  was  situate  n.

1  C  hr  oil.  26.  14.  Zecharias’  lot  came  out  n.

17.  and  ri.  were  four  Levites  a  day

Ezek.  8.  5.  n.  was  this  image  of  jealousy

47.  2.  then  he  brought  me  out  of  the  gate  n.

48.  31.  three  gates  n.  one  gate  of  Reuben

N  OSE.

The  Hebrews  commonly  place  anger  in  the  nose.
There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nostrils,  2
Sam.  22.  9.  And,  Job  41.  20.  Out  of  his  nostrils
goeth  smoke.  The  eastern  women,  in  several
places,  put  golden  rings  to  one  of  their  nostrils:
Solomon  alludes  to  this  custom.  Pros'.  11.  22.
At,  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine’s  snout,  so  is  a
fair  woman  without  discretion.  They  also  put
rings  in  the  nostrils  of  oxen  and  camels,  to  guide
them  by  ;  hence  is  that  metaphorical  speech  bor¬
rowed,  2  Kings  19.  28.  1  will  put  my  hook  111
thy  nose,  and  my  bridle  in  thy  lips,  and  1  will
turn  thee  back.

Ler.  21.  18.  that  hath  a  flat  n.  shall  not  otter
Peut.  33. 1 10.  they  shall  put  incense  at  thy  n

2  Kings  19.  28.  put  my  hook  in  thy  n.  Isa.  37  .  29.
Job  40.  24.  his  n.  pierceth  through  snares

41.  2.  canst  thou  put  a  hook  into  his  n.?

Prov.  30.  33.  the  wringing  of  the  n.  brmgeth  blood
C ant.  7.  4.  thy  n.  is  as  the  tower  of  Lebanon
8.  and  the  smell  of  thy  re.  like  apples
Isa.  65. 5.  these  are  a  smoke  in  my  n.  a  fire  that  burns
Ezek.  8.  17.  they  put  the  branch  to  their  n.

23.  25.  they  shall  take  away  thy  n.  and  ears
NOSES.

Psal.  115.  6.  n.  have  they,  but  they  smell  not
Ezek.  39.  11.  it  shall  stop  the  n.  of  the  passengers
NOSETewefo.  .

Isa.  3.21.  in  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away  their
tinkling  ornaments,  the  rings  and  n.-jewels
NOSTRILS.

Gen.  2.  7-  God  breached  into  man’s  n.  the  breath
7.  22.  all  in  w  hose  n.  wa3  breath  of  life,  died
Exod.  15.  8.  with  blast  of  thy  n.  waters  gathered

334


varativety,  1  Cor.  1.  17-  ,  c

1  Kings  1 1.  39.  I  will  afflict,  but  re.  for  ever  .

Job  7.8.  thine  eyes  are  upon  me,  and  1  a™  re.

14.  21.  come  to  honour,  he  knoweth  it  n.  35.  15.

Psal.  115.  1.  n.  unto  us,  O  Lord,  re.  to  us  be  glory
1  IQ.  36.  to  thy  testimonies,  and  n.  to  covetousness
Prov.  12.  7.  the  wicked  are  n.  11  23.  23.  sell  it  n.

27 . 24.  for  riches  are  n.  for  ever,  doth  crown  endure
Isa  3  7.1  will  n.  be  an  healer,  make  me  re.  a  ruler
10. 11.  shall  1  n.  as  1  have  done  to  Samaria,  so  do
16.  6.  pride  of  Moab.  but  his  lies  shal  I  n.  be  so
30.  l.  take  counsel,  but  n.  ot  me,  n.  of  my  Spirit
41  9  1  have  chosen  thee,  and  n.  cast  thee  away
44*  21.  thou  shalt  n.  be  forgotten  ot  me
45  13.  let  go  my*  captives,  n.  tor  a  price  nor  reward

48.  1.  but  n.  in  truth  and  righteousness

49.  15.  they  may  torget,  yet  w  ill  I  n.  forget  thee
57.  11.  I  held  my  peace,  and  thou  tearest  me  n.

65. 1.  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  me  n.

Jer.  4.  11 .  a  wind,  n.  to  fan  ||  10.  20.  and  they  are  n.

11.  8.  1  commanded,  but  they  did  them  re.

14.9.  leave  us  n.  ||  21.  10.  and  n.  for  good,  39.  16.

14.  1  sent  them  n.  neither  have  commanded  them,

15.  |  23.  32.  I  29.  9.31.  Ezek.  13.  6.

23.  16.  and  n.  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord
29.  11.  of  peace,  and  n.  of  evil  |)  30.  5.  n.  of  peace
31.  15.  because  they  were  n.  Mat. .2.  18.

Lam.  3.  2.  brought  into  darkness,  but  n.  into  light
5.  7.  our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  are  n.

Ezek.  16.  16.  the  like  things  shall  re.  come
61.  1  w’ill  give  them,  but  n.  by  thy  covenant
20.  44.  n.  according  to  your  wicked  ways
28.  2.  yet  thou  art  a  man,  and  re.  God
33.  31.  they  hear,  but  they  will  n.  do  them,  32.

36  22.  1  do  n.  this  for  yoursakes,  O  Israel,  Al.

Dan.  8.  24.  shall  be  mighty,  but  re.  by  his  power
9.  26.  but  n.  for  himselt  ||  11. 25.  shall  n.  stand
Ilos.  1.9.  ye  are  n.  my  people,  1  will  re.  be  vour  G.

7.  16.  they  return,  but  n.  to  the  Most  High
Amos  7.  3.  it  shall  n.  be,  saith  the  Lord,  6.

[lab.  2.  3.  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  re.  lie
Zech.  1.  4.  be  ye  n.  as  your  fathers,  to  whom  .

4  6.  n.  by  might  nor  power,  but  by  my  Spirit
Mai.  3.  6.  for  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  re.

Mat  6.  5.  be  n.  like  the  hypocrites,  8, 16.

7.  25.  and  it  fell  n.  ||  26.  and  doetli  them  re
29.  for  he  taught  n.  as  the  scribes,  Mark  1.  22.

9.  13.  1  will  have  mercy,  and  n.  sacrifice,  12.  7-
12.  31.  shall  n.  be  forgiven  to  men,  32.  Luke  12.  10.

16  22.  saying,  Lord,  this  shall  n.  be  unto  thee
°0  26.  but  it  shall  n.  be  so  among  you,  whoso  will
28.  the  Son  of  man  came,  n.  to  be  ministered  unto

21.  30.  the  second  said,  1  go,  sir,  and  went  n.

23.  3.  but  do  n.  ye  after  their  works
23  to  have  done,  and  n.  to  leave  the  other  undone

24.  *6.  the  end  is  n.  yet  |[  17.  let  him  n.  come  down

25.  43.  ye  clothed  me  n.  ye  visited  me  n.

45.  diu  it  ri.  to  one  of  these,  did  it  n.  to  me

26.  5.  7i.  on  the  feast  day ,  lest  there  be  an  uprmr
39.  n.  as  1  will,  but  as  thou  wilt,  Mark  14.  36.

Marks.  18.  see  ye  re..?  hear  ye  n.?  doyeTi.  rememb. .
10.  43.  but  so  it  shall  n.  be  among  you
14.  7.  the  poor  ye  have,  but  me  ye  have  ti.  always
Luke  3.  15.  whether  be  were  the  Christ  or  n.

13  14.  be  healed,  and  n.  on  the  sabbath-day
18.  11.  that  1  am  n.  as  other  men  are

22.  57.  woman,  1  know  him  n.  H  58.  man,  I  am»,
John  1.  20.  he  confessed,  1  am  n.  the  Christ,  3.28.

4.  42.  we  believe,  ti.  because  of  thy  say  ing
5. 40.  ye  will  n.  come  to  me,  that  ye  might  have  life
42.  1  know  ye  have  n.  the  love  of  God  in  you
6.  26.  ye  seek  me  n.  because  ye  saw  the  miracles
38.  1  came  down,  n.  to  do  mine  own  will
8  16.  my  judgment  is  true,  for  1  am  n.  alone,  but
1  and  the  Father  that  sent  me,  16.  32.
23. 1  am  n.  of  this  world  ||  10.  12.  n.  the  shepherd
10  26.  ye  believe  n.  because  ye  areTi.  of  my  sheep
ll!  40.  said  I  n.  unto  thee,  if  thou  wouldest  believe

51.  tliis  spake  he,  n.  of  himselt,  but  being  high-pr.

52.  and  n.  for  that  nation  only,  but  that  also

12.  6.  this  be  said,  re.  that  he  cared  tor  the  poor
47.  I  judge  him  re.  for  1  cameTi.  to  judge  world

13  9.  Lord,  n.  my  feet  only,  but  also  my  hands
10.  ye  are  clean,  but  re.  all  ||  14. 2.  if  it  were  re.  so

14.  22.  Judas,  re.  Iscariot,  and  re.  to  the  world
27.  re.  as  the  world  giveth,  give  1  unto  you

15.  15. 1  call  you  re.  servants,  but  friends

16.  7.  if  I  go  re.  away,  the  Comforter  will  re.  come

13.  for  he  shall  re.  speak  of  himself
18.  40.  saying,  re.  this  man  ||  20.  17.  touch  me  re.

Acts  4.  18.  re.  to  speak  at  all  in  the  name  of  Jesus
7.  53.  have  re.  kept  it  ||  8.  32.  he  opened  re.  his  mouth
10.  41.  and  shewed  him, re.  to  all  the  people
12  22.  it  is  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  n.  ot  a  man

13.  25.  1  am  re.  he  ||  18.  9.  hold  re.  thy  peace

17.  27.  though  he  be  re.  far  trom  every  one  of  us

20.  22.  re.  know'ing  the  things  that  shall  befall
29.  shall  wolves  enter  in,  n.  sparing  the  flock

21.  13.  for  1  am  ready  re.  to  be  bound  only
23.  5.  I  wist  n.  that  he  was  the  high-priest

Rom.  2. 13.  re.  the  hearers  of  the  law  are  just

14.  these  having  re. the  law,  are  a  law  to  themselves
29.  and  re.  in  the  letter  ||  4.  2.  but  re.  before  God

4.  5.  but  to  him  that  worked)  re.  but  believetb
10.  re.  in  circumcision,  but  uncircumcision

5.  16.  and  re.  as  it  was  by  one  that  sinned

7.  15.  I  allow  re.  what  1  would,  that  do  1  re.

8.  9.  but  ye  are  re.  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  Spirit
no  v,r,w  tliall  hp  n .  with  him  sive  us  all  things


Rom  9  24.  n  of  the  Jews  only,  but  o(  tX*s  Gentile)
CG.’where  it  was  sai  I,  ye  are  n.  my  ceop.e

10.  18.  have  they  re.  heard  r  yes.  ven  v
10  3  fi.  to  think  ot  himselt  more  highly  than
15  1  ought  to  bear,  and  re.  to  please  ourselves
20.  to  preach,  re.  where  Christ  was  named

16.  4.  to  whom  re.  only  1  give  thanks,  but  also

1  Cor  1  28.  bath  chosen  the  things  which  are  re.

o  o  *  eye  hath  re.  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  entered
5!  2.’  re.  with  meat  ||  7-  10.  >  ct  re.  1 ,  but  the  Lord

3.  HT6  ve  w.  (*Hrn<il*  find  walk  as  tnen,  4.

4  6  re  to  think  of  men  above  that  is  written
io!  and  1  will  know,  re.  the  speech  of  them  whirl

5.  8.  ri.  with  old  leaven  ||  6.  1.  re.  before  the  saint
7’  12  hut  to  the  rest  speak  l ,  n.  the  Lord
9!  1.  am  1  re.  an  apostle  tarn  1  re.  tree  '  have  I  n.see!
26.  I  therefore  so  run.  re.  as  uncertainly
10.  29.  conscience,  I  say,  n.  thine  own,  but  of  other
11  ocf  have  ye  n.  houses  to  eat  and  drink  in'
to'  16.'  because  re.  the  eye,  1  am  re.  ot  the  body
15  10  yet  re.  1,  but  the  grace  ot  God  with  me

2  Cor.  2. 17.  for  we  are  re.  as  many,  which  corrupt
^3.  3.  ti.  with  ink,  n.  in  tables  ot  stone

5  ti.  that  we  are  sufficient  ot  ourselves
13.  n.  as  Moses,  which  put  a  vail  over  his  far#

4. 1  we  faint  re.  16.  II  7 •  may  be  ot  God,  and  n. of  u

9.  re.  forsaken,  cast  down,  but  re.  destroyed
5  l  we  have  an  house  re.  made  with  hands
7.  we  walk  by  faith,  re.  by  sight  ||  12.  n.  in  hea
7  7  God  comforteth  us,  re.  by  his  coming  only
9  1  rejoice,  re.  that  ye  were  made  sorry
12  1  did  it  re.  for  his  cause  that  had  done  wrmi
8.  5.  and  this  they  did,  re  as  we  hoped,  but  hrst

12.  and  re.  according  to  that  he  hath  re .

10^  -jo.  we  diii‘6  w,  rnnke  ourselves  of  the  rnirnhe
12.  IB.  walked  we  n.  in  the  same  spirit,  same  step
I  Gal.  1.  1.  Paul  an  apostle,  re.  ot  men,  nor  hyrna

2  20.  I  live,  yet  n.  I  11  6.  4.  and  n,  m  another
Eph  2.8.  thro  mill  faith,  and  that  ti  ot  y  nurse!  ve

9.  re.  of  works  ||  5.  15.  re.  as  tools,  but  as  w,se

6.  7.  doing  service  as  to  the  Lord,  and  re.  to  tnei
12.  for  we  wrestle  re.  against  flesh  and  blood
Phil.  1. 29.  it  is  given  to  you,  re.  only  to  believe
2.  12.  have  obeyed,  re.  as  in  my  ptesence  only
27.  and  7t.  on  him  only,  but  on  mpalsn

3  9  found  in  him,  re.  having  mine  own  nghteoui

12.  re.  as  tho’  I  had  already  attained,  or  p.-iter
Col.  2.  19.  re.  holding  the  head,  trom  which  the  ho

21.  touch  re.  taste  re.  handle  ti.  all  to  perish
3  2  on  things  above,  re.  on  things  on  the  earth
0.3.  do  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  re.  to  men

1  Thess.  2.  1.  our  entrance,  that  it  was  re.  in  vaii

13.  ye  received  it,  re.  as  word  ot  men,  hut  «’.of
5  6.  therefore  let  us  re.  sleep,  as  do  others

2  Thess.  3.  2.  for  all  men  have  re.  faith

9  re.  because  we  have  re.  power,  but  to  make

1  Tim.  3.  3.  re.  given  to  wine,  re.  greedy  ot  him

2  Tim.  1.  9-  ti.  according  toonr  woiks,  lit.  A..

I  4.  8.  and  re.  to  me  only,  but  to  them  that  love

Tit  2  9.  to  please  them,  re.  answering  again
PhKem.  16.  re.  now  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  serv
lUh  7.  20.  w.  without  an  oath,  he  was  made  pr
8  2  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  re.  man
9!  7!  re.  without  blood,  which  he  oftered  lor  Inm
11  7i  made  with  hands,  n.  of  this  building

11.  1.  faith  is  the  evidence  ot  things  re.  seen
13.  died,  re.  having  received  the  promises
40.  they  without  us  should  re.  be  made  pirtec

12.  8.  bastards,  t i.  sons  ||  13.  ?•  n-  w,,h  ?ne'
Jam.  1.  23.  if  any  man  he  a  hearer,  and  re.  a  do

2.  14.  and  have  re  works,  can  faith  save  hitr i.
2.  24.  re.  by  faith  onlv  ||  3.  2.  offend  re.  m  wore

4.  2.  yet  y»  have  re.  ||  17-  an(J  doetli  it  re.  d  ts  st

1  Pet.  2.  10.  re.  a  people,  had  re.  obtained  mere.,

18.  be  subject,  n.  only  to  the  good  and  gentle

23.  who  reviled  re.  again,  lie  threatened  re.

2  Pet.  2.  21.  better  for  them  re.  to  have  known
1  John  2.  23.  the  same  hath  re.  the  father

3. 12.  re.  as  Cain  ||  4. 10.  re  that  we  loved  God

5.  12.  he  that  bath  re.  the  Son,  hath  n.  life

17.  and  there  is  a  sin  re.  unto  f|eath

Jude  19.  these  be  sensual,  having  re.  the  spirit
Rev.  2.  2.  which  say  they  are  apostles,  and  are

19.  10.  he  said  unto  me,  see  thou  do  it  n.  .
See  Able,  Afraid,  Ashamed,  A***™

Relieve,  Confounded,  Dep arte p ,
STROY,  Die,  Eat,  Enter,  Fear,  Few  ,  t
Forsaken, Give, Given,  Hear, Le a

1,1D*  7/NOT.  T  ....

Gen.  18.  21.  T  will  go  down,  and  if  n.  I  will

24.  49.  and  if  w,  tell  me,  that  I  may  kno\
Exod.  32.  32.  if  re.  blot  me.  I  pray,  out  ot  thv
Judo  9.  15.  ifn.  let  fire  come  out  of  bramble,

1  Sam  k.  16.  and  if  n.  I  will  take  it  by  force  ,

6.  9.  but  if  n.  tnen  we  shall  know  that  it  is

2  Sam.  13.26.  ifn.  let  Anmpngo||17.G.  r/»-sP
2  Kings  2.  10.  but  ifn.  it  shall  not  be  so
Job  9.  24.  ifn.  where,  and  who  is  he

33.  33.  if  re.  hearken  to  me,  hold  thj’. Peac,?  ,
Zech  ll  12.  give  me  my  price,  and  if  n.  rorD
I  Luke  10.6.  if  re.  it  shall  turn  to  you  again

13.  9.  and  ifn.  then  thou  shall  cut  it<i°wn

See  Is,  Knew,  Know,  No,  Obey,  Obe

Passed,  See,  Seek,  So,  Will,  Woi  li
Or  NO  l .

Gen  24.  21.  L.  made  his  journey  prosperous,!
eToL  17-7.  saying,  is  the  Lord  amongus  .^
Num.  1 1 . 23.  whether  my  word  come  to  pass,
13.20.  whether  there  be  wood  therein,  <  •

Judo  2.  22.  as  their  fathers  did  keep  it.  or  1.
Jg  NOTABLE

Signifies,  [1]  Conspicuous,  or  sightly.  Pan  »•
Notorious,  Mat.  27-  16.  M  Tetr,'f  e'  Act
[4]  Known,  or  apparent,  Acts  M 10.  .  ■ ,

Dan.  8.  5.  the  goat  had  a  re.  horn  between
8.  for  it  came  up  four  re  ones,  tov  ;

Mat.  27.  16.  and  they  had  then  a  w.  P"S"n
Acts  2. 20.  before  that  re.  day  of  the  Toni  co
4.  16.  are.  miracle  hath  been^done  b>  them

Isa.  30.  8.  now  go,  write  it,  and  re.  it  in  a  b°°


NOT


NOW


in.  10.  Cl.  that  is  rt  in  the  scripture  of  truth
I'hess.  3.  1 4.  w.  that  man.  and  liave  no  company
NOTE.

m.  16.  7.  who  are  of  n.  among  the  apostles

NOnilNG.

l-'nifies,  [1]  Not  any  thing ,  Gen.  19  8.  [2]  For
i’  use  or  service.  Mat.  5.  IS.  [S]  OJ  no  force
o  hind  or  oblige.  Mat.  23.  16,  18.  [4]  So  good
.arks  that  are  acceptable  to  Had,  John  15.  5
5]  False  and  groundless.  Acts  21.  24.  [6]  No
/her  means,  M ark  9.  29.  [?]  No  regard  or  wages,
i  John  7 ■  [8]  No  new  doctrine  pertaining  to  sal¬
tation,  Gal.  2.  6.  [9]  No  sin  or  guilt,  John

4.30.  [10]  No  divine  power,  no  Clod,  l  Cor.  8.  4.
is  taken,  [1]  Absolutely,  Job  26.  7.  Psal.  49.

7.  [2]  Comparatively,  Psal.  39.  5.  Isa.  40.  17.
3]  In  a  person's  estimation  of  himself,  2  Cor.
2.  11.  [4]  Not  in  the  matter,  but  in  the  man
ter,  as  being  of  no  use  or  service,  1  Cor.  7.  19.
I'hus  circumcision  is  called  nothing,  because  it
■vat/s  nothing,  in  point  of  acceptation  with  God
'.oil'  in  gospel-times.

n.  11.  6.  now  n.  will  be  restrained  from  them
1.8.  only  unto  these  men  do  n.  lor  they  came

1.  29.  as  we  have  done  to  thee  n.  but  good
k  15.  and  here  also  have  l  done  n.  to  put  me
od.  9-  4.  n.  die  that  is  the  children's  of  Israel
.  10.  let  n.  of  it  remain  until  morning
0.  ye  shall  eat  n.  leavened  in  your  habitations
.  18.  gathered  much,  had  n.  over.  2  Cor.  8.  15.

.  3.  if  he  have  n.  then  be  shall  be  sold  for  his  theft
.  26.  there  shall  n.  cast  their  young
m.  6.  4.  eat  n.  that  is  made  of  the  vine-tree
.26.  touch  re.  of  theirs,  lest  ye  be  consumed
.  16.  let  n.  hinder  thee  from  coming
ut.  2.  7.  thou  hast  lacked  n.  Neh.  9.  21.

.  16.  thou  shalt  save  alive  re.  that  breatheth
.  26.  to  the  damsel  thou  shalt  do  n.

.  55.  because  he  hath  n.  left  him  in  the  siege
,h.  11.  15.  Joshua  left  n.  commanded  undone
.  'g.  2.  +  19.  let  n.  fall  of  their  own  doings

2.  at  least  such  as  before  knew  n.  thereof
.  6.  he  rent  him,  and  had  n.  in  his  hand
am.  3.  18.  Samuel  told,  and  hid  n.  from  him
.  2.  my  father  will  do  n.  but  will  shew  it  me
.  15.  thy  servant  knew  n.  of  all  this
,21.  so  that  n.  was  missed  of  all,  30.  19.
x  she  told  him  n.  less  or  more  until  morning

1  im.  12.  3.  the  poor  man  had  n.  save  one  ewe-lamb

24.  not  offer  of  that  w  Inch  doth  cost  me  n.
ings  4.  27.  provided  victuals,  they  lacked  n.

9.  there  was  n.  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables

21.  silver  was  n.  accounted  of  in  days  of  Solom.

22.  and  he  answered  n.  Luke  22.  35.

16.  tell  me  n.  but  truth,  2  Chron.  18.  15.

:  ings  10.  10.  fall  n.  to  earth  of  word  of  the  Lord

13.  n.  in  his  house  that  he  shewed  not
.  be  carried  away,  n.  shall  be  left,  Isa.  39.  2,  6.

I  >r.  9.  2.  n.  hid  from  Solom.  which  he  told  her  not
a  4.  3.  ye  have  n.  to  do  with  us  in  building

1.  5.  8.  then  they  found  n.  to  answer
!.  we  wili  restore,  and  require  i\.  of  them

10.  send  portions  for  whom  n.  is  prepared
21.  sustained  them,  so  that  they  lacked  re.
h.  2.  15.  now  Esther  required  n.  but  what

13.  vet  all  this  availeth  me  n.  so  long  as  I  see
10.  let  n.  fail  of  all  that  thou  hast  spoken

6.  18.  they  go  tow.  and  perish  |)21.  for  ye  are  n

4.  we  are  but  of  yesterday,  and  know  n.

25.  who  will  make  my  speech  n.  worth

7.  and  he  hangeth  the  earth  upon  n.

9.  for  he  hath  said,  it  profiteth  a  man  n.  that

he  should  delight  himself  with  God

17.  3.  thou  hast  tiied  me  and  shalt  find  n.

5.  and  mine  age  is  as  n.  before  thee

17.  when  he  dieth,  he  shall  carry  n.  away
>.  165.  who  love  thy  law, and  re.shall  offend  them

1  v.9-  13.a  foolish  woman  is  simple, and  knoweth  n

2.  treasures  of  wickedness  profit  n.

4.  the  sluggard  desireth,  and  hath  n.  20.  4.
there  is  that  maketh  himself  rich,  yet  hath  n.

27.  if  thou  hast  n.  to  pay,  why  should  he  take

1 1. 3. 14.  whatsoever  God  doeth,  n.can  be  put  to  it

5.  and  he  shall  take  n.  of  his  labour

•  •  so  that  he  wanteth  n.  for  his  soul  of  all

14.  to  the  end  that  man  should  find  re.  after  him
1  34. 12.  none  there,  and  all  her  princes  shall  b  en.

17-  all  nations  before  him  are  as  n.  they  are
counted  to  him  less  than  n.  and  vanity,  41.  29
.  that  bringeth  the  princes  to  n.  41.  11,  12.
t  10.  before  me  there  was  n.  God  formed
■  10.  24.  not  in  anger,  lest  thou  bring  me  to  n
->•  done  n.  of  all  that  thou  commandest  them
14. 1  will  ask  thee  a  thing,  hide  n.  from  me

10.  left  of  the  poor  which  had  n.  in  Judah
4.  1  will  keep  n.  back  from  you
*6.  destroy  her  utterly,  let  n.  of  her  be  left
*•  1. 12.  is  it  n.  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ?

^  13.  3.  woe  to  the  prophets  that  have  seen  re.

’••4. 35.  all  the  inhabitants  of  earth  reputed  as  re.

Messiah  be  cut  off,  but  shall  have  re.

1  ~.X  a  wilderness,  yea,  and  w.shall  escape  them
:  w  3.  4.  will  young  lion  cry  if  he  have  taken  re.  ?
taken  up  snare,  and  taken  re.  ||  7.  Ld.  will  do  re.

!•  -  3.  it  is  not  in  comparison  of  it  as  re.  ?

'•  8.  +  10.  the  hire  of  a  man  became  re.

on  3r  ’hey  have  ”• t0  eat>  Mark  6- 36- 18-1.2.
-o.n.  shall  be  impossible  toyou,  Luke  1.  37.

*.»•  he  round  re.  thereon  but  leaves, Mart  11.  13.

02.  answerest  thou  re.  ?  what  is  it  these  witness  ?

12.  he  answered  re.  Mark  14.  60,  61 .  |  15.  3, 4, 5.

•  nave  thou  re.  to  do  with  that  just  man
\ 1  ’ e.n  dilate  saw  that  he  could  prevail  re.

,5  1-  44.  see  thou  say  re.  to  any  man,  but  go

and  had  spent  all.  and  was  re.  bettered
^ey.should  take  re. for their  journey,  Luke  9.  3.

■4.  this  kind  can  come  forth  by  re.  but  by  prayer
e  -4.  2.  and  in  those  days  he  did  eat  re.
ylave  toiled  all  nightand  taken  re.  John2\.  3.

they  had  re.  to  pay,  he  frankly  forgave  them
l"1®'  '.  shall  by  any  means  hurt  you
o-  and  1  have  re.  to  set  before  him


N  O  U

Luke  23.  15.  and  lo,  re.  worthy  of  death  is  done  to


him.  Acts  23]  29. 1  25.  25.  |  26.  31.
41.  hut  this  man  hath  done  re.  amiss
John  3. 27.  man  can  receive  re.  except  it  be  given  him

5.  19.  verily  the  Son  can  do  re.  of  himself,  30.

6.  12.  gather,  that  re.  be  lost  ||  39.  I  should  lose  re
63.  the  Spirit  quit  keneth,  the  flesh  profiteth  re.

7.  26.  they  say  re.  ||8.  28.  I  do  re.  of  myself

9.  33.  he  could  do  re.  ||  11. 49.  ye  know  n.  at  all

12.  19.  perceive  ye  how  ye  prevail  re.  ?  behold

14.  30.  the  prince  of  this  world  hath  re.  in  me

15.  5.  1  am  the  vine,  for  without  me  ye  can  do  re.

16.  23.  and  in  that  flay  ye  shall  ask  me  re.

24.  hitherto  have  ye  asked  re.  in  my  name

18.  20. 1  spake  openly,  in  secret  have  l  said  re
Acts  4.  14.  they  could  say  re.  against  it

21.  finding  re.  how  they  might  punish  them

10.  20.  and  go  with  them,  doubting  re.  11.  12.

19.  36.  ye  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  do  re.  rashly

20.  20.  1  kept  back  re.  that  was  profitable  to  you

21.  24.  all  may  know,  that  those,  things  are  re.

23. 14.  we  will  eat  re.  until  we  have  slain  Paul
27-  33.  ye  have  continued  fasting,  having  taken  re.

1  Cor.  1.  19.  bring  ton.  the  understand,  of  prudent
4.  4.  I  know  re.  by  mys.  ||  5.  judge  re.  before  the  time

8.  2.  he  knoweth  re.  yet  as  he  ought  to  know

9.  16.  for  though  1  preach,  1  have  re.  to  glory  of

13.  2.  and  have  no  charity,  1  am  re.  2  Cor.  12.  11.

3.  and  have  not  charity,  it  profiteth  me  re.

2  Cor.  6.  10.  as  having  re.  yet  possessing  all  things
13.  8.  tor  we  can  do  re.  against  the  truth

Gal.  2.  6.  they  in  conference  added  re.  tome

4.  1.  heir  when  a  child,  differeth  re.  from  a  servant

5.  2.  1  say  unto  you,  Christ  shall  profit  you  re.
Phil.  2.3.  let  re.  be  done  through  strife  or  vain  glory

1  Tim.  4. 4.  every  creature  is  good,  re.  to  be  refused
5.21.  doing  re.  by  partiality  1|  6.4.  proud,  knowing  re.

6.  7.  for  we  brought  re.  and  we  can  carry  re.  out
lit-  3. 13.  that  n.  be  wanting  unto  them
Philem.  14.  without  thy  mind  would  l  do  re.

Heb.  2.  8.  he  left  re.  that  is  not  put  under  him
7-  14.  Moses  spake  re.  concerning  priesthood

19.  for  the  law  made  re.  perfect,  but  bringing  in
Jam.  1.  4.  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  n.

6.  but  let  him  ask  in  faith,  re.  wavering

3  John  7.  they  went  forth,  taking  re.  of  the  Gentiles

For  NO  I'll  IN  G.

Exod.  21. 2.  in  the  seventh  he  shall  go  out  free  for  n.
Isa.  44.  10.  an  image  that  is  profitable  for  re.

Jer.  13.  7-  the  girdle  was  profitable  for  71.  10.

Mat.  5.  13.  unsavoury  salt  is  good  /.  re.  to  be  cast  out
Luke  6.  35.  do  gopd  and  lend,  hoping/or  re.  again
Phil.  4.  6.  becaretuljire-  re.  but  by  prayer  and  suppl.
/re  NOTHING.

Aets\7.2\.  Athenians  spent  their  time  in  re.  else

2  Cor.  7.  9.  ye  might  receive  damage  by  us  inn.

12.  11.  in  re.  am  1  behind  chiefest,  "though  I  be  re.
Phil.  1. 20.  and  my  hope,  that  inn.  1  shall  be  ash.

28.  and  in  re.  terrified  by  your  adversaries
Is  NO  !  II ING,

Num.  11.6.  there  is  re.  at  all  besides  this  manna
Judy. 7.  14.  this  is  re.  else  save  the  sword  of  Gideon
1  Sam.  27.  1.  there  is  re.  better  than  to  go  to  Philist,

1  Kings  18.  43.  he  looked,  and  said,  there  is  re.

2  A  ings  20.  15.  there  is  re.  among  my  treas.  Isa.  39. 4.

2  Chr.  14.  11.  it  is  n.  with  thee  to  help  with  many
Neh.  2.  2.  this  is  re.  else  but  sorrow  ot  heart
Esth.  6.  3.  they  said,  thereof  re.  done  for  him
Psal.  19.  6.  there  is  re.  hid  from  the  heat  thereof
Prov.  8.  8.  there  is  re.  froward  or  perverse  in  them
Eccl.  2.  24.  there  is  re.  better  for  a  man,  3.  22.

5.  14.  begetteth  a  son,  and  there  is  re.  in  his  hand

Jer.  32.  17.  there  is  re.  too  hard  for  thee
Mat.  10.  26.  for  there  is  n.  covered  that  shall  not  be
revealed,  Mark  4.  22.  Luke  12.2.
23.  16.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it  is  n.

18.  whoso  shall  swear  by  the  altar,  it  is  re.

Mark  7.  15.  there  is  n.  from  without  a  man  defileth
John  8.  54.  if  I  honour  myself,  my  honour  is  re.
Rom.  14.  14.  that  there  is  re.  unclean  of  itself
1  Cor.  7.  19.  circumcision  is  re.  uncircumcision  is  re

8.4.  we  know  that  an  idol  is  re.  in  the  world
Gal.  6.  3.  when  he  is  re.  he  deceiveth  himself
Tit.  1. 15.  to  them  that  are  defiled  is  re.  pure

Of  NOTHING.

Isa.  41.  24.  behold,  ye  are  of  n.  your  work  nought
1  Thess.  4.  12.  and  that  ye  may  have  lack  of  n.

Rev.  3. 17. 1  am  rich,  increased,  and  have  need  of  re
NOTWITHSTANDING.

Exod.  16.  20.  re.  they  hearkened  not  to  Moses,  but
some  left  of  it,  l  Sam.  2.  25.  2  Kings  17.  14.
21.  21.  re.  it  he  continue  a  day  or  two  not  punished
Deiit.  1.  26.  re.  ye  would  not  go  up,  but  rebelled
1  Kings  11.  12.  re.  in  thy  days  l  will  not  do  it
Jer.  35. 14.  re.  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  rising  early
Mat.  2.  22.  re.  being  -warned  of  God  in  a  dream
11.  11.  re.  he  that  is  least  in  kingdom  is  greater
17-  27.  w.  lest  we  should  offend,  go  to  the  sea
Luke  10.  11.  re.  be  sure  of  this  that  kingdom  is  come
20.  re.  in  this  rejoice  not,  that  spirits  are  subject
Phil.  1.  18.  re.  whether  in  pretence  or  truth  Christ  is
4.  14.  71.  have  well  done,  that  ye  communicate  with

1  Tim.  2. 15.  re.  she  shall  be  saved  in  child-bearing

2  Tim.  4. 17.  w.  L.  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened
Jam.  2.  16.  re.  ye  give  them  not  those  things  needful
Rev.  2.  20.  re.  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee

NOUGHT,  see  Naught.

NOVICE.

1  Tim.  3.  6.  not  a  71.  lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride

NOURISH

Signifies,  [1]  To  feed  or  maintain,  Gen.  47.  12.
[2]  To  educate  or  bring  up.  Acts  7-  21.  [3]  To
cause  to  grow,  Isa.  44.  14.  [4]  To  instruct,  1  Tim.

4.  6.  [5]  To  cherish  and  comfort,  Ruth  4.  15.
Jam.  5.  5.

Gere.  45.  11.  and  there  will  I  re.  thee,  50.  21.

Zfa.7.21.  that  man  shall  re.  young  cow  and  two  sheep

23.4. nordo  l  re.  up  young  men,  nor  bringup  virgins
44.  14.  he  planteth  an  ash,  the  lain  doth  71.  it

NOURISHED.

Gen.  47.  12.  Joseph  re.  his  father  and  brethren

2  Sam.  12.  3.  a  lamb  which  he  bought  and  re.  up


Isa.  7. 2.  1  have  re  and  brought  up  children,and  fmy
Ezek.  19.  2.  she  re.  her  whelps  among  young  lions
Acts  7.  20.  and  re.  in  his  father’s  house  three  months
21.  Pharaoh's  daughter  re.  him  for  her  own  son
12-  20.  their  country  was  re.  by  the.  king's  country

1  Tim.  4.  6.  re.  up  in  words  of  faith  and  good  doerr
Jam.  5. 5.  have  re.  your  hearts  as  in  day  of  slaughter
Rev.  12.  14.  re.  for  a  time,  times,  and  half  a  time

NOU  R.1SII Eli,  S.

Ruth  4. 15.  women  said,  he  shall  be  re.  of  thy  oh1  a gt

2  Kings  10.  t  1.  Jehu  sent  to  the  re.  of  Ahab  schil.ii.
Isa.  49.  +23.  and  kings  shall  be  thy  re.  and  queens
Jer.  46.  t  25.  1  will  punish  the  re.  of  No.

„  NOU  R1SHETH.

Eph.  5.  29.  but  re.  his  flesh,  as  the  Lord  the  chuich

NOURISHING.

Dare.  1.5.  so  re.  them  three  years  to  stand  before  king
Nah.  3.  +8.  art  thou  better  than  re.  No
NOURISHMENT.

Col.  2. 19. all  the  body  by  joints  and  bands  having  re..

.  now.

Gere.  2.  23.  Adam  said,  this  is  re.  bone  ot  my  bones.

18.  *1.  1  will  go  down  71.  and  see  whether  they

19.  9.  re.  will  we  deal  worse  with  thee  than
22.  12.  tor  w.  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God
2b.  29.  thou  art  re.  the  blessed  of  the  I x>rd
27-  37.  what  shall  1  do  re.  to  thee,  my  son

29.  35.  she  said,  re.  will  I  praise  the  Lord
32. 4.  sojourned  with  I.aban,  and  stayed  there  till »,
4-3.  11.  Israel  said  to  them,  if  it  be  so  re.  do  this
45.  8.  so  re.  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither
46. 34.  trade  hath  been  about  catt.  from  youth  till  tl.

Exod.  9.  18.  not  such  hail  been  in  Egypt  even  till  re.
10.  II.  gore,  ye  that  are  men,  and  serve  the  Lord
32.  32.  yet  71.  if  thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin
Sum.  12.  13.  heal  her  re.  O  God,  1  beseech  thee

14.  19.  has  forgiven  this  people  from  Egypt  till  re.
24.  17.  1  shall  see  him,  but  not  re.  shall  behold  him

Josh.  5.  14.  but  as  captain  of  Lord's  host  am  I  re. coma
7-  19.  tell  mere,  what  thou  hast  done,  hide  it  not
Judy.  11.7-  why  are  ye  come  to  me  re.  in  distress  ?

17-  13.  re.  I  know  that  the  Lord  will  do  me  good

1  Sam.  2.  16.  nay,  but  thou  shalt  give  it  me  re.

30.  but  re.  the  Lord  saith,  be  it  tar  from  me
15.30.  honour  me  re.  I  pray  thee,  before  the  elders
17 •  29.  what  have  1  re.  done  t  is  there  not  a  cause?

2  Sam.  13.  25.  nay,  my  son,  let  us  not  all  re.  go

15.  34.  so  will  1  re.  also  be  thy  servant
24.  14.  let  us  re.  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord

1  A  mys  14.  14.  wrho  shall  cut  off,  but  what  ?  even  re.
19. 4-  it  is_ enough,  re.  O  Lord,  take  away  my  life
•  Kmys  1.  5.  he  said,  why  are  ye  re.  turned  back  ?

8.  6.  restore  all  that  was  tier's  since  she  went  till  re.
10.  10.  know  re.  there  shall  fall  to  eaith  nothing

18.  25.  am  I  re.  come  up  without  Lord,  Isa.  36. 10.

19.  25. 7i.  have  1  brought  it  to  pass,  Isa.  37.  26.

20.  3.  remember  re.  how  1  have  walked,  Isa.  38.  3,
Ezra  4.  13.  be  it  re.  known  to  the  king,  if  city  built

5.  16.  even  til!  re.  hath  il  been  building,  not  finished
9. 8.  re.  tor  little  space  grace  been  shewed  from  Lord
10.  2.  re.  there  is  hope  in  lsr.  concerning  this  thing

Job  1.  11.  put  forth  thy  hand  re.  and  touch,  2.  5.

4.  5.  re.  it  is  come  upon  thee,  and  thou  faintest

6.  21.  for  re.  ye  are  nothing,  ye  see  my  casting  down
17-  3.  lay  down  re.  |]  24.  25.  and  if  it  be  not  so  re.

15.  where  is  re.  my  hope  r  ||  30.  9.  re.  1  am  their  sonj
42. 5.  have  heard  of  thee,  but  re.  my  eye  seeth  thee
Psal.  12.5.  re.  will  1  arise,  saith  the  Lord

20.  6.  re.  know  1  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  anointed
39.  7-  n.  Lord,  what  wait  I  for,  my  hope  is  in  thee
115.  2.  why  heathen  say,  where  is  re.  their  God  i

118.  25.  save  re.  I  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  send  now

119.  67-  but  n.  have  l  kept  thy  word

Prov.  6.  3.  do  this  re.  my  son,  and  deliver  thysel*

7.  12.  re.  she  is  without,  re.  in  the  streets,  and  beta
Eccl.  2.  1.  go  to  re.  1|  3.  15.  what  hath  been  is  re.

16.  that  which  re.  is  shall  all  be  forgotten
Cant.  3.  2.  I  will  rise  re.  and  go  about  the  city
Isa.  5.  5.  re.  go  to,  I  will  tell  you  what  I  will  do

16.  14.  but  re.  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  saying
19.  12.  thy  wise  men,  let  them  tell  thee  re.

22. 1.  what  aileth  thee  re.  that  thou  art  wholly  gon*

33.  10.  re.  will  I  rise,  re.  will  1  lift  up  myself
64.  8.  but  re.  O  I  ord,  thou  art  our  rather
Jer.  2. 18.  re.  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  way  of  Egypt?

4.  12.  re.  will  1  give  sentence  against  them

17.  15.  the  word  of  the  Lord  let  it  re.  come

25.  5.  turn  re.  every  one  from  his  evil  way

30.  6.  ask  ye  re.  and  see  whether  a  man  doth  tra\  ai5
34. 15.  ye  were  n.  turned,  and  had  done  right
35.  15.  return  ye  re.  every  man  from  his  evil  way
45.  3.  woe  is  me  n.  the  Lord  hath  added  griel
Dan.  10.  11.  O  Daniel,  to  thee  am  I  re.  sent
Hos.  2.  7-  for  then  was  it  better  with  me  than  re.

13.  2.  and  re.  they  sin  more  and  more,  and  made
Zech.  1 . 4.  turn  ye  re.  from  your  evil  ways  and  doing®

9.  8.  for  re.  have  1  seen  with  mine  eyes
Mai.  3. 10.  prove  me  re.  herewith,  safth  the  Lord,
Mat.  1.  22.  re.  all  this  was  done,  that  it  might  be

11.12.  from  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist,  till  re.

26.  45.  sleep  on  re.  |f  27.  43.  let  him  deliver  him  re.

53.  thinkest  that  1  cannot  re.  pray7  to  my  Father

27.  42.  let  him  re.  come  down  from  the  cross
Mark  4.  37.  so  that  the  ship  w7as  re.  full  of  waves
Luke  2. 29.  Lord,  re.  lettest  thy  serv.  depart  in  peac»

10. 36.  which  re.  these  three  was  neighbour  to  him  ?

14. 17.  come,  for  all  things  are  re.  ready
22.  36.  but  re.  he  that  hath  a  purse,  iet  him  take  it
John  2. 8.  draw  out  re.  and  bear  to  governor  of  feast

10.  but  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  re.

4.  18.  he  whom  thou  re.  hast  is  not  thy  husband

23.  but  the  hour  cometh,  and  re.  is,  5.  25.

9. 19.  who  was  born  blind,  how  then  doth  he  re.  see  ?
13.7.  what  Ido  thouknowest  not  re.  but  shalt  know

16. 12.  many  things,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  re.
22.yew.  therefore  havesorrow,  but  1  will  see  \<rr
29- lo,  re.  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  no  proverb
30.  re.  we  are  sure,  ||  31.  do  ye  re.  believe?

17.  13.  I  kept  them,  and  re.  come  I  to  thee

21.  14.  this  is  re.  the  third  time  that  Jesus  shewed
Acts  2. 33.  shed  forth  this  which  ye  re.  see  and  hew

37 -  n.  when  they  heard  this,  were  pricked  in  heart

33.5


N  U  M


OAT


NUM


.lets  4  Vi-  and  re.  Lord,  behold  their  threatenings
t<?  i  1 .  7i.  I  know  ot  a  surety  Lord  sent  his  angel
.3.  n.  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  there  was  a  stir
i°  16.  and  re.  why  tamest  thou,  arise,  be  baptized
26  17.  the  Gentiles,  to  whom  re.  1  send  thee
Horn.  0.  VI.  but  re.  being  made  tree  from  sin
7.  17.  re.  then  it  is  no  more  1  that  do  it,  but  sin
13.  11.  re.  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  ot  sleep
1  Cor.  4.  8.  re.  ye  are  full,  n.  ye  are  rich
7.  14.  7i.  are  they  holy  ||  13.  12.  re.  1  know  in  part
16.  7.  for  l  will  not  see  you  re.  by  the  way
Cral.  1.  9.  as  we  said  before,  so  say  1  n,  a^ain
10.  for  do  l  re.  persuade  men  or  God  t
2  20  the  life  which  1  re.  live  m  the  flesh,  l  live  by
3*  3.  are  ye  re.  made  perfec  t  by  the  flesh
4. 20.  L  desire  to  be  present  with  you  re.  and  change
29.  but  as  then,  even  so  it  is  m.  .  .

Evh  3  10.  to  the  intent  that  re.  to  principalities
5  s'  were  darkness,  but  re.  are  ye  light  in  the  Ld.
P/til.  1.5.  your  fellowship  from  the  hist  day  until  re.
2  12.  obeyed,  but  re.  much  more  in  my'  absence


1  L.  Uii“  y  cl*  fttit  m-.  uiuc  j

Col.  3. 8.  but  re.  ye  also  put  oft  all  these,  anger
1  Thess.  3. 8.  w.  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord

1  Tim .  4.  8.  having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  re.  is

2  Tini.  4.6.  tor  L  am  re.  ready  to  be  offered


Philem.  16.  not  re.  as  a  servant,  but  above  a  servant
Heb.  2. 8.  re.  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him
Jam.  4.  13.  go  to,  re.  ye  that  say ,  to-day  or  to-morrow

5. 1.  go  to,  n.  rich  men,  w  eep  and  howl  for  miseries
1  Pet.  1.  8.  though  re.  ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing

2  10.  but  are  re.  the  people  of  G.  had  not  obtained
1  John  2.  8.  because  the  true  light  w.  shineth

3. 2.  n.  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  it  doth  not  appear
4!  3*.  and  even  re.  already  is  it  in  the  world

See  Behold,  Hear,  If.

HOW  therefore.

Gen.  20.  7.  re.  therefore  restore  the  man  his  wife
29.  32.  w.  therefore  my  husband  will  love  me
37.  20.  come  n,  there f.  and  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast
Josh.  24.  14.  re.  therefore  fear  Lord,  anti  serve  him

1  Sam.  12.  13.  re.  there)',  behold  king  ye  have  chosen
16.  re.  therefore  stand  and  see  this  great  thing

2  Sam.  4.  11.  shall  1  not  th.  re.  require  his  blood  ?

2  Kings  1.  14.  re.  therefore  let  my  life  be  precious

1  Chr.  21.  12.  re.  there),  advise  thyself  what  word

2  Chr.  2.  7-  send  me  re.  there),  man  cunning  to  work
Heh.6.  9.  re.  there)’.  O  God,  strengthen  my  hands
job  6.  28.  re.  therefore  be  content,  look  upon  me
Psal.  2. 10.  be  wise,  re.  th.  O  ye  kings,  be  instructed
Isa.  28.  22.  re.  th.  be  not  mockers,  lest  your  bands

52.  5.  re.  there)',  what  have  1  here,  saith  the  Lord
Jer.  26. 13.  re.  there),  amend  your  ways  and  doings
29.  27.  re.  therefore  why  hast  thou  not  reproved  .

42.  22.  re.  therefore  know  certainly  that  ye  shall  die
Dan.  9.  17.  «.  there).  O  our  God,  hear  the  prayer
Joel  2. 12.  therefore  also  re.  saith  the  Lord,  turn  ye
Amos  6.  7.  therefore  re.  shall  they  go  captive  first
7.  16.  re.  therefore  hear  thou  word  ot  the  Dord
Acts  10.  33.  re.  there)',  are  we  all  present  before  ood
15. 10.  re.  there)’,  why  tempt  ye  God  to  put  a  yoke
16.36.  re.  therefore  depart,  and  go  in  peace
1  Cor.  6.  7.  w.  therefore  there  is  a  fault  among  you
•2  Cor.  8.  11.  w.  therefore  perform  the  doing  ot  it
Evh.  2.  19.  w.  therefore  ye  are  no  more  strangers
HUMBER,  Substantive,

Signifies,  [1]  A  small  number,  such  as  is  easy  to
reckon,  Gen.  34.  30.  Deut.  4.  27.  [2]  A  gieat

number,  or  multitude,  which  no  man  can  reckon
or  number,  Psal.  147-  4.  [3J  Society,  or  company,
Luke  22.  3.  Acts  1.  17.  The  number  of  the  beast,
or  the  number  of  the  name  of  the  beast,  K  ev.  13.  17 ,
18.  stands  for  the  numerical  value  of  the  letters  that
compose  his  name.

Gen.  34.  30.  I  being  few  in  re.  they  shall  slay  me
41.  49.  very  much,  for  it  was  without  re.

Rxod.  12.  4.  take  the  lamb  according  to  re.  ot  souls
16.16.  gather  manna,  according  to  re.  ot  persons

23.  26.  nothing  barren,  re.  of  thy  days  1  will  fulfil
Lev. 25.  15.  there,  of  years  after  the  jubilee,  the  re.

of  years  of  the  fruits  he  shall  sell,  16.  50.

26.  22.  beasts,  which  shall  make  you  tew  in  re.
Hum.  1.  2.  with  the  re. of  their  names,  18.  22.

3. 22.  re.  of  males  from  a  month  old, 28,  34,  40, 43.

48.  odd  re.  of  them  is  to  be  redeemed  to  Aaron
14.  29.  your  whole  re.  from  twenty  years  old
34.  after  the  re.  if  days  ye  searched  the  land
15. 12.  according  to  re.  ye  shall  prepare,  so  shall  ye
do  to  every  one  according  to  their  re.
23.  10.  who  can  count  the  re.  ot  fourth  part  of  Isr.  ?
29.  18.  their  off  erings  shall  be  according  to  their  re.

21.24,27,30,33,37.

31.  36.  the  half  of  their  portion  was  in  re.

Deut.  4.  27.  left  few  in  re.  among  heathen,  28.  62.

7.  7.  because  ye  were  more  in  re.  than  any  people
25.  2.  judge  cause  him  to  be  beaten  by  a  certain  re.

32.  8.  he  set  bounds  accordins  to  the  re.  of  Israel
Josh.  4.5.  every  man  of  you  a  stone  accord,  tow. 8.
Judg.  6.  5.  they  and  their  camels  without  re.  7.  12.

7.  6.  the  re.  of  them  that  lapped  were  300  men

21.  23.  according  to  the  re.  of  them  that  danced
1  Sam.  6.  4.  the  re.  of  the  lords  of  the  Philistines
18.  to  the  re.  of  all  the  cities  of  the  Philistines

27.  +  7.  re.  of  days  David  dwelt  in  country  of  Phil.
I  Sam.  2. 15.  there  arose  and  w  ent  over  by  re.  twelve
21.  20.  had  fingers  and  toes  twenty-tour  in  re.

24.  2.  that  I  may  know  the  re.  of  the  people

A  1 - L  .V  /-if’  fVin  ni  /if’  tliD  TICK


9.  the  re.  of  them  after  their  genealogy,  40.

11. 11.  the  re.  of  mighty  men  whom  David  had
16. 1 19.  when  ye  were  but  men  of  re.  even  a  few

22.  16.  of  the  gold  and  silver  there  is  no  re.

23.  3.  their  nfby  their  polls,  man  by  man

t  27-  the  Levitesre.  from  twenty  and  above
31.  set  feasts  by  re.  ||  25.  1 .  re.  of  the  workmen

25.  7.  the  re.  that  were  instructed  in  the  songs
27.  23.  but  David  took  not  the  re.  of  them

2  Chr.  12.  3.  the  people  w'ere  without  re.  that  came

26.  12.  the  whole  re.  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers
29.  32.  the  re.  of  the  burnt  offerings,  bullocks

80.  24.  a  great,  re.  of  priests  sanctified  themselves*

336


Ezra  1.  9.  and  this  is  the  re.  of  the  vessels

2.  2.  the  re.  of  the  men  of  the  people  ot  Israel

3.  4.  and  offered  the  daily  burnt  offerings  by  re.

6.  17.  twelve  he-goats,  aci  ording  to  the  re.  ot  tribes
8.  34.  by  re.  and  by  weight  of  every  one
E>th.  9.  II.  the  n.  of  those  slain  in  Shushan  the  palace
Job  1.  5.  lob  offered  according  to  there,  ot  them  all

3.  6.  let  it  not  come  into  the  re.  of  the  months
5.  9.  marvellous  things  without  re.  9-  10.

14.  5.  the  re.  of  his  months  are  with  thee

15.  20.  the  re.  of  years  is  hidden  to  the  oppressor

16.  t  22.  when  years  of  re.  are  come,  1  shall  go
25.  3.  is  there  any  re.  of  his  armies  t
31  37.  I  w  ould  declare  to  him  the  re. of  my  steps
34. 24.  shall  break  in  pieces  mighty  men  without  re.

36.  26.  neither  c  an  the  re.  of  his  years  be  searched
38.  21.  because  the  re.  of  thy  days  is  great
Psal.  105.  12.  when  they  were  but  a  tew  men  in  re.

34.  caterpillars,  and  that  without  re.

139.  18.  they  are  more  in  re.  than  the  sand
147.  4.  he  telleth  the  re.  of  the  stars,  calleth  them
t  5.  of  his  understanding  there  is  no  re.

Eccl.  2.  t  3.  re.  of  days  ot  their  life,  5. 1 18.  1  6. 1 12.
Cant.  6.  8.  there  are  queens  and  virgins  without  re.

Isa.  10.  t  19.  the  rest  of  the  trees  shall  be  re.

21.  17.  the  residue  of  there,  of  archers,  mighty  men
40.  26.  that  bringeth  out  their  host  by  re.

65.  11.  that  furnish  the  drink  offering  to  that  re.

Jer.  2.  28.  as  re. of  thy  cities  are  thy  gods,  O  Judah
32.  my  people  have  forgotten  me  days  without  re.

11. 13.  according  to  the  n.  of  thy  cities,  re.  ot  streets
44.  28.  yet  a  small  re.  that  escape  sword  shall  return
Ezek.  4.  4.  according  to  the  re.  of  the  days,  5,  9.

5.  3.  thou  shalt  take  a  few  in  re.  and  bind  them
12.  t  16.  1  will  leave  men  in  re.  from  the  sword
43.  +  10.  and  let  them  measure  the  re.

Dan.  9.  2.  1  understood  by  books  the  re.  of  years
Hos.  1. 10.  re.  of  Isr.  shall  be  as  the  sand,  Bom.  9.27.
Joel  1.  6.  a  nation  is  come  up  strong  and  without  re.
Hah.  3.3.  there  isa  greatw.  of  carcases,  they  stumble
Luke  22.  3.  Judas,  being  of  the  re.  ot  the  twelve
John  6.  10.  the  men  sat  down,  in  re.  5000,  Acts  4.  4
Acts  1.  15.  the  re.  of  the  names  together  were  120.

5.  36.  to  Theudas  a  re.  of  men  joined

6.  1.  when  the  re.  of  disciples  was  multiplied,  7.

11.  21.  a  great  re.  believed  and  turned  to  the  Lord
lb!  5.  the  churches  were  increased  in  re.  daily

2  Cor.  10. 12.  for  we  dare  not  make  ourselv.  ot  the  re
1  Tim.  5.  9.  let  not  a  widow  be  taken  into  the  re.

Rev.  5.  11.  the  re.  of  them  was  10,000  times  10,000
7. 4.  1  heard  the  re.  of  them  which  were  sealed
9.  16.  the  re.  of  the  army  of  the  horsemen
13. 17.  re.  of  his  name  ||  18.  count  the  re.

18.  it  is  the  n.  of  a  man,  and  his  re.  is  666
15.  2.  1  saw  them  that  had  victory  over  re.  of  beast
20  8.  re.  of  Gog  is  as  the  sand  of  the  sea
HUMBER,  Verb.

Gen.  13. 16.  if  a  man  can  re.  the  dust  of  the  earth
15.  5.  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to  re.  them
Lev.  15. 13.  he  shall  re.  seven  days  for  his  cleansing

28.  then  she  shall  re.  to  herselt  seven  days
23. 16.  after  the  seventh  sabb.  shall  ye  re.  fifty  days
25. 8.  thou  shalt  re.  seven  sabbaths  of  years  to  thee
Hum.  1.  3.  Aaron  shall  re.  them  by  their  armies

49.  only  thou  shalt  not  re.  the  tribe  of  Levi

3.  15.  re.  the  children  of  Levi  from  a  month  old
40.  re.  all  the  first-born  of  the  males  of  Israel

4.  23.  until  fifty  years  old  shalt  thou  re.  them,  30.

29.  as  for  the  sons  of  Merari  thou  shalt  re.  them

37.  which  Moses  and  Aaron  did  re.  41.

Deut.  16.  9.  seven  weeks  shalt  thou  re.  begin  to  re.

1  Sam.  14. 17.  re.  and  see  who  is  gone  from  us

2  Sam.  24. 1.  to  say,  go  re.  Israel  and  Judah
2.  go  now  and  n.  the  people,  4.  1  Chron.  21.  2.

1  Kings  20.  25.  re.  thee  an  army  like  the  army  lost
1  Chron.  21.  1.  Satan  provoked  David  to  re.  Israel
27.  24.  Joab  began  to  re.  but  he  finished  not
Job  38.  37.  who  can  re.  the  clouds  in  wisdom  ?

39.  2.  canstthou  re.  the  months  that  they  fulfil  ?

Ps.  90. 12.  so  teach  us  to  re.  our  days,  that  we  may
Isa  65.  12.  therefore  will  1  re.  you  to  the  sword
Rev.  7.  9.  a  great  multitude  which  no  man  could  re.
HUMBERS.

1  Chron.  12.  23.  these  are  the  re.  of  the  bands

2  Chron.  17.  14.  these  are  the  re.  of  them,  accord.
Psal.  71.  15.  for  1  know  not  the  re.  thereof

H  UMBERED.

Gen.  13.  16.  then  shall  thy  seed  also  be  re.

16. 10.  it  shall  not  be  re.  for  multitude,  32.  12.
Exod.  30.  13.  thatpasseth  among  them  that  are  re.  14.

38.  25.  them  that  were  re.  of  the  congregation,  26.
Hum.  1. 19.  he  re.  them  in  the  wilderness  ot  Sinai

21.  those  that  were  re.  of  them,  23,  44,  46. 1  2.  4,
13,  15,  19,  21,  23,  26,28,  30.
47.  the  Levites  were  not  re.  among  them,  2.  33.

2.  9.  all  that  were  re.  in  the  camp  of  Judah
16.  were  re.  in  camp  of  Reuben  ||  24.  re.  of  Ephraim
31.  re.  in  camp  of  Dan  11  3.  16.  Moses  re.  them,  42.

3.  39.  all  that  were  re.  of  the  Levites  were  22,000

4.  34.  they  re.  of  the  sons  of  the  Kohathites,  37.

38.  those  that  were  re.  of  the  Gershonites,  41.

42.  those  that  were  re.  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  45.
45.  these  whom  Moses  and  Aaron  re.  46.

7.  2.  who  were  princes  and  over  them  that  were  re.

14.  29.  carcases  fell  in  wilderness,  all  that  were  n.
26  51.  these  were  re.  of  the  children  of  Israel

57.  re.  of  the  Levites  ||  63.  Moses  and  Eleazar  re.
Josh.  8.  10.  Joshua  rose  early  and  re.  the  people
Judg.  20.  15.  the  children  of  Benjamin  were  re.

1  Sam.  11.8.  and  when  he  re.  them  in  Bezek

15.  4.  Saul  re.  people  in  i  claim,  200,000  foptmen

2  Sam.  18. 1 .  David  re.  the  people  that  were  with  him
24.  10.  David’s  heart  smote  him  after  lie  had  n.

1  Kings  3.  8.  a  great  people  that  cannot  be  re.

8. 5.  sheep  and  oxen  that  could  not  be  re.  2  Chr.  5.  6.
20.  15.  then  he  re  the  princes  of  the  provinces

26.  at  return  of  the  year  Ben-hadad  n.  the  Syrians
27*  Israel  were  re.  and  were  like  two  flocks

2  Kings  3.  6.  and  king  Jehoram  re.  all  Israel

1  Chron.  21.  17-  I  commanded  the  people  to  be  re.
23.3.  now  the  Levites  were  re.  from  thirty  years,  27;

2  Chr.  2.  17.  Solomon  re.  all  the  strangers  in  Israel


2  Chr.  25.  5.  he  re.  them  from  twenty  yeais  old  ana
Ezra  1.  8.  Cyrus  re.  the  vessels  to  Sheshbazzar
Psal.  40.  5.  they  are  more  than  can  be  re.

Eccl.  1.  15.  that  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  re.

Isa.  22.  10.  ye  have  re.  the  houses  of  Jerusalem
53.  12.  he  was  re.  with  transgressors,  Mark  15.28.
Jer  33.  22.  as  the  host  of  heaven,  cannot  be  re.

Dan.  5.  26.God  hath  re. thy  kingdom, and  finished  it
Hos.  1 . 10.  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be  n.
Mat.  10.  30.  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  re.  Luke  12.  7.
Acts  1.  17.  for  he  was  re.  with  us,  and  obtained  part
26  Matthias  was  re.  with  the  eleven  apostles
H  UMB  I  RES  1 .

Exod.  30.  12.  shall  give  every  man  a  ransom  when
thou  re.  that  there  be  no  plague  when  thou  j .
Job  14.  16.  for  now  thou  re.  my  steps,  dost  not  thou
HUMBERING.

Gen.  41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  corn  until  he  left  n.

2  Chron.  2. 17.  after  the  w.  wherewith  David  numb.
HURSE

Signifies,  [1]  A  woman  who  suckles  a  child,  Exod.
2  7  [2]  One  that  assists  in  bringing  vp  ./

children,  Ruth  4.  16.  It  is  applied,  [1]  Togod/f
kings  and  queens,  who  have  a  sincere  affection
and  tender  regard  to  the  church,  Isa.  49.  23.
[21  To  faithful  ministers  of  the  gospel,  who  ore
mild  and  obliging,  using  all  kind  and  winning
expressions ,  as  nurses  do  to  please  children ,
1  Thess.  2.  7*

Gen.  24.  59.  they  sent  away  Rebekah  and  her  «.
35.  8.  but  Deborah,  Rebekan’s  re.  died,  and  wash
Exod.  2.  7.  shall  1  call  to  thee  aw.  of  Hebr.  women U
Ruth  4.  16.  Haomi  took  the  child,  and  became  n.
2  Sam.  4.  4.  his  re.  took  him  up  and  fled,  and  he  tel
2  Kings  11.  2.  they  hid  him  and  his  re.  2  Chr.  22.  11
Acts  13.  +  18.  he  suffered,  as  a  re.  beareth  the  child
1  Thess.  2. 7.  were  gentle,  as  a  re.  cherish,  her  childr
HURSE.

Exod.  2.  7.  that  she  may  re.  the  child  for  thee
9.  take  this  child  away,  andw.it  forme,  l  will  giv
HURSED.

Exod.  2.  9.  the  woman  took  the  child,  and  n.  it
Isa.  60.  4.  thy  daughters  shall  be  re.  at  thy  side
H  URS1H  G.

Hum,.  11. 12.  carry  them  in  thy  bosom,  as  a  re.  fathe
Isa  49. 23.  kings  be  re.  fathers,  queens  thy  re.  mother
HURTURE.

Eph.  6.  4.  bring  them  up  in  the  re.  of  the  Lord
H  UTS.

Gen.  43.  11.  carry  down  a  present,  re.  and  almonc
Cant.  6.  11.  1  went  down  into  the  garden  of  re.


O.


OAK.

Gen.  35.  4.  Jacob  hid  the  gods  under  the  0.  by  She
8  Debor.  Rebekah’s  nurse,  was  buried  under  an
Josh.  24.  26.  and  set  it  up  there  under  an  0.
Judg.  6. 11.  an  angel  of  the  Lord  sat  under  an  0
9.  t  6.  made  Abimelech  king  by  the  o.  of  the  pill.
2  Sam.  18.  9.  Absalom’s  mule  went  under  an  0.

10.  Absalom  hanged  in  an  0.  ||  14.  alive  in  the
1  Kings  13. 14.  he  found  the  man  of  God  under  an
1  Chr.  10.  12.  buried  their  bones  under  0.  in .  Jabe
Isa.  1.  30.  ye  shall  be  as  an  o.  whose  leaf  tadeth
6  13.  as  teil  tree,  or  0.  whose  substance  is  in  the
44.  14.  he  taketh  the  cypress  and  0.  to  make  a  g
Ezek.  6.  13.  among  their  idols  under  every  tmck
OAKS.

Isa.  1.  29.  shall  be  ashamed  of  the  o.  which  ye  des
2.  13.  the  day  of  the  Lord  on  all  the  0.  ot  Las!)
57.  +  5.  inflaming  yourselves  among  the  0.
Ezek.  27.6.  of  o.  of  Bashan  have  they  made  thine  0;
Ilos.  4. 13.  and  burn  incense  upon  the  hills  undei
Amos  2.  9.  the  Amorite  was  strong  as  they.
Zech.  11.  2.  howl,  fir-tree,  howl,  O  yeo.  of  Bash
OAR.

Ezek  27.  29.  all  that  handle  the  0.  shall  cry
'  *  OARS

Isa.  33.  21.  wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  0.
Ezek.  27.  6.  of  the  oaks  oHJasban  they  made  th:

Is  a  solemn  action,  whereby  we  call  upon  God,
searcher  of  hearts,  to  witness  the  truth  0)  what
affirm,  for  the  ending  of  strife  or  controvers
Heb.  6.  16.  It  is  spoken,  (1)  Of  God  the
ther,  who  sware,  [1]  To  his  Son,  the  Lord  Messfc
the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  that  U‘-
should  be  his  only  and  eternal  Priest,  net

honouring  his  Son,  and  giving  strong  const  lac

to  his  people,  in  such  a  Royal  High  Priest,
should  effectually  manage  all  their  coiicerns  i
him  for  ever,  Psal.  110.  4.  Heb  7-  21.  [2]
men,  either  in  love  or  wrath,  hereby  assw
them  of  the  immutability  of  his  purposes,  that P
blessings  he  promised  should  be  bestowed,  ana
the  judgments  he  threatened  should  be  inffu
Gen.  22.  16,  17-  Psal.  95.  11.  Heb.  6.  17-
Of  men,  who  when  necessity,  or  t:l  mporit
of  a  matter,  t°. quires  it^ ought  to  swear,  m  x
giovs/y,  by  God  only,  Deut.  6.  13. 1  JO.  -
Reverently,  and  with  fear ,  Eccl  .9.  2.  L.
tiously,  Gen.  24.  5,  8.  Josh.  2.  17-  1.  J
cerely,  faithfully,  and  justly,  Jer.  4.  -•

Men  must  not  swear,  [1]  Idolatrously ,  in  then,
of  any  false  gods,  or  in  the  name  oj  tnty**
things,  Josh.  23.  7-  Jam.  5.  12.  [2]  Deceit
Ter.  42.  5,  20.  [3]  Fc.lsely,  Lev.  6.  3.  |ty.-
[4]  Rashly,  Lev.  5.  4.  Mat.  14.  7-  .

Gen.  24.  8.  thou  shalt  be  clear  from  this  my  4
26.  3.  I  will  perform  the  o.  which  1  swe,
Abraham,  Deut.  7-  8.  Psal. ,105.  9.  Jer-  -

28.  let  there  be  now  an  0.  betwixt  us  and  me?

50.  25.  Joseph  took  an  0.  of  the  chi  drenol M.
Exod.  22.  11.  an  o.  ot  the  Ixird  shall  be  beRvee
I.ev.  5.  4.  that  a  man  shall  pronounce  with  an
Hum.  5.  19.  the  priest  shall  charge  her  by  J m ,
21.  I..  make  thee  a  curse  and  an  0.  anion,.  I
30.  2.  if  a  man  swear  an  o.  to  bind  his  sou  ,
13.  every  vow,  and  every  binding  o. to  ami  ,
Deut.  29. 12.  his  0.  which  the  Lord  maketh  " 11


O  BE


O  B  S


O  B  T


ml.  29. 14.  neither  with  you  only  do  1  make  this  o.
sh.  2.  17.  we  will  be  blameless  of  this  thine  o.

.  CO.  lest  wrath  be  on  us,  because  of  the  o.
tiff.  21.  5.  for  Israel  had  made- a  great  a.

Sam.  14.  26.  for  the  people  feared  the  o.

Ti.  when  Saul  charged  them  with  the  o.  28.

Sam.  21.  7-  king  spared  Mephihosheth,  bee.  of  o
Kings  2.  43.  why  then  hast  thou  not  kept  the  o.  ?
31.  and  an  o.  be  laid  on  him,  and  the  o.  come  be
fore  thine  altar  in  this  house,  2  C 'hr.  6.22

l.  10.  he  took  an  o.  of  the  kingdom  and  nation
Kings  11.4.  .lehoiada  took  an  o.  of  them  in  house
Ihr.  16.  16.  be  mindful  of  his  o.  to  Isaac

Ihr.  15.  15.  all  Judah  rejoiced  at  thee.

>h.  5.  12.  and  Nehemiah  took  an  <>.  of  the  priests
).  29.  they  entered  into  an  o.  to  walk  in  God’s  law
•cl.  8.  2.  and  that  in  regard  of  the  o.  of  God
.  2.  he  thatsweareth,  as  he  that  feareth  an  o.
ek.  16.  59.  which  hast  despised  thee.  17,  18,  19.
'.  13.  a  covenant,  and  hath  taken  an  o.  of  him

6.  that  made  him  king,  whose  o.  he  despised
in.  9.11-  curse  is  poured  on  us,  ami  o.  writt.in  law
ch.  8.  17-  love  no  false  o.  for  this  I  hate

at.  14.  7.  he  promised  with  an  o.  to  give  her
(.nevertheless,  for  the  o.  sake,  A lark  6.  26.

5. 72.  again  he  denied  with  an  o.  1  know  not  man
’ke  1.  73.  the  o.  which  he  sware  to  our  father
Is  2.  30.  that  God  hath  sworn  with  an  o.  to  him
t.  21.  which  have  bound  themselves  with  an  o.
;A.6.  16.ane.for  confirmation  is  an  end  of  all  strife

7.  God  confirmed  it  by  an  o.  that  by  two  things

20.  as  not  without  an  o.  he  was  made  priest,  21.

8.  the  o.  which  was  since  the  law,  maketh  the  Son

m.  5.  12.  swear  not  by  the  earth,  nor  any  other  o.

OATHS.

ek.  21.  23.  divination  to  them  that  have  sworn  o.
ib.  3.  9.  the  bow  made  naked,  according  to  thee.
it.  5.  33.  shalt  perform  to  the  Lord  thine  o

r  OBEDIENCE

twofold,  (I)  That  which  is  given  to  God,  and  is
poken,  [1]  Of  Christ  the  great  Redeemer' s  per-
ect  obedience  to  the  trill  cf  his  Father ,  both  in
'ring  and  suffering,  by  the  merit  of  which  sinners
■re  justified  before  God,  Rom.  5.  19.  [2]  Of

hat  voluntary ,  free,  and  cheerful  obedience,  which
he  angels  in  heaven  yield  to  the  commands  of  God,
’sal.  103.  20.  Mat.  6.  10.  [3]  Of  that  involun-
ary  obedience  which  devils  and  wicked  men  are
■need  to  yield  to  the  commands  of  God,  Exod.  11
.  1.12.  31.  Mark  1.  27-  Luke  4.  36.  [4]  Of  the
bedience  of  good  men,  which  consists,  [1]  In  he-
\emng  and  embracing  the  gospel,  and  subjecting
hemselves  thereunto  ;  whence  it  is,  that  obedi-
nce  is  put  for  faith,  Rom.  16.  19.  compared  with
lom.  1.  8.  [2]  In  a  conformity  of  our  affections
nd  actions  unto  the  trill  of  God  revealed  in  his
ord,  which  is  begun  in  this  life,  but  is  to  be
effected  in  heaven,  Rom.  6.  16.  1  Pet.  1.  14.
>]  Of  the  subjection  of  all  creatures  to  the  com-
tand  of  God,  Psal.  105.  30,  31.  At  his  com-
‘and  the  ravens  did  feed  Elijah,  1  Kings  17.  4,

.  The  fish  vomited  out  Jonah,  chap.  2.  10.  The
mpestuous  sea  became  calm.  Mat.  8.  26,  27.
le  spake,  and  there  came  frogs,  flies,  lice,  hail,
fusts,  4c.  upon  Egypt,  Psal.  105.  30,  31,  32,

4.  (II)  7  hat  which  is  due,  or  performed  to  man,
ither,  [1]  By  the  unreasonable  creatures.  Jam.

•  Or,  [2]  By  inferiors  to  their  superiors:
h."y  wives  unto  their  husbands,  Tit.  2.  5.
hildren  to  their  parents,  Eph.  6.  1.  Servants
1  their  masters,  Eph.  6.  5.  Subjects  to  their
rinces  or  magistrates,  Rom.  13.  1.  And  by
eople  to  their  pastors,  Heb.  13.  17.

am.  22.  +  45.  strangers  shall  yield  feigned  0.  unto
ne  as  soon  as  they  hear,  Psal.  18.  +  44  |  66.  t  3.
>nh  V  ^or  0 •  t"e  faith  among  all  nations
19.  by  the  0.  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous
16.  of  sin  to  death,  or  of  o.  unto  righteousness

•  19.  your  0.  is  come  abroad  unto  all  men

5.  made  known  to  all  nations  for  thee,  of  faith
or.  14.  34.  women  are  commanded  to  be  under  0.
0T-  7-  15.  he  remembereth  the  0.  of  you  all

•  5.  bringing  every  thought  to  the  0.  of  Christ
.  all  disobedience,  when  your  o.  is  fulfilled
««w.  21.  having  confidence  in  thy  o.  I  wrote

"•  5.8.yet  learned  he  o.  by  the  things  he  suffered
et.  1.2.  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  toe.

.  OBEDIENT.

id.  24.  7.  Lord  hath  said,  we  will  do,  and  be  o.
w.  27.  20.  put  honour  on  him,  that  Isr.  may  be  o.
on  turn  to  L.  and  shall  be  o.  to  his  voice

-0.  ye  shall  perish,  because  ye  would  not  be  0.
am.  22.  45.  strangers  shall  be  0.  unto  me
w;  25.  12.  so  is  a  wise  reprover  upon  an  0.  ear

•  1;  19.  if  o.  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land

•  24.  neither  vvere  they  0.  to  his  law

<s  6.  7.  the  priests  were  0.  to  the  faith
m.  15. 18.  to  make  Gentiles  0.  by  word  and  need
?r,  2-9.might  know  whether  ye  be  o.  in  all  things
.:  b-  5.  servants,  be  0.  to  your  masters,  Tit.  2.  9.
8.  Christ  became  o.  unto  death  of  the  cross

•  2. 5.  wives,  be  0.  ||  1  Pet.  1.  14.  children,  be  0.

_  B  OBEY.

8.  therefore,  my  son.e.  my  voice,  13.  43.

5.  2.  who  is  the  Lord,  that  1  should  0.  him  ?

•  "•  now  if  ye  will  o.  my  voice  indeed

21. 0.  his  voice  ||  22.  if  shalt  indeed  0.  his  voice
<  ,27-  a  blessing,  if  ye  o.  commands  of  Lord

•  o-lns  voice,  27.  10.  30.  2,  8.  1  Sam.  12.  14.

-.  20.  and  that  thou  mayest  o.  his  voice

«•  24.  24.  the  Lord’s  voice  will  we  o.

8. 19.the  people  refused  to  0.  voice  of  Samuel
ho  “e  i°  too.  is  better  than  sacrifice
'^•  t7*  and  refused  to  0.  neither  were  mindful
/1 04  "  °'  an<^  serve  him  they  shall  spend

**•  .8*  44.  as  soon  as  they  hear,  they  shall  0.  me
■  17-  the  eye  that  despiseth,  too.  his  mother
■  ,4*  14.  the  children  of  Ammon  shall  0.  them
i.  23.0.  my  voice,  and  1  will  be  your  God,
and  ye  shall  be  my  people,  11.4,  7.

•  13.  amend  your  ways,  and  o.  the  voice  of  the

Lord  your  God,  38.  20.  Zeck.  6.  15.


Jer.  35. 14.  Rechabites  0.  their  father’s  commandm.
42.6.  we  will  0.  the  voice  of  laird  our  God,  that  it
tnay  be  well  with  us  when  we  0.  the  Lord
Banff.  27.  and  all  dominions  shall  serve  and  o.  him
Mat.  8.  27.  what  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even
winds  and  sea  0.  him  ?  Mark  4. 41.  Luke  8. 25.
Mark  1.  27.  e'en  the  unclean  spirits  0.  him
Luke  17.  6.  be  thou  plucked  up,  and  it  shall  0.  you
Acts  5.  29.  we  ought  to  o.  God  rather  than  men
32.  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  o.  him
Rom.  2.  8.  but  to  them  that  0.  unrighteousness
6. 12.  that  ye  should  o.  it  in  the  lusts  thereof
16.  know  ye  not,  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves
servants  to  0.  his  servants  ye  are  .to  whom  ye  0.
Eph.  6.  1.  children,  o.  your  parents,  Col.  3.  20.

Col.  3.  22.  servants,  o.  in  all  things  your  masters
lit.  3.  1.  put  them  in  mind  to  o.  magistrates
Heb.  5.9.  author  of  eternal  sal  vat.  to  all  that  <1.  him
13. 17-  o.  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you
Jam.  3.3.  put  bits  in  horses’  mouths,  that  they  mav  0
Not  OBEY,  OB EY  not.

Deut.  11. 28.  a  curse,  if  ye  will  noto.  the  command¬
ments  of  Lord  your  God,  28.  62.  1  Sam.  12
15.  Job  36.  12.  Jer.  12.  17. 1  18.  10.

21. 18.  who  will  not  o.  the  voice  of  his  father,  20.

1  Sam.  15.  19-  wherefore  then  didst  thou  not  off
Jer.  42. 13.  but  if  ye  say,  we  will  not  o.  the  Lord
Van.  9.  11.  that  they  might  not  o.  thy  voice
Acts  7.  39.  to  whom  our  fathers  would  not  o.

Rom.  2.  8.  that  are  contentious,  and  do  not  o.  truth
Gal.  3.1.  who  bewitcheth  you,  thatshould  not  o.?5ff.

2  Thess.  1.8.  taking  veng.  on  them  that  gospel
3. 14.  if  any  man  0.  not  our  word,  note  that  man

1  Pet.  3. 1.  if  any  o.  not  the  word,  they  may  be  won
4. 17.  what  shall  end  be  of  them  that  o.  not  gosnel  ?
OBEYED.

Gen.  22. 18.  be  blessed  ,  because  thou  hast  o.  26. 5.

28.  7.  that  Jacob  0.  his  father  and  his  mother
Josh.  22.  2.  have  0.  my  voice  in  all  I  command,  you
1  Sam.  15.  20.  Saul  said,  l  have  o.  the  voice  of  Lord
24.  because  1  feared  the  people,  and  0.  their  voice

28.  21.  behold,  thine  handmaid  hath  o.  thy  voice

1  Chron.  29.  23.  then  all  Israel  o.  Solomon

2  Chron.  11.4.  they  0.  the  words  of  the  Lord
Jer.  34.  10.  then  they  0.  and  let  them  go

35.  8.  thus  have  we  o.  the  voice  of  Jonadab,  10.

18.  because  ye  0.  the  commandment  of  your  fath.
Van.  9. 10.  neither  have  we  o.  the  voice  of  the  Lord
Hag.  1.  12.  the  people  0.  the  voice  of  the  Lord
Acts  5.  36.  many  as  0.  Theudas  were  scattered,  37.
Rom.  6. 17.  have  0.  from  heart  that  form  of  doctrine
Phil.  2.  12.  ye  have  o.  not  in  my  presence  only
Heb.  11.8.  by  faith  Abraham  0.  and  went  out
1  Pet.  3.  6.  Sarah  o.  Abraham,  calling  him.  Lord
Not  OBEYED.

Josh.  5.  6.  were  consumed,  because  they  0.  not
Judg.  2.  2.  but  ye  have  not  0.  my  voice,  6.  10.

1  Kings  20.  36.  thou  hast  not  0.  the  voice  of  Lord

2  Kings  18. 12.  because  they  o.  not  the  voice  of  Lord
Prov.  5. 13.  and  have  not  o.  the  voice  of  my  teachers
Jer.  3. 13.  ye  have  not  o.  my  voice,  saith  the  Lord,

25.|  42.  21.  |  43.  4,  7.  I  44.  23.

9. 13.  they  have  not  0.  my  voice,  11.  8.  I  17.  23  |

32.  2.3.  I  40.  3.  Van.  9.  10.  14.
Zeph.  3.  2.  she  o.  not  the  voice,  she  drew  not  near
Rom.  10. 16.  but  they  have  not  all  o.  the  gospel
OREYEDST.

1  Sam.  28. 18.  because  tlrou  0.  not  the  voice  of  Lord
Jer.  22. 21.  thymaimrr  that  thou  0.  not  my  voice
OR-YETH.

Prov.  15.  +32.thac<<.  reproof  getteth  understanding
Isa.  50.  10.  who  that  0.  the  voice  of  his  servant  ?
Jer.  7.  28.  this  is  a  nation  that  0.  not  the  Lord

11.  3.  cursed  be  the  man  that  0.  not  the  words  of

OBEYING.

Judg.  2.  17.  your  fathers  0.  but  they  did  not  so
1  Sam.  15.  22.  in  sacrifice,  as  in  c .  the  voice  of  Lord

1  Pet.  1.  22.  have  purified  your  souls  in  o.  the  truth

OBEISANCE.

Gen.  37.  7.  your  sheaves  made  0.  to  my  sheaf
9.  the  sun,  moon,  and  eleven  stars  made  o.  to  me
43.  28.  they  bowed  and  made  o.  to  Joseph
Exod.  18.  7-  Moses  did  o.  to  his  father  in-law

2  Sam.  1.  2.  the  Amalekite  did  0.  to  David

14.  4.  the  woman  of  Tekoah  did  o.  to  the  king

15.  5.  when  any  man  came  nigh  to  do  him  0.

1  Kings  1. 16.  Bath-sheba  did  o.  to  king  David

2  Chron.  24. 17.  princes  of  Judah  made  o.  to  the  king

OBJECT.

Acts  24. 19.  and  0.  if  they  had  ought  against  me
OBLATION.

Lev.  2.  4.  an  o.  of  a  meat  offering  baken,  5,  7,  13.

12.  as  for  0.  of  the  first-fruits,  ye  shall  offer  them
3.  1.  if  his  0.  be  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offering

7. 14.  he  shall  offer  one  out  or  the  whole  0.

29.  he  shall  bring  his  o.  to  the  Lord,  of  sacrifices
22.  18.  that  will  offer  his  o.  for  all  hi,  vows
Num.  18.  9.  every  o.  of  theirs  shall  be  most  holy
31.  50.  we  have  brought  an  0.  for  the  Lord
Isa.  19.21.  the  Egyptians  shall  do  0.  to  the  Lord
40. 20.  that  is  so  impoverished  that  he  hath  no  0.

66. 3.  that  offereth  an  0.  as  if  he  offered  swine’s  flesh

Jer.  14. 12.  when  they  offer  an  o.  I  will  not  accept
Ezek.  44.  30.  and  every  0.  shall  be  the  priest’s
45.  1.  when  ye  shall  divide  the  land,  offer  an  0.

13.  this  is  the  o.  ye  shall  offer,  48.  9,  20,  21.

16.  shall  give  this  0.  for  the  prince  in  Israel
Van.  2.  46.  that  they  should  offer  an  0.  to  Daniel
9. 21.  time  of  the  even  o.  ||  27.  shall  cause  0.  to  cease

OBLATIONS.

Lev.  7.  38.  he  commanded  Israel  to  offer  their  o.

2  Chron.  31.  14.  to  distribute  the  0.  of  the  Lord
Prov.  29.  +  4.  but  a  man  of  0.  overthroweth  it
Tsa.  1.  13.  bring  no  more  vain  0.  unto  me
Ezek.  20. 40.  1  will  require  the  first-fruits  of  your  o.
44.30.  every  sort  of  your  o.  shall  be  the  priest’s
OBSCURE.

Prov.  20. 20.  his  lamp  shall  be  put  out  in  o.  darkness
OBSCURITY.

By  obscurity,  or  darkness,  all  kinds  of  adversity
and  calamity  are  resembled,  as  happiness  and
prosperity  are  by  light,  Isa.  58.  10.  It  is  lid.


that  the  Jews,  after  they  were  delivered  from  their
dark  and  calamitous  condition  in  the  Babylonish
captivity,  observed  a  feast,  which  they  called,
1  he  feast  of  lights  ;  because  so  great  a  happiness
of  being  delivered  from  bondage,  and  of  having  the
service  of  the  temple  re-established,  broke  forth
upon  them  beyond  their  hope,  as  the  rays  of  the  sun
dart  themselves  through  the  clouds.  Obscurity
also  sigiiifi.es  spiritual  ignorance  and  blindness,
from  which  God  delivers  his  people,  when  he  bestows
upon  them  the  clear  and  saving  knowledge  of  the
truth,  Isa.  29.  18.

Isa.  29.  18.  the  eves  of  the  blind  shall  see  out  of  0.

58. 10.  then  shall  thy  light  rise  in  0.  and  darkness
59.  9.  we  wait  for  light,  but  behold  o.  for  brightness

OBSERVATION.

The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation.,
Luke  17.  20.  That  kingdom  which  God  will  set
up  in  the  world,  will  not  become  conspicuous  and
remarkable  by  any  outward  splendour,  or  worldly
pomp,  but  by  its  inward  power  and  efficacy  upon
the  hearts  and  minds  of  men.

Mai.  3.  t  14.  what  profit  that  we  have  kept  his  0.  ?
Lukeff.  20.  the  kingdom  of  God  co-meth  not  with  0.
OBSERVATIONS.

V*°d.  12.  f  42.  it  is  a  night  of  0.  unto  the  I.ord
A  eh.  13.  f  14.  my  deeds  done  for  the  0.  thereof
^  OBSERVE.

-E.jW.12.  17- ye  shall  0.  the  feast  of  unleaven,  bread,
for  I  brought  armies  out  of  Egypt,  24.  Veut.
16.  1.

31.  16.  o.  the  sabbath  ||  34.  22.  0.  feast  of  weeks

34. 11.  0.  thou  that  which  1  command  thee  this  day,

Veut.  12.  28.  I  24.  8.
Lev.  19.  26.  nor  shall  ye  use  enchantments,  o.  times
37.  ye  shall  0.  all  my  statutes,  2  Chron.  7.  17.

Neh.  1.  5.  Psal.  105.  45.  Ezek.  37.  24.
Num.  28.  2.  my  sacrifice  shall  ye  o.  to  offer  me
Vent.  16.  13.  0.  the  feast  of  tabernacles  seven  days
1  Kings  20.  3.3.  now  the  men  did  diligently  o.

Ps.  5.  t  8.  because  of  those  which  0.  me,  27.  f  11.
51.  t  5.  he  shall  reward  evil  to  those  that  o.  me
71. +10.  they  that  0.  my  soul  take  counsel  together
107.  43.  whoso  is  wise,  and  will  o.  these  things
119.  34.  I  shall  0.  it  with  my  whole  heart
Prov.  23.  26.  and  let  thine  eyes  0.  my  ways
Jer.  8.  7-  the  crane  and  swallow  0.  the  time
Ezek.  20.  18.  neither  0.  their  judgments  nor  defile
IIos.  13.  7.  as  a  leopard  by  the  way  will  1  0.  them
Jonah  2.8.  thate.  lying  vanities,  forsake  their  mercies
Mat.  28.  20.  teaching  them  to  o.  all  things  whatever
Acts  16.  21.  customs  not  lawful  to  0.  being  Romans

21.  25.  concluded  that  the  Gentiles  0.  no  such  thing
Gal.  4.  10.  ye  0.  days,  and  months,  and  times

1  Tim.  5.  21.  then  o.  these  things  without  preferring

See  Do.

OBSERVED.

Gen.  37.  11-  but  his  father  0.  the  saying
Exod.  12.  42.  it  is  a  night  to  be  much  0.  to  the  Lord
Num.  15.  22.  have  erred,  and  not  o.  commandments
Veut.  3.3.  9.  Levi  o.  thy  word,  kept  thy  covenant

2  Sam.  11. 16.  when  Joab  o.  city,  he  assigned  Uriah
2  Kings  21.  6.  Manasseh  o.  times,  2  Chron.  33.  6.
Hos.  14.  8.  I  have  heard  him,  and  0.  him

Mark  6.  2-0.  for  Herod  feared  John  and  0.  him

10.  20.  all  these  have  I  o.  from  my  youth

OBSERVER.

Veut.  18.  10.  there  shall  not  be  found  an  0.  ol  times
OBSERVERS.

Veut.  18.  14.  these  nations  hearkened  to  0.  of  times
Ps.  59.  +  10.  God  shall  let  me  see  my  desire  on  my  0.
OBSERVES!'.

Job  13.  +  27.  thou  0.  all  m3’  paths,  settest  a  print
Isa.  42.  20.  seeing  many  things,  but  thou  0.  not
OBSERVE!’!!.

Eccl.  11.  4.  he  that  o.  the  wind  shall  not  sow
OBSTINATE.

Veut.  2.  30.  the  Lord  thy  God  made  his  heart  o.
Isa.  48.  4.  because  1  knew  that  thou  arte.
OBTAIN.

Gen.  16. 2.  it  may  be  1  may  0.  children  by  her
1  Chron.  29.  +  14.  that  we 'should  o.  strength  to  offer
Prov.  8.  35.  and  shall  0.  favour  of  the  Lord
Isa.  35.  10.  they  shall  0.  joy  and  gladness,  51.  11.
Van.  11.  21.  he  shall  0.  the  kingdom  by  flatteries
Luke  20.  35.  be  accounted  worthy  to  o.  that  world
Rom.  11.  31.  thro’  your  mercy  they  may  0.  mercy
1  Cor.  9.  24.  so  run  that  ye  may  0.

25.  they  do  it  toe.  a  corruptible  crown,  but  we

1  Thess.  5. 9.  but  too.  salvation  bvour  L.  Jes.  Chr.

2  Tim.  2.  10.  may  0.  salvation  which  is  in  Chr.  Jes.
Heb.  4.  16.  that  we  may  0.  mercy,  and  find  grace

11.  35.  that  they  might  e.  a  better  resurrection
Jam.  4.  2.  ye  kill,  ye  desire  to  have,  and  cannot  e.

OBTAINED.

2  Chron.  2.  +  6.  but  who  hath  e.  strength  to  build
Neh.  13.  C.  after  certain  days  I  0.  leave  of  the  king
Esth.  2.  9-  Esther  0.  kindness,  ||  17.  she  0.  grace
Hos.  2.  23.  have  mercy  on  her  that  had  note,  mercy
Acts  1.  17.  and  had  o.  part  of  this  ministry

22.  28.  with  a  great  sum  o.  I  this  freedom

26.  22.  having  o.  help  of  G.  I  continue  to  this  day

27.  13.  supposing  that  they  had  0.  their  purpose
Rom.  11.  7.  what  then  ;  Israel  hath  not  0.  wnat  he

seeketh  for,  but  the  election  hath  0.  it
30.  ye  have  now  o.  mercy  through  their  unbelief
1  Cor.  7.  25.  as  one  that  hath  o.  mercy  of  the  Lord
Eph.  1.  11.  in  whom  we  haveo.  an  inheritance
1  Tim.  1.  13.  1  o.  mercy,  because  1  did  it  igno¬
rantly,  16.

IJeb.l.  4.  o.  a  more  excellent  name  than  they

6.  15.  he  had  patiently  endured,  he  0.  the  promises

8.  6.  he  hath  o.  a  more  excellent  ministry  than  they

9.  12.  having  0.  eternal  redemption  for  us
11. 2.  by  it  the  elders  o.  a  good  report,  39.

4.  Abel  o.  witness  that  he  was  righteous
33.  who  o.  promises,  stopped  mouths  of  lions

1  Pet.  2. 10.  which  had  not  0.  mercy ,  but  now  have  o.

2  Pet.  1.  1.  that  have  0.  like  precious  faith  with  us

See  Favour.

OBTAINING.

2  Thess.  2. 14.  to  0.  of  the  glory  of  our  T..  Tes.  Chr

n  337


OFF


OFF


OFF


OCCASION.  .

Gen.  43. 18.  that  he  may  seek  o.  against  us  and  fall
Judg. 9.33.  mayest  do  as  thou  shalt  find  o.  1  10.7 .

14.  4.  Samson  sought  o.  against  the  Philistines
2  Sam.  12.  14.  given  great  o.  to  enemies  to  blaspheme
Ezra  j.  20-  which  thou  shalt  have  o.  to  bestow
Jer  2.  24.  in  her  o.  who  can  turn  her  away  <

Ezek.  18.  3.  shall  not  have  o.  any  more  to  use  prov.
Dan.  6.  4.  sought  to  find  o.  and  could  find  none  o.  5.
Rom.  7. 8.  sin  taking  o.  by  the  commandment.  11.

14.  13.  put  not  an  o.  to  fall  in  his  brother  s  way
2  Cor  5.  12.  we  give  you  o.  to  glory  on  our  behalf
8  8  *1  speak  by  o.  of  the  forwardness  ot  others
li  12  that  I  may  cut  offo.  from  them  which  desire  o.
Gal.  5.  13.  only  use  not  liberty  tor  an  o.  to  the  fiesh
1  Tim .  5.  H.  younger  give  none  o.  to  the  adversary
1  John  2  10.  there  is  none  o.  of  stumbling  in  him
OCCASION  ED.

1  Sam  22  22.  1  have  o.  the  death  of  all  the  persons
OCCASIONS.

Deut.  22.  14.  and  give  o.  of  speech  against  her,  17.
Job  33.  10.  behold,  he  findeth  o.  against  me
OCCUPATION.

Gen.  46. 33.  shall  say,  what  is  your  o.?  47-  3.  Jew.  1.8.
Acts  18.  3.  for  by  o.  they  were  tent-makers
iq  25  whom  he  called,  with  the  workmen  of  like  o.

'  OCCUPY.

Ezek.  27.  9.  with  mariners  to  o.  thy  merchandise
Luke  19.  13.  he  said  to  his  servants,  0.  till  1  come
OCCUPIED.

Exod.  38.  24.  the  gold  that  was  0.  for  the  work
Judg.  16.11.  if  bind  with  new  ropes  that  never  weree.
Ezek.  27.  16.  Syria  0.  !l  19.  Dan  and  lavan  0.

21.  Arabia  0.  1!  22.  Sheba  0.  in  thy  fairs
Heb.  13.  9.  meats  not  profited  them  that  have  0.
OCCUPIERS.  .

Ezek.  27.  27.  the  o.  of  thy  merchandise  shall  fall
OCCUP1ETH.

1  Cor.  14.  16.  he  that  o.  the  room  of  the  unlearned
OCCUR  RENT.

1  Kings  5.  4.  there  is  neither  adversary  nor  evil  o.
ODD.

Num  3.  48.  the  0.  number  of  them  is  to  be  redeemed
ODIOUS.

1  Chron.  19.  6.  the  Ammonites  made  themselves  o.
Prov.  30.  23.  for  an  o.  woman  when  she  is  married

ODOUR.

John  12.  3.  house  was  filled  with  o.  of  the  ointment
Phil.  4.  18.  an  0.  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice
ODOURS.

Lev-'. 26. 31.  will  not  smell  the  savour  of  your  sweet  o.

2  Chron.  16.  14.  Asa  was  laid  in  a  bed  ot  sweet  0.
Esth.  2. 12-  six  months  with  oil  of  myrrh  and  sweet  o.
Jer.  34.  5.  so  shall  they  burn  0.  for  thee  and  lament
Dan.  2.  46.  that  they  should  offer  sweet  o.  to  Daniel
Rev.  5.  8.  having  harps  and  golden  vials  full  ot  o.

18.  13.  no  maxi  buyeth  their  0.  and  ointments
OFFENCE  .  .

Signifies,  Any  thing  that  a  man  finds  in  his  way,
that  may  occasion  him  to  stumble  or  fall :  thus
Moses  forbids,  To  put  a  stumbling-block  Cor  an
offence J  before  the  blind,  Lev.  19.  14.  that  is,
neither  wood,  stone,  nor  any  thing  else  that  may
make  him  stumble  or  fall.  It  teas  prophesied.
That  Christ  Jesus  should  be  for  a  stone  ot  stum¬
bling  and  rock  of  offence  to  both  the  houses  of
Israel,  Isa.  8.  14.  His  humiliation,  his  poverty,
his  birth,  death,  and  cross,  were  rocks  against
which  the  Jews  struck,  and  upon  which  they  have
fallen  and  are  broken  ;  because  they  could  not  be
convinced,  that  such  humble  qualifications  could
belong  to  the  Messiah  they  erpected.  And  the
apostle  Paul  exhorts  the  Corinthians,  J  o  give
none  offence  to  lews  or  Gentiles,  1  Cor.  10.  32.
that  is,  not  to  hinder  them  in  their  way  to  heaven,
or  induce  them  to  act  with  a  doubting  conscience,
by  an  unseasonable  use  of  Christian  liberty.

In  a  moral  sense,  there  is  an  active  and  passive
scandal  or  offence.  The  first  is  that  which  we
give  to  others  by  our  words  or  actions  ;  and  the
second  is  taken  from  others,  by  seeing  their  evil
words  or  actions.  It  signifies,  [1]  An  impedi¬
ment,  Mat.  16.  23.  [2]  Sin,  Rom.  4.  25.  [3]
Contempt,  Mat.  18.  7.

1  Sam.  25.  31.  this  shall  be  no  0.  of  heart  to  my  lord
Isa.  8. 14.  but  a  rock  of  0.  to  both  the  houses  of  Isr.
Hos.5. 15.  till  they  acknowledge  their  0.  and  seek  me
Mat.  16.  23.  get  behind  me,  Satan,  thou  art  o.  to  me
18.  7.  woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  0.  cometh
Acts  24.  16.  a  conscience  void  of  0.  towards  God
Rom.  5.  15.  but  not  as  the  o.  so  also  is  the  free  gift,
for  if  through  the  0.  of  one  many  be  dead,  18.
17.  for  if  by  one  man's  o.  death  reigned  by  one
20.  the  law  entered  that  the  0.  might  abound
9.  33.  I  lay  in  Sion  a  stumbling  stone,  and  rock  ofo.
14.  20.  it  is  evil  for  that  man  who  eateth  with  0.

1  Cor.  10.  32.  give  none  o.  in  any  thing,  2  Cor.  6.  3.

2  Cor.  11.  7.  have  1  commit,  an  0.  in  abasing  myself  t
Gal.  5.  11.  then  is  the  0.  of  the  cross  ceased

Phil.  1.  10.  may  be  without  o.  till  the  day  of  Christ
1  Pet.  2.  8.  a  rock  of  n.  to  them  which  stumble
OFFENCES.

Eccl.  10.  4.  for  yielding  pacifieth  great  0.

Mat.  18.  7-  w7oe  to  the  world  because  of  0.  for  it
must  needs  be  that  0.  come,  Luke  17-  1.
Rom.  4.  25.  who  was  delivered  for  our  0.  and  raised

5.  16.  but  the  free  gift  is  of  many  0.  to  justification
16.  17.  1  beseech  you,  mark  them  which  cause  o.
OFFEND.

Signifies,  [1]  To  commit  any  sin  in  thought,  word,
or  deed,  lam.  3.  2.  [2]  To  draw  one  to  evil,  or  be
a  let  and  hinderance  to  that  which  is  good,  Mat.  5.
29,  30.  [3]  To  take  occasion  of  sinning  when  none
is  given,  thus  the  Pharisees  were  offended  at
Christ,  Mat.  15.  12.  that  is,  they  were  more
alienated  from  his  person  and  doctrine.  [4]  To  be
scandalized,  or  stumbled  by  the  example  of  an¬
other,  1  Cor.  8.  13.  [5]  To  act  unjustly,  or  in¬
juriously,  Acts  25.  8.  [6]  To  wrong,  Psal.  73.  15.
Job  34.  31.  it  is  meet  to  say,  I  will  note,  any  more
Ps.  73. 15.  1  should  0.  against  generat.  of  thy  childr .
119.  165.  that  love  thv  law',  nothing  shall  0.  them

-338


Jer.  2.  3.  all  that  devour  him  shall  0.  evil  shall  come
50.’  7*.  and  their  adversaries  said,  we  0.  not
flos.  4. 15.  tho’  Isr.  play  the  harlot,  let  not  Judah  0.
Hah.  1.11.  and  he  shall  pass  over  and  o.  imputing
Mat.  5.  29.  it  thy  right  eye  0.  thee,  pluck  it  out
30.  if  thy  hand  0.  thee,  18.8,  9.  Mark  9.  43,  4.),  47-
13.  41.  they  shall  gatherall  things  that  o.

17.  27.  lest  we  should  0.  them,  go  to  the  sea

18.  6.  whoso  0.  one  of  these,  Mark  9.  42.  Rule  17-  —
John  6.  61.  he  said  to  them,  doth  tins  0.  you  i

1  Cor.  8.  13.  if  meat  make  thy  brother  o.  lest  he  o.
Jam.  2.  10.  yet  0.  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  ot  all

3.  2.  in  many  things  we  0.  fill,  it  any  man  0.  not
OFFEN  D  ED.

Gen.  20.  9.  and  what  have  1  o.  thee  5  Jer.  37.  18.

40.  1.  the  butler  and  baker  had  0.  their  lord

2  Kings  18.  14.  saying,  l  have  a.  return  from  me
2  Chr.  28.  13.  we  have  0.  against  the  I  ord  already
Ezra  10.  t  13.  for  we  have  greatly  o.  in  this
Prov.  18.  19.  a  brother  o.  is  harder  to  he  won  than
Ezek.  25.  12.  because  Edom  hath  greatly  0.

Hos.  13.  1.  when  Ephraim  0.  in  Haal,  he  died
Mat.  11.6.  bless,  is  he  whoshallnot  bee.  Luke  7.23.

13.  21.  when  tribulation  or  persecution  ariseth  be¬
cause  of  the  word,  by  and  by  he  is  o.  Mark  4. 17-
57.  and  they  were  o.  in  him,  Mark  6.  3.

15.  12.  the  Pharisees  were  0.  after  they  heard
24.  10.  then  shall  many  bee.  and  betray  one  anoth.

26.  31.  all  ye  shall  be  0.  because  of  me  this  night
33.  Peter  said,  though  all  men  shall  bee.  because
of  thee,  yet  will  1  never  be  0.  j  ark  14.29-
John  16.  1.  I  ha'  e  spoken,  that  ye  should  not  he  w.
Ads  25.  8.  nor  yet  against  Cesar  have  1  o.  at  all
Rom.  14.  21.  whereby  thy  brother  is  o.  or  made  weak
2  Cor.  11.  29.  who  is  o.  and  I  burn  not  t
OFFENDER.

Isa.  29. 21.  that  make  a  man  an  0.  for  a  word
Acts  25.11.  if  1  be  an  o.  or  have  committed  any  thing
OEFEN  DERS.

1  Kings  1.  21. 1  and  my  son  Sol.  shall  be  counted  0.
OFFER.

Exod.  22.  29.  not  delay  to  0.  the  first  of  the  fruits
23.  18.  thou  shalt  not  o.  the  blood,  34.  25.

29.  36.  thou  shalt  0.  every  day  a  bullock  for  atonem.

38.  thou  shalt  o.  on  aPar  two  lambs  of  first  year

39.  one  lamb  thou  shalt  o.  in  the  morning,  and

the  other  lamb  at  even,  41.  Num.  28.  4,  8.

30.  9.  ye  shall  n.  no  strange  incense  thereon
35.  24.  every  one  that  did  0.  silver  and  brass

Lev.  1.  3.  o.  male  without  blemish,  3.6.  |  22. 19,  20.

2  1  and  w'hen  any  will  o.  a  meat  offering  to  the
T .ord ,  14.  123.  16.  Num.  6.  17-
13.  with  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  o.  salt
3. 1.  if  he  0.  a  peace  offering,  he  shall  0.  it  without
blemish  before  the  T.ord,  6  |  9.  2.  1  19.5.

7.  if  he  0.  a  lamb  for  his  offering,  14.  12.

12.  the  goat  he  shall  0.  before  the  l  ord

4.14.  congregation  o.  a  young  bullock,  Num.  15.24.

5.  8.  0.  that  for  the  sin  offering  first,  9-7.

6. 14.  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  0.  it  before  the  l  ord,
22.  I  14.  19.  |  15.  15.  30.  Num.  6. 11.

7.  3.  he  shall  o.  of  it  all  the  fat  thereof
12.  if  he  o.  it  for  a  thanksgiving,  22.  29.

38.  Israel  to  o.  their  oblations  to  the  T.ord

if.  7.  they  shall  no  more  0.  their  sacrifices  to  devils
9.  bringeth  it  not  to  the  door  to  o.  it  to  the  Lord
19.  6.  it  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day  ye  o.  it

21 .  6.  and  the  bread  of  their  God  they  do  0.

21.  that  hath  a  blemish  shall  not  come  nigh  to  0.

22.  23.  thou  mayest  0.  fora  free-will  offering
Num.  7.  11.  they  o.  their  offering  each  prince

8.  11.  Aaron  shall  0.  the  Levites,  13.  15.

9.  7.  why  are  we  kept  back,  that  we  may  not  0.  ?

15.  7.  shalt  o.  the  third  part  of  an  hin  of  wine

14.  if  a  stranger  will  o.  an  offering  made  by  fire
19.  shall  0.  an  heave  offering,  18.  24,  26,  28,  29. ,

16.  40.  that  no  stranger  come  near  to  0.  incense
28.  2.  shall  ye  observe  to  0.  tome  in  their  season

11.  in  the  beginnings  of  your  months  ye  shall  o.

24.  after  this  manner  ye  shall  0.  daily  the  meat
Deut.  12.  14.  the  place  the  L.  shall  choose,  there o.
18.  3.  shall  be  the  priest’s  due  from  them  that  o.

33. 19.  shall  0.  sacrifices  of  righteousness.  Ps.4.  5.
Judg.  3. 18.  wdien  he  made  an  end  to  0.  the  present

16.  23.  to  0.  a  great  sacrifice  to  Dagon  their  God

1  Sam.  1.  21.  Elkanah  went  up  to  u.  to  the  T.ord

2. 19.  Hannah  came  with  her  husband  to  o.  sacrifice
28.  did  1  choose  him  mv  priest  to  0.  on  mine  altar

2  Sam.  24.  12.  1  0.  thee  three  things,  1  Chr.  21.  10.

1  Kings  13.  2.  on  thee  shall  o.  priests  ot  high  places

1  Chr.  29.  14.  should  be  able  to  0.  so  willingly,  17.

2  Chr.  24. 14.  whereof  were  made  vesselsto  0.  withal
Ezra  6.  10.  to  0.  sacrifices  of  sweet  savours  to  God
Psal.  16.  4.  drink  offerings  of  blood  will  I  not  o.

27.  6.  therefore  will  1  o.  in  his  tabernacle  sacrifices

50.  14.  o.  to  God  thanksgiving,  pay  thy  vows  to  L.

51.  19.  then  shall  they  0.  bullocks  on  thine  altar
66.  15.  I  w  ill  0.  to  thee  burnt  sacrifices  and  tatlings
72.  10.  the  kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  o.  gifts
116.  17.  I  will  o.  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving

Isa.  57.  7.  thither  wentest  thou  up  to  o.  sacrifice
Jer.  11. 12.  cry  to  the  gods  to  whom  they  0.  incense
Ezek.  20.  31.  when  ye  0.  your  gifts,  ye  pollute

44.  7.  when  ye  0.  my  bread,  the  fat  and  the  blood

15.  they  shall  0.  to  me  the  fat  and  the  blood

45.  1.  ye  shall  o.  an  oblation  to  the  Ld.  13.  1  48.  9.
Dan.  2. 46.  that  they  should  o.  an  oblation  to  Daniel
Hos.  9.  4.  they  shall  not  o.  wine-offerings  to  I.ord
Amos  4.  5.  0.  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  with  leaven
Hag.  2.  14.  that  which  they  0.  there  is  unclean
Mai.  1.  7.  ye  0.  polluted  bread  upon  mine  altar

8.  if  ye  o.  the  blind,  0.  it  now  to  thy  governor
3.  3.  0.  to  the  T.ord  an  offering  in  righteousness
Mat.  5.  24.  and  then  come  and  0.  thy  gift
8.  4.  0.  gift  Moses  commanded,  Mark  1.  44.  Luke
•  5.  14.

Luke  6.  29.  smiteth  on  one  cheek,  o.  also  the  other
11.12.  if  shall  ask  an  egg,  will  he  0.  him  a  scorpion  ?
1  Tim.  3.  f  3.  not  ready  to  0.  wrong,  asone  in  wdne
Ileb.  5.  1.  that  he  mayo,  both  gifts  and  sacrifi.  for  sin
3.  he  ought  for  himself  to  o.  for  sins
7. 27.  needeth  not  too.  sacrifice,  first  for  hisownstns


Ileb.  8.  3.  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  o.  it  is  or
necessity  that  this  man  have  somewhat  also  to  0.

9.  25.  nor  yet  that  he  should  o.  himself  often

13.  15.  b>  him  let  uso.  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God
1  Pet.  2.  5.  by  Jesus  Christ  to  0.  spiritual sacrifices
Rev.  8.  3.  he  should  o.  it  with  prayers  of  all  3aint$
See  Burnt  Offerings.

OF  FEU  ED.

Gen.  31.  54.  Jacob  0.  sacrifice  on  the  mount,  46. 1.
Ex,  d.  35.  22.  every  man  0.  an  offering  of  gold
Lev.  9.  15.  he  slew  the  goat,  and  0.  it  forsm

10.  1.  N  adab  and  Abihu  o.  strange  fire,  and  fire  de¬
voured  them  and  they  died,  16.1.  Num,3A  !  26.61,
Num.  7.  2.  the  princes  0.  for  the  dedication,  10.
b.  21.  Aaron  0.  them  as  an  offering  before  the  Ford
16.  35.  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  that  o.  incense
22.  40.  Palak  o.  oxen  and  sheep,  23.  2,  4,  14,  30.

Judg.  5.  2.  the  people  willingly  o.  themselves,  9.

13.  19.  Manoah  took  a  kid  and  0.  it  on  a  rock

1  Sam.  1.  4.  when  the  time  wa  >  that  Elkanah  0.

2.  13.  when  any  o.  the  priest’s  servant  came

2  Sam.  6.  17.  David  0.  peace  offerings,  24  .  25.

1  Kings  8.  62.  Solomon  and  all  Israel  0.  63.

12.  32.  Jeroboam  0.  in  Reth-el  to  the  calves,  33.

22.  43.  the  people  0.  yet  in  the  high  pla'  e3

2  Kings  3.  20.  w  hen  meat  ottering  was  0.  came  water
16.  12.  Ahaz  approached  to  the  altar  and  0.

1  Chron.  29.  6.  the  captains  with  the  rulers  0.

9.  the  people  rejoiced  for  that  they  0.  willingly

2  Chron.  15.  11.  Asa  o.  to  the  Lord  of  the  spoil
17. 16.  Amaziah  w  illingly  0.  himself  to  the  Lord

Ezra  1.  6.  besides  all  that  was  willingly  o,

2.  68.  some  of  fathers  0.  freely  for  the  house  of  God

6.  17.  o.  at  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God

7. 15.  his  counsellors  freely  0.  to  the  God  of  Israel

8.  25.  the  king  and  all  Israel  there  present  had  0.

10.  19.  they  o.  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  trespass
Neh.  11.2.  willingly  0.  themselves  to  dwell  at  fern.

12.  43.  that  day  they  0.  great  sacrifices  and  rejoiced
Isa.  57.  6.  to  them  thou  haste,  a  meat  wfenng
66.  3.  offereth  an  oblation,  as  if  he  0.  svmev  bhod
Jer.  32.  29.  they  have  0.  incense  unto  LaeJ
Ezek.  20.  28.  they  0.  there  their  sacrifices
Dai.  11.  18.  cause  the  reproach  0.  by  him  to  cep.se
Amos  5.  25.  have  ye  0.  to  me  sacrifices  and  offei mgs?!
Jonah  1.  16.  the  men  feared,  and  0.  a  sacrifice  to  L.;
Mai.  1. 11.  in  every  place  incense  bee.  to  my  ra-.-ne
Acts  8.  18.  Simon  o.  them  money,  saying,  give  me
15.  29.  abstain  from  meats  o.  to  idols,  21.  £0
21.26.  an  offering  should  be  0.  for  every  on  ■  if  them

1  Cor.  8.  1.  things  o.  to  idols,  4.  7, 10. 1  10.  19,  A
Phil.  2.  17.  if  I  be  o.  on  the  service  of  yor;  faith

2  Tim.  4. 6.  for  I  am  now  ready  to  be  0.  the  time
Heb.  5. 7.  when  he  had  o.  up  prayers  and  suppheat.

7.  27.  tfiis  he  did  once,  when  he  0.  up  himself

9.  7.  not  without  blood,  which  he  0.  for  himself
9.  wereo.  giftr.  ,j  14.  0.  himself  without  Spot  to  G.
28.  Christ  was  once  0.  to  bear  the  sins  of  many

11 . 4.  by  faith  Abel  0.  to  G.  a  more  excellent  suer.

17.  by  faith  Abraham,  when  tried,  0.  ur,  Isaac
Jam.  2. 21.  Abraham  justified  by  works  when  he  0,
OFFERETH.

Lev.  6.  26.  the  priest  that  0.  it  for  sin  shall  eat  it
7.  18.  neither  shall  it  be  imputed  to  him  ttni  .1.  it
21.  8.  for  he  0.  the  bread  of  thy  God,  shall  be  holy
Psal.  50.  23.  whoso  o.  praise  glorifieth  me,  to  .'  un
Isa. 66.3.  he  that  0.  oblation  as  if  offered  swine’?
OFFERING.

The  Hebrews  had  several  kinds  of  offerings,  which
they  presented  at  the  tabernacle  and  temple.  Sogu
were  f  ree-will  offerings,  and  others  were  of  obltya
tion.  The  First-fruits,  the  Tenths,  the  Sin  offer ,
nigs,  were  of  obligation ;  the  Peace  offerings
Vows,  offerings  of  wine ,  oil,  bread,  and  uhei
things  which  were  made  to  the  temple,  or  to  th,
ministers  of  the  Lord,  were  offerings  of  devotion
7  he  Hebrews  called  all  offerings  in  general,  Cor
ban.  But  the  offerings  of  bread,  salt,  fruits,  ttni
liquors,  as  wine  and  oil,  which  were  presented  (
the  temple,  they  called  Mincha.  The  offerings  <?
grain,  meal,  bread,  cakes,  fruits,  wine,  salt ^  on
were  common  in  the  temple  and  tabernacle,  borni
times  these  offerings  were  alone,  and  sometime
they  accompanied  the  sacrifices.  I  here  were  fir-
sorts  of  these  offerings,  called  in  FI  ebrew ,  Minche
1.  Fine  flour  or  meal.  2.  Cakes  of  several  sort 1
baked  in  an  oven.  3.  Cakes  baked  upon  a  pinto
4.  Another  sort  of  cakes  baked  upon  a  gridiron,  0,
plate  with  holes  in  it.  5.  I  he  first-fruits  of  tr,
new  corn,  which  were  offered  either  pure  and  wiu
out  mixture ,  or  roasted  or  parched  in  the  ear,  or  01
of  the  ear.  .  .

The  cakes  were  kneaded  with  oil-olive,  or  fried tit 0
in  a  pan,  or  only  dipped  in  oil  after  they  were  bakfi
The  bread  offered  to  be  presented  upon  the  alto
was  to  be  without  leaven,  for  leaven  was  never  offe
ed  upon  the  altar,  nor  with  the  sacrifices  ;  partly
put  them  in  mind  of  their  deliverance  out  oj  Eg>’P
when  they  were  forced  through  haste  to  take  awd
their  meal  unleavened ;  partly  to  signify  un,
Christ  would  be,  and  what  they  should  be,  puretii
free  from  all  error  in  the  faith  and  worship  oj  Go
and  from  all  hypocrisy  and  malice,  or
all  which  are  signified  by  leaven,  Mat.  10.  11
Mark  8.  15.  1  Cor.  5.  8.  Gal.  5.  9.

The  offerings  now  mentioned  were  appointed
favour  of  the  poorer  sort,  who  could  not  go  to  t
charge  of  sacrificing  animals  :  and  even  those  to
offered  living  victims  were  not  excused  from  gnu
meal,  wine,  and  salt,  which  was  to  go  along  un
the  greater  sacrifices  :  and  also  those  that  oyer
only  oblations  of  bread,  or  of  meal,  offered  a/so  0
incense,  salt,  and  wine,  which  were  in  a  man*
the  seasoning  of  it  /In  all  thy  offerings  thou  s
offer  salt,  Lev.  2.  13.  noting,  mcorrvption,
soundness  of  mind,  and  sincerity  of  Q’~ace,w
in  Scripture  is  signified  by  salt,  Mark  9  -  49.  *-
4.  6.  and  which  is  necessary  in  all  them  that  woi
offer  an  acceptable  off  ering  to  God,  or  intestimo
of  that  communion  which  they  had  with  j-’°  __
these  exercises  of  his  worship  ;  salt  being  the  g  <
symbol  of  friendship  in  all  nations  and  ages.


OFF


O  F  F


O  F  F


priest  tn  waiting  received  the  offerings  from  the
hand  of  him  that  offered  them ,  laid  a  part  of
them  upon  the  altar ,  and  reserved  the  rest  for  his
own  subsistence  :  that  was  his  right  as  a  minister
of  the  Lord  :  nothing  was  quite  burnt  vp  but  the
incense,  of  which  the  priest  kept  back  nothing  for
his  own  snare.

Vhen  an  Israelite  offered  a  loaf  to  the  priest,  or  a
whole  cake,  the  priest  broke  the  loaf  or  cake  into
two  parts,  setting  that  part  aside  that  he  reserved
to  hrmself,  and  broke  the  other  into  crumbs,  poured
oil  upon  it,  salt,  wine,  and  incense,  and  spread
the  whole  upon  the  fire  of  the  attar  :  If  these  offer¬
ings  were  accompanied  by  an  animal  for  a  sacri¬
fice,  it  was  all  thrown  vpon  the  victim,  to  be  con¬
sumed  along  with  it.

f  these  offerings  were  the  ears  of  new  corn,  either  of
wheat  or  barley,  these  ears  were  parched  at  the  fire,
or  in  the  fiame,  and  rubbed  in  the  hand,  and  then
offered  to  the  priest  in  a  vessel ;  over  which  he  put
oil,  incense,  wine,  and  salt,  and  then  burnt  it  upon
the  altar ,  first  having  taken  as  much  of  it  is  of
right  belonged  to  himself.

'he  greatest  part  of  these  offerings  were  voluntary,
and  of  pure  devotion.  But  when  an  animal  was
offered  in  sah  ifice,  they  were  not  at  liberty  to  omit
these  offerings:  every  thing  was  to  be  supplied
that  was  to  accompany  the  sacrifice,  and  which
served  as  a  seasoning  to  the  victim,
he  Hebrews  had  properly  but  three  sorts  of  sacri¬
fices,  which  were  the  burnt  offering,  or  Holocaust ;
the  Sacrifice  for  Sin,  or  the  Sacrifice  of  Expiation  ;
and  the  Pacific  Sacrifice,  or  Sacrifice  of  Thanks¬
giving.

he  Holocaust  was  offered  and  quite  burnt  up  on
the  altar  of  burnt  offerings,  without  any  reserve
to  the  person  that  gave  the  victim,  or  to  the  priest
that  killed  and  sacrificed  it  ;  only  the  priest  had
the  benefit  of  the  skin;  for  before  the  sacrifices
were  offered  to  the  Lord,  their  skins  were  flayed
off,  and  their  feet  and  entrails  were  washed.
Lev. 7.  8.

'he  sacrifice  for  sin,  or  for  expiation,  or  the  purifi¬
cation  of  a  man  who  had  fallen  into  any  offence
against  the  law,  was  not  entirely  consumed  upon
the  fire  of  the  altar.  Nothing  of  it  returned  to
him  that  had  given  it,  but  the  sacrificing  priest
had  a  share  in  it,  and  these  arc  the  particulars  that
were  observed  in  this  case.  If  it  were  the  high-
priest  who  had  offended  through  ignorance,  he
offered  a  calf  without  blemish  :  he  brought  it  to  the
door  of  the  tabernacle,  put  his  hand  vpon  the  head
of  the  sacrifice,  confessed  his  sin,  asked  pardon  for
it,  killed  and  stuck  the  calf,  carried  its  blood  into
the  tabernacle,  with  his  finger  made  seven  asper¬
sions  towards  the  veil  that  separated  the  holy
place  from  the  sanctuary,  put  a  little  of  this  blood
upon  the  altar  of  incense,  and  afterwards  poured
out  all  the  rest  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  of  burnt
offerings.  After  this  he  took  away  the  fat  that
covered  the  kidneys,  the  liver,  and  the  bowels ;
he  put  the  whole  upon  the  fire  of  the  altar  of
burnt  sacrifices  ;  and  as  to  the  skin,  the  feet,  the
bowels,  and  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice,  he  caused
them  to  be  burnt  out  of  the  camp,  in  a  clean  place,
where  they  used  to  put  the  ashes  that  were  taken
away  from  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifices,  Lev.  4.
3,4,&c.

’  it  were  the  whole  people  that  had  offended,  they
were  to  offer  a  calf  in  like  manner.  The  elders
brought  it  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  put  their
hands  upon  its  head,  and  confessed  their  off  ence  ;
after  which  the  priest  stuck  the  victim,  and  did
with  it  as  has  been  said  of  the  sin  offering  of  the
high-priest,  Lev.  4.  13,  14,  kc.
a  prince  or  ruler  had  offended,  he  offered  a  goat,
brought  it  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  put  his
hand  upon  its  head,  and  confessed  his  sin.  The
priest  sacrificed  it,  put  of  the  blood  of  the  victim
upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings,
poured  out  the  rest  of  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the
same  altar,  and  the  rest  of  the  sacrifice  was  for
himself:  he  was  obliged  to  eat  it  in  the  tabernacle,
and  icas  not  allowed  to  carry  any  of  it  without,
Lev.  4. 2 2,  23,  &c.

it  was  only  a  private  person  who  had  committed
an  offence,  he  offered  a  sheep,  or  a  she-goat  without
blemish.  If  he  was  not  of  ability  to  offer  a  sheep
or  a  she  goat,  he  offered  two  turtles,  or  two  young
pigeons,  one  for  his  sin,  the  other  for  a  burnt  offer¬
ing.  But  if  he  was  so  poor,  as  that  he  could  not
afford  to  offer  either  of  these,  he  might  offer  the
tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  meal,  that  is,  a  little
more  than  a  gallon,  without  oil  or  spice.  He  pre¬
sented  it  to  the  priest,  who  took  a  handful  of  it,
and  threw  it  upon  the  fire,  and  the  rest  was  for  him¬
self,  Lev.  5.  6,  7,  &c.

be  Peace  offering  was  offered  to  return  thanks  to
God  for  his  benefits,  or  tv  ask  favours  from  him,
or  to  satisfy  any  one's  private  devotion,  or  for  the
honour  of  God  only.  The  Israelites  offered  them
when  they  pleased,  and  there  was  no  law  that  obliged
them  to  it.  It  was  free  to  them  to  present  what  ani¬
mals  they  would,  provided  they  were  such  as  it  was
allowed  them  to  sacrifice.  In  these  sacrifices  no
distinction  was  observed  either  of  the  age  or  sex  of
the  victim,  as  was  required  in  the  burnt  sacrifices,
and  //^  sacrifices  for  sin,  the  law  only  required
that  their  victims  should  be  without  blemish,  Lev.

*•  L  He  that  presented  them  came  to  the  door
°f  tabernacle,  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of

i  and  killed  it.  The  priest  poured  out

the  blood  about  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings  ;  burnt
Ur°n L^‘e  ~^re  ^ie  a^taT  ^le  fat  which  covers
the  kidneys,  the  liver,  and  bowels ;  and  if  it
t“?Te,  a  Ltnih,  or  a  ram,  he  added  to  it  the  rump
'>>  the  animal,  which  in  that  country  is  always
’  fry  fat.  Before  these  things  were  set  in  order
upon  the  fire  of  the  altar,  the  priest  put  them  into
the  hands  of  the  person  that  provided  the  victim,
then  made  them  lift  them  up  on  high,  and  wave
them  towards  the  four  quarters  of  the  world,


the  priest  supporting  and  directing  his  hands
The  breast  and  the  right  shoulder  belonged  to  the
priest  that  performed  the  service  ;  all  the  rest  of
the  sacrifice  belonged  to  him  that  presented  it  to
the  priest,  and  he  might  eat  it  with  his  family  and
_  friends,  as  any  other  meat.

1  hose  sacrifices,  in  which  they  set  ai  liberty  a
bird,  or  goat,  were  not  property  sacrifices  ;  be¬
cause  there  was  no  shedding  of  blooo,  and  the  vic¬
tim  remained  alive  and  sound.  It  was  thus  they
set  at  liberty  the  sparrow  that  was  offered  for  the
purification  of  a  leper,  or  of  a  house  spotted  with
leprosy.  They  presented  to  the  priest  a  couple  of
sparrows,  or  two  clean  birds,  with  a  bundle  made
up  of  cedar-wood  and  hyssop,  and  tied  with  a
scarlet  string:  'The  priest  killed  one  of  the  birds
over  running  water,  which  was  in  a  clean  vessel
of  fresh  ea,th  ;  often  aids,  tying  the  living  spar¬
row  to  the  bundle  of  cedar  and  hyssop,  with  the
tail  turned  towards  the  handle  of  the  vessel,  he
plunged  it  in  the  water  drenched  with  the  blood
of  the  first  sparrow,  sprinkled  the  leper  or  the
house  with  it,  then  set  the  living  sparrow  at
liberty,  and  let  it  go  where  it  pleased,  Lev.  14.  4,
5,  &c.

The  other  sort  of  animal  that  was  set  at  liberty
was  a  goat ;  and  this  is  the  occasion  upon  which
it  was  done  :  On  the  day  of  solemn  expiation,  the
multitude  of  the  children  of  Israel  presented  to
the  high-priest  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  two
goats  for  a  sin  offering.  The  high  priest  then  cast
lots  upon  the  two  goats  which  should  be  sacrificed
to  the  Lord,  and  which  should  be  set  at  liberty,  or
be  the  scape-goat,  the  Azazel,  as  the  Hebrews
call  it.  He  that  was  determined  by  lot  to  be  sa¬
crificed,  was  put  to  death,  and  offered  for  the  sins
of  the  people  :  He  that  was  to  be  set  at  liberty  was
brought  alive  before  the  Lord.  The  high  priest
said  over  him  certain  prayers,  laid  his  two  hands
upon  his  head,  confessed  the  sins  of  the  whole  con¬
gregation,  charged  therewith  the  head  of  the  goat
with  imprecations,  then  sent  him  into  the  wilder¬
ness  by  a  mail  appointed  for  that  office.  Lev.  16.
5,  &c.  The  scape  goat,  did  bear  upon  him  all
their  iniquities,  to  a  land  not  inhabited.  Both
the  birds  and  goats  typified  Christ ;  those  that
were  killed  prefigured  his  death,  and  those  that
were  saved  alive  his  resurrection.

Such  were  the  sacrifices  of  the  Hebrews :  Sacri¬
fices  very  imperfect,  and  altogether  incapable  of
themselves  to  purify  the  defilements  of  the  soul.
The  apostle  Paul  has  comprehended  the  sacrifices,
and  the  other  ceremonies  of  the  law,  under  the
character  of  weak  and  beggarly  elements,  Gal.

4.  9.  They  represented  grace  and  purity,  but  they
did  not  communicate  it.  They  convinced  the  sin¬
ner  of  the  necessity  that  was  incumbent  on  him,
to  purify  himself,  and  of  a  satisfaction  to  be  made
to  God ;  but  they  did  not  impart  grace  to  him.
But  all  these  Sacrifices  were  no  other  than  pro¬
phecies  and  figures  of  Christ  Jesus  the  true
Christian  sacrifice,  which  eminently  includes
all  the  virtues  and  qualities  of  the  other  sacri¬
fices  ;  being  at  the  same  time  an  Holocaust,  a
Sacrifice  for  Sin,  and  a  Sacrifice  of  thanksgiv¬
ing  ;  but  with  this  diff  erence,  that  it  contains  the
whole  substance  and  efficacy,  of  which  the  an¬
cient  sacrifices  were  only  the  shadow  and  repre¬
sentation.

Gen.  4.  3.  Cain  brought  an  o.  unto  the  Lord
4.  the  L.ord  had  respect  to  Abel  and  to  his  o.
Exod.  25.  2.  bring  me  an  o.  of  every  man,  take  my  o.
3.  this  is  the  o.  which  ye  shall  take,  35.  5.

30.  13.  an  halfshekel  shall  be  the  o.  of  the  Lord

15.  an  o.to  the  L.  to  make  atonement  for  your  souls

Lev.  1.  2.  ye  shall  bring  vour  o.  of  the  cattle
14.  o.  to  Lord  be  of  fowls  ||  2.  1.  o.  of  fine  flour

2.  11.  no  meat  o.  shall  be  made  with  leaven

3.  2.  he  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  head  of  his  o.  8.
7-  if  he  offer  a  lamb  for  hise.  Num.  6.  14.

12.  and  if  his  o.  be  a  goat,  4.  23,  28.

6.  20.  this  is  the  o.  of  Aaron  and  of  his  sons
7-  16.  if  his  o.  be  a  vow,  or  a  voluntary  o.

Num.  5.  15.  an  o.  of  jealousy,  an  o.  of  memorial

7.  10.  the  princes  offered  their  o.  before  the  altar
11.  they  shall  offer  their  e.^ach  prince  on  his  day

8.  11.  shall  offer  Levites  before  the  L.forano.  21.
9. 13.  the  o.  of  the  Lord  in  his  appointed  season

16.  15.  Moses  said,  respect  not  thou  their  o.

1  Sam.  2.  29.  wherefore  kick  ye  at  mine  o.  ?

3.  14.  shall  not  he  purged  with  sacrifice  nor  o.

26.  19.  hear  the  words  of  thy  sen  ant,  if  the  Lord
have  stirred  thee  up  ag.  me,  let  him  accept  ano.

1  Kings  18. 29-prophesied  till  o.  of  evening  sacrifice
1  Chron.  16.  29.  bring  an  o.  and  come,  Tsai.  96.  8.
Neh.  10.  39.  Israel  shall  bring  the  o.  of  the  corn
Isa.  43.  23. 1  have  not  caused  thee  to  serve  with  ano.
53.  10.  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  o.  for  sin
66.  20.  they  shall  bring  your  brethren  for  an  o.
Ezek.  20.  28.  they  presented  provocation  of  their  o.
Zeph.  3. 10. the  daughter  of  my  dispersed  bring  my  o.
Mai.  1.  10.  nor  will  1  accept  an  o.  at  your  hand

13.  thus  ye  brought  an  o.  should  I  accept  this?

2.  13.  that  he  regardeth  not  the  o.  any  more

3.  3.  offer  to  the  Lord  an  o.  in  righteousness
Horn.  15.  16.  thattheo.  up  of  Gentiles  be  acceptable
Eph.  5.  2.  an  o.  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  us
Heb.  10.  5.  sacrifice  and  o.  thou  wouldest  not,  8.

10.  through  the  o.  of  the  body  of  Jesus  once  for  all

14.  by  one  u.  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  sanctified
18.  where  remission  is,  there  is  no  more  u.  for  sin

See  Burnt,  Drink,  Free.

Heave  OFFERING.

Exod.  29.  27.  sanctify  the  shoulder  of  the  heave  o.
Lev.  7.  14.  out  of  the  whole  oblation  for  an  heave  o.
Num.  15.  19.  ye  shall  offer  up  an  heave  o.  20.

21.  of  the  first  dough  give  an  heave  o.  to  the  Lord
18.  24.  the  tithes  which  they  offer  as  an  heave  o.

28.  give  the  Lord’s  heave  o.  to  Aaron  the  priest

31.  29.  give  it  to  Eleazar  for  an  heave  o.  of  the  Lord
41.  the  tribute  which  was  the  I. ord’s  heave  o.

See  Made,  Make,  Fire,  Burnt  Offering.


Peace  OFFFRING.

Lev.  3. 1.  if  oblation  he  sacrifice  of  peace  o.  3, 6,  9.
Sin  OFFER  1  NG.

Exod.  29.  14.  the  flesh  of  bullock  shalt  thou  bum,
it  is  a  sin  o.  Lev.  4.  21,  24. 1  5.  9,  11,  *2.
30.  10.  the  blood  of  the  sin  o.  ot  atonements
l.ev.  4.  3.  let  him  bring  a  young  bullock  without
blemish  for  a  sin  o.  16.  3,  27.  Num.  8.  8.
25.  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  sin  o.  5.  9

29.  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the  sino.  33.
slay  the  sin  o.  in  the  place  of  the  burnt  offering

32.  if  he  bring  a  lamb  for  a  sin  o.  Num.  6.  14.

5.  6.  he  shall  bring  a  lamb  or  a  kid  of  goats  for  a

sin  o.  9.  3.  I  16.  5,  15,  27..I  23.  19.
8.  priest  shall  offer  that  which  is  for  the  sin  o.  first
11.  he  shall  bring  fine  flour  for  a  sin  o.

6.  25.  saying,  this  is  the  law  of  the  sin  o.  7-  37-

7.  7-  as  the  sin  o.  is,  so  is  trespass  offering,  14. 13.

9.  2.  take  thee  a  young  calf  for  a  sin  o.  and  a  ram

10.  16.  Moses  sought  the  goat  of  the  sin  o.

17.  why  have  ye  not  eaten  sin  o.  in  the  holy  place
12.6.  she  shall  bring  a  turtle-dove  for  a  sin  0.

16.  25.  fat  of  the  sin  0.  shall  be  burnt  on  the  altar
Num.  7.  16.  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  o.  22,  28.

115.  24.  |  28.  15.  I  29.  5.
2  Chr.  29. 24.  the  sin  o.  should  he  made  for  all  Israel
Ezra  8.  35.  offered  twelve  he-goats  for  a  sin  o.
Tsai.  40.  6.  and  sin  o.  hast  thou  not  required
Ezek.  43.  19.  give  the  priest  a  bullock  tor  a  sin  0.
22.  on  the  second  day  offer  a  kid  for  a  sin  0.

25.  prepare  every  day  a  goat  for  a  sin  0.

44.  27,  into  sanctuary,  he  shall  offer  his  sin  o.

29.  they  shall  eat  the  meat  offering  and  sin  o.

46.  20.  this  is  the  place  where  priest  shall  boil  sino.
Tiespass  OFFERING.

Lev.  5.  6.  he  shall  bring  his  trespass  o.  to  the  Lord
15.  shall  bring  lamb  without  blem.  for  trespass  o
Iff.  atonem.  with  ram  /.  0.  18.  I  6.  6.  I  19.  21,  22.

6.  5.  he  shall  give  it,  in  the  day  of  his  trespass  o.

7.  37.  law  of  ties.  0.  ||  14.  13.  ties.  0.  is  most  holy
14.  12.  he-lamb  for  ties.  o.  21,  24,25.  Num.  6. 12.

1  Sam.  6.3.  but  in  any  wise  return  him  a  trespass  o.

4.  they  said,  what  shall  he  the  trespass o.?  8.  17.
Ezek.  40.  39.  tw'o  tables  to  slay  the  ties.  o.  on,  42. 13.
44. 29.  eat  the  trespass  0.  and  e\  ery  dedicated  thing
46.20.  where  the  priests  shall  boil  the  trespass  0.
Wave  OFFERING.

Exod.  29.  24.  wave  them  for  a  wave  o.  26.  Lev.  7.  30.

I  8.  27  ,  29.  I  9.  21.  |  10.  15.  1 14.  12,  24.  I  23.  20.
Num.  6.  20.

27.  thou  shalt  sanctify  the  breast  of  the  wave  o.
Lev.  23.  15.  ye  brought  the  sheaf  of  the  wave  o
Wood  OFFERING.

Neh.  10.  34.  cast  lots  for  the  wood  o.  to  bring  it
13.  31.  and  for  the  wood  0.  at  the  times  appointed
OFFERING.

1  Sam.  7.  10.  as  Samuel  w'as  o.  the  burnt  offering

2  Sam.  6.  18.  David  made  an  end  of  0.  1  Chron.  16. 2.
2  A  mgs  10.  25.  as  soon  as  Jehu  had  made  an  end  of  o.
2  Chr.  8. 13.  0.  according  to  commandment  of  Moses

29.  29.  made  an  end  of  0.  the  king,  and  all  bowed

30.  22.  they  did  eat  seven  days,  0.  peace  offerings
35.  14.  the  sons  of  Aaron  were  busied  in  o.

Ezra  7.  16.  priests  0.  willingly  for  the  house  of  God
Jer.  11.  17.  to  provoke  me  to  anger  in  o.  to  Baal
Luke  23.  36.  coming  to  him  and  0.  him  vinegar
Heb.  10. 11.  every  priest  o.  often  the  same  sacrifices
OFFERINGS.

Lev.  1 . 10.  if  his  o.  be  of  the  flocks,  sheep,  or  goats
2. 13.  with  all  thy  o.  thou  shalt  offer  salt

1  Sam.  2.  29.  to  make  fat  with  chief  of  all  the  0.

2  Sam.  1.  21.  let  there  be  no  dew  nor  fields  of  0.

2  Chron.  31.  12.  the  people  brought  in  the  o.

35.  8.  people  gave  to  the  priests  for  passover,  0.  9.
13.  but  the  other  holy  o.  sod  they  in  pots
Neh.  10. 37.  should  bring  the  first-fruits  of  0. 12.  44.
Psal.  20.  3.  the  Lord  remember  all  thy  o.

Jer.  41.  5.  with  o.  and  incense  in  their  hands
Ezek.  20.  40.  there  will  l  require  your  o.

Hos.  8.  13.  they  sacrifice  flesh  for  mine  o.

Amos  5.  25.  have  ye  offered  me  0.  forty  years  ?
Mai.  3.4.  then  o.ofJudah  and  Jerusalem  he  pleasant

8.  wherein  have  we  robbed  thee  ?  in  tithes  and  0.
Luke  21.  4.  of  their  abundance  cast  in  unto  the  0.
ActsZA.  17. 1  came  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation  and  0.

See  Burnt,  Drink,  Free.

Made  by  Fire.

Heave  OFFERINGS.

Num.  18.  8.  given  the  charge  of  mine  heave  o.

Deut.  12.  6.  thither  ye  shall  bring  your  heave  o.

OFFERINGS  of  the  Lord.

1  Sam.  2. 17.  for  men  abhorred  the  0.  of  the  Lord
See  Meat.

Peace  OFFERINGS.

Exod.  20.  24.  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  peace  o.

24.  5.  sacrificed  peace  0.  of  oxen  to  the  Lord
29.  28.  it  is  an  heave  offering  of  the  peace  o.

32.6.  people  brought  peace  0.  and  sat  down  to  eat
Lev.  4.  10.  as  taken  from  the  bullock  of  peace  o.

26.  shall  burn  as  fat  of  peace  0.  31,  35.  |  6.  12.

7. 11.  this  is  the  law  of  sacrifice  of  peace  o.  13,  37*

9.  4.  also  a  bullock  and  a  ram  for  peace  0.  18.

10. 14.  are  given  out  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace  0.
17.5.  offer  them  for  peace  0.  to  the  Lord,  23. 19.

19.  5.  if  ye  offer  a  sacrifice  of  peace  0.  22.  21.

Num  .  6. 14.  a  lamb  for  peace  0.  ||  17 .  a  ram  for  p.  o.

7.  17-  for  sac  rifice  of  peace  o.  two  oxen,  five  lambs
of  the  first  year,  23,  29,  35,  41. 1  29.  3©
10. 10.  blov  over  the  sacrifice  of  your  peace  0.

Josh.  8.  31 .  J  Dshuti  sacrificed  peace  o.  to  the  Lord
22.  23.  if  tr  offer  peace  0.  let  the  Lord  require  it
Jvdg.  20.  26.  all  Israel  offered  peace  0.  21.  4.

1  Sam.  10.  8.  I  will  come  and  offer  peace  o.  11. 15.

2  Sam.  6.17-  David  offered  p.  0. 24.  25. 1  Chr.  21.26.

1  Kings  3.  15.  Solomon  offered  peace  0.  8.  63.

9-  25.  thrice  in  a  year  Solomon  offered  peace  0.

2  Chron.  31 . 2.  Hezekiah  appointed  priests  for  p.  0.

33.  16.  Manasseh  offered  peace  0.  on  the  altar
Prov.  7  ■  14.  she  said  to  him,  I  have. peace  0.  with  me
Ezek.  45.  15.  peace  0.  to  make  reconc  iliation,  17.

46.  2.  priest  prepare  peace  0.  ||  12.  prince  his  peace  o.
Amos  5.  22.  not  regard  peace  0.  of  your  fat  things

N  2  339


OFT


O  I  L


()  L  J)


Sin  OFFERINGS.

Neh.  10.  33.  sin  o.  to  make  an  atonement  for  Isiaei
Thank  OFFERINGS.

2  Chr.  29.  31.  come  near  and  briny  thank  o.  to  house
33.  16.  the  altar,  and  sacrificed  thereon  thank  o.
Have  OFFERINGS.

Nutn.  18.  11.  all  the  wave  o.  1  have  given  to  thee
Wine  OFFERINGS.

Hos.  9.  4.  not  offer  wine  o.  to  be  pleasing  to  God
OFFICE. .

Gen.  41  13.  me  he  restored  to  mine  o.  him  he  hanged
Exod.  1.  16.  when  ye  do  the  e.  of  a  midwife
Num.  3.  t  36.  under  the  o.  of  the  sons  jt  Merari

4.  16.  to  the  o.  of  Eleazar  the  son  ot  Aaron

1  Chron.  6.  32.  and  then  they  waited  >n  their  o.

9.  22.  whom  David  did  ordain  in  their  set  o.

26.  the  four  chief  porters  were  in  their  set  o.

2  Chron.  24.  11.  chest  was  brought  to  the  kind’s  o.
31.  18.  in  their  set  o.  they  sanctified  themselves

Neh.  13.  13.  their  o.  was  to  distribute  to  brethren
Psal  109.  8.  and  let  another  take  his  o.

Ezek.  44.  13.  shall  not  come  near  to  do  o.  of  priest
Uom.  11. 13. 1  am  apos.  of  Gentiles,  I  magnify  myo.
12.  4.  all  members  have  not  the  same  o.

I  Tim.  3.  1.  if  a  man  desire  the  o.  of  a  bishop

10.  let  them  use  the  o.  of  a  deacon,  13.

of  the  priesthood


the

19.


Tleb.  7.  5.  who  receive  the  o.  of  tli
Priest's  OFFICE.

Exod.  28.  1.  that  he  may  minister  to  me  in
priest's  o.  3,  4,  41.  129.  1,  44. 1  30.  30. 1  35.

|  40.  13,  15.  Lev.  7-  35.  1  16.  32.  Num.  3.  3.

29.  9.  the  priest's  o.  shall  be  theirs  for  a  statute
31. 10.  to  minister  in  the  priest's  o.  39-  41.

Num.  3.  4.  Ithamar  ministered  in  the  priest's  o.

18.  7.  thou  and  thy  sons  keep  your  priests'  o.
Ueut.  10.  6.  Eleazar  Ids  son  ministered  in  the  p.  s  o.

1  Chr.  6.  10.  Azariah  executed  priest's  o.  in  temple

2  Chr.  11.  14.  cast  them  off  from  executing  p.'s  o.
Luke  1.  8.  while  Zachai  ias  executed  the  priest's  o

OFFICES.

1  Sam.  2.  36.  put  me  into  one  of  the  priests’  o.

1  Chr.  24.  3.  Dav.  distributed  priests  according  to  o.

2  Chron.  7.  6.  and  the  priests  waited  on  their  v.
Neh.  13. 14.  wipe  not  out  my  good  deeds  for  o.

OFFICER.

Gen.  37.  36.  Potiphar  an  0.  of  Pharaoh,  39.  1..

Judi 7.9.28.  is  not  he  son  Jerubbaal,  and  Zebul  hiso.?
1  Kings  4.  +  2.  Azariah  son  of  Zadok,  the  chief  o.

5.  Zabud,  son  of  Nathan,  was  the  principal  o.


19.  Geber,  son  of  Uri,  was  the  only  0.  in  the  land


22.  9.  Ahab  called  an  o.  and  said,  hasten  hither
2  Kings  8.  6.  the  king  appointed  an  o.  to  restore
25.  19.  Nebuzaradan  took  an  0.  out  of  the  city
Mat.  5.  25.  the  judge  deliver  thee  to  the  0.  and  the
o.  cast  thee  into  prison,  Luke  12.  58
OFFICERS.

Gen.  40.  2.  Pharaoh  was  wroth  with  two  of  his  o.

7.  Joseph  asked  Pharaoh’s  0.  why  look  ye  sad  t
41.  34.  let  Pharaoh  appoint  0.  over  the  land
Exod.  5.  15.  the  o.  of  Israel  cried  to  Pharaoh
19.  the  o.  did  see  that  they  were  in  evil  case
Num.  11.  16.  gather  unto  me  the  0.  Dent.  31.  28.
Deut.  1.  15.  1  made  them  o.  among  your  tribes
16.  18.  judges  and  0.  shalt  thou  make  thee  in  gates
20.  5.  the  0.  shall  speak  to  the  people,  8.

1  Sam.  8.  15.  take  vineyards  and  give  to  his  o.

1  Kings  4.  5.  Azariah.  son  of  Nathan,  over  the  o.

7.  Solomon  had  tw’eive  0.  over  all  Israel
28.  brought  they  to  the  place  where  the  0.  were

5.  16.  besides  the  chief  of  Solomon’s  0.  9.  23.

2  Kings  11.  15.  Jehoiada  commanded  the  0.

18.  appointed  o.  over  the  house,  2  Chron.  23.  18.
24.  12.  Jehoiaclrin  went  out  with  his  0.

15.  the  0.  and  mighty  men  carried  he  away

1  Chron.  23.  4.  six  thousand  were  0.  and  judges
26. 29.  Chenaniah  and  his  sons  were  for  0.  and  judg

2  Chron.  8.  10.  Solomon's  0.  250  that  bare  rule

19.  11.  also  the  Levites  shall  be  o.  before  you
Esth.  9.  3.  the  <>.  of  the  king  helped  the  Jews
Isa.  60. 17.  I  will  make  thine  0.  peace,  and  exact
Jer.  29.  26.  should  be  0.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord
John  7.  32.  the  chief  priests  sent  0.  to  take  him

46.  the  0.  answered,  n^rrsr  man  spake  like  this  man
18.  3.  Judas  having  received  0.  cometh  with  lant.
12.  o.  took  Jesus J|  22.  one  of  the  0.  struck  Jesus
Acts  5.  22.  the  o.  found  them  not  in  the  prison
OFF-SCOURING.

Lam.  3.  45.  thou  hast  made  us  as  the  0.  and  refuse
1  Cor.  4.  13.  and  are  the  o.  of  all  things  to  this  day
OFFSPRING

Signifies.  That  which  is  sprung  of  or  produced  by
another ,  as  children ,  plants ,  and  fruits,  Job  31.

8.  Isa.  48.  19.

1  am  the  Root  and  Offspring  of  David,  Rev.  22.

16.  I  am  David’s  Lord,  and  yet  his  Son :  his
Root,  as  I  am  God,  and  gave  a  being  to  his
family,  and  to  all  the  families  of  the  earth;  and
yet,  as  to  my  human  nature,  1  am  his  Son,  a
Branch  out  of  the  root  of  Jesse.

Job  5.  25.  and  thy  0.  as  the  grass  of  the  earth
21.8.  their  o.  is  established  before  their  eyes
27.  14.  and  his  0.  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  bread
31.  8.  yea,  let  my  o.  be  rooted  out
Isa.  22.  24.  they  shall  hang  on  him  the  0.  and  issue
44.  3.  I  will  pour  my  blessing  upon  thine  o.

48.  19.  the  o.  of  thy  bowels  like  the  gravel  thereof
61.  9.  their  0.  shall  be  known  among  the  people
65.  23.  the  seed  of  the  blessed,  and  o.  with  them
dets  17.  28.  for  we  are  also  his  o.  29.

Rev.  22.  16.  1  am  the  Root  and  the  O.  of  David
OFF.

2  Kings  4.  8.  as  0.  as  he  passed  by,  he  turned  in
Job  21.  17.  how  0.  cometh  their  destruction  on  them  ?
Ps.  78.  40.  how  0.  did  provoke  him  in  wilderness  ?
Mat.  9.  14.  why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  o.  ?

17.  15.  my  son  is  sore  vexed,  for  o.  times  he  falleth
into  the  fire,  and  0.  into  the  water,  Mark  9.  22.

18.  21.  how  o.  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me  ?
Mark  7.  3.  the  Jews,  except  they  wash  0.  eat  not
Acts  Qf>.  11.  I  punished  them  0.  in  every  synagogue

Cor.  17.25.  this  do  ye  as  o.  as  ye  drink  it  in  remem.
Cor.  11.  23.  in  prisons  frequent,  in  deaths  0.

340


2  Tim.  1.16.  for  0.  refreshed  me,  not  ashamed  of  bonds
Ueb.  6.7.  the  earth  drinketh  up  rain  that  cometh  o.

OFTEN.

Prov.  29.  1.  he  that  being  o.  reproved,  hardeneth
Mai.  3.  16.  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  o.

Mat.  23.  37.  how  0.  would  l  have  gathered  thy
children  as  a  hen  gathereth,  Luke  13.  34.
Mark 5 .4.  had  beeno.  bound  with  fetters  and  chains
Luke  5.  33.  why  do  the  disciples  of  John  fast  o./

1  Cor.  11.  26.  for  as  o.  as  ye  eat  tins  bread  and  drink

2  Cor.  11.  26.  in  journey ings  0.  in  perils

27.  1  have  been  in  watchings  0.  in  fastings  0.

Phil.  3. 18.  many  walk,  of  whom  1  have  told  you  0.

1  Tim.  5.  23.  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  o.  infirmities
Heb.  9. 25.  nor  yet  that  he  should  offer  lumself  o.

26.  then  he  must  0.  have  suffered  since  toundat.
Rev.  11.  6.  to  smite  the  earth  as  o.  as  they  will
OFTENTIMES.

Job  33.29.  these  things  worketh  God  o.  with  man
Eccl.  j.  22.  for  o.  also  thine  own  heart  knoweth
Luke  8  29.  fora,  it  had  caught  him,  was  kept  bound
John  18. 2.  for  Jesus  o.  resorted  thither  with  discip.
Rom.  1.  1.3.  that  0.  1  purposed  to  come  to  you

2  Cor. 8. 22.  have  0.  proved  diligent  in  many  things
Heb  10.  li.  and  0.  offering  the  same  sacrifices

OFTEN  ER.

Acts  24. 26.  Felix  sent  for  him  0.  to  commune  with
OIL

Signifies,  [1]  The  juice  of  olives,  Spc.  Psal.  104.

15.  [2]  That  oil  confected  by  God  s  appoint¬

ment,  Exod.  30.  25.  to  anoint  the  priests,  their
garments,  and  holy  things  about  the  tabernacle,
which  signified  the  separation  of  those  things,  to
the  service  of  God ,  and  the  mwai d  Qualifica¬
tions  requisite  for  the  office  of  the  high  priest,
namely,  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
which  elsewhere  in  scripture  are  set  forth  by  oil,
Mat.  25.  4.  It  was  also  typical  of  those  gifts
with  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  beyond  mea
sure,  and  by  him  his  members  in  measure,  should
be  furnished.  ...  „  ,  ,

God  hath  anointed  thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness,
Psal.  45.  7.  God  hath  raised  and  advanced  thee
far  above  all  men  and  angels,  to  a  state  of  joy
and  endless  glory  at  his  right  hand:  Thus  anoint
ing  signifies  the  designation  or  inauguration  of  a
person  to  some  high  dignity  or  employment,  Ezek.

28.  14.  Or,  God  hath  endowed  thee  with  all  the
gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy  Sfirit  in  an  emi¬
nent  and  peculiar  manner,  to  the  comfort  and


refreshment  of


10,


25,  31,
1  28.  13.


thine  own,  and  all  thy  people's
hearts  ;  and  hath  solemnly  called  thee  to  be  the
Priest,  Prophet,  and  King  of  his  church.

Gen.  28. 18.  Jacob  poured  0.  on  the  top  of  it,  35. 14
Exod.  25.  6.  take  o.  for  the  light,  35.  14.  |  39.  37-

29.  2.  cakes  unleavened,  tempered  with  0.  40.

30.  25.  shalt  make  it  an  0.  of  holy  ointment
Lev.  2.  1.  and  he  shall  pour  0.  upon  it,  6.

4.  cakes  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  o.  5. 1  14.

21. 1  23.  13.  Num.  6.  15.  17,  13,  19,

37,  43,  49,  55,  61,  67,  73,  79. 1  8.  8.

1  29.  3,  9,  14.

15.  thy  meat  offering  put  o.  upon  it,  6.  21.

16.  the  priest  shall  burn  part  of  the  o.  thereof
5.  11.  he  shall  put  no  o.  on  it,  Num.  5.  15.

7- 10.  meat  offering  mingled  with  0.  9.  4.  I  14. 10.

12.  shall  offer  cakes  mingled  with  o.  Num.  6.  15.
14. 16.  the  priest  shall  dip  his  right  finger  in  the  0.

17.  rest  of  the  0.  that  is  in  his  hand,  18,  29-
Num.  4. 9.  all  the  0.  vessels  wherewith  they  minister

11.8.  the  taste  of  it  was  as  the  taste  of  fresh  0.

15.  4.  mingled  with  fourth  part  of  an  hin  of  0.

6.  mingled  with  the  third  part  of  an  hin  of  0.

28.  12.  o.  for  one  bullock,  and  0.  for  one  ram
Deut.  28.  40.  shalt  have  olive  trees,  but  shalt  not

anoint  thyself  with  0.  2  Earn.  14.  2.  Mic.  6. 15.
32. 13.  made  him  suck  o.  out  of  the  flinty  rock
33. 24.  let  Asher  be  acceptable,  and  dip  his  foot  in  0.
1  Sam.  10. 1.  Samuel  took  a  vial  of  0.  and  poured  it

16.  1.  fill  thy  horn  with  0.  and  go,  13.

1  Kings  1 . 39-  Zadok  the  priest  took  an  horn  of  0.

5. 11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  measures  ot  0

17.  12.  o.  in  a  cruse  ||  14.  nor  cruse  of  o.  fail,  16.

2  Kings  A.  2.  nothing  in  the  house  save  a  pot  of  o.
6.  the  o.  stayed  ||  7.  go  sell  they,  and  pay  thy  debt

9.  1.  take  this  box  of  0.  go  to  Ramoth  Gilead,  3.

6.  he  poured  the  0.  on  his  head  and  said  to  him
1  Chron  <27.  28.  over  the  cellars  of  0.  was  Joash
Ezra  3.  7.  gave  drink  and  o.  to  them  ot  Zidon
Esth.  2.  12.  six  months  with  0.  of  myrrh
Job  24.  11.  which  make  0.  within  their  walls

29.  6.  and  the  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of  o.
Psal.  23.  5.  thou  anointest  my  head  with  0.

55. 21.  words  were  softer  than  0.  yet  drawn  swords
104.  15.  and  o.  to  make  his  face  to  shine
109.  18.  let  it  come  like  o.  into  his  bones
141.  5.  it  shall  be  a  kindness,  an  excellent  0.

Prov.  5.  3.  her  mouth  is  smoother  than  g.

21.  20.  and  0.  in  the  dwelling  of  the  wise
Isa.  5.  +  1.  a  vineyard  in  the  horn  of  the  son  of  0.
61.  3.  to  give  to  them  the  0.  of  joy  for  mourning
Jer.  41.  8.  slay  us  not,  we  have  treasures  of  0.
Ezek.  16.  13.  thou  didst  eat  flour,  honey,  and  o.  19.

18.  hast  set  mine  0.  and  incense  before  them
27.  17.  Judah  traded  in  honey  and  0.  and  balm
32.  14.  1  will  cause  their  rivers  to  run  like  o.

45.  14.  concerning  the  ordinance  of  e.  bath  of  0.

24.  ephah  for  a  ram,  an  hin  of  0.  for  an  ephah
Hos.  2.  5.  my  lovers  that  give  me  my  bread  and  0.
12. 1.  with  Assyrians,  and  o.  is  carried  into  Egypt
Mic.  6.7.  will  L.  be  pleased  with  10,000  rivers  of  0.?
Zech.  4.  12.  empty  the  golden  o.  out  of  th°:.iselves
1 14.  the  two  sons  of  0.  stand  by  the  Lord
Mat.  25.  3.  the  foolish  took  no  o.  with  them
4.  the  wise  took  o.  ||  8.  give  us  of  your  o.

Luke  7.  46.  my  head  with  0.  thou  didst  not  anoint
16.  6.  he  said,  an  hundred  measures  of  o.

See  Anointed,  Anointing,  Beaten,  Log
Wine  with  OIL.

Num.  18.  12.  best  of  the  0.  and  w.  they  shall  offer
Deut.  7.  13.  the  Lord  wdll  bless  thy  w.  and  thy  0.
11.  14.  that  thou,  mayest  gather  thy  wine  and  0.


Deut.  12.17.  noteat  the  tithe  of  thy  wine  and  0. 14.2\
18.  4.  the  first-fruits  of  wine  and  0.  2  Chron.  .11.5,
28.  51.  who  shall  not  leave  thee  either  wine  <>r  e.

1  Chron.  9.  29.  some  to  oversee  the  wine  and  0.

12.  40.  they  that  w  ere  nigh  brought  wine  ando.

2  Chr.  2.  10.  give  serv.  20,000  baths  of  a>.  and  0.  15,

11.  11.  Rehoboam  put  in  strong  holds  0.  and  wine
32.28.  Hezekiah  made  store-houses  for  wine  and  0,

Ezra  6.9.  give  wine  and  o.  according  to  appointment

7.  22.  to  100  baths  of  wine,  and  luo  baths  of  0.
Neh.  5. 11.  restore  wine  and  0.  that  ye  exact  of  them
10.  37.  should  bring  the  first-fruits  of  wine  and  0.
39.  offering  of  the  corn,  new  wine  and  0.

13.  5.  laid  the  tithes  of  corn,  new  wine  and  0.  12.
Prov.  21.17.  that  loveth  wine  and  0.  shall  not  be  rich
Jer.  31.  12.  they  shall  flow  to  Lord  for  wine  and  0,

40.  10.  gather  ye  wine  and  summer-fruits  and  0.
Hag.  l.l  1.  I  called  for  adrought  on  new  wine  and  0,
2.  12.  touch  bread,  wine  or  o.  shall  it  be  holy  I
hike  10. 34.  bound  up  his  wounds,  pour.  ino.  and  w,
Rev.  6.  6.  see  thou  hurt  not  the  wine  and  the  0.

18.  13.  no  man  buyeth  their  wine  and  0.  any  more
O ILL  D .

Exod.  29.  23.  one  cake  of  0.  bread,  Lev.  8.  26.

0 1  L -olive.

Exod.  27.  20.  pure  o.-olive  beaten  for  the  light
30.  24.  take  thou  unto  thee  of  o.-olive  an  hin
Lev.  24.  2.  that  they  bring  unto  thee  pure  o.-olive
Deut.  8. 8.  land  of  o.-ol.  and  honey,  2  Kings  18.  32.
OIL -tree.

Isa.  41. 19. 1  will  plant  in  the  wilderness,  the  o.-tre  1
O  l  N  1M  EN  1 .

Exod.  30.  25.  make  oil  of  holy  0.  and  0.  compound
2  Kings  20.  13.  Hezekiah  shewed  them  the  house  0
his  precious  things  and  precious  0.  Isa.  39.  2.
1  Chron.  9.  30.  the  priest  made  the  o.  of  the  spices
Job  41.  31.  he  maketh  the  sea  to  boil  like  pot  or  0
Psal.  1.3.3.  2.  it.  is  like  the  precious  0.  on  the  head
Prov.  27.  9.  o.  and  perfume  rejoice  the  heart

16.  the  o.  of  his  right  hand  bewrayeth  itself
Eccl.  7.  1.  a  good  name  is  better  than  precious  0.

9. 8.  garments  be  white,  and  let  thy  head  lack  noo

10. 1.  dead  flies  cause  the  0.  of  apothecary  to  stinl
Cant.  1.3.  thy  name  is  as  0.  poured  forth, virgins  lovi
Isa.  1.  6.  nor  bound  up,  nor  mollified  with  <>.

57.  9.  thou  wentest  to  the  king  with  0.  and  increase!
Mat.  26.  7.  a  box  of  prec.  0.  Mark  14.  3.  Luke  7 •  3*

9.  this  0.  might  have  been  sold  for  much,  John  12.5

12.  in  that  she  hath  poured  out  this  o.  on  my  bod'

Mark  14.  4.  why  was  this  waste  of  the  0.  made!
Luke  7.  38.  and  anointed  his  feet  with  0.  46.

John  11.2.  Mary  anointed  the  Lord  with  0.

12.  3.  Mary  took  pound  of  o.  and  anointed  the  fee
of  Jesus,  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  c
OINTMENTS.

Cant.  1.  3.  because  of  the  savour  of  thy  good  0.

4. 10.  the  smell  of  thine  0.  is  better  than  all  spices
Amos  6.  6.  and  anoint  themselves  with  the  chief  0
Luke  23.  56.  they  returned,  prepared  spices  and  c
Rev.  18.  13.  no  man  buyeth  their  odours  and  0.

OKE,  See  Oak.

OLD.

Gen.  5. 32.  Noah  was  500  years  0.  and  hegat  Sheri
7.  6.  Noah  was  600  years  o.  when  the  flood  came

11. 10.  Shem  was  100  years  o.  and  begat  Arphaxai
12.  4.  Abr.  75  years  o.  when  departed  from  liar
15.  9.  take  a  heifer  and  a  ram  of  three  years  0.
16. 16.  and  Abram  was  fourscore  and  six  years  <

when  Hagar  bare  lshmael  to  Abrat
17. 12.  he  that  is  eight  days  0.  shall  be  circumcise

17.  a  child  born  to  him  that  is  an  hundred  years  1

24.  A  braham  99  years  0.  when  he  was  circumcise

25.  lshmael  thirteen  years  0.  when  circumcised

18.  11.  now  Abraham  and  Sarah  were  0.

12.  after  I  am  waxed  0.  my  Lord  being  0.  also

13.  Sar.  said,  shall  of  surety  bear  child,  who  am  0
19. 4.  men  of  city  compass,  the  house,  0.  and  your

31.  our  father  is  o.  ||  24.  1.  Abraham  was  0.

21.  4.  Abr.  circumcised  Isaac  when  eight  days  0

5.  Abraham  100  years  0.  when  Isaac  was  born
23.  1.  Sarah  w’as  127  years  0.  the  years  ot  her  lit

25.  20.  Isaac 40 years  0.  when  took  Rebek.  to  wi

26.  Isaac  was  60  years  0.  when  she  bare  them

26.  34.  Esau  40  years  0.  when  he  took  Judith

27. 1.  it  came  to  pass  when  Isaac  was  0. 2. 1  35.  *9
37.  2.  Joseph  being  17  years  0.  was  feeding  floe!
47.  8.  Pharoah  said  to  Jacob,  how  0.  art  thou .

49.  9.  couch,  as  an  0.  lion,  who  shall  rouse  him  u

50.  26.  Joseph  died,  being  110  year3  0.  .

Exod.  7.7.  Moses  was  eighty  yrs.  0.  and  Aar.  eight

three  years  o.  when  they  spake  to  Pharai

10.  9.  we  will  go  with  our  young  our  0.  with  so

30.  14.  every  one  that  are  numbered  from  twen
years  0.  and  above,  38.  26.  Num.  1-3*1

1  14.  29.  1  Chron.  23.  27  -  2  Chron.  Zb.S
31.  17.  Ezra  3.  8.  .  ,  ,  .  ...

Lev.  13. 11.  it  is  an  0.  leprosy  in  the.  skin  ot  his  tie

25.  22.  shall  eat  o.  fruit  H  26. 10.  shall  eat  0.  store

27.  3.  the  male  from  20  years  0.  even  to  60  yea.

5.  and  if  it  be  from  five  even  to  twenty  yeaisf

6.  if  it  be  from  a  month  o.  to  five  years  0.
Num.  3.15.  every  male  from  a  month  0.  and  upwa

shalt  tnou  number,  22,  28,  34,  39,  40,  ■
4.  3.  from  thirty  years  0.  to  fifty  trom  among  t
son  of  Levi,  23.  30.  1  Chron.  23.

8.  24.  the  Levites  from  25  years  o.  and  uPwaF

18.  16.  to  be  redeemed,  from  month  0.  shalt  reaei

26.  62.  numbered  23000  from  a  month  0.  arid  up v

33.  39.  Aaron  was  123  years  0.  when  he  died
Deut.  8.4.  thy  raiment  waxed  not  0.  29.  5.  Ken.  .

28.  50.  which  shall  not  regard  the  person  ot  the

31.  2.  Moses  said,  I  am  120  years  o.  tins  (lay

34.  7.  Moses  was  an  120  years  o.  when  he  aiea
Josh.  5.  11.  and  they  did  eat  of  the  0.  corn,  u-

6.  21.  utterly  destroy,  men  and  worn,  young  an

9.  4.  they  tooke.  sacks  H  5.  0.  shoes  on  their  feet,

13. 1.  Joshua  was  0.  and  stricken  in  years,  -  •!

14.  7.  forty  years  0.  was  I,  when  Moses  sen-  m

10.  and  now,  lo.  1  am  this  day  eighty-fiveyear-

24.  29.  Joshua  died,  being  110  years  o.  Judg.  —
Ruth  1.  12.  for  1  am  too  o.  to  have  a  husband
1  Sam.  2.  22.  now  Eli  was  very  0.  and  heaia  as


OLD


O  L  I


ONE


1 1  Sam.  4. 15.  Eli  was  ninety  and  eight  yrs.  o.  his  eyes
8  1.  when  Samuel  was  o.  I>e  made,  5.  |  12. 2.

;  Sam.  2.  10.  Saul's  son  was  forty  years  o.  when

4.  4.  Mephibosheth  was  lame,  and  five  years  o.

5.  4.  David  thirty  years  o.  when  he  began  to  reign

19.  32.  now  Barziflai  was  eighty  years  o.  35.

c.  Kings  1.  1.  king  David  was  o.  15.  1  Ch iron.  23.  1.
11.  4.  when  Sol.  was  o.  his  wives  turned  his  heart
13.  11.  there  dwelt  an  o.  prophet  in  Beth-el
i!  Kings  4.  14.  she  hath  no  child,  and  her  husb.  is  o.
Chroyi.  2.21.  Hezron  married  when  sixty  years  o.
•  C/ir.  31. 16.  males  from  three  years  u.  and  upward
Esth. 3. 13.  sent  to  destroy  all  the  Jews,  young  and  o.
fob  21.  7*.  why  do  the  w  icked  live,  become  o.  ?

32.  6.  Llihu  said,  1  am  young,  and  ye  are  very  o.
Psal.  32.  3.  my  bones  waxed  o.  through  my  roaring

37.  25.  I  have  been  young,  and  now  am  o.

71.  18.  now  when  l  am  o.  O  God,  forsake  me  not
f'rov.  22.  6.  when  o.  he  will  not  depart  from  it
23.  10.  remove  noto.  land-mark,  enter  not  fields
22.  and  despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  o.
Eccl.  4.  13.  better  is  a  wise  child  than  an  o.  king
'.ant.  7. 13.  all  manner  of  pleasant  fruits  new  and  o.
Isa.  15.  5.  an  heifer  of  three  years  o.  Jer.  48.  34.

20.  4.  captives,  young  and  o.  naked  and  barefoot
50.  9.  they  shall  wax  o.  as  garment,  moth  eat  them
58.  12.  they  shall  build  the  o.  waste  places,  61.  4.
65.  20.  for  the  child  shall  die  100  years  o.  but  the

sinner  being  100  years  o.  shall  be  accursed
hr.  6.  16.  Lord  said,  see  and  ask  for  the  o.  paths

38.  11.  Ebedmol.  took  thence  o.  clouts,  o.  rags,  12.
51. 22.  with  thee  I  will  break  in  pieces  young  and  o.
Lam.  2. 21.  the  young  and  ?.  lie  on  the  ground

з.  4.  my  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  made  o.

Eztk. 9. 6.  slay  utterly  c.  and  ycung,  maids  and  ehil.
£3.  43.  then  I  said  to  her  that  was  o.  in  adulteries

25. 15.  vengeance  to  destroy  it  for  the  o.  hatred

36.  11.  I  will  settle  you  after  your  o.  estates
Dan.  5. 31.  Darius  took  kingdom,  being  62  years  o.
Mic.6.6.  shall  I  come  before  nim  with  calves  of  yr.  o.
flat.  2.  16,  Herod  slew  the  children  from  two  yrs.  o.
9.  16.  no  man  putteih  new  cloth  to  on  o.  garment

17-  neither  do  men  put  new  wine  into  0.  bottles,
I/lari  2.  21,22.  Luke  5.  36,  37.
13.  .52.  bringeth  forth  of  treasure  things  new  and  o.
Luke  2._ 42.  Jesus  twelve  years  o.  went  to  Jerusalem
5.  39.  for  he  saith,  the  9.  wine  is  better
9.8.  it  was  said,  that  one  of  the  0.  prophets  is  risen
rohn  3.  4.  how  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is  0.  ?

8.  57.  thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  o.  hast  seen  Abr.  ?

21. 1 8.  when  thou  shalt  be  o.  another  shall  lead  thee
jc/t  4.  22.  the  man  was  above  forty  years  o.

7. 23.  when  Moses  was  full  forty  years  o.

21.16.  brought  Mnason  of  Cyprus,  an  o.  disciple
lorn.  4.  19.  Abraham  when  about  100  years 0.

Cor.  5.  7 •  purge  out  therefore  the  0.  leaven
8.  lei  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  0.  leaven
Ccr.  3.  14.  in  the  reading  of  the  O.  Testament
5  17.  s.  thiugsare  past  away,  all  things  are  new
Tim.  4.  7.  refuse  profane  and  0.  wives’  fables
5.  9.  widow  not  be  taken  under  sixty  years  o.
ieb.  8.  13.  a  new  covenant,  he  hath  made  the  first  0.
what  decayeth  and  wax.  0.  is  ready  to  vanish  away
Pet.  1.  9.  that  he  was  purged  from  his  o.  sins
2. 5.  if  God  spared  not  the  o.  world,  but  saved  Noe
John  2.  7.  0.  commandm.  is  word  from  beginning
lev.  12. 9.  that  o.  serpent,  called  the  devil  and  Satan
20.  2.  lie  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  that  o.  serpent
^  OLD  Age.

ren.  15.  15.  thou  shalt  be  buried  in  a  good  o.  age
21. 2.  Sarah  bare  Abraham  a  son  of  Ins  0.  age,  7.

75.  8.  Abraham  died  in  a  good  0.  age,  an  old  man

37.  3.  Joseph  was  the  son  of  his  o.  age,  44.  20.
r-dg.  8.  32.  and  Gideon  died  in  a  good  o.  age
luth  4.  15.  he  shall  be  a  nourisher  in  thine  0.  age
kings  15.  2.3.  Asa  in  o.  age  was  diseased  in  his  feet
Chr.  29. 28.  Dav.died  in  good  0.  age,  full  of  days
ob  30.  2.  in  whom  0.  age  was  perished

3sal.  71.  9.  cast  me  not  off  in  the  time  of  o,  age

32. 14.  they  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in  o.  age
S'i.  46.  4.  and  even  to  your  0.  age  I  am  he
jitke  1. 36.  Elizabeth  conceived  a  son  in  her  0.  age
Days  of  OLD  ;  see  Of  OLD.

OLD  Gate,  see  Gate.

,  OLD  Man.

ren.  25.  8.  Abraham  died  an  0.  man  full  of  years

13.  27.  theo.  OTouiofwhoin  ye  spake,  is  he  alive?

14.  20.  and  we  said,  we  have  a  father,  an  0.  man

- ev .  19.  32.  thou  shalt  honour  the  face  of  the  o.  man
nag.  19.  16.  there  came  an  o.  man  from  his  work
17.  the  0.  man  said,  20.  ||  22.  spake  to  the  0.  man
Sam.  2.  31.  shall  not  be  an  o.  m.  in  thy  house,  32.

4. 18.  Eli  was  an  0.  m.  ||  17. 12.  Jesse  was  ano.  rn.
'8.  14.  an  0.  man  cometh  up,  and  is  covered
Citron.  36.  17.  and  had  no  compassion  on  0.  man
Sa- :  65.  20.  nor  o.  man  that  hath  not  filled  his  days
>e  l'  18.  1  am  an  0.  man,  my  wife  strick.  in  years
\om,  6.  6.  our  0.  man  is  crucified  with  him

\ph.  4.  22.  put  off  the  0.  man  which  is  corrupt
■ol.  3.  9.  ye  have  put  off  the  0.  man  with  his  deeds
OLD  men.

Ktngs  12.6.  Rehoboam  consulted  with  the  o.  men
a.  forsook  counsel  of  0.  m.  13.  2  Chr.  10.  6,  8,  13.
fat.  148. 12.  0.  men  and  child "en,  praise  the  Lord
9c>Vat\  7.,®'  children’s  children  the  crown  of  0.  men
2J.  29.  the  beauty  of  o.  men  is  'he  grey  head
er\  ,  •  13-  rejoice  in  the  dance,  young  men  and  o.

^ear  *his  ye  0.  men,  and  give  ear  all  ye
jf.  28.  o.  men  shall  dream  dreams.  Acts  2.  17.

■ecn.  8.  4.  0.  men  and  women  dwell  in  the  streets
'  .  Of  OLD.

•en.  6.  4.  which  were  of  0.  men  of  renown
•iam.  27.  8.  those  nations  were  of  0.  the  inhabitants
IhVa'  4"  ^3  ‘  they  of  Ham  had  d  welt  there  0/  o.

■  '  1^'  °f  °'  there  were  chief  of  the  singers

i  1  nc'  2nowest  th°u  not  this  of  o.  since  man
•  ■‘■*>•  6.  thy  tender  mercies  have  been  ev  er  of  0.
vs  work  thou  didst  in  the  times  of  o.

w.  19.  afflict  them,  even  he  that  abideth  of  o.

o  ,Tn  heavens  of  heavens  which  were  of  o.

10  e  *  congregation  which  hast  purchased  of  0.

и.  tor  God  is  my  king  of  0.  working  salvation


Ps.  77. 5. 1  have  considered  the  days  of  0.  the  years
11.  surely  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  0.

78.  2.  I  will  utter  dark  sayings  of  o.

93.  2.  thy  throne  is  established  of  0.  from  everlast.
102.  25.  of  o.  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth
119-  52.  1  remembered  thy  judgments  ofo.  O  Ld.
152.  thy  testimonies  1  have  known  ofo.

143.  5.  I  remember  the  days  ofo.  Isa.  63.  11.
Prov.  8.  22.  Lord  possessed  me  before  his  works  ofo.
Isa.  25.  1.  thy  counsels  ofo.  are  faithfuln.  and  truth

30.  33.  for  fophet  is  ordained  of  o.  he  hath  made
4.3.  18.  neither  consider  the  things  ofo.

46.  9.  remember  the  former  things  ofo.  I  am  God
51.  9.  awake,  awake,  as  in  the  generations  of  o.
57.  11.  have  not  I  held  my  peace  even  ofo.  ?

63.  9.  and  carried  them  all  the  days  of  0.

Jer.  28. .8.  the  prophets  before  me  and  thee  of  o.

31.  3.  the  Lord  hath  appeared  of  0.  to  me
46.26.  afterwards  shall  be  inhabited  as  in  days  0/0.

Lam.  1.  7.  pleasant  things  she  had  in  the  days  ofo.

2.  17.  word  that  he  commanded  in  days  ofo.

3.  6.  set  me  in  dark  places,  as  they  that  be  dead  of  0.
5.  21.  turn  us,  O  Lord,  renew  our  days  as  ofo.

Ezek.  26.  20.  shall  bring  thee  down  with  people  of  o.
35.  t  5.  because  thou  hast  had  hatred  of  0.

Amos  9.  11.  I  will  build  it  as  in  thedayse/  0.

Mic.  5.  2.  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  0.
7.  14.  let  them  feed  in  Bashan,  as  in  the  days  ofo.
20.  hast  sworn  to  our  fathers  from  the  days  of  0.
Nah.  2.  8-  Nineveh  is  of  o.  like  a  pool  of  water
Mai.  3. 4.  be  pleasant  to  the  Lord,  as  in  the  days  of  o.
2  Pet.  3.  5.  by  word  of  God  the  heavens  were  of  o.
Jude  4.  who  were  of  0.  ordained  to  condemnation
OLD  time.

Deut. 2.  20.  giants  d  welt  there  in  0.  t.  Zamzummims

19. 14.  they  of  o.  time  set  in  thy  inheritance
Josh.  24. 2.  your  fathers  dwelt  on  other  side  in  0.  t.
2  Sam.  20. 18.  they  were  wont  to  speak  in  0.  time
Ezra  4. 15.  they  have  moved  sedition  of  0.  time
Eccl.  1.  10.  it  hath  been  already  of  0.  time
Jer.  2.  20.  for  of  0.  time  I  have  broken  thy  voke
Ezek.  26.  20.  bring  thee  down  with  people  of  0.  time

38.  17.  he  of  whom  l  have  spoken  in  0.  time
Mat.  5.  21.  it  was  said  by  them  of  0.  time,  27,  33.
Acts  15.  21.  Moses  of  0.  time  hath  in  every  city

1  Pet.  3.  5.  in  0.  time  holy  women  also  adorned

‘l  Pet.  1. 21.  the  prophecy  came  not  in  o.time  by  man
See  Wax.

OLD  Way.

Job  22. 15.  the  0.  w.  which  wicked  men  have  trodden
OLDNESS.

Rom.  7. 6.  that  we  should  not  serve  in  0.  of  the  letter
OLIVE

Is  a  tree  full  of  fatness,  which  yields  plenty  of  oil.
The  church  of  the  Jews  is  compared  to  an
olive-tree,  Jer.  11.  16.  When  Cod  brought
them  into  Canaan,  he  fixed  them  in  a  flourishing
and  prosperous  state  and  condition,  so  that  they
were  in  a  capacity  both  to  have  done  much  good
to  themselves,  and  to  have  brought  him  much  glory ,
like  a  beautiful  green  olive-tree,  fit  to  bear  fair
and  goodly  fruit.

There  are  two  kinds  of  olive  trees,  the  wild  and
natural,  and  those  that  require  care  and  culture.
The  cultivated  olive-tree  is  of  a  moderate  height,
its  trunk  is  knotty,  its  bark  smooth,  and  of  an
ash-colour ,  its  wood  is  solid  and  yellowish,  the
leaves  are  oblong,  and  almost  like  those  of  the
willow,  of  a  green  colour,  dark  on  the  upper  side,
and  white  on  the  under  side.  In  the  month  of  J  une
it  puts  out  white  flowers  that  grow  in  bunches  :
Each  flower  is  of  one  piece,  widening  upwards,
and  dividing  into  four  parts.  After  the  flower
succeeds  the  fruit,  which  is  also  oblong  and  plump  :
It  is  first  green,  then  pale,  and  lastly  black,
when  it  is  quite  ripe :  In  the  flesh  of  it  is  inclosed
a  hard  stone,  full  of  an  oblong  seed.  The  wild
olive  differs  from  this,  in  that  it  is  smaller  in
all  its  parts.

Gen.  8.  11.  and  lo,  in  her  mouth  was  an  0.  leaf
Dent.  28.  40.  for  thine  0.  shall  cast  her  fruit
Neh.  8.  15.  go  to  the  mount,  anil  fetch  0.  branches
Job  15.  .33.  he  shall  cast  off  his  flower  as  the  0.

Ps.  128.3. thy  children  like  0.  plants  round  thy  table
Hab.  3.  17.  although  the  labour  of  the  0.  shall  fail
Zech.  4.  12.  I  said,  what  be  these  two  0.  branches  ?
Jam.  3.12.  can  fig-tree, my  brethren,  bear  0.  berries  ?
See  Oil.

OLIVES.

Judg.  15. 5.  the  foxes  burnt  up  the  vineyards  and  0.
Mic.  6. 15.shalt  tread  the  0.  but  shalt  not  anoint  thee
See  Mount.

OLIVET.

2  Sam.  15.  30.  David  went  up  by  ascent  to  mount  O.
Acts  1.  12.  they  returned  from  the  mount  called  U.

O  \AYL-tree.

Dent.  24.  20.  when  thou  beatest  thine  o.-tree
Judg.  9.  8.  they  said  to  the  o.-tree,  reign  over  us
9-  the  o.-tree  said,  should  1  leave  my  fatness  ?

1  Kings  6.  23.  he  made  two  cherubims  of  o.-tree
31.  two  doors  wereof o.-tree,  32.  ||  33.  posts  ofo. -tree
Psal.  52.  8.  like  a  green  o.-tree  in  the  nouse  of  God
Isa.  17.  6.  as  the  shaking  of  an  o.-tree,  24.  13.

Jer.  11.  16.  the  Lord  called  thy  name  a  green  o.-tree
Hos.  14.  6.  his  beauty  shall  be  as  the  o.-tree
Hag.  2. 19.  as  yet  the  o.-tree  hath  not  brought  forth
Rom.  11. 17.  thou  partakest  of  the  fatness  of  o.-tree
24.  cut  out  of  the  o.-tree ,  graffed  in  a  good  o.-tree
OlAVL-trees.

Exod.  23.  +  11.  thus  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  0. -trees
Deut.  6.  11.  and  q. -trees,  which  thou  plantest  not
8.  +8.  a  land  of  vines  and  o.-trees,  of  oil,  and  honey
28.  40.thou  shalt  have  0.  trees,  but  shalt  not  anoint
1  Chron.  27.  28.  over  the  o.-trees  was  Baal-hanan
Amos  4.  9.  o.-trees  increased,  palmer-worm  de

voured

Zech.  4.  3.  two  o.-trees  by  it  on  the  right  and  left
Rev.  11.  4.  these  are  the  two  o.-trees  standing  before
Wild  OLIVE-TREE.

Rom.  11. 17.  thou  being  wild  o.-tree  wert  graffed  in
OLIVE-YARD.

Exod.  23.  11.  thus  shalt  thou  do  with  thy  o.-yard


.  OLIVE-YARDS.

Josh.  24.  13.  cities  ye  built  not,  of  vineyards  and
o.-y.  which  ye  planted  not,  do  ye  eat,  Neh.  9.  25.

1  Sam.  8.  14.  the  king  shall  take  your  0. -yards

2  Kings  5.  26.  a  time  to  receive  money  and  o. -yards
Neh.  5.  11.  restore,  I  pray,  to  them  their  o.-yards

OMITTED.

Mat.  23.  23.  have  0.  weightier  matters  of  the  law
OMNIPOTENT.

Rev.  19.  6.  Alleluia,  for  the  Lord  God  0.  reigneth
ONCE.

Gen.  18.  32.  he  said,  I  will  speak  yet  but  this  0.
Exvd.  10. 17.  forgive  my  sin  only  this  0.  entreat  L.
30.  10.  Aaron  shall  make  an  atonement  on  horns  of
altar  of  incense  0.  year,  Lev.  16.  34.  Heb.  9.7, 12.
Num.  13.  30.  let  us  go  up  at  0.  and  possess  it
Deut.  7.  22.  thou  mayest  not  consume  them  at  o.
Josh.  6.  3.  ye  shall  go  round  the  city  0. 11, 14.

Judy.  6.39. 1  will  speak  but  this  0.  prove  but  this  0.
16.  18.  come  up  0.  ||  28.  strengthen  me  this  0.

1  Sam.  26.  8.  let  me  smite  him  to  the  earth  at  0.

1  Kings  10.  22.  0.  in  three  years  came  the  navy  of

Tarshish,  bringing  gold  and  silver,  2  Chr.  9.  21.

2  Kings  6.  10.  he  saved  himself  not  0.  or  twice
Neh.  5. 18.  0.  in  ten  days  ail  store  of  wine  was  prep.

13.  20.  lodged  without  Jerusalem  0.  or  twice
Jo&  33. 14.  G.  speaks  0.  yea  twice,  man  perceives  not
40.5.0.  have  I  spoken,  but  I  will  not  answer
Ps.  62.  11.  God  hath  spoken  0.  twice  I  have  heard
74.  6.  they  break  down  the  carved  work  at  0.

76.  7.  who  may  stand  in  sight  when  0.  art  angry  ?
89.  35.  0.  have  i  sworn  by  my  holiness,  I  will  not
Prov.  28.  18.  he  that  is  perverse  shall  fall  at  0.

Isa.  42,  14.  I  will  destroy  and  devour  at  0.

66. 8.  in  one  day.  or  shall  a  nation  be  born  at  0.  ?
Jer.  10.  18.  I  will  sling  out  the  inhabitants  ato.

13.  27.  wilt  thou  not  be  clean,  when  shall  it  0.  be  ?
16.  21.  behold,  1  will  this  0.  cause  them  to  know
Hag.  2.  6.  yet  0.  it  is  a  little  while,  and  I  will  shake
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  sea,  Heb.  12.  26.
Luke  13. 25.  when  0.  the  master  of  house  is  risen  up
23.  18.  they  cried  all  ato.  saying,  not  this  man
Rom.  6.  10.  in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto  sin  0.

7.9.  for  1  was  alive  without  the  law  0.  but  when

1  Cor.  15.  6.  was  seen  of  above  500  brethren  at  0.

2  Cor.  11.  25.  thrice  beaten  with  rods,  0.  was  I  stoned
Gal.  1.23.  nowpreacheth  the  faith  he  0.  destroyed
Eph.  5.  3.  but  fornication,  let  it  not  be  0.  named
Phil.  4.  16.  ye  sent  0.  and  again  to  mj'  necessity

1  T/tess.  2. 18.  would  have  come  to  you  0.  and  again
Heb.  6. 4.  those  who  were  c.  enlightened,  and  tasted

7. 27.  for  this  he  did  0.  when  he  offered  up  himself
9. 26.  but  now  0.  in  end  of  the  world  he  appeared

27.  as  it  is  appointed  to  men  0.  to  die,  after  this

28.  Chr.  was  0.  offered  to  bear  sins  of  many ,  10. 10
10.  2.  because  that  the  worshippers  0.  purged

12. 27.  yet  0.  more,  signifieth  the  removing  of  those
1  Pet.  3. 18.  for  Christhath  suffered  0.  foroursins

20.  0.  long-suffering  of  God  waited  indays  ofNoe
Jude  3.  contend  for  the  faith  0.  delivered  to  saints
5.  put  you  in  remembrance,  tho’  ye  0.  knew  this
ONE

Signifies,  [1]  One  only,  so  that  there  is  no  other  of
that  kind,  1  Tim.  2.  5.  Heb.  10. 14.  [2]  The  very
same,  Gen.  11.  1. 1  40.  5.  [3]  Very  few,  Deut.

32.  30.  Josh.  23.  10.  [4]  The  like,  1  Sam.  6.  4.
[5]  Some  body,  any  one,  2  Sam.  23.  15.

That  they  all  may  be  one,  John  17. 21.  May  be  one  in
mind,  love,  design,  and  interest ;  being  first  united
by  faith  to  me,  and  by  me  to  thee,  that  so  their
union  may  in  some  sort  resemble  that  inexpressible
union  between  thyself  and  me.

That  they  may  be  one  in  us,  [1]  By  the  communi¬
cation  and  inhabitation  of  the  Spirit  that  proceeds
from  us.  [2]  In  ways  of  holiness.  [3]  By  keeping
communion  with  us.  [4]  By  following  our  ex¬
ample.  [5]  Being  united  to  us  by  faith,  they  may
be  united  to  one  another  by  love.

In  one  day,  Rev.  18.  8.  that  is,  suddenly  and  unex¬
pectedly.

One  thing  is  needful,  I.uke  10.  42.  Attendance
upon  the  means  of  grace,  and  a  right  use  of  them,
is  absolutely  necessary  in  order  to  the  salvation  of
the  soul.  Mary  chose  to  take  the  advantage',  of
Christ's  company,  and  rather  to  spend  an  hour  or
two  in  hearing  him,  than  in  preparing  a  supper  for
him ;  she  was  taking  care  of  her  soul  with  refer¬
ence  to  eternity,  which  is  the  one  thing  needful,

Gen.  2. 24.  a  man  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they
shall  be  0.  flesh,  Mat.  19.  5.  Mark  10. 8. 1  Cor.  6. 16.
27.  38.  hast  thou  but  0.  blessing,  my  father?

34. 14.  not  give  our  sister  too.  that  is  uncircumcised
42.  13.  0.  is  not,  32.  ||  44. 28.  0.  went  out  from  me
Exod.  11.  1.  yet  will  bring  0.  plague  more  on  Phar.

12.  46.  in  0.  house  shall  it  be  eaten,  not  carry  forth
49.  0.  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  home-born  and


stranger,  Lev.  24.  22.  Num.  15. 16,  29.
23. 29.  I  will  not  drive  them  out  in  0.  year
26.  2.  every  curtain  shall  have  0.  measure,  36.  9, 15,
6.  and  it  shall  be  0.  tabernacle,  36.  13.

29. 23.  0.  loaf  of  bread,  0.  cake,  and  0.  wafer
Lev.  5.4.  he  shall  be  guilty  in  0.  of  these,  5, 13.

16.  29.  whether  0.  of  your  own  country,  17.  15.

26.  26.  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  0.  ovea
Num.  10.  4.  if  they  blow  but  with  0.  trumpet

16. 15.  I  have  not  taken  0.  as  from  them

17.  3.  0.  rod  shall  he  for  the  head  of  the  house

36.  8.  of  the  tribe  shall  be  wife  to  0.  of  the  family
Deut.  1.  23.  1  took  twelve  men,  0.  of  a  tribe
4.  42.  that  fleeing  tO0.  of  these  cities,  19.5, 11.

19.  15.  0.  witness  shall  not  rise  up  against  a  man
24.  5.  but  he  shall  be  free  at  home  0.  year
32.  30.  how  should  0.  chase  a  thousand  ?

Josh.  10. 42.  all  these  Joshua  took  at  0.  time
12.  9-  the  king  of  Jericho  0.  the  king  of  Aio.

10.  the  king  of  Jerusalem  0.  king  of  Hebron  0.
17. 14.  why  hast  given  me  but  0.  lot  and  0.  portion  ?
17.  a  great  people,  thou  shalt  not  have  0.  lot  only
Judg.  9.  2.  whether  is  better,  thato.  reign  over  you  ?
21.  8.  what  o.  is  there  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  ?

1  Sam.  6.  4.  for  0.  plague  was  on  you  all  and  lords
17.  for  Ashdod  0.  for  Gaza  0.  for  Ashkelon  0.

341


ONE


ONE


ONE


1  Sam  11.  7.  and  they  came  out  with  0.  consent
18  21.  this  day  my  son  in-law  in  0.  ot  the  twain
t  Sam.  7.  23.  what  o.  nation  is  like  thy  people.

8.  2.  and  with  0.  full  line  to  keep  alive  .

19.  7.  there  will  not  tarry  0.  with  thee  this  night

23.  8.  whom  he  slew  at  0.  time,  1  Car  on.  11. 11.

15.  6  that  o.  would  give  me  to  drink  ot  the  water
of  the  well  ot  Bethlehem,  1  Chron .  11.  17*

1  Kings  1.  48.  given  me  o.  to  sit  on  my  throne

2.  16!  1  ask  o.  petition  of  thee,  deny  me  not  _

6.  25.  the  cherubims  were  ot  o.  measure,  o.  size
8.  56.  there  hath  not  failed  o.  word  ot  his  promise

11.  13.  I  will  give  o.  tribe  to  thy  son.  3.,  36.

22.  13.  behold  now  words  ot  the  prophets  declare
good  to  the  king  with  o.  mouth,  2  Chron.  18.  12.

2  Kings  17  -27.  carry  thither  o.  ot  the  priests
28.  o.  of  the  priests  came  and  dwelt  in  Bethel

18.  24.  will  turn  away  face  of  o.  captain,  Isa.  36.  9.

1  Chron.  10. 13.  for  asking  counsel  ot  o.  that  had  tame

12.  14.  o.  of  the  least  was  over  an  hundred

2  Chron.  32.  12.  he  shall  worship  before  o.  altar
Keh.  1.  2.  Hanani,  o.  of  my  brethren,  came

11. 1.  bring  o.  of  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem
Job  9.  3.  he  cannot  answer  him  o.  of  a  thousand
f  33.  neither  is  there  o.  that  should  argue
21.  23.  o.  dieth  in  his  full  strength,  at  ease

23.  13.  he  is  in  o.  mind,  and  who  can  turn  him  r
33.  23.  if  an  interpreter  o.  among  a  thousand

Psal.  22.  t20.  deliver  my  only  o.  from  the  dog
35.  t  17.  rescue  my  only  o.  from  the  lions
49.  16.  be  not  afraid  when  o.  is  made  rich
72  +  15.  0.  shall  give  him  of  the  gold  of  Sheba
82.  7.  and  shall  fall  like  0.  of  the  princes
86.  t  2.  for  I  am  o.  whom  thou  tavourest
89.  19.  1  have  laid  help  on  0.  that  is  mighty
137.  3.  saying,  sing  uso.  of  the  songs  of  Zion
Prov.  1.  14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  all  have  u.  purse

26.  17.  is  like  0.  that  taketh  a  dog  by  the  ears
Peel.  1.  4.0.  generat.  passeth  away,  another  cometh

2. 14.  I  perceived  thato.  event  happen,  to  them  all

3.  19.  yea,  they  have  all  0.  breath,  all  is  vanity

20.  all  go  untoo.  place,  all  are  dust,  6.  6.

4.  9.  two  better  than  o.  ||  11.  how  can  0.  be  warm  .

12.  if  0.  prevail  against  him,  two  shall  withstand

7.  27.  counting  0.  by  0.  to  find  out  the  account
9’.  18.  but  0.  sinner  destroyeth  much  good
12.  11.  words,  which  are  given  from  0.  shepherd
Cant.  4.  9.  thou  hast  ravish,  my  heart,  my  sister,  my
spouse,  with  0.  of  thy  eyes,  with  0.  chain  of  thy  neck

6.  9.  my  undefiled  is  but  0.  she  is  the  only  0.

Jsa.  5. 10.  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  0.  bath
14  32.  what  shall  0.  answer  messengers  of  nation  ?

19.  18.  0.  shall  be  called  the  city  of  destruction
23.  15.  according  to  the  days  of  0.  king

27.  12.  ye  shall  be  gathered  0.  by  0.  O  Israel
30.  17.  0.  thousand  shall  flee  at  the  rebuke  of  0.

34.  16.  no  0.  of  these  shall  fail ,  none  want  her  mate
41.  25-  l  have  raised  up  0.  from  the  north

27.  I  will  give  Jerus.  0.  that  bringeth  good  tidings

44.  5.  0.  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord’s,  and  another

45.  24.  surely  shall  0.  say,  in  L.  have  I  righteous.
65.  8.  0.  saith,  destroy  it  not,  a  blessing  is  m  it

Ezek.  1.  16.  they  four  had  0.  likeness,  and  a  wheel
19.  3.  she  brought  up  0.  of  her  whelps,  it  became
21. 19  both  twain  shall  come  forth  out  of  0.  land
23.  13  then  I  saw  that  they  took  both  0.  way
33.  21.  that  0.  that  had  escaped  came  unto  me

24.  Abraham  was  0.  11  32.  as  a  lovely  song  of  0.

84.  23.  I  will  set  up  0.  shepherd  over  them,  37-  24.
37.  17.  and  they  shall  become  0.  in  thy  hand
19.  make  them  0.  stick  ||  22.  0.  nation,  0.  king
48.  31  0.  gate  of  Reuben  H  32.  0.  gate  of  Joseph
Van.  2.  9.  there  is  buto.  decree  for  you

4.  19.  then  Daniel  was  astonied  for  0.  hour

7.  13.  behold,  0.  like  the  Son  of  man,  10.  16,  18.

9.  27.  he  shall  confirm  the  covenant  for  0.  week
11.  7.  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall  0.  stand

10.  0.  shall  certainly  come  and  overflow,  and  pass
27.  they  shall  speak  lies  ate.  table,  not  prosper

Hos  1.  11.  Israel  shall  appoint  themselves  0.  head
Amos  4.  8.  two  or  three  cities  wandered  to  0.  city
6.  9-  if  there  remain  ten  men  in  0.  house
Zeph.  3.  9.  to  serve  the  Lord  with  0.  consent
Zech.  3.  9.  behold,  on  0.  stone  shall  be  seveh  ej’es

11.  8  I  will  cut  off  three  shepherds  in  0.  month
14.  9.  there  shall  be  0.  Lord,  and  his  name  0.

Mai.  «  15.  did  he  not  make  0.  ?  and  wherefore  0.  ?
Mat  3.  3.  the  voice  of  0.  crying  in  the  wilderness,
Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  23.

5.  18.  0.  jot,  or  0.  tittle  shall  not  pass  from  the  law
19.  whoso  shall  break  0.  of  these  least  commandm.
29!  that  0.  of  thy  members  should  perish,  30.

36.  thou  canst  not  make  0.  hair  white  or  black

6  27.  which  of  you  can  add  0.  cubit  to  his  stature  ?
29.  was  not  arrayed  like  0.  of  these,  Luke  12.  27.
10.  42.  shall  give  to  drink  to  0.  of  these  little  ones

12.  11.  what  man  among  you  shall  have  0.  sheep  '

16.  14.  Elias  and  Jeremias,  or  0.  of  the  prophets,

Mark  6.  15.  1  8.  28.  Luke  9.  8,  19.

17.  4.  three  tabernacles,  0.  for  thee,  0.  for  Moses,

and  0.  for  Elias,  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33.
18. 6.  shall  offend  0.of  these,  Mark  9. 42.  Luke  17 .2.
10.  take  heed  ye  despise  not  0.  of  these  little  ones
14.  that  0.  of  these  little  ones  should  perish

16.  if  not  hear,  then  take  with  thee  0.  or  two  more

19.  17.  none  good  but  0.  Mark  10.  18.  Luke  18.  19.

20.  12.  saying,  these  last  have  wrought  but  0.  hour

21.  35.  they  beat  0.  and  killed  another,  and  stoned

22.  5.  they  went  their  ways,  0.  to  his  farm,  another
£3.  4.  but  they  themselves  will  not  move  them

with  0.  of  their  fingers,  Luke  11.  46.

8.  for  o.  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  10.

9.  0.  is  your  Father  ||  25.  40.  as  ye  have  done  it  to  0.
26.  15.  he  gave  to  0.  five  talents,  to  another  two

18.  but  he  that  had  received  the  0.  24.

45.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  0.  of  the  least  ot  these
26.  21.  Jesus  said,  verily  1  say  to  you,  that  0.  of
you  shall  betray  me,  Mark  14.  18.  John  13.  21.
40.  could  ye  not  watch  0.  hour  ?  Mark  14.  37.
Marks.  14.  nor  had  they  more  than  0.  loaf
y.  37  whoever  shall  receive  0.  of  such  children
38  we  saw  0.  casting  out  devils,  Luke  9.  49.
34V


Mark  11.  29. 1  will  also  ask  or  you  0.  quest,  ans.  me
12.  6.  having  yet  0.  son,  he  sent  him  also  to  them
14. 19.  and  they  began  to  say,  0.  by  0.  is  it  l  .

15.  6.  at  the  feast  he  released  0.  Luke  23.  17.

Luke  3. 16.  John  said,  but  0.  mightier  than  1  cometh

7.  8.  1  say  to  0.  go,  and  he  goeth,  and  to  anothei
8.42.  he  hado.  only  daughter,  and  she  lay  advmg
12.  52.  there  shall  be  five  in  0.  house  divided
15.  7.  joy  in  heaven  overo.  sinnerthat  repenteth,10.

16!  17.  to  pass,  than  0.  tittle  of  the  law  to  lad

30.  nay,  but  if  0.  went  from  the  dead,  31.

17.  22.  to  see  0.  of  the  days  ot  the  Son  of  man
22.  36.  let  him  sell  his  garment,  and  buy  0.

John  1.  26.  but  there  standeth  0.  among  you
6. 70.  0.  of  you  is  a  devil  ||  7.  .21.  have  done  0. work

8.  9.  went  out  0.  by  0.  beginning  at  the  eldest
18.  I  am  0.  that  bear  witness  of  myself
41.  they  said,  we  have  0.  Father,  even  Cod

10. 16.  and  there  shall  be  0.  fold,  and  0.  shepherd
30.  1  and  my  Father  are  0.

11.  52.  should  gather  in  0.  the  children  ot  Cod

12.  48.  he  hath  0.  that  judgeth  him,  the  word

17.  11.  that  they  may  be  0.  as  we  are,  21,  22.

23.  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  0.

18.  17.  art  not  t'nou  0.  of  this  man  s  disciples  -5.
Acts  1.22.  muste.  be  ordained  to  be  witness  ot  resur.

4.  32.  believed,  were  of  o.  heart  and  of  o .  soul

9.  11.  go  and  enquire  for  0.  Saul  ot  larsus

13.  25.  there  cometh  0.  after  me,  whose  shoes
17.  7.  saying,  that  there  is  another  king,  0.  Jesus

26.  God  hath  made  of  0.  blood  all  nations

24.  21.  except  it  be  for  thiso.  voice,  of  resurrection

25.  19.  had  questions  of  0.  Jesus,  who  was  dead
28.  25.  after  that  Paul  had  spoken  0.  word

Pom.  5.7.  for  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will  0.  die

15.  for  if  through  the  offence  of  0.  many  be  dead

16.  and  not  as  it  was  by  0.  that  sinned,  tor  the

judgment  was  by  0.  to  condemnation

17.  death  reigned  by  0.  shall  reign  in  life  by  0.J .  C.

18.  by  the  offence  of  0.  so  by  righteousness  of  0.

19.  so  by  obedience  of  0.  shall  many  be  righteous
9.  10.  but  when  Kebekah  also  had  conceived  by  0.

1  Cor.  3.  4.  for  while  0.  saith,  1  am  Paul  ot
8.  now  he  that  planteth  and  that  watereth  are  0.

5. 1.  such  fornication,  that  0,ha\e  his  father  s  wife

8.  4.  and  that  there  is  none  other  God  but  0.

6.  to  us  there  is  but  0.  God,  and  0.  Lord  Jesus

9.  24.  all  run,  but  0.  receiveth  the  prize
10  17.  we  being  many  are  0.  bread  and  0.  body

11.  21.  0.  is  hungry  ||  14.  27-  let  0.  interpret

12.  8.  to  0.  is  given  by  Spirit  the  word  ot  wisdom
13.  by  0.  Spirit  we  are  baptized  into  0.  body

14.  24.  there  come  in  0.  that  believeth  not,  or  0. ^un¬

learned,  he  is  convinced  of  all,  judged  of  all
31.  for  ye  may  all  prophesy  0.  by  0.  that  all  may

15.  8.  was  seen  of  me  as  of  0.  bom  out  ot  due  time

2  Cor.  5.  14.  if  0.  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead
11.  2.  for  1  have  espoused  you  to  0.  husband

24.  five  times  received  1  forty  stripes  save  0.

13  11.  be  perfect,  be  of  good  comfort,  be  of  0.  mind,
Phil.  2  2.  I  Pet.  3. 8.  Rev.  17. 13.
Gal.  3. 16.  but  as  of  0.  ||  28.  ye  are  all  0.  in  Christ
5.  14.  for  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  0.  word
Eph.  1. 10.  he  might  gather  together  in  0.  ail  things
2.  14.  who  hath  made  both  0.  ||  15.  0.  new  man

18.  through  him  we  both  have  access  by  0.  Spirit
4.  4.  as  ye  are  called  in  0.  hope  ot  your  calling

5.  0.  faith,  0.  Lord.  0.  baptism  ||  6.  0.  God
Phil.  1.27.  that  stand  fast  with  0.  spirit,  with  o.mind
1  Tim.  3.  2.  the  husbaud  of  0.  wife,  Tit.  1.  6.

4.  a  bishop,  0.  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house
1  Tim.  3. 12.  the  deacons  be  the  husbands  of  0.  wife
Tit.  1. 12.  0.  of  themselves,  even  a  prophet,  said
lleb.  2.  6.  but  0.  in  a  certain  place  testifieth
11 .  and  they  that  are  sanctified  are  all  of  0.

5. 12.  ye  have  need  that  0.  teach  you  again

10. 12.  but  thisman  after  he  had  offered  0.  sacrifice
14.  for  by  0.  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever

11. 12.  therefore  sprang  there  even  of  0.  so  many
12. 16.  for  0.  morsel  of  meat  sold  his  birth  right
1.3!  14.  here  we  have  no  city,  but  we  seek  0.  to  come

Jam.  2. 10.  yet  offend  in  0.  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all
5  19.  if  any  of  you  err,  and  0.  convert  him
1  John  5.  7 .  these  three  are  0.  ||  8.  these  agree  in  0.

Rev.  9. 12.0.  woe  is  past,  there  come  tw  o  woes  more
13.  3. 1  saw  0.  of  his  heads  as  wounded  to  death
14!  14.  on  the  cloud  0.  sat  like  unto  the  Son  of  man

17. 12.  receive  power  as  kings  0.  hour  with  the  beast
18!  10.  for  in  0.  hour  is  thy  judgment  come

17.  in  0.  hour  so  great  riches  come  to  nought
19.  that  great  city,  for  in  0.  hour  is  she  made  desol.
21.21.  every  several  gate  was  of  0.  pearl
See  Accord,  Another,  Man,  God.

•  As  CIS  E.

Gen.  3. 22.  behold,  the  man  is  become  as  0.  of  us

19.  14.  but  he  seemed  as  0.  that  mocked  to  his  sons
49.  16.  Dan  shall  judge  as  0.  of  the  tribes  of  Israel
Exod.  12.  48.  be  circumcised,  and  he  shall  be  as  0.

that  is  born  in  the  land,  Lev.  19.  34.  1  24.  22.
Sum.  12.  12.  let  her  not  be  aso.  dead,  of  whom
Josh.  10.2.  Gibeon  a  great  city,  as  0.  of  royal  cities
ludg.  i7.ll.  young  man  was  to  him  as  0.  ot  his  sons

1  Sam.  17. 36.  uncircum.  Philistine  be  aso.  ot  them
26.  20.  as  when  0.  doth  hunt  a  partridge  m  mount.

2  Sam.  6.  20.  uncovered  as  o.  of  the  vain  fellow  s
~9.  11.  he  shall  eat  at  my  table  as  0.  of  king’s  sons

13.  13.  thou  shalt  be  0^0.  of  the  tools  in  Israel

14.  13.  the  king  speaketh  this  as  0.  that  is  faulty
17.  12.  there  shall  not  be  left  so  much  aso.

2  Kings  6.5.but  as  0.  was  felling  a  beam, axe  head  fell
2  Chron.  5.  13.  the  trumpeters  arid  singers  were  as  0.
Job  2. 10.  thou  speakest  as  0.  of  the  foolish  women
12.  4.  1  am  as  o.  mocked  of  his  neighbour
19. 11.  he  counteth  me  to  him  as  0.  of  his  enemies
Psal.  35. 14.  as  0.  that  mourneth  for  his  mother
78.  65.  then  the  Lord  awaked  as  0.  out  of  sleep

89. 10.  tliou  hast  broken  Rahab.  as  0.  that  is  slain
119.  162.  1  rejoice  as  0.  that  findeth  great  spoil
Prov.  6.  11 .  thy  poverty  as  0.  that  travajleth,  24.  3.
Eccl.  3.  19.  as  the  0.  dieth,  so  dieth  the  other
Cant.  1.7.  for  why  should  1  be  as  0.  turneth  aside .

8. 10.  then  I  was  in  his  eyes  as  0.  that  found  favour


Jsa.  10.  14.  as  c.  that  gathered)  eggs  that,  are  left
29.  4.  thv  voice  as  o.  that  hath  a  familiar  sp.m
66.  13.  as  c.  whom  his  mother  comfortetii
Jer.  19.  11.  I  will  break  as  0.  breakefh  potter’s  vesse
Zech.  12.  10.  mourn  as  0.  in  bitterness  for  first-born
Mat.  7.  29.  as  0.  having  authority,  Mark  1.  22.
Mark  6. 15.  or  as  0.  of  the  prophets  )|  9. 26.  as  0.  dead
Luke  15.  19.  make  me  as  0.  ot  thy  hired  servants

23.  14.  this  man  as  0.  that  perverteth  the  people
1  Cor.  7.  25.  aso.  that  hath  obtained  mercy  of  Lord
9  26.  so  fight  1 ,  not  as  0.  that  beateth  the  air
See  Day,  Heart,  Every.

Is  ORE.

Gen.  11.  6.  the  people  is  o.  ||  41. 25.  the  dream  is  0.26,
Exod.  2.  6.  this  is  0.  of  the  Hebrew  children
Deut.  6. 4.  the  Lord  our  God  is  0.  Lord,  Mark  12.29>
Ruth  2.  20.  Boaz  is  0.  of  our  next  kinsmen
Mat.  12.  6.  in  this  place  is  0.  greater  than  the  tempi*
Mark  14.  20.  it  is  0.  of  the  twelve  that  dippeth
Rom.  2.  28.  he  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  0.  outwardly
29.  but  he  is  a  Jew  who  is  0.  inwardly
3.  30.  seeing  it  is  0.  God  who  shall  justify
1  Cor.  6.  17.  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  ts  0.  spirit
12.  12.  for  as  body  is  0.  and  hath  many  members
15!  40.  but  the  glory  of  the  celestial  is  o.  and  glory
Gal.  3.  20.  is  not  a  mediator  of  one,  but  God  is  0
Col.  4.  9.  with  Onesimus,  who  is  0.  of  you,  12,

See  Little,  Man.

Not  OR  E.

Gen.  24.  41.  if  they  give  not  thee  0.  shall  be  clear
Exod.  8.  31.  there  remained  not  o.  10.  19.

9.  6.  but  of  the  cattle  of  Israel  died  not  0.  7.

12.  30.  not  a  house  where  there  was  not  0.  dead
Deut.  1.  35.  shall  n.  o.  of  these  men  see  that  good  land

2.  36.  there  was  net  0.  city  too  strong  for  us
I  2  Sam.  13.  30.  and  there  is  not  0.  of  them  left

17.  13.  till  there  he  not  0.  small  stone  found  there

1  Kings  16.  11.  he  left  him  n.  o.  that  pisseth  ag.  waff
Job  14.  4.  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean,  not  0.

31. 15.  and  did  not  0.  fashion  us  in  the  womb  ?

41.  9.  shall  n.  0.  be  cast  down  at  the  si°rht  of  him  ?
Psal.  14.  3.  are  altogether  become  filthy,  theie  is
none  that  doeth  good,  not  o.  53.  3.  Rem.  3.  12.
105.  37.  there  was  n.  0.  feeble  person  among  them
Jsa.  40. 26.  for  that  he  is  strong  in  power,  n.  o.  fadeth
Mat.  18.10.  take  heed  ye  desp.  n.  o.  ofthese  littltones
Rom.  3.  10.  there  is  none  righteous,  no  not  0.

1  C 'or.  6.  5.  no  not  0.  that  shall  be  able  to  judge
12. 14.  for  the  body  is  not  0.  member,  but  many
See  Mighty.

ORE,  in  reference  to  other.

Gen.  4. 19.  the  name  ot  0.  was  Adah,  of  otker  Zillak

13.  11.  they  separated  the  0.  from  the  othtr
47.  21.  from  the  0.  end  of  Egypt  to  the  other

Exod.  1.  15.  name  of  0.  Shiphrah,  of  the  oMcr  Puafc

14.  20.  so  that  the  0.  came  not  near  the  other

if.  12.  stayed  up  his  hands  cn  0.  side,  and  the  oth.

18. ’  3.  name  of  the  0.  Gershom,  of  the  other  Eliezer
Lev.  5.7.  two  pigeons,  0.  for  a  sin  offering,  the  other

for  a  burnt  offering,  12.  8.  Num.  6. 11. 1  8. 12

16.  8.  0.  lot  for  the  Lord,  other  for  the  scape-goat
Num.  11 . 26.  name  of  the  0.  EJdari,  the  other  MedaC

28.  4.  0.  lamb  in  the  morning,  the  other  at  even
Deut.  4.  32.  ask  from  0.  side  of  heaven  to  the  other

13.  7.  from  the  0.  end  of  the  earth  to  other ,  28.  64.
Judg.  16.  29.  took  hold  of  0.  pillar  and  ot  the  other
Ruth  ..  4.  name  of  the  0.  was  Orpah,  of  other  Ruth

1  Sam.  1.  2.  name  of  0.  Hannah,  the  otker  Pemnnah

2  Sam.  4.  2.  name  o c  0.  Baanah,  of  the  oth.  Recliab
12.  1.  there  were  two  men,  0.  rich,  the  other  poor

1  Kings  3.  23.  0.  saith,  this  is  my  sen,  the  0<A« 7  saitfc

25.  give  half  to  the  0.  and  half  to  the  other


ZxJ,  gl't  nan  w  . .  —  -- -

2o.  29.  they  pitched  o.  against  the  otner  seven  cays
J Seh.  4.  17.0.  hand  wrought,  with  oth.  heldweapor,
'  *  "  dieth,  so  dieth  the  other


Evil.  3.  19.  as  the  0.  . . -  - . -  -----

i  14.  God  hath  set  the  0.  over-against  the  ether
Jer.  12.  12.  for  the  sword  of  the  Lord  shall  devout
irom  0.  end  of  the  land  to  the  other  end.  25.  33.

24.  2.  0.  basket  had  good  figs,  other  basket  had  baC
Ezek.  21.  16.  go  the  0.  way  or  oth.  on  right  or  left
Dan.  8. 3.  but  0.  horn  was  higher  than  the  ether
U  6.  0.  on  this  side  of  river,  the  other  on  that  sin*
Zech.  11.7.  thee.  1  called  Beauty,  the  other  Bands
Mat.  6. 24.  he  will  hate  the  0.  and  love  the  other,  01
hold  to  the  0.  and  despise  the  other,  Luke  \b.  \3
20.  21.  my  two  sons  may  sit,  the  0.  on  thy  ngh
band,  and  the  other  on  thy  left,  Mark  10.  37

24.  31.  gather  from  0.  end  of  heaven  to  the  other
40.  0.  taken,  the  oth.  lett,  41.  Luke  17  -  34,  35,  36
Mark  15.27.  they  crucify  two  thieves,  the  0.011  hi
right  hand,  the  other  on  his  left,  Luke  23.  33
Luke  6.  29.  if  smite  thee  on  0.  cheek,  offer the  othe
7.  41.  the  0.  owed  500  pence,  the  other  fifty

17.  24.  lightningout  of  0.  part,  shineth  to  the  othe

18.  10.  thee.  a  Pharisee,  the  other  a  publican
John  20.  12.  0.  angel  at  the  head,  other  at  the  teet
Acts  15.  39.  that  they  departed  asunder  0.  from  oth

23.  6.  the  0.  part  Sadducees,  the  other  Pharisees

1  Cor.  7. 5.  defraud  ye  not  0.  the  other,  except  it  b

2  Cor.  2.  16.  to  0.  the  savour  of  life,  to  oth.  of  cleat
Ga/.  ’4.  22.  0.  by  bond  maid, other  by  a  free-woma

5.  i7 .  and  these  are  contrary,  the  0.  to  the  other
Rev.  17.  10.  and  0.  is,  the  other  is  not  yet  come
See  People.

There  is  OR  E.  .  J

I.ev.  7.7.  trespass  differing,  there  is  0.  law  for  ther
Judg.  21.  6.  there  is  0.  tribe  cut  off  from  Israel
Esth.  4. 11.  there  is  0.  law  of  his  to  put  him  to  deat
Eccl.  4.  8.  there  is  0.  alone,  and  there  is  not  a  secon
9.  2.  there  is  0.  event  to  righteous  and  the  wicked
3.  this  is  an  evil,  that  there  is  0.  event  to  all
Dan.  2.  9.  if ye  will  not,  there  iso.  decree  for  yoi
Nah.  1.  11.  th.  is  0.  come  out  of  thee  imagined)  evi
Mark  12.  32.  th.  is  0.  God,  1  Tim.  2.  5.  Jam.  2. 1
John  5.  45.  there  iso.  that  accuseth  you,  even  Mo

8.  50.  there  is  0.  that  seeketh  and  judgeth
1  Cor.  15.  39.  th.  is  0.  kind  of  flesh  ot  men,  anotn.

41.  there  iso.  glory  of  sun,  another  ot  moon
Jam.  4.  12.  there  is  0.  lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  s*'
ONE  c/  them.  .

Gen.  42. 27.  as  0.  of  them  opened  his  sack  in  the  im
Exod.  14. 28.  there  remained  not  so  much  a so.  oj  ‘


ONL


OPE


Vwn.  16.  15.  neither  have  T  hurto.  of  them
Deut.  25.  5.  it  o.  of  them  die,  and  have  no  child
'udg.  11.35.  thou  art  o.  oj  them  that  trouble  me
Ham.  17-  36.  this  Philistine  shall  be  aso.  of  them
!  Sam.  17.  22.  lacked  not  o.  of  th.  was  not  over  .lord.
20.  19.  I  am  0.  of  them  that  are  peaceable  in  Isr.

24. 12.  three  things  choose  0.  of  them,  1  Chr.  21.  10.
A'*»^18.40.  prophets  of  P.aal,  let  not  0.  of  t.  escape

19.2.  if  I  make  mot  thy  life  as  the  life  of  a.  of  them

22. 13.  let  thy  word  be  like  the  word  of  o.  of  them
u s .  34.  20.  keep,  his  bones,  not  0.  of  them  is  broken

53.3.  every  o.  of  th.  is  gone  back,  none  doth  good
58.  8.  as  a  snail  let  every  o.  of  them  pass  away
64. 6.  inward  thought  ot  every  0.  of  them  is  deep
84. 7-  every  0.  of  them  in  Zion  appeareth  before  G.
106. 11.  their  enemies,  there  was  note,  of  them  left
'3rov.  22. 26.  be  not  thou  0.  of  them  that  strike  hands
Zccl.  10. 15.  labour  of  foolish  wearieth  every  o.  of  th.
'er.  15.  10.  yet  every  o.  of  them  doth  curse  me
Ziek.  11.5.  for  I  know  the  things,  every  0.  of  them
lan.  8.  9.  out  of  o.  of  them  came  forth  a  little  horn
)bad.  11.  and  cast  lots,  even  thou  wast  as  o.  of  them,
'fat.  10.  29.  0.  of  them  sold  fora  farthing,  shall  not

fall  to  the  ground  without  your  l'atner,  Luke  12.6.
18.12.  have  sheep,  0.  oft.  be  gone  astray,  Luke  15.4.
26. 73.  surely  thou  art  0.  of  them,  Mark  14.  69,  70.
juke  17. 15.  o.  of  th.  when  he  saw  that  he  was  healed
ohn  6.  7.  that  every  o.  of  them  may  take  a  little

7.  50.  that  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  being  0.  of  them

12.  2.  Lazarus  was  0.  of  them  that  sat  at  the  table
lets  7.  24.  and  seeing  0.  of  them  suffer  wrong
11. 28.  and  there  stood  up  0.  of  them  named  Agab.
ONE  thing.

osh.  23.  14.  not  0.  thing  hath  failed  of  all  the  good
oh  9.  22.  this  is  o.  thing ,  therefore  I  said  it
'‘sal.  27.  4.  o.  thing  have  1  desired  of  the  Lord
Zccl.  3.  19.  even  o.  thing  befalleth  them
lat.2\.  24.  1  will  ask  you  o.  thing ,  Luke  6.  9. 1  20.3.
lark  10.  21.  o.  thing  thou  lackest,  Luke  18.  22.

,uke  10.  42.  thou  art  careful,  but  o.  thing  is  needful
ohn  9.  25.  0.  thing  1  know,  that  whereas  1  was  blind
lets  19.  32.  some  cried  o.  th.  some  another,  21.  34.
‘hil.  3.  13.  but  this  o.  th.  1  do,  I  p  'ess  toward  mark
Pet.  3.  8.  but  be  not  ignorant  of  this  0.  thing
Wicked  ON  E.

fat.  13. 19.  then  cometh  the  wicked  0.  and  catcheth

38.  the  tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked  o.
Joim2.  13.  because  ye  have  overcome  wicked 0. 14.

1.  12.  not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked  o.

5.  18.  and  that  wicked  o.  toucheth  him  not

ONES.

ia.  13.3. 1  have  commanded  my  sanctified  0. 1  have
also  called  my  mighty  o.  for  mine  anger
■an.  8.  8.  and  for  it  came  up  four  notable  0.

11. 17.  set  his  face  to  enter,  and  upright  0.  with  him
ONLY.

en.  6.5.  thoughts  of  his  heart  are  0.  evil  continually
'.  23.  Noah  o.  remained  alive,  and  those  in  the  ark
9.  8.  o.  to  these  men  do  nothing
!2.  2.  take  now  thy  son,  thine  0.  son  Isaac,  thou  lov.

12.  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  0.  son,  16.
!4.  8.  0.  bring  not  my  son  thither  again

7.  13.  0.  obey  my  voice,  and  go  fetch  me  them
(4.22.  0.  herein  will  the  men  consent  to  us,  23.

11.  40.  o.  in  the  throne  will  I  be  greater  than  thou
|7.  22.  o.  the  land  of  priests  bought  he  not,  26.
rod.  8.  9.  they  may  remain  in  the  river  0.  11.

28. 1  will  let  you  go,  0.  you  shall  not  go  far  away
10. 17-  now  forgive  my  sin,  1  pray  thee,  o.  this  once
that  he  may  take  away  from  me  this  death  0.

24.  0.  let  your  flocks  and  your  herds  be  stayed
2. 16.  ev.  man  must  eat,  that  0.  may  be  done  of  you
!1.  19.  o.  he  shall  pay  for  the  loss  of  his  time
!2.  20.  that  sacrificeth  to  any,  save  to  the  Lord  0.
27.  for  that  is  his  covering,  0.  it  is  his  raiment
•ev.  21.  23.  o.  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  vail
7.26.0.  the  firstling  of  the  beasts,  it  is  the  Lord’s
Jum.  1.  49.  0.  thou  shalt  not  number  tribe  of  Levi

2.  2.  hath  the  Lord  indeed  0.  spoken  by  Moses  ?

4.  9.  rebel  not  ye  against  the  Lord  0.

8.  3.  0.  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  vessels

!0.  19.  1  w  ill  0.  go  through  on  my  feet,  Deut.  2.  28.

12.  35.  0.  the  word  that  I  shall  speak  to  thee
U.  22.  0.  the  gold  and  the  silver,  the  brass

16.  6.  0.  marry  to  the  family  of  their  father’s  tribe
hut.  4.  9.  0.  take  heed  to  thyself,  keep  thy  soul
12.  ye  saw  no  similitude,  0.  ye  heard  a  voice

1.3.  know  that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  0.

0. 15.  0.  the  Lord  had  a  delight  in  thy  fathers

2.  16.  0.  ye  shall  not  eat  the  blood,  23.  |  15.  23.

!2.  25.  the  man  0.  that  lajr  with  her  shall  die

!8. 13.  thou  shalt  be  above  0.  not  he  beneath
29.  thou  shalt  be  0.  oppressed  and  spoiled,  33.

19.  14.  nor  w  ith  you  0.  do  I  make  this  covenant
nh.  1.7.  0.  be  thou  strong  and  very  courageous,  18.
17.0.  Lord  thy  God  be  with  thee  as  with  Moses
>•  15.  v.  that  day  compassed  the  city  seven  times
17. 0.  Rahab  shall  live  |1  11. 13.  burned  Hazor  0.

.7-  17.  thou  shalt  not  have  one  loto.

[idg.  3.  2.  they  might  0.  know  to  teach  them  war
>•  37.  if  dew  be  on  the  fleece  0.  and  dry  on  earth

39.  let  it  not  be  dry  0.  upon  the  fleece,  40.

0.  15.  deliver  us  0.  we  pray  thee,  this  day

11. 34.  came  to  meet  him,  and  she  was  his  0.  child
6  28.  strengthen  me,  I  pray  thee,  0.  this  once

9.  20.  the  man  said,  0.  lodge  not  in  the  street
Sam.  1. 13.  Han.  0.  moved  her  lips,  voice  not  heard
23.  0,  the  Ix>rd  establish  his  word

>•  4.  0.  the  stump  of  Dagon  was  left  to  him
•  3.  and  serve  him  0.  4.  Mat.  4.  10.  Luke  4.  8.

12.  24.  0.  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in  truth
fi.  17.  0.  be  thou  valiant  for  me,  and  fight  battles
•0.  14.  note,  while  1  live,  shew  me  kindness
39-  0.  Jonathan  and  David  knew  the  matter
Sam.  13.32.  Jonadabsaid,  0.  Amnon  is  dead,  33.

•7. 2.  the  people  flee,  and  I  will  smite  the  king  0.

6- 21. deliver  him  0.  and  T  will  depart  from  city
A  10.  the  people  returned  after  him  0.  to  spoil
h’yt  XQ.  0.  the  people  sacrificed  in  high  places, 3.

“  D-  Debar  was  the  0.  officer  who  was  in  the  land
2.20.  none  followed  David,  but  Judah  0.

.4.8.  David  did  that  0.  which  was  right  in  my  eyes


ONW


1  Kings  14.  1.3.  he  0.  of  Jeroboam  shall  come  to  grave

15.  5.  save  0.  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  llittite
19.  10.  I  0.  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life,  14.

22.  31.  fight  not,  save  0.  w  ith  the  king  of  Israel

2  Kings  10.  23.  but  the  worshippers  of  Raal  0.

17.  18.  there  w'as  none  left  but  the  tribe  of  Judah  0.
19.  19.  thou  art  the  Lord,  even  thou  0.  Isa.  37.  20.

1  Chron.  22.  12.  0.  the  Lord  give  thee  wisdom

2  Chron.  2.  6.  save  0.  to  burn  sacrifice  before  him
6.  30.  thou  0.  knowest  the  hearts  of  children  of  men

33.  17.  did  sacrifice,  yet  to  the  I.ord  their  God  0.
Esth.  1. 16.  the  queen  hath  not  done  wrong  to  kingo.
Job  1.  12.  0.  on  himself  put  not  forth  thy  hand

15.  I  0.  am  escaped  to  tell  thee,  16,  17,  19.

13.  20.  0.  do  not  two  things  to  me,  then  will  T  not

34.  29.  whether  done  against  a  nation,  or  a  man  0.
Psal.  4.  8.  thou  Lord.  0.  makest  me  dw'ell  in  safety
51.  4.  against  thee,  thee  0.  have  1  sinned

62.  2.  he  0.  is  my  rock  and  my  salvation,  6.

4.  0.  consult  to  cast  him  down  from  excellency

5.  my  soul,  wait  thou  0.  upon  God

71.  16.  mention  thy  righteousness,  even  thine  0.

72.  18.  God  of  Israel  0.  doth  wondrous  things
91.  8.  0.  with  thine  eyes  shalt  thou  behold  and  see

Prov.  4.  3.  tender  ana  0.  beloved  in  sight  of  mother

5.  17.  let  them  be  0.  thine  own,  and  not  strangers

11.  23.  the  desire  of  the  righteous  is  0.  good

13.  10.  0.  by  pride  cometh  contention

14.  23.  the  talk  of  the  lips  tendeth  0.  to  penury
17.  11.  an  evil  man  seeketh  0.  rebellion

21.  5.  tend  0.  to  plenteousness,  0.  to  want
Eccl.  7-  29.  this  0.  have  1  found,  that  God  made  man
Cant.  6.  9.  she  is  the  0.  one  ot  her  mother
Isa.  4.  1.0.  let  us  be  called  by  thy  name

26.  1.3.  we  w  ill  0.  make  mention  of  thy  name

28. 19.  it  shall  be  a  vexation  0.  to  understand  report
Jer.  3.  13.  0.  acknowledge  thine  iniquity

6.  26.  make  mourning  as  for  an  0.  son,  Amos  8. 10.
32.  30.  0.  done  evil,  0.  provoked  me  to  anger

Ezek.  7-  5.  and  evil,  an  0.  evil,  behold,  is  come

14.  16.  they  0.  shall  be  delivered,  18.

44.  20.  they  shall  0.  poll  their  heads
Amos  .3.  2.  you  0.  have  1  known  of  all  famil.  of  earth
Mat.  5.  47.  if  yesaluteyour  brethren 0.  whatdoyou
8.  8.  the  centurion  said,  I.ord,  speak  the  word  0.

10.  42.  shall  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  0.  in  name

12.  4.  not  lawful  for  him  to  eat,  but  0.  for  priests
14.  .36.  they  might  0.  touch  hem  of  his  garment
17.  8.  they  saw  no  man,  save  Jesus  0.  Mark  9.  8.
21.  19.  they  found  nothing  thereon  but  leaves  0.

21.  shall  not  0.  do  this  which  is  done  to  fig-tree
24.  36.  not  the  angels  in  heaven,  but  my  Father  0.
Mark  2.  7-  who  can  forgive  sins,  but  God  0.  ?

5.36.  Jes.saith,  be  not  afraid,  0.  believe,  Luke  8.50.

6. 8.  should  take  nothing  for  journey ,  save  a  staff  0.
Luke  7.  12.  was  a  dead  man,  0.  son  of  his  mother
8.  42.  one  0.  daughter  ||  9.  38.  he  is  my  0.  child

24. 18.  art  thou  0.  a  stranger  in  Jerusaf.  not  known
John  5.  18.  not  0.  because  he  had  broken  sabbath

44.  and  seek  not  honour  that  cometh  from  God  0.

11.  52.  that  Jesus  should  die,  not  for  that  nation  0.

12. 9.  came  not  for  Jesus’  sakec.  but  to  see  Lazarus

I. 3.  9.  Lord,  not  my  feet  0.  but  also  my  hands

17.  3.  that  they  might  know  thee  the  0.  true  God
Acts  8.  16.  0.  they  were  baptized  in  name  of  Jesus

II.  19.  preaching  the  word  to  none  but  Jew's  0.

18.  25.  Apollos  taught,  knowing  0.  hapt.  of  John
19-  27.  not  o.our  craft  is  in  danger  to  be  at  nought

21. 13.  ready  not  to  be  bound  0.  but  to  die  for  Jes.

25.  0.  that  they  keep  thems.  from  things  offered

26.  29.  I  would  to  1  od  that  not  0.  thou,  but  all
Rom.  L  32.  not  0.  do  same,  but  have  pleas,  in  them

3.  29.  is  he  God  of  Jews  0.  ?  is  he  not  of  Gentiles  ?

4.9.  cometh  this  blessedn.  on  circumcision  0.  ?  12.

16.  not  to  that  0.  which  is  of  law,  but  to  faith

5.  3.  note,  so,  11.  ||  8.  23.  note,  they,  but  ourselves
9.24.  whom  he  called,  notof  Jews  0.  but  of  Gentiles

1.3.  5.  ye  must  be  subject,  not  <>.  for  wrath,  but  also
16.  4.  to  whom  not  0.  1  give  thanks,  but  churches

27.  to  God  0.  wise  be  glory,  1  Tim.  1. 17.  Jude2b.

1  Cor .  7.  39.  0.  in  the  Ld.  |!  9.  6.  I  0.  and  Barnabas
14.  .36.  came  word  of  God  from  you  0.  or  to  you  0.  ?

15. 19.  if  in  this  life  0.  we  have  hope,  mostmiserable

2  Cor.  7. 7.  God  comforted  us,  not  by  his  coming  0.
8.  10.  have  begun  not  0.  to  do  ||  19-  not  that  0.

21.  noto.  in  sight  of  Lord,  but  in  sight  of  men
Gal.  1.  23.  heard  0.  he  who  persecuted  in  times  past

2. 10.  0.  would  that  we  should  remember  the  poor

3.  2.  this  0.  would  1  learn  of  you,  received  ye  Spird

4.  18.  and  noto.  when  1  am  present  with  you

5.  13.  0.  use  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh

6.  12.0.  lest  they  should  suffer  persecut.  for  Christ
Fph.  1.21.  every  name  named,  not  0.  in  this  world
Phil.y .  27.  0.  let  your  convers.  be  as  becomes  gosp.

29.  is  given  not  0.  to  believe  on  him,  but  to  suffer
2.  12.  as  j’e  obeyed,  not  as  in  my  presence  0.  hut,

in  absence

27.  God  had  mercy  not  on  him  0.  but  on  me

4.  15.  no  church  communicated  with  me,  but  ye  0.
Col.  4.  11.  these  0.  are  my  fellow-workers  to  kingd.

1  Thess.  1.  5.  gosp.  came  notin  word  0.  but  in  power
2.  8.  to  have  imparted  to  you  not  gospel  of  God  0.

2  Thess.  2.1.0.  he  vvlio  now  letteth  will  let,  till  taken

1  Tim.  5.  13.  not  0.  idle,  buttatlers  and  busy-bodies

6.  15.  is  blessed  and  0.  Potentate,  King  of  kings

16.  who  0.  hath  immortality,  dwelling  in  light

2  Tim.  4.  8.  not  to  me  0.  |l  11.  0.  Luke  is  with  me
Heh.  9.  10.  which  stood  0.  in  meats  and  drinks

12.  26.  once  more  1  shake  not  earth  0.  but  heaven
Jam.  1.  22.  be  ye  doers  of  word,  and  not  hearers  0.

2.  24.  a  man  is  justified  by  works,  and  not  faith  0.

1  Pet.  2.  18.  not  0.  to  good  and  gentle,  but  froward

1  John.  2. 2.  not  for  our  sins  0.  ||  5.  6.  not  by  water  0.

2  John  1.  whom  I  love  in  the  truth,  and  not  I  0.

Jude  4.  denying  the  0.  Lord  God  and  our  I.ord  Jesus
Rev.  9.  4.  but  0.  those  which  have  not  seal  of  God

15. 4.  who  shall  not  fear  thee  ?  for  thou  0.  art  holy
See  Begotten.

ONIONS.

Num.  11.5.  we  remember  the  0.  and  the  garlic
ONWARD.

Exod.  40.  36.  when  cloud  was  taken  up,  Isr.  wente.


ONYCHA.

Exod.  30.  34.  take  thee  s  pices,  0.  and  galbanum
ONYX.

Exod.  28.  20.  fourth  row  a  beryl  and  an  0.  39.  13.
Job  28.  16.  wisdom  cannot  be  valued  with  the  0.
Ezek.  28.  13.  the  topaz  and  the  0.  was  thy  covering
See  Stones.

OP  EN ,  Adjective.

Gen.  1. 20.  and  fowl  that  may  fly  in  0.  firmament
38.  14.  Tamar  sat  in  an  0.  place  by  way  of  Timnath
Num.  19.  15.  every  0.  vessel  not  covered  is  unclean
24.  3.  the  man  whose  eyes  are  0.  hath  said,  4.  15.
Josh.  8.  17.  they  left  Ai  0.  and  pursued  after  Israel
1  Sam.  3. 1.  word  of  Lord  precious,  was  noo.  vision

1  Kings  18.  cedar  carved  with  0. flowers,  29.  32,35.

8.  29.  that  thine  eyes  may  be  0.  towards  this  house

night  and  day,  52.  2  Chron.  6.  20,  40. 1  7.  15.
Neh.  1.  6.  let  thine  eyes  be  0.  ear  attentive  to  hear
6.  5.  Sanballat  with  an  0.  letter  sent  his  servant
Job  .34.  26.  as  wicked  men  in  the  0.  sight  of  others
Psal.  5.  9.  their  throat  is  an  0.  sepulchre,  Rom.  3.  13.
34.  15.  the  righteous,  his  ears  are  0.  to  their  cry
Prov.  13.  16.  but  a  fool  layeth  0.  his  folly

27.  5.  0.  rebuke  is  better  than  secret  love

Isa.  9.  12.  they  shall  devour  Israel  with  0.  mouth
24.  18.  for  the  windows  from  on  high  are  0.

60.  11.  thy  gates  shall  he  0.  continually,  not  shut
Jer.  5.  16.  quiver  is  an  0.  sepulchre,  are  mighty  men
32.  11.  took  evidence,  both  what  was  sealed  and  0.
19.  thine  eyes  ar eo.  on  all  thewaysof  men
Ezek.  37.2.  there  were  many  bones  in  theo.  valley
Dan.  6.10.  his  windows  being  0. in  chamber  to  Jerus.
Nah.  3.  1.3.  gates  of  thy  land  shall  be  set  wide  0.
John  1.  51.  hereafter  ye  shall  see  heaven  0.  angels
Acts  16.  27.  seeing  prison-doors  0.  drew  his  sword
19.38.  the  law  iso.  and  there  are  deputies

2  Cor.  3.  18.  we  all  with  0.  face  beholding  as  in  glass
6^  11.  our  mouth  is  0.  to  you,  our  heart  is  enlarged

1  Tim.  5.  24.  some  men’s  sins  are  0.  beforehand
Heb.  6.  6.  seeing  they  put  him  to  an  0.  shame

1  Pet.  3.  12.  his  ears  are  0.  to  their  prayers

Rev.  3.  8.  behold  1  have  set  before  thee  an  0.  door
10.  2.  he  had  in  his  hand  a  little  book  0.  8.

See  Field,  Fields.

OPEN,  Verb,

Signifies,  [1]  To  unlock  that  which  is  fastened  and
made  sure.  Acts  16.  26.  [2]  To  interpret,  unfold,
or  ex i  lain,  Luke  24.  32.  [3]  To  receive  an  an¬
swer  to  our  prayers.  Mat.  7-  7-  [4]  To  receive

Christ  into  the  heart  by  faith  and  love.  Cant.  5.  2.
Bev.  .3.  20.  [5]  To  uncover  or  lay  open,  Exod.  21.
33.  [6]  To  cleave,  rend,  or  divide,  Num.  16.  32.
Ezek.  1.  1.

To  open  the  book,  Rev.  5.  3,9.  To  unseal  the  hook ,
by  declaring  and  revealing  to  John,  and  by  him  to
the  church,  such  secret  mysteries  as  were  before
hidden  in  God's  counsel :  this  no  creature  could
do  ;  Christ  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant  was
only  able  to  do  it,  for  he  came  out  of  the  Lather's
bosom  to  reveal  his  wi'?  to  us.

To  open  their  eyes,  cts  26.  18.  To  preach  the
gospel  to  them,  whe/rby  they  may  attain  to  a  spiri¬
tual  understanding,  and  embrace  the  gospel.

To  open  the  heart,  Acts  16.  14.  To  enlighten  the
understanding,  renew  the  will  and  affections,  and
incline  a  person  to  embrace  the  gospel.

To  open  the  lips,  Psal.  51.  15.  To  give  occasion
and  ability,  both  of  heart  and  tongue,  to  praise
God.

Exod.  21.  3.3.  if  a  man  shall  0.  a  pit  or  dig  a  pit
Num.  8. 16.  given  ins*»adof  such  aso.  every  woml
16.  .30.  if  earth  0.  her  mouth  and  swallow  them
Deut.  15.  8.  thou  shalt  0.  thy  hand  wide  to  him,  11.

20.  11.  if  it  make  answer  of  peace,  and  0.  to  thee

28.  12.  Lord  shall  0.  to  thee  his  good  treasure
Josh.  10.  22.  0.  mouth  of  cave  and  bring  out  5  kings

2  Kings  9.  3.  then  0.  door,  and  flee,  and  tarry  not
13.  17.  and  he  said,  0.  the  window  eastward

Job  11. 5.  oh  that  God  would  0.  his  lips  against  thee
.32.  20.  I  will  c.  my  lips,  and  answer
35.  16.  therefore  doth  Job  0.  his  mouth  in  vain
41.  14.  who  can  0.  the  doors  of  his  face  ?

Psal.  22.  t  7-  they  that  see  me,  0.  the  lip

49.  4.  I  wilt  0.  my  dark  saying  upon  the  harp
78.  2.  I  will  0.  mouth  in  parable,  utter  dark  sayings
81.  10.  0.  thy  mouth  wide  and  1  w  ill  fill  it

118.  19.  0.  tome  the  gates  of  righteousness
Prov.  31.  8.  0.  thj'  mouth  for  dumb  in  the  cause

9.  0.  thy  mouth,  judge  righteously,  plead  cause
Cant.  5.  2.  0.  to  me,  my  sister,  my  love,  my  dove'

5.  1  rose  up  to  0.  to  my  helov. 'hands  droptmvrrh
Isa.  22.  22.  0.  none  shall  shut,  shut  and  none  shall  0.
26.  2.0.  the  gates,  that  the  righteous  nation  enter
28.  24.  doth  he  0.  and  break  clods  of  his  ground  ?

41.  18.  I  will  0.  rivers  in  high  places,  and  fountains

42.  7.  to  0.  blind  eyes,  to  tiring  out  the  prisoners

45.  1.  to  0.  before  him  the  two-leaved  gates

8.  let  the  earth  0.  let  them  bring  forth  salvation
Jer.  1.3.  19.  the  cities  shall  be  shut  up,  none  shall  0.

50.  26.  0.  her  store  houses,  cast  her  up  as  heaps
Ezek.  2.  8.  0.  thy  mouth  and  eat  that  1  give  thee

3.  27.  when  I  speak  with  thee,  I  will  0.  thy  mouth
16.  6.3.  mayust  be  confounded  and  never  0.  mouth

21.  22.  to  0.  the  mouth  in  the  slaughter  to  lift  up
25.  9.  behold,  I  willo.  side  of  Moabfrom  cities
37.  12.  I  will  0.  your  graves,  cause  you  come  up

46.  12.  one  shall  0.  him  the  gate  toward  the  east
Amos  8.  f  5.  and  the  sabbath,  that  we  may  0.  wheat
Zech.  11.1. 0. thy  doors,  O  Lebanon,  that  fire  devour
Mai.  3. 10.  if  1  will  not  0.  you  windows  of  heaven
Mat.  1.3.  35.  I  will  0.  my  mouth  in  parables

25. 11.  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  0.  to  us,  Luke  13.  25.
Luke  12.  36.  when  he  cometh  and  knocketh  may  0.
Acts  18.  14.  when  Paul  svasabout  to  0.  his  mouth
Eph.  6. 19.  praying,  that  I  may  0.  my!mouth  boldly
Col.  4.  3.  that  God  would  0.  to  us  door  of  utterance
Rev.  5.  2.  w  ho  is  worthy  to  0.  the  book  and  seals  ?

3.  no  man  in  heaven  or  earth  was  able  to  0.  book

4.  no  man  was  found  w'orthy  to  0.  and  read  book

5.  behold,  the  Boot  of  David  prevailed  to  0.  book

9.  thou  art  worthy  to  take  book,  and  0.  seals

See  Eyes.


343


OPE


O  P  P


ORA


OPENED.

Gen.  7. 1..  the  same  day  windows  of  heaven  were \o.

8.  6.  Noah  o.  the  window  of  the  ark  he  had  made
29.  31.  God  o.  Leah's  womb  \\  30.  22.  he  o.  Rachel  s
4l!  56.  Joseph  o.  all  storehouses  and  sold  to  Egypt
42.  27.  one  of  them  o.  his  sack,  43.  21.  I  44.  11.

Exod.  2.  6.  when  she  had  o.  ark  she  saw  the  child
Num.  16.  32.  the  earth  o.  her  mouth,  and  swallowed
up  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiratn,  Psal.  106.  17-
Judg.  3.  25.  he  o.  not  the  doors,  they  o.  them  _

4.  19.  she  o.  a  bottle  ot  milk  and  gave  him  drink
19  27.  her  lord  o.  doors,  went  out  to  go  his  w  ay
2  Sam.  7. 1 27.  thou,  O  Lord,  hast  o.  ear  ot  thy  serv.

2  Kings  9.  10.  and  Elisha  o.  the  door  and  fled

15.  16.  they  o.  not  to  him,  therefore  he  smote  them
2  Chron  29  3.  Hezekiah  o.  doors  of  Lord’s  house
A jeh  7  3  1  said,  let  not  gates  of  Jerusalem  be  o.

8.  5.  Ezra  o.  book,  when  he  o.  it  people  stood  up

13.  19.  charged  gates  not  to  be  o.  till  after  sabbath

Job  29.  +  19.  my  root  was  o.  by  the  waters
31  32.  but  l  o.  my  doors  to  the  traveller
32’ +  19.  behold,  my  belly  as  wine  which  is  not  o.

38.’  17.  have  the  gates  of  death  been  o.  to  thee  ?

Psal.  22.  +  13.  they  0.  their  mouths  against  me
40.  6.  sacrifice  not  desire,  mine  ears  hast  thou  0.

66  t  14.  1  will  pay  my  vows  that  my  lips  have  0.
78.  23.  though  he  had  o.  the  doors  ot  heaven
105.  41.  he  0.  the  rock,  and  the  waters  gushed  out
Can't.  5.  6.  I  0.  to  my  beloved,  but  he  was  gone
Jsa.  14.  17.  that  0.  not  the  house  of.his  prisoners
48 ’  8.  from  that  time  that  thine  ear  was  not  o.

50.  5.  Lord  God  hath  o.  mine  ear,  not  rebellious
Jer.  1. 1 14.  out  of  the  north  an  evil  shall  be  0.

20.’  12.  for  to  thee  have  1  0.  my  cause
50.  25.  Lord  hath  0.  his  armoury  and  brought  forth
Ezek.  1.  1.  that  the  heavens  were  o.  Mat.  3.  16.

Mark  1.  10.  Luke  3.  21.  Jets  7.  56.

16.  25.  thou  hast  o.  thy  feet  to  every  one  passed  by
37. 13.  when  1  have  0.  your  graves,  O  my  people
44.  2.  gate  shall  not  be  0.  no  man  enter  by  it

46.  1.  but  on  sabbath  and  new  moon  it  shall  be  0.
Dan.  7.  10.  the  judgment  was  set,  the  books  were  0.
Nah.  2.  6.  gates  of  the  rivers  shall  be  0.  palace  be
Zech.  13.  1.  fountain  shall  be  0.  to  house  ot  David
Mat.  2.  11.  when  they  had  0.  their  treasures
7.  7.  knock,  it  shall  be  o.  to  you,  Luke  11.  9,  10.

27.  52.  graves  were  0.  many  bodies  of  saints  arose
Mark 7.  34.  that  is,  be  0.  ||  35.  his  ears  were  0.

Luke  4.  17.  when  he  had  o.  book  he  found  the  place
24.  32.  while  he  0.  to  us  the  scriptures
45.  theno.  he  their  understand,  to  underst.  script.
Jets  5.  19.  the  angel  by  night  o.  the  prison  doors

23.  but  when  we  had  0.  we  found  no  man  within
10. 11.  Peter  saw  heaven  0.  and  a  vessel  descending

12.  10.  iron  gate  0.  11  14.  0.  not  the  gate,  but  ran  in

16.  when  they  had  0.  the  door  ami  saw  him

14.  27.  how  he  had  0.  the  door  of  faith  to  Gentiles
16.  14.  Lydia,  whose  heart  Lord  0.  she  attended

26.  the  prison  doors  were  0.  bands  were  loosed
1  Cor.  16.  9.  for  a  great  door  and  effectual  is  0.  unto
me,  there  are  many  adversaries,  2  Cor.  2.  12.
Heb.  4.  13.  all  things  are  naked  and  0.  to  him
Be v.  4.  1.  behold,  a  door  was  0.  in  heaven
6.  1.  1  saw  when  the  T.amb  0.  one  of  the  seals
3.  had  0.  the  second  ||  5.  the  third  117.  the  fourth

9.  0.  the  fifth  seal  |1  12.  the  sixth  |l  8.  1.  the  seventh

9.  2.  he  0.  the  bottomless  pit,  and  there  arose
11.  19.  the  temple  of  God  was  0.  in  heaven

15.  5.  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  was  0.

19.  11.  1  saw  heaven  0.  and  behold  a  white  horse

20.  12.  the  books  were  0.  the  book  of  life  was  0.

,  See  Days,  Mouth.

OPENEST.

Psal.  104.28.  thou  o.  thy  hand,  are  filled  with  good
145. 16.  thou  0.  thine  hand  and  satisfiest  the  desire
OPEN  ETII.

Exod.  13.  2.  sanctify  to  me  whatsoever  0.  the  womb
12.  thou  shalt  set  apart  all  that  0.  the  matrix,  15.

1  34.  19.  Num.  3.  12.  1  18.  15.  Luke  2.  23.
Job  27.  19.  the  rich  man  0.  his  eyes,  and  he  is  not
33.  16.  he  0.  ears  of  men,  and  sealeth  instruction
36.  10.  he  0.  their  ear  to  discipline  and  commands

15.  he  delivers  poor,  0.  their  ears  in  oppression
Psal.  38.  13.  1  as  a  dumb  man  that  o.  not  ids  mouth
Prov.  13.  3.  he  that  0.  wide  his  lips  have  destruction

24.  7.  he  0.  not  his  mouth  in  the  gate

31.26.  sheo.  her  mouth  with  wisdom,  in  her  tongue
Isa.  53.  7 .  brought  as  a  lamb,  so  he  0.  not  his  mouth
Ezek.  20.  26.  to  pass  thro’  the  fire,  all  thatc.  womb
John  10.  3.  to  him  the  porter  0.  sheep  hear  his  voice
Rev.  3.  7.  he  that  hath  key  of  David,  he  that  o.  and
no  man  shutteth,  and  shutteth  and  no  man  0 ,
OPENING.

Isa.  42.  20.  0.  the  ears,  but  he  hcareth  not
Acts  17. 3.  0.  and  alleging  Christ  must  have  suffer.
OPENING,  S.

1  Chron.  9.  27. 0.  of  house  of  God  pertained  to  them
Job  12.  14.  he  shutteth  up  a  man,  there  can  be  no  0
Prov.  1.  21.  in  the  0.  of  the  gates  wisdom  crieth

8.  6.  and  the  0.  of  my  lips  shall  be  right  things
Isa.  61.  1.  proclaim  the  0.  of  the  prison  to  the  bound
Ezek.  29.  21.  1  will  give  thee  the  0.  of  the  mouth
OPENLY.

Gen.  38.  21.  where  harlot  that  was  0.  by  way-side  ?

2  Sam.  6.  +  20.  as  a  vain  fellow  0.  uncovers  himself
Psal.  98.  2.  his  righteousness  hath  he  0.  shewed
Mat.  6.  4.  thy  Father  shall  reward  thee  0.  6.  18.
Mark  8.  32.  and  he  spake  that  saying  0.

John  7 .  4.  he  himself  seeketh  to  be  known  0.

10.  then  went  he  to  the  feast,  not  0.  but  in  secret

13.  no  man  spake  of  him  0.  for  fear  of  the  Jews

11.  54.  Jesus  walked  no  more  o.  among  the  Jews
18.  20.  Jesus  said,  1  spakd  0.  to  the  world
Acts  10.  40.  him  God  raised  up,  and  shewed  him  o.

16.  37.  they  have  beaten  us  0.  uncondemned
Col.  2.  15.  he  made  a  shew  of  them  o.  triumphing

OPERATION.

Psal.  28.  5.  they  regard  not  the  0.  of  his  hands
Isa.  5.  12.  nor  consider  the  0.  of  his  hands
Col.  2.  12.  risen  through  the  faith  of  the  0.  of  God
OPERATIONS.

Cor.  12. 6.  there  are  diversity  of  0.  but  same  God

344


OPINION.

Job  32. 6.  was  afraid,  and  durst  not  shew  you  mine  0.

10.  hearken  to  me,  1  also  will  shew  you  mine  o.  17 .
OP1N  IONS.

1  Kings  18. 21.  how  long  halt  ye  between  two  0.  ?

OPPORTUNITY.

Lev.  16.  +  21.  send  the  scape  goat  by  a  man  of  o.

Mat.  26. 16.  he  sought  to  betray  him,  Luke  22.  6.

Gal.  6.  10.  as  we  have  0.  let  us  do  good  to  all,  but
Phil. A.  10.  ye  were  also  careful,  but  ye  lacked  o.

Heb.  11. 15.  they  might  have  had  0.  to  have  returned
OPPOSE.

2  Tim.  2. 25.  instructing  those  that  0.  themselves

OPPOSED.

Acts  18. 6.  when  they  0.  themselves  and  blasphemed
OPPOSES!’.  ,

Job  30.21.  with  thy  strong  hand  thou  0.  thyselt
OPPOSE!!!.

2  Thess.  2.  4.  whoa,  and  exalteth  himself  above  all
OPPOSITIONS.

1  Tim.  6. 20.  avoidingo.  of  science  falsely  so  called
OPPRESS.

Exod.  3.  9.  wherewith  the  Egyptians  0.  them
22.  21.  neither  vex  nor  o.  a  stranger,  23.  9.

Lev.  25.  14.  ye  shall  not  o.  one  another,  17.

Deut.  23.  16.  shalt  not  0.  servant  that  is  escaped
24.  14.  thou  shalt  not  o.  an  hired  servant,  poor
Judg.  10. 12.  Moabites  did  0.  you,  and  ye  cried  '

Job  10.  3.  is  it  good  to  thee  that  thou  shouldest  0.  ?
Psal.  10.  18.  that  the  man  of  earth  may  no  more  0.
17.9.  hide  me  from  the  wicked  that  0.  me
119.  122.  be  surety  for  good,  let  not  proud  0.  me
Prov.  22.  22.  nor  0.  the  afflicted  in  the  gate
Isa.  49. 26.  will  feed  them  that  0.  thee  with  their  flesh
Jer.  7.  6.  if  ye  o.  not  the  stranger  and  the  widow

30.20.  and  l  will  punish  all  that  o.  them
Ezek.  45.  8.  princes  shall  no  more  0.  my  people
Hos.  12.  7.  he  is  a  merchant,  he  loveth  to  o.

Amos  4.  1.  ye  kine  of  Bashan  which  o.  the  poor
Mic.  2.  2.  they  o.  a  man  and  his  house,  even  a  man
Zech.  7. 10.  o.  not  the  widow  nor  the  fatherless
Mai.  3. 5.  will  be  swift  witness  against  those  that  0.

Thess.  4.  +  6.  no  man  0.  his  brother  in  any  matter
Jam.  2.  6.  do  not  ricli  men  0.  you  and  draw  you  ?
OPPRESSED.

Deut.  28.  29.  thou  shall  be  only  0.  and  spoiled,  33.
Judg.  2.  18.  by  reason  of  them  that  0.  and  vexed
4.  3.  Jabin  0.  Israel  ||  10.  8.  Philist.  and  Ammon  0
6.  9.  1  delivered  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyp
tians,  and  of  all  that  0.  you,  1  Sam.  10.  18

1  Sam.  12. 3.  whose  ox  have  1  taken  ?  whom  have  I  0.?

4.  thou  hast  not  defrauded,  nor  o.  us,  nor  taken

2  Kings  13.4.  Assyria  0.  them  ||  22.  king  of  Syria  0.

2  Chron.  16. 10.  Asa  o.  some  of  the  people  same  time
Job  20. 19.  because  he  hath  o.  and  forsaken  the  poor

35.  9.  by  oppressions  they  make  the  0.  to  cry
Psal.  9.  9.  the  Lord  will  be  a  refuge  for  the  0.

10. 18.  judge  the  fatherless  and  0. 103.  6.  1 146. 7.

74.21.  O  let  not  the  0.  return  ashamed
106. 42.  their  enemies  0.  them,  brought  to  subject.

Eccl.  4. 1.  and,  behold,  the  tears  of  such  as  were  0.
Isa.  1.17.  learn  todo  well, seek  judgment,  relieve  0
3.  5.  the  people  shall  be  0.  every  one  by  another
23.  12.  O  thou.  o.  virgin,  daughter  of  Zidon,  arise
38.  14.  O  Lord,  I  am  o.  undertake  for  me

52.  4.  the  Assyrian  o.  them  without  cause

53.  7.  he  was  0.  and  afflicted,  yet  he  opened  not
58.  6.  is  not  this  the  fast  ?  to  let  the  0.  go  free

Jer.  50.  33.  Israel  and  Judah  were  0.  together
Ezek.  18. 7.  hath  not  o.  any,  but  hath  restored,  16.

12.  because  he  hath  o.  ||  18.  he  cruelly  o.

22.29.  they  have  o.  the  stranger  wrongfully
Hos.  5. 11.  Ephraim  is  o.  and  broken  in  judgment
Amos  3.  9.  behold  the  0.  in  the  midst  thereof
Acts  7.  24.  Moses  avenged  him  that  was  0.

10.  38.  Jesus  healed  all  that  were  0.  of  the  devil
OPPRESS  ETII.

Num.  10.  9.  if  ye  go  to  war  against  him  that  0.  you
Job  40.  +  23.  behold,  Behemoth  0.  a  river,  hasteth  not
Psal.  56. 1.  be  merciful,  he  fighting  daily  0.  me
Prov.  14.  31.  he  that  0.  the  poor  reproacheth,  22. 16.
28.  3.  a  poor  man  that  0.  the  poor,  is  like  rain
OPPRESSING.

Jer.  46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  from  the  0.  sword
50. 16.  for  fear  of  the  0.  sword,  they  shall  turn
Zeph.  3. 1.  woe  to  0.  city ,  she  obeyed  not  the  voice
OPPRESSION

Is  the  spoiling  or  taking  away  of  men's  goods  or
estates  by  constraint,  terror,  or  force,  without
having  any  right  thereto ;  # working  upon  the
ignorance,  weakness,  or  fearfulness  of  the  op¬
pressed.  Men  are  guilty  of  Oppression,  when
they  offer  any  violence  to  men's  bodies,  estates,
or  consciences ;  when  they  crush  or  overburden
others,  as  the  Egyptians  did  the  Hebrews,  Exod.
3.  9.  when  they  impose  upon  the  consciences  of
men,  and  persecute  them  merely  because  they
are  of  a  persuasion  different  from  theirs:  St.
Paul  acknowledges  that  he  had  been  one  of  this
sort  of  oppressors,  1  Tim.  1.  13.  And  when  they
commit  adultery  or  fornication,  whereby  the  in¬
nocent  is  robbed  of  his  right  in  his  wife,  daugh
ter,  $c.  1  Thess.  4.  6.

Exod.  3.9. 1  have  seen  o.  wherewith  the  Egyptians
Deut.  26.7.  the  Lord  heard  and  looked  on  our  0.

2  Kings  13.  4.  the  Lord  saw  the  0.  of  Israel
J  J36.  15.  and  he  opem.th  their  ears  in  0.

Psal.  12.  5.  for  the  0.  Of  the  poor  will  I  arise
42.  9.  because  of  the  0.  of  the  enemy,  43.  2.1  55.  3.
44.  24.  forgettest  our  0. 11  62.  10.  trust  not  in  0.

73.  8.  and  they  speak  wickedly  concerning  0.

107.  39.  again’ they  are  brought  low  through  0.
119.  134.  deliver  me  from  the  o.  of  man
Eccl.  5. 8.  if  thou  seest  the  0.  of  the  poor,  and  violent
7.7.  surely  0.  maketh  a  wise  man  mad,  and  a  gift
Isa.  5. 7 .  but  behold  0.  ||  30. 12.  because  ye  trust  in  0.
30.  +20.  though  the  Lord  give  you  the  water  of  o.
54.  14.  thou  shalt  be  far  from  0.  ||  59.  13.  speak.  0.
Jer.  6.  6.  she  is  wholly  o.  in  the  midst  of  her
22.  17.  but  thine  eyes  and  heart  are  for  0.

Ezek.  22.  7.  they  dealt  by  0.  with  the  stranger
29.  the  people  of  the  land  have  used  0.


Ezek.  46. 18.  the  prince  shall  not  take  inherit,  by  »
OPPRESSIONS.

Job  35.  9.  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  o.

Eccl.  4.  1.  1  considered  the  o.  done  under  the  sun
Isa.  33s  15.  lie  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  0.

Amos  3.  +  9.  behold  the  0.  in  the  midst  thereof
OPPRESSOR.

Esth.  3.  +  10.  the  king  gave  his  ring  to  the  Jews’ »

Job  3.  18.  they  hear  not  the  voice  Of  the  o.

15.  20.  the  number  of  years  is  hidden  to  the  0.

Psal.  72.  4.  he  shall  break  in  pieces  the  o.

Prov.  3.  31.  envy  note,  choose  none  of  his  ways
28.  16.  prince  that  wanteth  understanding  is  an  0.
Isa.  9.  4.  for  thou  hast  broken  the  rod  of  his  0.

14.  4.  anil  say7,  how  hath  the  o.  ceased !

51.  13.  hast  feared  because  of  the  fury  of  the  0.

Jer.  21.  12.  O  house  of  David,  deliver  him  that  is
spoiled  out  of  the  hand  ot  the  0.  22.  3.
25.  38.  because  of  the  fierceness  of  the  0.

Zech.  9.  8.  no  o.  shall  pass  through  them  any  mort

10.  4.  out  of  him  came  every  0.  together
OPPRESSORS.

Job  27.  13.  this  is  heritage  of  0.  they  shall  receive
Psal.  54. 3.  strangers  risen  and  o.  seek  after  my  soul
119.  121.  have  done  judg.  leave  me  not  to  mine  0.
Eccl.  4.  1.  on  the  side  of  their  o.  there  was  power
Isa.  3. 12.  children  are  their  0.  women  rule  over  them
14.  2.  and  they  shall  rule  over  their  0.

16.  4.  the  0.  are  consumed  out  of  the  land

19.  20.  they  shall  cry  to  the  Lord  because  of  thee.
ORACLE

Is  by  some  taken  for  the  Propitiatory,  or  Mercy-
seat,  by  translating  the  Hebrew  word  Caphoreth,
Exod.  25.  18,  20.  by  Oracle.  This  word  comes
from  the  verb  Caphar,  which  signifies  to  expiate,
to  pardon  sins,  to  cover.  It  may  be  rendered  by
a  Covering,  for  it  was  the  cover  of  the  ark  of
the  covenant,  or  of  the  sacred  chest  in  which  the
laws  of  the  covenant  were  shut  up.  And  perhaps
by  translating  Caphoreth  by  propitiatory  or
mercy -seat,  it  may  be  insinuated  that  from  thence
the  Lord  heard  the  vows  and  prayers  of  his  peo¬
ple,  and  pardoned  them  their  sins.  And  by
translating  it  Oracle  they  would  shew,  that  it
was  from  thence  that  God  manifested  his  will
and  pleasure,  and  gave  responses  to  Moses.
Oracle  is  taken  for  the  sanctuary,  or  for  the  most
holy  place,  wherein  the  ark  of  the  covenant  was
deposited ,  1  Kings  6.  5,  16,  17-
It  is  taken  also  for  the  Oracles  of  false  gods  ;  the
most  famous  of  which  in  Palestine  was  that  oj
Baal-zebub,  the  god  of  Ekron,  which  the  Jews
themselves  often  went  to  consult,  2  Kings  1.  2,  3,
6,  16.  There  were  also  Teraphims,  as  that  of
Micah,  mentioned,  Judg.  17.  5.  and  the  false
gods  adored  in  the  kingdom  of  Samaria,  which
had  their  false  prophets,  and  consequently  their
oracles,  whether  these  oracles  were  really  deliverer
by  the  assistance  of  the  devil,  or  that  the  priests
and  false  prophets  imposed  upon  the  people ,  making
them  believe  they  were  inspired,  though  they  onl%
spoke  by  their  own  seducing  spirit.

Some  have  ascribed  to  Demons,  all  the  oracle*
of  antiquity ;  others  have  imputed  them  to  tin
knavery  of  the  priests ;  and  others  have  pre
tended,  that  there  were  several  kinds  of  oracles
some  were  illusions  and  tricks  of  the  devil
others  were  the  effects  of  the  juggling  and  con
trivance  of  the  priests.  The  Scripture  afford:
examples  of  these  sorts  of  oracles.  Balaam,  a
the  instigation  of  his  own  spirit,  and  urged  m
by  his  avarice,  fearing  to  lose  the  recompenc,
that  he  was  promised  by  Balak,  king  oj  th
Moabites,  suggests  a  diabolical  expedient  to  thi
prince,  of  making  the  Israelites  to  fall  int
idolatry  and  fornication,  by  which  he  assure
him  of  a  certain  victory,  or  at  least  of  a  eon,
siderable  advantage  against  the  people  of  Got
Num.  24.  14.  1  31.  16.

Micaiah,  the  son  of  Imlah,  a  prophet  of  the  Lore
says,  “  That  he  saw  the  Almighty  sitting  upm
his  throne,  and  all  the  hosts  of  heaven  roun
about  him;  and  the  Lord  said,  who  shall  temp
Ahab,  king  of  Israel,  that  he  may  go  to  via
against  Ram'oth  gilead,  and  fall  in  the  battle
One  answered  after  one  manner ,  and  another  1
another.  At  the  same  time  an  evil  spirit  pri
sented  himself  before  the  Lord,  and  said,  l  wi
seduce  him:  and  the  Lord  asked  him,  how?  1
which  Satan  answered,  I  will  go  and  be  a  lym
spirit  in  the  mouth  of  his  prophets.  And  tl.
Lord  said,  Go,  and  thou  shalt  prevail,"  1  Km£
22.  This  dialogue  proves  these  two  things:  Iirs
that  the  devil  could  do  nothing  by  his  own  power
and  secondly,  that  with  the  permission  of  Gi
he  could  inspire  the  false  prophets,  sorcerers,  ar,
magicians,  and  make  them  deliver  false  oracles
Among  the  Jews  there  were  several  sorts  of  rei
oracles.  [1]  They  had  oracles  that  were  deltve
ed  vivk  voce,  as  when  God  spake  to  Moses  ja<
to  face,  and  as  one  friend  speaks  to  anothe
Num.  12.  8.  [2]  Prophetical  dreams  sent  >
God ;  as  the  dreams  which  God  sent  to  Josepl
and  which  foretold  his  future  greatness,  Get
37.  5,  6.  [3]  Visions :  as  when  a  prophet  in  c
ecstasy,  being  neither  properly  asleep  nor  awak
had  supernatural  revelations,  Gen.  15.1.  M
2.  Num.  12.  6.  [4]  The  oracles  of  Unm  at
Thummim,  which  was  in  the  Ephod,  or  Pec*
ral,  worn  by  the  high  priest,  and  which  G>
endued  with  the  gift  of  foretelling  things
come.  This  manner  of  inquiring  of (  the  Lo
was  often  made  use  of,  ftom  Joshua’s  time,
the  erection  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  1  Sat
23.  9.  |  30.  7.  [5]  After  the  building  of  t
temple,  they  generally  consulted  the  prophet
who  were  frequent  in  the  kingdoms  of  Juoah  a
Israel.  These  oracles  of  truth  had  no  necessa
connexion  either  with  time,  or  place,  or  a
other  circumstance,  or  with  the  personal  quati
cations  and  merit  of  the  person  by  whom,  th
were  uttered:  the  high  priest  clothed  with  t


O  RD


O  T  H


Efhod  and  Pectoral  pave  a  true  answer ,  whatever
ons  the  manner  oj  his  life,  Sometimes  he  pave
an  answer  without  knowing  clearly  himself  what
was  the  subject  of  the  question  he  was  consulted
about.  Caiaphas  pronounces  an  oracle  relating
to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he  hated ,  and
whose  destruction  he  desired ,  and  an  oracle  which
he  understood  not  himself.  John  11.  49,  5!>,  51.
Ve  know  nothing  at  all,  nor  consider  that  it  is
expedient  tor  us  that  one  man  should  die  tor
the  people,  and  that  the  whole  nation  perish
not.  Jo  which  is  added.  And  this  spake  he
not  of  himself,  hut  being  high  priest  that  year,
he  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that
nation.

It  the  time  of  the  planting  cf  the  Christian  church,
the  gifts  of  prophecy  and  inspiration  were  very
common.  Christ  Jesus,  our  great  Prophet  and
High  Priest,  has  himself  taught  us  the  mind  and
will  of  tied  about  the  way  of  our  salvation,  and
by  his  Holy  Spirit  has  inspired  persons,  chosen  on
purpose,  to  pen  the  doctrine  which  he  taught  in  the
Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  and  to  open
and  unfold  the  mysteries  of  the  Did.  'lhese
revelations  are  the  oracles,  which  Christians  are
to  consult  at  all  times,  especially  in  all  matters
of  moment  and  difficulty,  and  in  the  great  affairs
relating  to  their  souls  and  another  life,  'll  eh.
5.  12.

Sam.  16.23.  as  if  man  had  inquired  at  the  o.  of  God
Kings  6. 16.  he  built  them  for  it  within,  for  the  o
i.  6.  the  priests  brought  the  ark  of  Lord  into  the  o.
Chr.  4.  20.  should  burn  before  the  o.  of  pure  sold
V.28.2.  when  1  lift  up  my  hands  towards  thy  lioTve
ORACLES,  J  J

lets  7.  38.  who  received  the  lively  n.  to  give  to  us
'om.  3.  2.  to  them  were  committed  the  o.  of  God
leb.5.  12.  the  first  principles  of  the  o.  of  God
Pet.  4. 11.  il  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  o.  of  God
ORATION .

cts  12.21.  uponasetday  Herod  made  an  o.  to  them
ORATOR.

<a-  3. 3.  L.  taketh  away  from  J udah  the  eloquent  o
cts  ^4. 1.  and  with  a  certain  o.  named  Teitullus
ORCHARD.

ant.  4.  13.  thy  plants  are  an  o.  of  pomegranates
ORCHARDS.

cc/.2.5.I  made  me  gardens  and  o.  and  planted  frees
ORDAIN

igmfies,  [1]  To  command  or  enjoin,  1  Cor.  9.  14.
[2]  To  appoint  or  design  to  a  certain  end  or  use',
Rom.  7.  10.  [3]  To  choose  or  set  apart  for  an  office
or  employment,  Mark  3.  14.  [4]  To  fore  ordain
Acts  10.  42.  |  13.  48.  [51  To  fund,  1  Chron.  9.  t
22.  Psal.  8.  t  2.  [6]  To  give.  Jer.  1.  t  5.  [7]
lo  oraer.  Lorn.  13.  +  1.  [8]  To  prepare,  Isa.  30
33.  Ephes.  2.  +  10.

Chr.  9.  22.  Dav.  and  Sam.  dido,  in  their  set  office
7.  9.  I  will  o.  a  place  for  my  people  Israel
■a.  26. 12.  Lord,  thou  wilt  o.  peace  for  us,  for  thou
Cor.  7.  17.  and  so  0.  1  in  all  churches
it.  1.5.  that  thou  shouldest  o.  elders  in  every  ertv
r  ORDAINED.  y

urn.  28. 6.  an  offering  that  was  0.  in  mount  Sinai
Smgs  12.  32.  and  Jeroboam  o.  a  feast,  33.

Krugs  23. 5.  and  he  put  down  idolatrous  priests  o.
Chron.  11.  15.  Jeroboam  o.  priests  for  high  places
3.  18.  to  offer  the  off  erings  as  it  was  o.  by  David
9.. 27.  the  instruments  o.  by  David,  king  of  Israel
stn.  9.  27.  the  Jews  0.  the  feast  of  Purim
ia‘.  8.  2.  out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  hast  o.  strength
3.  the  moon  and  the  stars  which  thou  hast  o.

L  5.  Jhis  lie  o.  in  Joseph  for  a  testimony
32.17.  I  have  o.  a  lamp  tor  mine  anointed
a.  30.  33.  lophet  is  o.  of  old,  he  made  it  deep
r.  1,5,  1  0.  thee  to  be  a  prophet  to  the  nations
tfw.  2.  £4.  the  king  had  o,  to  destroy  the  wise  men
ab.  1.  12.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  0.  them  for  judgment
ark 3. 14.  Jesus  0.  twelve  to  be  with  him
hn  15. 16.  1  have  o.  thatyeshouldbring  forth  fruit
cts}-  22.  one  o.  to  he  witness  with  us  of  resurrection
J.  42.o.  of  God  to  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead
3-  48.  as  many  as  were  o.  to  eternal  life  believed
‘•23.  when  they  had  0.  them  elders  in  every  church
t-,  the  decrees  that  were  0.  of  apostles  and  elders
7.  31.  will  judge  world  by  that  man  whom  hath  0.
om.7.  10.  the  commandment  which  was  o.  to  life
3.  1.  the  powers  that  he,  are  0.  of  God

2.  7-  w  e  speak  hidden  w  isdom  which  God  o.

■  j4.  the  I.ord  hath  o.  that  they  w  hich  preach
al.  3.  19.  the  law  was  o.  by  angels,  in  the  hand
t-'  2-„10'  to  good  works,  w  Inch  God  hath  before  o.
Itm.  2.7. 1  am  o.  preacher  and  apostle  to  Gentiles
et>.  5. 1.  for  every'  high  priest  is  o.  for  men,  8.  3.

.  0.  now  when  these  things  were  thus  0.  priests
de  4.  who  were  of  old  o.  to  this  condemnation
ORDAINED.

fal.  7. 13.  he  0.  his  arrows  against  the  persecutors
.  .  ORDER.

iVs  17*  +  10.  I  will  give  thee  an  o.  of  garments
23.  4.  king  commanded  priests  ofsecond  o.
'"ton.  p.  32.  they  waited  according  to  their  0.

I'  .1  we  s°«Jght  him  not  after  the  due  o.

3.  31.  the  o.  commanded  to  them  before  the  L.

I'  *•  ^eord.  to  the  o.  of  David.  6.  2  Chron. 8. 14.

°  /  *i,  '  a  ?n<^  °f  darkness,  without  any  0.

u-  4:  W  art  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  o.  of
Melchizedek  Heb.  5.  6,  10.  I  6.  20.  |  7. 11, 17.  21.
jo  l  •  •  "ave  Siyen  o.  to  churches  of  Galatia

*  \J,oyinsiand  beholding  your  0.  and  stedfast.
eb'  >’  IL  and  not  be  called  after  the  0.  of  Aaron
M  In  ORDER.

?  j7.’c^’^braham  laid  wood  ino.  and  bound  Isaac
rod.  26.17.  two  tenons  in  o.  ||  39.  37.  lamps  set  m  o.

’  i.  tnou  shalt  set  in  0.  the  things  that  are  to  he

,,  an, 1 1.  Set.  L”  °-  h1'-  !•  7.  8,  12. 1  6.  12.  1  24.  8.

oD<l  e.s^  bread  in  o.  upon  it  before  the  Lord
s  '  ,_•  °f  flax  she  had  laid  in  0.  upon  roof
ir"  ‘  Vo  ^3.  Aluthophel  put  his  house  in  o.

33.  Elijah  put  wood  ino.  and  cut  bullock
W  *0.  I.  set  thine  house  in  0.  Isa.  38.  1.

"on.  13.  ll.  the  shew  bread  also  set  they  in  0.


O  R  N

2  0/*r.  29.  35.  the  service  of  house  of  Lord  set  ino.
Job  33.  5.  set  thy  words  in  o.  before  me,  stand  up
Psal- 40.  5.  they  cannot  be  reckoned  up  in  o.  to  thee
5u.  21.  I  will  set  them  ino,  before  thine  eyes
Eccl.  12.  9.  the  preacher  set  in  o.  many  proverbs
Isa.  A  \.  7 .  who  declare  it,  and  set  it  in  o .  before  me  '
Ezek.  41.  6.  the  side  chambers  were  thirty  in  0
Luke  \.  1.  have  taken  in  hand  to  set  forth  ino.  3.

8.  Zac  harias  served  before  God  in  his  o.

Acts  18.  23.  he  went  over  country  of  Phrygia  in  o.
1  Oot\  11.  .$4.  the  rest  will  1  set  in  o .  when  1  come

14.  40.  let  all  things  he  done  decently  and  in  o

15.  23.  but  every  man  shall  rise  in  his  o.  Christ
lit.  1.  5.  1  left  thee  to  set  in  o.  the  things  wanting

ORDER.

Exod.Q7.Ql.  Aaron  and  sons  shall  o.  it,  Lev,  24.  3,  4.
Jiidu.  13.  12.  lie  Said,  how  shall  we  o.  the  child  \

1  Kings  20.  14.  then  he  said,  who  shall  o.  the  battle  '
Job  23.  4.  1  w'ould  o.  my  cause  before  him
37.  19.  teach  us,  for  we  cannot  o.  our  speech
Psal.  40.  t  5.  thy  thoughts  none  can  o.  them  to  thee

18.  t  19.  can  God  0.  a  table  in  the  w  ilderness  ?

119.  133.  0.  my  steps  in  thy  word,  letnot  iniquity
Isa.  9.  7-  «•>  throne,  and  upon  his  kingdom  to  o.  it
Jer.  46.  3,e.  ye.  the  buckler  and  the  shield,  and  draw
ORDERED,  ETII.

Judg.  6.  C6.  build  an  altar  to  Lord  in  the  o.  place
2 '  Sam.  23.  5.  made  everlasting  covenant  o.  and  sure
Job  13.  18.  behold  now,  I  have  o.  my  cause,  1  know
32.  f  14.  he  hath  not  0.  his  words  against  me
Psal.  37.  23.  steps  of  a  good  men  are  o.  by  the  Lord
50.  23.  to  him  w  ho  0.  his  conversation  aright
Prov.  4.  t  26.  let  all  thy  ways  be  o.  aright
ORDERINGS.

1  Chr.  24.  19.  these  were  their  0.  under  Aaron
^  ORDERLY.

Acts  21.  24.  thou  W'alkest  o.  and  keepest  the  law

ORDINANCE

Signifies,  [1]  Any  decree,  statute,  or  law,  made  by
civil  governors,  ]  Pet.  2.  13.  [2]  The  laws,  s/a
lutes,  and  commandments  of  God,  Lev.  18.  4
[3]  Appointment,  decree,  and  determination,  Psal
119.  91.  [4]  Laws,  directions,  rites,  institutions
and  constitutions,  in  the  worship  of  God,  II eb

9.  1 , 10.

Lxod.  12.  14.  yeshail  keep  to  I.ord  the  feast  of  the
passover,  for  an  o.  forever,  24,  43.  |  13.  10
.15.  25.  there  he  made  for  them  a  statute  and  an  0.
l  ev.  5.  +  10.  offer  according  to  the  o.  9.  +  16.

IVmw. 9. 14. according  to  0.  of  passover,  2  Chr.  35.  13,

10.  8.  they  shall  he  to  you  tor  an  o.  for  ever
15.  15.  one  o.  shall  he  for  you  in  your  generations

18.  8.  and  to  thy  sons  by  an  o.  for  ever,  2  Chr.  2. 4,

19.  2.  0.  of  the  law-  the  Lord  commanded,  31. 21.
Josh.  24.  25.  and  he  set  them  an  o.  in  Sheclietn

1  Sam.  30.  25.  he  made  it  an  o.  for  ever  to  this  day

1  Kings  6.  +38.  house  was  finished  with  all  the  o.

2  Chr.  35.  25.  and  made  them  an  0.  in  Israel
Ezra  3.  10.  after  the  o.  ot  David  king  of  Israel
Neh.  11.  +  23.  that  a  sure  o.  be  for  the  singers

Isa.  24. 5.  have  transgressed  the  law',  changed  the  0.
58.  2.  and  forsook  not  the  0.  of  their  God
Ezek.  40.  +  45.  for  the  priests  that  keep  the  0.

45.  14.  concerning  the  o.  of  oil,  the  bath  of  oil

46.  14.  an  offering  by  a  perpetual  o.  unto  the  Lord
Mai.  3. 14.  what  profit  is  it  that  w  e  have  kept  his  0.  ?
Bom.  13.2.W  hoso  resisteth  the  power  resists  o.  of  G.

1  Pet.  2.  13.  submit  yourselves  to  every  o.  of  man

ORDINANCES.

Erod.  18.  20.  thou  shalt  teach  them  0.  and  laws
Lev.  18.  3.  neither  shall  ye  walk  in  their  o.

4.  ye  shall  keep  mine  0.  30.  1  22.  9.  2  Chron.  33.

8-  Ezek.  11. 20.  |  43.  11.  1  Cor.  11.  2.
Niim.g.  12.  according  to  thee,  of  the  passover,  14.

2  Kings  17.  34.  neither  do  they  after  their  0.

37.  the  o.  which  he  wrote  for  you,  observe

Neh.  10.  32.  also  we  made  o.  for  us  to  charge  oursel.
Job  38.  33.  canstthou  guide  Arcturus  Pknowest  thoii
the  o.  of  heaven  ?  Jer.  31.  35.  |  33.  25
Psal.  99.  7-  they  kept  the  0.  that  he  gave  them
119-  91.  they  continue  according  to  thine  0.

Isa.  58.  2.  they  ask  ot  me  the  0.  of  justice,  delight
Jer.  10.  +  3  thee,  of  the  people  are  vanity
31.  36.  if  those  0.  depart  from  before  me,  saith  Lord
Ezek.  43.  18.  he  said,  these  are  the  o.  of  the  altar
44.  5.  concerning  the  0.  of  the  house  of  the  Lord
Mai.  3.  7.  ye  are  gone  away  from  mine  o.  not  kept
Luke  1.6.  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  walking  in  all
the  commandments  and  o.  of  the  Lord,  blameless
Eph.  2.  15.  law  of  commandments  contained  in  o.
Col.  2. 14.  blotting  out  the  hand-writing  of  o.

20.  why,  as  though  in  world,  areyesubject  to  o.  ?
Men.  9.  1.  the  first  covenant  had  o .  of  divine  service

10.  which  stood  in  carnal  0.  imposed  on  them

ORDINARY.

Ezek.  16.  27.  I  have  diminished  thine  0.  food
Acts  19. 1 39.  it  shall  he  determined  in  an  0. assembly
„  ORGAN,  S.

Gen.  4.21.  Jubal,  the  father  of  such  as  handle  thee.
Job  21.  12.  they  rejoice  at  the  sound  of  the  0.

30.  31.  my  o.  turned  into  voice  of  them  that  weep
Psal.  150.4.  praise  him  with  the  timbrel  and  o.
n  ORNAMENT.

Prov.  1.  9-  they  shall  be  an  0.  of  grace  fo  thy  head
4.  9.  she  shall  give  to  thine  head  an  o.  of  grace
25. 12.  as  an  0.  of  fine  gold,  so  is  a  wise  reprover
Isa.  30.  22.  ye  shall  defile  o.  of  thy  molten  images
49.  18.  shall  clothe  thee  with  them  all  as  with  ann.
hzek.  7.  H 0.  the  beauty  of  his  o.  he  set  it  in  majesty
Dan.  11.  f  16.  he  shall  stand  in  the  land  of  o.

1  Pet.  3.4.  even  the  o.  of  a  meek  and  quiet'spirit

ORNAMENTS.

Exod.  33.  4.  and  no  man  did  put  on  him  his  0.

5.  therefore  now  put  off  thy  o.  from  thee,  6.

Judg.  8.21 .  G  ideon  took  e.that  were  on  cainels’necks

26.  golden  ear-rings  that  he  requested,  beside  o.

2 '  Sam.  1 . 24.  weep  over  Sau  1,  who  put  o,  on  your
Isa.  3. 18.  shall  take  away  tinkling  0. about  their  feet
+  19.  the  chains,  the  bracelets,  and  the  spangled  0.
20.  bonnets,  and  the  0.  of  the  legs,  head-hands
61.  10.  as  a  bridegroom  decketh  himself  with  0.

Jer .  2. 32.  can  maid  forget  her  0.  or  bride  her  attire?


Jer.  4.  30.  though  thou  deckest  thee  with  o.  of  gold
Ezek.  16.  7.  and  thou  art  come  to  excellent  o.

11.  decked  thee  with  0.  put  bracelets  on  thy  hands
t  39.  and  shall  take  instruments  of  thy  0.

23.  40.  for  whom  thou  deckedst  thyself  with  0
ORPHANS.

Lam.  5.  3.  we  are  0.  our  mothers  are  as  widows
OSPREY,  OSSIFRAGE.

Lev.  11.13.  eagle,  osp.  and  ossif.  not  eat,  Dent.  14,12.
OSTRICH.

I  his  animal  is  ranged  among  birds  :  Moses  forbids
the  use  of  it  to  the  Hebrews,  Lev.  11.  +  16.  It  is
very  large,  has  very  long  legs,  its  wings  lery  short,
the  neck  about  the  length  of  four  or  five  spans.
The  Jeathers  if  its  wings  are  in  great  esteem,  and
are  used  as  an  ornament  for  hats,  beds,  and  cano¬
pies :  they  are  stained  of  several  colours,  and  made
into  zery  pretty  tufts:  they  are  hunted  by  way  of
course,  for  they  neierfly  ;  but  they  use  their  wings
to  assist  them  in  running  more  swiftly.

I  his  bird  is  made  the  symbol  of  cruel'  vid  forgetful¬
ness,  Job  39.  13,  14,  &e.  Lam.  4.  We  are  told
oj  it,  that  it  lays  its  eggs  upon  the  ground,  hides
them  under  the  sand,  and  the  sun  hatches  them.
As  the  Ostrich  is  extremely  large  and  heavy,  she
would  break  her  eggs  if  she  were  to  sit  upon  them
tike  other  birds ;  she  therefore  hides  them  in  the
sand,  watches  them,  and  hatches  them,  as  it  were,
uith  her  eye.  'J he  male  and  female  stay  with
them  alternately ,  and  while  one  of  them  goes  to
seek  its  provision,  the  other  does  not  leave  sig/u  of
them  :  however,  if  either  of  them  should  he  drhen
away,  or  go  too  far  from  their  nest,  they  could  not
find  their  eggs  again  :  and  it  is  probuhly  this,  that
has  given  occasion  to  what  is  said  of  their  cruelty
and  forgetfulness.

Job  39.  13.  gavest  thou  wings  and  feathers  to  o.  ?
OSTRICHES.

Job  30.  +  29.  and  1  am  a  companion  to  o.

Lam.  4.  3.  become  cruel,  like  o.  in  die  wilderness
Ol  HER.

Gen.  8.  10.  Noah  stayed  yet  ti.  seven  days,  12.

28.  17.  this  is  none  0.  hut  the  house  of  God

29.  27-  shalt  serve  with  me  jet  o.  seven  years,  30.

31.  50.  if  shalt  take  o.  wives  besides  my  daughters

32.  8.  then  the  v.  company  that  is  left  shall  escape
41.  3.  beheld,  seven  0.  kine  came  up,  19.

43. 14.  that  he  may  send  away  your  0.  brother
22.  o.  money  have  we  brought  down  to  buy  food
Lxod. 4.7.  behold,  it  was  turned  again  as  his  o.  flesh
18.7-  they  asked  each  o.  of  their  welfare

29.  41.  the  o.  lamb  offer  thou  at  even,  Nvm.  28.8.

30.  32.  ye  shall  not  make  any  o.  like  that  oil
Lev.  6.  11.  and  he  shall  put  off  his  garments,  and

put  on  o,  garments,  Ezek.  42.  14.  |  44.  19.
7.  24.  and  the  fat  may  be  used  in  any  0.  use
14.  42.  they  shall  take  0.  stones  and  o.  mortar
18.  18.  nor  take  a  wife  besides  the  0.  in  her  life
20.  24.  1  have  separated  you  from  0.  people,  26.
Nvm.  10.  21.  anti  thee,  did  set  lip  the  tabernacle
24.  1.  he  went  not  as  at  0.  times  to  seek  enchantm.

32.  38.  they  gave  0.  names  to  the  cities  they  built
36.  3.  if  they  he  married  to  any  of  the  0.  tribes
Josh.  11.  19.  all  o.  cities  they  took  in  battle
Judg.  13. 10.  the  man  that  came  to  me  the  o.  day

16.  17-  and  he  like  any  o.  man  ||  20.  as  at  0.  times
20.  31.  and  they  began  to  kill  as  at  0.  times

1  Sam.  3.  10.  the  Lord  called  as  at  0.  times,  Sam.
18.  lo.  David  played  with  his  hand  as  ato.  times

20.  25.  Saul  sat  on  his  seat  as  at  o.  times  by  wall

21.  9.  lake  it,  for  there  is  no  0.  save  that  here

2  Sam.  13.  16.  this  evil  is  greater  than  0.  thou  didst
2  Chron.  30.  23.  took  counsel,  to  keep  0.  seven  days

32.  22.  I  orcl  saved  Hezekiah  from  hand  of  all  o.
Neh.  4.  16.  the  v.  half  of  them  held  both  the  spears
5.  5.  for  0.  men  have  our  lands  and  vineyards
Job  8.  12.  the  flag  w  ithereth  before  any  0.  herb
24.  24.  they  are  taken  out  of  the  way,  as  all  o.

Psal.  73.  5.  the  wicked  are  not  in  trouble  as  0.

men,  neither  are  they  plagued  like  o.  men
85.  10.  righteousness  and  peace  kissed  each  0.

Eccl.  6.  5.  this  hath  more  rest  than  the  0.

Isa.  26.  13.  o.  lords  have  had  dominion  over  us
49.  20.  thou  shalt  have,  after  thou  hast  lost  the  0.
Ezek.  16.  34.  the  contrary  is  in  thee  trom  o.  women
Dan.  2.  11.  none  0.  can  shew  it  before  the  king

44.  the  kingdom  shall  not  he  left  to  0.  people
Ilos.  9.  1.  rejoice  not  for  joy,  O  Israel,  aso.  people

13.  10.  where  is  any  0.  to  save  thee  in  thy  cities?
Mat.  4.  21.  and  going  on  he  saw  o.  tw  o  brethren
5.  39.  on  the  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  o.  also

12.  13.  restored  w  hole  aso.  Mark  3.  5.  Luke  6. 10.

45.  then  he  taketh  seven  0.  spirits.  Luke  11.  26.
13.8.0.  fell  into  good  ground,  Mark4.ii.  Luke  8.8.

21.  36.  again  he  sent  0.  servants  more,  22.  4.

41.  he  will  let  out  his  vineyard  toe.  husbandmen
23.  23.  and  not  to  leave  0.  undone,  Luke  11.  42.

25. 11.  afterward  came  also  the  0.  virgins,  saying
16.  he  traded,  and  made  them  0.  five  talents

Mark  4.  19.  and  the  lusts  of  o.  things  entering  in
7-  4.  and  many  0.  things  there  be  they  hold,  8.

12.  31.  none  o., commandment  is  greater  than  these
32.  there  is  one  God,  and  there  is  none  0.  but  he

Luke  4.  43.  I  must  preach  kingd.  of  God  toe,  cities
10. 1.  the  l  ord  appointed  0.  seventy  also,  and  sent

14.  32.  or  else  w  hile  the  0.  is  yet  a  great  wav  off
18.  11.  1  thank  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  0.  men'

14.  he  went  down  justified  rather  than  the  0.

22.  65.  0.  things  blasphemously  spake  they  ag.  him
John  4.  38. men  laboured  ||  10. 16. 0.  sheep  l'have

15.  24.  it  I  had  not  done  works  none  o.  man  did
18.  16.  then  went  out  thato.  disciple,  spake  to  her
21.  25.  there  are  many  0.  things  w  hich  Jesus  did

Acts  2.  4.  they  began  to  speak  with  0.  tongues
40.  and  with  many  0.  words  did  he  testify
4.  12.  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  0.  none  0.

name  under  heaven  w  hereby  we  must  be  saved
8.  34.  speaketh  he  nf  himself,  or  of  some  o.  man  ?
Bom.  8.  39.  nor  0.  creature  shall  be  able  to  separate

13.  9.  and  if  there  he  my  o.  commandment,  it  is

1  Cor.  1.  16.  I  know  uot  whether  I  baptized  any  o.

3. 11.  o.  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  is  laid

34.5


O  YE


O  YE


O  V  E


1  Cor. 9. 5.  power  to  lead  about  sist.  well  as  a.  apost.

11.  21.  for  in  eating  every  one  taketh  before  o.

14.  17.  thou  givest  thanks,  but  the  0.  is  not  eddied

2i.  with  men  of  0.  tongues  and  0.  lips  l  will  speak
29.  let  the  prophets  speak,  and  let  the  0.  judge

15.  37.  it  may  chance  of  wheat,  or  some  0.  grain

2  Cor.  8.  13.  for  I  mean  not  that  0.  men  be  eased

10.  15.  not  boasting  ol  d.  men's  labours

11.  8.  L  robbed  0.  churches  to  do  you  service

13.  2.  I  write  to  them  and  to  all  o.  that  it  1  come

Gal.  1.  19.  0.  apostles  saw  1  none,  save  James
o  13  and  the  0.  Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him
Eph.  3.  5.  which  in  0.  ages  was  not  made  known

4  17.  that  ye  walk  not  as  0.  Gentiles  walk
Phil.  1.  17.  but  the  0.  preach  Christ  of  love

2  3  let  each  esteem  0.  better  than  themselves
3!  4.’  if  any  o.  thinketh  that  he  might  trust  in  flesh
4'  3"  with  Ciement  and  0.  my  fellow-labourers
2  The  si.  1.  3.  and  charity  toward  each  0.  aboundeth
1  Tim  1.  3.  charge  that  they  teach  no  0.  doctrine  .

10.  be  any  o.  thing  contrary  to  sound  doctrine

5  22.  neither  be  partaker  of  0.  men’s  sin3
Jam  5.  12.  neither  swear  by  any  o.  oath,  but  let

1  Pet.  4.  15.  as  a  busy-body  in  0.  men’s  matters

2  Pet.  3.  16.  they  wrest,  as  they  do  o.  scriptures
Rev.  2.  24.  I  will  put  on  you  none  0.  burden

8. 13.  by  reason  of  0.  the  0.  voices  of  the  trumpet
See  God,  Gods,  One,  Side.

OTHERS.

Job  8.  19.  and  out  of  the  earth  shall  0.  grow
31.  10.  and  let  a.  bow  down  upon  her
34.  24.  and  he  shall  set  o.  in  their  stead

26.  he  striketh  them  in  the  open  sight  ot  0.

Psal.  49.  10.  they  die,  and  leave  their  wealth  to  0.
Prov  5.  9.  lest  thou  give  thine  honour  to  0.

Eccl  7.22.  that  thou  thyself  likewise  hast  cursed  0.

Isa  56.  8.  yet  will  1  gather  a.  to  him,  besides  those
Jer.  6.  12.  their  houses  shall  be  turned  to  a.

8  10.  1  will  give  their  wives  unto  0.  and  fields
Ezek.  13.  6.  ami  they  have  made  0.  to  hope
10  and  a.  daubed  it  with  untempered  mortar
Han.7 . 19.  fourth  beast  which  was  diverse  from  all  a.

11  4.  for  his  kingdom  shall  be  plucked  up  for  a.
Mat.  5.  47.  what  do  ye  more  than  a.  ?

16  14.  a.  say  that  thou  art  Jeremias,  or  one  ot  the
old  prophets,  Mark  6.  15.  I  8.  28.  Luke  9.  8,19-
20  3  he  saw  a.  standing  idle  in  the  market
21.  8.  a.  cut  down  branches  from  trees,  Mark 11.  8.

26.  67.  a.  smote  him  with  the  palms  of  their  hands
Mark  12.  9.  will  give  vineyard  to  a.  Luke  20.  16.

15.  31.  saved  a.  himself  he  cannot,  Luke  2.3.  35.
Luke  8  3.  and  many  a.  which  ministered  to  him
John  18.  34.  or  did  a.  tell  it  thee  ot  me  ?

1  Cor.  9.  2.  if  1  be  not  an  apostle  to  a.  yet  to  you

12.  if  a.  be  partakers  of  this  power  over  you

27.  lest  when  1  have  preached  to  a.  I  be  oust-away

10.29.  conscience,  not  thine  own,  hut  of  the  a.

14.  19.  that  by  my  voice  1  might  teach  a.  also

2  Cor.  3. 1.  or  need  we,  assomea.epist.  of  commend.

8.  8.  but  by  occasion  of  the  forwardness  ot  a.

Eph.  2.  3.  we  were  children  of  wrath,  even  as  a.

Phi!  2  4.  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  a.

1  Then.  2.  6.  neither  of  you,  not  vet  of  a.  sought  we
4.13.  that  ye  sorrow  not  as  a.  which  have  no  hope

5.  6.  let  us  not  sleep  as  do  a.  but  let  us  watch

1  Ttm.  5.  20.  them  that  sin  rebuke,  that  a.  may  fear

2  Tun.  2.2.  who  shall  he  able  to  teach  a.  also
Heb.  9.  25.  entered  every  year  with  the  blood  of  a.

11.  35.  a.  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance
36.  0.  had  trial  of  cruel  mockings  and  scourgings

Jude  23.  a.  save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  fire
OTHERWISE.

2  Sam.  18. 13.  a.  1  should  have  wrought  falsh.  against
mine  own  life,  for  no  matter  is  hid  from  the  king

1  Kings  1.21.  a.  1  and  my  son  Solomon  be  counted

offenders

2  Chr.  30.  18.  they  eat  passover  a.  than  was  written
Psul.  38.  16.  hear  me,  lest  a.  should  rejoice  over  me
Mat.  6.  1.  a.  have  no  reward  of  your  Father  in  heav.
Rom.  11.  6.  not  of  works,  a.  grace  is  no  more  grace  ;

then  no  more  of  grace,  0.  work  is  no  more  work

22.  toward  thee  goodn.  a.  thou  shalt  also  be  cut  off
2  Cor.  11.  16  if  a.  yet  as  a  fool  receive  me  to  boast
Gal.  5.  10.  that  you  will  be  none  a.  minded
Phil .  3.  15.  and  if  in  any  thing  you  be  a.  minded
1  Tim.  5.  25.  and  they  that  are  a.  cannot  be  hid

6.  3.  if  any  man  teach  a.  and  consent  not  to  words
Heb  9  17.  a.  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  whilst  testator
OUCHES.

Exod.  28.  11.  set  the  stones  in  a.  of  gold,  39. 6, 13.

13.  shalt  make  a.  of  gold  ||  25.  fasten  in  the  two  a.

14.  and  fasten  wreathen  chains  to  the  a.  39.  18.

OVEN

Is  a  place  for  baking,  Lev.  2.  4.  To  which  are
compared,  [1]  Persons  inflamed  with  lust ;  who,
by  yielding  to  the  temptations  of  Satan,  and  en¬
couraging  them,  suffer  sin  to  seize  upon  the  whole
man,  both  the  understanding ,  will,  affections,  and
members  ;  as  a  baker  doth  by  a  continual  supply
of  fuel  heat  his  oven  to  the  highest  degree,  Hos.

J.  4.  [2]  Such  as  are  enemies  to  God,  upon  whom
e  will  bring  unavoidable  destruction :  as  wood,
when  it  is  cast  into  the  fire,  is  quickly  dissolved,
Psal.  21.  9.  [3]  The  day  of  judgment,  when  the
judgment  of  God  will  fall  dreadfully  and  terribly
upon  the  wicked  and  ungodly,  Mai.  4.  1.

Lev.  2.  4.  of  a  meat-offering  baken  in  the  a.  7  •  9
11.  35.  be  unclean,  whether  it  be  a.  or  ranges
26.  26.  ten  women  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one  a.
Psal.  21.  9.  thou  shalt  make  them  as  a  fiery  a.
Lam.  5.  10.  our  skin  was  black  like  an  a.  for  famine
Hos.  7.  4.  adulterers,  as  an  a.  heated  by  the  baker
6.  they  have  made  ready  their  heart  like  an  a.

7.  are  all  hot  as  an  a.  have  devoured  their  judges
Mai.  4.  1.  the  day  cometh  that  shall  burn  as  an  a.
Mat.  6.  30.  to-morrow  is  cast  into  a.  Luke  12.  28.
OVENS.

Exod.  8.  3.  the  frogs  shall  come  into  thine  a.

OVEB

Gen.  25.  25.  first  red,  all  a.  ike  an  hairy  garment
27  .  29.  be  lord  a.  thy  brethicn,  iet  them  bow  to  thee
41.  40.  Pharaoh  said,  thou  shalt  be  a.  my  house

346


Exod.  16. 18.  gathered  much  had  noth.  a.  2  Cor. 8. 15.
23.  what  remaineth  a.  lay  up  until  the  morning
30.  6.  the  mercy-seat,  a.  the  testimony,  Heb.  9.  5.
37  9  the  cherubims  covered  a.  the  mercy  seat
40.  36.  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  a.  the  tahern.


iU.  OU.  me  VIUUU  w  cco  . . -  -

Lev.  14.  5.  one  be  killed  a.  running  water,  6.  50.


Lev .  14.  o.  one  ue  u.  lumnwr,  »» — .

Sum,  1 . 50.  thou  shalt  appoint  Levites  a.  tabernacle
3.  49.  a.  and  above  them  that  were  redeemed
10  10.  blow  with  trumpets  a.  the  burnt  offerings
27!  16.  let  the  Lord  set  a  man  a.  the  congregation
Judg.  5.  13.  dominion  a.  the  nobles,  a.  the  mighty
9.  9.  and  goto  be  promoted  a.  the  trees,  ll.  43.

2  Sam.  1.  17.  a.  Saul  and  Jonathan  his  son,  ~4.

2  9.  he  made  Ish-bosheth  king  a.  Gilead, a.  Ashm
ites  a.  Jezreel,  a.  Ephraim,  and  a.  Lenjamin
0  Kings  8.  20.  Edom  made  a  king  a.  themselves
\  Chr  on.  29.  3.  a.  and  above  all  1  have  prepared
Ezra  9  6  our  iniquities  are  increased  a.  our  heads
Job  14.  16.  dost  thou  not  watch  a.  my  sin
41.  34.  he  is  a  king  a.  the  children  ol  pride
Psal.  23.  5.  anointestmy  head,  my  cup  runneth  a.

27  12-  deliver  me  not  a.  to  the  will  ot  mine  enemies
118.  Il8.  but  he  hath  not  given  me  a.  to  death
145.  9.  his  tender  mercies  are  a.  all  Ins  works
Cant  2.  1 1.  for  lo,  winter  is  past,  rain  is  a.  and  gone
Jer.  1.  10.  set  thee  a.  the  nations  and  a.  kingdoms
Dan  4.  17-  he  setteth  up  a.  it  the  basest  of  men
6.  3.  king  thought  to  set  him  a.  the  whole  realm
Hos  10  5.  for  the  people  shall  mourn  a.  it  and  priest
Mic.  3.6.  and  the  day  shall  be  dark  a.  them
Mat.  25.  21.  I  will  make  thee  ruler  a.  many,  23.
Luke  6.  38.  measure  shaken  together ,  and  running  a.

15  7  more  joy  a.  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  10.

19’  14  we  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  a.  us
17.  been  faithful,  have  thou  authority  a.  ten  cities
41.  come  near,  he  beheld  city,  and  wept  a.  it
4cts  6  3  whom  we  may  appoint  a.  this  business
Rom.  7.  1.  that  the  law  hath  dominion  a.  a  man
9.  21.  hath  not  the  potter  power  a.  the  clay
Eph.  4. 19.  have  given  themselvesa.  to  lasciviousness
Tim’ 2.  12.  not  usurp  authority  0.  the  man
Pet  3  12.  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  a.  the  righteous
Rev.  2.  26.  to  him  will  I  give  power  a.  the  nations
OVER  against.

Exod.  26.  35.  candlestick  a.  against  table,  40.  24.
Xum.  8.  2.  lamps  give  light  a.  against  candlestick,  3.

2  Sam  5.  23.  fetch  a  compass  behind  them,  come  on
thein'e.  against  mulberry-trees,  1  Chr.  14.  14.

1  Kings  20.  29.  they  pitched  one  a.  against  the  other
Neh.  7.  3.  appoint  every  one  to  be  a.  against  house
Eccl  7  14.  God  hath  set  one  a.  against  the  other
Jer.  31.  39.  the  line  shall  yet  go  forth  a.  against  it
Mat  21.  2.  go  into  village  a.  against  you,  and  ye

shall  find  an  ass  tied,  Mark  11.  2.  Luke  19.  30.
27.  61.  and  Mary  sitting  a.  against  the  sepulchre
See  All,  Him,  Jordan,  Israel,  Me,  Ihee,
Them,  Us,  You.

’  OVERCAME.

Jets  19. 16.  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was,  a.  them
Rev.  3.  21.  even  as  I  also  a.  and  am  set  down  at
12  11  and  they  a.  him  by  the  blood  ot  the  Lamb
‘  OVERCHARGE.

2  Car.  2.  5.  but  in  part,  that  I  may  not  a.  you  all

O  V  EltdllA  UGED.

Luke  21.  34.  lest  your  hearts  be  a.  with  surfeiting
OVERCOME.

Exod.  32.  18.  voice  of  them  that  cry  for  being  a.

Tsa.  28.  1.  the  head  of  them  that  are  a.  with  wine
Eph.  6.  +  13.  withstand,  and  having  a.  all  to  stand
2  Pet .  2. 19.  of  whom  man  is  o .  ot  same  is  he  brought

20  for  if  they  are  again  entangled  therein  and  a

OVERCOME.

Gen.  49.  19.  troop  shall  a.  him,  but  he  shall  a.  at  last
Sum.  13.  30.  go  up,  for  we  are  well  able  to  a.  it
22.  11.  peradventure  l  shall  be  able  to  a.  them
2  Kings  16.  5.  they  besieged  Ahaz,  could  not  a.  him
Cant.  6.  5.  turn  away  thine  eyes,  for  they  have  a.  me
Jer.  23.  9.  like  a  man  whom  wine  hath  a.

Luke  11.  22.  but  when  a  stronger  shall  a.  him
John  16.  33.  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  a.  the  world
Rom.  3.  4.  that  mightest  a.  when  thou  art  judged

12.  21.  be  not  a.  of  evil,  hut  a.  evil  with  good
1  John  2.  13.  because  ye  have  a.  the  wicked  one,  14.

4  4.  ye  are  of  God  and  have  a.  them,  because
Rev.  11.7.  beast  shall  a.  the  witnesses  and  kill  them

13.  7-  lo  make  war  with  the  saints,  and  to  u.  them
17  14  shall  make  war,  and  Lamb  shall  o.  them

*’  OVERCOMETH.

1  John  5.  4.  whosoever  is  born  ot  God,  a.  the  world,
this  is  victory  that  a.  world,  even  our  faith
5.  who  is  he  that  a.  world,  but  he  that  believeth
Rev.  2.  7-  to  him  that  a.  will  l  give  ot  tree  of  life
11.  he  that  a.  shall  not  be  hurt  of  second  death
17.  to  him  that  a.  will  I  give  to  eat  hidden  manna
26.  to  him  that  a.  will  l  give  power  over  nations
3.  5.  lie  that  a.  shall  be  clothed  in  white  raiment
12  him  that  a.  will  I  make  pillar  in  temple  of  G.
21.  to  him  that  a.  will  l  grant  to  sit  with  me

21  7.  he  that  0.  shall  inherit  all  tilings,  1  his  God
OVERDRIVE.

Gen  33.  13.  if  men  should  «.  them  all  flock  will  die
OVERFLOW.

Dent.  11.  4.  he  made  water  of  Red  sea  to  a.  them
Psal.  69.  2.  1  am  come  where  the  floods  a.  me
15.  let  not  waterfloods  a.  me,  nor  deep  swallow
Isa.  8.  8.  he  shall  pass  through  .1  udah,  a.  and  go  over
10.  22.  consumption  decreed  shall.  a.  with  righteo.
28!  17.  the  waters  shall  a.  the  hiding  place
43.  2.  and  through  the  rivers  they  shall  not  a.  thee
Jer.  47..  2.  waters  of  the  north  shall  a.  the  land
Dan.  11.  10.  one  shall  certainly  come  and  a.  26.  40.
Toel  2  24.  fats  shall  a.  with  wine  and  oil,  3.  13.
OVERFLOWED.

Psal.  78.  20.  he  smote  the  rock,  and  streams  a.

0  Pet.  3.  6.  world  being  a.  with  water,  perished
OVER  FI  OWETH.

Josh  3.  15.  in  harvest  Jordan  q  all  it3  banks
OVERFLOWING.

Job  28.  11.  he  bindeth  the  floods  from  a.


38


25.  who  divided  a  water-cqurse  for  a.  of  waters


Isa.  28.  2.  which  as  a  flood  of  mighty  waters  a.
15.  when  the  a.  scourge  shall  pass  through,  18.


Isa.  30. 28.  his  breath  as  an  a.  stream  shall  reach
Jer  47. 2.  out  of  the  north  shall  be  an  0.  flood
Ezek.  13.  11.  there  shall  be  an  a.  shower,  13.

38.  22.  I  will  rain  on  him  an  a.  rain  and  hailstones
l [ab  3. 10.  the  a.  of  the  water  passed  by  the  deep
OVERFLOWN.

1  Chron.  12. 15.  went  over  Jordan  when  it  had  0.

Job  22.  16.  whose  foundation  was  a.  with  a  flood
Dan  11.  22.  with  arms  of  a  flood  shall  they  be  a.
OVERLAY.

Exod.  25. 11.  shalt  a.  ark  with  pure  gold,  24.  |  30.  3,

27  2  a.  the  horns  of  the  altar  with  brass,  38.  2.
OVERLAID.

Exod.  26.  32.  pillars  of  shiftim-wood  a.  with  gold
38.  6.  he  a.  the  staves  of  shittim-wood  with  brass

1  Kings  3.  19.  her  child  died,  because  she  a.  it

2  Chron.  4.  9.  he  a.  the  doors  of  them  with  brass
Cant.  5. 14.  belly  is  as  bright  ivory  a.  with  sapphires

See  Gold.

OVERLAYING.

Exod.  38.  17.  the  a.  ot  their  chapiters  of  silver
19  and  0.  of  their  chapiters  and  fillets  of  silver
OVERLIVED.

Josh.  24.  31.  the  days  of  the  elders  that  a.  Joshua
OVERMUCH.

Eccl.  7. 16.  be  not  righteous  a.  ||  17 .  be  not  a.  wicked
2  Cor.  2.7.  lest  such  he  swallowed  up  with  0.  sorrow
OVERPASS.

Jer.  5.28.  they  shine,  they  0,  the  deeds  of  wicked
OVERPAST.

Psal.  57. 1.  make  refuge  until  these  calamities  be  >,
Isa.  £6.  20.  hide  thyself  until  indignation  be  0.
OVERPLUS.

Lev.  25.  27-  let  him  restore  the  a.  to  the  man
OVERRAN.

2  Sam.  18.  23.  Ahimaaz  ran  by  plain  and  a.  Cushi-
OVERRUNNING.

Nah.  1.  8.  with  an  a.  flood  he  will  make  an  end
OVERSEE.

1  Chron.  9.  29.  some  appointed  to  a.  the  vessels

15.  +  21.  with  harps  on  the  eighth  to  a.

23.  t  4.  of  which  24,000  were  to  a.  the  work

2  Chron.  2. 2.  three  thousand  six  hundred  too.  them

OVERSEER.

Gen.  39.  4.  he  made  him  a.  over  his  house,  5.

Neh.  11.  9.  Joel  was  their  a.  ||  14.  Zabdiel  was  a.

22.  a.  of  Levites  was  Uzzi  ||  12.  42.  Jezrahiah  a-
Prov.  6.  7.  the  ant  having  no  guide  a.  or  ruler
OVERSEERS.

Gen.  41.  34.  let  Pharaoh  appoint  a.  in  the  land
2  Chron.  2. 18-  Solomon  set  3,600  a.  of  the  work
31.  13.  they  were  a.  under  hand  of  Cononiah
34.  12.  the  a.  of  all  them  that  wrought,  13.

17.  have  delivered  money  into  the  hand  of  a.

Acts  20.  28.  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  you  0.
OVERSHADOW.

Luke  1.  35.  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  a.  thee
Acts  5.  15.  that  shadow  of  Peter  might  a.  them
OVERSHADOWED.

Mat.  17.  5.  a  cloud  a.  them,  Mark  9.  7 •  Luke  9.  34.
OVERSIGHT.

Gen.  43. 12.  carry  it  again,  peradventure  itwasana,
Num.  3.  32.  have  the  a.  of  them  that  keep  charge
4.  16.  pertameth  the  a.  of  all  the  tabernacle
o  Rings  12. 11.  of  them  that  had  the  a.  of  the  house-
of  the  Lord,  22.  5,  9.  2  Chron.  34.  10.

1  Ch-ron.  9.  23.  had  the  a.  of  the  gates  of  the  house
Neh.  11.  16.  had  the  a.  of  the  outward  business
13.  4.  the  a.  of  the  chamber  of  the  house  ot  God
1  Pet.  5. 2.  taking  a.  not  by  constraint,  but  willingly
OVERSPREAD.

Gen.  9. 19.  and  of  them  was  the  whole  earth  0.
OVERSPREADING.

Dan.  9.  27.  for  the  a.  of  abominations  be  desolate
OVERTAKE.

Gen.  44.  4.  up,  when  thou  dost  a.  them,  say  to  them
Exod.  15.9.  enemy  said,  1  will  pursue,  1  will  a.
Deut.  19. 6.  lest  the  avenger  of  blood  a.  the  slayer

28.  2.  all  these  blessings  shall  come  and  a.  thee

15.  that  ail  these  curses  shall  a.  thee,  45.

Josh.  2.5.  pursue  after  them,  tor  ye  shall  a.  them

1  Sam.  30. 8.  shall  1  a.  them,  thou  shalt  surely  0.  them

2  Sam.  15.14.  lest  Absalom  a.  us  suddenly ,  and  bring
Isa.  59.9.  judgment  is  far,  neither  doth  justice  a.  us
Jer.  42.  16.  the  sword  ye  feared  shall  a.  you
Hos.  2.7.  shall  follow,  but  she  shall  not  a.  her  lovers

10  9.  the  battle  in  Gibeah  did  not  a.  them
Amos  9.  10.  the  evil  shall  not  a.  nor  prevent  us
13.  behold,  the  plowman  shall  a.  the  reaper
Zech.  l.t 6.  my  words,  did  they  not  a.  your  ia“'.e*?

1  Thess.  5.  4.  that  that  day  should  a.  you  as  athiet
OVERTAKEN.  .

Ps.  18. 37. 1  have  pursued  mine  enemies  and  a.  them
Gal.  6.  1.  brethren,  if  a  man  he  a.  in  a  fault
OVERTAKE  TH.  J

1  Chron.  21. 12.  flee  three  months,  till  sword  a.  thee

OVERTHREW.  .

Gen.  19.  25.  God  a.  these  cities  and  the  plain,  29.
Exod.  14.  27.  Lord  0.  the  Egyptians,  Psal.  136.
Deut.  29.  23.  which  Lord  a.  in  his  anger  and  wratf
Isa.  13.  19-  Babylon  shall  be,  as  when  God  a
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Jer.  50.  40.  Amo.
4.  11.  .  .  .  ,

Jer.  20.  16.  let  that  man  be  as  the  cities  Lord  a.
Mat.  21.  12.  Jesus  0.  tables  ot  the  money  changer.

ill  the  temple,  Mark  11.  15.  John  ..  lo
OVERTHROW..

Gen.  19.  21.  I  hav  e  accepted  thee,  will  not  a.tnistcn:
Exod.  23.24.  but  thou  shalt  utterly  a.  their  gods
Deut.  12.3.  ye  shalla.  their  altars,  and  break  pillar

2  Sam.  10.  .3.  hath  not  David  sent  to  spy  it  out  and  a
11.  25.  make  thy  battle  more  strong,  and  a.  it

1  Chr.  19.3.  David  hath  sent  to  o.  and  spy  tt ie  lan
Psal.  106.  26.  his  hand  to  a.  them  m  the  yvildernes

27.  to  0.  their  seed  also  among  the  nations
140.  4.  who  have  purposed  to  0.  my  goings
11.  evil  shall  hunt  the  violent  man  to  a.  him
Pro v.  18.  5.  not  good  to  a.  righteous  in  judgment
Hag.  2.  22.  I  will  a.  the  throne  of  kingdoms,  1  «
o.  the  chariots  and  those  that  ride  m  th  ••
Acts  5.  39.  but  if  it  be  of  God,  ve  cannot  v.ii

2  Tim.  2.  18.  have  erred,  and  a.  the  faith  ot  soma-  >


O  U  G


OUT


OWN


OVERTHROW.

?en.  19.  29.  God  sent  Lot  out  of  the  midst  of  the  o.
lent.  29-  23.  as  in  the  o.  of  Sodom,  Jer.  49.  18.

!  Pet.  2.  6.  condemned  the  cities  with  ano.  making
OVERTHROWETH.

fob  12.  19.  he  leadeth  princes,  and  o.  the  mighty
°tov.  13.  6.  but  wickedness  o.  the  sinner

21.  12.  God  o.  the  wicked  for  their  wickedness

22.  12.  he  o.  the  words  of  the  transgressor
29-  4.  but  lie  that  receiveth  gifts  o,  the  land

OVERTHROWN.

Zxod.  15.  7-  hast  o.  them  that  rose  up  against  thee
rudg.  9.  40.  and  many  were  o.  and  wounded
Sam.  17-  9.  when  some  of  them  be  0.  at  the  first
Chron.  14.  13.  and  the  Ethiopians  were  0.
rob  19.  6.  know  now  that  God  hath  0.  me
°sal.  141.  6.  when  their  judges  are  0.  in  stony  places
3rov.  11.  11.  city  is  o.  by  the  mouth  of  the  wicked

12.  7-  wicked  areo.JI  14. 11.  house  of  wicked  o.

'sa.  1. 7.  your  land  is  desolate  as  0.  by  strangers
'er.  18.  23.  but  let  them  be  o.  before  thee

lam.  4.  6.  sin  of  Sodom,  that  waso.  as  in  a  moment

lan.  11.  41.  and  many  countries  shall  be  0.
hnos  4.  11.  I  have  o.  some  of  you,  as  Sodom
'onah  3.  4.  yet  forty  days  and  N  ineveh  shall  be  0.
Cor.  10.  5.  for  they  were  o.  in  the  wilderness

OVERTOOK.

rsn.  31.  23.  they  o.  Jacob  in  the  mount  Gilead

25.  Laban  0.  Jacob  ||  44.  6.  the  steward  o.  them
Ixod.  14.  9.  Egyptians^,  them  encamping  by  sea
iidg.  18.  22.  Micah  0.  the  children  of  Dan

20.  42.  but  the  battle  o.  the  men  of  Benjamin
Kings  25.  5.  the  army  of  Chaldees  o.  Zedekiah  in
the  plains  of  Jericho,  Jer.  39.  5.  |  52.  8.
.am,  1.  3.  all  her  persecutors  o.  her  between  straits
OVERTURN.

ob  12.  15.  he  sendeth  out  waters,  they  0.  earth
]tek.  21.  27.  I  w  ill  o.  o.  o.  it,  until  he  come  whose
OVERTURN  ETH.

oh  9.  5.  which  o.  the  mountains  in  his  anger
28.  9.  he  0.  the  mountains  by  the  roots
54.  25.  knows  their  works  and  o.  them  in  night
OVERTU RN  ED.

udg.  7.  13.  smote  the  tent  that  it  fell  and  0.  it
OVERWHELM.

ob  6.  27.  ye  0.  fatherless,  dig  a  pit  for  your  friend
OVERWHELMED.

'sal.  55.  5.  trembling  come,  and  horror  hath  0.  me
>1.  2.  when  my  heart  is  o.  lead  me  to  the  rock

7.  3.  and  my  spirit  was  o.  142.  3. 1  143.  4.

8.  53.  he  led  them  on,  but  the  sea  o.  their  enemies
.24.  4.  then  the  waters  had  0.  us  stream  gone  over

OVERWISE.

■cel.  7. 16.  not  right,  overmuch,  nor  make  thyself  o.
OUGHT  ;  see  Owed.

OUGHT.

en.  20.  9.  that  0.  not  be  done,  .34.  J.  Lev.  4.  2,  27.
Sam.  13.  12.  no  such  thing  o.  to  be  done  in  Israel
Chron.  12.  32.  to  know  what  Israel  o.  to  do
5.  2.  none  o.  to  carry  the  ark  but  the  Levites
Chr.  13.  5.o.  ye  not  to  know  Lord  gave  kingdom
'*«•  5.  9.  o.  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  God  ?

'sal.  76.  11.  bring  presents  to  him  whoo.  be  feared
lot.  23.  23.  these  0.  ye  to  have  done,  Luke  11.  42.
lark  13.  14.  desolation  standing  w'here  it  0.  not
uke  12.  12.  in  the  same  hour  what  ye  o.  to  say
.3.  14.  there  are  six  days  in  which  men  0.  to  work

16.  0.  not  this  woman  to  be  loosed  from  this  bond

8.  1.  that  men  o.  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint

14.  26.  O  fools.  0.  not  Christ  to  have  suffered  ?

>hn  4.  20.  the  place  where  men  o.  to  worship

3.  14.  ye  also  o.  to  wash  one  another's  feet

9.7.  we  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  0.  to  die
cts5.  29.  we  <>.  to  obey  God  rather  than  men
7.  29.  weo.  not  to  think  the  Godhead  like  gold

9.  .36.  ye  o.  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing  rash  ly
0.  35.  how  so  labouring  ye  0.  to  support  the  weak
J.  21.  that  they  0.  not  to  circumcise  their  children

4.  19.  who  0.  to  have  been  here  before  thee

5.  10.  judgment-seat,  where  I  o.  to  be  judged

24.  crying,  that  he  0.  not  to  live  any  longer

».  9.  that!  o.  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  Jesus
om.  8.  26.  we  know  not  what  to  pray  for  as  we  o.

2.  3.  not  think  of  himself  more  highly  than  he  o.

5.  1.  we  0.  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak
tor.  8.  2.  he  knoweth  nothing  as  he  o.  to  know

I.  7.  for  a  man  indeed  0.  not  to  cover  his  head

10.  the  woman  0.  to  have  power  on  her  head
tor.  2.3.  sorrow  from  them,  of  whom  I  o.  to  rejoice
7*  ye  o.  rather  to  forgive  him  and  comfort  him

*•  11.  for  1  o.  to  have  been  commended  of  you
^1’ k  ^  children  o.  not  to  lay  up  for  the  parents
pn. 5.28.  so  0.  men  to  love  their  wives  as  their  bodies
'•  20.  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  o.  to  speak,  Col.  4. 4.
°t  4.  6.  know  how  ye  0.  to  answer  every  man
loess.  4.  1.  ye  received  of  us  how  ye  0.  to  walk
Ikess.  3. yourselves  know  how  ye  0.  to  follow  us
Dm.  5.  1.3.  speaking  things  which  they  o.  not
it-  1.  11.  teaching  things  which  they  o.  not
o  u'  Jveo-  t0  ?*ve  t*1e  niore earnest  heed
i'io  Pe?pteand  for  himself,  to  offer  for  sins

*2.  for  when  tor  the  time  ye  0.  to  be  teachers

brethren,  these  things  0.  not  so  to  be
-  15.  for  that  ye  0.  to  sajT,  if  the  Lord  will
tet.  3. 11.  what  manner  of  persons  o.  ye  to  be
John  2.  6.  o.  himself  also  to  walk  as  he  walked
’•  |o-  ?•  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren
V  /  ’  n  ^0ve<l  ,IS>  we  0.  also  love  one  another
•loan  8.  we  therefore  0.  to  receive  such
OUGHT,  Substantive.

'”'10  u  '  be  knew  not  0.  that  he  had,  save  bread
:<•  18.  there  is  not  0.  left,  but  our  bodies  and  lands
„:P‘  >’e  shall  not  diminish  0.  thereof,  11.  19.

>0  11  !?ou  sbalt  not  carry  forth  0.  of  the  flesh
'Q  of"  r  a  mran  borrow  0.  of  his  neighbour

*  ii  besh  of  the  consecrations  remain

1  v  25.  whoso  beareth  0.  of  carcase  is  unclean

*  0.  it  0.  remain  unto  third  day,  shall  be  burnt
>7  If*  -c  ou  sellesto.  or  buyest.  0.  from  thy  neigh.

J.  31.  it  a  man  will  redeem  o.  of  his  tithes

10.  24.  it  o.  be  committed  by  ignorance
Jo  the  soul  that  doeth  0.  presumptuously


Num.30. 6.  when  she  vowed, or  utt.  0.  outofher  lips
Deut.  4.  2.  ye  shall  not  add  or  diminish  o.  from  it

15.  2.  creditor  that  lendeth  0.  to  his  neighbour

26.  14.  neither  have  I  taken  o.  in  my  mourning  for
any  unclean  use,  nor  given  0.  thereof  for  dead
Josh.  21.  45.  there  failed  not  0.  of  any  good  thing
Ruth  1.  17-  it  o.  but  death  part  thee  and  me
1  Nam.  12.4.  nor  hast  thou  taken  o.  of  any  man’s  hand
5.  that  ye  have  not  found  o.  in  my  hand

25.  7-  neither  was  there  0.  missing  to  them

30.  22.  we  will  not  give  them  o.  of  the  spoil

2 Nam. .3.35.  if  1  taste  bread  ore.  else,  till  sun  be  down

14.  10.  whoso  saith  0.  to  thee,  bring  him  to  me
19.  none  can  turn  from  0.  my  lord  hath  spoken
Mat.  5.  23.  that  thy  brother  hath  0.  against  thee

21.  .3.  if  any  man  say  o.  to  you,  ye  shall  say
Mark  7.  12.  and  ye  suffer  him  no  more  to  do  o.

8.  23.  he  took  blind  man  and  asked  him  if  he  saw  o.

11.  25.  forgive,  if  ye  haveo.  against  any
John  4.  33.  hath  any  man  brought  him  o.  to  eat?
Acts  4.  32.  neither  said  any  that  0.  was  his  own
24.  19.  and  object,  if  they  had  0.  against  me
28.  19.  that  1  had  o.  to  accuse  my  nation  of
Philem.  18.  if  he  oweth  thee  o.  put  to  my  account
O UGH  TEST.

1  Kings  2.  9.  and  knowest  what  thou  0.  to  do  to  him
Mat.  25.  27.  thou  0.  to  have  put  my  money  to
Acts  10.  6.  he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  o.  to  do
1  Tim.  3.  15.  how  thou  0.  to  behave  thyself
OUR;  see  Brother,  Father,  Lord.
OURS.

Gen.  26.  20.  did  strive,  saying,  the  water  is  o.

31.  16.  God  hath  taken  from  our  father  that  is  0.

34.  23.  shall  not  every  beast  of  theirs  be  o.  ?

Ar?/w. -.32.32.  possession  on  this  side  Jordan  may  be  o.

1  Kings  22.  3.  know  that  Ramoth  in  Gilead  is  0.
Ezek.  36.  2.  ancient  high  places  are  o.  in  possession
Mark  12.  7.  and  inheritance  shall  be  o.  Luke  20.  14.

1  Cor.  1.  2.  all  that  call  on  Jesus,  both  theirsando.

2  Cor.  1.  14.  as  ye  also  are  0.  in  the  day  of  the  Lore!
Tit.  3.  14.  leto.  learn  to  maintain  good  works

OUT.

Gen.  2.9.  0.  of  ground  made  Lord  to  grow  every  tree

23.  woman,  because  she  was  taken  n.  of  man
.3.  19.  for  n.  of  it  wastthou  taken  ;  dust  thou  art
Num.  .32.  2.3.  and  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  o.
Job  28.  5.  as  for  the  earth  o.  of  it  cometb  bread
Psal.  8.  2.  g.  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings
82.  5.  foundations  of  the  earth  are  o.  of  course
94.  12.  blessed,  whom  thou  teachest  o.  of  thy  law
118.  26.  we  have  blessed  you  o.  of  house  of  Lord
Prov.  4. 23.  keep  heart,  for  0.  of  it  are  issues  of  life
31.  18.  her  candle  goeth  not  o.  by  night
Isa.  13.  9.  he  shall  destroy  sinners  thereof  0.  of  it

29. 18.  eyes  shall  see  0.  of  obscurity,  o.  of  darkness
Jer.  30.  7.  but  he  shall  be  saved  0.  of  it

19.  and  o.  of  them  shall  proceed  thanksgiving
Ezek.  .31.  11.  behold  I  will  seek  0.  my  sheep

46.  20.  that  they  bear  them  not  0.  into  the  court
Mic.  5.  2.  yet  0.  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  to  me

that  is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel,  Mat.  2.  6.
Zech.  10.  4.  o.  of  him  came  forth  the  corner
Mat.  12.  34.  0.  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart

35.  o.  of  good  treasure,  o.  of  the  evil  treasure

15. 19.  0.  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts
Mark  10.  26.  they  were  astonished  o.  of  measure

13.  15.  nor  enter  to  take  any  thing  o.  of  his  house

16.  9.  o.  of  whom  he  had  cast  seven  devils

Luke  19.  22.  0.  of  thy  own  mouth  will  1  judge  thee
John  15.  19.  but  I  have  chosen  you  o.  of  the  world
Acts  2. 5.  devout  men,  0.  of  every  nation  under  hea.
28.  23.  both  o.  of  the  law,  and  o.  of  the  prophets

1  Cor.  !5.8.seenofme,  asofone  born  0.  ot  due  time

2  Cor.  2.  4.  fore,  of  much  affliction  1  wrote  to  you
8.  11.  be  a  performance  o.  of  that  which  ye  have

2  Tim.  2.  26.  recover  themselves  0.  of  snare  of  devil

3.  11.  but  o.  of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me

4.  2.  be  instant  in  season,  0.  of  season,  reprove
Jam.  3.  10.  e.of  same  mouth  proceedeth  blessing
See  Camp,  Captivity,  City,  Darkness,

Way,  Zion.

OUTCAST.

Jer.  30. 17.  saith  Lord ,  because  they  called  thee  an  0.
OU1  CASTS.

Psal.  147.  2.  he  gathereth  o.  of  Israel,  Tsa.  56.  8.
Isa.  11.  12.  he  shall  assemble  the  0.  of  Israel
16.  .3.  hide  the  o.  ||  4.  let  my  0.  dwell  with  thee

27.  13.  the  o.  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  worship
Jer.  49.  36.  whither  the  0.  of  Elam  shall  not  come
OUTER.

Ezek.  46.  21.  he  brought  me  into  the  o.  court

47.  2.  he  led  me  the  way  without  to  thee,  gate
Mat.  8. 12.  be  cast  into  0.  darkness,  22.  13.  I  25.  30.

OUT-GOINGS.

Josh.  17.  9.  the  0.  it  were  at  the  sea,  19.  29.

18.  and  the  0.  of  it  shall  be  thine
18.  19.  the  o.  of  the  border  were  at  the  north
19. 14.  the  o.  thereof  are  in  the  valley  of  Jiphthah-ei

22.  the  0.  of  their  border  were  at  Jordan,  33.

Psal.  65.  8.  thou  makest  the  0.  of  the  morning

OUTLANDISH.

Neh.  1.3.  26.  even  o.  women  caused  Solomon  to  sin
OUTLIVED.

Judg.  2.  7.  all  the  days  of  the  elders  that  o.  Joshua
OUTR AG  ECUS.

Prov.  27.  4.  wrath  is  cruel  and  anger  is  0.
OUTRUN.

John  20.  4.  they  ran,  and  other  disciple  did  0.  Peter
OUTSIDE.

Judg.  7-  11.  Gideon  went  to  0.  of  the  armed  men

17.  and  when  1  come  to  the  0.  of  the  camp
19-  so  they  came  to  the  0.  of  the  camp

1  Kings  7-  9.  and  so  on  0.  toward  the  great  court
Ezek.  40.  5.  behold  a  wall  on  the  o.  of  the  house
Mat.  23.  25.  make  clean  0.  of  the  cup,  Luke  11.39.

26.  that  the  0.  of  them  may  be  clean  also

OUTSTRETCHED.

Deut.  26.  8.  Lord  brought  us  out  with  an  0.  arm
Jer.  21.  5.  I  will  fight  against  you  with  an  0.  hand

27.  5.  I  have  made  the  earth  by  my  0.  arm
OUTWARD.

1  Sam.  16.  7-  foi  man  looketh  on  0.  appearance


1  Chron.  26.  29.  Chenaniah  for  the  0.  business
Neh.  11.  16.  thechief  of  the  Levites  for  o.  business
Esth.  6.  4.  Hainan  was  come  into  the  0.  court
Ezek.  40.  17-  he  brought  me  into  the  0.  court
Mat.  23.  27.  which  indeed  appear  beautiful  o.
Rom.  2. 28.  nor  circumcision,  which  is  o.  in  the  flesh

2  Cor.  4.  16.  but  though  our  0.  man  perish,  yet  our
10.  +  1.  who  in  0.  appearance  am  base  among  you
7.  do  ye  look  on  things  after  the  0.  appearance  ?

1  Pet.  3.  3.  not  that  0.  adorning  of  plaiting  hair
OUTWARD  LY.

Mat.  23.  28.ye  o.  appear  righteous  unto  men
Rom.  2. 28.  for  he  is  not  a  Jew  which  is  one  o.
OUTWENT.

Mark  6.  33.  many  ran  afoot  thither,  and  o.  them
_  OWE.

Rom.  1.3.  8.  0.  no  man  any  thing,  but  to  love
„  OWED.

Mat.  18.  24.  one  which  0.  him  10,000  talents

28.  and  found  one  which  0.  him  an  hundred  pence
Luke 7.  41.  the  one  o.  500  pence,  and  the  other  50
__  OWEST.

Mat.  18. 28.  he  took  him,  saying,  pay  me  that  thou  0.
-Luke  16.  5.  how  much  o.  thou  unto  my  lord  ?  7.
Philem.  19.  thou  o.tomeeven  thine  own  self  besides
.  OWETH.

Philem.  18.  if  he  hath  wronged  thee,  or  0.  thee  ought
_  OWL.

Lev.  11. 16.  o.and  cuckow  unclean,  Deut.  14. 15,  16.

17.  the  little  o.  and  cormorant,  Isa.  .34.  11,  15.
Psal.  102.  6.  I  am  like  an  o.  of  the  desert
OWLS.

Job  30.  29. 1  am  a  companion  to  0.  a  brother  to  drag.
Isa.  13.  21.  the  wild  beasts  shall  lie  there,  and  0.

shall  dwell  there,  34.  13.  Jer.  50.  39.

4.3.  20.  the  dragons  and  o.  shall  honour  me
Mic.  1.  8.  I  will  make  a  mourning  as  the  0.

OWN.

Gen.  1.27.  God  created  man  in  his  0.  image

5.  3.  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  o.  likeness

15.  4.  shall  come  of  thine  0.  bowels  shall  beheli
30.  25.  send  me,  that  I  may  go  to  mine  0.  place
47.  24.  four  parts  shall  be  your  0.  for  seed  of  field

Exod.  21.  36.  ox  for  ox,  and  dead  shall  be  his  0.
22.5.  of  best  ol  his  0.  field  shall  make  restitution
l.ev.  1.  3.  he  shall  offeritofhis  0.  voluntary  will
7.  30.  his  0.  hands  shall  bring  the  offering  of  Lord

14.  15.  pour  it  into  palm  of  his  0.  left  hand,  26.

18.  10.  for  theirs  is  thine  0.  nakedness

26.  nor  any  of  your  0.  nation,  nor  strangers  among
>rou,  shall  commit  any  of  these  abominations
25.  5.  that  which  groweth  of  its  0.  accord
41.  and  he  shall  return  to  his  0.  family
Num.  1.  52.  each  by  his  o.  camp,  by  his  0.  standard

16.  28.  have  not  done  them  of  mine  0.  mind,  24.  13.
38.  these  censers  ofsinners  against  their  o.  souls

.32.  42.  he  called  it  after  his  o.  name,  Deut.  3.  14.

36.  9.  shall  keep  himself  to  his  o.  inheritance
Deut.  23.  24.  mayest  eat  grapes  at  thine  0.  pleasure

24.  1.3. that  he  may  sleep  in  hiso.  raiment,  and  bless
16.  not  children  for  fathers,  every'  man  shall  be

put  to  death  fi;  -  0.  sin,  2  Kings  14. 6.  2  Chr.  25.  4.

28.  53.  thou  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  thine  0.  body
33.  9.  nor  knew  he  hiso.  children
Josh.  7. ’ll.  they  have  put  it  even  among  their  o.  stuff
Judg.  2. 19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  o.  doings
7.  2.  saying,  mine  o.  hand  hath  saved  me

1  Sam.  2.  20.  and  they  went  to  their  0.  home
5.  11.  let  the  ark  go  again  to  his  0.  place

15.  17.  when  thou  wast  little  in  thine  0.  sight

25.  26.  from  avenging  with  thine  0.  hand

2  Sam.  6.  22. 1  will  be  base  in  mine  0.  sight

7.  10.  that  they  may  dwell  in  a  place  of  their  0.

12.  .3.  did  eat  of  hiso.  meat,  and  drink  of  hiso.  cup

17.  11.  that  thou  go  to  battle  in  thine  o.  person

18.  1.3.  have  wrought  falsehood  against  mine  o.  life

1  Kings  2.  23.  spoken  this  word  against  his  o.  life

32.  shall  return  his  blood  on  his  0.  head,  37.

1.3.  30.  he  laid  his  carcase  in  his  o.  grave
17.  19.  and  Elijah  laid  him  upon  his  o.  bed

2  Kings  17.  29-  every  nation  made  gods  of  their  0.

1  Chr.  29.  14.  and  of  thine  0.  have  we  given  thee

16.  all  this  store  we  prepared,  is  all  thine  0.

2  Chr.  6. 23.  recompensing  his  way  on  his  0.  head
Neh.  4.  4.  turn  their  reproach  on  their  o.  head
Esth.  9.  25.  wicked  devise  should  return  one.  head
Job  20.  7.  he  shall  perisli  for  ever  like  his  0.  dung
Psal.  5.  10.  let  them  fall  by  their  0.  counsel

12.  4.  our  lips  are  our  0.  who  is  lord  over  us?

67.  6.  God,  eyen  our  0.  God,  shall  bless  us

78.  29.  were  filled,  for  he  gave  them  their  o.  desire
81.  12.  I  gave  them  up  to  their  o.  hearts’  lust
94.  23.  he  shall  bring  on  them  their  o.  iniquity,  and
shall  cut  them  off  in  their  0.  wickedness
Prov.  5.  17.  let  them  be  only  thy  0.  not  strangers
Isa.  37.  .35.  for  mine  0.  sake,  4.3.  25.  I  48.  11.

58.  13.  not  finding  thine  0.  pleasure,  noro.  words
Ezek.  29.  3.  which  hath  said,  my  river  is  mine  o.

33.  13.  if  he  trust  to  his  0.  righteousness
Hos.  7. 2.  now  their  o.  doings  have  beset  them  about
Jonah  2.  8.  they  forsake  their  0.  mercy
Mat.  20.  15.  lawful  to  do  what  1  will  with  mine  o.
Luke  14.  26.  if  any  man  hate  not  his  o.  life  also

16.  12.  who  shall  give  you  that  which  is  your  0.  ?
John  1. 11.  he  came  to  hiso.  his  0.  received him  not

8.  44.  when  he  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  hiso.
10.  12.  an  hireling,  whose  0.  the  sheep  are  not

1.3.  1.  having  loved  his  o.  that  were  in  the  world

15.  19.  if  of  the  world,  world  would  love  his  0.

16.  .32.  ye  shall  be  scattered  every  man  to  his  o.
Acts  .3.  12.  as  though  by  our  0.  power  or  holiness

5. 4.  was  it  not  thine  o.l  was  it  not  in  thine  0. power  ?
20.  28.  which  he  purchased  with  his  0.  blood

Rom.  4.  19-  he  considered  not  his  o.  body  now  dead
8.  32.  he  that  spared  not  his  0.  Son,  but  delivered
14.  4.  to  his  0.  master  he  standeth  or  falleth
1  Cor.  6. 19.  ye  are  not  your  0.  for  ye  are  bought
7.  2.  nevertheless,  let  every  man  Lave  hiso.  wife
10.  24.  let  no  man  seek  his  0.  but  another’s  wealth

29.  conscience,  1  say,  not  thine  0.  but  others

13.  5.  charity  seeketh  not  her  o.  is  not  easily
Phil,  2.21.  for  all  seek  their  0.  things,  not  C  ’hrist’i

347


PAL


OXE


PAL


Phil.  3.  9.  found  in  him,  not  having  mine  o.  right.

1  Tim.  5.  8.  but  if  any  proy  .de  not  tor  his  o.  Ins  o.

Tit.  1. 12.  a  prophet  of  their  o.  said,  the  (Jretians
lleb.  9.  12.  but  by  his  o.  blood  he  entered  in  onc  e
llev.  1.  5.  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  o.  blood
See  Counsel,  Country,  Eyes,  Heart,
House,  Land,  People,  Self,  Selves,
Soul,  Way,  Ways,  Will.

’  OWNER.

Exod.  21 . 28.  but  the  o.  of  the  ox  shall  be  quit
29.  it  hath  been  testified  to  his  o.  his  o.  shall
34  the  o.  of  the  pit  shall  make  it  good
36.  and  his  o.  hath  not  kept  him  in,  ox  tor  ox

22.  11.  o.  of  it  shall  accept  thereof,  not  make  good

12.  he  shall  make  restitution  to  the  o.  thereof
14  o.  thereof  not  being  with  it,  make  it  good
15.  but  if  o.  thereof  be  with  it,  not  make  it  good

1  Kings  16.  24.  after  name  of  Shemer,  o.  of  the  bill
Prov.  3.  +  2?.  withhold  not  good  from  the  0.

Isa.  1.  3.  the  ox  knoweth  his  0,  the  ass  his  crib
Acts  27.  11.  centurion  believed  the  o.  of  the  ship
OWNERS.  .

Job  31.  39.  or  have  caused  the  0.  to  lose  their  lives
Prov.  1. 19.  which  taketh  away  life  of  0.  thereof
Eccl.  5. 11.  what  good  is  there  to  the  0.  thereof  <

13.  a  sore  evil,  riches  kept  for  0.  to  their  hurt
Luke  19.  33.  the  0.  said,  why  loose  ye  the  colt  ?

OWNETH.  .

Lev.  14.  35.  he  that  0.  the  house  shall  tell  .priest
ActsZi.  11.  Jews  shall  bind  man  that  0.  this  girdle
OX.

Exod.  20. 17.  shalt  not  cov.  thy  nei°h.  ox,  Vent.  5.21.

21.  28.  if  ox  gore  a  man,  he  shall  be  stoned,  29,  32.

29.  if  ox  were  wont  to  push  with  his  horns,  36.

32.  if  ox  push  a  man-servant  or  maid-servant

33.  if  an  ox  or  ass  shall  fall  into  a  pit,  the  owner

22.  1.  if  a  man  shall  steal  an  ox  or  a  sheep
4.  whether  it  be  ox  or  ass,  he  shall  restore  double

9.  trespass  for  an  ox  ||  10.  deliver  an  ox  to  keep

23.  4.  if  thou  meet  thir.e  enemy's  ox  going  astray
12.  that  thine  ox  and  thine  ass  may  rest

34.  19.  every  firstling  of  an  ox  or  sheep  is  mine
Lev.  7.  23.  shall  eat  no  manner  of  tat  of  ox  or  sheep

17.  3.  what  man  soever  killeth  an  ox  or  lamb
Num.  7.  3.  they  brought  for  each  of  princes  an  ox

22.  4.  as  the  ox  licketh  up  the  grass  of  the  field
Deut.  5.  14.  thine  ox  shall  do  no  work  on  sabbath

14.  4.  the  ox,  the  sheep,  and  goat  ye  may  eat

18.  3.  the  priest’s  due,  whether  it  be  ox  or  sheep
22.  1.  thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother’s  ox  go  astray

4.  thou  shalt  not  see  thy  brother’s  or  fall  down

10.  shalt  not  plough  with  an  ox  and  ass  together
25.  4.  thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  or  when  he  tread-

eth  out  the  corn,  1  Cor.  9.  9- 1  Tim.  5. 18.
28.  31.  thine  ox  shall  be  slain  before  thine  eyes
Josh. 6.  21.  they  destroy,  or  and  sheep,  1  Sam.  15.15.
Judg .  3. .31.  Shamgar  slew  600  men  with  an  or-goad

6.  4.  they  left  neither  sheep  nor  or  for  Israel
1  Sam.  12.3.  Sam.  said,  whose  or  or  ass  have  1  taken
14.  34.  bring  me  hither  every  man  his  or  and  sheep
Neh.  5. 18.  prepared  for  me  daily  one  or, six  sheep
Job  6.  5.  or  loweth  the  or  over  his  fodder  ?

24.  3.  they  take  the  widow’s  or  for  a  pledge
40.  15.  behold,  Behemoth  eateth  grass  as  an  or
Psal.  69.  31.  this  shall  please  I.,  better  than  an  or
106.  20.  changed  their  glory  into  similitude  of  an  or
Prov.  7.22.  goeth  after  her  as  an  or  goeth  to  slaught.
14.  4.  but  increase  is  by  the  strength  of  the  or
15. 17.  better  than  a  stalled  or,  and  hatred  therewith
Isa.  1.  3.  the  or  knoweth  his  owner,  ass  his  crib

11.  7.  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  or
32.  20.  that  send  forth  thither  the  feet  of  the  or
66.  3.  that  killeth  an  or  as  if  he  slew  a  man

Jer.  11.  19.  but  1  was  like  a  lamb  or  an  or  brought
Ezek.  1. 10.  they  four  had  the  face  of  an  or
Luke  13. 15.  doth  not  each  of  you  loose  his  or  on  sab.
14.  5.  shall  have  an  or  or  an  ass  fallen  into  a  pit
Wild  OX.

Deut.  14. 5.  the  wild  ox  and  chamois  ye  may  eat
OXEN.

Gen.  12.  16.  Abram  had  sheep  and  0.  and  asses
20.  14.  Abimelech  gave  Abraham  sheep  and  0.
21.27.  Abraham  gave  Abimelech  sheep  and  o.

32.  5.  Jacob  said  thus,  1  have  0.  and  asses
34.  28.  the  sons  of  Jacob  took  Shechem’s  o.

Exod.  9.  3.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  the  0.

20.  24.  thou  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thine  0.

22.  1.  he  shall  restore  five  0.  for  one  ox,  and  four
30.  likewise  shalt  thou  do  with  thine  0.  and  sheep
Num.  7.  3.  and  the  princes  brought  twelve  0.

7.  four  0.  he  gave  to  the  sons  of  Gershom

8.  and  eight  0.  he  gave  to  the  sons  of  Merari
22.40.  Balak  offered  0.  and  sheep,  and  sent  to  Bal.
23. 1.  prepare  me  here  seven  0.  and  seven  rams

Deut.  14.  26.  shalt  bestow  that  money  for  0.  or  sheep
Josh.  7.  24.  Joshua  took  Achan,  hiso.  and  sheep

1  Sam.  11.7.  Saul  hewed  a  yoke  of  0.  in  pieces,  and

sent  them  thro’  Israel,  so  shall  it  be  done  to  hiso.
14. 14.  acre  of  land,  which  yoke  of  0.  might  plow
32.  the  people  took  sheep  and  0.  and  slew  them

15.  9.  Saul  spared  A  gag  and  the  best  of  the  0.

14.  what  meaneth  lowing  of  0.  which  I  hear  ?

15.  the  people  spared  tl  e  best  of  the  sheep  and  0.

22. 19.  Doeg  smote  the  0  and  sheep  and  asses
27.  9.  David  took  away  the  sheep  and  0.  and  asses

2  Sam.  6.  6.  Uzza  took  hold  of  it,  for  0.  shook  it
13.  David  sacrificed  0.  and  fatlings

24.22.  behold,  here  be  o.  for  burnt  sacrifice
24.  so  David  bought  the  threshing-floor  and  o.

1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  0.  19,  25.

4.  23.  Solomon’s  daily  provision,  10  tat  o.  100 sheep
7.  25.  one  sea,  12  0.  under  it,  44.  2  Chr.  4.  4, 15.
8.5.  with  him  before  ark,  sacrificing  sheep  and  0.

63.  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  to  the  I.ord  of
22,000  0.  and  120,000  sheep,  2  Chron.  7-.  5.

19. 19.  Elisha  was  plowing  with  twelve  yoke  of  0.

20.  Elisha  left  the  0.  and  ran  after  Elijah

21.  he  took  a  yoke  of  o.  and  slew  them

2  Kings  5.  26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  sheep  and  0.?

1  Chron.  12.  40.  brought  bread  on  mules  and  one.

2  Chron.  15.  11.  they  offered  of  the  spoil  700  o.

18.  2.  Ahab  killed  sheep  and  0  for  him  and  people

ais


2  Chron  29.  33.  consec.  things  were  600  0.  3000  sheep
31.6.  they  brought  in  the  tithes  of  o.  and  sheep
35  8.  princes  gave  for  passover  three  hundred  0.
Job  1.3.  his  substance  was  3000  camels,  500  yoke  of  0.

14.  the  o.  were  plowing,  and  the  asses  feeding

42. 12.  Lord  gave  him  1000  yoke  of  0.  .1000  asses
Psal  8.7.  thou  niadest  him  to  have  dominion  over  0.

144.  14.  that  our  0.  may  be  strong  to  labour
Prov.  14.4.  where  no  o.  are  the  crib  is  clean
Isa.  7. 25.  but  it  shall  be  for  the  sending  forth  of  o.

22. 13.  and  behold,  joy  and  gladness,  slaying  0.
30.  24.  the  0.  and  asses  shall  eat  clean  provender

Jer.  51.23. 1  will  break  the  husbandman  and  his  o.
Dan.  4*.  25.  make  thee  eat  grass  as  0.  32,  33. 1  5.  21.
Amos  6.  12.  will  one  plow  there  with  o  ?

Mat.  22.  4.  my  0.  and  my  fatlings  are  killed
Luke  14.  19.  1  have  bought  five  yoke  of  0.

John  2.  14.  found  in  the  temple  those  that  sold  0.

15.  he  drove  them  all  out,  the  sheep  and  the  o.
Acts  14. 13.  priest  of  Jupiter  brought  o.  and  garlands
1  Cor.  9.  9.  doth  God  take  care  tor  0.  ?

OYL,  see  Oil.


P.


PACES.

2  Sam.  6. 13.  when  gone  six  p.  he  sacrificed  oxen
PACIFY,  ED,  ETH.

Esth.7. 10.  hanged  Hainan,  then  was  king  s  wrathp.
Prov.  16. 14.  a  wise  man  will  p.  the  wrath  of  a  king
21.  14.  a  gift  in  secret;),  anger,  and  a  reward
Eccl.  10.  4.  for  yielding  p.  great  offences
Exek.  16.  63.  for  thy^lmme^when.  1  am  p.  toward

Deut.  23. 13.  thou  shalt  have  a  p.  on  thy  weapon
PAID,  see  after  Pay.

PA!N

Signifies,  [1]  Any  bodily  disease  or  distemper,  .fob
33.  19.  [2]  Disquiet,  or  uneasiness  of  mind,  Psal.

25!  18. 1  55.  4.  [3]  Travail  in  child  birth,  1  Sam.
4.19.  [4]  Lear,  Ezek.  30.  4.  .

The  wicked  man  travaileth  with  pain  all  his  days.
Job  15.  20.  He  lives  a  life  of  care,  tear,  and
grief  by  reason  of  God's  wrath,  and  the  torments
of  his  own  mind,  and  his  manifold  and  dreadjul
outward  calamities.  ,  „  ,  .  ,

They  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven,  because  of
their  pains,  Rev.  16.  11.  Some  observe  Jiom
hence  the  contrary  effects  that  trouble  produces
in  the  godly  and  in  the  wicked  j  the  one  blesseth,
the  other  b/asphemeth,  the  Lord.  In  tribulation
the  godly  rejoice,  the  wicked  rage  ;  for  the  one  in
suffer 77i g  communicates  with  the  cross  of  Christy
the  other  wit  ft  the  curse  oj  Adam,  Stars  shine  in
the  nighty  which  in  the  day  are  not  seen  j  and
grace  is  manifested  by  trouble,  which  in  prospei  tty
lies  secret.  Trouble  tries  true  religion  from  Jalse,
and  discerns  grace  from  nature.

Job  14.  22.  but  his  flesh  on  him  shall  have  p.

15.  20.  the  wicked  man  travaileth  with  p.

33.  19.  he  is  chastened  also  with  p.  on  Ins  bed
Psal.  25.  18.  look  on  mine  affliction  and  my  p.

48. 6.  p.  as  a  woman  in  travail,  Isa.  13.8. 1  26. 17-
139. +  24.  see  if  there  be  any  way  of  p.  in  me

Isa.  21.  3.  therefore  are  my  loins  filled  with  p.

26. 18.  we  have  been  with  child,  we  have  been  in  p.

66.7.  before  her  p.  came,  she  was  delivered

Jer.  6.  24.  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  and  p.

as  of  a  woman  in  travail,  22.  23.  Mark

13. +8.  ,  ,  „  t  _

12. 13.  put  themselves  to  p.  but  shall  not  profit
15- 18.  why  is  my  p.  perpetual,  wound  incurable
30.  23.  it  shall  fall  with  p.  on  head  of  the  wicked
51.  8.  howl  for  Babylon,  take  balm  for  her  p.

Ezek.  30.  4.  great  p.  shall  be  in  Ethiopia,  9.

16.  Sin  shall  have  great p.  No  shall  be  rent  asund.
Mic.  4. 10.  be  in  p.  and  labour  to  bring  forth,  O  /ion
Nah.1. 10.  much  p.  is  in  all  loins,  faces  gather  black .
Rom.  8.  22.  the  whole  creation  travaileth  in  p.

Rev.  16.  10.  they  gnawed  tl.eir  tongues  for  p.

21.  4.  nor  sorrow,  nor  shall  there  be  any  more  p.
nee  Pangs.

PAIN  ED.

Psal.  55. 4.  toy  heart  is  sorep.  within  me,  and  terror
Isa.  23. 5.  they  shall  be  sorely  p.  at  report  ot '1  yre
Jer.  4.  19-  my  bowels,  1  am  p.  at  my  very  heart
Joel  2.  6.  before  their  face,  people  shall  be  much  p.
Rev.  12. 2.  travailing  in  birth,  and  p.  to  be  delivered
PAINS.

1  $«???.  4. 19. she  travailed,  for  herp.  came  upon  her
Psal.  116.  3.  and  the  p.  of  hell  gat  hold  on  me
Acts  2.  24.  God  raised  up,  having  loosed  p.  ot  death
Rev.  16. 11.  they  blasphemed,  because  of  their  p.

PAINFUL.

Psal.  73. 16.  to  know  this,  it  was  too  p.  for  me
PAINFULNESS.

2  Cor.  11.  27.  in  weariness  and  p.  in  watchings  often
PAINTED.  .

2  Kings 9.  30.  Jezebel  p.  her  face,  and  tired  herhead
Jer.  22. 14.  ceiled  with  cedar,  and  p.  with  vermilion
PAINTEDST.

Ezek.  23.  40.  thou  p.  thy  eyes,  and  deckedst  thyself
PAINTING.  .  ,  ,  ,

2  Kings  9.  +  30.  Jezebel  put  her  eyes  in  p.  tired  head
Jer.  4.30.  though  thou  rentest  thy  face  with  p. in  vain
PAUL

Luke  2.  24.  to  offer  a  p.  of  turtle  (loves  or  pigeons
Rev.  6.  5.  he  had  a  p.  of  balances  in  his  hand
PALACE  .

Signifies,  [1J  A  royal  dwelling  or  mansion-house,
Isa.  39.  7.  [2]  The  temple  of  God  at  Jerusa¬

lem,  1  Chron.  29.  1,  19.  [3]  Stately  and  mag¬
nificent  buildings ,  2  Chron.  36.  19.  [4]  l  he  high
priest's  house,'  Mat.  26.  58.  [5]  The  church,

Psal.  48.  13.  .  ,  .  ,  ,  ,.  ,

1  Kings  16.  18.  Zimri  burnt  the  king  s  p.  and  died
21.  1.  Naboth  had  a  vineyard  hard  by  the  p.

2  Kings  15.  25.  Pekah  smote  Pekaiah  in  the  p.
20.18.  they  shall  be  eunuchs  kip.  of  kingor  Babylon

1  Chron.  29. 1  .p.  is  not  for  man,  but  tor  Lor<  God
19.  give  Solomon  a  perfect  heart  to  build  the  p.


2  Chr.  9.  11.  he  made  terraces  to  the  king’s  p.

‘ 'Ezra  4.  14.  we  have  maintenance  from  thep.

6.  2.  there  was  found  at  Achmetha,  in  p.  a  roll
Neii.  1. 1 .  it  came  to  pass,  as  I  was  in  Shushan  the  p.

2  Q  timber  to  make  beams  for  the  gates  ofp.

7  2.  1  gave  Hanani,  ruler  of  p.  charge  over  J  eras,
Esth.  2.  3.  may  gather  all  young  virgins  to  the  p.

3  15.  decree  was  given  in  Shushan  the  p.  8.  14.

9*  12  Jews  destroyed  500  men  in  Shushan  the p.

Psal.  45.  15.  they  shall  enter  into  the  king’s  p.

69  +25.  let  their  p.  be  desolate,  let  none  dwell
144  )2  polished  after  the  similitude  ot  a  p.

Cant  8.  9.  we  will  build  on  her  a  p.  of  silver
Isa.  25  2.  hast  made  a  p.  of  strangers  to  be  no  city
Dan  4.  4.  1  was  at  rest,  and  flourishing  in  my  p.

6  18.  king  went  to  hisp.  passed  the  night  fasting
11  45  he  shall  plant  his  p.  between  the  seas
Amos  4.  3.  ye  shall  cast  them  into  p.  saith  the  Lord
Nah.  2.  6.  gates  opened,  and  p.  shall  be  dissolved
Mat.  26.  58.  Peter  followed  Jesus  afar  off  to  the
high  priest's  p.  and  went  in,  Mark  14.  54,
Luke  11.21.  when  a  strong  man  keepeth  hisp.

Phil.  l.  13.  my  bonds  are  manifest  in  all  the p.
PALACES.

2  Chron.  36.  19.  and  burnt  all  the  p.  with  fire
Ps.  45.  8.  garments  smell  of  myrrh,  out  of  ivory  p.
48.  3.  God  is  known  in  her  p.  for  a  refuge
'  13.  mark  well  her  bulwarks,  consider  herp.

78  69.  he  built  his  sanctuary  like  high  p.

122.  7.  peace  and  prosperity  within  thy  p.

Prov.  30.  28.  spider  takes  hold,  and  is  in  king  ip.
Isa.  13.  22.  dragons  shall  cry  in  thy  pleasant p.

32.  14.  because  the  p.  shall  be  forsaken
34.  13.  thorns  shall  come  up  in  her  p.  nettles
Jer.  6.  5.  arise,  and  let  us  destroy  her  p.

9.  21.  for  death  is  come  and  is  entered  into  our  j>„
17.  27.  fire  shall  devour  the  p.  of  Jerusalem
49  27.  it  shall  consume  the  p.  of  Benhadad
lam.  2.  5.  he  hath  swallowed  up  all  her  p.

Ezek.  19.7.  and  he  knew  their  desolate  p.

25.  4.  they  shall  set  their  p.  in  thee,  and  make
Amos  3.  9.  publish  in  p.  at  Ashdod,  in  p.  of  Egypt

10.  who  store  up  violence  and  robbery  in  their  p.

11.  thy  p.  shall  be  spoiled  |]  6.  8.  I  hate  his  p.

I  Mic  5.5.  when  he  shall  tread  in  ourp.  then  shall  raise
See  Devour.

PALE.

Isa  29.  22.  neither  shall  his  face  now  wax  p.

Rev. 6.8.1  looked,  tmd  behold  ap.  horse,  name  Death

Jer.  30  6.  as  a  woman,  and  all  faces  turned  intop.
PALM.

Lev.  14.  15.  pour  it  into  p.  of  his  left  hand,  26.
Isa.  48.  + 13.  p.  of  my  hand  spread  out  heavens
John  18.  22.  struck  Jesus  with  the  p.  of  his  hand
PALM-BHANCHES.

Neh  8  15.  ao  forth  to  the  mount  and  fetch  p.
PALMER-WORM.

Joel  1.4.  what  the  p.  left,  the  locust  hath  eaten
2.  25.  1  will  restore  the  years  that  p.  hath  eaten
Amos  4.  9.  your  fisr-trees,  the  p.  devoured  them
PALMS.

1  Sam.  5. 4.  both  the  p.  of  his  hands  were  cutoff

2  Kings  Q.  35.  they  found  skull  and  p.  of  her  haDdf
La.  49.  16.  1  have  graven  thee  onp.  of  my  hands
Dan.  10.  10.  which  set  me  on  the  p.  of  my  hands
Mat.  26.  67.  they  spit  in  his  face,  others  smote  hrr

with  the  p.  of  their  hands,  Mark.  14,  65
Rev.  7.  9.  with  white  robes,  and  p.  in  their  hands
PALM-TREE  .  .

Is  an  upright,  tall,  fruit-bearing ,  flourishing,  an,
shadowy  tree,  Psal.  92.  12.  Cant.  7-  7>  8.  Jer.  10
5.  It  grows  by  the  sweet  springs  of  waters,  an,
continues  long.  It  will  not  be  pressed  or  brim
downward,  or  grow  crooked,  though  heavy  weight
be  laid  on  it.  This  tree  is  one  of  the  most  farnou
of  all  the  forest,  and  is  the  usual  emblem,  oj  cot.
stancy,  fruitfulness,  patience,  and  victory  ;  whtc
the  more  it  is  oppressed,  the  more  it  fluunsheth
the  higher  it  grows,  the  stronger  and  broader  it  1
in  the  top.  Some  think  it  is  the  same  with,  tr,
Date-tree,  which  is  not  only  of  a  beautiful  aspec
but  of  a  delightful  taste,  and  is  fit  both  for  Joe
and  drink ;  and  this  was  perhaps  the  reason  wh
the  children  of  Israel  pitched  their  camp  1
Elitn,  Num.  32.  9.  because  there  were  not  mu
twelve  fountains  of  water  there,  but  also  thre
score  and  ten  Palm-trees.  The  Hebrews  cal  It
it  Tharnar,  and  the  Greeks,  <Voivif.  I  Iff  fine
and  best  Palm-trees  were  about  Jericho,  En-geo,
and  along  the  banks  o/Uordan.  Palm-trees,  ft 0
the  same  root,  produce  a  great  number  of  sucket
which  form  upwards  a  kind  <f  forest  by  their  sprea
ing.  It  was  under  a  little  wood  of  Palm-trees
this  kind  that  the  prophetess  Deborah  dwelt  be  tree,
llamali  and  Beth  el,  Judg.  4. 5.  D  ,

It  was  probably  to  this  multiplication  of  the  tali
tree  that  the  prophet  makes  allusion,  wheii  he  sal
The  righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  Palm-tie
Psal.  92.  12.  Or,  it  is  made  an  emblem  of  a , 7*
man's  person  and  condition,  because  it  is  constant
green,  flourishing,  and  fruitful.

The  Palm-tree  is  a  symbol  if  victory,  Rev.  7.
And  the  spouse  is  compared  to  a  palm-tree.  Gar

7.  7*  because  it  is  tall,  and  grows  directly  upvta

and  in  spite  of  all  pressures.  ,

Judg.  4.  5.  she  dwelt  under  the  p.  of  Deborah
Psal.  92.  12.  the  righteous  shall  flourish  bke  tne
Cant.  7.  7.  thisthy  stature  is  like  to  ap.  thy  brea

8.  1  said,  I  will  go  up  to  thep.  I  will  take  hoK
Jer.  10.  5.  they  are  upright  as  thep.  but  speak  no
Ezek.  41.  19.  the  face  of  a  man  was  toward  tne  p
Joel  1.  12.  the  p.  and  the  apple  tree  are  witneret

PALM-TREES.

Exod.  15.  27.  came  to  Klim,  where  were  seventy
Lev.  23.  40.  ye  shall  take  your  branches  otp.
I)eut.  34.  3.  Lord  shewed  him  city  of  p.  unto /.o
Judo.  1.  16.  the  Kenite  went  out  ot  the  city  or  P-
3.  13.  Moab  smote  Israel,  and  possessed  city  01

1  Kings  6. 29.  he  carved  with  carved  figures  oty.
35. 1  7  -  36.  2  Chron.  3.  5.  Ezek. JO.

2  Chron.  28.  15.  and  brought  them  to  the  city  01


PAR


PAR


PAR


John  12.  13.  people  took  branches  of  p.  went  forth
PALSY.

This  distemper  is  a  preclusion  or  stoppage  in  one
or  more  of  the  limbs,  which  deprives  them  of
motion,  and  makes  them  useless  to  the  patient.
There  are  some  Palsies  that  are  very  painful,  and
others  not  so  much,  from  the  nature  of  the  humours
that  cause  them.  Our  Saviour  cured  several  Pa¬
ralytics  by  his  word  alone.  Mat.  4.  24.  |  8.  6,  7.
IQ.  2.  The  word  Paralytic  is  derived  from  the
Greek  word,  napaXvo),  which  signifies  to  resolve,
or  relax  ;  as  if  it  was  to  shew,  that  the  Palsy  is
a  relaxation  of  the  nerves :  but  it  may  be  pro¬
duced  by  other  causes.

Vat.  4.  24.  they  brought  to  him  those  that  had  the  p.
he  healed  them,  9.  2.  Mark  2.  3.  Luke  5.  18.

8.  6.  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  p.

9.  2.  Jesus  seeing  their  faith,  said  to  the  sick  of  the

p.  son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,  Mark  2.  5.
Mark ‘l.  10.  Jesus  saith  to  sick of p.  arise,  Luke  5.  24.
icts  9.  33.  be  found  Eneas,  who  was  sick  of  the  p.
PALSIES.

icts 8. 7-  many  taken  with  p.  and  lame  were  healed
PAN.

Lev.  2.  5.  if  it  be  a  meat  offering  baken  in  a  p.
6.21.  in  a  p.  it  shall  be  made  with  oil,  when  baken
7.  9.  all  that  is  dressed  in  p.  shall  be  the  priest’s
Sam.  2.  14.  the  priest’s  servant  stuck  it.  into  the  jo.

:  Sam.  1.3.  9.  Tamar  took  a  p.  and  poured  them  out
Ezek.  4.  3.  take  unto  thee  an  iron  p.  set  it  for  a  wall

PANS.

v,xod.  27.  3.  thou  shalt  make  p.  to  receive  his  ashes
Num.  11. 8.  they  baked  manna  in/).  and  made  cakes
Chron.  9-  .31.  over  the  things  made  in  the  p.  23.  29.

.  Chron.  35.  13.  other  holy  offerings  sod  they  in  p.
PANGS.

:  Sam.  22.  t  5.  when  the  p.  of  death  compassed  me
’sa.  13.  8.  p.  and  sorrows  shall  take  hold  of  them

21.  3.  p.  have  taken  hold  on  me,  as  p.  of  a  woman
26.  17-  as  a  woman  crieth  out  in  her  p.  so  have  we
r»*r.  22.  23.  gracious  shalt  thou  be  when  p.  come
48.  41.  as  the  heart  of  a  woman  in  her  p.  49.  22.

50.  4*3.  and  p.  as  of  a  woman  in  travail,  Mic.  4.  9.
PANN  AG.

Ztek.9,7.  17.  Jud.  traded  in  thy  market, p.  and  honey

PANT.

Imos  2.  7.  that  p.  after  the  dust  of  the  earth

PANTED.

°sal.  119. 131. 1  opened  myr  mouth  and  p.  1  longed
rsa.  21.  4.  at  the  grievous  vision  my  heart  p.
PANTETH.

°sal.  38.  10.  my  heart  p.  my  strength  faileth  me
42.  1.  as  hart  p.  so  p.  my  soul  after  thee,  O  God
PAPER

a  plant,  or  kind  of  bulrush,  which  grows  in
Egypt,  upon  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  The  Egyp¬
tians  applied  it  to  several  uses,  as  to  make  bas¬
kets,  shoes,  clothes,  little  boats  to  swim  in  upon
the  Nile,  and  paper  to  write  on;  it  was  of  this
that  the  little  ark  was  made,  in  which  the  pa¬
rents  of  Moses  exposed  him  upon  the  banks  of
the  Nile.

is  to  the  writing  paper  made  use  of  by  the  an¬
cients,  it  was  very  different  from  that  in  use
amongst  us,  and  was  composed  of  the  leaves  of  the
paper  reeds ,  from  whence  it  has  its  name.  This
is  said  to  be  their  manner  of  working  it.  The
trunk  of  this  plant  is  composed  of  several  leaves
or  films  placed  one  over  another,  which  were  peeled
off,  and  separated  with  a  needle  :  they  were  after¬
wards  stretched  out  upon  ittwet  table,  to  the  length
and  breadth  of  the  intended  leaf  of  paper  :  over  the
first  layer  of  the  leaves  of  paper  they  put  some  thin
paste,  or  only  some  of  the  muddy  water  of  the  Nile
a  little  warmed,  upon  which  they  spread  a  second
layer  of  the  leaves  of  the  plant :  then  they  let  it
dry  by  the  sun.  The  Egyptians  applied  the  paper
reeds  to  several  uses,  as  to  make  baskets,  shoes,
clothes,  little  boats  to  swim  in,  and  paper  to  write  on.
La.  19.  7.  the  p.  reeds  by  the  brooks  shall  wither
'  John  12.  1  would  not  write  with  p.  and  ink
PAPS.

Ezek.  23.  21.  lewdness,  for  the  p.  of  thy  youth
Luke  11.  27.  blessed  are  p.  which  thou  hast  sucked
23.  29.  blessed  are  the  p.  which  never  gave  suck
■lev.  1.  13.  and  girt  about  p.  with  a  golden  girdle
PARABLE.

This  word  is  formed  from  the  Greek,  napafio'Kr),
which  comes  from  the  verb  uagajdeWeiv,  signify¬
ing  to  compare  things  together.  It  is  a  simili¬
tude  taken  from  natural  things,  to  instruct  us  in
the  knowledge  of  things  spiritual.  The  parabolical,
enigmatical,  figurative,  and  sententious  way  of
speaking,  was  the  language  of  the  eastern  sages,
and  learned  men  ;  and  nothing  was  more  insup¬
portable  than  to  hear  a  fool  utter  Parables,  Prov.
26.  7.  The  legs  of  the  lame  are  not  equal,  so
is  a  parable  in  the  mouth  of  fools  ;  that  is,  /Is
it  is  uncomely  and  ridiculous  to  see  a  lame  man
dancing :  no  less  absurd  and  indecent  are  wise  and
pious  speeches  from  a  foolish  and  ungodly  man,
whose  actions  grossly  contradict  them,  whereby  he
makes  them  contemptible,  and  himself  ridiculous .
the  prophets  made  use  of  Parables,  to  give  a
stronger  impression  to  prince  and  people,  of  the
threatenings  or  of  the  promises  they  made  to  them.
N  athan  reproved  David  under  the  parable  of  a
ich  man  that  had  taken  away  and  killed  the  lamb
of  a  poor  man,  2  Sam.  12.  2,  3,  Nc.  'The  wo¬
man  of  '1  ekoah,  that  was  hired  by  Joab  to  recou¬
nt  1  mi7id  of  the  same  prince  towards  his  son
Absalom,  proposed  to  him  the  parable  of  her  two
sons  that  fought  together  in  the  field,  and  one  of
which  having  killed  the  other,  they  were  going  to
put  the  murderer  to  death,  and  so  to  deprive  her
of  both  her  sons  at  once,  2  Sam.  14.  2,  3,  &c.
Jotham,  son  of  Gideon,  proposed  to  the  men  of
tihechem,  the  parable  of  the  bramble,  whom  the
trees  had  a  mind  to  choose  for  their  king,  Judg.
9.  7.  8,  &c.  The  prophets  often  reprove  the  infi¬
delity  0/  Jerusalem  under  the  parable  of  an  adul¬
terous  wife.  They  describe  the  violence  of  such


princes  as  are  enemies  to  the  people  of  God,  under
the  representations  of  lions,  eagles,  bears,  qc.

Our  Saviour  in  the  gospel  often  speaks  to  the  people  in
parables.  Mat.  13.  10,  13,  &c.  He  made  use  of
them  to  verify  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  who  fore¬
told,  that  the  people  should  see  without  knowing,
and  hear  without  understanding,  and  should  con¬
tinue  in  their  blindness  and  hardness  of  heart,  in
the  midst  of  the  instructions  they  should  receive,
Isa.  6.  9,  10.  There  are  some  parables  in  the  New
Testament,  which  are  supposed  to  he  true  histories  ;
there  are  others  in  which  our  Saviour  seems  to  al¬
lude  to  some  particular  things  of  those  times.
Num.  23.7.  Baalam  took  up  his  p.  and  said,  Balak,
king  of  Moah,  24.  3,  15,  20,  21,  23.
18.  took  up  his p.  rise  up,  Balak,  and  hear
Job  27.  1.  Job  continued  bis/).  and  said,  29.  1.
Tsai.  49.  4.  I  will  incline  mine  ear  to  up.

78.  2.  1  will  open  my  mouth,  in  a  p.  1  will  utter
Pro v.  26.  7.  so  is  a  p.  in  the  mouth  of  fools,  9.
Ezek.  17.  2.  and  speak  a  p.  to  the  house  of  Israel
24.  3.  utter  a  p.  to  the  rebellious  house,  and  say
Mic.  2.  4.  one  shall  take  up  a  p.  against  you
Hub.  2.6.  shall  not  all  these  take  up  up.  against  him
Mat.  13.  18.  hear  ye  therefore  the  p.  of  the  sower
24.  another  p.  put  he  forth,  31,  33.  |  21.  33.

34.  without  ap.  spake  he  not  to  them,  Mark  4.  34.
36.  declare  to  us  the  p.  of  the  tares,  15.  15.

24.  32.  now  learn  a  p.  of  the  fig-tree,  when  branch
putteth  forth  leaves,  Mark  13.  28.  Luke  21.  29.
Mark  4.  10.  they  asked  him  of  p.  7.  17-  Luke  8.  9.
13.  he  said  to  them,  know  ye  not  this  p.  ?

12. 12.  he  had  spoken/).  against  them,  Luke  20.  19.
Luke  5.  36.  he  spake  a  p.  to  them,  6.  39.  I  8.  4.  |  12.
16.  |  13.  6.  |  14.  7. 1  15.  3.  1  18.  1,  9- 1  19-  11.  1
20.  9.  I  21.  29.  John  10.  6.

12.  41.  Lord,  spakest  thou  this  p.  to  us,  or  to  all  ?

PARABLES.

Ezek.  20.  49.  they  say  of  me, doth  he  not  speak  p.?
Mat.  13.  3.  he  spake  many  things  to  them  in  p.  13.

34.  |  22.  1.  Mark  3.  23.  |  4.  2,  13,  33.  1  12.  1.
Mark  4.  13.  how  then  will  ye  know  all  p.?

Luke  8. 10.  but  others  in  p.  that  seeing  might  not  see
John  16.  t  25.  when  I  shall  no  more  speak  in  p.
PARADISE.

Luke  23.  43.  to-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  p.

2  Cor.  12.  4.  how  that  he  was  caught  up  into/).

Rev.  2.  7.  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  p.  of  God
PARAMOURS.

Ezek.  23.  20.  for  she  doted  upon  their  p.  whose  flesh

PARCEL.

Gen.  33.  19.  Jacob  brought  a  p.  of  a  field  of  the
children  of  JTamor,  Josh.  24.  32.  John  4.  5.
Ruth  4.  3.  Naomi  selleth  up.  of  land,  Elimelech’s

1  Chr.  11. 13.  was  a  p.  of  ground  full  of  barley,  14.

PARCHED.

Tsa,  35.  7-  the/?,  ground  shall  become  a  pool
Jer.  17.  6.  but  he  shall  inhabit  the  p.  places
See  Corn.

PARCHMENTS.

2  Tim.  4. 13.  bring  the  books,  but  especially  the  p.

PARDON.

Exod.  23.  21.  he  will  not/),  your  transgressions
34.  9.  p.  our  iniquity  and  our  sin,  Num.  14.  19.

1  Sam.  15.  25.  therefore,  I  pray  thee,/),  my  sin

2  Kings  5. 18.  in  Ibis  the  Lord  p.  thy  servant
24.  4.  innocent  blood,  which  Lord  would  not  p.

2  Chron.  30.  18.  the  good  Lord  p.  every  one
Neh.  9.  17-  but  thou  art  a  God  ready  to  p.  gracious
Job  7.  21.  why  dost  thou  not  p.  my  transgression  ?
Psal.  25.  11.  for  thy  name's  sake/),  mine  iniquity
Tsa.  55.7.  return  to  Lord,  for  he  will  abundantly/).
Jer.  5.  1.  and  1  will  p.  it  ||  7.  how  shall  1  p.  thee
.33.  8.  1  will/),  all  tneir  iniquities,  whereby  sinned
50.  20.  for  1  will  p.  them  whom  1  reserve
PARDONED.

Num.  14.20.  L.  said,  1  have p.  accordingto  thy  word
Isa.  40.  2.  tell  her  that  her  iniquity  is  p.

Lam.  3.  42.  we  have  rebelled,  thou  hast  not  p.
PARDON  E  l'll.

Mic.  7. 18.  who  is  a  God  like  to  thee,  that/),  iniquity?
PARDONS.

Neh.  9. 1 17.  thou  art  a  God  of  />.  slow  fo  anger

PARE.

Deut.  21. 12.  he  shall  shave  her  head  and®,  her  nails
PARENTS.

Mat.  10.  21.  children  shall  rise  up  against  their/).

and  cause  them  to  bfe  put  to  death,  Mark  13.  12.
Luke  2.  27.  when  the  />.  brought  in  the  child  Jesus
8.56.  her  p.  were  astonished,  but  he  charged  them
18.  29.  there  is  no  man  that  hath  left/),  or  wife
21. 16.  ye  shall  be  betrayed  both  by  p.  and  brethren
John  9.  2.  Master,  who  did  sin,  this  man  or  his  p.  ?

22.  these  words  spake  p.  because  feared  Jews,  23.
Rom.  1.  30.  proud,  disobedient  to  p.  2  Tim.  3.  2.

2  Cor.  12.  14.  children  ought  not  to  lay  up  for  the/).
Eph.  6.  1.  children,  obey  your/).  Col.  3.  20.

1  Tim.  5.  4.  let  them  learn  to  requite  their/?.

Heb.  11.  23.  Moses  was  hid  three  months  of  his/).
PAR  LOUR.

Judg.  3.  20.  Eglon  was  sitting  in  a  summer  p.

23.  Ehud  shut  the  doors  of  the  p.  upon  him
1  Sam.  9.  22.  Samuel  brought  them  into  the/).

PARLOURS.

1  Chron.  28. 11.  David  gave  Solomon  a  pattern  of  p.
PART.

Exod.  19.  17-  they  stood  at  nether/),  of  mountain
29.  26.  thou  shalt  take  the  breast,  it  shall  be  thy  p.
I.ev.  2.  16.  p.  of  the  beaten  corn,/),  of  oil  thereof

7.  33.  he  shall  have  the  right  shoulder  for  his  p.

8.  29.  the  breast  of  consecration  was  Moses’/).

11.  37.  if  any  p.  of  their  carcase  fall  thereon,  38.

13.  41.  his  hair  fallen  off  from  the/),  of  his  head
Num,  18.  20.  neither  shalt  thou  have  any  p.  among

them,  Deut.  10.  9. 1  12.  21.  |  14.  27.  29.  1
18.  1.  Josh.  14.  4.  I  18.  7.

1  am  thy/), and  thine  inheritance  in  Israel
22.  41.  might  see  utmost  p.  of  the  people,  23. 13.
Dent.  33.  21.  he  provided  the  first  p.  for  himself
Josh.  19.  9.  the  p.  of  Judah  w.as  too  much  for  them
22.  25.  ye  have  no  p.  in  the  Lord,  27.

Ruth  2.  3.  her  hap  was  to  light  on  a p.  of  the  field


Ruth  3. 13.  if  he  will  perform  to  thee  p.  ot  a  kinsm.

1  Sam.  5.  +  4.  only  the  fishy  />.  was  left  to  Dagon

14. 2.  Saul  tarried  in  the  utmost  p.  of  the  camp

23.  20.  our  p.  shall  be  to  del.  him  into  king’s  hand
30. 24.  as  his/),  is  that  goeth  down  to  battle,  so  shall

his  p.  be  that  tarrieth  by  stuff',  shall  part  alike

2  Sam.  20.  1.  Sheba  said,  we  have  no  p.  in  David
2  Kings7. 5.  the  lepers  were  come  to  uttermost  p.S

18.  23.  if  able  on  thy  p.  to  set  riders,  Isa.  36.  8.

22.  +  14.  dwelt  in  the  second  p.  2  Chron.  34.  t  22.

1  Chron.  12.  29.  greatest  p.  had  kept  house  of  Saul

2  Chron.  29. 16.  the  priests  went  into  the  inner/).
Neh.  1.  9.  cast  out  to  the  uttermost  p.  of  heaven

5.  11.  restore  the  hundredth  p.  of  the  money
Job  32. 17. 1  will  answer  my  p.  will  shew  my  opinion
Psal.  5.  9.  their  inward  p.  is  very  wickedness
16.  +  5.  the  Lord  is  the  portion  of  my  p.

51. 6.  in  hidden  p.  shalt  make  me  know  wisdom
118.  7-  Lord  takes  my  p.  with  them  that  help  me
Prov.  8.  26.  nor  highest  p.  of  the  dust  of  the  world
31.  rejoicing  in  the  habitable  p.  of  his  earth

17. 2.  shall  have  p.  of  inheritance  among  brethren
Jsa.  7. 18.  hiss  for  the  fly  that  is  in  the  utmost  p.

24.  16.  from  utmost  p.  of  earth  we  heard  songs

44.  16.  he  burneth  p.  thereof  in  the  fire,  with  p.
thereof  he  eateth  flesh,  he  warmeth  himself,  19.

Ezek.  4.  11.  thou  shalt  drink  the  sixth  p.  of  an  bin

39.2.  leave  but  the  sixth/),  of  thee,  and  cause  thee

45.  13.  sixth  p.  of  an  ephah  of  an  homer  of  wheat

17.  it  shall  be  the  prince’s/),  to  give  offerings

46.  14.  a  meat  offering  the  sixth  p.  of  an  ephah
Dan.  2.  33.  his  feet  p.  of  iron,  and  p.  of  clay,  41 . 42.

5.  5.  the  king  saw  p.  of  the  hand  that  wrote,  24.
11.  31.  arms  shall  stand  on  his  p.  they  shall  pollute
Amos  7.  4.  it  devoured  great  deep,  did  eat  up  aj».
Mark  4.  38.  he  was  in  the  hinder  p.  of  the  ship
9.  40.  he  that  is  not  against  us,  is  on  our  p.

Luke  10.  42.  and  Mary  hath  chosen  that  good  p.
11.39.  your  inward  p.  is  full  of  ravening  and  wick.
17-  24.  as  lightning  that  lighteneth  out  of  one  p.
shining  to  other  p.  under  heaven,  so  Son  of  man
John  13.8.  if  I  w’ash  thee  not,  hast  no  p.  with  me
19.23.  soldiers  made  four  parts,  every  soldier  a  p.
Acts  1.  17.  and  had  obtained  p.  of  this  ministry'

25.  that  he  may  take  p.  of  this  ministry

5.  2.  but  Ananias  kept  back/),  of  the  price,  and
brought  a  certain  p.  and  laid  it  at  apostles’  feet,  3.
8.  21.  thou  hast  neither/),  nor  lot  in  this  matter

14.  4.  p.  held  with  the  Jews,/),  with  the  apostles
16.  12.  the  chief  city  of  that  p.  of  Macedonia

19.  32.  more/),  knew  not  wherefore  they  came

23.  6.  perceived  that  the  one  p.  were  Sadducees
27.  12.  the  more  p.  advised  to  depart  thence

1  Cor.  12.  24.  honour  to  that/),  which  lacked

15.  6.  of  whom  the  greater  p.  remain  to  this  day
16. 17-  what  was  lacking  on  your/),  they  supplied

2  Cor.  6.  15.  what  p.  he  that  believeth  with  infidel  ?
Eph.  4.  16.  the  working  in  the  measure  of  every  p.
Tit .  2.8.  that  he  of  the  contrary  p.  may  be  ashamed
Ileh.  2. 14.  himself  likewise  took  p.  of  the  same

1  Pet.  4.14.  Spirit  of  God  rests  on  you  ;  on  their  p. he
is  evil  spoken  of,  but  on  your p.  he  is  glorified
Rev. 20.  6.  holy  that  hath/),  in  the  first  resurrection

21.  8.  all  liars  shall  have  their/),  in  the  lake

22.  19.  God  shall  take  away  his  p.  out  of  book

In  PART.

Rom.  11.  25.  blindness  in  p.  is  happened  to  Israel

1  Cor.  13.  9.  we  know  in  p.  and  we  prophesy'  in  p.
10.  then  that  which  is  in  p.  shall  be  done  away
12.  1  know  in p.  but  then  shall  1  know  as  1  am

2  Cor.  1. 14.  as  also  ye  have  acknowledged  us  in  p.
2.  5.  caused  grief,  it  hath  not  grieved  me  but  in  p.

Third  PART.

Num.  15. 6.  for  a  ram,  flour  mingled  with  the  third
p.  of  an  bin  of  oil,  28.  14.  Ezek.  46. 14.

7.  thou  shalt  off  er  the  third  p.  of  an  bin  of  wine
2  Sam.  18.  2.  David  sent  a  third p.  of  the  people

2  Kings  1 1 . 5.  a  third  p.  that  enter  in  on  the  sabbath
2  Chron.  23.  4.  a  third p.  of  you  shall  be  porters
Neh.  10.  32.  charge  ourselves  with  third  p.  of  shekel
Ezek.  5.  2.  burn  with  fire  a  third  p.  a  third  p.  smite
about  it,  a  third  p.  scatter  in  the  wind,  12.
Zech.  13.  8.  but  the  third p.  shall  be  left  therein
9.  I  will  bring  the  third  p.  through  the  fire
Rev.  8.  7-  third p.  of  the  trees  was  burnt  up

8.  and  the  third p.  of  the  sea  became  blood

9.  third p.  of  the  creatures  died,  third p.  of  ships

10.  and  it  fell  upon  the  third p.  of  the  rivers

11.  the  third  p.  of  the  waters  became  wormwood

12.  the  third  p.  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  was

smitten,  the  day  shone  not  for  a  third p.  of  it
9. 15.  were  prepared  for  to  slay’  the  third p.  of  men

18.  by  these  three  was  the  third p.  of  men  killed
12.  4.  his  tail  drew  third  p.  of  the  stars  of  heaven

Eourth  PART.

Exod.  29. 40.  flour  mingled  with  the  fourth  p.  of  an
hin  of  beaten  oil,  Num.  15.  4.  I  28.  5.
fourth  p.  of  an  hin  of  wine  for  a  drink  offering.

Lev.  23. 13.  Num.  15. 5.  1  28.  7, 14.

1  Sam.  9.  8.  I  have  here  the  fourth  p.  of  a  shekel

1  Kings  6.  33.  posts  of  olive-tree  fourth  p.  of  wall

2  Kings  6.  25.  the  fourth  p.  of  a  cab  of  doves’  dung
Neh.  9.  3.  read  one  fourth  p.  another  fourth  p.  they
Rev.  6.  8.  power  was  given  over  fourth  p.  of  earth

Eifth  PART.

Gen.  41.  34.  take  up  fifth  p.  of  the  land  of  Egypt

47.  24.  ye  shall  give  the  fifth  p.  to  Pharaoh,  26.
Lev.  5.  16.  and  shall  add  the  fifth  p.  thereto,  6.  5.

I  22.  14. 1  27-  13,  19,  27,  31.  Num.  5.  7.
1  Kings  6.  31.  lintel  and  side  posts  were  a  fifth  p.
'Tenth  PART.

Exod.  16.  36.  an  homer  is  the  tenth  p.  of  an  ephah
Lev.  5.  11.  shall  bring  for  his  offering  the  tenth  p.

of  an  ephah  of  fine  flour,  6.  20.  Num.  28.  5
Num.  5. 15.  the  tenth  p.  of  an  ephah  of  barley -meal
18. 26.  ye  shall  offer  even  the  tenth  p.  of  the  tithe
Ezek.  45.  1 1 .  bath  and  ephah  may  contain  tenth  p.

14.  ye  shall  offer  the  tenth  p.  of  a  bath  of  oil
Heb.  7.  2.  to  whom  Abraham  gave  a  tenth  p.  of  all
Rev.  11. 13.  and  the  tenth  p.  of  the  city  fell
PARIS.

Gen.  47  24.  and  four  p.  shall  be  your  own

349


P  A  R


PAS


PAS


Lev.  1.  8.  Aaron’s  sons  shall  lay  the  p.  in  order
2Q.  23.  that  hath  any  thins  lacking  in  his  p.

Sum  31.  27.  and  divide  the  prey  into  two  p.

Dent.  19. 3.  divide  coasts  of  the  land  into  three  p.

30.  4.  it  any  be  driven  to  the  utmost/),  ot  heaven
Josh.  18.  5.  they  shall  divide  it  into  seven  p.  6,  9.

1  Sam.  5.  9.  they  had  emerods  in  then;  secret/).

2  Sam.  19.  43.  we  have  ten p.  in  the  king

1  Kings  16.  21.  Israel  were  divided  into  two/).

2  Kings  11.  7-  two  p.  keep  watch  about  the  king
Seh.  11.  1.  and  nine  p.  to  dwell  in  other  cities
Job  26.  14.  lo,  these  are/),  of  his  ways,  how  little

41.  12.  1  will  not  con.  ea}  his/),  nor  his  power
Psal.  2.  8.  uttermost  p.  of  earth  tor  thy  possession
63.  9.~shall  go  into  lower  p.  of  the  earth
65.  8.  that  dwell  in  utmost  p.  afraid  at  thy  tokens
136. 1.3.  which  divided  the  Red  sea  into/).

139.  9.  if  1  dwell  in  the  utmost/),  ot  the  sea
Prov.  18.  8.  they  go  down  into  innermost/).  26. 22.

Isa.  3.  1?.  and  the  Lord  will  discover  their  secret/).

44.’  23.  shout,  ye  lower  p.  of  the  earth
Jer.  34.  18.  ami  passed  between  the  p.  thereof,  19.
Ezek.  26. 20.  and  set  thee  in  the  low  p.  of  the  earth

31.  14.  are  delivered  to  the  nether  p.  of  earth,  18.

16.  comforted  in  nether/),  of  earth,  32.  18,  24.

37  11.  hope  is  lost,  we  are  cut  oft  for  our  p.

38!  15.  from  thy  place  out  of  the  north/).  39.  2.

48.  8.  offering  in  length  as  one  of  the  other  p.

Zech.  13.  8.  said  Lord,  two  p.  therein  shall  be  cut  off
Mat.  2.  22.  he  turned  aside  into  the/),  of  Galilee

12.  42.  she  came  from  uttermost/).  Luke  11.  31.

John  19.  23.  took  his  garments  and  made  four/).

Acts  20. 2.  when  he  had  gone  over  those  p.  he  came
Rom.  15.  23.  having  no  more  place  in  those  p.

1  Cor.  12.  23.  uncomely  p.  have  more  comeliness
24.  for  our  comely  p.  have  no  need,  but  God
Eph.  4.  9.  he  descended  first  into  lower/),  of  earth
Rev  16.  19.  the  great  city  was  divided  into  three p.
See  Back,  Hinder,  Inward.

PART,  Kerb.

Lev.  2.  6.  thou  shalt  p.  the  meat  offering  in  pieces
Ruth  1.  17.  if  ought  but  death  p.  thee  and  me

1  Sam.  30.  24.  they  shall  p.  alike,  and  it  was  so

2  Sam.  14.  6.  and  there  was  none  to  p.  them
Job  41.  6.  shall  they/),  him  among  the  merchants  ‘
Psal.  22. 18.  they  p.  my  garments  among  them

PARTED.

Gen.  2. 10.  the  river  was  p.  into  four  heads
2  Kings  2.  11.  the  chariot  p.  them  both  asunder
14.  the  waters  p.  hither  and  thither,  he  went  over
Job  38.  24.  by  what  way  is  the  light/)./

Joel  3.  2.  whom  they  scattered,  and  p.  my  land
Mat.  27.  35.  they  crucified  him,  and  p.  his  gar¬
ments,  Mark  15.24.  Luke  23.  34.  John  19.24.
Luke  24.  51.  while  he  blessed  them,  was  p.  from
Acts 2.  45.  /).  them  to  all  men,  as  each  had  need
P  A  RTF,  l  11.

Lev.  11.  3.  whatsoever  p.  the  hoof,  Dent.  14.  6.

Prov.  18.  18.  the  lot  p.  between  the  mighty
PAR  I  AKER.

Psal.  50.  18.  and  hast  been  p.  with  adulterers
1  Cor.  9.  10.  that  he  should  be/),  of  his  hope
23.  that  1  might  be  p.  thereof  with  you
10.  30.  if  1  by  grace  be/),  why  am  1  evil  spoken  of ?

1  Tim.  5.  22.  neither  be  p.  of  other  men's  sins

2  Tim.  1.  8.  but  be  thou  p.  of  afflictions  of  gospel
2.  6.  the  husbandman  be  first  p.  of  the  fruits

1  Pet.  5.  1.  who  am  also  a  p.  ot  the  glory  which

2  John  11.  biddeth  God  speed  is  p.  of  his  evil  deeds

PARTAKERS.

Mat.  23.  30.  would  not  l  een  p.  in  blood  of  prophets
Rom.  15.  27.  if  Gentiles  have  been  made  p.  of  their
spiritual  things,  their  duty  to  minister  in  carnal
1  Cor.  9.  12.  if  others  be  p.of  this  power  over  you

13.  who  wait  at  the  altar,  are  p.  with  the  altar
10. 17.  for  we  are  all  p.  of  that  one  bread

18.  are  not  they  which  eat  p.  of  the  altar  ?

21.  cannot  be/),  of  the  I  ord’s  table,  and  devils’

2 ‘Cor.  1.  7.  as  you  are  p.  of  the  sufferings,  so  shall  be
tph.  3.  6.  and  p.  of  his  promise  in  Christ  by  gospel

5.  7.  be  not  ye  therefore  p.  with  them

Phil.  1.7.  in  defence  ofgosp.  ye  all  are/),  ofmy  grace
Col.  1. 12.  hath  made  us  meet  to  be  p.  of  inheritance
1  Tim.  6.  2.  because  they  are  p.  of  the  benefit
Heb.  2. 14.  as  the  children  are  p.  of  flesh  and  blood
3. 1.  holy  brethren,/),  of  the  heavenly  calling

14.  for  we  are  made  p.  of  Christ,  it  we  hold

6.  4.  and  were  made  p.  of  the  Holy  Ghost

12.  8.  if  without  chastisement,  whereof  all  are  p.

10.  that  we  might  be  p.  of  his  holiness

1  Pet.  4.  13.  as  ye  are  p.  of  Christ’s  sufferings

2  Pet.  1.  4.  ye  might  be/),  of  the  divine  nature
Rev.  18.  4.  come  out  of  her,  that  ye  be  not/),  of  her

PARTAKES!.

Rom.  11. 17.  and  with  them  p.  of  root  and  fatness
PARTIAL.

Mai.  2. 9.  notkeep  my  ways,  but  have  been  p.  in  law
Jam.  2.  4.  are  ye  not  then  p.  in  voursehes  ?.
PARTIALITY.

1  Tim.  5.  21.  observe  these  things,  doing  noth.  by/).
Jam.  3.  17.  without  p.  and  without  hypocrisy
PARTICULAR.

1  Cor  12.  27.  ye  are  body  of  Christ,  members  in  p.
Eph.  5. 33.  let  every  one  of  vou  in/>.  so  love  his  wife
PARTICULARLY.

Acts 21.  19.  Paul  declar. p.  whatthingsG.  w’rought
Heb.  9. 5.  mercy -seat,  which  we  cannot  now  speak  p.
PAR  TIES.

Exod.  22. 9.  cause  of  both  p.  shall  come  before  judges
PARTING.

Exod.  21. 21.  king  of  Rabvlon  stood  at  p.  of  the  way
PARTITION.

1  Kings  6.21.  and  he  made  a/),  by  chains  of  gold
Eph.  2. 14.  who  hath  broken  down  middle  wall  of/).
PARTLY.

Dan.  2. 42.  the  kingdom  shall  be  p.  strong,/),  broken

1  Cor.  11. 18.  1  hear  there  be  divisions,  1  p.  believe  it.
Heb.  10.  33./).  whilst  ye  were  made  a  gazing-stock

by  afflictions./),  whilst  ye  became  companions
PARTN  ER.

Prov.  29.  24.  whoso  is  p.  with  thief  hateth  his  soul

2  C or.  8.  2.3.  Titus,  he  is  my  p.  and  fellow-helper

350


Philem.  17.  if  count  me  a  p.  receive  him  as  myself
PARTNERS.

Luke  5.  7-  they  beckoned  to  their/),  to  help  them

10.  lames  and  John  who  were  p.  with  Simon

PAR!  RIDGE.

1  Sam.  26. 20.  as  when  one  doth  hunt  a  p.  in  monn-.
Jer.  17.  11.  as p.  sitteth  on  eggs,  hatcheth  them  not
PASSAGE.

Sum.  20.21.  Edom  refused  to  give  Tsr.  p.thro  border
Josh.  22.  11.  have  built  an  altar  at  the  p.  of  Isr.

1  Sam.  1.3.  23.  garrison  of  Philistines  went  out  too.
Isa.  10.  29.  they  are  gone  over/).  Kamab  is  afraid
P  ASS  ACj  ES.

Judg.  12.  6.  took  and  slew  him  at  the/),  of  Jordan
1  Sam.  14.  4.  between  the  p.  there  were  sharp  rocks
Jer.  22.  20.  lift  up  thy  voice,  and  cry  from  the  p.

51  32.  to  shew  Babylon  that  the  p.  are  stopped
PASS.  ,  „

Gen.  18.  5.T  will  fetch  bread,  after  that  ye  shall  p.on
41.  32.  and  God  will  shortly  bring  it  to  p.

Exod.33.  19.  1  "ill  make  my  goodness  p.  before  thee
Sum.  27.  7.  inherit,  of  their  father  to  p.  to  them,  8.
Josh.  1.  14.  ye  shall p.  before  your  brethen  armed
6  7.  he  said  to  people,  p.  on,  and  compass  the  city
1  Sam.  9.  27.  bid  the  servants p.  on  before  us
16.8.  Jesse  made  Abinadab  p.  before  Samuel
10.  Jesse  made  seven  of  his  sons  p.  before  him
Seh.  2.  14.  there  was  no  place  for  the  beast  to  p.

Job  6.  15.  as  a  stream  of  brooks  they  p.  away

11.  16.  and  remember  it  as  waters  that/),  away
34.  20.  and  people  shall  be  troubled,  and  p.  aw'ay
Psal.  58.  8.  as  snail  which  melteth  let  them  p.  away
73.  t  7.  they  p.  the  thoughts  of  the  heart
1 19.  +  37.  make  top.  mine  eyes  from  beholding  van.

Prov.  16.  .30.  moving  his  lips  he  hringeth  evil  to  p.
22.  3.  the  simple  p.  on  and  are  punished,  27-  12.
Isa.  2.  +  18.  the  idols  shall  utterly  p.  away
30.  32.  in  every  place  where  grounded  staffshallp.
.31.  t  9.  his  rock  shall  p.  away  tor  fear
.33.  21.  no  galley  nor  gallant  ship  shall  p.  thereby
37!  26.  dried  up  rivers,  now  have  1  brought  it  top.
Jer.  8.  13.  the  things  I  have  given  shall  p.  away
15  14.  1  will  make  thee  to  p.  with  thine  enemies
33.  13.  the  flocks  shall  p.  again  under  the  hands  of
him  that  telleth  them,  saith  the  Lord
51.  4.3.  nor  doth  any  son  of  man  p.  thereby
Ezek.  5.  1 .  cause  a  barber’s  razor  top.  on  thine  head
20. 37.  1  will  cause  you  to  p.  under  rod,  and  bring
.32.  19.  whom  (lost  thou  p.  in  beauty  f  go  down
Amos  6.  2.p.  ye  unto  Ualneh  and  see,  go  to  Hamath
Mic.  1.  11.  p.  ye  away,  thou  inhabitant  of  Saphir
2.  13.  and  their  king  shall  p.  before  them
Zeph.  2.  2.  before  decree  brir.g  forth,  the  day  p.  as
Zech.  3.  4. 1  have  caused  thy  iniquity  top.  from  thee
Mat. 5.  18.  heaven  and  earth  shall  p.  one  tittle  notp,
26.  39  Father,  let  this  cupp.  from  me,  Mark  14.  .35
Luke  16. 26.  so  that  they  w  hich  would  p.  from  hence
to  you  cannot;  nor  can  they  p.  to  us  from  you
10.  4.  he  ran  to  see  him,  for  he  was  top.  that  way
1  Cor.  7.36.  if  she  p.  the  flower  of  her  age,  and  need
Jam.  1.  10.  as  flower  '?  the  grass  he  shall  p.  away

1  Pet.  1.  17.  p.  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear

2  Pet'.  3.  10.  in  which  the  heavens  shall  p.  away

PASS  by.

Exod.  33.  22.  cover  thee  with  my  hand  while  T p.  by
Dent  2.  30.  Sihon  would  not  let  usp.  by  him

1  Sam.  16.9.  then  Jesse  made  Shammahtop.  by
Psal.  80.  12.  all  they  that  p.by  the  way  do  pluck  her
89.  41.  all  thatp.  by  the  way  spoil  him,  he  is  at

Jer.  22.  8.  many  nations  shall  p.  by  this  city
Lam.  1.  12.  all  ye  that  p.  by  behold  and  see
2.  15.  all  thatp.  by  clap  their  hands  at  thee
Ezek.  5. 14.  a  reproach  in  sight  of  all  thatp.  by
37.  2.  and  caused  me  top.  ^pthern  round  about
46.  21.  caused  me  top.  by  four  corners  of  the  earth
Amos  7. 8.  I  will  not  again  p.  by  them  any  more, 8.  2.
Mic.  2.  8.  ve  pull  off  garments  of  them  that  p.  by
Mat.  8.  28"  that  no  man  might  p.  by  that  way
Luke  18.  36.  hearing  the  multitude  p.  by  he  asked

2  Cor.  1. 16.  and  to  p.  by  you  into  Macedonia

See  Game,  Come.

Sot  PASS.

Sum .  20. 17. we  will  not  p.  through  the  fields  or  vine

18.  and  Edom  said,  thou  shalt  not  p.  by  me
Dent.  24.  +5.  when  a  man  hath  taken  a  new  wife,  he

shall  not  go  out  to  war,  not  any  thing p.  on  him
Job  14.  5.  hast  appointed  his  bounds  he  cannot  p.

19.  8.  he  hath  fenced  my  way,  that  1  cannot  p.
Psal.  148.  6.  he  made  a  decree,  which  shall  not  p
Prov.  8.  29.  waters  should  not  p.  his  commandment
Jer.  5.  22.  by  a'perpetual  decree,  that  it  cannot  p
Dan.  7.  14.  everlast.  dominionithat  shall  notp.  aw'ay
Mat.  24.  34.  this  generation  shall  not  p.  away,  till  all

these  things  be  fulfilled,  Mark  13.  30.  Luke  21.32.
35. heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away, but  my  word
shallwo/p.  away,  Mark\3.  31.  Luke  21.33.
PASS  not.

Gen.  18.  3.  my  lord,  p.  not  away  from  thy  servant
2  Kings  6.  9.  beware  that  thou  p.  not  such  a  place
Prov.  4.  15.  avoid  it,  p.nnt  bv  it,  turn  aside
Amos  5  5.  seek  not  Teth-e),  p.  not  to  Eeer-sheba
PASS  ecer.

Gen.  8.  1.  God  made  a  wind  top.  over  the  earth
.31.  52.  that  1  will  notp.  over  this  heap  to  thee
32.  16.  p.  over  before  me,  and  put  a  space  betwixt
+  23.  he  caused  them  to  p.  over  the  brook
.3.3.  14.  let  my  lord  p.  over  before  thy  servant
Exod.12.  13.  w hen  1  see  blood ,  I  willp.  over  you, 23
1.3.  +  12.  cause  top.  over  to  the  T.ord  all  that  open
15.  16.  as  still  as  a  stone,  till  thy  people  p.  over
Sum.  32.  27.  but  thy  servants  will  p.  over,  29.  32
.30.  if  they  will  not  p.  over  with  you  armed-
Dent.  2.  18.  thou  art  to  p.  over  throimh  Ar  this  day
24.  p.  over  Arnon  1129.  until  1  shallp.  oztfr  Jordan
.3. 18.  ye  shall  p.  over  armed  before  your  brethren
6.  1 1.  might  do  them  in  land  whither  ye  p.  over
9.1.  thou art  to  p.  over  Jordan  this  day,  11.  31.  I
27.  2.  Josh.  1.  11.  1  3.  6,  14.  ,

Josh.  22.  19.  then  p.  over  into  the  land  of  possession
Judg.  3.  28.  and  suffered  not  a  man  top.  over
19.  12.  his  master  said,  we  will  p.  over  to  Gibeah
1  Sam.  14.  8.  behold,  we  will  p.  over  to  these  men


2  Sam.  15.  22.  David  said  to  Ittai,  go  and  p.  over
17.  16.  lodge  not  in  plains,  but  speedily  p.  over
Psal.  104.  9.  set  a  bound,  that  they  may  notp.  over
141. 1 10.  let  the  wicked  fail,  whilst  that  I  p.  over
Prov.  19.  11.  it  is  a  glory  to  p.  over  a  transgression
Isa.  2.3.  6.  p.  over  to  I  arshisn,  howl  ye  inhabitant*
12.  p.  0.  to  Chittim  11  28.  19.  by  morning  shallp.  0
.31.  9.  he  shall  p.  over  to  his  strong  hold  tor  fear
35.  8.  the  way  ot  holiness,  unclean  shall  not  p.  0.
47.  2.  uncover  the  thigh,  p.  over  the  river*

5l!  10.  the  depths,  a  way  for  ransomed  to  p.  oter
Jer.  2.  10.  for  p.  over  the  isles  of  Chittim  and  see
5.  22.  though  they  roar,  yet  can  thy  notp.  o.  it
Ezek.  47.  5.  it  was  a  river  that  I  could  not  p.  over
Dan.  4.  16.  and  let  seven  times  p.  over  him,  25.

11.  f  20.  one  that  causetii  an  exactor  to  p.  over

40.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  p.  over

Hab.  1.  11.  his  mind  shall  change,  he  shall  p.  over
Luke  11.  42.  and  p.  o.  judgment,  and  love  of  God
PASS  through.

Gen.  30.  32.  T  will  p.  through  all  thy  flock  to-day
Exod.  12. 12.  I  will  p.  thro'  land  of  Egypt  this  night
23.  the  Lord  will  p.  thro'  to  smite  the  Egyptians
Lev.  18.  21.  shalt  not  let  any  of  thy  seed  p.  through
the  fire  to  Molech.  Deut.  18.  10.  2  Kings  17.  17.
Sum.  20.  17.  let  us  1  pray  thee  p.  thro  thy  country
21.  22.  let  me  p.  through  thy  land,  Dent.  2.  27.

23.  Sihon  not  suffer  Israel  to  p.  t.  Judg.  11.  20.
Dent.  2.  4.  ye  are  to  p.  thro'  the  coasts  of  Edom
28.  w'ater  to  drink,  only  I  will  p.  thro'  on  my  feet
Josh.  1.  11.  p.  t.  the  host  and  command  the  people
2  Sam.  12.  31.  and  made  them  p.  thro'  brick  kiln

1  Kings  18.  6.  they  divided  the  land  to  p.  tb.ro'  It

2  Kings  16.  3.  to  p.  thro'  the  fire,  21.  6.  |  2.3.  10.
2  Chr.  .33.  6.  Jer.  32.  35.  Ezek.  20.  26,  .31.

Psal.  78.  13.  caused  them  to  p.  t.  the  sea,  1.36.  14.
Isa.  8.  8.  he  shall  p.  through  Judah,  and  go  over
21.  shall  p.  thro'  it  hardly  bestead  and  hungry
21.  1.  as  whirlwinds  in  the  south  p.  thro',  so  it

23.  10.  p.  thro'  thy  land  as  a  river,  O  Tarshish

28.  15.  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  p.  thro',  18.
34.  10.  none  shall  p.  through  it  for  ever  and  ever

Jer.  9.  10.  burnt  up,  so  that  none  can  p.  thro'  them
Lam.  3.  44.  that  our  prayers  should  not  p.  through
4.  21.  the  cup  also  shall  p.  through  to  thee
Ezek.  5.  17.  pestilence  and  blood  shall  p.  thro'  thee

14.  15.  if  I  cause  noisome  beasts  p.  thro'  land  that
no  man  may'  p.  thro'  tor  beasts,  29-  11. 1  33.  28.

39.  15.  the  passengers  that  p.  through  the  land
Dan.  11.  10.  one  shall  come,  p.  thro' ,  and  overflow
Joel  3.  17.  no  stranger  shall  p.  thro'  her  any  more
Amos  5  17.  I  will  p.  through  thee,  saith  the  !  ord
Sah.  1.’  12.’  shall  be  cut  down,  when  ne  shall  p.  t.

15.  the  wicked  shall  no  more  p.  through  thee
Zech.  9.  8.  and  no  oppressor  shall  p.  through  them
1  Cor.  16.  5.  when  1  shallp.  through  Macedonia
PASSED.

Gen.  15.  17.  a  lamp  thatp.  between  those  pieces
Sum.  20.  17.  until  we  have  p.  thy  borders
Josh.  3.  4.  ye  have  not  p.  this  w’ay  heretofore
6.  8.  the  seven  priests  p.  on  before  and  blew

24.  17.  Lord  our  God  preserved  us  in  all  the  way
we  went,  among  all  people  through  whom  we  p.

Judg.  3.  26.  Ehuri  escaped  and  p.  beyond  quarries

1  Sam.  15.  12.  Saul  is  gone  about  and  p.  oil

29.  2.  the  lords  of  Philistines  p.  on  by  hundreds

2  Sam.  15.  18.  David’s  servants  p.  on  beside  him
2  Kings  4.  8.  it  fell,  that  Elisha  p.  to  Shunem

31.  Gehazi  p.  on  before  them,  and  laid  the  staff
2  Chr  on.  9.  22.  Solomon  p.  all  the  kings  in  wisdom
Job  4.  15.  then  a  spirit  p.  before  my  face
9.  26.  my  days  are  p.  away,  as  the  swift  ships

15.  IQ.  and  no  stranger  p.  among  them
Psal.  18.  12.  at  the  brightness,  his  thick  clouds  p.
37.  36.  yet  hep.  away, and  lo,  he  w-as  not
81.  +  6.  his  hands  p.  away  from  the  pots
90.  9.  all  our  days  are  p.  away  in  thy  wrath

Cant.  3.  4.  it  was  but  a  little  that  I  p.  from  them
Isa.  10.  28.  he  is  come  to  Aiath,  he  is  p.  to  Migron

41.  3.  he  pursued  them,  and  p.  safely
Jer.  11.  15.  and  the  holy  flesh  is  p.  from  thee

34.  18.  and  p.  between  the  parts  thereof,  19.

46.  17.  he  hath  p.  the  time  appointed
Dan.  3.  27.  nor  the  smell  of  fire  had  p.  on  them
6.  18.  the  king  went  and  p.  the  night  tasting
Nah.  3.  19.  hath  not  thy  wickedness  p.  continually
Mark  6.  35.  a  desert  place,  now  the  time  is  farp.
John  5.  24.  but  is  p.  from  death  to  life,  1  John  3.  .4
Rom.  5.  12.  so  death  p.  on  all  men,  all  have  sinnei
Heb.  4. 14.  great  High  Priest  that  isp.  into  heaven
Rev.  21. 1.  first  heaven  and  first  earth  werep.  awa.
4.  for  the  former  things  are  p.  away
PASSED  by.

Gen.  37.  28.  there  p.  by  Midianites,  merchantmen
Exod.  34.  6.  Lord  p.  by  before  him,  and  proclaims
Deut.  29.  16.  through  the  nations  which  yep.  by

1  Kings  13.  25.  behold,  men  p.  by  and  saw  the  Ho

19.  11.  the  T.ord  p.  by  II  19.  Elijah  p.  by  Elisha

20.  39.  as  the  kingp.  by  he  cried  to  the  king  <

2  Kings  4.  8.  that  as  oft  as  he  p.  by  he  turned  in
6.  30.  the  king  p.  by  on  the  wall,  people  looked

14.  9.  and  there  p.  by  a  wild  beast,  2  Chron.  J>-  W
Job  28.  8.  nor  hath  the  fierce  lion  p.  by  it
Psal.  48.  4.  for  lo,  the  kings  p.  by  together
Ezek.  16.  6.  when  I  p.  by  and  saw  thee  polluted,.,

15.  poured  fornicat.  on  every  one  thatp.  by,  .0-
36.  34.  it  lay  desolate  in  sight  of  all  thatp.  by
Hab.  3.  10.  the  overflowing  of  the  waters/),  by
Mat.  20.  30.  wJien  heard  that  Jesus p.  by.  they  rne
27.  39.  they  thatp.  by  reviled  him,  Mark  .0.
Mark  2. 14.  as  he  p.  by  he  saw  Levi  sitting  at  recec
6.  48.  he  cometh,  and  would  havep.  by  them
1 1 .  20.  in  morning  as  they  p.  by  they  saw  tig-m

15.  21.  they  compel  one  Simon  who  p.  Aytobea
Luke  10.  31.  he  p.  by  on  the  other  side,  32.

John  8.  59.  going  thro’  midst  of  them,  and  sop.  "■
Acts  17.  23.  as  I  p.  by  and  beheld  your  devotion

PASSED  over.

Gen.  31.  21.  Jacob  rose  up,  and  p.  over  the  river

32.  10.  for  with  my  staff  1  p.  over  this  Jordan
Exod.  12.  27.  who  p.  over  houses  of  Israel  m  TgJ
Sum.  33. 51.  whenye  arep.  over  Jordan,  Deut.


PAS


PAS


PAT


(A  3.  It  they  p.  over  right  against  Jericho

17.  all  the  Israelites  p.  over  on  dry  ground
.  1.  when  all  people  were  clean p.  over,  11.

10.  people  hasted  and  p.  over  ||  11.  the  arkp.  over

12.  lleubeuites  and  Gadites p.  over  armed  before
1  dp.  8.  4.  Gideon  p.  over  and  300  men  with  him
0. 9.  the  children  of  Amnion  p.  over  Jordan

1.  29.  Jephthah  p.over  to  tight  with  Ammon,  32.
Sam.  14.  23.  the  battle  v.  over  to  Beth-aven

*.  2.  David  p.  over  with  600  men  unto  Achish
Sam.  2.  29;  Abner  and  his  men  p.  over  Jordan
5.  22.  lttai  p.  over  1|  23.  king  and  people  p.  over

а.  40.  27.  my  judgment  is  p.  over  from  my  God
5 ek.  47.  5.  a  river  that  could  not  bep.  over

lev.  10.  11.  but  l  p.  over  upon  her  fair  neck
riak  2.  3.  all  thy  billows  and  waves  p.  over  me
PASSED  through.

en.  12.  6.  Abram  p.  through  the  land  to  Sichem
um.  14.  7-  land  which  we  p.  thro'  to  searcti  is  good

3.  8.  they  p.  thro'  midst  of  the  sea  into  wilderness
Sam.  9.  4.  Saul  p.  t.  mount  Ephraim  and  Shalisha
b /iron.  30.  10.  posts  p.  thro'  country  of  Ephraim
ic.  2. 13.  breaker  is  come,  they  p.  through  the  gate
•ch.  7-  14.  land  was  desolate,  that  no  many,  thro'
ike  17- 11.  that  he  p.  thro'  the  midst  of  Samaria
-rj- 9. 32.  as  Peter  p.  thro'  all  quarters,  came  down

2.  10.  they  went  out,  and  p.  through  one  street
'or.  10.  1.  all  our  fathers  p.  through  the  sea

eh  11. 29.  by  faith  they  p.  through  the  Red  sea
PASSEDST.

ay.  12.  1.  why  p.  thou  over  to  fight  ag.  Ammon  ?
PASSENGERS.

>ov.  9. 15.  she  standeth  to  call  p.  who  go  right  on
.ek.  39.  11.  1  will  give  Gog  valley  ot  p.  it  shall
stop  noses  of  thep.  there  shall  they  bury  Gog

14.  to  bury  with  p.  those  that  remain  on  earth

15.  whenp.  see  a  man's  bone,  they  set  a  sign  by  it

PASSES  f.

f  iU.  3.21.  so  L.  do  to  all  kingdoms  whither  thou  p.
J.  18.  on  laud  whither  thoup.  over  to  possess
Sam.  15.  33.  if  p.  on,  thou  shalt  be  a  burden
Kings  2.  37.  day  thou p.  over  the  brook  Kidron
a.  43.  2.  whenp.  thro’  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee
PASSETH.

r ud.  30. 13.  every  one  thatp.  among  them,  14.

3.  22.  1  will  cover  thee,  while  my  glory  p.  by

w.  27.  32.  whatsoever  p.  under  the  rod,  the  tenth
■>•/<.  3.  11.  even  the  Lord  p.  over  before  you
Kings  9-  8.  at  this  house  everv  one  that  p.  by  it
shall  be  astonished,  and  shall  hiss,  2  Chr.  7.  21.
Kings  A.  9.  is  an  holy  man  of  God,  whichp.  by  us

2.  4.  money  of  every  one  that  p.  the  account
4  9.  11.  he  p.  on  also,  but  I  perceive  him  not

1.  20.  thou  prevailest  against  him,  and  hep.

,).  15.  and  niy  welfare  p.  away  as  a  cloud
T.  21.  but  the  wind  p.  and  cleanseth  them

al.  8.  8.  dominion  over  whatev  erp.  thro’  the  seas

13.  39.  are  a  wind  that  p.  away,  comes  not  again
13.  16.  for  the  windp.  over  it,  and  it  is  gone
14.4.  his  days  are  as  a  shadow  thatp.  away
•yv.  10.  25.  as  whirlwind  p.  so  is  wicked  no  more
5.  17.  he  that  p.  by  and  meddleth  with  strife

'■cl.  1. 4.  one  generat.  p.  away ,  and  another  cometh
a.  29.  5.  the  terrible  shall  be  as  chaff  thatp.  away
r.  2.  6.  a  land  that  no  man  p.  through,  9.  12.

3.  24.  scatter  them  as  stubble  that  p.  away

3. 16.  every  one  thatp.  shall  be  astonished,  19.  8.
■ek.  35.  7.  I  will  cut  off  from  it  him  thatp.  out
\us.  13.  3.  they  shall  be  as  early  dew  that  p.  away
ic.  7.  18.  G  that  p.  by  transgression  of  remnant
ph.  2.  15.  every  one  that  p.  by  her  shall  hiss

б.  1  made  their  streets  waste,  that  none  p.  by
ch.  9.  8.  I  will  encamp,  because  of  him  that  p.  by
ike  18.  37.  they  told  him  that  Jesus  p.  by

■or.  7. 31.  fashion  of  this  world  p.  away,  1  John  2.17.
>h.  3.  19.  the  love  of  Christ  whichp.  knowledge
ill.  4, 7  •  the  peace  of  God  which  p.  understanding
PASS  IMG.

dg.  19. 18.  we  arep.  from  Beth-lehem-judah
Sam.  l.  26.  thy  love  to  me  p.  love  of  women
5.  24.  the  people  had  donep.  out  of  the  city
Kings  6.  26.  as  king  of  Israel  wasp,  by  on  wall
>al.  84.  6.  p.  thro’  the  valley  of  Bacamake  a  well
rov.  7.  8.  p.  through  the  street  near  the  corner

2.  31.  5.  and  p.  over  he  will  preserve  Jerusalem
■ek.  39. 14.  p.  thro’  land  to  bury  those  that  remain
ike  4. 30.  he  p.  thro’  midst  of  them,  went  his  way
:tsb.  15.  at  the  least  the  shadow  of  Peter  p.  by
.40.  Philipp,  through,  preached  in  all  the  cities
5. 8.  the  v  p.  by  Mysia,  came  down  to  Troas

?.  8.  and  hardly  p.  Crete  we  came  to  fair  havens
PASSION

gnifies,  [1]  The  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ,
Acts  L  3.  1  Pet.  1.  11.  [2]  The  sufferings  which
fhrtst  s  members  endure  for  his  sake.  Col.  1.  24.
neb.  10.32.  1  Pet.  4.  13.  [3]  Natural  and  sinful
infirmities.  Acts  14.  15.  Jam.  5.  17.  [4]  Shame-
ul  passions,  to  which  persons  are  given  up,  whom
"od  abandons  to  their  own  desires,  Pom.  1.  26.
5J  I  he  passions,  or  motions  of  sin  which  act  in
members,  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  death,
Kom.  7.  5.  [6]  7  'he  pass  ions,  or  desires,  our  evil
^nations,  the  motions  of  concupiscence,  to
r/ich  the  heathen,  without  any  scruple,  abandoned
themselves,  1  Thess.  4.  5.

ost  of  the  passages  of  Scripture  here  cited  are  other-
vise  rendered  in  our  translation,  but  the  words  in
ie  original  are,  Ilaflov  and  UaOrgxa,  which  words
are  tjten  translated  by  passions.
ott  3.  to  whom  he  shewed  himself  alive  after  p.
PASSIONS.

ts  ly*  15.  we  also  ..re  men  of  like  p.  with  you
m.  5. 17.  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  p.  as  we
, .  PASSOVER.

l,s.w°Td  comes  from  the  Hebrew  verb,  pasach,
77-  signifies  to  pass,  to  leap,  or  skip  over.

icy  gave  the  name  of  Passover  to  the  feast  which
'•i  ns  established  in  commemoration  of  the  coming
ortn  out  of  Egypt,  because  the  night  before  their
dP<lTl'tre’  ^‘e  destroying  angel,  who  slew  the
r;j  :rV/  t^le  Egyptians,  passed  over  the  Is
acutes,  because  they  xvere  masked  with  the  blood


of  the  lamb  which  was  killed  the  evening  before  ;
and  which  for  this  reason  was  called  the  Paschal
Lamb.

It  was  typical  of  the  justice  of  God's  passing  over
and  sparing  such  who  are  sprinkled  with  the  blood
of  Christ,  1  Cor.  5.  7.  As  the  destroying  angel
passed  over  the  houses  marked  with  the  blood  of  i~e
paschal  lamb,  so  the  wrath  of  God  passes  over  them
whose  souls  are  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ.
As  the  paschal  lamb  was  killed  before  Israel  was
delivered ;  so  it  was  necessary  Christ  should  suffer
before  we  could  be  redeemed.  It  was  killed  before
Moses’  law,  or  Aaron’s  sacrifices,  were  enjoined ;
to  shew,  that  deliverance  comes  to  mankind  by  none
of  them,  but  only  by  the  true  Passover,  that  Lamb
of  God,  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,
Rom.  3.  25.  Heb.  9.  14.  It  was  killed  the  fiist
month  of  the  year,  which  prefigured  that  Christ
should  suffer  death  in  that  month,  John  18.  28.
It  was  killed  in  the  evening,  Exod.  12.  6.
•So  Christ  suffered  in  the  last  days,  and  at  that
time  of  the  day.  Mat.  27..  46.  Heb.  1.  2.  At
even  also  the  sun  sets,  which  shews,  that  it  was
the  Sun  of  righteousness  who  was  to  suffer  and
die ;  and  that  at  his  passion  universal  darkness
should  be  upon  the  whole  earth.  Luke  23.  44.
The  passover  was  roast  with  fire,  to  note  the
sharp  and  dreadful  pains  which  Christ  should
sufier,  not  only  from  men,  but  from  God  also.
It  was  to  be  eaten  with  bitter  herbs,  Exod.  12.
8.  not  only  to  put  them  in  remembrance  of  their
bitter  bondage  in  Egypt,  but  also  to  testify
our  mortification  to  sin,  and  readiness  to  un¬
dergo  afflictions  for  Christ,  Col.  1.  24.  and
likewise  to  teach  us  the  absolute  necessity  of
true  repentance  in  all  that  would  profitably  feed
on  Christ.

Exod.  12. 11.  it  is  Lord’s  p.  ye  shall  eat  it  with  your
loins  girded,  27-  Lev.  23.  5.  Num.  28.  16.

21.  kill  the  p.  ||  43.  this  is  the  ordinance  of  the  p.
Num.  9.  5.  they  kept  the  p.  at  even,  Jodi.  5.  10.

33.  3.  on  the  morrow  of  the  p.  Josh.  5.  1 1.

Dent.  16.  2.  thou  shalt  sacrifice  the  p.  to  Lord,  6.

5.  thou  mayest  not  sacrifice  p.  within  thy  gates
2  Kings  23.  22.  was  not  holden  such  a  p.  from  days
of  judges,  nor  in  days  of  kings  of  Israel  or  J  ud.
23.  wherein  t1  is  p.  was  holden  to  the  Lord
2  Chr.  .30.  15.  then  they  killed  p.  in  second  month,
35.  1,  11.  Ezra  6.  20.  Mark  14.  12.  Luke  22.  7.

18.  yet  did  they  eat  p.  otherwise  than  written
35.  1.  Josiah  kept  <vp.  to  Ld.  17.  19.  Ezra  6.  19.

7-  Josiah  gave  all  tor  the  p.  offerings,  8,  9.

13.  they  roasted  p.  with  fire,  accord,  to  ordinance
Ezek.  45.  21.  ye  shall  have  p.  a  feast  of  seven  days
Mat.  26.17-  where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for  thee
to  eat  p.  ?  Mark  14.  12.  Luke  22.  8,  11.

19.  disciples  did  as  Jesus  appointed  them,  and
they  made  ready  p.  Mark  14.  16.  Luke  22.  13.

Luke  22.  15.  with  desire  I  have  desired  to  eat  this  p.
John  2.  13.  and  the  Jews’  p.  was  at  hand,  11.  55.

23.  now  when  he  was  in  Jerusalem  at  the  p.
11.55.  many  went  to  Jerusalem  before  p.  to  purify
12.  1.  Jesus  came  six  days  before  p.  to  Bethany

18.  28.  lest  defiled,  but  that  they  might  eat  the  p.
39.  that  1  should  release  to  you  one  at  the  p.

19.  14.  and  it  was  the  preparation  of  the  p.

1  Cot .  5.  7.  Christ  our  p.  is  sacrificed  for  us

Heb.  11.  28.  through  faith  he  kept  the  p.  lest  he  that
See  Feast,  Keep.

PASSOVERS.

2  Chron.  30.  17.  Levites  had  charge  of  killing  ofp.

PAST.

Gen.  50.  4.  days  of  mourning  were  p.  2  Sam.  11.  27.
Exod.  21.  29.  if  ox  wont  push  with  horn  in  timep.  .36.
Num.  21.  22.  go  along,  until  we  be  p.  thy  borders
Deut.  2.  10.  the  Emims  dwelt  therein  in  times  p.

4.  .32.  for  ask  now  or  tne  uays  which  are  p.

42.  and  hated  him  not  ui  times  p.  19.  4,  6.

1  Sam.  15.  .32.  Agag  said,  bitterness  of  death  isp.
19.  7.  he  was  in  his  presence  as  in  times  p.

2  Sam.  .3.  17.  ye  sought  for  Dav.  in  timep.  to  be  king

5.  2.  also  in  time  p.  when  Saul  was  king  over  us

16.  1.  David  was  a  little  p.  the  top  of  the  hill

1  Kings  18.  29.  when  mid-day  was  p.  was  110  voice

1  Chron.  9.  20.  Phinehas  was  ruler  in  time  p.

Job  9. 10.  which  doeth  great  things  p.  finding  out

14.  13.  keep  me  in  secret,  until  thy  wrath  be  p.

17.  11.  my  days  are  p.  my  purposes  broken  off
29.  2.  O  that  1  were  as  in  months  p.  in  the  days
Psal.  90.  4.  years  are  but  as  yesterday  when  it  is  p.
Eccl.  3.  15.  and  God  requireth  that  which  is  p.

Cant.  2.  11.  for  lo  the  winter  is  p.  the  rain  is  over
Jer.  8.  20.  the  harvest  is  p.  the  summer  is  ended
Mat.  14.  15.  the  time  is  now  p.  send  them  away
Mark  16.  1.  and  when  the  sabbath  was  p.  Mary
Luke  9.  36.  when  the  voice  whs  p.  Jesus  was  alone
Acts  12. 10.  when  they  were  p.  first  and  second  ward

14.  16.  who  in  times  p.  suffered  all  nations  to  walk
27.  9.  because  the  fast  was  now  already  p.  Paul
Rom.  3.  25.  his  right,  for  remission  of  sins  that  are  p.

1 1.  30.  for  as  ye  in  times  p.  have  not  believed  God.
.3.3.  his  judgments  and  his  ways  arep.  finding  out

2  Cor.  5.  17-  old  things  p.  away  ;  all  things  are  new
Gal.  1.  13.  have  heard  of  my  conversation  in  timep.

2.3.  he  which  persecuted  us  in  times  p.  preacheth
5.  21.  1  tell  you,  as  I  have  also  told  you  in  timep.
Eph.  2.  2.  wherein  in  time  p.  ye  walked  after  course

3.  we  all  had  our  conversation  in  'iines  p.

4.  19.  who  being  p.  feeling  have  given  themselves
2  Tim.  2.  18.  saying  that  resurrection  isp.  already
Philem.  11.  who  in  time  p.  was  to  thee  unprofitable
Heb.  1.  1.  who  spake  in  time  p.  to  the  fathers
11 .  11.  strength  to  conceive  seed,  when  she  was  p.

1  Pet.  2. 10.  which  in  time  p.  were  not  a  people

4.  3.  for  the  timep.  of  our  life  may  suffice  us

1  John  2.8.  because  darkness  is  p.  true  light  shineth
Rev.  9- 12.  one  woe  isp.  ||  11. 14.  the  second  woe  isp.

PASTE.

2  Sam.  13.  +  8.  Tamar  took  p.  and  kneaded  it

PASTOR,  or  SHEPHERD,

Signifies,  One  who  takes  care  of  a  fiock  of  sheep,
not  only  that  they  feed  in  good  pasture,  but  also


that  they  be  not  torn  by  wild  beast  ,  or  hu>  1  any
other  way,  Gen.  47.  3.  Luke  2.  8.  it  is  spoken,
[1]  Of  God,  who  performs  the  office  of  a  faithfu.
shepherd  to  his  people,  by  leading,  feeding,  presen
ing,  and  healing  them,  Psal.  23.  1.  [2]  Of  Christ
who  not  only  exposed  and  adventured  his  life,  but
also  willingly  laid  it  down,  for  his  sheep,  and  who
takes  the  charge,  care,  and  oversight  of  them,  to
dispense  all  things  necessary  for  their  welfare,
John  10.  11.  1  Pet.  2.  25.  [3J  Of  ministers  of  the
gospel,  who  should  feed  their  people  with  know¬
ledge  and  understanding,  Jer.  3.  15.  Eph.  4.  11.
[4]  Of  civil  and  political  rulers,  Jer.  12.  10,  25
34.

Jer.  17.  16.  I  have  not  hastened  from  being  ap.
PASTORS.

Jer.  2.  8.  p.  also  transgressed  against  me,  and  proph.

3.  15.  1  will  give  you  p.  according  to  mine  heart
10.  21.  for  p.  are  become  brutish,  not  sought  Lord

12.  10.  many  p.  have  destroyed  my  vineyard

22.  22.  wind  shall  eat  up  all  thyp.  and  thy  lovers

23.  1.  woe  to  the  p.  that  destroy  and  scatter  sheep

2.  thus  saith  Lord  against  p.  that  feed  my  sheep

Eph.  4.  11.  and  he  gave  some  p.  and  teachers
PASTURE

Signifies,  [1]  Unplowed  land,  kept  for  feeding  of
cattle,  1  Chron.  4.  40.  Job  39.  8.  [2]  The  land
of  Canaan,  in  which  God  placed  his  people,  as
sheep  in  a  pasture,  Hos.  13.6.  [3J  All  necessary
and  delightful  provisions  both  for  soul  and  body,
Psal.  23.  2.  John  10.  9.

Gen.  47.  4.  thy  servants  have  no  p.  for  their  flocks
1  Chron.  4.  39.  they  went  to  seek  p.  for  their  flocks
4().  they  found  fatp.  ||  41.  because  there  wasp.

Job  39.  8.  the  range  of  the  mountains  is  his  p.

Psal.  74.  1.  thy  anger  smoke  against  sheep  of  thyp.
79.  1.3.  so  we  sheep  of  thy  y.  will  give  thee  thanks
95.  7.  we  are  the  people  of  his  p.  100.  3.

Ea.  32.  14.  a  joy  of  wild  asses,  ap.  of  flocks
Jer.  2.3. 1.  woe  to  pastors  that  scatter  sheep  of  myp.
25.36.  for  the  Lord  hath  spoiled  their  p.

Lam.  1.6.  princes  become  like  harts  that  find  nop.
Ezek.  .34.  14.  I  will  feed  them  in  a  goodp.  a  fatp.

18.  seemeth  it  a  small  thing  to  have  eaten  good  r.
.31.  ye  my  fiock,  flock  of  my  p.  are  men,  1  Gocf
Hos.  13.  6.  according  to  their  p.  so  were  they  filled
Joel  1.  18.  beasts  groan,  because  they  have  nop.
John  10.  9-  he  shall  go  in  and  out,  and  find  p.
PASTURES.

1  Kings  4.  23.  Solomon  had  twenty  oxen  out  of  p.
Psal.  23.  2.  he  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  p.
65.  12.  they  drop  upon  thep.ofthe  wilderness

13.  p.  are  clothed  with  flocks,  valleys  covered
Isa.  30.  2.3.  in  that  day  thy  cattle  shall  teed  in  largep.

49.  9.  and  their  p.  shall  be  in  all  high  places
Ezek.  34.  18.  but  ye  tread  down  residue  of  your  p.

45. 15.  one  lamb  out  of  flock  of  fat  p.  of  Israel
Joel  1.19.  for  fire  hath  devoured  p.  of  wilderness,  20.
2. 22.  for  the  p.  of  the  wilderness  do  spring
PA1E.

Ps.  7.  16.  his  dealing  shall  come  down  upon  ownp.

PATERN.  Nee  Pattern.

PATH

Is  spoken,  CL)  Of  God ,  and  signifies,  [1]  His  pre¬
cepts,  Psal.  17.  5.  [2]  His  dealings  and  dispensa¬
tions,  Psal.  25.  10.  [3]  The  clouds  which  distil
the  rain,  Psal.  65.  11.  (11.)  Of  good  men,  and
signifies,  [1]  Their  holy  conversation  and  good  ex¬
ample,  Prov.  2.  20.  [2J  The  affairs  they  under¬
take,  Prov.  3.  6.  [3]  7 heir  actions  and  course  of

life,  Job  13.  27.1  33.  11.  (Ill.)  Of  wicked  men,
signifying  their  ungodly  practices,  Isa.  59.  7-
Gen.  49.  17-  Dan  a  serpent,  an  adder  inp.  tbatbiteth
Num.  22.  24.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a  p.

Job  28.  7.  there  is  a p.  which  no  fowl  knoweth
.30.  13.  marmy'p.  they  set  forward  my  calamity
41.  32.  he  maketh  a  p.to  shine  after  him
Psal.  16. 11.  thou  wilt  shew  me  tliep.  of  life

27. 11.  teach  me  thy  way,  lead  me  in  a  plain p.

77.  19.  thy  way  in  sea,  thy  p.  is  in  great  waters

78.  t  50.  he  weighed  a  p.  to  his  anger

119-  35.  make  me  to  go  in  p.  of  thy  commands
105.  thy  word  is  a  lamp,  and  a  light  to  myp.

139.  3.  thou  compassest  my  p.  and  lying  down

142.3.  spirit  overwhelmed,  then  thouKnewestmyp.
Prov.  1.  15.  my  son,  refrain  thy  foot  fromtheirp.

2.  9.  then  thou  shalt  understand  every  good  p.

4.  14.  enter  not  into  the  p.  of  the  wicked
18.  the  p.  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light

26.  ponder  the  p.  of  thy  feet,  and  let  thy  ways

5.  6.  lest  thou  shouldest  ponder  the  p.  of  life
Isa.  26.  7-  thou  dost  weigh  thep.  of  the  just

30. 11.  get  ye  out  of  the  way,  turn  aside  out  of  p.
40.  14.  and  taught  him  in  the  p.  of  judgment
43.  16.  which  maketh  ap.  in  the  mighty  waters

Joel 2.  8.  they  shall  walk  every  one  in  hisp.
PATH-WAY.

Prov.  12.28.  in  the  p.  thereof  there  is  no  death
PATHS.

Job  6.  18.  the  p.  of  their  way  are  turned  aside
8.  13.  so  are  the  p.  of  all  that  forget  God
13.  27.  thou  lookest  narrowly  to  all  my  p.

19.  8.  he  hath  set  darkness  in  my  p.

24.  1.3.  neither  abide  they  in  the  p.  thereof

.33. 11.  putteth  my  feet  in  stocks,  marketh  all  my  p.
38.  20.  that  thou  shouldest  keep  the  p.  of  house
Psal.  8.  8.  whatsoever  passeth  thro’  the  p.  of  seas
17.  4.  I  have  kept  me  from  the  p.  of  destroyer

5.  hold  up  my  goings  in  p.  that  footsteps  slip  not

2.3.  3.  he  leadeth  me  in  thep.  of  righteousness

25.  4.  shew  me  thy  ways,  O  Lord,  teach  me  thyp
10.  all  the  p.  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth

65.  11.  and  thy  p.  drop  fatness  upon  the  pastures
Prov.  2.  8.  he  keepeth  p.  of  judgment,  and  preserved)

1.3.  who  leave  p.  of  uprightness  to  walk  in  darkn.

15.  ways  crooked,  and  they  froward  in  their  p.

18.  and  her  v.  incline  unto  the  dead

19.  neither  lake  they  hold  of  thep.  of  life

20.  thou  mayest  keep  the  p.  of  the  righteous

3.  6.  he  shall  direct  thy  p.  ||  17.  all  herp.  are  peace

4.  11.  I  taught  thee,  I  have  led  thee  in  right  p.

7-  25.  go  not  astray  in  herp.  J  8. 2.  in  places  of  p.

351


PA  W


PEA


PEA


Prov.  8.20.  I  lead  in  the  midst  of  the  p.  of  judgm.
Isa.  2.  3.  and  we  will  walk  in  his  p.  Mic.  4.  2.

3.  12.  they  destroy  the  way  of  thy  p.

42.  16.  I  will  lead  them  in  p.  they  have  not  known

58.  12.  be  called,  the  restorer  of  p.  to  dwell  in

59.  7.  wasting  and  destruction  are  in  their  p.

8.  they  have  made  them  crooked  p.

Jer.  6.  16.  stand  ye  in  the  way,  and  ask  for  old  p.

18.  15.  from  ancient  p.  to  walk  in  p.  in  a  way  not
Lam.  3.  9.  he  hath  made  my  p.  crooked
Hos.  2.  6.  I  will  make  a  wall,  she  shall  not  find  p.
Mat.  3. 3.  make  his  p.  straight,  Mark  1 . 3.  Luke  3. 4.
Heb.  12.  13.  and  make  straight/;,  for  your  feet
PA  l  ILNCE

Signifies,  [1]  Thai  grace  which  enables  us  to  bear
afflictions  and  calamities  with  constancy  and
calmness  of  mind,  and  with  a  ready  submission
to  the  will  of  Mod,  Rom.  5.  3.  2  l  im.  3.  10.

[2]  A  bearing  long  with  such  as  hate  greatly
transgressed,  e> peeling  their  reformation,  Mat
18.  26,  29.  [3]  An  humble  and  submissive  wait¬
ing  for,  and  expectation^  of,  eternal  life,  and  the
accomplishment  of  Mod's  promises,  Horn.  8.  25.
Heb.  10.  36.  [4]  Perseverance,  lames  5.  7.  9,  10.
Mat.  18.  26.  ser'  ant  worshipped  him,  saying,  Lord
havep.  with  me,  and  1  will  pay  thee  all,  29.
Luke  8.  15.  are  they  who  bring  forth  fruit  with  p.

21.  19.  in  your  p.  possess  ye  your  souls
Rom.  5.  3.  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  p.

4.  and  p.  experience,  and  experience  hope

8.  25.  we  see  not,  then  do  we  with  p.  wait  for  it

15.  4.  that  we  thro’  p.  and  comf.  might  have  hope

5.  the  God  of  p.  grant  you  to  be  like  minded
2  Cor.  6.  4.  ourselves  as  ministers  of  God  in  much/;.

12.  12.  signs  were  wrought  among  you  in  all  p.

Col.  1.11.  strengthened  with  all  might  to  all  p.

1  Thess.  1.  3.  remembering  your  p.  of  hope  in  Jesus

2  Thess.  1.  4.  so  that  we  glory  in  you  for  yourp.

3.  t5.  Lord  direct  your  hearts  into  the  p.  ot  Christ

1  Tim.  6.  11.  and  follow  after  love,  p.  meekness

2  Tim.  3.  10.  but  thou  hast  fully  known  my  p.

Tit.  2.  2.  that  aged  men  be  sound  in  faith,  in  p.

Heb.  6. 12.  whothrough  faith  andp.  inherit  promises

10.  36.  ye  have  need  of p.  that  after  ye  have  done

12.  1.  let  us  run  with  p.  the  race  set  before  us
Tam.  1.  3.  that  the  trying  of  your  faith  worketh  p.

4.  but  let  p.  have  her  perfect  work,  that  ye  may

5.  7.  behold,  the  husbandman  hath  long  p.  for  it
10.  for  an  exam.  ofp.  ||  11.  have  heard  ot  p.  of  Job
2  Pet.  1.  6.  add  to  temperance  p.  to  p.  godliness
Rev.  1.  9.  who  am  your  companion  in  p.  of  Jesus

2.  2.  I  know  thy  p.  19.  11  3.  and  thou  hast  p.

3.  10.  because  thou  hast  kept  word  of  my  p.

13.  10.  here  is  the  p.  of  the  saints,  14.  12.

PATIENT.

Eccl.  7.  8.p.  in  spirit  is  better  than  proud  in  spirit
Rom.  2.  7.  who  by  p.  continuance  in  well-doing

12.  12.  rejoicing  in  hope,  p.  in  tribulation

1  Thess.  5.  14.  brethren,  tie  p.  toward  all  men

2  Thess.  3.  5.  and  into  the  p.  waiting  for  Christ
1  Tim.  3.  3.  not  greedy  of  lucre,  but  p.  2  Tim.  2.24.
Tam.  5.  7.  be  p.  brethren  11  8.  be  ye  also  p.

PATIENTLY.

Psal.  37.  7-  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  waitp.  for  him

40.  1.  I  waited  p.  for  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me
Acts  26.  3.  wherefore  1  beseech  thee  to  hear  me  p.
Heb.  6.  15.  after  he  had  p.  endured,  obtained  prom

1  Pee.  2.  20.  if  when  ye  he  buffeted  for  faults  ye  take

it  p.  but  if  ye  do  well  and  suffer,  ye  take  itp
PATRIARCH.

This  name  is  given  to  the  heads  or  princes  of  the  fa
mily,  chiefly  to  those  that  then  lived  before  Moses,
as  Adam,  Lamech,  Noah,  Shem,  Phaleg,  Heber,
Abraham,  Isaac,  lacob,  Judah,  Levi,  and  the
other  sons  of  Jacob,  and  the  heads  of  the  twelve
tribes.  The  Hebrews  call  them  Princes  of  the
tribes,  or  heads  of  the  fathers,  Roshe  A  both.
The  name  Patriarch  comes  from  the  Greek  word,
u (xTpio.p'x.rx,  which  signifies  llead  ot  a  family  •
Acts  2.  29.  let  me  freely  speak  of  the  p.  David
Heb.  7.  4.  to  whom  the  p.  Abraham  paid  tithes
PATRIARCHS.

Acts  7.  8.  and  Jacob  begat  the  twelve  p.

9.  p.  moved  with  envy  sold  Joseph  into  Egypt
PATRIMONY.

Deut.  18.  8.  beside  that  cometh  of  sale  of  his  p.

PA  TJ  Eli  N.

Exod.  25.  9.  after  the  p.  of  all  the  instruments
40.  look  that  thou  make  them  after  their  p.

Num.  8.  4.  the  candlestick  was  made  after  the  p.
Josh.  22.  28.  behold  the  p.  of  the  altar  of  the  \  ord

2  Kings  16.  10.  Ahaz  sent  to  Urijah  thep.  of  altar
1  Chr.  28.  11.  David  gave  Solomon  p.  12,  18,  19.
Ezek.  43. 10.  let  them  measure  the  p.

1  Tim.  1.  16.  that  in  me  first  J.  Christ  mightshewp.
Tit.  2.  7.  shewing  thyself  a  p.  of  good  works
Heb.  8.  5.  according  to  p.  I  shewed  thee  in  mount

PATTERNS.

Heb.  9.  23.  it  was  necessary  that  the  p.  of  things
PAVED.

Exod.  24. 10.  under  his  feet  as  it  were  ap.  work
Cant.  3.  10.  the  midst  thereof  being  p.  with  love
PAVEMENT.

2  Kings  16.  17-  he  put  the  sea  on  a  p.  of  stones
2  Chron.  7.  3.  all  Israel  bowed  themselves  upon  p.
Esth.  1.  6.  the  beds  were  on  a  p.  of  red  and  blue
Ezek.  40.  17.  there  were  chambers  and  a  p.  made

for  the  court,  thirty  chambers  were  upon  thep.
18.  p.  by  the  side  of  the  gates,  was  the  lower  p.
42.  3.  over  againstp.  was  gallery  against  gallery
John  19. 13.  Pilate  sat  in  a  place  called  the  p.
PAVILION,  S.

2  Sam.  22.  12.  he  made  darkness  his p.  Psal.  18.  11.
1  Kings  20.  12.  Benhadad  and  kings  drinking  in  p.

16.  Benhadad  was  drinking  himself  drunk  in  p.
Psal.  27.5.  in  secret  of  his  tab.  he  shall  hide  me  inp.

31.  20.  thou  shalt  keep  them  secretly  in  a  p.

Jer.  43.  10.  Nebuchadnezzar  spread  his  royal  p.
PAW.

I  Sam.  17. 37.  Lord  delivered  me  out  ofp.  of  the  lion
PAWS.

Lev.  11.  27.  whatsoever  goeth  on p.  these  are  unclean
352


PAWETH.

Job  39.  21.  the  horse  p.  in  the  valley  and  rejoiceth
PAY.

Exod.  21.  19.  only  he  shall  p.  for  loss  of  his  time
22.  and  he  shallp.  as  the  judges  determine
36.  he  shall  surely  p.  ox  for  ox,  the  dead  his  own
22.  7.  if  thief  be  found,  let  hitnp.  double,  9..

17.  he  shall  p.  according  to  the  dowry  of  virgins
Num.  20.  19.  if  1  drink  thy  water  l  will  p.  tor  it
Deut.  23.  21.  shall  vow  a  vow,  shall  not  slack  top.

2  Sam.  15.  7.  let  me  go  and  p.  my  vow  in  Hebron

1  Kings  20.  39.  else  thou  shalt p.  a  talent  of  silver

2  Kings  4.  7.  he  said,  go  sell  oil,  andp.  thy  debt
2  Chron.  8.  8.  them  did  Solomon  make  to  p.  tribute

27.  5.  so  much  did  children  of  Ammon  p.  to  him
/•  zra  4.  13.  then  wdl  they  not  p.  toll  and  custom
Esth.  3.  9.  I  will  p.  10,  (XX)  talents  of  silver,  4.  7.

Job  22.  27.  shalt  make  prayer,  and  shalt p.  thy  vows
Psal.  22.  25.  I  will  p.  my  \ows,  66.  13.  |  1 16. 14,  18.
50.  14.  and  p.  thy  vows  to  the  Most  High
76.  11.  vow  andp.  to  the  Lord  your  God
Prov.  19.  17.  that  he  hath  given,  will  hep.  again

22.  27.  if  hast  nothing  to  p.  why  should  he  take
Eccl.  5.  4.  defer  not  top.  it,  p.  that  hast  vowed

5.  notxow,  than  thou  shouldest  vow  and  not  p.
Jonah  2.  9.  I  will  p.  that  which  I  have  vowed
Mat.  17.  24.  doth  not  your  master  p.  tribute  t

18.  25.  had  not  top.  he  forgave  him,  Luke  7.  42.

26.  I  will  p.  thee  all,  29.  |l  28.  p.  that  thou  owest
30.  but  cast  into  prison,  till  he  should  p.  debt
34.  till  he  should  p.  all  that" was  due  to  him

23.  23.  for  ye  p.  tithe  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin
Rom.  13.  6.  tor  this  cause  p.  ye  tribute  also

PAYED,  or  PAID.

Ezra  4.  20.  toll,  tribute,  and  custom,  was  p.  them
Prov.  7. 14.  peace-offerings,  this  day  have  I  p.  vows
Jonah  1.  3.  so  he  p.  fare  thereof,  and  went  into  it
Mat.  5.  26.  thou  shalt  not  come  out  thence  till  thou
hastp.  the  uttermost  farthing,  Luke  12.  59.
Heb.  7.  9.  Lei  i,  who  received  tithes, p.  tithes  in  Abr.
PAYE1I1.

Psal.  37.  21.  the  wicked  borroweth  and  p.  not
PAYMENT.

Mat.  18.25.  all  to  be  sold,  andp.  to  be  made
PEACE.  l

Mark.  4.  39.  he  arose  and  said  to  the  sea,p.  be  still
PEACE.

This  word  is  used  in  the  Scripture  in  different  ways,
as,  (I.)  There  is  peace,  or  reconciliation  with  God:
[1]  By  satisfaction  for  sins  committed  against
him:  this  is  done  by  the  sufferings  and  merits  of
Christ,  Eph.  2.  14.  (11.)  There  is  peace  with  our¬
selves  or  our  own  consciences  :  this  arises  from  a
sense  (four  .  ? conciliation  to  God,  which  is  the
gift  of  Christ,  and  wrought  in  us  by  Lis  Spirit,
Rom.  14.  1*.  Phil.  4.  7.  [2]  Submission  to  the
will  of  God,  Job  22.  21 .  (III.)  Peace  with  men  ;
[1]  Mutual  concord  and  agreement  with  Christian
brethren,  Psal.  34.  14.  Gal.  5.  22.  [2]  Deliver
ance  or  safety  from  such  as  are  our  enemies,  Prov

Peace  is  opposed  to  war ,  when  a  state  or  kingdom
enjoys  a  public  tranquillity ,  when  they  are  free
from  foreign  and  civil  wars,  2  K  ings  20.  19.  Ills
likewise  taken  for  the  public  tranquillity,  and  quiet
state  of  the  church,  when  it  is  not  troubled  within,
by  schisms  and  heresies,  or  without,  by  persecuting
tyrants,  filling  all  with  tumults,  slaughters,  and
bloody  wars,  VsA.  122.6.  Acts  9.  31.  Rev.  6.  4.
Sometimes  it  signifies  a  league  or  covenant  be
tween  one  prince  and  another,  1  Rings  5.  12.  and
sometimes  only  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  Judg.  4.

17.  The  apostle  Paul,  in  the  titles  of  his  epistles,
generally  wisheth for  grace  and  peace  to  the  faithful
to  whom  he  writes,  Rom.  1.  7.  1  Cor.  1.  3.  lhts
is  both  a  Christian  salutation,  and  an  apostolical
ministerial  benediction:  that  is,  I  wish  that  the
free,  undeserved  love  and  favour  of  Mod,  and  a
lively  sense  thereof  inyour  souls,  may  be  continued
to,  and  increased  in,  you;  and  that  as  a  fruit  of
this,  you  may  enjoy  all  blessings,  both  inward  and
outward ,  especially  peace  of  conscience ,  and  a  se
cure  enjoyment  of  the  love  if  God.  Lastly,  peace
is  prut  for  that  perfect  rest,  joy,  and  felicity ,  which
the  saints  enjoy  in  heaven,  where  they  are  out  oj
the  reach  of  enemies,  to  disturb  or  molest  them,  Isa.
57.  2.  2  Pet.  3.  14.

Gen.  29.  t  6.  he  said  to  them,  is  there  p.  to  him  ?
37.  t  14.  go  see  thep.  of  thy  brethren
41.  16.  God  shall  give  Pharaoh  an  answer  ofp.
Exod.  18.  +  7.  they  asked  each  other  ot  their  p.

Lev.  26.  6.  I  will  give  p.  in  land,  none  make  afraid
Num.  6.  26.  Lord  lift  up  counten.  and  give  thee  p
25.  12.  behold,  1  give  to  him  my  covenant  ot  p.
Deut. 2. 26- sent  a  messeng.  to  Sihon  with  words  ofp.
20. 10.  when  comest  nigh  city,  proclaimp.  to  it

11.  if  itmake  thee  answer  otp.  and  open  to  thee

12.  if  it  will  make  no  p.  with  ihee,  then  besiege
23.  6.  thou  shalt  not  seek  their  p.  nor  prosperity
29. 19. 1  shall  havep.  though  walk  in  imag.  of  heart

Judg.  4.  17.  there  wasp,  between  Jabin  and  Heber
6.  t  24.  Gideon  called  the  altar,  the  Lord  sentp.

18.  t  15.  they  came  and  asked  the  Levite  ofp.

1  Sam.  7. 14.  there  was p. between  Isr.  and  Amorites
10.  +  4.  they  will  ask  of  theep.  and  give  thee  loaves
17.  +  22.  David  came  and  asked  his  brethren  ofp
20.  7.  if  he  say,  it  is  well,  servant  shall  havep.

21.  come  thou,  for  there  is  p.  to  thee,  no  hurt
25.  t  5.  go  and  ask  Nabal,  ofp.  in  my  name

1  Kings  2.  .33.  but  on  his  throne  shall  there  be  p

4.  24.  Solomon  had  p.  on  all  sides  round  about

5.  12.  there  wasp,  between  Hiram  and  Solomon
20.  18.  whether  they  be  come  for  p.  take  them  alive

2  Kings  9.  17-  and  let  him  say,  is  itp.  Jehu  ?  18.

19.  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  p.  1  turn,  22.

22.  whatp.  so  long  as  her  witchcrafts  are  so  many  ?
3 1 .  she  said ,  had  /imri p.  who  slew  his  master  <

20.  19. is  it  not  good,  ifp.  be  in  my  days  ?  Isa.  39.8

1  Chr.  22.  9.  I  will  givep.  to  Israel  in  his  days

2  Chr.  15.  5.  in  those  times  there  was  nop.  to  him
Ezra  4.  17.  and  to  the  rest  beyond  the  river,  p.

5.  7.  to  Darius  king,  allp.  ||7.  12.  to  Ezraperf.p.


Ezra  9.  12.  nor  seek  their  p.  or  their  wealth  for  ever
Esth.  2.  +  11.  Mordecai  walked  to  know  p.  of  Esther

9.  30.  Mord.  sent  letters  with  words  of  p.  and  truth

10.  3.  Mordecai  speakingp.  to  all  his  seed
Job  5.  23.  beasts  of  field  shall  be  at  p.  with  thee

21.  +  9.  houses  arep.  from  fear,  nor  rod  on  them

22.  21.  acquaint  thyself  with  him,  and  be  at p.

25.  2.  he  maketh  p.  in  his  high  places

Psal.  7.  4.  if  1  have  eril  to  him  that  was  atp.  with

28.  3.  which  speak  p.  to  neighbours,  but  mischief

29.  11.  the  Lord  will  bless  his  people  with p.

34.  14.  do  good,  seek  p.  and  pursue  it,  1  Pet.  3. 11.

35.  20.  they  speak  notp.  but  they  devise  matters
37.  11.  meek  delight  themselves  in  abundance  ofp.

37.  for  the  end  of  the  upright  man  isp.

41.  +  9.  man  of  my  p.  hatli  lift  up  heel  against  me
55.  20.  put  forth  against  such  as  be  at  p.  with  him
72.  3.  the  mountains  shall  bringp.  to  the  people

7.  in  days  abundance  of  p.  so  long  as  moon  endur.
85.  8.  he  will  speak  p.  to  his  people  and  his  saints

10.  righteousness  and  p.  have  kissed  each  other

119.  165.  great  p.  have  they  which  love  thy  law

120.  6.  hath  long  dwelt  wilh  him  that  hatetlip.

7.  1  am  for  p.  but  when  I  speak  they  are  for  war
122.  6.  pray  for  p.  of  Jerusalem,  prosper  that  love
125.  5.  butp.  shall  be  upon  Israel

128.  6.  yea,  thou  shalt  see  p.  upon  Israel
147.  14.  he  maketh' p.  in  thy  borders,  and  filleth
Pr<»>.3. 17. wisdom's  ways  pleasantness,  and  pathsp.
12.  20.  but  to  the  counsellors  ofp.  is  joy
16.  7.  he  maketh  his  enemies  to  be  at  p.  with  him
Eccl.  3.  8.  a  time  of  war,  and  a  time  ofp.

Isa.  9.  6.  Prince  ofp.  |17.  increase  of  hisp.  no  end

26.  12.  Lord,  thou  wilt  ordain  p.  for  us,  for  thou

27.  5.  he  make  p.  with  me,  and  he  shall  make  p.

32.  17-  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  p.

3.3.  7.  the  ambassadors  of  p.  shall  weep  bitterly

38.  17.  behold,  for  p.  1  had  great  bitterness

45.  7.  make  p.  and  create  evil,  1  do  all  these  things
48.  18.  then  had  thy  p.  been  as  river,  righteousness
22.  there  is  nop.  to  the  wicked,  57-  21.

52.  7 ■  feet  of  him  that  publishetli  p.  Nah.  1.  15.

53.  5.  the  chastisement  of  our  p.  was  upon  him
54. 10.  nor  shall  covenant  of  my  p.  be  removed

13.  and  great  shall  be  the  p.  of  thy  children

55.  12.  ye  shall  go  out  with  joy,  led  forth  with  p.
57.  2.  he  shall  enter  into  p.  they  shall  rest  in  beds

19.  I  create  the  fruit  of  the  lips,  p.  p.  to  him

59.  8.  the  way  ofp.  they  know  not,  Rom.  3. 17.

60.  17.  1  will  make  thine  officers  p.  and  exactors
66.  12.  behold,  I  will  extend  p.  to  her  like  river

Jer.  4. 10.  ye  shall  have  p.  whereas  sword  reaches
6. 14.  saying,  p.  p.  when  there  is  nop.  8.  11.

8.  15.  we  looked  for  p.  but  no  good  came,  14.  19.
12.  5.  if  in  land  ofp.  they  wearied  thee,  then

12.  for  sword  shall  devour,  no  flesh  shall  have  p.

14.  13.  hut  l  will  give  you  assured  p.  in  this  place

15.  1 5.  who  shall  go  aside  to  ask  of  thy  p.

16.  5.  I  have  taken  away  my  p.  from  this  people

20.  +  to.  every  man  of  p.  watched  for  my  halting

28.  9.  the  prophet  which  prophesied  ofp.

29.  7.  and  seek  p.  of  the  city  whither  I  caused

11.  I  think  toward  you  thoughts  of  p.  not  evil

30.  5.  we  have  heard  a  voice  of  fear,  and  not  ofp.

33.  6.  reveal  to  them  abundance  ofp.  and  truth
38.  t  22.  men  of  thy  p.  have  prevailed  against  thie

Lam.  3.  17.  thou  hast  removed  my  soul  far  from  p,
Ezek.  7.  25.  they  shall  seek  p.  there  shall  be  none

13.  10.  saying  p.  and  there  was  nop.  16.

34.  25.  will  matte  with  them  a  covenant  of  p.  37. 26
Dan.  8.  25.  and  by  p.  he  shall  destroy  many
Obad.  7.  men  atp.  with  thee  have  deceived  thee
Mic.  3.  5.  that  bite  with  their  teeth  and  cry  p.

5.  5.  this  man  shall  be  p.  when  Assyrian  come
Hag .2.  9.  and  in  this  place  I  will  givep.  saith  Lort
Zech.  6. 1.3.  the  counsel  ofp.  be  between  them  botl

8.  10.  nor  was  there  any  p.  to  him  that  came  in
+  12.  for  seed  shall  be  ot  p.  vine  give  her  fruit
16.  execute  judgment  of  truth  and  p.  ||  19.  lovep

9.  10.  and  he  shall  speak  p.  to  the  heathen
Mai.  2.  5.  my  covenant  was  with  him  of  life  andp
Mat.  10. 13.  and  if  house  be  worthy,  let  yourp.  com'

upon  it;  if  not,  let  yourp.  return  to  yoi
34.  think  not  that  I  am  come  to  send  p.  on  earth
Mark  9.  50.  and  have  p.  one  with  another
Luke  1.  79.  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  p.

2.  14.  and  on  earth  p.  good  will  toward  men

10.  6.  if  son  of  p.  be  there,  your  p.  shall  rest  011  it

12.  51.  that  I  am  come  to  give  p.  on  the  earth  r

14.  32.  lie  sendeth  and  desireth  conditions  of  p.
19.  38.  p.  in  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  highest

42.  if  known  the  things  that  belong  to  thy  p.
John  14.  27.  p.  1  leave  with  you,  my  p.  I  give  you
16.  33.  that  in  me  ye  might  have  p.  in  world  trib.
Acts  10.  36.  preachingp.  by  Jesus  Chr.  he  L.  of  a!
12.  20.  having  made  Blastus  their  friend  desired  /
Rom.  1.  7 .p.  from  God  the  Father,  1  Cor.  1.  3.

Cor.  1.  2.  Gal.  1.  3.  Eph.  1.  2.  Phil.  1. 1
2.  10.  butp.  to  every  man  that  worketh  gooff  .
5. 1.  justified,  we  have  p.  with  God,  through  Chrii
8.  6.  but  to  be  spiritually  minded  is  life  and  p.
10.  15.  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  ofp.
14. 17.  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  joy  andp.

19.  let  us  follow  the  things  that  make  for  p..


15.  13.  fill  you  with  all  joy  andp.  in  believing


1  Cor.  7.  15.  but  God  hath  called  us  to  p.

14.  33.  but  author  of  p.  as  in  churches  ot  saints
Gal.  5.  22.  the  fruit  ot  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,p.
Eph.  2.  14.  for  he  is  our  p.  ||  15.  so  making  p.

17.  Christ  came  and  preached  p.  to  you  afar  on

4.  3.  to  keep  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  or  p.

6.  15.  feet  shod  w  ith  preparation  of  gospel  ol  p.
Phil.  4.  7.  p.  of  God,  which  passeth  un  lerstanou
Col.  1.2.  grace  andp.  from  God  our  Father,  1  Ikes
1.  1.  2  Thess.  1.  2.  1  Tim.  1.  2.  2  Jtm.i.
Tit.  1.4.  Philem.  \.  2  John  3.

3  15.  let  the  p.  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts

1  Thess.  5.  3.  tor  when  they  shall  say  p.  and  sare

13.  and  be  at  p.  amon^  ypurselves

2  Thess.  3.  16.  now  Lord  ot  p.  give  you  p.  aiv  ay.
2  Tim.  2.  22.  follow p.  with  all  men,  Heb.  12.  M.
Heb.  7.  2.  the  king  of  Salem,  that  is,  king  ot-p


PEA


P  EO


P  E  O


lleb.  11. 31.  Rahab  believed  and  received  spies  in p.
Jam.  3. 18.  is  sown  in  p.  of  them  that  make  p.?
Rev.  1.  4.p.  from  him  that  is,  was,  and  is  to  come
6.  4.  power  was  given  to  him  to  take  p.  from  earth
PF.ACE  be.

Gen.  43.  23.  and  he  said,  p.  be  to  yon,  fear  not
Judg.  6.  23.  the  Lord  said,  p.  he  to  thee,  fear  not
19.  20.  and  the  old  man  said,  p.  be  w  ith  thee

1  Sam.  25.  6.  p.  be  to  thee.p.  he  to  house, p.  be  to  all

2  Sam.  18.  t28.  Ahimaaz  said,  p.  be  to  thee

1  Chr.  12. 18.  p.  be  to  thee,  and  p.  he  to  thy  helpers
Psal.  122. “•  P-  be  within  thy  walls,  and  prosperity
8.  1  will  now  say,  p.  be  within  thee
Dan.  4. 1.  p.  be  multiplied  to  you,  6.  25.  1  Pet.  1.  2.

2  Pet.  1.  2.  Jude  2.

10.  19.  P ■  be  to  thee,  be  strong,  yea,  be  strong
Lx ike  10.  5.  first  say,  p.  be  to  this  house

24.  36.  he  saith,  p.  he  to  you,  John  20. 19,  21 , 26.
Gal.  6. 16.  p.  be  on  them,  and  mercy  on  Isr.  of  God
Eph.6.  23.  p.  be  to  brethren,  and  love  with  faith

1  Pet.  5. 14.  p.  be  with  you  all  that  are  in  Christ

3  John  14.  p.  be  to  thee,  our  friends  salute  thee

God  of  PEACE.

Rom.  15.  33.  the  Godot  p.  be  with  you  all,  amen
16.20.  the  God  of  p.  snail  bruise  Satan  shortly

2  Cor.  13. 11.  God  of  p.  shall  be  with  you,  Phil.  4.  9.

1  Thess.  5.  23.  very  God  of  p.  sanctify  you  wholly
lleb.  13.  20.  now  the  God  of  p.  make  you  perfect

See  Held,  Hold.

In  PEACE.

Gen.  26.29.  and  we  have  sent  thee  away  in  p.

31.  and  they  departed  from  Isaac  in  p.

28.  21.  so  that  1  come  to  my  father’s  house  in  p.

44. 17.  as  for  you,  get  you  up  in  p.  to  your  father
Josh.  10.  21.  came  to  Joshua,  at  Makkedah,  in  p.
Judg. 8. 9.  when  I  come  again  in  p.  will  breakdown

11.  31.  when  I  return  in  p.  whatever  meet  me

2  Sam.  3. 21.  Abner  went  inp.  22.  ||23.  he  is  gone  inp.
15.  27-  return  to  the  city  in  p.  and  your  two  sons
17.  3.  so  all  the  people  shall  be  in  p.

19.24.  king  departed,  until  the  day  he  came  in  p.
30.  as  my  lord  the  king  is  come  again  in  p.

1  Kings  2.  5.  Joab  shed  the  blood  of  war  in  p.

22.  17.  return  every  man  in  p.  2  Chron.  18.  16.

27.  in  prison  until  1  come  inp.  2  Chron.  18.  26.

28.  if  thou  return  at  all  in  p.  2  Chron.  18.  27-

2  Kings  22.  20.  behold  therefore  shalt  be  gathered  to

thy  grave  in  p.  not  see  evil,  2  Chron.  34. 28.
2  Chron.  19.  1.  and  Jehoshaphat  returned  in  p.

Job  5.  24.  shalt  know  thy  tabernacle  shall  be  in  p.
Psal.  4.  8.  I  will  lay  me  down  in  p.  and  sleep

55. 18.  he  hath  delivered  my  soul  in p.  from  the  batt.
Prov.  13.  f  13.  feareth  commandment  shall  bemp.
ha.  26.  3.  thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect;;.

41. +  3.  he  pursued  them,  and  passed  in  p.

Jer.  29.  7-  »»  the  p.  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace
34.  5.  but  thou  shalt  die  in  p.  they  will  lament
Mai.  2.  6.  he  walked  with  me  inp.  and  equity
Luke  2.29.  nowr  lettestthou  thy  servantdepart  inp.
11.  21.  keepeth  his  palace  his  goods  are  inp.

1  Cor.  16. 11.  but  conduct  him  forth  inp.  may  come

2  Cor.  13.  11.  be  perfect,  be  of  one  mind,  live  inp.
Jam.  2. 16.  depart  in  p.  be  ye  warmed  and  filled

3.  18.  the  fruit  of  righteous'ness  is  sown  in  p.

2  Pet.  3. 14.  that  ye  may  be  found  of  him  in  p.

See  Go,  Made,  Offerings.
PEACEABLE.

Gen.  34.  21.  saying,  these  men  are  p.  with  us
2  Sm.  20.  19.  1  am  one  of  them  that  are  p.  in  Israel
1  Chron.  4.  40.  the  land  was  wide,  quiet,  and  p.

22. 1 9.  a  man  of  rest,  for  his  name  shall  be  p.

Isa.  32.  18.  my  people  dwell  in  a  p.  habitation
Jer.  25.  37.  the  p.  habitations  are  cut  down

1  Tim.  2.2.  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  p.  life
lleb.  12. 11.  it  yieldeth  thep.  fruit  of  righteousness
Jam.  3.  17.  wisdom  from  above  is  pure,  p.  gentle
PEACEABLY.

Gen.  37.  4.  they  could  not  speak  p.  to  him
Jvdg.  11. 13.  therefore  restore  those  lands  again  p.
21.  13.  send  some  to  call  p.  to  the  Benjamites

1  Sam.UiA.  com.  thou p./||5.  he  said,p.  1  Kings 2.13.

2  Sam.  3.  +  27-  Joab  took  Abner  aside  to  speak  p.

1  Chron.  12.  17.  if  ye  be  come  p.  to  me,  to  help  me
Jer.  9.  8.  one  speaketh  p.  to  his  neighbour
Dan.  11.  21.  he  shall  come  in  p.  and  obtain,  24.
Rom.  12.  18.  if  possible,  live  p.  with  all  men
PEACE-MAKERS.

Mat.  5. 9.  blessed  are  p.  for  they  shall  be  children
PEACOCKS.

I  R  mgs  10. 22.  navy  came,  bringing  p.  2  Chr.  9.  21.
Job  39. 13.  gavest  thou  the  goodly  wings  to  p.  ?
PEARL

Is  a  gem  or  jewel  found  in  a  testaceous  fish.  The
finest  pearls  are  fished  up  in  the  Persian  gulf,
now  called  the  sea  of  Cat  if.  'They  fish  for  them
also  in  the  island  of  his,  and  upon  the  coast
of  Bahrein,  so  called  from  the  city  of  that
name,  which  lies  upon  the  borders  of  Arabia.
Idumaea,  and  Palestine,  being  not  far  from  this
sea,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  Pearls
were  so  well  known  to  Job  and  the  Hebrews,
Job  28.  18.  .

Christ  Jesus  forbids  his  apostles  to  cast  their
pearls  before  swine,  Mat.  7.  6.  That  is  to  say,
expose  not  the  sacred  truths  and  mysteries  of  the
gospel  to  the  raillery  of  profane  libertines  and
hardened  atheists :  preach  not  the  gospel  to  those
that  persecute  you  for  your  message  ;  and  apply
not  the  premises  to  the  profane.  The  transcend¬
ent  excellency  of  Christ  and  his  grace  made
known  and  offered  in  the  gospel ,  is  compared  to
a  pearl  of  great  price,  Mat.  13.  46.  find  the
glorious  state  of  the  saints  in  heaven,  which  will
yield  unspeakable  satisfaction  to  such  as  shall  be
admitted  into  them,  is  shadowed  out  by  pearls,
and  other  rich  things  in  the  world,  which  please
the  outward  senses,  Rev.  21.  19.

Mat.  13.  46.  when  he  found  one  p.  of  great  price
Rev.  21.  21.  every  several  gate  was  of  one  p.
r  PEARLS.

job  -28.  ig.  n0  mention  shall  be  made  of  coral  or  p.
Mat.  7  6  neither  cast  ye.  yourp.  before  swine


Mat.  13.45.  like  a  merchant-man  seeking  goodlyp.
1  Tim.  2.  9.  not  with  gold,  or  p.  or  costly  array
Rev.  17.  4.  the  woman  was  decked  with  gold  andp.

18.  12.  no  man  buyeth  the  merchandise  ofp.  16.

21.  21.  and  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  p.

PECULIAR.

F.xod.  19.  5.  then  ye  shall  he  a  p.  treasure  to  me
Deut.  14.  2.  to  be  a  p.  people,  26.  18.  1  Ret.  2.  9.
Ps.  135.4.  Lord  hath  chosen  Israel  for  his  p.  treas.
Bed.  2.  8.  I  gathered  the  p.  treasure  of  kings
Tit.  2. 14.  that  he  might  purify  to  himself  p.  people
PEDIGREE,  S.

Nnm.  1. 18.  they  declared  theirp.  after  their  families
Ezra  2.  t  59.  could  not  shew  their  p.  AW/.  7.  t  61.
Heb.  7.  f  3.  without  father,  mother,  without  p.
t  6.  he  whose  p.  is  not  counted  from  them
PEELED.

Isa.  18.  2.  go  ye  to  a  nation  scattered  and  p.  7.
Ezek.29.  18.  head  bald,  and  every  shoulder  wasp.
PEEP.

Isa.  8.  19.  to  wizards  that  p.  and  that  mutter
PEEPED.

Isa.  10.  14.  none  that  opened  the  mouth  or  p.
PELICAN.

Lev.  11.  18.  swan  and  p.  unclean,  Deut.  14.  17.
Psal.  102.  6.  I  am  like  ap.  of  the  wilderness
Isa.  34.  t  11.  the p.  shall  possess  it,  Zeph.  2. 1 14.
PEN.

Judg.  5. 14.  of  Zebulun,  they  that  handle  the  p.
Job  19.  24  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  p.

Psal.  45.  1.  my  tongue  is  the  p.  of  a  ready  writer
Isa.  8. 1.  take  a  rol  1 ,  and  write  in  it  with  a  man’s  p.
Jer.  8.  8.  he  made  it  p.  of  the  scribes  is  in  vain

17.  1.  the  sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  a  p.  of  iron
3  John  13.  1  will  not  with  ink  and  p.  write  to  thee
PENCE.

Mat.  18.  28.  one  who  owed  him  an  hundred  p.
Mark  14.  5.  sold  tor  more  than  300  p.  John  12.  5.
Luke  7-  41.  the  one  owed  500  p.  the  other  fifty
10.  35.  on  morrow  lie  took  out  two  p.  and  gave
PENKNIFE.

Jer.  36. 23.  Jehudi  cut  roll  with  a  p.  and  cast  it
PENTECOST.

Tins  word  is  derived  from  the  Greek  word  TTei/re-
koct rr],  which  signifies  the  fiftieth,  because  the  feast
of  Pentecost  was  celebrated  the  fiftieth  day  after
the  sixteenth  of  Nisan,  which  was  the  second  day
of  the  feast  of  the  passover.  The  Hebrews  call  it
trie  Feast  of  Weeks.  Exod.  34.  22.  because  it  was
kept  seven  weeks  after  the  passover.

On  the  sixteenth  day  of  the  month  N  isan,  or  March,
the  wave- off ering  of  the  first  sheaf  was  to  be  made,
to  implore  the  divine  blessing  upon  the  ensuing
harvest,  which  beg  an  about  that  time  ;  that  climate
being  so  much  warmer  and  forwarder  than  ours.
And  fifty  days  being  allowed  with  that  for  the  get¬
ting  in  all  the  if'  com ;  that  is,  the  remaining
fifteen  in  N  isan,  C  March,)  and  twenty-nine  in
Jair  or  Zif,  C April,)  the  sixth  of  Sivan  ( May )
would  be  the  day  of  Pentecost :  when  they  were  to
hold  the  solemn  festival  of  thanksgiving,  for  their
participation  of  the  harvest,  together  with  a  grate¬
ful  commemoration  of  their  being  delivered  from
Egyptian  servitude,  and  enjoying  their  property,
by  reaping  the  fruits  of  their  labours,  I.ev.  23.
10,  11,  <fec.  The  learned  have  observed,  that
the  very  day  of  Pentecost  was  the  same  day  on
which  God  delivered  the  law  from  mount  Sinai,
Exod'.  19.  11.  as  it  was  that,  on  which  the
apostles  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the
gospel  was  attended  with  remarkable  success,
Acts  2.  1.

ficts  2.  1.  when  the  day  ofp.  was  fully  come
20. 16.  he  hasted  to  be  at  Jerusalem  the  day  of  p.

1  Cor.  16.  8.  but  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  p.
PENURY.

Prov.  14.  23.  talk  of  the  lips  tendeth  only  to  p.
Luke  21.  4.  but  she  of  her  p.  hath  cast  in  all  she  had
PENNY.

Mat.  20. 2.  when  had  agreed  with  labourers  for  a  p.

9.  when  they  came,  they  received  every  man  a  p.

13.  friend,  didst  thou  not  agree  with  me  for  a  p.  ?

22.  19.  and  they  brought  unto  him  a p.

Mark  12.  15.  he  said,  bring  me  a  p.  Luke  20.  24.
Rev.  6.6.  I  heard  a  voice  say,  a  measure  of  wheat  for
a  p.  and  three  measures  of  barley  for  ap.
PEN  N  Y -worth.

Mark  6.  37-  and  buy  two  hundred  p. -worth  of  bread
John  6.  7.  two  hundred  p. -worth  is  not  sufficient
PEOPLE

Signifies,  [1]  The  whole  body  of  persons  that  make
up  a  nation,  being  governed  by  a  certain  magis¬
trate,  and  regulated  by  the  same  laws,  Gen.  41.
40.  1  Sam.  15.  30.  [2]  Godly  progenitors  and

forefathers  departed  this  life,  Gen.  25.  8.  Deut.
32.  50.  [3]  The  vulgar,  or  inferior  sort  of  per¬

sons  in  a  city,  or  nation,  Mark  12.  37.  Luke  23.

14.  [4]  Jacob's  children  and  posterity ,  Gen.  50.

20.  [5]  The  Gentiles,  Psal.  117-  1-  [6]  Both
Jews  and  Gentiles,  Luke  2.  10.  [7]  The  at  my,

or  soldiers  of  the  Romans,  Dan.  9.  26.  It
is  also  applied  to  unreasonable  creatures,  Prov.
30.  25.

Gen.  27.29.  let  p.  serve  thee,  and  nations  bow  to  thee
48.  19.  he  also  shall  become  a  p.  and  be  great
Exod.  6.  7-  l  will  take  you  to  me  for  ap.  and  be  to
you  a  God,  Deut.  4.  20.  2  Sam.  7.  24.  Jer.  13. 11.
33.  3.  thou  art  a  stiff  neckedp.  5. 1  34.  9.  Deut.  9.  6.
Lev.  20.  24.  I  separated  you  from  other  p.  26.

Num.  21.  29.  thou  art  undone,  O  p.  of  Chemosh

22.5.  behold,  there  isap.  come  out  from  Egypt,  11.
25.  15.  he  was  head  over  ap.  in  Midian
Deut.  4.33.  did  ever  p.  hear  voice  of  God  out  of  fire?

7.  6.  L.  thy  God  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  special  p.
14.  2.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  peculiar  p.
20.  1.  a  p.  more  than  thou,  be  not  afraid  of  them

28.  32.  thy  sons  shall  be  given  to  another  p._

29.  13.  that  he  may  establish  thee  for  p.  to  himself
32.  21.  will  move  them  with  those  that  are  not  ap.
3.3.  29.  who  is  like  to  thee.  Op.  saved  by  Lord?
Ruth  1.  15.  thy  sister  is  gone  back  to  herp.

1  Sam.  2.  24.  ye  make  the  Lord’s  p.  to  transgn  ss


1  Sam.  5. 10.  brought  ark  to  us,  to  slay  us  and  oui  p
11.  let  it  go,  that  it  slay  us  not,  and  our  p.

2  Sam.  7.  23.  whom  Gocf  went  to  redeem  for  a  p.
22.  28.  afflicted  p.  thou  wilt  save,  Psal.  18.27.

44.  a  p.  I  knew  not  shall  serve  me,  Psal.  18.  43.
.1  Kings  22.  28.  hearken,  O  p.  every  one  of  you
2  Kings  11.  17.  shalt  be  Lord’s  p.  2  Chr.  23.  16.

1  Chr.  16.  20.  they  went  from  nation  to  nation,  from

one  kingdom  to  another  p.  Psal.  105.  13.

19.  13.  let  us  behave  ourselves  valiantly  for  our  p.

2  Chron.  1.  9., thou  hast  made  me  king  over  ap.
Esth.  1.  22.  for  he  sent  letters  to  every  p.  after

their  language,  3.  12.  |  8.  9.  A  ’eh.  13  24.

2.  10.  Esther  had  not  shewed  her  p.  nor  kindled

3.  8.  there  is  a  certain  p.  scattered  abroad

4.  8.  go  in  to  make  request  before  him  for  her  p.
Job  36.  20.  when  p.  are  cut  off  in  their  place
Psal.  62. 8.  ye  p.  pour  out  your  hearts  before  him
66.  8.  bless  our  God,  ye  p.  ||  95.  10.  a  p.  that  do  err
114.  1.  went  out  from  a  p.  of  a  strange  language
144.  15.  happy  is  that  p.  ||  148.  14.  a  p.  near  to  him

Prov.  14.  34.  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  p.

28.  15.  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  poor  p.

30.  25.  ants  are  ap.  not  strong,  yet  prepare  meat
Isa.  1.4.  a  p.  laden  with  iniquity,  aseed  of  evildoers

10.  give  ear  to  the  law,  ye  p.  of  Gomorrah

7.  8.  Ephraim  shall  be  broken,  that  it  be  not  a  p.

8.  19.  should  not  a  p.  seek  unto  their  God  ?

27.  11.  for  it  is  ap.  of  no  understanding,  therefore
30.  9.  write,  that  this  is  a  rebellious  p.  65.  2.

43.  4.  therefore  I  will  give  p.  for  thy  life

8.  bring  forth  the  blind  p.  that  have  eyes
65.  3.  a  p.  that  provoketh  me  to  anger  to  my  face

18.  1  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  herp.  a  joy
Jer.  6.  22.  a  p.  cometh  from  the  north,  50.  41.

48.  42.  Moab  shall  be  destroyed  from  being  a p.
Lam.  1.  7.  herp.  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  enemy
Has.  4.  9.  and  there  shall  be  like  p.  like  priest

9.  1.  rejoice  not,  O  Israel,  for  joy  as  other  p.
Jonah  1.  8.  tell  us,  of  what  p.  art  thou  ?

Mic  4. 1.  it  shall  be  exalted,  and  p.  shall  flow  unto  it
Zech.  8.  ,20.  there  shall  come  p.  and  inhabitants
Luke  1.  17.  to  make  ready  ap.  prepared  for  Lord
Acts  15.  14.  to  take  out  of  them  a  p.  for  his  name
Rom.  10.  19.  provoke  to  jeal.  by  them  that  are  no p.
Tit.  2.  14.  he  might  purify  to  himself  a  peculiar  p.
Heb.  8. 10.  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  ap.
1  Pet.  2.  9.  but  ye  are  a  peculiar  p.  to  shew  forth

10.  p.  of  God,  in  time  past  were  not  a  p.  now
Rev.  5.  9.  thou  hast  redeemed  us  out  of  every  v.

All  PEOPLE.

Exod.  19.  5.  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  above
all  p.  Deut.  7.  6,  14.  I  10.  15.  Psal.  99.  2.
Deut.  7.  7.  for  ye  were  the  fewest  of  all  p.

28.  64.  the  Lord  shall  scatter  thee  among  allp.

1  Kings  4.  34.  came  of  all  p.  to  hear  wisdom  of  Sol.

8.  43.  all  p.  may  know  thy  name,  2  Chron.  6.  33.

9.  7.  snail  be  a  proverb  and  by-word  among  all p.
Esth.  3.  8.  and  their  laws  are  diverse  from  all p.

14.  copy  of  writing  was  published  to  all p.  8.  13.

9.  2.  for  the  fear  of  them  fell  upon  all p.

Ps.  47.  1.  O  clap  your  hands,  all  ye  p.  shout  to  G.
96.  3.  declare  his  wonders  among  all  p.

117.  1.  O  praise  L.  all  ye  nations,  praise  him,  all
ye  p.  for  his  kindness,  148.  11.  Rom.  15.  11.
Isa.  25.  6.  Lord  make  to  all p.  a  feast  of  fat  things
7.  the  face  of  the  covering  cast  over  all  p.

56.  7-  niy  house  be  called  house  of  prayer  for  allp.
Lam.  1.  11.  all  her  p.  sigh,  they  seek  bread
18.  hear,  I  pray  you,  all p.  behold,  Mic.  1.  2.
Dan.  5.  19.  all p.  and  nations  feared  before  him
7-  14.  that  all  p.  and  nations  should  serve  him
Mic.  4.  5.  all p.  will  walk  each  in  name  of  his  god
Hab.  2.  5.  because  he  heapetli  unto  him  all p.

Zeph.  3.  20.  make  you  a  praise  among  all p.  of  earth
Zech.  12.  3.  make  Jeru.  a  burdensome  stone  for  all p.
Luke  2.  10.  tidings  of  joy,  which  shall  be  to  allp.
31.  thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all  p.
All  the  PEOPLE.

Gen.  19.  4.  all  thep.  of  Sodom  compass.  Lot’s  housa

35. 6.  Jacob  came  to  Luz,  he  and  all  the p.  with  him

42. 6.  Joseph,  he  it  was  that  sold  to  all  thep.  of  Eg.
Exod.  11.8.  get  thee  out,  and  all  t.p.  that  follow  thee

18. 14.  all  thep.  stand  by  thee  from  morn,  to  evening
21.  thou  shalt  provide  out  of  all  the  p.  able  men
19  8..  all  the  p.  answered  together  and  said,  24.  3.

11.  Lord  will  come  down  in  sight  of  all  thep.

20.  18.  all  the  p.  saw  thunderings  and  lightnings
Lev.  9.  23.  glory  of  the  l.ord  appeared  to  all  the p.

10.  3.  and  before  all  the  p.  I  will  be  glorified
Num.  11.  29-  that  all  the  Lord’s  p.  were  prophets
13.  32.  and  all  t.  p.  we  saw  are  men  of  great  stature

15.  26.  seeing  all  thep.  were  in  ignorance

Deut.  1.3.  9-  afterwards  the  hand  of  all  the  p.  17.  7-
17. 13.  all  t.p.  shall  hear  and  fear,  and  do  no  more

27.  15.  all  the  p.  shall  say,  amen,  16,  17,  18,  19,

20,  21.

28.  10.  all  the  p.  of  the  earth  shall  see  that  thou
Josh.  4.  24.  that  all  the  p.  of  the  earth  might  know

5.  4.  all  the  p.  that  came  out  were  circumcised,  5.

6.  5.  all  the p.  shall  shout  |1  7-  3.  let  not  ail  the p.  go
24.  18.  Lord  drave  out  from  before  us  all  the  p.

Judg.  16.  30.  the  house  fell  upon  all  the  p.  therein
20.  8.  and  all  the p.  arose  as  one  man,  saying

1  Sam.  10.  24.  there  is  none  like  him  among  all  thep.
11.4.  all  thep.  wept  ||  12.18  all  thep.  feared  greatly
30.  6.  because  the  soul  of  all  the  p.  was  grieved

2  Sam.  2.  28.  all  the  p.  stood,  and  pursued  no  more
3.32.  king  wept  at  Abner’s  grave,  and  «//p.wept,34.

36.  and  all  the  p.  took  notice  of  it,  it  pleased
17.  3.  and  I  will  bring  back  all  the  p.  unto  thee,  so
all  the  p.  shall  be  in  peace

19.  9.  and  all  the  p.  were  at  strife  through  all  Isr.
20^  22.  woman  went  to  all  the  p.  in  her  wisdom

1  Kings  8.  5.3.  didst  separate  them  from  all  the  p.
60.  that  all  the  p.  of  the  earth  may  know  that

20.  10.  not  suffice  for  handfuls  for  all  the  p.

2  R  ings  23.  3.  and  all  the  p.  stood  to  the  covenant

1  Chron.  16.  36.  and  all  the  p.  said,  amen,  and  praised
28.  21.  all  the  p.  w  ill  be  w  holly  at  thy  command

2  Chron.  7.  4.  king  and  all  the  p.  offered  sacrifices
Ezra  7.  25.  set  judges,  which  may  judge  all  the  p.

353


PEO


PEO

Neh.  8. 5.  insight  of  all  thep.  for  he  was  above  allp.

11.  so  the  Levites  stilled  all  thep.  saying,  hold
Psal.  67.  3.  O  God,  let  all  the  p.  praise  thee,  5.

97.  6.  heavens  declare  right,  and  allp.  see  his  glory
106.  48.  blessed  be  L.  God,  let  all  thep.  say,  amen
Eecl.  4.  16.  there  is  no  end  of  all  the  p.  even  or  all
Jer.  26.  8.  L.  commanded  him  to  speak  to  all  the  p.

9.  all  the  p.  were  gathered  against  Jeremiah
34.  1.  and  all  the  p.  fought  against  Jerusalem

8.  Zedekiah  made  a  covenant  with  all  thep.  10.

38.  4.  thus  he  weakeneth  the  hands  ot  all  the  p.

43  4.  all  the  p.  obeyed  not  the  voice  ot  the  Lord
Ezek.  31.  12.  all  the  p.  are  gone  from  his  shadow
Dan.  3.  7.  when  all  the  p.  heard  the  sound  of  cornet
Zech.  1 1. 10.  break  my  covenant  1  made  with  all  t.p.

12.  2.  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  trembling  to  all  the  p.

14.  12.  the  Loi'd  will  smite  all  the  p.  that  fought

Mai.  2.  9.  1  also  made  you  base  before  all  thep.
Lu/ett.  47.  she  declared  unto  him  before  all  the  p.

13.  17.  all  the  p.  rejoiced  for  the  glorious  things

18.  43.  all  thep.  when  they  saw,  gave  praise  to  God

19.  48.  all  thep.  were  very  attentive  to  hear  him

20.  6.  but  if  we  say,  of  men,  all  the  p.  will  stone  us
Act  '  2.  47.  and  having  favour  with  all  the  p.

5  34.  Gamaliel  had  in  reputation  among  all  the  p.

10.  41.  not  to  all  the  p.  but  unto  witnesses  chosen

13.  24.  the  baptism  of  repentance  to  all  the  p.

21  27.  stirred  up  all  the  p.  and  laid  hands  on  him
Heh.  9.  19.  when  Moses  had  spoken  every  precept
to  all  thep.  he  sprinkled  both  book  and  all  the p.
Among  the  PEOPLE.

Lev.  18.  29.  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  thep.

Num.  5.  27.  woman  shall  be  a  curse  among  thep.

1  Sam.  14.  34.  disperse  yourselves  among  thep.
Psal.  94.  8.  understand,  ye  brutish  among  the  p.
Ezek.  28.  19.  all  that  know  thee  among  thep.  shall  be
Dan.  11.  33.  and  they  that  understand  among  thep.
Joel  2.  17.  wherefore  should  they  say  among  thep.
Zech.  10.  9.  and  I  will  sow’  them  among  the  p.

Mat.  4.23.  all  manner  of  disease  among  thep.  9.  35.
26.  5.  feast  day,  lest  there  be  an  uproar  among  thep.

John  7. 12.  there  was  much  murmuring  among  t.p.

43.  was  a  division  among  the  p.  because  of  him
Acts  3.  23.  shall  be  destroyed  from  among  thep.

4.  17.  that  it  spread  no  further  among  thep.

5.  12.  many  wonders  were  wrought  aw.  thep.  6.8.

14.  14.  Barnabas  and  Paul  ran  in  among  the  p.

2  Pet.  2. 1.  there  were  false  prophets  also  am.  the  p.

See  Common,  Foolish.

PEOPLE  of  Go,/.

Judg.  20.  2.  presently  in  assembly  of  the  p.  of  God
2  6am.  14. 13.  thought  such  a  thing  against/).  of  G.
Psal.  47.  9.  even p.of  the  GW of  Abraham,  gathered
Heh.  4.  9.  there  remainetii  a  rest  to  the/),  of  God

11.  25.  choosing  to  suffer  affliction  with  p.  of  God
1  Pet.  2.  10.  was  not  a  people,  but  are  now  p.  of  G.

See  Great.

His  PEOPLE.

Gen.  17.  14.  be  cut  off  from  his  p.  Exod.  30.  33,  38.
i  31.  14.  Lev.  7. 20,  21,  25,  27-  I  17.  4,  9  '
19.  8.  1  23.  29.  Num.  9.  13.  1  15.  30.

25.  8.  then  Abraham  was  gathered  to  his  p.
if.  Ishmael  was  gathered  to  his  p.  ||  35.  29.  Tsaac

49.  16.  Dan  shall  judge  his p.  as  one  of  tribes,  33.
Exod.  8.  29.  that  flies  may  depart  from  his  p.  31.

17.  13.  Joshua  discomfited  Amalek  and  his  p.

18.  1.  God  had  done  for  Moses  and  for  Israel  hisp.
Lev.  17.  10.  that  soul  that  eateth  blood,  l  will  cut

him  off  from  among  his  p.  20.  3,  6.  |  23.  30.

21.  1.  none  be  defiled  for  the  dead  among  hisp.

15.  nor  shall  lie  profane  his  seed  among  his  p.
Num.  20.  24.  Aaron  shall  be  gathered  to  his  p.  26
21.34.  fear  not  Og  of  Bashan,  I  have  delivered  him

into  thy  hand,  and  all  his  p.  35.  Dent.  2.  33
Deut.  3.  2.  1  will  deliver  Og  and  all  his  p.  3.

26.  18.  Lord  avouched  thee  to  be  his  peculiar  p.

32.  9.  for  Lord’s  portion  is  his p.  Jacob  the  lot
36.  the  Lord  shall  judge  hisp.  Psal.  135.  14.

43.  rejoice,  O  ye  nations,  with  his  p.  he  will  be
merciful  to  his  land  and  his  p.  Pom.  15.  10
50.  Aaron  died  in  mount  1  lor,  was  gather,  to  hisp.

33.  7.  hear,  Lord,  and  bring  Judah  to  hisp.

Josh. 8.  1.  I  have  given  thee  Ai,  the  king  and  hisp.
Judg.  11.23.  hath  dispossess.  Amorites  before /m  p.
Ruth  1.  6.  heard  how  the  Lord  had  visited  his p.

1  Sam.  12.  22.  L.  will  not  forsake  his p.  for  his  great

name’s  sake,  pleased  the  Ld.  to  make  you  hisp.

15.  l.to  anoint  thee  to  be  king  over  all  Ins  p.

27.  12.  made  hisp.  Israel  utterly  to  abhor  him

2  Sam.  8. 15.  David  reigned  over  all  Israel,  David

executed  justice  to  all  his  p.  1  Chr  on.  18. 14
1  Kings  20.  42.  and  thy  people  shall  go  for  hisp.

1  Chr.  21.  3.  Joab  answered,  the  Lord  make  his  p.  a

hundred  times  so  many  more  as  they  be

22.  18.  the  land  is  subdued  before  Lord  and  his  p

23.  25.  the  God  of  Israel  hath  given  rest  to  hisp.

2  Chr.  2.  11.  because  the  T.ord  hath  loved  his p.

31.  10.  for  the  Lord  hath  blessed  his  p.

32.  14.  who  was  there  that  could  deliver  hisp.  ?  15.
33. 10.  the  Lord  spake  to  Manasseh  and  hisp.

36.  15.  because  he  had  compassion  on  his p.

16.  mocked,  until  wrath  of  Ixjrd  rose  against  hisp.
23.  who  among  you  of  all  his  p.  go  up,  Ezra  1.  3.

Esth.  10.  3.  Mordecai  seeking  the  wealth  of  his  p.
Job  18.  19.  not  have  son  nor  nephew  among  hisp.
Psal.  14.  7-  bringeth  back  captivity  of  his  p.  53.  6.
29.  11.  the  T.ord  will  give  strength  to  his  p.  the
Lord  will  bless  hisp.  with  peace,  68.  35.
50.  4.  he  shall  call,  that  he  may  judge  his  p.

73.  10.  therefore  hisp.  return  hither,  and  waters
78.  20.  they  said,  can  he  provide  flesh  for  hisp.  T
62.  he  gave  hisp.  over  also  to  the  sword
71.  he  brought  him  to  feed  Jacob  his  p.

85.  8.  for  he  will  speak  peace  to  hisp.  and  saints
94.  14.  for  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  his  p.

100.  3.  we  are  his  p.  |l  105.  43.  brought  forth  his  p.

105.  24.  he  increased  his  p.  greatly,  made  them
25.  he  turned  their  heart  to  hate  his  p.  to  deal

106.  40.  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  kindled  against  his
i  p.  that  he  abhorred  his  inheritance,  Isa.  5.  25.

111.  6.  he  shewed  his p.  the  power  of  his  works
9.  he  sent  redemption  to  his  p.  holy  is  his  name

354


PEO


Psal.  113.8.  he  may  set  him  with  the  princes  of  hup.
116. 14.  now  in  the  presence  of  all  his  p.  18.

125.  2.  so  is  the  Lord  round  about  h is  p.  henceforth
136.  16.  him  who  led  hisp.  through  the  wilderness
148.  14.  he  alsoexalteth  the  horn  of  hisp.

149.4.  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  hisp.  beautify
Isa.  3.  14.  into  judgment  with  the  ancients  of  his  p.

7.  2.  his  heart  was  moved,  and  the  heart  of  his  p.

11.  11.  to  recover  the  remnant  of  his  p.  left
16.  be  an  highway  for  the  remnant  of  hisp.

14.  32.  the  poor  of  hisp.  shall  trust  in  him
25.  8.  the  rebuke  of  his  p.  shall  he  take  away
28.  5.  for  a  diadem  of  beauty  to  residue  of  Ins  p.

30.  26.  in  day  Lord  bindeth  up  breach  ot  his  p.

49.  13.  for  God  hath  comforted  his  p.  52.  9.,

51.  22.  thy  God  that  pleadeth  the  cause  of  his  p.

56.  3.  the  Lord  bath  separated  me  from  his  p.

63. 11.  he  remembered  days  of  old,  Moses  and  his p.
Jer.  27.  12.  and  serve  him  and  hisp.  and  live
5  >.  16.  they  shall  return  every  one  to  his  p.

Ezek.  18.  18.  and  did  what  is  not  good  among  his  p.
30.  11.  he  and  his  p.  with  him  shall  be  brought
Joel  2.  18.  then  will  Lord  be  jealous  and  pity  his  p.
19.  the  Lord  will  answer  and  say  to  hisp.

3.  16.  the  Lord  will  be  the  hope  of  hisp.

Mic.  6.2.  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  hisp.
Zech.  9.  16.  Lord  shall  save  them  as  flock  of  hisp.
Mat.  1.21.  Jesus,  he  shall  save  his  p.  from  their  sins
Luke  1.  68.  for  he  hath  visited  and  redeemed  hisp.
77.  give  knowl.  ofsalvation  to  hisp.  by  remission
7. 16.  prophet  risen,  and  that  God  hath  visited  hisp.
Rom.  11.  1.  hath  God  castaway  hisp.?  God  forbid
2.  God  hath  not  cast  away  his  p.  he  foreknew
Heb.  10.  30.  again,  the  Lord  shall  judge  hisp.

Rev.  21.  3.  they  shall  be  his  p.  God  himself  their  G.
See  IIoly,  Israel,  Many,  Men.
PEOPLE  of  the  land.

Gen.  23.7.  Abrah.  bowed  himself  to  p.  of  the  l.  12.
42.  6.  it  was  Joseph  that  sold  to  all  p.  of  the  land
Exod.  5.  5  .p.  of  the  l.  are  many,  ye  make  them  rest
Lev.  20.  2.  p.  of  the  l.  shall  stone  him  with  stones

4.  if p.  of  the  land  do  hide  their  eyes  from  him
Num.  14.  9.  rebel  not,  neither  fear  yep.  of  the  l.

2  Kings  11.  14.  all  p.  of  thel.  rejoiced  and  blew,  20

15.  5.  Jotham  judged  p.  of  the  land ,  2  Chr.  26.  21.

21.  24.  p.of  the  l.  slew  that  had  killed  Amon,  and
p.  of  the  l.  made  Josiah  king,  2  Chr.  3.3.  25.
23.  30.  p.  of  l.  took  Jehoahaz  his  son,  2  Chr.  .36.  1.

25.  3.  there  was  no  bread  for  p.  of  the  l.  Jer.  52.  6.
19.  N  ebuchadn.  took  him  that  mustered  /),  of  the  l
and  sixty  men  ot' p.  of  the  land,  Jer.  52.  25.

1  Chr.  5.  25.  went  after  the  gods  of/),  of  the  land
Ezra  4.  4.  p.  of  the  l.  weakened  hands  of  builders

10.  2.  and  taken  strange  wives  of  the/),  of  the  land

11.  separate  yourselves  from  the  p.  of  the  land
Neh.  10.  30.  not  give  our  daughters  to  p.  of  the  l.

31.  if  the  p.  of  the  l.  bring  ware,  or  any  victuals
Esth.  8.  17-  many  of  the  p.  of  the  land  became  Jews
Jer.  1. 18.  made  thee  an  iron  pillar  against/),  of  the  l.

34.  19.  all  the  p.  of  the  land  which  passed  between
Ezek.  7.  27.  hands  of  p.of  the  land  shall  be  troubled
22. 29./).  of  the  l.  have  used  oppression  and  robbery
33.  2.  if/),  of  the  land  take  man  to  he  a  watchman
39.  13.  and  all  the  p.  of  the  land  shall  bury  them

45.  16.  all  the  p.  of  the  land  shall  give  this  oblation
22.  that  day  the  prince  prepare  for/),  of  the  land

46.  3.  p.  of  the  I.  shall  worship  at  door  of  this  gate

9.  when/),  of  the  land  shall  come  in  solemn  feasts
Dan.  9.  6.  prophets  which  spake  to  the  p.  of  the  land
Hag.  2.  4.  be  strong,  all  ye  p.  of  the  land ,  and  work
Zech.  7.  5.  speak  to  all  the  p.  of  the  land  and  priests

Much  PEOPLE.

Num.  20.  20.  Edom  came  out  ag.  him  with  much  p.
Josh.  11.  4.  they  went  with  much  p.  even  as  the  sand

2  Sam.  13.  34.  there  came  much  p.  by  way  of  the  hill
2  Chr.  30.  1.3.  there  assembled  at  Jerusal.  much  p.

32.  4.  so  there  was  gathered  much  p.  together
Psal.  35.  18.  I  will  praise  thee  among  much  p.
Mark5.2i.  muchp.  gathered  unto  him  nigh  the  sea

24.  Jesus  went  with  him,  and  much  p.  followed  him

6.  .34.  Jesus  saw  much  p.  was  moved  with  compass.
John  12.  9.  much  p.  of  Jews  knew  that  he  was  there

12.  next  day  much  p.  took  branches  of  palm-trees
Acts 5.  37.  and  drew  away  muchp.  after  him

11.  24.  and  much  p.  was  added  unto  the  Lord

18.  10.  1  am  with  thee,  for  1  have  m.  p.  in  this  city

19.  26.  this  Paul  hath  turned  away  muchp.

Rev  19.  1.  I  heard  a  voice  of  much  p.  in  heaven

My  PEOPLE.

Gen.  23.  11 .  in  presence  of  the  sons  of  m.  p.  give  I  it
41.  40.  to  thy  word  shall  all  my  p.  be  ruled
49.  29.  I  am  to  be  gathered  to  my  p.  bury  me
Exod.  .3.  7.  I  have  seen  affliction  of  m.p.  Acts 7.  34.

10.  that  thou  mayest  bring  forth  my  p.  7.4.

5.  1.  let  my  p.  go, 7.  16.  |  8.  1,20.1  9-  1, 13. 1  10.  3.

8.  8.  take  away  the  frogs  from  me  and  from  my  p.

21.  else  if  thou  wilt  not  let  my  p.  go,  10.  4.

22.  I  will  sever  the  land  in  which  my  p.  are,  23.

9.  17.  as  yet  exaltest  thou  thyself  against  my  p.

27.  Lord  is  righteous,  1  ana  my  p.  are  wicked

12.  31.  and  get  you  forth  from  among  my  p.

22.25.  if  thou  lend  money  to  any  ot  myp.

Lev.  26.  12.  ye  shall  be  my  p.  Jer.  11.  4.  1  30.  22.
Num.  24.  14.  and  now  behold  I  go  unto  my  p.

Judg.  12.  2.  1  and  my  p.  were  at  great  strife

14.  3.  is  there  never  a  woman  among  all  my  p.  ?

16.  hast  put  forth  a  riddle  to  children  of  my  p.
Ruth  1.  16.  thy  people  shall  be  my  p.  God  my  God
3.  11.  for  all  the  city  of  my  p.  doth  know  that

1  Sam.  9.  16.  shalt  anoint  him  to  be  captain  over
my  p.  that  he  may  s  ewe  myp.  1  looked  on  myp.

2  Sam.  3. 18.  by  the  hand  of  David  l  will  save  myp.

7.  8. 1  took  thee  to  be  a  ruler  over  myp.  2  Chr.  6.  5.

1  Kings  22.  4. 1  am  as  thou  art,  my  p.  as  thy  people,
my  horses  as  thy  horses,  2  Kings  .3.  7  -  2  Chr .  18.  3.

2  Kings  20.  5.  tell  Hezekiah,  the  captain  of  my  p.

1  Chr.  17.  6.  whom  I  commanded  to  teed  my  p.

28.  2.  David  stood  and  said,  hear  me,  my  p.

29. 14  who  am  1 ,  and  w’hat  my  p.  to  be  able  to  offer

2  Chr.  1.  11.  wisdom,  that  thou  mayest  judge  myp.

6.  5.  since  day  I  brought  forth  myp.  out  of  Egypt

7.  13.  or  if  I  send  pestilence  among  myp.


2  Chr.  7.  14.  if  myp.  shall  humble  thems.  and  pray
Esth.  7.  3.  let  my  p.  be  given  me  at  my  request

4.  for  we  are  sold,  1  and  my  p.  to  be  destroyed
8.  6.  how  endure  to  see  evil  shall  come  to  my  p.f
Psal.  1 4 . 4 .  w  ho  eat  u  p  my  p .  as  they  eat  bread ,  53.  4«
59.  7.  hear,  O  my  p.  1  will  speak  and  testify,  81. 8.

59.11.  slay  them  not,  least  wy/). forget,  scatter  them
68.  22.  1  will  bring  my  p.  again  from  Bashan

78. 1 .  give  ear,  O  myp.  to  my  law,  incline  your  ears-

81. 11.  but  myp.  would  not  hearken  to  my  voice

1.3.  O  that  myp.  had  hearkened  unto  me

144.  2.  my  shield,  who  subdueth  myp.  under  me
Isa.  1. 3.  but  Israel  not  know,  myp.  doth  not  consid.

3. 12.  as  for  my  p.  children  are  their  oppressors,  O
myp.  they  which  lead  thee  cause  thee  to  err

15.  what  mean  ye  that  ye  beat  myp.  to  pieces?

5.  13.  my  /).  are  gone  into  captivity,  because
10.  2.  to  take  away  the  right  from  poor  of  my  p.

24.  O  myp.  that  dwellest  in  Zion,  be  not  afraid
19. 25.  blessed  be  Egypt,  myp.  and  Assyria,  Israel
26.  20.  come,  myp.  enter  thou  into  thy  chambers
32.  18.  my  p.  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  habitation

40. 1.  comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  myp.  saith  your  Gotf
43.20.  to  give  drink  towyg.  my  chosen

47.  6.  I  was  wroth  with  my  p.  I  have  polluted

51.  4.  hearken  unto  me,  myp.  and  give  ear  to  me

16.  and  say  to  Zion,  thou  art  myp.  _

52.  4.  my  p.  went  down  into  Egypt  to  sojourn  there

5.  saith  Lord,  that  myp.  is  taken  away  for  nought

6.  therefore  my  p.  shall  know  my  name

5.3.  8.  for  transgression  of  myp.  was  he  stricken
57. 14.  take  stumbling-block  out  of  the  way  ot  myp.

58. 1 .  and  shew  myp.  their  transgression,  and  .Jacob-
63.  8.  for  he  said,  surely  they  are  myp.  children
65. 10.  Sharon  a  fold  for  my  p.  that  ha\  e  sought  me

19.  I  will  rejoice  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  myp.
22.  for  as  the  days  of  a  tree,  are  the  days  of  myp.
Jer.  2. 11.  but  myp.  have  changed  their  glory  tor
13.  for  myp.  have  committed  two  evils,  forsaken

31 .  why  say  myp.  we  are  lords,  will  come  no  more

32.  yet  my  p.  have  forgotten  me,  18.  15.

4.  22.  for  my  p.  is  foolish,  they  havp  not  known  me

5.  26.  for  irmone  my  p.  are  found  wicked  men
.31  myp.  love  to  have  it  so,  what  will  ye  do  ?

6.  27.  1  have  set  thee  for  a  fortress  among  myp.

7.  2.3.  obey  my  voice,  and  ye  shall  be


8.  7.  myp.  know  not  the  judgment  of  the

9.  2.  that  1  might  leave  myp.  and  go  from  them
1-2. 16.  if  they  will  diligently  learn  the  ways  of  myp.

as  they  taught  my  p.  to  swear  by  Baal

15.  7.  1  will  destroy  myp.  since  they  return  not
2.3.  2.  saith  Txl.  against  the  pastors  that  feed  myp.
22.  if  they  had  caused  myp.  to  hear  my  words
27.  who  think  to  cause  my  p.  to  forget  my  name
32.  cause  myp.  to  err  by  their  lies  and  lightness
24.  7.  they  shall  he  my  p.  31.  1,  33. 1  32.  38.  Ezek

11.  20. 1  36.  28.  |  37  -  23,  27.  Zech.  8.  &
29  32.  nor  behold  good  that  l  will  do  for  myp.

31.  14.  myp.  shall  be  satisfied  with  my  goodness
.33.  24.  thus  they  have  despised  myp.  not  a  nation

50. 6.  my  p.  hath  been  lost  sheep,  they  have  gone
51. 45.  myp.  go  ye  out  of  midst  ot  her,  Rev.  18.  4.
Lam.  3.14.  I  was  a  derision  to  all  myp.  and  song
Ezek.  13.  9.  they  shall  not  be  in  assembly  of  myp.

10.  have  seduced  my  p.  ||  18.  hunt  souls  of  myp.

19.  ye  pollute  me  among  myp.  by  lying  to  myp .
21.  I  will  deliver  my  p.  out  of  your  band,  23.

14.8.  1  will  cut  him  off  fronvthe  midst  of  my  a.

11.  but  that  they  may  be  myp.  and  1  their  Goa
21. 12.  terrors  by  the  sword  shall  be  upon  my  p.
34.  .30.  even  house  of  Israel  are  my  p.  saith  Lord
.37.12.  behold,  ()  my  p.  1  will  open  your  graves,  ?£
38. 16.  thou  shalt  c  ome  up  against  my  p.  Israel

44.  23.  they  shall  teach  my  p.  the  difference

45.  8.  my  princes  shall  no  more  oppress  myp.

9.  take  away  your  exactions  from  myp.  saith  Lord

46.  18.  that  myp.  be  not  scattered  from  possession
1 1  os.  1.  9.  then  said  God,  are  ye  not  my  p.?  10.

2. 1 1.  say  unto  your  brethren,  my  p.  and  sisters

2.  23.  say  to  them  which  were  not  my  p.

4.6.  my  p.  are  destroyed  for  lack  ot  knowledge

8.  they  eat  up  the  sin  of  my  p.  and  they  set

12.  myp.  ask  counsel  at  their  stocks,  and  staff
6.  11.  when  1  returned  the  captivity  of  myp.
11.7.  myp.  are  bent  to  backsliding  from  me

Joel  2.  26.  myp.  shall  never  he  ashamed,  27.

3.  2.  anil  wiH  plead  with  them  there  for  my  p.

3.  and  they  have  cast  lots  for  my  p.  and  sold

Amos  9.10.  sinners  of  my  p.  shall  die  by  the  sworcl
Obad.  13.  not  have  entered  into  the  gate  of  my  v.
Mic.  1.9.  he  is  come  to  the  gate  of  my  p.  eve?

2.  4.  he  hath  changed  the  portion  of  my  p.

8.  of  late  my  p.  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy

9.  the  women  of  my  p.  have  ye  cast  out

3.  3.  who  also  eat  the  flesh  of  my  p.  and  flay
5.  concerning  prophets  that  make  my  p.  en

6.3.  O  my  p.  what  have  I  done  unto  thee  ?  5.

16.  therefore  ye  shall  bear  the  reproach  of  my  p.
Zeph.  2.  8.  whereby  they  reproached  my  p.

9.  the  residue  of  my  p.  shall  spoil  them
Zech.  2.  11.  and  many  nations  snail  be  my  p.

8.  7.  1  will  save  my  p.  from  the  east  country

13.  9.  1  will  say,  it  is  my  p.  and  th%y  shall  say
Rom.  9. 25.  call  them  my  p.  which  were  not  my  p.

26.  in  the  place  where  it  was  said,  ye  are  not  myp-
2  Cor.  6. 16.  1  will  be  their  God,  they  shall  be  myp-
See  Daughter.

Of  the  PEOPLE.

Gen.  25.  23.  two  manner  of  the  p.  -hall  be  separated
26.  10.  one  of  the  p.  might  lightly  have  lien
49.  10.  to  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  p.  be
Num.  25.  4.  take  all  the  heads  of  the  p.  and  bang
26.  4.  Hike  the  sum  of  the  p.  from  20  years  old
Josh.  4.  2.  take  you  twelve  men  out  of  the  p.

1  Sam.  9.  2.  lie  was  higher  than  any  of  the  p.  10.  23.

12.  for  there  is  a  sacrifice  of  the  p.  to-day

14.  24.  so  none  of  the  p.  tasted  any  fo°a

28.  then  answered  one  of  the  p.  and  said  .

26.  15.  there  came  one  of  the  p.  to  destroy  king

2  Kings  13.  7-  nor  did  he  leave  of  the  p.  to  Jehoana*
Ezra  3.  3.  because  of  the  p.  of  those  countries  _
Neh.  5. 1.  there  was  great  cry  of  t.p.  and  their  wives


P  EO


P  E  O


PEU


Neh.  7. 73.  and  some  of  the  p.  dwelt  it.  their  cities
Psal.  6.r).  7.  which  stilleth  the  tumult  of  the  j 0.

72.  4.  he  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  p.  and  save
89.  19.  1  have  exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the  p.

Isa.  18.  7-  a  present  of  a  p.  scattered  anil  peeled

42.  6.  I  will  «ive  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  p.

51.  4.  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  light  of  the  p.

63.  3.  and  of  the  p.  there  was  none  with  me
Ezek.  46.  18.  prince  not  take  of  the  p.  inheritance

24.  the  ministers  shall  boil  the  sacrifice  of  the  p.
fohn  7-  31.  and  many  of  the  p.  believed  on  him

11.  42.  because  of  the  p.  that  stand  by  1  said  it
Acts  4.  21.  how  they  might  punish,  because  of  the  p.
Heh.  9.  ?•  fie  offered  for  himself,  and  errors  of  the  p.
Rev.  11.  9.  they  of  the  p.  shall  see  their  dead  bodies

See  Ears.  Elders.

(hie  PEOPLE.

Gen.  25.  23  one  p.  shall  be  stronger  than  the  other
34.  16.  we  will  dwell  with  you,  and  become  one  v.

22.  will  consent  to  dwell  with  us,  to  be  one  p.

(hen  PEOPLE.

Exod.  5.  16.  hut  the  fault  is  in  thine  own  p.

Lev.  21.  14.  he  shall  take  a  virgin  of  his  o?en  p.

1  Chron.  17.  21.  God  went  to  redeem  to  be  his  ownp.

2  Chron.  25.  15.  that  could  not  deliver  their  ownp.
Psal.  45.  10.  O  daughter,  forget  also  thy  own  p.

78.  52.  but  made  Ids  own  p.  to  go  forth  like  sheep
Isa.  13.  14.  shall  every  man  turn  to  his  own  p.
fer.  46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  again  to  our  own  p.

The  PEOPLE.

Gen.  11.  6.  the  Lord  said,  behold  the  p.  is  one
Exod.  5.  4.  why  do  ye  let  the  p.  from  their  work  :

5.  behold,  the  p.  of  the  land  now  are  many

12.  27-  and  the  p.  bowed  the  head  worshipped

13.  18.  God  led  thep.  j|  14.  5.  was  told  that  thep.  fled
14.31.  the  p.  feared  Lord,  and  believed  the  Lord

15.  14.  ihep.  shall  hear  and  be  afraid,  sorrow  take

16.  till  the  p.  pass  over  which  thou  hast  purchased
24.  thep.  murmured,  saying,  what  shall  we  drink  ?

16.  30.  so  the  p.  rested  on  the  seventh  day

17.  1.  there  was  no  water  for  the  p.  to  drink

2.  thep.  did  chide  with  Moses,  Sum.  20.  3.

6.  shall  come  water  out  of  it,  that  the  p.  may  drink

18.  19.  be  thou  for  the  p.  to  God-ward,  to  bring

19.  9.  that  the  p.  may  hear  when  I  speak  with  thee

17.  Moses  brought  forth  the  p.  out  of  the  camp
21.  charge  thep.  ||  24.  let  not  the  p.  break  through

20.  18.  when  the  p.  saw  it,  they  stood  afar  off,  21.
24.  2.  neither  shall  the  p.  go  up  with  him

8.  Moses  took  blood  and  sprinkled  it  on  the  p.

Lev.  9.  7-  make  an  atonement  for  thyself  and  thep.
15.  the  sin  offering  for  the  p.  18. 1  16.  15.

23.  blessed  the  p.  ||  Sum .  11.  1.  the  p.  complained
"wim.  11. 2.  the  p.  cried  to  Moses,  and  he  prayed
13. 18.  and  see  the  p.  that  dwelleth  therein

28.  the  p.  be  strong  ||  30.  Caleb  stilled  the  p.

14.  1.  the  p.  wept  that  night  ||  39.  thep.  mourned
21.5.  the  p.  spake  against  God  and  against  Moses
23.  9.  lo,  the  p.  shall  dwell  alone,  not  reckoned

24.  behold,  the  p.  shall  rise  up  as  a  great  lion
Deut.  4.  10.  the  Lord  said,  gather  me  the  p.  together

18.  3.  this  shall  be  the  priest’s  due  from  the  p.

33.  3.  yea,  he  loved  the  p.  ||  17.  he  shall  push  thep.

19.  they  shall  call  the  p.  to  the  mountain
(osh.  4.  10.  and  the  p.  hasted  and  passed  over

6.  20.  so  the  p.  shouted  H  24.  28.  let  the  p.  depart
hidg.  7.  2.  the  p.  that  are  with  thee  are  too  many,  4.

9.  32.  up  thou,  and  the  p.  that  are  with  thee
Sam.  2.  13.  the  priest’s  custom  with  the  p.  was

4.  4.  so  the  p.  sent  to  Shiloh  to  bring  the  ark
6.  6.  did  they  not  let  the  p.  go,  and  they  departed

8.  19.  thep.  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  Samuel

9. 13.  for  the  p.  will  not  eat  until  he  come

14.  45.  the  p.  said  to  Saul,  shall  Jonathan  die  ?  so

.‘he  p.  rescued  Jonathan,  that  he  died  not

15.  15.  tor  the  p.  spared  the  best  of  the  sheep

21.  but  the  p.  took  of  the  spoil  sheep  and  oxen

17.  27.  the  p.  answered  after  this  manner,  30.

30.  6.  Dav.  distressed,  for  the  p.  spake  of  ston.’him
Sam.  1.  4.  that  the  p.  are  fled  from  the  battle

14.  15.  it  is  because  the  p.  have  made  me  afraid

15.  12.  tor  the  p.  increased  with  Absalom

m  i’ 40'  an<^  ‘hep.  piped  with  pipes  and  rejoic.

12.  30.  for  the  p.  went  to  worship  before  the  one

16.  22.  the  p.  that  followed  Omi  i  prevailed  against

the  p.  1,1111  followed  I  ibui,  son  of  Ginath
Ith  21.  and  the  p.  answered  him  not  a  word
Ktnys  4.  41.  pour  out  for  the  p.  that  they  may  eat
^43.  he  said,  give  the  p.  that  they  may  eat
<•  17.  and  the  p.  trode  upon  him  in  the  gate
in'  mat,e  a  covenant  between  king  and  the  p.

L- 3  as  yet  Me  p.  did  sacrifice,  14.  4f|15.  4,  35.
on  Jo'  ■  P-  ,ie,'l  tfieir  peace,  and  answered  not
'"IS-  inquire  of  the  Lord  for  me  and  for  the  p.
on  M12'  3‘  thep-  were  without  number  that  came
-0.  33.  as  yet  the  p.  had  not  prepared,  30.  3.

*7-  *.  and  the  p.  did  yet  corruptly
ri  in'  •  '  fieHrkcned  to  Ilezek.  and  healed  the  p.
since  thep.  began  to  bring  offerings
o-  ‘he  p.  rested  on  the  words  of  llezekiah
t°.  *4-  and  the  p.  transgressed  very  much
1  jl'l'  ^ut  t,l€  P-  Hre  many,  and  it  is  rain
-  o.  tor  the  p.  had  a  mind  to  work
;•  l-».  and  the  p.  did  according  to  this  promise
1  •  4.  city  was  large,  but  the  p.  were  few  therein
J*  a,1d  the  p.  stood  in  their  place
‘'I'  SD  t&p.  iveiit  and  brought  palm-branches
P-  filessed  all  that  offered  willingly
■ •  7  *hcy  had  shewed  him  the p.  of  Mordecai

1  V,  a  s9’ to  do  with  them  as  seemeth  to  thee
a  10  „  ,P\  .t,le  king’s  provinces  do  know
si  il  1  'On  said,  no  doubt  hut  ye  are  the p.

\  in  'lyP01'1  ,le  ret?n  not,  lest  the  p.  be  ensnared
m  in'iTi'  d°  ‘he  p.  imagine  a  vain  thing  ?
it  fi'essed  are  thep.  w  horn  he  hath  chosen
we  heard,  how  thou  didst  afflict  the  p.

0.5.  arrows,  whereby  the  p.  fall  under  thee
M  therefore  shall  the  p.  praise  thee  for  ever
£•  T  *n  thine  anger  cast  down  the  p.  O  God
0  ,  AV/ie  P;  ,P>  a'se  thee,  ()  God,  5.
v  •  15.  blessed  is  the  p.  that  know  the  joyful  sound
'  •  an'J  we  are  she  p.  of  his  pasture


Psal.  96.  13.  he  shall  judge  the  p.  with  his  truth

98.  9.  and  he  shall  judge  the  p.  with  equity

99.  1.  the  I  orct  reigneth,  let  the  p.  tremble
105.  1.  make  known  his  deeds  among  the  p.

Prov.  11.  14.  where  no  counsel  is  thep.  fall
26.  withholds  corn,  the  p.  shall  curse  him,  24. 24.

29.  2.  in  authority,  the  p.  rejoiced,  the  p.  mourn

18.  where  there  is  no  vision,  the  p.  perish

Isa.  3. 5.  thep.  sfial  1  be  oppressed,  every  one  by  ano.
9-  2.  the  p.  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen  light

13.  the  p.  turneth  not  to  him  thatsmiteth  them
19-  and  the p.  shall  be  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire

10.  6.  and  against  the  p.  of  my  wrath  will  I  give

14.  2.  and  the  p.  shall  take  them  and  bring  them

24.  2.  it  shall  be  as  with  the  p.  so  with  the  priest

30.  19.  for  the  p.  shall  dwell  in  Zion  at  lerusalem
33.  2t.  the  p.  snail  be  forgiven  their  iniquity

.34.  5.  my  sword  shall  come  on  the  p.  ot  my  curse
40.  7.  surely  the  p.  is  grass,  the  grass  withereth
51. 7.  the  p.  in  whose  heart  is  my  law,  fear  ye  not
63.  6.  I  will  tread  down  the  p.  in  mine  anger
18.  the  p.  of  thy  holiness  have  possessed  it
Jer.  23.  .34.  the  p.  that  shall  say,  the  burthen  of  Ld.
31. 2.  the  p.  which  were  left  of  sword  found  grace

37.  4.  Jeremiah  came  in  and  went  out  among  the  p.
39.  14.  carry  him  home, so  he  dwelt  among  the  p.
40. 5.  go  back  and  dwell  with  him  among  the  p.  6.
48. 46.  woe  to  thee.  O  Moab,  t.p.  of  (Jhemosh  perish
51.  58.  and  the  p.  snail  labour  in  vain,  and  be  weary

Ezek.  11.  17.  1  will  even  gather  you  from  thep.

20.  31.  1  will  bring  you  out  from  the  p.  34.  13.

25.  7.  and  I  will  cut  thee  off' from  the  p.

26.  20.  will  bring  thee  down  with  the  p.  of  old  time
3.3.  6.  see  sword  come,  and  the  p.  be  not  warned

.31.  and  they  come  unto  thee  as  the  p.  cometh

36.  20.  they  said,  these  are  the  p.  of  the  Lord
39.  4.  thou  shalt  fall,  and  the  p.  that  is  with  thee
42.  14.  approach  to  those  things  which  are  for  the  p.
44.  11.  they  shall  slay  the  sacrifice  for  the  p.

19-  shall  not  sanctify  the  p.  with  their  garments
Dan.  9.  26.  the  p.  of  the  prince  that  shall  come

11.  32.  thep.  that  know  their  God  shall  be  strong
Uos.  4.  14.  thep.  thatdoth  not  understand,  shall  fall

10.  5.  for  the  p.  thereo*  shall  mourn  over  it
10.  and  the  p.  shall  be  gathered  against  them

Joel  2.  6.  before  them  the  p.  shall  be  much  pained
Amos  1. 5.  the  p.  of  Syria  shall  go  into  captivity

3.  6.  shall  trumpet  be  blown,  and  the  p.  not  afraid?
Jonah  3.  5.  so  the  p.  of  "N  ineveh  believed  God
Hah.  2.  13.  that  the  p.  shall  labour  in  the  fire,  and

the  p.  shall  weary  themselves  for  very  vanity
Zeph.  2.  10.  magnified  themselves  ag.  the  p.  of  Lord
Hag.  1.  12.  and  the  p.  did  fear  before  the  Lord
Mai.  1. 4.  thep.  against  whom  Lord  hath  indignation
Mat.  4.  16.  the  p.  that  sat  in  darkness  siw  light

21.  26.  if  we  shall  say,  of  men,  we  fear  the  p.  for

all  hold  John  as  a  prophet,  Mark  11.  32.
Luke  1.21.  and  the  p.  waited  for  Zacharias
.3.  15.  as  the p.  were  in  expectat.  and  all  men  mused

4.  42.  the  p.  sought  him  ||  5.  1.  the  p.  pressed  on

8.  40.  when  returned,  the  p.  gladly  received  him

9.  18.  he  asked  them,  whom  say  the  p.  that  1  am  ?

20.  19.  feared  thep.  22.  2.  ||  23.  5.  stirreth  up  the  p.
23. 14.  brought  this  man,  one  that  perverteth  the  p.

John  6.  24.  when  the  p.  saw  that  Jesus  was  not  there

7.  12.  others  said,  nay,  but  he  deceiveth  the  p.

11.  50.  that  one  man  should  die  for  the  p.  18.  14.
Acts  5.  1.3.  but  the  p.  magnified  them

8. 6.  thep.  with  one  accord  gave  heed  to  those  things
12.22.  the  p.  gave  shout,  saying,  it  is  voice  of  God
14.  11.  and  when  the  p.  saw  what  Paul  had  done

18.  with  these  sayings  scarce  restrained  they  t.  p.

19.  who  persuaded  thep.  and  stoned  Paul

26. 17.  delivering  thee  from  the  p.  and  the  Gentiles
28.  17.  though  I  committed  nothing  against  the  p.
Heh.  5.  3.  as  for  the  p.  so  also  for  himself,  7.  27.

7-  11.  for  under  it  thep.  received  the  law

13.  12.  that  he  might  sanctify  the  p.  with  his  blood
Jude  5.  how  that  the  Lord  having  saved  the  p.

_  This  PEOPLE.

Exod.  3.  21.  T  will  give  this  p.  favour  in  sight  of

5.  22.  why  hast  thou  so  evil  entreated  this  p.?

23.  for  Pharaoh  hath  done  evil  to  this  p.

17-4.  Moses  cried,  saying,  whatshall  1  do  to  this p .?
18.  18.  thou  wilt  wear  away,  both  thou  and  this  p.
23.  all  this  p.  shall  also  go  to  their  plac  e  in  peace
32.  9. 1  have  seen  thisp.  ||  21.  what  did  thisp.  to  thee
32.  .31.  oh,  this  p.  have  sinned  a  great  sin
33. 12.  see,  thou  sayest  to  me,  bring  up  this  p.
Num.  11.  11.  layest  the  burden  of  all  Mny.onme

12.  have  I  conceiv.  all  this  p.  ?  ||  13.  flesh  to  this  p.
14.  I  am  not  able  to  bear  all  this  p.  alone

14. 11 .  Lord  said,  how  long  will  thisp.  provoke  me?

14.  thev  heard  that  th6u  art  among  this  p.

15.  if  thou  shalt  kill  all  thisp.  as  one  man

16.  was  not  able  to  bring  this  p.  into  the  land
19.  pardon  this  p.  as  thou  hast  forgiven  this  p.

21.  2.  if  thou  wilt  indeed  deliver  this  p.

22.  6.  come  now,  I  pray  thee,  curse  this  p.  17.

24.  14.  whatMwg.  shall  do  to  thy  people

.32.  15.  ami  ye  shall  destroy  all  thisp.

Deut.  3.  28.  Joshua  shall  go  over  before  this  p.

5.  28.  I  have  heard  voice  of  the  words  of  this  p.

9.  13.  the  Lord  spake,  saying,  I  have  seen  this  p.
27-  look  not  to  the  stubbornness  of  this  p.

31.  7*  be  strong,  for  thou  must  go  with  thisp,

16.  this p.  will  rise  up  and  go  whoring  after  gods
Josh.  1.6.  to  this  p.  thou  shalt  divide  the  land
Jndg.Q.  20.  because  this  p.  have  transgressed
9.  29.  would  to  God  this  p.  were  under  my  hand

38.  is  not  this  the  ju.  thou  hast  despised  ?  go  out

1  Sam.  2.2.3.  1  hear  of  your  evil  doings  by  this  p.

2  Sam.  16.  18.  but  whom  Lord  and  this  p.  choose

1  Kings  12.6.  that  I  may  ans.  thisp.  9.  2  (  hr.  10. 6,  9.

7.  if  thou  wilt  be  a  servant  to  this  p.  this  day

27.  if  thisp.  goupto  dosacrifice  at  Jerusalem, then
the  heart  of  thisp.  shall  turn  again  to  liehoboam

14.  2.  who  told  me  that  l  should  be  king  over  t.p.
18.  37.  hear  me,  O  Lord,  that  this p.  may  know

2  Rings  6.  18.  1  pray,  smite  this p.  with  blindness
2  Chr._  1. 10.  I  may  go  out  and  come  in  before  thisp.
Neh.f>.  18.  the  bondage  w'as  heavy  on  this  p.


Neh.  5.  19.  accord,  to  all  that  T  have  done  for  this  p.
Isa.  6.  9.  go  and  tell  this  p.  heal  ye  indeed,  but  not

10.  make  the  heart  of  this  p.  fat,  ears  heavy,  and

shut  their  eyes,  Mat.  13.  15.  Acts  28.  26.27-

8.  6.  this  p.  refuseth  the  waters  of  Shiloah

11.  1  should  not  walk  in  the  way. of  thisp.

12.  to  whom  this  p.  shall  say,  a  confederacy

9.  16.  the  leaders  of  this p.  cause  them  to  err

23. 13.  this  p.  was  not  till  the  Assyrian  founded  it

28.  11.  with  another  tongue  will  speak  to  this  p.

14.  hear,  ye  scornful  men  that  rule  this  p.

29.  13.  this  p.  draw  near  me  with  their  mouth

14.  to  do  a  marvellous  work  among  thisp.

42.  22.  but  this  is  a  p.  robbed  and  spoiled

43.  21.  this  p.  have  1  formed  for  myself
Jer.  4.  10.  thou  hast  greatly  deceived  thisp.

5. 14.  wdll  make  my  words  fire,  and  this  p.  wood

23.  but  this  p.  hath  a  revolting  heart

6.  19.  behold,  I  will  bring  eviTon  this  p.

21.  I  will  lay  stumbling-blocks  before  thisp.

7.  16.  pray  not  thou  for  thisp.  11.  14.  |  14.  11.

33.  carcasses  of  this  p.  meat  for  fowls  of  heaven

8.  5.  why  is  this  p.  of  Jerusalem  slidden  back  r

9.  15.  1  will  feed  even  this  p.  with  wormwood

13.  10.  this  evil  p.  who  refuse  to  hear  my  words

15.  1.  yet  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this p.

16.  5.  I  have  taken  away  my  peace  from  this  p.

19.  11.  even  so  will  1  break  this  p.  and  this  city
23.  32.  they  shall  not  profit  this  p.  at  all

33.  and  when  this  p.  shall  ask  thee,  saving

28.  15.  thou  makest  this  p.  to  trust  in  a  lie

29.  32.  shall  not  have  a  man  to  dwell  among  thisp.

32.  42.  brought  all  this  great  evil  upon  this  p.

33.  24.  considerest  not  what  thisp.  have  spoken
35.  16.  but  this  p.  have  not  hearkened  unto  me
36.7.  great  is  the  anger  pronounced  against  thisp.

37.  18.  what  have  1  offended  against  this p.  ?

38.  4.  this  man  seeketh  not  the  welfare  of  this  p.
Mic.  2.  11.  he  shall  be  the  prophet  of  this  p.

Hag.  1.  2.  this p.  say,  the  time  is  not  come

2.  14.  Haggai  said,  so  is  this  p.  before  me
Zech.  8.  6.  in  the  eyes  of  the  remnant  of  thisp.

11.  1  will  not  be  to  this  p.  as  in  former  days

12.  1  will  cause  the  remnant  of  thisp.  to  possess
Mat.  15.  8.  this  p.  draweth  nigh  with  their  mouih
Mark  7.6.  thisp.  honoureth  me  with  their  lips
Luke  9-  13.  except  we  should  buy  meat  for  this  p.

21.  23.  for  there  shall  be  wrath  upon  this p.

John  7.  49.  but  this  p.  who  knoweth  not  the  law
Acts  13.  17.  the  God  of  thisp,  chose  our  fathers

1  Cor.  14.  21.  with  other  lips  1  will  speak  to  this  p.

Thy  PEOPLE.

Exod.  5.  23.  neither  hast  thou  delivered  thyp.

8. 3.  trogs  on  thyp.  \.  ||  21 .  swarms  of  flies  on  thyp.

9.  14.  for  I  will  send  all  my  plagues  on  thy  p.

15.  that  I  may  smite  thee  and  thy p.  with  pestilen.
15. 16.  they  shall  be  still,  till  t//y7/.passover,  O  Ixl.

22.  28.  nor  shalt  curse  ruler  of  thy  p.  Acts  23.  5.

23.  11 .  let  it  rest,  that  the  poor  of  thyp.  may  eat

33.  13.  ano  consider  that  this  nation  is  thy  p.

16.  I  and  thyp.  have  found  grace  in  thy  sight

34.  10.  I  make  a  covenant  before  all  thyp.

Lev.  19. 16.  shalt  not  go  as  a  tale-bearer  among  thy  p.
Num.  5. 21 .  make  thee  a  curse  and  oath  among  thy  p.

24. 14.  what  this  peo.  shall  do  thyp.  in  latter  days

27. 13.  shalt  be  gathered  to  thy  p.  31.2.  Dear.  32.  50.
Deut.  9. 12.  for  t  y  p.  have  corrupted  themselves

26.  destroy  not  thyp.  ||  Ruth  1.16.  thy  p.  my  peo.

29.  yet  they  are  thy  p.  and  inheritance,  Neh.  1. 10.
Ruth  1.  10.  we  will  return  with  thee  to  thyp.

2  Sam.  7.  23.  what  nation  like  thy  p.  ?  1  Chr.  17.  21.

before  thyp.  which  thou  redeemedst  from  Egypt
1  Kings  3.  8.  thy  servant  is  in  the  midst  of  thy  p.

9.  understanding  heart  to  judge  thyp.  2  Chr.  1.10.

8.  44.  if  thy  p.  go  out  to  battle,  and  shall  pray

50.  forgive  thy  p.  that  have  sinned,  2  Chr.  6.  34, 39.

51.  they  be  thy  p.  ||  20.  42.  thy  p.  for  his  people
22.  4.  he  said,  1  am  as  thou  art,  my  people  as  thi

p.  my  horses  as  thy  horses,  2  Kings  3.  7.

1  Chron.  21.  17-  but  let  not  thy  hand  be  on  thy  p.

29.  18.  keep  this  in  the  thoughts  of  heart  of  thyp.

2  Chron.  21.  14.  with  a  plague  will  the  Lord  smite

thyp.  thy  children,  thy  wives,  and  thy  goods
Ps.  3.  8.  salvation  to  L.  thy  blessing  is  upou  thy  p.
28.  9.  save  thy  p.  and  bless  thine  inherit.  Jer.  31. 7.

44.  12.  thou  sellest  thy  p.  for  nought
60.  3.  thou  hast  shewed  thy  p.  hard  things
68.  7.  when  thou  wentest  forth  before  tliyp.

72.  2.  he  shall  judge  thy  p.  with  righteousness
77- 15.  thou  hast  with  thine  arm  redeemed  thy  p.

20.  thou  leddest  thy  p.  as  flock  by  Moses  and  Aar.
79.  13.  so  we  thy  p.  will  give  thee  thanks

80.4.  how  long  be  angry  against  prayer  of  thyp.  ?
83.  3.  they  have  taken  crafty  counsel  against  thy  p.
85.  2.  thou  hast .forgiven  the  iniquity  of  thy p.

6.  revive  11s,  that  thyp.  may  rejoice  in  thee
94.  5.  they  break  in  pieces  thyp.  O  Lord
106.  4.  the  favour  that  thou  bearest  to  thy  p.

110.  3.  thy  p.  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  power
Isa.  2.  6.  therefore  thou  hast  forsaken  thy  p.

7.  17-  the  Lord  shall  bring  on  thee  and  thyp.  days

14.  20.  thou  hast  destroyed  thy  land  and  thy  p.

60. 21.  thy  p.  shall  be  all  righteous,  shall  inherit
63.  14.  so  didst  thou  lead  thy  p.  1164.  9.  we  are  thyp.
Jer.  22.  2.  hear,  thou  and  thy  p.  that  enter  in
27.  13.  why  will  ye  die,  thou  and  thy  p.  by  sword  ?
Ezek.  3.  11.  get  thee  to  thyp.  and  speak  fo  them

13.  17.  set  thy  face  against  the  daughters  of  thy  p.
26.  11.  he  shall  slay  thy  p.  with  the  sword
33.  2.  speak  to  the  children  of  thy  p.  and  say,  12.

17.  yet  children  of  thy  p.  say,  way  is  not  equal

30.  the  children  of  thy  p.  still  are  talking
37. 18.  when  the  children  of  thy  p.  shall  speak

Dan.  9. 16.  thyp.  are  become  a  reproach  to  all
19.  thy  city  and  thy  p.  are  called  by  thy  name

24.  seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  p.

10. 14.  tp  understand  what  shall  befall  thy  p.

12. 1.  Michael,  whostandeth  for  the  children  of  thy
p.  and  at  that  time  thy  p.  shall  be  delivered
TIos.4.  4.  thy  p.  as  they  that  strive  with  the  priest

10.  14.  shall  a  tumult  arise  among  thy  p.

Joel 2.  17.  spare  thy  p.  !|  Mic  7.  14.  feed  thy  p.

355


PER


PER


PER


Nah.  3. 13.  thy  p.  in  tlie  midst  of  thee  aie  women

18.  thy  p.  is  scattered  on  the  mountains
llab.  3. 13.  thou  wentest  forth  for  salvation  ot  thyp.

To  or  unto  the  PEOPLE.

Exod.  4. 16.  and  lie  shall  he  spokesman  to  the  p.

18.  14.  when  .lethro  saw  all  that  he  did  to  the  p.
what  is  this  thinjr  that  thou  doest  to  the  p?

19.10.  fro  to  the  p.  ||  l'.’.  thou  shalt  set  bounds  to  the  p.
14.  Moses  went  down  from  mount  to  they.  25.

J)eut.  20.  2.  that  the  priest  shall  speak  to  the  p.

5.  and  the  officers  shall  speak  to  the  p.  8.

Judo.  8. 5.  give,  1  pray,  loaves  ot  bread  to  thep.

18. 10.  when  ye  go,  ye  shall  come  to  a  p.  secure,  27 .
Ruth  2.  11.  and  art  come  to  a.p.  thou  knewest  not

1  Sam.  8. 10.  Samuel  told  all  the  words  to  the  p.

26  7.  David  and  Abishai  came  to  the  p.  by  night

14.  David  cried  to  the  p.  and  to  Abner,  saying
30.  21.  when  David  came  near  to  the  p.  he  saluted

2  Sam.24.  3.  now  the  l.ord  thy  God  add  to  the  p.

1  Kings  12.  15.  the  king  hearkened  not  to  the  p.

18.  21.  Elijah  came  to  the  p.  and  said,  how  long

19.  21.  Elisha  gave  to  the  p.  and  they  did  eat

2  Kings 4.  42.  he  said,  give  to p.  that  they  may  eat
11.  13.  Athaliah  came  to  the  p.  2  Chron.  23.  12.

1  Chron.  10.  9-  Philist.  sent  to  carry  tidings  to  the  p.

2  Chron.  35. 7.  Josiah  gave  to  thep.  lambs  and  kids

8.  his  princes  gave  willingly  to  the  p.  to  priests

Nek.  4.  22.  at  the  same  time  said  l  to  the  p.  lodge

5. 15.  former


■  4.  <U  UJC  ou  i  lit.  wm.  r  ■  - -"O  ~

•rmer  governors  vvere  chargeable  to  the  p.
Psal.  9.  8.  he  shall  minister  judgment  to  thep.


[.  y.  o.  iic  u.ii  »  v.  - -

72.  3.  the  mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  the  p.

Isa.  42.  5.  he  that  giveth  breath  to  the  p.  upon  it
49.  22-  and  1  will  set  up  my  standard  to  the  p.

55.  4.  behold,  1  have  given  him  for  a  witness  to  the
p.  a  leader  and  commander  to  the  p.
Ezek.  24. 18.  so  I  spake  to  the  p.  in  the  morning
Pan.  7. 27-  kingdom  be  given  to  the  p.  of  the  saints
Joel  3.  8.  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  p.  far  off
Hah.  3.16.  when  he  cometh  up  to  t.  p.  he  will  invade
Zeph.  3.  9.  1  will  turn  to  the  p.  a  pure  language
Hag.  1.  13.  then  spake  llaggai  the  Lord's  mes¬
sage  to  the  p.

Mat.  12.  46.  while  he  yet  talked  to  the  p.  behold

27. 15.  was  wont  to  release  to  the  p.  a  prisoner
Luke  ~.  24.  he  began  to  speak*/;  the  p.  concern. .lohn
Acts  A.  1.  as  they  spake  to  the  p.  the  priests  came
5.  20.  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  p.  all  the  words
10.  2.  which  gave  alms  to  the  p.  and  prayed  to  God
42.  and  he  commanded  us  to  preach  to  the  p.

12.  4.  intending  to  bring  Peter  forth  to  the  p.

13.  31.  seen  of  them  who  are  his  witnesses  to  the  p.
17.  5.  the  .lews  sought  to  bring  them  out  to  the  p.

19. 30.  when  Paul  would  have  entered  in  to  the  p.
33.  and  would  have  made  his  defence  to  the  p.

21.  39.  I  beseech  thee  suffer  me  to  speak  to  the  p.
40.  Paul  beckoned  with  the  hand  to  the  p.

26.  23.  Christ  should  suffer,  and  shew  light  to  the  p.

PEOPLES.

Rev.  10.11.  thou  must  prophesy  before  many  p.

17.  15.  waters  thou  sawest  are  p.  and  multitudes
PER A  D VENTUR  E.

Gen.  18.  24.  p.  there  be  fifty  righteous  within  city

28.  p.  there  shall  lack  five  of  the  fifty  righteous

29.  v.  there  be  forty  |l  30.  thirty  ||  31.  twenty
32.  I  will  speak  this  once,/;,  ten  shall  be  found

24.  5.  p.  the  woman  shall  not  be  willing,  39.

27.  12.  .lacob  said,  my  father/;,  will  feel  me

31 . 31 .  p.  thou  wouldest  take  by  force  thy  daughters
32.  20.  I  will  see  his  face,/;,  he  will  accept  ot  me
42.4.  for  he  said,  lest  p.  mischief  befall  him

4.3.  12.  carry  it  again,  p.  it  was  an  oversight
44.  .34.  lest/;.  1  see  evil  shall  come  on  my  father
50.  15.  Joseph  will  p.  hate  us,  and  will  requite  us
Exod.  13. 17-  lest/;,  the  people  repent  when  see  war
32.  30.  p.  1  shall  make  an  atonement  for  your  sin
Nvm.  22.6.  curse  this  people,/;.  I  shall  prevail,  11

23.  3 .p.  the  Lord  will  come  to  meet  me
27.  p.  it  will  please  God  that  thou  curse  me  them


Josh.  9.  7.  men  of  Israel  said,  jd.  ye  dwell  among  us
1  Sam.  6.  5.p.  he  will  lighten  his  hand  from  off  you


J.  * mill .  vj .  .J  •  •  He  llf.nicii  nio  iiciiiV-*  **  win  r  v/u

9.  6.  p.  he  can  shew  us  our  way  that  we  should  go

1  Kings  18.  5 .p.  we  may  find  grass  to  save  horses
27.  or  p.  he  sleepeth,  and  must  be  awaked

20.  31.  go  to  the  king,  p.  he  will  save  thy  life

2  Kings  2. 16.  lest  p.  Spirit  of  Lord  hath  cast  him
Jer.  20. 10.  watched  for  halting,/;,  he  will  be  enticed
Rom.  5. 7 .p.  for  a  good  man  some  would  dare  to  die
2  Tim.  2.  25.  p.  God  will  give  them  repentance

PERCEIVE
Signifies,  [1]  To  discover,  or  find  out,  2  Sam.  14.
1.  Jer.  38.  27.  [2]  Spiritually  to  discern  and

consider  things,  so  as  to  make  a  good  use  and
improvement  of  them,  Deut.  29.  4.  [3]  To  know,
2  Kings  4.  9.

He  passeth  on,  but  I  perceive  him  not,  Job  9-  11.
God  continues  to  work  by  his  providence  in  ways
of  mercy  or  judgment :  but  though  1  see  the  ef-
fel  '  '


fects,  I  cannot  understand  the  causes  or  grounds


JCLlSj  J.  I  Clft/UU  UUUZ.I  Sttl/lU  l  ft O  I//

of  Ins  actions,  because  they  are  incomprehensible
by  me,  or  by  any  other  man.

Dent.  29.  4.  Lord  hath  not  given  you  a  heart  to  p.
Josh.  22.  31.  this  day  we  p.  the  Lord  is  among  us

1  Sam.  12. 17.  that  ye  may  p.  your  wickedness

2  Sum.  19.6.  I  p.  if  Absalom  had  lived,  and  we  died
2  Kings  4.  9.  1  p.  that  this  is  an  holy  man  of  God
Job  9.  11.  but  1  p.  him  not  ||  2.3.  8.  I  cannot/;,  him
Prov.  1.  2.  to  p.  the  words  of  understanding
Reel.  3.  22.  1  p.  that  there  is  nothing  better  than
Isa.  6.  9.  and  see  ye  indeed,  but  p.  not

.3.3.  19.  of  a  deeper  speech  than  thou  canst/;.
A/<7M.3.14.  shall  hear  and  not  understand,  seeing, ye
shall  see,  and  shall  not  /;.  Mark  4. 12.  Acts  28. 26.


suau  see,  anu  snail  wit  p.  wiu/n  1. 1~.  au.i  »<>.  ju,
JWarl-7.18.doye  not/;,  that  whatsoever  entereth  in
8. 17.  he  said,  p.  ye  not  yet,  neither  understand  ?
Luke  8.  46.  I  p.  that  virtue  is  gone  out  of  me
John  4.  19.  woman  saith,  1  p.  that  thou  art  a  proph.
12. 19.  Pharisees  said,  />.  ye  how  prevail  nothing  ?
Acts  8.  2.3.  1  p.  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness
10.  34.  of  a  truth  1  p.  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons
17.  22.  1  p.  in  all  things  ye  are  too  superstitious
2  Cor.  7-8.  I  p.  the  same  epistle  made  you  sorry


1,1//  .  |.Ot  L  }J.  LUC  O.LI1IC  epistle  IIILLLiC  ,V/Ll

John  3.  16.  hertby  p.  we  the  love  of  God

R.)6


PERCEIVED.

Gen.  19.  33.  lie/;,  not  when  she  lay  down,  35.

Jndg.  6.  22.  when  Gideon  p.  he  was  an  angel
1  Sam.  3.  8.  Eli  p.  that  Lord  had  called  child

28. 14.  and  Saul  p.  that  it  was  Samuel,  and  stooped
<1  Sum.  5.  12.  and  David  p.  that  the  Lord  had  esta¬
blished  him  king  over  Israel,  1  Chron.  14.  2.

1°.  19.  David  p.  that  the  child  was  dead
14. 1.  joabp.  the  king’s  heart  was  to  Absalom
1  Kinas  22.  3.3.  when  the  captains  ot  chariots/;,  that
it  was  not  king  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  18.  32.
Neh  6  12.  lo,  I  p.  that  God  had  not  sent  him
16  they  p.  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  Gpd
13  10.  1  ».  portions  of  Levites  had  not  been  given
Esth.  4. 1.  when  Mordecai  p.  all  that  was  done
Job  .38.  18.  liastthou  p.  the  breadth  of  the  earth
Eccl.  1. 17.  1  p.  that  this  also  is  vexation  of  spirit

2. 14.  1  myself/;,  that  one  event happeneth  to  all
Isa.  64.  4.  nor/;,  by  the  ear  what  God  hath  prepared
Jer  03’  18.  and  who  hath  p.  and  heard  his  word
'  38!  27.  they  left  off,  for  the  matter  was  not  /;.

Mat'.  21 .  45./;.  that  he  spake  of  them,  Luke  20. 19.

22.  18.  but  Jesus  p.  their  wickedness  and  said
Marki.ft .  Jes.p.  in  spirit  that  they  reasoned  among
Luke  l"  2^  they/;,  that  he  had  seen  a  vision
5.22.  but  when  Jesus/;.,  their  thoughts
9.  45.  the  saying  was  hid,  that  they  p.  it  not
20  23.  but  he  p.  their  craftiness,  and  said  to  them
John  6.  15.  Jesus  p.  they  would  make  him  a  kmg
Acts  4  13  when  they  p.  that  they  were  unlearned
03  6  when  Paul  p.  that  one  part  were  Pharisees
Gal  2.  9.  when  James  p.  the  grace  given  to  me
PERCE1  VEST.

Prov.  14.  7.  when  thou  p.  not  in  him  lips  of  knowl.
Luke  6  41.  but/;,  not  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye
PERCEIVE!  H.  .

Job  14.21.  are  brought  low,  but  hep.  ltnot  ofthem
.3.3  14.  God  speaketh  once,  yet  man  y.  it  not
Prov.  31.  18.  she  p.  that  her  merchandise  is  good
PERCEIVING.

Mark  12.  °8.  p.  that  he  had  answered  them  well
Luke  9.  47.  Jesus  p.  the  thought  of  their  heart
Acts  14  9  and  p.  he  had  faith  to  be  healed
PERDITION

Signifies,  Utter  ruin  or  destruction,  Rey.  17.  8.

'1  he  son  of  perdition.  Judas  is  called  by  this
name,  John  17.  12.  because  [1]  lie  was  most
worthy  to  be  destroyed,  haring  brought  himse/J  into
a  state  of  destruction.  [2]  He  was  ordained  and
appointed  by  God  to  destruction  for  his  sins.  [3J
lie  was  one,  who  by  reason  of  the  horridness  of  his
crime,  is  mentioned  as  the  most  dreadful  instance
of  God's  irrevocable  doom  to  eternal  perdition.
Antichrist  is  likewise  called  by  this  name,  2  1  hess.

2.  3.  because  he  brings  destruction  upon  others,  and
is  himself  devoted  to  perdition.

John  17.  12.  none  of  them  lost  but  the  son-ot  p.

Phil.  1.  28.  which  is  to  them  an  evident  token  otp.

2  Thess.  2.  3.  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  son  of  p.

1  Tim.  6. 9.  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and  p.
Heb.  10.  39.  are  not  of  them  who  drawback  to/;.
o  Pet.  3. 7.  day  of  judgment,  and  p.  of  ungodly  men
Rev.  17.8.  beast  was  and  is  not,  and  goethmtop.il.
11.  beast  is  eighth,  and  of  seven,  goeth  into/;.
PERFECT

Is  applied,  [1.]  To  God,  who  is  absolutely  perfect,
Mat  5  48.  [II.]  To  things,  as  weight,  measure,

&c.  Deut.  25. 15.  [III.]  To  man,  who  is  account¬
ed  so,  [1]  By  Christ's  righteousness  being  im¬
puted,  Col.  1.28.  [2]  Comparatively,  when  com-

pared  with  others  who  are  partial  in  their  obedience
to  God's  commands.  Job  8.  20.  1  9.  22.  [3]  As
being  upright  and  sincere  in  heart,  and  unblam¬
able  in  the  course  of  his  life,  Gen.  6.  9.  1  17-  1.
[4]  As  carrying  himself  innocently  and  harmlessly
towards  his  enemies,  Psal.  64.  4.  [5]  As  imitating
God,  in  loving  and  doing  good  to  others.  Mat.  5.
48.  [6]  As  being  joined  together  in  judgment,
affections,  and  conversations,  laying  aside  all
factions  and  divisions,  2  Cor.  13.  11.  [7]  As  hav¬
ing  a  good  degree  of  understanding,  1  Cor.  2.  6.
Gen.  6.  9.  Noah  was/;.  II  17.  1.  and  be  thou/;.

Lev.  22.  21.  the  free-will  offering  shall  be®.

Deut.  18.13.  thou  shalt  be  p.  with  the  Lord  thy  G.
25. 15. thou  shalt  have  up.  weight,  up.  measure

1  Sam.  14.  41.  Saul  said  to  the  Lord,  give  a p.  lot

2  Sam.  22.  3.3.  he  maketh  my  way  p.  Psal.  18.  32.
2  Chr.  4.  21.  lamps  and  tongs  made  he  otp.  gold
Ezra  7.  12.  Artax.  king  of  kings,  to  Ezra,  p.  peace
Job  1.1.  that  man  was  p.  and  upright,  8.  |  2.  3.

8.  20.  God  will  not  cast  away  a  p.  man

9.  20.  if  I  say,  1  am  p.  ||  21.  though  1  were  p.

22.  he  destroyed)  the  p.  and  the  wicked

22.  3.  is  it  gain  to  him,  thoumakest  thy  ways  p.?
Psal.  .37.  37.  mark  thep.  man,  Ins  end  is  peace
64.  4.  that  they  may  shoot  in  secret  at  the  p.

101.  2.  1  will  behave  myself  wisely  map.  way
C).  he  that  walketh  in  a  p.  way  shatl  serve  me
119.  +  1.  blessed  are  thep.  in  the  way
139.  22.  1  hate  them  withp.  hatred
Prov.  2.  21.  and  the/;,  shall  remain  in  it
4.  18.  path  of  just  shineth  more  and  more  top.  day
11.  5.  righteousness  of  the  p.  shall  direct  his  way
Isa.  26.  .3.  thou  wilt  keep  him  in  p.  peace,  whose
Ezek.  16. 14.  for  it  was  p.  through  my  comeliness

27.  3.  thou  hast  said,  I  am  of  p.  beauty
11.  they  have  made  thy  beauty,/;.  28.  12.

28.  15.  thou  wastp.  in  thy  ways,  from  the  day
Mat.  5.  48.  be  ye  p.  even  as  your  father  is  p.

19.  21.  thou  wilt  hep.  go  and  sell  that  thou  hast
Luke  1.  .3.  having  had  p.  understanding  of  things
JohnYl.  23.  that  they  may  be  madep.  in  one
Acts  3.  16.  hath  given  him  this  p.  soundness
22.  3.  taught  according  to  the  p.  manner  of  law
24.  22.  having  more  p.  knowledge  ot  that  way
Rom.  12.  2.  may  prove  what  isthatp.  will  ot  God

1  Cor.  2.  6.  speak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  p
14.  t  20.  but  in  understanding  be  p.  .

2  Cor.  12.  9.  my  strength  is  madep.  in  weakness
13.  11 .  be  p.  be  of  good  comfort,  be  of  one  nund

Gal.  .3.  3.  begun  in  Spirit,  are  ye  made  p.  by  flesh  ?
Eph.  4.  13.  till  we  come  to  p.  man,  tofulnessot  C.


Phil.  .3.  12.  not  as  though  I  were  already  p.

15.  let  us,  as  many  as  be  p.  be  thus  minded
Col.  1.  w.  we  may  present  every  man/;,  in  Christ

4.  12.  may  stand,  p.  and  complete  in  will  of  God

1  Thess.  3.  10.  might  p.  which  is  lacking  in  your

2  Tim.  3.  17.  that  the  man  ot  Clod  may  bep.

Ileb.  2*.  id.  to  make  Captain  of  their  salvation  p.

5.  9.  being  made  /;.  he  became  Author  of  salvation
7  19.  for  law  made  nothing  p.  but  bringing  in

9.  9.  could  not  make  him  that  did  the  service  p.
il  by  a  greater  and  moi  e  p.  tabernacle  not  mad*
10. 1.  law  can  never  make  the  comers  thereunto p.
11.  40.  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  p.

1°'  °3  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  madep.

13!  21.  God  make  you  p.  in  every  good  work
Jam.  1.  4.  but  let  patience  have  herp.  work,  that
ye  may  be  p.  and  entire,  wanting  nothing
17.  every  good  and  p.  gift  is  from  above
25.  whoso  looketh  into  thep.  law  ot  liberty
2.  22.  and  by  works  was  faith  made  p.

51  2  if  any  offend  not  in  word,  same  is  ap.  man
1  Pet.  5.  10.  after  ye  have  suffered,  make  youp.

1  Tolm  4. 17-  herein  is  our  love  made  p.  that  we  ,
18  but  p.  love  casteth  out  tear,  because  lear  hath

torment ;  he  that  feareth  is  not  made  p.  in  lovt
See  Heart.

Is  PERFECT.

Deut.  32.  4.  is  the  rock,  his  work  is  p.  his  ways

2  Sam.  22.  31 .  as  for  God,  his  way  is  p.  Psal.  18. 30
Job  36.  4.  he  that  is  p.  in  knowledge,  37.16.

Psal  19.7.  law  of  the  Lord  is p.  converting  soul
Isa.  18.  5.  behold  the  harvest,  when  the  bud  is  p.
42.  19.  who  is  blind  as  he  that  is  p.  as  Lord  s  serv

Mat.  5.  48.  as  vour  Father  which  is  in  heaven  isp
Luke  6.  40.  ev  ery  one  that  is  y.  shall  be  as  his  maste

1  GVr  13.  10.  when  that  which  is  p.  is  come,  then

PERFECTED.

2  Chron.  8.  16.  so  the  house  of  God  was  p.

24.  1.3.  workm.  wrought,  and  work  wasp,  by  then
Ezek  27.  4.  thy  builders  have  p.  thy  beauty
Mat.  21. 16.  out  of  mouth  of  babes  thou  hastp.  prais
Luke  6.'+  40.  every  one  shall  bep.  as  his  master

1.3.  32.' and  the  third  day  1  shall  bep.

Ileb.  7.  +  28.  maketh  Son,  who  is  p.  tor  evermore

10.  14.  by  one  offering  he  hath  p.  for  ever  sanctifie

1  John  2.  5.  in  him  verily  is  the  love  of  God  p.

4  10  if  w  e  love  one  another,  his  love  is  p.  in  us

PERFECTING.

2  Cor.  7.  1.  p.  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God

Evh  4  12.  forp.  of  the  saints,  for  edifying  of  bod
PER  FECIT  ON

Signifies,  [1]  The  highest  degree,  or  greatest  a
complin /intent  of ,  a  thing ,  .lob  11*  7«  ■  trio

find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection,  that  1
Canst  thou  know  him  and  his  counsels  perfectly
Const  thou  throughly  understand  what  he  alp
at  in  a  filleting  thee  ?  [2]  Evil  growth,  matunt
or  ripeness,  Luke  8.  14.  [3],  1  hat  good  ord .
which  by  the  word  of  God  is  settled  in  ai
church ,  when  nil  the  members  theieoj  the
due  place,  and  perform  their  office  duly,  2  Cc

1.3.  9.  [4]  The  deep  mysteries  of  the  9<>pel,

greater  degrees  of  knowledge  and  place,  Leo.
1.  [5]  Justification,  sanctification,  and  cons
quently  salvation,  Heb.  7.  1L  n  ,

1  have  seen  an  end  ot  all  perfection,  J  sal.  11

96.  1  have  observed  by  my  experience,  that  t

greatest  and  most  perfect  accomplishments  a,
enjoyments  in  this  world,  the  greatest  glory  a
riches,  power  and  wisdom,  are  too  narrow  a:
short  lived  to  make  men  happy.  .

Job  11.  7.  canst  thou  find  out  the  Almighty  top.
15.  29.  nor  shall  he  prolong  thep.  thereof  on  cart.

21.  +  2.3.  one  dieth  in  the  strength  ot  hisp.

28.  3.  setteth  an  end  to  dark,  he  searcheth  out  all
Psal.  50.  2.  out  of  Zion,  p.  of  beauty,  God  shin
119.  06.  1  have  seen  an  end  of  p.  but  thy  comir
Isa.  47.  Q.  they  shall  come  upon  thee  in  their p.
l.am.  2.  15.  the  city  that  men  call  the  p.  of  beau
Luke  8.  14.  are  choked,  and  bring  no  fruit  top.

2  Cor.  1.3.  9.  and  this  also  we  wish,  even  your  p
Heb.  6.  1.  leaving  the  principles,  let  us  go  on  to

7  11.  if  p.  were  by  the  Levitical  priesthood
PERFECTLY.

Jer.  23.  20.  in  the  latter  days  ye  shall  consider  it
TSlat.  14. 36.  as  many  as  touched  were  madep.  wm
Acts  18.  26.  and  expounded  way  of  God  motel

2.3.  15.  ye  would  inquire  something  more  p.  20.
1  Cor.  1.  10.  but  be  p.  joined  together  in  same  mi

1  Thess.  5.  2.  for  yourselves  know  p.  that  day  or  j
PERFECT,  Verb.

Psal.  138.  8.  the  l.ord  will  p.  which  concemetli
PERFECTNESS.

Col.  3.  14.  put  on  charity,  which  is  the  bond  or
PERFORMANCE.

Luke  1.  45.  for  there  shall  be  ap.  of  those  thin.

2  Cor.  8. 11.  so  may  be  a  p.  also  out  ot  that  ye  n.

perLorm  ,  ,  10

Signifies,  [1]  To  pvt  in  execution.  Job  5.  12.
To  fulfil  or  make  good,  Deut.  9.  5.  Jer.  ..8.
[3]  To  grant  or  yield  to,  Esth.  o.  o.  iy
keep  and  observe,  Psal.  119.  112.  [o]  Bo  fi

Gen.  26.  3.  1*  will  p.  the  oath  w  hich  I

Abraham  thy  father,  Deut.  9.  5.  Buke  i-
Exod.  18. 18.  thou  art  not  able  to  p.  it  thyself  an
Num.  4.  23.  all  that  enter  in  top.  the  service
Deut.  4.  13.  his  covenant  he  commanded  you  t

2.3.  23.  that  which  is  gone  out  ot  thy  lips  snail ;

25.  5.  and  p.  duty  of  a  husband’s  brother  to  <
7.  he  will  not  p.  duty  of  my  husband  s  broth/
Ruth  .3. 13.  if  he  will  p.  the  part  ot  a  kinsman

1  Earn.  3. 12.  in  that  day  1  will  p.  ag.  El

2  Sam.  14.  15.  that  the  king  will  p.  the  request

1  Kings  6.  12.  then  1  will  p.  my  word  with  thet

12. 15.  that  he  mightp.  Ins  saying,  2_  C«n>».  R  •

2  Kings  2.3.  3.  top.  the  words  of  this  co'enant
keep  God’s  commandments,  24.  2  Chen.  34.

Esth.  5.  8.  if  it  Please  the  king  to  p.  my  reques
Job  5.  12.  their  hands  cannot  p.  their  enterprise
Psal.  21 . 11  •  a  device  which  they  are  not  a  me  1
61.  8.  1  will  sing  praise,  that  I  may  daily  p ■


PER


PER


PER


119  106. 1  have  sworn,  and  I  wil.  p.  it,  to  keep
112.  1  have  inclined  my  heart  to p.  thy  statutes
'sa.  9.  7-  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  p.  this
19.21.  they  shall  pay  a  vow  to  the  I.ord,  and  p.  it
44. 28.  Cyrus  my  shepherd  shall  p.  all  my  pleasure
rrr.  1.  12.  for  I  will  hasten  my  word  top.  it
11.  5.  1  may  p.  the  oath  which  1  have  sworn
28.  6.  Lord  p.  thy  words  thou  hast  prophesied
29. 10. 1  will  p.  my  sood  word  toward  you,  33.  14.
44.  25.  ye  will  surely  accomplish  and p.  your  vows
■'.set.  12.  25.  1  will  say  the  word,  and  will  p.  it
t//V.  7.  20.  thou  wilt  p.  the  truth  to  Jacob
'•ah.  1.  15.  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  p.  thy  vows
i Jat.  5.  3.3.  thou  shaft  p.  to  the  Lord  thine  oaths
torn.  4.21.  what  he  promised,  he  was  able  also  to p.
J.  18.  how  top.  that  which  is  stood,  I  find  not
Cor.  8.  11.  now  therefore  p.  the  doing  of  it
'hil.  1.  6.  he  will  p.  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ
PERFORMED.

•Sam.  15.  11.  Saul  hath  not  p.  my  commandments

13.  1  have  p.  the  commandment  of  the  Lord
Sam.  21. 14.  theyp.  all  that  the  king  commanded
Kings  8. 20.  Lord  hath p.  his  word,  and  1  am  risen

up  in  room  of  David,  2  C/ir.  6.  10.  Neh.  9.  8.
'.sth.  1.  15.  Vashti  hath  notp.  command,  of  king
).  6.  to  half  of  the  kingdom  it  shall  hep.  7,  2.

'sa/.  65.  1.  and  unto  thee  shall  the  vow  be  p.
ra.  10.  12.  when  Lord  hath  p.  his  whole  work
er.  23.  20.  till  he  have  p.  the  thoughts,  30.  24.

14.  18.  who  have  not  p.  words  of  the  covenant

15.  14.  the  words  of  Jonadab  are  p.  16.

31.  29-  for  every  purpose  of  the  Lord  shall  be  p.
'.set.  37.  14.  having  spoken  and  p.  it  saitli  Lord
vie  1.  20.  till  the  day  that  these  things  shall  be p.

’.  39.  when  they  had  p.  all  things  to  law  of  Lord
om.  15.28.  when  1  have  p.  this,  1  will  come  to  Spain
PERFORMETH.

eh.  5.  13.  every  man  that  p.  not  this  promise
?A23.  14.  hep.  thing  that  is  appointed  for  me
'sal.  57.  2.  1  will  cry  to  G.  thatp.  all  things  forme
fa.  44.  26.  that  p.  the  counsel  of  his  messengers
PERFORMING.

'a m.  15.  3.  an  offering  or  sacrifice  in  p.  a  vow.  8
PERFUME,  S.

rod.  30.  35.  and  thou  shalt  make  it  a  p.  37.

'rov.  27.  9.  ointment  and  p.  rejoice  the  heart
ant.  5.  f  13.  his  cheeks  are  as  towers  ofp.

>a.  57.  9.  thou  didst  increase  thy  p.  and  send
PERFUMED.

rov.  7-  17.  I  have  p.  my  bed  with  myrrh,  aloes
ant.  3.  6.  who  is  this  that  cometh  p.  with  myrrh  ?
PERHAPS.

cts  8.  22.  it  p.  thyT  thought  may  be  forgiven  thee
Cor.  2.7.  lest  p.  such  a  one  be  swallowed  up
hilem.  15.  for  p.  he  therefore  departed  for  a  season
PERIL.


To  starve,  Luke
or.  2.  15.  2  Pet.  2.
2.  [6]  To  he


am.  5.  9.  we  get  our  bread  with  the  p.  of  our  lives
om. 8.  35.  shali  famine,  p.  or  sword,  separate  us  r
PERILS.

Cor.  11.  26.  in  p.  of  waters,  in  p.  of  robbers,  inp.
by  countrymen,  in  p.  by  heathen,  in  p.
in  city,  in  p.  in  wilderness,  in  p.  in  sea,
in  p.  among  false  brethren
PERILOUS.

Tim.  3.  1.  in  the  last  days  p.  times  shall  come
PERISH

gnifies,  [\]To  die,  or  lose  life,  Jonah  1.  6.  [2]  To
be  rooted  out,  2  Kings  9.  8.  ro"1  ,r~  —

15.  17  •  [4]  To  be  damned,  2  , _

12.  J5]  To  he  la  ten  away,  Mic.  7.  2.  [6]
deprived  of  being,  1  Cor.  15.  18.
en.  41.  36.  that  the  land  p.  not  through  famine
rerf.  19  21.  lest  they  gaze,  and  many  of  them  p.
1.  26.  jf  a  man  smite  eye  of  his  maid,  that  itp.
nm.  17.  12.  behold,  we  die,  wep.  we  all  p.

4.  20.  but  his  latter  end  shall  he  that  p.  for  ever
11.  17.  lest  ye  p  quickly  from  the  land
0.  5.  a  Syrian  ready  to  p.  was  my  father

8.  20.  until  thou  p.  quickly,  22.  Josh.  23.  13.

1 dp.  5.  31.  let  all  thine  enemies  p.  O  I.ord

Sam.  26.  10.  he  shall  descend  into  battle,  and  p.
sth,  3.  13.  and  to  cause  top.  all  the  Jews,  7.  4.

•  J6-  and  it  1  p.  1  p.  ||_8.  J 1 .  to  cause  to p.  all  power

•  *8-  nor  die  memor  ial  of  them  p.  from  their  seed
b  3.  .3.  let  the  day  p.  wherein  1  was  born

on’  r  ^le  dlast  ot  God  they  p.  by  the  breath
lo’ey  P‘  forever,  without  any  regarding  it
■  18.  paths  of  their  way  go  to  nothing  and  p.

9  13.  the  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  p.

L  19.  if  I  have  seen  any  p.  for  want  of  clothing
ta‘-  ”•  12.  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  p.  from  way

•  >e,  expectation  of  the  poor  shall  notp.

9.  10.  likewise  the  fool  and  the  brutish  person  p.
12.  man  111  honour  is  like  the  beasts  that p.  20.

"•  rtHS.wax  nielteth,  so  let  wicked  p.  8.3.  17.

*,•  ly*  drey  p.  at  the  rebuke  of  thy  countenance
40. 4.  not  trust,  in  that  very  day  his  thoughts  p.
rov.  ]].  10.  when  the  wicked  p. 28.  28.

9.  18.  where  there  is  no  vision,  the  people  p.

L  6.  give  strong  drink  to  him  that  is  ready  to  p.

C  oa  those  riches  p.  by  evil  travail

7'  V*'  and  made  all  their  memory  to  p.

/•  *3.  they  shall  come  which  were  ready  to  p.

m.  18.  the  law  shall  not  p.  from  the  priest
''  1,,  1  will  cause  to  p.  the  voice  of  mirth
(.  10.  that  I  drive  you  out,  and  ye  should  p.  15.
u- l5-  that  the  remnant  in  Judah  should  p.

•  23.  7.  I  will  cause  thee  to  p.  out  of  countries
an- 2r  18.  that  Daniel  and  fellows  should  notp.

-  6.  God  wil  1  think  on  us  that  we  p.  not,  3.  9.
;•  Y  Gm',  let  us  not  p.  for  this  man’s  life
0'.-  ■  diat  one  of  thy  members  should  p.  .30.

•  paying,  Lord,  save  us,  we  p.  l.nte  8.  24.

«  ii  *  1  w,ne  runneth  out,  and  the  bottles  p.

i  1  4  ?ne  °t  these  little  ones  should  p.

1*19  qI'  -^HSter,  carest  thou  not  that  we  p.  ?

.  e.  1  ’•  33.  that  a  prophet  p.  out  of  Jerusalem
1  ..  ve  “read  enough,  and  I  p.  with  hunger

/  ,  there  shall  not  an  hair  of  your  heail  p.
in  J.  15.  whoso  believetli  in  him  should  not  p.  16.
~ri  that  the  whole  nation  p.  not

8  thy  money  p.  with  thee,  because  thou


yJrfj  13.41.  behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  andp.

1  Cor.  1. 18.  for  preaching  ot  the  cross  is  to  them  that

p.  foolishness,  but  to  us  saved  power  of  God

2  Cor.  2.  15.  a  savour  ot  Christ  in  them  thatp.

4. 16.  but  tho’ our  outward  manp.  inward  is  renew.
Col.  2.  22.  which  all  are  top.  with  the  using
2  Thess.  2.  10.  of  unrighteousness  in  them  that  p
2  Pet.  3. 9.  not  willing  that  any  should  p.  but  that  all
Shall  PERISH.

Lev.  26.  38.  and  ye  shall p.  among  the  heathen
Num.  24.  24.  and  he  also  shall p.  tor  ever
Dent.  4A6.  ye  shall  soon  utterly  p.  ye  shall  not  pro
long  your  days,  8.  19,  20.  I  30.  18.  Josh.  2.3. 16.

1  •Sam.  27.  1.  I  shall  one  day  p.  by  the  hand  of  Saul

2  A  mgs  9.  8.  the  whole  house  of  Allah  shall  p.

Jobs.  13.  and  the  hypocrite’s  hope  shall p.

11.  4  20.  and  flight  shall  p.  from  the  wicked
18. 17_.  his  remembrance  shall p.  20.  7.  |  36.  12.

34. 15.  all  flesh  shall p.  together,  and  man  return
Psal.  1.  6.  but  the  wa>’  of  the  ungodly  shall p.
37.20.  wicked  shall p.  ||  92.  9.  thine  enemies  shall  p.
73.  27.  they  that  are  far  from  thee  shall  p.

102.  26.  they  shall  p.  hut  thou  shalt  endure
112.  10.  the  desire  of  the  wicked  shall  p.

Prov.  10.  28.  expectation  of  wicked  shall p.  11.  7.
19.  9.  and  he  that  speaketh  lies  shall p.

21.  28.  a  false  witness  shall  p.  but  the  man
Isa.  29. 14.  the  wisdom  of  their  wise  men  shall  p.
41.  11.  they  that  strive  with  thee  shall  p.

60. 12.  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall p.
Jer.  4.  9.  that  the  heart  of  the  king  shall p.

6.21. friend  shallp.  ||  10. 11.  gods.s7>«//p.  15.  1  51.18.
25. 1 35.  and  flight  shall  p.  from  the  shepherds
48.8.  valley  also  shall p.  and  the  plain  destroyed
Lset.  7.  26.  but  the  law  shall  p.  from  the  priest
Amos  1.  8.  the  remnant  of  the  Philistines  shallp.

2. 14.  therefore  the  flight  shall  p.  from  the  swift
3.  15.  and  the  houses  of  ivory  shallp.  great  houses
Zech.  9.  5.  and  the  king  shall  p.  from  Gaza
Mat.  26.  52.  that  take  the  sword,  shallp.  with  sword
Lute  5.  37.  new  wine  be  spilled,  and  bottles  shallp.
13.  3.  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  p.  5.
Jo/m  10.  28.  sheep. shall  never p.  nor  any  pluck  them
Horn.  2. 12.  sinned  without  law,  shallp.  without  law
1 Cor.  8.11.  shall  weak  brotherp.  for  whom  Chr.died
neb.  1.  11.  they  shall  p.  but  thou  remainest
2  Pet.  2. 12.  and  shall  p.  in  their  own  corruption
PERISHED.

Num.  16.  3.3.  and  they  p.  from  the  congregation
21.  3ft.  Heshbon  isp.  even  to  Dibon,  laid  waste
Josh.  22.  20.  that  man  p.  not  alone  in  his  iniquity
2  Sam.  1.  27.  and  how  are  the  weapons  of  war  p.  J
Job  4.  7.  remember,  who  everp.  being  innocent
30.  2.  might  profit  me,  in  whom  old  age  was  p.
Psal.  9.  6.  their  memorial  is  p.  with  them

10.  16.  the  heathen  are  p.  out  of  his  land
83.  10.  asSiseraand  Jabin,  which  p.  at  En-dor
119.92.  I  should  have  p.  in  mine  affliction
142.  +  4.  none  would  know  me,  refuge p.  from  me
Reel.  9.  6.  their  envy  is  p.  ||  Jer.  7.  28.  truth  is  p.
Jer.  48.  36.  the  riches  that  he  hath  gotten  are  p.

49.  ?•  is  counsel  p.  from  the  prudent  ?  is  wisdom
Lam.  3.  18.  1  said,  my  strength  and  hope  is  p.

Joel  1.  11.  because  the  harvest  of  the  field  isp.
Jonah  4.  10.  which  came  up  andp.  in  a  night
Mic.  4.  9.  why  dost  thou  cry  ?  is  thy  counsellor p.

7.  2.  the  good  man  is  p.  out  of  the  earth

Mat.  8.  32.  herd  of  swine  ran  and  p  in  the  waters
Lute  11.  51.  whichp.  between  the  altar  and  temple
Acts  5.  37.  he  also  p.  and  as  many  as  obeyed  him

1  Cor.  15. 18.  then  they  fallen  asleep  in  Christ  are  p.
Ileh.  11.  31.  by  faith  the  harlot  Rahabp.  not

2  Pet.  3.  6.  world  being  overflowed  with  water  p.
Jude  11.  and  p.  in  the  gain  saying  of  Core

PERISH  El  H.

Job  4. 11.  the  old  lion  p.  for  lack  of  prey
Psal.  31.  +12.  1  am  like  a  vessel  that  p.

Prov.  11.7.  and  the  hope  of  unjust  menp.

Reel.  7.  15.  there  is  a  just  man  that  p.  in  his  right.
Isa.  5“.  1.  righteous p.  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart
Jer.  9.  12.  tor  what  the  land  p.  and  is  burnt  up
48.  46.  O  Moab,  the  people  of  Chemosh  p.

John  6.  27.  labour  not  for  the  meat  which  p.

Jam.  1.11.  and  the  grace  of  the  fashion  of  it  p.

1  Pet.  1.7.  trial  of  faith  more  precious  than  gold  p.
PERISH  lNi..

Job  33.  18.  and  his  life  from  p.  by  the  sword
PERJURED.

1  Tim.  1.  10.  law  is  made  for  liars  and  p.  persons
PERMISSION.

1  Cor.  7. 6. 1  speak  this  by  p.  not  by  commandment
PERMIT.

1  Cor.  16.  7-  I  trust  to  tarry  awhile,  if  the  Lord  p.
Ileb.  6.  3.  and  this  will  we  do,  if  God  p.

PERMITTED.

Acts  26. 1.  Agrippa  said,  thou  artp.  to  speak  forthy.

1  Cor.  14.  34.  for  it  is  not  p.  to  women  to  speak

PERNICIOUS.

2  Pet.  2.2.  and  many  shall  follow  theirp.  ways

PERPETUAL

Signifies,  [1]  Continual,  or  uninterrupted,  Ezek.35.

5.  [2]  Everlasting,  or  endless,  Psal.  9.  6.  [3]

The  duration  of  time  to  the  end  of  the  world,  Gen.

9.  12.  [4]  During  the  continuance  of  the  legal

dispensation,  Exod.  29.  9. 1  30.  8.  [5]  A  set  space
of  time,  Jer.  25.  9, 12.

Gen.  9.  12.  token  of  the  covenant  for  p.  generations
Exod.  29.  9. .the  priest’s  office  be  theirs  for p.  statute
30. 8.  a  p.  incense  before  the  I.ord  for  generations
31 .  16.  keep  the  sabbath  for  a  p.  covenant
Lev.  3.  17.  a  p.  statute  not  to  eat  fat  or  blood
6.20.  a  p.  meat-offering  for  Aaron  and  his  sons

24.  9.  the  shew-bread  be  Aaron’s  by  a  p.  statute

25.  31.  may  not  be  sold,  for  it  is  theirp.  possession
Num.  19.  21.  a  p.  statute,  that  he  that  sprinkleth
Psal.  9.  6.  destructions  are  come  to  op.  end

74.  3.  litt  up  thy  feet  to  tliep.  desolations
78.  66.  he  put  them  to  a  p.  reproach
Jer.  5.  22.  by  a  p.  decree,  that  it  cannot  pass  it

8.  5.  why  peo.  slidden  back  by  op.  backsliding  ?

15. 18.  why  is  my  painp.  and  my  wound  incurable  ?
18.  16.  to  make  their  land  desolate,  and  p.  hissing


Jer. 23.40.  and  1  will  bring  upon  you  a  p.  shame
25.  9.  and  make  them  p.  desolations,  12.

49.  13.  the  cities  thereof  shall  be  p.  wastes

50.  5.  let  us  join  to  the  I^ord  in  a  y.  covenant

51.  39.  that  they  may  sleep  a  p.  sleep,  57.

Ezet.  35.  5.  because  thou  hast  had  a  p.  hatred

9.  1  will  make  thee  p.  desolations,  Zeph.  2.  9.
46.  14.  by  ap.  ordinance  to  the  I.ord
Hub.  3.6.  be  beheld,  and  tliep.  hills  did  bow
PERPETUALLY.

1  Kings  9.  3.  my  heart  shall  be  there p.  2  Chr.  7.  16.
Amos  J,  11.  his  anger  did  tearp.  and  kept  wrath

PERPLEXED.

Esth.  3. 15.  but  the  city  Shushan  wasp.

Joel  1.  18.  the  herds  ot  cattle  are  p.  no  pasture
Lute  9. 7-  Herod  was  p.  ||  24.  4.  as  they  were  p.

2  Cor.  4. 8.  we  are  p.  but  not  in  despair

r  .  PERPLEXITY.

Isa.  22.  5.  for  it  is  a  day  ofp.  by  the  Lord  God
Mic.  7.  4.  the  day  cometh,  now  shall  be  their  />.
Lute  21.  25.  on  earth  distress  of  nations,  with  p.
r  t  PERSECUTE.

Job  19. 22.  why  do  ye  p.  me  as  God,  and  are  not
28.  why  p.  ye  him,  seeing  the  root  is  in  me  ?
Psal  7.  1.  save  me  from  all  them  that  p.  me

5.  let  the  enemy  p.  my  soul,  and  take  it

JO.  2.  the  wicked  in  his  pride  doth  p.  the  poor
31.  15.  deliver  me  from  them  thatp.  me
35.  3.  stop  the  way  against  them  that  p.  me

6.  and  let  the  angel  of  the  Lord  p.  them
69.  26.  they  p.  him  whom  thou  hast  smitten
71. 11. p.  and  take  him,  there  is  none  to  deliver
83.  15.  sop.  them  with  thy  tempest,  and  make
119.84.  execute  judgment  on  them  thatp.  me

86.  theyp.  me  wrongfully,  help  thou  me
Jer.  17.  18-  let  them  be  confounded  that  p.  me
29.  18.  1  will  p.  them  with  the  sword
Lam.  3.  66.  p.  and  destroy  them  in  anger
Mat.  5.  11.  blessed  are  ye,  when  men  shall  p.  you
44.  and  pray  for  them  which  p.  you
10. 23.  when  theyp.  you  in  one  city,  flee  to  another
23.  34.  ye  shall  p.  them  from  city  to  city
Lute  11.49.  some  of  them  they  shall  p.  21.  12.
John  5.  16.  and  therefore  did  the  Jews  p.  Jesus
15.  20.  if  have  persecuted  me,  they  will  alsop.  you
Rom.  12. 14.  bless  them  which  p.  you,  curse  not
PERSECUTED.

Dent.  30.  7.  will  put  curses  on  them  thatp.  thee
Psal.  109.  16.  because  he  p.  the  poor  and  needy
119.  161.  princes  have  p.  me  without  cause
143.  3.  for  the  enemy  hath  p.  my  soul
Isa.  14.  6.  he  that  ruleth  nations  in  anger  is  p.
Lam.  3. 43.  thou  hasteovered  with  anger,  and  p.  us
Mat.  5.  10.  blessed  which  are  p.  for  righteousness
12.  so  p.  they  the  prophets  before  you
John  15.  20.  it  they  have  p.  me,  they  will  you
Acts  7. 52.  which  prophets  have  not  your  fathers p.
22.  4.  and  1  p.  this  way  unto  the  death
26.  11.  1  p.  them  even  to  strange  cities

1  Cor.  4. 12.  reviled,  we  bless  ;  being  p.  we  suffer  it
15.  9.  because  1  p.  the  church  of  God,  Gal.  1. 13.

2  Cor.  4.  9.  we  are  p.  but  not  forsaken,  cast  down
Gal.  1. 23.  that  be  which  p.  us  in  times  past

4.  29.  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  p.  him

1  Thess.  2.  15.  who  have  killed  the  I.ord  and  p.  us
Rev.  12. 13.  dragon  p.  woman  that  brought  forth

PERSECUTES!’.

Acts  9. 4.  Saul,  Saul,  why  p.  thou  me  ?22-7.  |  26. 14.
5.  1  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  p.  22.  8.  126.  15.
PERSECUTING.

Phil.  3.  6.  concerning  zeal.p.  the  church
PERSECUTION.

Lam.  5. 5.  our  necks  are  under  p.  we  have  no  rest
Mat.  13.  21.  for  when  p.  ariseth.  Mart  4.  17.

Acts  8.  1 .  at  that  time  there  was  great  p.  ag.  church

11. 19.  they  which  were  scattered  abroad  on  the  p.
13.  50.  and  raised  p.  against  Paul  and  Barnabas

Rom.H.  35.  shall  p.  or  sword,  separate  us  from  Chr.?
Gal.  5. 11.  if  I  preach  circum.  why  do  I  yet  suffer  p.?
6.  12.  lest  they  should  suffer  p.  for  cross  of  Christ

2  Tim.  3. 12.  all  that  will  live  godly  shall  suffer  p.

PERSECUTIONS.

Mart  10.  30.  shall  have  in  this  world  lands  with  p.

2  Cor.  12. 10. 1  take  pleasure  in  p.  for  Christ’s  sake
2  Thess.  1.  4.  we  glory  for  your  faith  in  all  your  p.
2  Tim. 3. 11.  know  my  p.  at  Antioch,  what p.  endured
PERSECUTOR,

1  Tim.  1.13.  who  was  before  ap.  and  injurious
PERSECUTORS.

Neh.  9. 11.  theirp.  thou  threwest  into  the  deeps
Psal.  7. 13.  be  ordaineth  Ids  arrows  against  the  p.
119.  157.  many  are  my  p.  ]|  142.6.  deliver  fromp.
Jer.  15. 15.  O  L.  visit  me,  and  revenge  me  of  my  p.
20. 11.  therefore  my  p.  shall  stumble,  not  prevail
Lam.  1.  3.  all  her  p.  overtook  her  between  straits

4. 19.  our  p.  are  swifter  than  the  eagles  of  heaven

PERSEVERANCE.

Eph.6. 18.  and  watching  thereunto  with  all  p.
PERSON

Signifies,  [1]  A  paiticvlar  individual  man  or  wo¬
man,  Gen.  14.  21.  Job  22.  29.  [2]  The  outward

qualities  and  conditions  of  men  ;  such  as  country,
riches,  friends,  poverty ,  and  the  like ,  Luke  20.  21.
Acts  io.  34.  Rom.  2.  11.  [3]  Sight,  name,  or  au¬
thority,  2  Cor.  2.  10.

Gen.  39.  6.  Joseph  was  a  goodly  p.  and  well  favour.
Exod.  12.  48.  no  uncircumcised  p.  shall  eat  thereof
Lev.  19.  15.  nor  honour  the  p.  of  the  mighty
Num.  5.  6.  when  commit  any  sin  that  p.  be  guilty
19. 17-  for  an  unclean  p.  shall  take  ot  the  ashes
18.  cleanp.  shall  take  hyssop  and  dip  it  in  water
22.  whatsoever  unclean  p.  toucheth,  he  unclean
31.  19.  whosoever  hath  killed  any  p.  or  touched
■  any  slain,  35.  11,  15,  3ft.  Josh.  20.  3,  9.
35.  30.  one  Witness  shait  not  testify  against  any  p.
Dent.  15.  22.  unclean  and  clean  p.  shall  eat  it  alike
27.25.  that  taketh  reward  to  slay  an  innocent  p.
28.50.  shall  not  regard  tliep.  of  old  or  young

1  Sam.  9.  2.  there  was  not  a  goodlier  p.  than  he
16. 18.  David  a  comely  p.  11 25.  35.  accepted  thy  p.

2  Sam.  4. 11.  have  slain  a  righteous  p.  in  his  house
14. 14.  neither  doth  God  respect  any  p.

357


PH  A


PER


PES


V*  St*!.  17.  11.  that  thou  go  to  battle  in  thine  ownp.
Job  22.  29.  and  he  shall  save  the  humble p.

Psal.  15.  4.  in  whose  eyes  a  vile  p.  is  contemned
49.  10.  likewise  the  tool  ami  the  brutish  p.  pensn
101.  4.  1  will  not  know  a  wicked  p.

105.37.  was  not  one  feeble  p.  among  their  mibes
Prop.  6.  12.  naughty  p.  walks  with  troward  mouth
24.8.  deviseth  evil,  shall  be  called  mischievous  p.
28. 17.  that  doeth  violence  to  the  blood  ot  any  p.


Isa.  32.5.  the  vilep


shall  be  no  more  called  liberal


6.  for  the  vile  p.  will  speak  villany,  and  his
43.  1  4.  therefore  1  w  ill  give  people  .or  thy  p.

Jer.  43.  6.  Johanan  took  every  p.  that  was  lett
52.  25  he  took  seven  that  were  near  the  king  s  p.
Ezek.  16.  5.  was  cast  out  to  the  loathing  ot  thy ■  p.

13  6  if  swmrd  come  and  take  any  p ■  among  Liem
44l  25.  die  priests  shall  come  at  no  dead  p.

Dan.  11.  21.  in  his  estate  shall  stand  up  a  vile  p.
Mat.  22. 16.  regardest  not  p.  ot  men ,  Mark  12.  14.
27.  24.  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  ot  this  just/?.

V  Cor.  5.  13.  put  away  from  you  that  wicked  p.

2  Cor.  2. 10.  forgave  I  it  in  the  p.  of  Christ
Eph.  5.  5.  nor  unclean  p.  hath  inheritance  in  kmgd.
Heb.  1.  3.  and  the  express  image  ot  hisp  .

12. 16.  or  profanep.as  Esau,  who  sold  his  birthright
2P«,2.  5.  but  saved  Noah,  the  eighth  p.  a  preacher
PERSONS.  ,  t  ..

Gen.  14.  21.  give  meg.  and  take  the  goods  to  thyself
Esod.  16.  16.  gather  according  to  number  of  your  p.
Lev.  27.  2.p.  shall  be  for  the  l  ord  by  estimation
Num.  19.  18.  clean  person  shall  sprinkle  it  uponp.
31.  28.  both  of  the  p.  beeves,  asses,  and  sheep


Jl.  zo.  UUUJ  yje  - ~  1

35.  thirty  and  two  thousand  p.  m  all,  ot  wminen
n cut.  10.  17.  God  of  gods,  which  regardeth  notp.

*■' _ n  ,1  _ L  J _ _  1  4  ~  inith  COVOtlfu  T)


22.  fathers  went  down  into  Egypt  with  seventy  p.
Judg.  9.  2.  the  sons  of  Jerubbaal  which  were  ?0^p.


'uag.  y.  s.  me  auua  uj  ■■  :  -  ■

4.  Abimelech  h.ired  vain  and  light  p.  follower

5.  he  went  and  slew  threescore  and  ten  p.  18.

20.  39.  Benjamin  began  to  kill  of  Israel  about  30p.

1  dam.  9.  22.  those  hidden,  which  were  about  30p.

22  18.  and  Doeg  slew  on  that  day  8 5®.

22  1  have  occasioned  the  death  ot  all  the  p.

«  Kings  10.  6.  now  the  king’s  sons  being  70  p.

7.  they  took  the  king’s  sons  and  slew  70  p.

Ps.  26. 4. 1  have  not  sat  with  vain  p.  nor  dissemblers
P’-ov.  12.  11.  he  that  followeth  vain  p.  28.  19.

Jer.  52.  29.  he  carried  captive  from  Jerusalem  832p.

30.  he  carried  away  captive  of  Jews 745  p.

Ezek.  7.f  11.  none  of  their  tumultuous  p.

17, 17.  and  building  forts  to  cut  oft  many  p.

27.  13.  they  traded  the  p.  cf  men  in  thy  market
Jonah  4.  11.  wherein  are  more  than  120,000  p.

Zeph.  3.  4.  her  prophets  are  treacherous  p.

Luke  15.7.  joy  more  than  over  ninety-nine  just  p.
Acts  17,  1?.  Paul  disputed  with  the  devout  p.

2  Cor.  1. 11.  gift  bestowed  on  us  by  meansot  manyp.

1  Tim.  1.  10.  the  law  is  made  for  perjured  p.

2  Pet.  3.  11.  what  manner  of  p. .ought  ye  to  be
Jude  16.  having  men’s®,  in  admiration  ot  advantage

See  "Respect.

PERSUADE

Signifies,  [1]  To  convince  and  convert ,  Gen.  9.  +  27
Luke  16.  31.  [2]  To  he  assured  or  satisfied ,  Rom
8.  38.  1  14.  +  5.  [3]  To  advise ,  or  put,  one  upon

doing  any  thing,  2  Chron.  32.  11.  [4]  lo  deceive,

1  Kings  22.  20.  [5]  To  pacify,  Prov.  25.  15.  [6]
To  trust  or  hope  for,  .Heb.  6.  9.  [7]  To  provoke,
or  stir  uv.  Acts  14. 19.

rGsn.  9.  t  27.  God  shall  p.  Japhet,  and  dwell  intents

1  Kings  22.  20.  who  shall  p.  Ahab,  to  go  up  and  fall
21. 1  will p.  him  ||  22.  thou  shaltp.  him  and  prevail

£  Chron.  32.  11.  doth  not  1  lezekiah  p.  you  to  give
Isa.  36.  18.  beware,  lest  Fezekiah  p.  you,  saying
Mat.  28.  14.  we  will  p.  him  and  secure  you

2  Cor.  5. 11.  we  v.  men  l|  Cal.  1. 10.  do  1  nowp.  men  ?

1  John  3. 1 19.  and  shall  p.  our  hearts  before  him

PERSUADED.

£  Chr.  18.  2.  Ahab  p.  Jehoshapat  to  go  with  him
Prov.  £5.  15.  by  long  forbearing  is  a  princ  e  p.

Mat.  27  .  20.  the  chief  priests p.  the  multitude
Luke  16.  31.  will  not  be  p.  if  one  rose  from  dead
20.6-  for  they  be  p.  that  John  was  a  prophet
Acts  13.  43.  p.  them,  to  continue  in  grace  of  God
14. 19.  who  p.  the  people,  and  having  stoned  Paul

18.  4.  Paul  p.  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks

19.  26.  this  Paul  hath  p.  turned  away  much  people
21.  14.  when  he  would  not  be®,  we  ceased
26.  26.  1  am  ®.  none  of  these  things  are  hid  from

Rom.  4.  21.  being  p.  that  what  he  had  promised
8  38.  I  amp.  that  nothing  can  separate  us  from

14.  5.  let  every  man  be  fully  p.  in  his  mind
14.  1  know  and  am  p.  there  is  nothing  unclean

15.  14.  I  myself  also  am  p.  ofyou.mv  brethren

2  Tim.  1.  5.  and  1  am  p.  that  in  thee  also

12.  I  am  p.  that  he  is  able  to  keep  what  I  comm.

Heb.  6.  9.  we  arep.  better  things  of  you.  though  thus
11.  13.  having  seen  them  afar  off,  were  p.  ot  them
PERSUADES  E.

Acts  26.  28.  almost  thou  p.  me  to  be  a  Christian
PERSUADETH.

£  Kings  18.  32.  when  Hezekiah  p.  you,  saying
Acts  18.  13.  Paul  p.  men  to  worship  contrary  to  law
PERSUADING.

Acts  19.  8.  p.  things  concerning  kingdom  of  God
28. 23.  p.  them  concern .  )  esus  from  law  and  proph
PERSUASION.

Gal.  5.  8.  thisp.  comelh  not  of  him  that  calleth  you
PERTAIN.

Lev.  7-  20.  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings  p.  to  l  ord
21.  and  eat  of  the  sacrifice  which  p.  to  the  Lord
1  Sam.  25.  22.  if  l  leave  all  that  p.  to  him
Rom.  15.  17  in  those  things  which  p.  to  God

1  Cor.  6.  3.  how  much  more  things  p.  to  this  life

2  Pet.  1.3.  hath  given  us  all  things  that  p.  to  life

PERTAINED.

Num.  31.  43.  the  half  thatp.  to  the  congregation
Josh.  24.  33.  Fleazar  was  buried  in  a  hill  thatp.
Judg.  6.  11.  angel  sat  under  an  oak  thatp.  to  loash
1  Sam.  25.  21 .  nothing  missed  of  all  that  p.  to  N  abal
•* 2  Sam.  2.  15.  which  p.  to  lsh-hosheth,  son  of  Saul

6.  12.  God  blessed  all  thatp.  to  Obed  edotn
9.  9.  have  given  master’s  son  all  thatp.  to  Saul

358


2  Sam.  16.  4.  thine  are  all  thatp.  to  Mephibosheth

1  Kings  7.48.  Solomon  made  vessels  thatp.  to  house

2  Kings  24.7  all  thatp.  tc  the  kingot  Egypt
1  Chron.  9.  27-  opening  every  morning  p.  to  them
o  Chron.  12.  4.  he  took  the  cities  which  p.  to  Judah
~34  33  losiab  took  away  abominations p.  to  Israel

‘  '  PERTA1NETH.

Lev.  14  32.  to  get  that  which  p.  to  cleansing
Num.  4.  16.  to  the  office  ot  l  leazar  p.  the  oil
l)eut  22  5.  woman  shall  not  wear  vvhat  p.  to  a  man
1  Sam. 21  ■  6.  Ziklagp.  to  the  kings  of  Judah
0  Chron  26  18.  itp.  not  to  thee,  Uzziah,  to  bum
Rom.  9.  4.  to  whomp.  the  adoption  and  the  glory
Ileb  7  13.  he  p.  to  another  tribe,  ot  which  no  man
PERTAINING.

Josh.  13.  31.  half  Gilead  and  cities  p.  toMachir
1  Chron.  26.  32.  rulers  for  every  matter  p.  to  Hod
Acts  1.  3.  speaking  of  things  p.  to  kingdom  ot  God
1  Cor.  6.  4.  have  judgment  of  things,  p.  to  this  life
Heb.  2.  17.  merciful  High  Priest  in  thingsp.  to  God
5.  1.  is  ordained  for  men  in  thingsp.  to  God
9.  9.  not  make  him  perfect,  as  p.  to  conscience
PERVERSE.

Num.  22.  32.  because  thy  way  is  before  me
Dew.  32.  5.  they  are  ap.  and  crooked  generation
1  Sam.  20.  30.  tnou  son  of  the p.  rebellious  woman
Job  6.  30.  cannot  my  taste  discern  p.  things?

9.  20.  my  mouth  snail  also  prove  me  p.

Prov.  4.  24.  andp.  lips  put  far  from  thee
8.  8.  there  is  nothing  froward  or  p.  in  them
12.  8.  he  that  is  of  a  p.  heart  shall  be  despised
14-.  2.  he  that  is  p.  in  his  ways  despiseth  him
17.  20.  that  hath  p.  tongue  talleth  into  mischief
19.  l.  than  he  that  isp.  in  his  lips,  and  a  tool
23.  33.  and  thine  heart  shall  utter  p.  things
28.  6.  than  he  that  is  p.  in  his  wavs,  though  rich

18.  he  that  isp.  in  his  ways  shall  tall  at  once
Isa.  19.  14.  the  Lord  hath  mingled  a  p.  spirit
Mat.  17.  17.  Op.  generation,  Luke  9.  41.

Acts  20.  30.  shall  men  arise,  speaking  p.  things
Phil.  2.  15.  blameless  in  the  midst  of  ap.  nation

1  Tim.  6.  5.  p.  disputings  of  men  ot  corrupt  minds
PERVERSELY.

2  Sam.  19.  19.  nor  remember  what  servant  did  p.

1  Kings 8.  47.  we  have  sinned  and  have  clone  p.

Psal  119.  78.  they  dealt  p.  with  me  without  cause

PERVERSENESS.

Num.  23.  21.  neither  hath  he  seen  p.  inTsrael
Prov.  11 .3. but  p.  of  transgressors  shall  destroy  them
15.  4.  butp.  therein  as  a  breach  in  the  spirit
Isa.  30.  12.  ye  trust  in  p.  and  stay  thereon
59.3.  lips  have  spoken  lies,  your  tongue  hath  mut¬
tered  p

Ezek.  9.  9.  the  land  is  full  of  blood,  and  city  of  p.
PERVERT.

Dent.  16.  19.  a  gift  doth  p.  words  of  the  righteous
24.  17.  thou  shalt  not  p.  thejudgment  ot  stranger
Job  8.  3.  doth  Godp.  judgment  or  justice  t
34. 12.  nor  will  the  Almighty  p.  judgment
Prov.  17.  23.  top.  the  ways  of  judgment
31. 5.  and  p.  the  judgment  of  any  of  the  afflicted
Mic.  3.  9.  hear  this,  1  pray  you,  ye  thatp.  equity
Acts  1.3.  10.  wilt  notecase  to p.  right  ways  of  Lord
(Jal.  1.7.  and  would  p.  the  gospel  ot  Christ
PERVERTED.

1  Sam.  8.  3.  Samuel’s  sons  took  bribes, p.  judgment
Joh33.  27.  if  any  say,  1  have  p.  what  was  right
Isa.  47. 10.  thy  wisdom  and  knowledge,  it  hath  p.
Jer.  3.  21.  they  havep.  their  way,  and  forgotten  L.

03  36.  ye  havep.  the  words  of  the  living  God
PERVERT ETH.

Exod.  23.  8.  the  gift  p.  the  words  of  the  righteous
Dent.  27.  19.  cursed  be  lie  thatp.  judgm.  of  stranger
Prov.  10.  9.  but  he  that  p.  his  ways  shall  be  known

19.  3.  the  foolishness  of  a  man  p.  his  way
Isa.  24.  +1.  the  Lord  p  the  face  of  the  earth
Luke  23.  14.  brought  this  man  as  one  thatp.  people

PERVERTING.

Eccl.  5.  8.  if  thou  seest  the  violent  p.  of  judgment
Luke  23.  2.  found  this  fellow  p.  the  nation
PESTILENCE.

Exod.  5.  3.  lest  he  fall  on  11s  with  p.  or  sword
9. 15.  that  1  may  smite  thee  and  thy  peop.  with  p.
Lev.  26.  25.  1  will  send  thep.  among  you
Num.  14.  12.  I  will  smite  them  with  thep.

Dent.  28.  21.  the  Lord  shall  makep.  cleave  to  thee

2  Sam.  24.  13.  there  be  three  days’  p.  1  Chr.  21. 12.
15  the  Lord  sent  a  p.  on  Israel,  1  Chr.  21.  14.

1  Kings  8.  37.  if  there  be  in  the  land  famine,  p.

blasting  locust,  2  Chr.  6.  28.  1  7.13.  |  20.9.
Psal.  78.  5o. he  gave  their  life  over  to  thep.

01.3.  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  noisome  p.

6.  nor  for  thep.  that  walketh  in  darkness
Jer  14.  12.  1  will  consume  them  by®. 24.  10.1  27-8.

21  6  the  inhabitants  of  this  city  shall  die  by  p.

7.  I  will  deliver  Zedekiah  from  the  p.

9.  he  that  abideth  in  city  shall  die  by  p.  38.  2.

27  13.  w  hy  will  ye  die  by  the  sword  and  p.  ?

28  8  prophets  of  old  prophesied  of  war  and  ofp.
29.  I?,  behold,  1  will  send  upon  them  thep.

18.  1  will  persecute  them  with  the  famine  and  p.
30  04,  the  city  is  given  because  of  the  p.  36.

34’  17  1  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you  to  thep.

42.  17.  they  that  goto  Egypt  shall  die  by  thep.  22
44  13  as  1  have  punished  Jerusalem  by  thep.
Ezek.  5.  12.  a  third  part  shall  die  with  the  p.

17  p  and  blood  shall  pass  thro’ thee,  L.  spoken  it

6.  11.  they  shall  fall  by  sword,  famine,  and  thep.

ic.  he  that  is  far  off  shall  die  by  the  p.

7  15.  a  sword  without,  p.  anil  famine  within

12  16  1  w  ill  leave  a  few  men  of  them  from  thep.
14  19. or  if  1  send  ap.intothat  land,  and  pour  out
21.  when  1  send  thep.  to  cut  off  man  and  beast
28.  23.  I  will  send  to  her  p.  and  blood  into  streets
33*  27.  they  that  be  in  caves  shall  die  of  the  p.

3R  22.  1  will  plead  against  him  w  ith  p.  and  blood
Amos  4.  10.  I  have  sent  among  you  the  p.

Hah  3.  5.  before  him  went  the  p.  and  burning

pestilences.

Mat  <>4.  7.  and  there  shall  hep.  Luke  21.11.
PESTILENT.

Acts  24.  5.  we  have  found  this  man  a  p.  fellow


PESTLE.

Prov  27.  22.  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar  with  a  p,
PETITION.

1  Sam.  1.  17.  the  God  of  Israel  grant  thee  thy  n.
27.  Lord  hath  given  me  my  p.  w  hich  I  asked
f  28.  he  whom  l  obtained  by  p.  shall  be  returned
2  t  20.  Lord  give  thee  seed,  for  the  p.  she  asked
1  Kings  2.  16.  now  I  ask  one  p.  of  thee,  deny  me  not

20.  I  desire  one  small  p.  ot  thee,  say  me  not  nay
Esth.b.  6.  the  king  said,  what  is  thy  p.  ?  7-2.  |  9. 12.

7.  then  Esther  said,  my  p.  and  request  is

8.  if  it  please  the  king  to  grant  my  p.  und  request
7.  3.  let  my  life  be  given  me  at  my  p.  and  my  pea
Isa.  7.  +  11.  ask  thee  a  sign,  make  thy  p.  deep
Dan.  6.  7.  whosoever  shall  ask  a  p.  ot  any  god,  12.

13.  but  maketh  bis  p.  three  times  a  day
PEiTTIONS.

Psal.  20.  5.  the  Lord  fulfil  all  thy  p.  .

1  John  5.  15.  we  know  we  have  the  p.  we  desired
PHARISEE.

This  sect  was  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  most  con¬
siderable  among  the  Jews,  and  its  original  is  not
very  well  known,  some  placing  the  beginning  of  the
Pharisees  sooner,  others  later.  They  take  then
name  from  a  Hebrew  word,  which  signifies  Divi¬
sion,  or  Separation,  because  they  distinguished
themselves  from  the  other  Israelites,  by  a  more
strict  manner  of  life,  of  which  they  made  profes¬
sion:  they  were  very  numerous,  and  Jar  extended ;
they  substituted  human  traditions  in  the  room  oj
Cod's  word,  affected  to  make  a  great  shew  0]
religion  in  outward  things  ;  but  were  proud,  covet¬
ous,  unjust,  superstitious,  an  /  hypocritical.

When  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  appeared  in  Judea,
the  Pharisees  were  then  in  great  credit  among  t hi
people,  because  of  the  opinion  they  had  conceit eo
of  their  great  learning,  sanctity  of  manners,  am
exact  observance  of  the  law.  They  fasted  often
made  long  prayers,  paid  their  tithes  scrupulously
distributed  much  alms.  But  all  this  was  vitiatei
and  corrupted  by  a  spirit  of  pride,  ostentation
hypocrisy ,  and  self-love.  Like  to  whitened  sepal
chres,  they  appeared  beautiful  without,  minis
within  was  nothing  but  corruption  and  deformity
Mat.  23.  27.  They  wore  large  rolls  of  parchmen
upon  their  foreheads  and  wrists,  on  which  wer
written  certain  words  of  the  law  ;  and  affected  t
have  fringes  and  borders  at  the  corners  and  hem
of  their  garments,  broader  than  the  other  Jew
wore,  as  a  badge  of  distinction ,  and  as  greate
observers  of  the  law  than  others.

In  matters  of  religion,  the  traditions  of  the  ancient
were  the  chief  subject  of  their  studies ;  and  t
these  they  made  additions  of  their  own,  as  the,
thought  fit,  making  their  own  opinion  to  pass  fo
traditions  of  the  ancients.  By  this  means  the
had  overburdened  the  law  of  God  with  a  vast  nun
ber  of  trifling  observances,  that  were  useless  an
disgustful,  and  which  made  it  a  heavy  and  insvj
portable  yoke.  They  had  even  altered  and  co
rupted  it  in  important  articles,  by  their  own  pe
verse  interpretations  of  it,  as  our  Saviour  tn  h
gospel  reproaches  them  with.  For  example y  tf
law  commands  us  to  honour  our  father  arid  mother
the  Pharisees  taught,  that  if  we  say  to  our  paren
that  are  in  necessity ;  “  rather,  or  mother,  tl
thing  you  ask  of  me  is  dedicated  to  God,  it  is  1
longer  in  my  power,  but  you  shall  have  a  part  1
the  merit  of  my  offering,  which  will  do  you  <
much  good  as  if  1  had  given  it  to  you ;  tin
were  then  freed  from  the  obligation  of  succourti
their  parents.  Mat.  15.  4,  5,  6.  .

The  observation  of  the  sabbath  is  another  point  ttu
had  refined  upon,  arid  our  Saviour  ojtsn  atgw
with  them  upon  this  head.  J  hey  maintained,  tn
upon  this  day  it  was  not  so  much  as  allowed
heal  a  sick  person,  though  Christ  did  it  only  wt
a  word  speaking ,  Luke  6.  7.8.  I  hey  found  f aw
that  upon  this  day  the  people  brought  their  sick
be  healed.  They  were  scandalized,  that  a  m,
carried  away  bis  bed  upon  the  sabbath-day,  ajt
he  had  been  cur  d  of  a  palsy,  John  5.  8,9,  1
From  all  which  they  concluded,  that  our  Lo
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  could  not  be  a  man  se
from  God,  because  he  so  little  observed  that  pi
found  rest,  that  they  thought  was  to  be  kept
this  day,  John  9;  16.

Our  Sit viourupbraids  them  with  making  long praye
standing  up  in  the  synagogues,  or  at  the  corners
the  streets,  and  under  pretence  oj  prayer  to  ci
sume  widows'  houses,  either  by  entertaining  tb<
on  account  of  their  prayers ,  or  by  persuading  tin
shallow  widows  to  intrust  them  with  their  estat
and  then  defrauding  them  of  the  same,  Mat.

14.  He  also  reproaches  them  with  compassing  >
and  land  tn  make  a  proselyte,  or  to  convert  a  Gi
tile:  and  after  that  to  make  him  still  a  grea
sinner  than  he  was  before,  by  teaching  hvm  a  p
vicious  doctrine,  and  making  him  more  oppositi
the  gospel,  instead  of  shewing  him  the  true  path'
piety.  Mat.  2.3.  15.  He  says,  they  affect  to  bu
up  the  tombs  of  the  old  prophets,  and  openly
declare,  that  they  disapprove  of  the  actions  oj  th
forefathers  who  persecuted  them,  while  they  the
selves  were  actuated  by  the  same  spirit .  ana  opp
all  those  that  would  reclaim  them  from  their  cn
mities.  Mat.  23.  29.  Luke  11.  47.  48.

The  Pharisees  believed  the  soul  to  be  immortal,  1
acknowledged  the  existence  of  angels  and  sptr
Acts  23.  8.  They  likewise  admitted  a  kino
transmigration  of  the  souls  of  good  men,  u’h,
might  pass  from  one  body  to  another ;  v,hf’
those  of  wicked  men  were  condemned  to  dwell
ever  in  prisons  of  darkness.  It  teas  in  conserve
of  these  principles,  that  some  of  the  l  hart
said,  that  Jesus  Christ  was  John  the  Bapttst
Elias,  or  some  one  of  the  old  prophets,  Mat.  10.
that  is,  that  the  snvl  of  one  of  these  g reat  men
passed  into  the  body  of  our  Saviour .  1  hey  bent

also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  admittei
all  the  consequences  of  it,  against  the  .'.1  daw
who  rejected  it.  Mat.  22.  23.  Acts  23.  8.


PIE


P1L


P  1  P


lut.  23.  26.  thou  blind  p.  cleanse  first  within
.uke  11.  3?.  a  certain  p.  besought  him  to  dine

18.  10.  went  to  pray,  one  a  p.  the  other  a  publican
11.  the  p.  stood  and  prayed  thus  with  himself
cts  5.  34.  then  stood  up  one  in  the  council,  a  p.

>3.  6.  Paul  cried  out,  I  am  a  p.  the  son  of  a  p.
.'6.5.  after  strictest  sect  of  our  religion  I  lived  a  p.
‘/itl.3.5.  Hebrew  of  Hebrews,  as  touching  law,  a p.
PHARISEES.

fat.  5.  20.  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  p.

).  14.  why  do  we  and  the  p.  fast  oft  ■  Mur/c  2.  18.
34.  p.  said,  he  casteth  out  devils  by  prince  of  dev.

5.  12.  k  no  west  thou  that  the  p.  were  offended
,6.6.  take  heed  and  beware  ot  the  leaven  of  the  p.

and  Sadducees,  11.  Mark  8.  15.  Luke  12.  1.
*.3.  the  p.  also  came  to  him,  tempting  him

2.  saying,  the  scribes  and  p.  sit  in  .Moses'  seat
\3.  woe  to  you  scribes  and  p.  hypocrites,  14,  15,

23,  25,  27,  20.  Luke  11.  42,  43,  44.
uke  5.  30.  the  scribes  and  p.  murmured,  15.  2.

1.  7.  the  scribes  and  p.  watched  him,  whether
■.  30.  but  tile  p.  rejected  the  counsel  of  (iod
1.  30.  now  do  ye  p.  make  clean  outside  of  the  cup

6.  14.  p.  who  were  covetous,  heard  these  things
1/1K  1.  24.  they  which  were  sent  were  of  the/).

It.  1.  there  was  a  man  of  the  p.  named  Nicodemus
.  32.  the  p.  and  priests  sent  officers  to  take  him
48.  have  any  of  the  rulers  or  p.  believed  on  him  ?
1.  47.  then  the  p.  gathered  a  council,  and  said
57.  now  the  p.  had  given  a  commandment
cts  15.  5.  there  rose  up  certain  of  sect  of  the  p.
i3. 7-  there  arose  a  dissension  between  p.  and  Sad.

8.  there  is  no  resurrection,  but  the  p.  confess  both
PHILOSOPHY,

he  love  of  wisdom.  It  comes  from  the  Greek  word
>t\ of,  a  lover,  and  aotpia,  wisdom.  The  apostle
Paul  bids  the  Colossians  beware,  lest  any  man
spoil  them  through  philosophy,  Col.  2.  8.  And
in  the  Acts,  St.  Luke  relates,  that  when  St.  Paul
came  to  Athens,  he  there  found  Epicurean  and
Stoic  philosophers,  who  made  a  jest  of  his  dis¬
courses  ;  and  no  wonder,  seeing  they  placed  the  chief
happiness  in  pleasure,  and  denied  the  providence  of
God,  Acts  17  •  18.  The  same  apostle,  in  many
places  of  his  epistles,  opposes  the  false  wisdom,  and
wise  men  of  the  age,  which  is  nothing  else  but  the
pagan  philosophy ,  always  contrary  to  the  wisdom
of  Christ,  and  the  true  religion ;  which  in  the
notion  of  the  philosophers  and  sophists  of  this  world
seemed  to  be  mere  folly,  being  built  neither  upon
evidence,  nor  the  eloquence  and  subtilty  of  those
that  preached  it,  but  upon  the  power  of  God,  and
his  single  authority,  upon  the  operation  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  influenced  the  hearts  and  minds  of
those  whom  he  called  to  the  faith.

)/.2.  8.  beware,  lest  any  man  spoil  you  through  v.
PHILOSOPHERS.

cts  17. 18. then  certain p.  encountered  him,  and  said
PHYLACTERIES.

his  word  comes  fromthe  Greek,  and  signifies, Things
to  be  especially  observed.  These  Phylacteries
were  certain  little  boxes ,  or  certain  rolls  of  parch¬
ment,  wherein  were  written  certain  words  of  the
law.  These  the  Jews  wore  upon  their  foreheads,
upon  their  wrists,  and  the  hem  of  their  garments,
which  custom  is  founded  upon  what  you  read  in
Exod.  13.  9,  16.  and  in  Mum.  15.  38,  39.  The
Pharisees  affected  to  have  their  phylacteries
broader  than  the  other  Jews  wore,  as  a  badge  of
distinction,  and  through  ostentation,  which  is  that
nir  Sai  iour  reprehends  them  for.

'at.  23.  5.  they  make  broad  their  p.  and  enlarge
PHYSICIAN

gmfies,  [1]  One  who  professes  and  practises  the
art  of  physic,  Mark  5.  26.  [2]  Embalmers  of  dead
bodies,  Gen.  50.  2.  [3]  Comforters  or  healers  by
advice  and  counsel.  Job  13.  4.  [4]  Prophets  and
teachers,  as  instruments  of  curing  hard-hearted
sinners,  Jer.  8.  22.  [5]  Jesus  Christ,  the  great

Physician  of  value,  the  only  sovereign  Physician
of  the  soul,  who  by  his  blood  and  Spirit  cures  all
our  spiritual  sicknesses.  Mat.  9.  12.
r .  8. 22.  is  no  balm  in  Gilead  ?  is  there  no  p.  there  ?
at.  9.  12.  lesus  said,  they  that  be  whole  need  not
a  p.  but  the  sick,  Mark  2.  17.  L.uke  5.  31.
ase  4.  23.  p.  heal  thyself  ||  Col.  4.  14.  Luke  the  p.
PHYSICIANS.

en.  50.  2.  Joseph  commanded  the  p.  his  servants,
1°  embalm  his  father  ;  the  p.  embalmed  Israel
-hr.  16.  12.  Asa  sought  not  to  the  Lord,  but  y.

"  13.  4.  forgers  of  lies,  ye  are  all/;,  of  no  value
aTk  5.  26.  had  suffer,  many  things  of  p.  L.uke  8.43.
PICK.

fov.  30.  17.  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  p.  it  out
PICTURES.

um.  33.  52.  shall  destroy  all  their  p.  and  images
rov.  25.  11.  like  apples  of  gold  in  p.  of  silver
a.  2.  16.  the  day  ot  the  Lord  on  all  pleasant  p.

.  PIECE.

!nj  *3.  _10.  he  laid  one  p.  against  another
*od.  37“  •  made  two  eherubims  beaten  out  of  one  p.
am.  10.  2.  make  thee  two  trumpets  of  a  whole  p.
9. 53.  a  certain  woman  cast  a  p.  of  a  millstone
upon  Abimelech’s  head,  2  Sam.  11.21.
stun.  2.  36.  shall  come  and  crouch  to  him  for  a  p.

.  of  silver,  that  1  may  eat  a  p.  of  bread

1«.  they  gave  him  a  p.  of  a  cake  of  figs
,  o.  19.  to  every  one  a  p.  of  flesh,  1  Chr.  16.  3.
■t;.ll.  where  was  a  p.  of  ground  full  oflentiles
v  an<^  mar  every  good  y.  of  land,  25.

1  q  ^  aaman  departed  a  little  p.  of  ground

3.  11.  and  Ilaslmb  repaired  the  others.

Ezer  ar“>ther  p.  20,  21,  24  ,  27  ,  30.

41.  24.  as  hard  as  a  p.  of  the  nether  millstone
11.  every  man  also  gave  him  a  p.  of  money
■  ut\  0.  26.  a  man  is  brought  to  a  p.  of  bread

hpra  p.  of  bread  that  man  will  transgress
•>.  thy  temples  ai  e  up.  of  pomegranate,  6. 7.

.  'fit-  -E  should  give  him  daily  a  p.  of  bread
e*.  .4.  4.  every  good  p.  the  thigh  and  the  shoulder
•  “r‘uK  11  out/>.  by/>.  let  no  lot  fall  upon  it
m°s  3.  12.  out  of  the  mouth  of  lion  a  p.  of  an  ear


Amos  4. 7-  one  p.  was  rained  on,  and  the  p.  whereon
Zech.  5. 1 7.  there  was  lift  up  a  weighty  p.  of  lead
Mat.  9.  16.  110  man  putteth  a  p.  ot  new  doth  to  an
old  garment,  Mark  2.  21.  Luke  5.  36.

17.  27.  thou  shalt  find  a  p.  of  money,  that  take
Luke  14.  18.  I  have  bought  a  p.  of  ground

15.  8.  if  she  lose  one  p.  she  doth  light  a  candle

9.  for  1  have  found  the  p.  that  1  had  lost

24.  42.  they  gai  e  him  a  p.  of  a  broiled  fish

PIECES.

Gen.  15. 17 .  a  burning  lamp  passed  between  those  p.
20. 16  I  have  given  thy  brother  1000  y.  of  silver
33. 19.  bought  for  100 p.  of  money,  Josh.  24.  32.

37.  +  23.  they  stripped  Joseph  of  his  coat  of  many  p.
28.  they  solo  Joseph  for  twenty  p.  of  silver
33.  Joseph  without  doubt  is  rent  in  p.  44.  28.

45.  22.  he  gave  to  Benjamin  thirty  p.  of  silver
Exod.  22.  13.  if  it  be  torn  in  p.  let  him  bring  it
28.7.  the  ephod  shall  have  the  two  shoulder/).

25.  put  two  chains  on  the  shoulder  p.  39.  4,  18.
Lev.  2.  6.  thou  shalt  part  the  meat  offering  in  p.

8.  20.  Moses  burnt  the  p.  and  fat  of  the  ram

9.  13.  they  presented  burnt  offering  with  the  p.
Judg.  9. 4.  they  gave  A  bimele.  h  seventy  p.  of  silver

16.5.  we  will  give  thee  1100 p.  ofsiLer

19.29.  he  divided  his  concubine  into  twelve  p.

1  Saw.  11.  7-  Saul  hewed  a  yoke  of  oxen  in  p.

15.  33.  Samuel  hewed  A  gag  in  p.  before  the  Lord

1  Kings  1 1.30.  Abijah  rent  new  garment  in  twelve/).
31.  Ahijah  said  to  Jeroboam,  take  thee  ten/).

19.  11.  a  strong  wind  brake  in  p.  the  rocks

2  Kings  2.  12.  Elisha  rent  his  clothes  in  two  p.

5.5.  Naaman  took  with  him  6000/).  of  gold

6. 25.  an  ass’s  head  was  sold  for  eighty  p.  of  silver

11. 18.  and  brake  the  images  of  Baal  in  p.  23.  14.

18.  4.  brake  in  p.  the  brasen  serpent  Moses  made

2  Chr.  23.  17.  went  to  the  house  of  Baal,  and  brake
the  images  in  p.  38.  1. 1  34.  4.  Mic.  1.  7.
Job  4.  +  20.  they  are  beaten  in  p.  from  morning

16.  12.  and  he  hath  also  shaken  me  in  p.  *

40. 18.  his  bones  as  strong/),  of  brass,  as  bars  of  iron
41.  +  15.  strong  p.  of  shields  are  his  pride

+  30.  sharp  p.  of  the  potsherd  are  under  him
Psal.  7.  2.  lending  in  p.  while  none  to  deliver

50.  22.  consider  this,  lest  l  tear  you  in  p.

68.  30.  till  every  one  submil  with  p.  of  silver
74. 14.  thou  biakest  the  heads  of  Leviathan  in  p.
Cant.  8.  11.  every  one  for  the  fruit  bring  1000/).

Isa.  3. 15.  what  mean  ye  that  ye  beat  my  people  to/)*.?
Jer.  5. 6.  every  one  thatgoeth  outshall’be  torn  in/).  ?

23.29.  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock  in  p.

Lam.  3. 11.  he  hath  turned  aside  and  pulled  me  in  p.
Ezek.  4. 14.  have  not  eaten  that  which  is  torn  in  p.

9-  +  2.  every  man  a  weapon  of  his  breaking  in  p.

13.  19.  and  will  ye  pollute  me  for  p.  of  bread  ?

24.  4.  gather  the  p.  thereof  into  the  pot
Dan.  2.  34.  which  brake  the  image  in  p.  45.

40.  forasmuch  as  iron  breakelh  in  p.  and  subdueth

6.  24.  the  lions  brake  all  their  bones  in  p.

7.  7.  the  fourth  beast  devoured  and  brake  in/).  19.
Hos.  3.2.  I  bought  her  to  me  for  fifteen/),  of  silver
Mic.  3.  3.  who  chop  my  people  in  p.  as  for  the  pot

4.  13.  and  thou  shalt  beat  in  p.  many  people
5.8.  as  a  lion  teareth  in  p.  and  none  can  deliver
Kali.  2. 12.  lion  did  tear  in  p.  enough  for  his  whelps
Zech.  11. 12.  they  weighed  for  my  price  thirty  p.

13.  I  took  the  thirty  p.  of  silver,  Mat.  27.  6,  9.
Luke  15.  8.  what  woman  having  ten  p.  of  silver
Acts  19.  19.  they  found  the  price  50,000  p.  of  silver
23.  10.  lest  Paul  should  he  pulled  in  p.  of  them
27  .  44.  and  some  on  broken  p.  of  the  ship
See  Break,  Broken,  Cut,  Dash,  Dashed.
PIERCE.

Nnm.  24.  8.  he  shall  p.  them  through  with  arrows
2  Kings  18.  21.  on  which  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go
into  his  hand  and  p.  if.  Isa.  36.  6.
Luke  2.  35.  a  sword  shall  p.  through  thy  own  soul
PI  ERG  ED.

Judg.  5.  26.  when  she  had  p.  through  his  temples
Job  30.  17.  my  bones  are  p.  in  me  in  the  night
Psal.  22.  16.  they  p.  my  hands  and  my  feet
Hag.  1.  +  6.  earneth  wages,  to  put  it  into  bag/),  thro’
Zech.  12. 10.  they  shall  look  on  me  whom  they  have
p.  and  shall  mourn  for  him,  John  19,  37.
John  19.  34.  one  of  the  soldiers  p.  his  side
1  Tim.  6.  10.  and  p.  themseL  es  with  many  sorrows
Rev.  1.  7-  they  also  which  p.  him  shall  see  him
PIERCETH.

Job  40.  24.  Behemoth's  nose  p.  through  snares
PIERCING.

Isa.  27.  L  the  Lord  shall  punish  the/),  serpent
fleb.  4. 12.  word  of  God  isquick,  p.  to  the  dividing
PI  I  RCINGS.

Prov.  12.  18.  that  speaketh  like  the  p.  of  a  sword
PIETY.

1  Tim.  5.  4.  let  them  learn  to  shew  p.  at  home
PIGEON,  see  Young.-
PILE.

Isa.  30.  33.  the  p.  of  it  is  fire  and  much  wood
Ezek.  24.  9.  1  will  e\  en  make  the  p.  fot  fire  great
PILGRIMAGE.

Gen.  47 . 9-  the  days  of  years  of  my  p.  are  130  years,

1  have  not  attained  to  years  in  the  days  of  their/).
Exod.  6.  4.  to  give  them  the  land  of  their  p.

Ps.  119. 54.  been  my  songs  in  the  house  of  my  p.

Pi  I.G  RIMS.

Heb.  11. 13.  confessed  they  were  strangers  and  p.

1  Pet.  2. 11.  1  beseech  you.  as p.  abstain  from  lusts
PILLAR

Signifies,  f  1  ]  That  which  supportetli  an  house  or
building,  Judg.  16.  25,  26,  29.  [2]  A  monument
raised  m  memory  of  some  person  or  action,  Gen.
35.  20.  2  Sam.  18. 18.  [3]  The  cloud  in  the  wilder¬
ness,  which  resembled  a  pillar,  Exod.  13.  21.

A  pillar  of  cloud,  a  pillar  of  tire,  a  pillar  of  smoke,
Exod.  13.  21.  Judg.  20.  40.  signify,  a  cloud,  a  fire,
a  smoke,  which  are  raised  up  towards  heaven  in
the  form  of  an  irregular  pillar.

The  pillars  of  heaven,  Job  26.  11,  and  the  pillars
of  the  earth,  Job  9.  6.  are  metaphorical  expres¬
sions,  that  suppose  the  heavens  and  the  earth  to
be  as  an  edifice,  raised  by  the  hand  of  God,  and


founded  upon  its  basis,  or  foundation  ;  which  ap¬
pears  from  those  words  in  Job  38.  4,  5.  6.  Where-
wast  thou  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the
earth  '  declare,  if  thou  hast  understanding.  The'
ancients  imagined  the  earth  to  lie  upon  a  flat,  and-
that  the  heavens  rested  upon  its  extremities.

The  church  is  called  the  pillar  of  truth,  1  Tim.  3.

15.  It  holds  forth  the  mind  of  Christ,  as  a  pillar
does  an  edict,  or  proclamation,  that  all  may  take
notice  of  it,  so  that  the  truths  of  God  are  published,
supported,  and  kept  from  sink  ing  by  it,  hut  do  not
derive  their  authority  from  it.  In  which  sense
teachers, prophets,  and  apostles,  are  likewise  called
pillars,  Prov.  9.  1.  Jer.  1.  18.  Gal.  2.  9.

Gen.  19.  26. she  looked  back, and  became  up.  of  salt-
28.  18.  Jacob  set  it  up  for  a  p.  22.  135.  14.

31.  13.  Beth  el,  where  thou  anointedst  the/).

51.  behold  this  p.  ||  52.  and  this  p.  be  witness
35.  20.  Jacob  set/),  on  Rachel’s  grave,  that  is  the/).
h.xod.  33.  9.  cloudy/),  descended  and  stood  at  door

10.  the  people  saw  the  cloudy  p.  stand  at  door  of
Lev.  26.  + 1.  ye  shall  not  rear  up  a  p.  Vent.  16.  +  22.
Judg  9.  6.  made  A!  iinelei  h  king  by  plain  of  the  p.

20.  40.  the  flame  arose  with  a p.  of  smoke
2  Sam.  18.  18.  Absalom  reared  up  a  p.  called  the p.

1  Kings 7 . 21 .  Solomon  set  up  the  l  ight  p.  the  lefe  p.

2  A  ings  11.  14.  king  stood  by  p.  23.  3.  2  Chr.  23.  13-
Neh.  9-  12.  thou  leddest  them  in  day  by  a  cloudy  p~
Psal.  99.  7-  he  spake  to  them  in  the  cloudy/).

La.  19.  19.  and  a  p.  at  the  border  thereof  to  Lord
Jer.  1.  18.  I  have  made  thee  this  day  an  iron/).

52.  21.  the  height  of  one  p.  w  as  eighteen  cubits
1  Tim.  3.  15.  church,  the  p.  and  ground  of  the  truth'
Rev.  3.  12.  him  that  overcometh  will  1  make  <tp.

See  Cloud,  Ft r e.

PILLARS.

Exod.  24.  4.  Moses  built  an  altar  and  twelve  p.

26.  32.  thou  shalt  hang  the  vail  upon  four/?.

37.  thou  shalt  make  for  the  hanging  five  p.  36.  38-

27.  10.  twenty  p.  thereof  brass  hooks  ol  the  p.  sil¬

ver  11.  1  38.  10,  11,  12,  17.
12.  ten  p.  li  14.  their  p.  three,  15.  I  38.  14,  15.

16.  p.  four  |1  38.  17.  sockets  for  p.  were  of  brass
Deut.  7. +  5.  ye  shall  break  dow  n  their  p.  12.  3.
Judg.  16.  25.  they  set  Samson  between  the  n.

1  Sam.  2.  8.  the  p.  of  the  earth  are  the  Lori’s

1  Kings  7.  15.  he  cast  two  p.  of  brass  of  18  cubits

10.  12.  the  king  made  of  the  almug  trees/;.

2  Kings  18.  16.  Ilezekiah  cut  off  gold  from  the  p.

25.  13.  the  Chaldees  brake  in  pieces  the/),  of  brass*.

and  carried  brass  to  Babylon,  16.  Jer.  52.  17,20-,
Esth.  1.6.  hangings  fastened  to  rings  and/),  of  marb.
Job  9.  6.  and  the/),  thereof  trem hie,  26.  11.

Psal.  75. 3.  earth  is  dissolved,  1  bear  up  the  p.  of  it
Prov.  9. 1.  she  hath  hewn  out  her  seven  p.

Cant.  3.  6.  that  cometh  like  a  p.  of  smoke  perfumed-
10.  made  p.  thereof  of  silver,  bottom  of  gold

5.  15.  legs  are  as  p.  of  marble  set  on  sockets  of  gold*
Joel  2.  30.  I  will  shew  blood,  fire,  and p.  of  smoke
Gal.  2.  9.  John  and  Cephas  who  seemed  to  be/).
Rev.  10. 1.  face  as  the  sun,  his  feet  were  as/),  of  lire
PILLED.

Gen.  30.  37.  Jacob  p.  white  strakes  in  the  rods

38.  he  set  rods  which  he  had  p.  before  the  flocks

PILLOW,  S.

It  signifies,  [1]  Properly,  a  sort  of  cushion  to  /la¬
under  one's  head  in  bed,  Mark  4.  38.  [2]  Figura¬
tively,  it  betokens  ease,  rest,  and  quietness  ;  sur/i-
did  the  false  prophetesses  make,  that  they  might-
be  signs  to  the  people  of  ease  and  rest  ;  and  they,
thus  endeavoured  to  render  them  secure,  Ezek.  13,
18,20.

Gen.  28. 11.  and  Jacob  put  stones  for  his  p.

18.  Jacob  took  the  stone  that  he  had  put  for  his  p.

1  Sam.  19.  13.  Michal  put  up.  of  goats’  hair,  16.
Ezek.  13.18.  woe  to  the  women  that  sew  p.  and  make-
20.  wherefore,  behold,  I  am  against  your  p.

Mark  4.  38.  Jesus  w  as  in  the  ship  asleep  on  a  p.

PI  LOTS.

Ezek.  27.  8.  thy  wise  men,  O  Tyrus,  were  thy  p.

28.  suburbs  snake  at  the  sound  of  the  cry  of  thy  p.

PINE.

Lev.  26.  39.  they  that  are  left  of  you  shall  p.  away*.

in  iniquities  of  their  fathers  shall  they/),  away;
Lam.  4.  9.  these/),  away,  stricken  through  for  wan-
Ezek.  24.  23.  ye  shall  p.  away  for  your  iniquities
33.  10.  if  sins  be  upon  us,  and  we  p.  away  in  the*
PIN  E.

Neh.  8.  15.  fetch  olive  and  p.  branches  for  booths

PINE-TREE.

Isa.  41. 19. 1  will  plant  p.  and  box-tree  together
60.  13.  the  p.  and  box-tree  shall  come  to  thee
PIN  ETH.

Mark  9.  18.  gnasheth  with  his  teeth,  and  p.  away
PINING.

Isa.  38. 12.  he  will  cut  me  off  with  p.  sickness

PIN.

Judg.  16.  14.  Delilah  fastened  it  with  a  p.  Samso*
aw  aked  and  went  away  w  ith  the  p.  of  the  bea«L
Ezra  9.  +  8.  and  to  give  us  a  p.  in  his  holy  place
Ezek.  15.  3.  will  men  take  a p.  of  the  vine-tree  ?
PINNACLE.

Mat.  4.  5.  setteth  him  on  a  p.  of  temple,  Luke  4.  9.
PINS.

Exod.  27.  19.  make  all  the  p.  of  the  tabernacle  and
court  of  brass,  35. 18.  I  38.  20,  31. 1  39.  40c
Num.  3.  37.  under  the  custody  of  Meiaii,  p.  4.  32.
PIPE,  S.

1  Sam.  10.5.  shalt  meet  company  of  prophets  with/), .

1  Kings 1.  40.  the  people  piped  with  p.  and  rejoiced
Psal.  149-  +  3.  praise  his  name  with  up.  150.  +  4.

Isa.  5.  12.  the  harp  and  p.  are  in  their  feasts

30.29.  have  a  song,  as  when  one  goeth  with  a/,

Jer.  48.  .36.  mine  heart  shall  sound  for  Moab  likes.
Ezek.  28.  1.3.  workmanship  of  thy/),  was  prepared
Zech.  4.  2.  ami  seven/),  to  the  seven  lamps
12.  which  through  the  golden  p.  empty  themselves-
1  Cor. 14.  7.  things  without  life,  whether  p.  or  harp-
PIPED.

1  Kings  1.40.  people  p.  with  pipes,  and  rejoiced
Mat.  11. 17.  saying,  we  have  v.  unto  you,  Luke  7 ■  3£c.

1  Cor.  14.  j.  hovv  shall  it  be  knc  \vn  what  is  p.  ?

359


PIT


P  L  A


PLA


Rev.


PIPERS.

18.  22.  voice  of  p.  shall  be  heard  no  more
PISS.

2  Kings  18.  27-  drink  own  p.  with  you,  Isa.  36. 12.
PISSEl'II.  See  Wall.

PIT,  S.

Signifies,  [1]  A  hole  in  the  earth,  Tsa.  30.  14.  [2]
Any  mischief,  or  evil,  for  insnartng  a  person,
Psal.  7.  15.  [3]  The  grave,  Psal.  28.  1. 1  30.  3.
f4]  Trouble,  Psal.  40.  2.  [5]  Abraham  and

Sarah,  front  whom  the  Israelites  sprang,  even
when  their  bodies  were  like  a  rock ,  or  pit,  Isa.

51.1,2.  [6]  Hell,  Rey  9.2.120.1.

Gen.  14. 10.  the  valeot  Stddnn  was  full  of  slime/?.

37.  20.  come,  let  us  cast  him  into  some  p.  24.

Exod.  21.  31.  owner  of  the  p.  shall  make  it  good
Lev.  11.  36.  a  p.  wherein  is  water,  shall  be  clean
Num.  16.  30.  they  go  down  quick  into  the  p.  33.

1  Sam.  13.  6.  the  Israelites  hid  themselves  in  p.

2  Sam.  17.  0.  behold,  he  is  now  hid  in  some  p.

18.  17.  cast  Absalom  in  a  great  p.  in  the  wood
23.  20.  Benaiah  slew  a  lion  in  a  p.  1  Citron.  11.  22.

2  Kings  10.  14.  and  .lehu  slew  them  at  the  p.

18.  f  31.  drink  every  one  the  waters  of  his  p.

Job  17.  16.  they  shall  go  down  to  the  bars  of  the  p.
33.  18.  he  keepeth  back  his  soul  from  the  p.  30.

24.  deliver  him  from  going  down  into  the  p.  28.
Psal.  9.  15.  heathen  are  sunk  down  into  the  p.

28  1.  become  like  them  that  go  down  into  the  p.

30.  3.  that  1  should  not  go  down  to  the/?.

9.  what  profit  in  my  blood,  when  l  go  down  to p.  I
35.  7.  they  have  hid  from  me  their  net  in  a  p.

40.  2.  lie  brought  me  up  out  of  an  hoirible  p.

55.  23.  bring  them  to  the  p.  of  destruction
69.  15.  let  not  the  p.  shut  her  mouth  on  me
88.  4.  I  am  counted  with  them  that  go  into  p.

6.  thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  p.

119.  85.  the  proud  have  digged  p.  for  me
140.  10.  let  them  he  cast  into  deep  p.  not  to  rise
143.  7.  like  them  that  go  down  into  p.  Prov.  1.  12.
Prov.  22.  14.  mouth  of  strange  women  is  a  deep/?.

23.  27.  and  a  strange  woman  is  a  narrow/?.

28.  10.  he  shall  fall  himself  into  his  own  p.

17.  he  shall  fiee  to  the  p.  let  no  man  stay  him
Isa.  14.  15.  be  brought  down  to  the  sides  ot  the  /?.

19.  that  go  down  to  the  stones  of  the  p.

24. 17.  fear,  and  the/?,  and  the  snare  are  on  thee

18.  cometh  out  of  midst  of/?.  Jer.  48.  43,  44.

22.  be  gathered,  as  prisoners  are  gathered  in  /?.

30.  14.  a  sherd  to  take  water  withal  out  of  the  /?.

38.  if.  hast  delivered  it  from  the  /?.  of  corruption

38. 18.  they  that  go  down  to  p.  cannot  hope
51. 14.  hastened),  that  lie  should  not  die  in  the  /?.

Jer.  2.  6.  the  l  ord  that  led  us  through  a  land  of/?.

14.  3.  they  came  (o  the  /?.  and  found  no  water

41.  7.  and  cast  them  into  the  midst  of  the  /?.

9.  the  p.  which  Asa  made  for  fear  of  Baasha

Lam.  4.  20.  anointed  of  1  ord  was  taken  in  their  p.
Ezek.  19.  4.  nations  heard,  he  was  taken  in  /?.  8.

26.  20.  with  them  that  descend  into  the  /?.  28.  8
131.  14,  16.  1  32.  18,  24,  25,  29,  30.

32.  23.  whose  graves  are  set  in  the  sides  of  the  /?.
Jonah  2.  t  6.  hast  thou  brought  my  life  from  /?.

Zeph.  2.  9.  even  the  breeding  of  nettles  and  salt  /?.
Zech.  9. 11.  1  have  sent  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  /?.
Mat.  12.  11.  if  it  fall  into  a/?,  on  sabbath,  Luke  14.  5

See  Bottom less,  Dig,  Dicged.

PI  I  CH.

Gen.  6.  14.  pitch  it  within  and  without  with  /?.

Exod.  2.  3.  she  daubed  it  w  ith  slime  and  with  p
Isa.  34.  9.  streams  thereof  shall  be  turned  to  /?.  and
the  land  thereof  shall  become  burning  /?.
PITCH.

Num.  1.  52.  Israel  shall  /?.  every  man  by  his  camp
53.  the  Levites  shall  /?.  round  the  tabernacle

2.  2.  every  man  shall  p.  by  his  own  standard

3.  camp  of  'udah  /?.  H  3.  23.  the  Gershonites  /?.
3.29.  sons  of  Kohath  /?.  ||  35.  Merari  shall  /?.

Deut.  1.  33.  to  search  you  out  a  place  to  /?.  in
Josh.  4.  20.  Joshua  did  p.  twelve  stones  in  Gilgal
Isa.  13.  20.  neither  shall  the  Arabian  /?.  tent  there
Jer.  6.  3.  shepherds  shall  /?.  their  tents  against  her
PI  1 CII  ED.

Gen.  12. 8.  Abram  /?.  his  tent,  and  built  an  altar
13.  12.  Lot  p.  II  26.  I?-  Isaac  /?.  in  valley,  25.

31.  25.  Jacob  p.  in  mount,  Laban  /?.  in  Gilead.

33.  18.  Jacob/?,  his  tent  before  the  city  Shalem
Exod.  17.  1.  from  Sin,  Israel  /?.  in  Rephidim

19.  2.  were  come  to  desert,  and  had  p.  in  wildern.
33.  7.  Moses  took  tabernacle,  /?.  it  without  camp
Num.  1.51.  when  tabern.  is/?.  Levites  shall  set  it  up
2.  34.  so  they  /?.  by  their  standards  and  set  forward
9.  18.  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  /?.

12.  16.  the  people/?,  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran
21.  10.  Israel  /?.  in  Ohoth  ||  11./?.  in  Ije  abarim
33.  5.  Israel  /?.  in  Suecoth  ||  6.  they  /?.  in  Etham.

Josh.  8.  11.  the  ambush  p.  on  the  north  side  of  Ai
2  Sam.  6.  17-  set  ark  in  tabernacle  David  had  p.
if.  26.  Israel  and  Absalom  p.  in  land  of  Gilead

1  Kings  20.  27.  and  Israel  /?.  before  them,  29.

2  Kings  25.  1.  Kebuchadn.  /?.  against  it,  Jer.  52.  4.
I  Chron.  15.  1.  David  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark,

and  /?.  for  it  a  tent,  16.  1.  2  Chron.  1.  4.
Ezra  8.  + 15.  there  p.  we  by  the  river  Ahava
f leb.  8.  2.  of  the  true  tabernacle  which  Lord  p.

PILCHER,  S,

Signifies,  [1]  A  vessel  with  a  handle,  for  contain¬
ing  liquors,  Gen.  24.  14,  15.  [2]  Such  vessels  in
the  human  body  as  convey  vital  supplies  into  the
several  parts  of  it,  as  the  veins  and  arteries  ;
especially  the  arterious  vein,  by  which  the  blood
is  conveyed  to  the  lungs,  and  thence  to  the  left
ventricle  of  the  heart,  and  then  by  the  pulse  thrust
out  into  the  great  artery ,  called  Arteria  aorta
and  by  its  branches  dispersed  into  all  the  parts  of
the  body ;  which  being  done,  the  residue  of  the
blood  is  carried  back  into  the  right  ventricle,
whence  it  is  disposed  as  has  been  mentioned,  and
so  runs  a  perpetual  round,  Eccl.  12.  6.  which
may  be  said  to  be  broken,  when  they  become  use¬
less  and  insufficient  for  the  performance  of  their
several  functions.

360


Gen.  24.14. let  down /?.  I  pray  the.e,  that  I  may  drink
15.  behold,  Rebekah  came  with  her/?.  45.

Judg.  7.  16.  with  empty  /?.  and  lamps  within  the/?.

19.  they  brake  /?.  that  were  in  their  hands,  20.

Eccl.  12.  6.  or  the  p.  be  broken  at  the  fountain
Lam.  4.  2.  how  are  they  esteemed  as  earthen  p.  ?
Mark  14.  1.3.  man  bear,  a  /?.  of  water,  Luke  22.  10.

PI  1  V.

Deut.  7. 16.  thine  eye  shall  have  no  /?.  on  them
2  Sam.  12.  6.  restore  the  lamb,  because  he  had  nop.
Job  6.  14.  to  the  afflicted  p.  should  be  shewed
19.  21.  have/?,  on  me,  /?.  on  me,  O  my  friends
Ps.  69.  20.  looked  for  some  to  take  p.  but  was  none
Prov.  19.  17.  that  hath/?,  on  poor,  lendeth  to  Lord
l.<a.  1.3.  18.  they  shall  have  no  p.  on  fruit  of  womb
63.9.  in  his  love  and  in  his  /?.  he  redeemed  them
Jer.  15. 5.  for  who  shall  have /?.  on  thee  O  Jerusalem
21. 7.  he  shall  not  spare,  nor  have  p.  nor  mercy
Ezek.  5. 11.  nor  will  I  have  p.  7. 4,  9. 1  8.  18.  |  9. 10.

9.  5.  let  not  your  eye  spare,  neither  have  ye  /?.

24.  t  21.  behold,  1  will  profane  p.  ot  your  soul
36.  21.  but  l  had  p.  for  mine  holy  name

Amos  1.  11.  because  Edom  did  cast  off  all  p.

Jonah  4.  10.  thou  hast  had  p.  on  the  gourd
Mat.  18.  33.  have  had  compassion, as  1  had p.  on  thee
PITY.

Deut.  1.3.  8.  nor  shall  thine  eye/?,  him,  19.  13,  21.

25.  12.  shalt  cut  off  her  hand,  thine  eye  shall  not/?.
Prov.  28.  8.  shall  gather  for  him  that  will  /?.  poor
Jer.  1.3.  14.  1  willnot  /?.  nor  spare,  but  destroy
Joel  2.  18.  then  the  Lord  w  ill  p.  his  people
Zech.  11.  5.  their  own  shepherds  p.  them  not

6.  for  l  will  no  more/?,  inhabitants  of  the  land
pm  ED.

Psal.  106.  46.  he  made  them  also  to  be  p.  of  all
Lam.  2.  2.  and  the  Lord  hath  not  p.  17.  21.  I  .3.  4.3.
Ezek.  16.  5.  none  eye  /?.  thee,  to  do  any  of  these
P1T1  El  II.

Psal.  103.  13.  like  as  a  father  p.  his  children,  so  the
Lordp.  them  that  fear  him
Ezek.  24.  21.  I  will  profane  what  your  soul  p.

PIT  IF  LI  L.

Lam.  4.10.  hands  of  p.  women  have  sodden  children
Jam.  5.  11.  ye  have  seen  that  the  Lord  is  very  p.

1  Pet.  3.  8.  love  as  brethren,  bep.  be  courteous
PLACE

Signifies,  [1]  The  space  or  room  in  which  a  person
or  thing  is,  Gen.  40.  3.  [2]  A  city,  tent, or  dwell
(wp,  Gen.  18.  26,  .3.3.  [3]  Lot,  state,  or  condition.
Job  18.  21.  [4]  Room,  or  stead,  Gen.  50.  19.  [5]
Acceptation,  kind  welcome,  or  entertainment,  John

8.  37.  [6]  A  portion  or  text  of  scripture,  Acts  8.

32.  [7]  Advantage,  occasion,  or  opportunity,
Eph.  4.  27.  [8]  An  office,  or  employment,  Gen
40.  1.3.

Gen.  13. 14.  Lord  said,  look  from  p.  where  thou  art
18.  24.  w  ilt  thou  destroy  and  not  spare  thep.  ?

26.  I  will  spare  the  p.  for  their  sakes

20.  13.  the  kindness  thou  shalt  shew  at  every  p.

22.  4.  the  third  day  Abraham  saw  the  p.  afar  off
30.25.  send  me  away,  1  may  go  to  mine  own/?.

40.  .3.  into  prison,  the  p.  where  Joseph  was  bound

Exod.  3.  5.  p. w  here  thou  standestis  holy,  Josh.  5. 15.
18.  23.  this  people  shall  go  to  their  p.  in  peace

23.  20.  to  bring  thee  into  the  p.  I  have  prepared
Lev.  1.  16.  he  shall  cast  it  by  the  p.  of  the  ashes
Num.  10.  14.  in  the  first p.  w  ent  standard  of  Judah

18.  31.  ye  shall  eat  in  every  p.  ye  and  households
Deut.  11.  24.  every  p.  whereon  the  soles  of  your
feet  shall  tread  shall  be  yours,  Josh.  1.  .3
12.  5.  p.  the  Lord  God  shall  choose,  14. 1  16.  16.

13.  offer  not  thy  burnt-offering  in  every  p.

21.  if  thep.  be  too  far  from  thee,  14.  24.

Judg.  11.  19.  let  us  pass  through  thy  land  to  my  p.
20.  36.  men  of  Israel  gave  p.  to  the  Benjamites
Ruth  .3.  4.  thou  shalt  mark  the  p.  w  here  he  lieth

1  Sam.  10.  12.  and  one  of  the  same  p.  answered

14.  46.  the  Philistines  w  ent  to  their  ownp.

20.  25.  and  David's  p.  was  empty,  27.

2  Sam.  2.  2.3.  he  fell  down  and  died  in  the  same  p.

15.  21.  in  what  p.  my  lord  the  king  shall  he

17.  9.  he  is  hid  in  some  pit,  or  in  some  other  p.

12.  so  shall  we  come  upon  him  in  some  p.

18.  18.  it  is  called  to  this  day  Absalom's  p.

1  Kings  8.  29.  thine  eyes  may  be  open  tow'ard  p.

2  Kings  5.  11.  and  strike  his  hand  over  the  p.

6.  1.  behold, p.  where  we  dwell  is  too  strait  for  us

1  Chron.  21.  22.  grant  me  the  p.  of  threshing-floor
25.  David  gave  to  Oman  for  the  p.  600  shekels

2  Chron.  30.  16.  the  priests  stood  in  their  p.  35.  10
.35.  15.  singers,  sons  of  Asaph,  were  in  their  p.

Neh.  2.  3.  p.  of  my  father's  sepulchre  lieth  w-aste

14.  there  was  nop.  for  beast  under  me  to  pass
4.  20.  in  whatp.  ye  hear  sound  of  the  trumpet.

13. 11.  1  set  singers  and  Levites  in  their  p.

Esth.  2.  9.  Esther  and  her  maids  to  the  best  p.

4.  14.  shall  deliverance  arise  from  another  p.

Job  6.  17.  they  are  consumed  out  of  their  p.

9.  6.  which  shake  the  earth  out  of  her  p.

16.  18.  cover  not  my  blood,  let  my  cry  have  no  p.
28.  12.  where  is  the  p.  of  understanding  ?  20.

2.3.  and  he  knoweth  thep.  thereof
36.  20.  when  people  are  cut  off  in  their  p.

38.  19.  as  for  darkness,  where  is  thep.  thereof?

40. 12.  and  tread  down  the  wicked  in  their p.

Psal.  26.  8.  the  p.  where  thine  honour  dwelleth

12.  my  foot  stand-eth  in  an  even  /?.

.32.  7.  thou  art  my  hiding  p.  119.  114.

33.  14.  from  thep.  of  his  habitation  he  looketh
10.3.  16.  thep.  thereof  shall  know  it  no  more

Eccl.  3.  16.  the p.of  judgment  thep.of  righteousness
20.  all  go  to  one  p.  ail  are  of  the  dust,  6.  6.

Isa.  5.  8.  that  lay  field  to  field,  till  there  be  nop.

13.  13.  the  earth  shall  remove  out  of  her  p.

14.  2.  shall  take  them,  and  bring  them  to  their  p
28.  8.  full  of  filthiness,  so  that  there  is  nop.  clean

25.  the  appointed  barley  and  rye  in  their  p.

30.  32.  in  every  p.  where  grounded  staff  shall  pass
49.  20.  the  p.  is  too  strait  for  me,  give  p.  to  me
54.2.  enlarge  thep.  of  thy  tent,  spare  not
60.  13.  I  will  make  the  p.  of  my  feet  glorious
66.  1.  and  where  is  the  p.  of  my  rest:


Jer.  7.  12.  go  to  my  p.  ||  32.  till  there  be  nop.  19.  u.

17.  12.  glorious  throne  is  thep.  ot  our  sahctuary

18.  14.  the  flowing  waters  come  from  another  p.
Ezek.  6.  13.  there  slain  be  on  p.  where  they  offered
43.  7.  p.  of  my  throne  shall  Israel  no  more  defile

21.  lie  shall  bum  it  in  the  appointed  p.of  house
Dan.  2.  35.  that  no  p.  was  found  for  them
8.  11.  the  p.  of  his  sanctuary  was  cast  down
Ifos.  5.  15.  I  w ill  go  and  return  to  my  p.  till  thev
Joel  .3.  t  16.  the  Lord  will  be  thep.  ot  repair
Amos  2.  t  13.  press  yourp.  as  a  cart  is  pressed
8.  3.  there  shall  be  many  dead  bodies  in  every  p.
Nah.  3.  17.  their  p.  is  not  known  w  here  they  are
Zech.  10. 10.  and  p.  shall  not  be  found  for  them
12.  6.  shall  be  inhabited  again  in  her  own  p.  14. 10.
Mai.  1.  11.  incense  shall  be  offered  in  every  p.
Mat.  28.6.  see  the  p.  where  Lord  lay,  MarklQ.  16,
Mark  6.  10.  in  what  p.  soever  ye  enter  into  an  house
Luke  4.  17.  he  found  the  p.  where  it  was  written

10.  1.  Lord  sent  them  two  and  two  unto  every  p

32.  a  Levite,  when  he  was  at  the  p.  passed  by

14.  9.  and  say  to  thee,  give  this  man  p.

John  4.  20.  Jerusalem  is  the  p.  of  worship

8.  37.  because  my  word  hath  no  p.  in  you

11.  6.  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  same  p.

48.  Romans  shall  take  away  ourp.  and  nation

18.2.  Judas  which  betrayed  him,  knew  thep.

Acts  2.  1.  they  were  with  one  accord  in  onep.

4.  31.  when  they  had  prayed,  the  p.  was  shaken

7.  33.  the  p.  whereon  thou  standestis  holy

49.  or  what  is  the  p.  of  my  rest  ?

8.  32.  the  p.  of  s  ripture  which  he  read  was  this
Rom.  12.  19.  avenge  not,  but  rather  give  p.  to  wrath

15.  23.  but  now  having  no  more  p.  in  these  parts

1  Cor.  1.  2.  with  all  that  inevery  p.  call  on  Jes.  Chr.

11.  CO.  when  ye  come  together  into  one  p.

14.  2.3.  the  whole  church  be  come  into  one  p.

2  Cor.  2.  14.  the  savour  of  his  knowledge  in  every  p.
Gal.  2.5.  to  whom  gavep.  by  subjection  not  an  hour
Fph.  4.  27.  neither  give  p.  to  the  devil

1  Chess.  1 .8.  in  every  p.  your  faith  G  .-ward  is  spread
1  Tim.  2. 1 2.  prayers  for  kings  and  all  in  eminent  p.
Ileb.  5.  6.  as  he  saith  also  in  another p.  thou  a  priest
8.7.  no  p.  should  have  been  sought  for  the  second

12.  17.  he  found  no  p.of  repentance  though  sought
Jam.  .3.  11.  at  the  samep.  sweet  water  and  bitter
Rev.  12.  8.  nor  was  there  p.  found  any  more  in  hear.

14.  that  she  mightily  into  wilderness  to  her  p.

20  It  and  there  was  found  no  p.  for  them
A  PLACE.

Gen.  39.  20.  a  p.  where  king’s  prisoners  were  bound
Exod.  21. 1.3.  then  I  will  appoint  thee  a  p.  to  fiee

33.  21.  the  Lord  said,  behold,  there  is  a  p.  by  me
Num.  32.  1.  behold,  the  place  was  ap.  for  cattle
Deut. 1.5^.  search  you  out  a.  p.  to  pitch  your  tents  in
23.  12.  thou  shalt  have  a  p.  without  the  camp

J0A1.  20.  4.  they  shall  give  him  a  p.  in  the  city
Judg.  17.  8.  to  sojourn  where  he  could  find  a  p.  9.
18.  10.  a  p.  where  is  no  want  of  any  thing

1  Sam.  15.  12.  Saul  set  him  up  a  p.  and  is  gone

21. 2.  1  have  appointed  my  servants  to  such  a  p.
27.  5.  let  them  give  me  a  p.  in  some  tow  n

2  Sam.  7. 10.  I  will  appoint  a  p.  for  Israel,  they  may
dwell  in  ap.  oft'n.  own,  move  no  more,  1  Chr.l  7.9.

11.  16.  loaf?  assigned  Uriah  to  a  p.  where  valiant

1  Kings  8.  21 .  I  set  there  ap.  for  ark,  1  Chron.  15. 1.

2  Kings  6.  2.  let  ns  make  a  p.  where  we  may  dwell

8.  in  such  anil  such  a  p.  shall  be  my  camp

9.  man  of  God  said,  beware  thou  pass  not  such  a  p,
2  Chron.  6.  2.  1  have  built  a  p.  for  thy  dwelling
Job  28.  1.  there  is  a  p.  for  gold  where  they  tine  it
Psal.  132.  5.  until  1  find  out  a  p.  for  the  Lord
Prov.  14.  26.  and  his  children  have  a  p.  of  refuge
Isa.  4.  6.  shall  be  for  a  p.  of  refuge  from  rain
3.3.  21.  the  Lord  will  he  to  us  ap.  of  broad  rivers

34.  14.  and  find  for  herself  a  p.  of  rest
56.  5.  and  within  my  walls  a  p.  and  a  name
65.  10.  Achor  a  p.  tor  the  herds  to  lie  down  in
Ezek.  26.5.  a  p.  for  the  spreading  of  nets,  14,

39.  11.  I  will  give  to  Gog,  a  p.  of  graves  in  Israel

Zeph.  2. 15.  she  is  become  a  p.  for  beasts  to  liedowi
Mat.  27.  33.  that  is  a  p.  of  a  scull,  John  19-  17-
Mark  11.4.  found  colt  in  a  p.  where  two  ways  me
John  14.  2.  1  go  to  prepare  a  p.  for  you,  3.

Iieb.  2.6.  one  in  a  certain  p.  te  fitted,  saying
4.  4.  be  spake  in  a  certain  p.  of  the  seventh  day
11.8.  when  called  to  go  out  into  a  p.  he  obeyed
Rev.  12.6.  where  she  hath  a  p.  prepared  of  God
16. 16.  gathered  them  into  a  p.  called  Armagedcloi
See  Choose,  Dwelling.

High  PLACE.  .  ’

Num.  23.  3.  and  Balaam  went  up  to  an  high  p.

1  Sam.  9.  12.  there  is  a  sacrifice  to-day  in  high p.

10.  5.  shalt  meet  prophets  coming  from  high  p.

13.  when  had  made  an  end,  Saul  came  to  'ighp.

1  Kings  3.  4.  that  was  great  high  p.  1  Chron.  16-3S
11. 7.  Solomon  built  an  highp.  tor  Chemosh

2  Kings  23.  15.  high  p.  that  Jeroboam  had  made
Josiah  brake  flown  the  high  p.  burnt  the  highp

2  Chron.  1.  3.  so  Solomon  went  to  the  highp.

13.  come  from  his  journey  to  high  p.  at  Gibeon
Psal: 9.  +  9.  Lord  will  be  an  high p.  for  the  oppresse?

20.  +  1.  name  of  God  of  Jacob  set  thee  on  a.  highp
46.  +  7.  the  God  of  Jacob  is  an  high  p.  for  us
Isa.  16.  12.  that  Moab is  weary  on  the  highp.
Ezek.  16.  24.  made  highp.  in  every  street,  25.  31.

20.  29.  what  is  the  high  /?.  whereunto  ye  go?
His  PLACE.

Gen.  18.  33.  and  Abraham  returned  to  his  p.

31.  55.  T.ahan  rose  up  and  returned  to  his  p.
Exod.  10.  2.3.  neither  rose  from  his  p.  for  three  day
36.  29-  abide  ev.  man  in  his  p.  none  go  out  of  .ns ;
Lev.  13.  23.  but  if  the  bright  spot  stay  in  Ins  /?.
Num.  2.  17-  every  man  in  his  p.  by  their  standard
24.  25.  Balaam  rose  up  and  returned  to  his p.
Deut.  21.  19.  and  bring  him  to  the  gate  of  hisp.
Ruth  4.  10.  name  of  dead  be  not  cut  off  from  hisp
l  Sam.  3.  2.  when  Eli  was  laid  down  in  his  p.

9.  so  Samuel  went  and  lay  down  in  hit  p.

5.  3.  and  they  set  Dagon  in  his  p.  again

11.  let  the  ark  go  down  to  his  own/?.  6.  2.

23.  22.  go  and  see  his  p.  where  his  haunt  u


PL  A


P  L  A


Sum.  26.  25.  Dav.  went  on,  Saul  returned  to  his  p
29-  4.  send  David,  that  he  may  so  again  to  his p.
Sam.  6.  17-  they;  set  the  ark  of  the  Lord  in  his  p.

19.  39.  Hai'zillai  returned  to  his  own  p.

Kings 8. 6.  priests  brought  ark  to  his p.  2  Chron.5. 7,
20. 24.  take  kings  away,  every  man  out  of  his  p.
Chron.  15.  3.  to  bring  the  ark  of  the  Lord  to  his  p.
16.27-  strength  and  gladness  are  in  his  p.

Chron.  24. 11.  carried  the  c  hest  to  his  p.  again
54.  31.  king  stood  in  his  p.  and  made  a  covenant
)tra  1.4.  let  men  of  his  p.  help  him  with  silver
2. 68.  for  house  of  G.  to  set  it  in  his p.  5.  15.  |  6.  7.
■)h  2.  11.  they  came  every  one  from  his  own  p.

’.  10.  neither  shall  his  p.  know  him  any  more

1.  18.  if  he  destroy  him  from  his p.  it  shall  deny
14. 18.  and  the  rot  k  is  removed  out  of  his  p.

18.  4.  and  shall  the  rock  be  removed  out  of  his  p.?

20.  9.  nor  shall  his p  any  more  behold  him

.7. 21.  and  as  a  storm  hurleth  him  out  of  his  p.

23.  men  sltal  I  clap  hands  and  hiss  him  out  of  his  p.
7. 1.  and  my  heart  is  removed  out  of  his  p.

(8. 12.  and  caused  the  day-spring  to  know  his p.
'sal.  37. 10.  thou  shalt  diligently  consider  his p.
'rov.  27 . 8.  so  is  a  man  that  wandereth  from  his  p.
cel.  1.  5.  the  sun  hasteth  to  hi ,  p.  where  he  arose
•a.  26.  21.  Lord  cometli  out  of  his  p.  to  punish
13. 16.  his  p.  of  defence  shall  be  munition  of  rocks
6. 7.  set  him  in  his p.  shall  not  remove  from  his  p
ir.  4.  7-  he  is  gone  from  his  p.  to  make  desolate

i.  3.  they  shall  feed  every  one  in  his  p.

*ek.  3. 12.  blessed  be  the  glory  of  Lord  from  his  p.
he.  1.  3.  behold,  the  Lord  cometh  out  of  his  p.
tph.  2. 11.  men  shali«w<  rship  every  one  from  his  p.
tch.  6.  12.  and  he  shall  grow  up  out  of  his  p.

'at.  £6.  52.  put  up  again" thy  sword  into  his  p.
cts  1.  25.  that  he  might  go  to  his  own  p.
ev.2.  5.  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  his p.

See  Holy,  Most  Holy.

In  the  PLACE.

ra.  50. 19.  Jos.  said,  fear  not,  1  am  in  the  p.  of  God
zod.  15. 17  ;  plant  them  in  the  p.  thou  hast  made
\W.  4.24.  kill  it  in  tliep.  where  they  kill  burnt  offer-

’  ing  before  the  Lord,  29, 33.  I  6. 25.  |  7.2.

3.19.  in  tliep.  of  the  boil  there  be  white  rising
um.  9;  17-  »«  the p.  where  cloud  abode,  there  Israel
3.54.  inheritance  be  in  the p.  where  his  lot  falleth
sh.  4.  9.  Joshua  set  up  tweh  e  stones  in  the  p.
Kings  13. 22.  because  hast  drunk  water  in  the p.

1. 19.  in  thep.  where  dogs  licked  blood  of  Naboth
shron.  3. 1.  m  the  p.  that  David  had  prepared
^34.  t26.  Striketh  them  in  thep.  of  beholders
<al.  44. 19.  hast  sore  broken  us  in  the  p .  of  dragons

or.  25.  6.  and  stand  not  in  the  p.  of  great  men
'cl.  11.3.  in  thep.  where  the  tree  falleth  it  shall  be
r.  22. 12.  but  he  shall  die  in  the p.  38. 9.  |  42.  22.

■ek.  17.  16.  in  the  p.  where  the  king  dwelleth  *

1.  30.  judge  thee  in  the p.  where  thou  wast  created

os.  1. 10.  that  in  the  p.  where  it  was  said,  ye  are  not

my  people,  shall  be  sons  of  God,  Rom.  9.  26.

?.  13.  not  stay  long  in  the  p.  of  breaking  forth
£»19.41.  in  thep.  where  crucified,  was  a  garden
Cf  the  PLACE.

’■n.  26. 7.  men  of  p.  asked  him ,  lest  men  of  p.  kill
4.  22.  Laban  gathered  all  the  men  of  the  p.

2.  30.  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  p.  Peniel

l. 17.  name  ofp.  Succoth  ||  35. 15.  na.  ofp.  Beth-el
od.  17.7.  and  he  called  name  of  the  p.  Massah
im.  11. 3.  name  of  the  p.  Taberah  ||  21. 3.  Ilormah
sh.  4.  3.  take  ye  out  of  the  p.  twelve  stones
9.  name  oj  the  p.  Gilgal  ||  7.  26.  valley  of  Achor
d9- 19. 16.  the  meno/  the  p.  were  Benjamites
[th  1.  7.  Naomi  went  forth  out  of  tliep.  where
iam.  6.8.  David  called  name  of  thep.  Perez-uzzah
ihron.  28. 11.  pattern  of  the  p.  of  the  mercy-seat
hr  on.  20.  26.  name  of  the  p.  valley  of  Berachah
ek.  41. 11.  breadth  oj  the p.  left  was  five  cubits
n  3.  7.  raise  them  out  of  the  p.  whither  ye  sold

1.8.  make  an  utter  end  of  the  p.  thereof
That  PLACE.

n.  21.31.  Abraham  called  that  p.  Beer-sheba
/  \A\tJ>at  p-  Jehovah-jireh  ||  28.  19.  Beth-el

2.  Mahanaim  ||  38.  21.  asked  men  of  that  p.
tm.  11. 34.  name  of  that  p.  Kibroth-hattaavah
ut.  12.  3.  destroy  names  of  them  out  of  that  p.

.  10.  the  sentence  they  of  that  p.  shall  shew
off.  2. 5.  the3'  called  name  of  that  p.  Bochim
;•  17.  thatp.  Kamath-lehi  ||  18. 12.  Mahaneh-dan
am.  23.  28.  called  that  p.  Selah-hammah-lekoth
am.  2.  16.  that p.  wras  called  Helkath-hazzurim
20.  called  that  p.  Baal-perazim,  1  Chron.  14. 11.
hron.  13.  11.  that  p.  is  called  Perez-uzzah
**•  14. 35.  men  of  that  p.  had  knowdedge  of  him
yhfo.  10.  there  abide  till  ye  depart  from  that  p.

”*5.  13.  a  multitude  being  in  that  p.

.  30.  but  w'as  in  that  p.  where  Martha  met  him
is  21. 12.  both  we  and  they  of  that  p.  besought
This  PLACE.

19. 12.  thy  sons  bring  them  out  of  this  p.

3.  we  will  destroy  this  p.  ||  14.  get  out  of  thisp.

'•  1  j.  surely  the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  this  p.

•  1°-  Lord  is  in  this  p.  ||  17.  dreadful  is  this  p.

•21.  there  was  no  harlot  in  this  p.  22.

'.9.  are  sons,  whom  God  hath  given  me  in  this  p.
ad.  13. 3.  the  Lord  brought  you  out  from  this  p.

m.  20.  5.  to  bring  us  unto  this  evil  p.

“J-1.31.  bare  thee  till  ye  came  to  tliisp.  9.7.  |  11.5.

•  9.  and  he  hath  brought  us  into  this  p.

•  7.  when  ye  came  unto  this  p.  Sihon  came  out
iff.  18.  3.  and  what  makest  thou  in  this  p.  ?

■  mgs8. 29.  hearken  to  prayer  toward  thisp.  30.

35.  2  Chron.  ft.  20,  21 , 26,  40.  1  7.  15.

;  8.  nor  eat  bread,  lior  drink  water  in  this  p.  16.

J8. 25.  come  not  without  L.  against  this  p.

•  16.  1  wi.i  bring  evil  on  this  p.  and  inhabitants

thereof,  17,  20.  2  Chron.  31.  24,  25,  28.
■f?1-  7. 12.  and  have  chosen  this  p.  to  myself
18.  21.  this  the  p.  of  him  that  knows  not  God

•  1  •  and  shed  not  innocent  blood  in  this  p.

"®y  fury  shall  be  poured  out  on  this  p.

•  1  will  give  you  assured  peace  in  this  p.

•  i.  neither  have  sons  nor  daughters  in  thisp.

■  cause  to  cease  out  of  this  p.  the  voice  of  mirth


Jer.  19.  3.  behold,  1  will  bring  evil  upon  thisp.

4.  they  estranged  this  p.  filled  thisp.  with  blood
6.  that  this  p.  shall  no  more  be  called  Tophet
12- thus  will  1  do  to  this  p.  saith  the  Lord,  40.2

22.  11.  Which  went  forth  out  of  this  p.  24.  5.

27.  22.  and  I  will  restore  them  to  this  p.  32.  37.

28.  3.  I  will  bring  to  thisp.  all  the  vessels,  6.

4.  1  will  bring  again  to  this  p.  Jeconiah

29.  10.  in  causing  you  to  return  to  this  p.

33.  10.  again  be  heard  in  this  p.  the  voice  of  joy
42.  18.  and  ye  shall  see  this p.  no  more
44.  29.  that  1  will  punish  you  in  thisp.

51.62.0  Lord,  thou  hast  spoken  against  this  p.

fftek.  46.  20.  this  is//.  where  the  priests  shall  boil
/ep'i.  1.  4.  cut  off  the  remnant  ot  Baal  from  this  p.
Clag.  2.  9.  in  t.  p.  will  l  give  peace,  saith  the.  Lord
Mat.  12.  6.  in  thisp.  one  greater  than  the  temple
Luke  16.  28.  lest  they  come  into  this  p.  of  torment

23.  5.  teaching,  beginning  from  Galilee  to  this p.
Act*  6.  14.  Jesus  ot  Nazareth  shall  destroy  thisp,

7.  7*  they  shall  come  forth  and  serve  me  in  thisp,

21.  28.  that  teacheth  against  the  law  and  this  p.
tleb.  4.  5.  and  in  this  p.  again,  if  they  shall  enter

Thy  PLACE.

Gen.  40.  13.  Pharaoh  shall  restore  thee  to  thy  p
A um.  24.  11.  therefore  now  tiee  thou  to  thy  p.

2  •Sam.  15.  19.  return  to  thy  p.  and  abide  with  king
Ccd.  10.  4.  it  ruler  rise  against  thee,  leave  not  t.p,
Ezek.  12.  3.  thou  shalt  remove  from  thy  p.  38.  15.
To  or  unto  the  PLACE.

3‘  Abram  went  wire  t.  p.  where  his  tent,  4

22.  3.  went  unto  thep.  of  which  God  told  him,  9.
~f?d.  3.8.  to  bring  you  unto  t.p.  of  the  Canaanite

32.  34.  lead  people  unto  the  p.  of  which  1  spake
Jfoim.  10.  29.  we  are  journeying  to  the  p.  of  which
14.  40.  go  up  to  the  p.  which  Lord  hath  promised
Josh.  4. 8. carried  stones  to  t.p.  where  they  lodged
1  bam.  20. 19.  come  to  t.  p.  where  thou  hide  thyself
x  bam.  2. 23.  as  many  as  came  to  thep.  stood  still
7  J$lndsp-  10.  sent  to  the  p.  which  man  of  God  told
at  ;  75.  12.  bring  ark  to  thep.  that  1  prepared

Ac//.  1.  9.  1  will  bring  them  to  tliep.  I  have  chosen
If  sal.  104.  8.  they  go  to  t.  p.  that  thou  hast  founded
Jsa.  18.  7-  present  brought  to  the  p.  of  name  of  L.
Jer.  7.  14.  1  will  do  to  tlie  p.  which  1  gave  to  you
29.  14.  will  bring  you  again  to  t.p.  whence  1  caused
Rets  2u.  23.  and  was  entered  into  the  p.  of  hearing
_  PLACE,  Verb.

Gen.  .33.  f  15.  let  me  p.  some  of  the  folk  with  thee
Exod.  18.  21.  and  p.  such  over  them  to  be  rulers
lJeut.  14.  23.  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose,  to
,  P •  his  name  there,  16.  2,  6, 11.  |  26.  2

\  Kings  20.  t  12.  Benhadad  said,  p.  the  engines
Lzra  6.  5.  and  p.  them  in  the  house  of  God
Isa.  46M3.  and  I  will  p.  salvation  in  Zion  for  Israel
Lzek.  37.  14.  I  shall//,  you  in  your  own  land,  26
Dan.  11.31.  and  they  shall  /?,  the  abomination
Hos.  11.  11.  1  will//,  them  in  their  houses,  saith  L.
/.ech.  10.  6.  I  will  bring  them  again  to®,  them
„  PLACED.

Gen.  3.  24.  God  p.  at  east  of  the  garden  cherubims
47.  11.  Joseph  p.  his  father  and  his  brethren

1  Kings  12.  32.  Jeroboam  p.  in  Beth-el  the  priests

2  Kings  17.  6.  and//,  them  in  Halah  and  in  Habor

24.  and  p.  them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria,  26.

~  Chron.  1.  14.  which  he  p.  in  the  chariot  cities

4.  8.  he  made  tables,  p.  them  in  the  temple

17.  2.  he/?,  forces  in  all  the  fenced  cities  of  Judah
Job  20.  4.  ot  old,  since  man  was  p.  upon  earth
Rsal.  78. 60.  the lent  which  lie  had/?,  among  men
Cant.  5.  1  12.  his  eyes  as  the  eyes  of  doves  fitly  p
Isa.  5.  8.  that  they  may  be  /?.  alone  in  the  midst
Jer .  5.  22.  which//,  sand  for  the  bound  of  the  sea
Ezek.  17.  5.  the  eagle/?,  it  by  the  great  waters

PLACES.

Gen.  28.  15.  I  am  with  thee,  will  keep  thee  in  all  p.
Exod.  20.  24.  in  all  p.  where  1  record  my  name
Deut.lt,  2.  shall  utterly  destroy  all  the  /?.  wherein
Josh.  o.  8.  abode  in  their  p.  till  they  were  whole
Judg.  5.  11.  delivered  in  the/?,  of  drawing  water
19.  13.  let  us  draw  near  to  one  of  these//,  to  lodge

1  bam.  7. 16.  Samuel  judged  Israel  .j  all  those  p.

30.  31 .  David  sent  presents  to  all  the  p.

2  Sam.  7.  7.  in  all  the  p.  spake  1  a  word  with  any
2  Kings  23.  5.  put  down  priests  in  p.  about  Jerusal.

14.  he  filled  their//,  with  the  bones  of  men
Kelt.  4. 12.  from  all//,  whence  ye  shall  return
13.  I  set  the  people  in  lower  p.  and  on  higher  p.

12.  27.  they  sought  Levites  out  of  all  their//.

Job 21.  28.  where  are  dwelling//,  of  the  wicked

37.8.  beasts  go  into  dens  anrf  remain  in  their  /?.

I  sal.  10.  8.  he  sitteth  in  lurking//,  of  the  villages

16.  6.  the  lines  are  fallen  to  me  in  pleasant  p.

18.  45.  and  be  afraid  out  of  their  close  p.

73.  18.  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  p.

74.  20.  the  dark  p.  of  the  earth  are  full  of  cruelty
103.  22.  bless  the  Lord,  all  his  works,  in  all  p.

105.  41.  they  ra-n  in  the  dry//,  like  a  river
110.  6.  he  shall  fill  the  p.  with  the  dead  bodies
Prov.  8.  2.  she  standeth  in  the  p.  of  the  paths
Cant.  2.  14.  O  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  secret p.

Isa.  32. 18.  my  peor/le shall  dwell  in  quiet  resting//

40.  4.  crooked  made  straight,  and  rough/?,  plain

45.  2.  1  will  make  the  crooked  p.  straight
Jer.  4.  12.  a  wind  from  those//,  shall  come  to  me

8.  3.  in  all//,  whither  I  have  driven  them,  29.  14.

17.  26.  they  shall  come  from  p.  about  Jerusalem
24.  9.  to  be  a  taunt  and  a  curse  in  all  p.  1  drive
32.  44.  take  witnesses  in  the//,  about  Jerusalem
40.  12.  all  the  Jews  returned  out  of  all  p.  whither
45.5.  thy  life  I  will  give  for  a  prey  in  all  p.

Lam.  2.  6.  he  hath  destroyed  his p.  of  the  assembly
Ezek.  34.  12.  I  will  deliver  them  out  of  all//.

26.  I  will  make  the//,  round  my  hill  a  blessing

46.  24.  he  said  these  are  the  p.  of  them  that  boil

47.  11.  but  the  miry  p.  thereof  shall  not  be  healed
Amos  4.  6.  and  want  of  bread  in  all  your  p.

Zech.  3.  7.  1  will  give  thee  p.  to  walk  among  these
Mat.\ 2.  4.3.  he  vvalketh  through  dry  p.  Luke  11.  24.

13.  5.  some  fell  on  stony  p.  and  sprung  up,  20.

24.  7.  and  there  shall  be  famines  and  earthquakes

in  divers  j?.  Mark  13.  8.  Luke  21. 11.


P  L  A

Acts  24.  3.  we  accept  it  in  all p.  most  noble  Felix
Eph.  1. 3.  who  hath  blessed  us  in  heavenly  p.

JO.  set  him  at  his  own  right  hand  in  heavenly  o.


~  '  . -  . - -  iw  nca-.  tin  y

2.  6.  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  p.  in  Chr.  , .

3.  10.  to  powers  in  heavenly  p.  might  be  known’
Phil.  1.  1.3.  my  bonds  in  Chr.  are  manifest  in  all  p.
Rev.  6. 14.  mountain  and  island  mov.  out  of  their  p.

bee  Desolate,  Holy.

High  PLACES.

Lev.  26.  .30.  I  will  destroy  your  high  p.  and  images
Hum.  21.  28.  consumed  lords  of  high  p.  of  Arnon
22.  41.  brought  him  up  into  the  highp.  of  Baal
33.  52.  and  quite  pluck  down  all  their  liighp.
Dent.  32. 13.  made  him  ride  on  high  p.  of  the  earth
33.  29.  and  thou  shalt  tread  upon  their  high  p.
Judg.  5. 18.  jeoparded  their  lives  in  the  high  p.

1  bam.  13. 6.  the  people  hide  themselves  in  high  p.

2  bam.  1.  19.  the  beauty  of  Israel  slain  in  high p.
2o.  Jonathan,  thou  wast  slain  in  thy  highp.

22. -34.  and  setteth  me  on  my  high  p.  Psal.  18.  33.
1  Kings  3.  2.  only  the  people  sacrificed  in  high  p.
„  ...  ,  ,2  Kings  17.  .32.  2  Chr.  3.3. 17.

3.  sacrificed  and  burnt  incense  in  high  p  00  43
t0  T2  £**8*  12.  3. 1  15.  4,  35.  |  16.  4.  \  if.  11.

12.  31.  Jeroboam  made  an  house  of  high  p
32.  he  placed  in  Beth-el  the  priests  of  high  p.

13.  2.  he  shall  otter  the  priests  of  the  highp
32.  lie  cried  against  all  the  houses  of  the  high p.

1  Kings  13.  33.  Jeroboam  made  ot  the  lowestof  the
people  priests  of  the  high  p.  2  Kings
37.  32.

15.  14.  but  the  high  p.  were  not  removed,  22  43
o  v  2  Kings  12.  .3.  |  14.  4.  |  15.  4,’  35.

AAiA7'  put  their  gods  in  houses  of  high  p.

18.  4.  Hezekiah  removed  the  highp.  22.

2.3.  5.  had  ordained  to  burn  incense  in  the  high  p

8.  defiled  the  high  p.  and  brake  down  the  high  p

_  •  .  A3,  Chron-  31.  1.  |  .32.  12.  Isa.  36.  7.

9.  priests  of  high  p.  came  not  up  to  altar  of  Lord

20.  lie  slew  all  the  priests  of  the  high  p.

2  Chr.  11.  15.  Rehoboam  ordained  priests  for  high  p,
14-  3.  Asa  took  away  the  high  p.  and  images.  5.

15.  17 .  the  high  p.  were  not  taken  away,  20.  33,

17.  6.  Jehoshaphat  took  away  the  high  p
21  11.  Jehor.  made  highp.  ||  28.  25.  Ahaz  high  p.

34.  3.  Josiah  did  purge  Jerusalem  from  the  high  v.

Job  2 o.  2.  he  maketh  peace  in  his  high  p.

Psal.  78.  58.  they  provoked  him  with  their  high  p.
Prov.  8.  2.  she  standeth  on  the  top  of  the  high  p.

9.  14.  sitteth  on  a  seat  in  the  high  p.  of  the  city
Isa.  15.2.  he  is  gone  up  to  the  highp.  to  weep
41. 18.  I  will  open  rivers  in  highp.  and  fountains

49.  9.  their  pastures  shall  be  in  all  high p.

58.  14.  cause  thee  to  ride  on  high  p.  of  the  earth

Jer.  3.  2.  jift  up  thine  eyes  to  the  high  p.  and  see

21.  a  voice  was  heard  on  the  high  p.  weepiim
4. 11.  a  dry  wind  in  the  high  p.  of  the  wilderness
7.  29.  and  take  up  a  lamentation  in  the  high  p
12.  12.  the  spoilers  are  come  up  on  all  the  high  v

14.  6.  the  wild  asses  did  stand  in  the  high  p.

17.  3.  1  will  give  thy  high  p.  for  sin,  thro’  borders
2b.  18.  and  the  mountain  of  the  house  shall  be¬
come  as  the  liighp.  of  the  forest,  Mic.  3. 12.

48.  35.  to  cease  in  Moab  him  that  otfei  eth  in  highp.
Ezek.  6.  3.  behold,  1  will  destroy  your  high  p.

16.  16.  deckedst  thv  liighp.  with 'divers  colours
39.  and  they  shall  break  down  thy  high  p.

36.  2.  the  ancient  high  p.  are  ours  in  possession
Plus.  10.  8.  the  high  p.  of  A  ven  shall  be  destroved
Amos  4.  13.  treadeth  on  high  p.  of  earth,  Mic.'  1.  3.

7.  9.  the  highp.  of  Isaac  shall  be  desolate
Mic.  1. 5.  and  what  are  the  high  p.  of  Judah  ?

Hab.  3.  19.  will  make  me  to  walk  on  mine  highp.
Eph.  6.  12.  against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  p.
See  Built.

Waste  PLACES.

Isa.  5.  17.  waste  p.  of  fat  ones  shall  strangers  eat

51.  3.  the  Lord  will  comfort  all  her  waste  p.

52.  9.  sing  together, ye  waste  p.  of  Jerusalem"

58. 12.  and  they  shall  build  the  old  a ;aste  p

n  PLAGUE.

Psal.  89.  23.  and  I  will p.  them  that  hate  him
PLAGUE,  bubstantive.

Exod.  11.1.  yet  I  will  bring  one  p.  on  Pharaoh
12.  13.  the  p.  shall  not  be  on  you  to  destroy  you
30.  12.  that  there  be  no p.  among  them
Lev.  13.3.  when  hair  in  the  p.  is  turned  white,  17.

5.  if  the  p.  spread  not  in  the  skin,  6.  |  14.  48.

30.  if  a  man  or  woman  hath  a  p.  then  priest  shall
see  the//.  31,32,  50,  51,  55.  1  14.  37.
44.  he  is  a  leprous  man,  his  p.  is  in  his  head

50.  and  shut  up  it  that  hath  the p.  seven  days

57.  if  it  app.  in  warp  or  woof,  it  is  a  spreading  p.

58.  if  p.  be  departed  from  them,  it  he  washed
14.  .35.  there  is  as  it  were  a  p.  in  the  house

Num.  8.  19.  that  there  be  no  p.  among  Israel
11.  33.  Lord  smote  people  with  a  very  great  p.

14.  37.  those  men  died  by  the  p.  before  the  Lord
16.  46.  wrath  is  gone  out,  the  p.  is  begun,  47.

48.  and  the  p.  was  stayed,  50.  |  25.  8.

49.  now  they  that  died  in  the//,  were,  25.  9.

Dent.  28.  61 .  every  p.  which  is  not  written  in  book
Josh.  22.  17.  we  are  not  cleansed,  altho’  there  was  p.

1  bam.  6.  4.  one  p.  was  on  you  all  and  your  lords

Sam.  24.  21.  that  p.  may  be  stayed,  1  Chr.  21.  22.

1  Kings 8.  37.  whatever//,  or  sickness  there  be
.38.  shall  know  every  man  the//,  of  his  own  heart

2  Chron.  21. 14.  with  a  great//,  will  the  Lord  smite
Psal.  91. 10.  nor  any//,  come  nigh  thy  dwelling

106.  29.  and  the  p.  brake  in  upon  them
.30.  Phinehas  executed  judgment,  so  p.  was  stayed
Zech.  14. 12.  this  shall  be  p.  the  Lord  will  smite,  18.
Mark  5.  29.  she  felt  that  she  was  healed  of  that p.

.34.  go  in  peace,  and  be  whole  of  thy  p.

Rev.  16.  21.  blasphemed  because  of  the  p.  of  hail

Plagued.

Gen.  12. 17.  the  Lord  //.  Pharaoh  and  his  house
Exod.  32.  .35.  Lord  p.  the  people  for  making  calf
Josh.  24.  5.  p.  Egypt,  and  afterwards  brought  you
1  Chr.  21.  17.  noton  people,  that  they  should  be p.
Psal.  73.  5.  nor  are  they//,  like  other  men
14,  all  the  day  have  1  been  p.  and  chastened

361


PL  A


PLE


P  L  A


PLAGUES.

« \ien.  12.  17.  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  with  great  p.
Fsad.  9.  14.  I  "  dl  at  this  time  send  all  my  p.

Lev.  26.  21.  1  "  ill  bring  seven  times  more  p.  on  you
Detit.  28.  59.  the  Lord  will  make  thy  p.  wonderful
go.  22.  when  they  see  the  p.  ot  that  land
1  Sam.  4.  8.  gods  that  smote  the  Egyptians  with  p.
Jcfl 0.  +  17.  thou  renewest  thy  p.  against  me
Jut.  19.  8.  hiss,  because  ot  the  p.  49.  1 1 .  1  50.  18.
Fzek  39  +  2.  I  will  strike  thee  with  six  p.

Hos.  13.  14.  O  death,  1  will  be  thy  p.  O  grave
Mark  3.  10.  pressed  to  touch  him  as  many  as  had*/.
I  rke  7  21.  same  hour  he  cured  many  ot  their  p.
Rev  9  20  rest  which  were  not  killed  by  these  p.
11  6.  these  have  power  to  smite  earth  with  p.-
16.  9.  name  ot  God,  who  hath  power  over  these p
18!  4.'  and  that  ye  receive  not  ot  her  p.

8  therefore  shall  her  p.  come  in  one  clay,  death
22*.  18.  God  shall  add  to  him  the  p.  written
See  Seven.

PLAIN.

Gen.  25.  27.  Jacob  was  a  p.  man,  dwelling  m  tents
psai.  27.  11.  teach  me,  and  lead  me  in  a;,  path
Prov.  8.  9.  they  are  p.  to  him  that  understanaetti
15.  19.  but  the  way  of  the  righteous  is  made  p.
Isa.  28.  25.  when  he  made  p.  the  face  thereof
40.  4.  crooked  made  straight,  and  rough  places  p.
Jer.  48.  21.  judgment  is  come  on  tire  p.  country
Hal.  2.  2.  write  the  vision,  make  it  p.  upon  tables
Mark  7.  35.  tongue  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  p.

Gen.  11.  2.  they  found  a  p.  in  the  land  of  Shinar
13.  10.  and  Lot  beheld  all  the  p.  of  Iordan
11  then  Lot  chose  him  all  the  p.  01  Jordan
12.  Lot  dwelled  in  cities  of  the  p.  toward  Sodom

18.  Abram  came  and  dwelt  in  the  p.  14.  13.


ig,  17.  nor  stay  thou  in  all  p.  escape  to  mountain
25.  ne  overthrew  those  cities  in  all  the  p.


Jcsh.  11.  16.  Joshua  took  the  valley  and  the  p.

Judo.  9-  6.  made  Abimelech  king  by  p.  of  pillar
11  33  Jephthah  smote  the  Ammonites  to  the  p

1  Sam.  10.  3.  thou  shaltcome  to  the  p.  of  labor
23.  24.  David  and  his  men  were  in  the  p.

2  Sam  2*  29.  Abner  and  his  men  walked  through  p
4  7.  Baanah  and  Rechab  gat  them  through  thep.

5!  I *20.  he  called  that  place  the  p.  of  breaches
15.  £8-  I  will  tarry  in  the  p.  tili  I  hear  from  you
18  22  then  Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  way  of  the  p.

\  Kint '  7  46.  in  p.  of  Jordan  did  king  cast  them
20.  23.  let  us  f:ght  against  them  in  the  p.  25.

2  Kings  25.  4.  king  went  towards  the  p.  Jer  52.  7 .
Neh.  3.  22.  after  him  repaired  the  priests  of  the  p
Jer.  if.  26.  shall  come  from  p.  bringing  oflermgs
21 !  13!  I  am  against  thee,  O  rock  of  the  p.

48  8  P  shall  be  destroyed,  as  T.ord  hath  spoken
Etek.  3.  22.  he  said,  arise,  go  forth  in  the  p.  23.
f!  4.  according  to  the  vision  that  I  saw  in  the  p.
PLAINS..

Gen  18.  1.  the  Lord  appeared  in  the  p.  of  Mamre
Num.  22.  1.  Israel  pitched  inp.  of  Moab,  33.  48.

26.  63.  who  numbered  Israel  in  the  p.  of  Moab
3t!  12.  they  brought  spoil  to  the  camp  in  the  p.

33.  .50.  the  Lord  spake  to  Moses  in  the  p.  35.  1.

36.  13.  the  Lord  commanded  in  the  p.  of  Moab
jUut.  34.  1.  Moses  went  up  from  thep.  of  Moab
8.  Israel  wept  for  Moses  in  the  p.  forty  days
2  Sam.  17.  16.  lodge  not  in  the  p.  ot  the  wilderness
g  Kings  25.  5.  the  army  of  the  Chaldees  overtook
him  in  the  p.  of  Jericho,  Jer.  39.  5. 1  52.  8.

1  Chron.  27.  28.  over  sycamore -trees  in  the  low  p.

2  Chron.  9.  27.  made  cedars  as  sycamores  in  lowp.
26  10.  Uzziah  had  much  cattle  in  thep.

PLAINLY.

Exod.  21.  5.  if  the  servant  p.  say,  T  love  my  master
Deut.  27.  8.  write  the  words  ot  this  law  very  p.

1  Sam.  2.  27.  did  I  p.  appear  to  house  of  thy  father  ?

10,  56.  he  told  us  p.  that  the  asses  were  found

2  Sam.' 10.  f  18.  they  p.  spake  in  the  beginning
Ezra  4,  18.  the  letter  hath  beenp.  read  before  me
Isa  32.  4.  tongue  of  the  stammerers  shall  speak  p.
Jchn  10. 24.  if  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  p.  .

11.  14.  then  Jesus  said  to  thepi  p.  Lazarus  is  dead
16.  25.  but  I  shall  shew'  you  p.  cf  the  Father

29.  now  speakest  thou  p.  and  speakest  no  proverb
Heb  11. 14.  for  they  that  say  such  things  declare  p.
PLAINNESS.

2  Cor.  3.12.  have  such  hope,  we  use  grealp.  of  speech
PLA  IS  JER.

Isa.  38.  21.  a  lump  of  figs,  lay  it  for  a  p.  on  boil
PLA  1ST  ER.

Lev ,  14.  42.  shall  take  mortar  and  shall  p.  house
Deut.  27.  2.  great  stones,  and  p.  them  with  p.  4.
Dan.  5.  5.  wrote  on  the  p.  of  the  wall  ot  palace
PLA1STERED.  .  .

Lev.  14.  43.  if  the  plague  come  again  after  it  is  p.
*18.  plague  hath  not  spread  after  the  house  was  p.
P  LA  I  ITNG.

1  Pet.  3.  3.  whose  adorning  let  it  not  be  p.  of  hair

PLANES.

Isa.  44.  13.  the  carpenter  fitteth  the  image  with  p.
PLANETS.

2  Kings  23.  5.  that  burnt  incense  to  sun,  moon,p.

PLANKS.

1  Kings  6.  15.  he  covered  the  floor  with  p.  of  fir
Ezek.  41. 25.  were  thick  p.  on  face  of  the  porch
26.  on  the  side  chambers  of  house,  and  thick  p.
PLANT,  Substantive.

Gen.  2.  5.  the  Lord  God  made  every  p.  of  the  field
Job  14.  9.  will  hud  and  bring  forth  boughs  like  p.
Isa.  5.  f.  and  the  men  of  Judah  his  pleasant p.

17. 11 .  in  the  day  thou  sbalt  make  thy  p.  grow
53.  2.  he  shall  grow  before  him  as  a  tender  p.

Jer.  2.  21.  how  art  thou  turned  injto  degenerate  p.
Ezek.  34.  29.  raise  up  for  them  a  p.  of  renown
Mat.  15.  13.  every  p.  my  Father  hath  not  planted
PLANTS.

1  Chr.  4.  23.  those  that  dwell  among  p.  and  hedges
Psal.  128.  3.  thy  children  like  olive  p.  round  table
144. 12.  that  our  sons  may  be  as p.  grown  up
Cant.  4.  13.  thy  p.  as  an  orchard  of  pomegranates
Isa.  16.8.  have  broken  down  principal  p.  thereof
17.  10.  therefore  shalt  thou  plant  pleasant  p.

362


Jer.  48.  32.  thy  p.  are  gene  over  sea.  they  reach
Ezek.  31.4.  with  rivers  running  round  about  his  p.

P  LA  N  1

Signifies,  [1]  To  set  trees  or  herbs,  Gen.  9.  .20.

[2]  To  bring  a  people  from  one  country  into
another,  there  to  place  and  settle  them,  Psal.

44.  2.  1  80.  8.  [3]  To  be  made  real  ana  living

members  of  the  church  of  God,  Psal.  92.  1.3.  [4]

To  lay  the  first  foundation  of  Christianity  among
a  people,  and  be  instrumental,  by  the  preaching
ejf  the  gospel,  in  converting  them  to  Christ,  1

Exod.  15.  17.  p.  them  in  mount  of  thy  inheritance
Pent.  16.  21.  thou  shalt  not  p.  a  grove  ot  any  trees
28.  .30.  thou  shalt  p.  a  vineyard,  and  not  eat,  .39.

2  Sam.  7.  10.  moreover,  1  "  ill  p.  them,  1  (  hr.  1 1  •  9.

2  Kings  19.  29.  p.  vineyards  and  eat,  Isa.  17-40.

Psal.  107  .  37.  sow  the  fields,  and  p.  vineyards
Isa.  17.  10.  therefore  thou  shalt p.  pleasant  plants
41.  19.  I  will  p.  in  the  wilderness  the  cedar
51.  16.  that  l  may  p.  heavens,  and  lay  foundations
65.21.  they  shall  p.  vineyards,  eat  truitol  them
22.  they  shall  not p.  and  another  eat
Jer.  1. 10.  1  have  set  thee  to  build  and  to  p.

18.  9.  concerning  a  kingdom  to  build  and  to  p.

24.  6.  1  will  p.  and  not  pluck  them  up,  42.  10.

29*.  5.  p.  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them,  28.  .

31  5.  shall  p.  vines  on  the  mountains  ot  Samaria
28.  1  will  watch  over  them  to  build  and  top.

.32.  41.  1  will  p.  them  in  this  land  assuredly
35!  7.  nor  shall  vou  sew  seed.  norp.  vineyard
Ezek.  17.  22.  I  will  p.  it  on  a  high  mountain,  2.3.

28.  26.  they  shall  p.  vineyards,  and  dwe  1  safely
.36.36.  Lord  build  and  p.  that  that  was  desolate
Dan.  11.  45.  he  shall  p.  tabernacles  of  his  palace
Amos  9.  14.  they  shall  p.  vineyards  and  drink  wine
15  1  will  p.  them  upon  their  land,  saith  Lord
Zevh  l  13.  they  shall  p.  viney.  but  not  drink  wine
PLANTATION .

Ezek.  17.  7.  might  water  it  by  furrows  of  her  p.
PLAN  1ED.

Gen.  2.  8.  the  Lord  God  p.  a  garden  eastward
9.  20.  Noah  p.  vineyard  II  21.  .3.3.  Abram  p.  a  grove
Num.  24.6.  as  trees  which  the  Lord  hath  p.

Deut.  20.  6.  whatman  is  he  that  hath  p.  a  vinejTard
Josh.' 24.  13.  of  olive-yards  yep.  not,  do  ye  eat
Psal.  1.  3.  like  a  tree  p.  by  the  rivers,  Jer.  1< .  8.

80.  8.  thou  hast  cast  out  heathen,  and  p.  the  vine
15.  the  vineyard  which  thy  ri^ht  hand  hath  p.

92.  13.  those  that  be  p.  in  the  house  ot  the  Lord
94.  9.  he  that  p.  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear  ?

104.  16.  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  which  he  hath  p
Eccl.  2.  4.  I  p.  me  vineyards  ||  5.  1  p.  trees
3.  2.  and  a  time  to  pluck  up  that  which  is  p.
isa.  5.  2.  and  p.  it  with  the  choicest  vine
40.'  24.  yea,  they  shall  not  be  p.  nor  be  sown
Jer  2  21.  yet  1  had  p.  thee  a  noble  vine

11.  17.  for  the  Lord  of  hosts  that  p.  thee

12.  2.  thou  hast  p.  them,  they  have  taken  root
45.  4.  what  l  have  p.  I  will  pluck  up

Ezek.  17-  5.  and  p.  it  in  a  fruitful  field,  8.

10.  yea,  behold,  being  p.  shall  it  prosper  t
19.  10.  p.  by  the  waters  she  was  fruittul
13.  and  now  she  is  p.  in  the  wilderness
Hos  9.  13.  Ephraim  is  p.  in  a  pleasant  p  ace
Amos  5.  1 1 .  ye  have  p.  pleasant  vineyards
Mat.  15.  13.  plant  my  heavenly  lather  hath  not  p.

21  3.3.  man  p.  a  vineyard,  Mark  12.  1.  Luke  20.  9.
Luke  13.  6.  certain  man  had  a  fig-tree p.  in  vineyard
17.  6.  be  plucked  up,  and  be  thou  p.  in  the  sea
28.  they  bought,  they  sold,  they  p.  they  budded
Rom  6  5.  if  we  have  been  p.  together  in  his  death
1  Cor.  3. 6.  1  havep.  A  polios  watered,  God  increase
PLANTEDST.

Pent.  6.  11.  and  olive-trees  which  thou  p.  not
Psal  44  2.  didst  drive  out  heathen  and  p.  them

planters.

Jer.  31.  5.  p.  shall  plant,  and  eat  them  as  common
PLANTETH.  .

Prov.  .31. 16.  with  fruit  of  her  hands  she p.  vineyard
Isa.  44.  14.  he  p.  an  ash,  and  the  rain  doth  nourish

1  Cor.  .3.  7.  neither  is  he  that  p.  any  thing
8.  he  that  p.  and  he  that  watereth  are  one

9  7  who  v  a  vineyard  and  eateth  not  the  tiuit
PLANTING.

Isa.  60.  21.  branch  of  my  p.  work  of  mv  hands
61  3.  they  might  he  called  the  p.  ot  the  Lord
PLANTINGS.

Mic.  1.  6. 1  will  make  Samaria  as  p.  of  a  vineyard
PLAT.

2  Kings  9.  26. 1  will  requite  thee  in  this  p.  now  take
and  cast  him  into  the  p.  ot  ground

PLATE.

Exod.  28.  36.  thou  shalt  make  a  p.  of  pure  gold
39.  30.  they  made  the  p.  of  holy  crown  or  gold
Lev.  2.  t  5.  meat  offering  taken  in  a  p.  7.  +  9.

8  9.  on  his  fore-front  he  put  the  golden  p.

Ezek.  4.  +  3.  take  a  fiat  p.  set  it  for  a  wall
PLATES.  .

Exod.  .39.  3.  they  did  beat  gold  into  thin  p.

Num.  16.38.  let  them  make  ot  censers  broad  p.

39  were  made  broad  p.  for  a  covering  ot  altar
1  Kings  7. 30.  and  every  base  had  p.  of  brass
Jer.  10.  9.  silver  spread  into  p.  is  brought  from  lars.
PLATTED.

Mat.  27.29.  when  they  hadp.  a  crown  of  thorns,  they
put  it  on  his  head,  Mark  1j.  17-  John  19.2.
F  PLATTER.  ,

Mat.  2.3.  25.  ye  make  clean  outside  of  the  p.  but
within  full  of  extortion  and  excess,  Luke  11-  -9.
PLAY

The  Hebrew  word.  Zachak,  which  signifies,  to  play,
is  also  commonly  used  for  laughing,  mocking,
insulting.  When  Sarah  saw  Ishmaei  play  with
her  son  Isaac,  she  was  offended  at  it,  Gen.  .-.
9.  It  was  a  play  of  mockery,  or  insult,  or  per  naps
of  squabbling,  as  the  word  is  used,  2  Sam.  2.  i4.
Let  the  young  men  now  arise  and  play  before
us  ;  let  them  fight  as  it  were  by  way  oj  play,  but
the  event  shews  that  they  fought  m  good  earnest,
since  they  were  all  killed.  We  find  play  taken  in
another  sense  in  Exod.  32.  6.  II  hen  the  Israelites


had  set  up  the  golden  calf ,  they  began  to  shout,  to
sing,  and  dance  about  it,  and  to  divert  themselves ,

1  lie’  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  drink,  and  rose
up  to  play.  „

Exod.  32.  6.  the  people  rose  up  to  p.  1  Cor.  10.  7.
Deut  22.  21.  top.  the  w  hore  m  her  father’s  house

1  Sam.  16.  16.  that  he  shall  p.  "ith  his  hand

17  provide  me  now  a  man  that  can  p.  well
21.  15.  have  brought  this  fellow  top.  madman

2  Sam.  2.  14.  let  young  men  arise  and  p.  before  us
~6  21  therefore  will  1  p.  before  the  T.ord

10.  12.  and  let  us  p.  the  men  tor  our  people
Job  40.  20.  where  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  p.

41 .  5.  wilt  thou  p.  with  him  as  with  a  bird  ?

Psal  3.3  3  P-  skilfully  with  a  loud  noise
304.' 26.  leviathan  whom  thou  made  top. therein
7sa.  ll.  8.  sucking  child  shall  p.  on  hole  of  the  asp
E~ek  33  32.  and  can  p.  well  on  an  instrument
PLAY  ED.

Judo  19.  2.  and  his  concubine  p.  the  whore

1  Sam.  16.  23.  David  p.  with  his  hand,  18. 10. !  19. 9.

18  7  the  w  omen  answered  one  another  as  they  p.
26’  21  1  have  p.  fool,  and  have  erred  exceedingly

offam  6  5.  David  and  all  Israel  p.  1  Chr.  13.  8.

2  Kings  3.  15.  it  came  to  pass  when  the  minstrel  p.
Ezek  16.  28.  hastp.  the  whore  with  the  Assyrians

See  Harlot.

PLAYER.

I  Sam.  16.  16.  who  is  a  cunning  p.  on  an  harp
PLAYERS.

Psal  68  25.  the  p.  on  instruments  followed  after
87.  7.  as  well  the  singers  as  thep.  on  instruments

1  Sam  21.  t  14.  yon  seethe  man  p.  the  madman
Ezek.  23.  44.  as  to  a  womanthat  p.  the  harlot

1  Sam.  16. 18.  have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse  cunning  inp.

1  Chron  15  29.  Michal  saw  David  dancing  andp.
Psal  68.  25.  amongst  them  were  the  damsels p.
Zech.  8  5.  boys  and  (prls  /l  in  the  streets  thereof

Deut  17.  8.  if  a  matter  too  hard  between  j?.  and  p.
PLEAD.

Judg.  6.  .31  .will  yep.  for  Baal /he  that  willp.  for  him
.32.  saying,  let  Baal  p.  against  him,  because  he
Job 9. 19.  if  of  judgni.  who  shall  set  me  a  time  top,?
13.  19.  who  is  ne  that  will  p.  with  me  ?

16.  21.  O  that  one  might p.  for  a  man  with  God

19.  5.  if  he  will  p.  against  me  mv  reproach
23.  6.  will  he  p.  against  me  with  his  great  power;

Isa.  1.  17-  seek  judgment,  p.  for  the  widow
3.  13.  Lord  stanaeth  up  to  p.  and  judge  the  peop.e
43  26  let  us  p.  together,  declare  thou  to  be  justified
66.  16.  by  tire  will  the  Lard  p.  with  all  flesh
Jer.  2.  9.  wherefore,  I  will  yetp.  with  you,  35.  and
with  your  children  s  children  wall  Ip
09  wherefore  will  yep.  with  me  ?  all  transgressec

12.  'l .  righteous  art  thou,  O  Ld.  when  I  p.  with  thee
25.  31.  Lord  willp.  with  all  flesh,  saith  the  Lord
5o!  t  44.  and  who  will  covenant  me  to  p.  ?

Ezek.  17.20.  and  I  willp.  with  him  there

20.  t  4.  wilt  thou  v.  for  them  ?  22.  +  2.  I  23.  +  .36.

35.  and  there  will  Ip.  with  you  face  to  face

36.  so  will  I  p.  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  God
38.  22.  1  will  p.  against  him  with  pestilence

Hos.  2.  2.p.  with  your  mother,  p.  she  is  not  my  witi
5.  t  13.  F.phraim  sent  to  the  king  that  should  p.
Joel  3.  2.  and  1  will  p.  with  them  for  my  people
Mic.  6.  2.  and  the  Lord  will  p.  with  Israel
See  Cause.

P  LEADED.

1  Sam.  25.  39.  blessed  be  the  Lord  thatp.  the  cans
Lam.  3.  58.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  p.  causes  of  mv  soi
Ezek.  20.  36.  like  as  I  p.  with  your  fathers  m  wi.dei

PLFADETTT.

Joh\6.  21.  with  God,  as  a  man  p.  for  his  neighbour
Isa.  51 . 22.  saith  thy  God,  that  p.  cause  ot  his  peopl
59  4.  none  calleth  for  justice,  nor  any  p.  tortrut
PLEADING.

job  13.  6.  hear  and  hearken  to  the  p.  of  my  lips
PLEASANT.

Gen.  2.  9.  God  made  every  tree  grow  that  is  p.

.3.  6.  wasp,  to  the  eyes,  and  a  tree  to  be  desired
49.  15.  Issachar  saw  the  land  that  it  was  p.

2  Sam.  1.2.3.  Saul  anc  ’onathan  were  p.  in  their  in  1
~  26.  Jonathan,  very  p.  hast  thou  been  to  me

1  Kings  20.  6.  whatever  is  p.  they  shall  take  a"  aj

2  Kings 2.  19.  behold,  the  situation  ot  this  r it)  is,
o  Chron  32.  27.  he  made  treasuries  tor  p.  jevveis
Psal.  16.  6.  the  lines  are  fallen  to  me  in  p.  flares
81.  2.  bring  hither  the  p.  harp  with  the 1  psal. eiv  1
lu6.  24.  yea,  they  despised  thep.  land,  believed  r
1.3.3. 1.  howp.  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  uru
135.  3.  sins  praises  to  his  name,  for  it  is  p.  Hi  .

Prov.  2.  10.  when  knowledge  is  p.  to  thy  soul


5.  19.  let  her  be  as  the  loving  hind  andp -

9. 17 .  stolen  waters  sweet,  bread  eaten  in  secret  is

15.  26.  but  the  words  of  the  pure  are  p.  words

16.  24.  p.  words  are  as  honey  comb,  sweet  to  soi
22.  18.  for  it  isp.  if  thou  keep  them  within  tr.ee

24.  4.  the  chambers  shall  be  tilled  with  al.p.  1  iCJ'1
Eccl.  1 1 .  7 .  p.  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun
Cant.  1.  16.  thou  art  fair,  my  beloved,  yeap.

4  13.  thy  plants  are  an  orchard  with  p.  truits
16.  let  my  beloved  come  and  eat  his  p.  truits  ;
7.  6.  how  fair  and  p.  art  thou,  O  love,  for  <icn0
13.  at  our  gates  are  all  manner  of  p.  truits
Isa.  2.  16.  the  day  of  the  Lord  upon  all  p.  pictui
5.  7.  and  the  men  of  Judah  his  p.  plant
13.  22.  and  dragons  shall  cry  in  their  p.  palace,

17.  10.  therefore  shalt  thou  plant  p.  Pla?Ls  ,  •
.32  12.  they  lament  forp.  fields,  for  fruitful  v in
54.  12. 1  will  make  all  thy  borders  of  p.  stones
64.  11.  and  all  our  p.  things  are  laid  waste

Jer.  3. 19.  how  shall  1  give  thee  ap.  land  .

12. 10.  made  my  p.  portion  a  desolate  "ddeire,
03  jo.  p.  places  of  the  wilderness  are  dried  up

25.  34.  and  ye  shall  fall  like  a  p.  vessel  }

31 . 20.  is  F.phraim  my  dear  son  ?  is  he  a  p.  cni

Lam.  1.  7.  she  remembered  all  her  p.  things  of  0
10.  advers.  hath  spread  his  hand  on  herp.  t
11.  they  have  given  tlieirp.  things  tor  meat


roe


PLE


PLE


PLU


am. 2.  4  sle  w  all  that  were  p.  to  the  eye  in  tabern.
zek.  ‘26.  l‘J.  they  shall  destroy  thy  p.  houses
3.  32.  very  lively  song  of  one  that  hath  p.  voice
8.  9.  waxed  exceeding  great  toward  the  p.  I  and
0.3.  1  ate  now.  bread,  nor  came  flesh  intm  mouth
1.  38.  lie  shall  honour  a  god  w  ith  p.  things
e.v.  9.  6.  the p.  places  nettles  shall  possess  them
13.  Ephraim  is  planted  in  a  p.  place,  but  Ephraim
el  3.  5.  have  carried  into  your  temp.  tnvp.  things
mos  5.  11.  ye  planted//,  vineyards,  shall  not  drink
u\  2.  9.  women  have  ye  cast  out  from  p.  houses
ah.  2.  9.  and  glory  out  of  all  the  p.  furniture
ch.7-  14.  for  they  laid  Ihep.  land  desolate
al.  3.  4.  offering  of  Jerusalem  be  p.  to  the  Lord
PLEASAN  I  N  ESS.

rot.  3.  1".  her  ways  are  ways  of p.  her  paths  peace
5.  t  26.  the  words  of  the  pure  are  words  of  ®.

PLEASE

spoken,  (T)  Of  God.  pleasing  himself ,  and  de
notes,  [1]  His  will  and  good  pleasure,  Isa.  55.  11
l  Cor.  1.  21.  [2]  His  decree  and  purpose,  Psal.
115.  3.  I  135.  6.  (11)  Of  Christ  pleasing  God,
md  signifies,  /  hat  God  the  lather  did  perfectly
iccept  of  Christ  as  Mediator,  and  had  a  sin¬
gular  complacency  and  satisfaction  in  his  under¬
taking,  and  in  all  he  should  do  or  suffer  in  the
iccomplishment  of  mans  redemption.  Mat.  3.


17 ‘  5.  John  8.29.  (Ill)  Of  man,  who
i Leases y  (.Ij  Uvdy  denoting  a  being  approved  and
iccept ed  of  God,  Heb.  11.  5.  I  13.16.  [2]  Him-
:e/J,  1.  In  things  sinful,  Isa.  2.  6.  2.  In  things
■axeful,  Acts  15.  34.  [3]  His  neighbour,  which
f;  first.  Lawful,  to  endeavour  to  comply  with
ns  weakness  m  things  indifferent,  or  that  tend  to
dtficauon,  Rom.  15.  2.  1  Lor.  10.  33.  Secondly,
Sinfu,  to  flatter  him,  or  suit  one's  doctrine  to
its  humour,  concealing  some  necessary  truth
jal.  1.  10.  ’

■od.  21.  8.  if  she  p.  not  her  master,  who  betrothed
im.  23. 27 .  peradventure  it  will  p.  God  thou  curse
sam.  20.  13.  if  it  p.  my  father  to  do  thee  evil
iam.'.  29.  let  it  p.  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy
servant,  that  it  may  continue,  l  Chron.  17.27.
\ flips  21. 6.  if  it  p.  [  will  give  thee  another  viney.
./iron.  10.  7-  if  thou  p.  they  will  be  thy  servants
’A  2.  5.  if  ltp  king,  and  thy  servant  found  favour,

,  7-  Lsth.  L .19.  1  3.  9.  15.  8.  I  7-  3.  |  8.  5. 1  9. 13.

•  o,  9.  that  it  would  p.  God  to  destroy  me
h  10.  his  children  shall  seek  to  p.  the  poor

al,  69.  31.  this  also  shall  p.  the  Lord  better
ov,  16.  7-  when  a  man’s  wrays  p.  the  Lord

nr. 2.  7.  noravrake  my  love’ till  he/;.  3.  5.  |  8.  4.
i.  2.  6.  they  p,  themselves  in  children  of  strangers
11.  it sha.ll  accomplish  that  which  1  p.

;•  4.  and  choose  the  things  that  p.  me
:n  8.  29.  I  do  always  those  things  that  p.  him
m.  8.  8.  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  p.  God
'•  L  ought  to  bear,  anti  not  to  p.  ourselves

•  let  every  one/;,  his  neighbour  for  his  good
or.  7.  32.  careth  how  he  may  p  the  Lord

C  /-.  his  wife  j|34.  how  she  may  p.  her  husband

•  33.  even  as  1  p.  all  men  in  all  things

..  1. 10.  do  1  persuade  men  ?  do  1  seek  to p.  men  ?
liss-s.  2.  15.  they/;,  not  G.  are  contrary  to  all  men
,!•  how  ye  ought  to  walk  and  to  p.  God
un.  2.  4.  that  may  p.  him  who  hath  chosen  him

•  2.  9.  an  !  to  p.  them  well  in  all  things

b.  11.  6.  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  p.  God
PLEASED.

*•  28.  8.  Esau  seeing  daugh.  Canaan/;,  not  Isaac
.  10.  have  seen  thy  face,  thou  wast  p.  with  me
.  18.  and  their  words/;.  Hamor  and  Shechem
.  16.  it  p.  Pharaoh  well  and  his  servants

24.  1.  Balaam  saw  it/;.  Lord  to  bless  Israel
■ft.  1.  23.  the  saying  p.  me  well,  I  took  12  men
L  22.  30.  what  children  of  Gad  spake  it/;,  them
•O'  13.  23.  if  the  Lord  were  p.  to  kill  us
.  7.  he  talked  with  her,  and  she  p.  Samson  well

am.  12.  22.  it ».  Lord  to  make  you  his  people
.20.  it  p.  Saul  that  Michal  loved  David

).  it p.  David  to  be  the  king’s  son-in  law

■  im.  3.  36.  what  the  king  did  p.  all  the  people

4.  say,.*/,.  Absalom  well,  and  elders  of  Israel
.16.  if  all  we  haduied,  then  it  had  p.  thee  well
mgs  3.  10.  Solomon’s  speech  p.  the  Lord
12.  the  cities  Solomon  gave®,  not  Iliram
hron.  3(i.  4.  the  thing  p.  the  king  and  all  the
congregation,  Neh.  2.  6.  Esth.  1.  21. 1  2.4.

,  •  2- 9-  the  maiden  p.  the  king,  and  she  obtained
14.  the  thing  p.  Hainan,  he  caused  the  gallows

-  '7- 40.  13.  be  ®.  O  Lord,  to  deliver  me

19.  then  shalt  thou  he  p.  with  sacrifices
>•  3.  our  God  is  in  the  heavens,  he  hath  done
whatsoever  lie  p.  135.  6.  Jonah  1.  14.

■  •  03.  10.  yet  it  p.  the  Lord  to  bruise  him
-’i.6._l.  it  ®.  Darius  to  set  over  the  kingdom

•  7  ”•  7.  Will  Lord  be  p.  with  thousands  of  rams  ?

-  ‘ •  1.  8.  oiler  it,  will  he  he  p.  with  thee  1

-  c  14.6.  on  Herod's  birth-day  daugh.  of  Herodias
liJficed  before  them,  and  p.  Herod,  Mark  6.  22.

*  *  if ' t  le  saving/,,  the  whole  multitude

з.  because  Herod  saw  it  p.  the  Jews

-  fl  15.  3.  for  even  Christ  p.  not  himself
/•lor  it  hathp.  them  of  .Macedonia,  27.

I o'  God  by  foolishness  of  preaching

и.  and  she  bep.  todwell  with  him,  let  him  not
'lor'  Ae  p'  t0  dwell  with  hei ,  let  her  not

18.  Hod  hath  set  members  as  it  hath’p.  him
,  ,  •  v’0l‘  g'tveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath  p.  him

•  10.  tor  if  I  yet  p.  men.  I  should  notheserv.

(*■ when  it  p.  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me

,,  e"  *1 P;  Father  that  in  him  all  fulnessdwell
J '■  11.5.  he  had  this  testimony,  that  he  p.  God
»  Well  PLEASED.

oi+  *V  *?ou  *last  been  we^  V-  with  thy  land

■  ,  L-  is  well  p.  for  his  righteousness’  sake

'  \  <■  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  welt  p.  12.

i  ,r18- >  17.5.  Mark  1.11.  Luke  3.  22.  2  Pet.  1. 17.

,  with  many  of  them  G.  was  not  veil p.

•  13. 16.  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  v.

Men  PLEAS  ERS.

•  0. 0.  not  with  eye  service,  as  men  p.  Col.  3.  22


„  PLEA  SETH.

Gen.  16. 6.  Abraham  said,  do  to  her  as  it  /;.  thee
20.  15.  behold  my  land,  dwell  where  it  p.  thee
Judg.  14.  3.  get  her  for  me,  for  she  /;.  me  well
Esth.  2.4.  let  maiden  which  p.  the  king  he  queen
Lccl.  7.  26.  whoso  p.  God  shall  escape  from  her
8.  3.  stand  not  in  evil,  he  doeth  whatsoever  ®  him
PLEASING.

Esth.  8.  5.  and  if  I  bep.  in  his  eyes  let  it  be  written
Hos.  9.  4.  neither  shall  they  be  p.  to  him
Col.  1. 10.  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  to  all  p.

1  Thess.  2.  4.  so  we  speak,  not  as  p.  men,  but  God
1  John  3. 22.  do  those  things  that  arep.  in  his  sight
Well  P  LEA  SING.

Phil.  4. 18.  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  we  Up.  to  God
Col.  3.  20.  obey,  for  this  is  well  p.  to  the  Lord
Heb.  13.21.  working  in  you  w  hat  is  w.-p.  in  his  sight
PLEASURE

Signifies,  [1]  Delight  or  joy,  Psal.  102.  14.  [2]
Purpose,  intention,  or  resolution,  Ezra  5.  17 .
[3]  Commands,  Psal.  103.  21.  [4]  Lawful  de

lights,  Eccl.  2.  1.  [5]  A  kindness,  or  favour,

Acts  25.  9.  [6]  P vlvptuous  and  sinful  ways,  1

Tim.  5.  6.

Gen.  18. 12.  after  I  am  waxed  old,  shall  I  have  p.  ?
Deut.  23.  24.  mayest  eat  grapes  thy  fill  at  own  p.

1  Chron. 29.  17.  1  know  thou  hastp.  in  uprightness
Ezra  5.  17-  and  let  the  king  send  hisp.  to  us
10. 11 .  make  confession  to  Lord  God,  and  do  his p.
Neh.  9. 37.  have  dominion  over  our  cattle  at  their  p
Esth.  1.8.  should  drink  according  to  every  man’s  p
Job  21.21.  whatp.  hath  he  in  his  house  after  him?
25.  another  dieth,  and  nev  er  eateth  with  p.

22.  3.  is  it  any  p.  to  Almighty  that  thou  art  right.
Psal.  5.  4.  art  not  a  God  that  hath  p.  in  wickedness
35.  27.  which  hath  p.  in  the  prosperity  of  his  serv.
51. 18.  dp  good  in  thy  good  p.  to  Zion,  build  walls

102.  14.  tor  thy  servants  take  p.  in  her  stones

103.  21.  bless  L.  ye  ministers  of  his,  that  do  his  p,
105.  22.  to  bind  his  princes  at  his  p.  and  teach
111.2.  sought  out  ot  all  them  that  have  p.  therein
147.  10.  he  taketh  not  p.  in  the  legs  of  a  man

11.  the  Lord  taketh  p.  in  them  that  fear  him
149.  4.  for  the  Lord  taketh  p.  in  his  people
Pfov.  21.  17.  he  that  loveth  p.  shall  be  a  poor  man
lccl.  2. 1.  enjoy  p.  ||  5.  4.  he  hath  np  p.  in  fools
12.  1.  thou  shalt  say,  1  have  no  p.  in  them
Isa.  21.  4.  the  night  of  my  p.  he  turned  to  fear
29.  t  9.  stay  and  w  onder,  take  your  p.  and  riot
44.  28.  Cyrus  my  shepherd  shall  perform  all  my  p
46.  10.  my  counsel  shall  stand,  I  will  do  all  my  p.
48.  14.  he  will  do  his  p.  on  Babylon,  and  his  arm

53. 10.  and  p.  ol  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand
58.  3.  behold,  in  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find  p.

13.  from  doing  thy  p.  on  my  holy  day,  and  call  the
sabbath  a  delight,  not  finding  thine  ownp.
Jer.  2.  24.  she  snuffeth  up  “he  wind  at  her  p.

22.  28.  is  he  a  vessel  wherein  is  no  p.  ?

34.  16.  whom  had  set  at  liberty  at  their  p.  to  return
48.  38.  broken  Moab  like  a  vessel  w  herein  is  no  p.
Lzek.  16.  37.  with  whom  thou  hast  taken  p.

18.  23.  have  I  any  p.  that  wicked  die,  saith  Lord,
and  not  that  he  should  return  r  32.  I  33.  11.
Hos.  8.  8.  Israel  as  a  vessel  wherein  is  no  p.

Hag.  1.  8.  build  the  house,  and  1  will  take  p.  in  it
Mai.  1.  10.  1  have  no  p.  in  you  saith  the  Lord
Luke  12.  32.  Father’s  good  p.  to  give  you  the  kingd.
Acts  24.  27.  Felix,  willing  to  do  the  Jews  a  p.  left
„  ,  _  Paul  bound

25.  9.  but  Festus  willing  to  do  the  Jews  a  p.  said
Korn.  1.  32.  but  have  p.  in  them  that  do  them
2  Cw.  12.  10.  therefore  1  take  p.  in  infirmities
Lph.  1.  5.  according  to  the  good  p.  of  his  will,  9.
Phil.  2.  13.  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  p.

2  Thess.  1.  11.  fulfil  the  good  p.  of  his  goodness
2*  12.  believed  not,  but  had  p.  in  unrighteousness

1  Jim.  5.  6.  but  she  that  liveth  in  p.  is  dead
Heb.  10.  6.  in  sacrifices  thou  hast  had  no  p.  8.

38.  if  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  nop.  in  him

12. 10.  they  chastened  us  after  their  own  p.

Jam.  5. 5.  ye  have  lived  in  p.  on  earth,  in  day  time
2 '  Pet. 2.13.  as  they  that  count  it  p.  to  riot  in  day  time
Rev.  4. 11.  for  thy  p.  they  are  and  were  created

PLEASURES.

Job  36.  11.  they  shall  spend  their  years  in  p.

Psal.  16.  11.  at  thy  right  hand  are  p.  for  evermore
36.8.  shalt  make  them  drink  of  river  of  thy  p
Isa.  47 .  8.  hear  this,  thou  that  art  given  to  p.

Luke  8. 14.  are  choked  with  the  p.  of  this  life

2  7V;«.  3.  4.  loyers  of  p.  more  than  lovers  cf  God
lit.  3.  3.  deceived,  serving  diver*  lusts  and  p.

Heb.  11. 25.  th ail  to  enjoy  the  p.  of  sin  for  a  season

PLEDGE.

Gen.  38. 17.  Tamar  said,  wilt  thou  give  me  a  p.?

18.  what  p.f  ||  20.  Judah  sent  to  receive  his  p.
Exod.  22. 26.  if  thou  take  a  neighbour’s  raiment  to  p.
Deut.  24.  6.  110  man  shall  take  the  nether  or  upper
millstone  top.  for  he  taketh  a  man’s  life  to  p.
10.  shalt  not  go  into  his  house  to  fetch  his  p.  11
12.  if  poor,  thou  shalt  not  sleep  with  his  p.  13.

17.  nor  shalt  take  a  widow’s  raiment  top.

1  Sam.  17.  18.  how  thy  brethren  fare,  take  their  p
Job  22.6.  thou  hast  taken  a  p.  from  thy  brother

24.  3.  they  take  the  widow’s  ox  for  a  p.

9.  and  they  take  a  p.  of  the  poor
Prov.  20.  16.  take  p.  for  a  strange  woman,  27.  13
Ezek.  18.  7.  hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  p.  16.

12.  hath  not  restored  the  p.  shall  he  then  live  ?

33.  15.  if  wicked  restore  the  p.  he  shall  not  die
Amos  2.  8.  on  clothes  laid  to  p.  by  every  altar
PLEDGES.

2  Kings  18.23. 1  say,  give  p.  king  of  Assy .  Isa.  36. 8.

PLEIADES.

They  are  seven  stars  beyond  the  Bull,  which  ap¬
pear  at  the  beginning  of  the  spring.  The  He¬
brew  leads,  Chima,  Job  38.  31.  Canst  thou  bind
the  sweet  influences  of  the  Pleiades,  or  Chima?
Canst  thou  hinder  them  Jrom  rising  in  their  sea
son;  or  canst  thou  hinder  or  shut  up  the  earth
when  they  open  it  ?

Job  9-  9.  which  maketh  Arcturus,  Orion,  and  P.

38.  31.  canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  Pr  ?


„  PLENTEOUS.

Gen.  41.  34.  take  the  fifth  part  in  the  p.  years
4L  111  the  p.  years  the  earth  brought  forth
Dent.  28. 11.  the  Lor  i  shall  make  t  hee  p.  30.  0.
h  Chron.  1 .  15.  Solomon  made  gold  as  v.  as  stones?
Psal.  86.  5.  artp.  in  mercy  to  all  call  on  thee,  15-..
103.  8.  Lord  is  merciful,  gracious,  and  p.  in  mercy-
130.  7.  and  with  him  is  v.  redemption
Isa.  30.  23.  the  bread  shall  be  tat  and  /;.  in  that  day
Hah.  l.  16.  their  portion  is  fat,  and  their  meat  p.
Mat.  9.  37.  the  hai  vest  truly  is  p.  hut  labourers  few
PLEN  1  EOUSN  ESS.

Gen.  41.  53.  the  seven  years  of  p.  were  ended
Prov.  21.  5.  the  thoughts  of  the  diligent  tend  to  p.
PLENTY.

Gen.  27.  28.  God  give  thee  p.  of  corn  and  wine
41.  29.  behold,  there  come  seven  years  of  great  p^
3tf.  all  the  p.  shall  be  forgotten  in  land  of  Egypt
31.  and  the  p.  shall  not  be  known  in  the  land
Le®.  11.  36.  a  pit,  wherein  there  is  p.  of  water
1  Kings  lo.  1 1.  brought  in  trom  Ophirp.  of  almug-tr.

~  ,lfS.n'  we  I11*'!  el,°ugh  to  eat,  have  left®,

Jab  22.  25.  anti  thou  shalt  have  p.  ot  silver
37.  23.  he  is  excellent  in  power  and  p.  of  justice
Prov.  3.  10.  so  shall  thy  barns  be  filled  with  p.

-8.  19.  he  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  havep.  of  bread
44*  1 7 •  f°r  then  had  wep.  of  victuals,  and  well
Joel *6.  shall  eat  in  p.  and  praise  Lord  your  God
PLENTIFUL.

Psal.  68.  9.  thou,  Q  God,  didst  send  a  p.  rain
Isa.  16.  10.  joy  is  taken  out  of  the  p.  field
Jer.  2.  7;  and  I  brought  you  to  a  p.  country
48.  33.  joy  and  gladness  is  taken  from  the  p.  field
PLENTI  FULLY.

Job  26.  3.  how  hast  p.  declared  the  thing  as  it  is  r1
Psal.  31.  23.  and  p.  lewardeth  the  proud  doer
Luke  12.  16.  ground  of  a  rich  man  brought  forth  »
PLOT 1 ETH.

Psal.  37. 12.  the  wicked  p.  against  the  just,  gnasheth
P I  .O  UGH.

Luke  9.  62.  no  man  having  put  his  hand  to  the  r.
PLOW

Signifies,  fl]  To  till  and  break  up  ground  with  a
plow,  Deut.  22.  10.  [2]  To  labour  in  any  call-
rng,  1  Cor.  9.  10.  [3]  To  contrive,  plot .  and
practise,  Job  4.  8.  Hos.  10.  13.  [4]  Cruelly  to
torment,  wound,  and  manale ,  Psal.  129.  3.
l  o  put  the  hand  to  the  plough,  Luke  9.  62.  To
engage  oneself  m  the  service  of  God,  or  work  of
the  ministry,  or  preaching  the  gospel.  ’

Deut.  22.  10.  shalt  not  p.  with  an  ox  and  ass  together
1  oam.  14.  14.  which  a  yoke  of  oxen  might  p.

Job  4.  8.  they  thatp.  iniquity,  reap  the  same
Prov.  20.  4.  sluggard  will  not  p.  by  reason  of  cold
Isa.  28.  24.  doth  the  plowman  p.  all  day  to  sow
Hos.  10.  11.  Judah  shall  p.  Jacob  break  his  clods
Amos  6.  12.  will  one  p.  there  with  oxen  ?

1  Cor.  9.  10.  he  that  ploweth  should  ®.  in  hope
PLOWED.

Judg.  14.  18.  if  ye  had  not  p.  with  my  heifer
Psal.  129.  3.  the  plowers  p.  on  my  back
Jer.  26.  18.  Zion  shall  be  p.  as  a  field,  Mic.  3.  12.
Hos.  10. 13.  ye  have  p.  wickedness,  reaped  iniquity
PLOWETH.

1  Cor.  9.  10.  that  he  thatp.  should  plow  in  hope
PLOWING.

1  Kings  19.  19.  Elijah  found  Elisha,  who  wasp.

Job  1.  14.  the  oxen  were  p.  and  the  asses  feeding
Luke  17.  7.  which  of  vou  having  a  servant  p.

PLOWING.

Prov.  21.  4.  and  the  p.  of  the  wicked  is  sin
PLOWMAN.

ha.  28.  24.  doth  the  p.  plow  all  day  to  sow  ?

Amos  9.  13.  the p.  shall  overtake  the  reaper
PLOWMEN.

Isa.  61.  5.  the  sons  of  the  alien  shall  be  your  p,

Jer.  14.  4.  thep.  were  ashamed,  they  covered
PLOW-SHARES.

Isa.  2.  4.  shall  beat  their  swords  intop.  Mic.  4.3.
Joel  3.10.  beat  your  p.  into  swords,  hooks  into  spears
PLUCK.

Lev.  1.  16.  shall  p.  away  his  crop  with  his  feathers
Num.  33.  52.  and  quite  p.  down  their  high  places
Deut.  ~.  +22.  thy  God  will  p.  off  those  nations

23.  25.  then  thou  mayest  p.  the  ears  with  thy  hand-

2  Chron.  7.  20.  then  will  1  p.  them  up  by  the  roots
Job  24.  9.  they  p.  the  fatherless  from  the  breast
Psal.  25.  15.  he  shall  p.  my  feet  out  of  the  net

52.  5.  and  p.  thee  out  of  thy  dwelling-place
74.  11.  thy  right  baud,  p.  it  out  of  thy  bosom
80.  12.  they  which  pass  by  the  way  do  p.  her
Eccl.  3.  2.  and  a  time  to  p.  up  what  is  planted
Jer.  12.  14.  p.  out  the  house  of  Judah  from  them
17.  I  will  utterly  p.  up  and  destroy  that  nation
18.  7.  I  speak  concerning  a  kingdom,  to  p.  it  up

22.  24.  on  my  hand,  yet  would  I  p.  thee  thence

24.  6.  will  plant  them,  and  notp.  them  up,  42. 10,
31.  28.  as  I  have  watched  over  them  top.  up

45.  4.  that  which  1  have  planted  I  will  p.  up
Ezek.  17.  9.  without  many  people  top.  it  up  by  roots-

23.  34.  thou  shalt  p.  off  thine  own  breasts
Mic.  3.  2.  who  p.  off  the  skin  from  off  them
5.  14.  1  will  p.  up  thy  groves  out  of  thee
Mat.  5.  29.  it  thy  right  eye  offend  thee,  p.  it  out

and  cast  it  from  thee,  18.  9.  Mark  9.  47
12.  1.  began  to  p.  the  tars  of  corn,  Mark  2.  2.3.

John  10.  28.  nor  shall  any  p.  them  out  of  my  hand
29.  no  mau  is  able  to  p.  them  out  of  Father’s  hanc
PLUCKED.

Gen.  8.  11.  in  her  mouth  was  an  olive-leaf  p.  off
Exod.  4.  7.  and  he  p.  his  hand  out  of  his  bosom
Deut.  28.  63.  ye  shall  be  p.  from  off  the  land
Josh.  4.  +  18.  the  soles  of  the  priests’  feet  werep.  up
Ruth  4.  7.  a  man  p.  oft’  his  shoe,  and  gave  it
2  Ham.  23.  21.  p.  the  spear  out  of  Egyptian’s  hand
and  slew  him  with  his  spear,  1  Chron.  11.  23
Ezra  9.  3.  1  p.  ofl  the  hair  of  my  head  and  beard
Neh.  13.  25.  I  cursed  them,  and  p.  ofl  their  hair
Job  29.  17-  and  p.  the  spoil  out  ol  his  teeth
Prov.  2.  +  22.  the  transgressors  shall  be  p.  up
Isa.  50.  6.  my  cheeks  to  them  that  p.  off  the  hair
Jer.  6.  29.  for  the  wicked  are  not  p.  away

363


POL


POO


POO


eT  12.  15-  after  I  have  ®.  them  oat,  I  will  return
31.* 40.  it  shall  not  hep.  up  nor  thrown  down
Ezek.  19. 12.  but  she  was  p.  up  in  tury,  anil  cast
Dan  7.  4.  1  beheld  till  the  wings  thereof  were®.

8.  three  of  the  first  horns  v.  up  by  the  roots

11.  4.  for  his  kingdom  shall  be  p.  up  foi  others
Amos  4.  11.  as  a  fire-brand  p.  out  ot  the  burning  .
Zech.  3.  2.  is  not  this  a  fire-brand  p.  out  of  the  fire
Mark  5.  4.  the  chains  had  been®,  asunder  by  him
Luke  6.  1.  his  disciples  p.  ears  ot  corn,  and  did  eat
17.  6.  be  thou  p.  up  by  the  root,  it  should  obey
Gal.  A.  15.  ye  would  have®,  out  your  own  eyes
Jude  12.  twice  dead,®,  up  by  the  roots
PLUUthi  ti.

Prov  14  1.  the  foolish  ®.  it  down  with  her  hands
'  PLUMB-LINE.,

Amos  7.7.  he  shewed  me,  and  behold  the  Ld. stood
on  a  wall  made  by  a  ®.  with  a  ®.  m  his  band
8  Amos,  what  seestthou  -  and  l  said,  a®,  behold,

'  L  will  set  a  ®.  in  the  midst  ot  my  people  Israel
PLUMMET.  ,

2  Kings  21.13.  1  will  stretch  over  Jerusalem  the  ®.

Isa.  °8.  17.  I  will  lay  i  ighteousness  to  the  ®.

Zech  4. 10.  shall  see  the®,  in  hand  ot  Zerubbabel
PLUNGE.  ..

Job  9.  31.yetshalt  thou  ®.  nie  in  the  ditch  and  my
POETS.

Acts  17.  28.  as  certain  also  of  your  own®,  said
POINT.  TI

Kum.  34.7.  ye  shall  ®.  out  for  you  mount  Hor
8.®.  out  your  border  I!  10.  ®.  out  your  east  border
POIN  x'.

Gen.  25.  32.  Esau  said,  behold,  I  am  at  the®,  to  die
Jer.  17.  1.  is  written  with  the  ®.  ot  a  diamond
Mark  5.  23.  my  daughter  lieth  at  the  ®,  ot  death
John  4.  47.  for  he  was  at  the®,  ot  death
Jam.  2.  10.  and  yet  offend  in  one®,  is  guilty
POLN'IS.

Eccl.5. 16.  in  all  ®.  as  lie  came,  so  shall  he  go
Heb.  4.  15.  but  was  in  all®,  ^tempted  like  as  we  are

Job  41.  30.  he  spreadeth  sharp  ®.  things  on  the  mire
POlSOiN.  C4U

Dent.  32.  24.  with  the®,  ot  serpents  of  the  dust
33.  their  wine  is  ®.  of  dragons  and  venom  ot  asps
Job  6.  4.  the  ®.  whereof  drinketh  up  my  spirit

20.  16.  he  shall  suck  ®.  of  asps,  viper  s  tongue  slay

Psal.  58.  4.  their®,  is  like  the®,  ot  serpents  .

140. 3.  like  a  serpent,  adders’  ®.  is  under  their  lips
Jer.  8.  +  14.  he  hath  given  us  ® .  to  drink
Zech.  12.  t  2.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  ot®.

Rom.  3. 13.  the  ®.  of  asps  is  under  'heir  lips
Jam.  3.  8.  their  tongue  is  an  evil,  full  ot  deaoly  ®.
POLE.

Vtt/n  21. 8.  set  it  upon  a  ®.  |!  9.  Moses  put  it  on  a®.
POLICY.

Dan.  8.25.  thro’  his®,  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper
POLISHED.

Psal.  144.  12.  ®.  after  the  similitude  ot  a  palace
Isa.  18.  t  2.  to  a  nation  outspread  and  p.  t  7.

49.  2.  he  hath  made  me  a  ®.  shaft,  he  hid  me
Dan.  10.  6.  his  feet  like  in  colour  to®,  brass
POLISHING.

Lam.  4. 7.  N  azarites  purer,  their®,  was  of  sapphire
POLL,  S.

Exod.  16.  +  16.  gather  of  it  an  homer  for  every  ®.
Sum.  1.  2.  with  the  number  ot  their  names  every
male  by  their®.  18.20,22.  1  Chron.°3.3,  24.

3. 47.  thou  shalt  take  five  shekels  a  piece  by  their®.
POLL.  .

Ezek.  44.  20.  they  shall  only  ®.  their  heads
Mic.  1. 16.  make  thee  bald,  and  ®.  thee  foi  children
POLLED.  ,  „

2  Sam.  14.26.  whenhe ®.  his  head,  atyear  s  end  he®.
Jer.  9.t  26.  having  cornerso!  their  hair®,  thatdwell
in  the  wilderness, 25.  t  23.  1  49.  T  32.
POLLUTE.  ,  ,  _

Sum.  18.  32.  neither  shall  ye  ®.  the  holy  things
35.  33.  so  shall  ye  not  ®.  the  land  wherein  ye  are
Isa.  23.  +  9.  L.  purposed  to®,  the  pride  ot  all  glory
Jer.  7.  30.  in  the  house  called  by  name,  to®,  it
EzeJc.  7.  21.  they  shall®,  my  secret  place,  22.

13.  19.  will  ye®,  me  among  my  peo.  tor  handfuls
20.  31.  ye  ®.  yourselves  w  ith  idols,  23.  30.  1  36. 18.

39.  but  ®.  ye  my  holy  name  no  more,  39. 7.,

44.  7.  strangers  to  be  in  my  sanctuary  to  ®.  it
Dan.  11.  31.  they  shall ®.  the  sanctuary  ot  strength
POLLU1ED.

Exod.  20.  25.  if  lift  thy  tool  upon  it,  thou  hast®,  it
2  Kings  23.  16.  Josiah  ®.  the  altar  at  Beth-el
2  Chr.  36.  14.  the  priests®,  the  house  ot  the  Lord
Ezra  2.  62.  therefore  were  they  as®.  Neh.  7.  64.
Psal.  106.  38.  and  the  land  was®,  with  blood
Isa.  47.  6.  1  was  wroth,  1  have  ®.  mine  inheritance
48. 11.  for  how  should  my  name  be®.

Jer.  2.  23.  how  canst  thou  say,  I  am  not®.  ?

3.  1.  shall  not  that  land  be  greatly  ®.  ?  2.

34.  16.  but  ye  turned  and  ®.  my  name

Lam.  2.2.  he  hath®,  the  kingdom  and  princes

4.  14.  they  have  ®.  themselves  with  blood

1 15.  they  cried,  depart,  ye  ®.  depart,  touch  not
Ezek.  4.  14.  behold,  my  soul  hath  not  been  ®.

14.  11.  nor  be®,  with  all  their  transgressions
16.  6. 1  saw  thee  ®.  in  thine  own  blood,  22.

■20. 9.  my  name’s  sake,  that  it  should  not  be®.  14,22,

13.  my  sabbaths  they  greatly®.  16,  21,  24.

26.  and  1  ®.  them  in  their  own  gifts

30.  are  ye  ®.  after  the  manner  of  your  fathers  r

22.  +  5.  snail  mock  thee  which  art  ®.  in  name

23.  17.  and  she  was®,  with  the  Babylonians
llos.  6.  8.  Gilead  is  a  city  that  is  ®.  with  blood

9.  4.  all  that  eat  thereof  shall  be®.

Amos  7.  17.  and  thou  shalt  die  in  a®,  land
Mic.  2. 10.  this  is  not  your  rest,  because  it  is  ®.
Zeph.  3.  1.  woe  to  her  that  is  filthy  and®.

4.  her  priests  have®,  sanctuary,  done  violence
Mai.  1.  7-ye  offered  ®.  bread  upon  mine  altar,  and
ye  say,  wherein  have  we  ®.  thee  r

12.  that  ye  say,  the  table  of  the  Lord  is®.

Acts  21.  28.  and  hath  ®.  this  holy’  place
POl. LUTING.

Isa.  56.  2.  that  keepeth  the  sabbath  from  ®.  it,  6

364


POLLUTION.

Ezek.  22. 10.  have  humbled  her  that  was  apart  for  ® .
POLLUTIONS.

Acts  15.  20.  will  that  they  abstain  from  p.  of  idols
2  Pet.  2.  20.  if  after  having  escaped  ®.  ot  the  world
POLLUX,  see  Sign.
POMEGRANATE

Is  a  kind  of  apple,  covered  without  with  a  reddish


rind,  and  red  within,  which  opens  length-ways,  and
shews  red  grains  within,  full  oj  juice  like  wine,
with  little  kernels.  God  gave  orders  re  Moses  to
put  embroidered  pomegranates,  with  gulden  bells
between ,  at  the  bottom  of  the  high  priest  s  blue  robe
or  ephod,  Exod.  28.  33,  34.  Pomegranates  being
vevy  co7n77io?L  in  Palestine,  and  being  a  very  beauti-
fill  fruit,  the  Scriptures  make  use  of  similitudes
taken  from  the  pomegranate,  l  he  blossoms  oj  the
tree  or  shrub  that  bears  this  fruit,  are  called
Balausts  by  the  apothecaries.  lhey  are  astringent,
and  very  good  in  a  Dysentery,  Diarrhoea,  and
/  .ip.ntp.ry.

Exod  28.  34.  a  golden  bell  and  a®,  upon  the  hem
of  the  robe  round  about,  39.  26.

1  Sam.  14.  2.  Saul  tarried  under  a®,  tree
Cant.  4.  3.  thy  temples  are  like  a  piece  of®.  6.  7-
8.  2.  would  cause  thee  to  drink  of  juice  of  my  ®.

Joel.  1.  12.  the  ®.  tree  and  all  trees  are  withered
Hag.  2. 19.  as  yet  the®,  hath  not  brought  forth
POMEGRANATES.

Exod.  28.  33.  thou  shalt  make  ®.  of  blue,  39.  24,  25.

A ’um.  13.  23.  they  brought  ot  the®,  and  figs
20.  5.  it  is  no  place  of  seed,  figs,  vines,  or  ®.

Dent.  8.  8.  into  a  land  of®,  oil  olive,  and  honey

1  Kings  7.  18.  to  cover  the  chapiters  on  top  with®.

2  Kings  25.  17.  2  Chr  on.  3.  16.  Jer,  52.  22.
Cant.  4.13.  thy  plants  are  an  orchard  ot®.  with  fruits
6.  11.  1  went  to  see  whether  the®,  budded,  7.  12.
POMMELS.

2  Chr.  4. 12.  the  pillars  and  ®.  of  the  chapiters

POMP.

Isa.  5. 14.  and  their  ®.  shall  descend  into  hell
14.  11.  thy  ®.  is  brought  down  to  the  grave
Ezek.  7.  24.  1  will  make  the  ®.  of  the  strong  to  cease
30.  18.  the  ®.  of  her  strength  shall  cease,  33.  28.

32.  12.  and  they  shall  spoil  the®,  ot  Egypt
Acts  25.23.  Agrippa  and  Bernice  come  with  great®.
PON  DER.

Prov.  4.  26.  ®.  the  path  of  thy  feet,  and  let  thy  ways
5.  6.  lest  thou  shouldest  ®.  the  path  of  life,  her  ways
PONDERED.

Luke  2. 19.  but  Mary  ®.  them  in  her  heart,  and  kept
PONDERE1H.

Prov.  5.  21 .  ways  of  man,  the  Lord  ®.  all  his  goings
21.  2.  Lord  ®.  the  heart  ||  24.  12.  he  that  ®.  the  heart
PON  DS.

Exod.  7.  19.  stretch  out  thy  hand  on  their  ®.  8.  5
Isa.  19.  10.  be  broken  in  purposes,  that  make®.

POOL.  .  ,

2  Sam.  2.  13.  the  one  set  on  the  one  side  of  the  ®.

4.  12.  they  hanged  them  up  over  the  ®.  at  Hebron

1  Kings  22.  38.  one  washed  chariot  in  ®.  of  Samaria

2  Kings  18.  17.  when  come  up  they  came  and  stood

by  the  conduit  of  the  upper  ®.  Isa.  7-  -3- 1  36.  2.
20.  20.  and  how  he  made  a  ®.  and  conduit
Keh.  2.  14.  then  I  went  on  to  the  king’s®.

3.  15.  Shallum  repaired  the  wall  of  the  ®.

Isa.  22.  9.  ye  gathered  the  waters  of  the  lower®.

11.  ye  made  a  ditch  for  the  water  of  the  old®.

35.7.  the  parched  ground  shall  become  a®.

41.  18.  1  will  make  the  wilderness  a®,  ot  water
Nah.  2.  8.  N  ineveh  of  old  is  like  a  ®.  of  water
John  5.  2.  there  is  at  Jerusal.  by  sheep  market  a  ®.

4.  an  angel  went  down  into  the  ®.  and  troubled
7.  he  said,  1  have  no  man  to  put  me  into  the  ®.

9.  7.  he  said,  go  wash  in  the  ®.  of  Siloam,  11.
POOLS,

Exod.  7.  19.  take  rod, stretch  thy  hand  on  all  their®.
Psal.  81.  6.  make  it  a  well,  ram  also  filleth  the®.
Eccl.  2.  6.  I  made  me  ®.  of  water  to  water  the  wood
Isa.  14.  23.  1  will  also  make  it  for  the®,  of  water

42. '  15.’  and  I  will  dry  up  the  ®.  and  herbs
POOR

Signifies,  [1]  Indigent,  needy,  or  necessitous.  Mat.
26.  11.  [2]  Such  as  are  sensible  oj  their  lost  and
undone  condition  by  sin,  and  discern  their  poverty
and  inability  in  spiritual  things,  and  fly  to  the
free  grace  of  God,  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ,
for  pardon  and  acceptance.  Mat.  5.  3.  Luke  6.  20.
[3]  Such  as  are  void  <f  true  saving  grace,  or
spiritually  poor,  Rev.  3.  17-
Gen.  41.  IQ.  came  up  after  them  seven®,  kine
Exod.  23.  11.  that  the  ®.  of  thy  people  may  eat
30.  15.  the  ®.  shall  not  give  less  than  halt  a  shekel
Lev.  14.  21.  if  he  be  ®.  and  cannot  get  so  much
19. 10.  thou  shalt  leave  them  for  the  ®.  and  stranger

15.  thou  shalt  not  respect  the  person  ot  the®.

25.  25.  if  thy  brother  be  waxen  ®.  35,  39,  47 .

Deut.  15. 4.  save  when  there  be  no  ®.  aniong  you
11.  for  the  ®.  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land
Buth  3.10.  thou  followedst  not  young  men,®,  or  rich

1  Sam.  2.  7.  the  Lord  maketh  ®.  and  maketh  rich
8.  he  raiseth  up  the  ®.  out  of  the  dust,  Ps.  113.  7-

2  Sam.  12. 1.  two  men,  one  rich,  and  the  other®.

2  Kings  25.  12.  but  the  captain  ot  the  guard  lett  ot

the  ®.  of  the  land,  Jer.  39.  10.  I  40.  7.  I  52.  15, 16.
Job  5.  15.  but  he  saveth  the  ®.  from  the  sword

16.  so  the  ®.  hath  hope,  and  iniquity  stoppeth
20.  10-  his  children  shall  seek  to  please  the  ®.

19.  because  he  hath  oppressed  and  forsaken  the®.
24.  *4.  the  ®.of  the  earth  hide  themselves  together
'9!  and  they  take  a  pledge  of  the  ®.

14.  the  murderer  killeth  the®,  and  needy

29.  12.  because  1  delivered  the  ®.  that  cried

30.  25.  was  not  my  soul  grieved  for  the  ®.  ?

31.  16.  if  1  withheld  the  ®.  from  their  desire
19.  or  if  1  have  seen  any  ®.  without  covering

34. 19-  nor  regardeth  the  rich  more  than  the  ®.

28.  they  cause  the  cry  of  the  ®.  to  come  to  him
36.  15.  he  deiivereth  the  ®.  in  affliction,  Ps.  72..1--.
Ps.  9.  18.  the  expectation  of  the  ®.  shall  not  perish
10.  2.  the  wicked  in  his  pride  doth  persecute  the  ®.
8.  his  eyes  are  privily  set  against  the  ®


Psal  10.  9.  he  lieth  in  wait  secretly  to  catch  the®.

10.  that  the  ®.  may  fall  by  his  strong  ones

14.  the  ®.  committeth  himself  to  thee,  thou  art
12.  5.  for  the  oppression  ot  the  ®.  I  will  arise
14.  6.  ye  have  shamed  the  counsel  of  the®.

35. 10.  who  deliverest  the®,  from  him  that  spoileth
37  14  have  bent  their  bow  to  cast  down  the  p.

40.  17.  but  1  am  ®.  69-  29. 1  70.  5. 1  86. 1. 1  109.  22.

41.  1.  blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the®.

49.  2.  both  low  and  high,  rich  and  ®.  together

68.  10.  hast  prepared  of  thy  goodness  for  the®.

69.  33.  Lord  heareth®.  and  despiseth  not  prisoners
72.  4.  he  shall  judge  the®,  ot  the  people

13.  he  shall  spare  the  ®.  ||  82.  3.  defend  the  ®.

74.  21.  let  the  ®.  and  needy  praise  thy  name
82.  4.  deliver  the®. and  needy,  rid  them  out  of
107.  41 .  yet  settetfi  he  ®.  on  high  from  affliction
109.  31 .  he  shall  stand  at  the  right  hand  of  the  ®.
132.  15.  will  satisfy  her  ®.  with  bread,  will  clothe
140. 12.  and  will  maintain  the  right  ot  the®.

Prov.  10.  4.  he  becometh  ®.  thatdealeth  with  a  slack

15.  the  destruction  of  the  ®.  is  their  poverty
13. 7.  there  is  that  maketh  himself  ®.  hath  riches

8.  his  riches,  but  the  ®.  heareth  not  rebuke
23.  much  food  is  in  the  tillage  ot  the  ®.  but  there

14.  20.  the  ®.  is  hated  even  of  his  neighbour

21.  he  that  hath  mercy  on  the  ®.  happy  is  he

31.  he  that  oppresseth  ®.  reproacheth his  Maker;

he  eliat  honoureth  him  hath  mercy  on  the  ®
17.  5.  whoso  mocketh  the  ®.  reproacheth  hisMaker
18.23.  the®,  useth  entreaties,  but  the  rich
19.  4.  the  ®.  is  separated  from  his  own  neighbour
7.  all  brethren  of  the  ®.  do  hate  him,  how  much
21. 13.  whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the®,

22.  2.  the  rich  and  ®.  meet  together,  Lord  ismakei

7.  the  rich  ruleth  over  the®,  and  the  borrower  is

16.  he  that  oppresseth  the  ®.to  increase  his  riche:

28.  8.  shall  gather  it  for  him  that  will  pity  the®.

11.  the®,  that  hath  understanding searcheth  lum

15.  so  is  a  wicked  ruler  over  the  ®.  people

29.  7.  righteous  considereth  the  cause  of  the®.  13
14.  the  king  that  faithfully  judgeth  the  ®.

30.  9.  lest  1  be  ®.  and  steal,  and  take  name  of  Got

14.  whose  teeth  are  as  swords,  to  devour  the  ®.

31.  9.  and  plead  the  cause  of  the  ®.  and  needy
Eccl.  4.  14.  that  is  born  in  his  kingdom,  becometuj

5.  8.  if  thou  seest  the  oppression  ot  the  ®.

6.  8.  what  hath  the  ®.  that  knoweth  to  walk
La.  3.  14.  the  spoil  of  the  p.  is  in  your  houses

15.  what  mean  ye  that  ye  grind  faces  of  the  ®.  ?

10.  2.  and  to  take  away  the  right  from  the  ®.

30.  cause  it  to  be  heard  to  Laish,  O®.  Anathoth

11.  4.  with  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  ®.

14.  30.  the  first-born  of  the  ®.  shall  feed  in  it

32.  and  the ®.  of  his  people  shall  trust  in  it
26.  6.  even  the  feet  of  the  ®.  shall  tread  it  down
29. 19. even®,  among  men  shall  rejoice  in  Holy  Or

32.  7.  to  destroy  the  ®.  with  lying  words
41.  17.  when  the®,  and  needy  seek  water
58.  7.  that  thou  bring  the  ®.  that  are  cast  out

Jer.  2.  34.  is  found  the  blood  ot  the®,  innocents

5.  4.  L  said,  surely  these  are  ®.  they  are  foolish
20.  13.  for  he  hath  delivered  the  soul  ot  the  p.

22. 16.  he  judged  the  cause  of  the®,  and  needy
Ezek.  16.  49.  nor  did  she  strengthen  hand  ot  the ;
18.  12.  hath  oppressed  ®.  and  needy,  hath  spoil:

17.  that  hath  taken  off  his  hand  from  the  ®.

22.  29.  and  they  have  vexed  the  ®.  and  needy
Amos  2.  6.  they  sold  the  ®.  for  a  pair  of  shoes

7.  that  pant  after  the  dust  on  the  head  ot  the  p.
4.  1.  which  oppress  the®,  and  crush  the  needy
5. 11.  forasmuch  as  your  treading  is  on  the®.

12.  and  they  turn  aside  the  ®.  in  the  gate

8.  4.  even  to  make  the  ®.  ot  the  land  to  tail

6.  that  we  may  buy  the  ®.  for  silver,  and  needy

Hab.  3. 14.  their  rejoicing  was  to  devour  the  ®.
Zeph.  3. 12.  the  ®.  people  shall  trust  in  the  Lord
Zech.  7. 10.  and  oppress  not  the  widow  nor  ®.
11.  7.  I  will  feed  even  you,  O  ®.  of  the  flock
11.  the  ®.  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon  me  _
Mat.  5. 3.  blessed  are  the  ®.  in  spirit,  for  theirs
11.5.  the  ®.  have  the  gospel  preached  to  tnem
26.  11.  for  ye  have  the  ®.  always  with  you,  but
.  ye  have  not  always,  Mark  14.  7.  John  !-■
Mark  12.  42.  there  came  a  certain  ®.  widow
43.  this  ®.  widow  cast  more  in,  Luke  21.  3.
Luke 6.  20.  blessed  be  ye®,  your’s  is  the  kingdo
14.  13.  call  the®,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  21.
John  12. 6.  this  he  said,  not  that  he  cared  for  the
Rom.  15. 26.  to  make  a  contribution  for  the  ®.

2  Cor.  6.  10.  as®,  yet  making  many  rich

8.  9.  though  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  becam*
Gal.  2.  10.  that  we  should  remember  the  ®.
Jam.  2.  5.  hath  not  God  chosen  thep.ot  this  wo

6.  hut  ye  have  despised  the  ®.  rich  oppress  yo
Rev.  3.  17.  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art®.

13. 16.  he  causeth  rich  and  ®.  to  receive  a  mark
Is  POOR.  ,

Exod.  22.  25.  if  lend  to  any  of  my  people  that  if

Dent.  24.  14.  shalt  not  oppress  hired  servt.  that!

15.  for  he  is  p.  and  setteth  his  heart  upon  it
Judg.  6. 15.  behold,  my  family  isp.  in  Manasse
Prov.  19.  L  better  is  the  ®.  that  walketh  m  his  1
grity,  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  lips,  u
22.  22.  rob  not  poor  because  he  is  v.  nor  oppre
Eccl.  4.  13.  better  is  a  ®.  and  wise  child,  than  an
Isa.  66.  2.  to  him  that  isp.  and  of  a  contrite  ne
.  POOR  man.  .

Exod.  -23.  3.  nor  countenance  a  ®.  man  his  ca
Deut.  15.  7-  if  a®,  man,  harden  not  thy  heart

24.  12.  if  a  p.  man  sleep  not  with  Ins  pledge

1  18. 23.  to  be  king’s  si  n,  seeing  l  amap.wj

2  Sam.  12. 3,®.  man  had  nothing,  save  one  eve  t
4.  but  took  the  ®.  man  s  ewe-lamb  and  drt.

Psal  34.  6.  this  ®.  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  ne

109.16.  but  persecuted  the®,  and  need}  man
Prov.  19.  22.  and  a®,  man  is  better  than  a  liar
21.  17.  he  that  loveth  pleasure  shall  be  a p. mn

28.  3.  a  ®.  man  that  oppresseth  the  poor^1’

29.  13.  the  ®.  and  deceitful  man  meet  to,,eti
Eccl.  9.  15.  now  there  was  found  in  it  a®;  wise

vet  no  man  remembered  tnat  s»me®


P  O  R


Etc/.  9.16.  thcp.  man's  wisd.  is  desp.  and  not  heard
(am.  2. 2.  there  come  in  a  p.  man  in  vile  raiment
To  the  POOR.

!>0.23.22.  thou  shalt  leave  them  to  thep.  and  stran
'■..sth.  9. 22.  make  them  days  of  sending  gifts  to  the  p
foA  29.  16.  I  was  a  father  to  the  p.  and  feet  to  lame
36.  6.  of  the  wicked,  but  he  giveth  right  to  thep.
?sal.  112.  9-  he  hath  given  to  thep.  2  Cor  9  9
°rov. 22. 9.  for  he  giveth  of  his  bread  to  the  p.
28.27.  he  that  giveth  to  thep.  shall  not  lack
SI.  20.  she  stretcheth  out  her  hand  to  the  p.
sa.  25. 4.  thou  hast  been  a  strength  to  the p.

)an.  4. 27 .  break  off  sins,  by  shewing  mercy  to  the  p.
slat,  19.21.  sell  all,  and  give  to  the p.  Mark  10.  21.

26. 9.  this  ointment  might  have  been  sold  for  much,
and  given  to  thep.  Mark  14.  5.  ./>./*«  12. 5.
juke  4. 18.  to  preach  the  gospel  to  thep.  7.  22.

18.  22.  sell  all  thou  hast  and  distribute  to  thep.
19.8.  behold,  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to  the  p.
ohn  13.  29.  that  he  should  give  something  to  the  p.
Cor.  13.  3.  1  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  the  p.
am  2. 3.  and  say  to  thep.  stand  thou  there,  or  sit  h.
Thy  POOR.

'.xod.  23.  6.  shalt  not  wrest  the  judgment  of  thy  p.
(cut.  15.  i  .nor  shut  thine  hand  from  thy  p.  brother
9.  and  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy  p.  brother

11.  thou  shalt  open  thine  hand  wide  to  thy  p
W.  72.  2.  he  shall  judge  thy  p.  with  judgment
4. 19.  forget  not  tne  congregation  of  thy  p.  for  ever

ev.  27. 8.  if  he  be  p.  than  thy  estimat.  shall  present
f  d  O  Jv  LS 1 .

Kinys  24. 14.  none  re^immed,  save  p.  sort  of  people

cn. 30. 37.  Jacob  took  rods  of  green  p.  and  of  hasel
os.  4. 13.  and  they  burn  incense  under  oaks  and  p
POPULOUS.

eut.  26.  5.  became  a  nation  great,  mighty,  and  p.
ah.  3.  8.  art  thou  better  than  p.  No>

PORCH.

<do.  3.23.  then  Ehud  went  forth  through  the  p.
Jtron.28.  11.  David  gave  Solomon  pattern  of p.
Jiron.  29- 7.  they’ have  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  p.

I, .  eighth  day  of  the  month  came  they  to  the  p.

.  0  if  between  the  p.  and  altar  were  25  men
1.  3.  shall  enter  by  way  of  p.  of  tiie  gate,  46.  2  8
’ 1  PLnes!s  weeP  between  pfand  the  altar
^hen  he  was  20ne  °ut  into  the  p.

14.  08.  he  went  out  into  the  p.  and  cock  crew
o°;  *3-  Jesus  walked  in  temple  in  Solomon’s p
«3.  il.  the  people  ran  together  in  Solomon’s  p.

12.  t,ley  were  all  with  one  accord  in  Solomon's  p.

PORCHES.

e*.  41. 15.  with  the  temple  and  p.  of  the  court
’m  5.  2.  a  pool  called  Bethesda,  having  five  p
PORTER.  v"

•am.  18.  26.  watchmen  called  to  the  p.  and  said
(tnpsT.  10.  lepers  called  to  the  p.  of  the  city
Aron.  9.  2 1 .  Zechariah  was  p.  of  door  of  tabern.

V  and  Ivore  the  p.  toward  the  east
irk  13.  34.  and  commanded  the  p.  to  watch
tn  10. 3.  to  him  the  p.  openeth,  the  sheep  hear
,  PORTERS.

Aron.  9. 17.  thep.  were  Shallum,  Akkub,  Talmon
.  18.  and  Obed-edom,  and  Jehiel  the  p.
c  *  Hosah  II  42.  the  sons  of  leduthun  were  p.

•  5.  moreover,  four  thousand  were  p.

•  L  concerning  the  divisions  of  the  p.  12, 19.

Arm.  8. 14.  the  p.  by  their  courses  at  every  gate
.  15.  and  the  p.  waited  at  every  gate

7.  7- J>.  and  Nethinims  went  up  to  Jerusalem
A.{.  1 3.  the  Levites  and  p.  dwelt  in  their  cities
PORTION.

T’i,  ’21:/Xner’  Eshcol>  let  them  take  then  p.

.14.  is  there  yet  anyp.  or  inheritance  for  us  J
on  P!Mest  h?‘l  KP-  assigned,  and  did  eat  their  p.

have  given  thee  one p.  above  thy  brethren
a.  16. 14.  shall  gather  thep.  of  a  day  in  his  (lay
id.  what  is  this  t  it  is  a p.  for  they  wist  not
’ 41?  ‘  ■  v?  "lven  them  it  for  p.  of  my  offerings’
this  is  the  p.  of  the  anointing  of  Aaron
'w.  31.30.  of  Israel’s  half  take  thou  one  p.  36.

•  ™os,e®  t°°k  one  p.  of  fifty  for  the  Levites
it.  21. 17.  by  giving  him  a  double  p.  of  all  he  hath
9.  tor  Lord  s  p  is  his  people,  Jacob  is  the  lot
1  iV?.a?L  1 the  lawgiver  was  he  seated

1 <  •  why  hast  thou  siven  me  but  one  p.  ?
hut  to  Hannah  he  gav  e  a  worthy  p.

.,•„*  ,'n“®l  said,  bring  thep.  which  1  gave  thee
mgs  12.  16.  whatp.  have  we  in  David,  nor  inhe-
f  ■  /‘tance  in  the  son  of  Jesse,  2  Chron.  10. 16.
’S"9’e‘a  double  p.  of  thy  spirit  be  on  me
‘0  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  in  p.  of  Jezi  eel,  36  37
■  Jorain  met  him  inp.  of  Naboth  the  Jezreelite'
'.take  up,  cast  him  in  the  p.  of  Naboth’s  field
«;?■  1  ^‘requite  thee  in  this  p.  saitli  the  Lord
21' Ahaz  took  a  p.  out  of  house  of  Lord
3.  Hezekiah  appointed  king’s p.  for  offerings
i‘Ae  L  , F;  of  the  Priests  and  Levites,  16.
n’„h.  shalt  have  no  p.  on  this  side  the  river
'  o'-i  VC  hut  ye  have  nop.  nor  right  in  Jerusalem
7,  that  a  certain  p.  should  be  for  the  singers
j*?-,5f':s.s,?*e«and  porters  every  day  his  p.

"*29/. this  is  the  p.  ot  a  wicked  man  from  God
...  Ins  words  more  than  my  appointed  p.

,  jaeirp.  is  cursed  in  the  earth
H.  but  how  little  ap.  is  heard  of  him  ?  27.  13
1  r/orwhat  p  of  God  is  there  from  above  ?
k  u-  this  shall  be  the  p.  of  their  cup
d.  the  Lord  15  the  p.  of  mine  inheritance
io’eLr0i?«men  ^ho  have  their  p.  in  this  life
,  57  Ah  bA  a  V ’ tor  foxes  I1  73-  ~6-  GPd  is  my  P-


POS

ha.  57.  6.  among  smooth  stones  ot  stream  is  thy  r.
61.  7.  for  contusion,  they  shall  rejoice  in  their  p.

■  A*  },■  l  P'  ot  lacob  is  not  like  them,  51.  10.

,  10.  they  have  troooen  my  p.  under  fo<-t,  they
,  baYe  .T?“le  pleasant p.  a  desolate  wilderness
In*  * 11S  ls  ,  e  P*  *hy  measures  from  me


1  **  Vu  ^  11  .  -  ---  --

/  7  q!  T  a,t  m.y  r*  0  Lord,  142.  5.

I'  d  in  ’  a.n(l  ?lve*b  *P-  to  her  maidens

all<1  this  was  my  p.  of  all  my  labour
i mal?  shall  he  leave  it  for  his  p.

,o  o?“,  u  reJ01?e,  tor  that  is  his p.  5.  18.  |  9.  9.

'  nnr  h  2,ven  him  power  to  take  his  p.

‘o  triv«Vethey  any  morep.  ever  in  any  thing
7  iV®l ,  a  P.  to  seven,  and  also  to  eight
•  lo  i,  i,1  jJS.the  T’.  of  them  that  spoil  us
2.  1  will  divide  him  ap.  with  the  great


5..  34.  every  day  ap.  until  the  day  of  his  death
Lam.  3.24.  the  Lon  I  is  my  p.  saitli  my  soul
Lzeh.  4o.  1.  shall  offer  an  holy  p.  of  the  land,  4.

(.up.  shall  he  for  prince  on  one  side  and  other
48.  1.  to  the  coast  of  Hethlon,  a  p.  for  Dan

2.  by  the  border  or  Dan  a  p.  for  Asher

3.  a  p.  tor  Naphtali  ||  4.  a  p.  tor  Manasseh
Van.  1.  8.  not  defile  himself  with  p.  of  king’s  meat

4.  15.  and  let  his  p.  he  with  the  beasts,  23

11 .  26.  yea,  they  that  feed  of  the  p.  of  his  meat
j/ir.  2.  4.  he  hath  changed  the  p.  of  my  people
Hob.).  16.  because  by  them  their  p.  is  fat,  and  meat
ZecA.  2.  12.  the  Lord  shall  inherit  Judah  his  p.
Mat.  24. 51.  shall  appoint  him  hisp.  with  hypocrites
Luke  12.  42.  to  give  them  their  p.  in  due  season

40.  will  appoint  him  hisp.  with  unbelievers
Id.  12.  give  me  the  p.  of  goods  that  falleth  to  me
PORTIONS.

Uerit.  18.8.  they  shall  have  like p.  to  eat  besides  that
Josh.  17.  5.  there  tell  ten  p.  to  Manasseh

1  (Sam.  1.  4.  he  gave  her  sons  and  (laughters  p.

2  Chron-  31.  19  to  give  p.  to  all  the  males
(Seh.  8.  10.  eat  the  fat,  and  send  p.  to  them,  12.

12.  44.  p.  for  the  priests  ||  47.  p.  of  the  singers
lm  10.  that  thep.  of  the  1  evites  had  not  been  given

Lsth.  9.  19.  a  day  of  sendingp.  to  one  another,  2°
Lsek.  47.  13.  Joseph  shall  have  two  p.

48.  21 .  over  against  the  p.  for  the  prince
Hos.  5.  7.  a  month  shall  devour  them  with  their  v
„  POSSESS.

Hen.  22.  17.  thy  seed  shall  p.  the  gate,  24,  60.

J\um.  13.  30.  let  us  go  up  at  once  and  p.  it,  for  we
are  well  able  to  overcome  it,  Dent.  1.  21.

27.  11.  and  his  next  kinsman  shall  p.  it
Her it.  1.  39.  to  them  will  I  give  it,  they  shall  p.  it
?’<  nibegln,t0.?’  t,lat  t,l0u  gayest  inherit  his  land
11.  23.  ye  shall  p.  greater  nations,  and  mightier

than  yourselves,  12.  2,  29.  I  18.  14  131  3

28.  +  42.  the  fruit  of  thy  land  shall  locusts  p.

30.  18.  thou  passest  over  Jordan  top.  it,  31.  13.

Josh.  24.  4.  1  gave  to  F.sau  mount  Seir  to  p.  it
Judg.  11.  23.  and  shouldest  thou  p.  it?

24.  wilt  not  thou  p  what  Chemosh  giveth  thee  ?

14.  1 15.  have  ye  called  us  to p.  us?  is  it  not  so
l  lung*  21.  18.  he  is  gone,  down  to  p.  the  vineyard
J°o  7.  3.  I  am  made  to  p.  months  of  vanity
13.  26.  thou  makest  me  p.  iniquities  of  mV  youth
Ho.  34.  11.  the  cormorant  and  bittern  shall  p.  it  17
Ezek.  7.  24.  and  they  shall  p.  their  houses  ’

35. 10.  these  two  countries  shall  be  mine,  we  will  «
36.  12.  I  will  cause  my  people  Israel  to  p.  thee
Von  7.  18.  the  saints  shall  p.  the  kingdom  forever
Hos.  9.  6.  pleasant  places  for  silver,  nettles  shall  p
Amos  9.  12.  that  they  may  p.  the  remnant  of  Edom
Chad.  17.  the  house  of  Jac.  shall  p.  their  possessions

19.  shaltp.  mount  Esau,  and  Benjaminp.  Gilead

20.  captivity  of  Isr.  shall  p.  that  of  Canaanites  ;
rj  2  and  Terusa  e  hall  p.  the  cities  of  the  south
Hob.  1.  6.  the  Chaldeans  top.  that  is  not  theirs
Zeph.  2.  9.  the  remnant  of  my  people  shall  p.  them
Zech.  8.  12.  I  will  cause  rerun,  to  p.  all  these  things
Luke  18.  12.  I  fast,  I  give  tithes  of  all  that  Ip.
21.19.  in  your  patience  p.  ye  your  souls

1  lhess.  4. 4.  every  one  should  know  how  to  v.  vessel
POSSESS,  with  land.

Lev.  20.  24.  I  will  give  you  their  land  to  p.  Nvm
,  33.  5.3.  Deut.  3.  18. 1  5.  31.  |  17.  14’

Aww.  14.  24.  seed  shall  p.  it,  I  will  bring  into  land
Veut.  1.  8.  go  in  and  p.  the  land,  4.  1.16.  18.  I  8
„  _  ,  L  19.  5,  2.3.  I  10.  11.  |  11.  .31.  Josh.  1.  1]

4.  5.  land  whither  ye  go  to  p.  it,  14,  26.  |  5  .33  |

„  6-1’17-  1-1  11.  10,  11,  29.1  23.'20.
2*.  but  ye  shall  go  over  and  p.  that  good  land
9.  4.  the  Lord  hath  brought  me  top.  this  land
6.  gives  not  this  land  to  p.  for  thy  righteousness

11.  8.  that  ye  may  be  strong  and  p.  the  land

12.  1.  land  which  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  °Jveth

thee  top.  15.  4.  |  19.  2,  14.  I  21.  1.  |  25  19
28.  21  have  consumed  from  off  l.  thou  goest  to  p  ’

63.  plucked  from  off  the  land  thou  goest  to  p
Josh.  18.  3.  how  long  are  ye  slack  to  p.  the  land
23.  o.  drive  them  out,  and  ye  shall  p.  their  land
24  8.  I  gave  them,  that  ye  might  p.  their  land
Judg.  2.  6.  Israel  went  every  man  to  p.  the  land

18.  9.  be  not  slothful  to  enter  to  p.  the  land
1  Chron.  28.  8.  that  ye  may  p.  this  good  land
Ezra  9. 11.  the  land  ve  go  top.  is  an  unclean  land
Neh.  9.  15.  promisedst  that  they  should  p.  the  land

23.  thou  broughtest  them  in  to  p.  the  land
Isa.  14.  2.  Israel  shall  p.  them  in  the  land  ot'  the  L.

21.  that  they  do  not  rise  nor  p.  the  land
57-  1.3.  that  putteth  trust  in  me  shall  p.  the  land
61.  7-  m  their  land  shall  theyp.  the  double
Jer.  30.  3.  cause  them  to  return  to  land  and  p.  it
Ezek.  33.  25.  ye  shed  blood,  shall  ve p.  the  land ?  26.
Amos  2. 10.  1  brought  you  to  p.  land  of  Amorite
POSSESSED.

[sum..  21.  24.  Israel  p.  Sihon’s  land  from  Arnon  to
3d.  they  smote  Og,  his  sons,  and  people,  and  have
p.  the  land,  Deut.  3.  12.  |  4.  47.  Neh.  9.  22.
Dent.  30.  5.  will  bring  thee  to  land  thy  fathers  p.

Josh.  1.  15.  until  your  brethren  have  p.  the  land
12.  1.  they  p.  their  land  on  the  other  side  Jordan

I. 3.  1.  there  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  hep.

19.  47.  the  children  of  Dan  took  T.eshem  and  p.  it
21.  4.3.  they  p.  if  and  dwelt  therein,  22.  9.

Judg.  1.  t  19.  and  Judah  p.  the  mountain
3.  13.  Eglon  king  ot  INIoabp.  city  of  palm-trees

II.  21.  Israel  p.  all  the  land  of  the  Amorites,  22.

2.  Kings  17.  24.  men  of  Ava  p.  Samaria  and  dwelt
Esal.  139.  13.  for  thou  hast  p.  my  reins,  thou  hast
Prov.  8.  22.  Lord  p.  me  in  the  beginning  of  his  way
Isa.  63.  18.  people  of  thy  holiness  hath  p.  it  a  little
Jer.  32.  15.  vineyards  shall  hep.  again  in  this  land

23.  they  came  in  and  p.  it,  but  obeyed  not
Dan.  7.  22.  time  came  that  saints  p.  the  kingdom


I


P  o  s

Eukeii.  36.  by  what  means  he  that  was  p.  was  cured
,  CJS  4*  32.  none  said  that  aught  lie  p.  was  his  own

,  n  164  a  daI!lsel  PJ  w‘th  a  spii  it  of  divination

1  Cor. 7.  30.  they  that  buy  as  though  theyp.  not
dee  Devils.

POSSESSES'!1.

Deut.  26.  1.  when  thou  comest  into  land  and  v  it
POSSESSETH.

/yMw.  36.8.  every  daughter  that  p.  an  inheritance
Luke  12.  15.  a  man  s^hte^consists  not  in  things  hep.

2  Cor.  6.  10.  as  having  nothing,  yet  p.  all  things
POSSESSION

signifies,  [1]  The  possessing  or  actual  enjoyment  of
any  thing,  )  Kings  21.  19.  [2]  Lands,  houses,

or  habitations,  Obad.  17.  [3]  Kingdom,  or  do¬
minion,  Ggn.  36.  43.  [4]  Riches,  whether  in

lands,  goods ,  servants,  or  cattle,  Eccl.  2.  7.  Mat.
19 •  22.  [5]  7 he  land  0/  Canaan,  which  was  pos¬
sessed  by  the 'Gentiles,  Acts  7.  45.  [6]  That  peo¬
ple  which  t  hrist  has  purchased  with  his  blood,  to
be  his  peculiar  possession,  Eph  1  14
am  their  possession,  Ezek.  44.  28.  That  por¬
tion  which  I  have  reserved  for  myself  out  of  the
offerings  I  have  bestowed  on  them;  or,  1  have
\ obf  ’thns  t  ,e>H  a  liberal  maintenance  out  of  my

Gen.  17. 8.  I  will  give  all  the  land  of  Canaan  for  an
everlasting  p.  and  I  will  be  their  God,  48.  4
*3.  4.  give  me  ap.  ot  a  bnrying-place  to  bury  my
dead  out  ot  my  sight,  9,  18,  20.  |  49.  30.  1 60. 13.
Ai*  Aj=aac  had  p.  of  Hocks,  ot  herds,  and  servants
•j6.  43.  the  dukes  of  Edom  in  the  land  of  their  v.
r‘  a  ,  /?ave  them  aP- in  the  land  of  Egypt
Muail’-^.ch  1  Siveto  you  fora  p.

10.  it  shall  be  a  jubilee  to  you,  and  ye  shall  re-
turn^every  man  to  hisp.  13,  27  ,  28,  41.  Deut.

of’  ‘A  th7  brodl,er  sold  away  some  of  his  p.

33.  the  Levites  p.  shall  go  out  in  the  jubilee
45.  the  strangers  shall  be  your  p.  46.

27. 16.  it  a  man  shall  sanctify  some  part  of  his p.

21.  the  p.  thereof  shall  be  the  priest’s

TV?,4’  rSAur,o  t«'rhomuth,e  P-  of  the  land  did  belong
^®*  Edom  shall  be  ap.  Seir  also  ap.

26.  56.  according  to  the  lot  shall  the p.  be
~7.  4.  give  us  a  p.  among  brethren  of  our  fathers
J’  A0  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad  give  ap.

„*  5.  let  this  land  be  given  to  thy  servants  for  p.
-A'™1?  ^and  shall  be  your  p.  before  the  Lord
00  t0  the,  l  evites  of  their  p.  cities,  8.

28.  the  slayer  shall  return  to  the  land  of  hisp.
Veut  2.  5.  I  have  given  mount  Seir  to  Esau  for  ap.

9.  because  I  have  given  Ar  to  I.ot  for  a p.  19.
ii2  Jsraei  dld  in  land  of  his  p.  Lord  gave  them
AA’  eart,‘  swallowed  up  all  in  their  p.
r  V  Gan,a.an’  which  I  gave  Israel  for  a p.

00  'a  12\°‘  Moses  gave  it:  for  a  P-  to  Reubenites
n,  r".i>’e*  ?et  ye  unto  the  land  of  your  p.

7.  to  half  tribe  ot  Manasseh  Moses  had  given  a®

9.  they  returned  to  the  land  of  their  p.

19.  it  yourp.  be  undean,  takep.  among  us

1  in  15’J-nke,p*  of(thf  'iosyard  of  Naboth
I  n  A/'  oast  thou  killed,  and  also  taken  p.?

2  Chron.  20.  11 .  to  come  to  cast  us  out  of  thy  p.

Neh.  11.  3.  in  Judah  dwelt  every  one  in  his  p.  .
Psai  2.  8.  the  uttermost  parts  of  earth  for  thy  p.

In’  ^ le  P>  by  their  own  sword

00  Ibey  may  dwell  and  have  it  in  p%

83.  12.  let  us  take  the  houses  of  God  in  p.

Pro®.  28.10.  the  upright  have  good  things  in  p.

/tvz.  14.23.  I  will  make  it  a  p.  for  the  bittern
Lzek.  11.  15.  to  us  is  this  land  given  inp.

25.  4.  I  will  deliver  thee  to  men  of  the  east  forp.

36.  2.  even  the  ancient  high  places  are  ours  in  p.

...  AAhl  -  haye  appointed  my  land  into  their  p.

”•  t8-  ?lve  them  nop.  in  Israel,  1  am  their  p.

40.  18.  his  son’s  inheritance  out  of  his  own  p.

Ads  5.  1.  Ananias  with  Sapphira  sold  ap.

7.  5.  that  he  would  give  it  to  him  forap.

4d.  brought  in  with  Jesus  into  p.  of  Gentiles
Eph.  1.  14.  till  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  p.

POSSESSIONS.  P

d,'yel!  and  trade,  and  get  you  p.  therein
47.  2( .  Israel  had  p.  therein,  and  multiplied
Num.  32k30.  they  shall  have  p.  among  you
Josh.  22.  4.  get  you  to  the  land  of  your  p.

1  25.  2.  a  man  in  Maon,  whose  p .  were  in

1  Chron.  9.  2.  the  inhabitants  that  dwelt  in  their  p.

2  Chron.  11.  14.  for  the  Levites  left  their  p.

32.  29.  Hezekiah  provided  p.  of  flocks  and  herds-
Eccl.  2.  7.  I  had  greatp.  of  great  and  small  cattle
Chad.  17.  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their p.
Mat.  19.  22.  for  he  had  greatp.  Mark  10.  22.

Acts  2.  45.  and  sold  their  p.  and  parted  them
28.  7.  in  the  same  quarters  were  p.  of  Publius
POSSESSOR.

Gen.  14. 19.  most  high  G.p.  of  heav.  and  earth,  22.
Judg.  18.  +  7.  and  there  was  nop.  in  the  land
POSSESSORS.

Zech.  11.  5.  whose p.  slay  them,  and  hold  themselves
Acts  4.  34.  as  many  as  were  p.  of  lands  sold  them
POSSIBLE

■  ■gP'fipS'  [1]  That  which  may  be  done,  or  effected,
Mark  9.  23.  Rom.  12.  18.  [2]  Profitable  or  ne¬
cessary,  Gal.  4.  15.  [3]  Agreeable  to  the  will  of
God,  Mat.  26.  39.  Acts  20. 16.

Mat.  19.  26.  with  God  all  things  arep.  Mark  10.  27.

24.  24.  if  p.  shall  deceive  the'elect,  Mark  13.  22.

26.  39.  if  p.  let  this  cup  pass  from  me,  Mark  \  L  35.
Mark  9.  23.  all  things  are  p.  to  him  that  believp»h
14.  36.  all  things  arep.  to  thee,  Luke  18.  27.

Acts  2.  24.  was  not  p.  he  should  be  holdenof  it
20. 16.  it  p.  he  at  Jerusalem  the  dav  of  Pentecost
Rom.  12.  18.  if  it  bep.  live  peaceably  with  all  men
2  Cor.  12.  +  4.  which  is  notp.  for  a  man  to  utter
GtiL  4. 15.  lfp.  ye  would  have  plucked  out  your  eyes
lleb.  10.  4.  not  p.  the  blood  of  bulls  take  away  sins
POST.

Job  9.  25.  now  my  days  are  swifter  than  ap.
rer.  51.  31.  onep.  shall  run  to  meet  another

365


P  o  \


p  o  w


p  o  w


1


POSTS.

2  Citron.  30.  6.  so  the  p.  went  with  th^  lettera  frorn
the  king  and  Ins  prunes,  Lath.  3. 13.  15. 1  8. 10.

Esth.  8.  14.  V ■  rode  on  mules  and  camels  went  out

1  Sam.  1.  9.  Eli  sat  on  a  seat  by  a  p.  of  the  temple
Ezek.  40.  16.  and  on  each  p.  were  palm  trees

pos  is.  ..  ,

Dent.  6.  9.  shall  write  them  on  the  p.  of  thy  house
Judo  '6.  3.  Samson  took  the  two  p.  and  went  away
1  Kings  7-5.  all  the  doors  and  p.  were  square
Prov.  8.  34.  waiting  at  the  p.  ot  my  doors
ha  6  4-  the  p.  ot  the  door  moved  at  the  '0*ce
Sfl'.l.  behind  the  p.  thou  set  up  thy  remembrance
E-’ek  40.  10.  the  p.  had  one  measure  on  this  side
43.  8.  in  their  setting  ot  their  p.  by  my  p.

Amos  9.  1.  smite  the  lintel,  that  the  p.  may  shake
See  Door.

Sufc-POSTS.

Exod.  12.7.  strike  the  blopd  on  the  two  side-p.  2~.

23.  when  he  seeth  the  biood  on  the  s-ide-p.

1  Kings  6.  31.  lintel  and  side  p.  were  a  tilth  part
y  POSTERITY.

Gen  45.  7.  to  preserve  you  a  p.  in  the  earth
Nurn.  9.  10.  or  if  any  of  your  p.  be  unclean
1  Kings  16.  3.  I  will  take  away  the  P  of  Baasha
21.  21.  will  take  away  the  p.  ot  -A  nab
Psal.  49. 13.  yet  their  p.  approve  their  sayings
109.  13.  let  his  p.  be  cut  oft  and  blotted  out
Dan.  11.  4.  kingdom  shall  not  be  di '  ided  to  hisp.

Amos  4.  2.  and  take  yourjn  with  hsh-hooks

Is  a  vessel  of  earth  or  metal  for  uses  in  a  family,  2

Though  ye  have  lien  among  the  pots,  Pja/.  68.  13.
Though  ye  hate  endured  great  hardships  m  Lgy  Pt>
and  have  been  in  an  afflicted  contempt tibl e  t condi¬
tion  there.  It  is  a  metaphor  taken  from  scul¬
lions  that  commonly  lie  down  tn  the
the  pots,  or  upon  the  hearthstones,  whereby  they
are  very  much  discoloured  and  defamed.  In
Psal  8?.  6  it  is  said ,  His  hands  were  deliver¬
ed  from  the  pots;  where  pots  may  note  all  those
vessels  wherein  they  canted  .  water,  lime,  sJrf  f;
bricks,  &c.  The  meaning  is,  1  delivered  him
from  his  slavery  and  bondage  in  Egypt.  -And  in
F?ek  °4  3  6.  by  the  similitude  of  a  boiling  pot,
are  shewed  the  miseries  and  calamities  wherewith
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  should  be  afflicted

Exod.  16? 33.  take  a  p.  and  put  an  homer  of  manna
Lev.  6.  28.  and  if  it  be  sodden  m  a  brazen  p.

Judo.  6.  19.  Gideon  put  the  broth  in  a  p.

1  Sam  2.  14.  he  struck  it  into  the  caldron  or  p.

2  Kings  4.  2.  hath  not  any  thing,  save  a  p.  ot  oil

38.  set  on  great  p.  II  40.  there  is  death  in  the  p.

41.  he  cast  meal  into  the  p.  no  harm  in  the  p.

Job  41  20.  goeth  smoke,  as  out  ot  a  seething  p.

31.  he  maketh  the  deep  to  boil  like  a  p.

Prov.  17.  3.  the  fining  p.  is  for  silver,  27.. 21.

Jer.  i.  13.  what  seest  thou  ?  1  see  a  seething  p.

F-’ek  *24  3.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  set  on  a  p.

6.  woe* to  bloody  city,  to  p.  whose  scum  is  therein
Joel  2.  1 6.  all  faces  shall  gather  p.

Mic.  3.  3.  they  chop  them  in  pieces,  as  roi  the  p.

!/c<  h  14  21.  every  p.  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  holiness
Heb  9. 4.  wherein  was  the  golden  p.  with  manna
Water-  POl.

John  4. 28.  the  woman  then^lett  her  wuter-p.

Exod  38.  3.  Bezaleel  made  the  p.  and  shovels
Lev.  ’ll.  35.  whether  it  be  oven,  or  ranges  tor  p.

1  Kings  7 .  45.  p.  and  shovels  of  brass,  2  Chron.  4. 16.

2  Chron.  4.  11.  lluram  made  the  p.  and  shovels
35.  13.  but  the  other  holy  offerings  sod  they  in  p.
Psal.  58.  9.  before  your  p.  can  teel  the  thorns

68  13.  though  ye  have  lien  among  the  p.

81 ;  6.  his  hands  were  delivered  train  the  p.

Jer .  35.  5.  1  set  before  the  Rechabites  p.  full  ot  wine
Mark  7. 4.  as  the  washing  of  cups  andp.  8.

See  Flesh.

Water-  POT  S.

John  2.  6.  there  was  set  there  six  water-p.

7.  Jesus  saith  to  them,  h\\  watei-p.  with  water
1  POTENTATE.

Tim  6  15.  who  is  the  blessed  and  only  P .

•  POTSHERD,  S.

lob  2.  8.  he  took  him  a  p.  to  scrape  himself

*  41.  t  30.  sharp  pieces  ot  p.  are  under  him
Ptal  22  15.  my  strength  is  dried  up  like  ap.

Prov.  26!  23.  are  like  a  p.  covered  with  silver  dross
Isa.  45.  9.  let  the  p.^triye^vuhp.  ot  the  earth

Gen  25.  29.  Jacob  sod  p.  and  Esau  came  from  field
30.  feed  me  with  p.  if 34.  Jacob  ga'  e  Esau p.

2  Kings  4.  38.  seethe  p.  for  sons  ot  the  prophets

39.  and  came  and  shred  them  into  the  pot  ot  p.

40.  as  they  were  eating  the  p.  they  cried  out
Una  °  12  if  one  with  his  skirt  do  touch  bread  oi  p.

v  .  POTTER.  .  „  .

Frequent  mention  is  made  of  the  f  otter.

tUre  When  God  would  shew  his  absolute  do¬
minion  over  men.  and  his  irresistible  power  over
their  hearts,  he  has  often  recourse  to  the  sirnili-
tude  of  a  Potter,  wfw  makes  what  he  pleases  oj
his  clay  ;  sometimes  a  vessel  of  honour ,  and  some-
times  of  dishonour;  now  forming  it,  and  then
breaking  it;  now  preserving  it,  and  then  reject¬
ing  it.  Psal.  2.  9.  R«>m.  9.  21.
psal  o  9.  shaltdash  them  in  pieces  like  a  p.  vessel
Isa.  30.  i4.  he  shall  break  it  as  the  breakmg^  ot  a
p .  vessel,  Jer.  19.  11.  itev.

Jer.  18.  2.  arise,  go  down  to  the  p.  house
19.  1.  go  and  get  a  p.  earthen  bottle  and  take
Lam.  4.  2.  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  p.

Zech.  1 1.  13.  the  Lord  said,  cast  it  unto  the  p.
Mat.  27-  10.  and  gave  them  ^f or  the  p.  held

1  Chron.  4. 23.  these  were  the  p.  and  those  that  dwelt
See  Clay.

POVERTY.

Gen  45  11.  lest  thou  and  all  thou  hast  come  to  p.

366


Chr.  22.  +  14.  in  my  p.  1  prepared  for  the  house


.  gg.  T  1^-  111  uv  P-  *  m'-m"

6  11.  so  thy  p.  come  as  an  armed  man,  .4-  «>*.

_  *  i  _ a.:..  .  iva/m*  ic  tnpil*


irrov.  U.  1 1.  ao  mj  >'•  w.uv  . .  -  '

10  15  the  destruction  ot  the  poor  is  then  p.
ll’24.  that  withholdeth,  nut  it  tendeth  top.

13  18  p  be  to  him  that  retuseth  instruction
2o!  13’.  love  not  sleep,  lest  thou  come  top.

23.  21.  the  drunkard  and  glutton  come  top.

"8  19.  foiloweth  vain  persons,  shall  havep.enougn
~oo.  considered!  not  tiiatp.  shall  come  upon  him
30.  8.  give  me  neither  p.  nor  riches,  feed  me  with
31  7.  let  him  drink  and  forget  his  p.  and  remember
2  Car.  8. 2.  their  deep  p.  abounded  to  riches  of  Ebe-

9.  became  poor,  that  ye  thro’  his  p.  might  be  rich
Rev  2.  9.  1  tnow  thy  works  and  p.  thou  art  lien
POUND,  S.

1  Kings  10.  17.  three  p.  ot  gold  went  to  one  shield
Ezra  l  69.  they  gave  to  treasure ^uCX>P-ot  silver
L\eh.  7.  71.  gave  to  the  treasure  2200  p.  ot  silver

72  the  rest  gave  2000  p.  ot  silver  and  gold
Luke  19  13.  and  delivered  to  his  servants  tenp.

16.  second  said,  Lord,  thy  p.  hath  gained  ten  p.

18.  hath  gained  five  p.  ||  20.  behold,  here  is  thy  p.

24  take  from  him  thep.  1 25.  he  hath  tenp.

John  12.  3.  then  Mary  took  ap.ot  ointment

19.  39.  and  of  aloeSjabout p.  weight

F~ek  4  1  andp.  upon  it  the  city  Jerusalem

POU  RTR  A  YED.  „

Ezek.  8.  10.  all  the  idols  ot  Israel  p.  on  the  wall
I  23  14  for  when  she  saw  men  p.  on  the  wall,  me
images  of  the  Chaldeans  p.  with  vermilion
POWDER.

Exod.  32.  20.  Moses  burnt  calf  and  ground  it  to  p.
Deut  28  24.  Lord  shall  make  rain  ot  thy  land  p.

2  Kings  23.  6.  stamped  the  grove  to  p.  cast  the  p.

15.  he  stamped  the  a|tar  top.  2  C/mm.31.7

Mat  21  44.  it  will  grind  him  top.  Luke  *,0.  18.
mat.  POWDERS.

Cant  3.  6.  perfumed  with  all  the  p.  ot  the  merchant
F  POWER  ,

Signifies,  [1]  That  attribute,  or  perfection  of  God,
whereby  he  can  do  whatsoever  he  hath  purposed  to
do,  and  hinder  what  he  will  not  have  done.  Mat.  0.

13  f2l  Absolute  nght  and  authority ,  Mat.  9.  o.
The  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive
sins;  that  is,  he  that  is  the  Son  of  man,  being  God,
hath  thn  power.  [3]  Eight,  or  privilege,  John  1.

+  12.  [4]  Force,  violence,  or  compulsion,  gz la  i
23.  ’  [5]  Liberty,  or  freedom,  1  Cor.  9.  4,  5.  .  LbJ

The  effectual  and  powerful  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
in  regenerating  and  carrying  on  the  work  of  grace
in  believers,  against  all  opposition,  from  one  degree
to  another ,  till  it  be  perfected  in  glory  ,  Eph.  1.  19.

[7]  The  means,  or  instrument ,  which  by  Goa  s
power  is  made  effectual  to  briny  to  salvation,  Horn.

1.  16.  1  Cor.  1.  18.  [8]  A  veil,  or  covering ,  in
token  that  one  is  under  the  power  of  a  superior.  1
Cor  11  10.  The  woman  ought  to  have  power  on
her  head  ;  that  is,  she  ought  to  wear  a  covering,
or  veil,  in  token  that  she  is  under  the  power  of  her
husband:  or  she  ought  to  reckon  and  acknowledge
power  to  be  in  her  head,  that  is,  m  her  husband,
who  is  her  head,  Eph.  5.  23.  [9]  Good  or  evil

angels.  Col.  1.  16.  Eph.  6.  12.  [10]  Civil  yoveni-
ors,  or  magistrates,  Rom.  13.  1.  [11]  Excellency,
beauty ,  and  glory  ,\  Cor.  15.  43.

All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  ana  m
earth,  Mat.  28.  18.  Supreme  and  absolute  autho¬
rity  and  ability  is  given  me  in  heaven,  so  as,  [1J
'To  prevail  with  God  to  be  reconciled  to  man.  [.J
To  send  the  Holy  Ghost,  Acts  2.  33.  [3]  Over
angels,  Col.  1.  16.  Heb.  1.  4.  [4]  lo  give  heaven

to  all  that  believe  in  me,  Mat.  25.  34.  Cower  ts
also  given  me  in  earth,  to  prevail  with  men  to  be  re¬
conciled  to  God,  and  so  to  gather  a  church  out  of  all
nations,  Mark  16.  15,  16.  and  to  rule, govern,  and
defend  the  same  against  all  its  enemies.  Acts  10.
36,  38,  42.  Eph.  1.  2  ,21.

The  body  is  raised  in  power,  1  Cor.  15.  43.  It  will
be  able,  [1]  To  attend  the  soul  in  the  highest  ope¬
rations.  [2]  To  be  continually  exercised  m  the
highest  employments  without  weariness.  13  J  l  o
bear  the  weight  of  glory.  [4]  lu  whatsoever
the  soul  would  have  it.  [5]  It  will  be  above  the
reach  of  inward  infirmities,  or  outward  dangers.
Gen.  32.  28.  as  a  prince  hast  thou  p.  with  Cod
49.  3.  the  excellency  of  dignity  .excellency  ot  p.
Lev.  26.  19.  1  will  break  the  pride  ot  yourp.

\um.  22.  38.  have  1  now  any  p.  to  say  any  thing  .

Deut  3  +  18.  ye  shall  pass  over  all  that  are  sonsotp.
4.  37.  brought  thee  with  his  mighty  p.  outot  Egypt
8.  18.  it  is  lie  that  giveth  thee  p.  to  get  wealth
32.  36.  when  he  seeth  that  their  p.  is  gone
Knth  4.  +  11.  and  get  thee  p.  in  Ephratah
2  Sam.  22.  33.  Cod  is  my  strength  and  p.
o  Kings  19.  26.  the  inhabitants  were  ot  small  p.

1  Chron.  20.  1.  Joab  led  forth  the  p.  °t  the  army
29.  II.  thine  is  the  p .  and  the  jdory,  Mat.  o.  1.3.

12.  in  thine  hand  isp.  and  might,  2  Chron.  ,0.  6.

2  Chron.  25.  8.  God  hath  p.  to  help,  and  cast  down
32  9.  Sennacherib  laid  siege,  and  all  his  p.  with  him
Ezra  4.  23.  and  made  them  cease  by  force  and  p.

8  22  liisp.  and  wrath  against  all  that  forsake  him
Keh~5. 5.  nor  is  it  in  our  p.  to  redeem  them
F.sth.  1.  3.  he  made  a  feast  to  p.  ot  Persia  and  Media

8.  11.  to  cause  to  perish  the  p.  of  the  people

9.  1.  the  Jews  hoped  to  have  p.  over  them
Job  5.  20.  redeem  in  war  from  the  p.  or  the  swora

24  22.  he  dravveth  also  the  mighty  with  his  p.

°()  °  how  hast  thou  helped  him  that  is  without  p.
*12.~'he  divided  the  sea  with  hisp.

14.  the  thunder  of  his  p.  who  can  understana  .

36.  22.  behold,  Cod  exalteth  by  his  p.

41.  12.  1  will  not  conceal  his  parts  nor  his  p.

Psal  22  20.  my  darling  from  thep.  of  the  dog
49  i5.  redeem  my  soul  from  thep.ot  the  grave
62.  11.  1  heard,  thatp.  belongeth  unto  (rad
65  6.  who  setteth  fast  mountains  girded  with  p.
66.  7.  he  ruleth  by  hisp.  tor  ever,  his  eyes  beholn
68.  35.  he  giveth  strength  and  p.  to  his  people
78.  26  by  hiS'jF.  he  brought  in  the  south  winu


Psal  90.  11.  who  knoweth  the  p.  ot  thine  angel  t
106  8.  might  make  his  mighty  p.  to  be  known
111.  6.  he  shewed  his  people  the  p.  of  his  works^

150  1  praise  him  in  the  firmament  of  hisp.

Feel.  4.  E  on  the  side  of  oppressors  there  wasp.

5  19.  and  hath  given  him  p.  to  eat  thereof
6.  2.  Cod  giveth  him  not  ^..  to  eat  thereof

8.  4.  where  the  word  of  a  xing  is,  there  isp.

8.  there  is  no  man  hath  p.  over  the  spirit
Isa.  37  -  27.  their  inhabitants  were  ot  small  p.

40  29  life  giveth  p.  to  the  taint,  and  to  them
-13’  17’  which  bringeth  forth  the  army  and  p.

47’  14'  shall  not  deliver  trom  the  p.  of  the  flam
Jer  10  12.  he  made  the  earth  by  hisp.  51. 15.

Ezek  00  6  were  in  thee  to  their  p.  to  shed  blood
30  6  and  the  pride  of  her  p.  shall  come  down
l)an  2  37.  Cod  hath  given  thee  p.  and  glory

6  07  who  delivered  Daniel  trom  the  p.  ot  hons

8  6  ran  in  fury  of  his  p.  II  22.  but  not  in  hisp.

24  his p.  shall  be  mighty,  but  not  by  hisp.

11.6.  but  she  shall  not  retain  the  p.  of  the  arm
25.  he  shall  stir  up  hisp.  and  his  courage
43  but  lie  shall  have p.  over  the  treasures  of  goi&
12.  7.  lo  scatter  the  p.  of  the  holv  peop
Idos  1°  3  bv  his  strength  he  had  p.  with  trad
4'  ’yea  he  had  p.  over  the  angel,  and  prevailed
13  14  I  will  ransom  them  from  the  p.  ot  the  grave
Mic  2.  1.  because  it  is  in  the  p.  of  their  hand
’3  8  1  am  full  of  p.  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Irard
Hub.  1.  11.  imputing  this  hisp.  to  his  god
2  9  that  he  may  be  delivered  from  the/?,  of  evil
3!  4 ‘and  there  was  the  hiding  of  his  p.

Zech  A.  6.  not  by  might,  nor  by  myp.  but  by  my  Sp.

9  4.  behold,  the  Lord  will  smite  her  p.  in  the  sea
Mat  9.  6.  may  know  Son  of  man  hath  p.  on  eanh  '

to  forgive  sins,  Mark  2.  10.  Luke  5.24.

8.  glorified  God,  who  had  given  such  p  to  men

10  1  <rive  p.  against  unclean  spirits,  Luke  9.  1.

24*.  30.  coming  in  the  clouds  with  p  Luke  21.  .j.
°6  64.  sitting  on  right  hand  .with  p.  Mark  G.  6...

°8  18  all  p.  is  given  to  me  in  heaven  and  earth

Mark  3.  15.  and  to  have  p.  to  heal  sicknesses

9  1.  have  seen  the  kingdom  ot  Cod  come  with  p.
Luke  1.  35.  p.  of  the  lliuhestshal  overshadow  thee

4.  6.  the  devil  said,  all  this  p.  will  I  give  thee
3°  they  were  astonished  tor  Ins  word  v as  with  p.

4  36  with  p.  he  commandeth  unclean  spirits
5'  17  the  v  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal  tnem

10  0  1  give  you  p.  to  tread  on  serpents,  and  over
'  all  the  p.  of  the  enemy,  nothing  shall  hurt  yon

12.  5.  fear  him  that  hath  p.  tp  cast  into  hell
20.  20.  they  might  deliver  him  to  p.of  governor
2°  5.3.  this  is  your  hour,  and  the  p.  of  darks.ty,

04"  44.  until  ye  be  endued  with  p.  from  on  high
John  i."  12.  to  them  gave  he  p.  to  become  sonsot  G.
10.  18.  1  have  p.  to  lay  it  clown,  and  p.  to  take  it
17  2.  thou  hast  given  him  p.  over  all  flesh
10  10.  1  have  p.  to  crucity  thee  p.  to  release  thee
Acu  \  7  seasons  the  Father  hath  put  in  ms  own  p.
8  shali  refeive  p. after  Ti .Ghost  is  come  on  you

3  \o  as  though  by  our  own  p.  or  holiness  we  made
4!  they 'asked,  by  what  p,  have  .ye .done this  t  J
5  4  after  it  was  sold,  was  it  not  in  thme  owj  p.

6. 8.'  Stephen  full  of  faith  and  p.  did  great  wonders
8. 19.  saving,  give  me  also  tins p.  otT 'V horn  lay  han.
lb.  .38.  how  C.  anointed  Jesus  with  H. Ghost anop.
or,'  '18  to  turn  them  from  the  p.  ot  Satan  ,o  God

Rom.  1. 4?  and  declared  to  be  the  Son  ofCodwithE
20.  clearly  seen,  even  hiseternal  p.  and  Godhead
0  hath  not  the  potter  p.  over  the  c.la>  .

922  what  if  God,  willing  to  make  his  p.  known
1.3.2.  whosoever  therefore  resist eth  the  p.  resistet.i

3.  wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  ^  'he  p. .

15.  13.  abound  in  hope,  thro  p.ot  the  hloly  Ghost
19.  wonders,  by  the  p.  of  the  Spirit  of  God

16.  25.  now  to  him  that  is  of  p.  to  establish  \o
1  Cor.  2.  4.  in  demonstration  ol  the  S

4  19.  I  will  not  know  their  speech,  but  thep.

5'  4  with  thep.  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ

6.  12.  I  will  not  be  brought  under  the  p.  of  anj
14  and  will  also  raise  us  up  by  his

7.  4*.  the  wife  and  husband  have  not  p.  oti  tt^od'
37.  but  hath  p.  over  his  own  wil.  so  decreed

9.  4.  have  we  not  p.  to  eat  and  to

5.  have  we  not  p.  to  lead  about  a  ~ister,  a  vuie

6.  have  we  not  p.  to  forbear  working
12.  if  others  be  partakers  ot  this  p.  over  you^

|  have  not  used  this  p.  but  suffer  allthmg

10.  the  woman  ought  to  have  p., on  her


11.  10.  the  woman  ougm  w

15  24.  he  hath  put  down  all  authority  „

2  Cor.  4.  7.  that  the  excellency  of  p.  may  bern  C
8.  3.  to  their  p.  yea,  and  beyond  their  p.

12.  9.  that  the  p.  ot  Christ  may  1  upon  ™

13. 10.  according  to  the  p.  Cod  hath  g  sen  n*

Eph.  1. 19.  the  exceeding  greatness  ot  Ins  P-  *

P  us,  according  to  the  working  ot  his  mighty  1
21.  far  above  all  principality  ,p.  a“d  iheair

2.  2.  according  to  the  prmce  of  the  p.  o  the

3.  7.  given  to  me,  by  the  effectual  working 01

20.  according  to  the  p.  that  worketh  tio,

Phil  3.  10.  1  inay  know  thep.ot  his  resui
Col.  i.  11.  strengthened  according  to  hls  ^-^rkue'
13.  who  hath  delivered  us  from  th.e  P\°  {

2.  10.  who  is  head  ot  all  pruicipahty  aml  p.

2  Thess.  1.  9.  be  punished  from  the  Jory  01
11.  and  fulfil  the  work  of  faith  with  p.

2.  9.  after  the  working  of  Satan  ,  J; 0urse

3. 9.  not  because  we  have  not  p.  but  to 1  xt

1  Tim.  6.  16.  whom  be  honour  and  p.  e\  erla~  .  a

2  Tim.  1.7.  God  hath  given  us  spirit  ot  p.  »

3.  5.  having  a  form  of  godliness,but  deu>  .  .

Heb.  1.3.  upholding  all  things  by  word

2.  14.  be  might  destroy  him  that  had  p.

7!  16.  but  after  the  p.  of  an  endless  I  lie  thin
2  Pet.  1.  3.  as  his  divine  p.  hath  u1' f”  lord
I  16.  when  we  made  known  the  p.  ot  our  L*  (
Jude  25.  to  only-  wise  C.  our  Sa\  ioui  b*  J
Rev.  2.  26.  to  him  will  I  give  p.  over  tn®

4. 11.  thou  art  worthy  to  receive  tmnoiirandp.h,

5.  13.  blessing,  glory,  honour,  and  p.  hQrse

6.  4.  p.  was  given  to  him  that  sat  on  t  ^

8.  p.  was  given  them  over  fourth  part©*


PO  u


PR  A


P  R  A


ev.  7.  12.  honour,  p.  and  might  he  jjiven  to  our  G.
).  3.  to  them  was  given  p.  as  scorpions  have  p.

10.  and  their  p.  was  to  hurt  men  five  months
19.  for  their  p.  is  in  their  mouth  and  their  tails

1.  3.  1  will  give  p.  to  my  two  witnesses

6.  these  have  p.  to  shut  heaven,  p.  over  waters

2.  10.  now  is  the  p.  of  his  Christ  come

3.  2.  the  dragon  gave  him  p.  and  his  seat,  4.

5.  p.  was  given  to  him  to  continue,  7.

12.  he  exerciseth  all  the  p.  of  the  first  beast
15.  had  p.  to  give  life  II  14.  18.  had  p.  over  fire

5.  8.  the  temple  was  filled  with  smoke  from  his  p.
5.  8.  p.  was  given  him  to  scorch  men  with  fire
9.  blasphemed  God  who  hath  p.  over  these  plagues

7.  12.  but  receive  p.  as  kings  one  hour  with  beast

13.  shall  give  their  p.  and  strength  to  the  beast
9.  1.  glory,  honour,  and  p.  to  the  Lord  our  God

1  POWER  of  God.

at.  22.  29.  Jesus  said,  ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the
scriptures,  nor  the  p.  of  Hod,  Mark  12.  24.
•ike 9. 43.  were  all  amazed  at  the  mighty  p.  of  God
■2.  69.  the  Son  sit  on  the  right  hand  of  p.  of  God
cts  8.  10.  saying,  this  man  is  the  great  p.  of  God
7m.  1.  16.  the  gospel  is  the  p.  of  God  to  salvation
Cor.  1.  18.  to  us  which  are  saved,  it  is  thep.  of  God
24.  Christ  the  p.  of  God,  and  wisdom  of  God
,  5.  faith  should  not  stand  but  by  the  p.  of  God
Cor.  6.  7.  by  the  word  of  truth,  by  the  p.  of  God
J.  4.  tho  crucified  thro’  weakness,  yet  he  liveth  by
z>.o/  G.  but  we  shall  live  with  him  by  p.  of  God
Tim.  1.  8.  but  be  thou  partaker  of  the  afflictions
ot  the  gospel,  according  to  the  p.  of  God
■  et.  1.  5.  who  are  kept  by  the  p.  of  God  thro’  faith
See  Great.

/jiPOWIili.

•n.  31.  29.  it  is  in  p.  of  my  hand  to  do  you  hurt
•od.  15.  6.  thy  right  hand  is  become  glorious  inp.

;  21  •  7.  why  are  the  wicked  mighty  in  p.  ?

'.  23.  he  is  excellent  in  p.  and  in  judgment
al.  29.  t  4.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  in  p.
ov.  3.  27.  when  it  is  in  p.  of  thy  hand  to  do  it
1.  21.  death  and  lite  are  in  the  p.  ot  the  tongue

l.  40.  26.  that  he  is  strong  in  p.  not  one  faileth
'h.  1.  3^  the  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  great  inp.
ke  1.  17.  shall  go  before  him  in  the  p .  of  fcLlias

14.  Jesus  returned  in  the  p.  of  the  Spirit

■or-  4.  20.  kingdom  of  God  not  in  word,  hut  in p.

'.  43.  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  p.
h.  6. 10.  be  strong  in  the  Lord  and  p.  of  his  might
"ess.  1.5.  butour  g os.  came  in  word,  and  also  inp.
et.2.  11.  angels  who  are  greater  in  p.  and  might
My  POWER.

n.  31. 6.  with  all  my  p.  I  have  served  your  fathei
od.  9.  16.  1  raised  thee  to  shew  in  thee  my  p.
ut.  8. 17 .  sayest*  myp.  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth
n.  4.  30.  Babylon  built  by  the  might  of  my  p.

m.  9.  17.  that  1  might  shew’  my  p.  m  thee

'or .  9.  18.  that  I  abuse  not  my  p.  in  the  gospel
,  No  POWER.

od.  21.  8.  to  sell  her,  he  shall  have  no  p.

1'  „ •  •  shall  have  no p.  to  stand  before  enemies

•  "•  20.  men  ot  Ai  had  no  p.  to  flee  this  way

7rn.  30.  4.  till  David  and  peo.  had  no  p.  to  weep

n°nu  44‘  * l-’  '°  f>eJP  with  them  that  have  nop.

•  zA  bouse °f  Ahaziah  had  no  p.  to  keep  kingdom
.  50. 2.  or  have  1  nop.  to  deliver  ?  behold  1  dry  up

3.  27.  on  whose  bodies  the  fire  had  no  p.

7.  there  was  no p.  in  the  ram  to  stand  before  him
n  V'/10  P‘  a“ainst  me,  except  it  were  given
L  for  there  is  no  p.  but  of  God
7.  20.  6.  on  ouch  the  second  death  hath  no  p.

Thy  POWER.

ltT  broughtest  out  by  thy  mighty  p.

•  J-  12.  behold,  all  that  he  hath  is  in  thy  p.
u.  21.  13  so  will  we  sing,  and  praise  t/iyp.

11.  scatter  them  by  thy  p.  II  lfl.  will  sing  of  thy  p.

2.  to  see  thy  p.  and  thy  glory,  as  1  have  seen

.  3.  through  greatness  ot  thy  p.  enemies  submit
J8.  and  thy  p.  to  every  one  that  is  to  come

n.  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  p.

.)•  thy  People  shall  be  willing  in  day  of  thy  p.

>.  11.  and  they  shall  talk  of  thy  p.

0  2.  1.  watch  the  way,  fortify  thy  p.  mightily

POWERFUL.

i  .A4-,  „e^vo‘,c.e  the  !  ord  isp.  full  of  majesty
'  ^or  bl,s  letters,  say  they,  are  p.

•  .  4.  12.  the  word  ot  God  is  quick,  p.  and  sharp.

POWERS.

' 2J-  29.  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  p.  of
aven  shall  be  shaken,  Mark  13.  25.  Luke  21.  26.

6  o  oo’  wben  brought  before  p.  take  no  thought

1  nor  P-  can  separate  from  love  of  God

l.  the  p.  that  be  are  ordained  of  God
yr\ '*2.  t  29.  are  all  teachers?  are  all  p.  ?

10  '  ''ia'  now  to  p.  in  heavenly  places

|  u.  we  wrestle  against  principalities  and  p.
l.  10.  p.  were  created  by  him  ami  for  him
0.  having  spoiled  p.  he  made  a  shew  openly
*•  Puf  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  p.

1  o^7JEas,e,<^  t-*le  P‘  °'  'be  "  orld  to  come
1  et •  22.  who  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  p.

■  .  POUR,

v  ,  <ake  anrl  P-  water  on  the  dry  land

D  snau  »  the  anointing  oil  on  his  hern!

!l?Uu  ^  P'  ,'b®  blood  of  the  bullock  beside
o  nfnu01,’1  ^  a,tar>  Lev.  4.  7,  18,  25,  30,  34.

1  o  n1eltJ’er ,8b®Il  ye  p.  drink  offerings  thereon
jr  *•  pe  shall  p.  oil  on  the  meat  offerings,  6.

„  P;  11  •n'0  Vle  Pa.lni  of  his  own  left  band,  26.

•  p.  it  on  bead  ot  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed
.  thev  shall  ».  out  the  dust  that  they  scrape  off

;  „  'e,S  i  1  f-  out  blood  thereof  and  cover  it

7  1  n  sllal*  P-  no  0,1  upon  her  offering
,  ■  he  shall  p  water  out  of  his  buckets

1 ,  «  n,  b1,00''  0llt  as  water,  24  |  15.  23.

'  ?p-  'ake  'he  flesh,  and  p.  out  the  broth
1  a  ,  '  p •  water  on  the  burnt  sacrifice

'  p-  ?ut  'he  oil  into  those  vessels

ip‘ ®.ut  ror  the  people,  that  they  may  eat
1  3fia,cn  01L011  'ehu’s  head,  and  say

1  /  V';  tne^’  P- down  rain  according  to  vapour
••  ‘U.  4.  when  1  remember  I  v.  out  mv  soul


Psal.  62.8.  ye  people,/;,  out  your  heart  before  nim
b9.  24.  p.  out  tlune  indignation  on  them
79.  6.  p.  out  thy  wrath  on  the  heathen,  not  known
Prov.  1.  23.  I  will  p.  out  my  spirit  unto  you,  Isa.

T  ia  o  t  II44’  3 •  Joel  2-  28,  29.  Acts  2.  17,  18.
Isa.  44.  3.  1  will  p.  water  on  him  that  is  thirsty
45.  8.  let  the  skies p.  down  righteousness
Jer.  6.  t  6.  v.  out  engine  of  shot  against  Jerusalem

6.  11.  I  will  p.  it  out  on  the  children  abroad

7.  18.  and  top.  outdrink  offerings  toother  gods
10.  25.  p.  out  thy  fury  on  heathen,  know  thee  not

14.  16.  I  will  p.  their  wickedness  upon  them
18.  21.  p.  out  their  blood  by  force  of  the  sword
44.  17.  top.  out  drink  offerings  to  the  queen  of  hea¬
ven,  as  we  and  fathers  have  done,  18,  19,  25.

I. am.  2.  19. p.  out  thine  heart  like  water  before  Ld!
Kzek.  1.8.  now  will  I  shortlyp.  out  my  fury  upon

I  o.  O,  T  -.1  thee>  14.  19.  120.8,  13,  21.  |  30.  15.

21.  31.  1  will  p.  out  mine  indignation,  Zeph.  3.  8.

I  24.  3.  set  on  the  pot,  and  p.  water  into  it
Ltfs.  5.  10.  1  willp.  out  my  wrath  like  water
Mic.  1.6.  I  will  p.  down  the  stones  thereof  into
Zech.  12.  10.  1  will  p.  on  house  of  David  the  Spirit
Mai.  3.  10.  if  I  will  not  p.  you  out  a  blessing
l\ev.  16.  l.p.  out  the  vials  of  wrath  of  God  on  earth
^  POURED.

Gen.  28.  18.  Jacob  p.  oil  on  the  top  of  the  stone
35.  14.  Jacob  p.  a  drink  offering  thereon
Exod.  9.  3.3.  the  rain  was  notp.  on  the  earth

30.  32.  upon  man’s  flesh  shall  it  not  hep.

Lev.  4.  12.  where  ashes  are  p.  he  sliail  be  burnt
8.  12.  Moses  p.  anointing  oil  on  Aaron’s  head

15.  hep.  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  altar,  9.  9.

21.  10.  on  whose  head  the  anointing  oil  was  p.
!\um.  28.  7.  to  be  p.  to  the  Ld.  for  a  drink  offering
Eeut.  12.  27.  blood  of  thy  sacrifices  shall  hep.  out
Josh.  7.  t  23.  and  p.  them  out  before  the  Lord

1  Sam.  1.  15.  but  1  have  p.  out  my  soul  before  Ld.
7.  6.  drew  water,  and  p.  it  out  before  the  1  ord
10. 1.  Samuel  p.  oil  on  Saul’s  head,  and  kissed  him

2  Sam.  13.  9.  I  amar  p.  them  out  before  him

23.  16.  nevertheless,  Dav.  would  not  drink  thereof,
but p.  it  out  unto  the  l  ord,  1  Chron.  11.  18.

1  Rings  1.3. 3.  aitar shall  be  rent,  and  ashes p.  out,  5.

-  Kings  3.  11.  whop,  water  on  the  hands  of  Elijah

4.  5.  who  brought  the  vessels  to  her,  and  she  p.  out
40.  so  they  p.  out  for  the  men  to  eat
16.  13.  and  Ahazp.  his  drink  offering

2  (lhr.  12.  7 .  my  wrath  not  be  p.  out  on  Jerusalem
34.  21.  great  is  the  wrath  of  Lord  p.  out  on  us

25.  therefore  my  wrath  shall  be  p.  out  on  this  place
Job  3.  24.  my  roarings  are  p.  out  like  the  waters
10.  10.  hast  not  thou  p. me  outas  milk,  and  curdled

22. +  16.  flood  wasp.  011  their  foundation
29.  6.  v  hen  the  rock  p.  me  out  rivers  of  oil
30. 16.  and  now  my  soul  is  p.  out  upon  me

Lsal.  22.  14.  I  am  p.  like  water,  bones  out  of  joint
45.  2,  grace  isp.  into  thy  lips,  therefore  God  blessed
<7  -17 •  clouds  p.  out  water,  skies  sent  out  a  sound
142.  2.  1  p.  out  my  complaint  before  him
Cant.  1.  3.  thy  name  is  as  ointment  p.  forth
Lfti.  26. 16. p.  out  a  prayer,  when  chastening  on  them
29.  10.  I  ord  hath  p.  on  you  the  spirit  ofdeepsleep

32.  15.  till  the  Spirit  be  p.  on  us  from  on  high
42. 25.  he  hath  p.  on  him  the  fury  of  his  anger
53.  12.  because  he  hath  p.  out  his  soul  to  death
57.  6.  to  them  thou  hast  p.  out  a  drink  offering

Jer.  7.  20.  my  fury  shall  hep.  out  on  this  place

19.  1.3.  they  have  p.  out  drink  oft'erin<>s,  32.  29
42.  18.  as  fury  hath  been,  so  shall  it  be  p.  out  *

44.  6.  my  fury  and  mine  anger  was  p.  forth

19.  when  we  p.  drink  offerings  to  queen  of  heaven
Lam.  2.  4.  he  p.  out  his  fury  like  fire,  4.  11.

II.  my  liver  is  p.  on  earth  ||  12.  their  soul  p.  out
4.  1.  the  stones  of  the  sanctuary  arep.  out
Ezek.  16.36.  because  thy  filthiness  was  p.  out

20.  28.  and  p.  out  there  their  drink  offerings

33.  with  fury  p.  out  will  I  rule  over  them,  34.

22.  22.  that  I  the  I.ord  bavep.  out  my  fury

31.  therefore  1  p.  out  mine  indignation  on  them

23.  8.  they  p.  their  whoredom  upon  her

24.  7.  she  p.  it  not  or,  the  ground  to  cover  it
36.  18.  wherefore  1  p.  out  my  fury  upon  them
39.  29.  I  p.  out  my  Spirit  on  the  house  of  Israel

Dan.  9.  11.  theietore  the  curse  isp.  on  us,  and  oath

27.  and  that  determined  sha.ll  be  p.  on  desolate
Mic.  1.  4.  as  waters  that  arep.  down  a  steep  place
Nah A.  fury  isp.  out  like  fire, rocks  thrown  down
Zeph.  1.  17.  their  blood  shall  be  p.  out  as  dust
Mat.  26.  7.  p.  ointment  on  his  head,  12.  Mark  14.  3.
John  2.  15.  and  he  p.  out  the  changers’  money
Acts  10.  45. on  the  Gentiles  wasp,  out  the  gift
Phil.  2.+  17.  it  I  be  p.  forth  on  service  of  your  faith
Lev.  14. 10.  wine  of  wrath  of  G.p.  without  measure

16. 2.  went  and  p.  out  his  vial,  3,  4,  8,  10, 12, 17,
POUREDST.

Ezek,  16. 15.  p,  out  thy  fornications  on  every  one
POURETH.

Job  12. 21.  he  p.  contempt  on  princes,  Psal.  107.40.

16.  13.  he  p.  out  my  gall  upon  the  ground
20.  but  mine  eye  p.  out  tears  unto  God
Psal.  75.8.  wine  is  red,  and  he  p,  out  of  the  same
/  rov.  15.  2.  but  mouth  of  foolsp.  out  foolishness

28.  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  p.  out  evil  things
Amos  5.  8.p.  out  waters  on  the  face  of  earth,  9. 6.
John  13.  5.  after  that,  he  p.  water  into  a  basin

POURING.

Lev.  4.  +  12.  he  shall  be  humt  at  thep.  out  of  ashes
Ezek.  9.  8.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  in  p.  thy  fury  on
r  Jerusalem?

Luke  10.  34.  he  bound  up  his  wounds,  p.  in  oil
PRACTICES.

2  Pet.  2. 14.  an  heart  exercised  with  covetous  p.

_  ,  PRACTISE.

Psal.  141 .  4.  not  to  p.  wicked  works  with  men
Prov.  3. 1 29.  p.  no  evil  against  thy’  neighbour
Jsa.  32.  6.  the  vile  person  shall  p.  hypocrisy
Dan.  8.  24.  a  king  shall  destroy,  prosper,  and  p.

Mic.  2. 1.  when  the  morning  is  light,  they  p.  it

1  e  no  PRACTISED.  [mischief

1  Sam.  23.  9.  David  knew  that  Saul  secretly  p.
Dan.  8.  12,  the  little  born  p.  and  prospered


,  PRAISE

Signifies,  [1]  A  confession  and  due  acknowledgment
oj  the  great  and  wonderful  excellences  and  per¬
fections  that  be  in  God ,  Psal.  138.  1.  Rev.  19.
5.  [2]  A  speaking  forth  and  commending  the

good  qualifications  that  be  in  others,  Prov.  27.  2.
[3]  The  object,  matter,  and  ground  of  'praise.
Deut.  10.  20.  Psal.  118.  14.  [4]  Commendation,
encouragement ,  and  protection,  Rom.  13.  3.  1  Pet.
2.  14.  [5]  Great  and  praiseworthy  actions.  Psal"
106. 2.  ’

Gen.  29.  +  35.  therefore  she  called  his  name  P.
lleut.  10.  21.  he  is  thy  p.  and  he  is  thy  God
26.  19.  to  make  thee  high  in  p.  and  in  name
Judg.  5.  3.  I  will  singp.  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.

.  r,  7,  1.7.  I  9.  S.  I  57-  7. 1  61.  8. 1  104.  33.

l  Laron.  16.  .>5.  deliver,  that  we  may  glory  m  tf+yp.
\Lhr,  23.  13.  and  such  as  taught  to  singp.

Neh.  9.  5.  who  is  exalted  abpve  all  blessing  and  p

12.  46.  in  the  days  of  David  were  songs  of  p.

Psal.  9.  14.  that  I  may  shew  forth  all  thy  p.

22.  25.  my  p.  shall  be  of  thee  in  the  congregation
30.  12.  that  my  glory  may  singp.  to  thee

33.  1.  forp.  is  comely  for  the  upright

34.  1.  his  p.  shall  be  continually  in  my  mouth

35.  28.  my  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  p.  all  day  long
I.,  ,•  evel+  P-  to  our  God  ||  42.  4.  with  voice  ofp.
48.  10.  so  is  thy  p.  to  the  ends  of  the  earth

50.  23.  whoso  offereth  p,  glorifieth  me

51.  15.  and  my  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy  p.

65.  1.  p.  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Sion
06.  2.  sing  forth  his  honour,  make  his  p.  glorious

8.  and  make  the  voice  of  his  p.  to  be  heard
7L  6.  myp.  shall  be  continually  of  thee
8.  let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  thy  p.  and  honour
79.  13.  we  will  shew  forth  thyp.  ||  98.  4.  sing p,

100.  4.  and  enter  into  his  courts  with  p.

102.  21.  and  to  declare  his  p.  in  Jerusalem
106.  2.  who  can  shew  forth  all  his  p.  ?

12.  then  they  sang  his  p.  ||  17.  triumph  in  thyp,

108.  1.  I  will  sing  and  give  p.  with  my  glcry

109.  1.  O  God  of  my  p.  ||  in.  10.  his p.  endureth
119.  171.  ups  shall  utter  p.  when  thou  hast  taugnt

138. 1.  before  the  gods  will  I  singp.  to  thee

145.  21.  my  mouth  shall  speak  the  p.  of  the  Lord

147. 1.  p.  is  comely  ||  7.  sing  p.  on  the  harp

148.  14.  he  exalteth  thep.  of  all  his  saints"

149.  1.  sing  his  p.  in  the  congregation  of  saints
Prov.  27.  21.  as  the  furnace,  so  is  a  man  to  his  p.

Isa.  42.  8.  1  will  not  give  my  p.  to  graven  images

10.  smg  his  p.  from  the  end  of  the  earth
12.  let  them  declare  his  p.  in  the  islands

43.  21.  this  people,  they  shall  shew  forth  my  p.

48.  9.  and  tor  myp.  will  I  refrain  for  thee

60.  18.  but  thou  shalt  call  thy  gates  P.

61.  3.  the  garment  of  p.  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness

,  cause  righteousn.  an  dp.  to  spring  forth
02.  7.  till  he  make  Jerusalem  a  p.  in  the  earth
Jer.  13.  11.  that  they  might  be  to  me  for  a  p.

17.  14.  save  me,  O  Lord,  for  thou  art  mv  n,

26.  bringing  sacrifices  of  p.  to  house  of  L.  33. 11.
sba'J  me  a  joy,  a  p.  and  an  honour

48.  2.  there  shall  be  no  more  p.  of  Moab

49.  25.  how  is  the  city  of  p.  not  left,  city  of  jov  ?

51.  41.  how  is  the  p.  of  whole  earth  surprised?

Hah.  3.  3.  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his  p,

^ eK h.  3.19.  I  will  get  themp.  and  fame  inevery  land
[  20.  make  you  ap.  among  all  people  of  the  earth

Mat.  21.  16.  of  sucklings,  thou  hast  perfected  p.

Luke  18.  43.  people,  when  they  saw  it,  gave  p.  to  G
John  9.  24.  give  God  the  p.  this  man  is  a  sinner

12.  43.  they  loved  p.  of  vnen  more  than  p.  of  God
Rom.  2.  29.  whose  p.  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God

13.  3.  do  what  is  good,  thou  shalt  have p,  of  satv*e
1  C or.  4.  5.  then  shall  every  man  have p.  of  God
%  Cor,  8.  18.  the  brother,  whose p.  is  in  the  gospel
Lph.  1.  6.  predestinated  to  p.  of  glor'  of  his  gr'ac®

12.  top.  of  glory  who  first  trusted  fn  Christ,  !4.

V  h  A"  Jesus  Christ,  to  p.  and  glo\'«  of  God

4.  8.  if  there  be  any  p.  think  on  these  things
Heb.  2. 12.  in  midst  of  the  church  will  1  sing  p.

13.  15.  by  him  let  us  offer  sacrifice  of  p.  continually

1  P&t»  1*  7*  trial  of  your  faith  might  be  found  to  n,

2.  14.  and  for  the  p.  of  them  that  do  well

4.  11.  to  whom  be  p.  and  dominion  for  ever
PRAISE,  Verb.

Gen.  49.  8.  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  p
Lev.  19.  24.  the  fruit  thereof  holy  to  p.  the  Lord
Ueut.  32.  t  43.  p.  his  people,  ye  nations

2  &am,  14.  t  25.  as  Absalom,  notaman  top. greatly
1  Chr.  23.  5.  instruments  I  made  top.  therewith

29.  13.  we  thank  and  p.  thy  glorious  name
Chron.  8.  14.  Levites  to  p.  before  the  priests

20.  21.  that  should  p.  the  beauty  of  holiness
22.  and  when  they  began  to  sing  and  to p.

31.  2.  and  top.  in  the  gates  of  the  tents  of  I.ord
Psal.  21.  13.  so  will  we  sing  andp.  thv  power
22.  23.  ye  that  fear  the  Lord.p.  him,  seed  of  ’acob

30.  9.  when  I  go  to  the  pit,  shall  the  dust p.  thee  ’

42.  5.  hope  in  God,  for  1  shall  yetp.  him,  n.  |  43.  5.

44.  8.  in  God  we  boast,  and p.  thy  name  for  ever

45.  17.  therefore  shall  the  people  p.  thee

49.  18.  men  will  p.  thee,  when  doest  well  to  thyself
63.  3.  my  lips  shall  p.  thee  ||  5.  mouth  shall  ?Crhee
67.  3.  let  people  p.  thee  ||  5.  let  all  peoplep.  thee
09.  34.  let  the  heaven  and  earth  p.  him
71.  14.  1  will  yetp.  thee  more  and  more
74.  21.  let  the  poor  and  needy  p.  thy  name
76.  10.  surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall  p.  thee

88.  10.  shall  the  dead  arise  and  p.  thee  ?

89.  5.  the  heavens  shall  p.  thy  wonders,  O  Lord
99.  3.  let  them  p.  thy  great  and  terrible  name
107  .  32. p.  him  in  the  assembly  of  the  elders
113.  1.  p.  him,  ()  ye  servants  of  the  Lord,  135  l
115.  17.  the  deadp.  not  the  Lord,  nor  any  that  '

119.  164.  seven  times  a  day  do  1  p.  thee  ^

175.  let  my  soul  live  and  it  shall p.  thee
1?8’  J  w,1!1  v‘  thy,nam®  for  thy  loving  kirdnes*

4.  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  sballp.  thee
142.7.  bring  out  of  prison  that  1  may  p.  thv  name
145.  4  one  generation  shall  p.  thy  works  to  knothe  ■

10.  all  thy  works  shall  p.  thee,  O  I  ord

367


P  R  A


P  R  A


P  R  A


Pr  147  12. P.  the  L.  Jerusalem, thy  God,  O  Zion

148  1.  P •  ye  the  Lord,  p.  him  m  the  heights
C.  ’p.  him,  all  his  angels,  p.  him,  ye  his  hosts

3  p.  him,  sun  and  moop,  p.  him,  all  ye  stais

4. p.  him,  ye  heavens  ot  heavens,  and  wateis
149.  3.  let  themp.  his  name  in  the  dance

150  l.p.God  >n  his  sanctuary, p.  him  in  fiimam.

Tp.  him  for  his  mighty  acts,  p.  him  for  greatness
3.  p.  him  with  trumpet  1|  4.  p.  him  with  tmibiel

5.  p.  him  upon  the  loud  and  sounding  cymbals
Prov.'  27.  2.  let  another  man  p.  thee,  a  stranger

28.  4.  they  that  forsake  the  law  p.  the  wicked
31.  31.  let  her  own  works  p.  her  in  the  gates
Isa.  38. 18.  the  grave  cannot  p.  thee,  death  cannot
19.  the  living  he  shall  p.  thee,  as  1  do  this  day
Jer.  31.  7.  publish,  p.  ye  anci  say,  O  L.  save  people
Dan  °  °3.  1  thank  and  p.  thee,  O  God  of  my  fathers

4  37*'l  P.  extol,  and  honour  the  king  of  heaven
roel  2*.  26.  p.  the  name  ot  the  Lord  your  God
'Luke  19.  37.  disciples  began  to  p.  G.  with  loud  voice
1  Cor  11.  2.  now  i  p.  you  that  ye  remember  me

17.  in  this  that  1  declare,  1  p.  you  not,  2...

Lev.  19.  5.  saying,  p.  our  God.  all  ye  his  servants
1  will,  or  will  1  ERA  ISt..

Gen.  29.  35.  Leah  said,  now  will  1  p.  the  Lord
Psal.  7.  17-  I  will p.  Ld.  according  to  his  righteous.

9.  1.  I  will  p.  thee,  O  Lord,  with  my  whole  heart,
will  shew  forth  thy  works,  1 1 L  1. 1  138.  l.

22  22  in  midst  of  the  congregation \  will  1  p.  tliee
28’.  7. 'therefore  with  my  song  will  Ip.  him

35. 18.  1  will  give  thee  thanks,  1  wtUp.  thee  amon„
much  people,  5* .  9.  I  loo.  o.  1  iuy.  ou
43.  4.  on  the  harp  will  I P ■  thee,  O  God
52  9  2  will  p.  thee  forever,  because  thou  hast  done
54'.  6.  I  will p.  thy  name,  O  Lord,  for  it  is  good
56.  4.  in  God  I  will  p.  his  word,  in  God  1  tiust,  10.

69.  30.  1  will  p.  the  name  of  God  with  a  song
71  22.  I  will  also  p.  thee  with  the  psaltery
86. 12. 1  will p.  thee,  O  Lord  my  G.  with  my  heart
118  19.  I  will  go  into  them,  and  will  p.  the  -Lora
21*  J  will  p.  thee,  for  thou  hast  heard  me
28.  thou  art  my  God,  and  1  will  p.  thee
119.  7.  I  will  p.  thee  with  uprightness  ot  heart
139  14  I  will  p.  thee,  for  l  am  wonderfully  made
145  2  I  will  p.  thy  name  for  ever  and  ever
Isa  12  1.  I  will p.  thee,  though  thou  wast  angry
25  1  /  will  p.  thy  name,  thou  hast  done  wonders
PRAISE  ye  the  Lord,  or  PRAISE  the  Lord .

Judo.  5.  2.  p.  ye  the  Lord,  for  the  avenging  ot  Israel

1  Chr.  16.  4.  he  appointed  Levites  top.  the  Lord
23.  30.  to  stand  every  morning  top.  the  Lord
25.  3.  who  prophesied  with  a  harp  to  p.  the  Eoia

2  Chr  20.  19.  the  Levites  stood  up  to  p.  the  Lord

21.  p.  the  Lord ,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever
Ezra  3.  10.  set  Levitee  with  cymbals  to  p.  the  Lord
Psal  °2  °6  they  shall  p.  the  Lord  that  seek  him

33.  2.  p'  the  Lord  with  harp,  sing  unto  him

102. 18.  people  that  shall  be  created  shall  p.  the  L.
104  35  v  ve  L.  106.  1 ,  48.  1  111.  l.|  112.  1*  I  113.
!°4.  fll6.  19.  1 117.  2.1  135.  1. 1

146.  1,  10. 1  147  -  20.  I  148.  1,  14. 1  149. 1,  9-
1  150.  1,  6.  Jer.  20. 13.

107.  8.  oh  that  men  would  p.  the  Lord,  15,  21,  31.
109.  30.  1  will  greatly  p.  the  Lord  with  my  mouth
118. 19. 1  will  p.  the  L.  II  135.  3  p.  L.  for  he  is  good
146  2  while  1  live  will  l  p.  the  Lord.l  will  sing
147!  1.  p.  ye  the  Lord,  for  it  is  good  to  sing  praise
1°  v  the  L.  O  Jerusalem,  praise  thy  God,  O  Zion
148.  7.  P.  the  Lord  from  the  earth,  ye  dragons
Isa.  12.  4.  shall  say,  p.  the  Lord,  call  upon  Ins  name
62.  9.  but  they  shall  eat  it,  and  p.  the  Lord
Jer.  33.  11.  p.  the  Lord  ot  hosts,  for  the  Lord  is  good
Horn.  15. 11.  and  again, p.  the  Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles
PRAISED.

Judo.  16.  24.  the  people  p.  their  god  Da^on
2  Sam.  14.  25.  none  to  be  so  much  p.  as  Absalom

22.  4.  the  Lord  is  worthy  to  be  p.  Psal.  18.  3.

1  Chron.  16.  25.  for  the  Lord  is  great  and  greatly

to  be  p.  Psal.  48. 1.  I  96.  4. 1  145.  3.
36.  all  the  people  p.  the  Lord,  and  said,  amen

23.  5.  four  thousand  were  porters,  and  tour  thou¬

sand  p.  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  7.  3.  Jseh.b.  13.

2  Chron.  5.  13.  with  instruments  of  music  p.  Lora
7.  6.  when  David  p.  by  their  ministry

30  21.  Levites  and  priests  p.  the  Lord  day  b>  day
Ezra  3.  11.  a  great  shout  when  they  p.  the  Lord
Psal.  72. 15.  prayer  tor  him,  and  daily  shall  he  bep.

11.3.  3.  from  rising  of  sun  Lord’s  name  is  to  be  p.
Prov.  31.  30.  a  woman  that  feareth  Lord  shall  bep.
Eccl.  4.  2.  wherefore  1  p.  the  dead  more  than  living
Cant.  6.~9.  yea,  the  queens  and  concubines  p.  her
Isa.  64.  il.  our  house,  where  our  fathers  p.  thee
Dan.  4.  34.  1  p.  and  honoured  him  that  liveth  for  ev.
5.  4.  and  they  p.  the  gods  ot  gold  and  silver,  23.
Luke  1.  64.  and  Zacharias  Sjiake  and  p.  God

Exod.  15.  11.  who  is  like  thee,  fearful  in  p.  ?
g  Sam  00  50  1  will  give  thanks  and  sing  p.  to  thy

2  50.  ^  ig>  4Q  (  92.  1 . !  135.  3.

2  Chron.  29.  30.  commanded  the  Levites  to  sing  p.

to  the  Lord,  and  they  sang  p.  with  gladness
Psal.  9. 11.  sing  p.  to  Lord  that  dwelleth  in  Zion
22  3.  art  holy,  O  thou  that  inhabitest  p.ot  Israel
27.  6. 1  will  sing,  yea,  1  will  sing  p.  to  God,  47.  C.

47.  7.  Gcd  is  king,  sing  ye  p.  witli  understanding
56.  12.  1  will  render p.  unto  thee,  144.  9.

68.  4.  sing  to  God,  sing p.  to  his  name,  extol  him
78.  4.  shewing  to  generation  to  come  p.  ot  Lora
146.2.  1  w  ill  sing  p.  to  my  God  while  I  have  being
H7!  1.  for  it  is  good  to  singp.  to  pur  Goa
149.  3.  let  them  sing  p.  to  him  with  thetimbiel

6.  let  the  high  p.  of  God  be  in  their  mouths
Isa.  60.  6.  they  shal  shew  forth  the  p.  ot  the  Lord
63.7.  I  will  make  mention  of  thep.  ot  the  Lord
Acts  16.25.  Paul  and  Silas  prayed  and  sang  p.  to  C.

1  Pet.  2.  9.  shew  forth  the  p.  ot  him  who  called  you

PRA1SETII.

Prov.  31 . 28.  her  husband  also,  and  he  p.  her
PRAISING.  .

2  Chr.  5. 13.  to  make  one  sound  to  be  heard  in  p.  I..
23.  12.  Athaliah  heard  the  people p.  the  king

368


Ezra  3.  11.  they  sang  ny  course  inp.  the  Lord
Psal.  84.  4.  they  will  be  still  p.  thee
Luke  2.  13.  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  hostp.  God
20.  the  shepherds  returned  p.  God  tor  all  things
24.  53.  they  were  continually  in  the  temple  p.  tjod
Acts  2.  46.  they  did  eat  with  gladness,  p.  God
3.  8.  walking,  and  leaping,  and  p.  God,  9.

PliA  NCLNG.

Nah  3.  2.  the  noise  of  the  p.  horses  and  chariots
P  RANGINGS


Judy.  5.


*  OO


horse-hoofs  broken  by  means  of  p.
PRATING.

Prov.  10.  8.  but  a  p.  fool  shall  fall,  10.

3  John  10.  p.  against  us  with  malicious  words
P  |{A  Y.

Gen.  20.  7.  he  is  a  prophet,  and  shall  p.  for  thee
24.  t  63.  Isaac  went  out  to  p.  in  the  held

1  Sam.  1. 1 12.  as  Hannah  multiplied  top.  before  L
7.  5.  Samuel  said,  I  will  p.  tor  you  to  the  Lord

12.  19.  p.  for  thy  servants  to  the  Lord  thy  God
23.  that  1  should  sin  in  ceasing  top.  tor  you

2  Sam  7.27.  found  in  his  heart  top.  1  Chr.  17-  ^>.

1  I<ings8. 30.  hearken  thou  when  they  shal  Ip.  toward

this  place,  35,  42,  44,  48.  2  Chron.  6.  26,  34,  38.

13.  6.  p.  that  my  hand  may  be  restored  again
o  Chron.  6.  24.  shall  p.  and  make  supplication,  32.

~  37.  and  turn  and  p.  in  the  land  ot  their  captivity

7  14.  if  iny  people  shall  p .  and  seek  my  tace
Ezra  6.  10.  and  p.  for  the  life  ot  the  king  and  sons
Neh .  1.6.  hear  the  prayer  which  1  p.  b.etoie  11  e.®

Job  21.  15.  what  profit  should  we  have  it  p.  to  him
33.  26.  p.  to  God,  and  he  will  be  favourable  to  him
42. 8.  my  serv.  lob  shall  p.  for  you,  him  wil  accept
Ps.  5.  2.  my  King,  my  God,  tor  to  thee  will  L  p.

55.  17.  evening,  morning,  and  at  noon  will  l  p.

1°2.  6.  p.  for  peace  of  .1  erus.  prosper  that  lose  thee
Da.  16.  12.  he  shall  come  to  his  sanctuary  top.

45.'  20.  and  p.  to  a  god  that  cannot  save
Jei.  7.  16.  p.  not  thou  tor  this  people,  11.  14.  14.11.

29.  7.  seek  peace  of  the  city,  p.  to  the  Lord  for  it
12.  ye  shall  p.  to  me,  and  I  will  hearken  to  > ou
.37  .3  p.  now  to  the  Lord  our  God  for  us,  4r.  -,  ~0.

42.  4.  behold,  l  will  p.  to  the  Lord  your  God
Zech.  7.  2.  they  sent  men  tq  p.  betoie  the  1  ord
8  01  20  speedily  top.  before  the  Lord,  »-•

Mat.  5.  44.  and  p.  for  them  which  despitetully  use
you  and  persecute  you,  Luke  16.  27.

6.  5.  for  they  love  to  p.  standing  in  the  synagogue

6.  p.  to  thy  F ather  which  is  in  secret,  shall  rewai  d

7.  whenyep.  use  not  vain  repetitions  as  heathen  do

9.  after  this  manner  p.  ye,  Our  Father  who  art

9.  38.  p.  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  Luke  10.  -•

14.  23.  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  a  par  t  to  p.  and

was  alone,  Mark  6.46.  Luke  b.lv.  19-^8.

10.  13.  that  he  should  put  his  hands  on  them  and  p.

24  20.  p.  your  flight  be  not  in  winter,  Mark  13.  18.

26!  36.  Jesus  saith  to  the  disciples,  sit  ye  here  while

I  go  and  p.  yonder,  Mark  14.  32.
41.  watch  and  p.  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation,
Mark  13.  3.3.  1 14.  38.  Luke  21.  36. 1  22.  40,  46.
53.  thinkest  thou  that  1  cannot p.  to  my  Fathei  ?
Mark  5.  17.  and  they  began  to  p.  Inm  to  depart

11.  24.  what  things  soever  ye  desire  when  yep..
Luke  11.  1.  Lord,  teach  us  to  p.  as  John  taught  his

2.  he  said  to  them,  when  ye  p.  say.  Our  bather
18.  1.  that  men  ought  always  to  p.  and  not  to  taint
10.  two  men  went  up  into  the  temple  to  p.

John  14.  16.  and  1  will  p.  the  Father,  16.  .6.

17.  9  I  p.  for  them,  1  p.  not  for  the  woild
15.  1  p.  not  that  thou  take  them  out  of  the  worl

20.  nor  p.  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also
Acts  8.  22.  p.  God,  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  heart

24.  Simon  said,  p.  ye  to  the  Lord  tor  me

10.  9.  Peter  went  up  on  the  house  top  to  p,

Rom.  8.  26.  for  we  know  not  what  we  should  p.  tor
1  Cor.  11. 13.  is  it  comely  that  woman  p.  uncovered

14  13  wherefore  let  him  p.  that  he  may  interpret
14  for  if  l  P-  in  unknown  tongue,  spirit  pray  etc
15.  I  will  p.  with  Spirit,  p.  with  understanding
0  Cor.  5.  20.  we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  we  p.
you  in  Christ’s  stead,  be  ye  reconci.ed  to  God
13.  7.  now  1  p.  to  God,  that  ye  do  no  evil
Phil.  1.  9.  this  l  p.  that  your  love  may  abound

Col  1  9  for  this  cause  we  do  not  cease  to  p.  tor  you

1  Thess.  5  17.  rejoice  evermore,  p.  without  ceasing
2.3  1  p.  God  your  whole  spirit  be  preserved
25!  bi^tliren,  p.  for  us,  2  Thess  3.  1.  Heb.  13. 18.

2  Thess.  1.  11.  wherefore  wep.  always  for  you

1  Tim.  2.  8.  I  will  that  men  p.  every  where

2  Tim.  4.  16.  I  p.  God  it  be  not  laid  to  their  charge
Jam.  5.  13.  is  any  among  you  afflicted  .  let  lump.

14.  and  let  them  p.  over  him,  anointing  him
16.  confess  your  faults,  and  p.  one  for  another
1  John  5.  16.  1  do  not  say  that  he  shall  p.  tor  it
.3  John  f2.  Ip.  that  thou  may  est  prosper  and  in  health

PRAY  ED.

Gen  20  17.  Abrahamp.  and  God  healed  Abimelech
Num.  11.2.  when  Moses  p.  the  fire  was  quenched

21.  7.  and  Moses  p.  for  the  people,  Dtut.  9.  -6.
Dent.  9.  20.  I  p.  for  Aaron  also  the  same  time

1  Sam.  1.  10.  Hannah  p.  to  Lord  and  wept  sore,  21.
27.  for  this  child  I  p.  |l  8.  6.  Samuel  p.  to  the  Lord

2  Kings  4.  3.3.  Elisha  p.  to  the  Lord,  6.  17,  18.

19.  15.  Hezekiah  p.  20.  2.  2  Chron.  30. 18. 1  32.

20.  that  which  thou  hast  p.  to  me,  Isa.  37.  21.

2  Chron.  32.  20.  Isaiah  p.  ||  33.  13.  Manasseh  p.
Ezra  10. 1.  now  when  hzra  had  p.  ISen.  1.  4.  I  ...  4.
job  42.  10.  Lord  turned  the  captivity  when  dob  p.
Jer.  32.  16.  Jeremiah  p.  ||  Jonah  2.  1.  Jonah  p.  4.  2.
Dan.  6.  10.  Daniel  p.  three  times  a  day,  9.  4.

Mat.  26.  39.  Jesus  fell  on  his  face  andp.  let  this  cup
pass  from  me,  42, 44.  Mark  14.  35,  39.  Luke  2-.  41.
Mark  1 .  .35.  he  went  into  a  solitary  place  and  p
5.  18.  he  p.  him  that  he  might  be  with  mm
Luke  5.  3.  iesusp.  him  he  would  thrust  out  a  little
16.  he  withdrew  into  the  wilderness  and  p.

9.  29.  as  he  p,  his  countenance  was  altered
18. 11.  the  Pharisee  stood  and  p.  thus,  I  thank  thee
°°  3°  but  I  have  p.  that  thy  faith  fail  not
44.'  being  in  an  agony  he  p.  more  earnestly
John  4.  .31.  his  disciples  p.  him,  Mas.er,  eat
Acts  1.  24.  the  disciples  p.  and  said,  tnou  Lora


Jets  4.  .31 .  when  they  p.  they  laid  their  hands  on  tn.

8  15  Peter  and  John  when  come  p.  for  them

9  40.  Peter  p.  ||  10.  2.  Cornelius  p.  always,  30.

10.  48.  then  they  p.  him  to  tarry  certain  days

1.3.  3.  and  when  they  had  fasted  and  p.  14.  2.3.

16.  9.  p.  him,  saying,  come  over  into  Macedonia

25.  at  midnight  Paul  and  Silas  p.  and  sang
20.  36.  Paul  kneeled  down  and  p.  with  them  all
215  we  kneeled  down  on  the  shore  and  p.
oo  17.  while  1  p.  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  atrance
2d!  18!  Paul  p.  me  to  bring  this  young  man  to  thee
28.  8.  to  whom  Paul  entered  in  and  p.  .

Jam.  5.  17.  Elias  p.  that  it  might  not  rain
18  and  he  p.  again,  and  the  heaven  gave  rain
PRAY  ER

Is  an  offering  up  of  our  desires  to  God  for  things
lawful  and  needful,  with  an  humble  confidence
to  obtain  them  through  the  alone  mediation  o}
Christ,  to  the  praise  of  the  mercy,  truth,  and
power  of  God,  Mat.  6.  6.  John  16.  2.3,  24,  26.
It  is  either  menial  or  vocal,  ejaculatory  or  oc¬
casional,  either  private  or  public  ;  for  ourselves
or  others  ;  for  the  procuring  of  good  things,  or
the  removing ,  or  preventing ,  of  things  evil,  3
Tim  2.  1,  2.  As  God  is  the  only  object  of
prayer,  Psal.  50.  15.  and  as  we  must  pray  for
others,  as  well  as  for  ourselves,  Jam.  5.  16.  so
we  are  to  pray  fervently,  Col.  4.  12.  sincerely
Psal  17.  1.  constantly,  Col.  4.  2.  with  faith
Jam  5.  15.  and  not  without  repentance,  Psai
66.  18.  Jer.  36.  7-  and  by  the  help  of  the  Hol\
Spirit,  Rom.  8.  26.

Prayer  comes  from  a  word  tn  the  Hebrew,  w/itct
signifies  appeal,  interpellation,  intercession


whereby  we  refer  our  own  cause,  and  that  a
others ,  unto  God  as  judge,  calling  upon  him


(J  L  Rv  /  J  ,  U/C(  i"  V M  l/U  ZAnJ  J  if  7  .  *  m

appealing  to  him  for  right,  presenting  vurselve
and  our  cause  unto  him.  1  he  prayers  that  w
direct  to  God,  are  the  ordinary  conveyance  <
the  graces  that  we  receive  from  him  :  Christ  Inn
self,  the  great  example  of  the  righteous,  and  <
the  elect,  taught  us  to  pray,  to  inform  us,  that  <
is  by  that  we  honour  God,  and  draw  down  ujro

ourselves  his  favours  and  graces.

The  parts  of  Prayer  are  said  to  be  invocation
adoration,  confession,  petition,  pleading,  dedicr
tion,  thanksgiving ,  and  blessing.

2  Sam.  7.27.  found  in  his  heart  to  pray  this  p.  to  thi

1  Kings  8.  28.  ha-e  respect  to  the  p.  ot  thy  servant

29.  mayest  hearken  to  the  p.  2  Chron.  6.  19, 20.
.38.  p.  shall  he  made  by  any  man,  2  Chron.  6.  2
45.  hear  their  p.  49-  2  Chron.  6.  35,  .39,  40.

54.  Solomon  made  an  end  ot  praying  tmsp.

2  Kings  19.  4.  lift  up  thy  p.  tor  remnant,  La.  37.

2  Chron.  7.  15.  my  ears  shall  be  attent  to  tnep.

30.  27.  their  p.  came  to  his  holy  dwelling

33. 18.  Manasseh’sp.  how  God  was  intreated,19
Neh.  1.6.  thou  mayest  hear  the  p.  ot  thy  servant
4.  9.  nevertheless  we  made  our  p.  to  our  God
Job  15.  4.  yea  thou  restrainest  p.  betore  Gou
22  27.  thou  slralt  make  thy  p.  to  him,  shall  hear
Psal.  65.  2.  O  thou  that  hearest  p.  to  thee  shall  a
7°  15  p.  shalt  be  made  tor  him  continually
80.  4.  how  long  be  angry  against  p.  ot  thy  oeop
10°.  17-  shall  appear  in  his  glory,  he  w  11 J ega,
the  p.  of  the  destitute,  and  not  despise  their
109.4.  my  adversaries,  but  I  give  myself  unto

7.  let  him  be  condemned,  and  let  his p.  become
Prov.  15.  8.  the  p.  of  the  upright  is  his  delight
29.  but  he  heareth  thep.  of  the  righteous
28.  9.  even  hisp.  shall  be  abomination  ,
Isa.  26.  16.  poured  out  ap.  when  thy  chastemn
56.  7.  1  will  make  them  joyful  in  my  house  ot
for  mv  house  shall  be  called  an  house  0
Mat.  21.  13.  Mark  11.  IJ.  Luke  19.  46.
jer.  7. 16.  nor  lift  up  my  cry  norp.  for  them,  11.
Lam.  .3.44.  that  our  p.  should  not  pass  through
Dan.  9.  3.  1  set  my  tace  to  the  Lord,  to  seek  b

1.3.  yet  made  we  not  our  p.  before  Lord  our  (
17.  now,  O  our  God,  hear  the  p.ot  thy  sen ar
Iiab.  3.  1.  a  p.  of  Habakkuk  the  prophet
Mat.  17.21.  nothing  impossible,  howbeit,  tins  k  ■
goeth  not  out  but  by  p.  and  tasting,  J‘u.k  ...
Luke  1.  13.  fear,  not,  Zachanas,  thy  ii.is  betu
Acts  .3.  1.  went  into  the  temple  at  the  hour  or  j

6.  4.  but  we  will  give  ourselves  continual^  to

10.  .31.  Cornelius,  thy  p.  is  heard,  and  thy  alul
12.  5.  p.  was  made  without  ceasing  to  God  or
16.  1.3.  we  went  out  where  p.  was  wont  to  be
16  as  we  went  to  p.  a  certain  damsel  rnet  u.

1  Cor.  7.5.  that  ye  may  give  yourselves  top.

2  Cor.  1.  11.  ye  also  helping  together  by  P-fo^
Q  14  hv  their  tor  you,  which  lon&  iitte-  )  I

Is'lzL  A  nravin?  always  with  alii?,  and  supply


4.  6.  in  every  thing  by  p.  let  requ.  be  made  kne
1  Tim.  4. 5.  tor  it  is  sanctified  by  the  word  an
Jam  5  15  the  p.  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick
16.'  the  effectual  p  of  a  righteous  man  au.

1 17.  he  prayed  in  his p.  that  it .might  not  ra
1  Pet  4  7.  be  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto
‘  See  HEARD.

In  PRAYER.  .  L

Neh.  11. 17.  Mattaniah  began  the  thanksgiving
Dan.  9.  21.  yea,  while  I  was  speakmg  a  p-/
Mat  °1.  22.  whatever  ye  ask  in  p.  belie'  in-
Luke  6. 12.  he  continued  all  night «»  P-toG 9
Acts  1  14  they  continued  with  one  accora  in
Rom.  12.12.  patient  in  tribu.  c°ntinuing,insD  1

C«/.  4. 2.  continue^,  ^anAYE»tchm  the  ^

Job  16. 17.  not  for  any  injustice,  also  r

Ps.  4. 1.  have  mercy,  hear  myp.  17-  *•  l  "tij
5.3.  in  the  morning  will  1  directwvTO
6.  9.  the  Lord  heard,  the  Lord  will  lee  e
.35.' 13.  and  my  returned  to  mmeownbos..

f  \  «POGod  and  hide  ( .

61.  1.  hear  my  ^y,  O  God, aUend  om^  )V •

66. 19.  he  hath  attended  to  the  voice  oi  my  p


FRE


PRE


P  R  R


s.  66.  CO.  God  which  hath  not  turned  away  my  p.
9.  13.  my  p.  is  to  thee  in  an  acceptable  time
8.  2.  let  my  p.  come  before  tliee,  incline  thine  ear

13.  in  the  morning  shall  my p.  prevent  thee
41.2.  let  my  p.  he  set  forth  before  thee  as  incense
5.  for  yet  my  p.  shall  be  in  their  calamities

nn  3.8.  when  1  cry ,  and  shout,  he  shutt.  out  my  p.
n. 2.  7-  my p.  came  in  to  thee  into  thy  holy  temple
am.  10.  1.  brethren,  my  p.  to  God  tor  Israel  is
PRAY  ERS.

sal.  72.  £0 .p.  of  David,  son  of  Jesse,  are  ended

а.  1.  15.  when  ye  make  many  p.  1  will  not  hear
at,  23.14.  for  pretence  make  longp.  therefore  have

greater  damnation,  Mark  12.  40.  Luke  20.  47.
■ike  2.  37.  Anna  continued  ii  p.  day  and  night
.  33.  why  do  the  disciples  ol  John  make  p.  /
cts  2.  42.  continued  in  breaking  of  bread  and  in  p.
0.  4.  thy  p.  and  alms  are  come  up  before  God
jrn.  1.9-1  make  mention  of  y  ou  always  in  my p.

Eph.  1.16.  1  These.  1 . 2.  2  Tim.  1.3.  P/tilem.  4.
5.  30.  strive  with  me  in  yourp.  to  God  for  me
i/.4.12.  Epaphras  labouring  fervently  for  you  in  p.
I'im.  2. 1.  1  exhort  that  p.  be  made  for  all  men
.  5.  widow  indeed  continued!  in  p.  night  and  day
'lilem.  22. 1  trust  thro’  your  p.  1  shall  be  given  toy.
eb.  5.  7.  when  he  had  offered  up  p.  with  tears
°et.  3.7 •  as  heirs  of  life,  that  your p.  he  not  hinder.
12.  his  ears  are  open  to  their  p.  but  face  of  Lord
ev.  5. 8.  full  of  odours,  which  are  p.  of  the  saints
.  3.  he  should  offer  it  with  the  p.  of  the  saints

1.  the  smoke  which  came  from  the p.  of  the  saints

PRAYEST.

at.  6.  5.  when  thou  p.  be  not  as  the  hypocrites,  6
PRAYETH,  1NG.

Sam.  1. 12.  as  Hannah  continued  p.  before  Lord
■6.  my  lord,  1  am  woman  that  stood  p.  by  thee
Kings 8.  28.  hearken  to  prayer  which  thy  servant
p.  before  thee  this  day,  2  Chron.  6.  19,  20.
>4.  Solomon  had  made  an  end  of  p.  2  Chron.  7.  l!

2.  44.  17.  he  worshippeth  it  andp.  to  it

in.  6.  11.  these  assembled  and  found  Daniel  p.

20.  while  1  was  speaking  and  p.  and  confessing
ark  11.25.  when  ye  stand  p.  forgive  aught  ag.  any
ike  1. 10.  multitude  of  the  people  werep.  without

21.  and  Jesus  p.  the  heaven  was  opened

18.  and  was  alone  p.  his  disciples  were  with  him
.  1.  as  he  was  p.  in  certain  place,  when  he  ceased
ts  9. 11.  behold  he  p.  ||  11.5.  1  was  at  Joppa  p.

!.  12.  where  many  were  gathered  together/;.

.'or.  11.  4.  every  man  p.  with  his  head  covered
'.  but  every  woman  that  p.  with  head  uncovered
.  14.  my  spirit/;,  but  my  understand,  is  unfruitf.
.’or.  8. 4.p.  us  with  much  entreaty  to  receive  gift
•h.  6.  18.  p.  always  with  all  prayer  in  the  Spirit
/.l.  3.  p.  always  for  you  ||  4.  3.  p.  also  for  us
'ness.  3. 10.  night  and  day  p.  exceed,  to  see  your
ie  20.  but  ye,  beloved,  p.  in  the  Holy  Ghost
PR  EACH.

h.  6.  7-  thou  hast  appointed  prophets  to  p.  of  thee
1.61.1.  Ld.  hath  anointed  me  to  p.  good  tidings
iah  3.  2.  p.  to  it  the  preaching  that  1  bid  thee
if.  4. 17.  from  that  time  Jesus  began  to p.

;7  ■  P.  saying,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand

7.  what  ve  hear,  that/;,  ye  upon  the  house-tops
.  1.  he  departed  thence  to  p.  in  their  cities

irk  1.  4.  John  did  p.  the  baptism  of  repentance

8.  that  I  may  p.  there  also,  Luke  4.  43.

14.  that  he  might  send  them  forth  to  p.  Luke  9.  2.
ke  4.  18.  to/;,  deliverance  to  the  captives,  19.

60.  but  go  thou  and p.  the  kingdom  of  God

<s  5.  42.  they  ceased  not  to p.  Jesus  Christ
.  42.  he  commanded  us  to  p.  to  the  people
.15.  and  p.  unto  you  thatye  should  turn  to  God
.  21.  Moses  hath  in  every  city  them  that  p.  him

б.  forbidden  by  Holy  Ghost  to/;,  word  in  Asia
.  3.  that  this  Jesus  whom  1  p.  to  you  is  Christ
vi.  10.8.  that  is  the  word  of  faith  which  we  p.

j.  and  how  shall  they  p.  except  they  be  sent :
or.  1.23.  but  w ep.  Christ  crucified
16.  tho’  I  p.  gospel,  1  have  nothing  to  glory,  woe
to  me  it  I  p.  not  gospel,  necessity  is  laid  on  me
.  11.  1  or  they,  so  we  p.  and  so  ye  believed
If  - 4- 5.  we  p.  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus
l.  1.  16.  that  I  might p.  him  among  the  heathen
-.the  gospel  which  I  p.  among  the  Gentiles
■  oao(*  1!’  brethren,  if  i  yet p.  circumcision
?:  3.  8._  that  1  should  p.  among  the  Gentiles
’/•  4.  15.  some  indeed  /;.  Christ  of  envy  and  strife
''1  i/,°.l’eil''  Christ  of  contention,  not  sincerely

•  1.  +  2o.  dispensation  given  me  fully  to p.  word
'■  whom  we/;,  warning  every  man,  in  all  w  isdom
‘m.  4.  2 .p.  the  word,  be  instant  in  season

PREACHED.

/iic  righteousness  in  great  congregat.

i  1  >* '  1  l  1)001  have  the  gospel  p.  to  them
,  - 1  •  7.  J  ohn  p.  saying,  there  cometh  one  after  me
1.  he/;,  in  their  synagogues  through  Galilee

were  gathered,  he  p.  the  word  to  them
fhey  went  and  p.  that  men  should  repent
-0.  they  went  forth  and  p.  every  where
3.18.  many  other  things/;,  he  to  the  people
*4.  he  /;,  in  the  synagogues  of  Galilee
I-  .Sunce  ^at  time  the  kingdom  of  God  is  p.

.  I-  that  remission  of  sin  should  b ep.  in  his  name
a  J esiis  Christ,  who  before  was  p.  to  you
r  r-u00®  1  Jesus  the  resurrection  from  dead

•  p.  Christ  to  Samaria  ||  35.  p.  Jesus  to  eunuch

the  word  of  the  Lord,  p.  the  gospel
'•  Philip/;,  ill  a.11  cities  till  he  came  to'Cesarea
a  .  saul  p.  C  hrist  in  synagogues  to  be  Son  of  G.

•  "arnabas  told  how  Saul  had  p.  boldly  at  Dam.

37.  that  word,  after  the  baptism  which  John  p.

0.  tney  p  the  word  of  God  in  their  synagogues

ren  u0!10  had  first  p.  before  his  coming
’  (i  r?l!c  this  man  isp.  to  you  forgiveness  of  sins
.  that  these  words  might  bep.  the  next  sabbath
-o.  when  they  had  p.  the  word  in  Perga
io  us  ar?d  vis>t  where  we  have  p.

V' tne  word  ot  God  wasp,  of  Paul  at  Berea
?  P.au?e  Jesus  and  the  resurrection  /
r  'fi  P. ready  to  depart  on  the  morrow

•  ..27.  lest  when  I  havep.  to  others,  1  myself


1  kee.p  111  memory  wnat  1  p.  to  you

12.  it  Christ  be  p.  that  he  rose  from  the  dead
'•-X0 V  9-  J,esus  who  wasp,  among  you  by  us
11*  4.  it  pleach  another  Jesus  whom  we  have  not  v
Cal.  1.  8.  other  gospel  than  that  we  have  p.  to  you
ni-i  **  ^7- came  and peace  to  you  who  were  afar
rs  i\  ^  u  st  an(i  I  therein  do  rejoice
,V/.' 1  •  ~J-'ylucl'  wasp,  to  every  creat.  under  heaven
\j  \m-  3*  16.  p.  to  Gentiles,  believed  on  in  the  world
Deb.  4.  2.  but  the  word  p.  did  not  profit  them

6.  they  to  whom  it  was  first  p.  entered  not  in
1  Pet.  3.  19.  he  went  and  p.  to  the  spirits  in  prison
See  Gospel.

_  ,  PREACHER.

Lccl.  1.1.  the  words  of  the  p.  the  son  of  David

2.  vanity  ot  vanities,  saith  thep.  all  vanity,  12  8
12.  1  thep  was  king  over  Israel  in  Jerusalem  '

7.  27.  behold,  this  have  1  found,  saith  the  p
12.  9.  becausep.  was  wise,  he  still  taught  the  people

10.  thep.  sought  to  find  out  acceptable  words
Tom.  10.  14.  how  shall  they  hear  without  a  p.  ?

1  Jim.  2.  7.  whereto  1  am  ordained  ap.  2  Tim.  1. 11.
-  Pet.  2.  5.  but  saved  Noah,  ap.  of  righteousness
PREACHES!,  E1H,  1NG.

Jonah  3.  2.  preach  to  it  the  p.  that  1  bid  thee
Mat.  3.  1.  in  those  days  came  John  p.  Luke  3.  3
4.  23.  p.  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  9.  35.

1  v  41-  r'se  ln  Judgment,  because  they  repented  at
tmW  .  J°,nas> Hntl  a  greater  is  here,  Luke  11.  32.
Maik  1.  14.  Jesus  came  into  Galilee  p.  the  gospel
Luke  8.  1.  p.  and  shewing  glad  tidings  of  the  kingd.

9.  b.  they  went  through  the  towns  p.  the  gospel
Acts 8.  4.  they  went  every  where  p.  the  word

tlle  thin£s  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God

10.  36.  p.  peace  by  Jesus  Christ,  he  fs  Lord  of  all

11.  19.  p.  the  word  to  none  but  to  the  Jews  only
2°.  spake  to  the  Greeks,  p.  the  Lord  Jesus

10. 3o.  Paul  and  Barnabas  continued  in  Antioch  p

19.  13.  we  adjure  you  by  Jesus,  whom  Paul  p.

~0.  9.  as  Paul  was  longp.  Eutychus  sunk  with  sleep

25.  ye  all,  among  whom  1  have  gone  p.  shall  see

28.  31.  p.  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teaching

ir!”;  71  2r  th,ou  p-  a  man  should  not  steal

10.  f  16.  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  p.  !

16.  25.  to  establish  you  according  to  the  p.  of  Jesus

1  Voru  1-,18:-  fo,r  l,lle  p-  01  tlle  cross  is  foolishness
21.  by  the  foolishness  of  p.  to  save  them  that
2.  4.  my  p.  was  not  with  enticing  words
15.  14.  it  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  p.  vain

2  Cor.  1.  1 18.  our  p.  toward  you  was  not  yea
J?'  J4.  come  as  tar  as  to  you,  p.  gospel  of  Christ

11.  4.  it  he  that  cometh  p.  another  Jesus

Gal.  1.  23.  hep.  the  faith  which  once  he  destroyed
2  1  im.  4.  17.  that  by  me  p.  might  be  fully  known
kit.  1.  3.  hath  in  due  times  manifes.  his  word  thro’p
„T  ,  PRECEPT,  S.

Neh  9.  14.  commandedst  them  p.  and  statutes
Psal.  119.  4.  thou  hast  commanded  us  to  keep  thy  p

15.  I  will  meditate  in  thy p.  78.

27.  make  me  to  understand  the  way  of  thy  p.

40.  behold,  I  have  longed  after  thy  p.  quicken  me
45-  fpr  1  seek  thy  p.  ||  »7.  1  forsook  not  thy  p.

50.  this  1  had,  because  1  kept  thy  p.  HK),  168.
b3.  keep  thy  p.  69, 134.  ||  93.  never  forget  thy  p.

4-  1  am  thine,  save  me,  for  I  have  sought  thy  p
104.  through  thy  p.  1  get  understanding,  and  hate
110.  wicked  laid  snare,  yet  I  erred  not  from  thy  p
128.  therefore  1  esteem  all  thy  p.  to  be  rmht
141.  1  ain  small,  yet  do  not  1  forget  thy  p.

159.  consider  how  1  love  thy  p.  quicken  me
173.  help  me,  for  1  have  chosen  thy  p.

Isa.  28.  10.  torp.  must  be  upon  p.  p.  on  p.  1,3.

29.  13.  their  fear  is  taught  by  the  p.  of  men
Jer.  35.  18.  because  ye  have  kept  all  .lonadab’s  r.

„  an-  9-  5.  we  have  rebelled  by  depart,  from  thyp.
Mark  10.  5.  tor  hardn.  of  heart  he  wrote  you  this  p.
Ueb.  9.  19.  for  when  Moses  had  spoken  every  p
PRECIOUS.  ^  p’

Gen.  24.  53.  he  gave  to  Rebekah’s  mother  p.  things
Deut.  33.  13.  blessed,  for  the  p.  things  of  heaven
14.  tor  p.  fruits  brought  forth  by  sun  and  moon
lo.  and  for  the  p.  things  of  the  lasting  hills

16.  torp.  things  of  the  earth,  and  fulness  thereof
\o  ?V>3’  f- ,lle  yordof  the  Ld.  was  p.  in  those  days

18.  t  30.  David  behaved  so  that  his  name  was p.

26.  21.  because  my  soul  was  p.  in  thine  eyes

~  lyings  1.  13.  let  my  life  b ep.  in  thy  sight,  14.

20.  13.  Ilezekiah  shewed  themp.  things,  Isa.  39  2
2  Chr.  20.  25.  and  p.  jewels  which  they  stripped  off
—1.  3.  Jehoshaphat  gave  them  gitts  ot  p,  things
32.  t  23.  many  brought  p.  things  to  Hezekiah

6.  strengthened  their  hands  with  p.  things

8.  27.  two  vessels  ot  fine  copper,  p.  as  gold
Job  28.  10.  and  his  eye  seeth  every  p .  thing
16.  cannot  be  valued  with  the  p.  onyx  or  sapphire
Psal.  36.  t  7.  how  p.  is  thy  loving  kindness!

49.8.  tor  the  redemption  of  their  soul  js  p.

72.  14.  and  p.  shall  their  blood  be  in  his  sight
U6.  15.  p.  in  sight  of  Ld.  is  the  death  of  his  saints
126.  6.  he  that  goeth  forth  bearing  p.  seed
133.  2.  it  is  like  the  p.  ointment  on  the  head
139.  17 •  how  p.  also  are  thy  thoughts  to  me,  O  God
141.  f  5.  let  not  their  p.  oil  break  my  head
Prov.  1.  13.  we  shall  find  allp.  substance

3.  15.  wisdom  is  more  p.  than  rubies,  and  all  things
6.  26.  the  adulteress  will  hunt  for  the  p.  life

12.  27-  but  the  substance  of  a  diligent  man  isp.

20. 15.  but  lips  of  knowledge  are  a p.  jewel
24.  4.  chambers  filled  with  all  p.  and  pleasant
n  ,  _  ,  ,  .  ,  riches

Lccl.  7.  1.  a  good  name  is  better  than  p.  ointment
Isa.  13. 12. 1  will  make  a  man  inorep.  than  fine  gold
28.  16.  1  lay  in  Zion  a  p.  corner-stone,  1  Pet.  2.  6.

43.  4.  since  thou  wastp.  in  my  sight  been  honour,

Jer.  15.  19.  it  thou  take  the  p.  from  the  vile
20.  5.  1  will  deliver  all  the  p.  tilings  thereof
Lam.  4.  2.  the  p.  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  gold
Lzek.  22.  25.  have  taken  the  treasure  and  p.  things

27.  20.  Dedan  was  merch.  in  p.  clothes  for  chariots
Dan.  11.  8.  and  shall  carry  away  their  p.  vessels

43.  he  shall  have  power  over  all  tilings
Zech.  14.  +  6.  in  that  day  light  shall  not  be  p.


Mat.  26.  7.  thei  t  came  to  him  a  woman,  having  an
a  labaster  box  ct  very  p.  ointment,  Mark  14.  3
Jam.  5.  7.  the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the  p.  fruit’

1  /  et.  1 .  t .  ti  ial  ot  your  faith  much  more  p.  than  gold
19.  but  with  the  p.  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb

2.  4.  as  to  a  living  stone,  chosen  ot  God,  and  p
7.  to  you  therefore  which  believe  he  is p.

2  Pet.  1.  1.  that  have  obtained  like  p.  faith  with  us

4.  are  given  to  us  exceeding  great  and  p.  promises

Rev.  18.  12.  for  no  man  buyeth  their  p.  vessels

21.  11.  her  light  was  like  to  a  stone  most  p.
PRECIOUSN  ESS.

Psal.  3J.  f  20.  enemies  of  the  Lord  as  the  p.  of  lambs
P  REDES!  IN  ATE.

I  his  word  is  taken  for  the  design  that  God  has  been
pleased  to  have  from  all  eternity ,  of  bringing  by
Ins  free  grace  to  faith  and  eternal  salvation,  some
certain  persons,  whom  he  loved  in  Christ ;  whilst
he  leaves  others  to  continue  in  their  infidelity,
or  m  their  corruptions :  Those  that  are  so  left  are
the  Reprobate,  and  the  others  are  the  Elect,  or
Predestinated.

Rom.  8.  29.  for  whom  he  did  foreknow,  he  did  p.
oO.  and  whom  he  did  p.  them  he  also  called
PR  EDESi  IN  A  !  ED.

Lph.  1.  5.  having  p.  us  to  the  adoption  of  sons
11.  being  p.  according  to  the  purpose  of  him
_  ,  PRE-EMINENCE.

Led.  3.  19.  a  man  hath  no  p.  above  a  beast
Col.  L  18.  that  in  all  things  he  might  have  the  p.

3  John  9.  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to  have  the  v

,  .  PREFER.

Ps.  137.  6.  if  I  p.  not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief  iov
,  PREFERRED,  1NG.  y

Lsth.2.  9.  and  he  p.  her  and  her  maidens
Dan.  6.  3.  Daniel  was  p.  above  the  presidents
John  1. 15.  he  that xometh  after  me  is  p. before  me  27

30.  who  is  p.  before  me,  for  he  was  before  me
Roffi.  12.  10.  in  honour  p.  one  another
1  l  im.  5.  21.  observe,  without p.  one  before  another
PREJUDICE.

1  1  im.  5.  f  21.  observe  these  things  without  p.

,  PR  E-MED1TA  1  E.

Mark  13.  11.  neither  p.  but  whatsoever  is  given
PREPARATION.  S
\  Chron.  22.  5.  I  will  therefore  now  make  p.  for  it
IS  ah.  2.  3.  with  flaming  torches  in  the  day  of  p
Mat.27.  62.  the  next  day  that  followed  the  day  of  p
Mark  15.  42.  Luke  23.  54.  John  19.  14,31,42.’  •
ii^ph.  6.  15.  leet  shod  with  p.  of  the  gospel  of  peace

.  preparations.

Prov.  16. 1.  p.  of  the  heart  of  man  from  the  Lord
0.  ..  PREPARE

SlrnV'/S’  PI  To  get  or  make  ready,  Josh.  1.  11
L2]  lo  fit  and  qualify,  Roill.  9.  23  ("31  To

appoint,  Mat  20.  23.  [4]  To  be  fixed, '  Psal.

•  +  G  ko  direct,  guide,  and  establish,  1

l  hrrvt-i  OH  1 0  ’


Chron.  29.  18.

Exod.  15. 2.  ray  God,  and  I  will  p.  him  a  habitation
16.  5.  on  sixth  day  they  shall  p.  that  they  brino-  in
Lev.  14.  f  36.  priest  shall  command  they  p.  the  house
jSum.  15.  5.  tor  a  drink  offeringp.  the  fourth  part
6.  or  tor  a  ram  p.  thou  for  a  meat  offerin°-
12.  according  to  the  number  that  ye  shall  p.

23. 1.  Balaam  said,  p.  me  seven  oxen,  live  rams
29.  build  me  seven  altars,  and  p.  seven  bullocks
Dent.  19.  3.  thou  shait  p.  thee  a  way,  divide  coasts
Josh.  1.  11.  p.  you  victuals  to  pass  over  Jordan
22.  26.  we  said,  let  us  now  p.  to  build  us  an  altar
4  Sam. 7. 3.  p.  your  hearts  to  the  Lord,  and  serve  him
1  K  ings  18. 44.  say  tc  Ahab,p.  chariot,  get  thee  down

1  Chron.  9.  32.  top.  shew-bread  every  sabbath

29.  18.  O  Lord  God.p.  their  heart 'unto  thee

2  Chron.  2.  9.  to  p.  me  timber  in  abundance
31.  11.  p.  chambers  |)  35.  4.  and  p.  yourselves
35.  6.  sanctify  yourselves,  and  p.  your  brethren
Lsth.  5.  8.  come  to  banquet  that  1  shall p.  for  them
Job  8. 8.  andp.  thyself  to  the  search  of  their  fathers

11.  13.  it  thou  p.  thine  heart  toward  him

27.  16.  tho’ hep.  raiment  as  clay  ||  17.  he  may  p  it
Psal.  10.  17.  Lord,  thou  wiltp.  their  heart
59.  4.  they  p.  themselves  without  my  fault
6L  7.  O  p.  mercy  and  truth,  which  may  preserve
107  .  36.  that  they  may  p.  a  city  for  habitation
Prov.  24.  27.  p.  thy  work  without,  and  make  it  tit

30.  25.  yet  they  p.  their  meat  in  the  summer
Isa.  14. 21.  p.  slaughter  for  his  children  for  iniquity

21.  5.  p.  the  table,  watch  in  the  watch-tower

40.  3.  of  him  that  crieth,  p.  ye  way  of  Lord,  Mai.

on  u  3‘  V  3’  ’?•  Mark  4-  2,  3.  Luke  1.  76,
20.  he  seeketh  a  workman  to  p.  a  graven  ima°e
57 .  14.  and  shall  say,  cast  ye  up,  p.  the  way  °

62.  10.  p.  ye  the  way  of  the  people,  cast  up
65.  11.  they  thatp.  a  table  for  that  troop
Jer.  6.  4.  p.  ye  war  against  her,  arise,  let  us  go  up

12.  3.  and  p.  them  tor  the  day  of  slaughter

22.  7.  I  will  p.  destroyers  against  thee

46. 14.  say  ye,  stand  fast  and  p.  thee,  sword  shaN
51.  12.  set  up  watchmen,  p.  the  ambushes
27.  blow  the  trumpet,  p.  nations  against  her,  28.
Lzek.  4. 15.  and  thou  shait  p.  thy  bread  therewith
12.  3.  p.  thee  stuff  for  removing,  and  remove
35.  6.  I  will  p.  thee  to  blood,  blood  shall  pursue
38.  7.  p.  for  thyselt,  thou  and  all  thy  companv’

43.  25.  p.  every  day  a  goat,  they  shall  also  p.

45.  17.  the  prince  shall  p.  the  sin  offering

22.  on  that  day  prince  shall  p.  for  himself,  46. 12.
24.  he  shall  p.  a  meat  offering,  46.  7,  14.

46.  2.  the  priest  shall  p.  his  burnt  ottering,  13
15.  they  shall  p.  the  lamb  and  meat  offerin'*

Joel  3.  9.  p.  war  ||  Amos 4. 12.  p.  to  meet  thy  God
Mic.  3.  5.  they  even  p.  war  against  him
Mat.  11. 10.  messenger,  who  shall  p. way  before  thee
26.17.  where  wilt  thou  that  we  p.  for  thee  to  eat
the  passover?  Mark  14.  12.  Luke  22  8  9
Luke  3.  4.  saying,  p.  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  7.  27.’
John  14.  2.  1  go  to  p.  a  place  for  you
3.  if  I  go  and  p.  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  ag.
iCor.  14.  8.  who  shall  p.  himself  to  the  battle  r
Philem.  22.  but  withal  p.  me  also  a  lod'-in'*
PREPARED.

Gen.  24.  31.  I  p.  the  house  and  room  for  camels

369


P  R  E


P  R  E


P  R  E


GenA\ .  r  32.  dream  doubled,  b'r  the  tiling  isp.  ot  G.
Exod.  1C.  39-  neither  had  they  p.  any  victual
°3.  20.  to  bring  thee  into  the  place  1  have  p.

Nuin.  21.  27.  let  the  city  of  Sihon  be  built  and  p.

°3.  4.  1  have  p.  seven  altars,  and  have  ottered
2 ~Sam.  15.  1.  Absalom  p.  chariots  and  horses
1  Kings  1.  5.  Adonijah  p.  ||  5.  18.  they  p.  timber
6  19  the  oracle  he  p.  in  the  house  within
n  Kings  6.23.  he  p.  provision  and  sent  them  away

1  Chr.  12.  39.  for  their  brethren  had  p.  tor  them

15.  1.  David  p.  a  place  for  ark  of  God,  and

pitched  for  it  a  tent,  3,  12.  2  Chron.  \.  4.  3.  1.

22. 3.  David  p.  iron  in  abundance  tor  trie  nails
5  David  p.  abund.  before  his  death,  14.  129.  2.

2  Chron.  8.  16.  all  the  work  ot  Solomon  was  p.

12  14.  Uehoboam  p.  not  Ins  heart  to  seek  the  Ld.

19.  3.  Jehoshaphat  p.  his  heart  to  seek  God
20  33.  for  as  yet  the  people  had  not  p.  their  heart

26.  14!  Uzziah  p.  shields  and  spears  tor  them
C?!  6.  Jotham  p.  his  ways  before  tlie  Lord
"9.  19.  the  vessels  Ahaz  cast  away  we  havep.

36.  he  rejoiced  that  God  had  p.  the  people
31.  11.  they  p.  chambers  in  the  house  ot  the  I ford
35!  10.  the  service  was  p.  the  priests  stood,  16.

20.  after  this,  when  Josiah  had  p.  the  temple
Ezra  7.  10.  Ezra  had  p.  his  heart  to  the  law
Ve/i  5  18  now  that  which  was  p.  tor  me  daily
*8  10  and  send  to  them  for  whom  nothing  is  p.

13.  5.  he  had  p.  for  him  a  great  chamber
Esth.  5.  4.  to  the  banquet  that  1  have  p.  12.  1  0.  4
6. 4.  to  hang  Mcrdecai  on  gallows  Hainan  p.  (.  10.

Job  28.  27.  hep.  it,  yea,  and  searched  it  out

29.  7.  when  1  p.  my  seat  in  the  street
Psal  7  13  he  p.  for  him  the  instruments  ot  death
9  7'  he  hath  p.  his  throne  for  judgment
57.  6.  ttiey  have  p.  a  net  for  my  steps

+  7.  my  heart  is  p.  1  will  sing  and  give  praise

68. 10.  thou  hast  p.  ot  thy  goodness  tor  the  poor
74.  16.  thou  hast  p.  the  light  and  the  sun
78  t  8.  a  generation  that  p.  not  their  hearts
103. 19.  tlie  I.ord  hath  p.  his  throne  in  the  heavens
Prov.  3.  +  19.  by  understanding  hep.  the  heaven.,

8.  27.  when  he  p.  the  heavens,  1  w'as  there
19.  29.  judgments  are  p.  for  scorners,  and  stripes
2l!  31.  the  horse  is  p.  against  the  day  ot  G«tt le
Isa  o  +  2  mountain  ot  the  I.ord  s  house  shall  hep.

16.’  +  5.  in  mercy  shall  the  throne  he  p.

30.  33.  Tophet  ot  old,  tor  the  king  it  is  p.

64.  4.  neither  hath  the  eye  seen  what  he  hath  p.

Ezek.  23.  41.  a  stately  bed,  and  a  table  p.  before  it
28  13.  workmanship  of  the  pipes  was  p.  in  thee
38.  7.  be  thou p.  and  prepare  tor  thyself
Dan.  2.  9.  for  ye  have  p.  lying, words  to  speak
Hos.  2.  8.  her  silver  and  gold  which  they  p.  tor  Baal

6.  3.  his  coing  forth  isp.  as  the  morning

Jonah  1. 17.  now  the  Lord  had  p.  a  great  fish
4.  6.  God  p.  a  gourd  H  7-  a  worm  II  8.  an  east  wind
Nah.  2.  5.  make  haste,  and  the  defence  shall  be  p.
Zepii.  1.7.  for  the'  Lord  hath  p.  a  sacrifice
Mat.  20.  23.  it  is  not  mine  to  give,  but  it  shall  be
given  to  them  for  whom  it  is  p.  Mark  10.  40.
22.4.  tell  them,  behold,  I  have  p.  my  dinner
25."  34.  inherit  the  kingdom  p.  I!  41.  into  hre  p.

Mark  14.  15.  will  shew  you  a  large  upper  room  p.
Luke  1.  17.  to  make  ready  a  people  p.  tor  the  Lord
o  31.  which  thou  hastp.  before  face  ot  all  people

12.  47-  which  knew  his  Lord’s  w  ill,  but  p.  not
23.  56.  theyp.  spices,  and  rested  the  sabbath,  24.  1.
Rom  9.  23.  the  vessels  of  mercy  atore  7'.  to  glory

1  Cor.  2.  9.  things  G.  hath  p.  for  them  that  love  him
Eph.  2T  +  10.  good  works  God  hath  p.  to  walk  in

2  Tim.  2.21.  be  a  vessel  p.  to  every  good  work
Heb.  10.  5.  but  a  body  hast  thou  p.  me

11  7  Noah  p.  an  ark  to  the  saving  of  his  house
16.  their  God.  for  he  hath  p.  for  them  a  city
Rev  8. 6.  and  tne  seven  angels  p.  to  sound

9.  7.  the  locusts  were  like  to  horses  p.  tor  battle
is.  which  wrerep.  for  an  hour,  a  day.  and  a  month
12.  *6.  and  the  woman  hath  a  place  p.  of  God
16"  12.  that  the  way  of  kings  of  east  may  be  p.
of  o  me  holy  cityp.  as  a  bride  for  her  husband
‘  PREPAREDST.

Psal  80.  9.  thou  p.  room  before  it,  to  take  deep  rool^,

PREPARES!’.

Mum  15.  8.  when  thou  p.  a  bullock  for  an  offering
Psal'.  23.  5.  thou  p.  a  table  before  me  in  presence
65.  9.  thou  waterest  the  earth,  thou  p.  them
corn  when  thou  hast  so  prepared  tor  it
PREP  All  El  H.

2  Chron.  30.  19.  that  p.  his  heart  to  seek  God
Job  15.  35.  bring  forth  vanity,  their  belly  p.  deceit
Psal. 141  .Q.  whop,  rain  for  earth,  rnaketh  grass  grow
PREPARING.

Kelt  13. 7.  p.  him  a  chamber  in  courts  of  house  of  G.
i  Pet  3.  20.  in  days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  p.
PRESBYTERY.

1  Tim  4  14.  with  laving  on  of  the  hands  of  the  p.

PRESCRIBED,  1NG.

Ezra  7.  22.  and  salt  withoutp.  how  much
Isa.  10.1.  that  write  grievousness  which  they  have  p.
PRESENCE.

Gen.  3.  8.  hid  themselves  from  the  p.  of  the  Lord
4.  16.  Cain  went  out  from  the  p.  of  the  Lord

27.  30.  Jacob  was  scarce  gone  from  the  p.  of  Isaac
45.  3.  for  Joseph’s  brethren  were  troubled  at  hisp.
47. 15.  for  why  should  we  die  in  thy  p.f  money  tails
Exod.  10. 11.  they  were  driven  out  from  Pharaoh’sp.
33.  14.  he  said,  my  p.  shall  go  with  thee
15.  if  thv  p.  go  not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hence
35.  20.  all  Israel  departed  from  the  p.  of  Moses
Lev.  22.  3.  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  From  my  p.
Num.  20.  6.  Moses  went  fron  the  p.  of  assembly

1  Sam.  18.  11.  David  avoided  out  of  hisp.  twice

19. 10.  hut  he  slipped  away  outof  Saul’s^,  and  fled

21.  15.  this  fellow  to  play  the  madman  in  my  p.

2  Sam.  16.19.  whom  should  1  serve  ?  as  I  have  served

in  thy  father’sp.  so  will  1  be  in  thy  p.

17.*  t  11.  1  counsel  that  thy  p.  go  to  battle
!  Kings  12.  2.  .leroboam  fled  from  the  p.  ot  Solomon
2  Kings  3. 14.  were  it  not  1  regardp.  of  Jehoshaphat
5.  27!  and  he  went  out  from  his  p.  a  leper

13.  23.  neither  cast  he  them  from  his  p.  as  yet

370


2  Kings  24.20.  till  he  had  cast  them  out  from  hisp.

*°5  19  five  of  them  that  were  in  the  king  s  p.

1  Chron.  16.  27-  glory  and  honour  are  m  hisp.

33.  then  shall  the  trees  sing  at.  the  p.  of  God

2  Chron.  9.  23.  the  king  sought  the  p.  ot  Solomon
20.  9.  when  we  stand  before  this  house  in  thy  p.

34.  4  they  brake  the  altars  of  Baalim  in  his  p.

Neh.  2.  1.  1  had  not  been  before  sad  in  hisp.  .

Esth.  7.  6.  Raman  was  afraid  at  the  p.  of  the  king

8.  15.  Mordecai  went  from  the  p.ot  king  in  apparel
Job  1 .  12.  Satan  went  from  the  p.  of  the  Lord,  7.

23.  15.  therefore  1  am  troubled  at  hisp.

Psal.  9.  3.  they  shall  fall  and  perish  at  thy  p.

16. 1 1.  in  thy  p.  fulness  ot  joy ,  right  hand  pleasure
17.2.  let  my  sentence  come  forth  from  thy  p.

31.20.  thou  shalt  hide  them  in  the  secret  of  thy  p.

42.  t  5.  1  shall  praise  him,  his  p.  is  salvation
51.  11.  cast  me  not  away  from  thy  p.  take  not  tny
68.  2.  let  the  wicked  p-rish  at  the  p.  ot .God
8.  heavens  dropped.  Sinai  moved  at  the  p.  ot  Gotl
05.  2.  come  before  his  p.  with  thanksgiving
97.  5.  the  hills  melted  like  wax  at  thep.  of  God

100.  2.  come  before  his  p.  with  singing  _

114  7.  tremble,  thou  earth,  at  the  p.  ot  the  Lord
139.7.  whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy  p.  t
140.  13.  the  upright  shall  dwell  in  thy  p.

Prov  14.  7-  go  from  the  p.  of  a  foolish  man
Isa.  1.7.  strangers  shall  devour  your  land  in  your  p.

19.  l.  the  idols  of  Egypt  shall  be  moved  at  hisp.

63.  9.’ and  the  angel  of  hisp.  saved  them

64.  1.  that  mountains  might  flow  down  at  thyp.

2.  that  the  nations  may  tremble  at  thyp.

3.  the  mountains  flowed  down  at  thy  P •  .

Jer.  4.  26.  all  the  cities  broken  down  at  p.  ot  Lord

5.  22.  will  ve  not  tremble  at  my  p.  which  have
23.  39.  and'  I  will  cast  you  out  of  my  p.  52.  3.

Ezek.  38.  20.  all  the  men  shall  shake  at  my  p.

Jonah  1.  3.  Jonah  rose  to  flee  from  thep.  ot  the  L.

10  men  knew  he  fled  from  the  p.  or  the  Dora
Nah.  1.5.  and  the  earth  is  burnt  at  hisp.

Zeph.  1.7.  hold  thv  peace  at  thep.  of  the  I.ord
Luke  13.  26.  we  have  eaten  and  drunk  in  thyp.

Acts  3.  19.  the  times  of  refreshing  come  from  thep.

5.  41.  they  departed  from  the  p.  of  the  council

1  Cor.  1.29.  that  no  flesh  should  glory  111  hisp.

2  Cor.  10.  1.  who  in  p.  am  base  among  you
10.  his  letters  weighty,  but  his  bodily  p.  is  weak

Phil .  jo.  ye  have  obeyed,  not  as  in  my  p.  only

1  Thess.  2.~17.  being  taken  from  you  inp.  not  in  heart

2  Thess.  1.9.  with  destruction  from  the  p.  of  the  L.
~Iude  °4  present  you  faultless  before  p.ot  his  glory

In  the  PRESENCE.  .

Gen.  16.  12.  he  shall  dwell  in  the  p.ot  his  brethren
23.  11.  in  thep.  of  my  people  1  give  it  thee
18.  made  sure  in  thep.  of  the  children  ot  Heth
25.  18.  Ishmael  died  in  the  p.ot  all  his  brethren
Dent  °b  Q.  his  brother's  wife  come  in  t.  p.  or  elders
2  Sam.  16.  19.  should  I  not  serve  in  the  p.ot  his  son
1  Kings  8.  22.  Solomon  stood  in  t.  p.  ot  congregation
21.  13.  against  Naboth,  in  thep.  of  the  people
1  Chron.  24.  31.  these  cast  lots  in  the  p.  ot  David
Psal.  23.  5.  a  table  in  the  p.  of  mine  enemies
1 16. 14.  now  in  the  p.  ot  all  his  people,  18.

Prov.  17.  18.  become  surety  in  the  p.  ot  his  friend
25.  6.  put  not  forth  thyself  in  the  p.  ot  the  king
7.  than  be  put  low'er  in  the  p.  of  the  prince
Jer  28  1  Hananiah  spake  in  the  p.ot  the  princes
11.  in  the  p.  of  people  II  32.  12.  in  p.  ot  witnesses
Luke  1. 19.  1  am  Gabriel,  that  stand  tn  the  p.ot  G.

14.  10.  thou  shalt  haye  worship  in  the  p.  ot  them

15.  10.  there  is  joy  in  thep.  of  the  angels  or  God
J.  hn  20.  30.  si cns  did  Jesus  in  the  p.  ot  his  disciples
Acts  3.  13.  and  denied  him  in  thep.  ot  Pilate

16.  given  him  perfect  soundness  in  the  p.ot .you  all
27.  35.  he  gave  thanks  to  God  in  thep.  ot  them  all

1  Thess.  2.  19.  are  not  evenye  in  f.p. pfour  L.  Jes.
Heb  9.  24.  now  to  appear  in  the  p.  ot  God  tor  us
Rev.  14.  10.  in  thep.  of  holy  angels,  in  t.p.  ot  Lamb
PRESENT,  Substantive.

Gen  32.  13.  he  took  a  p.  for  F.sau  his  brother,  18.

20.  for  he  said,  I  will  appease  him  with  thep.

21 .  so  went  the  p.  over  before  him,  himself  lodged
33. 10.  if  found  grace,  then  rec ,  my  p.  at  my  hand
43.  11.  Israel  said,  carry  down  the  man  ap.

15.  men  took  the  p.  II 25.  they  made  ready  the  p.

26.  thev  brought  him  the  p.  in  their  hand
Judg.  .3.  "15.  by  Ehud  Israel  sent  a  p.  to  l-.glon

17 .  he  brought  the  p.  |1  18.  an  end  to  oner  the  p.

6. 18.  depart  not  till  I  come  and  brine  forth  my  p.

1  Sam.  9.  7.  there  is  not  a  p.  for  the  man  or  God
25.  +  27.  let  this  p.  be  for  the  young  men  .

30.  26.  behold,  a  p.  of  the  spoil  of  the  enemies
1  Kings  9. 16.  had  given  it  for  ap.  to  his  daughter
10. 25.  they  brought  eveiy  man  hisp.  2  Chr.  9.  24.

15.  19.  I  have  sent  thee  a  p.  ot  silver  and  gold
o  Kings  8.  8.  the  king  said,  take  ap.  in  thine  hand
~  9.  so  Hazael  went  to  meet  him,  and  took  ap.

16  8.  and  sent  it  for  ap.  to  the  king  of  Assyria

17.  4.  and  brought  no p.  to  the  king  of  Assyria

18.  31 .  make  an  agreement  by  a  p.  Isa.  36. 16.

20.  12.  sent  letters  and  ap.  to  Hezekiah,  Isa.  39.  1.
Ha.  18.  7.  p.  brought  to  Lord  of  hosts  tor  a  people
Ezek.  27-  15.  they  brought  for  ap.  horns  of  ivory
IIos  10  6.  be  carried  to  Assy  ria  tor  p.  to  king  Jareb

PRESENT,  Participle.

]  Sam.  13.15.  Saul  numbered  the  peoplep.  with  him
21  3.  give  me  five  loaves,  or  what  there  isp.

0  Sam.  20.  4.  assemble  Judah,  and  be  thou  here  p.

1  Kings  20.  27.  Isr.  were  numbered,  and  were  all Ip.

1  Chr.  29.  17.  have  seen  thy  people  p.  to  otter  will

2  Chron.  5. 11.  all  the  priests  p.  were  sanctified
.SO.  21.  Israel  p.  at  Jerusalem,  kept  the  feast
3l!  1.  all  p.  went  out  and  brake  the  images
34.  32.  he  caused  all  that  were  p.  to  stand  to  it
Ezra  8.  25.  king,  lords,  and  all  1  srael  p.  offered
Esth.  4.  16.  gather  all  the  Jews  p._  in  Shushan
Psal  46.  1.  God  is  a  very  p.  help  in  time  of  trouble
Luke  5.  17.  power  of  the  Lord  was  p.  to  heal  them

1  S.l .  there  "were  p.  at  that  season  some  that  tolci  him
18.  SO.  shall  receive  manifold  more  in  this/?,  life
John  14.  25.  I  have  spoken,  bein<r  yet  p.  with  you
•lets  10.  33.  now  are  we  all  p.  before  God,  to  hear


Acts  21.18.  Paul  went  with  us,  all  the  elders  were*.

28.  2.  kindled  a  fire,  received  us  because  of  p.  rani
Horn.  7  wil  I  is  «.  with  me.  hut  how  to  rw*rfr.m„


MUUICU  Cl  til  '  »  I  wv».v«  uu  i.cvhuov  VI  p .  J  rtill

.  18.  to  will  is  p.  with  me,  hut  how  to  perform
21.  when  1  would  do  good,  evil  is  r.  with  me


xl.  W  licit  I  WWUIU  f  •  -••III  MIC

8.  18.  1  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  p.  time
38.  nor  things  p.  are  able  to  separate  us  from  love

11.  5.  even  at  this  p.  time,  there  is  a  remnant

1  Cor.  3.  22.thingsp.or  things  to  come,  all  are  yours

4.  11.  even  to  tlnsp.  hour  we  both  hunger  and  thirst

5.  3.  but  p.  in  spirit,  have  judged  as  tho’  1  were  p

7.  26.  that  this  is  good  for  the  p.  distress

15.  6.  of  whom  the  greater  part  remain  to  this  p.

2  Cor.  5.  8.  willing  rather  to  bep.  with  the  Ixird
*  9.  we  labour,  that  whether  p.  or  absent

10. 2.  1  beseech  you,  that  I  may  not  be  bold  when  p.

11.  9.  when  1  wasp,  with  you  and  wanted

13.  2.  1  foretell,  as  if  1  were  p.  the  second  time

10.  I  write,  lest  being  p.  1  should  use  sharpness

Gal.  1.4.  that  h.  might  deliver  us  from  this p.  world
4.  18.  aim  noi  only  when  I  am  p.  with  you
20  1  desire  to  be  p.  with  you,  and  to  change
2  Tim.  4.  10.  forsaken  me,  having  lov.  thisp.  world
Tit.  2.  12.  we  should  live  godly  in  this  p.  world
Heb.  9.  9.  which  was  a  figure  tor  the  time  then  p.

12.  li.  no  chastening  for  the  p.  seemeth  joyous
2  Pet  1  12.  and  be  established  in  thep.  truth

PRESENT,  ED.

Gen.  46.  29.  Joseph  p.  himself  to  his  father
47.2  he  p.  five  of  his  brethren  to  Pharaoh
Exod.  34.  2.  and  p.  thyself  there  to  me  in  the  mount
Lev.  2. 8.  the  meat  offering,  when  it  isp.  to  the  priest
7.  35  in  the  day7  when  he  p.  them  to  minister
9’.  12’.  Aaron's  sons  p.  to  him  the  blood,  18.

13.  and  thev'p.  the  burnt  offering  to  him

14.  1 1 .  the  priest  shall  p.  the  man  to  be  made  clean

16.  7-  the  two  goats,  and  p.  them  before  the  I  ord

10.  the  scape  goat  shall  be  p.  betore  the  Lord
27.  8.  then  he  shall  p.  himself  before  the  priest

11.  then  he  shall  p.  the  beast  before  the  priest
Num.  .3.  6.  and  p.  the  tribe  of  T.evi  before  Aaron
Dent.  31.  14.  p.  yourselves  before  tlie  tabernacle
Josh. ’24.1.  they  p.  themselves  before  God
Judg.  6.  19.  Gideon  brought  it  under  oak,  and  p.  it

20.  2.  the  tribes  of  Israel  p.  themselves

1  Sam  10  19.  now  p.  yourselves  betore  the  Lord

17.  16.  Goliath  the  Philistine  p.  himselt  forty  day*

2  Chron.  11.  I  13.  the  Levitesp.  themselves  to  him
Job  1.  6.  the  sons  of  God  came  to  p.  themselves

2  1  Satan  came  to  p.  himself  betore  the  Lord
Jer.  36.  7.  it  may  he  they  will  p.  their  supplicatior
38.  C6.  I  P •  my  supplication  before  the  king
42*  9.  ye  sent  to  p.  your  supplication  before  him
Ezek  °0  28.  they  p.'the  provocation  of  offering
Dan.  9.  18.  for  we  do  notp.  our  supplications
Mat.  2.  11.  they  p.  to  him  gifts,  gold  and  my  Mi
Luke  2.  22.  they  brought  him  to  p.  to  the  Lord
Acts  9.41.  when  he  hatl  called  the  saints, p.  her  ain’t
23.  33.  thev  p.  Paul  also  before  the  governor
Rom.  12. 1.  that  ye  p.  your  bodies  a  living  sacrific;
2  Cor.  4. 14.  shall  raise  us  up  by  Jes.  and  p.  us  witl
112  that  I  mavp.  you  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  (  hris
Eph.  5. 27.  he  might  p.  it  to  hints,  a  glorious  churrl
Col.  1.  22.  top.  you  holy  and  unblameable
°8.  that  we  may  p.  every  man  perfect  in  C  hnst
Jude  24.  to  him  t  h at ^ ahf  e ^ to ^y o u  faultless

Dan  9.  20.  p.  my  supplication  before  the  Lord

p  ■>preskntly.

1  Sam.  2.  16.  let  them  not  fail  to  burn  the  fatp.
Prov.  12.  16.  a  fool’s  wrath  is  p.  known
Mat.  21.  19.  and  p.  the  fig-tree  withered  away
26.  53.  l  e  shall  p.  give  me  more  than  twelve  Iegtor
Phil.  2.  23.  him  therefore  1  hope  to  sendp.
PRESENTS.

1  Sam.  10.  27.  and  they  brought  him  nop.

1  Kings  4.  21.  they  brought  p.  and  served  Solemn
o  Kings  17.  3.  Ilosheagave  Shalmanezerp.

2  Chron.  17 .  5.  p.  to  Jeliosh.  11.(1  32.  23.  to  Bezel
Psal.  68.  29.  kings  shall  bring  p.  unto  thee  .

7°.  10.  kings  of  Tarsh.  and  'he  isles  shall  bring  p

76. 11.  let  all  bring  p.  to  him  that  ought  to  be  ,eare
Mic.  1. 14.  therefore  shalt  give  p.  to  Moreshelh  gai

PRESERVE

Signifies,  [1]  To  keepfafe  or  defend,

To  sustain  or  uphold ,  Psal.  36.  6.  [3J  lo  reser  ^
save,  or  keep  alive ,  Gen.  45.  7.  ,  ,  j

O  thou  Preserver  of  men,  Job  , .  20.  C
as  thou  roast  the  Creator  of  man ,  dell/h*est-'0
and  to  be  called,  the  Preserver  and  Saviour
men  :  and  that  u  ai test  to  be  kind  and  gracious
men  from  day  today,  as  occasion  requires,  an
deal  with  me  in  a  way  contrary  t0Jh,ine°rf*C‘,
and  name,  and  to  the  manner  of  thy  J‘

all  the  rest  of  mankind.  Or,  thou
men,  thou  who  didst  exactly  know  and  diligeni
observe  all  the  inward  motions  andoutward  acti
of  men;  1  have  sinned;  and  therefore  if  t
shalt  be  severe  to  mark  mine  mtqwUes,  t
seeme  t  to  be,  I  have  not  what  to  say  |

G«teei9.  32.  that  we  may  p.  seed  of  Ja‘heme  \
45.  5.  for  God  did  send  me  before  you  to  p.  .he

7.  God  sent  me  to  p.  you  a  posterity  in i  the  ear
Dent.  6.  24.  that  he  might  p.  us  alive,  as  aUhis  o
Psal.  12.  7.  thou  shalt p.  them  from  this  generatic
16.  i.  p.  me,  O  God,  for  in  thee  do  l  put  my  t.
25.  21.  let  integrity  and  uprightness p.  me  .
32.  7.  mv  hiding  place,  shalt  p.  me  '  m,

40.  11.  let  thy  loving  kindness conunna  P:

41.  2.  the  Lord  will  p.  him  and  keep  him  aU
61.  7-  prepare  mercy  and  truth  whidi  rna  P^

64. 1.  hear  me,  p.  my  life  from  fear  ot  the  eneri
79.  11.  p.  thou  those  that  are  appointed  t
86.  2.  p.  my  soul,  for  1  am  holy,  O  thoum.

121.  7.  L.  p.  thee  from  all  evil,  he  shall  p.  V

8.  the  Lord  shall  p.  thv  going  out  and  on nn

140. 1.  O  Lord,  p.  me  from  the  violent  man,  ■ *

Dw.2.11.  discretion  shall  p.  thee,  unders.ke  p

4.  6.  forsake  her  not,  and  she  s ha  P-  mee

14.  3.  but  the  lips  of  the  wise  shall  p.  them
20.  28.  mercy  and  truth  p.  the  king,  his

22.  12.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  p.  knowiedg


PRF


PRI


P  II  E


ha.  3!.  5.  and  passing  over  lie  will  y.  .lerusalem
49.  8.  1  will  p.  thee,  and  give  thee  tor  a  covenant
re/\  49.  1J.  thy  children,  1  will  p.  them  alive
lab.  3. 1 2.  p.  aliv  e  thy  work  in  midst  of  the  years
duke  17-33.  whoso  shall  lose  his  life  shall  ju.  it
Tim.  4. 18.  Iginl  will  p.  to  his  heavenly  kingdom
PRESERVED,  Ki  ll.

•  en.  32.  30.  1  have  seen  God,  and  my  life  is  p.
'oth.  24.  17.  and  p.  us  in  all  the  way  we  went
'aw.  30.23.  Lord  hath  giv  en  us,  who  hath  p.  us
Sam.  8.  6.  Syrians  David’s  servants,  Lord  y.  !)av.

whithersoever  he  went,  1  Chum.  18.6, 13.
ob  10.  12.  thy  visitation  hath  p.  my  spirit
29-  2.  that  1  were  as  in  the  days  when  God  p,  me

36.6.  lie  p.  not  the  lifeot  the  wicked,  gives  right
}sal.  31.  23.  love  Lord,  for  the  Lord  p.  the  faithful

37.  28.  forsakes  not  his  saints,  they  are  p.  for  ever
97. 10.  hate  ev  il,  he  p.  the  souls  of  his  saints

116.6.  the  Lord  p.  the  simple,  I  was  brought  low

145.  20.  the  Lord  p.  all  them  that  love  him

146.  9-  the  Lord  p.  the  strangers,  he  relieveth
Vac.  2.  8.  he  p.  tlie  way  of  his  saints

16.  17.  he  that  keepeth  his  way  p.  his  soul
•> a.  49.  6.  and  to  restore  the  p.  of  Israel
los.  12.  13.  and  by  a  prophet  was  he  y.
lat.  9. 17.  but  they  put  new  wine  into  new  bottles,
an<l  both  are  p.  Luke  5.  38.
Thess.  5. 23.  your  spirit  soul  and  body  p.  blameless
ude  1.  san.  titled,  and  p.  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  called
PRESERVER.

ob  7 . 20.  what  shall  1  do  to  thee,  O  thou  P.  of  men  ?
PRESERVES!'.

•eh.  9.  6.  thou  Lord  hast  made  and  p.  them  all
'sal.  36.  6.  O  Lord,  thou  p.  man  and  beast

PRESIDENTS.

hm.6.  2.  and  over  these  three  p.  Daniel  was  first

3.  this  Daniel  was  preferred  above y.  and  princes

4.  the  p.  sought  to  find  occasion  against  Daniel
6.  these  p.  and  princes  assembled  to  the  king,  7.

PRESS

gnifies,  [1]  To  squeeze  close  together,  Gen.  40.
11.  [2]  To  throng  or  crowd,  Luke  8.  45.  [3]

Jo  urge,  or  be  instant,  Gen.  19.  3.  [4]  To

pursue  and  seek  after  salvation  and  happiness
null  a  holy  boldness,  resolution,  zeal,  and  fer¬
vency,  Luke  16.  16.  Phil.  3.  14.  [5]  A  crowd  or
throng,  Luke  19.  3.

lie  word  Press  is  likewise  used,  not  only  for  the
instrument  or  machine  by  which  grapes  are
squeezed ,  Isa,  16.  10.  but  also  for  the  vessel  or
vat,  wherein  the  wine  runs  from  the  Press,  and
in  which  it  is  received  and  preserved :  Whence
are  these  expressions  ;  He  digged  a  wine  press
i?<  his  vineyard.  Mat.  21.  33.  Thy  presses  shall
burst  out  with  new  wine,  Prov.  3.  10.  To  draw
out  ot  the  press,  Ilag.  2.  16.  It  was  a  kind  of
moteri  aneous  cistern  ;  in  which  the  wine  was  re¬
ceived  and  kept,  till  it  was  put  into  jars  or  ves¬
sels  of  earth  or  wood.

ark  2. 4.  could  not  come  nigh  for  the  p.  T.uke  8. 19.

.  27.  ( amc  in  p.  behind  him,  touched  his  garment
10.  Jesus  turned  him  about  in  the  p.  and  said
ike  19. 3.  Zaccheus  could  not  see  Jesus  for  the  v
PRESS.

el  3.  13.  for  they.  is  full,  the  fats  overflow
ay.  2.  16.  to  draw  out  fifty  vessels  out  of  the  p.

See  Wine.

PR,  ESS- FAT.

ay.  2.  16.  when  one  came  to  the  p.  to  draw  vessels
PRESS.  ED,  ETH.

n.  19.  3.  Loty.  on  the  two  angels  at  Sodom  greatly
>.  they  p.  sore  on  Lot,  and  came  near  the  door
>.  11.  and  I  took  the  grapes  and  p.  them
ay.  16. 16._  Delilah  p.  him  daily  with  her  words
am.  13.  25.  Absalom  p.  him ,  he  would  not  go,  27.
th.8.  14.  posts  p.  on  by  the  king's  command
a/.  38.  2.  an  ous stick  fast,  and  thy  hand y.mesore
ek.  2.3.  3.  there  were  their  breasts  p.  they  bruised
nos  si.  13.  behold,  1  am  p.  under  you  as  a  cart  is  p.
irk  .3.  10.  they  y.  on  him  for  to  touch  him
«5. 1.  as  the  people  p.  to  hear  the  word  of  God
••>8.  good  measure, p.  down  and  shaken  together
45.  the  multitude  throng  thee  and  p.  thee
'.16.  kingdom  preached,  every  man  y.  into  it
-tt!8.5.  Paul  was p.  inspirit,  and  testified  to  Jews
'or.  1.  8.  that  we  were  p.  above  measure
“•  ‘3- 14.  1  p.  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize
PRESSES.

10.  thy  y.  shall  burst  with  new  wine
.  16.10.  treaders  shall  tread  out  no  wine  in  their p.
PRESUME.

ut.  18_. 20.  the  prophet  who  shall  p.  to  speak
■h.  7-  5.  where  is  he  that  durst  »  in  hi«;  ht^rt  fr


■  n.  1.  o.  where  is  he  that  durst  y.  in  his  heart  to  do
PRESUMED.

m.  14.  44.  but  they  p.  to  go  up  to  the  hill  top

PRESUMPTUOUS.

Mf*l‘fL3,  ye  were  p.  and  w’ent  up  the  hill
•  19.  1.3.  keep  thy  servant  also  from  p.  sins
-  et.  ...  10. y.  are  they, self-willed,  not  afraid  to  sp.

PRESUMPTUOUSLY.

>d.  -1.  14.  if  a  man  come  p.  on  his  neighbour

•  m  .  Id.  30.  the  soul  that  doth  aught  p.  Dent.  17. 12.
«-l.T3.  and  went  p.  up  into  the  hill

•  13.  the  people  shall  hear,  and  do  no  more  p.

■  A.  but  the  prophet  hath  spoken  it  v.
PRETENCE.

‘  7  W,,4'  t0,r  AP-  m.ake  lon?  prayers,  Mark  12.  40.
-it.  1.  18.  whether  in  p.  or  in  truth  C.  is  preached
,  .  PREVAIL

*  times,  [1]  To  have  the  advantage  over,  or  the
’-iter  of,  ludg.  16.  5.  [2]  To  be  raised  or  lifted

.P,  Geu.  7.  20.

"  ’  blessings  of  thy  father  have  prevailed  above
ie  blessings  of  my  progenitors,  Gen.  49.  26.
ie  blessings  which  I  thy  father  have  conferred
von  thee,  are  much  more  considerable  than  those
aich  1  received  either  from  my  father  Isaac,  or
om  my  grandfather  Abraham  ;  and  that,  (1)  In
Client  of  the  blessings  :  Ishmael  was  excluded
‘  one!  a>ld  Lsau  in  the  other's  blessings  ;  but  I
we  included  both  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  in
■V  blessing,  (21  fn  the  distinctness  and  clear¬


ness  of  them  :  For  that  land  of  Canaan,  which  was
ti ansmitted  to  Isaac  and  Jacob  only  in  the  gene¬
ral,  was  now  in  some  sort  particularly  distributed
to  Joseph  and  to  the  rest  of  his  brethren;  and,  (3)
In  the  nearness  of  the  accomplishment  :  Now  there
was  a  more  likely  prospect  of  the  multiplication  of
their  seed,  than  to  Abraham  or  Isaac  j  and  soon
after  they  multiplied  to  astonishment,  and  drew
near  to  the  possession  of  the  promised  land.

Gen.  7.  20.  fifteen  cubits  upward  did  the  waters  p.
JSum.  22.  6.  peradventure  1  shall  p.  +  11.

Judy.  16.  5.  and  see  by  what  means  we  may  p.

1  Ham.  2.  9.  for  by  strength  shall  110  man  p.

17.  9.  if  I  y.  ag.  him,  then  ye  shall  be  our  servants

26.  25.  thou  shalt  do  great  things  and  shalt  still  p.

3  Kings  22.  22.  he  said,  thou  shalt  persuade  him,

and  p.  also,  go  forth  and  do  so,  2  C 'hr.  18.  21.

2  C hr  on.  14. 11.  OLord,  let  not  man  p.  against  thee
Esth.  6.  13.  thou  shaltnoty.  against  him
Job  15.  24.  they  shall  p.  against  him,  as  a  king

18.  9.  and  the  robber  shall  p.  against  him
Tsai.  9.  19.  arise,  O  Lord,  let  not  many.

12.  4.  who  said,  with  our  tongue  will  we  p.  our  lips
65.  3.  iniquities  ».  ag.  me,  as  for  our  transgressions
’I’ov.  6.  +  3,  so  shalt  thou  p.  with  thy  friend
Lccl.  4. 12.  if  oney.  against  him,  tw  o  shall  withstand
Isa.  7.  1.  to  war,  but  could  not  y.  against  it

16.  12,.Moab shall  come  to  pray,  but  he  shall  not  y.
42.  1.3.  he  shall  cry,  he  shall  y.  against  his  enemies
47.  12.  stand  now,  it  so  be  thou  mayest  y.

Jer.  1.  19.  they  shall  not  p,  against  thee,  for  I  am
with  thee,  saith  L.  of  hosts,  15.  20.  |  20.  11.

5.  22.  though  the  waves  toss,  yet  can  they  not y.

20. 10.  will  be  enticed,  and  we  shall  y.  against  him
Van.  11.  7.  who  shall  deal  against  him  and  shall  y.
.Mat.  16.  18.  the  gates  of  hell  shall  noty.  against  it

27.  24.  when  Pilate  saw  he  could  y.  nothing
John  12.  19.  perceive  ye  how  ye  y.  nothing

PREVAILED.

Gen.  7. 18.  the  waters  y.  and  increased,  19.

21.  the  watersy.  on  the  earth  150  days
.30.  8.  I  have  wrestled  with  my  sister  and  have  y.
32.  25.  when  he  saw  he  y.  not  against  him

28.  thou  hast  power  with  God 'and  men,  hasty.

47.  20.  because  the  famine  y.  over  them

49.  26.  the  blessings  of  thy  father  have  y.

Lsiod.  17.  11.  when  Moses  held  up  his  hand ,  Israel
y.  when  he  let  clown  bis  hand,  Amaleky.
Judg.  1.  .35.  the  hand  of  the  house  of  Joseph  y.

3.  10.  Othniel's  hand  y.  against  Chushan

4.  24.  the  children  of  Israel y.  against  Jabin

6.  2.  the  hand  of  Midian  y.  against  Israel

1  Sam.  17.  50.  so  David  y.  over  Goliath

2  Sam.  11.  2.3.  surely  the  meny.  against  us

24.  4.  the  king’s  word  y.  against  .loab

1  Kings  16.  22.  the  people  that  followed  Omri  y.

2  Kings  25.  .3.  the  faminey.  in  the  city,  no  bread

1  Chron.  5.  2.  for  .1  udah  y.  above  his  brethren

2  Chr.  8.  .3.  Solomon  y.  against  Ifamath-zobah
1.3.  18.  Judah  y.  because  they  relied  on  the  Lord
27.  5.  Jotham  y.  against  the  Ammonites
Ps.  13. 4.  lest  mine  enemy  say,  I  have y.  against  thee

129.  2.  yet  they  have  noty.  against  me
.Ter.  20.  7-  thou  art  stronger  than  I,  and  hast  y.

38.  22.  thy  friends  havey.  against  thee
Lam.  1.  16.  1  w'eep  because  the  enemy  y.

Dan.  7.  21.  the  same  horn  y.  against  the  saints
Dos.  12.  4.  he  had  power  over  the  angel  and  y.

Obad.  7.  the  men  at  peace  have  deceived  thee  an  dp.
Luke  23.  23.  the  voices  of  the  chief  priests  y.

Acts  19.  16.  the  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was y
20.  so  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and  y.

Rev.  5.  5.  the  root  ot  David  hath  p.  to  open  the  book
12.  8.  the  dragon  and  his  angels  y.  not
PR  EVA  I  LUST.  •

Job  14.  20.  thouy.  for  ever  against  him,  he  passeth
PRKVAILETH.

Lam.  1.  13.  lie  sent  fire  into  my  bones,  and  it  y.
PREVENT.

Job  3.  12.  why  did  the  knees  y.  me  ?  or  the  breasts
Psal.  17. 1 13.  arise,  O  Lord,y.  his  face
59.  10.  the  God  of  my  mercy  shall  y.  me
79.  8.  let  thy  tender  mercies  speedilv  y.  us
88.  13.  in  the  morning  shall  my  prayer  y.  thee
95.  +  2.  let  us  y.  his  face  with  thanksgiving
119.  118.  mine  eyes  y.  the  night  watches
Amos  9. 10.  which  say,  the  evil  shall  noty.  us

1  Thess. 4.  15.  we  shall  noty.  them  who  are  asleep

PREVENTED.

2  Sam.  22.  6.  the  snares  of  death  y.  me,  Psal.  18. 5.

19.  they  y.  me  in  the  day  ot  my  calamities,  but

r  ,  Ike  Lord  was  my  stay.  Psal.  18.  18.

Job  30.  27.  the  days  of  affliction  y.  me
41.  11.  who  hath  y.  me  that  I  should  repay  him  ?
Psal.  119. 147.  1  y.  the  dawning  of  the  morning
Isa.  21.  14.  theyy.  with  their  bread  him  that  fled
Mat.  17.25.  Jesus  y.  him,  saying,  Simon,  of  whom
PREY  EN  TEST.

Ps.  21.  .3.  for  thou  y.  him  with  blessings  of  goodness
P  REV.

Jer .  30.  16.  and  all  that  y.  on  thee  will  l  give  for  a  p
PREY.

Gen.  49.  9-  from  the  y.  my  son,  thou  art  gone  up
27.  111  the  morning  he  shall  devour  they.

Nu/n.  14.  3.  why  brought  to  this  land,  that  our  wives
and  children  shall  be  a  p.?  31.  Deut.  1.  39.

23.  24.  Israel  not  lie  down  till  he  eat  of  the  y.

31.  12.  they  brought  the  captives  and  y.  to  Moses

26.  take  the  sum  of  the  y.  that  was  taken

27.  and  divide  they,  into  two  parts  between  them
32.  and  the  booty  being  the  rest  of  the  y.

Deut.  2.  35.  only  thecatde  we  took  fora  y.  to  our¬
selves  and  the  spoil,  3.  7.  Josh.  8.  2, 27.  |  11.14.
Judg.  5.  30.  divided  the  y.  a  y.  of  divers  colours

8.  24.  that  ye  would  give  me  the  ear  rings  of  hisy.

25.  did  cast  every  man  the  ear-rings  of  his  y.

2  K  ings  2 V.  14.  .1  udah  shall  become  a y.  and  a  spoil
Neh.  4.  4.  give  them  for  ay.  in  the  land  of  captivity
Esth.  3.  13.  take  the  spoil  of  them  for  ay.  8.  11.

9. 15.  on  they,  they  laid  not  their  hand,  16.

Job  4. 11.  the  old  lion  perisheth  for  lack  ofy.

9.  26,  as  the  eagle  that  hasteth  to  the  y.


Job  24.  5.  behold,  as  wild  asses  rising  betimes  tor y

38.  .39.  wilt  thou  hunt  the  y.  for  the  lion  '

39.  29-  from  thence  she  seeketh  the  y.  and  her  eye*
Psal.  17.  12.  like  a  lion  that  is  greedy  of  his  y."
76.  4.  more  excellent  than  the  mountains  ofy.
104.  21.  the  young  lions  roar  after  their  y.

111.  t  5.  he  hath  given  y.  to  them  that  fear  him
124.  6.  who  hath  not  given  us  for  a  y.  to  their  teeth

Prov.  23.  28.  she  also  lieth  in  wait  as  for  ay.

Isa.  5. 29.  yea,  they  shall  roar  and  lay  hold  of  the  y.
10. 2.  that  widows  may  be  their y.  and  rob  fatherless
6.  to  take  the  y.  of  an  hypocritical  nation
31.  4.  as  the  lion  and  young  lion  roaring  on  his  p.

3.3.  23.  then  is  the  y.  of  a  great  spoil  divided
42.  22.  they  are  for  ay.  and  none  delivereth
49.  24.  shall  the  y.  be  taken  from  the  mighty  5

25.  the  y.  of  the  terrible  shall  be  delivered
59.  15.  that  departeth  from  evil  maketb  himself  ay.
Jer.  21.  9.  he  shall  live,  and  his  life  shall  be  to  him
for  a  y.  .38.  2.  |  39.  18.  |  45.  5.
30.  16.  and  all  that  y.  on  thee  1  will  give  for  a  y.
Ezek.  7.  21.  I  will  give  it  to  hands  of  strangers  for  y.
19.  3.  a  young  lion,  it  learned  to  catch  they.

22.  27.  her  princes  are  like  wolves  ravening  the  y.

26.  12.  they  shall  make  ay.  of  thy  merchandise
29.  19.  he  shall  take  her  spoil,  and  take  her  y.

34.  8.  because  my  flock  became  ay.  and  meat
22.  and  my  dock  shall  no  more  be  a y.  28.

36.  4.  saith  the  Lord,  to  the  cities  that  became  ay.

5.  with  despiteful  minds  to  cast  it  out  for  ay.

38.  12.  1  will  go  up  to  take  a  spoil  and  a  y.  1.3!
Dan.  11.  24.  he  shall  scatter  among  them  they
Amos  .3.  4.  will  a  lion  roar  when  he  hath  no  y.  ?
Nah.  2. 12.  the  lion  filled  his  holes  with  y.  and  dens
13.  I  will  cut  off  thy  y.  from  the  earth
3.  1.  woe  to  the  bloody  city,  the  y.  departeth  not
Zeph.  3.  8.  till  the  day  that  1  rise  up  to  the  v.
PRICE

Signifies,  [1]  The  rate  of  any  thing  that  is  bought
or  sold,  2  Chron.  1.  16.  [2]  Worth  or  value
Prov.  31.  10.  [3]  Esteem,  1  Pet.  3.  4.  [4]  An
opportunity  or  advantage,  Prov.  17.  16.

Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,  1  Cor.  6.  20.  Ye  are
redeemed  out  of  the  hands  of  divine  justice,  and
rescued  out  of  the  bondage  of  sin  and  Satan,  by
the  blood  of  Christ,  paid  to  God,  the  Supreme
Judge,  for  your  ransom,  whereby  Christ  has  got
an  everlasting  dominion  over  you.

Lev.  25.  16.  according  to  years  thou  shalt  increase
they,  to  fewness  thou  shalt  diminish  the  y.  50.
52.  shall  give  him  again  the  y.  of  his  redemption
Deut.  23.  18.  not  bring  y.  of  a  dog  to  house  of  Lord
2  Sam.  24.  24.  I  will  buy  it  at  a  y.  1  Chr.  21.  22,  24.

1  Kings  10.  28.  king  Solomon’s  merchants  received
the  linen  yarn  at  a  y.  2  Chron.  1.  16.
Job  28.  13.  man  knoweth  not  the  y.  thereof,  15.

18.  for  the  y.  of  wisdom  is  above  rubies
Ps.  44.  12.  thou  dost  not  increase  wealth  by  theiry
Prov.  17.  16.  why  is  there  a  y.  in  hand  of  a  fool  J
26.  and  the  goats  are  the  y.  of  the  field
31.  10.  virtuous  woman,  for  her  y.  far  above  rubies
Isa.  45. 13.  shall  let  go  my  capt.  not  fory.  nor  reward
55.  1.  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and  milk  withouty.
Jer.  15.  13.  thy  substance  to  the  spoil  without  y.
Lam.  5.  +  4.  our  wood  cometh  for  y.  unto  us
Zech.  11.  12.  give  me  my  y.  weighed  for  me  my  y.

13.  a  goodly  y.  that  I  was  prized  at  of  them
Mat.  13.  46-  when  lie  had  found  one  pearl  of  great  y

27.  6.  not  info  treasury,  because  it  is  they,  of  blood
9.  they  took  the  y.  of  him  that  was  valued
Acts  5.  2.  and  kept  back  part  of  the  y.  3.

19.  19-  they  counted  they,  of  the  books  burnt
1  Cor.  6.  20.  for  ye  are  bought  with  ay.  7.  23.

1  Pet.  3.  4.  meek  spirit  is  in  sight  of  God  of  great  v
PRICES.

Acts  4.  34.  brought  y.  of  the  things  that  were  sold

PRICKED.

Psal.  73.  21.  thus  heart  grieved,  1  wasy.  inmj-  reins
Acts  2.  37.  they  were  y.  in  their  heart,  and  said
PRICKING.

Ezek.  28.  24.  shall  be  no  more  a  y.  briar  to  Israel
PRICKS.

Num.  3.3.  55.  those  that  remain  be  y.  in  your  eves
Acts  9.  5.  it  is  hard  to  kick  against  the  y.  26.  14
PRIDE.

Lev.  26.  19.  I  will  break  they,  of  your  power

1  Sam.  17.  28.  I  know  thy  y.  and  naughtiness

2  Chron.  .32.  26.  llezekiah  humbled  himself  fory.

Job  9.  +  1.3.  the  helpers  of  y.  do  stoop  under  him

26.  +  12.  by  understanding  he  smiteth  through  y.

3.3.  17.  and  that  he  may  hide  y.  from  man
.35.  12.  they  cry  because  of  the  y.  of  evil  men
.38.  +  11.  the  y.  of  thy  waves  shall  be  stayed
41.  15.  his  scales  are  his  p.  shut  up  together

34.  he  is  a  king  over  all  the  children  ofy.

Psal.  10.  2.  the  wicked  in  hisy.  doth  persecute
4.  through  y.  of  his  countenance  will  not  seek  God
.31.  20.  thou  shalt  hide  them  from  the/;,  of  man
.36.  11.  let  not  the  foot  of  p.  come  against  me
59.  12.  let  them  even  be  taken  in  theiry.

73.  6.  thereforey.  com  passeth  them  about  as  chain
Prov.  8.  13.  y.  do  I  hate  ||  11.  2.  when  y.  cometh

1.3.  10.  only  by  y.  cometh  contention

14.  3.  in  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a  rod  ofy.

16.  18.  y.  goeth  before  destruction,  before  a  fall
21.  +  24.  who  dealeth  in  the  wrath  of  p.

29.  2.3.  a  man’s  y.  shall  bring  him  low
Isa.  9.  9.  that  say  in  the  y.  of  their  hearts

16.  6.  we  have  heard  of  the  y.  of  Moab,  even  ot

his  haughtiness  and  his  y.  Jer.  48.  29.

2.3.  9.  hath  purposed  to  stain  the  y.  of  all  glory
25.  11.  and  he  shall  bring  down  their  y.

28.  1.  woe  to  the  crown  ofy.  to  the  drunkards,  3.

Jer.  1.3.  9.  1  will  mar  the  p.  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem

17.  my  soul  shall  weep  in  secret  places  for  your y.

49.  16.  the  y.  of  thy  heart  hath  deceived  thee

50.  +  31.  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  O  thou  y.

+  32.  y.  shall  stumble  and  fall,  none  shall  raise
Ezek.  7. 10.  the  rod  hath  blossomed, y.  hath  budded
16.  49.  iniquity  of  thy  sister  Sodomy,  fuln.  of  bread
56.  Sodom  was  not  mentioned  in  the  day  of  thy  y.

30.  6.  and  the  y.  of  her  power  shall  come  down

O  2  371


P  R1


P  R  1


PRI


Dan.  4.  37.  those  that  walk  in  p.  he  is  able  to  abase
5.  20.  but  when  his  mind  was  hardened  inp.

Bos.  5.  5.  the  p.  of'  Israel  doth  testify,  7-  10.

bad.  3.  the/*,  of  thy  heart  hath  deceived  thee
Nah.  2.  +  2.  for  the  Lord  hath  turned  away  the  p.

of  Jacob  and  the  p.  of  Israel
Zeph.  2.  10.  this  shall  they  have  for  their  p.

3.  11.  1  will  take  them  away  that  rejoice  in  thy  p.
Zech.  9.  6.  1  will  cut  off  the  p.  of  the  Philistines

10.  11.  the  p.  of  Assyria  shall  be  brought  down

11.  .3.  roaring  of  lions,  for  thep.  of  Jordan  is  spoiled
Mark.  7.  22.  for  out  of  the  heart  proceedeth  p.

1  Tim.  3.  6.  lest  being  lifted  up  with  p.  he  fall  into
1  John  2.  16.  the  p.  of  life,  is  not  of  the  lather
PRIEST.

The  Priest  under  the  law  was  a  person  consecrated
and  ordained  of  God,  not  only  to  teach  the  people,
and  pray  for  them,  but  also  to  offer  up  sacrifices
for  his  own  sins,  and  those  of  the  people.  Lev.  4.

5,  6.  .  ,

The  Priesthood  was  not  annexed  to  a  certain  family ,
till  after  the  promulgation  of  the  law  of  Moses.
Before  that  time  the  first  born  of  every  family,
the  fathers,  the  princes,  the  kings,  were  priests,
born  in  their  city  and  in  their  house.  L  ain  and
Abel,  Noah,  Abraham,  and  lob,  Abimelech  and
Laban,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  offeied  themselves  their
own  sacrifices.  In  the  solemnity  of  the  covenant
that  the  Lord  made  with  his  people  at  the  foot  of
mount  Sinai,  A loses  performed  the  office  of  medi¬
ator,  and  young  men  were  chosen  from  among  the
children  of  Israel,  to  /  erform  the  office  of  priests,
Exod.  24.  5,  6.  But  after  that  the  Lord  had  chosen
the  tribe  of  Levi  to  serve  him  in  his  tabernacle,  and
that  the  priesthood  was  annexed  to  the  family  oj
Aaron,  then  the  right  of  offering  sacrifices  to  God
was  reserved  to  the  priests  alone  of  his  family,

N  um.  16.  40.

The  ordinary  priests  served  immediately  at  the  altar,
offered  the  sacrifices,  killed  and  .flayed  them,  and
poured  their  blood  at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  2  Chron.
29.  34. 1  35.  11.  'They  kept  up  a  continual  fire
upon  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifices,  and  in  the  lamps
of  the  golden  candlestick  that  was  in  the  holy  place  ;
they  kneaded  the  loaves  of  the  shew  bread,  baked
them,  offered  them  upon  the  golden  altar,  and
changed  them  every  sabbath  day.

One  of  the  chief  employments  of  the  priests,  next  to
attending  upon  the  sacrifices  and  the  service  of  the
temple,  was  the  instruction  of  the  people  ;  the  dis¬
tinguishing  the  several  sorts  of  leprosy,  the  causes
of  divorce,  the  waters  of jealousy ,  vows,  the  unclean¬
nesses  that  were  contracted  several  ways  ;  all  these
were  brought  before  the  priests.  Lev.  13.  13.  Num.

5.  14,  15.  Hos.4.  6.  Mai.  2. 7-

The  high  priest  only  had  the  privilege  of  entering
into  the  sanctuary  once  a  year,  which  was  the  day
of  solemn  expiation,  to  make  atonement  for  the  sins
of  the  whole  people.  Lev.  16.  2,  3,  4,  &c.  God  had
also  appropriated  to  his  person  the  oracle  of  his
truth;  so  that  when  he  was  habited  with  the  proper
ornaments  of  his  dignity,  and  with  the  Urim  and
Thummim.  he  gave  answers  to  the  questions  made
to  him,  and  God  discovered  to  him  secret  and  fu¬
ture  things,  P.xod.  28.30.

The  term  Priest  is  most  properly  given  to  Christ,  of
whom  the  high  priests  under  the  law  were  types
and  figures,  he  being  the  High  priest,  especially
ordained  of  God,  who,  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,
once  offered  by  himself,  and  also  by  his  interces¬
sion,  might  lec *  ncile  unto,  and  for  ever  keep  in
favour  with  God,  all  true  believers,  Ileb.  7.  17*  I
9.  1 1,  12, 24,  25.

The  word  is  also  applied  to  every  true  believer,  who
is  enabled  to  offer  up  himself  spiritual  sacrifices
of  prayer  and  praise  to  God,  through  Jesus  Christ,

1  Pet.  2.  5.  Rev.  1.  6.

Gen.  14. 18.  the  p.  of  the  most  high  Clod,  Heb.  7.  1 .
Exod.  2.  16.  the  p.  of  Midian  had" seven  daughters
29.  30.  that  son  that  is  p.  in  his  stead,  Lev.  16.  32.
Lev.  1.  9.  the  p.  shall  burn  it  all  on  the  altar,  13,
17.  I  2.  2,  9,  16. 1  3. 11, 16. 1  4.  10.  |  31.  35.  1
7.  5,  31.

12.  the  p.  shall  lay  them  in  order  on  the  wood
2.  8.  when  it  is  presented  to  the p.  he  shall  bring  it

4.  3.  if  the  jo.  that  is  anointed  do  sin  as  the  people

6.  the  p.  shall  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood,  17.

20  p.  shall  make  an  atonement  for  them,  26.  I  5.  6.

I  6.  7.  I  12.  8.  |  15.  15,  30.  |  16.  30.  |  19.  22.

25.  and  the  7).  shall  take  of  the  blood,  30,  34.

5.  8.  he  shall  bring  them  to  the  p.  who  shall  offer

6.  10.  the  p.  shall  put  on  his  linen  garment

7.8.  the  p.  shall  have  to  himself  the  skin  of  offering
9.  it  shall  be  the  p.  that  offereth  it,  14.  1 14.  13.

13.  3.  the  p.  shall  look  on  the  plague  in  the  skin,  5.
6,  17,  20,  21,25,  26,  27,  30,  31,  32.  the  p.  shall
look  on  him,  and  pronounce  him  unclean,  8,
1 1 , 20,  22,  25,  30,  44.

4.  thep.  shall  shut  him  up  seven  days,  5.  31,  33.
6.  p.  shall  pronounce  him  clean,  17.  23,  28,  34.

9.  brought  to  the  p.  ||  16.  come  to  the  p.  14.  2.

14. 11.  p.  that  maketh  him  clean  shall  present

16.  the  p.  shall  dip  his  right  finger  in  the  oil
35.  thatowneth  the  house  shall  come  and  tell  p.
48.  the  p.  shall  pronounce  the  house  clean

21.  9.  it  the  daughter  of  a  p.  profane  herself

22.  11.  if  thep.  buy  any  soul  with  his  money

23.  10.  ye  shall  bring  a  sheaf  of  first-fruits  to  the  p.
11.  the  p.  shall  wave  it  before  the  Lord

2J.  8.  thep.  shall  value  him,  according  to  ability
Num.  5.8.  let  the  trespass  be  recompensed  to  thep.
15.  then  the  man  shall  bring  his  wife  to  thep.

30.  thep.  shall  execute  upon  her  all  this  law
6.  20.  this  is  holy  for  the  p.  with  the  wave-breast

19.  7-  the  p.  shall  wash  and  be  unclean  until  even
35.  32.  shall  not  dwell  in  land  till  death  of  high p.
Dent.  17.  12.  the  man  that  will  not  hearken  trip.

20.  2.  are  come  nigh  to  battle,  the  p.  shall  approach

26.  3.  thou  shaltgo  to  the  p.  in  those  days
Judg.  17-  5.  one  of  his  sons,  who  became  his  p.

10.  dwell  with  me,  and  be  to  me  a  father  and  a p.
13. 1..  do  me  good,  seeing  1  have  Levite  to  my  p.

372


Judg.  18.  4.  Micah  hath  hired  me,  and  I  am  his  p.

19.  be  to  us  ap.  and  a  father,  better  be  ap.

1  Sam.  2.  14.  all  that  the  p.  took  for  himself

15.  and  said,  give  flesh  to  roast  for  the  p.

28.  did  1  choose  him  out  of  Israel  to  be  my  p.  ?

35.  and  I  will  raise  me  up  a  faithful  p.

14.  19.  while  Saul  talked  to  the  p.  the  noise

36.  then  said  the  p.  let  us  draw  near  to  God

21.  4.  the  p.  answered,  there  is  no  common  bread

6.  so  the  p.  gave  him  hallowed  bread

1  Kings  2.  27.  So  lorn.  thrust  Abiathar  from  beingp.

2  Kings  11. 15.  thep.  had  said,  let  her  not  be  slain
2  Chron.  13.  9.  the  same  may  be  a  p.  of  them  that

are  no  gods,  but  as  for  us,  the  Lord  is  our  God

15.  3.  Israel  hath  been  without  a  teaching p.

Ezra  2.  63.  till  there  stood  up  ap.  A 'eh.  7.  65.

Psal.  110.  4.  L.  hath  sworn,  thou  art  ap.  for  ever

after  the  order  of  Melchis.  Heb.  5.  6. 17-  17 >  21.
Isa.  8.2.  1  took  faithful  witnesses,  Uriah  thep.

24.  2.  as  with  the  people,  so  with  the  p.

28.  7.  the  p.  and  the  prophet  have  erred  thro’  wine
Jer.  6. 13.  to  the  p.  every  one  dealeth  falsely,  8.  10.

14.  18.  prophet  and  p.  go  to  a  land  they  know  not

18.  18.  the  law  shall  not  perish  from  the  p.

23.  11.  for  both  prophet  and  p.  are  profane

33.  when  a  prophet  and  p.  shall  ask  thee,  34.

29.  26.  the  Lord  made  thee  p.  instead  of  Jehoiada
Lam.  2.  6.  and  hath  despised  the  king  and  the  p.

20.  shall  the  p.  and  prophet  be  slain  in  sanctuary
Ezek.  7.  26.  but  the  law  shall  perish  from  the  p.

44.  13.  shall  not  come  near  to  do  the  office  of  a  p.

21.  nor  shall  any  p.  drink  wine  when  they  enter

22.  or  shall  take  a  widow  that  had  ap.  Before

30.  ye  give  to  the  p.  the  first  of  your  dough

31.  the  p.  shrill  not  eat  of  any  thine  that  is  torn
Bos.  4.  4.  this  people,  as  they  that  strive  with  the  p.

6.  1  will  reject  thee,  thou  shalt  be  no  p.  to  me

9.  and  there  shall  be  like  people  likep.

Amos  7.  It),  the  p.  of  Pethel  sent  to  Jeroboam
Zech.  6.  13.  and  he  shall  be  a  p.  on  his  throne
Mai.  2.  7.  the  7.  lips  should  keep  knowledge
Mat.  8.  4.  see  thou  tell  no  man,  but  go  thy  way,

shew  thyself  to  the  p.  Mark  1.  44.  Luke  5.  14.
Luke  1.  5.  a  certain p.  named  /acharias,  and  his  wife

10.  31.  by  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  p.
Acts  14.  13.  p.  of  Jupiter  brought  oxen  and  garlands
Heb.  7.  3.  like  Son  of  God,  abideth  a  p.  continually

11.  what  need  another  p.  should  rise  after  order

15.  after  similitude  Mtlchisedec  ariseth  anoth.  p.
20.  as  not  without  an  oath  he  was  made  p.

8.  4.  if  he  were  on  earth,  he  should  not  be  a  p.

10.  11.  every  p.  standeth  daily  ministering

See  Chief.

High  P  R  1  EST.

Lev.  21.  10.  the  high  p.  shall  not  uncover  his  head
Num.  35.  25.  he  shall  abide  in  the  city  of  refuge
till  the  death  of  the  high  p.  Josh.  20.  6.

2  Kings  12.  10.  when  much  money  in  chest,  the
high  p.  came  and  put  it  in  bags,  2  Chr.  24.  11.

22.  4.  go  to  Hilkiah  the  high  p.  that  he  may  sum
Neh.  3.  1 .  Eliashib  the  high  p.  rose  up  with  brethren
Zech.  3.  1.  Joshua  the  high  p.  standing,  8.  1  6.  11.
Mat.  26.  3.  to  the  palace  of  the  high  p.  Luke  22.54.
51.  one  of  them  struck  a  servant  of  the  high  p.

and  smote  off  his  ear,  Luke  22.  50.  John  18.  10.
57.  led  him  to  Caiaphas  the  high  p.  John  18.  24.
65.  the  high  p.  rent  his  clothes,  Mark  14.  63.

Mark  2.  26.  in  the  days  of  Abiathar  the  high  p.

John  11.  49.  Caiaphas  being  high  p.  51.1  18.  13.

18.  15.  that  disciple  was  known  to  the  high  p.

22.  saying,  answerest  thou  the  high  p.  so  ?

Acts  4.  6.  as  many  as  were  of  the  kindred  of  high  p.
7.1.  then  said  the  hiyhp.  are  these  things  so  ?

9.  1.  Saul  went  to  the  high  p.  and  desired  letters

22.  5.  as  also  the  high  p.  doth  bear  me  witness

23.  4.  they  said,  revilest  thou  God’s  high  p.  '{

Ileb.  2.  17.  that  he  might  be  a  faithful  high  p.

3.  1.  consider  Apostle  High  P.  of  our  profession

4.  14.  we  have  great  h.p.  that  is  passed  into  heav.

15.  we  have  not  a  h.  p.  which  cannot  be  touched

5.  1.  for  every  high  p.  taken  from  among  men

5.  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be  a  high  p.

10.  called  an  high  p.  after  order  of  Melch.  6.  20.
7. 26.  such  an  h.  p.  became  us,  who  is  holy,  harml.

8.  1.  we  have  such  an  high  p.  who  is  set  on  throne

3.  every  high  p.  is  ordained  to  offer  gifts  and  sacr.

9.  7.  but  into  the  second  went  the  high  p.  alone

1 1 .  Christ  being  come  an  high  p.  of  good  things

25.  as  the  high  p.  entereth  into  the  holy  place

10.  21.  having  an  high  p.  over  the  house  of  God
13.  11.  blood  is  brought  into  sanctuary  by  high  p.

See  Office.

PRI  ESTS.

Gen.  47  .  22.  the  land  of  the  p.  bought  he  not,  for
the  p.  had  a  portion  assigned  them  of  Pharaoh

26.  except  the  land  of  the  p.  only,  not  Pharaoh’s
Exod.  19.  6.  ye  shall  be  to  me  a  kingdom  ofp.

Lev.  1.  11.  thep.  shall  sprinkle  the  blood,  3.  2.

5. 13.  and  the  remnant  shall  be  thep.  as  an  offering

6.  29.  all  the  males  among  the  p.  shall  eat  thereof
13.  2.  or  brought  to  one  of  his  sons  the  p.

16.  33.  he  shall  make  an  atonement  for  the  p.

22.  10.  a  sojourner  of  the  p.  shall  not  eat

12.  if  p.  daughter  be  married  ||  13.  if  widow

23.  20.  they  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord  for  the  p.

27.  21.  the  "possession  thereof  shall  be  thep.

Deut.  18.  3.  this  hall  be  the  p.  due  from  the  people

19.17.  shall  stand  beforep.  and  judges  thatshall  be
Josh.  3.  17.  the  p.  that  bare  the  ark  stood  firm

4.  3.  take  you  out  where  the  p.  feet  stood,  9.

6.  4.  thep.’ bare  seven  trumpets  of  rams’  horns,  13.

12.  and  the  p.  took  up  the  ark  of  the  Lord
Judg.  18.  30.  he  and  his  sons  were  p.  to  tribe  of  Dan
1  Sam.  1.  3.  Hophni  and  Phinehas  the  p.  were  there

5.  5.  nor  the  p.  of  Dagon  tread  on  the  threshold

6.  2.  the  Philistines  called  for  the  p.  anti  d  viners
22.  17.  king  said,  turn  anti  slay  the  p.  of  the  Lord

18.  said  to  Doeg,  turn  thou  and  fall  on  thep.

21.  shewed  David,  that  Saul  had  slain  Lord  s  p.

1  Kings  8.  3.  the  elders  ami  the  p.  took  up  the  ark
12.  31.  Jeroboam  madep.  of  tVie  lowest  of  the
people  who  were  not  of  thesonsof  Levi,  13.  33.


1  Kin.  13.  2.  on  thee  shall  he  offer  the  p.  ofhign  plae.

^  Kings  10.  11.  Jehu  slew  Ahab’sp.  he  left  him  none

19.  call  me  all  Baal’s  p.  let  none  be  wanting

12.  6.  p.  had  not  repaired  breaches  of  the  house

17.  27.  carry  thither  one  of  the  p.  ye  brought

23.  5.  he  put  down  idolatrousp.  of  kingof  Judah

20.  and  he  slew  all  the  p.  of  the  high  places

2  Chron.  4.  6.  the  sea  was  for  the  p.  to  wash  in

5.  12.  an  bund,  twenty  p.  sounding  with  trumpets
14.  thep.  could  not  stand  to  minister  for  the  cloud

6.  41.  let  tliyp.  be  clothed  with  salvation

8.  14.  he  appointed  the  courses  of  the  p.

11.  15.  he  ordained  him  p.  for  the  high  places

13.  9.  have  ye  not  cast  out  the  p.  of  the  Lord  r

12.  and  his  p.  with  trumpets  to  cry  alarm

23.  6.  none  came  into  the  house  of  Lord  save  the
26.  17.  with  him  fourscore  p.  of  the  Lord

19.  while  Uzziah  was  wroth  with  the  p.

29.  34.  but  the  p.  were  too  few,  they  could  not  slay

30.  3.p.  bad  not  sanctified  themselves  sufficiently

34.  5.  Josiah  burnt  the  bones  ot  the  p.

35.  2.  Josiah  set  the  p.  in  their  charges

8.  gave  it  to  the  p.  tor  the  passover-offerings
Ezra  6.  18.  they  set  the  p.  in  their  divisions

20.  p.  were  purified,  and  killed  the  passover  for  p.

7.  16.  of  the  people  and p.  offering  willingly

9.  7.  and  our  p.  been  delivered  into  hand  of  kings
Neh.  2. 16.  nor  had  I  as  yet  told  it  to  the  p.

3.  22.  after  him  repaired  the  p.  men  of  the  plain
9.  32.  the  trouble  that  hath  come  on  us  and  our p.

34.  neither  have  we  nor  our  p.  kept  thy  law

13.  5.  where  they  laid  the  offerings  of  the  p.

Psal.  78. 64.  their  p.  fell  by  the  sword,  their  widows
99.  6.  Moses  and  Aaron  among  his  p.  and  Samuel
132.  9.  let  thy  p.  be  clothed  with  righteousness

16.  1  will  clothe  her  p.  with  salvation
Isa.  37.  2.  he  sent  elders  ofp.  covered  with  sackcloth
61.  6.  but  ye  shall  be  named  the  p.  of  the  Lord
Jer.  1. 18.  against  the  p.  thereof  and  people  of  land

2.  8.  the  p.  said  not,  where  is  the  Lord  f

26.  their  p.  ashamed  ||  4.  9.  their  p.  astonished

5.  31.  and  the  p.  bare  rule  by  their  means

8.  1.  the  bones  of  thep.  they  shall  bring  out

13.  13.  I  will  fill  the  p.  with  drunkenness

31.  14.  1  will  satiate  the  souls  of  the  p.  withfatnea

32.  32.  to  provoke  me  to  anger,  they  and  theirp.

48.  7.  shall  go  into  captivity  with  his  p.  49.  3.

Lam.  1.  4.  her  p.  sigh,  her  virgins  are  afflicted

19.  my  p.  and  mine  elders  gave  up  the  ghost

4.  13.  for  the  iniquities  of  her  p.  that  shed  blood

16.  they  respected  not  the  persons  of  the  p.

Eze/c.  22.  26.  her  p.  violated  my  law,  and  profaned
40.  45.  he  said,  this  chamber  is  for  the  p.

44.  30.  shall  be  for  the  p.  45.  4.  |  48.  10,  11.

Ilos.  5.  1.  hear  this,  O  p.  and  hearken,  O  Israel

6.  9.  company  ofp.  murder  in  the  way  by  consent
Joel  1.  9.  p.  the  Lord’s  ministers  mourn,  13.  |  2. 17
Mic.  3.  11.  thep.  thereof  teach  for  hire

Zeph.  1.  4.  1  will  cut  off  the  names  of  the  p.

3.  4.  her  p.  have  polluted  the  sanctuary'

Bag.  2.  11.  ask  now  thep.  concerning  the  law
Mai.  1.  6.  to  you,  O  p.  that  despise  my  name

2. 1.  and  now,  O  p.  this  commandment  is  for  you
Mat.  12.  4.  not  lawful  but  only  for  the  p.  to  eat

5.  the  p.  in  tbe  temple  profane  the  sabbath,  and
are  blameless,  Mark  2.26.  Luke  c.  4.
Mark  2.  26.  which  is  not  lawful  to  eat  but  for  the  p.
Luke  17.  14.  go  shew  yourselves  to  the  p.

Acts  4.  1.  the  p.  and  captain  came  upon  them

6.  7.  a  company  of  p.  were  obedient  to  the,  faith

19.  14.  the  sons  of  Sceva  chief  ot  thep.  did  so
Ileb.  7.21.  those p.  were  made  without  an  oath

23. theytruly  were  many  p.  not  suffered  to  continue

8.  4.  seeing  there  are  p.  that  offer  gifts  by  law

9.  6.  the  p.  went  always  into  the  first  tabernacle
Lev.  1.  6.  hath  made  us  kings  and p.  to  God, 5.  10.

20.  6.  shall  be  p.  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  reign

See  Chief,  Levites,  Office.

High  PRIESTS.

Luke  3.  2.  Annas  and  Caiaphas  were  high  p.

Heb.  7.  27.  needeth  not  daily  as  those  highp.  tooftei

28.  for  the  law  maketh  men  highp.  which  have
PRIESTHOOD.

Exod.  40. 15.  for  their  anointing  shall  be  an  everlast
ing  p.  throughout  their  generations,  Num.  25.  IS.
Num.  16.  10.  and  seek  ye  the  p.  also  ?

18.  1.  thou  and  sons  shall  bear  iniquity  of  yourp.
Josh.  18.  7.  for p.  of  the  Lord  is  their  inheritance
1  Sam.  2.  t  36.  put  me  into  somewhat  about  thep.
Ezra  2.  62.  as  polluted  from  the p.  Neh.  7.  64.

Neh.  13.  29.  they  defiled  the  p.  the  covenant  ofp.
Heb.  7.  5.  they  of  Levi,  who  receive  the  office  ot  p.

11.  if  perfection  were  by  the  Levitical  p.

12.  for  the  p.  being  changed,  there  is  made

14.  Moses  spake  nothing  concerning  the  p.

24.  but  this  man  hath  an  unchangeable  p.

1  Pet.  2.  5.  an  holy  p.  ||  9.  ye  are  a  royalp.

PRINCE.

This  name  is  given,  [1]  To  God,  who  is  the  supreme
Euler  and  Governor,  Dan.  8.  11.  [2]  To  Christ,
who  is  called  the  Prince  of  Peace,  Isa.  9.  6.  Be
is  the  only  purchaser  and  procurer  oj  peace  between
God  and  men,  Isa.  53.  5.  and  of  peace  between
men  and  men,  between  Jews  and  Gentiles,  Lpn.  -

15.  and  he  left  peace  as  his  legacy  to  his  disciples,

John  14.  27-  Be  is  called  the  Prince  ot  Life,  Acts-
3.  15.  As  God,  he  is  the  author  of  our  temporal
life,  in  whom  we  live  and  move,  and  in  whose  hands
is  our  breath  ;  and  as  Mediator,  he  is  the  guide  and
way  to  eternal  life,  John  14.6.  He  is  also  called ,
the  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,  Rev.  1.  5.  Be,
as  King,  rules  over  all,  even  his  greatest  and  most
powerful  enemies.  [3]  To  the  chief  of  the  priests,
called  the  princes  of  the  sanctuary,  Isa.  43.  -8-
[4]  To  the  Roman  emperor,  Dan.  9-  26.  L5J
To  men  of  princely  excellency  and  worth,  Eccl.lt*.
7.  [6]  To  the  nobles,  counsellors ,  and  officers  in  a

kingdom ,  Isa.  10.  8.  [7]  To  the  chief,  or  principal
men  of  families,  or  tribes,  Num.  17-  2.  [8J  B
the  devil,  called  the  prince  of  this  world.  John  \i.
31.  who  boasts  of  having  all  the  kingdoms  oj  tnt
earth  at  his  disposal,  Mat.  4.  9.


P  RI

Gen.  23.  6.  thou  art  a  mighty  p.  amongst  us
32.  28.  as  a  p.  hast  thou  power  with  God  and  men
34.  2.  when  Shechem,  p.  of  the  country,  saw  her
41.  +  45.  he  gave  him  to  wife  Asenath  tne  daughter
Of  Potipherah,  p.  of  On,  t  50.  I  46.  t  20.
Exod.  2.  14.  who  made  thee  a  man,  a  p.  over  us  ?

1 16.  thep.  of  Midian  had  seven  daughters
Num.  7-  11.  each  p.  shall  offer  on  his  day

16.  13.  except  make  thyself  altogether  a  p.  over  us

17.  6.  for  each  p.  a  rod,  even  twelve  rods

25. 18.  Cozbi  the  daughter  of  a  p.  of  Midian

34.  18.  take  one  p.  of  every  tribe  to  divide  the  land
Josh.  5. 1 14.  as  a  p.  of  host  of  the  Lord  am  I  come
22. 14.  of  each  chief  house  up.  through  all  Israel
2  Sam.  3.  38.  know  ye  not  there  is  a  p.  fallen  in  Israel

20.  +  26.  Ira  the  Jairite  was  ay,  about  David
1  Kings  11.  34.  I  will  make  him  p.  all  his  days

14.  7-  and  made  thee  ay.  over  my  people.  16.  2.
Ezra  1.8.  numbered  to  Sheshbazzar  thep.  of  Judah
Job  21. 28.  for  ye  say,  where  is  the  house  of  the  p.  ?

31.  37-  as  ay.  would  I  go  near  to  him
Prov.  14.  28.  but  in  want  of  people  is  destruct.  ofp.
17-7.  much  less  do  lying  lips  become  ay.

25.  7-  shouldestbe  put  lower  in  presence  of  the  p.

15.  by  long  forbearing  is  a  p.  persuaded

28.  lfi.p.  that  wanteth  understand,  is  an  oppressor
Cane. 7. 1.  how  beautiful  are  thy  feet,  Op.  daughter !
Isa.  9-  6.  the  P.  of  peace  |J  24.  1 2.  so  with  the  p.

Jer.  51.  59.  and  this  Seraiah  was  a  quiet  p.

Ezek.  7.  27.  the  p.  shall  be  clothed  with  desolation

12. 10.  this  burden  concerned)  the  p.  in  Jerusalem

12.  and  p.  shall  bear  on  his  shoulder  in  twilight

21. 25.  thou  profane  wicked  p.  of  Isr.  day  is  come
28.  2.  son  of  man,  say  to  the  p.  of  Tyrus

30.  13.  be  no  more  a  p.  of  the  land  of  Egypt
34.24.  and  my  servant  David  ap.  among  them

37.  25.  my  servant  David  shall  be  their  p.  for  evei

38.2.  son  of  man,  prophesy  against  Gog,  Magog,
the  chief  p.  of  Meshecn  and  Tubal,  3.  I  39.  1.

+4.  3.  this  gate  is  for  the  p.  the  p.  shall  sit  in  it

45.  7-  and  a  portion  shall  be  for  the  p.  on  one  side
17.  it  shall  be  the  p.  part  to  give  burnt  offerings

22.  on  that  day  shall  the  p.  prepare  a  bullock

46.  2.  the  p.  shall  enter  by  the  way  of  the  porch

4.  the  burnt  offering  that  the  p.  shall  offer

8.  and  when  the  p.  shall  enter  he  shall  go  in
10.  and  the  p.  in  the  midst  of  them,  shall  go  in

12.  when  p.  prepares  a  voluntary  burnt  offering

16.  if  the  p.  give  a  gift  to  any  of  his  sons

17.  after,  it  shall  return  to  thep.  but  inheritance

18.  p.  shall  not  take  of  the  people’s  inheritance
48.  21.  residue  shall  be  for  the  p.  on  the  one  side
Dan.  1.  7.  to  whom  p.  of  the  eunuchs  gave  names

8.  he  requested  of  p.  of  the  eunuchs  not  to  defile

9.  Daniel  in  favour  with  the  p.  of  the  eunuchs

8. 11.  he  magnified  himself  even  to  p.  of  the  host

25. _he  shall  also  stand  up  ag.  the  p.  of  princes

9. 25.  to  build  Jerusalem,  unto  the  Messiah,  the  P.

26.  people  of  the  p.  that  shall  come  shall  destroy

10.  13.  but  the  p.  of  Persia  withstood  me

20.  to  fight  with  p.  of  Persia,  p.  of  Grecia  come

21.  none  holdeth  with  me,  but  Michael  your  p.

11. 18.  but  a  p.  for  his  own  behalf  shall  cause

22.  shall  be  broken,  also  the  p.  of  the  covenant

12.  1.  then  shall  Michael  stand  up,  the  great p.
Hos.  3. 4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  a p.

12. 1 3.  Jacob  by  his  strength  was  a  p.  with  God
Mic.  7.  3.  the  p.  and  the  judge  ask  for  a  reward
Mat.  9.  34.  the  Pharisees  said,  he  casteth  out  devils

by  the  p.  of  devils,  12.  24.  Mark  3.  22.
John  12.  31.  the  p.  of  this  world  shall  be  cast  out

14.  30.  for  the  p.  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath

16. 11.  because  the  p.  of  this  world  is  judged

Aces  3. 15.  and  killed  P.  of  life  whom  God  raised
5.31.  him  hath  God  exalted  to  be  a  P.  and  Saviour
Eph.  2.  2.  according  to  p.  of  the  power  of  the  air
tier.  1.  5.  Jesus  Christ  the  P.  of  kings  of  the  earth
_  PRINCES.

Gen.  12. 15.  the  p.  also  of  Pharaoh  saw  Sarai
17.20.  twelve  p.  shall  Ishmael  beget,  25.  16.

47.  +  22.  the  land  of  thep.  bought  he  not,  +26.

Exod.  12.  +  12.  and  against  all  the  p.  of  Egypt  will  I

execute  judgment,  I  am  the  Lord
yum.  7.  3.  a  waggon  for  twop.  ||  10.  the  p.  offered
16.  2.  rose  up  250p.  ||  21. 18.  the  p.  digged  a  well
*.2.^8.  and  tnep.  of  Moab  abode  with  Balaam

15.  Balak  sent  yet  again  p.  more  honourable  than
24.+  17.  sceptre  outof  Israel  shall  smite  p.  of  Moab

Josh.  9. 15.  p.  of  the  congregation  sware  to  them

13.  21.  whom  Moses  smote  with  the  p.  of  Midian

22.14.  with  Phinehas  ten  p.  sent  to  Reuben
Judo.  5.  3.  hear,  O  ye  kings,  give  ear,  Q  ye  p.

15.  and  thep.  of  lssachar  were  with  Deborah

7.25.  they  took  the  two  p.  of  the  Midianites

14.  he  described  to  him  the  p.  of  Succoth

nnm'  ra‘set''  the  poor,  to  set  them  amongp.

29.4.  the  p.  of  the  Philistines  were  wroth
~  Sam.  8.  f  18.  and  David’s  sons  were  p.

19;  + 6.  thatp.  or  servants  are  not  to  thee
l  Kings  20. 14.  even  by  the  young  men  of  the  p.
Xc.hron.  4.  38.  these  were  p.  in  their  families
28-21.  p.  and  people  will  be  at  thy  command
-Ehron.  28.  14.  armed  men  left  spoil  before  the  p.

30. 12.  one  heart  to  do  the  commandment  of  p.

~4.  and  thep.  gave  a  thousand  bullocks

8-  hisp.  gave  willingly  to  the  people  to  priests

36. 18.  treasures  of  his  p.  brought  to  Babylon
Ezra  7.  28.  and  before  all  the  king’s  mighty  p.

9.2.  yea,  the  hand  of  the  p.  hath  been  chief
10.  8.  come  according  to  the  counsel  of  thep.

Sen.  9.  34.  neither  have  our  p.  kept  thy  law

38.  our  p.  l.evites,  and  priests  seal  to  it
Esth.  1,  3.  he  made  a  feast  to  all  his  p.  2.  18.

J.  11.  how  he  had  advanced  him  above  the  p.
o.  9.  to  the  hand  of  one  of  the  king’s  noble  p.

10  1  *la<^  been  at  rest  with  p.  that  had  gold

*-•  49.  leadeth  p.  away  spoiled,  overthrows  mighty

21.  he  poureth  contempt  on  p.  and  weakeneth
“O’ 9.  the p.  refrained  talking,  and  laid  their  hands

34. 18.  is  it  tit  to  say  to  p.  ye  are  ungodly  ?

19.  to  him  that  accepteth  not  the  persons  of  p.
r’sal.  45.  16.  thou  mayest  makep.  in  all  the  earth


P  R  J

Psal.  47-  9.  the  p.  of  the  people  are  gathered  toge.
68.  27.  the  p.  ot  Zebulun,  thep.  of  Naphtali

31.  p.  shall  come  out  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia  stretch
76.  12.  he  shall  cut  off  the  spirit  of  p.  he  is  terrible
82.  7.  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one  of  the  p.

105.  22.  to  bind  hisp.  at  his  pleasure,  and  teach
107.  40.  he  poureth  contempt  upon  p.  and  causeth
113.  8.  he  may  set  him  with  p.  even  with  the  p.

1 18.  9.  to  trust  in  I.ord,  than  to  put  confidence  in  p.

119.  23.  p.  also  did  sit  and  speak  against  me
161.  p.  have  persecuted  me  without  a  cause

146.  3.  put  not  your  trust  in  p.  nor  in  son  of  man
148.  11.  p.  and  all  judges  of  the  earth,  praise
Prov.  8.  15.  by  me  p.  decree  justice  ||  16.  p.  rule
17.  26.  it  is  not  good  to  strike  p.  for  equity
19.  10.  much  less  for  a  servant  to  rule  over  p.

28.  2.  for  transgression,  many  are  the  p.  thereof

31.  4.  it  is  not  for  p.  to  drink  strong  drink
Eccl.  10.  7.  p.  walking  as  servants  on  the  earth

16.  O  land,  when  thy  p.  eat  in  the  morning

17.  blessed  art  thou,  when  thyp.  eat  in  dueseason
Isa.  1.  23.  thy  p.  are  rebellious  and  thieves

3.  4.  and  I  will  give  children  to  be  their  p.

14.  the  Lord  will  enter  into  judgment  with  thep.
10.  8.  are  not  my  p.  altogether  kings  ?

19.  11.  p.  of  Zoan  fools,  p.  of  Noah  deceived,  13.
21.  5.  arise,  yep.  and  anoint  the  shield

23.  8.  against  Tyre,  whose  merchants  are  p.

30.  4.  hisp.  were  at  Ziaan,  his  ambassadors  came
31.9.  his  p.  shall  be  afraid  of  the  ensign

32.  1.  and  p.  shall  rule  in  judgment
34.  12.  and  all  her  p.  shall  be  nothing

40.  23.  that  bringeth  the  p.  to  nothing

41.  25.  and  he  shall  come  upon  p.  as  on  mortar

43.  28.  1  have  profaned  the  p.  of  the  sanctuary
49.  7-  P-  also  shall  worship  because  of  the  Lord

Jer.  1.  18.  made  thee  brasen  walls  against  the  p.

2.  26.  they,  their  kings  and  p.  are  ashamed

4.  9.  the  heart  of  the  p.  shall  be  astonished

8.  1.  they  shall  bring  out  the  bones  of  his  p.

17-  25.  kings  and  p.  sitting  on  the  throne  of  David

24.  8.  so  will  1  give  the  king  of  Judah  and  his  p.
26.  16.  the  p.  said,  this  man  is  not  worthy  to  die

32.  32.  they  and  their  kings  and  p.  provoke  me
34.  21.  his  p.  I  will  give  to  their  enemies

37.  15.  the  p.  were  wroth  with  Jeremiah

38.  17.  if  thou  go  forth  to  the  king  of  Babylon’sp.

25.  if  the  p.  hear  that  L  have  talked  with  thee

44.  21.  the  incense  that  ye  and  yourp.  burn

48.  7.  Chemosh  and  his  p.  go  into  captivity,  49.  3.

49.  38.  1  will  destroy  from  thence  thep.

50.  35.  a  sword  is  on  her  p.  and  her  wise  men

51.  5'.- 1  will  make  drunk  herp.  and  wise  men
Lam.  1.  6.  her  p.  are  become  like  harts  that  find

2.  2.  he  hath  polluted  the  kingdom  andp.  thereof

9.  her  kings  and  p.  are  among  the  Gentiles

5.  12.  p.  are  hanged  up  by  their  hand

Ezek.  22.  27.  herp.  like  wolves  ravening  the  prey

23.  15.  in  dyed  attire,  all  of  them  p.  to'look  to
32.  29.  Edom  and  herp.  with  their  might

30.  there  the  p.  of  the  north,  all  of  them

39.  18.  and  ye  shall  drink  the  blood  of  the  p.

45.  8.  my  p.  shall  no  more  oppress  my  people
Dan.  3.  2.  the  king  sent  to  gather  together  the  p.

6.  1.  pleased  to  set  over  the  kingdom  120  p.

3.  this  Daniel  was  preferred  above  the  p.

4.  the  p.  sought  to  find  occasion  against  Daniel

8.  25.  he  shall  stand  up  against  the  prince  of  p.

9.  6.  the  prophets  who  spake  in  thy  name  to  ourp.
8.  confusion  of  face  to  ourp.  and  fathers

10.  13.  Michael  one  of  the  chief  p.  came  to  me
11.5.  one  of  his  p.  shall  be  strong  above  him

Hos.  7.  3.  they  make  p.  glad  with  their  lies

5.  the  p.  have  made  him  sick  with  wine
16.  their  p.  shall  fall  by  the  sword  for  rage

8.  4.  they  have  made  p.  and  1  knew  it  not

10.  shall  sorrow  for  the  burthen  of  the  king  of  p.

9.  15.  I  love  them  no  more,  all  theirp.  are  revolvers

13.  10.  of  whom  thou  saidst,  give,  me  a  king  and  p.

Amos  1. 15.  their  king  go  into  captivity,  he  and  hisp.
Mic.  3.  1.  hear,  ye  p.  of  the  house  of  Israel,  9.

5.  +  5.  shall  raise  against  him  eight  p.  of  men
Hab.  1.  10.  the  p.  shall  be  a  scorn Unto  them
Zeph.  1.  8.  I  will  punish  the  p.  and  king’s  children

3.  3.  her  p.  within  her  are  roaring  lions

Mat.  20.  25.  tlie  p.  of  Gentiles  exercise  dominion

1  Cor.  2.  6.  nor  the  wisdom  of  the  p.  of  this  world
8.  which  none  of  the  p.  of  this  world  knew

All  the  PRINCES.

2  R  ings  24.  14.  carried  away  a.  t.  p.  and  migh.  men

1  Chron.  29.  24.  and  all  the  p.  submitted  themselves

2  Chron.  24.  23.  and  destroyed  all  the  p.  of  people
Esth.  1.  16.  hath  done  wrong  to  all  the  p.  and  peo.

3.  1.  set  his  seat  above  all  the  p.  that  were  with  him
Psal.  83.  11.  all  their  p.  as  Zebah  and  Zalmunna
Jer.  26.  12.  Jeremiah  spake  to  all  the  p.  and  people
36.  21.  Jehudi  read  it  in  the  ears  of  all  the  p.

Ezek.  26.  16.  then  all  the  p.  of  the  sea  came  down
Amos  2.  3.  and  will  slay  all  the  p.  thereof  with  him
See  Israel.

PRINCES  of  Judah.

Neh.  12.  31.  then  1  brought  up  p.  of  Judah  on  wall
Psal.  68.  27.  there  is  p,  of  Judah,  and  their  counsel.
Jer.  52. 10.  he  slew  all  the  p.  of  Judah  in  Riblah
Hos.  5.  10.  p.  of  Judah  are  like  to  them  that  remove
Mat.  2.  6.  thou  art  not  the  least  among  p.  of  Judah
PRINCESS.

Lam.  1.  l.  she  that  was  p.  among  the  provinces
PRINCESSES.

1  Kings  11.  3.  Solomon  had  700  wives  p.

Isa.  49.  +  23.  p.  shall  be  thy  nursing  mothers
PRINCIPAL.

Exod.  30.  23.  take  thou  also  unto  thee  p.  spices
Lev.  6.  5.  he  shall  even  restore  it  in  the  p.

Num.  5.  7.  recompense  his  trespass  with  thep.

1  Rings  4.  5.  Zabud  son  of  Nathan  wasp,  officer

2  Kings  25.  19.  thep.  scribe  of  the  host,  Jer.  52.  25.

1  Chron.  24.  6.  one  p.  household  taken  for  Eleazar

31.  the  priests  even  p.  fathers  cast  lots

27.  +  5.  Benaiah  son  of  Jehoiada  was  a  p.  officer
Neh.  11.  17.  Mattaniah  p.  to  begin  thanksgiving
Job  30.  +  15.  they  pursue  my  p.  one  as  the  "wind


P  RI

Prov.  1.  +7.  fear  of  the  L.  is  the  p.  part  of  wisdom

4.  7.  wisdom  is  the  p.  thing,  therefore  get  wisdom
Isa.  16.8.  have  broken  down  the  p.  plants  thereof

28.  25.  and  cast  in  the  p.  wheat  and  barley

Jer.  25.  34.  wallow  in  the  ashes,  ye  p.  of  the  flock
35.  no  way  to  fly,  nor  the  p.  of  the  flock  escape

38.  +  14.  the  king  took  Jeremiah  into  the  p.  entrv
Ezek.  47.  +  12.  it  shall  bring  forthp.  fruit

Mic.  5.5.  there  we  shall  raise  ag.  him  eight  p.  men
Acts<25.  23.  p.  men  of  the  city  entered  with  Agrippa
PRINCIPALITY,  TIES.

Jer.  13.18.  for  yourp.  shall  comedown,  the  crown
Rom.  8.  38.  angels, p.  nor  powers  be  able  to  separate
Eph.  1.  21.  far  above  all  p.  power,  and  might
3.  10.  that  now  to  the p.  might  be  known  wisdom

6.  12.  we  wrestle  against  p.  and  against  powers
Col.  l.  16.  p.  were  created  by  him  and  for  him
2.  10.  which  is  the  head  of  all  p.  and  power

15.  having  spoiled  p.  he  made  a  shew  of  them
Tit.  3. 1.  put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  top.

Jude.  +  6.  the  angels  which  kept  not  theirp.
PRINCIPLES.

Neb.  5. 12.  have  need  that  one  teach  you  the  first  p.

6.  1.  leaving  the  p.  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ

PRINT.

Lev.  19.  28.  ye  shall  not  p.  any  marks  upon  you
PRINT.

Job  13.  27.  thou  settest  a  p.  on  the  heels  of  my  feet
John  20.  25.  except  1  see  in  his  hands  the  p.  of  the
nails,  and  put  my  finger  into  thep.  of  the  nails
PRINTED.

Job  19.  23.  O  that  my  words  were  p.  in  a  book  !
PRISON

Signifies,  [1]  A  place  to  confine  debtors  or  male¬
factors,  Mat.  18.  30.  Luke  23.  19.  [2]  A  low,  ob¬
scure,  and  base  condition,  Eccl.  4.  14.  [3]  The
cave  wherein,  as  in  a  prison,  David  hid  himself,
Psal.  142.  7-  [4]  That  spiritual  thraldom  and

bondage  in  which  sinners  are  kept  by  Satan,  and
their  own  lusts,  Isa.  42.  7.  [5]  The  grave,  Isa.
53.  8.  [6]  That  powerful  restraint  by  which  God
keeps  in  and  bridles  Satan,  Rev.  20.  7 •

He  preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison,  1  Pet.  3.  19.
Christ  preached  to  the  sinners  of  the  old  world  by
Noah,  whom  he  inspired,  that  he  might  be  a
preacher  of  righteousness,  to  warn  that  wicked
generation  of  approaching  judgments,  and  exhort
them  to  repentance  ;  whose  souls,  because  of  their
disobedience,  are  reserved  in  the  infernal  prison  of
hell,  and  were  so  at  the  time  when  the  apostle  Peter
io rote,  this  epistle.

Gen.  39. 20.  Potiphar  put.Toseph  inp.

22.  the  keeper  of  the  p.  committed  to  Joseph

40.  3.  put  butler  and  baker  in p.  where  Joseph  was
42.  19-  let  one  be  bound  in  the  house  of  yourp.

1  Kings  22.  27.  put  this  fellow  in  p.  2  Chr.  18.  26.

2  Kings  17.  4.  king  of  Assyria  bound  Iloshea  in  p.
25.  27.  he  brought  Jehoiachin  out  of  p.

29.  and  changed  his  p.  garments,  Jer.  52.31,  33.
Neh.  3.  25.  Palal  repaired  by  the  court  of  the  p.

Ps.  142. 7-  bring  my  soul  out  ofp.  to  praise  thy  name
Eccl.  4.  14.  for  out  ofp.  he  cometh  to  reign

Isa.  24.  22.  and  they  shall  be  shut  up  in  the  p.

42.  7-  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  thep.

22.  they  are  all  of  them  hid  in  p.  houses
53.  8.  he  was  taken  from  p.  and  from  judgment

61. 1.  to  proclaim  opening  of  thep.  to  the  bound
Jer.  29.  26.  that  thou  shouldest  put  him  inp.

32.  2.  Jeremiah  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  p.
12.  before  Jews  that  sat  in  the  court  of  thep.

33. 1.  word  came  to  Jeremiah  while  he  was  shut  up
in  court  of  the  p.  37.  21. 1  38. 6,  28. 1  39. 15.

37-  4.  for  they  had  not  put  him  into  p.

15.  they  put  him  inp.  in  Jonathan’s  house

39.  14.  they  took  Jeremiah  out  of  thep.

52. 11.  he  put  Zedekiah  inp.  till  his  death
Mat.  4.  12.  Jesus' heard  that  John  was  cast  intop.

5.  25.  and  thou  be  cast  into  p.  Luke  12.  58.

11.2.  when  John  heard  in  p.  the  works  of  Christ

14.  3.  Herod  put  him  in  p.  for  Herodias’  sake

10.  he  sent  and  beheaded  John  inp.  Mark  6.  27.

18.  30.  he  cast  him  into  p.  till  he  should  pay  debt

25.  36.  1  was  in p.  and  ye  came  unto  me

39.  when  saw  we  thee  in  p.  and  came  to  thee  ?44.
Mark  1.  14.  now  after  that  John  was  put  inp.

6.  17.  Herod  had  sent  and  bound  John  inp.

Luke  3.  20.  added  this,  that  he  shut  up  John  in  p.

22.  33.  to  go  with  thee  both  intop.  and  to  death

23.  19.  and  for  murder  was  cast  into  p.  25.

John  3.  24.  for  John  was  not  3'et  cast  intop.

Acts  5.  18.  and  put  the  apostles  in  the  common  p.

19.  the  angel  by  night  opened  the  p.  doors

21.  sent  to  the  p.  ||  22.  found  them  not  in  thep.

8. 3.  haling  men  and  women,  committed  them  top.
12.  4.  Peter  was  put  in  p.  |(  5.  he  was  kept  in  p.

7.  light  shined  ||  17-  Lord  brought  him  out  ofp.
16.23.  Paul  and  Silas  were  cast  intop.

24.  the  inner p.  ||  27-  seeing  the p.  doors  open

26.  10.  many  of  the  saints  did  1  shut  up  in  p.

1  Pet.  3. 19.  he  went  and  preached  to  the  spirits  inp.
Rev.  2.  10.  the  devil  shall  cast  some  of  you  into  p.

20.7*  Satan  shall  be  loosed  outof  hisp.

See  Gate.

PRISON-HOUSE.

Judg.  16.  21.  and  Samson  did  grind  in  the  p.

25.  and  they  called  for  Samson  out  of  the  p.

2  Chron.  16.  10.  then  Asa  put  Hananiinap.

Isa.  42.  7.  to  bring  them  in  darkness  out  of  the  p.

PRISON  ER.

Psal.  79. 11 .  let  sighing  of  the  p.  come  before  thee
102.  20.  to  hear  groaning  of  the p.  to  loose  those
Mat.  27.  15.  was  wont  to  release  to  the  people  a  p.

16.  they  had  then  anotablep.  Mark  15.  6.

Acts  23.  18.  Paul  p.  called  me  to  him,  and  prayed

25.  27.  it  seemeth  unreasonable  to  send  ap.

28. 17.  yet  was  I  delivered  p.  to  the  R omans
Eph.  3.  1.  I  Paul  the  p.  of  Jesus,  4.  1.  Philem.  1.  9..
2  Tim.  1.8.  be  not  thou  ashamed  of  me  hisp.

See  Fellow.

PRISONERS.

Gen.  39.20.  a  place  where  king’sp.  were  bound

22.  the  keeper  committed  to  Joseph  all  thep.

372


PRO


PRO


PRO

Hum.  Cl.  1.  king  Arad  took  some  of  Israeli
Job  3.  18.  there  the  p.  rest  together,  they  hear  not
Psal.  69.  33.  the  Lord  despiseth  not  Ins/;.

H6.  7.  the  Lord  louseth  trie  p.  opens  ey  es  ot  blind
Jsa.  10.  4.  they  shall  bow  down  under  the  p.

14.  1".  that  opened  not  the  house  of  his  p.

CO.  4.  Assyria  shall  lead  the  Egyptians/;.

C4.  22.  they  shall  be  gathered  together  as  p.

4 C.  to  bring  out  the  p.  from  the  prison
49.  9.  that  thou  mayest  say  to  the  p.  go  forth
Lam.  3.  34.  to  crush  under  teetthep.  ot  the  earth
Zech.  0.  11.  1  have  sent  forth  thy  p.  out  of  the  pit
12.  turn  ye  to  the  strong  hold,  yep.  ot  hope
flcts  16.  25.  sang  praises,  and  the  p.  heard  them
27.  supposing  that  the/;,  had  been  fled
27.  1.  they  delivered  Paul  and  certain  other/;.

42  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the  p.
oh'  16  the  centurion  delivered  the/;,  to  captain
PRISONS.

J.uke  21.  12.  persecute  you,  delivering  you  into  p.
Acts  22.  4.  bind. and  deliver,  into  p.  men  and  worn.

2  Cor.  11.  23.  in/;,  more  frequent,  in  deaths  oft
PRIVATE.

2  Pet  1.  20.  no  prophecy  of  any  p.  interpretation
PRIVATELY.

Mat.  24.  3.  the  disciples  came  to  Christ/;,  saying
Mark  6.  32.  .lesuswent  into  a  ship/;.  Luke  9.  10.

9.  28.  disciples  John  and  Andrew  ask  him  p.  13.  3.
Luke  10.  23.  he  turned  to  his  disciples  and  said/;.
Acts  23.  19.  went  aside  with  Paul’s  kinsman  p.

Cal  2.  2.  but  p.  to  them  that  were  of  leputation
PRIVILEGE.

Jo/m  1.  t  12.  to  as  many  as  received  him  gave  hep.
PRIVILY.

Judg.  9.  31.  he  sent  messengers  to  Abitnelechp.

1  Sam.  24.  4.  David  cut  off  Saul's  skirt  p.

Psal.  10.  8.  his  eyes  are  p.  set  against  the  poor

11.  2.  that  they  may  p.  shoot  at  the  upright
31.  4.  pull  me  out  of  net  laid  p.  for  me,  142.  3.

64.  5.  they  commune  of  laying  snares/;.

101. 5.  whoso  p.  slanders  his  neighbour  will  cut  off
Prov.  1.11.  let  us  lurk  /;.  for  the  innocent

18.  they  lurk/;,  for  their  own  lives

Mat  1.  19.  Joseph  was  minded  to  put  her  away/;.

2.  7  Herod,  when  he  had  p.  called  the  wise  men
Acts  16.  37.  and  now  do  they  thrust  us  out  p.?

Gal.  2.  4.  who  came  in  p.  to  spy  out  our  liberty

2  Pet  2.  1.  who  shall/;,  bring  in  damnable  heresies

PRIVY.

Dent.  23.  1.  he  that  hath  his  p.  member  cut  off
1  Kings  2.  44.  the  wickedness  thy  heart  is  p.  to
Ezek. 21.  14.  the  sword  enters  into  their  p.  chambers
Acts'b.  2.  part  of  price,  his  wife  also  being/;,  to  it
PRIZE.

1  Cor.  Q.  24.  all  run,  but  one  receiveth  the  p.

Phil  3  14.  1  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  p.

PRIZED.

Zech  11.  13.  a  goodly  price  that  1  wasp,  at  of  them
PROCEED.

Prod.  25.  35.  according  to  the  six  branches  that  p.
Josh.  6.  10.  nor  any  word  p.  out  of  your  mouth

2  Sam.  7.  12.  seed  which  shall  p.  out  of  thy  bowels
Job  40.  5.  twice  spoken,  but  1  will  p.  no  further
Jsa.  29.  14.  1  will  p.  to  do  a  marvellous  work

51.'  4.  give  ear,  for  a  law  shall  p.  from  me
Jer.  9.3.  for  they  p.  from  evil  to  evil,  know  not  me
30.  ij.  and  out  of  them  shall  p.  thanksgiving

21.  their  governor  shall  p.  from  midst  ot  them
Hab.  1.7.  their  judgm.  and  dignity  shall/;,  of  thems.
Mat.  15.  18.  />.  out  of  the  mouth  defile  the  man

19. ' out  of  the  heart/;,  murders,  Mark  7.  21.

Eph.  4.  29.  let  no  corrupt  communication  p.

2  Tim  3  9.  they  shall  p.  no  further,  folly  manifest
PROCEEDED.

Hum.  30.  12.  whatever/;,  out  of  her  lips,  not  stand
32  24.  do  that  which  hath  p.  out  of  your  mouth
Judg.  11.  36.  do  that  which  p.  out  of  thy  mouth
Job  36.  1.  Elihu  also/;,  and  said,  sutler  me
Luke  4.  22.  wondered  at  the  gracious  words  which/;.
John  8.  42.  for  I  p.  forth  and  came  from  God
Acts  12.  3.  he  p.  further  to  take  Peter  also
Pev  19.  21.  wliich  sword  p.  out  of  his  mouth
PROCEEDED!!.

Gen.  24.  50.  the  thing/;,  from  the  Lord
Hum.  30.  2.  according  to  all  that  p.  out  of  his  mouth
JJeut.  8.  3.  but  by  every  word  that  p.  out  of  the
mouth  of  God  doth  man  live,  Mat.  4.  4.

1  Sam  24.  13.  wickedness  p.  from  the  wicked
Eccl.  10.  5.  as  an  error  which/;,  from  the  ruler
Lam.  3.  38.  out  of  Most  High  p.  not  evil  and  good
Hab.  1.  4.  therefore  wrong  judgment  p.

John  15.  26.  Spirit  of  truth  which  p.  from  Father
Jam.  3.  10.  out  of  the  same  mouth  p.  blessing
Lev  11.  5.  fire  p.out  of  their  mouth  and  devours
PROCEEDING.

Eev.  22.  1.  water  of  life  p.  out  of  throne  of  God
PROCESS.

Gen.  4.  3.  in/;,  of  time  Cain  brought  an  offering
38.  12.  in  p.  of  time  Shuah  Judah’s  wife  died
Exod.  2.  23.  in  p.  of  time  the  king  of  Egypt  died
Judg.  11.  4.  in  p.  children  of  Ammon  made  war

2  Chron  21.  19.  in  p.  Jehoram’s  bowels  tell  out

PROCLAMATION.

Exod.  32.  5.  Aaron  made  p.  and  said,  to  morrow

1  Kings  15.  22.  king  Asa  made  a p.  through  all  lud.

22.  36.  and  there  went  a  p.  throughout  the  host

2  Chr.  24.  9.  Joash  made  ap.  thro’  .1  udali  and  Jerus.
30.  5.  to  make  p.  throughout  all  Israel

36.22.  Cyrusmadep.  through  kingdom,  Ezra  1.1.
Ezra  10.7.  Ezra  and  princes  made/;,  through  Judah
Van.  5.  29.  Belshazzar  made  p.  concerning  Daniel
PROCLAIM.

Exod.  33.  19.  and  1  will  p.  the  name  of  the  Ix>rd
Lev.  23.  2.  feast  of  the  Lord  ye  shall  p.  4,  21, 37.
25.  10. />.  liberty  ||  Deut.  20.  10./;.  peace  unto  it
Judg.  7.  3.  go  to p.  in  the  ears  of  the  people
21.  t  13.  they  sent  to p.  peace  to  Benjamin
liuth  4.  t  11.  and  p.  thy  name  in  Beth  lehem

1  Kings  21.  9.  p.  a  fast,  and  set  Naboth  on  high

2  Kings  10.  20.  Jehu  said,  p.  a  solemn  assembly
Heh.  8.  15./;.  that  they  fetch  pine -branches
Esth  6.  9.  /;.  before  him,  thus  shall  it  be  done

374


Prov.  20.  6.  most  men  p.  their  own  goodness
Isa.  12. 1 4.  praise  the  Lord,  />.  his  name
61.  1.  he  hath  sent  me  to  p.  liberty  to  the  captives
2.  to  p.  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord
Jer.  3.  12.  go  and  p.  these  words,  1 1. 6. 1  19.  2.

7.  2.  stand  in  gate  of  Lord,  and  p ■  there  this  word
34.  8.  had  made  a  covenant  to  p.  liberty  to  them
17.  1  p.  a  liberty  for  you  to  sword,  to  pestilence
Joel  3.  9.  p.  ve  this  among  the  Gentiles,  prepare
"  war

Amos  4.  5.  and  p.  and  publish  the  free  offerings
PROCLAIMED.

Eiod.  34.  5.  and  p.  the  name  of  the  Lord,  6.

36.  6.  they  caused  it  to  be  p.  through  the  camp

1  Kings  21.  12.  they/;,  a  fast,  set  Naboth  on  high

2  Kings  10.  20.  a  solemn  assembly,  and  they  p.  it
23.  16.  the  man  of  God p.  who/;,  these  words,  17.

2  Chron.  20.  3.  Jehoshaphat  feared  and  p.  a  fast
Ezra  8.  21.  1  p.  a  fast  there  at  the  river  Ahava
Esth.  6. 11.  Ham  an/;,  before  him,  thus  shall  be  done
Isa.  62.  11.  Lord  hath  p.  thy  salvation  cometh
Jer.  36.  9.  they  p.  a  fast  before  Lord  to  Jerusalem
Lam  1.  +  21.  thou  wilt  bring  the  day  thou  hast/;.
Jonah  3.  5.  they  p.  a  fast,  and  put  on  sackcloth
7.  caused  it  to  be  p.  and  published  thro  Nineveh
Luke  12.  3.  shall  be  p.  upon  the  house-tops
PROCLAIM ETU, ING.

Prov.  12.  23.  the  heart  of  fools/;,  foolishness
Jer.  34. 15.  in  p.  liberty  every  man  to  neighbour,  17 .
Rev.  5. 2.  1  saw  a  strong  angel  p.  with  a  loud  voice
PROCURE.

Jer.  26.  19.  thus  might  wep.  great  evil  ag.  oui  souls
33.  9.  they  shall  fear  for  all  posterity  I  p.  to  it
PROCURED.

Jer.  2.  17.  hast  thou  notp.  this  to  thyselt  ?

4.  18.  thy  doings  have  p.  these  things  to  thee
PROCURE 1H.

Prov.  11.  27.  that  diligently  seeketh  good  p.  favour
17.  t  9.  he  that  covereth  a  transgression p.  love
PRODUCE.  .

Isa.  41.  21.  p.  your  cause,  saitli  Lord,  bring  forth
'  PROFANE.

This  is  said  of  the  contempt  and  abuse  oj  holy  things :
A  man  who  is  defiled ,  and  touches  any  sacred
thing  pollutes  or  profanes  it.  A  profane  person  is
one  openly  wicked.  lie  that  makes  a  jest  oj  sacred
things ,  who  defies  himself  by  impure  and  shameful
actions,  is  a  profane  person,  Lev.  21.  9,  12.  The
Scripture  calls  E.sau,  profane,  because  he  sold  his
birthiighl,  which  was  considered  as  an  holy  thing,
not  only  because  the  priesthood  was  annexed  to  it,
but  also  because  it  was  a  privilege  leading  to
Christ,  and  a  type  of  his  title  to  the  heavenly  inhe¬
ritance,  Heb.  12.  16.  The  priests  of  the  race  oj
Aaron  were  enjoined  to  distinguish  between  sacred
and  profane,  between  pure  and  def  ied,  Lev.  10.
10.  and  for  this  reason  the  use  of  wine  was  forbid
them  in  the  temple,  during  their  time  of  waiting.
It  was  forbid  them  to  keep  the  flesh  of  the  peace-
offerings  above  two  days :  ij  they  eat  oj  it  on  the
third  day,  they  were  punished  as  profaners  of  holy
things.  Lev.  19.  7;  8.  ,

To  profane  the  temple,  to  profane  the  sabbath,  to
profane  the  altar,  are  expressions  to  denote  the
violation  of  the  holy  rest  oj  the  sabbath,  the  entering
of  foreigners  into  the  temple,  the  irreverences  that
are  committed  there,  the  impious  sacrifices  that  are
offered  on  the  altar  of  the  Lord.  To  profane  a
vine,  or  a  tree,  is  '0  make  them  common,  and  proper
to  be  employed  in  ordinary  uses,  Deut.  20.  6.
What  man  is  he  that  hath  planted  a  vineyard,
and  hath  not  eaten  of  it  r  The  Hebrew  says,  who
hath  not  yet  profaned  it.  In  Lev.  19.  23,  24,  Arc.
where  Moses  passes  a  law  concerning  the  fruit  of
trees  newly  planted,  he  expressed  the  impurity  of
the  first-fruits,  by  calling  them  uncircumcised.
For  the  three  first  years  these  fruits  were  cut  off
as  impure :  the  fourth  year  they  offered  what  was
produced  in  the  temple:  and  in  the  fifth  year  the
owner  had  the  liberty  of  making  use  of  the  fruit
as  his  own,  which  then  became  protaue,  or  common.
Jeremiah  promises  the  Israelites  that  they  should
return  again  into  their  own  country ,  that  they  should
plant  vineyards  on  the  mountains  of  Samaria,  and
should  profane  them  ;  that  is,  should  eat  oj  the
fruit  thereof,  Jer.  31.  t  5.

Lev.  21.  7.  they  shall  not  take  a  wife  that  is  p.  14.
Jer.  23.  11.  both  prophet  and  priests  are  p.

Ezek.  21.  25.  and  thou  p.  wicked  prince  of  Israel
22.  26.  and  put  no  difference  between  holy  and  p.
28.  16.  1  will  cast  thee  asp.  out  of  mountain  of  God
42.  20.  between  the  sanctuary  and  tliep.  place
44.  23.  shall  teach  difference  between  holy  andp.
48.  15.  shall  be  a  p.  place  for  the  city,  for  suburbs
1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  made  for  the  unholy  and  p.
4.  7.  refuse  p.  and  old  wives’  fables,  exercise  tbys.
6.  20.  avoid p.  and  vain  babblings,  2  Tim.  2. 16.
Heb.  12.  16.  lest  there  be  any  p.  person,  as  Esau
PROFANE.

Lev.  18.  21.  neither  slmlt  thou  p.  name  of  thy  God,
1  am  Lord,  19. 12.  1  20.  3.  I  21. 6. 1  22.  2,  32.
19.  +  29.  do  not  thou  p.  thy  daughter  to  cause

21.  4.  being  chief  among  his  people  top.  himself
9.  the  daughter  of  any  priest,  if  she  p.  herself
12.  he  shall  notp.  the  sanctuary  of  his  God,  23.
15.  nor  shall  hep.  his  seed  among  his  people

22.  9.  and  die  therefore,  if  they  do  p.  my  ordinance
15.  they  shall  notp.  the  holy  things  ot  Israel

Hum.  30.  +  2.  if  a  man  vow  he  shall  not  p.  his  word
Deut.  28.  +  30.  plant  a  vineyard,  and  not  p.  it
Heh.  13.  17.  evil  that  ye  do,  and  p.  the  sabbath  day
Psal.  89.  +31.  if  they  p.  my  statutes,  and  keep  not
Jer.  31.  +5.  the  planters  shall  plant  andp.  them
Ezek.  23.  39.  they  came  to  my  sanctuary  to  p.  it
24.  21.  behold,  1  will  p.  my  sanctuary
Amos  2.  7.  go  in  to  same  maid,  to  p.  my  holy  name
Mat.  12.  5.  the  priests  in  the  temple  p.  the  sabbath
Acts  24.  6.  who  hath  gone  about  top.  the  temple
PRO  FAN  ED.

Lev.  19.  8.  he  hathp.  the  hallowed  things
Psal.  55.  +  20.  he  hath  p.  his  covenant
89.  39.  thou  hast  p.  his  crown  to  the  ground


Isa.  43.  28.  therefore  I  have  p.  the  princes  of  sane,
Ezek.  22.  8.  thou  hast  p.  my  sabbaths,  23.  .38.
t  16.  thou  shalt  be  p.  in  sight  of  ihe  heathen
26.  p.  my  holy  things,  1  am  p.  among  them
25.  3.  aha,  against  my  sanctuary,  when  it  wasp.
.36.20.  they  p.  my  holy  name,  when  they  said
21.  pity  for  my  name  which  I  srael  had  p.  22,  23.
Mai.  1.  12.  but  ye  have  p.  it,  in  that  ye  say

2.  11.  Judah  hath  p.  the  holiness  of  the  Lord

PROFANENESS.

Jer.  23.  15.  from  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem  is  p
PROFANE!  II .

Lev.  21.  9.  shep.  her  father,  she  shall  be  burnt
PROFAN  ING.

Heh.  13.  18.  bring  more  wrath  by  p.  the  sabbath
Mai.  2.  10.  by  p.  the  covenant  of  our  fathers
PROFESS.

Dent.  26.  3.  T  p.  this  day  to  the  Lord  thy  God
Mat,  7.  23.  then  will  1  p.  I  never  knew  you
Tit.  1. 16.  they  p.  that  they  know  God,  but  deny  him

3.  t  14.  let  ours  learn  to  p.  honest  trades

PROFESSED,  ING.

Rom.  1.  22.  p.  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became
2  Cor.  9. 13.  glorify  God  for  yourp.  subject,  to  gosp,

1  Tim.  2.  10.  which  becometh  women  p.  godliness

6.  12.  hast  p.  a  good  profession  before  many
21.  some  p.  hav  e  erred  concerning  the  faith

PROFESSION.

1  Tim.  6. 12.  hast  professed  a  good  p.  before  many
1 13.  who  before  Pontius  Pilate  witnessed  good  p.
Heb.  3.  1.  the  high  priest  of  our  p.  Christ  Jesus

4.  14.  an  high  priest,  let  us  hold  fast  our  p.  10.23.

PROFIT,  Substantive.

Gen.  25.  32.  whatp.  shall  this  birth-right  do  me  !
37.26.  whatp.  is  it  if  we  slay  our  brother  -
Esth.  3.  8.  it  is  not  for  the  king’s  /;.  to  sutler
Job  21.  15.  what  p.  should  have  if  we  pray  to  him  ?
30.  2.  whereto  might  their  strength  p.  met  <
35.  3.  and  what  p.  if  1  be  cleansed  from  my  suri
Psal.  30.  9.  what  p.  is  there  in  my  blood  r
Prov.  14.  23.  in  all  labour  there  is p.  but  talk  ot  lips
Eccl.  1.  3.  all  is  vanity  ,  what  p.  hath  a  man  of  all
his  labour  under  the  sun  ?  3.  9. 1  5.  16.
2.  11.  and  there  was  no  p.  under  the  sun

5.  9.  moreover  the  p.  of  the  earth  is  for  all

7.  11.  by  wisdom  there  is  p.  to  them  that  see  sun
Isa.  .30.  5.  nor  be  any  help  nor  p.  but  a  shame
Jer.  16.  19.  have  inherited  things  wherein  is  nop.
Mai.  3. 14.  what  p.  that  we  have  kept  ordinance  ?
Rom.  3.  1.  what  p.  is  there  of  circumcision  -

1  Cor.  7. 35.  and  this  1  speak  for  your  own  p

10.  33.  not  seeking  mine  own p.  but  the  p.  ot  many

2  Tim.  2.  14.  they  strive  not  about  words  to  no  p.
Heb.  12.  10.  but' he  chasteneth  us  for  our  p.

PRO  Eli,  Verb.

1  Sam.  12.21.  after  vain  things  which  cannot  p.

Job  35.  8.  thy  righteousness  may  /;.  the  son  of  man
Psal.  120.  +  3.  what  shall  it  p.  thee, .false  tongue  '
Prov.  10. 2.  treasures  of  wickedness  p.  nothing

11.  4.  riches  p.  not  in  the  day  of  wrath

Isa.  30.5.were  ashamed  of  people  that  could  not  p. (L
44.  9.  their  delectable  things  shall  not  p.

47.  12.  if  so  be  thou  shalt  be  able  to  p.

48.  17.  1  am  the  Lord  which  teacheth  thee  top.

57.  12.  and  thy  works,  for  they  shall  notp.  thee

Jer.  2.8.  and  walked  after  things  that  do  notp.

11.  pe  pie  changed,  for  that  which  doth  notp.
7.8.  behold,  ye  trust  in  lying  words  that  cannot/,

12.  13.  put  themselves  to  pain,  but  shall  notp.

23.  32.  they  shall  not p.  this  people,  saith  the  Lord

Mark  8.  36.  what  p.  if  he  gain  the  whole  world
1  Cor.  12.7.  is  given  to  every  man  top.  withal
14.  6.  speaking  w  ith  tongues,  what  shall  1  p.  you
Gal.  5.  2.  Christ  shall  p.  you  nothing
Heb.  4.  2.  the  word  preached  did  notp.  them
Jam.  2.  14.  what  doth  it  p.  my  bretlnen,  though
16.  if  ye  give  not  things  needful,  what  doth  it  p.l
PROFITABLE.

Job  22.  2.  can  a  man  be p.  to  God,  asp.  to  himself

Eccl.  10.  10.  but  wisdom  is  p.  to  direct

Isa.  44.  10.  a  graven  image  that  is  p.  for  nothing

Jer.  13.  7.  the  girdle  was  p.  for  nothing

Mat.  5.  29.  p.  that  one  of  thy  members  perish,  30,

Acts  20.  20.  1  kept  back  nothing/;,  to  you

1  Cor.  6. 1 12.  all  things  are  lawful,  but  not  p.

1  Tim.  4.  8.  but  godliness  is  p.  to  all  things

2  Tim.  3. 16.  the  scripture  is  p.  for  doctrine
4.  11.  Mark  is p.  to  me  for  the  ministry
Tit.  3.  8.  these  things  are  good  and  p.  to  men
Philem.  11.  but  now  p.  to  thee  and  to  me

PROFITABLY.

Eph.  4.429.  but  that  which  is  good  to  edify  p.

P  PROFITED,  1?TH.

Job  33.  27.  if  any  say  1  have  sinned,  and  ltp.  not
34.  0.  lie  said,  it  p.  nothing  to  delight  in  God
Hab.  2. 18.  what  p.  the  graven  and  molten  image
Mat.  15.  5.  whoso  shall  say  to  father  or  mother,  it  is  a
gift  by  whatever  thou  mightest  bep.  Mark".  11-
16.  26.  what  is  a  man  p.  if  Ire  gain  whole  world
John  6.  63.  the  spirit  quickeneth,  tiesh  p.  nothing
Rom.  2.  25.  circumcision  p.  if  thou  keep  the  law
1  Cor.  13.  3.  and  have  not  charity,  itp.  nothing
Gal.  1.  14.  1  p.  in  the  Jews’  religion  above  many
1  Tim.  4. 8.  for  bodily  exercise  p.  little,  but  godliness
Heb  13.  9.  notp.  them  that  have  beexr  occupied
PROFITING.

1  Tim.  4.  15.  that  thy  p.  may  appear  to  ail

PROFOUND.  .  t

Hos.  5.  2.  the  revolters  are  p.  to  make  slaughter
PROGENITORS.  .

Gen.  49.26.  prevailed  above  the  blessings  ot  my  p
PROGNOSTICATORS.

Isa.  47. 13.  let  monthly/;,  stand  up  and  save  tnee
PROLONG,  ED.  ,

Hum.  0.  +  19.  when  cloud  p.  they  journeyed  not
Deut.  4.26.  ye  shall  not  /;.  your  days,  30.  18-

40.  thou  shalt  keep  his  statutes,  that  thou  mayest

p.  thy  days  upon  the  earth,  5.  16,  33. 1  0.  ~
I  11.  9.  I  17.  20.  I  22.  7-  ,

32.  47.  through  this  thing  ye  shall  p.  your  oajs
Josh.  24.131.  Israel  served  all  the  days or  the  elders
that p.  after  Joshua,  Judg ■  2. 1 7-


PRO

6onUfV  What  Is  TW,1’  tha‘  I  should  ,,  my  life  »
picked  shall  not  p.  the  perfection
01.  6.  thou  wilt  p.  the  king's  life  and  years
/W  ea  C.  by  knowledge  the  state  shall  be  p.
r  ,  o  JJjat  hatetli  covetousness  shall  p.  his  days
Lee/.  8.  1 ..  though  a  sinner's  days  be  p.  yet  surely
I  t.  neither  shall  the  wicked  p.  his  days
,13-  ,an,<11  ller  <ia>'s  shall  not  be  p.

53  it)  he  shall  see  Ins  seed,  he  shall  p.  his  days
2r;  days  are  ».  and  vision  taileth
*5.  1  am  the  l  ord,  1  will  speak,  and  the  word
n  shall  come  to  pass,  it  shall  be  no  more p.
.8.  there  shall  none  of  my  words  be  p.  any  more
Van.  7.1--  yet  there  lives  wer ep.  for  season  and  time

„  prolongeih.

Prov.  10.  27.  the  tear  of  the  Lord  p.  days
tccl.  ,.  Id.  there  is  ^wicked  man  that'/.,  his  life

It  is  an  assurance  that  God  has  given  in  his  word
oj  bestowing  blessings  upon  his  people ,  C  Pet.  1.

4.  lhe  word  in  the  Sew  Testament  is  often
taken  for  those  promises  that  God  heretofore
made  to  Abraham  and  the  other  patriarchs,  of
sending  the  Messiah.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the
c,0T7f»l(!nlP  uses  the  word  promise,
Uom.  4.  1>,  14.  Gal.  3.  16.  The  promises  of  the
nff  are  called  better  than  those  of  the

otety  I  Jen.  8.  o.  because  they  are  more  spiritual ,
dear,  extensive,  and  universal,  than  those  in  the
Mosaical  covenant  were.  The  tune  of  the  pro¬
mise,  Acts  7-  |7-  is  the  time  of  the  fulfilling  of
the  promise.  God  had  told  Abram,  Gen.  15.1:1
14.  that  his  seed  should  be  a  stranger  in  a  strange
tand,  but  that  after  Jour  hundred  years  he  would
hrmg  them  out  thence  ;  the  time  of  the  promise
fame,  when  these  Jour  hund/ed  years  were  expired,
lhe  children  of  the  promise  are,  [1]  The  Israel-
4tes  descended  Jro/n  Isaac,  in  opposition  to  the
foiov  .teS  descended  from  Ishmael  and  Ilagar.
lrJ  1  he  .lews  converted  to  Christianity,  in  oppo¬
sition  to  the  incredulous  Jews,  who  will  not  be-
•leve  171  Christ:  and  [3]  All  true  believers  who
are  bom  again  by  the  supernatural  power  of  God's
opu  it,  and  by  faith  lay  hold  on  the  promise  of
salvation  made  in  Christ ;  these  are  the  spiritual
seed  oj  Abraham,  to  whom  the  spiritual  blessings
contained  in  the  covenant  and  the  inheritance  do
belong,  Pom.  9.  8.  Gal.  4.  28.  The  Holy  Spirit
fe«-.Ep h.  1.  13.  signifies,  the  Holy  Ghost,
nhich  God  has  promised  to  those  that  shall  believe
in  him,  which  is  the  pledge  of  a  believers  ever-
(asung  happiness.  The  first  commandment  to
r  .i  s  annexed  a  promise,  is  that,  Hon¬
our  thy  father  and  mother.  Eph.  6.  2.  To  which

in  i  mf;fin!‘ed  this  promise,  that  their  days
shall  be  multiplied  upon  the  earth,  Exod  «0  ]  n
Promises  also  denote  eternal  life,  or  the  blessed-
ness  promised ,  -which  is  the  object  of  the  Chrz
fians  hope,  Heb.  6.  12.

Yum.  14.  34.  and  ye  shall  know  my  breach  of  p.
Lings  8.  d6.  hath  not  tailed  one  word  of  wood  u
n.  et  t,hy  P-  to  Da'  id  be  established  '

,»•  .i* ••  V"  thry  sh°old  do  according  to  this  p.

13.  tha.  performeth  not  this  p.  even  thus  be  he
^shaken  out,  and  emptied  people  did  accord,  to  p
sat.  7  ( .  8.  doth  his  p.  fail  for  evermore  ?

in' he  >;emembered  his  holy  p.  and  Abram
f ike  24.  49.  oehold,  I  send  p.  of  my  Father  on  you
ictsl.  4.  hut  wait  for  the  p.  of  the  Father

fnrertIVed  ,°f  Father  the  p.  of  the  Holy  Ghost
%39  tor  the  p.  is  to  you  and  to  your  children
(•  but  when  the  time  of  the  p.  drew  nigh
qo  God  acVord-  to  bis  p.  hath  raised  a  Saviour
32- ‘he  p‘ ltlade  t0  ^bers  God  hath  fulfilled
.3.  21.  now  are  ready,  looking  for  a  p.  from  thee
-0.  6.  .or  hope  of  the  p.  made  of  God  to  fathers
7.  to  which  p.  our  tribes  serving  G.  day  and  night
om.  4.  13.  the  p.  that  lie  shall  be  the  heir  of  world
fnd.  the  P-  1S  made  of  none  effect
lb.  to  the  end  the  p.  might  be  sure  to  the  seed

20.  he  staggered  not  at  the  p.  through  unbelief
I.  8.  but  children  of  thep.  counted  for  the  seed
9.  for  temi  ord  of  p.  at  this  time  1  will  come
•'/  V*.  mat  we  might  receive  p.  of  the  Spirit

17.  mat  it  should  make  the  p.  of  none  effect

18.  tor  if  the  inheritance  be  of  the  law,  it  is  no
in  ™°5e  R-  but  God  &ave  it  to  Abraham  by  p.
]„(s,ee‘ '  shall  come,  to  whom  the  p.  was  made
on  *i  at  tbep.  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  might  be
"V Vfn,  are  ye  heirs  according  to  the  p.

.  .3.  but  he  of  the  free  woman  was  bv  p.

u  Zh  as  Isaac  was>  are  the  children  of  p

>  e  'vere  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  ofp
'  i2-and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  p.

■  b.  the  Gentiles  be  partakers  of  his p.  in  Christ
•  v.  which  is  the  first  commandment  with  p
lm.  4.  8.  having  the  p.  of  the  life  that  now  is
LXm,  D  according  to  the  p.  of  life  in  Christ  Jes.

mV1'  i  r’  ^st  ^p-  left  us  of  entering  into  rest
; r3,  lor  yben  God  madep.  to  Abraham
.0.  after  he  had  patiently  endured,  he  obtain,  p.

is  •  'VfHuig, to  shew  unto  the  heirs  ofp.

;  P11^,.b?  receive  the  p.  of  eternal  life,  10.  36

1-  y.  by  taith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  ofp.  in  a

to  r^?.euCOunMy>  he-ir3  Jvitl1  bitn  of  the  same  p.

19.  and  these  all  received  not  the  p.

)  s?-Vino>  where  is  the  p.  of  his  coming  ?

,,  the  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  p.

p'  ,ook  for  new  heavens
ohn  2-  25-  th*s  is  thep.  that  he  hath  promised  us
n  PROMISE,  Verb.

et-  2.  while^they^.^h^m  liberty,  they  are

*2‘  \5-  wi"  she  you  according  as  he  hath  p.

■Z'  !4',l0,.i'veTWl11  “°  t0  the  place  the  Lord  p

D-  me  Lord  bless  you  as  he  hath  p.  15.  6.

3.  that  ye  may  increase  as  the  Lord  p.  thee
,  jot  able  to  bring  them  to  the  land  he  p.

‘  oA  .l  r  rd  ,1S  b>s  inheritance,  as  he  p.

■  *0.  the  Lord  shall  enlarge  thy  border,  as  he  p.

’  anil  n\ve  ,be.e  tbe  land  lie  p.  to  give,  27.  3.

••  23.  shall  keep  that  which  thou  hast  p.  to  God


PRO

hi.a  Peculiar  people,  ashe  p.thee
?*•  let  diem  live,  as  the  princes  had  p.

’•  8lven  rest  to  your  brethren,  as  hep.  them
"In  r  !;ball  possess  their  land,  as  the  L.  p.  you
10.  God  hghteth  tor  you,  as  he  hath p.  you
15.  as  a  1  good  things  are  come  the  Lord  p.  you
.  Sam.  7. -8.  hast  p.  this  goodness  to  thy  servant

1  Kings  -4.  and  hath  made  me  an  house,  as  hep.
o’i?'  ,Lo-1d  ga\e  Solomon  wisdom,  as  lie  p.  him

*s,t.on  the  throne  ot  Israel  as  the  Lord  p
50.  hath  given  rest  to  people,  as  hep.  by  Moses
9-0-  as  1  p.  to  David  thy  father,  saying

2  Kings  8.  19.  as  hep.  to  give  a  light,  2  Chron  °l  7

1  C/irow  17  26.  and  thou  hastp.  this  goodness'  '

2  Uiron.  6.  10.  I  am  set  on  the  throne  as  the  Lord  p
15.  hast  kept  that  which  thou  hast  p.  David  16

JSeh  9.  23.  concerning  which  thou  hadst  p.  to  father
Esth.  4.  (.  of  the  sum  that  Hainan  had  p  to  pay
Jer.  32.  42.  will  bring  on  them  all  good  \  p.  33  14
7*  Herod  p.  with  oath  to  give  her  whatever
Mark  14. 11.  they  were  glad,  p.  to  give  him  money
Luke  1  72.  to  perforin  the  mercy  p.  to  our  fathers
22.  b.  hep.  to  betray  him  unto  them  in  absence
7,*  to  give  it  to  him  for  a  possession

1’u2’  «osPel  °f  God,  which  he  had  p.  afore
L  21.  that  what  he  p.  he  was  also  able  to  perform
i/'Vf-  m  bopeof  eternal  life,p.  before  world  began
Heb  10.23.  hold  tast  profession,  he  is  faithful  that  p
11. 11.  because  they  judged  him  faithful  that  had  p
U.  .6.  now  he  hath  p  saying,  once  more  I  shake
Jam.  1. 12.  which  Lord  p.  to  them  that  love  him  2  5
1  John  2.  25.  this  us  {promise  he |iaf  h  p.  us  eternal  life

1  Kings  8.  24.  keep  with  David  that  thou  p.  him  25
Kelt.  9.  15.  and  p.  that  theyshould  go  into  the  land

Eorn.9.  4.  are  Israelites,  to  whom  pertain  the  p
15.  8.  to  confirm  the  p.  made  to  the  fathers

2  c?r*  D  r°-  aJI  P-of  God  in  him  are  yea  and  amen
7.1.  having  therefore  these  p.  dearly  beloved

Gal.  3.  16.  to  Abraham  and  his  seed  were  p.  made
21.  is  the  law  then  against  the  p.  of  God  ;

!leb-  6-12.  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  p

7.  o.  Melchisedec  lilessed  him  that  had  the  p.

8.  6.  covenant  which  was  established  upon  better  p.
11.13.  these  all  died  in  faith,  not  having  received  p

17-  he  that  had  received  the  p.  offered  up  his  son'
33.  who  thro  faith  obtained  p.  and  stopped  mouths
2  HetA.  4.  given  us  exceeding  great  and  precious  p.
PROMISING.

Ezek.  13.  22.  not  return  from  his  wick,  way  by  v  life
PROMOTE.  yp-me

Nnm.  22.  17.  I  will  p.thee  to  great  honour,  24.  11
37.  am  1  not  able  indeed  to  p.  thee  to  honour  7
Erov.  4.  8.  exalt  her,  and  she  shall  p.  thee
PROMOTED.

Judg.  9.  9.  and  go  to  be  p.  over  the  trees,  11 ,  13
Esth.  5.  11.  told  wherein  the  king  had  p.  him
Dan.  3.  30.  then  the  king  p.  Shadrach,  Meshach
PROMOTION.

Psal.  75.  6.  p.  cometh  not  from  the  east  nor  west
Erov.  3.  35.  but  shame  shall  be  the  p.  of  fools
PRONOUNCE.

Lev.  5.  4.  that  a  man  shall  p.  with  an  oath

13.  3.  the  priest  shall  look  on  him  and  p  him

,  u,r}clea9-  0,  8,  11,  15,  20,  22,  25,  27,  30,  44.

1 3.  shall  p.  him  clean,  17,  23,  28,  34,  37.  |  14.  7.

59.  this  is  the  law,  to  p.  it  clean  or  unclean

14.  48.  then  the  priest  shall  p.  the  house  clean
Judg.  12.  6.  for  he  could  not  frame  to  p.  it  right

PRONOUNCED.

Aeh.  6.  12.  but  he  p.  this  prophecy  against  me
Jer.  11.  17.  the  Lord  hath  p.  evil  against  thee

so'  o°-7;uthis  gr-eat  evi!»  ly-  15-  I  35.  17.  I  40.  2.
lo.  o.  if  that  nation  against  whom  I  p.  turn
55.  13.  the  word  which  I  have  p.  against  it
26.  13.  Lord  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  he  p.

19.  the  Lord  repented  of  the  evil  he  had  p.

34.  5.  for  I  have  p.  the  word,  saith  the  Lord
3”*  7*  that  the  I.ord  hath  p.  against  this  people
18.  Jeremiah  p.  all  these  words  unto  me,  31
.  PRONOUNCING.

Tev.  5.  4.  if  a  soul  swear,  p.  to  do  evil  or  good
„  PROOF.

2  Cor.  2.  9.  that  T  might  know  the  p.  of  you
8.  24.  shew  ye  to  them  the  p.  of  your  love
U3  .  3- since  ye  seek  a  p.  of  Christ  speaking  in  me
EM.  2.  22.  but  ye  know  the  p.  of  him
2  lim.  4.  5.  make  full  p.  of  thy  ministry
PROOFS.

Acts  1.3.  shewed  himself  alive  by  many  infallible  p
PROPER.

A*.  1  in9«3i  .T-  haV,I  0/ mine  own  p.  good,  of  gold
ActslA9.he]d  is  called  in  their  p.  tongue,  Aceldama
\ yor.7.  7.  but  every  man  hath  his  p.  gift  of  God
lleb.  11.  23.  because  they  saw  he  wasap.  child
P ROP II AN E,  See  Profane.
PROPHECY.

2  Uiron  9.  29.  Solomon's  acts  in  the  p.  of  Ahijah
at  ;  wber}  ^sa  heard  p.  of  Obed  he  took  courage
A/eh.  6.  12.  he  pronounced  this  p.  against  me
Erov.  30.  1.  the  p.  man  spake  to  Ithiel  and  Ucal
31.  1.  and  the  p.  that  his  mother  taught  him
Mat.  13.  14.  in  them  is  fulfilled  the  p.  of  Esaias
1  C or.  12.  10  to  another  p.  by  the  same  Spirit
L3  2.  though  I  have  the  gift  ofp.  and  not  charity

1  Dm.  4.  14.  neglect  not  (he  gift  given  thee  hyp.

2  l  et.  1 .  19.  we  have  also  a  more  sure  word  of p.

20.  nop.  ot  scripture  is  of  private  interpretation

21.  p.  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man
Eev.  1.3.  blessed  that  hear  the  words  of  this  p,

11.6.  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  p.

12'  1®',  f'or  tbfc  testimony  of  Jesus  is  spirit  ofp.

*2.  7.  blessed  thatkeepeth  the  sayings  of  thisp.

10.  seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  p.  of  this  book

18.  that  heareth  words  of  the  p.  of  this  book

19.  if  any  man  take  from  the  words  of  this  p.

PROPHECIES.

1  y°r.  13.8.  but  whether  p.  they  shall  cease
1  lim.  1.  18.  according  to  the p.  that  went  before
„  PROPHESY,  Verb.

Aum.  11.  27.  Eldad  and  Medad  dop.  in  the  camp


PRO

1  Sam.  10.  5.  they  shall  p.  ||  6.  thou  shalt p.

1  iR”mlf2h08A.!!e  M°th  P0t  P'  gPod  ofme-  but  e\u
1  A?,'  ie  vVou*d  uuf  P •  good,  2  Chron.  18.  17
\  ^  lTo If'Z'  w^°  should  p.  with  harps  and  cymbal#
Da.  30.10.  p.  not  to  us  right  things,  p.  deceit!

Jer  5  31.  the  prophets  p.  falsely0,  and  priests
11.  21.  saying,  p.  not  in  the  name  of  the  I  ord
14  14.  prophets  p.  lies,  they  p.  false  visions

5.  concerning  the  prophets  thatp.  in  my  name
16.  the  people  to  whom  they  p.  shall  bc  cast  out

I, 9/  Jeremiah  came  rom  where  Lord  sent  to  p

23.  16.  hearken  not  to  the.  prophets  that p

25.  what  the  prophets  said,  that  p.  lies  in  mi

os  on  name- 2d-  32.  127.  10,  14,  15,  16.  |  29.  9,  21
25.  30.  p.  against  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
on  i2-  tord  sel^t  me  t0  P •  against  this  house
3.  3.  why  dostthou  p.  and  say,  will  give  this  city
E~ek.  4.  ( .  thou  shalt  p.  against  Jerusalem
o.  2.p.  against  the  mountains  of  Israel,  36.  1.

II.  4.  p.  against  Jaazaniah  and  Pelatiah.p.

13.  2.  p.  against  the  prophets  that  p.  17.

-.0.  46.  p.  against  the  forest  of  the  south  field
A.  2.  p.  against  land  of  Israel  ||  9.  Jerusalem

14.  son  ot  man,  p.  and  smite  thy  hands  together
oq'cZ'  an<  say  c°ucerning  the  Ammonites,  25  0

sol  ;/.,„ag-HUIstrZl,l02 11 P'  2  p-  against Pharaoh
o2'2.p.  against  Egypt  ||  35.  2.  p.  against  mount  S  ir
34.  2.  son  ot  man,  p.  against  the  shepherds  of  Ur.
3b.  6.  p.  concerning  the  and  of  Israel,  and  say
37-  4-p.  on  these  bones  ||  9.  p.  to  the  wind
38.  -  son  of  man,  p.  against  Gog,  14.  |  39  l

i!l/  03'Jhen  1  came  to  p.  city  should  be  destroyed
Joel  2.  28.  your  sons  shall  p .  Acts  £.  17  18
Amos  2.  12.  ye  gave  the  Nazarites  wine,  and  com-
nianded  the  prophets,  sayiilg,p.  not  5//,..  n  a
3.  &  who i  can  but  p.  ?  ||  7.  12.  eat  bread  and  p."  '
7-  13.  but  p.  not  again  any  more  at  Beth  el
Id.  Lord  said  to  me,  go  p.  to  my  people  Israel
n}P'  n°t  against  Israel  and  the  house  of  Isaac
v  i  7,1'  Lu  '  ('■ t0  ,llee  of  "'me  and  strong  drink
tbat.J'  beu  any  shall  yetp.  then  his  father
oPka5'  7;  ,well  dld  Esaias  p.  of  you,  saying
P:  68  P-  thou  Christ,  Mark  14.  65.  Luke  22.  64.
P<l»,2iA9khadi,f0uir  'laughters,  virgins,  which  did  p.
Esm.  12.  6.  whether p.  let  usp.  to  the  proportion

13'.,9'  w.e  know  111  Part-  and  "e  P-  in  part
!•}•  rather  that  ye  mayp.  ||  39.  covet  to  p.

»4'  l‘  a'!  pJ  3L  we  may  all  p.  one  by  one
KevAO.ll.  thoumustp.  ag.  before  nations  and  king'¬
ll.  3.  my  two  witnesses  shall  p.  1260  days
,T  PROPHESIED.

P-  and  did  not  cease

,  e  ‘  ^  dad  and  jy.edad  they  p.  in  the  camp
1  Sam.  10.  10.  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Saul  and
..  be-P-  among  them,  11.  |  18.  10.  |  19.  23,  24

19.  20.  the  messengers  of  Saul  alsop.  21.

nn  t^ni  2i?'  P‘  tmtil  the  evening  sacrifice
22.  10.  prophets  p.  before  them,  12.  2  Chron.  18.  0
1  C/‘r.?n •  25.  2.  sons  of  Asaph  p.  according  to  order
3.  the  sons  of  Jeduthun  who  p.  with  a  harp
T’  /0rW',2°T'r37-  FRezerp.  against  Jehoshaphat
hjZra  5.  1.  Haggai  and  Zechariah  p.  to  the  Tews
Jer  2.  8.  pastors  transgressed,  prophets  p.  by  Baal

20.  1.  Pashur  heard  that  Jeremiah  p.  these  things

6.  Pashur  shall  die,  and  all  to  whom  thou p .  lies

23  13.  the  prophets  of  Samaria  p.  in  Paal

21.  I  have  not  spoken  to  them,  yet  they  p.

25. 13.  bring  on  Babylon  all  that  Jeremiah  hath  »

26.  9.  why  hast  thou  p.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  '

11.  tor  he  hath  p.  against  this  city,  20.
il8.  Micah  p.  in  days  of  Hezekiah  king  of  Judah
~0,  R  .I'-tah  p.  ||  28.  8.  p.  against  many  countries

28.  6.  the  Lord  perform  the  words  thou  hast  p.

29.  31.  because  Shemaiah  hathp.  to  you  a  lie
37.  19.  where  are  your  prophets  which  p.  to  you  r
Ezek.  11. 13.  when  Jp.  Pelatiah  son  of  Benaiah  died
37.  7-  so  I  p.  as  l  was  commanded,  and  as  1  p  10
J8-17-  whop.  I  would  bring  thee  against  them
Z|c.i.  13.  4.  prophets  shall  be  ashamed  when  theyp.
Mat.  7.  Lord,  have  we  not p.  in  thy  name  ?

11. 13.  the  prophets  and  the  law  p.  until  john
Mark  7.  6.  lie  said,  well  hath  f'.saias  p.  of  you
Luke  1.  67.  his  father  Zaehariah  p.  saying,  blessed
John  11.51.  Caiaphas  p.  that  Jesus  should  die
Acts  19.  6.  they  spake  with  tongues  and  p.

1  Cor.  14.  5.  I  would  rather  that  ye  p.  greater  is  he

1  Eet.  1.  f.  10.  of  which  salvation  they  p.  who  p.  of

the  grace  which  should  come  unto  you
Jude  14.  Enoch  also  p.  of  these  things,  saying
PROPHESIETH.

2  Chr .  18. 7.  for  he  never p.  good  to  me,  but  evil
Jer.  28.  9.  the  prophet  which  p.  of  peace
Ezek.  12.  27-  he  p.  of  the  times  that  are  far  off
Zech,  13.  3.  shall  thrust  him  through  when  he  p.

1  Cor.  11.  5.  thatp.  with  her  head  uncovered

14.  3.  he  that  p.  speaketh  unto  men  to  edification

4.  but  he  thatp.  edifieth  the  church

5.  greater  is  he  thatp.  than  he  that  speaketh

PROPHESYING,  S.

1  Sam.  10. 13.  when  he  had  made  an  end  ofp.

19.  20.  they  saw  the  company  of  the  prophets  p
Ezra  6.  14.  they  prospered  throughp.  of  IInggai
1  Cor.  11.  4.  every  man  p.  having  his  head  covered
14.  6.  except  I  shall  speak  to  you  by  p.  or  doctrine

22.  hut  p.  serveth  not  for  them  that  believe  not
1  Ihess.  5.  20.  despise  not  p.  prove  all  things
_  .  PROPHET.

This  word  comes  from  the  Greek,  npodirmis,  which
signifies,  one  that  foretells  future  events.  The  1 1  e-
brews  at  the  beginning  called  them  Seers,  TTSS  vi¬
deos.  Afterwards  they  called  them  Nabi,  which
comes  from  the  root  SOU]  N  ibba  ,to  foretell,  to  divine.

Also  the  scripture  often  gives  them  the  name  0}

Men  ot  God,  and  of  Angels,  or  Messengers  of  the
Lord.  The  verb  Nibba,  to  prophesy,  is  of  great
extent.  Sometimes  it  signifies  to  foretell  what  is
to  come  :  at  other  times,  to  be  inspired,  to  sj  cak
from  God.  It  is  said,  Exod.  7-  1.  Aaron  thy  bro¬
ther  shall  be  thy  prophet :  that  is,  he  shall  explain
and  interpret  thy  sentiments  and  commands  to  Pha-
raoli  the  people.  The  apostle  Paul,  in  his  epistle
to  I  ltus,  1.  12.  quoting  a  profane  poet,  calls  him

375


PRO


PRO


PRO


Prophet ;  because  the  Pagans  thought  their  poets
inspired  by  the  gods.  The  Scripture  often  gives
the  name  of  Prophet  to  impostors,  who  Jalsely
boasted  of  inspiration,  1  Kings  18.  22.

As  the  true  Prophets,  at  the  time  that  they  were
transported  by  the  motions  of  (Sod  s  Spirit,  were
sometimes  agitated  in  a  violent  manner  ;  those  mo¬
tions  were  called  prophesying,  which  persons  exhi¬
bited,  who  were  filled  with  a  good  or  evil  spirit,  lor
example,  Saul,  being  moved  by  an  evil  spirit,  pro¬
phesied  in  his  house,  I  Sam.  IB.  10.  that  is,  he  was
agitated  with  violence,  and  used  strange  and  un¬
usual  gestures,  signs,  and  speeches,  as  the  Pt  opliets
did.  To  prophesy  is  also  put  for  to  make  or  sing
psalms,  or  songs  of  praise  to  God,  1  Sam.  10.  o,  0.

1  Chron  °5  1.  This  term  is  also  used  by  of.
Paul,  for  'explaining  Scripture,  preaching,  or
speaking  to  the  church  in  public,  1  Cor.  14. 1 ,  3,  4.
The  most  usual  way  by  which  God  communicated
himself  to  the  Prophets  was  by  inspiration,  which
consisted  in  illuminating  the  mind  of  the  piophet,
and  exciting  his  will  to  proclaim  what  the  Lord
dictated  to  him  from  within.  It  is  iti  this  sense
that  all  the  authors  of  the  canonical  books  oj  ■'scrip-
ture  both  of  the  Old  and  Kew  lestament,  are
acknowledged  as  Prophets.  God  also  communi¬
cated  himself  to  the  prophets  by  dreams  arid  noc¬
turnal  visions.  In  Acts  10. 11,  12.  it  is  said,  that
Peter  fell  into  an  ecstasy  at  noon- day,  and  had  a
revelation  concerning  the  call  oj  the  Gentiles  to
the  faith.  '1  he  Lord  appeared  to  lob  and  to  Moses
in  a  cloud,  and  discovered  his  will  to  them ,  Num.

11.  25.  lob  38. 1.  He  has  often  made  his  voice  to
be  heard  in  an  anticulate  manner  j  thus  he  spake
to  Moses  in  the  burning  bush,  and  upon  mount
Sinai,  and  to  Samuel  in  the  night,  1  Sa  n.  3.  4.

We  have  in  the  Old  lestament  the  writings  oj  the
sixteen  Prophets;  that  is,  of  four  greater,  and
twelve  lesser  Prophets.  The  four  great  Prophets
are  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel.  dhe
twelve  lesser  Prophets  are,  Hosea,  Joel,  Amos,
Obadiah,  Jonah,  Micah,  Nahum,  Habakkuk,
Zephaniah,  11  aggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malacln.

This  is  nearly  the  chronological  order  in  which  they
may  be  ranged.  .

1  Hosea prophesied  under  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,
‘and  Hezekiah,  kings  of  Judah,  and  under  Jero¬
boam  II.  king  oj  Israel,  and  his  successors,  to
the  destruction  oj  Samaria.  0 ome  think,  that  the
title  if  I  losea's  prophecy,  wherein  mention  is  made
of  his  having  prophesied  under  so  many  kings,  is
not  his  own,  hut  some  ancient  transcriber's  ;  and
that  the  true  beginning  of  t his  Prophet  s  work  is
at  verse  2.  The  beginning  of  the  word  ot  the
Lord  :  For,  say  they,  if  he  had  prophesied  under
the  reign  of  all  these  princes,  he  must  have  lived  a
very  long  time  y  by  a  moderate  calculation,  Jot  the
space  of  one  hundred  and  twelve  years.

2.  Amos  began  to  prophesy  the  second  year  before

the  earthquake,  which  was  in  the  reign  of  king
Uzziah,  about  six  years  before  the  death  of  Jero
boam  II.  king  of  Israel.  .  ,

3.  Isaiah  began  to  prophesy  at  the  death  oj  Uzziah,
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Jotham
king  of  Judah.  He  continued  to  prophesy  to  the
reign  of  Manasseh,  who  caused  him  to  be  put  to

4.  Jonah  lived  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel  wider  the
kings  Joash  and  Jeroboam  11.  about  the  same
time  as  Hosea,  Isaiah,  and  Amos.


16.  Malacln,  the  last  prophet,  has  not  put  any
date  to  his  prophecies.  If  he  was  the  same  as
Ezra,  as  some  think,  he  may  have  prophesied  un¬
der  N ehemiah,  who  returned  into  Judah  in  3550.
Besides  these,  there  are  found  the  names  of  a  great
many  more  prophets  in  Scripture,  such  as  Abra¬
ham',  Isaac,  Jacob,  Moses,  Joshua,  Samuel,
Nathan,  David,  Solomon,  &c.  Christ  Jesus  is
the  great  Prophet  of  his  church ;  Moses  pro¬
phesying  of  him,  Deut.  18.  15.  says,  God  will
raise  up  a  Prophet  like  unto  me ;  that  is,  such
a  prophet  as  I  am,  resembling  me  in  viatuie
and  office,  being  a  man  and  mediator,  as  1  am,
though  more  excellent ,  and  in  a  more  singular
sort ;  I  as  a  servant,  he  as  a  Son  and  Lord  of
his  church,  who  will  teach  them  the  will  oj  God,
not  only  in  his  own  person  on  earth,  but  by  his
word  and  Spirit  when  exalted  to  the  right  hand  oj
power  in  heaven.

Exod.  7.1.  and  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  he  thy  p.
Deut.  18.  20.  but  the  p.  which  shall  presume,  22.

1  Sam  22  5.  the  p.  Gad  said  to  David,  abide  not

2  Sam.  24.  11.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  the/?.

1  Kings  1 .  32.  David  said,  call  me  Nathan  the  p.

44  the  king  hath  sent  with  him  Nathan  the  p.

11.  29.  Ahijah  the  p.  found  Jeroboam  in  the  way
13.  11.  there  dwelt  an  old  p.  in  Bethel,  25.

23.  for  the  p.  whom  he  had  brought  back
29  p  took  up  the  carcase  of  the  man  ot  God,
and  the  old  p.  came  to  mourn  and  bury  him
16.  7.  by  hand  of  the  p.  Jehu  came  the  word,  12.
18.  .36.  Elijah  p.  came  near  and  said,  God  ot  Abr.
20.  22.  p.  came  to  king  of  Israel,  and  said  to  him

2  Kings  5.  3.  would  God  my  lord  were  with  the  p.
13.  if  the  p.  had  bid  thee  do  some  great  thing

6.  12.  Elisha  the  /?.  telleth  what  thou  speakest
9.  4.  young  man  they,  went  to  Ramotli-gilead

20.  11.  Isaiah  the  p.  cried  to  Lord,  he  brought
23. 18.  with  bones  of  p.  that  came  outot  Samaria

2  Chron.  12.  5.  came  Shemaiah  the  p.  to  Rehoboam
*13  22.  are  written  in  the  story  of  the  p.  lddo
15.  8.  when  Asa  heard  the  prophecy  ot  the/;.  Oded

21.  12.  there  came  a  writing  trom  Elijah  they;.

25.  16.  then  the  p.  forbare,  and  said,  l  know-
32'.  20.  the  p.  Isaiah  prayed  and  cried  to  heaven
35'  18.  none  like  it  from  the  days  ot  Samuel  they).
36  12.  humbled  not  himself  betore  Jeremiah  they?.
Ezra  5.  1.  then  H aggai  the;?,  prophesied

/*  ■.  j  D _ _  .1.  I  ktOOUl  1  n


5.


UUG  US  llO^ca,  Aocwtv.i  ,  t*»*-i*  ITT  1  •  1

Micah  lived  under  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  llezekian,


kings  of  Judah  ;  he  was  contemporary  with  Isaiah,
but  began  later  to  prophecy .

6.  Nahum  appeared  in  Judah  under  the  reign  oj
Hezekiah,  and  after  the  expedition  of  Sennache-
rib.

7.  Jeremiah  began  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  the
reign  of  josiah  king  of  Judah.  He  continued  to
prophesy  under  the  reigns  of  Shallum,  Jehoiakim,
.leconiah,  and  Zedekiah,  to  the  taking  of  Jerusa¬
lem  by  the  Chaldeans ;  and  it  is  thought  he  died
two  years  after  in  Egypt ;  Baruch  was  his  disciple
and  amanuensis .

8.  Zephaniah  appeared  at  the  beginning  of  the  reign
of  Josiah,  and  before  the  twenty  eighth  year  oj  this
prince  ;  he  was  contemporary  with  Jeremiah.

9.  Joel  prophesied  under  J osinh  about  the  same  time

as  Jeremiah  and  Zephaniah.  .

10.  Daniel  was  taken  into  Chaldea  in  the  fourth
year  of  Jehoiakim,  king  of  Judah,  and  prophesied
at  Babylon  to  the  end  of  the  captivity.

11.  Ezekiel  teas  carried  captive  to  Babylon,  along
with  .leconiah  king  of  Judah,  in  the  year  oj  the
world  3405.  He  began  to  prophesy  m  the  year
3409.  He  continued  till  towards  the  end  of  the
reign  of  N  ebuchadnezzar,  who  died  in  the  year  oj
the  world  3442.

12.  Habakkuk  lived  in  Judea  at  the  beginning  of

the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  about  the  year  3394,  and
before  the  coming  of  N  ebuchadnezzar  into  the
country  in  3398.  He  dwelt  in  J  udea  Tiring  the
captivity.  .

13.  Obadiah  lived  in  Judea  after  the  tal  tg  of  Jeru
salem,  avid  before  the  desolation  of  Idumea.

14.  Haggai  was  born  in  all  probability  at  Babylon,
from  whence  he  returned  with  Zerubbabel.  In
the  second  year  of  Darius  son  of  Hystaspes,  he
was  excited  by  God  to  exhort  Zerubbabel,  the
prince  of  Judah,  and  the  high  priest  Joshua,  go
resume  the  work  of  the  temple,  which  had  been  in¬
terrupted  for  so  long  time,  by  the  envy  of  those  who
were  enemies  to  the  Jews,  who  prevailed  with
Cyrus  to  revoke  that  permission  whereby  he  had
empowered  the  Jews  to  rebuild  their  temple.  And
Cambyses  the  son  of  Cyrus  coining  to  the  crown,
renewed  the  same  prohibition :  so  that  the  temple

•  for  fourteen  years  continued  in  the  same  state
wherein  the  Jews  had  put  it  immediately  after
their  return.

15.  Zechariah  prophesied  in  Judea  at  the  same  time
as  Haggai,  and  he  seems  to  have  continued  to  pro¬
phesy  after  him.

376


5  /  U  O.  1.  INCH  1  ]ape,n»  v»*v.  je  •  «  ,  ...

6.  14.  through  the  prophesying  ot  Haggai  the;?.
Psal.  7-1.  9-  there  is  no  more  any  p.  among  you
Isa  3  2.  Lord  doth  take  away  the  p.  and  prudent
9.  15.  the  p.  that  teaoheth  lies,  he  is  die  tail
28.  7.  priest  and  p.  have  erred  thro  strong  drink
Jer  6  13  from  p.  to  the  priests  deal  falsely,  8. 10.
is!  18.  nor  shall  the  word  perish  trom  the  p.

23.  11.  for  both  p.  and  priests  are  profane
28.  the  p.  that  hath  a  dream  let  him  tell
°8  6.  the  p.  Jeremiah  said,  amen,  the  Lord  do  so
'9'  p.  which  prophesieth  of  peace,  when  the  word
of  the  p.  shall  come  to  pass  then  p.  be  known
17.  so  Hananiah  the  p.  died  the  same  year

36.  26.  to  take  Baruch  and  Jeremiah  the  p.

37.  2.  nor  he  nor  his  servants  hearken  to  the  p.

38  10.  take  up  leremiah  the  p.  outot  dungeon
Lam.  2.  20.  shall  the  p.  he  slain  in  the  sanctuary  ?
Ezek. 26.  then  shall  they  seek  a  vision  of p.

14.  4.  and  cometli  to  the  p.  1  w  ill  answer  him

9.  if  die  /?.  be  deceived,  I  have  deceived  that  p.

10.  the  punishment  of  the  p.  shall  be  even  as
Flos  4  5  the  p.  also  shall  fall  with  thee  m  the  night
Q.  7.  the  p.  is  a  fool  |1  8.  p ■  is  a  snare  ot  a  towler

Amos  7.  14.  then  he  said,  i  was  no  /;.  nor  p.  son
Hah  3. 1.  a  prayer  of  Habakkuk  the;?,  on  Slugionoth
Zech.  13.  5.  be  shall  say.  I  am  no  p.  an  husbandman
Mai.  4.  5.  behold,  L  will  send  you  Elijah  the ./?.

Mat  1  22.  which  was  spoken  by  the p.  Isaiah,  2.
15  1  3.  3.  1  4.  14.  I  8.  17  - 1  21.  4.  Luke  3.  4.
John  1.  23.  1  12.  38.  Acts  28.  25.

2.  5.  in  Bethlehem,  for  thus  it  is  written  byjhe/?.
17.  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy  p.  27.  9.

12.  39.  but  the  sign  of  the  /?.  Jonas,  Luke  11.  29.

13.  35.  which  was  spoken  by  /?.  David,  27.  35.

21.  11.  this  is  Jesus  the  p.  ot  Nazareth  ot  Galilee
24.  15.  spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  p.  Mark  13.  14.
Luke  1.  76.  thou  child  be  called  p.  ot  die  Highest
4.  17.  delivered  to  him  the  book  of  the  p.  Esaias

24.  no;,  is  accepted  in  his  own  country
27.  many  lepers  in  the  time  ot  Eliseus  the  p.

7.  28.  not  a  greater  p.  than  John  the  Baptist
John  7.  40.  the  people  said,  of  a  truth  tins  is  the  p.

52.  look,  for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  p.

Jets  2.  16.  this  is  what  was  spoken  by  the  p.  Joel
7  an  not  in  temoles  made  with  hands,  as  saitli  p


Flos.  12.  13.  by  a  p.  the  Lord  brought  Israel  outot
Egypt,  and  by  a  p.  was  he  preserved
Mic.  2.  11.  he  shall  even  be  they,  of  his  people
Mat.  10.  41.  lie  that  receiveth  a  p.  in  the  name  of  a
p.  shall  receive  a  p.  reward

11.9.  but  wliat  went  ye  out  for  to  see :  a  p.?

13.  57.  a  p.  is  not  without  honour  save  in  his  own

country  and  house,  Mark  6.  4.  John  4.  44.
14.5.  he  feared  multitude,  because  they  accounted
him  as  a  p.  21. 26.  Mark  11.  32.  Luke  20.  6.

21.  46.  the  multitude,  they  took  him  for  a  p.

Mark  6. 15.  that  it  is  a  p.  or  as  one  ot  the  prophets
Luke  7. 16.  saying,  a  great  p.  is  risen  up  among  us

39.  this  man,  if  he  were  a  p.  would  have  known

13.  33.  for  it  cannot  be  that  a  p.  perish  out  ot  Jerus
24. 19.  concerning  Jesus,  who  was  a  p.  mighty

John  4. 19.  she  said,  1  perceive  that  thou  art  a  p.

9.  17.  the  blind  man  said,  he  is  ap.

Acts  2.  30.  David  being  a  p.  and  knowing  that  God

21. 10.  there  came  a  lertain  p.  named  Agabus
1  Cor.  14.  37.  if  any  man  think  himselt  to  be  a  p.
Tit  1. 12.  one,  even  a  p.  of  their  ow  n  land

False  PROPHET.

Acts  13.  6.  found  a  false  p.  a  Jew  named  Barjesus
Rev.  16. 1.3.  like  frogs  out  of  mouth  of  false  p.

19.  20.  the  beast  was  taken,  with  him  the  false  p.

20. 10.  devil  was  cast  where  beast  and  false  p.  are

See  Lord.

That  PROPHET.

Deut.  13.  3.  not  hearken  to  the  w-ords  of  that  p.

5.  and  that  p.  or  that  dreamer  shall  die,  18.  20.
Ezek.  14.  9.  1  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  p.

John  1.  21.  they  asked  him,  art  thou  that  p.  ?  25.

6. 14.  this  is  of  a  truth  that  p.  that  should  come
Acts  3.  23.  every  soul  which  will  not  hear  that  p.
PROPHETS.

Num.  11.  29.  that  all  the  Lord’s  people  were  p.

1  Sam.  10.  5.  thou  sha.lt  meet  a  company  of  p.

10.  p.  met  him  \\  11.  prophesied  among  the  p.

12.  is  Saul  also  among  the  p.  ?  19-  24.

28.  6.  the  Lord  answered  him  not  by  p.  15.

1  Kings  18. 4.  Obadiah  hid  100  p.  by  50  in  a  cave

13.  Jezebel  slew  the  p.  II 19. p.  of  Baal  450.  ||22.

40.  take  the p.  of  Baal,  let  none  of  them  escape
19.  10.  Israel  have  forsaken  thy  covenant,  have

slain  thy  p.  with  the  sword,  14.  Neh.  9.  SC-

22.  6.  the  king  of  Israel  gathered  the  p.  together
22.  I  will  be  a  lying  spirit  in  p.  2  Chron.  18.21.

2  Kings  3. 13.  to  p.  of  thy  father,  and  p.  of  mother
’the;


23.  2.  josiah  went  and  the p.  to  the  house  of  Lord
2  Chron.  20. 20.  believe  his  p.  so  shall  ye  prosper

24.  19.  he  sent  p.  ||  36.  16.  they  misused  his  p.
Ezra  5.  2.  with  them  were  the  p.  of  God  helping
Neh.  6.  7.  and  thou  hast  appointed  p.  to  preach

9.  30.  thou  testitiedst  by  thy  Spirit  in  thy  p .

32.  the  trouble  that  hath  come  on  our;?.

Isa.  29. 10.  the  p.  and  seers  hath  he  covered
30.  10.  say  to  the  p.  prophesy  not,  Amos  2. 12.
Jer.  2.8.  and  p.  prophesied  by  Baal,  and  walked
26.  their  urinces.  their  priests  and  p.  are  asnamet


CIS  X.  JO.  11113  13  "HOI  ..c.o  ..  .  -  -

1 .  48.  not  in  temples  made  with  hands,  as  saitli  p.
8.  28.  in  his  chariot  he  read  Esaias  the  p.  30.

34.  1  pray  thee,  of  whom  speaketh  the  p.  this  r
13  20.  he  gave  them  judges  until  Samuel  the  p.

2  Pet.  2.  16.  the  ass  forbade  the  madness  ot  the  p.
See  Priest.

A  PROPHET.

Gen.  20.  7-  now  restore  man  his  wife,  for  he  is  a  p.
Num.  12.  6.  if  there  be  ap.  among  you,  I  the  Lord
Deut.  13.  1.  if  there  arise  ap.  or  dreamer  ot  dreams
18.  15.  I  w  ill  raise  up  a  p.  from  among  brethren,
to  him  ye  shall  hearken,  18.  Acts  3.  22.  17.  37.
22.  when  ap.  speaketh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
34?  10.  there  arose  not  a  p.  in  Israel  like  Moses
ludg  6.  8.  Lord  sent  a  p.  to  the  children  of  Israel
j  Sam.  3.  20.  Samuel  was  established  to  be  a  p.

9  9.  he  that  is  now'  called  a  p.  was  called  a  seer

1  Kings  13.  18.  he  said,  1  am  a  p.  also  as  thou  art

18.  22.  1,  even  I  only  remain  a  p.  of  the  Lord

19.  16.  shalt  anoint  Elisha  to  he  a  p.  111  thy  room

20.  13.  there  came  a  p.  unto  Ahab,  saying

22.  7-  is  there  not  here  aj>.  of  the  Lord  besides,  to
inquire  of  him  ?  2  Kings  3. 11.  2  Chron.  18.  6.

2  Kings  5.  8.  he  shall  know  there  is  ap.  in  Israel
2  Chron.  25.  15.  the  Lord  sent  a  p.  to  Amaziah

28.  9.  but  a  p.  of  the  Lord  was  there,  Oded
Jer.  1.  5.  1  ordained  thee  a  p.  to  the  nations

29.  26.  that  is  mad  and  maketh  himselt  a  p.  27-
Ezek.  2.  5.  there  hath  been  a  p,  among  them,  33.  33.

14.  7*  cometh  to  a  v.  to  inquire  ot  him  about  me


.  i.O-  mi'*/'.  J  — > -  ", . —

26.  their  princes,  their  priests  and  p.  are  asnamed
30.  your  own  sword  hath  devoured  your;?.

4.  9.  the  p.  shall  wonder  ||  5. 13.  p.  become  wind

5.  31.  the p.  prophesy  falsely,  and  priests  bear  rule
8.  1.  they  shall  bring  out  the  bones  of  the  p.

13.  13.  1  w'ill  till  the  p.  with  drunkenness

14.  13.  the;?,  say,  ye  shall  not  see  the  sword

14.  p.  prophesy  lies  in  my  name,  sent  them  not

15.  by  sword  and  famine  shall  those  p.  be  cons-
23. 13.  1  have  seen  folly  in  the  p.  ot  Samaria

14.  1  have  seen  in  the  p.  an  horrible  thing

15.  from./),  is  profaneness  gone  forth  into  land

21.  1  have  not  sent  these  p.  yet  they  ran

25.  I  have  heard  what  the  p.  said,  that  prophesy

26.  they  are  p.  of  the  deceit  ot  their  own  hear’

30.  1  am  against  the  p.  that  steal  my  word,  31.

26.  7.  so  priests  and  p.  heard  Jeremiah  speaking
8.  the;?,  and  all  the  people  took  Jeremiah

1 1 .  then  spake  the  p.  this  man  is  worthy  to  die

27.  9.  therefore  hearken  not  to  your  /?.  16.
t5.  and  that  ye  and  the  p.  might  perish

18.  if  they  b e/?.  and  word  of  Lord  he  with  them

28.  8.  the  p.  that  have  been  before  me  and  thee
29. 1.  words  of  the  letter  Jeremiah  sent  to  the  p.

8.  saith  the  Lord,  let  not  your;?,  deceive  you

15.  the  Lord  hath  raised  us  up;?,  in  Babylon

32.  32.  they  and  their  /?.  provoke  me  to  anger
37.  19.  where  are  now  your p.  which  prophesied
Lam.  2. 9.  her  p.  also  find  no  vision  from  the  Lore
14.  thy  p.  have  seen  vain  things  tor  thee
4.  13.  for  the  sins  of  her  /?.  that  hath  shed  blood
Ezek.  13.  2.  prophesy  against  the  p.  of  Israel

3.  thus  saitli  the  Lord,  woe  unto  the  foolish  p.

4.  O  Israel,  thy  p.  are  like  foxes  in  deserts

9.  my  hand  shall  be  upon  the  p.  that  see  vanity

22.  25.  there  is  a  conspiracy  ot  her  /?.  in  midst
28.  her  p.  daubed  them  with  untempered  mortar

Flos.  6.  5.  I  have  hewed  them  by  the  p.  have  slain

12. 10.  1  have  spoken  by  p.  and  multiplied  visions
Amos  2. 11.  I  have  raised  up  of  your  sons;?.

12.  and  commanded  the  p.  saying,  prophesy  not
Mic.  3.  6.  the  sun  shall  go  dow  n  over  the  p.

11.  and  the  p.  thereof  divine  tor  money
Zeph.  3.  4.  her  p.  are  light  and  treacherous  persons
Zech.  1.  4.  to  whom  the  former;?,  have  cried

5.  and  the  p.  do  they  live  for  ever  ?

7.7.  the  words  the  Lord  hath  cried  hy  former  p.

12.  wrord  Lord  sent  in  his  Spirit  by  former  p-
13. 2.  I  will  cause  the  p.  to  pass  out  of  the  land

4.  the  p.  shall  be  ashamed ,  each  of  his  vls.10“
Mat.  5. 12.  so  persecuted  they  the  p.  Luke  0.  -4.

17.  think  not  that  1  am  come  to  destroy  the  />•

7.  12.  do  so  to  them,  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  /?.

13.  17.  many;,  have  desired  to  see,  Luke  10.  -4.
22.40.  on  these  two  hang  all  the  law  and  the;?.

23.  31.  the  children  of  them  who  killed  the  J?.

34.  1  send  unto  you  p.  and  wise  men,  Luke  11.  w-
37.  O  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest  the p.

Mark  1.  2.  as  it  is  written  in  the/?. 1  send  my  n: les
senger,  Luke  18.  31 . 1  24.  2d.  John  * 6.  ■ 1-
Luke  1.70.  as  he  spake  by  his  holy;?.  2  Ret-  3.^
16. 16.  the  law  and  the  p.  were  until  John
29.  Abraham  said,  they  have  Moses  and/?.


P  RO


P  R  O


Luke  24.  25.  slow  to  believe  what  the  ®.  have  spoken
JohnX.  45.  we  found  him  ot  whom  the  p.  did  write
8.  5».  Abraham  and  the  p.  are  dead,  5.1.

Acts*.  18.  God  shewed  by  the  mouth  of  his  p.  21.
11.  27.  p.  came  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch
13.  1.  in  church  at  Antioch  certain  p.  and  teachers
15.  after  the  reading  of  the  law  and  the  p.

J.  .  c?me  o“  y?u  which  is  spoken  in  the  p.

15.  3..  Judas  and  Silas  being p.  also  themselves
24.  14.  believing  all  things  written  in  the  p.

26.  22.  saying  none  other  things  than  p.  did  say
27.  king  Astrippa,  believest  thou  the  p.  ?

Horn.  1.  2.  which  he  promised  afore  by  his  p.

3.  21.  being  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the  p.

11.  3.  Lord,  they  have  killed  p.  and  digged  down
l  Cor.  12.28.  secondarily,  p.  thirdly,  teachers

29.  are  all  p. ?  ||  14.  29 .  let  p.  speak  two  or  three
Eph.  2.  20.  built  on  the  foundation  of  the  p.

3.  5.  as  it  is  now  revealed  to  liisp.  by  the  Spirit
4*  11.  and  he  gave  some  p.  and  teachers
1 Loess.  2.  15.  who  killed  the  l.onl  and  theirown  p.
Heh.  1. 1.  who  spake  to  the  fathers  by  the  p.

Jam.  5. 10.  take,  my  brethren,/),  who  have  spoken

1  /  et.  1.  10.  ot  which  salvation  the  p.  inquired
Rev.U.  10.  because  these  two  p.  tormented  them

18.  20.  rejoice  over  her,  ye' holy  apostles  and  p.

C4.  m  her  was  found  blood  of  p.  and  of  saints
22.  9.  do  it  not,  for  I  am  of*  thy  brethren  the  v
All  the  PROPI1  ELS.

-Ktngs  19.1.  told  Jezebel  how  he  had  slain  all  the  p.
22.  10.  kings  ot  Israel  and  Judah  on  their  throne,
and  all  the  p.  prophesied,  12.  2  Citron.  18  9  11

2  Kings  10.  19.  now  call  to  me  all  the  p.  of  Baal
17.  13.  Lord  testified  against  Israel  by  all  the  p.

Mat.  11.  13.  all  the  p.  prophesied  until  John
Luke  11.50.  that  blood  of  all  the  p.  may  be  required
13.  28.  when  ye  see  all  the  p.  in  kingdom  of  God
24.  2< .  and  beginning  at  all  the  p.  he  expounded
24.  yea,  and  all  the  p.  from  Samuel  foretold
10.  43.  to  him  give  all  the  p.  witness  thro’  his  name
False  P  ROPH  E  L  S.

Mat.  7.  15.  beware  of  false  p.  in  sheep's  clothing
24.  11.  many  false  p.  shall  rise,  24.  Mark  13.  22.
Luke  6.  26.  tor  so  did  their  fathers  to  the  false  p.

2  let.  2. 1.  there  wer  e  false  p.  also  among  them
1  John  4.  1.  because  many  false  p.  are  gone  out
My  PROPHETS.

1  Chron.  16.  22.  saying,  touch  not  mine  anointed,
and  do  my  p.  no  harm,  Psal.  105.  15.
Of  the  PROPHETS.

10. 10.  behold,  a  company  of  the  p.  met  him
,t.' •  when  they  saw  the  company  of  the  p.

1  Kings  20.  35.  a  certain  man  ot  the  sons  of  the  p

41.  the  king  discerned  him  that  he  was  of  the  p.

13-  words  of  the  p.  declare  good,  2  Chr.  18  12

2  K  nigs  2.  .3.  sons  of  the  p.  that,  were  at  Ref  h  el  came
5.  the  sons  of  the  p.  at  Jericho  came  to  Elisha

7- fifty  sons  of  thep.  wentto  view  afar  ofif

15.  the  sons  of  the  p.  said,  the  spirit  of  Elijah
oJ-  a  'Yoma'i  of  the  wives  of  sons  of  the  p.  cried
38.  and  seethe  pottage  for  the  sons’  of  the  p.

i4'. my  Hod,  think  thou  of  the  rest  of  the  p.

, :  '£■  9-  because  of  the  p.  all  my  bones  shake

16.  hearken  not  to  the  words  of  the  p.  2?.  14.

26.  how  long shall  this  be  in  the  heart  of  the  p.  ?

7i  o'  n°'.uSf  l  si,nilitudes  by  ministry  of  the  p.

?-.t1,af.hear  these  by  the  mouth  of  the  p.
Mm'  14L  Ldia.3  or  one  of  the  p.  Mark  ft.  15.  |  8.  28.
ye  build  the  tombs  of  the  p.  Luke  11.  47
s  Wlth  them  in  the  blood  of  the  ®.

/t/i-fo  that,  scriptures  of  the  p.  might  be  fulfilled
aVZn-  oneff. tlie  P-  was  risen  again,  19.

,  I* „3.  ye  are  children  of  the  p.  and  of  covenant

*12"  J*? 't  written  in  the  book  of  the  p.

0..  which  of  p.  have  not  your  fathers  persecuted  ?

13  15.  alter  the  reading  of  the  law  and  the  p.

.7.  because  they  knew  not  the  voice  of  the  p.

15. 10  and  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the  p.

Persuafling  them  of  Jesus  out  of  the  p.

I  t.6*  ‘£1  ma.d?  manifest  by  scriptures  of  the  p.
vi;!  'o  oA3r  s.Pmits  of  the  p.  are  subjects  to  the  p.

‘if  r.  20*  built  on  the  foundation  of  the  p.

Rev  a'  iC'f  T  w?uld  fail  me  to  fell  of  the  p.

«  6-/or  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  the  p.

>2.  6.  the  Lord  God  of  the  holy  p.  sent  his  angel
,  .  Servants  the  PROPHETS.

17  u'-nuyT avenge  blood  of  my  serv.  the  p.

^3  itlJl'oM  i  liSen-t)tuyoV,buy  my«™.  thep.

21'  i^in4LT0rdJlaH  1alf  by  a  1 1  his  servants  the  p.
cl'  Q'  ?,  M  spake  by  his  servants  the  p.  24.  2.
A  h"'  lch  thou  hast  commanded  by  serv.  p.
or  «  ,  •  s<rnt  you  my  .r.  p.  25.  4.  |  20.  10  |  35  15

^/'38eal|7enTt0hthe  woriis  of-  my  ser™nts  the  p.

J  ft.  38.  17.  I  have  spoken  in  old  time  by  my

7  ^h'chhe,set  before  us  by  his  servants  p.

'erh  i  *  I'  ie  eaJetb  Ins  secret  to  his  servants  p
fev  m  7  WS-Th!?h  1  commanded  my  serv.  p.

II  in  7fj hmshed, as  he  declared  to  his  serv.p.

•  o.  that  thou  shouldest  give  reward  to  ser-

iw  on  ...PROPHETESS.  vantstheP-

«/*4  *42and1rVhnrfi  took  a  ti,mbrel  in  her  hand

a  ?ianrl  Geborah  a p.  judged  Israpl
4‘T  ft 14'  'yent  to  Hohlah  pci  c/tron  34  00

A631!*S;0,  hthink  f!’6  *  ^diJh  “*

Johno  'o'an’lT  °  m  hath,set  forth  to  he  a  p.

....  jj-.tar  our  sins,  4. 10.

h  a<jcording  t°  the  p.  of  every  one

•  -  0.  let  USpP^0(Pb|S^according  to  p.  of  faith

ibroad  or  Pro  ,uer’  °,ne  that  routes  from

vord  P  ace’  The  Hebrew

or  Lecher,  has  the  same  signification.


PRO


In  the  language  of  the  .Terns,  they  go  by  this  name,
who  come  to  dwell  m  their  country,  or  who  embrace
tnetrreligton,  though  they  are  not  Jews  by  birth,
riii Hebrews  distinguish  two  kinds  of  Proselytes.
1  he  first  are  called  Proselytes  of  the  Gate,  and
the  others  Proselytes  of  Justice.  The  first  are
those  who  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Israel,  or  even  out
of  that  country ,  and  who,  without  obliging  them¬
selves  to  circumcision ,  or  to  any  other  ceremony  of
the  law,  feared  and  worshipped  the  true  God,  ob¬
serving  the  rules  that  were  imposed  upon  the  chil-
dren  of  Noah  :  these  precepts  are  seven  in  number,
L1.J  He  Judicns.  Obedience  is  due  to  judges,  ma¬
gistrates,  and  princes.  [2]  De  cultu  extraneo.  The
worship  of  false  gods,  superstition,  and  sacrilege .
are  absolutely  forbidden.  [3]  De  maledictione  no-
minis  sanctissimi.  As  also  cursing  the  name  of
(.rod,  blasphemies,  and  false  oaths.  [4]  De  revela-
tione  turpitudmum.  Likewise  all  incestuous  and
unlawf  ul  conjunctions  or  copulations,  as  sodomy
bestiality,  crimes  against  nature.  [5]  De  sangui-
nis  eftusione.  The  effusion  of  the  blood  of  all  sorts
oj  animals,  murder,  wounds,  and  mutilations.  f(jl
JJe  rapina._  Thefts,  cheats,  lying,  tkc.  [7]  He
metnbro  ammalis  viventis.  The  parts  of  an  ani-
(hol  still  alive  are  not  to  be  eaten,  as  was  practised
try  some  pagans.  Of  this  number  was  Naaman,
the  Syrian,  Cornelius  the  centurion,  the  eunuch  of
queen  Candace,  and  others.  Such  as  would  enter
themselves  as  Proselytes  of  habitation,  or  of  the
gat  e,,  promised  with  an  oath,  in  the  presence  of  three
witnesses,  to  keep  those  seven  precepts.  Their  pri¬
vileges  were  said  to  be,  First,  that  by  the  observa¬
tion  of  the  rules  of  natural  justice,  and  by  exemp¬
tion  from  idolatry,  blasphemy,  incest,  adultery,
and  murder,  they  thought  they  were  in  the  path
to  eternal  life  Secondly,  they  might  dwell  in  the
land  of  Israel,  and  have  a  share  in  the  outward
prosperities  of  the  people  of  God.
lhe  Proselytes  of  Justice  are  those  that  were  con¬
verted  to  Judaism,  who  had  engaged  themselves  to
lecene  circumcision,  and  to  observe  the  whole  law
oj  Moses.  I  bus  were  they  admitted  to  all  the  pre¬
rogatives  of  the  people  of  God,  as  well  in  this  life  as
a  the  other.  The  Rabbins  say,  that  before  cir¬
cumcision  was  administered  to  them,  and  before
they  were  admitted  into  the  religion  of  the  He¬
brews,  they  were  examined  about  the  motives  of
their  conversion ;  to  know  whether  their  change
was  voluntary,  or  whether  it  proceeded  from  any
reasons  of  interest,  fear,  ambition,  or  such  like.

/  tu  ee  things  were  required  in  a  complete  Prose-
D  'e>  which,  were,  washing,  or  plunging  his  body  in
a  cistern  of  water,  circumcision,  and  sacrifice  ;  but
Jor  women,  only  washing  and  sacrifice.
af'Pr  !3-  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  p.
Acts  b.  o.  they  chose  Nicholas  a p.  of  Antioch
PROSELYTES.

Jews  and/;,  we  hear  in  our  tongues
J3.  43.  many  Jews  and  religious®,  followed  Paul
,  PROSPECT.

/r V.+  o.fioors  and  posts  were  square  in  p.

.  4i'  chambers  whose/),  was  to  the  south
46./).  to  the  north  ||  42.  15.  p.  to  the  east,  43  4
„  PROSPER,

ao'  ;V'  4°'  ,90d  T11  send  his  ansel,  and  p.  thee

o7T'o  t  ow,' tll0u, cio  P-  my  way  which  1  go
3y.  3.  Lord  made  all  which  Joseph  did  top.  23.

*4.  41.  you  transgress,  but  it  shall  not  p.
cf\<fn  thou  shalt  not/),  in  thy  ways

.'9.  9.  that  ye  may  p.  Josh.  1.  7.  1  Kings<2.  3.

1  Rings  2„.  ]2.  the  prophets  prophesied,  saying,  go
up  to  Ramoth-gilead  and  p.  15.  2  Chr.  18.  if  14
1  C /iron.  22.  11 .  now,  my  son,  the  Lord  p.  thee’

13.  then  shalt  thou  p.  it  thou  takest  heed
™  1 '■  hgbt  ye  not,  for  ye  shall  not  p.

20.  20.  believe  his  prophets,  so  shall  ye p.

-4.  »0.  why  transgress  ye,  that  ye  cannot  p.  ?

\t  )  a®  he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made  him  to®.
o' UrT'i 11  •••?•  P''ay  thee,  thy  servant  this  day
r- ■  f  said ,  the  Godot  heaven,  he  will  ®.  us

u  '  )'■  dle  tabernacles  of  robbers  p.
r'.'vH.  1  3.  and  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  p.

-7'  ,t4-an<l  111  thy  majesty  p.  thou,  ride  thou
mo  L,ese  ara,the  ungodly  who  p.  in  the  world
they  shall  p.  that  love  thee
_ov.  28.  13.  he  that  coverelh  liis  sins  shall  not®.
tC' A}’  ®'„t h°n  knowest  not  whether  shall  ®.

Isa.  5_.  +  13.  behold  my  servant  shall/).

53.  10.  pleasure  of  the  J.ord  shall  p.  in  his  hand
o+.  17.  no  veapon  formed  against  thee  shall  ».

T°:  sha,Jl  p-  m  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it

v>7-  and  thou  shalt  not  p.  in  them

5.  28.  yet  they  p.\]  lo.  21.  they  shall  not  p.  20. 11.
lo’  here  tore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  p.  ?

- 30.  w  rite  this  man  childless,  a  man  that  shall

^  notp.  in  his  days,  for  no  man  of  his  seed  shall  ®.
qo'  ,  n~  si'aJ*  ceign  and  p  and  execute
?'■  tho  ye  fight  with  Chaldeans,  ye  shall  notp.
fa™,- \ her  adversaries  are  chief,  her  enemiesp.

lj;.  +  4.  the  vine  when  burnt,  will  it  p.f

6.  13.  thou  didst p  ||  17.  9.  shall  it  p.f  10.

J 7 •  m.  shall  he  p.  shall  he  escape  ?

Dan  3  +30.  king  made  Shadrach  top.  in  Pabylon

*4.  Ite  shall  destroy  wonderfully  and  p.

25.  through  his  policy  he  shall  cause  .  raft  top.

11.  .  they  shall  speak  lies,  hut  it  shall  not  p.  36.

3  John  1  wish  above  all  that  thou  ma\’est»

„  „  .  PROSPERED.

Gcw.24.  56.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  p.  my  way
■Tudg.  4.  24.  the  hand  of  Israel p.  against  Jabin
J  Ram.  18.  +  o.  and  David  went  out  and  p.  +  14.

*;  II-  7-  Davirl  demandetl  how  the  war  p.

-  Kings \S,  I.  Hezekiah  p.  2  Citron.  .31  21  13°  30
\  Uiron.  qg.  23.  Solom.  p.  ||  2  Chron.  14.7.  Asap.*
tin  4uP;  through  the  prophesying  of  flaggai
n  m,ho  hardened  himself  ag.  him,  and  hafhp.f
a\lo  •;  'b'  f°.,hIS  Daniel  p.  in  the  reign  of  Darius
8.  K.  it  cast  dowrn  truth  to  the  ground.and  itp.

1  Cor.  16.  2.  ever/R^)afp'ay  hy,  as  God  hath  p.  him

E:> a  5.  8.  and  this  work  p.  in  their  hands


Psal.  3< .  7-  fret  not  bcc.  of  him  that  p.  in  his  way
/  rov.  17.  8.  a  gift,  whithersoever  it  turneth  it  p.

3  John  2.  mayest  be  in  health,  even  as  thv  soul®
j  PROSPERITY.

Dent.  23.6.  thou  shalt  not  seek  their  p.  all  thy  days
i  Ram.  25.  6.  thus  shall  say  to  him  that  liveth  in  p
1  h  trigs  10.  7.  thy  wisdom  and  p.  exceedeth  fame
Job  15.  21.  in  p.  the  destroyer  shall  come  on  him
36.  11.  if  serve  him,  shall  spend  their  days  in  p.
i  sal .  30.  6.  in  my  p.  I  snid,  l  sha.ll  never  he  moved

3o.  27.  Lord  hath  pleasure  in  the  p.  ot  his  servant
<3.  3.  when  I  saw  the  p.  of  the  wicked
118.  25.  O  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  send  no wp.

122.  7.  peace  be  within  thy  walls,  p.  in  palaces
Krov.  l.  32.  the  p.  ot  fools  shall  destroy  them
Eccl.  7.  14.  in  the  day  ofp.  be  joyful
Jer.  22.21.  1  spake  to  thee  in  thy  p.

33.  9.  for  all  the  p.  that  1  procure  to  it
Lam.  3.  17._ removed  far  from  peace,  I  forgat  p
Dan.  8.  +  25.  by  p.  shall  he  destroy  many
Zee®.  1.17 .  my  cities  thro’p.  shall  yet  be  spread
7.  7*  when  Jerusalem  was  inhabited  and  inp.
PROSPEROUS.

21:  whether  the  Lord  made  his  journey  p
j’,..  Lord  was  with  Joseph,  he  wasap.  man
Josh.  1.  8.  then  shalt  thou  make  thy  way  p.

Judg.  18.  5.  whether  the  way  we  go  shall  be  p.

‘j  .rP‘  biake  the  habitation  ot  righteousnessp.

Jsa.  48. 15.  and  he  shall  make  his  wav p.

Zech.  8.  12.  for  the  seed  shall  be  p.  vine  give  fruit
Rom.  1.  10.  if  at  length  1  might  have  a  p.  journey
„  PROSPEROUSLY.

~  Chron.  7.  11.  Solomon  p.  effected  all  that  came
“sal.  45.  4.  and  in  thy7  majesty  ride  p.  because
PROSTITUTE.


Lev.  19.  29.  do  notp.  thy  daughter  to  be  a  whou
r>  PROTECTEST.


Psal.  5.  f  11.  shout  for  joy,  because  thou  p.  them
j.  ,  PROTECTION.

Deut.  32.  38.  let  them  rise  up  and  be  your  p.

_  <0  t  PROTEST,  ED.

Gen.  43.  3.  the  man  did  solemnly  p.  to  us,  saying
1  o am.  8.  9.  hearken,  yet  p.  solemnly  unto  them
1  Kings  2.  42.  and  1  p.  unto  thee,  saying,  know
Jer.  \\  7.  1  earnestly  p  to  your  fathers
Zee®.  3.  6.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  p.  to  Joshua
1  Cor.  15.  31.  Ip.  by  your  rejoicing  in  Christ
PROTESTING.

Gen. ,43.  t  3.  the  man  p.  protested  to  us,  saying
Jer.  11.  7.  andp.  saying,  obey  my  voice
.j  ,  PROTRACT.

JSeh.  9.  1 30.  many  years  didst  thou  p.  over  them
rin  ,  PROUD.

‘Cl  9*  13.  the  p.  helpers  do  stoop  under  him
do.  E.  by  understanding  he  smiteth  through  thep.

J,1'  and  !eire  si,al1  tll>'  P-  waves  be  stayed
40  11.  behold  every  one  that  isp.  and  abase  him

r>  /  ,Sk<?n?ver'y  one  tkat 's  P-  bring  him  low

42.  3.  the  tongue  that  speaketh  p.  things

31.  23.  and  plentifully  rewardeth  thep.  doer
f-  blessed  is  the  man  w;lio  respecteth  not  the  p
i,  Ood,  the  ®.  are  risen  against  me
94.  lift  up  thyself,  render  a  reward  to  the p.

101  •  o.  him  that  hath  ap.  heart  will  I  not  suffer
* a9u  bas1  rebuked  the  p.  that  are  cursed
51.  thep.  have  had  me  greatly  in  derision
69.  the  p.  have  forged  a  lie  against  me
78.  let  p.  be  ashamed,  for  they  dealt  perversely
85.  thep.  digged  pits  for  me,  not  after  thy  law
\.be  surety  tor  me,  let  not  the  p.  oppress  me
123.  4.  our  soul  is  filled  with  contempt  of  the  p.
EL  5.  the  p.  waters  had  gone  over  our  soul
138.  6.  but  tlie  p.  he  knoweth  afar  off
140.  5.  thep.  have  hid  a  snare  for  me  and  cords

'AP-  *00*<’  a  lying  tongue

15.  ..o.  the  T.ord  will  destroy  the  house  of  the®

, °;uevery  in,  heart  is  abomination  to  Lord
19.  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  p.

21.  4.  an  high  look  and  a  p.  heart  is  sin
i4,  P-  scorner  is  his  name,  who  deals  in  p.  xvrath
*8.  2o.  he  that  is  of  a  p  heart  stirreth  up  strife
7  •  7- 8-  lhe  patient  better  than  the  p.  m  spirit

f'  d?iy  0  I  onl  on  every  one  that  is  p.
13.  11. 1  will  cause  the  arrogancy  of  thep.  to  cease

16.  6.  we  have  heard  ot  the  p.  wrath  of  Moab

l?’  V?'  l  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken

43.  2.  all  thep.  men  answered  Jeremiah
48.  29.  heard  pride  of  Moab,  he  is  exceeding  p.

50.  29.  she  hath  been  p.  |l  31.  O  thou  mostp.

T?~i  510.SV;’  ?hal  1  stumble  and  fall,  none  raise  him
tlab.  2.  0.  he  is  a  ».  man,  neither  keepeth  at  home
Mai.  3.  15.  we  cal  the  p.  happy  ||  4.  l.p.  as  stubble

1*  an  f;nh;i(h  .S('atter7<l  the  p.  in  imagination
Rom.  L  30.  filled  with  unrighteousness,  p.  boasters
l  rnm-  0-4.  he  iso.  knowing  nothing,  but  doting
r  im;  y.n\en  shall  be  lovers  of  themselves,  p.
Jam.  4.  6.  God  resisted)  the  p.  1  Pet  5  5
„  J  ,  PROUDLY.  *  ’

1  w  ^'i1;  nherem  dealtp.  he  was  above  them
n(>  more  so  exceeding  p.

n  /  ^V1C!'r,tboP  ,kn,e'Yest  that  tlfey  dealtp.  16,  29.
/W. 017.  10.  with  their  mouth  they  speak  p.

31. 18.  which  speak  grievous  thingsp.  against  ri°ht
Isa.  3- 5  child  shall  behave  himself  p.  agsL  ancient
nrnj  5i'o+2°'a.n<  ’,1S  mind  hardened  to  deal  p
Chad.  12.  neither  shouldest  thou  have  spoken  v
c.  ..  PROVE

Signifies,  [1]  To  try  and  examine,  2  Cor.  13.  5.  foi
lo  make  manifest  by  argument.  Acts  9.  22'.  Rom
3.  9.  [3]  lo  make  good,  Acts  24.  13.  [4]  To  try
by  some  affliction,  that  men  may  know  their  own
hearts,  Deut.  8.  2.  [5]  To  .find  true,  Eccl.  7.  23
[6]  To  judge.  Job  9.  20.  [7]  To  discern,  approve
of ,  and  conform  to,  \\ om.  12.  2.  **

Prod.  16.  4.  that  I  niayp.  them,  Deut.  8. 16

7H*  f oar* h?4,  , Pd  iscome  f0 P-  you  '

72q  Q  ,?• t0  11  umble  thee,  and  to  p.  thee,  to  know

Tuda’q  00  ?he;  hom  didst  P-  atMassah
Jung,  2.  that  through  them  l  mav  v  Isr  S  i  4

6  39.  let  me  p  thee  but  this  once  £4  fleece  ’
r  1  she  oanetop.  Solomon,  2  Chr.  9.  l.

Job  9-  20.  tf  I  say  pertect,  it  shall  p.  me  perverse

377


P  U  13


P  R  O


FRU


Job  13.  *  la.  1  wil  p.  mine  own  ways  before  him
Psal. ‘26.  2.  examine  me,  O  Lord,  and  p.  me
Eccl.  2.  1.  go  to  now,  1  will  p.  thee  with  mirth
Dan.  1 . 12.  p.  thy  servants,  1  beseech  thee,  ten  days
Mai.  3. 10.  bring  the  tithes,  p.  me  now  herewith
Luke  14.  19.  1  have  bought  oxen,  1  go  1o  p.  them
John  0.  6.  this  he  said  to  p.  him,  tor  he  knew
Acts  24.  13.  neither  can  they  p.  the  things,  25. 7-
R»/n.  12.  2.  that  ye  may  p.  what  is  that  good  will
2  Cor.  8.  8.  to  p.  'the  sincerity  ot  your  love
13  5  p.  your  own  selves,  know  ye  not  youi  sen  es
Gal.  6.  4.  but  let  every  man  p.  his  own  work
1  Thess  5  21.  p.  all  things,  hold  tast  what  is  good
PROVED.

Gen.  42. 15.  hereby  ye  shall  bep.  by  life  of  Pharaoh
1(1.  aend  one  of  you,  that  your  words  may  be  p.
Exod.  15.  25.  made  a  statute,  and  there  he  p.  them

1  Sam.  17.  39-  lie  had  not  p.his  sword,  David  said  to

Saul,  1  cannot  go  with  these,  1  have  not  p.  them
Psai  17.  3.  thou  hast  p.  my  heart  and  visited  me
66.  10.  thou,  <  >  God,  hast  p.  us,  thou  hast  tried  us
81. 7.  1  p-  thee  at  the  waters  ot  Menbah
Q5  9.  when  your  fathers  p.  me  and  saw  my  works
Eccl.  7.23.  all  this  ha-  e  1  p ■  by  wisdom
Van.  1.  14.  he  consented,  and  p.  them  ten  days
Rom.  3. 9.  we  before p.  lews  and  Gentiles  under  st.n

2  Cor.  8  22.  whom  we  have  often  p.  diligent
1  Tim.  3.  10.  and  let  these  also  be  first  p.

Heb  3. 9.  your  fathers  p.  me,  and  saw  my  works

PROVE I H.

Deut.  13.  3.  for  Lord  your  God  p.  you,  to  know
PROVING.

Acts  9.  22.  Saul  p.  that  this  is  very  Christ
Ei'h.  5.  10.  p.  what  is  acceptable  to  the  Lord
*  PROVENDER.

Gen.  24.  25.  we  have  both  straw  and  p.  enough
32.  the  man  gave  straw  and  p.  for  camels

42.  27.  one  opened  sack  to  give  his  ass p.  in  the  inn

43,  24-.  the  man  gave  their  asses  p.

Jud';.  19.  19.  yet  there  is  both  straw  and  p.

21.  he  brought  him  and  gave  p.  to  the  asses
Isa  30.  24.  the  oxen  and  asses  shall  eat  clean  p.
PROVERB.

The  Hebrew’s  give  the  name  of  Proverbs,  Para¬
bles,  or  Similitudes,  to  moral  sentences,  maxims,
comparisons,  or  enigmas,  expressed  in  a  style
that  is  poetical,  figurative,  close,  and  sententious  :
they  call  this  kind  of  Proverbs,  Mishle  Solo¬
mon  says,  that  in  his  time  maxims  oj  this  sort
uere  the  chief  study  of  the  learned.  A  wise  man
will  endeavour,  says  he,  to  understand  a  pro¬
verb,  and  the  interpretation,  the  words  ot  the
wise,  and  their  dark  sayings,  Prov.  1.  6.  In
the  Proverbs  of  Solomon  we  find  rules  Jor  the
conduct  of  all  conditions  of  life  ;  for  kings,  cour¬
tiers,  men  engaged  in  the  affairs  of  the  world  ;
for  masters,  servants,  fathers,  mothers,  and  chil¬
dren.  ,,  ,  ,  ,

Deut.  28.  37.  and  ye  shall  be  a  p.  and  a  by-word
1  Sam.  10.12.  it  became  a/),  is  Saul  among  prophets .
24. 1.3.  as  saith  the  p.  of  the  ancients

1  Kings  9.  Israel  shall  be  a p.  and  a  by-word

2  Chron.  7.  20.  this  house  will  l  make  to  be  a  p.

Psal.  69.  11.  and  1  became  a  p.  to  them

Prov.  1 . 6.  to  understand  a  p.  and  words  or  the  wise
Isa.  14. 4.  take  up  this  p.  against  the  king  ot  Baby  Ion
Jer.  24.  Q.  I  will  deliver  them  to  be  a p.  and  curse
Ezek.  12.  22.  what  is  thatp.  ye  have  in  land  of  lsr  r
23.  1  will  make  this  p.  cease,  and  they  shall  no
more  use  it  as  a  p  in  Israel,  18.  2,  3.
14. 8.  T  will  make  him  a  sign,  and  a  p.  and  cut  oft
Hah.  2.  f).  all  these  take  up  a  taunting,?.  against  him
Lukek.  23.  will  surely  say  thisjo.  physician  heal  thy
John  16.  29  now  speakest  thou  plainly,  and  nop.

2  Pet.  2.  22.  it  is  happened  according  to  the  p.
PROVERBS.

Hum.  21.  27.  wherefore  they  that  speak  in  p.  say
1  Kings  4.  32.  Solomon  spake  three  thousand  p.
Prov.  1.  1.  the  p.  of  Solomon,  10.  1.  i  25.  1.

Eccl.  12.  9.  the  preacher  set  in  order  many  p.

Ezck.  16.  44.  behold,  every  one  that  useth  p.  shall
John  16.  25.  these  spoken  111  p.  no  more  speak  in  p.
PROVIDE.

Gen.  22.  8.  God  will  p.  himself  a  lamb  for  offering
+  14.  Abraham  called  the  place,  the  Lord  will  p.
30.  30.  now  when  shall  l  p.  for  mine  own  house  ?
Exod.  18.  21.  shalt  p.  out  of  the  people  able  men

1  Sam.  16.  17.  p.  me  a  man  that  can  play  well

2  Chron.  2.7.  with  cunning  men  whom  David  did  p
Psal.  78.  20.  can  he  p.  flesh  for  his  people  t
Mat.  10. 9.  p.  neither  gold  nor  silver  in  your  purses
Luke  12.  3.3.  p.  yourselves  hags  which  wax  not  old
Acts  23.  24.  and  p.  them  beasts  to  set  Paul  on
Rom.  12.  17.  p.  things  honest  in  sight  of  all  men
1  Tim.  5. 8.  but  if  any  p.  not  for  his  own  house

PROVIDED.

Deut.  33.  21.  he  p.  the  first  part  for  himself

1  Sam.  16.  1.  1  have  p.  me  a  king  among  his  sons

2  Sam.  19.  32.  he  had  p.  the  king  of  sustenance

1  Kings  4.  7-  which  p.  victuals  for  the  king,  27-

2  Chron.  32.  29.  Hezekiah  p.  possessions  of  flocks
Psal.  65.  9.  preparest  corn,  when  thou  hast  p.  for  it
Luke  12.20.  whose  shall  those  things  he  thou  hastp.;’
Heb.  11.  40.  God  having  p.  better  things  for  us

PROV1 DENCE.

Acts  24.  2.  are  done  to  this  nation  by  thy  p.
PROVIDE  PH.

Job  38.  41.  who  p.  for  the  raven  his  food
Prov.  6.  8.  and  p.  her  meat  in  the  summer
PROVIDING.

2  Cot .  8. 21.  p.  for  honest  things,  not  only  in  sight
PROVING L,  S.

1  Kings  20.  14.  bv  the  princes  of  the  p.  15, 17,  19.
Ezra  4.  15.  this  city  is  hurtful  to  kings  and  p.

6.  2.  there  was  found  in  the  p.  of  the  Medes

7.  16.  carrv  the  gold  thou  canst  find  in  thep.

2 Veh.  7.  6.  these  are  the  children  of  the  p.  went  up
11.  3.  now  these  are  the  chief  of  the  p.

Esth.  1.1.  Ahasuerus  reigned  over  127  p-
16.  hath  done  wrong  to  all  people  in  all  p.  22.

2.  3.  let  the  king  appoint  officers  in  all  the  p.

18.  then  the  king  made  a  release  to  the  v.

378


Esth  3.8.  is  a  people  scattered  in  all  p.  of  thy  king.

13.  Hainan  sent  by  posts  to  all  the  king  sp.

4.  11.  all  the  people  of  the  king  s  p.  do  know
8*  9.  127  p.  and  to  every  p.  according  to

12.  upon  one  day  in  all  p.  ot  king  Ahasuerus
9  4.  Mordecai’s  fame  went  through  all  the  p.
i2.  what  have  they  done  in  the  rest  ot  the  p.

28.  these  days  should  be  kept  through  every  p.

Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gathered  the  treasure  ot  the  p.

5.  8.  if  thou  seest  oppression  in  a  p.  marvel  not
I, am.  1.1.  she  that  was  princess  among  the  p.

Ezek.  19.  8.  nations  set  against  him  from  the  p.

Dan.  2.  48.  the  king  made  Daniel  ruler  over  thep.

3.  1.  he  set  up  an  image  in  the  p.  or  Babylon

30.  promoted  Shadrach  in  the  p.  of  Babylon
8.  2.  1  was  at  Slmshan  in  the  p.  ot  Elam
11.  24.  shall  enter  on  the  fattest  places  ot  the  p.

Acts  23.  .34.  he  asked  of  what  p  he  was
25  1.  now  when  Festus  was  come  into  tnep.
PROVISION..

Gen.  42.  25.  and  to  give  them  p.  for  the  way
45.  21.  toseph  gave  them  p.  tor  the  way
Josh.  9.  5.  all  the  bread  of  their  p.  was  dry
12  this  our  bread  we  took  hot  for  ourp.

1  Kings  4.  7 .  each  man  his  month  111  a  year  made  p.
22.  Solomon's  p.  for  one  day  was  30  measures

2  Kings  6.  2.3.  he  prepared  great  p.  for  them

1  Chron.  29.  19.  for  the  which  l  have  made  p.

Psal  132.  15.  I  will  abundantly  bless  her  p.

Dan.  1.  5.  the  king  appointed  them  a  daily  p.

Rom.  13  14.  and  make  not  p.  for  the  ttesn
PROVOCATION.

1  Kings  15.  30.  Jeroboam  niade  Israel  sin  by  hisp.

°i  on  for  the  p .  wherewith  A  hah  provoked
2* Kings  19.  +  3.  it  is  a  day  of  trouble,  rebuke,  and  p.
03  26.  because  of  the  p.  Mauasseh  provoked
Heh.  9.  18-  and  had  wrought  great  p.  26.
fob  17  2.  doth  not  mine  eye  continue  in  their  p. .
Psal.  95.  8.  harden  not  your  hearts  as  in  p.  as  in
dav  of  temptation  in  tiie  wildern.  Heb.  3.  8,  in.
Jer.  32.  31.  this  city  hath  been  to  me  as  ap.

Ezek.  20.  28.  there  they  presented  p.  ot  offering
PROVOKE.

Exod.  23.  21.  obey  his  voice,  and  p.  him  not
Hum.  14. 11.  how  long  will  this  people  p.  me  .

Deut.  31.  20.  if  vep.  and  break  my  covenant
Job  12.  6.  and  they  tiiatp.  God  are  secure
Psal.  78.  40.  bow  oft  did  they  p.  linn  m  wilderness  .
Isa.  3.  8.  doings  against  Lord  to  p.  eyes  of  his  glory
Jer.  7.  19.  do  they  p.  me  to  anger  saith  the  Lord
44.  8.  in  that  ye  p.  me  to  wrath  with  works
Luke  11.  53.  began  to  urge  and  p.  him  to  speak
Rom.  10.  19.  I  will  p.  to  jealousy  by  them  no  peo.
11.  11.  for  to  p.  them  to  jealousy.  14.

1  Cor  10  22.  do  we  p.  the  Lord  to  jealousy  .

Eph.  6.  4.  ye  fathers,  p.  not  your  children  to  wrath
lUb  3. 16  some  when  they  had  heard,  didp.

10  rt4  to  v  to  love  and  to  good  works
PROVOKED.

Hum  14.  23.  nor  shall  any  of  them  that  p.  me  see  it
*16.  30.  ye  shall  know  these  men  have  p.  the  Lord
Deut.  9  ”8.*  in  lloreh  ye  p.  the  Lord  to  wrath
00,  at  Taberah  and  Massah  ye  p.  Lord  to  wrath
1  Sam.  1 .  6.  and  her  adversary  also  p.  her  sore
7.  so  she  p.  her,  theref.  she  wept  and  did  not  eat

1  Kings  14.  22.  Jud.p.him  to  jealousy  with  their  sins

2  Kings  23.  26.  Mauasseh  had  p.  him  withal

1  Chron.  21.  1.  ^atan  p.  David  to  number  Israel
Ezra  5.  12.  after  that  our  fathers  had  p.  God
Psal.  78.  56.  tempted  andp.  the  most  high  God
106.  7.  but  p.  him  at  the  sea,  even  the  Red  sea
29.  they  p.  him  with  their  own  inventions
33.  because  they  p.  the  spirit  ot  Moses,  43.

Zech.  8.  14.  when  your  fathers  p.  me  to  wrath

1  Cor.  13.  5.  charity  is  not  easily  p.  tlunketh  no  evil

2  Cor.  9.  2.  and  your  zeal  p.  very  many
P  ROVOK  EDS  1 .

Deut.  9.  7.  forget  not  how  thou  p.  Lord  thy  God
See  Anger
PROVOKE  I  LL  .

Prov  20.  2.  whoso  p.  him  to  anger  sinneth  ag.  soul
Tsa.  65.  3.  people  that  p.  me  to  anger  to  my  face
Ezek.  8.  3.  where  was  image  which  p.  to  jealousy
PROVOKING.

Deut.  32.  19.  because  of  p.  his  sons  and  daughters
1  Kings  14.15.  they  made  groves,  p.  Lord  to  anger
16.  7.  against  Baasha  in  p.  the  Lord  to  anger,  13.

,  •»  “ _ 1  .1  Il!,vk  m  Iho  mm  Harnoc


PRUNED.

l.sa.  5.  6.  I  lay  it  waste,  it  shall  not  be  p.  nor  digged
PRUNING.

Isa.  2.  4.  they  shall  beat  their  spears  intop.  hooks
18.  5.  he  shall  cut  off  their  sprigs  with  p.  hooks
Joel  3.  10.  beat  your  p.  hooks  into  spears
Mic.  4.  3.  they  shall  beat  their  spears  intop.  hooks
PSALM.

1  Chron.  16.  7.  then  David  delivered  first  this  p.
Psal.  81.  2.  take  a  p.  H  98.  5.  with  the  voice  of  a  p.
Mat.  26.  t  30.  when  they  had  sung  a  p.  they  went
out  into  the  mount  ot  Olives,  Mark  14.  +26
Acts  13.  33.  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second  p.

35.  wherefore  he  saith  also  in  another  p.  thou  shalt

1  Cor.  14.  26.  how  is  it  every  oneot  you  hath  a  p.  T

PSALMIST.

2  Sam.  23. 1.  last  wordsof  David, sweet  p.of  Israel

PSALMS.

1  Chron.  16.  9.  sing  p.  to  him,  Psal.  105.  2.

Heh.  12.  +  8.  the  Levites  over  the  p.  ot  thanksgiving
Psal.  95.  2.  make  a  joyful  noise  to  him  with  p.

Luke  20.  42.  David  himself  saith  in  the  book  otp.

24.  44.  which  were  written  inp.  concerning  me
Acts  1.  20.  for  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  p.

Eph.  5. 19.  speaking  to  yourselves  in  p.  and  hymns
Col  3.  16.  admonishing  one  another  inp.  and  hymns
Jam.  5.  13.  is  any  merry  '  let  him  sing  p.

PSALTERY.

1  Sam.  10.  5.  meet  a  company  of  prophets  with  ap.
Psal.  33.  2.  sing  to  him  with  thep.  144.  9.

57.  8.  awake,  my  glory ,  awake  p.  and  harp,  108. 2.
71.  22.  I  will  also  praise  thee  with  the  p.  92.  3.

81.  2.  bring  hither  the  pleasant  harp  with  the  p.
150.  3.  praise  him  with  trumpet  the  p.  and  harp
Dan.  3.  5.  when  ye  hear  sound  or  thep.  7,  10,  15.
PS  A  LT  E  R 1  ES,  See  Cymbals.
PUBLICAN,

In  Greek,  TeXcovev,  was  a  farmer,  or  receiver  of
public  money,  an  officer  of  the  revenue,  a  nianem -
ployed  in  collecting  such  impositions  as  are  hateful
to  the  people.  Among  the  Romans  there  were  two
sorts  of  farmers :  some  were  general  Farmers,
who  in  every  province  had  their  deputies,  and
under-farmers,  who  collected  the  revenues  and  other
profits  of  the  empire,  of  which  they  gave  an  account
to  the  emperor.  'These  principal  farmers  were
men  of  great  consideration  in  the  government ;
and  Cicero  says,  that  among  these  were  to  he  found
the  flower  of  the  Roman  knights,  the  ornament  of
the  city,  and  the  strength  of  the  commonwealth.
But  the  deputies,  the  under  farmers,  the  commis¬
sioners,  the  Publicans  of  the  lower  order,  were
looked  upon  as  so  many  thieves  and  pickpockets.
Theocritus  being  once  asked,  which  was  the  most
cruel  of  all  beasts,  made  answer,  that  among  the
beasts  of  the  wilderness,  they  were  the  bear  and  the
lion ;  among  the  beasts  of  the  city,  they  were  the
Publican  and  the  Parasite.  .

I  many  the  Jews,  the  name  and  profession  of  a  Pub
lican  was  the  most  odious  thing  in  the  world.  I  his
nation,  in  a  particular  manner,  valued  themselves
upon  their  freedom  .*  XV  e  be  Abraham  s  seed,  and
were  never  in  bondage  to  any  man,  John  8.  33.
They  could  not,  without  the  utmost  veluctancy,  see
Publicans  in  their  country,  rigorously  exacting
those  tributes  and  impositions  that  were  laid  on
them  by  the  Romans.  Especially  the  Galileans-
or  Ilerodians  submitted  to  this  badge  of  servitude
not  without  the  greates  t  impatience,  and  thought  it
even  unlawful  to  pay  tribute  to  a  foreign  power;
as  they  shewed  by  that  question  they  put  to  our
Saviour,  Luke  20.  22.  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to  give
tribute  to  Caesar,  or  no  '  Those  of  their  own  nation
that  undertook  this  employ,  they  looked  upon  as
no  better  than  heathen.  Let  him  be  unto  u'ee  *s'
an  heathen  man,  and  a  Publican,  Mat.  18.  1<.
It  is  said,  that  they  would  not  allow  them  to  come
into  their  temple,  or  their  synagogues,  nor  admit
them  to  partake  of  their  public  prayers,  or  of  their
offices  of  judicature,  or  allow  them  to  give  testi¬
mony  in  a  court  of  justice  ;  and  for  certain  hey
would  not  accept  of  their  presents  at  the  temple,  no


Psal.  78.  17.  by  p.  the  Most  High  in  the  wilderness
Gal  5.  26.  not  desirous  of  vain  glory, p.  one  another
PRUDENCE.

2  Chr.  2.  12.  son  endued  with  p.  and  understanding
Prov.  8.  12.  1  wisdom  dwell  with  p.  find  knowledge
19.  +  11.  the,p.  of  a  man  deferreth  his  anger
Evh  1.  8.  he  hath  abounded  in  all  wisdom  and  p.
PRUDENT.

1  Sam.  16.  18.  Dav.p.  in  matters,  and  a  comely  pet
Prov.  12. 16.  but  a  p.  man  covereth  shame
2.3.  a  p.  man  concealed)  knowledge

13.  16.  every  p.  man  dealeth  with  knowledge

14.  8.  wisdom  of  the  p.  is  to  understand  his  way
15.  hut  thep.  man  looketh  well  to  his  going

18.  but  thep.  are  crowned  with  knowledge

15.  5.  but  he  that  regardeth  reproof  is  p.

16.  21.  the  wise  in  heart  shall  he  called  p.
is!  15.  the  heart  of  the  p.  getteth  knowledge

19.  14.  and  ap.  wife  is  from  the  Lord

22.  3.  ap.  man  foreseeth  evil  and  ludeth,  27-  12-
ha.  3.  2.  take  away  the  p.  and  the  ancient
5.  21.  woe  to  them  that  are  p.  in  their  own  sight
10. 13.  bv  my  wisdom  I  have  done  it,  tor  1  am  p.
29.  14  understanding  of  their  p.  men  should  be  md
Jer.  49.  7.  is  counsel  perished  from  the  p.  ?

Hos  14.  9.  who  is  p.  and  he  shad  know  them  r
Amos  5.  13.  the  p.  shai.  keep  silence  in  that  time
‘Mat.  IE  25.  hid  these  things  from  v.  Luke  10.  21.
Acts  13.  7.  the  deputy  Sergius  Paulus,  a  p.  man
1  Cor  1.  19.  to  nothing  understanding  ot  thep.
PRUDEN  TLY.

Isa  52  13.  my  serv.  shall  deal  p.  lie  shall  beexalted
J  PRUNE.

Lev  25.  3.  six  years  shalt  thou  p.  thy  vineyard
4.  seventh  year  not  sow  thy  field  nor  p.


u/uui-H  fivi  yj  *'*«'*»  - - .  ,  -

more  than  they  would  of  the  price  of  prostitution
or  of  blood,  or  of  any  thing  else  of  the  like  nature,
there  were  many  Publicans  in  Judea,  in  the  time
of  our  Saviour.  Zaccheus  probably  was  one  of  the
principal  Farmers,  since  he  is  called  the  clue,
among  the  Publicans,  Luke  1 9.  2.  but  Matthew
was  only  an  inferior  Publican.  I  he  levs
proached  our  Saviour  with  being  a  friend  o.  mur
licatis  and  sinners,  and  of  eating  with  them,  imm
7.  .34.  And  our  Saviour  told  the  Jews,  I  hat  har¬
lots  and  Publicans  went  into  the  kingdom  0.
heaven  before  them,  Mat.  21.  31.  In  the  parable
of  the  Publican  and  Pharisee,  who  made  their
prayers  together  in  the  temple,  we  see  with  what
sentiments  of  humility  the  view  of  his  condition
inspired  the  Publican  :  he  keep <■  afar  off,  and fff
bably  dares  not  so  much  as  enter  the  court  of  the
people ;  he  is  afraid  to  lift  up  his  eg  es  to  heaven,
he  smites  his  breast,  and  submissively  asks  pardon
of  God,  Luke  18.  10,  <Vc.  Zaccheus  says  to  our
Saviour,  that  he  was  ready  to  give  half  of  his  goods
to  the  poor,  and  to  restore  fourfold  of  whatever  hi
nad  unjustly  acquired,  Luke  19.  8.  And  this,  -
, unseat  that  time  the  Roman  laws  required  that
whenever  any  Publican  was  convicted  of  extortion,
tie  should  be  obliged  to  render  four  times  the  value
vf  what  he  had  extorted.

PUBLICAN,  S.  _

Mat.  5.  46.  do  not  even  thep.  the  same  r  4,.

9. 10.  many  p.  sat  with  him,  Mark <2.  In.  Luke 5.  .9-
11.  said  to  his  disciples,  why  eateth  youi  mas,e
with  p.  ami  sinners,  Mark  2.  16.  Luke  5. 3U-

10.  3.  Philip,  Thomas,  and  Matthew  thep.

11.  19.  a  friend  ofp.  and  sinners,  Luke  7.  34.

18.  17.  let  him  be  to  thee  as  an  heathen  and  ap.
21.  31.  p.  go  into  the  kingdom  ot  God  before  50U
*32.  hut  the  p.  and  the  harlots  believed  him

Luke  3.  12.  then  came  also  p.  to  be  baptized
5.  27.  be  saw  a  p.  named  Levi  sitting  at  receip
7.  29.  the  p.  justified  God.  being  baptized  wii-


PUN


P  U  N


I.uke  15.1 .  then  drew  near  to  him  the  p.  to  hear  him

18.  10.  the  one  a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  p.

11.  God,  i  thank  thee,  I  am  not  as  this  p,

■£an‘,!in* afar  °^’  sa'd>  U.  be  mercttul  to  me

19.  2.  Zaccheus  was  dnef  among  the  p.  and  rich

Mat.  1.  19.  not  willing  to  make  her  a  p.  example
.  .  PUBLICLY.

1S?S  Jor  beE.  convinced  the  .Tews,  shewing

.0.  .0.  but  have  she  wed  you,  have  taught  you  p.

Deiit.  32.  3.  I  will  p.  the  name  of  the  T.ord
1  Sam.  31.  9.  to  p.  it  in  the  house  ot  their  idols
i1,1101  in  ,he  streets  of  Askelon
n  /  8.  lo.  should  p.  that  they  bring  pine  branches
V  ,  1  '■  may  \vltl1  tl,e  v°>ce  ot  thanksgiving

-on  v\ ,n  'erusaleniji  16.  p.  against  Jerusalem
o.  20.  declare  this,  p.  it  m  Judah,  saying
/:  p;  y®  and  say,  O  Lord,  save  thy  people
46. 14.  declare  in  Egypt, p.  in  Migdol.p.  in  Koph
00.  -.  p.  and  conceal  not,  Babylon  is  taken
'  "f  3-  9-p.  in  the  palaces  of  Ashdod  and  Egypt
y  proclaim  and  p.  the  tree  offerings
Mark  1.  45.  but  he  began  to  p.  it  much,  5.  20.
PUBLISHED.

v  .1  king  s.  decree  be p.  thro’  all  empire, 22.
o  /  ,{0py  of  Hainan’s  decree  wasp.  8.  13.

rial.  08.  1 1.  great  was  the  company  that  p.  it

tJ  i-  -  iille  cause,d  lt  to  bep.  through  Nineveh
;<•  30.  so  much  more  a  great  deal  they  p.  it
A«iJ«*  o,,e  ^0SPel  must  first  be  p.  among  nations
j,.8,:  39-  went  an<l  V-  through  the  whole  city
37 •  that  word  ye  know,  which  was  p.

13.  49.  word  ot  the  p  jj jj h  ro  u  8 1 1  all  region

Isa.  52.  7.  that  p.  peace,  that  p.  salvation
v  }L  Invoice,  affliction  from  mount  Ephraim
Aa/c.  1.  lo.  behold  the  feet  of  him  that  p.  peace
P  u  i*’p#

Joh  11-  t  20.  their  hopes  shall  be  a  p.  of  breath
r  PLFFED  zip.

1  iif’cH'  n0  one  of  you,  be  p-  vp  against  another
io'  l°,TieLare  PJ  vpl  as  though  1  would  not  come
1  .  will  know,  not  speech  ot  them  that  are  p.  vp

iq  i b  Ci ara ?.  vp  and  have  not  rather  mourned
J3/  charity  vaunteth  not  itself,  is  not  p.  vp
<-0t.  -.  18.  vainly  p.  up  by  his  fleshly  mind
j-,  .  r  P U  EEL  1  H  at.

c  A-as  fPr  a11.  his  enemies,  he  p.  at  them
12.  5.  set  him  in  safety  from  him  that  p.  at  him
-  n  P  U  FI'  E 1 II  vp.

l  <or.  8.  1.  knowledge  p.  vp,  charity  edifieth
r  „  n  v  ,  PULL,  ED.

ioM'in  k  ♦  ,uah  p -  ,he  c,iove  t0  h!m  into  the  ark
J,, 1 ’•  Jbe  men  p.  Lot  into  the  house
1  !A  till  we  have  p.  them  from  the  city

u'  it'f  tfr°Kb0aKnl  C0l,,ld  notp-  [t  in  again
pi,  6g111'  let  timber  be  p.  down  from  his  house

ha  bo  \ a  L?f°ut0J  net  they  have  'aid  for  me
Ter  I'jnA  An  fr?n:  *  Y  s,ate  slia|l  p’  thee  ''own
l°-  Set  thee  top.  clown  and  destroy,  18.  7

oE  6*  T'wiTinK°l!t|1iike  sheeD  for  the  slaughter
.4.  o.  I  will  build  them  and  notp.  down,  42  10

Ez7k  7  0  Afnn  V1  piAeS)  hatl;  niade  me  desolate
Mvat  o  h  1  Lhe  11(?t7V  UP  the  roots  thereof?
/jywoj  9.  15.  and  they  shall  no  more  be  p.  up

td  7  W;  f  ,he  robe  " it!l  the  garment
f/  ,  -  ■  J1'  but  Aey  7  •  a"  ay  the  shoulder
Tut  m 4j!f-  out.mote  out  of  thine  eye,  Lvkeo.  42

14  a  In  fi  ll  /' <  C?Wn  my  barns  and  build
m  la  JV  011  the  sabbath?

~.  0.  est  Paul^shoulc^  have  been  p.  in  pieces

2  Cor.  10.  4.  mighytodiep.  Jown  of  strong  holds

Jude  23.  others  save  w  Rh  fear,  p.  them  out  of  fire

^eh.  8.  4.  Ezra  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  p.  of  wood
ic  m  P  U  LSE.

brought  beans  and  parched  p.
uan.  1.  12.  let  them  give  p.  to  eat,  and  water,  16
r  PUNISH.

Prlov  it8 'dfi*  3  PcU  S*even  l'mes  more  for  your  sins,  24.

Ac  m  In  u°  to  P-  tf,e  JUSt  ls  not  good
^s'l  l  wf)|  eut0Ut  ll(;art  the  king  of  Assyria
If  l ]■  L'v  V1  P-  the  world  for  their  evil
Ofi’  91  Thnri'0rd  s*\a  P ■  ,he  host  of  the  high  ones
27  'i  ‘/nr  elh  t0^'  ‘“habitants  of  the  earth

hr  J*  ofr,d  A  h  strong  sword  shall  p.  Leviathan

behold  wifi  tlif.rn  that  aje  circumcised
13  oT'  L.!11  P-  ‘he  men  of  Anafhoth

21Y41  \v  H  n  1  thou  5,ay  when  he  shall  p.  thee  ?
21.14.  Vill p.  you  accord,  to  the  fruit  of  vour  doings
23.  34.  p.  man  H  25.  12.  p.  king  of  Babylon,  50.  il!

30 ‘  oh  T  wfli that  II  32-  P"  Htemaiah

3fi  '  t  p '  411,  that  oppress  them
.u'  t  "1,  P-  Jehoiakim  and  his  seed

2Qas'mV1fhY'[herriiin  E?yf.,t-  as  I  E- Jerusalem
4fi"csSTgn  nat  L"’lU  P;  you  ln  this  place
5?*  P"  .t.ie  multitude  of  No  and  1

t  1  -il 1  P;  Bel  in  Babylon
14'  I  wil/  ml  P-  them,  for  [heir  ways  and  reward
anH  «  °t'P*  'k°ur  daughters  when  commit
i.'J1,3™ p\  J4cob  according  to  his  ways

jn  thJ  thaTl  iiTl ‘Hffi  f°r  y°Ur  ini£t*

7eei>  r  1  1  P'  tbau  are  Se*tled  on  their  lees
jm-4  Yi4’msr  thought  to  p.  when  your  fathers
.  -1.  fi n <1 1  n ynofflj ne nwt hey  might p.  them


PUR


Pharaoh


•,26.  if  srnite,  he  shall  be  surely  p.  22.
.  ;}■  !;e. shall  not  be  for  he  is  his  money


■’ra  q  iq  .i — f  />*  ,"JI  ,,c  13  ,;13  money

~b  31  11  it  Sc11  last-7y-  less  than  iniquities  deserved
Vec.  h  j  /  irn.!i‘1.q'idy  tB  be  p.  by  judges,  28.


•./  O  "hen  scorner  is  p.  simple  made  wise
er  41  4ltbe  sm'Ple  pass  on  and  are p.  2".  12.
iO*  IK*,.  iijaS  ,  e  Pf  Jerusalem  with  the  sword
Vc  3  7  n^t'!n,Sh  Y  ]JTbp-  the  king  of  Assyria
ec/,'  i,i  q  !  e  (  l,t  off,  hov  soever  I  p.  them
er"-  lu.  o.  anger  ag  the  shepherds,  I  p.  the  goats


22.  5.  to  bring  them  bound  toJerusal.  to  be«.
o*7v  n*  i  thif 111  every  synagogue
2  lt,SSb  169;®hiaAb,e^;  W11,h  everlasting  destruction
2  et.  ..  9.  ““j’pjjtc.th^hay  ot^judgment  to  hep

7  here  u  ere  several  sorts  of  punishment  irt  use  among
Me  Jews,  u/ttvh  are  mentioned  in  the  scripture ,  as
[1]  The  punishment  ot  the  cross  :  this  - las  a  ser¬
vile  punishment,  -..  htth  was  inflicted  on  the  vilest
(J  slaves:  to  he  crucified,  vas  a  great  mark  of  in-
jamy  to  officers  and  men  of  quality.  The  common
way  of  crucifying  was  by  fastening  the  criminal
icith  nails,  one  at  each  hand,  and  one  at  hath  his
Jeety  or  one  at  each  oj  them.  They  nere  likewise
bound  frequently  with  cords ;  and  this  penaltu
winch  seems  m  one  sense  gentler,  because  it  occa¬
sions less  pain,  in  another -was  more  cruel,  because
the  condemned  person  by  this  means  teas  made  to
languish  for  a  longer  time.  Before  they  nailed
the  person  to  the  cross,  they  generally  scourged  him
with  whips,  or  leathern  ladies.  Uur  Saviour  zeas
severely  scourged  during  his  passion  ;  Pilate,  hav¬
ing  pronounced  sentence  against  him,  ordered  him
to  be  scourged x  and  delivered  him  up  to  he  crucified
lhe  law  ordained,  that  the  persons  executed  should
not  be  left  upon  the  cross  after  sun-set,  because  he

Dent  J21  ”0^03”  thlS  manner  is  cursed  by  God,

2]  Suspension  hanging,  ©r  the  punishment  of  the
rope.  J  he  Jews  maintain,  that  Uone  but  idola-
teis  ana  blasphemers  underwent  this  punishment
anw.n  ,?ni  av7fl  were  hung  upon  a  high  gal-
i  */1'  1 tth  Pharaoh's  chief  baker  was  first
r  aVld  afterwards  hanged  upon  a  gibbet,

Gen.  40.  *  c  H  e  read  in  the  Scripture,  that  some¬
times  they  hung  up  men  alive,  and  sometimes  hunt,

cA a m  1  r°  1 a '7oSeS  °^te‘  they  uere  deadi  Josh,  8.  29.

toning,  or  putting  to  death  by  casting  stones.

1  his  punishment  teas  very  m  uch  in  use  among  the
rietirews  :  it  is  said,  that  this  penalty  was  inflicted
upon  all  those  criminals  that  the  law  condemns  to
ocat h,  without  expressing  the  particular  kind  if
death :  for  example,  the  incest  of  a  son  -with  his
nn  ther,  or  of  the  son  with  his  n/<  ther-in-larc,  or  of
a  father  with  his  daughter,  or  with  his  daughter-in-
law  ;  or  of  a  man  that  debauches  a  -woman  that  is
contracted  ;  or  of  her  that  is  contracted,  and  con¬
sents  to  another  ;  those  that  are  guilty  <  f  the  crimes
of  sodomy  or  bestiality ;  idolaters,  blasphemers
magicians,  conjurors,  breakers  of  the  sabbath  ;
those  that  offer  their  children  to  lUoIoch  ;  those
that  edtice  others  to  idolatry  ;  a  son  rebellious  to
m  i yatrr!  nnd  cov damned  by  the  judges.

1  ,!ru‘  Uas punishment  was  very  common.  When
Juctan  was  informed  that  his  daughter-in-law  Ta-
mar  was  with  child,  he  would  have  had  her  burnt  as
an  adulteress,  G en .  38, 24.  The  law  of  .Moses  in¬
flicts  the  punishment  of  the  fire  upon  the  daughters
oj  the  Priests  who  were  guilty  of  fornication,  T.ev.
21.  9.  Nebuchadnezzar  caused  Daniel  and  his
companions  to  he  thrown  into  a  burning  fiery  fur¬
nace,  because  they  would  m  t  worship  his  golden
DanV3-  "l-/‘”dby  the  la-w  he  was  ordered
tc  be  burnt  alive,  who  should  marry  the  mother  and
tier  daughter,  l  ev.  20.  14

t5U[!ie .  Punishment  of  the  rack,  or  tympanum.
I/ns  is  met  with  in  the  Greek  of  St.  Paul  to  the
Shrews,  11.  35.  Interpreters  are  divided  about
°f  tbii,  w?fd,  Topwavi^eiv.  Some  bare
explained  it  of  the  fressel,  or  Chi  valet,  a  punish-

%n  a7ntl^'itp,  but  very  much
unknjmn  at  this  day  :  others  think  that  the  apostle
aJ,hJ?esf  70  the  death  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  to
t'M  St.  James,  who  were  both  beheaded.  Some
think  it  signifies  to  flay  alive,  others  take  it  in
a  general  sense,  for  all  kinds  of  capital  punish-
nents ,  and  violent  deaths  :  but  interpreters  are
°fpPmt™>  ‘'‘at  ‘he  apostle  here  means
Bastinado,  or  the  punishment  of  the  whip,  and
an  aZ/ttston  to  the  cruelties  exercised
upon  old  Eleazar,  and  the  seven  brethren  the  Mac¬
cabees.  lhe  second  book  of  Mac.  6.  19.  speaking
of  the  martyrdom  of  Eleazar,  says,  that  he  came
to  the  Tympanum.

[6]  Imprisonment.  Tins  was  not  always  considered
as  a  punishment ,  but  was  to  keep  and  secure  a  ter-
son  accused  or  suspected.  Joseph  detained  his  bro-
fp/Jl  ,1^eo“  171  Prison,  till  he  should  be  assured  of
the  truth  of  what  his  brethren  had  told  him  concern-
ing  his  father  and  Ins  brother  Benjamin,  Gen
Y’  d''e .blasphemer  that  was  brought  to  Moses,

'~e- 1 1  and  the  man  that  was  found  cat  hernia

sticks  on  the  sabbath-day,  N  uni,  15.  34.  were  put
“fr.^  ttl1  t,ie  L°rd  declared  the  kind  of  punish¬
ment  they-were  to  undergo.

But  often  imprisonment  was  made  a  punishment
tv/71  wax  attended  with  shame  and  severities,
n  nen  Joseph  was  unjustly  accused  by  Potiphar’s
ivije,  he  was  put  m  prison,  and  loaded  with  fetters,
Oen.  39.  -0.  Samson  uas  taken  by  the  Philistines
cast  into  a  dungeon,  had  his  eyes  put  out,  and  forced
to  grind  at  the  mill,  Judg.  16.  21.  Bonds,  fetters,
shackles,  manacles,  and  chains,  which  usually  at¬
tended  imprisonment ,  must  be  looked  upon  as
^punishments.  ^

[/J  1  he  swoid,  or  beheading.  In  Scripture  there
are  several  instances  of  Decapitations.  Pharaoh’s
chief  baker  bad  bis  head  cut  off ;  after  which  his
body  v'as  hung  upon  a  gibbet,  Gen.  40.  19.  Abi-
melech,  son  of  Gideon,  cut  off  the  beads  of  se¬
venty  sons  of  Gideon,  his  brethren,  upon  one
stone,  Judg.  9.  5.  The  people  of  Samaria  cut  off
the  heads  of  seventy  of  the  sons  of  A  hab,  and  sent
them  in  baskets  to  Jehu,  2  Kings  10.  7.  John
Baptist  7vas  beheaded  in  prison,  by  the  order
of  IJerod,  Mat.  14.  10.

[8]  The  precipice,  or  throwing  headlong  from  the
top  of  a  rock  :  this  was  not  a  common  punish¬
ment:  if  it  has ■  heen sometimes  used  among  theUc-
t  TE’ lt  uas  171  SV7‘Vular  cases.  A  maziah  king  of
J  udah,  overcame  ten  thousand  Idumeatu  md  made


them  prisoners  of  war,  and  cast  them  down  from
the  top  of  a  high  rock,  2  Chron.  25  12.

[9J  Bo  be  torn  in  pieces  by  thorns,  or  under  har¬
rows  or  sledges  of  iron.  There  are  some  exam¬
ples  of  these  punishments  in  Scripture.  TV  hen
Gideon  leturned from  pursuing  the  Midianites
he  tore  with  thorns  or  brambles  of  the  desert
the  chief  men  of  the  city  of  Succoth,  who  had  in¬
sulted  him,  Judg.  8.  16.  And  David  made  the
/Ammonites  undergo  a  punishment  more  cruel
and  severe,  2  Sam.  12.  31.  He  put  them  under


•  1  7  .  /.  .•  UUUtT

nai rou*s  anti  axes  ot  iron,  and  made  them  pass
through  the  brick  kiln.  These  harrows  or  sleX7s

Ot  9  TBit?  ynaro  - - - - -  f _  u


OJ  iron  were  machines  proper  for  threshing  of
corn  in  order  to  get  the  grain  out  of  the  straw,
wntc/i  were  loaded  with  iron  or  stones,  for  bruis¬
ing  the  straw-.  By  the  Brick-kiln,  is  either  meant
the  furnace  in  which  the  bricks  -were  burnt,  or
the  place  where  the  earth  was  beat  and  macer¬
ated, vn  which  these  miserable  wretches  were  ex-

€CVt  €d,

[10]  l  he  saw,  to  be  cut  through  the  middle.  This
punishment  was  not  known  among  the  Hebrews
Some  are  of  opinion  that  it  came  originally  from
the  Persians  or  C  haldeans.  It  is  certain  that  it

1,7:1  tU  Use  amo,HJ  ‘he  Switzers,  and  that  they
F7>t  it  in  practice  not  many  years  ago ,  upon  one
°f  their  countrymen  guilty  of  a  great  crime :

nt  VlT  iT7?  Ul  a-  kmd  tkff’Jnn,  and  sawed  him
at  length,  beginning  at  his  head,  as  a  piece  of
wood  is  sawn,  lhe  apostle  Paul ,  in  his  Epistle
1116 37-  peaking  of  the  calami-
il/j  jBVeied  by  the  prophets  and  saints  of  the
Old  lest  ament,  says,  that  they  were  sawn  asun-
aer.  several  of  the  ancients  have  explained  thi t
passage  concerning  the  death  of  Isaiah,  who  is
said  to  have  been  put  to  death  by  king  Manas-
seh  with  a  saw.

H1U,(?uttin&  the  hair  of  the  gjilty  person
lhis  seems  to  be  a  punishment  ra.her  shameful
than  painful ;  and  yet  it  is  thought  that  pain
likewise  was  added  to  the  disgrace ;  and  that
they  were  not  contented  to  shave  or  cut  the  hair
but  tore  it  off  -with  violence,  as  if  they  bad
been  plucking  a  bird  alive.  Ibis  much  the  He¬
brew  signifies  in  N'eh.  1.3.  25.  1  contended  with

offTheTdr31110^  Certain  of  them’  and  Plucked

[12]  Jo  pluck  out  the  eyes.  This  is  a  punishment
not  common ;  and  though  Moses  had  appointed
hat  an  eye  should  be  given  for  an  eye,  and  a
tooth  for  a  tooth,  Pxod.  21.  24.  yet  it  is  the
opinion  of  Commentators  that  this  law  was  very
seldom  put  in  practice  according  to  the  letter  •
and  that  the  offender  was  generally  punished  hv
a  pecuniary  penalty,  which  -was  converted  to  the


r  .  V  a  as  c  omeirea  to  the

use  of  the  injured  party.  U  hen  the  Philistines
Had  laid  hold  on  Samson,  and  intended  to  ore-


_  .  7  ■  ,  -  ^o.ouvu ,  urm  i/uenatci  zo  pre-
vent  his  doing  them  any  more  harm,  they  put
him  171  prison,  and  bored  out  his  eyes,  luiffl  16
71-  Nebuchadnezzar  took  king  Zedekiah.V/wi
had  Ins  children  put  to  death  in  his  presence
then  caused  his  eyes  to  be  put  out,  and  after-
ivards  had  him  carried  to  Babylon  in  chains,  2
lungs  2 o.  7.

[1.3]  To  cut  off  the  extremities  of  the  feet  and
hands  aw  «  piece  of  cruelty  formerly  exercised
by  Adom-bezek  king  of  Bezek,  upon  seventy
kings  who  had  been  conquered  by  him,  and  who
ate  like  dogs  under  Ins  table.  But  God  thought
fit  to  have  him  tortured  after  the  same  manner
that  he  had  tortured  others.  The  Israelites  een-
quered  him,  took  him,  and  cut  off  the  extremities
of  his  hands  and  feet,  Judg.  1.  5,  6,  7.  David
treated  the  murderers  of  Ish-bosheth  in  the  same
manner,  and  had  their  bodies  hung  up  over  the
pool  of  Hebron,  2  Sam.  4.  12.

my  p.  is  greater  than  T  can  bear
19. 1 15.  lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  p.  of  the  city
Ley.  26. 41.  than  accept  the  p.  of  their  iniquity,  43.

1  -  am,  28. 10.  Saul  sware,  nop.  shall  happen  to  thee
j.  7M  9- they  said,  if  v  e  tarry,  we  shall  find  p.

o  lv  God  Iayethp.  ot  iniquity  for  children
•tl.  3.  and  a  strange p.  to  the  workers  of  iniquity
1  rov.  19.  19.  a  man  ot  great  wrath  shall  suffer  p
Lam.  3.  .39.  a  man  for  the  p.  of  his  sins
4. 6.  p.  of  my  people  is  greater  than  the  p.  of  Sodom
22.  thep.  of  thine  iniquity  is  accomplished
Bzek.  14. 10.  they  shall  bear  the  p.  of  their  iniquity
thep.  ot  prophets  asp.  of  him  that  seeketh  to  him
rlos.  12.  +8.  he  shall  have  p.  in  whom  is  sin
Amos  1.  3.  and  for  four  1  will  not  turn  away  thep
n,  ,  .  .  thereof,  6,  9,  11,  13.  |  2.  1.  4.  fi’

Zeeh.  14. 19.  this  shall  be  the  p.  of  Egypt
Mat.  25.  46.  these  shall  go  into  everlasting  p.

-  Cor.  2.  6.  sufficient  to  such  a  man  is  this  p.

Ilf”- 10. 29.  ot  how  much  sorer  p.  suppose  ye
1  Pet.  2.  14.  sent  by  him  for  the  p.  of  evil  doers
_  PUNISHMENTS.

Job  19.  29.  for  wrath  bringeth  the  p.  of  the  sword
Psal.  149.  7-  to  execute  p.  upon  the  people
Jer.  44.  J9.  have  ye  forgot  the  p.  of  your  fathers  7
_,  ,  PUR.

Psib  3.7.  they  castp.  that  is,  the  lot,  before  Haman
9- -4.  tor  Hainan  had  castp.  for  to  consume  them
♦6.  called  these  days  Purim,  after  the  name  of  p.

See  Purim.

PURCHASE,  Substantive.

Gen.  49.  32.p.  of  field  and  cave  that  was  therein
Lev.  22.  +  11.  if  the  priest  buy  a  soul  with  p.

Jer.  32.  11.  so  I  took  the  evidence  of  the  p.

12. 1  gave  evidence  of  the  p.  to  Baruch,  14.  ifl
PURCHASE,  F.D.  ’  ’

Gen.  25. 10.  field  A  braham  p.  of  the  sons  of  Ileth
BxodAb.  16.  till  people  pass  over  which  thou  hast  p.
Lev.  -5.  3.3.  if  a  man  p.  ot  the  Levifes,  then  house
I uth  4.  10.  Ruth  have  T  p.  to  be  my  wife
Pjal.fA.  2.  remember  thy  congregation  thou  hast  a.

18.  54.  mountain  w  hich  his  right  hand  had  p.

Acts  1.  18.  this  man  p.  a  field  with  iniquity
8.  20.  thought  the  gift  0!  God  may  bep.  by  money
20.28.  which  he  hath p.  with  his  own  blood

379


P  U  II


PUR


PUS


Eph.  1. 14.  until  the  redemption  of  the  p.  possession
I  Tim.  3.  13.  have  used  the  office  of  deacon  well,  p.

1  Pet.  2.  +  y.  ye  are  a  p.  people,  that  ye  should  shew

PURE

Signifies,  [1]  Simple,  unmixed,  uncompounded,  as
wine  without  water,  </old  or  silver  without  dross,
Exod.  25.  IT,  31.  Dent.  32.  14.  [2]  Holy,  free
from  spot,  stain,  or  the  least  mixture  of  sin,
Psal.  19.  8.  1  John  3.  3.  [3]  One  who  is
single-hearted  and  sincere,  free  from  any  reign¬
ing  sin.  Mat.  5.  8.  [4]  Devout  and  religious,
Prov.  30.  12.  [5]  Tried  or  refined,  Psal.  119.
t  140.  Thy  word  is  pure  t  that  is,  it  is  per¬
fectly  free  from  all  falsehood  and  deceit,  and
contains  pure  precepts,  pure  examples,  great
helps,  and  strong  encouragements  to  purity,  and
dissuasives  from  sin.  [6]  Clear  and  free,  Acts
20.  26.  [7]  Lawful  to  he  used,  Horn.  14.  20.

[8]  Believers,  whose  hearts  are  purified  by  faith,
Tit.  1.  15.  [9]  Tree  from  error,  idolatry ,  and
hypocrisy,  James  1.  2?..

Exod.  27.  20.  that  they  bring  the  p.  oil,  Lev.  24.  2.

30.  23.  take  p.  myrrh  ||  34.  with  p.  frankincense

31.  8.  the  p.  candlestick,  39.  37.  Lev.%  24.  4.

Lev.  24.  6.  set  cakes  on  the  p.  table  before  the  Lord

7.  thou  shalt.  putp.  frankincense,  on  each  row
Deut.  32.  14.  didst  drink  the  p.  blood  of  the  grape

2  Sam.  22.  27.  with  the  p.  thou  wilt  shew  thyself  p.

with  froward,  thyself  fro  ward,  fW.  18.  26.

1  Kings  5.  11.  and  twenty  measures  of  p.  oil

2  Chron.  13. 11.  the  shewbread  set  on  the  p.  table
Ezra  6.  20.  all  werep.  and  killed  the  passover
Job  4.  17.  shall  a  man  be  more  p.  than  his  Maker .

8.  6.  if  thou  wert  p.  and  upright,  surely  now

11.  4.  for  thou  hast  said,  my  doctrine  is  p.

16.  17.  not  for  any  injustice,  also  my  prayer  isp.

25.  5.  yea,  the  stars  are  not  p.  in  his  sight.

Psal.  12.  6.  the  words  of  the  Lord  are  p.  words

19.  8.  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  is  p.

119.  140.  thy  word  is  very  p.  therefore  1  love  it
Prov.  15.  26.  the  words  of  the  p.  are  pleasant

20.  9.  who  can  say,  I  am  p.  from  my  sin  ?

11.  whether  his  work  be  p.  whether  it  be  right

21.  8.  but  as  for  the  p.  his  work  is  right

30.  5.  every  word  of  God  is  p.  he  is  shield  to  them

12.  a  generation  that  are  p.  in  their  own  eyes
Jer.  51.  t  11.  make/),  the  arrows,  gather  shields
Dan.  7.  Q.  the  hair  of  his  head  like  the  p.  wool
Mic.  6.  11.  shall  l  count  them  p.  with  wicked
Zeph.  3.  9.  1  will  turn  to  the  people  a  p.  language
Mai.  1.  11.  in  every  place  a  p.  offering  be  offered
Mark  14.  t  3.  an  alabaster  box  of  p.  nard,  precious
Acts  20.  26.  I  am  p.  from  the  blood  or  all  men
Bom.  14.  20.  all  things  indeed  are  p.  but  it  is  evil
Phil.  4.  8.  whatsoever  things  are  p.  what  lovely

1  Tim.  3.  9.  the  mystery  of  faith  in  a  p.  conscience
}>.  22.  neither  be  partaker  of  sins,  keep  thyself/).

2  Tim.  1.  3.  whom  I  serve  with  a  p.  conscience
Tit.  1.  15.  to  the  p.  all  tilings  are  p.  but  to  them

that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  nothing  is  p.
Heb.  10.  22.  and  our  bodies  washed  with  p.  water
Tam.  1.  27.  p.  religion  and  undefiled  is  this,  to  visit

the  fatherless

3.  17.  but  the  wisdom  from  above  is  first  p.

2  Pet.  3.  1.  in  both  which  1  stir  up  your  p.  minds

1  John  3.  3.  purifieth  himself  even  as  he  is  p.

Jev.  15.  6.  the  seven  angels  clothed  in  p.  linen

22.  1.  he  shewed  me  a  p.  river  of  water  of  life

See  Heart,  Gold.

PURELY.

Isa.  1.  25.  and  I  will  p.  purge  away  thy  dross
PURER  ESS.

Job  22.  30.  it  is  delivered  by  the  p.  of  thine  hands
Prov.  22. 11.  he  that  lov./).  of  heart,  king  his  friend

2  Cor.  6.  6.  approving  ourselves  by  p.  by  knowledge

PURER.

Lam.  4.  7.  her  Nazarites  were  p.  than  snow
II ab.  1.  13.  thou  art  of  p.  eyes  than  to  behold  evil
PURGE.

2  Chr.  34.  3.  Josiah  began  to/).  Judah  and  Jertis.
Psal.  51.  7.  /).  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean
65.  3.  our  transgressions  thou  shalt  p.  them
79.  9.  and  p.  away  our  sins  for  thy  name's  sake
Isa.  1.  25.  and  purely  p.  away  thy  dross  and  tin
Ezek.  20.  38  I  will  p.  from  among  you  the  rebels
43.  20.  thus  shalt  thou  cleanse  and  p.  it

26.  seven  days  shall  they/),  the  altar  and  purify  it
Dan.  11.  35.  some  of  them  shall  fall  top.  them
Mai.  3.  3.  and  p.  them  as  gold  and  silver,  to  offer
Mat.  3.  12.  he  will  thoroughly  p.  his  floor,  and

gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner,  Luke  3.  17

1  Cor.  5.1.  p.  out  therefore  the  old  leaven

2  Tim.  2.  21.  if  a  man  therefore/),  himself  from  these
Heb.  9.  14.  p.  your  conscience  from  dead  works

PURGED.

1  Sam.  3.  14.  iniquity  of  Eli’s  house  shall  not  be/)

2  Chron.  34.  8.  when’ he  had  p.  the  land  and  house
Prov.  16.  6.  by  mercy  and  truth  iniquity  is/).

Isa.  4.  4.  and  shall  have  p.  the  blood  of  Jerusalem

6".  7.  thy  iniquity  is  taken  away,  and  thy  sin/).

22.  14.  surely  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  p.

27.  9.  by  this  shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be/).
Ezek.  24.  1.3.  because  I  have  p.  thee,  and  thou  wast

not  p.  thou  shalt  not  be  p.  fiom  thy  filthiness
Heb.  1.  3.  when  he  had  by  himself  p.  our  sins

9.  22.  almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  p.  by  blood

10.  2.  because  that  the  worshippers  once  p.

2  Pet.  1 . 9.  hath  forgotten  he  was/),  from  his  old  sins
PURGETH.

John  15.  2.  every  branch  that  beareth,  he/),  it
PURGING.

Prov.  20.  +  30.  blueness  of  a  wound  is  a  p.  medicine
Mark  7.  19.  goetli  out  into  the  draught,  p.  meats
PURIFICATION,  S.

Num.  19.  9.  it  shall  be  kept,  it  is  up.  for  sin

17.  take  of  ashes  of  the  burnt  heifer  of  p.  for  sin
2  Chum.  30.  19.  according  to  p.  of  the  sanctuary
Neh.  12.  45.  porters  kept  the  ward  of  their  p.

Esth.  2.  3.  the  things  of  their/),  be  given  them
12.  so  were  the  days  of  their/),  accomplished
Luke  2.  22.  when  days  of  her  p.  were  accomplished
Acts  21.  26.  the  accomplishment  of  the  days  of/).

380


PURIFY.

AWn.19.12.  shall/),  himself  with  it  the  third  day,  19.
20.  shall  be  unclean,  and  shall  not  p.  himself
31. 19./).  yourselves  and  your  captives  on  third  day

20.  p.  all  your  raiment,  and  all  made  of  skins
Job  41 . 25.  by  reason  of  breakings  they  p.  themselves
Isa.  66.  17.  that/),  themselves  in  the  gardens
Ezek.  43.  26.  seven  days  shall  they  p.  the  altar
Mai.  3.  3.  and  he  shall  p.  the  sons  of  Levi

John  11.  55.  went  to  Jerusalem  to  p.  themselves
Acts  21.  24.  take  and  p.  thyself  with  them
Tit.  2.  14.  and  p.  to  himself  a  peculiar  people
Jam.  4.  8.  p.  your  hearts,  ye  double-minded
PURIFIED.

Lev.  8.  15.  and  p.  the  altar,  and  poured  the  blood
Num.  8.  21.  the  Levites  were  p.  Ezra  6.  20.  _

31.  23.  shall  be  p.  with  the  wmter  of  separation
2  Sam.  11.4.  Ratlisheba  was  /;.  from  uncleanness
Psal.  12.6.  are  pure  words,  as  silver/),  seven  times
Prov.  30.  +  5.  every  word  of  God  is  p.

Dan.  12.  10.  many  shall  be  p.  and  in  de  white
Acts  24.  18.  certain  Jews  from  Asia  found  me  p.
Heb.  9.  +  18.  nor  first  testament  p.  without  blood
23.’  the  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavens  be/).

1  pet  1  22.  seeing  ye  have  p.  your  souls  in  obeying
PURIFIER.

Mai.  3.  3.  he  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  p.  of  silver
PURI  FIE  III.

Num.  19.  13.  toucheth  a  dead  body  and  p.  not
John  3.  3.  that  hath  this  hope  p.  himself
PURIFYING.

Lev.  12.  4.  shall  continue,  in  the  blood  of  her  p.

6.  when  the  days  of  her  p.  are  fulfilled
Num.  8.  7-  sprinkle  water  of/),  on  them
Chron.  23.  28.  office  was  in  p.  all  holy  things
Esth.  2.  12.  with  other  things  for  p.  of  women
John  2.  6.  after  the  manner  of  the  p.  of  the  Jews
3.  25.  then  there  arose  a  question  about/).
ileb.  9.  13.  sanctifieth  to  the/),  of  the  fiesh
PURIFYING.

Acts  15.  9.  p.  their  hearts  by  faith

21.  26.  and  the  next  dav  p.  himself  with  them

PU  RlM,

Or  Pur,  or  Phur  ;  that  is  to  say,  Lots.  This  was  a
very  solemn  feast  of  the  Jews,  instituted  in  memory
of  the  lots  that  were  cast  by  Hainan  the  enemy  of
the  Jews.  These  Lots  were  cast  in  the  first  month
of  the  year,  Esth.  3.  7.  and  marked  out  the  twelfth
month  of  the  same  year,  for  the  execution  oj  11a-
man’s  design,  which  was  to  destroy  all  the  Jews  oj
the  kingdom  1  f  Persia.  Thus  the  superstition  of
Hainan,  in  casting  and  pursuing  t’e  event  oj  these
lots,  was  the  cause  of  his  own  ruin,  and  of  the  pre¬
servation  of  the  Jews  ;  who  had  now  time  to  avert
this  blow,  by  means  of  Esther  the  spouse  e/Aha-
suerus,  and  to  remove  those  ill  impressions  he  had
conceived  of  the  Jews.  In  memory  of  this  so
signal  and  miraculous  deliverance,  the  Jews  insti¬
tuted  a  feast,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  Pur,
or  Purim.  __

Esth.  9.  26.  called  these  days  P.  after  name  of  Pur

28.  and  that  these  days  of  P.  should  not  fail

29.  to  confirm  this  second  letter  of  P.  31.

32.  and  the  decree  of  Fsther  confirmed  these  P.

PURITY.

Tim.  4.  12.  be  thou  an  example  in  faith,  in  p.


5.  2.  rebuke  the  younger  as  sisters,  with  all/).
PURLOINING.

Tit.  2. 10.  not/),  but  shewing  all  good  fidelity
PURPLE.

F.xod.  25.  4.  this  is  the  offering,  blue,  p.  and  scarlet
26.  1.  thou  shalt  make  curtains  of  fine  linen  and/).
39.  3.  the  gold  cut  into  wires,  to  work  in  the/).
Num.  4.  13.  take  away  ashes  and  spread  a  p.  cloth
Judg.  8.26.  p-  raiment  was  on  the  kings  of  Midian
2  Chron.  2.  7.  send  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  p.  14.

3. 14.  he  made  the  vail  of  blue,  and  p.  and  crimson
Esth.  1.6.  fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and  p.

8.  15.  Mordec.went  out  with  garni,  of  linen  and/).
Prov.  31. 22.  her  clothing  is  silk  and  r.

Cant.  3.  10.  he  made  the  covering  of  it  of/).

7.  5.  and  the  hair  of  thine  head  like  p.

Jer.  10.  9.  blue  and  p.  is  their  clothing
Ezek.  27.7./).  was  that  which  covered  thee
16.  Syria  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  emeralds,  p.
Mark  15.  17.  and  they  clothed  him  with  p.

20.  mocked  him,  they  took  off  the  p.  from  him
f.uke  16.  19.  a  certain  rich  man  clothed  in  p.

John  19.  2.  the  soldiers  put  on  him  a  p.  robe
5.  then  came  Jesus  forth  wearing  the  p.  robe
Acts  16.  14.  a  woman  named  1  ydia,  a  seller  of  p.
Heb.  9.  +  19  Moses  took  p.  and  sprinkled  the  book
Rev.  i 7.  4.  the  woman  was  arrayed  in/). and  scarlet
18.  12.  none  buyeth  the  merchandise  or  p.

16.  that  great  city ,  that  was  clothed  in p.  and  scarl.
PURPOSE.

Num.  14.  4  34.  ye  shall  know  my  altering  of  my  p.
Ruth  2. 16.  and’  let  fall  some  handfuls  of/),  for  her
Ezra  4.  5.  hired  counsellors  to  frustrate  their/).

Neh.  8.  4.  a  pulpit  of  wood  they  made  for  the  p.

Job  33.  17.  that  he  may  withdraw  man  from  his  p.
Prov.  20.  18.  every/),  is  established  by  counsel
Eccl.  3.  1.  and  a  time  to  every  p.  17-1  8.  6.

5.  f  8.  if  thou  seest  oppression,  marvel  not  at  the  p.
Isa.  1.11.  to  what  p.  is  multitude  of  your  sacrifices
14."  26.  tins  is  the  p.  that  is  purposed  upon  the  earth
30.7.  the  Egyptians  shall  help  in  vain,  and  to  no  p.
Jer.  6.  20.  to  what  p.  cometh  to  me  incense  ?

49.  30.  Nebuchadnezzar  conceived  a p.  a g.  Hazor
51.  29.  for  every  p.  of  the  Lord  shall  stand
Ezek.  38.+  10.  thou  shalt  conceive  a  mischievous/).
Dan.  6.  17-  that  p.  be  not  changed  concerning  Dan.
Mat.  26.  8.  saying,  to  what  p. is  this  waste  i
Acts  11.  23.  with  p.  of  heart,  they  would  cleave

26.  16.  for  I  have  appeared  to  thee  for  this  p.

27.  13.  supposing  that  they  had  obtained  their  p.
43.  the  centurion  kept  them  from  their/).

Rom.  8.  28.  who  are  the  called  according  to  his  p.
9. 11.  that  the/),  of  God  according  to  election  stand
17.  even  for  this  same  p.  have  1  raised  thee  up
Eph.  1.  11.  according  to  the  p.  of  him  whoworketh
3.  11.  according  to  the  eternal  p.  in  Christ


Eph.&AQ..  1  sent  to  you  for  the  same  p.-Col.  4.8.

2  Tim.  1.  9.  called  us  accord,  to  his  own/),  and  grace
3.  10.  but  thou  hast  fully  known  my  p.  faith
1  John  3.  8.  for  this/).  Son  of  God  was  manifested
PURPOSES.

Den.  6.  +  5.  the  p.  of  man’s  heart  was  only  evil
Job  17.  11.  my  days  are  past,  my  p.  are  broken  off
Prov.  15.  22.  without  counsel  p.  are  disappointed
Isa.  19.  10.  they  shall  be  broken  in  the  p.  thereof
Jer.  49.  20.  hear  counsel  of  the  Lord  and  p.  50.  45
PURPOSE,  ED.

1  Kings  5.  5.  I  p.  to  build  an  house  to  the  Lord

2  Chr.  28.  10.  p.  to  keep  under  Ju  ah  and  Jerus.

32.  2.  Sennacherib  p.  to  fight  against  Jerusalem
Psal.  17-  3.  I  am  p.  my  mouth  shall  not  transgress
110.  4.  who  have  p.  to  overthrow  my  goings

Isa.  14.  24.  and  as  1  have  p.  so  shall  it  stand

26.  this  is  the  purpose  p.  upon  the  whole  earth

27.  the  Lord  hath  p.  who  shall  disannul  it?

19.  12.  what  the  Lord  hath  p.  upon  Egypt

23.  9.  Lord  hath  p.  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  glory
46.  11.  I  have/),  it,  and  I  will  also  do  it
Jer.  4.  28.  1  have  p.  it,  and  will  not  repent
26.  3.  repent  me  of  the  evil  which  I  p.  to  do  them
36.  3.  will  hear  all  evil  which  I  p.  to  do  to  them
49.  20.  his  purposes  that  lie  hath  p.  50.  45.

Lam.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  p.  to  destroy  the  wall
Dan.  1.  8.  Dan.  p.  in  his  heart  not  to  defile  himself
Acts  19.  21.  Paul/),  in  Spirit  to  go  to  Jerusalem

20.  3.  Paul  /).  to  return  through  Macedonia
Rom.  1.  13.  that  oftentimes  I  p.  to  come  to  you

2  Cor.  1.  17.  things  I  p.  do  I  p.  accord,  to  the  flesh  r
Eph.  1.  9.  his  will  which  he  hath  p.  in  himself
3  11.  eternal  purpose  which  he  p.  in  Christ  Jesus
PURPOSETH.

2  Cor.  9.  7.  every  man  as  lie/),  in  his  heart,  so  give
PURPOSING.

Gen  °7 . 42.Esau  doth  comfort  himself,  p.  to  kill  thee
PURSE.

Prov.  1.  14.  cast  in  thy  lot,  let  us  have  one  p.

Luke  10.  4.  carry  neither  p.  nor  scrip,  nor  shoes
22.  35.  when  1  sent  you  without  p.  and  scrip
36.  but  now  he  that  hath  a  p.  let  him  take  it
PURSES.

Mat.  10.9.  provide  neither  silv.  nor  brass  in  your/).
Mark  6.  8.  they  should  take  no  money  in  their/).
PURSUE.

Gen.  35.  5.  they  did  not/),  after  the  sons  of  Jacob
Exod.  15. 9.  the  enemy  said,  1  will/).  1  will  overtake
Deut.  19.  6.  lest  the  avenger  of  blood  p.  Josh.  20. 5.

28.  22.  they  shall  p.  thee  until  thou  perish.  45.

Josh.  2.  5./).  after  them,  ye  shall  overtake  them

8.  16.  the  men  of  Ai  were  called  together  top.

10.  19.  stay  not,  butp.  after  your  enemies

1  Sam.  24.  14.  after  whom  dost  thoup.  ?

25.  29.  a  man  is  risen  to  p.  thee  and  seek  thy  soul

26.  18.  wherefore  doth  my  lord  thusp.  me  t

30. 8.  shall  I  p.  after  this  troop  ?  lie  answered, p.

2  Sam.  17.  1.  I  "  ill  arise  and  p.  after  David
*20.  6.  take  thy  lord’s  servants,  p.  after  Sheba,  7.

24.  1.3. wilt  thou  flee  while  enemies  p.  thee  ?

Job  13.  25.  and  wilt  thou  v.  the  dry  stubble?

30.  l‘5.  terrorsp.  my  soul  as  the  wind
Psal.  34.  14.  do  good,  seek  peace  and  p.  it
Isa.  5.  t  11-  that  continue  till  wine  p.  them

30. ’  16.  therefore  shall  they  that  p.  you  be  swift
ter.  48.  2.  O  madmen,  the  sword  shall  p.  thee
"Ezek.  35.  6.  and  blood  shallp.  thee  _

IIos.  8.  3.  Israel,  the  enemy  shall  p.  him
Amos  1.  11.  bee.  Edom  didp.  FiS  broth,  with  sword
AWi  1.  8.  and  darkness  shall  p.  his  enemies
PURSUED.

Gen.  14. 14.  Abram  p.  them  to  Dan  and  Uoban,  15.

31.  23.  Laban  and  his  brethren/).  Jacob,  36.

Exod.  14.  8.  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians  p.  after

Israel,  9,  23.  Deut.  11.  4.  Josh.  24.  6.
Josh.  2.  7.p.  the  spies  ||  8.  16.  they  of  Aip.  17-  .
Judg .  1.6 .  p.  after  Adoni-bezek,  and  caught  him

4.  16.  but  Barak  p.  after  the  chariots,  22;

1.  23.  Gideon  p.  after  the  Midianites,  25.  I  8.  12.
20  45.  Israel  p.  Benjamin  unto  Gidom
18am.  7.  11.  Israel  p.  the  Philistines,  17.  52.

°3  25.  Saul  p.  David  H  .30. 10.  Dav.  p.  Amalekites
2 "Sam.  2.  19.  and  Asahel  p.  after  Abner
24.  Joabp.  Abner  (1  28.  Joab  p.  Israel  no  more
20.  10.  so  Joab  and  Abishai  p.  after  Sheba
2°  38.  1  li'ivep.  mine  enemies,  Psal.  18.  37.

1  Kings 20. 20.  Syrians  fled,  and  Isr.p.  after  then)

2  Kings  25.  5.  and  the  army  of  Chaldees  p.  the

king  and  overtook  him,  Jer .  39.  5.  i  o*
2  Chron.  13.  19.  Abijahp.  after  Jeroboam
14. 13.  Asa  and  people  p.  the  Ethiopians  to  Gerar
Isa.  41.  3.  he  p.  them,  and  passed  safely
Lam  4. 19.  they  p.  ns  upon  the  mountains,  laid  wail
PURSUER,  S.

Josh.  2.  16.  get  to  the  mountain  lest  p.  meet  you
22.  until  the  p.  returned,  tliep.  sought  them
8.  20.  and  the  people  turned  hack  upon  the  p.
Lam  1.  6.  are  gone  without  strength  before  tnep.
PURSUE  I  11,  ING.

Lev.  26.  17.  and  ye  shall  flee  when  none_p.  you
.36.  and  they  shall  fall  when  none  p.  37 .

Judg.  8.  4.  Gideon  with  300  men, faint, yet p.  there

5.  lamp.  Zebah  and  Zalmunna,  kings  of  M  nhan

1  Sam.  23.  28.  Saul  returned  from  p.  after

2  Sam.  3.  22.  behold,  Joab  came  from  p.  a  troop

18.  16.  the  people  returned  from  p.  after  Israel
1  Kings  18.  27-  your  god  is  p.  or  on  a  journey

22.  33.  perceived  it  was  not  the  king,  they

back  from  p.  .lehoshaphat,  °  Chron.  lb-  ■  -
Prov.  11. 19.  he  that*,  evilp.  it  to  his  own  death

13.  21.  evil  p.  sinners,  to  the  righteous  good  re  pa

19.  7.  he  p.  them  with  words,  yet  they  are  wanting
28  1.  the  wicked  flee  when  no  manp.

PURSUI  T.  .  .  „

1  Kings  18.  t  27.  he  is  a  goo,  talking,  or  ham  a  p.

PU  REFINANCE.  ,

Exod.  12.  9.  roast  with  fire,  his  head,  legs,  andp.

push.

Exod.  21.  29.  but  if  the  ox  were  wont  to  p.  30.

32.  if  the  ox  p.  a  man-servant  or  maid  sen  au
Dent  33.  17.  with  them  he  shallp.  the  people


P  U  T


PUl


P  UT


1  K ings  22. 11.  with  these  shalt  thou  p.  the  Syrians*
uiitil  thou  have  consumed  them,  2  Chron.  18.  10.
Job  .'50. 12.  they  p.  away  my  feet,  and  raise  up
PiaL  44.  5.  thro’  thee  will  we  p.  down  our  enemies
Dan.  11. 40.  at  the  end  shall  king  ot' south p.  at  him
PUSH  ED.

Ezek,  34.  21.  p.  all  the  diseased  with  vour  horns
PUSHING.

Dan.  8. 4. 1  saw  the  ram  p.  westward  and  northward

PUT.

Gen.  2. 8.  there  God  p.  the  man  he  had  formed,  15.

3. 15.  I  will  p.  enmity  between  thee  and  woman

24.  2.  p.  thy  hand  under  my  thieh,  0.  I  47.  29.

47.  and  l  p.  the  ear-ring  upon  her  face

27.  15.  p.  them  upon  Jacob  tier  younger  son
16.  she  p.  the  skins  of  the  kids  upon  nis  hands

28.  11.  Jacob  p.  the  stones  for  his  pillows

29.  3.  p.  the  stone  again  on  the  well’s  mouth

30.  40.  he  p.  his  own  Hocks  by  themselves

42.  when  cattle  were  feeble,  he  p.  not  the  rods

31.  34.  Rachel  p.  them  in  the  camels’  furniture

32.  16.  p.  space  betwixt  drove  and  drove

38.  14.  Tamar  p.  off  her  widow’s  garments

39.  4.  all  he  had  he  p.  into  Joseph’s  hand

40. 15.  that  they  should  p.  me  into  the  dungeon
42.  17.  he  p.  them  altogether  in  ward

46.  4.  Joseph  shall  p.  his  hand  on  thine  eyes
48.  18.  p.  thy  right  hand  upon  his  head
Exod.  3.  5.  draw  not  nigh  hither,  p.  off  thy  shoes
from  off  thy  feet,  Isa.  20.  2.  Acts  7.  33.

22.  ye  shall  p.  them  on  your  sons  and  daughters

4.  6.  Lord  said,  p.  now  thy  hand  in  thy  bosom
15.  speak  to  him,  and  p.  words  in  his  mouth

5.  21.  to  p.  a  sword  in  their  hand  to  slay  us

8.  23.  1  will  p.  a  division  between  my  people

11.  7-  may  know  the  Lord  doth  p.  a  difference
15.26.  1  will  p.  none  of  these  diseases  on  thee
16.  33.  p.  an  homer  full  of  manna  therein

22.  5.  and  p.  in  his  beast  in  another  man’s  field

8.  to  see  whether  he  have  p.  in  his  hand
11.  an  oath  that  he  hath  not  p.  his  hand

23.  1.  p.  not  thine  hand  with  the  wicked
29.24.  thou  shalt  p.  all  in  the  hands  of  Aaron

30.  36.  p.  o,  the  perfume  before  the  testimony

32.  27-  p.  e'  ery  man  his  sword  by  his  side

33.  5.  now  p.  off  thy  ornaments  from  thee
22.  I  will  p.  thee  in  a  cleft  of  the  rock

Lev.  8. 27.  he  p.  all  on  Aaron’s  and  his  sons’  hands

19.  14.  nor  p.  a  stumbling-block  before  the  blind

24. 12.  and  they  p.  the  blasphemer  in  ward
26.  8.  p.  ten  thousand  to  flight,  Deut.  32.  30.

Num.  6. 27.  shall  p.  my  name  on  the  children  of  Isr.
H.17.  of  spirit  which  is  on  thee,  and  p.  upon  them

29.  the  Lord  would  p.  his  Spirit  on  them

21.9.  Moses  made  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  p.  it  on  a

23.  5.  the  Lord  p.  a  word  in  Balaam’s  mouth,  16.
Dent.  10.  2.  thou  shalt  p.  them  in  the  ark
5. 1  p.  the  tables  in  the  ark  which  I  had  made
11.29-  thou  shalt  p.  the  blessing  on  mount  Gerizim

12.5.  the  place  he  shall  choose  to  p.  his  name,  21.

7.  ye  shall  rejoice  in  all  ye  p.  your  hand  to

18. 18.  and  will  p.  my  words  in  his  mouth

23.  24.  but  thou  shalt  not  p.  any  grapes  in  thy  vessel
Josh.  7. 11.  p.  it  even  among  their  own  stuff
Judg.  12.3.  1  p.  my  life  in  my  hands,  and  passed
1  Sam.  2.  36.  p.  me  into  one  of  the  priest’s  offices

8. 16.  your  king,  he  will  p.  your  asses  to  work

14.  26.  but  no  man  p.  his  hand  to  his  mouth
17-  39-  and  David  p.  them  off  him

54.  but  he  p.  Goliath’s  armour  in  his  tent

19.5.  for  he  did  p.  his  life  in  his  hand
28.  21.  1  have  p.  my  lire  in  my  hand

Kings  5.  3.  Lord  p.them  under  the  soles  of  his  feet

9.  3.  to  p.  my  name  there,  11,  36.  |  14.  21.

12.  29.  the  other  of  the  calves  p.  he  in  Dan

18.  23.  lay  it  on  w  ood,  and  p.  no  fire  under
22.  27.  saith  the  king,  p.  this  fellow  in  prison

!  Kings  4.  34.  he  p.  his  mouth  upon  his  mouth

11. 12.  the  king’s  son,  they  p.  the  crown  on  him

13. 16.  p.  thine  hand  upon  the  bow,  he  p.  his  hand

19.  28.  1  will  p.  hook  in  thy  nose,  Isa.  37.  29.

21.  7.  in  this  house  and  Jerusalem  will  1  p.  my
name  for  ever,  2  Chron.  6.  20.  |  12. 13.  |  33.  7.
''/iron.  11. 19.  that  have  p.  their  lives  in  jeopardy

13.  10.  because  he  p.  his  hand  to  the  ark

21.  27.  and  the  angel  p.  up  his  sword  again
■  Chron.  6.  11.  and  in  the  house  have  I  p.  the  ark

36.  3.  the  king  of  Egypt  p.  him  down  at  Jerusalem
22.  Cyrus  p.  the  decree  in  writing,  Ezra  1.  1.

Ezra 6.  12.  destroy  kings  that  p.  their  hand  to  alter

7.  27.  hath  p.  such  a  thing  in  the  king’s  heart
*eh.  2. 12.  what  God  had  p.  in  my  heart  to  do

3.  5.  their  nobles  p.  not  their  necks  to  the  work
4.23.  that  every  one  p.  them  off  for  washing

6. 14.  Tobiah  would  have  p.  me  in  fear,  19.

E st/i.  9.  l.  his  decree  drew  near  to  be  p.  in  execution
Job  4.  18.  behold,  he  p.  no  trust  in  his  servants

13.14.  wherefore  do  1  p.  my  life  in  mine  hand?

17-  3.  lay  down,  p.  me  in  a  surety  with  thee

19. 13.  he  hath  p.  my  bretluen  far  from  me

23. 6.  no,  hut  he  would  p.  strength  in  me
38.  36.  who  p.  wisdom  in  the  inward  parts
41.  2.  cansf  thou  p.  an  hook  into  his  nose  ?

Csal.4.7.  thou  hast  p.  gladness  in  my  heart

8.6.  thou  hast p.  all  things  under  his  feet,  1  Cor.

n  „  „  15.25,27.  Eph.  1.22.  Ileb.  2.8.

9.  20.  p.  in  fear,  O  Lord,  that  nations  may  know
30. 11.  thou  hastp.  off  my  sackcloth  and  girded  me

31.  18.  let  the  lying  lips  be  p.  to  silence

40.  3.  he  hath  p.  a  new  song  in  my  mouth

14.  let  them  be  driven  backward,  and  p.  to
shame,  that  wish  me  evil,  44.  7.  |  53.  5.
44.  9.  but  thou  hast  cast  off  and  p.  us  to  shame
00.  8.  p.  thou  my  tears  into  thy  bottle
18.66.  he  p.  them  to  a  perpetual  reproach

88. 18.  lover  and  friend  hast  thou  p.  far  from  me
‘48.8.  better  to  trust  in  L.  than  to  p.  confid .  in  man

9.  better  to  trust  in  L.  than  to  p.  confid.  in  princes
119.  31.  ()  Lord,  p.  me  not  to  shame

Crov.  2.3.  2.  and  p.  a  knife  to  thy  throat

20.  8.  when  thy  neighbour  hath  p.  thee  to  shame

10.  lest  he  that  heareth  it  p.  thee  to  shame


Eccl.  10.  10.  then  must  he  p.  to  more  strength
Cant.  5.  3.  L  have p.  off  my  coat,  how  shall  I  p.  iton?

4.  my  beloved  p.  in  his  hand  by  hole  of  the  door
Isa.  5.  20.  woe  to  them  that  p,  darkness  tor  light

10.  13.  1  have  p.  down  the  inhabitants

11.8.  weaned  child  p.  his  hand  on  cockatrice’ den

37.  t  7.  I  will  p.  a  spirit  into  him

42.  1.  1  havep.  my  Spirit  upon  him.  Mat.  12. 18.

43.  26.  p.  me  in  remembrance,  let  us  plead

47.  11.  thou  shalt  not  be  able  to  p.  it  off

51.  16.  I  have  p.  words  in  thy  mouth,  Jer.  1.9.

23.  p.  it  into  the  hand  of  them  that  afflict  thee

53. 10.  to  bruise  him,  he  hath  p.  him  to  grief
59.  t  19.  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  p.  him  to  (fight

21.  the  words  I  p.  in  thy  mouth  shall  not  depart

63. 11.  where  is  he  that;;,  his  11.  Spirit  within  him  ?
Jer.  3.  19.  how  shall  1  p.  thee  among  the  children

8.  14.  for  the  Lord  our  God  hath  p.  us  to  silence

12. 13.  they  havep.  themselv.to  pain,  but  not  profit
31.33.  1  will  p.  my  law  in  their  inward  parts

32.  40.  I  will/;,  my  fear  in  their  hearts

47.  6.  O  sword,  p.  up  thyself  into  thy  scabbard
Ezek. 8.  17.  they  p.  the  branch  to  their  nose

11.  19.  I  will  give  them  one  heart,  1  will  p.  a  new

.  ..  sJ)irit  within  >’ou-  36-  26>  27. 1  37.  14.
16.  14.  through  my  comeliness  I  had/;,  upon  thee

22.  26.  her  priests  have/;,  no  difference

29.  4.  I  will  p.  hooks  in  thy  jaw  s,  38.  4.

30.  1.3.  I  will  p.  a  fear  in  the  land  of  Egypt
37.  6.  and  p.  breath  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live
Dan.  5.  19.  and  whom  he  would  he  p.  down
Joel 3.  13.  p.  in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  ripe
Mtc.  2.12.  1  will  p.  them  togeth.  as  sheep  of  Bozrah
7.5.  trust  not  a  friend,/;,  ye  not  confid.  in  a  guide
/.eph.  3.  19.  where  they  have  been/;,  to  shame
L/a</.  1.  6.  earneth  wages  to  p.  it  in  a  bag  with  holes
Mat.  5. 15.  nor  light  candle  and  p.  it  under  a  bushel

9.  17.  nor  do  men/;,  new  wine  into  old  bottles

19.  6.  let  not  man  p.  asunder,  Mark  10.  9.

22.  34.  that  he  had  p.  the  Sadducees  to  silence

25.  27.  oughtest  to  p.  my  money  to  exchangers

26.  52.  p.  up  again  thy  sword,  John  18.  11.

27.  6.  not  lawful  to  p.  them  into  the  treasury
Mark  10. 16./i.  his  hands  on  them,  and  blessed  them
Luke  1.52.  hath/;,  down  mighty  from  their  seats

15.  22.  bring  best  robe,  p.  it  on  him,  and  p.  a  ring
John  5.  7.  1  have  none  to  p.  me  into  the  pool

9.  15.  he  p.  clay  upon  mine  eyes,  and  1  do  see

19.  29.  p.  it  upon  hyssop,  and  p.  it  to  his  mouth

20.  25.  unless  1  p.  my  finger  into  the  print  of  nails
Acts  1.  7.  the  father  hath/;,  in  his  own  power

4.  3.  they/;,  the  apostles  in  hold  unto  next  day

5.  18.  and  p.  them  in  the  common  prison
25.  behold,  the  men  whom  yep.  in  prison

13.  46.  seeing  ye  p.  the  word  ot  God  from  you

15.  9.  and  p.  no  difference  between  us  and  them

10.  to  p.  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disciples
Rom.  14_.  13.  that  no  man  p.  a  stumbling  block

1  Cor.  15.  24.  he  shall  have/;,  down  authority
25.  till  he  p.  all  his  enemies  under  his  feet

2  Cor.  5.  t  19.  p.  in  us  the  word  of  reconciliation

8.  16.  God,  which  p.  the  same  earnest  care  in  1  itus
Eph.  4.  22.  that  ye  p.  off  the  old  man,  Col.  3.  9.

Col.  3.  8.  ye  also  p.  off  these,  anger,  wrath

1  Tim.  4.  6.  it  thou/;,  the  brethren  in  remembrance,

shalt  be  a  good  minister,  2  Tim.  2.  14.

2  Tim.  1.  6.  wherefore  1  p.  thee  in  remembrance
Tit.  3.  1.  p.  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  powers
Philem.  18.  it  heoweth.p.  that  on  my  account
Ileb.  2.  5.  to  angels,  hath  he  not/;,  in  subjection

6.  6.  if  fall  away,  to  renew  them, seeing  they  cru¬
cify  Son  of  G.  afresh, and p.  him  toanopen  shame

8.  10.  I  will  /;.  my  laws  into  their  mind,  and  write

10.  16.  1  will/;,  my  laws  into  their  hearts
Jam.  3.  3.  we  p.  bits  in  the  horses’  mouths

1  Pet.  2.  15.  ye  may  p.  to  silence  the  ignorance

2  Pet.  1.  12.  to  p.  you  always  in  remembrance

14.  knowing  that  1  must/;,  off  this  tabernacle
Jude  5.  I  will  p.  you  also  in  remembrance
Rev.  2.24.  1  will/;,  on  you  none  other  burden

17. 17-  God  hath/;,  in  their  hearts  to  fulfil  his  will
P  UT  away.

Gen.  35.  2.  p.  array  the  strange  gods  among  you
Exod.  12.  15.  p.  away  tile  leaven  out  of  your  houses
Lev. 21. 7.  nor  take  a  woman  p.  away  from  her  husb.
Deut.  19.  13.  p.  away  guilt  of  innocent  blood,  21.  9.

22. 19.  he  may  not  p.  her  away  all  his  days,  29.
Josh.  24.  14,  p.  away  the  strange  gods  your  fathers
served,  23.  Judg.  10.  16.  1  Earn.  7.  3.

1  Sam.  1.  14.  Eli  said,/?,  away  thy  wine  from  thee

28.  3.  Saul  had  v.  away  wizards  out  of  the  land

2  Sam.  7.  15.  Saul  whom  1  p.  away  before  thee

12.  13.  Nathan  said,  the  Lord  hath  p.  away  thj’  sin
2  Kings 3.  2.  Jehoram  p.  away  the  image  of  Baal

2.3.  24.  all  the  abominations  did  Josiahp.  away
2  Chron.  15.8.  Ash  p.  away  the  abominable  idols
Ezra  10.  3.  make  a  covenant  to  p.  away  the  wives
19.  they  gave  their  hands  to  /;.  away  their  wives
Job  11.  14.  if  iniquity  be  in  thine  hand,/;,  it  away
22.  23.  p.  away  iniquity  from  thy  tabernacle
Psal.  18.  22.  1  did  not/;,  away  his  statutes  from  me
27.  9 .p.  not  thy  servant  away  in  anger
88.  8.  thou  hast  p.  array  mine  acquaintance
Prov. 4.  24.  p.  away  from  thee  a  froward  mouth
Isa.  50. 1.  whom  1  have  p.atvay  your  mother,  p.  a.
Jer.  3.  1.  if  a  man  p.  away  his  wife,  will  he  return
8.  1  had  p.  her  away,  and  given  her  a  bill  of  divot  ce
4. 1.  if  thou  wilt  p.  away  thine  abominations
Ezek.  43.  9.  let  then)  p.  away  their  whoredom

44.  22.  nor  shall  priest  take  her  that  is  p.  away
Hos.  2.  2.  let  her  p.  away  her  whoredoms
Amos  6.  3.  ye  that  p.  far  array  the  evil  day
Mai.  2.  +  16.  if  he  hate  her,  p.  her  away
Mat.  1. 19.  Jos.  was  minded  top.  her  away  privily

5.  31.  it  hath  been  said,  whoso  shall  p.  away  ins
wife,  32.  |  19.  9.  Mark  10.  11.  Luke  16.  18.
Mark  10.  2.  is  it  lawful  for  man  to  p.  away  his  wife  !

12.  if  a  woman  shall /;.  away  her  husband

1  Cor.  5. 13. p.  away  from  you  that  wicked  person
7- 11.  let  not  the  husband  p.  away  his  wife,  12.

13.  11.  when  a  man,  I  p.away  childish  things
Eph.  4. 31.  let  anger  and  evil  speaking  be  p.  away


1  Tim.  1.  19.  which  some  having  p.  away
Heb.  9.  26.  to  p.  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  hims.
See  Dkath,  Evil.

P  UT  forth.

Gen.  3.  22.  lest  he  p.  forth  and  take  of  tree  of  IP"

8.  9.  Noah  p.  forth  his  hand  and  took  the  dove
19.  10.  the  men  p.  forth  their  hand  and  pulled  Lot

Exod.  4.  4.  p.  forth  thine  hand  and  take  it  by  the  tail
Deut.  33.  14.  precious  things  p.  forth  by  the  moon
Judg.  3.  21.  and  Ehud  p.  forth  his  left  hand

6.  21.  the  angel  p.  forth  the  end  of  the  staff

14.  12.  1  will  now  p.  forth  a  riddle  to  you,  13.

15.  15.  Samson  p.  forth  and  took  the  jaw-bone

1  Sam.  14.  27.  Jonath.  p.  forth  the  rod  and  dipped  it
22.  17.  the  servants  not  p.  forth  to  slay  the  priests

24.  10.  not  p.  forth  mine  hand  ag.  Lord’s  anointed

2  Sam.  6.  6.  Uzzali  p.  f.  his  hand  to  ark,  1  Chr.  13.  9.
15. 5.  to  do  Absalom  obeisance,  he  p.  forth  his  hand
18-.  J2-  yet  not  p.  forth  my  hand  against  king's  son

1  Kings  13.  4.  Jerob  p.  forth  his  hand,  and  lie  p.f.
Job  1.  11.  p.  forth  thy  hand  and  touch  all,  2.  5.

12.  only  upon  himself  p.  not  forth  thy  hand
Psal.  55.  20.  he  p.  forth  hands  against  him  at  peace
125.  3.  lest  the  righteous  p.  forth  their  hands
Prov.  8.  1.  doth  not  Understand,  p.  forth  her  voice  ?

25.  6.  p.  not  forth  thyself  in  presence  of  the  king
Jer.  1. 9.  L.  p.  forth  his  hand  and  touched  my  mouth
Ezek.  8.  3.  he  p.  forth  form  of  an  hand  and  took  me

17-  2.  son  ot  man,  p.  forth  a  riddle  and  speak
Mat.  8.  3.  Jesus  p.  forth  his  hand  and  touched  him,
I  will,  be  thou  clean,  Mark  1.  41.  Luke  5.  13.

9.  25.  but  when  people  were  p.  forth ,  he  went  in

13.  24.  another  parable  p.  he  forth,  31.  Luke  14.  7.
Acts  5.  34.  commanded  top.  the  apostles  forth

9.  40.  but  Peter  p.  them  all  forth,  and  kneeled
PUT  on.

Gen.  28.  20.  bread  to  <at,  and  raiment  to  p.  on

38.  19.  lamar  p.  on  garments  of  her  widowhood
Exod.  29.  30.  his  son  that  is  priest,  shall  p.  them  on

33.  4.  no  man  did  p.  on  him  his  ornaments
Lev.  6.  10.  the  priest  shall  p.  on  his  linen  garment

11.  he  shall  p.  on  other  garments,  and  carry  forth

16.  4.  he  shall  p.  on  the  holy  linen  coat

24.  he  shall  p.  on  his  garments  and  come  forth

21.  10.  high  priest  consecrated  top.  on  the  garm.
Rum.  16.  46.  p.  on  incense,  and  go  quickly  to  cong
Deut.  22.  5.  nor  a  man  p.  on  a  woman’s  garment

2  Sam.  1.  24.  weep  for  Saul,  whop,  on  ornaments

14.  2.  I  pray  p.  on  now  mourning  apparel

20.  8.  Joab’s  garment  he  had  p.  on  was  girded

1  Kings  22. 30.  but/;,  thou  on  thy  robes,  2  Chr.  18.  29.

2  Kings  3.  21.  all  that  were  able  to  p.  on  armour
Esth.  4.  1.  Mordecai  p.  on  sackcloth  with  ashes

5.  1.  Esther  p.  on  her  royal  apparel  and  stood
Job  27.  17.  may  prepare  it,  but  the  just  shall  p.  it  on

29.  14.  1  p.  on  righteousness,  and  it  clothed  me
Cant.  5.  3.  I  put  off  my  coat,  how  shall  I  p.  it  on?
Isa.  51.  9.  awake,  awake,  p.  on  strength,  52.  1.  '

52.  l.p.  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O  Jerusalem
59.  17-  he  p.  on  righteousness  as  a  breastplate,  he
p.  on  garments  of  vengeance  for  clothing
Jer.  13.  1.  take  a  girdle  and  p.  it  on  thy  loins,  2.

46.  4.  furbish  the  spears,  and  p.  on  the  brigandines
Ezek.  24.  17-  and  p.  on  thy  shoes  upon  thy  feet
42.  14.  and  shall  p.  on  other  garments,  44.  19.

Jonah  3.  5.  the  people  of  Nineveh p.  on  sackcloth
Mat.  6.  25.  nor  what  ye  shall  p.  on,  Luke  12.  22.

21. 7.  they  p.  on  the  ass  and  colt  their  clothes

27  .  28.  they  stripped  him  and  p.  on  him  scarlet  robe
29.  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,
they  p.  it  on  his  head,  John  19.  2.

48.  one  of  them  p.  a  sponge  on  a  reed,  Mark  15.  36.
Mark  6.  9.  be  shod  with  sandals,  not  p.  on  two  coats
Luke  15.  22.  bring  and  p.  on  him  the  best  robe
John  19.  19.  Pilate  wrote  a  title  and  p.  it  ov  cross
Rom.  13.  12.  and  let  us  p.  on  armour  of  light
14.  but  p.  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ

1  Cor.  12.  +  2.3.  on  these  we  p.  on  more  honour

15.  53.  this  corruptible  must  p.  on  incorruption
54.  this  mortal  shall  have  p.  on  immortality

Gal.  3.  27.  baptized  into  Christ,  have  p.  on  Christ
Eph.  4.  24.  that  ye  p.  on  the  new  man,  Col.  3.  10.

6.  11./?.  on  the  whole  armourof  God,  ye  may  be  able
Col.  3. 12.  p.  on  therefore  bowels  of  mercies  and  kind.

14.  p.  on  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness
PUT  out.

Gen.  38.  28.  when  she  travailed  one  p.  out  his  hand
Exod.  17.  14.  p.  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek
Lev.  6.  12.  the  fire  on  the  altar  shall  not  be  p.  out
Num.  5.  2.  p.  out  of  the  camp  every  leper,  4.

3.  both  male  and  female  shall  ye  p.out

16.  14.  wilt  thou  p.  out  the  eyes  of  these  men  ?
Deut.  7 •  22.  the  Lord  will  p.  out  those  nations

25.  6.  that  his  name  he  notp.  out  of  Israel

Judg.  16.  21.  the  Philistines  p.  out  Samson’s  eyes

2  Sam.  13. 17-  p .  now  this  woman  out  from  me

2  Kings  6.  7-  he  p.  out  his  hand  and  took  the  axe
25.  7-  and  they  p.  out  the  eyes  of  Zedekiah  and
bound  him  with  fetters,  Jer.  39.  7.  |  52.  11.

2  Chron.  29-  7.  also  they  have  p.  out  the  lamps
Job  18.  5.  the  light  of  the  wicked  shall  be  p.  out
6.  the  light  shall  be  dark,  and  his  candle  be  p.  out,

21.  17.  Prov.  13,  9.  |  20.  20.  I  24.  20.
Psal.  9.  5.  thou  hast  p.  out  their  name  for  ever
Ezek.  32.  7.  when  l  p.  thee  out  1  will  cover  heaven
Mark  5.  40.  when  he  had  p.  them  all  out,  Luke  8.  54.
J.uke  16.  4.  when  I  amp.  out  of  the  stewardship
John  9.  22.  he  should  be  p.  out  of  the  synagogue

12.  42.  lest  they  should  be  p.  out  of  the  sy  nagogue

16.  2.  they  shall  p.  you  out  of  the  synagogues
PUT  trust.

Judg.  9.  15.  come  and  p.  your  trust  in  my  shadow
2  Kings  18.  24.  p.  thy  trust  oil  Egypt,  Isa.  36.  9.

1  Chron.  5.  20.  because  they  p.  their  trust  in  him
Psal.  4.  5.  and  p.  your  trust  in  the  1  ord
5.  11.  let  all  that  p.  their  trust  in  thee  rejoice
7. 1.0  Ld.G.  in  thee  Ip.  trust,  16.  1.1  25.20.  |  71. 1.

9.  10.  that  know  thv  name,  will  p.  trust  in  thee

11.  1.  in  the  Lord  p.  1  my  trust,  31.  1.  |  71.  1.

17. 7.  that  savest.  them  which  p.  their  trust  in  thee
36.  7-p.  their  trust  under  the  shadow  of  thy  wings
56.  4.  in  God  1  have  p.  my  trust,  I  will  not  fear

381


QUA

Psal.  73.  28  I  have  p.  my  trust  in  the  Lord  God  |
146.  3.  p.  n  )t  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  son  of  man
Prov.  30.  5.  shield  to  them  that  p.  their  trust  in  him
Jer.  39.  18.  because  thou  hast  p.  thy  trust  in  me

1  Thess.  2.  4.  to  be  /?.  in  trust  with  the  gospel
Heb.  2.  13.  and  again,  I  will  p.  my  trust  in  him

PUT,  Participle.

Gen.  50.  26.  Joseph  was  p.  in  a  coffin  in  F.gypt
Lev.  11.32.  the  vessel,  it  must  be  p.  into  water
38.  but  if  any  water  be  p.  on  seed,  be  unclean
15. 19.  she  shall  be  p.  apart  seven  days

18.  19.  shalt  not  approach  as  long  as  she/?.  apart

2  Sam.  3.  34.  hands  not  bound,  nor  feet/7,  in  fetters

1  Kings  22.  10.  the  kings  having  p.  on  their  robes

2  Kings  14.  12.  Judah  was  p.  to  worse  before  Israel

1  Chron.  19.  16.  the  Syrians  p.  to  the  worse,  19.

2“.  24-  neither  was  the  number/?,  in  the  a  count

2  Citron.  2.  14.  to  find  out  every  device  shall  be/?.

6.  24.  if  thy  people  Israel  be  p.  to  the  worse

25.  22.  Judah  wasp,  to  the  worse  before  Israel
Ezra  2.  62.  were  not  found,  therefore  were  they’  as
polluted, p.  from  the  priesthood,  Nek.  7.  64.
Psal.  35.  4.  let  them  be  p.  to  shame  that  seek  after
m3’  soul,  let  them  be  turned  back,  83.  17.

70.  2.  and  p.  to  confusion,  that  desire  my  hurt

71.  1.  in  thee  I  trust,  let  me  never  be  p.  toconfus.
Prov.  25.  7.  than  that  thou  shouldest  be  p.  lower
Eccl.  3.  14.  what  God  doeth,  nothing  can  be/?,  to  it
Isa.  54.  4.  for  thou  shalt  not  be  p.  to  shame

Jer.  50.  42.  they  shall  ride,  every  one  /?.  in  array
Zeph.  3.  19.  where  they  have  been  p.  to  shame
Mat.  9.  16.  for  that  which  is  /?.  in  to  fill  it  up
Mar/ 11.  14.  now  after  that  John  was  p.  in  prison
2.  22.  new  wine  /?.  into  new  bottles,  Luke  5.  38.
Luke  9. 62.  no  man  having  /?.  his  hand  to  plough
John  12.  6.  Judas  bare  what  wasp,  in  the  bag
13.2.  devil  having  now  p.  into  the  heart  of  Judas
Heb.  2.  8.  he  left  nothing  that  is  not  p.  under  him.

but  now  we  see  not3’etall  things  p.  under  him
Rev.  11.  9.  not  suffer  dead  bodies  to  be  p.  in  graves
PUTTEST.

Num.  24.  21.  and  thou  p.  tli3’  nest  in  a  rock
Deut.  12. 18.  bless  all  thou p.  thine  hands  to,  15.  10.

2  Kings  18. 14.  that  which  thou  p.  on  me  will  1  bear
Job  13.  27.  thoup.  my  feet  in  stocks  and  lookest
Psal.  119.  119.  thoup.  away  the  wicked  like  dross
Hab.  2. 15.  that/?.  thy  bottle  to  him,  makest  drunken
PUTTETH.

Exod.  30.  33.  who  p.  any  on  a  stranger,  be  cut  oft
Num.  22.  38.  the  word  that  God  p.  in  my  mouth
Deut.  25.  11.  woman  p.  forth  her  hand  and  taketh

27.  15.  graven  image,  and  p.  it  in  a  secret  place

l  Kings  20. 11.  b^ast  himself  as  he  that  p.  off  harness
\>b  15.  15.  he  p.  no  trust  in  saints,  heavens  not  clean
t8.  9.  he  p.  forth  his  hand  upon  the  rock
33. 11.  hep.  my  feet  in  the  stocks,  marketh  my  steps
Psal.  15.  5.  he  thatp.  not  his  money  to  usury
66.  +  9.  which  p.  our  soul  in  life  and  suffereth  not
75.  7-  God  p.  down  one  and  setteth  up  another
Prov.  26.  4  8.  thatp.  a  precious  stone  among  stones

28.  25.  that  p.  his  trust  in  T  ord  shall  be  made  fat
29.25.  whop,  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe

Cant.  2.  13.  the  fig-tree  p.  forth  her  green  figs
Isa.  57.  13.  p.  his  trust  in  me  shall  possess  the  land
Jer.  43.  12.  as  a  shepherd  p.  on  garment  go  forth
Lam.  3.  29.  he  p.  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  be  hope
Ezek.  14.  4.  p.  the  stumbling  block  of  iniquity,  f.
Mic.  3.  5.  and  he  thatp.  not  into  their  mouths
Mat.  9-  16.  no  man p.  new  cloth,  Luke 5.  36.

24.  32.  when  branch  is  yet  tender  and  p.  forth
leaves  ye  know'  that  summer  is  nigh,  Mark  13.  28.
Mark  2.22.  no  man/,  new  wane  into  old  bottles,  new
wine  must  be  p.  into  new  bottles,  Luke 5.  37.

4.  29.  immediately  nep.  in  sickle,  harvest  come
Luke 8.  16.  no  man  p.  a  lighted  candle  under  a  bed
11.  33. a  candle,  no  man p.  a  lighted  candle  in  sect  et
16. 18.  whoso  p.  away  his  wife  and  marries  another
John  10. 4.  when  he  p.  forth  his  own  sheep,  he  goeth
Rom.  14.  +23.  that  p.  a  difference  between  meats
PUTT  I  MG.

Gen.  21. 14.  bottle  of  water  p.  it  on  Tf  agar’s  shoulder
Lev.  16.  21.  p.  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat
Judg. "I .  6.  p.  their  hand  to  their  mouth  and  lapped
Isa.  58.  9.p.  forth  of  the  finger  and  speaking  vanity
Mai.  2.  16.  God  saith  that  he  hateth  p.  aw’ay
Acts  9.  12.  Ananias  p.  his  hand  on  him,  17.

19.  33.  they  drew  Alexander,  Jewsp.  him  forward
Rom.  15.  15.  in  some  sort,  as  p.  you  in  mind
Eph.  4.  25.  wherefore  p.  aw’ay  lying,  speak  truth
Col.  2.  11.  in  p.  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh
1  Thess.  5.  8.  p.  on  the  breast-plate  of  faith  and  love

1  Tim.  1.  12.  me  faithful  p.  me  into  the  ministry

2  Tim.  1.  6.  the  gift  in  thee  by  p.  on  of  my  hands

1  Pet.  3.  3.  whose  adorning,  notp.  on  or  apparel,

but  hidden  man  of  the  heart
21.  not  thep.  aw'ay  the  filth  of  the  flesh

2  Pet.  1. 13.  to  stir  you  up  hyp.  you  in  remembrance

PUTRIFY1NG.

Isa.  1.  6-  but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  p.  sores

Q.

QUAILS,

Birds  somewhat  less  thanpigeons.  God  gave  Quails
to  the  Israelites  upon  two  occasions :  First,  in  the
wilderness  of  Sin,  or  Zin,  a  few  days  after  they  had
passed  over  the  Red  sea,  Exod.  16. 13.  The  second
time  was  at  the  encampment ,  called  in  Hebrew,
Kibroth-hattaavah,  or  the  graves  of  lust,  Num.  11.
32.  The  number  of  them  was  miraculous  ;  for  it  is
said,  that  God  rained  flesh  upon  them  as  dust,
and  feathered  fowls  like  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,
Psal.  78.  27.  They  are  said  to  be  birds  larger  than
sparrows ,  and  we  are  told  that  their  flesh  is  very
delicious  and  agreeable.  When  God  fed  the
Israelites  with  these,  it  happened  to  be  in  the
spring,  when  the  Quails  passed  from  Asia  into
Europe.  Then  they  are  to  be  found  in  great
num  hers  upon  the  coasts  of  the  Red  sea  and  the
Mediterranean.  God  caused  a  wind  to  arise,
that  drove  them  within  and  about  the  camp  of  the

•m


QUE

Israelites;  and  it  is  in  this  that  the  miracle  con¬
sists,  that  they  were  brought  so  seasonably  to  this
place,  and  in  so  great  numbers,  as  to  suffice  above
a  million  of  persons  above  a  month.  Some  authors
affirm,  that  in  those  eastern  and  southern  coun¬
tries,  Quails  are  innumerable,  so  that  in  one  part
of  Italy,  within  the  compass  of  five  miles,  there
were  taken  about  an  hundred  thousand  of  them
every  day  for  a  month  together ;  and  that  some¬
times  they  fly  so  thick  over  the  sea,  that  being
weary  they  fall  into  ships,  sometimes  in  such  num¬
bers,  that  they  sink  them  with  their  weight.

Exod.  16.  13.  that  at  even  q.  came  up  and  covered
Num.  11.  31.  a  wind  from  the  Lord  brought  q.

32.  the  people  stood  and  they  gathered  the  q.
Psal.  105.  40.  the  people  asked,  and  he  brought  q.
QUAKE.

Joel'l.  10. earth  shall  q.  before  them,  heavens  tremble
Nah.  1. 5.  the  mountains  q.  at  him,  the  hills  melt
Mat.  27.  51.  at  Christ's  death  the  earth  did  q.

Ileb.  12.  21.  Moses  said,  1  exceedingly  fear  and  q.
QUAKED.

Exod.  19.  18.  and  the  whole  mount  q.  greatly
1  Sam.  14.  15.  the  host  trembled,  and  the  earth  q.
QUA K  IMG.

Ezek.  12. 18.  son  of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  q.
Dan.  10.  7.  buta  great q.  fell  on  them,  that  they  fled
QUANTITY.

Isa.  22.  24.  shall  hang  on  him  vesselsot  small  q.
QUARREL.

1  Tim.  3.  +  3.  a  bishop  not  ready  to  q.  but  patient

QUARREL.

Lev.  26.25.  a  sword  shall  av  enge  q.  of  my  covenant

2  Kings  5.  7-  see  how?  he  seeketh  a  <7.  against  me
Mark  6.  19.  Ilerodias  had  a  q.  against  John

Col.  3.  13.  forgiving,  if  any  man  have  a  q.  ag.  any
QUARRIES.

Judg.  3.  19.  Ehud  turned  again  from  the  q.

26.  Ehud  escaped  and  passed  beyond  the  q.
QUARTER.

Gen.  19.  4.  all  people  from  every  q.  to  Lot’s  house
Josh.  18.  14.  Kirjath-jearim,  this  was  the  west  q.
Isa.  47.  15.  thy  merchants  shall  wander  to  his?.

56.  11.  every  one  for  his  gain  from  his  q.

Mark  1.  45.  and  they  came  to  him  from  every'  q.

See  South.

QUARTERS.

Exod.  13.  7-  no  leaven  shall  be  seen  in  thy  q.

Deut.  22.  12.  shalt  make  thee  fringes  on  the  four  q.

1  Chron.  9.  24.  in  four  q.  were  the  porters
Jer.  49.  36.  four  winds  from  the  four  q.  of  heaven
Acts  9.  32.  as  Peter  pass,  thro'  all  q.  came  to  I.ydda

16.  3.  because  of  the  Jews  which  were  in  those  q.
28.  7-  in  same  q.  were  possessions  of  Publius
Rev.  20.8.  shall  receive  nations  in  four  q.  of  earth
QUATERNIONS.

Acts  12.  4.  he  delivered  Peter  to  four  <7.  of  soldiers
QUEEN.

This  name  is  given,  [1]  To  the  wife  or  consort  of  a
king,  Meh.  2.  6.  [2]  To  a  sovereign  princess,

or  chief  ruler  of  a  kingdom,  1  Kings  10.  1.  [3]
To  the  true  catholic  church,  espoused  to  Christ
the  King  of  his  people,  as  to  an  husband,  Psalm
45.  9.  [4]  To  the  false  antichristian  church,

which  through  pride,  presumption,  and  security,
boasts  that  she  is  the  only  infallible  and  impregna¬
ble  church,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall
not  prevail.  Rev.  18.  7-  [5]  To  the  sun,  moon,
and  stars,  which  the  Hebrew  idolaters  called  by
the  name  of  the  queen  of  heaven,  Jer.  44.  17,  25.
They  set  up  altars  to  her  upon  the  platforms  or
roofs  of  their  houses,  or  the  corners  of  the  streets,
near  their  doors,  and  in  groves.  They  offered
cakes  to  her  kneaded  up  with  oil  and  honey,
and  made  libations  to  her  with  wine  and  other
liquors  ;  these  were  offerings  wlfich  the  Lord  had
commanded  to  be  made  to  himself.  Lev’.  23.  13.
N  um.  6.  17.

1  Kings  10.  1.  the  q.  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fame  of
Sol.  she  came  to  him  with  questions,  2C/?t\9.  1.

4.  when  the  q.  bar!  seen  all  Solomon’s  wisdom

10.  no  such  spices  as  the  q.  of  Sheba  gave  Solom.
13.  king  Solomon  gave  the  q.  of  Sheba  all  herde-

sire,  whatsoever  she  asked,  1  Chron.  9.  9,  12.
11.  19.  Pharaoh  gave  IJadad  the  sister  of  the  q.

15.  13.  Asa  removed  mother  Maachah  from  being
q.  she  had  made  an  idol,  2  Chr.  15.  16.

2  Kings  10.  13.  we  go  to  salute  children  of  the  q.
Neh.  2.  6.  the  king  said,  the  q.  sitting  by  him
Esth.  1 . 9.  Vashti  the  q.  made  a  feast  for  the  women

11.  to  bring  the  q.  |l  12.  the  q.  refused  to  come

15.  what  shall  we  do  to  the  q.  Vashti  ?

16.  the  q.  hath  not  done  wrong  to  the  king  only

17.  this  deed  of  q.  shall  come  abroad  to  all  women

18.  which  have  heard  the  deed  of  the  q.

2.  4.  let  the  maiden  that  pleaseth  the  king  be  q.

17.  he  made  Esther  q.  instead  of  Vashti

4.  4.  q.  grieved  ||  5.  3.  what  wilt  thou,  q.  Esther  ?

5.  12.  ?.  let  no  man  to  the  banquet  but  himself

7.  2.  what  is  thy  petition,  ?.  Esther  5  shall  be  grant.

6.  then  Haman  was  afraid  before  king  and  q,

7.  Haman  make  l  eanest  to  the  q.  for  his  life

8.  will  he  force  q.  also  before  me  in  the  house  ?

8.  1.  king  gave  house  of  Haman  to  Esther  the  q.

9.  31.  as  Mordecai  and  Esther  the  q.  enjoined  them
Psal.  45.  9.  did  stand  the  q.  in  gold  of  Ophir

Jer.  13.  18.  say  to  the  king  and  q.  humble  y’ourselves
44.  17.  to  burn  incense  to  the  q.  of  heaven
25.  vowed  to  burn  incense  to  the  q.  of  heaven
Dan.  5.  10.  the  <7.  came  into  the  banquet-house
Mat.  12.  42  the  q.  of  the  south  shall  rise  up  in  the
judgment  with  this  generation,  LukeW.  31.
Acts  8.  27.  eunuch  under  Candace  q.  of  Ethiopians
Rev.  18.  7.  she  saith,  I  sit  a  <7.  and  am  no  widow
QUEENS.

Cant.  6.  8.  there  are  threescore  q.  and  virgins,  9.
Isa.  49.  23.  and  their  <7.  thv  nursing  mothers
QUENCH

Signifies,  [1]  To  hinder  or  extinguish,  2  Sam.  14.  ~ .
Cant.  8.  7-  [2]  To  let  or  hinder  the  consuming
force  of,  Ileb.  11.  34.

Quench  not  the  Spirit,  1  Thess.  5.  19.  You  that


QUE

have  received  the  Spirit,  and  have  had  experience
of  the  workings  and  motions  thereof  in  and  upon
your  hearts,  take  heed  of  doing ,  or  neglecting,  any
thing  that  may  render  them  ineffectual  to  y,ru,
either  in  whole  or  in  part  ;  but  cherish  them  by  a
ready  compliance  therewith.  Not  that  the  habits
of  grace  may  he  totally  extinguished  in  such  as  are
truly  regenerated,  yet  they  may  be  abated  as  to
degree  and  lively  exercise :  but  those  common  illu¬
minations  and  convictions  of  the  Spirit,  which  per¬
sons  unregenerated,  especially  such  as  live  under
the  gospel,  do  often  find,  may  be  totally  lost,  Heb.
6.  4,  5,  6.

2  Sam.  14.  7.  so  they  shall  q.  my  coal  which  is  left
21.  17.  that  thou  q.  not  the  light  of  Israel
Psal.  104.  11.  the  wild  asses  q.  their  thirst
Cant.  8.  7.  waters  cannot?,  love,  nor  floods  drown
Isa.  1.  31.  both  shall  burn,  and  none  shall  q.  them

42.  3.  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  q.  Mat.  12.  20.
Jer.  4.  4  lest  fury  burn,  that  none  can  ?.  it,  21. 12.
Amos  5.  6.  and  there  be  none  to  q.  it  in  Beth  el
Eph.  6.  16.  able  to  q.  the  fiery  darts  of  the  w  icked

1  Thess.  5. 19.  q.  not  Spirit,  despise  not  prophesying*

QUENCHED.  .

Num.  11 . 2.  Moses  prayed,  fire  was  q.  2  Chr.  34.  25,

2  Kings 22.17.  my  wrath  shall  not  be  q.  ag.  this  place
Psal.  118.  12.  they  are  q.  as  the  fire  of  thorns
Isa.  34.  10.  it  shall  not  be  q.  night  nor  day

43.  17.  they  are  extinct,  they  are  q.  as  tow

66. 24.  worm  shall  not  die,  nor  shall  their  fire  be  q.
Jer.  7.  20.  my  fury  burn,  and  shall  not  be  q.  17.27.
Ezek.  20.  47."  the  flaming  flame  shall  not  he  ?.  18.
Mark  9.  43.  into  the  fire  that  never  shall  be  q.  45,
44.  and  where  the  fire  is  not  q.  46.  48.

Heb.  11.  34.  q.  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped  sword
QUESTION

Signifies,  [1]  A  demand  to  which  an  answer  is  re¬
quired,  Mat.  22.  35.  [2]  Contentions ,  quarrels,

or  disputes,  1  Tim.  1.  4.  The  apostle  Paul
would  have  his  disciples  Timothy  and  Titus  to
avoid  vain  questions,  or  vain  disputes,  which
are  only  concerning  genealogies,  and  the  sense
of  the  law,  because  this  kind  of  question  is  more
apt  to  give  offence  than  to  edify,  2  Tim.  2.  23.
1  it.  3.  9.

Of  Questions  there  are  several  sorts,  [1]  Religious,
as  when  one  asks  the  import,  sense,  and  meaning
of  the  statutes  and  commandments  of  God,  Deut.
6.  20.  [2]  Blasphemous,  such  was  the  Jews’

question  to  our  Saviour,  John  8.  48.  Say  we  not
well,  that  thou  arta  Samaritan, and  hastadevil?
[3]  Curious,  Luke  13.  23.  Lord,  are  there  few
that  be  saved  '  [4]  Foolish  and  unlearned, ,  such
as  questions  about  genealogies ,  that  recounting  of
ancestors,  which  proceeds  from  a  vain  mind,  and
tends  to  vain-glory  ;  and  questions  about'  the  ob¬
servance  of  the  ceremonial  law,  or  the  sense  of
some  little  things  therein,  2  T  im.  2.  23.  T  it.  3.  9.
[5]  Hard,  1  Kings  10.  1.  The  queen  of  ‘■Teba
came  to  prove  Solomon  with  hard  questions;
that  is,  with  enigmatical,  parabolical,  intricate,
and  perplexing  questions,  which  were  much  used
among  the  eastern  sages,  Judg.  14.  12.  [6]

Captious,  such  as  are  proposed  to  entangle  and
perplex  a  person,  that,  from  his  answers  an  occa¬
sion  and  opportunity  may  be  had  for  accusing  and
punishing  him ;  of  this  sort  was  the  que.  tiov  of
the  Pharisees  find  ITerodians  to  our  Saviour,
Mark  12.  14.  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to
Ccesar,  or  no  ?  [7]  Hypocritical,  such  was

Herod's  to  the  wise  men.  Mat.  2.  7.  He  asked
them  diligently,  what  time  the  star  appeared;
but  concealed  his  bloody  design  of  murdering
Christ ;  which  in  a  short  time  after  he  in  vain
endeavoured  to  effectuate,  by  murdering  alt  the
children  that  were  in  Bethlehem.  [8]  Accusa¬
tory,  Neh.  2.  19.  M  ill  ye  rebel  against  the
king  ?  [9]  Reprehensive,  1  Sam.  1. 14.  How  long
wilt  thou  be  drunken  ?  [10]  Affirmative,  Num.
12.  2.  Hath  not  the  Lord  also  spoken  by  us  ’
that  is,  He  hath  spoken  by  us.  [11]  Negative,
Num.  23.  8.  How  shall  1  curse  whom  God  hath
not  cursed  ?  that  is,  1  cannot  curse  them.  [12]  A
question  may  be  propounded  through  pride  and
ambition:  the  disciples  came  to  Christ,  and  asked
him,  Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of
heaven  ?  Mat.  18.  1.  'The  kingdom  of  heaven  of
which  our  Saviour  talked,  though  they  expected  it
should  be  perfected  in  heaven,  yet  they  made  ac¬
count  that  it  should  be  begun  on  earth,  and  ad¬
ministered  in  a  pompous  manner,  as  other  earthly
kingdoms  are.

To  put  one  to  the  question,  was  a  punishment  among
the  Romans.  'They  put  criminals  to  the  question,
or  endeavoured  to  extort  confessions  from  them,  by
whipping  them  with  whips  or  scourges.  Some  think
that  the  offender  was  stripped  to  his  waist,  and
that  his  hands  were  tied  to  a  pillar,  that  his  back
might  be  stretched  out  to  receive  the  blows.  Others
are  of  opinion,  that  his  hands  were  fastened  to  a
stake  drove  into  the  ground,  of  a  foot  and  a  hat}
or  two  feet  high,  so  that  the  criminal  stooping
with  his  face  towards  the  ground,  might  present
his  naked  back  to  such  as  were  appointed  to  scourge
Mm.

There  is  an  example  of  this  in  Acts  22.  24.  If  hen  toe
apostle  Paul  made  an  oration  to  the  people  at
Jerusalem,  and  related  to  them  the  manner  if  his
conversion,  they  listened  to  him  very  attentively
till  he  came  to  that  part  of  his  discourse,  where  be
told  them  that  God  had  sent  him  to  preach  to  the_
Gentiles  ;  then  they  raised  their  voices,  andertea
out,  that  he  was  not  fit  to  live,  and  were  going  to
put  him  to  death  :  I.ysias  the  tribune  gave  com¬
mand,  that  he  should  be  examined  by  scour .  ing,  or
be  put  to  the  question,  as  the  French  expression
is,  agreeable  to  the  Greek  word  here  used ;  but
when  they  were  binding  him,  Paul  asked  the
centurion  there  present.  Is  it  lawful  for  you
to  scourge  a  Roman  citizen,  and  uncon¬
demned  I  upon  which  I.y  sias  caused  him  to  be
unbound.


R  A  13


R  A  1


Q  U  1


Q  l  ES  T I  ON ,  Substantive.

Mat.  22.  35.  then  a  lawyer  asked  nim  a  q.

Mark  11.  29.  I  will  ask  you  one  q.  answer  me
12.  34.  no  man  durst  ask  him  any  q.  Luke  20.  40.
John  3.  25.  there  arose  a  q.  between  the  disciples
Acts  15.  2.  came  to  the  apostles  about  this  q.

18.  15.  it  it  be  a  q.  of  words  and  names

19.  40.  we  are  in  danger  to  be  called  in  q.

23.  6.  ot  resurrection  1  am  called  in  q.  24.  21.

1  Cor.  10.  25.  asking  no  q.  for  conscience,  27.

QUESTION,  Verb.

Mark  8.  11.  the  Pharisees  began  to  q.  him
9.  16.  he  asked  the  scribes,  what  q.  ye  with  them  ?
QUES1  ION  ED,  ItsG.

2  Chron.  31.  9.  then  Hezekiah  q.  with  the  priests
Mark  1.  27.  that  they  7.  among  themselves

9.  10.  q.  what  rising  from  the  dead  should  mean
14.  he  saw  a  multitude,  and  scribes  q.  with  them
Luke  23.  9.  Pilate  q.  with  him  in  many  words
QUESTIONS.

1  Kings  10.  1.  the  queen  came  to  prove  him  with  q.

3.  Solomon  told  her  all  her  q.  2  Chron.  9.  l,  2.
Mat.  22.  46.  neither  durst  any  ask  him  more  q.
Luke  2.  46.  {?oth  hearing  and  asking  them  q.

Acts  23.  29.  to  be  accused  of  q.  of  their  law

25.  19-  but  hac.  certain  q.  against  him

20.  because  I  doubted  of  such  manner  of  q.

26.  3.  because  I  know  thee  to  be  expert  in  q.

1  Tim.  1.  4.  which  minister  q.  rather  than  edifying
6.  4.  but  doting  about  q.  and  strifes  of  words

2  Tim.  2.  23.  but  unlearned  q.  avoid.  Tit.  3.  9.

QUICK.

Lev.  13.  10.  and  there  be  q.  raw  flesh  in  the  rising

24.  the  q.  flesh  that  burneth  have  a  white  spot
Num.  16.  30.  and  they  go  down  q.  into  the  pit
Psal.  55.  15.  let  them  go  down  q.  into  hell

124.  3.  then  they  had  swallowed  us  up  q.

Isa.  11.  3.  and  shall  make  him  of  q.  understanding
Acts  10.  42.  ordained  to  be  judge  of  the  q.  and  dead
2  7’j/w.  4.  1.  who  shall  judge  the  q.  and  the  dead
Heh.  4.  12.  the  word  ot  God  is  q.  and  powerful
1  Pet.  4.  5.  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  q.  and  dead
QUICKEN

Signifies,  [1^]  To  give  life  to  the  dead,  Pom.  4.
17.  [2]  To  raise  and  cheer  up  such  as  languish,
by  renewing  their  comforts,  and  exciting  their
graces,  Psal.  119.  25.  [3]  To  bring  such  as  are
dead  in  sin  into  a  slate  of  spiritual  life,  by  en¬
duing  them  with  a  principle  of  grace  and  spirit¬
ual  life  in  sanctification,  and  delivering  them
from  the  guilt  of  sin  by  justification,  Eph.  2.
1,  5.  The  last  Adam  was  made  a  quickening
spirit,  1  Cor.  15.  45.  Christ,  the  second  Adam,
or  public  person,  and  head  of  the  new  covenant ,
is  partaker  of  the  divine  nature,  and  endued
with  the  IJo/y  Spirit,  whereby  he  becomes  the
fountain  of  heavenly  life  to  all  his  members,
Pom.  8.  10,  11.  And  as  the  soul  dwelling  in
*  rnT'**  body,  made  him  a  living  soul,

so  Christ  s  dwelling  in  true  believers,  quickens
and  enables  them  both  here  and  hereafter,  John
17.  23.

Pjo-l.  7 1  •  20.  thou  shalt  7.  me  again,  and  bring  me
80.  18.  q.  us,  and  we  will  call  on  thy  name
119.  25.  q.  me  according  to  thy  word,  107,  154.

37.  turn  me  from  vanity,  q.  me  in  thy  way

40.  q.  me  in  thy  righteousness

88.  g.  me  after  thy  loving-kindness,  159.

149.  q.  me  according  to  thy  judgment,  156.

143.  11.  q.  me,  O  Lord,  for  thy  name’s  sake
Horn.  8.  11.  shall  also  q.  vour  mortal  bodies
_  ,  QUICKENED.

Psal.  119.  50.  for  thy  word  hath  q.  me
93.  tor_  with  thy  precepts  thou  hast  7.  me
■  vVr.  15.  36.  that  which  thou  sowest  is  not  q.

Lph.  2.  1.  you  hath  he  q.  who  were  dead  in  sins
0.  hath  q.  us  together  with  Christ,  Col.  2.  13.

1  Pet.  3.  18.  put  to  death  in  flesh,  but  q.  by  Spirit

_  QUICK  ENETH.

lohn  o.  21.  Father  q.  them,  Son  q.  whom  he  will
q.  63.  it  is  Spirit  that  q.  flesh  profited]  nothing
horn.  4.  17.  believed,  even  God  who  q.  the  dead
-  Cor.  3.  +  6.  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit^.

.  lim.  6.  13.  in  the  sight  ot  God,  who  q.  all  things
.  „  QUICKENING.

Cor.  15.  45.  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  q.  spirit
QUICKLY.


jen.  18. 6.  make  ready  7.  three  measuresof  fine  mea
~i  ■  20.  how  hast  thou  found  it  so  q.  my  son  ?
tiod.  32.  8.  they  have  turned  aside  q.  out  of  th
.  way,  Deut.  9.  12,  16.  Judg.  2.  17
.'«/«.  16.  46.  put  on  incense  and  go  q.  to  congreg
9-  3-  s0  shalt  thou  destroy  them  q.  as  Ld.  sail
00  down  7.  ||  11.  17.  lest  ye  perish  q.

~8.  U),  till  thou  perish  q.  because  of  thy  doings
osh.  ...  5.  pursue  q.  for  ye  shall  overtake  them
° •  *9.  the  ambush  arose  q.  out  of  their  place
no  come  UP  to  us  q.  and  save  us,  and  help  us
“3.  16.  ye  shall  perish  q.  from  off  the  land
Sam.  20.  19.  thou  shalt  go  down  q.  and  come
J7.  16.  therefore  send  q.  and  tell  David
18.  but  they  went  both  of  them  away  q.

-I. said  to  David,  arise  and  pass  q.  over  the  wate;
tUngs  1. 11.  thus  hath  the  king  said,  come  down  q
f  hron.  18.  8.  fetch  q.  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imla
91-  t  17-  jny  soul  had  q.  dwelt  in  silence
r#  ’  i'  a  threefold  cord  is  not  7.  broken
ou* o  a?ree  with  thine  adversary  q.
o  Ji‘  £°  ?•  an,J  tell  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen
they  departed  q.  with  fear,  Mark  16.  8.

lnt9  the  streets  and  lanes
6.  take  thy  bill,  sit  down  q.  and  write  fifty
,0  J.1,  -',ar->'  arose  q.  and  came  to  Jesus

j  '  10  _  n  sa'(t  -Jesus,  that  thou  doest,  do  q.
w  an^!-  saying,  arise  up  7.  Peter

5—  18.  Paul,  get  thee  q.  out  of  Jerusalem
ev:  2.  5.  repent,  else  1  will  come  to  thee  7.  16.

»•  11.  behold,  1  come  7.  hold  fast,  22.7,  12.

1L  14.  behold,  the  third  woe  cometh  7.

20.  surely  1  come  7.  ev  en  so,  come  Lord  Jesus
.  ,  QUICKSANDS.

lets  27.  17.  lest  they  should  fall  into  7.


QUIET.

Judg.  16.  2.  the  Philistines  laid  wait,  and  were  7.
18.  7-  after  manner  ot  the  Zidonians,7.  and  secure

27.  came  to  Laish,  to  a  people  that  were  at  7.

2  Kings  11. 20.  all  the  people  rejoiced,  and  the  city
was  1117.  they  slew  Athaliah,  2  Chron.  23.21.

1  Chr  n.  4.  40.  and  the  land  was  wide  and  7.

2  Chron.  14. 1.  in  his  days  the  land  was  7.  ten  years
5.  the  kingdom  was  7.  before  him,  20.  30.

Job  3.  13.  tor  now  should  I  have  been  7.  and  slept
26.  neither  was  I  7.  yet  trouble  came

21.  23.  one  man  dieth,  being  wholly  at  ease  and  7.
Psal.  35.  20.  devise  against  them  that  are  7.  in  land
I07.  30.  then  are  they  glad,  because  they  be  7.
Prov.  1.  33.  whoso  hearkeneth  to  me  shall  be  in  7.
Eccl.  9.  17.  the  words  of  wise  men  are  heard  in  7.
Isa.  7.  4.  say  to  him,  take  heed  and  be  7.  fear  not
14.  7.  the  whole  earth  is  at  rest,  and  is  7.

32. 18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  7.  resting-places

33.  20.  thy  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  7.  habitation
Jer.  30. 10.  Jacob  shall  return  and  be  in  rest  and  7.

47.  6.  O  sword,  how  long  will  it  be  ere  thou  be  q.?
7.  how  be  7.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  given  charge
49.  23.  there  is  sorrow  on  the  sea,  it  cannot  be  7.
51.  59.  and  this  Seraiah  was  a  7.  prince
Ezek.  16.  42.  I  will  be  7.  and  will  be  no  more  angry
Amos  1.  +3.  for  four  transgress.  1  will  not  let  be  7.
Nah.  1. 12.  tho'  they  be  7.  they  shall  be  cut  down
Acts  19.  36.  ye  ought  to  be  7.  and  do  nothing  rashly
1  fbess.  4. 11.  and  that  ye  study  to  be  7.  and  to  work
1  1/m.  2.  2.  that  we  may  lead  a  7.  and  peaceable  life

1  Pet.  3.  4.  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  7.  spirit

QUIETED.

Ps.  131. 2.  1  have  behaved  and  7.  myself  as  a  child
Zech.  6.  8.  these  7.  my  spirit  in  the  north  country
QU1ETETH.

Job  37.  17.  when  he  7.  the  earth  by  the  south  wind

QUIETLY.

2  Sam.  3.  27.  Joab  took  Abner  to  speak  7.  and  smote
Lam.  3.  26.  and  7.  wait  for  the  salvation  of  Lord

QUIETNESS.

Judg.  8.  28.  the  country  was  in  7.  forty  years

1  Chron.  22.  9.  I  will  give  7.  to  Israel  in  his  days
Job  20.  20.  surely  he  shall  not  feel  7.  in  his  belly

34.  29.  when  he  giveth  7.  who  can  make  trouble  '
Psal.  23.  +2.  leadeth  me  beside  the  waters  of  7.
Prov.  17.  1.  better  is  a  dry  morsel  and  7.

Eccl.  4.  6.  better  is  handful  with  7.  than  both  hands
Isa.  30.  15.  in  7.  and  confid.  shall  be  vour  strength

32.  17.  effect  of  righteousness,  7.  and  assurance"
Ezek.  19.  +  10.  thy  mother  like  a  vine  in  7.

Acts  24.  2.  seeing  that  by  thee  we  enjoy  great  7.

2  Thess.  3.  12.  we  exhort  that  with  7.  they  work.

QUIT.

Exod.  21.  19.  then  shall  he  that  smote  him  be  7.

28.  but  the  owner  of  the  ox  shall  be  7.

Josh.  2.  20.  then  we  will  be  7.  of  thine  oath
QUIT.

1  Sam.  4.  9.  ?.  yourselves  like  men,  1  Cor.  16. 13.

QUITE.

Gen.  31.  15.  and  7.  devoured  also  our  money
Exod.  23.  24.  thou  shalt  7.  break  down  their  images
Lev.  25.  +  23.  the  land  shall  not  be  7.  cut  off
Num.  17-  10.  shalt  7.  take  away  their  murmurings

33.  52.  and  7.  pluck  down  all  their  high  places  ”

2  Sam.  3.  24.  sent  Abner  away,  and  he  is  7.  gone
Job  6.  13.  and  is  wisdom  driven  7.  from  me  r
Hah.  3.  9.  thy  bow  was  made  7.  naked

QUIVER.

Gen.  27.  3.  therefore  take  thy  7.  and  thy  bow
Job  39.  23.  the  7.  rattleth  against  him
Psal.  127.  5.  happy  the  man  that  hath  his  7.  full
Isa.  22.  6.  Elam  bare  the  7.  with  chariots  of  men
49.  2.  polished  shaft  in  his  7.  hath  he  hid  me
Jer.  5.  16.  their  7.  is  as  an  open  sepulchre
Lam.  3.  13.  arrows  ot  his  7.  to  enter  into  my  reins
QUIVERED.

Hab.  3. 16.  when  1  heard,  my  lips  7.  at  the  voice

R.

RABBI.

Rab,  Rabbin,  Rabban,  Rabbam  ;  a  name  of  dig¬
nity  among  the  Hebrews ,  signifying  Doctor,  or
Master.  The  name  of  Rab  was  given  to  their
masters  and  doctors,  to  the  chief  of  a  class,  and  to
the  principal  officers  of  the  court  of  a  prince  :  for
example,  Nebuzar-adan,  general  of  the  army  of
king  Nebuchadnezzar,  is  always  called  Rab  Ta-
bachim,  the  master  of  the  butchers,  cooks,  or
guards,  2  Kings  25.  8,20.  Daniel  speaks  of  Ash-
penaz  the  Rab  of  the  eunuchs  of  the  house  of  N  e-
buchadnezzar,  Dan.  1.  3.  and  oj  the  Rab  of  the
Saganim,  or  chief  of  the  governors,  or  peers,  Dan.

2.  48.  This  prophet  himself  was  preferred  to  be
the  chief  of  the  interpreters  of  dreams,  or  the  Rab
of  the  Chartumim,  Dan.  5.  11.  It  appears  that
this  name  came  originally  from  the  Chaldees  ;  for
before  the  captivity,  when  any  mention  was  made
of  J  udea,  it  is  not  found  that  it  was  used,  but  only
when  aiiy  mention  was  to  be  made  of  the  officers
of  the  king  of  Babylon.

Rab,  or  Rabban,  properly  signifies  Master,  or  one
that  excels  in  any  thing.  Rabbi,  or  Rabbani,  is
my  Master  ;  Rabbin  is  the  plural.  ’Thus  Rab  is
of  greater  dignity  than  Rabbi;  and  Rabbin,  or
Rabbim,  is  a  word  of  greater  dignity  than  either
r  Rab,  or  Rabbi.

There  were  several  gradations  before  they  could  ar¬
rive  at  the  dignity  of  Rabbin.  He  that  was  mas¬
ter,  or  head  of  the  school,  was  called  Cacham,  or
NV  ise  ;  and  he  had  the  name  of  Baehar,  or  Blow,
who  aspired  to  the  doctor-ship,  and  for  this  purpose
frequented  the  school  of  the  Cacham.  When  he  was
further  advanced,  he  had  the  title  of  Cabar  of  the
Rab,  or  the  master's  companion.  And  then,  when
he  was  further  skilled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  law
and  the  traditions,  he  was  called  only  Rab,  or
Rabbin,  and  Morena,  our  master.

The  Cacham  Rab,  or  master  Rabbin,  decided  all
sons  of  differences,  determined  what  things  were


allowed,  or  forbidden,  and  judged  in  all  matters
oj  religion.  He  celebrated  marriages,  and  de
clared  divorces :  he  preached,  if  he  had  a  talent
for  it,  and  was  head  oj '  the  academies.  He  had
the  head  seat  of  the  assemblies,  and  in  the  syna¬
gogues.  He  reprimanded  the  disobedient,  and
could  even  excommunicate  them,  which  procured
him  great  respect  and  authority.  In  their  schools
they  sat  upon  raised  chairs,  and  their  scholars
were  at  their  feet :  hence  it  is  that  Paul  is  said
to  have  studied  at  the  feet  of  Rabbi  Gamaliel
Acts  22.  3.

Gur  Saviour  reprehends  the  scribes  and  Pharisees
for  affecting  to  have  honourable  titles  given  them,
and  to  be  the  lords  and  guides  of  the  people's
faith  ■  and  exhorts  his  disciples  not  ambitiousli
to  afject  such  titles,  or  any  vain  applause,  or
precedency  one  above  another ;  telling  them,  that
himself  was  the  only  Lawgiver  and  Teacher,
who  only  can  teach  powerfully  and  inwardly,  and
m  matters  of  faith  and  worship  is  only  to  be  fol¬
lowed,  Mat.  23.  7,  8.

Mat.  23.  7.  they  love  to  be  called  of  men,  r  r.

8.  be  not  ye  called  r.  for  one  is  your  mastti
John  1.  38.  they  said,  B.  where  dwellest  thou  ?

49.  Nathanael  saith,  B.  thou  art  the  Son  of  God
3*  2.  ff.we  know  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from  God
_2o.  B.  he  that  was  with  thee,  the  same  baptizeth
6.  25.  they  said,  B.  when  earnest  thou  hither  ?
RABBON1.

John  20.  16.  Mary  turned  herself  and  saith,  R.
RACA,

Gr  Racha,  is  a  Syriac  word,  which  properly  sig¬
nifies  empty,  vain,  beggarly,  foolish,  and  which
includes  in  it  a  strong  idea  of  contempt.  Light-
foot  y ays,  that  in  the  books  of  the  Jews,  the
word  Raca  is  a  term  of  the  utmost  contempt,
and  is  used  to  be  pronounced  with  certain  ges¬
tures  of  indignation,  as  spitting,  turning  away
the  head,  Stc.  The  Pharisees  in  their  lectures
upon  this  law,  i  hou  shalt  not  kill,  extended  it  no
further,  than  that  a  man  should  not,  without  a
warrant,  actually  take  away  the  life  of  another.
But  our  .'saviour  gave  them  another  sense  of
this  law,  namely,  that  if  a  man  doth  but  in
his  heart  nourish  wrath  and  anger  against  an¬
other  without  a  just  cause  ;  and  lets  it  grow  up
into  malice,  and  thoughts,  and  desires,  of  pri¬
vate  revenge,  though  he  be  not  by  it  obnoxious
to  courts  of  justice,  yet  he  is  accountable  to  God,
and  liable  to  his  judgment :  but  if  men  suffer
their  passions  to  break  out  into  reviling  and  op¬
probrious  language,  such  as  Raca,  or  ihou  fool,
they  are  n, t  only  liable  to  the  eternal  vengeance
of  God ,  but  ought  to  be  subjected  to  the  punish¬
ment  of  the  civil  magistrate ;  these  scornful,
disdainful,  and  vilifying  speeches  being  the  be¬
ginnings  of  murder,  provocatives  to  it,  and  indi¬
cations  of  murderous  hearts.  Mat.  5.  22  Who¬
soever  shall  say  to  his  brother,  Baca,  shall  be
in  danger  of  the  council.

RACE.

Psal.  19.  5.  rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  r.
Lccl.  9.  11.  1  saw  that  the  r.  is  not  to  the  swift

1  Cor.  9.  24.  they  which  run  in  a  r.  run  all
Heb.  12.  1.  run  with  patience  the  r.  set  before  us

RAFTERS.

Cant.  1.  17.  the  beams  of  cedar,  and  our  r.  of  fir
RAGE,  Substantive.

2  Kings  5.  12.  Naaman  turned  away  in  a  r.

19.  n7.  1  Know  thy  r.  against  me,  Isa.  37.  28.

2  Chi.  n.  16.  10.  Asa  was  in  a  r.  with  the  seer
28.  9.  and  y  have  slain  them  in  a  r.  that  reach
Job  39.  24.  he  swalloweth  the  ground  with  r.

40.  11.  cast  abroad  the  r.  of  thy  wrath
Psal.  7.  6.  lilt  up  thyself  because  of  r.  of  enemies
Prov.  6.  34.  for  jealousy  is  the  r.  of  a  man
Dan.  3.  13.  N  ebuchad.  commanded  in  his  r.  to  bring
IIos.  7. 16.  they  shall  fall  for  the  r.  of  their  tonsue
RAGE,  Verb.

Psal.  2.  1.  why  do  the  heathen  r.  ?  Acts  4.  25.

Prov.  29.  9-  whether  he  r.  or  laugh,  no  rest
Jer.  46.  9.  come  up,  ye  horses,  r.  ye  chariots
A  ah.  2. 4.  chariots  shall  r.  in  the  streets  shall  justle
RAGED.

Psal.  46.  6.  heathen  r.  tiie  kingdoms  were  moved
RAGETH.

Prov.  14.  16.  but  the  fool  r.  and  is  confident
RAGGED.

Isa.  2.  21.  to  go  into  the  tops  of  the  r.  rocks
R  A  G I  N  G .

Psal.  89.  9.  thou  rulest  the  r.  of  the  sea
Prov.  20.  1.  wine  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is  r
Jonah  1.  15.  and  the  sea  ceased  from  her  r.

Luke  8. 24.  he  rebuked  the  wind  and  r.  of  the  water
Jude  13.  r.  waves  of  the  sea  foaming  out  their  shame
RAGS.

Prov.  23.  21.  drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man  with  r.
Isa.  64.  6.  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  r.

Jer.  38.  11.  Ebedmelech  took  old  rotten  r.

12.  put  r.  under  thine  arm  holes,  under  cords
RAIL.

2  Chron.  32.  17-  Sennacherib  wrote  letters  to  r.

RA  1  LED.

1  Sam.  25.  14.  Nabal  r.  on  David’s  messengers
Mark  15.  29.  they  that  passed  by  r.  on  Jesus
Luke  23.  39.  one  of  the  malefactors  r.  on  him
RAILER.

1  Cor.  5.  11.  keep  not  company  with  r.  or  drunkard

RAILING.

2  Pet.  2. 11.  angels  bring  not  r.  accusation  ag.  them
Jude  9.  durst  not  bring  against  him  a  r.  accusation

RAILING.

1  Tim.  5.  + 14.  give  none  occasion  to  adversary  for  -
6.  4.  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  r.

1  Pet.  3.  9.  not  rendering  r.  for  r.  but  contrariwise
RAIMENT.

Gen.  24.53.  ;ne  servant  gave  r.  to  Rebekah
27j_  15.  Rebekah  took  goodly  r.  of  her  son  Esau
27.  Isaac  smelled  his  r.  and  blessed  him
28.  20.  if  the  Lord  will  give  me  r.  to  put  on
41.  14.  Joseph  shaved,  and  changed  his  r.

383


R  A  I


R  A  I


RAM


Gen.  45.  22.  gave  to  each  man  changes  of  r.  but  to
Benjamin  300  pieces  of  silver  and  ti  ve  changes  of  r.
Exod.  3.  22.  borrow  of  the  Egyptians  r.  1C.  35.

21. 10.  her  food  and  r.  shall  he  not  diminish
22.  9.  anv  manner  of  trespass  for  sheep,  tor  r.

26.  if  thou  take  thy  neighbour's  r.  to  pledge,  27.
Lev.  11.  .32.  when  unclean  beast  falls  on  r.  wash
Num.  31.  20.  purify  all  your  r.  all  made  ofskins
Deut.  8.  4.  thv  r.  waxed  not  old  upon  thee

10. 18.  the  Lord  loveth  the  stranger,  giving  him  r.

21.  13.  she  shall  put  r.  of  her  captivity  from  her

22.  3.  lost  r.  restore,  and  all  lost  thing  of  brother
24.  13.  that  he  may  sleep  in  his  r.  and  bless  ‘hee

17.  thou  shalt  not  take  a  widow’s  r.  to  pledge
Josh.  22.  8.  return  to  your  tents  with  much  r.

Jiidg.  3.  16.  F.hud  girded  a  dagger  under  his  r.

8.  26.  purple  r.  that  was  on  the  kingsot  Midian
Ruth  .3.  .3.  wash  thyself  and  put  th  v  r.  upon  thee

1  Sam.  28.8.  Saul  disguised  Idmselfand  put  on  r.

2  Kings 5.  5.  Naaman  took  with  him  ten  chang.  of  r.

7.  8.  the  lepers  carried  thence  r.  and  hid  it

2  Chron.  9.  24.  presents  to  Solomon,  gold,  and  r.
Esth.  4.4.  the  queen  sent  r.  to  clothe  .Mordecai
Job  27.  16.  and  though  he  prepare  r.  astheclay
Psal.  45. 14.  he  brought  to  king  in  r.  of  needle-work
Isa.  14.  19.  cast  out  as  the  r.  of  those  thatare  slain
63.  3.  and  l  will  stain  all  my  r.

Ezek.  16.  13.  thy  r.  was  of  fine  linen  and  silk
Zech.  .3.  4.  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of  r.
Mat.?>.  4.  John  had  his  r.  of  camels’  hair
6.  25.  and  the  body  more  than  r.  Luke  12.  2.3.

28.  why  take  ye  thought  for  r.  ?  consider  the  lilies
11.  8.  a  man  clothed  in  soft  r.  Luke  7.  25.

17.2.  his  r.  white  as  light,  Mark 9-  3.  Luke  9.  29.

27.  .31.  put  his  own  r.  on  liim.and  led  him  away

28.3.  and  his  r.  was  white  as  snow

Luke  10.  30.  among  thieves  who  stripped  him  of  r.

23.  34.  they  parted  his  r.  and  cast  lots,  John  19.  24.
Acts  18.  6.  Paul  shook  his  r.  and  said  to  them

22.  20.  I  kept  the  r.  of  them  thatslew  Stephen
1  Tim.  6.  8.  having  food  and  r.  let  us  be  content
Jam  2.  2.  and  there  came  a  poor  man  in  vile  r.

Rev.  .3.  5.  the  same  shall  be  clothed  in  white  r.

18.  buy  white  r.  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed

4  4  1  saw  twenty  four  elders  clothed  in  white  r.

PAIN

Is  the  vapours  exhaled  by  the  sun,  which  fall  from
the  clouds  to  the  earth  in  drops.  Keel.  11.  3.
There  are  some  who  think ,  by  some  expressions  of
the  scripture,  that  the  ancient  Hebrews  imagined
the  Rain  to  be  derived  from  certain  great  re.'erva-
tories,  which  they  supposed  to  be  above  the  heavens ,
and  which  Moses  calls  the  renters  above  the  firma¬
ment,  by  way  of  contradistinction  from  the  infe¬
rior  waters,  which  are  those  of  the  sea,  rivers,
$c.  For  example,  Moses  says,  that  at  the  time
of  the  Deluge,  the  rain  did  not  fall  according
to  the  ordinary  course  of  nature,  but  that  the
cataracts,  the  flood-gates  of  heaven  were  set  open,
Gen.  7.  11.  All  the  fountains  of  the  great
deep  were  broken  up,  and  the  windows  of
heaven  were  opened.  And  Hosea  says,  that  in
times  of  great  drought  the  clouds  cry  to  the
Lord,  beseeching  him  to  permit  the  waters  which
he  keeps  in  his  treasuries  and  repositories,  to  fall
into  them  and  replenish  them,  Ilos.  2.  21.  I  will
hatin'  the  heavens

The  sacred  writers  often  speak  of  the  rain  of  the
former  season,  and  of  the  rain  o  f  the  latter  season.
Deut.  11.  14.  1  will  give  you  the  rain  of  your
land  in  his  due  season,  the  first  rain,  and  the
latter  rain:  Also  in  Ilos.  6.  .3.  Twice  in  the
year  there  fell  plenty  of  rain  in  Judea;  in  the
beginning  of  the  civil  year ,  about  September  or
October,  and  half  a  year  after  in  the  month  A  bib
or  March,  which  was  the  first  month  in  the  eccle¬
siastical  or  holy  year,  whence  it  is  called  the  latter
rain  in  the  first  month,  Joel  2.  23.

The  Hebrews  often  compare  speech  and  discourse  to
rain.  Deut.  32.  2.  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as
the  rain  ;  that  is,  As  rain  falling  upon  herbs  and
grass  makes  them fresh,  fragrant,  and  flourishing,
the  same  effect  I  may  justly  expei  t  and  hope  that
my  discourse  will  have  upon  your  hearts,  namely,
to  make  them  soft ,  pliable,  and  fruitful.  .1  ob  says,
that  in  the  time  of  his  prosperity  he  was  attended
to  with  great  respect  and  eagerness,  that  his  dis¬
course  distilled  like  soft  rain:  I  hat  they  ex¬
pected  it  like  rain,  and  ppened  their  mputh  to
receive  his  words,  and  therewith  to  satisfy  their
thirst,  as  the  parched  earth  opens  its  mouth  to
receive  the  rain  of  the  latter  season,  Job  29.
2°  23.

The’  Psalmist  says,  that  God  maketh  lightnings
for  the  rain,  Psal.  135.  7-  He  bnngeth  wuter
even  out  of  the  fire  ;  he  maketh  thick  clouds,  which
being  broken  produce  lightnings,  and  so  are  dis¬
solved  into  showers  of  rain:  Ur,  he  maketh  light¬
nings  with  rain,  Jer.  10.  13.  He  causeth  both  of
them  to  come  out  of  the  same  cloud.  Or  thus :
Lightning  goes  before  thunder  and  rain  ;  and  when
we  perceive  lightning ,  and  hear  a  fresh  dap  oj
thunder  during  a  storm,  we  conclude  that  the  shower
will  soon  come.  This  is  easily  applied.  Light¬
ning  and  thunder  are  produced  only  by  the  shock  of
clouds  one  against  another  J  and  the  same  shock
is  the  cause  of  rain  also.  The  prophet  there¬
fore  may  observe  here,  that  lightning  is  as  it
were  the  forerunner  and  the  natural  token  of
rain.

Gen.  7.  12.  the  r.  was  upon  the  earth  forty  days

8.  2.  and  the  r.  from  heaven  was  restrained
Exod.  9.  .3.3.  and  the  r.  was  not  poured  on  the  earth
34.  Pharaoh  saw  the  r.  ceased,  he  sinned  yetmore
Lev.  26.  4.  then  I  will  give  you  r.  in  due  season,  and
land  shall  yield  increase,  Dent.  11.  14.  1  28.  12.
Dent.  11.  11.  land  drinks  water  of  the  r.  of  heaven
17.  he  shut  up  the  heaven  that  there  be  no  r.

1  Kings  8.  35.  2  Chron.  6.  26. 17-  13.

28.  24.  the  Lord  shall  make  r.  of  thy  land  powder
32.  2.  my  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  r.  as  the  dew
1  Sam.  12.  17.  I  will  call  on  the  Lord  to  send  r.

384


1  Sam.  12.  18.  Lord  sent  thunder  and  r.  that  day

2  Sam.  1.  21.  let  there  be  no  dew  nor  r.  upon  you
23.  4.  as  grass  springing  by  clear  shining  after  r.

1  Kings  8.  .36.  then  hear  thou  and  give  r.  upon  thy

land  thou  hast  given  thy  people,  2  Chr .  6.  27.

17.  1.  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  r.  these  years
7.  brook  dried  up,  because  there  had  been  no  r.

14.  till  day  that  the  Lord  send  r.  on  the  earth

18.  1.  shew  to  Ahab,  I  will  send  r.  upon  the  earth
41.  for  there  is  a  sound  of  abundance  of  r.

44.  that  the  r.  stop  thee  not  ||  45.  was  a  great  r.

2  Kings  .3.  17.  ye  shall  not  see  wind,  nor  see  r.

Ezra  10.  9.  people  sat  trembling  for  the  great  r.

1.3.  people  are  many,  and  it  is  a  time  of  much  r
Job  5.  10.  who  giveth  r.  upon  the  earth

28.  26.  and  when  he  made  a  decree  for  r.  and  way-

29.  2.3.  they  waited  for  me  as  for  the  r.

36.  27.  clouds  pour  down  r.  according  to  vapour
.37.  6.  to  small  r.  and  to  great  r.  of  his  strength
.38. 28.  hath  r.  a  father  <  or  who  hath  begotten  dew :
Psal.  65.  t  10.  causest  r.  descend  into  the  furrows
68.  9.  thou,  O  God,  didst  send  a  plentiful  r.

72.  6.  he  shall  come  down  like  r.  on  mown  grass
81.  6.  the  r.  also  filleth  the  pools
105.  .32.  he  gave  them  hail  for  r.  and  flaming  fire
135.  7.  he  maketh  lightnings  for  the  r.

147.  8.  sing  to  the  Lord,  who  prepareth  r.  for  earth
Prov.  25.  14.  is  like  clouds  and  wind  without  r.

23.  the  north  wind  driveth  away  r.

26.  1.  as  snow  in  summer,  and  r.  in  harvest
28.  3.  that  oppresseth  poor  is  like  a  sweeping  r.
Eccl.  11.3.  if  clouds  be  full  of  r.  they  empty
12.  2.  nor  the  clouds  return  after  the  r.

Cant.  2.  11.  winter  is  past,  the  r.  is  over  and  gone
Isa.  4.  6.  tabernacle  for  a  covert  from  storm  and  r.

5.  6.  1  will  command  clouds  they  rain  no  r.  on  it
18.  +  4.  like  clear  heat  after  r.  and  cloud  of  dew
.30.  2.3.  then  shall  he  give  the  r.  of  thy  seed
44.  14.  he  planteth  an  ash,  and  r.  doth  nourish  it
55.  10.  as  the  r.  cometh  down  from  heaven
Jer.  5.  24.  let  us  fear  the  Lord  that  giveth  r.

10.  1.3.  he  maketh  lightnings  with  r.  51.  16.

14.  4.  ground  ischapt,  for  there  was  no  r.

22.  are  there  any  vanities  of  Gentiles  can  cause  r.  ?
Ezek.  1.  28.  as  the  bow  in  the  cloud  in  day  of  r.

.38.  22.  1  will  r.  an  overflowing  r.  and  brimstone
Ilos.  6.  .3.  and  he  shall  make  us  as  the  r.

Joel  2.  2.3.  he  will  cause  to  come  down  for  you  r.
Amos  4.  7.  I  have  withholden  the  r.  from  you
Zech.  14.  17.  even  upon  them  shall  be  no  r.

18.  if  family  of  Egypt  go  not  up,  that  have  no  r.
Mat.  5.  45.  he  sendeth  r.  on  the  just  and  unjust

7.  25.  and  the  r.  descended,  and  floods  came,  27-
Acts  14.  17.  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  r.

28.  2.  and  received  us,  because  of  the  present  r.
Heb.  6.  7.  the  earth  which  drinketh  in  the  r.

Jam.  5.  18.  he  prayed,  and  the  heaven  gave  r.

See  Latter.

R A 1 N ,  Verb.

Gen.  2.  5.  Lord  had  not  caused  it  to  r.  on  the  earth
7.  4.  cause  it  to  r.  forty  days  and  forty  nights
Exod.  9.  18-  to-morrow  I  will  cause  it  to  r.

16.  4.  I  will  r.  bread  from  heaven  for  you
Job  20.  23.  God  shall  r.  bis  fury  on  him
38.  26.  to  cause  it  to  r.  on  the  earth
Psal.  11.  6.  on  the  wicked  he  shall  r.  snares
Isa.  5.  6.  the  clouds,  that  they  r.  no  rain  on  it
Ezek.  38.  22.  1  will  r.  an  overflowing  rain
Ilos.  10.  12.  till  he  come  and  r.  righteousness  on  you
Amos  4.7. 1  caused  it  to  r.  on  one  city ,  noton  another
Jam.  5.  17.  Elias  prayed  earnestly  it  might  not  r.
Rev.  11.  6.  that  it  r.  not  in  days  of  their  prophecy
RAINBOW

Rev.  4.  3.  there  was  a  r.  round  anout  the  throne
10.  1.  I  saw  an  angel,  and  a  r.  was  upon  his  head
RAIN  ED.

Gen.  19.  24.  T  Old  r.  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
Exod.  9.  2.3.  the  T.ord  r.  hail  on  the  land  of  Egypt
Psal.  78.  24.  and  had  r.  down  manna,  flesh,  27.
Ezek.  22.  24.  thou  art  the  land  not  r.  upon
Amos  4.7.  I  withheld  rain,  one  piece  was  r.  upon  ;

and  the  piece  whereupon  it  r.  not,  withered
Luke  17.  29.  the  same  day  it  r.  fire  from  heaven
Jam.  5.  17.  it  r.  not  for  three  years  and  six  months

rainy:

Prov.  27.  15.  a  continual  dropping  in  a  r.  day
RAISE

Signifies,  [1]  To  lift  up,  1  Sam.  2.  8.  Psal.  113.
7.  [2]  To  invent,  or  relate,  Exod.  23.  1.  [3]
To  ordain  and  appoint.  Exod.  9.  16.  [4]  To
beget,  Gen.  .38.  8.  [5]  To  keep  in  remembrance,
Ruth  4.  5.  [6]  To  be  restored  to  life,  Mat.  11.
5.  John  2.  19.  [7]  To  call  to,  arid  fit  persons
for  any  work,  Judg.  2.  16.  [8]  To  build, ^  Isa.
23.  1.3.  [9]  To  make  to  stand.  Psal.  107-  25.
Gen.  38.  8-  marry  her,  and  r.  up  seed  to  thy  brother
Exod.  2.3.  1.  thou  shalt  not  r.  a  false  report
Deut.  18.  15.  Lord  thy  God  will  r.  up  a  prophet  like
to  me,  to  him  hearken,  18.  Acts  .3.  22.  17-  37.
25.  7.  refuseth  to  r.  up  to  brother  a  name  in  Israel
Josh.  8.  29.  and  r.  thereon  a  great  heap  of  stones
Ruth  4.  5.  to  r.  up  the  name  of  the  dead,  10.

1  Sam.  2.  .35.  1  will  r.  me  up  a  faithful  priest

2  Sam.  12.  11.  I  will  r.  up  evil  ag.  thee  out  of  house
17.  elders  went  to  him  to  r.  him  up  from  earth

1  Kings  14. 14.  the  Lord  shall  r.  up  a  king  in  Israel
1  Chron.  17.  11.  I  will  r.  up  thy  seed  after  thee
Job  3.  8.  who  are  ready  to  r.  up  their  mourning

19.  12.  his  troops  r.  up  their  way  against  me

30.  12.  they  r.  up  against  me  ways  of  destruction
P.f.  41.  10.  Lord,  be  merciful  to  n  3,  and  r.  me  up

48.  +  13.  mark  her  bulwarks,  r.  up  her  palaces
Isa.  15.  5.  they  shall  r.  up  a  cry  of  destruction

29.  .3.  and  1  will  r.  forts  against  thee

44.  26.  I  will  r.  up  the  decayed  places  thereof

49.  6.  my  servant  to  r.  up  the  tribes  of  Jacob

+  8.  will  give  thee  for  a  covenant  to  r.  up  the  earth
58.  12.  shalt  r.  up  foundations  of  many  generations
61.  4.  they  shall  r.  up  the  former  desolations
Jer.  2.3.  5.  I  will  r.  to  David  a  righteous  branch

30.  9.  David  their  king,  whom  1  will  r.  up

50.  9.  I  will  r.  against' Babylon  an  assembly


Jer.  50.  .32.  none  shall  r.  him  |1 51 .  1.  r.  adestr.  viuj
Ezek.  23.  22.  I  will  r.  up  thy  lovers  against  thee
.34.  29.  I  will  r.  up  for  them  a  plant  of  renown
Hos.  6.  2.  in  the  third  day  he  will  r.  11s  up
Joel  3.  7.  I  will  r.  them  whither  ye  have  driven
Amos  5.  2.  virgin  of  Israel,  there  is  none  to  r.  her  up
6.  14.  but,  behold,  I  will  r.  a  nation  against  you

9.  11.  I  will  r.  up  the  tabernacle  of  David,  and  1

will  r.  up  his  ruins,  and  1  will  build  it
Mic.  5.  5.  we  shall  r.  against  him  seven  shepherds
Hab.  1.  3.  there  are  that  r.  up  strife  and  contention
6.  1  will  r.  up  the  Chaldeans,  that  hasty  nation
Zech.  11.  16.  I  will  r.  up  a  shepherd  in  the  land
Mat.  3.  9.  tor.  up  children  to  Abraham,  Luke  3. 8

10.  8.  heal  the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  r.  the  dead
22.  24.  his  brother  marry  his  wife,  and  r.  up  seed

to  his  brother,  Mark  12.  19.  Luke  20.38.
John  2.  19.  and  in  three  days  I  will  r.  it  up

6.  39.  I  will  r.  it  up  again  at  last  day,  39.  40, 44,  54.
Acts  2.  30.  he  would  r.  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  throne
26.  8.  why  incredible  that  God  should  r.  the  deadJ

1  Cor.  6.  14.  and  will  alsor.  up  us  by  his  power

2  Cor.  4.  14.  that  he  shall  r.  up  us  also  by  Jesus
Heb.  11.  19.  accounting  God  was  able  to  r.  him  up
Jam.  5.  15.  and  the  Lord  shall  r.  him  up

RAISED.

Exod.  9. 16.  1  r.  thee  up  to  shew  my  pow.  Rom.  9. 17.
Josh.  5.  7.  children  whom  he  r.  up  in  their  stead

7.  26.  they  r.  over  him  a  great  heap  of  stones
Judg.  2.  16.  nevertheless  the  Lord  r.  up  judges,  18.

3.  9.  the  Lord  r.  up  a  deliverer  to  Israel,  15.

2  Sam.  2.3.  1.  the  man  who  was  r.  up  on  high,  said

1  Kings  5.  13.  Solomon  r.  up  a  levy  of  Israel,  9. 15.

2  Chron.  .32.  5.  and  r.  it  up  to  the  towers,  .3.3.  14.
Ezra  1.  5.  all  whose  spirit  God  r.  to  go  tip  to  build
Job  14.  12.  not  awake,  nor  be  r.  out  of  their  sleep
Prov.\5.  + 19.  the  way  of  righteous  r.  like  a  causeway
Cant.  8.  5.  I  r.  thee  up  under  the  apple-tree

Isa.  14.  9.  it  r.  up  from  their  thrones  kings  of  nations

2.3.  13.  the  Assyrian  r.  up  the  palaces  of  Chaldea
41.  2.  who  r.  up  the  righteous  man  from  the  east

25.  I  have  r.  up  one  from  the  north

45. 1.3.  1  haver,  him  up  in  righteousness

Jer.  6.  22.  a  great  nation  shall  be  r.  from  the  earth
25.  32.  a  great  whirlwind  shall  be  r.  up  from  earth

29.  15.  Lord  hath  r.  us  up  prophets  in  Babylon
50.  41.  many  kings  shall  be  r.  from  the  earth

51. 11.  Lord  r.  up  the  spirit  of  the  kings  of  Medes
Dan.  7.  5.  a  bear  r.  up  itself  on  one  side

Amos  2.  11.  1  r.  upot  your  sons  for  prophets
Zech.  2.  13.  is  r.  up  out  of  his  holy  habitation

9.  13.  when  1  haver,  up  thy  sons,  O  /ion
Mat.  1.  24.  then  Joseph  being  r.  from  sleep  did

11.  5.  the  deaf  hear,  the  dead  are  r.  up,  Luke  7.22.
16.  21.  he  must  go  and  suffer,  be  killed,  and  r.  up

again  the  third  day,  17*  23.  Luke  9.  22.
Luke  1 .  69.  hath  r.  up  an  horn  of  salvation  for  us
20.  .37.  now  that  the  dead  are  r.  Moses  shewed
John  12. 1.  Lazarus  whom  he  r.  from  the  dead,  9,17.
Acts  2.  24.  whom  God  hath  r.  up,  .32. 1  3.  15,  26.

I  4.  10.  I  5.  .30.  |  10.  40.  I  13.  30,  33,  34.  |  17.
31.  Rom.  10.  9.  1  Cor.  6.  14.  2  Cor.  4.  14.
Gal.  1.  1.  Eph.  1.  20.

12.  7.  angel  r.  up  Peter  ||  13.  22.  he  r.  up  David

1.3.  23.  hath  God  r.  to  Israel  a  Saviour  Jesus
50.  the  Jews  r.  persecution  against  Paul

Rom.  4.24.  if  we  believe  on  him  thatr.  up  Jesus
25.  who  was  r.  again  for  our  justification

6.  4.  like  as  Christ  was  r.  from  the  dead  by  Father
9.  Christ  being  r.  from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more

7.  4.  married,  even  to  him  who  is  r.  from  the  dead

8. 11.  if  the  Spirit  of  him  that  r.  up  Jesus  dwell  in

you,  he  that  r.  up  Christ  shall  quicken
1  Cor.  15.  15.  r .  up  Christ  ;  whom  he  r.  not  up

16.  if  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ  r.  _

17.  if  Christ  be  not  r.  your  faith  is  vain,  yet  in  sins
35.  some  men  will  say ,  how  are  the  dead  r.  ?

42.  it  is  sown  in  corruption, r.  in  incorruption, 52.

4.3.  it  is  r.  in  glory,  it  is  r.  in  power

44.  it  is  sown  a  natural  body,  r.  a  spiritual  body
Eph.  2.  6.  and  hath  r.  us  up  together  in  Christ  Jesus
Col.  2.12.  through  operation  of  God  who  r.  him  ‘rom

1  These.  1 . 10.  wait  for  his  Son,  whom  be  r.  from  uead

2  'iim.  2.  8.  remember  Jesusof  seed  of  David  was r.
Heb.  11.  35.  women  received  their  dead  r.  to  life

1  Pet.  1.21.  believe  in  God  thatr.  him  up  from  dead

RAISER.

Dan.  11.  20.  then  shall  stand  up  a  r.  of  taxes
Hos.  7.  +  4.  the  r.  will  cease  after  he  hath  kneaded
RA I. SET  II.

1  Sam.  2.  8.  he  r.  poor  out  of  dust,  Psal.  113.  7
Job  41.  25.  when  her.  himself,  mighty  are  afraid
Psal.  107.  25.  for  he  commands  and  r.  stormy  wina

145.  14.  he  r.  those  that  be  bowed  down,  146. 8.
John  5.  21.  for  as  the  Father  r.  up  the  dead

2  Cor.  1.  9.  but  trust  in  God  which  r.  the  dead

RAISING.

Hos.  7.  4.  oven  heated  by  baker  whoceaseth  from  r.
Acts  24.  12.  nor  found  they  me  r.  up  the  people


HAISINS.  ,  f

L  Sam.  25.  18.  Abigail  took  an  hundred  clustersotr.
.30.  12.  they  gave  the  Egyptians  two  clusters  of  r.

I  Sam.  16.  1. Z iba  met  David  with  100  bunches  of  r.
L  Chr.  12.  40.  they  brought  bunches  of  r.  and  wine
RAM.  J  ,  .

Gen.  15.  9.  take  a  r.  of  three  years  old,  andshe-goat
22.  13.  behind  him  a  r.  caught  in  a  thicket  by  ho,nj
Exod.  29.  15.  take  one  r.  ||  io.  thou  shalt  slay  ther.
18.  thou  shalt  burn  the  whole  r.  Lev.  8.  21.

22.  it  is  a  r.  of  consecration,  27,  31.  Lev.  8.

32.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  me  r.
Lev.  9.  2.  take  ar.  fora  burnt-offering,  and  otter
4.  r.  for  peace  offerings  |!  19.  21.  for  trespass  on.
Num.  5.  8.  besides  the  r.  of  the  atonement
15.  11.  thus  shall  it  be  done  for  one  r.  or  a  lan«J
Ezra  10. 19.  being  guilty,  they  offered  a  r.  tor  tresp.
Ezek.  43.  23.  shall  offer  a  r.  without  blemish,  <

45.  24.  prepare  an  ephali  tor  a  r.  46.  5, 7 ,

46.  4.  the  prince,  shall  offer  to  the  Lord  a  r.

6.  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon  six  lambs  and  ar.
Dan.  8.  3.  I  saw  a  r.  which  had  two  horns  ,

4.  I  saw  the  r.  pushing  westward  and  nortnwar


\


R  A  N


R  A  1


Dan,  8.  6.  the  goat  ran  to  the  r.  that  had  two  horns
7*  come  close  to  the  r .  there  was  no  power  in  the
r.  none  to  deliver  the  r.  out  of  the  hands
20.  the  r.  having  two  horns  are  the  kings
RAMS.

Den.  31. 10.  r.  which  leaped  were  ring-straked,  12
38.  the  r.  ot  thy  Hock  have  1  not  eaten
32.  14.  Jacob  sent  Esau  200  ewes  and  20  r.

Ueiit.  J2.  14.  with  r.  ot  breed  ot  Bashan  and  goats
.bam.  15.  22.  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  r.

.  htugs  3.4.  Moab  rendered  loo.ooOr.  with  wool
Chron.  29.  21.  they  sacrificed  to  the  Lord  1000  r.
j:  Chron.  17.  11.  the  Arabians  brought  7700  r.

Szra  6.  9.  r.  for  offerings  of  the  God  of  heaven
17.  ottered  at  dedication  of  the  house  200  r.

7.  17.  thou  mayest  buy  with  this  money  r.  iambs

8.  35.  offered  nniety-six  r.  for  a  sin  offering
’sal.  fib.  15.  with  the  fat  of  r.  Isa.  34.  0.  °

114.  4.  the  mountains  skipped  like  r.  6.

sa.  1.  11.  I  am  full  ot  the  burnt  offerings  of  r
14.  6.  the  sword  is  tilled  with  fat  of  kidneys  of  r
>0.  7-  the  r.  ot  Nebaioth  shall  minister  to  thee
er.  51.  40.  bring  them  to  the  slaughter  like  r.

.zek.  27.  21.  Kedar  occupied  with  thee  in  r
U.  17.  1  judge  between  the  r.  and  the  he-goats
19.  18.  ye  shall  drink  the  blood  ©f  T.  of  lambs
lie.  6.7.  will  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands of r
see  Battering,  Seven,

R  A  MU' -horns,

>s/i.  6.  4.  seven  priests  shall  bear  before  the  ark
,  .  .,  sev®n  trumpets  ot  r. -horns,  d,  8.  13.

5.  when  they  make  a  long  blast  with  the  r.  horns

R  AMS-^Liwj.

xod.  25.  5.  r. -skins  dyed  red,  and  badgers’-skins,
and  slnttim-wood,  20.  14. 1  35.  7.  |  36.  19  I  39  34
RAMPART.  1  y- J4‘

fhe™de  ‘i6  r- and  th,e  wal1  f0  lament
an.  3. 8.  than  populouj^No,  whose  r.  was  the  sea

en.  18. 2.  Abraham  r.  to  meet  them  from  tent-door
nSt0phlrlJla24- 17.  servant  r.  to  meet  liebekah
>0  "l9‘  l'ebekah  r.  to  the  well  to  draw  water
.8.  the  damsel  r.  and  told  her  mother’s  house
.9.  Laban  r.  out  to  the  man  to  the  well
).  12.  and  Rachel  r.  and  told  her  father
18.  Laban  r.  to  meet  Jacob  and  embraced  him
J’o  ot  t2meet  him,  and  embraced  him
tb®  hre  r.  along  upon  the  ground
/m.  11.  27.  there/-,  a  young  man  and  told  Moses
\,L‘  an'??  r' lnt0  midst  ot  the  congregation
1  in  th«f  messenger  r.  to  Aaron’s  tent
Wo ,amnVub  f'  int0..^l*  and  set  it  on  fire
7i‘  til'  a  t  le  10St  1NJ i<lian  r.  and  tied
~in  f  •  awa/’  an<1  and  went  to  Beer

>’!Y’  'Vte  T:  a,‘,ld  shewed  her  husband

1  o  Sia™“el  r-  *9  Isli,  and  said,  here  am  I
1..  &  man  of  Benjamin  r.  out  of  the  army

•|o^alnd■t,he•>•,'•  and  fetched  Saul  thence
;  rC  D^vid  r •  mt°  the  army  and  saluted  brethr.

I.  Land  r.  and  stood  upon  the  Philistine
...6.  as  the  lad  r.  he  shot  an  arrow  beyond  him

■  18.  21.  Cushi  bowed  himself  to  Joab  and  r.

by  the  plain  and  overran  Cushi
!ozS.Z'  39-  tuo  servants  ofShimei  r.  away
.35.  the  wtiter  r.  round  about  the  altar
emjjm  [■  before  Ahab  to  Jezreel

'  £-  'ii  tile  oxen  and  r‘  after  Elijah
f- mto  the  midst  of  the  chariot
/  772o  ti2’  klng  be.at  down,  and  r.  from  thence
my  sore  r.  in  the  night  and  ceased  not
.41  the  waters  r.  in  the  dry  places  like  a  river
,  *b,e  ointment  that  r.  down  upon  the  beard
.  ,~3.-  21  •  I  have  not  sent  them,  yet  they  r.

o  Vu’  thfe  bvlng  creatures  r.  and  returned
,  *•  f^el"a  r’  ont  waters  on  the  right  side

n° 're ram  ln  tur>’  °f  his Power

-  •  8.  32.  the  herd  of  swine  r.  violently  down

a  steep  place  into  the  sea,  Mark  5.  13
Luke  8.  .3.3.

1 °£e  ™and  ifilled  fl.sPun»e>  Mark  15.  .36.

!?any  un,ew  hlln>  and  r-  afoot  thither
t{’r°osh  thHt  whole  region  round  about
l  e  15.  -0.  his  father  r.  and  tell  on  his  neck
4.  Zaccheus  r.  before  and  climbed  up  a  tree
/  *00 lh/n  ar,?se  Petuer  and  r •  to  the  sepulchre
V.  20-  *■  ,s°  they  r.  both  together,  other  outrun

-  _3- 2 1  •  me  people  r.  together  unto  them
ll'  m*  uPon  Stephen  with  one  accord
tO.  Philip  r  to  the  chariot  and  heard  him

1144‘PanPanH  &neW  V°ice’  she  r-  in

cqA’  uaU  anc1  ®arnabas  r.  in  amon^  the  people
'■w  Pe°P*e  T ■  together  and  took  Paul  P
41  mIe  caRtam  took  soldiers  and  r.  down
/,  i  f  t.hKey/’  the  sblP  aground  and  stuck  fast

II.  they  r.  greedily  alter  the  error  of  Balaam

.  ,  ,  RANG.

snouted,  so  that  the  earth  r.  again
ngs  1.4m  Israel  shouted, so  that  the  cit y  r.  again
f.  n  o  4U  r-  KAJSGE.

8‘  the  r-  of  mountains  is  his  pasture
KANCtLD.

17.  f  2.  Saul  and  Israel  r.  the  battle
HANGERS,

071’  12,  +  33-  Oo^e^u*un  t.  of  battle  50,000

' ,  1,  o,  r  RANGES.

f°r  P°tsgtl,ey  sha11  be  broken
have  ha,  V,a’com.ctb  within  r.  let  him  be  slain
i'd\e  hei  forth  without  the  r.  2  Chr.  23.  14.

a,  0q  ranging.

-8.15.  as  a  roaring  lion,  and  a  r.  bear,  so  a  ruler

;,4i  s  RANK.

1  even  fhm  came  !Jp  uP°n, one  stalk,  r.  and  good
v  .  thin  ears  fievour^fi  tht»  *


>  n  Viiu1  farS  devoured  the  seven  r.  ears:

0  i  7?’  lsr,ac  went  up  by  five  in  a  r.
t'thev  hny  S1?  set  fUftb  m  the  second  r.

V  7  ■ y  r,1al  *,  go  forward  in  the  third  r.

(  io  l  ’  v  went  to  outside  of  the  r.  by  five
t  ’  ‘f-  °t  /ebulun  50,lKK)  could  keep  r.

3  '  A?her  keeping  their  r.  40, (KK)

\  55n  o  war  that  could  keep  r.  came  to  Hebron
'■ai  4' on  a  thou-  a- ,T,an  according  to  my  r.

•  T  -5  Agar  is  ui  the  same  r.  with  Jerusalem


,  .  ranks.

7a  4’,  ight  was  against  light  in  three  r.  5.
M  I'ef '  and  fbeysi'aH  not  break  their  r.

Mai k  6.  40.  they  sat  down  in  ? .  by  bund,  and  fifties
,  .  ..  RANSOM

Is  a  signification  made ,  or  price  paid,  for  the  re
deeming  oj  a  captive,  or  for  procuring  a  pardon
Jor  some  notorious  offender.  Hod,  giving  dir ec-
tiorn  to  his  ministers  ho:v  to  behave  tonai ds  pent

to  the  nif  1  S\  ys'  I?ellvS1'  hlm  troln  going  down
to  the  pit,  1  have  found  a  ransom,  Job  33  24

j*ec/f  e  t0  httn,  that  I  have  pardoned  and  will
heal  him;  Jor  1  have  found  out  an  expedient,  and
away  oj  ransoming  and  redeeming  sinners  from
death,  both  spiritual  and  eternal,  which  they  bn
deserved:  which  is  by  the  death  of
”>1/  Son,  the  Redeemer  and  Saviour:  hence  Christ
is  called  a  Ransom.  1  Tim.  2.6.  Who  gave  him
self  a  ransom  tor  all,  to  be  testified  indue  time.
Man  being  m  a  lost  and  deplorable  condition,  and
uab/e  to  eternal  death  on  account  of  his  sins  ;  the
J*I?  l  fun  °f  ^od,  moved  by  his  divine  love,  un¬
dertook  tc  estore  J  alien  man  to  the  favour  of  God
and  voluntarily  endured  the  punishment  due  to  our
and  9.ave  most  precious  life  and  blood  as
^  r  0W  redemP“on  :  and  therefore  such  as
adeems  Jrom  the  spiritual  bondage  of  sin
and  tin  tan,  are  called  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord
J.SCI,  liOi  10.  ’

jp  ,  RANSOM,  Substantive.

™  ^o2 li  3°’  ue  ?,ha!*  give  f’°r  the  r.  of  his  life
1  SaL'\toe?oh*}1  f ve  ?’er-y  'nan  a  r.  for  his  soul
TnhZ*oi'W0i  whose  hand  I  received  any  r.  ?

j«2n  dellver  bim  from  pit,  I  have  found  a  r
36.  18.  then  a  great  r.  cannot  deliver  thee

p“l:  (nn  they  f°  (i°d  a  r.  for  him

h  f  1  not  regard  any  r.  neither  rest
01  id  7u  r‘  Ph.a  man  s  life  are  Ins  riches

4^'  fhe  w'cked  shall  be  ar.  for  the  righteous

Annhh  ogaAe  L%pt  kir  thy  *cba  For  thee
\lnt  on  U2-  *  ’ey  a  ict  thejust’  ‘hey  take  a  r.

Mat.  M.  28.  even  as  the  Son  ot  man  came  to  give

1  Tim  o  n  ,  ,  ll,s  "fc .«■  r.  tor  many,  Mark  10.  45.

1  Jim. ...  6.  who  gave  turns,  r.  tor  all,  to  be  testified
Tr  RANSOM.

Uos.  1.3. 14. 1  w  11  l^fh^u  y^jjPO wer  of  the  grave

7M '  m*  m‘  0t  the  hord  shad  return  and  come

/er  m'  1 1  dT  th?  teaa  way  for  ,the  r.  to  pass  over
Jer.  .31.  11.  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob  and  r.  him

7-1  .  .  RARE.

Dan.  2. 1 1.  it  is  a  r.  thingthat  the  king  requireth
r,  ,  10„  .  RASE.

JJsal.  137.  7.  r.  it,  r.  it  even  to  the  foundation
r  ,  ,  „  .  RASH.

Un  ho  f\nnotJ'  ^lth  fhy  mouth,  heart  not  hasty
La.  3..  t  4.  the  heart  ot  the  r.  shall  understand

1  L or.  13.  f  4.  charity  is  not  r.  is  not  puffed  ud

.  f<i  ^  RASHLY.  P'

Rets  19.  36.  ye  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  do  nothing  r
.,0  itASHNESS.

2  •oom.  6.  f  7.  God  smote  Uzzah  for  his  r.  and  he  died

jp  ,  .  HA  J  E.

Lxod.  16.  4.  people  shall  gather  certain  r.  every  day

1  K  ings  10.  25.  brought  mules  at  a  r.  2  Chr.  9  24  ^

2  chron  R°'m‘  a  dal!y  r’  f°revery  da>' al1  his  days
-  Lhron.  8.  13.  even  after  a  certain  r.  every  dav

r  .  RATHER.  *  y

Josh.  22.  24.  if  we  have  not  r.  done  it  for  fear
rWt'  V3-  h°w  much  r.  when  he  saith  to  thee
7>  15.  chooseth  death  r.  than  life,  Jer.  8.  3
32‘  l\  because  lie  justified  himself  r.  than  God
'}•  “’is  hast  thou  chosen  r.  than  affliction

84  m  'LdnP  ylng/’  tll,an  t0  sPeak  righteousness
84.  10.  had  r.  be  a  door-keeper  in  house  of  God

1  10’  !'ecel,ve  knowledge  r.  than  choice  gold

lo.  10.  to  get  understand,  r.  to  be  chosen  than  silver

I  < .  U.  meet  a  man,  r.  than  a  fool  in  his  folly

1.  good  name  is  r.  to  be  chosen  than  great  riches
n/r  .  lfl  A  loving  favour  r.  than  silver  and  gold
Mat.  10.  6.  go  r.  to  the  lost  sheep  ot  house  of  Israel
'H'/'  fear  bim  that  is  able  to  destroy  in  hell
n  ia?  having  two  hands  to  be'east  into  fire

9-  *han  having  two  eyes  to  be  cast  into  hell

07’  o’.  bKtF?uy5  t0  t!ie,m  that  sell,  and  buy
27  •  f4-  bat  mat  r.  tumult  was  made,  be  took  water
Yi?rii5\i‘b;  frothing  bettered,  but  r.  grew  worse
1  f;, tbat  be  should  r.  release  Barabbasto  them

II  00  ,;ir’ rej;  >’our  names  are  written  in  heaven

'b.  r.  blessed  are  they  that  hear  and  keep

i41vYUk  glVC  ^ImS  ,°.f  such  things  as  >’e  have
1-.  31.  but  r.  seek  ye  kingdom  of  God,  all  things

,71oCaII'^  t0.Rlve feace,  I  tell  you  nay,  r.  division
17-8.  and  will  not  r.  say  unto  him,  make  ready
r  /’  went  down  justified  r.  than  the  other

John  3.  19.  and  men  loved  darkness  r.  than  light
Acts  5.  29.  we  ought  to  obey  God  r.  than  men

aal  *0}  r •  Let  usdo  evil  that  tfood  may  come
11,,  ur!s  !ed|  yea>  r.  that  is  risen  again
10’  ii'  bu^  r’  *brough  their  tall  salvation  is  come
12. 19.  avenge  not,  but  r.  give  place  to  wrath
13-  not  judge  one  another,  but  judge  this  r.

1  2'  ?re  puded  np,  and  have  not  r.  mourned
7  m  w,hy  9?'>;e  not  r-  fake  wiong  ?  why  not  suffer'
a  in  hot  *f  thou  mayest  be  made  free,  use  it  r.

9.  J~.  iroth.  be  partak.  of  this  power,  are  not  we  r.  ?
iA  u  jesire  r-that  ye  may  prophesy,  5.

19.  had  r.  speak  five  words  with  my  understand,
o  o  l  *'  s9  mat  ye  ought  r.  to  forgive  him
3.  8.  how  ministration  of  the  Spirit  he  r.  glorious  ?

5- b.  willing  r.  to  be  absent  from  the  body

fbcccfore  1  will  r.  glory  in  my  infirmities
i?i  d;  ye,  hif'e  Known  God,  or  r.  known  of  God
Lph  4.  28.  steal  no  more,  but  r.  let  him  labour

O.  4.  let  it  not  be  named,  but  r.  giving  of  thanks
73/ v  with  works  ot  darkness,  but.  r.  reprove  them
,  r,v'  f-  *y  ’•  *9  fl,e  furtherance  of  the  gospe!
f.  R.4-  which  minister  questionsr.  than  edify.

4.7.  and  exercise  thyself  r.  to  godliness

P. \ but  r.  do  them  service,  because  faithful
ij/em.  9- >ct  f°r  love’s  sake  1  r.  beseech  thee
Heh.  11.  25.  choosing  r.  to  suffer  affliction  with


REA

Ueb  12.9.  r.be  in  subjection  to  the  Father  ot  spirits
1?3’,'et,lan,le  be  fnrned  out,  but  let  it  r.  be  healed
LL  19.  but  1  beseech  you  the  r.  to  do  this
2  Pet.  1.  lo.  r.  gn’^thhgence  to  make  calling  sure

Job  39.23.the  quiver  r.  against  hin'i,  spear  and  shield
AT  ,  .  R  A 1  1  Ll  NG.

Nah.  3.  2.  noise  of  the  r.  of  the  wheels  and  horses
RAVEN  S

Gen .  8. 7._Noah  sent  forth  a  r.  which  went  forth
Lev.  11.  lo.  every  r.  is  unclean,  Deut.  14. 14.

1  lungs  17.  4.  1  have  commanded  the  r.  to  feed  thee

r  A.n?(i,the.r’  brou£bt  1  Hjah  bread  and  flesh
Job  38.  41.  who  provideth  (he  r.  food,  Psal.  147  9
Pm;.  3°.  17.  the  r.  of  the  valley  shail  pick  it  out
Cant^5 .11.  his  locks  bushy,  arid  black  as  a  r.

Isa  34. 11.  the  owl  and  the  r.  shall  dwell  in  it
J-iUke  12.  24.  'onsider  the  r.  they  neither'soM

D  .  ravening.

rSaT  iS,'  *ib,ey  7aPed.  nP°n  'ue  as  a  r.  lie
lke  a  soaring  lion  r.  the  prey
J27/  be,;Pr'nc«  are  llke  wolves  r.  the  pre\

Mat. I.  15.  but  inwardly  they  are  /•.  wolves
r  7  RAVENING.

Luke  11.  39.  your  inward  part  is  full  of  r
T  RAVENOUS.

Jsa.  35.  9.  nor  any  r.  beast  shall  go  up  thereoi
46.  11.  cfflling  a  r.  bird  from  the  east
Lsek.  39.  4.  1  will  give  thee  to  the  r.  bird*

_  RAVIN,  Verb.

Gen.  49.  27.  Benjamin  shall  r.  as  a  wolf
T’sal.  17.  f  12.  as  a  lion  that  desireth  to  r
,  RAVIN.

Nah.  2. 12.  the  lion  filled  his  dens  with  r

RAVISHED.

r  j«’i«  ^j011  b.ast  r-  P'V  heart,  my  sister
La.  13. 16.  the  wives  of  Babylon  shall  be  r.

Lam.  5.  11.  they  r.  the  women  in  Zion
Zee//.  14. 2.  the  women  in  Jerusalem  shall  be  r
D  RAVISHED.

/“Tar;.  5.  19.  and  be  thou  r.  alwa3rs  with  her  love
-0.  why  wilt  thou  be  r.  with  a  strange  woman  ?

I?  j  .RAW.

Lxod.  12.  9.  eat  not  of  it  r.  nor  sodden  with  water
Le.v:  i3V10*.,b  thfre  be  quick  r.  flesh  in  the  rising

14.  but  when  the  r.  flesh  appeareth  in  him

15.  the  priest  see  r.  flesh,  for  r.  flesh  is  unclean
2/,]5- lle  "  'll  have  sodden  flesh,  but  r.

Mat.  9.  t  lb.  no  man  putteth  r.  cloth  to  an  old  ear
ment,  for  the  rent  is  niade  worse,  Mark  2.  t  21.

T/ijs  instrument  well  'known,  ft  is  said

Psal  52.  2.  I  hy  tongue  is  like  a  sharp  razor
working  deceitfully.  Wherein  the  Psalmist
speaking  of  Do  eg  the  Edomite,  insinuates,  that
as  a  man  pretending  only  to  shave  off  the  hair
with  a  sharp  razor,  doth  suddenly  and  unex¬
pectedly  cut  the  throat ;  so  Doeg  pretended  only
to  vindicate  himself  from  the  imputation  of  dis¬
loyalty,  1  Sam.  22.  9.  hut  really  intended' to  ex¬
pose  the  priests,  who  were  David’s  friends,  to
feaul  s  jury  and  cruelty.  And  in  Isa  7  «o
God  threatens  to  shave  Judah  with  a  razor  that

tHat  1S'  ntter,'y  t0  ip,nl  and  ^stroy
Judah,  by  the  successive  kings  of  the  Assyrian
empire,  as  Sennacherib,  2  Kings  18  13  f  sar’
haddon,  2  Kings  19.  37.  and  especially  by  Ne¬
buchadnezzar,  who  having  subdued  the  Assyrian
monarchy,  from  thenceforth  was  king  of  Assyria
as  wen  as  of  Chaldea,  and  who  cVphted  the
calamity  of  Judah,  which  teas  begun  by  the  kinqs
oj  /issyna.

Kum.  6.  5.  all  the  days  there  shall  no  r.  come  upon
his  head,  Judy.  1.3.  5.  I  16.  17.  1  Sam.  1.  11
8. 1 7.  cause  a  r.  to  pass  over  the  flesh  of  the  Levites
Psal.5'2.2.  t\\y  tongue  like  a  sharp  r.  working
Isa.  7.Q0.  the  Lord  shall  shave  with  a  r.  hired
Lzek.  o.  1.  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  barber’s  r
_  REACH.

{9wer  whose  top  may  r.  to  heaven
£wrf  28.  42.  linen  breeches  shall  r.  to  the  thighs
Lev.  5.  +7.  if  his  hand  cannot  r.  to  a  lamb,  14. 1 21.

^o.  5.  your  threshing  shall  r.  to  the  vintage,  and
\t  your  v'ntaf?e  shall  r.  to  the  sowing  time

r  /  nA3i’  n5  ll?e  border  shal1  r.  to  the  sea  °
rl’  'Y’Y’!and,  tbVugl‘  hjs  bead  r.  unto  the  clouds
hi16  ?i,aY  V,even  t(,Lthe  neck-  °  Immanuel

f30‘  2«-  oACatLb  sb?  r ■  t0  tbe  midst  of  the  neck
Jer.  48.  32.  thy  plants  r.  to  the  sea  of  Jazer
z.ech.  14.  5.  valley  ot  the  mountains  shall  r.  to  Azal

9  rw2?^'/’  hlther  thy  fin?er.  ai>d  r.  thy  hand
-  c-er.  iu.  13.  a  measure  to  r.  even  unto  vou
„  ^  REACHED.

Ge«  28. 12.  the  ladder's  top  r.  to  heaven
, ,  7’.1.4’ be  r>  b,er  parched  corn,  she  did  eat

J'9:71’  v  lre^»  whose  height;*,  to  heaven,  20
~  Lor.  10.  14.  as  though  we  r.  not  to  you
Rev.  18.  5.  Babylon  s  sins  have  r.  to  heaven
,  REACH ETII.

2  Chron.  <28.  9  slain  in  a  rage  that  r.  up  to  heaven

Yno/-;36’  5;  lLly  tait|dulness  r.  to  the  clouds
108.  4.  and  thy  truth  r.  to  the  clouds
Prov.  31.20.  yea,  she  r.  her  hands  to  the  needy
Jer.  4.  10.  whereas  the  sword  r.  to  the  soul
'J1,?  bitter,  because  it  r.  to  thine  heart
51.  9.  Babylon  s  judgment  r.  to  heaven
Dan.  4.  22.  for  thy  greatness  r.  to  heaven
„  REACHING.

I  hi/.  3. 13.  r.  forth  to  those  things  which  are  before
REA  D.


Exod.  24. 7- he  r.  in  the  audience  of  the  people
he  r.  all  the  words  of  the  law,  35.


Josh.  8.  34.  . . .  U1C  mw  10

ki«8  of  Israel  had  r.  the 'letter
19. 14.  Hezekiah  received  and  r.  the  letter
22.  8.  Shaphan  r.  the  book  of  the  law,  10.

~'k  2-  k"?F  josiah  r.  in  their  ears  all  the  words  of
„  the  book  of  the  covenant,  2  Chron  34  30

~  CAi on.  34.  24.  I  will  bring  all  the  curses  r.

4;  18.  the  letter  hath  been  plain!  \'  r.
at'  T  k,lng  setter  was  r.  they  made  them  cease
Kelt.  8.  3.  he  r.  before  all  book  of  the  law,  8.  |  13.  1.

18.  iiom  first  day  to  the  last  he  r .  the  law

385


R  E  IS


REA


REA


AV/i.  9.  3.  they  stood  up  in  their  place  and  r.  in  law
6.  1.  book  of  the  records  was  r .  before  king
Isa  37.  14.  he  received  the  letter,  and  r.  it
Jer'.  29.  29.  Zephaniah  the  priest  /'.  this  letter
3d'  10.  then  r.  Baruch  the  words  of  lereimali
oi  leliudi  r.  it  in  the  ears  of  the  king  and  prince..

03’.  when  lie  -  three  or  four  leaves,  the  king  cut  it

Mat.  12.  3.  have  ye  not  r.?  19.  4. !  -1-  lb-  l"-3*-
Mark  2.  25.  1 12.  10,  26.  Luke  6.  3.

John  19.  20.  this  title  r.  many  of  the.Jews
Act*  8.  28.  the  eunuch  r.  Esaias  the  prophet
32  the  place  of  scripture  which  he  r.  was  this
13  "7.  prophets  are  r.  every  sabbath-day  ,  lo.  .1
15.  31.  which  when  they  had  r.  they  rejoiced

23.  31.  when  the  governor  had  r.  the  letter

o  Cor  3.  2.  ye  are  our  epistle  known  and  r.  or  all  men
15.  when  Moses  is  r.  the  vail  is  upon  their  heart
Co/' 4.  16.  when  this  epistle  is  r.  among  you
1  Th.ss,  5.  27.  1  charge  you  that  this  epistle  be  r.

READ.  .

Dent.  17.  19.  the  king  shall  r.  therein  all  his  lire
31  11.  thou  shalt  r.  this  law  before  all  Israel
ha.  29.  11.  saying,  r.  this,  1  pray  thee,  12.

34  16.  seek  out  of  the  book  ot  the  Lord  and  r.

Jer  36.  6  go  and  r.  in  the  roll  thou  hast  written
15.  they  said,  sit  down  now  and  r.  it  in  our  ears
51  61  when  thou  comest  to  Babylon  and  shalt  r.

Van.  5.7.  whosoever  shall  r.  this  writing  and  shew

8.  king’s  wise  men,  they  could  not  r.  the  writing
17.  let  thy  gifts  be  to  thyselt,  yet  l  will  >'•

Mat.  21.  42.  did  ye  never  r.  in  the  scriptures
Luke  4.  16.  .lesus  went  in  and  stood  up  tor  to  r.

Acts  8.  30.  Philip  ran  and  heard  him  r.  Esaias
fiCor.1.13.  we  write  none  other  things  than  what  ye  r.
hvh.  3'.  4.  whereby  when  ye  r.  ye  may  understand
Col.  4. 16.  likewise  r.  the  epistle  from  Laodicea
Rev  5  4.  wept,  because  none  worthy  to  r.  the  book
READEST.  ,  .

Luke  10.  26.  what  is  written  in  law,  how  r.  thou  .

Acts  8.  30.  understandest  thou  what  thou  t.  ?

READETH.

Hah.  2.  2.  make  it  plain,  that  he  may  run  that  r.  it
Mat  "4  15.  when  ye  shall  see  the  abomination,
whoso  r.  let  him  understand,  Mark  13.  14
Rev.  1.  3.  blessed  is  he  that  r.  and  they  that  hear
READING.

Heh.  8.  8.  they  caused  them  to  understand  the  r.

Reel.  12.  +  12.  much  r.  is  a  weariness  ot  the  flesh
Act y*13.  15.  after  the  r.  of  the  law  and  the  prophets
2  Cor.  3.  14.  vail  untaken  away  in  r.  the  Old  lest.

1  Tim  4.  13.  till  1  come,  give  attendance  to  r-
READING.

Jer.  36.  8.  r.  in  the  book  ot  the  words  of  the  Lord
51  63.  when  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  r.  this  book
READINESS.

Acts  17. 11.  they  received  the  word  with  r .  of  mind
£  Cor.  8'.  11.  that  as  there  was  a  *\  to  will
10  6  having  a  r.  to  revenge  all  disobedience
READY.

Lxod.  17.  4.  the  people  be  almost  r.  to  stone  me
19.  11.  and  be  r.  against  the  third  day,  15.

34.  2.  be  r.  in  the  morning,  and  come  up  to  Sinai
Hum.  32.  17.  we  will  go  r.  armed  before  Israel
Vent.  1.  41.  ye  were  r.  to  go  up  into  the  hill
26.  5.  a  Syrian  r.  to  perish  was  my  father
Josh.  4.  +  13.  about  40,000  r.  armed  pass  over
8.  4.  go  not  far  from  the  city,  but  be  ye  all  /

1  Sam.  25.  18.  Abigail  took  five  sheep  r.  dressed

2  Sam.  15.  15.  thy  servants  are  r.  to  do  whatsoever
18  22.  why  run,  seeing  thou  hast  no  tidings  r .  ?

Ezra"/.  6  Ezra  was  a  r.  scribe  in  the  law  of  Moses
Heh.  9.  17.  but  thou  art  a  God  r.  to  pardon
Esth.3. 14.  they  should  be  r.  against  that  day,  8. 13
Joh  3.  8.  who  are  r.  to  raise  up  their  mourning
12.  5.  lie  that  is  r.  to  slip  with  his  feet
15.  23.  knoweth  the  day  ot  darkness  is  r.  at  hand
£4.  anguish  shall  prevail  as  a  king  r.  to  battle

28.  in  houses  which  are  r.  to  become  heaps

17 .  1.  my  days  are  extinct,  the  graves  are  tor  me

18.  12.  and  destruction  shall  be  r.  at  his  side

29.  13.  the  blessing  of  him  r.  to  perish  came  on  me
32  10.  my  belly  is  r.  to  burst  like  new  bottles
P7al.  38.  17.  for  l  am  r.  to  halt,  and  my  sorrow
45.  1.  my  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a  r.  writer

86.  5.  thou,  Lord,  art  good,  and  r.  to  forgive
88.  15.  1  am  afflicted,  and  r.  to  die  from. my  youth
Prov.  24.  11.  to  deliver  those  that  are  r.  to  be  slain
31  6  give  strong  drink  to  him  that  is  r.  to  perish
Eccl.  5.  1.  be  more  r.  to  hear  than  to  give  sacrifice
Jsa.  27.  13.  they  shall  come  who  were  r.  to  perish

30.  13.  this  iniquity  shall  be  as  a  breach  r.  to  fall
32.  4.  the  tongue  of  stammerers  be  r.  to  speak  plain
38.  20.  the  Lord  was  r.  to  save  me,  we  will  sing
41.  7.  saying,  it  is  r.  for  the  soldering,  he  fastened
51.  13.  the  oppressor,  as  if  he  were  r.  to  destroy

Van.  3.  15.  now  if  ye  be  r.  to  fall  down  and  worship
Mat.  22.  4.  fatlings  are  killed,  and  all  things  are  r.

8.  then  saith  he,  the  wedding  is  r.  Luke  14.  17.

24.  44.  therefore  be  ye  also  r.  Luke  12.  40.

25.  10.  they  that  were  r.  went  in  with  him
Mark  14.  38.  the  spirit  is  r.  but  the  flesh  is  weak
Luke  7.  2.  a  centurion’s  servant  sick,  and  r.  to  die

22.  33.  Lord,  I  am  r.  to  go  with  thee  into  prison
John  7.  6.  my  time  not  come,  your  time  is  alway  r.
Acts  20.  7.  Paul  preached  to  them,  r.  to  depart

21.  13.  I  am  r.  not  to  be  bound  only,  but  to  die

23.  15.  we,  or  ever  he  come  near,  are  r.  to  kill  him
21.  now  are  r.  looking  for  a  promise  from  thee

Rom.  1.  15.  1  am  r.  to  preach  the  gospel  at  Home
£  Cor.  8.  19-  and  the  declaration  of  your  r.  mind

9.  2.  Achaia  was  r.  a  year  ago,  zeal  hath  provoked
3.  I  sent  brethren,  that,  as  I  said,  ye  may  be  r.

5.  that  the  same  might  be  r.  as  a  matter  of  bounty

12.  14.  the  third  time  I  am  r.  to  come  to  you

1  Tim.  3.  f  3.  must  not  be  r.  to  quarrel,  as  one  in  wine
6.  18.  that  ye  be  rich  in  good  works,  r.  to  distribute

2  Tim.  4.  6.  for  1  am  now  r.  to  be  offered

Tit.  3.  1.  put  in  mind  to  be  r.  to  every  good  work
Heh.  8.  13.  that  waxeth  old.  is  r.  to  vanish  away
1  Pet.  1 . 5.  salvation,  r.  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time

3.  15.  be  r.  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man

4.  5.  to  gi  ve  account  to  him  that  is  r.  to  judge  quick

386


1  Pet.  5.  2.  net  for  filthy  lucre,  but  ol  a  r.  mind
Rev.  3.  2.  strengthen  the  things  that  are  r.  to  die
J2.  4.  the  woman  which  was  r.  to  be  delivered
See  Made,  Mare.

REALM.

a  Citron.  20.  30.  the  r.  of  Jehoshaphat  was  quiet
'Ezra  7 .  13.  they  of  my  r.  who  are  minded  to  go
03.  why  should  there  be  wrath  against  the  1.  .

IJan  1  20.  he  found  them  better  than  all  in  his  r.

6.  3'.  the  king  thought  to  set  him  over  the  r.

9.  1.  Darius,  king  over  the  r.  of  the  Chaldeans
li.  2.  he  shall  stir  up  all  agamsrt  the  r.  ot  Grecia
REAP

Signifies,  [1]  To  cut  down  com,  Jam.  5.  4.  L2J  1°
receive  the  fruit  or  reward  of  our  works,  whether
good  or  had.  Gal.  6.7,8.  [3]  lo  expect  increases
Mat.  25.  26.  [4]  To  execute  judgment  on  anti¬
christ  and  his  adherents.  Rev.  14.  15.

Lev.  19.  9.  and  when  ye  r.  the  harvest,  23.  10,  22.

shall  not  wholly  r.  the  corners  of  thy  field
05.  5.  what  groweth  of  itseH  thou  shalt  not  r.

11.  in  jubilee  ye  shall  neither  sow  nor  r.

Ruth  2.  9.  let  thine  eyes  be  on  the  field  they  r.

1  Sam.  8.  12.  set  your  servants  to  r.  his  harvest
0  Linns  19. 29.  in  third  year  sow  and  r.  Isa.  3/ .  30.
fob  4.  8.  they  that  sow  wickedness  r.  the  same
04  6  they  r.  every  one  Ins  corn  in  the  held
Ps'aL  126.  5.  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  r.  in  joy
Prov.  22.8.  he  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  r.  vanity
Eccl.  11.  4.  he  that  regardeth  the  clouds  shall  not  r.
fer  1°  13.  they  have  sown  wheat  but  shall  r.  thorns
//m. 8  7. have  sown  wind,  they  shall  r.the  whirlwind
10  1°.  sow  in  righteousness  /'.  in  mercy
Mic.  6.  15.  thou  shalt  sow,  butshalt  not  r.

Mat  6  °6.  the  fowls  of  the  air  r.  not,  Luke  12.24.

25.  26.  thou  knewest  I  r.  where  1  sowed  not
John  4.  38.  to  r.  whereon  ye  bestowed  no  labour
1  Cor.  9.  11.  if  we  shall  r.  your  carnal  things
0  Cor  9.6.he  which  soweth  sparing  y  sha  1  r. sparing,
he  which  soweth  bountifully  shall  r.  bounti-

Gal  fi^^whatever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  r.

8. ‘soweth  to  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh  r.  corruption,
to  Spirit,  shall  of  the  Spirit  r.  life  everlasting
9  in  due  season  we  shall  r.  if  we  taint  not
Rev  14.  15.  thrust  in  thy  sickle  and  r.  tor  the  time
is  come  for  thee  to  r.  for  the  harvest  is  ripe
REAPED.

[Jos  10  13.  ye  have  plowed  wickedn.  ye  r .  iniquity
Jam.  5.  4.  the  hire  of  labourers,  which  r.  down  your
fields,  the  cries  of  them  which  r.  are  entered
Rev.  14.  16.  thrust  in  his  sickle,  the  earth  was  r.
REAPER .

■\mos  9  13.  the  plowman  shall  overtake  the  r.
REAPERS.

Ruth  2.  3.  Ruth  gleaned  in  the  field  after  the  r.

4.  Boaz  said  to  the  r.  the  Lord  be  with  you
7.  T  pray  you,  let  me  glean  after  the  r.

2  Lings  4.  18.  he  went  out  to  his  father  to  the  r .

Mat.  13.  30. 1  will  say  to  the  r.  gather  the  tares
39  the  enemy  is  the  devil,  and  r.  are  the  angels
REAPEST.

f,ev.  23.  22.  not  make  clean  riddance  when  thou  r.
Luke' 19.  21.  and  thou  r.  that  thou  didst  not  sow
REAPETI1.

Jsa.  17.5.  the  harvest-man  r.  the  ears  with  his  arm
John  4.36.  he  that  r.  receiveth  wages,  that  both  he
that  soweth  and  he  that  r.  may  rejoice  together
37  that  sayintr  is  true,  one  soweth  and  another  r.
REAPING.

1  Sam.  6.  13.  and  they  of  Beth  shemesh  were  r.

Mat  25.  24.  Ld.  1  knew  that  thou  art  an  hard  man,
r.  where  thou  hast  not  sown,  Luke  19.  22.
REASON  ,  ,  ,

Signifies,  [1]  That  faculty  of  the  soul  whereby  we
judge  of  things,  Dan.  4.  .36.  2]  ProoJ ,  ground,

or  argument ,  1  Pet.  3.  15.  [3]  lo  confer,  dispute,

or  argue.  Mat.  16.  8.  Mark  8.  16.  .  .  .

Reasonable  service,  Rom.  12.  1.  The  spiritual
sacrifice  of  a  Christian,  offering  not  the  bodies  of
unreasonable  beasts,  as  they  were  wont  to  do
under  the  law ;  but  himself  wholly  being  a  rea¬
sonable  creature,  as  a  sacrifice  unto  Cod  his
Creator  and  Redeemer,  which  is  a  most  reasonable
thing,  to  do  him  service  and  obedience  in  all  things,
according  to  his  revealed  will,  which  is  a  veiy
reasonable  rule.

Reasonable  service,  in  Greek,  XoyiKii  Aurpeia,
may  be  such  as  will  be  agreeable  to  the  notion  of
6  Ao-yo?,  the  Word,  as  it  signifies  Christ,  and
then  it  is  the  Christian  service.  Jt  may  be  as
Ao'vor  signifies  the  word,  or  scripture,  and  then
it  will  be  that  worship  which  is  prescribed  us  m
the  scripture.  It  may  be  as  X070?,  word ,  is  op¬
posed  to  voixos,  law,  and  then  it  will  he  the
evangelical  worship.  Or  it  may  be  such  a  wor¬
ship  of  God  as  is  most  agreeable  to  reason,  as  is

before  observed.  ...  ,.  ,  ...

1  Lings  9.  15.  and  this  is  the  r.  ot  the  levy,  which
Prov.  26.  16.  than  seven  men  that  can  render  ar.
Eccl.  7.  25.  1  applied  to  search  the  r.  ot  things
t  27.  weighing  one  by  one  to  find  out  the  1 .

Dan.  4.  36 Tat  the  same  time  my  r.  returned  to  me
.  lets  6.  2.  it  is  not  r.  we  should  leave  the  word
18.  14.  O  ye  lews,  would  that  1  should  bear

1  Pet  3. 15.  that  asketh  you  a  r.  of  the  hope  m  you

By  REASON.  .

Gen.  41.  .31.  pie nt v  not  known  by  r.  of  that  famine
47.  13.  land  of  Canaan  fainted  by  r.  of  the  famine
Fxod  2  23.  Israel  sighed  by  r.  ot  the  bondage
3  7.'  I  heard  their  cry  by  r.  of  their  task-masters
8.  24.  the  land  was  corrupted  by  it  of  the  Hies
Xum.  9.  10.  if  any  be  unclean  by  r.  of  a  dead  body
18.  8.  the  hallowed  things  given  by  r.  of  anointing
32  shall  bear  no  sin  by  r.  of  it,  when  ye  heaved
Dent.  5.  5.  for  ye  were  afraid  by  r.  pi  the  tire
Josh.  9. 13.  our  shoes  are  become  old  by  r.  pt  journey
+  14.  they  received  the  men  by  r.  ot  their  victuals
Judo. 2.  18.  for  it  repented  the  L.  for  their  groanmgs
J  by  r.  of. them  that  oppressed  and  vexed  them

1  Kings  14.  4.  Ahiiah's  eyes  were  set  byr  of  age

2  Chr  b.  14.  notable  to  minister  he-  r.  ot  the  cloud


2  Chr.  20.  15.  be  not  atraid  by  r.  of  this  great  multit.

21 .  15.  thy  bowels  fall  out,  by  r ,  ot  the  sickness,  19.
Job  f>.  16.  brooks  are  blackish,  by  r.  of  the  ice
17  7.  mine  eye  also  is  dim  by  . .  ot  sorrow
31  23.  by  r.  of  his  highness  1  could  not  endure
35  9  by  r.  of  oppressions  they  make  the  oppressed
'cry,  they  cry  out  by  r.  of  the  arm  of  the  mighty
37  19  we  cannot  order  speech  by  r .  ot  darkness
4l’  05.  by  r.  of  breakings  they  purify  themselves
Psaf.  38.  8.  roared  by  r.  of  disquietness  ot  my  heai
44.  16.  that  blasphemeth  by  r.  ot  the  enemy
78.65.  a  mighty  man  thatshouteth  by  r.  ot  wine
88^  9.  mine  eye  mourneth  by  r.  of  affliction
90.  10.  it  by  r.  of  strength  they  be  fourscore  years
10"  5  by  r.  of  my  groan,  my  bones  cleave  to  ski
Prov.  20.  4.  the  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  r.  ot  col
Jsa.  49. 19-  too  narrow,  by  r.  of  the  inhabitants
Ezek.  19.  10.  full  of  branches  Ay  r.  ot  many  waters
21.  12.  terrors  Ay  r.  of  sword  shall  be  on  my  people
26".  10.  by  r.  of  the  abundance  ot  his  horses
28.  17.  Tyrus  corrupted  Ay  r.  ot  thy  brightness
Dan.  8.  12.  an'host  given  him  Ay  r.ot  transgression
Jonah  2.2.  I  cried  Ay  r.  ot  niy  affliction  to  the  Ld.
Mic.  2.  12.  shall  make  great  noise  Ayr.  of  multitude
John  6.  18.  the  sea  arose  Ay  r.  of  a  great  wind
12.  11.  Ay  r.  of  him  many  believed  on  Jesus
Rom.  8. 20.  Ay  r.  of  him  who  subjected  same  in  hope
2  Cor.  3.  10.  Ay  r.  of  the  glory  that  excelled!

Jieb  5  3  Ay  r.  hereof  he  ought  to  otter  for  the  sins
14]  who  Ay  r.  of  use  have  their  senses  exercised  jd
7.  23.  priests  not  suffered  to  continue  Ay  r.  ot  death  j
2  Pet.  2. 2.  Ay  r.  of  whom  way  ot  truth  evil  spoken  ot
Rev.  8.  13.  Ay  r.  of  the  other  voices  of  the  trumpet
9.  2.  sun  and  air  were  darkened  Ay  r.  ot  the  smoke
18.  19.  all  made  rich  Ay  r.  of  the  costliness
REASON,  Verb.

1  Sam.  12.  7.  that  I  may  r.  with  you  before  the  Ld.  .
Job  9.  14.  and  choose  out  my  words  to  r.  with  you
13.3.  si  rely  1  would  speak  and  desire  to  r.  with  G
15.  3.  should  he  r.  with  unprofitable  talk  .

Isa.  1.  18.  come  now  and  let  us  r.  together
Jer.  12.  +  1.  let  me  r.  the  case  with  thee
Mat.  16.  8.  Jesus  said,  why  r.  ye  a’V°np  „  Tf
because  ye  have  no  bread  ?  Mark  ..  8.  I  8.  17
Luke  5.  21.  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  began  to  r.

00  Jesus  said  to  them ,  what  r.  ve  in  your  hearts  n
REASONABLE.

Rom.  12. 1.  living  sacrifice,  which  is  your  r.  service:  J
REASONABLY.

Heb.  5.  t  2.  who  can  r.  bear  with  the  ignorant

REASONED.  .  ’

Mat.  16.  7.  and  they  r.  among  themselves,  21.  lo
Mark  8.  16.  I  11.  31.  Luke  20. 5.  j
Mark 2.  8.  when  Jesus  perceived  that  they  so  r.
Luke  20.  14.  the  husbandmen  r.  among  themselve  |


2-4.'  1 5.~ "while  they  r.  Jesus  himself  drew  near
Arts  17.  2.  three  sabbaths  Paul  r.  with  them
18.  4.  he  r.  in  the  synagogue  every  sabbath
19  Paul  r.  with  the  Jews  at  Ephesus
04  "5  and  as  he  r.  of  righteousness  and  judgmei
*  '  REASONING.

Job  13.  6.  hear  now  my  r.  and  hearken  to  pleading
Luke  9.  46.  then  there  arose  a  r.  among  them
Acts  28  29.  the  Jews  departed,  and  had  greatr.  ■
REASONING.  .  .

Mark  2.  6.  there  were  certain  scribes  r.  in  their  heal
12  28.  and  having  heard  them  r.  together

REASONINGS.  I

O  qot  10.  t  5.  casting  down  r.  and  every  high  tnn

Reasons.

Job  32. 11.  behold  I  waited,  and  gave  ear  to  yoin
Isa  41  21.  bring  forth  your  r.  saith  king  ot  Jaco  I
REBEL.  ,  j|

To  rebel  is  to  fight  or  make-war  against  a  Aiuyl I
sovereign,  as  Absa'om  did  against  bis, father  Uau  I
2  Sam.  15.  10,  Ac.  Or  to  cast  off  the  yoke  of]  I
lawful  governor,  as  Korah  and  A  biram.A  um.m
1  o  S,c.  Rebellion  cometh  of  the  Hebrew  awl
Marah,  which  signifies  bitterness,  because  reb»  S
lion  is  a  thing  distasteful  unto  God,  and  provo  \
him  to  anger.  Men  are  said  to  rebel,  GJ.Affan j]


the  Lord,  Num.  14.  9.  .[2]  Against


his  WOP  1


_  UUl.  it.  L-J  .

Psalm  107.  11.  [3]  Against  his  Spirit,  isa.  t

10.  [4]  Against  an  earthly  king,  1  Kin_s  1..

Xum.  14.  9.  only  r.  not  against  the  Lord,  nor  fej
Josh.  1.  18.  whosoever  doth  r.  he  shall  die
22.  16.  ye  have  builded  an  altar  that  ye  might ,  j
18.  seeing  that  ye  r.  to-day  against  the  E"rd
19  r.  not  against  the  Lord,  nor  r.  against  us  I
"9  God  forbid  that  we  should  r.  against  the
1  Sam.  12.  14.  if  ve  will  obey  and  not  r.  ag.  E01  J
15.  and  if  ye  will  not  obey  the  Lord,  but  r.

V eh.  2.  19.  what  do  ye  ?  will  ye  r.  against  the  Kir
6.  6.  saith  it,  that  thou  and  the  Jews  think  to  r.
fob  24.  13.  they  are  ot  those  that  r.  against  the  HF
Psa'l.  78.  t  40.'  how  oft  did  they  r.  against  him  .  .

1. 20.  if  ye  refuse  and  r.  ye  shall  be  devour
Jlos  7  14.  they  assemble  for  corn,  and  r .  against-
*'  REBELLED.

Gen.  14.  4.  and  in  the  thirteenth  year  they  r.
Xum.  20.  24.  because  ye  r.  ag.  my  words  at  wa
of  Meribah,  27-  14.  Dent.  1.  26,  4.  .  19-

1  Linns  12.  19.  Rehoboam  fled,  so  Israel  •.  ag. -

liouse  of  David  unto  this  day,  2  Cbrcn.  10.<

2  Kings  1.  1.  Moab  against  Israel,  3,5, j.

18.  7.  Uezekiah  r.  against  the  king  ot  Assj  na

24.  1.  Jehoiakim  r.  against  N ebuchadnezzai

20.  Zedekiah  r.  2  Chron.  .36.  13.  Jer.  5-.  3.
o  Chron.  1.3.  6.  Jeroboam  hath  r.  against  ms  IT
Ye  A.  9.  26.  they  were  disobedient,  and  i.  a„si.  1
PsaL  5.  10.  for  they  have  r.  against  thee
105.  28.  and  they  r.  not  against  ns  wo-Tt
107.  11.  because  they  r.against  the  words  ot  G
Jsa.  1. 2.  1  have  nourished  children,  and  t.iej _ua
63  10.  but  they  r.  and  vexed  his  Holy  ap’.ru
Lam.  1.  18.  I  have  r.  11  20.  I  have  grievousb  T\

3  42.  we  have  r.  thou  hast  not  pardoned
E*ek  2.  3.  1  send  thee  to  a  nation  that  fiatn  •[.
17  15.  he  r.  in  sending  his  ambassadors  to  r-
20!  8.  but  they  r.  against  me,  13,  21.

Dan.  9.  5.  we  have  r.  by  departing  from  thee
9  to  our  God  mercy,  though  we  have  r.  ae.


R  E  B


R  E  C


Hot.  13.  16.  Samaria  hath  r.  against  her  God
REBELLEsT.

2  Kings  18.  CO.  Rab  shakeh  said  to  Hezekiah,  on
whom  dost  thou  trust,  that  thou  r. !  Isa  36  5
REBELLION.

J7*  +  10;  asa  token  against  the  children  of  r.
Defu.  VL.jn.  tor  I  knowthv  r.  and  thy  stiff  neck
Tosh.  22.  22.  Isiael  he  shalf  know  it  it  be  in  r
1  &am.  15.  23.  r.  is  as  the  sin  of  witchcraft

20.  t  30.  thou  son  of  perverse  r.  do  not  I  know
Ezra  4.  19.  and  that  r.  hatli  been  made  therein

r  l  o?'oJ'.-an<i  ln  t1h?ii;  r •  appointed  a  captain
ob  34.  37.  tor  he  addeth  r.  unto  his  sin
rov.  17.  11.  an  evil  man  seeketh  only  r.

,Vr.  28.  16.  because  thou  hast  taught  r.  29.  32.

\,zek.  2.  t  7.  whether  hear  or  forbear,  they  are  r

n  _  REBELLIOUS.

Dent.  91  7.  ye  have  been  r.  ag.  the  Lord,  21. 1  31.  27.

21.  18.  it  a  man  have  a  stubborn  and  r.  son

20.  they  shall  say,  this  our  son  is  stubborn  and  r.
Sam.  20.  30.  thou  son  ot  the  perverse  r.  woman
S,zra,  t*  *2-  building  the  r.  and  the  bad  city,  15.
sa/.  66.  1 .  let  not  the  r.  exalt  themselves
08.  6.  but  the  r.  dwell  in  a  dry  land
r  18.  yea,  tor  the  r.  also  ||  78.  8.  and  a  r.  generation
ia.  1.  *.3.  thy  princes  are  r.  companions  of  thieves
30.  1.  woe  to  the  r.  children,  saith  the  Lord
9.  this  is  a  r.  people  ||  50.  5.  I  was  not  r.

00.  2.  I  have  spread  out  my  hands  to  a  r.  people
ff-f  v17 1 S., e  liath  b,ee\1  a"ainst  me,  saith  Lord
••  thls  P?'>ple  hath  a  revolting  and  r.  heart

jif*\  "  ’**  son  ,nan>  1  send  thee  to  a  r.  nation
0.  they  are  a  r.  house,  6, 7.  |  3.  9, 26,  27.  I  12.  2  3.
m'  ni?ttb<?u  '"•  like  that  r.  house,  open  thy  mouth
L.  2.  thou  dwellest  in  the  midst  of  a  r.  house

17.  12.  sav  now  to  the  r.  house,  know  ve,  44.  6.

.4.  3.  and  utter  a  parable  to  the  v.  house
'  REBELS.

,Fn'r}  <  •  RR  Aaron’s  ro<J  kept  for  a  token  ag.  the  r.
.0. 10.  nloses  and  Aaron  said,  hear  now,  ye  r.

?r.  50.  t  21.  go  up  against  the  land  of  r.

,j^.2.  t  6.  though  r.  and  thorns  be  with  thee
.0.  38.  1  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the  r.

„  REBUKE,  Substantive,
exit.  .8.  20.  the  Lord  shall  send  on  thee  r.

Kings  19.  3.  this  is  a  day  of  r.  Isa.  37.  3.
sal.  18.  15.  at  thy  r.  at  the  blast  of  thy  nostrils
l  ^  ~  e  horse  cast  into  a  dead  sleep
0.  16.  they  perish  at  the  r.  of  thy  countenance
9R  ';at,tlly  r’  tied,  they  hasted  away
rer.  1.3.  1.  butascorner  heareth  notr.

i.  but  the  poor  heareth  not  r.

*.  5.^open  r.  is  better  than  secret  love
cci.  7.  5.  it  is  better  to  hear  the  r.  of  the  wise
a.  Co.  8.  the  r.  of  his  people  shall  he  take  away
J.  17.  thousand  shall  hee  at  the  r.  of  one  at  the

->  o  k'ui  ?ve  *lla11  >’e  Hee,  till  left  as  a  beacon
J.  2.  behold,  at  my  r.  I  dry  up  the  sea
1.20.  thy  sons  lie  full  of  th'e  r.  of  thy  God

j.  15.  to  render  his  r.  with  flames  of  fire
r.  15.  15.  know  that  for  thy  sake  I  suffered  r.

?s.:  f  9.  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of  r.

“I ■—  IP*  without  r.  hi^inidst^of  a  perverse  nation

mifies,  [1]  To  reprove  or  check ,  Lev.  ly  17  roi
r°  restrain,  Zech.  3.  2.  Jude  9.  [3]  To  silence,
f  command  persons  to  hold  their  peace,  Luke  19
-9.  L4J  lo  convince  of  sin,  and  bring  to  revent-
mce,  Isa.  2.  4.  [5]  To  cure,  Luke  4.  39.  [6]  j'o
hasten,  afflict,  or  correct,  Psal.  6.  1.

w1o9-,1/-ih0.u!halt  in  any  wise  r.  thy  neighbour
’t/i  ..  16.  that  she  may  glean  them,  and  r.  her  not
T°c'  look  thereon,  and  r.  it

a 6.  1*  O  Lord,  r .  me  not  in  thine  ancer,  38  1
'•  •*)•  T •  the  company  of  spear-men,  the  bulls
ov-9-8‘,r-  a  wise  man,  and  he  will  love  thee
.  Co.  to  them  that  r.  him  shall  be  delight
!.  4.  he  shall  r.  many  nations,  Mic.  4  3

.  13.  the  nations  rush,  but  God  shall  r.  them
.  9.  1  would  not  be  wroth  with,  nor  r.  thee
h.  3.  2.  Lord  said  to  Satan,  the  Lord  r.  thee
even  the  Lord  that  hath  chosen  Jerusalem’
r.  thee

j;  ?>JR  1  'l11  r:  the  devourer  for  your  sakes
t.  6.  22.  P^ter  began  to  r.  him,  Mark  8.  32.

h.3.  it  thy  bi other  trespass  r.  him
.39.  some  said,  Master,  r.  thy  disciples
tm  o.  1.  r.  not  an  elder,  but  entreat  him
,.-  th£m  that  sin,  r.  before  all,  that  others  may  fear
4A2,  r-  exhort,  with  all  long-suffering
;  “  ly*. wherefore  r.  them  sharply,  2.  15
e  9.  Michael  said,  the  T.ord  r.  thee
3. 19.  as  man y^  as^ l  ^  I oy e ^1  r.  and  chasten

God  hath  seen  and'r.  thee  yesternight
r  k  J?1S  ^H^er  T •  him,  and  said  to  him
*;  £  7.  and  I  r.  the  nobles  and  the  rulers
;  9-5.  hast  r.  the  heathen,  thou  hast  destroyed
"1  r-  ,e  Red  sea  also,  and  it  was  dried  up
••Rthou  hast  r.  the  proud  that  are  cursed
f.  8.  26.  he  r.  the  wind,  Mark  4.  39.  Luke  8.  24.

18.  Jesus  r.  devil,  and  he  departed  out  of  him
13.  disciples  r.  them,  Mark  10.  13.  Luke  18.  15.

•51.  the  multitude  r.  the  blind  men
l*  R  -5.  he  r  the  devil,  9.  25.  Luke  4.  35.  I  9.  42.

1  .  r'  Pe,?r>  get  thee  behind  me

_e  4.  .39.  he  stood  over  her  and  r.  the  fever
*?•  huul  'esus  turned,  and  r.  James  and  John
in'  they  that  went  before  r.  the  blind  man
die  other  thief  answering  r,  him

*  o*  faint  when  thou  art  r.  of  him

tt*  16.  but  Balaam  was  r.  tor  his  iniquity

t  rebuker.

•  b.  2.  though  I  have  been  a  r.  of  them  all

REBUKETH.

L’ 9-  1  -  he  that  r.  a  wicked  man  getteth  a  blot
r’;  he  mat  r.  a  man,  after  shall  find  more  favour
's  5.  10.  they  hate  him  that  r.  in  the  gate
!*  R  4*  "e  r.  the  sea,  and  maketli  it  <lry
REBUKES.

39.  1R  when  thou  with  r.  dost  correct  man
s.  1j.  execute  judgments  in  furious  r.  25. 17,


R  E  C


REBLTKING.

2  Sam.  22.  16.  foundations  discovered  at  r.  of  Lord
REBUKING,  Participle.

Luke  A.  41.  he  r.  them,  suffered  them  not  to  speak
RECALL.

Lam.  3.  21.  this  I  r.  to  mind,  therefore  I  hope
RECEIPT.

Mat.  9.9.  as  Jesus  passed,  he  saw  Matthew  siftin''
at  the  r.  ot  custom,  Mark  2. 14.  Luke  5  27
c.  .„  ,  RECEIVE  '

Signifies,  [1]  To  take  what  is  given,  paid,  or  pvt
into  one  s  hands,  2  Sam.  18.  12.  2  Kings  5.  26.
[2]  To  contain,  1  Kings  8.  64.  [3]  To  enter

tain,  lodge,  or  harbour.  Acts  28.  2,  7.  [4]  7’,.

hear  with,  or  suffer,  2  Cor.  11.  16.  [5]  To

hearken  to,  Prov.  2.  1.  [6]  To  believe.  Mat.  11.
14.  John  1,  12.  [7]  To  give,  Rev.  13. +16.  [8l
Lo  attend  and  assent  to.  Mat.  13.  20.  [9]  J'o

admit  one  to  be  a  member  of  the  church,  Rom.

R  .  [10]  J'o  be  endued  with.  Acts  1.  8.  [Il  l
Lo  enjoy  and  possess,  Ileb.  10.  36.  [121  J'o


./  cs  _  //I'uovaoj  4  1  CO,  JUi  .)U,

near  patiently  and  thankfully,  Job  2.  10.  [131

lo  be  rewarded,  Mat.  10.  41.  [14]  To  hate


Hos.  10.  6.

Exod.  29.  25.  thou  slialt  r.  the  wave  offering
Num.  18.28.  shall  offer  all  your  tithes  which  you  r
Lieut.  33.  3.  every  one  shall  r.  of  thy  words
1  Sam.  10.  4.  which  thou  shalt  r.  of  their  hands
7  18. 12.  though  I  should  r.  a  thousand  shekels

l  Kings 5.  9.  and  thou  shalt  r.  the  cedar  and  fir
Job  2.  10.  shall  we  r.  good  at  the  hand  of  God
27- 13.  which  they  shall  r.  of  the  Almighty
PsaL  6.  9.  the  Lord  will  r.  my  prayer
24.  5._  he  shall  r.  the  blessing  from  the  Lord
49.  15.  God  will  redeem  my  soul,  for  he  shall  r.  me
7-3.  24.  guide  me,  and  afterward  r.  me  to  glory
75.  2.  when  1  shall  r.  the  congregation  I  will  judo,.
Prov.".  l.  my  son,  if  thou  wilt  r.  my  words
10.  8.  the  wise  in  heart  will  r.  commandments
Isa.  5~ .  6.  offering,  should  T  r.  comfort  in  these  ?
Kzek.  16.  61.  be  ashamed,  when  thou  shalt  r.  sisters
JJan.".  6.  ye  shall  r.  of  me  gifts  and  rewards
Hos.  10.  6.  Ephraim  shall  r.  shame,  and  Israel
Mic.  1.  11.  he  shall  r.  of  you  his  standing
<-evh.  3.  7.  I  said,  thou  wilt  r.  instruction
Mat.  10.41.  a  prophet,  he  shall  r.  a  prophet's  reward,
a  righteous  man  shall  r.  a  righteous  man’s  reward
11.5.  the  blind  r.  their  sight,' the  lame  walk
14.  lfye  will  r.  it,  this  is  Elias  which  was  to  come

18.  5.  whoso  shall  r.  one  such  little  child  in  my
name,  receiveth  me,  Mark  9.  37.  Luke  9.  48,

19.  11.  he  said,  all  men  cannot  r.  this  savin°-
29.  he  shall  r.  an  hundred  fold,  Mark  10  30

20.  7.  and  whatsoever  is  right,  that  shall  ye  r
21. 22.  whatsoever  ye  ask,  believing,  ye  shall  V.

34.  that  they  might  r.  the  fruits  of  it
23. 14.  long  prayers,  therefore  ye  shall  r.  the  greater
71  r  ,  .  damnation,  Mark  12.40.  Luke  20.  47.
Mark  4.  16.  r.  the  word  with  gladness,  Luke  8.  13.

.0.  these  are  such  as  hear  the  word  and  r.  it
10.  51.  Lord,  that  1  might  r.  my  sight,  Luke  18.  41
£4-  ,  e,n  ye  Pra>’>  heIieve  that  ve  r.  them
12.  2.  that  he  might  r.  from  the  husbandmen
Luke  10.  8.  whatsoever  city  ye  enter,  and  they  r.

16.  4.  that  they  ma}’  r.  me  into  their  houses
9*  ™ey  may  r.  you  into  everlasting  habitations

r  /  4!'  i0r  .T?  T\  Ple  ciue  reward  of  our  deeds
John  5.  43.  if  m  his  own  name,  hi*n  ye  will  r.

_44- hpw  can  believe,  which  r.  honour  one  of  anoth.

1  •  a  on  sabbath  r.  circumcision
39.  this  spake  ot  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  be-
o  .ve  f,?  him  should  r.  Holy  Ghost  not  given
]R  1  will  come  again,  and  r.  you  to  myself
lb.  14.  tor  he  shall  r.  of  mine,  and  shew  it  to  you
~4.  ask  ye  shall  r.  that  your  joy  may  be  full
1*  8.  but  ye  shall  r.  power  after  that  Holy  Gh
2.  38.  and  ye  shall  r.  the  gift  ot  the  Holy  Ghost  '

■i.  21.  Jesus,  whom  heavens  must  r.  till  restitution

8.  15.  prayed,  that  they  might  r.  the  Holy  Ghost
IQ.onwhoms.  1  lay  hands,  may  r.  the  Holy  Ghost

9.  12.  hands  on  him,  that  he  might  r.  his  s'ight

17.  Jesus  sent  me,  that  thou  mightesf  r.  thy  sight

o/P  beReveth,  shall  r.  remission  of  sins

-6.  18.  that  they  may  r.  forgiveness  of  sins

more  they  which  r.  abundance  of  grace
10  n  ^ilat  resist  shall  r.  to  themselves  damnation
16.  2.  that  ye  r.  her  in  Lord,  as  beeometh  saints
1  evel7  rnar>  shall  r.  his  own  reward

^ 4.  it  Ills  W'ork  abide,  he  shall  r.  a  reward
4.  ( ._  11  thou  didst  r.  it,  why  dost  thou  glory  ?

14.  0.  that  the  church  may  r.  edifying
~P°Jj  10.  that  every  ime  may  r.  the  things  done
6.  17.  touch  not  unclean  thing,  and  I  will  r.  you
7-  9.  that  ye  might  r.  damage  by  us  in  nothin^-

8.  4.  praying  us,  that  we  would  r.  the  gift  °

‘74i°r.  X.e  r*  ano,h.er  spirit  ye  have  not  received
LraL  3. 14.  that  we  might  r.  promise  of  the  Spirit

4.  o.  that  we  might  r.  the  adoption  of  sons

o.  8.  (he  same  shall  he  r.  of  the  T  ord
LoL  3.  24.  ye  shal II  r.  the  reward  of  the  inheritance
-5.  he  shall  r.  tor  the  wrong  he  hath  done
Philem.  15.  that  thou  shouldest  r.  him  for  ever
Ueb.  7.  5.  sons  ot  Levi,  who  r.  office  of  priesthood
8.  and  here  men  that  die  r.  tithes

9.  15.  which  are  called  might  r.  promise,  10.  36.

11.8.  he  should  after  r.  for  an  inheritance

yam.  1.7.  that  man  think  he  shall  r.  any  thinsr
1C.  when  tried,  he  shall  r.  the  crown  of  life
3.  1.  knowing,  we  shall  r.  greater  condemnation

5. (.  until  lie  r.  the  early  and  latter  rain
1  let.  5.  4.  ye  shall  r.  a  crown  of  glory,  fadeth  not
~  let.  13.  shall  r.  the  reward  of  unrighteousness
l  John  Z.  22.  w  hatsoever  we  ask,  we  r.  of  him

5.  9.  if  we  r.  the  witness  of  men,  God  is  greater
*  John  H .  but  that  we  r.  a  full  reward
Liev.  14.  9.  if  any  man  r.  his  mark  in  his  forehead
17- 12.  but  r.  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  beast
RhX'EIVE,  Lmperatively.

Gen.  33. 10.  then  r.  my  present  at  my  hand
Job  22.  22.  r.  I  pray  thee,  the  law  from  his  mouth
Pr°v-  4. 10.  hear,  O  my  son,  and  r.  my  sayings
8.  10.  r.  my  instruction,  and  not  silver,  19.  20.


£  T9'  o2°vJety0}!r  ear  r- the  wo"'  of  "'outti
Kzek.  3.10,  r.  all  my  words  in  thine  heart
Hos.  14.  2.  say  to  him,  r.  us  graciously
Mat.  19.  12.  he  that  is  able,  let  him  r.  it
Luke  18.  42.  Jesus  saith,  r.  thy  sight,  Acts  ""  1  r

John  20.  22.  he  saith,  r.  ye  the  Holy  Ghost .

Acts  7.  59.  saying,  Lord  Jesus,  r.  my  spirit
irew.  14. 1.  him  that  r  weak  in  the  faith,  r.  ve
15.  (.  r.  ye  one  anomer, as  Christ  also  receive  I  u»
-  ,or-  <  ■  -•  r-  us-  we  ha'  e  wronged  no  man
11.  16.  yet  as  a  fool  r.  me,  that  1  may  boast
/  Ini.  2.  29.  r.  him  in  the  Lord  with  gladness


■  n


iff4.,  10*  and  Marcus*  if  he  come  unto  you.
t  Mem.  12.  r.  him  that  is  mine  own  bowels
lr .  it  thou  count  me  a  partner,  r.  him  as  mv pell
Jam.  1.  „1.  r.  with  meekness  the  ingrafted  word
o  rr-  -  RECEIVE,  Negatively.

5.  16.  but  Elisha  said,  I  will  r.  none
r  Vi'/'  n.°  V?ore  rll0ne5'  of  your  acquaintance
Jler  T71  ,1  ,?k  r.  good,  and  shall  we  not  r.  evil  •>
SRfkat  they  might  not  r.  instruction
‘R>’e  '.*  instruct,  tohearken  to  words  '

irfrfn  M'yeuShal1  r'  noum,<,)re  reproach  of  famine

Mat.  10.  14.  whosoever  shall  not  r.  you,  nor  hear
jJ  ^wonls  shake  ott  dust,  Mark  6.'  11 .  Luke  u  5
Mark  10.  15.  whosoever  shall  not  r.  the  kingdom  of
le  c|?‘l.d.  not  enter  therein,  /  tike  18.  1*.
Luke  9.  o3.  they  did  not  r .  him,  because  his  face  was
ir’  aIld  thseynr'  ^ou  not’  r°  into  the  streets
A/b3^’  „osha11  notr.  manifold  more  in  this  time
John  3.  11.  we  testify,  and  ye  r.  not  our  witness
W  .  a  man  can  r.  nothing,  except  it  be  given  him
o.  34.  but  I  r.  not  testimony  from  man
41.  I  r.  not  honour  from  men
43.  T  am  come  in  Father’s  name,  and  ye  r.  me  not
i4;  SP»nt  of  truth,  whom  the  world  cannot  r.
Jets  22. 18.  for  they  will  not  r.  thy  testimony

l  7V  Y,hat  hast  thou  tl,at  thou  didst  not  r  ?

:  yr-  R  that  ye  r.  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain
V!w;  °a  19‘  aSalnst  an  elder;-,  not  an  accusation

0T1  4in  ye.ask  and  T •  not>  because  ye  ask  amiss
-  John  10.  r.  him  not  into  your  house

3  John  10.  neither  Goth  he  himself  r.  the  brethren
Liev.  18.  4.  and  that  ye  r.  not  of  her  plagues
r  a  R  ECE1  VE,  Ivjinitive/y.

won  eau-h  °PeVed  jnouth  to  r.  brother's  blood
38.  20.  to  r.  his  pledge  horn  woman’s  hand

nZf;  X7\3'  ‘f1011  shalt  make  his  pans  tor.  his  ashes
Lieut.  9.  9.  when  I  was  gone  up  to  r.  the  tables
1  A  mgs  8.  64.  because  brazen  altar  before  L.  was  too
„  Tr.  ‘‘ttie  to  r.  the  burnt  offerings,  2  C/iron.  7.  7

o5ffiu'  Qd,-1S  11  tln'e  to  r;  n'one>'-  f°  r.  garments  J

12.  8.  the  priest  consented  to  r.  no  more  money
P/ov.  1.3.  to  r.  the  instruction  of  wisdom

Jlri  00  3;ubut  uhey  hav®  refHsed  t0  r •  correction
t1nyfihavein0iti  hearukened  tor.  instruction
Mat.  3.  10.  there  shall  not  he  room  enough  to  r  it
^•19-  12.  he  that  is  able  tor.  it,  let  him  r.  it
ra,  '■  f  iat  f"ere  v  as  110  r00m  to  r.  them
Snsn  34i  Pf  whom  ye  h°P£  t0  r-  as  much  again

19.  12.  nobleman  went  to  r.  for  himself  kingdom
16  21.  teach  customs  not  lawful  for  us  to  r

18.  27.  brethren  exhorting  the  disciples  to  r  him

20.  35.  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  r.'

A  John  8.  we  therefore  ought  to  r.  such

liev.  A.  11.  thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  r.  <dorv
o.  H  worthy  is  the  Lamb  to  r.  power  and  riches

13.  16.  causeth  to  r.  a  mark  in  their  right  hand
RECEIVED.

26.  H.'Tsaacr.  the  same  year  an  hundredfold
Exod.  32.  4.  and  Aaron  r.  them  at  their  hand
36.3.  and  they  r.  of  Moses  all  the  offering
\TonT  J4',  aR?rulhat  let  Miriam  be  r.  in'again
-3.20.  behold,  I  have  r.  commandment  to  bless
34.  14.  two  tribes  and  half  r .  inheritance,  15
36.  3.  their  inheritance  shall  he  put  to  the  inherit
ance  ot  ,he  tribe  whereunto  they  are  ?•  4
Josh  9.  +  14.  r.  the  men  by  reason  of  victuals
13.8.  the  Gadites  have  r.  their  inheritance
18.  2.  which  had  not  r.  their  inheritance
Judg.  13.  23.  he  would  not  have  r.  burnt  offering
1  Sam.  12.  3.  of  whose  hand  have  1  r.  any  bribe" r
25.  35.  David  r.  ot  Abigail  that  she  brought

1  ftiBfj  10.  28.  had  linen  yarn  from  Egypt,  king’s
nierchants  r.  linen  yarn  at  a  price, i.Chr  1  16

2  Kings  19.  14.  Hezekiah  r.  the  letter,  Isa,  37."  14."
1C /iron.  12.  18.  thine  are  we  ;  then  David  r.  them"
f'sth.  4.  4.  Esther  sent  raiment,  Mordecai  r.  it  not
Job  A.  12.  and  mine  ear  r.a  little  thereof

Psal.  68.  18.  thou  hast  r.  gifts  for  men
Prov.  24.  32.  I  looked  upon  it,  and  r.  instruction
Isa.  40.  2.  she  hath  r.  of  the  Lord’s  hand  double
Jer .  2.  30.  your  children,  they  r.  no  correction
Esek.  18.  17.  hath  notr.  usury  nor  increase
Zeph.  3.  2.  she  obeyed  not,  she  r.  not  correction
Mat.  10.  8.  cast  out  devils,  freely  ye  r.  freel  v  give
13.  19.  this  is  he  which  r.  seed  by  the  way  side
20.  r.  into  stony  ||22.  thorns  ||23.  good  ground
17-  24.  they  that  r.  tribute  money  came  to  Peter
20.  9.  when  came,  they  r.  every  man  a  penny,  10.

11.  and  when  they  had  r.  it,  they  murmured
34.  immediately  their  eyes  r.  sight,  followed  him

25.  16.  r  five  talents  ||  17.  r.  two  ||  18.  had  r.  one
27.1  should  have  r.  mine  own  with  usury
Mark  7.  4.  many  things  which  they  r.  to  hold
10.  52.  he  r.  his  sight,  Luke  18.  43.  Acts  9.  18.

15.  23.  gave  him  wine  with  myrrh,  but  r.  it  not

16.  19.  be  was  r.  up  into  heaven,  Acts  1.  9.

Luke  6.  24.  woe  to  rich,  for  ye  have  r.  vourconso*.

8.  40.  was  returned,  the  people  gladly  r.  him

9.  11.  r.  them,  and  spake  to  them  of  kingdom
51.  when  time  was  come  that  he  should  he  r.  up

10.  38.  and  Martha  r.  him  into  her  house

15.  27.  because  he  hath  r.  him  safe  and  sound
19.  6.  Zaccheuscame  down  and  r.  him  joyfully

15.  when  he  was  returned,  having  r.  kingdom
John  1.  11.  lie  came  to  his  own,  his  own  r.  him  nc-

12.  to  as  many  as  r .  him,  to  them  gave  he  power

16.  out  ot  fulness  have  all  we  r.  grace  tor  grace
.■>.  33.  he  that  hath  r.  testimony,  hath  set  his  seal
4.  45.  when  he  was  come,  Galileans  /.  him

6.  21.  then  they  willingly him  into  the  ship

387


REC


REC


REC


r.,in  Q.  ll.  I  went  and  washed,  and  I  sight
*  15  'Pharisees  asked  him  how  he  had  r.  his  sight
ih'  lews  did  not  believe  that  he  had  r.  his  sight
called  parents  of  him  that  had  r.  his  sight
10  18.  this  commandment  l  r.  ot  my  Lather
.o'oii  he  then  having  r.  the  sop,  went  out
l  V  8  have  given  them  thy  words,  and  they  r.  them
18  3.  .ludas  then  having  r.  a  band  of  men

19.  30.  when  .lesus  had  /;.  the  vinegar,  he  said


J d f  1  ' 9"  and  a  cloud  r .  h ini  o u t  of  their  sight


<7  *33  and  having  r.  of  the  Father  the  promise
2ai  thev  that  gladly  r.  his  word  were  baptized
3  7  immediately  feet  and  ancle  bones  r.  strengt
7’  k  who  r.  the  lively  oracles  to  give  unto  us
*53  who  have  r.  law  by  angels,  and  have  not  kept
o  Vl  heard  that  Samaria  had  r.  the  woid  of  God
17  laid  hands  on  them,  they  r.  the  Holy  Ghost
o1 19  when  he  had  r.  meat  he  was  strengthened
,0  16  the  vessel  was  r.  again  up  into  heaven

47  which  have  r.  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  we

U  \ heard  that  Gentiles  had  r.  the  word  of  God
is'  4'  when  come,  they  were  r.  ot  the  church  .

16*24  who  having  r.  such  charge,  thrust  them  into
17'  7  when  Jason  hath  r.  these  all  do  contrary
li  the  Bereans  r.  the  word  with  all  readiness
-in  2  have  ye  r.  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  believed  ?

20*  24.  the  ministry  which  1  have  r.  ot  the  Lord
5,  17.  when  we  were  come,  brethren  r.  us  gladly
2°  5  from  whom  l  r .  letters  to  the  bi  ethren
ofi*  10  having  r.  authority  from  the  chief  priests
or  2  barbarians  kindled  afire  and Ir.  us  everyone
7  Publius  r.  11s  I  30.  Paul  r.  all  that  came
21  we  neither  r.  letters  outof  .1  udea,  nor  brethren
1  5.  by  whom  we  have  r.  grace,  for  obedience
4  li  and  he  r.  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal
r.  1 1  hv  whom  we  have  now  r.  the  atonement
8  15  ye  have  notr.  the  Spiritof  bondage  again  to
fear,  but  ye  haver,  the  Spirit  of  adoption

14  3  iud?e  him  thatcateth,  for  God  hath  r.  him

15  7  receive  ye  one  another,  as  Chi  ist  also  r,  us

1  Cor  °  12.  we  have  r,  not  the  spirit  ot  the  world
4  7.  why'dost  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not  r.  it  ?

11.  23.  I  r.  of  the  Lord,  that  which  1  delivered
15.  1.  which  also  ye  have  r.  ||  3.  which  I  r.

2  Cor  4.  1.  as  we  have  r.  mercy  we  taint  not
7  15.'  how-  with  fear  and  trembling  ye  r.  him
11  4.  if  receive  anoth.  spirit,  which  ye  have  not  r

24.  of  the  Jews  five  times  r.  1  forty  stripes
Gal  1.  9.  preach  another  gospel  than  that  ye  have  r
10’  1  ;•  it  not  of  man,  neither  was  1  taught  it

3  2.  r.  ve  the  Spirit  by  the  works  ot  the  law  :

4!  14.  but  r.  me  as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ

Phil  4.  9-  the  things  ye  have  r.  and  seen  in  me,  do
t  18.  1  have  r.  all,  having  r.  of  Ivpaphroditus
Col  2.  6.  as  ye  have  r.  Christ,  so  walk  ye  m  him

4  10*.  touching  whom  ye  r.  commandments
17.  take  heed  to  the  ministry  thou  hast  r.  in  Lord

]  Thess.  1.  6.  having  r.  the  word  in  much  affliction
0  13  when  yer.  word,  r.  it  not  as  the  word  of  rnan
4*.  1.  as  ye  have  r.  of  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk
2  Thess  2.  10.  because  they  r.  not  the  love  of  truth
.3. '6.  not  after  the  tradition  which  he  r.  ot  us
1  Tim  3  lfi.  believed  on  m  world,  r.  up  intoglory
4  3  meats  which  God  hath  created  to  he  r.

4.  creature  is  good,  if  it  be  r.  with  thanksgiving
Ile'b  2  0  transgression  r.  just  recom pence  ot  reward
7  6  r.  tithes  of  Abrah.  and  blessed  him  that  had

il.’ for  under  it  the  people  r.  the  law

10  26  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  we  have  r. knowledge

11  *11  through  faith  Sarai  r.  strength  to  conceive
13  these  all  died,  not  having  r.  the  promises
17.  he  that  r.  promises  offered  up  his  only  son

19  from  whence  also  he  r.  him  in  a  hguie
31."  when  Rabat)  had  r.  the  spies,  Jam.  2.  25.

35.  women  r.  their  dead  raised  to  life  again
39’  these  all  having  obtained  a  good  report  thro

faith,  r.  not  the  promise,  God  having  provided

1  Pet.  1.’ 18.  from  your  vain  conversat.  r.  bytradit.

4  10.  as  everyone  hath  r.  the  gift,  so  minister

2  Pet.  1. 17.  for  he  r.  from  God  the  Father  honour

1  John  2*.  27*.  anointing  ye  have  r.  abideth  in  3  0 11

2  John  4.  as  we  have  r.  a  command  from  the  Lather
~Pev.  2.27.  give  power,  even  as  f  r.  ot  m3’  Father

.3.  3.  remember  now  thou  hast  r.  and  heard
17.  12.  ten  kings  who  have  r.  no  kingdom  as3’et
19.  20*.  them  that  had  r.  the  mark  of  the  beast

20  4  had  not  r.  the  mark,  reigned  with  Christ

RECE1VEDST.

Puke  16.  25.  thou  in  thy  lifetime  r.  thy  good  things

Isa.  33. 18.  where  is  the  scribe  ?  where  is  the  r.  ?
RECE1VETH.

Judo.  19.  18.  there  is  no  man  that  r.  me  to  house
Job  35.  7.  or  what  r.  he  of  thine  hand  -  .

Psal.  15.  +  3.  nor  r.  reproach  against  Ins  neighbour
Prov  21  11.  when  wise  is  instructed,  be  r.  knowl.
29.  4.  but  lie  that  r.  gifts,  overthroweth  it
Jer.  7.  28.  this  is  a  nation  that  r.  not  c  orrection
Mai.  2. 13. or  r.  offering  with  good-will  atyourhand
Mat.  7.  8.  every  one  that  asketh  r.  Luke  11.  10.

10.  40.  he  that  r.  you,  r.  me,  and  he  that  r.  me
r.  him  that  sent  me,  John  13.  20.
41.  he  that  r.  a  prophet,  that  r.  a  righteous  man
13  °0.  heareththe  word,  and  anon  r.  it  with  joy
18!  5.  one  such  little  child  in  my  name,  r.  me
Mark  9.37.  whosoever  shall  receive  me,  r.  not  me,
but  him  that  sent  me,  Luke  9.  48.
Luke  15.  2.  this  man  r.  sinners,  eateth  with  them
John  3.  32.  and  no  man  r.  his  testimony
4.  36.  he  that  reapeth  r.  wages,  and  gathereth
12.  48.  he  that  rejecteth  me,  and  r.  not  my  words
1  Cor.  Q.  24.  they  run  all,  but  one  r.  the  prize
Heb.  6.7.  for  the  earth  r.  blessing  from  God
7.8.  men  that  die  receive  tithes,  but  there  he  r
them, of  whom  it  is  witnessed  that  he  livetli
9.  Levi  who  r.  tithes,  paid  tithes  in  Abraham
12.  6.  anci  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  r .

Rev.  2.  17.  no  man  knoweth,  saving  lie  that  r.  it
14.  11.  whosoever  r.  the  mark  ot  his  name
RECEIVE!!!  not.

1  Cor.  2.  14.  natural  man  r.  rwt  the  things  of  God
John  9.  T  wrote,  but  Diotrephes  r.  us  not

388


RECEIVING.

2  Kings  5.  20.  spared  N  aaman,  in  not  r.  at  his  hands
dots  i7.  15.  and  r.  a  commandment  to  Leilas
Rom.  1.  27.  r.  in  themselves  that  recompence
11.  15.  what  shall  r.  of  them  be  but  life  from  dead.-1
Phil.  4.  15  as  concerning  giving  and  r.  but  ye  only
Heb.  12.28.  wheref.  wer.  a  kingdom  which  cannot
1  Pet  1  9.  r.  the  end  of  your  faith,  the  salvation
RECKON

Signifies,  [1]  To  cast  up  an  account,  Mat.  18.  .4.
[2]  To  esteem,  repute,  and  number,  Luke


37  [3]  1°  propound  to  ones  selj ,  or  tfnn/c

with  one's  self,  Isa.  38.  13.  [4]  1<>  conclude,


Willi  U/*c  o  u  J  ,

collect,  and  gather,  as  by  reason  and  argument,

Gen  40  t  13.  within  3  days  Pharaoh  shall  r.  t  19.
Lev.  25.  50.  lie  shall  r.  with  him  that  bought  him
°7.  18.  the  priest  shall  r.  to  him  the  worth,  23.

Rum.  4.  32.  by  name  ye  shall  r.  the  instruments
Ezek.44.  26.  they  shall  r.  to  him  seven  days
Mat  18  24.  when  he  began  tor.  one  was  brought
Rom.  6.11.  r.  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  to  sin

8.  18.  I  r.  the  sufferings  ot  this  present  tune
o  Cm-  10  +  2.  which  r.  <>r  us  as  though  we  walked
RECKONED.

Gen.  40.  t  20.  lie  r.  with  the  butler  and  baker
Num.  18.  27. your  heave  offering  r.  as  corn  ot  flour
2.3.  9.  the  people  shall  not  he  r.  among  the  nations
2  Sam.  4.  2.  for  Beerotli  also  was  r.  to  Benjamin
2  Kings  *12.*  15.  moreover,  they  r.  not  with  the  men

1  C hr.  5.  1.  genealogy  is  not  to  be  r.  by  birth  right
7.  when  the  genealogy  ot  generations  was  r.

17.  all  these  were  r.  by  genealogies,  7.  5,  7.

1  y.  1,  22.  2  Chron.  31.  19.  Lzra  2.  62. 1
8.  3.  Neh.  7.  5,  64.

Psal.  40.  5.  thy  thoughts  to  us  cannot  be  r.  up
Isa.  38.  13.  1  r.  till  morning,  that  as  a  lion  so  will
Luke  22  .  37.  lie  was  r.  amongst  the  transgressors
Rom  4.  4.  the  reward  is  not  r.  ot  grace,  but  ot  debt

9.  faith  was  r.  to  A  hr.  ||  10.  how  was  it  then  r.  ?
RECKON  ETII.

Mat.  25. 19.  lord  of  those  servants  r.  with  them
RECKONING.

2  Kings  22.  7-  there  was  no  r.  made  with  them
I  Chron.  23.  11.  therefore  they  were  in  oner.

RECOMMENDED.

Acts  14.  26.  from  whence  they  had  been  r.

15  40.  Paul  departed,  being  r.  to  the  grace  of  God
RECOMPENCE,

A  requital,  retaliation,  or  amends,  Luke  14.  12.  In
Rom  1.  27.  we  read,  that  the  Gentiles  received
that  recompence  of  their  error  which  was  meet ;
and  in  chap.  11.  9.  it  is  said ,  Let  then  table  be
made  a  snare  and  a  recompence  unto  them.  In
both  which  places  the  apostle  speaks  oj  that  judg
ment  of  God,  by  which  sin  is  punished  with  sm  ;
[I]  In  the  Gentiles,  who  abused  their  natural
knowledge ;  how  meet  ivas  it  that  they  who  had
forsaken  the  Author  of  nature,  should  be  given  up,
not  to  keep  the  order  of  nature  !  that  they  who  had
changed  the  glory  oj  God  into  the  similitude  oj
beasts,  should  be  left  to  do  those  things  which
beasts  themselves  abhorred !  [2]  In  the  Jews,

abusing  their  revealed  knowledge ,  Jor  which  then
understandings  were  darkened,  and  spiritual
blindness  increased,  so  that  they  could  discern
nothing  of  heavenly  things  ;  and  what  things
were  delectable  to  them,  were  turned  into  their
ruin  and  destruction.  _  Recompence  is  also  taken
for  that  free  and  gracious  rev.  aid  which  the  saints
shall  have  in  heaven.  Luke  14. 14.  Lor  thou  shalt
be  recompenced  at  the  resurrection  ot  the  just.
Dent  32.  35.  to  me  belonaetli  vengeance  and  r.
Job  15.  31.  not  trust  in  vanity,  vanity  shall  be  his  r
Prov.  12. 14.  the  r.  of  a  man  s  hand  shall  be  rendered
Isa.  35.  4.  even  God  will  come  with  a  r.

40.  +  10.  reward  and  r.  for  his  works,  62.  t  11.

59.  18.  repay  r.  to  his  enemies,  to  the  islands  r.
66.  6.  voice  of  I.d.  that  rendfereth  r.  to  his  enemies
Jer.  51.  6.  time  of  veng.  he  will  render  to  her  a  r.
Lam.  3.  64.  render  to  them  a  r.  O  l  ord
Uos.  9.  7.  days  of  r.  are  come,  Israel  shall  know


Rom.  11.  35.  and  it  shall  he  r.  to  him  again
RECOMPENSES'!.

Jer  3°  18.  thou  r.  iniquity  of  fathers  to  children
KFAOMPKNSETH.

Psal  137.  t  8.  happy  shall  he  be  that  r.  thee
RECOMPENSING.

2  Chron.  6.  23.  by  r.  his  way  upon  his  own  head
RECONCILE.

Reconciliation,  is  a  restoring  to  favour,  or  makin,
those  friends  who  before  were  at  variance,  as  Go <
and  the  elect  were,  through  sin,  till  of  enemie
they  became  friends,  through  the  atonement  mad
in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  received  by  faith
Eph  2.  16.  1  hat  he  might  reconcile  both  tj
God  by  the  cross.  Col.  1.  21.  Ye  were  enemies
yet  now  hath  he  reconciled  you.  I  he  mmistA
vf  the  gospel  is  called,  the  ministry  of  recoin  i!
ation,  2  Cor.  5.  18.  because  reconciliation  is  then
by  published  and  declared  to  suih  as  are  yet  eiu
mies  to  God.

To  the  making  of  reconciliation  three  things  are  »
quired  in  him  who  is  Mediator  oj  it,  [1]  Jhat  l j
make  intercession  jor  the  offender.  [2J  Jhat  /I
satisfy  the  offended  paity  for  the  wrong  done.  [;|
Jo  provide  that  the  off  ender  shall  offend  no  mor  m
All  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  doth.  Isa.  5.
12.  John  17.  22.  Eph.  2.  16.

Lev.  6.  30.  the  blood  is  brought  to  r.  withal  ||
1  Sam.  29.  4.  for  wherewith  should  he  r.  himself
Ezek.  45.  20.  so  shall  ye  r.  the  house
Eph.  2.  16.  that  lie  might  r.  both  to  God  bv  cross*
Col.  1.  20.  by  him  tor.  all  things  to  hnnselt
*  RECONCILED.

Mat.  5.  24.  go  thy  way,  first  be  r.  to  thy  brothei  L
Rom.  5. 10.  if  when  enemies  we  were  r .  to  God  0

1  Cor.  7.  11.  or  let  her  be  r.  to  her  husband  Vi

2  Cor.  5. 18.  who  hath  r.  us  to  himselt  by  Jesus  Cl
20.  we  pray  you  in  Christ’s  stead,  be  ye  r.  to  Gill

Col.  1. 21 .  you  that  were  enemies,  yet  now  hath  lie;

RECONCILIATION.

Lev.  8.  15.  sanctified  it,  to  make  a  r.  upon  it
2  Chron.  29.  24.  they  made  r.  with  their  blood
Ezek.  45.  15.  one  lamb  to  make  r.  for  them,  17.  |  j
Dan.  9.  24.  to  make  r.  for  iniquity,  and  bring  nil
2  Cor.  5.  18.  who  hath  given  to  us  the  ministry  ot  <
19.  and  hath  committed  to  us  the  word  ot  r.
Heb.  2.  17.  to  make  r.  for  the  sins  ot  the  people
RECONCILING.

I,ev.  16.20.  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  r.  holy  phi
Rom.  11.  15.  if  the  casting  away  be  the  r.  of  wor  j
2  Cor.  5.  19.  God  was  in  Christ,  r.  the  world
RECORD.

Exod.  20.  24.  in  all  places  where  I  r.  my  name  '
Dent.  30.  19.  1  call  heaven  and  earth  to  r.  31.  2
1  Chron.  16.  4.  he  appointed  Leyites  to  r.  and  pra
Isa.  8.  2.  1  took  unto  me  faithful  witnesses  to  r.
Acts  20.  26.  1  take  you  to  r.  this  day ,  that  1  am  pi
RECORD,  Substantive.  _

Ezra  6.  2.  and  therein  was  a  r.  thus  written
Job  16.  19.  also  now,  behold,  my  r.  is  on  high
John  1.  19.  and  this  is  the  r.  of  John,  when
32.  John  bare  r.  saying,  I  saw  the  Spmt,  34.

8.  13.  thou  bearest  r.  of  thyself,  thy  r.  is  nnttru
14.  though  1  bear  r.  of  m>self,  yet  my  r.  is  Ir
12.  17.  the  people  that  was  with  him,  bare  r.

19.  35.  he  that  saw  bare  r.  and  his  r.  is  true


LIUS,  'A.  I.oatooi  /  .  — - ,  - - ...  -j

Joel  3.  4.  will  ye  render  me  a  r.j  speedily  will  1
7.  1  will  return  your  r.  on  your  own  head

m-  m  -  a  .1  1*1  X  1  _ _ _  . .  ..  L  n  %  ^ '  0  l  /  J  II  4  r\  A  A


Luke  14.  12.  they  bid  thee,  and  a  r.  be  made  thee
Rom.  1.  27.  receiving  that  r.  of  their  error
11.  9.  let  their  table'  be  made  a  r.  to  them
2  Cor.  6. 13.  now  for  ar.  in  the  same,  be  ye  enlarged
Ileb.  2.2.  transgression  received  a  just  r.  ot  reward
10.  35.  your  confid.  which  hath  great  r.  ot  reward
ll!  26.  for  he  had  respect  to  the  r.  of  reward

RECOMPENCES.  .  .

Isa.  34.  8.  it  is  year  of  r.  for  controversy  ot  Zion
59.  +  18.  according  to  their  r.  he  will  repay
Jer  51.  56.  the  Lord  God  of  r.  shall  surely  requite
RECOMPENSE,  Verb.

Num.  5.7.  he  shall  r.  his  trespass,  and  add  the  htth
8.  if  lie  have  no  kinsman  to  r.  the  trespass  unto
Ruth  2.  12.  the  Lord  r.  thy  work  and  reward  thee
2  Sam.  19.  36.  why  should  the  king  r.  me  r
Job  34.  33.  he  will  1.  it,  whether  thou  refuse
Prov.  20.  22.  say  not  thou,  1  will  r.  evil
Isa.  65.  6.  I  will  r.  1  will  r.  into  their  bosom
Jer.  16.  18.  and  first  1  will  r.  their  iniquity  and  sin
°5  14  will  /-.according  to  their  deeds,  Has.  12.  2.
50.  29.  r.  work  ||  Ezek.  7-  3.  r.  abominations,  8.
Ezek.  7.4.  r.  thy  ways,  9. 1  9. 10. 1  11.  21.  16.  43.
17  19  mine  oath  and  my  covenant  1  will  r.

23*.  49.  they  shall  r.  your  lewdness  upon  you
Joel  3!  4.  if  ye  r.me,  speedily  will  1  return  it
Luke  14. 14.  shalt  be  blessed,  tor  they  cannot  r.  thee
Rom.  12.  17-  r.  to  no  man  evil  for  evil
2  Thess  A.  6.  to  r.  tribulat.  to  them  that  trouble  vou
Heb  10  30.  we  know  him  that  hath  said,  1  will  r.
RECOMPENSED.

Num.  5.  8.  let  the  trespass  be  r.  to  the  Lord
2  Sam.  22.  21.  according  to  the  cleanness  ot  my
hands  hath  he  r.  me,  25.  Psal.  18.  20,  24.
Prov.  11.  31.  behold,  the  righteous  shall  be  r.

Jer.  18.  20.  shall  evil  be  r.  for  good  ?

Ezek,  22.  31 .  their  own  way  have  1  r,  on  their  heads
Luke  14.  14.  thou  shalt  be  r.  at  the  resurrection


Rom.  10.  2.  1  bare  them  r.  that  they  have  a  ze<i

2  Cor.  1. 23. 1  call  God  for  a  r.  upon  my  soul
8.  3.  to  their  power  I  bear  r.  yea,  and  beyond
Gal.  4.  15.  1  bear  you  r.  if  it  had  been  possible!
Phil.  1 .  8.  God  is  my  r.  how  greatly  I  long  alter  i
Col.  4.  13.  I  hear  him  r.  that  he  hath  a  zeal  tor  i>

1  John  5.  7.  there  are  three  that  bear  r.  in  heav  !

10.  because  he  believeth  not  r.  God  gave  ot  ms  »

11.  this  is  the  r.  that  God  hath  given  us

3  John  12.  we  bare  r.  and  our  r.  is  true
Rev  1.  2.  who  bare  r.  of  the  W ord  ot  God

RECORDED.

\eh  1°.  22.  Levites  were  r.  chief  of  the  lather
RECORDER.

2  Sam.  8.  16.  Jehoshaphat  the  son  of  Ahilud  w; ...

20.  24.  1  Kings  4.  3.  1  Chron.  18).
2  Kings  18.  18.  and  Joah  the  son  ot  Asaph  tit.

Isa,  oO./tf*

2  Chron.  34.  8.  Joah  son  of  Joahaz  r.  to  repair
RECORDS.  .  u

Ezra  4.  15.  that  search  be  made  in  1  lie  book  ot

Esth  6  1.  he  commanded  to  bring  the  book  ot  :|

RECOVER.  .  j
Judg.  ll.  26.  why  did  ye  not  r.  them  in  that An,

1  Sam.  30.  8.  for  thou  shalt  without  tail  r.  all  ,

2  Sam.  8.  3.  as  lie  went  to  r.  his  border  at  Eupmfts
2  Kings  1.2.  enquire  of  Baahzebub  whether  1  sn.  .

5.  3.  the  prophet  would  r.  him  of  his  leprosy

6.  1  have  sent  N  aaman,  that  thou  mayest  r.  )

7.  that  this  man  doth  send  to  me  to  r.  a  man;

1 1 .  and  strike  his  hand  over  place,  and  r.  the  1-

8.8.  enquire  by  him,  shall  1  r.  of  this  disease  h
io.  thou  mayest  r.  \\  14.  that  shouldest  suiely
2  Chron.  13.  20.  nor  did  Jeroboam  r.  strength  a?*
14.  13.  that  they  could  not  r.  themselves
Psal.  39.  13.  spare  me,  that  1  may  r.  strength
Isa.  11.  11.  to  r.  the  remnant  ot  his  people
38.  16.  so  wilt  thou  r.  me  and  make  rue  to  m

21 .  and  lay  it  for  a  plaister,  and  lie  shall  r.
Ilos.  2.  9.  and  1  will  r.  my  woo  and  mv  flax
Mark  16. 18.  lav  hands  on  the  sick,  and  1  hey  sly
2  Tim.  2.  26.  t h at^ they  ^ m ay  r  A h e n ) se  1  v es o u t

1  Sam.  30.  18.  David  r.  all  the  Amalekites  too:  9

22.  not  give  them  aught  of  spoil  we  have  r.

2  Kings  13. 25.  Joash  beat  him,  and  r.  cities  ot  l
14  28.  how  lie  warred,  and  r.  Damascus
16*.  6.  Rezin  king  of  Syria  r.  Elath  to  Syria
20.  7 .  and  they  laid  it  on  the  boil,  and  lie  r.

Isa.  38.  9.  when  Hezekiah  was  sick,  and  was  r.  ,
Jer  8  °°  why  is  not  the  health  ot  my  people-
41 !  16.  Johanan  took  the  people  he  had  r.  ,
RECOVERING.  i

Luke  4.  18.  to  preach  r.  ot  sight  to  the  blinq
RECOUN1.

Nah.  2.  5-  he  shall  r.  his  worthies,  they  shall!  •


RED


ll  E  E


ll  E  F


RECTIFY.

Prov.  11.  t  5.  righteousness  of  perfect  shall  r.  way
RED.

Gen.  25.  25.  first  came  out  r.  all  over  like  an  hairy
30.  Esau  said,  teed  me  with  that  same  r.  pottage
49.  12.  Judah,  his  eyes  shall  be  r.  with  wine
Exod. 25.  5.  rams’  skins  dyed  r.  and  badgers’  skins,
and  shittim  wood,  26.  14.  1  35.  7.  |36.  19.
39.  34.

35.  23.  with  whom  was  found  r.  skins  of  rams
Num.  19.  2.  bring  thee  a  r.  heifer  without  spot
2  A  mgs  3.  22.  Moabites  saw  the  water  r.  as  blood
Esth.  1.  6.  on  a  pavement  of  r.  blue,  and  white
Psal.  68.  +  23.  foot  may  be  r.  in  blood  of  thy  enemies
75.  8.  the  wine  is  r.  it  is  full  of  mixture
Prov.  23.  31.  look  not  on  the  wine  when  it  is  r.

Isa.  1.  18.  though  your  sins  be  r.  like  crimson
27.  2.  sing  ye  to  her,  a  vineyard  of  r.  wine
63.  2.  wherefore  art  thou  r.  in  thine  anoarel  ?

Xah.  2.  3.  the  shield  of  his  mighty  men  is  made  r.
Zech.  1.8.  1  saw  by  night  a  man  riding  on  a  r.  horse
and  behind  him  were  there  r.  horses  and  white
6.  2.  in  first  chariot  were  r.  horses,  in  second  black
Mat.  16.  2.  it  will  be  fair  weather,  for  sky  is  r.  3.
Rev.  6.  4.  then  went  out  another  horse  that  was  r.

12.  3.  a  great  r.  dragon,  seven  heads  and  ten  horns

RED  sea.

Exod.  10.  19.  and  cast  the  locusts  into  the  r.  sea

13.  18.  God  led  them  by  the  way  of  the  r.  sea
15.  4.  chosen  captains  are  drowned  in  the  r.  sea

22.  Moses  brought  Israel  from  the  r.  sea

23.  31.  1  will  set  thy  bounds  from  the  r.  sea
Xum.  14.  25.  get  into  the  wilderness  by  the  r.  sea

21.  14.  it  is  said,  what  did  he  in  the  r.  sea  ?

Deut.  1.  40.  take  your  journey  by  the  r.  sea

11.  4.  how  he  made  the  r.  sea  to  overflow  them
Josh.  2.  10.  heard  how  the  Lord  dried  up  the  r.  sea
4.  23.  as  the  Lord  your  God  did  to  the  r.  sea

24.  6.  the  Egyptians  pursued  after  to  the  r.  sea
Xeh.  9.  9.  thou  heardest  their  cry  by  the  r.  sea
Psal.  106.7.  but  provoked  him  at  the  r.  sea

9.  he  rebuked  the  r.  sea ,  and  it  was  dried  up

22.  he  had  done  terrible  things  by  the  r.  sea
13b.  13.  to  him  who  divided  the  r.  sea  in  parts

15.  overthrew  Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  r.  sea
Jer.  49.  21.  noise  thereof  was  heard  in  the  r.  sea
Jets  7.  36.  he  shewed  wonders  in  the  r.  sea
Heb.  11.  29.  by  faith  they  passed  through  the  r.  sea
REDDISH.

Lev.  13.  19.  a  bright  spot  somewhat  r.  24  ,  43.

42.  a  white  r.  sore,  it  is  a  leprosy  sprung  up
49.  if  the  plague  be  r.  in  the  garment  or  skin
14.37.  it  the  plague  be  with  hollow  strakes,  r.
REDEEM

Signifies,  [1]  To  bay  again  something  that  had
been  sold,  by  paying  back  the  price  unto  him  that
bought  it,  Lev.  25.  25.  I  27  .  20.  [2]  To  deliver
and  bring  out  of  bondage  with  a  strong  hand,
and  without  any  ransom ,  such  as  were  kept
pnsmers  By  their  enemies,  Deut.  7.  5.  |  32.  6.
[3]  To  deliver  sinners  from  the  tyranny  of  Satan',
ijom  sin,  death,  and  hell,  by  the  purchase  of
Christ  s  blood,  and  the  power  of  his  grace.  'Thus
is  Christ  both  the  Ransomer,  and  ransom,  Luke
1.  68.  1  1  nil.  2.  6.  lit.  2.  14.

Redemption  sometimes  signifies  deliverance  both
Jrom  the  guilt  and  power  oj  sin,  by  forgiveness
and  sanctification,  Eph.  1.  7.  Sometimes  it  is


taken  Jor  the  whole  work  of  a  sinner's  salvation
comprehending  all  things  that  belong  to  it.  Heb.
9.  12.  Having  obtained  eternal  redemption  foi
us.  Our  whole  redemption,  from  the  first  act  to
i.le  last,  both  for  merit  and  efficacy',  is  wholly
Jrom  Cnnstf  and  not  at  all  from  ourselves .
Lastly,  the  last  act  of  our  salvation  is  the  re -
surrection  oj  our  bodies  and  the  sentence  of  the
last  judgment ,  after  which  the  saints  shall  be
glorified  as  the  sons  oj  God  by  adoption,  their
souls  and  bodies  being  reunited;  in  this  sense
redemption  is  taken,  Luke  21.  28.  Rom.  8  23
lo  redeem  time,  l  pit.  5.  16.  To  embrace" and
improve  every  opportunity  of  doing  good.  It  is
a  metaphor  taken  from  merchants  that  diligently
observe  the  time  of  buying  and  selling,  and  easily
part  with  their  pleasures  for  gain;  that  is,  deny
yourselves  in  your  ease,  pleasure,  djc.  to  gain  an
opportunity  of  doing  good.

io^'o I,.wi11  -vou  "'ith  astretched-out  arm
*“•  la-  firstling  ot  ass  shalt  r.  with  a  lamb,  34.  20.

,  Ju.  the  first-born  of  m3’  children  I  r.  34.  20.

and  any  of  b's  kin  come  to  r.  it
«  he  have  none  to  r.  it  ||  29.  he  may  r.  it
•  the  cities  may  the  I.evites  r.  at  any  time
™'  ^.hen  sold,  one  of  his  brethren  may  r.  him
4  19  kUI?CAmS  sol.,:,or  any  of  kin  may  r.  him
~{r  J}ut  lf  l;e,",,1'.at1  atl  r-  fi.-’beu  he  shall  add
to.  that  sanctified  his  house  will  /-.  it,  ]Q.  20  31
15.  the  first-born  of  man  shalt  thou  r
0.  from  a  month  old  shalt  thou  r.

,>  .in  filing  of  a  goat  thou  shalt  not  r.

a  a  -etc0,  ma9  ’s  9n*  t*lat  kath  right  to  r.  3.  4  9
4.  4.  lf  thou  wilt  r.  it,  if  not  l  will  r.  it
0.  I  cannot  r.  it  for  myself,  r.  thou  it
<  am.  7-  2.3.  what  nation  in  earth  is  like  Isr.  whom
r.  ,0(1  w.ent  to  r.  to  himself  t  1  Chron.  17. 21
r  eri  5-  0.  nor  is  it  in  our  power  to  r.  them
c  „•  111  famine  be  shall  r.  thee  from  death

j  ,  '/??  r-  lne  f,01TI  the  hand  of  the  mighty
of!  ii'0’  r‘  'f:0  ',od’  out  of  all  his  troubles
is  or  r-.wo  and  be  merciful  unto  me
lo  -  *  anse,  and  r.  us  for  thy  mercies’  sake
is  ‘i.  ‘l0?*  'hem  can  r.  his  brother,  nor  give
diiS  j  ’0I  wdl  r.  my  sou!  from  the  grave
I?/  }”•  £raw  nigh  to  my  soul,  and  r.  it,  deliver  me
j -.14.  he  sha  r.  their  soul  from  deceit

he  shall  r.  Israel  from  all  his  iniquities
‘Hr  k  nl  1Si  n’-V  hand  shortened  that  it  cannot  r.  ?

1.  ’  Vvi!  thee  out  of  hand  of  terrible

diJ  i  in4'  1  "t1  r-  'kvm  from  death
,ni'  \  - d;  the  Lord  shall  r.  thee  from  Babylon
it  0  i°i  7 '  Jhem  that  were  under  the  law
•  14.  that  he  might  r.  us  from  all  iniquity


REDEEMED.

48. 16- the  angel  whicn  r.  me  trom  all  evil
15.  ].3.  led  forth  people  whom  thou  hast  r.
-‘*’1*  please  not,  then  shall  lie  let  her  he  r
■■ ?.°-  }vll°  lieth  with  a  bondmaid  not  r.‘
zo.  30.  it  a  house  in  a  walled  city  be  not  r.

3E  hut  the  houses  of  the  villages  may  be'r.
yh  brother  sold  to  a  stranger  may  be  r.  again
bL  u  he  be  not  r.  then  go  out  in  year  of  jubilee
-7- 20.  it  he  hath  sold  the  field,  it  shall  not  be  /•
27-  an  unclean  beast  not  r.  then  shall  it  be  sold
28.  no  devoted  thing  to  the  Lord  shall  be  r.  29
3.3.  the  tithe  and  the  change  shall  not  be  r.

A  ww.  3.  46.  those  be  r.  that  are  more  than  Levites
J8.  lo.  those  that  are  to  be  r.  from  a  month  old
Ueut ;  7-  8.  the  Lord  hath  r.  you  out  of  the  house  of
bondmen,  from  kirn-  ot  Egypt,  15.  15.  |  24.  18.
V'y  People  thou  hast/-,  through  thy  greatness

13.  o.  Lord  which  r.  you  out  of  house  ot  bondage
-1.8.  be  merciful  to  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  r.

7  4‘  2'  4j0rt*  kath  /-.  my  soul,  1  Kings  1 . 29.

I  Chron.  17.  21.  whom  thou  hast  r.  out  of  Egypt  hv
»r  .  -  0th.V  ^Teat  power,  A  ’eh.  1.  10.  Psal.  77. 15.
Ae//  o.  8.  we  after  our  ability  have  /-.  the  Jews

71"  o931’ 5’ thon.  haSt,/‘-  me,  O  Lord  God  of  truth
71.  23.  my  soul  shall  rejoice  which  thou  hast  r
'.remember  thine  inheritance  thou  hast  /-.

01  LF  the"2  tr011'  the  kand  of  the  enemy
ill  -  V. iet  ' fif  '•  0  Lor<-  say  S0)  whom  he  hath  r.
loo.  „4.  and  hath  /-.  us  from  our  enemies

00'  00  Zi0a  shall  be  r.  with  judgment
-9.  22.  thus  salt  1 1  the  Lord,  who  r.  Abraham
3o.  9.  no  lion  there,  but  the  r.  shall  walk  there
ai  oh  not’  mve  r.  thee,  thou  art  mine
no!  return  unt0  me,  for  I  have  r.  thee
23.  the  Lord  hath  r.  Jacob,  4».  20.  Jer.  31.  11
51.  11.  therefore  the  r.  of  the  Lord  shall  return'

3.  and  ye  shall  be  r.  without  money
9.  r.  Jerusalem  ||  62.  12.  holy  people  of  Lcrd

P3-J-y™  ?!  py  rd  if  C0lVe  II  9.  in  pity  he  r.  them
Tam.  3.  08.  O  l.ord,  thou  hast  r.  my  life

V  13.  tho  I  r.  them,  yet  they  have  spoken  lies
M*c.  6.  4.  I  r.  thee  out  ot  the  house  of  servants
'viH  hiss.for  them,  1  have  r.  them
01  kp  ka,fi  visifed  and  r.  his  people

r?  7  i’i!h/au  keen  he  who  should  have  r.  Israel
3- 13- C  hrist  r.  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law

r?  etk L  4?r  ye  fvere  not  r‘  with  corruptible  things
Rev.  5.  9.  thou  hast  r.  us  to  God  by  thy  blood

14.  3.  none  learn,  but  the  144,000  which  were  r.

4.  these  were  r.  from  among  men,  being  first  fruits

„  _  REDEEM  EDS  1’.

-  oam.  7.  23.  which  thou  r.  to  thee  from  E°TDt
u  ,  REDEEMER.

r  ui  ,4*  4  14;  who  hath  not  left  thee  without  a  r.

Job  19.  2d.  tor  1  know  that  my  R.  liveth
Co  o-19L14-  °  Lord>  my  strength  and  my  R.

78. 35.  they  remembered  the  high  God  was  their  r.
rVoc.23. 11.  their  IT  is  mighty,  he  shall  plead  cause
aod J*  k)4'  and.t,ky,-R,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  54.  5.
43. 14.  thus  saith  the  Lord  your  R.  the  Holy  One
44.  b.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  his  R.  the  Lord  of  hosts
24.  saith  the  Lord  thy  R.  48.  17.  |  49.  7.  I  54.  8.

1- as.foi,°1ur  R-  »fie  Lord  of  hosls'is  his  name
49.  26.  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  am  thy  R.  60.16.
59.  20.  R.  shall  come  to  Zion,  to  them  that  turn
t>3.  16.  thou,  ()  Lord,  art  our  Father,  our  /{.

Jei .  50.  34.  their  R.  is  strong,  the  Lord  of  hosts
„  ,  .  HEDEEMEIH.

Psal.  3k.  22.  the  Lord  7-.  the  souls  of  his  servants
103.4.  whor.  life  from  destruction,  who  crowns

D  . A  ,  redeeming.

Huth\.  7.  this  was  the  manner  in  Israel  concern,  r.
Eph.  5. 16.  r.  time,  because  the  days  ai  eevil,  CW.4.5
It  EDEMP  l  ION.

Exod.  8. 1 23. 1  will  put  a  ?-.  between  m  v  people
Lev.  2d.  24.  ye  shall  grant  a  r.  for  the  land
t  .31.  houses  ot  the  villages,  r.  belongeth  to  it
51.  he  shall  give  again  the  price  of  his  r.  52.

Aw///.  3.  49.  Moses  took  the  r.  money  of  them
Psal.  49.  8.  r.  of  their  soul  is  precious,  and  ceaseth
1  !'■  9-  he  sent  r.  to  his  people,  holy  is  his  name
130.  7.  with  the  T.ord  there  is  plenteous  r.

Jer.  32.  7-  the  right  of  r.  is  thine  to  buy  it,  8.

Euke  2.  38.  to  them  that  looked  for  r.  in  Jerusalem
2L  28.  then  look  up,  for  your  r.  draweth  nigh
Rom.  3.24.  justified  through  the  r.  that  is  in  Christ
8.  23.  for  adoption,  to  wit,  the  ?-.  of  our  body
\,,r  • 1  30.  Christ  is  made  to  us  sanctification  and  /-.
Eph.  1.7.  in  whom  have  r.  through  blood,  Col.  1, 14.

14.  until  the  r.  ot  the  purchased  possession
4.  30.  whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  r.

Heb.  9.  12.  having  obtained  eternal  r.  for  us

15.  for  r.  of  the  transgressions  that  were  under

REDN  ESS.

Prov.  23. 29-  who  hath  woe  s  who  hath  r.  of  eves
REDOUND.

2  Cor .  4. 15.  that  grace  might  r.  to  the  glory  of  God
It  ICED

Signifies,  [1]  A  plant  growing  in  fenny  and  watery
places,  Job  40.  21.  [2]  A  staff  or  rod  of  a  reed,
which  was  put  m  our  Saviour's  hand  at  his  pas -
sion,  by  way  of  derision,  instead  of  a  sceptre.
Mat.  27-  29.  [3]  A  Jewish  measure  of  six  cu¬

bits  three  inches,  or  three  yards  three  inches.
Ezek.  40.  3.  ’

Egypt  is  called  a  reed,  2  Kings  18.  21.  in  allu¬
sion  to  the ,  reeds  that  were  numerous  upon  the
banks  oj  the  N  ile  ;  and  a  broken  reed,  to  de¬
note  the  inability  and  weakness  of  the  Egyp¬
tians  to  support  and  aid  Hezekiali  against  the
Assyrians.  A  bruised  reed,  Isa.  42. '.3.  A  be¬
liever  weak  in  grace,  who  is  of  a  broken  and
contrite  heart  for  sin.  Cur  Saviour,  speaking
oj  John  the  Baptist,  says  that  he  was  not  a
reed  shaken  with  die  wind.  Mat.  11.  7.  He
was  not  one  of  an  unsettled  mind ;  but  constant
and  fixed  in  the  truth;  his  testimony  of  me  was
always  the  same.

1  Kings  14.  15.  the  Lord  shall  smite  Israel  as  a  r.

2  Kings  18.  21.  thou  trustest  upon  the  staff  of

this  bruised  r.  Isa.  .36.  6.


Isa.  42.  3.  a  bruised  r.  shall  lie  not  break,  and  the
smoking  flax  shalll  henotquench,  Mat.  \°  <>o
Ezek.  29.  6.  they  have  been  a  staff  of  r.  to  Israel'
40.  3.  a  man  with  a  measuring  /-.  in  bis  baud
42.  16.  the  east  side  with  measuring  r.  17,  jh  19
Mat.  11.7.  what  went  ye  to  see  ;  a  r.  Luke  7  ’  04  ‘
27.  29.  they  put  a  /-.  in  his  right  hand,  and  ho'ued
30.  they  smote  him  with  a/-.  Mark  15.  )9.

48.  one  of  them  ran  and  put  the  spunge  on  a  r
and  gave  him  to  drink,  Mark  15.  36!
Rev.  11.  1.  there  was  given  me  a  r.  like  a  rod
21.  15.  had  a  golden  r.  to  measure  the  city
16.  he  measured  with  the/-.  12,000  fur  Ion”  s
ri  .  REEDS.

Job  40.  21 .  he  lieth  in  the  covert  of  the  r.

Isa.  19..  6.  the  r.  and  flags  shall  wither,  j.

I  35.  7.  in  the  habitation  of  dragons  shall  be  r.

Jer.  51.  32.  the  /-.  they  have  burnt  with  fire
Ezek.  42.  16.  he  measured  the  east  side  with  Hie
1  m,easul'ing  reed  five  hundred  r.  17,  18,  19.
45.  1.  the  length  shall  be  the  length  of  25,OoO  r.
REEL.

j  aJ0?'  'key,  t.  to  an.i  no,  and  stagger
Isa.  „4.  -0.  earth  shall  r .  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard-
REFINE.

Zech.  13.  9.  and  1  will  r.  them  as  silver  is  refined
REFINED.

-  Sam.  22.  t  31 .  his  way  is  perfect,  the  word  of  the
,  ^  ^  Lord  is  r.  Psal.  18.  +  30.  I  1 19.  +  140.

1  Chron.  28.  18.  tor  the  altar  /-.  gold  by  wei°ht
29. 4.  seven  thousand  talents  ot  r.  silver  to  overlay
Isa.  25.  6.  a  feast  ot  w  ines  on  the  lees  well  r.

48.  10.  behold,  I  have  r.  thee,  but  not  with  silver
Zech.  13.  9. 1  will  refine  them,  as  silver  is  r

„  ,  ,  refiner.

Mai  3.  2.  he  is  like  a  /-.  fire,  and  like  fuller’s  soap
3.  he  shall  sit  as  a/-,  anti  purifier  of  silver
.  REFORMA  LION.

Heb.  9.  10.  imposed  on  them  until  the  timeofr
REFORMED.

Lev.  26.  23.  and  if  ye  will  not  be  r.  by  these  things
,  REFRAIN.

Gen.  45.  1.  then  Joseph  could  not  r.  himself
Job  4.  +  2.  but  who  can  r.  from  words?

7-  H.  therefore  I  will  not  r.  my  mouth
Prov.  1. 15.  my  son,  r.  thy  foot  from  their  path
Eccl.  3.  5.  there  is  a  time  to  /-.  from  embracing
Isa.  48.  9.  and  for  my  praise  I  will  r.  for  thee
64.  12.  wilt  thou  r.  thyself  for  these  things,  O  Ld.?

m  7  3i‘ «?,?* /•  V01ce  tronl  weeping,  eyes  from  tears
Acts  5.  38.  1  say  to  yoti,_r.  trom  these  men
1  Pet.  3.  10.  let  him  r.  his  tongue  from  evil
REFRAINED.

Gen  43.31.  Joseph  r  himself,  and  said,  seton  bread
Esth.  5. 10,  nevertheless,  Haman  r.  himself
Job  29.9.  princes  r.  talking,  and  laid  their  hand
Psal.  40.  9.  1  have  not  r.  my  lips,  tiiouknowest
119.  101.  I  have  r.  my  feet  from  every  evil  way
Isa.  42.  14.  1  have  been  still,  and  /-.  myself
Jer.  14. 10.  they  have  not  r.  their  feet
REFRAIN  Fill.

Prov.  10. 19.  but  he  that  r.  his  1  i ps  is  wise
0.  REFRESH

Signifies,  [1]  To  revive,  1  Cor.  ]6.  18.  [2]  To  take
rest,  Exod.  23.  12.  f.3]  To  strength**’  oneself  by
Jood,  1  Kings  13.7-  [4]  To  breathe.  Job  32.  t  20
limes  of  refreshing,  Acts  3.  19.  or  times  of  tool¬
ing.  As  afflictions  are  called  a  fiery  trial,  deliver¬
ance  from  them  is  a  season  of  refreshing  or  cool¬
ing  :  such  a  time  of  refreshing  af  ter  troubles,  fre¬
quently  comes  in  this  life  ;  hut  when  this  life
ends,  a  deliverance  comes  from  all  afflictions  to
them  that  truly  fear  and  serve  God.  It  is  a  figu¬
rative  manner  of  speaking,  taken  from  the  custom
oj  labourers,  who  in  the  heat  of  the  day  repose  them¬
selves  in  cool  shades.

1  Kings  13.  7.  come  home  witli  me  and  r.  thyself
Acts  27.  3.  Julius  suffered  Paul  to  /-.himself
Phil.  20.  brother,/-,  my  bowels  in  the  Lord
R EFRESH  ED.

Exod.  23.  12.  and  that  the  stranger  may  be  r.

31.17.  on  the  seventh  day  he  rested  and  was  r.

1  Sam.  16.  23.  Dav.  played,  so  Saul.was  r.and  well

2  Sam.  16.  14.  David  and  people  with  him  r.  thems.
Job  32.20.  I  will  speak  that  l  may  be  r.

Rom.  15.  32.  and  that  1  may  with  you  be  r.

1  Cor.  16.  18.  for  they  r.  my  spirit  and  yours

2  Cor.  7. 13.  Titus,  his  spirit  was  /-.  by  you  all
2  Tim.  1.  16.  Onesiphorus,  for  lie  often  /  .  me
Phil.  7.  the  bow  els  of  the  saints  are  r.  by  thee

REFRESHE  111.

Prov.  25.  13.  for  he  /-.  the  soul  of  his  masters
REFRESHING.

Isa.  28.  12.  this  is  the  r.  yet  they  would  not  hear
Acts  3.  19.  when  times  of  r.  shall  come  from  Lord
REFUGE

Is  a  strong  hold,  or  place  of  safety,  to  fly  to  in  dan¬
ger,  where  men  may  he  protected,  and  escape  the
enemy,  Num.  35.  1.3.  Co  t  is  called  the  refuge  ot
his  people,  Deut.  .3,3.  27.  lie  defends  them  against
the  assaults  of  all  their  enemies.  Christ  is  a  re¬
fuge  in  his  righteousness  and  blood,  Isa.  25.  4.

Citjes  of  refuge.*  In  order  to  provide  for  the  secu¬
rity  of  those,  who  unawares  and  without  any  design
should  kill  a  man,  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  to
appoint  .six  cities  of  refuge,  that  whoever  suddenly
and  against  his  will  should  spill  the  blood  of  a  man,
might  retire  thither,  and  have  time  to  prepare
for  his  defence  and  justification  before  the  judges,
so  that  the  kinsman  of  the  deceased  might  not
pursue  him  thither,  and  kill  him.  Cf  these  cities
there  were  three  on  each  side  Jordan  :  those  on
this  side  Jordan  were  kedesli  of  N aphtali,  He¬
bron,  and  Shechem.  Those  beyond  Jordan  were
Bezer,  Golan,  and  Ramoth  gilead,  Josh.  20.  ~,

8.  These  cities  were  to  be  easy  of  access,  and  to
have  smooth  and  good  roads  to  them,  and  bridges
where  there  should  be  occasion  ;  when  there  were
any  cross-roads,  they  took  care  to  set  up  posts  with
an  inscription ,  directing  the  way  to  the  city  of  re¬
fuge.  This  city  was  to  he  well  supplied  with  water
and  all  kind  of  provisions.  It  was  not  allowed

389


REG


REG


REI


'there  to  make  any  weapons,  that  the  relations  of
the  deceased  might  not  he  furnished  there  with
arms  to  gratify  their  revenge.  Though  the  man-
slayer  had  fled  to  the  city  of  re  tune,  yet  he  was
not  thereupon  exempt  from  the  pursuits  <j  jus¬
tice  :  an  information  was  )  referred  against  him.
he  was  summoned  before  the  judges,  and  before
the  people,  to  clear  himself,  and  to  prove  the  mur¬
der  was  merely  casual  and  involuntary.  IJ  he
teas  found  innocent,  he  dwelt  safely  in  the  city
to  which  he  had  retired ;  ij  otherwise,  he  was  pvt
to  death,  according  to  the  severity  oj  the  taw.
Though  he  was  found  innocent,  he  was  not  there¬
fore  immediately  set  at  liberty ;  but  to  inspiie
the  greater  horror,  even  of  involuntary  murder,
it  seems  as  if  the  law  would  punish  it  with  a
kind  of  banishment  ;  for  he  was  obliged  to  dwell
in  this  city,  without  going,  out  of  it,  till  the
death  of  the  high  priest  ;  and  if  before  this  time
he  should  any  where  go  out  of  the  city ,  the  re¬
venger  of  blood  might  safely  kill  him,  Num.  35.
25,  06,  07,  &c.

yum.  35.  13.  six  cities  shall  ye  have  for  r.  15
Deut.  33.  07.  the  eternal  God  is  thy  r.

Tosh.  20.  3.  shall  be  your  r.  from  avenger  of  blood
2  Sam.  00.  3.  he  is  my  high  tower  and  my  r.

Ps.  9.  9.  Lord  also  w  ill  he  a  r.  tor  the  oppressed,  a  r.
in  times  of  trouble,  they  that  know  thy  name


14.  6.  counsel  of  the  poor,  because  the  T.ord  is  his  r.
46. 1.  God  is  our  r.  7. 1 1.  II 48. 3.  God  is  known  tor  r.


57.  1.  in  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  make  my  r.

until  these  calamities  be  overpast,  61.  +4.
59. 16.  thou  hast  been  my  r.  in  the  day  of  trouble
■62.  7.  my  r.  is  in  God  |l  8.  God  is  a  r.  tor  us
71.  7.  wonder  to  many,  thou  art  my  strongr.  142.5.
91,  2.  he  is  my  r.  9. 1'  94.  22.  God  is  rock  ot  my  r .

104.  18.  the  high  hills  a  r.  for  wild  goats
142.  4.  r.  failed  me  ||  5.  thou  art  my  r.  and  portion
Prov.  14.26.  his  children  shall  have  a  place  ot  r.

Isa.  4.  6.  a  place  of  r.  ||  25.  4.  to  the  needy  a  r.

28. 15.  for  we  have  made  lies  our  r.  and  under
17.  the  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  r.  of  lies
Jer.  16.  19.  O  Lord,  my  r.  in  the  day  of  affliction
Ueb.  6. 18.  who  have  lied  for  r.  to  lay  hold  on  hope
R  EFUSE.

I  Sam.  15.  9.  every  thing  that  was  vile  and  r.

Jer.  6.  +  30.  r.  silver  shalfmen  call  them  because  T,.
Lam.  3.  45.  thou  hast  made  us  as  r.  midst  of  people
Amos  8.  6.  that  we  may  sell  '.he  r.  of  wheat
REFUSE,  Verb.

Exod.  4. 23.  if  thou  r.  to  let  them  go,  8. 0.  ]  9. 2.  1 10.4
10.  3.  how  Ions  wilt  thou  r.  to  humble  thyself  ?

16.  28.  r.  ye  to  keep  my  commandments  and  laws
22.  17.  if  her  father  utterly  r.  to  give  her  to  him
Job  34.  33.  whether  thou  r.  or  choose,  and  not  I
Prov.  8.  33.  hear  instruction,  be  wise,  and  r.  it  not
21.  7.  because  they  r.  to  do  judgment
25.  the  desire  of  slothful,  his  hands  r.  to  labour
Isa.  1 . 20.  but  if  ye  r.  shall  be  devoured  with  sword
7.  15.  that  lie  may  know  to  r.  the  evil,  16.

Jer.  8.  5.  they  r.  to  return  1!  9  6.  they  r.  to  know  me
13.  10.  this  evil  people  which  r.  to  hear  my  words
25.  28.  if  they  r.  to  take  the  cup  at  thine  hand
38.21.  if  thou  r.  to  go  forth,  this  is  the  word
Acts  05.  11.  if  l  be  an  offender,  I  r.  not  to  die
1  Tim.  4.  7.  but  r.  profane  anti  old  wives’  tables
5.  11.  but  the  younger  widows  r.

Heb.  12.  25.  see  that  ye  r.  not  him  that  speaketh
REFUSED.

Gen.  37  .  35.  but  Jacob  r.  to  be  comforted,  and  said
39.8.  Joseph  r.  to  lie  with  his  master’s  wite
48.  19.  Jacob  r.  to  remove  his  hand
Num.  20.21.  Edom  r.  to  give  Israel  passage
l  Sam.  8.  19-  people  r.  to  obey  the  voice  of  Samuel
16.  7.  look  not  on  him  for  1  have  r.  him
28.  23.  but  Saul  r.  and  said,  1  will  not  eat
■0  Sam.  0.  23.  howbeit  Asahel  r.  to  turn  aside
13.  9.  she  poured  out,  but  Amnon  r.  to  eat
1  Kings  20.  35.  and  the  man  r.  to  smite  him
21.  15.  the  vineyard  he  r.  to  give  thee  for  money
■•2  Kings  5.  16.  Naaman  urged  him  to  take,  but  he  r.
Neh.  9.  17.  oui  fathers  hardened,  and  r.  to  obey
Esth.  1.  12.  but  the  queen  Vashti  r.  to  come
Job  6.  7.  the  things  that  my  soul  1 .  to  touch  are  as
Psal.  77.  2.  my  soul  r.  to  be  comforted
78.  10.  and  they  r.  to  walk  in  his  law
67.  her  tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and  chose  Ephraim
118. 22.  the  stone  which  the  builders  r.  is  become
Prov.  1.24.  because  1  have  called  and  ye  r.

Isa.  5 4.  6.  when  thou  wast  r.  saith  thy  God
Jer.  5.  3.  they  r.  to  receive  correction,  they  r.  to  ret.

11.  10.  their  fathers  who  r.  to  hear  my  words
31.  15.  Rachel  r.  to  be  comforted  for  her  children
50.  33.  all  that  took  them  r.  to  let  them  go
Ezek.  5.  6.  for  they  ha'  e  r.  my  judgments
Hos.  11.  5.  Assyrian  his  king,  because  they  r.  to  ret.
Zech.7. 11.  but'they  r.  to  hearken,  and  pulled  away
Acts  7. 35.  this  Moses  whom  they  r.  saying

1  Tim.  4.  4.  and  nothing  to  be  r.  if  it  be  received
Heb.  1 1. 24.  by  faith  Moses  r.  to  he  called  the  son  of

12.  05.  who  r.  him  that  spake  on  earth

RKFUSEDST.

Jer.  3. 3.  a  whore’s  forehead,  thoi*r.  to  be  ashamed
R  E  FUSEL  II.

Exod.  7.  14.  Pharaoh  r.  to  let  the  people  go
Num.  22. 13.  the  Lord  r.  to  give  me  leave  to  go
14.  the  princes  said,  Palaam  r.  to  come  with  us
Deut.  25.7.  my  husband’s  brother  r.  to  raise  up  name
Prov.  10.  17.  but  he  that  r.  reproof,  erreth

13.  18.  shame  shall  he  to  him  that  r.  instruction
15.32.  he  that  r.  instruction  despiseth  his  own  soul

Isa.  8.  6.  this  people  r.  the  waters  of  Shiloah
Jer.  15.  18.  my  wound  which  r.  to  be  healed
REGARD.

Eccl.  8.  2.  and  that  in  r.  of  the  oath  of  God
Dan.  3.  +  13.  these  men  have  set  no  r.  on  thee
Acts  8. 11.  to  him  they  had  r.  because  he  had  bewitch.
REGARD

Signifies,  [1]  To  look  upon  with  concern  or  com
passion,  Deut.  28.  50.  [2]  To  think  of,  consider .

or  lay  to  heart,  Isa.  5.  12.  [3]  To  have  respect
for,  2  Kings  3.  14.  [4]  To  hear  and  answer,

390


Psal.  102.  17.  [5]  To  observe,  Rom.  14.  6.  [6]

To  look  to  with  an  approving  covetous  eye,  Job
36.  21.  Psal.  66.  18.  [7]  To  set  the  heart  unto
Exod.  9.  t  21.  F8]  To  lay  to  heart,  1  Sam.  25.  25.
REGARD,  Verb.

Gen.  45.  20.  r.  not  your  stuff,  for  Egypt  is  yours
Exod.  5.  9.  and  let  them  not  r.  vain  words  _  ,

Lev.  19.  31.  r.  not  them  that  have  familiar  spirits
Deut.  28.  50.  which  shall  not  r.  person  ot  the  aged

1  Sam.  4.  20.  she  answered  not,  nor  did  she  r.  it
25.  5.  let  not  my  lord  r.  this  man  of  Relial

2  Sam.  13.20.  r.  not  this,  he  is  thy  brother
2  Kings  3.  14.  were  it  not  that  1  r.  Jehoshaphat
Job  3.  4.  that  day,  let  not  God  r.  it  from  above

35.  13.  nor  wilfthe  Almighty  r.  it

36.  21.  take  heed,  r.  not  iniquity
Psal  28.  5.  they  r.  not  the  works  of  the  L,ord
31.  6.  1  have  hated  them  that  r.  lying  vanities
66.  18.  if  l  r.  iniquity  in  my  heart,  Lord  not  hear
94.  7-  neither  shall  the  God  ot  lacob  r.  it
102.  17.  he  will  r.  the  prayer  of  the  destitute

Prov.  5.  2.  that  thoumayest  discretion
6. 35.  he  will  not  /-.any  ransom,  nor  will  rest  content
Isa.  5.  12.  they  r.  not  the  work  of  the  Lord
13.  17.  the  Medes  who  w  ill  not  r.  silver
18  t  4.  I  will  r.  my  set  dwelling  like  a  clear  heat
Lam.  4.  16.  the  T.ord,  he  will  no  more  r.  them
Dan.  11.  37.  r.  God  of  his  lathers,  nor  r.  any  god
Amos  5.  22.  nor  will  1  /-.the  peace-offering
Hah.  1.  5.  behold  r.  and  wonder  marvellously
Mai.  1.  9.  will  her.  your  persons  5  saith  the  Lord
Luke  18.  4.  though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  r.  man
Bom.  14.  6.  to  the  T  ord  he  doth  not  r.  it
REGARDED.

Exod.  0.21.  he  that  r.  not  the  word  of  the  T.ord
1  Kings  18.  29.  there  was  no  voice,  nor  any  that  r.

1  Chron.  17.  17.  thou  hast  r.  me  as  ot  high  degree
Psal.  106.  44.  nevertheless,  he  r.  their  affliction
Prov.  1.  24.  1  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  r.
Dan.  3.  12.  these  men,  O  king,  have  not  r.  thee
Luke  1.  48.  he  r.  the  low  estate  of  his  handmaid

18.  2.  the  judge  feared  not  God,  neither  r.  man
Heb  8.  9.  and  I  r.  them  not,  saith  the  Lord
REGARD  EST.

2  Sam.  19.  6.  thou  r.  not  princes  nor  servants
Job  30.  20.  I  stand  up  and  thou  r.  me  not

Mat  22.  16.  r.  not  the  persons  of  men,  Mark  12. 14.
R!  GARDE ITI.

Dent.  10. 17.  mighty  and  terrible,  that  r.  not  persons
Job  34.  19.  nor  r.  the  rich  more  than  the  poor
39.  7.  neither  r.  the  crying  of  the  driver
Prov.  12.  10.  a  righteous  man  r.  the  life  of  his  beast
13.  18.  he  that  rJ  reproof  shall  be  honoured
15.  5.  but  he  that  r.  reproof  is  prudent
29.  7.  wicked  r.  not  to  know  the  cause  of  the  poor
Eccl.  5.  8.  he  that  is  higher  than  the  highest  r.

11.  4.  he  that/-,  the  clouds  shall  not  reap
Isa.  33.  8.  he  hath  despised  cities,  he  r.  no  man
Dan.  6.  13.  they  said,  Daniel  r.  not  thee,  O  king
KJal.  2.  13.  he  r.  not  the  offering  any  more
Bom.  14.  6.  he  that  r.  a  day,  r.  it  to  the.  Lord
REGARDERS.

Judo •  9.  t  37.  come  along  by  plain  of  the  r.  of  times
REGARDING.

Job  4.  20.  they  perish  for  e'  er  without  any  r.  it
Phil.  2.  30.  not  r.  his  life  to  supply  your  lack
REGENERATION
Is  the  change  and  renovation  of  the  soul  hy  the
Spirit  and  grace  of  God,  John  3.  5,  6.  It  is
called  the  new  birth,  and  consists  in  the  infusion
of  spiritual  life  into  the  soul,  John  5.  25.  whereby
it  is  enabled  to  perform  spiritual  actions,  and  live
to  God,  Rom.  14.  8.  Tit.  3.  5.  Not  by  works  of
righteousness  w  hich  we  have  done,  but  according
to  his  mercy  he  saved  us  by  the  washing  of  re¬
generation,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Jam.  1.  18.  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  hy  the
word  of  truth.  And  our  Saviour  speaking  to
Nicodemus,  says,  Verily  T  say  unto  thee,  Ex¬
cept  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the
kingdom  of  God,  John  3.  3,  4,  5.  And  the  apos¬
tle  Peter  says  in  like  manner.  That  God  hath
begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope,  by  the  re
surrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  1  Pet.  1.  3.
that  is,  he  hath  given  us  a  new  birth,  he  hath  re¬
generated  and  renewed  vs,  and  thereby  wrought  in
us  such  a  hope  or  assurance  of  salvation,  as  puts
life  into  our  souls ;  which  hope  is  built  upon  the
resurrection  of  Christ,  and  the  doctrines  depending
on  it,  as  the  foundation  of  our  resurrection  and
future  glory,  since  the  members  must  partake  or
the  same  condition  with  the  head,  John  14.  19.  It
is  said,  Mat.  19-  28.  Ye  which  have  followed
me  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  man
shall  sit  in  the  throne  of  his  glory,  ye  shall  also  sit
upon  thrones.  Ye  which  have  followed  me  in
the  regeneration,  that  is,  ye  my  apostles,  who  have
been  my  attendants  and  assistants,  while  *  have
been  by  my  doctrine  reforming  the  world  ;  while  1
have  been  regenerating  my  church,  and  putting
it  into  a  new  state  ;  Or,  joining  regeneration  with
the  following  words,  I  lithe  regeneration  when  the
Son  of  man  shall  sit,  &c.  that  is,  at  the  day  of
judgment,  when  there  shall  he  new  heavens  and
earth,  and  your  bodies  shall  he  raised  up  again
in  a  glorious  manner,  and  your  souls  made  per¬
fectly  happy  then  you  shall  rot  only  partake  oj
the  heavenly  treasure,  hut  shall  be  in  the  highest
degree  of  dignity  there.

Mat.  19.  28.  that  ye  which  followed  me  in  the  r.
Tit.  3.  5.  he  saved  us  by  the  washing  of  r.
REGION.

Deut.  3.  4.  all  the  r.  of  Argob  the  kingdom  of  Og,  13.
1  Kings  4.  11.  the  son  of  Abinadab  in  all  r.  ot  Dor
24.  Solomon  had  dominion  over  all  the  r.

Mat.  3.  5.  then  went  to  him  all  the  r.  round  Jordan
4.  16.  peo.  saw  great  light,  and  to  them  which  sat
in  the  r.  and  shadow  of  death  light  is  sprung  up
Mark  1.  28.  his  fame  spread  about  throughout  a!1

the  r.  round  about  Galilee,  Luke  4.  14.  I  7 •  17

6.  55.  and  ran  through  that  whole  r.  round  about
Luke  3. 1.  Philip  tetrarch  of  the  r.  of  Trachonitis


lets  13.  49.  word  of  the  Lord  published  thro’  the  r
14.  6.  they  lied  to  the  r.  that  lieth  round  about

16  6  when  they  had  gone  thro'  the  r.  of  Galatia

REGIONS.

Acts  8.  1.  they  were  scattered  thro’  the  r.  ot  Judes
2  Cor.  10. 16.  to  preach  the  gospel  in  r.  beyond  jot
'll  10.  no  man  shall  stop  me  m  the  r.  ot  Achaia
Gal  1.  21.  afterwards  1  came  into  the  r.  ot  Syria
REGISTER.

Ezra -2.  62.  these  sought  their  r.  Neh.  7.  64.

Neh  7.  5.  I  found  a  r.  of  the  genealogy  ot  them
REHEARSE.

Exod.  17.  14.  and  r.  it  in  the  ears  ot  Joshua
Judo.  5.  11.  r.  the  righteous  acts  of  the  Lord
REHEARSED.

1  Sam.  8.  21.  he  r.  them  in  the  earsot  the  Lord

17  31.  they  r.  David’s  words  before  Saul

Acts  11.  4.  Peter  r.  the  matter  from  the  beginning
14  °7  they  r.  all  that  God  had  done  w  ith  them
REJECT


Signifies,  [1]  To  slight,  or  despise,  ITos.  4.  6.  [2
To  cast  off,  or  forsake,  Jer.  7-  29.  1,14.  19.  [3]  2  »
refuse,  or  deny  the  granting  oj  one  s  suit,  Mark  fj
26.  [4]  To  frustrate,  Mark  7.  +  9.  -  d

Chat  which  beareth  thorns  and  briars  is  rejected-  •
Heb.  6.  8.  As  the  earth,  when  it  is  painfvtM
tilled,  and  plentifully  watered  with  rain  from  hec tl
ven,  is  good  for  nothing  hut  to  he  burnt,  ij  vis  tea
of  good  fruit  it  bringetli  forth  thorns  and  thistles  \
so  they  that  enjoy  the  means  of  grace,  and  ydi
bring  forth  willing  hut  cursed  fruit,  displeasnM
to  God,  deserve  no  further  care  nor  culture,  bi\  1
must  expect  to  he  deprived  oj  the  means  of  grac^  |
and  exposed  to  utter  ruin.


ana  vipuscu  id

Lam.  5.  +22.  wilt  thou  utterly  r.  us,  thou  art  wrot  I


Eos.  4  6.  I  will  r.  thee,  that  thou  be  no  priest  sj
Mark  6.  26.  for  his  oath’s  sake  he  would  not  r.  he;

7  9.  full  well  ye  r.  the  commandment  of  God
Tit.  3  10.  after  the  first  and  second  admonition,  r
REJ  LXTED.

1  Sam.  8.  7.  they  have  not  r.  thee,  but  they  r.  me
10. 10.  ye  have  this  day  r.  your  G.  w  ho  saved  ydl

15.  23.  because  thou  hast  r.  the  word  of  the  Lor
he  hath  also  r.  thee  from  being  king,  Si

16.  1.  seeing  I  have  r.  him  from  being  king

2  Kings  17.  15.  they  r.  his  statutes  and  his  coven  a  I


20.  Lord  r.  all  the  seed  of  Isr.  and  afflicted  thei
Isa.  53. 3.  he  is  despised  and  /-.  of  men,  manof  sorrj
Jer. 2.  37.  for  the  Lord  hath  r.  thy  tonfidence
6  10  r.  my  law  ||  30.  because  the  Lord  hath  /-.the  I

7.  29.  Lord  hath  r.  the  generation  of  his  wrath  I

8.  9.  lo.  they  haver,  the  word  of  the  Lord
14.  19.  hast  thou  utterly  .  .  Judah  ?

Tam.  5.22.  but  thou  hast  utterly  r.  us,  thou  art  wrd
Hos.  4.  6.  because  thou  hast  r.  knowledge
Mat.  21.  42.  stone  which  the  builders  r.  is  becor
head  of  the  corner,  Mark  12. 10.  Luke  20.  J
Mark  8.  31.  he  shall  be  r.  of  the  elders,  Luke  9.  2
Luke  7.  30.  the  lawyers  r.  the  counsel  ot  God
25.  but  he  must  first  be  /'.  of  this' generation
Gal  4.  14.  my  temptation  in  my  flesh  ye  r.  not
Heb.  6.  8.  that  which  beareth  thorns  and  briars  is
10  17  when  would  have  inherited  blessing,  was

REJ  ECTETH.

John  12.  48.  he  that  r.  me  received)  not  my  wore;

1  Thess.  4. 1 8.  he  that  r.  r.  not  man,  but  God

REIGN.  .  I

To  reign,  is  to  rule  or  command  as  a  sovereign  prm
2  Sam.  5.  4,  5.  God  is  the  absolute  monarch
the  world,  he  governs  and  d  sposes  of  all  thi.
in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Psal.  93.  1.  1  he  I.<
reigneth.  Sin  is  said  to  reign,  Bom.  6.12.
the  lusts  and  motions  of  sin  are  readily  obey
as  one  would  obey  the  lave  and  command  cj
king  :  when  it  exercises  an  uncontrolled  absol'
power  i7i  the  sovl.  Grace  is  said  to  rei^n,  iu  z
5.  21.  when  the  righteousness  of.  Christ ;  be
freely  imputed,  his  Spirit  reigns  in  our  hen
and  we  are  governed  hy  the  motions  and  impti,
thereof ;  so  that  sin  cannot  condemn  us  to  dei .
nor  rule  over  us,  as  it  did  before  grace  <
planted  in  the  soul.  And  such  as  receive  an-
dance  of  grace,  are  said  to  reign  in  hie  by  h
sus  Christ,  Bom.  5.  17-  that  is,  they  partake
spiritual  life  here,  whereby  they  conquer  sin,  j
obtain  eternal  life  hereafter,  when  they  reigvk
glory.

1  Kings  6. 1 .  in  fourth  year  of  Solomon  s  r.  over  .

2  Kings  24. 12.  took  Jehoiachin  in  8th  year  of  hi,

1  Chron.  4.  31.  their  cities  to  the  r.  ot  David
29.  30.  king  David’s  acts  with  all  his  r.  writtej

2  Chron.  36.  20.  till  the  r.  of  the  kingdom  nil  er
Neh  12.  22.  the  priests  recorded  to  the  r.  ot  Dai
Esth.  2.  16.  was  taken  to  kinc  in  7th  year -of  his
Luke  3.  1.  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  r.of  libei;

REIGN.  Verb.

Gen.  37.  8.  breth.  said.shalt  thou  indeed  r.  oyer
Exod.  15.  18.  T.ord  shall  r.  for  ever,  Psal.  14o.  1U
I.ev.  26.  17.  they  that  hate  you  shall  r.  over  yot
Deut.  15.  6.  the'  1..  blesseth  thee,  thou  shalt  r.cF
many  nations,  but  they  shall  notr.  over  t-
Judg.  9. 2.  thaf70  r.  over  you,  or  that  oner,  over.i

8.  the  frees  said,  r.  thou  over  us,  10.  12, 14.

1  Sam.  8.  7-  that  I  should  not  r.  over  them  j

9.  shew  the  manner  of  the  king  that  shall  r.  1
9. 17.  Lord  said,  this  same  shall  r.  oyer  my  pe>

11.  12.  who  is  he  that  said,  shall  Saul  r.  over  u.

12.  12.  nav,  but  a  king  shall  r.  over  us

2  Sam.  3.  21.  thou  mayestr.  over  all  that  hy  tie
1  Kings  1 .  +  5.  then  Adonijah  said,  I  ■  /*u

11.  hast  thou  not  heard  that  Adonijah  doth  /•/


1.  13.  assuredly  Solomon  shall  r.  after  me,  U

.  .  .i  ^  *i  \  a _ offpr  m


1.  1.).  HbSMieui.y  .JUlum  moM  M.  ... -  ’  *

24.  hast  thou  said,  Adonijah  shall  r.  after  me

2.  15.  Israel  set  their  faces  on  me,  that  I  shout  •
11. 37.  and  1  will  take  thee,  an  I  thou  shatt  r.

16.  15.  Zimri  did  r.  seven  days  in  I  irzah

2  Chr.  1.8.  and  hast  made  me  to  r.  in  Ins  steam.
23.  3.  he  said,  behold,  the  king  s  son  shall  r.

Job  34.  30.  that  the  hypocrite  r.  not,  lest  people.
Prm-.  8.15.  bv  me  kings  /-.ami  princes  decree  juj*
Eccl.  4.  14.  tor  out  of  prison  he  cometh  to  r.

Isa.  24.  23.  when  the  Lord  ot  hosts  shall  r.  ui


R  E  1


RE  J


R  E  .1


sa.  32.  1.  behold  a  king  shall  r.  in  righteousness
cr.22.  15.  shalt  thou  r.  because  thou  closest  thyself


.’.3. 5.  a  king shall  r.  prosper  and  execute  judgment
53.  Cl.  that  David  should  not  have  a  son  to  r.
lie.  4.  7.  the  lx>rd  shall  r.  over  them  in  Zion
lat.  C.  CC.  when  he  heard  that  Archelaus  did  r.
.uke  1.  33.  he  shall  r.  over  the  house  of  Jacob
10.  14.  we  will  not  have  this  man  to  r.  over  us
C7.  enemies  that  would  not  that  1  should  r.  over
'.am.  5.  17-  shall  r.  in  lire  by  one,  Jesus  C  hrist
Cl.  even  so  might  grace  r.  to  life  by  Jesus  Christ

5.  1C.  let  not  sin  r.  fn  your  mortal  bodies
,5.  12.  he  that  shall  rise  to  r.  over  the  Gentiles
Cor.  4.  8.  would  to  God  ye  did  r.  that  we  might  r.

15.  25.  for  he  must  r.  till  he  put  all  enemies  under
Tim.  C.  12.  if  we  sutler,  we  shall  r.  with  him

ev.  5.  10.  and  we  also  shall  r.  on  the  earth

1.  15.  and  he  shall  r.  forever  and  ever
!0. 6.  they  shall  r.  with  him  a  thousand  years
’C.  5.  they  shall  r.  for  ever  and  ever
See  Began.

REIGNED.

en.  36.  31.  the  kings  that  r.  in  the  land  of  Edom
before  any  king  r.  over  Israel,  1  Chron.  1.  43.
tdc.  9.  22.  when  Abimelech  had  r.  three  years
Sam.  13.  1.  Saul  r.  one  year,  and  when  he  r.  two
Sam.  C.  10.  lsh-bosheth  Saul s son  r.  two  years

i.  4.  David  r.  forty  years  over  Judah  and  Israel

5.  David  r.  seven  years  in  Hebron,  thirty -three  in
Jerusalem,  1  King*  C.  11.  1  Chron.  3.  4.  |  C9.  C7.

.  15.  David  r.  over  Israel,  1  Chron.  18  14.  1  29.26.

!  0. 1.  llanun  his  son  r.  in  his  stead,  1  Chron.  ly.  ] .

6.  8.  house  of  Saul,  in  whose  stead  thou  hast  r.
Kings  4.  21.  and  Solomon  r.  overall  kingdoms,  11.

42.  1  Chron.  C9.  28.  2  Chron.  9.  26,  30.

1.  C4.  Rezon  r.  in  Damascus  ||  25.  r.  over  Syria

43.  Uehoboam  r.  12.  17.  2  Chron.  9.  31.  |  10.  17.

4.  31.  A  bijam  his  son  r.  2  Chron.  12.  16.  I  13.  2.

5.  8.  and  Asa  r.  in  his  stead,  9. 10.  2  Chron.  14. 1.

24.  Jehoshaphat  his  son  r.  2  Chron.  17.  1. 1  20.  31.

25.  Nadab  r.  ||  28.  Baaslia  r.  29.  ||  16.  6-  Elah  r.

6.  10.  Zimri  r.  in  his  stead  j|  22.  Omri  r .  23.

28.  Omri  died,  and  Ahab  his  son  r.  in  his  stead

2.  40.  Ahaziah,  Ahab’s  son,  r.  in  his  stead,  51

2  Kings  8.  24,  26.  2  Chron.  22.  1,  2

2.  42.  Jehoshaphat  1;  25  years,  2  Chron.  20.  31.

50.  Jehoram  r.  2  Kings  3.  1. 1|  8.  17.  2  Chr.  21.5,20.
King '  3.  27.  his  eldest  son  that  should  have  r
.  15.  Hazael  r.  ||  10.  35.  JeliOahaz  r.  |l  36.  Jehu  r.

2.  1.  Jehoashr.  forty  years  in  Jerusalem

21.  Amaziah  /•.  14.  1.2  Chron.  24.  27.  1  25.  1.

5.  24.  Benhadad  r.  ||  14.  16.  Jeroboam  r.  23.

1.  29.  Zachariah  r.  |l  15.  2.  Azariah  r.  2  Chr.  26.  3.
5.7.  and  Jotham  r.  33.  2  Chr.  26.  23.  1  27.  1,  8.

10.  Shallum  r.  13.  ||  14.  Menahem  sonofGadi  r.17

22.  Pekahiah  his  son  r.  23.  ||  25.  Pekah  r.  27.

50.  lioshea  r.  ||  38.  Ahaz  16.  2.  2  Chr.  28.  1.

3.  20.  Hezekiali  r.  18.  2.  2  Chr.  28.  27.  1  29.  1.

).  37.  Esarhaddon  r.  in  his  stead,  Isa.  37.  38.

).  21.  Manasseh  r.  21.  1.  2  Chr.  32.  3.3.  1  33.  1.

..  18.  Anion  r.  in  his  stead,  19.  2  Chr.  3.3.  20,21.
’6.  Josiah  r.  in  his  stead,  22.  1.  2  Chron.  31.  1.

!.  31.  Jehoahaz  r.  three  months,  2  Chron.  36.  2.

16.  Jehoiakim  r.  eleven  years,  2  Chron.  36.  5.

l.  6.  Jehoiachin  his  son  r.  8.  2  Chron.  36.  8,  9,

8.  Zedekiah  r.  2  Chr.  36.  11.  .Ter.  37.  1.  j  52.  1.

Sir  on.  22.  12.  and  Athaliah  r.  over  the  land
th.  1.  1.  Ahasuerus  r.  from  India  to  Ethiopia

\  22.11 .  touch.  Shallum  which  r.  instead  of  Josiah

m.  5.  14.  death  r.  from  Adam  to  Moses

7.  for  if  by  one  man's  offence  death  r.  by  one

j .  that  as  sin  hath  r.  unto  death,  so  might  grace  r.
.'or.  4.  8.  ye  have  r.  as  kings  without  us

v.  11.  17.  hast  taken  thy  great  power, and  hast  r.
i.  4.  lived  and  r.  with  Christ  a  thousand  vears

REIGN  ESP.

hr.  29. 12.  thou  r.  over  all,  and  in  thy  hand  power
REIGN  ET1I.

'am.  12. 14.  ye  and  the  king  that  r.  over  you

am.  15.  10.  shall  say,  Absalom  r.  in  Hebron

•  mgs  1.  18.  Adonijah  r.  ||  2  Kings  9.  + 13.  Jehu  r.
hr.  16.  31.  the  Lord  r.  Ps.  96.  10.  |  97.  1. 1  99.  1.

.  47.  8.  God  r.  over  the  heathen,  God  sitteth  on

•  1.  Ld.  r.  he  is  clothed  with  majesty  and  strength
or.  30.  22.  for  a  servant  when  he  r.  and  a  fool

■  52.  7.  that  saith  unto  Zion,  thy  God  r.
c.  17..  18.  which  /■.  over  the  kings  of  the  earth
.  6.  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  r.

REIGN  1NG.

am.  16.  1.  I  have  rejected  him  from  r.  over  Isr.
REINS,

Kidneys.  The  Hebrews  ascribe  to  the  Reins  or
Kidneys,  knowledge,  joy ,  pain,  pleasure  :  hence  it
f  that  in  Scripture  it  is  so  often  said,  that  God
tarcheth  the  hearts  and  the  reins,  Psal.  7.  9.  Jer.

7-  10.1  20.  12.  God  upbraids  the  Jews  with  hav-
ig  him  in  their  mouths,  but  not  in  their  reins.
er.  12.  2.  Thou  art  near  in  their  mouth,  and
<r  from  their  reins  :  thou  art  far  from  their
carts  and  affections:  they  have  neither  fear  of
iee,  nor  love  for  thee,  nor  desire  after  thee,  nor
Vjght  in  thee:  nor  are  they  obedient  to  thee.


■  prophet  being  under  temptation,  by  reason  of
'w  prosperity  of  wicked  men,  complains  that  his
istemper  had  set  fire  to  his  heart,  and  caused  a
real  inflammation  in  his  reins.  Psal.  73-  21.  I
hs  pricked  in  my  reins  :  1  was  heartily  and
teply  wounded  with  disquieting  thoughts  and
fmenting  passions,  envy,  sorrow,  and  anger.
Ae  Psalmist  > ays,  that  his  reins  instructed  him,
sal.  16.  7-  that  is,  his  inward  thoughts  and  ajfec-
[ons,  being  moved  by  the  secret  influence  of  God's
pu  tt,  directed  him  how  to  serve  and  please  God,
nd  put  his  whole  trust  and  confidence  in  him.
ind  Jeremiah  says,  that  the  Lord  had  sent  the
a  lighters  of  his  quiver  into  his  reins,  Lam.  3.
.5.  that  is,  be  has  pierced  me  with  his  arrows,  he
ath  exhausted  his  whole  quiver  upon  me;  for
!e  daughters  of  the  quiver  is  a  poetical  erpres-
h,n  for  arrows.

p.  15.  t  2.  when  any  man  hath  a  running  of  the
r.  because  of  his  issue  he  is  unclean,  22.  t  4.


r.


Job  16.  13.  he  cleaveth  my  r.  asunder,  he  poureth
19.  27-  though  my  r.  be  consumed  within  me
Psal.  7.  9.  for  righteous  God  trieth  the  heart  and  r.

16.  7.  oiy  r.  also  instruct  me  in  the  nisht-seasons

20. 2.  examine  me,  ( >  Lord,  try  my  r.  and  my  heart
73.  21.  and  thus  1  wis  pricked  in  my  r.

139.  13.  for  thou  hast  possessed  my  r.

Prov.  23.  16.  yea,  my  r.  shall  rejoice  when  thy  lips
/'a.  11.5.  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  r.

Jer.  11.  20.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  that  triest  the  r.

12. 2.  thou  art  in  their  mouth,  and  far  from  their  r.

17.  10.  I  try  the  r.  H  20.  12.  that  seest  the  r.

t .am.  3.  13.  he  caused  his  arrow  to  enter  into  my  r.
Rev.  2.  23.  know  1  am  he  whosearcheth  the  r.
REJOICE.

Dent.  12.7-  ye  shall  r.  in  all  that  ye  put  vour  hand
unto*  ye  and  your  households,  14.  26.
16.  14.  thou  shalt  r.  in  thy  feast,  thou  and  thv  son
15.  God  shall  bless  thee,  therefore  thou  shalt  r.
26.  11.  and  thou  shalt  r.  in  every  good  thing
28.  63.  so  the  Lord  will  r.  over  you,  30.  9.

32.  43.  r.  O  ye  nations,  with  his  people

33.  18.  he  said,  r.  Zfcbulun,  in  thy  going  out
Judg.  9.  19.  r.  ye  in  Abimelech,  and  he  in  you

16.  2.3.  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  gathered  to  r.

1  Sam.  2.  1.  because  I  r.  in  thy  salvation

19.  5.  thou  sawest  it,  and  didst  r.  why  wilt  thou

1  Chr.  16.  10.  glory  in  his  holy  name,  let  the  heart

of  them  r.  that  seek  the  Lord,  Psal.  105.  3.
32.  let  the  fields  r.  and  all  that  is  therein

2  Chi  on.  6.  41.  and  let  thy  saints  r.  in  goodness

20.  27.  Lord  hath  made  them  to  r.  Kelt.  12.  43.
dob  3.  +  6.  let  it  not  r.  among  the  days  of  the  year

20.  18.  and  he  shall  not  r.  therein

21.  12.  they  r.  at  the  sound  of  the  organ

Psal.  2.  11.  serve  the  Lord  with  fear.  r.  with  tremb.

5.  11.  let  all  that  put  their  trust  in  thee  r.

9^  14.  I  will  r.  in  thy  salvation

13.  4.  those  that  trouble  me  r.  when  1  am  moved
5.  my  heart  shall  r.  in  thy  salvation
14.7.  Jacob  shall  r.  and  Israel  shall  be  glad

20.  5.  we  will  r.  in  thy  salvation,  and  in  the  name

21.  1.  and  in  thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  her.
30.  1 .  and  hast  not  made  my  foes  to  r.  over  me
33.  21.  for  our  heart  shall  r.  in  him,  because  trusted
35.  9.  my  soul  shall  r.  in  his  salvation

19.  let  not  mine  enemies  wrongfully  r.  over  me
24.  judge  me,  O  Lord,  and  let  them  not  r.  over  me
26.  let  them  be  ashamed  that  r.  at  mine  hurt
38.  16.  hear  me,  lest  they  should  r.  over  me
48.  11.  let  mount  Zion  r.  let  Judah  be  glad
51.  8.  that  the  bones  thou  hast  broken  may  r.

58.  10.  the  righteous  shall  r.  when  heseeth
60.  6.  G.  hath  spoken  in  holiness,  I  will  r.  108.  7.
63.  7.  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  1  r.

11.  but  the  king  shall  r.  in  God

65.  8.  the  outgoings  of  morning  and  evening  to  r.

12.  the  little  hills  r.  ||  66.  6.  there  did  we  r.

68.  3.  let  the  righteous  r.  yea,  exceedingly  r.

4.  r.  before  him  ||71.  23.  my  lips  shall  greatly

85.  6.  revive  us.  that  thy  people  may  r.  in  thee

86.  4.  r.  the  soul  of  thy  servant,  unto  thee  do  I  lift
89.  12.  Tabor  and  Ilermon  shall  r.  in  thy  name

16.  in  thy  name  shall  they  r.  all  the  day
42.  thou  hast  made  all  his  enemies  to  r.

96.  11.  let  the  heavens  r.  !|  12.  trees  of  the  wood  r.
97-  1.  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  r.  isles  be  glad
98.  4.  make  a  loud  noise,  r.  and  sing  praise
104.  31.  the  Lord  shall  r.  in  his  works

106.  5.  that  I  may  r.  in  the  gladness  of  thy  nation

107.  42.  the  righteous  shall  see  it  and  r.

109.  28.  let  them  be  ashamed,  let  thy  servant  r.

119.  162.  I  r.  at  thy  word,  as  one  that  findeth
149.  2.  let  Israel  r.  in  him  that  made  him
Prov.  2.  14.  who  r.  to  do  evil,  and  delight  in  froward.

5.  18.  and  r.  with  the  wife  of  thy  youth

23. 15.  if  thine  heart  be  wise,  m’ine  heart  shall  r.

16.  yea,  my  reins  shall  when  thy  lips  speak

24.  the  fatheV  of  the  righteous  shall  greatly  r.

25.  shall  be  glad,  and  "she  that  bare  thee  shall  r.

24.  17.  r.  not  when  thine  enemy  falleth

27-  9.  ointment  and  perfume  r.  the  heart

28.  12.  when  right,  men  do  r.  there  is  great  glory

29.  2.  when  righteous  are  in  authority,  people  r.

6.  but  the  righteous  doth  sing  and  r.

31.  25.  and  she  shall  r.  in  time  to  come
Led.  3.  12.  for  a  man  to  r.  and  do  good  in  his  life

22.  than  that  a  man  should  r.  in  Ids  works,  5.  19.

4. 16.  they  also  that  come  after  shall  not  r.  in  him
11.  8.  but  if  a  man  live  many  years,  and  r.  in  them
9.  r.  O  young  man,  in  thy  youth,  let  thy  heart

Isa.  8.  6.  and  r.  in  Rezin  and  Remaliah's  son
9.  3.  and  as  men  r.  when  they  divide  the  spoil

13.  3.  even  them  that  r.  in  my  highness

14.  8.  yea,  the  fir-trees  r.  at  thee,  and  the  cedars
29.  r.  not  thou,  whole  Palestina,  because  the  rod

23.  12.  he  said,  thou  shalt  no  more  r.  O  virgin

24.  8.  the  noise  of  them  that  r.  endeth,  joy  ceaseth
29.  19.  poor  among  men  shall  r.  in  the  Il’oly  Oue
35.  1.  the  desert  shall  r.  ||  2.  shall  blossom  and  r.

61.  7.  for  confusion  they  shall  r.  in  their  portion

62.  5.  as  a  bridegroom,  so  shall  God  r.  over  thee
65. 13.  my  servants  shall  r.  but  ye  shall  be  ashamed

19.  I  wiH  r.  in  Jerusalem,  and  joy  in  my  people
66.  10.  r.  ye  with  Jerusalem,  and  be  glad  with  her
14.  and  when  ye  see  this,  your  heart  shall  r.

Jer.  31.  13.  then  shall  the  virgin  r.  in  the  dance,
and  I  will  make  them  r.  from  their  sorrow

32.  41.  1  will  r.  over  them  to  do  them  good
51.  39.  that  they  may  r.  and  sleep,  and  not  awake
Lam.  2.  17.  he  hath  caused  thine  enemy  to  r.  over
b'.zek.  7.  12.  let  not  the  buyer  r.  nor  seller  mourn
35.  15.  as  thou  didst  r.  at  the  inheritance  of  Israel
Has.  9.  1.  r.  not,  O  Israel,  for  joy,  as  other  people
Amos  6.  13.  ye  which  r.  in  a  thing  of  nought
Mic.  7-  8.  r.  not  against  me,  O  mine  enemy
Zeph.  3. 11.  will  take  away  them  that  r.  in  thy  pride

17.  the  Lord  will  r.  over  thee  with  joy
Zech.  2. 10.  sing  and  r.  O  daught.  of  Zion,  lo,  T  come

4. 1 10.  with  the  seven  eyes  of  the  Lord  shall  r.

9.  9.  r.  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion,  shout

10.  7.  and  their  heart  slia.ll  r.  as  through  wine


Luke  1.  14.  and  many  shall  r.  at  his  birth

6.  23.  r.  ye  in  that  day,  and  leap  for  joy-
10.  20.  in  this  r.  not,  rather  r.  because  your  names

15.  6.  r.  with  me.  for  I  have  found  my  sheep
9.  r.  with  me,  for  1  have  found  the  piece  1  lost

19.  37.  whole  multitude  of  the  disciples  began  to  r.
John  4.  36.  he  that  sowetli  and  that  reaped)  may  r.
5.  35.  ye  were  willing  for  a  season  to  r.  in  his  fight

14.  28.  if  ye  loved  me,  ye  would  r.  because  I  said

16.  20.  ye  shall  weep,  but  the  world  shall  r.

22.  but  I  will  see  you,  and  your  heart  shall  r.

.  lets  2.  26.  therefore  did  my  he’art  r.  my  tongue  glad
Horn.  5.  2.  and  r.  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God
12.  15.  r.  with  them  that  do  ;-.  and  weep  with  them

15.  10^  he  saith,  r.  .se  Gentiles,  with  his  people
1  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  r.  as  tho'  they  rejoiced  not

12.  26.  is  one  honoured,  all  the  members  r.  with  it
2 JJor.  2.  3.  lest  1  ha'  e  sorrow  of  whom  1  ought  to  r.
7-  9.  now  1  r.  not  that  ye  were  made  sorry

16.  1  r.  that  1  have  confidence  in  you  in  all  things
GW.  4. 27 .  r.  thou  barren  that  bearest  not,  break  forth
Phil.  1.  18.  and  1  therein  do  r.  yea,  and  will  r.

2. ^16.  that  I  may  r.  in  the  day  of  Christ

17.  yea,  if  1  be  offered,  I  joy  and  r.  with  you  all
]8.  tor  the  shirs  cause  do  ye  joy  and  with  me
28.  that  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye  may  r

3.  3.  we  worship  God,  and  r.  in  Christ  Jesus
Col.  1.  24.  who  now  r.  in  my  sufferings  for  you

1  Thess.  5.  16.  r.  evermore,  pray  without  ceasing
Jam.  1.  9.  let  the  brother  of  low  degree  r.

4.  16.  but  now  ye  r.  in  your  boastings

1  Pet.  1 . 6.  wherein  ye  greatly  r.  though  now-  ye  are

8.  r.  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory

4.  13.  but  r.  in  as  much  as  ye  are  partakers
Lev.  11.  10.  they  thatdwellon  earth  sh.  r.  over  them

12.  12.  therefore  r.  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  dwell.

18.  20.  r.  over  her,  thou  heaven,  and  ye  apostles
See  Glad.

REJOICE  before  the  Lord.

Lev.  23.  40.  ye  shall  r.  before  the  Lord  seven  d a _v s
l)eut.  12.  12.  ye  shall  r.  before  the  Lord  your  God

18.  shalt  r.  bef.  the  Lord  thy  God,  16.  11.  i  27.  7

REJOICE  in  the  Lord.

Psal.  33.  1.  r.  in  the  Lord,  O  ye  righteous,  97.  12.
Isa.  41.  16.  r.  in  the  Lord,  glory  in  the  Holy  One
61.  10.  1  will  greatly  r.  in  the  Lord,  and  be  joyful
Joel  2.  23.  ye  children  of  Zion,  r.  in  the  Lord
(Jab.  3.  18.  yet  1  will  r.  in  the  Lord,  1  will  joy
Zech.  10.  7-  their  heart  shall  r.  in  the  Lord
Phil.  3.  1.  finally,  my  brethren,  r.  in  the  I^ord
4. 4.  in  the  Lord  al  way,  and  again,  I  say,  rejoice
REJOICED.

Exod.  18.  9.  Jethro  r.  for  all  goodness  done  to  Isr.
Dent.  28.  63.  as  the  L.  r.  over  you  to  do  you  good
30.  9.  rejoice  for  good,  as  he  r.  over  thy  fathers
Judg.  19.  3.  the  lather  of  the  damsel  saw  him,  he  r.

1  Sam.  6.  13.  the  men  of  Beth  shemesh  r.  to  see  it
11.  15.  Saul  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  r.  greatly

1  Kings  1.  40.  the  people  r.  so  that  the  earth  rent

5.  7.  Hiram  r.  great  ly  at  Solomon’s  words

2  Rings  11. 14.  the  people  r.  and  blew  with  trumpets
when  Joash  was  made  king,  20.  2  Chr.  23.  13,  21,

1  Chron.  29.  9.  the  people  r.  and  David  also  r.

2  Chron.  15.  15.  and  all  Judah  r.  at  the  oath
24.  10.  all  the  princes  and  all  the  people  r.

29  36.  and  Hezekiali  r.  and  all  the  people

30.  25.  the  strangers  out  of  Israel  and  Judah  r.
Kelt.  12.  43.  all  that  day  they  offered  great  sacri¬
fices  and  r.-the  wives  also,  ami  the  children  r .

44.  foi  Judah  r.  for  the  priests  and  Levites
Esth.  8.  15.  the  city  of  Shushan  r.  and  was  glad
Job  31.  25.  if  1  r.  because  my  wealth  was  great
29.  if  1  r.  at  the  destruction  of  him  that  hated  me
Psal.  35.  15.  but  in  mine  adversity  they  r.

97-  8.  Sion  was  glad,  and  the  daughters  of  Judah  r.
119.  14.  1  have  r.  in  the  way  of  thy  testimonies
Peel.  2.  10.  for  my  heart  r.  in  all  my  labour
.ler.  15.  17.  I  r.  not  in  the  assembly  of  mockers
50.  11.  ye  r.  O  destroyers  of  mine  heritage
Lzek.  25.  6.  the  Ammonites  r.  against  Israel
U os.  10.  5.  the  priests  that  r.  on  it  shall  mourn
Chad.  12.  nor  shouldest  thou  have  r.  over  Judah
Jonah  4.  +  6.  Jonah  r.  with  great  joy  for  the  gourtk
Mat.  2.  10.  when  they  saw-  the  star,  they  r.  with  joy
Luke  1.  47.  my  spirit  hath  r.  in  God  my  Saviour
58.  Elisabeth’s  friends  and  cousins  r .*  with  her
10.21.  in  that  hour  Jesus  r.  in  spirit,  and  said
13.  17.  the  people  r.  for  the  things  that  were  done
John  8.  56.  your  father  Abraham  r.  to  see  my  day
Acts'!.  41.  r.  in  the  works  of  their  own  hands

15.  31.  when  had  read,  they  r.  for  the  consolation

16.  34.  the  jailer  r.  believing  in  God  with  his  house-

1  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  rejoice,  as  though  they  r.  not

2  Cor.  7.  7.  when  he  told  us,  so  that  1  r.  the  more
Phil.  4.  10.  but  1  r.  in  the  Lord  greatly

2  John  4.  I  r.  greatly  that  I  found,  3  John  3.

R  EJOICETH.

1  Sam.  2.  1.  Hannah  said,  my  heart  r.  in  the  Lord
Job  39.  21.  the  horse  r.  in  his  strength
41.  +  22.  and  sorrow  r.  before  leviathan
Psal.  16.  9.  my  heart  is  glad,  and  my  glory  r.

19.  5.  which  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race
28.7.  therefore  my  heart  greatly  r.  1  will  praise
Prov.  11.  It',  when  goeth  well  with  righteous,  city  «

13.  9.  the  light  of  the  righteous  r.  but  the  lamp
15.  30.  the  light  of  the  eyes  r.  the  heart
29.  3.  whoso  loveth  wisdom  r.  his  father
Isa.  5.  14.  and  he  that  r.  shall  descend  into  it
62.  5.  as  the  bridegroom  r.  over  the  bride
64.  5.  thou  meetest  him  that  r.  and  worketh  right
Lzek.  35.  14.  when  the  whole  earth  r.  I  will  make
Mat.  18.  13.  I  say  to  you,  he  r.  more  of  that  sheep.
John  3.  29.  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom  r.  greatly
1  Cor.  13.  6.  r.  not  in  iniquity,  but  r.  in  truth
Jam.  2.  13.  and  merc  y  r.  against  judgment
REJOICES!'.

Jer.  11.  15.  when  thou  doest  evil,  then  thou  1.

REJOICING.

1  Kings  1.  45.  and  they  are  come  up  from  thence-

2  Chron.  23.  18.  to  offer  burnt  offerings  with  r,

Job  8.  21.  till  lie  fill  thy  lips  with  r.

Psal.  19.  8.  his  statutes  are  right,  r.  the  heart

391


REM


REM


REM


Ps.  45. 15.  with  r.  shall  be  brought  to  king  s  palace
107.  22.  let  them  declare  his  works  with  r.

1 18.l5.the  voice  of  ms  in  the  tabernacle  ot  righteous
119.  111.  for  they  are  the  r.  of  my  heart
126.  6.  he  shall  doubtless  come  again  with  r.

Prov.  8.  80.  1  was  his  delight,  r.  always  before  him
31.  r.  in  the  habitable  part  ot  his  earth
Isa.  65.  18.  for,  behold,  1  create  Jerusalem  a  r.

Jer.  15.  16.  thy  word  was  to  me  the  r.  of  my  heart
Hah.  3.  14-  their  r.  was  to  devour  the  poor  secretly
Zevh  2.  15.  this  is  the  r.  city  that  said,  1  am
Luke  15.  5.  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders  r.

Acts  5.  41. r . that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer
8  39.  and  the  eunuch  went  on  his  way  r.

Pom  12.  12.  r.  in  hope,  patient  in  tribulation

1  Cor  15  31.1  protest  by  your  r.  which  1  have

2  Cot. 1.12. for  our  r.  is  this,  testimony  ot  conscience

14. 'that  we  are  your  r.  even  as  ye  also  are  ours

6  lO.as  sorrow ful, yet  always  r. as  poor, yet  making
Gal.  6.  4.  then  shall  he  have  r.  in  himself
Phil  1  26.  that  your  r.  may  be  more  abundant
1  Thess.  2.  19.  for  what  is  our  crown  of  r.  are  not  ye
Heh  3  6.  the  r.  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end
Jam  4  16.  in  your  boastings,  all  such  r.  is  evil
RELEASE  „

Signifies,  a  remission,  or  discharge  :  It  is  called  in
Ilehrew,  Shemittah,  in  Greek,  atpeois  !  that  is,
forgiveness,  or  remission  ;  being  the  same  word
which  in  the  New  Testament  is  used  Jfor  the
pardon  of  sin.  Mat.  26.  28.  Mark  14.  of  which
this  release  of  debts  was  a  shadow.  Deut.  15.  1.

1  his  is  the  manner  of  the  release  :  Every  creditor
that  lendeth  aught  shall  released;  that  is,  not
absolutely  and  finally  forgive  it,  but  jorbeat  it
for  that  year.  ,

Dent.  15.  1.  at  the  end  of  seven  years  make  a  r.

2.  this  is  the  manner  of  the  r.  it  is  the  lord  s  r.

9.  tlie  seventh  year,  the  year  ot  r.  is  at  hann
31  10.  in  the  solemnity  of  the  year  of  r.  in  feast
Fuh  °  18  he  made  a  r.  to  provinces  and  gave  gifts
RELEASE,  Verb.

Deut  15  2.  every  creditor  that  lendeth  shall  r.  it
3  what  is  thine'  with  thy  brother,  hand  shall  r.
Mat.  27. 15.  at  that  feast  governor  was  wont  to  r.  a
prisoner  whom  they  would,  Luke  23.  17.
John  18. 39.  ,  ...  ,,  iT

17  Pilate  said  unto  them,  whom  will  ye  that  I  r.

unto  you  5  21.  Mark  15.  9-  John  18.  39.
Mark  15. 11.  the  chief  priests  moved  the  people,  that
he  should  rather  r.  Parabbas,  Luke  2.3. 18.
Lukefl 3.16.1  will  therefore  chastise  him,  and  r.  hini
°0  Piiate  therefore, willing  to  r.  lesus, spake  again
John  19.  10.  and  that  1  have  power  to  r.  thee.'

12  from  thenceforth  Pilate  sought  to  r.  bun
RELEASED.

Mat.  27.  26.  then  r.  he  Parabbas  to  them,  and
scourged  Jesus,  Mark  15.  15.  Luke  23.  25.
Mark  15.  6.  now  at  the  fea^stdie  r.  one  prisoner

o  Chron.  16.  8.  because  thou  didst  r.  on  the  Lord
RET. 1  ED.

2  Chr.  13.  18.  because  they  r.  on  the  Lord  God
16.  7 .  thou  hast  r.  on  Syria,  and  hast  not  r.  on  Lord
RELIEF.

Act  r  11.  29. disciples  determined  to  send  r.  to  bretm
RELIEVE.

Lev  25.  35.  if  brother  poor,  then  thou  shalt  r.  him
Isa.  1.  17.  r.  the  oppressed,  +  righten  the  oppressed
Lam.  1.  11.  given  pleasant  things  for  meat  tor.  soul
16.  the  comforter  that  should  r.  is  far  from  me
19.  while  they  sought  meat  to  r.  their  souls
1  Tim.  5.  16.  if  any  have  widows,  let  them  r.  them,
that  it  may  r.  them  that  are  widows  indeed
RELIEVED.

1  Tim.  5.  10.  if  she  have  r.  the  afflicted,  if  followed
RELIEVETH.

Psal.  146.  9.  he  r.  the  fatherless  and  the  widow
RELIGION

Is  taken,  [1]  For  a  profession,  or  the  external  and
ceremonial  worship  of  the  Jews,  as  it  was  cor¬
rupted  by  the  traditions  of  the  Pharisees,  Acts

26.  5.  [2]  For  true  godliness,  or  real  religion,
even  that  inward  piety  of  the  heart,  whereby  God
is  truly  acknowledged,  feared,  and  loved,  and  which
inclines  persons  to  perform  all  duties  of  love  or
charity  towards  those  that  are  in  distress,  espe¬
cially  for  religion ,  Jam.  1.  27.  [3]  For  super¬
stition.  Col.  2.  18.  Let  no  man  beguile  you  of
your  reward,  in  worshipping  of  angels  ;  in  the
Greek  it  is,  ev  Opnceeia  r cor  ay-yeXcor,  in  the  re¬
ligion  of  angels.  Do  not  imitate  those  who  affect
to  humble  themselves  before  the  angels,  and  to  pay
them  a  superstitions  worship.

Acts  26.  5.  after  the  straitest  sect  of  our  r.  I  lived
Gal.  1.  13.  ye  heard  my  conversation  in  the  Jews’  r.

14.  profited  in  the  Jews’  r.  above  many  my  equals
Jam.  1. 26.  deceiveth  his  heart,  this  man’s  r.  is  vain

27.  pure  r.  and  undefiled  before  God,  is  this

RELIGIOUS.

Acts  13.  43.  and  r.  proselytes  followed  Paul
Jam.  1.  26.  if  any  among  you  seem  to  be  r.
REMAIN.

Gen.  38.  11.  r.  a  widow  at  thy  father’s  house  till
Exod.  8.  9.  that  the  frogs  r.  in  the  river  only,  11.

12. 10.  let  nothing  of  it  r.  until  the  morning

23.  18.  nor  fat  of  my  sacrifice  r.  till  morning
29.  34.  if  the  flesh  of  consecrations  r.  burn  it
Lev.  19.  6.  if  aught  r.  till  third  day,  shall  be  burnt
25.  28.  then  that  which  is  sold  shall  r.  in  the  hand
27.  18.  reckon,  according  to  the  years  that  r.

Num.  33.  55.  those  which  ye  let  r.  shall  be  pricks
Deut.  2.  34.  we  destroyed  all,  we  left  none  to  r.

16.  4.  nor  shall  any  of  the  flesh  r.  till  morning
19.  20.  those  which  r.  shall  hear  and  fear
21.  13.  she  shall  r.  in  thine  house,  and  bewail
23.  his  body  shall  not  r.  all  night  on  the  tree
Josh.  1.  14.  your  little  ones  and  cattle  shall  r.

2.  11.  neither  did  there  r.  anv  more  courage

8.  22.  so  that  they  let  none  of  them  r.  10.  28,  30.
23.  4.  1  divided  to  you  by  lot  these  nations  that  r.
.  that  ye  come  not  among  these  nations  that  r.
12.  else  if  ye  cleave  to  these,  nations  thatr.

392


Judg.  5. 17.  and  why  did  Dan  r.  in  ships  ?

21.  7-  bow  shall  do  for  wives  tor  them  that  r.  16.

1  Sam.  20.  19.  and  thou  shalt  r.  by  the  stone  Ezel

1  Kings  11. 16.  six  months  did  .loab  r.  in  Edom
18.22.  1,  even  I,  only  r.  a  prophet  of  the  Lord

2  Kings  7. 13.  let  some  take  five  of  the  horses  that  r.
Ezra  9.  15.  for  we  r.  vet  escaped,  as  it  is  this  day
Job  21.  32.  yet  shall  he  r.  in  the  tomb

27.  15.  those  that  r.  of  him  shall  be  buried  in  death

37. 8.  the  beasts  go  to  dens  and  r.  in  their  places
Psal.  55.  7-  then  would  I  r.  in  the.  wilderness
Prov.  2.  21.  and  the  perfet  t  shall  r.  in  the  land
21.  16.  shall  r.  in  the  congregation  ot  the  dead

Isa.  10.  32.  as  yet  shall  he  r.  at  Nob  that  day
32.16.  righteousness  shall  r.  in  the  fruitful  field
65.4.  which  r.  among  the  graves,  and  lodge  in
66.  22.  as  the  new  heavens  and  ngw  earth  shall  r.

before  me,  so  shall  your  seed  and  your  name  r.
Jer .  V>.  3.  residue  ot  them  that  r.  ot  this  evil  tamily
17.  25.  and  this  city  shall  r.  for  ever

24.8.  1  will  give  the  residue  ot  Jerusalem  that  r.

27. 11.  those  will  1  let  r.  still  in  their  own  land

19.  saith  Lord,  concerning  the  vessels  that  r.  21.

30  18.  the  palace  shall  r.  after  the  manner  thereof
38.  4.  he  weakeneth  the  hands  of  the  men  that  r.

42.  17.  none  of  them  shall  r.  44.  14. 1  51. 62.

44.  7.  why  commit  ye  evil,  to  leave  you  none  to  r.
Ezek.J. 11.  violence  is  risen  up,  noneot  them  shall  r.
17.  21.  and  they  that  r.  shall  be  scattered
31.  13.  on  his  ruin  shall  the  fowls  ot  heaven  r.

30  4.  1  will  cause  the  fowls  to  r.  upon  Pharaoh
39. 14.  shall  sever  out  men  to  bury  those  thatr.  ot
Amos  6.  9.  if  there  r.  ten  men  in  one  house
(/bad.  14.  nor  delivered  those  that  r.  in  distress
Zech.  5.  4  flying  roll  shall  r.  in  midst  ot  his  house
12.  14.  all  the  families  thatr.  shall  mourn  apart
Luke  10. 7.  in  the  same  house  r.  eating  such  things
John  6. 12.  he  said,  gather  up  the  fragments  that  r.

15  11.1  have  spoken,  that  my  joy  might  r.  in  you

16.  1  have  chosen  you,  that  your  fruit  should  r.

19  31.  that  the  bodies  should  not  r.  on  the  cross

1  Cor.  7.  11.  if  she  depart,  let  her  r.  unmarried
15.  6.  of  whom  the  sreater  part  r.  to  this  present
1  Thess.  4.  15.  we  alive  r.  till  coming  of  the  I  ord

17.  we  which  are  alive  and  r.  shall  be  caught  up
Heb  12.27. those  things  that  cannot  be  shaken  may  r.

1  John  2.  24.  if  that  which  ye  have  heard  r.  in  you
Rev.  3. 2.  strengthen  the  things  which  r.  ready  to  die

REMAINDER.

Exod.  26. 1 13.  a  cubit  on  the  other  side  in  the  r.

29;  34.  then  thou  shalt  burn  the  r.  with  fire
Lev.  6. 16.  the  r.  shall  Aaron  and  his  sons  eat

7. 16.  on  the  morrow  also  the  r.  shall  be  eaten

17.  but  the  r.  on  the  third  day  shall  be  burnt

18. 1 6.  none  approach  to  rny  that  is  r.  of  his  flesh

2  Sam.  14.  7.  shall  not  leave  neither  name  nor  r.

2' Chron.  36.  +20.  r.  from  sword  carried  to  Babylon
Psal  76  10.  the  r.  of  wrath  shalt  thou  restrain
Jer.  51.  +  35.  the  violence  done  to  me  and  my  r.

REMAINED.

Gen.  7. 23.  Noah  only  r.  alive,  and  they  in  the  ark
14.  10.  and  they  that  r.  fled  to  the  mountain
Exod.  8.  31.  he  removed  the  flies,  there  r.  not  one
10.  15.  there  r.  not  any  green  thing  in  the  trees
19.  there  r.  not  one  locust  in  all  coasts  of  Egypt
14  28.  there  r.  not  so  much  as  one  chariot
Num.  11.  26.  but  there  r.  two  of  the  men  in  camp
35.  28.  because  he  should  have  r.  in  city  of  refuge
36  12.  their  inheritance  r.  in  house  of  their  father
Dent.  3. 11.  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  r.  of  the  giants
4.  25.  when  thou  shalt  have  r.  long  in  the  land
Josh.  10. 20.  the  rest  who  r.  entered  into  fenced  cities
1).  22.  in  Gath  and  Ashdod  there  r.  Anakims
13.  12.  who  r.  of  the  remnant  of  the  giants

18.  2.  and  there  r.  of  Israel  seven  tribes
21.20.  the  T.evites  which  r.  of  the  Kohathites,  26.

Judg.  7.  3.  there  r.-  with  Gideon  but  10, OCX)  men

1  Sam.  11.11.  they  which  r.  were  scattered  so  that

23.  14.  David  r.  in  a  mountain  in  the  wilderness,,

24.  3.  David  and  his  men  r.  in  the  sides  of  the  cave

2  Sam.  1.3.20.  Tamar  r.  desolate  in  Absalom’s  house

1  Kings  22. 46.  the  Sodomites  which  r.  he  took  out  of

2  Kings  10.  1 1 .  Jehu  slew  all  that  r.  of  Ahab’s,  17.
13.  6.  and  there  r.  the  grove  also  in  Samaria
25  22.  people  that  r.  he  set  Gedaliah  over  them

1  Chron.  13. 14.  thearkr.  inthe  family  of  Obed-edom
Eccl.  2.  9.  also  my  wisdom  r.  with  me
Jer.  34.7.  for  these  defenced  cities  r.  of  Judah
37.  10.  there  r.  but  wounded  men  among  them
16.  Jeremiah  had  r.  many  days  in  the  dungeon
21.  he  r.  in  the  court  of  the  prison,  38.  13.

39. 9.  Nebuzar-adan  carried  away  captive  the  rem¬
nant  of  the  people  that  r.  in  the  city,  52. 15.

41. 10.  lshmael  carried  away  captive  them  thatr.
48.  11.  therefore  his  taste  r.  in  him,  his  scent
51.  30.  the  mighty  men  have  r.  in  their  holds
Lam.  2.  22.  in  the  day  of  the  I  ord’s  anger  none  r.
Ezek.  3.  15.  1  r.  there  astonished  seven  days
Dan.  10.8.  there  r.  no  strength  in  me,  17.

13.  and  1  r.  there  with  the  kings  pf  Persia
Mat.  1 1 . 23.  had  been  done  in  Sod.  it  would  have  r.
14  20.  they  took  up  the  fragments  that  r.  twelve
baskets  full,  Luke  9.  17-  John  6.  13.
Luke  1.  22.  he  beckoned  to  them,  and  r.  speechless
Acts  5.  4.  while  it  r.  was  it  not  thine  own  ?

07  41  the  forepart  stuck  fast,  and  r.  immoveable
R  EM  A  IN  EST.

Lam.  5. 19.  thou,  O  Lord,  r.  for  ever,  Heb.  1. 11.
REMAIN  ETH.

Gen.  8. 22.  while  earth  r.  seed-time  shall  not  cease
Exod.  10.  5.  that  which  r.  to  you  from  the  hail

12. 10.  that  which  r.  until  morning  ve  shall  burn
16.  23.  that  which  r.  over  lay  it  up  for  you

Lev.  8.  32.  that  r.  of  the  flesh  and  bread  shall  burn
10. 12.  take  the  meat  offering  that  r.  and  eat  it
16  16.  so  shall  he  do  for  the  tabernacle  that  r.
Num.  24. 19-  and  he  shall  destroy  him  that  r.
Josh.  8.  29.  a  great  heap  of  stones  that  r.  to  this  day
i.3.  1.  there  r.  vet  much  land  to  he  possessed
2.  this  is  the  land  that  yet  r.  all  Geshuri  _

Judg.  5. 13.  he  made  him  that  r.  have  dominion
1  Sam.  6.  18.  Abel,  which  stone  r.  unto  this  day


1  Sam.  16. 11.  Jesse  said,  there  r.  yet  the  youngest

2  Kings  19.  t  30.  the  escaping  ot  .1  udah  that  r.  shall

again  take  root  downward,  La.  37.  +31.

1  Chron.  17.  1.  the  ark  of  the  Ld.  r.  under  curtains
Job  19.  4.  and  be  it,  my  error  r.  with  myself
21.  34.  in  your  answers  there  r.  falsehood
41 . 22.  in  his  neck  r.  strength,  sorrow  turned  to  joy
Isa.  4.  3.  he  that  r.  in  lerusalem  shall  be  called  holy
Jer.  38.  2.  he  that  r.  in  this  city  shall  die  by  sword
47.  4.  to  cut  off  from  Tyrus  every  helper  that  r.
Ezek.  6.  12.  he  that  r.  and  is  besieged  shall  die
Hag.  2.  5.  so  my  Spirit  r.  among  you,  fear  ye  not
Zech.  9.  7.  he  that  r.  even  he  shall  be  for  our  God
John  9.  41.  ye  say,  we  see  ;  therefore  your  sinr.

1  Cor.  7.  29.  it  r.'that  they  that  have  wives  be  as

2  Cor.  3.  11.  much  more  that  which  r.  is  glorious

14.  to  this  day  r.  the  same  veil  untaken  away

9.  9.  it  is  written,  his  righteousness  r.  for  ever
Heb.  4.  6.  seeing  it  r.  that  some  must  enter  therein

9.  there  r.  therefore,  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God

10.  26.  there  r.  no  more  sacrifice  tor  sins

1  John  3.  9.  doth  not  sin,  for  his  seed  r.  in  him

REMAIN  1NG.

Num.  9.  22.  the  cloud  tarried,  r.  on  the  tabernacle
Deut.  3.  3.  smote  him,  till  none  was  leftr.  to  Og
Josh.  10.  33.  he  left  none  r.  37  ,  39  ,  40. 1  11.  8.

21.  40.  which  were  r.  of  the  families  of. the  Levite:
QSam.Tl  .5.  we  should  be  destroyed  from  r.  in  coast-  1

2  Kings  10.  11.  Jehu  slew  all,  he  left  Ahabnoner

1  Chron.  9.  33.  who  r.  in  the  chambers  were  free
Job  18.  19.  nor  shall  have  any  r.  in  his  dwelling
Jer.  30.  +  23.  a  r.  whirlwind  shall  fall  on  the  wickeoj  ■
Chad.  18.  shall  not  be  any  r.  of  the  house  of  Esau  5
John  1.  33.  on  whom  thou  shalt  see  the  Spirit  r.

REMEDY.

2  Chron.  36.  16.  till  w  rath  arose,  till  there  was  nor  I
Prov.  6.15.  suddenly  shall  he  be  broken  without  r:  i
29.  1.  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  andwithoutr.il

REMEMBER,

When  referred  to  God,  signifies.  To  care  for  one.  I
to  pity,  succour,  and  save  him  ;  or,  when,  aftem
some  delays  and  suspensions  of  his  favour,  /ioI
returns  and  shews  kindness  to  him  :  God  remem  ]
bered  Noah  ;  he  shewed  himself  careful  of  Noah!
and  the  creatures  that  were  with  him  in  the  ark  I
by  providing  for  their  deliverance  from  the  deluge] I
according  to  his  promise.  He  remembered  A  brahaml
Gen.  19.  29.  God  remembered  and  heard  Abraji
ham’s  prayer  in  behalf  of  Lot,  and  sent  him  out  0  I
the  overthrow.  God  says,  1  will  remember  thenl
sins  no  more,  Jer.  31.  34.  that  is,  I  will  pardon  I
them  ;  1  will  blot  them  out  of  the  book  of  my  re  I
membrance.  When  applied  to  men,  it  signifies;  j
[1]  Either  to  call  to  mind  something  past,  or  t  j
keep  in  mind  something  for  the  time  to  come  \
Exod.  20.  8.  Luke  17-  32.  [2]  To  muse,  or  medi  j
tate  upon,  Psal.  63.  6.  [3]  rlo  put  trust  and  con  j
fidence  in,  Psal.  20.  7.  [4]  To  consider ,  Mat.  If]  I
9.  [5]  To  celebrate  and  extol,  1  Chron.  16.  12  ,
[6]  To  make  a  collection  or  contribution  for,  Gal;  I
2.  10.  [7]  To  call  one  to  an  account,  to  censure
or  punish,  3  John  10.  [8]  Jo  esteem,  Ecci

9.  15.

Gen.  40. 23.  yet  did  not  ihe  butler  r.  Joseph
Exod.  13.  3.  Moses  said  to  the  people,  r.  this  day
20.  8.  r.  the  sabbath-day  to  keep  it  holy
32. 13.  r.A braham,  Isaac,  and  Israel,  Dent.  9.2",
Num.  11.  5.  we  r.  the  fish  which  we  did  eat  in  F.gyil

15.  39.  r.  all  the  commandments  of  the  Lord

40.  that  ye  may  r.  and  do  my  commandments
Deut.  5.  15.  and  r.  that  thou  wast  a  servant  in  tl

land  of  Egypt,  15.  15. 1  16.  12.  1  24.  18,  2‘
7. 18.  thou  shalt  r.  what  the  l.ord  did  to  Pharaotf

8.  2.  thou  shalt  r.  all  the  way  the  l.ord  led  thee  ;

18.  r.  the  Lord  givetli  thee  power  to  get  wealth;

9.  7.  r.  how  thou  provokedst  the  Lord  thy  God

15.  15.  r.  that  thou  wast  a  bond-man  in  Egypt,  an
the  Lord  redeemed  thee,  16.  12. 1  24.  18,  25 .!

16.  3.  r.  the  day  when  thou  earnest  out  of  Egypt!

24.  9.  r.  what  the  Lord  thy  God  did  to  Miriam

25.  17.  r.  what  Amalek  did  to  thee  by  the  way
32.  7.  r.  the  days  of  old,  consid.  the  years  of  mar.;

Josh.  1. 13.  r.  w  ord  w  hich  Moses  commanded  yov
Judg.  9.  2.  r.  also  that  1  am  your  bone  and  flesh  ;

1  Sam.  25.  31.  Abigail  said,  then  r.  thine  handmaC

2  Sam.  14.  11.  let  the  kingr.  the  Lord  thy  God

19.  19.  neither  do  thou  r.  what  thy  servant  did
2  Kings  9.  25.  r.  when  I  and  thou  rode  after  Ah:

20.  3.  r.  how  1  have  walked  befoie  thee,  Isa.  38.

1  Chr.  16. 12.  r.  his  marvellous  works,  Psal.  105.  1

2  Chron.  6.  42.  r.  the  mercies  of  David  thy  serva
Nek.  1.  8.  r.  the  word  thou  commandedst  Moses
4. 14.  r.  the  Lord,  which  is  great  and  terrible
13.  29.  r.  them  that  have  defiled  the  priesthood

Job  4.  7.  r.  who  ever  perished,  being  innocent?  !
7.7.O  r.  my  life  is  wind,  eye  shall  no  more  see  gd

10.  9. 1  that  thou  hast  made  me  as  the  clay

11.  16.  and  r.  it  as  waters  that  pass  away
36.  24.  r.  that  thou  magnify  his  work

41.  8.  lay  thine  hand  upon  him,  r.  the  battle
Psal.  20.  3.  r.  all  thy  offerings  and  accept  sacriff

7.  but  we  will  r.  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God
22.  27.  all  ends  of  world  shall  r.  and  turn  to  Lor
25.  6.  r.  thy  mercies,  they  have  been  ever  of  or
7.  r.  not  the  sins  of  my  youth,  r.  thou  me
74.  2.  r.  thy  congregat.  which  thou  hast  purchas;
18.  r.  this,  that  the  enemy  hath  reproached  <
22.  r.  how  the  foolish  man  reproacheth  thee  dan
79.  8.  O  r.  not  against  us  former  iniquities
89.  47.  r.  how  short  my  time  is,  why  hast  thou  ma
50.  r.  Lord  the  reproach  of  thy  servants


iA*.  /.  J^OI  11  llicicpimiviivi  ui;  — . .

103.  18.  and  to  those  that  r.  his  commandments


1VM.  JO.  iv/  umoc  men  #  .  ^ ;

119.49.  r.  the  word  unto  thy  servant,  upon  wh.
132.  1.  Lord,  r.  David,  and  all  his  afflictions
137  7.  r.  O  Lord,  the  children  of  Edom,  who  sf.
Prov.  31. 7.  let  him  drink,  and  r.  his  misery  no  m<
Eccl.  5.  20.  he  shall  notmuch  r.  thedavsof  his  1
11.8.  yet  let  him  r.  the  days  of  darkness

12.  1.  r.  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  ot  thy  you
Cant.  1.4.  we  will  r.  thy  love  more  than  wune
Isa.  43.  18.  r.  ye  not  the'former  things  ?  46.  9.

25.  for  mine  own  sake  I  will  not  r.  thy  sms


R  E  M


REM


REM


a  44. 21.  r.  these ,  O  Jacob  and  Isr.  thou  my  serv
£>•  8.  r.  this,  and  shew  yourselves  men
7.7.  neither  didst  r.  the  latter  end  of  it
4.  4.  shalt  not  /'.  the  reproach  of  thy  widowhood
4.5.  thou  meetest  those  that  r.  thee  in  thy  ways

3.  be  not  wroth,  neither  r.  iniquity  for  ever

r.  3.  16.  neither  shall  they  r.  it,  neither  visit  it
4. 10.  he  will  now  /-.  their  iniquity,  and  visit
21.  r.  break  not  thy  covenant  with  us

7.2.  whilst  their  children  /-.  their  altars  and  groves

3.  20.  r.  that  1  stood  before  thee  to  speak  good

1.  20.  since  1  spake  1  do  earnestly  r.  him  still

4.  21.  and  the  people,  did  not  the  Lord  r.  them  ?
1.  50.  ye  that  have  escaped,  r.  the  Lord  afar  off
im.  3. 1 19.  r .  mine  affliction  and  my  misery

1.  r.  O  Lord,  what  is  come  upon  us,  consider
■etc.  16.  61.  then  shalt  r.  thy  ways, 20. 43.  1  36.  31.
53.  that  thou  mayest  r .  and  be  confounded

5.  2( .  so  that  thou  shalt  not  r.  Eeypt  any  more
»•  8-  13.  now  will  he  r.  their  iniquity,  and  visit
9.  therefore  he  will  /-.  iniquity,  and  visit  their  sins
ic. 6.  5.  O  my  people,  /-.  now  what  Balak  consult.
ab.  3.  2.  OLd.  revive  thy  work,  in  wrath  r.  mercy

al.  4.  4.  r.  the  law  ot  Moses  my  servant

at.  16. 9-  neither  r.  the  live  loaves,  Murk  8.  18.

.  63.  sir,  we  r.  that  deceiver  said,  1  will  rise  again
■ke  1.  72.  the  mercy,  and  to  r.  his  holy  covenant
».  25.  r.  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst
'.  32.  r.  Lot  s  wife  ||  24.  6.  r.  how  he  spake  to  you
hn  15. 20.  r.  the  word  that  1  said  unto  you
i.  4.  that  when  the  time  shall  come,  ye  may  r.

«  20.  31.  r.  that  by  the  space  of  three  years
■o.  r.  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  how  he  said
!/.  2.  10.  they  would  that  we  should  r.  the  poor
«.2.  11.  r.  that  ye  being  in  time  past  Gentiles
f-4. 18.  r.  my  bonds,  grace  be  with  you,  amen
bess.  2.  9.  tor  ye  r.  brethr.  our  labour  and  travail
Viess.  2.  5.  r.  ye  not  that  I  told  you  these  things
im.  2. 8.  r.  that  Jes.  Christ  was  raised  from  dead
b.  13.  3.  t.  them  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound
.  r.  them  which  have  the  rule  over  you
ie  11.  r.  the  words  spoken  of  the  apostles  of  Jes.
‘•v.  2.  5.  T.  from  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  rep.

3.  r.  how  thou  hast  received,  and  hold  fast
.  1  REMEMBER.

n.  41.  9.  saying,  I  do  r.  1113-  faults  this  day

am.  15.  2.  1  r.  that  which  Amalek  did  to  Israel
21.6.  even  when  I r.  1  am  afraid,  and  trembling
r/.  42.  4.  when  1  r.  these,  I  pour  out  my  soul
.6.  when  1  r.  thee  upon  my  bed,  and  meditate

7.  6.  if  1  do  not  r.  thee,  let  my  tongue  cleave

3- 5.  I  r.  the  days  of  old,  1  muse  on  thy  works

•  2.  2.  I  r.  thee  the  kindness  of  thy  youth

s.  7.  2.  consider  not  that  I  r.  all  their  wickedness

I  will  REMEMBER.

’i.  9.  15. 1  will  r.  my  covenant  between  me,  16.

!•  26.  42 .  I  will  r.  mv  covenant  with  Abraham
3.  1  will  tor  their  sakes  /.  the  covenant
tl.  42.  6.  therefore  will  I  r.  thee  from  Jordan
.  10.  but  I  will  r.  the  years  of  the  right  hand
1.  1  will  r.  the  works,  1  w.  r.  thy  wonders  of  old
.  31.  34.  and  I  will  r.  their  sin  no  more,  I  will
;  1ct(irgUre  their  iniquity,  Heb.  8.  12.  |  10.  17.

16.  60.  1  will  r.  mv  covenant  with  thee
)hn  10. 1  will  r.  hisd>.eds  which  hedoeth

REMEMBER  me.

”•40.  +  14.  r.  me  with  thee,  and  shew  kindness
g.  16. 28.  r.  me,  that  I  may  be  at  once  avemred
am.  1.  11.  look  on  thine  handmaid,  and  r.  me
”•  13. 14.  r.  me,  O  God,  concerning  this,  22,  31.
14.  13.  appoint  me  a  set  time,  and  r.  me
i/.  25.  7.  r.  me,  for  thy  goodness’  sake,  O  Lord
3 -  4.  r  me  with  the  favour  that  thou  bearest
.  Id.  15.  O  Lord,  thou  knowest,  r.  me,  and  visit
’*•  6.  9.  and  they  that  escape  of  you  shall  r.  me
inn  9' t  nc  ^ey  shall  r.  me  in  far  countries
re 23. 42.  L.  r.  me  when  thou  comest  to  thy  kingd.
or.  11.  2.  that  ye  r.  me  in  all  things,  and  keep

REMEMBRANCE.

17.  14. 1  will  put  out  the  r.  of  Amalek
w.  5.  lo.  an  offering,  bringing  iniquity  to  r.

~5.-  19.  thou  shalt  blot  out  the  r.  of  Amalek
-6. 1  said,  I  would  make  the  r.  of  them  to  cease
im.  18M8.  I  have  no  son  to  keep  my  name  in  r.

17 -  10-  art  thou  come  to  call  my  sin  to  r.  ?

1 8- 1 1.  his  r.  shall  perish  from  the  earth
«•  6.  5.  for  in  death  there  is  no  r.  of  thee

•  4.  give  thanks  at  r.  of  his  holiness,  97.  12.

16.  to  cut  off  the  r.  of  them  from  the  earth

•  1.  a  psalm  of  David,  to  bring  to  r.  70. 1.
a  n1  , to  r'  song  in  the  night

j  in  t  ,  nitme  of  Israel  be  no  more  in  r.

V  and  thy  r.  unto  all  generations
-•  0.  the  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  r.
b  *•  IE  there  is  no  r.  of  former  things

no  r.  of  the  wise  more  than  the  fool

•  --6.  8.  the  desire  ot  our  soul  is  to  the  r.  of  thee
'  ~6-  Put  roe  in  r.  let  us  plead  together

8.  behind  the  doors  hast  thou  set  up  thy  r.

!?•  o,2^onVy  so.'jl  them  still  in  r.  is  humbled
1  ,-E  -*3.  but  he  will  call  to  r.  the  iniquity
’•because,  I  say,  that  ye  are  come  to  r.

•  tailing  to  r.  the  days  of  her  youth,  21.

/*  ''j’1"*1  bringeth  their  iniquity  to  r.

'•  3  , 16-  a  book  of  r.  was  written  before  him
Peter  calling  to  r.saithto  him
,  A*  *ie  hath  hoi  pen  Israel  in  r.  of  his  mercy

•  19.  this  do  in  /-.  of  me,  1  Cor.  11.  24.

”  JE  26.  he  shall  bring  all  things  to  your  r.

■  -3E  thine  alms  are  had  in  7.  before  God
1.7.  timothy,  who  shall  bringyou  into  r.
tl’ls.d4<3  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  r.  of  me
I  thank  my  God  upon  every  r.  of  you
■  „  •  Jv6- that  ye  have  good  r.  of  us  always
,lr1,  6.  it  thou  put  the  brethren  in  r.

E  ?•  that  1  have  r.  of  thee  in  my  prayers
hen  I  call  to  r.  the  unfeigned  fakli  in  thee
id  eJ 4u,re  1  Pl)tthee  in  r.  that  thou  stir  up
4  Jo  these  things  put  them  in  r.  charging
>’  e  ,  Vi  t,lose  sacrifices  there  is  a  r.  of  sins
1  call  to  r .  the  former  days  in  which
'• J*  to  put  you  always  in  r.  Jude  5.


r.


2  Pet.  1.13.  T  think  it  meet  to  stir  you  up  put. you  inr
15.  be  able  to  ha'  e  these  things  always  in  r.

3.  1.  1  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of  r.

Rev.  16  19.  great  Babylon  came  in  r.  before  God
REMEMBRANCER.

2  Sam.  8.  t  16.  Jeboshaphat  the  son  of  Ahilud  was
r.  20.  t  24.  1  Kings  4.  t  3.  1  C/iron.  18.  t  15.
REMEMBRANCES.

Job  13. 12.  your  r.  are  like  to  ashes,  bodies  to  bodies
REMEMBERED.

Gen. 8. 1.  God  r.  Noah  ||  19.  29.  God  r.  Abraham
30.  22.  God  r.  Rachel  ||  42.  9.  Joseph  r.  dreams
Lxod.  2. 24.  God  r.  his  covenant  with  Abraham,  6. 5.
Num.  10.  9.  ye  shall  be  r.  before  the  Lord  your  God
Judy.  8.  34.  children  of  Israel  r.  not  the  Lord

1  Sam.  1.  19.  and  the  Lord  r.  Hannah

2  Chr.  24.  22.  thus  Joasli  r.  not  the  kindness
Esth.  2.  1.  Ahasuerus  r.  Vasliti,  what  she  had  done

9.  28.  that  these  days  of  Purim  should  be  r.

Job  24.  20.  the  sinner  shall  be  no  more  r.

Ps. 45. 17.  1  will  make  thy  name  to  be  r.  in  all  gen
77-  3.1  r.  God  and  was  troubled,  1  complained
78.  35.  they  r.  that  God  was  their  Saviour
39.  for  he  r.  that  they  were  but  flesh,  a  wind
42.  they;-,  not  his  hand,  when  he  delivered  them
98.  3.  he  r.  his  mercy  toward  the  house  of  Israel

105.  8.  he  hath  r.  his  covenant  for  ever
42.  for  he  r.  his  holy  promise,  and  Abraham

106.  7.  they  r.  not  the  multitude  of  thy  mercies
45.  he  r.  tor  them  h.s  covenant,  and  repented

109.  14.  let  the  iniquity  of  his  fathers  be  r.

16.  because  that  he  r.  not  to  shew  mercy
111.  4.  hath  made  his  wonderful  works  to  be  r.
119.  52.  1  r.  thy  judgments  of  old,  O  Lord
55.  1  have  r.  thy  name,  O  Lord,  in  the  night

136.  23.  who  r.  us  in  our  low  estate,  his  mercy

137.  1.  we  sat  down,  yea,  we  wept,  when  we  r.  Zion
Reel.  9.  15.  yet  no  man  /-.  that  same  poor  man
Isa.  23.  16.  sing  many  songs,  that  thou  mayest  be  r.
p7.  11.  thou  hast  not  r.  me,  nor  laid  to  thy  heart
63.  11.  then  he  r.  the  da3’S  ot  old,  Moses,  and  peo.
65.  17-  and  the  former  heavens  shall  not  be  r.

Jer.  11.  19-  that  his  name  may  be  no  more  r.

Lam.  1.7.  Jerusalem  r.  in  the  days  of  her  afflictions
2.  1.  r.  not  his  footstool  in  the  day  of  his  anger
Ezek.  3.20.  his  righteousness  shall  not  be  r.  33.  13
16.  22.  thou  hastnotr.  the  days  of  thy  youth,  43.

>21.  24.  because  ye  made  your  iniquity  to  be  r.

32.  thou  shalt  be  for  fuel,  thou  shalt  be  no  more
25.  10.  that  the  Ammonites  may  not  be  r.

Hos.  2.  17.  they  shall  no  more  be  r.  Zech.  13.  2.

Amos  1. 9.  and  r.  not  the  brotherly  covenant
Jonah  2.  7-  when  my  soul  fainted,'  I  /-.  the  Lord
Mat.  26. 75.  Peter  r.  the  words  of  Jes.  Luke  22.  61.
Luke  24.  8.  they  r.  his  words,  and  told  these  things
John  2.  17.  his  disciples  r.  that  it  was  written
22.  when  he  was  risen,  they  r.  that  he  had  said
12.  16.  when  Jesus  was  glorified  then  they  r
Aets  11.  16.  then  r.  1  the  word  of  the  Lord
Heb.  11.  t  22.  by  faith  Joseph  r.  the  departing
Rev.  18.  5.  and  God  hath  r.  her  iniquities
.  REMEM  BEREST.

Psal.  88.  5.  like  the  slain  whom  thou  r.  no  more
Mat.  5.  23.  there  r.  that  thy  brother  hath  aught
REMEMBERETH.

Psal.  9.  12.  .when  he  maketh  inquisition,  he  r.

103. 14.  he  knoweth  our  frame,  he  r.  we  are  but  dust
Eccl.  5.  f  20.  yet  he  r.  the  days  of  his  life
Lam.  l.  9.  she  r.  not  her  last  end,  she  came  down
John  16.  21.  she  r.  no  more  the  anguish,  for  joy
2  Cor.  7  15.  whilst  he  r.  the  obedience  of  you  all
REMEMBERING.

Lam.  3.  19.  r.  mine  affliction  and  my  misery

1  1/iess.  1.  3.  r.  without  ceasing  your  work  of  faith

REMISSION.

Mat.  26.  28.  blood  shed  for  many,  for  the  r.  of  sins
Mark  1.  4.  baptism  of  repentance  for  r.  Luke  3.  3.

I. uke  \.  77-  knowledge  of  salvation  by  r.  of  sins

24.  47.  that  r.  should  be  preached  in  his  name
Acts  2.  38.  repent,  and  be  baptized  for  /•.  of  sins

10.  43.  whosoever  believeth  shall  receive  r.  of  sins
Rom.  .3.  25.  for  the  r.  of  sins  that  are  past
Heb.  9.  22.  without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  r.

10. 18.  where  r.  is,  there  is  no  more  offering  for  sin

REMIT,  TED.

John  20.  23.  whose  soever  sins  ye  r.  they  are  r
REMNANT.

Gen.  45.  +7-  God  sent  me  before,  to  put  for  you  a  r
Lev.  2.  3.  the  r.  of  meat  offering  shall  be  Aaron's
5.  13.  r.  shall  be  the  priest’s  as  a  meat  offering
14.  18.  the  r.  of  the  oil  that  is  in  the  priest’s  hand
Dent.  3.  11.  for  only  Og  king  of  Bashan  remained
of  the  r.  of  giants,  Josh.  12.  4.  |  13.  12
28.  51.  his  eye  evil  toward  the  r.  of  his  children  '
Josh.  23.  12.  if  ye  cleave  to  the  r.  of  these  nations

2  Sam.  21.  2.  the  Gibeonites  were  of  r.  of  Amorites

1  Lings  12.  23.  speak  to  the  r.  of  the  people,  sayin
14.  10.  I  will  take  away  the  r.  of  Jeroboam
22.46.  r.of  the  Sodomites  Jehoshaphat  took  away

2  A  inys  19.  4.  lift  up  thy  prayer  for  the  r.  lxa.3 7.4.

30.  the  /-.  escaped  shall  take  root,  Isa.  37.  31.

31.  out  ot  Jerusalem  shall  go  forth  a  r.  Isa.  37.  32
21.  14.  I  will  forsake  the  r.  of  mine  inheritance

25.  11.  the  r.  did  Nebuzar-adan  carry  away
2  C /iron.  30.  6.  he  will  return  to  the  r.  of  you
Ezra  3.  8.  the  r.  of  their  brethren  the  priests
9. 8.  grace  shewed  from  L.  to  leave  us  a  r.  to  escape

14.  so  that  there  should  be  no  r.  nor  escaping
Ngh.  1. 3.  the  r.  that  are  left  of  the  captivity
Job  22.  20.  but  the  r.  of  them  the  fire  consumed
Isa.  1.  9.  *unless  the  Ld.  had  left  us  a  very  small  r.

7.  t  3.  the  r.  shall  return,  even  the  r.  10.  21.

II.  11.  set  his  hand,  to  recover  the  r.  of  his  people
16.  there  shall  be  an  high-way  for  the  r.  of  his

14.  22.  I  will  cut  off  from  Babylon  the  r.

30.  I  will  kill  thy  root,  and  he  shall  slay  thy  r

15.  9.  I  will  bring  lions  on  the  r.  of  the  land

16.  14.  the  r.  shall  be  very  small  and  feeble

17.  3.  the  kingdom  shall  cease  from  r.  of  Syria
46.  3.  hearken  all  the  r.  of  the  house  of  Israel

Jer.  6.  9.  they  shall  glean  the  r.  of  Israel  as  a  vine

11.  23.  and  there  shall  be  no  r.  of  them


Jer.  15.  11.  verily  it  shall  be  well  with  thy  /

1  will  - . .

25.  20.  the  r.


23.  3.  and  I


will  gather  the  r.  of  my  Hock
.  —  . .  of  Ashdod  did  drink  of  the  cup
31.  7.  O  Lord,  save  thy  people,  the  r.  of  Israel

39.  9.  Nebuzar-adan  carried  away  the  r.  of  peopl"

40.  11.  the  king  of  Babylon  had  left  a  r.  of  Judah
15.  Jews  be  scattered,  and  r.  ot  Judah  perish

41.  16.  Johanan  took  the  r.  of  the  people,  43.  5.

42.  2.  pray  for  us  to  the  Lord,  even  for  all  this  r.
15.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  r.  of  Judah
19.  O  ye  r.  ot  Judah,  go  ye  not  into  Egypt

44.  12.  1  will  take  the  r.  ot  Judah,  that  have  set
14.  so  that  none  of  the  r.  of  Judah  shall  escape
28.  the  r.  shall  know  whose  words  shall  stand
47.  4.  Lord  will  spoil  r.  of  the  country  of  Caphtor
5.  Ashkelon  is  cut  off',  with  the  r.  ot  their  valley
Ezek.  5.  10.  the  whole  r.  of  thee  will  I  scatter
6.  8.  yet  will  1  leave  a  r.  that  ye  may  have  some


^  -  .  .  . •  v  »  #  .  tiicii .  j  1  ua^  urtve

11.  13.  Lord,  wilt  thou  make  an  end  of  the  r
14.  22.  yet  behold,  therein  shall  be  left  a  r.

23.  25.  and  thy  r.  shall  tall  by  the  sword
25.  16.  1  will  destroy  the  r.  of  the  sea  coast

Joel  2  32.  in  the  r.  whom  the  Lord  shall  call
Amos  1.  8.  the  r.  of  the  Philistines  shall  perish

5.  15.  God  will  be  gracious  to  the  r.  of  Joseph

9.  12.  that  they  may  possess  I  he  r.  of  Edom
Mic.  2.  12.  1  will  surely  gather  the  /-.  of  Israel

4.  7.  and  1  will  make  her  that  halted,  a  r.

5.  3.  the  r.  ot  his  brethren  shall  return  to  Israel

7.  the  r.  ot  Jacob,  in  the  midst  of  many  people

8.  the  r.  of  Jacob  shall  be  among  the  Gentiles

7.  18.  the  transgression  of  the  r.  of  his  heritage
Dab.  2.  8.  all  the  r.  of  the  people  shall  spoil  thee
Zeph.  1.  4.  and  1  will  cut  off'  the  r.  of  Baal

2.  7.  the  coast  shall  be  for  the  r.  of  house  of  Judah

9.  the  r.  ot  my  people  shall  possess  them

3.  13.  the  r.  ot  Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity

Day.  1.  12.  all  the  r.  of  the  people  obeyed  the  Lord
14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  the  r.

Zech.  8.  6  it  it  be  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  the  r.

12.  1  will  cause  the  r.  of  this  people  to  possess
Mat.  22.  6.  the  r.  took  his  servants,  and  slew  them
Rom.  9.  27 . . Esaias  also  crieth,  a  r.  shall  be  saved

11.  5.  at  this  present  time  also  there  is  a  r.

Rev.  11.  13.  the  were  affrighted,  anil  gave  glory

12.  17.  the  dragon  went  to  make  war  with  the  r.
19.21.  the/-,  we're  slain  with  the  sword  of  him  that

REMORSE.

Rom.  11.  t  8.  God  hath  given  them  the  spirit  of  r.
_  REMOVE.

Gen.  48.  17.  he  held  up  his  father’s  hand  to  /-.  it
Sum.  36.  7.  so  shall  not  the  inheritance  of  Israel  r.

from  tribe  to  tribe,  but  keep  to  his  tribe,  9.
Dent.  19.  14.  shalt  not/-,  thy  neighbour’s  land-mark
Josh.  3.  3.  then  ye  shall  /-.  from  your  place  and  go
Judy.  9.  29.  then  would  1  r.  in  Abimelech
2  Sam.  6.  10.  so  David  would  not  r.  the  ark
2  Kings  23.  27-  the  Lord  said,  I  will  /-.  Judah  also
24.  3.  came  on  Judah,  to  r.  them  out  of  his  sight
2  Chron.  3.3.  8.  neither  will  1  any  more  /-.  Israel
Job  24.  2.  spine  r.  the  land-marks,  they  take  away
27-  5.  1  will  not  /-.  mine  integrity  from  me
Psal.  36.  11.  let  not  the  hand  ot  the  wicked  r.  me
39.  10.  r.  thy  stroke  away  from  me,  l  am  consumed
119.22.  r.  from  me  reproach  and  contempt
29.  r.  from  me  the  way  ot  lying,  and  grant  me
Pjov.  4.  27.  turn  not,  r.  thy  foot  from  evil
5.  8.  r.  thy  way  far  from  her,  and  come  not  nigh
22.  28.  r.  not  the  ancient  land-mark,  23.  10.

30. 8.  r.  from  me  vanity  and  lies
Eccl.  11.  10.  therefore  r.  sorrow  from  thy  heart
Isa.  10.  +  27.  his  burden  shall  /-.  from  thy  shoulder

13.  13.  the  earth  shall  /-.  out  of  her  place

31.  t  2.  yet  he  is  wise,  and  will  notr.  his  words

46.  7.  he  standeth,  from  his  place  shall  he  not  r.
Jer.  4.  1.  return  unto  me,  then  shalt  thou  not  r.

27. 10.  prophesy  a  lie,  to  r.  you  far  from  your  land

32.  31.  that  1  should  /-.  it  from  before  my  face
50.  3.  they  shall  /-.  they  shall  depart  man  and

beast

8.  r.  out  ot  the  midst  of  Babylon,  and  go  forth
Ezek.  12.  3.  r.  by  day,  thou  shalt  r.  from  thy  place
21.  26.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  r.  the  diadem

45.  9.  O  princes,  r.  violence  and  spoil

Hos.  5.  10.  they  were  like  them  that  /-.  the  bound
bet  2.  20.  but  I  will  r.  the  northern  army
3.  6.  that  ye  might  r.  them  from  their  border
Mic.  2.  3.  from  which  ye  shall  not  r.  your  necks
Zech.  3.  9.  1  will  r.  the  iniquity  of  that  land

14.  4.  half  the  mountain  shall  /-.  toward  north
Mat.  17.  20.  ye  shall  say,  r.  hence,  and  it  shall  r.
Luke  22.  42.  if  thou  be  willing,  1 .  this  cup  from  me
1  Cor.  13.  2.  all  faith,  so  that  1  could  /-.  mountains
Rev.  2. 5.  or  else  1  will /-.thy  candlestick  out  of  place

REMOVED.

Gen.  8.  13.  Noah  r.  the  covering  of  the  ark
12.  8.  Abram  r.  13,  18.  ||  26.  22.  Isaac  r.  from  thence
30.  35.  Jacob  /-.  the  he-goats  that  were  spotted

47.  21.  and  Joseph  r.  the  people  to  cities
Exod.  8.  31.  the  Lord  r.  the  swarms  of  flies

14.  19.  the  angel  of  God  r.  and  went  behind  them

20.  18.  the  people  saw  it  and  r.  and  stood  afar  off'
Num.  12.  16.  the  people  r.  from  Ilazeroth  to  Paran

21.  12.  they  r.  and  pitched  in  the  valley  of  Zared

13.  r.  and  pitched  on  the  other  side  ot  Arnon
3.3.  5.  the  children  of  Israel  /-.  from  Raineses

7.  they  r.  from  Etham  |l  9.  Marah  ||  10.  Elim
11.  they  r.  from  the  Red  sea  ||  14.  r.  from  A  lush
16.  r.  from  the  deseit  of  Sinai  ||  21.  from  Libnan
24.  r.  from  mount  Shapher  j|  25.  from  Haradah

33.  26.  r.  from  Makheloth  ||  28.  from  Terali
32.  r.  from  Bene-jaakan  ||  34.  from  Jotbathah
36.  they  /-.  from  Ezion  gaber  ||  37.  from  Kadesh

46.  r.  from  Dibon-gad  ||  from  Almon-diblathaim
Dent.  28.  25.  and  shall  be  r.  into  all  kingdoms
Josh.  3.  1.  they  r.  from  Shittim,  and  came  to  Jordan

14.  when  the  people  r.  to  pass  over  Jordan

11. 1 15.  Joshua  /-.  nothing  of  all  Lord  commanded

1  Sam.  6.  3.  known  why  his  hand  is  not  /-.  from  you

18.  13.  therefore  Saul  r.  David  from  him

2  Sam.  20.  12.  he  r.  Amasa  out  of  the  high-way
1  Kings  15.  12.  Asa  r.  the  idols  his  fathers  made

393


REP


REP


REN


4  Kin.  15. 13.  Maachah  his  moth,  even  hei  he  > .  from
being  queen,  tor  making  an  idol,  2  L/iron.  id.  id.
14.  the  hisrh  places  were  not  r.  2  Kings  lo.  4,  do.
•2  Kings  16.  17-  Ahaz /.the  layer  from  off  the  bases


~17.  18.  LordV.  Israel  out  of  his  sight,  23.  1  23.  27-


26  the  nations  which  thou  hast  r .  know  not
18.  4.  Hezek.  r.  the  high  places,  and  brake  images

1  Chron.  13.  +  13.  so  David  r.  not  the  ark  home

2  Chrm.  35. 12.  and  they  r.  the  burnt  offerings
36.  +  3.  the  king  of  Egypt  r.  Jehoahaz  at  Jerusal.
rob  14.  18.  and  the  rock  is  r.  out  of  his  place
18.  4.  shall  the  rock  be  r.  out  of  his  place  .

.19.  10.  and  my  hope  hath  he  r.  like  a  tree
32  +  15.  they  r.  speeches  from  themselves
36’  16.  so  would  he  have  r.  thee  out  ot  the  strait
Psal.  46.  2.  we  will  not  tear  though  the  earth  be  i .
81.  6. 1  r.  his  shoulder  trom  the  burden
103  12.  so  far  hath  he  r.  our  transgressions
loV.  5.  the  earth,  that  it  should  not  be  r .  tor  ever
125.  1 .  shall  be  as  mount  Zion,  w  Inch  cannot  be  r.
Prov.  10.  30.  the  righteous  shall  never  be  r.
isa.  6.  12.  till  the  I  ord  have  r.  men  tar  away

10.13,  1  have  r.  the  bounds  of  the  people
31.  Madmena'.i  is  r.  the  inhabitants  gather
17.  +  11.  harvest  shall  be  r .  in  day  of  inheritance
22!  25.  the  nail  fasten,  in  the  sure  place  s.iall  be  r .

24.  20.  the  earth  shall  be  r.  like  a  cottage
26. 15.  thou  hast  r.  it  far  to  all  ends  or  the  earth
20.  13.  but  have  r.  their  heart  tar  trom  me
30.  20.  yet  shall  not  thy  teachers  be  r.  to  a  corner
33. 20.  not  one  of  the  stakes  shall  be  r.  any  more
38.  12.  mine  age  is  r.  from  me  as  a  shepherd  s  tent
54'.  10.  the  hills  shall  be  r.  my  kindness  and  the
covenant  of  my  peace  shall  not  be  r.  saith  Lout
Jer  15  4.  I  will  cause  them  to  be  r.  into  kingdoms
24.' 9.  I  will  deliver  them  to  be  r.  29.  18.  1  34.  1(.
Lam.  1.  8.  Jerusalem  sinned,  therefore  she  tsr.

3.  17.  and  thou  hast  r.  my  soul  tar  from  peace
Ezek.  7.  19.  their  gold  shall  be  r.  gold  not  able
23.  46.  1  will  give  them  to  be  r.  and  spoiled

36.  17.  their  way  as  the  uncleanness  ot  a  r.  woman

fmos  6.7-  and  the  banquet  ot  them  shail.be  r.
j He.  2.  4.  how  hath  he  r.  it  from  me,  turning  away
7.  11.  in  that  day  shall  the  decree  be  far  r.

Mat.  21.  21.  if  ye  shall  say,  be  thou  r.  Mark  W.  r3
Acts  7.  4.  he  /.  Abraham  into  this  land,  wherein
13.22.  when  he  had  r.  Saul,  he  raised  up  David
■Gal.  1.  6. 1  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  r.  trom  him
REMOVETH.  ,

Deut.  27.  17.  curs,  that  r.  his  neighbour  s  land-mark
Jab  9. 5.  which  r.  the  mountains,  and  they  know  not
12.  20.  he  r.  away  the  speech  of  the  trusty
Reel.  10.  9.  whoso  r.  stones  shall  be  hurt  therewith
Isa.  27.  t  8.  when  he  r.  his  rough  wind  in  day  ot  east
Dan.  2.  21.  he  changeth  the  seasons,  he  r.  kings
REMOVING.

Gen.  30.  32.  r.  from  thy  flock  all  the  speckled
]sa.  14. +  6.  who  smote  people  in  wrath  without  r.
49.  21.  seeing  I  am  a  captive  r.  to  and  tro
Jer.  15.  +4.  1  will  give  them  for  a  r.  24.  +  9.  34.

Lam.  1.  +  8.  therefore  Jerusalem  is  become  a  r.
Ezek.  12.  3.  therefore  prepare  the  stuff  for  r.4.

23  +  46.  and  I  will  give  them  for  a  r.  and  spoil
Ueb.  12.  27.  signified!  the  r.  of  those  things  shaken


REND.

.Exad.  39.  23.  a  band  round,  that  ephod  should  not  r.
Lev.  10.  6.  neither  r.  your  clothes,  lest  ve  die
13.56.  priest  shall  r.  the  plague  out  ot  the  garment

1  Kings  11.  11.  1  will  surely  r.  the  kingdom,  12,31.
13.  howbeit  I  will  not  r.  away  all  the  kingdom
31.  behold,  I  will  r.  the  kingdom,  14.  8.

2  C/ir.  34.  27.  didst  r.  thy  clothes,  and  weep  before
Lccl  3.  7.  a  time  to  r.  and  a  time  to  sew
Isa.  64.  1.  oh  that  thou  wouldest  r.  the  heavens
Ezek.  13.  11.  and  astormy  wind  shall  r.  it,  13.

29.  7.  thou  didst  break  and  r.  all  their  shoulder
,Hos.  13.  8.  and  I  will  r.  the  caul  of  their  heart
Joel  2.  13.  r.  your  heart,  and  not  your  garments
Mat. 7.  f .  lest  they  turn  again  and  r.  you
John  10.  24.  let  us  notr.  it,  but  cast  lots  tor  it
RENDER.

Num.  18.  9.  every  offer,  they  r.  to  me  he  most  holy
Dent.  32.  41.  I  will  r.  vengeance  to  mine  enemies
43.  he  will  r.  vengeance  to  his  adversaries
Judg.  9.  57.  evil  of  the  men  of  Shechem  did  God  r.

1  .Sam.  26.  23.  Ed.  r.  to  every  man  his  faithfulness

2  C/ir.  6.  30.  r.  to  every  man  according  to  his  ways
Job  33.26.  for  he  will  r.  untoman  his  righteousness

34.  11.  for  the  work  of  a  man  shall  he  r.  to  him
PsaL  28.  4.  r.  to  them  their  desert,  they  regard  not
38.  20.  they  that  r.  evil  for  good  are  adversaries
56.  12.  O  God,  1  will  r.  praises  unto  thee
79.  12.  and  r.  to  our  neighbour  seven-told
94.  2.  lift  up  thvself,  r.  a  reward  to  the  proud
116.  12.  what  shall  I  r.  to  the  I.d.  for  all  benefits
Prov.  24.  12.  doth  not  he  know  it,  and  shall  not  he
r.  to  every  man  according  to  his  works  ?  Rom.  2.6.
29.  say  not,  1  will  r.  to  man  accord,  to  his  work
26!  16.  than  seven  men  that  can  r.  a  reason
Isa.  66.  15.  Ld.  will  come,  to  r.  his  anger  with  fury
Jer.  51. 6.  he  will  r.  to  Pabylon  a  recompence,  24.
Lam.  3.  64.  r.  to  them  a  recompence,  O  Lord
Has.  14.  2.  so  will  we  r.  the  calves  of  our  lips
Joel 3.4.  will  ye  r.  me  a  recompence  ?  ifrecompense
Zeth.  9.  12.  1  declare,  that  I  will  r.  double  to  thee
Mat.  21.  41.  which  shall  r.  him  the  fruits  in  season
22.21.  r.  unto  Caesar,  Mark  12.  17.  Lvke  20.25.
Rom.  13.  7.  r.  therefore  to  all  their  dues,  tribute
1  Cor.  7.  3.  let  husband  r.  to  wife  due  benevolence

1  Thess.  3.9.  what  thanks  can  we  r.  to  God  foryou  r
5. 15.  see  that  none  r.  evil  for  evil  to  any  man

R  EM  D  ER  ED.

hidg.  9.  56.  thus  God  r.  wickedness  of  Abimelech

2  Kings  3. 4  the  king  of  Moab  r.  to  the  king  ot  Isr.
17.  +  3.  Hoshea  r.  Shalmaneser  tribute

2  C/ir.  32.  25.  Hezekiah  r.  not  according  to  benefit
Prov.  12.14.  recompence  of  man’s  hands  be  r.  to  him
REN  DEREST.

Psal.  62.  12.  r.  to  every  man  according  to  his  work
RENDERETH.

Isa.  66.  6.  a  voice  of  the  Lord  that  r.  recompence
394


RENDERING.  ...

1  Vet  3.  9.  notr. evil  for  evil,  or  railing  for  railing

RENDEST.  .  .  .

Ter.  4.  30.  though  thou  r.  thy  face  with  painting
RENDING.

Psal.  7.  2.  lest  he  tear  my  soul,  r.  it  in  pieces
RENEW.

To  renew  sometimes  signifies  to  establish ,  or  con
firm.  1  Sam.  11.  14.  Let  us  go  to  Gilgal,  and
renew  the  kingdom  there  :  let  us  ratijy  the  cove¬
nant  between  Saul  and  the  people  concerning  the
kingdom,  and  instal  him  public  Ip  and  solemn  y
into  it.  Asa  renewed  the  altar  ot  the  Lord,

2  Chron.  15.  8.  tie  repaired,  or  rebuilt  it,  after  it
had  been  decayed  through  long  use,  or  broken  down
by  idolaters :  or,  he  consecrated  and  dedicate  1
the  altar,  which  had  been  polluted  by  idolaters,  and
needed  pur  ifii  at  ion.  Job  says,  that  God  tenewee
his  witnesses  against  him,  Job  10.  17-  that  is,  lie
brought  fresh  ;  /agues  and  judgments  upon  him,
which  were  the  witnesses  and  evidences  b_ th  oj  his
sin,  and  God's  displeasure  against  him.  In  another
place  he  says,  that  his  bow  was  renewed  in  his
hand,  Job  29.  20.  Or,  as  it  is  in  the  Hebrew,  it
changed  itself,  gtew  as  it  were  a  new  bozv ,  zv/ien
other  bows  by  much  use  grow  weak  and  useless  :  or,
it  changed  its  strength,  and  got  new  force,  as  the
word  is  used  in  Isa.  40.  31.  they  that  wait  upon
the  l  ord  shall  renew  their  strength  ;  they  shall
grow  stronger  and  strongei  in  faith  and  patience.
God  renews  the  face  ot  the  earth,  /  sal.  104.

30.  By  his  providence  he  preserves  the  succes
s ion  of  living  creatures  upon  the  earth,  which
otherwise  wnild  be  desolate,  and  without  mhabi
tants.  Renew  ou,  days  as  of  old,  says  Jeremiah,
Lam.  5.  21.  that  is,  Bring  ns  out  of  our  cap¬
tivity,  and  >  estore  us  to  our  former  fi< .wishing
condition.  .  „  „  _  ,  ,  ,  .

Renewing  is  taken  eithei ,  [1]  For  that  work  oj  the
Spirit,  whereby  the  elect,  of  enemies  to  God,  and
children  of  wrath,  become  the  children  oj  God,
citizens  with  the  saints,  heirs  and  co-heirs  with
Christ,  being  by  faith  made  partakers  of  his  righte¬
ousness  and  sufferings,  and  having  the  image  oj
God,  which  consists  in  righteousness  and  holiness,
restored  in  their  souls  /  and  this  is  the  same  with
regeneration,  or  being  born  again,  1  it.  3.  5.  Gr ,

[2]  Lor  reviving,  strengthening,  and  repairing  oj
that  which  is  decayed  and  blemished  by  sin ,  Psal.

1  &mh!°11.  14.  let  us  go  to  Gil  gal  and  r.  kingd.  there

2  Chron.  24.  +  4.  Joash  minded  to  r.  house  ot  Lord
Psal.  51.  10.  and  r.  a  right  spirit  witnin  me
Isa.  40.  31.  they  that  wait  on  L.  shall  r.  strength

41  1  let  the  people  r.  their  strength,  come  near
Lam.’ 5.  21.  turn  us,  O  Lord,  r.  our  days  as  ot  old
Ueb.  6.  6.  if  they  fall  away,  to  r.  them  again

to  repentance

RENEWED.

2  Chron.  15.  8.  As;  r.  the  altar  of  the  Lord
Job  29  20.  and  my  bow  was  r,  in  my  hand
Psal.  103.  5.  so  that  thy  youth  is  r.  like  the  eagle's
2  Cor.  4. 16.  yet  the  inward  man  is  r.  day  by  day
Eph.  4.23.  and  be  r.  in  the  spirit  ot  your  mind
Col.  3.  10.  the  new  man  which  isr.  in  knowledge
R  EN  EW  E^T.

Job  10.  17.  thou  r.  thy  witnesses  against  me
Psal  104.  30.  and  thou  r.  the  face  ot  the  earth
RENEWING.

Rom.  12.2.  be  transformed  by  the  r.  of  your  mind
Tit  3  5.  he  saved  us  by  the  r.  of  the  Holy  Ghost
RENOUNCED.

o  Cor  4  2.  but  haver,  the  hidden  things  of  dishon.
RENOWN.

Gen.  6.  4.  the  giants,  which  were  of  old,  men  of  r.
Num.  16.2.  famous  in  the  congregation,  men  ot  r.
Ezek  16.  14.  thy  r.  went  forth  among  the  heathen
15. ’and  playedst  the  harlot  because  of  thy  r.

34.  29.  I  will  raise  up  for  them  a  plant  ot  r.

39  13.  it  shall  be  to  them  a  r.  saith  the  Lord
Dan.  9.  15.  and  hast  gotten  thee  r.  as  at  this  day
R  ENOWNED.

Num.  1.  16.  these  were  the  r.  of  the  congregation
Isa.  14.  20.  the  seed  of  ecil-doers  shall  never  be  r.
Ezek.  23.  23.  captains,  and  great  lords,  and  r.

26.  17.  the  r.  city  which  was  strong  in  the  sea
RENT,  Substantive.

Isa.  3.  24.  and  instead  of  a  girdle  there  shall  be  a  r.
Mat.  9.  16.  and  the  r.  is  made  worse,  Mark  2.  21.
Luke  5.  36.  then  botli  the  new  maketh  a  r.

RENT,  Participle.

Gen.  37.  33.  Joseph  is  without  doubt  r.  in  pieces
Exod.  28.  32.  an  nole  in  the  ephod,  that  it  be  not  r.
Josh  9  4.  they  took  w  ine  bottles,  old  and  r.  13.

2  Sam.  15.  32.  Ilushai  came  w  ith  his  coat  r.

1  Kings  13.  3.  the  altar  shall  be  r.  ||  5.  altar  was  r.
Ezra  9.  5.  having  r.  my  garment  and  my  mantle
Mat  27.  51.  behold,  the  vail  of  the  temple  was  r.

in  twain,  Mark  15.  38.  Luke  2.3.  45
Mark  1.  J  10.  John  saw  the  heavens  r.  and  Spirit
See  Clothes.

RENT,  Verb.

Judo  14.  6.  Samson  r.  the  lion  as  he  would  have  r.

a  kid,  and  he  had  nothing  m  his  ham.

1  Sam  15.  27.  Saul  r.  the  skirt  of  Samuel's  mantle
28.  Lord  hath  r.  the  kingdom  from  thee,  28.  17.

2  Sam.  13.  19.  Tamar  r.  her  garment  that  was  on  her

1  Kings  1.40.  the  earth  r.  with  the  sound  ot  them
11. 30.  Ahijah  r.  Jeroboam's  new  garment
19. 11.  and  a  strong  wind  r.  the  mountains  *

2  Kings  17.  21.  he  r.  Isr.  from  the  house  ot  David
'Ezra  9.  3.  when  I  heard  this,  I  r.  my  garment
Job  1. 20.  then  Job  arose,  and  r.  his  mantle

2.  12.  Job’s  friends  r.  every  one  his  mantle
26.  8.  and  the  cloud  is  not  r.  under  them
Jer.  36.  24.  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  r.  their

garments

Ezek.  30.  16.  Sin  shall  have  pain,  and  Noshall  be  r.
Mat.  27.  51.  vail  of  the  temple  was  r.  and  rocks  r.
Mark  9.  26.  the  soirit  cried,  andr.  him  sore
‘  REPAID.  ,

Prov.  13.  21.  but  to  the  righteous  good  shall  be  r.


REPAIR.

Kings  12.  5.  let  the  priests  r.  the  breach
of  the  house  of  God,  22.  5,  6.  2  C hr.  24.  4.
34.  8,  10.  _  ,  ,

7.  why  r.  ye  not  the  breaches  of  the  house  r

8.  neither  to  r.  the  breaches  of  the  house  r
12  and  hewed  stone  tor.  the  breaches,  22.5,  6.

2  Chron.  24.  5.  go  and  gather  money  to  r.  the  hou
12.  and  hiied  carpenters  to  r.  the  house  of  Lord
E-ra  9  9.  to  give  us  a  reviving  to  r.  the  house
Isa.  61.4.  and  they  shall  r.  the  waste  cities
REPAIRED.

Judg.  21.  23.  Benjamin  r.  cities,  and  dwelt  in  the

1  Kings  1 1 .  2?.  Solomon  r.  the  breaches  ot  the  ci
18. 30.  Elijah  r.  the  altar  of  the  Lord  broken  dov;

2  Kings  12.  6.  the  priests  had  not  r.  the  breaches
14.  and  r.  therewith  the  house  of  the  Lord

1  Chron.  11.8.  and  Joab  r.  the  rest  of  the  city

2  Chron.  26.  +  9.  Uzziah  r.  the  towers  in  Jerusaie
*29.  3.  Hezekiah  r.  the  doors  of  the  house

3°  5.'  Hezekiah  r.  Millo  in  the  city  of  David
3T  16.  Manasseh  r.  the  altar  of  the  Lord
Neh.  3.  4.  next  to  them  r.  5,  7.  8,  10,  12,  19.

6.  after  him  r.  17,  18,  20,  22,  23,  24.

REPAIR  ER.

Isa  58. 12.  thou  shalt  be  called  the  r.  of  the  breach
REPAIRING.

2  Chron.  24.  27.  concerning  the  r.  of  the  house

REPAY.  .  .  y

Deut.  7.  10.  not  be  slack,  he  w  ill  r.  him  to  his  fil  j
Job  21.  31.  who  shall  r.  him  what  he  hath  done  r
41. 11. who  hath  prevented  me,  that  1  should  r.  hit
Isa.  59.  18.  according  to  their  deeds  he  will  r.  full  |
and  to  the  islands  he  will  r.  reccmpei  1
Luke  10.  35.  w  hen  I  come  again,  1  w  ill  r.  thee  1
Rom.  12.  19.  vengeance  is  mine,  I  w  ill  r.  saith  T.<U
Phiiem.  19.1  Paul  have  written  it,  1  will  r.  it

REPAY  El  H.  I

Deut  7  10.  and  r.  them  that  hate  him  to  their  fa  |
REPEATE1  H.  .  1

Prov.  17. 9.  he  that  r.  matter,  separateth  very  friei
PEPEN1.

Bepentance  is  taken  [1]  For  that  regret  and  rei |ij
tance  that  arise  iu  a  person,  after  having  d’\
something  that  he  (light  not  to  have  done,  u  ja
Judas  saw  that  Christ  was  condemned,  it  is  sai<||
him,  that  he  repented  of  what  he  had  done,

27.  3.  He  was  mightily  afflicted  in  his  mind  alt*
it,  and  wished  it  had  not  been  done.  But  this  A
pentance  arises  from  a  fear  if  the  punishment  A
nounced  against  Si?i,  and  is  not  accompanied  ;.M
hatred  of  sin:  as  when  a  malefactor  suffers  forM
crimes,  he  reflects  upon  his  actions  with  sornA
but  this  not  being  a  sacred  act,  but  proceeding  fM
a  violent  principle,  is  consistent  with  as  (/recil
love  to  sin  as  he  had  before,  and  may  be  enti.A
terminated  on  himse/J  ;  he  may  be  sorry  for  in
crimes,  as  they  have  exposed  him  to  punishni ,  I
and  yet  not  be  grieved  that  thereby  he  has  off eM
God.  This  is  legal  repentance.  [2]  for  M
saving  grace  wrought  in  the  soul  by  the  Sptrir.
God,  whereby  a  sinner  is  made  to  see  and  be  st  -
ble  of  his  sin,  is  grieved  and  humbled  before  Gera
account  of  it,  not  so  much  for  the  punishmeno
which  sin  has  made  him  liable,  as  that  thereby  i
is  dishonoured  and  off  ended ,  his  laws  violated,  (d
his  own  sou!  polluted  and  defiled  j  and  this  gf
arises  from  love  to  God,  and  is  accompanied  ji
a  hatred  of  sin,  a  love  to  holiness,  and  a  fixed  f
lution  to  forsake  sin,  and  an  expectation  of  Ja\T
and  forgiveness,  through  the  merits  of  Christ,  s
is  evangelical  or  gospel  repentance,  Mat.  3.  is.
Acts  3.  19.2  Cor.  7.  10.  „  ,  ,L

The  sacred  writers  ojten  represent  God  as  movea  M
regret,  or  repentance,  or  relenting,  for  ha.V
suffered  or  resolved  upon  certain  things.  It  is  A,
that  God  repented  that  he  had  made  man,  st-,j
that  his  wickedness  had  proceeded  to  such  aix-
tremity,  Gen.  6.  6.  It  is  elsewhere  saidt.tnm
repented  of  having  made  Saul  king  over  his  >
pie,  1  Sam.  15.  11.  This  is  not  to  be  under  ji
as  if  God  had  conceived  any  regret  at  any  tig
that  he  had  done  wrong,  or  that  he  repents  >a
false  step  that  he  had  made,  as  a  man  does  wjnyt
perceives  he  has  committed  an  error,  (>od  iot
capable  of  repentance  in  this  sense.  But  s*-
times  he  changes  his  conduct  towards  thosev*
are  unfaithful  to  him,  and  after  having  tfft
them  with  mercy,  he  corrects  them  with  severtm
if  he  had  repented  of  what  he  had  before  doff*
their  favour.  Also  God  is  said  to  repent  of  thA\
he  was  about  to  inflict ;  when  moved  with  rm-S
sion  towards  the  miserable,  or  entreated,  by  W
prayers,  he  remits  the  ;  unisliment  of  their  sm>>
dees  not  execute  the  threatenmgs  he  bad  a\
against  them  :  Thus  it  is  said  m  the  Psalms.
he  repented  according  to  tlie  multitude
mercies,  Psal.  106.  45.  See  Jer.  18.8.

Exod.  13.  17.  lest  peradventure  the  people  r.

32.  12.  turn  from  thy  fierce  wrath,  and  r.  orb
Num.  23. 19.  neither  son  of  man,  that  he  shou  r.
Deut.  32.  36.  the  Lord  shall  r.  for  his  servants]

1  Sam.  15.  29.  and  also  the  Strength  of  lsrae.it
not  r.  for  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  snoi  r
1  Kings 8. 47.  if  they  r.  in  the  land  of  their  cap’  .
J  h  42.  6.  1  abhor  myself,  and  r.  in  dust  ana
Psal.  90.  13.  let  it  r.  thee  concerning  thyserv»
110. 4.  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  w ill  not  r.

135.  14.  he  w  ill  r.  himself  concerning  his  ser

Jer.  4.28.  1  have  purposed  it,  and
18.  8.  if  nation  turn,  I  w  ill  r.  of  the  evt.,  -0.
10.  if  it  do  evil,  then  1  will  r.  of  the  good
26.  3,  that  I  may  r.  H  42.  10.  for  I  r.  of  the ;  e
Ezek.  14.  6.  r.  and  turn  yourse  v.  from  idols,  »»
24.  14.  neither  will  1  spare,  neither  will  1  '■
Joel  2. 14.  who  knoweth  if  he  will  return  «nd  (
leave  a  blessing  behind  hint .  J°nai  ■
Mat.  3.  2.  John  the  Baptist  preached,  saying
the  kingdom  ot  heaven  is  at  nano,
Mark  1. 15.  Jesus  preached,  r.ve.and  l  elieve  ,8
6.  12,  they  went  and  preached  that  1

Luke  13. 3. except  ye  r.  ye  shall  all  likewise  pi  r  *


R  E  P


Luke  16.  30.  if  one  went  from  the  lean,  they  will  r.
17.  3.  and  it  thy  brother  r.  forgive  him,  4'.

‘lets  ‘...  .>8.  /.  an  I  be  baptized  every  one  ot  you
3.  19.  r.  ye  theret.  and  be  converted,  tliat  your  sins

8.  SC.  r.  ot  this  thy  wickedness,  and  prav  God
It.  '10.  but  commaudeth  all  men  every  where  to  r.
C6.  CO.  that  they  should  r.  and  turn  to  God
1  Cor.  7 .  8.  made  you  sorry,  I  do  not  r.  tho’  I  did  r
‘{ei.  C.  5.  remember  therefore  and  r.  except  thou  r
16.  r.  or  else  l  will  come  unto  thee  quickly

21.  I  gave  her  space  to  r.  of  her  fornication

22.  except  they  r.  ot  their  deeds

3.  3.  remember  how  thou  hast  received,  and  «•

19.  1  chasten,  be  zealous  therefore  and  /•

REPEN  I  ANCE.

lot.  13.  14.  r.  shall  be  hid  from  mine  ev’es
lat.  3.  8.  bring  forth  truits  meet  for  r.  Luke  3.  8.
11.  I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  unto  r
).  13.  to  call  sinners  to  r.  Mark  2.  17  /  uke  5  3°
lark  1.  4.  John  did  preach  the  baptism  of  r.  for
remission  ot  sins,  Luke  3.  3.  Acts  13.  24.  |  19.  4.
uke  15.  < .  than  over  ninety-nine  which  need  nor
•4.  47.  that  r.  and  remission  of  sins  be  preached
cts  0.  31.  him  hath  God  exalted  for  to  give  r.  to  Is.

1.  18.  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  r.  to  life
10.  21.  testifying  to  the  Greeks  r.  towards  God
0.  20.  should  turn  to  God;  and  do  works  meet  for  r.


REP

%'•  f8hi3;rhis  sa-vi'1-1  is  commonly  r.  among  Jews
if/ o4,  a  ,hat1t.he  chief  priests  had  said

10.  ..  I  imotheus  was  wellr.  ot  by  the  brethren

i  rZ’  5'  o  •'  U<,A  ,  at!lel  as  he  slanderously  r.

1  'm  *S '  ‘  thflt  tliK1  e *3  fornication  among  you

1  jf  im.  5.  10.  a  w  idow,  well  r.  ot  for  Rood  works
/  et.  1.  12.  minister  things  that  are  now  r.  to  you

£  rot/.  15. +  9.  will  drau^svTOrdpiunc  hand  shall  r.thein

[1]  Scorn,  or  derision,  N eh.  2.  17.  |  5,  q
UJ  Shame,  infamy,  or  disgrace,  Prov,  6.  33
Censures  and  reflections,  Isa.  51.  7.  [41  Iniurl
or  contumely  either  in  word ,  or  deed,  2  Cor.  12.  lo!
LOJ  the  sins  of  men,  which  cast  dishonour  or  re


om.°.  4.  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  r.


.  .1  •L‘F  — , ...  ^  V'V4  'CW'ICUI  UJC'C  IU  r.

1.  the  gifts  and  calling  of  (iod  are  without  r,

tor.  i.  9.  but  l  rejoice  that  ye  sorrowed  to  r.

10.  godly  sorrow  worketh  r.  to  salvation
I /}l'  C.  25.  it  God  peradventure  will  give  tliem  r.
c‘cl .!•  n?na -vln=  again  the  foundation  of  r.

0.  it  they  rail  away,  to  renew  them  again  to  r
•2.  1(.  he  found  no  place  of  r.  though  he  sought  it
Cet.  3.  9.  any  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  r
REPEN  l  ED.

iUj  00  r*  ^le  that  he  had  made  man

rod.  32.  14.  the  Lord  r.  of  the  evil  he  thought  to
do,  2  Sam.  24.  16.  1  Chr.  21.  15.  Jer.  26  10
k18‘  i'm  the  W  because  of  their  groanings
!>•  6-  tbe  children  of  srael  r.  tor  Benjamin,  15
15.  3o.  the  Lord  r.  that  he  made  Saul  king
al.  10b.  4d.  the  Lord  r.  according  to  his  mercies
/•  6-  n<?  man  r.  him  of  his  wickedness,  savins

lb.  as  cities  the  Lord  overthrew,  and  r  not  °

.  19.  surely  after  that  I  was  turned,  I  r.

7<,7 l’  Vord  /•/or  tllis’  jt  shall  not  be,  6

tah3.  10.  God  r.  of  the  evil  that  he  had

,8.-  14f  *1}  thought  to  punish  you,  ana  r.  not
u.  11.  20.  to  upbraid  cities,  because  they  r.  „ot
1.  they  would  have  r.  long  a  go,  Luke  10.  13
.  41.  the  men  of  Nineveh  shall  rise,  because
‘hneV  mthe  Preaching  of  Jonas,  Luke  11.  32
.29.  I  will  not,  but  afterward  he  r.  and  went
..  and  ye,  when  ye  had  seen  it,  r.  not  afterward
.  3.  Judas  r.  Imnselt,  and  brought  the  silver
or.  7.  10.  worketh  repentance  not  to  be  r.  of
n  ^an/  that  llave  not  r.  of  the  uncleanness
•.2.-1.  I  gave  space  to  repent,  and  she  /.  not
0.  whowere  not  killed  bythese  plagues,  yet  r.  not
I.  neither  r.  of  their  murders  nor  their  thefts

9.  blasphemed  name  of  God,  and  r  not  11
REPENTES  l  !  ’  1

ah  4.  2.  art  a  gracious  God,  and  r.  thee  of  the  evil
.  REPEN  I  E  I'll.

i.  6*  7_.  for  it  r .  me  that  I  have  made  them

•a'llV1--  lt,r-  me  that  [  have  set  up  Saul  kin*

-•  13;he  is  slow  to  anger,  and  r.  him  of  the  evfl
e  Id.  joy  shall  be  over  one  sinner  that  r.  10.
REPENT  IN  G.

15.  6.  I  will  destroy  thee,  1  am  weary  with  r
REPENTINGS.

•  il.  8.  my  he}ag^nrned6r.  are  kindled  togetli

•  6.  7.  use  not  vain  r.  as  the  heathen  do
,  „  L  r  REPLENISH.

I'1-®- be  theea,'h’  »-•-

C.  6.  because  they  be  r.  from  the  east
2- the  merchants  of  Zidon  have  r.  Tyre

or  a  ,  ,  I,,haVe  r •  evel'y  sorrowful  soul
M'0;.-  1  shall  be  r.  now  she  is  laid  waste
.0.  thou  wast  r.  and  made  very  glorious
n  REP  LI  EST.

•  -  20  °  man,  who  art  thou  that  r.  ag  God  >

REPORT.

ok  °'\  '?SePh,  brought  to  his  father  their  evil  r
.  -3.  1.  thou  sha.it  not  raise  a  false  r,
r  ,  3;'  ‘^'brought  up  an  evil  of  the  laud
L  m.en  Ibatdid  bring  up  the  evil  r.  died
"o'oi  16  nations  who  shall  hear  r.  of  thee
”;/T  ?*>’•  my  sons,  it  is  no  good  r.  I  hear

T  i‘2‘  11  wa-s  a  tr,ue  r.  1  heard,  2  Chr  on.  9.  5.

°i's  Jin  l6y  Jnigllt  have  matter  for  an  evil  r.

■  lo.  30.  an<  a  good  r.  maketh  the  bones  fat
5'  tLa/  ,  concerning  Egypt,  so  shall
Q  bci  fr  .e  snrely  pained  at  the  r.  of  Tyre

who  hall  her  Vexiatl0n  011 'y  t0  understand  r.
til  t  at,h  believed  our  r.  ?  to  whom  is  the  arm
e,4  levealed  :-  John  12.  38.  Rom.  10.  16
3'  leKkln§l  0t  by  Ion  hath  heai  d  the  r. '

.  3.  +  .3.  I.  have  heard  thy  r.  and  was  afraid
->•  J.  loox  out  seven  men  of  honest  r.  full  of

o'  Ananiist  °f  g00<l  r'  among  the  Je^w^

-•  Ananias  laving  a  good  r.  of  the  Jews

4  fi  \!h  f'1  ^00cl  r-  as  deceiv.  yet  true

4. 8.  vv hatever  tilings  are  of  good  r.  anil  pure

,  o7'ha  &P  must  have  a  good  r.  of  them

these  afl  h  !  the  elders  obtained  a  good  r.

12^  D  „  n?0hb  rd  H  7ood  r-  thro*  faith
1-  Demetrius  hath  a  good  r.  of  all  men

.  ,o  REPORT,  Verb.

14  oi/;Say. ,t,ey -anti  we  will  r.  it
•  -o.  he  'vj|,j^tliatGo.l  is  m  you  of  a  truth

aU  it‘his  r‘  an!ong  heathen,  Gasbmu  saith  it
ilso  th^v/;  u  kiag  a(;cording  to  these  words
thej  7 .  his  good  deeds  before  me

9  ji  df|*P“e  ‘ben  husbands,  when  it  shall  be  r
k-  U.  the  man  which  had  the  inkhorn  r.


p/oach  upon  Lod,  Rom.  15.  .3.  [6]  Sterility,  or

/IT  luK"  m  TVOmen' /-en.  30.  2.3.  This  among
^.Debiews  was  reckoned  a  reproach,  because
such  did  seem  to  be  excluded  from  the  promise

of" his  concerning  the  multiplication

oj  tits  seed ,  and  because  they  were  not  in  a  ca-
paevy  of  having  the  promised  Seed  to  be  one  of
t  ieir  posterity.  [7]  Uncircumcision,  which  the


i  lij  which  tnt

have  \°Tud,  a  cepfuacli.  Josh.  5.  9.  This  day

off  vn  >  7e/d  a"'ry  1  le  reP.,;oacb  of  Egypt  from
tf  jou.  I  have  freed  y,  U  /rom  that  shame  and
dishonour  which  did  lie  upon  you  whilst  you  were

iZj/tieS  Vt  the  !mld  °f  <-gypt'  by  receiving
you  into  covenant  with  me,  acknowledging  vou  for
my  peculiar  people,  and  admitting  you  to  hare
^Privilege  sealed  unto  you  by  circumcision.  It
is  1  ailed  the  reproach  ot  Egypt,  either,  [1]  Be
ause  the  Egy  pi lans  were  not  m  covenant  with  God
neither  dtd  they  partake  of  the  seals  of  it,  as  may
be  jathered  from  Exod.  2.  6.  where  the  child  Moses

?hSZZW'UlV°  v6  a".Hebrew  by  his  mark  ;  and
l/Z  J  e  (be  Egy  |)tians,  as  other  nations,  were
aliens  and  strangers  from  God,  and  had  in  abo¬
mination  by t  lie  church  and  people  of  God,  Eph.  2
P"  DO  [2]  Because  the  Israelites  came  out  of
fnm  W1^  l%S.e?e?,med. tu  be  a  sort  of  I  '.gy  ptians,
oro  .L'y'h^:f‘tch  they  justly  thought  a  great  re
r  by!  ien  circumcision  they  weredistin ■
fond  Of  '7  tben,  and  manifested  to  be  another
u  l  J r>ple-  <  T’  PI  because  many  of  them  lay
wider  this  reproach  in  Egypt,  having  wickedly
neglected  this  duty  there  for  worldly  reasons  ;  and
rl  t  fi  °r  t  iem  continued  in  the  same  shameful  con-
f  for  many  years  in  the  wilderness.  J
5:  9-  1  have  rolled  away  the  r.  of  Egypt
l  wV  Ze^u‘l!n  and  ^ aphtali  exposed  to  r.
\eh<  Vo6'  and  take‘ 1  a-vay  the  r-  fro,n  Israel
4  4  j  V,e  rTnant  are  111  -reat  affliction  and  r
4.  4.  and  turn  their  r.  upon  their  own  head

rial  57CaQUSh®  T‘  0t  the  lleathen  our  enemies
Jft.  57.  3.  he  shad  save  me  from  the  r.  of  him

60, \  7r'  >ecause  tor  thy  sake  I  have  borne  r.

711*  '|Airokeun  n,y  heart,  I  am  full  of  heaviness

I'T  1  1  len!  be  covered  with  that  seek

7o'  oe  put  th<im  t0  a  Perpetual  r.
ho  cn'/,eir  r  •."'herewith  they  re|)roached  thee
89.  50.  remember  the  r.  of  thy  servants,  how  1  bear
no  00  ,  my  bosom  the/-,  of  the  mighty  people
MZ  f  o.rm<n7, from  me/-  and  contem pt  P

ir  6Jn3/'  hls  sha11  not  be  wiped  away
“-  and  with  ignominy  cometh  r.

\9.  -6.  is  a  son  that  causetli  shame  and  r.

.0.  cast  out  the  scorner,  strife  and  r.  shall  cease
£a.4.  1.  called  by  thy  name  to  take  away  our  r
54-  r  yen°l  the/-  Ofinen,  nor  be  afraid

hr  1  Ttibhr  the/‘'  of  th,>  widowhood

31  10  K°'  1  Wlll  bring  an  everlasting  r.  on  you
■31.  19.  because  1  did  bear  the, r.  of  my  youth
d\.  51.  we  are  confounded,  bee.  we  have  heard  r
Bnm.  3.  .30.  he  is  filled  full  with  /-.

61.  thou  hast  heard  their  r.  O  Lord,  against  me
p.h  r'-n'r’’  0  Loid’  consider  and  behold  our/

01  oo16-  57  •  discovered,  as  at  the  time  of  thy  r  '
ji-  j-?-  concerning  the  r.  ot  Ammonites,  say  thou

a'r/'th11?1"  ShHi '  n10u  b?ar  >'■  ot  the  people  any  more
/)«?'  <*  yesha-U  lcG/lv?.no  more  r.  of  famine

Uan.  11. 18.  a  pi  ince  tor  his  own  behalf  shall  cause

llos  io°u‘ltdpT, -hU11  fr  cfH/e- without  his  own  r.
r  /*  jns  r .  shall  his  Lord  return  to  hi»n

\  1,~;  and  not  thine  heritage  to  r?

Mtc.  5.  16.  theiefore  ye  shall  bear  r.  cf  my  peonie
Jeph  2  8. 1  have  heard  ther.  of  MoabandAmnfon
3A18-it°  whom  the  r.  of  it  was  a  burden
.  V/r-H.  "1  •  j  speak  as  concerning  r.  as  though  weak
1 .7,n'  m  7'  rmust  baveagood  report  lest  fall  intor
tbcfctccc  we  both  labour  and  suffer  ?•

13  13  'll  r-°[  Christ  greater  riches

13.  13.  let  us  gowi  bout  the  camp,  bearing  his  r.

n.  tA  stl  REPROACH.

\'in-  34-  14.  we  can  not  do  this,  that  were  a  /■.  f0  us

\tTo  Vi  7  and  >•>’,  !tfor  "  '•  npon  all  Israel
}V '  }  'jc  7A  ,et  uf  build,  that  we  be  no  more  a  r
on  k  _3- be  that  taketli  not  up  a  r.  ag.  neighbour

*  .  l).  n  T .  fll  m  Pll  O  W  /]  /Joe  J  — Til..  1


REP

Ps_al.f>9.  10.  when  I  wept,  that  was  my  r.

19.  fflou  hast  known  my  r.  and  my  shame
119.  .39.  turn  away  my  r.  which  1  fear
/ .uke  1.  25.  to  take  away  my  r.  among  men
n  ,  n  ■  RRPKGACH.

(Ol-t  2-  15- saying,  let  her  glean,  and  r.  her  not
-  Kings  iy  4.  whom  king  of  Assyria  his  master  hatts
...  0  '■  Rff  living  God,  16.  Isa.  37.  4,  17

/  In-8-  1"  have  matter  that  they  might r.  me

b-  heart  shall  not  r.  me  so  long  as  I  live
-4  ioL  'ias  "V'm  sword,  mine  enemies  /-.  me


on  ^  l’  - ;**■  **''•  .  iicii'UL

XT’  9:  aJ ■  ot  men,  and  despised  of  the  people
as  a  r.  among  all  mine  enemies


-jr>’  ^  Y3,3  “  '  ■  ““  'lime  euein

Vi  Pi  me  ke  me  not  ,lle  r ■  °i’  the  foolish
44.  13.  thou  makest  us  a  r.  to  our  iK-iiffibours
on  T;  wf . are  become  a  r.  to  our  neighbours
ion4o'-i  ?,3od  bun  :  he  is  a  r.  to  his  neighbours
\  became  ajso  «  /-.  to  them,  they  shaked
r  rovA,Pl 3  but  sin  is  a  r.  to  any  people
7  '  *  1  n’  ashamed  of  a  people  that  were  a  r.

-er.K.10.  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  to  them  a  r.

20.  8.  the  word  ot  the  Lord  was  made  «  r.

-4.  9.  I  will  deliver  them  for  their  hurt  to  bear

40  13  T^‘ld  .a  P,0,ye'  b,29.  18.  I  42.  18.  144.  8,  12.
49.  1.1.  riozi an  shall  become  a  r.  and  a  curse
Lzek.  5.  \A.  1  will  make  thee  a  r.  arnon^  the  nations
15.  Jerusalem  shall  be  a  r.  and  a  taunt
/>  4«‘  nlade  a,  r •  U11‘0  ‘be  heathen

r  aJi"c?\n' '  because  thy  people  are  become  <z  r.

Joel  -.  19.  and  I  will  no  more  make  vou  a  r.

7-  u  REPROACH.

ren.  .30^  .3.  she  said,  God  hath  taken  away  my  r.
\Z0va  P5'r  -y-  .  bat  hath  pleaded  the  cause  of  my  r.
on  1o'  ?'.d  unleed ye  plead  against  me  my  r.

20.  3.  1  I  Hive  heard  the  check  of  my  r.


-»/l  1CV  L  I  yv  »  on  V1U,  MliUC  dicmies  ,

<4.  10.  how  long  shall  the  adversary  r.  me  ;

10-.  8.  mine  enemies  r.  me  all  the  day
■uke  6.  22.  when  men  shall  r.  you  for  my  sake
.  REPROACHED.

Lev.  19.  +  20.  who.  lieth  with  a  bond  maid,  r.  by  man.
o  A  /f'  ~l<\  \ I1'  V  ben  he  /-.  Israel,  Jonathan  slew
'  o\  Ps  3,?-  22-  whom  hast  thou  r.  ?  Isa.  37.  23.

-3.  by  thy  messengers  thou  hast  r.  the  Lord,  and
r,  „  sa>d,  I  am  come  to  Lebanon,  Isa.  37.  24.
J,°b  ;  J^3',Lhe-?e  ten  ,lmes  have  ye  me  ‘

60  0  fffA2;  1.tuwas  n<jt/!1,  enemy  that  r.  me
-4'  ?Rlbat  r‘  tk,ee’  a,r®  fallen  upon  me,  Rom.  15.  3.
7q"  o  re,member  this,  that  the  enemy  hath  r.

,q  12-  wherewith  they  have  /-.  thee,  O  Lord
89.  51.  wherewith  thnje  enemies  have  r.  O  Dird

7enh  o  t  !ey  ;yyet  T ■  .Vie  footsteps  of  thine  anointed
in  V  8'  wbereby  they  have  r.  my  people

PetbT uS1f  vpyhhaVef  r'  ?n.d  H'agmfiecl  themselv

/  sal.  69.  9.  and  the  r.ot  them  that  reproached  thee
L„  43  o«  t\,or  are  fallen  upon  me,  Rom.  15.  3.

"  Li/VV  I  |feL°re  1  have  ^lven  lspacl  to  r.
//crio'sfw  P'e<,SUre  I?r-  f'°r  Christ’s  sake

10,  33'  RL^PROAChi^ |es^^«8St.ock  by  r.

rule  11.  «.  r.  us  also

-(•  lo '  le  1  ■  bin)  that  would  swallow  me  up
!H)  4or|,meniher  b?w  the  foolish  man  r.  thee
/i19’4,2;  ,Gallswer him  that/-,  me,  Prov.  27  11
>  toy.  14.  31.  oppressetb  poor,  /-.  his  Maker,  17/5
,  .  REPROACHFULLY.

Jop  w.  10.  they  have  smitten  me  on  the  cheek  r.

J  im.  o.  14.  give  none  occasion  to  speak  r

reprobate,

iO’JOZ J\a-BrOT-  This  word  amom  Metallists-
the  irV)  TT  °ny-  m,£ta,1  thut  wUl  ,wt  endure
adu  WlriZ  when  ,rled’  that  betray'  itself  to  be
O  l  J  ’  l  l  ePr°bate,  and  of  a  coarse  alloy  :
thus  Jeremiah  says  oj  Judah,  Jer.  6.  30.  Repro-
bate  silver  shall  men  call  them,  because  the  l!ord
hath  .ejected  them.  They  are  not  purged,  uor  re-
flned,  neither  will  they  pass  for  current  before
Vod,  or  good  men  I  he  Agones  take  the  word  m
another  sense.  As  he  that  strives  as  he  ought .  and
conquers,  is  Sokiuos,  approved  ;  2  Tim.  2.  15

or  strive**6*' 1 'l9 a,ne  °nd prize,  that  doth  hoi  'run
/  s/t  ue  according  to  the  laws  of  the  game,  and  'o
overcome,  is  said  to  be  aboxouor,  f/miscany  nv
the  lace,  and  so  to  lose  the  reward:  thus,  at  the
close,  of  ati  agomstical  discourse  of  runnin*  and
^MheaPostie  Paul  says,  I  bn, . g  under  my
ootly,  1  subdue  my  sensitive  power f,  and  mortify
my  cam  a1  affecnons,  lest  when  1  have  preached
?,iers>  I  myself  should  be  a  cast-way,  or  re-
1  C»r-  9-  27.  Lest  1  should  be  a  coul
teijeit,  a  mere  pretender,  being  void  of  true  grace  ■
and  consequently  such  as  God  would  reject  as  unfit
and.  unworthy  to  be  rewarded  by  him.  A  reprobate

sZZhJjT  U'  a  mliid  l,ardefcd  in  wickedness,  and
Rom  1^28  1  discern  between  good  and  evil.

Reprobation  is  generally  understood  of  the  decree
and  purpose  of  God,  to  abandon  the  wicked  to  the
gi  eates  t  of  evils,  by  not  delivering  them  out  of  that
corruption,  in  which  alt  mankind  are  in-
tolved  by  nature  ;  and  in  not  affording  them  the

mneti  ■lrySJaIy  f°  theU  anffmg  at  eternal  hap-
pmess .  God  does  not  reprobate  men  by  making

of  /nZ!r\ed'.  >Ut  hy  7wi  drantiug  them  the  benefits
_  OJ  his  gratuitous  mercy.  J

//l6vVr!li’er  sliai!  men  call  them,  because
o  God  gave  them  over  to  a  r.  mind

'r  V  h '  r?en  r-  concerning  the  faith
Hi.  1.16.  and  being  to  every  good  work  r
_  REPROBATES.

-  {zor- 13-  5.  that  L  hrist  is  in  you,  except  ve  be  r
b-  I  trust  ye  shall  know  that  vve  are  not »-.

7.  should  do  that  which  is  honest,  tho’  we  be  as  r

re  REPROOF.  oeasr..

Job  .6.  11  and  they  are  astonished  at  his  r
P/ov.  1.  _3.  turn  you  at  my  r.  I  will  pouroutmy  Sp
niy  r-  II  30-  ‘lespised  my  P
in  r  h  „  W  instruction,  my  heart  despised  7
10.  17.  but  he  that  retuseth  r.  erreth
]*’  3 A Dof  be  that  hateth  r.  is  brutish
3.  18.  he  that  regardeth  r.  shall  be  honoured
f?-  5-  buthe  that  regardeth  r.  is  prudent
10.  and  he  that  hateth  r.  shall  die

30'  hSf  hhe  ?'o0f  ,ite’  abjrfcth  among  the  wis,

3-.  he  that  heareth  r.  getteth  understandin*

on  in'  n,r-  enferfe*b  more  into  a  wise  man  than
o-4..15.  the  rod  and  r.  give  wisdom,  hut  a  child

-  dim.  3.  16.  all  scripture  is  profitable  for  r

REPROOFS.

t  sal.  38.  14.  as  a  man  in  whose  mouth  are  no  r
on°r'i  •  23,  r ■  °f  mstruction  are  the  way  of  life
29. 1 1.  a  man  of  /^fhaMiardeneth  his  neck

4;  r-fbc  words  ofRab-shaKeh,  Isa.  37.  3
Job  0.  .o.  but  what  doth  your  arguing  r  ?

I  o  inlP  f°  r-  words  and  speeches  of  one

90  Iw/llT  &TlyS-  3;ou  ‘Ur  accept  persons

II  4,.wl‘f  be  r.  thee  tor  tearot  fliee  ;

IV'&i  I8'  T-iVl n.u0t  r •  th.ee  for  burnt  offerings
•  1.  hut  1  will  7.  thee,  and  set  them  in  order
HI.  5.  let  him  r.  me,  it  shall  be  an  excellent  oil
/  rov.  9.  8.  r.  not  ascornei,  lest  lie  hate  thee

395


RES


REQ


RES


Prov.  IP.  25.  and  r.  one  that  hath  understanding

to  6  lest  he  r.  thee,  and  thou  be  found  a  liar

Isa  11.  3.  neitlier  r.  after  the  hearing  ot  his  ea
Vaud  r.  with  equity  for  the  meek  ot  'r ,i

3?'.  4.  will  r.  the  words  which  the  Lord  hath  heard
Jer.  °\  19.  and  thy  backslidings  shall  r.  thee
Ho's.'a.  4.  let  no  man  strive  nor  r.  another
; nf  /  o  4.  hphold  1  will  /*.  your  seed,  and  spread
"faW  i  ifS  come.  he  will  r.  the  world  ot  ...


Pr!h  i  ll  ITave 1»  fellowship,. but  rather  r.  them
2  Tim.  4. 2.  r.  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long  suflering


REPROVED.  ...  ,

r or,  in  she  was  r.  II  21.25.  Abraham  r.  Abimel.
lC/ir'  If).  21.  he  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong,
vea  he  r  kings  for  their  sakes,  /  sal.  lOo.  14.

Prov? 29.  1.  lie  that  being  often  r.  hardeneth  neck
Ter  V)  27  why  hast  thou  not  r.  Jeremiah  .

Hah  2  1  and  what  1  shall  answer  when  1  am  r.

Luke  3. 19.  Herod  the  tetrarch  being  r.  by  John
John  3  20.  nor  cometh  to  light  lest  deeds  should  be  .

Evh  5  13.  all  things  that  are  r.  are  made  manifest
REP  HOVE  i;ii.

Job  40.  2.  he  that  r.  God,  let  him  answer  it
Psal  HQ  t  42.  so  shall  l  answer  him  that  r.  me
Prov.  9.  7.  he  that  r.  a  scorner  getteth  shame
15  a  scorner  loveth  not  cme  that  r.  him
Isa.  29.  21 .  and  lay  ^snare^  foi^hnn  that  r.  in  gate

Prov.  25.  12.  so  is  a  wise  r.  upon  an  obedient  ear
F-ek  3  20.  thou  shalt  not  be  to  them  a  r.

REPUTATION..  .

Eccl.  10. 1 .  so  a  little  folly  him  that  is  in  r.  for  v ,  lsd.

Acts  5.  34.  Gamaliel  had  in  r.  among  the  people
dal  2  2.  privately  to  them  which  were  of  r.

Phil.  2. 7.  but  made  himself  of  no  r.  and  took  on  him
20  receive  him  therefore,  hold  such  in  r.

REPUTED.  .

Job  18.  3.  wherefore  are  rye  r.  vile  in  your  sight .

Dan.  4.  35.  all  the  inhabitants  are  r.  as  nothing
REQ  U  KS  A  >  S.  .  »

Judg  8.  24.  Gideon  said,  I  would  desire  a  r.  of  you
i  sani  14.  15.  that  the  king  shall  perform  the  r.

22  the  king  hath  fulfilled  the  r  of  Ins  servant
Ejtr'a  7.  6.  the  king  granted  him  all  his  r •

%eh  2.  4.  king  said,  for  what  dost  thou  make  r.  ?

Esth.  4.  8.  go  to  the  king,  to  make  r.  before  hini
5  .3  wliat  is  thy  r.  queen  Esther,  b.  I  7*  2.  19.  1-.

7  3  my  life  be  given  me,  my  people  at  my  r.

7  and  11  am  an  stood  up  to  make  r.  for  his  life
Job  6.  8.  O  that  1  might  have  my  r. .  .  ..

Psa!  21  °  and  hast  not  withholden  r.  of  his  lips
106  'l5.  lie  gave  them  their  r.  but  sent  leanness
Pom.  1.  10.  making  r.  tor  a  prosperous  journey
Phil  1  4.  in  every  prayer  making  ?  .with  joy
4  6  let  your  r.  be  made  known  to  God  .

,  Thfss  4  t  1  we  r.  von,  that  as  ye  have  received
1  mess.  4.  REQUESTED.  ,

Tuda  8  26.  weight  of  the  ear  rings  that  he  r.

1  Kmosig.A.  and  Elijah  r.  that  he  might  die
1  Chron.  4.  10.  and  God  granted  Jabez  what  he  E
Xeh  13. 1  6.  N ehemiah  earnestly  r.ot  the  king
Pan  1 .  8.  he  r.  of  the  prince  ot  the  eunuchs

a  40  Daniel  r.  of  the  king,  and  lie  set  Shadrach
REQUIRE.

Gen  9.5.  your  blood  will  I  r.  of  every  beast,  and
‘  at  the  hand  of  man  will  I  r  the  life  of  man
31  39.  1  bare  the  loss,  ot  my  hand  didst  thou  r.  it
43*.  9.  I  will  be  surety,  ofmy  hand  shalt  thou  r.  him
Dent.  10.  12.  what  doth  the  Lord  r .  I  Mtc.  (y.  8.

18.  19.  whoso  will  not  hearken,  I  will  r.  it  of  him
23  21.  for  the  l  ord  will  surely  r.  it  of  thee
Toji  22.  23.  let  Lord  himself  r.  it,  1  tsam.  20.  16.

2  Sam.  3.  13.  but  one  thing  1  r.  ot  thee,  that  is
4. 11.  shall  l  not  r.  his  blood  at  your  hand  .

IQ.  38.  whatsoever  thou  shalt  r.  that  will  1  no  _

1  Kings  8. 1 31 .  if  trespass,  and  he  r.  an  oath  of  him
59.  maintain  the  cause  as  the  matter  shall  r.

1  Chron.  21.  3.  why  doth  my  lord  r.this  thing  .

2  Chron.  24.  22.  he  said,  l.ord,  look  on  it,  and  r.  it
Ezra  7.21.  whatsoever  Ezra  shall  r.  ot  you

8  22.  I  was  ashamed  to  r.  ot  the  king  a  band
\eh.  5.  12.  we  will  restore,  and  r.  nothing  or  them
Psal  10.  13.  he  hath  said,  thou  wilt  not  r.  it
Ezek.  3.  18.  wicked  man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity,
but  his  blood  will  I  r.  at  thine  hand,  »0. 1  33. 6,  8.
20.40.  and  there  will  I  r.  your  offerings
34.  10.  and  l  will  r.  my  flock  at  their  hand
Luke  12.  +  20.  this  night  do  they  r.  thy  soul

1  Cor.  1 . 22.  for  the  Jews  r.  a  sign,  and  the  G  reeks
7.  36.  and  need  so  j^.  tjh uti^cIo  what  he  will

Gen  4°  22.  therefore  behold,  his  blopd  is  r.

Fxoil.  12.  36.  they  lent  to  them  such  things  as  they  r.

\  Sam.  21.  8.  because  the  king’s  business  r.  haste

2  Sam.  12.  20.  when  he  r.  they  set  bread  before  .11m

1  Chr.  16.  37-  to  minister,  as  every  day  s  work  r.

2  Chron.  8.  14.  as  duty  ot  every  day  r.  Ezra  3.4.

04  6  why  hast  thou  not  r.  of  the  Levites  to  bring
Neh.  b.  18.  yet  r.notl  the  bread  of  the  governor
Esth.  2. 15.  she  r.  nothing  but  what  Uegai  appointed
Psal.  40.  6.  and  sin  offering  hast  thou  not  r.

137  3.  anil  they  that  wasted  us,  r.  oi-us  mntn
Prov.  30.  7.  two  things  have  I  r.  of  thee,  deny  not
Isa  1.  12.  who  hath  r.  this  at  your  hand,  to  tread
Luke  11.  50.  may  be  r.  of  this  generation,  51.

12.  20.  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  r.  ot  thee
48  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  r.

10  23.  1  might  have  r.  mine  own  with  usury
°3.  24.  gave  sentence  that  it  should  be  as  they  r.

\  Car  V  2  it  is  r.  of  stewards  to  be  faithful
REQUIRES!’.

Ruth  3. 11.  fear  not,  I  will  do  to  thee  all  that  thou  r.
REQUIRE  111.

Eccl.  3.  15.  and  God  r.  that  which  is  past
Dan  2.  11.  it  is  a  rare  thing  that  the  king  r.
REQUIRING.

Luke  23.  23.  were  instant,  r.  he.  might  be  crucified
REQUITE.

Gen.  50.  15.  Joseph  will  certainly  r.  us  the  evil
Dent.  32.  6.  do  ye  thus  r.  Lord,  O  foolish  people  .

2  Sam.  2.  6.  and  I  also  will  r.  you  this  kindness
16  12  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  r.  me.  good  for  this

396


2  Kings  9.  26.  I  will  r.  thee  in  this  plat,  saith  Lord

Psal.  10.  14.  beholdest  to  r.  ^  VlVma  '^lhem
41.  10.0  Lord,  raise  me  up,  that  l  may  /  .them
Jer  51. 56.  the  God  ot  recompences  shall  surely  r.

1  Tim.  5.  4.  let  themlearn  U^r.  their  parents

Judo  1.7.  as  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  r.  me

1  Sam.  25.  21.  And  he  hat  hr.  me  evil  tor  good

1A  EQ  VJ  l  A  l  ^  ^  •  .  •  *  1

2  Chron.  6. 23.  J^^^^RD^  ^

Num.  10.  25.  the  standard  of  Dan  was  the  r.

Tosh  6.  9.  and  the  r.  came  after  the  ark

13'  hut  the  r.  came  after  the  ark  ot  the  L°rcj

1  Sam  09.  2.  David  and  his  men  passed  on  in  the  r.

p-a.  52.  12.  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  r.

58  8  the  °lory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  r.
au.a.  me  Bm.y  rescUE.

Devt.  28.  31.  and  thou  shalt  have  none  to  r. .the
Psal  .35  17  r.  my  soul  from  their  destructions
lios'.'b.  14.  I  will  take  away,  and  none  shall  r.  him
RESCUED.  •

1  Sam.  14.  45.  the  people  /'.  Jonathan,  he  died  not
on  10  and  David  r.  bis  two  wives
Acts  23:  27.  then  came  l  with  an  army,  and  r.  im
l  A  ESL  U  L/  A-  r  l  •  |  ,«

Dan.  6.  SJ.  he  A  L  C?C  ^  , “

Zech.  5.  6.  this  is  their  r.  through  all  the  earth

Luke  13. 18.  whereu ntoshaU Y ^kingdom  ot  God

Judg.  8. 18.  each  one V.  the  children  of  a  king
RESERVE.

Psal.  79. 1 1 1.  r.  the  children  ot  death
Jer.  .3.  5.  will  he  r.  his  anger  toi  e\  er  wi  1  he  keep  it
30  20  for  1  will  pardon  them  whom  l  r-
o  pe1  q  q  to  r.  the  unjust  to  the  day  of  judgment
RESERVED.  .

Gen  °7  .36  hast  thou  not  r.  a  blessing  tor  me  .

Kum. '18.  9.  shall  be  thine  of  the  most  hoy  things  r.

Tvtlu  21  2°  because  we  r.  not  to  each  his  'vife
Ruth  2.  "ld'  siie  gave  her  mother  tliat  she  had  r.

°  Sam.  8. 4.  but  r.  tor  100  chariots,  1  Chron.  Ip.  4.

Job  21.  30.  wicked  is  r.  to  the  day7  ot  destruction
38.  2.3.  which  1  have  r.  against  time  ot  trouble
Acts  25.  21.  but  when  Paul  had  ^appealed  to  be  r.
Rom.  11.  4.  I  have  r.  to  myself  7000  me.,

1  Pet.  1.  4.  an  inheritance  r.  in  heaven  for  you
°  Pet  2  4  delivered  them  to  be  r.  tp  judgment
'  17.  to  whom  the  mist  of  darkness  is  r  for  ever
3.  7.  the  heavens  and  earth  are  /.  unto  h^e
jude  6.  angels  he  hath  r.  in  everlasting  chains
13.  to  whom  r.  the  blackness  ot  daikness
RESERV  E  L  II.

Jer.  5.  24.  lie  to  us  the  weeks  ot  the  harvest
Nah.  1.2.  th-  Lord  r.  w rat h^ tor  his  enemies

Fxod.  10.  5.  and  the  locusts  shall  eat  the  r.

1  Chron  6  66.  r.  of  the  sons  ot  Kohath  had  cities
%  11.50  e  r.of  Israel  were  in  a  1  the  cities

La  A  the  r.  of  archers  shall  be  diminished
28!  5.  Lord  shall  he  a  diadem  to  r.  ot  his  people
38.  10.  I  am  deprived  ot  the  r.  of  my  years
44  17  and  the  r.  thereof  he  maketh  a  god
10  shall  I  make  the  r.  thereof  an  abomination
Je ,  S  3  chosen,  by  all  the  r.  of  them  that  remain
15,  9.  the  r.  of  them  will  1  deliver  to  the  sword
24.  8.  and  the  r.  of  Jerusalem  that  remajn
27.  19.  saith,  concerning  the  r.  ot  the  'essels
29.T.  that  Jeremiah  sent  to  the  r.  ot  the 1  el<  ers
39  3.  with  all  the  r.  of  the  princes  ot  Kahylon
4i  10.  Ishmael  carried  captive  the  r.  ot  the  people
52.  15.  and  the  r.  of  the  peo|de  that  remained
Ezek.  9.  8.  wilt  thou  destroy  all  the  r.  of  I  srael
«3  05  and  thy  r.  shall  be  devoured  by  the  hie
34  18.  but  ye  must  tread  the  r  ot  your  pastures
36'  3  miCTht  be  a  possession  ot  the  r.  to  heathen
4*  became  a  derision  to  the  r.  of  the  heathen.

5.  in  the  fire  of  my  jealousy  have  I  spok^n^gain^

48  18  the  r.  in  length  over  against  the  oblation
21.  the  r.  shall  be  for  the  prince  on  one  side
Dan.  7.  7.  and  stamped  the  r.  with  the  feet,  19.

Joel  1. 1 4.  r.  of  palmer- worm  locusts  hath  eaten
Zevh.  2.  9.  the  r.  of  my  people  shall  spoil  them
Haa.I.  2.  speak  to  Joshua  and  the  r.  ot  the  people
Zech.  8. 11.  1  will  not  be  to  the  r.  as  in  former  days
14.  2.  the  r.  of  the  people  shall  not  be.  cut  off
Mai  2.  15.  yet  had  he  the  r.  of  the  Spirit
Mark  16.  13.  they  went  and  toW  ‘t  to  the  r.

Acts  15.  17.  that  the  r.  might  seek  the  Lord

Zech  .3. 1.  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  r.
Mnt  5  3Q  but  1  say  unto  you,  that  ye  r .  not  evil
Luke 21 . 15.  all  your  adversar.  shall  not  be  able  tor.
Arts  6  10  they  were  not  able  to  r.  the  spirit
4  51  ye  do  aWays  r.  the  Holy  Ghost  as  fathers
Rom.  13.  2.  they  that  r.  shall  receive  damnation
2  Tim  3  8.  so  do  these  also  r.  the  truth
Jam  4.1  r.  the  devil  and  he  will  Hee  from  you
5  6  ve  killed  the  just,  and  he  doth  not  r.  you
1  Ret.b.  9.  whom  r.  s  ted  fast  irGhe  taith,  knowing

Rom-  9. 19-  thou  wilt  say,  who  hath  r.  his  will  ?
Heb.  12.  4.  ye  have  not  y  et  r.  unto  blood,  striving

R  LS 1 S 1 L 1 II .  ,.  p  1

Rom  13.  2.  whoso  r.  the  power ,  r.  ordinance  ot  God
Jan,: 4.6.  God  r.  the  5-  5-

Tvke  16  4  I  am  r.  what  to  do,  when  I  am  put  out
'  RESORT.  „

Neh  4.  20.  r.  ye  thither  to  us,  God  will  fight  tor  us
Psal.  71. 3.  w hereunto  I  may  continually. r.

Mark  10.  1.  and  the  people  r.  to  him  again
John  18.  20.  in  the  temple,  xvhither  Jews  always  .
RESOKJ  EU-  .

o  Chron  11. 13.  the  priests  and  Levites  r.  to >  him
Mark  2.'  13.  multitude  r.  to  him  he  taught  them
Tohn  10.  41.  and  many  r.  to  him  and  said
18.  2.  Jesus  ofttimes  r.  thither  with  his  disciples
Acts  16. 13-  we  spake  to  the  women  who  r.  tmthc


RESPECT.

God  had  respect  to  Abel ,  and  to  his  offering,  Gen
4  4  lie  looked  to  him  with  a  javourable  ana
gracious  eye,  he  kindly  accepted  and  owned  him
'and  his  sacrifice,  and  testified  r  “l

there  present,  either  by  an  audible  voice,  or  by
some  visible  sign,  by  consuming  his  sacrifice  by
fire  from  heaven,  as  is  generally  conjectuied ,  bp
which  token  God  did  afterwards  j regnemb  signijy
his  acceptance  oj  sacrifices,  Lev.  9.  .4.  Judg.  b.

Respect  of  person's.  God  appointed,  that  the  Judges
should  pronounce  their  sentences  aW

respect  of  persons,  Lev .  19.  15.  Dent.  1.  U.
That  they  should  consider  neither  the  poor,  nor  the
rich ,  nor  the  weak ,  nor  the  power] ul ,  but  only  at-
tend  to  truth  and  justice,  and  give  .sentence  accord¬
ing  to  the  merits  of  the  cause.  God  hath  no  respect
of  persons,  Deut.  10.  17-.  -  Chron.  19.  i.  lie-
deals  justly  and  equally  with  all  sorts  oj  men,  and
as  every  one  that  truly  fears  and  obeys  him  shall
be  accepted,  so  all  incorrigible  transgressors  shalt
be  severely  punished,  whether  Jews  </r  Gentiles,
of  whatsoever  nation,  family,  name,  or  quality,

GenAA.  the  Lord  had  r.  to  Abel  and  his  offering
5.  to  Cain,  and  to  his  offering,  he  had  not  r.

Exod.  2.  25.  God  looked,  and  had  r.  unto  them
Lev  *26!  9.  for  1  will  have  r.  unto  you
l  Kings  8.  28.  yet  have  thou  r  unto  the  prayer  of
thy  servant  and  his  supplication,  ~  Lhr.b.  19.»
o  Kings  13.  23.  and  the  Lord  had  r.  unto  them
o  Q/ir  ]Q  7.  there  is  no  iniquity  nor  r.  of  Persons
*  wife  God.  Rom.  2.  11.  tph.  6.  9.  Col.  3.  25.
Psal.  74.20.  haver,  unto  covenant,  tor  dark  places
119  6  when  1  haver,  to  all  thy  commandments
15  and  l  will  haver,  unto  thy  ways
117.  I  will  have  r.  unto  thy  statutes  continually
138.  6.  yet  hath  her.  unto  the  lowly
Vrmi  04  OQ  jt  is  not  good  to  have  r.  of  persons
PrW' in  judgment,  nations  shall  abhor  him  28  21
lta  17  7.  his  eyes  shall  have  r.  to  the  Holy  One  I

22.  ll.  nor  had  r.  to  him  that  fashioned  it  long  ag(j


2  Cor  3  10.  for  even  that  had  no  glory  in  this  r.  ,
Phil.  A.  11.  not  that  l  speak  in  r.  ot  want  1

Col.  *2.  16.  let  none  judge  you  in  r.  of  an  holy  day  {
Tleh  11  26.  Closes  had  r.  to  recompense  ot  rewari  t
Jan’  °  1.  have  not  the  faith  with  r.  ot  peisons
3  v  have  r.  to  him  that  weareth  gay  clothing  i
o'  i,  ye  have  r.  to  persons,  ye  comimt  sin
l  t-'et  l  17  who  without  r.  of  persons,  jud^eth  H

'  RESPECT,  Verb.

Tev  19.  15.  thou  shalt  not  r.  the.  person  ot  poor  I
Sum  16  15.  Moses  said,  r.  not  thou  their  offennH
Deut.  1  17.  ye  shall  not  r.  persons  in  judgment

o  Sam.  14.  14.  neither  doth  God  r.  any  person  j
~lsa  17  8  nor  shall  r.  that  which  his  fmgeis  mac  i

‘  respected.

Lam.  4.  16.  they  r.  not  6’e  persons  of  the  priest
RESPEt  A  EUoi  .

Isa.  57.  f  9.  thou  r.  the  king  and  didst  increase
RESPEG 1  EK.

Acts  10  34.  J  perceive  God  is  no  r.  ot  persons
^  p  respecteth.  .

Tub  37  °A.  he  r.  not  any  that  are  wise  ot  heart  ;
Psal.  40.  4.  blessed  is  the  man  that  r.  not  the  pioi
R  ESP IT  E.

Exod.  8. 15.  when  Pharaoh  saw  that  there  was  r.

1  Sam.  11.  3.  the  elders  said,  give  us  seven  daj  j  ■

Signifies,  [1]  A  ceasing  from  labour  or  works,

5  5  I  35.  2.  [2]  A  respite,  or  hi eathmg-tin I

from  open  wars  and  hostilities,  J  j'  -,

A  calmness,  composure,  and  ti anquillity  oj  p
and  a  cheerful  confidence  m  the-  promises  c  ,
providence  oj  God,  Psal.  lib.  i.  -  I

fixed,  and  secure  habitation,  such  was  Ganaan
S Israelites,  Deut.  3..  20  and  the  temple  j
Moriah  to  the  ark,  udnch  before  had  no  f
place,  or  settlement ,  Psal.  132.  8.  Ani^s\
says  to  Ruth,  The  Lord  grant  jou  may  ^
rest  that  is,  a  comfortable  settlement,  Kuth
[5]  'The  church  and  house  of  God,  wherein  Ch
rested  by  his  lore  and  grace,  Isa. Ml •  10.  LW
ceasing  from  tillage  and  husbandly,  Leu
[7]  That  peace  with  God  and  their  own  £
sciences,  which  believers  enjoy  in  th™?orJf')j
inq  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  their  heart  /
the  Holy  Ghost,  witnessing  their  recoricihat,
justification,  renovation,  and  adoption,  so
they  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  9 lory  of  God  \
on  Heb.  4.  3.  lor  we  which  have  belie  ec

enter  into  rest.  [81  OoJs  sacred  ^/^(]  fc
works  of  creation,  Heb.  4.  4-  And  oou
the  seventh  day  from  all  his  "9™s  <
after  God  had  perfected  the  nattstbUmdvtJA
world,  on  the  review  oj  all  his  '  i  ;t
very  good,  he  was  satisfied  in  all  those
of  his  own  perfections  in  the  woiks  oj  s  '  ^
God  always  enjoyed  his  own  glory  and
ness  even  from  eternity  ,  but  this '  .
sped  to  the  precedent  work  of  creatmn,  an  ^
joyful  reflection  that  God  made  upon  is  ^
works;  because  they  were  accoi di ng 1  ,

of  his  infinite  wisdom,  he  was  whiclb*

in  them.  This  sacred  rest,  and  that  J  c  ,
promised  to  the  Israelites  tn  the
are  mentioned  by .  the  apostles  as  ^

that  rest  which  the  saints  shall  enjoy  .  F
after  all  their  works  done  Jor  the •  gK '1/  /
eirth.  Heb.  4.  9.  There  remained
rest  to  the  people  of  God.  I  he  lsr.ae
at  first  harassed  in  Egypt  with
and  they  were  to  pass  through  a  n  a  t‘  n
wilderness,  wherein  they  were  to '  hate  a  V

and  difficult  journeys:  to  those  tha  t  did  J ,
and  obey,  Canaan  was  promised  as  a  tana  j  /(
but  this  temporal  Canaan  was  only
heavenly  Canaan,  the  land  an  o\

milk  and  honey  ;  that
and  pleasure  are  jor  ever  in  perfection.


RES


RES


REST,  Substantive.

’ en  8.  *  21.  the  I.on)  smelled  a  savour  of  r.

49.  15.  Issachar  saw  that  r.  was  good

16.  23.  to-morrow  the  r.  of  the  holy  sahbath
SI.  15.  but  m  the  seventh  is  the  sabbath  of  r  35
,  .  2-  Lev.  16.  3I.|  23.  3,  32. 1  25.  4.

33. 14.  my  presence  shall  go,  and  I  will  give  thee  r
,ev.  25.  5.  for  it  is  a  year  of  r.  to  the  land
,W  28. +  2.  ottering  for  a  savour  of  r.  shall  observe
)fut.  3.  CO.  until  the  J.orci  have  given  r.  Josh  1  13
12.  9.  for  ye  are  not  as  yet  come  to  the  r.

10.  when  he  gi'eth  you  r.  from  your  enemies
.’5.  19.  when  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  thee  r
18.  65.  neither  shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  r.
tsh.  1.  15.  the  Lord  hath  given  your  brethren  r
4.  15.  Hebron  the  inheritance  of  Caleb,  and  the

and  had  r.  from  war,  Judg.  3.  11.15.  31.

I.  44.  the  Lord  gave  them  r.  round  about

■2*  4- God  hatl?  ?ive,n  r-  H  23-  1-  l-ord  had  given  r.
wg.  .3.  .30.  and  the  land  had  r.  eighty  years
nth  1.  9.  the  Lord  grant  you  may  find  r.  each
..  1.  daughter,  shall  I  not  seek  r.  for  thee
18.  for  the  man  will  not  be  in  r.  till  have  finished
Sam.  7.  ].  the  Lord  had  given  him  r.  from  his
enemies,  1  hings  5.  4.  |  8.  56.  2  Citron.  14.  6,  7
4.  f  17  word  of  my  lord  king  shall  now  be  for  r.
Chron.  6.  31.  after  that  the  ark  had  r.

2.9.  whoshall  he  a  man  ofr.  and  I  will  give  him  r.
18.  hath  he  not  given  you  r.  on  every  side  '

3.  25.  God  of  Israel  hath  given  r.  to  his  people
8.  2.  I  had  in  mine  heart  to  build  a  house  of  r.

H  ™”v15,k-5’  Ahej 1  'ord  ?»vethem  r.  round  about

J.  30.  tor  his  God  gave  him  r.  round  about

^o'o«10h  l]le£  °fer.; sacrifices  of  r.  to  God

1  o'  ?8,Qb'it  atter,,hey  had  r.  they  did  evil  again
r  .+  he  made  a  r ■  10  t,le  Provinces

.  16.  the  Jews  had  r.  from  their  enemies

l3-  13.  I  should  have  slept,  then  had  1  been  at  r

!/.  and  there  the  weary  he  at  r .

.’6.  I  was  not  in  safety,  neither  had  I  r.

I.  18.  thou  shalt  take  thy  r.  in  safety
wllen  our  r-  together  is  in  the  dust
lo.  r.  of  thy  table  should  be  full  of  fatness
a/.38.  3.  neither  is  there  any  r.  in  my  bones
>•6  then  would  1  fly  away  and  be  at  r.

:.  13.  that  thou  merest  give  him  r.  from  adversity
>.11.  that  they  should  not  enter  into  my  r
6.  7.  return  to  thy  r.  O  my  soul,  for  the  Lord
■2.  8.  arise,  O  Lord,  into  thy  r.  thou  and  ark

4.  this  is  m3’  r.  for  ever,  here  will  1  dwell

ov,- ».  17.  correct  thy  son,  he  shall  give  thee  r.
cl.  2.  23.  his  heart  taketh  not  r.  in  the  night

5.  this  hath  more  r.  than  the  other

:,i1:u10-TGePti,le?,se?k’  and  his  r.  Shall  be  glor.

.  3.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  r.  from  thy  sorrow
.  whole  earth  is  at  r.  and  quiet,  Zeeh.  1.  ]].

•  4 •  ‘  ord  said,  1  will  take  my  r.  and  consider

.  1~.  this  is  r.  wherewith  ye  cause  weary  to  re*t

•  Iff  m  returning  and  r.  shall  ye  be  saved
.  14.  and  find  for  herself  a  place  ofr

•  1.  and  where  is  the  place  of  my  r.

.  6.  16.  and  ye  shall  find  r.  for  your  souls

•  l°.  Jacob  shall  return  and  be  in  r.  46.  27.

■  34.  thiit  he  ma3r  give  r.  to  the  land

1 1.  *19-  hast  set  it  before  them  forsavour  of  r

■  T41  l  will  accept  with  your  savour  ofr.

11.  I  will  go  to  them  that  are  at  r.

n'o'  fx1  ^ebuchadnez.  was  at  r.  in  mine  house
7  -•  arise  and  depart,  tor  this  is  not  your  r.

"■  9-  "  and  Damascus  shall  be  the  r.  thereof
t.  11.  28.  come  unto  me  and  1  will  give  you  r
and  ye  shall  find  r.  to  your  souls
43.  seeking  r.  and  findeth  none,  Luke  11.  24

■  m  ™  ?i0Il  ?°Y-  and  take  r.  Mark  14.  41.

J.1’ that  he  had  spoken  of  taking  r.  in  sleen

f  7-  49.  or  w  hat  is  the  place  of  my  r.  ?  H

31.  then  had  the  churches  r.  through  all  Tudea
tels- };  7-  to  you  who  are  troubled  r.  with  us
!•  4.  11.  they  shall  not  enter  into  my  r  18
l.  lest  a  promise  being  left  us  of  enter,  into  r
tor  we  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  r
and  again,  if  the3’  shall  enter  into  my  r.
for  if  Jesus  had  given  them  r.  then  not  spoken
there  remaineth  a  r.  to  the  people  of  God

•  he  that  is  entered  into  his  r.  hath  ceased
.  let  us  labour  therefore  to  enter  into  that  r.

See  No.

„  REST,  Adjective.

y  ™  J,eCob  ted  the.  r-  °r  I  aban’s  flock

Ho  th'he  nfanJes  l5e  !■  ,?n  ‘he  other  stone

•  5.  9.  the  r.  of  the  blood  shall  be  wrung  out

o  k  °-  ,the ,od  that  is  in  his  hand.  29.

Vn!i  blSI<le  thu  r-  ot  them  that  were  slain
.  and  the  booty  being  the  r.  of  the  prey

10  If/'  °f  Gllead.  "av®  I  to  the  half  tribe
7  A°ktheL  -  entered  into  fenced  cities
^7.  6.  but  the  r.  bowed  down  to  drink  water
'  iA  1^1?  the  r;.bave  we  utterly  destroyed
•  10.  10.  the  r.  of  the  people  he  delivered  to
Abishai  lus  brother,  1  Chron  19  11
XVr  the„r-  fled  ‘0uAPhek  to  the  city
Z  W\,U\e  k10u  and  thy  children  of  the  r.

4? 8;  -,oah  repaired  the  r.  of  the  city
41.  Jed  nth  un  and  the  r.  chosen  to  give  thanks
r',; -  •  they  brought  the  r.  of  the  money

•  -  16.  nor  told  it  to  the  r.  that  did  the  work

1  tl»r,Mem,esh.ear{i  1  had  built  the  wall

°[  ’he  people  also  cast  lots
•’  ;•  ,  \  have  done  in  the  r.  of  provinces  5
in  ’J4 ;i?nd  leave  the  r.  to  their  babes

»'  ue  r‘  °tthLe  t^ts  of  his  forest  be  few

2  lAh^ri  ot- t,he, laI^  shall  give  to  Israel

•  ».  i«.  that  Daniel  should  not  perish  with  the  r
97  ao  fet  tbe/-,  eat  the  flesh  of  another

iy  r.  said,  let  us  see  if  Elias  will  come
o  Ti**  take  thought  for  the  r.  ?

2  P7d  ld  t0  the  eleven  and  to  all  the  r.

9  ilf  r  i ‘V  said  to  Pe,er  an(*  the  r.  of  apostles
14  anrf  *kUrSt  ?,°  man  J°in  himself  to  them

117  ill-*  they  escaped  all  safe  to  land
'  7  *19  mu1011  °b,ained,  and  r.  were  blinded

•  <•  12.  to  the  r.  speak  1,  not  the  Lord


RES


}  V'/?4,  tb r  r'  set  In  order  when  1  come

\i{  etX  4*  2-  n°t  l*ve  r.  of  Ins  time  to  lusts  of  men

o  oo2,n4‘  .k^0.11  1  say’  a^<;  to  ,he  r-  in  I  hyatira
9.  20.  the  r.  that  were  not  killed  repented  not

»0.  u.  r.  ot  the  dead  lived  not  again  till  1000 years
See  Acts.

^  REST,  Verb.

Gen.m.  4.  wash  your  feet,  and  r.  under  the  tree
t,xod.  b.b.  ye  make  them  r.  from  their  burdens
23  11.  in  the  seventh  year  thou  shalt  let  it  r.

12.  on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  r.  .34  21

r4-  no  1l\ena,jn§:  time  and  in  harvest  thou  shalt  r.
Lev.  23.  +  32.  from  even  to  even  shall  ye  r

20.  f  2.  then  shall  the  land  r.  to  the  Lord,’ 26.  34.
26.  35.  because  it  did  not  r.  in  your  sabbaths
Uevt.  5. 14.  thy  maid-servant  may  r.  as  well  as  thou
Josh.  3.  13.  as  soon  as  the  feet  of  the  priests  shal  1  r.
2  Sam.  3.  29.  let  it  r.  on  the  head  of  Joab

oi  "av?  cal,sed  to  r.  from  thine  enemies

21.  10.  neither  the  birds  to  r.  on  them  by  dav
2  Rings  g  15.  the  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  r.  on  Elisha

r  *  o  if  n;,we  r'.  on  thee-  thy  name  we  go
dob  3.  18.  there  the  prisoners  r.  together,  hear  not
ji*4,  .n*  ibtit  he  may  r.  'ill  he  shall  accomplish
J~a  L  b-  ?•  r.ny  besh  shall  r.  in  hope,  Acts  2.  26
G  r-*n  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him
L5.  3.  rod  ot  wicked  shall  not  r.  on  the  righteous
V/°v.  t>.  3o.  nor  will  he  r.  content,  tho’  thou  g.  gifts
Cant  l  7  where  thou  makest  thy  flock  to  r.  at  noon
if  V  i9,  all.°t  them  shall  r  in  the  desolate  valleys

ll-  ?Atl?e  4Skf?,nt  ot  ,hfe-  Lord  sha'l  r.  upon  him
25.  10.  in  this  mountain  shall  the  hand  of  lord  r
28.  12.  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the  weary  to  r  '
30.  t32.  the  grounded  staff  shall  r.  upon  Trim
34.  14.  the  screech-owl  also  shall  r.  there
51. 4.  1  will  make  my  judgment  to  r.  for  a  li°fit
5g  2-  en.t.elf  >n/o  Peace,  they  shall  r.  in  their  beds
20  are  like  the  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  r.

62.  1.  tor  Jerusalem  s  sake  l  will  not  r

63.  14.  tbe.  Spirit  of  the  l  ord  caused  him  to  r
Jer.  31.  2.  when  1  went  to  cause  him  to  r

47.  6.  put  up  into  thy  scabbard,  r.  and  be  still
Lsek.  5.  13.1  will  cause  my  tur3’  to  r.  upon  them,
and  will  be  comforted,  16.  42.  I  21.  17  I  24  13
44.  30.  that  he  may  cause  the  blessing  to  r
Dan  12.  1.3.  for  thou  shalt  r.  and  stancl  in  the  lot

vZ  t,  o  -•  hat  fV’18  - 1  f  111  ^he  da>’  of  trouble
.  he  will  r.  in  love,  he  will  joy  over  thee

nf°  a  delert  PIace>  and  r.  a  while
Luke  10.  6.  it  son  of  peace  there,  your  peace  shall  r.
2Gf  • 12-  y-.'battbe  power  of  Christ  may  r.  on  me
w  ‘  4-4-D°ddid  r.  seventh  day  from  his  works
! ,Ty  r‘  P0t  ,(l,ay  and  ni'ht  saying,  Holy

1 1  At!h.ty  Sh0uld  r-  yet  for  a  li<tle  season

14.  13.  that  they  may  r.  from  their  labours
RESTED.

Cen.  2.  2.  he  r.  on  seventh  day,  3.  Ex.  20. 11.  I  31  17
8.  4.  the  ai  k  r.  ||  Exod.  10. 14.  locusts  r.  in  E°rnt
Exod.  16.  30.  the  people  r.  on  the  seventh  day^P
JSum.  9.  18.  as  long  as  the  cloud  abode  they  r  «3
10  12.  the  cloud  r.  m  the  wilderness  of  Paran"

.,6  when  it  r.  he  said,  return,  O  Lord,  to  thous.

11.  25.  when  the  Spirit  r.  upon  them,  26
Josh.  11.  23.  and  the  land  r.  from  war
1  Sam.  25.  t  9.  they  spake  in  David’s  name,  and  r
1  A  trigs  o.  10.  the  chambers  r.  on  the  house

?-•  8-  pPople  f-  Pn  ,he  wor'is  of  Uezekiah
9.  1  g. on  the  14th  day  of  the  same  r.  they,  18
22.  wherein  the  Jews  r.  from  their  enemies
Job  30.  27.  my  bowels  boiled  and  r.  not
Lule  23. 56.  they  r.  sabl>atlt-day ,  according  to  com.

Horn.  2.  17.  thou  art  a  Jew,  aiid  r.  in  the  law
REST  ETH .

Jo*  24.  23.  it  be  given  him  in  safety,  whereon  he  r
Erov.  14.  33.  wisdom  r.  in  heart  of  him  that  hath  ’
Lccl.  (.  9.  for  anger  r.  in  the  bosom  of  fools
La  7.  t  2.  saying,  Syria  r.  on  Ephraim
1  Pet.  4. 14.  tor  the  Spirit  of  God  r .  upon  you
_ _  R ESI  IMG.

Aww.  10.  33.  to  search  out  a  r.  place  for  them
~  Chron.  6.  41.  arise,  O  Lord,  into  thy  r.  place
Erov.  24.  15.  spoil  not  his  r.  place
Isa.  32. 18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  r.  places
Jer.  50.  6.  they  have  forgotten  their  r.  place

„  ,  ,  restitution.

Exod.  22.  3.  he  should  make  full  r.  5, 6, 1°

Job  20.  18.  according  to  his  substance  shalf  r.  be
Acts  3.  21.  until  the  times  of  v.  of  all  things
..  RESTORE

Signifies,  [1]  To  give  back  again ,  Gen.  20.  14.
Judg.  il.  13.  [2]  To  set  again  in  the  first  state
or  condition,  Gen.  40.  13.  Isa.  1.  26.  Acts  1.  6.

|3J  Jo  recover,  or  get  again,  2  Kings  14.  25.  [4]

Jo  make  restitution  or  satisfaction  for  pretended
V'ontE  out  °f  one's  proper  right  or  substance,

T-i  69’  4.  [5]  Jo  heal  or  cure.  Mat.  12.  13

16}  Jo  reform  the  corrupt  state  of  the  church,
octhm  doctrine,  worship,  and  life.  Mat.  17.  11.

U\  Jo  endeavour  to  bring  a  person,  that  has
J alien  into  sm,  to  a  sight  ot  his  sin,  to  a  sense  of
Lod  s  pardoning  mercy,  and  to  amendment  of  life.
Gal.  6.  1.

Gen.  20.  7.  now  therefore  r.  the  man  his  wife,  and

in  i  o  Tii  l,er  not-  thou  shalt  surely  die

40.  13.  Pharaoh  will  r.  thee  to  thy  place
42.  25.  to  r.  every  man’s  money  into  his  sack
Exod.  22.  1.  he  shall  r.  five  oxen  for  an  ox

4.  ff  theft  be  certainly  found,  he  shall  r.  double
Lev.  6.  4.  he  shall  r.  that  w  bich  he  took  away

5.  tie  shall  even  r.  it  in  the  principal

24.  21.  he  that  kill eth  a  beast,  he  shall  r.  it

25.  27.  and  r.  the  overplus  to  w  hom  he  sold  it
28.  but  it  he  be  not  able  to  r.  it  to  him

hum.  .35.  25.  congregation  shall  r.  him  to  the  city
Dent.  22.  2.  things  strayed  thou  shalt  r.  again
Judg.  11. 1.3.  therefore  r.  those  lands  again  peaceably
17-  3.  1  will  r.  it,  1  Sam.  12.3.  1  Kings  20.  34.

2  Sam.  9.  7-  1  will  r.  thee  all  the  land  of  Saul
12.  6.  lie  shall  r.  the  lamb  fourfold
16.  3.  to-day  shall  the  house  of  Israel  r.  me
2  Kings  8.  6.  r.  all  that  was  hers,  and  fruits  of  field


Neh  5.  11.  r.  I  pray  you,  to  them  II 12.  we  will  r
’?•  and.  ",1S  '.'amis  shall  r.  their  goods
18.  that  which  he  laboured)  lor,  shall  he  r
flaJ-  51- G  me  the  joy  of  thy  salvation

dV3V ‘  ;ne  o  0pi!51,  heshal1  T-  sevenfold
ao'  1  J  ,hy  JV.dgres  as  at  the  first
42.  22.  they  are  tor  spoil,  and  none  saith  r
49.  6.  and  to  r.  the  preserved  of  Israel
57.  18.  I  will  lead  and  r.  comforts  unto  him
Lf-r-  27.  22.  I  will  r.  them  to  tliis  place
a(>-  J7. 1  will  r.  health  to  thee,  and  heal  thee
Ezek.  33.15.  if  the  wicked  r.  pledge,  shall  live

TC0,.V,mand  ioJ-  and  t0  build  Jerusalem
£  n  il1  r  •  the  >’ears  locust  hath  eaten
Mat.  17.  11  Ehas  shall  come  and  r.  all  things
tf,15;  8y  haVe  takenany  thing,  l  r.  him  fourfold
/lets  1.6.  Lord,  wilt  thou  r.  kingdom  to  Israel  '
Lai.  0.1 .  r.  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness
_  ^  R ES’l  OR  ED.

14-  Abimelech  r.  him  Sarah  his  wife
40.  21.  he  r.  the  chief  butler  to  his  butlership

40  ’e  r’  t0.nune  0bb.ce>  him  lie  hanged

42.  *-8.  my  money  is  r.  and  it  is  in  my  sack
^8.  31.  thine  ass  shall  not  be  r.  to  thee
JW<7.  lr.  3.  when  he  had  r.  the  1100  shekels,  4.

1  Sam.  7. 14.  the  cities  taken  from  Israel  were  r.

1  Kings  1.1.  6.  pray  tor  me,  that  my  hand  may  be

2  Kir,n :  ,he  k,ny  s  band  was  r.  him  again

“1  a  w°nian,  whose  son  he  had  r.  to  life  5

14.  22.  he  bu.lt  and  r.  Elath  to  Judah/ 2  Chron.


o  n5f  he  o  of.Tsrael  from  Hamath  to  the' sea”
2  Chron.  &.  <2.  the  cities  Hu. am  had  r.  to  Solomon
E~ia  6.  5.  the  vessels  brought  to  Babylon  be  r
Esal  09.  4.  r.  that  w  hich  1  took  not  away
Ezek  18.  7-  but  hath  r.  to  the  debtor  his  pled-e

12.  hath  spoiled  t>y  violence,  hath  not  r.  pledge
Mat.  12.  13.  he  stretched  his  hand  forth  and  it

Lwle  6Wlo  6  HS  the  °tller’  ^lark  3-  5.

¥,alk£;  h,is  si?bt  was  r •  and  be  saw  clearly
JrJeb.  13.  19.  that  f^may  be^r^to  you  the  sooner

Euth  4.  15.  he  shall  be  to  thee  a  V.  of  thy  life
Jsa.  58. 12.  shall  be  called  r.  of  paths  to  dwell  in
„  ,  RESTORETH.

2-3- be  r.  ruy  soul  he  leadeth  me  in  paths
Maik  9.  12.  Elias  cometh  hrst  and  r.  all  things
D  ,  RESTORING.

AU,  'o9:\7-  !aw  °f  d,e  Lord  is  perfect,  r.  the  soul
Mic.  2.  t  4.  mstead  ot  r.  he  hath  divided  our  fields
i  It  ESI  RAIN.

1  Sam.  9.  f  17.  this  same  shall  r.  my  people
'/V  y?'y  4- +  24.  r.  not  for  me  to  ride  except  1  bid  thee
Job  Jo.  8.  and  dost  thou  r.  wisdom  to  thyself''

Esal.  76.  10.  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  lliou  r.
JJan.  9.  f  24.  seventy  weeks  determined  to  r  trans»
RESTRAINED.  g*

Gen.  8.  2.  and  the  rain  from  heaven  Avas  r.

11.6.  and  iioav  nothing  w  ill  be  r.  from  them
1  j.  2.  Sarai  said,  Lord  hath  r.  me  from  bearing
Lxod.  36.6.  the  people  were  r.  from  bringing
\Sam.  3.  13.  Ill’s  sons  vile,  and  he  r.  them  not
Isa.  63.  15.  thy  mercies  toward  me,  are  they  ?•  ?
Lzek.39.  t  18.  at  J  ehaphnehes  the  day  shall  be  r.
31.  15.  l  r.  the  floods  thereof,  and  areat  waters
/lets  14.  18.  w  ith  these  say  ings  scarce  r.  they  people
T,  e  ,  RESTRA1NEST.

Job  15.  4.  yea,  thou  r.  prayer  before  God

_  .  RESTRAINT.

Lev.  2.3.  t  36.  it  is  a  day  of  r.  Dent.  16.  +  8  2  Chi
T  .  1Q  ,  _  7.  t  9.  Neh.  8.  t  18.  Joel  1 .  +  14!

Judg.  18.  +  j .  there  w'as  no  heir  ot  r.  to  put  to  shame
I  Sam.  14.  6.  for  there  is  no  r.  to  the  Lord  to  save
Jer,  17.  t  8.  snail  not  he  careful  in  the  year  of  r
RESTRAINTS.

Jer.  14.  +  1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  r

RESTS.

1  Kings  6.  6.  he  made  narrowed  r.  round  about

rr,  it-,  hesukkection.

Jhe  belief  of  a  general  resurrection  of  the  dead,
which  will  come  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  world,
Li7ul  which  will  he  followed,  with  a.7i  immortality
either  of  happiness  or  misery,  is  a  principal
article  °j  religion  in  common  to  the  Jew  and  the
Christian  .it  is  very  expressly  taught  hath  in  the
Did]  and  New  'testament.  Job  19.  25,  26  27.
And  though  after  my  skin  w'orms  destroy ’this
body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God,  &c.  John
5.  *.8,  29.  Marvel  not  at  this,  for  the  hour  is  com-
ing,  in  which  all  that  are  in  the  grav’es  shall  hear
Ins  voice,  and  shall  come  forth,  they  that  have
done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of  life;  and
they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of
damnation.

l  he  resurrection  is  a  doctrine  unknown  to  the  wisest
heathens,  and  peculiar  to  the  gospel:  some  glim¬
merings  they  had  Of  the  soul's  immortality,  but  no
knowledge  oj  the  reviving  of  the  body.  But  reason
assists  faith  in  this  point,  both  as  to  the  will  of
Lod,  arid  his  power  for  the  performing  it.  The
divine  laws  are  the  rule  of  duty  to  the  entire  man,
and  not  to  the  soul  only  ;  and  they  are  obeyed
or  violated  by  the  soul  and  body  in  conjunction.
Jhe  soul  designs,  the  body  executes.  The  senses
are  the  open  ports  to  admit  temptations.  Carnal
affections  deprave  the  soul,  corrupt  the  mind
and  mislead  it.  The  heart  is  the  fountain  of
projaneness,  and  the  tongue  expresses  it:  Thus
the  members  are  instruments  of  iniquity.  And
the  body  is  obedient  to  the  holy  soul  in  doing
or  suffering  for  God ;  and  denies  its  sensual
appetites  and  satisfactions  in  compliance  with
reason  and  grace  ;  the  members  are  instruments
of  righteousness.  Hence  it  follows,  that  there
will  he  an  universal  resurrection,  that  the  re¬
warding  goodness  of  God  may  appear  in  making
the  bodies  of  his  servants  gloriously  happy  with
their  souls,  and  their  souls  completely  havvv
in  union  with  their  bodies,  to  which  they  have  a
uatm  at  incluiation ;  and  lus  revenymg  justice
may  be  manifest,  in  punishing  the  'bodies  of  the

397


RET


RES


RET


Kicked  iJith  eternal  torments  answer  able  to  their
guilt  And  as  to  the  possibility  oj  the  resurrec¬
tion ,  the  continual  production  o)  things  in .  the
world,  is  a  clear  demons n atipn  oj  the  pome i  of
God  /or  that  effect.  There  is  an  instance  ha
our  Saviour  and  the  apostle  Paul
an  image  of  the  resurrection :  A  pm  oj  coi  n
sowed  in  the  earth,  corrupts  and  d-es,  and  atter
springs  up  entire;  its  death  is  a  disposition  to
John  12.  24.  1  Cor.  15.  3b.  The  essays  of
God's  power  in  the  works  of  returning  natuie,
flowers  and  fruits  in  their  season,  instruct  us  how
easily  he  can  make  those  that  are  in  the  dust  to

ffut^rnore  especially  the  resurrection  of  Christ*
the  argument,  the  claim,  ana  aSiUTff\cer?fJh*/*e
surrection  of  believers  to  glory,  lor  God  chose
and  appoint  d  him  to  be  the  example  and  princi¬
ple,  from  whom  all  divine  blessings  should  be  de¬
prived  to  them;  accordingly  he  tells  his  disciples,
Because  1  live,  ye  shall  live  a.so,  John  14.  19.

He  is  called  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept,

1  Cor.  15.  20.  because  as  the  first  fruits  weie  a
pledge  and  assurance  of  the  following  harvest ;
and  as  from  the  condition  of  the  first  fruits  being
offered  to  God,  the  whole  harvest  was  entitled  to  a
consecration,  so  our  Saviour's  resurrection  to  the
life  ,f  glory  is  the  earnest  and  assurance  of  outs,
lit  is  the  Head,  believers  are  his  members  ;  and
therefore  shall  have  communion  with  him  in  his
life.  It  is  recorded,  to  confirm  the  hope  of  be¬
lievers,  how  early  his  power  was  displayed  in  forc¬
ing  the  grave  to  release  its  captives.  Mat.  .7.  £>-.

53.  And  many  bodies  ot  saints  which  slept,
arose,  and  came  out  ot  the  graves  after  his  l  esui-
rection,  and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and  ap
peered  unto  many,  from  what  he  has  done,  to
what  he  can  do,  the  consequence  ts  clear.

Ihe  Resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  most
important  article  of  the  gospel,  and  the  demonstra
tion  of  all  the  rest;  hence  St.V*u\says,\  Cor.

15.  14.  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  pur
preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also
And  verse  17,  If  Christ  be  not  raised,  your  faith
is  vain,  ye  are  yet  in  vour  sins.  Jhe  apostles,
being  sent  to  convert  the  world,  were  to  lay  this

down  as  the  foundation  of  their  preaching,  that

Jesus  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead,  that  all
might  yield  faith  and  obedience  to  him.  Acts  1.

21  22.  Wherefore  of  these  men  which  have

companied  with  us,  all  the  time  that  the  Lord
Jesus  went  in  and  out  among  us,  beginning
"from  the  baptism  of  John,  unto  the  same  day
that  lie  was  taken  up  from  us,  must  one  be
ordained  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  his  resur
rection.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  confirms  the
faith  of  Christians  in  his  person,  as  he  is  thereby
declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  horn.

1  4  He  was  the  Son  of  God  from  eternity,  as
the  Word;  and  from  the  first  moment  of  his
incarnation  as  God-Man:  yet  the  honour  of
this  relation  was  much  eclipsed  in  his  poor  life
and  ignominious  death  ;  but  in  his  1  esurrection
God  did  publicly  own  him  in  the  face  of  the
world :  therefore  he  is  represented  testifying  from
heaven,  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  1  be¬
gotten  thee,  Acts  13.  33.  Tbs  resurrection  was
likewise  a  most  pregnant  proof  of  the  all-sufli-
ciency  °f  his  satisfaction .  1  he  curse  of  the  law

accompanied  his  death ,  and  seemed  line  an  iiim
finite  weight  to  lie  on  his  grave  ;  hut  in  i  using
again,  the  value  and  virtue  of  his  sufferings  was
fully  declared.  Horn.  4.25.  He  was  delivered
*or  our  offences,  and  was  raised  again  for  our
justification  :  Having  as  our  surety  paid  our  debt ,
and  given  full  satisfaction  to  divine  justice ,  he
was  released  from  the  gvavv,  and  the  dischai ge
was  most  solemnly  published  to  the  world.  Fn
this  doctrine  of  his  resurrection ,  as  was  said,  is
also  built  our  faith  in  his  promises ,  to  give  life
and  glory  to  his  servants .  For  how  could  we  be¬
lieve  him  to  be  the  Author  of  life ,  who  remained
under  the  power  oj  death  ?  If  he  had  been  con¬
fined  to  the  grave ,  all  our  hopes  had  been  buried
with  him.  But  his  resurrection  is  the  cause,  pat¬
tern,  and  argument  of  ours ;  and  Christ  may  be
said,  not  only  to  have  raised  his  body  from  the
grave,  but  also  his  church  with  him.

Mat.  22.  23.  came  to  him  the  Sadducees,  w  ho  say
there  is  no  r.  MarkXQ..  18.^c^23. 8.  1  Cor.  15.  12.
28  therefore  in  the  r.  whose  wife  shall  she  be  of
the  seven  ?  Mark  12.  23.  Luke  20.  33.

30.  in  the  r.  they  neither  marry ,  nor  are  given

31.  but  as  touching  the  r.  have  ye  not  read  that
27.  53.  and  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his  r.
rMke  14.  14.  thou  shalt  be  recompensed  at  the  r.

20.  27.  deny  any  r.  ||  36.  the  children  ot  the  r.

John  5.  20.  they  that  have  done  good  to  the  r.  of
life,  that  have  done  evil,  to  the  r.  of  damnation
11. 24.  I  know  that  my  brother  shall  rise  in  the  r.

25.  Jesus  said  to  her,  I  am  the  r.  and  the  life
Acts  1.  22.  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  his  r.

2.  31.  David  spake  of  the  r.  of  Christ
4. 2.  they  preached  through  Jesus  r .  from  the  dead
33"  gave  witness  of  the  r.  of  the  Lord  Jesus
17.  18.  because  he  preached  Jesus  and  the  r.

32.  when  they  heard  of  the  r.  some  mocked

23.  6.  of  the  hope  and  r.  I  am  called  in  question

24.  15.  that  there  shall  be  a  r.  ot  the  dead

21  I  cried  among  them,  touching  r.  of  the  dead
E  om.  1  4.  declared  by  the  r.  from  the  dead
6.  5.  we  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  ot  his  r.

1  Cor.  15.  13.  but  if  there  be  no  r.  of  the  dead

21.  by  man  came  the  r.  ||  42.  so  is  r.  of  the  dead

Phil.  .3.  10.  that  1  may  know  the  power  or  his  r.

11.  if  l  might  attain  to  the  r.  of  the  dead

2  Tim.  2.  18.  saying,  that  the  r.  is  past  already
Heb.  6.  2,  ofr.  from  thedead,  and  eternal  judgment

11.35.  that  they  might  obtain  abetter  r.

1  Pet.  1.  3.  a  lively  hope,  by  r.  of  Jesus  from  dead
3.  21.  baptism  doth  save  us,  by  r  ot  Jesus  Christ
Eev.  20.  5.  thia  is  the  first  r.

398


Nev  °0  6.  blessed  and  holy  is  he  hath  part  in  first  r.

•  RETAIN.

1  Chr.  29.  +  14-  rny  people  that  we  should  r.  strength
fob  2.  9.  dost  thou  still  r.  thine  integrity  ?

I'rov.  4.  4.  he  said,  let  thine  heart  r.  my  words
11.16.  gracious  woman  honour,  strong  men  r .  riches

1  ccl.  8.  8.  no  man  hath  power  to  r.  the  spirit
Dan.  11.6.  she  shall  not  r.  the  power  ot  the  arm
lohn  20.  23.  whose  soever  sins  ye  r.  they  are  retain.

Ilom  1  28.  did  not  like  to  r.  God  in  their  knowl.

RETAIN  ED.

fudg.  7-  8.  Gideon  r.  those  three  hundred  men
19.  4.  the  damsel’s  father  r.  him,  and  lie  abode
Dan.  10.  8.  left  alone,  and  1  r.  no  strength,  16.

John  20.  23.  whose  sins  ye  retain,  they  are  r.

Philem.  13.  whom  1  would  have  r.  with  me
R  ETA  IN  E 1  Tl.

Prov.  3.  18.  and  happy  is  every  one  that  r.  her
11.  16.  grac.  woman  r.  honour,  strong  men  riches
Mic  7.  18.  he  r.  not  his  anger  for  ever
*  RE  l  IRE.

2  .S am.  11.  15-  set  him  in  the  hottest  battle,  and  r.

Jer.  4,6.  set  up  standard  toward  Zion,  r.  stay  not

fudg.  20.  39.  when  the  men  of  Israel  r.  in  battle
o  Sam.  20.  22.  they  r.  from  the  city  every  man
RETURN',  Substantive.

Gen.  14.  17-  went  out  to  meet  Abram  after  his  r.

1  Sam  7.  17.  Samuel's  r.  was  to  Ramab,  his  house

2  Sam,  11  +  1.  at  1.  of  year  Dav.  sent,  1  Chr.  20.  +  1.

1  Kings  20.  22.  for  at  the  r.  of  the  year  the  king  01

Syria  will  come  up  against  thee,  26
RETURN

Signifies,  [!]  To  go  back  agpin,  F.xod.  13.  17.  [2
To  come  again,  2  Chron.  18.  26.  [3]  to  re
quite  or  recompense,  1  Rings  2.  44.  14  J  to  re¬
pent,  as  when  a  sinner,  who  has  erred  Jrom  the
ways  of  God's  commandments,  doth  return  to
God  by  unfeigned  -epentauce,  Isa.  10.  21.  Lzek.

18  3°.  [5]  T°  comply  with  sinners  in  their

sinful  courses,  or  to  soothe  them  up  therein,  Jer.

15.  19.  [6]  To  shew  fresh  signs  of  favour  and
mercy,  after  some  afflictions  for  sms, ,  Psal.  6.

4.  Joel  2.  14.  [71  To  relate,  Exod.  19.  8.  [8]

To  depart  or  get  away,  1  Sam.  29.  4.  L9J  1°
iterate,  Prov.  26.  +  11.  ...  .  ,,

Gen.  3.  19.  in  sweat  eat  bread,  till  thou  r.  to  the
ground,  for  dust  thou  art,  to  dust  shalt  thou  r.

16.  9.  r.  to  thy  mistress  and  submit  thyself
18.  10.  he  said,  I  will  certainly  r.  to  thee,  14

31.  3.  and  r.  to  the  land  ot  thy  kindred,  13.

.32.  9.  O  God,  the  Lord,  which  saidst  to  me,  r.

Exod.  4.  18.  let  me  r.  to  my  brethren  in  Egypt

19.  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  go  r.  into  Egypt
1.3  17.  lest  the  people  repent,  and  r.  to  Egypt
Lev.  25.  10.  shall  r.  to  his  possession,  13,  2<,  28.

41.  and  he  shall  r.  unto  his  own  tarnilv
07  °4  in  year  of  jubilee,  the  field  shall  r.  to  him
Xum.  8.  +  25.  from  the  age  of  fifty  r.  from 1  warfare
*10.  36.  r.  Lord,  to  the  many  thousands  of  Israel
14.  4.  let  us  make  a  captain,  and  r.  into  Egypt
23.  5.  the  Lord  said,  r.  unto  Balak,  and  speak

32.  22.  then  afterward  ye  shall  r.  and  be  guiltless
35'  28.  after  the  death  of  high  priest,  the  slayer

shall  r.  to  the  land  of  his  possession,  Josh.  20.  6.
Deut.  3.  20.  then  shall  ye  r.  every  man  to  his  pos¬
session  which  I  have  given  to  you.  Josh-

J6.  nor  shall  he  cause  people  to  r.  to  Egypt
5.  let  him  go  and  r.  to  nis  house,  6,  7,  8.

.3  the  Lord  thy  God  will  r.  and  gather  thee
thou  shalt  r.  and  obey  the  voice  ot  the  Lord
Josh.  22.  4.  now  r.  ve,  and  get  you  unto  your  tents
8.  saying,  r.  with  much  riches  to  vour  tents
Judo.  7.  3.  whosoever  is  fearful  and  afraid,  let  him  r.

11  31  when  I  r.  from  the  children  of  Ammon
Eutli  1.  6.  arose,  that  she  might  r.  from  Moab

8.  Naomi  said,  go  r.  to  her  mothers  house

10.  sureiy  we  will  r.  with  thee  to  thy  people
15.  r.  thou  after  thy  sister-in-law  .

1  Sam.  6.  3.  but  in  any  wise  /  him  trespass-offering
8.  and  put  the  jewels  of  gold  which  ye  r.  him

9.  5.  Saul  said  to  his  servant,  come,  let  us  r.

26.  21.  then  said  Saul,  1  have  sinned  r  my  son  Da.
29.  4.  the  princes  said,  make  this  tel  low  r.  7«

2  Sam.  2.  26.  how  long  ere  thou  bid  the  people  r.  ?
*3.  16.  then  said  Abner  to  him,  go,  r.  lie  returned

10.  5.  till  beards  be  grown,  then  r.  1  Chron.  19.  5.
15.  19.  wherefore  goest  thou  also  with  us  r  r.

20  seein,r  1  go  whither  1  may,  r.  thou,  and  take
34'  if  thou  r.  to  the  city  and  say  unto  Absalom
19.  14.  they  said,  r.  thou  and  all  thy  servants
24.  1.3.  advise  and  see  what  answer  I  shall  r.

1  Kings  2.  32.  the  I.ord  shall  r.  his  blood,  3.,.

44.  Lord  shall  r.  thy  wickedness  upon  thine  head
8.  48.  so  r.  to  thee  with  all  their  heart  and  soul
12.  24.  ye  shall  not  go.  r.  every  man  to  hrs  house
26.  now  shall  the  kingdom  1 .  to  house  ot  David

19.  15.  so,  r.  on  thy  way  to  the  wilderness
22."  17.  these  have  no  master,  let  them  r.  every  man

to  his  house  in  peace,  2  Chr.  11.  4.1  18.  16.
28.  if  thou  r.  at  all  in  peace,  ‘{Chron.  18.  27-
°  Kings  18.  14.  saying,  1  have  oflended,  r.  nom  me
19.7:  the  king  of  Assyria  shall  hear  a  rumour
and  shall  r.  to  his  own  land,  33.  Isa.  37 .  1,  o4

20.  10.  nay,  but  let  the  shadow  r.  backward
q' chron.  6.  24.  and  shall  r.  and  confess  thy  name

38  if  they  r.  to  thee  with  all  their  heart
10.  9.  that  we  may  r.  answer  to  this  people
18.  26.  put  this  fellow  in  the  prison  until  1  r.

30.  6.  he  will  r.  to  you  ||  9.  it  ye  r.  unto  him
Kelt.  2.  6.  the  king  said  to  me,  when  wilt  thou  r.  t
4  1°  from  all  places,  whence  ye  shall  r.  to  us
Esth  4  15.  Esther  hade  them  r.  Mordecai  this  answ.
9. 25.  devise  of  Daman  should  r.  upon  his  own  head
Job'l.  21.  and  naked  shall  1  r.  thither  .

6.  20.  r.  yea,  r.  again,  my  righteousness  is  in  it
7  10.  he  shall  r.  no  more  to  his  house,  nor  place
15.  22.  he  believeth  not  that  he  shall  r.  out  ot  dark.
17.  10.  but  as  for  you  all,  do  ye  /".and  come  now
22.  23.  if  thou  r.  to  the  Almighty,  be  built  up
33.  25.  he  shall  r.  to  the  days  ot  his  youth


17.

20.

30.

8.


Job  .35.  +  4.  I  "HI  words  to  thee,  and  companion*

.36.  10.  commandeth  that  they  r.  from  iniquity
P.sal.  6.  4.  r.  O  Lord,  deliver  tny  soul,  O  save  me
lit  let  mine  enemies  r.  and  be  ashamed
7  7  for  their  sakes  therefore  r.  thou  on  high
16  his  mischief  shall  r.  upon  his  own  head
59.  6.  they  r.  at  evening  II  14.  and  let  them  r.

73.  1  therefore  his  people  r.  hither,  and  waters

74.  21.  let  not  the  oppressed  /  .  ashamed,  let  poor
80.  14.  r.  we  beseech  thee,  O  God  of  hosts

ijo".  3.  thou  sayest,  r.  ye  children  ot  men
1.3  r  O  Lord  ?  how  long  '  and  let  it  repent  thee
94.15.  judgment  shall  r.  unto  righteousness

104.  29.  they  die,  and  r.  to  their  dust

116.  7.  t.  to  thy  rest,  O  my  soul,  Lord  hath  dealt
piov  2.  19.  none  that  go  unto  her  /  .  again,  neither
06  27.  he  that  rolleth  a  stone,  it  will  r.  on  him
Ei  cl  1  7  •  from  whence  rivers  come,  tluther  they  r.

5.  15.  naked  shall  he  r.  to  go  as  lie  came
1°  2.  nor  the  clouds  r.  atter  the  rain

7  dust  shall  r.  to  the  earth,  and  spirit  r.  to  God
Cant  6  13.  r.  r.  O  Shulamite,  r.  r.  that  we  may
Isa  i  +27.  they  that  r.  of  her  shall  be  redeemed

6.  i.3.  yet  in  it  a  tenth  shall  r.  and  shall  be  eaten
10  °1.  the  remnant  of  Jacob  shall  r.  to  God,  22.

2i.  12.  if  ye  will  inquire,  inquire  ye,  r.  come
.35.  10.  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  r.  51.  11.

41.  +  28.  that  when  1  asked  them  could  r.  a  word
44.  22.  r.  unto  me,  for  1  have  redeemed  thee
63  17  r.  for  thv  servant  s  sake,  the  tribes

Jer.  .3.  1.  shall  lie  r.  to  her  again  r  yet  r.  again  to  me

12.  proclaim  these  words,  r.  backsliding  I  srael

00  r  ye  backsliding  children,  and  1  will  heal
4  V  if  thou  wilt/-,  saith  the  Lord,  r.  unto  me
1°  15  1  will  r.  and  have  compassion  on  them
15*  19  thus  saith  the  Lord,  if  thou  r.  let  them  z.  -
unto  thee,  but  /.  not  thou  unto  them
18.  11.  r.  ye  every  one  from  his  evil  way,  35. 15.
22’.  I1 1.  for  he  shall  r.  no  more  his  country
°3  14  that  none  doth  r.  from  his  wickedness
24’  7  for  they  shall  r.  with  their  whole  heart
30.  10.  and  Jacob  shall  r.  and  be  in  rest,  46  .  27.

.31.  8.  a  great  company  shall  r .  thither
36.  3.  that  ye  may  /  .  every  man  from  his  evil  way
7.  it  may  lie  they  will  r.  every  one  fr.  his  evil  way
37.7.  behold,  Pharaoh's  army  shall  r.  to  Egypt
44  14  that  they  should  r.  into  the  land  ot  Judah, ]
for  none  shall  r.  but  such  as  escape,  28.  i
50.  9.  their  arrows  none  shall  r.  in  vain
E-ek.  16. 55.  when  Sodom  and  Samaria  shall  r.  they
desire  to  r.  then  thou  and  thy  daughters  shall  r.j
18.  2.3.  that  w  icked  should  r.  from  ways  and  live
46.  17.  after  it  shall  /'.to  the  prince
Dan.  9.  +  25.  after  sixty-two  weeks  shall  street  r.
10  °0  and  now  will  1  r.  to  fight  with  Persia
tl".  9.  and  shall  r.  into  his  own  land,  10,  28.

13.  the  king  of  the  north  shall  r.  and  set  torth

29.  and  the  time  apointed  he  shall  r.  and  come

30.  therefore  he  shall  be  grieved  and  r.

Hos  2.  7  1  will  go  and  r.  to  my  first  husband  _  I

9.  I  will  r.  and  take  away  my  corn  and  my  wine
3.  ’5.  afterward  shall  the  children  ot  Israel  r.

5  15.  1  will  go  and  r.  to  my  place,  till  they

7.  16.  they  r.  but  not  to  the  Most  HigT
8. 1.3.  visit  their  sins  they  shall  r.  to  Eg}  pt,  9.3.  1
12.14.  his  reproach  shall  his  Lord  r.  unto  him
14  7  they  that  dwell  under  the  shadow  shall  r.  !
loei  2".  14.  who  knoweth  if  he  will  r.  and  repent  _
3.  4.  speedily  will  l  r.  recompence  6n  your  head,  <
Chad.  15.  thy  reward  shall  r.  upou  thine  own  heac
Mic  1  7.  they  shall  r.  to  the  hire  of  an  harlot
*5.  .3.  then  the'  remnant  of  his  brethren  shall  r.
Mai.  1.  4.  whereas  Edom  saith,  we  will  r.  and  bull
3  7.  r .  to  111  e,  and  I  will  r.  to  you,  saith  the  Loi  .
of  hosts,  but  ye  said,  wherein  shall  we  r.
18  then  shall  ve  r.  and  discern  between  ngiiteot
Mat.  10.  13.  if  it  be  not  worthy ,  let  your  peace  r
12.  44.  he  saith,  1  will  r.  into  my  liouse, Luke. 11.2-
24.  18.  nor  let  him  which  is  in  the  field,  r.  back
Luke  8  39.  r.  to  thine  own  liouse,  shew  how  grea
12.  36.  when  lie  will  r.  from  the  wedding
Acts  15.  16.  after  this  I  will  r.  and  build  again
18  °1.  but  1  will  again  r.  to  you,  it  God  will
To  RETURN.

Exod.  4.  21.  when  thou  goest  to  r.  into  Egypt
Kum.  14.  3.  were  it  not  better  for  11s  to  r.  to  Eg}  |
Deut.  17-  16-  nor  cause  the  people  to  r.  into  Lg}
Enth  1.  7.  they  went  to  r.  unto  the  land  ot  Judan
16.  entreat  me  not  to  leave  thee,  or  to  r.

1  Sam.  29.  11.  so  David  ann  hismen  rose  early  to

2  Chr.  10.  6.  what  counsel  give  ye  to  r.  answer,  .
~Neh.  9.  17.  appointed  a  captain  to  r.  to  bondage
Jer.  5.  3.  they  have  refused  to  r.  8.  5.  Hos.U.5.

22.  27.  to  the  laud  where  they  desire  to  r.  44. 14.
29  10.  in  causing  you  to  r.  to  tins  "y*  3

^  .32.  44.1  .33.  7,  11,  26.  1  34.  22. 1  42.  1

34.  11.  but  they  caused  the  servants  to  r.  lb.

37.  20.  cause  me  not  to  r.  to  the  house,  .Jo.  *0.
Lam.  3.  +21.  this  l  make  to  r.  to  my  heart
Ezek.  21.  30.  shall  I  cause  it  to  r  into  his  sheath
29.  14.  cause  them  to  r.  to  the  land  ot  Patnros
47.  6.  caused  me  to  r.  to  the  brink  or  the  river
Dos.  4.  +  9.  1  will  cause  to  r.  their  doings
11.  5.  Assyrian  be  his  king,  bee.  they  refused ito,
l.uke  19.  12.  went  to  receive  a  kingdom  and  to  r,
Acts  13.  34.  now  no  more  to  r.  to  corruptioii
20  3.  he  purposed  to  r.  through  Macedonia
RETURN  to,  or  unto  the  Lord.

Deut.  30.  2.  and  shalt  r.  unto  the  Lord.

1  Sam.  7 •  3.  it  ve  r.unto  the  L.  with  all  your  nea
Isa  19  22.  they  shall  r.  unto  Ld.  he  shall  heal  th
55.'  7."  let  him  r.  unto  L.  he  will  have  mercy  on  W
Hos.  6.  1.  let  us  r.unto  the  Lord,  for  lie  hath  to ,
7.  10.  they  do  not  r.  to  Lord  nor  seek  him  .

14  1  O  Israel,  r.  unto  L.  thy  G .  for  thou  hast  t
Not  RETURN.

Num.  32.  18.  we  will  uotr.  to  our  housestill  is
Dent.  28.  +  31.  thy  ass  taken,  and  shall  iwt ■£«  ,

1  Sam.  15.  26.  Samuel  said,  wiU  w^r.  with  t

2  Sam.  12.  23.  go  to  him,  hut  he  shall  not  r .  .to  i
1  Kings  13.  16.  he  said,  1  may  not  r.  with  tliee
Job-.  +7.  mine  eyes  shall  not  r.  to  see  good


RET


REV


Job  10. 21.  before  I  go  whence  I  shall  not  r.  16.  22.
39.  4.  they  go  forth,  and  r.  not  unto  them
l  a.  45.  23.  the  word  is  gone  out,  and  shall  not  r.
55.  11.  it  shall  not r.  to  me  void,  but  accomplish
Jer.  8.  4.  shall  he  turn  away,  and  not  r.  ?

15. 7*  destroy,  since  they  r.  not  from  their  wav's
22. 11.  he  shall  notr.  thither  any  more,  2”.

23.  20.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  shall  not  r.  30.  24
Ezek.1.  13.  tor  seller  shall  notr.  to  what  is  sold, ’the
whob- multitude  thereof  which  shall  w<*r.

13.  22.  that  he  should  not  r.  from  his  wicked  way

21.  5.  my  swo-d  not  r.  any  more  into  his  sheath
35.  9.  thy  cities  shall  not  r.  and  ye  shall  know
46.  9.  he  shall  not  r.  by  the  way  he  came  in

Mos.j  .10.  they  do  not  r.  to  the  Lord,  nor  seek  him
11.5.  he  shall  not  r.  into  the  land  of  F.gvpt
9.  I  will  not  r .  to  destroy  Ephraim,  I  am  God
Mat.  2. 12.  being  warned  they  should  not  r.  to  Ilerod
Luke  17. 31.  he  in  field,  let  him  likewise  not  r.  back
RETURNED.

Gen.  8.  3.  waters  r.  from  oft  the  earth  continually
9.  the  dove  r.  to  him  ||  12.  the  dove  r.  not  again
18.  33.  and  Abraham  r.  unto  his  place

22.  19.  so  Abraham  r.  to  his  young  men
42.24.  Joseph  r.  again,  and  communed  with  them
43. 10.  surely  now  we  had  r.  this  second  time

18.  because  of  the  money  that  was  r.  in  our  sacks
Lxod.  o.  22.  Moses  r.  to  the  Lord  and  said,  32.  31.
14.27.  and  the  sea  r.  to  his  strength,  28.

19.8.  Moses  r.  the  words  of  the  people  to  Lord
Lev.  22. 13.  it  she  is  r.  to  her  father’s  house
Sum.  11.  t  4.  the  children  of  Israel  r.  and  wept,  and
said,  who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat  ?  Dent.  1.  45
lMaam  rose  UP»  and  r.  to  his  place
loth.  2.  16.  hide  yourselves  till  pursuers  be  r.  22.

4.  18.  that  the  waters  of  Jordan  r.  to  their  place
22.  9.  the  children  of  Reuben  and  of  Gad  r

32.  Phinehas  and  the  princes  r.  from  Reuben
'udg.  19.  when  the  judge  was  dead  they  r.
o.  29.  yea,  she  r.  answer  to  herself
]■  tli ere  r.  of  the  people  22,000  from  Gideon

8. 1.3.  Gideon  r.  from  battle  before  sun  was  up
11.  39.  Gideon’s  daughter  r.  to  her  father
21.  23.  the  Benjamites  r.  to  their  inheritance
iutn  1.  22.  so  Naomi  and  Ruth  her  daughter  r
■W.l  +27-  whom  I  obtained  by  petition  shall  be  r.

5.  lb.  they  r.  to  Ekron  the  same  day

oI’oI’.PaTid  V  ,fro,ln  the  slaughter  of  Goliath
.0.  39.  the  Lord  hath  r.  the  wickedness  of  Nabal
New.  1  22.  the  sword  of  Saul  r.  not  empty

1.  16.  then  said  Abner,  go,  return,  and  he  r
).20.  then  David  r.  to  bless  his  household
16.  8.  Lord  r.  on  thee  all  blood  of  house  of  Saul
/•  ?•  the  man  whom  thou  seekest,  is  as  if  all  r.

19. 15.  so  the  king  r.  and  came  to  Jordan
..L  10.  and  the  people  r.  after  him  only  to  spoil?
Kmgs  1.3. 10.  and  r.  not  by  the  way  that  he  came

33.  after  this  thing  Jeroboam  r.  not  from  evil
Kings  4. 35.  Elisha  r.  and  w  alked  to  and  fro

1. 15.  he  r.  to  man  of  God,  he  and  his  company
C/i/wi.  25.  10.  and  they  r .  home  in  great  anger

2.  21.  Sennacherib  r.  with  shame  of  face  to  land
zra  o.  11.  thus  they  r.  us  answer,  sayincr
eh  A.  15.  we  r.  all  of  us  to  the  wall  to  work
’  ,  ’o^e,towhen  the-y  r •  an.ci  cried  unto  thee
saA  3d.  13.  my  prayer  r.  into  mine  own  bosom
8.  34.  they  r.  and  enquired  early  after  God

ien  1  ie  R°rd  T'  the  returning  of  Zion
a.  38.  8.  so  sun  r.  ten  degrees,  by  which  degrees
t.  3  7.  I  said,  turn  thou  unto  me,  but  she  r? not

4.3.  they  r.  w  ith  their  vessels  em  pty  ,were  ashamed
8. 14.  so  he  r  and  made  it  another  vessel
°-,12-  even  al  the  Jews  r.  out  of  all  places
■ek.  1.  14  and  the  living  creatures  ran,  and  r.

1<.  and  they  r.  not  when  they  went
.  17-  and  have  r.  to  provoke  me  to  anger
.Ml.  the  man  with  the  inkhorn  r.  the  wo. d

•  '-4w0h?n  ^ .had  r.  lo,  at  the  bank  ot  the  river
f”-,4.  34.  mine  understanding  r.  unto  me

1,  e  same  time  my  reason  r.  unto  me
whfu  1  r •  the  captivity  of  my  people

./  K6\Xet  have  n?1 '  • to  me> 8- 9- 10, 1 1.

c/i.  1. 6.  they  r.  and  said,  as  the  Lord  thought
lb.  thus  saith  L.  1  am  r.  to  Jerusal.  with  mercies

14.  land  desolate,  that  no  man  passed  tin  o’  nor  r.
Joi^TP0r-  to.,Zlon’  a?d  wiI1  awell  in  midst
Jrth  m  Lhe  ru°rnn.1o  «s  he  r.  into  the  city

1  «40,  he  r-  be  found  them  asleep
li  Mary  r.  to  her  own  house

i  tlcf ?  ce^S  God  for  all  things

1.  Jesus  full  of  the  lloly  Ghost  r.  from  Jordan
4.  Jesus  r.  in  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee
37.  he  went  up  into  the  ship  and  r.  back  again

in  {ln;,eSU3r-  thZ  people  gladly  received  him
Kk  the  apostles  when  r.  again  told  him  all

•  Ji .  the  seventy  r.  again  with  joy,  saying

.  18.  are  not  found  that  r.  to  give  glory  to  God
:  4H  be  was  r.  having  received  kingdom

7 »i!ad  *be  people  smote  their  breasts  and  r.

and  Prepared  spices  and  rested  sabbath
.  J.  r.  from  sepulchre  and  told  all  these  things

3.  they  rose  same  hour,  and  r.  to  Jerusalem
;;1the>  worshipped  him,  and  r.  to  Jerusalem
agjrvlben  g  they  to  Jerusalem  from  Olivet
-2.  when  the  officers  found  them  not,  they  r.

"olj  he  apostles  r.  to  Jerusalem,  and  preached

•  *o.  Barnabas  and  Saul  r.  from  Jerusalem
'*  and  John  departing  from  them,  r.  to

I1’ 1 [•  a?a*n  to  Lystra  and  Imlmm^'1'

’  3c  tLik(vluP’and  dle>’  r-  home  again
.3..  they  left  the  horsemen  and  r.  to  the  castle

i  ,j  Iian-  c  r;  aSain  unto  Damascus
et  d  ox  might  hav,e  had  opportunity  to  have  r.

L  -  -5.  now  r.  to  the  Shepherd  of  your  souls
1’  14#:  a  1-  REl URN  El  H.
w  or;  it’  hls  brfath  goetb’  be  r.  to  his  earth


REV


returning.

x  «’  .i  +  ’’’  *  le  waters  returned  in  going  and  r.
t  7.  the  raven  went  forth  in  going  and  r.

/  ra/.  12b.  +  l.  when  the  Lord  returned  r.  of  Zion
Yai  ln  r ■  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved

L,uke’!.\o.  and  they  r.  found  the  servant  whole
j,ct,s  8*  -o.  was  r.  and  sitting  chariot,  read  l  saias


11*1.  •t  1  a.  Aii  iui,  I  t*d(l  I  SHIRS

neb'  ( •  nie*  Abraham  r.  from  slaughter  of  kings
rr>  ,  REVEAL,

lo  reveal  signifies,  To  discover  that  which  was  be-
Jore  concealed,  as  to  reveal  a  secret,  Prov.  11.  1.3
Also  to  make  a  person  understand  any  part  of  di¬
vine  truth  which  he  knew  not,  or  was  in  a  mistake

ft  oef°neA  '/  I!1  dny  ,thin?  ye  be  otherwise
D1/1/  o  9?d  *hall  reveal  even  this  unto  yon,
fhil.  3.  15.  7 he  apostle  Paul,  speaking  of  the
gospel,  says  That  therein  is  the  righteousness  of
God  revealed,  Rom.  1.  17.  that  is,  That  way,  v
method  oj  becoming  righteous,  which  is  of  God'

Ulxfi tut _ ’..x .  »  J .  •  >■  .


)71  Of.  11  gVCIlJ,  lie  7.  10  I

•/'i  A  m  as  a  d.og  r ■ fo  h»s  vomit,  so  a  fool  r.
«  1  _e  wind  r.  according  to  his  circuits


11  V  -  '  •  “ycoiumg  to  nis  circuits

•k  35 l- r|!J"  fhither,  but  watereth  earth

. •  1  .  him  that  r  T  m  i  _ o  •


'k  V*  7  1.;^,' : u*'T  mjt‘U4C.viuui  >v«iici  em  eai  in
4  0  h  t  nthat  r-  1  w*11  off  from  Seir
•  y. 8.  l  will  encamp  because  of  him  that  r.


institution,  01  dination,  appointment,  and  establish¬
ment,  and  which  alone  he  will  accept  of  to  life
namely  by  faith  in  Christ,  is  fully  and  plainly  dis¬
covered  in  the  gospel;  which  was  wholly  unknown
to  the  G  entiles,  and  but  obscurely  made  known  to

wrath  "iff  rL^-  m  VerS,e3  he  taVS'  That  the
wiatn  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against

all  ungodliness  of  men:  His  displeasure  was
made  known  by  those  judgments  which  he  inflicts
upon  sinners,  and  by  their  remorse  and  the  chal-
tenges  oj  their  consciem  es.
revelation,  m  Greek  AwoKaXvsl/t?,  is  the  name
given  in  particular  to  that  part  of  the  holy  Scrip-

lures  which  was  revealed  to  John  the  Divine,  in
I  teisle  oj  Patmos,  whither  he  had  been  banished
y  lJomitian,  and  which  chiefly  contains  prophe¬
cies,  or  predictions  concerning  the  state  of  the
church  in  future  ages.  It  is  also  called  Revelation,
when  God  makes  manifest  any  thing  to  man  in  an
extraoi  dmary  and  supernatural  manner,  whether
oy  dream,  vision,  ecstasy,  or  otherwise.  St.  Paul
says{  1  hat  he  had  not  received  the  gospel  by  the
ministry  of  men,  but  by  a  particular  Revelation
had  immediately  conveyed  the
Knowledge  of  divine  things  unto  him,  Gal.  1.  12.
And  elsewhere.  That  he  did  not  go  up  to  Jerusalem
after  his  conversion  by  the  mere  motion  of  his  own
mind,  but  in  consequence  of  a  revelation  that  he
had  for  that  purpose.  Gal.  2.  2.  The  word  Apo-
u.  v/fd.  likewise  to  express  the  mani-

T  nst  to  the  Je'vs  and  Gentiles,

Which  r  7  -It  of  Hie  glory  with

Much  God  will  glorify  his  elect  and  his  faith-

xi  Je.TrVat,Lts,  at  Hfe  last  judgment,  Rom.  8.  18.
declaration  of  his  just  judgments,  in  his

wicked  Rom  t0oKa-rds  “e  gudly  and  towords  the

s<dd’  will  r.  in  thine  ear
tbe  heaven  shall  r.  his  iniquity

Tcr  klc  I  18-„r*  mAne  ey,es  that  1  may  behold
Jer.  b  i  will  r.  them  abundance  ot  peace
i\ian/  ^£eel,ng  t.b°u  eouldest  r.  this  secret
Mat.  II.  ^7.  the  lather,  but  the  Son,  and  he  to
vyhomsoever  the  Son  will  ?•.  him,  Luke  10.  22.
Phi)  'j  T  by  his  grace,  to  r.  his  Son  in  me

f/ni.  3.  15.  God  shall  r.  even  this  unto  you
„  _  ,  REVEALED.

Deut  .9.  29.  but  things  r.  to  us  and  our  children

1  o,mlu3'  I  ■  tu!r  w,as  t'ie  word  of  the  Lord  r.  to  him
21- the  Lord  r.  himself  to  Samuel  in  Shiloh
9.  t  15.  now  the  Lord  had  r.  the  ear  of  Samuel
..  Sam.  7-  27.  thou  hast  r.  to  thy  servant,  saying

1Edh  °p\  13  +ih5'  haSt  r‘Ae  ear.°.f  thy  servant
p/  /'  no  /o'  Ube  co?y  of  the  Wi  lting  r.  to  people
if  sal.  98.  t  2.  his  righteousness  hath  he  r.

Ie4'  lt,WiJs  r- in  mine  ears  by  the  Lord
7c.'  m0?1  ,tbe  ,iand  of  Chittim  it  is  r.  to  them

40.  5.  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  r.

J-  to  whom  is  arm  of  Lord  r.  ?  John  12.  38.
ob.  1.  and  my  righteousness  is  near  to  be  r.
n  ’  n  7^'  unt0  tbee  have  1  r.  my  cause
19’  then  was  the  secret  r.  to  Daniel
30.  this  secret  is  not  r.  to  me  for  any  wisdom
L  a  thmg  was  r.  to  Daniel,  and  ‘was  true
,10-  26-  tor  there  is  nothing  covered  that  shall
not  ber.  nor  hid  thatsh.  not  be  known,  Luke  12.2
tU  '5.  and  hast  r.  them  to  babes,  Luke  10.  21.
r',  •  and  blood  hath  not  r.  it  unto  thee

26;,lt  was  r.  to  Simeon  by  the  Holy  Ghost
that  the  thoughts  ot  many  hearts  may  be  r.

17.  30.  shall  be  in  day  when  the  Son  of  man  r
,0  V1’  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God  r.

18.  for  the  wrath  ot  God  is  r.  from  heaven
i8;,18-  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  r.  in  us
1  o'  "i  IQ.  God  hath  r.  them  to  us  by  his  Spirit

1 .  oL  •  declare  it,  because  it  shall  be  r.  by  fire
14.  30.  if  any  thing  be  r.  to  another  that  sitteth  ,
v-i  o'  th?  faith  which  should  afterwards  be  r.
ffPh-  3.  5.  as  it  is  now  r.  to  his  holy  apostles
2  fhess.  17.  when  the  Lord  Jesus" shall  be  r.

2.  3.  a  falling  away  first,  and  that  man  of  sin  be  r.

6.  withhqldeth,  that  he  might  be  r.  in  his  time
8.  that  wicked  one  be  r.  whom  L.  shall  consume

1  t;  !°  salvation,  ready  to  be  r.  in  last  time
i2.  unto  whom  it  was  r.  that  not  to  themselves
4.  13.  that  when  his  glory  shall  be  r.  ye  may  be
5. 1.  and  also  a  partaker  glory  that  shall  be  r.

Dan.  2.  47.  your  God  a  God  of  gods,  a  r.  secrets
Tln  REVEALEl’H.

Job  3.3.  f  16.  then  he  r.  the  ears  of  men,  and  sealeth
1  r°v.  11.  13.  a  tale-bearer  r.  secrets,  20.  19.
kJan.2.  22.  he  r.  the  deep  and  secret  things
x8.  but  there  is  a  God  in  heaven  that  r.  secrets
29.  he  that  r.  secrets  maketh  known  to  thee
Amos  3.  7.  he  r.  his  secrets  to  his  servants  prophets
REVELATION.

and.  r •  the  righteous  judgment  of  God

16.  25.  according  to  r.  of  mystery  kept  secret
1  Cor.  1.  t  7.  waiting  for  the  r.  of  our  Lord  Jesus
14.  6.  except  1  shall  speak  to  you  either  by  r.

26.  every  one  hath  a  r.  hath  an  interpretation
Gal.  1.  12.  but  by  the  r.  of  Jesus  Christ


Ink  ?’  rr  1  went  upby  r.md  communicated
Ts  L\I‘™*yJ:!Vre  fie 'n  r'*  ^Pint  °f  wisdom  and  ,.


3.  3.  how  that  by  r.  he  made  lknown  to  me

grace  brought  at  the  r.  of  Jesus  Christ
Rev.  1.  1.  the  r.  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  God  gav
nrs  ac  T  REVELATIONS.

“  70rf  will  come  to  visions  and  r.  ofthe  L.

1.  lest  1  should  be  exalted  thro’  abundance  of  r.
RLVELLI  NC  S.

works  of  the  flesh  are  r.  and  such  like
A  ret.  4.  3.  when  ye  walked  in  lusts,  r.  banqueting
j,  _  REVENGE.

Kevenge,  as  it  includes  a  sense  of  sorrow  and  trouble
for  the  injuries  that  are  done  t„  us,  .  annor  bv
any  means  belong  to  God.  Hone  of  his  c n  atures
or  dlfJ??b  hl*Peace>  or  cause  to  him  any  trouble
or  resentment.  Man  has  recourse  to  revenge

W/JjC,Ameche  ts.yMled  and  sensible  of  injuries'.
II  hen  theiejore  it  is  said  in  scripture,  that  God

7mDrovfrhlmief’  *&aks -  aff.er  a  Popular  and
rl/mc  f  i  -manner ■  Me  vindicates  the  injuries

o  drr  l  )lS  JUSt\C,e-  f'ld  hu  majesty,  and  to  the
older  he  has  established  in  the  world,  yet  without

ienopTrl°n  °J  -p/efsure  or  displeasure.  He  re
it  hist*  J‘{UrieS  d°Ue  t0  ,ns  se)vants  because  he
J  !,ecause  order  and  Justice  must  be  pre¬
ened.  Men  revenge  themselves  out  of  weakness
muchVd^  /'-fended,  because  they  are  toi
lZk  n,3dZlCed  >y  s.e,f:love-  rl  great  soul  over-
orace  ltd  s.°ul  enlightened  by

f-pnai  c  th’  teaves  the  judgment  and  re-
tlefl  10  God,  who  has  sufficiently  de¬
eded  himself,  to  make  it  understood  by  good  men
that  vengeance  belongeth  only  to  him;  To  me  be-
longeth  vengeance  and  recompence,  Deut.  3°  35

heVjulio  ™itlC€  revenge,  in  express  terms';

not-  allow  ust  t0  f eeP  any  resentment  in  our
th v  hr*thmS-  °UL  .6ret/iren:  Thou  shalt  not  hate
b  lnu  thln®  heart ;  thou  Shalt  in  any

[abukt;rib>'  neighbour,  and  not  suffer  sin
upon  Inm  :  Ihou  shaft  not  avenge,  nor  bear  any
?gainsS  tbe  children  ot  thy  people.  Lei.
ry.  17. .18.  And  when  God  established  the  Lex
1  aiionis,  he  does  not  thereby  allow  of  revenge,  but

esf  tu^A  t0tU'  t0mes’  sed  Iimes  turoris

est,  says  Austin.  He  does  not  intend  to  provoke  to

y,lge/l  hu‘/Pt  *top  the  progress  and  consequences  of
mV  . U  ‘'m800'1  sopifum  erat,  hinc  accendere-
,  a  Vd  q^od  aldehat,  ultra  extenderetur
o' Uord,  r.  me  ot  my  persecutors.

-  C or.  10.6.  in  readiness  to  r.  all  disobedience

nr.  in  R-EvENGE,  Substantive,
vlic'a'e.  au^ c  we  shall  take  our  r.  on  him

ork'  'b  }?■  becai|se  the  Philistines  have  dealt  by  r.

-  Got.  (.  11.  yea,  what  r.  it  wrought  in  you

v  v  ok  An  c  REVENGED.8  *
tzek.  12.  because  Edom  r.  himself  upon  them

Hum.  35.  19.  the  r.  shall  slay  the  murderer,  21.
ox  congregation  shall  judge  between  slayer  and  r.

-5.  deliver  the  slayer  out  of  the  hand  or  the  r.

\ab  if  onlb,rTn  without,  and  r.  kill  the  slaver
7//  iV  r  tthe  J-°rd  is  a  jealous  God,  and  a  r„

Rom.  13.  4.  for  he  is  minister  of  G.  a  r.  to  execute
REVENGERS.

2  6 a,n •  14-  H*  that  thou  wouldest  not  suffer  the  r
r.  REVENGES.

Psm'  Q3^  Vw/p  mi  lli?  beginning  ofr.  on  enemy
‘  U-O  God  of r  shew  thyself,  lift  up  th  1  self

..t  »  .  1  T  REVENGE  1H.

Leu.  1.  2.  the  Lord  r.  the  Lord  r.  and  is  furious
d  i  t  ivE\  ENGIN G,
pS~aJi  ok'  Ibe  r-  of  Tie  blood  of  thy  servants

hj~ek*  -cO.  f  12.  Edom  dealt  by  r .  revengement

„  ,  ,  revenue.  8

Lziak.  13.  so  thou  shalt  endamage  the  r.  of  kings
T°lob'  r'  1S  better  than  choice  silver

Isa.  3.  the  harvest  ot  the  river  is  her  r

D  , x  /.  1  .  REVENUES.

I  rov.  15.  6.  but  in  the  r.  of  the  wicked  is  trouble
t7'  ,01]  l  is  better  than  great  r.  without  right
Jer.  1_.  13.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  your  r
D  ,  REyERENCK.

Reverence  when  it  is  said  to  be  given  to  man ,  is
a  submissive  humble  carriage  and  respect,  which
inferiors  ozve  to  their  superiors;  thus,  Mephibo-
sheth  izzif  reverence  to  David,  and  acknowledged
him  for  his  sovereign,  2  Sam.  9.  6.  And  wives
are  commanded  to  reverence  their  husbands.
vpa-  5.  o3.  that  is,  to  esteem  them,  to  fear  them,
not  with  a  servile,  but  ingenuous  fear,  and  such
as  proceeds  from  love,  and  to  manifest  their  esteem
ay  the  whole  of  their  carriage  towards  them.  But
when  God  is  the  object  of  our  reverence,  it  sig¬
nifies,  I  hat  holy,  humble,  and  filial  fear  of  bis
displeasure,  and  that  submissive,  loivly,  and  self-
abasing  temper  of  spirit,  with  which  we  should  ap¬
proach  to  him  in  the  duties  of  his  worship,  and
with  which  we  should  demean  our-selves  under  his
chastenings  ;  this  temper  being  absolutely  neces¬
sary  and  most  congruous  with  respect  to  God
upon  the  account  of  his  sovereignty ,  justice,  and
goodness,  declared  m  his  chastenings ;  and  with
respect  to  our  frailty,  our  dependence  upon  him.
our  obnoxiousness  to  his  law,  and  our  obligati,  ns
to  him,  that  he  will  please  to  afliict  us  for  our  good
lo  this  purpose  the  apostle  speaks;  Heb.  12.  9
We  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  who  corrected
us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence  ;  shall  we  not
much  rather  be  in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of
spirits,  and  live  ?  IVe  have  had  our  natural  va-
rents,  who  were  our  instructors  and  correctors,  who
made  use  of  the  rod,  as  well  as  the  word,  for  our
nurture,  yet  our  bowels  turned  towards  them  ■  we
have  been  covered  with  shame  and  blushing  for  our
faults,  and  have  submitted  to  their  correction,  so  as
to  reform  and  turn  from  the  faults  for  which  they
chastised  us  ;  and  shall  we  not  much  rather  sub¬
missively  receive  correction  from  God,  reform
tinder  it,  and  resign  our  souls  to  him  who  is  the
Creator  of  them,  and  the  sovereign,  guardian, pro¬
tector,  and  a isposer  of  them  ?  Likewise  in  the  duties

39P


R  1  C


R  1  C


R  E  V


prayer,  hearing  the  word,  xnd  the  Me,  an
humble  conception  of  God,  as  the  supi  emeeter-^
nal ,  and  infinitely  perject  Being ,  as  the  omni
present,  omniscient,  and  an  incomprehensibly
*a  lor  ions  Majesty,  whose  throne  is  in  heaven,  uhose
°Name  alone  is  excellent,  whose  glory  is  above
the  earth  and  heaven,  would  engage  7ls  tof  ap
proach  him  with  deep  reverence  and
1 1  pK  10  03  29.  Let  us  have  grace,  wneieny
vve  may  sene  God  acceptably,  .with  reverence

and  godly  fear  ;  for  our  God  is  a  consuming

30  shall  r. my  sanctuary,  I  am  Lord,  26.  2.

Fstii  3°  all  the  king’s  servants  in. gate  r.  Hainan
S;li.237  but'lHStlf  ,11  he  ?n.  ,0  tton  hiss™,
they  will  r.  my  son,  Maik  12. p.  L.iUce  ~u.  so.

Foh  5  33.  the  wife  see  that  she  r.  her  husband
jLph.o.^.i  rrvERKUGE.

o  Sam  9  6.  Mephibosheth  did  r.  to  David  .

2  Kings  i.  31.  Bathsheba  bowed,  and  did  r.  to  king
Fsth.  3.  2.  Mordecai  bowed  not,  nor  did  him  r.  5.
Fsal.  89.7-  to  be  had  in  r.  of  all  that  are  about  him
Heb.'  12.  9.  we  gave  them  r.  |l  28.  serve  God  with  r.

1  Pet  3+15  to  give  an  answer  of  your  hope  with  7 .

\ret.A.  Tio  °REVEREMD.  .  .

Ptal  111  9  he  sent  redemp.  holy  and  r.  is  his  name

*  REVERSE.

Slum  23.  20.  and  he  hath  blessed,  and  1  cannot  r.

Esth  *8  5  let  it  be  written,  to  r.  the  letters  devis.

8.  and  sealed  with  king’s  ring,  may  no  man  r.

Ter  °  +  °4  in  her  occasion  who  can  r.  it .

**  REVILE.

Exod.  22.  28.  thou  shalt  not  r.  the  gods,  nor  curse
Mat  5.  11.  blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  r,  you
REVILED.

Neh.  13.  +  25.  I  contended  with  them,  and  r.  mem
Mat.  27-  39.  that  passed  by  r.  him,  wagg.  their  heads
Mark  15  32.  they  that  were  crucified  r.  him  .

John  9.  28.  they  r.  him,  and  said,  thou  art  disciple
1  Cor.  4.  12.  being  r.  we  bless,  being  persecuted
i  Pet  °  23  who  when  he  was  r.  r.  not  again
1  REV1LERS.  ,  ,

1  Cor  6  10  nor  r.  shall  inherit  kingdom  of  God
REVILEST.

Acts0 3  4  they  said,  r.  thou  God’s  high  priest
^  REVILE  I’ll.  ,  4.

Find  21  1 17.  that  r.  his  fathei  shall  be  put  to  death
REV  I  LINGS.  .  j  .
ha  51.  7.  fear  not,  neither  be  ye  afraid  or  their  r.
Zevli  2  8.  and  the  r.  of  the  children  of  Ammon
'  REVIVE.

Neh  4  2.  will  they  r.  the  stones  out  of  the  heaps
Psal.  85.  6.  wilt  thou  not  r.  us  again,  that  thy  people
138.  7.  thou  wilt  r.  me,  thou  shalt  stretch  toith

Isa  57  15.  with  a  contrite  spirit,  to  r.  spirit  of  the

'humble,  and  to  r.  the  heart  of  the  contrite  ones
Hos.  6.  2.  after  two  clays  will  he  r.  us,  we  shall  lice
14.  7.  they  shall  r.  as  corn,  and  grow  as  the  vine
Hab  3  2.  O  Lord,  r.  thy  work  in  nudst  ot  the  years
REVIVED.  .

Gen.  45.  27.  the  spirit  of  Jacob  their  father  r.

Judy.  15.  19.  his  spirit  came  again,  and  he  r.

1  Kings  17.  22.  soul  of  the  child  came,  and  he  r.

2  Kings  13.  21.  and  touched  bones  ot  Elisha,  he  r.
Bom.  7.  9.  w  hen  the  commandment  came,  sin  r.

14.  9.  to  this  end  Christ  both  died,  rose,  and  r.

Phil.  4.  +  10.  that  now  your  care  ot  me  is  r.

reviving.

Ezra  9.  8.  to  give  us  a  little  r.  in  our  bondage,  9.
REVOLT.  .

Deut.  13.  t  5.  prophet  spoken  r.  against  the  fora
Isa.  59. 13.  speaking  oppress,  and  r  uttering  false.
Jer.  28.  +  16.  because  thou  hast  taught  r.  29.  +  3-.
REVOLT.

2  Chron.  21.  10.  the  same  time  also  did  Libnah  r.

Isa  1.  5.  be  stricken,  ye  will  r.  more  and  more
REVOLTED.

2  Kings 8.20.  in  his  days  Edorn  r.  22.  2  Chr.  21.8,10,
22.  then  Libnah  r.  at  the  same  time
Isa.  31.  6.  to  him  from  whom  Israel  have  deeply  r.
Jer.  5.  23.  but  this  people,  they  are  r.  and  gone
REVOLTERS
Jer.  6.  28.  are  all  grievous  r.  walking  with  slanders
Eos.  5.  2.  the  r.  are  profound  to  make  slaughter
9  15.  I  will  love  them  no  more,  princes  are  r.

REVOLTING.

Jer  5  23.  this  people  hath  a  r.  and  rebellious  heart
REVOLUTION.

Exod.  34.  t  22.  observe  feast  at  the  r.  of  the  year

1  Sam.  1.  +20.  when  the  r.  ot  days  was  come  about

2  Chron.  24.  +  23.  in  the  r.  of  the  year  Syria  came

REWARD

Signifies,  [1]  A  recompence,  requital,  or  amends,
upon  account  of  some  service  done,  or  good  action
performed ,  such  as  is  due  to  labourers  fir  their
work,  1  Tim.  5.  18.  [2]  That  free  and  unmerited

recompence  which  shall  be  given  tc  the  godly  by
the  goodness,  bounty,  and  mercy  of  God,  ajter  all
their  labours  in  his  service.  I  his  ts  a  reward
wholly  of  grace,  in  respect  of  us,  or  our  deserving ,
but  of  justice  on  account  of  the  purchase  oj  it  by
the  sacred  treasure  of  Christ’s  blood,  and  the  un¬
changeable  tenor  of  the  gospel,  wherein  God  pro¬
mises  heaven  to  all  obedient  and  true  believers,

,  Mat.  5.  12.  1  6.  6.  [3]  That  extreme  and  Jearfvl
punishment  and  recompence  Jrom  the  terrible
majesty  and  revenging  justice  of  God,  which  will
he  inflicted  upon  impenitent  sinners,  Psal.  91.  8.
[4]  A  gift  or  bribe,  Deut.  27-  25.  [5]  1  he  fruit
or  benefit  of  labour  in  this  world,  Eccl.  9.  5.  [oj
Human  applau.  e.  Mat.  6.  2,  5.  [7]  Comfort  and
joy,  Psal.  19.  11.  ,.

Gen.  15.  1.  Abram,  I  am  thy  exceeding  great  r.
Num.  18.  31.  for  it  is  your  r.  tor  your  service
Deut.  10.  17.  '  terrible  God,  who  taketh  not  r .

27.  25.  cursei  bat  taketh  r.  to  slay  the  innocent
Buth  2.  12.  a  U  \.  be  given  thee  ot  the  Lord
2  Sam.  4.  10.  who  might  1  would  have  given  him  r.
19.  36.  the  king  recompense  it  me  with  such  a  r.

1  Kings  13.  7-  go  home,  and  1  will  give  thee  a  r.
Job  6.  22.  did  1"  say,  bring  to  me,  or  give  a  r.

1  2.  as  an  hireling  looketh  for  r.  ot  his  work

400


Psal  15.  5.  nor  taketh  r.  against  the  innocent
19.  11.  and  in  keeping  of  them  there  is ;  great  r.

40  15.  let  them  be  desolate  for  a  r.  of  their  shame
58'  1 1.  verily,  there  is  a  r.  tor  the  righteous
70!  3.  let  them  be  turned  back  tor  r .  ot  their  shame
91.  8.  only  thou  shalt  see  the  r.  ot  the  wicked
94.  2.  lift  up  thyself,  render  a  r.  to  the  proud
109.  CO.  let  this  be  the  r.  ot  mine  adversaries
1°7  3.  and  the  fruit  of  the  womb  is  his  r.

P~rov.  11.  18.  that  soweth  righteousness,  a  sure  r.
oi  14  a  r.  in  the  bosom  strong  wrath
°2.  +  4.  the  r.  of  humility  is  riches  and  honour
03  +  18.  surely  there  is  a  r.  and  thine  expectatio  1
04'  14  hast  found  wisdom,  then  there  shall  be  a  1.

20.  for  there  shall  tie  110  r.to  the  evil  man
Eccl.  4.  9.  bee.  they  have  a  good  7 .  tor  their  labour

9  5  neither  have  they  any  more  a  7\

Isa.  3.  11.  the  r.  of  his  hands  shall  he  given  him

5.  23.  which  justify  the  wicked  tor  r.

40.  10.  his  r.  is  with  him,  and  his  work,  62.  11.

45’.  13.  he  shall  let  go  mv  captives,  not  tor  r.

49.  +  4.  and  my  r.  is  with  my  God
Jer.  40.  5.  the  captain  gave  Jeremiah  a  r.

Ezek.  16.  34.  thou  givest  r.  and  nor.  is  given  thee
Hos.  9. 1 .  thou  hast  loved  a  r.  upon  every  corn-boo
Obad.  15.  thy  r.  shall  return  upon  thine  own  head
Mic.  3.  11.  heads  thereof  judge  tor  r.  pnests  teac
7.  3.  the  prince  asketh,  and  judge  asketh  tor  a  r.

Mat.  5.  12.  great  is  your  r.  in  heaven,  Luke  6.  23.

46.  if  love  them  which  love  >'ou,  what  r.  have  ye.

6. 1.  otherwise  ye  have  no  r.  of  your  h  ather  in  hea\ .

2.  verily,  1  say  to  you,  they  have  their  r.  5,  16.

10. 41.  he  that  receiveth  a  prophet,  shall  receive  a

prophet’s  r.  shall  receive  a  righteous  man  s  r.

42.  he  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  r.  Mark  9.  i  1.

Luke  6.  35.  but  do  good,  and  your  r.  shall  be  =reat
°3.  41.  for  we  receive  the  due  r.  ot  our  deeds
Acts  1. 18.  man  purchased  a  field  with  r.  ot  iniquity
Bom.  4.  4.  him  that  worketh  is  the  r.  not  reckoned
1  Cor.  .3.  8.  every  man  shall  receive  Ins  own  ?.

14.  if  any  man's  work  abide,  he  shall  receive  a  r.

9.  17.  if  1  do  this  thing  willingly  ,  1  have  a  r.

18.  what  is  my  r.  then  ?  verily,  that  when  1  preach
Col  0  18.  let  no  man  beguile  you  ot  your  r.

3.  24.  ye  shall  receive  the  r.  of  the  inheritance

1  Tim.  5.  18.  the  labourer  is  worthy  ot  Ins  r.

Heb  2  2.  every  transg.  received  ajust  recomp,  or  r.

10.35.  confidence,  which  hath  great  recomp.  of  r.

11  he  had  respect  to  the  recompence  ot  the  r.

0  Pet  2.  13.  shall  receive  the  r.  ot  unrighteousness

2  John's,  but  that  we  receive  a  full/.

Jude  1 1 .  ran  greedily  after  error  of  Balaam  tor  7  .
Bev.  11. 18.  the  time  is  come  thou  shou  ldest  gn  e  r.

go  10  l  come  quick  ly,  and  my  r.  is  with  me

~  reward.

Dent  32.  41.  and  I  will  r.  them  that  hate  me

1  Sarn.  24.19.  wherefore  the  Lord  r.  thee  good

2  Sam.  3.  .39.  the  Lord  shall  r.  the  doer  ot  evil
°  Chron.  20. 11.  behold,  1  say,  how  they  r.  us
Psal.  54.  5.  he  shall  r.  evil  to  mine  enemies
Prov  °5  00  heap  coals,  and  the  Lord  shall  r.  thee
Hos.  X  9.  and  L  will  r.  them  their  doings
Mat.  6.  4.  Father  himself  shall  r.  thee  openly  ,  6, 18.

16. 27.  he  shall  r.  every  man  accordingto Ins  wo)  ks
0  Tim  4  14.  Lord  r.  him  according  to  his  works

»"•  ’*■  '■  her’l,TwAHDE,a  J0U

Gen.  44.4.  wherefore  have  ye  r.  evil  for  good  ?

1  Sam  °4. 17.  for  thou  hast  r.  me  good,  whereas  thou
art  more  righteous  than  l ,  1  have  r.  thee  evil

2  Sam.  22.  21.  the  Ld.  r.  me  according  to  my  right¬
eousness  and  cleannessot  my  hands,  '  ™

o  Chron  15.  7.  he  strong,  your  work  shall  be  r.

Psal.  7.  4.  il  1  have  /•.  evil  to  him  that  was  at  peace
35.  12.  they  r.  me  evil  for  good,  109;  5.  _  .

103  10  nor  r.  us  according  to  our  iniquities
Prov  13  13  that  feareth  the  commandment  be  r.
Isa.  3.  9.  for  they  have  r.  evil  to  themselves
Jer  31  16  thy  work  shall  be  r.  saith  the  Loi  d
Rev.  18.  6.  rewa^he^^enas  she  r.  you,  double

Heb  116  a  r.  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him
ueo.  11.0.  R  EWAR  D  ETH .

Job2\.  19. her.  him,  and  he  shall 1  know  it
Psal.  31.  23.  and  plentifully  r.  the  proud  doer
137.  8.  happy  he  that  r.  thee,  as  thou  hast  served
Prov.  17.  13.  whoso  r.  evil  for  good,  evil  not  depait
26  10  both  r.  the  fool,  and  r.  transgressors
REWARDS.  .

Nurj .  ju-i.  7.  with  the  r.  of  divination  in  their  hand
Isa.  1.23.  every  one  loveth  gifts,  followeth  after  r.
Dan  2.  6.  ye  shall  receive  ot  me  gifts,  and  r.  honour

5.  17.  Daniel  said,  give  thy  r.  to  another

Hos  2.  12.  these  are  my  r.  my  lovers  have  gn  en  me
1  1  i  B  s

Gen  2.  21.  Adam  slept,  and  God  look  one  of  his  r.

2 o  {he  r.  which  God  had  taken  from  man
Exod.  SO.  +  4.  make  two  rings  by  two  r.  m  altar
0  Sam  °.23.  Abnersmote  Asahel  undei  the  nttn  r.
3  07 .  J oab  smote  A  bner  II 20. 10.  J°ab  sn\0,f,  A  masa
4. 6.  Rechab  and  Baanah  smote  lsh-bosheth^under

1  Kings  6.  +  5.  and  he  made  r.  round  about
7  +  3.  it  was  covered  with  cedar  upon  the  r.

Dan  7.  5.  beast  had  three  r.  in  the  mouth  ot  it
‘  ‘  RIBBAND.

Num.  15.  38.  on  fringe  of  the  borders  a  r.  of  blue
RIG II

Signifies,  [1]  One  that  has  great  incomes,  or  plenty
of  worldly  good  things,  1  Tim  6. 17-  [2]  that
aboundeth  in  spiritual  good,  things,  being f furnished
with  the  araces  of  God  s  Spirit y  .lam.  5.  1  e  •  ?•
9  [3]  Such  as  in  their  own  opinion  are  spiritually

rich,  when  in  reality  they  are  not.  Rev.  6.  1J.  l«J

Such  as  place  all  their  happiness  aiid  con fidmeem

their  outward  prosperity ,  Mat.  19.  -4.  Luke  6 .  4.
[5]  Wise  and  worthy  men,  who  are  tchly  fur¬
nished  with  excellent  endowments  of  the  mind,

Gen/lVa.*  Abram  was  very  r.  in  cattle,  »n  silver
14  23.  lest  thou  shouldest  say ,  1  have  made  Abr.  ,
Exod.  30. 15.  r.  shall  not  give  more,  nr>t  poor  les*


Lev  °5  47.  and  if  a  stranger  wax  r.  by  thee
Ruth' 8  10.  followedst  not  young  men  poor  or  r.

1  Sam  °  7.  the  Lord  maketh  poor  and  maketh  r.
o  Sami0  1  •  there  were  two  men  in  one  city,  one  r.
Job  15  2°.  he  shall  not  be  r.  neither  shall  Ins  subst.
31  jej  nor  regardeth  the  r.  more  than  the  poor
Psal  45  12  the  r.  shall  entreat  thy  favour
49  o  hear  this,  both  r.  and  poor  together
itTbe  not  thou  afraid  when  one  is  made  r.

P,ov.  10.  4.  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  r.

00  the  blessing  ot  the  T.ord,  it  maketh  r.
lV  7  Litre  is  that  maketh  himself  r.  yet  hath
14  op  poor  is  hated,  but  the  r.  hath  many  tnendt
18.  23.  but  the  r.  answereth  roughly

17.  he  that  loveth  wine  and  oil  shall  not  be  r.

*  '  i  ...  ♦rtTvn  +  lmr  T  Ai’il  1C  muL  nr


gJ.  17.  ne  ”  V  T- . I

22.  2.  r.  and  poor  meet  togetlier,  t.ord  is  maker


'g.  g.  r.  aim  [iwi  - - -  ,  .  .  .

7  the  r  ruleth  over  the  poor,  and  the  borrower
16  he  that  <dveth  to  the  r.  shall  come  to  want
03  4  labour^ not  to  be  r.  cease  from  thy  wisdom
°8  6  than  he  that  is  perverse,  though  he  be  r.

*20  but  be  that  maketh  baste  to  be  r.  22.

Eccl  5  1°  abund.  of  r.  will  not  sutler  him  to  slee*

10  6  Vo  fly  is  set,  and  the  r.  sit  in  low'  place
20  and  curse  not  the  r.  in  thy  bed-chamber
Isa.  53.  9.  and  with  the  r.  in  his  death,  because
Ter  5  °7  therefore  they  are  great,  and  waxen  r.
Ezek. ’27.24.  in  chests  of  r.  apparel,  hound  with
Hus  *l®  8  Ephraim  said,  yet  1  am  become  r.

Zech  11  5.  say,  blesseii  be  the  Lord,  for  l  am  r.
Mark  i°  41.  many  that  were  r.  cast  111  much
hike  1  53.  and  the  r.  he  hath  sent  empty  away
5  o4>  t>ut  woe  unto  you  that  are  r.  for  ye  received
jo  oj  so  is  he  tlint  is  not  r.  toward  Ciod
14’  call  not  thy  r.  neighbours,  lest  they  bid  thee
18  °3  he  was  very  sorrowful,  tor  he  was  very  r.

19-  2.  Zaccheus  chief  among  publicans,  was  r.

Bom.  10.  12.  same  Lord  is  r.  to  all  that  call  on  him  J
1  Cor.  4.  8.  now  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  r.

0  Cor.  6.  10.  as  poor,  yet  making  many  r.  1

*8  9  though  he  was  r.  yet  tor  your  sakes  he
'  '  became  poor,  that  ye  through  his  poverty  1

niiaht  be  r.

F.vh  0  4  but  God  who  is  r.  in  mercy  J

lTim.6.  9.  they  that  will  be  r.  fall  into  temptatior

17  charge  them  that  are  r.  in  this  w  orld

18.  that  they  do  good,  and  be  rJ?h  good  works  I
Jam.  1.  10.  let  the  r.  rejoice  in  that  he  is  made  lov  I
2.  5.  hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor,  r.  in  faith  !
Bev.2.  9.  1  know  thy  poverty,  but  thou  art  r.

3. 17.  because  thou  sayest,  1  am  r. ,  and  increased  i

18  1  counsel  to  buy  ot  me  gold,  thou  mayest  be  r  i
13. 16.  he  causeth  the  r.  and  poor  to  receive  a  marl  I
1th  3.  the  merchants  of  earth  are  waxed  r.  15

19  wherein  were  made  r.  all  that  had  ships
RICH  man  or  men.

o  sam  \0  2  the  ?'.  man  had  exceeding  many  flocks1!
~  4.  there  came  a  tra>  eller  to  the  r.  man
Job  21.  19-  r.  man  shall  lie  down  but  shall  not  be
Prov.  10. 15.  the  ?'.  man's  wealth  is  his  strong  city  1
the  destruction  of  the  poor  is  poverty,  18. 11  ■
28  11.  the  7'.  man  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit
Jer.  9.  2.3.  let  not  the  r.  man  glory  in  his  riches
Mic.  6  12.  the  r.  men  thereof  are  full  or  violence  i  j
Mat.  19. 2.3.  a  r.  man  shall  hardly  enter  the  knigdoij
04  *  it  is*  easier  than  for  a  r.  man  to  enter  into  th
kingdom  of  God,  Mark  10.  25.  Luke  18.  G
27.  57.  there  came  a  r.  man  of  Anmathea,  Joseph
Luke  12.  16.  the  ground  of  a  r.  man  brought  toith

16. 1.  there  was  a  certain  r.  man  had  a  steward
19.  a  7-.  man  was  clothed  in  purple  and  hue  'me
21.  the  c-umbs  which  fell  from  the  r.  mans  taw
00  the  r.  man  also  died  and  was  btuied

21. 1.  and  saw  the  r.  men  casting  into  the  treasui
Jam.  1.11.  so  also  shall  the  r.  man  fade  away

2.  6.  do  not  ?'.  men  oppress  you  and  draw  you
5.  1.  go  to  now,  ye  r.  men,  weep  and  howl
Rev.  6. 15.  great  men,  and  r.  men  hid  themselves
RICHER.

Dan.  11.  2.  the  fourth  shall  be  far  r.  than  they  all
RICHES.

Gen.  31.  16.  the  r.  God  hath  taken  that  is  ours
36. 7.  r.  were  more  than  they  might  dwell  togethe
josh.  22.8.  return  with  much  r.  to  your  tents
Ruth  4.  +  11.  get  thee  r.  in  Ephratah,  and  be  tamo  ,
1  Sam.  17.25.  the  king  will  enrich  with  great  r.

1  Kings  3. 11.  neither  hast  asked  r.  2  Chron.  1. 11.
13.  I  have  given  thee  both  r.  and  honour
10  23.  king  Solomon  exceeded  all  the  kings  or  t
earth  for  r.  and  wisdom,  2  Chron.  9.  ■

1  Chron.  29.  12.  both  r.  and  honour  comeot  thee
28.  David  died  full  ot  days,  r.  and  honour

2  Chron.  17-  5.  brought  presents  to  Jehoshaphat,
had  r.  and  honour  in  abundance,  IK.

°0  °5  they7  found  r.  with  dead  bodies  and  'ewei
32.  27.  Hezek.  had  exceeding  much  r.  and  honoi
Esth  1. 4.  he  shewed  the  r.  ot  his  glorious  kingtK
5. 11.  Haman  told  them  of  the  glory  of  us  r.

Job  20. 15.  he  swallowed  down  r.  vomit  them  ui
36.  19-  will  he  esteem  thy  r.  ?  no,  not  gold
Psal.  37. 16.  is  better  than  the  r.  ot  many  wicke,

39. 6.  he  heapeth  upr.  and  knoweth  not  who  sl)<
44  +  12.  thou  sellest  thy  peopke  without  r.

49.  6.  they  that  boast  themselves  in  then;  r.

52.7.  hut  trusted  in  the  abundance  ot  Ins  r.

62. 10.  if  r.  increase,  set  not  your  heart  on  tneif
73.  12.  the  ungodly  prosper,  they  increase  in
104.  24.  O  Lord,  the  earth  is  full  of  thy  r.
112.3.  wealth  and  r.  shall  be  in  his  house
119.  14.  I  have  rejoiced  as  much  asm  an  r.
Prov.  3.  16.  and  in  her  left. hand  r.  and  liono ur
8. 18.  r.  and  honour  are  with  me,  yea  duiaD
11.4.  r.  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath

16.  a  woman  retains  honour,  and  strong  men
28.  he  that  trusteth  in  his  r.  shall  tall

13.  7.  that  maketh  himself  poor,  yet  hath  =r
8.  the  ransom  of  a  man’s  life  are  Ins  r.

14.  24.  the  crown  of  the  wise  is  their  r.

19. 14.  and  r.  are  the  inheritance  °*  ratners

22. 1.  a  good  name  is  rather  to  be

4.  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  are  r.  and  honou
16.  he  that  oppresseth  the  poor  to  increase
23.  5.  tor  r.  certainly  make  themselves  w  mp


RID


RIG


Prov.  24.4.  chambers  be  filled  with  all  pleasant  r

27.  24.  for  r.  are  not  tor  ever,  and  doth  crown

30.  8.  give  me  neither  poverty  nor  r.  feed  me

31.  t  29.  many  daughters  have  gotten  r.

Eccl.  4.  8.  nur  is  his  eye  satisfied  with  r.

5.  13.  even  r.  kept  for  the  owners  to  their  hurt
14.  but  those  r.  perish  by  evil  travail
19.  every  man  to  whom  God  hath  given  r.  6.  2.

9.  11.  nor  yet  r.  to  men  of  understanding

La.  8.  4.  the  r.  of  Damascus  shall  be  taken  away

10.  14.  my  hand  found  as  a  nest  the  r.  of  people
.30.  6.  they  will  carry  their  r.'  on  young  asses

4o.  3.  I  will  give  thee  hidden  r.  of  secret  places
61.  6.  ye  shall  eat  the  r.  of  the  Gentiles
Jer.  9.  2.3.  let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  r.

17.  11.  so  he  that  getteth  r.  and  not  by  right
48  .36.  because  r.  that  he  hath  gotten  is  perished
Liek.  26.  12.  they  shall  make  a  spoil  of  thy  r.

2( .  12.  iarshish  was  thy  merchant  by  reason  of
.  the  multitude  of  all  kind  of  r.  18.  27  33

28.  4.  with  thy  understanding  thou  hast  gotten  r.  '
0.  by  thy  traffic  hast  thou  increased  thy  r.  and

n  11  „  thine  heart  is  lifted  up  because  of  thy  r.

thro,JiS r-  shitH  stir  u p  all  against  Grecia
13.  the  kingot  the  noith  shall  come  with  much  r
S’fkJ 11  scatter  amongt  hem  the  prey ,  spoil  and'  r.

,  ;28/  he  return  info  his  land  with  great  r.

Mat.  13.  ^2.  care  of  this  world  and  the  deceitfulness
of  r.  choke  the  word,  Mark  4.  19.  Luke  8  14

Molk* i°*  2*u  bow  har.d|y  they  that  have  r,  enter
.4.  them  that  trust  in  r.  to  enter,  Luke  18.  24
Luke  16. 1 9.  make  friends  of  r.  of  unrighteousness

11.  who  will  commit  to  your  trust,  the  true  r  ?
qo\ ^spis,est, tll0u  the  r.  of  his  goodness  ?
?:  *:•  he  "’’Sht  make  known  the  r.  of  his  glory

11.  12.  if  the  fall  of  them  be  the  r.  of  the  world
33  of  tt.h(r,n  r-  ot' the  Gentiles

,  p'  °oo  ciKPtl>  ,the  of  tlle  wisdom  of  God
■  Cor.  8.  2.  abounded  to  the  r.  ot  their  liberality

•  rf‘lemption  according  to  r.  of  his  grace
A,'  r-’  95^15  s*or>'  of  his  inheritance

r  LWWj*  shew  exceeding  r.  of  his  grace
3.  8.  that  I  should  preach  unsearchable  r.  of  Christ
olf;  you  according  to  the  r.  of  his  glory

V  i  2  J'-  \nglory  b-v  Christ  Jes.

-or.  l.  27.  what  the  r.  ot  the  glory  of  this  mvsfprv

love,  to  all  the  r.  ohhl  full  assurance
Lh  \\ P'oJ ■  ti°r  trust m  uncertain  r.  but  in  living G
lnt;  r,1-o20-  the  reProach  of  Christ  greater  r.  than
am.j.  2.  your  r.  are  corrupted,  your  <*armpnt«

5. 12  worthy  is  Lamb  to  receive  pSwe™  and  r
18. 17.  >n  one  hour  so^eat  r;  are  come  to  nought

°'r-  3*  Lthe  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  r
ltm-  £>■}(■  hut  trust  in  living  God,  who  giveth  r
it.  3.  t6.  which  he  shed  on  us  r.  tliro’  Jesus  Chr.

w  th%  he  might  r- 1,im  out  of  their  hands

9'  r  "‘m  r-  you  out  of  their  bondage
u'l'oo  j  1  r *  eV1  feasts  out  of  the  iand

44  7  «  n  ;  'e,Ti  out,  0f  the  hand  °h  the  wicked
l  4.  7.  send  thine  deliver  me,  11.

LA2?'  ,b°tt  Shalt  not  make  clean  r.  of  thy  field

V  '  1.18  he  shall  make  even  speedy  r.  of  all  them

„„  HIDDEN.

um.  ...  30.  am  not  I  thine  ass,  which  thou  hast  r.  ?
r,  RIDDE1H.

‘Sam-  —  +  33'  G°Ri13DnIjVISEenSth’  he  r'  my  way
ld°'  14f„rtk  Sam?on  said  to  them,  I  will  now  put
,el  17f°rtb  a  r- to  you,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19

Cot  173  +  iT  °f  man’  put.  forth  a  r.  and  speak
Lot.  1.3. 1 12.  now  we  see  m  a  r.  then  face  to  face

lut%4hhl  mad<i  ’’A1 10  ^ iu  the  second  chariot
^ *  "e  madelum  r.  on  ugh  places  of  earth

1,°i5,rk’-,S  »K5es

iothp  3‘  hey  made  t0  r- the  ark,  1  Chr  on.  13  +7

‘  %  hl  satlTwill’?  ’hi ‘Ug’S  household  to  r.  on'

1  33  .  11  saddle  an  ass  that  1  may  r.

fvfwp.5  1.  33.  cause  Sol.r.  upon  my  mule  44
4.  f  24.  restrain  not  for  me  to  r.  except  1  bid
*  }6{r^ty  fj'ade  him  to  r.  in  his  chariot
.thme  hand  to  r.  upon  the  bow
i  3fl  ‘  Cause  ',lrn  t0  r •  through  the  city

«/  45  4  thnU|  oausest  me,  to  r.  upon  the  wind

i  1  45t'hon  ,y  !!1HJesty  r ■  prosperously

;  b:  hast  caused  men  to  r.  over  our  beads

I’  ?  •  j6wi^ty®  sa‘d’  we  will  r.  upon  the  swift

fi  03  ml  USe  Jhee  t0  r-  0IJ  h'S*i  Places

ry  ,on  horses  set  in  array,  50.  42.

3  w  wi  ]'I1i  make  Ephraim  to  r.  Judah  plow
A  9Wo  U1  n,ot  r-  upon  horses
n  .,ou  dldsLt  r>.  upon  thine  horses

J.  2.  22.  o\  erthrow  chariots,  and  those  that  r.

4,9;  V-s°  that  his  r.  shall  fall  backward

30  iq  k0rse  and/-  thrown  into  the  sea,  21

31  S' 'sh?  scorneth  the  horse  and  his  r.

'and  his  r  hrthte>V1  -1  brea,k  in  Pieces  the  horse
h "io  4S  T\nnak  Pjoces  tl.e  chariot  and  hisr.

•  U-  4- 1  wdl  smite^his  r.  with  madness

//IT  in'  2'n  Mthou  be  able  to  set  r.  on ,  Isa.  36.  8.
r  0  o o’  fhndl,e  sent  tetters  by  r.  on  mules
//  702V  horses  and  their  r  shall  come  down
.  5.  the  r.  on  horses  shall  be  contounded
,  HIDE  1' II.

it  '^.what  suddle  he  r.  on  shall  be  unclean
h  ‘ k  q  ,°u'  upon  the  heaven  in  thy  help
'•  6^8.  and  the  horse  that  the  king  r.  upon
iq  ,  e^t0  him  that  r.  on  the  heavens,  33.

isb  n  ’  tbu  Vi°ild  on  a  swift  cloud

•  0.  neither  sh.ali  he  that  r.  the  horse  deliver

a*%a  I10,W  was  r .  on  his  ass


RIG


*17*25  2ki'nS<!fCh  Inf  thy  r-  fPr  nie>  except  I  bid
i  oVc  kings  shall  enter  r.  in  chariots,  22.  4.


k  09  e.  e  1  enter  r ■  ln  chariots,  22.  4.
i.'cre'af  iy  4nng,7le?\horsemen  r.  on  horses,  12,
15  thnn°-f«3’  a  °  tbem  r-  upon  horses

u  and  many  people  with  thee  r.  on  horses


8i,and  behold»  a  man  r.  on  a  red  horse
9.  J.  thy  lung  eometli  ^ nto  tl.ee  r.  upon  an  ass

ha.  33.  f  19. thou  shaftnot  see  a  people  of  a  r.tongue

Ps.  60. 10.  thou  wateriest  llie  r.  thereof  abundantly
r,  ,  K1E,  or  RYE.

/  ' o«V-2* the. wheat  and  r.  were  not  smitten

ha.  .8. 2o.  cast  m  wheat,  bai  ley  and  r.  in  their  place

Zech.  14. 2.  the  houses  r.  and  women  ravished
n  10  .  ..  1*  *  »  Substantive.

\fn‘  oi  *■»*  sbaii  n°t  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  r  ?

Dent  i7  thiJaU^ilfrhrS  ?/'  ^clopbehad  speak  ,

21  17.  the  /.  ot  the  first-born  is  his
huth  2.  t  20.  is  one  that  hath  r.  to  redeem,  3.  +-9

2  W,reme0no  hT  lny  [■  to  tbyseif.  for  I  cannot
2  j.f"'-  '8>  what  r.  have  I  to  cry  to  the  king  ?

1  *-•  eoaye..alsP  rnol'e  r.  in  David  than  ye
1  A  mgs  8.  f  45.  hear  thou  in  heaven  their  prayer
and  maintain  their  r.  t  4<>.  2  Chr  6  +  35  +  30’
2;.20.  but  ye  have  no  portion  no.- r.  in  lerJs'
jobh  i0t{  tb0Au  nSf <  one  r-  we  have  done  wickedly

i7,Sti,ni  h  du 1  Ale  against  nr  r.?  my  wound
„J7.  shall  e\en  he  thathateth  r.  govern  ;

3b.  6.  but  he  giveth  r.  to  the  poor
f  sat.  9.  4.  thou  hast  maintained  my  r.  judgin'*  r
17.1.  bear  the  r  O  ?..  attend  to  my  ciy,  give  ear

Proi,  If,  8etGr<J  Wll‘  u'amtain  the r.  of  the  poor
13  1C.  1  s‘^at  revenues  without  r.

r„13- and  they  love  him  that  speaketh  r.

397  m  1  t0,  take  away  the  r.  from  poor  of  my  peo.
5.V  +  «°meS>tr°y  when  the  needy  speaketh  r.
r'  t8- pere  is  no  r.  in  their  goings
Jer.  5.  ~8.  the  r.  ot  the  needy  do  they  not  jud°c
17.  1).  he  thatgetteth  riches,  and  not  by  r.
as'  .ona'0  redemption  is  thine  to  buy  it,  8
/?*  1  30-„t,h°se.on  whom  be  stayeth  do  not  r.

Ezek  »i  »7  h"!!;lSl  e "’an  bef.  Most  High
00  +00  Vh  ‘  u  0  rnore’ tdl  be  come  whose  r.  it  is
Arnlst'  19  thpt'T  oppre?^ed  fbe  stranger  without  r.
Mai  3  517ht»htV  ’uru  aside  the  poor  from  their  r.
John  13't3iohm  ,h  aSlde  lle  Stranser  from  his  r.
Heh  13+  in  th|tm  ga'!e  he  l-  t°  be  sons  ot  God
He6. 13.  10.  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no  r.  to  eat

n  n*  An  1  Adjective.

nZ\  2?V!'  th,e  L?rd  who  had  led  me  in  the  r.  way
W  q  2254'  f  God  of  truth >  just  and  r.  is  he  7
j!}'  -  •  ~5.-  do  as  seemeth  good  and  r.  unto  thee
Jud(/.  !2.  b.  he  could  not  frame  to  pronounce  it  r
2  Z'"1:  ,r  -3-  1  WJ  1  teach  you  the  good  and  r.  way
7  t5.  3.  see,  thy  rnatters  are  good  and  r

0  Kings  9.  t  12.  the  cities  were  not  r.  in  his  eyes
~i-  cf'L10'  n1. thy  beartr.  asiny  heart  with  thine

EziaX  I|1iaefr.d=d  tecrA  y  t  nngs  tbat  were  not  r.

V?J,a 81  f?-  to  seek  of  him  a  r.  way  for  us

h  Jth  «  5,1  uga.lest  them  '•  Judgments
Lh  k  8-.5-.dnd  the  thing  seem  r.  before  the  king
34  oV5h  ho^ .forcible  are  r.  words  !  but  what  doth

35'  o\u-  iW1  Iiot  ay  011  man  n’ore  than  r.

3o.  ..  thinltest  thou  this  to  be  r.  that  thou  saidst ?

8-  the  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  r  '

?Atbe,  59cPt'  e  ot  thy  kingdom  is  a  r.  sceptre
im  \°  i  uVrene^v  a  r  spirit  within  me
97 •  7.  he  led  them  forth  by  the  r.  way

Proi  7f'  ny  Judgments  are  r.  ||  128.  thy  precepts  r
o  °F’  4-  l1’,  t  have  led  thee  m  r.  paths
o  the  opening  of  my  lips  shall  be  r.  things

19‘  5  &  all  r.  to  them  that  find  knowledge

.V  ,15  thoughts  of  the  rigl.teous  are  r.
oa  if  ,h.er!,IS  5  way  which  seemeth  r.  16.  25.

7 o'  ,i '  -bed’-  b‘?  worn  he  pure,  and  Whether  r.

A3'  fo-  wbeu  'by  lips  shall  speak  r.  things
r”4;,2 4*  4ha11  klss.  tns  lips  that  giveth  a  r.  answer
i.ii'.l:  g5ln  1  considered  every  r.  work
//•  thou  kpowest  not  whether  shall  be  r.

4?'  1,9'  fo-whuhsay ,  *)rophesy  not  to  us  r.  things
t.5.:  AZ'o\ tbe  Lord  dedare  things  that  are  r.

00'  TA  '.]•  !  bad  Planted  thee  wholly  a  r.  seed
04'  ,1(b  1  beir  c°urse  is  evil,  and  their  force  is  not  r.

34.  15.  ye  turned,  and  had  done  r.  in  my  sight
Hos.  14.  9.  tor  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  r
ninws,  h  1(b  for  they  know  not  to  do  r.  saith  Lord
Mark 5. 15.  clothed,  and  in  hisr.  mind,  Luke  8  35
Luke  Vd  2B.  thou  hast  answered  r.  this  do  and  live
4 4-  19-  whether  !t  be  r.  in  the  sight  of  God
8A 'L  thy  theai  t  is  not  r.  in  the  sight  of  God
op},°o  nZ  cea?e  to  pervert  the  r.  ways  of  the  L.

haVC  °5sak-  r-  way, gone  astray
Lev.  14.  that  they  may  have  r.  to  the  tree  of  life
Is  RIGHT.

Lxod.  15.  26.  if  thou  wilt  d  iligently  hearken  and  do
tbat  which  is  r.  in  Ins  sight,  1  Kinas  11  38
Dent.  6.  18.  thou  shalt  do  that  is  r.  12.  °5  I  °i  a  *

12.  S.  every  man  doeth  whatsoever  is  r.  in  own  eye's
28.  when  thou  doest  that  which  isr.  13  18
Judo.  14.  t  3.  get  her  tor  me,  she  isr.  in  mine  eves
1  Kings  11 .  33.  hast  not  walked  to  do  that  is  r
t  rZ?i1(u  30'  ln  exec'ut.  that  which  isr.  in  my  eyes

pt/  33-  T,0,' Spoke?  °t  T  tbe  ‘hing  that  if  r.  8.
L’sat.  33.  4._foi  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  r.

P/ov.  12.  15.  the  way  of  a  fool  is  r.  in  his  own  eyes
21. 2.  every  way  ot  man  is  r.  in  his  own  eyes
8.  but  as  for  the  pure,  his  work  is  r.

i4Vd?  jydh  me  as  isr.  in  your  eyes
-£^-.18.  5.  but  if  a  man  do  ti,at  which  is  r
19.  he  hath  done  that  which  is  lawful  and  r.  and
kept  my  statutes,  21.  27.  |  33  14  16  10
Mat.  20.  4.  whatsoever  is  r.  1  will  give  you  1  ’  9’

7*  whatsoever  is  r.  that  shall  ye  receive
Luke  12.  57.  and  why  judge  ye  not  what  is  r.  f
Lph.  6.  1.  obey  your  parents  in  the  Lord,  this  is  r.
lias  RIGHT.

Jitdff.  17.  6.  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,  but  every
mandiu  that  winch  was  r.  in  his  own  eyes  21  °5
1  6am.  18.  +  20.  the  thing  was  r.  in  Saul’s  eyes
.  6am.  1/.  +4.  the  saying was  r.  in  eyes  of  Absalom

1  A  ings  14. 8.  David  do  that  which  was  r.  15.  5.

Jo.  11.  Asa  did  that  which  teas  r,  2  C/iron .  14.  2.

^>43.  Jehoshaphat  did  that  was  r.  2  Chron .  20  3°

2  Kings  12.  2.  Jeboash  did  that  was  r.  2  Chron  24.  2~.

14.  3.  Amaziah  did  that  which  was  r  2  Chi .  \'5.


2  I3,  3‘  ^zariah  did  which  was  r.  2  Chr.  °6  4

otham  did  that  which  was  r.  2  Chron.  27.  -2.
in’  3'  ^haz  did  not  that  which  was  r.  in  sight  of  L.

18.  3.  Hezekiah  did  that  was  r.  2  Chron.  29.  2.

2..  „.  Josiah  did  that  which  was  r.  2  Chron.  34.  2
1  Chron.  13.4  the  thing  wasr.  in  eyes  of  the  people

33  o73  i’  /  4'  t  uno  teas  r  in  eyes  of  Hezekiah
u  have  perverted  that  which  was  r.

rsal.  18.  37.  their  heart  was  not  r.  with  him
Jer .  17.  16.  that  whic  h  came  out  of  my  lips  was  r.
RIGHT.

Josh.  3.  16.  the  people  passed  overv.  against  Jericho
HIGH  I  cheek.

Mat.  5.  39.  whoso  shall  smite  thee  on  the  r.  cheek
.  RIGHT  corner.

~  Kings  11. 1 1.  guard  stood  round  from  ther  cornet
6ee  Foot,  Hand.

D  .  RIGHT  early.

Psal.  46.  5.  God  shall  help  her,  and  that  r.  early
r  An  RIGHT  forth •

Jer.  49.  5.  ye  shall  be  driven  every  man  r.  forth
r>  ,  .  RIGH  T  on.

f  rov.  4  25  let  thine  eyes  look  r.  on  and  eye-lids

9.  In.  to  call  passengers  who  go  r.  on  their  ways

.  L  RIGHT  pillar.

I  Kings’;.  21.  he  set  up  the  r.  pillar  called  Jachin
d  ,  , ,  itlGll  1  well.

Psal.  139. 14.  ^d^thatuny  souUnoweth  r.  well

„  See  the  signification  o/Just.

L  1- .for  thee  have  L  seen  r.  before  me
Oi  nu  foou  destroy  the  r.  with  the  wicked  ?

-4.  if  theie  be  hfty  r.  wilt  thou  destroy,  and  not

05  nal5khrP  ?Ce  t0r  the  fiffy  r.  that  are  therein^
.5.  that  be  far  from  thee  to  slay  r.  with  wicked
-6.  it  l  find  fifty  r.  in  the  city,  1  will  spare
28.  peracl ven tore  there  shall  lack  five  of  fifty  r
20- 4 -Lord  >  w,  It  thou  slay  also  a  r.  nation  V

Pri,2boJ ^d?h  Sa'd’  she  ,iath  been  more  r.  than  1
r ^'L.  r3- 7- the  innocent  and  r.  slay  thou  not
A &’ft  Perverteth  the  words  of  the  r.  Deut.  16. 19
Num.  23.  10.  let  me  die  the  death  of  the  r.
oeZ\  ti,8'  ^v.h at  nation  that  hath  judgments  so  r.

-5.  1.  they  shall  justify  the  r.  2  Chron.  6.  23.

Jttdg.  5. 11.  the  r.  acts  of  the  Lord,  1  Sam.  10  7

1  6am.  24.17.  he  said,  thou  art  more  r.  than’ 1
~  6am.  4.  11  wicked  men  have  slain  a  r.  person
1 2,.52:  who.  I  ell  on  two  men  more  r.  than  he

8.  3.. justifying  ther.  to  give  him  according  to  his

2  Kings  10.  9.  Jelm  said  to  all  the  people,  ye  be  1
Ezra  9.  15.  Gird  God  of  Isr.  thou  art r.  Keif.  9  8

a  4-  7vor  where  were  the  r.  cut  off  >

1  were  r.  yet  would  I  notanswei

10.  15.  if  I  be  r.  yet  will  I  not  lift  up  my  head
lo.  L4.  what  is  man,  tliat  he  should  be  r .?

00  {'  f-  afsoshaH  hold  on  his  way,  grow  stronger

ltany  pleas,  to  Almighty  tliat  thou  art  r.  ?
Jb  r'  se,e  ’Land  are  glad,  Psal.  107  .  42.

23.  7.  there  the  r.  might  dispute  with  him
oT'  2'  because  lie  wasr.  in  his  own  eyes
34.  5.  Job  hath  said,  I  am  r.  ||  35.  7.  if  thou  be  r.

06.  7  he  withdraweth  not  his  eyes  from  the  r.  but
an  wUh  kings  are  they  on  the  throne,  Psal.  34.  15
40.  S.  wilt  thou  condemn  me  that  thou  mayest  be  r.
esc  L.p-  nor  sinners  in  the  congregation  of  the  r
6  for  the  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  r
b.  12.  for  thou  wilt  bless  the  r.  with  favour,  compass
7i  ,9’/  ,tbe  9°d  tneth  the  hearts  and  reins  1
11  o  ,  (he?*.  God  is  angry  with  wicked

1.  3.  what  can  the  r.  do  ?  ||  5. 1.orTl  trieth  the  r.

,a  a  V?r  y°<  is  m  the  generation  of  the  r

19.  9.  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and  r
31  10  i-  altogether,  119.7,  62,  106,160,  164*
.J'  ,18-  liPs  sPeak  contemptuously  against  the  r.

™  111  rhe  Lord,  and  rejoice,  ye  r

33.  1.  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  O  ye  r .  97  12
.34.  17.  the  r.  cry,  and  the  Lord  heareth  them
1J.  many  are  the  nfflictionsof  the  r.  Lord  deliver

351’0ihe.yAh,at  h1fe  ,l,ler'  shal‘  he  desolate
3b.  27.  et  them  be  glad  that  favour  my  r.  cause
37.  17-  but  the  l  ord  upholdeth  the  /■

21.  but  the  r .  sheweth  mercy,  and  giveth
on  fiet  n  s^en,  r\ forsaken,  nor  his  seed
•in’  th'o  m. shn  inherit  the  land,  and  dwell  therein
30  the  mouth  of  the  r.  speaketh  wisdom

9A  V’ V!2cked.  watcheth  the  r.  to  slay  him
39.  but  the  salvation  of  the  r.  is  of  the  Lord

55'  o7tileri,an°  shallse9j  and  fear,  and  laugh
50'  7a ‘  ,’e shall  never  suffer  the  r.  to  be  moved
b8.  JO.  the  r.  shall  rejoice  when  lie  seeth  vengeance
ver?  y  there  is  a  reward  for  the  r.

no'  310h,Aei  r;  fila11  Lbe  g!ad  in  the  l  ord,  and  trust
9a‘  *he  r •  he  glad,  let  them  rejoice

Un  28.  Jet  them  not  he  written  with  the  r.
ir  7- in  his  days  shall  the  r.  flourish,  and  peace
la’  AUt  the.  horns  of  the  r.  shall  be  exalted
aT'  2,?'  *  ,e  r‘  shall  Hourish  like  the  palm-tree
P4-  2 L  they  gather  against  the  soul  of  the  r.

110  4  2ghtT  sown  for  r .  and  gladness  for  upright
1J2j4.  the  Ld.  is  full  of  compassion  and  r.  116.  5.
i,'  he  r.  shall  be  in  everlasting  remembrance
118.  15.  rejoicing  is  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  r
4.0.  this  gntc,  into  which  tli6  r,  sh<tll  enter
Lfo  ldG;  ,s;v;«rn  ‘hat  I  will  keep  thy  judgments
137 ■  t.  ait  thou,  O  Lord,  Jer.  12.  1
,2.58othA  fos’hnonies  are  r.and  very  faithful
1*5.  3.  the  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest  upon  the

14D  13  .1  ot  thu  ii  *9st  ‘he  r.  put  forth  their  hand*

140.  1.3.  ther.  shall  give  thanks  to  thy  name

| fL  5-  let  the  r  smite  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness
|42-  7-  the  r.  shall  compass  me  about,  thou  shalt
i  ia  J,7 -the  Lord  is  r.  in  all  his  ways,  and  holy
146.  8.  Lord  loveth  the  r.  he  preserveth  strangers
P^c-.*-7.  he  layeth  up  sound  wisdom  for  the  r
20.  that  thou  mayest  keep  the  paths  of  the  r.

'ir,  o  troward  is  abominat.  but  his  secret  is  with  r,

10  3  the  Lord  will  not  suffer  the  r.  to  fairish
lb.  labour  of  the  r.  tendeth  to  life,  wicked  tosiu
?]■  fhe.  JPsof  the  r.  feed  many,  but  fools  die
24.  but  the  desire  of  the  r.  shall  be  granted
7o  1  2he  r’  ’ra,n  everlasting  foundation
28.  the  hope  of  the  r.  shall  he  gladness

P  401


R  1  G


RIG


RIG


prov  io.30.  the  r.  shall  never  he  removed,  butwick
3-2. ’the  lips  ot'  the  r.  know  what  is  acceptable
1 1  8  the  r  is  delivered  out  ot  trouble  .

"6 .  when  itgoeth  well  with  the  r.  city ’rejoiceth
21.  but  the  seed  ot  the  r.  shall  be  delivered
>23.  the  desire  of  the  r.  is  only  good
28.  but  the  r.  shall  flourish  as  a  brancn
30  the  fruit  of  the  r.  is  a  treeot  lne
3l!  behold,  r.  shall  be  recompensed  in  the  ea

12.  3.  but  the  root  ot  the  r,  shall  not  be  moved
5.  thoughts  of  the  r.  are  right,  but  the  counsels
7.  but  the  house  of  the  i.  shad
1°  but  the  root  of  the  r.  yieldet h  ti  uit

26.  the  r.  is  more  excellent  than  1  l?s hi anvn

13.  9.  the  light  of  the  r.  reipiceth,  but  the  lamp
21.  but  to  the  r.  good  shall  be  repaid

25.  the  r.  eatelh  to  the  satisfying  ot  his  soul

14.  *9.  but  among  the  r.  there  is  favour

19.  and  the  wic  ked  bow  at  the  gates  of  the  r.

3°  but  the  r.  hath  hope  m  his  death

,5.6.  in  the  house  of  the  r .  is  much  treasure

19.  but  the  way  of  the  r.  is  made  plain
«8  the  heart  of  the  r.  studieth  to  answer

20.  but  he  heareth  the  prayer  of  the  r.

lb  IS  r  lips  are  the  delight  or  kings  .  .

18!  5.  it  is  not  good  to  overthrow  the  r.  in  judgm.

10.  the  r.  runneth  into  it,  and  is  sate

21.  18.  the  wicked  shall  be  a  ransom  for  the  .

26.  hut  the  r.  giveth,  and  spareth  not
n3  °4.  the  father  ot  the  r.  shed l  gieath  rejoice
24!  15.  lav  not  wait  against  the  dwelling  ot  tie

24.  he  that  saith  to  the  wicked,  thou  art  r.

28.  1.  the  wic  ked  flee,  but  the  r.  are  boh  as  a  Hon
10.  whoso  causeth  the  r  to  go  astray,  shall  tall
28.  but  when  the  wic  ked  perish,  the  ;.  mcrease

29.  2.  when  the  r.  are  in  authority,  people  rejoice

b!  but  the  ;'.  doth  sing  and  rejoic  e
(.  the  r.  considered!  the  cause  of  the  poor
16  but  the  r.  shall  see  their  tall  .  ,  ,

Ecci.  3.  17.  God  shall  judue  the  r.  and  the  wicked
7  16  be  not  r.  over  much,  neither  over- wise
8!  14.  happened!  according  to  the  "hork|otftl).e  j
9.  1.  the  r  and  the  wise  are  111  the  hand  ot  God
0  there  is  one  event  to  the  r.  and  to  the  wickec
Isa.  3  10.  say  ye  to  the  r.  it  shall  he  well  with  him
5.  23.  and  takeaway  the  righteousness  ot  the  .

24.  16.  we  have  heard  songs,  even  glory  to  the  1.
of.  o  open  ye,  tliatthe  r.  nation  may  enter  in
4i!  26.  who  hath  declared,  that  we  may  say,  he  is  r .

53  ll.  mv  r.  servant  shall  justify  niany
5"!  1.  r.  perisheth,  and  no  man  layetli  it  to  heart,
none  considering  that  the  r  is  taken  ta
60  21.  thy  people  also  shall  he  all  1.  ^hal  1  lniieiu
Jer.  12.  1.  r.  art  thou,  O  Ld.  when  1  plead  w  nil  thee
on  12.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  that  triest  the  r,

2.3!  5.  that  I  will  raise  to  David  a  r.  branch
E-ek.  13.  22.  with  lies  ye  have  made  the  r.  sad
16.  52.  thy  sisters,  they  are  more  r.  than  thou
18  20.  the  righteousness  ot  the  r.  shall  be  on  him
04  but  when  the  r.  turneth  away  from,  33.18.

21.  3.  1  will  cut  off  from  thee  the  r.  and  wicked,  4.

33’  12  the  righteousness  of  the  r.  shall  not  deliyei
'  him  in  the  day,  nor  shall  the  r.  be :  able :  to  lne
13  when  1  shall  say  to  the  r.  lie  shall  lne
^2.  6  because  they  sold  r.  for  silver  and  poor
Hah  1  4  the  wicked  doth  compass  about  the  r.

13."  wicked  devoureth  him  that  is  more  r.  than  he
Mai.  3.  18.  discern  betwen  the  r.  and  the  wicked
Mat.  9.  13.  1  am  not  come  to  call  the  '  .  but  sin¬
ners  to  repentance,  Mark  2.  1 1 .  fuse  0.  ■}*•

13.  43.  then  shall  the  r.  shine  forth  as  the  sun
°3.  28.  ye  outwardly  appear  r.  to  men,  but  within
~29.  because  ye  garnish  the  sepulchres  ot  r.

35.  that  on  you  may  come  all  r.  blood  shed  on  the
earth,  from  blood  ot  r.  Abel  to  Zacliarias
25  37.  then shal.  the  r.  answer,  say  mg,  Loid
46.  but  tiie  r.  shall  go  into  hte  eternal
Luke  1.  6.  and  they  were  both  r.  before  God
18.  9.  w  ho  trusted  they  were  r.  and  despised  others
Jo/tnj.  24.  judge  not  by  appearance,  but  judge  r.

17  °5  O  r.  rather,  the  work!  hath  not  known  thee
Rom  2  5.  and  revelation  ot  the  r.  judgment  of  G

3.  16.  it  is  written,  there  is  none  r.  no  nc!t  one
5  19  so  by  obedience  of  one,  many  be  made  r.

VT/iess.  1.5.  a  manifest  token  of  r.  judgment  of  G.

6  it  is  a  r  thing  with  God  to  recompense  ti  lbulat.

2  Tim  4.  8.  the  W,  the  r.  Judge,  shall  give  me
Heb  11. 4.  he  obtained  witness  that  he  was  r.

\  Pet  3T  12.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  r.

4.  18.  if  r.  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  sinner
2  Pet  0  8  Lot  vexed  his  r.  soul  from  day  today

1  Tohn'd  1 .  we  have  an  advocate,  Jesus  Christ  the  r.
oq  if  ye  know  that  he  isr.  ye  know  every  one
3*7'  he  thatdoeth  righteousness  is  r.  as  he  is  r.

12.  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his  brother  s  r.
Rev.  16.  5.  1  heard  the  angel  say,  thou  art  ?.  O  Ld.

7  O  Lord,  true  and  r.  are  thy  judgments,  19.  2.
22  11  and  he  that  is  r.  let  him  be  r.  still

•See  Lord  is.

•RIGHTEOUS  man,  or  men.
p,a1  37.  16.  a  little  that  a  r.  man  hath  is  better
Prov.  10. 11. the  mouth  of  a  r.  man  is  a  well  of  life
1°  10.  a  r.  man  regardeth  the  life  of  Ins  beast
13  5  a  r.  m.  liateth  lying,  but  w  icked  is  loathsome
oj ‘  in.  a  man  wisely  considereth  the  house
25!  26.  a  r.man  falling  dow  n  before  the  wicked
28.  12.  w  hen  r.  men  do  rejoice,  there  is  glory7
Isa.  41.  2.  w  ho  raised  up  the  r.  yuan  from  the  east
Ezek.  3.  20.  again,  when  a  r.  man  doth  turn,  18.  *0.
21.  nevertheless,  if  thou  warn  the  r.  man
23.  45.  and  the  r.  men ,  they  shall  judge  them
Mat  10.  41.  he  that  receiveth  a  r.man  in  the  name
of  a  r.  man ,  shall  rec  eive  a  r.  man  s  reward
13. 17.  many  r.  men  have  desired  to  see  those  tilings
l.uke  23.  47.  saying,  certainly  this  was  a  r.  man
Rom.  5.  7.  scarcely  for  a  r.  man  will  one  die

1  Tim.  1. 9.  tliatthe  law  is  not  made  tor  a  r.  wcm
jam.  5.  16.  the  fervent  prayer  of  a  r.  man  availed)

2  Pet  2.  8.  for  that  r.  man  dw  elling  among  them

RIGHTEOUSLY.

Dent.  1.  16.  hear  causes,  and  judge  r.  /  rot*.  31.9
Psal  67. 4.  thou  slin.lt  judge  the  people  r.  96.  10

402


ha  33  15  he  that  walketh  r.  shall  dwell  on  ln„h

lei  '  11  20.  O  Lord  of  hosts,  thatjndgest  r.

7 y/  2. 12.  that  we  should  live  soberly  ,  ;'.  and  godly
1  i>pi  o  23  committed  to  him  that  judged)  1.

1  1  et.~.  m.  ulGHTEOUsNESS

Signifies,  [1]  That  perfection  of  the  divine  na

'  fur e  f c hereby  God  is  most  just,  and  most  holy  in
himself,  and  in  all  his  dealings  with  his  creatures,
and  observes  the  strictest  rules  of  rectitude  and
equity,  .lob  36.  3.  John  17,  25.  [2]  Jhe  cl0e”,e'1™.'
mercy,  and  goodness  oj  God,  Deut.  6.  .5.  Fsa  .

51  14.  [3]  Ilis  truth  and  faithfulness  in  fulfil

ling  and  making  good  his :  promises,  1.  3 1.1

Isa  42.6.  I  45.  19-  [4]  The  blessed  and  gra

cions  fruit  and  reward  of  righteousness,  I  sal.  *4-
5  Isa  58  8.  [5]  The  active  and  passive  obed

e'nce  of  Christ,  whereby  he  perfectly  fulfilled  the
law  and  propitiated  the  justice  <j  God.  winch
obedience  being  imputed  to  the  elect,
bv  faith,  their  sins  are  pardoned,  their  persons
accepted,  and  they  are  brought  to  eternal  glory,
nmi  0  °4  This  righteousness,  whereby  a  sin¬
ner  is  justified,  is  called  the  righteousness  ot
God,  Rom.  1.  17.  because  it  is  of  Gods  institu¬
tion,  ordination,  and  apt  ointment,  and  whu
alone  he  will  accept  of  to  life  :  Or,  bee. aic e  it  was
performed  by  him  who  is  God  as  well  as  man,  and
is  therefore  of  infinite  valve  and  met  it  ■
cause  it  is  opposed  to  the  righteousness  of  woiks,

Rom  10  3.  h  is  called  the  righteousness  ot
faith,  Rom.  4.  13.  because  it  is
applied  by  faith.  And  it  u  called  the  law  ot
righteousness,  Rom.  9.  31 .  m  opposition  to  that
law  of  righteousness,  by  which  the  unbelieving
.lews  sought  to  be  justified.  And  Christ  is  called.

The  Lord  our  Righteousness,  Jer.  23.  6.  that  is.

The  procurer  and  bestower  of  all  that  righteousness
and  /udiness  that  are  m  believers,  [b]  I  hat  up¬
rightness,  equity,  and  justice  in  dealing,  u  hu  i
ought  to  be  between  man  and  man,  Luke  1.

L-’pli  4  °4  [7 ]  An  eminent  act  of  justice  and

piety,  proceeding  from  a  sincere  real  tor  Gods
honour,  and  the  good  of  his  people,  1  sal  106.

31.  [8.1  Holiness  of  life  and  conversation,  1  Cor.

The' doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  called  the  word  of
righteousness,  11  eb.  5.  1.3  because  therein  the
righteousness  of  God  is  revealed  to  vs,  and  it  alone

declares  the  way  of  becoming  righteous.

Dent.  6.  25.  and  it  shall  be  our  r.  if  we  observe  todo
24.  13.  it  shall  be  r.  to  thee  before  Lord  thy  (,od
33.  19.  there  they  shall  off  er  sacrifices  ot  r.
job  29."  14.  I  put  on  r.  and  it  clothed  me
36.  3.  and  1  will  ascribe  r.  to  my  Maker
Psal.  4.  5.  offer  the  sacrifices  of  r.  and  trust  in  the  L.

11  7  for  the  righteous  Lord  loveth  r.  33.  5.

15!  2!  he  that  worketh  r.  shall  never  be  moved
23.  3.  lie  leadetli  me  in  paths  ot  r.  for  name  s  sake
04  5  and  r.  from  the  God  ot  Ins  salvation
40!  9.  1  have  preached  r.  in  the  great  congregation
45.  4.  because  of  truth,  and  meekness,  and  1.

7.  thou  lovestr.  and  hatest  wickedness,  Heb.  1.9-
48.  10.  thy  right  hand,  O  God,  is  full  ot  r.

51  19  then  shalt  he  pleased  with  sacrifices  of  r.

52  3  thou  lovest  ly  ing,  rather  than  to  speak  r.

58!  1.  do  ye  indeed  speak  7.  O  congregation  ?

72.  2.  he  shall  judge  thy  people  with  r.  and  poor

3.  mountains  sliall  bring  peace, and  little  hills  by  r.
85.  10.  r .  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other
11.  and  r.  shall  look  down  from  heaven
13.  r.  shall  go  before  him,  and  set  us  111  the  way
94.  15.  but  judgment  shall  return  unto  r.

06.  13.  he  shall  judge  the  world  with  r.  98.  9.

97.  2.  r.  is  the  habitation  ot  Ins  throne
99.  4.  thou  executest  r.  in  Jacob,  103.  6.

106.  3.  blessed  is  he  that  doetli  r.  at  all  times

118.  19.  open  to  me  the  gates  ot  r.  1  will  go  into

119.  144.  the  r.  of  thy  testimonies  is  everlasting
172.  for  all.  thy  commandments  are  r.

132  9.  let  thy  priests  be  clothed  with  i .  thy  saints
Prov.  2.  9.  thenslialt  thou  underst.  r.  and  judgment

8.  18.  yea,  durable  riches  and  >\  are  with  me
20.  I  lead  in  the  way  of  r.  m  nndst  of  the  paths
10.2.  but  r.  delivereth  from  death,  11.  4.

11.5.  the  r.  of  the  perfect  shall  direct  his  way

6.  the  r.  of  the  upright  shall  deliver  them

18.  to  him  that  soweth  r.  shall  be  a  sure  reward

19.  as  r.  tendeth  to  life  so  lie  that  pursuetli  evil
12  17.  he  that  speaketh  truth,  sheweth  forth  i .

28  in  the  way  of  r.  is  life,  and  in  the  pathway

13.  6.  r.  keepeth  him  that  is  upright  in  the  way

14.  34.  r.  exalteth  a  nation,  sin  is  a  reproach  to

15.  9  lie  loveth  him  that  follow  eth  after;'.

16.  8.  better  is  a  little  with  r.  than  great  revenues
12.  for  the  throne  is  established  by  r.

31.  is  a  crown  of  glory,  if  found  in  the  way  ot  r

21  21.  he  that  followeth  after  r.  and  mercy  nnd-
L  eth  life,  r.  and  honour

F.ccl  3  16.  and  the  place  ofr,  that  iniquity  was  there
Isa  V  °1  r  lodged  in  it,  but  now  murderers
°6  the  city  ofr.  ||  27-  and  her  converts  with  r
5.  23.  which  take  away  the  r.  of  the  righteous
10  00  consumption  (fecreed  sliall  over  now  \\  ltn  j
ll’  r’but  with  r.  shall  he  judge  the  poor
5.  and  r.  shall  be  the  girdle  ot  Ins  loins
16.5.  judging  and  seeking  judgment,  and  hastine  r
°6.  9.  the  inhabitants  ot  the  world  will  learn  i .

10  let  favour  be  shewed,  yet  will  be  not  learn  r.
08  17.  and  r.  will  1  lay  to  the  plummet
3°’  16.  and  r.  sliall  remain  in  the  fruitful  held
17  and  the  work  ofr.  shall  be  peace,  and  the  eflec  t
'  ’  of  r.  quietness  and  assurance  tor  ever

33.  5.  Lord  hath  filled  Zion  with  judgment  and  r.
41 !  +  2.  who  raised  up  r.  from  the  east

45.  8.  drop  down,  ye  heavens,  trom  above, and  let
skies  pour  down  r.  and  let  r.  spring  up  togethe

19  1  tCe  Lord  speak  r.  1  declare  nglit.things
24.  in  the  Lord  have  1  r.  +  m  the  Loid  is  a  1 1  r.

46.  12.  hearken  unto  me,  ye  that  are  tar  Rom  r
51.  1.  ye  that  follow  after  r.  II  7-  diat  know  r.
54.  17.  their  r.  is  of  me,  saith  the  Lord
58.  2.  yet  they  seek  me  as  a  nation  that  dul  r.


Isa  59  17  for  he  put  on  r.  as  a  breastplate
go!  17.  will  make  thy  offv-ers  peace,  thine  exact  r
61  3  that  they  might  he  called  trees  ot  r.

10  iie  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  ot  r.

U  '  30  1  ord  will  cause  r.  and  praise  to  spring  forth
6°  1  until  the  r.  thereof  go  forth  as  brightness
6t  5!  thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth  and  work.  r.

Jer.  9.  24.  that  1  am  the  Lord  which  exercise  r.
no  q  execute  ve  judgment  Him  nnd  deluer
23.  6!  this  is  his  name,  the  Lord  our  r.  33.  16.

33  15  at  that  time  will  I  cause  the  branch  ot  /.  to
grow  up  to  David, and  he  shall  execute/’.

51.  10.  the  l  ord  bath  brought  forth  our  r.

Ezek.  14. 14.  deliver  their  ou  n  souls  by  their  r.  ^0.

18. 90.  the  r.  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him
33  1°  the/*  ot  the  righteous  shall  not  deliver  him
Dan.  4.  27!  and  break  ofl'  thy  sins  by  r.
q  7  O  Lord,  r.  belongeth  unto  thee,  but  to  us
r>4  to  bring  in  everlasting  r.  and  to  seal  up  vision
12  *3.  they  that  turn  many  to  r.  sliall  shine  as  stars
1/os.  10.  12.  till  he  come  and  ram  r.  upon  you
Arnos  5.?.  and  who  leave  off  r.  in  the  earth
°4.  and  let  r.  run  down  as  a  niighty  stream
6.  12.  ye  have  turned  the  fruit  ot  r .  into  hemlock
Mic.  6.  5.  that  ye  may  know  the  r.  ot  the  Lord
Zevh  °  3.  all  ye  meek  ot  earth,  seek  r.  seek  meekn.
Mai  4  2.  to  you  that  fear  shall  the  Sun  otr.  arise
Mat.  3.  15.  thus  it  becometh  us  to  tulhl  all  r.

5. 6.  blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  alter  r.
2(1.  except  your  r.  exceed  the  r.  ot  the  ..cribes
21  32.  for  John  came  to  you  in  the  wav  of  r.

J  u'ke  1 . 75.  in  r .  before  him  all  tiie  days  ot  our  life
John  16  8  lie  will  reprove  the  world  ot  sin  and  of  r.

10.  ofr.  bee.  I  go  to  my  Father,  ye  see  me  no  more
Acts  10.  35.  he  that  worketh  r.  is  accepted  vvitli  him
13.  10.  thou  enemy  ot  all  r.  wilt  thou  not  cease
>'4  °5  as  he  reasoned  of  r.  and  judgm.  Velix  trem.
Rom.  1. 17-  for  therein  is  the  r.  of  God  revealed
°  >’6.  if  uncircunn  ision  keep  the  r.  or  the  law  <.i
3  5  it  our  unrighteousness  commend  the  r.  ot  God
o\  the;'  of  God  without  the  law  is  manifested
ao  even  the  r.  of  God  which  is  by  taithot  Christ
4~6  to  whom  God  imputeth  without  works  .
11  received  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  ot  the  r.ot  i
'  the  faith,  that  r.  might  be  imputed  to  them  alsc*
13.  for  the  promise  was  through  the  r.  ot  faith

5  17  they  which  receive  giftot  r,  shall  reign  b>  Jes
18.  so  by  the  r.  of  one  the  free  gift  came  on  a  l  l

so  might  grace  reign  through  r.  to  eternal  Iff*

6  13  yield  your  members  instruments  ot  r.  to  Goc  |
16.  whether  of  sin  to  death,  or  ot  obedience  untor
18.  free  from  sin,  ye  became  the  servants  ot  r.

19  so  now  v  ield  your  members  servants  to  r.

20  when  ye  were  serv.  ot  sin,  ye  were  tree  Irom  r
8  4  that  the  r.  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us

io.  but  the  spirit  is  life  because  ot  r.
q  30.  that  the  Gentiles  who  followed  not  after  *
have  attained  to  ;'.  even  the  r. .which  is  of  hut
31.  but  Israel  which  followed  a  ter  the  aw  of  M
hath  not  attained  to  the  law  of.
10. 3.  they  being  ignorant,  going  about  1 to  estal bl's
their  own  r.  have  not  submitted  to  the  ; .  ot  Gc  I

5.  Closes  describeth  the  r.  which  is  ot  the  lavv  I
6  the  r.  which  is  of  faith  speaketh  on  this  wise

10.  for  with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  r.

14  17.  kinirciom  of  God  not  meat  and  drink,  but  1

1  Cor.  1. 30.  in  Christ,  whoof  God  is  made  unto  us
15.  34.  awake  to  r.  and  sin  not,  tor  some  have  not  1
o  Cor.  3  Q.  much  more  doth  the  ministration  ot  r.
"5.  21.  that  we  might  be  made  the  r.  ot  God  m  -n
6  7  by  the  armour  of  ;'.  on  the  right  hand  and
14 'what  fellowship  hath  r.  with  unrighteousnej
a  10.  your  seed  and  increase  the  fruits  ot  v  our

11.  15.  he  transformed  as  the  ministers  ot  r.

Gal.  2.  21 .  if  r.  come  by  law,  Christ  is  deatl  m  vai

o  01  verily,  r.  should  liave  been  by  the  lavv
5!  5.  we  through  the  Spirit  vyait  tor  the  hope  of ;
Evh.  5.  9.  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  r.  and  trutt

6.  14.  and  having  on  the  breastplate  01  r-  .
Phil.  1. 11.  being  filled  with  the  truits  of  r.  bv  Je.

3  6.  touching  r.  which  is  in  the  lavv,  blameless  .

9.  but  the-  r.  which  is  ot  God  by  faith

1  Tim.  6. 11 .  and  follow  after  r.  2  1  mu  -.  f

2  Tim.  4.8.  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  ,
Tit  3.  5.  not  by  works  of  r.  which  we  have  don
Heb  1.8.  a  sceptre  ofr.  is  sceptre  ot  thy  k"?8(.

5  13.  is  unskilful  in  the  word  of  r..he  is  a  bab

7.  2.  first  being  by  interpretation  king  of  r.  1
11  7  and  became  heir  ot  tiie  r .  which  is  by  ..

33.  through  faith  subduecl  kingc^ms,  vvrougnt  ;

12.  11.  afterward  it  yieldeth  peaceable  Tmt
Jam  1. 20.  wrath  ot  man  worketh  not  r.  ot  God
3  18.  the  fruit  of  r.  is  sown  in  peace  of  them

1  Pet  0  24.  webeing  dead  tosm  should  liveun

O  Pei.  l.i.  obtained  like  faith  through  the  r.ot  d
a  5  spared  not,  but  saved  Roe  a  preacher  ot
'f>l  been  better  not  to  have  known  the  wav

3  13  we  look  fora  new  earth,  wherein  dweller

1  John  2  29.  every  one  that  doetli  r.  is  born  0
T  7.  he  that  doetli  r.  is  righteous  as  he  is  riglites
10.  whosoever  doth  not  r.  is  not  ot  God
Rev  10.  8-  for  the  tine  linen  is  the  r.  ot  the
J  For  RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Gen.  15.  6.  A  brain  believed  m  the  ^

counted  it  to  him  Jor  r.  /  sal.  U  t .  •  •  .  t

Psal  143  11.  for  thy  r.  sake  bring  my  soul  oul(
Ra  5.  7.  he  looked  for  r.  but  behold  a  cry
Mat.  5.  10.  blessed  are  they  w  hich  are  perse  ■
Rom.  4.  5.  his  faith  is  counted  Jor  r.  Gal. .3 .  t  -  }  I
q.  reckoned  j|  22.  iniputed  to  him  •  '*'  '  *  I

10.  4.  for  Christ  is  the  end  ot  the  IjjW  *

1  Safn.M.e 3.  the  Lord  render  to  f
1  Kinas  8. 39.  to  give  acc  ording  to  ///■'  i  ■  -  L  •  '

Job  33.  26.  for  he  will  render  unto  man  , f
Psal. 7 .  17.  1  will  praise  the  Lord  accorc  f.  e

00  31.  they  shall  declare /m  r.  to  a.pe  J  -

50.  6.  the  heavens  shall  declare  his  r.  .  j-'- j
08.  2.  his  r.  ball)  he  openly  shewed  m  the  ^
103.  17.  and  his  r.  unto  children  s  c  hi  di  n
HI.  3.  and  his  r.  eudureth  toi  ever,  11*


,9-


R  I  N


RIS


l.ccl.  7.  15.  there  is  a  just  man  that  perishetli  in  his  r.
ha.  45.  51.  the  Lord  is  well  pleased  for  his  r.  sake
yj.  \0.  brought  salvation,  and  his  r.  sustained  him
Lxek.  3.  CO.  again,  when  a  righteous  man  doth  turn
from  his  r.  and  commit  iniquity,  18  24  °6
1H.  22.  in  his  r.  that  lie  hath  done  he  shall  live
33.  12.  not  he  able  to  live  tor  his  r.  in  the  day
1.1.  if  he  trust  to  his  own  r.  and  commit  iniquity,
ii  _  ,  .til  ilooe  shall  not  be  remembered

7.  9.  will  bring  to  liaht,  and  1  shall  behold  hisr.
Mut.  6.  33.  but  seek  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  r.
Aew.  3.  25.  to  dec  lare  his  r.  tor  remiss,  of  sins,  26
2  tor.  y.  y.  given  to  the  poor,  his  r.  remain,  for  ever

/«  RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Lev.  iy.  15.  in  r.  shalt  thou  judge  thy  neighbour
l  KtnysS.  6.  as  he  walked  bef.  thee  in  truth  and  inr
fs.  y.  f  4.  thou  sattest  in  the  throne,  judging  in  r

8.  and  he  shall  judge  the  world  in  r.

17.  15.  as  for  me,'l  will  behold  thy  face  in  r
oo.  5.  by  terrible  things  in  r.  wilt  thou  answer  us
,'ov-  o-.8.  all  the  words  ot  tny  mouth  are  in  r.

25.  5.  his  throne  shall  be  established  in  r.

Goel  that  is  holy  shall  be  sanctified  in  r.
b  behold,  a  king  shall  reign  in  r.  and  princes
4«..  o.  I  the  Lord  have  called  thee  in  r.

45.  13.  1  have  raised  him  in  r.  and  will  direct
2.4.  the  word  is  gone  out  of  my  mouth  in  r.

48.  1.  mention  the  God  of  Israel,  but  not  in  r.

54. 14.  in  r.  shalt  thou  be  established
63.  1.  1  that  speak  in  r.  mighty  to  save
Jer.  4.  2.  thou  shalt  swear,  the  Lord  liveth,  in  r.
Has.  2.  iy.  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  inr.

10.  12.  sow  to  yourselves  inr.  reap  in  mercy
if  i  o®\8’  }  will  be  their  God  in  truth  and  in  r.
■AJnl.  3.  3.  mat  they  may  offer  an  ottering  in  r.

Acts  17.  31.  he  will  judge  the  world  in  r.

Rom.  y.  28.  he  will  finish  and  cut  it  short  in  r.

Lph.  4.  24.  which  after  God  is  created  in  r.

2  / ini.  3.  16.  scripture  is  for  instruction  in  r.

Lev.  iy.  11.  and  m  r.  he  doth  judge  and  make  war

„  RIGHTEOUSNESS.

y en.  30. 33.  so  my  r.  answer  for  me  in  time  to  come
yf"-  9.4.  saying,  for  my  r.  l  ord  hath  brought  me
*  dam.  22.  21.  the  Lord  rewarded  me  according  to
my  r.  and  cleanness  of  hands,  25.  Fs.  18.  20  ^24.
Jon  q.  20.  yea,  return  again,  my  r.  is  in  it
G .  6.  my  r,  l  hold  fast,  and  will  not  let  it  go
35.  2.  that  thou  saidst,7«y  r.  is  more  than  God’s
Rsal.  4.  1.  hear  me  when  1  call,  O  God  of  my  r.

(.8.  judge  me,  O  Lord,  according  to  my  r.

45.  t  2".  let  them  be  glad  that  favour  my  r.

thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  r.

40.  13.  I  bring  near  my  r.  ||  51. 5.  my  r.  is  near
51.  0.  and  my  r.  shall  not  be  abolished
8.  but  my  r.  shall  be  for  ever,  and  my  salvation

50.  1.  salvat.  is  near  to  come,  my  r.  to  be  revealed
rfiil,  3.  9.  may  be  found,  not  having  mine  own  r

Thy  .RIGHTEOUSNESS.

9.  5.  nor  for  thy  r.  or  uprightness,  6.

•  ™  6.  make  the  habitation  of  thy  r.  prosperous

35. 8.  and  thy  r.  may  profit  the  son  of  man
Rsal.  5.  8.  lead  me,  0  Lord,  in  thy  r.  because
31.  1.  in  thee  I  trust,  deliver  me  in  thy  r.  71.  2.

35.  24.  judge  me,  O  Lord,  according  to  thy  r.
o28Vand  m>  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  r.  71.  24.

30.  6.  thy  r.  is  like  the  great  mountains
W.  O  continue  thy  r.  to  the  upright  in  heart
37.  0.  he  shall  bring  forth  thy  r.  as  the  light
40.  10.  I  have  not  hid  thy  r.  within  my  heart

51.  14.  and  ray  tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of  thy  r.
oy.  27.  and  let  them  not  come  into  thyr.

7L  15.  my  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy  r.  all  day

16.  1  will  make  mention  of  thy  r.  of  thine  only
]9.  thy  r.  O  God,  is  very  high,  who  is  like  to  thee
72.  1.  and  give  thy  r.  unto  the  king’s  son
88.  12.  thy  r.  be  known  in  land  of  forgetfulness
8y.  16^  and  in  thy  r.  shall  they  be  exalted
119.  +7..  "lien  1  have  learned  judgments  of  thyr
40.  quicken  me  in  thy  r.  )|  123.  for  word  of  thy  r.
i  iq  ’ f  ■  r:.1? an.  yerlast.  right,  thy  law  is  the  truth
14.4.  1.  in  taithlulness  answerme,  and  in  thy  r

11.  tor  thy  r  sake  bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble
1  45.  i .  and  they  shal  I  sing  ot  thy  r.

48.  18.  then  had  thy  r.  been  as  waves  of  the  sea
5<  •  lx-  1  will  declare  thy  r.  and  thy  works
ott.  8.  thy  r .  shall  go  before  thee,  glory  of  Lord
03.  x.  and  the  Gentiles  shall  see  thy  r.  and  kin^s
Dun.  9.  16.  O  Lord,  according  to  all  thy  r.
RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Jndg.  5.  +  11.  they  shall  rehearse  r.  of  the  T  ord
1571/71.  12.  +  7  -  that  1  may  reason  of  the  r.  of  Lord
Isa.  33.  +  15.  he  that  walketh  in  r.  and  speaketh
4o.  1 24.  in  the  Lord  is  all  r.  and  strength
64.  6.  and  all  our  r.  is  as  filthy  rags
•)q  i o'  ^  20.  when  righteous  turneth  from  his  r.

33.  *3.  all  hisr.  shall  not  be  remembered
Dan.  9.  18.  not  for  our  r.  but  for  thy  great  mercies
RICH  1LY.

,en-  27-  36.  Esau  said,  is  not  he  r.  named  Jacob  ?

Riike  , .  43.  he  said  to  him,  thou  hast  r.  judged
20.  21.  master,  we  know  that  thou  teaehest  r.

2  hm.  2.  15.  r.  dividing  the  word  of  truth

„  RIGOUR.

Rzod.  1.  13.  made  Israel  to  serve  with  r.  14.

Let.  25.  43.  thou  shalt  not  rule  with  r,  46,  53
r,  ■  ■  •  R>NG.

Ihe  antiquity  of  rings  is  known  from  Scripture:
Afiraham  s  servant  gave  an  ear-ring  to  Rebekah,

Lew.  24.  22.  After  the  victory  that  the  Israelites
obtained  over  the  Midianites,  they  offered  to  the
yord  the  rings  and  bracelets  that  they  had  taken
from  the  enemy ,  N  um.  31.  53.  It  was  a  mark  of
government  and  authority,  and  teas  used  chiefly  to
seal  patents  or  public  orders ;  thus  when  Pharaoh
committed  the  government  of  all  Egypt  to  Joseph,

,  t0°*  bis  nng  from  his  finger,  and  gave  it  to
Joseph,  as  a  token  of  that  authority  with  which  he
nvested  him,  and  which  he  intended  he  should  ex¬
ercise  over  all  his  people.  In  like  manner  did  Aha-
suerus  to  his  favourite  Ilaman,  and  to  Mordecai,
u/w  succeeded  Ilaman  in  his  dignity .  Esth.  3.  10


R  1  S


Tf  hen  Jacob  arrived  at  the  land  of  Canaan,  at  his
Z  .nU  /  ,  Mesopotamia,  he  gave  orders  to  his

«  ‘  P  t  t.nt0Jlt*  custody  all  the  strange  gods

"Inch  were  in  their  hand,  and  all  their  ear¬
rings  which  were  in  their  ears,  Gen.  35.  4.  'This
seems  to  insinuate,  and  other  writers  expressly
affiim,  that  those  strange  gods  were  superstitious
or  magical  figures,  engraven  upon  their  rings
their  bracelets,  and  the  pendants  in  their  ears'
Ur  else,  according  to  others,  that  these  rings  and

and  “  “■*  s

Feroj  W  IV  yhari5oh, t00k  <)ff  his  r.  from  his  hand
L.r< 6  4.  b'laids  be  coupled  unto  one  r.  36.  nQ
Lsth.  3.  10.  king  Ahasuerus  took  his  r.  from  his  hand
12.  and  sealed  with  the  king  s  r.  8  8  10
8.  2.  the  king  took  off  his  r.  gave  it' to’  Mordecai

Lf  t?  o5o22V  tather  sald>  Put  a  r.  on  his  hand
Jam.  2.  2.  if  there  come  in  a  man  with  a  gold  r

y,  _  RINGLEADER.

Acts  *,4.  5.  and  a  r.  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes
ri  j  _  KINGS,

^l0Ll  s*la^  cast  four  r.  of  gold  for  it
14.  put  staves  into  the  r.  15.  |  27.  7.  |  37 #  5

I  38  7

26.  29.  and  make  their  r.  of  gold,  °8.  23  26  27  I*
27  4  , i  _  30 .  4-1  36.  34.  1  37.  3,  13.  |  39.16,  19,  20.

o«  oo  *UU  S1ia  n‘uak?  Vpon  net  i°lir  brazen  r.
at8’  '8’,th.e>’  shall  bind  the  breastplate  by  the  r.
Num.  31. 50.  prey  gotten  of  jewels,  bracelets,  and  r.

V  6;  ,w lre  han"lngs  fastened  to  silver  /•.  pillars
iV  ‘h  o,14’  h|s  hands  are  as  gold  r.  set  with  beryl
i.ia.  3.  .I  wiH  take  away  the  r.  and  nose  jewels
L~ek.  1.  18.  their  r  s<»  high  that  they  were  dreadful,
their  r.  were  full  of  eyes  round  about  them  four
RING-STRAKED.
i5'  renJ°y,ed  he  -0ats  ^at  were  r.-straked
31  8.  if  he  said,  the  r.-straked  shall  be  thy  hire
10.  rains  were  r.-straked^ speckled,  and  grisled,  12.

Let).  6.  28.  the  brasen  pot  be  both  scoured  and  r.
lo.  11.  and  hath  not  r.  his  hands  in  water
12.  every  vessel  of  wood  shall  be  r.  in  water
;  on  x  .  RIO  1 ,  Substantive.
lpa:  9.  stay  yourselves,  wonder,  take  your  r.

ht.  1.  6.  children  not  accused  of  r.  or  unruly
J  fet.  4.  4.  that  you  ruryiot  to  the  same  excess  of  r.

2  Pet.  2.  13.  as  they  that  count  it  pleasure  to  r
u  RIOTING.

Rom.  13. 13.  walk  not  in  r.  and  drunkenness
RIOTOUS.

oo01-  T3,  1°’  b-e  not  amongst  eaters  of  ttesh
ri  1  i  r’,e,  „  1S  a  comPamon  of  r.  men  shameth
Luke  lo.  13.  there  wasted  his  substance  with  r.  living

ct  Tf  ’  •  K- 1 P  •

x  KmgsQ.  12.  thou  wilt/-,  up tlieir  women  with  child
RIPE.

pTn't  4oo  1Sdtlie  clA,Ster,s  brou"ht  f°rth  r.  grapes
Pxod.  22.  29.  to  otter  the  hrstot  thy  r.  fruits

13.  20  was  the  time  of  the  first  r.  grapes

rl8’  if  nwhat3?ev,er  fi!'st  r ■  in  the  land  he  thine
Jet .  x4.  one  basket  had  good  figs,  even  like  the  figs
r,  „  .„  fhat  are  first/-.  Hus.  9.  10.  Nah.  3.  12.
'L°.e.  13.  put  in  sickle,  tor  the  harvest  is  r.

/w  Vi  ^  ™y  s?ul  desired  the  first  r.  fruit
\  Go-  1’.+ H’nWlle?-the  fr,Lut  >3  r.  he  puts  in  sickle
butin  understanding  be  of /.  age
’  i4*Y15-.uirnf  t0  reaP’  bor  harvest  of  earth  is  r.
lo.  teatner  the  clusters,  for  grapes  are  fully  r
RIPENING.  *

Isa.  18.  5.  and  the  sour  grape  is  r.  in  the  flower
„  „.  ,  RIPPED.

~  Kings  15.  16.  all  the  women  with  child  her.  up
llos.  13. 16.  their  women  with  child  shall  be  r.  up
Amos  1.  lj.  because  they  have  r.  up  the  women
O-  C  r  ,  ™  RISE.

..tgnifies,  W  To  get  up  from  one's  seat,  or  from
bed,  Gen.  19.  2.  Mark  lo.  49.  [2]  To  proceed  or
come  from,  Num.  24.  17.  [3]  To  be  advanced  to
Honour  or  authority,  Prov.  28.  12  141  To  be

Tov,%d  ^  ^^l  Eccl.  jo.  4.  [5]  To  shine,  Mat.

5.  45.  [6]  l o  rebel,  2  Sam.  18.  32.  [7]  To  stir
or  awake  out  of  a  spiritual  sloth  and  security  to  a

Gen.  I9el%tame’  Cant‘  3’  2’  [8]  To  go  forth'

tv  if  h?  r •  a?ain  and  walk  abroad  on  staff

nZ'  ft*  V  am  aiuSt  ep',re  3ha11  out  ob  Israel
Gck/  3.3.  il  snnte  them  that  r.  that  they  r.  not  again

Jh!l"  If’oV  S  lal1  r-  and  go  through  the  land
JQ  Vih1'  4Vel?  ,he;y  s,ald’  r ■ thou’  and  fall  on  us
I  O33'  XL1  f-,ear  •>  ’  alK*  Set  upon  the  city

2x.  13.  that  he  should  r.  to  lie  in  wait
924.  V  a"(i  3uffer,e<1  thfin  not  to  r.  against  Saul
~ir To  V2ii  2L  when  child  was  dead,  thou  didst  r.
PxLrT'io  1  lat  T'  a=a?nst  thee  be  as  Absalom  is
d  , 0 *  1 2 •  upon  my  right  hand  r.  the  youth
rsaL  18. 38.  wounded  them,  they  were  not  able  to  r.

V  f?  war  should  r .  ag.  me,  will  be  confident
i  in  tbey  .are  east  down,  shall  not  be  able  to  r.

In’  m  ^  Jn,^ni*ht  •’  WI  1  to  give  thanks  to  thee
140.  10  into  deep  pits,  that  they  r.  not  up  again
Prov  V.  22.  for  their  calamity  shall  r.  suddenly
A8’  2-  when  the  wicked  r.  a  man  is  hidden,  28.

Cant  3.  2.  I  will  r.  now  and  go  about  the  citv

2d"  on’  prepar<i  sjaughter,  that  they  do  not  r.

V  e  earth  shall  tali  and  not  /.  again
x6.  14.  they  are  deceased,  they  shall  not r.

33.  10.  now  will  [  r.  saith  the  Lord
4.4.  17.  they  shall  lie  down  togeth.  they  shall  not  r.

5h’  in’rtVnV.  t0,usue  that  shell  r  thou  shall  cond.

58.  10.  then  shall  thy  light?*,  in  obscurity

D^udfInk  5’e.,spne,  tail  and  r.  no  more
51.  61.  Babylon  shall  not  r.  from  evii,  j  will  bring
.1/z/tM  5.  2.  the  virgin  of  Israel  shall  no  more  r.  °

7:  9 ■  *  will  r.  against  the  house  of  Jeroboam
Mat  5.  45.  he  maketh  sun  to  r.  on  evil  and  good
20. 19.  crucify  him,  and  third  day  he  shall  r.  again
Mark  9.  31  I  10.  .34.  Luke  18.  33.  |  24.  7.

~4\  7-  f°r  nation  shall  /-.  against  nation,  and  king¬
dom  against  kingdom,  Mark  13.  8.  Luke  21.  10
11.  many  talse  prophets  shall  r.  Mark  13.  22


'6-  d.6.  r.  let  us  he  going,  behold,  he  is  at  nana

tii  ’  VV  aile‘  tbl.ee  da^  1  ,wl11  r-  again,  Mark 8.  31.

?nd  should  sleep,  and  r.  night  and  day

10.  49.  be  ot  good  comfort,  /-.  he  calleth  thee
l2- 23.  in  the  resurrection,  when  they  shall  r.  25

26.  and  as  touching  the  dead,  that  they  r.

Luke  11.  7.  trouble  me  not,  I  cannot  /-.  and  give
8.  though  he  will  not  r.  because  he  is  his  friend
nn'  .I’  ^hen  ye  see  a  cloud  /-.  out  of  the  west
22.  46.  he  said  to  them,  why  sleep  ye  ?  r.  and  nrav
24.  46.  it  behoved  Christ  to  sutler  and  to  r.  front
John  5.  8.  Jesus  saith,  r.  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk
W  -,esus  saith-  thy  brother  shall  r.  again
24.  1  know  he  shall  /-.  ||  2o.  9.  that  he  must  r.  again
oTii0’.13-  came  a  vo>ce,  r.  Peter,  kill  and  eat
oo  u  r%  anc^  stand  upon  thy  feet

should  he  the  first  that  should  r.  from  the  dead
Roifl.  15.  12.  he  that  shall  r.  to  reign  over  Gentile*

}  I°-  16.  if  so  be  the  dead  r.  not,  16,  29,  32.

rri-?'  4’  16.  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  r.  first
Den.  7.  11.  what  need  that  another  priest  should  r.
Lev.  11.  1.  r.  and  measure  the  temple  of  God
n  RISE  up.

sba,*.;  -  up  early  and  goon  your  wav?
?•  '  ™  not  displease,  that  1  cannot  r.  up

Rfod-S.  20.  r.  up  and  stand  before  Pharaoh,  9.  13.
/:•  31j  r,rd  get  you  forth  from  my  people
Lev.  19.  32.  thou  shalt  i.up  before  the  hoary  head
2«*2n%35’  r-  up’  L°rd,  let  enemies  be  scattered
™  T  ‘I  men  come  to  call  thee  up,  r.  up  and  go
ot  ,r- ,?/p>  Lala-k,  and  hear,  thou  son  ot  Zippoi
24.  behold,  the  people  shall  /-.  up  as  a  lion  ^
Dent.  2.  13.  now,  r.  up,  said  I,  and  get  over  brook
f-7-  Yf  tip,  and  pass  over  the  river  Arnon
iy.  11.  if  a  man  /-.  up  against  his  neighbour
m16  w'toess  shall  not  r.  up  against  a  man
oWt  ‘  . se  wRoess  /-.  up  against  any  man
on  ooH’u  Lord  W1*1  cause  thme  enemies  that  r.  up
6?^  generation  that  shall  r.  up  after  you
tV  -V11?  People  will  r.  up,  and  go  a  whoring
3x  38.  their  gods,  let  them  r.  up  and  help  you

J*}'  o’o7Qoheli  ye  shiiH  /-.  up  from  the  ambush
Judg.  20.  38.  should  make  a  great  flame  r.  up,  40.

l\Lbmo  2i«  10’  whereiore  r  up  early  in  morning
Tkbn’m’  anj  lbeY  sald>  let  US  r.  up  and  build
■p^  7Pq"?’  and  tbfc  earth  shall  r.  up  against  him
sjil.3.  1.  many  are  they  that  r.  up  against  me

,<V  40  TiTyLlx  tr,0ITI  tbose  lb,at  r-  up  against  them
i8-  i'tle5!  me  above  those  that  r.  up  against  me
3o.  11.  false  wi tn.  did  r.  up,  they  laid  to  my  charge

41.  8.  now  that  lie  iieth,  he  shall  r.  up  no  more
t4.’  i  'Je,-W1  1  tread  them  under  that  r.  up  ag.  us
74' t  TetJd  me  from  them  that  r.  up  against  mt
74.  x3.  the  tumult  of  those  that  r.  up  against  thee
ol’  it  d?sire.<?f  the  wicked  that  r.  up  against  mt

]6-.who  will  r.  up  for  me  ag.  the  evil-doers  '

1V0  01  lt„ls.vain.  for  you  to  r.  up  early,  to  sit  up  late

Prnr,  Vi  'iVi  'i  tbose  tbat  T-  vp  ae:anisi  thee  ?

Fed' m*  I8if  chll.dffn  ,r-  tip,  and  call  her  blessed
To.  T  4f  ,,the  spmit  of  the  ruler  r.  up  ag.  thee
lx.  4.  he  shall  /-.  up  at  the  voice  of  the  bird
-ant.  2.  10.  my  beloved  said  to  me,  /-.  up,  my  love
14' 00  4t'  "-ne  unto  tbe,P  that  r.  up  in  the  morning
00  27’  r\up  against  them,  saith  the  Lord

x8.  21.  the  Lord  shall  /-.  up  as  in  mount  Perazim
t'  Hi  r',o^\ye  women  at  ease,  hear  my  voice
o7’,  should  r.  up  every  man  in  his  tent
47.  2.  behold,  waters  /-.  up  out  of  the  north
49.  14.  gather  against  her,  and  r.  up  to  battle
ol.  1.  against  them  that  r.  up  against  me,  a  wind
Lam.  1.  14.  from  whom  I  am  not  able  to  r.  up
Amos  8.  8.  it  shall  /-.  up  wholly  as  a  flood,  9.  5.

•Vye?  mey  shall  tall,  and  never  r.  up  again
Goad.  L  let  us  r.  up  against  Edom  in  battle
La ! '  !•  9-  affliction  shall  not  r.  up  the  second  time
nab.  x.  7  shall  they  not  r.  up  suddenly  that  bite
Aeph.  3.  8.  until  the  day  that  l  r.  up  to  the  prev

mT*'  in'  m’  his.h,and  r-  tip  against  his  neighbour
Mat.  10.  21.  children  shall  r.  up  against  their  oa
rents,  and  cause  them  to  be  put  to  death
Mark  13.  12.

12.  41.  the  men  of  Nineveh  shall  r.  up,  Luke  11  32

42.  queen  ot  the  south  shall  r.  up,  Luke  11.  31.

TT  xr,3’  an,d  1  Satan  r.  up  against  himself
rl4’z  4r  nnup\  lo,’  be>at  betray eth  me  is  at  hand
Lukes.  23.  whether  is  easier  to  say,  r.  vp  and  wa.tc
0.  8.  fie  said,  r.  up  and  stand  forth  in  the  midst

Acts  3.  6.  in  the  name  of  Jesus  r.  up  and  walk
t\ev.  13.  1.  1  saw  a  beast  r.  vp  out  of  the  sea
^  RISEN.

rh  Vn  23-.d'e  su,n  was  r.  when  Lot  entered  Zoai
Lxod.  2x.  3.  it  sun  be  r.  on  him,  blood  shall  be  shed
rT’n  in  4,  ye  are  T‘  up  in  your  fathers’ stead
Judg.  9.  18.  ye  are  r.  up  against  my  father’s  house
ixict/i  z,  15.  and  when  she  was  r .  up  to  glean
1  6am.  55.  59.  yet  a  man  is  ;*.  to  pursue  thee
-  6am.  14.  7.  behold,  the  whole  family  is  r.  up

1  Kings  8.  50.  I  am  r.  up  in  room  of  David,  5  Chr.

2  Kings  6.  15.  the  servant  of  the  man  of  God  wi dr'
"nsA71'  i13’  dle  servant  of  Solomon  is  r.  up

n '•  ,4-  when  .lehoram  was  r.  up  to  the  kingdom
Rsal.  20.  8.  but  we  are  r.  and  stand  upright
~7.  12.  for  talse  witnesses  are  r.  up  against  me
54.  3.  for  strangers  are  r.  up  against  me
86.  14.  O  God,  the  proud  are  r.  against  me
"*•  60.  1.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  /-.  upon  thee
Lfffk.  7.11.  violence  is  r.  into  a  rod  of  wickedness
47.  5.  tor  the  waters  were  r.  waters  to  sv. im  in
The.  2.  8.  even  ot  late  my  people  is  r.  up  as  enemy
f“*L  11-  11.  there  hath  not  /-.  a  greater  than  John
14.  2.  Herod  said,  this  is  John  the  Baptist,  he  is  r.

‘r<.,,m,th?  dead>  Mark  6.  14,  16.  Luke  y.  7.

IJ-  9.  until  the  Son  of  man  be  /-.  again,  Mark  9.  9.

26.  32.  after  I  am  r.  I  will  go  before,  Mark  14.  28.

27.  64  his  disciples  steal  him  away  and  say  lie  is  r.

28.  6.  he  is  not  here,  he  is  r.  as  he  said,  Mark  16. 6.

Mark  16.  9.  now  when  Jesus  was  r.  early  the  first

14.  which  had  seen  him  after  he  was  r.  John  21. 14
Ill  IP* tllat  a  ^reat  prophet  is  r.  among  us
9.  8.  that  one  ot  the  old  prophets  was  ?*.  19.

p  2  403


Ill  V


RO  A


R  O  13


Luke  1 3.55. when  once  the  master  of  the  house  is  r.up

24.  34.  the  Lord  is  r.  indeed,  and  hath  appeared
John  2.  22.  when  therefore  he  was  r.  from  the  (lead
Acts  IT.  3.  that  Christ  must  needs  have  r.  again
Rom. 8.  34. Christ  that  died,  yea  rather  that  is  r. again

1  Cor.  15.  13.  if  no  resurrect  ion,  then  is  Christ  not  r .

14.  if  Christ  be  not  r.  ||  20.  but  now  is  Christ  r.

Col.  2.  12.  in  baptism  ye  are  also  r.  with  him

3.  1.  if  ye  be  r.  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  above
Jam.  1.  11.  for  the  sun  is  no  sooner  r.  with  heat
RISEST.

Deut.  6.  7. thou  shalt  talk  of  them  when  thou  r.  11.19.

RISEl'H.  .

Deut.  22.  26.  as  when  a  man  r.  against  Ins  neighbour
Josh.  6.26.  cursed  thatr.  up  and  buildeth  Jericho

2  Sam.  23.  4.  shall  be  as  the  light  when  the  sun  r.
job  9.  7.  which  comm andeth  the  sun  and  itr.  not

14.  12.  so  man  liethdown,  and  r.  not
24  22.  he  r.  up  and  no  man  is  sure  of  life

27.  7.  he  that  r.  up  against  me,  as  the  unrighteous
3l!  14.  what  then  shall  I  do  when  God  r.  up  ?

Prov.  24.  16.  a  just  man  falle  h.  and  r.  up  again
31.  15.  she  r.  also  while  it  is  yet  night,  giveth  meat
Isa.  47.  11  thou  shalt  not  know  from  whence  it  r.
jer.  46.  8.  Egypt  r.  up  like  a  flood  and  his  waters
Mic.  7. 6.  the  daughter  r.  up  against  her  mother
John  13.  4.  Jesus  r.  from  supper,  and  girded  himself
R 1  SI  N G,  Substantive.

Lev.  13.  2.  if  in  skin  of  his  flesh  a  r.  or  bright  spot
10.  the  priest  shall  see  if  the  r .  lie  white,  19,  43

28.  if  the  spot  stay,  it  is  a  r.  of  the  burning
14.  56.  this  is  the  law  for  a  r.  and  for  a  scab
Neh.  4.  21.  heid  spears  from  the  r.  of  the  morning
Prov.  30.  31.  a  king,  against  whom  there  is  no  r.

Isa.  60.  3.  and  kings  to  the  brightness  of  thy  r.

Mark  9. 10.  what  the  r.  from  the  dead  should  mean
Luke  2.  ‘34.  this  child  is  set  for  the  fail  and  r.  of  many
Snn-W  I  SI  N  G.

Num.  2.  3.  on  the  east  side  toward  the  r.of  the.nm
21.  11.  before  Moab,  toward  sun-r.  34. 15.  Dent.  4.

41, 47.  Josh.  12.1.  I  13.5.  I  19-12,27,34
Psal.  50. 1.  called  the  earth  from  the  r.  of  the  sun
113.  3.  from  r.  of  sun,  Lord's  name  is  to  be  praised
Isa.  41.  25.  from  r.  of  sun  shall  he  call  on  my  name
45.’  6.  that  they  may  know  from  the  r.  of  the  sun
59.  19.  and  fear  his  glory  from  the  r.  of  the  sun
Mai.  1.  11.  from  r.of  sun  my  name  shall  be  great
Mark  16.  2.  came  to  the  sepulchre  at  r.  of  the  sun
Luke  1.  t  78.  the  sun-r.  from  on  high  visited  us
RISING.

2  Chron.  36.  15.  sent  by  his  messengers  r.  betimes
Job  16.  8.  my  leanness  r.  in  me  beareth  witness
24.  5.  as  wild  asses  go  forth,  r.  be, times  for  a  prey
14.  murderer  r.  with  the  light  killeth  the  poor
Prov.  27.  14.  he  that  blesseth  his  friend,  r.  early
Jer.  7.  13.  I  spake  unto  you,  r.  up  early ,  and  speak¬
ing,  but  ye  heard  not,  25.  3.  |  35.  14.

25.  1  sent  my  servants  the  prophets  to  you  r.  up
early,  25.4.  I  26.5.  I  29-  19-  I  .35.  15.  I  44.  4.
11.7,  r.  early,  and  protesting,  say .  obey  my  voice
32.  33.  though  1  taught  them,  r.  up  early,  teaching
I, am.  3.  63.  sitting  down  and  r.  up,  1  am  their  music
Mark  1. 35.  in  the  morning,  r.  before  day,  he  prayed
RUES.

Hum.  9.  3.  keep  it  according  to  all  the  r.  of  it
Acts  6.  +  14.  this  Jesus  shall' change  the  r.

Heb.  9. 1 10.  which  stood  in  washings  and  carnal  r.
RIVER

Is  a  great  stream  of  fresh  water  flowing  in  a  channel
from  a  source  or  spring  into  the  sea,  Exod.  2.

5.  It  is  used  to  denote  great  plenty  of  any  thing.
Job  29.  6.  The  rock  poured  me  out  rivers  of
oil,  that  is,  great  plenty  and  abundance  of  oil.
Psal.  36.  8.  Thou  shalt  make  them  drink  of  the
river  of  thy  pleasures.  Thou  shah  make  them
partake  of  that  abundant  pleasure,  delight,  and
satisfaction,  which  thou  not  only  enjoyest  thyself,
but  bestowest  on  thy  people :  And  river  may  note
the  constancy  and  perpetuity  of  these  pleasures,  as
well  as  their  plenty.  And  in  John  7-  38.  lie
that  believeth  on  me,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow
rivers  of  living  water  ;  that  is,  He  shall  he  en¬
dued  with  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  a
plentiful  measure,  which  shall  not  only  refresh  him¬
self,  but  shall  break  forth,  and  be  communicated  to
others  also  for  their  refreshing.  And  of  Belie-
moth  it  is  said.  Job  40.  23.  that  he  drinketh  up
a  river,  that  is,  a  great  quantity  of  water,  by
an  hyperbole.  Thou  waterest  the  earth  with  the
river  of  God,  says  the  Psalmist,  that  is,  with
plentiful  showers  of  rain  from  the  clouds,  Psal.
65.  9.  And  in  Psal.  46.  4.  There  is  a  river,
the  streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of
Got!  ;  that  is.  The  gracious  presence  oj  God.  and
the  blessings  flowing  from  thence,  shall  make  Zion,
or  the  church  of  God,  glad.

Gen.  31.  21.  Jacob  rose  up,  and  passed  over  the  r.
36.  37.  Saul  of  Rehoboth  by  the  r.  1  Chron.  1.  48.
41.  1.  Pharaoh  dreamed,  behold,  lie  stood  by  the  r
Exod.  1.  22.  every  son  ye  shall  cast  into  the  r.

2.  5.  daughter  of  Pharaoh  came  to  wash  at  the  r.

4.  9-  the  water  of  the  r.  shall  become  blood

7.  18.  the  fish  in  the  r.  shall  die,  and  r.  stink

8.  3.  the  r.  shall  bring  forth  frogs  abundantly

9.  that  they  may7  remain  in  the  r.  only,  1 1.

Deut.  2.  24.  take  your  journey,  pass  over  the  r

3.  16.  I  gave  from  Gilead  even  to  the  r.  Arnon
Josh.  13.  9.  the  city  in  the  midst  of  r.  2  Sam.  24.  5.
Judg.  4.  7.  I  will  draw7  to  the  r.  Kishon,  Sisera

5.  21.  r.  Kishon  that  ancient  r.  swept  them  aw7ay
2  Sam.  17. 13.  we  will  draw  that  city  into  the  r.

1  Kings  4.  21.  Solomon  reigned  over  from  the  r.
Ezra  4.  10.  the  rest  that  are  on  this  side  the  r.

16.  thou  shalt  have  no  portion  on  this  side  the  r.
5.  3.  cameTatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  r.

8.  15.  I  gathered  them  to  r.that  runneth  to  Ahava
Job  40.  23.  behold  he  drinketh  up  r.  and  hasteth  not
Psal.  36.8.  make  them  drink  ot  r.  of  thy  pleasured
46.  4.  a  r.  the  streams  shall  make  glad  city  of  God
65.  9.  thou  enrichest  it  with  the  r.  of  God
72.  8.  have  dominion  from  the  r.  to  ends  of  earth
80.  11.  she  sent  out  her  branches  unto  the  r.

404


Psal.  105.  41.  the  waters  ran  in  dry  places  like  a  r
Isa.  8.  7.  bringeth  upon  them  the  waters  of  the  r
11.’  15.  he  shall  shake  his  hand  over  the  r.

19.  5.  and  the  r.  shall  be  wasted  and  dried  up
23.  3.  the  harvest  of  the  r.  is  her  revenue
10.  pass  through  thy  land  as  a  r.  O  daughter
27.  12.  Lord  shall  beat  off  from  channel  of  the  r.

48!  18.  then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  r.  O  daughter
66.  12.  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a  r.

Jer.  2. 18.  to  drink  the  waters  of  the  r.

17. 8.  and  that  spreadeth  out  her  roots  by  the  r.

Lam.  2.  18.  let  tears  run  down  like  r.  day  and  night
Ezek.  29.  3.  which  hath  said,  my  r.  is  my  own,  9.

47.  5.  it  was  r.  that  I  could  not  pass  over

9.  every  thing  shall  live  whither  the  r.  cometh
Amos  6. 14.  afflict,  you  to  the  r.  of  the  wilderness
Mic. I.  12.  he  shall  come  from  the  fortress  to  the  r.
Zech.  9. 10.  his  dominion  from  r.  to  ends  ot  earth

10.  11.  all  the  deeps  of  the  r.  shall  dry  up
Mark  1.5.  and  were  baptized  in  the  r.  ot  Jordan
Acts  16.  13.  on  the  sabbath  we.  went  by  a  r.  side
Rev.  22.  1.  he  shewed  me  a  purer,  ot  water  of  life

2.  on'either  side  of  the  r.  was  the  tree  of  life
See  Hank,  Brink,  Beyond,  Chebar,  Eu¬
phrates.  tu  VERS.

Exod.  7.  19.  stretch  out  thine  hand  on  the  r.  8.  5.

Lee.  11.9.  whatsoever  bath  fins  in  the  r.  ye  may  eat
10  all  that  have  not  fins  in  the  r.  ye  may  not  eat
Deut.  10.  7.  to  lothath,  a  land  of  r.  of  waters
2  Kings  5  12.  are  not  the  r.  of  Damascus  better
19.  24.  1  have  dried  up  all  the  r.  Isa.  37  .  25.

Job  20.  17.  ye  shall  not  seethe  r.  of  honey
28.  10.  he  cutteth  out  the  r.  among  the  rocks

29  6.  when  the  rock  poured  me  out  r.  of  oil
Psal.  1.  3.  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  r.  ot  w-ater
74.  15.  thou  driedstup  mighty  r.

78. 16.  he  caused  waters  to  run  down  like  r.

44.  had  turned  theirr.  into  blood,  and  their  floods
89.  25.  I  will  set  his  right  hand  in  the  r.

107.  33.  he  tnrneth  r.  into  a  wilderness
119.  136.  r.of  waters  run  down  mine  eyes
137.  1 .  bv  the  r.  of  Babylon  there  we  sat  and  wept
Prov.  5.  16.  and  r.  of  waters  in  the  streets
21.  1.  in  the  hand  of  the  T.ord,  as  r.  of  waters
Eccl.  1.  7.  all  r.  run  into  the  sea,  yet  it  is  not  full
Cant.  5.  12.  as  the  eves  of  doves  by  the  r.of  waters
Isa.  7.  18.  the  Lord  shall  hiss  for  the  fly  in  the  r.

18.  2.  a  nation,  whose  land  r.  have  spoiled,  7.

19.  6.  and  they  shall  turn  the  r.  far  away

30  25  andoneverv  high  hill  r.  and  streams

32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  as  r.  of  water  in  a  dry  place
33.21.  the  Lord  will  be  to  us  a  place  ot  broad  r.

41. 18.  I  will  open  r.  in  high  places  and  fountains
42!  15.  I  will  make  the  r.  islands  and  dry  up

43.  2.  passest  thro’  the  r.  they  shall  not  overt!,  thee
19.  and  1  will  make  r.  in  the  desert.  20.

44.  27.  to  the  deep, be  dry,  and  will  dry  upthy  r.

47.  2.  uncover  the  thigh,  pass  over  the  r.

50.  2.  1  maker,  a  wilderness,  their  fish  stinketh

Jer.  31.  9.  1  will  cause  them  to  walk  by  the  r.

)6.7.  whose  waters  are  moved  as  the  r.  8.

Lam.  3.48.  mine  eve  runneth  down  with  r.  of  waters
Ezek.  6.  3.  thus  sa’itli  the  Lord  to  the  hills  anil  r.

°9  3  the  great  dragon  that  lieth  in  midst  of  his  r.

V  1  will  cause  fish  of  thy  r.  to  stick  to  thy  scales,

I  will  bring  thee  up  out  of  midst  of  thy  r.

5.  I  will  leave  thee,  and  all  the  fish  of  thy  r.

10.  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  and  against  thy  r.

30.  12-  I  will  make  the  r.  dry,  and  sell  the  land

31  4  the  deep  set  him  up  on  high  with  her  r.

12.  his  boughs  are  broken  by  the  r.  of  the  land

32.  2.  thou  earnest  forth  with  thy  r.  and  troubledst

6. ’  and  the  r.  shall  he  full  of  thee
14.  then  will  I  cause  their  r.  to  run  like  oil

34.  13.  1  will  feed  them  on  mountains  by  the  r.
.35.8.  in  all  thy  r.  shall  they  fall  that  are  slain
36.  6.  say  to  the  hills,  to  the  r.  and  the  valleys
47.  9.  whithersoever  the  r.  shall  come,  shall  live
Joel  T.  20.  for  the  r.  of  w'aters  are  dried  up
’  .3.  18.  all  the  r.  of  Judah  shall  flow  with  waters
Mic.  6.7.  be  pleased  with  ten  thousands  ot  r.of  oil
Nah.  1. 4.  rebuketh  the  sea,  and  drieth  up  the  r.

2.  6.  the  gates  of  the  r.  shall  be  opened

3.  8.  populous  IS  o,  that  was  situate  airionsr  the  r.
if  ah.  3.  8.  was  the  Lord  displeased  against  the  r.  ?

0.  thou  didst  cleave  the  earth  with  r.

Jo/>w7.38.  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  r.of  living  water
Rev.  8.  10.  the  star  fell  on  the  third  part  of  the  r.

16.  4.  the  third  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  the  r.
ROAD.

1  Sam.  27. 10.  whither  have  ye  made  a  r.  to-day
ROAR.

1  Chron.  16.  32.  let  the  sear.  Psal.  96.  11. 1  98.  7-
Psal.  46.  3.  we  w’ill  not  fear,  tho’  waters  thereof  r.
74.  4.  thine  enemies  r.  in  thy  congregations
104.  21.  the  young  lions  r.  after  their  prey
Isa.  5.29.  they  shall  r.  like  young  lions
.30.  in  that  day  they  shall  r.  against  them
42.  13.  L.  shall  r.  he  shall  prevail  against  enemies
59.  11.  we  r.  all  like  bears,  and  mourn  sore
Jer'.  5.  22.  tho’  they  r.  yet  can  they  not  passover
25.  .30.  the  Lord  shall  r.  from  on  high,  and  utter
.31.  .35.  divideth  the  sea,  when  the  waves  thereof  r.
50  42  their  voice  shall  r.  like  the  sea,  shall  ride  .
5l’  38*.  they  shall  r.  together  like  lions,  and  yell
55.  when  her  wavesdo  r.  likegreat  waters
Ilos.  11.  10.  he  shall  r.  like  a  lion,  when  he  shall  r.
Joel  3.  16.  the  I  ord  shall  r.  out  of  Zion,  Amos  1.  2.
Amos  3  4.  will  a  lion  r.  if  he  hath  taken  no  prey  i
ROARED.

Tudg  14.5.  a  young  lionr.  against  Samson
'Psal  38.8.  I  have  r.  by  reason  of  the  disquietness
Isa.  51.  15.  that  divided  the  sea,  whose  waves  r.
Jer.  2.  15-  the  youns  lions  r.  upon  him,  and  yelled
Imos  .3.  8.  the  lion  hath  r.  who  will  not  fear
ROARETH.

Job  37.  4.  after  it  a  voice  r.  he  thunuereth  with  voice
Jer.  6.  2.3.  their  voice  r.  like  the  sea,  they  ride
Rev.  10.  3.  the  angel  cried,  as  when  a  lion  r .

ROARING,  Substantive.

Job  4.  10.  the  r.  the  teeth  of  the  lion  are  broken


Psal  22.  1.  why  so  far  from  the  words  ot  my  r.  ?

.32.  3.  my  bones  waxed  old  thro’  my  r.  all  the  day
Prov.  19.  12.  the  king’s  wrath  is  as  the  r.  of  a  lion
20.  2.  the  fear  of  a  king  is  as  the  r.  of  a  lion
Isa.  5. 29.  their  r.  shall  be  like  a  lion,  they  shall  roaj
30.  they  shall  roar  like  the  r.  of  the  sea
Ezek  19.7.  land  was  desolate  by  the  noise  of  his  r
Zech.  11 .  3.  a  voice  of  the  r.  of  young  lions
ROARING,  Adjective.

Psal.  22.  13.  they  gaped  upon  me  as  a  r.  lion
Prov.  28.  15.  as  a  r.  lion,  so  is  a  wicked  ruler
Isa.  31.  4.  as  the  young  lion  r.  on  his  prey
Ezek.  22.  25.  there  is  a  conspiracy  like  a  r.  lion
Zeph.  .3.  3.  her  princes  within  her  are  r.  lions
Luke  21.  25.  distress,  the  sea  and  the  waves  r.

1  Pet.  5.  8.  the  devil,  as  a  r.  lion,  walketh  about
ROARINGS.

Job  3.  24  my  r.  are  poured  out  like  the  waters
ROAST,  ED.

Exod.  12. 8.  shall  eat  in  that  night  flesh  r.  with  fire
9.  eat  not  of  it  raw,  but  r.  with  fire,  Deut.  16. 7.

1  Sam.  2.  15.  give  flesh  tor.  for  the  priest

2  Chron.  .35.  13.  they  r.  the  passover  with  fire
Isa.  44.  16.  he  roasteth  r.  is  satisfied,  he  warmeth

19.  yea,  also,  1  have  r.  flesh,  and  eaten  it
Jer.  29.  22.  whom  the  king  ot  Babylon  r.  in  fire
ROASTETH.

Prov  12.  27.  the  slothful  man  r.  not  that  he  took
ROB.

Lev.  19.  13.  thou  shalt  not  r.  thy  neighbour

26.  22.  beasts,  which  shall  r.  you  ot  your  children

1  Sam.  2.3.  1.  and  they  r.  the  threshing  floors
Prov.  22.  22.  r.  not  the  poor,  because  he  is  poor
Isa.  10.  2.  and  that  they  may  r.  the  fatherless

17.  14.  and  this  is  the  lot  of  them  that  r.  us
Ezek.  .39.  10.  spoil  and  r.  those  that  robbed  them
Mai.  3. 8.  will  a  man  r.  God  ?  yet  ye  have  robbed  me

ROBBED.

Judg.  9.  25.  and  they  r.  all  that  came  by  them

2  Sam.  17.  8.  they  be  chafed  in  minds,  as  a  bearr.
Psal.  1 19.  61.  the  bands  of  the  wicked  have  r.  me
Prov.  17.12.  let  a  bear  r.  of  her  whelps  meet  a  man
Isa.  10.  13.  and  I  have  r.  their  treasures

42.  22.  but  this  is  a  people  r.  and  spoiled
Jer.  50.  37.  a  sword  on  her  treasures,  they  shall  be  1
Ezek.  33.  15.  if  the  wicked  give  again  that  he  had  r.
39.  10.  and  they  shall  rob  those  that  r.  them
Mai.  3.  8. ye  haver,  me,  wherein  have  wer.  thee  l
9.  ye  are  cursed  with  a  curse,  for  ye  have  r.  me
2  Cor.  11.8.  1  r.  other  churches,  taking  wages
ROBBER.

Job.  5.5.  and  the  r.  swalloweth  up  their  substance

18.  9.  and  the  r.  shall  prevail  against  him
Prov.  23.  +28.  she  also  lieth  in  wait  as  a  r.

Ezek.  18. 10.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  is  a  r.

John  10.  1.  the  same  is  a  thief  and  a  r.

18  40.  they  cried,  not  this  man,  now  Barabbas
ROBBERS.  [was  a  r.

Job  12.  6.  the  tabernacles  of  r.  prosper
Isa.  42.24.  and  who  gave  Israel  to  the  r.

Jer.  7. 11.  is  this  house  become  a  den  of  r.f  .
Ezek.  7.22.  forther.  shall  enter  into  it,  anddefileit
Dan., 11. 14.  the  r.  of  thy  people  shall  exalt  thems.
Ilos.  6.  9.  as  troops  of  r.  wait  for  a  man,  so  priests
7.  1.  and  the  troop  of  r.  spoileth  without
Chad.  5.  if  r.  by  night,  woilld  they  not  have  stolen
John  10.  8.  all  that  came  before  me  are  r.

Acts  19.  37.  these  men  are  not  r.  of  churches
2  Cor.  11.  26.  in  perils  of  waters,  in  perils  ot  r.
ROBBERY.

Psal.  62.  10.  and  become  not  vain  in  r.

Prov.  21.7.  the  r.of  the  wicked  shall  destroy  them
Isa.  61.8.  I  hate  r.  for  burnt  offering
Ezek.  22.  29.  have  exercised  r.  and  vexed  the  poor
Amos  3.  10.  who  store  up  r.  in  their  palaces
Nah.  .3.  1.  the  bloody  city  is  full  ot  lies  and  r.

Phil.  2. 6.  who  thought  it  no  r.  to  be  equal  with  G.
ROBBETH.

Prov  28.  24.  whoso  r.  his  father  or  his  mother
ROBE.

God  gives  orders  to  Moses  to  make  the  robe  of  the
ephod,  Exod.  28.  31.  In  Hebrew  it  is  called
Meguil :  it  was  a  long  garment  worn  next  under
the  ephod,  which  was  girded  about  the  high  priest's
body  with  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod.  Our
Satiour  says,  Beware  of  the  Scribes,  who  desire
to  walk  in  long  robes,  Luke  20.  46.  The  Scribes
wore  those  garments  in  token  of  greater  gravity
than  others :  Christ  condemns  not  the  garb,  but
their  affectation,  ambition,  vain  glory,  and  seem¬
ing  holiness,  whereby  they  deceived  the  people.  I  be
best  robe  is  the  righteousness  oj  Christ  imputed  to
believers  for  their  justification,  I  ,uke  15.  22.  Hea¬
venly  glory  is  likewise  set  forth  by  white  robes,
Rev.  6.  11.  White  robes  were  given  them,  speak¬
ing  of  the  martyrs :  their  innocency  was  cleared,
and  they  made  perfectly  happy.

Exod.  28.  4.  they  shall  make  an  ephod  and  a  r.

31.  thou  shalt  make  the  r.  of  the  ephod  of  blue
.34.  a  golden  bell  on  the  hem  of  the  r.  39.  25,  26.

29.  5.  put  upon  Aaron  the  coat  and  r.  Lev.  8.  7-
1  Sam.  18.  4.  Jonathan  stripped  himself  ot  lusr.

24.  4.  David  cut  off  the  skirt  of  Saul’s  r.  .

11.  see  the  skirt  of  thy  r.  in  my  hand,  for  m  that
l  cut  off  the  skirt  of  thy  r.  and  killed  thee  not

1  Chron.  15.27.  David  was  clothed  with  at.

Job  1.  +20.  then  Job  arose,  and  rent  his ;  r.

29.  14.  my  judgment  was  as  a  r.  and  a  diadem
Isa.  22.  21.  1  will  clothe  him  with  thy  r.

61.  10.  hath  covered  me  with  r.  of  righteousness
Jonah  3.  6.  the  king  arose  and  laid  his  r.  from  Inn
Mic.  2.  8.  'fe  pull  off  the  r.  with  the  garment
Mat.  27.  28.  they  put  on  Jesus  a  scarlet  r.

31 .  after  that,  they  took  the  r.  off  from  him
Luke  15.  22.  bring  forth  the  best  r.  and  put  it  on
23. 11 .  his  men  of  war  arrayed  him  in  a  gorgeous  r.
John  19.  2.  they  put  on  Jesus  a  purple  r.

5.  Jesus  came  forth,  wearing  the  purple  r.

ROBES.  ,  .

2  Sam.  13. 18.  with  such  r.  were  virgins  apparefiec
1  Kings  22. 10.  the  kings  having  put  on  their  r.

30.  but  put  thou  on  thy  r.  2  Chron.  18.  9.  29


ROC


ROD


EzekA 6.  10.  the  princes  shall  lay  away  their  r
Luke  20.  40.  the  Scribes  desire  to  walk  in  Ion**  r.
Rev.  6.  11.  and  white  r.  were  given  un'o  then?

7.  0.  stood  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white  r

13.  what  are  these  which  are  arrayed  in  white  r.

14.  these  are  they  which  have  washed  their  r

ROCK.

Palestine  being  a  mountainous  country ,  had  also
many  rocks,  which  made  part  of  the  strength  of
the  country  ;  for  in  times  of  danger  they  retired  to
them,  where  they  found  a  refuge  against  any  sud¬
den  irruptions  of  the  enemy.  When  the  Renia-
inites  were  overcome,  and  almost  exterminated  by
the  Israelites  oj  the  other  tribes,  they  secured  them¬
selves  in  the  rock  Rimmon,  Judg.  20.  47.  Samson
kept  garrison  in  the  rock  Etam,  judg.  15  8  When
David  was  persecuted  by  Saul,  he  often  hid  him-

si  i  V?  cavernx  made  in  «  rock:  as  at  Maon,  at
Adullam,  at  En  gedi,  where  there  was  a  case  of  a
vast  extent,  in  which  David  and  his  people  con¬
cealed  themselves,  and  Saul  entered  into  it,  and
continued  for  some  time  without  discovering  them
1  Sam.  22.  1.  |  23.  25.  |  24.  2,  4,  5.

Mention  is  made  in  Scripture  of  several  rocks,  as,
the  locks  Bozez •  and  Seneh,  which  were  between
Michmash  and  Gibeah,  and  which  Jonathan,  the
*°,n  01.  climbed  up,  when  he  went  to  attack

the  Philistines,  1  Sam.  14.4.

Sela-hamma-lekoth,  or  the  rock  of  divisions:  This
was  in the  deserts  of  Maon,  and  had  this  name
given  it,  because  Saul  was  here  obliged  to  quit  his
pursuit  after  David,  and  to  return  to  the  assist-
ance  Ins  country,  which  was  then  invaded  by  the
Philistines,  1  Sam.  23.  28.

The  rock  of  Iloreb.  From  this  rock  Moses  caused
te  uateis  to  gush  out,  to  supply  the  necessities
oj  the  people,  when  they  were  encamped  at  Re-
Plndim,  Exod.  17.  6.

The  rock  Adullam  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
city  of  the  same  name,  in  the  tribe  of  Judah  1
Sam.  22.  1.  ’

The  rock  of  the  waters  of  Meribah,  or  Strife  This
is  the  rock  where  the  faith  of  Moses  failed,  and
where  the  Scripture  makes  mention  of  his  having
hesitated  in  mind,  and  that  he  did  not  honour
at  aoc!e  °ught  before  the  children  of  Israel,

1X11771 .  “0»  10,  11.

The  name  o/  rock  is  also  given  to  God,  by  way  of
metaphor,  because  God  is  the  strength,  the  refuge ,
and  the  asylum  of  Ins  people,  as  the  rocks  were  in
those  places,  ivlnther  the  people  retired  in  case  of
an  unforeseen  attack  or  irruption  of  the  enemy
lhe  Lord  is  my  rock  and  my  fortress  ;  who  is  a
save  our  God  ?  Psal.  18.  2,  31.  Then  he  for¬
sook  God  which  made  him,  and  lightly  esteemed
the  rock  ot  his  salvation,  Deut.  32.  15
‘  yjatd  in  Deut.  32,  13.  That  the  Lord  had  set¬
tled  his  people  tn  a  high  country,  and  made  them
to  suck  honey  out  ot  the  rock,  and  oil  out,  of  the
ninty  rock.  1  hat  is,  he  brought  them  out  of  Egypt
which  was  a  flat  country,  and  subject  to  inunda¬
tions  and  placed  them  in  the  land  of  Canaan
which  was  a  mountainous  country  of  great  fer¬
tility ;  the  lulls  of  which  were  loaded  with  vines
^f  ^ite-trees,  and  of  which  the  very  rocks  were
filled,  with  swarms  of  bees,  by  which  means  the  in-
hahitants  had  abundance  of  honey.
ock  is  also  used  for  a  quarry,  and,  in  a  figura-
tue  sense,  for  the  patriarch  of  a  nation,  or  the
first  father,  who  is,  as  it  were,  the  quarry  from,
xhom  the  men  of  that  nation  have  proceeded,  Isa.

51.  1.  Rook  unto  the  rock  whence  ye  are  hewn  •
look  unto  Abraham  and  Sarah  whose  descendants
y t)u,  u  y c .

he  rock  from  which  the  Israelites  were  supplied

With  IT n t p  r  wt/*p  />  A* „  _ .j,  i  t  “


*,/  -  .  aic/e  isunvnea

has  a  anri  {ype  of  Christ,  as

the  apostle  observes,  1  Cor.  10.  4.  I  hey  drank  of
that  spiritual  rock  that  followed  them,  and  that
rock  was  Christ.  Believers  have  their  spiritual
refreshing  from  Christ,  as  the  thirsty  Israelites
lLJ',e J^leshed,  with  the  waters  that  gushed  out  of
rockJ?  th«  wilderness.  Christ  likewise  sul
ratns  and  bears  up  his  church,  built  upon  him  by
a  bo™  upon  a  rock.  Mat.  16.  18.  And
upon  this  rock  will  1  build  my  church
ock  also  signifies  unfruitful  and  stony-hearted
hearers  of  the  word,  Luke  8.  6.  A  firm,  solid
uni  immovable  foundation.  Mat.  7.  25  A  safe
lr  secure  place  of  retreat,  Num.  24.  21.  Job  24
s.  barren  and  rocky  places ,  Job  29.  6.
raw  wi,11  stand  before  thee  upon  the  r.

b'lhJh  L°f,d  sald;  tho.u  shalt  stand  upon  a  r.

.2.  that  1  will  nut  thee  in  a  cleft  of  the  r.
rim.  20.  8.  speak  to  the  r.  before  their  eyes
o.  must  we  fetcn  you  water  out  of  this  r.  ?

1  hi  ose?  ?lth  his  rod  smote  the  r.  twice
*•  o  ail(  ^'10u  puttest  thy  nest  in  a  r,

*lt:  ,  who  brought  thee  wafer  out  of  the  r.

i3  h^n1S  tle>r' hls  w°rk  is  Perfect,  a  God  of  truth
i3.  ne  made  him  suck  honey  and  oil  out  of  the  r
o.he  hghUy  esteeme'i  the  r.  of  his  salvation'

io!v«n/ti  ha  ibelat.t  leue  tll0L1  art  unmindful
i  m  •  pf  -he  r' had  sold  them,  and  I.,  had  shut
u'eir  t.  is  not  as  our  r.  our  enem.  being  judges
J  «befe  is  their  r.  in  whom  they  trusted^  "

m  V^'-2°ctake  an<l  la>’ them  on  this  r.  he  did  so
rose  hre  out  of  the  r.  and  consumed  Mesh
0.  and  build  an  altar  to  the  Lord  on  this  r.

I  ib  m  °re.b°n  ther.  Oreb  and  Zeeb  they  slew
'•  J9.  ivianoah  offered  it  on  a  r.  to  the  I  ord
Samson  dwelt  in  the  top  of  the  r.  Edam
o  o  "enjamites  turned  to  the  r.  of  Himmon
'««.2.  2.  neither  is  there  any  r.  like  our  God
•  J.  a  sharp  r.  on  one  side,  sharp  r.  on  other  side
,u  av,<i,raJn,e  down  into  a  r.  and  abode
,  de>’  ca  ?d  it  the  r.  of  divisions
?Z‘P  " 1(?.  Rizpah  spread  sackcloth  on  the  r.

,V  n®, said.  Lord  is  my  r.  P.sal.  18.  2.  I  9°  15
W  I ,i’0dk  °- my  r- in  him  will  1  trust,  my  shield
f  o'1'1 ho.  >s.  a  r-  save  our  God  ?  P.sal.  IB.  31.
an  »v.°ir.‘  ^ssed  be  my  /.  Psal.  18.46.

exalted  be  the  God  ot  the  r.  of  my  salvation


2  Sam.  23.  3.  the  God  of  Isr.  said,  the  r  of  Isr  snake

t'  !J'  An’aziah  took  the  r.  by  war

I  rIPP"  o\'  i o'  caP,ams  went  to  the  r.  to  David

VfA  o '  Ik'  Ihn088!1  ‘ leM?  do"’n  from  ,,ie  <op  of  the  r.
Belt.  9.  15.  thou  broughtest  water  for  them  out  of

T  .  the  r.  for  their  thirst,  Psal.  78  16  I  ink  41
Job  14.  18  the  r  is  removed  out  of  his  pface  '  1 '

io  oj  fhdfoa  he  r'  be  removed  out  of  his  place  :
o?‘  o4;.that  the?  we»e  graven  in  the  r.  for  ever
^4.  8.  they  embrace  (he  r.  for  want  of  a  shelter
on'  le  Puttcth  forth  his  hand  upon  the  r
29.  6.  and  the  r.  poured  out  rivers  of  oil
oo  1:itirrlf  wben  wild  goats  of  the  r.  bring  forth  ?
p'n  dwelleth  on  the  r.  on  the  crag  of  the  r.

07  Vhjti14.'.0  .Lord’  my  r-  and  my  Redeemer
JJ .  5.  he  shall  set  me  up  upon  a  r.  40  o

O  Knt.utl,ee  wil1  1  tTy-  O  Lord,  niy  V.
3'LbOn10U  ? y  strong  r.  for  an  house  of  defence
J'i  t  n?  art  'ny  r-  and  my  fortress,  71.  3.

4..  9. 1  will  say  to  G.  my  r.  why  hast  forgotten  me
no'  o‘  r  a<i  t0- tbe  r-  that  is  higher  than  I

tT'  ?'3Gndon  Vs  mV*  6'  11  7'  ofmy  strength
II*  1 1',  b%  th,°n  to  me  for  a  r.  of  habitation  b

on  k  uij1Sl  the  r- of  my  heart,  and  my  portion
10  d’  'eusmo,te  file  r.  tlie  waters  gushed
they  remembered  that  God  was  their  r.

«o  on  Wltl‘  boney  out  of  the  r.  have  1  satisfied  thee
Ok’  s?'yatlpn  II  94.  22.  r.  of  my  refuge

i  u  J.oyful  noise  to  the  r.  of  our  salvation

A  .  ■ *  8t; 'vb'c  ‘  turned  the  r.  into  a  standing  water
L rov:  the  way  of  a  serpent  upon  a  r.

2.-  14‘  tmy.dpvf,.  that  art  in  the  clefts  of  the  r.
{P*  en^er  ipto  the  r.  and  hide  thee  in  the  dust
4;.  or  a  r- pf  offence  to  both  houses  of  Israel
10.  26.  according  to  the  slaughter  at  the  r.  of  Oreb
oo'  in'  n,°t  mindful  of  the  r.  ot  thy  strength
oF  i  a'  ‘.bat  §raveth  an  habitation  for  himself  inar
an  ton  in  ,the  Lord  Jehovah  is  ther.  of  ages

30.  +  9.  when  one  goeth  to  come  to  the  r.  of  Israel

31.  t  9.  and  his  r  shall  pass  away  for  tear

4o‘  Vi  ainifJP  S-,ai  t  ,e  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  r.

42.  11.  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  r.  sin<>-

1ooi8'iyea’  the!e  is nor.  1  know  not  any

48. 21.  he  caused  waters  to  flow  out  of  r.  for  them

51.  1 .  look  unto  the  r.  whence  ye  are  hewn

13‘  s'  In t  | tpade .them  faces  harder  than  ar.

13.  4  go,  hide  the  girdle  in  a  hole  of  the  r
18. 14.  leave  the  snow  which  cometh  from  the  r.

21.  13. 1  am  against  thee,  O  inhabitant  of  the  r.
23*29.  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  r.  in  pieces

In'  'Z' leave  c,ltles’ and  dwell  in  the  r.  like  the  dove
49.  16.  thou  that  chvellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  r
Lze/c.  24.  , .  she  set  it  upon  the  top  of  a  r
J-  f  nave  set  her  blood  upon  the  top  of  a  r.

-wO.  4.  I  will  make  her  like  the  top  ot  a  r.  14
/  w  °f  h'  sball  horses  run  upon  the  r.  ?

Ubad.  3.  thou  that  dwellestin  the  clefts  of  the  r
Aiaaht'  -  o]2'  °  tho,u.  bast  established  them  ’
ok  /nr  it  a  n\an  W  ,K;h  built  his  house  upon  a  r.

*5.  font  whs  founded  upon  a  r.  Luke  6.  48
16.  18.  and  upon  this  r.  ]  will  build  my  cliurch
-1.  60.  and  Joseph  laid  it  in  his  own  new  tomb
r  ,  n  b'ctl  he  had  hewn  out  in  the  r.  Mark  1 5  46
Luke  8.  some  fell  upon  a  r.  ||  13.  they  on  ther
Bom.  9.  33  as  it  is  written,  behold,  I  lay  in  SJon  a
i  stumbling  stone,  and  r.  of  offence,  1  Pet.  2.8
1  Cor.  10.  4.  for  they  drank  of  that  spiritual  r.  that
followed ^em^  and  that  r.  was  Christ

Num.  23  9.  for  from  the  top  of  the  r.  I  see  him

1odaZ' c13'  P-  the?  tlle  P.eojP'e  hid  themselves  in  r.

2L  2.  Saul  went  to  seek  David  upon  the  r.

r  r  1-  a  strong  wind  brake  in  pieces  ther

Job  be  cutteth  out  rivers  among  the  r.

30.  6. _to  d  well  in  the  caves  of  the  earth,  and  in  r.

inJ'so'  C  ave  tle  r '  ,n  tlle  wilderness
104.  18.  and  the  r.  are  a  refuge  for  the  conies
Prof.  30.  26.  yet  make  they  their  houses  in  the  r.

Isa.  2.  19.  they  shall  go  into  the  holes  of  the  r
21.  info  clefts  of  the  r.  and  tops  of  the  ragged  r
h  ^  tb?y  slmll  rest  in  the  holes  of  the  r.

33. 16.  Ins  defence  shall  he  the  munitions  of  r
5t.5.  slaying  the  children  under  the  clefts  of  the  r

Jirej  fr  29v'  it1 1  wb°'e  Clty  shall  climb  on  the  r
IT  iP*  shall  hunt  them  out  of  the  holes  of  the  r
5L  25.  I  will  roll  thee  down  from  the  r.

Lah.  1.  6.  the  r.  are  thrown  down  by  him
at »  •  £)I .  t n e  earth  did  quake,  and  the  r.  rent

fi7jkVemk  ley  S.hould  have  fallen  upon  the  r.
Rev  6.  15.  hid  themsel  ves  in  the  dens  and  in  the  r
16.  and  said  to  the  r.  fjU^on  us,  and  hide  us  from

Is  used  sometimes  for  the  branches  of  a  tree,  Gen.  30
37.  Jacob  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar,  and  of
the  hazel  and  chesnut-tree.  Sometimes  for  a  staff
or  wand,  1  Sam.  14.  27.  Jonathan  put  forth  the
end  of  the  rod  that  was  in  his  hand,  and  dipped
i  ln  o?  b”ney'c?nlb-  for  a  shepherd's  crook.

Lev  27.  32.  And  concermngthe  tithe  of  the  herd
or  of  the  flock,  even  of  \\  hatsoever  passeth  under
the  rod.  Or  for  those  rods  and  chastisements
which  God  makes  use  of  to  correct  men.  2  Sam  7
14.-'f  be  commit  iniquity,  1  will  chasten  him
with  the  rod  of  men.  Job  9.  34.  Let  him  take  his
rod  away  from  me.  The  mighty  power  of  the
JVIessiah  is  sometimes  represented  by  a  rod  of  iron.

/  sal.  2  9.  lhou  shalt  break  them  with  a  rod  of
iron.  Rev.  27.  lie  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod
ot  iron.  Hod  is  put  for  a  young  sprout  or  branch
and  to  point  out  the  miraculous  birth  of  the  Mes¬
siah,  who  was  to  proceed  from  a  virgin  mother
Jsa.  11  1.  I  here  shall  come  forth  a  iWoutofthe
stem  ot  Jesse,  and  a  branch  shall  grow  out  of  his
roots.  t  signifies  sometimes  a  tribe,  or  people.
Psal.  74.  2.  Kemember  the  rod  of  thine  inherit¬
ance  which  thou  hast  redeemed.
lhe  gospel  published  by  Christ  himself,  or  by  his
apostles  and  ministers,  being  accompanied  by  his
■Spirit,  is  called  the  rod  of  his  strength,  or  his
strong  and  powerful  rod,  whereby  he  did  his  great
exploits ,  and  established  his  church  in  the  world
Psal.  110.  2.  It  is  also  taken  for  the  rod  of


RO  L

of  discipline,  or  ecclesiastical  censures,  1  Cor.  4
f/  bha11  1  come  unto  you  with  a  rod ?  And  for
those  means  and  instruments  which  God  makes

of  tttprt°\aLcari  °Je!\hu  People,  Psal.

and  fhy  staff,  they  comfort  me.
l  he  t  od  of  the  wicked  is  their  power  and  autho¬
rity,  Psal.  125.  3.  M oab  is  called  a  stron-  staff
and  a  beautiful  rod,  Jer.  48.  17.  7  hey  'were  a

people  that  had  been  a  rod  against  others,  or  had
ruled  over  so  many  others  ;  the  rod  and  staff  being
.e  ensigns  of  power  and  government,  as  well  as-
instruments  for  punishing  offenders.

it SL4'  ,cau3ht  V’-  and  11  bee.  a  r.  in  bis  hand
nil  Tilou  shalt  take  this  r.  in  thine  hand

20.  Moses  took  the  r.  of  God  in  his  hand,  17.  9.
'•9.  thou  shalt  say  to  Aaron,  take  thy  r.  19.
ortui-ti?  cast,d°wn  every  man  his  r.
oT°on  H  ted  up  tlie/-  and  smote  the  waters,  14. 16.
P-  20-  if  a  man  smite  his  servant  with  a  r.

Lev.  27  32.  whatsoever  passeth  under  the  r

Ao ' ‘•f-'VAnte  lh?u  e,Yery  man’s  name  on  his  r.
8.  the  r.  of  Aaron  for  the  house  of  Levi  budded
20.  11.  with  his  r.  he  smote  the  rock  twice

o  W-7  i!7'id0pnthan  put  forth  the  end  of  the  r.

~r  in'll  .  -  f  wdl  chasten  him  with  the  r  of  inpn
fob  9.  34.  let  him  take  his  r.  away  from  me
P'  p is  the  r.  of  God  upon  them
Poi°  A  \j  9'  t  l0u  ,sh,alt  break  them  with  a  r.  of  iron
74'  o'  r'  a(nd  stH^t  they  comfort  me
on’  2ireTmember  the  r, of  thine  inheritance

.l  i1  \lsIt  their  transgression  with  a  r
110.  2.  the  Lord  shall  send  the  r.  of  thy  strength
pf  'V',0,f  wicked  shall  not  rest  on  tL  rffious
13 Vo±°f  J;  a/' 1S  f°r  the  back  of  fools,  26"  3
3-  f*.  ^  that  spareth  his  r  hateth  his  son

lo  «•  4hfkm0uth,  of  ‘be  foolish  is  a  r.  of  pride
2i78,'uand  thre  r-  of  his  anger  shall  fail  f
°fu°utctiP  shall  drive  it  away
o'«‘  II*  f)l0u  shalt  beat  him  with  the  r.  14
t'  A 5\tnAe.  r ■  a,nd  reproof  give  wisdom

in'  k'  n  a'°U  hast  broken  the  r.  of  his  oppressor

10.  5.  O  A  jsynan,  the  r.  of  mineangei-

15.  as  if  the  r.  should  shake  itself  against  them
on4'ob1  smite  with  a  r.  and  lift  his  staff
if'  1  WaS  °P  t  ,e  sea’  so  shall  he  lift  it  up

11.  1.  shall  come  forth  a  r.  out  ot  the  stem  of  lesse
ii‘  shfil'  smite  the  earth  with  the  r.  of  his  niomh
00’  29’  fbe  r  ot  him  that  smote  thee  is  broken
3n‘  Vs'  mndAtle  cummin  is  beaten  out  with  a  r
30.  31.  the  Assyrian  be  beat,  which  smote  with  a  r

in'  if,  L  uald’  1  S,ese- a  r-  of  an  almond-tree  ‘
]«'  Asrae.f  tbe  T-  °f  his  inheritance,  51.  19
48.  17.  how  is  the  beautiful  r.  broken '

Lam.  3. 1.  have  seen  affliction  by  the  r.  of  his  wrath

E\\'  xi olen  Ap®  r'  bath  bfessomed,  pride  hath  budd
io1 '14  •  S  nsen  up  into  a  r.  of  wickedness

19’  t4h4.7bLe  I?  lone  out  0  a  r%  °f  her  branches  so
that  she  hath  no  strong  r.  to  be  a  sceptre  to  rule

in  -V  cause  you  to  pass  under  the  r.  and  brim-

21.  10.  it  contemneth  the  r.  ot  my  son  13  0

Mic.  5.  1.  they  shall  smite  Judge  of  Israel  with  a  r
t>.  9.  bear  ye  the  r.  and  who  hath  appointed  it

1.  14.  feed  thy  people  with  thy  r.  the*  flock

i°Cor  \'  ow'han  <?ffiCer  S!ruck  Jesus  with  a  r.
klfh'n'V'  s,ba  -  c°me  to  you  with  a  r.  or  in  love  J

I, '  wherein  was  Aaron's  r.  that  budded

711  V'thLf  Ia  rU'e  them  wi,h  a  r-  °f  iron,  19  15

II.  1.  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  to  a  r.

12.  5.  who  was  to  ruff  agnations  with  a  r.  of  iron

9™'  24-  6i- T'chekahand  her  damsels  r.  on  camels
'VifPsh  had  fbmty  sons  that  r.  on  thirty  col  s
/I-  14.  he  had  thirty  nephews  that  r.  on  ass  ml u

1  Sam  25.  20.  it  was  so  Abigail  r.  on  the  fss  42
30.  17.  none  escaped,  save  400  which  r.  on  camel's

2irT‘a  k'  i29'  CVery  man  r-  on  his  mule  and  fled
lo'  Absalom  r.  upon  a  mule,  went  under  the  oak

22.  11.  he  r.  on  a  cherub,  and  did  fly  Psal  m  m

old  prophet  r.  on  the  as's  ’  J°'
18,45.  and  A  hah  r.  and  went  to  Jezreel

2  A: mgs  9.16.  Jehu  r.  in  a  chariot  and  went  to  Tezreel
Jo.  remember  when  1  and  thou  r.  together
pef,‘  2-  12.  nor  any  beast,  save  beast  that  I  r.  upon
Esth.  8.  14.  the  posts  thatr^  on  the  mules  went  out

GeZ'  A0,  37-  Jacob  took  r.  of  green  poplar
41.  that  they  might  conceive  among  the  r
Ef°d.  (.  1-.  Aaron  s  rod  swallowed  up  their  r
the  .Princes  gave  him  twelve  r
„7-,and  laid  up  the  r.  before  the  I  .ord

,A19'  I1-  she  had  strong  r.  for  the  sceptres
-P 2 •  her  strong  r.  were  broken  and  withered
Mat.  ^6.  +  67.  «nd  others  smote  him  with  r.

2  C or.  1 1. 25.  thrice  was  I  beaten  with  r
.  r,,  ROE,  S.

1  Lhron.  12.  8.  as  swift  as  the  r.  on  the  mountains
Prtm  5.  I9.  let  her  be  as  the  hind  and  ffleasant  r
6.  5.  dehver  thyself  as  a  r.  from  the  hunter
n*™2,  L'  1  charge  you  hy  the  r.  and  hinds,  3.  5
9-  my  beloved  is  like  a  r.  or  a  young  hart

t}J '  V3  r  14 n; A c^e  n Vk d  ’  be  fll0L!  like  r.  or  hart,  8. 14.

Isa.  13.  14.  it  shall  be  as  the  chased  r.  as  a  sheen

■See  Young.

„  0  Wild  ROE.

~  Sam.  2. 18.  Asabcl  was  as  Hght  of  foot  as  a  wild  r.
r.  -ROE-BUCIv,  S.

Deut.  12  15.  ye  may  eat  of  the  r.  22.  |  14.  5.  1 15  on
1  Rings  4.  23.  an  hundred  sheep,  besides  harts  and  r
,,  „  ROLL,  Verb.

Gen.  29.  8.  we  cannot,  till  they  r.  away  the  stonP
43.  t  18.  brought,  that  he  may  r.  himself  on  us
Josli.  10.  18.  and  Joshua  said,  r.  great  stones

I4;  33-r-  a  great  stone  unto  me  this  day
Ps.  37.  +  5  r.  <hy  way  upon  the  Lord,  trust  iniiim
and  he  shall  bring  to  pass  Prm-  in  +  -j
Jer.  51.  25.  and  I  will  r.  thee  down’ from  the  rocks
Amos  5.  t  ~4.  let  judgment  r.  down  as  waters

Mark’s  n°3  m  h  phirai!’  r'  ‘byself  in  the  dust
Mark  16.  3.  who  shall  r  us  away  stone  from  sepu.

'ere  was  b,und  at  Achmetha  a  r.

Isa.  8.  1.  tale  thee  a  great  r.  and  write  in  it

40.5


ROU


RO  S


ROU


Jer  36.  2.  take  thee  a  r.  of  a  book,  write  therein
6.  go  ami  read  in  the  r.  II  2b.  take  another  r.
qrt  *,n  an  (he  r.  was  consumed  in  the  nre
09  thussaith  the  Lord,  thou  hast  burnt  tins  r.

E-ek.  2.  9.  an  hand  was  sent  unto  me,  and  10,  a  r.

3  I  eat  this  r.  |l  2.  he  caused  me  to  eat  that  ; .

3.  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  r.  that  1  give  thee
Zech  5  l.then  1  looked, ami  behold, a  dying  r.

Ezra  6  1.  search  was. made  in  the  house  ot  the  r.

Gen  29.  3.  they  r.  the  stone  trom  the  well  s  nioutl
to’  that.  Jacob  went  near,  and  r.  the  stone
Josh  5  9  1  haver,  away  the  reproach  of  Egypt
lob  30  14.  in  desolation  they  r.  themselves  on  me
Rsal.  22.  +8.  lie  r.  himself  on  the  Lord  to  deli'  er  him
Isa  9  5.  with  noise,  and  garments  r.  in  blood
34.' 4  the  heavens  shall  be  r.  together,  Rev.  6.  14.

Lam  3  +  16.  he  hath  r.  me  in  ashes
Matioi.GR-  he  laid  it  in  his  own  new  tomb,  her.  a
•meat  stone  to  door  ot  the  sepulchre,  Mark  Id.  46.
aoro  the  angel  came  and  r.  back  the  stone
Mark  16.  4.  they  saw  that  the  stone  was  r.  away
Luke  24.  2.  and  they  found he  stone  r.  away

Ezek.  30.21.  not  be  bound^u p,  to  Pu*  a  T’  *°

Prov  26  27.  he  that  r.  a  stone  it  will  returnon  him
ROLLING..  .  ,

E%ra5.  18.  the  house  of  God  built  with  stones  of  r.

ROLLING.  .

Isa  17  13.  the  nations  shall  flee  like  a  r.  thing
'  ‘  HOOF.

Gen.  19.  8.  they  came  under  the  shadow  ot  my  r.

Exod.  30.  +  3.  thou  shalt  overlay  the  i.  with  gold
Dent.  22.  8.  thou  shalt  make  a  battlement  for  thy  r.
Josh.  2.  6.  but  she  brought  them  up  to  the  r.  and  hiu
with  flax  which  she  had  laid  in  order  on  ther.
Tudq.  16.  27-  on  the  r.  were  3000  men  and  women
■  Sam  11.2.  David  walked  on  the  r.  ot  the  house,
and  from  the  r.  he  saw  a  woman  washing  herselt
18.  24.  watchman  went  up  to  the  r.  over  the  gate
Meh.  8. 16.  people  made  booths  on  the  r.  of  ins  house
Ezek.  40.  13.  he  measured  the  gate  from  the  r.  ot  one
Mat.  8  8.  1  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldestcome
under  my  r.  but  speak  the  word  only, Lukel.  b.
Mark  2.  4.  they  uncovered  ther.  where  he  was
ROOF  with  mouth.

Job  29.  10.  their  tongue  cleaved  to  r.  of  their  mouth
Psal.  137.6.  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  r.  otniy  mouth
Cant.  7.  9.  the  r.  of  thy  mouth  like  the  best  wine
La7n.  4.  4.  tongue  of  chil  cleaveth  to  r.ot  his  mouth
Ezek.  3.26.  1  will  make  thy  tongue  cleave  to  r.  ot  m.
Has  8  t  1.  set  the  trumpet  to  the  r.  ot  thy  mouth
ROOFS.

Jer  19  13.  on  whose  r.  they  burnt  incense,  32.  29.

ROOM.  ,

Gen.  24. 23.  is  there  r.  in  thy  father  s  house  for  us .

25.  we  have  r.  to  lodge  in  |j  31.  r.  tor  the  camels

26.  22.  for  now  the  Lord  hath  made  t .  tor  us
Deut.  2.  t  12.  the  children  of  F.sau  dwelt  in  their  r.

2  Sam  19. 13.  if  thou  be  not  captain  in  the  r.  of  Joab
1  Kings  2.  35.  the  king  put  Benaiah  in  Joab  s  r.
and  lie  put  Zadok  the  priest  in  the  r.  ot  Abiathar
5.  l .  had  anointed  him  king  in  ther.  ot  his  father
5.  thy  son  whom  I  will  set  in  thy  r.  shall  build
8  20  1  am  risen  in  the  r.  of  David,  2  Chr. 6.  10.

19  16.  and  Elisha  shalt  thou  anoint  in  thy  r.

Psal.  31.  8.  thou  hast  set  my  feet  in  a  large  r.

80  9.  thou  preparedstr.  before  it,  it  filled  the  land
Pr  'ov.  18.  16.  a  man’s  gift  maketh  r.  for  him
Isa.  57 .  t  8.  thou  lovedst  their  bed ,  thou  providedst  r.
Mai.  3.  10.  there  shall  not  be  r.  enough  to  receive
Mat  2.  22.  Archtlaus  reigned  in  the  r.  of  Herod
Mark  2.  2.  that  there  was  no  r.  to  receive  them
14. 15.  he  will  shew  you  a  large  upper  r.L.uke  22.12.
Luke0  7  because  there  was  no  r.  tor  them  in  the  inn
12  17.  1  have  no  r.  where  to  bestow  my  goods
14*8.  bidden  to  a  wedding, sit  not  down  in  highest  r.

9  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take  the  lowest  r.

10.  when  bidden,  go  and  sit  down  in  the  lowest  r.
22!  Lord,  it  is  done,  and  yet  there  is  r.

Acts  1.  13.  went  upto  an  upper  r.  where  was  Peter
24  27  Porcius  Festus  came  into  lelix  r.

1  Cor  14  16.  how  shall  he  that  occupieth  the  r.

ROOMS.  ,  .

Gen  6.  14.  r.  shalt  thou  make  in  the  ark,  and  pitch
1  Kings  20.  24.  and  put  captains  in  their  r.

1  Chron.  4.  41 .  destroyed  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  r
Mat  °3  6  they  love  the  uppermost;-,  at  teas.s  anil
chief  seats' in  sy  nag.  Mark  12  39.  Luke  20.  4b.
Luke  14  7.  how  they  chose  out  the  chief  r.

ROOT

Is  that  part  of  a  plant  which  extends  itself  downward,
and  which  fastens  the  plant  to  the  earth.  Job  14.8.
It  is  said  of  such  as  received  the  seed  into  stony
places,  that  they  had  no  root  in  themselves,  Mat.
13.  21.  They  had  not  the  soil  of  a  sincere  heait,
solid  affections,  firm  and  fixed  resolutions,  ana
habitual  dispositions  of  grace.  It  is  taken  Jor  the
fountain,  the  cause ,  or  occasion  of  any  thing.  1  inn.
6.  10.  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  ot  all  evil
Lest  there  be  among  you  a  root  that  beareth  ga  l
and  wormwood,  Deut.  29-  18.  Lest  there  should
be  among  you  some  close  idolaters,  who  concealing
themselves  from  the  public  view,  might  secretly
infect  and  poison  others,  and  so  draw  down  upon
you  the  effects  of  God's  anger.  It  is  also  taken
for  parents  or  progenitors.  Isa.  14.29.  Out  or  the
serpent’s  root  shall  come  forth  a  cockatrice  ;
meaning  IJezekiah,  who  should  be  born  of  the
royal  family  of  David.  And  the  apostle  Paul,
speaking  of  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  ,says,  horn.

11.  16.  If  the  root  be  holy,  so  are  the  branches  ;
that  is.  If  Abraham  and  the  patriarchs,  from
whom  the  Jews  descended,  were  in  covenant  with
God,  the  body  of  the  nation  is  also  in  covenant  with
him,  and  consecrated  to  him,  and  therefore  l-od
will  not  cast  them  off  for  ever.  Christ  Jesus  is  by
a  metonomy  called  the  root  of  Jesse,  Isa.  11.  10.
And  the  root  of  David,  He v.  5.  5.  instead  oja
Branch  growing  out  of  the  root :  lie  is  Dai  id  s

406


son.  as  he  is  man,  yet  David’s  Root,  and  Lord,
as  he  is  God,  and  gave  a  being  to  him  and  his
family.  Psal.  110.  1.  '1  heir  root  shall  be  rotten¬
ness,  and  their  blossom  shall  go  up  as  dust,  Isa.

5  24.  that  is,  They  shall  be  utterly  destroyed,  both
root  and  branch,  parents  and  children,  old  and
young,  as  a  tree  that  is  rotten  at  the  root  cannot

grow  any  more.

ROOl,  Substantive.

Deut.  29.  18.  among  you  a  r.  that  beareth  gall
Judg. 6.  14.  outot  Ephraim  was  a  r.  against  Amalek
2  Kings  19.  30.  Judah  shall  again  take  r.  downward
Job  5.  3.  1  have  seen  the  foolish  taking  r.

14.  8.  though  the  r.  thereof  wax  old  in  the  earth
19  28.  seeing  the  r.ot  the  matter  is  found  in  nre
°9  19.  my  rTwas  spread  out  by  the  waters
Psal. 80. 9-  thou  didst  cause  the  vine  to  take  deep  r.
Prov.  12.  3.  r.  of  the  righteous  shall  not  be  mo\ed
1°  the'  r.  of  the  righteous  yieldeth  fruit
Da.  5. 24.  so  their  r.  shal  1  be  rottenness,  and  blossom
11  10.  there  shall  be  a  r.  of  Jesse,  horn.  15.  12.

14  29  for  out  of  the  serpent  s  r.  a  cockatrice

30.  and  I  will  kill  thy  r  with  famine
27.6.  them  that  come  if  Jacob  to  take  r.  3|.  31.
40.24.  .yea,  their  Stock  shall  not  take  r.

53.  2.  he  shall  grow  up  as  a  • .  out  of  a  dry  ground

Jer.  12.  2.  yea,  they  have  taken  r.  they  grow
Ezek.  31. 7.  for  his  r.  was  by  great  waters
Dan.  11.  7-  out  of  a  branch  ot  her  r.  shall  one  stand
Has  9. 16.  Ephraim  is  smitten,  their  r.  is  dried
Mai.  4.  1.  it  shall  leave  neither  r.  nor  branch
Mat.  3.  10.  and  now  also  the  axe  is  laid  unto  the  r.

ot  the  trees,  Luke  3.  9-
13.  6.  because  they  had  not  r.  they  withered  away ,

21.  Mark  A.  6,  17-  Luke  8.  13.
Luke  17.  6.  might  say ,  be  thou  plucked  up  by  the  r.
Rom  11  16.  if  the  r.  be  holy,  so  are  the  branches
17  with  them  partakers  of  the  r.  and  fatness
18.  thou  bearest  not  the  r.  but  the  r.  thee
1  Tim.  6.  10.  the  love  of  money  is  the  r.  of  all  evil
Ileb  12  15.  lest  any  r.  of  bitterness  trouble  you
Rev  5  5.  r. of  Dav.hath  prevailed  to  open  the  book
—  1(3  i  am  the  r.  and  offspring  of  David

ROOT.  ri.  ,

1  Kings  14.  15.  he  shall  r.  up  Israej  out  ot  Ins  land
job  31.  12.  and  would  r.  out  all  mine  increase
p,a/  52  5  and  r.  thee  out  of  the  land  of  the  living
Jer.  1.  10.  this  day  I  have  set  thee  to  r.  out
Mat  13  29.  lest  ye  r.  up  the  wheat  with  them

ROOFED.

Deut.  29.28.  the  Lord  r.  them  out  of  their  land
Job  18.  14.  confidence  shall  be  r.  outot  tabernacle

31.  8.  vea,  let  my  offspring  be  r .out
Prov.  2.  22.  the  transgressors  shall  be  r.  out  ot  it
Zeph.  2.  4.  and  F.kron  shall  be  r.  up
Mat.  15. 13.  my  Father  hath  not  planted,  shall  be  r.
Fph.  3.  17.  that  ye  being  r.  and  grounded  in  love
Col  2  7  r.  and  built  up  in  him,  and  stablished

ROOFING.

F-r<z  7  126.  whether  it  be  to  death,  or  to  r.  out
ROOTS.

2  Chron.  7 .  20.  I  will  pluck  them  up  by  the  r.

Job  8.  17.  his  r.  are  wrapped  about  the  heap

13.  +  27.  thou  settest  a  print  on  the  r.  ot  my  teet
18.  16.  his  r.  shall  be  dried  up  beneath
28.  9.  he  overturned!  the  mountains  by  the  r.

30.  4.  who  cut  up  juniper  r.  for  their  meat
36.4  30.  behold,  God  covereth  the  r.  ot  the  sea
Isa.  11.  1.  and  a  branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  r.

Per  17.  8.  that  spreadeth  out  her  r.  by  the  river
Ezek.  17.  6.  and  the  r.  thereof  were  under  him
7  this  vine  did  bend  her  r.  toward  him
9'.  shall  he  not  pull  up  the  r.  thereof  r
Dan.  4.  15.  leave  the  stump  of  his  r.  23,  26.

7  8  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked  up  by  ther.
lies.  14.  5.  he  shall  cast  fprth  his  r.  as  Lebanon
Amos  2.  9.  1  destroyed  his  r.  from  beneath
Mark  11. 20.  they  saw  fig-tree  dried  up  trom  the  r.
Jude  12.  trees  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  r.
ROPES.

Judg.  16.  11.  if  they  bind  me  with  new  r.  12.
o  Sam  17  13.  then  shall  all  Isr.  bring  r.  to  that  city
1  Kings  20.  31.  let  us  put  r.  on  our  heads,  32.

Acts  27.  32.  the  soldiers  cut  off  the  r.  ot  the  boat
Robe,  see  Roar.

ROSE,  Substantive.

Cant.  2. 1. 1  am  r.  of  Sharon,  and  the  lily  of  valleys
ha.  35.  1.  the  desert  shall  blossom  as  the  r.

ROSE,  Verb.

Gen.  4.  8.  Cain  r.  up  against  Abel,  and  slew  him

19.  1.  Lot  r.  upto  meet  them,  and  bowed  himself
22!  3.  Abraham  r.  early,  and  went  to  the  place
25.  34.  Esau  did  eat,  and  r.  up,  and  went  his  way
32.  31.  the  sun  r.  upon  him  as  he  passed  Benue  1
37  .  35.  his  sons  and  daughters  r.  to  comfort  him
Exod.  10. 23.  nor  r.  any  from  his  place  for  three  days

12.  30.  Pharaoh  r.  up  in  the  night,  and  servants
15.7.  overthrown  them  that  r.  up  against  thee
33  10  and  all  the  people  r.  up  and  worshipped
hum.  25.  7.  Phinehas  r.  up  from  the  congregation
Deut.  33.  2.  the  Lord  r.  up  from  Seir  unto  them
Josh.  3.  16.  the  waters  stood  and  r.  up  on  an  heap
Judg.  6.  21.  there  r.  up  fire  out  ot  the  rock

20.  5.  the  men  of  Gibeah  r.  up  against  me
Ruth  3.  14.  she  r.  up  before  one  could  know  another
o  Sam.  22.  40.  them  that  r.  up  against  me,  hast  thou

subdued  under  me,  Psal.  18.39.

1  Kings  2.  19.  and  the  king  r.  up  to  meet  her

2  Kings  7.  5.  the  lepers  r.  in  the  twilight  to  go
2  Chron.  26.  19-  the  leprosy  r.  up  in  his  forehead

28. 15-  the  men  which  were  expressed  by  name  r.  up
Psal  124  2.  L.  who  was  on  our  side  when  men  r.  up
Cant'.  5.  5.  I  r.  up  to  open  to  m  v  beloved
Jer  26.  17.  then  r.  up  certain  ot  the  elders
/  am  3  62'.  the  lips  of  those  that  r.  up  against  me
Dan.  3.  24.  then  Nebuchadnezzar  r.  up  in  haste
a  •”*  1  f,  up  and  did  the  king’s  business
Jon'a/t  1.  3.  but  Jonah  r.  up  to  flee  to  I  arshish
Zeph.  3.  7.  thev  r.  early  anil  corrupted  their  doings
Luke  4.  29.  r.  up,  and  thrust  him  out  ot  the  city
5.28.  and  lie  left  all,  r.  up,  and  followed  him
16.  31.  not  be  persuaded  tno  one  r.  from  the  dead


Luke  22.  45.  when  he  » .  from  prayer  and  was  com*-
24.  33.  they  r.  up  the  same  hour,  and  returned
j'o/in  il.  31.  when  they  saw  Mary  that  she  r.  up
Acts  5.  17.  then  high  priest  r.  up,  and  all  with  him
36.  for  before  these  days  r.  up  1  heudas
10  41  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him  after  lie  ;

26!  30.  kingr.  up,  and  the  governor,  and  Rennie
Rom.  14.9.  to  this  end  Christ  both  died  and  r.

1  Cor.  10.7.  the  people  did  eat,  and  r.  up  to  play
15.  4.  he  was  buried  and  r.  again  the  third  day

12.  now  if  Cbr.  be  preached  that  be  r.  from  oead

2  Cor  5  15.  but  live  to  him  "bo  died  and  r.  again
1  These'.  4.  14.  if  we  believe  that  Jes.  died  and  r.  ag
Rev  19  3-  her  smoke  r.  up  tor  ever  and  ever

See  Morning.

ROSIN.  ,  J

E"ek  27. 1 17.  Judah  traded  in  thy  marketoil  andr.
ROT.

Mum.  5.  21.  when  L.  make  thy  thigh  to  r.  22.  27.
Prov.  10.  7.  but  the  name  of  the  "  lcked  shall  r.

Isa  40  20.  he  chooseth  a  tree  that  will  not  r.
ROTTEN.

Job  13.  28.  and  he,  as  a  r.  thing,  consumed)

41.  27.  he  esteemed  brass  as  r.  wood
Jer  38.  11.  so  Ebed-melech  took  old  r.  rags

12.  put  now  these  r.  rags  under  thine  arm-holes
Joel  \  17.  the  seed  isr.  under  then  clods

ROTTENNESS.  .

Prov.  12.  4.  but  she  that  maketh  ashamed,  is  as  r
14.  30.  but  envy  is  the  r.  ot  the  bones
Isa.  5-  24.  so  their  root  shall  be  as  r.  blossom  asdu:A
Hos.  5.  12.  1  will  be  to  the  house  of  Judah  as  r-
flab.  3.  16.  when  1  heard  r.  entered  into  my  ee
ROVERS.

1  Chron.  12.  21.  they  helped  David  against  the  r.
ROUGH.

Deut.  21. 4.  bring  the  heifer  to  a  r.  valley
Isa.  27.  8.  he  stayeth  his  r.  wind  in  the  day  ot  east
40.4.  and  the  r.  places  shall  be  made  plain
Jer.  51.  27.  cause  horses  to  come  as  r.  caterpillars
I  tan.  8.  21.  the  r.  goat  is  the  king  ot  Grecia
Zech.  13.  4.  neither  shall  they  wear  a  r. garment
Luke  3.  5.  and  the  r.  ways  shall  be  made  smooth
ROU  G II L^  .

Gen.  42.  7.  Joseph  spake  r.  unto  them, 30.

1  Sam.  20. 10.  what  if  thy  father  answer  thee  r.  f
1  Kings  12.13.  and  the  king  answered  the  people  r.

and  forsook  old  men’s  counsel,  2  Chr.  lo.  13.
Prov  18.23.  but  the  rich  answereth  r.

ROUND.

Lev.  19.  27.  ye  shall  not  r.  corners  of  your  heads
3  ROUND.

Gen.  19.  4.  compassed  the  house  r.  old  and  young
Exod.  16.  14.  there  lay  a  small/,  thing  on  ground
Josh.  7.  9.  the  inhabitants  shall  environ  us  r.

1  Kings  7.  2.3.  the  molten  sea  was  r.  all  about
35.  ar.  compass  U  10. 19.  top  ot  the  throne  was  r.
Psal.  22.  12.  strong  bulls  of  Baslian  have  beset  me  r
Cant.  7~  2.  thy  navel  is  like  a  r.  goblet  .

Isa.  3.  18.  the  Lord  "  ill  take  a"  ay  their  r.  tires
Ezek.  41.  t  7.  it  was  made  broader  and  wentr.
Luke  19.  43.  thine  enemies  shall  compass  thee  r.
ROUND  about-

Gen.  35.  5.  the  terror  of  God  was  on  cities  r.  aboxu
Exod.  7. 24.  digged  r.  about  the  liver  for  water
16. 13.  in  the  morning  dew  lay  r.  about  the  host
Id!  12.  thou  shalt  set  bounds  to  the  people  r.  about
Lev.  14.  41.  cause  the  house  to  be  scraped  r.  abon.  1
Mum .  1.  50.  the  Lev ites  encamp  r.  about  tabernaclj

11  2*4.  Moses  set  the  elders  r.  about  the  tabernacle
16!  34.  all  Israel,  that  were  r.  about  them  fled
22.  4.  company  shall  lick  up  all  that  are  r.  about  v
Deut.  6  14.  gods  of  the  people  r.  about  you,  13.  <.!

12  10.  when  he  giveth  rest  from  all  your  enema
r.  about,  25.  19.  Josh.  21.  44.  2  Chron.  15.  1.1

21.  2.  measure  the  cities  r.  about  him  that  is  slain
Josh.  6.  3.  and  ye  shall  go  r.  about  the  city  once
Judg.  19.  22.  men  beset  the  house  r.  about,  ,0.  5.  1
1  Sam.  23.  26.  for  Saul  compassed  David  r.  abou]
31.  y.  they  cut  off  Saul’s  head,  and  sent  into  tl
land  of  the  Philistines  r.  about,  1  Chron.  10. '
2-S<z;«.22.12.  and  he  made  darkness  pavilions  r.  a b<r
him,  and  thick  clouds  of  the  skies,  Psal.  18.  1

1  Kings  4.24.  Solomon  had  peace  on  all  sides  r.  abo.
31.  anil  his  fame  "as  in  all  nations  r.  about

18.  35.  and  the  water  ran  <r.  about  the  altar

2  Kings  6.  17-  and  chariots  ot  hi  e  r.  about  Llisna
1  Chr.  9.  27.  they  lodged  r.  about  the  house  ot  Go
Job  10.8.  thine  hands  have  fashioned  me  r.  about
'  16.  13.  his  archers  compass  me  r.  about

19.  12.  his  troops  encamp  r.  about  my  tabernaclei
22!  10.  therefore  snares  are  r.  about  thee
.37.  12.  it  is  turned  r.  about  by  his  counsels

41.  14.  his  teeth  are  terrible  r.  about
Psal.  3.  6.  that  set  themselves  against  me  r.  a  hoi

27.  6.  head  be  lifted  above  mine  enemies  r.  aboi
34.7.  angel  encampeth  r.  about  them  that  tear  hi
44!  13.  a  derision  to  them  that  are  r.  about.  *9.  ■
48.  12.  walk  about  Zion, and  go  r.  about  her
59.  6.  make  a  noise,  and  go  r.  about  the  city,  n
76.  11.  let  all  r.  about  him  bring  presents  to  mil

88.  17.  they  came  r.  about  me  daily  like  water

89.  8.  or  like  to  thy  faithfulness  r.  about  thee
97.  3.  he  burneth  up  his  enemies  r.  about  him
125.  2.  as  the  mountains  ar  er.  about  Jerusalem,
128.  3.  children  like  olive  plants  r.  abimt  thy  tai
Isa.  29.  3.  I  will  camp  against  thee  r.  about

42.  25.  and  it  hath  set  him  on  fire  r.  about
49  18  lift  up  thine  eyes  r.  about  and  beliolo,  no.

Jer.  20.  +  3.  Lord  hath  called  thy  name,  tear  r.  at»\
21.  14.  afire,  it  shall  devour  all  things  r.  about
46.  5.  for  fear  was  r.  about,  saith  the  lord

50.  29-  camp  against  Babylon  r.  about

51.  2.  in  trouble  they  shall  be  against  her  r.  abo
Ezek.  10.  12.  the  wheels  were  full  ol  eyes  r-
.34.  26.  "  ill  make  places  r.  about  my  hill  a  bless

Joel  3.  11.  gather  yourselves  together  r.  about
12.  there  will  sit  to  judge  all  the  heathen  r.  fl
Amos  3.  11.  an  adversary  even  r.  about  the  lano
Jonah  2.  5.  the  depth  closed  me  r.  about,  the  "e-
Zech.  2.  5.  1  "  ill  be  to  her  a  wall  ot  file  r.  abo.
Mat.  21.  33.  he  hedged  the  vineyard  r.  about.


RUL


RUL


1  •  65.  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  r.  about
Q  9.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  r.  about  them
pj  's  9.  3.  shined  r.  about  him  a  light  from  heaven
%om •  15-  19.  r.  about  to  Illyricum,  1  have  preached
Lev.  4.  3.  there  was  a  rainbow  r.  about  the  throne
4.  r.  about  the  throne  were  tour  and  twenty  seats
6.  tour  beasts  ||  5.  11.  angels  r.  about  the  throne
Zee  Camp.

_  HOUSE.

Gen.  49.  9.  and  as  an  old  lion  who  shall  r.  him  up
.  .  ROW,  S.

Exod.  28.  17.  set  it  in  four  r.  of  stones,  39.  10.
li  .  the  first  r.  39.  10.  ||  18.  the  second  r.  39.  11.
19.  the  third  r.  39.  12.  ||  20.  the  fourth  r.  39.  13.

c«hes,  six  on  a  r.  on  the  pure  table
7:  thou  shalt  put  pure  frankincense  on  each  r.
■_Lingso.  36.  he  built  the  inner  court  with  three  r.
f.  t.  tour  r.  of  cedar  pillars  ||  3.  fifteen  in  a  r.

4.  there  were  windows  in  three  r.  and  light

12.  the  great  court  round  about  was  with  three  r.
18.  two  r.  pomegranates,  42.  2  Chron.  4.  13.

•2  C/tr<<».  4.  3.  two  r.  of  oxen  cast  when  it  was  cast
y*ra  d-  4.  a  r.  of  new  timber,  three  r.  of  stones
cheeks  comely  with  r.  of  jewels
L~ek.  46.  ~3.  with  boiling  places  under  the  r

.  .  Rowed.

Jena/i  1  13.  the  men  r.  hard  to  bring  it  to  land
John  6.  19.  when  they  had  r.  25  or  30  f  urlongs
ROWERS.

Ezek.  27.  26.  thy  r.  fraught  thee  into  great  waters

Mark  6.  48.  he  saw  them  toiling  in  r.  wind  contrary
_  ,  ROYAL.  ^

Gen.  49.  20.  Asher  shall  yield  r.  dainties
Josh.  10.  2.  Gibeon  was  as  one  of  the  r.  cities

1  Sam.  27.  5.  for  why  should  1  dwell  in  the  r.  city  ?

2  -jam.  I1...  *.6.  Joab  tough t,  and  took  the  r .  city

1  Kings  10.  13.  Solomon  gave  leer  of  his  r.  bounty

2  Kings  11.  1.  Athaliah  the  mother  of  Ahaziah  de-

.  nu  3trT°.>'ed  a^  the  sced  r •  °  Chron.  22.  10.

1  vy  *5.  Ld.  bestowed  on  Solomon  r.  majesty
7.. they  gave  them  r.  wine  in  abundance"
11.  to  bring  \  ashti  the  queen  with  the  crown  1 .

19.  give  her  r.  estate  to  another  that  is  better
2.  16.  so  Esther  was  taken  into  his  house  r.

17.  so  that  he  set  the  crown  r.  on  her  head
.3;  bstu-er  Pld  rjr*  her  r.  apparel,  and  the  king
sat  on  his  r.  throne  111  his  r.  house  near  the  gate
6.8.  let  r.  apparel  be  brought,  and  the  crown  r.

8.  15.  Mordecai  went  in  r.  apparel  of  blue  and  white
T  Vo  -  ,3d  ,dlaliem  >n  the  hand  of  thy  God
n't  1°*  he  shall  spread  his  r.  pavilion  over  them
4,  id  7m°  establish  a  r.  statute  and  make  a  decree

Irm  V'«21;YHer?difiirr,aye<J  ,in  r •  aPparel,  sat  on
Jam  2  &  it  ye  fulfil  the  r.  law,  ye  do  well

1  let.  9.  ye  are  a  r.  priesthood,  an  holy  nation
tic  KUnBlNG,

Luke  6.  1.  and  did  eat,  r.  them  in  their  hands
.T  ,  RC  BBISH.

4.  ...  will  they  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  r.

10.  strengtli  is  decayed  and  there  is  much  r
r  .  „„  ,  RUBY,  RUBIES.

",8d  +  17 •  the  first  row  a  r.  39.  t  10.

■Job  28.  18.  price  of  wisdom  is  above  r.  Prov.  8.  11.
m  i5, ’  wJsdo™,  is  more  precious  than  r.

vO.  15.  there  is  gold,  and  a  multitude  of  r.

31.  10.  for  her  price  is  far  above  r.

Ez?k  3«7;  iV^Htes  were  more  ruddy  than  r.

Kze/c.  1 13.  the  r.  was  thy  covering
RUDDER bands.

Acts  27.  40.  and  loosest h  e^r .-b ands,  and  hoised  up

1  Sam, _16. 12.  David  was  r.  and  beautiful,  17.  42
Jant-  5. 10.  my  beloved  is  white  and  r.  chiefest
Lam.  4.  7.  her  B azarites^vere  more  r.  than  rubies

2  Cor.  11.  6.  but  though  1  be  r.  in  speech

.  RUDIMENTS.

-  4:  +  3- in  bondage  under  the  r.  of  the  world
r  in  n'y  Hlln  ye  again  to  the  beggarly  r.
on  "P'a  .  a-‘£  SP,011  3’0U  after  the  r.  of  the  world
*0.  it  dead  with  Christ  from  the  r.  of  the  world
R  U  E.

Cuke  11.  42.  for  ye  tithe  mint,  and  r.  and  herbs

T  J  a  .  ^-L^Cr .

Judg.  4.  f  18.  turned  in,  Jael  covered  him  with  a  r.

,  RUI N.

Pc /  an  2;3;  bu,t  they  were  the  r •  of  him
>  sal.  89.  40.  thou  hast  brought  his  holds  to  r.

0*  oa24,  2f‘  'L110  kP°weth  the  r.  of  them  both  ?

»0.  28.  and  a  nattering  mouth  worketh  r.

on'  1  aPd  let  th's  T-  be  under  thy  hand
-3. 13.  he  brought  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans  to  r.

P  '1 ‘too  hast  made  of  a  defenced  city,  a  r.

0*  so  ‘U’yu'iy  shall  not  be  your  r.

£,  fq"  ^hy  company  shall  fall  in  the  day  of  thy’  r.
/VV1].-  fi.13/.  shall  all  the  fowls  remain

Luke  6.49.  it  fell,  the^of  that  house  was  great

j*;*-  2L  15.  that  thi  ir  r.  may  be  multiplied
&,?■  ?i*  1“  thf  day  will  I  raise  up  his  r.

cli  15.  16.  1  W1ll  build  again  the  r.  thereof
1  q  „  r  RUINED.

pJiS:  «  Jerusalem  is  r.  and  Judah  is  fallen
in  cVi f  i3j'  anf,  tke  r-  cities  are  become  fenced
36.  shall  know  that  1  the  Lord  build  the  r.  places
,  ...  RUINOUS.

tngs  19.  25.  that  thou  shouldest  be  to  lay  waste
Isa  1-j  1  fenced  cities  into  r.  heaps.  Isa.  37.  26.

“•  U-  !•  Damascus  not  a  city,  it  shall  be  a  r.  heap
■>  .  RULE.

Kin,:  U6qfheugreute,r  lig,lt  for  the  T-  °f  the  day
csrln o  7*“i3  '  that  had  r.  over  Ahab’s  chariots
o.  /  ,  ’  J;  »ews  had  r.  over  them  that  hated  them
4m,  iV  t,4*  th*,rr-  1S  »one  through  all  the  earth
to  irfr  2‘  a  W13e  servant  shall  have  r.  over  a  son
■  s  *0'  lor.?  se[vant  to  have  r.  over  princes
?  "/  0  ue  that  hath  no  r.  over  his  own  spirit
■Sa  if,1®; yet  shall  he  have  r.  over  all  my  labour
fi,' ,  I-  43-  the  carpenter  stretcheth  out  his  r.

Cot  thine,  thou  never  barest  r.  over  them

•  15.  „4.  when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  r.


RUN


2  fJ-  according  to  the  measure  of  the  r.

15.  be  enlarged  according  to  our  r.  abundantly
T  16.  and  not  to  boast  in  another  man's  r.
d/v  «  as  many  as  walk  according  to  this  r.

3-  if3-  let  us  walk  by  the  same  r.  let  us  mind
lieb.  13.  ,.  remember  them  that  have  r.  over  you

17.  obey  them  that  have  the  r.  over  you
24.  salute  all  them  that  have  the  r.  over  you

See  Bare,  Bear.

_  RULE.

Gen.  1.  16.  God  made  two  great  lights,  the  greater
light  to  r.  the  day,  and  lesser  light  tor.  night

18.  to  r.  over  the  day,  and  over  the  night

3.  16.  and  thy  husband  shall  r.  over  thee

4.  7.  to  thee  be  his  desire,  thou  shalt  r.  over  him
Kev.  J).  43.  not  r.  over  him  with  rigour,  46.  53

8.  22.  r.  thou  over  us,  thou  and  thy  son
D  /  1  'V1i‘  not:,’  over  you,  nor  shall  my  son  r.

I  J*  28. 1 9.  r.  them,  and  lift  them  up  tor  ever
in  the  midst  ot  thine  enemies

13b.  B.  sun  to  r.  by'  day,  for  his  mercy  endur.  ever
9.  moon  and  stars  to  r.  by  night,  for  his  mercy
L’/ov.  8.  16.  by  me  princes  r.  and  nobles,  all  judges
Isa.  3.  4.  and  babes  shall  r.  over  them

II  oaSufor  my  PeoP*e*  women  r.  over  them

]4.  they  shall  r.  ov  er  their  oppressors
io  a  f16^  ki,?a  shall  r.  over  them
00  fi*?1!  r.  lhis  Pe°ple  that  is  in  Jerusalem

™  1-  and  princes  shall  r.  in  judgment
40. 10.  and  his  arm  shall  r.  for  him
-3‘  Tu10  m.ade  the  righteous  man  r.  over  kings
02.  5.  they  thatr.  over  them  make  them  to  howl
on  QO  *  she  hath  no  strong  rod  to  be  a  seep,  to  r
on  it  W  P°ured  out  will  I  r.  over  you

71  '  uiey  shall  no  more  r.  over  the  nations

■  4’  'P*  shalt  have  known  that  the  heavens  r.

qf.3>  mighty  kings  shall  stand  up,  that  shall  r.

>y.  and  he  shall  cause  them  to  r.  over  many
Joel  v.  17.  that  the  heathen  should  r.  over  them
Alic.  5.  t  4.  he  shall  r.  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord
J-  t  J4-  r.  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  Hock
6.  13.  he  shall  sit  and  r.  on  his  throne

u  tw'in'overllor  that  shall  r.  my  people  Israel
\lark -10.42.  who  are  accounted  to  r.  over  Gentiles
,  .ft  3-  16*  let  the  peace  of  God  r.  in  your  hearts
c  3,  r  a  1T*an  know  not  how  to  r.  his  house
47.  eiders  that  r.  well,  worthy  of  double  honour
Kev.  2.  2< .  r.  with  a  rod  of  iron,  12.  5.  I  19.  15
n  .  RULED.

h  us  elde3t  servant  that  r.  over  all  he  had
,  •  40.  at  thy  word  shall  all  my  people  be  r.

1  Kings  5.  16.  three  thousand  r.  over  the  people
v>Zra,  wh,°  have  r.  over  all  countries
Csal.  106.  41.  they  that  hated  them  r.  over  them
isa.  14.  6.  he  that  r.  nations  in  anger  is  persecuted
a  i  8<‘  ser>’an*s  have  r.  over  us,  none  delivereth
Lzek.  34.  4.  with  cruelty  have  ye  r.  over  them
Dan.  5.  21.  till  he  knew  that  God  r.  in  kingdom
.  RULER.

c' en.  41.  43.  Phaiaoh  made  Joseph  t.  over  all  the
10  ,  ,  la9d  °f  Egypt,  45.  8.  Psal.  105.  21.

4o.  16.  loseph  said  to  the  r.  ot  his  house,  bring
Kxod.  22. 28.  thou  shalt  not  curse  r.  of  thy  people
-Lev.  4.  22.  when  a  r.  hath  sinned  through  ignorance
Kum.  13_.  2.  every  one  a  r.  among  them
1  Sam.  25.  30.  appointed  thee  r.  over  my  people  Isr.

2  Sam.  6.  21.  |  7.  8.  1  Chron.  11.  2.  |  17.7.

^  Kam.  7.  8.  1  took  thee  ti'om  following  sheep  to  be
bover  my  people,  over  Israel,  1  Chron.  17.  7.
*•?;  J  3.  thou  r.  over  men,  ruling  in  fear  of  God
1  Kings  1  3o.  I  have  appointed  Solomon  to  be  r.

1  Chron.  5.  2.  for  of  Judah  came  the  chief  r.
oh,'  Azanahr.  of  house  of  God,  2  Chron.  31.  13.
iV  ™7l  18‘  th,ere  ska11  not  fail  thee  a  man  to  be  r.

VT  A  f!e  made  Abijah  r.  among  his  brethren
,1  ’.I-  %'  and  llananuh  the  r.  ot  the  palace
11.  11.  Seraiah  was  r.  of  the  house  of  God
if,e  J2?'  tfi,ere  Is  little  Benjamin  with  their  r.

105.  20.  even  the  r  of  the  people,  let  him  go  free
Grov.  6.  7.  the  ant  having  no  guide,  overseer,  or  r.

00  ,•  w"e9  thou  sittest  to  eat  with  a  r.  consider
on  In  S?  1S  a,wlcked  r- over  the  poor  people
39-  12.  if  a  r.  hearken  to  lies,  his  servants  wicked
-6.  many  seek  r .  favour,  but  judgment  cometh
Keel.  10.  4.  it  the  spirit  of  the  r.  rise  against  thee
.  3-  as  an  error  which  proceedeth  from  the  r.

Isa.  3.  6.  be  thou  our  r.  ||  7.  make  me  not  a  r.

16.  1.  send  ye  the  lamb  to  the  r.  of  the  land
Jer.  51.  46.  and  violence  in  the  land,  r.  against  r.

Van.  2.  10.  no  king  nor  r.  asked  such  things
38.  and  hath  made  thee  r.  over  them  all,  48.

5.  7- shall  be  third  r.  in  the  kingdom,  16.  29.
iti  ?•  ou^  I-866  shall  he  come  that  is  to  be  r.
7'k  as  creeping  things  that  have  no  r.

Mat.  9.  18.  behold,  there  caine  a  certain  r.

2f.  45.  whom  his  Lord  hath  made  r.  Luke  12.  42.

47  •  he  shall  make  him  r.  overall  his  goods
ffi'V-i  ’  thee  r.  over  many  things,  23.

Maik5.  3j.  while  he  yet  spake,  there  came  from  the
IQ  1  [ ■  M  the  synagogue’s  house,  Luke  8.  49.
KuAe  13.  14.  the  r  of  the  synagogue  answered
John2.  9.  when  the  r.  of  the  feast  had  tasted  water
3.  1.  a  man  named  Nicodemus,  ar.  of  the  Jews
\,Ctrn'  u  ’  f*  °i  lfie  temple  came  upon  them
•  •  *7.  who  made  thee  a  r.  and  a  judge  over  us  ?35
,35-  the  sanie  did  God  send  to  be  a  r.  and  deliverer
18.  17.  the  Greeks  beat  Sostbenes  the  chief  r.

23.  5.  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  r.  of  thy  people
_  RULERS.  pc

Gen.  47.  6.  then  make  them  r.  over  my  cattle
o,  A  ,18;  21.  r.  of  thousands,  r.  of  hundreds,  25.

34-  31.  Moses  called  the  r.  of  the  congregation
35.  27.  the  r.  brought  onyx-stones  to  be  set
Deut.  L  13.  and  I  will  make  them  r.  over  you
Judg %  lo.  11.  kno west  thou  not  the  Philistines  are  r.

~  8.  18.  and  David’s  sons  were  chief  r.

1  Kings  9.  22.  were  r.  of  his  chariots  and  horsemen

2  Kings  10.  1.  Jehu  wrote  to  ther.  of  Jezreel
IE  4.  Jehoiada  set  r.  over  hundreds,  19.

1  Chron.  27.  31.  all  these  were  r.  of  the  substance
2 Chron.  35.  8.  r .  of  the  house  of  God  gave  to  priests
Kzra  9.  2.  the  hand  of  the  r.  chief  in.this  trespass


Neh.  4.  16.  the  r.  were  behind  the  house  of  J  udah
,;7\  *  febuke?  Jhe  r ■  and  said,  ye  exact  usury

11.  1.  the  r.  of  the  people  that  dwelt  at  Jerusalem

12.  40.  so  stood  1 ,  and  halt  ot  the  r.  with  me
13. 11.  then  contended  1  with  the  r.  and  said

Lsth.  9.  3.  the  r.  of  the  provinces  helped  the  Jews
Psal.  2.  2.  the  r.  fake  counsel  against  the  Lord
La.  1.  10.  hear  word  ot  the  Lord,  ye  r.  of  Sodom
14.  5.  the  Lord  hath  broken  the  sceptre  of  the  r

22.  3.  all  thy  r.  are  tied  together,  they  are  bound
29.  10.  and  your  r.  the  seers  hath  he  covered
49.  7.  to  a  servant  of  r.  kings  shall  see  and  arise
Jer .  33.  26. 1  will  not  take  any  of  his  seed  to  be  r.

51.  23.  thee  will  1  break  in  pieces  captx/is  and  r.
28.  prepare  against  her  r.  |l  57.  make  drunk  her  r.
Kzek.  23.  6.  her  lovers,  which  were  captains  and  r.

23.  i  will  raise  up  those  r.  against  thee
Dan.  3.  3.  all  the  r.  were  gathered  together
7.  t  27.  and  all  r.  shall  serve  and  obey  him
4.  18.  her  r.  with  shame  do  love,  give  ye
A lark  5.  22.  cometh  one  ot  the  v.  of  the  synagogue

13.  9.  ye  shall  be  brought  before  r.  Luke  21,  12.
Luke  cLi.  13.  when  he  had  called  together  the  r.

35.  and  r.  also  with  the  people  derided  him

24.  20.  how  our  priests  and  r.  delivered  him
John!-  26.  do  the  r.  know  that  this  is  the  Christ?
48.  have  any  of  the  r.  believed  on  him  ?

12.  42.  many  among  the  chief  r.  believed  on  him
*  through  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  also  did

4.  26.  the  r.  were  gathered  against  the  Lord
43-  15.  the  r.  ot  the  synagogue  sent  to  Paul
27.  and  their  r.  because  they  knew  him  not

14.  5.  an  assault  made  of  the  Jews,  with  their  r.

16.  19.  the  damsel’s  masters  drew  them  to  the  r.

17.  8.  they  troubled  the  people  and  r.  of  the  city
Korn.  13.  3.  r.  not  a  terror  to  good  works,  but  evil
Kph.  6. 12.  we  wrestle  against  the  r.  of  the  darkness

RULES!’.

2  Chron.  20.  6.  and  r.  not  thou  over  all  kingdoms

1  sal.  89.  9.  thou  r.  the  raging  of  the  sea

„  _  RULE  1  LI.

2  . bam. ,23.  3.  he  that  r.  over  men  must  be  just
Psal.  59.  13.  let  them  know  that  God  r.  in  Jacob
66. 7.  he  ; .  by  his  power  for  ever,  his  eyes  behold
103.  19.  and  his  kingdom  r.  over  all

Prov.  16.  32.  that  r.  his  spirit  is  better  than  he  that
22.  7  •  rich  r.  over  the  poor,  and  the  borrower
■Lfcl.  8.  9.  wherein  one  man  r.  over  another  to  hurt
9.  17.  more  than  cry  of  him  that  r.  among  fools
Dan.  A.  17.  the  Most  High  r.  among  men,  25.  32.
Dos.  11  12.  but  Judah  yet  r.  with  God,  is  faithful
Mom.  12.  8.  he  that  r.  with  diligence

1  hm .  3.  4.  one  that  r.  well  his  own  house

0  RULING.

2  Sam.  23.  3.  must  be  just,  r.  in  the  fear  of  God

Jer. .22. 30.  sit.  on  throne  and  r.  any  more  in  Judah
1  Aim,  3. 12.  r.  tiieir  children  and  houses  well
_  RUMBLING.

Jer  47.  3.  at  r.  of  his  wheels,  fathers  not  look  back

RUMOUR,  S.

v.  Kings  19.  7-  and  he  shall  hear  a  r.  Isa.  37.  7.

Jer.  49.  14.  I  have  heard  a  r.  from  the  Lord
51.  46.  lest  ye  fear  for  the  r.  in  the  land,  a  r.  shall
come  one  year,  in  another  year  shall  come  a  r.
Lzek.  I .  i6.  mischief  on  mischief,  r.  shall  be  upon  r.
Gbad.  1.  we  have  heard  a  r.  from  the  Lord
Mat.  24.  6.  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  r.  of  wars
Mark  13. 7  •  when  ye  shall  hear  ot  wars  and  r. of  war?
Luke  1. 17.  this  r.  of  him  went  forth  thro’  all  Judea"

_  ,  RUMP.

Exod.  29.  22.  thou  shalt  take  of  the  ram  and  the  fat
and  the  r.  Lev.  3.  9. 1  7  -  3.  |  8. 25.  |  9. 19.

.  RUN.

1  ornnu  to  move  with  a  swift  pace,  2  Sam.  18.  19.
Die  Christian  conversation  is  called  a  race  or
running,  1  Cor.  9.  24.  So  run  that  you  may  ob¬
tain  :  that  is.  Use  such  diligence,  care ,  and  con¬
stancy  vn  your  Christian  course,  that  ye  may  ob¬
tain  the  prize  oj  eternal  glory  set  before  you.  It
is  spoken  m  allusion  to  the  custom  in  their  races
oj  hanging  up  a  crown  or  garland  at  the  goal,  and
such  as  first  laid  hold  on  it  and  took  it  down,  had
it  as  a  reward.  St.  Paul  say.s  to  the  Galatians,

^1  e  did  run  well,  who  did  liinder  you?  Gal.  5.

7.  that  is,  Ye  were  forward  formerly  in  adhering
D  the  true  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  in
Christ,  and  to  Christian  liberty,  and  you  prac¬
tised  accordingly ;  who  has  turned  you  out  of
your  way,  or  hindered  you  in  your  race,  that  you
now  expect  to  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law,
ana  submit  yourselves  to  the  yoke  of  ceremonies  j
lhe  same  apostle  compares  his  labour  and  dili¬
gence  in  the  work  of  his  ministry  to  a  race.  Phil
Z.  16.  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life,  that  I
may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  have  not
run  in  vain.  And  an  eager  pursuit  of  sinful
courses  is  also  by  the  apostle  Peter  compared  to  a
race.  1  Pet.  4.  4.  That  ye  run  not  with  them
to  the  same  excess  of  riot.

Gen.  41. 1 14.  they  made  Joseph  r.  out  of  dungeon
49.  22.  whose  branches  r.  over  the  wall
pc'  J'  wl,et;ller  his  flesh  r.  with  his  issue
^5.  if  a  woman's  issue  r.  beyond  the  time
Judg.  18.  25.  lest  angry  fellows  r.  upon  thee

1  Sam.  8.  11.  some  shall  r.  before  his  chariots
17- 17.  and  r.  to  the  camp  to  thy  brethren

20.  6.  asked  me,  that  he  might  r.  to  Beth  lehem
36.  r.  find  out  now  the  arrows  which  1  shoot

2  Sam.  15.  1.  Absalom  prepared  chariots,  horses,

,0  ,  fifty  men  t0  r-  before  him,  1  Kings  l.  5

18.  19.  let  me  now  r.  and  bear  tidings,  22.  23.

22^  30.  by  thee  1  have  r.  thro’  a  troop,  Psal.  18  °9

2  A  tngs  4.  22.  that  1  may  r.  to  the  man  of  God
26.  r.  now,  I  prav  thee,  to  meet  her,  and  say
5.  . 20.  as  the  Lord  liyeth,  1  will  r.  after  Naaman
\Chron  10.  9..eyes  of  Lord  r.  to  and  fro  thro  earth
Job  5.  +  14.  they  r.  into  darkness  in  the  day-time
Psal  19. 5.  and  rejoiceth  as  strong  man  to  r.  a  race
58. 7.  let  them  melt  as  waters,  which  r.  continually
-o  7%thLey  r-  and  Prepare  thems.  without  my  fault

18.  16.  he  caused  waters  to  r.  down  like  l  ivers
104.  10.  the  springs,  which  r.  among  the  hills

407


S  A  B


SAB


SAC


pial  119.  32.  I  will  r.  the  way  of  thy  commandtn.

136.  rivers  ot  waters  r.  down  mine  eyes_,  because
Prov.  1.  16.  for  their  feet/,  to  evil,  Isa.  59-  7.

Eccl.  1 . 7.  all  the  rivers  r.  into  the  sea,  sea  not  full
Cant.  1.  4.  draw  me,  we  will  r.  after  thee
Isa.  33. 4.  as  running  of  locusts  shall  he  r.  on  them
40."  31.  they  shall  r.  and  not  be  weary,  shall  walk
55!  5.  nations  that  knew  not  thee  shall  r.  to  thee
Jer  5.  1.  r.  ye  to  and  fro  thro’  streets  of  Jerusalem
.9.  is’,  that  your  eyes  may  r.  down  with  tears
12.  5.  if  thou  hast  r.  with  the  footmen
13  17.  mine  eyes  shall  /*.  down  with  tears,  because
the  I  ord’s  nock  is  carried  away  captive,  14.  17-
49.  3.  lament,  and  r.  to  and  fro  by  the  hedges
19.  i  will  make  him  r.  away  from  her,  50.  44.
51.31.  one  post  shall  r.  to  meet  another  .

Lam.  2.  18.  let  tears  r.  (town  like  river  day  and  night
Ezek  2*4.  16.  neither  shall  thy  tears  r.  down
30  {4  cause  their  rivers  to  r.  like  oil,  saith  Lord
Dan.  12.  4.  many  shall  r.  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge
Joel  2.  4.  and  as  horsemen,  so  shall  they  r.

7  they  shall  r.  like  mighty  men,  they  shall  climb
9  they  shall  r.  in  the  city,  shall  r.  on  the  wall
Amos  3.  +  6.  shall  trumpet  be  blown,  people  not  r.  :

5  24  but  let  judgment  r.  down  as  waters
6.’  12.’ shall  horses  r.  upon  the  rock  ?  will  one  plow
8. 12.  shall  r.  to  and  fro  to  seek  word  ot  the  . Lord
Nah.  2.  4.  they  shall  r.  like  the  lightnings  .

tlab.  2.  2.  write  vision,  that  he  may  r.  that  readetn  it
Hag  1.  9.  and  ye  r.  every  man  to  his  own  house
Zecll.  2.  4.  r.  speak  to  this  young  man,  saying

4  10.  eyes  of  the  Lord  r.  to  and  fro  thro  the  earth
Mat  28.  8.  they  did  r.  to  bring  his  disciples  word
)  Cor.  9.  24.  that  they  which  r.  in  a  race  r.  all,  but

one  receiveth  the  prize,  so  r.  that  ye  may  obtain
26. 1  therefore  so  r.  not  as  uncertainly ,  so  ti^ht  1
Gal.  2.  2.  lest  by  any  means  1  should  r.  or  had  r.  in

5  7.  ye  did  r.  well,  who  did  hinder  you  .  _

Phil.  2. 16.  that  I  may  rejoice,  1  have  not  r.  in  vain
2  Thess.  3.  +  1.  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  may  r.

Heb.  2.  +  1.  lest  at  any  time  we  should  /.out

12.  1.  let  us  r.  with  patience  the  race  before  us
1  Pet  4  4.  that  ye  r.  not  to  the  same  excess  ot  riot
RUN  NEST.

Prov  4.  12.  when  thou  r.  thou  shalt  not  stumble
RUNNETH.

Job  15.  26.  he  r.  upon  him,  even  on  his  neck
16  14.  he  breaketh  me,  he  r.  upon  me  like  a  giant
Psal.  23.  5.  thou  anointest  my  head,  my  cup  /-.over
147.  15.  his  word  r.  very  swiftly  -

Prov.  18.  10.  the  righteous  r.  into  it,  and  is  sate
Lam.  1.  16.  mine  eyes  r.  down  with  water,  3.  48.

Mat.  9.  17.  the  bottles  break,  and  the  wine  r.  out
John  20.  2.  then  she  r.  and  cometh  to  Simon  Peter
Rom  9. 16.  not  of  him  that  willeth,  norot  him  thatr.
RUNNERS.

1  Sam.  22.  i  17.  the  king  said  to  the  r.  turn  and  slay

1  Kings  14. 1 27.  committed  shields  to  the  chief  ot  r .

RUNNING.

Lev.  14.  5.  one  bird  be  killed  over  r.  water,  6.  o0.

51.  dip  them  in  water,  and  sprinkle  the  house

52.  he  shall  cleanse  the  house  with  the  r.  water
15.  2.  when  any  man  hath  a  r.  issue,  22.  4.

13.  shall  bathe  his  flesh  in  r.  water,  and  be  clean
Num.  19.  17.  for  an  unclean  person  take  r.  water

2  Sam.  18.  24.  and  behold,  a  man  r.  alone,  26.

27.  the  r.  of  the  foremost  is  like  r.  ot  Ahimaaz

2  Kings  5.  21.  when  Naatnan  saw  him  r.  after  him
2  Chron.  23.  12.  Athaliah  heard  the  people  r.

Prov.  5.  15.  and  r.  waters  out  of  thine  own  well
6.  18.  feet  that  be  swift  in  r.  to  mischief
Isa.  33.  4.  as  the  r.  to  and  fro  of  locusts  shall  he  run
Jer.  18.  +  14.  shall  the  r.  waters  be  forsaken/

Ezek.  31.  4.  with  her  rivers  r.  about  Ins  plants
Mark  9.  15.  the  people  r.  to  him  saluted  him
25.  when  Jesus  saw  the  people  r.  together
10.  17.  there  came  one  r.  and  kneeled  to  him
Luke  6.  38.  good  meas.  and  r.over  shall  men  give
Acts  27.  16.  and  r.  under  a  certain  island,  Clauda
Vev  9  9.  as  the  sound  of  chariots  r.  to  battle
RUSH.

Tob  8. 11.  can  the  r.  grow  up  without  mire  J
ha.  9-  14-  L.  will  cut  off  branch  and  r.  in  one  day
to  15  nor  any  work  which  branch  orr.  may  do
RUSH.

Tko  17  13  nations  shall  r.  like  rushing  many  waters

lia RUSHED.

Tudg.  9.  44.  Abimelech  and  company  r.  forward
°0  37  the  liers  in  wait  hasted  and  r.  upon  Gibeah
Job  1.  +  17.  the  Chaldeans  r.  upon  the  camels
Mark  3.  1 10.  they  r.  upon  Jesus  to  touch  him
Art*  IQ  oQ  they  r.  with  one  accord  into  theatre
RUSHES.

Ln  35  7  where  dragons  lav  shall  be  reeds  and  r.

'  RUSHETH.

Ter  8  6  every  one  turned,  as  horse  r.  into  battle
RUSHING.

Isa  17  12.  woe  to  multitude  and  to  r.  of  nations,
that  make  a  r.  like  the  r.  of  many  waters
13.  nations  shall  Fush  like  the  r.  of  many  waters
Jer.  3.  at  r.  of  chariots  fathers  shall  not  look
Ezek.  3.  12.  1  heard  a  voice  of  a  great  r.  13.

Acts  2  2.  there  came  a  sound  as  of  r.  mighty  wind
RUST.

Mat  6  19.  where  moth  and  r.  doth  corrupt,  20.
Jam.  5.  3.  r.  of  them  shall  be  a  witness  againstyou


that  his  ministers  perform  for  him  m  the  tabjr-
nacle  ;  because  they  are  there ,  as  tt  were,  soldiers
or  guards  attending  at  the  court  oj  their  Prince,

Row!™'.  29.  except  the  Lord  of  .v.  had  left  us  a  seed

Jam  5.  4.  are  entered  into  the  earsot  the  Lordot  s.

SABBATH.

This  word  in  Hebrew  FOr  signifies  Rest,  Cod
having  created  the  world  in  six  days,  rested  on  tne
seventh,  Gen.  2.2.  that  is,  after  God  had  perfected
the  invisible  and  visible  world,  on  the  review  ot
all  his  works,  finding  them  very  good,  he  took
pleasure,  he  was  satisfied  in  all  those  discoveries  of
his  own  perfections  in  the  works  of  his  hands,  tie
blessed  this  day,  arid  sanctified  it,  because  he
had  rested  upon  it.  From  that  time  he  set  it  apar  t,
and  appointed  it  in  a  peculiar  manner  for  his
worship.  And  the  Hebrews  afterwards,  in  conse¬
quence  of  this  designation,  and  to  preserve  the
memory  of  the  creation,  sanctified,  by  his  order,  the
Sabbath-day,  or  the  seventh  day,  by  abstaining
from  all  work,  labour,  and  servile  employments,
and  by  apt  lying  themselves  to  the  service  of  the
Lord,  to  the  study  if  his  law,  and  to  prayer.  And
at  mount  Sinai  by  a  positive,  moral,  and  perpetual
commandment  God  hath  appointed  one  day  in  the
seven  to  be  kept  holy  to  himself  ;  winch  in  the  INew
Testament  is  called  the  Lord’s  day,  and  is  to  be
continued  to  the  end  of  the  world  as  the  Chnslian
Sabbath


oauua.111.  ,  _  ,  ,  T  1  «  10

Sabbath  is  also  taken  for  the  whole  week.  .Luke  lo.
12.  I  fast  twice  in  the  week  ;  in  the  Greek  it  is,


S.


SABAOTH,  ...

Or  rather  Zabaoth,  an  Hebrew  word,  that  signifies
Hosts  or  Armies.  Jehovah  Sabaoth,  lhe  lord
of  Hosts,  Rom.  9.  29.  Whose  host  all  creatures
are,  whether  the  host  of  heaven,  or  the  angels  and
ministers  of  the  Lord ;  or  the  stars  and  planets,
which  are  as  an  army  ranged  in  battle  array,  and
performing  the  will  of  God  :  or  the  people  of
the  Lord,  both  of  the  Old  and  New  lest  ament,
which  is  truly  the  army  of  the  Lord,  of  which  God
is  the  General  and  Commander,  lhe  llebiew
word  Zaba  is  also  used  to  signify  the  service

4U8


J  J,.  I  irtai  111  Lilt  -----  r

I  fast  twice  in  the  Sabbath.  Sometimes  for  the
sabbatical  year,  which  was  celebrated  among  the
Jews  every  seventh  year,  when  the  land  was  to  test,
and  to  be  left  without  culture.  Lev.  25.  2,  4.  >od
appointed  the  obervation  of  the  sabbatical  year  to
enforce  the  acknowledgment  of  his  sovereign  au¬
thority  over  all  things,  and  particularly  over  the
land  of  Canaan,  which  he  had  given  to  the  Hebrews,
and  in  rvhich  they  were  but  tenants  at  his  will.
Likewise  for  the  trial  and  exercise  of  their  obedi¬
ence,  and  the  demonstration  of  his  providence,  as
well  in  the  general  towards  men,  as  more  especially
towards  his  own  people  ;  and  to  wean  them  Sr0,f
inordinate  love,  and  pursuit  of,  or  trust  to,  wot  laly
advantages  ;  and  to  inure  them  to  depend  upon  Ood
alone,  and  upon  God's  blessing  for  their  subsist¬
ence  ;  and  to  put  them  in  mind  of  that  blessed  and
eternal  rest  provided  for  all  the  godly  .wherein  they
shall  be  perfectly  freed  from  all  worldly  labours
and  troubles.  T  .  ,  .  .

Sabbath  is  likewise  taken  for  all  the  Jewish  festi¬
vals,  indifferently.  Lev.  19.  3,  30.  Keep  my  sab¬
baths  ;  that  is,  my  feasts,  a.s  the  Passover,  the
feast  of  Tabernacles,  Ac.  Ezekiel  says,  that  the
Sabbaths  are  signs  that  God  has  given  t°  his
people  to  distinguish  them  from  othei  nations,
Ezek.  20.  12,  20.  And  Moses,  in  Deut.  0.  lo.

'l  he  Lord  hath  brought  thee  out  ot  Egypt,  there¬
fore  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  commanded  thee  to
keep  the  Sabbath-day.  ......

Sabbath  is  also  taken  for  the  eternal  rest  and  felicity
in  heaven,  where  the  spirits  ot  just  men  ai e  made
perfect ;  and  the  saints  are  delivered  from  sin  and
sorrow,  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  and  even
from  the  very  being  of  sin,  for  Jesus  saves  his
people  from  their  sins.  Ihey  will  be  blessed  in
heaven  with  complete  conformity  to  God,  and
uninterrupted  communion  with  him  ;  and  their
hd/piness  will  be  eternal,  tor  they  will  be  ever
with  the  Lord,  and  will  enjoy  an  eternal  Sabbath,
Heb  4.  9.  I  here  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to
the  people  of  God:  In  the  Greek  it  is  crafifia.-
TicrpLOs,  a  keeping  of  a  sabbath.

A  Sabbath-day’s  journey.  Long  journeys  were  for¬
bidden  the  Jews  on  Sabbath-days.  Pray  that  join
flight  be  not  in  the  winter,  neither  on  the  Sabbath-
day,  says  our  Saviour,  Mat.  24.  20.  Howeiei  it
is  evident  they  were  allowed  to  go  a  ceitain  spate
on  that  day,  at  least  to  the  temple  or  tabernacle,
from  the  remote  parts  of  the  city  or  camp.  Arid  St.
Luke  says,  that  the  mount  of  Olives  was  distant
from  Jerusalem  the  space  of  a  sabbath  day  jour¬
ney,  Acts  1.  12.  The  Rabbins  generally  fix  this
space  at  two  thousand  cubits,  that  is,  about  a  mile.
The  second  Sabbath  after  the  first,  Luke  0.  1.  Some
have  taken  it  for  the  second,  others  for  the  last,  day
of  unleavened  bread  ;  and  some  for  the  day  of  t  en-
tecost:  the  Passover  was  the  first  Sabbath  accord¬
ing  to  them,  and  Pentecost  the  second.  Others
have  thought,  that  the  first  grand  Sabbath  was  the
first  sabbath  of  the  civil  year  m  the  month  1  izi  1  ;
and  that  the  second  was  the  first  of  the  hoiy  year,
or  of  the  month  Nisan.  The  opinion  most  gene¬
rally  followed,  is  of  those  who  think  that  to  have
been  the  first  Sabbath,  which  followed  the  second
day  of  unleavened  bread.  'The  Jews  thus  reckoned
their  sabbaths  from  the  passover  to  pentecost;
the  first  was  called  secundo-pnmum,  or  second
after  the  first ;  that  is,  the  first  after  the  second
day  of  unleavened  bread:  lhe  second  was  called
secundo-secundum,  or  the  second  day  of  the  sab¬
bath  after  the  second  day  of  unleavened  bread :
The  thud  was  called  secundo-tertium,  or  the  third
day  of  the  Sabbath  after  the  second  day  of  un¬
leavened  bread:  And  so  of  all  the  rest,  as  faf®s
secundo  septimum,  that  is,  the  seventh  day  of  the
Sabbath  after  the  second  day  of  unleavened  bread
This  seventh  Sabbath  immediately  preceded  Pen
tecost ,  which  was  celebrated  the  fiftieth  day  after
the  second  day  of  unleavened  bread.

The  preparation  ot  the  sabbath,  in  Greek  riapa-
< rxeun .  The  Jews  gave  the  name  of  Parasceue  to
the  sixth  day  of  the  week,  because  being  riot  al¬
lowed  on  the  sabbath  to  prepare  their  food,  they
provided  the  day  before  what  was  necessary  for
their  subsistence  on  the  sabbath.  lhe  eiang.-
1  i., t  John  says,  that  Friday,  on  which  our  Saviour
suffered,  was  the  preparation  ot  the  passover,
John  19.  14.  because  the  passover  was  to  be  cele¬
brated  the  day  following.  At.  ;Matthew  marks


out  the  day  by  these  words,  The  day  that  follow¬
ed  the  Parasceue,  Mat.  27  .  62.  All  the  Evan¬
gelists  observe,  that  they  delayed  not  to  take  down
Christ  from  the  ctoss ,  and  to  put  him  in  the
nearest  tomb,  because  it  wa  -  the  evening  of  the
Parasceue,  and  that  the  sabbath  was  to  begin  im¬
mediately  after  the  setting  of  the  sun,  or  the  rising
of  the  stars.  .  ..  .  ,  ,

Exod  16.  23.  to-morrow  is  the  rest  ot  the  holy  s.

25.  eat  that  to-day,  for  to-day  is  to  to  the  Lord
29.  see,  for  that  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  .c.

°0.  10.  the  seventh  day  is  the  s.  ot  the  Lord  thy
God,  31.  15.  1  35.  2.  Lev.  2.3.  3.  Deut.  5.  14
31.  14.  ye  shall  keep  the  s.  therefore,  16.

Lev.  16.  31.  on  that  day  the  priest  shall  make  an
atonement,  it  shall  be  a  s.  of  rest  to  you,  23. 3, 32.

23-  11.  morrow  after  the  s.  priest  shall  wave  it

15.  count  to  you  from  the  morrow  after  the/.

16.  after  seventh  s.  shall  ye  number  Arty  days

24.  on  first  day  of  the  month  shall  ye  have  a  $.

32.  from  even  to  even  shall  ye  celebrate  your  s.

39.  on  the  first  day  shall  be  a  s.  on  the  eighth  a  1

24.8.  every  s.  he  shall  set  in  order  before  Lord
25!  2'.  then  shall  the  land  keep  a/.  4,  6.

Num.  28.  10.  this  is  the  burnt  offering  ot  every  s.

2  Kings  4.  23.  he  said,  it  is  neither  new  moon  not  s.
11.  5.  a  third  part  of  you  that  enter  in  on  the  s.

7.  two  parts  of  all  you  that  go  forth  on  the  s.  even
they  shall  keep  the  watch,  9.  2  Chron.  23.8.
16. 18.  the  covert  for  the  .s.  turned  Ahaz

1  Chron.  9.  32.  to  prepare  the  shew-bread  every  s.

2  Chron.  36.  21.  as  long  as  desolate  she  kept  the  *.
Neh.  9.  14.  and  madest  known  to  them  thy  holy  s.

10.  31.  we  would  not  buy  it  pf  them  on  the  s.

13. 15.  1  saw  some  treading  wine-presses  on  the  s.

16.  men  of  Tyre  brought  ware,  and  sold  on  the  s,

18.  ye  bring  wrath  on  Israel,  by  profaning  the  s.

19.  the  gates  began  to  be  dark  before  the  s.

°1  from  that  time  came  they  no  more  on  the  /
Isa.' 56.  2.  blessed  is  the  man  that  keepeth  the  .v.  0.
58.  13.  turn  thy  foot  from  the  s.  call  s.  a  delight
66  23.  from  one  s.  to  another  shall  all  worship
Ezek.  46.  1.  but  on  the  s.  it  shall  be  opened
A.mos  8.  5.  saying,  when  will  the  s .  be  gone  .

Mat.  28.  1.  in  the  end  of  the  s.  came  Mary
Mark  2.  27 .  the  s.  was  made  tor  man,  not  man  tor  s.
28.  the  Son  of  man  is  Lord  of  the  s.  Luke  6.  0.

16.  1.  when  the  s.  was  past,  Mary  Magdalene
Luke  6.  1.  on  the  second  j.  after  the  first,  he  went
13.  10.  teaching  in  the  synagogue  on  the/.

15.  doth  noteach  on  the.?,  loose  hisox  or  Ins  asst
23.  54.  it  was  the  preparation,  and  the/,  drew  on
John  5.  18.  because  he  not  only  had  broken  the  s.
Acts  1.3.  42.  these  words  he  preached  to  them  nexU
16.  13.  on  the  s.  we  went  out  of  city  by  riverside
18.'  4.  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every  s.

Heb  4.  t  9.  there  remaineth  a  keeping  ot  a  s.

See  Day,  Days.

SABBATHS.

Exod.  31.  13.  speak  to  the  children  of  Israel,  say
ins,  my  s .  ye  shall  keep,  Lev.  19.  3,  30.  1  ~o.  ~
Lev .  23.  15.  seven  s.  shall  be  complete
.38  beside  the .v.  of  the  Lord,  and  beside  your  gift;

25.  8.  and  thou  shalt  number  seven./  ot  years

26.  31.  land  enjoy  her  s.  even  then  shall  the  Ian

rest  and  enjoy  her  s.  43.  2  Chron.  .36.21)
35.  it  shall  rest,  because  it  did  not  rest  m  your  s.

1  Chron.  23.  31.  to  offer  the  burnt  sacrifices  in  tlr
s.  2  Chron.  2.  4.  I  8. 13.  I  31.  3.  A  eh.  10.  33
Isa  1.  13.  new  moons  and  s.  I  cannot  away  with
56.  4."  saith  Lord  to  the  eunuchs  that  keep  my  s.
Lam  1.7.  the  adversaries  did  mock  at  her  /
o  6  T  ord  caused  the  to  be  forgotten  in  Zion
Ezek.  20.  12.  also  1  gave  them  my  j.  to  be  a  sign
13.  and  mv  t.  they  greatly  polluted,  16.  24.

22.  8.  and  thou  hast  profaned  my  s.  23.  38.

°6  the  priests  have  hid  their  eyes  from  my  s.

44  24.  they  shall  keep  my  laws  and  haJlow  my  i.
45.17  .it  shal  l  be  prince's  part  to  give  offerings  tor ,
46.  3.  the  people  shall  worship  at  this  gate  in  the  •>•
Hos.  2.  11.  I  will  also  make  to  cease  her  s.

SACK.

Gew.42.25.  then  Joseph  commanded  to  restore  ever.

man’s  money  into  lus  j.  3d.  I  4.3.  -1. 1  44.  .
44.  2.  put  my  silver  cup  in  s.  mouth  ot  younges
11.  they  took  down  every  man  his/,  to  ground
12!  and  the  cup  was  found  in  Benjamin  s  j
I ev  11.  32.  or  s.  ot  unclean  must  be  put  in  watei
SACKBUT.  w

Dan.  3.  5.  ye  hear  the  sound  ot  the  s.  1 , 10, 15.

SACKCLOl H.  .

This  is  a  pure  Hebrew  word,  and  has  spread  tm
many  languages.  Besides  the  common  sign  fio
lion,  which  is  very  well  known,  it  stands  aiso  for
suit  of  mourning,  which  was  worn  at  the  deaUm
a  friend  or  relation.  In  great
troubles,  they  wore  sackcloth  about  their  bi[^
Gird  you  with  sackcloth  and  /.ourr  beo.
Abnerf  2  Sam.  3.  31.  Let  us  put  sackcloth  r
our  loins,  and  go  out  and  impiore  the  clemenc
of  the  king  of  Israel,  1  lungs  20.  31.  Ah.
tore  his  clothes,  put  on  a  shirt  ot  hair-cloth  tit
to  his  skin,  fasted,  and  lay  upon  sackctot\

1  Kin"S  21.  27.  Andwlen  Mordecai  was  info
ed  of  the  ruin  that  threatened  his  nation,  he  pw<

sackcloth  and  covered  his  head  /'ll-W  loth  up
4.  1.  And  Job  says,  1  have  sewed  sackcloth  up«

Ontte  kcontrary]m  'tie  time  of  joy,  [

ing  of  any  good  news,  those  that  uere
cloth,  tore  it  from  their  bodies,  and  last  U  1
them  Psal  30.  11.  1  hou  bast  put  on

sackcloth,  and  girded  me  with  glHdness*  ,J,

prophets  were  commonly  clothed  mSAclcU  u

Lord  bids  Isaiah  to  put  ofi  the  sacLfoth  that  .

clothed  in  sackcloth,  Rev.  11.  3.

Gen.  37.  34.  and  Jacob  put  *.  uP?th  hf  and  mour
2  Sam.  3.  31.  be  said,  gird  you  with  f.  and


SAC

2  Sam.Cl  .lO.Rizpah  took  *.  and  spread  it  on  the  rock

1  Kings 20. 31. the  kings  of  Israel  are  merciful  kings,

„  us  pats,  on  our  loins,  and  ropes,  .‘32.

21. 27.  Ahab  put.?,  on  his  flesh,  and  lay  in  *

2  A  tugs  6.  30.  people  looked,  and  he  had  *.  w'ithin

19.  1.  II ezekiah  covered  himself  with  *  lsa  .-37  1
2.  elders  of  the  priests  covered  with  *.  Isa.  .‘37.’ 2.'

I  Chr.Zl.  16.  David  and  elders  were  clothed  with  *’
Lsth.  4.  1.  Mordecai  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  on  *
2.  toi  none  might  enter  the  gate  clothed  with  *
Job  16.  15.  I  have  sewed  s.  upon  my  skin
Psal.  30.  11.  hast  put  off  my  *.and  girded  with  °  lad
35.  13.  when  they  were  sick,  my  clothing  was  s.
69.  11.  I  made  *.  also  my  garment,  and  a  proverb
Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  a  stomacher,  agirdim*  of  r
15.  3.  in  streets  they  shall  gird  themselves  with 's

20.  2.  go,  and  loose  the*,  from  off  thy  loins

22.  12.  in  that  day  did  Lord  call  to  girding  with  *.
32.  11.  strip  you,  and  make  you  bare,  and  gird  *  on
„  y°ur,  ^ins,  Jer.  4.  8.  I  6.  26.  I  48.  37.  |  49.  3
50.  3.  I  make.?,  the  covering  of  the  heavens
Lam.  2. 10.  they  have  girded  themselves  with  *  vir¬
gins  hang  down  their  heads,  Ezek.  7.  18.  I  27.  31
Dan.  9.  3.  to  seek  the  Lord  with  fasting  and  * '

Joel  1.  8.  lament  like  a  virginuirded  with  *.  for
13.  come,  lie  all  night  in  *.  ye  ministers  of  God
Amos  8.  10.  and  l  will  bring  up  *.  upon  all  loins
Jonah  3.  5.  the  people  of  Nineveh  put  on*.

6.  the  king  covered  him  with  *.  and  sat  in  ashes
8.  but  let  man  and  beast  be  covered  with
Eev.  6. 12.  the  sun  became  black  as*,  of  hair
11.  3.  they  shall  prophesy  1260  days,  clothed  in*
SACK  CLOTHES.

LTeh.  9.  1.  Israel  were  assembled  with  *.  on  them
SACKS.

Gen.  42.25.  to  fill  their  *.  with  com,  44.  1.

43.  12.  the  money  was  brought  again  in  your*.

22.  we  cannot  tell  who  put  our  money  in  our  *.

23.  your  God  hath  given  you  treasure  in  your  "*.

Josh.  9.  4.  the  Gibeonites  took  old  *.  on  their  asses
_  .  SACRIFICE

Is  an  offering  made  to  God  upon  his  altars  by  the
hand  of  a  lawful  minister,  to  acknowledge  his
power,  to  own  entire  dependence  on  him,  or  to  con¬
ciliate  his favour.  A  sacrifice  differs  from  a  mere
oblation  tn  this,  that  in  a  sacrifice  there  must  be
a  real  change  or  destruction  of  the  thing  offered  •
whereas  an  oblation  is  but  a  'simple  offering  of  a
gift.  As  men  hare  always  been  under  an  obliga¬
tion  of  acknowledging  the  supreme  dominion  of
God  over  them,  and  whatever  belongs  to  them  ;  and
as  there  have  always  been  found  persons  that  have
conscientiously  acquitted  themselves  of  this  duty
it  is  probable,  that  there  have  been  always  sacri¬
fices  in  the  world.

Adam  and  his  sons,  Noah  and  his  descendants
Abraham  and  his  posterity.  Job  and  Melchizedek’
before  the  law,  have  offered  to  God  real  sacrifices
lhe  taw  did  only  ascertain  the  quality,  the  number ,
and  other  circumstances  of  sacrifices  :  Before  that
all  was  arbitrary.  They  offered  the  fruits  of  the
earth,  the  fat  of  the  milk  of  animals,  the  fleeces  of
sheep,  or  the  blood  and  the  flesh  of  the  victims  •
Every  one  pursued  his  own  humour,  his  acknow¬
ledgment,  his  zeal,  or  his  devotion  :  But  among  the
Jews,  the  law  appointed  what  they  were  to  off  el¬
and  in  n  hat  quantities.  Before  the  law  was  given
every  one  was  the  priest  and  minister  of  his  own
sacrifices  ;  at  least  he  teas  at  liberty  to  choose  what
Pi  test  he  pleased  to  offer  his  victims:  This  honour
was  generally  conferred  upon  the  most  ancient ,  or
head  oj  a  family,  on  princes,  or  men  of  the  greatest
virtue  and  integrity.  But  after  Moses  this  was
wholly  confined  to  the  family  of  Aaron.

W  Atese  sacrifices  some  -were  eueharistical,  and  are
cal  ed  peace-offerings,  by  which  the  sacrifice)-
acknowledged  the  bounty  of  God,  and  bis  own
unworthiness,  and  rendered  praise  for  a  favour
received,  and  desired  the  divine  blessing.  Others
vere  expiatory,  the  sin-offerings,  for  averting  of
Gods  wrath:  7  hese offerings  signified,  That  man
iS  A-  sinner *  and  therefore  obnoxious  to  the  just
indignation  and  extreme  displeasure  of  the  ho'y
and  righteous  God ;  and  that  God  was  to  he
propitiated,  and  that  he  might  pardon  him  :  That
God  would  not  forgive  sin  without  the  atone¬
ment  of  justice,  which  required  the  death  of  the
offender ;  but  it  being  tempered  with  mercy,  ac¬
cepted  a  sacrifice  in  his  stead.  There  was  a
aoub/e  gm/t  contracted  by  those  that  were  under
,.e  Mosaical  dispensation.  [1]  Typical,  from
(tie  breach  of  a  ceremonial  constitution  which  had
no  relation  to  morality  ;  such  were  accidental
diseases,  the  touching  of  a  dead  body,  Ike  which
7ere,  efeemed  vicious  according  to  the  '  law,  and
.  defiled  were  excluded  from  sacred  and  civil  so¬
ciety:  but  as  those  pollutions  were  penal,  merely  by
the  positive  will  oj  God,  so  the  exercise  of  his  su¬
preme  right  being  tempered  with  wisdom  and  equity
he  ordained  that  the  guilt  should  he  abolished  by  a
Sf^fice,  and  that  they  should  he  fully  restored  to
lUk  J°n,,er  Privileges:  Thus  the  apostle  says,

'  {hat  the  blood  of  those  sacrifices

sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh  ;  that  is
communicated  a  legal  purity  to  the  offerers ,  and
consequently  a  right  tet  approach  the  holy  place.

I  he  reason  of  these  institutions  was,  that  the  legal
jpnruy  might  represent  the  true  defilement  of
an,d  the  ff^rifory  sacrifices  prefigure  that  great
nd  admirable  Oblation  which  should  purge  away
«l/  sm.  [2]  They  had  contracted  a  real  guilt
uhich  respects  the  conscience ,  from  the  breach  of
the  moral  law,  and  which  subjected  the  offender
’  "eat/‘  temporal  and  eternal.  This  could  not  be
W’ged  away  by  those  sacrifices  :  For  how  is  it
possible,  that  the  blood  of  a  beast  should  cleanse
or  satisfy  the  justice  of  an  of-
(f’od?  Gn  the  contrary,  they  revived  the
■)T‘t  oj  sin,  and  reinforced  the  rigour  of  the
a  j  wefe  a  Public  profession  of  the  misery  of
'  r  •  the ,  moral  contained  a  declaration  of
r  gu,lt<  “nd  God  s  right  to  punish,  so  all  the


SAC

parts  of  the  ceremonial  were  either  arguments  and
convictions  of  sin,  or  images  of  the  punishment  due
jor  them.  But  as  they  had  a  relation  to  Christ
the  great  gospel  sacrifice,  who  was  their  comple¬
ment,  so  they  signified  the  expiation  of  moral  guilt
ty  his  sacrifice,  and  freed  the  sinner  from  that  tem¬
poral  death  to  which  he  was  liable ,  as  a  represent a-
five  oj  our  Jrcedom  from  eternal  death  by  the  blood
oj  the  cross.  Hence  in  the  New  Testament  Christ
is  called  a  Lamb,  in  the  notion  of  a  sacrifice
7  he  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of
the  world,  John  1.  29.  The  Lamb  slain  from
the  foundation  of  the  world,  Rev.  13.  8.  He  teas
represented  by  the  red  heifer,  whose  ashes  were  tlie
c/nej  ingredient  in  the  waters  of  purification,  Heb
9.  13,  14.  I  or  if  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats
and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  un¬
clean,  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh
bow  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ  pur^e
the  conscience  t  Especially  the  anniversary  sacri-
Jice,  which  was  the  abridgment  and  recapitulation
ll/bO  r~Stg  lat  1  °n  em*nent  respect  to  Christ,

As  to  the  beasts  sacrificed  by  the  Jews,  and  their
^OFF &\™GCin°  th€m’  See  the  SiSnification

fe3*-  3i-  ,fhen  Jacob  offered  *.  upon  the  mount
•  let  us  go  and  do  *.  to  the  Lord,  8.  8.
oT  iq‘  Sa-'l’  ]i.ls  fi)e  s\  nfthe  Lord’s  passover
01  not  offer  blood  of  *.  with  leavened,  34  25
34.  15.  and  one  call  thee,  and  thou  eat  of  his  *.
r  •  no*' shaU  f-  passover  be  left  to  morning
Eev.  7. 12.  then  he  shall  offer  with  *.  of  thanksgiving
}3-  leavened  bread  with  *.  of  thanksgiving,  22.  29.
q  f\  be  a  'a7w,  it  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day
17.  8.  whoso  offerefh  a*,  and  bringeth  not  to  door


*7. 11.  any  beast  of  winch  they  do  not  offer  a  *.
-\um.  15.  3.  or  make  a  *.  in  performing  a  vow,  8.


OO  C  ’4.  •  L'  .  ^  '  UW,  O.

»8.  0.  it  is  for  a  sweet  savour,  a  *.  made  by  fire  unto
r,  the  Lord,  8,  13,  19,  24.  I  29.  6  13  36

TeV'oo'nd  !he  pries,s’  due  from  them  that’ offer  *’
Josh.  22.  26.  let  us  now  build  an  altar,  not  for *  ’

Judff-  16.  23.  tor  to  offer  a  great  *.  to  Dagon
o  nr?*  ivent,  up  to  offer  the  yearly  *.  2.  19.

5’  11'  wherefore  kick  ye  at  my  *.  anti  offerin0' ?

0  14- imqu.ty  of  Eli’s  house  not  purged  with”*’

9. 1 for  there  is  a  *.  of  people  to-day  in  high  place

1  -'\oe<ka  usei  ,he  dot  1  bl<?ss  the  s- the11  they  eat

ln.  behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  *.

16.  3.  call  Jesse  to  the  *.  and  I  will  shew  thee,  5.
vO.  6.  there  is  a  yearly  *.  tor  all  the  family,  29.
1is*oo'r  tk"  if  1, his. people  do  *.  at  Jerusalem

a*  *  they  prophesied  till  time  of  the  evening  *.
36.  at  the  fane  of  evening*.  Elijah  drew  near

"in  inSe'  'uwt  offer  ,f- t0  other  ^ods’  hut  the  Lord
19.  for  I  have  a  great  *.  to  do  to  Baal
1  r .  36.  him  shall  ye  fear,  and  to  him  shall  ye  do  *
~S L,0,n:  '•  9-  ,save  only  to  hum  *.  before  him
1.5.  king  Solomon  offered  a  *.  of  22,000  oxen
U.  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  an  house  of*.
*9.  t  1).  the  Loro  hath  chosen  you  to  offer  *.
htzra  9.  4.  I  sat  astonied  until  the  evening  s.

pt/d 4nhfievenin§' a/0Se  ap  from m>'  heaviness
l  sal.  40.  6.  *.  thou  didst  not  desire,  51.  16.

i  ha.'ie  !?.ade  a  covenant  with  me’ by  *.
o-  *7-  { ."  ill  offer  to  thee  the  *.  of  thanksgiving
hind  the*,  with  cords  to  horns  of  altar"
141.  2.  and  lifting  up  of  my  hands  as  evening  *.
c>A0vd  °f  lhe  "  icked  is  abomination

3.  to  do  juStice  is  more  acceptable  than  *.

Eccl.  5.  1.  to  hear  than  to  give  the  *.  of  fools
7*«.  19.  21  the  Egyptians  shall  do  *.  and  oblation
34.  6.  for  the  Lord  hath  a  *.  in  Bozrah  and  Idumea
5(.  (.  even  fhither  wentest  thou  to  offer  *.

Jer.  33. 11.  the  voice  of  them  that  bring  *.  of  praise

lo.  nor  want  a  man  to  do  s.  continually

4o.  10.  for^God  hath  a  s .  in  the  north  country
Ezek.  39. 17 ..  gather  together  to  my  *.  even  a  great *.

1  J.  anddnnk  blood  till  ve  be  drunken  of  my*.

44.  11  they  shall  slay  the  *.  for  the  people
46.  24  vvhere  ministers  boil  the  *.  of  the  people
Uan.  8. 1 1.  daily  *.  was  taken  away,  9.  27  I  11  31

12.  an  host  was  given  him  against  the  daily  s'.

13.  how  long  shall  be  the  vision  of  the  daily  *  ?

rl2’  1o1’fr<?m  th,e,tirP.e  dai|y^  shall  be  taken  a*vay
r  lsrael  shall  abide  many  days  without  a  t,

6.  o.  I  desired  mercy,  and  not*.  Mat.  9.  1.3.  I  12.  7

Amos  4.  5.  offer  a  *.  of  thanksgiving  with  leaven
Jonah  1.  16.  then  the  men  offered  a  *,  to  the  Lord
Ac ph .  1.7.  for  the  Lord  hath  prepared  a  *.  8.

Mfil.  l.  8.  if  ye  offer  the  blind  for  *.  is  it  not  evil  ?
Mark  9.  49.  every  *.  shall  be  salted  with  salt
Luke  2.  24.  and  to  offer  a  *.  according  to  the  law
Acts  7.  41.  in  those  days  they  offered  *.  to  the  idol
14.  13.  and  would  have  done  *.  with  the  people
18.  that  they  had  not  done  *.  unto  them
Rom.  8. +  3.  by  a  *.  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh

12.  1.  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  *.

1  Cor.  8.  4.  are  offered  in  *.  to  idols,  10.  19,  28.

Eph.  5.  2.  a  *  to  God  for  a  sweet  smelling  savour
Phil.  2.  17.  if  I  be  offered  on  the  *.  of  your  faith
4. 18.  a  *.  acceptable,  well  pleasing  to  God

Heb.  7-  27 1  needeth  not  daily  as  those  to  offer  up*

9.  26.  to  put  away  sin  by  the  *.  of  himself

10.  5.  he  saith,  *.  and  offeringthou  wouldest  not, 8.

12.  after  he  had  offered  one  *.  for  sins,  for  ever
26.  there  remaineth  no  more  *.  for  sins

11.  4.  Abel  offered  to  Godamore  excellent  *.

13.  15.  by  him  let  us  offer  the  *.  of  praise

Bee  Burnt,  Puace-Offkr  ing.
SACRIFICE,  Verb.

Exod.  3.  18.  let  us  go  and  *.  to  the  Lord  our  God
0  „  ,  5.  3,  8  |  8.  27.  I  10.  25.  ||  8.  25.  go  ye  *.

8.  26.  shall  we  *.  abomination  ot  the  F.gyptians  ?

29.  in  not  lettina  the  people  go  to  *.  to  the  Lord
13.  15.  1  *.  to  Lord  all  that  openeth  the  matrix
20.  24.  thou  shalt  *.  thereon  thy  burnt  offerings
Devi.  15.  21.  any  blemish,  thou'shalt  not*,  it,  17.  l,

16.  2.  thou  shalt  therefore  *.  the  passover,  6.

5.  not  *.  the  passover  within  any  of  thy  gates
1  Sam.  I.  3.  Klkanah  went  up  yearly  to  *.  to  Lord
15. 15.  the  people  spared  the  best  to  *.  to  the  Lord


SAC

15.  21.  should  have  been  destroved  10  *.  to  J
,  a9d,sa£’tI  am  come  t0  *•  to  the  Lord,  5.  ’
\o  XSo3-,4'  ^oIom°o  .went  to  Gibeon  to  *.  there
7‘-  J  Jeroboam  offered  to  *.  to  calves  he  maH*
2  kings  14.  4.  as  yet  the  people  did  *.  and  Irnn  t
incense  on  the  high  places,  2  Chron.  33  17
o1/;,  35.  nor  shall  *.  to  other  gods,  nor  serve  them
thion .11.  16.  came  to  Jerusalem  to  *.  to  the  I  d
4.2.  we  seek  your  God,  and  do  *.  to  him

Psai  S4  fiV1  th-1f /•  ’  ,w,n  tlie^;  make  en(f  in  a  day  >
in?  oo4’  16;  ,  'Vl11  treelLi- t0  thee,  1  will  praise
107.  2t.  let  them  *.  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving

t0  Py  •r‘  that  1  do  for  you
i*’  4’i3lthey  ,s'  .on  ttle  t0Ps  of  the  mountains
14  and  they*  with  harlots,  therefore  the  people
4?; tbey  s-  but  th?  Lord  accepteth  them  not
T  “-.,they  are  vanity,  they  *.  bullocks  in  Gilga!
TmJaq  ,ayfay,iiet  Pen  thatf-  kiss  lhe  calves
Hnhh i2'ia  1iWi11/’  t0,thee  with  thanksgiving
j"hr  therefore  they  *.  unto  their  net

/y  /  j  A*1’.,!' that  r.  shall  seethe  therein
l  Car1™  V  o  e  offeP  tbe.,blind  to  *.  is  it  not  evil  t

‘  "'"ScfkrFfcED^  ,0  deVilS

Dei  %>  Vhzrde  ‘l160?  a  c,alf  and  ^  thereunto
ft  Vi 1  thi  3  fu  unt0  dev,ls-  not  to  God
f  '  P  31  •  they  thereon  peace  offerings

Judg.  2  5.  and  they  *.  there  unto  the  Lord
fi  1  1*  i15’  the  servant  said  to  the  man  that  *.

6  i5.  and  *.  sacrifices  the  same  day  to  the  Lord
11.  15.  all  the  people  went  to  Gilgal  and  *.
r  6-  f  3.  David  *.  oxen  and  fatlings
1  Kings  3.  2.  only  the  people  *.  in  the  high  places,  3
2  Kings  12.  3.  |  15.  4,  35.  |  16.  4.
hoc  u-  2  Chron.  28.  4.

11.  8.  tor  his  strange  wives,  and  *.  to  their  gods
2o?  foo1kk3~’  ot  the  lowest  priests  which  *.


i  on  L  11  *u  ftnesis  wmen

23.  t  20.  he  *.  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places
I  21 .28.  Lord  answered  him,  then  he*,  there

2oroT'\\1  6‘  al  iiat  ass,embl«l  before  ark  *.  sheep
oq  -r?’  ^.laz  s •  P  the  gods  of  Damasc.  which  smote
oAc’  MAanasseh  on  the  altar  of  the  J.ord
foi  Anion  *.  to  all  the  carved  images

pt?‘  u7d  olr°Wed  0n  ?raves  °f  them  "that  had  *.

q„  •  J06-  37.  yea,  they  *.  their  sons  unto  devils
fffh  dau|bters-  they  *.  to  the  idols  of  Canaan
in  in  nf20,  1  lese  .tbou-!'-  to  them  to  be  devoured
if  -  f9-  °f  my  sacrifice  which  1  have  *.  for  you
‘hey  to  Baalim,  and  burnt  incense
Jonah  1.  t  16.  then  the  men  *.  a  sacrifice  to  Lord
¥nk  IV  12’  when  they  *.  the  passover
p  ~or-  ,  7.  for  even  Christ  our  Passover  is  *.  for  us
Rev. 2. 14.  to  eat  things*,  to  idols,  20.
n  .  SACRIFICEDST.

Ueut.  16.  4.  nor  shall  fiesh  thou  *.  remain  all  night
„  ^  t  SACRIFICES.  8

EW  4in  pJS[fel  at  B.e.er-sheba  offered  *.to  God
io10f  m’  Moses  said,  thou  must  give  us  also  *.
}8i  Va  ■,fdiroy  Moses  father-in-law,  took  *.  for  G.
,^•10*  13.  of  the  *.  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire
l( .  5.  the  *.  which  they  offer  in  the  open  field
7-  they  shall  no  more  offer  their  *.  to  devils
'or?o‘  25-  2.  they  railed  people  to  the*,  of  their  gods
n8’  7’  ,sb?B  ye  observe  to  offer  in  season

Ho  kJ  t?'-  tkUimrye  Skali  brin& your  *.  and  tithes
32.  38.  which  did  eat  the  tat  ot  their*.

r  3)^q f  bfre  tlle^  shall  offer  the  *.  of  righteousness
Joo  0 o3Vi  4-  {;°f  the  Lord  are  their  inheritance
22-  -8  the  altar  not  for  *.  but  it  is  a  witness,  29.

^nd  sacr,ficed  s-  same  day  to  the  Lord
1  nk  Lon,  as  §>  eat  delight  in  *.  as  obeying

1  Chron.  29.  21.  they  sacrificed  *.  in  abundance
2 7.  1.  fire  came  down  and  consumed  the*
.9.  31.  come  near  and  bring*,  they  brought  in  *.
Ezia  6.3.  let  the  place  where  he  offered  *.  be  laid
10.  that  they  may  offer  *.  to  God  of  heaven
»  7  V2' 43.  also  that  day  they  offered  great  *.
nia  zai  ’  offer  J.  of  righteousness,  put  your  trust
;7-  6-  therefore  will  1  offer  *.  ot  joy,  I  will  sing
5t).  8^  1  will  not  reprove  thee  for  thy  *.  offerings
Gl'  ,  ,God,  are  a  broken  spirit,  a  broken
in«  ®6n  Shal,t  be  Plea,sed  Wlth  °f  righteousness
‘8.  joined  to  Baal-peor,  and  eat*,  of  dead
f°7-  22.  let  them  saenhee  the*,  of  thanksgiving
Prov.  17.  1.  than  a  house  full  of  *.  with  strife

u:  t°  what  purpose  is  the  multitude  of  *.  r
29.  1.  add  ye  year  to  year,  let  them  kill  *.

43.  23.  nor  hast  thou  honoured  me  with  thy  *.

24.  nor  hast  thou  filled  me  with  the  fat  of  thy  *,

5b.  7.  their  *.  shall  be  accepted  on  mine  altar
Jer.  6.  20.  nor  are  3Tour  *.  sweet  unto  me

7.  21.  put  your  burnt  offerings  to  your  *.  and  eat

22.  nor  commanded  them  concerning  *  *

17.  26.  bringing  *.  of  praise  to  house  of  the  Lord
Ezek.  QQ.  28.  they  saw  every  high  hill  and  offered  *
ri  4'u1P’ tbey  sba11  be  ashamed,  because  of  their  *.

9.  4.  their  *.  shall  he  as  the  bread  of  mourners
13.  t  2.  they  say,  let  *.  of  men  kiss  the  calves
/Jntos  4.  4.  and  bring  vour,?.  every  mornin0-

5.  25.  have  ye  offered  unto  me  *.  and  offerfn^s
Mark  12.33.  to  love  the  Lord,  is  more  thanalT  *.

Luke  13.  1.  whose  blood  Pilate  mingled  with

Acts  7.  42.  have  ye  offered  *.  for  forty  years  ?

j  r  10‘  ff}at  eat  tbe  s-  partakers  of  the  altar
Heb.  5.  1.  that  he  may  offer  gifts  and  *.  for  sins

8.  3.  every  high  priest  is  ordained  to  offer  *.

9-  9.  in  which  were  offered  both  gifts  and  *.

23.  but  the  heavenly  things  with  better*.

10. 1.  can  never  with  those  s.  make  comers  perfect
3.  but  in  those  *.  there  is  a  remembrance  made

6.  in  *.  for  sin  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure

11.  offering  oftentimes  the  same  *.  that  never  can
13.  16.  for  with  such  *.  God  is  well  pleased
1  Pet. 2.5.  an  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  *.

See  Burnt.

SACRIFICETH.

Exod  22.  20.  he  that  *.  to  any  god,  save  to  Lord  onlv
Eccl.  9.  2.  to  him  that  *.  and  to  him  that  *.  not
rS'v?*?'  P.eoP*e  ^at  s .  in  gardens,  and  burn  incense
00.  3.  he  that  s.  a  larnb  as  if  he  cut  off  a  dog's  neck
Mai.  1.14.  which  hath  a  male,  ami a  corrupt  thing

409


S  AF


S  A  1


S  A  I


SACRIFICING.

1  Kings  8.  >.  Israel  were  with  him  s.  sheep  and  oxen
12.  32.  ■  to  the  calves  ihat  he  had  made
Rom.  15.  +  16.  that  the  a.  up  of  Gentiles  might  be
SACRILEGE.  .

Rem.  2.22.  that  abhorrest  idols,  dost  thou  commit  s . .

SAD

Gen.  40.  6.  Joseph  looked  on  them,  bell,  they  were  s.

1  Sam  1.  18.  her  countenance  was  no  more  s.

1  Sa  21. 5.  Jezebel  said,  why  is  thy  spirit  so  s.f
Neh  2.  1.  I  I) ad  not  been  before  a.  in  Ins  presence

2  the  king  said,  why  is  thy  countenance  s. .

3  l  said,  why  .mould  not  toy  countenance  De  a.  ?
Ezek.  13.  22.  uecause  with  lies  ve  have  made  the

heart  of  righteous  s.  whom  I  have  not  made  a.
Mat.  6.  16.  be  not  as  hypocrites,  ot  a  a.  countenan.
Mark  10.22.  he  was  a.  at  that  saying,  and  went  away
/  uke  24  17.  communications  as  ye  w  alk,  and  are  a.

Dan  1  t  10.  why  should  he  see  your  faces  s. .

Uan.  J  SADDLE.  ,  .

r* v  15  a.  what  s.  he  rideth  upon  shall  be  unclean
^  SADDLE.

2  Sam.  19.  26.  thy  servant  said,  l  will  '.me  an  ass

1  Rinas  i3.  13.  old  prophet  said,  s.  me  the  ass,  27.

SADDLED.

Gen  22.  3.  Abraham  rose  up  early  and  his  ass
Nui'n.  22.  21.  Bala.  s.  his  ass,  and  went  with  princes
Judu  19  10.  were  with  the  Levite  two  asses  s.

2  Sam.  16.  1.  Zibamet  David  with  couple  of  asses*.

17.  23.  Ahithophel .'.  his  ass,  and  gat  him  home

1  Kings  2.  40.  Shimei  s.  and  went  after  his  servants
13  13  eo  they  s.  him  the  ass,  and  he  rode,  23,  27-
o  kina v  4  24.  the  woman  of  Shunam  s.  an  ass
1  SADDUCEES.  .  j  ,

The  disciples  of  Sadoc.  They  constituted  one  of
the  four  principal  Sects  of  the  Jews.  H  hat  chieffy
distinguished  them  from  the  other  Jews  was,  the
opinion  they  maintained  concerning '  the  f****™™
of  angels,  and  the  immortality  of  the  sold,  lhey
did  not  deny  but  that  we  had  reasonable  souls ■ ,
but  they  maintained  this  soul  was  mortal ,  and
by  a  necessary  consequence  they  denied  theJe
wards  and  punishments  of  another  life.  .  They
pretended  also,  that  what  is  said  of  the  existence
of  angels,  and  of  a  future  resurrect  ion,  are  nothing
but  illusions.  Epiphamus,  and  after  him .  Aus¬
tin  have  advanced  that  the  Sadducees  denied  the
Holy  Ghost.  But  neither  the  Evangelists  nor
Josephus  accuse  them  of  any  error  like  this.

They  are  likewise  accused  of  rejecting  all  the  books
of  scripture,  except  those  of  Moses  ;  and  to  sup¬
port  this  opinion  it  is  observed,  that  our  Saviour
makes  use  of  no  scripture  against  them,  but  pas¬
sages  taken  out  of  the  Pentateuch .  But  it  is  said,

to  vindicate  them  from  this  reproach,  that  they

did  not  appear  in  Israel  till  after  the  number  of
the  holy  books  were  fixed,  and  that  if  they  had
been  to  choose  out  of  the  canonical  Scriptures,  the
Pentateuch  was  less  favourable  to  them  than  any
other  book,  since  it  so  often  makes  mention  of  an¬
gels.  Besides,  the  Sadducees  were  present  in  the
temple,  and  at  other  religious  assemblies,  where
the  books  of  the  prophets  were  read  indifferently,
as  well  as  those  of  Moses.  1  hey  were  m  the  chief
employs  of  the  nation,  many  of  them  were  even
priests.  Would  the  Jews  have  suffered  in  these
employments  persons  that  rejected  the  gieatest
part  of  their  Scriptures  ?  .  ,

As  the  Sadducees  acknowledged  neither  punishments

nor  recompences  in  another  life,  so  they  were  in¬
exorable  in  their  chastising  transgressors,  lhey
observed  the  law  themselves,  and  caused  it  to  bt
observed  by  others,  with  the  utmost  rigour,  lhey
admitted  of  none  of  the  traditions,  explications,
or  modifications  of  the  Pharisees  ,  they  kept  only
to  the  text  of  the  law  ;  and  maintained,  that  only
what  was  written  was  to  be  observed .  _

As  to  Sadoc  the  founder  of  their  Sect,  it  is  said,  that
he  succeeded  one  Antigonus  Socchmus,  as  a  disci¬
ple  succeeds  his  master,  in  the  tradition  of  his  doc¬
trine  :  which  Antigonus  had  in  the  same  manner
succeeded  Simon  the  .1  mUthe  high  priest  of  the  Jews.
This  Simon  the  just  died  in  the  year  of  the  world
3711,  before  the  vulgar  era  293.  So  that  Sadoc
may  have  lived  about  the  year  of  the  world  3740.
Mat.  3.  7.  when  he  saw  the  s.  come  to  his  baptism
16. 1.  the  a.  came  tempting  Jesus,  and  desired  him

6.  Jesus  said,  beware  of  tJie  leaven  or  the$.  11
12.  but  beware  of  the  doctrine  of  the  a.

22.  23.  the  same  day  came  to  him  the  s.  which  say
34.  had  heard  that  he  had  put  the  a.  to  silence
Acts  4.  1.  the  priests  and  the  s.  came  upon  them
5.  17.  the  a.  laid  their  hands  on  the  apostles
23  6  Paul  perceived  that  the  one  part  were

7.  arose  a  dissension  between  the  Pharisees  and  s

8.  for  the  s.  say,  that  there  is  no  resurrection

SADL’l  .

Gen.  40. 7.  he  asked,  say.  why  look  ye  so  a.  to  day
SADNESS.  .

Eccl.  7. 3.  by  s.  of  countenance  heart  is  made  better
SA I E.  ,

1  Sam.  12. 11.  Lord  delivered  you,  and  ye  dwelled  s.

2  Sam.  18.  29.  is  the  young  man  Absalom  s.  !  61.
Job  21.  9.  their  houses  are a.  from  tear,  nor  is  rod
Psal.  119.  117.  hold  thou  me  up,  and  1  shall  be  a.
Prov.  18.  10.  the  righteous  run  into  it,  and  are
29  25.  whoso  trusteth  in  the  Lord  shall  be  s.

Isa.  5.  29.  they  shall  carry  the  prey  away  '.

Ezek.  34.  27.  and  they  shall  be  a.  in  their  land
Luke  15.  27.  because  he  had  received  him  s.

Acts  23.24.  that  they  may  bring  hum.  to  helix

27  44.  and  so  they  escaped  all  s.  to  land  .
Phil.  3.  1.  to  write  the  same  things,  for  you  it  is  s.
SAFEGUARD.

1  Sam.  22.  23.  but  with  me  thou  shalt  be  in  s.

SAFEL’i  .

Psal.  78.  53.  he  led  them  on  they  feared  not
Prov.  1.  33.  whoso  hearkenetb  to  me  shall  dwell  a
3.  23.  then  shalt  thou  walk  in  thy  way  s.  .

31.  11.  heart  of  her  husband  doth  s.  trust  in  her
Isa  41.  3.  he  pursued  them,  and  pasted  s.

410


Hos  2. 18.  I  will  make  them  to  he  down  s.

Zech  14.  11.  Jerusalem  shall  be  a.  inhabited
Mark  14. 44.  that  is  he,  take  and  lead  him  away  s.
Acts  16.  23.  charging  the  jailor  to  keep  them  s.

See  Dwell.

SAFETY.

Job  3. 26. 1  w'as  not  in  s.  nor  had  I  rest,  trouble  came
5.  4.  his  children  are  far  from  and  are  crushed
11  that  those  which  mourn  may  be  exalted  to  a.
11. ‘l8.  and  thou  shalt  take  thy  rest  in  a.

,1  „  1  IaI - /rLiAt-t  him  +A  HP  114


2l!  23 !  though  it  be  given  him  to  be  in


p,a!  ic.  5.  I  will  set  him  in  s.  from  him  that  pnfteth
22. 1 9.  keepest  me  in  s.  when  on  my  mother  s  breasts
33.  17.  an  horse  is  a  vain  thing  tor  s.

Prov.  11. 14.  in  multitude  ot  counsellors  is  s.  A.  6.

2i  31.  horse  is  for  battle,  but  a.  is  ot  the  Lord
Tsa.  14.  30.  the  needy  shall  lie  down  in  s.

Arts  5  23  the  prison  found  we  shut  with  all  s.
iThess.  5.  3.  for  when  they  shall  say,  peace  and  a.

See  Dwell.

SAFFRON.  J  .

Cant  A.  14.  spikenard  and^Lcalamus  and  cinnamon

Gen.  2.  23.  Adam  a.  this  is  bone  of  my  bone
3.  1.  the  serpent  s.  hath  God  s.  ye  shall  not  eat .

9.  26.  Noah  s.  blessed  be  the  Lord  God  ot  Shem
21. 12.  in  all  that  Sarah  hath  s.  hearken  to  her
24!  65.  the  servant  had  .r.  it  is  my  master
41.  54.  theMearth  began  to  come,  as  Josephs.

Exod.  5.22.  Moses  returned  to  the  Lord  and  s.

1°  31  rise  up,  go,  serve  the  Lord  as  ye  have.'.

32.  also  take  your  flocks  and  herds,  as  ye  have  a.

17.  10.  so  Joshua  did  as  Moses  had  s.  to  him
r pf  ip  5  thev  carried  them  out,  as  Moses  had  s.
A7ww.  1L  21.  thou  hast  a.  1  will  give  them  flesh  to  eat
14.31.  little  ones,  yes.  should  be  a  prey  ,  Deut.  1.39.
23.30.  Balak  did  as  Balaam  had  s.  and  offered
36  5  the  tribe  of  the  sons  ot  Joseph  hath  s.  well
Deut  A.  21.  as  the  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  s.

Judo  1.20.  they  gave  Hebron  to  Caleb  as  Moses  s.

6  36.  if  thou  wilt  save  Israel,  as  thou  hast  a.  37 .

1  Sam.  10. 15.  tell  me,  I  pray  thee,  what  Samuel  s.

11.  12.  who  is  he  that  s.  shall  Saul  reign  o\ei  us
12  1.  I  have  hearkened  to  you  in  all  ye  s.  to  me
27*  1  David  s.  I  shall  now'  perish  by  hand  of  Saul

2  Sam  7.  25.  and  now,  O  Lord,  do  as  thou  hasts.

13.35.  behold,  as  thy  servant  s.  so  it  is  ,

23  1  David,  son  ot  Jesse,  s,  the  anointed  of  God

of  lacob,  and  the  sweet  psalmist  of  Israel  s.
i: Kings  2.  38.  as  my  lord  king  hath  a.  so  will  1  do
8.29.  thy  eyes  open  toward  place  ot  which  thou
hast  s.  my  name  shall  be  there,  2  Chron.  6,  20.
lo  ofo  Jeroboam  s.  now  shall  the  kingdom  return
17*.  13.  Elijah  s.  to  her,  go,  do  as  thou  hast  s.

22  20.  one  s.  on  this  manner,  another  s.  on  that
2  Kings  7. 17.  and  hedied,  as  the  man  of  God  had  s.

1  Chron.  17  23.  therefore,  Lord,  do  as  thou  hast  s.
Ezra  10.  12.  as  thou  hast  s.  so  must  we  do
Neh  5.  2.  theiv  were  that .'.  we  are  many,  3.

Esth.  5.  5.  that  he  may  do  as  Esther  hath  a.

8  I  will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king  hath  s.

Job ’ll.  4.  for  thou  hast  s.  my  doctrine  is  pure
31  31  if  the  men  of  my  tabernacle  s.  not
38*11  when  I  s.  hitherto  shalt  thou  come
Psal  12  4.  who  a.  with  our  tongue  will  we  prevail
14.  i.  fool  s .  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God  ,  o3. 1.

27.8.  my  heart  a.  to  thee,  thy  face  will  1  seek
Prov  7  1.3.  and  with  an  impudent  lace,  a.  to  him
Isa.  14. 13.  thou  hast  a.  i  will  ascend  into  heaven
°8  15.  ve  s.  we  have  made  a  covenant  with  death
30.  16.  ye  s.  no,  for  we  will  flee  upon  horses
47.  10.  for  thou  hast  s.  none  seeth  me
Jer.  2.8.  the  priests  s.  not,  where  is  the  Lord
*23!  25.  I  have  heard  what  the  prophets  s.

28!  6.  even  the  prophet  Jeremiah  s.  amen
29. 15.  because  ye  a.  Lord  hath  raised  up  prophets
38.  25.  declare  unto  us  what  thou  hast  s.  to  the
king,  also  what  the  king  s.  unto  thee
Lam  4.20.  of  whom  we  s.  under  his  shadow  sha.l  live
Ezek.  Q.  8.  and  l  .v.  ah,  Lord  God,  wilt  thou  destroy
12.9.  hath  not  the  rebellious  house  a.  to  thee
06  2.  Tyros  hath  against  Jerusalem.  36.  ~.

27.  3.  O  Tyrus,  thou  hast  a.  I  am  of  perfect  beauty
°8  2.  because  thou  hast  s.  1  am  a  god,  1  sit
°9  3.  the  great  dragon  who  hath  s.  my  river  is  mine
own,  and  1  have  made  it  for  myself
Dan.  3.  28.  Nebuch. a.  blessed  be  God  of  Shadrach

8  13  and  another  saint  .v.  to  that  saint  who  pake

Jonah  4.  8.  Jonah  a.  it  is  better  for  me  to  die  ?
Mic.  7. 10.  her  who  s.  to  me,  where  is  the  Lord  .
Zeph.  2.  15.  the  city  that  r.  in  her  heart,  I  am
Mai  3.  14.  ye  have  s.  it  is  vain  to  sei  ce  God
Mat.  17  -5.  behold , a  voice  which  s  this  is  my  beloved
Son,  in  whom  1  am  well  pleased,  Luke  3.  .....
°6  35.  likewise  also  s.  all  the  disciples
~64.  Jesus  saith  unto  him,  thou  hast  .v.

27  63.  sir,  we  remember  that  that  deceiver  s.

Mark  2. 14.  as  he  passed  by ,  he  s.  to  Levi,  follow  me
Luke  1.  13.  the  angel  s.  to  him,  fear  not,  30.

20.30.  the  scribes  s.  Master,  thou  hast  well  s.

24.  23.  had  seen  angels,  who  .v.  that  lie  was  alive
24.  and  found  it  even  so  as  the  women  had  i.
John  1.23.  make  straight  the  way  ,  as  s.  Esaias
5.  18.  but  .>.  also,  that  God  was  his  Father
7.  38.  as  the  scripture  hath  s .  out  of  his  belly  flow
12.  41.  these  things  s.  Esaias,  when  he  saw  Ins  gloiy
50,  even  as  the  Father  .v.  unto  me,  so  I  speak
Acts  2.  38.  then  Peter  .f.  repent,  ami  be  baptized
4  23.  reported  al  1  the  chief  priests  had  to  them
7  37.  this  is  that  Moses  who  i.  unto  srael
17.  28.  as  certain  of  your  own  poets  have  s.

Rom.  7.7.  except  law  had  thou  shalt  not  cocet
Gal.  1.  9.  as  we  s.  before,  so  say  l  now  again
Ileb.  7.21.  bv  him  that  s.  to  him,  the  Lord  sw  are
10  30.  we  know  him  that  hath  s.  cengeance
Rev.b.  14.  and  the  four  beasts  s.  amen.

Answered  and  SA  1 1J.

Exod.  24.  3.  and  all  the  people  answered  and  s.

1  Sam.  10. 12.  one  of  the  same  place  answered  ands.
Job  2.  *4.  Satan  answered  and  s.  skin  tor  skin
40. 1.  moreover  the  l  ord  answered  Job  orta  *’•
Mat.  20. 13.  lie  answered  ‘ie  ol  them  and  s.  ti  lend


Cuke  9.  49.  John  answ.  and  s.  Mastei,  we  saw  ont
See  Answered.

God  SA  ID.

Gen.  3.  1.  yea,  hath  God  s.  ye  shall  not  eat '  3.

17.  23.  circumcised  the  same  day, as  God  nail  s.

31  16.  whatsoever  God  hath  s. .unto  thee,  do
2  Chr.  33.  7.  set  an  idol  in  the  house  ot  which  O.  s.
Acts  7.  7.  and  the  nation  will  l  judge,  God
2  Cor.  6.  16.  temple  ot  the  living  God,  as  G .  hath  s.

He  SA  ID.

Gen.  19.  17.  he  s.  escape  for  thy  life,  look  not
20.  5.  s.  he  not  unto  me,  she  is  my  sister  J
31  8.  if  he  s.  thus,  speckled  shall  be  thy  wages
12.  he  s.  lift  up  thine  eyes  and  see  the  rams

32.  26.  he  s.  let  me  go,  tor  the  day  breaketh
07  ~he  s  what  is  thy  name  f  and  he  s.  Jacob
41.  51.  God,  .v.  he.  hath  made  me  forget  my  toil
Exod.  i8.  24.  so  Moses  did  all  that  he  had  a;.

Deut  11  25.  no  man  shall  be  able  to  stand  before
you  a s  he  hath.'.  18.  2.  129.  13.  Josh.  1.3.  14,33
Josh.  14.  10.  the  Lord  hath  kept  me  alive,  as  lies,
ludg.  8.  3.  their  ang.  was  abated  when  he  had  .s.  (hat
1  Sam.  3.  17.  if  thou  hide  any  thing  he  s.  to  thee

1  Kings  2.  4.  not  fail  thee,  -f.  he,  a  man  on  throne
31.  do  as  he  hath  s.  fall  upon  him,  and  bury  ;

2  Kings  17.23.  as  he  s.  by  all  his  servants,  prophets

1  Chron.  22.  11.  build  the  house,  as  he  s.  ot  thee

2  Chr-  24.  22.  lies.  Lord,  look  on  it,  and  require  it.
Job  28.  28.  to  man  he  s.  behold,  fear  ot  the  Lord.
Psal.  10.  6.  he  hath  a.  in  his  heart,  11.  13.

106.  23.  he  s.  that  he  would  destroy  them
Isa.  28. 12.  to  whom  he  s.  this  is  rest  wherewith
40.  6.  the  voice  said,  cry,  he  s.  what  shall  1  cry  r
63.  8.  for  he  s.  surely  they  are  my  people
Jer.  40  3.  now  the  Lord  hath  done  as  he  hath
Ezek.  9.  5.  to  the  others  lies,  in  mine  hearing
°9  9.  because  he  hath  s.  the  river  is  mine
Jonah  3.  10.  God  repented  ot  the  evil  he  had  s.

Mat.  27.  43.  for  he  s.  1  am  the  bon  ot  God
28.  6.  he  is  not  here,  for  he  is  risen,  as  he  s.

Mark  14.  16.  came  and  found  as  he  s.  Luke  ...  13.

16  7.  there  shall  ye  see  him,  as  he  s.  unto  you
Luke  9.  33.  Peter  said,  not  knowing  what  lies.

13. 17.  when  he  s.  these,  his  advers.  were  ashamed
John  2  22.  the  disciples  remembered  that  he  s.  this.

'  6.  6.  this  he  s.  to  prove  him,  for  he  knew

9.  17.  what  sayest  thou  ?  he  s.  he  is  a  prophet
12.  6.  this  he  s.  not  that  he  cared  tor  the  poor

33.  this  he  s.  signifying  what  death  he  should  die

18.  6.  as  soon  as/;e  s.  to  them,  1  am  he,  they  tell

19.  30.  he  s.  it  is  finished,  and  bowed  his  head
°0*  20.  when  he  had  so  s.  he  shewed  his  hands

1  22.  when  he  had  s.  this,  he  breathed  on  them

Acts 7 .  60.  when  he  had  s.  this,  he  fell  asleep

9  5.  he  s.  who  art  thou,  Lord  '  I  am  Jesus
°0  35  how  he  s.  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to-
23!  7.  when  he  had  so  a.  there  arose  a  dissension

^  Cor  12  9  he  .'.my  grace  is  sufficient  tor  thee
Heb.  1. 5*.  to  which  of  the  angels  s.  he,  13

10  9.  then  a.  he,  lo,  I  come,  to  do  thy  will,  O  Go
13  5.  for  he  hath  a.  1  will  never  leave  thee

Jam.  2.  11.  he  that  a.  do  not  commit  adultery
Rev  2°  6.  he  s.  these  things  art  faithful  and  true
/SAIL).

Gen.  26.  Q.  because  /  a.  lest  1  die  for  her
Exod.  3. 17.  1  have  s.  I  wilt  bring  you  up  put  of  F.gy
03  13.  in  all  things  that  1.  have  a.  be  circumspect
Deut  32  °6  I  a.  I  would  scatter  them  into  corners
Josh  A.  3.  that  have  1  given,  as  Is.  to  Moses
.ludg.  6.  10.  /  a.  unto  you,  1  am  the  Lord  your  G.

1  Sam  2.  30.  /  a.  indeed,  that  thy  house  should  waff-
q  03'  bring  the  portion  of  which  I  s.  set  it  by
0  Sam.  19-  29.  Is.  thou  and  Ziba  divide  the  laqn
o  Kings  23.  27.  house  of  which  I  s.  my  namesTiat-
Job  9.  22*.  this  is  one  thing,  therefore  I  s.  it  _
29  18  then  /  a.  1  shall  die  m  my  nest,  multip.y
V  7.  /  s.  days  should  speak,  and  years  teach
Pa  30.  6.  in  prosperity  1  s.  1  shall  never  be  moc  ei.
3Q  1 .  I  s.  1  will  take  heed  to  my  ways,  not  to  sin
40*  7  then  a.  1,  lo,  1  come,  Heb.  10.  7-
4  j  4'  /  Lord,  be  merciful  to  me,  heal  my  soul
ro*  ft  1  have  a.  ye  are  gods,  and  are  children  I
94.  18.  when  /  s.  foot  slippeth,  mercy  held  me  up
102.  24.  1  s.  O  my  God,  take  me  not  away
142.5.  I  a.  thou  art  my  refuge  and  portion

Eccl  2  1. /a.  in  my  heart, go  to  now,  lo.  II  3.  l(,  id.

Ha  6  11.  then  a.  1,  Lord,  how  long  t  he  answered
45  19.  I  s.  not  to  seed  ot  Jacob,  seek  ye  me  in  van
65.  1.  7  a.  behold  me,  behold  me,  to  a  nation
Ezek.  16.  6.  I  a.  when  thou  wast  111  thy  blood,  Ine
John\.  30.  this  is  he  of  whom  1  s.  after  me  come
3.  7.  marvel  not  that  7  s.  ye  must  be  born  again

8.  25.  the  same  that  7  a.  from  the  beginning

10.  36.  because  7  a.  1  am  the  Son  ot  God
11  40.  a.  7  not  fo  thee,  it  thou  wouldest  believe

42.  7  a.  it,  that  they  may  believe  thou  hast  sentm
14  28.  ye  have  heard  how  7  a.  to  you,  I  goa
16*.  4.  these  things  7.  a.  not  at  the  beginning
18.  20.  and  in  secret  have  7  a.  nothing
21  ask  them  which  heard  me,  what  1  nave  a.

Act "J  11  8  7  a.  not  so,  T.ord,  for  nothing  common
a  Cor  7*.  3.  7  have  a.  that  ye  are  in  our  hearts

9.  3.  yet  have  1  sent,  that  as  I  s.  ye  may  be  e  ^
See  J  esus.

6AeSAID.  .  ,

Gen.  4.  25.  God,  '.  she,  hath  appointed  me  anothi-

20.  5.  even  she  herself  a.  he  is  my  brother
24  58.  wilt  thou  go  with  this  man  '  . she  s.  *  v> 1
Exod.  4.  26.  then  she  s.  a  bloody  husband  thou  a  ^

1  I\inas°  14  I  have  somewhat  to  say .  she  s.  say
Mat.  15.  *7.  she  s.  truth,  Lord  yet  dogs  ea  cam
John  8.  11  she  s  no  man.  Lord  J ^us  said  to  he.

H.  28.  when  she  had  so  a.  she  went  her  )

00  14.  when  she  had  thus  a.  she  turned  herseii
Acts  5.8.  gnd  she  A^yea^tor  so  much

*»*«•»•  -•

Dent  5  28.  they  have  well',  all  they  haves

2  Chron.  22.  9.  a  .they,  he  is  the  son  of  .lehosha^1

0Q  ^1-  ..  1 — !«•»  fiol.l  fnr  the.v s.  ne  .

Psal.  83


1  22.  9.  a.  they,  he  is  the  son  or  Jtnos  .
"they  buried  in  field,  tor  tl,ey*-  ^ A"  ^ n  Jf.l-
S3.  4.  they  have  a.  come,  let  us  cut  them  ^


s  a  r

.Jer.  2.fr  neithei  4.  they ,  where  is  the  Lord  >

;,8-  believe  ve  -  they  s.  unto  him.  yea.  Lord
»V '  f2‘  they  'a\  1  let  lorn  be  crucified  •

21.  they  s.  lie  is  beside  himself
30.  because  .v.  he  haf'  m  unclean  spirit

i ,  ifionia.Ze,/’  nor  thVJ  any  thing  to  any  man
j  the  Lord  hath  need  of  him

12.  15.  then  s.  they ,  it  is  his  angel
SAID,  Passively.

9‘-  'Vheref°re  it  is  4.  even  as  Nimrod
j  :  a*  "  13  f-  to  this  day,  in  mount  of  the  Lord
t,iod.  5.  19.  after  it  was  ,v.  ye  shall  not  minish
\  T"9.?  ]3;  '/•  11  was  .v.  by  the  word  of  the  Lord
3;,3-  le"  the  night  perish,  in  which  it  was  4.

34.  31.  surely  it  is  meet  to  be  4.  to  God
I  sal.  87.  5.  ot  Zion  it  shall  be  4.  this  and  that  man
i  rov.' f5:  <\  better  it  be  4.  to  thee,  come  up  hither
l’  ,°''s  there  any  thing  whereof  it  may  bes.?
Pa.  .5.  9.  it  shal  be  s.  in  that  day,  this  is  our  God
7c/-  lo  H  it  shall  no  more  be  .t.  the  Lord  liveth
txek.  13.  12.  shall  it  not  be  s.  where  isthedaubing
(,  •  where  it  was  .r.  to  them,  ye  are  not
Mat.  5.  21.  it  was  s.  by  them  of  old  time,  27,  33
31.  ye  have  heard  it  hath  been  s.  38,  43
00  eJ- ,24’  ?ccordi,nS  to  that  which  is  4.  in  law  of  L
*3.  46.  having  s.  thus,  he  gave  up  the  ghost
Ro.m ;,9-  12.  it  was  4.  the  elder  shall  serve  younger
,'p\  fl'a‘  ^vhe.r?. If  ."’.as  ,f.  ye  are  not  my  people
if*  Yu'  15.-  whilst  ltis  ..to  day, if  ye  will  hear, 4. 7.

11.  18.  of  whom  it  was  s.  in  Isaac  shall  thy  seed

Kev.  6.  11.  and  it  was  s.  to  them,  they  should  rest
_  SAIDST.

1—  'p-  why  4.  thou,  she  is  my  sister  J
in'  n'  bow  s.  thou,  she  is  my  sister  ?

.0  ‘  °c!  the  Lord,  which  4.  to  me,  return

12.  thou  r  1  will  surely  do  thee  good,  make  seed

LW.  3.13.  4.  to  them,  I  will  multiply  your  seed
Judg.  9.  38.  where  is  thy  mouth  wherewith  thou  .v.
r  a  ^ou  s*  .worr*  I  Have  heard  is  good

I  [,  ,  •  thou  s.  my  righteous,  is  more  than  God’s
'  sal ■  27.  8-  when  thou  4.  seek  ve  my  face

47  U7’  and  thou  1  shall  be  a  lady  for  ever
V  and  dlou  s •  I  will  not  transgress
;  2b.  but  thou  Si  there  is  no  hope,  1  loved  strangers

,22,  21-  I_ spake,  but  thou  .9.  I  will  not  hear
v,'  ‘  Jhou  drewest  near,  thou  s.  for  me

/7ov  I35in '^?ChUSe  !,hou  s‘  alla’  a£-  my  sanctuary
pL  a  ' P  Vvb°m  '•  ?lve  me  a  king  and  prin.
John  4,  18.  he  is  not  thy  hush,  in  that  4.  thou  truly

1  00  Substantive,

v  i» 2S-  they  could  not  spread  the  .r.

i-'  which  thou  spreadedst  forth  to  be  thy  s.

27.  17-  they  strake  s.  and  so  were  driven
40.  and  hoised  up  the  main  4.  to  the  wind

.  ,  SAIL.

Sets  20.  3  as  he  was  about  to  4.  info  Syria

lo.  Paul  had  determined  to  4.  by  Ephesus
‘£4  Vn^hVi  was  determ,  we  should  s.  into  Italy
24.  God  hath  given  thee  all  them  that  4.  with  thee

fits  27  43'wLlhey  Si  he  ^"asleep,  came  a  storm
.d.js  27.  4.  when  we  launched,  we  4.  under  Cyprus
1.  and  when  we  had  s.  slowly  many  days

,  „  sailing;  y

dels  27.  9.  and  when  s.  was  now  dangerous
a  SAILING.

w  VVk2'  an1  fipdln/  a  ship  s.  over  to  Phenicia
27.  6.  the  centurion  found  a  ship  4.  into  Italy
p  SAILORS.

«^r.l8.17.  all  compan  v^ri  slii^ps,  and  .9.  stood  afar  off'

^  holy  or  godly  person ,  one  that  is
so  hy  profession,  covenant,  and  conversation,  Psal
16.  3.  Hen.  6.  10.  [2]  Those  blessed  spirits  which
are  graciously  admitted  by  God  to  partake  of
:  fZsrPftty,  slory  and  blessedness.  Rev  18  24
cv  L.  hol.y  aV-SelG  Deut.  33.  2.  Jude  14.
for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  Eph.  4.  12  To
strengthen  and  confirm  them  more  and  more  in
then  snuon  to  Christ  their  Head,  and  in  their
love  to  one  another,  and  in  faith  and  every  grace,
till  they  come  to  a  perfect  man  in  heaven,  when
drace  shall  be  turned  into  glory.

Dan  8  °ft  1LthCVuenv!ed  Aaron’  *•  of  the  Lord
13-  ‘hen.  1  heard  one .9.  speak,  another said

01, ;? oV*  W  UC;h  spake  h°w  long  shall  vis.  be  trod.

mi.  4.  21.  salute  every  r,  in  Christ  Jesus
n  oo  ,  SAINTS.

Jeut  33.  2.  he  came  with  ten  thousands  ol  s
3.  he  loveo  the  people  ;  all  his  4.  are  in  thy  hand
Sam.  2.  9.  he  will  keep  the  feet  of  his  s.
rjf o-  3L  let  thy  .9.  rejoice  in  goodness
is  it  rfu0  which  of  the  s.  wilt  thou  turn  ?

P-  15.  behold,  he  putteth  no  trust  in  his  .9.

•  3-  h11,1  to  the  .9.  that  are  in  the  earth
3?'  03  Snf'?  lr  e  I;ord:  0  Jfe  9.  of  his,  give  thanks
04’  f  °iie  >’e)1,S  A*  T.ord  preserveth

».  fear  the  Lord,  ye  his  .9.  there  is  no  want
•  28.  for  the  Lord  forsaketh  not  his  s.

W.  5.  gather  my  s.  together  to  me,  those  made

70  9  °'L t’?’ ,name’  f01; 11  is  good  before  thy  .v.

S'  ?•  A’e  hesh  Of  thy  ,s.  to  the  beasts  of  the  earth
.  •  9;  thy.  faithfulness  in  the  congregation  of  the  s.
n  Y°VS  t0  leared  in  the  assembly  of  the  s
he  Pr?serveth  the  souls  of  his  .9.
lib.  15.  precious  to  the  Lord  is  death  of  his  j.
ir  9'  Ihy  s.  shout  for  joy

10.  and  her  s.  shall  shout  aloud  ?or  joy
40.  10.  all  thy  works  praise,  and  j.  shall  bless  thee
48.  14.  he  exalteth  the  praise  of  all  his  .9.

V  u  hls  5r?'.3e  in  the  congregation  o fs.
o.  et  .9  be  joyful  in  glory,  let  them  sing  aloud

roJho  «°K°Ur  have  al!  his  f.  praise  ye  the  Lord
,  2-  f-  he  preserved)  the  \9ay  of  his  .9.

£*•7-  18-  but  s.  shall  take  the  kingdom,22,  27.
os'  tbe  same  horn  made  war  with  the  s.

'  '  ,®ha11  wear  out  the  .v.  of  the  Most  High

“nil  Vi  *PUV  Ldsh  1S  faithful  with  the  4.
r,  -'4- b-  God  shall  come  and  all  4.  with  thee
oi'ii  io’Lman^  bodies  of  .9.  that  slept  arose
o  p  '  3-  h°w  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  s.
reter  catne  down  also  to  the  s.  at  I.ydda


SAI


S  A  K


41-  when  he  had  called  the  s.  and  widows
2b.  10  many  of  the  .9.  did  I  shut  up  in  prison
J;  <•  beloved  of  God,  called  to  be  s.

10  ,f.cau.se  he  maketh  intercession  for  the  s.

;'  '3-  distributing  to  the  necessity  of  the  .9

%  k?-°  ,eruSHleni  to  minister  to  4.

Vi  fi  l  k  ce.ltain  contribution  for  the  poor  j.
my  service  may  be  accepted  of  the  .9

Ih^  yn  *uCelve  heur  ln  Lnrd  asbecometh  4.
15.  salute  all  the  s.  with  them,  Heb  13  04
1  Cer.  1.2.  to  them  that  are  sanctified,  cal'led 'to  be  j

6.  1.  dare  any  go  to  law,  and  not  before  the  9  ?

.?■  d°  >’e,  not  know  .that  the  s.  shall  judge  world  -

14.  33.  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  churches  of  the  s
16  1  now  concerning  the  collection  for  the  9  '

15  have  addicted  themselves  to  the  ministry 'off.

2RC4  a  the.u  wh?cl.1  are  in  Acha'ia

8.  4.  and  take  upon  us  the  ministering  to  the  s
y.  1.  tor  as  touching  the  ministering  to  the  s
12.  not  only  supplieth  the  want  of  the  s.

13.  13.  all  the  .9.  «alute  you,  Phil.  4.  22

15'  HftW  h«iiaJrfEp  1 s,and  fai,thr'ul  in  Christ

15.  after  I  heard  of  your  love  to  all  the  f.

o  Voncbes  °cti!e  nf  his  inheritance  in  s.
o'  I9 ’Ae  are  fellow  citizens  with  the  s.

iu  *1°  I116  who  HLni  less  than  the  least  of  all  f.

4  Lmay  ,be  able  to  com  prebend  with  all  .9.

5  o2j  Ibc  perfecting  of  the  s.  for  (he  ministry
5.  3  let  it  not  be  once  named,  as  becometh  f

Ph)f  'iPriy,t«g  pra?er ^andsupplicat.  foi  all  t.

C,  \  V  f'nal!  the  s-  m  Cbnst  Jesus  at  Pb.bppi
.  ..  -•  to  all  the  s.  and  faithful  at  Golosst
4  since  we  heard  of  the  love  ye  have  to  all  t.,e  s
V2.  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  f.  in  light
26  the  mystery  novy  made  manifest  to  his  .9

o  Thell'l  in  hi  c?nJ}n®  of 011  r  Lord  with  all  his  .9.

7  m  1°-  he  shal'  come  to  be  glorified  in  his.)

she  ,h?'.’e  washed  the  s.  feet
7*hn’hn  0ye  faltl1’  which  thou  hast  to  all  s
He'h  *  m  ^e  !i°f.the  V  ai'e  refreshed  by  thee
y  9'  fl.1at  >’e  have  ministered  to  thef.

Jude  3.  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  s
H.  the  Lord  cometh  with  10,000  of  his  s'

iT'iq'  o'  Th)lch  al^e  tl?e,  Pra>’ers  of  f.  8.  3,4.

11.  18.  that  thou  shouldest  give  reward  to  thy  s

in  i'  U  wa®  "n'en  him,  to  make  war  with  the  s
10  here  is  the  patience  and  faith  of  the  f.

14.  12.  here  is  the  patience  of  the  9

I  V  f  &hnd  V16  ar,e  thy  ways,  thou  King  of
[  16.  6.  for  they  have  shed  the  blood  of  the  s.

t.ke  woman  drun  ken  with  the  blood  of  the  4.
Jn'oVu"  her  was  found  the  blood  of  the  4.
on*  n  the  bne  linen  is  the  righteousness  of  the  s.

•41.  9.  and  compassed  the  camp  of  the  4.  about

1  Kings  3.  23.  the  one  4.  this  is  my  son  that  liveth
on  o  m  and  the  other  4.  nay,  but  thy"  son  is  dead
.0  2  thus4  Renhauad,  thy  silver  and  gold  is  mine
3..  senant  Benhadad  s  I  pray  thee  let  me  live
.<  •  s-  king,  put  this  fellow  in  pris.  2  Chr.  18

TnSth"  18'  lhus  ■*'  the  king,  is  it  peace  5  19.’  ~
1871P;  thus;v:  the  great  king,  the  king  of  Assyria
29.  thus  4.  king,  let  not  Ilezekiah  deceive,  not  able

10  1  V?,  deh';er  ?!  •  2  Chr  .  32.  10.  7.9a.  36.  14.

3- thus  4.  I  fezek.  tins  aday  ot  trouble,  Isa  37  3

rS^36,. TV1!!'8  JV  Cyr,us’  kin?  ?t  Pers.  Ezra\.  2.

„  l4'  .the  depth  4.  the  sea  4.  it  is  not  in  me

9^'  in'  k.,S  "raclous  to  him,  and  4.  deliver  him
3o  10.  but  none  4.  where  is  God  my  maker  ?

1  sat.  36  1  the  transgression  of  the  wicked  4.
Vn’Vd9';?;  mt  Pnderstanding, she  4.to  him,  16.
oo'  U'  *1  d  1S  nanght,  4.  the  buyer

or'  Vn  the  slothful  man  .9.  there  is  a  lion,  26.  13.
r'  ,Lat  deceiveth,  and  4.  am  not  I  in  sport  ?

M  ■  w.ho  ls  be  that  .9.  and  it  cometh  to  pass  J

^.7,21.  not  every  one  that  4.  to  me.  Lord,  Lord
M6'  lo  $  p  ('lm’  V  aster  4.  my  time  is  at  hand
IS  no8'  29,  Peter  t0  hlm’  thou  art  the  Christ
15-28.  scripture  was  fulfilled  which  4.  Jam.  2.  23
Luke  18.  6.  L.  said,  hear  what  the  unjust  judge  4
J9nUoi'  it0'  1  fllou  knewest  who  it  is  that4J.  give  '

19.  28.  the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  4.  1  thirst
VWf  4?u  ln  fen? p  es  made  with  hands,  as  4.  proph
n\l}\  T- f,he  Hol.y  Chost,  so  the  Jews  do
Pom.  3. 19.  the  la\y  4.  it  4.  to  them  that  are  under
4.  3.  for  what  4.  the  scripture,  10.  8.

9^17.  for  scripture  4.  to  Pharaoh,  for  this  purpose
V'  n  s<rr,Pfnre  4.  whoso,  believeth  on  him
16.  for  Lsaias  4.  20.  ||  19.  first  Moses  4.

!}■  ?•  w°t  ye  not  what  the  scripture  4.  of  Elias  ?

1  but  what  4.  the  answer  of  God  to  him  ?
no'  3*4'  i0s  while  one  4.  1  am  of  Paul,  another
8<Gor  s’  not  Jaw  the  same  also  ?

V  /  f'  ^nn'a,n  t0  be  under  obedience,  as  also  4.  law
Gal.  4.  30.  what  4.  the  scripture  ?  1  Tim.  5  ir
Heb.  3.  7.  as  the  Holy  Ghost  .9.  if  ye  will  hear’

Jam.  4.  5.  do  ye  flunk  the  scripture  4.  in  vain
tiev.  2.  1.  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  .9  to  the
churches,  11,  17,  29. 1  3. 6  ’  13  00
8.  9.  the  First  and  the  Last  ||  18.  4.  Son  of  God
3  14.  4.  the  Amen  ||  14.  13.  yea,  4.  the  Spirit
7.  she  4.  I  sit  a  oueen,  and  am  no  widow
22.  20.  he  4.  surely  1  come  quickly,  amen
„  God  SAITH.

2o?^on*’tV. n'c 13 ' n  1  jat  nuy  Pod  f- t,iatI  will  speak
PW2«Vifi  £  G°1:  T^'  bansgress  ye  commands
Psal.  50  16.  to  wicked  God  s.  what  hast  thou  to  do

5f  lhu®u'f-  C,,,d  the  Lord,  that  created  heavens
54.6.  when  thou  wast  refused,  4.  thy  God
57.  21.  there  is  no  peace,  s,  my  God ,  to  wicked
t)().  9-  brinp  forth  and  shut  the  womb,. r.  thy  God
Acts  2.  17  ■  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  4  G
_  ,  „  He  SAI  L’H.  '

Gen.  41.  o5.  go  to  Joseph,  what  he  s.  to  you,  do

1  Naw.  9.  6.  all  that  he  s.  cometh  surely  to  pass

2  esam.  17.5.  let  us  hear  likewise  what  he  s.

~T  )  ^S.lS.when  he  s.  to  thee,  wash  and  be  dean
Job  37.  6.  for  he  s.  to  the  snow,  be  thou  on  earth

otOVAPf  7Vea<  anfl  drink,  s.  he  to  thee,  his  heart
24.  24.  he  that  4.  to  wicked,  thou  art  righteous
Peel.  4.  8.  nor  4.  he,  for  whom  do  1  labour’

10.  3.  and  he  4.  to  every  one  that  he  is  a  fool


Mark  11.  23.  shall  believe  those  things  he  4  shai
,  ,  0C°™  to  pass,  he  shall  have  whatever  he  s'.
John  2.  5.  whatsoever  he  s.  to  you,  do  it
16. 18.  what  is  this  he  s.f  we  cannot  tell  what  lies
19.  35.  and  he  knoweth  that  he  s.  true
21. 15.  he  4.  to  Peter,  feed  my  lambs,  16.

VW'i'  W!’,cb-  i-  he'  -ve  '’are  heard  of  me
7^'  ^he  more  silence,  and  he  s

Rom.  10.  21  to  Israel  he  s.  ||  15.  10.  again  he  s.

,tK  for  two,  4.  he,  shall  be  one  flesh
y.  io.  or,  4.  he  it  altogether  for  our  sakes  ?

~  Lor.  o.  2.  he  s.  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time
v  f  „  J6'  ie  not’  and  to  seetls,  as  of  many
iq  8'  *u  see,’ s’ ,,e' ttlat  thou  make  all  things
13.  m  that  he  s.  a  new  covenant,  he  made  first  old
See  Jesus,  Lord.

T  SAKE.

io”'ia'  L1' T  vvil1  not  curse  the  ground  for  man’s  s
k?.'  l  entreated  Abram  well  for  her  4.
ol  he  said,  [  will  not  do  it  for  forty’s  s
31  'iIjot4or  twenty’s  4.  II  32.  not  for  ten’s  4.

'?'Jh  they  will  slay  me  for  my  wife’s  4.

OQ  7  ’,  will  multiply  thy  seed  for  Abraham’s  s.
r?:;.b‘«d  the  Egyptian’s  house  for  Joseph’s  4.

01  ofi  ?'*V'°rd  i-ad  <  one  to  E«'Pt  for  Israel’s  4.
sl'f)  etblinJ°  tree  for  eye  s  4.  ||  27.  for  tooth’s  4.
™;1L  29-  Moses  said,  enviest  thou  for  my  4.  ?

^5.  11.  while  he  was  zeajous  for  my  4.  among  them

1  I8'  7 so  SirIn  111  t!ay  the  plague  for  Peor’s  4.
oq  ui  V  I'  no|  torsake  his  people  for  name’s  4
^.3.  10.  Saul  seeketh  to  destroy  the  city  for  mv  4
.  Sam.  5  12.  Lord  exalted  kingdom  for  Israeli  4!

7.  21.  for  thy  word  s  4.  hast  done  all,  1  Chr  17  IQ

9.  L  I  may  shew  him  kindness  for  Jonathan’s  V.  7  '
deal  gently  for  my  4.  with  young  man  Absal.

1  Kings  8.  41.  a  stranger  that  cometh  out  of  a  far
„  ,  country  for  thy  name's  4.  2  Chr  on.  6.  32.

11.  12.  for  David  thy  father’s  s.  13.  32  34  I  15  4
2  Kings  8.  19.  I  19.  34.  |  20.  6.  Psal.' 132. 10.'
ati.'  mr  Jerusalem  s  4.  which  1  have  chosen
tiIJ-  31  •  not  consume  them  for  great  mercies’  s
Job  19. 17.  entreated  for  children’s  4.  of  my  bodv
6.  4.  save  me  for  thy  mercies’.  4.  31.  16.
n'T  m'  'e<tdeth  me  for  his  name’s  s.  31.  3.
ii  7- remember  thou  me  for  thy  goodness’ ’4.

. *  t- tor  thy  name’s  4.  pardon  mine  iniquity

44.  26.  arise,  redeem  us  for  thy  mercies’  4.

09.  b.  not  be  confounded  tor  m3’  4.  O  God
j, -h  (J-  purge  away  our  sins  for  thy  name’s  s.

106.  8.  ne  saved  them  for  his  name’s  s.

109.  21.  but  do  thou  for  me,  for  thv  name’s  4.

JIq  ViglVe-g  °ry’  for  th>'  mercy  an<l  truth’s  4.

143.  11.  quicken  me,  for  tlvy  name’s  4.  for  thy
,  righteousness  4.  bring  my  soul  out  of  trouble
Gn'nl'  r;  •  r  ,mne  own  4.  and  Dav  id’s  4.

e  ' ls  we"  Pleased  for  his  righteousness’

4ii  'ui  kor  your  s-  1  have  sent  to  Rabylon
*5.  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  my  own  4

45.  4.  for  Jacob’s  .9.  1  have  even  called  thee
48.  9.  for  my  name’s  4.  will  I  defer  mine  an^er

11.  even  for  mine  own  4.  will  I  do  it
6..  1  tor  Zion  s  .9.  for  Jerusalem’s  4.  I  will  not  rest
l7'  ,reJurn  for  thy  servant's  4.  the  tribes
00.  5  that  cast  you  out  for  mv  name’s  4.  said
JeL:  14-7‘  O  Lord,  do  thou  it  for  thy  name’s  1.

21.  do  not  abhor  us  for  thy  name  s  4.

Pze/c.  20.  9.  but  I  wrought  'for  my  name’s  4.  that  it

should  not  be  polluted,  14.  22,  44  |  36  °2
I7' shin?  on  toy  sanctuary,  for  the  Lord’s" 4!

19.  defer  not  for  thine  own  .9.  O  my  God
Jonah  1.12 .  for  my  .9.  this  great  tempest  is  on  you
Mie.  3. 12.  shall  Zion  toryoui  .v.  he  plowed  as  a  field
’  , 5:  1  \\-  "  ho  are  persecuted  for  righteousness’ s.

1 '  Shall  sa\-  evil  against  >tou  falsely  for  my  4.

10.  18.  ye  shall  be  brought  before  governors  and

kings,  for  my  4.  Mark  13.  9.  Luke  21.  12

22.  and  ye  shall  be  hated  of  all  men,  for  m~v
on  u  game’s  .9.  24.  9.  Mark  13.  13.  l.uke  21.  17.

39.  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  s.  shall  find  it

,  ,  _  tt  ,  .  'b;  25-  Mark  35.  Luke  9.  24.’

14.3.  Herod  bound  John  for  Herod,  s.  Mark  6  17
9.  nevertheless,  for  the  oath’s  .9.  Mark  6.  26
19. 12.  eunuchs  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven’s  4.

29.  that  hath  left  lands  for  m>r  name’s  4.  shall  r  1-
04  nneln  e  hun,drccl  fold,  Mark  10.  29.  Luke  18.  29.

A.  there,  shall  no  flesh  he  saved,  but  for  elect’s
ns  /;  toose  da>'s  shall  be  shortened,  Mark  13.  20
Mark  A.  17.  persecution  ariseth  for  the  word’s  4
Puke  6.  22.  cast  out  your  name  for  Son  of  man’s  s.

,0  o!2'  9--  toe  people  came  not  for  Jesus’  4.  only'

13.  38.  wilt  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  my  4.  ?

14. 11.  else  believe  me  for  the  very  works’  4
J5;  21.  these  things  shall  do  to  you  for  my  name’s  s.

Acts  9.  lo.  things  he  must  suffer  for  m3'  name’s  s.

~o.  7-  for  which  hope’s  4.  1  am  accused  of  Jews
GomA  4'/3’  was  not  written  for  his  4.  alone
11 . 28.  tor  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your  4.

Lc"okyf  mTust  n,eeds  be  subject  for  conscience’ s.

15.30.  tor  Lord  s  4.  strive  w  ith  me  in  your  pra3  ers
'to'  4-  to- we  are  fools  for  Christ’s  4.  ye  are  wise

9.  23.  and  this  1  do  for  the  gospel's  4.

10.  25.  asking  no  question  for  conscience’ s.  27.

28.  this  is  offered  in  sacrifice  to  idols,  eat  not,  for

O  m  4  bJs  f-  to  at  shewed  it,  and  for  conscience’  4.

~  C or.  4. 5.  ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus’  4

11.  we  areal  way  delivered  to  death  for  Jesus’  4.

12.  10.  1  take  pleasure  in  distresses  for  Christ’s  4.

Hpq.  4.  32.  as  God  for  Christ’s  s,  forgave  you
Ihil.  1.  29.  but  it  is  given  also  to  suffer  for  his  s.
VVi24-  f°r  his  body’s  4.  which  is  the  church
3- b-  tor  which  things’  4.  wrath  of  God  cometh
\  Ihess.  1.5.  what  manner  of  men  we  were  for  your  4
5  1.3.  to  esteem  them  highly  for  their  work’s  s  *
LV?’  2;3’  UY-  a  '"‘to  wine,  for  thy  stomach’s  4
■ftt-.L  H.  teaching  things  for  filthy  lucre’s  9
Philem.  9. yetfor  love’s  4.  I  rather  beseech  thee
1  f t-  2. 13.  submit  to  every  ordinance  for  Lord’s  4,

‘itt  anc  “  suffer  for  rigliteousness’ s.

1  John  2.  12.  your  sins  are  forgiven  for  name's  s.

VJohn  2.  for  the  truth’s  4.  that  dwelleth  in  us
3  John  7 .  because  for  his  name’s  4.  they  went  forth
hev.  2.  3.  and  for  my  name's  s .  nast  laboured

411


SAL


SAL


SAL


Thy  SAKE.

Gen.  3.  17-  cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  s
12. 13.  that  it  may  be  well  with  me  tor  tnt  s.

30.  27.  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed  me  for  thy  s.

Psal.  44.  22.  for  thy  s.  are  we  killed  all  day  long,  we
are  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter,  Korn.  8.  30.

69.  7.  because  for  thy  s.  I  have  torne  reproach
Isa.  5 4.  15.  who.  gather  ag.  thee,  shall  tallfoi  thy  s.

Jer.  2.  +  2.  I  remember  tor  thy  s.  the  kindness

15.'  15.  know  that  for  My  s.  1  have  suffered  rebuke
John  13.  37.  I  will  lay  down  my  life  tor  thy  s.

SAKES.  ,  .

Gen  18.  26.  I  will  spare  the  place  tor  their  s.

Lev  26.45.  i  will  for  their  s.  rememb.  the  covenant

Deut'  1.  37-  Mso  the  Kcr<l  was  allSry  'vlAl  F\e  LSr
your  s.  saying,  thou  shalt  not  gp,  3.  .6. 1  4.  21.
Juda.  21.  22.  be  favourable  to  them  tor  our  s.

Ruth  l  13.  it  gneveth  me  much  tor  your  s.

1  Chr.  16.21.  yea,  he  reproved  kings  tor  their  s.  he
suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong,  Ps.  105.  14.
Psal.  7.  7-  for  their  *.  therefore  return  thou  on  high
106.'  32.  it  went  ill  with  Moses  for  their  .s.

1°2  8.  for  my  brethren  and  companions  s
Isa.' 65.  8.  so  will  l  do  for  my  servant's  s.

Ezek  36.  22.  I  do  not  this  tor  your  s.  O  Israel,  32.

Dan  '  2.  30.  but  for  their  s.  that  shall  make  known

Mai'  3  11.  and  l  will  rebuke  the  devourer  tor  your
"  f.'he  shall  not  destroy  the  fruits  of  your  ground
Mark  6.  26.  and  for  their  s.  which  sat  with  him
John  11.  15.  1  am  glad  for  your  s.  1  was  not  theie
12.  30.  this  voice  came  not  tor  me,  but  tor  your  s,
if!  19.  and  for  their  s.  I  sanctify  myself  (

Rom  11  28.  they  are  beloved  for  the  father  s  s,

1  Cor.  4.  6.  I  have  transferred  for  your  *.

9.  10.  or  saith  he  it  for  our  s.  ?  tor  our  *.  no  doubt

2  Cor.  4.  15.  for  all  things  are  tor  your  s.

8  9  though  rich,  yet  tor  your  s.  became  poor

1  Thess.  3.  9.  we  joy  for  your  5.  before  God

2  Tim.  2.  10.  1  endure  all  things  tor  the  elect  s  s.

SALE.  ,.

lev  25.  27.  let  him  count  the  years  of  the  s.  thereof
50.  price  of  his  s.  shall  be  according  to  the  y’eais
Deut.  18.  8.  besides  that  which  cometh  ot  the  s.

SALT,

In  Greek,  aX? ;  in  Hebrew,  Melach.  God  ap¬
pointed  that  Salt  should  he  used  in  all  the  sacri¬
fices  that  were  offered  to  him:  Every  oblation  ot
thy  meat  offering  shalt  thou  season  with  salt,
neither  shalt  thou  suffer  the  salt  ot  the  covenant
of  thy  God  to  be  lacking  from  thy  meat  ottering :
With  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  off  er  salt ,  Lev.

2.  13.  This  signified  that  mcorruption  oj  mind,
and  sincerity  of  grace,  which  are  necessary  in  all
them  that  would  offer  an  acceptable  offering  unto
God  ■  or  it  denoted  that  communion  which  they
had  with  God  in  these  exercises  of  his  worship,  salt
being  a  symbol  both  oj  friendship  and  inconup-
(ion.  It  appears  from  Ezek.  16.  4.  that  heretofore
they  rubbed  new-born  children  with  salt ,  in  the
day  thou  wast  born  thou  wast  not  salted  at  all,
nor  swaddled  at  all.  Some  think  they  did  this,
to  dry  up  the  humidity  that  abounds  m  children,
and  to  close  up  the  pores  which  are  then  too  open.
Others  say,  that  salt  hardens  the  skins  of  children,
and  makes  them  more  firm.  Others  think,  it  was
to  hinder  any  corruptions  that  might  proceed  jrom
cutting  of  the  navel-string.  Whatever  was  their
end  in  it,  the  prophet  here,  in  continued  allegory,
describes  the  worthless,  helpless,  and  despicable
condition  of  the  Jews  at  first,  till  trod  pitied  and
helped  them ,  and  bestowed  all  manner  of  precious

blessings  upon  them.  .

In  2  Kings  2.  21,  the  prophet  Elisha  being  desired
to  Sweden  the  waters  of  the  fountain  of  Jericho,
and  make  them  fit  to  drink,  required  a  new  ves¬
sel  to  be  brought  to  him,  and  some  salt  to  be  put
therein.  They  followed  his  orders :  lie  threw  this
salt  into  the  spring,  and  said ;  Thus  saith  the
Lord,  1  have  healed  these  waters;  and  .or  the
future  they  shall  not  be  the  occasion  either  ot
death  or  barrenness:  So  the  waters  became  good
for  drinking ,  and  lost  all  their  former  bad  quail-
ties.  Naturally  the  salt  must  only  have  served  to
increase  the  brackishness  or  bitterness  of  this  Joun-
tain;  but  the  prophet  is  directed  to  make  use  of  a
remedy  that  seemed  contrary  to  the  effect  which
was  produced,  that  the  miracle  might  become  the
more  evident.  „  . .

Our  Saviour,  in  his  sermon  on  the  mount,  tells  his
disciples,  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  Mat.  5.  13.
Ye  are  persons,  who  being  endued  with  giace  your-
selves,  ought  to  season  others,  and  preserve  them
from  corruption  ;  and  the  doctrine  which  ye  pro¬
fess  is  as  opposite  as  can  be  to  the  putrefaction  of
the  world,  both  in  respect  to  corrupt  doctrine  and
corrupt  manners.  Salt  has  an  acrimony  by  which
it  pierceth  the  lump  ;  so  the  word  is  piercing ,  lleb.
4.  12.  By  the  salt  of  the  earth,  some  understand
marl,  with  which  they  manure  their  land  in  some
countries,  instead  of  dung.

Salt  is  the  symbol  of  wisdom.  Col.  4.  6.  Let  your
speech  be  always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt.
It  is  the  symbol  of  perpetuity  and  incorruption  :
Thus  they  said  of  a  covenant,  It  is  a  covenant
of  salt  for  ever,  before  the  Lord,  Num.  W.  19.
And  in  2  Chron.  13.  5.  I  he  Lord  God  ot  Israel
gave  the  kingdom  over  Israel  to  David  tor  ever,
even  to  him,  and  to  his  sons,  by  a  covenant
of  salt.  Salt  is  the  symbol  also  of  barrenness
and  sterility.  When  Abinielecli  took  the  city  ot
Shechem,  he  destroyed  it,  and  sowed  the  place
with  salt,  that  it  might  always  remain  de.se/ 1  and
unfruitful,  Judg.  9.  45.  Zephaniah  threatens
the  Ammonites  and  Moabites,  from  the  Lord ;
Moab  shall  be  as  Sodom,  and  the  children  ot
Ammon  as  Gomorrah,  even  the  breeding  ot
nettles,  and  salt-pits,  and  a  perpetual  desola¬
tion,  Zeph.  2.  9.  Salt  is  likewise  the  symbol  oj
hospitality ,  and  of  that  fidelity  that  is  due  from
servants,  friends,  guests,  and  domestics,  to  those
that  entertain  them,  and  receive  them  at  their
tables.  'The  governors  of  the  provinces  beyond

412


the  Euphrates,  writing  to  king  Artaxerxes,  tell
him.  Because  we  have  maintenance  from  the
king’s  palace,  &c.  Ezra  4.  14.  which  m  the ^  Chal¬
dee  is.  Because  we  are  salted  with  the  oalt  of

Mhierat'saft ;  or  salt  that  is  dug  out  of  m
form  of  a  hard  stone.  It  is  thought  that  Lots
wife  was  changed  into  a  statue  tj  such  lmnei  at
salt,  that  she  became  as  a  rock  or  stone  oj  salt,

T^Salt^ea?’  Gen.  14.  3.  is  the  Dead  sea,  or  Me
lake  of  Sodom,  called  likewise  the  lake  Asphal-
tites,  because  of  the  great  quantity  oj  bitumen  in
it,  so  that  no  fish  can  hie  in  its  waters,  and  a  man
cannot  without  difficulty  sink  in  them,  by  reason
of  the  weight  and  density  oj  them.  Hie  enniei  ff
the  inhabitants  oj  Sodom,  Gomoirah,  Zeboim,
and  Admah,  were  come  to  such  an  height,  th^t
God  destroyed  these  cities;  together  with  their  in¬
habitants,  by  fire  from  heaven.  I  he  plain  where¬
in  they  stood,  which  before  was  pleasant  andUuit-
ful,  like  an  earthly  Paradise,  was  first  inflamed
by  lightning,  which  put  fire  to  the  bitumen ,  with
which  it  was  replete,  and  was  ajterwards  0^tJl°wed
by  the  waters  of  the  Jordan,  which  diffused  t  em
selves  there,  and  formed  the  Dead  sea,  or  Salt  sea.
This  lake  receives  all  the  water  oj  Jordan,  oj  the
brooks  Arnon  and  Jabbok,  and  other  waters  which
descend  from  all  the  nev,  hbturing  mountains  ;  and
notwithstanding  it  has  no  visible  issue,  it  does  not
overflow.  It  is  believed  that  it  discharges  itse/j  by
sem „  subterraneous  channels-  into  the  Red  sea,  or
im  uie  Mediterranean.  According  to  Josephus
account,  the  lake  of  Sodoni  is  580  Jur longs  in
length,  from  the  mouth  of  the  rivet  Jordan  to
Zoar,  that  is,  about  two  and  twenty  leagues,  at
three  miles  to  a  league  ;  and  150  jurlongs  wide  ;
that  is  to  say,  about  five  leagues  oj  the  same

Gen.  19.  26.  Lot’s  wife  became  a  pillai  of  s.

Lev.  2.  13.  with  all  thy  offerings  thou  shalt  offers.
Deut.  29.  23.  and  that  the  whole  land  thereof  is  s.
Josh'll,  t  8.  Israel  chased  them  to  *.  pits

15.  62.  the  children  of  Judah  bad  the  ei  y ;  of. s.


salvation.  Thus,  the  word  of  salvation,  the  joy
of  salvation,  the  rock  of  salvation,  the  shield  ot
salvation,  the  horn  of  salvation,  the  tower  ot  sal¬
vation,  &c.  is  as  mufh  as  to  say,  lhe  word  that
declares  deliver ancr.  ,  the  joy  that  attends  the
escaping  a  great  d^.sjer ;  a  rock  where  any  one
takes  refuge,  and  where  he  may  be  in  safety
from  his  enemy  ;  a  buckler  that  secures  jrom  the
arm  of  the  enemy ;  g  horn  or  ray  oj  glory,  of
happiness,  and  salvation,  &c.

Exod.  14.  1.3.  see  the  x.  ot  the  Lord,  2  Chr .  20.  17.
Deut.  32.  15.  lightly  esteemed  the  rpek  of  his  j.

1  Sam.  11.  13.  the  Lord  wrought  s.  in  Israel  touay
14.  45.  Jonathan,  who  hath  wrought  this  great  j.
19  5.  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  s.  tor  all  Israel

2  Sam.  19.  t  2.  the  s.  was  turned  into  mourning
°2  51  he  is  the  tower  of  s.  tor  his  king

1  Chron.  11.  1 14.  the  Lord  saved  them  by  a  great  s.
16.  23.  shew  forth  from  day  to  day  his  s.

35.  save  us,  O  God  ot  our  s.  and  gather  us

2  Chron.  6.  41.  let  thy  priests  be  clothed  with  *.


10.  oz.  xne  umuica  vji  ^  nuuu  .1

Judg .  9.  45.  beat  down  the  city ,  and  sowed  it  with  s.
2  Sam.  8. 13.  smiting  the  Syrians  in  the  a  iey  of  ^


Z  dum,  o*  lO*  oiiiiLiiifc,  tut-  y-jj  *  *  ^  |  •

2  Kings  2.  20.  bring  me  a  new  cruse,  put  s.  therein
21  he  went  to  the  spring,  and  cast  the  *.  in  there
14.  7.  Amaziah  slew  of  Edom  in  the  valley  ( ot  s.

10,000,  1  Chron.  18.  12.  2  Chron.  25.  11.
Ezra  4+14  we  are  salted  with  the  s.  ot  the  palace

6.  9.  that  which  they  have  need  of,  wheat,  s.  wine

7.  22.  and  s.  without  prescribing  how  much
Job  6.  6.  can  what  is  unsavoury  be  eaten  w.ihout  s. .

Jer.  17.  6.  but  he  shall  inhabit  places  in  a  f.  land
Ezek.  43.24.  the  priest  shall  cast  s.  upon  them

47.  11.  the  marishes  thereof  shall  be  given  to  s.

Zeph.  2.  9  surely  Moab  shall  be  as  s.  pits
Mat.  5.  13.  ye  are  the  s.  ot  the  earth,  but  if  the  -f.
Mark  9.  49.  every  sacrifice  shall  be  salted  with  s.

50  s  is  °ood,  but  it  s.  have  lost  his  saltness,  w hei  e-
’  with  will  ye  season  it?  have  s.  in  yourselves
Luke  14.  34.  s.  is  good,  but  if  .f.  have  lost  savour
Col.  4.  6.  let  your  speech  be  seasoned  with  s.

Jam.  3.  12.  no  fountain  can  yield  s.  water  and  tiesli
See  Covenant.

SALT  sea.  .  ,

Gen  14.  3.  in  the  vale  of  Siddim,  which  is  the  s.  sea
Num.  34.  12.  goings  out  of  it  shall  be  at  the  s.  sea
Deut  3  17.  coast  even  to  the  J.  sea  under  Ashdoth
Josh.' 3.  16.  the  waters  that  came  toward  the  .f.  sea
12.  3.  sea  of  plain,  even  to  s.  sea,  15.  2,  5. 1  18.  19.
SALTED.

Exod.  30.  +  35.  make  it  a  perfume  s.  together
Ezra  4.  +  14.  we  are  s.  "  ith  the  salt  ot  the  PaJac®
Ezek.  16.  4.  thou  wast  not  j.  at  all,  nor  swaddled
Mat. 5.13.  if  salt  lost  savour  wherewith  shall  it  be  s'..
Mark  9.  49.  for  every  one  shall  be  .c.  with  fire,  and
every  sacrifice  shall  be  s.  with  salt ;  salt  is  good
y  SALTNESS.

Psal.  107.  +  34.  lie  turneth  a  fruitful  land  into  s.
Mali  9.  50.  but  if  the  salt  have  lost  lus  s.

SALVA1ION

Is  taken,  1  .for  deliverance  from,  or  victory  over,
outward  dangers  and  enemies  Exo<i.l4.13.

Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  ot  the  Lord  ,
See  how  he  will  deliver  you  jrom  Me  Egyptians
your  enemies:  and  in  1  Sam.  14.  45.  Shall  Jona¬
than  die,  who  hath  wrought  this  great  salvation
in  Israel  ?  who  hy  God  s  assistance  hath  obtained
this  signal  victory  over  the  Philistines.
o  Rot  remission  of  sins,  true  faith,  repentance,

" obedience ,  and  other  saving  graces  of

which  are  the  way  to  salvation.  Luke  19.9.  inis
dav  is  salvation  come  to  this  house.  .

3.  lor  eternal  ha/piness  hereafter,  which  is  the.  ob¬
ject  of  our  hopes  and  desires :  thus  it  is  said,  l  o
save  knowledge  of  salvation  to  his  people,  I.uke
1  77  Godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  unto
salvation,  2  Cor.  7.  10.  And  the  gospel  is  called.
The  gospel  of  salvation,  Pph.  1.  1.3.  because  it
brings  the  good  news  that  salvation  is  to  be  had  ;  it
offers  salvation  to  lost  sinners  :  it  shews  the  way  to
attain  it :  it  also  fits  for  salvation,  and  at  last

4  b> Loft  he  Author  of  salvation.  Psal.  27.  1-  The
Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation  :  He  is  my
counsellor  in  all  my  diffiiulties,  and  my  Comjorter

and  Deliverer  in  all  my  distresses.  .

5  For  the  blessed  Jesus;  who  is  the  Saviour  oj  sni-
’ ners.  Luke  2.  30.  Mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  sal¬
vation,  says  Simeon  ;  1  have  seen  him  whom  thou
hast  sent  into  the  world  to  be  the  Autho/  and  Pio-
curer  of  salvation  to  lost  sinneis.

6  For  the  praise  and  benediction  that  is  given
to  God.  Rev.  19.  1.  Alleluia,  salvation,  and
glory,  and  honour,  and  power,  unto  the  Lord

The'  Hebrews  but  rarely  make  rise  of  concrete
terms,  as  they  are  called,  but  often  of  abstracted.
Thus,  instead  of  saying  that  God  saves  them,
and  protects  them ;  they  say,  that  God  is  then


z  unron.  o.  -11.  f1  ,  .t  ui  •  ■

Psal  3.  8.  L  belongeth  to  the  Lord,  thy  blessing  s»

14.  7.  O  that  the  *.  of  Israel  were  come,  53.  6.

°0  +  6  by  the  strength  of  the  s.  ot  his  right,  hand
24^  5.  and  righteousness  from  the  God  ot  his  s.

35.  9.  my  soul  shall  rejoice  in  his  .v.

37.  3y.  the  .y.  of  the  righteous  is  ot  the  Lord
42.  +5.  I  shall  praise  him,  his  presence  is  s.

50.  23.  to  him  will  1  shew  the  s.  ot  God

60.  +  11.  for  vain  is  the  of  man,  146.  +  3.

65.  5.  wilt  thou  answer  us,  O  God 1  of  our  s.?

68.  IQ.  blessed  be  the  Lord,  even  the  God  ot  our  s.
20.  he  that  is  our  God,  is  the  God  ot  s.

74.  12.  working  s.  in  the  midst  ot  the  earth
7s!  22.  because  they  trusted  not  in  his  s.

70  9.  help  us,  O  God  of  our  s.  for  the  glory
85.  4.  turn  us,  O  God  of  our  s.  cause  anger  to  cease-
Q.  surely  his  s,  is  nigh  them  that  fear  him

95.  1.  make  a  joyful  noise  to  the  rock  of  our  s.

96.  2.  shew  forth  his  s.  from  day  to  day
98.  2.  the  Lord  hath  made  known  his  s.

3.  ends  of  the  earth  have  seen  the  ,v.  of  our  God
116.  13.  I  will  take  the  cup  ot  *.  and  call  on  name

1 18.  15.  the  voice  of  s.  is  in  tabernacles  of  righteous

119.  155.  is  far  from  wicked,  they  seek  not  thy
132.  16.  I  will  clothe  her  priests  with  s.

144.  10.  it  is  he  that  givetli  s.  unto  kings
1-19.  4.  he  will  beautify  the  meek  with  s.

Isa.  12.  3.  shall  ye  draw  water  out  ot  the  wells  ot  t.

25.  9.  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  lus  s.

26.  1.  i.  will  God  appoint  tor  walls  and  bin  walks
33.  2.  be  thou  our  s.  in  the  time  of  trouble

6.  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  strength  or  •>.

45.  8.  let  the  earth  open,  and  let  them  bring  forth  r.
17.  Israel  shall  be  saved  with  an  everlasting  s.

46.  13.  1  will  place  s.  in  Zion  tor  Israel  my  glory
49.  8.  in  a  day  of  s.  have  1  helped  thee

52.  7.  the  feet  of  him  that  publisheth  s.

10.  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the  s.  of  our  God

59.  11.  we  look  for  s.  but  it  is  far  from  us

16.  therefore  his  arm  brought  s.  unto  him

17.  lie  put  on  an  helmet  of  s.  upon  his  head

60.  18.  but  shalt  call  thy  walls  s.  thy  gates  praise

61.  10.  he  hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  ot  5

62.  1.  and  the  s.  thereof  as  a  lamp  that  burneth

63.  5.  therefore  mine  own  arm  brought  s.  to jne
Jer.  3.  23.  truly  in  vain  is  i.  hoped  tor  from  the  into

and  mountains,  truly  in  the  Lord  is  the  s.  of  Is  .
Lam.  3.  26.  quietly  wait  tor  the  s. .  ot  the  l  ord
Jonah2.  9.  I  will  pay  that  1  vowed,  ,y.  is  of  the  Let.
[lab.  3.  8.  thou  didst  ride  on  thy  chariots  ot  s.

13.  thou  wentest  forth  for  s.  ot  thy  people,  evea
for  s.  with  thine  anointed,  woundedst  the  wicked
Zech.  9. 9.  behold,  thy  King,  he  is  just ^ind  having  s
Luke  1.  69.  who  hath  raised  up  an  horn  ot  f.  tor  u&
77.  to  give  knowledge  ot  s.  to  Ins  people
3.  6.  all  flesh  shall  see  the  ot  God
19.  9.  Jesus  said,  this  day  is  come  to  this  house
John 4.22.  weknow  what  we  worship, tor  J.isot  Jews
Acts  4.  12.  neither  is  there  s.  in  any  other
13.  26.  to  you  is  the  word  ot  this  s.  sent

47.  thou  shouldest  be  for  s.  to  ends  ot  the  earth
16.  17.  these  men  shew  to  us  the  way  or  s.

28.  28.  the  s.  of  God  is  sent  to  the  Gentiles
Rom.  1.  16.  the  gospel  is  the  power  ot  God  to  J>,
10.  10.  with  the  mouth  confession  18  A;jes

11.11.  through  their  tall  t.  is  come  to  the  Gentiles
13.  11.  now  is  ours,  nearer  than  when  we  belie
2  Cor.  1 . 6.  whether  we  be  comforted ,  it  is  for  your  s.

6.  2.  in  the  day  of*,  have  1  succoured  thee  ,  now
is  the  accepted  time,  behold  now  is  the  day  ot

7.  10.  godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance  to  s.
Eph.  1.  13.  after  ye  heard  the  gospel  of  your  J.

6.  17.  take  the  helmet  of  s.  and  the  sword  of  bPi
Phil.  1.  28.  which  is  to  you  an  evident  token  o  ..
2. 12.  work  out  your  own  f.  with  fear  and  trembli  g
1  Thess.  5.  8.  and  for  an  helmet  the  hope  ot
9.  hath  appointed  us  to  obtain  f.  by  our  Lord  je.
Thess.  2.  13.  for  God  hath  chosen  you  to


2  Thess.  2.  13.  tor  ciou  i»u>  •  AT  .  ; n  Ph ri si
2  Tim.  2.  10.  that  they  may  obtain  the  s.  m  Lnr
3.  15.  scriptures  are  able  to  make  thee  vise
Tit.  2.  11.  the  grace  of  God  that  bnngeth  s.


lit.  2.  ll.  me  giace  ui  v.uw
Heb  1  14.  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  s.

2.  3.  how  shall  we  escape,  if  vve  neglec^ STfA,4
10.  to  make  the  Captain  of  their*.  Pe|rtcecG"[1°tuh°a'
5  Q  he  became  the  Author  ot  eternals,  to  a
6*.  9*.  better  things,  and  things  that  accompany  -
9. 28.  shall  appear  the  second  time  without  s,n  to

1  Pet.  1.  5.  who  are  kept  through  faith  unto'-,
9  receiving  the  end  ot  your  faith,  s.  ot  >

10.  of  which  5.  the  prophets  ,"iqr ‘.ird  is  *

0  Pet.  3.  15.  the  long  suffering  of  the  Lord  is
Jude  3.  to  write  to  you  of  the  common  or

Rev.  7.  10.  saying,  *.  to  ou.r  God  \\  19. .  *j
1°  10  now  is  come  s.  and  stiength,  ana  „

My  SALVATION.

£X0d  15  2.  the  L.  is  my  song,  he  is  become  .

2  Sam.  22.  3.  he  is  my  shield,  the  horn  ot -my  ■
47.  exalted  be  the  rock  ot  my  -.  Psal.jp-

23.  5.  for  this  is  all  my  s.  and  all  m>  desite
Job  13.  16.  he  also  shall  be  my  s.  foi  an  hy  P
Psal.  25.  5.  for  thou  art  the  God  <  t  my  •>


8  A  M


SAN


JW.  27.1  L.  is  my  light  and  my  S.&2.6  Isa.  12.2.
9-  leave  me  not,  O  God  of  my  s.  51 .  14.  1 88.  1 .

88.  22.  O  Lord  my  s.  ||62.  2.  he  only  is  mys.  6.

1.  iny  sou.  waits  on  G.  from  him  cometli  my  „
^GinGod  .is  my  j.  ||  89.26.  my  God, rock  of  mys
yi.  10.  1  will  satisfy  him,  and  shew  him  mys.

1 18.  14.  the  Lord  is  become  my  s.  21.  Isa.  12.  2.

&£cklI,  the  I'or<J,  the  strength  ot 'my  s.

•c*  ‘  **  b?h°ld,  God  is  mys.  lie  is  become  my  s

nguteousn.  not  far,  my  s.  shall  not  tarry
4y.  0.  thou  mayest  be  my  s.  to  the  end  of  the  earth
51.  5.  mys.  is  gpne  forth  ||  6.  mys.  shall  be  for  ever
8.  ami  my  s.  from  generation  to  generation

50.  1 .  my  s\  is  near  to  come,  and  my  righteousness
iji’’  '  ‘  ^  wl*l  wait  for  the  tiod  of  w/y  f.  my  God

3. 18.  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  s.

Phil.  1. 19.  for  l  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  mv  s
„  Thy  SALVATION.  '

(>en.  49.  18.  1  have  waited  for  thy  s.  O  Lord

1  5a/«.  2. 1.  mouth  enlarged,  because  I  rejoice  in  t.  s

2  5awj.22.36.  thou  hast  also  given  me  the  shield  of
‘hy  s.  thy  gentleness  made  me  grecft,  Fsal.  18.  35

/  sal.  9.  14.  I  will  rejoi.e  in  thy  s.

13.  5.  my  heart  shall  rejoice  in  thy  s.

20.  5.  we  will  rejoice  in  thy  s.  and  set  up  banners
-1. 1.  and  in  thy  s.  how  greatly  shall  he  rejoice  !

5.  Ins  glory  is  great  in  thy  s.  honour  and  majesty
3o.  3.  say  unto  my  soul,  1  am  thy  s.

40. 10.  I  have  declared  thy  faithfulness  and  thy  s.
10.  let  such  as  love  thy  s.  say,  Lord  be  magnified

51.  12.  restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  thy  s.  ?0.  4.

69.  13.  O  God,  hear  me  in  the  truth  of  thy  s.

29.  I  am  poor,  let  thy  s.  set  me  up  on  high
7L  lo.  my  mouth  shall  shew  forth  thy  s.

85.  7.  shew  us  thy  mercy,  ()  Lord,  grant  us  thy  s.
100.  4.  remember  me,  O  visit  me  with  thy  s.

119.  41.  let  thy  s.  come  according  to  thy  word
81.  my  soul  fainteth  for  thy  s.  but  I  hope  in  word
123.  mine  eyes  tail  for  thy  s.  and  for  the  word
*00.  Lord,  1  have  hoped  for  thy  s.  and  done


SAN


1”  1.  1  have  longed  for  thy  O  Lord
Jjfi-  17-  10.  thou  hast  forgotten  the  God  of  thy  s.

62.  11.  say  to  Zion,  behold,  thy  s.  cometli
-Luke  2.  30.  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  s.

,  ,  SALUTATION.

lmke  1.  29.  what  manner  of  j.  this  should  be
41.  at  s.  of  Mary  babe  leaped  in  her  womb,  44.
tor.  lb.  21.  brethren  greet  you,  the  s.  of  me,  Paul,
with  mine  own  hand,  Col.  4.  18.2  Thess.  3. 17
.SALUTATIONS.

Mark  1„.  38.  scribes  who  love  s.  in  the  market-places
,  0  SALUTE.

I'rTn  s-  fhee  and  give  thee  tw’o  loav.

l.l.  10.  Saul  went  to  meet  Samuel,  that  might  s.  him
14.  behold,  David  sent  to  j.  our  master
t;  5awj.  8.  10.  loi  sent  Joram  his  son  to  s.  David

i n  s'  not>  s-  thee,  answer  not

10.  13.  we  go  to  s .  the  children  of  the  king
i  '  an(l  ye  s.  your  brethren  only
10.  12.  when  ye  come  into  an  house,  s.  it
Maik\5.\Q.  and  began  to  s.  him,  hail,  king  of  Jews
in-  ,  o  11  a1  s!l0es>  and  s.  no  man  by  the  way
Acts  Zo.  13.  Agnppa  and  Bernice  came  to  s.  Festus
Horn.  16.  5.  s.  my  well  beloved  Epenetus
;•  Annronicns  ||  9.  s.  Urbane  our  helper
10.  r-.  Apelles,  s.  Aristobulus’  household
s'  erod ian  ||  12.  s.  the  beloved  Persis
ld.j.  llufuschosen  in  the  Lord,  and  his  mother
f* 'yit‘!  an  holy  kiss,  the  churches  j.  you
22. 1  lertius,  who  wrote  this,  s.  you  in  the  Lord

1  d  ■  -n19-  churches  of  Asia  .f.  you,  Aquila  and
0  Triscilia  j.  you  much,  with  church  in  their  house

2  Cer.  13.  13.  all  the  saints  s.  you,  Phil.  4  oo
CW  ,;yL  s;  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus
toJ.  A.  lo.  .j.  the  brethren  in  Laodicea  and  Nymphas

T  the  household  of  Onesiphorus
3-  15.  all  that  are  with  mej.  thee,  greet  thee

rr  1  ,o'  %  ■  the[e  fl!ee  f.paphras  and  Marcus
Ueb.  J3.  24.  s.  them  that  have  the  rule  over  you  ;

,  t  i  , ,  e-v  ^Jaly  s.  you,  grace  be  with  you  all

3  John  14.  our  friends  s.  thee,  greet  the  friends

,  J  SALUTED".

18.  15.  the  Danites  came  and  s.  Mieah
!(•  22.  David  came  and  s.  his  brethren
M.rl.  David  came  near  to  the  people,  and  r.  them
\r*V'9J  ,-K  ’A  Jehu  s.  Jehonadab,  and  said  to  him
Mai  kg.  lo.  the  people  running  to  Jesus,  s.  him
-Luke  1.40.  Mary  entered,  and  j-.  Elisabeth
Acts  18.  22.  Paul,  when  he  had  s.  the  church,  w  ent
,  •  we  came  to  Ptolemais,  and  s.  the  brethren
ly.  when  Paul  had  s.  James  and  the  elders
„  SALUTETII.

Gaius  mine  host,  and  Erastus,  s.  you
in  '  Aristarchus  my  fellow-prisoner,  s.  you
i  n  h'Paphras,  a  servant  of  Christ,  s.  you
l  l  et.  5.  13.  the  church  that  is  at  Babylon,  s.  you
SAMARITAN.

ii  i  J0:-  33.  but  a  certain  5’.  came  where  he  was
r  i  o  I* 11  ?own  Sivmg  him  thanks,  and  he  was  a  S.
JohnU.  48.  that  thou  art  a  5’.  and  hast  a  devil
0  ...  SAMARI  TANS.

/l/,fm1I'2’9-1h5uses°fhi^  places  the  5.  had  made
r  10*  5-  into  any  city  of  the  5.  enteryenot
hey  entered  into  a  village  of  the  5.
jj/in  4.  9.  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  5.

•  9.  many  of  the  5.  of  that  city  believed  on  him
1  ?o,e«  •  besou&hJ  him  totally  with  them
Acts  8.  a.5.  preached  in  many  villages  of  the  5.
r  -  .  .SAME.

J71/  5.  29.  saying,  thisj.  shall  comf.  us  in  our  work
io  in  1  became  mighty  men,  men  of  renown
i  Vo  i an“  .iJcsen,  the  s.  is  a  great  city
14.8.  the  j  is  ZoarH  23.2.  the  s.  is  Hebron,  19.

oi'  me  s.  be  she  thou  hast  appointed,  44.

1a  a  u  he  Lord  appealed  to  Isaac  the  .v.  night
«.  0.  he  overtook  and  spake  to  them  these  s.  words
7'or  o,e  'v.’ay  of  Kphrath,  the  r.  is  Beth  lehem
31.  his  flowers  shall  be  of  the  ,i.  37.  17.

30.  knopsand  branches  shall  be  of  the  s.  37.  22
ou  5'  bls  h°i'ns  shall  be  of  the  s.  37.  25.  |  38.  2.
x?7  pirdle  of  ephod  shall  be  of  j.  39.  5.

Sum-  10.  32.  the  goodness  will  we  do  unto  thee


Hum.  15.  30. .presumptuously,  the.f.  reproacheth  L
josh.  15.  8.  the  ,/ebusite,  the  s.  :s  Jerusalem
Juag.  7 .  4._the  s.  shall  go,  the  s.  shall  not  go

1  Ham.  9.  17.  the  s.  shall  reign  over  my  people

2  \im.o.  , .  Zion  the  r.  is  the  city  of  David

1  Kings  13.  9.  nor  turn  by  the  j.  way  thou  earnest

2  A  mgs  19.  29.  and  in  the  second  year  ye  shall  eat
that  which  sprmgeth  of  the  s.  Isa.  37.  30

1  C /iron.  1.  27.  Abram,  ther'.  is  Abraham

16.  17.  hath  confirmed  the  s.  to  Jacob,  Ps.  105.  10.
;  13-  0-  ther.  may  be  a  priest  of  them,  no  gods

18.  7.  the  s.  is  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imla

32.  12.  hath  not  the  r.  Ilezekiah  taken  away
h.zra  10.  23.  Shimei,  and  Kelaiah,  the  s.  is  Kelita
Asth.  9.  1.  month  Adar,  on  thirteenth  day  of  the  s

17.  on  the  fourteenth  ||  18.  on  the  fifteenth,  21.

Job  4.  8.  they  that  sow  wickedness  reap  the  s.

13.  £  what  ye  know,  the  s.  do  I  know  also
-ia  h  and  the  tongue  of  thy  dogs  in  the  s.

7o.  8.  full  ot  mixture,  he  poureth  out  of  the  ^

102.  27.  but  thou  art  the  r.  thy  years  have  no  end
113.  3.  to  the  going  down  of  the  s.  Mai.  1.11.
P/oti.  28.  24.  the  s.  is  the  companion  of  a  destroyer
Lccl.  9.  15.  no  man  remembered  that  s.  poor  mar,
Jer.Z8.  17.  so  Ilananiah  the  prophet  died  the  f.  year
Lzes.  3.  18.  s.  wicked  man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity
21.  26.  this  shall  not  be  the.),  exalt  him  that  is  low
44.  3.  the  prince  shall  go  out  by  the  way  of  the  s
Pan.  7.  21.  the  s.  horn  made  war  with  the  saints
Amos  2.  7.  a  man  and  Ins  father  go  in  to  the  f.  maid
Mat.  5  19.  the  shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingd.
46.  it  love  them,  do  not  even  the  publicans  the  .?  ?
12.  50.  the  s .  is  my  brother  and  sister,  Mark  3.  35
21.  42.  the  stone  builders  rejected,  the  s.  is  become
the  head  of  the  corner,  l  uke  20.  17.  1  Pet.  2.  7.
24.  13.  shall  endure,  s.  shall  be  saved,  Mark  13  1.3

26.  23.  that  dippeth  his  hand  the  j.  shall  betray  nie

48.  that  is  he,  hold  him  fast,  Mark  14.  44.

27.  44.  the  thieves  also  cast  the  s.  in  his  teeth
Mark  8.  35.  lose  life,  the  r.  shall  save  it,  Luke  9  04

9.  35.  desire  to  be  first,  the  .:.  shall  be  last  of  all
Luke  6.  .33.  for  sinners  also  do  even  the  X
38.  for  with  the  .(.measure  that  ye  inete  withal
7-  47.  to  whom  little  is  forgiven  the  s.  loveth  little
9.  48.  that  is  leastamongyou,  the  £.  shall  be  great
16.  1.  the  s.  was  accused  that  he  wasted  his  goods
20.  47.  the  shall  receive  greater  damnation

23.  51.  the  j.-.  had  not  consented  to  the  counsel
John  1.  2.  the  s.  was  in  the  beginning  with  God

7.  the  f.  came  for  a  witness  of  the  light

33.  the  s.  is  he  which  baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Gh

7.  18.  the  s.  is  true  ||  10.  l.the  f.  is  a  thief

8.  25.  the  s.  I  said  to  you  from  the  beginning

11.  6.  he  abode  two  days  still  in  the  r.  place

49.  being  high  priest  that  s.  year,  18.  13.

12.  48.  the  j.  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day

15.  5.  abideth  in  me,  the  bringeth  forth  much  fruit
Acts  1. 11.  this  j.  Jesus  shall  so  come  in  like  manner
2.  36.  God  made  that  j.  Jesus  both  Lord  ami  Christ

7.  19.  the  f.  dealt  subtilly  with  our  kindred
35.  the  s.  did  God  send  to  be  a  ruler  and  deliverer

3oA  t>£§aP,at  '•  scripture  and  preached  Jesus

13.  33.  God  hath  fulfilled  the  s.  to  us  theirchildren

14.  9.  the  s.  heard  Paul  speak,  who  beholding  him

16.  17.  the  .r.  followed  Paul  and  us,  and  cried

24.  20.  or  else  let  these  s.  here  say,  if  they  found
Pom.  1. 32.  who  knowing  not  only  do  the s.

2.  3.  that  judgest  them  which  do,  and  doest  the  s.

8.  20.  who  hath  subjected  the  s.  in  hope
10.  12.  the  s.  Lord  over  all  is  rich  to  all  that  call

12.  4.  all  the  members  have  not  the  s.  office
16.  be  ot  the  i  .  mind  one  toward  another,  mind  not

high  things,  1  Cor.  1 .  10.  Phil.  4.2.  1  Pet.  4.  l

13.  3.  do  good,  and  thou  shalt  have  praise  of  the  s

1  Cor.  l.  lo  l  beseech  that  ye  all  speak  the*,  thin^

9.  8.  or  saith  not  the  law  the  j.  also  t

10.  3.  did  all  eat  the  f.  spirit,  meat  ||  4.  the  s.  drink
12.  4.  but  the  j.  Spirit,  2  Cor.  4.  13.  |  12  18
5.  but  the  .j.  Lord  ||  6.  but  it  is  the  f.  God

15.  39.  all  flesh  is  not  the  .r.  flesh,  one  kind  of  men

2  tor.  2.  2.  but  the  s.  which  is  made  sorry  by  me

3.  I  wrote  this  s.  unto  you  lest,  when  1  came

8.  1_9.  administered  by  us  to  the  glory  ofthe  y.  Lord

9.  o.  that  f.  might  be  ready  as  a  matter  of  bounty
Ca..  2.  8.  the  s.  was  iniehty  in  me  to  the  Gentiles
3.  7.  the  s.  are  the  children  of  Abraham
Lph.  4. 10.  he  that  descended  is  the  .r.  that  ascended
b.  8.  the  .y.shall  he  receiveofthe  Lord,  bond  or  free
Phil.  1.  30. having  the  .?.  conflict  which  ye  saw  in  me

2.  2.  having  s.  love,  being  of  one  accord  and  mind

3.  16.  let  us  walk  by  the  j.  rule,  mind  the  s',  things
tot.  4.  2.  and  watch  in  the  s.  with  thanksgiving  °

1 L  ,  1  2- ,,le  s-  commit  thou  to  faithful  men

„  ,  A1L12,,tllSu-  art,t!'e's-  thj'  years  shall  not  fail

2.  14.  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  s.

11.  9.  the  heirs  with  him  ofthe  s.  promise
13.8.  Jesus  Christ,  s.  yesterday ,  to-day, and  forever

Jam.  3.  2.  it  any  offend  not,  the  s.  is  a  perfect  man

1  let.  4.  10.  even  so  minister  the  s.  one  to  another

2  Pet.  2.  19.  ofthe  s.  is  he  brought  in  bondage

3.  7-  by  the  s.  word  are  kept  in  store,  reserved
1  John  2.  23.  denies  the  Son,  s.  hath  not  the  Father

27.  as  thes.  anointing  teacheth  you  all  things
Pev.  3.  5.  overcoineth  thes.  shall  be  clothed  in  white
See  Day,  Hour.

SAN  CT1  FI  CATION.

*  G  *n  Christ,  who  of  God  is  made  to  us  s.

1  lhess.  4.  3.  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  yours'.

4.  should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  s.

2  lhess.  2.  13.  through  s.  ofthe  Spirit,  1  Pet.  1  2
SANCTIFY,

Tl  hen  referred  to  God,  signifies,

1.  lo  separate  and  appoint  any  thing  to  an  holy
end  religious  use.  God  sanctified  the  seventh
day ,  Gen.  2.  3.  'The  first-born  were  sanctified,
Lxod.  13.  2.  And  thus  the  tabernacle,  the  tem¬
ple,  the  priests,  the  altars,  the  sacrifices,  S^c.  were
sanctified  under  the  law.

To  cleanse  a  sinner  from  the  pollution  and
filth  of  sin,  to  free  him  from  the  power  and
dominion  of  sin,  and  endue  him  with  a  prin¬
ciple  oj  holiness ;  thus  God  by  his  Spirit  sanc-


tjfics  the  elect,  or  true  believers .  1  Cor.  6.  H.
And  such  were  some  ot  you,  but  ye  are  wa&h
ed,  but  ye  are  sanctified.

3.  7b  manifest  his  glory  and  vindicate  his  honour
Jrom  the  bla  phemies  of  the  wicked,  Ezek.  36  23
I  will  sanctity  my  great  name.  1  will  clear  up'
and  remove  the  objections,  that  the  sufferings  and
sins  oj  the  Jews  have  raised  among  the  Baby¬
lonians  :  they  gave  the  heathen  occasion  to  think
meanly  and  contemptibly  of  me,  but  I  will  shew
that  1  am  infinite  in  greatness  and  goodness
And  m  N  uni.  20.  13.  This  is  the  water  of  Me-
ribah,  because  the  children  of  Israel  strove  with
the  l  ord,  and  lie  was  sanctified  in  them.  He
was  sanctified  among  them  by  the  demonstration
oj  Ins  omnipotence ,  veracity ,  and  clemeyicy  to¬
wards  the  Israelites,  and  of  his  impartial  holt*
ness  a?id  seventy  against  sin,  even  in  his  greatest
friends  and  favourites,  as  Moses  was.  Thus  God
ts  said  to  sanctify  himself,
i.  lo  free  the  creature  from  the  curse  that  sin  has
brought  upon  it,  and  make  it  fit  for  a  free  and
holy  use.  1  1 1111.  4.  5.  The  creature  is  sanctified
c  *  uord  ot  God.  and  prayer.

5.  ^  1°  separate,  ordam,  and  appoint  the  Messiah  to
(/‘e  A  mg  and  Head  of  his  church.  John  10.
30.  bay  ye  of  him  whom  the  Father  hath  sanc¬
tified,  thou  blaspheinest,  because  1  said,  I  am
the  Son  ot  God  ?  that  is,  If  the  title  of  Gods  be
giien  to  those  to  whom  God  has  given  some  part
of  Ins  dominion,  then  surely  it  does  much  more
property  and  truly  belong  to  me,  whom  my  Fa¬
ttier  has  appointed  to  rule  over  all  with  himself,
and  whom  he  has  separated  and  ordained  for  Me*
diator  and  A  ing  of  his  church  ;  which  office  can¬
not  be  assumed  or  executed  by  any  mere  creature,
but  only  by  the  eternal  Aon  of  God.

Lo  sanctify  is  also  spoken  of  man,  and  signifies,

1.  lo  purify,  and  to  be  in  a  proper  condition  to
appear  before  the  Lord,  and  to  partake  of  holy
thing*..  Exod.  19.  10,  11,  22.  And  the  Lord
said  unto  Moses,  Go  unto  the  people,  and  sanc¬
tity  them  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and  let  them
n  asj  f he 1  r  clothes  ;  and  be  ready  against  the
tlurd  day  to  receive  the  law.  And  let  the  priests
also  winch  come  near  to  the  Lord,  sanctify  them-
seh  fcs,  lest  the  Lord  break  forth  upon  them.

.  lo  prepare.  Null),  11.  18.  Sanctify  yourselves
against  to-morrow,  and  ye  shall  eat  flesh.  Josh.

3.  5.  Sanctity  yourselves,  for  to-morrow  the
Lord  will  do  wonders  among  you.  That  is,
l  1  epnre  yourselves ,  endeavour  to  bring  your  hearts
to  a  holy  frame,  that  with  faith,  reverence,  and
admiration,  you  may  behold  the  great  work  that
Luid  will  do  for  you.

3.  lo  praise  God,  to  acknowledge  his  majesty,  to
worship  him,  to  endeavour  to  make  him  known,
adored,  praised,  and  beloved  by  all  those  that  are
capable  of  it:  thus  men  hallow  or  sanctify  the
name  of  God.  Isa.  8.  13.  Sanctify  the  Lord  of
hosts  himself,  and  let  him  be  your  fear.  And
Mat.  6.  9.  Hallowed  be  thy  name.  When  we
desire  of  God,  that  his  name  may  be  sanctified
or  hallowed,  it  is,  that  he  may  be  honoured,
praised,  arid  glorified  through  the  whole  world,
mid  especially  by  those  who  have  the  happiness
7  knowing  him,.  Let  them  sanctify  it  by  their
holy  lives,  their  fidelity,  their  submission  to  his
orders :  And  they  that  know  him  not,  that  they
may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  him,  may  hear  his
may  become  tractable  to  the  instructions
of  his  ministers.  What  is  meant  by  sanctifying
the  name  ot  God,  may  be  yet  better  appre¬
hended,  by  wliat  is  opposite  to  it ;  that  is,  pro¬
faning  the  name  of  God  by  vain  swearing,  blas¬
phemy,  and  ascribing  his  name  to  idols  ;  by  fur¬
nishing  wicked  men  and  infidels  with  an  occasion
oj  blaspheming  it  by  a  bad  life  and  scandalous
conversation.  It  is  said,  Lev.  10.  3.  I  will  be
sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me  ;  in  his
priests,  when  by  the  terrible  and  exemplary  pun¬
ishment  of  Nadab  and  A  bill  u,  the  Lord  shewed
what  purity  he  required  m  his  servants,  what
punctual  exactness  he  expected  in  his  service.

20.  12.  the  Lord  complains  that  Moses
and  Aaron  did  not  sanctify  him  before  the  peo-
ple  of  Israel :  and  how  did  they  not  sanctify
Inm?  By  shewing  some  distrust  to  his  words.
Because  ye  believed  me  not.

Saint,  holy,  holiness,  are  epithets,  which  in  a  sove¬
reign  manner  are  ascribed  to  God,  the  author  of
all  sanctity  and  holiness.  So  the  Cherubinis  and
Sera  [Tims  cry  to  him  without  ceasing,  Holy,
Holy,  Holy,  Isa.  ft.  3.  He  is  named  by  way  of
excellence ,  the  Saint,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,

Isa.  10.  20.  Alt  our  holiness  before  him  is  no¬
thing  but  pollution ;  his  name  is  Holy,  or  rather
Holiness  itself.

To  sanctify  may  be  reduced  to  the  four  following
significations  :

1.  Tt  signifies,  To  confess  and  celebrate  that  to  be
holy,  which  in  itself  was  so  before,  Mat.  6.  9.
And  thus  it  is  to  be  understood  wheresoever  God
is  said  to  be  sanctified.

2-  To  make  persons  holy,  who  were  impure  and  de¬
filed  before,  1  Cor.  6.  II.  And  this  is  the  sense  of
the  word  m  those  passages  oj  Scripture  w/iere  the
elect  are  sard  to  he  sanctified .

3.  To  separate  and  set  apart  some  things,  or  per¬
sons,  from  a  common  unto  an  holy  use,  as  the
tefbernacle,  temple,  priests,  fc.

4.  To  employ  a  thing  in  holy  and  religious  exer¬
cises,  in  the  worship  of  God  in  public  and  in  pri¬
vate,  and  the  celebration  of  his  works  ;  rn  this
and  the  former  sense  the  seventh  day  is  sancti
fied,  Exod.  20.  8.

Sanctification  differs  from  Justification,  thus:

1.  Justification,  is  the  absolution  of  a  sinner  from
the  guilt  oj  sin  and  death  ;  whereas  sanctification
is  an  alteration  of  qualities  from  evil  10  good.

2.  Justification  consists  of  remission  of  sins  through
the  imputation  of  Chust's  righteousness  ;  sancti-

413


S  AR


SAN


SAN


hcation  is  the  renovation  of  nature  hy  the  Holy

S.  ^Justification  is  perfect  in  ' his  life;  so  is  not

4  justification  is  in  nature  before  sanctification,
but  not  in  order  of  time  ;  for  Cod  only  sanctifie •>
those  that  are  justified.  .  ..  .

Exod.  13.  2.  s.  unto  tne  all  the  first-born,  it  is  mine
19.  10.  go  and  s.  them  to-day  and  to-monow

22.  and  let  the  priests  also  s.  themselves

23.  set  bounds  about  the  mount,  and  s.  it

28.  4 L.  thou  shalt  anoint  and  a.  Aaron  and  hr

sons,  29.  33. 1  40.  13.  Lev.  8.  1—121.  8.

29.  27.  thou  shalt  a.  the  breast  of  the  wave  ottei  mg

36.  and  thou  shalt  s.  the  altar,  37.  1  40.  10.

44.  1  will  a.  the  tabernacle  and  the  altar

30.  29.  and  thou  shalt  s.  the  tabernacle  and  all

his  vessels,  40.  10, 11.  Lev.  8.  11.
13  ve  may  know  that  l  am  the  l.ord  that
doth  "you,  Lev.  20.  8.  I  21.  8.  Ezek.  20  12.
11  44.  ye  shall  s.  yourselves,  20.  7-  Num.

11.  18.  Josh.  3.  5.  1  7-  13.  1  Sam.  lb.  5.
15  nor  profane  his  seed,  1  the  Lord  do  s.  him
for  1  the  Lord  do  a.  them,  22.  9,  16.

14.  when  a  man  shall  a.  his  house  to  be  holy
if  a  man  shall  s.  his  field,  17,  18,  22.


31.

Lev.


21.

23.


16


IQ.  II  a  LUfl.ll  sunn  V - -

26.  only  the  Lord’s  firstling,  no  man  shad


wU.  (JUI)  Uic  O  1.1

\nrn  20.  12.  ye  believed  me  not,  to  s.  me,

“i.  »  ..  il _ U  An,.  .•  if  Xlvh


S .


it

14.


13.  22.


Vent.  5.  i2.~keep  the  sab.-day ,  to  .v.  it,  Neh
15  19.  all  the  firstling  males  thou  shalt  a.

Josh.  7. 13.  up,  a.  the  people,  s.  yourselves
2  Kings  10. 1 20.  .lehu  said,  a.  an  assembly  for  Haal

1  Chron.  15.  12.  a.  yourselves,  2  Chr.  29.  5. 1  3d.  6.

23.  13.  that  he  should  s.  the  most  holy  things

2  Chron .  29.  34.  levites  more  upright  in  heart,  to  s
30  17  for  every  one  that  was  not  clean  to  s.

Isa.  8.  13.  s.  the  L.  of  hosts  himself,  him  your  fear
29.  23.  they  shall  s.  the  Holy  One  of  Jacob
66'  17.  they  that  s.  themselves  in  gardens
Ezek.  36.23.  1  will  s.  my  cr.  name  which  was  pro  fa.

37.  28.  heathen  know,  that  I  the  Lord  do  a.  Israel

38.  23.  thus  will  I  magnify  myselt,  and  f.  myself
44.  19.  shall  not  s.  people  with  garments,  46.  20.

Joel  1.  14.  a.  ye  a  fast,  2.  15.  ||  3.  t  9.  s.  war
2.  16.  s.  the  congregation,  assemble  the  elders
John  17.  17. a.  them  through  thy  truth,  word  is  truth
19.  and  for  their  sakes  I  s.  myself,  that  they  may
Eph.  5.26.  that  he  might  s.  and  cleanse  the  church
1  These .  5.  23.  the  very  God  of  peace  s.  you  wholly
Ueb.  13.  12.  that  he  might  s.  people  with  his  blood
Pet  3  15.  but  s.  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts
SANCTIFIED.

‘Sen.  2.  3.  God  blessed  the  seventh  day  and  s.  it
Exod.  19.  14.  Moses  s.  the  people,  and  they  washed
29.  43.  the  tabernacle  shall  be  a.  by  my  glory
Lev  8  10.  s.  the  tabernacle,  and  all  that  was  therein

15.  s.  the  altar  H  .30.  a.  Aaron  and  his  garments
10.  3.  1  will  be  s.  in  them  that  come  nigh  me
27*.  15.  if  he  that  s.  it  will  redeem  his  house
19.  and  if  he  that  a.  the  field  will  redeem  it
Num.  7.  l.s.  the  tabernac.  instruments,  and  vessels

8.  17.  I  s.  the  first-born  of  Israel  tor  myselt
Dent  32.51 .  because  ye  s.  me  not  in  the  midst  ot  lsr.
Josh.  20.  +  7.  and  they  a.  the  cities  of  refuge
1  Sam.  ~.  1.  s.  Eleazarhissonto  keep  the  ark  ot  L.

16.  5.  he  s.  Jesse  and  his  sons  to  the  sacrifice
21.  5.  though  it  were  s.  this  day  in  the  vessel

1  Chr  15  14.  the  priests  and  Levites  s.  themselves

2  Chron.  5.  11.  all  the  priests  present  were  s
7.  16.  I  have  chosen  and  s.  this  house,  20.

29.  15.  gathered  their  brethren,  and  a.  themselves
17  they  s.  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  8  days
19.  all  the  vessels  have  we  prepared  and  s.

34.  till  the  other  priests  had  s.  themselves  .

30.  3.  the  priests  had  not  s.  themselves  sufficiently
8  enter  into  his  sanctu.  which  he  hath  a.  tor  ever
15.  the  Levites  were  ashamed,  and  s.  themselves

17.  many  in  the  congregation  were  not  a.

24.  a  great  number  of  the  priests  s.  themselves

31.  18.  in  their  set  office  they  a.  themselves
Neh.  3.  1.  they  built  and  a.  the  sheep  gate

12.  47.  they  a.  holy  things  to  the  Levites,  and  the

Levites  s.  them  to  the  children  ot  Aaron
Job  1  5.  lob  sent  and  s.  his  sons  and  his  daughters
Isa.  5.  16.  holy  God  shall  be  s.  in  righteousness

13.  3.  1  have  commanded  my  s.  ones
Jer.  1.5.  I  s.  thee,  and  ordained  thee  a  prophet
Ezek.  20.  41.  I  will  teA.  in  you,  .36.  23.

28.  22.  when  1  shall  be  a.  in  her  .38. 16-  shall  s.  thee

25.  be  s.  in  them  in  sight  of  the  heathen,  39.  27
48. 11.  it  shall  be  for  the  priests  that  are  s.

Zeph.  1.  +  7.  for  the  Lord  hath  a.  his  guests
John  10.  36.  say  ye  of  him,  whom  the  Father -  s.

17.  19.  that  they  also  might  be  s.  thro  thy  truth
Let  1  20  .32.  an  inheritance  among  them  s.  26.  18.
Rom.  15.  16.  being  a.  by  the  Holy  Ghost
1  Cor.  1.  2.  to  them  that  are  .?.  in  t  hast  Jesus
6  11  but  now  ye  are  s.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
7'  14.  the  unbelieving  husband  is  a.  wife  is  a.

1  Tim.  4.  5.  it  is  a.  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer

2  Tim  2.  21 .  shall  be  a  vessel  s.  tor  the  Master  s  use
Ueb.  2.  11.  and  they  who  are  a.  are  all  ot  one

10  10  by  the  which  will  we  are  s.  through  Jesus

14.  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  a.

29.  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  wast.
Jude  1.  to  them  that  are  s.  by  God  the  Father
S  A  N  CT 1  F 1  E  I  H .

Mat.  23.  17.  or  the  temple  that  s.  the  gold  ?

19.  greater  the  gift,  or  the  altar  that  s.  the  gift '
Ueb.  2.11 .  both  he  that*,  and  they  that  are  sanctified

9.  1.3  if  blood  of  bulls  s.  to  the  purifying  ot  the  flesh

SANCTUARY

Signifies,  A  holy  or  sanctified  place,  a  dwelling
place  of  the  Most  High.  They  called  by  this
name  that  part  of  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,
which  teas  the  most  secret,  and  most  retired
of  all  the  rest,  in  which  was  the  ark  of  the  cove
nant,  and  wherein  none  but  the  high  priest  might
enter,  and  he  but  once  in  a  year,  to  Inch  was  upon
the  day  of  solemn  expiation.  The  same  name
uas  also  given  to  the  most  sacred  part  of  the
• abernac/e ,  which  was  set  up  in  the  wilderness.

414


and  which  remained  still  some  time  after  the
building  of  the  temple:  each  of  these  were  collet
Sanctuary,  or  the  Holy  ot  Holies,  or  the  Most
Holy  Place,  Lev.  4.  6.  1  Kings  6.  16.  It  was  a
square  of  twenty  cubits,  and  divided  from  the  holy
place  by  a  curtain  or  veil  of  rich  cloth.  Solomon
had  embellished  the  inside  of  it  with  palm-trees  in
relievo,  and  cherub/ ms  oj  wood  lovered  with  plates
of  gold  ;  and  in  general,  the  whole  Sanctuary  was
adorned,  and,  as  it  were,  overlaid,  with  plates  oj
gold.  Erom  between  the  cherubims  which  covered
the  mercy-seat.  Cod  gar":  answers  to  his  people,
when  they  consulted  him  about  momentous  and  ini-
portant  matters ;  hence,  says  the  Psalmist,  l  lie
Lord  send  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary ,  t  sal.  M.

2.  It  was  a  type  of  Heaven,  which  is  also  foiled
by  the  name  uj  Sanctuaiy,  Psal.  102.  19.  1  or  n
hath  looked  down  from  the  height  of  Ins  Sanc¬
tuary  ;  from  heaven  did  the  Lord  behold  the  earth.

Sometimes  the  word  Sanctuary  is  used  m  general
for  the  temple,  taking  its  denomination  from  its
principal  part.  2  Chron.  20.  8.  1  hey  have  built
thee  a  Sanctuary  therein,  tor  thy  name.  Some¬
times  for  the  holy  place,  for  the  place  appointed
for  the  public  worship  oj  the  Lord,  Psal.  75.  17 •
Until  I  went  into  the  Sanctuary  or  uod.  u
taken  likewise  for  the  holy  land ,  the  land  oj  la
naan.  Exod.  15.  17-  Thou  shalt  bring  them  in,
and  plant  them  in  the  Sanctuary  which  thy  nanus
have  established.  Or,  by  Sanctuary  here  may  be
understood  the  temple  on  mount  Moriah,  wliic/i
Cod  would  certainly  cause  to  be  built  and  estab¬
lished  :  the  past  tense  being  put  J or  the  future,
to  note  the  certainty  oj  it,  according  to  the  style
of  the  prophets.  It  is  said,  Psal.  114.  2.  J  udah
is  God’s  Sanctuary  :  that  is,  li/e  children  of
Israel  are  the  people  of  Cod  s  holiness,  as  they  are
called,  Isa.  63.  18.  or  his  holy  people,  sanctified
and  set  apart  from,  all  the  nations  oj  the  world,  to
be  his  peculiar  people  and  possession.  Lastly,
Sanctuary  is  taken  for  a  refuge,  defence,  or  pro¬
tection,  Isa.  8.  14.  He  shall  be  your  sanctuary.
Ezek.  11.16.  1  will  be  to  them  as  a  little  Sanctuaiy.
Exod.  15.  17-  thou  shalt  plant  them  in  the  s.

25.8.  let  them  make  me  a  s.  that  1  may  dwell
30  13.  give  every  one  after  the  shekel  ot  the  a.

24.  of  cassia  5<)0  shekels  after  the  shekel  ot  the  s.
36.  1.  to  work  all  manner  ot  work  for  the  s.  .3.  4.

6.  not  make  any  more  work  for  offering  ot  the  i.
38.  24.  shekels,  after  the  shekel  ot  the  s.  -5.  26.

Lev.  5.  15.  I  27.  3,  25.  Num.  3  .  47  ,  50. 1  7.
13,  19,  25,  31,  37.  1  18  16.

27.  of  100  talents  were  cast  the  sockets  ot  the  J.
Lev.  4.  6.  sprinkle  the  blood  before  the  vail  ot  the  s.
10.  4.  carry  your  brethren  from  before  the  J.

12.  4.  nor  come  into  the  s.  till  her  purifying  fulfilled
16.  3.3.  he  shall  make  an  atonement  tor  the  holy  s.
19.  30. ye  shall  reverence  my  s.  1  am  the  Lord,  26.2.
21.  12.  neither  shall  he  go  out  ot  the  s.  nor  profane
the  .v.  of  his  God  ;  1  am  the  Lord
Num.  3.  28.  males  8600,  keeping  charge  of  the  5.

38.  Aaron  and  his  sons  keeping  charge  ot  the  s.
4.  12.  wherewith  they  minister  in  the  s.

15.  when  they  have  made  an  end  ot  covering  the  s.

7.  9.  the  service  of  s.  belonging  unto  them

8.  19.  w’hen  children  ot  Israel  come  nigh  to  the  s.
10.  21.  hohathites  set  forward,  bearing  the  s.

18.  1.  with  thee  shall  bear  the  iniquity  ot  the  s.

3.  they  shall  not  come  nigh  the  vessels  ot  the  s.

5.  and  ye  shall  keep  the  charge  ot  the  s.

19.  20.  because  he  hath  defiled  the  s.  of  the  Lord


& w.  i;ct  ciuoc  iic  Ham  wvuiv*  -

Josh.  24.  26.  he  set  up  a  great  stone  by  th e  a.

1  Chron.  9.  29.  to  oversee  the  instruments  ot  the  s.


Ks'lll'/c,  W  v  Cl  DOV  .  _

22.  19.  arise,  and  build  ye  the  s.  of  the  Lord
24.  5.  divided  by  lot,  for  the  governors  of  the  a.
28. 10.  hath  chosen  to  build  an  house  tor
2  Chron.  20.  8.  they  have  built  thee  a  therein
26.  18.  go  out  of  the  s.  for  thou  bast  trespassed

29.  21.  for  a  sin  offering  for  the  s.  and  Judah

30.  8.  but  yield  yourselves  to  lord,  enter  into  his  s.
19.  according  to  the  purification  of  the  s.

36.  17.  the  king  of  Babylon  slew  men  in  the  s.
Neh.  10.  39.  where  are  the  vessels  of  the  s.

Psal.  20.  2.  the  l.ord  send  thee  help  from  the  s.

28.  +  2.  towards  the  oracle  of  thy  holy  s.

29.  +  2.  w  orship  the  Lord  in  his  glorious  s.

63.  2.  to  see  thee,  as  1  have  seen  thee  in  the  s.

68.  24.  they  have  seen  thy  goings  in  the  a.

73.  17.  till  1  went  into  the  a.  ot  God,  T  understood

74.  3.  all  that  the  enemy  hath  done  wickedly  in  a.
7.  they  have  cast  fire  into  thy  a.  they  have  defiled

77.  13.  thy  way,  O  God,  is  in  the  s.  who  so  great

a  a  l->  t.  Lr>/M,  ivUt  tKom  fA  flip  hnrtlpr  of  hfS  Y.


77  13.  thv  way,  U  uod,  is  111  me  s.  who  g
78.  54.  he'  brought  them  to  the  border  of  his  s.

69.  and  he  built  hiss,  like  high  palaces
96.  6.  strength  and  beauty  are  in  his  a.

102.  19.  he  natb  looked  from  the  height  of  his  s.
114.  2.  Judah  was  his  s.  Israel  his  dominion
134.  2.  lift  up  your  hands  in  the  s.  bless  the  Lord
150.  1.  praise  the  Lord,  praise  God  in  his  s.

Isa.  8.  14.  the  Lord  of  hosts,  he  shall  be  tor  a  J.

16.  12.  that  lie  shall  come  to  his  s.  to  pray

43.  28.  1  have  profaned  the  princes  ot  the  s.

60.  13.  to  beautify  the  place  ot  my  s.

63.  18.our  adversaries  have  trodden  down  thy  s.
Jer.  17.  12.  from  the  beginning  is  the  place  ot  our  a
Lam.  1.  10.  bath  seen  the  heathen  entered  into  her  a.
2.7.  the  Lord  hath  abhorred  his  s.  .

20.  shall  the  priest  and  prophet-be  slain  in  the  s.  ?
4.  1.  stones  ot  the  s.  are  poured  out  in  the  street
Ezek.  5.  11.  because  thou  hast  defiled  my  s.

11.  16.  yet  will  I  be  to  them  as  a  little  a.

23.  .38.  they  defiled  my  j.  in  the  same  day
39.  they  came  the  same  day  into  my  a.  to  profane  it
42.  20.  between  the  s.  and  the  profane  place

44.  5.  with  every  going  forth  of  the  s.

27-  and  in  the  day  that  he  goeth  into  the  s.

45.  3.  in  it  shall  be  the  s.  and  most  holy  place

47.  12.  because  their  watersthey  issued  out  ot  the  s.

48.  8.  the  s.  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  it,  10,  21.
Dan.  8.  11.  and  the  place  of  his  a.  was  cast  dow’n

1.3.  to  give  the  s.  to  be  trodden  under  foot
14.  he  said  to  me,  then  shall  the  a.  be  cleansed


Dan  9.  17.  and  cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  s.

Ool  the  people  shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  s.

11  31  they  shall  pollute  the  s.  of  strength
Amos  7.  t  13.  Bethel  is  the  king’s  a.  and  court
Zeph.  3.  4.  her  priests  have  pol luted 1  the  a.

Ueb  8  2  a  minister  ot  the*.  and  the  true  tabernacle
9.  1.  verily  the  first  covenant  had  a  worldly  a.

2.  there  was  a  tabernacle,  which  is  called  the  s.

13  11.  whose  blood  is  brought  into  the  a.

SAN  G  1  L  A  R I LS,

Lev  21 . 23.  shalt  not  go  in,  that  lie  profane  not  my  s.

26  .31.  and  1  will  bring  your  a.  to  desolation
Ter  51  51  strangers  are  come  into  a.  ot  I  orcl  s  bouse
Ezek  28.  18.  bast  defiled  thy  a.  by  thine  iniquities
Amos  7. 9.  the  s.  of  Israel  shall  be  laid  waste

SAN  D.

A  similitude  taken  from  the  sand  of  the  sea,  is
often  made  use  of,  to  express  a  very  great  multi¬
tude,  or  a  very  great  weight,  or  something  very
grievous  and  intolerable.  Cod  promises  Abra¬
ham  and  Jacob,  to  multiply  their  posterity  as
the  stars  of  dieaven,  and  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,
Gen.  22.  17-  1  32.  12.  Job  compares  the  weight
of  his  afflictions  and  troubles  to  that  of  the  sand
of  the  sea.  Job  6.  3.  Oh  that  my.  grief  were
weighed,  for  now  it  would  be  heavier  than  the
sand  of  the  sea.  And  Solomon  says,  that  the
sand  and  gravel  are  very  heavy  things,  yet  the
anger  of  a  fool  is  much  heavier,  Prop.  Zj.  J.

A  fool's  anger  is  more  insupportable,  more  in¬
tolerable,  as  being  without  cause,  without  mea¬
sure,  without  end.  Sand  is  likewise  oj  a  slippery
nature  ;  hence  it  is  said,  that  a  house  built  upon

it  cannot  stand,  Mat.  7  26.  .

The  prophet  Jeremiah  magnifies  the  omnipotence
of  Cod,  who  has  fixed  th  sand  oj  the  shore  for  the
boundaries  of  the  sea,  and  has  said  to  it.  Hitherto
thou  shalt  come,  and  here  thou  shalt  break  th>
foaming  waves, and  shalt  pass  no  further,  Jer  5.  .2.
Gen.  22.  17.  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  a.  32.  1 Z.

41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  corn  as  the  a.  ot  the  sea
Exod.  2.  12.  he  slew  and  hid  the  Egyptian  in  the  s.
Dent.  33.  19-  they  shall  suck  of  treasures  hid  in  s.
Josh  11  4.  there  went  out  much  people  as  the  a.
Judg.  7-12-  their  camels  were  as  the  a  by  the  sea

1  Him.  13.  5.  the  Philist.  gathered  to  fight  as  the  a.

2  Sam.  17.  11.  that  all  Israel  be  gathered  as  the  s.

1  Kings  4.  20.  Judah  and  Israel  are  many,  as  the  s.

29.  God  gave  Solomon  largeness  ot  heart  as  the  s.
job  6  3  for  now  it  would  be  heavier  than  the  s.

29.  la  and  1  shall  multiply  my  days  as  the  s.

Psal.  78.  27.  and  feathered  fowls  like  as  the  s.

139.  iy.  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  s.

Prov  27-  3.  a  stone  is  heavy,  and  the  a.  weighty
Isa.  10.  22.  tho’  thy  people  lsr.  be  as  a.  ot  the  sea
48.  19.  thy  seed  also  had  been  as  s.  and  offspring
Jer  5  22.  which  plac  ed  the  a.  tor  the  hound  ot  the  sea

15.’  8.  that  widows  are  increased  to  me  above  the  a.

33  22  as  the  a.  of  the  sea,  cannot  be  measured
Ho,.  1  10  Israel  shall  be  as  a.  of  sea,.  Rom.  9.  27.
Hab.  1.9-  they  shall  gather  the  captivity  as  the  s.
Mat.  j.  26.  a  foolish  man  who  built  Ins  house  on  a.
Ueb.  11.  12.  there  sprang  of  one  so  many  as  the  s.
Rev.  13.  1,  I  stood  upon  the  a.  ot  the  sea  and  saw
20.  8.  the  number  of  whom  is  as  the  s.  or  the  sea
•SANDALS

At  first  were  only  soles  tied  to  the  feet  with  strings
or  thongs ;  afterwards  they  were  covered ;  and  at
last  they  called  even  shoes  sandals.

Mark  6.  9.  but  be  shod  with  a.  put  not  or 1  tw’0  coats
Acts  12.  8.  angel  said,  gird  thyself,  and  bind  thy  s.

SANG.  .

Exod.  15. 1.  then  a.  Moses  and  Israel  this  song
Num.  21 .  17.  Israel  a.  this  song,  spring,  O  w  ell
Ju  ’o.  5.  1.  then  a.  Deborah  and  Barak,  saying

1  Sam.  29.  5.  is  not  this  David  of  whom  they  s. .

2  Chr.  29.  28.  the  sinsers  a.  the  trumpeters  sounded
~  30.  a.  praises  with  gladness,  and  bowed  their  heads
Neh.  12.  42.  the  singers  a.  aloud,  with  Jezraluah
Job  .38.  7.  when  the  morning  stars  a.  together
Psal.  106. 12.  they  believed  his  words,  a.  his  praise
Acts  16.  25.  Paul  and  Silas  a.  praises  to  God

SAN  K.

Exod.  15.  5.  they  a.  into  the  bottom  as  a  stone

10.  they  a.  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters
SAP.

Psal.  104.  16.  the  trees  of  the  l.ord  are  full  of  s.
SAPPHIRE,

Is  a  precious  stone,  second  only  to  the  diamond  m
lustre,  hardness,  and  price  :  there  is  frequent
mention  made  of  it  in  Scripture:  Job  says,  there
are  places  whose  stones  are  sapphires,  Job  *8.  0.
that  is,  that  sapphires,  and  other  precious  stones,
are  very  common  in  some  countries ;  they  or
mixed  with  the  stones,  and  cut  out  of  them  ana
polished.  Pliny  says .  that  the  best  came  out  oj
Media  ;  perhaps,  out  of  the  country  oj  the  >a-
pires,  or  from  mount  Sephar,  mentioned,  y
Moses,  Cen.  10.  30.  The  oriental  sapphire  «
of  a  blue  sky-colour,  or  a  fine  azure ;  whence  it
is,  that  the  prophets  describe  the  throne  of  Ooa,
as  it  were  of  the  colour  of  a  sapphire  ;  that  is,
of  a  celestial  blue,  or  azure,  Exod.  24.  10.

Exod.  24.  10.  as  it  were  a  paved  work  ot  a.  stone
28.  18.  the  second  row  a  .v.  a  diamond,  .39.  1L
Job  28.  16.  wisdom  cannot  he  valued  with  onyx  or  s.
Lam.  4.  7.  her  Nazarites,  their  polishing  wasot  s.
Ezek.  1.26.  likeness  ot  a  throne,  as  appearance  or
10.  1.  there  appeared  over  them  as  it  were  a  s.

28.  1.3.  the  a.  and  the  emerald  were  thy  covering
Rev  21  19.  the  second  foundation  ot  the  wall  whsa.
SAPPHIRES.

Job  28.  6.  the  stones  of  it  are  the  place  of  s.

Cant.  5.  14.  his  belly  as  bright  ivory ,  overlaid  w  ltd  s.
La  54.  11.  1  will  lay  thy  foundations  with  s.

•  SARDINE.

Rev  4.  3.  he  was  to  look  upon  like  a  a.  stone

SA  R  D 1  US,  ,  .  .  .

Or  Rubv,  in  Hebrew,  Odem  :  A  gem  found  ahm
Sardis,  of  a  bloody  colour;  some  translate  t  W
ruby,  or  by  pyropus.  It  was  the  first  in  Aaro
breast-plate.


SAT


SAT


F.nui.  2b .  17.  the  first  row  shall  he  ay.  39.  10.

Esek.  ‘.’8.  13.  the  s.  and  diamond  were  thy  covering
liev.  2 1.  CO.  the  sixth  touiuintioii  of  the  wall  was  a  ,*■
SARDONYX,

As  ij  it  were  a  Sardius  united  to  an  Onyx,  as  par¬
taking  of  both  their  colours.  The  Onyx  is  a  pre¬
cious  stone,  commonly  called  Cornelian.  The
basis  of  the  Cornelian  is  white,  as  the  nail  grow¬
ing  under  the  files  n.  The  Hebrew  word  .Shohem
has  been  translated  by  Sardonychus  Lapis,  which
rather  signifies  an  Emerald.

Rev.  21. 20.  filth  foundation  of  wall  of  city  was  a  y.
SA  r.

Rach.  had  taken  and.c.  upon  the  images
38. 14.  1  ainar  covered  with  a  vail,  s.  in  open  place
Lxod.  12.  29.  first  born  of  Pharaoh  that  y.  on  throne
16.  3.  when  we  y.  by  the  flesh  pots,  and  did  eat
18. 13.  on  the  morrow  .Moses  s.  to  j udge  the  people
Judg.  20.  26.  they  wept  and  s.  before  the  Lord
1 /***”*•  E9.  10  w  Eli  0,1  a  seat  by  post  of  temple
4-  13.  Eli  s.  on  a  seat  by  the  wayside,  watching

11*  as  soon  as  hey.  on  his  throne,  he  slew

21.  13.  the  children  of  Belial  s.  before  Naboth

22.  10.  the  two  kings  s.  each  on  his  throne

«  Rings  6.  32.  but  Elishas,  in  his  house,  and  elders
e.  with  him,  and  the  king  sent  a  messenger

1  Caron.  17.  1.  as  David  s.  in  his  house,  he  said

.r  ,•  before  the  l.d.  and  said,  who  am  I  ?

,,  °*  17.  they  made  booths,  and  s.  under  them
Job  29.  25.  I  chose  out  their  way,  and  y.  chief
rsal.  26.  4.  I  have  not  s.  with  vain  persons
Jer.  3.  2.  m  the  ways  hast  thou  s.  for  them
15. 17. 1  s.  not  in  the  assembly  of  the  mockers,  nor
rejoiced,  I  s.  alone  because  of  thy  hand
3o.  now  the  king  s.  in  the  winter-house

3. 15.  I  .s',  where  they  and  remained  there
1 ,  .as,  lr*nl3'  house,  the  elders  s.  before  me
E*-  behold,  there  s.  women  weeping  for  Tammuz
20.  1.  the  elders  came  to  inquire  of  the  l.d.  and  s.
Tfctn.  2.49.  but  Daniel  s.  in  the  gate  of  the  king
Mat.  4.  16.  people  who  y.  in  darkness  saw  great
light  j  to  them  that  s.  in  shadow  of  death
light  is  sprung  up

R  9-  for  them  which  y.  with  him,  Mark  6.  26.

]  s-  daily  with  you  teaching  in  the  temple
58.  Peter  s.  with  the  servants  to  see  the  end
Mark  10.  46.  blind  Bartimeus  s.  by  the  wayside

10  .n  .  u  begging,  Luke  18.  35.  John  9.  8.
16.  19.  and  hey.  on  the  right  hand  of  God

in  on  ’  dlat  lvas  dead  s.  up,  and  beg.  to  speak
In*  ^ary  at  Jesus  teet.and  heard  his  words

19.  30.  a  colt  whereon  never  man  y.  Mark  11  n
John  4.6.  Jesus  wearied,  y.  thus  on  the  well
Acts  2.  3.  cloven  tongues  y.  upon  each  of  them

2  1  o  ur‘10.'f-  for  alms  at  the  beautiful  gate

3-  be  that  y.  on  the  throne  was  like  a  jasper
EE  |4.  on  the  cloud  one  y.  like  the  Son  of  man
l}-  be  that  s.  upon  him  was  called  Faithful
19.  to  make  war  against  him  that  y.  on  the  horse
_  SAP  down.

Tttod.  32.  6.  the  people  s.  down  to  eat  and  to  drink
Vent.  33.  3.  and  they  s.  down  at  thy  feet

P^ucked  otf  hair,  and  y.  down  astonied
to.  16.  they  y.  down  to  examine  the  matter
V.e,‘;  '•  4.  1  s.  down  and  mourned  certain  days
rid  o  1  ‘  ^e  king  and  Hainan  y.  down  to  drink
006  1.  8.  Job  y.  down  among  the  ashes
•jal.  137.  1.  there  we  s.  down,  yea,  we  wept
\fnt- «  ’  ,•  1  s'  dovPl  under  his  shadow  with  delight
or  l  ‘  niany  sinners  came  and  s.  down  with  him
20.  -0.  he  y.  down  with  the  twelve,  Luke  22.  14.

Ruke  4.20.  gave  book  to  the  minister,  and  y.  down
tut  an,d  taught  die  people  out  of  the  ship
John  8.  2.  people  came,  he  y.  down  and  taught  them
‘  ^ey  went  into  the  synag.  and  y.  down
we  s'  down  and  spake  to  the  women
neb.  1.  3.  s.  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  10. 12.
n  c  SATAN,

Or  Sathan,  or  Sathanas :  this  is  a  mere  Hebrew
woid,  and  signifies  an  adveisary,  an  enemy,  an
accuser.  atan,  in  Scripture,  is  sometimes  taken
in  Jie  seiise  of  an  adversary  ;  for  example,  Christ
says  to  Peter,  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,  thou
art  an  offence  unto  me,  Mat.  16.  23.  That  is,
tiegone,  O  mine  adversary,  thou  that  withstandest
what  1  most  desire,  and  what  I  came  into  the  world
about,  namely,  to  lay  down  my  life  for  the  elect ;
tn  that  thou  dissuades  t  me  from  this,  thou  art  an
enemy  to  the  redemption  and  salvation  of  mankind,
which  ts  a  work  fit  for  none  but  a  dei  it.  But  most
cwnnion/y  Satan  is  takenfor  the  Devil.  Mat.  12.

20.  It  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  is  divided  against
himself.  Rev.  20.2.  He  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,
that  o!d  serpent,  which  is  the  Devil  and  Satan
and  bound  him  a  thousand  years.  lie  is  said  to

J.osbua  s  n  ht  hand,  and  to  accuse  him
nd  the  Jews  before  God,  and  to  oppose  them  in
building  the  temple,  Zech.  3.  1.
lhe  kingdom  of  Satan,  Mat.  12.  26.  Our  Saviour
epresentS'  Satan  as  a  monarch,  who  has  other  sub-
ainate  devils  obedient  to  him .  Beelzebub  is
"7  ™r,e>  their  king.  //  Beelzebub,  says  he,

1  oh-  °}lt  devils,  his  kingdom  is  divided  against  it
■'etj,  he  labours  for  his  own  ruin,  which  is  by  no
means  credible  ;  it  is  therefore  false,  that  1  drive
J  the  name  °f  Beelzebub.  The  apostle
Paul  declares  in  Acts  26.  18.  that  all  those  who

power^ of  Satan  Chnst  aTe  Uhder  the  emPue  and

lnh£'Uag?gue  °f  Satan,  of  which  the  evangelist
,2!^,/nakes  mention,  Rev.  2.  9.  are  probably  the
Mo ’  ew,s>  the  false  zealots  for  the  law  of
f  ?t  the  beginning  were  the  most  eager

“e  Chnstla,ls-  They  were  very  nu-
Z  t  Smyrna,  to  the  angel  of  which  church
rif  .  ’°bn  speaks  in  this  passage.

/  1  eptbs  of  Satan.  St.  John,  writing  to  the
the  church  o/Thyatira,  says  to  them,
no  In  w  !lot  t}?e  d,ePths  of  Satan  ;  which  have
cl  U  Jh  d"pth,3„of  Suthan,  Ta  /3u0ea
v ;  “i'*'.;  Pe'  .  2.  24.  I  hat  is,  the  mysteries  of  the
ui tans, and  °J  the  Simonians,  who  concealed


S  A  V


their  errors  under  a  mysterious  abstruseness :  they
spoke  of  certain  intelligences  that  had  created  the
world,  and  that  were  m  opposition  to  the  Creator,
lhey  taught  a  profound  knowledge  concerning  the
nature  of  the  angels,  and  their  different  degrees,
lhey  had  secret  books  written  in  an  abstruse  and

'$8SZ$!*3£">  *"

If  hen  Christ  sent  forth  his  disciples  to  preach  in
1  he  cities  and  villages  of  Judea,  they  returned
back  with  great  joy,  and  told  him,  saying.  Lord
even  the  devils  are  subject  to  us  through  thy
name.  Jesus  tells  them,  1  beheld  Satan  as
lightning  fall  from  heaven,  Luke  10.  1 7 ,  18.

seems  to  allude  to  that  passage  of  Isaiah;
now  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  Lucifer
son.  ot  the  morning !  Isa.  14.  12.  By  which  he
insinuated,  that  the  kingdom  of  the  devil  was
coming  to  a  period ;  that  Satan  should  soon  lose
nis  power  and  dominion  in  the  world,  by  the
preaching  and  miracles  of  the  apostles.  And  in
i.uke  22.  31  he  says,  Simon,  Simon,  behold,
hatan  hath  desired  to  have  you,  that  he  may
f|df.  you  as,  "beat ;  but  I  have  prayed  for  thee
,  ./  jh  fed  not;  shewing  thereby  what  vain
enure/  t  ie  “£l  t  tvould  make  to  destny  the  infant

collecting  the  passages  where  Satan  or  the
uevil  is  mentioned,  it  may  be  observed:  that  he
jeujrom  heaven,  with  all  h:s  company ;  that
Vod  cast  him  down  from  thence  for  the  punish¬
ment  of  his  pride  ;  that  by  his  envy  and  malice,
sin,  death,  and  all  other  evils,  came  into  the
world ;  that  by  the  permission  of  God  he  exer¬
cises  a  sort  of  government  in  the  world  over  his
subordinates,  over  apostate  angels  like  himself :
t/iat  (rod  makes  use  of  him  to  prove  good  men
and  chastise  bad  ones  ;  that  he  is  a  lying  spirit
m  the  mouth  of  false  prophets,  seducers,  and  he¬
retics  ;  that  it  is  he,  or  some  of  his,  that  ’tor¬
ment  or  possess  nien,  that  inspire  them  with  evil
esigns,  as  he  did  David  when  he  suggested  to
him  to  number  his  people ,  and  to  Judas  to  betray
his  Lord  and  Master,  and  to  Ananias  and  Sap-
pliira,  to  conceal  the  price  of  their  field.  That
he  loves  full  of  rage,  like  a  roaring  lion,  to  tempt,
o  bet:  ay,  to  destroy  us,  and  to  involve  us  in  guilt
and  wickedness.  That  his  power  and  malice  are
restrained  within  certain  limits,  and  controlled
by  the  will  of  God.  In  a  word,  that  he  is  an
enemy  to  God  and  man,  and  uses  his  utmost  en¬
deavours  to  rob  God  of  his  glory,  and  men  of  their
souls.  See  Devil.

1EW  21-  E  provoked  David  to  number  Israel
J0" '  6.  and  y.  came  also  among  them,  2.  1.

d  out,b  °ln  tlle  presence  of  the  Lord

y,  qd'J.  6.  and  let  y.  stand  at  his  right  hand
„h:A-  E  r.  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  him
die  Lord  said  to  y.  the  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O  y
,  "E  4-  10.  Jesus  saith  to  him,  get  thee  hence,  y.

lf  cast  out  .v.  Mark  3.  23,  26.  Luke  11 .  18.

}?' 2,3;  8ft  thee  behind  me,  s.  Mark  8.  33.  Luke  1.  8.
Mark  4. 15.  y.  cometh  and  taketh  away  the  word
ZTe,l°-  1  beheld y.  as  lightning  fall  from  heaven
I3, 1  .uWhonl s"  ^,ath-  bound  these  eighteen  years
-3- then  entered  y.  into  Judas  Iscariot,  of  twelve
31.  pinion,  Simon,  y.  hath  desired  to  have  you
.  ohn  13.  *7.  and  after  the  sop,  y.  entered  into  him
3.  why  hath  y.  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  ?

y.  to  God
.  our  feet

-  k  .u  2  '1  — -  that  spirit

on’  tempt  you  not  for  your  incontinency

2  Ccr  2.  11.  lest  s  should  get  an  advantage  of  us
JE  14.  y.  himself  is  transformed  into  angel  of  lDht
1  m/7-  WoSfiVen  me  the  messenger  of  y.  to  buffet  me
1  Ihess.  2. 18.  we  would  have  come,  but  y.  hind,  us
-  d/iess.  2.  9.  whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of  y
f  hm.\.  20.  whom  1  have  delivered  unto  y.

5.  15.  for  some  are  already  turned  aside  after  y
Rev.  2.  9.  are  not  Jews,  but  the  synagogue  of  y

13.  where  Satan’s  seat  is,  where  s.  dwelleth
24.  and  who  have  not  known  the  depths  of  y.

3.  9.  I  will  make  them  of  the  synagogue  of  y’

12.  9.  the  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  called  y'

20.  2.  he  laid  hold  on  the  dragon,  which  is  y.

7.  y.  shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison
,  .  SATIATE.

.c' '? 1 '  1,4-  1  will  y.  soul  of  the  priests  with  fatness
46.  10.  the  sword  shall  be  y.  with  their  blood
SATIATED.

Jet .  31.  25.  I  have  y.  the  weary  soul ,  and  replenished
..  _  SATISFACTION.

Sum.  35.  31.  shall  take  noy.  for  life  of  a  murderer
32.  shall  take  110  y.  for  him  that  is  tied  for  refuse
_  t  SATISFY.

'n  27-  1°  s-  the  desol  ite  and  waste  ground
Rsal.  90.  14.  O  y.  us  early  with  thy  mercy
91.  16.  with  long  life  will  I  y.  him,  and  shew  salvat.

132.  15.  I  will  s.  her  poor  with  bread
Prov.  5.  19.  let  her  breasts  s.  thee  at  all  times

6.  30.  if  he  steal  to  v.  his  soul  when  he  is  hungry
Isa.  58. 10.  it  thou  y.  the  afflicted  soul,  then  thy  light

11;  Ford  sl.all  guirle  anrl  y.  thy  soul  in  drought
ek.  7- 19.  they  shall  not  s.  their  souls,  nor  fill
Marks.  4.  whence  can  a  man  s.  these  with  bread
„  SATISFIED.

Lxod.  15.  9.  my  lust  shall  be  j.  upon  them
Lev.  26.  26.  and  ye  shall  eat  and  not  he  y.

Pent.  14.  29.  the  fatherless  shall  eat  and  be  s.

33.  23.  O  Naphtali,  y.  with  favour,  and  full
Job  19.22.  and  why  are  ye  not  y.  with  my  flesh  ?

27.  14.  his  offspring  shall  not  he  y.  with  bread
31.  31.  oh  that  we  had  of  his  flesh  !  we  cannot  bey.

/  sal,  17 •  15.  1  shall  be  v.  when  awake  with  thy  liken.

22. 26.  the  meek  shall  eat  and  be  y.  they  shall  praise

36.  8.  they  shall  be  y.  with  the  fatness  of  thy  house

37.  19.  in  the  days  of  famine  they  shall  be  y.

59. 15.  and  let  them  grudge  if  they  be  not  y.

63.  5.  my  soul  shall  be  y.  as  with  mar.  and  fatness
65.  4.  we  shall  be  s.  with  the  goodness  of  thy  house

81. 16.  with  honey  out  of  rock  should  1  have  y.  thee


nJs 10  .  ‘  T' batb  y.  filled  thine  heart  to
^o.  18.  to  turn  them  from  the  power  of  s.  ‘
Horn.  16.J20.  God  shall  bruise  s.  under  you
l_G«r.  5.  5.  to  deliver  such  an  one  to  y.  thai


4P4.  13.  the  earth  isy.  with  the  fruit  of  thy  works
lOo.  40.  he  y.  them  with  the  bread  of  heaven
Prov.  12.  11.  he  thattilleth  his  laud  shall  hey.

14.  a  man  be  s.  with  good  by  the  fruit  of  Ids  mouth
14.  14.  and  a  good  man  shall  bey.  from  himself
J8-  20.  a  man  s  belly  be  s.  with  fruit  of  his  mouth

19.  23.  and  he  that  hath  it  shall  abide  y.

20.  13.  open  thine  eyes,  and  thou  shalt  be  y.

30.  15.  there  are  three  things  that  are  never  y

Bed.  1.  8.  the  eye  is  noty.  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear

4.  8.  neither  is  his  eye  y.  with  riches

5.  10.  that  lovetli  silver,  shall  not  he  y.  with  silver
La.  9.  20.  shall  eat  and  not  be  y.  Mic.  6.  14.

44.  16.  he  roasteth  roast  and  is  y.  he  warms  himself
o3.  11.  he  shall  see  ot  travail  of  his  soul,  and  he  s.
Go.  11.  be  y.  with  the  breasts  of  her  consolations

Jcr.  31.  14.  my  people  shall  be  s.  with  goodness
30  10.  al  that  spoil  Chnldea shall  be  y.  saith  Lord
19.  anil  his  souj  shall  be  y.  on  mount  Ephraim
Lam.  5.  0.  have  given  the  hand  to  Egyptians  to  be  y.
Lzek.  16.  28.  and  yet  thou  couldest  not  bey.  29.
Amos L  8.  wandered  to  drink  water,  but  were  not  s.
•Jab.  -.0.  he  is  as  death,  ,  nil  cannot  be  y.

_  ,  .  SAT1SFI EST.

I  sal.  145.  16.  and  thou  y.  the  desire  of  every  thing
_  ,  „  SATISFI ETH.

,^•103.  5.  who  y  thy  mouth  with  good  things
10i .  9.  for  he  y.  the  longing  soul,  and  filleth  hungry
Isa.  55.  and  your  labour  for  that  which  y.  not
SATISFYING.

NT1’;.13-  25'  d!e  righteous  eateth  toy.  of  his  soul
Col.  2.  23.  not  in  any  honour  to  the  y.  of  the  flesh
SATTES’I’.

Psal.  9.  4.  thou  y.  in  the  throne  judging  right
Lzek.  23.  41.  thou  y.  upon  a  stately  bed  and  a  table
SA  J  Y  K.

Isa.  34.  14.  and  the  s.  shall  cry  to  his  fellow
,  SATYRS.

Isa.  13. 21.  owls  shall  dwell  there,  and  s.  dance  there

. SAVE

Signifies,  1.  lo  deliver  from  temporal  dangers,  and
protect  and  defend  any  one  in  them ,  Mat.  14.  30.
Peter  cried,  saying,  Lord,  save  me.

2.  lo  deliver  from  the  guilt,  to  free  from  the  power
and  pollution,  of  sin,  Mat.  1.  21.  For  he  shall
save  his  people  from  their  sins.  Thus  only  Christ
saves  his  people  :  they  are  justified  by  the  imputa-
tion  of  Jns  righteousness  :  and  by  the  operation  of
his  Spirit  they  are  sanctified ,  the  power  and  do -
minion  of  sin  are  subdued  and  weakened,  and  at
last  sm  is  utterly  destroyed.

3.  To  obtain  eternal  life.  Mat.  10.  22.  But  he  that
endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved.

Salvation  is  attributed ,

E  J<>  God,  Jer.  17.  14,  Save  me,  O  Lord,  and  I
Shall  be  saved.  God  is  often  called  by  the  name
of  Saviour,  2  Sam.  22.  3.  The  Lord  is  my  re¬
fuge  and  my  Saviour,  Has.  13.  4.  There  is  no
Saviour  besides  me,  Isa.  15.  15.  Verily  thou  art
a  God  that  hidest  thyself,  ()  God  of  Israel,  the
Saviour.  God  is  the  >a.y  ionr  of  saviours,  and  the
God  of  gods  :  without  him  there  is  neither  salva¬
tion,  nor  deliverance,  nor  succour  to  be  hoped  for.

It  is  he  that  raises  up  Saviours  to  his  people.
He  raised  them  up  a  Saviour  in  the  person  of
Othniel,  the  son  of  Kenez,  against  the  king  of
Mesopotamia,  who  oppressed  them,  Judg.  3.  9.
He  raised^  them  up  another  in  Ehud  son  of  Gerah,
against  Fglon,  king  of  the  Moabites,  Judg.  3.
15.  And  Obadiah  promises,  that  the  Lord  will
send  Saviours  upon  the  mountain  of  Zion  to
^  judge  the  mountain  of  Esau,  (Jbad.  2*.

2.  lo  Christ.  The  name  Saviour  is  ■  appropriated
to  the  Messiah,  who  was  prefigured  by  all  those  to
whom  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  I  estament  give  the
name  of  Saviour,  as  Joshua,  the  judge  of  Israel,
the  kings,  David,  Solomon,  Josiah,  and  the  great
men  raised  up  in  an  extraordinary  manner  to  de¬
liver  the  people  oj  God.  The  prophets  had  mark¬
ed  out  Christ  under  the  name  of  Saviour,  Isa.

19.  20.  I  he  Lord  shall  send  them  a  Saviour,
and  a  great  One,  and  he  shall  deliver  them.
And  the  apostles  and  sacred  writers  of  the  New
1  estament  generally  give  to  Christ  the  name
of  Saviour  by  way  of  eminence.  When  the
angel  proclaimed  his  birth,  he  said  that  he  should
be  called  Jesus,  that  is,  a  Saviour,  for  he  shall
save  his  people  from  their  sins,  Mat.  1.  21.  And
in  John  4.  42.  he  is  called  the  Saviour  of  the
world.  See  Acts  13.23.  Phil.  3.  20.

This  name  is  properly  given  to  Christ.  He  saves  his
people  from  sin,  from  hell,  and  destruction  :  he
hath  not  only  merited  salvation  for  them  by  his
death  ;  but  he  applies  the  purchased  redemption  by
shedding  abroad  the  Holy  Ghost  into  their  hearts,
and  by  maintaining  and  constantly  preserving  the
graces  that  are  implanted  in  them,  as  the  natural
head  doth  distil  and  derive  sense,  motion,  and  life,
into  the  natural  body.  He  is  a  Saviour  by  merit,
and  a  Saviour  by  efficacy  :  Hence  he  is  said  to  be
the  Author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that
obey  him,  Ileb.  5.  9.  And  to  have  obtained  eter¬
nal  redemption  for  us,  Heb.  9.  12.

3.  Salvation  is  attributed  to  faith,  to  the  word  of
God,  to  baptism,  and  to  men:  These  are  only  in¬
struments  and  means  which  God  makes  use  of
either  for  beginning  or  furthering  this  work,  Luke
7.  50.  Jesus  said  to  the  woman,  thy  faith  hath
saved  thee,  go  in  peace.  Jam.  1.21.  Receive  with
meekness  the  ingrafted  word,  which  is  able  to
save  your  souls.  1  Pet.  3.  21.  The  like  figure
where  unto,  even  baptism,  dotli  also  now  save  us.
Rom.  11.  14.  If  by  any  means  I  may  provoke
to  emulation  them  which  are  my  flesh,  and
might  save,  that  is,  be  an  instrument  of  saving
some  of  them.  And  in  1  Cor.  7.  16.  For  what
knowest  thou.  O  wife,  whether  thou  shalt  save
thy  husbai  Lr  or  how  knowest  thou,  O  man
whether  thou  shalt  save  thy  wife  ;  The  word
directs  and  points  out  where  salvation  may  be  had  ,
faith  is  the  hand  or  instrument  that  receives
Christ  iht  author  of  satiation  ;  baptism  becomes  a»

415


SAY


SAY


SAY


effectual  means  of  salvation ,  not  from  any  vlTtue
that  is  in  the  outward  administration  oj  it,  out
on'y  by  the  blessing  <f  Christ,  and  the  working  of
his  spirit  in  them  that  receive  it,  inclining  and
enabling  them  to  believe  and  heartily  to  acquiesce
m  the  covenant,  which  th-y  make  with  God  at  bap¬
tism,  whereof  it  is  the  seal.  Good  men  likewise,
by  their  admonitions  and  good  example,  are  made
instrumental  in  converting  others  to  the  Jaitn,

In  Eph f  2.5,  8.  it  is  said ,  By  grace  ye  are  saved.

[1]  hi  respect  of  God's  eternal  purpose,  looking  to
nothing  in  the  creature,  but  decreeing  and  purpos¬
ing  all  benefits  to  them  out  of  his  free  love  and
favour  [2]  Because  all  the  parts  oj  this  salvation
are  from  this  grace  :  as,  Conversion.  Gal.  1.16.
When  it  pleased  Cod,  who  separated  me  trom
mv  mother’s  womb,  and  called  me  by  his  grace.
Justification.  Tit.  3.  7-  that  being  justified  by
his  trace,  we  should  be  made  heirs,  according  to
the  hope  of  eternal  life.  All  our  qualifications
and  endowments,  yea,  and  all  the  good  we  do,  are
of  grace.  1  Cot.  15. 10.  By  the  grace  of  God  1  am
what  1  am.  J  he  outturn  means  of  salvation  are
of  grace.  Horn.  10.  15.  How  shall  thej  preach,
except  they  he  sent?  Eph.  4.  8.  He  gave  gitts
unto  men.  The  price  of  our  redemption  was  f  ree¬
ly  paid.  John  10.  17,  18.  '1  here  lore  doth  my
Father  love  me,  because  l  lay  down  my  life,
that  I  might  take  it  again.  No  man  taketh  it
from  me,  but  1  lay  it  down  ot  myself.  lhe
kingdom  of  heaven  is  freely  prepared  for  us.  John

14.  2.  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  tor  you.  And

eternal  life  is  freely  bestowed.  Rom.  6.  23.  But
the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord.  ..

Gen.  45.  7.  God  sent,  me  before  you  to  #.  your  lives
Dent.  20.  4.  the  Lord  goeth  with  you  to  j.  you

22.  27.  she  cried,  and  there  was  none  to  #.  her
28.  2Q.  shall  he  spoiled,  and  no  man  shall  #.  thee

Judg.  6.14.  go  in  this  thy  might,  thou  shalt#.  srael

15.  O  my  Lord,  wherewith  shall  1  s.  Israel  '

31.  will  ye  plead  for  Baal  t  will  ye  #.  him  .

36.  if  thou  wilt  s.  Israel  by  mine  hand,  as  hastsaid

37.  then  shall  I  know  that  thou  wilt  s.  Israel

7.  7.  by  the  300  men  that  lapped  will  1  s.  you

1  Sam.  9. 16.  anoint  him,  that  lie  may  #.  my  people

10.  24.  the  people  shouted  and  said,  God  s.  the  king

2  Sam.  16.  16.  2  Kings  11.  12.  2  C '/iron.  23.  11.

14.  6.  there  is  no  restraint,  to  #.  by  many ,  or  by  few

19.  11.  it  thou  #.  not  thyself  this  night, shall  beslain

23.  2.  the  Lord  said  to  David,  go  and  #.  Keilah

2  Sam.  3.  18.  by  the  hand  of  David  1  will  #.  Israel
22.  28.  the  afflicted  people  thou  wilt  j.  Psal.  18.  27.

42.  but  there  was  none  to  s.  them,  Psal.  18.  41.

1  Kings  1.  12.  that,  thou  mayest  #.  thine  own  life
25.  behold,  they  say,  God  s.  king  Adonijah
34.  blow  trumpet,  say,  God  s.  king  Solomon,  39.

20.  31.  go  to  kins,  peradventure  he  will  s.  thy  life

2  Kings  19.  34.  for  1  will  defend  this  city  to  5.  it,  tor
my  own  sake  and  servant  David’s  sake,  lsa.SJ .35.

Neh.  6.  11.  would  go  into  the  temple  to  his  life
Job  2.  6.  behold,  he  is  in  thine  hand,  but  #.  his  life
20.  20.  he  shall  not#.  of  that  which  he  desired
22.29.  and  he  shall  s.  the  humble  person
40.  14.  that  thine  own  right  hand  can  s.  thee
Psal.  12.  t  1.  #.  Lord,  for  the. godly  man  ceaseth
20.  Q.  s.  Lord,  let  the  king  hear  us  when  we  call
28.  9.  s.  thy  people,  feed  them  also,  Jer.  31.  7;

37.  40.  he  shall  #.  them,  because  they  trust  in  him

44.  3.  neither  did  their  own  arm  s.  them
60.  5.  #.  with  thy  right  hand,  and  hear  me,  108.  6.
6Q.  35.  for  God  will  s.  Zion,  and  will  build  Judah
72.  4.  he  shall  s.  the  children  of  the  needy

13.  and  he  shall  s.  the  souls  of  the  needy

76.  9.  when  God  arose  to  s.  the  meek  of  the  earth
86.  2.  O  my  God,#,  thy  servant  that  trusteth  in  thee

16.  and  #.  the  son  of  thine  handmaid
109.  31.  #.  him  from  those  that  condemn  his  soul
118.25.#.  1  beseech  thee,  O  Lord,  send  prosperity
145.  19.  he  also  will  hear  their  cry,  and  #  them
Prov.  20.  22.  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  #.  thee
Isa.  35.  4.  behold,  your  God  will  come  and  #.  you

45.  20.  and  pray  unto  a  god  that  cannot  #.

46.  7.  he  cannot  answer,  nor  #.  him  out  of  trouble

47.  13.  let  now  the  astrologers  stand  up  and  #.  thee

15.  they  shall  wander,  none  shall  #.  thee

49.  25.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  #.  thy  children
59. 1.  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened,  that  it  cannot#.
63.  1.  1  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  #.
Jer.  2.  28.  let  them  arise,  if  they  can  #.  thee

11.  12.  but  they  shall  not  #.  them  at  all  in  trouble

14.  9.  shouldest  be  as  a  mighty  man  that  cannot#.

15.  20.  for  1  am  with  thee  to  #.  thee,  and  to  deliver

thee,  saith  the  Lord,  30.  11.  1  42.  11.  146.  27.
30.  10.  ()  lsr.  1  will  #.  thee  from  atar,  and  thy  seed

48.  6.  tiee,  #.  your  lives,  be  like  the  heath  in  wilder.
Ezek.  3.  18.  to  warn  the  wicked,  to  #.  his  life

13.  t  22.  should  not  return,  that  1  should  #.  his  life
34.  22.  therefore  will  I  #.  my  flock,  ami  will  judge
36.  20.  I  will  #.  you  ||  37  .  23.  1  will  #.  them
llos.  1.  7.  but  1  will  #.  them  by  the  Lord  their  God,
and  will  not#,  them  by  bow  nor  by  sword
13. 10.  where  is  there  any  other  that  may  #.  thee  ?
Hah.  1.2.  crv  to  thee  of  violence,  and  thou  wilt  not#.
Zeplu  3.  17.“he  will  #.  lie  will  rejoice  over  thee
19.  I  will  #.  her  that  halteth,  and  gather  her
Zech.  8.7.  1  will  #.  my  people  from  the  east  country
9  16.  the  Lord  their  God  shall  #.  them  in  the  day
10.  6.  and  1  will  #.  the  house  of  Joseph

12.  7.  the  Lord  also  shall  #.  the  tents  of  Judah  first
Mat.  1.21.  Jesus,  shall  #.  his  people  from  their  sins

16.  *25  for  whosoever  will  s.  his  life  shall  lose  it,

Mark  8.  35.  Luke  9.  24. 1  17-  33.
18.  11.  for  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  #.  that
which  was  lost,  Luke  19.  10.
27.40.  faying  »hou  that  destroy  est  the  temple,  and
buildest  it  in  three  days,  #.  thyself,  Mark  15.  30.
42.  saved  others,  himself  lie  cannot  #.  Mark  15.  31.

49.  let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to  #.  him
Mark  3.  4.  is  it  lawful  to  #.  life,  or  to  kill  ?  Luke  6.  9
Luke  9.  56.  is  not  come  todestr.  men’s  lives,  but  to#

416


Luke 23.  35.  let  him  #.  himself,  if  he  be  Christ
37.  #.  thyself  i|  39.  if  Christ,  #.  thyself  and  us
John  12.  47.  1  came  not  to  judge,  but  to  #.  the  world
Acts  2.  40.  #.  yourselves  from  this  generation
27.  43.  but  the  centurion,  willing  to  #.  Paul
Rom.  11. 14.  if  T  might#,  some  of  them,  1  Cor.  9. 22.

1  Cor.  1. 21.  t>y  the  foolishness  of  preach,  to  #,  them
7.  16.  shalt  #.  thy  husband,  shalt  #.  thy  wife

1  Tim.  1. 15.  Christ  came  into  the  world  to#,  sinners
4  16.  in  doing  this  thou  shalt#.  thyself  and  them

Ileh.  5.7.  to  him  that  was  able  to  #.  him  trom  death
7.  25.  he  is  able  also  to  #.  them  to  the  uttermost
Jam.  1.  21.  the  word,  which  is  able  to  #.  your  souls
2.  14.  and  have  not  works,  can  faith  #.  him

4.  12.  one  lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  #.  and  to  destroy

5.  15.  the  prayer  of  faith  shall  #.  the  sick
20.  shall  #.  a  soul  from  death,  and  hide  sins

Jude  23.  others  #.  with  tear,  pulling  them  out  of  fire
See  Alive.

SA  V  E  me.

2  Kings  16. 7.  #.  me  out  of  hand  of  the  king  of  Syria
Psal.  3.  7.  arise,  O  Lord,  #.  me,  O  my  God

6.  4.  #.  me  for  thy  mercies’  sake,  31.  16.  1  109.  26.

7. 1.  #.  me  from  all  them  that  persecute  me
22.21.  #.  me  from  the  lion's  mouth,  thou  hastheard
31. 2.  he  thou  for  an  house  of  defence  to  #.  me
44.  6.  not  trust  in  bow,  nor  shall  my  sword  #.  me

54.  1.  #.  me,  O  God,  by  thy  name,  and  judge  me

55.  16.  1  will  call  on  God,  and  the  Lord  shall  #.  me
57.  3.  he  shall  send  from  heaven  and  #.  me
59.  2.  deliver  me,  and  #.  me  from  bloody  men
69.  1.  #.  me,  for  waters  are  come  in  unto  my  soul
71.  2.  incline  thine  ear  unto  me,  and  #.  me

3.  thou  hast  given  commandment  to#,  me
119.  94.  #.  me,  for  1  have  sought  thy  precepts
146.  I  cried  unto  thee,  #.  me,  and  1  shall  keep
138.  7.  and  thy  right  hand  shall  #.  me  .

Isa.  38.  20.  the  Lord  was  ready  to  #.  me,  we  will  sing
Jer.  17.  14.  O  Lord,  #.  me,  and  1  shall  be  saved
Mat.  14.  30.  Peter  cried,  saying,  Lord,  #.  me
John  12.  27.  Father,  #.  me  from  this  hour
SAVE  us.

Josh.  10.  6.  come  up  to  ns  quickly,  and  s.  us
22.  22.  if  it  he  in  rebellion,  #.  us  not  this  day  _

1  Sam.  4.  3.  the  ark  may  #.  us  from  our  enemies
7.  8.  cease  not  to  cry  to  the  Lord,  that  he  will  #.  us
10.27.  menof  Belial  said,  how  shall  this  man#,  us?
11.3.  if  there  be  no  man  to  #.  us,  we  will  come

2  Kings  19. 19.  #.  thou  us  out  of  his  hand,  Isa.  37.20.

1  Chron.  16.  35.  #.  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation
Ps.  80.  2.  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  come  and  #.  us

106.  47.  #.  us,  O  Lord  our  God,  and  gather  us
Isa.  25.  9.  we  have  waited  for  him,  he  will  #.  us
33.  22.  the  Lord  is  our  king,  he  will  #.  us
Jer.  2.  27.  in  their  trouble  they  will  say,#,  us
Lam.  4.  17.  watched  for  a  nation  that  could  not#,  us
Dos.  14.  3.  Asshur  shall  not  #.  us,  we  will  not  ride
Mat.  8.25.  they  awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  #.  us
1  Pet.  3.  21.  even  baptism,  doth  also  now  #.  us
SAVE,  tor  Besides.

Gen.  14.  24.  #.  what  the  young  men  have  eaten
39.  6.  he  knew  not  aught,  #.  the  bread  he  did  eat
Exod.  12.  16.  #.  that  which  every  man  must  eat
22.  20.  he  thatsacrificeth  to  any  god,#,  to  the  Lord
Num.  14.  30.  #.  Caleb,  26.  65. 1  32.  12.  Dent.  1.  36.
Dent  A 5.4.  #.  when  there  shall  be  no  pooranrongyou
Josh.  11. 13.  Israel  burned  none,  #.  Hazor  only
19.  that  made  peace  with  Israel,  #.  the  Hivites

14.  4.  they  gave  no  part  to  the  Levites,  #.  cities
Judg.  7. 14.  is  nothing  else,  #.  the  sword  of  Gideon

1  Sam.  21.  9.  there  is  none  other,  #  that  here
30.  17.  there  escaped  none,  #.  400  young  men

22.  #.  to  every  man  his  wife  and  his  children

2  Sam.  12.  3.  poor  man  had  nothing,  #.  one  ewe  lamb
22.  32.  who  is  God,  #.  the  Lord  r  Psal.  18.  31.

1  Kings?>.  18.  was  no  stranger  in  the  house,  #.  we  two
8.  9.  there  was  nothing  in  the  ark#,  the  two  tables

15.  5.  #.  in  the  matter  of  Uriah  the  Hittite
22.  31.  fight  not,  #.  with  the  king  of  Israel

2  Kings  4.  2.  hath  not  any  thing,  s.  a  pot  of  oil
15.  4.  #.  that  the  hiah  places  were  not  removed

2  Chron.  2.  6.  #.  only  to  burn  sacrifice  before  him
21.  17.  no  son  left,  #.  Jehoahaz  the  youngest
Neh.  2. 12.  nor  any  with  me,  #.  the  beast  1  rode  on
Dan.  6.  7.  ask  a  petition  *.  of  thee,  O  king,  12.
Mat.  11.  27.  nor  knoweth  any  the  Father,#.  Son
13.57.  not  without  honour,  #.  in  his  own  country
17.  8.  they  saw  no  man,  #.  Jesus  only,  Mark  9.  8.
19.  11.  cannot  receive,  #.  they  to  whom  it  is  given
Markb.  37.  and  he  suffered  no  man  to  follow  him,  #.

Peter,  James,  and  John,  LukeB.  51.
6.  5.  #.  that  he  laid  his  hands  upon  a  few  sick  folk
8.  that  they  should  fake  nothing.#,  a  staff  only
Luke  4.  26.  sent,  #.  unto  Sarepta,  a  city  of  Sidon

17.  18.  none  found  that  returned,  #.  this  stranger

18.  19.  none  is  good,  #.  one,  that  is  God
John  6.  22.  there  was  no  other  boat,  #.  that  one

46.  hath  seen  the  Father,  #.  he  which  is  of  God
13.  10.  he  needeth  not,  #.  to  wash  his  feet
Acts  20.  23.  #.  that  the  Holy  Ghost  witnesseth
21.  25.  #.  to  keep  themselves  from  fornication

1  Cor.  2.  2.  not  to  know  any  thing,  #.  Jesus  Christ
11.  #.  the  spirit  of  man  which  is  in  man

2  Cor.  11.24.  five  times  receiv.  1  forty  stripes,#,  one
Gal.  1.19.1  saw  none,  #.  James,  the  Lord’s  brother

6.  14.  God  forbid  that  1  should  glory,  #.  in  the  cross
Rev.  13. 17.  buy  or  sell,  #.  he  that  had  the  mark
SAVED.

Gen.  47.  25.  they  said,  thou  hast  #.  our  lives
Exod.  1. 17.  mid  wives  #.  the  men  children  alive,  18.
Num.  22.  33.  1  had  slain  thee,  and  #.  her  alive
31. 15.  Moses  said,  have  ye  #.  all  the  women  alive  ?
Josh.  6.  25.  Joshua  #.  Bahabthe  harlot  alive
Judg.  7-2.  lest  I  srael  say,  mine ov  n  hand  hath  #.  me
8. 19.  if  he  had  #.  them  alive,  1  would  not  slay  you
21.  14.  they  gave  them  wives  which  they  had  #.

1  Sam.  2.3.  5.  David#,  the  inhabitants  of  Keilah
27.  11.  David#,  neither  man  nor  woman  alive

2  Sam.  19.  5.  servants  who  this  day  have  #.  thy  life
Q.  the  king#,  us,  and  now  he  is  tied  tor  Absalom

2  Kings  6.  10.  #.  himself  there,  not  once  nor  twice
Neh.  9.  27.  thou  gavest  them  saviours,  who  #.  them


Peal  33  16.  no  king  is  #.  by  multitude  of  an  host

44  7  but  thou  hast  #.  us  from  our  enemies

106.  8.  nevertheless,  he  s.  them  for  his  name’s  sake
10  he  #.  them  from  him  that  hated  them
J#«.  43. 12. 1  have  declared,  and  have#,  and  shewed

45  22.  look  to  me,  and  be  ye  #.  all  the  endsot  earth
Jer.  4.  14.  wash  thy  heart,  that  thou  mayest  be  #.

8.  20.  the  summer  is  ended,  and  we  are  not  #.

Ma't  19.  25.  when  his  disciples  heard  it,  saying,
who  then  can  be  #.  ?  Mark  10.  26.  Luke  18.  26.

24.  22.  no  flesh  should  be  #.  Mark  13.  20.

07  4°  he  #.  others,  Mark  15.  31.  Luke  23.  35.

Luke  1  71.  that  we  should  be  #.  from  our  enemies
7.  50.  he  said,  thy  faith  hath  #.  thee,  18.  42.

8. 12.  takes  away,  lest  they  should  believeand  be#.

13  23.  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  #. ?

John  3.  17.  that  the  world,  through  him,  might  he#.

5.  34.  these  things  1  say,  that  ye  might  be  #.

Acts  2.  47.  the  Lord  added  such  as  should  he  #.

4  12  "there  is  no  other  name  whereby  we  must  be  t.

15.  1.  except  ye  be  circumcised,  ye  cannot  be  #.

16.  30.  he  said,  sirs,  what  must  l  do  to  be  #.  ?

27.  20.  all  hope  we  should  be  #.  was  taken  away

31 .  except  these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  cannot  be  #.
Rom.  8.  24.  we  are  #.  by  hope,  hope  seen  is  not  hope
10.  1.  my  prayer  for  Israel  is,  that  they  may  be  #.

1  Cor.  1.  18.  to  us  who  are  #.  it  is  the  power  ot  God
5.  5.  that  the  spirit  may  be  #.  in  day  of  the  Lord
10  33  hut  the  profit  of  many,  that  they  may  he  #.

15.  2.  by  which  also  ye  are  #.  it  ye  keep  m  memory

2  Cor.  2. 15.  we  are  sweet  savour  in  them  that  are  #.
~Eph.  2.  5.  hath  quickened  us  with  Chr.  by  gr.  are  s.

B.  for  by  grace  are  ye  #.  through  taith
1  Thess.  2.  16.  to  the  Gentiles  that  they  might  be#.
o  Thess.  2.  10.  because  they  received  not  the  love
of  the  truth,  that  they  might  he  #.

1  Tim..  2.  4.  who  will  have  all  men  to  be  #.  and  come
Tit  3  5.  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  #.  us

1-  Pet.  3.  20.  wherein  eight  souls  were  #.  by  water
4  18.  if  the  riirhteous  scarcely  be  #.  where  shall

2  Pet.  2.  5.  but  #.  Noah,  eighth  person,  a  preacher
~Rev.  21."  24.  nations#,  shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it

God  or  Lord  SAVED.

Exod.  14.  30.  Lord  s.  Israel  that  day,  1  Sam.  14.  23.
Ueut.  33.29.  who  is  like  thee,  O  people,  #.  by  Lord?

1  Sam.  10.  19-  ye  have  rejected  jour  God,  who#,  you

2  Kings  14.  27-  Lord  s.  them  by  hand  ot  Jeroboam

1  Chr.  11.  14.  Lord  #.  them  by  a  great  deliverance

2  Chron.  32.  22.  thus  Lord  s.  Hezekiah  from  Senn.
Psal.  34.  6.  Lord  #.  him  out  of  all  his  troubles

107.  13.  the  Lord  #.  them  out  of  their  distresses
Isa.  63.  9.  angel  of  his  presence,  #.  them  in  his  love
2  Tim  1  9.  God  who  hath  #.  us  and  called  us
Jude  5.  how  that  the  Lord,  having  #.  the  people
Shall  or  shalt  be  SAVED.

Num.  10.  9.  ye  shall  be  s.  from  your  enemies
2  Sam.  22.  4.  1  shall  bes.  from  mine  enem.  Ps.  18.  3.
Psal.  80.  3.  cause  thy  face  to  shine,  we  s.be  s  7-  19.
Prov.  28.  18.  whoso  walketh  uprightly  shall  be  s.
Isa.  30.  15.  in  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  #.

45. 17.  but  Israel  shall  be  s.  in  Lord  with  salvation
64.  5.  in  those  is  continuance,  and  we  shall  be  #.
Jer.  17.  14.  O  Lord,  save  me,  and  I  #  hall  be  s.

23.  6.  in  his  days  Judah  shall  be  s.  33.  16.

30  7  lacob's  {rouble,  but  he  shall  he  s.  out  of  it
Mat.  10.  22.  be  hated  for  my  name’s  sake,  but  he
that  endureth  to  end  shall  be  s.  24. 1 3.  Mark  13. 13.
Mark  16.  16.  he  that  believeth  shall  he  s.

John  10.  9.  by  me,  if  any  man  enter,  he  shall  be  #.
Acts  2.  21.  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  shall  call
on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  s.  Rom. HO.  13.
11.  14.  whereby  thou  and  thy  house  shall  be  s.

15  11.  we  believe  that  through  grace  we  shall  be  s.
16.  31.  believe  on  Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shall  bes.
Rom.  5.  9.  we  shall  he  #.  from  wrath  through  him
10.  beinsi  reconciled,  we  shall  be  s.  by  his  life

9.  27.  tho’  Israel  he  as  sand,  a  remnant  shall  be  s.

10.  9.  shalt  believe  God  raised  him,  thou  shah  be  s.

11.  26.  so  all  Israel  shall  he  s.  as  it  is  written
1  Cor.  3.  15.  but  he  hims.  shall  bes.  yet  so  as  by  lire

1  Tim.  2.  15.  shall  be  #.  in  child-bearing,  if  continue
SAVES!’.

2  Sam  22.  3.  my  Saviour,  thou  #.  me  from  violence
Job  °6  0  how  #.  thou  arm  that  hath  no  strength  r
Psal  17'.’ 7.  O  thou  that  #.  by  thy  right  hand

SAVE/1H.

1  Sam.  14.  39.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  who  #.  Israel
17  47  the  Lord  #.  not  with  sword  and  spear
Job  5.  15.  but  he  #.  the  poor  from  the  sword  .
Psal.  7- 10.  my  defence  is  ot  God,  who  #.  the  upright
20.  6.  now  know  1  that  the  Lord  #.  his  anointed
34.  18.  he  #.  such  as  he  of  a  contrite  spirit
107.  19.  they  cry,  he  #.  them  out  ot  their  distresses
SAVING.  .  ..f

Gen.  19. 19.  mercy  thou  hastshewed  me  in  #.  my  lire

1  Sam.  25.  t  26.  withhcilden  thee  from  #.  thyself
Neh.  4.  23.  #.  that  every  one  put  them  oft  tor  wasn
Psal.  20.  6.  with  the  #.  strength  of  his  right  hand

28.  8.  he  is  the  #.  strength  of  his  anointed
67*.  2.  thy  #.  health  among  all  nations
Eccl.  5.  11.  #.  the  beholding  of  them  with  their  eyes
Amos  9.  8.  #.  that  1  will  not  utterly  destroy  .  acch

Mat.  5.  32.  #.  for  the  cause  ot  fornication,  causetnner

Luke  4.  27.  and  none  was  cleansed,  #.  Naaman
Ileh.  10.  39.  hut  of  them  that  believe  to  #.  ot  the  sour
11.7.  Noah  prepared  an  ark  to  the  #.  ot  his  nout>'-
Rev.  2.  17.  no  man  knoweth,  #.  he  that  receivetn  1
SAVIOUR.

•  See  Signification  of  Save.

Judg.  3.  +  9.  the  Lord  raised  up  a  #.  to  Israel
0  ,\am.  22.  3.  my  high  tower,  my  refuge,  my  #.

2  Kings  13.  5.  and  the  Lord  gave  Israel  a#.

Psal.  106.  21.  they  forgat  God  then  #.  who  had don
Isa.  19.  20.  lie  shal  send  them  a  #.  a  great  one

4S.  3.  for  1  am  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  tnj  •  •
Isa.  43.  11.  1  am  the  Lord,  beside  me  there  s  no  •
45.  15.  that  hidest  thyself,  O  God  of  Israel,  tl

21.  a  just  God  and  a  #.  there  is  none  beside  me
49.  26.  all  flesh  shall  know  that  1  am  thy  #.

60. 16.  thou  shalt  know  that  1  the  Lord  am  tn>
63.  8.  they  are  my  people,  so  he  was  their  u
Jer.  14.  8.  the  #.  of  Israel  in  time  ot  double


S  A  W


Hos.  13.  4.  for  there  is  no  9.  beside  me

Luke  1.  47.  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  9.

C  11.  is  born  tins  day  in  the  city  of  David  a  t.
John  4. 42.  this  is  Christ  the  .f.  or  the  world

,JSna  3\h''"hath  {’•  exalted  to  be  a  prince  and  s.
l/>.  *3.  hath  God  raised  to  Israel  aj.  Jesus
bvh.  5.  p.  and  Christ  is  the  of  the  body
p/n/.  3.20.  from  whence  we  look  for  the  9.

I  kim.  1.  1.  by  the  commandment  of  God  our*.

2.  3.  is  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  s.

E  10.  we  trust  in  living  God,  who  is9.  of  all  men
%■  '?•  I'  1()-  'CJfnifest  by  the  appearing  of  our  s.
lit.  1.3.  according  to  the  commandm.  of  God  our  s
4.  peace  from  the  Lord  lesus  Christ  our  9.

2.  10.  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  9.
13.  looking  for  the  glorious  appearing  of  our  9.

4.  after  the  kindness  ot  God  our  s.  appeared
o.  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  througli  Christ  our  s
~  1-  thr,ou?h  righteousness  of  God  and  ourj.'

A1-  11 Koeverh asting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  9.

2.  20.  through  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  j.  Jesus

3.  2.  ot  us  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  and  9

18.  but  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  our  .9.  Christ
l  John  k.  14.  the  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  s
Jude  25.  to  ttie  only  wise  God  our  s.  be  glory
SAVIOURS.

A,27'  ^l011  8?v,e,st  ,liem  who  saved  them
iJOaa.  21.  and  s.  shall  come  up  on  mount  Zion
SAVOUR.

Savour  properly  signifies  a  scent  or  smell.  Eccl.
10.  1.  Dead  flies  cause  the  ointment  of  the
apothecary  to  send  forth  a  stinking  savour,  or
smell.  It  also  signifies  acidity,  sharpness,  tart¬
ness,  or  that  quality  m  bodies  by  which  they  give
a  relish  to  other  bodies,  and  make  them  palatable,
or  by  which  they  corrode  other  bodies.  Mat.  5.  13.
but  if  the  salt  have  lost  its  savour  ;  that  is,  its
acrimony  or  acidity.  It  is  likewise  put  for
name,  reputation,  or  character.  Exod  5  "1
1  ou  have  made  our  savour  to  be  abhorred  in
the  eyes  of  Pharaoh.

It  is  often  said  of  sacrifices  or  offerings,  that  they
were  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.  When
Pvoah  had  built  an  altar,  and  offered  burnt-off cr-
mgs  upon  it,  the  Lord  is  said  to  have  smelied  a
sweet  savour,  or  a  savour  of  rest,  Gen.  8  21
t/iat  is,  God  graciously  accepted  of  his  sacrifice
it  waspleasing  and  delightful  to  him,  being  a
fruit  of  Moah  s  faith  and  thankfulness :  These
sacrifices  God  was  graciously  pleased  to  accent
of,  as  they  represented  Christ  the  great  gospel  sa¬
crifice,  and  as  they  were  offered  up  by  faith  in
'X;  ,  Me  sacrifice  of  himself,  which  Christ
dd  erect  to  God  for  man  is  by  the  apostle  Paul
sacrifice  of  a  sweet-smelling  savour,
rmn.  o.  2.  God  is  satisfied  and  appeased  thereby
lhe  same  apostle  says,  2  Cor.  2.  15.  We  are
unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ  in  them
Ylat  are  saved,  and  in  them  that  perish  ;  that  is
/  e  are  careful  to  discharge  our  duty  to  all  men
oy  preaching  the  way  of  salvation  to  them,  and
y  warning  them  of  t he  danger  of  a  sinful  course :
and  our  labours  are  acceptable  to  God,  what
ever  eff ects  they  have  upon  souls.  I'or  God
whom  we  serve,  will  not  judge  of  us,  nor  reward
according  to  our  success,  but  according  to  our
Jait/iJutness  and  diligence  in  his  work.  God  ac¬
cept  eth  of  our  labours  as  to  good  men,  to  whom  we
a™,  instruments  of  eternal  life  and  salvation  :
and  though  others  despise  the  gospel,  and  refuse
to  hear  the  sweet  and  joyful  sound  of  it,  yet  as
as  to  them  also  we  are  a  sweet  savour  to  God  ■  For
it  is  nod  for  any  neglect  in  us,  as  to  our  duty,  if
any  perish,  hut  from  their  own  wilfulness  and  per-

2.1'  made  our  s.  to  be  abhorred

e>‘?A3  •  90t  smell  J-.  of  your  sweet  odours

fcJ;  1,°'Q1-,the  ointment  to  sent!  forth  a  stinking  9.
oho  JA3-^ecf.us,e  ot  }hue.  '-of  thy  good  ointment
°,e\ 2>  2,°-  I'.is  stink  and  his  ill  9.  shall  come  up
lat.  5.  13.  it  the  salt  has  lost  his  s.  Lvke  14  34
Cor .  2. 14.  maketh  manifest  the  s.  of  his  knowledge
10.  the  s.  of  death  unto  death,  9.  of  life  unto  life
Sweet  SAVOUR.

8.  21.  and  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweets.

■rod.  29.  18.  it  is  a  sweet  s.  an  offering  to  the  T  ord
Lev.  1.  9,  13,  17.  I  2.  9.  I  3.5.  |  s'.  21
Am.  15.  14.  1  18.  17.  I  28.  8.

*o.  tor  nsweet  s.  an  offering  to  the  I  ord  41  Ter
2.  12.  I  3.  16.  I  4.  31.  |  6.  15,  21.  1  8.  28."

I  17.6.  [  23.  13.  Num.  15.  7.  24.  I  °8  °  6
13,  27..  I  29.  2,  6,  8.  Ezek.  16.  19.  "

■ev.  „3.  18.  of  a  sweet  s.  Num.  28.  24.  I  °Q  13  38
,*•  to  make  a  sweet  s.  unto  the  Lord
«.  13.  tor  a  burnt  offering  of  a  sweet  s.  to  T/ird
£  oq  I,3- whe,re  tl??y  did  offer  meet  s.  to  their  idols
Vi  t  -Mre  aIso  they  made  their  sweet  s.

41.  1  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet  s.

e  h15'  tor  >^e  are  to  God  a  sweets,  of  Christ
pn.D.  2.  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-svneWincr  c
•Sweet  SAVOURS.

ZTa  6.  10.  may  offer  sacrifices  of  sweet  s.  to  God

'at.  16.  23.  thou  s .  not  things  of  God,  Mark  8.  33.

SA  VOU  R  Y.


V  ‘  4'  make  me  s.  meat,  such  as  I  love,  7,  14.
ji.  Esau  had  made  s.  meat,  and  brought  it
SA  W.

en.  .3  6.  the  woman  s.  the  tree  was  good  for  food
■  the  sons  or  God  s.  the  daughters  of  men
'f--  ' ‘am  9.  the  nakedness  of  his  father
6  on'd?,  'f'  nc!fll  ".4.  Abraham  9.  the  place  afar
J.  28.  they  said,  we  .v.  the  I.ord  was  with  thee
..  -a.  when  her.  that  he  prevailed  not  against  him
f  11-  mr  slier,  that  Shelah  was  grown,  not  given
J.  3.  Ins  master  r.  that  the  I  ord  was  with  him
V  ii-  ,n .that  we  s.  the  anguish  of  his  soul
.  to.  when  Joseph  s.  Renjamin  with  them
i  fl'  ,  en  Ve  s.  the  wagons  which  Joseph  sent
,  ‘ssaG>ar  s.  that  rest  was  good,  and  land
>3  i  ,lls.hrethren  .v.  that  their  father  was  dead
Joseph  s.  Ephraim’s  childien  of  third  gener.


S  A  VV

Exod.  2. 2.  when  she  s.  that  he  was  a  goodly  child
on  he  that  there  was  110  nian,  he  slew
;V'  t  ley  V  not  one  another  for  three  days
14.  31.  Israe  r.  that  great  work  the  Lord  did

24.  10.  and  they  r.  the  God  of  Israel,  11
33.  10.  all  the  people  r.  the  cloudy  pillar  stand

AW13.  28.  we  s.  the  children  of  Anak  there
22.  2.3.  ass  r.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  in  the  wav  °7

25.  7.  and  when  Phinehas  r.  it  he  rose  up  y,~'"
32.  9.  when  they  r.  the  land,  they  discouragea  Isr

Llen,ti  4;12' ye  heard  a  V0lce-  but.v.  no  similitude,  15
7. 19.  the  great  temptations  which  thine  eyes  s.
Judy,  19. 30.  a  1 1  that  s.  it  said,  no  such  deed  was  done
1.  18.  when  she  she  was  stedfastly  minded
1  oam.  6.  13.  they  s.  the  ark,  and  rejoiced  to  see  it
10.  14.  when  he  s.  that  they  were  no  where

}7  -  24 •  israe1'  Y.hen  !hey  -f-  the  man,  fled  from  him
18.28.  Saul  ,v.  that  the  I.ord  was  with  David
7  Kam.  11.  2.  David  .9.  a  woman  washing  herself

1  KingsS.28.  s.  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him
16.  18.  when  Zimri  .9.  that  the  city  was  taken

18.  17.  when  Ahab  s.  Elijah  he  said  to  him

1 9.  .3.  when  he  .9.  that,  lie  arose  and  went  for  his  life

2  Kings  2  12.  Elisha  j.  it,  and  he  9.  him  no  more
.3.  22.  .9.  the  water  on  the  other  side  as  red  as  blood
4.  2o.  when  the  man  of  God  s.  her  afar  off

h  °Pened  eyes  of  the  young  man  and  he  j.
13.  4.  for  he  s.  the  oppression  of  Israel
16.  10.  Ahaz  .y.  an  altar  that  was  at  Damascus,  12
‘ZChron.  15.  9.  they  9.  that  the  Lord  was  with  him
25.  21.  and  they  9.  one  another  in  the  face

xwVVl611  Pnnces,  f-  heaps,  they  blessed  the  Lord
IS  eh  6.  16.  when  .9.  these  things  they  were  cast  down
Esth.  1.  14.  the  princes  which  s.  the  king’s  face
7-7.  he  J.  that  there  was  evil  determined  ag.  him
Job  2. 13.  they  .9.  that  his  grief  was  very  great
.3.  16.  had  not  been,  as  infants  which  never  9  ljo-ht
20.  9.  eye  which  9.  him,  shall  see  him  no  more“
29.8.  the  young  men  9.  me.  and  hid  themselves
IE  when  the  eye  9.  me,  it  gave  witness  to  me
ffifi'.  48.  0.  they  9.  it,  and  so  they  marvelled
(7.  16.  waters  9.  thee,  O  God,  the  waters  9  thee
95.  9.  your  fathers  proved  me,  and  9.  my  work
9j.  4  the  earth  .9.  his  lightnings  and  trembled
114.  3.  sea  9.  it  and  fled,  Jordan  was  driven  back
Cant.  .3.  .3.  9.  ye  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  ?

La.  41 . 5.  isles  .9.  it,  and  feared,  ends  of  the  earth
Jer.  .3.  (.  and  her  treacherous  sister  Judah  .9.  it
4‘  'Y.,ien  ^eflekiah  9.  them,  and  men  of  war
44.  17.  for  then  we  were  well,  and  9.  no  evil
Lam.  1.7.  adversaries  9.  her  and  did  mock  at  her
Ezek.  8. 10.  so  1  went  in,  and  9.  behold,  every  form
20.  28.  then  they  9.  every  high  hill,  offered  there
.3.  16.  as  soon  as  she  s.  them,  she  doted  on  them
Uan  .3.  27 .  9.  these  men  on  whom  fire  had  no  power

4.  2.3.  whereas  the  king  9.  a  watcher  coming  down

5.  5.  the  king  9.  part  of  the  hand  that  wrote
Hos.  5. 1.3.  when  Ephraim  .9.  his  sickness  and  Tudah

9.  his  wound,  then  went  Ephraim  to  the  Assyrian
slag.  2.  .3.  who  among  you  9.  this  house  in  first  <dory  ?
Mat.  2.  9.  the  star  which  they  .9.  went  before  them  '

3. 16.  9.  the  Spirit  of  God  descending,  Mark  1.  10
12.  22.  the  blind  and  dumb  both  spake  and  9.

17-8.  they  9.  no  man,  save  Jesus  only
21.38.  but  when  the  husbandmen  s.  the  son
22. 11.  s.  a  man  who  had  not  on  wedding  garment
”5.  37.  Lord,  when  .9.  we  thee  an  hungered,  44
38.  when  9.  we  thee  stranger  ||  .39.  when  9.  thee  sick

26.  ( 1  .  another  maid  9.  him,  and  said,  this  was  with

Jesus  of  azareth,  Mark  14.  69.  Luke  22.  58

27.  .3.  Judas,  when  9.  he  was  condemned,  repented

28.  17.  when  they  9.  him  they  worshipped  him
Mark  2.  5.  when  Jesus  9.  their  faith  he  said  to  sick

8- 2.3.  spit  on  his  eyes,  he  asked  him,  if  he  9.  aught
9.  38.  sa3’ing,  Master,  we  .9.  one  casting  out  devils

in  thy  name,  and  he  follows  not  us,  Luke  9.  49’
LukeQ.  .34.  when  they  9.  what  was  done,  they  fled
47.  when  the  woman  9.  that  she  was  not  hid

9-  32.  when  they  were  awake,  they  9.  his  glory
15.  20.  his  father  9.  him,  had  compassion  on  him
17-  15.  one  of  them,  when  he  9.  he  was  healed
24.  24.  they  found  it  even  so,  but  him  tiiey  9  not

John  6.  26  ye  seek  me,  not  because  ve  9.  miracles
8.  56.  Abraham  .9.  my  day,  and  was  glad
12.  41.  these  things  said  FLsaias,  when  he  9.  his  glory
19.  35.  he  that  9.  it,  bare  record,  his  record  is  true
20.20.  disciples  were  glad  when  they  9.  the  Lord
diets  4.  1.3  when  they  9.  the  boldness  of  Peter
6.  15.  9.  his  face  as  it  had  been  face  of  an  ano'el
7-55.  Stephen  9.  glory  of  God  and  Jesus  standing

8.  18.  when  Simon  9.  that  Holy  Ghost  was  given"

.39.  caught  Philip,  that  eunuch  9.  him  no  more

9.  8.  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  he  9.  no  man
3o.  all  at  Lydda  9.  him,  and  turned  to  the  Lord
40.  and  when  Tabitha  9.  Peter,-  she  sat  up


SAY


10.  .3.  Cornelius  .9.  a  vision  ||  11. ’9.  heaven  opened
12.  .3.  and  because  he  9.  it  pleased  the  Jews


13.  36.  David  9.  corruption  ||  .37.  9.  no  corruption

16.  19.  masters  9.  the  hope  of  their  gain  was  gone

17.  16.  he  .9.  the  city  wholly  given  to  idolatry
22.  9.  they  9.  indeed  the  light  and  were  afraid

28.  6.  had  looked,  and  9.  no  harm  come  to  him
Gal.  2.  7.  but  when  they  9.  that  the  gospel  of  the

,  uncircumcision  was  committed  to  me

ry/?/.  1.  30.  having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  s .
rleb.  .3.  9.  your  fathers  s.  my  works  forty  years
11.  2.3.  because  they  9.  he  was  a  proper  cliild
Lev.  1.  2.  who  bare  record  of  all  things  he  9.

11.  11.  great  fear  fell  on  them  who  9.  them
12. 1.3.  when  the  dragon  9.  that  he  was  cast  out
18. 18.  cried,  when  they  .9.  smoke  of  her  burning
SAW  joined  with  Lord  or  God.

Gen.  1. 4.  and  God  s.  the  light  that  it  was  sood
10.  God  called  the  dry  land  earth,  and  God  s
that  it  was  good,  12,  18,  21,  25,  .31
6.  5.  God  9.  that  the.  wickedness  of  man  was  great

29.  .31.  when  the  Lord  s.  that  Leah  was  hated
Exod.  .3.  4.  when  the  Lord  s.  that  he  turned  aside
Gent.  .32.  19.  when  the  Lord  s.  it,  he  abhorred

2  Kings  14.  26.  the  Lord s.  the  affliction  of  Israel
2  Citron.  12.7.  when  L.  s.  they  humbled  themselves
Isa.  59.  15.  the  Lord  s.  it,  and  it  displeased  him


Isa.  59. 16.  L.  s.  that  (here  was  no  man,  and  wonder.
Jonah  3.  10.  God  s.  their  works,  that  they  turned
Luke  7. 13.  Lord  9.  her,  he  had  compassion  on  her
1  SAW.

41.  19.  such  as  Z  never.,  in  Egypt  for  badness
44.  28.  one  went  out,  and  I  s.  him  not  since
Josh.  7.21.  when  1  s.  among  the  spoils  a  garment
Judg.  12.3.  when  I  s.  that  he  delivered  me  not

1  Sam.  22.  9.  I  s.  the  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  Mob
28.  1.3.  /  9.  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth

2  Sam.  18.  10.  Is.  Absalom  hanged  in  an  oak
29.  I  s.  great  tumult,  but  knew  not  what  it  was

1  Kings  22. 17.  1  s.  all  Israel  scattered  on  the  hills
10-  I  s.  the  Lord  on  his  throne,  2  Chron.  18.  18.
Keh.  13.15.  in  those  days  9.  7 in  Judah  some  trading
Job  31.  21.  when  1  s.  my  help  in  the  gate
Csal.  73.  3.  when  I  s.  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked
Csov.  24.  .32.  then  1  s.  and  considered  it  well
Eccl.  2.  24.  this  also  Is.  from  the  hand  of  God
8.  10.  so  1  s.  the  wicked  buried,  who  had  gone
Ezek.  111.  among  w  bom  Is.  .1  aazaniah  son  of  A  zur
16.50.  therefore  l  took  them  away  as  1  s.  good
then  1  s.  that  she  was  defiled,  took  one  way

1, s.  9.  10.  1  s.  your  fathers  as  first-ripe  in  fig-tree
13.  Ephraim,  as  Is.  1  yrus,  is  planted  in  pleasant

d°An  4  l3~-  I s.  the  Spirit  descending  upon  him

48.  when  thou  wast  under  the  fig-tree,  Is.  thee
Acts  26.  1.3.  I  s.  in  the  way  a  light  from  heaven
Gal.  1.  19.  but  other  of  the  apostles  9.  I  none

2.  14.  when  I  s.  that  they  walked  not  uprightly

Lev.  1.  17.  when  1  s.  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead
rrt  ■  SAW.

7  he  punishment  of  the  S  a  w.  ^Punishment
Isa.  10. 15.  shall  9.  magnify  ag.  him  that  shaketh  it 5

.  SAWS.

2  Sam.  12.31.  he  put  Ammonites  under  9. 1  Chr  °0  3
SAWED.

1  Kings  7 .  9.  these  were  of  costly  stones  9.  with  saws
SAWEST.

Gen.  20.  10.  what  9.  thou  that  hast  done  this  thing?

1  Sam.  19.  5.  thou  9.  it  and  didst  rejoice

28. 1.3.  king  said,  be  not  afraid,  for  what  9.  thou

2  Sam.  18.  11.  Joabsaid,  and  behold,  thou  s.  him
Esal.  5 0.  18.  w'hen  fhou9.  a  thief,  thou  consentedst
Van.  2.  .31.  thou,  O  king,  ,9.  a  great  image

34.  thou  9.  till  that  a  stone  was  cutout,  45.
o  ™  ue  tree  thou  f-  which  grew  and  wa  strong
8.  20.  the  ram  which  thou  9.  having  two  horns
^•1.20.  seven  stars  thou  9.  seven  candlesticks  9.

17«  o.  the  beast  that  thou  s.  was,  and  is  not
12.  the  ten  horns  which  thou  9.  are  ten  kin^s,  16
15.  waters  thou  9  where  whore  sitteth  are  peoples
18.  the  woman  which  thou  9.  is  that  great  citv
SAWM.

Heb.  11.  37.  they  were  stoned,  they  were  9.  asunder
c.  .  SAY

Sonifies,  [1]  To  speak,  to  tell,  or  relate,  Gen.  .37.

'  L 44.  16.  [2]  To  utter,  or  pronounce,  Judg.  12."

6.  L3J  Jo  will  and  comm  and  with  efficacy,  Gen.  1 .

9.  Euke  7.  7.  [4]  To  promise,  Luke  2.3.  43'
foj  Jo  think,  muse,  or  meditate,  Dent.  7.  17  Isa

49.  21.  Mat.  3.  9.  [6]  To  a,X-,Mark  11.  .31.  [7]
1°  a,nZer2  f.xod-  3-  r13-  [8]  To  affirm  and

1  ( 1()-  f9]  7 0  expound,  Ileb.  5.  11.

[10]  To  admonish.  Col.  4.  17.  [11]  To  confess,

or  acknowledge,  Luke  17-  10.  [12]  To  bear  wit-

24‘  20’  ^-3]  To  reason,  or  argue,

Gew.  14.  2.3.  lest  thou  shouldest  s.  I  have  made  Abra.

34.  11.  what  ye  shall  9.  to  me  1  will  give  1°

37.  17.  for  1  heard  them  9.  let  usgo  to  Dothan
2°.  we  will  9.  some  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him
1!’  if'  1  aa''e  heard  9.  that  thou  canst  interpret  it
44.  16.  Judah  said,  what  shall  we  9.  to  my  Lord

50.  17.  so  shall  ye  9.  to  Joseph,  forgive,  1  pray
Exod.  3. 14.  thus  shall  ye  s.  to  the  children  of  Israel.

1  AM  hath  sent  me  to  you,  15.  |  19.  3.  |  ?o  00

4.  12.  I  will  teach  you  what  thou  shalt  9.

12.  26.  when  your  children  shall  9.  unto  .you
if*  P"ara°h  will  9.  of  the  children  of  Israel
4^1.  5.  if  the  servant  shall  s.  I  love  my  master
Kum.  5.  22.  and  the  woman  shall  9.  amen,  amen
11.  12.  that  thou  shouldest  9.  to  me,  carry  them
22. 19.  tnat  f  may  know  what  the  Lord  will  9.

.38.  have  I  now  any  power  at  all  to 9.  any  thine >
Deut  5.  27.  hear  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  9.

6.  21.  then  thou  shalt  9.  to  thy  son,  we  were
9.  2,  a  people  great,  of  whom  thou  hast  heard  9.

28.  67-  in  the  mornina  thou  shalt  9.  and  at  even  9.

31. 17.  so  that  they  will  9.  in  that  day,  are  not
3i.  27.  lest  they  should  9.  our  hand  is  high
Josh.  22.  27.  your  children  may  not  9.  oiir  children
.8.  when  they  should  9.  to  us  in  time  to  come
Judg.  7.  11.  and  thou  shalt  hear  what  they  9.

16.  15.  she  said,  how  canst  thou  9.  1  love  thee  ?

18.  24.  what  is  this  ye  9.  to  me,  what  aileth  thee  ?

1  Sam.  8.  7 -  in  all  they  9,  unto  thee,  hearken  to  voice
Aiv  ",ey  s-  come  up  to  us,  we  will  go

20.  7.  if  he  9.  thus,  thy  servant  shall  have  peace

1  o«w.  7.  8.  therefore  thou  shalt  s.  to  my  servant
David,  1  took  thee  from  sheep  cote,  1  Chr.  7.  21.

15.  26.  if  he  9.  I  have  no  delight  in  thee

21. 4.  what  you  shall  9.  that  will  I  do  for  you

1  Kings  1.  36.  the  Lord  God  of  my  lord  9.  so  too
2.  17.  speak  1  pray  thee,  for  he  will  not  9.  thee  nay
9.8.  they  shall  9.  why  hath  the  l  ord  done  thus  to

this  land  and  to  this  house,  2  Chron.  7.  21.

1.3. 22.  of  which  the  Lord  did  9.  eat  no  bread
22.  8.  let  not  the  king  9.  so,  2  Chron.  18. 7.

2  Kings 7.  4.  if  we  9.  we  will  enter  into  the  city
9.  37.  so  that  they  shall  not  9.  this  is  Jezebel

2  Chron.  18.  15.  that  thou  9.  nothin?  but  truth  torn*
Zwa  8.  17.  1  told  them  what  they  should  9.  to  Iddo
9.  10.  O  our  God,  what  shall  we  9.  after  this  J
Job  9. 12.  he  takes  away,  who  can  hinder  him  J  who
will  9.  to  him,  what  dost  thou  ?  Eccl.  8.  4.

21.  14.  they  9.  unto  God,  depart  from  us

22.  29.  then  shalt  thou  9.  there  is  lifting  up

2.3.  5.  1  would  understand  what  he  would  9.  tome
28.  22.  destruction  anti  death  9.  we  have  heard
.32.  IE  whilst  you  searched  out  what  to s.

3.3.  27.it  any  9. 1  have  sinned,  and  perverted  right

41?


S  C  A


SAY


SAY


Job  37.  19.  teach  us  what  we  shall  *.  unto  him
Pi.  3.2.  many  s.  of  my  soul,  there  is  no  help  in  It.

4.  6.  there  be  that  *.  who  will  shew  us  any  good .
35.  25.  let  them  not  *.  we  have  swallowed  him  up
5h!  1 1 .  so  that  a  man  shall  s.  there  is  a  re  war  d

50.7.  they  belch  out,  for  who,  *.  they,  doth  hear  .

94. 7.  yet  they  s.  Lord  shall  not  see,  nor  G.  or  Jacob
129. 8.  nor  do  they  who  go  by  s.  blessing  of  the  L.

Prov.  1.  11.  if  they  *.  come,  let  us  lay  wait  for  blood

20.  9.  who  can  s,  1  have  made  my  heaitclean  .
Eccl.  12.  1.  when  thou  shalt  s.  1  have  no  pleasure
Isa.  2.  3.  many  people  shall  go  and  *.  come  ye
29.  15.  they  s.  who  seeth  us,  and  who  kno  weth  us  .
lG.  shall  the  work  s.  ot  him  that  made  it '  or  the
thing  tranced  s,  ot  him  that  trained  it  .
30. 10.  who  s.  to  the  seers,  see  not,  and  to  prophets
33*  °4  and  the  inhabitant  shall  not  s.  l  am  sick
44'  5  one  shall  *.  1  am  the  Lord’s,  and  another
45  04  surely  shall  one  *.  in  L.  have  I  righteousness
48.  5.  lest  thou  shouldest  s.  my  idol  hath  done  them

7.  lest  thou  shouldest  s.  behold,  I  knew  them
58.  3.  why  have  we  fast.  s.  they ,  and  thou seest  not .

9  thou  shalt  cry,  and  he  shall  *.  here  l  am
Jer.  2.  27.  in  trouble  they  will  s.  arise  and  save  us

5.  15.  neither  understandest  what  they  *.

10.  11.  thus  shall  ye  s.  them,  the  gods  shall  perish
14.  17.  therefore  thou  shalt  s.  this  word  to  them
20*.  10.  report,  .v.  they,  and  we  will  report  it
23.  7.  they  shall  no  more  s.  the  Lord  uveth
3l!  29.  they  shall  s.  no  more  fathers  have  eaten
39.  12.  do  to  him  even  as  he  shall  s.  unto  thee
42  .  20.  ac  cording  to  all  that  the  Lord  shall  s.

Ezek.  13.  7.  whereas  ye  s.  the  Lord  saith  it
28.  9.  wilt  thou  yet  s.  before  him  that  slay  eth  thee  •
this.  14.  3.  nor  will  we  s.  to  the  work  of  our  hands

8.  Ephraim  shall  s.  what  have  1  to  do  with  idols  .''
Mic. 2.  6.  prophesy  ye  not,  s.  they  to  them  that  pro.

3  11.  they  will  .v.  is  not  the  Lord  among  us
Hah  0  1.  I  will  watch  to  see  what  he  will  *.  tome
Zee) i.  11.  5.  they  that  seU  them  *.  1 .am rich
Mai.  1.2.  yet  yes.  wherein  loved  us  2. 14, 17. 1  3.13.
Mat.  3.  9.  think  not  to  s.  in  yourselves,  Luke  3.  8.
5  1 1  shall  s.  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely


Isa.  62.  11.  s.  ye  to  daughter  of  Zion,  behold  thy
Jer.  1.  7.  *.  not,  1  am  a  child,  for  thou  shalt  go
46.  11.  s.  ye,  stand  fast,  and  prepare  thee
48.  19.  ask  her  that  escapeth,  and  s.  what  is  done
50.  2.  s.  Babylon  is  taken,  Bel  is  confounded
Ezek.  6.  11.  and  stamp  with  thy  foot,  and  s.  alas

12.  11.  s.  I  am  your  sign,  like  as  1  have  done
19.  2.  and  s.  what  is  thy  mother  '  a  lioness

21.  9.  s.  a  sword,  a  sword  is  sharpened
28.  *.  the  sword  is  drawn  for  the  slaughter
Hos.  14.  2.  s.  unto  him,  take  away  all  iniquity
Joel  2.  17.  let  them  *.  spare  thy  people,  O  Lord

3.  10.  let  the  weak  s.  1  am  strong
Zec/i.  1.  3.  *.  unto  them,  turn  ye  unto  me

Mat.  21.  3.  *.  Lord  hath  need  ot  them,  Mark  11.  3.
Luke  7.7.  *.  in  a  word,  and  my  serv.  shall  be  heal.
10.  10.  go  out  into  the  streets  of  the  same,  and  s.
John  4.  35.  *.  not  ye,  there  are  yet  tour  months
10.  36.  s.  ye  of  him  the  Father  hath  sanctified
Col.  4.  17.  s.  to  Archippus,  take  heed  to  the  ministry
/  SAY.

Exod.  3.  13.  his  name,  what  shall  I  s.  to  them

4.  23.  I  s.  unto  thee,  let  my  son  go  to  serve  me

6.  29.  speak  all  that  I  s.  unto  thee,  Ezek.  44.  5.
Josh.  7.  8.  what  shall  I  s.  when  Isr.  turneth  backs
Judo.  7.  4.  of  whom  I  s.  this  shall  go  with  thee

1  Sam.  20.  21.  if  I s.  expressly  to  the  lad,  behold

2  Kings  4.  28.  did  not  L  s.  do  not  deceive  me  ?

7.  13.  behold,  1  s.  they  are  as  all  the  multitude
2  Chron.  20.  11.  behold,  1.  s.  how  they  reward  us
Job  6.  22.  did  I  s.  bring  unto  me,  or  give  reward .

7  1.3  when  I  s.  my  bed  shall  comfort  me
9’.  20." if  I  *.  1  am  perfect,  itshall  prove  me  perverse
27.  if  1  s.  I  will  forget  my  complaint,  leave  on
10.  2.  1  will  s.  to  God,  do  not  condemn  me
Psal.  27.  14.  be  of  courage,  wait,  I  s.  on  the  Lord
73.  15.  if  Is.  1  will  speak  thus,  l  should  offend
91.  2.  I  will  s.  of  the  Lord,  he  is  my  refuge
130.  6.  I  s.  more  than  they  that  watch  for  morning
139'.  11.  if  Is.  the  darkness  shall  cover  me
Eccl  6.  3.  I  s.  an  untimely  birth  is  better  than  he
Isa  .36.5.  Is.  sayest  thou,  but  they  are  but  vain  words


7  OO


.  snail  d.  cin  liidiuiti  j  “  .  T

many  will  -v.  to  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord


38  15.  what  shall  1  s,  ?  he  hath  both  spoken  to  me

•  _  ...  .1  _  ' .  ..^,1  PAIll


7.  w.  many  win  o.  w  ’  — T  '  ,

13.  51.  have  ye  understood  r  they  s.  yea,  Lord
16. 13.  Jesus.saici,  w  hom  do  men  *.  that 1  the  bon
of  man  am  ?  Mark  8.  2< .  Luke  9. 18.

15.  whom  s.  ye  that  1  am  '  Mark  8.  29-  Luke  9. 20.

21  3.  if  any  man  s.  ought  to  you,  ye  shall  s.

16.  and  s.  to  him,  hearest  thou  what  these  s.  ?

25.  if  we  should  s.  from  heaven,  he  will  *.  to  us,
why  not  believe  him'  Mark  11.  31.  Lule  20.  5.

26.  if  we  shall  s.  of  men,  Mark  11.  32.  Luke  20.  6.
23.  3.  do  not  their  works,  for  they  *.  and  do  not

Mark  1.44.  and  saith,  see  thou  5.  nothing  to  any  man
9  6.  he  wist  not  what  to  5.  for  they  were  afraid
Luke  4.  23.  ye  will  surely  *.  this  proverb,  heal  thys.

7.  40.  Simon,  I  have  somewhat  to  *.  to  thee

12.  11.  take  ye  no  thought  what  ye  shall  s.

12.  the  Holy  G.  shall  teach  what  ye  oug  to*.
John  4. 20.  ye*.  that  Jerusalem  is  the  place  .vhere

7.26.  he  speaketh,  and  they  s.  nothing  to  him

8.  26.  I  have  many  things  to  *.  of  you,  16.  12.

48.  s.  we  not  well,  that  thou  hast  a  devil '

54.  of  whom  ye  *.  that  he  is  your  God

13.  13.  ye  call  me  master,  ye  s.  well,  for  so  1  am
Acts  3. 22.  him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things  he  shall  *.

4.  14.  they  could  s.  nothing  against  it

6.  14.  we  heard  him  s.  that  Jesus  ihall  destroy

21.  23.  do  therefore  this  that  we  s.  to  thee

23.  18.  who  hath  something  to  s.  unto  thee

24.  20.  or  else  let  these  same  here  s.  if  found  evil
26  22  none  other  things  but  what  Moses  did  s.

Pom.  3.  5.  what  shall  we  *.  is  God  unrighteous  ?

8.  as  some  affirm  that  we  s.  let  us  do  evil
4. 1.  what  shall  we*,  then,  shall  wec.ontinue  in  sin  ?

6.  1.1  7- 7,18.  31.)  9. 14,  .30.

9.  20.  shall  thing  formed  *.  to  him  that  formed  it  ?

1  Cor.  12.3.  no  man  can  s.  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord
14.  16.  how  shall  he  *.  amen  at  thy  giving  thanks  ?

23.  will  they  not  ,v.  that  ye  are  mad  ?

15  12.  how  *.  some  that  there  is  no  resurrection  !

2  Cor  9.  4.  we,  that  we  *.  not  you,  should  be  asham.

10.  10.  for  his  letters,  *.  they,  are  weighty

1  Thess.  4.  15.  this  we  *.  to  you  by  word  of  the  L.

1  Tim.  4.  7.  understanding  neither  what  they  *.

Tit.  2.  8.  having  no  evil  thing  to  *.  of  you
Philem.  19.  albeit  1  do  not*,  how  thou  owest  me
Heb.  5.  11.  of  whom  we  have  many  things  to  *.

7.  9.  as  I  may  so  s.  Levi  paid  tithes  in  Abraham
g.  li .  that  is  to  *.  not  of  this  building
10  20.  for  us  thro’  the  vail,  that  is  to  *.  his  flesh
ll’.  14.  they  that  *.  such  things  declare  plainly

13.  6.  so  that  we  may  boldly  *.  Lord  is  my  helper
Jam.  1. 13.  let  no  man  *.  when  he  is  tempted

4.  13.  go  to,  now,  ye  that  *.  to-day  or  to-morrow
i5.  for  that  ve  ought  to  *.  if  the  Lord  will
1  John  1.  6.  if  we  *.  we  have  fellowship  with  him
8  if  we  *.  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselv.  10.
4.  20.  if  man  .>.  1  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother
5. 16.  I  do  not  *.  that  he  shall  pray  for  it
Rev.  2.  2.  which  *.  they  are  apostles,  and  are  not
9.  which  *.  they  are  Jews,  and  are  not,  3.  9.

82.  17-  and  the  spirit  and  the  bride  *.  come
See  Began.

SAY,  Imperatively .

Gen.  12.13.*.  I  pray  thee,  thou  art  my  sister
20.  13.  at  every  place,  *.  of  me,  he  is  my  brother
Deut.  1.42  *.  unto  them,  gonotuD,  neither  tight
Judg.  18.*.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and  ot  Gideon
12.6.  they  said  to  him,*,  now  shibboleth
1  Sam.  15.  16.  and  he  said  to  him,  *.  on,  2  Sam.  14.

12.  1  Kmgs  2.  14,  16.  Luke  7«  40.  A.cts  13  15.
Prov.  3.28.*.  not  to  thy  neigh,  go  and  come  again

24.  29.  *.  not,  I  will  do  so  to  him  as  he  hath  done
30.  9.  lest  I  deny  thee,  and  *.  who  is  the  Lord  '

Eccl.  7.  10.  *.  not  thou,  what  is  cause  former  days
Isa.  3.  10.  *.  ye  to  righteous,  shall  be  well  with  him
35.  4.  *.  to  them  that  are  of  fearful  heart,  fear  not
40.  9.  *.  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  behold  your  God
43.  9  or  let  them  hear,  and  *.  it  is  truth
oo.  3.  neither  let  the  eunuch  *.  1  am  a  dry  tree

41 A


AO.  iO.  VVIJfU  3Uail  X  O.  .  nvmv..  --

43.  6.  I  will  *.  to  the  north,  give  up,  and  the  south
Ezek.  2.  8.  son  of  man,  hear  what  I  s.  unto  thee
3.  18.  when  I  s.  to  the  wicked,  33.  8,  14.

12.  25.  I  will  *•  the  word,  and  will  perform  it
21.  24.  because  I.  s.  ye  are  come  to  remembrance
33.  13.  when  l  s.  to  the  righteous,  he  shall  live
Mat.  8.  9.  I  s.  unto  this  man,  go.  Luke  7 •  8.

18.  22.  I  s.  not  unto  thee,  until  seven  times,  but
Mark 2.11.  Is.  to  thee,  arise,  5. 41.  Luke  5. 24. 1  7.14.
Luke  6.  46.  and  do  not  the  things  which  i  f.

JohnS.  34.  these  things  1  *.  that  ye  might  be  saved

8.  46.  if  Is.  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  me  :
55.  if  /should  *.  1  know  him  not,  shall  be  a  liar

12.27.  what  shall  Is.  Fa.  save  me  trom  this  hour
49.  lie  gave  me  commandment,  what  1  should  s.
Rom.  3.26.  to  declare,  I  s.  his  righteousness

9.  1.  /  *.  the  truth  in  Christ,  l  lie  not
1  Cor.  1.  12.  this  I  s.  that  every  one  of  you  saith

7.  29.  but  this  /  v.  brethren,  the  time  is  short

9.  8.  *.  1  these  things  as  a  man '.  pr  saith  not  the  law

10.  15.  I  speak  as  to  wise  men,  judge  ye  what  1  s.
19.  what  *.  i  then  ?  that  the  idol  is  any  thing
29.  conscience,  /  *.  not  thy  own,  but  ot  others

11  22.  what  shall  I  s.  to  you  ?  shall  I  praise  you  r


15.  50.  now  this  I  s.  brethren,  2  Cor.  9.  6.  Gal  3.

17.  1  5.  16.  Eph.  4.  17-  Col.  2.  4.
Gal.  1.  9.  as  we  said  before,  so  *.  /  now  again
2  Tim.  2.  7.  consider  what  I  s.  L.  give  thee  unders.
Philem.  21.  knowing  thou  wilt  do  more  than  /  *.
Heb.  11.32.  what  shall  /more*.  ?  time  would  fail  me
I  SAY  unto  you.

2  Sam.  13.  28.  when  I  s.  unto  you,  smite  Amnon
2  Kings  2.  18.  he  said,  did  I  not  *.  unto  you,  go  not  ?
Mat.  6. 29.  Is.  unto  you,  that  Solpmon  in  all  his  glory
21.  31.  /  *.  unto  you,  that  publicans  go  before  you
Mark  1 3.  37 .  w  hat  /  *.  unto  you,  1  say  unto  all,  watch
John  16.  26.  Is.  not  unto  you,  1  will  pray  the  rath.
Gal.  5.  2.  I  Paul  *.  unto  you,  if  ye  be  circumcised
Rev  2.  24.  unto  you  1  *.  and  to  the  rest  in  1  hyatira
SAYEST.

Exod.  33. 12.  see,  thou  *.  to  me,  bring  up  this  people
Hum.  22.  17.  I  will  do  whatsoever  thou  *.  untome
Ruth  3.  5.  all  that  thou  *.  unto  me,  I  will  do

1  Kings  18.  11.  and  now  thou  *.  go  tell  thy  lord,  14.

2  Kings  18.  20.  thou  *.  but  they  are  but  vain  words,

I  have  counsel  and  strength  for  war,  Isa.  36.  5.

2  Chron.  25.  19.  thou  *.  lo,  thou  hast  smitten  Ldom
Neh.  5.  12.  we  will  restore,  so  will  we  do  as  thou*.
6.  8.  there  are  no  such  things  done  as  thou  *.

Job  22.  13.  and  thou  *.  how  doth  God  know  .

Psal.  90.  3.  and  *s  return,  ye  children  ot  .men
Prov.  24.  12.  if  thou  *.  behold,  we  knew  it  not
Isa.  40.  27.  why  *.  thou,  O  Jacob,  and  speak.  U  Is.
47.  8.  that  *.  in  thine  heart,  I  am,  and  none  else
Jer  2.  35.  yet  thou  *.  because  1  am  innocent,  I  will
plead  with  thee,  because  thou  *.  I  have  not  sinned
■Enos  7.  16.  thou  *.  prophesy  not  against  Israel
Mat.  26.  70.  saying,  1  know  not  what  thou  *.

°7  11.  art  thou  kingot  the  Jews  Jesus  said  unto
him,  thou  *.  Mark  15.  2.  Luke  23.  3 .  John  18.  37.
Mark  14.  68.  Peter  denied,  saving,  I  know  not,
neither  understand  l  what  thou  *.  Luke  VI.  60.
Luke  20.  21.  Master,  we  know  that  thou  *.  rightly
John  1.  22.  who  art  thou  ?  what  *.  thou  ot  thyselt  t
8.  5.  that  such  should  he  stoned,  hut  what  *.  thou
33.  *.  thou,  ye  shall  be  made  free  12.  34.  1 14.  9.

9  17.  they  say  to  blind  man,  what  *.  thou  or  him  .
18  34.  *.  thou  this  of  thyself  or  did  others  tell
Rom.  2.  22.  thou  that  *.  a  man  should  not  steal
1  Cor.  14.  16.  he  understandeth  not  what  thou  *.
Rev.  3. 17-  because  thou  *.  I  am  rich,  and  increased
SA  Y  IN  G.

Gen  37.  11.  breth.  envied,  buthis  father  observed  *.
Deut.  1.  23.  and  the  «.  pleased  me  well

1  Sam.  18.  8.  the  *.  displeased  Saul,  and  he  said

2  Sam.  17.  4.  and  the  *.  pleased  Absalom  well
6.  shall  we  do  after  his  s.?  if  not,  speak  thou

24.  19.  David,  according  to  the  *.  ot  God,  went  up
l  Kings  2.  38.  and  Shimei  said,  the  *.  is  good


1  Kin.  12. 15.  that  he  might  perform  ms*,  by  AinjaG

13.  4.  when  Jeroboam  heard  *.  ot  the  man  of  God
32.  the*,  which  he  cried  by  the  Lord  shall  come
15.29.  according  to  the*,  of  the  L.  2  Rings  U).  17

17.  15.  accord,  to  the*,  of  Elijah,  2  Kings  2.  22.

0  Kings  5. 14.  according  to  the  *.  ot  man  of  God,  8. 2
Esth.  1.  21.  the  *.  pleased  the  king  and  the  princes-
Psal  49  4.  I  will  open  my  dark  *.  upon  the  harp
Jonah  4.  2.  was  not  this  my  *.  when  in  my  country
Mat.  15.  12.  were  offen  led  after  they  heard  this  *.

19.  11.  all  men  cannot  receive  this  *.  save  they

22.  but  when  the  young  man  heard  this  *.

28^15-  this*,  is  commonly  reported  among  Jews
Mark 7.  29.  for  this  *.  go  thy  way,  the  devil  is  gone-

8.  32.  and  he  spake  that  *.  openly

9.  10.  and  they  kept  that  *.  with  themselves

32.  they  understood  not  that  *.  Luke  2. 50.  |  9. 45.
10.22.  he  was  sad  at  that*,  and  went  away

Luke  1.  29.  she  wastroub.  at  his  *.  and  cast  111  mind
2.  17.  they  made  known  abroad  *.  that  was  told
9. 45.  and  they  feared  to  ask  him  ot  that  j.

18.  34.  this  *.  was  hid  from  them,  nor  knew  they
John  4.  37.  herein  is  that  *.  true,  one  soweth

39.  many  believed,  for  the  *.  of  the  woman
42.  now  we  believe,  not  because  ot  thy  s.

6.  60.  this  is  an  hard  *.  who  can  hear  it  ,

7.  36.  what  manner  of  s.  is  this  that  he  saic  .

40.  many,  when  they  heard  this  *.  saltl

8.  51.  1  say  to  you,  it  a  man  keep  my  *.  5~.

55.  but  I  know  him  and  keep  his  *.

12.  38.  that  the  *.  of  Esaias  might  he  fulfilled
15.  20.  if  they  have  kept  my  *.  they  will  keep  you.  *

18.  9.  that  the  *.  of  Jesus  might  be  tulhlled,  32.

19.  8.  when  Pilate  heard  that*,  he  was  atraid
21.  23.  then  went  this  *.  abroad  among  brethren

Acts  6.  5.  the*,  pleased  the  whole  multitude
7.29.  then  tied  Moses  at  this  *.  into  Midian
16.36.  the  keeper  of  the  prison  told  this  *.  to  Bau,
Rom.  13.  9.  it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  *.

1  Cor  15.  54.  then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  *.

1  Tim.  1. 15.  this  is  faithful*,  that  Christ  Jesus  came-
to  save  sinners,  4.  9.  2  Tim.  2.  11.  Itt.  3.  8.

3.  1.  this  is  a  true  s.  it  a  man  desire  the  ornce
SAYING,  Participle.

1  Kings  1. 6.  displeased  in  *.  why  hast  thou  doue  so  .
Mat.  26.  44.  he  prayed  third  time,  *.  the  same  words
Mark  13.  6.  *.  1  am  Christ,  and  shall  deceive  many
'Luke  11.  45.  Master,  thus  *.  thou  reproachest  us  also
Acts  11.  7.  a  voice,  *.  arise,  Peter,  slay  and  eat
26  2°  s.  none  other  things  than  those  which
SAYINGS.

Hum.  14.  39.  Moses  told  these*,  to  the  people
Judg  13.  17.  that  when  thy  *.come  to  pass, may  do
1  Sam.  25.  12.  so  David’s  young  men  told  all  those*.
o  Chron  13.22.  Ahijah’s  *.  are  written  m  the  story

33.  19.  that  are  written  among  the  *.  of  the  seers
Psal.  49.  13.  yet ’.heir  posterity  approve  their  *.

78.  2.  open  in  parables,  I  will  utter  (fans  s.  of  old
Prov.  1.  6.  to  understand  the  dark*,  ot  the  wise

4  10.  hear,  O  my  son,  and  receive  my  *.

20.  my  son  attend,  incline  thine  ear  to  my  *.

Mat.  7.  24.  whoso  heareth  these  *.  26.  Luke  b.  4<.

28.  when  .1  esus  had  ended  these  *.  the  people  v^ere
astonished  at  his  doctrine,  19. 1. 1  26. 1 .  Luke  1 . 1.
Luke  1.  65.  all  these*,  were  noised  abroad  in  Juuea
2.  51.  his  mother  kept  all  these  *.  in  her  heart
9'.  44.  let  these  *.  sink  down  into  youi  curs
John  10.  19.  there  was  a  division  again  for  these*.
14  24.  he  that  loveth  me  not,  keepeth  not  my  *.
Acts  14.  18.  with  these  *.  scarce  restrained  they  peo.
19  28.  when  heard  these  *.  they  were  full  of  v  rath
Rom.  3.  4.  that  thou  mightest  be  justified  m  thy  *.
Rev.  19.  9.  he  saith  to  me,  these  are  true  *.  ot  God
22.  6.  he  said  to  me,  these  *.  are  faith  till  and  true
7.  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the  *.  of  this  book

9  and  of  them  who  keep  the  *.  of  this  book

10.  seal  not  the  *.  of  the  prophecy  ot  this  book.

SCAB.

rev  J3  2.  when  shall  have  in  skin  of  his  flesh  a<

6  it  is  but  a*.  ||  7-  if*,  spread  much  in  skin,  8.

14.  56.  this  is  the  law  for  a  *.  and  tor  a  hi  tglit  spot
Deut.  28.27.  the  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  a  *.
Isa.  3.  17.  therefore  the  Lxird^vvdll  smite  with  a*.

Jer.  47.  6.  O  sword,  put  up  thyselt  into  thy  *.

‘  SCABBED.

Lev.  21 . 20.  he  that  is  scurvy  or  *.  shal  1  not  approach
°o  or  scurvy,  or  s.  ye  shall  not  oiler  to  tue  L.
SC AFFO  LD .

2  Chron  6.  13.  Solomon  had  made  a  brasen  *.
SCALES.

L.ev.  11.  9.  these  that  have  *.  eat  ye,  Deut.  1-4.  9.

10  that  have  no*,  ye  shall  not  eat,  1-.  Dew*.  14. 10.
Job  41.  15.  his*,  are  his  pride,  shut  up  together
Da  40  12.  who  weighed  the  mountains  in  *.ano  mils
Ezek.  29.  4.  1  will  cause  the  fish  to  stick  to  thy  *.
Acts  9.  18.  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had  been*.

SCALE  l  II.

Prov.  21.  22.  a  wise  man  *.  the  city  o  the  migr.tj
SCALL.  ,

Lev.  13.  30.  it  is  a  dry  *.  even  a  leprosy  on  the  heau

31.  plague  of  the  *.  be  not  deeper  than  the  sk  •
shall  shut  up  him  that  hath  the  *.  seven  days,  .W.

32.  and  behold,  if  the  *.  spread  not,  34.

33.  he  shall  be  shaven,  hut  the  *  shall  he  not  Shave
35.  but  if  the*,  spread  much,  he  is  unclean,  30.
37.  if  the  *.  be  at  a  stay,  the  *.  is  healed

14.  54. this  is  the  law  ofaU manner  ot  leprosy  and*

Psal.  68.  21.  God  shall  wound  the  hairy  *.  of  suet
SCANDAL.  .  ..

1  John  2.  t  10.  there  is  none  occasion  ot  *.  in  nnu
SCAN  DALS.

Mat.  13.  t  41.  gather  out  of^ his  kingdom  all  *.

2  Kings  4.  t  3.  borrovv^the^yesseb,  abroad,  *•  not

Mic  6  10.  and  the  *.  measure  that  is  abominable
SCAPE-GOAT.  See  Goat.

SCARCE.  .  ...  .

Gen.  27.  30.  Jacob  was  *.gone  out  from  his  taui
Acts  14. 18.  with  these  sayings  *.  restrained  p  P


S  C  A


S  C  E


S  C  H


SCARCELY.

Rom.  5.  7.  for  ?.  for  a  righteous  man  will  one  die

1  Pet  4. 18.  it'theriglite  usj.be  saved,  where  sinner

SCAKCKN  l-.SS.

Deut.Q.  9.  where  thou  shalt  eat  bread  without  s.
SCAR  EST.

Job  7.  14.  then  thou  s.  me  with  dreams  and  terrifiest
SC  A  RLE  I’.

Gen.  38.  28.  the  midwife  bound  a  s.  thread,  30.
£ierf.  25.  4.  olue,  and  purple,  and  .?.  26.  1,31,36. 1
27.  16. 1  28.  5,6,8, 15.  I  35.6,23,25.  I  38.  18,23.
39.  3.  they  did  cut  gold  into  wires,  to  work  it  in  s.
Lev.  14. 4.  to  take  two  birds  alive,  and  clean,  cedar-
wood,  s.  and  hyssop,  6,  49.  51 , 52.  Xum.  19.  6.

.V um.  4.8.  they  shall  spread  on  them  a  cloth  of  s.
Josh.  2. 18.  shalt  bind  this  line  of  ?.  thread  in  window
21.  and  she  bound  the  s.  line  in  the  window

2  Sam.  1.  24.  weep  over  Saul,  who  clothed  you  in  s.
Prov.  31.21.  her  household  are  clothed  with  .?.
Cant.  4.  3.  thy  lips  are  like  a  thread  of  s.  thy  speech
Isa.  1.  18.  come  now,  though  your  sins  be  as  .?.
Lam.  4.  5.  that  were  brought  up  in  s.  embrace  dung.
Dan.  5.  7-  shall  be  clothed  with  ?.  16.  29.

.V ah.  2.  3.  the  valiant  men  are  in  s.  fir-trees  shaken
Mat.  27. 28.  they  put  on  Jesus  a  s.  robe
Heh.  9.  19.  he  took  water,  and  s.  wool,  and  hyssop
Rev.  17-  3.  a  woman  sit  on  a  s.  coloured  beast
4.  the  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and  s.  colour
18.  12.  no  man  buyeth  the  merchandise  of  s.

16.  that  great  city  that  was  clothed  with  s.
SCALIER.

Gen.  11. 9.  from  thence  did  Lord  s.  them  on  earth
49.7-  I  will  divide  them  in  Jacob,  s.  them  in  Isr.
ljev.  26.  33.  and  1  will  s.  you  among  the  heathen
Sum.  16.  37.  take  up  the  censers,  and  s.  the  fire
Deut.  4.  27-  and  the  Lord  shall  s.  you  among  the
heathen,  28.  64.  Jer.  9.  16.  Ezek.  22.  15.
32.  26.  1  said,  1  would  s.  them  into  corners
1  Kings  14.  15.  he  shall  s.  them  beyond  the  river
Seh.  1.8.  if  ye  transgress,  1  will  s.  you  abroad
Job  18.  t  1 1.  terrors  make  afraid,  and  shall  j.  him
Psal.  59. 11.  s.  them  by  thy  power,  O  Ld.  our  shield
68.  30.  s.  thou  the  people  that  delight  in  war
106.  27.  he  lifted  up  his  hand  to  .v.  them  in  lands
144.  6.  cast  forth  lightning,  and  s.  them,  shoot  out
Isa.  28.  25.  cast  abroad  fitches,  and  s.  the  cummin
30. +  22.  thou  shalt  s.  them  as  a  menstruous  cloth
41.  16.  whirlwind  shall  s.  them,  and  shall  rejoice
Jer.  13.24.  therefore  I  will  s.  them  as  stubble
18.  17.  I  will  s.  them  as  wVh  an  east  wind
23.  1.  woe  to  the  pastors  that  s.  the  sheep
49.  32.  1  will  s.  into  all  winds  them  that  are  in  the
utmost  corners,  36.  Ezek.  5.  10,  12.
Ezek.  5.  2.  a  third  part  thou  shalt  s.  in  the  wind
6.  5.  1  will  .?.  your  bones  round  about  your  altars

10.  2.  fill  thine  hand,  and  .s.  the  coals  over  the  city
12.14.  I  will  s.  toward  every  wind  all  that  help  him

15.  when  1  shall  s.  them  among  the  nations
20.23.  that  I  would  s.  them  among  the  heathen
29. 12.  1  will  s.  the  Egyptians,  30.  23,  26.

Dan.  4.  14.  hew  down  the  tree,  and  s.  his  fruit

11.  24.  he  shall  s.  among  them  the  prey  and  spoil

12.  7.  to  s.  the  power  of  the  holy  people

Hab.  3.  14.  they  came  out  as  a  whirlwind  to?.  me
Zech.  1.21.  lift  up  their  horn  over  J  udah  to  s.  it
Mai.  2.  +3.  1  will  j.  dung  on  your  faces,  dung  of  fea.
SCATTERED.


Gen.  11.4.  lest  we  be  s.  abroad  upon  the  earth
8.  so  the  Lord  s.  them  abroad  from  thence
Exod.  5.  12.  the  people  were  s.  to  gather  stubble
Sum.  10.  35.  let  thine  enemies  be  s.  Psal.  68.  1.
Deut.  30.3.  whither  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  s.  thee
t  Sam.  11.  1 1.  the  Ammonites  that  remained  were  ?.
13.8.  and  the  people  were  s.  from  Saul

11.  because  I  saw  the  people  were  s.  from  me
l  Sam.  18.  8.  the  battle  was  ?.  over  the  country
20.  t  22.  and  they  were  s.  from  the  city

22. 15.  he  sent  out  arrows  and  ?.  them,  Psal.  18.  14.
1  Kings  22.  17.  1  saw  all  Israel  ?.  2  Chron.  18.  16.

I  Kings 25.  5.  his  army  were  ?.  from  him,  Jer.  52.  8.
E sth.  3.8.  there  is  a  certain  people.?,  abroad
lob  4.  11.  the  stout  lions’  whelps  are  s.  abroad
18.  15.  brimstone  shall  be  s.  on  his  habitation
Psal.  44.  11.  thou  hast  s.  us  among  heathen,  60. 1.
53.  5.  God  hath  ?.  the  bonesof  him  that  encampeth
68.  14.  when  the  Almighty  s.  kings  in  it
89. 10.  thou  hast  s.  thine  enemies  with  thy  arm
92.  9_.  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  shall  be  s.

141.  7.  our  bones  are  s.  at  the  grave’s  mouth
!sa.  18.2.  go  ye  messengers  to  a  nation  ?.  and  peeled
7.  the  present  shall  be  brought  of  a  people  s.

33. 3.  at  lifting  up  of  thyself  the  nations  were  s.
Jer.  3.  13.  and  hast  s.  thy  ways  to  the  strangers
10.  21.  and  all  their  Hocks  shall  be  s.

23.  2.  ye  have  s.  my  flock,  and  driven  them  away
30.  11.  an  end  of  all  nations  whither  I  have  ?.  thee
.31. 10.  he  that?.  Isr.  will  gather  him  and  keep  him

40. 15.  that  all  Jews  should  be  ?.and  Judah  perish  ?
50.  17.  Israel  is  a  j.  sheep,  lions  have  driven
Ezek. 6.  8.  when  ye  shall  be  5.  through  the  countries

11. 16.  though  I  s.  them,  I  will  be  a  little  sanctuary
:  17.  I  will  gather  and  assemble  you  out  of  coun¬
tries  where  ye  have  been  .?.  20.  34,  41.  |  28.  25.

17.  21.  they  that  remain  shall  be  ?.  to  all  winds
-9.  13.  Egyptians  gathered  whither  they  were  s.
+4.  5.  flock  s.  because  there  is  no  shepherd,  they  be¬
came  meat  to  beasts  of  field  when  they  were  .?.
6- my  flock  was  s.  on  the  face  of  the  earth

12.  in  the  day  that  he  is  among  his  sheep  that  are  ?.

where  they  have  been  .?.  in  the  cloudy  day
'L  pushed  the  diseased  till  ye  have  s.  them
36.  19.  and  1  s.  them  among  the  heathen
46.18.  that  my  people  be  not  s.  every  man
v  r  i  '■  !>'eau  for  my  people  whom  they  have  s.

r  3-  18.  thy  people  is  s.  on  the  mountains
y  /  3‘  t*le  everlasting  mountains  were  s.

-ech.  1  19.  these  are  the  noms  which  have  s.  21.
.'•14.  I.?. them  with  whirlwind  among  nations
13.  1 .  awake,  ()  sword,  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the
n  ileeE  sl,all  be  s ■  Mat-  26.  .31.  Mark  14.  27.
'tat.  9.  .36.  they  were  .?.  as  sheep  having  no  shep.

■  'uie  51.  he  hath  >  the  proud  in  the  imagination


John  11.52.  gather  in  one  the  children  that  were  ».

16.  32.  hour  cometh,  is  now,  that  ye  shall  be  s.
Aces  5.  36.  as  many  as  obeyed  1  heudas  were  s.

8.  1.  were  s.  abroad  through  the  regions  of  Judea
4.  were  ?.  went  every  where  preaching,  11.  19.
Jam.  1.  1.  to  the  twelve  tribes  that  are  .?.  abroad
1  Pee.  1.  1.  Peter  to  the  strangers  s.  through  Pontus
SC  A  ITER  El  11.

Jot>  37.  11-  the  thick  cloud  he  s.  his  bright  cloud
38.  24.  which  s.  the  east-wind  upon  the  earth
Psal.  147-  16.  he  s.  the  hoar-frost  like  ashes
Prov.  11.24.  there  is  that  s.  and  yet  increaseth
20.  8.  a  king  •?.  away  all  evil  witli  his  eyes
26.  a  wise  king  s.  the  wicked,  and  bringeth  wheel
Isa.  24.  1.  the  Lord  s.  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth
Mat.  12.  30.  he  not  with  me  isag.  me,  and  he  that
gathereth  not  with  me,  s.  abroad,  Luke  11.  23.
John  10.  12.  the  wolf  catcheth  and  s.  the  sheep
SC  All  ER1NG.

Job  37.  +  9.  and  cold  cometh  out  of  the  s.  winds
Isa.  30.  30.  the  Lord  shall  shew  his  anger  with  s.
SCEN  r.

Job  14.  9.  yet  through  the  s.  of  water  it  will  bud
Jer.  48.  11.  therefore  hiss',  is  not  changed
Dos.  14.  7-  the  s.  thereof  be  the  wine  of  Lebanon
SCEPl  RE.

In  Greek,  cnormpov  ;  in  Hebrew,  Sl+febet.  This
word  signifies,  1.  A  rod  of  command,  a  staff  of
authority,  which  is  supposed  to  be  in  the  hand  of
kings,  of  sovereigns  of  a  province,  of  the  chief  of
the  people.  Anasuerus  carried  in  his  hand  a
golden  sceptre,  Esth.  8.  4.  The  sceptre  is  a  sign
of  power  and  authority ;  hence  says  Isaiah,  the
Lord  hath  broken  the  sceptre,  or  the  power  of  the
rulers,  Isa.  14.  5.  And  Amos  represents  the
sovereign  power  by  him  that  holds  the  sceptre,
Amos  1.  5,  8.

II.  The  sceptre,  or  the  word  Shebet,  is  put  for  the
rod  of  correction,  for  the  sovereign  authority  that
punishes  and  humbles.  Thou  shalt  break  them
with  a  rod  of  iron,  or  with  an  iron  sceptre,  Psal.
2.  9.  Solomon  uses  the  word  Shebet,  to  express
the  rod  with  which  the  disobedient  son  is  disciplin¬
ed,  Prov.  22.  15.

III.  The  sceptre  is  often  taken  for  a  tribe ,  probably,
because  the  princes  of  each  tribe  carried  a  sceptre,
as  a  icand  of  command,  to  shew  their  dignity ;
thus  the  word  shebet  is  rendered  in  1  Sam.  9.  21.  |
10.  19,  20,21.1  15.  17.  1  Kings  11.32.

IV.  The  sceptre,  or  the  Hebrew  word  shebet,  signi¬
fies  a  shepherd's  wand.  Lev.  27-32.  The  truncheon
of  a  warrior,  or  any  common  staff,  2  Sam.  23.  21.
And  the  rod  or  flail  with  which  they  thresh  the
smaller  grain,  Isa.  28.  27.

Jacob  foretold  to  Judah,  that  the  sceptre  should  not
depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between
his  feet,  till  Shiloh  come,  Gen.  49.  10.  By  the
sceptre  and  lawgiver,  are  meant  divers  forms  of
government  :  the  first  being  the  mark  of  regal  power
or  sovereignty ;  the  other  title  respects  those
whose  power  succeeded  that  of  their  kings,  in  the
person  of  Zerubbabei  and  his  successors :  and  this
is  that  which  should  not  depart  from  J  udah  till
Shiloh,  or  the  Messiah,  should  come.  This  pro¬
phesy  doth  not  precisely  respect  the  person  of  Ju-
dah ,  for  he  never  ascended  the  throne,  nor  possessed
the  empire  over  his  brethren  ;  neither  doth  it  re¬
spect  his  posterity  as  a  tribe  distinguished  from
the  rest,  although  it  had  special  advantages  from
that  time  :  for  the  banner  of  J  udah  led  the  camp  in
their  march  through  the  wilderness.  Mum.  2.  .3.
That  tribe  had  the  first  possession  of  the  land  of
Canaan,  Josh.  15.  1.  And  these  were  the  begin¬
nings  of  its  future  glory.  And  from  David  to
the  captivity,  that  tribe  possessed  the  kingdom,
but  the  glory  of  his  sceptre  was  lost  in  the  per¬
son  of  Zedekiah.  Therefore  the  full  meaning  of
the  prophecy  regards  the  people  of  Israel,  in  the
relation  they  had  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  :  for  that
tribe  alone  returned  entire  from  the  captivity,
with  some  relics  of  Levi  and  Benjamin  ;  so  that
the  nation  from  that  time  was  distinguished  by
the  title  of  the  Jews,  in  relation  to  it  :  and  the
right  to  dispose  oj  the  sceptre  was  always  in  the
tribe  of  Judah:  for  the  Levites  that  ruled  after
that  time  received  their  power  from  them :  so
that  the  intent  of  the  prophesy  is,  that  after  the
establishment  of  the  supreme  power  in  the  family
of  Judah,  it  should  not  pass  into  the  hands  of
strangers,  but  as  a  certain  presage,  and  imme¬
diate  forerunner  of  the  coming  of  Shiloh.  And
this  was  fully  accomplished :  for  in  the  captivity
there  was  an  interruption,  rather  than  an  ex¬
tinction,  of  their  government;  their  return  was
promised  at  the  time  they  were  carried  captives
to  Babylon:  but  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  Ju¬
dea  was  a  province  of  the  Roman  empire  :
Herod,  an  Edomite,  sat  on  the  throne ;  and
as  the  tribe  of  Judah  in  general,  so  the  family
of  David  in  particular,  was  in  such  a  low
state,  that  Joseph  and  Mary,  who  were  descend¬
ed  from  him,  were  constrained  to  lodge  in  a
stable  at  Bethlehem.  And  since  our  blessed
Saviour  hath  appeared  on  the  earth,  the  Jews
have  lost  all  authority,  their  civil  and  eccle¬
siastical  state  is  utterly  ruined,  and  they  bear
the  visible  signs  and  marks  of  infamous  servi¬
tude.  For  though  great  numbers  of  this  people
swarm  all  over  the  world,  since  the  destruc¬
tion  of  their  temple  and  city  by  Titus,  yet  they
have  never  been  able  to  embody  again  into  a
nation,  either  in  their  own,  or  any  other  land;
nor  have  they  to  this  day  ever  found  a  place
where  they  could  re-establish  their  old  constitution
of  law,  or  have  a  prince  of  their  own  to  govern
them  by  it.

The  Jews  seek  in  vain  to  put  forced  meanings  upon
this  prophecy  of  Jacob,  saying,  that  the  sceptre
intimates  the  dominion  of  strangers,  to  which  they
have  been  in  subjection,  or  the  hope  of  seeing,  one
day,  the  sceptre,  or  supreme  power,  settled  again
among  themselves .  In  vain  likewise  they  take


refuge  in  their  /F.chrnalotarcha ;  that  it,  The
1  lead  of  the  captivity.  Such  an  officer  the  Baby¬
lonish  Jews  had ,  to  whom  they  paid  a  voluntary
submission,  and  who  was  always  chosen  by  them
out  of  the  house  of  David.  If  such  an  officer  be
still  there  in  being,  he  is  no  more  than  what  their
Alabarcha  was  at  Alexandria,  their  Ethnarcha,
at  Antioch,  or  their  Episcopus  Judaeorum,  in
England  ;  that  is,  the  head  of  that  sect  in  that
place,  without  sword  or  sceptre,  or  any  power  of
coercion,  or  authority  of  jurisdiction,  but  what  he
hath  by  the  voluntary  submission  of  the  Jews  of
that  country,  which  was  the  case  with  their  Baby¬
lonian  A-’.chmalotarcha.  Nothing  therefore  can  be
more  vain  than  what  the  Jews  urge  as  to  this  mat¬
ter  ;  that  is,  that  in  this  /Tchmalotarcha  is  still
preserved  both  the  Sceptre  and  the  Lawgiver  in  the
tribeof.)  udah,  and  that  therefore  the  prophecy  of  Ja¬
cob  is  not  yet  fulfilled,  nor  the  Messiah  as  yet  come.
Gen.  49.  10.  the  s.  shall  not  depart  from  Judah
Kum.  24.  17.  and  a  .?.  shall  rise  out  of  Israel
Esth.  4.  11.  the  king  shall  hold  out  the  golden  s.

5.  2.  king  held  out  to  Esther  the  golden  .?.  8.  4.
Psal.  45.  6.  the  s.  of  thy  kingdonYis  a  right  s.

Isa.  14.  5.  Lofd  hath  broken  the  .?.  of  the  rulers
Ezek.  19.  ll.  she  had  strong  rods  for  the  ?.  of  them
14.  so  that  she  hath  no  strong  rod  to  be  a  to  rule
Amos  1.5.  i  will  cut  off  him  that  holdeth  the  s.

8.  will  cut  off  him  that  holdeth  ?.  from  Ashkelon
Zech.  10.  11.  and  the?,  of  Egypt  shall  depart  away
Deb.  1.  8. .?.  ot  righteousness  is  the  ?.  of  thy  kingdom
SCHISM

Is  a  word  formed  from  the  Greek  word  Zxi<rua,
which  signifies  rupture,  or  division.  ‘ The  apostle
Paul  exhorts  the  Corinthians  to  live  in  union  toge¬
ther,  that  there  may  be  no  divisions,  or  schisms,
among  them,  1  Cor.  1.  10,  11,  12.  As  heresy  is  a
departing  from  the  communion  of  the  church  in
respect  of  doctrine,  or  some  fundamental  article  of
religion,  so  schism  is  taken  for  a  separation  from
the  society  of  the  church  for  externa!  things.  Thus
the  divisions  among  the  Corinthians  were  not
about  matters  of  faith,  but  occasioned  from  their
having  men's  persons  in  admiration  ;  everyone  of
you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul,  and  1  of  Apollos,  and  I
of  Cephas,  and  1  of  Christ.

1  Cor.  12.  25.  that  there  should  be  no  s.  in  the  body
SCHOLAR.

1  Chron.  25.  8.  they  cast  lots,  the  teacher  as  the  .?.
Mai.  2.  12.  Lord  will  cut  off  the  master  and  the  .?.

SCHOOL.

Though  it  cannot  be  doubted,  but  that  religious  and
devout  men,  from  the  first  beginning  of  mankind,
did  take  care  to  instruct  their  children  and  fami¬
lies  in  the  fear  of  God,  yet,  for  many  ages,  there
is  no  mention  made  of  academies,  or  schools
erected  for  this  purpose.  The  schools  or  colleges
of  the  prophets  are  the  first  of  which  we  have  any
accounts  in  Scripture  ;  where  the  children  of  the
prophets,  that  is,  their  disciples,  lived  in  the  exer¬
cise  of  a  retired  and  austere  life,  in  study,  and
meditation,  and  reading  of  the  law  of  Cod.  It  is
said,  1  Sam.  19.  18.  David  fled,  and  escaped,
and  came  to  Samuel  to  Hamah,  and  told  him
all  that  Saul  had  done  to  him :  And  he  and
Samuel  went  and  dwelt  at  Naioth.  This  Naioth,
which  was  in  the  suburbs  of  Ramah,  was  the  aca¬
demy  of  the  prophets.  And  it  is  probable,  that
among  them  Samuel  chose  to  spend  all  the  leisure
time  he  could  get  from  the  necessary  avocations
of  his  public  duty,  lie  find  more  also  under  the
prophets  Elijah  and  Elisha,  at  Beth-el,  and  in
the  plain  of  Jericho,  2  Kings  2.  3.  6.  These  pro¬
phets  were  consulted  upon  affairs  of  importance’ ;
people  went  to  hear  their  lessons,  as  appears  from
the  woman  of  Shunem,  with  whom  Elisha  had
lodged.  Her  husband  asked  her,  Why  she  went
to  see  the  prophet,  seeing  that  day  was  neither
the  Sabbath,  nor  the  new-moon,  2  Kings  4.
23.  which  insinuates  that  these  were  the  chief
and  usual  times  in  which  they  resorted  to  the
prophets  for  instruction.  These  Schools  continued
down  to  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  and  it  should
seem,  that  even  the  captives  went  still  to  hear
the  j  rophets,  when  there  were  any  in  the  places
where  they  resided.  Ezekiel  relates  several  con¬
versations  that  he  had  with  the  elders  of  Israel,
who  came  to  see  him,  and  to  consult  him  several
times,  Ezek.  14.  1,  2.  |  20. 1,  2,  3.  These  Schools,
or  Societies,  of  the  prophets,  were  succeeded  by  the
synagogues.  See  Synagogue.

Some  make  it  a  doubt  whether  there  were  any  syna
gogues  before  the  captivity  of  Rabylon.  Yet  we
read  in  Psal.  74.  8.  They  have  burnt  up  all  the
synagogues  of  God  in  the  land.  It  is  affirmed ,
however,  that  they  were  become  so  numerous  in
Judea,  after  the  return  from  the  captivity,  that  in
the  city  of  Jerusalem  only,  there  were  upwards  of
four  hundred,  according  to  some  ;  or  three  hundred
and  ninety-four ,  according  to  others.

The  method  of  teaching  in  the  Synagogues  and  m
the  Schools,  is  observable  in  the  Gospels  and  in
the  Acts.  When  Jesus  was  of  the  age  of  twelve
years,  he  was  found  in  the  temple  in  the  midst  of
the  doctors,  hearing  them,  and  risking  them  ques¬
tions,  Luke  2.  46.  By  which  it  should  seem,  that
the  doctors  of  the  law  gave  a  general  liberty  to  any
person  to  propound  questions  to  them  about  the  law
of  God,  to  which  they  gave  answers.  Our  Saviour
entering  another  day  into  the  synagogue  of  IS'  aza-
reth,  his  own  country,  they  presented  to  him  the
volume  of  the  prophet  Isaiah:  He  unfolded  and
opened  it,  and  having  read  a  passage  out  of  the
prophet ,  he  lolled  it  up  again,  and  sat  down  to
speak,  Luke  4.  16,  17,  &c.  As  to  the  posture  of
the  disciples  in  the  schools,  the  apostle  Paul  speaks
of  it  in  Acts  22.  3.  I  was  brought  up  in  this  city,
at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel.  The  Rabbin  sat  upon  a
chair  that  was  raised  aloft ;  the  scholars  that  were
the  greatest  proficients,  were  upon  benches  just  be¬
low  their  master  ;  and  the  younger  sort  sat  upon  the
ground  on  hassocks.

419


SCO


SCO


SCR


/lets  19.  9.  disputing  in  the  s.  of  one  Tyrannus
SCHOOL  MASTER.  .

Gal.  3. 24.  the  law  was  our  r.  to  bring  us  to  Christ
25.  after  faith  we  are  no  longer  under  a  s.

SCI  EMC E,

Dan.  1. 4.  children  skilful  in  wisdom, understan.f.

1  Tim.  6.20.  avoiding  babblings  and  oppositions ot  s.

SCO  EE.  ,  .

Hah.  1.  10.  they  shall  .s.  at  the  kings  and  princes
SCOFFERS.

2  Pet.  3.  3.  there  shall  come  in  last  days  s.  walking

SCORCH.  .  .  _

Rev.  16. 8.  power  was  given  him  to  s.  men  with  tire
SCORCHED.

Mat.  13.6.  when  sun  was  up  they  were  s.  Maiki.  o.

Rev.  16.  9.  and  men  were  s.  with  great  heat
SCORN,  Verb.

Job  16.  20.  my  friends  s  me,  mine  eye  poureth  tears
SCORN.  ,  .

Esth.  3.  6.  he  thought  s.  to  lay  hands  on  Mordecai

Ps.  44.  13.  thou  makestus  a  reproach  and  s.  79.  4.

Ilab.  1.  10.  and  the  princes  shall  be  a  s.  to  them
See  Laughed.

SCORNER.

A  scorner  is  one  who  males  a  meek  of  sin,  and  of
God's  threatenings  and  judgments  against  sin¬
ners;  one  who  derides  all  •wholesome  reproofs  and
counsels,  scoffs  at  religion,  and  contemns  the  word
and  faithful  ministers  of  God  ;  he  is  a  monster  of
iniquity,  having  obtained  the  highest  degree  of
sinning.  Psal.  1.  1.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  sit-
teth  not  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.  Prov.  1.  22.
How  long  will  the  scorners  delight  in  their  scorn¬
ing  ?  Solomon  describes  the  Scorner  in  a  variety
of  expressions ;  he  is  one  that  takes  pleasure  in
scorning,  Prov.  1.  22.  He  is  ready  to  hate  such
as  rebuke  him,  and  to  entertain  malicious  and  re¬
vengeful  thoughts  against  them.  Prov.  9.  8.  Re¬
prove  not  a  scorner,  lest  he  hate  thee.  He  stop-
pet  h  his  ears  against  reproofs.  Prov.  13.  1.  A
scorner  heareth  not  rebuke.  He  is  proud,  arro¬
gant,  and  haughty,  Prov.  21.  24.  He  causes
strifes,  contentions,  and  divisions  in  a  society.
Prov.  22.  10.  Cast  out  the  scorner,  and  conten¬
tion  shall  go ’out.  He  brings  others  likewise  into
a  snare,  and  that  by  his  wicked  counsels  and  courses,
whereby  he  seduces  and  infects  them,  so  that  they
are  exposed  to  God's  wrath.  Prov.  29.  8.  Scorn¬
ful  men  bring  a  city  into  a  snare.  God  s  dread¬
ful  judgments  are  threatened  against  them  in  are-
markable  manner.  Prov.  3.  34.  |  9.  12.  1  19.  29.
Surely  he  scorneth  the  scorners.  It  thou  scorn-
est,  thou  alone  shalt  bear  it.  J  udgments  are  pre¬
pared  for  scorners.  And  it  is  said,  that  he  seek-
eth  wisdom,  and  tindeth  it  not,  Prov.  14.  6.  He
finds  it  not,  because  he  doth  not  seek  it  aright,  to
wit,  sincerely,  earnestly,  and  seasonably,  and  in  a
constant  and  diligent  use  oj  all  the  means  which  God
hath  appointed  to  that  end,  and  with  an  honest  in¬
tention  of  employing  his  knowledge  to  the  service  of
God,  and  the  furtherance  of  his  practice  of  religion.
Prov.  9.  7.  lie  that  reproveth  a  .f.  getteth  shame
8.  reprove  not  a  s.  lest  he  hate  thee,  rebuke  a  wise

13.  1.  but  a  .?.  heareth  not  rebuke

14.  6.  aj.  seeketh  wisdom,  and  tindeth  it  not

15.  12.  a  r.  loveth  notone  that  reproveth  him
19.  25.  smite  a  s.  ||  22.  10.  cast  out  the  s .

21.  11.  when  s.  is  punished,  simple  is  made  wise
24.  s.  is  his  name,  who  dealeth  in  proud  wrath
24.  9.  and  the  s.  is  an  abomination  to  men
Isa.  29.  20.  the  s.  is  consumed,  and  all  that  watch
SCORNERS.

Prov.  1.22.  how  long  will delight  in  their  scorning
3.  34.  surely  he  scorneth  the  s.  but  he  giveth  grace
19.  29.  judgments  are  prepared  for  .f.  and  stripes
Hos.  7.  5.  he  stretched  out  his  hands  w  ith  s.

SCORN  EST.

Prov.  9.  12.  if  thou  s.  thou  alone  shalt  bear  it
Ezek.  16.  31.  not  been  as  harlot,  in  that  thou  s.  hire
SCORNETH.

Job  39.  7-  be  r.  the  multitude  of  the  city
18.  the  ostrich,  she  s.  the  horse  and  his  rider
Prov.  3. 34.  surely  he  j.  the  scorner,  but  giveth  grace
19.  28.  an  ungodly  witness  .9.  judgment,  and  mouth
SCORNFUL.

Psal.  1.  1.  norsitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  s.

Prov.  29.  8.  s.  men  bring  a  city  into  a  snare
Isa.  28.  14.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  s.  men
SCORNING.  [water?

Job  34.  7. 'who  is  like  .lob,  who  drinks  up  s.  like
Ps.  123.  4.  is  filled  with  .f.  of  those  that  are  at  ease
Prov.  1. 22.  how  long  will  scorners  delight  in  their  s.
SCORPION.

A  venomous  reptile,  somewhat  like  a  small  lobster,
that  has  a  bladder  full  of  dangerous  poison  :  its
head  appears  to  be  joined  and  continued  to  the
breast :  it  has  two  eyes  in  the  middle  of  its  head,
and  two  towards  its  extremity ,  between  winch  come
out,  as  it  were  two  arms,  which  are  divided  into  two
like  the  claws  of  a  lobster.  It  has  eight  legs,  pro
ceeding  from  its  breast,  every  one  of  which  is  di
vided  into  six  parts,  covered  with  hair,  at  the  end
of  which  are  six  talons  or  claws.  The  belly  is  di¬
vided  into  seven  rings, from  the  last  of  which  the
tail  proceeds,  which  is  divided  into  seven  little
heads,  of  which  the  last  is  armed  with  a  sting.  In
some  are  observed  six  eyes,  and  in  others  eight  may
be  visibly  perceived.  The  tail  is  long,  and  made
after  the  manner  of  a  string  of  beads  tied  end  to
end,  one  to  another :  the  last  bigger  than  the  others
and  something  longer ;  at  the  end  of  which  art
sometimes  two  stings,  which  are  hollow,  and  filled
with  a  cold  poison,  which  it  squirts  into  the  part
which  it  stings.

The  Scorpion  is  of  a  blackish  colour,  like  soot  ;  it
waddles  as  it  goes,  and  fixes  violently  with  its
snout,  and  by  its  feet,  on  such  persons  as  it  seizes
upon,  so  that  it  cannot  be  plucked  off  but  with


mischievous  to  women  than  men,  and  more  to  girls
than  women.  It  is  said,  that  the  best  and  surest
remedy  against  the  bite  of  a  Scorpion  is,  to  squeeze
it  to  pieces  upon  the  wound.  Moses  says,  that
the  Israelites  passed  through  a  great  and  terrible
wilderness,  wherein  were  fiery  serpents,  and  Scor¬
pions,  Deut.  8.  15.  The  Hebrew  reads  llakaiab,
or  Akrab  ;  from  whence  is  Akrabbim  ;  the  ascent
of  Akrabbim,  or  Scorpions,  A  ’urn.  34.  4.


difficulty.  They  say.


that  the  dam  brings  forth


eleven  young  ones,  which  are  small  round  worms  ;
that  after  she  has  sat  upon  them,  and  hatched
them,  then  they  kill  the  mother.  They  are  more

420


In  scripture,  Scorpions  are  used  in  a  figurative
sense,  for  wicked,  malicious,  and  crafty  men,
who,  scorpion  like,  wound,  torment,  and  kill  good
men.  Ezek.  2.  6.  Thou  dweljest  among  Scor¬
pions.  Our  Saviour  says  to  his  disciples,  Luke
10.  19.  Behold  1  give  unto  you  power  to  tread
on  serpents  and  scorpions ;  by  which  may  be
signified  whatsoever  the  devil  may  make  use  of  to
hurt  them.  'The  disciples  of  Antichrist,  who  by
their  poisonous  doctrines  wound  the  souls  of  men,
are  likewise  compared  to  Scorpions,  Rev.  9.  3.
Scorpions  were  also  a  kind  of  whip  armed  with
points,  or  pointed  thorns,  like  the  tail  tf  a  Scor¬
pion.  When  the  Israelites  complained  to  lteho-
boam  of  the  weight  of  the  yoke  wherewith  Solo¬
mon  had  loaded  them,  1  hy  father  made  our
yoke  grievous,  make  it  lighter,  he  returned
them  this  answer  ;  W  hereas  my  father  did  lade
with  an  heavy  yoke,  1  will  add  to  your  yoke:
my  father  hath  chastised  you  with  whips,  but
1  will  chastise  you  with  scorpions,  1  Kings  12.

4,  11,  14.

Luke  11.  12.  if  he  ask  an  egg,  will  he  offer  him  a  s.  ?
Rev.  9.  5.  their  torment  was  as  the  torment  ot  a  s.

SCORPIONS.

Deut.  8. 15.  through  that  wilderness  wherein  were  r.
Kings  12. 11 .  my  father  chastised  you  with  whips,
but  I  will  chastise  you  with  j>'.  14.  2  Chr .  10. 11,14.
Ezek.  2.  6.  tho’  thou  dost  dwell  among  s.  be  not  afraid
Luke  10.  19.  I  give  you  pow  er  to  tread  onser.  and  s.
Rev.  9.  3.  to  them  was  given  pow  er,  as  s.  have  power
10.  they  had  tails  like  to  .v.  and  stings  in  them
SCOURED.

Lev.  6.  28.  if  it  be  sodden  in  a  brasen  pot,  it  shall  ber.

SCOU  RG  E.

The  punishment  of  the  scourge,  or  whip,  teas  ve:y
common  among  the  Jews.  1  he  law  orcains,  that
if  the  w’icked  man  be  worthy  to  be  beaten,  the
judge  shall  cause  him  to  lie  down,  and  to  be
beaten  before  his  face,  according  to  his  fault,  by
a  certain  number:  Forty  stripes  he  may  give
him,  and  not  exceed  :  lest,  if  he  should  exceed,
and  beat  him  above  these  with  many  stripes,
then  thy  brother  should  seem  vile  unto  thee,
Deut.  25.  1,  2,  3.  There  were  two  ways  of  giving^
the  lash  ;  one  with  thongs  or  whips;  made  of  ropes'
ends,  or  straps  of  leather ;  the  other,  with  rods,
tuigs,  or  branches  of  some  tree.

The  Rabbins  think,  that  ordinary  faults  committed
against  the  law,  and  submitted  to  the  penalty
of  the  scourge,  were  punished,  net  with  blows
with  a  rod,  but  with  a  whip.  'They  hold,  that  all
punishable  faults,  to  which  the  law  has  not  an¬
nexed  the  kind  or  degree  of  punishment,  are  to  he
punished  by  the  scourge.  The  offender  was  stript
from  his  shoulders  to  his  middle,  and  was  tied
by  his  arms  to  a  pretty  low  pillar,  that  he  might
lean  forward,  and  the  executioner  might  the
more  easily  come  at  his  back.  Ihe  law  directed
that  they  should  not  exceed  the  number  of  forty
stripes :  and  the  Jews,  that  they  might  not  trans¬
gress  this  law,  seem  to  hare  made  thirty-nine
. blows  a  fixed  number,  which  they  never  went
beyond,  as  may  be  gathered  from  2  Cor.  11.  24.
where  the  apostle  says,  Ot  the  Jews  five  times
received  l  forty  stripes  save  one.  But  it  is
said,  that  in  greater  faults  they  struck  with
greater  violence.

The  Rabbins  further  say,  that  the  penalty  of  the
scourge  was  not  at  all  ignominious  among  them,
and  that  it  could  not  be  objected  as  a  disgrace  to
those  that  had  suffered  it.  They  pretend,  that  no
Israelite,  not  so  much  as  the  king,  or  high  priest,
was  exempted  from  this  law,  when  he  had  com¬
mitted  any  fault  that  deserved  this  punishment .
But  this  must  be  understood  of  the  punishment
of  whipping  that  was  inflicted  in  their  synagogues,
and  which  was  rather  a  legal  and  particular
penalty,  than  a  public  and  shameful  correction.
Philo,  speaking  of  the  manner  in  which  Flaccus
treated  the  Jews  of  Alexandria,  says,  he  made
them  undergo  the  punishment  of  the  whip,  which,
says  he,  is  not  less  insupportable  to  a  free  man,
than  death  itself.  Uur  Saviour,  speaking  of  the
pains  and  ignominy  of  his  passion,  commonly
puts  his  scourging  in  the  first  place.  Mat.  20.
19.  Mark  10.  34.  Luke  18.  33.

Ihe  punishment  of  scourging  inflicted  on  our
Saviour,  which  is  mentioned  in  Mat.  27  .  26.
has  given  occasion  for  several  conjectures :  Some
say,  that  this  punishment  among  the  Romans
was  a  solemn  preparative  to  crucifixion,  but  this
would  make  scourging  a  part  of  the  sentence  of
death  pronounced  upon  our  Saviour,  which  it
was  not,  as  appears  from  John  19.  1,  4,  6,  &c.
where  it  is  said,  that  Pilate  again  and  again
sought  to  release  him,  even  after  he  was  scourged,
and  that  he  told  the  Jews  that  he  found  no  fault
in  him;  but  being  pressed  upon  by  the  Jews,  he
at  last  gave  sentence  against  him,  that  he  should
be  crucified,  which  was  not  till  some  time  after
he  had  been  scourged.  Grotius  explains  this  of
the  punishment  of  putting  one  to  the  question,
which  was  common  among  the  Romans,  an  ex¬
ample  of  which  we  have  in  Acts  22.  24.  Con¬
cerning  which,  see  QUESTION.  But  the  gos¬
pels  give  no  ground  for  this  conjecture.  The  rea¬
son  'generally  assigned  ftfr  our  Saviour's  being
scourged  is,  that  Pilate,  willing  to  deliver  him  from
a  capital  sentence,  appointed  this  oj  scourging  to
be  inflicted  on  him:  He  proposed  to  the  Jews
the  scourging  of  him,  as  a  lighter  punishment,
proportionable  to  the  crimes  they  laid  against


him,  intending  afterwards  to  release  him.  So  tk*i
the  notion  of  his  scourging  was  that  of  a  light*!
punishment,  to  release  him  from  a  greater  ;  though
when  that  was  inflicted,  he  was  prevailed  upon  to
gratify  the  Jews,  by  delivering  Jesus  up  to  be
crucified.

The  scourge  of  the  tongue.  Job  5.  21.  lhou  shalt
be  hid  from  the  scourge  of  the  tongue,  or,  w  hen
the  tongue  scourgeth;  that  is,  from  false  accusa¬
tions,  and  virulent  slanders  and  reproaches;
Scourge,  figuratively,  is  taken  for  any  instrument
which  God  makes  use  of  for  executing  his  judg¬
ments  :  thus  he  used  a  destroying  angel  to  scourge
the  Assyrians,  Isa.  10.26.  I  37  .  36.

Job  5.  21.  thou  shalt  be  hid  from  s;  ot  the  tongue
9.23.  if  the  r.  slay  suddenly,  he  will  laugh  at  trial
Isa.  10.  26.  Lord  of  hosts  shallistir  up  a  s.  for  him
28.  15.  when  the  overflowing  s;  shall  pass,  18.

John  2.  15.  when  he  had  made  ai.  ofsmail  cords
SCOURGE.

Mat.  10.  17.  they  will  s.  you  in  their  synagogues
20.  19.  they  shall  s.  him,  Mark  10.  34.  Luke  18.33
23.  34.  some  of  them  ye  shall  s.  and  persecute
Acts  22.  25.  is  it  lawful  for  you  to  s.  a  Roman  ?
SCOURGED.

Lev.  19.  20.  lie  with  a  bond-maid,  she  shall  be  j-.

Mat.  27  .  26.  and  when  they  had  s.  Jes.  hedelivereo
him  to  be  crucified,  Mark  15.  15.  John  19. 1.
SCOURGES.

Josh.  23. 13.  s.  in  your  sides,  and  thorns  in  your  eyes
SCOURGETH.

Ileb.  12.  6.  the  Ld.  s.  every  son  whom  he  receivetb
SCOURGING.

Acts  22.  24.  that  he  should  be  examined  by  s.
SCOURGINGS.

Ileb.  11.  36.  others  had  trial  of  s.  yea  of  bonds
SCRABBLED.

1  Sam.  21.  13.  David  feigned  himself  mad,  ands.
SCRAP  E.

Lev.  14.  41.  shall  pour  out  the  dust  that  they  v.  efi
Job  2.  8.  Job  took  a  potsherd  to  s;  himself  withal
Ezek.  26.  4.  1  will  also  s.  her  dust  from  her
SCRAPED.

Lev.  14.  41.  he  shall  cause  the  house  to  be  s.  w  ithin
43.  if  plague  come  again,  after  lie  hath  s.  house

SCRIBE,  r,  .  !

In  Hebrew,  Sopher  ;  in  Greek,  ^panixarevs.  Lhis
woid  is  taken,  1.  For  a  clerk,  writer,  or  secretary.
This  was  a  very  considerable  employment  m  the
court  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  in  which  the  scripture
often  mentions  the  secretaries,  as  the  first  officers
of  the  crown.  Seraiah  was  Scribe,  or  secretary,
to  king  David,  2  Sam.  8.  17 .  Sheva  is  said  to
have  filled  that  post,  2  Sam.  20.  25.  Elihoreph  and
Ahiah,  were  secretaries  to  king  Solomon,  1  Kings
4.  3.  Shebna  under  Hezekiah,  2  Kings  19.  2.
and  Shaphan  under  Josiah,  2  Kings  22.  8.  As
there  were  but  few  in  those  times  that  could,  write
well ,  the  employment  of  a  Scribe  or  writer  was
very  considerable.

II.  A  Scribe  is  put  for  a  Commissary  or  Muster-
master  of  an  army,  who  makes  the  review  of  the
troops,  keeps  the  list  or  roll,  and.  calls  them
over :  Under  the  reign  of  U  zziah  king  of  J  udah,
there  is  found  Jeil  the  Scribe,  who  had  under  his
hand  the  king's  armies,  2  Chron.  26.  11.  And
at  the  time  of  the  captivity,  it  is  said,  Ihe
captain  of  the  guard,  among  other  considerable
persons,  took  the  principal  Scribe  of  the  host,  or
Secretary  of  war,  who  mustered  the  people  ot  the
land,  2  Kings  25.  19.

III.  Scribe  is  put  for  an  able  and  skilful  man,  a
doctor  of  the  law,  a  man  of  learning,  that  under¬
stands  affairs.  Jonathan,  David's  uncle  by  the
lather's  side,  was  a  counsellor,  a  wise  man  ana  a
‘Scribe,  1  Chron.  27-  32.  Baruch,  the  disciple
and  secretary  c/Jeremiah,  is  called  a  Scribe,  Jer.
36.  26.  And  Ezra  is  celebrated  as  a  skilful  Scribe
in  the  law  of  his  God,  Ezra  7-6.  I  he  Sciibes  of
the  people,  who  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the
gospel,  were  public  Miters,  and  professed  doctors  of
the  law,  which  they  read  and  explained  to  the
p€Opl€ ,

Someplace  the  original  of  Scribes  under  Moses,
but  their  name  does  not  appear  till  under  the
ludaes.  It  is  said,  that  in  the  war  of  Baiak
against  Sisera,  out  of  Machir  came  dow  n  gover¬
nors,  and  out  of  Zebulun  they  that  handle  the
pen  of  the  writer,  Judg.  5.  14.  Others  think  that
David  first  instituted  them,  when  he  established
the  several  classes  of  the  priests  and  Levites.
The  Scribes  were  of  the  tribe  of  Levi;  and  at
the  time  that  David  is  said  to  have  made  the  re¬
gulation  of  that  tribe,  we  read  that  six  thousand
'of  them  were  constituted  Officers  and  Judges,

1  Chron.  23.  4.  among  whom  it  is  reasonable  to
believe  the  Scribes  were  included :  For  in  1  Chron.
04.  (3.  ice  read  oj  Shern<*ia.h,  the  Scribe,  one  oi
the  LeviteS  ;  and  in  2  Chron.  34.  13.  ue  find  it
written.  Of  the  Levites,  there  were  Scribes  and

Officers.  ...  1  .

It  is  not  unlikely  that  they  might  have  had  their
education  arm  ng  the  colleges  of  the  prophets  ;  since
we  do  not  read  of  any  other  schools  of  learning
than  among  them.  Their  very  name  implies  some
degree  of  scholarship,  and  that  no  tnconsideraote
one  ;  since  we  find  our  Lord  joining  •promts,  ana
wise  men,  and  Scribes  together.  Mat-
And  the  prophet  Isaiah,  and  after  him  the  apostle
Paul,  instancing  them  as  such:  If  here  is  j  ,
wise?  where  is  the  Scribe  ?  where  is  the  disputer  ij
this  wold?  Isa  33.18.  1  Cor.  1.20.

The  Scribes,  and  doctors  of  the  law,  in  scrip  *
phrase,  mean  the  same  thing:  And  he  t.iat  in
Mat.  22.  35.  is  called  a  doctor  of  the  law,  or  a
lawyer,  in  Mark  12.  28.  is  named  a  Seri  be,  0.
one  of  the  Scribes.  They  seem  to  have  had  tt
sole  expounding  of  the  Scriptures  >  a,l<  ...
fore  the  disciples  ask  our  Saviour, _  Mat.  1/.  n-
u  inr  ♦  hon  wv  the  Scribes  that  Elias  must  nr


Why  then  say  the  Scribes  that  Elias  ...
come  ?  And  in  Mark  12.  35.  Ho'v  *i1-v  ,
Scribes  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  David,  xinc


S  C  R


scu


tn  Luke  20.  1,  2.  while  Christ  was  preaching  the
gospel,  the  chief  priests  and  Scribes  came  upon
him,  with  the  elders,  saying,  tell  us  by  what
authority  doest  thou  these  things  J.  or  who  is  he
that  gave  thee  this  authority  ?  which  they  thought
,  no  one  had  a  right  to  but  themselves.

I  hough  they  were  employed  to  be  the  judges,  inter¬
preters,  and  preachers  of  the  law  to  the  people,
we  find  that  they  came,  tn  length  of  time,  greatly
to  abuse  their  trust ;  by  delivering  traditions,  in-
stead  oj  Scripture,  and  thereby  setting  aside  even
‘‘f...?  tise'f‘  Thus  they  very  pertly  demanded
of  Christ,  Mat.  15.  2,  3,  <Yc.  Why  do  thy  disci¬
ples  transgress  the  tradition  of  the  elders  t  which
onr  Lord  fully  answers  by  another  question;
Why  do  you  transgress  the  commandment  of
God  by  your  tradition  ?  For  God  commanded,
saying,  Honour  thy  father,  &c.

Their  departure  from  the  true  faith  in  doctrine,
was  accompanied,  as  is  generally  the  case,  with
a  depravity  of  morals  in  their  lives  ;  for  all  their
outward  zeal  and  profession,  they  had  little  or  no
true  religion  at  bottom.  Therefore  our  Saviour
says  to  his  audience  upon  the  mount.  Except  your
righteousness  shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  in  no  case
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  Mat.  5.  20.
And  he  gives  various  instances  of  their  irregular
and  unjust  doings,  in  Mat.  2.3.  2,  .3,  4,  &c.  And
because  they,  the  least  of  all  men,  could  bear  a
reformation,  we  find  them  taking  all  occasions  to
oppose  the  preaching  and  spreading  of  the  gospel :
I  hey  murmur  at  our  Lord,  whenever  they  see
him  to  do  an  act  of  charity  or  public  good.  They
upbraid  Jam  for  eating  with  publicans  and  sin¬
ners.  lhey  .charge  him  with  holding  a  corres¬
pondence  with  Beelzebub.  They  watch  him;
seek  to  lay  hands  on  him  ;  vehemently  accuse  him
before  the  Roman  governor ;  and  at  last  suborn
false  witnesses  to  procure  him  to  be  crucified.

2  ‘jam.  8.  17.  Seraiah  was  s.  ||  20.  25.  Sheva  was  s.

2  Kings  18. 18.  there  came  out  Eliakim,  and  Shebna
„  ,  .  the  s.  .37.  I  19.  2.  Isa.  36.  .3,  22.  |  37.  2.

1  2z.  3.  the  king  sent  Shaphan,  the  ?.  8,  9,  10,  12.

.  .  2  Chron.  .34.  15,  18,  20.  Jer.  36.  10.

25. 19-  he  took  principal  ?.  of  the  host,  Jer.  52.  25.
skfhron.  24.  6.  and  Shemaiah  the  ?.  wrote  them
27.  also  Jonathan  was  a  wise  man  and  a  s.
Lzra  4.  8.  Slnmshai  the  ?.  wrote  a  letter,  9,  17,  23.

7.  6.  Ezra  went  from  Babylon,  was  a  ready  s.  in
at  ,  „  the  law,  11,  12.  Neh.8.4,  9, 13.  |  12.  26,  36.

,  ly  , ra.thef.  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  wood
13. 13.  Shelemiah  the  priest,  Zadolt  the  s.

Isa.  33. 18.  where  is  the  s.  ?  where  is  the  receiver  ?

36. 12.  princes  sat,  even  Elisliama  tiles'.  20,  21,
^6.  Baruch  the  ?.  32.  |  37.  15.  Jonathan  the  s.  20.

19.  a  said,  Master,  1  will  follow  thee
13.  5...  ?.  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven
Mark  32.  the  s.  said  unto  him,  well,  Master
1  C or.  1. 20.  where  is  the  s.  ?  where  is  the  disputer ?
SCRIBES.

1  Kings*.  3.  Elihoreph  and  Ahiah,  sons  ofShisha,  s.

1  Chron  2.  55.  the  families  of  the  s.  at  Jabez

2  Chron.  34. 13.  of  Levites  there  were  s.  and  officers
Lsth.  3.  12.  then  were  the.  king’s  s.  called,  8.  9.

Jer.  8. 8.  the  pen  of  the  s.  is  in  vain

Mat.5.20  except  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  s.

7.  29.  tor  he  taught  them  as  one  having  authority,

.  and  not  as  the  j.  Mark  1.22.

16.  21.  he  must  suffer  many  things  of  the  s.

17. 10.  why  say  s.  Elias  must  come,  Mark  9.  11.

20. 18.  Son  of  man  be  betrayed  to,?.  Mark  10.  33.

2, L  }?'  'vtlen  i-.saw,  they  were  sore  displeased

23.  2.  the  s.  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses’  seat

13.  woe  to  you  ?.  14, 15, 23, 25, 27,  29.  Luke  11.41.

-0.  3.  then  assembled  the  chief  priests  and  s.  and
elders  ot  the  people,  Mark  14.  53.  Luke  22.  66.
Mark  2.6.  went  certain  ?.  reasoning  in  their  hearts
16.  when  the  s.  saw  him  eat  with  publicans

3,  22.  the  s.  said,  he  hath  Beelzebub,  by  prince

8.  31.  Son  of  man  must  be  rejected  of.?.  Luke  9.  22.

9. 14.  the  s.  questioning  with  the  disciples

11. 18.  the  s .  and  chief  priests  heard  it,  and  sought
how  they  might  destroy  him,  Luke  19.  47.

27.  ?.  say,  by  what  authority  doestthou  these  things:
o-  0Ile  s‘  asked  what  is  the  first  command  :

3o.  how  say  ?.  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  David  ?

38.  he  said  to  them,  beware  of  s.  Luke  20.  46.

J4. 1.  the  J.  sought  how  to  take  him  by  craft
Luke  o.  30.  the.?,  and  Pharisees  murmured,  15.2.

11  io'  ''’atc'ied  him  ||  20.  1.  the  ?.  came  upon  him
11.53.  the  s.  began  to  urge  him  vehemently
t9*  19.  Priests  and  s.  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him
2.  the  chief  priests  and  ?.  sought  to  kill  him
23.  10.  the  ?,  stood  and  vehementlv  accused  him
'°hn  8.  3.  the  ?.  brought  a  woman  ta'ken  in  adultery
Jets  4.  5.  the  s.  gathered  against  the  apostles
0.  12.  the  ?.  brought  Stephen  to  the  council
23. 9.  the  s.  ot  the  Pharisees  part  arose  and  strove
SCRIP.

ortw.  17.40.  David  put  smooth  stones  in  a  s.
slat.  10.  10.  provide  riosilv.  nor?,  for  your  journey
r  L  r,  nor  two  coats>  Marks.  8.  Luke  9.  3.  |  10.  4’

”•  35.  when  1  sent  you  without?,  lacked  ye
36.  but  now  let  him  take  his  purse  and  his  ?.

^  „  SCRIPTURE,

Jr.  'vntmg.  There  is  great  dispute  concerning
the  first  inventor  of  letters  and  writing.  Some
maintain  that  the/e  was  writing  before  the  de-
a,  l hat  Adam  was  the  inventor  of  letters.
Vthers  think,  that  Moses  is  the  first  author  of
whom  we  have  any  writings,  and  that  before  him
there  were  no  written  monuments.  Through  the
whole  lives  of  the  patriarchs,  there  are  found  no
Jootstepsoj  any  writing;  neither  does  Moses  quote
any  writing,  that  was  extant  before  his  own  ;  for
the  book  ot  the  wars  of  the  Lord,  mentioned,
j  V'V  21  •  IE  some  think  that  it  is  a  passage
added  to  the  text  of  51  uses,  or  that  it  was  a  writ¬
ing  composed  in  his  time.  Others  take  it  as  a
piophecyi  oj  what  should  afterwards  be  recorded  in
tie  bov.es  of  Joshua  and  Judges;  and  instead


SKA


oj  reading  the  text,  It  is  said  in  the  book  ot  the
wars  ot  the  Lord,  they  say  the  Hebrew  will  bear
to  be  read  in  the  future  tense,  It  shall  be  said  in
the  book  ot  the  wars.

All  agree  that  it  is  an  admirable  invention:  To
paint  speecli,  and  speak  to  the  eyes,  and  by
tracing  out  characters  in  different  forms  to  give
colour  and  body  to  thoughts.  It  is  also  agreed
by  all,  that  there  is  nothing  extant  this  day  in  the
world,  either  more  ancient,  or  more  authentic,  than
the  books oj  Moses;  but  it  does  not  follow  from
thence,  that  there  was  no  writing  before  him.  It
appears;  on  the  contrary,  that  writing  was  known
and  common  enough  at  that  time  both  among  the
Egyptians  and  Hebrews.  This  people  seemed  al¬
ready  prepared  and  accustomed  to  express  their
thoughts  and  sentiments  after  this  manner.  And
it  is  to  be  supposed,  that  the  chief  of  the  nation
read  the  tables  of  the  law.  Moses  had  been  in¬
structed  in  all  the  knowledge  of  the  Egyptians,
and,  doubtless,  had  learned  their  manner  of
writing.

The  word  Scripture  generally  stands  for  the  sacred
books  oj  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  written  by
holy  men,  as  they  weie  inspired,  instructed,  and
enabled  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  2  Tim.  3.  16.  All
Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is
piohtable  for  doctrine,  to  declare  and  confirm  the
truth:  Jor  reproof, _  to  convince  of  sin,  and  confute
errors  ;  for  correction,  to  rej'urm  the  life  ;  and  for
instruction  in  righteousness,  that  is,  to  teach  us  to
make  a  further  progress  in  the  way  to  heaven  ;  or
to  instruct  us  in  the  true  righteousness  revealed  by
the  gospel  oj  Jesus  Christ,  in  which  we  may  ap¬
pear  with  comfort  before  God.  Scripture  is  some¬
times  taken  for  some  one  sentence  or  passage  of
the  sacred  writings.  51  ark  15.  28.  1  he  scripture
was  fulfilled,  which  saith,  And  he  was  number¬
ed  with  the  transgressors.  The  passage  referred
to  is  recorded  in  Isa.  53.  12.  Scripture  is  also
taken  Jor  the  lloly  Ghost  speaking  in  the  Scrip-
lute,  by  whose  inspiration  the  •'Scripture  was  writ¬
ten.  Gal.  3.  8.  I  he  Scripture,  foreseeing  that
God  would  justify  the  heathen  through  faith,
pleached  before  the  gospel  unto  Abraham ,  say-
\llV  -  ,  e  s*)aE  all  nations  be  blessed.  And  in
John  5.  39,  our  Saviour  says,  Search  the  Scrip-
tures,  tor  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life,
and  they  are  they  which  testify  of  me:  that  is
Diligently  examine  the  books  of  the  Old  Testa¬
ment,  which  yourselves  acknowledge  do  set  forth
t  e  way  t0  eternal  life  :  and  upon  due  trial  you
’  l‘lat  Ml  those  prophecies  and  types  are
Jul filled  in  me  ;  and  that  all  the  promises  of  life
the/e  made,  have  respect  tome,  and  point  meout  as
r  the  true  Messiah.

The  inspired  writings  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa¬
ments  are  called ,  the  Scriptures,  the  Bible,  or  the
Book,  by  way  of  cminency  and  distinction  ;  because
they  jar  excel  all  other  books :  for,  (1)  'They  contain
the  whole  will  of  God  necessary  to  be  known  for
our  salvation.  (2)  They  contain  that  wisdom  which
is  Jar  above  all  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  1  Cor.  2
7.  (3)  They  were  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost'd
Inn  3.  16.  2  Pet.  1.  21.  (4)  They  were  penned
by  the  most  excellent  of  men,  for  wisdom  and  holi-
ness,  as  Moses,  David,  Solomon,  the  prophets,
apostles,  and  evangelists.  (5)  They  are  most  per-
Ject,  pure,  deep ,  and  immutable,  and  contain  all
things  necessary  for  faith  and  practice,  Psal.  19
7.  2  rim.  3.  16,  17.  1  Pet.  1.23.  (6)  No  writings
01  scriptures  but  these  bring  such  glory  to  God,  or
have  such  an  ejficacy  in  converting  a  soul,  Psal.
19.  7,  8.  Ileb.  4.  12.  (7J  Though  these  books  were
written  by  divers  men  in  divers  ages ,  yet  there  is
as  great  harmony  in  them,  as  if  they  had  been  writ¬
ten  by  one  man.

Da/i.U).  21.  shew  what  is  noted  in  the?,  of  truth
Mark  12.  10.  have  ye  not  read  this?,  stone  which
Id.  ‘.8.  the  s.  was  fulfilled  which  saith.  he  was
Luke  4.  21.  he  said,  this  day  is  this  ?.  fulfilled

they  believed  the  ?.  and  the  word  Jesus
7.  38.  he  that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  ?.  saith
42.  hath  not  the  ?.  said,  Christ  cometh  of  David  ?

10.  35.  word  came,  and  the  ?.  cannot  be  broken
19.  37.  ag.  another  ?.  saith,  they  shall  look  on  him

this?,  must  needs  have  been  fulfilled
ox  nu  e,  p‘ace  ot  the  s-  wllit'h  he  read  was  this
3o.  Philip  began  at  the  same?. and  preached  Jes.
Horn.  4.  3.  what  saith  the  ?.  ?  11.  2.  Gal.  4.  30
9.  17.  for  the  ?.  saith,  10.  11.  1  Timu5. 18.

3.8.  the  ?.  foreseeing  that  God  would  justify
but  h&th  concluded  all  under  sin
\ l  int*  3. 16.  all  s.  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God
Jam.  4.  5.  do  you  think  the  s.  saith  in  vain

1  r>  *  ^  is  contained  in  the  s.  I  lay  in  Sion

2  Pet .  1.  20.  no  prophecy  of  s.  is  of  private  intei  pr.

SCRIPTURES.

Mat.  21.  42.  have  ye  never  read  in  the.  ?.  the  stone
22.  29.  ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  ?.  Mark  12.  24.

26.  54.  but  how  then  shall  the  ?.  be  fulfilled  t
Mark  14.  49.  but  the  ?.  must  be  fulfilled
Luke  24.  27.  he  expounded  to  them  in  all  the  ?.

32.  did  not  our  heart  burn,  while  he  opened  to  us  ?.

45.  opened  underst.  that  they  might  understand  ?.
John  5.39.  search  ?.  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have
Acts  17.  2.  he  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  ?.

11.  were  more  noble,  and  searched  the  ?.  daily
18.  24.  a  Jew  named  A  polios,  mighty  in  the?.

28.  shewing  by  the  ?.  that  Jesus  was  Christ
Rom.  1.  2.  promised  afore  by  prophets  in  the  holy  ?.

15.  4.  that  we  thro’  comfort  of  ?.  might  have  hope

16.  26.  and  by  the  ?.  made  known  to  all  nations

1  yor.  I®.  3.  Christ  died  li4.rose  according  to  the  ?.

2  Jim.  3.  15.  from  a  child  thou  hast  known  holy  ?.

2  Ret.  3. 16.  unstable  wrest,  as  they  do  also  other  ?.

SCROLL.

Isa.  34.  4.  heavens  shall  be  rolled  together  as  a  ?.

Rev.  6.  14.  and  the  heaven  departed  as  a?,  rolled
SCUM.

Ezek.  24.  6  woe  to  the  pot  whose  ?.  is  therein
11.  thatdhe?.  of  it  may  be  consumed


Ezek.  24. 12.  she  wearied  hers,  with  lies,  her  •  wen*
not  forth  out  of  her,  her  ?.  shall  be  in  the  iire
jCURVY,

Lev.  21.  20.  none  shail  appr.  that  is?,  or  scabbed
22.  22.  the  ?.  or  scabbed  ye  shall  not  offer  to  t  ord
SEA.

1  Kings  7.  23.  he  made  a  molten  ?.  2  Chron.  4.  2.

24.  there  were  knops compassing  ?.  round  abouf"

25.  the  ?.  was  set  above  upon  oxen,  2  Chron  4  4
39.  set  the  .v.  011  right  side  of  the  house  eastward  ’

2  Kings  16.  17.  Ahaz  took  down  the  ?.  from  oxen
25.  13.  the  ?.  did  Chaldees  break  in  pieces,  16.

2  Uiron.  4.  6.  the  ?.  was  for  the  priests  to  wash  in
15.  one  ?.  and  twelve  oxen  under  it
Jer.  27. 19.  saith  Lord,  concerning  the  pillars  and  s.
S  LiA ,

In  Hebrew,  Jum;  in  Greek,  OaXacroe.  It  is
taken  Jor  that  general  collection  of  waters,  which
encompasses  the  earth,  and  has  several  names  given
it,  according  to  the  countries  it  washes,  Gen.  1.
10.  Exod.  20.  11.  Psal.  95.  5.  The  Hebrews
gave  the  name  of  Sea  to  all  great  collections  of
water ,  to  great  lakes  or  pools.  Thus  the  Sea  of
Galilee,  or  of  Tiberias,  or  of  Cinnereth,  is  no
other  than  the  lake  of  liberias  or  Gennesareth  in
Gall  ee,  Mat.  4.  18.  I  8.  32.  John  6.  1,  18.  The
Dead  Sea,  or  Salt  Sea,  See  Salt.  The  Sea  of
Jazer  2s  the  lake  that  was  near  the  city  Jazer
beyond  J  ordan ,  Jer .48.  32.  The  G  real  Sea  is  the
Mediterranean,  lhey  gave  also  the  name  of  Sea
to  a  very  great  brazen  basin,  that  Solomon  valued
to  be  made  Jor  the  temple,  for  the  convenience  of
the  priests,  out  oj  which  they  drew  water  for  wash
mg  their  hands  or  feet,  or  other  things  as  occasion
required,  1  Kings  7.  23.

The  Arabians,  and  Orientals  in  general,  sometimes
give  the  name  of  Sea  to  great  rivers,  as  the  Nile
Me  Euphrates,  the  'ligris,  and  others,  which  by
their  magnitude,  and  by  the  extent  of  their  over-
fiowmg,  seem  as  little  Seas  or  great  lakes.  Hence
the  country  oj  Babylon  which  was  watered  by
the  Euphrates  is  called  the  Desert  of  the  Sea
Isa.  21.  1.  Jeremiah  speaks  of  it  in  the  same
manner,  Jer.  51.  36.  I  will  dry  up  her  sea,  and
make  her  springs  dry.  By  which  some  under¬
stand,  that  God  would  deprive  her  of  all  necessaries
Jor  her  succour  ;  though  others  refer  it  to  the  par¬
ticular  stratagem  by  which  Cyrus  took  Babylon,
namely,  by  drying  up  in  some  measure  the  rivet
Kuplirates,  that  is,  turning  it  into  other  channels.
Dud  Ezekiel  describing  the  king  of  Egvpt
says,  Ezek.  32.  2.  Thou  art  as  a  whale  of  "the
seas;  because  hzs  habitation  was  upon  the  banks
of  the  N  lie.

Sea  is  taken  for  a  multitude,  a  deluge  of  enemies.
Jer.  51.  42.  The  sea  is  come  up  upon  Babylon.
Also  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  of  the  sea.
Isa.  60.  5.  I  he  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  con¬
verted  unto  thee.  The  islands  or  nations  that
Jormerly  hated  thee,  shall  love  thee,  and  join  with
thee  in  religious  worship  ;  and  shall  bring  their
wealth,  which  they  get  by  their  merchandise,  unto
thee.  Job  says ,  Am  1  a  sea  or  a  whale,  that  thou
settest  a  watch  over  me  r  Job  7.  12.  Am  1  so
unruly,  and  so  ungovernable  a  creature,  that  thou
neeaest  to  use  extraordinary  power  to  rule  and
subdue  me?  Am  1  as  fierce  and  unruly  as  the  sea,
which  would  overwhelm  the  earth,  and  destroy  its
inhabitants,  ij  thou  didst  not  appoint  boundaries
to  it  ?  Or  is  my  strength  so  g/eat  as  that  of  the.
sea,  which  can  endure  so  many  violent  storms  one
ajter  another,  and  yet  can  subsist  under  them,  and
alter  them  ?  5  o,  Lor d ;  thou  knowest  that  I  am
but  a  weak,  feeble  creature,  whom  thou  const  crush
m  a  moment,  without  putting  these  chains  upon
me;  without  these  insupportable  pains  and  mis e-
T\ef‘,  J- he  prophet  51icah  says.  Thou  wilt  cast
all  their  sms  into  the  depth  of  the  sea,  Mic.  J.

1 9-  What  is  cast  into  the  depth  of  the  sea,  is
ordinarily  accounted  as  lost,  we  have  710  expecta
if  on  of  finding  it  any  mure  ;  so  to  cast  sins  into-
the  depth  ot  the  sea,  imports  the  lull  and  free  par¬
don  of  them.

the  ®e.a  of  glass,  mentioned  Rev.  4.  6.  most  pro¬
bably  is  signified  the  blood  of  Christ,  whereby
our  persons  and  services  are  made  acceptable  to
Gad.  It  is  called  a  sea  in  allusion  to  that  large
vessel  m  the  temple,  out  of  which  the  priests  drew
water  to  wash  themselves ,  and  the  sacrifices,  and  the
instruments  which  they  made  use  of  for  sacrificing,
IK  mgs  7.  23.  Its  being  represented  as  a  sea  ot
glass  like  unto  crystal,  may  denote  the  spotless
innocence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  his  suffer
lugs  ;  t hat  it  was  not  the  blood  of  a  malefactoi ,
but  of  an  innocent  person.

Exod.  14.  16.  stretch  thine  hand  over  the  ?.  27.

21.  Lord  caused  the  ?.  to  go  back,  made  the  ?.  dry

10.  10.  thou  didst  blow,  the  ?.  covered  them

20.  11.  Lord  made  the  ?.  and  all  that  is  therein,
Psal.  95.  5.  Jonah  1.  9.  Jets  4.  24.1  14.15.
Bum.  11,  31.  a  wind  brought  quails  from  the  ?.

Deut.  30.  13.  nor  is  it  beyond  s.  that  tliou  shouldest
say ,  who  shall  go  over  the  ?.  for  us  and  bring  it
Josh.  24.  6.  you  came  unto  the  ?.  Egyptians  pursued
7 •  he  brought  the  ?.  upon  them  and  covered  them

1  Kings  10.  22.  the  king  had  at  ?.  a  navy  of  Tarshisb
18.  43.  he  said,  go  up  now,  look  toward  the?

2  Kings  14. 25.  he  restored  the  coast  to  the  ?.  of  plain

1  Chr.  16.  32.  let  the  ?.  roar,  Psal.  96.  11.  |  98.  7.

2  Chr.  20.  2.  cometh  a  multitude  ag.  thee  beyond*?.
Neh.  9.  11.  thou  didst  divide  the  ?.  went  tho’  the  <

T  ,  „  /nob  26-  12.  Psal.  74.  13.  |  78.  13.  Jer.  31.35a
Job  7. 12.  am  I  a  ?.  ?  |l  38.  8.  or  who  shut  up  the  ?  ?

11.  9.  the  measure  thereof  is  broader  than  the  ?.

14. 11.  as  the  waters  fail  from  ?.  and  flood  decays
28.  14.  and  the  ?.  saith,  it  is  not  with  me

41.  31.  he  maketh  the  ?.  like  a  pot  of  ointment
Psal.  66.  6.  he  turned  the  ?.  into  dry  land
72.  8.  he  shall  have  dominion  from  ?.  to  ?.

(8.  53.  but  the  ?.  overwhelmed  their  enemies
80.  11.  she  sent  pur  her  boughs  to  ?.  and  branches
104.  25.  so  is  this  great  wide  ?.  wherein  are  things

421


S  E  A


SEA


SEA


jpsal.  107  23.  they  that  go  down  to  the  ,9.  in  ships  j
U4.  3.  the  #.  saw  it  and  tied  ||  5.  O  thou  #.

Prov.  8.  29.  when  he  gave  to  the  #.  his  decree
Isa.  1 1.  9.  as  the  waters  cover  the  #.  Hab.  2.  14.

16.  8.  her  branches  are  stretched  and  gone  over  #.

19.  5.  the  waters  shall  fail  from  the  #.  and  rivers

23.  2.  the  merchants  of  Zidon  that  pass  over  #.

4.  be  ashamed,  O  Zion,  for  the  #.  hath  spoken

11.  he  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  #.  he  shook

24.  14.  they  shall  cry  aloud  from  the  #.

42.  10.  sing  to  the  Ixird,  ye  that  go  down  to  the  #.

50.  2.  behold,  at  my  rebuke  1  dry  up  the  #.

51.  10.  art  thou  not  it  which  hath  dried  the  #.  ?

57.  20.  but  tlie  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  #.

Ter  6  23.  their  voice  roareth  like  #.  and  they  ride
48.32.0  vine  of  Sibmah,  thy  plants  are  gone  oyer  #.

50.  42.  their  voice  shall  roar  like  the  s.  shall  ride

51.  36. 1  will  dry  up  her  s. and  make  her  springs  dry

42.  the  #.  is  come  up  upon  Babylon, she  is  covered
Earn.  2.  13.  for  thy  breach  is  great  like  the  #.

Ezek.  26.  3.  as  the  #.  causeth  his  waves  to  come
Dan.  7.  3.  four  great  beasts  came  up  from  the  #.
AmosK.  12.  they  shall  wander  from  .v.  to  #.

Jonah  1.  11.  what  shall  we  do,  that#.  may  be  calm  r
Mic.  7.  12.  in  that  day  he  shall  come  from  .v.  to  s.
Nah.  1.  4.  he  rebuketh  the  #.  and  maketh  it  dry

3.  8.  populous  Mo,  whose  rampart  was  the  #._
llab.  3.  8.  was  thy  wrath  against s.  that  didst  ride
15.  thou  didst  walk  through  the  s.  with  thy  horses
Hay.  2.6.  1  will  shake  the  heavens,  earth,  and  s.
Zech.Q.  10.  his  dominion  shall  be  from  #.  to  #.

10. 11.  he  shall  pass  through  the  s.  with  affliction
Mat.  8.  26.  then  he  arose  and  rebuked  the  s.

27.  even  winds  and  #.  obey  him,  Mark  4.  39,  41.

17.  27.  go  thou  to  the  #.  and  cast  an  hook

23. 15.  woe  to  hypocrites, for  ye  compass  #. and  land
Luke  21.  25.  distress,  the  #.  and  the  waves  roaring
Acts  27.  40.  they  committed  themselves  to  the  #.

28.  4.  this  man,  though  he  hath  escaped  the  #.

1  Cor.  10.  1.  all  our  fathers  passed  through  the  s.

Lev.  4.6.  and  before  the  throne  was  a  #.  of  glass

7.  2.  to  whom  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth  and  #.

3.  saving,  hurt  not  the  earth  norther.

10.  6.  who  created  the  #.  and  the  things  therein

14.  7.  fear  God,  and  worship  him  that  made  the  #.

15.  2.  1  saw  a  #.  of  glass,  mingled  with  fire

20.  13.  and  the  s.  gave  up  the  dead  that  were  in  it

21.  1.  first  earth  passed,  and  there  was  no  more#.

By  the  SEA.

Exod.  14.  2.  before  it  shall  ye  encamp  by  the  s.

9.  Egyptians  overtook  them  encamping  by  the  s.

2  Sam.  17.  1 1 .  all  Israel  be  gathered  as  sand  by  the  s.

1  Kings  4.  20.  .ludah  and  Israel  as  sand  by  the  s.

5.  9.  1  will  convey  them  by  the  s.  2  Chron.  2.  16.
Isa.  18.  2. woe  to  that  land  sendeth  ambassadors  by  #.
Jer.  46.  18  as  Carmel  by  the  s.  so  shall  he  come
Mark  4.  1.  the  multitude  was  by  the  s.  on  the  land
lie v.  18.  17.  as  many  as  trade  by  the  s.  stood  afar  ofl

See  Coast  ,  G  it  f.at.

In  and  into  the  SEA.

Exod.  14.  28.  host  of  Pharaoh  that  came  into  the  s.

15.  1.  horse  and  rider  hath  he  thrown  into  the  s.  21 .

4.  Pharaoh’s  host  hath  he  cast  into  the  s.

19.  his  horse  with  horsemen  went  into  the  s.

Psal.  77.19.  thy  way  is  in  the  s.  thy  path  in  great
89.  25.  1  will  set  his  hand  also  in  the  s.

Eccl.  1.  7-  all  rivers  run  into  the  s.  yet  seanot  full
Isa.  27.  1.  he  shall  slay  the  dragon  that  is  in  the  r.

43.  16.  saith  lord,  which  maketh  a  way  in  the  s.
Ezek.  26.  17.  renowned  city  that  was  strong  in  thes.

18.  the  isles  that  are  in  the  s .  shall  be  troubled
47. 8.these  waters  go  into  the  s.  which  being  brought
forth  into  the  s.  the  waters  shall  be  healed
Jonah  1.  4.  there  was  a  mighty  tempest  in  the  s.

5.  mariners  cast  forth  the  wares  into  the  s.

12.  take  me  up,  and  cast  me  into  the  s.  15.

Zech.  9.  4.  lie  will  smite  her  power  into  the  s.

10.  11.  he  shall  smite  the  waves  into  the  s.

Mat.  A.  18.  casting  a  net  into  the  s.  Mark  1.  16.

8.  24.  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  s.

32.  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  into  the  s.  Mark  5.  13.

13.  47.  kingdom  of  heaven  like  a  net  cast  into  the  s.
21.  21.  be  thou  cast  into  the  s.  Mark  11. 23.

Mark  9.  42.  and  he  were  cast  into  the  s.  Luke  17.2.
Luke  17.  6.  ye  might  say,  be  thou  planted  in  the  s.
John  21.  7.  Peter  did  cast  himself  into  thes.

Acts  2.7  .38.  and  cast  out  the  wheat  into  the  s.

43.  they  should  cast  themselves  first  into  the  s.

1  Cor.  10.  2.  all  baptized  in  the  cloud,  and  in  thes.

2  Cor.  1 1.  26.  in  perils  in  the  s.  among  false  brethren
Jam.  .3.  7.  beasts  and  things  in  the  s.  is  tamed
Rev.  5.  13.  every  creature  in  the  s.  saying,  blessing

8.  8.  great  mountain  burning  was  cast  into  the  s.

16.  3.  and  every  living  soul  died  in  the  s.

18.  19.  were  made  rich  all  that  had  ships  in  the  s.
21.  a  mighty  angel  cast  a  millstone  into  the  s.

Of  the  SEA.

Gen.  1.  26.  let  us  make  man  in  ourimage,  let  them
have  dominion  over  fish  of  the  s.  28.
Psal.  8.  8.  *

9.  2.  the  fear  of  you  upon  all  fishes  of  the  s.

32. 12.  and  make  thy  seed  as  the  sand  of  the  s.

41.  49.  Joseph  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  s.
49.  1.3.  Zebulun  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the  s.

Exod.  15.  8.  depths  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  s.

19.  brought  again  the  waters  of  the  s.  upon  them
Num.  11.  22.  shall  all  the  fish  of  the  s.  be  gathered
2  Sam.  22.  16.  and  the  channels  < /  the  s.  appeared
1  Kings  18.  44.  there  ariseth  a  cloud  out  of  the  s.
Job  6.  3.  it  would  be  heavier  than  the  sand  of  the  s.
9.  8.  which  treadeth  upon  the  waves  of  the  s.

12.  8.  the  fishes  of  the  s.  shall  declare  to  thee
.36  .  30.  behold  he  covered)  the  bottom  of  the  s.

38.  16.  hast  thou  entered  into  the  springs  of  the  s.
Ps.  .3.3.  7  ■  he  gathereth  the  waters  of  the  s  together
68.  22.  I  will  bring  my  |ieople  from  depths  of  thes.
78.  27.  feathered  fowls  like  as  the  sand  of  the  s.

89.  9.  thou  rulest  the  raging  of  the  s.  when  waves
93.  4.  the  Lord  is  mightier  than  the  waves  of  the  .s.
139-  9.  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  s.
Isa.  5.  30.  against  them,  like  the  roaring  of  the  s.
6.1  and  afterwards  afflict  her  by  the  way  of  the  s.

422


Isa.  10.  22.  for  tho'  Isr.  be  as  the  sand  of  the  s.  yet  a
remnant  shall  return,  tlos.  1.  10.  Korn.  9.27.

2.3.  4.  even  the  strength  of  the  s.  hath  spoken
48. 18.  thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  s.

51.  10.  that  hath  made  the  depths  of  the  s.

60.  5.  abund.  of  the  s.  shall  be  converted  unto  thee
63.  11.  he  that  brought  them  up  out  of  the  s.

Jer.  5.  22.  placed  the  sand  ter  the  bound  of  the  s.

.33.  22.  neither  the  sand  of  the  s.  be  measured
Ezek.  26.  16.  the  princes  of  the  s.  shall  come  down
27.  .3.  Tyrus,  O  thou  situate  at  the  entry  of  the  s.

9.  the  ships  of  the  s.  were  it)  thee  to  occupy
29.  all  the  pilots  of  the  s.  shall  comedown
.38.  20.  the  fishes  of  the  s.  shall  shake  at  my’  presence
Ilos.  4.  .3.  the  fishes  of  the  s.  shall  be  taken  away
Arnos 5.  8.  that  called)  for  the  waters  of  the  s.  9.  6.

9.  .3.  hid  from  my  sight  in  the  bottom  of  the  s.

Mic.  7 .  19.  thou  wilt  cast  their  sins  into  depths  of  s.
Hab.  1.14.  and  makestmen  as  the  fishes  of  the  s.
Zeph.  1.  3.  I  will  consume  the  fishes  of  the  #.

Mat.  4.  15.  by  the  wayo/  the s.  beyond  Jordan

18.  6.  better  he  were  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  s.
Jam.  1.  6.  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  s.
Jude  13.  raging  waves  of  the  s.  foaming  out  their
Rev.  8.  8.  the  third  part  of  the  s.  became  blood

12.  12.  woe  to  the  inhabiters  of  earth  and  of  the  s.

13.  1.  1  stood  and  saw  a  beast  rise  up  onto/  the  s.

20.  8.  the  number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand  of  the  s.

See  Midst.

On  or  upon  the  SEA.

Psal.  65.  5.  of  them  that  are  afar  off  upon  the  s.

Jer.  49.  23.  faint-hearted,  there  is  sorrow  on  the  s.
Mat.  14.  25.  walking  on  s.  Mark  6.  48.  John  6.  19.

26.  disciplessaw  him  walking  on  the  s.  Mark  6.  49.
Rev.  7.  1.  that  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  the  s.

10.  2.  and  he  set  his  right  foot  upon  the  s.

5.  the  angel  which  1  saw  stand  upon  the  s.  8.

15.  2.  and  1  saw  them  stand  on  the  ».  of  glass

16.  3.  the  second  angel  poured  out  his  vial  upon  t.  s.

SEA  faring  men.

Ezek.  26.  17 .  that  was  inhabited  of  #. faring  men
SEA-monsters.

Lam.  4.  3.  even  the  s.-monsters  draw  out  the  breast
See  Red,  Salt,  Sand.

SEA-.vAor«.

Gen.  22. 17.  thy  seed  as  sand  which  is  upon  the  s.-s.
Exod.  14.  30.  saw  the  Egyptians  dead  upon  s.-s.
Josh.  11.4.  came  together  as  the  sand  upon  s. -shore
Judy.  5.  17.  Asher  continued  on  the  s. -shore
1  Sam.  1.3.  5.  the  Philistines  as  sand  on  the  s.-s/wre

1  Kings  4.  29.  largeness  of  heart  as  sand  on  s. -shore
Jer.  47.  7.  given  it  a  charge  against  the  s.-shore
Heb.  11.  12.  of  one  sprang  many,  as  sand  by  s.-s.

SEA  -side.

Dent.  1.  7.  turn  you,  and  go  by  the  way  of  the  s.-s.
Jvdg.  7.  12.  the  Midianites  lay  as  sand  by  the  #.-«<&

2  Chron.  8.  17.  Solomon  went  to  Eloth  at  the  s.-s.
Mat.  13.  1.  the  same  day  Jesus  sat  by  the  s.-stde
Mark  2.  1.3.  and  he  went  forth  again  by  the  s.-stde

4.  1.  and  he  began  again  to  teach  by  the  s.-stde
Acts  10.  6.  Simon,  whose  house  is  by  the  s.-stde,  32.
SEAS.

Gen.  1.  10.  the  gathering  of  the  waters  called  he  s.

22.  multiply,  and  fill  the  waters  in  the  #.

Lev.  11.  9.  what  hath  fins  and  scales  in  the  #.  eat
10.  that  have  not  fins  in  the  s.  be  an  abomination
Deut.  .3.3.  19.  they  shall  suck  of  abundance  of  the #.
Neh.  9  6.  thou  hast  made  the  #.  and  all  therein
Psal.  8.  8.  whatsoever  nasseth  thro’  paths  of  the  s.
24.  2.  for  he  hath  founded  it  upon  the  #.

65. 7.  which  stilleth  the  noise  ot  the  s.  their  waves
69.  34.  let  the#,  praise  him,  and  every  thing
135.  6.  what  the  L.  pleased,  that  did  he  in  the#.
Isa.  17.  12.  which  make  a  noise  like  noise  of  the  #.
Jer.  15.8.  widows  are  increased  above  sand  ot  s.
Ezek.  26.  t  17-  thou  that  wast  inhabited  of  the  #.

27.  4.  thy  borders  are  in  the  midst  of  the  #.

25.  thou  wast  made  glorious  in  midst  ot  the  s.

26.  hath  broken  thee  in  the  midst  ot  the  s.  27.  34.
3.3.  when  thy  wares  went  forth  out  ot  the  s.

28.  2.  I  sit  in  seat  of  God,  in  midst  of  the  #.

8.  of  them  that  are  slain  in  the  midst  of  the  s.
32.2.  Pharaoh,  thou  art  as  a  whale  in  the  s.

Dan.  11.  45.  tabernacle  of  his  palace  between  the  s.
Jonah  2.  3.  thou  hadst  cast  me  into  midst  ot  the  #.
Acts2J.  41.  and  falling  into  place  where  two#,  met
SEAL

Is  an  instrument  well  known ,  wherewith  letters  and
other  writings  arc  sealed  and  ratified.  1 he  ancient
I  lebrews  wore  their  seals  or  signets  in  rings  on
their  finger t,  or  in  bracelets  on  their  arms.  Je¬
zebel  wrote  letters  to  the  elders  of  Israel,  to  con¬
demn  Maboth,  and  sealed  them  with  king  Ahab’s
seal,  1  Kings  21.  8.  Ilaman  r/ie  Agagite  sealed  the
decree  of  king  Ahasuerus  against  the  Jews  with
the  king's  seal,  Esth.  3.  12.

Pliny  observes,  lib.  33.  cap.  1.  that  the  use  of  seals
or  signets  was  yet  rare  at  the  time  of  the  1  rojati
war,  and  that  they  were  obliged  to  shut  up  their
letters  with  several  knots :  but  among  the  Hebrews
they  are  much  more  ancient.  Judah  the  son  of  Ja¬
cob  left  his  seal,  his  bracelet,  arid  his  staff,  as  a
pledge  with  Tamar,  whom  he  did  not  know,  Gen.
.38.  18,  25.  And  it  is  said  in  Deut.  32.  .34.  Is  not
this  laid  up  in  store  with  me,  and  sealed  up
1  among  my  treasures?  Job  says  that  God  keeps
the  stars  as  under  his  seal,  that  he  is  governor  and
master  of  them,  and  allows  them  to  appear  when  he
thinks  proper,  Job  9.  7-  He  sealeth  up  the  stars.
And  in  chap.  14.  17-  My  transgression  is  sealed
up  in  a  bag.  .  .

In  civil  contracts  they  generally  made  two  origi¬
nals :  one  continued  open,  and  was  kept  by  him  for
whose  interest  the  contract  was  made  ;  the  other
was  sealed  up,  and  deposited  in  some  public  office.
.  It  was  sealed  up  to  prevent  any  fraud  or  falsifi¬
cation.  Jeremiah  bought  a  field  in  his  country
if  Anathoth,  of  one  named  Ilananeel  :  he  wrote
the  contract,  called  witnesses,  and  sealed  it  up  ;
and  then  put  it  into  the  hands  of  his  disciple
Baruch,  and  said  to  him  ;  lake  these  evidences,
.  this  evidence  of  the  purchase,  both  which  is


sealed,  and  this  evidence  which  is  open,  and
put  them  in  an  earthen  vessel,  that  they  may
continue  many  days,  Jer.  .32.  10,  11,  12,  14.

The  apostle  Paul  calls  circumcision  a  seal  of  the
righteousness  of  faith.  Rom.  4.  11.  Abraham
received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the
righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he  had,  yet  being
uncircumcised.  Circumcision  was  a  seal,  and
an  assurance,  on  Gods  part,  both  to  Abraham
and  his  spiritual  seed,  that  he  would  give  them
Christ  the  promised  seed  out  of  the  loins  of  Abra¬
ham,  and  in  him  accept  of  them  as  his  peculiar
people,  pardon  their  sins,  and  cleanse  them  from
their  natural  corruption,  signified  by  their  cutting
off  of  their  foreskins.  It  was  a  confirmation  of  the
covenant  of  grace,  and  of  the  righteousness  therein
promised  upon  believing  in  Christ.  And  the  same
apostle,  writing  to  the  believing  Ephesians,  says,
In  whom  also,  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were
sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  ot  promise,  Eph.  1.
13.  In  Christ  as  your  head  and  representative
ye  were  sealed,  that  is,  assured  and  ascertained
of  your  interest  in  the  heavenly  inheritance,  which
assurance  was  wrought  in  your  souls  by  the  imme¬
diate  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

It  is  said  in  2  Tim.  2.  19-  The  foundation  ot
God  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal,  the  Lord
knoweth  them  that  are  his  ;  that  is,  God's  de¬
cree  of  election  is  unchangeable,  upon  which,  as
a  firm  foundation,  the  salvation  oj  the  elect  de¬
pends  :  and  also  the  work  of  grace,  or  principle
of  holiness,  which  God  has  laid  in  the  hearts  of
the  elect,  to  be  as  a  foundation,  root,  or  seed,  for
eternal  life,  remains  immovable,  having  this  seal
confirmation,  or  security,  that  God  discerns  his
people  from  others,  and  will  take  care  of  them
and  preserve  them  to  eternal  life.  1  he  apostle  in
1  Cor.  9.  2.  calls  the  Corinthians  the  seal  ot  his
apostleship  ;  The  seal  ot  mine  apostleship  are
ye  in  the  Lord.  Ye  are  the  certain  evidence  oj
my  divine  call ;  my  apostolical  office  hath  a  con¬
firmation  in  you  by  the  effect,  as  the  Writing  is
confirmed  by  the  seal,  l'or  how  can  you  think
that  the  blessing  of  God  should  so  far  accompany
the  gospel  which  1  preach,  as  to  turn  you  from
Pagan  idolatry,  and  your  lewd  courses  of  life,
to  the  true  Christian  religion,  and  to  an  holy
life  and  conversation,  if  God  had  not  been  with


me  and  sent  me  l  ...

In  Rev.  5.  1.  John  saw  a  book  sealed  with  seven
seals.  This  was  the  book  of  God's  decrees  and
purposes  relating  to  bis  church,  as  to  what  re
markable  things  should  happen  to  it  to  the  end
of  the  world ;  its  being  sealed  denotes  that  the
matter  contained  in  it  was  locked  up  Jrom,  and
unknown  to,  the  creatures .  Elsewhere  sealing
denotes  secrecy,  as  in  Isa.  8.  16.  Dan.  12.  4.  It
also  denotes  security,  as  in  Rev.  20.  .3.  lie  cast
him  into  the  bottomless  pit,  and  shut  him  up,
and  set  a  seal  upon  him.  He  put  a  restraint
upon  him,  and  made  him  absolutely  incapable  of
doing  any  considerable  mischief  to  the  church.  And
in  Mat.  27.  66.  1  hey  went  and  made  the  sepul¬
chre  sure,  sealing  the  stone,  and  setting  a  watch.
The  grace  of  sanctification  wrought  in  the  soul  by
the  Holy  Ghost,  is  the  seal  and  assurance  of  our
redemption  to  come,  of  a  joyful  resurrection.  F.ph.
4.  30.  And  grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,
whereby  ye  are  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemp¬
tion.  One  observes,  that  in  the  comparison  of
our  sanctification  with  sealing,  there  are  the  fol¬
lowing  circumstances  of  likene  ss  ;  [1]  I  he  letter
written,  or  cabinet  filled  with  treasure,  isevtfy
good  Christian,  2  Cor.  4.  7 •  Heb.  10.  16.  [2]
The  wax  appointed  to  be  sealed,  is  the  re leiiting
heart  of  man,  apt  to  take  any  impression,  Esal.

22.  14.  [3]  'The  sealer  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  Eph.

1.  13.  |  4.  .30.  [4]  The  seal  itself  is  the  word  of
God,  which  being  applied  to  the  heart,  makes  an
impression  upon  it.  [5]  The  sealing,  or  impres¬
sion  active,  is  the  act  of  applying  the  word  if
God,  whether  precept,  or  promise,  by  the  Holy
Ghost  within,  and  the  minister  without,  to  the
hearer.  [6]  The  print,  or  impression  passive,  or
the  image  of  the  seal  left  in  the  wax,  is_  the
knowledge ,  faith,  and  love  of  that  truth,  holiness,
and  happiness  which  God  originally  hath  m  him¬
self,  and  his  word  from  him,  and  the  new  man
hath  the  true  image  thereof  in  himself,  Lph.  4.

23.  Col.  3.  10.  [7]  The  use  and  end  of  this

sealing,  is  the  secrecy  and  safety  of  the  thing  seat¬
ed  from  the  eyes  of  curiosity,  and  hands  of  violence,
wherewith  strangers  or  enemies  would  abuse  it.  00
the  children  of  God  are  past  the  censure  of  the
wicked  world,  1  Cor.  2.  15.  I  4.  3.  They  are  pre¬
served  as  precious  things,  for  God's  own  use,  to  be
with  him  in  heaven,  2  Tim.  2.  20,  21.  I  hey  are
freed  from  the  malice  and  violence  of  men  «na
devils,  and  from  the  stroke  of  God  s  justice,  Ezek.
9.4.  Mat.  16.  18.  The  spouse  in  the  Canticles
wishes  to  be  set  as  a  seal  upon  her  beioveu*
heart,  as  a  seal  upon  his  arm,  Cant.  8.  b.  that  ts,
that  she  might  be  engraven  upon  the  tables  oj  his
heart,  that  his  mind  and  heart  may  be  constantly
set  upon  her.  There  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to
the  graven  tablets  which  were  frequently  worn
upon  the  breast  ;  and  to  the  signet  on  a  man  s
arm  or  hand,  which  men  prized  at  a  more  than
ordinary  rate  ;  as  appears  from  Jer  22.  24.  lag.

2.  23.  and  which  are  continually  in  thetr  tight.

1  Kings  21.8.  Jezebel  sealed  letters  with  Abatis#.
Job  .38.  14.  it  is  turned  as  clay  to  the  #.  thev  stand
41.  15.  his  scales  are  shut  up  as  with  a  close#.
Cant.S.  6.  set  me  as  a#,  on  thy  heart,  as  a  #.  on  arm
John  .3.  33.  hath  set  to  his  #.  that  God  is  true
Rom.  4.  11.  circumcis.  a#,  of  righteousness  ot  raiin

1  Cor.  9.  2.  the  #.  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in  Ld.

2  Tim.  2.  19.  having  this  #.  the  I.ord  knoweth  his
Rev.  6.  3.  the  sec.  #.  ||  5.  the  third  II  7- the  fourth  s.

9.  the  fifth  #.  II  12.  when  he  had  opened  the  sixtn#

7.  2.  another  angel,  having  the  #.  ot  the  living  vt

8.  1.  and  w  hen  lie  had  opened  the  seventn  #


SEA


SEA


SEC


iU r.  9-  4.  hurt  only  tliose  that  have  not  the  s.  of  God
Z.  J.11O  shut  him  up,  and  set  a  y.  upon  him
SEALS.

JiVe.  5.  1.  and  I  saw  a  book  sealed  with  seven  y.

2.  woo  is  worthy  to  loose  the  >.  thereof'

5.  Lion  of  tribe  -4  )uda  prevailed  to  loose  the  s.
9.  tnou  art  woitny  to  take  and  open  tile  r.

6.  1.  I  saw  when  the  l.amb  opened  one  of  the  y.

SKA  L.

Seh.  y.  38.  our  princes  and  priests  y.  unto  it,  10. 1.
?v«.8.  16.  y.  the  law  among  my  disciples
■j «•  32  44.  men  shall  subscribe  evidences,  and  y.  th.
Dan.  9.  24.  seventy  weeks  to  y.  up  the  vision
12.4.  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  .f.  the  hook
Rev.  10.  4.  y.  those  things  the  seven  thunders  uttered
22. 10.  s.  not  the  say  mgs  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book
SEALED.

Dent.  32.  34.  is  not  this  s.  up  among  my  treasures J

1  A  niffs  21.  8.  the  letters  were  y.  with  Allah’s  seal
Esth.  3.  12.  written  and  y.  with  the  king’s  ring,  8. 8.
Job  14.  17.  my  transgression  is  s.  up  in  a  ba»

Cant.  4.  12.  my  spouse  is  a  fountain  y.

ha.  29.  11.  the  vision  is  as  the  words  of  a  book  y
Jer.  32.  10.  1  subscribed  and  .v.  the  evidence

11.  so  I  took  both  that  which  was  s.  and  open,  14
Dan.  6.  17-  the  king  s.  it  with  his  own  signet

12.  9-  for  the  words  are  closed  up,  and  y.  till  the  time
John  6.  27.  tor  him  hath  God  the  Father  y.

Rom.  15.  28.  when  l  have  y.  to  them  this  fruit

2  Cor.  1.  22.  who  hath  y.  us  and  given  the  earnest
Eph.  1. 13.  ye  were  y.  with  that  lloly  Spirit  of  prom

4. 30.  grieve  not  the  Spirit,  whereby  ye  arey.  to-day
Rev.  5.  1.  1  saw  a  book  s.  with  seven  seals

7.  3.  hurt  not  earth  nor  sea,  till  we  have  y.  servants

4.  I  heard  the  number  of  them  which  were  y
there  were  s.  144,000  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel’

5.  ot  Judah  werey.  12,000 ;  of  Reuben;  of  Gad  y

6.  oj  Aser  ;  of  Nephthalim  ;  of  Manasses  y.

7.  ot  Simeon  ;  of  Levi ;  of  Issachar  were  y.  12.00C

8.  ot  Zabulon  ;  ot  Joseph  :  of  Beniamin  were  s

SEA  LEST.

Ezek.  28.  12.  thou  s.  up  the  sum  full  of  wisdom
SEALETH.

Job  9.  7.  commandeth  the  sun,  and  y.  up  the  stars
33.16.  he  openeth  their  ears,  and  .v.  their  instruction
3< .  7-  he  y.  up  hand  of  every  man,  all  may  know
.  SEALING.

n. ,'  +  381  Princes  and  priests  are  at  the s.  10. 1 1.

Mat.  27 •  66.  s.  the  stone  and  setting  a  watch

SEAM.

John  19.  23.  now  the  coat  was  without  s.  woven
„  SEARCH.

Dear.  13.  14.  then  shalt  thou  enquire  and  make  y.
Ezra  4.  Id.  that  y,  may  be  made  in  the  records,  5  17

19.  s.  hath  been  made,  and  it  is  found,  6  1  ’

o,  8’A  PrePare  thyself  to  the  s.  of  ttieir  fathers
38.  16.  hast  thou  walked  in  the  y.  of  the  depth  ?
Fsa/.61. 6.  they  search  and  accomplish  a  diligent  y.
11.  o.  1  commune,  and  my  spirit  made  diligent  y.

Jer.  2.  34.  1  have  not  found  it  by  secret  s.

~  SEARCH,  Verb.

Lev.  27.  33.  he  shall  not  y.  whether  it  be  good
A«w.  10.  33.  to  y.  out  a  resting-place  for  them

on2;uSeI?d  t[‘°P  melL  th*t  they  may  s.  the  land
3,^ the  land  through  which  we  have  gone  to  s.  it
o A I  ■  the  land  w'e  passed  through  to  y.  it  is  good
38.  Joshua  and  Caleb  of  the  men  that  went  to  y
Ueut.  1  22.  we  will  send  men,  and  they  shall  y
o3.  who  went  before  to  y.  you  out  a  place
Josh.  2.  there  came  men  to  s.  the  country,  3.

Judy.  18.  2.  the  Danites  sent  men  to  y.  the  land

1  S«;«.  23.  23.  if  he  be  in  the  land,  I  will  y.  him  out

2  oam.  10.  3.  hath  not  David  rather  sent  his  sei  vants

unto  thee  to  y  the  city ,  to  spy  it  out  ?  1  Chr.  19.  3
1  A  mgs 20.6 .  wil  1  send  my  servants,  and  they  shall  .y.
lTiVfs}Q-  th,at  none  of  the  servants  of  the  I.ord

Job  13.  9.  is  it  good  that  lie  should  s.  you  out  ?

4„4-  21  •  sllaJl  not  God  y.  this  out,  he  knoweth
139.  23.  s.  me,  O  God,  and  know  my  heart
Rrov.  25. 2.  but  the  honour  of  kings  to  y.  out  a  matter
27.  tor  men  to  s.  their  own  glory,  is  not  glory
Acer.  1. 13.  I  gave  my  heart  to  y.  by  wisdom,  7.25.

1  the  Lord  y.  the  heart,  I  try  the  reins
29. 13.  when  ye  shall  s.  for  me  with  all  vour  heart
Lam  3  40.  let  us our  ways,  and  turn  to'  the  Lord
Lze/c.  34.  6.  and  none  did  y.  or  seek  after  them
D?lthe,V  d'd,  shepherds  y.  for  my  flock
•  4  will  both  .v.  my  sheep,  and  seek  them  out
39. 14.  after  the  end  ot  seven  months  shall  they  s.
-imos9-  3.  1  will  s.  and  take  them  out  thence
Uph.X.  12.  1  will  .f.  Jerusalem  with  candles
t  l  r  8‘  an(  s‘  diligently  for  the  young  c  hild
lohrib.  39.  r.  the  scriptures,  they  testify  of  me
7.  o».  s.  tor  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet
SEARCHED.

o~'  -,4L34.  Laban  s.  the  tent,  but  found  them  not, 35.
.’L.- whereas  thou  hast  .v.  all  my  stuff,  thou  found
44. 12.  the  steward  s .  tor  the  cup,  and  began  ateldest
21  •  so  they  went  up,  and  y.  the  land
32.  brought  up  an  evil  report  of  the  land,  and  y.

H.  6.  Joshua  and  Caleb  y.  the  land,  38.

34.  after  the  number  of  days  ye  y.  the  land
ueut_.  L  24.  came  unto  the  valley  of  Eshcol.and  y.  i
so  we  have  it,  know  it  for  thy  good

2J.  he  prepared  it,  yea,  and  y.  it  out
*'•  *6*  t,le  cause  which  1  knew  not,  I  s.  out
sc-  ii’  waited,  whilst  ye  s.  out  what  to  say
p  '  /  , 0can  ,  e  nun'ber  of  his  years  be  y.  out
1  1 '  0  Lord,  thou  hast/,  me,  and  known  m

Jr.'  oi’  Ai  ■  a,nd  tlle  foundations  of  the  earth  s.  out
;?•  P-tut  down  her  forest,  tho’  it  cannot  be  j.

>oud.  6.  how  are  the  things  of  Esau  s.  out

Bereans  s.  the  scriptures  daily
ret.  l.  10.  which  salvation  the  prophets  s.  dilig.

,  SEARCIIEST.

Pr  v  ,d'ou  s-  ,alter  toy  sin  and  enquirest

rov.  2.  4.  it  thou  x.  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures
r.  ^  SEARCHETH.

<  \  '/•  9-  for  the  Lord  s.  all  hearts  and  underst.

so  u  ’’’  ?*?d  he  s.  out  all  perfection,  the  stones
Pr  B’,on(l  l  ,a-  er  ?very  green  thing
•>v.  18.  1, .  but  his  neighbour  -.ometh.  and  x.  him


Prov.<2&.  11.  the  poor  that  hath  underst.  s.  him  out
Rom.  8.  27.  that  s.  hearts,  knows  the  mind  of  Spirit
1  Cor.  2.  10.  for  the  Spirit  s.  all  things,  things  of  G.
Rev.  2.  23.  know  that  1  am  he  which  *.  the  "reins
SEARCHING.

Nvm.  13.  25.  they  returned  from  s.  of  the  land
Job  11.7-  canst  thou  by  s.  find  out  God  ?

Prov.  2o.  27.  x.  all  the  inward  parts  of  the  belly
Ixa.  40.  28.  there  is  no  .v.  of  his  understanding
1  Ret.  1.  ll.j.  what  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  did  sig.
•  SEARCHINGS.

Judy.  5.  16.  for  the  divisions  of  Reuben  were  great  s.
SEARED.

1  Tim.  4.2.  having  their  conscience  s.  with  a  hot  iron

SEASON.

Gen.  40.  4.  and  they  continued  a  s.  in  ward
Erod.  1.3.  10.  thou  shalt  keep  this  ordinance  in  his  f.
Dent.  16.  6.  at  the  s.  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  Egypt
28.  12.  to  give  the  raiu  unto  thy  land  in  his  s.
Josh.  24.  7-  ye  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  a  long  s.

2  Kings  4.  16.  about  this  s.  thou  shalt  embrace  a  son
17.  and  the  woman  bare  a  sou  at  that  s.

1  Chron.  21.  29.  the  altar  was  at  that  s.  at  Gibeon

2  Chr.  15.  3.  for  long  s.  been  without  the  true  God
Job  5.  26.  to  grave,  as  a  shock  of  corn  cometh  in  his  s.

30.  17.  my  bones  are  pierced  in  the  night  s.

38.  32.  canst  thou  bring  forth  Mazzaroth  in  his  s.
Psal.  1.  3.  a  tree  that  bringeth  forth  fruit  in  his  s.

22.  2.  1  cry  in  the  night  j-.  and  am  not  silent
Prov.  15.  23.  a  word  spoken  in  due  s.  how  good  is  it?
Eccl.  3.  1.  to  every  thing  there  is  a  s.  and  a  time
Isa.  50.  4.  1  should  know  how  to  speak  a  wrord  in  s.
Jer.  5.  24. God  giveth  former  and  latter  rain  in  his  s'.

33.  20.  there  should  not  be  day  and  night  in  their  s.
Ezek.  34.  26.  cause  the  shower  come  down  in  s.
Dan.  7.  12.  their  lives  were  prolonged  for  a  s.
tins.  2.  9.  take  away  my  wine  in  tlTe  thereof
Mark  12.  2.  at  the  s.  he  sent  to  the  husbandmen
Luke  1.  20.  my  words  shall  be  fulfilled  in  their  s.

4.  13.  the  devil  departed  from  him  for  a  s.

13.  1.  were  present  at  that  s.  some  that  told  him
20.  10.  at  the  i'i  he  sent  a  servant  to  husbandmen

23.  8.  he  was  desirous  to  see  him  of  a  long  s.

John  5.  4.  for  an  angel  went  down  at  a  certain  s.

35.  ye  were  willing  for  a  s.  to  rejoice  in  his  light
Acts  13.  11.  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  sun  for  a  j.

19.  22.  but  he  himself  stayed  in  Asia  for  a  f.

24.  25.  when  1  have  a  convenient  j'.  I  w  ill  call

2  Cor. 7.  8.  made  you  sorry,  tho’  it  were  but  for  at.

2  Tim.  4.  2.  be  instant  in  out  of  s.  rebuke,  exhort
Philem.  15.  perhaps  he  therefore  departed  for  a  s.
Ueb.  11.  25.  than  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  s.

1  Pet.  1 . 6.  tho’  for  a  s.  if  need  be,  ye  are  in  heaviness
Rev.  6.  11.  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  little

20.  3.  and  after  that  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  s.

See  Appointed,  Due.

SEASONS.

Gen.  1. 14.  lights  shall  be  for  signs,  and  f.  and  days
Exod.  18.  22.  let  them  judge  the  people  at  all  s.  26.
Lev.  23.  4.  the  feasts  ye  shall  proclaim  in  their  s.
Psal.  16. 7- my  reins  also  instruct  me  in  the  night  s.
104.  19.  he  appointeth  the  moon  for  the  sun
Dan.  2.  21.  he  changeth  the  times  and  the  s.

Mat.  21.  41.  who  shall  render  the  fruits  in  their  s.
Acts  1.  7.  it  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  s.

14.  17.  in  that  he  gave  us  rain  and  fruitful  s.

20.  18.  how  1  have  been  with  you  at  all  s.

1  Thess.  5.  1.  of  the  s.  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write
SEASON.

Lev.  2. 13.  every  meat  offer,  shalt  thou  s.  with  salt
Mark  9-  50.  wherewith  will  ye  s.  it  ?  have  salt
SEASONED.

Luke  14.  34.  if  lost  savour  wherewith  shall  it  be  s.  ?
Col.  4.  6.  let  your  speech  be  always  with  grace,  s.
SEAT.

Ihe  seat  of  Mose3,  upon  which  the  Scribes  and
Pharisees  sat,  is  to  express  the  authority  of  the
doctors  of  the  law,  and  the  office  of  teaching  which
was  granted  to  them  ,  or  which  they  took  upon  them¬
selves.  Our  Lord  commanded  that  they  should  be
heard  and  respected ;  but  he  forbad  that  their
actions  should  be  made  precedents  and  examples.
Mat.  23.  2,  3.

The  seat  of  the  Scorners,  of  which  there  is  mention
in  Psal.  1.1.  denotes  an  association  or  incorpora¬
tion  zcith  libertines,  and  such  as  make  a  mock  of
religion,  who  corrupt  as  much  by  their  scandalous
example  and  conduct,  as  by  their  loose  principles ,  all
those  that  hear  them  and  keep  them  company .  1  he

seat  of  God  is  his  throne  or  judgment-seat ,  Job
23.  3.  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  !
that  1  might  come  even  to  his  seat !  To  his  judg¬
ment-seat  to  plead  my  cause  before  him  ;  not  upon
terms  of  strict  justice,  but  of  grace  and  mercy.
There  is  also  the  seat  of  justice,  a  bench  or  chair
whereon  magistrates  sat  when  they  administered
justice.  Job  29.  7-  When  1  prepared  my  seat  in
the  street.

Judy.  3.  20.  Eglon  rose  out  of  his  s.

1  Sam.  1.  9.  Eli  sat  upon  a  s.  by  a  post,  4. 13.

4.  18.  he  fell  from  off  the  s.  backward  near  the

gate

20.  18.  be  missed,  because  thy  s.  will  be  empty

25.  the  king  sat  on  his  s.  on  a  f.  by  the  wall

2  Sam.  23.  8.  the  I  achmonite  that  sat  in  the  s.

1  K  ings  2.  19- caused  a  s.  to  be  set  for  king’s  mother
Esth.  3.  1.  set  Daman’s  s.  above  all  the  princes
Job  23.  3.  O  that  1  might  come  even  to  his  s.  !

29-7-  when  1  prepared  my  s.  in  the  street
Psal.  1.1.  nor  sitteth  in  the  s.  of  the  scornful
Prov.  9.  14.  a  foolish  woman  sitteth  on  a  s.  in  city
E-ek.  8.  3.  where  was  the  i'.  of  the  image  of  jealousy
28.  2.  I  sit  in  the  s.  of  God  in  midst  of  the  seas
Dan.  11. +38.  the  Almighty  in  his  s.  he  shall  honour
Amos  6. 3.  and  cause  the  s.  of  violence  to  come  near
Mat.  23.  2.  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses’  f.
Rev.  2.  13.  thou  dwellest  where  Satan’s  s.  is
See  Judgment,  Mercy.

SEALED.

Deut.  33.  21.  in  a  portion  of  the  lawgiver  was  he  s
SEATS.

Jer.  18.  +  3.  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  s.


Mat.  21. 12.  he  overthrew  tables  of  money ^ -changer-l¬
and  the  s.  of  them  that  sold  doves,  Mark  ]  1 .

23. 6.  love  chief  s.  in  the  synagogues,  Mark  12.  30
Luke  1.  52.  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  .0
11.  43.  for  ye  love  the  uppermost  s.  20.  46.

Rev.  4.4.  four-and-twenty  s.  upon  the  .f.  24  elders
11.  16.  the  elders  which  sat  before  God  on  their
SECOND.

Gen.  6.  16.  with  s.  and  third  stories  make  the  ark-
32.  19.  and  so  commanded  he  the  s.  and  third
41.  43.  he  made  him  to  ride  in  the  .t.  chariot
Exod.fK).  4. the  coupling  of  the  s.  5. 10.  j  36. 11, 12,  lp
28.  18.  the  .y.  row  shall  be  an  emerald,  39.  11.

Lev.  5.  10.  he  shall  offer  the  s.  for  a  burnt  offering
Sum.  2.  16.  they  shall  set  forth  in  the  s.  rank
Josh.  19.  L  the  s.  lot  came  forth  to  Simeon
Judy.  6.  25.  the  s.  bullock  of  seven  years  old
26.  take  r,  bullock,  and  offer  ||  28.  they,  was offerert

1  Sam.  15.  +  9.  Saul  spared  ot  the  best  and  s.  sort

2  Kings  9.  19.  then  he  sent  out  a  s.  on  horseback
22.  t  14.  Huldah  dwelt  in  Jerusalem  in  thes.  part
‘  G/J7*0w,  15.  18.  with  them  brethren  of  the  s,  degree-
2  C hi  on.  35.  24.  his  servants  put  him  in  the  s.  chariot
Ezra  1.  10.  silver  basons  of  a  sort  410,  vessels
Esth.  9.  29.  to  confirm  this  s.  letter  of  Purim
Eccl.  4.  8.  there  is  one  alone,  there  is  not  a  s.

15.  with  the.r.  child  that  shall  stand  up  in  hisstead>
Ezek.  10.  14.  the  s.  face  was  the  face  ot  a  man
Dan.  7.  5.  behold,  another  beast,  as.  like  to  a  bear

8.  +  3.  but  one  horn  was  higher  than  the  s.

Zeph.  1.  10.  noise  ot  aery,  an  howling  from  the  s.
Zech.  6.  2.  in  the  s.  chariot  were  black  horses
Mat.  21.  30.  he  came  to  the  s.  and  said  likewise

22.26.  likewise  the  y.  had  her,  and  the  third,  unto-
the  seventh,  Mark  12.  21.  Luke  20.  30.
39.  s.  commandment  is  like  unto  it,  Mark  12.  31.
Luke  6.  1.  and  it  came  to  pa  s  on  the  s.  sabbath

12.  38.  if  he  shall  come  in  s.  watch  or  the  third

19.  18.  the  s.  came  saying,  L.  thy  pound  gained
John  4.  54.  this  is  the  y.  miracle  that  Jesus  did
Acts  12.  10.  when  they  were  past  the  s.  ward

13.  33.  as  it  is  written  in  s.  psalm,  thou  art  my  son-

1  Cor.  15.  47.  the  s.  man  is  the  Lord  from  heaven

2  V or.  1.  15.  that  ye  might  have  a  j.  benefit

I  it.  3.  10.  after  the  first  and  s.  admonition,  reject
neb.  8.  7-  no  place  should  have  been  sought  for  .n

9.  3.  and  after  the  s.  vail,  the  tabernacle

7-  into  they,  went  the  high  priestonce  a  year

10.  9.  taketh  away  first,  that  he  may  establish  s.

~  Pet.  3.  1.  this  s.  epistle  1  now  write  unto  you
Rev.  2.  11.  shall  not  be  hurt  of  the  s.  death,  20.  6.

4.7.  the  s.  beast  like  a  calf,  the  third  had  a  face

6.  3.  1  heard  the  y.  beast  say,  come  and  see

8.  8.  y.  angel  sounded,  and  as  it  were  a  mountaiss

11.  14.  the  y.  woe  is  past,  the  third  woe  cometh
16.  3.  the  y.  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  the  sea

20.  14.  death  and  hell,  this  is  the  s.  death,  21.  8.

21.  19.  the  y.  foundation  of  the  wall  was  sapphire-

See  Day,  Month.

SECON  D  time.

Gen.  22.  15.  the  angel  called  to  Abraham  the  y.  t.

41.  5.  Pharaoh  slept,  and  dreamed  the  y.  time
43.  10.  surely  now  we  had  returned  this  y.  tin  e
Lev.  13.  58.  then  it  shall  be  washed  they,  time
Sum.  10.  6.  when  you  blow  an  alarm  the  .v.  time
Josh.  5.  2.  and  circumcise  Israel  the  y.  time

1  Sam.  26.  8.  1  will  not  smite  him  the  y.  time

2  14-  29.  Absalom  sent  to  Joabthe  y.  time

1  A  mgs  9.  2.  the  L.  appeared  to  Solomon  the  y.  time
18.  34.  do  it  the  y.  time,  they  did  it  the  s.  time

19;  7-  the  angel  came  again  to  Elijah  the  y.  time

2  Kings  It).  6.  Jehu  wrote  a  letter  they,  time

1  L 'hr.  29.  22.  they  made  Solomon  king  the  y.  time
Esth.  2.  19.  when  virgins  were  gathered  the  y.  time
Isa.  11.  11.  Lord  set  his  hand  the  y.  time  to  recover
Jer.  1.  13.  the  word  of  Lord  came  to  me  they,  time

saying,  what  seest  thou  ?  13.  3.  |  33.  1.
Jonah  3.  1.  the  word  came  to  Jonah  the  y.  time
K ah.  1.  9.  affliction  shall  not  rise  up  th-3  y.  time
Mat.  26.  42.  he  went  again  the  s.  time  and  prayed
Mark  14.  72.  and  the  y.  time  the  cock  crew
John  3.  4.  can  he  enter  they,  time  into  the  womb  '

21.  16.  Jesus  saith  to  Peter  the  y.  time,  Simon
Acts~.  13.  at  the  y.  time  Joseph  was  made  known
10.  15.  the  voice  spake  to  Peter  again  the  y.  time

2  Cor.  13.  2.  as  if  1  were  present  the  y.  time
Lleh.  9.  28.  lie  shall  appear  the  y.  time  without  sin

SECOND  Year.

Gen.  47. 18.  they  came  the  y.  year  to  Joseph,  and  said
Exod.  40.  17,.  in  the  y.  year,  t  he  first  day  of  the  month
Slum.  1.  1.  in  the  s.  year  after  they  were  come
9. 1.  in  first  month  of  s.  year,  the  Lord  spake  to  Mos.
10.  11.  in  the  s.year  the  cloud  was  taken  up
2  Kings  19.  *9.  this  a  sign,  ye  shall  eat  in  the  s.  year
that  which  springeth  of  the  same,  Isa.  37  .  30.

2  Chron.  27-  5.  Ammon  paid  Jotham  the  s.year
Ezra  3.  8.  in  the  s.year  of  their  coming  to  Jerusalem
4.  24.  it  ceased  the  y.  year  of  Darius  king  of  Persia-
Dan.  2.  1.  in  the  y.  year  of  reign  of  N  ebuchadnezz.
Hag.  1.  l.iny.  year  of  Darius,  15. 1  2.  10.  Zech.  1  7
SECONDARILY.

1  Cor.  12.  28.  God  set. v.  prophets,  thirdly  teachers
SECRET

Is  taken,  [1]  For  an  affair  which  few  people  know ,
and  that  ought  to  be  kept  private,  Prov.  20.  19.
He  that  goeth  about  as  a  talebearer,  revealeth-
secrets.  [2]  For  that  which  is  hid  from  the  under¬
standing  of  all  men,  and  known  only  to  God.
Deut.  29.  29.  The  secret  things  belong  unto  the-
Lord  our  God.  The  counsels  and  purposes  of
God  concerning  persons  or  nations,  and  the  reasons
of  his  dispensations  towards  them,  together  with
the  time  and  manner  of  inflicting  judgments,  or
shewing  mercy,  are  hidden  in  his  own  bosom,  and
not  to  be  pried  into  by  ns.  And  in  Amos  3.  7.

I  he  Lord  will  do  nothing,  but  he  revealed)  his-
secret  unto  his  servants  the  prophets.  [3]  For
the  secret  favour  and  blessing  of  Cod,  protecting,
directing,  and  succeeding  persons  in  all  their  af¬
fairs.  Job  29.  4.  When  the  secret  of  God  was
upon  my  tabernacle.  And  in  Psal.  25.  14.  The
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him  ;  and

423


SEC


SEC


S  E  I)


he  will  shew  them  his  covenant.  His  gracious
and  fatherly  providence  is  towards  them ,  taking
erne  of  them,  and  working  for  them,  even  then
when  God  seems  to  frown  upon  them  :  his  word
is  with  them,  to  direct  and  guide  them  in  the  right
way,  to  shew  them  their  duty  in  all  conditions ,
and  the  way  to  their  eternal  salvation:  and
this,  though  revealed,  yet  may  be  called  a  se
cret,  because  of  the  many  and  deep  mysteries
in  it ;  because  it  is  said  to  be  hid  from  many  of
those,  to  whom  it  was  revealed.  Mat.  11.  25.

2  Cor.  3.  13,  14,  15.  And  because  it  is  not  to  be
understood  to  any  purpose  unless  the  mind  be
illuminated  by  the  Spirit  o)  God,  Psal.  119.  IB,
19.  [4]  tor  the  hidden  meaning  and  import  of  a
dream  or  vision ,  Dan.  4.  9.  15]  lor  that  which
is  kept  close  from  the  knowledge  of  all  other  men,
and  whereof  ourselves  only  are  conscious.  Psal.
90.  B.  Thou  hast  set  our  secret  sins  in  the  light
of  thy  countenance,  Feel.  12.  14.  For  God
shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every
secret  thing,  whether  it  he  good,  or  whether  it
be  evil.  Horn.  2.  16.  In  the  day  when  God  shall
judge  the  secrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ.  When
God  shall  judge  not  only  the  outward  actions  of
men,  which  are  manifest  to  all,  but  their  most
hidden  sins,  and  secret  duties,  their  inward  pur¬
poses,  designs,  and  aims.  I  he  numberer  ot  se¬
crets,  or  the  wonderful  numbeiei,  Dan.  8.  +  1.3.
By  this  is  meant  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  wonder¬
ful,  Isa.  9.  6.  and  who  hath  all  the  hidden  things
of  God  numbered  before  him,  and  knows  them
perfectly,  and  revealeth  to  angels  and  men  those
secrets  of  the  lather.

Gen.  49.  (?•  O  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  s.
Job  15.  8.  hast  thou  heard  the  s.  of  God  ?

19.  +  19.  all  the  men  of  my  s.  abhorred  me

24.  t  15.  the  adulterer  setteth  his  face  in  s.

29.  4.  when  the  4.  of  God  was  upon  my  tabernacle
40.  13.  hide  them,  and  bind  their  faces  in  4.

Psal.  25. 14.  the  s.  of  Ld.  is  with  them  that  fear  him
2?.  5.  in  of  his  tabern.  shall  he  hide  me,  31.  20.
64.  4.  that  they  may  shoot  in  s.  at  the  perfect
139.  15.  not  hid  from  thee  when  1  was  made  in  4.
Prov.  3.  32.  but  his  4.  is  with  the  righteous
9.  17.  stolen  waters,  bread  eaten  in  s.  is  pleasant
21.  14.  a  gift  in  s.  pacitieth  anger,  a  reward  wrath

25.  9.  and  discover  not  a  s.  to  another

26.  t  26.  whose  hatred  is  covered  in  s.

Isa.  24.  t  1C.  but  1  said,  my  s.  to  me,  woe  unto  me
45.  19.  1  have  not  spoken  in  s.  48.  10.

Jer.  23.  t  18.  w  ho  hath  stood  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord
Ezek.  28.  3.  no  ,v.  that  they  can  hide  from  thee
Dan.  2.  18.  desire  mercies  of  God  concerning  this  s.
19.  then  was  the  4.  revealed  to  Daniel  in  vision

27.  the  s.  which  the  king  hath  demanded

30.  this  4.  not  revealed  to  me  tor  any  wisdom  I  have
47.  seeing  thou  couldst  reveal  tins  s.

4.  9-  because  1  know  that  no  s.  troubleth  thee
Amos  3.  7-  he  revealeth  his  4'.  to  his  servants
Mat.  6.4.  that  thine  alms  may  be  in  s.  and  thy  Father
who  seeth  in  s.  shall  reward  thee  openly,  6,  18.
6.  pray  to  thy  Father  who  is  in  s.  and  thy  Father
18.  thou  appear  to  fast  to  thy  Father  who  is  in  s.
John  7.  4,  there  is  no  man  doth  any  thing  in  s.

10.  he  w'ent  up  to  the  feast  as  it  were  in  4.

18.  20.  I  spake  openly,  in  .1.  have  1  said  nothing
Eph.  5.  12.  things  which  are  done  of  them  in  s.

SECRET,  Adjective.

Deut.  27. 15.  cursed  that  puttc  th  an  idol  in  a  s.  place
29.  29.  s.  things  belong  unto  the  Ford  our  God
Judg.  3.  19.  I  have  a  s.  errand  unto  thee,  O  king
13.  18.  why  askest  thou  my  name,  seeing  it  is  s.  ?

1  Sam.  5.  9.  they  had  emerods  in  their  s.  parts

19.  2.  take  heed,  abide  in  a  s.  place,  hide  thyself

2  Kings  5.  +  24.  when  Gehazi  came  to  the  s.  place
Job  14.  13.  O  that  thou  wouldest  keep  nte  in  s.

15.  11.  is  there  any  s.  thing  with  thee?

20.  26.  all  darkness  shall  be  hid  in  his  s.  places
Psal.  10.  8.  in  4.  places  doth  lie  murder  the  innocent

17.  12.  as  a  young  lion  lurking  in  s.  places

18.  11.  he  made  darkness  his  s.  place
19. 12.  cleanse  thou  me  from  s.  faults

64.  2.  hide  me  from  the  s.  counsel  of  the  wicked
81. 7-  I  answered  thee  in  the  s.  place  of  thunder

90.  8.  cur  4.  sins  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance

91.  1.  that  dwelleth  in  the  s.  place  of  the  Most  II.
Prov.  27.  5.  open  rebuke  is  better  than  s.  love
Eccl.  12.  14.  shall  bring  into  judgm.  every  s.  thing
Cant.  2.  14.  O  my  dove,  that  art  in  the  s.  places
Isa.  3.  17.  the  Ford  will  discover  their  s.  parts

26.  +  16.  they  have  poured  out  a  s.  speech

45.  3.  1  w  ill  give  thee  hidden  riches  of  s.  places
Jer.  2.  34.  1  have  not  found  it  by  s.  search
13.17.  my  soul  shall  weep  in  s.  places  for  your  pride

23.  24.  can  any  hide  himself  in  s.  places,  saith  Ford
49.  10.  Esau  bare,  I  have  uncovered  his  s.  places
Lam.  3.  10.  he  was  to  me  as  a  lion  in  s.  places
Ezek.  7.  22.  and  they  shall  pollute  my  s.  place
Dan.  2.  22.  he  revealeth  the  deep  and  s.  things
Mat.  13.  35.  1  will  utter  things  which  have  been

kept  .v.  from  found,  of  the  world,  Rom.  16.  25.

24.  26.  behold,  he  is  in  s.  chambers,  believe  it  not
Mark  4.  22.  nothing  hid,  nor  was  any  thing  kept  s.

but  that  it  should  come  abroad,  Luke  8.  17.
Luke  11.  33.  no  man  putteth  a  candle  in  a  s.  place
SEC  It  ETS.

Job  11.6.  that  he  would  shew  thee  the  4.  of  wisdom
Psal.  44.  21.  for  he  knoweth  the  s.  of  the  heart
Prov.  11.  13.  a  tale-bearer  re' ealeth  s.  but  he  that
20.  19-  that  goeth  as  a  tale-bearer,  revealeth  5.
Dan.  2.  28.  but  there  is  a  God  that  revealeth  s.

29.  he  that  revealeth  s.  maketh  knowm  to  thee
47.  of  a  truth  it  is,  your  God  is  a  revealer  of  s.
Rom.  2.  16.  when  God  shall  judge  the  4.  of  men
l  Cor.  14.  25.  thus  are  the  4'.  of  his  heart  manifest
SECRETS.

Deut.  25.  11.  and  the  wife  taketh  him  by  the  s.
SECR  ETFY.

Gen.  31.  27.  wherefore  didst  thou  flee  away  s.  ?
Deut.  13.  6.  if  thy  brother  entice  thee  s.  saying

27.  24.  cursed  be  he  that  smiteth  his  neighbour  s.

424


L.ev. 28.  57.sheshall  eat  them  for  want  of  all  things  s.
Josh.  2. 1.  Joshuason  of  N  un,  sent  two  men  to  spy  s.

1  Sam.  18.22.  commune  with  David  s.  and  say
23.  9.  David  knew  that  Saul  s.  practised  mischief

2  Sam.  12.  12.  for  thou  didst  it  s.  but  1  will  do  this
2  Kings  17.  9.  did  .v.  those  things  that  were  notright
Job  4.  12.  now  a  thing  was  s.  brought  to  me

13.  10.  will  reprove  y  ou,  if  you  4-.  accept  persons

31.  27.  and  my  heart  hath  been  s.  enticed
Psal.  10.  9.  he  lieth  in  w  ait  s.  as  a  lion  in  his  den
31. 20. keep  them  s.  in  a  pavilion  from  strife  of  tong.
Jer.  37.  17.  Zedekiah  asked  s.  is  there  any  word  r
.38.  16.  Zedekiah  the  kings  ware  s.  unto  Jeremiah
40.  15.  Johananspake  to  Gedaliah  in  Mizpah  s.

Hah.  3.  14.  their  reioicing  was  to  devour  the  poor  s.
John  11.  28.  she  went  and  called  Mary  her  sister  s.

19.  38.  Joseph  was  a  disciple,  but  s.  for  fear  of  Jews
SECT.

This  word  is  the  same  in  the  Greek  with  the  word
heresy,  though  the  sound  be  not  so  odious.  Among
the  Jews  were  known  Jour  several  Sects,  which
were  distinguished  by  the  singularity  of  their
practices  and  opinions,  and  yet  continuing  united
in  communion  with  each  other,  and  with  the  body
of  their  nation.  These  Sects  are  those  of  the  Pha¬
risees,  the  Sadduce.es,  the  Essenians,  and  the
Uerodians.  As  to  the  first  two  Sects;  see  the
Significations  on  Pharisees,  and  Sadducees.
The  Essenians,  or  Essenes,  are  not  mentioned  in
Scripture,  but  they  are  described  by  Josephus  and
other  historians:  Joseph  de  Bello,  lib.  2.  cap.  12.
He  says,  that  they  live  in  perfect  union  among
themselves,  and  abiior  voluptuousness ,  as  poison  of
the  most  dangerous  consequence.  They  do  not
marry,  but  they  bring  up  other  men's  children  with
as  much  care  as  if  they  were  their  own,  and  in¬
fuse  into  them  very  early  their  own  spirit  and
maxims.  These  children  are  all  treated  and  clothed
in  the  same  manner,  and  do  not  change  their  dress
till  the  clothes  they  have  are  entirely  worn  out.
Some  employ  themselves  in  husbandry,  others  in
trades,  and  manufactures  of  such  things  only  as
are  of  use  in  time  of  peace,  their  designs  being  to
do  good  only,  to  themselves  and  other  men.  Before
they  admit  any  who  desire  it,  to  be  of  their  Sect,
they  put  them  to  a  year's  probation,  and  during
this  time  inure  them  to  the  practice  of  their  most
uneasy  exercises.  After  this  term,  they  permit
them  to  come  into  the  common  refectory,  which  is
as  it  were  a  sacred  temple,  where  they  all  continue
in  profound  silence.  There  they  are  served  with
bread,  and  every  one  has  his  particular  mess.  'The
priest  says  grace,  after  which  they  may  eat  ;  they
finish  their  meal  also  with  a  prayer.  After  hav¬
ing  proved  such  as  desire  to  be  oj  their  bed  for  a
year,  they  permit  them  then  to  come  into  the  place
where  they  bathe  when  they  come  from  their  work  ;
but  they  do  not  admit  them  into  the  inner  part  oj
the  house,  till  they  have  gone  through  another
trial  of  two  years.  When  these  two  years  are  ex¬
pired,  they  are  allowed  to  make  a  kind  of  profession,
whereby  they  engage  themselves  by  the  most  awful
oaths  to  observe  the  laws  of  piety ,  justice,  and
modesty  ;  fidelity  to  God  and  their  prince;  never
to  discover  the  secrets  of  the  Sect  to  strangers,  and
to  preserve  the  books  of  their  masters  and  the  names
of  angels  with  great  care.  If  any  one  violates  these
promises,  and  incurs  the  guilt  of  any  notorious
fault,  he  is  expelled  the  society,  and  generally  dies
of  want,  because  he  can  receive  no  food  from
any  stranger,  being  tied  to  the  contrary  by  these
oaths.

'The  Essenes  generally  live  long,  and  many  reach
the  age  of  an  hundred  years  ;  which  is  said  to  be
owing  to  the  simplicity  of  their  diet,  and  the  great
regularity  of  their  lives.  'They  shew  an  incredible
firmness  under  torments,  whereof  there  were  some
eminent  examples  during  the  war  between  the  Ho¬
mans  and  the  Jews.  They  hold  the  souls  of  men
to  be  immortal,  and  believe  that  they  descend  from
the  most  elevated  part  of  the  air  into  the  bodies,
which  are  animated  by  them,  whither  they  are
drawn  by  some  natural  attraction,  which  they  are
not  able  to  resist.  After  death,  they  return  with
rapidity  to  the  place  from  whence  they  came ,  being
as  it  were  freed  from  a  long  and  melancholy  cap¬
tivity.  As  to  the  state  of  men's  souls  after  death,
they  have  the  same  sentiments  almost  as  the  hea¬
thens,  who  place  the  souls  of  good  men  in  the  Ely-
sian  fields,  and  those  of  wicked  men  in  the  king¬
dom  of  Pluto,  where  they  are  tormented  according
to  the  quality  of  their  faults.

Although  the  Essenes  were  the  most  religious  of  their
nation,  they  nevertheless  did  not  go  to  the  temple
of  Jerusalem,  nor  offered  any  bloody  sacrifices.
They  were  afraid  of  being  polluted  by  the  conver¬
sation  of  other  men,  whose  lives  were  not  so  pure  as
theirs.  'They  sent  their  offerings  thither,  and
themselves  offered  up  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  a  clean
heart,  free  from  the  guilt  of  any  great  off  ences.
'They  lived  at  a  distance  from  the  sea  shore,  for
fear  of  being  corrupted  by  the  conversation  of
strangers.  They  chose  rather  to  dwell  in  the  fields,
than  in  cities  ;  and  applied  themselves  to  agricul¬
ture  and  other  laborious  exercises,  which  did  not
take  them  out  of  that  solitude  whereof  they  made
profession.

Their  studies  were  neither  logic,  nor  natural  philo¬
sophy,  but  morality  and  the  taws  of  Moses.  To
these  they  applied  themselves  principally  upon
sabbath  days,  when  they  assembled  in  their  syna¬
gogues,  where  every  one  was  seated  according  to
his  rank ;  the  elder  above,  the  younger  part
of  them  below.  One  of  the  company  read,  and
another  of  the  most  learned  of  them  expounded.
'They  made  use  of  symbols  very  much,  of  allego-
goiies  and  parables,  after  the’  manner  oj  the  an¬
cients.  This  is  a  summary  of  the  description
which  Josephus  gives  of  the  Essenes.  Some  are
of  opinion  that  John  'the  Baptist  lived  among
them,  till  the  time  when  he  began  to  baptize  and
preach  repentance.


The  Uerodians,  so  named  from  Herod,  were  an¬
other  Sect,  which  was  among  the  Jews  in  our
Saviour's  time,  who  had  a  leaven,  or  particular
doctrines,  distinct  from  those  oj  the  Pharisees
and  Sadducees,  against  whom  our  >aviour  re¬
quires  his  followers  to  guard  themselves,  Mark  8.
15.  People  are  much  divided  about  this  Sect
Borne  believe  that  the  Uerodians  took  Ilerod  fc
the  Messiah  ;  but  as  there  uere  several  Herods
who  were  known  to  have  reigned  over  the  Jews,
they  are  still  divided  to  know  ,  which  of  them  was
acknowledged  for  the  Messiah.  The  generality
are  for  Ilerod  the  Great,  the  son  of  Antipater,
who  died  in  a  short  time  after  the  birth  of  Christ.
They  say ,  that  the  Uerodians  grounded  their
opinion  of  Herod’s  being  the  Messiah  upon  the
celebrated  prophecy  of  Jacob,  Gen.  49.  10.  The
sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  law¬
giver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come;
and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people
be.  These  marks  they,  mistaking  the  nature  oj
Christ’s  kingdom,  thought  suited  exactly  with
Flerod  ;  because  he  was  a  stranger,  and  withal  a
powerful,  brave,  and  warlike  prince,  and  appear¬
ed  at  a  time  when  all  the  world  were  in  expec¬
tation  of  the  Messiah.  And  Herod  is  said  to
have  procured  the  genealogical  memoirs  of  the
house  of  David  to  be  burnt,  that  so  no  one  might
be  able  to  prove  that  he  was  not  of  a  family,
from  which  it  was  well  known  that  tjie  Messiah
was  to  spring.

Others  are  of  opinion,  that  Ilerod  II.  surnamei
Antipas,  and  Tetrarch  of  Galilee,  was  the  head
of  the  Uerodians.  He  was  a  very  ambitious  and
very  politic  prince,  for  our  Saviour  calls  him,
Fox,  Luke  13.  32.  He  might  be  very  well  thought
to  be  ambitious  of  passing  for  the  Messiah.

Some  others  believed  Herod  Agrippa,  who  was  ap¬
pointed  king  of  Judea  by  Caligula,  to  have  given
name  to  the  Uerodians.  But  how  is  this  opinion
maintainable,  since  the  Uerodians  were  already
known  some  years  before  this  prince  ascended  the
throne  ?

Many  of  the  Fathers,  and  several  Commentators ,
have  asserted,  that  the  Uerodians  were  people  of
Herod’s  retinue,  who,  to  satisfy  their  curiosity,
or  make  their  court  to  their  master,  came  with
the  Pharisees  to  tempt  Christ  upon  paying  tri¬
bute  :  but  by  the  recital  of  the  Evangelists  it  ap¬
pears,  that  the  Uerodians  were  a  Sect  subsisting
in  Judea  without  any  dependence  on  king  Herod,
and  his  power  at  Jerusalem.

Some  will  have  it,  that  the  Uerodians  were  poli¬
ticians  who  favoured  the  dominion  of  Herod  and
the  Homans  against  the  Jews,  who  were  zealous
for  the  liberty  of  their  nation :  the  former  main¬
tained,  that  it  was  their  duty  to  pay  tribute  to
the  kings  established  by  the  Homans  :  but  the
other  Jews  were  of  the  contrary  opinion.

Dr.  Prideaux  says,  that  the  Uerodians  were  a  Sect
formed  amongst  the  Jews,  and  had  particular  doc¬
trines  distinct  from  those  of  the  Pharisees  and
Sadducees,  and  that  these  doctrines  were  reduci¬
ble  to  two  heads:  [1]  In  their  belief  that  the  do¬
minion  of  the  Romans  over  the  Jews  was  just
and  lawful,  and  that  it  was  their  duty  to  submit
to  it.  [2]  That  in  the  present  circumstances  they
might  with  a  good  conscience  follow  many  of  the
heathen  modes  and  usages.  It  is  certain,  says
he,  that  these  were  Herod’s  principles  ;  since  he
excuses  himself  on  the  score  of  the  necessity  of
the  times,  for  acting  in  many  things  against  the
maxims  of  the  Jew  ish  religion.

Their  hypocritical  loose  way  of  professing  and  prac¬
tising  the  law,  or  true  religion,  among  other  bad
effects  which  it  produced,  made  these  strange  fac¬
tions  and  divisions,  even  among  the  vain  pro¬
fessors  themselves.  (  fliers  think,  that  the  Jews
divided  themselves  into  several  sects,  in  imita¬
tion  of  the  Greeks,  whose  philosophers  were  di¬
vided  into  different  factions ;  such  as,  the  Aca¬
demics,  the  Stoics,  the  Peripatetics,  the  Epicu¬
reans,  <Jjc.  It  seems  as  if  the  Corinthians  had  a
mind  to  introduce  something  like  this  into.  Chris¬
tianity’,  when  they  boasted,  I  am  a  disciple  of
Paul,  I  of  Apollos,  1  of  Peter;  which  abuse  the
apostle  Paul,  u  it h  great  vehemence,  corrects,  1
Cor.  1.  12,  13.  1  3.  22.

Acts  5.  17.  which  is  the  4.  of  the  Sadducees
15.  5.  the  s.  of  the  Pharisees  which  believed
24.  5.  a  ringleader  of  the  4.  of  the  Nazarenes
26.  5.  after  the  straitest  4.  of  our  religion  1  lived
28  22.  this  s.  is  every  where  spoken  against
SECTS.

1  Cor.  11.  +  19.  there  must  be  also  s.  amongst  you

SECURE.

Judg.  8. 11.  Gideon  smote  the  host,  for  it  was  4.

18.  7.  after  the  manner  of  the  Zidonians,  4.

10.  when  ye  go  ye  shall  come  to  a  people  4.  27-
Jol  11.  18.  thou  shalt  be  4.  because  there  is  hope
12.  6.  and  they  that  provoke  God  are  s.

Mat.  28.  14.  w'e  will  persuade  him,  and  4.  you

SECURELY.

Prov.  3.  29.  devise  not  evil  against  thy  neighbour,
seeing  he  dwelleth  s.  by  tliee
Mic.  2.  8.  pull  garment  from  them  that  pass  by  4.

SECURITY.

Acts  17.  9-  and  when  they  had  taken  4.  of  Jason

SEDITION.

Ezra  4.  15.  that  they  moved  4.  in  the  city,  19.
Luke  23.  19.  for  a  certain  4.  cast  into  prison,  25
Acts  24.  5.  we  have  found  this  man  a  mover  of  s.

SEDITIONS.

Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  4.  heresies

SEDUCE.

Mark  13.  22.  shall  shew  signs  and  wonders  to  4.

1  John  2.  26.  written  concerning  them  that  4.  you
llev.  2.20.  thou  sufferest  Jezebel  to  s.  my  servants

SEDUCED.  ..

2  Kings'll.  9.  Manasseh  s.  them  to  do  more  evil
Isa.  19.  13.  they  have  also  4.  Egypt,  even  they
Ezek.  13.  10.  they  have  also  4.  rav  people,  saving


SEE


SEE


*  Tim.  3.  13.


Prov.


SEDUCERS.

but*.  shall  wax  worse  and  worse
SEDUCE  I  II.

12.  26.  but  the  way  ot  the  wicked  *.  them
,  ...  SEDUCING.

1  J/w.  4.1. depart  trom  tanh^,  giving  heed  to*. spirits

Signifies,  [1]  To  he  hold,  or  perceive  with  the  eyes ,
£*0d.  23.  5.  [2]  Jo  observe  with  approbation,

vrtn.  j.  4.  L-i J  lo  look  upon  with  consideration
and  observation,  Mat.  22.  11.  [4]  To  visit,  1

Sam.  15.  35.  1  Cor.  16.  7.  [5]  To  suffer,  or

*  Ezra  4.  14.  [6]  To  hear,  Ex'od.  20.

lo.  All  the  people  saw  the  thunderings  and  the
noise  ot  the  trumpet.  And  in  Rev.  1  I
turned  to  see  the  voice  that  spake  with  me.

qOF0  ft'  ,  s -  '  90r7  J 5  •  M  7 '0  taste  of,  Luke
-6.  John  «.  51.  [9]  To  know  or  learn,  Gen.

J7.  14.  L 10J  Jo  have  abundance  of  knowledge,
so  as  not  to  stand  in  need  of  instruction  from
others,  John  9.  41.  [11]  To  perceive  and  under

ftand  experimentally,  Exod.  5.  19.  Rom.  7.  23.
ri5i  4?  beware,  or  take  care.  Rev.  19.  10.  |  22.  9
1  r,ii  know  by  divine  revelation,  Isa.  2.  1.  |  13

E  tj4J  To  believe  in,  and  rely  upon,  Heb.  11.
r*:  Ll5J  Jo  have  the  perfect  and  immediate  fru-
glorious  presence  of  God  in  heaven.
Job  19.  *6.  Mat.  0.  8.  Blessed  are  the  pure  in
heart ;  tor  they  shall  see  God.

Ihus  seeing,  or  to  see,  is  not  only  said  of  the  sense
oj  vision,  by  which  we  perceive  external  objects,
but  also  oj  inward  perception,  of  the  knowledge
oj  spiritual  things,  and  even  of  that  supernatural
signt  oj  hidden  thmgs,  of  prophecy,  of  visions ,  of
ecstacies.  Whence  it  is,  that  formerly  they  were
called  Seers,  who  afterwards  were  called  JS'abi,
or  prophets,  1  Sam.  9.  9.  and  that  prophecies
were  called  visions,  Obad.  1.

Lo  see  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  27.  13  it
to  enjoy  the  mercy  or  blessing  which  God  hath
promised.  Job  says,  O  remember  that  my  life
is  wind,  mine  eyes  shall  no  more  see  good.  Job
7-7-  1  shall  die,  and  see  no  more:  1  shall  no

longer  enjoy  the  good  things  of  this  world.  And
in  Mat  5.  8.  I  he  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God
Jhey  shall  understand  the  mysteries  of  salvation,
they  shall  perceive  the  loving-kindness  of  Goa
towards  them  m  this  life,  and  shall  at  length
perject/y  enjoy  him  in  heaven.

t‘x0  1  ~E  -JO.  That  the  elders  saw  the
God  of  Israel.  1  hey  did  not  see  any  resem-
blance  oj  the  divine  nature,  which  is  expiessly  de¬
nied, V eut.  4.  15.  but  some  glorious  appearance
or  tOKcnot  Gods  special  presence ;  or  rather  the
second  Person  of  the  Trinity,  who  then  shewed
ntmse/J  to  them  m  a  human  shape,  as  a  testi
mony  of  his  future  incarnation.
lo  see  the  face  of  the  king,  Esth.  1.  14.  is  to  be
oj  Ins  household ,  to  approach  near  him,  or  to
have  familiar  converse  with  him.  The  kings  of
.Persia,  under  the  pretence  of  maintaining  that
respect  and  majesty  that  was  due  lo  them,  sel
dam  permitted  their  subjects  to  see  them,  and
hardly  ever  shewed  themselves  in  public :  none
biit  their  most  intimate  friends,  or  their  familiar

faces  tlCS>  'ta<  116  advanta9e  °f  beholding  theii

jenAAtj.  brought  to  Adam,  to  ?.  what  he  would  call
8.8.  he  sent  a  dove  to  *.  if  the  wafers  were  abated
in  “u  • e  Eord  came  down  to  s.  the  city
Z Vi  <ASald  unto  him,*.  I  have  accepred  thee
22. +  14.  the  name  of  that  place,  the  Lord  will  *.

27-  27.  f.  thesmel  of  my  son  is  as  the  smell  of  a  field
31  and , Eeah  called  his  name,  s.  a  son
il.5.  he  said,  I  *.  your  father’s  countenance
s  n’  ,?‘nah  we?t  °u‘  to  the  daughters  of  land
1-.  9.  but  to  *.  the  nakedness  of  the  land,  12
4.  23.  thou  saidst,  you  shall  *.  my  face  no  more

n.  J’01:11'  eyes  s.  and  the  eyes  of  my  brother
24.  he  said,  *.  that  ye  fall  not  out  by  the  way

10  -ii  'V1!  g0  and  s-  Joseph  before  I  die
.8.  11.  1  had  not  thought  to  *.  thy  face,  and  lo
f°“-  E  16-  and  when  ye  *.  them  upon  the  stools
10  1  1  ‘Vrn  aside,  and  s.  this  great  sight,  4

.18.  f.  whether  my  brethren  be  yet  alive
2V  J.  that  thou  do  those  wonders  before  Pharaoh
'.19.  the  officers  did  s.  they  were  in  evil  case

A]inr.sllaU  thou  -f-  what  1  will  do  to  Pharaoh
0.5.  that  one  cannot  be  able  to  *.  the  earth

28.  take  heed  to  thyself,  *.  my  face  no  more
.9.  hast  spoken  well,  1  will  s.  thy  lace  no  more
T  T  ‘f r\  *’ “ie  blood,  1  wdl  pass  over  you
i  !v  ,st  ‘,le  People  repent  when  they  s.  war

4.  13.  stand  still  and  *.  the  salvation  of  the  Lord

29.  s,  for  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  sabbath

C.  they  may  .?.  the  bread  wherewith  1  fed  you
, •  ‘.Of.  there  shall  no  man  ,?.  me  and  live

and  thou  shalt  s.  my  hack  parts
*•  t.0*  the  People  shall  *.  the  work  of  the  Lord
i*':  t3;  10.  and  the  priest  shall  s.  him,  17.

s‘  her  nakedness,  and  she  s.  his
w/.  4. 20.  shall  not  go  in  to*,  holy  things  covered
,  7'3>  s,'aJt5.  whether  my  word  come  to  pass  '

,  the  land  what  it  is,  and  people  that  dwell
>  ii  niPr  s,  ‘  any  that  provoked  me  s.  it
-.41.  that  thence  he  might  *.  the  utmost  part

5.  9.  tor  from  the  top  of  the  rocks  I  *.  him
3.  come  to  another  place,  whence  thou  mayest*.

them,  thou  shalt  s.  but  the  utmost  part  of  them
J- 17.  I  shall*  him,  but  not  now,  I  shall  behold
.17.  and  s.  the  land,  which  1  have  given  to  Isr.

-.8.  i  sent  your  fathers  from  Kadesh  to  s.  land
11.  surely  none  ot  the  men  that  came  up  out
,  °*  Egypt  shall  s.  the  land,  Dent.  1.  35.

ui.  1. 36.  save  Caleb,  he  shall  s.  land,  will  give
.0.  1  pray  thee,  let  me  s.  the  good  land

o.  cause  to  inherit  the  land  which  thou  shalt  s.

!•  ]E  that  he  s.  no  unclean  thing  in  thee
'I  •  .  .  P«’,P.le  shall  *.  that  thou  art  called  by
a  2?  ht  1  thlne!  eyes  wl|ich  thou  shalt  *.  67.

1  a  iuU  Vla  j  T  i*  n,>  more  again,  and  be  sold
•  4.  tne  Lord  hath  not  given  you  eyes  to  s.


SEE


7o*  E.29.  ...  v\nen  they  .v.  me  plagues  or  that  land
00  1,  •  1  hav  e  set  before  thee  life  and  good
32.  .°.  he  said,  1  will  .f.  what  their  end  will  be
39.  *.  now,  1 ,  e\  en  I ,  am  he,  there  is  no  C, .  with  me

qj'VlV  10U  shalt  j11111'  before  thee,  but  not  go
gE,  4-  have  caused  thee  to  s.  it  with  thine  eves

Juda  u  L°\they  b'J|U  a  ?reat  altar  to  to
Judg  14.  8.  Sainson  turned  aside  to  s.  the  carcase

16.  5.  and  .f.  wherein  his  great  strength  iieth

Sha*  aLn  ene.n,y.  10  my  habitation
?•  mey  saw  the  ark,  and  rejoiced  to  s.  it
16.  now  .v.  this  great  thing  the  Lord  will  do
i  •  ye  may  j.  that  your  wickedness  is  great

14.  u.  number  now  and  s.  who  is  gone  from  us
.58.  and  .v.  wherein  this  sin  hath  been  this  clay

15.  3d.  samuel  came  no  more  to  Saul,  mourned

17.  -o.  art  come,  that  thou  mightest  j.  the  battle
19.  3.  and  what  l  j.  that  I  will  tell  thee
ooJ?aiUlsent  messengers  again  to  s.  David
o |  ■  7  |  eP  me  ».el  a:-vay  >  I  pray ,  and  s.  my  brethren
„E  IE  hen  Said  Achish,  you  the  man  is  mad
-•3.  know  and  s.  Ins  place,  where  his  haunt  is
off  U’  my  [athftf.E  yea-  the  skirt  of  thy  robe

o  e  lb’  fn  wber®  kln7  s  sPea»'  is.  and  cruse  of  watei
«  13.  5.  when  thy  father  cometh  toj-.  thee,  let

iu  oamar  co™e-  P'at  1,may  ‘E  and  eat  it  at  her

14.  32.  now  therefore,  let  me  the  king’s  face

15.  3.  j.  thy  matters  are.good  and  right,  Absal.  said
24  3.  that  the  eyes  of  my  Lord  the  king  may  4.  it

1  \?LS'  "hat.anSl  ha,11  return  him  that  sent  me
^  thy  house,  David,  o  chr.  10.  16

17.  -3.  and  Elijah  saiu,  s.  thy  son  liveth

s‘  ^w  this  man  seeketh  mischief

00  oileuPr0,JuetuSald-’  m.ark  and  what  thou  dost
thou  shalt  s.  in  that  day,  2  Chron.  18.  °4

~  Rings  2.  10.  if  thou  s.  when  1  am  taken  from  thee
5.  7.  f.  how  lie  seeketh  a  quarrel  against  me
0.  I7.  Lord,  I  pray  open  his  eyes  that  he  may  4.
-.0.  open  the  eyes  of  these  men  that  they  ma/(
mo  f;  how  this  son  of  a  murderer  hath  sent  to

7.  -  thou  shalt  j.  it  with  thine  eyes,  but  not  eat,  19
13  let  us  send  and  j.  |l  14.  saying,  go  and  ^

8.  29.  went  down  to  4.  Joram,  9.  16.  2  Chr.  22.  6
•  ^‘,e  watchman  said,  1  s.  a  company

f-  now  this  cursed  woman,  and  bury  her
10.  6.  come  with  me  and  s.  my  zeal  foi  the  Ld
19.  16.  open,  Lord  thine  eyes,  and  ,v.  Jsa.  .37.  17
oni  17;„th^  h,e  sald >  what  title  is  that  that  I  s.

~on^i'-18’  !ib'  he,Siil(.f’  1  dld aH  Israel  scattered
~0.  17.  s.  the  salvation  ot  the  Lord  with  you

ot'  °-g0’  and,J-  that  ye  hasten  the  matter
j-5.  17.  come,  let  us  j.  one  another  in  the  face
k  n4^via?  notm'!ee-t  t0  e  the  king’s  dishonour
u  ,  dldst  affliction  of  our  fathers  in  Egyot
Esth  3.  4.  to  if  Mordecai’s  matters  would  stand
o’  as,  I  s.  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting

8.  0.  Esther  said,  how  can  I  endure  to  s.  the  evn
that  shall  come  on  my  people  ?  to  j.  the  destruct.
oobji.  9.  neither  let  it  s.  the  dawning  of  the  day
7.  1  •  mine  eye  shall  no  more  s.  good  ;  my  life  wind
8.  the  eye  that  hath  seen  me  shall  me  no  more
n?,w  nEv  da>s  flee  away,  they  no  good
10.  Id.  therefore  s.  thou  mine  affliction
17.  15.  as  for  my  hope,  who  shall  j.  it J
19.26.  worms  destroy,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  s.  G
on7Vwi10m  sha!l/-  lor  myself,  and  not  another
20.  9.  the  eye  which  saw  him  shall  ,f.  him  no  more
his  eyes  shall  .f.  his  destruction,  shall  drink
22.  19.  the  righteous  it,  and  are  glad
24.  1.  why  do  they  that  know  him  not s.  nis  days  ?

15.  the  adulterer  saith,  no  eye  shall  j  me
28.  27,  then  did  hei.it,  ami  declare  it,  he  prepar  it
£E  4.  doth  not  he  i.  my  ways,  and  count  my  steps  ?

'To,  1  :  shall  pray7,  ami  he  will  s.  his  face  with  iov
28.  his  soul,  and  his  life  shall  1.  the  light  J  J
oa’  n-  ook  unto  the  heavens,  and  1.  the  clouds
3t>.  2d.  every  man  may  1.  it,  man  may  behold  it
Psal.  lo.  11.  he  hath  said,  God  will  never  s.  it
14.  2.  God  looked  to.?,  if  any  did  understand  5.3  2
16.  10.  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to
1.  corruption,  Acts  2.27.31  I  n  q*

7-  all  they  that  s.  me  laugh  me  to  scorn
i'?'  la<l  heheved  to  j-.  the  goodness  of  the  Lord
4E  they  ffiat  did  .?.  me  without,  fled  from  me
34.  o.  G  taste  and  s.  that  the  Lord  is  good
12.  that  loveth  many  days,  that  he  may  good
.37.  .34.  when  the  wicked  are  cut  off,  thou  shalt  f.  it
40.  3.  niany  shall  s.  it  and  trust  in  the  Lord
;E  6.  if  he  come  to  .?.  me,  he  speaketh  vanity
49.  19.  he  shall  go,  they  shall  never  s.  light
5?'  ?•  ^  righteous  also  shall  and  fear  and  laugh
5J.  10.  God  shall  let  me  .?.  my  desire  on  my  enem.

tiod  of  mercy  shall  prevent  me,  92.  ]].  |  U8.  7.

6.3.  2.  to  s.  thy  power  and  glory,  as  1  have  seen
o’  5,.  they  commune,  they  say,  who  shall them  ?
o.  all  that  s.  them  shall  flee  away

ah  QoC?imei  and  f-  ‘he  works  of  God,  he  is  terrible
69.  32.  the  humble  shall  5.  this,  and  be  glad
86.  17.  that  they  which  hate  me  may  s.  it
91 . 8.  thou  shalt  s.  the  reward  of  the  wicked
97.  6.  and  all  the  people  s.  his  glory7

106.  5.  that  I  may7  s.  the  good  of  thy  chosen

107.  24.  these  f.  the  works  of  the  Lord  in  the  deep

,1o’  o'8.-ne?us  sl?a11  f-  i‘  and  rejoice,  all  iniquity
1 12.  8.  till  he  s.  his  desire  upon  his  enemies
10.  the  wicked  shall  .?.  it  and  be  grieved
119.  74.  they  will  be  glad  when  they  .?.  me
128.  5.  thou  shalt  s.  the  good  of  Jerusalem  all  days
6.  thou  shalt  s.  thy7  children’s  children,  and  peace
139.  16.  thy7  eyes  did  s.  my  substance  yet  imperf.

2E  search,  .?.  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me
Prim.  24.  18.  lest  the  Lord  .?.  and  it  displease  him
29.  16.  but  the  righteous  shall  j.  their  fall
00  -E| .“J7  whereof  it  may  be  said,  .?.  this  is  new
'•  ‘J  1  ‘  might  s.  what  was  good  for  sons  of  men
3-  18-  that  men  might  s.  that  themselves  are  beasts
22.  bring  him  to  .?.  what  shall  be  after  him

7.  1 1.  by  it  there  is  profit  to  them  that .?.  the  sun

8.  16.  to  j.  the  business  that  is  done  upon  earth
Cant.  2.  14.  O  my  dove,  let  me  s.  thy  countenance

o.ll.  1  went  into  the  garden  of  nuts  to  .v.  the  fruits,
and  to  s.  whether  the  vine  flourished,  7.  12.


7/am*|19;  ftlum  h^‘enL  his  work,  that  we  may  4
i'A  *f  th,?’  I'  w*!,h  ‘heireyes,  hear  with  ears
/f’ '!’!>' ‘haV’  tl,eS  ihal1  narrowly  look  on  thee
on'  ii'  * ley  sl\a  s‘  ?Pd  be  ashamed  for  their  enw

qn  in  tbe  blin,(1  f,ba11  e  out  of  obscurity

30.  20.  but  thine  eyes  shall  s.  thy  teachers
32.  3.  the  eyes  of  them  that*,  shall  not  be  dim
oAVu-  bme  ^fsshall  *.  the  king  in  his  beauty
-0.  thine  eyes  shall  *..  erusalem  a  quiet  habitation
35.  2.  they  shall  *  (l.e  glory  of  the  L.and  excellency
4  ».5.glory  reveakd.and  all  fiesl.  shall*,  it  together
41.  0.  that  they  may  *.  and  know,  and  consider
ao'o'/'  ‘lls^  I?7  7>  klngs  shall  *.  and  arise
5i7i8;,  0P  s,han  E  e>’e  fo.eye,  when  the  Lord
10.  the  earth  shall  *.  salvation  of  our  God
15.  what  had  not  been  told  them  shall  fhey  *.

w  .ell.we  s^a^  there  is  no  beauty

10.  he  shall  j.  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days
^E  he  shall  *.  ot  travailot  his  soul, and  be  satisfied
60.  5.  then  thou  shalt  *.  and  How  together
ro  o  iba ‘f-’i  tEei'n  shall  acknowledge  them

a?-  Gentiles  shall  *.  thy  righteousness
04.  9- behold  *.  we  beseech,  we  are  all  thy  people
66.  18.  and  they  shall  come  and  *.  my  glory
JZr\  E  IE  I  s.  a  rod  ||  13.  I.  *.  a  seething  pot

2.  10.  send  to  lvedar,  *.  if  there  he  such  a  thing
oq‘  i  nuW  an<  S;  l*.at  ‘‘  an  evd  ‘hing  and  bitter

,,2'o  ’  y  Wa.y  ln.‘.he  vallelr  what  thou  hast  done

3.  _  and  *.  where  thou  hast  not  been  lien  with

4.  21.  how  long  shall  1  *.  the  standard,  and  hear

a  ik^now  and  know,  and  seek  in  the  broad  places
b.  16.  stand  ye  in  the  ways  and  *.  and  ask  for  paths
\\  s ,°  }°  my  ace>  and  what  I  did  to  it

ii.  70.  let  me  *.  thy  vengeance  on  them,  20  12
00  uUt  ^  the  womb  to  *.  labour  and  sorrow
22.  1-.  he  shall  die  and  *.  this  land  no  more
30.6.  *.  whether  man  doth  travail  with  child  ;  why

do  I  *  everv  man  with  his  hands  on  his  loins  3
51.  61.  and  shalt*.  and  shalt  read  all  these  tvords
Ram.  1.11.  *.  O  Lord,  consider,  for  1  become  vile
r1  /  SA  -  *, ere  ,e  any  sorrow  like  my  sorrow
10  A  1  ■  ‘bou  greater  abominations,  13.  J5

1A-  oA  ‘['at  vanity  II  16.  *.  visions  of  peace  for  her
‘h-  37.  that  they  may  *.  all  thy  nakedness
Ai '  In’  ai  h^sh  shall  *.  that  1  the  L.  have  kindled  it
2E  ^.whiles  they*,  vanity  unto  thee,  and  divine
E haraoh  shall  *.  them,  and  shall  be  comfort,
on  7,’,  bu,‘,d,‘b^  watchman  *.  the  sword  come
39.  21.  all  the  heathen  shall  *.  my  judgment
o  ”-  E  10.  why  should  he  *.  your  faces  worse  liking

3.  .0.  lo,  !  *.  four  men  loose,  walking  in  the  fire01
Joel  —  28.  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your
a  r  n  .voting  men  shall  s.  visions,  Acts  2.  17.

A mos 6.  2:  pass  ve  to  Calneh  and  *.  goye  to  Hamath
Jonah  4.  d.  might  *.  what  would  become  of  the  city

?•  ‘-he  man  ot  wisdom  shall  *.  thy  name
t  •  ‘hen  she  that  is  mine  enemy  shall  *.  it
16.  the  nations  shall  *.  and  be  confounded
JJcib.  2.  1 .  I  will  watch  to  *.  what  he  will  say  to  me
Zech.  2.  2.  to*,  what  is  the  breadth  thereof

4.  10.  shall*,  the  plummet  in  hand  of  Zerubbabel
O- what  seest  thou  ?  I  answered,  I  *.  allying  roll

5.  lilt  your  eyes  *.  what  is  this  that  goeth  forth
9-  o.  Ashkelon  shall  *  .  it,  and  fear,  Gaza  shall  *  it
EE  7.  yea,  their  children  shall  *.  it,  and  be  glad

T/1;  E  5.  and  your  eyes  shall  *.  and  ye  shall  sav
ir'Pu  hiessed  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  *.'G.

16.  they  may  *.  your  good  works,  and  glorify
7-  5.  and  then  shalt  thou  *.  clearly  to  cast  out  the
o  1  mote  out  of  thy  brother’s'eye,  Luke  6.  42.

8.  4.  *.  thou  tell  no  man,  shew  thyself  to  the  priesl

,  1  ,  .  m  T  1.  '|°-  Mark  1.44.  Acts  23.  22.’

11.  4.  tell  John  those  things  ye  do  hear  and  *.

/ .  what  went  you  out  into  wilderness  to  s.  ?  a  reed

10  q|h aA*en.'vlth  the  wil?d>  8>  Q-.Lnke 7.  24,  25,  26.
'2.38.  Master,  we  would  *.  asignfrom  thee
1.3.  14.  seeing,  ye  shall  *.  Mark  4.  12.  Acts  28.  26-.

15.  heart,  gross,  lest  at  any  time  they  should  *.
with  their  eyes,  hear  with  tiieirears,  Acts  28.  27.

16.  but  blessed  are  your  eyes,  for  they  *.

1_7- many  desired  to  *.  those  things  which  ye  *.

15- 31.  when  they  saw  the  blind  to*.  J.uke  7.  22.

16.  28.  till  they  *.  the  Son  of  man  coming
AT’  JE  when  the  king  came  in  to*,  the  guests

~oA6Tuha  ^  °‘  Yars’  •f-  that  J'e  be  not  troubled
30.  they  shall  *.  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the
co  c,l0l‘(ls  °‘  heaven,  Mark  13.  26.  Luke  21.  27.

26.  58.  Peter  sat  with  servants  to  *.  the  end
27.4.  they  said,  *.  thou  to  that  l|  24.  s.  ye  to  it
J9.  let  us*,  whether  Elias  will  come  to  save  him
.8.  6.  come  *.  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay
10.  that  they  go  into  Galilee,  there  shall  they  *.  me
^  0,1  ,,  ‘hey  went  out  to  *.  what  was  done
.32.  tie  looked  to  *.  her  that  had  done  this  thing
3d-  f°  a[‘d;t-  II ,8-  24.  I  *.  men  as  trees  walking
15.  32.1et  Christ  descend  that  we  may  *.and  believe
Luke  2.  15.  let  us  go  to  Bethlehem  and  *.  this

3.  6.  and  all  flesh  shall  *.  the  salvation  of  God
8. 16.  they  who  enter  in  may  *.  light,  11.  .33.

20.  thy  brethren  stand  without,  desiring  to  *.  thee
9-9-  "’ho  is  this  ?  and  he  desired  to  *.  him,  23.  8.

,  •  lI°‘‘as‘e  °f  death  till  they  *.  kingdom  of  God
JE  1  have  bought  ground,  I  must  go  and  *.  it
no  Jvhen  ye  shall  desire  to  s.  one  of  the  days
iA3'</c-ber^’  or  e  ‘here,  go  not  after  them
19.  3.  Zaccheus  sought  to9.  Jesus,  who  he  was

4.  he  climbed  into  a  sycamore-tree  to  *.  him

A?’  ™  'hey, will  reverence  him  when  they  *.  him
24.  39.  behold,  it  is  I  myself,  handle  me  and  *

John  1 .  .3.3.  on  whom  thou  shalt*.  Spirit  descending
39.  come  and  *.  46.  |  11.  34.  Rev.  6.  1,  3,  5,  7.  "

50.  thou  shalt  *.  greater  things  than  these
4.  29.  .?.  a  man  who  told  me  all  things  ever  I  did
8.  51.  if  man  keep  my  sayings,  shall  never*,  death
56.  your  father  Abraham  rejoiced  to  *.  my  day
9-  15;u  1  washed,  and  do*.  ||25.  I  was  blind,  now!  *.

19.  they  asked  them,  how  then  doth  he  now  *  f
39.  I  came  into  this  world,  that  they  who*  'not
r  that‘hey  who*,  might  be  made  blind
]E  40.  if  believe,  thou  shouldest  *.  the  glory  of  God
9;but  that  they  might  *.  Lazarus  also
21.  the  Greeks,  saying,  Sir,  we  would*.  Jesus

425


SEE


SEE


SEE


'John  16.  22.  ye  have  sorrow,  but  i  wilU  vou  again
20  °5.  except  I  a.  ui  his  hands  the  print  of  nails
.Acts’  15.  36.  and  visit  our  breth.  and  s.  how  they  do
19  21.  after  1  have  been  there,  l  must  also  a.  home
2o!  25.  ye  all  shall  s.  my  face  no  more,  38.

■  22. 14.  shouldst  know  his  will,  and  a.  that  just  One
28.  20.  for  this  cause  1  called  you,  u  /°u
•'Rom.  1. 11.  for  1  long  to  s.  you,  that  I  ..lav  impart
7  °3  1  s.  another  law  in  my  members,  waning

15  21  whom  he  was  not  spoken  ot,  they  shall  s.

24.  for  1  trust  to  a.  you  in  my  journey
1  Cor  8.  10.  if  any  man  a.  thee  that  hast  knowledDe

16  10  "a.  that  he  may  be  with  you  without  tear
-2  Cor.  8.  7.  s.  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace  also
'Gal.  1.  18.  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  a.  Peter

Evh  3  9.  to  make  all  men  s.  what  is  fellowship
/  Vs  V  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools
33  the  wife  a.  that  she  reverence  her  husband
Phil.  1.  27.  whether  1  come  and  s.  you  or  be  absent

2  2.3  so  soon  as  I  a.  how  it  will  go  with  me
1  Thess  2  17-  to  s.  your  face  with  great  desire

3  6  desiring  greatly  to  a.  us,  as  we  also  to  a.  you

5.  15.  .v.  that  none  render  evil  tor  evil  to  any  man

1  Tim  6  16.  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can/.

•2  Tim  1 . 4.  greatly  desiring  to  s.  thee,  being  mindt.
Heb.8. 5.  s.  thou  make  all  according  to  the  pattern

12.  14.  holiness,  without  which  no  man  s,  the  Lord

25.  s.  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh
13  23.  with  whom,  if  he  come  shortly,  1  will  s.  you
1  Pet  1.  22.  a.  that  ye  love  one  another  fervently

3  10  lie  that  will  s.  good  days,  let  him  refrain
1  John  5.  16.  if  any  man  s.  his  brother  sin  asm  not
3  John  14.  but  1  trust  1  shall  shortly  s.  thee
Rev  1  7  he  cometh,  and  every  eye  shall/,  him
12*.  1  turned  to  s.  the  voice  that  spake  with  me
3  18  anoint  with  eye  salve,  that  thou  mayest  a.

■6’  6  and  s.  thou  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the  wine
11  9  shall  s.  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and  halt
<16  15  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they ■  s.  his  shame

18  7  for  she  saith,  1  sit  a  queen,  shall  a.  no  sorrow
Q  when  they  shall  a.  the  smoke  of  her  burning

19  10.  he  said  to  me,  s.  thou  do  it  not,  22.  9.

22  4  and  they  shall  a.  his  face,  name  in  foreheads

SEE  not,  or  not  SEE.

, (Jen  21.  16.  let  me  not  s.  the  death  of  the  child
27. "l.  when  Isaac  was  old,  that  he  could  not  s.

43  3  the  man  did  protest,  ye  shall  not  s.  my  face,  5.

44’  for  we  may  not  s.  the  man  s  face  except
43!  10*.  eyes  of  Israel  were  dim,  he  could  not  s.

:Exi'd.  33. 20.  thou  canst  not  s.  my  face  and  live
Vwm".  11.  15.  let  me  not  s.  my.  wretchedness

14.  23.  surely  they  shall  not  s.  the  land  1  sware
03"  13  utmost  part,  and  shall  not  s.  them  all
Ve'ut  22  1.  thou  shalt  not  s.  thy  brother  s  ox  go  astray
4  thou  shalt  not  s.  thy  brother’s  ass  fall  down

1  Sam.  3.  2.  Eli,  his  eyes  dim,  he  could  not  s.  4.  15.

2  Sam.  3.  13.  not  s.  my  face,  except  thou  first  bring
14  24.  the  king  said,  let  not  Absalom  a.  my  face

1  Kings  14.  4.  Ahi.jah  could  wot  s.  his  eyes  set

2  Kings  3.17-  ye  shall  not  s.  wind,  nor  shall  ye  a.  rain
2°  20  thine  eyes  shall  not  s.  all  evil  1  will  bring

Job  9.  il.  lo,  he  goeth  by  me,  and  1  a.  him  wot
°0  17  he  shall  not  s.  the  rivers  of  honey  and  butter
22’  11.  or  darkness  that  thou  canst  not  s.

•2.3.  9.  hehideth  himself  that  1  cannot  s.  him
.31.  32.  that  which  1  s.  not  teach  thou  me
:35.  14.  though  thou  sayest,  thou  shalt  not  s.  him
37.  21.  men  s.  not  the  bright  light  111  the  clouds
i'sal  49  9.  should  still  live,  and  not  s.  corruption
58.  8.  pass  away,  that  they  may  not  s.  the  sun
69  03.  let  their  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  s.  not
74-.  9.  we  a.  not  our  signs,  there  is  no  more  prophet
89.  48.  what  man  liveth,  and  shall  not  s.  death
94.’  7.  yet  they  say,  the  Lord  shall  not  s.

9.  he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  net  s.f
115.  5.  eyes  have  they,  but  they  s.  not ,  13o.  16.

Isa.  26.11.  when  thy  hand  is  lilted  up,  they  will  n.s.
.30.  10.  children,  which  say  to  the  seers,  s.  not
-.33  19.  thou  shalt  not  s.  a  fierce  people,  a  people
•38.  11.  1  shall  not  s.  the  Lord,  even  the  Lord
44  9  they  5.  not,  that  they  may  be  ashamed

18.  he  hath  shut  their  eyes,  that  they  cannot  s.

Jer.  5. 21.  which  have  eyes,  and  s.not,  Ezek.  12.  12.
12.  4.  they  said,  he  shall  not  s.  our  last  end
14  13  the  prophets  say,  ye  shall  not  s.  the  sword
17. 6.  like  heath,  he  shall  not  s.  when  good  cometh
8.  he  shall  not  s.  when  heat  cometh
23.  24.  can  any  hide,  that  1  shall  not  s.  him  .

Ezek.  12.  6.  that  thou  5.  not  the  ground  12.

13.  yet  shall  he  not  s.  it,  though  he  shall  die  there
Dan.  5.  23.  hast  praised  gods  of  gold,  which  s.  not
Zeph.  3.  15.  thou  shalt  not  s.  evil  any  more
Mat.  13.  13.  because  they  seeing.?,  not  and  hear  not

23.  39.  ye  shall  not  s.  me  henceforth,  Luke 13.  35.

24.  2.  Jesus  said,  s.  ye  not  all  these  things  .

Mark  8.18.  having  eyes  s.  ye  not?  and  ears,  hear  not
Luke  2.  26.  riots,  death, before  he  had  seen  t  hrist

8.  10.  that  seeing,  they  might  wot  s.  and  hearing

17.  22.  shall  desire  to  s.  and  ye  shall  not  a.  it
John  3.  3.  he  cannot  s.  the  kingdom  of  God

36.  shall  not  s.  life,  but  wrath  abideth  on  him

9.  39.  1  am  come,  that  they  who/,  not  might  a.

12.  40.  that  they  should  not  s.  with  their  eyes

16. 16.  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  not  s.  me,  17. 19-

18.  26.  did  1  not  s.  thee  in  the  garden  with  him  t
Acts  22.  11.  when  I  cotfld  not  s.  for  the  glory
Rom.  11.8.  hath  given  eyes,  that  they  should  not  s.

10.  let  their  eyes  be  darkened  that  they  may  not  s.

1  Cor.  16.  7.  for  l  will  not  s.  you  now  by  the  way
■Heb.  2.  8.  but  we  a.  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him
11.5.  was  translated,  that  he  should  not  s.  death

1  Pet.  1.  8.  though  now  ye  s.  him  not,  yet  believing

2  Pet.  1.  9-  he  is  blind,  and  cannot  s.  atar  off

We  SEE.

Gen.  37.  20.  toe  shall  s.  what  will  become  of  dreams
/Psal.  36.  9.  in  thy  light  shall  toes,  light
Jer.  5.  12.  neither  shall  we  s.  sword  or  famine

42.  14.  go  into  Egypt,  where  we  shall  s.  no '  war
Mark  15.  32.  that  we  may  s.  and  believe,  John  6.  30
John  9.41.  now  ye  say,  we  s.  your  sin  remaineth
Atom.  8.  25.  but  if  we  hope  for  that  we  s.  not
1  Cor.  13. 12.  now  we  s.  through  a  glass  darkly

426


1  Thess.  3.  10.  praying  that  we  might  s.  your  face
Heb  0  9  but  we  s.  Jes.  who  was  made  a  little  lower
3  19.  so  we  s.  that  they  could  not  enter  m  be-  a  use

1  John  3.  2.  be  like  him,  for  we  shall a.  him  as  he  is

Ye  SEE,  or  SEE  ye.

Exod.  14.  13.  ye  shall  a.  them  again  no  more
16.  7.  then  ye  shall  s.  the  glory  ot  the  Lord
Josh.  3.  3.  when  ye  s.  the  ark  of  the  covenant
]  Sam.  10.  24.  s.  ye  him  whom  Lord  hath  chosen

2  Citron.  29-  8.  to  hissing,  as  ye  s.  with  your  eyes
30  7.  who  gave  them  up  to  desolation,  as  ye  s.

Xeh.  2.  17.  I  said,  ye  a.  the  distress  that  we  are  in
Job  6  21 .  ye  s.  my  casting  down,  and  areatiaid
Cant.  6.  1.3.  what  will  ye  s.  m  the  Shulamite
Isa.  6.  9.  and  a.  ye  indeed,  but  perceive  not

18.  3.  s.  ye,  when  he  litteth  up  an  ensign
42.  18.  hear,  yedeaf,  look,  ye  blind,  that  ye  may  a.

66  14.  when  ye  s.  your  hearts  shall  rejoice
Jer  0  31  O  generation,  s.ye  the  word  of  the  leird
42!  18.  and  ye  shall  5.  this  place  no  more
Ezek.  13.  23.  therefore  ye  shall  a.  no  more  vanity
14  22  ve  shall  s.  their  way  and  their  doings
23.  they  shall  comfort  you  when  ye  a.  their  ways
Dan  2  8  because  ye  s.  the  thing  is  gone  from  me
Mat.  13.  17-  many  have  desired  to  see  those  things
which  yc  s.  and  have  not,  fufcc  10.

24.  2.  Jesus  said,  s.  ye  not  all  these  things  <

33.  when  „  31.

26'

27  .  24.  I  am  innocent,  s.  ye  to  it,  Mark  10.  30
28.  7.  in  Galilee  there  shall  ye.?,  him,  Mark  16.  7-
Lake  12.  54.  when  ye  s.  a  cloud  rise  out  ot  the  west
55.  and  when  ye  s.  the  south  wind  blow,  ye  say

13.  28.  when  ye  shall  s.  Abraham  and  the  prophets
°1  20.  when  ye  shall  s.  Jerusalem  compassed

30.  ye  s.  and  know  of  yourselves,  summer  is  nigh
24  39  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  ye  s.  me  have
John  1.’  51.  hereafter  ye  shall  ?  heaven  open
4.  48.  except  ye  s.  signs,  ye  will  not  believe
6  62  what  if  ye  shall  s.  the  Son  ot  man  ascend

14.  19.  but  ye  s.  me  ||  16.  10.  and  ye  s.  me  no  more
16.  16.  a  little  while  ye  shall a.  me,  li,  19.

Acts  2  33.  shed  this  which  ye  now  s.  and  hear
3. 16.  made  this  man  strong,  whom  ye  a.  and  know
19.  26.  ye  s.  and  hear,  that  not  alone  at  Ephesus
25.  24.  ye  s.  this  man,  about  whom  Jews  dealt
1  Cor.  1.  26.  for  ye  s.  your  calling,  brethren
Gal.  6.  11.  ye  s.  how  large  a  letter  1  have  written
Phil.  2.  28.  when  ye  s.  him  again,  ye  may  rejoice
Heb.  10.  25.  much  more,  as  ye  s.  day  approaching
Jam.  2.  24.  ye  s.  how  that  by  works  man  is  justified
1  Pet.  i.  8.  though  now  ye/,  him  not,  yet  ye  rejoice

Seed  in  Scripture  is  taken,  [1]  Properly , for  that
thin,  hot,  spirituous  humour  in  mans  body,
which  is  fitted  by  nature  for  the  generation  of  man
kind,  Gen.  38.  9.  Likewise  for  that  matter  which
in  all  plants  and  fruits  is  disposed  for  ^Propa¬
gation  of  the  kind,  Gen.  1, 11.  1  47-  19.  [21  Figu¬
ratively  ,  for  that  which  is  begotten,  and  this  is
spoken  either,  (1)  Collectively,  of  many,  of  chil¬
dren,  or  posterity  in  general,  as  in  lien.  t,  o.

God  says  to  Abraham,  I  will  establish  m\  cove¬
nant  between  me  and  thee,  and  thy  seed  attei
thee  in  their  generations.  1  will  give  unto  thee,
and  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  the  land  wherein  thou
art  a  stranger.  Or,  (2)  Individual  ly ,  of  one  alone,
as  of  Seth”  Gen.  4.  25.  God  hath  appointed  me
another  seed:  He  hath  given  me  another  son.
Also  of  Jesus  Christ,  Gen.  3.  15.  I  will  put  en¬
mity  between  thy  seed  and  the  woman  s  seed.
Gal.  3.  16.  He  saith  not,  And  to  seeds,  as  ot
many,  but  as  ot  one;  and  to  thy  Seed,  ,  w hith  is
Christ.  (3)  For  works  of  mercy,  Eccl.  11.6.
t  he  seed  of  Abraham  signifies,  Li]  The  whole  pos
terity  of  Abraham,  according  to  the  flesh, includ¬
ing  both  the  bad  and  good.  Rom.  9.  '•
because  they  are  the  seed  oi  Abraham,  are  thej
all  children.  [2]  The  faithful  only,  whether  lews
or  Gentiles,  who  are  endued  with  such  ajaith  as
Abraham  had.  Rom.  4.  16.  Io  the  enu  the  pro¬
mise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed,  not  to  that
only  which  is  ot  the  law,  but  to  that  also  which
is  of  the  faith  of  Abraham.  [3]  Christ,  who  came
d/Abraham  according  to  the  flesh .  u al.  o.  10.
To  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ.  Or  thus,  Peisons
are  called  Abraham’s  seed,  either  carnally  only,
as  they  who  valued  themselves  on  account  of  their
descent  from  Abraham  after  the  flesh,  Jo  in  8. 33,
37.  Or  carnally  and  spiritually  too,  as  the  believ¬
ing  Jew's  :  or  spiritually  only,  as  the  Gentiles,  who
had  the  same  faith  with  Abraham,  though  they  did

not  come  out  of  his  loins.

The  word  of  God  is  compared  to  seed,  Luhe '8.5,  11
which  is  sown  in  the  heart,  as  the  husbandman
casts  his  seed  into  the  ground.  Jhereoid  is  called
an  incorruptible  seed,  1  Pet.  1.  23.  because  con¬
tinuing  still  the  same,  and  being  immutable  in  it
self,  it  changes  and  renews  the  hearts  of  those  that
by  faith  receive  it.  Or,  it  may  be  understood  of
its' being  incorruptible  effectively,  because  it  leads
and  tends  to  an  immortal  life  :  it  begets  in  the  soul
an  abiding  life,  which  shall  continue  for  ever.
Hence  it  is  said,  1  John  3.  9.  Whosoever  is  born
of  God ,  doth  not  commit  sin  ;  for  his  seed  remain
eth  in  him  :  the  new  or  divine  nature,  the  principle
or  habit  of  grace  or  holiness  in  the  heart,  remaineth
or  abideth  in  him.

The  apostle  Paul,  writing  to  the  Romans,  guotes
a  passage  out  of  Isaiah,  Except  the  Loid  ot  sa
baoth  had  left  us  a  seed,  we  had  been  as  Soflkwo,
and  been  made  like  unto  Gomorrah  Rom.  9.
29.  What  the  apostle  calls  seed,  ti  by  the  pro
phet  called  a  remnant,  Isa.  1.  9.  It  is  an  a/lu
sion  to  the  custom  among  husbandmen,  who  spend
the  greatest  part  oj  their  corn  in  bread  and°f"e’
food,  reserving  a  small  quantity  of  the  choicest
and  best  for  seed  :  so  would  God  deal  tilth  the
Israelites  ,  though  they  were  innumerable  as  the
sand,  or  gs  the  stars,  yet  a  few  of  them  only  should


be  delivered  out  of  Babylon,  and  he  would  after-


oe  aemtizu  7 -

wards  bring  but  a  few  oj  th€iny  coinparativi

believe  in  Christ.  ,

Gen.  1.  11.  bring  forth  herbs  yielding  a.  K,  -9.

47  19.  give  us  s.  II  23.  io.  here  is  j.  lor  you
24.  and  four  parts  shall  he  your  ovyr.  tor  s.  •
Exod.  16.  31.  the  manna  was  like  coriander  s
Lev.  11.  37.  their  carcase  tail  on  any  sowing  .«

38.  but  if  any  watei  be  put  upon  the  a.

19  19  thou  «halt  notsow  thy  held  with  mingled
26!  16.  am.  ye  shall  sow  your  s.  in  vain
27  16.  thy  estimation  shall  be  according  to  the  s.  an
homer  of  barley  s.  valued  at  50  shekels
30.  all  the  tithe  of  the  a.  of  the  land  is  the  J  .ord’.s
Xum.  20.  5.  it  is  no  place  ot  .v.  or  ot  figs  or  vines
Dent.  11.  10.  not  as  Egypt,  where  thou  sovvedsti.

14  00  shalt  surely  tithe  all  the  increase  ot  thy  s.
22!  9:iest  the  fruit  of  thy  s.  sown  be  defiled
28.  38.  thou  shalt  carry  much  a.  into  the  held
1  Sam.  8.  15.  the  king  will  take  the  tenth  ot  s.

1  Kings  18.  32.  a  trench  contain  two  measures  of  s.
Job  39.  12.  will  the  unic  rn  bring  home  thy  a.
Psal.  126.6.  he  that  goeth  forth  bearing  precious  s.
Eccl.  11.6.  in  the  morning  sow  thy  a.  and  evening
Isa.  5. 10.  the  s.  of  an  homer  shall  yield  an  ephah
17.  11.  in  the  morning  make  thy  s,  to  nourish
23.  3.  and  by  great  waters  the  s.  of  bibor
55. 10.  that  it  may  give  a.  to  the  sower  and  bread
Jer.  35.  7-  nor  shall  sovv  s.  nor  plant  vineyard
9.  neither  have  we  vineyard,  held,  nor  a.

Ezek  17.5.  he  took  also  ot  the  a.  ot  the  land
Joel  1.  17.  the  s.  is  rotten  under  their  clods
Amos  9.  13.  the  treader  overtake  him  that  soweth  s.
Hag  2  19.  is  the  s.  yet  in  the  barn  '  yea,  as  yet
Zec/i  8. 12.  for  the  a.  shall  be  prosperous,  the  v  me
Mal’.A.  3.  behold,  I  will  corrupt  your  a.  and  spread
Mat  13.  19.  which  receiv  e  a.  by  the  way-side
20  a.  into  stony  places  )|  22.  a.  among  the  thorns

23.  but  he  that  received  a.  into  good  ground

24.  a  man  which  sowed  good  m  his  nelu
27.  sir,  didst  not  thou  sow  good  s.  in  thy  held

37.  he  that  soweth  the  good  a.  is  the  .  on  ot  man

38.  the  good  s.  are  the  children  ot  the  kingdom
Mark  4.26.  if  a  man  should  cast  a.  into  t.ie  ground

27  and  the  a.  should  spring  and  grow  up
Luke  8. 5.  a  sower  went  out  to  sow  his  s.  some  ell

11.  the  parable  is  this  ;  the  a.  is  word  ot»God

1  Cor.  15.  38.  and  to  every  a.  Ins  own  body

2  Cor.  9.  10.  he  that  ministereth  a.  to  the  sow  er

I  Pet.  1.  23.  being  born  again,  not  ot  corruptible  s.
1  John  3.  9.  for  his  a.  remaineth  in  him,  cannot  sin
See  Cop  ui. at  ion.

SEED  for  Posterity.


Gen.  4.25.  God  hath  appointed  me  another  s.
7  3  to  keep  s.  alive  upon  the  face  ot  the  eai


th


/  .  o.  tvt  O .  till '  V-  v»  -  .

15.  3.  Abram  said,  to  me  thou  bast  given  no  a.

1 9.  32.  that  we  may  preserv  e  a.  ot  our  father ,  34.

38  8.  marry  her,  and  raise  up  s.  to  thy  brothel,
Mat.  22.  24.  Mark  12. 19-  Luke  20.  28
9.  Onan  knew  that  the  s.  should  not  be  his
Lev.  12. 2.  if  a  woman  have  conceived  s.  ana  born

21.  21.  that  hath  a  blemish  ot  the  a.  ot  Aaron

22.  4.  what  man  of  the  a.  of  Aaron  is  a  leper
Num.b.  28.  then  the  woman  shall  conceive  a.

16.  40.  which  is  not  ot  a.  ot  Aaron  come  near
Deut.  1 . 8.  to  give  it  to  their  a.  attei  mem,  11.  9.

4.  37.  he  chose  their  a.  after  them,  10.  15.  _

31.21.  forgotten  out  ot  the  mouths  ot  tiieir  s,
Ruth  4.  12.  a.  the  Lord  shall  give  ot  this  woman
1  Sam.  2.  20.  the  Lord  give  thee/,  ot  this  woman
°4  21.  that  thou  w  ilt  not  cut  off  my  a.  after  me

1  Kings  11.  14.'he  was  of  the  king  s/.  in  Edom
39  1  will  for  this  afflict  the  s.  ot  David

2  Kings  11.  1.  Athaliah,  mother  ot  Ahaamh  arose

and  destroyed  all  the  s.  royal,  2  C hr.  10.
17.20.  the  Lord  rejected  all  the  a.  ot  Israel
25.25.  lshmael  of  the  a.  royal  came,  Jer.  41.  1.

1  Chron.  16.  13.  O  ye  a.  of  Israel  his  servant
Ezra  2. 59.  they  could  not  shew  their  a.  A  eh..  7-01.

9  2.  the  holy  a.  have  mingled  themselves
Xeh.  9.  2.  the  a.  of  Israel  separated  themselves
Esth.  6.  13.  if  Mordecai  be  ot  the  s.  of  the  Jews
9.  27.  the  Jews  took  upon  them  and  their  a.  Ji-
28.  nor  memorial  of  them  perish  trom  their  ...
Job  21.8.  their  a.  is  established  in  their  sight
Psal.  21.  10.  their  a.  shalt  thou  destroy  horn  earth
22.  23.  praise  him  all  ve  the  a.  ot  J acob,  glontj
him  ;  and  tear  him,  all  ye  the  s.  ot  Israe

30.  a  a.  shall  serve  him,  it  shall  b.e  counted  b o  Ui
37.28.  but  the  a.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  otl
69.  36.  the  a.  also  of  his  servants  shall  mheiit  il
102.  28.  their  a.  shall  be  established  before  thee
106.27.  to  overthrow  their  a.  among  tbe  naUoiiS
Prov.  11.21.  the  a.  of  righteous  shall  be  delivered
Isa.  1.  4.  ah,  sinful  nation,  a  a.  ot  evd-doers

6.  13.  the  holy  a.  shall  be  the  substance  ,

14.  20.  the  a.  of  evil-doers  shall  never  be  renown/
45  19. 1  said  not  unto  a.  ot  J  acob,  seek  ye  me  it

&  in  the  Lord  shall  all  a.  of  Israel  be  justified
57.  3.  the  a.  ot  the  adulterer  and  the  "bore
4.  ye  not  children  of  transgression,  a  a.  ot  ta  sem
61.  9.  their  a.  shall  be  known  among  the  Gentiles
that  they  are  the  a.  which  the  Lord  hath  blesst
65.  9.  1  will  bring  forth  a  a  out  of  -]*e°DT  ,

23.  they  are  the  a.  of  the  blessed  of  the  Lord
Jer.  2.  21.  1  had  planted  thee  w  holly  a  rib'1!  *■

7.  15.  1  will  cast  out  the  whole  a.  of  Ephraim
23.  8.  which  led  the  a.  of  the  house  of  lsrdeh  .

31.  27.  I  vvill  sow  with  s .  of  man  and  s.  .

36.  then  a.  of  Israel  also  shall  cease  as  a i  natioi

37.  1  vvill  cast  otl  all  the  s.  of  Israel,  33- *  .  ^

33.22.  so  will  I  multiply  the  a.  ot  David  mj  se

Ezek.  17. 13.  and  hath  taken  of  the  king  s  a.

20.  5.  1  lifted  up  my  hand  to  the  a.  «fn  k

43.  19.  give  to  priests  that  be  ot  the  a.  0 :  /■*_  ,

44.  22.  they  shall  take  maidens  of  the  a.  of  Is*«

Dan.  1.  3.  bring  of  the  children  °f  ^ei

2.  43.  shall  mingle  themselves  with  th®-*-  ^

9  1.  Darius  of  the  a.  ot  the  Medes  was  made  Kin
Mai.  2.  15.  that  he  might  seek  a  godly  a.

Mark  12.20.  the  first  dying  left  no  a.  y

John  7.42.  that  Christ  cometh  ot  the  a  ot  1  a


SEE


SEE


Acts  13.  23.  of  this  man's  y.  hath  God  raiser)  Jesus
hom  13.  was  made ot  the  ...  of  David,  2  Tim.  2.  8
4.  10.  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  all  his  y.
y.  8.  the  children  ot  the  promise  counter)  for  the ...

29.  except  the  Lord  ot  sahaoth  hat)  left  us  a  y.

Wi 4  •[.  was  a*Wed,  till  tlie  ...  should  come

li'i- *  ral b  received  strength  to  conceives.
hev.  1*.  17.  to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  s
See  Abu  a  n  a. Mi
_  Hi*  SEED.

Gw.  !7  19  my  covenant  with  Isaac  and  his  s.

To'  &  .  anrl  all  his  ...  with  him,  7.

v*'  shal1  become  a  multitude  of  nations

i-rcrf.  28.  43.  a  statute  of  hi*  s.  after  him,  3o.  21.
Lev.  A\  2.  that  gneth  any  of  his  s.  to  Molech,  3,  4.


21.  15.  nor  shall  ye  profane  his  ...  among  people
nt  Caleb  anil  his  s.  shall  possess  it


*4,  ^4;  servant  yaieo  anil  /its  s.  stiall  possess
(•  anil  his s .  shal  I  be  in  many  waters
25.  13.  he  shall  have  it,  and  his  s.  after  him
»  24.  3.  1  multiplied  /u*  s.  and  gave  Isaac

4.'  8-,hath  avenged  thee  of  Saul  and  his  s.
2*..  51.  he  shewed  mercy  to  his  anointed,  to  David
.  ir-  „  o„an  .  u  s’  foI'evermore,  Psal.  18.50.
1  htngs  *..  33.  on  hear!  of  Joab,  and  his  s.  for  ever
v  a  Pf0,?  yavid  and  his  s.  shall  he  peace  for  ever
r,/  otl)0  J  m  a  < !  est  a  covenant  to  give  it  to  his  s.

u‘i  an,  .  speaking  peace  to  all  his  s.

rsal.  J).  13.  Am  s.  shall  inherit  the  earth

l*  have  l  seen  /its  s,  begging  bread
on  Is-  merc1>ful,  anti  /its  s.  is  blessed

i  S  Sm  at  s?.  ^  l  make  to  endure,  36.
r  co*  ,^'V*  s,  be  m*©hty  upon  earth
Isa,  53.  10.  he  shall  see  /us  s .  shall  prolong  his  davs

‘8>  vvl)y  arp  8!ey  cast  out,  he  and  his  s.  ?*

30.  tor  no  man  of  /its  s.  shall  prosper

fv*  ?D(^n  Punish  ^hemaiah  and  his  s.

33.  26.  I  will  not  take  any  of  hiss,  to  be  rulers
"*•  £  " 1,1  Punish  lehoiachim  and  his  s.

4. .  10.  Esau,  his  s.  isspoilerl,  anil  he  is  not

wW°U  11  t0  him  and  his  s-  ftfter  him

o.  that  his  s.  should  sojourn  in  a  strange  land

n  „  ,,  'Mv  SEED.

\on V3;^#  W‘  Pn4  fnmity  bet.  thy  ...  and  her  seed
*"  y  4-will  I  Sive  this  land,  13,  15.  |  15.  18

1  f7- ,8-l  24;  7.  I  26.  3.  |  28.  4,  1.3.  |  35.  12.  |
.A48!'  4-;Pxodi  33-  1-  Veut.  34.  4.
it  c  L  1  •  i  e  *hy  s •  as  dust,  16.  10.  I  28.  14

ffo 5;,be.  said  to  hin\’  so  shall  thy  s.  be,  Horn.  4.  18
, that  thy  s.  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land
1‘.  '*  my  covenant  between  me  and  thy  ...  after
n  ,  e,  ’  a  to  thee  and  thy  s.  10

:  *  .  0li  anc^  t  l^  c*  aI*er  ^hee  in  their  generations
21", |  s|ra[lser  n?f  ”f  t,fy  s-  shall  be  circumcised
2-  'P  ^aac  shall  thy  s.  be  called,  hleb.  11.  18
^l3- make  Ishmael  a  nation,  because  he  is  thy  ...

,o  assess  the  gate  of  enemies,  24.  60.

18.  m  thy  ...  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be

blessed,  26.  4.  I  28.  14  3m  3  os
i4-  nnd  tty  *'  for  Abraham’s  sake'  '

To’  }r*  thou  saidst,  I  will  make  thy  ...  as  the  sand
48.  11.  and  lo,  God  hath  shewed  me  also  thy  ,.
pi1'’.!8,  2’  -  not  any  ot  thy  s.  pass  through  the  fire

V,/m17i«  io<)o°ei  er  °f  thM  hatb  any  blemish
iZZ'  18-1^tbeheave  offerings  I  gave  thee  and  thys.

^•cmrses  lor  a  sign  on  thy  s.  for  ever
iff  fit?  t  J  make. Pogues  ot  thy  s.  wonderful
w![l  circumcise  the  heart  of  thy  s.

19.  choose  life,  that  thou  and  thy  s.  may  live

\  tz  ?°’1o42’Ithe-,V0,Yt1  be  hf1'  my  seedYnd  thy  s.
o  A-  U  li-  wlU  set,uP  thy  s-  1  Chron.  17.  11
7,,/  '  KPT?  Sha  1  cleave  to  thee  and  thy  s.

pL5/'hq shalt. know  ,bat  thys.  shall  be  great
/.las  9s  4i  Wl11  1  establish  forever,  and  build
44  33i  Wi  1W1  bnng^^  h  om  the  east  anrl  gather
48  To  7/  P°T  mrv  sIP»nt  uPr»n  thy ...  and  blessing
\9 'Jjfii'  also,ha1(.i  been  as  the  sand  and  offsp
54.  3  and  thy  s.  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles  P
59’;p[^  Spirit  that  is  upon  thee,  shall  not  de
Jet  in  m  f  the  mouth  ot  thy  ...  nor  thy  seed’s ...
'e')  30-t°-  m*-  from  the  land  of  captivity,  46.  27
-*al.  3.  16.  and  to  thy  s.  which  is  Christ
„  Your  SEED.

n°d  *\  13Ka11  th,s  la,nd  wil1  1  S'ce  to  your  s.
hl  fifi"  3-  whosoever  ot  your  s,  goeth  to  holy  things
-a.  6b.  22.  so  shall  Itours.  and  your  name  remain
SEED -time.

-en.  8.  22.  s.-time  anrUiarvest  shall  not  cease

3.  16.  he  saith  not,  and  to  r.  as  of  manv
,.  SEEDS.

ST  thy  v,ineyairl  with  divers  v.

.fjf*  he  sowed  some  fell  by  wav-side

32.  which  is  the  least  of  all  Mark  4  3
.  .  „  SEEING.

Md-  4-  n-  or  who  maketh  the  i.  or  the  blind  J
,  .  SEEING,  Verb,

fum  an7’-beast  he  driven  away,  no  man  5

A'T»^5i'  2j«  ’  hlni  not’  cast  if  on  him  that  he  die
i\ings  1.  48.  given  one  to  sit,  mine  eves  even  c  it
>*.  20.  12  the  Lord  maketh  the  J.  eye
f“o}-  8-  the  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  ..  nor  ear
fl'  V  1  w*s  dismayed  at  the  ...  of  it
io  on  1  lat  sb,,tteth  his  eyes  from  ...  evil

ooS'onJ any  tbln«s*  hut  thou  observest  not
fi/'iV'if''  vanity ,  and  divining  lies  to  them
\a  cE  ii  ,n  ^arHbleb»  because  they  s.  see  not
14.  shall  not  understand, ...  ye  shal  [see  and  shall
,L„  Q  -  .  not  perceive,  Mark  4.  12.  Acts  28.  26.
o  li  ’i6  Wfent  and  washed  and  came  s.

*  'U',,e  v-  f  Hs,  spake  of  the  resurrection
'  o\S‘r  Peter  and  ’ohn  about  to  go  to  the  temple

•  -4.  j.  one  of  them  suffer  wrong,  defended  him

•  b.  the  people  ...  the  miracles  that  he  did
s  iiSPkeCkt-  ?’  hearing  a  voice,  but  j.  no  man
Th  bLbl!nd’  n?f  ‘he  sun  for  a  season
K.o  y  •■l,e  end>ed  as  s-  him  who  is  invisible

e‘  ln  r.and  heanng,  vexed  his  right,  soul
o h  r, I  N  G,  Adxerb .


o>  1C  /»  1  ‘  ca  ,  Z  J  U  l  C I  U  t

°  l^mhWbait  Wilt  t!,ou  give  tne.j.  I  go  childless
4  Sfi’  '  m  Ur  UtS!  'K)t,  W|(hheld  thine  only  son


i  Vu  t  'vi,„„clu  unne  only  ;

f.’  %!'  Sm  ,tbe  J-or^  bath  prospered  my  way
fit.  wherefore  come  ye  to  me,  s\  ye  hate  me  ?


C\um  f  uU,\He  is  bound  “P  in  the  lad’s  lift

rJfif'if  k  1  ,e  congregation  are  holy
'»  i3, j  8,  why  askest  thou  my  name,  s  it  is  secret

17.  3.  do  me.  good, ...  I  have  a  I.evitetomy  pHes
S}-}6-  i,\  wf0l7’en  are  destroyed  out  of  Benjamin
ffi  ‘  i  tb 7-  ;°rd  ha.th  testified  against  me
i  i8;,1'  V  •  have  rejected  him  from  reigning
Am  j?  i?L  1s  departed  from  thee  and  become

Job  in  OR12;,  me  ™  fV?.no  wrong  in  mine  hands
of  oi'  28'|  4  T  the  matter  is  found  in  me

21.  22.  ...  he  judgeth  those  that  are  high

times  are  not  hidden  from  the  Almighty
I  sal.  50.  h.  s.  thou  hatest  instruction,  and  easiest
Prov.  3.  29.  r.  he  dwelleth  securely  by  thee
ha  49.  21.  s  i  have  lost  my  children  and  am  deso.
Jer.  4  (.  (.  ...the  Lord  hath  given  it  a  charge
Dan.  2.  47.  s.  thou  couldst  reveal  this  secret

23*4o\3mhOW  Si,'al1  tk*is  be’  '•  1  kllOW  not  a  man

T  ;  4 !;  \\  thou^ai  f  in  the  same  condemnation

17.  ^4.  s.  he  is  the  Lord  ot  heaven  and  earth
.5.  s.  ne I  givetb  to  all  life  and  breath  and  all  things
or"''  'Vn  s-  Vs  011e  God  who  shall  justify  "
rC/°*  o  12V4- tben  ‘hat  we  have  such  hope
«  a  .9’/’  tbat  ye  have  Put  off  the  old  man
, S‘!o  remaineth  some  must  enter  therein
s  i/u  j1.  l  we  bave  a  great  high  priest

5.  11.  hard  to  be  uttered,  *.  ye  are  dull  of  hearing

6.  0. ...  they  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh

7.  ~o.  s.  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them
are  compassed  about  with  witnesses

o  pJ,Ai  2.2;  'f’ye  have  purified  your.souls  in  obeying
2  \.et-  3‘  l4-  ^  ye  >00k  torsuch  things,  be  diligent
1  s-  >e  know  these  things  before,  beware  lest
SEEK.

jH7;h16/k°Seph  Said  1  my  brcthien,  tell  me
v,/  18-tha>e  may  ...  occasion  against  us  and  fall
of  }0-and  s.  ye  the  priesthood  also  -
, ,  •  Balaam  went  not  to  ...  for  enchantments
Dent  4.  29.  if  thou  j.  him  with  all  thy  heart
12.  5.  even  to  his  habitation  shall  ye  j.  and  come
•  "r,'  sbe|p  >  w’fh.thee  till  thy  brother  !■.  after  it
1  9.  3.  Kish  said  to  Saul  his  son,  go s  the  asses

0.  14.  whither  went  ye  ?  he  said,  to  T the  asses
16.  16.  to  s  out  a  cunning  player  on  an  harp
23.  15.  Saul  come  to  ...  his  hte,  25.  I  24  °  I  ofi  o
20.  26  they  that  evil  to  my  Lord,  b'e'is  Nahj
29- yet  a  man  is  risen  to  pursue  and  j.  thy  soul  '

7,-'  20-/orlkff^iOtJ  Israel  *s  come  out  to  s.  a  flea
~i.  1.  Saul  shall  despair  to  s  me  any  more
0-8-  7-  4.  me  a  woman  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit
7  A?/”‘  5o  (A 4 ku  .Phj!,sflnes  came  up  to  ...  David
i n  l?r(S  *i,w  S,nine11  went  to  ...  his  servants
n  n’  ,vyblther  my  lord  hath  not  sent  to  j.  thee
19.  10.  they  j.  my  life  to  take  it  away,  H

V/Y>''  2:  j6-  !f‘  them  go,  and  ...  thy  master

6.  19.  and  I  will  bring  you  to  the  man  whom  ve^

1  n^v*,’28’  8’.  :f-  4t!e  conimandmentsot  the  Lord
o  n'j  14  4  ,<Ta  o  hum’  he  Wl11  be  found,  2  Chron.  i/  s

P3;3-  hast  Prepared  thine  heart  to  ...  God
30.  19.  that  prepareth  his  heart  to  s.  God  Id  find
3P  “I- to  .4.  his  God,  he  did  it  with  all  his  heaD
34 •  3;  losiah  began  to  s.  after  the  God  of  David
^•3,|°A9‘r"  blV  ‘  j  4or  we  '•  your  God  as  ye  do
i.  10.  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  f.  the  law
V1'  f0  hln'rikdn  way  for  us,  and  our  little  ones
\2?*  odV\e  04  God  ls  on  them  tor  good  that  j.  him
y  e/‘-  2-  f,0-  come  a  man  to  ...  the  welfare  of  Israel
J<>b5  8  I  would  s.  unto  God,  and  unto  God  comm  t

7.  21.  shalt  r.  me  in  morning,  but  I  shall  not  be
oA5’,a  4ih0UuV,0,u  dst  ,y-  unto  God  betimes
20  iO  his  children .shall  ..  to  please  the  poor

o  in/'i2’  > U/e  love  canity,  and  after  leasing

9.  10.  thou  hast  not  forsaken  them  that  j.  thee  =

10.  15.  r.  out  his  wickedness  till  thou  find  none
*4-  2'  to  ?ee  if  there  were  any  that  did  ...  God ,  53  2
24.  6.  this  is  the  generation  of  them  that*,  him  '

27-  4-  °ne  thing  have  I  desked,  that  will  1  j-  aftPr

8.  4.  ye  my  face,  thy  face,  Lord,  will  [  s
34.  14.  s.  peace,  and  pursue  it,  1  Pet.  .3  li

to  m  eitheA  b*e  put  t°  shame  that  j.  my  soul
38 •  they  that  ..  my  life,  they  that  j.  my  hurt
40.  14.  be  confounded  that  s.  after  my  soul  7o  o
54.  3.  and  oppressors  s.  after  my  soul
63.  1  thou  art  my  God,  early  will  1  ...  thee

9.  those  that s.  my  soul  go  into  the  lower  parts
69.  6.  let  not  those  that  ..  thee  he  confounded

32-  alJd  your  heart  shall  live  that  j.  God
If  f-  Iff  aH  those  that  f.  thee  rejoice  and  he  glad
/l.  13.  be  covered  with  dishonour  that  s.  mv  hurt

834ifiht^a/mbrOUght  ,,n4k0shame  that  4.  my  hint
lb-  that  they  may  s.  thy  name,  O  Lord

mo  in'  i  'T  ^uns  'ions  their  meat  from  God
109.  10.  et  his  children  f.  their  bread

/  blessed,  that  j.  him  with  their  whole  heart
f-fi  rWk.  ,  'Vfi  k  at  l.lberty,  for  I  j.  thy  precepts
ba\e  gone  astray  as  a  sheep,  ...  thy  servanf
122.  9  tor  the  house  of  God,  1  will  7.  thy  good
Prov.  1.  28.  they  shall  ...  me,  hut  shall  not  find  me
8.  17.  and  those  thatf.  me  early  shall  find  me

o\'  iLVanult'ylt°.1Sed  to  and  fro  of  them  that ...  death
23,  3P-  who  hath  woe  3  who  hath  sorrow  3  they  that
tarry  long  at  wine,  they  that  go  to  s-.  mixt  wine

oo  '  /a"  aW\ke’  !  wil1'-  d  yet  again

29.  10.  blood-thirsty  hate  upright,  just  ...  his  soul
*6.  many  .  the  ruler  s  favour,  judgment  from  l.d
7  £  i  .  .  n /f  6  my  heart  to  ...  out  by  wisdom
7-  25.  1  applied  mine  heart  tc  s.  out  wisdom
8.  17.  tho  a  man  labour  to  ...  it,  not  able  to  find  it
(.ant.  3.  2.  I  will  s.  him  whom  my  soul  loveth
0.  L  thy  beloved,  that  we  may  ...  him  with  thee
L  17- learn  to  do  well,  j.  judgment,  relie.  e
8.  19..  w  hen  shal  I  say  ,  ..unto  them  that  have  familiar
S.PAr  kS  ’  sh')uld  not  a  people  unto  their  God  3

o  °’mbe  r0k4M4  ',esse.’  40  ,14  shal1  the  Gentiles  ...'

19.  3.  thev  shall  .y.  to  the  charmers  and  wizards
26.9.  with  my  spirit  within  me  will  Is.  thee  early
34.  16.  .f.  ye  out  of  the  book  of  the  r.ord,  an, I  read
4?4  f*"  thou  shalt  i-.  them,  and  not  find  them
,‘7-  when  the  needy  j.  water,  and  there  is  none
45.  19*  I  said  not  to  Jacob,  s.  ye  me  in  vain

r'  l'yoe}  4.i1e-v  ■i* ,me  dai|y,  and  delight to'know
./er  2.  ^4.  thats.  her,  in  her  month  shall  find  her


SEE


Jfr-f  33-  Y hy  trimmest  thou  thy  way  to  y.  love  5
4.  30.  thy  lovers  despise  thee,  they  will  ,.  thy  life

!,V  i4', 4  ly  a ’T11  °i  ^ na,t both,  that  s.  thy  life
19.  f.  to  tall  by  them  that  s .  their  lives,  21  7

oo'  Z3'  4ilai4  *'■  jbeir  lives  shall  straiten  them’

22.  25.  into  hand  ot  them  that  y.  thy  life,  .38.  16
29.  ,.  y.  the  peace  ot  the  city,  whither  carried
3-ye.shal  '  •  me-ami  bnd  me,  when  ye  search  me
34.  20.  into  hand  ot  them  that  y.  their  life  21
44-  3P-  ■  will  give  Pharaoh  to  them  that  y. ’his  life
1a  o^’  .Egyptians  to  those  that  ...  their  lives
49.  37.  Elam  dismayed  before  them  thaty.  their  life
Lam  1.  11.  all  her  people  sigh,  they  s.  bread

25-,  they  shall  s.  peace  there  shall  be  none
'6- then  shall  they  y.  a  vision  ot  the  prophet
34.6.  flock  was  scattered,  none  did  y.  after  them

11.  I  will  search  my  sheep,  and  s.  them  out

12.  as  a  shepherd  so  will  1  y.  out  my  sheep
16.  1  willy,  that  which  was  lost  and  bring  again

I  S/  4a‘e  un4°  God’ t0  4.  by  player
I  s-  2-  7-  be  shall  y  them,  but  not  find  them
Amos  5  4.  saiih  the  Lord,  y.  me,  and  ye  shall  live
8.  y.  him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion
14  y.  good  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live
vJVV’  t  le  word  °t  the  Lord,  and  not  find  it
1 1’ m  ' ’  ubfnue  ,sfla11  1  4.  comforters  for  thee  -
11.  thou  shalt  be  hid,  thou  shalt  y.  strength

/7,h  n  3jfi  ye  fhe  Lord,  ye  meek  of  the  earth
io  a  “a16;  ^  shepherd  shall  not  y.  the  young  one
/2’/9o,V1;?td>  1  oS1  '■  J0  destroy  all  the  nation'

A  ‘l  f be;y  should  y.  the  law  at  his  mouth
M  ;  oh74oh?,mig  lt  >a  S°<lly  seed,  take  heed
k  no  /’  li"0/  W1 11 1-  young  child  to  destroy  him

6.  32.  after  all  these  things  do  the  Gentiles  *.

S3,  s.  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  Luke  12  31
7- 7-  f.  and  ye  shal  find,  knock,  Luke  11.9.
rip'  /  ,L  k»°w  that  ye  y.  Jesus,  Mark  16.  6.

^  to  Vi  37 ’  4  Ay  sald  to  him,  all  men  y.  for  thee
3.  3^.  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  s.  for  thee

1 n  fine  _ _  „ .  r  .  -  .


a8’  this  generation  y.  after  a  sign,  Luke  11. 29
h'Ae^lQ.  3(/.  tliese  things  do  the  nations  s.  after


!?’  24>a°y,’  *  say  unto  you.  will  y.  to  enter  in
o.  8  doth  she  not  y.  diligently  till  she  find  it  3
hV  in  'Cbosoever  shall  y.  to  save  his  life,  shall  loseit
oY  i°’  V1  e  Son  ot,man  IS  come  to  y.  and  to  save
r,  w„hy  i-  >’e  the  living  among  the  dead  3
•'"™k  38.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  what  y  ye  3
o?’  4’™.>  *jot  because  ye  saw  the  miracles

/.  25.  is  not  this  he  whom  they  y.  to  kill  3
.34.  ye  shall  v.  me,  and  shall’ not  find  me,  36.

8.  ^1.  ye  Shall  y.  me,  and  shall  die  in  your  sins
A  '•  are  Abraham  s  seed  but  ye  y.  to  kill  me,  40.

13.  33.  ye  shall  a,  me,  and  whither  I  go  cannot  come
.8.  4.  Jesus  said  unto  them,  whom  y.  ye  '  7
8.  if  ye  y.  me,  let  these  go  their  wav
rets  10.  19.  Spirit  said,  behold,  three’  men  y.  thee
ii  A-er?r  said’  behold,  I  am  he  whom  ye  s.
p  •  Bamahas  departed  to  Tarsus,  to  s.  Saul
,*>•  2- 7-  to  them  who  y.  for  glory  and  honour
11.  3.  1  am  left  alone,  and  they  y.  my  life
!a  o'|l’i22.  and  (be  Greeks  y.  after  wisdom
it  io'  leIkn?  nian  4-  bis  own,  but  another's  wealth
ot'  -ii'  tbat.>'e  may  excel  to  edifying  of  church
C„fr\  13-  3k  slV<,e  ye  4-  a  Proof  of  Christ  speaking
o  persuade,  or  y.  to  please  men  3

o'/  V' *4  whl,e  we  4.  to  be  justified  by  Christ
PhiL  2  21  tor  all  y  their  own  things'  not  ChristV
a/  a  i }  J  k  en’  4-  those  things  which  are  above
6-,he,ls  a  re  warder  of  them  that  him
H  they  declare  plainly  that  they  v.  a  country
o3-  14- /ere  we  have  no  city,  but  we  y.  one  to  come
Rev.  9.  6.  in  those  days  shal  I  meny.  death,  not  find  it
Ree  I- ace,  Lord.

r  io  ozr  ,ot  °r  SEEK  not.

Rev.  13.  36.  the  priest  shall  not  s.  for  yellow  hair

\um  1 1  ?eTO»’ta44er  wizards  to  be  defiled  by  them
.\um.  lo.  39.  that  ye  y.  not  after  your  own  heart
3;  6.  thou  shalt  not  s.  their  peace,  Ezra  g.  ]2.
uth  3.  1  daughter,  shall  I  not  s.  rest  for  thee  3
/io7'  i4«  4*i 4  le  wicked  will  not  s.  after  God

az/to5//1  nWJck(id’  they  4*  not  thy  statutes
Jer.  30.  14.  all  thy  lovers,  they  y.  thee  not

j  •  5-(:se|>st  th°u  great  things?  y.  them  not
?Z°/?fi  ^i/114  slnct  Rcth-el,  norenter  into  Gilgal
i,  £'  to' on'  a  sh<JPhcrd  shall  not  y.  the  young  one
i  ,kel\ a29C  4’  not  Ivhat  -ve  shal>  cat  or  /  ink
John  5.  30.  because  I  not  mine  own  will,  but  will
pH'aS™'  4be  honour  that  cometh  from  God
i  1  4-  not  mine iown  glory,  there  is  one  seeketh
o  n  ■  27-  s-not  to  be  loosed,  y.  not  a  wife

-  R°r-  12.  14.  for  I  y.  not  yours,  but  you

^  SEEK  EST.

3T'  of  1he  rli1,an,  aske()  him,  what  y.  thou  3
».  4.  22.  I  will  shew  thee  the  man  whom  y.

“on  io'  a7'  3‘  th*e  n.lan  tl,ou  4-  is  as  if  all  returned

20.  19.  thou i  y.  to  destroy  a  mother  in  Israel
1/t  mgs  11.2*,.  that  thou  y.  to  go  to  thy  country

'  1kOU  4-  her  as  silver,  and  searehest  her
Jer.  45.  5.  y.  thou  great  things?  seek  them  not

'oa  ,1’  ,27'  yet  nP  man  said-  what  .v.  thou  3
*0.  15.  Jesus  saith  unto  her.  woman  whonn.  thou  3
,  0  SEEKETH.

aa  f'  19u  2*. Saul  ray  father  ,v.  to  kill  thee
no  *  at  is  my  sin.  that  he  y.  my  life  3
o.r  j3'  cear.no4’  that  4.  my  life,  y.  thy  life
of  A  ’  u  u  4-  to  destroy  the  city  for  my  sake
0'4'  9-  why  hearestthou,  saying,  David  ,i  thy  hurt3
~^am.  16.  II. who  came  forth  of  tny  bowe  s,v.  mv  life
i  20  7.  and  see  how  this  man  ...  mischief

'hi  Zfoo'  V  see  bow  hey.  a  quarrel  against  me
‘o  /»k froni  thence  she  y.  the  prey,  her  eyes
Psal.  37.  32.  watcheth  righteous,  and  i  to  slay  hirr
/  rov.l  I .  *7-  he  that  diligently  y.  good  procureth  fa
'°ur.  but  he  that  y  mischief,  it  shall  come  uiit.

14.  0  a  scorner  y.  wisdom  and  findeth  it  not

-  <i4i  hAth*at  ha4b  understanding,  y.  knowledge
1 1 . 9.  he  that  covereth  a  transgression, ...  love

fk‘!InaP  4- only  rebellion,  a  messenger
19  he  that  exalteth  his  gate.y.  destruction  k
18.  1.  having  separated  lumself,  y.  all  w.sdom
lo.  and  the  ear  of  the  wise  y.  knowledge

31.  13.  the  virtuous  woman  y.  wool  and  flax

4’27


SEE


SEE


SEE


Feel.  7.  28.  which  yet  my  soul  *.  but  I  find  not
/,,,  4o.  20.  he  *.  unto  him  h  cunning  workman
Jer.  5.  1.  any  that  *.  the  truth,  1  will  pardon  it
SO  17.  this  is  Zion,  whom  no  man  s.  rutei
38.  4.  this  man  not  the  wd tare  of  this  peop  e
Lam.  3. 25.  the  Lord  is  good  to  the  soul  that  *.  him
Ezek.  14. 10.  as  punishment  of  him  that s.  unto 'him
34,  12.  as  a  shepherd  *.  out  his  flock  in  the  day
Mat.  7.  8.  and  he  that  *.  findeth,  Luke  11.  10.

10  30.  an  adulterous  generation  v.  a  sign,  1(3.  4.

IQ.  12.  leaveth  the  99,  and*.  that  gone  astray

John  4.  23.  the  Father  *.  such  to  worship  him

7.  4.  doethin  secret,  and  *,to  be  known  openly

18.  *.  Ids  own  glory  ;  *•  his  glory  that  sent  him

8.  50.  there  is  one  that  *.  and  udgeth
Rom.  3.  11.  there  is  none  that  S.  alter  Ood

11.7.  Israel  hath  not  obtained  that  which  he  s.

1  Cor  13  5.  charity  *.  not  her  own,  thinketh  no  eul
SLEWING.

Fsth  10.  3.  Mordecai  *.  the  wealth  of  his  people
lla.  16.  5.  *.  judgment,  and  hasting  righteousness
Mat  1°  43.  *.  rest,  and  findeth  none,  Luke  11.24.

13.  45,'iike  to  a  merchantman  *.  goodly  pearls
Mark  8.  11.  *.  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven  .

Luke  2.  45.  they  turned  back  to  Jerusalem,  *.  lam

11  54  ^  to  catch  something  out  of  his  mouth
13’  7. ’behold,  I  comer,  fruit,  and  find  none

John  6.  24.  and  came  to  Capernaum,  s.  for  Jesus
Acts  13.  8.  s.  to  turn  away  the  deputy  from  faith
11.  went  about  *.  some  to  lead  him  by  the  hand
1  Cor.  10.  33.  not  s.  mine  own  profit,  but  of  many
1  Pet.  5.  8.  walketh  about, s^  whom  he  may  devour

Gen.  °7.  12.  I  shall  s.  to  him  as  a  deceiver
Pent  15.  18.  not s.  hard,  when  thou  sendest  away
05  3  then  thy  brother  should  *.  vile  unto  thee
Toih  24  15.  it  it  s.  evil  unto  you  to  serve  the  Lord
'Neh'.  9.  32.  let  not  all  the  trouble  s.  little  before  thee
Esth.  8.  5.  if  the  thing  •  *.  right  before  the  king
Nah  2  4.  the  chariot  shall  s.  like  torches

1  Cor  11.  16.  but  if  any  man*.  to  be  contentious
12  those  members  which  s.  to  be  more  feeble

2  Cor  10.  9.  1  may  not  *.  as  if  1  would  terrify  you
ileh  4  1  lest  any  of  you  should  s.  to  come  short  of  it
Jam  1  26.  if  any  among  you  *  to  be  religious

See  Good.

SEEMED.  ,  ,

Gen  19  14.  but  he  s.  as  one  that  mocked  to  his  sons
29.  ’20."and  they  s.  unto  him  but  a  few  days
Eccl.O.  13.  this  wisdom  *.  great  unto  me
Ter  27  5.  °dven  earth  unto  whom  it  *.  meet  unto  me
■Luke  24.  n.  their  words  s.  to  them  as  idle  tales
Gal.  2.  6.  but  these  who  s.  to  be  somewhat
9  James,  Cephas,  and  John,  who*.  to  be  pillars
y  ’  SEEMEFll.

Lev.  14.  35.  it  s.  there  is  a  plague  in  the  house
Nnm  16.  9.  s.  it  but  a  small  thing  unto  you  r
1  Sam.  18.  23.  *.  it  light  to  be  a  king  s  son-in-law  .
Prov  14. 12.  there  is  a  way  which  s.  right,  10.  .5.

18  17.  he  that  is  first  in  his  own  cause  s.  just
Ezek.  .34.  18.  *.  it  a  small  thing  to  have  eaten  up
Luke  8.  18.  from  him  be  taken  what  he  s.  to  have
Acts  17.  18.  he  *.  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods
°5.  27.  it  s.  unreasonable  to  send  a  prisoner
1  ~Cor.  .3.  18.  if  s.  to  be  wise,  let  lnm  become  a  tool
Heh  12  11  now  no  chastening  *.  to  be  joyous
See  Good.

SEEMLY.  „  ,

Prov.  19.  10.  delight  is  not*,  tor  a  fool,  much  less
ofj  1  rain  in  harvest,  so  honour  is  not  s.  tor  a  tool
SEEN.  _  .  .  .  .

■Gen.  31.  42.  God  hath  s.  mine  affliction  and  labour
Exod.  10.  6.  such  locusts  as  fathers  have  not  *.

Lev  5.  1.  whether  he  hath  s.  or  known  ot  swearing
Nnm.  14.  22.  those  men  which  have  f.  ray  glory

2.3.  21.  nor  hath  he  *.  perverseness  in  Israel
07  1.3.  when  thou  hast  s.  it,  thou  shalt  be  gathered
■De'ut.  i.  28.  we  have  s.  the  sons  ot  the  Anakims
31.  thou  hast  * .  how  the  Lord  bare  thee  as  a  man
.3  21.  thine  eyes  have  *.  all  the  Lord  hath  done

4  3  s  what  the  Lord  did  because  of  Paal-peor

9.  iest  thou  forget  the  things  thine  eyes  have  *.

5  04  we  have  s.  that  God  doth  talk  with  m&n
10.21  ■  great  and  terrible  things  thine  eyes  have  s.
11.  2.  have  not  *,  the  chastisement  of  the  Lord

7  hut  vour  eyes  have  5*.  all  the  great  acts  ot  Lord
21.  7.  hands  have  not  shed,  nor  have  our  eyes  it
2Q*  3.  the  greett  temptations  thine  eyes  have  s.

33  9.  who  said  to  his  mother,  1  have  not  s.  him
Josh  24.  7.  eyes  have  s.  what  l  have  done  in  Lgypt
Tnda.  2.  7-  the  elders  who  had  s.  the  great  works
13  we  shall  die,  because  we  have  s.  Ood
18  9.  we  have  s .  land,  behold,  it  is  very  good
1  Sam.  6.  16.  five  lords  had  *.  it,  they  returned
03  22.  see  his  place,  and  w  ho  hath  s.  him  there
04’  10.  behold,  this  day  thine  eyes  have  *.  how
•l  Sam  18  21.  go  tell  the  king  what  thou  hast  *.


Eccl  4.  3.  who  hath  not  *.  the  evil  work  that  is
6  5  he  hath  not  *.  the  sun,  nor  known  any  thing
6.  yea,  though  1  live,  yet.  hath  lie  *.  no  good
Isa.  6.  5.  for  mine  eyes  have  *.  the  Lord  ot  hosts
9  2.  that  walked  in  darkness  have  *.  a  great  light
61. 4.  nor  hath  eye  s.  what  be  hath  prepared  for  him
66  8  who  hath  heard,  who  hath  s.  such  things  .

19.  to  the  isles  afar  off  that  have  not*,  my  glory
Jer.  1.  12.  then  said  the  Lord,  thou  hast  well  *.

3.  6.  hast  thou  *.  what  backsliding  Isr.  hath  done  .

12.  3.  thou  hast  *.  me,  and  tried  my  heart
Lam.  1.  8.  because  they  have  *.  her  nakedness

10.  she  hath  *.  heathen  entered  into  her  sanctuary

2  14.  thy  prophets  have  s .  vain  and  foolish  things

for  thee,  they7  have  *.  false  burdens  and  causes
16.  thy  enemies  say,  we  have  found,  we  have  *.  it

3  59.  U  L.  thou  hast  *.  my  wrong,  judge  my  cause
60.  thou  hast  *.  all  their  vengeance  against  me

Ezek.  8. 12.  thou  hast  *.  what  the  ancients  do
15.  then  said  he,  hast  thou  *  this  .  1  < .  I  47-  6-

13.  .3.  and  have  *.  nothing  |1  6.  they  have  *.  vanity
7.  have  ye  not  s.  a  vain  vision,  whereas  ye  say

Dan.  9.  21.  Gabriel  whom  1  had  *.  in  the  vision
Zec/i.  10.  2.  and  the  diviners  have  * .  a  lie,  and  told
Mat'.  2.  2.  for  we  have  s.  his  star  in  the  east
13.  17.  many  prophets  desired  to  see  those  things
which  ye  see,  and  have  not  s.  them,  Juke  10.  24.

21.  32.  and  ye,  when  ye  had  *.  it,  repented  not
Mark  Q.  1.  till  they  have  *.  the  kingdom  ot  God
9.  they  should  tell  no  man  what  things  they  had  *.
lb!  14.  they  believed  not  them  which  had  *.  hint
Luke  ) .  22.  they  perceived  that  he  had  *.  a  vision
2.20.  praising  God  for  all  things  they  had  *.

26.  not  see  death  before  he  had  *.  Lord  s  Christ
.30.  for  mine  eyes  have  s.  thy  salvation
5.  26.  saying,  we  have  *.  strange  things  to  day
9  ,36.  told  no  man  the  things  which  they  had  *.

19  .37.  for  all  the  mighty  works  that  they  had  *.

2.3.  8.  he  hoped  to  have  *.  some  miracle  done
24.  23.  saying,  that  they  had  *.  a  vision  of  angels
37.  and  supposed  that  they  had  *.  a  spirit
John  1.18.  no  man  hath*.  God  at  any  time,  the  Son
in  bosom  of  Father  declared  him,  1  John  4. 1~.

3  11  verily  w7e  testify  that  we  have  s.

.32.  what  he  hath  *.  and  heard  that  he  testified!

4  45  the  Galileans  had  *.  all  he  did  at  Jerusalem
5’.  .37.  ye  have  not  at  any  time  *.  his  shape

6. 14.  those  men,  when  they7  had  *.  the  miracle
46.  not  that  any  man  hath 11.  the  Father
8. 57.  not  fifty  years  old,  and  hast  thou  *.  Abraham  .
9.8.  the  neighbours  which  before  had l  *.  him
.37.  thou  hast  both  s.  and  it  is  lie  that  talketh
11. 45.  had  *.  what  Jesus  did,  believed  on  him
14.  9.  he  that  hath  *.  me,  hath  s.  the  l  ather

15  24.  have  *.  and  hated  both  me  and  my  father

20.  18.  she  had  *.  the  Lord  11  25.  have  *.  the  Lord
29.  Thomas,  because  thou  hast*,  hast  belie' ed

Acts  4.  20.  we  cannot  but  speak  things  we  have  *.

7  44  according  to  the  fashion  that  he  had  s.

9*.  12.*  he  hath  in  a  vision  a  man  named  Ananias
27 .'declared  to  them  how  he  had  *.  the  Lord
10  17  what  this  vision  he  had  *.  should  mean
ll'.  13.  he  shewed  us  how  he  had  *.  an  ange
0.3  when  he  had*,  the  grace  of  God  was  glad

16  10.  after  he  had  *.  vision  we  went  to  Maced.

40.  they  had  *.  the  brethren,  they  comforted  them

21.  29.  they  had  s.  before  with  him  lrophimus
02*  15'  be  witness  of  what  thou  hast  *.  26.  16.

\Cor  2  9.  eye  hath  not*,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  entered

9  1.  have  1  not  *.  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ?

Phil.  4.  9.  things  ye  have  heard  and  *.  in  me,  do
Col.  2. 1  .and  tor  as  many  as  have  not  *.  my  face
18.  intruding  into  those  things  he  hath  not  *.

1  Tim.  6.  16.  whom  no  man  hath  *.  or  can  see
1  John  1.  1.  that  which  we  have  *.  with  our  eyes
2.  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  *.  it
.3.  that  which  we  have  *.  declare  we  unto  you

3  6  whosoever  sinn.  hath  not  *.  him  nor  known

4  14  we  have  *.  and  do  testify ,  F  ather  sent  the  Son
20.  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  *.

how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not
.3  John  11.  he  that  doeth  evil,  hath  not  *.  God
Rev.  1.  19.  write  the  things  which  thou  hast  *.

22. 8.  when  I  had  heard  and  *.  1  fell  down  to  worsh.
Have  I  SEEN.

Gen.  7.  1.  thee  have  Is-  righteous  before  me


( jr67l.  I.  1.  tiltrc  nave  x  o.  i  ~  ,  .  rr

1  Citron.  29.17.  now  have  I  s.  thy  people  to  offer
Psal.  37.  25.  vet  have  l  not  *.  the  righteous  forsaken


mat.  01 .  ~*«j.  v #*»**/«/  *  *.~v  .  -0-

Eccl  7. 15.  all  things  have  I s.  in  days  ot  my  \  amty
8.9.  all  this  have' I  s.  and  applied  my  heart


1  &  lO.t  queen  of  Sheba  had  *  Solomon’s  wis.
7.  till  l  came  and  mine  eyes  had  s.  ZChr.  9-  3,  o.


7.  nil  l  CdlllC  (Vll'i  miuu  w  - -  -  •  .  -  I  X

13.  12.  sons  had  *.  what  way  man  of  God  went
20  1.3.  hast  thou  *.  all  this  great  multitude
2 Kings  20.  15.  what  have  they  s.  ?  Hezekiah  said,
all  things  in  mine  house  have  they  s.isa.  39.

23  29.  he  slew  Josiah,  when  he  had  *.  him
Ezra  .3.  12.  many  that  had  *.  the  first  house,  wept
Fvr/i  Q  26.  of  that  which  they  had  *.  concerning
Jot)  7.  8.  eye  that  hath  *.  me  shall  see  me  no  more

8.  18.  his  place  shall  say  ,  l  have  not  s.  thee
10  18.  oh  that  1  had  died,  and  no  eye  had  *.  me
13.  1.  mine  eye  hath  *.  all  this,  mine  ear  heard

20. 7.  they  that  have  *.  him  shall  say,  v'  hei'e  is  he  .

28.7.  a  path  which  the  vulture  s  eye  hath  not  *.

38.  17.  hast  thou  *.  doors  ot  the  shadow  of  death  .

22.  or  hast  thou  *.  the  treasures  of  had  '

Psal.  10.14.  thou  hast  *.  it,  for  thou  beholdest  misch
35.  21.  our  eye  hath  *.  11.22.  this  thou  hast  *

48.  8.  so  have  we  s.  in  city  of  the  Lord  ot  hosts  #

54  7.  mine  eye  hath  *.  his  desire  on  mine  enemies
68  24.  they  have  *.  thy  goings,  O  God,  ot  my  Goa
uo.  15.  and  the  years  wherein  we  have  *.  evil

98.3.  the  ends  of  earth  have  *.  salvation  ot  God
■Prov  25  7.  the  prince  whom  thine  eyes  have*.

428


9.  13.  this  wisdom  have  I  *.  under  the  sun
Jer.  46.  5.  wherefore  have  Is.  them  dismayed
Zech.  9.  8.  for  now  have  1  s.  with  mine  eyes
I  hare  SEEN.

Gen.  .31.  12. 1  haves,  all  that  Laban  doth  to  thee
.32.  .30.  I  have  *.  God  face  to  face,  and  am  preserved
.3.3  10.  for  therefore  I  have  s.  thy7  face,  46.  30.
Exod  .3.  7.  I  haves,  the  affliction  of  my  people
q.  1  have  also  *.  the  oppression,  16.

32.  9.  T„ord  said,  I  have  *.  this  people,  Dent.  9. 13.
juda.  6,  22.  alas,  for  because  I  have  s.  an  angel
14  2  I  have  *.  a  woman  m  Timnah,  get  her

1  Sam.  16.  18.  7  have  *.  a  son  of  Jesse  cunning

2  Kings  9-  26.  7  have  s.  yesterday  blood  ot  N  aboth
20.  5.  saith  Lord,  /  have  s.  thy  tears,  Isa.  38.  0.

Job  4.  8.  even  as  7  have  *.  they  that  plow  iniquity
5  .3  I  haves,  the  foolish  taking  root,  but  1  cursed
15.  17.  hear  me,  that  which  1  haves.  1  declare
.31  19.  if  I  have  *.  any  perish  for  want  ot  clothing
Psal  37  35.  7  have  *.  the  wicked  in  great  power
55.  9.  I  haves,  violen  e  and  strife  in  the  city

6.3.  2.  glory,  so  as  7  have  *.  thee  in  the  sanctuary
119  *96  I  have  s.  an  end  of  all  perfection

Eccl.  1. 14.  7  haves,  all  the  works  under  the  sun
3.  10.  7  haves,  the  travail  which  God  hath  given

5. 1.3.  there  is  a  sore  evil  which  7  have  *.  under  sun
18.  behold  that  which  1  have  s.  it  is  good  to  eat

6  1.  there  is  an  evil  which  7  have  *.10.  5.

10  7  lh  *.  servants  upon  horses,  and  princes  walk

La,  44.  16.  he  saith,  1  am  warm,  I  have  *.  the  tire
57. 18.  7  have  *.  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him
Jer  7.11.  behold.  /  have  s  it  saith  the  Lord


Jer  13.  27-  7  have  s.  thine  adulteries  and  p.eighings
2.3!  1.3!  7  have  s.  folly  in  prophets  ot  Samaria,  14.
Lam.  .3.  1.  7  have  s.  affliction  by  rod  of  Ins  wrath
Dan.  2.  26.  make  known  unto  me  the  dream  1  have  s.

4  9  die  visions  of  my  dream  that  7  have  s.  18.

IIos.  6.  10.  7  have  s.  an  horrible  thing  in  Israel
John  8.  38.  1  speak  that  7  have  *.  with  my  Father
Acts  7.  34.  7  have  s.  the  affliction  ot  my  people
Ye  have  SEEN.

Gen.  45.  13.  tell  my  father  of  all  that  ye  haves
Exod.  14.  13.  the  Egyptians  whom  ye  haves,  to-day

19.  4.  ye  have  s.  what  1  did  unto  the  Egyptians
2o!  22.  ye  have  s.  that  1  have  talked  with  you
Ueut  oQt  o.  ye  haves,  all  that  the  Lord  did  in  Lgypt
unto  Pharaoh,  his  servants,  and  land.  Josh.  23.  3.

17.  ye  have  s.  their  abominations  and  idols
Juda.  9.  48.  what  ye  have  s.  nie  do,  do  as  I  have  done
1  Sam.  17-  25.  have  ye  s.  this  man  that  is  come  up  i
Job  27 . 12.  behold,  all  ye  yourselves  have  s.  it
Isa.  22.  9.  ye  haves,  the  breaches  of  the.  city7 8
Jer.  44.  2.  ye  have  s.  all  the  evil  1  have  brought
Ezek  13.8. ye  haves,  lies,  therefore  1  am  againstyou
Luke  7  °2.  tell  John  what  things  ye  have  s.

John  6.  .36.  ye  also  har  e  s.  me,  and  believe  not

8.  38.  ye  do  that  ye  have  s.  with  your  1<  ather
14  7  henceforth  ye  know  him,  and  have  *..  hirr.

Acts  1.11.  Jesus  shall  so  come,  asye  have  s.  him  g :
Jam.  5.  11.  and  ye  haves,  the  end  ot  the  Lord
SEEN,  Passively.

Gen.  8  5.  were  the  tops  of  the  niountains  *.

9.  14.  that  the  bow  shall  be  *.  in  the  cloud
22.  14.  in  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  *.

Exod.  13.  7.  no  leavened  bread  be  s.  Dent.  16.4.

3.3.  23.  back  parts,  but  my  face  shall  not  be  *.

.34  .3  neither  let  any  man  be  *.  through  the  mout
Num.  14.  14.  that  thou.  Lord,  art  *.  face  to  face
Juda.  5.  8.  was  there  a  shield  or  spear  *.  amg.  40,000
19  30.  there  was  no  such  deed  done  nor  *.

2  Sam.  17.  17-  for  they  might  not  be  * .  to  come
2°  11  he  was  *.  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind
1  Kings  6.  18.  all  was  cedar,  there  was  no  stone  *.

8.  8.  ends  of  the  staves  were  not  *.  in  holy  place

10.  12.  no  such  almug-trees  were  *.  unto  this  day

job  33.  21.  his  flesh  is  consumed,  it  cannot  be  *.

Psal.  18.  15.  then  the  channels  of  water  were  *.

Isa.  1.  f  12.  when  ye  come  to  be  *.  before  me
16.'  12.  when  it  is  *.  that  Moab  is  weary
47.  3.  thy  nakedness  covered,  thy  shame  shall  be
60.  2.  and  his  glory  shall  be  *.  upon  thee
Zech.  9.  14.  and  the  Lord  shall  be  *.  over  them
Mat.  6.  1.  do  not  your  alms  to  be*,  of  men,  5.

9.  33.  saving,  it  was  never  so  *.  in  Israel

2.3.  5.  all  their  works  they  do  to  be  *.  of  men
Mark  16.  11.  they  heard  that  he  had  been  *.  ot  h«
Luke  24.  +31.  and  he  ceased  to  be  *.  ot  them
Acts  1.  3.  being  *.  of  them  forty  days,  1.3.  31.

Rom.  1.  20.  the  invisible  things  ot  lnm  are  clearly  *.

8  °4.  but  hope  that  is  *.  is  not  hope,  for  what  a  mai
V Cor.  15.  5.  he  was  *.  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve
6  after  that  he  was*,  of  above  500  brethren
7’.  *.  of  James  H  8.  last  of  all  he  was  *.  of  me  also
2  Cor. 4.  18.  while  we  look  not  at  things  that  are*.

but  at  things  which  are  not  *.  thgs.  *.  are  temporal
1  Tim.  3.  I6j  God  was  manifest  in  flesh,  *.  ot  angels
Heb.  11.  1.  faith  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  *.

3.  so  that  things  which  are  *.  were  not  made
7.  Noah  being  warned  of  God  of  things  not.  *.

13.  having  *.  them  afar  off  were  persuaded
1  Pet.  1.8.  whom  having  not  *.  ye  love,  in  whom
Rev.  11. 19.  there  was  *.  in  his  temple  the  ark

See  the  Signification  0/ Prophet.

1  Sam.  9.  9.  come,  and  let  us  go  to  the  *.  he  that  is
now  called  a  prophet  was  before-time  called  a  *.

11.  is  the*,  here  ?  ||  18.  where  the  *.  house  is
19.  Samuel  answered  Saul,  and  said,  1  am  the*.

2  Sam.  15.  27-  the  king  said,  art  not  thou  a*.  T
24.  11.  word  came  to  Gad,  David  s  *.  1  C hr.  jL  9.

1  Chr  9  22.  Samuel  the  *.  did  ordain  in  set  other
25.5.'  li  email  the  king’s  *.  in  words  of  God
26.  28.  all  that  Samuel  the  *.  had  dedicated
29.  29.  the  acts  of  David  are  written  in  the  bo^kof

Samuel  the*,  and  in  the  book  of  Gad  the  s.

2  Chr  on.  9.  29.  written  in  visions  of  Iddo  the*.

12  15  acts  of  Kehohoam  in  the  book  of  Iddo  the*.
If/.  7.  Ilanani  the*,  came  to  Asa  king  of  Judah

10.  then  Asa  was  wroth  with  the  *.  for  this  thing
19.  2.  Jehu  son  of  Ilanani  the  *.  went  to  meet
29.  25.  the  commandment  ol  Gad  the  king  s  *.

.30.  with  the  words  of  David  and  Asaph  the  f.

35  15  commandment  of  Jeduthun  the  king  S  *.
Amos  7.  12.  said  unto^Amos,  O  thou  *.  flee  away

2  Kings  17. 13.  testified  against  Isr.  and  Judah  by*
2  Chr  on.  3.3.  18.  words  ot  the  *.  that  spake  to  him

19.  they  are  written  among  the  sayings  or  the*.
Isa  29.  10.  vour  rulers,  the  *.  hath  he  covered
.30.10.  who  say  to  the  *.  see  not,  and  to  prophets

Mic.  3.  7-  then  shall  the  *.  be  ashamed  and  divineis

Gen.  13.15.  the  land  thou  *.  to  thee  will  I  gi^e
16.  13.  called  the  F.ord  that  spake,  thou  God  *.  m
31.  43.  Laban  said,  all  that  thou  *.  is  mine
Exod.  10. 28.  that  day  thou  *.  my  face  thou  shalto  ,
Dent.  4.  19.  lest  when  thou  *.  the  sun  thou  worst

12.  13.  offer  not  in  every  place  that  thou  *.

20.  1.  when  thou  goest  to  battle  and  *.  horses

21  11.  and*,  among  captives  a  beautiful  wo

Judg.  9.  36.  thou  *.  the  shadow  of  the  mount?.

1  Kings  21.  29.*.  thou  how  Ahabhumbleth  hit  -
Job  Iff.  4.  hast  thou  eyes,  or  *.  thou  as  man  seet
Prov.  22.  29.  *.  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  busin
26.  12.  *.  thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conce  ,
29.  20.  *.  thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  v  o  •  ■
Eccl.  5.  8.  if  thou  *.  the  oppression  ot  [he  poor
La.  58.  .3.  wherefore  have  we  tasted,and  thou  •

L  when  thou  *.  the  naked  that  thou  cove  I  im

Jer  1. 11.  the  word  came  to  Jeremiah,  w.iat*.

13.  |  24. 3.  Amos  7-  8.  1  8.  2,  Zech  4  2.  5^

7.  17.  s.  thou  not  what  they  do  in  c’*tie®  J  ..*
20.  12.  O  Lord,  that  *.  the  reins  and  the  be
32.  24.  is  come  to  pass,  and  behold  thou  *.  1


S  £  L

Ezek  8.  6.  son  of  man,  s.  thou  what  they  do  3
40.  4.  declare  all  thou  s.  to  the  house  of  Israe.

[■  VJ-  f.lld  as  diou  deal  with  thy  servants
AiorK  o.  ol.  thou  s.  the  multitude  throusfinsr  thee
15.  2.  Jesus  said,  j.  thou  these  great  buildings3
,Ai  t4;  sai(i  V3  Simon,  j.  thou  this  woman  3
Wm  21.20.  thou  s .  how  many  thousands  believe
A//w.  2L.  s .  thou  how  faith  wrought  with  works  3

l'ev-  J*!1*  what  thot^fj  write  in  a"  book  and  send  it

”en.\6. 13.  have  I  also  looked' after  him  that  s  me  3
44.  31.  w  hen  he  s.  lad  is  not  with  us,  he  will  die
hxod.  4.  14.  and  when  he  s.  thee  he  will  he  <dad

12.  2.5.  and  when  he  j.  the  blood  upon  the  lintel
Uv.  13.  20.  when  the  priest  f.  the  plague  in  sight
Jeut.  32.  30.  when  he  j.  that  their  power  is  gone
oaw.  16.  7.  Lord  s.  not  as  man  looks  on  heart
tiS'0??-  19j  thls«ty 's  pleasant,  as  my  lord  s.

'ob  8.  17.  and  s.  the  place  of  stones

11.  11.  s.  wickedness,  will  he  not  then  consider  it3
no’  cl0“(  S  Hre  a  covering  to  him  that  he  j.  not
28.  10.  and  his  eye  j.  every  precious  thing
24.  and  he  .r.  under  the  whole  heaven
34.  21.  Ins  eyes  are  on  man,  he  j.  all  his  goings
42.  o.  1  have  heard,  but  now  mine  eye  s.  thee
43'  *,e  s-  tbat  his  day  is  coming

la  ?£'  he u ;  that  YY?  m.en  die,  likewise  the  fool
1  ighteoua  shrill  rejoice,  whfn  he  s.  ven^ean
fo?‘  Jd-  n°rday  nor  night,  .e.  sleep  with  his  eyes
*£•. ■ *'!•  d.  let  the  watchmen  declare  what  he  s
.8.  4.  when  he  that  looketh  upon  it,  s.  it

\  a‘ld  sa>’  who  s.  us  3 1|  47.  10.  none  s.  me
J2.  they  say,  the  Lord  s.  us  not,  9.  9.
o  V:  lYe,  vl?lon  ,hat  he  s.  is  for  many  days
8.  14.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  r.  his  father’s  sins
>3.  .Lit  when  he  a.  the  sword  come,  he  blow
Q.  Id.  when  any  s  a  man’s  bone,  then  set  up  a  sign
,  ,  4-.th-v  rather  who  .c.  in  secret,  6,  18.

/I0-  no’  tumult,  and  them  that  wept

i  i16«n3;uhe  f’  Ab1l'aham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus
'  irt’j'9,  die  next  day  John  s.  Jesus  coming
'  d?  nothmg  but  what  he  ,f.  the  Father  do

•  ’d-  who  s.  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him

•  , :  hy  what  means  he  now  A.  we  know  not

12.  but  an  hireling  s.  the  wolf  coming

1.  9.  he  stumbleth  not,  because  he  s.  the  light
7.  f”-  he  that.c.  me,  s.  Inin  that  sent  me

m  , ’infiCa,u^ei1^ s‘  h'/11  not,  nor  knoweth  him
.9.  a  little  while,  and  the  world  s.  me  no  more
!■  I-  f  die  stone  taken  aw'ay  from  the  sepulchre
*•  defer  went  in  and  s.  the  linen  clothes  lie
*”on  two  angels  in  white,  sitting,  one  at  head
“  o  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  following
'm- 8- ~4-  what  a  man  s.  why  doth  he  yet  hope  for
t  —  6.  think  of  me  above  what  lie  s.  me  to  be
ohn 3.17.  hath  this  worjd,  and  s.  brother  iiave  need

erf.  16. 23.  morrow  is  sabb.  to-day  j.  thatye  will  r.

•.  19.  the  first-fruits  bring,  thou  shalt  not.?,  a  kid
in  his  mothers  milk,  34.  26.  Deut.  14.  21.

,.  31.  thou  shalt  .y.  his  flesh  in  the  holy  place
i|«^4  38.  y.  pottage  for  the  sons  of  the  prophets
1  ?f  ,  them  f •  the  bones  therein
14- 21.  that  sacrifice  shall  come  and  a  therein
•  II ING.

2-13-  p,'f  st  s  servants  came,  while  flesh  was  .f.

'  1  n  ^  pot  or  caldron

. .  1. 13.  what  seeSt  thou 1  said,  1  see  a  .v.  pot
,  SEIZE.

*  o  Y  ‘-then  ye  shall  rise  up  and  upon  the  city
"  c-  tfs  night,  let  darkness.?,  upon  it

'  /  %15sr  1  f  eatn  u  Ppon  ,h5m>  Jet  them  go  down
-  .  *1.  38.  let  us  kiU^h unhand  s.  on  his  inheritance

‘  49- 24-  Damascus  isfeeble,’  fear  hath  y.  on  her

s  [  ™ebrew  word  is  found  seventy-four  times  in
e  book  of  Psalms,  and  thrice  tn  Uaff.kkuk.  The
ptuagint,  and  other  interpreters ,  translate  Selah
iiaifaAiia  lJiapsalma,  which  signifies  a  rest
or,'f,chin'pe  Of  tone,  accord-
?  to  others.  Some  will  have  it,  that  Selah  marks
‘  ^Oinning  of  a  new  sense ,  or  a  new  measure  of
' es)  y.tters  translate  Selah  by  for  ever,  and
V,  that  it  joins  what  follows  to  that  which  goes
ore,  and  shews  that  what  has  been  said  deserves
.  be  always  remembered.

~  ancfents  have  thought,  that  Selah  shewed  the
//,Td?T  cessation  of  the  actual  inspiration
the  Psalmist,  or  of  the  internal  motions  of  his
tig?*:-  1,iereJ  a]e  to  ho  say  that  Selah  has  no
nihcation,  and  that  it  is  only  a  note  of  the  an-
music,  whose  use  is  no  longer  known. :  for

•  ™«yj>e  taken  away  frorn  all  the  places  where
,s,Jouvd  without  interrupting  the  sense  of  the

s,ay'  U  Kas  n  note  which  shewed
elevation  of  the  voice  ;  and  that  in  those  places
?  eil<ier  s'mud  cry  out,  and  make  an  exclamation
t  is  generally  agreed  and  concluded,  that  the  pro -
signification  of  Selah  is,  the  end,  or  a  pause  .•
a  though  it  be  not  always  found  at  the  end  of  the

si’JaZ  at  ■  tie  6nd  n  ‘Psalm’  l,ct  the  ancient
sicians  might  sometimes  put  Selah  in  the  mar-

JJ.'VI  1  sa|ters,  to  shew  where  the  pause  was
7 f\a] 1,1  K,lere  the  tnne  ended,  hr  if  the
\  '  *'ebre"’S  sanO  with  great  pauses,  ending

■  rh  Tn  ’  'TA  ia  s,°  ginning  again  all  at  once,
\C}j?me  Tmk  they  dld-  ,hen  il  was  necessary
,  *rk  tn  the,  margin  of  the  Psalm  the  place  of
pause,  and  of  the  end,  that  the  whole  chon


S  E  L


15.  I  50.  6.  |  .52.  .3,  5  I  51  t  1  55  -
19.  I  57.  3  6.  i  59.  5,  ’..3.  |  60  4.  fei!  4  16c.’
1’  I  °t>.  4,  7.  15.  |  67.  1,  4.  |  68.  7,  19,  30

e  \m  e1  im.W' iU.\ %'75-.j “•  jiff

prov.  .0.  f  17.  let  th^uii  her,  i„  neighbour’s  house

'e1P'io5'i^i!henSral1  shp  Humh.  to  her  s.  seven  days
Num9'^)  S"i.pro  a'le  ie'\  P  hy  Playing  the  whore
r  j71’  ir  a  woman  bind  her  s.  bv  a  bond

Jt?dn‘  .5’J29’  ye,a'  she  returned  answer'to  her  s
iiuth  I  t  18  that  she  strengthened  her  s  to  go
oflT{  4A  ’  S  “e(  bow"d  her  s.  and  travailed"

°~iam'  n  bo'ai‘  >0We<  hers‘ to  tl,eL  ?arth.  and  said
'  1 2.  lie  saw  a  woman  washing  her  s.

I  Kiu,  iias  PuUnuen  hcr  s- trom  uncleanness
Joh  ?o  i« '  5’,S  le  s-hal1  teign  hers,  another  woman
pfJV  o  she,lifteth  up  her  s.  on  high

Pino  swallow  found  a  nest  for  her  0

7  Vk  ‘2,‘  ma.keth  her  s.  coverings  of  tapestrv
^.  5  14.  therefore  hell  hath  enlarged  her  s
ill '  In  streec'h.owl  find  for  her  s.  a  place  of  rest
61.  to.  as  a  bride  adorneth  her  s.  with  jewels


anf  t  ie  f"u.  ymi  me  w/toie  ebon
tit  lest  at  orue,  and  begin  again  at  the  same

t  arkrt/i  Wit  ta  tl  ls  ffcnei ally  placed  at  some
1  Passage  ;  which  gives  occasion  to  think

0  Jinirifd.ia  S°  t0  (l'lH'ken  the  attention  or  ub-
ation  of  the  singer  and  hearer.

i V"lar|y  say .  there  is  no  help  for  him  in  G.  r.

•  ie  Lord  heard  me  out  ot  his  holy  hill,

< 1  w!i?n’  fi!y  hlessmg  is  upon  thy  people,  r.
,MU  confess  forgavest  iniquity  ofmy  sin,k

o  ilia2’  ,  5.  |  9.  16,  20.  |  20.  3.  I  21.

24.  6,  10.132.  4,  7  -  139.  5,  11.1  44.


H ■  I  46.  3.  7.’  1L  I  47


47.  4.  |  48.  8.  |  49.  13i


Ja  T'  lb  backsliding:  Israel  hath  justified  her  s.
4V  :  daughter  ot  Zion  that  bewaileth  her  s.
fIT  oo  o  ,?SC“S  IS  teeble,  and  turn,  her  s.  to  flee
23  7  widian  >l!y-  tpaheth  idols  against^”.

01  in  .  1al*the,r  u)o\s  she  dehied  her  s.

//  *  s  ie  ,  ^  "'enneci  her  s.  with  lies

Ze°ci  0  '3  '  fcn«etreM^-’!  f ’/'Vith  her  ear-rings
i/nTr ,  oT  P  ,  did  build  her  s.  a  strong-hold
M  '"iTi  Vf  s  1e  Sa’d  within  hers,  if  I  touch
Yukel'op'  It  bruifeth  forth  fruit  ot  hers
11  *. "i4,  hdsabeth  hid  her  s.  five  months
Jib  ;  „  cf?ujd  in  no  wise  lift  up  her  s.

llev  IVn1-  lth  iSara  1  si  received  strength

10  Jezebel,  who calleth  her  s.  a  prophetess

18.  7-  how  much  she  hath  glorified  her  .r.  and  lived

19.  7.  and  his  wife  hath  made  her  s.  ready
idee  Himself.

7-  It  SELF.

Tn-'al '  ^ctruU-tree,  whose  seed  is  in  it  s.  12.
Tev.  ( .  „4.  and  the  fat  of  the  beast  that  dieth  of  it  s

-10  or  O  ,  n,ot  eat>  J7..15.  |  22.  8.  Dent.  14.  21 '
18.  <.5.  the  land  u  s.  vomiteth  out  inhabitants

^°r  '  eaP  whatgroweth  of  it  s.  Isa.  37  30
A  myt(.  3 1.  the  undersetterr.  were  of  the  base  it  s
pt/°A,8  «  |ar?d  0t  darkness,  as  darkness  it  s
•  41  •  his  heart  gathereth  iniquity  to  its

Prorbrn^  iTTT  b  was  moved  at  the  presence
oi™:.18,,2'  that  his  heart  may  discover  it  .c.

V ’  fihe  "•lne’  "  hen  it  moveth  it  s.  aright
or  the  ointment  which  bewrayeth  it  s.
r(!5'inheilell<el'.frass  she  wet  h  its.  and  herbs
Lsa-  1  ,  15-  .suhal1  axe  boast  it  s.  against  him  that
hew?  h  /  saw  magnify  it  s.  ?  rod  shake  it  s.  r
stair  lift  up  it  s.  ?

fin'  on  ^"our  soul  delight  it  s.  in  fatness
J?r  4?'owk’erSla  ']'y  '.?9on  withdraw  its.
fe;/31ri'tbeffeshalid":e11  V1  Judah  its.  husbandm
a  1  ]j  f’  a  bre  unfolding  it  s.  and  bright,  about  it
17  11  IKha?  no^.ea^en  wfiatdiefh  of  it  s.  44.  31
on  U'  be  base.  that  it  might  not  lift  it  s.  up

5°drXa  any  m °re  a hove  the  nations
mT  e  o',  d raised  up  its.  on  the  one  side
10  ■  34-  tah?  thought  for  the  things  of  it  s.

1~.  >o.  every  kingdom  divided  acst  it  s.  is  brought
to  desolation,  Mark?,.  24,25.  Luke  11  17
*90  VI 5  4t  8S  tiie  hrancli  cannot  bear  fruit  of  it  s  7'
in' 2k  n  1  "’rapped  together  in  a  place  bv  it  ,t
•  -5.  the  world  it  s.  could  not  contain  the  books
^of ’n’ lb:'Spint  u  s-  hears  witness  with  our  spirit
ol'  »  e  Pre.at,jre  it  s.  also  shall  be  delivered
-  the  .Spirit,  it  s.  maketli  intercession  for  us
14.  14.  that  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  it  s.

1  '  •;  doth  not.even  nature  it  s.  teach  ycu  3
r'  T  cl)ant,v  \auntetri  not  it  s.  is  not  puffed  up
5.  charity  doth  not  behave  it  s.  unseemly

FnT'x  uT  mWh  d°rc  e.very  thing  that  exalts  its.
rf/'n'o.  tothe  eddying  of  it  s.  in  love
Jjj  9> ,|4, J? hr-  is  entered  into  heaven  it  s.  to  appear
3  John  1_.  Demeti  ius  hath  good  report  of  truth  it  a
r.  My  SELF.  \mv  c

Cgon‘ ifi'i10'  1  Wa^  afra‘d'  because  naked,  and  hid
2_.  16.  by  my  s.  have  I  sworn,  in  blessing  1  will

r  a  in.  TSLhee’  Isa‘  45'  23-  Jer-  22.  5.  |  4Q  13
wf  I9’4'  1  bare  you,  and  brought  you  unto  my  s.
Amtw.  8.  I*.  1  sanctified  them  for  my  s.

n  '  Li  i  i  Ij0rd  wd,1  make  my  s.  known  to  him

r.Ttn'  ffi  V  a!n  nc?[  able  t0  l)ear  you  my  s.  alone,  12.

.  h •  '[’•  1  will  go  out  and  shake  my  s.

Tilth  4.  6.  he  said,  I  cannot  redeem  it  for  my  s.
on  ?‘i  f  1  forced  my  s.  therefore,  and  offered

A5'  Tl  ViTJ,eu°’  4l?at  1  may  hide  my  s.  in  the  field
^o.  33.  which  hast  kept  me  from  avenuing  my  y

"0“™ 1  t'i2'  Y'  sure|y  P°  fol'th  with  you  my  s.
'~>24.  I  have  kept  my  s.  from  mine  iniquity

00  vf'fi18'-,'i5j-  "  lU  surely  shew  my  s.  unfohim
2..  . 30.  I  will  disguise  my  s.  2  Chron.  18.  29.

O  A \8o  ]ibow  my,  s- in  ‘l1?  house  of  Rimmoa

( ;  ' •  4  f?av,e  chosen  this  place  to  my  s.

Ve,,f  7-  consulted  with  my  s.  and  rebuked  nobles
a  fi  ’  a  ‘  }eA.  no,rnan  come  with  the  king  but  my  s.
r,f  delight  to  do  honour  more  than  to  my  s.

_  "  6-  Id.  yea,  1  would  harden  my  s.  in  sorrow
If  why.  a  mark,  so  that  I  am  a  burden  to  my  s.
9220:,.,f  1  Justify  my  s.  ||  27.  1  will  comfort  my  s.

30-  “  *  was  i  '•  with  snow  water,  and  make
43*  20.  then  will  I  not  hide  my  s.  from  thee

in  I'  -Y Y  u  leave  my  complaint  upon  my  s.

191 4‘  Y  1  have  erred ,  mine  error  remain,  with  my  s.

.  whom  I  shall  see  for  my  s.  and  eyes  behold
?J  have  eaten  my  morsel  my  s.  alone
.9.  or  if  I  lift  npmy  s.  when  evil  found  him
74t‘  be  Y  ,  r.e  l  r,e  1  at?hor  my  s.  and  repent  in  dust
1  Sm  "Ju-  14.  1  behaved  my  s.  as  though  he  had  been
m\  ri  lend  or  brother,  I  bowed  down  heavily
VAi  oaYa  “lory,  I  my  s.  awake  early,  108.  2.

1U1.  l.  1  will  behave  my  s.  wisely  in  u  perfect  way


SEE

Psal.  109.  4.  are  my  adver.  but  I  give  mv  r  to  nnv
f]9-  16.  lw.ll  defight  my  s.  in  tf,y  s.aU,tes  P  ay'
to'  1  ,.WI  delight  my  s.  in  thy  commandments
5».  1  lemembered  thy  judgm.and  comforted  my  s
o'  uordo  1  exercise  my  s.  in  great  matters
7SLnreiy^  have  behav.  and  quieted  my  s.  as  child
Led.  2.  3.  1  sought  in  my  heart  to  give  my  s.To  wine
19.  my  labour  wherein  I  have  shewed  mgs  wise

VV,M0'  Sa',h  fhe,  1  0r<1,’  ,10"’  wil1  1  lift  up

43.  21.  this  people  have  1  formed  for  my  ,?
j'  24.  that:  spreadeth  abroad  the  earth  by  my  s.

’  r’  ftl.  f  would  comfort  my  s.  against  sorrow
2L  5.  and  I  my  s  will  hght  against  you

1-4- ?•  J.  tbef  Lord  will  answer  him  by  my  s.
-0.  5.  in  the  day  1  made  my  s.  known  unto  them,  o
-9.  3.  my  river  is  mine,  1  have  made  it  for  my  s'.
tYoq  Yi  W1,l  make  my  s.  known  amongst  them
magnify  my  s.  and  sanctify  my  s
‘fan-  10.  3.  neither  did  1  anoint  my  s.  at  all
f  o.  6.  Htic  bow  my  s.  before  the  high  God
3-  *6-  when  I  heard,  I  trembled  m  my  s.
r,  !  1‘  3-  separat.  mys.  as  I  have  clone  many  year»

04 Vl’  Lt V  Y'l  thOI,Sh,t  1  Ws-  worthy  tef come*
TV  39- fh-it  it  is  I  mys.  handle  me  and  see

7  nh!;h  i  ibear  Wltunesus  otmy  s-  it  is  not  true
7*17 •  he  shall  know  whether  1  speak  of  my  s

R^i’a 1  thb'  ?°k  COlne  °f  ?,ys-  but  he  that  sent  me
8.  I4.  tho  1  bear  record  of  my  s.  my  record  is  true
18.  I  am  one  that  bear  witness  of  my  s.

28.  when  ye  shall  know  that  I  do  nothing  of  my  s
4“'  n.e|thei  came  1  of  my  s.  but  he  sent  me
54  if  1  honour  my  s.  my  honour  is  nothing
}2-  \80  V°hman  ta,ke,h;  but  1  lay  it  down  otmy  s.

1!'  s9i  ,bn  e  not  sp9ken  0  my  s ■  father  sent  me
ik3.,}  " 1,1  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  my  s

IT  hl;Y,  [dS  t  ,at  1  sPe.ak *  I  speak  not  of  my  A.
W1,l  h"  e  him,  and  manifest  my  s.  to  Inin
J7;  i9’An,d  for  tlleJr  sakes  1  sanctify  my  s.
ioS of  t  37-.  a  prophet  ot  j  our  bretliren  as  I  my  s

on  Is  fYYV18’  S,and  Pp’  1  ("y  s-  also  a>n  a  man
oj'  ?n'  ?eJt,lel  count  1  my  life  dear  unto  my  s.

^  do  more  cheerfully  answer  for  my  s.
herein  do  1  exercise  my  s.  to  have  always

ofi  o*"r Vr-'PPo Sai<  1’  w°u,(1  hear  the  man  mys.

l?L9o  ?C|  y  thought  with  mys.  I  ought  to  do
A!  ?;*.  9.  3.  1  could  wish  that  my  s.  were  accursed
U'  fi  1  laY?  reserved  to  my  s.  7000  men
ic  lb  and  1  wys-  also  a,n  Persuaded  of  you
1  rtrQA  a  succourer  of  many,  and  of  my  s.  also
1  c  i  .  4’  • tor  J  know  nothing  by  my  s.  yet  am  I

6.  1  ha\e  in  a  figure  transfer,  to  my  s.  and  Apollo?

/>  .k4  w,ou'd  that  all  men  were  even  as  I  my  s.


n  .i  V .  as  1  my  i

9‘_19i'  ychave  I  made  mys.  servant  unto  all
~7.  lest  that  I  my  s.  should  be  a  castaway
11  Y°'  4  ’  ,now  1  Paul  my  s.  beseech  you

n  { -  have  1  commit,  an  offence  in  abasing  my  s  *
y.  1  have  kept  my  s.  from  being  burdens,  to  you
1  fd-  receive  me,  that  1  may  boast  mys.  a  little
Ij..  5.  of  mys.  1  will  not  glory  but  in  infirmities
a  7  ia,i  1  my  s-  "as  not  burdens,  to  you

Y,,  -,  2-  18.  1  make  my  s.  a  transgressor
.j  /•  ~j24.  that  1  also  my  s.  shall  come  shortly
3.  13.  I  count  not  my  s.  to  have  apprehended
l  hilem.  17.  receive  Onesimus  as  my  s.

„  Own  SELF.

32- PL  to  whom  thou  swarest  by  thine  own  s.
jo/in  o.  30.  1  can  of  mine  own  s.  do  nothin^

1  4  <•  5-  father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thineYwra  f.
4V? T-  4-  3-  yea,  1  judge  not  mine  owns.

I  Mlem.  19.  how  thou  owest  unto  me  even  fhine  o.  s.
i  ret.  ^.4.  who  his  own  s.  bare  our  sins  in  his  body
..  S  Ml.V-same.

Mat.  8. 13.  his  servant  was  healed  the  s.-same  nour
o  n°r’  2 ~ 4 p '  worketh  that  one  and  s.-same  Spirit
-°,rf  .1  •5’  le  that  wrought  us  for  s.-same  thing
(.  11.  this  s.-same  thing  that  ye  sorrowed  after
See  Same  Day.

_  Thy  SELF.

Ocn.  Vi.  9.  separate  thy  s.  I  pray  thee,  from  me
14.  21.  give  me  the  persons,  take  goods  to  thy  s
n'  PetYrn’  a,nd  submit  thy  s.  under  her  hands
.I3.  9-  mother,  keep  that  thou  hast  unto  thy  s.

in  q  17'  ias  yet  C;xal,test  s •  against  my  people

,10Y  0I??  wilt  thou  refuse  to  humble  thy  s  f
28.  take  heed  to  thy  s.  see  my  face  no  more,  34

. o  i,12/  P^f'  4-,9’  ‘.12-  13!  19>  30.  1  Sam.  19.  2.

s3ly'  w sittest.  thou  thy  s.  alone  ?

2w.  so  shall  it  be  easier  for  thy  .?.  and  they  bear
34 •  2.  come  and  present  thy  s.  there  before  me
7-.?0  and  make  an  atonement  for  thy  s.
iff-  .with  thy  neighbour’s  wife  to  defile  thy  s.

23.  neither  lie  with  any  beast  to  defile  thy  s.

19.  18.  tliou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  s.  1  am
the  Lord,  Mat.  19.  19.  I  22.  39.  Mark  12  31
34.  the  stranger,  thou  shalt  love  him  as  thy  s.  '
Sum.  11.  17.  that  thou  bear  it  not  thy  s.  alone
16.  1.3.  except  tliou  make  thy  s.  a  prince  over  us
hJeat  9.  1.  to  possess  nations  greater  than  thy  s.

2P-  }4-  f,ven  a>l  die  spoil  shalt  thou  take  to  thy  s.

ia  lby  v,esture  wherewith  tliou  coverest  thy  s
liuth  4.  6.  redeem  thou  my  right  to  thy  s.  I  cannot

oa  oA2P'.l'  lM"!f|,!\ty  bf;  1,1  me,  slay  me  thy  s.

^5.  26.  hath  w  ithholden  thee  from  avenging  thv  s

1  Sam.  5.  24.  that  then  thou  shalt  bestir  thy  s

7- 24.  hast  confirmed  to  thy  s.  thy  people  Israel

13.  5.  lay  down  on  thy  bed  and  make  thy  s.  sick
lo  io  ,gn  ,hy  [npurner,  and  put  on  appare
oo  os' .u  s'  "'?u,  dst  ’,ave  set  thy  s.  against  me
-6.  thou  wilt  shew  thy  s.  merciful,  Psal.  18.  25.

27.  with  pure  thou  wilt  shew  thy  s.  pure,  Ps.  18. 26.

40  i?^f,2'  2.  be  thou  strong,  and  shew  thy  s.  a  man
3.  11.  thou  hast  not  asked  tor  thy  s.  long  life  noi
riches,  hut  understanding,  2  Chron.  1  11

13.  7.  come  home  with  me  and  refresh  thy  s

14.  2.  arise,  1  pray  thee,  and  disguise  thy  s.

6.  why  ffeiirnest  thou  thy  s.  to  be  another  3

18.  1  go .shew  thys  to  Ahab,  and  1  will  send  rain

20.  22.  strengthen  thys.  and  see  what  thou  dost

ot  'on°  hha  1  thy  Judgment  be,  thy  s.  hast  decid.  it

21 .  20.  because  thou  hast  sold  thy  s.  to  work  evil

2  Kings  22  19.  hast  humbled  thy  l  0  Chron! 34.  ^

1  Chron.  21.  1^.  advise  with  thy  s.  what  word

429


SEL


S  E  L


SEL


2  Chr  on, 20. 37.  thou  hast  joined  thy  s.  with  Ahaziah

21. 13.  hast  slain  thy  brethren,  better  than  thy  s.

Lath.  4.  13.  think  not  with  thy  s.  thou  shalt  escape
Job  5.  +  27-  hear  it,  and  know  thou  it  tor  thy  s.

15.  8.  and  dost  thou  restrain  wisdom  to  thy  s.

22.  21.  acquaint  thy  s.  with  him,  ami  be  at  peace

30.  21.  with  thy  hand  thou  opposest  thy  s.  agst.  me
Psal.  7.  6.  O  Lord,  in  thine  anger  lift  up  thys.

10. 1.  why  hidestthou  thy  s.  in  times  ot  trouble  .

35.  23.  stir  up  thy  s.  and  awake  to  my  judgment

37.  4.  delight  thy  s.  also  in  the  Lord,  shall  give
49.  18.  praise  thee,  when  thou  dost  well  to  thy  s.

50.21.  that  I  was  altogether  such  a  one  as  thy  s.

52.  1.  why  boastest  thou  thy  s.  in  mischief  ?

60  1.  been  displeased,  O  turn  thy  s,  to  us  again
80. 15.  branch  thou  madest  strong  tor  thy  s.  17-
94.  1.  shew  thy  .v.  |)  2.  lift  up  thy  4.  thou  judge
Prov.  6.  3.  do  this,  my  son,  and  deliver  thy  s.  5.

9. 12.  if  thou  be  wise,  shalt  be  wise  tor  thy  s.

24.  19.  fret  not  thy  s.  because  of  evil  men

27.  and  make  it  tit  for  thys.  in  the  field
25. 6.  put  not  forth  thy  s.  in  presence  ot  the  king
27.  1.  boast  not  thy  s.  of  to-morrow,  kno west  not
30.  32.  thou  hast  done  foolishly  in  lilting  up  thy  a.
Eccl.lAb.  be  not  righteous  over  much,  nor  make  thy
s.  over  wise  ;  why  shouldest  thou  destroy  thy  s.  ?

22.  that  thou  thy  s.  also  hast  cursed  others
Isa.  26.  20.  hide  thy  s.  as  for  a  little  moment
33.  3.  lifting  up  thy  s.  the  nations  were  scattered

45.  15.  verily  thou  art  a  God  that  hides!  thy  s.

52.  2.  shake  thy  s.  from  the  dust,  loose  thy  s.

57.  8.  thou  hast  discovered  thy  s.  to  another

9.  and  thou  didst  debase  thy  s.  even  unto  hed

58. 14.  then  shalt  thou  delight  thy  s.  in  the  Lord

63. 14.  to  make  thy  s.  a  glorious  name

64. 12.  wilt  thou  refrain  thy  s.  for  these  things  r
65.5.  which  say,  stand  by  thys.  come  not  near

Jer.  2. 17.  hast  thou  not  procured  this  unto  thy  s.

4  30.  tho’  thou  clothest  thy  s.  with  crimson,  in  vam
shalt  thou  make  thy  s.  fair,  lovers  despise  thee

6.  26.  gird  with  sackcloth,  wallow  thy  s.  in  ashes
17. 4  .thys.  shall  discontinue  from  thy  heritage
20.  4.  behold,  1  will  make  thee  a  terror  to  thy  s.

22.  15.  because  thou  closest  thy  s.  in  cedar
32  8.  the  redemption  is  thine,  buy  it  tor  thy  s.

45.  5.  and  seekest  thou  great  things  for  thy  s.? .

46.  19.  furnish  thy  s.  to  go  into  captivity

47.  5.  how  long  wilt  thou  cut  thy  s.  ?

6.  O  sword,  put  up  thy  s.  into  thy  scabbard

Lam.  2.  18.  give  thy  s.  no  rest,  let  not  thy  eye  cease

3.  44.  thou  hast  covered  thy  s.  with  a  cloud

4.  21.  thou  shalt  be  drunken,  make  thy  s.  naked
Ezek.  3.  24.  go  shut  thy  s.  within  thine  house

16.  17.  thou  madest  to  thy  s.  images  ot  men

22.  4.  and  hast  defiled  thy  s.  in  thine  idols

23.  40.  they  came  for  whom  thou  didst  wash  thy  s.

31.  10.  because  thou  hast  lifted  up  thy  s.  in  height

38.  7.  prepare  for  thy  s.  and  all  thy  company
Dan.  5.  17.  Daniel  said,  let  thy  gifts  be  to  thy  s.

23.  but  hast  lifted  up  thy  s.  against  the  Lord

10.  12.  and  to  chasten  thy  s.  betore  thy  God
Hus.  13.  9.  O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thy  s.

Obad.  4.  though  thou  exalt  thy  s.  as  the  eagle
Mic.  1.  10.  in  house  of  Aphrah  roll  thy  s.  in  dust

5.  1.  now  gather  thy  s.  in  tfoops,  ()  daughter
Nah.  3.  15.  make  thy  s.  many  as  the  canker- w  orm
Zech.  2. 7.  deliver  thy  4.  O  Zion,  that  dwellest
Mat  A.  6.  if  Son  of  God,  cast  thy  s.  down,  Luke  A.  9.

5.  33.  again,  thou  shalt  not  forswear  thy  s.

8.  4.  shew  thy  s.  to  priest,  Mark  1.  44.  Luke  5.  14.

27. 40.  save  thy  s.  Mark  15.  30.  Luke  23.  39.

Luke  4.  23.  ye  will  say,  physician,  heal  thy  s.

6.  42.  when  thou  thy  s.  beholdest  not  the  beam
7-6.  Lord,  trouble  not  thy  s.  for  1  am  not  worthy
10.  27.  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighboui  as  thy  4.  Rum.

13.  9.  Gal.  5.  14.  Jam.  2.8.
17.8.  will  rather  say,  gird  thy  s.  and  serve  me
John  1. 22.  who  art  thou  '  what  sayest  thou  ot  thy  s.  ?

7.  4.  if  thou  do  these,  shew  thy  s.  to  the  world

8.  13.  thou  bearest  record  of  thy  s.  it  is  not  true
53.  prophets  are  dead,  whom  makest  thou  thys.

10.  33.  thou,  being  a  man,  makest  thy  s.  God

14.  22.  Lord,  how  wilt  thou  manifest  thy  s.  unto  us

18.  34.  sayest  thou  this  of  thy  s.  ?  or  did  others  tell  it '
21.  18.  when  thou  wast  young, thou  girdedst  thy  s.
Acts  8.  29.  go  near,  join  thy  s.  to  this  chariot

12.  8.  gird  thy  s.  ||  16.  28.  do  thy  s.  no  harm
21  24.  them  take,  purify  thy  s.  with  them,  that  all
may  know  that  thou  thy  s.  walkest  orderly

24.  8.  thy  s.  mayest  take  knowledge  of  these  things
26.  1.  thou  art  permitted  to  speak  for  thy  s.

24.  Festus  said,  Paul,  thou  art  beside  thy  s.

Rum.  2.  1.  judgest  another,  thou  condeinnest  thy  s.

19.  that  thou  thy  s.  art  a  guide  of  the  blind
21  thou  that  teachest,  teachest  thou  not  thy  s.

14.  22.  hast  thou  faith  ;  have  it  to  thy  s.

Gal.  6.  1.  considering  thy  s.  lest  thou  be  tempted

1  Tim.  .3.  15.  how  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thy  s.

4.  7.  and  exercise  thy  s.  rather  unto  godliness

15.  these  things,  give  thy. s.  wholly  to  them

16.  take  heed  to  thy  s.  and  to  thy  doctrine  ;  in  doing
this  thou  shalt  save  thy  s.  and  them  that  hear  thee

5.  22.  nor  partaker  of  others  sins,  keep  thy  s.  pure
6. 5.  men  of  corr.  minds,  from  such  withdraw  thy  s.

2  Tim  A.  15.  study  to  shew  thy  s.  approved  unto  God
Tit.  2. 7.  shewing  thy  a  pattern  of  good  works

SELl-wiV/.

Ge/i.49. 6.  in  their  .v.-wi7/,  they  digged  down  a  wall
See  Fret,  Hide.

SELF -willed.

Tit.  1.7.  for  a  bishop  must  not  be  s. -wit led
2  Pet.  2.  10.  presumptuous  are  they,  4.  willed
SELL.

In  case  of  extreme  necessity  the  Hebrews  were
allowed  to  sell  their  own  liberty.  Lev.  25.  39.
If  thy  brother  that  dwelleth  by  thee  be  waxen
poor,  and  be  sold  unto  thee,  thou  shalt^  not
compel  him  to  serve  as  a  bond-servant.  Thou
shall  not  oppress  him,  nor  sell  him  again  as  a
slave  ,  he  shall  abide  with  thee  only  as  a  work¬
man  fur  hire  ;  and  must  be  used  kindly,  as  a
bi other,  and  as  a  member  of  the  church  of  God

430


as  well  as  thyself.  Lathers  had  a  power  of  selling
the  liberty  of  their  children.  Exod.  21.  7.  It  a
man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a  maid  servant,  She
shall  not  go  out  as  the  men-servants  do.  Her
master  shall  not  dismiss  her,  as  another  slave  is
dismissed  at  the  sabbatical  year.  He  shall  take
her  as  his  wife,  or  shall  marry  her  to  his  sun.  1J
he  caret  to  do  neither  oj  these,  he  shall  set  her  at

liberty.  ,  ,  .  , .,

They  sold  also  in  oh  ent  debtors,  and  even  their  chil¬
dren,  as  appears  from  2  Kings  4.  1.  and  Mat.  18.

25.  Sometimes  they  sold  free  men  for  slaves,  as
Joseph  u as  sold  by  his  brethren.  Hus  crime  was
called  Plagium,  and  the  law  punished  it  with  death.
Exod.  21.  6.  He  that  stealeth  a  man,  and  selleth
him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,  he  shall  suie-
ly  be  put  to  death.  'The  Jews  confine  this  to  the
theft  of  a  man  of  their  own  nation.  I  he  apostle
Paul,  writin,  ^Timothy , places  plagiaries  amongst
the  greatest  miscreants,  1  1  im.  1.  10.  A enpu t o *
6iscuv,  in  English,  Men-stealers.  Esau  sold  ms
birth-right,  Gen.  25.  33.  and  is  therefore  called  a
profane  person,  Heb.  12.  16.  for  slighting  that  to
which  so  many  glorious  privileges  belonged.  1  he
birth-right  was  a  special  type  oj  Christ,  who  uas
to  be  a  first-born  :  and  oj  the  church  called  God  s
first-born,  Exod.  4.  22.  and  oj  the  great  privileges
of  the  church;  particularly  adoption,  and  eternal
life.  Heb.  12.  23.  It  is  said,  that  the  Lord  had
sold  his  people  to  their  enemies,  as  a  master  parts
with  a  vicious  slave,  to  punish  him  for  his  infide¬
lity  and  disobedience.  Deut.  32.  30.  How  should
one  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  put  ten  thousand
to  flight,  except  their  rock  had  sold  them  r  See
Judg.  2.  14. 1  3.  8.  1  10.  7.

The  prophet  Elijah  said  to  Ahab,  1  Rings  21.  20.
'lhou  hast  sold  thyself  to  work  evil  111  the  sight
of  the  Lord.  Thou  hast  wilfully  and  wholly  Re¬
signed  up  thyself  to  be  a  slave  to  thine  own  bad  in¬
clinations,  to  Satan,  and  his  emissaries,  to  do
whatsoever  they  persuade  thee  to  do,  as  a  slave  is
wholly  in  his  master's  power,  and  must  employ  all
his  time  and  strength  for  his  service.  I  he  like
is  saidof  the  idolatrous  Israelites,  2  Rings  17 .  17-
The  apostle  Paul  says,  Rom.  7-  14.  But  J  H11,'
carnal,  sold  under  sin.  lie  did  not  sell  himself
to  sin,  or  to  commit  sin,  as  it  is  said  of  Ahab  ;
but  only  he  was  overpowered  sometimes  by  the
tyranny  of  corruption,  like  a  slave  forced  to  be
subject  to  a  cruel  master  :  he  was  not  sin  s  ser¬
vant  or  slave,  but  many  times  he  was  sin  s
captive  against  his  will,  as  himself  decla/es,
Horn,  7-23.

Gen.  25.31.  Jacob  said,  s.  me  this  day  thy  birth  right
37.  27.  come,  let  us  s.  him  to  the  Ishmaelites
Exod.  21.  7.  if  a  man  s.  his  daughter  to  be  a  servant
8.  to  s.  her  to  strange  nation,  shall  have  no  power
35.  they  shall  4.  the  live  ox  and  divide  the  money
22  1.  it  a  man  steal  an  ox,  and  kill  it,  or  s.  it
Lev.  25.  14.  if  thou  4.  ought  unto  thy  neighbour
29.  if  a  man  4.  a  dwelling-house  in  a  walled  city
47.  il  thy  brother  4.  himself  unto  the  stranger
Deut.  2.  28.  thou  shalt  4.  me  meat  for  money-
14.  21.  4.  that  which  dieth  ot  itself  unto  an  alien
21.  14.  thou  shalt  not  4.  her  at  all  for  money
Judg.  4.  9.  4.  Sisera  into  the  hand  ot  a  woman

1  Kings  21. 25.  Ahab  did  4.  himselt  to  work  wicked.

2  Kings  4.  7  •  go  4.  the  oil ,  and  pay  thy  debt,  and  live
Seh.  5.  8.  and  will  ye  even  4.  your  brethren  ?

10.  31.  bring  victuals  on  the  sabbath-day  to  4.

Prov  23.  237  buy  truth,  and  4.  it  not,  also  wisdom
Ezek.  30.  12.  4.  land  into  the  hand  ot  the  wicked
48.  14.  they  shall  not  4.  the  first-fruits  ot  the  land
Joel  3  8  1  will  4 .  your  sons  and  daughters  into  hand
of  Judah,  they  shall  4.  them  to  the  Sabeans
Amos  8.  5.  new-moon  be  gone,  that  we  may  s.  corn
6.  yea,  and  4.  the  refuse  of  the  wheat
Zech.  11.  5.  and  they  that  4.  them  say,  I  am  rich
Mat.  19.  21.  go  and  4.  that  thou  hast,  and  come  and
f<  llow  me,  Mark  10.  21.  Luke  12.  3.3. 1  18.  22.
25.  9.  but  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  4.  and  buy
Luke  22.  36.  let  him  j.  his  garment,  and  buy  a  sword
Jam.  4.  13.  we  will  buy  and  4.  and  get  gain
Rev.  13.  17.  that  no  man  might  buy  or  s.  save  he
SELLER.

Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  the  buyer,  so  with  the  4.

Ezek.  7.  12.  let  not  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  4.  mourn
13.  the  4.  shall  not  return  to  that  which  is  sold
Acts  16.  14.  a  woman  named  Lydia,  as.  ot  purple
SELLERS.

Seh.  13.  20.  merchants  and  4.  lodged  without  Jerus.
SELLEST.

Psal.  44.  12.  thou  4.  thy  people  tor  nought,  dost  not
SELLEI  H.

Exod.  21.  16.  he  that  stealeth  a  man  and  4.  him,  he
shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  Deut .  24.  7.
Ruth  4.  3.  he  said,  Naomi  4.  a  part  of  land
Prov.  11. 26.  blessing  upon  head  of  him  that  4.  corn
31.  24.  she  maketh  fine  linen  and  4.  it
Salt.  3.  4.  that  4.  nations  through  her  whoredoms
Mat.  13.  44.  he  4.  all,  and  buyeth  that  held
SELVEDGE.

Exod.  26.  4.  from  the  4.  in  the  coupling,  36.  11.
Our  SELVES.

Gen.  37.  10.  shall  we  come  and  bow  down  our  s.  ?


Of  .  IV.  Oiiou  »»  v.  -

44.  16.  Judah  said,  how  shall  we  clear  our ,


Sum.  32.  17.  but  we  our  s.  will  go  ready  armed
Deut.  2.  35.  cattle  we  took  for  a  prey  unto  ours.  3.  7 .
1  Ham.  14.  8.  we  will  discover  ours,  unto  them
Ezra  4.  3.  but  we  cmr  4.  together  will  build  to  Lord
8.  21.  that  we  might  afflict  our  s.  before  our  God
Job  34.  4.  let  us  know  among  our  s.  what  is  good
Psal.  83.  12.  let  us  take  to  our  s.  the  houses  of  God
100.  3.  it  is  he  that  made  us,  and  not  we  our  s.
Prov.  7.  18.  come,  let  us  solace  our  s.  with  loves
Isa.  28.  15.  and  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  our  4.
56.  12.  we  will  fill  our  s.  w  ith  strong  drink
Jer.  50.  5.  come,  let  us  join  our  4.  to  the  Lord
Luke  22.  71.  we  our  s.  have  heard,  John  4.42.

Acts  6.  4.  but  we  will  give  our  s.  to  prayer
23.  14.  w-e  have  bound  our  s.  under  a  curse
Rom.  8.  23.  even  we  our  s.  groan  within  ours.


Rom.  15. 1.  w  e  ought  to  bear  and  not  to  please  ours..

1  Cor.  11.  31.  if  we  would  judge  ours,  should  not

2  Cor.  1.  4.  wherewith  we  our  s.  are  comforted  of  G
*  9.  that  we  slKiuld  not  trust  in  our  s.  but  in  God

3.  1.  do  we  begin  again  to  commend  our  s.  to  you  ‘

5.  not  that  we  are  sufficient  of  our  s.  to  think  any

thing  as  of  ow  f.  but  our  sufficiency  is  ot  God

4.  2.  commending  our  4.  to  every  man's  conscience

5.  for  we  preach  not  our  s.  but  Christ  Jesus  the

Lord,  and  our  s.  your  servants  for  Jesus  sakt

5.  12.  for  we  commend  not  our  s.  again  unto  y  ou

13.  whether  we  be  besides  our  s.  it  is  to  God

6  4.  in  all  tilings  approving  our  s.  as  ministers

7.  1.  let  us  cleanse  our  s.  from  all  filthiness  ot  flesh
It).  12.  or  compare  our  s.  vviili  some  that commeud

14.  we  stretch  not  our  s.  beyond  our  measure

12.  19.  again,  think  ye  we  excuse  our  s.  unto  you  ;
Gal  2.  17.  we  our  s.  also  are  found  sinners

1  77/m.  2.  10.  how  unblameably  we  behaved  our  s.

2  Thess.  1.  4.  so  that  we  our  s.  glory  in  you

3.  7.  we  behaved  notc/wr  4.  disorderly  among  you

9.  but  to  make  our  s.  an  ensample  unto  you
Tit  3  3.  for  we  our  s.  were  sometimes  foolish
Heb.  io.  25.  not  forsaking  the  assembling  ot  our  s,

1  John  1.  8.  we  deceive  our  s.  the  truth  is  not  m  us.

Own  SELV  ES.

Acts  20.  30.  also  of  your  owns,  shall  men  rise

2  Cor.  8.  5.  but  first  gave  their  own  s.  to  the  Lord
13  5.  prove  your  own  s.  know  ye  not  your  owu  t.

2  Tim.  3.  2.  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  s.

Jam.  1.  22.  not  hearers,  deceiving  your  own  s.

Your  SELVES.

Gen.  18.  4.  wash,  and  rest  your  s.  under  the  tree
45.  5.  be  not  angry  with  your  s.  that  ye  sold  me
49.  1.  gather  your  s.  together,  2.  Jer.  6.  1.  Ezek

39.  17.  Joel  3.  11.  Zeph.  2.  1.  Rev.  19. 17
Exod  19.  12.  take  heed  to  your  4.  Deut.  2.  4.  |  4
15,  23. 1  11.  16.  Josh.  23.  11.  Jer.  17.  21
30.  37.  ye  shall  not  make  like  perfume  to  your  4.

32!  29-  consecrate  your  s.  to-day  to  the  Lord
Lev.  11.  43.  ye  shall  not  make  your  s.  abominable,
neither  shall  ye  make  your  s.  unclean  with  them
11. 44.  sanctify  y.  s.  20.  7-  Num.  11.  18.  Josh.  3.  5.  I

7.  13.  1  Sam.  16.  5.1  Chr.  15.  12.  2  Chr.  29. o.  I  35.6.
44.  nor  shall  y  e  defile  your  s.  18.  24,  30.

19.  4.  nor  make  to  your  s.  molten  gods
Sum.  16.  3.  wherefore  then  lift  you  up  your  s.  f
21.  separate  your  s.  from  this  congregation
31.3.  Moses  said,  arm  some  of  yewr  4.  unto  the  was

18.  the  w  omen-children  keep  alive  for  your  s.

19.  purify  both  your  s.  and  your  captives
Deut.  4.  16.  take  heed,  lest  ye  corrupt  your  4.  25.

11.  23.  shall  possess  mightier  nations  than  your  s .

14.  1.  ye  shall  not  cut  your  s.  tor  the  dead
31  14.  and  present  your  s,  in  the  tabernacle

29.  1  know  that  ye  will  utterly  corrupt  yours.
Josli.  2.  16.  and  lode  your  s.  there  three  days

6.  18.  and  ill  any  wise  keep  your  s.  from  the  accur¬
sed  thing,  lest  ye  make  your  s.  accursed

8.  2.  only  the  spoil  take  fora  prey  unto  your  4.

23.  7.  nor  serve  them,  nor  bow  your  s.  unto  them
*16.  ye  have  served,  and  bowed  your  4.  to  them
04  22  ye  are  w  itnesses  against  your  s.  have  chosen-

Judg.  i5.  12.  that  y  e  will  not  fall  upon  me  your  s.

1  Sam.  4.9.  quit  you- 1.  like  men,  O  ye  Philistines

10.  19.  present  your  s.  beiore  the  Lord  by  tribes
14!  34.  Saul  said,  disperse  your  s.  among  the  people

1  Kings  18.  25.  choose  you  one  bullock  for  your  s.

20.  12.  stl  yours.  111  array ,  and  they  set  themselves-
in  array,  2  Chrun.  20.  17.  Jer .  50.  14.

2  Chron.  29.  31.  now' ye  have  consecrated  your  s.

30.  8.  but  yield  your  s.  unto  Lord,  serve  him

32.  11.  to  give  over  your  s.  to  die  by  famine
35.  4.  prepare  your  s.  by  the  houses  ot  your  fathers-

Ezra  10.  11-  separate  your  s.  from  the  people  ot
Seh.  13.  25.  nor  take  their  daughters  for  your  4.

Job  19.  3.  that  you  make  your  s.  strange  to  me
5.  if  ye  will  indeed  magnify  your  4.  against  me
27.  12.  behold,  all  ye  your  s.  have  seen  it
42.  8.  and  offer  up  for  your  s,  a  burnt  offering
Isa.  8.  9-  associate  your  4.  gird  your  s.  Joel  1.  13.
29.  9.  stay  your  s.  II  46.  8.  shew  your  s.  men
49!  9.  to  them  that  are  in  darkness,  shewy<ttr  4,

50.  1.  for  your  iniquities  have  ye  sold  your  s.

11.  that  compass  your  s.  about  with  sparks
52.  3.  ye  have  sold  your  s.  for  nought
57.  4.  against  whom  do  y  e  sport  your  s.

5.  by  inflaming  your  s.  with  idols  under  every  tree
61.  6.  in  their  glory  shall  ye  boast  your  s.

Jer.  4.4.  circumcise  your  s.  to  the  Lord,  take  aw  ay
13.  18.  humbleyimr  s.Jam.  4.  10.1  Pet.b.  6-

25.  34.  wallow  your  s.  in  ashes,  ye  principal  ot  tlock

26.  15.  ye  shall  bring  innocent  blood  upon  yaw/-  s.
37.  9-  tli us  saith  the  Lord,  deceive  not  your  1.

44. 8.  that  ve  might  cut  your  s.  off  and  be  a  curse

Ezek.  14.  6.' repent  and  turn  your  s  18.  30,  32.

20.7.  defile  not  yours.  w.iththe  idols  of  Egypt, lo  -
31.  ye  pollute  your  s.  II  43.  loathe  your  s.  3o.  31.
44.  8.  have  set  keepers  of  my  charge  tor  your  s.
Hus.  10  12.  sow  to  your  s.  in  righteousness
Amos  5.  26.  the  star  of  your  God  ye  made  to  your  s.
Zech.  7.  6.  eat  for  your-s.  and  drum  tor  your  s.
Mat.  3.  9.  think  not  to  say  w  ithm  your  s.  Luke  3. 8

6.  19-  lay  not  up  for  your  4.  ||  20.  lay  up  toi  youi  s.
16.  8.  Jesus  said,  why  reason  y^e  among  yew  4.
23.  13.  ye  neither  go  in  yours.  Luke  11.  0~.

15.  tw  o-fold  more  the  child  ot  hell  than  your  s.
31.  wherefore  ye  be  witnesses  unto  youi  s.

25.  9.  but  go  ye  rather,  and  buy  for  your  s.

Mark  6.  31.  come  ye  your  s.  apart  into  ailesen

9.  33.  what  was  it  that  ye  disputed  among
"50.  have  salt  inyewr4.and  peace  one  with  another
13.  9.  but  take  heed  to  yours,  they  shall  deliver  y
up,  Luke  17  -  3.  1  21.  34.  ^m5.35.|M.  -o.


Luke  11.  46.  ye  your  4.  touch  not  the  burdens
12.  33.  provide  your  s.  bags  which  wax  not  t
36.  ye  your  s.  like  men  that  wait  h>r  the  ■ '

57.  why  evenot  your  s.  judge  ye  not  "bat  i-  -
13  28  prophets  in  the  kingdom,  \eyour  s. thi  s
16.  9.  made  to  your  s.  Jriends  of  the  mammon
15.  ve  are  they  which  justify  your  s.  before  men
17  14.  he  said,  go  shew  your  s,  unto  the  pnest


SEN


SEN


S  E  N


Luke  21  30.  ye  know  of  your  s.  that  summer  is  nigh

22.  17-  take  this,  and  divide  it  among  your  s.

23.  28.  but  weep  for  your  s.  and  for  your  children
John  3.  28.  ye  your  x.  bear  me  witness,  that  1  said

6.  43.  Jesus  said,  murmur  not  among  your  s.

16.  19-  do  ye  inquire  among  yours,  of  that  1  said
Acts  2.  22.  signs  God  did,  as  you  your  s.  also  know
40.  save  your  s.  from  this  untoward  generation

13.  46.  seeing  ye  juJge  your  s.  unworthy  of  life

15.  29.  from  which  it  ye  keep  your  s.  ye  do  well

20.  10.  trouble  not  your  s.  for  his  life  is  in  him
34.  you  yours,  know  that  these  hands  ministered

•Rom.  6.  11.  reckon  ye  also  your  s.  to  be  dead  to  sin
13.  but  yield  your  s.  unto  God,  as  those  alive
16.  to  whom  ye  yield  yours,  servants  to  obey

12.  19.  dearly  beloved,  revenge  not  your  s.  but

1  Cor.  5.  13.  put  from  your  s.  that  wicked  person

6.  ~.  why  do  ye  not  rath,  suffer  y.  s.  to  be  defraud,  r

7.  5.  ye  may  give  your  s.  to  fasting  and  prayer

11.  13.  judge  in  your  s.  is  it  comely  that  a  woman

pray  unto  God  uncovered  •

16.  16.  I  beseech,  that  ye  submit  your  s.  unto  such
•2  Cor.  7.1 1.  yea,  what  clearing  ot'your  s.  in  all  things

ye  have  approved  your  s.  clear  in  this  matter
11. 19.  suffer  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye  yours,  are  wise

13.  5.  examine  your  s.  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith
Eph.  2.  8.  through  faith,  and  that  not  ot'your  s.

5.  19.  speaking  to  your  s.  in  psalms  and  hymns

21 .  submitting  your  s.  one  to  another  in  fear  of  G .
Col.  3.  18.  wives,  submit  your  s.  unto  your  husbands
1  Thess.  2. 1 .  y.  s.  brethr.  know  our  entrance  to  you

3.  3.  your  s.  know  that  we  are  appointed  thereunto

4.  9.  ye  y.  s.  are  taught  of  G.  to  love  one  another

5.  2.  your  x.  know  that  day  of  the  Lord  so  corneth
11.  wherefore  comfort  your  s.  together,  and  edify
13.  and  be  at  peace  among  your  s.  15.

‘2  Thess.  3.  6.  we  command  that  ye  withdraw  yours.

7.  your  x.  know  how  ye  ought  to  follow  us
lleb.  10.  34.  knowing  in  your  s.  ye  have  in  heaven
13.  3.  remember,  as  being  yours,  also  in  the  body

17.  submit  your  s.  ||  Jam.  4.7.  submit^owx.  to  G.
lam.  2.  4.  are  ye  not  then  partial  in  your  s.?

1  Pet.  1.  14.  not  fashioning  your  s.  to  former  lusts

2.  13.  submit  your  s.  to  every  ordinance  of  man

4.  1.  arm  your  s.  likewise  with  the  same  mind

8.  above  all  things  fervent  charity  among  your  s.

5.  5.  ye  younger,  submit  yours,  unto  the  elder

1  John  5.  21.  little  children,  keep  your  s.  from  idols
•2  John  8.  look  to y.  s.  that  we  lose  not  those  things
Jude  20.  building  up  your  s.  on  most  holy  faith
21.  keep  yew  x.  in  love  of  G.  looking  for  mercy
See  Assemble,  ed.

SEN  ATE.

Acts  5.  21.  they  called  all  the  s.  of  Israel  together
SENATORS.

Ps.  105. 22.  to  bind  princes,  and  teach  his  s.  wisdom
SEND.

Jen.  24.  7-  Ood  shall  s.  his  angel  before  thee,  40.

12.  I  pray  thee,  s.  me  good  speed  this  day
54.  he  said,  s.  me  away  unto  my  master,  56.

38.  17..  wilt  thou  give  me  a  pledge  till  thou  s.  it  ?

43.  4.  if  thou  wilt  s.  our  brother  with  us
45.  5.  God  did  x.  me  before  you,  to  preserve  life
Exod.  4.  1.3.  s.  by  hand  of  him  whom  thou  wilt  s.

7.  2.  that  he  x,  children  of  Israel  out  of  his  land

9.  19.  s.  therefore  now,  and  gather  thy  cattle
12.  .3.3.  that  they  mights,  them  out  in  haste
3.3.  12.  nor  let  me  know  whom  thou  wilt  x.  with  me
Jev.  16.  21.  s.  him  away  by  the  hand  of  a  fit  man
Num.  13.  2.  s.  thou  men  to  search  land,  of  every
tribe  shall  ye  s.  a  man  a  ruler  among  them
31.  4.  of  every  tribe  s.  a  thousand  to  the  war
Deut.  1. 22.  we  will  s.  men  before  us  to  search

7.  20.  thy  God  will  s.  the  hornet  among  them
59.  12.  the  elders  shall  s.  and  fetch  him  thence

24.  1 .  give  her  a  bill  of  divorce,  and  s.  her  out
28.  20.  T.ord  shall  s.  upon  thee  cursing  and  rebuke

48.  shall  serve  enemies  Lord  shall  t.  against  thee
Judy.  13.  8.  let  man  of  God  thou  didst  s.  come  again

1  Sam.  5.  11.  s.  away  the  ark  of  God,  6.  8.

6.  2.  tell  us  wherewith  we  shall  s.  it  to  his  place

3.  if  ye  x.  away  the  ark  of  God,  s.  it  not  empty
9.  26.  saying,  up,  that  I  may  s.  thee  away

11.  .3.  give  us  respite,  that  we  may  s.  messengers

12.  17-  the  Lord  shall  s.  thunder  and  rain

16.  11.  Samuel  said  to  Jesse,  s.  and  fetch  David
19.  Saul  sent  and  said,  x.  me  David  thy  son

25.  25.  I  saw  not  the  young  men  thou  didst  s.

2  Sam.  11.6.  David  saying,  s.  me  Uriah  the  Ilittite

14.  .32.  come  hither,  that  I  may  s.  thee  to  king

15.  .36.  by  them  ye  shall  s.  unto  me  every  thing
17 -.16.  now  therefore  s.  quickly,  and  tell  David

1  Kings20.  9.  all  thou  didst  .v.  for  thy  serv.  I  will  do

2  Kings  2.  16.  he  said,  ye  shall  notx.  ||  17.  he  said,  x.

5.  7-  doth  x.  to  me  to  recover  a  man  of  his  leprosy
6. 13.  spy  where  he  is,  that  I  may  s.  and  fetch  him

7.  13.  let  us  x.  and  see  ||  9.  17-  x.  to  meet  Jehu
15.  37.  the  Lord  began  to  s.  against  Judah  Ttezin

1  Chron.  1.3.  2.  let  11s  s.  abroad  unto  our  brethren

2  Chr.  2.  7.  x.  me  therefore  a  man  cunning  to  work

8.  x.  me  also  cedar  trees,  fir  trees,  algum-trees

6.  27.  then  hear  thou,  and  s.  rain  upon  thy  land
28.  16.  Ahaz  did  s.  to  king  of  Assyria  to  help  him
.32.  9.  Sennacherib  did  s.  servants  to  Ilezekiah
Ezra  5.  17-  let  the  kingx.  his  pleasure  to  us
Neh.  2.  5.  that  thou  wouldest  s.  me  unto  Judah

6.  so  it  pleased  the  king  to  s.  me,  and  1  set  a  time

8.  10.  eat,  drink,  and  s.  portions  unto  them,  12.

Job  21.  11.  they  s.  forth  their  little  ones  as  a  flock

38.  .35.  canst  thou  s.  lightnings,  that  they  may  go  ?
Psal.  20.  2.  s.  thee  help  from  the  sanctuary
43.  3.  O  x.  out  thy  light  and  truth,  let  them  lead
57.  3.  he  shall  s.  from  heaven,  and  save  me  from
reproach  ;  God  shall x.  forth  his  mercy  and  truth
68.9-  thou,  O  God,  didst  s.  a  plentiful  rain
33.  he  doth  s.  out  his  voice,  a  mighty  voice
1 10.  2.  shall  s.  rod  of  thy  strength  out  of  Zion
1 18.  25.  O  Lord,  1  beseech  thee,  s.  now  prosperity
144.  7.  s.  thine  hand  from  above,  rid  me,  deliver
■Prov.  10.  26.  so  is  the  sluggard  to  them  that  s.  him

22.  21.  answ.  words  of  truth  to  them  that  x.  to  thee
'25.  13.  so  :s  faithful  messenger  to  them  that  x.  him


Eccl.  10.  1.  ointment  to  s.  forth  a  stinking  savour
Isa.  6.  8.  whom  shall  1  s.?  I  said,  here  am  1,  s.  me
10.  16.  Lord  shall  s.  among  his  fat  ones  leanness

16.  1.  s.  ye  the  lamb  to  the  ruler  of  the  land
19.  20.  he  shall  s.  them  a  Saviour,  a  great  one
32.  20.  that  s.  forth  thither  the  feet  of  ox  and  ass
57.  9.  didst  thy  messengers  far  oft,  and  debase

Jer.  1.  7.  thou  shalt  goto  all  that  1  shall  s.  thee
2.  10.  s.  unto  Kedar  H  9.  17-  s.  for  cunning  women
27.  .3.  x.  the  yokes  to  king  of  Edom  and  Moab
29.  31.  s.  to  all  them  of  the  captivity,  saying
42.  5.  for  the  which  the  Lord  shall  s.  thee  to  us
6.  we  will  obey  the  Lord,  to  whom  we  s.  thee
Mat.  9.38.  pray  ye  therefore  the  Lord  that  he  will
s.  forth  labourers  into  his  harvest,  Luke  10.  2.
10.  .34.  think  not  that  1  am  come  to  s.  peace
12.  20.  till  he  s.  forth  judgment  unto  victory
13. 41.  Son  ot  man  shall  v.  forth  his  angels,  and  they
shall  gather  them  offend,  24.  31.  Mark  13.  27.
15.  23.  s.  her  away,  for  she  crieth  after  us
21.  .3.  straightway  he  willx.  them,  Mark  11.  3.
Mark  3.  14.  that  he  might  s.  them  to  preach,  6.  7.

5.  10.  would  not  s.  them  away  out  of  the  country
12.  besought  him,  saying,  s.  us  into  the  swine
Luke  16.  24.  x.  Lazarus  ||  27.  x.to  my  father’s  house
John  14.  26.  whom  the  Father  will  s.  in  my  name

17.  8.  they  have  believed  that  thou  didst  s.  me
Acts  .3. 20.  he  shall  s.  Jes.  Christ  who  was  preached

7.  35.  same  did  God  s.  to  be  a  ruler  and  deliverer

10.  5.  and  now  s.  men  to  Joppa,  32.  |  11.  13.

11.  29- disciples  determined  tox.  relief  to  brethren
15.  22.  to  s.  chosen  men  of  their  company,  25.

25.  3.  that  he  would  s.  for  him  to  Jerusalem
27.  it  seemeth  unreasonable  to  s.  a  prisoner  and

Phil.  2.  19.  I  trust  in  the  Lord  to*.  Timotheus,  23.

25.  1  supposed  it  necessary  to  x.  F.paphroditus
2  J hess.  2.  11.  for  this  cause  God  shall  s.  delusions
Jit.  3.  12.  when  1  shall  x.  Artemas  unto  thee
Jam.  3.  11.  doth  fountain  s.  sweet  water  and  bitter  ?
Rev.  1.  11.  write  andx.  it  to  seven  churches  in  Asia
11.  10.  and  they  shall  s.  gifts  one  to  another
1  SEND.

Exod.  23.  20.  behold.  Is.  an  angel  before  thee
Sum.  22.  37.  did  I  not  earnestly  s.  unto  thee  ?

1  Sam.  20. 12.  if  there  be  good,  and  I  s.  not  to  thee
21.  2.  know  the  business  whereabout  1  s.  thee

2  Chron.  7.  13.  if  Is.  pestilence,  Ezek.  14.  19.

Isa.  6.  8.  voice  of  the  Lord,  say.  whom  shall  Is.?
Jer.  25.  15.  cause  all,  to  whom  Is.  thee  to  drink  it
Ezek.  2.  3.  1  s.  thee  to  the  children  of  Israel,  4.

14.  21.  when  Is.  my  four  sore  judgments
Mat.  10. 16.  behold,  1  s.  you  forth  as  sheep
11.  10.  behold,  Is.  my  messenger  before  thv  face
to  prepare  thy  way,  Mark  1.2.  Luke' 7 .  27.

23.  34.  behold  l  x.  you  prophets  and  wise  men
Mark  8.  3.  if  7  s.  them  away  fasting,  they  will  faint
Luke  10.  .3.  1  s.  you  forth  as  lambs  among  wolves

24.  49.  7  s.  the  promise  of  my  Father  upon  you
John  13. 20.  he  that  receiveth  whom  7  s.  receiv.  me

20.  21.  as  my  Father  sent  me,  even  so  x.  7  you
Acts  25.  21.  to  be  kept  till  7  s.  him  to  Caesar

26.  17.  from  Gentiles,  unto  whom  now  7  s.  thee

7  will  SEND.

Gen.  27.  45.  I  will  s.  and  fetch  thee  from  thence
37. 13.  come,  and  I  will  s.  thee  unto  them
38.  17.  he  said,  7 will  s.  thee  a  kid  from  the  flock
Exod.  .3. 10.  I  wills,  thee  unto  Pharaoh,  Acts  7.  34.

8.  21.  7  will  s.  swarms  of  flies  upon  thee

9.  14.  Iwill  s.  all  my  plagues  upon  thine  heart
23.  27.  7  will  s.  my  tear  ||  28.  7  will  s.  hornets

33.  2.  7  will  s.  an  angel  before  thee,  and  drive  out
Lev.  26.  22.  7  will  s.  wild  beasts  among  you

25.  7  will  s.  pestilence  ||  36.  7  will  s.  faintness
Dent.  11.  15.  1  will  s.  grass  in  thy  fields  for  cattle

32.  24.  7  will  s.  the  teeth  of  beasts  upon  them
1  Sam.  9.  16.  7  will  s.  thee  a  man  of  Benjamin
16.  1.  I  wills,  thee  to  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite
20.  13.  then  7  will  s.  shew  it  thee,  and  s.  thee  away

1  Kings  18.  1.  and  7  will  s.  rain  upon  the  earth
20. 6.  yet  7 will s.  my  servants  unto  thee  to-morrow

34.  7  will  s.  thee  away  with  this  covenant

2  Kings  19.  7.  7  will  s.  a  blast  upon  him,  Isa.  37.7.
Isa.  10.6.  7  will  s.  him  against  hypocritical  nation
66.  19.  7  wills,  those  that  escape  unto  the  nations

Jer.  8.  17.  behold,  7  wills,  serpents  among  you
9.  16.  7  will  s.  a  sword  after  them  till  consumed,
24-10.125.  16,  27.  129.  17.149.  37.
16.  16.  I  will  s.  for  many  fishers,  many  hunters
25.  9.  7  will  s.  and  take  the  families  of  the  north

4.3.  10.  7  will s.  Nebuchadnezzar  my  serv  ant
48.  12.  behold,  7  will  s.  unto  him  wanderers
51.  2.  and  7  will  s.  unto  Babylon  fanners

Ezek.  5.  16.  7  will s.  famine,  17.  I  14.  13.  AmosQ.  11.

7.3.  7  will  s.  mine  anger  upon  thee  and  judge
28.  23.  7  wills,  unto  her  pestilence  and  blood

Joel 2. 19.  7  will  s.  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil
Mai.  2.  2.  I  wills,  a  curse  ||  4.  5.  7  will  s .  Elijah
3.  1.  7  will  s.  my  messenger,  and  he  shall  prepare
Mat.  15.  32.  1  will  not  s.  them  away  fasting
Luke  11.  49.  7  will  s.  them  prophets  and  apostles
20.  1.3.  what  shall  I  do?  7  will  s.  my  beloved  son
John  15.  26.  the  Comforter  whom  7  will s.  16.  7.

Acts  22.  21.  7  will  s.  thee  far  hence  to  the  Gentiles

1  Cor.  16.  3.  whom  you  shall  approve,  them  Iwill s.

See  Fire.

SENDEST.

Dent.  15.  1.3.  when  thou  s.  him  out  free,  18.

Josh.  1.  16.  whithersoever  thou  x.  us  we  will  go

2  Kings  1.  6.  that  thou  s.  to  enquire  of  Baal  zebub
Job  14.  20.  changest  countenance,  and  x.  him  away
Psal.  104.  30.  thou  s.  thy  Spirit,  they  are  created

.  SENDETlf.

Dent.  24.  3.  and  if  the  latter  husband  s.  her  out
1  Kings  17.  14.  till  the  day  that  the  Lord  x.  rain
Job  5.  10.  and  who  x.  waters  upon  the  fields
12.  15.  he  s.  them  out,  they  overturn  the  earth
Psal.  104.  10.  hex.  the  springs  into  the  valleys
147.  15.  hex.  forth  his  commandment,  18.

Prov.  26.  6.  that  s.  a  message  by  the  hand  of  a  fool
Cant.  1.  12.  my  spikenard  s.  forth  the  smell  thereof
Isa.  18.  2.  that  s.  ambassadors  by  the  sea  in  vessels
Mat.  5.  45.  and  s.  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust


Mark  11.  1.  he.s.  forth  two  ot  his  disciples,  14.  13
Luke  14.  32.x.  and  desireth  conditions  of  peace
Acts  23.  26.  Claudius  Lysias  to  Felix  x.  greeting
SENDING.

2  Sam.  1.3.  16.  this  evil  in  x.  me  away  is  greater
2  Chron.  36.  15.  his  x.  messengers,  Jer.  7.  25.  I  25.
_  ,  4.  |  26.  5.1  29.  19. 1  35.  15.  |  41.  4.

Esth.  9. 19.  and  of  s.  portions  one  to  .mother,  22.
Psal.  78.  49.  by  x.  evil  angels  among  them
La.  7.25.  it  shall  be  for  the  .s.  forth  of  lesser  call  le
Ezek.  17.  15.  rebelled  in  x.  ambassadors  unto  Kgypt
Rom.  8.  .3.  God  x.  his  Son  in  likeness  01  sinful  flesh
SENSE,

Or  meaning  of  scripture.  It  is  said,  Neh.  8.  8.  I  hev
read  in  the  book,  in  the  law  of  God  distinctly,
and  gave  the  sense,  and  caused  them  to  under¬
stand  the  reading.  A  learned  author  says,  that
these  Jive  different  senses  may  be  distinguished  in
the  Scripture.  The  Grammatical  Sense  I  he
Historical  or  Literal  Sense.  1  he  Allegorical  or
Figurative  Sense.  The  Analogical  Sense,  j  he
Tropological  or  Moral  Sense.

I.  1  he  Grammatical  Sense  is  that  which  the  words
of  the  text  present  to  the  mind,  according  to  the
proper  and  usual  signification  of  those  words.
Thus  when  it  is  said,  that  God  repents,  that  he  is
in  anger,  that  he  ascends  or  descends,  that  he  has
eyes  open,  or  ears  attentive,  Hfc.  the  grammatical
sense  of  all  these  expressions  might  induce  one  to
think  that  God  is  corporeal,  and  subject  to  the  same
weaknesses  as  ourselves.  But  as  reason  and  sound
faith  do  assure  us,  that  he  hasnone  of  our  infirmi¬
ties  and  imperfections  ;  upon  such  occasions  we  are
not  to  abide  by,  or  confine  ourselves  to,  the  Gram¬
matical  Sense.

II.  The  Literal  and  Historical  Sense  is  that  which
belongs  to  the  history  or  fact,  to  the  sense  which
the  rehearsal  and  terms  of  the  Scripture  imme¬
diately  present  to  the  mind.  Thus  when  it  is  said,
that  Abraham  married  llagar,  that  he  afterwards
sent  her  away,  that  Isaac  was  born  of  Sarah,  that
he  received,  circumcision  :  all  these  facts,  taken  in
the  historical  and  literal  sei.se,  mean  nothing  else
than  what  is  expressed  in  the  history  ;  that  is,  the
marriage  of  Abraham  with  Hagar,  the  birth  of
Isaac,  & c.

HI.  The  Allegorical  and  Figurative  Sense  is  that
which  examines  what  may  be  concealed  under  the
terms,  or  under  the  event  mentioned  in  the  history.
Thus  the  marriage  of  Abraham  with  Hagar,  who
was  afterwards  repudiated  and  driven  away  because
of  her  insolence,  and  that  of  her  son,  is  a  figure  or
representation  of  the  Synagogue,  which  was  only
as  it  were  a  slave,  and  which  was  divorced  and
rejected,  because  of  its  infidelity  and  ingratitude.
Sarah  ex  the  figure  of  the  Christian  Church,  and
Isaac  of  the  people  chosen  of  God,  Gal.  4.  22.
23,  24,  &c.  *

IV.  The  Analogical  Sense,  or  Sense  of  Analogy
and  Agreement,  ex  that  which  refers  some  expres¬
sions  of  Scripture  to  eternal  life  and  happiness ;
because  of  some  conformity  or  similitude  between
the  terms  that  are  brought  to  express  something
coming  to  pass  in  this  world,  and  what  shall  come
to  pass  in  heaven.  For  example,  on  occasion  of
the  Sabbath,  or  of  the  seventh  day's  rest  that  was
enjoined  the  people  of  God,  a  transition  may  be
made  to  that  repose  or  rest  that  the  saints  enjoy  in
heaven.  On  occasion  of  the  Israelites  entering
into  the  land  of  promise,  we  naturally  pass  to  treat
of  the  entering  of  the  Elect  into  heaven  :  these
transitions  the  Apostle  makes,  Heb.  3.  18,  19.

V.  The  Moral  or  Tropological  Sense  is  that
which  deduces  moral  refections  for  the  conduct
of  life,  and  for  the  reformation  of  manners,
from  what  is  related  historically  or  literally  in
Scripture.  For  example,  on  occasion  of  these
words  of  Dent.  25.  4.  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle
the  ox  when  he  treadeth  out  the  corn,  St.  Paul
says,  that  those  that  preach  the  gospel,  and  in¬
struct  us  in  the  way  to  salvation,  ought  to  be
supplied  with  the  necessaries  of  life,  1  Cor.  9.  9

r  10,  11,14.

These  five  Senses  may  be  observed  in  this  one
word,  Jerusalem.  According  to  the  Grammati¬
cal  Sense,  it  signifies  the  Vision  of  peace  ;  ac¬
cording  to  the  literal  and  historical,  the  capital
city  of  Judea ;  according  to  the  allegorical ,
the  church  militant  ;  according  to  the  analogi¬
cal,  the  church  triumphant ;  according  to  the
moral,  a  faithful  soul,  of  which  Jerusalem  is  a
kind  of  figure.

SENSES.

Heb.  5.  14.  have  their  x.  exercised  to  discern  good

SENSUAL.

Jam.  .3.  15.  this  wisdom  is  earthly,  x.  devilish
Jude  19.  these  be  x.  having  not  the  Spirit
SENT.

Gen.  .37.  32.  they  x.  the  coat  of  many  colours
38.  20.  Judah  x.  the  kid  by  hand  of  his  friend
25.  Tamar  x.  to  her  father-in-law,  saying,  by
41.  14.  then  Pharaoh  x.  and  called  Joseph
42.4.  but  Benjamin  Jacob  x.  not  with  his  brethren
45.  8.  it  was  not  you  that  x.  me  hither,  but  God
50.  16.  they  x.  a  messengers  unto  Joseph,  saying
Fxod.  3.  14.  thou  shalt  say,  1  AM  hath  x.  me  to  you

5.  22.  Lord,  why  is  it  that  thou  hast  x.  me  ?

Num.  1.3.  16.  the  names  of  the  men  Moses  x.  14.36.
22.  10.  Ralak  the  king  of  Moab  hath  x.  unto  me

15.  Balak  x.yet  again  princes  more  honourable
Josh.  6.  17-  because  she  hid  the  messengers  we  x.

14.  7.  forty  years  old  was  I  when  Moses  x.  me
Judg.  20. 6.  I  cut  her  in  pieces  and  x.  her  thro’  1  srael

1  Sam.  31.  9-  x.  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines

2  Sam.  24.  13.  what  answer  return  him  that  x.  me

1  Kings  18. 10.  no  nation  whither  my  lord  hath  not.

21.  11.  the  elders  did  as  Jezebel  had  x.  unto  them

2  Kings  1 .6.  return  unto  the  kingthatx.  you,  and  say

6.  10.  and  king  of  Israel  x.  to  the  place  the  man

14.  9.  thistle  x.to  the  cedar  in  Lebanon,  saying

16.  11.  Urijah  built  according  as  Ahaz  had  x.

431


SEN


SEN


SEP


2  Kings  IS.  27.  Rab  shakeh  said  to  them,  hath  my
master  s.  me  to  thy  master  to  speak,  words  ?
Isa.  36.  12.

19.  4.  his  master  s.  to  reproach  the  living  God
22. 15.  she  said,  thus  saitli  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,
tell  man  that  s.  you  unto  me,  IB.  2  Chron.  34.  23.
Ezra  4.  11.  this  is  the  copy  of  the  letter  they  .r.

Neh.  6.  4.  they  s.  unto  me  four  times  after  this  sort
Psal.  105.  20.  king  .?.  and  loosed  him,  the  ruler
Isa.  48. 16.  Imrd  Go  I  and  his  Spirit  hath  r.  me
Jer.  14.  3.  their  nobles  have  s.  their  little  ones
23.21.  I  have  not  s.  these  prophets,  yet  they  ran

29.  25.  because  thou  bast  s.  letters  in  thy  name
37.  7.  thus  shall  ye  say  unto  the  king  that  s.  you
42.  9*  whom  ye  -v.  to  present  your  supplication,  20.
Ezek.  23  40.  ye  have  s.  for  men  to  come  from  far
Dav  3.28.  who  had  s.  his  angel  and  delivered
Hos.  5.  13.  then  Ephraim  went  and  s.  to  king  .lareb
Zech.  7.  2.  when  they  had  s.  unto  the  house  of  God
Mat.  10.  40.  he  that  received)  me,  received)  him  that
s.  me,  Mark  9.  .37.  Luke  9.  48.  John  13.  20.

21. 1.  then  s.  Jesus  two  disciples,  saying  to  them
27- 19.  Pilate’s  wife  s.  unto  him,  saying,  have
Mark  6.  27.  immediately  the  king  s.  an  executioner
Luke  7.  20.  John  Baptist  hath  j.  us  unto  ihee
10.  1.  Jesus  s.  them  two  and  two  before  his  face

14.  17.  he  s.  his  servant  at  supper  time  to  say
19.  14.  they  s.  a  message  after  him,  saying
23. 11.  mocked  him,  and  s.  him  again  to  Pilate
John  1.  22.  we  may  give  answer  to  them  that  s.  us

4.  34.  my  meat  is  to  do  will  of  him  that  s.  me

5.  23.  honoureth  not  the  Father  who  hath  j.  me

24.  that  believeth  on  him  that  s.  me,  12.  44.

30.  but  will  of  him  who  s.  me,  6.  38,  39,  40.

33.  ye  s.  unto  John,  and  he  bale  witness  to  truth
36.  the  same  works  1  do  bear  w  itness  that  the

Father  hath  s.  me,  37.  1  6.  57.  I  8.  16,  18

6.  44.  except  the  Father  which  .t.  me  draw  him

7.  16.  my  doctrine  is  not  mine,  but  his  that  s.  me
18.  but  he  that  seeketh  his  glory  that  .t.  him
32.  Pharisees  and  priests  s.  officers  to  take  him

9.4.  1  must  work  the  w  orks  of  him  that  s.  me
10.  36.  say  ye  of  him  whom  the  Father  hath  s.
11.42.  that  they  may  believe  thou  hast  s.  me

12.  45.  he  that  seeth  me,  seeth  him  that  v.  me
49.  F'ather  who  s.  me  gave  me  a  commandment

14.24.  word  is  not  mine,  but  Father’s  who  s.  me
15!  21.  because  they  know  not  him  that  s.  me
16.  5.  but  now  l  go  my  way  to  him  that  s.  me

17.3.  is  life  eternal,  to  know  Jesus  whom  thou  s.

18.  as  thou  hast  j-.  me  into  the  world,  so  1  s.

21.  the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  s.  me

23.  that  the  world  may  know  thou  hast  s.  me

25.  and  these  have  known  that  thou  hast  .9.  me
20. 21.  as  my  Father  nath  s.  me,  even  so  send  1  you

Acts  5.  21.  .v.  to  the  prison  to  have  them  brought

10.  29.  1  ask  for  what  intent  ye  have  s.  for  me

11.  30.  s.  it  to  the  elders  by  Barnabas  and  Saul

13.  15.  the  rulers  of  the  synagogue  .r.  urto  them

15.  27.  we  have  therefore  s.  Judas  and  Silas

16.  36.  the  magistrates  have  s.  to  let  you  go

19.  31.  Paul's  friends  .t.  unto  him,  desiring  him

1  Cor.  1. 17.  Christ s.  me  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach

2  Cor.  8.  18.  we  have  s.  with  him  the  brother,  22.

Phil.  4. 16.  in  Thessalonica  ye  s.  once  and  again
1  John  4.  14.  testify  that  the  Father  s.  the  Son

SENT  auay.

Gen.  12.  20.  Pharaoh  s.  away  Abraham  and  his  wife

21.  14.  Abranams.  Ishmael  and  Ilagar  away

24.  59.  they  r.  away  Rebekah  their  sister

25.  6.  Abraham  s.  Keturah’s  children  away

26.  27.  seeing  ye  hate  me  and  have  s.  me  away
29.  as  we  have  thee  away  in  peace,  thou  art

28.  5.  Isaac  s.  away  Jacob  to  Pade.n-aram
6.  Isaac  had  blessed  Jacob  and  s.  him  array

31.  27.  I  might  have  s.  thee  away  with  mirth
42.  surely  thou  hadst  s.  me  away  empty

45.  24.  he  s.  his  brethren  away,  they  departed
Deut.  24.  4.  .r.  her  away,  may  not  take  her  again
Josh.  2.21.  Rahab  s.  spies  away,  they  departed

22.  6.  Joshua  .t.  Reuhenites  and  Gadites  away ,7-
Judy.  11.  38.  Jephthah  s.  his  daughter  away

1  Sam.  10-  25.  Samuel  .v.  all  the  people  away

19. 17.  Sj.nl  said,  why  hast  thou  s.  away  my  enemy  ?

2  Sam.  3.  21 .  David  .r.  Abner  away,  and  he  went
24.  why  is  it  that  thou  hast  s.  him  away?

10.  4.  cut  garments,  and  f.  them  away,  1  Chr  j.  4.

1  Chron.  12.  19.  lords  of  Philistines  s.  David  away
Job  22.  9.  thou  hast  s.  widows  away  empty
Mark  12.  3.  and  they  caught  the  servant  and  beat
him  and  s.  him  away,  4.  Luke  20.  10,  11
Luke  1.  53.  and  the  rich  he  hath  s.  empty  away

8.  38.  but  Jesus  s.  him  array,  saying
Acts  13.  3.  laid  hands  on  them,  they  s.  them  away
17. 10.  brethren  immediately' s.  away  Paul,  14.

God  SEW.

Gen.  45.  7.  God  s.  me  before  you  to  preserve  life
Exod.  .3. 13.  the  God  of  your  fathers  hath  s.  me
15.  the  God  of  Jacob  hath  .v.  me  unto  you
Judy.  9.  23.  Gods,  evil  spirit  between  Abimelech
1  Chron.  21.  15.  God  s.  an  angel  unto  Jerusalem
Neh.  6. 12.  I  perceived  that  God  had  not  s.  him
Jer.  43.1.  for  which  the  Lord  their  Gods,  him
2.  God  hath  net  s.  to  thee  to  say ,  go  not  into  Egypt
Dan.  6.  22.  God  hath  s.  his  angel,  and  hath  shut
John  3.  17.  Gods,  not  his  Son  to  condemn  world
.34.  he  whom  God  hath  s.  speaketh  words  of  God
Acts  3.26.  God  hath  raised  his  Son  Jesus,  s.  him
10.  36.  word  God  s.  unto  the  children  of  Israel
Gal.  4.4.  Gods,  forth  his  Son  made  of  a  woman
6.  God  hath  s.  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son
1  John  4.  9.  ( iod  s.  his  only  begotten  Son  into  world
10.  God  s.  his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation  for  our  sins
Rev.  22.  6.  Gods,  his  angel  to  shew  his  servants
He  SENT.

Gen.  45.  2.3.  to  his  father  he  s.  after  this  manner
46.  28.  he s.  Judah  before  him  unto  Joseph
l.rod.  18.  2.  took  Zipporah,  after  he  had  s.  her  back
Judy.  11.  28.  Ammon  hearkened  not  to  words  hes,

1  Sam.  17.  31.  rehearsed  words,  and  he  s.  for  David
30.  26.  he  s.  of  the  spoil  unto  the  elders  of  J  udah
t  Sam.  10.  5.  he  s.  to  meet  them.  I  Chron.  19.  5.

43?


2  Sam.  14.  29.  when  he  s.  again,  he  would  not  come
22.  if.  he  s.  front  above,  took  me,  Psal.  18.  16.

1  Kinys  20.  7.  for  he  s.  unto  me  for  my  wives

2  Kings  17.  26.  therefore  he  s.  lions  among  them
2  Chron.  24.  19.  yet  he  s.  prophets  to  them  to  bring

25.  15.  he  s.  unto  Amaziah  a  prophet,  which  said
Esth.  5.  10.  he  s.  and  called  for  his  friends
Psal.  78.  25.  he  s.  them  meat  to  the  full

105.  17.  he  s.  a  man  before  them,  even  Joseph
26.  he  s.  Moses  his  servant  and  Aaron

28.  he  s.  darkness,  and  made  it  dark

106.  15.  but  he  s.  leanness  into  their  soul

107.  20.  he  s.  his  word  and  healed  them
111.  9.  he  s.  redemption  unto  his  people
Isa.  61.  1.  he  s.  me  to  bind  up  the  broken  hearten,

to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  l  like  4.  18.
Jer.  29.  28.  he  s.  unto  us  in  Baby  Ion,  saying
42.  21.  forthe  which  he  hath  s.  me  unto  you
Lam.  1.  13.  from  above  he  s.  fire  into  my  bones
Zech.  2.  8.  after  the  glory  hath  he  s.  me  to  nations
Mat.  21.  .36.  again  he  s.  other  serv.  more  than  first
.37.  last  of  all  he  s.  unto  them  his  son,  Mark A2.  4.

22.  7.  he  s.  forth  his  armies,  and  destroyed  those
John  1.  33.  he  that  s.  me  to  baptize  with  water

5.  .38.  for  whom  he  hath  s.  him  ye  believe  not

6.  29.  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  .?.

7.  28.  he  that  .c.  me  is  true,  ye  know  not,  8.  26.

29.  but  I  know  him,  and  he  hath  s.  me

8.  29.  and  he  that  .v.  me  is  with  me  ;  the  Father

42.  neither  came  I  of  myself,  but  he  s.  me
Acts  24.  26.  wherefore  he  s.  for  Paul  the  oftener
Kev.  1.  1.  he  s.  and  signified  it  by  his  angel  to  John

1  SENT.

Gen.  32.  5.  Ihave  s.  to  tell  my  lord,  to  find  grace
.38.  23.  Is.  this  kid,  and  thou  hast  not  found  her
Exod.  .3.  12.  this  shall  be  a  token  that  I  haves,  thee
Num.  .32.  8.  thus  did  your  fathers  w  hen  I  s.  them
Josh.  24.  5.  Is.  Moses  also  and  Aaron,  Mic.  6.  4.
Judy.  6.  14.  thou  shalt  sa  ve  lsr.  have  not  I  s.  thee  ?

2  Kinys  5.  6.  I  have  s.  Naaman  my  servant  to  thee
17.  13.  the  law  which  I  s.  to  you  by  my  servants
Isa.  42.  19.  who  is  deaf,  as  my  messenger  that  I  s.  ?

43.  14.  for  your  sake  I  have  s.  to  Babylon
55.  11.  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  Is.  it

Jer.  7.  25.  Is.  untoyou  all  my  servants  the  prophets,
daily  rising  up  early,  26.  5.  I  35.  15.  I  44.  4.
14.  14.  I  s.  them  not,  nor  commanded,  nor  spake
to  them,  15.  123.  21,  32.1  27-  15.  129-  9.
29.  31.  I s.  him  not,  he  caused  you  to  trust  in  a  lie
Ezek  .3. 6.  surely  had  Is.  thee  to  them  would  hearken
Dan.  10.  11.  O  Daniel  underst. ;  to  thee  am  I  now  s.
Joel  2.  25.  my  great  army  which  I  s.  among  you
Imos  4.  10.  I  have  s.  among  you  the  pestilence
Zech.  9.  11.  7  have  s.  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  pit
Mai.  2.  4.  and  ye  shall  know  that  1  have  j.  this
Luke  A.  43.  I  must  preach,  for  therefore  am  7  s.

22.  35.  when  7  s.  you  without  purse  and  scrip
John  17.  18.  so  have  7  .t.  them  into  the  world
Acts  10.  20.  doubting  nothing,  tor  7  have  .t.  them
33.  immediately  there!.  7  s.  thee,  hast  well  done
1  Cor.  4. 17.  for  this  cause  have  Is.  toyou  Timotheus
Cor.  9.  3-  yet  have  7 s.  brethren,  lest  our  boasting
12.  17.  did  1  make  a  gain  of  you  by  any  whom  Is.?
18.  1  desired  Titus,  and  with  him  7  v.  a  brother
F-ph.  6.  22.  whom  1  s.  for  same  purpose,  Col.  4.  8.
Phil  2.  28.  7  s.  him  therefore  the  more  carefully

1  These.  3.  5.  for  this  7  s.  to  know  your  faith
Phil.  12.  whom  7  have  again,  receive  him

See  Lord.

SENT  forth.

Gen.  8.  7.  Noah  s.  forth  a  raven  ||  10.  s.  forth  clove
Prov.  9.  .3.  she  hath  s.  forth  her  maidens,  she  crieth
Mat.  2.  16.  Ilerod  s.  forth  and  slew  all  the  males

10.  5.  these  twelve  Jesus  s.  forth,  and  commanded
22.  .3.  and  s.  forth  his  servants  to  call  them  bidden

Mark  6.  17.  Herod  s.  forth  and  laid  hold  upon  John
Luke  20.  20.  chief  priests  and  scribes  s.  forth  spies
Acts  9.  .30.  the  brethren  r.  him  forth  to  Tarsus

11.  22.  they  s.  forth  Barnabas  as  tar  as  Antioch
SENT  out.

Gen.  19.  29.  God  s.  Lot  out  of  midst  of  overthrow
Sam.  26.  4.  David  theref.''.  out  spies  and  unders.

2  Sam.  22.  15.  and  he  s.  out  arrows,  Psal.  18.  14.
Job  .39.  5.  who  hath  s.  out  the  wild  ass  free  f
Psal.  77.  17.  clouds  poured  out,  skies  s.  out  a  sound
80.  11.  she  s.  out  her  boughs  to  sea,  and  branches

Jer.  24.  5.  whom  I  have  s.  out  of  this  place  to  Chald.
Ezek.  31.  4.  she  hath  s.  out  her  little  rivers  to  trees
Acts  7-  12.  Jacob  s.  out  our  fathers  first
Jam.  2.  25.  Rahab  had  .t.  them  out  another  way
SENT,  Passive.

Gen.  32.  18.  it  is  a  present  j.  to  my  lord  Esau
1  Kings  14.  6.  I  am  s.  to  thee  with  heavy  tidings
Ezra  7.  14.  forasmuch  as  thou  art  s.  of  the  king
Prov.  17.II.  acruel  messenger  shall  be  s.  againsthim
Jer.  49. 14.  an  ambassador  is  s.  unto  the  heathen
Ezek.  2.  9.  behold,  an  hand  was  j.  unto  me,  and  lo

3.  5.  art  not  j.  to  a  people  of  a  strange  speech
23.  40.  unto  whom  a  messenger  was  s.  and  lo
Dan.  5.  24.  then  was  part  of  the  hand  j.  from  him
Chad.  1.  an  ambassador  is  s.  among  the  heathen
Mat.  15.  24.  I  am  not but  unto  lostsheep  of  Israel

23.  37.  and  stonest  them  who  are  f.  Luke  1.3.  .34.
Luke 1. 19.  I  am  Gabriel,  and  am  s.  tospeak  to  thee
26.  angel  Gabriel  was  s.  from  God  unto  Nazar.

4.  26.  but  unto  none  of  them  was  Elias  s.  save
John  1.  6.  a  man  s.  from  God,  whose  name  was  Jo

8.  John  was  s.  to  bear  witness  of  that  light
24.  they  who  were  s.  were  of  the  Pharisees
3.  28.  I  said,  I  am  not  Christ,  but  .f.  before  him
9.  7-  wash  in  Siloam,  which  is  by  interpretation,  j
13.  16.  nor  he  that  is  s.  greater  than  he  that  j.  him
Acts  10.  17.  men  that  were  s.  had  made  inquiry
21.  Peter  went  to  the  men  who  were  s.  11.  11.

29.  theref.  came  I  to  you  as  soon  as  I  was  j.  for
1.3.  4.  so  they  being  s.  forth  by  the  Holy  Ghost
26.  to  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  s.

28.  28.  the  salvation  of  God  is  s.  unto  the  Gentiles
Rom.  10.  15.  how  shall  they  preach,  ex.  they  be.r.f
Phil.  4.  18.  received  things  which  were  s.  from  you
Heb.  1.  14.  spirits  .?.  forth  to  minister  for  them
1  Pet.  1.  12.  with  the  Holy  Ghost  s.  from  heaven


1  Pet.  2.  14.  or  unto  governors,  as  them  that  are  s.
Rev.  5.  6.  the  seven  spirits  j.  forth  into  the  earth
SEN  TEST.

Exod.  15.7 .s.  forth  thy  wrath,  which  consumed  them
Num.  13.  27.  we  came  to  land  whither  thou  s.  us
24.  12.  spake  I  not  to  the  messengers  thou  s.  us

1  Kinys  5.  8.  have  considered  things  thou  s.  to  me  for

SENTENCE.

Deut.  17.  9.  they  shall  shew  thee  the  s.  of  judgme  &

10.  thou  shalt  do  according  to  the  s.  11.

Psal.  17.  2.  let  my  j.  come  forth  from  thy  presence
Prov.  16.  10  a  divine  s.  is  in  the  lips  of  the  king
Eccl.  8.  11.  because  £.  is  not  executed  speedily
Jer.  4.  12.  now  also  will  1  give  s.  against  them
Luke  23.  24.  Pilate  gave  s.  that  it  should  be
Acts  15.  19.  my  s.  is,  that  we  trouble  not  them

2  Cor.  1.  9.  we  had  the  s.  of  death  in  ourselves

SENTENCES.

Dan.  5. 12.  shewing  of  hard  s.  found  in  same  Daniel
8.  23.  a  king  understanding  dark  s.  shall  stand  up
SEPARATE

Signifies,  [1]  To  part,  divide,  or  put  asunder,  Gen.
30.  40.  [2]  To  consecrate  and  set  apart  for  some
special  ministry  or  service.  Acts  13.  2.  Separate
me  Barnabas  and  Saul,  for  the  work  whereunto
1  have  called  them.  [3]  To  withdraw,  or  retire
from  worldly  empl  yments  and  enjoyments,  and  to
devote  oneself  to  the  service  of  God  ;  thus  the  N  a-
zarites  separated  themselves,  Num.  6.  2.  some  for
life,  others  for  a  certain  time  only.  See  Naza-
r  ite.  [4]  To  forsake  the  communion  of  the
church,  Jude  19.  [5]  To  excommunicate,  Luke
6.  22.  [6]  To  disperse,  or  scatter  abroad  into  dif¬
ferent  parts  of  the  world,  Deut.  32.  8.  [7]  To  be
disowned,  disregarded,  and  forsaken  by  a  person,
Prov.  19.  4.  The  poor  is  separated  from  bis
neighbour  ;  that  is,  is  forsaken  by  those  who  are
most  obliged  to  help  him.  [8]  To  distinguish  per¬
sons  from  others,  by  conferring  upon  them  many
precious  and  valuable  privileges  and,  blessings  ;
thus  the  Lord  separated  the  Israelites  from  all
other  nations  in  the  earth,  and  chose  them  for  his
peculiar  people,  1  Kings  8.  53.

Gen.  13.9.  Abram.said,  s.  thys.  I  pray  thee,  from  me
.30.  40.  Jacob  did  s.  the  lambs,  and  set  the  faces
Lev.  15.  .31.  thus  shall  ye  j.  the  children  of  Israel
22.  2.  speak  to  Aaron  and  his  sons  that  they  j.

Num.  6.  2.  when  man  or  woman  shall  s.  themselves,
to  vow  a  vow,  to  i.  themselves  unto  the  Lord
3.  the  Nazarite  shall  s.  himself  from  wine
8.  14.  thus  shalt  thou  s.  the  Levites  from  Israel
16.  21.  s.  yourselves  from  among  this  congregation
Deut.  19.  2.  thou  shalt  j.  three  cities  in  thy  land, 7.
29.  21.  Lord  shall  j.  him  unto  evil  out  of  Israel

1  Kings  8.  53.  didst .?.  them  to  be  thine  inheritance
Ezra  10.  11.  .v.  yourselves  from  people  of  the  land
Jer.  37.  12.  Jeremiah  went  to  s.  himself  thence
Mat.  25. 32.  he  shall  j-.  them  as  a  shepherd  his  sheep
Luke  6.  22.  blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  s.  you
Acts  1.3.  2.  s.  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  forthe  work
Rom.  8.  35.  who  shall  s.  us  from  love  of  Christ?

39.  nothing  be  able  to  .t.  us  from  love  of  God
Jude  19.  these  be  they  who  s.  themselves,  sensual
SEP  A  RATE.

Gen.  49.  26.  shall  be  on  the  head  of  Joseph  and  of
him  that  was  a.  from  his  brethren,  Deut.  .33.  16.
Josh.  16.  9.  the  j.  cities  of  Ephraim  were  among
Ezek.  41.  12.  building  that  w  as  before  the  place

13.  so  he  measured  the  house  and  the  j.  place

14.  the  breadth  of  the  j.  place  toward  the  east
42.  1.  chamber  over  against  the  s.  place,  10,  13.

2  Cor.  6.  17.  come  out  from  among  them,  be  ye  .r.
Heb.  7. 26.  is  holy ,  harmless,  undefil.f.  fromsinners

SEPARATED.

Gen.  1.3.  11.  then  Abram  and  Lot  s.  themselves

14.  Lord  said,  after  that  Lot  was  5.  from  him
25.  2.3.  tw  o  manner  of  people  be  .t.  from  thy  bowels

Exod.  33.  16.  so  shall  we  be  s.  from  people  on  earth
Lev.  20.  24.  I  am  the  Lord  who  have  j.  you  from
25.  which  I  have  s.  from  you  as  unclean
Num.  16.  9.  that  the  God  of  Israel  hath  s.  you
Deut.  10.  8.  the  Lord  s.  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  stand

32.8.  when  he  .s.  sons  of  Adam,  he  set  bounds

1  Chron.  12.  8.  of  the  Gadites  there  s.  unto  David

2.3.  13.  Aaron  was  .t.  that  he  should  sanctify
25.  1.  David  s.  to  the  service  of  sons  of  Asaph

2  Chron.  25.  10.  then  Amaziah  s.  them,  the  army
Ezra  6.21.  all  that  had  .t.  themselves  unto  them

8.  24.  then  l  s.  twelve  of  the  chiefs  of  the  priests

9.  1.  priests  and  Levites  have  not.?,  themselves

10. 8.  who  would  not  come,  lie  s.  from  congregation

16.  all  of  them  by  their  names  were  s.  and  sat
Neh.  4.  19.  work  is  great,  and  we  are  s.  upon  wail

9.  2.  Israel  j.  themselves  from  all  strangers

10.  28.  they  that  had  .t.  clave  to  the  brethren

1.3.  3.  they  s.  from  Israel  the  mixed  multitude
Prov.  18.  1.  through  desire  a  man  having  s.  himself

19.  4.  but  the  poor  is  s.  from  his  neighbour
l,a.  56.  3.  the  Lord  hath  s.  me  from  his  people
59.  2.  iniquities  have  j.  between  you  and  your  G.
Hos.  4.  14.  for  themselves  are  .v.  w  ith  w'hores
9. 10.  they  w  ent  and  s.  themselves  unto  that  shame
Acts  19.  9.  Paul  departed,  and  j-.  the  disciples
Rom.  1. 1.  Paul  an  apostle,  s.  to  the  gospel  of  God
9.  +  3.  1  could  wish  that  1  were  s.  from  Christ
Gal.  1.15.  God  who  s.  me  from  my  mother’s  womb
2.  12.  Peter  withdrew  and  s.  himself,  fearing
SEPARATETFI.

Num.  6.  5.  till  the  days  be  fulfilled  in  which  he  s
6.  the  days  he  s.  he  shall  come  at  no  dead  body
Prov.  16.  28.  and  a  whisperer  s.  chief  friends

17.  9.  he  that  repeateth  a  matter  s.  very  friends
Ezek.  14.  7.  or  of  the  stranger  which  s.  himseh

SEPARATION.

Lev.  12.  2.  the  days  of  the  j.  for  her  infirmity
5.  she  shall  be  unclean  two  weeks,  as  in  her  s.

15.  t  19.  she  shall  be  in  her  s.  seven  days
20.  bed  she  lieth  upon  in  herj.  shall  be  unclean

25.  an  issue  of  blood  out  of  the  time  of  her  s.

26.  every  bed  shall  be  to  her  as  the  bed  of  her  s.

16.  +22.  goat  shall  bear  iniquities  to  land  of  s
20.  +  21.  take  his  brother’s  wife,  it  is  a  j


SEP


S  E  R


A nr».  6.  4  days  of  s.  shall  eat  nothing  of  vine-tree
5.  all  days  of  his  .r.  no  razor  shall  come  on  head
H.  all  the  days  of  his  s.  he  is  holy  unto  the  Lord

12.  he  shall  consecrate  to  Lord  the  days  of  his  s.

and  bring  a  lamb,  because  his  .v.  w  as  defiled"

13.  when  the  days  of  his  s.  are  fulfilled

18.  Nazarite  shall  shave  the  head  of  his  s.  and
take  the  hair  of  his  s.  and  put  it  in  the  fire

19.  after  the  hair  of  the  Nazarite’s  s.  is  shaven

21.  his  offering  for  his  .v.  after  the  law  off.

19.  9.  the  ashes  shall  be  kept  for  a  water  of  s.

13.  the  water  of  s.  hath  not  been  sprinkled,  20.

21.  he  that  sprinkleth  water  of  e.  shall  wash  his

clothes,  that  toucheth  water  of  s.  shall  be  unci.
31.  23.  it  shall  be  purified  with  the  wafer  of  s.
bzek.  42.  20.  it  had  a  wall  round  to  make  a  s.
cech.  13.  f  1.  fountain  opened  for  s.  for  uncleanness
,  SEPARATING.

Zech.  7.  3.  should  1  weep  in  the  fifth  month,  s.

SEPULCHRE,

Or  Grave.  The  Hebrews  have  always  taken  great
care  about  the  burial  of  their  dead.  The  greatest
part  of  their  Sepulchres  were  hollow  places  dug
into  rocks,  as  was  that  bought  by  Abraham,  for
the  burying  of  Sarah,  Gen.  23.  6.  those  of  the
kings  of  Judah  and  Israel  ;  and  that  wherein  our
■'avtour  was  laid  in  mount  Calvary.  Sometimes
also  their  graves  were  dug  in  the  grouna,  and
commonly  without  their  towns  in  burying -places,
set  apart  on  purpose.  Generally  they  used  to  put
some  hewn  stone,  or  other  thing,  over  the  grave,
to  shew  it  was  a  burying-place.  that  passengers
might  be  warned  not  to  come  near  it,  that  they
might  not  be  polluted.

Out  Saviour  in  Mat.  23.  27.  compares  the  hypocri¬
tical  Pharisees  to  whited  sepulchres,  which  ap¬
peared  fine  without,  but  inwardly  were  full  of
rottenness  and  corruption.  It  is  said,  that  every
year,  on  the  fifteenth  of  February,  the  Jews  took
care  to  whiten  their  sepulchres  anew.  In  Luke
11.  44.  he  compares  them  to  graves  which  appear
not,  and  the  men  that  walk  over  them  are  not
aware  of  them,  or  know  not  that  the  places  are
unclean,  so  that  they  contract  an  unknown  and
involuntary  impurity .  So  they  that  conversed
with  these  Pharisees,  being  deceived  by  eh  sir  fair
shews  of  religion  and  devotion,  were  easily  in-
snared  and  drawn  into  sin  by  them.

It  is  said,  Mat  23,  29,  30,  31.  Wo  unto  you
Scribes  and  Pharisees;  because  ye  build  the
tombs  of  the  prophets,  and  garnish  the  sepul¬
chres  of  the  righteous;  And  say,  if  we  had
Deen  m  the  days  of  our  fathers,  we  would  not
have  been  partakers  with  them  in  the  blood  of
the  prophets.  Wherefore  ye  be  witnesses  unto
yourselves,  that  ye  are  the  children  of  them
which  killed  the  prophets.  As  if  our  Saviour
had  said,  Ye  pretend  a  great  deal  of  respect  to
the  ancient  prophets,  and  to  disallow  what  your
fathers  did  to  them,  by  building  and  garnishing
their  tombs ;  yet  this  practice  of  yours  seems
rather  to  be  an  approbation  of  your  fathers'
wickedness,  if  one  look  upon  it,  either'  in  the
nature  of  the  thing,  for  hereby  you  keep  in
memory  what  your  fathers  did  against  them:
whereas,  if  you  did  detest  it,  you  would  rather
do  alt  you  could  that  it  might  he  utterly  for¬
gotten  ;  or  if  one  may  judge  of  your  affections
to  the  dead  prophets,  by  your  usage  of  the  living,
namely ,  Myself  and  my  Apostles.

(yen.  23.  6.  none  shall  withhold  from  thee  his  j.
JJeut.  34.  6.  no  man  knoweth  of  his  s.  unto  this  day
Sudg.  8.  32.  Gideon  was  buried  in  his  father’s  .9.

1  Sam.  10.  2.  thou  shalt  find  two  men  by  Rachel’s  s
■?'  Hunied  Asahel  in  his  father’s  s.

?f  Jshbosheth  buried  in  Abner’s  j
Ai"  7.  Ahithophel  buried  in  the  .9.  of  his  father

21.  14.  bones  of  Saul  in  the  .9.  of  Kish  his  father
*  „*nfs  22.  thy  carcase  shall  not  come  to  the  s.

31.  bury  me  in  the  s.  wherein  man  of  God  is
\Kfng,  9.  28.  Ahaziah  in  the  s.  with  his  fathers

I,  .y  cast  ,he  man  into  the  s.  of  Elisha
ni,'  “mon  was  buried  in  his  s.  in  the  garden

oA  t  they  said,  it  is  the  s.  of  the  man  of  God
30.  Josiah  buried  in  bis  own  s.  2  Chrtm.  35.  24.

If  sal.  5.  9  their  throat  is  au  open  s.  Horn.  3.  13."

Isa.  — .  in  that  thou  hast  hewed  thee  out  ai  here
nr  515  l’e  that  heweth  out  a  s.  on  high,  and  graveth
27.  60.  be  rolled  a  great  stone  to  the  door  of  f.

01.  the  other  Mary,  sitting  over  against  the  s.

64.  command  that  the  s.  be  made  sure,  66.

~8.  1.  and  the  other  Mary  came  to  see  the  s.

8.  departed  quickly  from  the  f.  with  fear  and  joy
Mark  15.46.  Joseph  wrapped  him  in  the  linen,

and  laid  him  in  a  s.  and  rolled  a  stone  to  the
door  of  the  s.  Luke  23.  53.  Acts  13.  29.

16.  2.  they  came  to  the  s.  at  the  rising  of  the  sun
3.  who  shall  roll  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  s
lntP  the  ^  II  8-  the>'  fle(i  the

women  also  beheld  the  s.

24-  1.  early  in  the  morning  they  came  to  the  s.

~.  they  found  the  stone  rolled  from  s.  John  20  1

9.  returned  from  the  .9.  ||  12.  Peter  ran  to  the  f.

22.  certain  women  which  were  early  at  the  s
24.  certain  of  them  with  us  went  to  the  s.

J°bn  19.  41.  and  in  the  garden  there  was  a  new  s
42.  they  laid  Jesus,  for  the  s.  was  nigh  at  hand

20.  1.  cometh  Mary  when  it  was  vet  dark  to  s.

%■  .u  ey  ,  e  taken  away  the  Lord  out  of  the  j.

3.  that  other  disciple  came  to  the  s.  4,  8.

6-  then  cometh  Peter,  and  went  into  the  s.

II.  Mary  stood  without  at  the  s',  weeping,  as  she
a  ''ePt.  she  stooped  down  and  looked  into  the  s.
sdets  2.  29.  and  his  s.  is  with  us  unto  this  day
7*  lo.  Jacob  laid  in  the  s.  that  Abraham  bought

SEPULCHRES.

\jeVy.  .3.  6.  in  the  choice  of  our  s.  bury  thy  dead
2  Kings  23.  16.  Josiah  spied  the  .9.  and  took  the
bones  out  of  the  s.  and  burnt  them  upon  the  altar
.21.  Jehoram  not  buried  in  j.  of  kings
24.  25.  Joash  not  ||  28.27.  Ahaz  not  buried  in  s.  of

kings


S  E  R


~  Chrtm.  ■>..  13  Hezekiah  buried  in  chierestof  the  s.
seh.  ..  3  the  place  of  my  father’s  .v.  lieth  waste

5.  wouldst  send  me  to  the  city  of  my  father’s  s.

?:  ‘6g  ^  chemiah  repaired  to  place  over-against  s.

on’L3  ’  WOe,°  >’ou>  f°r >’e  are  like  unto  whited  s.
29.  because  ye  garnish  the  s.  of  the  righteous
Luke  11.  47.  ye  build  the  s.  of  the  prophets,  48
T  „  l  .SERAPHIMS.

Isa.  6.  above  it  stood  thee.  each  had  six  win^s

6.  then  Hew  one  of  the  .9.  having  a  live  coal  *
SERGEANTS.

off  IP'  ^ •  sent  the  s.  saying,  let  these  men  go
38.  the  .v.  told  these , words  unto  the  magistrates

iw  Greek,  otpis,  in  Hebrew,  Nachash.  The  craft
the  wisdom,  the  subtitty  of  the  Serpent,  are  things
insisted  on  in  Scripture,  as  qualities  that  distin¬
guish  them  from  other  animals.  Moses  introduces
the  relation  of  Eve’s  temptation,  by  affirming,
Now  the  serpent  was  more  subtil  than  any  beast
of  the  held  which  the  Lord  God  had  made,  Gen.
3.  1.  And  our  Half  our  recommends  to  his  apostles

to  have  the  wisdom  of  the  Serpent,  Mat.  10.  16.
lhey  bring  several  proofs  of  this  subtilty  •of  the
Serpent,  lhey  say,  that  the  Cerastes  hides  him-
se/J  in  the  sand,  in  order  to  bite  the  horse's  foot,
that  he  might  throw  his  rider.  Jacob  makes  an
allusion  to  this  in  the  blessing  he  gave  to  Dan
Gen .  49.  17-  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way’
an  adder  in  the  path  ;  that  biteth  the  horse  heels
so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  backward.  It  is  like¬
wise  said  of  the  Serpent,  that  when  he  is  old,  he
has  the  secret  of  growing  young  again,  and  of  strip-
trig  off  his  old  skin  or  slough,  by  squeezing  himself
between  two  rocks.  He  assaults  a  man  if  he  has

nr,,.  on'  hut  fiees  ’-f  he  finds  him  naked
When  he  is  assaulted,  his  chief  care  is  to  secure  his
head ;  became  his  heart  being  under  his  throat,
and  very  near  his  head,  the  readiest  way  to  kill
him  is  to  squeeze  or  cut  off  his  head :  hence  in  the
curse  that  God  gave  the  Serpent,  he  told  him,

1  he  ^ seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  ser¬
pent  s  head,  that  is,  the  principal  seat  of  his  life,
Gen.  3.  15.  And  many  have  supposed  that  his
chief  subtilty,  or  wisdom,  as  the  gospel  calls  it
comists  in  this,  that  he  chooses  to  expose  his  whole
body  to  danger,  that  he  may  save  his  head.  When
he  goes  to  drink  at  a  fountain,  he  first  vomits  up
all  his  poison,  for  fear  of  poisoning  himself  as  he
is  drinking.  Though  this  observation  be  not  as¬
sented  to  by  every  body,  it  has  nevertheless  a  great
many  defenders.

It  is  said  further  of  the  Serpent’s  subtilty,  that  it
stops  up  its  ears  that  it  may  not  hear  the  voice  of
the  charmer  or  enchanter.  The  Psalmist  takes
notice  of  this  piece  of  subtilty  of  the  Adder.  Psal .

58 •  4-  they  are  like  the  deaf  adder,  that  stop-
peth  her  ear  ;  which  will  not  hearken  to  the
voice  of  charmers,  charming  never  so  wisely.

It  is  said,  it  applies  one  of  its  ears  hard  to  the
ground,  and  stops  up  the  other  with  the  end  of
its  tail.  Others  say  the  subtilty  of  the  Serpent
consists  in  its  agility  and  suppleness ;  or  in  a
secret  it  has  in  recovering  its  sight  by  the  juice  of
fennel.  Every  one  proposes  his  own  conjectures  on
this  matter.

Some  place  the  venom  of  the  Serpent  in  its  gall,
others  in  it 9  tongue,  and  others  in  its  teeth.  The
Scripture  in  different  passages  expresses  itself
sometimes  as  supposing  the  gall  of  the  Serpent  to
be  its  venom,  Job  20.  14.  His  meat  in  his  bowels
is  turned,  it  is  the  gall  of  asps  within  him.  David
seems  to  place  it  in  the  tongue.  Psal.  140.  3.  They
have  sharpened  their  tongues  like  a  serpent
And  Solomon  in  the  teeth,  Prov.  23.  32.  At  the
last  it  biteth  like  a  serpent,  and  stingetfi  like  an
adder.

The  Devil  is  called  a  Serpent,  Rev.  12.  9.  both  be¬
cause  he  hid  himself  in  the  body  of  a  real  serpent
when  he  seduced  the  first  woman,  and  because  of
his  serpentine  disposition ,  being  a  subtil,  crafty,
and  dangerous  enemy  to  mankind.  See  Deyii,.
Interpreters  have  much  speculated  concerning  the
nature  of  the  first  Serpent,  that  tempted  Eve.
Home  have  thought,  that  then  the  Serpent,  or  that
kind  of  Serpents,  there  being  several  kinds  of
them,  had  two,  four,  or  many  feet,  or  moved  upon
the  hinder  part  of  its  body,  wA  ’•  head,  breast,  and
belly  upright.  They  ground  their  opinion  on  the
curse  that  God  gave  the  Serpent.  Gen.  3.  14.
Upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go.  Whereas  for¬
merly  thou  hadst  a  privilege  above  other  kinds  of
Serpents,  whereby  thou  didst  go  with  erected  breast,
and  didst  feed  upon  the  fruit  of  trees  and  other
plants m;  now  thou  shalt  be  brought  down  to  the
same  mean  and  vile  estate  with  them.  Others  think
that  there  is  no  7  robuhility  that  this  animal  was
otherwise  than  what  it  is  now  ;  bnt  what  before  the
fall  was  natural  to  it,  afterwards  became  painful,
as  nakedness  was  to  man.  It  is  put  for  wicked
malicious  persons,  Mat.  23.  33.

Another  curse  that  God  gave  the  Serpent,  was.  That
it  should  feed  upon  dust,  Gen.  3.  14.  Isaiah  says
also,  Dust  shall  be  the  serpent’s  meat,  Isa.  65.

25.  And  in  Mic.  7.  .17.  They  shall  lick  the  dust
like  a  serpent.  It  is  true,  however,  that  they  eat
fiesh,  birds,  frogs,  fish,  fruits,  grass,  &c.  But  as
they  continually  creep  upon  the  earth,  it  is  impos¬
sible  but  that  their  food  must  be  often  defiled  with
dust  and  dirt.  Home  of  them  may  really  eat  earth
out  of  necessity,  or  at  least  earth-worms,  which
they  cannot  swallow  without  a  good  deal  of  dirt
with  them.

Among  other  kinds  of  Serpents  mentioned  in  Scrip¬
ture,  are  those  fiery,  flying  serpents,  that  made  so
great  a  destruction  among  the  Israelites,  and
were  the  death  of  so  many  people  in  the  desert,
Num,21.  6.  The  Hebrew  word  here  used  for  Ser¬
pent,  is  Saraph,  which  properly  signifies  to  burn  ;
and  it  is  thought  that  this  name  was  given  to  it,
either  because  of  its  colour ;  or  because  of  that
heat  and  t  ’first  it  creates  by  its  biting


It  was  upon  this  occasion  that  the  Lord  command
ed  Moses  to  make  the  brasen  serpent,  or  the
figure  oj  the  Serpent  Saraph,  and  to  rai-e  11
upon  a  pole ,  that  the  people  who  were  bit  by  the
Serpents,  by  looking  upon  this  image,  might  be
presently  healed.  Moses  did  so;  and  the  event
was  answerable  to  this  promise.  By  this  account
Jrom  Hcnpture  we  may  understand  something  of
greatest  consequence  was  represented  by  it :  For
the  only  wise  God  ordains  nothing  without  just
reason.  Why  must  a  Serpent  of  brass  be  eie
voted  on  a  pole  ?  Could  not  the  divine  power  re
cover  them  without  it  f  Why  must  they  look  to¬
wards  it  ?  Could  not  a  healing  virtue  be  conveyed
to  their  wounds,  but  through  their  eyes?  All
this  had  a  direct  reference  to  the  mystery  of
Christ,  and  expressed  the  manner  of  his  death
and  the  benefits  derived  from  it.  Therefore
Christ,  being  the  minister  of  the  circumcision
chose  this  figure  for  the  instruction  of  the  Jews',
John  3.  14.  As  Moses  lifted  up  the.  Serpent  in
the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man
be  lifted  up.  The  biting  of  the  Israelites  by  the
Jiery  serpents  doth  naturally  represent  the  effects
oj  sin,  that  torment  the  conscience,  and  inflame
the  soul  with  the  apprehension  of  future  judg¬
ment  And  the  erecting  of  a  brasen  serpent  ?/»cn
a  pole,  that  had  the  figure,  not  the  poison  of  those
serpents,  doth  in  a  lively  manner  set  forth  the
lifting  up  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross,  who  only
had  the  similitude  of  sinful  flesh.  The  looking  to¬
wards  the  brasen  serpent,  is  a  fit  resemblance  of
believing  in  Christ  crucified  for  salvation.  The
sight  of  the  eye  was  the  only  means  to  derive  vir¬
tue  from  it  ;  and  the  faith  of  the  heart  is  the
means  by  which  the  sovereign  efficacy  of  our  Re¬
deemer  is  conveyed.  John  6.  40.  This  is  the  will
of  bun  that  sent  me,  that  every  one  which  seeth
the  Son  and  beheveth  on  him,  may  have  ever¬
lasting  life.

This  brasen  serpent  was  preserved  among  the  Is¬
raelites  down  to  the  time  of  Hezekiah,  who,  being
inf  ormed  that  the  people  paid  a  superstitious  wor¬
ship  to  it ,  had  it  broken  in  pieces,  and  by  wav  of
contempt  gave  it  the  name  of  N  eliushtan,  that  is
a  brazen  bauble  or  trifle,  2  Kings  18.  4.

Gen.  3.  1.  the  .9.  was  more  subtle  than  any  beast

I. 3.  woman  said,  the  .v.  beguiled  me,  2  Cor.  11. 3.

49- J7-  A?ar)  shaH  be  a  6y  the  way,  an  adder
Lxod.  4.  3.  the  rod  became  a  e.  7,  9,  10,  15
A7/W.21. 8.  the  Lord  said,  make  thee  a  fierv  e.

9.  Moses  made  a  .9.  of  brass  and  put  it  on  a
pole  :  if  a  s.  had  bitten  any  man,  he  be¬
held  the  s.  ot  brass
2r  Hezek.  brake  in  pieces  the  brasen  s,

n"  76-13.  his  hand  hath. formed  the  crooked  s.

!  sal.  08.  4.  their  poison  is  like  the  poison  of  a  s
140.  .3.  they  sharpened  their  tongues  like  a  e.

Prov.  23.  32.  at  last  it  biteth  like  a  s.  and  stingeth
30.  19^  too  wonderful,  the  way  of  a  .v.  upon  a  rock
Lcc/,10.8.  whoso  breaketh  an  hedge,  s.  shall  bite  him

II.  surely  the  s.  will  bite  without  enchantment
Isa.  14.  29.  out  of  the  .9.  root  shall  come  forth  a

cockatrice  ;  his  fruit  shall  he  as  a  fiery  fiyin°-j.
27. 1  the  Lord  shall  punish  the  s.  that  crooked  s'.
30.  6.  from  whence  come  viper  and  fiery  flyiniT  s
65. 25.  lion  eat  straw,  and  dust  shall  be  the  meat
Jer.  46.  22.  the  voice  thereof  shall  go  like  a  .9.

Amos  5.  19.  leaned  hand  on  wall,  and  a  .9.  bite  him
9.  3.  1  will  command  the  j.  and  he  shall  bite  them
Mic.  7.  17.  they  shall  lick  the  dust  like  a  .9.

Mat.  7.  10.  will  he  give  him  a  s.  ?  Luke  11.  11.

John  3. 14.  as  Moses  lifted  up  the  s.  so  Son  of  man
Rev.  12.  9.  that  old  .9.  called  the  devil,  20.  2.

14.  where  she  is  nourished  from  the  face  of  the  .9.

15.  the  s.  cast  out  of  his  mouth  water  as  a  flood
SERPENTS.

Excd.7. 12.  they  castdown  their  rods,  they  became  s,
Rum.  21.  6.  the  Lord  sent  fiery  s.  among  them
7.  pray  to  I  ord  that  he  take  away  the  s.  from  us
Devt.  8.  15.  terrible  wildern.  wbere'in  v  ere  fiery  .9.

32.  24.  I  will  also  send  the  poison  of  s.  upon  them
8- 17-  behold,  T  will  send  s.  among  you
Mat.  10. 16.  be  ye  therefore  wise  as  .9.  and  harmless

23.  33.  ye  .9.  how  can  ye  escape  damnation  of  hell J
Mark  16. 18.  thev  shall  take  up  ,c.  and  if  they  drink
Luke  10.  19.  I  give  unto  you  power  to  tread  on  s.

1  Cor.  10.  9.  also  tempted,  and  were  destroyed  of  s.
Jam.  3.  7.  for  every  kind  of  beasts  and  of  s.  is  tamed
Rev.  9. 19.  their  tails  were  like  untof.  and  had  heads
SERVANT

Is  taken,  I.  For  a  slave.  The  Hebrews  had  two
sorts  of  servants  or  slaves.  Home  were  strangers,
either  bought,  or  taken  in  the  wars ;  and  their
masters  kept  them,  exchanged  them ,  sold  them,
or  disposed  of  them  as  their  own  goods.  Lev.  25.

44,  45,  Arc .  The  others  were  Hebrew  slaves,
who,  being  poor ,  sold  themselves,  or  were  sold  to
pay  their  debts:  or  were  delnered  up  for  slaves
by  their  parents,  in  cases  of  necessity.  This  sort
oj  Hebrew  slates  continued  in  slavery  but  six
years ;  then  they  might  return  to  liberty  again,
and  their  masters  could  not  retain  them  against
their  wills.  If  they  would  continue  voluntarily
with  their  masters,  they  were  brought  before  the
judges  ;  there  they  made  a  declaration,  that  for
this  time  they  disclaimed  the  privilege  of  the
law,  had  their  ears  bored  with  an  awl,  by  apply¬
ing  them  to  the  door-posts  of  their  master  ;  and
after  that  they  had  no  longer  any  power  of  reco¬
vering  their  liberty,  except  at  the  next  year  of
jubilee,  Exod.  21.  2,  3,  Szc.  Lev.  25.  40.

II.  Servant  is  also  taken  for  a  man  that  dedi¬
cates  himself  to  the  service  of  another,  by  the
choice  of  his  own  will  and  inclination.  Thus
Joshua  was  the  servant  of  Moses,  Elisha  of  Eli¬
jah,  Gehazi  of  Elisha,  and  the  Apostles  were
servants  of  Jesus  Christ.

IIL  Servant  is  put  for  the  subjects  of  a  prince
The  servants  of  Pharaoh,  Me 'servants  of  Saul’
and  those  of  David,  are  their  subjects  in  general*
and  their  domestics  in  particular ,  C  Sam.  11  11*

Q  433


S  E  R


i  l*  19.  1  Chron.  21.  3.  In  like  manner  also
the  Philistines,  the  Syrians,  and  several  ot/ier
nations,  were  servants  oj  David  ,  they  obeyed
him,  they  uere  his  subjects,  they  paid  him  tndute,

5  Sam.  8.  6.  ,  ^

IV  Servants  or  slaves,  as  opposed  to  those  that  a  e

free,  and  to  the  children  of  the

the  .lews  in  contradistinction  to  the  Christians  ,
or  those  that  were  under  the  yoke  oj  ceremonies,  to
those  that  are  under  the  gospel  dispensation,  l  ie
Jews  were  the  slaves  represented  by  Hagar  and
lshmael  ;  the  Chi  istians  are  the  children  oj  Merty,
represented  by  Sarah  and  by  Isaac,  G at.  4.  J,  G

^pirvant  or  servants  of  God.  As  all things  are  sub-
S  ject  to'  the  power  and  pleasure  of  tied,  and  as  none
can  resist  his  will  or  word;  m  this  sense  all  crea¬
tures  are  God's  servants,  Psal.  119.  9  •  j  awie
particularly  by  th.s  name  are  called,  [1]  All J ait h
Vful  and  godly  persons,  who  being  bought  and  re¬
deemed  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  tint  an,  do  serve
and  obey  <  >  od  in  righteousness  and  holmes >,  I  tom.

6.  55.  [2]  Une  that  serveth  and  obeyetn  Lsoa  not

only  in  a  common  profession  oj  religion,  hut  also  in
some  particular  function  and  calling:  l bus  the
apostle  Paul  calls  himself  the  servant  ot  God,
Bom.  1.1.  And  in  this  sense,  C hnst  .1  esus  is  term¬
ed  the  Father’s  servant  to  execute  his  will  as  Me¬
diator,  in  working  mans  redemption ,  Isa.  53.  11.

A]  y  righteous  servant.  [3]  One  whom  God  males
use  of  as  an  instrument  to  effect  and  perform  his
will  m  the  work  of  some  particular  men y  or  judg¬
ment :  Thus  may  Cyrus  be  called  the  servant  of
God,  his  shepherd  and  anointed ,  Isa.  44.  U5.  I  40.

1.  And  Nebuchadnezzar,  Jer.  lb.  9.

Moses  is  often,  by  way  of  eminence,  called  the  serv¬
ant  of  the  Lord,  l)evt.  34.5.  Moses  the  .servant
of  the  Lord  died.  Josh.  1.  2.  Moses  my  servant
is  dead.  This  title  is  often  given  him,  not  only  to
reflect  honour  upon  him,  but  also  to  give  authority
to  his  la  cs  and  writings,  in  publishing  oj  which  he
only  acted  as  God  s  servant,  in  his  name  and
stead:  And  likewise  that  the  Israelites  might  not
think  of  Moses  above  what  was  meet,  remembering
that  he  was  not  the  Lord  himself,  but  only  his
servant ;  and  therefore  not  to  be  worshipped,  nor
vet  too  pertinaciously  followed  m  all  his  institu¬
tions,  -cheu  the  Lord  himself  should  cyme  and  abo¬
lish  part  of  the  Mosaical  dispensation ;  it  being
but  reasonable  that  the  servant  should  give  place
to  the  Son  and  Heir,  Heb.  3.  3,  5,  6.

Servant  is  also  taken  for  a  person  oj  a  servile  ignoble
condition  and  spirit ,  who  is  altogether  unfit  for
places  of  dignity.  Feel.  10.7.  1  have  seen  servants
upon  horses.  The  apostle  Paul  says,  1  Cor.  9.  19-
1  have  made  myself  servant  unto  all,  that  1
might  gain  the  more.  /  have  complied  with  then
weaknesses  and  infirmities,  so  far  as  they  u  eie  not
sinful:  1  have  denied  myself  in  my  liberty,  and
determined  myself  to  that  part  m  my  aitions,
which  1  saw  would  most  oblige ,  profit,  and  engage
them  to  me  so  as  to  bring  them  in  love  with  the  gos¬
pel.  The  servant  ot  sin,  John  8.  34.  is  one  who
is  in  spiritual  bondage,  and  under  the  power  of  sm

and  corruption.  ,

Gen.  9.  25.  Canaan,  a  s.  ot  servants  shall  he  be

24.  34.  and  he  said,  1  am  Abraham  s  s.

49.  15.  lssachar  bowed  and  became  a  s.  to  tribute

Exod.  21.  5.  if  the  s.  plainly  say,  1  love  my  master
Deut.b.  15.  remember  that  thou  wast  a  s.  in  Egypt
23.  15.  thou  shalt  not  deliver  the  ■>.  that  is  escaped

1  Sam.  2.  13.  priest's  came  and  said,  15.

9.27.  Samuel  said,  bid  the  a.  pass  on  before  us

25.  41.  let  thy  handmaid  be  a  s.  to  wash  the  feet

29.  3.  is  not  this  David  the  j.  of  Saul  the  king

30.  13.  I  am  a  young  man  j.  to  an  A  male  kite

2  Sam.  9.  2.  of  house  of  Saul,  s.  named  Ziba,  19.  1<
16.  1.  Ziba  the  a.  of  Mephibosheth  met  David

18.  29.  when  Joab  sent  the  king's  a.  and  me  thy  a.

1  Kings  1 1 . 26.  J eroboam  Solom.  s.  lift  up  his  hand
12.  7.  if  thou  wilt  be  a  s.  to  this  people  this  day

2  Kings  A.  24.  she  said  to  her  s.  drive  and  go  forward
6  15  when  the  '.of  the  man  of  God  was  risen

Neh.  2. 10.  Tobiah  the  s.  the  Ammonite  heard,  19
Job  3.  19.  and  the  a.  is  there  tree  from  his  master

7.  2.  as  a  s.  earnestly  desireth  the  shadow
41.  4.  wilt  thou  take  Leviathan  tor  a  j.  for  ever .
Psal.  105.  17-  even  Joseph,  who  was  sold  tor  a  s.
Prov.  11. 29.  the  fool  shall  be  s.  to  the  wise  of  heart
12.  9.  he  that  is  despised  and  hath  ai.  is  better
IT  35.  the  king's  favour  is  toward  a  wise  a.


S  E  R

L.uke  17.  7.  but  which  of  you  having  a  s.  plowing
9.  doth  lie  thank  that  s.  ?  1  trow  not
20.  10.  and  at  the  season  he  sent  a  s.  11.

John  8  34.  whoso  committeth  sin,  is  the  s.  ot  sin
35.  the  s.  abideth  not  ill  the  house  tor  ever

13.  16.  the  s.  is  not  greater  than  his  lord,  lo.  -0.
15. 15.  the  s,  knoweth  not  what  Ins  lord  doetn

Bom.  1.  1.  Paul  a  t.  of  Jesus  Christ, an  apostle

14.  4.  who  art  thou  that  judgest  another  man  8*..
16.  1.  1  commend  to  yo.i  Phebe,  a  s.  ot  the  churc^


17.  2.  a  wise  s.  .  - - -  - - -

19.  10.  much  less  for  a  a.  to  rule  over  princes
22. 7.  and  the  borrower  is  s.  to  the  lender
29.  19.  a  s.  will  not  be  corrected  with  words

30  10.  accuse  not  s,  to  his  master,  lest  he  curse  thee
22.  the  earth  cannot  bear  a  a.  when  he  reigneth
Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  the  s.  so  with  his  niaster
40.  7.  to  a  s.  of  rulers  II  Jer.  2.  14.  is  Israel  a  s.  ;
Dan.  6.  20.  O  Daniel,  a.  of  the  living  God
10.  17.  how  can  s.  ot  my  lord  talk  with  my  lord
Mai.  1.  6.  s.  honoureth  his  master,  it  l  be  a  master
Mat.  10.  24.  nor  the*,  above  his  lord
25.  it  is  enough  for  the  s.  to  be  as  his  lord
18  26.  the  s.  fell  down  and  worshipped  him  .

27  -  the  lord  of  that  a.  was  moved  with  com  passion
32.  O  thou  wicked  s.  I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt

20.  27.  and  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you,

let  him  be  your  s.  23.  11.  Mark  10.  44.

24.  45.  who  then  is  a  faithful  and  wise  a.  whom  lord
46.  blessed  is  that  j.  whom  his  lord,  Luke M2. 43.
48.  but  if  that  evil  a.  shall  say,  Luke  12.  4 o.

50.  the  lord  of  that  s.  shall  come,'  Luke  12.  4b.

25.  21.  well  done,  thou  good  and  taithtul  s. .enter

thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  lord,  23.  Luke  19.  17.
26.  thou  wicked  and  slothful  a.  l.uke  19.

30.  cast  the  unprofitable  s.  into  outer  darkness

26.  51.  Peter  struck  a  s .  ot  the  high  priest,  and

smote  off  his  ear,  Mark  14.  47.  John  18.  10.
Mark  12,  2.  and  he  sent  to  the  husbandmen  a  t.
Luke  12.  47.  that  a.  which  knew  his  lord  s  will
14. 21.  so  that  s.  came  and  shewed  his  lord
434


'shall  have  rule  over  a  son  that


1  Cor.l.  21 .  art  thou  called  being  a  s.  I  care  not  for  it
22.  is  called,  being  a  s.  is  the  Lord  s  free  man

9.  19.  yet  have  1  made  myselt  a  s.  unto  all
Gal  1  10.  1  should  not  be  the  s.  of  Christ
4.  1.  as  a  child  differeth  nothing  from  a  s.

7.  wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a  s.  but  a  son
Phil.  2.  7.  he  took  upon  him  the  form  ot  a  J.

Col.  4.  12.  F.paphras,  a  a.  ot  Christ, saluteth  >ou.

2  Tim.  2. 24.  s.  of  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle
Phile/n.  16.  not  now  as  a  s.  but  above  a  s.  a  brother
Heb.  3.  5.  Moses  was  faithful  in  his  house  as  a  s.
q  pet.  1.1.  Simon  Peter,  a  s.  of  Jesus  Christ
Jude  l’.  J  ude  the  s.  of  J  esus  Christ  to  them  sanctified

.  See  David.  „  _  ,

SERVANT,  and. SERVANTS  of  God.

Gen.  50.  17.  forgive  the  a.  of  the  God  ot  thy  ta-ther
1  Chr.  6.  49.  as  1\I  oses  the  a.  of  God  commanded
0  Chron  24.9.  the  collection,  Moses  the  a.  o/G.said
Ac/  10  29.  to  walk  in  God’s  law,  which  was  given
'  by  Moses  the  s.  of  God  to  observe  all  commands
Dan.  6.  20.  he  said,  O  Daniel,  s.  of  the  It' too
9  11  written  in  the  law  of  Moses  the  a.  of  God.

Tit.  l.l.ai  of  God  ||  Jam.  1.  1.  lames  a  a.  of  God
I  Pet  2.  16.  not  using  liberty,  but  as  a  s.  of  (<od
Lev  7  3.  till  we  have  sealed  the  a.  of  our  God
15  3  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  s.  of  God
See  1 1 1 R  e  D .

His  SERVANT.

Gen  9.  26.  and  Canaan  shall  be  his  s.  27.

Exod.  14  31.  people  believed  Lord  and  /ns  j.  Moses
oi  on  if  a  man  smite  hit  s.  and  die  under  his  hand
~26.  if  he  smite  the  eye  of  /its  s.  that  it  perish
33  11  but  his  s. . I oshua  departed  not  out  of  tabern.
josh.  b.  14.  Joshua  said,  whatsaith  my  L.  to  hiss. .

9.  24.  God  commanded  his  s.  Moses  to  give  you
Tiida  7  11.  Gideon  wentdown  with  Phurah  /m  s.

19  3.  the  Levite  went,  having  his  s.  with  him
Q  when  the  man  rose  to  depart,  he. and  his  s.

1  Sam.  19.  4.  let  not  the  king  sin  against  his  s.

2°  15.  let  not  the  king  impute  any  thing  to  his  s.

25.  39.  the  Lord  hath  kept  his  s.  from  evil
26  18  why  doth  my  Lord  thus  pursue  after  hiss. .

19  let  my  lord  the  king  hear  the  words  ot  hiss.

2  Sam .  9.  11.  as  my  lord  hath  commanded  his  s.

~14.  22.  the  king  hath  fulfilled  the  request  ot  his  s.

04’  01;  wherefore  is  my  lord  come  to  his  s.?

Kings  1.51.  swear,  that  he  will  not  slay  his  s.

8.  56.  which  he  promised  by  han  I  of  M oses  his  s.

59.  that  he  maintain  the  cause  of  Aw  a1,  and  Israel
14  18.  he  spake  by  hand  of  his  s.  Ahuah,  15.  .9.

19.3.  Elijah  came  and  left  his  s.  at  Beer-sheba
2  Kings  9.36.  word  which  he  spake  by  his a.  Elijah
*"14  05  the  word  which  he  spake  by  hiss.  Jonah
17  3  I  loshea  became  his  s.  and  gave  him  presents
24  i!  and  Jehoiakim  became  his  s  three  years

1  Chron.  16. 13.  O  ye  seed  of  Israel  his  s. .

2  Chron.  32.  16.  spake  against  his  s.  Hezekiah
Xeh  4.  22.  let  every  one  with  his  s.  lodge  within
)>sai  35. 27.  Ld.  hath  pleasure  in  prosperity  ot  his  a.

105  6.  6  ye  seed  of  Abraham  hiss',  he  is  our  God
56.  he  sent  Moses  his  s .  and  Aaron  his  chosen
42  for  he  remembered  Abraham  /its  s.

136.  22.  gave  even  an  heritage  unto  Israel  /ns  s.
Prov.  29.  21.  that  delicately  bringeth  up  his  s.

Isa  44  26.  that  confirmeth  the  word  of  «ia  a.

48* 20 "the  Lord  hath  redeemed  his  s.  Jacob
49*  5  Lord  formed  me  from  the  womb  to  be  his  s.
50*  10.  who  that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  his  s.  ?

Jer  34.  16.  ye  caused  every  man  his  s.  to  return
Mat  813  his  s.  was  healed  in  the  same  hour
Luke  1  54.'he  hath  holpen  his  s.  Israel  m  mercy
7  3  beseeching  that  he  would  corne  and  heal  his  s.

14  17.  and  sent  his  s.  at  supper  time  to  say
Rev  1  1  signified  it  by  his  angel  unto  his  s.  John
See  Lord,  Maid.
Maw-SERVANT.

Exod.  20.  10.  do  no  work, thou  nor  mans.  Dent.  5.14,

17  not  covetthy  neighbour  s  man-s.  Deut.  5.  21.

01  07  and  if  he  smite  out  his  man-s.  tooth
'30  "if  the  ox  shall  push  a  man-s.  or  maid  servant
Deut.  12.  18.  must  eat  them,  thou,  and  thy  man-s.
16  11  rejoice  before  Lord,  thou  and  thy  /nan  s.

14.  rejoice  in  thy  feast,  thou  and  thv  mans.

Job  31.  13.  if  1  did  despise  the  cause  ot  my  mans.
Jer.  3\.  9.  should  let  his  ma.ns^  go  free,  10.

Gen  26.  24.  1  will  multiply  thy  seed  for  my  s.  sake
44  10.  he  with  whom  it  is  found  shall  be  my  s.  17  .
Xum  12.  7.  my  s.  Moses  is  not  so,  who  is  taithtul
8.  why  vvere  ye  not  afraid  to  speak  against  my  s. .
14  °4.  but  my  s.  Caleb  had  another  spirit
Tosh'  1  2.  Moses  my  s.  is  dead,  therefore  arise
‘l  Sam.  22.8.  that  my  son  had  stirred  u p  my  s.

07  i°  therefore  he  shall  be  mys.  tor  ever
p  Sam  19.  26.  my  lord,  O  king,  my  s.  deceived  me
a  Kinas  5.  6.  I  have  therewith  sent  Naaman  my  a.
'21  8.  according  to  the  law  my  s.  Moses  commanded
fob  1  8.  hast  thou  considered  my  s.  Job  r  2.  3.

'  19.  i6.  I  called  my  s.  and  he  gave  me  no  answer
40  7  ye  have  not  spoken  right,  as  mys.  Job  haul
8  go  to  my  s,  Job,  he  sha.ll  f°*  ?

La.  20.  3.  like  as  my  s.  Isaiah  hath  walked  naked
°2  °0  in  that  day  I  will  call  my  s.  Eliakim
4l!  8.  but  thou,  Israel,  art  mys.  fear  not,  9.

45.  1.  behold  my  s,  whom  I  uphold,  mine  elect
IQ.  who  is  blind  but  mys.  that  1  sent

43.  10.  ye  are  witnesses  and  my  s.  1  have  chosen

44. ’  1 .  hear,  O  J acob,  my  s.  |j 2.  fear  not, O  .lac.  my  s.
21.  remember  those,  for  thou  artmiM.  49.  A.

45.  4.  for  Jacob  my  s.  sake,  and  Israel  mine  elect
49.6.  it  is  a  light  thing  thou  shouldest  be  my  s


SER

Isa.  05.  8.  so  will  I  do  for  my  s.  sake  lmt  desti .  them
hr  fib.  9.  IN ebuchadnezzar  my  s.  2< .  6.  I  43.  1U.

3o!  10.  tear  thou  not,  O  my  s.  Jacob,  46.  .  -8.  _

/,  -gt  og  05.  land  1  have  given  my  v.  Jacob,  Ji.lo.
Haa .’2'.  23.  1  will  take  thee,  O  Zerubbabel  niys.^
/.ech  3.  8.  1  will  bring  forth  my «.  the  BRANCH
Mai  A.  4.  remember  the  law  of  Moses  my  s.

Mat'.  8.  6.  my  s.  lieth  at  home  sick  of  tlie  palsy
8.  speak,  and  mv  s.  shall  be  healed,  Luke  7  -  1  •

Q.  and  to  my  s,  do  tins,  and  he  doeth  it,  Luke  <  •  8
12.  18.  behold  mys.  whom  1  have  chosen
John  12  26.  where  1  am,  there  shall  also  my  s.  be
Thy  SERVANT.

Gen.  18.  3.  pass  not  away,  1  pray  thee,  *rom  thy  ■ <

19  19.  behold,  thy  s.  hath  found  grace,  Ae/u  -.  5.
24  14.  be  she  that  thou  hast  appointed  tor  thy  s.

30’  IP.  not  worthy  of  the  mercies  shewed  to  thy  s.
18.  then  thou  siialtsay,  they  be  thy  .r.  Jacobs
33  5  the  children  which  God  hath  given  thy  s.

4t‘  31.  grey  hairs  of  thy  s.  our •  father  to  the  grave
32.^ thus,  became  surety  tor  the  lad  to  iny  lather
E rod  A.  10.  nor  since  thou  hast  spoken  unto  thy  s.
Lev.  25.  6.  he  meat  for  you,  tor  thee,  and  tor  thy  s.
Num  31.  11.  wherefore  hast  thou  afflicted  thy  s.  ?
Deo''  3  °A.  hast  begun  to  shew  thy  s.  thy  greatness
15.  17.  thro’ his  ear,  and  he  shal  l  be  thy  s.  tor  ever
Tuda.  7.  10.  go  thou  dow  n  with  Phurah  thy  s.

15  18  this  great  deliverance  into  hand  of  thys.

1  Sam.  3.  9.  speak,  Lord,  for  thy  s.  hearetii,  10.

17  36  thy  s.  slew  both  the.  lion  and  the  bear
20.7.  if  he  say  thus,  thy  a.  shall  have  peace
02  15.  for  thy  s.  knew  nothing  ot  all  this
23  11  O  Lord  God,  I  beseech  thee,  tell  thy  s.

2«'  o  surely  thou  shalt  know  what  thy  s.  can  do
o  Sam  7  19  hut  thou  hast  spoken  ot  thy  s.  house
20.  for  thou,  Lord  God,  knowest  thy  s.

09  let  it  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  ot  thy  s.
o"  ti  Mephibosheth  answered,  behold  thy  s.

13  35  the  king's  sons  came,  as  thy  s.  said,  so  it  is
15  21*.  in  death  or  life,  even  there  will  thy  s.  be
07  he  hath  slandered  thy  s.  unto  my  lord
04  10  O  Lord,  take  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  s.
l' Kinas  1  26.  but  me,  even  me  thy  s.  and  ZadoK
1  the  priest,  and  thy  s.  Solomon  hath  he  not  called
*  38.  as  my  lord  the  king  said,  so  will  thy  s.  do


n  it  is  a  light  thing  inou  bnuumwi  i  c

13.  behold  my  s.  shall  deal  prudently ,  be  very


3  8  and  thy  s.  is  in  the  midst  of  thy  people
'  9  Mve  thy  s.  an  understanding  heart,  to  judge
8  28.  have  thou  respect  to  the  prayer  of  thy  s,

18. 12.  but  1  thy  s.  tear  the  Lord  from  my  youth
36.  Tet  it  be  known  this  day  that  1  am  thy  s.

20  3°  thv  s.  Benhadad  saith,  I  pray  let  me  live
40 !  as  thy  s.  was  busy  here  and  there,  he  was  gone
1  Kinas  4  1.  thy  s.  my  husband  is  dead,  and  thou
1  knowest  thy  s.  did  fear  Lord,  the  creditor  is  come
5.  18.  the  Lord  pardon  thy  s.  111  tins  thing
25.  Gehazi  said,  thy  s.  went  no  whither  __

8.  13.  but  what,  is  thy  s.  a  d.og  r- 1|  16.  i .  I  am  thy ..

Neh.  1.11.  prosper,  I  pray  thee,  thy  s.  this  day
Psal  19  11  moreover,  by  them  is  thy  s.  warned
13 'keep  hack  thy  s.  from  presumptuous  sms
07'  '9  Pllt  not  thy  s.  away  in  anger,  leave  me  not  |
31  ’  1 6.  make  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  s.  save  me
69’  17.  hide  not  thy  face  from  thy  s.  in  trouble
86!  2.  O  my  God,  save  thy  s.  that  trusteth  in  thee
16.  give  thy  strength  unto  thy  s.  and  save  me
89  39-  thou  hast  made  void  the  covenant  of  thy  a.
116. 16.  truly  l  am  thy  s.  119.  125.  I  143.  1_.

Eccl.  7.21.  lest  thou  hear  thy  f.  curse  thee
Isa.  63.  17.  return,  for  thy  s.  sake,  the  tribes
Dan  9  17-  O  God,  hear  the  prayer  ot  thy  s.
like*  29  Lord,  lettest  thou  thy  s.  depart  in  peace
e "  ’SERVANTS.

Gen.  9.  25.  Canaan,  a  servant  of  s.  shall  he  be
°7  37.  all  his  brethren  have  1  given  him  tori.

/  e'v  05  55.  tome  the  children  ot  Israel  are  s.
j„sh  9."  11.  go  meet  them,  and  say,  we  are  your  s.

I  Sam.  A.  9.  that  ye  be  not  a.  unto  the  Hebrews  ;

17  8.  am  not  I  a  Philistine,  and  you  s.  to  &au|  ,

9.  if  he  kill  me,  then  will  we  be  your  s.  but  if
'i  kill  him,  then  shall  ye  be  our  a.  and  serve  us

0(2  17  but  the  s.  of  the  king  would  not  put  forth
05.  jo.  manvA.  break  aw  ay  from  their  masters
41.  to  wash*  the  feet  of  the  a.  of  my  lord
0  Sam.  8.  2.  so  the  Moabites  became  Dawd  s  a.

6.  the  Syrians  ||  14.  they  ot  Edom  bee.  David  s
9  10.  now  Ziba  had  fifteen  sons  and  twenty  s
12.  M  in  the  house  of  Ziba  a.  to -Mephibosheth

10.  4.  Tlanun  took  David  s  s.  and  shaved  the  hal
of  their  beards,  and  cut  garments,  1  Chr.  19.  4.

11  11  the  a  of  my  Lord  are  encamped  in  fields
1  1 1  Kings  2.  39.  two  of  the  a.  of  Shimei  ran  away
o  Kings  21 .23.  the  a.  of  Amon  conspired  against  him

1  Chron.  21.  3-  but  are  they  not  all  my  lord  sa.  .

2  Chr.  8.  9-  of  the  children  of  Isr.  Sol.  made  no  s.
36  °0  carried  to  Babylon,  where  they  were  a.

Eziab.  11  we  are  the  a.  oi  the  God  ot  heaven
Neh.  5.  15.  their  a.  bare  rule  over  the  people

9  36.  behold,  we  are  a.  this  day,  a.  in  the  land
t.N  1  'j5.  they  have  slain  the  a.  with  the  sword,  17.
Psal'  T‘“3  2  as  the  eyes  of  a.  look  to  their  masters
Led'  2  7.  '>  got  n1e  a.  and  had  a.  born  in  my  house

10  7  1  have  seen  a.  upon  horses,  and  pnnees

1U-  **  walking  as  a.  upon  the  earth

u  o  Israel  shall  possess  them  for  a.  and  haurtm.

S  34  il  .  caused  the  a.  whom  they  had  let  go  free
to  'return,  and  brought  them  into  subjection  toi  a
f  am  5  8.  s,  have  ruled  over  us,  none  deliver
Dan'.  3.  26.  ye  a.  of  the  most  high  God,  come  forth
Tnfl  ‘0  °o  upon  the  a.  will  1  pour  out  my  Spin
&2  9  behold,  they  shall  be  as  pad  to  their  a
Mat  22.  13.  then  said  the  king  to  the  a.  bind
°5  19  the  lord  of  those  a.  cometh  and  reckoned
MarkiA  0b.  the  a.  did  strike  Jesus  with  their  hands
/  vke  1°  37 .  blessed  are  those  a.  found  watchin-,

17  jo'sav  are  unprofitable  a.  have  done  our  duj

John  1  15 '  hence  forth  1  call  you  not  a  for  servant

Acts  16  17.  these  men  are  a  ot  the  most  higl  Go  .

rZ.  6. 16.  to  whom  ye  yield  yourselves  a  to  obey

17  God  be  thanked,  that  ye  were  the  A.  ot  sm
ir  made  free,  ye  became  the  a.  of  righteousness
19  asve  have  yielded  your  members  a.  to  sin
2?:  a  of  sin,  ye  were  free  from  righteousness


S  E  R


S  E  R


8ER


Rom.  6. 22.  being  free  from  sin,  and  become  *.  to  G.

1  Cor.  7.  23.  ye  are  bought,  be  not  ye  the  *.  of  men

2  ('or.  4.5.  and  ourselves  tour  j.  for  .lesus'sake
Fvh.  6.  5.  *.  be  obedient  to  your  masters  according

to  the  flesh,  Col.  3.  22.  Tit.  2.  9.  1  Pet.  2.  18.
6.  not  with  eye  sert  ice,  but  as  the  *.  of  C  hrist
Phil.  1.  1.  Paul  and  1  imotheus  the  *.  of  Christ
Col.  4.  1.  masters,  give  your  s.  what  is  just
1  'Tim.  6.  1.  let  as  many  s.  as  are  under  the  yoke

1  Pet.  2.  16.  not  using  liberty,  but  as  the  *.  of  God

2  Pet.  2.  19.  they  themselves  at  e  the  *.  of  corruption
Rev.  7-  3.  till  we  have  sealed  the  *.  of  our  God

See  Hired.

His  SERVANTS.

Gen.  40.  20.  Pharaoh  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  s.
I:.rod.  9.  20.  Pharaoh  made  his  s.  flee  into  bouses

12.  30.  Pharaoh  rose  in  the  night,  he  and  his  s.
Num. 22.22.  Balaam  riding,  and  his  two  s.  with  him
Dent.  32.  36.  Ixtrd  shall  repent  himself  for  hiss.

43.  for  he  will  avenge  the  blood  of  hiss.

1  Pam.  8.  14.  take  the  best,  and  give  to  his  s.  15.

17.  ye  will  take  the  tenth,  ye  shall  be  his  s.

19.  1.  Saul  spake  to  all  his  s.  to  kill  David
22.  6.  and  all  his  s.  were  standing  about  him

2  Kings  5.  13.  his  s.  came  near,  and  spake  unto  him

1  Chron.  19-  3.  are  not  his  s.  come  to  thee  to  search  t

2  Chron.  12.  8.  nevertheless,  they  shall  be  his  s.

32.  16.  his  s.  spake  yet  more  against  the  Lord  G.
Neh.  2.  20.  therefore  we  his  s.  will  arise  and  build
Job  4.  18.  behold,  he  put  no  trust  in  his  s.  and  angels
Psal.  69.  36.  the  seed  also  of  his  s.  shall  inherit  it

105.  25.  turned  their  heart,  to  deal  subt.  with  his  s.
135.  14.  he  will  repent  himself  concerning  his  s.
Prov.  22.  12  if  hearken  to  lies,  all  hiss,  are  w icked
ha.  56.  6.  to  love  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  be  his  s.

65.  15.  the  Lord  shall  call  hts  s.  by  another  name

66.  14.  hand  of  the  Lord  be  known  toward  his  s.
Jer.  22.  4.  riding  in  chariots,  on  horses,  he  and  hiss.

36.  31.  punish  him,  his  seed  and  his  s.  for  iniquity
Ezek.  46.  17-  if  the  prince  give  a  gift  to  his  s.

Dan.  3.  28.  and  delivered  hiss,  that  trusted  in  him
Mat.  18.  23.  king  who  would  take  account  of  his  s.

21.  34.  he  sent  his  s.  to  the  husbandmen  to  receive
Luke  19.  13.  he  called  his  ten  s.  and  delivered  them
Rom.  6.  16.  his  s.  ye  are  to  whom  ye  obey

Rev.  1. 1.  to  shew  his  s.  things  that  must  come,  22.  6.

19.  2.  hath  avenged  blood  of  his  s.  at  her  hand

5.  praise  God,  all  ye  his  s.  and  ye  that  fear  him

22.  3.  throne  shall  be  in  it,  and  his  s.  shall  serve  him

Pee  Lord,  Maid,  Men.

My  SERVANTS.

Lev.  25.  42.  they  are  my  s.  whom  1  brought  out,  55.
1  Pam.  21.  2.  I  have  appointed  my  s.  such  a  place

1  Kings 5.  6.  my  s.  shall  be  with  thy  serv.  2  Chr.  2. 8.

20.  6.  yet  I  will  send  my  s.  unto  thee  to-morrow
22.  49.  let  my  s.  go  with  thy  serv.  in  the  ships,  but

2  Kings  9.  7-  that  I  may  avengothe  blood  of  my  s.
Neh.  4.  16.  the  half  of  my  s.  wrought  in  the  work

23.  neither  1  nor  my  s.  put  off  our  clothes
5. 10.  1  and  my  s.  might  exact  of  them  money,  corn
16.  all  my  s.  were  gathered  thither  to  the  work

13.  19.  and  some  of  my  s.  set  I  at  the  gates

Isa.  65.  9-  mine  elect  and  my  s.  shall  dwell  there

13.  my  s.  shall  eat  ||  14.  my  s.  shall  sing  for  joy
Jer.  7.  25.  1  have  even  sent  to  you  all  my  s.  44.  4.
John  18. 36.  if  kingd.  of  world,  then  would  my  s.  fight
Acts  2.  18.  on  my  s.  1  will  pour  out  of  my  Spirit
Rev.  2.  20  calls  herself  a  prophetess,  to  seduce  my  s.

Pee  Prophets.

Thy  SERVANTS.

Gen.  42.  11.  we  are  true  men,  thy  s.  are  no  spies
44.  16.  God  hath  found  out  the  iniquity  of  thy  s.
47.  3.  thy  s.  are  shepherds,  both  we  and  our  fathers
50.  18.  his  brethren  said,  behold,  we  be  thy  s.
Exod.  5.  15.  wheref.  dealest  thou  thus  with  thy  s.  ?

11.  8.  these  thy *.  shall  bow  down  themsel.  to  me

32. 13.  remember  A br.  and  Israel  thy s.  Deut. 9.  27 .
Num.  32. 25.  thy  r.  will  do  as  my  lord  command,  31 .
Josh.  9-  8.  Gibeonites  said  to  Joshua,  we  are  thy  s.

10.  6.  saying,  slack  not  thy  hand  from  thy  s.

1  Pam.  12.  19.  pray  for  thy  s.  to  the  Lord  thy  God

22. 14.  who  is  so  faithful  among  all  thy  s.  as  David  ?

2  Pam.  19.  7-  and  speak  comfortably  to  thy  s.

14.  they  sent  this  word,  return  thou  and  all  thy  s.

1  Kings  2.  39.  they  told  Shimei,  thy  s.  be  in  Gath
5.  6.  my  servants  shall  be  with  thy  s.  2  Chr.  2.  8.
8.  23.  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy  w  ith  thy  s.

32.  hear  thou  and  judge  thy  s.  2  Chron.  6.  23.

10.  8.  happy  are  these  thy  s.  2  Chron.  9-  7.

12.  7-  they  will  be  thy  s.  for  ever,  2  Chron.  10.  7.

2  Kings  6.  3.  one  said,  be  content,  and  go  with  thy  s.
Neh.  1.  10.  now  these  are  thy  s.  and  thy  people

11.  let  thine  ear  be  attentive  to  prayer  of  thy  s.
Psal.  79-  2.  the  bodies  of  thy  s.  have  they  given
10.  by  the  revenging  of  the  blood  of  thy  s.  shed

89.  50.  remember,  Lord,  the  reproach  of  thy  s.

90.  13.  let  it  repent  thee  concerning  thy  s.

16.  let  thy  work  appear  to  thy  s.  and  thy  glory
102.  14.  for  thy  s.  take  pleasure  in  her  stones
28.  children  of  thy  s.  shall  continue,  their  seed
119.  91.  they  continue  this  day,  for  all  are  thy  s.
Isa.  37  .  24.  by  thy  s.  hast  thou  reproached  the  Ld.
Dan.  1.12.  prove  thy  s.  I  beseech  thee,  ten  days

13.  and  as  thou  seest,  deal  with  thy  s.

Acts  4.  29.  grant  unto  thy  s.  that  with  all  boldness
> ee  Women.

SERVE.

Gen.  15.  13.  thy  seed  shall  *.  them  400  years

14.  that  nation  whom  they  shall  s.  will  I  judge
25.  23.  and  the  elder  shall  s.  the  younger

27.  29.  let  people  s.  thee,  nations  bow  down  to  thee
40.  by  thy  sword  shalt  thou  live,  and  s.  brother
29.  15.  shouldst  thou  therefore  *.  me  for  nought  ?
18.  1  will  s.  thee  seven  years  for  Rachel
27.  thou  shalt  s.  with  me  seven  other  years
Exod.  1.  13.  they  made  Israel  to  s.  with  rigour

3.  12.  ve  shall  s.  God  upon  this  mountain

4.  23.  1  say,  let  my  son  go,  that  he  may  s.  me

7.  16.  let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  s.  me  in
the  wilderness,  8.  1,  20.  19.  1,  13.  1  10.  3.

14.  12.  saying,  let  us  alone,  that  we  may  *.  Egyp¬

tians,  for  it  had  been  better  for  us  to  s.  them


Exod. CO.  5.  not  bow  down tothem,  nor. y.  Dent.  5.  9-

21.  2.  an  Hebrew  servant,  six  years  he  shall  s.

6.  shall  bore  his  ear,  and  he  shall  s.  him  forever
Lev.  25.  39.  shalt  not  compel  him  to  *.  as  bond-serv.

40.  he  shall  s.  thee  unto  the  year  of  Jubilee
Num.  4.  24.  the  family  of  the  Gershonites  to*.

26.  shall  bear  all  made  for  them,  so  shall  they  s.

8.  25.  from  the  age  of  fifty  they  shall  j.  no  more

18.  21.  the  tenth  to  Levi,  for  their  service  they  s.
Dent.  4.  19.  thou  shouldest  be  driven  to.?,  them

6.  13.  thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  G.  and.?,  him,

10.  12,  20.  1  11.  13.  I  13.  4.  Josh.  22.  5.  1  24.
14, 15.  1  Sam.  7.  3.  I  12.  14,  20,  24.

15.  12.  if  brother  be  sold  to  thee,  and  s.  six  years

20.  11.  shall  be  tributaries  to  thee,  and  shall  s.  thee

28.  48.  therefore  shalt  thou  s.  thine  enemies
Josh.  24.  15.  choose  you  this  day  whom  you  will  .?.
Judg.  9.  28.  should  s.  Shechem,  should  s.  Hamor

38.  who  is  Abimelech,  that  we  should  s.  him  ?

1  Pam.  10.  7-  do  thou  as  occasion  shall  s.  thee

11.  1.  make  covenant  with  us,  and  we  will  *.  thee
12. 10.  but  now  deliver  11s,  and  we  will  s.  thee
17-  9.  then  shall  ye  be  our  servants,  and  s.  us

2  Sam.  16.  19.  whom  should  1  .?.  ?  should  1  not  s.

22.  44.  a  people  1  knew-  not  shall  s.  me,  Ps.  18.43.

1  Kings  12.  4.  now  therefore  make  thou  this  heavy
yoke  lighter,  and  we  will  .?.  thee,  2  Chron.  10.  4.

2  Kings  10.  18.  but  Jehu  shall  s.  Baal  much

25.  24.  dwell  in  the  land,  and  .?.  the  king  of  Baby¬
lon,  Jer.  27.  11,  12,  17.  I  28.  14.  1  40.  9.

1  Chron.  28. 9.  and  s.  him  with  a  perfect  heart

2  Chron.  29.  11.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  s.  him
34.  33.  Josiah  made  all  present  to  s.  the  Ld.  God

Job  21.  15.  what  Almighty,  that  we  should  s.  him  r
36.  11.  if  they  obey  and  s.  him,  they  shall  spend

39.  9.  will  the  unicorn  1  e  willing  to  s.  thee  ;

Psal.  22.  30.  a  seed  shall  s.  him,  and  be  accounted
72.  11.  yea,  all  kings,  all  nations  shall  s.  him
97-7.  confounded  be  all  they  that  s.  graven  images
101.  6.  walketh  in  a  perfect  way,  he  shall  s.  me

Da.  14.  3.  bondage  wherein  thou  wast  made  to  r.

19.  23.  the  Egyptians  shall .?.  with  the  Assyrians
43.  23.  I  have  not  caused  thee  to  s.  with  offering

24.  but  thou  hast  made  me  to  s.  with  thy  sins
56.  6.  join  themselves  to  the  Lord  to  s.  him

60.  12.  the  nation  that  w  ill  not  s.  thee  shall  perish
Jer.  5.  19.  so  shall  ye  j.  strangers  in  land  not  yours
17.  4.  1  will  cause  thee  to  s.  thine  enemies

25.  11.  these  nations  shall  s.  the  king  of  E’abylon

14.  many  nations  shall  s.  themselves,  27-  7-

27.  6.  beasts  of  the  field  have  1  given  to  s.  him

8.  the  nation  that  will  not  s.  king  of  Babylon,  13.

9.  the  prophets  that  say  ye  shall  not .?.  14.

30.  8.  strangers  shall  no  more  .?.  themselves  of  him
34.  9.  that  none  should  s.  himself  of  them,  10.

40.  9.  saying,  fear  not  to  s.  the  Chaldeans  ;  dwell

10.  as  for  me,  behold,  1  will  s.  the  Chaldeans
Ezek.  20.  32.  families  of  the  countries  to.?,  wood

39.  O  house  of  Isr.  go .?.  ye  every  one  his  idols

40.  Israel  all  of  them  in  the  land  shall  .?.  me

29.  18.  his  army.?,  a  great  service  against Tyrus
48.  18.  increase  for  food  to  them  that  s.  the  city

19.  that.?,  the  city,  shall .?.  it  out  of  all  tribes
Dan.  3.  17.  our  God  whom  we  s.  is  able  to  deliver

28.  they  might  not  s.  any,  except  their  own  God

7.14.  people,  nations,  and  languages, should*,  him

27.  and  all  dominions  sIlrII  s.  and  obey  him
Zeph.3.  9.  call  on  Lord,  to*,  him  with  one  consent
Mai.  3.  14.  ye  have  said  it  is  in  vain  to*.  God
Mat.  4.  10.  him  only  shalt  thou  s.  Luke  4.  8.

6.  24.  no  man  can  *.  two  masters  ;  ye  cannot  s.  God

and  mammon,  Luke  16.  13.
Luke  1.  74.  that  we  being  delivered,  might*,  him
10.  40.  that  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  *.  alone

12.  37.  I  say,  he  will  come  forth  and  *.  them

15.  29.  lo,  these  many  years  do  1  *.  thee

17.  8.  will  not  rather  say,  gird  thyself  and  s.  me
22.  26.  and  he  that  is  chief,  as  he  that  doth  s.

John  12.  26.  if  any  man  *.  me,  let  him  follow  me
Acts  6.  2.  that  we  leave  wrord  of  God,  and  *.  tables

7.  7.  shall  they  come  forth  and  .?.  me  in  this  place
27. 23.  stood  by  me  the  angel  of  God  whom  1  *.

Rom.  1.9.  for  God  is  my  witness,  w  hom  1  *.  w  ith
my  spirit  in  gospel  of  his  Son,  w  ithout  ceasing

6.  6.  that  henceforth  we  should  not*,  sin

7.  6.  that  we  should  *.  in  new  ness  of  spirit,  not  in

25.  so  then,  with  the  mind  1  *.  the  law  of  God
9. 12.  it  was  said,  the  elder  shall .?.  the  younger

16.  18.  for  they  that  are  such  *.  not  our  Lord
Gal.  5.  13.  but  by  love  *.  one  another

Col.  3.  24.  receive  reward,  for  ye.?,  the  l  ord  Christ

1  Thess.  1.  9.  ye  turned  from  idols  to*,  living  God

2  Tim.  1.  3.  l’thank  G.  whom  I  *.  from  my  fathers
Heb.  8.  5.  who  *.  to  the  example  of  heavenly  thing's

9.  14.  purge  from  dead  works  to*,  the  living  God

12.  28. grace,  w  hereby  we  may  *.  God  acceptably

13.  10.  no  right  to  eat,  which  *.  the  tabernacle
Rev.  7. 15.  they  *.  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple

22.  3.  of  the  Lamb,  and  his  servants  shall  *.  him
SERVE,  joined  w  ith  gods.

Exod.  23.  24.  shalt  not  *.  their  gods,  Dent.  6.  14.  |  28.

14.  Josh. 23.  7-  2  Kings  17.  35.  Jer.  25.  6.  I  35. 15.
33.  if  thou  s.  their  gods,  it  will  be  a  snare  to  thee
Deut.  4.  28.  there  ye  shall  *.  gods,  the  w  ork  of  men’s
hands,  wood,  28.  36.  64.  Jer.  16. 13.

7.  4.  will  turn,  that  they  may .?.  other  gods,  31. 20.

8.  19.  if  thou  *.  other  gods,  and  worship  them,  1 1.

16  |  .30.  17.  Josh.  24.  20..  2  Chron.’.  19.

12.  30.  how  do  these  nations  *.  their  gods?

13.  2.  let  us  go  after  and  *.  other  gods,  6.  13.

29.  18.  turneth  away  from  God  to*,  other  gods

Josh.  24.16.  God  forbid  we  should  *.  other  gods
Judg.  2.  19.  they  corrupted  themselves  more  than
their  fathers  to  .?.  other  gods,  Jer.  11. 10.  1  13.  10.
1  Sam.  26.  19.  driven  me,  saying,  go  *.  other  gods
Jer.  44.  3.  provoke  me  to  anger,  to  *.  other  gods
Dan  3. 12.  they  *.  not  thy  gods,  nor  worship  image’

14.  do  ye  not  *.  my  gods  ?  ||  18.  we  will  not*,  thy  g.
See  Lord.

SERVED.

Gen.  14.  4.  twelve  years  they  *.  Chedorlaomer
29.  20.  Jacob  *.  seven  years  for  Rachel,  30.


Gen.  30.  26.  give  me  my  children  for  whom  I  j.  thee

29.  he  said,  ihou  knowest  how  l  have  *.  thee
34.  6.  with  all  my  power  1  have  *.  your  father

41.  I  .?.  thee  14  years  for  thy  two  daughters
Deut.  12.  2.  wherein  the  nations  *.  their  gods

17.  3.  hath  gone  and  .?.  other  gods,  and  worshipped

them,  the  sun  or  moon,  29.26.  Josh.  23. 16.
Josh.  24.  2.  your  fathers  *.  other  gods,  15.

14.  put  away  the  gods  which  your  fathers  s.

31 .  and  Israel  *.  Lord  all  the  days  of  Joshua,  and
of  the  elders  that  o?  erlived  Joshua,  Judg.  2. 7.
Judg.  2.  11.  Israel  *.  Baalim,  13.  13.7-1  10.  6, 10.
3.  6.  they  gave  (laughters  to  sons,  and  *.  their  gods

8.  Israel  *.  Chushan  rishathaim  eight  years
14.  so  Israel  *.  Kg  Ion  king  of  Moab  18  years

8. 1.  men  of  Ephr.  said,  why  hast  thou  *.  us  thus  l

10.  13.  ye  have  forsaken  me,  and  *.  other  gods

16.  they  put  away  gods,  *.  Lord  1  Sam.  7.  4.

2  Sam.  10.  19-  the  Syrians  made  peace  and  *.  Israel
16.  19.  as  1  have  *.  in  thy  father's  presence

1  Kings  4. 21.  they  brought  presents  and  *.  Solomon

9.  9.  because  they  .?.  other  gods,  2  Chron.  7.  22.

16.  31.  Ahab  .?.  Baal  |i  22.53.  Ahaziah  *.  Baal

2  Kings  10. 18.  Jehu  said,  Ahab  *.  Baal  a  little
18. 7*  Hezekiah  *.  not  the  king  of  Assyria

21.  3.  Manasseh  *.  host  of  heaven,  2  Chron.  33.  3.

21 .  Amon  *.  idols  his  father  *.  2  Chron.  33.  22.

2  Chron.  24. 18.  princes  of  Judah  *.  groves  and  idols
Neh.  9.  35.  they  have  not  *.  thee  in  their  kingdom
Psal.  106.  36.  and  they  *.  their  idols,  which  w  ere

137.8.  that  rewardeth  thee  as  thou  hast  *.  us
Reel.  5.  9.  the  king  himself  is  *.  by  the  field
Jer.  5. 19.  as  ye  have  .?.  strange  gods  in  j?our  land

8.  2.  before  the  sun  and  moon,  whom  they  have  s.
16. 11 .  have  walked  after  other  gods  and  *.  them

22.  9.  they  worshipped  other  gods  and  s.  them

34. 14.  when  he  hath  *.  thee  six  years,  let  him  go
*Ezek.  29.  18.  for  the  service  which  he  had  .?.  20.

34.  27.  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that  s.
Hos.  12. 12.  Israel  .?.  for  a  wife,  he  kept  sheep
Luke  2.  37.  Anna*.  God  night  and  day  in  the  temple
John  12.  2.  they  made  him  asupper,  and  Martha  *.
Acts  13.  36.  after  David  had  *.  his  generation
Rom.  1.  25.  who  worshipped  and  *.  the  creature
Phil.  2.  22.  he  hath  *.  with  me  in  the  gospel
SERVEDST.

Deut.  28.  47.  thou  *.  not  the  Lord  with  gladness
SER  VEST.

Dan.  6. 16.  thy  God  whom  thou  *.  will  deliver

20.  is  thy  God  whom  thou  *.  able  to  deliver  thee

SERVETH.

Num.  3.  36.  under  the  charge  of  Merari  all  that  *.
Mai.  3. 1“.  as  a  man  spareih  his  son  that  *.  him

18.  between  him  that  *.  God,  and  him  that  s.  not
Luke  22. 27.  whether  greater,  he  that  sitteth  at  meat
or  he  that  *.  ?  but  1  am  among  you  as  one  that  s.
Rom.  14.  18.  he  that  in  these  things  *.  Christ  is
1  Cor.  14.  22.  prophecy  s.  not  them  that  believe  not
Gal.  3. 19.  wherefore  then*,  the  law  ?  it  was  added
SERVICE.

Gen.  29.  27.  for  the .?.  that  thou  shalt  serve  with  me

30.  26.  thou  knowest  the  *.  which  I  have  done
Exod.  1.  14.  in  all  manner  of  •?.  in  field ;  all  their  *.

wherein  they  made  them  serve  was  with  rigoui
12.  25.  come  to  land,  ye  shall  keep  this  *.  1.3.  5.

26.  children  shall  say ,  what  mean  you  by  this*.?

27.  19.  all  vessels  in  all  the*,  thereof  be  of  brass

31.  10.  may  make  the  clothes  of  the  *.  .35.  19.

36.  5.  people  bring  more  than  enough  for  the  *.
Num.  3.  7-  tribe  of  Levi  to  do  *.  of  tabernacle,  8.

26.  the  charge  of  the  Gershonites  for  the  *.

31.  *.  of  sanctuary  the  charge  of  Kohathites,  4. 4.

4. 19.  Aaron  and  sons  shall  appoint  them  to  the  *.
2.3.  all  that  enter  in  to  perform  the  *.  to  do  w  ork
24.  this  is  the  *.  of  the  Gershonites,  27.  28.

30.  the  *.  of  the  sons  of  Merari,  33.  4.3.

7.  5.  that  they  may  do  the  *.  of  the  tabernacle

8.  11.  the  Levites  may  execute  the  *.  of  the  Lord

24.  they  shall  go  in  to  w  ait  upon  *.  of  tabernacle

25.  from  50  years  shall  cease  waiting  on  the  *.
16.  9.  a  small' tiling  to  bring  you  to  do  the  *.

18.  4.  the  Levites  be  joined  to  thee  for  all  the  *.

6.  the  Levites  are  given  as  a  gift  to  do  the  .?.

21.  have  given  all  tenth  in  Israel  for  their  .?.  31.
Josh.  22.  27-  be  a  witness,  that  we  might  do  the  *.

1  Kings  12.  4.  make  thou  the  grievous  *.  lighter

1  Chron.  6.  31.  w  hom  David  set  over  the  *.

9.  13.  very  able  men  for  the  work  of  the  *.  26.  8.
24.  .3.  David  distributed  them  in  their  *.

28.  1.3.  the  Levites  for  all  the  w'ork  of  the  ■?.

21.  the  priests  shall  be  with  thee  for  all  the  *.

29.5.  who  is  willing  to  consecrate  bis  *.  to  1  01  <1  ‘

7.  and  gave  for  the  *.  of  house  of  God,  gold,  sih  er

2  Chron.  8.  14.  the  courses  of  the  priests  to  their  .*.

12. 8.  they  may  know  my  *.  and  *.  of  the  kingdoms
24.  12.  and  gave  the  money  to  such  as  did  the  *.

29.  35.  so  the  *.  of  the  house  was  set  in  order

31.  2.  appointed  every  man  according  to  bis  *.

21.  in  every  work  that  he  began  in  the  *.

.35.  2.  encouraged  them  to  the  *.  of  the  Lord

10.  so  the  *.  of  the  Lord  was  prepared,  16.

Ezra  6.  18.  in  their  courses,  for  the  *.  of  God,  7- 19.
Neh.  10.  32.  with  the  third  part  of  a  shekel  for  *.
Psal.  104. 14.  causeth  herb  to  grow  for  the  .?.  of  man
Jer.  22.  1.3.  that  useth  neighbour’s  *.  without  wages
Ezek.  29. 18.  caused  his  army  to  serve  a  great  *.'

44. 14.  keepers  of  the  charge  of  house  for  all  the  *,
John  16. 2.  w  hokilleth  you  will  think  he  doth  God  *.
Rom.  9.  4.  to  whom  pertaineth  the  *.  of  God

12. 1.  sacrifice  to  God,  w  hich  is  your  reasonable  *.

15.  31.  that  my  *.  may  be  accepted  of  the  saints

2  Cor.  9. 12.  for  the  administration  of  this  *.  not  only

11.8.  taking  wages  of  them  to  do  you  *.

Gal.  4.  8.  did  *.  to  them  who  by  nature  are  no  gods
F.ph.  6.  7-  with  good  w  ill  doing  *.  as  to  the  1  ord
Phil.  2.  17.  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  *.  of  your  faith

30.  to  supply  your  lack  of*,  toward  me
1  Tim.  6.  2.  rather  do*,  because  they  are  beloved
Heb.  9.  1.  first  covenant  had  ordinances  of  divine  *.
6.  the  priests  accomplishing  the  *.  of  God

9.  that  could  not  make  him  that  did  the  ?.  perfect
Rev.Q.  19- 1  know  thy  works,  and  iharify,  and  *.

Q  2  43  s


S  E  T


S  ET


SET


ftmrf-SERVICE.

1  Kings  9. 21.  Solomon  did  levy  a  tribute  ot'  bond  s.

Eye-  SERVICE.

Evli.  6. 6.  not  with  eye-s.  as  men-pleasers,  but  as  ser.
SERVILE.

Lev.  23.7.  ye  shall  do  no  s.  work,  8.  21,  25,  35,  36.

Num.  28.  18,  25,  26.  I  29.  1,  12,  35.
SERVING.

Exod.  14.  5.  that  we  have  let  Israel  go  from  s.  us
Dent.  15.  18.  worth  a  double  hired  servant  in  s.  thee
Luke  10.  40.  Martha  was  cumbered  about  much  s.
Acts  20.  19.  s.  the  Lord  with  all  humility  of  mind

26.  7-  our  twelve  tribes  instantly  s.  G.  day  and  night
Horn.  12. 11.  not  slothf  ul,  fervent  in  spirit,  a.  Lord
Tit.  3.  3.  were  sometimes  foolish,  a.  divers  lusts
SERVITOR.

2  Kings  4  43.  s.  said,  shall  1  set  this  before  100  men  <

SERVITUDE.

2  Chr.  10.  4.  ease  somewhat  grievous .?.  of  thy  father
Lam.  1.  3.  J  udah  is  gone  because  of  great  s.

SET.

Gen.  1.  17.  God  s.  the  stars  in  firmament  ot  heaven

4.  15.  and  the  Lord  s.  a  mark  upon  Cain

6.  16.  door  of  the  ark  shalt  s.  in  the  side  thereof

9.  13.  1  do  s.  my  bow  in  the  cloud  for  a  token

18.  8.  Abraham  s.  calf  before  them,  they  did  eat

19.  16.  the  angels  s.  Lot  without  the  city  Sodom

31.  37.  s.  it  before  my  brethren  and  thy  brethren
41.  33.  let  Pharaoh  s.  him  over  the  land  of  Egypt

41.  1  haves,  thee  over  all  the  land  of  Egypt
43.  9.  if  I  bring  him  not,  and  s.  him  before  thee
48.  20.  Jacob  s.  Ephraim  before  Manasseh
Exod.  7-  23.  nor  did  he  s.  his  heart  to  this  also

9.  t  21.  he  that  s.  not  his  heart  to  the  word  of  Lord

13.  12.  s.  apart  to  Lord  all  that  open  the  matrix

19.  12.  s.  bounds,  23.  |!  26.  35.  s.  the  table  without

21. 1.  judgments  which  thou  shalt  s.  before  them

23.  31.  1  will  s.  thy  bounds  from  the  Red  sea  •

25.  30.  thou  shalt  s.  on  table  shew  bread  before  me
40.  4.  s.  in  order  things  that  are  to  be  s.  in  order

5.  s.  altar  of  gold  ||  6.  s.  altar  of  burnt  offering

7.  s.  the  laver  ||  20.  he  s.  the  staves  |l  23.  the  bread
Lev.  24.8.  every  sabb.  he  shall  s.  it  in  order  before  L.

26.  11.  1  wills,  my  tabernacle  among  you
Num.  2.  9.  camp  of  Judah,  these  shall  first  s.  forth

4.  15.  as  the  camp  is  tos.  forward

5.  16.  the  priest  shall  s.  her  before  the  Lord

8.  13.  thou  shalt  s.  the  Levites  before  Aaron

10.  17.  s.  forward,  bearing  the  tabernacle

21.  8.  Lord  said,  s.  the  fiery  serpent  upon  a  pole

27.  16.  let  the  Lord  s.  a  man  over  the  congregation
lJeut.  1.  8.  1  have  s.  the  land  before  you,  21.

4.  8.  as  all  this  law  which  1  s.  before  you,  44.

7.  7-  Ed.  did  not  s.  his  love  on  you,  because  more

11.  26.  1  s.  before  you  a  blessing  and  a  curse

32.  to  do  all  the  judgments  which  1  s.  before  you

14.  24.  choose  to  s.  his  name  there,  Ne/t.  1.  9.

17.  14.  and  shalt  say,  1  will  s.  a  king  over  me

15.  in  any  wise  shalt  s.  him  the  Lord  shall  choose
19. 14.  land-mark,  which  they  of  old  time  have  s.

26. 4.  s.  down  the  basket  before  the  altar,  10.

28.  1.  the  Lord  thy  God  will  a.  thee  on  high
56.  would  not  s.  sole  of  her  foot  on  the  ground

30.  15.  1  have  s.  before  you  life  and  death,  19.

32.  8.  he  s.  bounds  of  the  people  by  the  numbers
46.  s.  your  hearts  unto  all  the  words  I  testify

Josh.  24.  25.  he  s.  them  a  statute  in  Shechem
Judg.  6. 18.  till  1  bring  and  s.  my  present  before  thee

7.  5.  that  lapped),  him  shalt  thou  s.  by  himself

19.  and  they  had  but  newly  s.  the  watch

22.  Lord  s.  every  man’s  sword  against  his  fellow

1  Satn.  2.  8.  he  raiseth  up  poor  out  of  the  dust,  to  s.

them  among  princes;  he  hath  s.  world  on  them

4.  t  20.  she  answered  not,  nor a.  her  heart

5.  2.  the  Philistines  s.  the  ark  of  God  by  Dagon

9.  20.  as  for  thine  asses,. ?.  not  thy  mind  on  them

10. 19.  ye  have  said,  nay,  but  s.  a  king  over  us

12.  13.  the  Lord  hath  s.  a  king  over  you

13.  t  21.  yet  they  had  a  file  to  s.  the  goads

17-  2.  Saul  and  Israel  s.  the  battle  in  array,  8.
2  Earn.  10.  17.  1  Kings 20.12.  1  Chron.  19.  17*

2  Sam.  6.  3.  they  s.  the  ark  of  God  on  anew  cart

11.  15.  s.  Uriah  in  forefront  of  the  hottest  battle

19.  28.  yet  didst  thou  s.  thy  servant  at  thy  table

1  Kings  2.  15.  that  all  Israel  s.  their  faces  on  me

5.  5.  son,  whom  1  will  s.  on  throne  shall  build

12.  29.  he  s.  the  one  in  Peth  el,  the  other  in  Dan
21.  9.  and  a.  N  aboth  on  high  among  the  people,  12.

2  Kings  4.  4.  thou  shall  s.  aside  that  which  is  full

10.  let  us  s.  for  him  there  a  bed  and  a  table

38.  s.  on  the  great  pot,  and  seethe  pottage

43.  what,  should  1  .v.  this  before  an  hundred  men  ?

6.  22.  s.  bread  and  water  before  them  to  eat  and  dr.

20. 1.  s.  thine  house  in  order,  for  shalt  die,  Isa.  38. 1.

1  Chron.  16.  1.  they  s.  the  ark  in  midst  of  the  tent

22. 19.  s.  your  heart  to  seek  the  Lord  your  God

29.  3.  because  1a.  my  affection  to  house  of  God

2  Chron.  11.  16.  s.  their  hearts  to  seek  the  Lord

20.  3.  he  feared,  and  a.  himself  to  seek  the  Lord

24.  13.  they  s.  the  house  of  God  in  his  state
35.  2.  Josiah  s.  the  priests  in  their  charges

Ezra  6.  18.  they  s.  the  priests  in  their  divisions
Neh.  2.  6.  it  pleased  the  king,  and  l  s.  him  a  time

4.  9.  we  a.  a  watch  against  them  day  and  night
9.  37.  it  yieldeth  much  increase  to  kings  .v.  over  us

12.  t  47.  they  s.  apart  holy  things  to  the  Levites

13.  11.  1  gathered  and  s.  them  in  their  place
Job  1.  +  8.  hast  thou  a.  thy  heart  on  my  servant  ?

6.  4.  the  terrors  of  God  s.  themselves  against  me
7. 17*  that  thou  shouldst  s.  thine  heart  upon  him

20.  why  hast  thou  s.  me  as  a  mark  against  thee?

9. 19.  who  shall  s.  me  a  time  to  plead  ?

19.  8.  and  he  bath  s.  darkness  in  my  paths

30. 1.  have  disdained  to  s.  with  the  dogs  of  my  flock

13.  they  s.  forward  my  calamity,  have  no  helper

33.5.  s.  thy  words  in  order  before  me,  stand  up

31.  14.  it  he  s.  his  heart  upon  man,  if  he  gather
24.  break  mighty  men  and  s.  others  in  their  stead

38.  33.  canst  thou  .v.  dominion  thereof  in  earth  ?
Psal.  2.  2.  the  kings  of  the  earth  s.  themselves

6.  yet  have  I  s.  my  king  on  my  holy  hill  of  Zion

3.  6.  1  will  not  be  afraid  if  10,000 s.  themselves

436


Psal.  4.  3.  the  Lord  hath  a.  apart  him  that  is  godly

8.  1.  who  hast  s.  thy  glory  abo\e  the  heavens

12.  5.  1  will  a.  him  in  safety  from  him  that  puffeth

16.  8.  1  have  s.  the  Lord  always  before  me

19.  4.  in  them  hath  he  s.  a  tabernacle  for  the  sun

21.  t  6.  for  thou  hast.?,  him  to  be  blessings  for  ever
+  12.  therefore  thou  shalt  .?.  him  as  a  butt

31.  8.  thou  hast.?,  my  feet  in  a  large  room

40.  2.  brought  me  up,  and  s.  my  teet  upon  a  rock
48.  +  13.  a.  your  heart  to  her  bulwarks

50.  21.  I  will  s.  them  in  order  before  thine  eyes
54.  3.  they  have  not  s.  God  before  them
59.  +  1.  s.  me  on  high  from  such  as  rise  against  me
62.  10.  if  riches,  s.  not  your  heart  upon  them

73.  18.  surely  thou  oi  1st  s.  them  in  slippery  places

74.  17.  thou  hast.?.  all  the  borders  of  the  earth
78.  7-  that  they  might  s.  their  hope  in  God

8.  a  generation  that  a.  not  their  heart  aright
+  43.  how  he  had  j.  his  signs  in  Egypt

85.  13.  and  shall  s.  us  in  the  way  of  his  steps

86.  14.  violent  men  have  not  s.  thee  before  them
90.  8.  thou  hast  .v.  our  iniquities  before  thee

91. 14.  because  he  hath  a.  his  love  upon  me,  there¬
fore  1  will  deliver  him  and  a.  him  on  high
101.  3.  1  will  s.  no  wicked  thing  before  my  eyes
104.  9.  hast  s.  bound  that  they  may  not  pass  over
109.  6.  s.  thou  a  wicked  man  over  him,  let  Satan
1 13.  8.  that  he  may  s.  him  with  princes,  even  with
118.  5.  Lord  answered,  and  a.  mein  a  large  place
132.  11.  fruit  of  the  body  will  1  s.  upon  thy  throne

140.  5.  the  proud  have  s.  gins  for  me

141.  3.  s.  a  watch,  O  Lord,  before  my  mouth
Prov.  1.  25.  ye  have  s.  at  nought  all  my  counsel
22.28.  the  land-mark  which  thy  fathers  have  s.

23.  5.  wilt  thou  a.  thine  eyes  on  that  which  is  not  ?

24.  +  32.  then  1  saw,  and  s.  mine  heart  upon  it

25.  +6.  s.  notout  thy  glory  in  presence  of  the  king

27.  +  23.  and  s.  t hy’  heart  to  thy  herds

29.  +8.  scornful  men  s.  a  city  on  tire
Eccl.  3.  11.  also  he  hath  .v.  the  world  in  their  heart

7.  14.  God  hath  s.  the  one  against  the  other
12.  9.  he  sought  out,  and  s.  in  ordermany  proverbs
Cant.  8.  6.  s.  me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart
Isa.  7.  6.  let  us  s.a  king  in  midst  of  it,  son  of  Tabeal

14.  1.  the  Lord  will  s.  them  in  their  own  land

17.  10.  and  thou  shalt  s.  it  with  strange  slips

19.2.  1  will  s.  Egyptians  against  Egyptians

21.  6.  gos.  a  watchman,  let  him  declare  what

22.  7-  shall  s.  themselves  in  array  at  the  gate
27.  4.  who  would  s.  briers  and  thorns  against  me

41.  19.  I  will  s.  in  the  desert,  the  fir-tree  and  pine

42.  4.  till  he  have  s.  judgment  in  the  earth
44.  7.  who  as  I  ,  shall  s.  it  in  order  for  me  ?

46.  7.  they  carry  him,  and  s.  him  in  his  place

57.7.  on  a  high  mountain  hast  thou  s.  thy  bed
62.  6.  1  have  a.  watchmen  on  thy  walls,  Jer.  6. 17.
66.  19.  and  1  will  s.  a  sign  among  them,  and  send

Jer.  1.  10.  see,  l  have  a.  thee  over  the  nations

5.  26.  lay  wait,  they  s.  a  trap,  they  catch  men

6.  27.  1  have.?,  thee  for  a  tower  and  a  fortress

7.  12.  the  place  where  1  s.  my  name  at  the  first

30.  they  .?.  their  abominations  in  the  house

9. 13.  have  forsaken  my  law  which  I  s.  before  them

21.  8.  I  s.  before  you  the  w  ay  of  life  and  death
24.  6.  for  1  w  ill  a.  mine  eyes  on  them  for  good

26.4.  to  walk  in  my  law,  w  hich  I  s.  before  you
34.  16.  his  servant,  whom  he  had  s.  at  liberty

35.5.  I  a.  [lots  of  wine  before  sons  of  Rechabites

38.  22.  women  said,  thy  friends  have  s.  thee  on

39.  +  12.  s.  thine  eyes  on  him,  and  do  him  no  harm

40.  +  4.  come,  and  l  will  s.  mine  eyes  upon  thee
44.  10.  nor  walked  in  statutes  which  I  a.  before  you

Lam.  3.  6.  hath  a.  me  in  dark  places,  as  dead  of  old
12.  he  hath  a.  me  as  a  mark  for  the  arrow
Ezek.  5.  5.  I  have  s.  it  in  the  midst  of  the  nations

7.  20.  therefore  have  1  s.  it  far  from  them

9.  4.  s.  a  mark  on  the  foreheads  of  men  that  sigh
J2.  6.  for  1  have  a.  thee  fora  sign  unto  Israel

16.  18.  thou  hast.?,  my  oil  before  thy  images,  19.

17.  22.  1  will  take  off  highest  branch,  1  will  a.  it
19.  8.  then  nations  a.  against  him  on  every  side

22.  7.  in  thee  have  they  s.  light  by  father  and  moth.

24.  2.  king  of  Babylon  a.  himselt  against  Jerusal.
3.  a.  on  a  pot,  a.  it  on,  and  also  pour  water

7.  her  blood,  she  s.  it  upon  the  top  of  a  rock,  8.

25.  when  1  take  them  whereon  they  a.  their  minds

26.  20.  I  shall  a.  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living

27.  10.  they  of  Persia  a.  forth  thy  comeliness

28.  2.  tho’  thou  a.  thy  heart  as  the  heart  of  God

14.  art  anointed  cherub,  and  1  have  a.  thee  so

32.  25.  they  a.  her  a  bed  in  the  midst  of  her  slain
37.  26.  1  will  a.  my  sanctuary  in  midst  of  them

39.  21.  1  will  a.  my  glory  among  the  heathen

40.  4.  a',  thy  heart  upon  all  that  1  shall  shew  thee

44.8.  have  a.  keepers  of  my  charge  in  my  sanc  tuary
Dan.  6.  3.  king  thought  to  a.  him  over  the  realm

14.  he  a.  his  heart  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him

9.  10.  to  walk  in  his  laws  which  he  a.  before  us

10.  12.  thou  didst  a.  thine  heart  to  understand
Hus.  2.  3.  lest  1  a.  her  as  in  day  that  she  was  born

4.  8.  and  they  a.  their  heart  on  their  iniquity

6.  11.  O  Judah,  he  hath  a.  an  harvest  for  thee

11.  8.  how  shall  1  a.  thee  as  Zeboirn :

Amos  8.  5.  sabb.  be  gone,  that  we  may  s.  forth  wheat

9.  4.  1  will  a.  mine  eyes  upon  them  for  evil,  not  for
Obad.  4.  though  thou  a.  thy  nest  among  the  stars
Hab.  2.  9-  that  he  may  a.  his  nest  on  high,  be  deliv.
Zeph.  3.  +  19.  and  1  will  s.  them  for  a  praise
llag.  1 .  +  5.  a.  your  heart  on  your  ways,  saith  T.ord
Zech.  3.  5.  I  said,  let  them  a.  a  fair  mitre  on  his  head

5.  11.  it  shall  be  a.  there  upon  her  own  base

6. 11.  make  crowns,  and  a.  them  on  head  of  Josh.

8.  10.  I  a.  all  men,  everyone  against  his  neighbour
Mat.  10.  35.  1  am  come  to  a.  a  manat  variance

25.  33.  he  shall  a.  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand
Mark  12.  1.  and  a.  an  hedge  about  it,  and  digged
Luke  4.  18.  to  a.  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised

10.  34.  and  a.  him  on  his  own  beast  and  brought

11.  6.  friend  come,  1  have  nothing  to  a.  before

23.  11.  IJerod  with  men  of  war,  a.  him  at  nought
John  2.  10.  every  man  doth  s.  forth  good  wine

3.  33.  he  hath  a.  to  his  seal,  that  God  is  true


Acts  7.  5.  no  not  so  much  as  to  a.  his  foot  01.

13.  9.  then  Paul  s.  his  eyes  on  him  and  said
47.  1  have  a.  thee  to  be  a  light  to  the  Gentiles

18.  10.  no  man  shall  a.  on  thee  to  hurt  thee
Horn.  3.  25.  whom  God  a.  forth  to  be  a  propitiation

14.  10.  why  dost  thou  a.  at  nought  thy  brother  r
1  Cor.  4.  9.  God  hath  s.  forth  us  the  apostles  last

6. 4.  a.  them  to  judge  who  are  least  esteemed  in  ch.
12.  18.  now  God  hath  a.  the  members  in  the  body
28.  God  hath  a.  some  in  the  church,  first  apostles
Eph.  1.  20.  when  he  a.  him  at  his  own  right  hand
Col.  3.  2.  a.  your  affect,  on  things  above,  not  on  earth
Heb.  2-7-  thou  didst.?,  him  over  work  of  thy  hands
Lev.  3.  8.  1  have  a.  before  thee  an  open  door
20.  3.  and  he  shut  him  up,  and  a.  a  seal  upon  him
SE’l  up.

Gen.  28.  18.  Jacob  took  the  stone  and  a.  it  up  for  a
pillar,  and  poured  oil  on  it,  22. 1  3j .  45.  I  35.  14.
Exod.  40.  2.  shalt  a.  up  the  tabernacle  of  the  tent
8.  thou  shalt  a.  up  the  court  ||  18.  boards  ||  21.  vai.
28.  he  a.  up  hanging  at  door  of  tabernacle,  33.
Lev.  26.  1.  nor  shall  ye  a.  up  any  image  of  stone
Num.  1.  51.  the  tabernacle,  Levites  shall  a.  it  up
7.  1.  that  Moses  had  fully  a.  up  the  tabernacle
10.  21.  and  other  did  a.  it  up  against  they  came
Dent.  27.  2.  that  thou  shalt  a.  up  these  stones,  4.
Josh.  4.  9.  Joshua  a.  up  twel  ve  stones  in  Jordan

6.  26.  shall  he  a.  up  gates  of  it,  1  Kings  16. 34.
Judg.  18.  30.  children  of  Dan.  a.  up  graven  image

31.  they  a.  them  up  Micah’s  graven  image

1  Sam.  15.  11.  it  repenteth  me  1  have  a.  up  Saul
12.  behold,  Saul  hath  a.  him  up  a  place,  and  gone

2  Sam.  3.  10.  to  a.  up  throne  of  David  over  Israel

7.  12.  1  will  a.  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  which  shall

1  Kings  15.  4.  to  a.  up  his  son  after  him  and  establ  isli

2  Kings  17.  10.  they  s.  them  up  images  and  groves

1  Chr.  21.  18.  a.  them  up  an  altar  in  threshing-fh.or

2  Chron.  25.  14.  Amaziah  a.  them  up  to  be  his  gods
3.3.  19.  Manasseh  a.  up  groves  and  graven  images

Ezra  2.  68.  offered  freely  to  a.  up  God’s  house

4.  12.  Jews  have  a.  up  the  walls  thereof,  13.  16.

5.  11.  build  the  house  a  great  king  of  Israel,  a.  up

6.  11.  being  a.  up,  let  him  be  hanged  thereon

9.  9.  to  give  us  a  reviving  to  a.  up  house  of  God
Neh.  3.  1.  they  built  sheep-gate,  they  sanctified  it,

and  a.  up  the  doors  of  it,  3.  6,  13, 14,  15.  I  7.  1.

6.  1.  tho’  at  that  time  1  had  not  a.  up  the  doors
Job  5.  11.  to  a.  up  on  high  those  that  be  low

16.  12.  hath  shaken  me  and  a.  me  up  for  his  mark
Psal.  20.  5.  the  name  of  G.  we  will .?.  up  our  banners

27.  5.  he  shall  hide  me,  and  a.  me  up  upon  a  rock
69.  29-  let  thy  salvation,  O  God,  a.  me  ?^on  high
74.  4.  they  a.  up  their  ensigns  for  signs

89.  42.  thou  hast  a.  up  right  hand  of  adversaries
Prov.  8.  23.  1  was  a.  ?<pfrom  everlast.  from  begin.
Isa.  9. 11.  Lord  shall  a.  wpthe  adversaries  of  ReziL

11. 12.  he  shall  a.  up  an  ensign  for  the  nations
23.  13.  they  a.  up  towers  thereof,  raised  palaces
45.  20.  that  a.  up  wood  of  their  graven  image

49.  22.  behold  1  will  .?.  up  my  standard  to  people

57.8.  thou  hast  a.  up  thy  remembrance

Jer.  4.  6.  a.  up  the  standard  toward  Zion,  retire

10.  20.  there  is  none  to  a.  up  my  curtains

11. 13.  have  ye  a.  up  altars  to  that  shameful  thing?
23.  4.  and  1  will  a.  up  shepherds  over  them

31.  21.  a.  thee  up  way-marks,  make  high  heaps

50.  2.  a.  up  a  standard,  publish,  51.  12,  27.

51.  12.  a.  up  the  watchmen,  prepare  ambushes
Lam.  2.  17-  he  hath  a.  up  horn  of  thy  adversaries
Ezek.  14.3.  these  men  have  a.  up  their  idols

31.  4.  the  deep  a.  him  up  on  high  with  her  rivers
34.  23.  1  will  a.  up  one  shepherd  over  them
Dan.  2.  44.  God  of  heaven  shall  a.  up  a  kingdom
3.  14.  nor  worship  the  golden  image  l  have  a.  up
5.19.  whom  he  would  he  a.  up  and  put  down
12.  11.  abomination  "that  maketh  desolate  a.  up

Hos.  8.  4.  they  have  a. up  kings  but  not  by  me
Mai.  3.  15.  they  that  work  wickedness  are  a.  up
Mat.  27.  37.  and  a.  up  over  his  head  this  accusatior
Acts  6.  13.  and  a.  up  false  witnesses,  who  said

15.  16.  1  will  build  again  the  ruins,  and  a.  it  up

SET,  Passive.

Gen.  2i.  3.3.  there  was  a.  meat  before  him  to  eat

28.  11.  sun  was  s.  ||  12.  a  ladder  was  a.  upon  earth
Exod.  25.  7.  stones  a.  in  ephod,  28.  11. 1  35.  9,  27-
26.  17.  two  tenons  a.  in  order  against  another

32.  22.  knowest  people,  they  are  a.  on  mischief
.37.  3.  the  rings  a.  |[  39  .  37.  the  lamps  a.  in  order

1  Sam.  18.  30.  so  that  his  name  was  much  a.  by
26.24.  behold,  as  thy  life  was  much  a.  by  this  day

2  Sam.  12.  30.  crown.?,  on  Dav.  head,  1  Chr.  20.2.

1  Kings  2.  19.  a  seat  to  be  a.  for  the  king’s  mother
14.  4.  Ahijah  could  not  see,  for  his  eyes  were  a.

2  Kings  12.  4.  the  money  that  every  man  is  a.  at

1  Chron.  9.22.  porters  appointed  in  their  a.  office

19.  10.  Joab  saw  the  battle  was  a.  against  him

29.  2.  David  gave  onyx-stones  and  stones  to  he  a.

2  Chron.  6.  10.  and  1  am  a.  on  the  throne  of  Israel
29.  35.  service  of  the  house  of  L.  was  a.  in  order
31.  15.  in  their  a.  office  to  give  their  brethren

18.  in  their  a.  office  they  sanctified  themselves
Job  36.  16.  and  what  should  be  a.  on  thy  table
Psal.  10.8.  his  eyes  are  privily  a.  against  the  poor
122.  5.  there  are  a.  thrones  of  judgment,  of  David
141.  2.  let  my  prayer  be  a.  forth  before  thee
Prov.  18.  +  10.  righteous  run  into  it,  and  is  a.  aloft
29.  +  25.  puts  trust  in  the  Lord,  shall  be  a.  on  high
Eccl.  8.  11.  the  heart  is  fully  a.  in  them  to  do  evil
10.  6.  folly  a.  in  great  dignity  ;  rich  sit  in  low  plac.t
Cant.  5.  12.  his  eyes  are  as  the  eyes  of  doves  fitly  a.

14.  his  hands  are  as  gold  rings  a.  with  the  beryl

15.  his  legs  are  a.  upon  sockets  of  fine  gold

7.  2.  thy  belly  as  a  heap  of  wheat  a.  with  lilies
Isa.  3.24.  and  instead  of  well  a.  hair,  baldness

21.8.  I  am  a.  in  my  ward  whole  nights

Jer.  6. 23.  a.  in  array,  as  men  for  war,  Joel  2.  5.

31.  29.  children's  teeth  are  a.  on  edge,  Ezek.  18.2.
.30.  man  that  eateth,his  teeth  shall  be  a.  on  edge
Ezek.  22.  10.  they  humbled  her  that  was  a.  apart
Dan.  7.  10.  judgment  was  a.  books  were  opened
Nali.  3.  1.3.  the  gates  of  thy  land  shall  be  a.  open
Mat.  5.  14.  a  city  a.  on  a  hill  cannot  be  hid


S  E  V


S  E  V


SEY


Mat.  27.  19.  when  he  was  *,  on  judgment-seat,  wife
Mark  1.  32.  when  sun  did  ?.  they  brought  diseased

4.  21.  a  candle,  and  not  to  he  .?.  on  a  candlestick

9.  12.  must  suffer  many  things,  and  he  s.  at  nought
Luke  2.  34.  this  child  is  s.  for  the  fall  and  rising

7.  8.  for  I  also  am  a  man  s.  under  authority

10.  8.  eat  such  things  as  are  ?.  before  you
John  2.  6.  there  were  ?.  six  water-pots  of  stone
Aces  4.  11.  the  stone  s.  at  nought  of  you  builders

19.  27.  our  craft  is  in  danger  to  be  s.  at  nought
26.  32.  this  man  might  have  been  s.  at  liberty

1  Cor.  10.  27.  whatsoever  is  ?.  before  you  eat
9a/.  3. 1.  Chr.  had  been  evidently  s.  forth  crucified
Phil.  1.  17.  I  am  s.  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel
Ueb.  6.  18.  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  ?.  before  us

8.  1.  who  is  ?.  on  right  hand  of  the  throne,  12.  2.

12.  1.  let  11s  run  the  race  that  is  .?.  before  us

2.  who  for  joy  that  was  .?.  before  him,  endured

13.  23.  our  brother  Timothy  is  s.  at  liberty
Jude  7.  the  cities  are  s.  forth  for  an  example
Pev.  3.  21.  am  s.  down  with  my  Father  in  throne

4.  2.  a  throne  was  s.  in  heaven,  one  sat  on  throne
SET  day.

Acts  12.  21.  on  a  ?.  day,  Herod  arrayed  in  royal  ap.
See  Face,  Faces,  Feasts.

SET  time.

Gen.  17.  21.  Sarah  shall  bear  to  thee  at  this  ?.  time
21.  2.  at  the  .?.  time  of  which  God  had  spoken
Exod.  9.  5.  the  Lord  appointed  a  s.  time,  saying

1  Sam.  13.  8.  according  to  s.  time  Sam.  appointed

2  Sam.  20.  5.  Amasa  tarried  longer  than  the  s.  time
Job  14.  13.  that  thou  wouldst  appoint  me  a?.  time
Psal.  102.  13.  the  s.  time  to  favour  her  is  come

SE  ITER.

Acts  17.  18.  seems  to  be  a  ?.  forth  of  strange  gods
SETT  ESI.

Deut.  23.  20.  in  all  thou  s.  thy  hand  to,  28.  8,  20.
Job  7.  12.  am  i  a  sea,  that  thou  s.  a  watch  over  me  ?
13.  27.  thou  s.  a  print  on  the  heels  of  my  feet
Psal.  21.  3.  thou  s.  a  crown  of  gold  on  his  head
41.  12.  thou  ?.  me  before  thy  face  for  ever
SETTETH.

Exod.  30.  +  8.  when  Aaron  s.  up  the  lamps
Num.  1.  51.  when  the  tabernacle  s.  forward
4.  5.  when  camp  s.  forward,  Aaron  shall  come
Deut.  24.  15.  he  is  poor,  and  s.  his  heart  upon  it
2~.  16.  cursed  be  he  that  s.  light  by  his  father
2  Sam.  22.  34.  s.  me  on  high  places,  Psal.  18.  33.
Job  24.  +  15.  the  adulterer  .?.  his  face  ;n  secret
28.  3.  he  ?.  an  end  to  darkness,  and  searcheth
40.  +  17.  lie  s.  up  his  tail  like  a  cedar
Psal.  36.  4.  he  ?.  himself  in  a  way  that  is  not  good
65.  6.  which  by  his  strength  .1.  fast  mountains
68.  6.  God?.  solitary  in  families,  lie  brings  out
75.  7.  he  putteth  down  one,  and  s.  up  another
83.  14.  as  the  flame  s.  the  mountains  on  fire
107.  41.  yet  s.  poor  on  high  from  affliction
Isa.  44. 1 19.  none  ?.  to  his  heart,  nor  is  there  know.
Jer.  5.  26.  they  lay  wait  as  he  that  s.  snares
43.  3.  but  Baruch  s.  thee  on  against  us
Ezek.  14.  4.  that  s.  up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  7.

Dan.  2.  21.  he  removeth  kings  and  s.  up  kings
4.  17.  he  s.  up  over  it  the  basest  of  men
Mat.  4.  5.  and  ?.  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple
Luke  8.  16.  but  s.  it  on  a  candlestick  that  they  see
Jam.  3.  6.  tongue  s.  on  tire  the  course  of  nature
SETTING.

Ezek.  43.  8.  in  their  s.  of  their  threshold  by  mine
Mat.  27  .  66.  sealing  the  stone,  and  s.  a  watch
Luke  4.  40.  when  sun  was  s.  they  brought  the  sick
SETTINGS.

Exod.  28.  17.  thou  shalt  set  in  it  s.  of  stones

SETTLE.

Ezek.  43.  14.  from  the  ground  even  to  the  lowers.
17.  and  the  s.  shall  be  fourteen  cubits  long

20.  put  blood  on  four  corners  of  the  s.  45.  19.

SETTLE.

1  Chron.  17.  14.  but  I  will  s.  him  in  mine  house
F.zek.  36.  11.  I  will  s.  you  after  your  old  estates
Luke  21.  14.  s.  it  in  your  hearts,  not  to  meditate
l  Pet.  5.  10,  but  God  stablish,  strengthen,  s.  you
.  SETTLED.

1  Kings  8.  13.  built  a  r.  place  for  thee  to  abide  in

2  Kings  8. 11.  he  s.  his  countenance  stedfastly
Psal.  30.  t7-  thou  hasty,  strength  for  my  mountain

39.  +  5.  every  man  s.  is  altogether  vanity

1 19.  89.  for  ever,  O  Lord,  thy  word  is  s.  in  heaven
Prov.  8.  25.  before  mountains  were  s.  before  hills
Jer.  48.  11.  Moab  been  at  ease,  he  hath  ?.  on  his  lees
Zeph.  1.  12.  punish  men  that  are  s.  on  their  lees
Col.  1.  23.  if  ye  continue  in  faith  grounded  and  s.
SETTLES!'.

Psal.  65.  10.  thou  s.  furrows  thereof,  makest  soft
SEVEN.

Besides  the  known  signijicatiun  of  this  word,  it  is
also  used  in  scripture  as  a  number  of  perfection.
In  the  sacred  books,  and  in  the  religion  of  the
Jews,  a  great  number  of  events  and  mysterious
circumstances  are  set  forth  by  the  number  of  se¬
ven.  God  consecrated  the  seventh  day,  on  which
he  ceased  from  his  works  of  creation,  as  a  day
of  rest  and  repose.  This  rest  of  the  seventh  day,
according  to  the  apostle,  intimates  eternal  rest,
Heb.  4.  4,  9.  And  riot  only  the  seventh  day
is  honoured  among  the  Jews,  by  the  rest  of  the
sabbath,  but  every  seventh  year  is  also  conse¬
crated  to  the  rest  of  the  earth,  by  the  name  of
a  sabbatical  year;  as  also  the  seven  timei  se¬
venth  year,  or  forty-nine  years,  is  the  year  of  Ju¬
bilee.  In  the  prophetic  style,  a  week  often  stands
for  seven  years,  Dan.  9.  24,  25.  Jacob  served
his  father-in-law  Lahan  seven  years  for  each  of
his  daughters.  Pharaoh’s  mysterious  dream  re¬
presented  to  his  imagination  seven  fat  oxen,  and
seven  lean  ones ;  seven  full  ears  of  corn,  and  as
many  that  were  blasted:  these  stood  for  seven
years  of  plenty,  and  seven  of  scarcity.  The
golden  candlestick  had  seven  branches:  seven
trumpets,  seven  priests  that  sounded  them  ;  seven
days  to  surround  the  walls  of  Jericho,  Josh.  6.
4,  6,  8,  15.  In  the  Revelation  are  the  seven
churches,  seven  candlesticks,  seven  spirits,  seven


stars,  seven  lamps,  seven  seals,  seven  angels,  seven
vials,  seven  plagues,  Jc.

In  certain  passages  the  number  seven  is  put  for  a
great  number:  Isaiah  says,  that  seven  women
should  lay  hold  of  one  man,  to  ask  him  to  marry
them,  Isa.  4.  1.  Hannah  the  mother  of  Samuel
says,  that  she  who  was  barren  should  have  seven
children,  that  is,  several  children,  1  Sam.  2.  5.
God  threatens  his  people,  to  smite  them  seven
times  for  their  transgression,  that  is,  several  times,

I. evr.  26.  24.  The  Psalmist,  speaking  of  very
pure  silver,  says,  it  is  purified  seven  times,  Psal.

12.  6.  And  iii  Psal.  79.  12.  Render  unto  our
neighbours  sevenfold  into  their  bosom.  Punish
them  severely,  and  as  often  as  they  deserve  it.
The  slothful  man  thinks  himself  wiser  than  seven
men  that  can  give  a  reason  for  their  actions,
Prov.  26.  16.  In  these  and  many  other  passages,
the  certain  number  seven  is  placed  for  an  uncer¬
tain  and  indefinite  number.

Gen.  7.  t2.  of  every  clean  beast  take  to  thee  s.

41.  2.  there  came  up  well-favoured  kine

3.  s.  other  kine  came  up,  4.  18,  19,  20,26,  27.

5.  s.  ears  of  corn  came  up,  rank  and  good

6.  s.  thin  ears,  and  blasted,  7,  22,  23, 24,  26,  27.

46.  25.  the  sons  of  Bilhah,  all  the  souls  were  s.

Exod.  2.  16.  the  priest  of  Midian  had  ?.  daughters
Lev.  23.15.  s.  sabbaths  shall  be  complete
25.8.  shalt  number  s.  sabbaths  of  years  to  thee
Num.  23.  1.  Balaam  said  to  Balak,  build  me  here
?.  altars,  and  prepare,?,  oxen  and  s.  rams,  29.

4.  and  he  said,  I  have  prepared  s.  altars,  14.
Dene.  7.  1.  s.  nations  greater  and  might,  than  thou
16.  9.  s.  weeks  thou  shalt  number  to  thee,  begin
28.  7.  Ld.  cause  enemies  to  flee  before  thee  s.  ways

25.  thou  shalt  flee  s.  ways  before  them
Josh.  6.  4.  s.  priests  bearing  s',  trumpets,  6,  8,  13.
18.  2.  there  remained  of  lsr.  s.  tribes  not  received

5.  and  they  shall  divide  it  into.?,  parts,  6.

9.  described  it  by  cities  into.?,  parts  in  a  book
Judg.yf.  7.  if  they  bind  me  with.?,  green  withs

13.  if  thou  weavest  s.  locks  H  19.  shave  off  s.  locks

1  Sam.  2.  5.  so  that  the  barren  hath  born  .?.

6.  1.  the  ark  was  with  the  Philistines  s.  months
16.  10.  Jesse  made  .?.  of  his  sons  to  pass  before  Sam.

2  Sam.  21. 9.  they  fell  all .?.  togetherand  put  to  death

1  Chron.  3.  24.  and  the  sons  of  Elioenai  were.?.

5.  13.  their  breth.  of  house,  of  their  fathers  wer  e?.

2  Chron.  29.  21.  they  brought  .?.  bullocks,  .?.  rams
Ezra  7.  14.  sent  of  king  and  of  his  s.  counsellors
Esth.  1.  10. ?.  chamberlains  that  served  in  presence

14.  the  s.  princes  which  saw  the  king’s  face

2.  9.  he  gave  her  .?.  maidens  meet  to  be  given  her
JobS.  19.  in  s.  troubles  no  evil  shall  touch  thee
Prov.  5.  16.  yea  s.  are  an  abomination  unto  him

9.  1.  wisdom  hath  hewn  out  her  .?.  pillars

26.  25.  for  there  are  s.  abominations  in  his  heart
Eccl.  11.  2.  give  a  portion  to,?,  also  to  eight
Isa.  4.  1.  in  that  day  .?.  women  take  hold  of  one  man

11.  15.  the  Lord  shall  smite  it  in  the.?,  streams
Jer.  15.  9.  she  that  hath  born  s.  languisheth
Ezek.  39.  12.  s.  months  shall  they  be  burying  them

14.  after  the  end  of.?,  months  shall  they  search

40.  22.  they  went  up  unto  it  by  s.  steps,  26.

41.  3.  and  the  breadth  of  the  door  s.  cubits
Dan.  9.  25.  unto  the  Messiah,  shall  be  s.  weeks
Mic.  5.  5.  we  shall  raise  against  him  s.  shepherds
Zech.  3.  9.  behold,  upon  one  stone  shall  be  s.  eyes

4.  2.  his  w.  lamps  thereon,  and.?,  pipes  to  s.  lamps

10.  plummet  in  hand  of  Zerubbahel  with  those  ?.
Mat.  15.  34.  they  said,.?,  loa.ves,  36.  Mark  8.  5.

37.  they  took  up  .?.  baskets  full,  Mark  8.  8.

16.  10.  nor  the  s.  loaves  among  four  thousand
22.  25.  now  there  were  with  us  s.  brethren,  and  the
first  deceased,  Mark  12.  20.  Luke  20.  29.
28.  in  resurrection  whose  wife  shall  she  be  of  s.
Mai  k  12.  22.  and  s.  had  her,  2.3.  Luke  20.  31,  3.3.

16.  9.  out  of  whom  he  cast  s.  devils,  Luke  8.  2.
Acts  13.  19.  when  he  destroyed  .?.  nations  in  Canaan

21.  8.  Philip  who  was  one  of  the  .?.  deacons
llev.  1.  4.  John  to  .?.  churches  in  Asia,  grace  to  you

II.  write,  and  send  it  to  the  s.  churches  in  Asia

12.  being  turned,  l  saw.?,  golden  candlesticks

I. 3. in  midst  of  s.  candlesticks  one  like  Son  of  man
20.  s.  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  churches,  the  s.

candlesticks  thou  sawestare  the.?,  churches
2. 1.  who  walketh  in  midst  of?,  golden  candlesticks

5.  6.  I  beheld  Lamb  as  slain,  having  s.  horns,  and
s.  eyes,  which  are  the  ?.  spirits  of  God  sent  forth

8.  2.  1  saw  the  s.  angels  which  stood  before  God

6.  the.?,  angels  prepared  themselves  to  sound

10.  3.  when  he  cried,?,  thunders  uttered  voices
4.  seal  up  what  the  ?.  thunders  have  uttered

12.  3.  behold,  a  great  dragon,  having  ?.  heads,  and

?.  crowns  upon  his  heads,  13.  1.  I  17.  3,  7.

15.  1.  I  saw?,  angels  having  the?,  last  plagues, 6.

7.  gave  to  ?.  angels  ?.  golden  vials  full  of  wrath

8.  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple,  till

the  ?.  plagues  of  they,  angels  were  fulfilled

16.  1.  1  heard  a  voice,  saying  to  the  ?.  angels

17-  1.  and  there  came  one  of  the  ?.  angels  which
had  the?,  vials,  and  talked  with  me,  21.  9.

17.  9- the?,  heads  are  ?.  mountains  on  which

10.  there  are  .?.  kings,  five  are  fallen,  one  is,  other

II.  the  beast  is  of  the  .?.  and  goeth  into  perdition

See  Days,  Hundred.

SEVEN  bullocks.

Num.  23.  29.  prepare  me  here  ?.  bullocks,  s.  rams
29.  32.  on  the  seventh  day  ?.  bullocks,  two  rams

1  Chron.  15.26.  Levites  offered  .?.  bullocks,  s.  rams

2  Chron.  29.  21.  they  brought?,  bullocks,  s.  rams
Job  42.  8.  take  to  you  now,  ?.  bullocks,  s.  rams
Ezek.  45.  23.  prepare  a  burnt  offering,  ?.  bullocks

SEVEN-FOLD.

Gen.  4.  15.  vengeance  shall  be  taken  on  him  ?.

24.  if  Cain  shall  be  avenged  ?.  Lantech  70  and  ?.
Psal.  79.  12.  render  .?.  into  their  bosom  reproach
Prov.  6.  31.  but  if  he  be  found  he  shall  restore?.
Isa.  30.  26.  and  the  light  of  the  sun  shall  be  ?.

See  Lambs,  Lamps.

SEVEN  men.

2  Sam.  21.  6.  let  «.  men  of  his  sons  be  delivered


Prov.  26.  16.  than  ?.  men  that  can  render  a  reaacn
Jer.  52.  25.  took  ?.  men  that  were  near  the  king
Acts  6.  3.  look  out  ?.  m.  of  honest  rep.  full  of  Holy  G.
SEVEN  rams,  See  SEVEN  bullocks.

See  Seals.

SEVEN  sons.

Ruth  4.  15.  thy  daughter  is  better  than  ?.  sons
Job  1.  2.  and  there  were  horn  unto  him  ?.  sons
42.  13.  he  had  also  ?.  sons,  and  three  daughters
Acts  19.  14.  there  were  .?.  sons  of  one  Sceva  a  Jew
SEVEN  spirits.

Mat.  12.45.  then  goeth  he,  and  taketli  with  himself
?.  other  spirits  more  wicked,  Luke  11.  26.
Rev.  1.  4.  from?,  spirits  before  the  throne  of  God

3.  1.  these  saith  he  that  hath  the  ?.  spirits  of  God

4.  5.  seven  lamps,  which  are  the  ?.  spirits  of  God

5.  6.  seven  eyes,  which  are  the  ?.  spv  its  of  God

SEVEN  stars.

Amos  5.  8.  seek  him  that  maketh  the  stars
Rev.  1.  16.  had  in  his  right  hand  .?.  stars,  2. 1.  I  3.  1.
20.  mystery  of  ?.  stars,  thou  sawest  in  my  right
hand  ;  ?.  stars  are  the  angels  of  the  ?.  churches
SEVEN  and  thirty,  See  Thirty.

See  Thousand.

SEVEN  times.

Gen.  33  3.  Jacob  bowed  before  Esau  .?.  times
Lev.  4.  6.  priest  shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  ?.  times
17. 1  8.  11. 1  14.  7.  I  16.  14,  19.  Num.  19.  4.
14.  16.  shall  sprinkle  oil  with  his  fingers  ?.  times,  27 .
51.  dip  in  blood, and  sprinkle  the  house  ?.  times

25.  8.  thou  shalt  number  ?.  times  seven  years

26.  18.  I  will  punish  you?,  times  more, 21,  24,  28.
Josh.  6.  4.  he  shall  compass  the  city?,  times,  15.

1  Kings  18.  43.  said  to  his  servant,  go  again,?,  times

2  Kings  4.  35.  child  neesed  ?.  times,  and  opened  eyes
5.  JO.  Elisha  sent,  go  wash  in  Jordan  .?.  times,  14.
Psal.  12.  6.  words  are  as  silver  purified  ?.  times

119.  164.  ?.  times  a  day  do  1  praiSe  thee,  because
Prov.  24.  16.  a  just  man  falletli  ?.  times,  andriseth
Dan.  3.  19.  heat  the  furnace  one  ?.  times  more  than
4.  16.  let?,  times  pass  over  him,  23,  25,  32.

Mat.  18.  21.  how  oft  shall  I  forgive  ?  till  .?.  times
22.  1  say  not,  till  ?.  times,  but  until  10  times  s.
Luke  17. 4.  if  thy  brother  trespass  agst.  thee .?.  times
a  day,  and  ?.  times  a  day  turn  again  to  thee
SEVEN  and  twenty.  See  Twenty.
SEVEN  YEARS.

Gen.  29.  18.  I  w ill  serve  thee  ?.  years  for  Rachel
20.  served  ?.  years  ||  27.  serve  ?.  other  years,  30.

41.  26.  the  seven  good  kine  are  ?.  years,  and  the
seven  good  ears  are?,  years,  the  dream  is  one
27.  seven  thin  ami  ill-favoured  kine  are  ?.  years
seven  empty  ears  shall  be  ?.  years  of  famine

29.  there  come  ?.  years  of  plenty,  .34,  47,  48.

30.  there  shall  arise  .?.  years  of  "famine,  36.  54.

53.  the  ?.  years  of  plenteousness  were  ended

Lev.  25.  8.  thou  shalt  number  seven  times  ?.  years
Num.  13.  22.  IJebron  was  built  ?.  years  before  Zoan
Deut.  15.  1.  at  end  of  every  s.yearsa.  release,  .31.10.
Judg.6.  1.  Lord  delivered  Israel  to  Midian  ?.  years
25.  take  the  second  bullock  of?,  years  old
12.  9.  Ibzan  of  Bethlehem  judged  Israel  ?.  years
2  Sam.  2.  11.  David  was  king  in  Hebron  ?.  years
six  months,  5.  5.  1  Kings  2.  11.  1  Chron.  29.  27.
24t  13.  shall  ?.  years  of  famine  come  to  thee?

1  Kings  6.  38.  Sol.  was  s.  years  in  building  temple

2  Kings 8.  1.  famine  shall  come  upon  lan ds. years

2.  she  sojourned  with  the  Philistines?,  years

11.  21.  Athaliah  was  slain,  and  s.  years  old  wa_
Jehoash  when  he  began  to  reign,  2  Chron.  24.  ].
Jer.  34.  14.  at  end  of  ?.  years  let  ye  go  every  man
Ezek.  39.  9.  shall  burn  weapons  with  fire  ?.  years
Luke  2.  36.  Anna  lived  with  an  husband  ?.  years
SEVENS.

Gen.  7.  2.  of  every  clean  beast  shalt  thou  take  b37  ?.

3.  of  fowls  of  the  air  by  ?.  the  male  and  female

SEVENTEEN.

Gen.  37.  2.  Jos.  being?,  years  old  was  feeding  flock
47:  28.  Jacob  lived  in  the  land  of  Egypt  ?.  years

1  Kings  14.  21.  Rehoboam  reigned  ?.  years  in  Jerus.

2  Kings  13. 1.  Jehoahaz  son  of  Jehu  reigned  ?.  years
Jer.  32.  9.  Jerem.  bought  field,  weighed  ?.  shekels

SEVENTEENTH.

Gen.  7.  11.  on  .?.  day  the  fountains  were  broken  up
8.  4.  ark  rested  on  the  ?.  day  in  seventh  month

1  Kings  22.  51.  Ahaziah  began  to  reign  the  ?.  year

2  Kings  16.  1.  ill .?.  year  of  Pekah  son  of  Remaliah
1  Chron.  24.  I5t  the  ?.  lot  came  to  Ilezir

25.  24.  the  s.  lot  came  to  .loslibekashah

SEVENTH.

Exod.  21.  2.  in  ?.  he  shall  go  out  free  for  nothing
31.  15.  but  in  the  ?.  is  the  sabbath  of  rest  to  Lord
Lev.  23.  16.  unto  the  morrow  after  the  ?.  sabbath
Josh.  6.  16.  at  the  ?.  time  when  the  priests  blew
19.  40.  and  ?.  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of  Dan
1  Kings  18.  44.  at  the  ?.  time  there  arose  a  cloud
1  Chron.  2.  15.  David  was  the?,  son  of  Jesse
24.  10.  the?,  lot  came  forth  to  Hakkoz

26.  3.  Elioenai  the  ?.  son  of  Meshelemiah
5.  lssachar  was  the  •?.  son  of  Obed-edom

27.  10.  the  .?.  captain  for  the  ?.  month  was  Helez
Mat.  22.  26.  second  also,  and  the  third,  to  the  ?.
John  4.  52.  yesterday  at  ?.  hour  the  fever  left  him
Jude  14.  Enoch  the  .?.  from  Adam  prophesied
Lev.  8.  1.  and  when  he  had  opened  the  ?.  seal

10.  7.  in  the  days  of  the  voice  of  the  ?.  angel
11. 15.  the?,  angel  sounded,  there  were  voices
16.  17.  ?■  angel  poured  out  his  vial  into  the  air
21.  20.  the  ?.  foundation  was  a  chrysolite
See  Day.

SEVENTH  month.

Gen.  8.  4.  ark  rested  in  ?.  month  on  the  mountains
Lev.  16.  29.  in  ?.  m.  afflict  your  souls,  23.  27.  |  25.  9.
23.  24.  in  the  ?.  month  shall  ye  have  a  sabbath
Num.  29.  1.  in  ?.  month  an  holy  convocation,  12.

1  Kings  8.  2.  Israel  assembled  at  feast  of  the  .?.  m.

2  Kings  25.  25.  in  ?.  m.  Ishmael  killed  Gedaliah,

the  Jews  and  Chaldees  with  him,  Jer.  41.  1.
2  Chr.  7.  10.  in.?,  month  Solomon  sent  them  away
31.  7.  they  finished  the  heaps  in  the  .?.  month
Ezra  3. 1.  when  ?.  month  was  come,  and  the  children
of  Israel  were  in  the  cities,  Neh.  7.  73

137


S  H  A


S  H  A


SH  A


Ezra  .3.  6.  from  first  day  of.?,  m.  began  they  to  offer
Sell.  8.  ‘2.  on  the  first  day  of  the  .?.  month  Ezra  read

14.  in  feasts  of  s.  month  Isr.shall  dwell  in  booths
Jer.  28. 17.  so  Hananiah  died  in  the  z.  month
Ezek.  45.  25.  in  the  z.  month  shall  he  do  the  like
Hay.  2.  1.  in  the/.  month  the  word  came  to  11  aggai
Zech.  7 .  5.  when  ye  mourned  in  fifth  and  z.  month

8.  19.  the  fast  of  the  s',  month  shall  be  to  J  udah  joy

SEVENTH  year.

Exod.  23.  1 1 .  but  the  .?.  year  thou  shalt  let  it  rest
Lev.  25.  4.  in  the  .?.  year  shall  be  a  sabbath  of  rest
20.  if  ye  say,  what  shall  we  eat  in  the z.  year  ?
Deut.  15.  9.  saving,  the  s.year,  year  of  release,  is
at  hand,  thine  eye  be  evil  against  thy  brother
12.  in  the  s.  year  thou  shalt  let  him  go  tree
2  Kings  11.  4.  in  the  s.year  Jehoiada  sent  and  set
the  rulers  with  the  captains,  2  Chron.  23. 1.
12.  1.  in  s.  year  of  Jehu  Jehoash  began  to  reign
18.  9.  in  s.  year  of  Hoshea  king  of  Assyria  came
Ezra  7.  7.  went  to  Jerus.  in  s.  year  of  Artaxerxes,  8.
Seh.  10.  31.  leave  s.  year  exaction  of  every  debt
Esth.  2.  16.  Esther  was  taken  to  king  in  s.  year
Jer.  52.  28.  people  carried  away  captive  in  s.  year
Ezek.  20.  1.  in  the  /.  year  elders  came  to  inquire
SEVENTY.

Gen.  4.24.  if  Cain,  truly  Lamech  s.  and  seven-fold
5.  12.  and  Cainan  lived  z.  yeais,  and  begat

11.  26.  Terah  lived  s.  years,  and  begat  Abram

12.  4.  Abram  was  s.  five  years  old,  when  he  depart.
Exod.  1.  5.  of  the  loins  of  Jacob  w-ere  .?.  souls

24.  1.  come  up,  thou,  and  z.  elders  of  Israel,  9.

38.  29.  the  brass  of  the  offering  was  s.  talents
Sum.  7.  1.3.  his  offering  was  one  silver  bowl  of  z.
shekels,  19.  25,  31, 37,43.  49,  55,  61,  67,73,  79.
85.  each  bowl  weighings,  shekels  of  silver
11.  16.  gather  unto  me  z.  men  ot  the  elders,  24.

25.  he  gave  of  the  spirit  unto  the  j.  elders
Judy.  9.  56.  wickedness,  in  slaying  his  s.  brethren
2  Kings  10.  1.  A  hah  had  s.  sons  in  Samaria,  6.

7.  they  took  king’s  sons,  and  slew  s.  persons
Ezra  2.  40.  children  of  Hodaviah  z.  four,  Neh.  7.  43.

8.7.  of  sons  of  Elam,  with  Jeshaiahz.  males
14.  of  the  sons  of  Zabbud,  with  them  s.  males
Psal.  90.  t  10.  as  for  our  days,  they  are  s.  years
Isa.  23.  )5.  that  Tyre  shall  be  forgotten  z.  years

17.  after  end  of  s.  years,  the  l.ord  will  visit  Tyre
Jer.  25.  11.  shall  serve  the  king  of  Babylon  z.  years
12.  when  s.  years  are  accomplished,  29. 10.

Ezek.  8. 11.  there  stood  before  them  s.  men
Dan.  9. 2.  accomplish  s.  years  in  desolat.  of  Jerus.

24.  s.  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people
Zech.  7.  5.  even  those  j.  years  did  ye  fast  to  me
Mat.  18.  22.  not  till  seven  times,  but  until  s.  times
Luke  10.  1.  Lord  appointed  other  s.  also,  and  sent
17.  the  z.  returned  again  with  joy ,  saying,  Lord
SEVER.

Exod.  8.22.  1  will  s.  in  that  day  the  land  of  Goshen

9.  4.  Ld.  shall  s.  between  cattle  of  Israel  and  Egy.
Ezek.  39.  14.  shall  s.  out  men  of  continual  employ
Mat.  13.  49.  and  s.  the  wicked  from  among  the  just

SEVERED.

Lev.  20.  26.  1  have  s.  you  from  other  people
Dent.  4. 41.  Moses  z.  three  cities  on  this  side  Jordan
Judg.  4.  11.  Heber  had  /.  himself  from  Kenites
SEVERAL.

Sum.  28.  13.  and  a  s.  tenth  deal  of  flour  mingled
with  oil  fora  meat  offering,  21,  29-  1  29.  10,  15.
2  Kings  15.  5.  Azariah  was  leper  to  the  day  of  his
death,  and  dwelt  in  a  s.  house,  2  Chron.  26.  21.
2  Chr.  11.  12.  in  every  s.  city  put  shields  and  spears

28.  25.  in  every  s.  city  of  Judah  made  high  places
31. 19.  also  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  in  every  s.  city
Mat.  25.  15.  every  man  according  to  1  iss.  ability
Kev.  21.  21.  every  s.  gate  was  of  one  pearl,  street
SEVERALLY.

1  Cor.  12.  11.  dividing  to  everv  man  y.  as  he  will
SEVERITY.

Rom.  11.  22.  behold  therefore  the  goodness  and  s.
of  God,  on  them  who  fell  s.  but  to  thee  goodness
SEW.

Eccl.  3.  7.  a  time  to  rend,  and  a  time  to  s.  a  time
Ezek.  13.  18.  woe  to  womens-,  pillows  to  arm  holes
SEWED.

Gen.  3.  7.  they  s.  fig-leaves  together,  made  aprons
Ezra  4.+  12.  they  s.  together  the  foundations
Jof>  16.  15.  I  have  s.  sackcloth  upon  my  skin
SEW  ES  I.

Job  14. 17.  in  a  bag.  and  thouz.  up  mine  iniquity
‘  SEWETH.

Mark  2. 21.  no  man  s.  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old
SHADE.

Ps.  121.  5.  the  Lord  is  thy  s.  upon  thy  right  hand
SHADOW

Is  the  representation  which  any  thing  makes  of  it¬
self.  being  interposed  between  the  sun  or  a  light ,
and  any  solid  body ,  Isa.  38.  8.  Acts  5.  15.  Also  a
place  sheltered  from  the  sun.  Job  7.  2.  As  a  servant
desiretii  the  shadow.  The  law  is  called  a  shadow
of  good  things  to  come,  Heb.  10.  1.  that  is,  the  Mo-
saical  economy  was  only  a  dark  obscure  represent¬
ation  of  Christ,  who  teas  the  substance  of  the  legal
types  and  shadows.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the
apostle  here  alludes  to  the  custom  of  Painters,  who
Jirst  make  a  rude  draught,  and from  it  draw  a  per¬
fect  and  lively  picture  ;  then  the  sense  of  the  words
is  this,  The  old  covenant  did  contain  only  dark  re¬
semblances  and  types  of  heavenly  things,  no  lively
representations  pf  them  ;  this  being  reserved  unto
the  time  of  the  gospel,  wherein  Christ  and  all
spiritual  blessings  in  him  are  clearly  and  plainly
manifested.  Others  think  that  the  apostle  alltides  to
the  shadow  of  a  body,  and  makes  this  the  sense  ;
That  the  old  covenant  had  only  types,  wherein
Christ  and  heavenly  things  through  him  xcere
darkly  represented,  not  the  substance  atid  truth  of
the  things  themselves.

A  Shadow  being  made  by  the  sun,  follows  its  mo¬
tions,  and  is  in  perpetual  variation,  until  at  last
it  quite  vanish  and  disappear  ;  in  this  sense  the
life  of  man  is  compared  to  a  shadow,  1  Chr.  29.  15.
Our  days  on  earth  are  as  a  shadow,  and  there
is  none  abiding.  Job  says,  17.  7.  All  my  mem¬

438


bers  are  as  a  shadow :  that  is,  I  am  shrunk  to
nothing,  and  become  a  mere  anatomy  or  ghost.

The  shadow  of  death.  Job  says.  Let  the  shadow
of  death  stain  the  day  wherein  1  was  born,
Job  3.  3.  that  is,  such  a  dismal  darkness  as  is
in  the  place  of  the  dead  ;  or,  so  gross  and  pal¬
pable  darkness,  that  by  its  horrors  and  damps
may  take  away  men's  spirits  and  lives.  1  he
morning  is  to  murderers  and  adulterers  as  the
shadow  of  death  ;  that  is,  terrible  and  hateful,
because  it  both  discovers  them  and  their  wore:
of  darkness,  and  hinders  their  practices.  Job
24.  17.  The  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  ;
that  is,  the  depth  of  the  most  terrible  and  af¬
frighting  dangers,  Psal.  23.  4.

Gen.  19. 8.  they  came  under  the  s.  of  my  roof
Judg.  9. 15.  then  come  and  put  your  trust  in  my  s.

36.  thou  seest  the  s.  of  the  mountains  as  it  men
2  Kings  20.  9.  shall  the  z.  go  forw  ard  ten  degrees  ?

10.  it  is  a  light  thing  for  the  s.  to  go  down  ten

11.  and  he  brought  the  s.  ten  degrees  backward
1  Chron.  29. 15.  our  days  on  earth  are  as  a. (.Job  8. 9.
Job  7.  2.  as  a  servant  earnestly  desireth  the  s.

14.  2.  he  fleeth  also  as  a  z.  and  continueth  not
17.  7.  and  all  my  members  are  as  a  s
40.  22.  the  shady  trees  cover  him  with  their  s.
Psal.  17.  8.  hide  me  under  the  s.  of  thy  wings

36.7.  put  their  trust  under  the  s.  of  thy  wings,  57. 1.

63.7.  in  the  of  thy  wings  will  1  rejoice

>  80.  10.  the  hills  were  covered  with  the  s.  of  it

91. 1.  shall  abide  under  the  s.  of  the  Almighty
102.  11.  my  days  are  like  a  s.  that  declineth
109.  23.  1  am  gone  like  a  z.  when  it  declineth
144.  4.  man  is  vanity,  his  days  are  as  s.  Eccl.  8. 13.

Eccl.  6. 12.  his  vain  life  which  he  spendeth  as  a  s.
Cant.  2.  3.  1  sat  under  his  s.  with  great  delight
Isa.  4. 6.  a  tabernacle  for  a  s.  in  day-time  from  heat
16.  3.  make  thy  s.  as  the  night  in  the  noon  day
25. 4.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  been  a  s.  from  the  heat

5.  bring  down  the  heat  with  z.  of  a  cloudy

30. 2.  to  strengthen,  and  trust  in  the  s.  of  Egypt
3.  and  the  trust  in  s.  of  Egypt  your  confusion

32.  2.  as  the  s.  of  a  great  rock  in  a  w-eary  land

34. 15.  owl  lay  and  hatch,  and  gather  under  her/.
38.  8.  1  will  bring  again  the  s.  of  the  degrees

49. 2.  in  s.  of  his  hand  hath  he  hid  me,  51 .  16.

Jer.  48.  45.  they  stood  under  the  s.  of  Heshbon
Lam.  4.20.  we  said,  under  his  s.  we  shall  live
Ezek.  17.  23.  in  the  s.  thereof  shall  they  dwell

31.  6.  and  under  his  s.  dwelt  all  great  nations

12.  all  the  people  are  gone  down  from  his  s.

17.  that  dwelt  under  his  ?.  in  midst  of  heathen

Dan.  4. 12.  the  beasts  of  the  field  had  s.  under  it
Has.  4. 13.  under  elms,  because  s.  thereof  is  good

14.  7-  they  that  dwell  under  his  s.  shall  return
Jonah  4.  5.  made  a  booth,  and  sat  under  it  in  s.

6.  over  Jonah,  that  it  might  be  s.  over  his  head
Mark  4.  32.  that  fow  ls  may  lodge  under  the/.  of  it
Acts  5.  15.  that  .9.  of  Peter  might  overshadow  some
Col.  2.  17.  which  are  a  s.  of  things  to  come,  but
Heb.  8.  5.  who  serve  unto  the  z.  of  heavenly  things

10.  1.  the  law  having  a  j.  of  good  things  to  come
Jam.  1.  17.  with  whom  is  no  s.  of  turning
See  Death.

SHADOWS.

Cant.  2. 17.  till  the  day  break,  and  5.  flee  away,  4.  6.
Jer.  6. 4.  for  s.  of  the  evening  are  stretched  out
SHADOWING.

Isa.  18.  1.  woe  to  the  land  s.  with  wings,  which  is
Ezek.  31 . 3.  Assyrian  was  a  cedar  with  a  s.  shroud
Heb.  9. 5.  over  cherubims  of  glory  s.  the  mercy -seat
SHADY.

Job  40.  21.  he  lieth  under  the  s.  trees  in  the  covert
22.  the  s.  trees  cover  him  with  their  shadow
SHAFT.

Exod.  25.  31.  his  s.  and  branches,  his  bowls  and
flowers,  shall  be  of  the  same,  37.  17-  Num.Q.  4.
Isa.  49. 2.  and  he  hath  made  me  a  polished  s.
SHAKE.

Erod.  29.  +24.  s.  them  to  and  fro  for  wave  offering
Judg.  16.  20.  Samson  said,  1  will  go  out  and  s.  m  vs.
Neh.  5. 13.  also  1  shook  my  lap,  and  said,  so  God  s.
Job  4.  14.  fear  came,  which  made  my  bones  to  s.

15.  33.  he  shall  s.  off  his  unripe  grape  as  the  vine
16.4. 1  could  heap  up  words,  and  s.  my  head  atyou
Psal.  22.  7.  they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  s.  head

46.  3.  tho’  the  mountains  s.  with  sw  elling  thereof

68.  +  9.  thou  didst  .?.  out  a  plentiful  rain

69.  23.  and  make  their  loins  continually  to  s.

72. 16.  the  fruit  thereof  shall  s.  like  Lebanon
Isa.  2. 19.  w  hen  he  ariseth  to  s.  the  earth,  21.

10.  15.  as  if  the  rod  should  z.  itself  against  them

32.  he  shall  s.  his  hand  against  the  mount

11.  15.  the  Lord  shall  s.  his  hand  over  the  river

13.2.  exalt  the  voice  unto  them,.?,  the  hand

13.  I  will  s.  heavens,  Joe!  3. 16.  Hag.  2.  6,  21.

24.  18.  the  foundations  of  the  earth  do  /.

33.  9.  Eashan  and  Carmel  s.  off  their  fruits
52.  2.  s.  thyself  from  the  dust,  O  Jerusalem

Jer.  2.3.  9.  mine  heart  is  broken,  all  my  bones  s.
Ezek.  26.  10.  thy  walls  shall  z.  at  noise  of  horsemen
15.  shall  not  the  isles  a.  at  the  sound  of  thy  fall  ?
27. 28.  the  suburbs  shall  s.  at  the  sound  of  the  cry

31. 16.  I  made  nations  s.  at  the  sound  of  his  fall
38.  20.  all  men  of  the  earth  shall  s.  at  my  presence
Dan.  4.  14.  s.  off  his  leaves,  and  scatter  his  fruit
Amos  9.  1.  smite  the  lintel,  that  the  posts  may  s.
Hag.  2.  7.  I  w  ill .?.  all  nations,  desire  of  all  nations
Zech.  2. 9.  behold,  1  will  s.  my  hand  on  them
Mat.  10.14.  when  ye  depart  out  of  that  house,  or  city,

s.  off  the  dust  of  your  feet,  Mark  6. 11.  Luke'd.b.
28.  4.  and  for  fear  of  him  the  keepers  did  s.

Luke  6.48.  stream  beat  that  house,  and  could  not  s.  it
Heb.  12.26.  once  more  I  s.  not  the  earth  only
SHARED.

Psal.  109.  25.  they  looked  on  me,  they  s.  their  heads
SHAKEN.

Lev.  26.  36.  the  sound  of  a  z.  leaf  shall  chase  them

1  Kings  14.15.  shall  smite  Tsr.  as  a  reed  isz.  in  w  ater

2  Kings  19.  21.  hath  despised  thee,  the  daughter  of

Jerusalem  hath  s.  her  head  at  thee,  Isa.  37.  22.
Neh.  5  13.  even  thus  be  he  s.  out  and  emptied


Job  16.  12.  taken  me  by  my  neck,  z.  me  to  pieces-
38.  13.  that  the  wicked  might  be  s.  out  of  it
Psal.  18.  7.  the  foundations  of  the  hills  w-ere  s.
Nah.  2.  3.  and  the  fir-trees  shall  be  terribly  s.

3.  12.  iff.  they  fall  into  the  mouth  of  the  eater
Mat.  11.  7.  a  reed  s.  w  ith  the  wind,  Luke  7.  24.

24.  29.  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  powers  ot

heaven  shall  be  s.  Mark  13.  25.  Luke  21.  26.
Luke  6.  38.  give  good  measure,  pressed,  s.  together
Acts  4.  31.  when  they  had  prayed,  the  place  was  s.

16.  26.  so  that  the  foundations  of  the  prison  were  s.

2  'Chess.  2.  2.  ye  be  not  soon  s.  in  mind,  or  troubled
Heb.  12.  27.  removing  of  those  things  that  are  s.  that
those  things  w-hich  cannot  be  z.  may  remair
Rev.  6.  13.  as  a  fig-tree  when  s.  of  a  mighty  wind
SHAKETH.

Job  9.  6.  w  hich  s.  the  earth  out  of  her  place
Psal.  29.  8.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  z.  the  w  ilderness

60.  2.  heal  the  breaches  thereof,  for  it  is  z.

Isa.  10. 15.  shall  saw  magnify  against  him  that  s.  it  ?
19.  16.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  which  he  s.  over  it

33.  15.  he  that  s.  his  hand  from  holding  of  bribes
SHAKING.

Job  41.  29.  he  laugheth  at  the  s.  of  a  spear
Psal.  44.  14.  the  z.  of  the  head  among  the  people
Isa.  17.  6.  as  the  s.  of  an  olive  tree,  24.  13.

19.  16.  shall  fear,  because  of  the  s.  of  the  hand
30.  32.  and  in  battles  of  s.  shall  he  fight  with  it
Ezek.  37.  7.  behold  a  z.  and  bones  came  together
38. 19.  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  great  s.  in  Israel
.SHAMBLES.

1  Cor.  10.  25.  whatsoever  is  sold  in  the  s.  that  eat

SHAME

Is  taken,  (1)  For  that  affection  which  ariseth  by
reason  of  some  civil  dishonesty  or  filthiness,  and
appears  in  the  countenance  by  blushing.  Gen.
2.  25.  They  were  naked,  and  were  not  ashamed.
There  was  neither  deformity  in  their  bodies,  nor
guilt  in  their  souls,  the  cause  of  shame.  (2)
For  trouble  and  perturbation  of  mind  and  con¬
science,  being  grieved  and  cast  down  at  the  re¬
membrance  of  sin  against  God;  Rom.  6.  21.
What  fruit  had  ye  in  those  things  whereof  ye
are  now  ashamed  ?  And  in  Ezra  9.  6.  I  am
ashamed  awd  blush  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee,
my  God,  for  our  iniquities  are  increased  over
our  head.  This  is  shame  of  conscience,  which  in
wicked  men  is  an  evil  affection,  and  part  of  the
torment  of  hell ;  but  in  the  godly  it  is  a  good
affection,  a  sign  and  fruit  of  their  repentance.
Jer.  31.  19.  Ephraim  smote  upon  his  thigh,  and
was  ashamed.  (3)  For  a  shameful  idol,  which
would  bring  the  worshippers  of  it  to  shame  a
last.  IIos.  9.  10.  1  hey  went  to  Baal-peor,  Jana
separated  themselves  unto  that  shame.  (4)  For
scorn,  derision,  and  contempt.  Ezek.  36.  6.  Ye
have  borne  the  shame  of  the  heathen.

To  uncover  the  shame,  or  nakedness,  of  a  person,
are  synonymous  terms.  Isaiah  threatens  the
Egyptians,  that  they  should  be  led  away  captive
stark  naked,  without  any  thing  to  cover  their
shame  or  their  nakedness,  Isa.  20.  4.  And  the
same  prophet  says.  Thy  nakedness  shall  be  un¬
covered,  yea,  thy  shame  shall  be  seen,  Isa.  47.  3.
It  is  said,  Prov.  3.  35.  Shame  shall  be  the  pro¬
motion  of  fools  ;  Their  promotion  shall  be  their
oxen  shame,  and  the  disgrace  of  those  that  promote
them.  And  in  Prov.  y.  7.  He  that  reproveth  a
scorner,  getteth  to  himself  shame  :  He  loseth  his
labour,  and  shall  only  get  discredit  by  it.  The
apostle  says,  Rom.  5.  5.  Hope  maketh  not
ashamed.  Such  hope,  which  is  the  fiuit  of  faith,
patience,  and  experience,  shall  not  be  disappoint
ed,  but  shall  certainly  obtain  the  good  things
hoped  for,  and  so  bring  matter  of  rejoicing,  anct
not  of  shame.

Exod.  32.  25.  Aaron  made  them  naked  unto  theirs
Judg.  18.  7.  was  none  to  put  them  to  s.  in  any  thing

1  Sam.  20.  34.  because  his  father  had  done  him  s.

2  Sam.  13.  13.  whither  shall  I  cause  my  s.  to  go  ?

2  Chron.  32.  21.  returned  w  ith  s.  of  face  to  his  land
Job  8.  22.  that  hate  thee  shall  be  clothed  with  s.
Psal.  4.  2.  how  long  will  ye  turn  my  glory  into  /.?
35.  4.  put  them  to  s.  that  seek  after  my  soul

26.  let  them  be  clothed  with  s.  and  dishonour
40.  14.  let  them  be  put  to.?,  wish  me  evil,  83.  17.

15.  let  them  be  desolate  for  a  reward  of  their  z.
44.  7.  thou  hast  put  them  to  s.  that  hated  us,  53.  5.

9.  but  thou  hast  cast  off  and  put  us  to  s.

15.  the  .?.  of  my  face  hath  covered  me,  69-  7.

69.  19-  thou  hast  known  my  reproach  and  s.

70.  3.  let  them  be  turned  back  for  reward  of  their  /.

71.  24.  let  them  be  brought  unto  s.  that  seek  hurt
83.  16.  fill  their  faces  w  ith  s.  O  Lord

89.  45.  thou  hast  covered  him  with  s.

109.  29.  let  mine  adversaries  be  clothed  with  s.
119.  31.  stuck  to  thy  testimon.  O  L.  put  not  to  s.
132.  18.  his  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  s.

Prov.  3.  35.  but  z.  shall  be  the  promotion  of  fools

9.  7-  he  that  reproveth  a  scorner,  getteth  s,

10.  5.  that  sleeps  in  harvest,  is  a  son  that  causeth  1.

11.  2.  when  pride  cometh,  then  cometh  s.

12.  16.  but  a  prudent  man  covereth  s.

13.  5.  a  wicked  man  is  loathsome  and  cometh  to/.-

18.  .?.  shall  be  to  him  that  refuseth  instruction

14.  35.  but  his  wrath  is  against  him  that  causeth  /.
17-  2.  shall  have  rule  over  a  son  that  causeth  .?.

18. 13.  answereth  before  he  heareth,  it  is  z.  to  lnm

19.  26.  that  chaseth  his  mother,  is  a  son  causeth  /

25.  8.  when  thy  neighbour  hath  put  thee  to  s.

10.  lest  he  that  heareth  it  put  thee  to  .?.

29.  15.  child  left  to  himselt  brings  his  mother  to  s.
Isa.  20.  4.  their  buttocks  uncovered,  to  s.  of  Egypt
22.  18.  chariots  shall  be  the  z.  of  thy  lord’s  house

30.  3.  the  strength  of  Pharaoh  shall  be  your  s.  5.
47.  3.  be  uncovered,  yea,  thy  s.  shall  be  seen
50.  6.  1  hid  not  my’  face  from  /.  ana  spitting

54.  4.  fear  not,  thou  shalt  not  be  potto  .?.  nor  con¬
founded,  for  thou  shalt  forget  z.  of  thy  youth

61.  7  for  your  z.  you  shall  have  double

Jer.  3.  24.  .?.  devoured  the  labour  of  our  fathers
25.  we  lie  down  in  z.  and  our  confusion  covers  us-


SHA

l3'26'.1  vrl1'  discover,  that  th y  s.  may  appear
20.  18.  that  my  days  may  be  consume'!  with  a
sn.  40.  and  a  perpetual  a.  not  be  forgotten
■46.  12.  the  nations  have  heard  of  thy  s.  thy  cry
48.  .39.  how  hath  Moab  turned  back  with  /.

51  51  a.  hath  covered  our  fa.  es,  for  strangers
( *18.  s.  shall  be  on  all  faces,  and  baldness
62-  bear  thine  own  a.  for  thy  sins,  54.

63.  never  open  thy  mouth  because  of  thy  s.
o  yet  .ve  the>'  born  the ir  s.  with  them.  25.
30.  bear  their  a.  with  them  that  go  down  to  pit
54.29.  nor  bear  the  s.  of  the  heathen  any  more
36.  6.  becau.e  ye  have  borne  the  a.  of  the  heathen
7-  the  heathen,  they  shall  bear  their  ..  44.  13.
a  , •  Hor  to  hear  in  thee  a.  of  the  heathen

39.  26.  after  that  they  have  borne  their  a.
yati-  12.  2.  many  of  them  shall  awake,  some  to  a.
f-  "•  therefore  1  will  change  their  glory  into  a.

18.  her  rulers  with  a.  do  love,  give  ye

9.  10.  they  separated  themselves  unto  that  a.

10.  6.  Ephraim  shall  receive  a.  Israel  be  ashamed
txi ■ '  bl'  ^0>  fhy  violence  a.  shall  cover  thee
AUc.  1.11.  pass  ye  away,  having  thy  s  naked

2.  6.  slial  not  prophesy,  they  shall  not  take  a.

7-  10.  a.  shall  cover  her  which  said,  where  is  Lord  ?
■Ran.  3‘  ^  W'H  shew  the  kingdoms  thy  s.

Hah.  2.  10.  thou  hast  consulted  a.  to  thy  house
16.  thou  art  filled  with  a.  for  glory,  drink  thou
-iCepn.  3.  5.  but  the  unjust  knoweth  no  a.

19.  get  praise,  where  they  have  been  put  to  a.
Liile  14.  9.  thou  begin  with  a.  to  take  lowest  room
acts  5.  41.  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  a.

1  C cr.  6  5.  I  speak  to  your  a.  15.  34.

11.  6.  if  it  be  a  a.  for  a  woman  to  be  shorn

14.  it  a  man  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  a.  unto  him
14.  35.  it  is  a  a.  for  a  woman  to  speak  in  church
/r  tr'  *  2  bu*  rell°uticed  the  hidden  things  of  a
Lph.  5.  12.  a  a.  to  speak  of  things  done  of  them
///if.  3.  19.  whose  glory  is  in  their  a.  who  mind

.b'  criJCity  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  a
12  2.  he  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  a.

Jude  13.  raging  waves,  foaming  out  their  own  a.
Lev.  3.  18.  that  a.  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  appear
Jo.  Jo.  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  thev  see  his  f
t>  *  i  SHAME.

Kijth  2.  t  lo.  let  her  glean  among  sheaves,  a.  her  not
14-1  write  not  these  things  to  a.  you
11.  22.  despise  ye  church  of  God,  and  a.  them  J
SHAMED.

1  <-am.  25.  +  "•  thy  shepherds  with  us,  we  a.  them  not
t  15.  men  were  sood  unto  us,  anH  we  were  not^
-2^.  19.5.  thou  hast  a.  the  faces  of  all  thy  servants
i  sal.  14.  6.  you  have  a.  the  counsels  of  the  poor
SFIAM El  H.

Prov.  28.7.  companion  of  riotous  men  a.  his  father
.SflAMhlACLDNEsS.

1  1  im.  2.  9.  that  woi^n  adorn  themselves  with  a.

‘tv,Vo  VI  -veVHVe  set  upaltars  to  that  a.  thin®
liab.  2.  16.  and  s.  spueing  be  on  thy  ®lorv

¥,0S-C\n  ?he  tha‘90nceived  them,  hath  done  a.

Mark  12.  4.  sent  him  away  a.  handled,  Luke  2d.  11

1  fc.  «.  *.  know

2  Sam.  6.  20.  as  one  of^va 01^6110 ws  a.  uncovereth

Z.wX-e.3.  22.  descended  in  bodiiy  a.  like  dove  on  him
John  o.  37.  not  heard^jns  voice,  nor  seen  his  a.

Psal.  51.  5.  behold,  ^wasA^in  iniquity,  an<'  in  sin

Rev.  9.".  the  a.  of  the  locusts  were  like  horse*

*c*  ,  _  _  SHARE.

1  bam.  13.^0.  went  down  Resharpen  every  man  his  s.

£J^t/-,402*V  Zipporah  took  a  a.  stone  and  cut  off
‘ ?■  r  mal<e  thee  A.  knives,  and  circumcise  again
3.  Joshua  made  a.  knives  and  circumcised  Israel
\obTi  ^4;  b*tweenthe  Passages  there  was  a.  rock
Job  41.  30.  a.  stones  are  under  him,  he  spreadeth
D  ,  A-  a  a.  pointed  things  upon  the  mire

P4?o  thvV  arT°Wrr' 111  the  heart  of  k>ng’s  enemies
?'  l  u  tongue J'keaA.  razor  working  deceitfully
5< .  4  u  hose  teeth  are  spears,  their  tongue  a.  sword

Proi  Viar,?  0t  nV^  lty  with  coals  of  juniper
oJ  ,o0'g4nlbutt;er  5n,J  IS/’,as  a  two-edged  sword
T  V8'w  ,u  n  that  ,bears  taIse  witness  is  a.  arrow
Isa.  o.  -8.  they  shall  come,  whose  arrows  are  a

40  h't  'naVf  thee  af-  threshing  instrument
49.  2.  he  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  a.  sword

Ltau  thee  a  ^  knlte  and  cause  it  to  pass
4SJS  45*  5p.  the  contention  was  so  a.  between  Paul
K ei  •  £!'t  ot  his  mouth  went  a  a.  two-ed®ed

sword,  his  countenance  was  as  the  sun,  19.^5
’r;  VlSe  t'l^gssaith  he  that  hath  the  a.  sword

iV  ‘  °n  °fi  man  iln  band  a  a.  sickle,  17.

18.  the  angel  cned  to  bin,  that  had  the  a.  sickle
^  onaKrhiN.

Vent.  6.  +7.  thou  shalt  s.  them  to  thy  children
i  Sam.  13  20  went  down  to  a.  every  man  his  share
21.  yet  they  hat^a  ^  axcs,  and  to  a.  goads

(>54  J,40- 5-  the3-  J. 'their  tongues  like  a  serpent

”•  * SshAHPENCTHbbl,ed'  ">•  >'•

Job  16.  9.  mine  enemy  a.  his  eyes  upon  me
Pnm.  w.  17.  iron  a  iron,  w  a  man  a.  his  friend

•mj .  onAKFER,

V/c-  1  •  4,  the  most  upright  is  a.  than  a  thorn  hedge
Heb'  4- 12-  tbe  word  God  is  a.  than  any  sword"

T  A  HP  LI  ,

Jiidg.  Q.  X.  and  they  did  chide  with  Gideon  a.

Jit.  1.  13.  rebuke  them  a.  that  they  may  be  sound

.  A  I v x  ESS.

•  Cor.  13.  10.  lest  being  present  I  should  use  s
SHAVE

sh?11  be  shaven,  but  stall  shall  he  not  a.

H.  8.  the  unclean  person  shall  a.  off  his  hair,  9.

~1.  5.  nor  shall  they  a.  the  corner  of  their  beard
Jiurn.6.  9.  then  he  shall  a.  his  head  in  the  day  of
his  cleansing,  on  the  seventh  day  shall  he  a.  it


SHE

j  C;  V8*  ^  az‘  r'!e  shall  a.  head  of  his  separation
nli  *m  f  ’eir  ue?.h>  and  wash  their  clothes

TV  :;Va,P"Ve  sha,  -'  her  heafl>  Pare  her  nails
itdg-  f  ,lfc  5a!',se<i  hu,n  t0  *•  off  seven  locks
,al1  i'  with  a  razor  that  is  hired
44‘ 2<)‘.  ne'theur  sha11  they  a.  their  heads
Jets  21.  24.  be  at  charges  that  they  a.  their  heads
SHAVED.

(jen.  41.  14.  J05  :ph  a.  and  changed  his  raiment

7-  r^V;  f-  °?Kalf  theiir  beards,  1  Chron.  19.  4.
Job  1.  20.  Job  r  nt  his  mantle  and  a.  his  head

Lev.  13.  .33.  be  f.  but  the  scall  shall  he  not  shave
Sum.  6. 19.  aft  -r  the  hairof  his  separation  is  a.

bej'  m>'  strength  will  go  from  me
22.  the  hair  l^gan  to  grow  again  after  he  was  a.
Jer.  41.  D.  fourscore  men  having  their  beards  a.

1  Jl-  5.  that  is  even  all  one  as  if  she  were  a.

6.  if  it  be  a  shame  to  be.v.  let  her  be  covered
_  SHEAF.

~>en. 3, .  ( .behold,  my  a. arose, and  also  stood  upright ;

behold,  your  slieay  es  made  obeisance  to  my  a.
Lev.  »3. 10.  ye  shall  bring  a  a.  of  the  first-fruits
11.  yre  shall  wave  the  a.  before  the  Lord,  12.

tor»ot  a  shalt  not  go  to  fetch  it
V®,-4-  10-  they  take  away  the  a.  from  the  hungry
Zech.  12.  6.  governors  of  J  udah  like  a  torch  in  a  a
SHEAVES.

behold,  we  were  binding  a.  in  the  field
1  •  let  me  S'ean  and  rather  among  the  a.  15.
p  7  V  some  on  the  sabbath  bringing  in  a.

6.  he  shall  come  bringing  a.  with  him
1a9.  7- nor  he  that  bindeth  a.  his  bosom
Jm°s2. 13.  lam  pressed  under  you,  as  cart  full  of  a.
Alic.  4.  12.  the  Lord  shall  gather  them  as  the  a
_  SHEAR.

Oen.  31.  19.  and  Laban  went  to  s.  his  sheep
38.  13.  Judah  goeth  to  limnah  to  s.  his  sheep
Ueut.  15.  19.  nor  shalt  a.  the  firstling  of  thy  sheep
1  Sam.  2o.  4.  David  heard  that  N abal  did  a.  his  sheep
SHEARER.

Jets  8.  32.  and  like  a  lamb  dumb  before  his  a
SHEARERS.

yen.  38.  12.  and  Judah  went  up  unto  his  sheep  a.

1  Sam.  2d.  7.  now  1  have  heard  that  thou  hast  a
11.  shall  I  take  my  flesh  1  have  killed  for  my  a
7  I3-  23‘  ^  bsaloin  had  a.  in  Baal  hazor,  24. '

Isa.  0.3.  7 .  as  a  sheep  betore  her  s.  is  dumb,  opens  not
_  SHEARING.

1  Sam.  25.  2.  anti  Nabal  was  a.  sheep  in  Carmel

SHEARING  HOUSE.

2  Rings  10. 12.  Jehu  met  brethren  of  Ahaziah  at  s.-h
14.  he  slew  them  at  the  pit  of  the  a  h

SHEA  I  H.

1  Sam.  I".  51.  David  drew  the  sword  out  of  his  a

2  Sam.  20.  8.  with  a  sword  fastened  in  the  a.  thereof

21.  27.  the  angel  put  the  sword  into  his  a.

' '  ■  5-  1  will  draw  his  sword  out  of  the  a.  4  5
30.  shall  I  cause  it  to  return  into  his  a.  .?will  jud®e
John  18.  11.  Jesus  saitL  pur  up  thy7  sword  into  a."

2  Sam.  20. 10.  Joab  s.  Amasa’s  bowels  to  the  ground
AJat.  26.  28.  Isa.  tor  many  for  the  remission  of  sins
Jets  2  33  received  the  promise  of  Holy  Ghost,  he
hath  a.  forth  this  which  ye  now  see  and  hear
5*51ove  °f  G .is  a.  in  our  hearts  by  Hoi  v  Ghost
/  it.  o.  6.  which  he  s.  on  us  abundantly  thro’  jes.  Ch
See  Blood.

SHEDDER.


SHE

1  Kings  8.  63.  Sojomon  offered  a.  2  Chr.  5.  6.  |  7  5.

2  Kings  5.  26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  s.  and  oxen  l

W  .  ?'  'V  they  took  from  Hagarites  250.000  s.

12.  40.  they  brought  oxen  and  a.  abundantly
2U,ron.  14.  15.  Asa  carried  from  the  Ethiopians  s.

10.  11  ana  thev  offered  ot  the  spoil  7« HJO  s

18.  2.  Ahab  killed  a.  and  oxen  tor  Jehosha’phat

29.  33.  the  consecrated  things  were  3000  a

30.  24.  Hezekiah  the  king  did  give  ?ooo  a.’ and  the
„  *  ..  Pn"ces  ?av?  to the  .congregation  10,000  a.
•f1 -  6.  they  brought  in  the  tithes  of  oxen  and  a.

V  vV  5-  t°r  N  ehemiah  daily  one  ox,  six  choice  a.
Job\ .  3.  his  substance  also  was  70(X)  a.  3000  camels

16.  the  fire  is  fallen,  and  hath  burnt  up  the  a

31.  20.  if  he  were  not  wanned  with  lieece  of  my  a

42.  12.  tor  he  had  14,(>00  a.  and  6000  camels
si\ ?•  , tbou  .hast  given  him  all  a.  and  oxen

44-  tl-  thou  hast  given  us  like  a.  for  meat

49.  14.  like  a.  are  laid  in  the  grave,  death  feed
L*-  w' by  doth  thine  anger  smoke  against  thy  a  *

18.  d2.  but  made  his  own  people  go  forth  like  a.  ‘

1 9.  E3.  so  we  thy  people  and  a.  of  thy  pastuie

,  aPd,  are  tbe  s-  °t  his  hand,  100.  3

J  have  ®one  astray  like  a  lost  a.

,  ia  Tr.u  may  bring  forth  thousands
Cawr. 4  2.  thy  teeth  are  like  a  flock  of  a.  6.  6.

00'  iq2!"  ln  f,™  ciay  a  man  shall  nourish  tsvo  a
...13.  behold  joy  and  gladness,  and  killing  of  a
03.  b  all  we  like  s.  are  gone  astray  ;  we  have
Jei.  1-.  3.  pull  them  out  like  a.  for  the  slaughter
23.  1.  woe  be  unto  the  pastors  that  scatter  the  „

50. 6.  my  people  hath  been  lost  a.  their  shepherds

1 7.  Israel  is  as  scattered  a.  lions  have  driven  him
i,r  i-  my  wander  through  the  mountains

11.  I  will  search  my  a.  and  seek  them  out,  12.
tlos  i2. 12.  Israel  served,  and  for  a  wife  he  kept  a
Joel  1.  18.  the  flocks  of  a.  are  made  desolate
Ajtc.D.K.jis  a  young  lion  among  the  flocks  of  a.
/Zech.  1.3.  (.awake,  O  sword, smite  the  shepherd  ana

A._shall  be  scattered,  Mat.  26.  31.  Mark  14.  27
Alat  ,  lo.  beware  of  false  prophets  in  a.  clothing'
0.  6  go  rather  to  the  lost  a.  of  the  house  of  Israel
12.  11.  it  one  a.  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  sabbath

12.  how  much  then  is  a  man  better  than  a  a. ?
lo.  .4.  1  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  a.  of  lsrae

,  i  a  man  have  100  a.  and  one  be  gone

13.  he  rejoiceth  more  of  that  a.  Luke  15.  4  6
00  3r  a?  a  shepherd  divideth  his  a.  from  goats
33.  he  shall  set  a.  on  his  right  hand,  but  goats

,  -  r  •  be  f<?und  m  the  temple  those  that  sold  t
.m- bed  rove  them  out  of  the  temple,  and  the  a.

10-  mat  entereth  by  door  is  shepherd  of  the  a.

3.  the  a.  hear  his  voice,  27.  11  4.  the  a.  follow  him


Ezek.  18.  10.  if  he  beget  a  son  that  is


a  a.  of  blood


SHEDDETH.

r  /  b.°LS0  s‘- man's  blnod>  his  blood  shall  be  sh.

Ezek.  3.  the  city  s.  blood  in  the  midst  of  it

TT  ,  SHEDDING.

Heb.  9.  22.  and  without  a.  of  blood  is  no  remission
oHErliOATS,  See  Goats.

_  ,  ,  SHEEP.

Abel  a  keeper  of  a.  Cain  tiller  of  ground
'9-  y  Rachel  his  daughter  cometh  with  the  a.  9.
Eiod:  9.  3.  the  hand  of  the  Txird  is  upon  the  a.

9.'  ye.  sna‘l  it  out  from  the  a.  or  the  goats
oo‘  r4--ftbou  shalt  sacrifice  thereon  thy  s.  and  oxen
a  man  steal  a  a.  and  kill  it  or  sell  it,  4  Q
10.  if  a  man  give  to  his  neighbour  a  a.  to  keep
.30.  likewise  do  with  the  firstling  of  s.  .34.  19.

**  b*s  offering  be  of  the  s.  or  goats
7- 23.  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat  of  a.  or  of  goafs

*ve  sha  a  ma,e  the  a.  or  goats,  21

2..  26.  no  man  shall  sanctify  the  firstling  of  a  a.  '

18u  D.  the  firstling  of  a.  thou  shalt  not  redeem
5—  -4-  builcl  ye  cities  and  folds  for  your  a.  36.
IJeut.  /.  13.  he  will  bless  the  flocks  of  thy  a.

,o'  l'  !,  ou  sbalt  not  sacrifice  a.  wherein  is  blemish
18.  .3.  the  priest  s  due  from  them  that  offer  a.  4.

00  V  t,  sllal,t  not  see  thy  brother's  a.  go  astray
28.4.  blessed  shall  be  the  flocksof  thy  a  ^

18.  cursed  shall  be  the  flocks  of  thy  a.  .31.  51.

3..  14.  that  he  might  eat  butter  of  Line,  milk  of  a.
Josh.  6.  21.  they  destroyed  at  Jericho  ox  and  a.

1  •  '-4.Joshua  took  Achan’s  A.and  tent.and  all  lie  had
Judg.  6.  4.  the  Midianites  left  neither  a.  nor  oxen
4, ,  8-. 17-  the  kln?  will  take  the  tenth  of  your  a.

o  1  3u  •  e  .P.epPle  few  upon  the  spoil  and  took
1 3-4.  bring  hither  every  man  his  ox  and  his  a.
lo.  3.  slay  both  ox  and  a.  [J  9.  Saul  spread  the  s.

14.  what  meaneth  this  bleating  of  a.  in  my  ears  >
2L  the  people  took  of  the  spoil  a.  and  oxen
16.  11.  the  youngest,  behold,  he  keepeth  the  a.

19.  send  me  David  thy  son,  who  is  with  the  a.

oA  ^avld  returned  to  feed  his  father's  s.
o9*  T^e  r(?Sie  ,an(^  s.  with  a  keeper

ne  /T  x'l  sa,d-,thy  servant  kept  his  father's  a.

*?•  *•  abal  had  3000  a.  he  was  shearing  his  a.

j  asted,  and  took  five  a.  ready  dressed
'(•  9-  Uavid  took  away  the  s.  the  oxen,  and  asses
V~  ™  V;  8-  fbee  from  following  the  a.

J1,  Rarzillai  brought  David  butter  and  a.

-4.  17.  David  said,  lo,  I  have  sinned,  but  these  a.
...  what  have  they  done  ?  1  Chron.  21.  17.

1f 19'  A.donlJ-  slain  a.  oxen  and  fat  cattle,25.

4.  .3.  Solomon  s  provision  for  one  dav  hundred  a,

8.  d.  all  the  congregation  sacrificing  a.  and  oxen


7.  then  said  Jesus,  verily  I  am  the  door  of  the  a

8.  were  robbers,  but  the  a.  did  not  hear  them

11.  the  good  Shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  his  a

12.  an  hireling  leaveth  the  a.  and  fleeth,  13.

14.  good  Shepherd  ,  I  know  my  a.  |1  16.  other  a.  1 1

15.  the  Lather,  and  I  lay  down  my  life  for  the  a
26.  because  ye  are  not  of  my  a.  as  1  said  unto  yoi

*1-  lb.  lie  saith  unto  Peter,  feed  my  a_17.

-neo.  13.  20.  Lord  Jesus,  that  great  Shepherd  of  a
Eev.  18. 13.  none  buyet'h  a.  horses,  slaves,  and  souk
As  SHEEP.

A  urn.  27.  17.  benotaAA.  which  have  no  shepherd
1  Kings  22. 1?.  I  saw  all  Israel  scattered  on  the  hills
as  s.  that  have  no  shepherd,  2  Chron.  18.  16*
Psal.  44.  22.  we  are  killed  all  the  day  long,  we  are
counted  as  s.  for  the  slaughter,  Bom.  8.  36.
Isa.  13. 14.  it  shall  be  as  s.  that  no  man  taketh  up
03.  1 .  and  as  a  a.  before  his  shearers  is  dumb
aJic.2.  12.  1  will  put  them  together  as  s.  of  Bozra
Alat.  9.  36.  compassion,  because  fainted  and  were
scattered  as  s.  having  no  shepherd,  Mark  6  34
10. 16.  I  send  you  forth  as  s.  in  midst  of  -wolves  ’
Acts  8.  32.  he  was  led  as  a  a.  to  the  slaughter

1  Pet.  2. 25.  ye  were  a.  going  astray,  but  returned

orJ  thr-LO  1  E.

2  Sam.  7.  8.  I  took  thee  from  the  a.  1  Chron.  17  7

SHEEP-COTES.

1  Sam.  24.  3.  Saul  came  to  the  a.  after  David
SHEEP-FOLD.

John  10. 1.  he  that  entereth  not  the  a.  by  the  door
SHEEP-FOLDS.

.\um.  .32. 16.  we  will  build  a.  for  our  cattle
Judg.  5.  16.  why  abodest  thou  among  the  s.?

Psal.  78. 70.  he  chose  David,  took  him  from  the  a.
SHEEP-^a/e.

Xeh.  3.  1.  Eliashib  and  brethren  built  the  s.-gate
32.  between  going  up  of  the  corner  to  the  s.-g

12.  39.  they  went  on  to  the  s.-gate,  and  they  stood

SH  EEP- market.

John  5.  2.  there  is  at  Jerusalem  by  the  s.-market  a
pool,  called  in  the  Hebrew7  tongue,  Bethesda
SI  I  EEP-77/flA7e;\

2  Kings  3. 4.  Meslia  k  ing  of  Moab  w  as  a  s. -master
See  Shearers,

SH  EEP-atHwa.

Heb.  11. 37.  they  wandered  in  a.-a.  and  goat-skins
SH  EET.

Acts  10. 11.  a  vessel  descending  as  a  great  a.  11  5
SHEETS?  '  ‘

Judg.  14. 12.  then  1  will  give  you  thirtv  s.  and  thirty

13.  then  shall  give  me^ thirtv  a.  and  thirty  changes

Gen.2A.22.  the  man  took  an  ear-ring  of  half  a  s.
Ezod.  30. 13.  a  a.  after  the  a.  of  the  sanctuary,  a  a.  is
20  srerahs,  Nvm.  3.  47.  Ezek.  45.  12.
15.  the  poor  shall  not  give  less  than  half  a  a.

1  Sam.  9.  8.  1  have  here  the  fourth  part  of  a  a.

2  K  ings  7.1.  measure  of  fine  flour  for  a  a.  16.  18.

Keh.  10.  32.  charsed  yearly  with  the  third  of  a  a.
Amos  8.  5.  making  the  epliah  small,  and  the  a.  great

SH  EKELS.

Gen.  23.  15.  my  lord,  the  land  is  w7orth  400  a.  16
24. 22.  two  bracelets  for  her  hands  of  ten  a.  weight
Exod.  21. 32.  he  shall  give  her  master  thirty  a.

30.  23.  of  pure  myrrh  500  s.  of  sw-eet  cinnamon
r  _  „  ,  .  250  a.  of  sw7eet  calamus  250  a.

Lev.  5.  lo.  the  estimation  by  a.  27.  .3,  4. 5.  6. 7, 16
Num.  “.  14.  one  spoon  of  ten  a.  of  gold  hill’of  in
cense,  20, 26,  32,  38,  44,  50, 56,  62.  68.  74. 80

439


SHE


SHE


SHE


Dent.  22.  19.  they  shall  amerce  him  in  100  a.

29.  man  snail  give  to  the  damsel's  father  fifty  a.
Josh.  7-21.  when  1  saw  in  the  spoils  200  s.  of  silver
Judy.  8.  20.  weight  of  golden  ear  rings  was  1700  s.
17-  2.  the  1100  s.  1  took  it  ||  3.  had  restored  the  s.
10.  I  will  give  thee  ten  s.  of  silver  by  the  year
2  Sam.  14.  26.  Absalom  weighed  his  hair,  200/.

18.  11.  1  would  have  given  thee  ten  s.  and  a  girdle

24.  24.  David  bought  oxen  for  fifty  a.  of  Araunah

1  Kings  lu.  16.  six  hundred  a.  of  gold  to  one  target

2  Kings  15.  20.  exact*  d  of  each  man  50  s.  of  silver
1  C/iron.  21.  25.  so  David  gave  to  Oman  600  s.

Keh.  5.  15.  former  govern,  had  taken  40  a.  by  year
Jer.  32.  9.  1  bought  the  field  for  17  s.  of  silver
Ezek.  4. 10.  meat  shall  be  by  w  eight  twenty  s.  a  day

See  sanctuary.

SHELTER.

Job  24.8.  they  embrac  e  the  rock  for  want  of  a  s.
Ps.  61.  3.  for  thou  hast  been  s.  for  me  and  a  tower
SH  EPHERD.

See  Signification  on  Pastor.

Gen.  46.  34.  every  s.  is  abomination  to  the  Egypt.
49.  24.  from  thence  is  the  s.  the  stone  of  Israel
1  Sam.  17.  40.  he  put  the  stones  into  a  s.  bag  he  had
Psal.  23.  1.  the  Lord  is  my  s.  1  shall  not  want
80.  1.  give  ear,  O  s.  of  Israel,  thou  that  leadest
Eccl.  12. 11.  the  words  w  hicb  are  given  from  one  a.
Isa.  38. 12.  mine  age  is  departed  from  me  as  s.  tent

40.11.  he  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  a.  gather  lambs
44.  28.  the  Lord  thatsaith  of  Cyrus,  he  is  my  s.
63.  11.  that  brought  them  up  with  s.  of  his  flock

Jer.  31.10.  an  I  keep  him  as  a  s.  doth  his  flock

43. 12.  array  himself  as  a  s.  putteth  on  his  garment
49.  19.  who  is  that  s.  that  will  stand,  50.  44.

51.  23.  I  will  also  break  in  1  ieces  s.  an  I  his  flock
Ezek.  34.  5.  they  were  scatter,  because  there  is  no  a.
8.  my  flock  became  prey',  because  there  was  no  s.
12.  as  a  s.  seeketh  out  his  flock  among  the  sheep
23.  I  will  set  up  one  a.  over  them,  myr  servant
David  shall  feed  them,  and  be  their  a.  37.24.
Amos  3.  12.  as  the  a.  takes  out  of  mouth  of  the  lion
Zech.  10.2.  they  were  troubled,  bee.  there  vras  no  a.

.  11.  15.  fake  to  thee  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  a.
11.  l6.  lo,  1  will  raise  up  a  a.  in  the  land

17.  woe  to  the  idle  a.  that  leaveth  the  flock,  sword
13.7.  awake,  O  sword,  ag.  my  a.  and  my  fellow

John  10.  12.  but  he  that  is  an  hireling,  and  not  a.
14.  I  am  good  a.  know  my  sheep,  and  am  known
16.  and  there  shall  be  one  fold  and  one  a.
lleb.  13.  20.  our  Ld.  Jesus  that  great  a.  of  the  sheep
1  Pet.  2.25.  but  ye  are  now  returned  unto  the  a.

5. 4.  when  chief  a.  shall  appear,  ye  shall  receive

See  Sheep.

SHEP1J  ERDS.

Gen.  46.  32.  men  are  a.  ||  47-  3.  thy  servants  are  a.
Exod.  2.  17-  Rnd  the  a.  came  and  drove  them  away

19.  an  Egyptian  delivered  us  out  of  hand  of  a.

1  Sam.  25.  7-  now  thy  a.  with  us,  we  hurt  them  not
Cant.  1.  8.  and  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  a.  tents
Isa.  13.  20.  nor  shall  the  a.  make  their  folds  there
31.  4.  when  multitude  of  a.  is  c  alled  forth  ag.  him
56.  11.  and  they  are  a.  that  cannot  understand
Jer.  6.  3.  the  a.  with  their  flocks  shall  come  unto  her

23.4.  1  will  set  up. v.  over  them,  who  shall  teed

25.  34.  howl,  ye  a.  ||  35.  the  a.  have  no  way  to  flee
36.  a  voice  of  the  cry  of  the  a.  and  an  howling

33.  12.  in  all  the  cities  shall  be  an  habitation  of  a.
56.  their  a.  have  caused  them  to  go  astray
Ezek.  34.  2.  prophesy  against  the  a.  of  Israel,  woe
to  the  a.  of  Israel,  should  not  a.  feed  the  flocks  ?
8.  my  flock  a  prey,  nor  did  my  a.  search  for  my
flock,  but  a.  fed  themselves,  and  fed  not  my  flock
10.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  behold,  1  am  against  the
A.‘neither  shall  the  a.  feed  themselves  any  more
Amos  1.2.  and  the  habitations  of  the  a.  shall  mourn
Mic.  5.  5.  then  shall  we  raise  against  him  seven  s.
Nab.  3. 18.  thy  a.  slumber,  O  king  of  Assyria,  nobles
Zeph.  2.  6.  the  sea  coasts  shall  be  cottages  for  a.
Zech.  10.  3.  mine  anger  was  kindled  against  the  a.
11.  3.  there  is  a  voice  of  the  howling  of  the  a.

5.  ami  their  own  a.  pity  them  not
8.  three  a.  also  I  cutoff  in  one  month
Luke  2.8.  there  were  in  the  same  country  a.  in  field

18.  those  things  which  were  told  them  by  the  s.

20.  the  a. returned,  glorifying  and  praising  God

SI  I  ER  I).

Isa.  30. 14.  there  shall  not  be  found  a  a.  to  take  fire
SHERDS.

Ezek.  23.  34.  thou  shalt  break  the  a.  thereof
SHERIFFS.

Dan.  3.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  sent  to  gather  the  a.

3.  then  the  a.  and  rulers  were  gathered  together
SHEW,  Substantive.

Psal.  39.  6.  surely  every  man  walkelh  in  a  vain  a.
Isa.  3.  9.  the  a.  of  their  countenance  doth  witness
Luke  20.  47.  and  for  a  a.  make  long  prayers
Gal.  6. 12.  as  many  as  desire  to  make  a  fair  a.  in  flesh
Co/. 2. 15.  spoiled  powers,  made  a.  of  them  openly
23.  which  things  have  s.  of  wisdom  in  will  worship
SI1  EW  -bread.

See  Signific  at  ion  on  Bread.

Erod.  25.  .30.  shalt  set  upon  a  table  a.  bread  before  me
35.  13.  make  the  table,  and  the  a.  bread,  39.  36.
Knm.  4.  7.  on  table  of  a.  bread  shall  spread  a  cloth
1  Stem.  21.  6.  there  was  no  bread  but  the  a.  bread
1  King s^.  48.  table  of  gold  whereon  the  s.  bread  wees

1  Chr.  9.  32.  sonsof  Kohathites  to  prepare  a.  bread
23.  29.  service  both  for  the  a.  bread  and  fine  flour
28.  16.  David  gave  gold  for  the  tables  of  a.  bread

2  Chron.  2.  4.  an  house  for  the  continual  a.  bread
4.  19.  made  tables  whereon  the  a.  bread  was  set
13.  11.  the  a.  bread  also  set  they  in  order

29. 18.  have  cleansed  a.  bread  table  with  vessels
Kelt.  10.  .3.3.  to  charge  ourselves  for  the  a.  bread
Mat.  12.4.  how  he  entered  into  the  house  of  God,
and  did  eat  the  a.  bread ,  Mark  2.Q6.  Luke  6.  4.
Ileb.  9.  2.  a  tabernacle,  w herein  was  the  a.  bread
SHEW.

Exod.  7-  9.  Pharaoh  shall  speak,  saying,  a.  miracle

9.  16.  I  raised  thee  up  for  to  s.  in  thee  my  power

10.  1.  that  1  might  a.  iny  signs  before  him
13.  8.  and  thou  shalt  a.  thy  son  in  that  day

440


Exod.  14. 1.3.  see  the  salvation  L.  will  .r.  to  you  to  day

18.  20.  shalt  a.  way  they  must  walk,  Deut.  1.  33.
25.  9.  made  it  according  to  all  that  i  a.  thee
33  13.  a.  me  now  thy  way  ||  18.  a.  me  thy  glory
Deut.  5.  5.  I  stood  to  a.  you  the  word  of  the  Lord

7.  2.  make  no  covenant,  nor  a  mercy  unto  them

13.  17-  that  the  Lord  may  a.  thee  mercy

17.  9.  they  shall  a.  t'hee  the  sentence  of  judgment

10.  thou  shalt  do  as  they  shall  a.  thee,  j  1.

28.  5J.  not  regard  old,  nor  a.  favour  to  young

32.  7-  ask  thy  father,  and  he  will  s.  thee

Josh.  5.  6.  the  Lordsware  he  would  not  a.  the  land
Judy.  1.  24.  the  spies  said,  s.  us  we  pray  thee,  the
entrance  into  the  city,  and  we  will  a.  time  mercy

6.  17.  then  s.  me  a  sign  that  thoutalkest  with  me

1  Sam. ‘3.  15.  Samuel  feared  to  a.  Eli  the  vision

8.  9.  a.  them  the  manner  of  the  king  that  shall  reign
9-  6.  man  of  God  peradventure  can  a.  us  our  way

27.  stand,  that  L  may  v.  thee  the  word  of  God
ld.  8.  I  will  come  and  a.  thee  what  thou  shalt  do

14.  12.  come  up  to  us,  and  we  will  a.  you  a  thing
2d.  2.  my  lather  will  do  nothing,  he  will  a.  it  me

12.  if  l  then  send  not  unto  thee,  and  s.  it  thee

22.  17.  they  knew  when  he  fled,  and  did  not  *■.  it
25.  8.  ask  thy  young  men,  and  they  will  .v.  thee

2  Sam.  15.  25.  he  will  a.  me,  both  it  and  his  habitat.

1  Kings  1.  52.  if  he  will  a.  himself  a  worthy  man
2.2.  be  thou  strong  therefore,  and  a.  thyself  a  man

18.  1.  came  to  Elijah,  go  a.  thyself  to  Ahab,  2.

2 Kings  6. 11.  will  ye  not  a.  me  which  of  us  is  forking

2  Chr.  16.  9.  to  a.  himself  strong  in  behalf  of  them
Ezra  2.  59.  they  could  not  a.  their  fathers’  house,

whether  they  were  of  Israel,  Neh.  7.  61.
Neh.  9.  19.  the  pillar  of  fire  to  a.  them  light
Esth.  1.  11.  to  a.  the  people  and  princes  her  beauty

2.  10.  Mordecai  charged  her  not  to  a.  her  kindred

4.  8.  gave  him  a  copy  of  the  writing  to  a.  Esther
Job  10.  2.  a.  me  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me

11.  6.  he  would  a.  thee  the  secrets  of  wisdom

32.  6.  I  was  afraid,  durst  not  a.  you  my  opinion

33.  23.  if  a  messenger  to  a.  to  man  his  uprightness
Psal.  4.  6.  many  will  say,  who  will  a.  us  any  good  ?

9.  14.  that  l  may  a.  forth  all  thy  praise  in  gates
16.  11.  wilt  a.  me  the  path  of  life,  in  thy  presence

25.  4.  a.  me  thy  ways,  O  Lord,  teach  me  thy  paths
14.  the  l  ord  will  a.  them  his  covenant

51.  15.  and  my  mouth  shall  a.  forth  thj7  praise
71.  15.  my  mouth  shall  a.  forth  thy  righteousness
79.  13.  we  thy  people  will  a.  forth  thy  praise

85.  7-  a.  us  mercy,  O  Lord,  grant  us  thy  salvation

86.  17-  a.  me  a  token  of  good,  that  they  may  see  it
88.  lo.  wilt  thou  a.  wonders  to  the  dead

92.  15.  to  a.  that  Lord  is  upright,  he  is  my  rock
94.  1.  O  G.  whom  vengeance  belongeth,  a.  thyself
106.  2.  who  can  a.  forth  all  his  praise  r
Prov.  18.24.  a  man  must  a.  himself  friendly
Isa.  27.  11.  he  that  formed  them  will  a.  no  favour
30.  30.  the  Lord  shall  a.  lighting  down  of  his  arm

41.  22.  let  them  bring  them  forth  and  a.  us  what

shall  happen,  let  them  a.  the  former  things

23.  a.  the  things  that  are  to  come  hereafter

43.  9.  who  among  them  can  a.  us  former  things  •

21.  people  have  I  forme  1, shall  a.  forth  my  praise
44.7.  things  that  are  coming,  let  them  a.  to  them
46.  8.  remember  this,  and  a.  yourselves  men

49.  9.  say  to  them  in  darkness,  a.  yourselves
58.  1.  a.  my  people  their  transgression  and  sins
60.  6  tiiey  shall  a.  forth  the  praises  of  the  Lord
Jer.  16.  10.  thou  shalt  a.  them  all  these  words

13.  into  a  land,  where  1  will  not  a.  you  favour

42.  3.  thy  God  may  a.  us  the  way  we  may  walk
51.  31.  to  a.  the  king  of  Babylon  his  city  fs  taken

Ezek.  22.  2.  thou  shalt  a.  her  all  her  abominations
33.31.  for  with  their  mouth  they  a.  much  love
.37.  18.  wilt  thou  not  a.  us  what  thou  meanest?

40.  4.  set  thine  heart  upon  all  that  l  shall  a.  thee

43.  10.  son  of  man,  a.  the  house  to  house  of  Israel

11.  a.  them  the  form  of  the  house  and  fashion
Dan.  2.  2.  the  sorcerers  for  to  a.  king  his  dreams

4.  and  we  will  a.  the  interpretation,  7-
6.  if  ye  a.  the  dream  and  interpretation,  therefore
a.  the  dream  and  interpretation  thereof

10.  not  a  man  that  can  a.  the  king’s  matter
16.  he  would  a.  the  king  the  interpretation

27.  the  secret  cannot  the  wise  men  a.  to  the  king

4.  2.  I  thought  it  good  to  a.  the  signs  and  wonders

5.  7.  whosoever  shall  a.  me  the  interpretation

9.  23.  command  came,  and  l  am  come  to  a.  thee
Hub.  1.  3.  why  dost  thou  a.  me  iniquity  ?

Mat.  8.  4.  go  thy  way,  a.  thyself  to  the  priest,  and
cfl’er  the  gift,  Mark  1.  44.  Luke  5.  14. 1  17.  14.

11.  4.  go  and  a.  John  these  things  ye  do  hear

12.  18.  he  shall  a.  judgment  to  the  Gentiles

14.  2.  he  is  risen,  therefore  mighty  works  do  a.

forth  themselves  in  him,  Mark  6.  14.
16.  1.  the  Pharisees  desired  he  would  a.  a  sign

22.  19.  a.  me  the  tribute  money,  Luke  20.  24.

24.  1.  came  to  a.  him  the  buildings  of  the  temple

24.  for  there  shall  arise  false  Christs,  and  shall  a.

great  signs  and  wonders,  Mark  13.  22.
Mark  14.  15.  he  will  a.  you  a  large  upper  room  fur¬
nished,  there  make  ready  for  us,  Luke  22.  12.
Luke  1.  19.  I  am  sent  to  a.  thee  these  glad  tidings

8.  39.  a.  how  great  things  God  hath  done  to  thee
John  5.  20.  he  will  a.  him  greater  works  than  these

7.  4.  if  thou  do  these  things  a.  thyself  to  the  world

11.  57.  if  any  knew  where  he  was  they  should  a.  it
14.  8.  a.  us  the  Father  and  it  sufficeth  us,  9.

16.  13.  and  he  will  a.  you  things  to  come
14.  he  shall  receive  of  mine,  and  a.  it  to  y'ou,  15.

25.  but  1  shall  a.  you  plainly  of  the  Father
Aits  1.24.  Lord  a.  whether  of  these  thou  hast  chosen
7.  3.  and  come  into  the  land  which  1  shall  a.  thee

12.  17.  and  he  said,  go,  a.  these  tilings  to  James
16.  17.  the  men  who  a.  to  us  the  way  of  salvation
24.  27.  Felix  willing  to  a.  the  Jewsa  pleasure

26.  23.  that  he  should  s.  light  to  the  people
Horn.  2.  15.  who  a.  the  work  of  the  law  written

9.  17.  I  have  raised  thee,  that  1  might  a.  my  power
22.  what  if  God,  willing  to  a.  his  wrath,  endured

1  Cor.  11.  26.  ye  do  a.  the  Lord’s  death  till  become
12.  31.  yet  a.  I  to  you  a  more  excellent  way


1  Cor.  15.51.  I  a.  you  mystery,  we  shall  not  all  sleep

2  Cor.  8.  24.  a.  >e  to  them  the  proof  of  your  love
Ejh.  2.  7-  that  he  might  a.  the  exceeding  riches

1  These.  1 . 9-  for  they  themselves  a.  of  us  what  maim.

1  Tim.  1.  16.  that  Christ  might  a.  all  long-suffering

5.  4.  let  them  learn  first  to  a.  piety  at  home

6.  15.  which  in  his  times  he  shall  a.  who  is  the

2  Tim.  2.  15.  study  to  a.  thyself  approved  to  Cod
lleb.  6.  1 1.  that  every  one  of  you  a.  the  same  dilig.

17.  God  willing  to  a.  to  the  heirs  of  promise
Jam.  2.  18.  a.  me  thy  faith  without  thy  works

3.  13.  let  him  a.  his  works  out  of  good  conversation
1  Pet.  2.  9.  ye  should  a.  forth  the  praises  of  him

1  John  1.  2.  and  a.  unto  you  that  eternal  life
Rev.  1.  1.  he  sent  his  angel  to  a.  his  servants,  22.  6.

/  will  SI1  EW.

Gen.  12.  1.  get  thee  unto  a  land  that  1  will  s.  thee
Exod.  33.  19.  1  will  be  gracious  to  whom  I  will  be
gracious,  I  will s.  mercy  on  whom  1  wills,  mercy
Judy.  4.  22.  I  will  s.  thee  man  whom  thou  seekest
1  Sam.  16.  3.  1  will  s.  thee  what  thou  shalt  do

20.  13.  to  do  thee  evil,  then  1  will  s.  it  thee

1  Kinys  18.  15.  1  zvill  surely  s.  myself  to  Ahab

2  Kings'!.  12.  1  will s.  you  what  Syrians  havedone
Job  15.  17.  I  will  a.  thee  that  which  1  have  seen

32.  10.  1  also  will  s.  mine  opinion,  17.  |  36.  2.
Psal.  9.  1.  7  will  a.  forth  all  thy  marvellous  works
50.  23.  I  will  a.  the  salvation  of  God,  91.  16.

Jer.  18.  17-  I  will  s.  them  the  back,  and  not  face
.3.3.  3.  I  will  s.  thee  great  and  mighty  things
42.  12.  I  will  a.  mercies  unto  you,  cause  to  return
Dan.  2.  24.  I  will  s.  the  king  the  interpretation

10.  21.  but  1  will  a.  thee  what  is  noted  in  script.

11.  2.  and  now  I  will  s.  thee  the  truth.  Behold
Ji  el  2.  30.  1 7vill  a.  wonders  in  heaven,  Acts  2.  19.
Mic.  7-  15.  1  will  a.  to  him  marvellous  things
Kali.  3.  5.  I  will  s.  the  nations  thy  nakedness
Zech.  1.  9.  angel  said,  1  will  a.  thee  what  these  be
Luke  6.  47.  1  will  a.  you  to  whom  he  is  like
Acts9. 16. 1  will  a.  him  how  great  things  he  mustsuf.
Jam.  2.  18.  1  will  s.  thee  my  faith  by  my  works
Rev.  4.  1.  /  will  a.  thee  things  which  must  be

17.  1.  I  will  a.  thee  the  judgment  of  the  whore

21.  9.  I  will  a.  thee  the  bride  the  Lamb’s  wife

See  Kindness.

SHEWED.

Lev.  13.  19.  a  white  spot,  and  it  be  a.  to  priest,  49.
Kum.  13.  26.  and  a.  them  the  fruit  of  the  land
De-ut.  34.  12.  which  Moses  a.  in  the  sight  of  Israel
Jut  g.  1.  25.  and  when  he  a.  them  the  entrance

4.  12.  a.  Sisera,  that  Barak  w'as  gone  up  to  Tabor

13.  10.  the  woman  made  haste,  and  a.  her  husband
16.  18.  come  up,  for  he  hath  a.  me  all  his  heart

Ruth  2. 1 1.  it  hath  been  a.  me  all  that  thou  hast  done

1  Sam.  11.  9.  came  and  a.  it  to  the  men  of  Jabesh

19.  7-  Jonathan  a.  him  all  those  things

22.  21.  Abiathar  a.  Dav.  that  Saul  had  slain  priests
24.  18.  Saul  said  to  David,  thou  hast  s.  this  day

how  thou  hast  dealt  well  with  me

2  Sam.  11. 22.  messenger  s.  David  all  Joab  had  sent

1  Kings  1.  27-  thou  hast  not  a.  it  to  thy  servant

16.  27.  Otnri,  and  his  might  that  he  a.  22.  45.  •

2  Kings  6.  6.  where  fell  it?  he  a.  him  the  place
11.4.  took  an  oath,  and  a.  them  the  king’s  son

20.  13.  Hezekiah  hearkened  to  them,  and  a.  them
all  the  house  of  his  precious  things,  Isa.  39.  2.

15.  there  is  nothing  1  have  not  a.  them,  Isa.  39.4.
Esth.  1.  4.  when  he  a.  riches  of  his  glorious  kingdom
2. 10.  Esther  had  not  a.  her  people  nor  kindred,  20.
3.  6.  for  they  had  a.  him  the  people  of  Mordecai
Job  6. 14.  to  afflicted  pity  should  be  a.  from  his  friend
Psal.  71.  18.  until  I  have  a.  thy  strength  to  this  gen.
105.  27.  they  a.  his  signs  among  them,  Acts  7.  36.
142.  2.  poured  my  complaint,  1  a.  before  him  my
Prov.  26.  26.  his  wickedness  shall  be  a.  before  cong.
Eccl.  2.  19-  labour,  wherein  1  have  a.  myself  wise
Isa.  40. 14.  who  a.  to  him  the  way  of  understanding
Ezek.  22.  26.  they  a.  no  difference  between  clean
Mat.  28.  11.  and  a.  to  chief  priests  all  things  done
Luke  4.  5.  devil  s.  him  all  kingdoms  of  the  world

7.  18.  the  disciples  of  John  a.  him  these  things
10.. 37-  and  he  said,  he  that  a.  mercy  on  him

14.  21.  that  serv.  came  and  a.  his  lord  these  things
20.  37-  that  the  dead  are  raised,  Moses  a.  at  bush

John  10.  32.  many  good  wrnrks  have  1  a.  you

20.  20.  he  a.  unto  them  his  hands  and  his  side

21.  1.  JesusA.  hims.  again  to  disciples,  14.  Actsl.  3.
Acts  4.  22.  on  whom  this  miracle  of  healing  was  s.
7.  26.  Moses  a.  himself  to  them  as  they  strove

36.  after  he  had  a.  wonders  and  signs
52.  which  a.  before  of  the  coming  of  the  just  One
11.  13.  he  a.  how  he  had  seen  an  angel  in  his  house
19. 18.  many  that  believed  confessed,  a.  their  deeds
20.  20.  but  have  a.  and  have  taught  you  publicly
35.  1  have  a.  you  all  things,  how. so  labouring

23.  22.  tell  no  man  thou  hast  a.  these  things  to  me

26.  20.  but  first  Paul  a.  to  them  of  Damascus

28.  2.  the  barbarous  people  a.  no  little  kindness
21.  none  of  brethren  a.  or  spake  any  harm  of  thee
1  Cor.  10.  28.  eat  not,  for  his  sake  that  a.  it
lleb.  6.  10.  love  which  ye  have  a.  toward  his  name
Jam.  2.  13.  shall  have  judgment  that  a.  no  mercy
Rev.  21.  10.  angel  a.  me  the  great  city  Jerusalem

22.  1.  lie  a.  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life

8.  I  fell  down  to  worship  the  angel  who  a.  me
God,  or  Lord  SHEWED,  expressly,  or  implicitly.
Gen.  19.  19.  thy  mercy  a.  to  me  in  saving  my  life

24.  14.  that  thou  hast  a.  kindness  to  my  master
32.  10.  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  the  mercies  a.
39-  21.  the  Lord  s.  Joseph  mercy,  and  gave  favour
41.25.  Gods.  Pharaoh  what  he  is  about  to  do

39.  forasmuch  as  God  hath  a.  thee  all  this
48.  11.  and  lo,  God  hath  a.  me  also  thy  seed
Exod.  15.  25.  he  cried,  and  the  Lord  s.  him  a  tree

25.  40.  look  thou  make  them  after  the  pattern  s.

thee  in  the  mount,  26.  30. 1  27  .  8.  77 eb.  8.  6.
Lev.  24.  12.  that  the  mind  of  the  Lord  might  be  a.
Kum.  8.  4.  to  the  pattern  the  Lord  had  a.  Moses
14.  11.  all  signs  1  have  a.  among  them.  Dent.  6.22.
Deut.  4.  36.  and  upon  earth  he  a.  thee  his  great  fir«

5.  24.  behold,  the  Lord  our  God  s.  us  his  glory

34.  1.  the  Lord  s.  him  all  the  land  of  Gilead


S  H  I


SHO


S  H  1


Judy.  13.  23.  nor  would  lie  have?  all  these  things

1  h,ings  3.  6.  Solomon  said, thou  hast  ?. to  thy  servant

David  my  father  great  mercy,  2  Chron.  1.  8.

2  Kings 8.  10.  Lorrfhath  ?.  me,  lie  shall  surely  die
13.  the  Lord  hath  ?.  me  that  thou  shalt  be  king

2  Chron.  7.  10.  for  goodness  the  Lord  had  ?.  David
Lr.ra  9.  8.  grace  hath  been  ?.  from  Lord  our  God
™*.  31.  21.  he  hath  ?.  me  his  marvellous  kindness
60.  3.  thou  hast  ?.  thy  people  hard  things
71. 20.  thou  hast  ?.  rue  great  and  sore  troubles
78.  11.  they  torgat  his  wonders  he  had  ?.  them
98.  2.  his  righteousness  hath  ?.  in  sight  of  heathen
111.  6.  hej.  his  people  the  power  of  his  w  orks
118.  27-  God  is  the  Lord  who  hath  ?.  us  light
/•fa.  26.  10.  let  favour  be  ?.  to  wicked,  yet  not  learn
43.  12.  1  have  ?.  when  there  was  no  strange  god
48.  3.  I  ?.  them,  1  did  them  suddenly ,  came  to  pass
5.  before  it  came  to  pass  1  ?.  it  thee
Jer.  24.  1.  the  Lord  s.  me  two  baskets  of  figs
38.  21.  this  is  the  word  that  the  Lord  hath  ?.  me
Ezek.  11.  25.  all  things  that  the  Lord  hath  ?.  me
VO,  11.  gave  statutes  and  s.  them  my  judgments
A mos  7 •  1.  thus  hath  the  Lords,  me,  4.  7.  |  8.  1.

6.8.  he  hath  .f.  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good
Zech.  1.  20.  and  the  Lord  s.  me  four  carpenters

3.  1.  he  .r.  me  Joshua  standing  before  angel  of  Lord
Luke  1.  51.  he  hath  s.  strength  with  his  arm
58.  heard  how  Lord  had  ?.  great  mercy  on  her
/lets 3. 18.  but  those  things  which  God  before  had  s.
10.  28.  God  s.  I  should  not  cajl  any  man  common
40.  God  raised  him  the  third  day  and  ?.  him
liom.  1.  19.  is  manifest,  for  Gerfhath  ?.  it  to  them
2  Pet.  1.  14.  even  as  our  L.ord  Jesus  hath  ?.  me
SH  EW  EDS  1’.

Left.  9.  10.  and  .f.  signs  and  wonders  upon  Pharaoh
Jer.  11.  18. 1  know'  it,  then  thou  s.  me  their  doings
Ti  SHEWEST.

Job  10.  16.  thou  s.  thyself  marvellous  upon  me
Jer.  32.  18.  thou  s.  loving-kindness  to  thousands
John  2. 18.  Jews  said,  what  sign  s.  thou  to  us  >  6  30
_  SHEW  ETH.

Gen.  41. 28.  whatGod  is  about  to  do, her.  to  Pharaoh
Aum.  23.  3.  whatsoever  her.  me,  I  will  tell  thee

1  Sam.  22.  8.  none  r.  me  that  my  son  marie  a  league

2  Sam.  22.  51.  he  r.  mercy  to  his  anointed,  to  David,

and  to  his  seed  for  evermore,  Psal.  18.  50.
Job  36.  9.  he  r.  them  their  work  and  transgressioi.s
33.  noise  thereof  r.  concerning  it,  the  cattle  also
Psal.  19.  1.  and  the  firmament  j.  his  handy  work

2.  and  night  untonight?.  knowledge
112.  5.  good  man  r.  favour,  and  lendeth,  will  guide
147.  19.  he  r.  his  word  unto  Jacob,  his  statutes
Prov.  12. 17-  he  that  speaks  truth,  r.  forth  right
27.  25.  the  hay  appears,  the  tender  grass  r.  itself
Isa.  41.  26.  yea,  there  is  none  that  r.  your  words
Mat.  4.  8.  and  r.  him  all  kingdoms  of  the  world
John  5.  20.  Father  loveth,  and  r.  the  Son  all  things
SHEWING.


Efod- 20.  6.  and  s.  mercy  unto  thousands,  Deut. 5. 10
Psal.  78.  4.  r.  to  generation  to  come  praises  of  Lord


-  *  wine  pi  nnca  wi  jajji

Cant.  2.  9.  my  beloved  ?.  himself  thro’  the  lattice
Van.  4.  27.  break  off  thine  iniquities  by  .f.  mercy
5.  12.  s.  of  hard  sentences  found  in  the  same  Daniel
Luke  8.  1.  s.  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom  of  God
Acts  9.  39.  and  .f.  the  coats  which  Dorcas  made
18.  28.  s.  by  scripture  that  Jesus  was  Christ
2  Thess.  2.  4.  as  Cod,  s.  himself  that  he  is  God
lit.  2. 7 -in  all  things  s.  thyself  pattern  of  good  works
10.  not  purloining,  but  ?.  all  good  fidelity

3.  2.  but  be  gentle,  s.  all  meekness  to  all  men
SHEWING.

Luke  1.80.  was  in  cleserts  till  day  of  his  s.  to  Israel
SHIELD

Is  a  piece  of  defensive  armour.  The  common  ma¬
terials  of  a  shield  were  wood :  it  was  covered  with
leather,  with  plates  of  gold,  or  brass.  Sometimes
they  were  made  all  of  gold,  or  brass.  Those  that
Solomon  made  were  of  massy  gold,  \  Kings  10.  17.
Shishak  king  of  Egypt  took  these  away,  and  Re-
hoboam  made  others  of  brass  to  serve  in  there
stead,  1  Kings  14.  26,27.

Scripture  God  is  often  called  the  shield  of  his
people  :  I  am  thy  shield,  says  God  to  Abraham,
Gen.  15.  1.  1  will  protect  and  defend  thee.  I  he
Psalmist  says.  Thou,  Lord,  wilt  bless  the  righte¬
ous;  with  favour  wilt  thou  compass  him  as  With
a  shield,  Psal.  5.  12.  With  thy  love  and  gra¬
cious  providence  thou  wilt  keep  him  safe  on  every
s>d.e -  Princes  and  great  men  are  also  called  the
shield  of  the  people,  because  by  their  office  they
are,  or  should  be,  the  common  parents  and  pro¬
tectors  of  their  people ,  to  defend  them  from  all
oppressions  and  injuries.  Psal.  47.  9-  The  shields
of  the  earth  belong  unto  God,  are  dependent
upon  him.'  Faith  in  Scripture  is  likewise  called
a  shield,  Eph.  6.  16.  because  it  derives  strength
from  Christ  for  overcoming  the  temptations  of
Satan.

They  hung  up  their  shields  upon  towers  for  or
naments,  or  as  trophies  of  victory,  to  make  use
of  them  upon  occasion.  The  tower  of  David  was
adorned  with  a  thousand  shields.  Cant.  4.  4.

J  hy’  neck  is  like  the  tower  of  David,  budded
for  an  armoury,  whereon  there  hang  a  thousand
bucklers,  all  shields  of  mighty  men.  By  neck,
Commentators  understand  the  grace  of faith,  which,
as  is  said,  is  called  a  shield  ;  and  this  shews  that
by  faith  the  church  is  strong  and  victorious  over
all  her  enemies.

Gen.  15.  1.  I  am  thy  s.  and  exceeding  great  reward

Dent.  33.  29.  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  ?.  of  thy  help

Judg.  5.  8.  I  Deborah  arose  a  mother  in  Israel,  was
there  a  s.  or  spear  seen  among 40,000  in  Israel  ?

1  Sam.  17.  7.  one  bearinga  s.  went  before  him,  41.
45.  thou  comest  to  me  with  a  spear  and  a  .t.

2  Sam.  1.  21.  there  the  ?.  of  the  mighty  is  vilely
cast  away,  ?.  of  Saul  as  tho’  not  anointed  withoil

22.  3.  he  is  my  ?.  P?.3.3.  |  28.7. 1  119.  114.  |  144.  2.
36.  given  me  the  s.  of  thy  salvation,  l'sal.  18.  35.

I  Lings  10.  17.  three  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  ?.

*  Kings  19.  32.  he  shall  not  come  before  it  u  ith  a
s.  nor  cast  a  bank  against  it,  ha.  37.  33.


1  Chron.  12.  8.  the  Gadites  that  could  handle  ,f.

04  xV  11  1  e,*?  ludrth  that  bare  s.  and  spew
.14.  or  Naphtali  with  a.  and  spear  37,()(X)

2rC,7o’25 '5.  choice  men  that  could  handle  sp.  and  s.
Job  39.23.  glittering  spear  and  s.  rattleth  ag.  him
00  V"  with  favour  wilt  compass  him  as  with  s.
33.  20.  the  Lord  is  our  s.  59.  1 1.  |  84.  9  |  89  t  18
35.  2.  take  hold  of  the  ?.  and  buckler,  and  stand
7b.  3.  there  brake  he  the  arrows  of  bow,  the  s.

84. 11.  L.  G.  is  sun  and  s.  will  give  grace  and  g'lorv
91.  4.  his  truth  shall  be  thy  ?.  and  buckler  J
115.  9.  he  is  their  help  and  their  s.  10.  11.

Prov.  3,1.  5.  he  is  a  s.  to  them  that  put  trust  in  him
"<*•21. .5.  arise,  ye  princes,  and  anoint  the  s.

22.6.  Elam  bare  quiver,  Kir  uncovered  the  s.

Jer .  46.  3.  order  buckler  and  ?.  draw  near  to  battle
9.  come  forth,  Libyans,  that  handle  the  s.

Ezek.  23.  24.  they  shall  set  ag.  thee  buckler  and  s.
27.10.  they  hanged  the  ?.  and  helmet  in  thee,  11
If  ah.  2.  3.  the  s.  of  his  mighty  men  is  made  red
Eph.  6.  16.  above  all  taking  the  s.  of  faith
SHIELDS.

2  Sam.  8.  7-  David  took  the  s.  of  gold  that  were  on

the  servants  of  Hadadezer,  1  Chr.  18.  7.

1  Kings  10. 17.  Solomon  made  .300  s.  o.  beaten  gold,

the  king  put  them  in  Lebanon,  2  Chron.  9.  16.
14.  26.  Shishak  took  away  all,  even  all  s.  of  gold
which  Solomon  had  made,  2  Chron.  12.  9
27.  Rehoboam  made  in  their  stead  brazen  5.  and
committed  them  to  chief  of  guards,  2  Chr.  12.  10

2  Kings  11.  10.  priest  gave  king  Dav. s.  2  Chr.  23  9

2  Chr.  1 1  10  !»  - - 1  -


•  ]2.  in  every  several  city  put  Wand  spears
ut  of  Benjamin  that  bare  s.  17.  17.


26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  for  them  ?.  and  spears
32.  5.  Ilezek.  made  darts  and  ?.  in  abundance,  27.
Kelt.  4. 16.  the  other  half  of  them  held  spears  and  s.
Job  41.  +  15.  strong  pieces  of  ?.  are  his  pride
Psal.  47.  9.  the  s.  of  the  earth  belong  to  God
Cant.  4.4.  whereon  hang  bnckl.  all  ?.  of  mighty  men
Jer.  51.  11.  make  bright  the  arrows,  gather  the  s.
Ezek. .38.  4.  even  great  company  with  buckl.  and  s.5
39.  9.  they  shall  burn  the  s.  and  the  weapons
_  .  SH1GGAION.

This  word  is  found  in  the  title  of  Psal.  7.  It  com¬
et  h  from  another  Hebrew  word  which  signifies  to
stray  or  wander  ;  whence  some  do  conjecture,  that
it  was  a  various  song,  running  from  one  kind  of
tune  into  another  ;  and  that  it  was  used  in  great
anguishes  of  heart,  when  as  the  thoughts  and  stir¬
rings  of  the  heart,  through  the  greatness  of  trouble,
do  vary  and  fall  from  one  strain  to  another  in  a
straying  and  scattering  manner.

Some  think  it  is  an  instrument  of  Music  ;  others
translate  it,  The  error  of  David  ;  others.  The
secret  of  David  ;  others.  The  delight  of  David  ;
and  others  again,  The  disquiet  of  David.  Some
think  it  ought  to  be  translated,  A  song  of  trouble,
or  A  song  of  consolation  of  David  :  The  Arabic
word  Schaga  signifies,  to  be  in  trouble  ;  and  the
Hebrew  word  Schagah,  or  Shagah,  to  rejoice,  to
be  comforted.

_  SHILOH,

One  of  the  glorious  names  of  the  Messias,  dene  ng
him  to  be  the  only  procurer  of  cur  happiness  ;
and  our  alone  peace  maker  with  God :  for  it  im-
porteth  a  Saviour,  or  happy,  blessed,  peaceable,  or
a  peace-maker,  $c.  from  the  root  Shalah,  he  was
quiet,  and  in  peace  ;  he  was  safe  and  happy.  It  i


found,  Gen.  49-  10.  1  he  sceptre  shall  not  depart
from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his
feet,  until  Shiloh  come,  and  unto  him  shall
the  gathering  of  the  people  be.  All  Christian
commentators  agree,  that  this  word  ought  to  be
understood  of  the  Messiah;  of  Jesus  Christ.  Je-
rom  translates  it  by  Qui  mittendus  est,  lie  who
is  to  be  sent,  and  manifestly  reads  Shiloach,  sent
instead  of  Shiloh.  Ihe  Septuagint  translate  it,
Until  the  coming  of  him  to  whom  it  is  reserved  ;
or,  till  we  see  arrive  that  which  is  reserved  fol¬
ium.

Some  translate,  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from
Judah,  till  he  comes  to  whom  it  belongs  :
others,  till  the  coming  of  the  Peace-maker,  eWthe
Pacific  ;  or  of  prosperity  :  others,  till  the  birth  of
hint  who  shall  be  born  of  a  woman,  who  shall
conceive  without  the  knowledge  of  a  man.  Other¬
wise,  the  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  till
its  end,  till  its  ruin,  till  the  downfall  of  the  king-
(lorn  of  the  Jews*  A  certain  author  derives  Shiloh
from  shalah,  which  sometimes  signifies  to  be  weary,
to  suffer  ;  till  his  labours,  his  sufferings,  his  pas¬
sion,  should  come  to  pass.

SHINE.

Num.  6.  25.  the  Lord  make  his  face  s.  upon  thee
Job  3.  4.  that  da.y  be  dark  ;  neither  let  light.?,  on  it

10.  3.  thou  shouldest  s.  on  counsel  of  the  wicked

11.  17.  thou  shalt ?.  forth,  thou  shalt  be  as  morning
18.  5.  and  the  spark  of  his  fire  shall  not  s.

22.  28.  and  the  lightshall  s.  upon  thy  ways

36.  .32.  the  light  he  commandeth  it  not  to  .?.

37.  15.  when  he  caused  the  light  of  his  cloud  to  s.
41.  18.  by  hisneesings  a  light  doth  ?.  and  his  eyes

32.  he  maketli  a  path  to  s.  after  him
Psal.  31.  16.  make  thy  face  to  s.  upon  thy  servant
67-  1.  cause  his  face  to  s.  upon  us,  80.  3,  7,19.

80.  1.  that  dwellest  between  cherubims,  ?.  forth
104.  15.  and  oil  to  make  his  face  to  s.  and  bread
119.  135.  make  thy  face  to  s.  upon  thy  servant
Eccl.  8.  1.  a  man’s  wisdom  maketli  his  face  to  s.
Isa.  13.  10.  the  moon  shall  not  cause  her  light  to  s.
60.  1.  arise,  ?.  for  thy  light  is  come,  glory  of  Lord
Jer.  5.  28.  8103’  are  waxen  fat,  they'  .<.  they  overpass
Dan.  9-  17-  cause  thy  face  to  s.  upon  thy  sanctuary

12.  3.  that  be  wise,  shall?,  as  stars  for  ever  and  ever
Mat.  5. 16.  let  your  light  so?,  before  men  toseeyour

13.  43.  then  shall  the  righteous?,  forth  as  the  sun
17.  2.  his  face  did  ?.  as  sun,  and  his  raiment  white

2  Cor.  4.  4.  lest  light  of  gospel  of  Christ  should  ?.

6.  God  who  commanded  light  to  ?.  out  of  darkn.
Phil.  2. 15.  among  whom  ve?.  as  lights  in  worl  d
Rev.  18. 23.  light  of  a  candle  shall  ?.  no  more  at  all
21 .  23.  city  had  no  need  of  sun  nor  moon  to  ?.  in  it


„  .  SHINED.

Dent.  3.3.2.  the  Lord  ?.  forth  from  mount  Paran
Job  29.  3.  when  his  candle  ?.  upon  my  head
31. 26.  if  1  beheld  the  sun  when  it  ?.  or  the  moon
Psal.  50.2.ouiof  Zion  perfect,  of  beauty  God  hath  s.
Isa.  9.  2.  upon  them  hath  the  light  ?.

Ezek.  43.  2.  and  the  earth  ?.  with  his  glory
Acts  9.  3.  suddenly  there  ?.  about  him  a  light
12.  7.  the  angel  came,  and  a  light  ?.  in  the  prison
2  Cor.  4.6-  for  God  hath  v.  in  our  hearts  to  give  light
SHIN  ETH.

Job  25.  5.  behold  even  to  the  moon,  and  it?,  not
Psal.  139.  12.  but  the  night  ?.  as  the  day
Pfov.  4.  18.  as  shining  light  that  ?.  more  and  more
Mat.  24.  27.  as  lightning  ?.  even  to  the  west
Luke  17.  24.  and  ?.  to  other  part  under  heaven
John  1.  5.  the  light?,  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness
7  r  /’  ^ ‘  19-. as  to  a  light  that  ?.  in  a  dark  place
l  Jo/m2.8.  darkness  is  past,  the  true  light  now  ?.
Rev.  1. 16.  Ins  countenance  was  as  the  sun  ?.

„  p  SHINING.

camA  2.3-  4.  as  grass  springing  by  clear?,  after  ram
Ezra  8.  t27.  anti  two  vessels  of  ?.  brass  precious
Prov.  4. 18.  the  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  ?.  light
Isa.  4.  5.  will  create  the  ?.  of  a  flaming  fire  by  night
Joel  2. 10.  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their?.  3.  15.

11.  they  went  at  the  ?.  of  thy  glittering  spear
Mark  9.  3.  his  raiment  became  s .  white  as  snow
Luke  11.  36.  when  the  ?.  of  a  candle  giveth  light
24.4.  two  men  stood  by  them  in  ?.  garments
John  5.  35.  he  was  a  burning  and  a  ?.  light
Acts  26.  13.  a  light  above  the  brightness  of  sun  ?
•SHIP.

Prov.  30. 19.  the  way  of  a  ?.  in  the  midst  of  the  se
Isa.  33.  21.  no  gallant  ?.  shall  pass  thereby
Jonah  1.  3.  Jonah  found  a  ?.  going  to  Tarshish

4.  a  tempest,  so  that  the  ?.  w as  like  to  be  broken

5.  mariners  cast  forth  the  wares  into  the  ?.

Mat.  4.  21.  in  a  ?.  with  Zebedee  their  father

22.  and  they  left  the  ?.  and  followed  him

8.  24.  that  the  ?.  was  covered  with  the  waves
14.  24.  the  ?.  was  tossed  with  wav  es,  Mark  4.  37.
Mark  1. 19.  who  were  in  the  ?.  mending  their  nets
20.  they  left  their  father  Zebedee  in  the  ?.

4.  38.  he  was  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  ?.  asleep

8.  14.  neither  had  they  in  the  ?.  but  one  loaf
John  6.  21.  and  immediately  the  ?.  was  at  the  land

21.  6.  he  said,  cast  the  net  on  right  side  of  the  ?.
Acts  20.  38.  and  they  accompanied  him  to  the  ?.

21.  2.  finding  a  ?.  sailing  over  unto  Phenicia
27.  2.  and  entering  into  a  ?.  of  Adramyttiuin
SHIPS.

Gen.  49. 13.  Zebulun  shall  be  an  haven  for  ?.

Aum.  24.24.  and  ?.  shall  come  from  (  hittim
Deut.  28.  68.  L.  shall  bring  thee  into  1  gypt  with  s.
Judg.  5.  17.  and  why  did  Dan  remain  in  ?.  ?

1  Kings  9.26.  king  Solomon  made  a  navy  of?
22.48.  Jehoshaphat  made  ?.  of  Tarshish  to  go  to

Ophir,  the  ?.  were  broken,  2  Chron.  20.  37.
49.  let  my  servants  go  with  thine  in  the  ?.

2  Chron  8. 18.  Iluram  sent  hint  by  his  servants,  ?.

9.  21.  king’s?,  went  to  Tarshish  every  three  years
Job  9.  26.  they  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ?.
Psal.  48.  7.  thou  breakest  the  ?.  of  Tarshish

104.  26.  there  go  the  ?.  there  is  that  Leviathan
107.  23.  they  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ?.  that  do
Prov.  31.  14.  she  is  like  the  merchant  ?.  she  brings
Isa.  2. 16.  the  day  of  Lord  on  the  ?.  of  Tarshish
23.  1.  howl,  ye  ?.  of  Tarshish,  no  entering  in,  14.
43.  14.  the  Chaldeans,  whose  cry  is  in  the  ?.

60.  9.  the  ?.  of  Tarshish  first,  to' bring  thy  sons
Ezek.  27.  9.  all  ?.  of  the  sea  with  their  mariners
25.  ?.  of  Tarshish  did  sing  of  thee  in  thy  market
29.  the  pilots  shall  come  down  from  their  ?.

30.  9.  the  messengers  go  forth  from  me  in  ?.

Dan.  11.30.  for  ?.  of  Chittim  shall  come  ag.  him
40.  king  of  the  north  shall  come  with  many  ?.
I.ule  5.7.  they  filled  both  the  ?.  they  began  to  sink
Jam.  3.  4.  behold  also  the  ?.  though  they  be  great
Rev.  8.  9.  the  third  part  of  the  ?.  were  destroyed
18.  17.  the  company  in  ?.  stood  afar  off  and  crieo
19.  wherein  were  made  rich  all  that  had  ?.

SH  I  V-boards.

Ezek.  27.  5.  have  made  all  thy  s.-boards  of  fir  trees
SHIP-MASTER.

Jonah  1.6.?.  said,  what  meanest  thou,  O  sleeper  ?
Rev.  18.  17.  every  ?.  and  sailors  afar  off,  cried
SHIP-MEN.

1  K  ings  9. 27 .  II iram  sent  ?.  that  had  knowl.ofsea
Acts  27.  30.  the  ?.  were  about  to  flee  out  of  the  ship

SHIPPING.

John  6.  24.  they  took  ?.  and  came  to  Capernaum
SHIPWRECK.

2  Cor.  11. 25.  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  suffered  ?.

1  Tim.  1.  19.  some  concerning  faith  have  made  ?.

SH  VlTAll-tree.

Isa.  41. 19.  I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness  the  s.-tree
SH  ITT  I  INI -wood.

Exod.  25.  5.  and  badgers’  skins  and  s.-wood,  35.  7.

10.  shall  make  an  ark  of  s.-w.  37. 1.  Dent.  10.  3.

13.  thou  shalt  make  staves  of  s.-wood,  28.  |  27  6

,  ,  ,  ,  ,  ,1  37.  4,  15,  28.  |  38.’  6.'

23.  thou  shalt  make  a  table  of  s.-ivood,  .37.  10.

26. 15.  make  boards  for  tabernacle  of  s.-wood,  36.20.
26.  thou  shalt  make  bars  of  s.-wood,  36.  31.

32.  upon  four  pillars  of  s.-wood,  37.  |  36.  36.

27. 1.  thou  shalt  make  an  altar  of  s.-wood,  30.  1.

35.  24.  every  man  with  whom  was  found  s.-wood
SHIVERS.

Rev.  2. 27.  as  vessels  of  a  potter  shall  be  broken  to  ?
SHOCK.

Job  5.  26.  like  as  ?.  of  coin  cometh  in  his  season
SHOCKS.

Judg.  15.5.  Samson  burnt  u  p  die  ?.  and  standing  corn

2  Chron.  28.  15.  took  the  captives  and  ?.  them
Ezek.  16. 10.  1  ?.  thee  with  badgeis’  skin  and  girded
Mark  6.  9.  be  ?.  with  sandals,  put  not  on  two  coats
Eph.  6. 15.  ?.  with  the  preparation  of  the  sosnel

SHOE

Is  put  for,'  [1]  The  ground  under  feet,  Deut.  33.
25.  [2j  The  weakest  means,  Psal!  60.  8.  |  108.  0

441


SHO


S  H  O


SHO


[3]  Freedom  from  danger,  Cant.  7.  1.  t[4]  A  con -
temptible  price,  Amos  2.  6.  I  8.  6.  To  cast  the
shoe  over  a  country ,  is  to  subdue  that  country,  Ac-
Psal.  60.  8.  To  loose  the  shoe  was,  [1]  A  sign
of  reverence,  Exod.  3.  5.  [2]  Of  disgrace,  Deut.
25.  10.  [3]  Of  a  contract,  Ruth  4.  7-  [4]  OJ

mourning,  Ezek.  24.  17*

The  apostle  exhorts  the  Ephesians  to  have  their  feet
shod  with  the  preparation  ot  the  gospel  of  peace,
Eph.  6. 15.  that  »«,  to  have  a  prepared  and  resolved
frame  of  heart,  w  hich  the  gospel  teaches  and  works  ;
and  which,  like  leg  or  foot  harness,  would  enable
them  to  walk  ivith  a  steady  pace  in  the  ways  of  re¬
ligion,  notwithstanding  the  hardships,  dangers,  and
difficulties  that  attend  it.

lo  go  barefoot  was  a  sign  of  mourning  and  humi¬
liation  :  David  went  up  by  the  ascent  of  mount
Olivet  barefoot,  2  Sam.  15.  30.  See  Isa.  20.  2,
4.  Ezek.  24.  17.  The  man  that  refused  to  raise  up
seed  unto  his  brother  deieased,  had  his  shoe  taktn
off  by  his  brother's  wife  in  presence  of  the  elders,
Deut.  25.  9-  This  was  done,  partly  as  a  sign  of
his  resignation  of  his  right  to  tie  woman,  and  her
husband's  inheritance,  as  the  plucking  off  the  slice
signifies  in  Ruth  47-  and  partly,  as  a  note  of  in
famy ;  to  signify  that  he  deserved  to  be  treated
like  a  servant  or  captive,  who  in  token  of  submis¬
sion  and  obedience  went  barefoot,  Isa.  20.  4.  It
is  said,  Psal.  60.  8.  Over  Edom  will  1  cast  my
shoe.  ]  will  take  possession  of  them,  I  will  trample
upon  them,  and  use  them  tike  slaves.  A  pair
of  shoes,  in  Amos  2.  6.  denotes  a  small  incon¬
siderable  bribe.  To  bear  one’s  shoes, ’or  untie
the  latchet  of  one’s  shoes,  is  to  perform  the  mean¬
est  services  fur  him.  ■'see  Mat.  3.  11.  Mark  1.  7 •
Luke  3.  16.

Deut.  25.  9.  his  brother's  wife  shall  loose  his#.

10.  the  house  of  him  that  hath  his  s.  loosed

29.  5.  thy  s.  is  not  waxen  old  upon  thy  toot
ah.  5.  15.  thy  s.  from  off  thy  foot,  for  the  place
Ruth  4.  7.  man  plucked  off  his  s.  and  gaveit  to  him

8.  buy  it  lor  thee,  so  he  drew  off  bis  #.

Ps.  60.  8.  over  Edom  will  1  cast  out  my  #.  108.  9.
Isa .  20. 2.  and  put  off  thy  .v.  from  thy  foot,  he  did  so
SHU  E  -latchet.

Gen.  14.  23. 1  will  not  take  from  thread  to  s. -latchet
John  1.  27.  whose  s.-latchet  I  am  not  worthy  to  loose
SHOES.

Exod.  3.  5.  put  off  thy  #.  from  thy  feet,  Acts  7-  33.

12. 11.  thus  shall  ye  eat  it,  with  your  #.  on  your  feet
Deut.  33.  25.  s.  shall  be  iron  and  brass,  as  thy  days
Josh.  9. 5.  old  s.  and  clouted  upon  their  feet,  old  gar.
13.  our  s.  are  become  old  with  a  longjourney

1  Kings  2.  5.  put  the  blood  in  his  s.  on  his  feet
Cant.  7.  1.  how  beautiful  are  thy  teet  with  s.  !

Isa.  5.  27.  nor  the  latchet  of  their  s.  be  broken
Ezek.  24.  17.  put  on  thy  s.  upon  thy  feet,  2.3.

Amos  2.  6.  because  they  sold  the  poor  for  pair  of  s.

8.  6.  that  we  may  buy  the  needy  for  a  pair  of  s.
Mat.  3.  11.  whose  s.  1  am  not  worthy  to  bear
10.  10.  carry  neither  s.  nor  staves,  Luke  10.  4.
Mark  1.  7.  the  latchet  of  whose  s.  I  am  not  worthy
to  stoop  down  and  unloose,  Luke  3.  16.  Acts
1.3.  25.

I.vke  15. 22.  put  ring  on  his  hand,  and  s.  on  his  feet
22.  35.  when  I  sent  you  without  purse  and  s.
SHONE.

Exod.  34.  29.  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  s.

30.  the  skin  of  his  face  #.  they  were  afraid,  35.

2  Kings  3.  22.  rose  up  early,  sun  s.  upon  the  water
Luke  2.  9.  glory  of  the  Lord  s.  round  about  them
Acts  22.  6.  suddenly  there  s.  from  heaven  great  light
*4V.  8. 12.  the  day'  s.  not  for  a  third  part  of  it

SHOOK.

2  Sam.  6.  6.  Uzzah  took  hold, for  oxen  s.  the  ark
22.  8.  the  earth  #.  Psal.  18.  7- 1  68.  8.  1  77.  18.

Neh.  5. 13.  I  5.  my  lap,  and  said,  so  God  shake
Isa.  23.  11.  he  stretched  out  and  the  kingdoms
Acts  13.  51.  but  they  s.  off  the  dust  of  their  feet

18.  6.  he  r.  his  raiment,  and  said  unto  them

28.  5.  he  s.  off  beast  into  the  fire,  and  felt  no  harm
Heb.  12.  26.  whose  voice  then  s.  the  earth
SHOOT.

Exod.  36.  33.  he  made  the  middle  bar  to  s.  through

1  Sam.  20.  20.  I  will  s.  three  arrows  on  the  side
36.  run,  find  out  the  arrows  which  1  s.

2  Sam.  11.  20.  knew  ye  not  they  would  s.  ?

2  Kings  13.  17.  then  Elisha  said,  #.  and  he  shot

19.  32.  he  shall  not  s.  an  arrow  there,  Isa.  37.  33.

1  Chron.  5.  18.  valiant  men  able  to  s.  with  bow

2  Chron.  26.  15.  he  made  engines  to  #.  arrows
Psal.  11.2.  they  may  privily  #.  at  upright  in  heart

22.  7-  they  #.  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head
58.  7.  when  he  bendeth  his  bow  to  s.  his  arrows
64.  3.  to  s.  their  arrows,  even  bitter  words
4.  that  they  may  s.  in  secret  at  the  perfect
7.  but  God  shall  s.  at  them  with  an  arrow
144.  6.  s.  out  thine  arrow's,  and  destroy  them
Jet.  50.  14.  all  ye  that  bend  the  bow,  s.  at  her
Ezek.  31. 14.  nor  s.  up  their  top  among  boughs
36.  8.  ye  shall  s.  forth  your  branches,  and  yield
Luke  21.  30.  when  they  now  s.  forth,  ye  know
SHOOTERS.

2  Sam.  11.24.  s.  shot  from  off  the  wall  on  thy  servant
SHOOT ETH.

Job  8.  16.  and  his  branch  s.  forth  in  his  garden
Isa.  27. 8.  in  meas.  when  it  s.  forth,  thou  wilt  debate
Mark  4.  32.  mustard  seed  s.  out  great  branches
SHOOTING.

1  Chron.  12.  2.  could  use  right  hand  and  left  in  s.
Amos  7.  1.  in  the#.  up  of  the  latter  growth
SHORE.

Mat.  13.2.  the  whole  multitude  stood  on  the  s.

48.  which  when  it  was  full,  they  drew  to  s.

John  21.  4.  when  morning,  .lesus  stood  on  the  s.
Acts  21.  5.  we  kneeled  down  on  the  5.  and  prayed
27-  39.  they  discovered  a  certain  creek  with  a#.

40.  hoised  up  the  main-sail, and  made  toward  s.
See  Sea.

SHORN.

Cant.  4.  2.  teeth  like  a  flock  of  sheep  that  are  even  s.
Acts  18. 18.  having  s.  his  head  in  Cenchrea,  had  vow

442


1  Cor.  11.  6.  if  woman  be  not  covered,  let  her  be  s.  if
it  be  a  shame  to  be  #.  or  shaven,  let  her  be  cover.
SHOR  l’.

Num.  11. 23.  Mos.  said,  is  the  Lord’s  hand  waxen#./
Job  17.  12.  the  light  is  s.  because  of  darkness

20.  5.  the  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  #.

Psal.  89.  47-  remember  how  #.  my  time  is
Horn.  3. 23.  all  have  sinned  and  come  s.  of  glory  of  G .

9.  28.  because  a  s.  work  will  Lord  make  on  earth
1  Cor.  7.  29.  this  I  say,  brethren,  the  time  is  s.

1  Thess.  2.  17-  being  taken  from  you  for  a  s.  time
Rev.  i2.  12.  he  knoweth  that  he  bath  but  a  #.  time
17.  10.  when  he  cometh,  ye  must  continue  s.  space
See  Come,  Cut.

SHORTENED.

Psal.  89.  45.  the  days  of  his  youth  hast  thou  s.

102.  23.  he  weakened  my  strength,  he  s.  my  days
Prov.  10.  27.  the  years  of  the  wicked  shall  be  s.
Isa.  50.  2.  is  my  hand  #.at  all,  that  it  cannot  redeem  ?
59.  1.  behold,  the  Lord’s  hand  is  not  .v.  not  to  save
Mat.  24.  22.  except  those  days  should  be  s.  no  flesh
be  saved,  but  for  the  elect's  sake  s.  Mark  13.  20.
SHOR  PER.

Isa.  28.  20.  the  bed  is  s.  than  that  a  man  can  stretch
SHOR I LY.

Gen.  41.  32.  is  established,  G.  will  .v.  bring  it  to  pass
Jer.  27.  16.  vessels  shall  s.  be  brought  ag.from  Bab.
Ezek.  7.  8  now  will  I  s.  pour  out  my  fury  upon  thee
Acts  25.  4.  that  he  himself  would  depart  #.  thither
Rom.  16.  20.  God  of  peace  bruise  Sat.  under  feet.v.

1  Cor.  4.  19.  I  will  come  to  you .>.  if  the  Lord  will
Phil.  2.  19.  I  trust  to  send  Timotheus  s.  unto  you
24.  1  trust  that  I  also  myself  shall  come  s.

1  Tim.  3.  14.  1  write,  hoping  to  come  unto  thee  s.

2  Tim.  4.  9.  do  thy  diligence  to  come  s.  unto  me
Heb.  13.23.  with  whom  if  he  corner.  1  will  see  you

2  Pet.  1.  14.  5.  1  must  put  off  this  my  tabernacle

3  John  14.  but  I  trust  1  shall  s.  see  thee  and  speak
Rev.  1.  1.  things  that  must  s.  come  to  pass,  22.  6.

SHORTN  ESS.

Exod.  6.  +  9.  but  they  hearkened  not  for  s.  of  spirit
SHOT.

Gen.  40.  10.  it  budded,  and  her  blossoms  s.  forth

49.  23.  the  archers  s.  at  him,  and  hated  him
Exod.  19.  13.  he  shall  surely  be  stoned,  or  s.  thro’
Num.  21.  30.  we  have  s.  at  them,  Heshbon  is  perish.

1  Sam.  20.  37.  the  arrow  which  Jonathan  had  #.

2  Sam.  11.  24.  the  shooters  s.  from  off  the  wall

2  Kings  13.  17.  then  Elisha  said,  shoot,  and  he  s.

2  Chron.  35.  23.  the  archers  #.  at  king  Josiah
Psal.  18.  14.  s.  out  lightnings,  and  discomfited  them
Jer.  9.8.  their  tongue  is  an  arrow  s.  out,  speaks  deceit
Ezek.  17.  6.  it  became  a  vine,  and  s.  forth  sprigs
7.  this  vine  #.  forth  her  branches  toward  him

31.  5.  the  multitude  of  waters  when  he  s.  forth

10.  he  hath  s.  up  his  top  among  the  thick  boughs

SHOE,  Substantive.

Gen.  21.  16.  Ilagar  sat  down  as  it  were  a  bow  s.
Jer.  6.  t  6.  hew  down  trees,  pour  out  the  engine  of  <•

32.  t  24.  behold,  the  engines  of  s.  come  into  the  city
Ezek.  26.  +  8.  he  shall  pour  out  the  engine  of  s.

SHOVEL.

Isc  10.  24.  that  hath  been  winnowed  with  the  s.
SHOVELS.

Exod.  27.  3.  thou  shalt  make  his  pans  and  his  s.

38.  3.  he  made  the  pots,  and  the  s.  and  the  basons
Num.  4.  14.  they  shall  put  on  the  purple  cloth  s.

1  Kings'!.  40.  Hiram  made  the  lavers,  the  s.  and

the  basons  of  brass,  45.  2  Chron.  4.  11,  16.

2  Kings  25. 14.  pots  and  s.  he  took  away,  Jer.  52.  18.

SHOULDER

Ts  apart  of  the  body  well  known.  To  give  or  lend
his  shoulder,  for  bearing  of  a  burden,  signifies  to
submit  to  servitude.  Issacliar  bowed  1, is  shoulder
to  bear,  and  became  a  servant  unto  tribute,  Gen.
49.  15.  The  Messiah  has  delivered  his  people
from  the  rod,  or  from  the  yoke,  to  which  they  wete
subject.  Isa.  9.  4.  Thou  hast  broken  the  staff  of
his  shoulder.  And  in  Isa.  10.  27-  the  prophet
comforting  Israel  with  the  promise  of  deliverance
from  Assyria,  says,  His  burden  shall  be  taken
away  from  off  thy  shoulder.  The  Scripture
calls  that  a  rebellious  shoulder,  a  withdrawing
shoulder,  that  will  not  submit  to  the  yoke,
Neh.  9.  t  29.  and  those  that  bear  it  together
with  joint  consent,  serving  with  one  shoulder,
Zeph.  3.  +  9.

Heretofore  they  wore  the  marks  of  honour  and  com¬
mand  upon  their  shoulders,  .lob  desires  of  God
to  decide  his  cause  ;  Surely  I  would  take  it  upon
my  shoulder,  as  a  trophy  or  badge  of  honour,
and  bind  it  as  a  crown  to  me,  Job  31.  36.  Isaiah
says  that  the  Messiah  shall  bear  the  mark  of  his
government  upon  his  shoulder.  Isa.  9.  6.  The
government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder.  God
promises  Eliakim  the  son  of  I  lilkiah,  to  give  him
the  key  of  the  house  of  David,  and  to  lay  it  upon
his  shoulder ;  so  he  shall  open,  and  none  shall
shut;  and  he  shall  shut,  ana  none  shall  open.
To  be  borne  upon  shoulders,  sometimes  stands  for
a  kind  of  honour  and  distinction.  God  says  that
he  would  lift  up  his  hand  to  the  Gentiles,  and
set  up  his  standard  to  the  people  ;  and  they  shall
bring  thy  sons  in  their  arms,  and  thy  daughters
shall  be  carried  upon  their  shoulders,  Isa.  49.
22.  Sometimes  this  denotes  great  wickedness,  or
some  great  disgrace.  God  commanded  Ezekiel  to
make  a  breach  in  the  wall,  and  carry  out  thereby
on  his  shoulders  in  the  night  time,  to  represent
the  taking  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  captivity  of  the
king  and  his  people.  Ezek.  12.  6,  7-  In  their
sight  bear  upon  thy  shoulders,  &c.

It  is  said,  Deut.  33.  12.  That  the  Lord  shall  dwell
between  Renjamin’s  shoulders ;  that  is,  God's
temple,  wherein  he  dwelt,  shall  be  built  upon
mount  Moriah,  which  is  in  the  tribe  of  Benja¬
min  ;  shoulder  being  elsewhere  pvt  for  border,  or
side,  as  in  Num.  34.  t  11.  lo  fly  upon  the
shoulders,  Isa.  11.  14.  is  to  rise  up  against  one,
to  attack  him,  to  offer  violence  to  him.

Gen.  21.  14.  putting  the  bread  on  IJagar's  s.

24.  15.  Rebekah  w  ith  her  pitcher  upon  her  s .  45.


Gen  AO.  15.  Issachar  bowed  his#.to  bear,  became  seJ
Exod.  28.  7-  the  ephod  shall  have  twos,  pieces

25.  put  the  ends  of  the  chains  on  the  s.  pieces

29.  27.  sanctify  the  s.  of  the  heave-offering
39.  4.  they  made  s.  pieces  for  it  to  couple  it

Num.  6.  19.  priest  shall  take  sodden  s.  of  the  ram,,
to  putin  the  hands  of  the  Nazarite,  Deut  18.  3».
Josh.  4.  5.  take  ye  every  man  a  stone  upon  his  s.
Judg.  9.  48.  Abimelech  laid  a  bow  on  his  s.

1  Nam.  9.  24.  and  the  cook  took  up  the#.

10.  +  9.  when  Saul  had  turned  his  s.  to  go

1  Kings’!.  +39.  he  put  bases  on  right  s.  of  the  house

2  Kings  11.  +  11.  guard  stood  about  the  king  witff

his  weapons  from  the  rights.  2  Chron.  23.  +  1(T
Neh.  9.  29.  withdrew  the  s.  and  hardened  their  neck
Job  31.  36. surely  1  would  take  it  on  my  s.  bind  it
Psal.  81.  6.  1  removed  hiss,  from  the  burden
Isa.  9.  4.  thou  hast  broken  the  staff  of  hiss.

6.  and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  s.

10.  27.  his  burden  shall  be  taken  from  off  thy  s.

22.  22.  the  key  of  David  w  ill  1  lay  upon  his  s.

45.  7.  they  bear  him  upon  the  s.  they  can y  him
Ezek.  12.  f.  I  bare  it  on  my  s.  in  their  sight

12.  princeshatl  bear  upon  his  s.  in  the  twilight

24.  4.  gather  the  pieces,  even  the  thigh  and  s.

25.  +  9.  therefore  1  will  open  the  s.  of  Moab

29.  7.  thou  didst  break  and  rent  all  their  s.  18.

34. 21.  ye  have  thrust  with  side  and  with  s.

Hos  6.  +  9.  priests  murder  in  the  way  with  one  #.
Zeph.  3.  +  9.  to  serve  the  Lord  with  one  s.

Zech.  7 .  11 .  but  they  refused  and  pulled  away  the  #„
Luke  15.  5.  w  hen  found  it  lays  it  on  his  s.  rejoicing;

SHOULDER-BLADE.

Job  31.  22.  then  let  mine  arm  fall  from  my  s.
Heave-S  HO  U  LD  E  R .

Lev."!.  34.  the  heave-s.  have  I  taken,  Num.  6.  20.

10.  14.  the  heave  s.  shall  ye  eat  in  a  clean  place

15.  the  heave-s.  and  wave  breast  shall  they  bring'

Right  SHOULDER.

Exod.  29.  22.  thou  shalt  take  of  the  ram  the  right  s.
Lev.  7.  32.  the  right  s.  shall  ye  give  unto  the  priesN

33.  offereth,  shall  have  the  right  s.  for  his  part

8.  25.  Moses  took  the  fat  and  the  right  s.

26.  put  them  on  the  fat,  and  upon  the  rights.

9.  21.  the  rights,  waved  is  thine.  Num.  18.  18.

SHOULDERS.

Gen,  9  23.  they  laid  the  garment  upon  both  their  #;
Exod.  12.  34.  their  troughs  bound  upon  their  s.

28.  12.  shalt  put  two  stones  on  s.  of  ephod,  39.  7.
Num.  7.  9.  sons  of  Kohath  should  bear  on  their  s.
Deut.  33.12.  and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  s.
Judg.  16.  3.  Samson  took  bar  and  all  put  upon  his  s
1  Earn.  9-  2.  from  his  s.  and  upward  higher,  10.  23.
17-  6.  he  had  a  target  of  brass  between  his  s.

1  Chron.  15.  15.  the  Levites  bare  the  ark  on  their  s.

2  Chron.  35.  3  it  shall  not  be  a  burden  upon  your  s.
Isa.  11.  14.  but  they  shall  flv  on  the  a.  of  Philistines

14.  25.  and  his  burden  uc^ai't  finm  off  their  s.

30.  6.  w  ill  carry  riches  upon  the  s.  of  young  asses-

49.  22.  thy  daughters  shall  be  carried  upon  their#.
Ezek.  12.  6.  in  their  sight  shall  bear  it  upon  thy  s.
Mat.  23. 4-  they  bind  burdens,  lay  them  on  men’s  #

SHOUT,  Substantive.

Num.  23.  21.  and  the  s.  of  a  king  is  among  them
Josh.  6.  5.  the  people  shouted  with  a  great  #.  20.

1  .Saw.  4.  5.  with  a  great  #.  so  that  the  earth  rang
6.  what  meaneth  the  noise  of  this  great  #.  ?

2  Chron.  13.  15.  then  the  men  of  Judah  gave  a  #.
Ezra  3.  11.  with  a  great  #.  when  they  praised  Lord

13.  could  not  discern  the  #.  of  joy  from  weeping
Psal.  47.  5.  God  is  gone  up  with  s.  Lord  with  sound
Jer.  25.  30.  Lord  shall  give  a  #.  as  they  tread  grapes

51.  14.  they  shall  lift  a#,  against  Babylon
Acts  12.  22.  the  people  gave  s.  saying  \  oice  of  a  God
1  Thess  A.  16.  L.  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a#.
SHOUT.

Exod.  32.  18.  is  not  voice  of  them  that#,  for  mastery
Josh.  6.  5.  when  ye  hear  trumpet,  all  people  shall  #.

10.  shall  not#,  till  1  bid  you  #.  then  shall  ye  #.

16.  #.  for  the  Lord  hath  given  you  the  city
Psal.  47.  1.  #.  unto  God  with  the  voice  of  triumph
Isa.  12.  6.  cry  out  and  #.  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion

42.  11.  let  them  #.  from  the  top  of  the  mountains
44.  23.  #.  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  break  forth
Jer.  31.  7.  sing  and  #.  among  chief  of  the  nations

50.  15.  Babylon  had  sinned,  ag.  her  round  abou
Earn.  3.  8.  when  l  #.  he  shutteth  out  rny  prayer
Zeph.  3.  14.  #.  O  Israel,  be  glad  with  all  the  heart
Zech.  9.  9.  #.  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  king  cometh

SHOUTED.

Exod.  32.  17.  as  they  #.  he  said,  there  is  a  noise
Lev.  9.  24.  when  the  fire  consumed,  they  #.  and  fell
Josh.  6.  20.  so  the  people  #.  when  the  priests  blew
Judg.  15.  14.  the  Philistines  #.  against  Samson

1  Sam.  4.  5.  all  lsr.  #.  with  great  shout.because  of  ark

10.  24.  the  people  #.  and  said,  God  save  the  king

17.  20.  as  the  host  was  going  forth  and  #.  for  battle

52.  the  men  of  Israel  and  Judah  #.  and  pursued

2  Chron.  13.  15.  as  Judah  s.  God  smote  Jeroboam
Ezra  3.  11.  when  they  praised  the  Lord,  they  #.

12.  many  of  the  people  #.  aloud  foi  joy,  13.

See  Joy.

SHOUT  ETIl.

Psal.  78.  65.  likeamighty  man  that#,  by  reason  ot

wine


SHOUTING.

2  Sam.  6.  15.  brought  up  ark  with  #.  1  Chron.  15.  28.
2  Chron.  15.  14.  they  sware  to  the  Lord  with  #.

Job  39-  25.  hesmelleth  the  battle  and  #.  afar  off
Prov.  11.  10.  when  the  wicked  perish,  there  is#.
I,a.  16.  9.  the#,  for  summer-fruits  is  fallen,  10.

Jer.  20.  16.  let  them  hear  the  #.  at  noon-tide
48.  33.  none  shall  tread  with  #.  their  v.  shall  be  no  s
Ezek.  21.  22.  to  lift  up  the  voice  with  #.  to  appoint-
Amos  1.  14.  afire  shall  devour  Rabb.ih  with  #.

2.  2.  Moab  shall  die  with  tumult,  #.  and  trumpet
SHOUTINGS.

Zech.  4.  7.  he  shall  bring  forth  head-stone  with  #.
SHOWER.

Ezek.  13.  11.  there  shall  be  an  overflowing  #.  13.

34.  26.  I  will  cause  #.  to  come  down  in  his  season.
Luke  12.  54.  straightway  ye  say  there  cometh  a.  s


S  H  U

_  SHOWER,1.

my  speecl1  sllal1  disti.  as  s.  on  the  grass

pl/4fis8'i  !e,f)0Wr  anLwet  ^lth  '•  of ,he  mountains
*-!o  J?'  ld‘  u  nU  makest  the  earth  soit  with  a.

?-  p-  king  shall  come  like  s.  that  water  the  earth
an  3-  therefore  the  a.  have  been  withholden
can  cause  ram,  or  can  the  heavens  give  a.  ?
k*ek.Z\.  20.  in  Ins  season  shall  he  a.  of  blessing
fjf;  5\J-  jemnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  as  a.  on  grass
■Zech.  10.  1.  the  Lord  shall  give  them  a.  of  rain
SHRANK.

Wn.  .32.  32.  therefore  Israel  eat  not  of  sinew  that  j.
.  .. .  S  rl  R.  L 13 .

Y  KtngsA.  39.  came  and  s.  wild  gourds  into  pottage
SCREECH-OWL.

Isa.  34. 14.  a.  also  shall  rest  there  and  find  for  herself
SH  H  1 N  ES.

Acts  19. 24.  Demetrius  whomade  silver  a.  for  Diana

E~ek.  31. 3.  Assy  rian  was  a  cedar  with  shadowin®  s
_  „  SH  HUBS.

Oew.  .1. 15.  Hagar  cast  the  child  under  oneof  the  s.
SH  UN.

2  J  tm.  2.  16.  hut  s.  profane  and  vain  babblings
_  SHUNNED.

Acts  20.  27-  1  have  not  s.  the  whole  counsel  of  God
„  SI  I  L  I ,  Actively ,  Passively.

vni  7V,16,  ?ient  a11  flesh,  the  l.ord  t.  him  in
a  ""'  ,14’  3-  the  Wilderness  hath  a.  them  in

14'  et  ler  he  .'.out  from  camp  seven  days
oa  *  «  fu3111  was  /  0l,lt  h,r?m  the  camp  seven  days
isV  .  ,v‘ie  1111111  who  had  his  eyes  s.  but  now  open
j  e,}f’}GJ  \aor  s.  thy  hand  from  thy  poor  brother
A  os  A.  2.  7.  they  s.  the  gate  of  Jericho

n  3lJ  was  s  of  his  right  hand

A51,  ‘hey  s  the  tower  to  them,  and  gat  them  up
Atp a  7 i  for  16  lsf- m-hy  entering  into  a  town

p  i  <i3d4?= 1  commanded  gates  to  be  s.  till  after  sab.

T  a  ,A15-  if1  not  s>  her  mouth  upon  me

oo'  on  i,  '  ‘JW1  eyes,  lest  they  see  with  their  eyes
2y keL  °  , I)av-  on  his  shoulder,  so  he  shall  open
iiaDi«  f0neA  a'  he  shall  .(.and  none  shall  open
44.  18.  for  he  hath  s.  then*  eyes,  they  cannot  see
ig-  }i  to  °Pen  before  him,  and  gates  shall  not  be  a.
Y2-  \5-  me  kings  shall  s.  their  mouths  at  him
«  n  'Ilr?tes  shall  not  be  a.  day  nor  night
66.  9.  shall  I  s.  the  womb,  saith  thv  God  '

ai  i  3‘2*4'  SFirl‘  ?ald- s-  thys.  within  thine  house
44.  1 .  gate  wind!  looktih  toward  the  east  was  s.
this  gate  shall  be,?.  it  shall  not  be  opened,  God

a*  i  hath  entered  m  by  it,  therefore  it  shall  be  r.

o  ?•  the  gate  shall  be  s.  the  six  working-days
^i^t? -shaU  n°t  he  a.  till  the  evenin®
n2,  «fAhls  gem?  forth,  one  shall  .v.  the  gate
God  hath  s-  ,he  lions’  mouths
f/J?  f*  |3;.  the  prison  truly  found  we  a.  in  safety

oV‘^leSei,h^  e  pTer  tok-  heav.  that  it  rain'not
21.  25.  Bates  shall  not  be  s.  by  day,  no  night  there
See  Door.
r  SH UT  up.

■Lev'  13.  4.  then  the  priest  shall  a.  him  t/pthat  hath
1 1  thoPr7U.e  tev,f n  days,  5>  21  >  26>  31 ,  33,  50,  54.

Ia,  I?Pt,y-  ljim  up'  he  is  unclean
dk  3t8‘  the  priest  shall  s.  vp  the  house  seven  days
46.  he  that  goeth  in  while  the  house  is  s.  vp
wLU-l7-  Pytb  be  kindled,  and  he  a.  vp  heaven
3363when  he1  ‘heir  lock  the  Lord  had  a.  them  up
t„i  1  ,  he  see,th  there  is  none  j.  vp  nor  left
Josh.  o.  l.  now  when  Jericho  wasstraitly  a.  vp

1  ka?h'n'^'  *iie  l°r<ihad  a.  vp  Hannah’s  womb
fP'io  ef^'iISu  t  le  Lord  had  s.  vp  her  womb
17  iifi  tre!?  and  /  VP  their  calves  at  home
ll' t  to'  -n  d.uy  Wl11  the  r  ord  a.  thee  vp
23- t.12-  Wl11  ’he  men  of  Keilah  a.  me  up  ?

Ofila  CJ?  kord  ,lad  s-  me  up  into  thy  hand
~6.  t  8.  God  hath  ,v.  vp  thine  enemy  into  thy  hand

2  18.  +  28.  blessed  be  the  Lord  who  hath  s  up

ithLT^  lT5  tV ere  up  t0  da-v  of  their  death

1  Jvnps  8.-  35.  When  heav.  is up,  2  Chr.  6. 26.  |  7. 13
14.  10.  I  will  cut  off  from  Jeroboam  him  that  is  f

«  v  Pip  and  left  111  Israel.  21.  21.  2  KinosQ  s’

V  Ki7igs  \A.  26.  there  was  not  any  s.  vp  nor  left
17.  4.  therefore  the  king  of  Assyria  ...  him  vp

2  C/iron.28.  24.  Ahaz  r.  up  doors  of  house,  29.  7.
j  ;  A'  L,*-  the  house  of  Shemaiah  who  was.c.  vp
Job  3.  10  because  it  r.  not  up  my  mother’s  womb

Id'  In  pLcuh  ?,fl’  and  f  •  vp,  who  can  hinder  him  ?

.jo  o11-  tJ®d  hdt h  s .  me  vp  to  the  ungodly
38.  8.  or  who  hath  s.  vp  the  sea  with  doors  s

ii!iS  tca,es  are  vp  together  as  a  seal
77  oh’  u  u35-  n0t  s’  me  up  mt0  hand  of  the  enemy
21 ■  Mh  he  ln  angerr.  up  his  tender  mercies  ?

78.  +48.  he  j.  up  also  their  cattle  to  the  hail
A8’ A1  «n  s-  up,  and  1  cannot  come  forth
jfnt\ n  '}l'  3  spr-lng  S\VP>  a  fountain  sealed
os'  to  f  4’  up  lntp  ‘he  hand  of  a  cruel  lord
/bA;  e'eay  nP1156  IS  s:  VP,  no  man  can  come  in

Jef'\ ^'ei QSml  bvf'  Am  the  Pr,ison-  and  be  visited
oo  n’t  -9‘  the  cities  of  the  south  shall  be  s.  up

oo'  o'  iiIS  word  /as  as  fire  s.  up  in  my  bones
?' ‘beA0+PThetfwas^  vpM  Zedekfah,  3.

«'  L  word  of  Lord  came,  while  he  was.?,  up,  .39  15

&&&.'•  A,  cannot  go  to  the  Lord’s  house
M?n\  8-  26  •  *• 7 A  he  y>slon  II  12-  4.  ...  up  the  words
haoe  f’  A  tll0Se  <hat  remain
r  a  '  o  oA3’  y,e,s-  Vp  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men
e  this,  that  he  s.  John^fn priTon
f'le  heaven  was^.  wo  three  years
Acts  £6.  10.  many  saints  did  I  s.  up  in  prison

'V  32'  G,0dhatfh  -V,  them  up  in  ‘unbelief
Rev  in  ;  P  uA  fa!  h  that  should  be  revealed
Aei.  20.  3.  r.  up  thedevjLandset  a  seal  upon  him
T  ,  ,  .  ,  ^H  U  1  1  LI  H.

Prnl if'  Up,a- man’  ‘here  can  be  no  opening
17  oftbefhLt6  fmhl.S  cy.es  to  devise  fro  ward  things
7,1'  t*  ,Vh  n  U,S  I|)S1S  a,man  of  understanding

d  a.  33.  15.  and  j.  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil  b
ir™/  3-„8- also  ^hen  1  cry,  he  j.  out  my  prayer
j/ef'o  2’  ’J' and.  s-  UP  his  bowels  of  compassion
•  I .  i  eneth^no^man  j^and  s.  no  man  openeth

Josh.  2. 5.  about  time  of  s.  the  gate,  men  went  out


S  I  c

/-A7*  i  SHUTTLE.

Job  7-  6-  m>'  da>’S  are  swifter  than  a  wear  er’s  s.

,s.  taken  not  only  for  one  that  is  under  some  hodilv
indisposition ,  as  m  l  Sam.  30.  13  Luke  7  nf

b3  .a,ls0  f°r  iUC,t  us  are  sensible' of  fh, e  burden
of  their  sins,  and  earnestly  desire  to  be  deli

Maf  fS  A  O&rtt

"5SI  r„  j

rA*TBt.rs«

can,  Jo,  the  supporting,  strengthening,  andcom-

Jthe  aorJl  '°Vi'  \  applpinp  t,ie  promises  of
the  go  pel,  and  such  other  means  as  mar  conduce

to  my  relief  ;  for  1  an,  greatly  troubled,  and  in
a  languishing  estate,  for  want  of  all  that  full

.  01  Chris,'s^“  f »

The  efficient  cause  of  sickness  is  God,  Lev.  26
16  Deut.  28.  27,  35,  59,  60,  61.  The  meri-

citeTS,C/m'e  tS  ,Sm’  "S  ,appears  from  the  fore-
cited  places,  where  sickness  and  disease  are

tin  eatened  as  a  punishment  for  sin.  The  instru¬
mental  cause  is  either  Satan,  who  sometimes  is
peimitted  by  God  to  inflict  diseases  upon  per¬
sons,  as  he  did  on  Job,  chap.  2.  6.  7  Or  in

teheVlikaenCeThf.  incontinency,  and

wicked  1  £  '/  AkneSS  V  10  pMiish  the

w  ched,  1  Sam  5.  6.  To  try  the  patience  and

kiah  mor°t  t  ie  9ed,V\  as  ,in  Job  and  Heze-
3  I  11  4  manlfest  the  glory  of  God,  John  9.

Lev' k°tT  f°'d  ASePm’  behold  ‘hy  father  is  j.

/  A1^33- the  law  of  her  that  is  ,y.  of  her  flowers
nevt.  29  +  22.  wherewith  the  Lord  hath  made  it  j


s  1  l)


I4?  mU*  i  r  /  ©cm,  oi jc  baia,  ne  is  .9.

30.  13-  master  left  me,  because  3  days  ago  1  fell

13T  i2;  5- the  Lord  sf“ck  the  chfld,  Tt  was  "
13.  2.  Amnon  was  so  vexed,  he  fell  s.  for  Tamar

1  A7»TakiViiySA  A'iJ1  6u'  Alnnon  made  himself  j.

1  A  mgs  14. 1.  A  bijah  the  son  of  Jeroboam  fell  4-

,2-  w’te  of  Jerob.  cometh  to  ask  for  son,  for  he  is  s

22‘+  RiaAhr  KhlSA  son,°f  the  woman  fell  s.  '

1 3J-  Ahab  said  unto  driver,  carry  me  out,  for  T
n  tt-  am  made  s.  2  Chron.  18.  t  33  |  35  +  on

8  7 T1'.2'^ hiaf,iah,  fel‘  down  «  Samaria,  was3‘
8oo*  ^enhadad  the  kin®  of  Syria  was  j.

29.  Ahaziah  king  of  Judah  went  to  see  Joram  son
,,  1,  Ahab,  because  he  was#.  2  Chron.  22.  6

aw'  5ao  i'8"1  "’f  Ib“k,'Ed'£,?,1:  A"/8]1

kll?g  said,  why  sad,  seeing  thou  art  not  a.

4i‘  3+5i‘  hiwie?  dle/  Zeres-  my  clo‘hing  sackcloth
A  t  L  b  essed  is  he  that  considereth  the  s.

cAnV13.V  2'  ihope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  s.
r3;,o  iley  har'e  8tncken  me,  and  I  was  not  r.
(.ant.  2.  5.  comfort  me  with  apples,  1  am  s.  of  love
5.  8.  1  charge  you,  tell  him  that  1  am  j.  of  love
A'  L. 5.  whole  head  is  s.  and  the  whole  heart  faint
w  o4’  r'e  mhabitant  shall  not  say,  1  am  j.

^i'Ah8'\l  ef  C;  ,ad  b.een  v’  and  was  recovered
nfr-,14-,18-  behold  them  that  are  s.  with  famine

34;i4'  ?,9r  have  -fe  healed  that  which  was  r.
n16'  and  will  strengthen  that  which  was  j.

Daw.  8.  27.  I  Daniel  tainted,  and  was  a.  certain  days
mZ'  fi'  foPrinne? rnade  htm  ^  with  bottles  of  wine
Mai  1 '  p3 '; f V '  'J,,ake  tbee  ^  in  smiting  thee
Mai.  1.  8.  if  ye  offer  the  lame  and  .f.  is  it  rtot  evil  >

13  and  ye  brought  that  torn,  the  lame,  and  the  t.
A4;?4'  ami  they  brought  to  him  all  s.  people

ia  *  hiSuWl  e  s,  m.?t*!er  s-  °t  a  fever,  Mark  1.  30.
lo.  and  healed  all  that  were  s.  14  14

9. 12.  they  that  be  whole  need  not  a  physician,  but

in  p  uy  libat  are/'  Ar*2.  17.  Luke  5.  31.

l  the#,  cleanse  the  lepers,  Luke9.2.  I  10.9
.5.  3&.  1  was  j.  and  ye  visited  me,  1  was  in  prison'
A9;,8*} wwf.fl l'ef  i-Jn  prison  and  came  tofhee?  44.
rw-!  5’  /  '.at  j,le  laid  his  hands  on  a  few  s.  folk
ifibiQbty  ?ld  jbe  s‘  ‘,n  tbe  streets,  Acts  5.  15.
A}8-  lay  bands  on  the  j .  and  they  shall  recover
Aike  7.  centurion  s  servant  was  s.  ami  ready  to  die
T1!0'!  AAd  the  servant  whole  that  had  been  j.
Jo/m4. 46.  a  certain  nobleman’s  son  was.c  at  Caper,
s'  Lazarus  of  Bethany,  was  s.  2

3.  Lord,  behold,  he  whom  thou  Io\est,  is  c
be  had  heard  he  was  s.  he  abode  2  days
taS,Q0‘  3?’  m  those  days  Dorcas  was  j.  and  died

on'  R‘'thefe,trOU8!1nU?r  tb?  ^  handkerchiefs
28-8- ‘be  fatber  of  Publius  lay  t.  of  a  fever

1  97  2J9-  l!tCoUfe  ye  bad  beard  that  he  had  been  r
9  '  A  *ad,eed  be  was  j.  nigh  unto  death

%llmk 4i'  A  but  1  fophimus  have  I  leftat  Miletum  s.

'S  rn/f,'  .  b,1,'11  caI1  elders  of  the  church
15.  prayei  of  faith  shall  save  the  s.  Lord  raise  up
See  Palsy.

•  SICKLY.

1  C or,  11. 30.  for  this  cause  many  are  s.  among:  you
_  .  SICKNESS.

rA  9o3'i2q'LWi11  fak,e  'yaway  from  the  midst  of  thee
^  nian  ,le  a  w°man  having  her  s.
mai1'  15‘  tbe  Lord  will  take  from  thee  all  s.

28.  61.  every  s.  that  is  not  written  in  this  law
1  ,8-'  37.  whatsoever  j.  there  be,  2  Chron.  6.  28.

or/-''  ,  o  /.was  so  sore,  there  was  no  breath  left
9  r)n  9l  01’  Vs  Llisha  sick  of  the  s.  whereof  he  died
»  Chron. ^^1. 15.  thou  shalt  have  great s.  by  disease  of
10  1  •  tlly  bo,w?V;  b>’  reason  of  the  s.  day  by  day
dA  Ins  bowels  tell  out  by  reason  of  his  .(.  so  he  died
41.  3.  thou  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  s.
r  o on'  1  tb  much  sorrow  and  wrath  with  his  s.

10-11*  wilen  fjc^kiah  was  recovered  of  his. c
rj'  eVA„  c  l  m®pff  with  pining  c  from  day  tonight
'mS1  a  ok  "lben  Ephraim  saw  his  s.  J  udah  his  wound
V,  or4’,23-  Jesus  went  about  healingall  manner  of  #.

9.  35.  Jesus  went  about  preaching  and  heal,  every  s.

10.  1.  power  to  heal  all  manner  of  s.  Mark  3.  15.

John  11.  4.  he  said,  this  s.  is  not  unto  death


,,  SICKNESSES.

sore  -t-  and  of  long  continuance
nf  V»ey  sb?  say’  when  they  seethe  s.  L,  laid
Mat.  8.  17.  spoken,  sayin®,  himself  hare  our  s
SICKLE.

Ueut._16.  9.  as  thou  beginnest  to  put  s.  to  the  corn
.  -3.  2o.  not  move  as.  unto  thy  neighbour’s  corn
Jer  50  16.  cut  off  him  that  handleth  s.  in  harvest
•{^3  !3- Put  ye  in  the  .v.  for  the  harvest  is  ripe
Mark  4.  29.  immediately  he  putteth  in  the  s  P
hev.  14.  14.  having  croun,and  in  his  hand  sharp  j
J5.an  angel  crying,  thrust  in  thy  s.  16,  18,  19.

J  i .  another  an^el  came,  he  also  having  a  sharp  s
SIDE.  p

V.en\  G-  tb-  d°or  of  the  ark  shall  set  in  the  f.  thereo.
io0tl,  2,A  her  maidens  walked  along  by  river  s.

<  ■  shalt  strike  blood  on  the  two  s.  posts,  22."

17  ioV  Aen  be  see.fh  blood  on  the  lintel  and  s.  posts
(.  1-.  A ai on  and  II ur  stayed  up  IMoses’  hands,  the
39  9/s16  °iU  tbe  one, -t-  and  the  other  on  the  other  s
32  26.  who  is  on  the  Lord’s  let  him  come  to  me

Lev  1  1VW»II  !"-i|S'f  °rd  by<bis.  'f' g0  in  andput
Vk  Ti 11 )  U  nu  kl11  ‘too-1-  of  altar  northward
lo.  blood  shall  be  w.  ung  out  at  the  a.  of  the  altar

at  9'  V909V0f  s,n  offering  sprinkled  on  a.  of  altar
VmA  Vi'  24'  a  wall  on  this  s.  and  a  wall  on  that  a
•in'  iVi tbey  a ’ m  sPre.ad  as  gardens  by  the  river’s  s'
jf']\  w«  will  not  inherit  on  yonder  a.  Jordan

Vi  9>4'  3  V  fuk  lrotV  °?e,  s'  of  heaven  to  the  other
j  V  26,'nP,Ut  re  book  of  the  law  in  a.  of  the  ark
judg.  19.1.  a  Levite  sojourned  on  a.  of  Ephraim  18
1  -V/„.4  18.  tell  backward  by  the  a.  of  the  gate

l',VUItd!Tim.1CeAac°ffer  by  the  A.  of  tile  ark
2i’:20/  ‘will  shoot  three  arrows  on  the  a.  thereof
9  2b-  ‘he  king  sat,  and  A  bner  sat  by  Saul’s  a
~£aZ'  2f16,;and  thrust  bis  sword  into  his  fellow’s  a
it  s  sons  came  by  way  of  the  hill  r.'

21A-t«Voh  SeiiWunt  amng  ?n  ■ he  hil,’s  f-  against
7  Ljngs  9.  32.  Jehu  said,  who  is  on  my  a.  wJ10  '

1  Chron.  12.  18. .thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy,.
a ‘J-42-  having  Judah  and  Benjamin  on  his  a
Ae/i.  4.  18.  every  one  had  his  sword  girded  bv  his  s'
J.°h  1B;  12-  and  destruction  shall  be  ready  at  Lis V."

Vl7't  10UiSand  sbal1  fal1  at  ‘by  f-  ten  thous*
}‘8-  b-  ’he  Lord  is  on  my  a.  1  will  not  fear

^  n°t  been  the  Lord  on  our  s  2
1*  *°un  *  le  fY0/  the!r  oppressors  was  power
fe/j'  r'  ly  da,u5b,er!  shall  be  nursed  at  thy  a.
Lzek  4. 8.  thou  shalt  not  turn  from  one  a.  to  another
9.  the  number  pt  days  thou  shalt  lie  upon  thy T
ok  2A  ^Itb-M  writer  s  ink  horn  by  his  s.  3. 11.

9i'  V w  1  1  °Pen ’he  a.  of  Moab  from  the  cities
iy4- 2V  because  ye  have  thrust  with  a.  and  shoulder
Uan.  J.  5.  and  it  raised  up  itself  on  one  a.  three  ribs
shall  not  stand  on  his  a.  nor  be  for  him
Joh7}’  ‘8-  the  two  thieves,  on  either  a.  one

»n  '«riUi°ni,O  SO  Itrs  with  aspear  pierced  his  a.

20.  20.  he  shewed  unto  them  his  hands  and  liis  a
except  I  thrust  my  hand  into  a.  will  not  believe
n 27 •  reach  thy  hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  s

i  q2'  7 •  aFel  S/P0,e  Peter  on  the  A.'raised  him  up
16.  13.  on  the  sabbath  we  went  out  by  a  river  ,  P
Lev.  22.  2.  on  either  a.  of  river  was  the  tree  of  life
See  Chambers,
at  t  Every  SIDE.

JvZ  46i87'hfr°m  tabernacle  of  Abiram  on  every,.
Judg.  7.  18.  blow  ve  tbe  trumpets  on  every  s.  V

8;,3±rermem.Vered  no“.he  Lord,  who  had  delivered
them  [rom  their  enemies  on  every  s.  l  Sam.  12.  11
j  7- Saul  fp.oghtag.  enemies  on  every  s .

1  4  fh/  i  ham  wblch  vvere  about  him  on  every  a.

,  i'0,;d  bath  given  me  rest  on  every  s.

o  CA™«2'J8-  bath  he  not  given  you  rest  on  every  s.

~/ooo,/A'  id  bf  ba,fh  g-'yet?  us  rest  oo  every  a.

32' 22- thus  the  Lord  guided  them  on  every  s.

Job  l  io.  put  an  hedge  about  all  he  hath  on  every  s
io'  in'  ,‘elT01"  shal  1  mal<e  him  afraid  on  every  SV  '
,]y-,10- he  hath  destroyed  me  on  every s.  1  am  ®on«
Da«7  12  8.  the  wicked  walk  on  every  s.  while
13‘  fear, \v,as  V11  efer,y,l  while  they  took  counsel
7,'  oC  find  ‘Ve  mle  ''ills  rejoice  on  every  s .

71.  21.  thou  shalt  comfort  me  on  every  s.

Jer.  6.  25.  tear  is  on  every  s.  20.  10.  |  4Q  °g

VV  33‘  ‘.hat  they  may  come  to'thee'on  every,.

In  ok  i  H.at'ons  set  against  him  on  every  s.

9q'  9®'  -  wjl1  bring  them  against  thee  on  every  ,.

A3’.(Iudg,ed  by  the  sword  upon  her  on  every  ,.

36.  3.  they  have  swallowed  you  up  on  every  s.
qo’  Sa!  h  Lord,  1  will  gather  them  on  every  s.

’/gather  yourselves  to  my  sacrifice  on  c,-  ery  s.

Luke  19.43.  enemies  shall  keep  thee  in  on  every  ,.

2  C or.  4.  8.  we  are  troubled  on  every  s.  7.  5
Farther  SIDE.

Mark  10. 1.  .Tesuscame  by  the  farther  s.  of  Jordan
See  Left.

„  On  this  SIDE.

Trod.  37.  8.  one  cherub  on  this  s.  other  on  that  a.
TJ1'3!  b'ought  quails  a  day’s  journey  on  this,.

So'  a  wall  being  on  this  s.  and  on  that  side
3|-  }9.  inheritance  on  this s.  Jordan,  32.  |  34.  15
35.  14.  three  cities  of  refuge  on  this  s.  Jordan

Jo&  22isom,e  ow, t/ns  of  Ai,  and  some  on  that
33.  Israel  and  judges  stood  on  this  s.  the  ark
2c'  2f*  lf  1  say’ ,lle  arrows  are  on  this  s.
r3.  *6.  Saul  went  on  this  s.  of  the  mountain
h.zia  4.16.  shalt  have  no  portion  on  this  a.  the  river
5.  3.  governor  on  this  s.  the  river,  6.  |  6. 13. 1  8  36
i\eh.  3.  7.  to  throne  of  (he  governor  on  this  a.  river
,n  m'  23-  every  one  had  two  wings,  on  this  s.

40.  39.  were  two  tables  on  this  s.  and  two  on  that
,»--,>,0ur  .  le.s  °n  this  s.  four  tables  on  that  side

n7'  1^9°c  bunk  of  riv,er  onthis  s-  shall  grow  trees
Dan  12  5.  there  stood  other  two,  the  one  on  this s.

Zech.  5.3.  every  one  that  stealeth  shall  be  cut  off  as
on  this  s.  every  one  that  sweareth,  on  that  side
r  ,  On  other  SIDE.

Josh.  24  2  your  fathers  d  welt  on  other  s.  the  flood

1  Sam.  14. 40.  I  and  Jonathan  will  be  on  (he  other  a„

2  Kings  3.  2*.  saw  water  on  other  a.  as  red  as  bloo<5
?‘7”;9- 19.  twelve  lions  stood  cwone  and  others
(  oad.  n  on  the  day  thou  stoodesf  on  the  others.

John  o.  «.5.  had  found  him  on  the  other  s.  of  the  sea

4-13


S  1  G


S  1  G


*


3.


S  I  G

Right  SIDE.

I  Kings  6.  8.  door  tor  middle  chamber  was  on  r.  s.

7.  39.  put  five  bases  on  the  right  s.  the  house  ;  se.t
the  sea  on  the  right  s.  the  house,  2  Chron.  4.  10.
49.  five  candlesticks  on  the  right  s.  2  C /iron.  4.8.
Ezek.  1.  10.  had  the  face  of  a  lion  onthenyAl  ?•

4.  6.  lie  again  on  thy  right  s.  and  shalt  bear
47. 1.  from  under  right  s.  ot  house  ran  waters,  i.
Zech.  4.  3.  olive-trees,  one  on  right  s.  the  bow  ,11.
Mark  16.  5.  saw  young  man  on  rights,  ot  sepulchre
Luke  1.  11.  angel  standing  on  rights,  ot  the  altar
John  21.  6.  cast  the  net  on  the  right  s.  ot  the  ship
See  Sea,  Sooth.  Way,  West.

SiDES.  .

Exod.  32.  15.  the  tables  were  written  on  both  ?.
Num.  33.  55.  shall  be  thorns  in  your  ?.  Judg.  2
Josh.  23.  13.  they  shall  be  scourges  in  your  s.

Judg.  5.  30.  a  prey  of  needle-work  on  both  ?.

1  Sam.  24.  3.  David  and  his  men  in  ?.  ot  the  cave

1  Kings  4.  24.  Solom.  had  peace  on  all  s.  round  him
Psal.  48.  2.  beautiful  is  Zion  on  the?.  or  the  north

128.  3.  thy  wife  as  a  fruitful  vine  by  ?.  ot  thy  house
J?a.  14.  13.  I  will  sit  also  in  the  5.  of  the  north
15.  thou  shalt  be  brought  down  to  s.  ot  the  pit
66.  12.  ye  shall  be  borne  upon  her  s.  and  dandled
Jer.  6.  22.  a  great  nation  raised  from  s.  ot  the  earth

48.  28.  maketh  her  nest  in  the  ?.  of  the  holes

49.  32.  1  will  bring  their  calamity  trom  all  ?.
Ezek.  1.  17.  they  went  upon  their  four  ?.  10.11.

32.  23.  whose  graves  are  set  in  the  s.  ot  the  pit
48.  1.  for  these  are  his  .v.east  and  west
Van.  2.  t  32.  his  belly  and  his/,  were  ot  brass
4 mos  6.  10.  say  unto  him  that  is  by  s.  ot  the  house
Jonah  1.  5.  Jonah  was  gone  down  to  j.  ot  ttie  ship
llah.  3.  t  4.  he  had  bright  beams  out  ot  his  s.

S  l  EG  E.

Deut.  20. 19.  shalt  not  cut  to  employ  them  in  the  s.
28.  53,  thou  shalt  eat  thy  children  in  the  s.

55.  because  nothing  left  him  in  the  ?.  57-

2  Chr.  32. 10.  whereon  do  ye  trust,  that  ye  abide  in?..'
~J-a  29  3.  I  will  lay  ?.  against  thee  with  a  mount
Jer.  19.  9.  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  his  triend  in  the  s.
Ezek.  4. 2.  lay  ?.  against  it,  and  build  a  tort,  3.


„  when  title  days  of  the  5.  are  fulfilled
Mic.b.  1.  he  hath  laid  s',  ag.  us,  they  shall  smite
Nah.  3. 14.  draw  thee  waters  for  the  s.  fortify
Zech.  12.  2.  a  cup  of  trembling,  when  in  the  s.
SIEVE.

Isa.  30.  28.  to  sift  the  nations  with  the  ?.  of  vanity
dmos  9.  9.  1  will. sift,  like  as  corn  is  sitted  in  a  s.

SIF  L'.

Isa.  30.  28.  to  s.  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  vanity
Amos  9.  9.  1  will  ?.  Israel  as  corn  is  sifted  in  a  sieve
Luke  22.  31.  Simon,  Satan  hath  desired  to  s.  you
SIGH.

Isa.  24. 7.  wine  mourneth,  all  merry-hearted  do  s.
Lam.  1.  4.  her  priests.?.  II  11.  all  her  people/.

21.  they  have  heard  that  l  s.  none  to  comfort  me
Ezek.  9.  4.  set  a  mark  on  foreheads  ot  men  that  ?.

21.  6.  s.  therefore  with  the  breaking  ot  thy  loins,
and  with  bitterness  ?.  before  their  eyes
SIGHED.

itud.  2.  23.  Israel  ?.  by  reason  of  the  bondage
Mark  7.  34.  and  looking  up  to  heaven,  he  ?.

8.  12.?.  deeply  in  his  spirit,  andsaith,  why  doth
SIGHES1'.

Ezek.  21.7.  when  they  say  to  thee,  wheref.  ?.  thou  ?
SIGlI  EXIT.

Lam.  1.  8.  yea,  she  ?.  and  turneth  backward
SIGHING.

Job  3.24.  my?,  cometli  before  I  eat,  roarings  poured
Psal.  12.  5.  forthe?.  of  the  needy  will  I  arise

31. 10.  my  life  is  spent  with  grief,  my  years  with  ?

79. 11.  let  the  ?.  of  the  prisoner  come  betore  thee
Isa.  21.  2.  all  the  ?.  thereof  have  1  made  to  cease

35.  10.  obtain. joy,  and  sorrow  and  ?.  shall  flee  away
Jer.  45.  3.  I  fainted  in  my  ?.  and  l  find  no  rest
SIGHS.

Lam .  1. 22.  for  my  ?.  are  many,  my  heart  is  faint
SIGH  1’.

Gen.  2.  9.  every  tree  that  is  pleasant  to  the  ?.

Exod.  3.  3.  1  will  now  turn  and  see  this  great?.

24. 17.  ?.  of  glory  of  Lord  was  like  devouring  fire
Lev.  13.  3.  the  plague  in  ?.  he  deeper,  20,  25,  30.

4.  in  ?.  be  not  deeper  than  the  skin,  31,  32,  34.

14.  37.  if  the  plague  in  ?.  be  lower  than  the  wall

Num.  13. 33.  we  saw  the  giants,  and  we  were  in  our
own  ?.  as  grasshoppers,  and  so  we  were  in  their  ?,
27. 19.  before  con»r.  and  give  him  charge  in  their  ?.
Deut.  28.  34.  shalt  be  mad  for  ?.  of  thine  eyes,  67
Josh.  23.  5.  God  shall  drive  them  from  outot  your?
24.  17.  which  did  those  great  signs  in  our  ?

£  Sam.  23.  +  21.  he  slew  an  Egyptian,  a  man  of  ?

1  Kings’] A  4.  and  ?.  was  against  ?.  in  three  ranks

2  Kings  2.  1 7.  fifty  of  sons  of  prophets  stood  in  ?.
Job  18.  3.  why  are  we  reputed  vile  in  your  ?.  ?,

19.  15.  me  for  a  stranger,  I  am  an  alien  in  their  ?
21.  8.  their  seed  is  established  in  their?,  with  them
34.  26.  he  striketh  them  in  the  open  ?.  of  others

'  41.  9.  shall  not  one  be  cast  down  at  the  ?.  of  him  ?
Psal.  79.  10.  be  known  among  the  heathen  in  our?.
Eccl.  6.  9.  better  is  ?.  of  the  eyes  than  wanderin/
Isa.  5.  21.  them  that  are  prudent  in  their  own  ?.

11.  3.  he  shall  not  judge  after  the  ?.  of  his  eyes
Jer.  51. 24.  I  will  render  eviVdone  in  Zion  in  your  ?
Ezek.  4.  12.  thou  shalt  bake  it  with  dung  in  their  ?.

12.  3.  prepare,  and  remove  by  day  in  their  ?.

5.  dig  thou  thro’ the  wall  in  their  ?.  and  carryout

20.  9.  in  whose  ?.  1  made  myself  known  to  them
14.  heathen  in  whose  ?.  1  brought  them  out,  22,
43.  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  you!  own  ?.  36.  31.

21.  23.  shall  be  as  a  false  divination  in  their  ?.

23.  1 16.  at  the  ?.  of  her  eyes  she  doted  on  them

43. 11.  shew  the  forms  thereof,  and  write  in  their  ?.

Dan.  4.  1 1.  ?.  thereof  to  end  of  all  the  earth,  20
8.  +  5.  the  goat  had  a  horn  of?,  between  his  eyes
Mos.  2.  2.  put  away  her  whoredoms  out  of  her  ?.
Mat.  11.  5.  the  blind  receive  their  ?.  the  lame  walk,
the  lepers  are  cleansed,  20.  31.  Luke  7-.  21.
Luke  4.  18.  preach  the  recovering  of  ?.  to  the  blind

23  48.  that  came  to  that  ?.  smote  their  breasts

24  31 .  they  knew  him,  he  vanished  out  of  their  ?.

444


John  9.  11.  I  went  and  washed,  and  1  received  ?.

Acts  1.  9.  and  a  cloud  received  him  out  ot  their  ?.

7.  31.  when  Moses  saw  it,  he  wondered  at  the  ?.

9.  9.  was  three  days  without  ?.  nor  eat  nor  drink
18.  he  received  ?.  forthwith,  arose,  was  baptized
Cor.  5.  7.  for  we  walk  by  faith,  not  by  s.

Heb.  12.  21.  so  terrible  was  the  ?.  that  Moses  said
SIGHT  of  God.

Prov.  3. 4.  find  good  understanding  in  the  ?.  of  God
Luke  16.  15.  is  abomination  in  the  ?.  of  God
Acts  4.  19.  whether  right  in  ?.  of  God  to  hearken

8.  21.  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  ?.  of  God

10.  31.  thy  alms  had  in  remembrance  in  s.  of  God
2  Cor.  2.  17.  in  the  ?.  of  God  speak  we  in  Christ

4.  2.  to  every  man’s  conscience  in  the  ?.  of  God
7.  12.  our  care  for  you  in  ?.  of  God  might  appear
Gal.  3.  11.  no  man  justified  by  the  law  in  ?.  of  God
1  Thess.  1.  3.  remembering  work  ot  faith  in  ?.  of  God
1  Tim.  2.  3.  this  is  good  and  acceptable  in  ?.  oj  God
6.  13.  1  give  thee  charge  in  the  ?.  of  God

1  Pet.  3.  4.  which  is  in  the  ?.  of  God  ot  great  price
His  SIGHT.

Exod.  15.  26.  if  wilt  do  that  which  is  right  in  Ins  s.
Lev.  13.  5.  behold,  if  the  plague  in  hiss,  be  at  astay
37.  but  if  the  scall  be  in  his  s.  at  a  stay
Num.  19.  5.  and  one  shall  burn  the  heiter  in  Ins  s.
Deut.  4. 37.  he  broughtthee  out  in  A*?  ?.  outot  Egypt
Judg.  6.  21.  the  angel  of  Lord  departed  out  of  his  s.

2  Sam.  12.  9-  why  despised  Lord,  to  do  evil  in  his  s.
13.  8.  so  Tamar  went  and  made  cakes  in  his  s.

2  Kings  17. 18.  remove  them  out  of  h.  s.  20,2.3.  1 24. 3.

1  Chron.  19.  13.  the  Lord  do  what  is  good  in  his  s.
Job  15.  15.  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  s.

25.  5.  yea,  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  ?.

40.  4  24.  will  any  take  him  in  his  s.?

Psal.  10.  5.  thy  judgments  are  far  above  out  of  h.  s.
72.  14.  precious  shall  their  blood  be  in  his  s.

Eccl.  2.  26.  God  giveth  to  a  man  that  is  good  in  his  s.

8.  3.  be  not  hasty  to  go  out  of  his  ?.  stand  not  in  evil
IJos.  6.2.  he  will  raise  us,  and  we  shall  live  in  his  ?.
Mark\0. 52.  Bartitneus  immediately  received  hiss.

and  followed  Jesus  in  the  way,  Luke  18.  43.
John  9.  15.  asked  how  he  had  received  his  s.  18.
Acts  9.  12.  a  vision  that  he  might  receive  his  s.

Horn.  3.  20.  by  law  shall  no  fiesh  be  justi.  in  his  s.
Col.  1.  22.  thro’  death  to  present  you  holy  in  hiss.
Heb.  4.  13.  every  creature  is  manifest  in  hiss.

13.  21.  working  what  is  well  pleasing  in  his  s.

1  John  3.  22.  do  those  things  that  are  pleas,  in  hiss.
In  the  SIGHT.

Gen.  21. 11.  the  thing  was  grievous  in  Abraham’s  ?.
47.  115.  there  is  not  ought  left  in  the  s.  ot  my  lord
Exod.  4. 30.  and  did  the  signs  in  the  s.  pf  the  people
7.  20.  he  smote  the  waters  in  the  /.  ot  Pharaoh

9.  8.  Moses  sprinkled  the  ashes  in  the  s.  of  Phar.
11.  3.  Moses  great  in  the  s.  of  Pharaoh’s  servants
17.  6.  Moses  did  so  in  the  s.  of  the  elders  ot  Israel

19.  11.  the  L.  will  come  down  in  the  s.  ot  people
40.  38.  fire  by  night  in  the  s.  of  Israel  all  journeys
Lev.  20.  17.  shalfbe  cutoff  in  the  s.  of  their  people

26.  45.  out  of  Egypt  in  the  s.  of  the  heathen
JS’um.  3.  4.  lthamar  ministered  in  the  s.  of  Aaron
20  .  27.  Aaron  and  Eleazar  went  in  the  s.  of  cong
25.  6.  brought  Midianitish  woman  in  the  s.  of  Mo.

33.  3.  went  with  high  hand  in  the  s.  of  Egyptians
Deut.  4.  6.  for  this  is  your  wisdom  in  the  s.  ot  nations

31.  7.  Moses  said  to  Joshua  in  the  s.  of  all  Israel

34.  12.  terror  Moses  shewed  in  the  s.  of  all  Israel
Josh.  3.  7-  to  magnify  thee  in  the  s.  ot  Israel,  4.  14

10.  12.  he  said,  in  the  s.  of  Israel,  sun,  stand  still

1  Sam.  18.  5.  David  accepted  in  the  s.  of  the  peop

2  Sam.  12.  11.  lie  with  thy  wives  in  the  s.  of  this  sun

1  Chr.  28.  8.  in  the  s.  of  all  Israel  keep  command.
29.  25.  Lord  magnified  Solomon  in  the  s.  ot  Israel

2  Chr.  32.  23.  Hezekiah  magnified  in  s.  of  nations
Ezra  9.  9.  shewed  mercy  in  the  s.  of  kings  of  Persia
Neh.  1.  11.  grant  him  mercy  in  the  s.  ot  this  man
8.  5.  opened  the  hook  in  the  s.  ot  all  the  people
Ps.  78.  12.  marvellous  things  did  he  in  s.  of  fathers

98.  2.  he  openly  shewed  in  the  s.  of  the  heathen
Prov.  1.  17.  in  vain  net  is  spread  in  the  s.  of  any  bird
4.  3.  tender  and  beloved  in  the  s.  of  my  mother
Eccl.  11.  9.  and  walk  in  the  s.  of  thine  eyes
Jer.  19.  10.  break  the  bottle  in  the  ?.  of  the  men

32.  12.  I  gave  the  evidence  in  the  s.  of  Ilanameel
43.  9.  hid  stones  in  the  s.  of  the  men  of  Judah
Ezek.  5. 8.  execute  judgments  in  the  s.  of  the  nations

14.  Jerus.  a  reproach  in  s.  of  all  that  pass  by
16.  41.  judgment  on  thee  in  the  s.  of  many  women

20.  22.  name  not  be  polluted  in  s.  ot  the  heathen
28.  18.  I  will  bring  thee  to  ashes  in  the  s.  of  all

25.  be  sanctified  in  them  in  s.  ot  heathen,  39.  27
36.  34.  lay  desolate  in  the  s.  of  all  them  that  pass
Hos.  2.  10.  1  will  discover  lewd,  in  s.  of  her  lovers
Acts'].  10.  gave  him  wisdom  in  the  ?.  6t  Pharaoh
Rom.  12.  17.  provide  things  honest  in  s.  of  all  men
2  Cor.  2.  t  10.  1  forgave  it  in  the  s.  ot  Christ


Jer.  34.  15.  ye  turned,  and  had  done  right  in  my  $


Ezek.  10.  2.  ?ie  went  in  my  s.  to  fill  his  hand


Rev.  13.  13.  maketh  fire  come  down  in  ?.  ot  men

14.  miracles  he  had  power  to  do  in  s.  of  the  beast

See  Lobo.

My  SIGHT.

Gen.  23.  4.  that  I  may  bury  my  dead  out  of  my  s.  8.
Exod.  33.  12.  thou  hast  found  grace  in  my  ?.  17-

1  Sam.  29.  6.  thy  coming  in  is  good  in  my  s.

9.  1  know  that  thou  art  good  in  my  s.  as  an  angel

2  Sam.  6.  22.  and  l  will  be  base  in  mine  own  ?.

13.  5.  let  Tamar  come,  and  dress  the  meat  in  my  s.

6.  come,  and  make  me  a  couple  of  cakes  in  my  ?.

1  Kings  8.25.  not  fail  thee  a  man  in  my  s.  2  Chr.  6.16.
9.  7.  this  house  which  l  have  hallowed  for  my

name  will  I  cast  out  of  my  s.  2  Chron.  7.  20.
11.  38.  if  thou  wilt  do  that  is  right  in  my  s.

2  Kings  21.15.  have  done  that  which  was  evil  in  my  s.
23.  27.  I  will  remove  Judah  also  out  of  my  s.

1  Chr.  22.  8.  thou  hast  shed  much  blood  in  my  s.
Psal.  101.  7.  that  tell,  lies,  shall  not  tarry  in  my  s.
Isa.  43.  4.  since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  s.

Jer.  4.  1.  will  put  away  abominations  out  of  my  s.
7.  15.  I  will  cast  you  out  of  my  s.  as  your  brethren
30.  the  children  of  Judah  have  done  evii  in  my  s.

15.  1.  cast  them  out  of  my  s.  and  let  them  go
18.  10.  if  it  do  evil  in  my  s.  that  it  obey  not


19.  mounted  up  from  the  earth  in  my  s.

Arnos  9. 3.  be  hid  from  my  s.  in  the  bottom  of  the  sea
Mark  10.  51.  what  wilt  thou  1  should  do  to  thee  !

Lord,  that  1  might  receive  my  s.  Luke  18.  41.
Thy  SIGHT.

Gen.  19.  19.  thy  servant  hath  found  grace  in  thy  s.

21.  12.  God  said,  let  it  not  be  grievous  in  thy  s.

33.  10.  Jacobsaid,  if  I  have  found  grace  in  thy  s.

47  .  29.  Exod.  3.3. 13,  16.  I  34.  9.  Judg.  6.  17.
Lev.  25.  53.  shall  not  rule  with  rigour  in  thy  s.

1  Sam.  15.  17.  when  thou  wast  little  in  thine  own

2  Sam.'].  9.  have  cutoff  thine  enemies  out  of  thy
19.  this  was  yet  a  small  thing  in  thy  s.

14.  22.  knoweth  1  have  found  grace  in  thy  s.

2  Kings  1.  1.3.  let  my  life  be  precious  in  thy  s.  14.

20.  3.  done  what  was  good  in  thy  s.  Isa.  38. 3.

Psal.  5.  5.  the  foolish  shall  not  stand  in  thy  s.

9. 19.  arise.  Lord,  let  heathen  be  judged  in  thy  s.

19.  14.  meditat.  of  my  heart  be  acceptable  in  thy  s.
51.4.  I  have  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  thy  s.

76.  7.  who  may  stand  in  thy  s.  when  thou  art  angry  i
90.  4.  thousand  years  in  thy  s.  are  but  as  yesterday
143.  2.  for  in  thy  s.  shall  no  man  be  justified
Isa.  26.  17.  so  have  we  been' in  thy  s.  O  Lord
Jer.  18.  23.  neither  blot  out  their  sin  from  thy  s.
Jonah  2. 4.  then  1  said,  I  am  cast  out  of  thy  s.

Mat.  1 1 . 26.  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  s.  Luke  10. 21.
Luke  15.21. have  sinned  against  heaven  and  in  thy  s.
18.  42.  Jesus  said  unto  him,  receive  thy  s.

Acts  9.  17.  sent  me  that  thou  mightest  receive  thy  ?.
22.  13.  stood  and  said,  brother  Saul,  receive  thy  s.
See  Favour,  Find.

SIGHTS.

Luke  21.  11.  shall  be  fearful?,  signs  from  heaven
SIGN,

Or  token,  is  taken,  I.  for  any  thing  that  serves  to
express  or  represent  another  thing:  as,  when  the
Lord  gave  to  Noah  the'' rainbow,  as  a  sign  or
token  of  his  covenant,  Gen.  9.  12,  13.  and  when
he  appointed  Abraham  the  use  of  circumcision,
as  the  sign  and  seal  of  the  covenant  he  made  with
him  and  his  posterity,  Gen.  17.  11.  Horn.  4.  11.
Circumcision  was  a  sign,  evidence,  or  assurance,
both  of  the  blessings  promised  by  God, ,  and  of
man's  obligation  to  the  duties  required.  'The  sun
and  moon  are  appointed  by  God  for  signs  and
seasons,  Gen.  1.  14.  They  represent  the  quality
of  the  weather  by  the  manner  of  their  rising  or
setting,  by  their  eclipses,  conjunctions,  %c.  Mat.
16.  2,  3.  Sometimes  they  are  forerunners  of  great
calamities,  and  remarkable  events  in  the  course
of  human  affairs,  by  their  strange  appearances,
unusual  conjunctions,  Use.  Luke  21.  25,  26.  Acts
2.  19  20.

II.  Sign  is  put  for  a  miracle  :  Thou  shalt  take  this
rod  in  thine  hand,  wherewith  thou  shalt  do  signs..
says  the  Lord  to  Moses,  Exod.  4.  17-  and  if  the
Egyptians  do  not  believe  the  first  sign,  they  will
believe  the  second,  Exod.  4.  8.  The  word  sign  is
frequent  in  this  sense  in  scripture.

III.  A  sign  or  token  is  often  put  for  the  proof  or
evidence  of  a  thing:  for  example,  I  his  shall  be  a
token,  or  sign,  unto  thee,  that  1  have  sent  thee,
Exod.  .3.  12.  Shew  me  a  sign  that  thou  talkest
with  me,  that  is,  a  proof,  Judg.  6.  17.  What
shall  be  the  sign,  or  evidence,  that  the  Lord  will
heal  me  ?  2  Kings  20.  8.  This  acceptation  agrees
with  the  first  above  mentioned.

IV.  The  signs  of  heaven;  the  signs  of  the  magi¬
cians  ;  are  the  phenomena  of  the  heavens,  the
motions  of  the  stars  and  planets,  the  appearances
of  meteors,  and  the  like  ;  and  the  impostures  of
magicians,  which  they  make  use  of  to  deceive
the  weak.  The  Lord  frustrated!  the  tokens,  or
signs,  of  the  liars,  and  maketh  diviners  mad,
Isa.  44.  25.  And  in  Jer.  10.  2.  Be  notdismayed
at  the  signs  of  heaven,  for  the  heathen  are  dis¬
mayed  at  them.

To  be  a  sign  to  the  house  of  Israel,  that  is,  to  be  a
prophecy,  type,  or  prediction  of  what  should  happen
to  the  house  of  Israel.  Thus  the  prophet  Ezekiel
by  the  type  of  a  siege  shews  what  should  happen  to
Jerusalem  some  time  after,  Ezek.  4.  3.  And  in
chap.  14.  8.  the  Lord  pours  down  his  vengeance
upon  sinners,  and  makes  them  as  a  sign,  as  a  public
and  sensible  proof ,  oj  his  wrath.  lhe  prophet
Isaiah  says.  Behold,  1  and  the  children  whom
the  Lord  hath  given  me,  are  for  signs  and  tor
wonders  in  Israel,  Isa.  8.  18.  We  are  a  gazing-
stock  to  them ,  and  wondered  at  Jor  our  jolly  in  be-
lieving  the  promises  of  God.

Exod.  4.  8.  if  they  believe  not  nor  hearken  to  v  ace
offirst?.  they  will  believe  the  voice  of  the  latter?.
8.  23. 1  will  put  division,  to-morrow  shall  this  ?.  be
1.3.  9.  it  shall  be  a  s.  to  thee  upon  thine  hand
31.  13.  my  sabbaths  ye  shall  keep,  for  it  is  a?,  be¬
tween  me  and  you,  17.  Ezek.  20.  12,20.
Num.  16.  38.  and  they  shall  be  a.v.  unto  Israel
26.  10.  fire  devoured  them,  and  they  became  a  ?.
Deut.  6.  8.  bind  them  fora?,  on  thy  hand,  11.18.
1.3.  1.  if  there  arise  a  prophet,  and  giveth  thee  a?,
2.  and  ?.  come  to  pass  whereof  he  spake  to  thee
28.  46.  they  shall  be  on  thee  for  a  ?.  and  a  wonder
Josh.  4.  6.  that  this  may  be  a  ?.  among  you  _

Judg.  6.  17.  then  shew  me  a  ?.  thou  talkest  with  n;
20.  38.  was  an  appointed  ?.  between  Israel  and  ners
1  Sam.  2.  34.  this  shall  be  a  ?.  to  thee,  in  one  day
they  shall  die  both  ot  them,  2  Kings  19.  .9.
14.  10.  we  will  go  up,  this  shall  be  a  ?.  unto  us  .

1  Kings  13.  .3.  gave  a  ?.  the  same  day,  saying,  this
is  the  s.  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  altar  shall  be  rent

5.  according  to  the  s.  the  man  of  God  hath  given

2  Kings  20.  8.  what  shall  be  the  ?.  Lord  will  heal
9.  this?,  shall  have  of  L.  Isa.  37  .  30.  I  38.  7>  22.

o  chr  .32.  24.  he  spake  to  him,  he  gave  him  a  ?.

Isa.  7.  1 1.  ask  thee  a  ?.  of  Lord  thy  God,  ask,

14.  L.  himself  shall  give  you  a  ?.  behold  a  virgin

19.  20.  it  shall  be  for  a?,  unto  the  Lord  ot  hosts

20.  .3.  as  Isaiah  hath  walked  bare-foot  tor  a  ?.

55.  13.  it  shall  be  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting  s.


S1L


SIL


S  1  M


/re.66.19.  1  will  set  a  *.  among  them  and  will  send
Jet.  o.  1.  set  u  p  a  *.  of  fire  in  Reth-haccerem
44.  29.  and  this  shall  he  a  *.  to  you,  Luke  2.  12.
Ezek.  4.  3.  this  sh-dl  be  a  *.  to  the  house  of  Israel
12.  6.  I  have  set  thee  for  a  s.  to  Israel,  1 1 .

14.  8. 1  will  make  him  a  s.  a  proverb,  and  cut  off
24.  24.  thus  Ezekiel  is  a*.  ||  27.  thou  shalt  be  a  *.
39.  15.  then  shall  he  set  up  a.?,  by  it  till  buriers
Mat.  12.  38.  savins.  Master  we  would  see  a  *.
from  thee,  16.  1.  Mark 8.  11.  Luke  II.  16.
39.  an  evil  and  adulterous  generation  seeketh
after  a *.  16.  4.  Mark  8.  12.  Luke  1 1 .  29.
there  shall  no  s.  be  given  but  the  x.  of  the  pro¬
phet  donas,  Marks.  12.  Luke  1 1 . 29,  .30.

24.  3.  and  what  shall  be  the  x.  of  thy  coming  ?

30.  then  shall  appear  the  x.  of  the  Son  of  man

26.48.  now  he  that  betrayed  him  gave  them  a  x.
Mark  13.  4.  who'  >.  when  all  these  things  shall  be
Luke  2.  34.  for  a  *.  which  shall  be  spoken  against
John  2.  18.  what*.  she  west  thou  unto  us  ?  6.  30.*
Acts  28.  11.  a  ship,  whose  x.  was  Castor  and  Pollux
Bom.  4.  11.  he  received  of  circumcision,  a  seal

1  Cor.  1.  22.  for  Jews  require  x.  Greeks  seek  wisdom

14.  22.  wherefore  tongues  are*.  not  to  them  that
Rev.  15. 1.  I  saw  another  x.  in  heaven,  seven  angels
SIGN.

Van.  6.  8.  O  king,  establish  decree,  s.  the  writing
SIGNED.

Dan.  6.  9.  wherefore  king  Darius  *.  the  writing
10.  when  Daniel  knew  that  the  writing  was  s.

12.  they  spake,  hast  thou  not  s.  a  decree
SIGNS.

Gen.  1.14.  let  them  bo  for*.  and  for  seasons,  ford  ays
Exod.  4.  9.  if  they  will  not  believe  these  two  s.

17.  with  this  rod  in  thy  hand  thou  shalt  do  s.

28.  Moses  told  Aaron  all  words  of  Lord  and  all*,
which  he  had  commanded,  30.  Josh.  24.  17.
7-  3.  T  will  multiply  my  s.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
10.  2.  mayest  tell  thy  son  my  *.  which  I  have  done
Num.  14  11.  for  all  the  s.  which  1  have  shewed
Dent.  4.  34.  to  take  him  a  nation  by  x.  26.  8.

6.  22.  Lord  shewed  s.  on  Egypt,  on  Pharaoh  and
on  all  his  household,  Nek.  9. 10.  Psal.  78.  43.
7-  19.  the  great  *.  which  thine  eyes  saw,  29.  3.

34.  11.  in  all  s.  which  the  Lord  sent  him  to  do

1  Sam.  10.  7.  when  these  s.  are  come  unto  thee
9^  and  all  those  >■.  came  to  pass  that  day

2  K  ings  23.  +  5.  put  down  them  that  burn  to  twelve  s.
Job  38.  +  32.  canst  thou  bring  forth  the  twelve  s.  ?
Psal.  74.  4.  they  set  up  their  ensigns  for  s.

9-_wesee  not  our/,  there  is  no  more  any  prophet
105.  27.  shewed  his  s.  among  them,  and  wonders
Isa.  8.  18.  behold,  I  and  the  children  are  for  s.

Jer.  10.  2.  be  not  dismayed  at  the.?,  of  heaven
32.  20.  which-hast  set  x.  and  wonders  in  Egypt

21.  hast  brought  forth  Israel  out  of  Egypt  with  s.
Dan.  4.  2.  I  thought  it  good  to  shew  s.  and  wonders

3.  how  great  are  his  s.  ?  how  mighty  his  wonders

6.  27.  he  worketh  s.  in  heaven  and  in  earth
Mat.  16.  3.  can  ye  not  discern  the  s.  of  the  times  ?

24.  24.  there  shall  arise  false  Christs  and  false  pro¬
phets,  and  shall  shew  great  s.  Mark  13.  22.

Mark  16.  17-  these  x.  follow  them  that  believe

20.  confirming  the  word  wifh.v.  following
Luke  1.  62.  they  made  *.  to  his  father  Zachariah

21.  11.  and  great  s.  shall  there  be  from  heaven

25.  there  shall  be  x.  in  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars
John  4.  48.  except  ye  see  *.  ye  will  not  believe

20.  30.  and  many  other  s.  truly  did  Jesus
Acts  2.  19.  I  will  shew  *.  in  the  earth  beneath
.  22.  a  man  approved  of  God  by  s.  which  God  did
43.  many  s.  were  done  by  the  apostles,  5.  12.

4.  30.  that  x.  may  be  done  by  the  name  of  Jesus

7.  36.  after  he  had  shewed  s.  and  wonders  in  Egypt

8.  13.  (hen  Simon  wondered,  beholding  the  s.  done
'  14.  3.  granted  s.  and  wonders  to  be  done  by  hands
Rom.  15.  19.  things  Christ  hath  not  wrought  by  me

through  mighty  *.  and  wonders,  2  Cor.  12.  12.

2  Thesx.  2.  9.  after  the  working  of  Satan,  with  x.

Ileh.  2.  4.  G.  bear,  them  witness  with  s.  and  wond.
SIGNET.

Gen.  38.  18.  give  me  thy  s.  and  thy  staff,  25.

Exod.  28.  11.  with  work  of  an  engraver  on  stone,
like  the  engravings  of  at.  21,  36.  |  39.  14,  30.
Jer.  22.  24.  tho’  Coniah  were  s.  on  my  right  hand
Dan.  6.  17-  the  king  sealer!  it  with  his  own  s.

Hag.  2.23.  I  will  take  thee  and  make  thee  as  a  s.
SIGNETS.

Exod.  39.  6.  onyx-stones  graven  as  s.  are  graven
SIGNIFICANT.

1  Cor.  14.  f  9.  so  you,  except  vou  utter  words  s.

SIGNIFICATION.

1  Cor.  14.  10.  and  none  of  them  without  s.

SIGNIFY.

Acts  21.  26.  to  s.  the  accomplishment  of  the  days
23.  15.  s.  thee  to  chief  captain  that  he  bring  Paul
25.  27-  and  not  to  x.  the  crimes  laid  against  him
1  Pet.  1.  11.  signifying  what  Spirit  in  them  did  s.
SIGNIFIED.

Acts  11.28.  Agabus  s.  there  should  be  dearth
Rev.  1.  1.  s.  it  by  his  angel  to  his  servant  John
SIGN  I  FIFTH.

Heh.  12.  27.  s.  removing  of  those  things  shaken
SIGNIFYING.

John  12.  33.  this  he  said,  *.  by  what  death  he  should
glorify  God,  18.  32.  |  21.  19.
Heh.  9.  8.  the  Holy  Ghost  this  s.  that  the  way
SILENCE.

This  word  does  not  only  signify  the  ordinary  si¬
lence,  or  refraining  from  speaking  ;  hut  -also,  in
the  style  of  the  Hebrews,  it  is  taken  for  to  be
qjuiet,  to  remain  immovable.  Josh.  10.  12,  13.
Sun,  stand  thou  still  upon  Giheon:  Hebrew,  he
silent.  And  the  sun  stood  still,  and  the  moon
stayed,  or  were  silent,  at  the  commandment  of
Joshua.  And  in  Prov.  26.  20.  Where  there  is
no  taleTearer,  the  strife  ceaseth,or  is  silent.  Si¬
lence  is  taken  for  an  entire  ruin  or  destruction,
for  a  total  subjection,  Isa.  15.  1.  Ar  of  Moah  is
laid  waste,  and  brought  to  silence,  or,  is  utterly
destroyed.  Also  in  Jer.  8.  14.  The  Lord  our
God  hath  put  us  to  silence,  or,  has  brought  great


calamities  upon  us.  Silence  is  also  taken  for
death  and  the  grave.  Psal.  94.  17.  Unless  the
Lord  had  been  my  help,  mv  soul  had  almost
dwelt  in  silence.  And  in  "Psal.  115.  17.  The
dead  praise  not  the  Lord,  neither  any  that  go
down  into  silence.  The  prophet  Jeremiah  says.
Let  ns  enter  into  the  defenced  cities,  and  let  us
be  silent  there,  Jer.  8.  14.  Let  vs  hasten  to  some
places  of  strength  to  secure  ourselves,  and  let  us  sit
still,  and  not  say  a  word  to  provoke  so  potent  an
enemy  ax  the  Chaldeans  are.

Job  4.  16.  an  image  was  before  me,  there  was  .r.

29.  21.  men  gave  ear,  and  kept  s.  at  my  counsel
Psal.  31.  18.  let  the  lying  lips  be  put  to  s.

39.  2.  I  was  dumb  with  *.  I  held  my  peace
94.  17.  my  soul  had  almost  dwelt  in  s.

115.  17-  neither  any  that  go  down  into  x.

Isa.  15.  1.  Moab  brought  to  s.  Kir  brought  to  s.
Jer.  8.  14.  the  Lord  our  God  hath  put  us  to  s.

Lam.  3.28.  he  siffeth  alone  and  keepeth  s.  because
Amos  8.  3.  they  shall  cast  them  forth  with  s.

Mat.  22.  .34.  had  heard  he  had  put  Sadducees  to  s.
Acts  HI.  40.  there  was  made  a  great  s.  he  spake
22.  2.  that  he  spake  in  Hebrew,  they  kept  mores’.

1  Tim.  2.  11.  let  woman  learn  in  s.  with  subjection
12.  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to  usurp
authority  over  the  man,  but  to  be  in  s.

1  Pet.  2.  15.  may  put  to  s.  ignorance  of  foolish  men
Rev.  8.  1.  there  was  x.  in  heaven  half  an  hour
See  Keep,  Kept.

_  SILENT.

Josh.  10.  t  12.  he  said,  sun,  be  s.  upon  Gibeon
Judg.  16. +2.  they  were  x.  all  the  night,  saying

1  Sam.  2.9.  the  wicked  shall  be  s.  in  darkness

7. +8.  be  not*.  from  us  from  crying  to  the  Lord

2  Sam.  19.  t  10.  why  are  ve  .9.  in  bringing  king  back  ?

1  Kings  22.  +  3.  Ramoth  is  ours,  be  s.  from  taking  it
Job  13.  +  13.  be  s.  from  me,  that  I  mav  speak
Psal.  22.  2N  cry  in  the  night  season,  ana  am  not  s.
28. 1.  be  not.?,  to  me,  lest  if  thou  be  s.  to  me

30.  12.  my  glory  may  sing  praise  to  thee,  not  be  s.

31.  17.  let  the  wicked  he  s.  in  the  grave

37.  +  7.  be  s.  to  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently
62.  +  1.  truly  my  soul  is  s.  upon  God

65.  f  1.  praise  is  x.  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Zion
Prov.  26.  +  20.  where  no  tale-bearer,  strife  is  x.

Isa.  23.  +  2.  be  s.  still,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle
47.  5.  sit  thou  s.  and  get  thee  into  darkness
Jer.  8. 14.  enter  defenced  cities,  let  us  be  s.  there

38.  +  27.  so  they  were  *.  from  him

Exod.  24.  +  17.  be  s.  make  no  mourning  for  dead
Amos  8.  +3.  they  shall  cast  forth  dead  bodies,  be  s.
Jonah  1.+  11.  that  the  sea  may  be  *.  from  us
4.  +  8.  that  God  prepared  a  s.  east  wind
Hah.  2.  +  20.  be  s.  all  the  earth  before  him
Zeph.  3.  +  17.  he  will  be  s.  in  his  love,  he  will  joy
Zech.  2. 13.  be  s.  O  all  flesh,  before  the  Lord
SILK.

Gen.  41.  +  42.  Pharaoh  arrayed  Joseph  in  vest,  of  s.
Prov.  31 . 22.  her  clothing  is  x.  and  purple
Ezek.  16. 10.  I  girded  thee,  I  covered  thee  with  s.

1.3.  thy  raiment  was  of  *.  and  broidered  work
Rev.  18. 12.  no  man  buveth  her  merchandise  of  s.
SILLY.

Job  5.  2.  and  envy  slayeth  the  x.  one
Hos.  7.11.  F phr.  also  is  like  a  *.  (love  without  heart
2  Tim.  3.  6.  they  who  lead  capt've  s.  women  laden
SILVER.

This  metal  does  not  appear  to  have  been  in  use
before  the  deluge  ;  at  least ,  Moses  says  nothing
of  it  before  that  time,  he  speaks  only  of  the  metals
of  brass  and  iron,  Gen.  4.  22.  But  in  Abra¬
ham's  time  it  wax  become  common,  and  traffic
was  carried  on  with  this  metal.  Gen.  13.  2.  Abra¬
ham  was  very  rich  in  silver  and  in  gold  :  And  he
bought  a  sepulchre  for  his  wife  Sarah  for  four
hundred  shekels  of  silver,  Gen.  23.  15.  This  sil¬
ver  was  not  coined,  according  to  all  appearance,
but  wax  only  in  bars,  or  ingots,  and  in  commerce
it  was  always  weighed.

The  silver  cord,  Eccl.  12.  6.  Py  this  Commen¬
tators  generally  understand  the  pith,  or  marrow
of  the  back-bone,  which  comes  from  the  brain,
and  thence  goeth  down  to  the  very  lowest  end  of
the  back  bone,  together  with  the  nerves  and  sinews,
which,  as  anatomists  observe,  are  nothing  else
but  the  production  and  continuation  of  the  mar¬
row.  And  this  is  aptly  compared  to  a  cord,
both  for  its  figure,  which  is  very  long  and  round,
and  for  its  use,  which  is  to  draw  and  move  the
parts  of  the  body  ;  and  it  is  compared  to  silver,
both  for  its  excellency  and  colour,  which  is  white
and  bright,  even  in  a  dead,  and  much  more  in  a
living  body.

Gen.  23. 15.  the  land  is  worth  400  shekels  of  *.

16.  and  Abraham  weighed  400  shekels  of  s.

Exod.  20.  23.  ve  shall  not  make  gods  of  *.  or  gold
26. 19.  sockets  of  f.  21 , 25,  32.  I  36.  24,  26,  30,  36.

27.  17-  tlieir  hooks  shall  be  of  x.  38.  19.

35.  24.  they  did  offer  an  offering  of  s.  and  of  brass
38.  25.  x.  of  them  that  were  numbered  of  eongreg.

Lev.  5.  15.  rani  with  thy  estimation  by  shekels  of  *.

27.  3.  thy  estimation  of  male  50  shekels  of  s.

27.  6.  of  male  five,  of  female  three  shekels  of  s.

16.  an  homer  of  barley'  seed  at  fifty  shekels  of  s.
Num.  7. 13.  his  offeringsvas  one  s.  charger,  19,  25.

31, 37. 43,  49,55.  61, 67,  73, 79.  one  s.  bowl  of
70  shekels,  19,  25,  31 , 37, 4.3,  <Vc.

84.  twelve  chargers  of  x.  twelve  x.  bowls

85.  each  charger  of  s.  weighing  130  shekels
10.2.  make  thee  two  trumpets  of*.  for  the  calling

of  the  assembly,  and  journeying  of  the  camps
Dent. ‘IQ.  19;  shall  amerce  him  in  100 shekels  of  s.

29.  shall  give  to  damsel’s  father  50  shekels  of  s.

Josh.  7.  21.  I  saw  200  shekels  of  s.  then  I  coveted
22.  was  hid  in  his  tent,  and  the  x.  under  it,  24.

Judg.  17.2.  1100  shekels  of  s.  that  were  taken  from
'thee,  behold,  the  s.  is  with  me,  I  took  it
3.  when  he  had  restored  the  x.  ||  4.  took  the  s.

10.  I  will  give  thee  ten  shekels  of  s.  by  the  year

1  Sam.  9. 8.  at  hand  fourth  part  of  a  shekel  of  s.

2  Sam.  18. 11.  I  would  have  given  10  shekels  ot


2  Sam.  18.  12.  tho’  1  should  receive  1000  shekels  of*
24.  24.  bought  flour  and  oxen  for  50  shekels  of  *.

1  Kings  10.  21.  none  were  of  s.  2  Chron.  9.  20.

27.  king  made  s.  to  be  in  Jerusalem  as  stones

20.  39.  else  thou  shalt  pay  a  talent  of  s.

2  Kings  5.  22.  give  them,  I  pray  thee,  a  talent  of  *

15.  20.  exacted  ot  each  man  fifty  shekels  of  ,v.

18.  15.  Ilezekiah  gave  him  all  *,  that  was  found

22.  4.  that  Hilkiah  may  sum  the*,  brought

1  Chron.  28.  14.  s.  of  all  instruments  of*.  20.  2,  5.

15.  for  candlesticks  of*.  ||  17.  for  basins  of  *.

2 Chron.  17.  11.  brought  Jehoshaphat  presents  of*.
Neh.  5.  15.  former  gover.  had  taken  40  shekels  of  *.
Job  3.  15.  with  princes  who  filled  houses  with  *.
22.25.  thy  defence,  thou  shalt  have  plenty  of*.

27.  16.  tho’  he  heap  up  *.  as  the  dust,  and  raiment
17.  and  the  innocent  shall  divide  the  *.

28.  15.  nor  shall  *.  be  weighed  for  price  of  wisdom
Psal.  12.  6.  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure,  as  *.  tried
66.  10.  for  thou,  O  God,  hast  tried  us,  as  *.  is  tried
Prov.  2.4.  if  seekest  her  as  *.  and  searchest  for  her
3.  14.  merchandise  of  wisdom  is  better  than  of*.
8.  10.  receive  my  instruction,  and  not  *.

19.  and  my  revenue  than  choice  *.

10.  20.  the  tongue  of  the  just  is  as  choice  *.

16.  16.  to  get  understanding  chosen  rather  than  *.

17.  3.  fining-pot  is  for  *.  and  the  furnace  for  g>  Id
25.  4.  take  away  the  dross  from  the  *.

Eccl. 5.  10.  loveth  *.  shall  not  be  satisfied  with*.
Cant.  8.  9.  we  will  build  on  her  a  palace  of*.

Isa.  1.  22.  thy  *.  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  mixed
30.  22.  shall  defile  covering  of  thy  images  of*

48.  10.  behold  1  have  refined  thee,  but  not  with*.
60.  17.  for  iron  I  will  bring  *.  and  for  wood  brass
Jer.  6.  30.  reprobate  *.  shall  men  call  them
10.  9.  *.  spread  into  plates  is  brought  from  Tarshish
32.  9. ‘I  weighed  him  even  seventeen  shekels  of*.
Ezek.  22.  18.  Israel  they  are  even  the  dross  of*.

20.  as  they  gather  *.  brass,  and  iron,  and  lead

22.  as*,  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace
27.  12.  with  *.  Tarshish  traded  in  thy  fairs

Dan.  2.  32.  this  image’s  breast  and  arms  were  of  *.
Hos.  9.  6.  pleasant  places  for  *.  nettles  shall  possess
13.  2.  they  made  them  molten  images  of  their  *.
Amos  2.  6.  because  they  sold  the  righteous  for  *.

8.  6.  that  we  may  buy  poor  for  *.  and  the  needy
Zeph.  1.11.  howl,  all  they  that  bear*,  are  cut  off
Zech.  9.  3.  Tyrus  heaped  up  *.  as  dust  and  fine  gold
13.  9.  and  1  will  refine  them  as  *.  is  refined
Mai.  3.  3.  he  shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of*.
See  Fillets,  Gold,  Pieces.

SI  LVERL1NGS.

Isa.  7.  23.  there  w'ere  thousand  vines  at  thousand  .s.
SILVER  smith.

Acts  19.  24.  Demetrius  a  *.  smith  made  shrines
Talents  of  SILVER.

1  K  ings  16.  24.  bought  hill  Samaria  for  two  tal.  of  s.

2  Kings  5.  5.  Naaman  took  with  him  ten  tal.  of  s.

23.  and  bound  two  talents  of  s.  into  two  bags

15.  19.  Menahem  gave  Pul  1000  talents  of  s.

1  Chron.  19.  6.  Hanun  sent  1000  talents  of  s.

22.  14.  I  prepared  a  thousand  thousand  talents  of  s.
29.  4.  and  seven  thousand  talents  of  refined  *.

2  Chr.  25.6.  hired  mighty  men  for  100  talents  of  s.
27.  5.  Ammon  gave  .lot ham  100  talents  of  s.

36.  3.  condemned  land  in  100  talents  of  s.

Ezra  7.  22.  I  decree  it  be  done  to  100  talents  of  s.

8.  26.  1  weighed  to  their  hand  650  talents  of  s\

Esth.  3.  9.  I  will  pay  ten  thousand  talents  of  s.
Vessels  of  SILVER.

Num..  7.  85.  all  the  *.  vessels  weighed  2400  shekels
2  Sam.  8.  10.  Joram  brought  w  ith  him  vessels  of  s.

1  Rings  10.  25.  every  man  his  present,  vessels  of  s.

2  Kings  12.  13.  there  were  not  made  vessels  of  s.

1  Chron.  18.  10.  and  with  him  all  manner  of  vessels

of  x.  gold  and  brass,  2  Chron.  24. 14.
Ezra  1.  6.  strengthened  their  hands  with  ves.  ofs.  11.

5.  14.  vessels  of  gold  and  *.  of  the  house  of  God,

which  Nebuchadnezzar  took

6.  5.  let  the  golden  and  *.  vessels  be  restored
8.  26.  I  w-eighed  *.  vessels  an  hundred  talents

Dan.  5.  2.  commanded  to  bring  golden  and  *.  \ess.
11.  8.  carry  with  their  precious  re*,  of  s.  and  gold
SILVER.

GenAk.2.  put  my  *.  cup  in  sack’s  mouth  of  youngest
Prov.  26.  23.  like  a  potsherd  covered  with  *.  dross
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  ever*,  cord  be  loosed  or  bowl  broken
Isa.  40. 19.  the  goldsmith  casteth  *.  chains
Mat.  27.  6.  the  chief  priests  took  the  *.  pieces
Acts  19.  24.  Demetrius  made  *.  shrines  for  Diana
See  Vessels  just  before.
SIMILITUDE.

Num.  12.  8.  the  *.  of  the  Lord  shall  be  behold
Dent.  4.12.  ye  heard  voice  of  words,  but  saw  no*.  15.

16.  lest  ye  make  you  the*,  of  any  figure

2  Chron.  4.  3.  under  it  was*,  of  oxen  round  about
Psal.  106.  20.  changed  their  glory  into  *.  of  an  ox

144.  12.  corner  stones  polished  after  *.  of  a  palace
Dan.  10.  16.  one  like  the  *.  of  the  sons  of  men
Rom.  5.  14.  after  the  *.  of  Adam’s  transgression
Heb.  7.  15.  after*,  of  Melchisedec  ariseth  a  priest
Jam.  3.  9.  men  w  ho  are  made  after  the  *.  of  God
SIMILITUDES.

Hos.  12.  10.  I  have  used  *.  by  ministry  of  prophets
SIMPLE

Is  taken,  [1]  For  one  who  is  harmless,  innocent,  and
free  from  deceit,  Rom.  16.  19.  St.  Paul  would
have  the  Romans  be  wise  unto  that  which  is  good,
and  simple  concerning  evil  ;  that  is,  discerning
in  the  choice  of  good,  to  distinguish  the  good  from
the  bad  doctrine  ;  but  they  must  avoid  whatever
has  the  appearance  of  evil  as  children  who,  with¬
out  much  reasoning,  Jly  from  every  thing  that
does  but  seem  hurtful  to  them  :  he  would  have  them
so  innocent  as  not  to  deceive,  and  yet  so  prudent
as  not  to  be  deceived.  [2]  For  such  as  are
ignorant,  weak,  and  subject  to  delusion,  yet
sincere  and  willing  to  be  taught  ■  such  simple
ones  are  invited  to  Wisdom's  feast ;  and  are
opposed  to  such  as  are  proud  and  self-conceited,
Prov.  9.  4.  Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in
hither.  [3]  Simple  is  taken  for  a  silly,  foolish


S  I  N


S  I  N


SIN


• redulous  man,  who  is  easily  deceived  with  the
smooth  words  and  fair  pretences  of  false  and  de¬
ceitful  men,  Prow  14.  15.  I  he  si nple  beheveth
every  word  ;  and  this  simple  man  is  opposed  to
the  prudent  man,  who  looketh  well  to  his  goings  ,
who  not  only  orders  his  conversation  and  dealings
in  the  world  with  due  circumspection,  hut  also
judges  of  the  words  and  professions  oj  otheis  by
their  conversations.  [4]  It  is  taken  for  ignorant,
easy,  and  credulous  persons,  who  are  soon  cheated
by  the  world  and  the  devil,  and  who  do  not  under¬
stand  their  own  interest,  but  persist  in  their  sinful
courses.  Prow  22.  3.  But  the  simple  pass  on,  and
are  punished.  Simple  here  is  opposed  to  the  wise
and  prudent  man,  who  foreseeing  the  calamity  or
judgment  of  God  threatened,  does  by  prayer  and
repentance  put  himself  under  the  protection  of  the
Almighty.  [5]  Simplicity  is  sometimes  taken  for
fidelity  and  liberality.  Rom.  12.  8.  He  that  giv-
eth,  let  him  do  it  with  simplicity.  He  that  dis¬
tributes  the  church's  stock  to  the  poor,  let  hint  do  it
faithfully,  without  fraud  ;  impartially ,  not  for
favour  or  affection  ;  gently,  without  fierceness  ;  and
liberally,  according  to  every  one's  necessity.

Psal.  19.  7.  the  law  of  the  Lord  making  wise  the  s.
116.  6.  Lord  preserveth  the  s.  1  was  brought  low
119.  130.  it  giveth  understanding  to  the  s.

Rrov.  1.  4.  to  give  subtilty  to*.  to  young  knowledge
22.  how  long,  ye  s.  ones,  will  ye  love  simplicity
32.  the  turning  away  of  the  *.  shall  slay  them
7. 7.  1  beheld  among  the  *.  ones  a  young  man

8.  5.  O  ye*,  understand  wisdom,  and  ye  tools

9.  4.  whoso  is  s.  let  him  turn  in  hither,  16.

13.  a  foolish  woman  is  *.  and  knoweth  nothing
14.  15.  s.  believeth  every  word,  but  prudent  man

18.  *.  inherit  folly  11 19.25.  the  *.  will  beware
21.  11.  the  scorner  is  punished,  the  *.  made  wise
22.3.  the  *.  pass  on  and  are  punished,  27-  12.

Ezek.  45.  20.  so  thou  shalt  do  for  him  that  is  *.

Rom.  16.  18.  by  fair  speeches  deceive  hearts  of  *.

19.  have  you  wise  to  good,  and  *.  concerning  evil

SIMPLICITY.

2  Sam.  15.  11.  they  went  in  their  *.  and  knew  not
Yrov.  1.  22.  how  long, simple  ones,  will  ye  love*. ?
Horn.  12.  8.  he  that  giveth,  let  him  do  it  with  *.

2  Cor.  1.  12.  in  *.  we  had  our  conversation  in  world
11.  3.  be  corrupted  from  the  *.  that  is  in  Christ
SIN

Is  any  thought,  word,  action ,  omission,  or  desire,
contrary  to  the  law  of  God.  Sin  is  any  w  ant  of
conformity  to,  or  transgression  of  the  law,  1  John
3.  4.  It  is  taken,  [1]  For  original  corruption,  or
the  depravity  and  naughtiness  of  our  corrupt  na¬
ture,  which  is  prone  to  all  evil.  Psal.  51.  5.  Be¬
hold,  1  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did
my  mother  conceive  me.  Rom.  7-  8.  Sin  taking
occasion  by  the  commandment,  wrought  in  me
all  manner  of  concupiscence.  [2]  For  actual  sin,
which  flows  from  the  corruption  of  nature.  Jam.
1.  15.  When  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth
sin.  [3]  It  is  taken  for  the  guilt  and  defi  ement  of
sin.  Psal.  51.  2.  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine
iniquity,  and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin.  And  in
Heb.  10.2.  Tne  worshippers,  once  purged,  should
have  had  no  more  conscience,  of  sins.  [4]  For  the
punishment  of  sin,  Gen.  4.  7.  And  if  thou  doest
not  well,  sin  lieth  at  the  door  ;  be  sure  thy  sin  will
find  thee  out ;  thou  shalt  not  long  enjoy  the  fruits
of  thy  wickedness,  but  a  dreadful  judgment  shall
tread  upon  the  heels  of  thy  sin.  And  in  Gen.  19.
15.  Lest  thou  be  consumed  in  the  iniquity  or
punishment  of  the  city.  [5]  Sin  is  taken  both  for
the  guilt  and  punishment  of  sin.  Psal.  32.  1.
Blessed  is  he  whose  sin  is  covered.  And  in
Mat.  9.  2.  Son,  thy^  sins  be  forgiven  thee:  the
guilt  of  them  is  pardoned,  and  so  the  punishment
shall  be  removed.  [6]  The  name  of  sin  is  often
given  to  the  sacrifice  of  expiation,  or  to  the  sacri¬
fice  for  sin,  Lev.  4.  3,  25,  29.  What  is  there  ren¬
dered  sin  offering,  is  in  Hebrew,  sin.  St.  Paul
says,  that  God  was  pleased  that  Jesus  Christ,  who
knew  no  sin,  should  he  our  victim  of  expiation,  2
Cor.  5. 21.  For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,
who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the
righteousness  of  God  in  him.  [71  Sin  is  taken  for
any  fault,  either  in  doctrine  or  life.  John  8.  46.
Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin  3  [8]  For  in¬
fidelity  and  unbelief.  John  16.  9-  t  he  Spirit  will
convince  the  world  of  sin,  because  they  believe
not  on  me.  [9]  For  a  sinful  course  of  life.  Jam.
1.  15.  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth
death.  [10]  For  the  remainders  of  sin  in  such  as
are  renewed  and  regenerated.  Rom.  6.  12.  Let
not  sin  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal  body  :
since  you  are  regenerated ,  and  spiritually  alive,
let  not  the  remainders  of  corruption  exercise  an
uncontrolled  absolute  power  in  you.  [11]  It  is  taken
ror  sin  greatly  aggravated.  John  15.  22,  24.  If  I
had  not  come  and  spoken  to  them,  they  had  not
had  sin  :  they  had  not  been  guilty  of  this  particu¬
lar  sin  ,./  infidelity  in  rejecting  me  ;  or,  their  sin
had  not  been  so  heinous  as  now  it  is  ;  or,  they  had
had  more  to  say  in  excuse  for  their  sin.  [12]  For
the  idols  or  calves  at  Dan  and  Reth-el,  which  were
the  occasion  of  the  sin  of  Samaria.  Amos  8.  14.
They  that  sw'ear  by  the  sin  of  Samaria.

God  was  not  the  author  of  sin  or  of  death  ;  it  is  in¬
consistent  with  the  divine  holiness  and  purity  to  in¬
cline  the  creature  to  sin  :  As  God  cannot  be
tempted  to  evil,  neither  tempts  he  any  man,  Jam.
1.  13.  But  sin  and  death  entered  into  the  world  by
the  malice  of  the  devil ;  and  Adam,  by  his  disobe¬
dience,  and  yielding  to  the  temptation  of  Satan,
has  made  us  all  guilty  in  the  eyes  of  God.  See
Devil,  Fall.  Jesus  Christ,  by  his  death,  hath
restored  life  to  us  ;  by  his  obedience  he  has  recon¬
ciled  us  to  God  the  l  ather  ;  instead  of  children  of
wrath,  as  we  were,  he  has  merited  for  us  the  cha¬
racter  of  children  of  God.  The  apostle  Paul,  in
several  places,  speaks  of  the  misery  which  the  first
Adiun  brought  on  himself  and  his  posterity,  and  of
the  blessings  which  Christ  the  second  Adam  has

446


purchased  for  his  children.  See  Rom.  3.  23.  I  5.
12.16.  2.3.  1  Cor.  15.  21,  22.  Though  sin  be
permitted  of  God,  he  can  no  more  be  the  author
of  it,  than  light  is  the  author  of  darkness,  1  John
1.  5.  Sin  is  not  a  creature,  or  a  being,  but  ra¬
ther  the  privation  of  a  being  ;  as  light  is  the  pri¬
vation  of  darkness,  so  is  sin  a  privation  of  holiness.
Piesumptuous  sins.  David  prays  that  God  would
keep  him  back  from  presumptuous  sins,  Psal.

19-  13.  From  known  and  evident  sins,  such  as
proceed  from  the  choice  of  the  perverse  will  against
the  enlightened  mind,  which  are  committed  with
deliberation,  with  design,  resolution,  and  eager¬
ness,  against  the  checks  of  conscience,  and  the
motions  of  God  s  Spirit:  such  sins  are  direct  re¬
bellion  against  God,  a  despising  of  his  command,
and  provoke  his  pure  eyes.

Original  sin  was  the  rebellion  of  the  first  man
Adam  against  his  Creator,  which  was  a  sin  of
universal  efficacy,  which  derives  a  guilty  and  stain
to  mankind  in  all  ages  of  the  world.  The  account
the  scripture  gives  of  it,  is  grounded  on  the  rela¬
tion  which  alt  men  have  to  Adam  as  their  natural
and  moral  principal  or  head.

I.  Their  natural.  God  created  one  man  in  the
beginning,  from  whom  all  others  derive  their
beings:  And  that  the  unity  might  be  the  more
entire,  he  formed  him  that  aid  which  was  neces¬
sary  for  communicating  his  kind  to  the  world.
lie  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men,
for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  Acts
17.  26.  And  as  the  whole  race  of  mankind  was
virtually  in  Adam’s  loins,  so  it  was  presumed  to
give  virtual  consent  to  what  he  did ;  when  he
broke,  all  suffered  shipwreck  that  were  contained
in  him  as  their  natural  original.

II.  He  was  the  moral  principal  of  mankind.  In
the  first  treaty  between  God  and  man,  Adam
was  considered,  not  as  a  single  person,  but  as  the
representative  of  a  nation,  and  contracted  for  all
his  descendants  by  ordinary  generation :  his  per¬
son  was  the  fountain  of  theirs,  and  his  will  the
representative  of  theirs.  From  hence  his  vast
progeny  became  a  party  in  the  covenant ,  and  had
a  title  to  the  benefits  contained  in  it  upon  his
obedience,  and  was  liable  to  the  curse  upon  his
violation  of  it.  Upon  this  ground  the  apostle  in¬
stitutes  a  parallel  between  Adam  and  Christ.
Rom.  5.  19.  That  as  by  one  man’s  disobedience
many  were  made  sinners  ;  so  by  the  obedience
of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous.  As  Christ
in  his  death  on  the  cross  did  not  suffer  as  a  pri¬
vate  person,  but  as  a  surety  and  sponsor  repre¬
senting  the  whole  church,  as  it  is  said,  2  Cor.  5.
14.  If  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead  :  So
the  first  Adam,  who  was  the  figure  of  him  that
was  to  come,  Rom.  5.  14.  in  his  disobedience  was
esteemed  a  public  person  representing  the  whole
race  of  mankind  ;  and  by  a  just  law  it  was  not
restrained  to  himself.

The  Scripture  proves  in  many  places  that  the  sin  of
Adam  was  communicated  to  all  his  posterity ,  and
that  it  has  infected  and  corrupted  it.  Eph.  2.  3.
We  were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath  ;  that  it,
liable  to  punishment,  and  that  hath  relation  to  guilt.
And  in  Rom.  5.  12.  By  one  man  sin  entered  into
the  world,  and  death  by  sin  ;  and  so  death  passed
upon  all  men,  as  a  just  sentence  upon  the  guilty,
for  that  all  have  sinned.  Job  describes  this  sin ,
Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  r
not  one,  Job  14.  4.  It  is  the  universal  law  of
nature,  that  every  thing  produces  its  like,  not  only
in  regard  of  the  same  nature,  that  is  propagated
from  one  individual  to  another,  without  a  change
of  the  species,  but  in  respect  of  the  qualities  with
which  that  nature  is  eminently  affected.  The
Psalmist  David  likewise  speaks  of  this  sin,  Psal.
51.  5.  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in
sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me.

The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  Saviour
says  in  Mat.  12.  31,  32.  Wherefore  1  say  unto
you.  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be
forgiven  unto  men,  but  the  blasphemy  against
the  Holy  Ghost  shall  not  be  forgiven  unto  men.
And  whoever  shall  speak  a  word  against  the
Son  of  man,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him  :  but  who¬
soever  speaketh  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  shall
not  be  forgiven  him,  neither  in  this  world,  nei
ther  in  the  world  to  come.  Interpreters  have
differently  explained  the  sin  against  the  Holy
Ghost.  St.  Ambrose  in  one  place  makes  it  to
consist  in  denying  the  deity  of  the  Son.  In  an¬
other  place  he  says,  it  consists  in  denying  the
divinity  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  imputing  his
works  to  the  power  of  the  devi1 :  And  in  his  book
(f  Repentance  he  extends  it  to  heresy  and  schism.
Hennas  says,  that  the  sin  against  the  Holy
Ghost  is  the  blaspheming  of  God  ;  and  another
author  says,  that  it  is  the  renouncing  of  God:
Others  think  the  irremissible  sin,  to  be  that  of  a
hardened,  impenitent,  and  insolent  sinner:  Gro-
tius  espouses  this  opinion,  and  gives  for  examples
of  this  crime,  the  sin  of  Korah,  Pharaoh,  Simon
Magus,  Ananias,  and  Sapphira.

The  generality  of  interpreters  place  the  sin  against
the  Holy  Ghost,  mentioned  by  our  Saviour,  in
the  wilful  malice  of  those  that  withstand  the
evidence  of  truth,  and  who  will  not  acknowledge
the  miracles  of  Christ  to  be  wrought  by  the
finger  of  God,  but  maliciously,  and  against  the
conviction  of  their  own  consciences,  impute  them
to  the  prince  of  darkness.  ’This  was  certainly
the  crime  of  the  Pharisees,  to  whom  Christ  ap¬
plied  his  discourse  ;  and  those  also  become  guilty
of  the  same  crime,  who  oppose  07  persecute  the
doctrine,  ways,  and  servants  of  Christ,  because
they  are  spiritual,  or  have  any  thing  of  the
Spirit  appearing  in  them,  and  that  contrary  to
their  own  convictions.  Such  as  are  guilty  of  this
sin,  are  excepted  from  pardon,  because  the  death
of  Christ  was  not  appointed  for  the  expiation  of
it :  And  there  being  no  sacrifice,  there  can  be  no


satisfaction,  and  consequently  no  pardon.  For  if
we  sin  wilfully  after  we  have  received  the  know¬
ledge  of  the  truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  sacri¬
fice  for  sins,  Heb.  10.  26,  27,  ,&c.  The  wisdom
and  justice  of  God  require  this  severity  against
such  sinners  :  For  if  he  that  despised  Moses  lav ,
died  without  mercy,  of  how  much  sorer  punish¬
ment  shall  he  be  thought  worthy,  who  hath  trod¬
den  underfoot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted
the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  he  was
sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite
to  the  Spirit  of  grace!  that  is,  They  renounce
their  Redeemer  as  if  he  were  not  the  Son  <f  God,
and  virtually  consent  to  the  cruel  sentence  passed
against  him,  as  if  he  had  blasphemed  when  he  de¬
clared  himself  to  be  so :  and  thereby  out  sin  his
sufferings.  How  reasonable  is  it  therefore  that
they  should  be  for  ever  deprived  of  the  benefits,
who  obstinately  reject  the  means  that  purchased
them.  The  same  apostle  speaks  also  of  this  sin  in
Heb.  6,  4,  5,  6.  For  it  is  impossible  for  those  who
were  once  enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the
heavenly  gift,  and  were  made  partakers  of  the
Holy  Ghost :  and  have  tasted  the  good  word  of
God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come
if  they  shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again
unto  repentance :  seeing  they  crucify  to  them
selves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an
open  shame  :  that  is,  ■Such  as  have  attained'  to
some  acquaintance  with  the  doctrine  of  the  gos¬
pel,  and  have  had  some  experience  of  the  powei
and  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  heaven  in
gospel  administrations  and  worship  ;  yea,  even
some  of  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit  ;
who  have  likewise  relished  comfort  and  sweetness
in  the  doctrine  and  %  romises  of  the  gospel ;  and
particularly  having  heard  that  the  Redeemer
saves  them  from  wrath,  and  instates  them  in
happiness  beyond  what  is  attainable  here  on
earth ;  their  self-love  has  externally  closed  with
the  revelation,  and  made  application  of  it  to  it¬
self :  Now,  says  the  apostle,  if  such  shall  turn
apostates,  it  is  impossible,  in  regard  of  any  law,
rule,  or  constitution  of  God,  to  bring  them  to  re¬
pentance  whereby  they  should  be  restored  to  their
former  condition ;  and  this  because  they  despise
the  means  of  salvation,  they  shew  themselves  to  be
of  the  same  opinion  with  those  that  did  crucify
Christ,  and  they  would  do  it  again,  were  it  in
their  power  ;  and  actually  do  it  as  much  as  they
can  by  persecuting  his  members.  The  great  un¬
pardonable  sin  against  the  Iloly  Ghost,  appears
to  be  a  presumptuous  sin  against  some  more  than
ordinary  illuminations ,  convictions,  and  taste  of
gospel  grace,  whereby  a  man  doth  knowingly  and
studiously  rebel  against  the  truth,  and  maliciously
persecute  /t  in  himself  and  others  from  an  univer¬
sal  hatred  of  it  for  itself,  Mat.  12.  31,  32.  Heb.  6.

4.  5.  Job  24.  13.  Heb.  10.  29.  Acts  13.  41.  1  John

5.  16.  .  .

From  the  above-mentioned  passage,  in  Ileb.  6.  it
appears,  [1]  That  it  cannot  be  any  sin  that  is
committed  ignorantly .  St.  Paul  was  a  blas¬
phemer,  but  was  forgiven,  because  lie  did  it  ig¬
norantly.  [2]  It  must  be  a  sin  knowingly  com¬
mitted  against  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  the  convictions  of  conscience  ;  it  is  a  sinning
wilfully  after  having  received  the  knowledge  of
the  truth,  and  having  been  made  partakers  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  [3]  Apostasy  seems  to  be  an  ingre¬
dient  in  it.  If  they  fall  away,  says  the  apostle.
[4]  It  takes  in  malice  and  persecution  ;  the  Pha¬
risees  did  not  only  impute  the  miracles  of  our
Saviour  to  the  devil,  but  they  spake  it  out  of
malice,  designing  to  destroy  him.  [5]  Though
impenitency  cannot  be  called  that  sin,  yet  it
comes  into  the  number  of  its  ingredients  ;  and
therefore  the  Apostle  says  of  such  sinners.  It  is
impossible  to  renew  them  again  to  repentance.
Gen.  4.  7.  if  thou  doest  not  well,*,  lieth  atthedoor
Exod.  34.  7.  forgiving  iniquity,  transgression,  and  *.
Lev.  4.  3.  if  priest  *.  according  to  the  *.  of  people
14.  when  *.  is  known,  congregation  shall  offer

6.  26.  the  priest  thatoffereth  it  for  *.  9-  15.

19.  17.  and  not  suffer  *.  upon  th  v  neighbour

22.  the  *.  which  he  hath  done  shall  be  forgiven
Num.  5.  6.  when  a  man  or  woman  shall  commit*.
12. 11.  I  beseech  thee  lay  not  the  *.  upon  us
19.  9.  it  is  a  purification  for*.  17.

27.  3.  our  father  died  in  his  own  *.  had  no  sons
Deut.  15.  9.  cry  to  Lord  and  it  be  *.  to  thee,  24.  15.
19.  15.  one  winess  shall  not  rise  up  for  any  *.
21.22.  if  man  have  committed  *.  worthy  of  death

22.  26.  there  is  in  damsel  no  *.  worthy  of  death

23.  21.  L.  shall  require  it,  and  it  would  *.  in  thee
22.  if  thou  forbear  to  vow,  it  shall  be  no  *.

24.  16.  every  man  shall  be  put  to  death  for  his  o\\  n

*.  2  Kings  14.  6.  2  Chrnn.  25.  4.
1  Sam.  15.  23.  for  rebellion  is  as  *.  of  witchcraft

1  Kings  8.  34.  forgive  the  *.  of  thy  people  Israel
36.  forgive  *.  of  thy  servants,  2  Chron.  6.  25,  27.

12.  30.  and  this  thing  became  a  *.  13.  34.

2  Kings  12.  16.  the  *.  money  was  the  priest’s
Job  20.  11 .  his  hones  are  full  of  *.  of  his  youth
Psal.  32.  1.  blessed  is  he  whose  *.  is  covered
51.  5.  and  in  *.  did  my  mother  conceive  me
59.  12.  for  *.  of  their  mouth  let  them  be  taken
109.  7.  and  let  his  prayer  become*.

14.  let  not  the  *.  ot  his  mother  be  blotted  out
Prov.  10.  16.  the  fruit  of  the  wicked  tendeth  to  *.
19.  in  multitude  of  words  there  wanteth  not  *.

13.  +  6.  but  wickedness  overthroweth  *.

14.  9.  fools  make  a  mock  at  *.  but  among  righteous
34.  but  *.  is  a  reproach  to  any  people

21.  4.  and  the  plowing  of  the  wicked  is*.

24.  9.  the  thought  of  foolishness  is  *.
i*a.5.18.wo  to  them  draw  *.as  it  were  with  cart-rope
.30.  1.  and  cover,  that  they  may  add  s.  to  *.

31 . 7-  his  idols  which  yourhan 's  have  made  for  *.
53.  10.  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  *.

12.  he  bare  the  *.  of  many,  and  made  intercession
Jer.  17.  1.  *.  of  Judah  written  with  a  penot  iron


S  I  N


S  I  N


S  I  N


Jet.  17.  3.  I  will  give  high  plat,  fora  s.  in  thy  bord
51.  5.  though  their  land  was  t  lied  with  s.

Lam.  4.  6.  than  the  punishme.it  of  the  s.  of  Sodom
Has.  4.8.  they  eat  ups.  ot  my  people,  set  their  heart

10.  8.  the  s.  of  Israel  shall  be  destroyed
1C.  8.  they  shall  find  no  iniquity  in  me  that  were  s.
Amos?.  14.  they  that  swear  by  the  s.  of  Samaria
Mir.  1.  13.  she  is  the  beginning  of  s.  to  Zion

6.  7.  shall  l  give  fruit  of  my  body  for,?,  of  my  soul
Zech.  13.  1.  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  for  s.

14.  t  19.  this  shall  be  the  s.  of  Kgypt
Mat.  12.  31.  all  manner  off.  shall  be  forgiven  to  men
John  1.  29.  which  taketh  away  the  f.  of  the  world
8.  7.  he  that  is  without  s.  among  you,  let  him  cast
34.  whoso  committeth  s.  is  the  servant  of  s.

V  41.  if  ye  were  blind,  he  should  have  no  s.

.5.  22.  it  1  had  not  come,  they  had  not  had  s.  24.

16.  8.  Comforter,  he  will  reprove  the  world  off.
y  off.  because  they  believe  not  on  me

19.  11.  he  that  delivered  me  hath  the  greater  f.
Acts  7.  60.  Lord,  lay  not  this  f.  to  their  charge
Rom.  3. 9.  proved  .lews  and  Gentiles  are  all  under  s,

20.  for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  s.

4.  7-  blessed  are  they  whose  f.  is  covered
5. 12.  f.  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  s.

13.  for  till  the  law  f.  was  in  the  world

20.  where  s.  abounded,  grace  much  more  abound

21.  that  as  f.  reigned  unto  death,  even  so  grace
6.  1.  what  shall  we  say  ?  shall  we  continue  in  s.  ?

2.  how  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  f.  live  therein  -

6.  with  him,  that  the  body  of  s.  might  be  destroy¬

ed  that  henceforth  we  shou  ld  not  serve  s

7 .  for  he  that  is  dead  is  freed  from  s .

10.  for  in  that  he  died,  he  died  to  s.  once
1..  reckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto  s.

12.  let  not  f.  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal  body

13.  nor  yield  vour  members  as  instruments  to  f  '

14.  for  f.  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you

16.  his  servants  ye  are,  whether  of  f.  unto  death
17-  God  be  thanked,  ye  were  the  servants  off.

18.  being  then  made  free  from  s.  22.

20.  for  when  ye  were  the  servants  of  f .  ye  were
23.  for  wages  of  f.  is  death,  but  the  gift  of  God

7,7.  is  law  f.  ?  God  forbid,  I  had  not  known  f.

8.  s.  taking  occasion  wrought  in  me  ail  manner  of
concupiscence:  for  without  the  law  f.  was  dead

9.  commandment  came,  .c.  revived,  and  I  died

11.  for  f.  by  the  commandment  slew  me

13.  but  s.  that  it  might  appear,  f.  that  s.  by  the
commandment  might  become  exceeding  sinful

14.  law  is  spiritual,  but  I  am  carnal,  sold  under  s

17.  no  more  I,  but  f.  that  dwelleth  in  me  °0
23.  and  bringing  me  into  captivity  to  law  of  s’.

25.  but  with  the  flesh,  the  law  off.

8.  3.  and  for  s.  condemned  f.  in  the  flesh

, !°v*f  9hris*  be  in  y°u>  body  is  dead  because  of  f

14.  23.  for  whatsoever  is  not  of  faith,  is  f.

1  9"CvfiV,8:  every  *-  a  man  doth  is  without  body

15.  56.  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  the  sting  of

„  _  .  death  is  f .  and  the  strength  of  f.  is  the  law

.ma,  to  be  s.  for  us,  who  knew  no  s,

^al.  2.  17.  is  therefore  Christ  the  minister  of  i*.  ?

3.  22.  the  scripture  hath  concluded  all  under  s'

2  /  ness.  2.  3.  and  that  man  of  s.  be  revealed
H.eb ,3.  13.  be  hardened  thro’  the  decitfulness  off
4-  nr  ,emP.te(l  as  we  are,  yet  without  f.

9.  26  but  once  hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  f.

28.  he  shall  appear  without  f.  to  salvation

10.  6.  in  sacrifices  for  s.  thou  hast  had  no  pleasure
8.  ottering  tor  .v.  thou  wouldst  not,  nor  pleasure

18.  where  remission,  is  no  more  offering  for  f

11.  25.  than  to  enjoy  pleasures  off.  for  a  season

12.  1.  let  us  lay  aside  s.  that  doth  easily  beset  us

4.  ye  have  not  yet  resisted,  striving  against  f.

13.  11.  the  bodies  of  those  beasts  for  s.  are  burnt
am.  1.  15.  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  hringeth

forth  f.  and  s.  when  finished,  bringeth  forth  death

2.  9.  if  ye  have  respect  to  persons,  ye  commit  f
4; .17.  knoweth,  and  doth  not  good,  to  him  it  is  f
\  Ret.  2.  22.  who  did  no  f .  nor  was  guile  found
4-  1.  that  suffered  111  flesh  hath  ceased  from  r

2  /  e. 1.  2.  14  having  eyes  that  cannot  cease  from  f
l  John  1.  7.  blood  of  Christ  deanseth  us  from  all  s.

8.  if  we  say  we  have  no  s.  we  deceive  ourselves

3.  4.  whoso  committeth  s.  transgresseth  also  the

law,  for  s.  is  the  transgression  of  the  law

5.  he  was  manifested,  and  in  him  is  no  f

8.  he  that  committeth  s.  is  of  the  devil

9.  whosoever  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  f

5.  16.  if  any  man  see  his  brother  s.  a  f.  which  is

.  potto  death,  there  is  a  s.  unto  death
17.  all  unrighteousness  is  f.  and  there  is  a  s  not
unto  death,  whosoever  is  born  of  G.  sinneth  not
■See  Pear.

Great  SIN.

Gen  20. 9.  brought  on  me  and  my  kingdom  great  f
4  ’.at  hast  brought  this  great  s.  on  them

30.  INI oses  said,  ye  .have  sinned  a  ffvcott  s .

31 .  and  said,  oh,  this  people  have  sinned  a  great  s.

1  oam.  2.  17.  f.  of  the  young  men  was  very  great

2  Kings  1 1 . 21.  Jeroboam  made  them  sin  a  great  s

His  SIN,

Lev-  4-  3.  bring  for  his  s.  he  sinned  a  young  bullock
23.  or  if  hiss,  come  to  his  knowledge,  28.

26.  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  his  s.

00  k  unll  u  -sha11  b?  forgiven,  35.  I  5.  6,  10,  1.3’

28.  he  shall  bring  a  kid  of  the  goats  for  his  s
5.  6.  he  shall  bring  his  trespass  offering  for  hiss.

1  1  Nadab  walked  in  the  w'ay  of  his  s

,24\J?aS-  , fd  in  w'ay  of  Jeroboam  and  his s

Iff  19.  Zimn  walked  in  hiss.  ||  Omri  in  his  s.

2  Kings  21.16.  beside  his  s.  wherewith  made  Judah
17.  acts  of  Manasseh,  and  his  s.  that  he  sinned

’9-  a**  his  s.  before  he  was  humbled
Job  14.  37.  for  he  addeth  rebellion  to  his  s.

27.  9.  this  is  all  the  fruit  to  take  away  his  s.
Lzek.  3.20.  lie  shal  1  die  in  hiss.  18.  24.

33.  14.  if  he  turn  from  his  s.  and  do  right
r/(M.  13.  12.  iniquity  is  hound  up,  his  s.  is  hid
Mtc.  3.  8.  truly  1  am  full  to  declare  to  Israel  his  s.

.  My  SIN.

Gen.  31. 36.  what  is  my  s.  that  thou  hast  pursued  me  ?


Exod.  10.  17_.  therefore  forgive  my  s.  only  this  once
1  Sam.  15. 25.  1  pray  thee,  pardon  my  s.  turn  with  me
2ff  1 .  what  is  my  s.  before  thy  tathertoseek  my  life
1  A  m5r.s-_i7.l8.  come  to  call  my .».  to  remembrance
Job  10.  6.  that  thou  searchest  after  my  s.

13.  23.  make  me  to  know  transgression  and  my  s.

14.  16.  dost  thou  not  watch  over  my  s.

35.  3.  wdiat  profit  if  1  be  cleansed  from  my  s.

Psal.  32.  5.  I  acknowledged  my  s.  and  iniquity  to

thee,  and  thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  s.
38.  3.  nor  rest  in  my  bones  because  of  my  s.

18.  mine  iniquity,  for  I  will  be  sorrv  for  mys.
51.2.  wash  me  throughly,  cleanse  me  from  mys.

3.  my  s.  is  ever  before  me  ||  59. 3.  not  for  my  s.  O  L.
Prov.  20.  9.  who  can  say,  I  am  pure  from  my  s.  ?
Han.  9.  20.  and  whilst  I  was  confessing  my  s.

See  Offering.

Our  SIN.

Exod.  34.  9.  Lord  ,  pardon  our  iniquity  and  our  s.
Jer.  16.  10.  what  is  mr  s.  we  have  committed
Their  SIN.

Gen.  18. 20.  L.  said,  because  their  s.  is  very  grievous
50.  17.  forgive,  1  pray  thee,  their  s.  2  Chron.  7. 14.
Lxod.  32.  32.  yet  now,  if  thou  wilt  forgive  theirs.

34.  in  the  day  when  1  visit,  l  will  visit  their  s.
Sum.  5. 7 •  they  shall  confess  their  s.  they  have  done
ueut .  9.  27 .  look  not  unto  stubbornness,  nor  their  s.

1  Kings  8. 35.  if  they  turn  from  their  s.  2  Chr  6  26
IS  eh  4.  5.  let  not  their  s,  be  blotted  out  from  thee
Psal.  85.2.  forgiven,  thou  hast  covered  all  theirs
Isa.  .3.  9.  they  declare  their  s.  as  Sodom,  hide  it  not
Jer.  16. 18.  1  will  recompense  their  s.  double
18.  23.  neither  blot  out  their  s.  from  thy  sight
31.  34.  and  I  will  remember  their s.  no  more
36.  3.  that  I  may  forgive  their  iniquity  and  their  s.
John  15.  22.  now  they  have  no  cloak  for  theirs.

„  „  ,  Thy  SIN.

~  Sam.  12.  13.  the  Lord  also  hath  put  away  thy  s.

Isa.  o.  7 •  thine  inic| .  is  taken  away ,  thy  s.  is  purged
Your  SIN.”

Exod.  32.  30.  I  shall  make  atonement  for  your  s.
Num.  32.  23.  be  sure  your  s.  will  find  you  out
l)eut.  9.21.1  took  yours,  the  calf  which  ye  had  made
John  9. 41.  ye  say  we  see,  therefore  your  s.  remaineth
SIN,  Kerb.

Gen.  39.9.  how  can  1  do  this  wickedn.  and  s.  a g.  God3
42.  22.  Reuben  said,  do  not  s.  against  the  child
Exod.  20.  20.  his  fear  may  be  before  you,  that s.  not
2.3.33.  not  dwell,  lest  they  make  thee  s .  ag.  me
Lev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  shall  s.  thro"  ignorance  ag.  com.

3.  if  the  priest  s.  ||  13.  if  congregation  s.

27.  if  any  one  of  the  common  peoples,  thro’  ignor.

5.  1.  if  a  soul  s.  and  hear  the  voice  of  swearing

15.  if  a  soul  commit  a  trespass  and  s.  thro’  ignor
in  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord,17.  Num.  15. 27!

6.  2.  it  a  soul  s.  and  lie  unto  his  neighbour
Num.  16. 22.  shall  one  s.  wilt  thou  be  wroth  with  all 3
Deut.  20.  18.  so  should  you  s.  against  L.  your  God
24.  4.  thou  shaft  not  cause  the  land  to  s.  Lord  give

1  Sam.  2.  25.  if  one  man  s.  against  another ;  if  a  man
s.  against  the  Lord,  who  shall  entreat  for  him  3
12.23.  God  forbid  I  should  s.  in  ceasing  to  pray

14.  33.  behold,  the  people  s.  against  the  Lord
34.  slay  them,  and  s.  not  in  eating  with  the  blood

19.  4.  let  not  the  king  s.  against  his  servant
5.  why  wilt  thou  s.  against  innocent  blood  ?

1  Kings?,.  46.  if  they  s.  against  thee,  2  Chron.  6.  36.

2  Kings  21.1 1 .  Manasseh  made  .1  udah  to  s.  with  idols
2  Chron.  6.  22.  if  a  man  s.  against  his  neighbour
Neh.  6.13,  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so,  and  s.

13.  26.  did  not  Solomon  s.  by  these  things  ?

Job  2.  10.  in  all  this  did  not  lob  s.  with  his  lips
5.  24.  thou  shalt  visit  thy  habitation  and  not  s.

10. 14  if  I  .v.  thou  markest  me,  not  acquit
31.  30.  neither  have  I  suffered  my  mouth  to  s.

Psal.  4.  4.  stand  in  awe,  and  s.  not,  commune
39.  1.  I  will  take  heed  that  I  s.  not  with  mv  tongue
119-  11.  that  1  might  not  s.  against  thee  c
Eccl.  5.  6.  suffer  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh  to  s
Jer.  32. 35.  do  this  abomination  to  cause  .1  udah  to  s
Ezek.  3.  21.  that  righteous  s.  not,  and  he  doth  not  s
tlos.  8.11.  because  Ephraim  hath  made  many  altars
to  s.  altars  shall  be  unto  him  to  s
13.  2.  and  now  they  s.  more  and  more  and  made
Mat.  18.  21.  Lord,  how  oft  shall  my  brother  s.  ?

John 5. 14. s.  no  more,  lest  worse  thing  come  to  thee

8.  11.  neither  do  1  condemn  thee,  s.  no  more

9.  2.  who  did  s.  this  man  or  his  parents  ?

Rom.  6. 15.  shall  we'S.  because  we  are  not  under  law3
1  Cor.  8.  12.  when  ye  s.  so  against  the  brethren  and

wound  their  conscience,  ye  s.  against  Christ

15.  34.  awake  to  righteousness,  and  s.  not
Eph-  4.  26.  be  ye  angry,  and  s.  not,  let  not  the  sun
1  Tim.  0.  20.  them  that  s.  rebuke  before  all
Heb.  10.26.  if  we  s.  wilfully  after  knowl.  of  truth
1  John  2.  1.  these  things  1  write  unto  you  that  ye  s.

not,  and  if  any  man.!,  we  have  an  advocate
3.  9.  he  cannot  s.  because  he  is  born  of  God
5.  16.  if  any  man  see  his  brother  s.  not  to  death,  he
shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  .f.  not  to  death
See  Israel.

SINCE.

Gen.  30.  30.  the  Lord  hath  blessed  thee  s.  my  com.

44.  28.  the  one  went  out,  and  I  saw  him  not  s.

46.  30.  let  me  die,  s.  I  have  seen  thy  face
Exod.  5.  23.  for  s.  I  came  to  Pharaoh  to  speak
9.  18.  hail  not  in  Egypt,  s.  the  foundation  thereof
24.  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  ,v.  it  became  a  nation
Sum.  22.30.  thou  hast  ridden  on  ever.v,  I  was  thine
Dent.  34.  10.  there  arose  not  a  prophet  s.  in  Israel
Josh.  2.  12.  swear,  s.  I  have  shewed  you  kindness
3.  +  4.  ye  have  not  passed  this  way  s.  yesterday
14. 10.  I  ord  kept  me  alive,  even  s.  the’l  ord  spake
Ruth  2.  1 1 .  all  thou  hast  done  s.  death  of  thy  husbd.

1  Sam.  9. 24.  s.  I  said,  I  have  invited  the  people
21.  5.  about  these  three  days  s.  I  came  out
29.  3.  I  found  no  fault  in  him  s.  he  fell  to  me

2  Sam.  7.  6.  s.  the  time  that  1  brought  up  Israel
11.  and  s.  I  commanded  judges,  1  Chron.  17.  10.

13.  f  28.  w  ill  you  not  s.  1  have  commanded  you
2  Chron.  30.  26.  s.  Solomon  not  like  passo>  er
31 .  10.  s.  the  people  began  to  bring  the  offerings


Ezra  4. 2.  s.  the  days  of  Esar-haddon  king  of  Assur
5.  16.  s.  that  time  till  now  hath  it  been  in  building
9  7*  s.  days  ot  our  fathers  have  we  been  in  trespass
Job  20.  4.  s.  man  was  placed  upon  earth
38.  12.  hast  thou  commanded  morning  s.  thy  days  ?
Isa.  14.  8.  ■*.  thou  art  laid  down,  no  feller  is  come

16.  13.  hath  spoken  concerning  Moab  s.  that  time

43.  4.  s.  thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,  hast  been

44.  7-s.  I  appointed  the  ancient  people
61.  4.  s.  the  beginning  men  have  not  heard

Jer.  15.  7.  s.  they  return  not  from  their  ways
20.  8.  for  s.  I  spake,  1  cried  out,  I  cried  violence

23.  38.  but  s.  ye  say,  the  burden  of  the  Lord
31.  20.  s.  I  spake  against  him,  1  remember  him  still
44.  18.  s.  we  left  off  to  burn  incense  to  the  queen
48.  27-  s.  thou  spakest  of  him,  thou  skippedst

Dan.  12.  1.  as  never  was  s.  there  was  a  nation
Dag.  2.  16.  s.  those  days  when  one  came
Mat.  24.  21.  such  as  was  not  s.  the  beginning
Mark  9.  21.  how  long  is  it  a°-o  s.  this  came  to  him  3
Luke  1.  70.  been  s.  the  world  began,  John  9.  32.

7-  45.  s.  the  time  I  came  in,  she  hath  not  ceased
16.  16.  s.  then  the  kingdom  of  God  is  preached

24.  21.  is  the  third  day  s.  these  things  were  done
Acts  3.  21.  s.  the  world  began,  Rom.  16.  25

19.  2.  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  s.  ye  believed  3
24-  11.  ye  but  twelve  dayss.  1  went  to  Jerusalem
1  Cor.  15.21.  for  s.  by  man  came  death,  by  man  came
<~Cor.  13.  3.  s.  ye  seek  a  proof  of  Christ  in  me
<{Sl:  i-  4- • f- we  heard  ot  your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus
Deb.  1.  28.  but  word  ot  oath  which  was  ,s-.  the  law
et.  3.  4.  for  s.  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things
Kev.  16. 18.  as  was  not  j.  men  were  upon  the  earth
See  Day.

.SINCERE,

Or  Sincerity .  This  word  properly  signifies  truth  and
uprightness,  when  the  heart  and  tongue  agree  to
get  her .  Sinceiity  is  opposed  to  double-mindedness
or  deceit,  when  the  sentiments  of  the  heart  are  con¬
trary  to  the  language  of  the  mouth.  The  Latin
word,  sincerus,  is  derived  from  sine  and  cera,
without  wax,  honey  separated  from  the  wax,  or
pure  honey.  In  the  Scripture  sincere  signifies
pure,  or  without  mixture,  1  Pet.  2.  1.  Desire  the
sincere  milk  of  the  word  ;  that  is,  unmixed  with
errors,  traditions,  and  heresies,  free  from  deceits.
St.  Paul  would  have  the  Philippians  to  be  pure,
impartial,  and  unbiassed  in  their  choice  ;  that  their
behaviour  may  be  innocent,  and  give  no  offence  to
any  body,  Phil.  1.  10.  that  ye  may  be  sincere  and
without  offence  till  the  day  of  Christ.  The  same
Apostle  speaks  of  sincerity  and  truth,  or  of  purity
and  truih,  which  he  sets  in  opposition  to  the  leaven¬
ed  bread  of  impurity  and  filthiness,  1  Cor.  5.  8.
Let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven,  neither
with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness  ;  but
with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth.

1  hat  is.  Let  the  whole  of  our  lives  be  like  the
Jewish  feast  of  the  Passover  and  unleavened
bread ;  let  us  not  spend  them  with  the  leaven  of
malice  and  wickedness,  allowing  ourselves  in  any
way  of  stn,  either  by  corrupt  affections,  sinful
actions,  or  tolerating  among  us  any  scandalous
offence;  but  let  us  practise  all  Christian  purity,
and  hold  fast  the  truth  that  has  been  delivered  to
us.  And  he  reproaches  the  false  apostles  with  not
preaching  Christ,  sincerely ,  purely,  with  upright
and  disinterested  sentiments  of  the  heart,  Phi j .

1.  16.  1  he  one  preach  Christ  of  contention,  noi

sincerely.

Gen.  17.  4  1.  walk  before  me,  and  be  thou  ^

Gent.  18.  4  13.  thou  shalt  be  s.  with  Lord  thy  God
Csal.  119.  4  1.  blessed  are  the  s.  in  the  way
Eph.  4.  +  J5.  being  s.  in  love  may  grow  up  into  him
1  «  ■  1  ye  may  he  i’.  till  day  of  Christ,  2.  4  15.

1  let.  2.  2.  as  new-born  babes  desire  s.  milk  of  word
SINCERELY.

Judg.  9.  16.  now  if  ye  have  done  truly  and  s.  19.
Phil.  1.  16.  the  one  preach  Christ,  not  s.

.  SINCERITY.

Gen.  20.  4  5  in  the  s.  of  my  heart  have  I  done  thiy
Josh.  24.  14.  tear  and  serve  the  Lord  in  s.  and  truti

1  Cor.  5.  8.  with  unleavened  bread  of  s.  and  truth

2  Cor.  1.12.  in  godly  s.  we  have  had  our  conversation

2.  17.  but  as  of  s.  in  the  sight  of  God  speak  we
8.  8.  and  to  prove  the  s.  of  your  love

Eph.  6.  24.  grace  with  them  that  love  our  L.  J.  in  s.
'Tit.  2.  7.  in  doctrine  shewing  gravity,  s.

SIN  EW.

Gen.  32.  32.  Tsrael  eat  not  of  the  s.  that  shrank,
because  he  touched  Jacob  in  the  s.  that  shrank
Isa.  48.  4.  because  thy  neck  is  an  iron  s.  brow  brass
SIN  EWS.

Job  10.  11.  thou  hast  fenced  me  with  bones  and  s.
30.17.  niy  bones  are  pierced,  and  my  s.  takeno  rest
40.  17.  the  s.  of  his  stones  are  wrapped  together
Ezek.  37.  6.  I  will  lays,  upon  j’ou  and  bring  flesh
8.  the  s.  and  the  flesh  came  up  upon  them
SINFUL.

Num.  32.  14.  ye  are  risen  an  increase  of  s.  men
Isa.  1.  4.  ah  s.  nation,  a  people  laden  with  iniquity
Amos  9  8.  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  on  the  s.  kingdom
Mark  8.  38.  shall  be  ashamed  in  this  s.  generation
Luke  5.  8.  depart  from  me,  for  I  ams.  man,  O  Lord
24.  7.  must  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  s.  men
Rom.  7.  13.  that  sin  might  become  exceeding  f.

8.  3.  God  sending  his  Son  in  the  likeness  of  s.  flesh
SING.

Exod.  15.  21.  s.  to  the  1  ord,  1  Chron.  16.  23.  Psal
30.  4.  |95.  l.|  96.  1,  2.1  98.  l.|  147.  7-1*
149. 1.  Isa.  12.  5.

32.  18.  but  the  noise  of  them  that  s.  do  I  hear
Num.  21.  17.  spring  up,  O  well,  s.  ye  unto  it
1  Sam.  21.  11.  did  they  not  s.  one  to  another  3

1  Chron.  16.  9.  s.  unto  him,  s.  psalms  unto  him

33.  then  shall  the  trees  of  the  woods,  out

2  Chron.  20.  <?2.  when  they  began  to  s.  and  praise
29  -  30.  Iiezt.Aiah  commanded  the  I.evitesto  s.

Job  29.  13.  I  caused  the  widow’s  heart  to  j.  for  joy
Psal.  21.  13.  so  will  we  s.  and  praise  thy  power
33.2.  praise  the  Ldfd,s.  to  him  with  the  psalterv

3.  s.  unto  him  a  new  song,  Isa.  42  10.

147


S  I  N


S  I  N


S  1  N


Psal.  51.  14.  mv  tongue  a.  of  thy  righteousn.  145.  7.
65.  13.  the  valleys  shout  tor  joy,  they  also  a.


66  2.  a.  forth  the  honour  of  his  name,  make  praise


4.  the  earth  a.  to  thee,  they  shall  a.  to  thy  name

67.  4.  let  the  nations  be  glad  ami  s,  for  joy

68.  32.  a.  to  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth

71.22.  to  thee  will  1  a.  with  the  harp,  98.  5.

81.  1.  .v.  aloud  uuto  God  our  strength,  make  noise

104.  12.  the  fow  ls  which  a.  among  the  branches

105.  2.  a.  to  him,  a.  psalms  unto  him,  talk  ye

137.  3.  saying,  a.  us  one  of  the  songs  of  /ion
4.  how  shall  we  a.  Lord’s  song  in  a  strange  lanct  .

138.  5.  yea,  they  shall  a.  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord
149.  5.  let  the  saints  a.  aloud  upon  their  beds
Prov.  29.  6.  but  the  righteous  doth  a.  and  rejoice
Isa.  23.  15.  after  seventy  years  shall  l  yre  a.  as  har  ot

24.  14.  they  shall  a.  for  the  majesty  of  the  Lord

26.  19.  awake  and  s.  ye  that  dwell  m  dust

27.  2.  in  that  day  v.  ye  to  her,  vineyard  of  red  wine
35.'  6.  then  shall  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  s.

38.  20.  therefore  we  will  s.  my  songs  <tll  days
42.  11.  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  rock  a.

44.  23.  s.  O  ye  hea'  ens,  for  L.  hath  done  it,  49.  13.

52.  8.  with  the  voice  together  shall  they  a.

9.  s.  to  the  Lord,  ye  waste  places  of  Jerusalem
54.  1.  a.  O  barren,  thou  that  didst  not  bear
65.  14.  behold,  my  servants  shall  a.  tor  joy  ot  heart
Jer.  31.  7-  s.  with  gladness  for  Jacob,  and  shout

12.  they  shall  come  and  s.  in  the  height  ot  /ion
51.  48.  all  that  is  therein  shall  s.  for  Babylon
Ezek.  27.  25.  the  ships  of  Tarshish  did  s.  ot  thee
Uos.  2.  15.  she  shall  .v.  as  in  the  days  of  youth
Zeph.  2.  14.  their  voice  shall  v.  in  the  windows
3.  14.  a.  O  daughter  of  Zion,  Zech.  2.  10.

Jam.  5.  13.  is  any  merry  i  let  lum  a.  psalms
lier.  15.  3.  they  s.  song  of  Moses  and  ot  the  Lamb
i  will  SING.

Exod.  15. 1. 1  wills,  to  the  L.  Judg.  5.  3.  Psal.  13. 6.
Psal.  57.  7.  my  heart  is  fixed,  ()  God,  1  will  s.

9.  I  will  s.  unto  thee  among  the  nations
59.  16.  I  will  s.  of  thy  power,  of  thy  mercy,  89. 1.

17.  unto  thee,  O  my  strength,  will  I  s.  tor  God  is
101.  1.  I  will  s.  of  mercy  and  judgment,  O  Lord
104.  33.  1  will  s.  to  the  Lord  as  long  as  1  live
144.  9.  1  wills,  a  new  song  unto  thee,  O  God
Isa.  5.  1.  now  will  I  s.  to  my  well-beloved  a  song
Hum.  15.  9.  for  this  cause  will  1  s.  to  thy  name
1  Cor.  14. 15.  1  will  pray  with  spirit,  7  will  s.  with
the  spirit,  and  1  will  s.  with  the  understanding
See  Praise,  Praises.

SINGED.

Dan.  3.  27.  nor  was  an  hair  of  their  head  s.
SINGER.

1  Chron.  6.  33.  Heman  a  s.  the  son  of  Joel
Heb.  3.  19.  to  chief  s.  on  my  stringed  instruments
SINGLES.

1  Kings  10.12.  kingmade psalteries  for.?.  2  Chr.  9.11.

1  Chron.  9.  33.  these  are  the  a.  chief,  15.  16.

15.  19.  so  s.  were  appointed  to  sound  with  cymbals

27.  the  Levites  and  the  s.  had  tine  linen

2  Chr.  5.  13.  the  trumpeters  and  s.  were  as  one
20.  21.  Jehoshaphat  appointed  s.  unto  the  Lord

23.  13  the  people  rejoiced  and  also  the  s.  29.  28
35.  15.  the  if.  the  sons  of  Asaph  were  in  their  place

Ezra  2.  41.  the  s.  an  hundred  twenty  and  eight
70.  so  the  a.  dwelt  in  their  cities,  Neh.  7.  73.

7.  7.  some  of  the  s.  went  up  unto  Jerusalem

24.  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll  upon  a.

10.  24.  the  s.  gave  their  hands  to  put  away  wives
Neh.  7.  1.  the  porters  and  the  5.  were  appointed

10.  29.  the  s.  clave  to  their  brethren,  their  nobles

11.  22.  the  .f.  were  over  the  business  ot  the  house

23.  a  portion  shall  be  for  the  s.  12.  47.  I  13.  5.

12  28.  sons  of  a.  gathered  themselves  together

29.  the  a.  had  builded  them  villages  round  about
42.  a.  sang  aloud  II  45.  a.  kept  ward  of  their  God
46.  in  the  days  of  David,  there  were  chief  of  s.

13  10.  for  the  Levites  and  the  s.  were  fled
Psal.  68.  25.  s.  went  before,  players  followed  after

87.  7.  as  well  the  a.  as  the  players  shall  he  there
Ezek.  40.  44.  the  chambers  of  the  s.  in  inner  court
Men- SIN  G  EH  S,  Women- S 1 N  G ERS
Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gat  me  men-s.  and  women-s.

SINGLED.

Prov.  25.  20.  so  is  he  that  a.  songs  to  a  heavy  heart
SINGING.

1  Sam.  18.  6.  women  came  01V  of  cities  of  Israel  s

1  Chron.  6.  32.  and  they  ministered  with  a
13.8.  David  and  all  Isr.  played  before  God  with*

2  Chron.  23.  18.  to  offer  the  burnt  offerings  with  s.

30.  21.  s.  with  loud  instruments  unto  the  I  ord
Neh.  12.  27.  kept  the  dedication  of  the  wall  with  s ,
Psal.  30.  f  5.  but  s.  cometh  in  the  morning

100.  2.  come  before  his  presence  with  s.

105.  +  43.  he  brought  forth  his  chosen  with  s.

107.  +  22.  and  declare  his  works  with  a.

126.  2.  then  was  our  tongue  filled  with  s.
t  5.  they  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  s.

Cant.  2.  12.  the  time  of  the  s.  of  birds  is  come
Isa.  14.  7.  earth  is  at  rest,  they  break  forth  into  s

16.  10.  in  the  vineyards  there  shall  be  no  a.

35.  2.  it  shall  blossom  and  rejoice  with  joy  and  s.
44.  23.  break  forth  into  a.  ye  mountains,  O  forest

48.  20.  dee  from  the  Chaldeans  with  a  voice  of  s.

49.  13.  be  joyful,  O  earth,  and  break  forth  into  s.
51.  n.  the  redeemed  shall  come  with  s.  to  Zion

54.  1.  break  forth  into  a.  O  barren,  and  cry  aloud

55.  12.  the  mountains  shall  break  forth  into  s.
Zeph.  3. 17.  rest  in  his  love,  will  joy  over  thee  with  a.
Eph.  5.  19.  s.  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord,  Col.  3.  16.

SIN  G  IN  G-men,  SINGING-aomew.

2  Sam.  19.  35.  can  1  hear  voice  of  s.-men,  s.-women
2  Chron.  35.  25.  all  the  s.-men  spake  of  Josiah
Ezra  2.  65.  two  hundred  s.-men,  200  s.-women
7.  67.  they  had  245  s.-men  and  s.-women
SINGLE.

23.  +47-  the  company  shall  s.  them  out
SINGLE.

6.22.  if  therefore  thine  eye  be  s.  thy  whole
body  shall  be  full  of  light,  Luke  11.  34.
SINGLENESS.

lets  2.  46.  did  eat  meat  with  gladness  and  s.  of  heart

448


Neh.


Ezek.

Mat.


Eph.  6.  5.  serv.  obey  in  s.  of  your  heal  t,  Col.  3.  22.
SINGULA  11.

Lev.  27.  2.  when  a  man  shall  make  a  s.  vow
SINK.

Job  .38  +  6.  whereon  are  the  fouixlations  made  to  a.
Psal.  69.  2.  I  a.  in  deep  mire  where  is  no  standing

14.  deliver  me  out  of  the  mire,  and  let  me  not  s.
Jer.  51.  64.  thus  shall  Babylon  a.  and  shall  notrise
Mat.  14.  .30.  beginning  to  s.  he  cried.  Lord,  save  me

,uke  5.  7.  filled  both  ships,  so  that  they  began  to  s.

9.  44.  let  these  sayings  a.  down  into  your  ears
SINNED.

Exod.  9.  .34.  Pharaoh  s.  yet  more,  hardened  his  heart
32.  30.  Moses  said,  ye  have  a.  a  great  sin,  .31.

.33.  whosoever  hath  s.  him  will  1  blot  out
Lev.  4.  .3.  bring  for  the  sin  he  hath  s.  a  bullock
14.  when  the  sin  the  congregation  have  a.

22. when  ruler  a.  2.3.  |l  28.  one  ofcommon  people  a.
5.5.  he  shall  confess  he  hath  a.  in  that  thing
6.  for  sin  which  he  hath  s.  shall  bring  a  female
10.  priest  shall  make  atonement  for  the  sin  he  hath
s.  and  shall  be  forgiven,  11.  1.3.  Num. 6.  11.

6.  4.  because  he  hath.?,  shall  restore  what  he  took
A um.  12.  11.  lay  not  sin  on  us  wherein  we  have  s.

32.  2.3.  behold,  ve  have  a.  against  the  Lord
Dent.  9.  16.  I  looked,  and  behold  ye  had  s.  ag.  Lord

18.  your  sins  which  ye  a.  in  doing  wickedly
Josh.  7.11.  Isr.  hath  a.  and  transgressed  my  covenant
Judg.  11.  27.  w'herefore  I  have  not  s.  against  thee

Sam.  19.  4.  because  he  hath  not  a.  against  thee
24.  11.  know  that  1  have  not  a.  against  thee
1  Kings  8.  3.3.  because  they  have  a.  against  thee,  and
shall  turn  again  to  thee,  .35.  2  Chr.  6.  24,  26.
50.  forgive  thy  people  that  a.  2  Chron.  6.  .39.

15.  30.  sins  of  .Jeroboam  which  he  s.  16.  1.3,  19.

18.9.  what  have  1  a.  that  thou  wouldst  deliver

1  Kings  17.  7.  Israel  had  a.  against  Lord  their  God
21.  17.  the  sin  that  Manasseh  had  a.  is  written
Neh.  9.  29.  but  a.  against  thy  judgments

Job  1.5.  Job  said,  it  may  be  that  my  sons  have  a.

22.  in  all  this  Job  a.  not,  nor  charged  G.  foolishly
8.  4.  if  children  have  a.  against  him  and  have  cast
24.  19.  so  doth  the  grave  those  who  have  A.

Psal.  IS.  17.  they  a.  vet  more  against  him,  32.

Jsa.  4.3.  27.  thy  first  father  hath  a.  and  thy  teachers
Jer.  2.  35.  because  thou  sayest,  I  have  not  a.

33.  8.  their  iniquity,  whereby  they  have  a.  ag.  me
40.  3.  because  ye  have  a.  and  not  obeyed,  44.  23.

50.  7.  because  they  have  a.  ag.  the  L.  Zeph.  1.  17.

14.  for  Babylon  hath  a.  against  the  Lord
Lam.  1.  8.  Jerusalem  hath  grievously  a.  is  removed
5. 7.  our  fathers  have  a.  and  are  not,  we  have  borne
Ezek.  18.24.  in  sin  he  hath  a.  in  them  shall  he
28.  16.  have  filled  with  violence,  and  thou  hast  a.
37.  2.3.  of  their  dwelling  places  wherein  they  a.

Hos.  4.  7.  as  they  increased  so  they  a.  against  me
10.  9.  O  Israel  thou  hast  a.  from  days  of  Gibeah
Dab.  2. 10.  and  thou  hast  a.  against  thy  soul
John  9.  .3.  neither  this  man  a.  nor  his  parents
Rom.  2.  12.  for  as  many  as  have  a.  without  law  ;  as
have  a.  in  the  law,  shall  be  judged  by  the  law
3.23.  for  all  have  a.  and  come  short,  5.  12.

5.  14.  death  reigned  even  over  them  that  had  not  a.
16.  not  as  it  \vas  by  one  that  a.  so  is  the  gift
Cor.  7.  28.  but  and  if  thou  marry,  thou  hast  not  a.

and  if  a  virgin  marry  she  hath  not  a.

2  Cor.  12.21.  1  shall  bewail  many  that  have  a.

1.3.  2.  I  write  to  them  which  heretofore  have  a.

Deb.  3.  17.  was  it  not  with  them  that  had  a.  ?

2  Pet.  2.  4.  for  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  a.

1  John  1.  lO.if  we  say  we  have  not  a. we  deceive  ours
I  have  SINN  ED.

Exod.  9.  27.  Pharaoh  said,  I  haves,  this  time.  10. 16
Num.  22.  34.  Balaam  said  to  angel  of  Lord,  I  have  a
Josh. I.  20.  indeed  I  haves,  ag.  Lord  God  of  Israel
1  Sam.  15.  24.  Saul  said,  I  hare  >.  .30.  I  26.  21.

0  Sam  12.  13.  David  said  to  Nathan,  I  have
against  the  Lord,  24.  10.  17-  1  Chr.  21.  8,  17-

19.  20.  thy  servant  doth  know  that  I  have  s.

Job ’7.  20.  I  have  s.  ||  3.3.  27.  if  any  say  I  have  a.
Psal.  41.4.  heal  my  soul,  for  I  have  a.  against  thee
51. 4.  against  thee,"  thee  only  h.  1  s.  done  this  evil
Mic. 7.  9.7  //ameA.against  him,  till  he  plead  mv  cause
Mat.  27.  4.  Judas  said,  7  hare  s.  in  betraying  inno.
Luke  15.  18.  the.  prodigal  said,  father,  I  have  s.  21.

We  have  SINN  ED.

Num.  12.  11.  lay  not  sin  on  us,  wherein  we  have  s.
14.  40.  we  will  go  up,  for  we  have  s.  Deut.  1.  41.
21.7.  we  have  s.  v’e  have  spoken  against  the  Lord
Judg.  10.  10.  we  hare  s.  because  we  have  forsaken
our  God  and  served  Baalim,  1  Sam.  12.  10.
15.  we  have  s.  do  to  us  what  seemeth  good  to  thee
1  Sam.  7-  6.  they  fasted  that  day,  and  said,  we  haves.

1  Kings  ft.  47.  we  have  a.  and  have  done  perversely

2  Chr.  6.  37.  saying,  we  haves,  we  have  done  amiss
Neh.  1.  6.  and  confess  the  sins  which  we  have  s.
Psal.  106.6.  we  have  a.  with  our  fathers,  we  have
Isa.  42.  24.  the  Lord,  he  against  whom  we  haves.

64."  5.  behold  thou  art  wroth,  for  we  have  s.

Jer.  .3.  25.  we  lie  down  in  our  shame,  for  we  have  s.
8.  'll",  hath  given  us  water  of  gall,  for  we  have  s.

14.  7.  for  our  backslidings  are  many,  we  haves.

20.  acknowledge  our  wickedness,  for  we  haves.

I, am.  5. 16.  crown  is  fallen,  woe  to  us  that  we  hare  s.
Dan.  9.  5.  we  have  s.  and  have  committed  iniquity
8.  to  11s  belongeth  confusion,  because  we  have  s.
11.  the  curse  is  poured  on  us,  because  we  have  s.
15.  O  Lord,  we  haves.  w>e  have  done  wickedly
SINN  LB.

Prov.  11.  31.  much  more  the  wicked  and  the  a.

1.3.6.  but  wickedness  overthroweth  the  a.

22.  the  wealth  of  the  a.  is  laid  up  for  the  just
Eccl.  2.  26.  but  to  the  a.  he  giveth  travail,  to  gather

7.  26.  but  the  a. shall  be  taken  by  her

8.  12.  tho’  a.  do  evil  an  hundred  times,  yeti  know

9.  2.  as  is  the  good,  so  is  the  a.  and  he  that  sweareth
i8.  but  one  a.  destroyeth  much  good

Isa.  65.  20.  a.  being  100  years  old  shall  be  accursed
Luke  7.  .37.  behold  woman  in  the  city  who  was  a  a.
.39.  would  have  known  this  woman  she  is  a  a.

15.  7.  joy  in  heaven  over  one  a.  that  repenteth,  10
18.  13.  saying,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  a.


1


Luke  19.  7.  was  gone  to  be  guest  with  man  tnat  isa  a
John  9.  16.  how  can  a  man  a  a.  do  such  miracles  '■
24.  give  God  praise,  we  know  this  man  is  as.
he  said,  whether  he  be  a  a.  1  know  not


25


Rom.  3.  7.  why  yet  am  1  also  judged  as  a  a.  ?

Jam.  5.  20.  he  that  converteth  a  a.  shall  saveasoul
Pet.  4.  18.  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  a.  appear
SINNERS.  .

Gen.  13.  13.  the  men  of  Sodom  were  a.  exceedingly
Num.  16.  .38.  Lleazar,  take  the  censers  of  these  a.

1  Sam.  15. 18.  utterly  destroy  the  s.  the  Amalekites
Ps.  1.1.  blessed  that  standeth  not  in  the  way  ot

5.  nor  a.  in  the  congregation  of  the  righteous

25.  8.  therefore  will  he  teach  a.  in  the  way

26.  9.  gather  not  my  soul  with  a.  nor  my  life
51.  1.3.  and  a.  shall  be  converted  unto  thee
104.  35.  let  the  a.  be  consumed  out  of  the  earth

Prov.  1.  10.  if  a.  entice  thee,  consent  thou  not

1.3.  21.  evil  pursueth  a.  but  to  the  righteous  good
23. 17.  letnot thine  heart  envy  a.  be  in  fear  of  Ld.
Isa.  1.  28.  the  destruction  of  the  a.  shall  be  together

13.  9.  he  shall  destroy  the  a.  thereof  out  of  it
33. 14.  the  a.  in  Zion  are  afraid,  fearfulness
Amos  9.  10.  all  a.  of  my  people  shall  die  by  sword
Mat.  9. 10.  many  a.  sat  at  meat  with  Jes.  Mark  2. 15.

11.  they  said,  why  eateth  your  master  with  pub-
licans  and  a.  ?  Mark  ft.  16.  Luke  5.  .30.  1  15.  2

13.  for  l  am  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  a.

to  repentance,  Mark  2.  17.  Luke  5.  32.

11.  19.  a  friend  of  publicans  and  a.  Lukel.  34.

26.  45.  the  hour  is  at  hand,  and  the  Son  of  man  is

betrayed  into  the  hands  of  a.  Mark  14.-41.
Luke  6.  32.  for  a.  also  love  those  that  love  them

3.3.  what  thank  have  ye  ?  for  a.  also  do  even  same
34.  for  a.  also  lend  to  a.  to  receive  again

1.3.  2.  suppose  ye  that  these  were  a.  above  all,  4.

15.  1.  the  publicans  and  a.  for  to  hear  him
John  9.31.  we  know  that  God  heareth  not  a.

Rom.  5.  8.  while  we  were  yet  a.  Christ  died  for  us
19.  by  one  man’s  disobedience  many  were  made  a
Gal.  2. 15.  we  Jews  by  nature,  not  s.  of  Gentiles

17.  but  if  we  ourselves  also  are  found  a.

1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  made  for  a.  for  unholy
15.  that  Christ  Jesus  came  to  save  a.  1  am  chief
Deb.  7.  26.  an  high  priest,  holy,  separate  from  a.

12.  3.  him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of  a.
Jam.  4.  8.  cleanse  your  hands,  ye  a.  purify  hearts
Jude  15.  speeches  which  ungodly  a.  have  spoken

SIN  NEST.

Job  35.  6.  if  thou  a.  what  doest  thou  against  him  ?
SINNETD.

Num.  15.28.  make  aton.  for  soul  that  a.  ignorantly
29.  have  one  law  for  him  that  a.  thro’  ignorance
Deut.  19. 15.  one  witn.  shall  notrise  in  any  sin  he  a.

1  Kings  8.  46.  for  there  is  no  man  that  a.  not,  if  they
sin  against  God,  2  Chron.  6.  .36.  Eccl.  7.20.
Prov.  8.  .36.  he  that  a.  against  me  wrongeth  his  soul

14.  21.  he  that  despiseth  his  neighbour  a.

19.  2.  he  that  hasteth  with  his  feet  a.

20.  2.  whoso  provoketh  a  king,  a.  ag.  his  own  soul
Ezek.  14. 13.  when  the  land  a.  then  will  1  stretchout

18.  4.  the  soul  that  a.  it  shall  die,  20.

33.  12.  for  his  righteousness  in  the  day  he  a.

1  Cor.  6. 18.  but  fornicator  a.  against  his  own  body
7.  .36.  let  him  do  what  he  will  a.  not,  letthem  marry
Tit.  .3.  11.  he  that  is  such  is  subverted  and  a.

1  John  3.  6.  whosoever  abideth  in  him  a.  not,  who¬
soever  a.  hath  not  seen  him  nor  known  him

8.  is  of  the  devil,  for  devil  a.  from  the  beginning
5.  18.  we  know  whosoever  is  born  of  God  a.  not

SINN  I N  G .

Gen.  20.  6.  for  I  withheld  thee  from  a.  against  me
Lev.  6.  3.  in  any  of  these  that  man  does,  a.  therein
SINS.

1  KingsIA  16.  shall  give  Israel  up,  because  of  a.  ot

15.  3.  Abijam  walked  in  the  a.  of  Rehoboam
.30.  smote”  Nadab  because  of  the  a.  of  Jeroboam

16. 1.3.  for  all  the  a.  of  Baasha,  and  the  a.  of  Elah

19.  for  his  a.  which  Zimri  sinned  in  doing  evil

31.  a  light  thing  to  walk  in  the  a.  of  Jeroboam

2  Kings .3.  .3.  J ehoram  cleaved  to  the  a.  of  Jeroboam
10.  29.  from  the  a.  of  Jeroboam  Jehu  departed  not

1.3.  6.  Israel  departed  not  from  the  a.  of  Jeroboam
11.  Joash  ||  14.  24.  Jeroboam  departed  not  IromA.

15.  9.  Zachariah  ||  18.  Menahem  den.  not  from  a.

24.  Pekabiah  ||  28.  Pekah  departed  not  from  a.

17.22.  Israel  walked  in  all  the  a.  of  Jeroboam

24.  .3.  to  remove  Judah  for  the  a.  of  Manasseh
2  Chron.  28.  10.  are  there  not  even  with  you  a.  ?
Neh.  1.  6.  and  confess  the  a.  of  the  children  of  Isr.
Job  4.3.  2.3.  how  many  are  mine  iniquities  and  a.  ?
Ps.  19.  13.  keep  thy  servant  from  presumptuous  a.

25.  7.  remember  not  the  a.  of  my  youth
Prov.  5.  22.  shall  be  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  a.

10.  12.  hatred  stirreth  up  strifes,  love  cover,  all  a.

28.  13.  he  that  covereth  his  a.  shall  not  prosper
Isa.  40.  2.  she  hath  received  double  for  all  her  a.

4.3.  24.  but  thou  hast  made  me  to  serve  with  thy  a

25.  1  blot  out  and  will  not  remember  thy  a
44.  22. 1  have  blotted  out  as  a  cloud  thy  a.

Jer.  15. 13.  substance  will  1  give  to  spoil  for  all  thy  a.
30. 14.  because  thy  a.  were  increased,  15.

50.  20.  a.  of  Judah  sought  for,  and  not  be  found
Lam.  3.  39-  a  man  for  the  punishment  of  his  a.

4. 1.3.  for  the  a.  of  her  prophets  and  her  priests
22.  O  daughter  of  Edom,  he  will  discover  thy  a.

Ezek.  16.51.  nor  hath  Samaria  committ.  half  thy  a.
52.  bear  thou  thine  own  shame  for  thy  .v.

18.  14.  ifhe  beget  son  thatseethall  his  father’s  a.
21.  if  the  wicked  will  turn  from  all  his  a.

2.3.  49.  and  he  shall  bear  the  a.  of  your  idols.

.33.  16.  none  of  his  a.  shall  be  mentioned  to  him

Dan.  4.  27.  break  off  thy  a.  by  righteousness

9.  24.70  weeks  are  determ,  to  make  an  end  of  a..
Mic.  1.  5.  for  the  a.  of  the  house  of  Israel  is  all  this

6.  13.  in  making  thee  desolate  because pf thy  a.
Mat.  26.  28.  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  a.
Mark  1 . 4.  John  did  baptize  and  preach  the  baptism
of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  a.  Luke  3.  3.
Lade  24.47.  that  remission  of  a.  should  be  preached
John  9.  34.  they  said,  thou  wast  altogether  born  in  a

20.  2.3.  whosesoever  a.  ye  remit,  whose  a.  ye  retain


S  1  R

Actsd,  38.  lepent  and  be  baptized  for  remission  of  s.
5.  31.  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  s.

10. 43.  whoso  believeth, shall  receive  remission  of  x.

„  wash  away  thy  .v.  calling  on  name  of  Lord
livm.  3.  15.  tor  the  remission  ot  x.  that  are  past
(.  o.  the  motions  ot  x.  did  work  in  our  members
t.pn.2. 1.  you  hath  quickened,  who  weredead  in  x.  5
■  1  m  Rutting  off  the  body  of  .y.  of  the  flesh
i  I*m.  5-  22.  nor  be  partakers  of  other  men’s  x.

.  %.?.•  so'nf  nien  s  x.  open  beforehand,  going  before
n  , 9'  "  10  *ead  oaPt-  s> I  ly  women  laden  with  x.

i  W°  make  reconciliation  for  x.  of  people
5.  1.  that  he  may  offer  gilts  and  sacrifices  for  x.

3 •  ■?t\P60R  e’  s.°  also  lor  himself,  to  offer  for  x.
n  no  m  .*<ir  his  own  s.  then  for  the  people's
y.  28.  Christ  was  onc  e  offered  to  bear  x.  of  many
o  .u  sh°.l,hi  have  had  no  more  conscience  of  s.

3.  there  is  a  remembrance  again  made  of  x.

4.  not  possi.  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  take  away  s.

me  same  sacrifices  can  never  take  away  s.
ok  a,r  lle  had  offered  one  sacrific  e  for  x.  for  ever

2o.  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  .y.

Jaw.  5.  20.  save  soul,  and  shall  hide  multitude  ofx
o  -4A,'V^  being  dead  to  .c.  should  live  to  right.

3.  18.  tor  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  s

4.  8.  for  charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  off.

i  r /’  o'  o'  '01r0t,tenhe  was  purged  from  his  old  x.

1  John  2.  2.  but  also  for  the  f.  of  the  whole  world
ic<f».18.  4.  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  x.

5.  for  her  x.  have  reached  unto  heaven

See  Forgive,  Forgiven.

„  .  ,  .  ,  My  SINS.

eok  ?'  Yde  face  from  my  x.  and  blot  out
r.y'  „  °  p0''*  mP  s-  are  not  hid  from  thee
lia.  38. 17.  thou  hast  cast  my  x.  behind  thy  back
Our  SINS.

I  Sam.  12.19.  for  we  have  added  to  all  our  x.  thisevil
ye  intend  to  add  more  to  ourT
d  7  *  ie  set  over  us  because  of  our  s

J’sal.  (9.  9.  purge  away  our  s.  for  thy  name’s  sake

iM8ioMK.Sfnret/jmithe  lLs  lt0  countenance
103.  10.  hath  not  dealt  with  us  according  to  our  s
Isa.  59.  12.  for  our  x.  testify  against  us

n  V‘n3,V10u  if  our  Jv*)e  uP°n  us>  "'e  pine  away
iJan.  9. 16.  because  of  our  x.  thy  people  are  become
I  Gor  15.  3  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  s.  accord?
Gal.  1.  4.  who  gave  himself  for  our  x.  to  deliver  us
3A.w)e.n  !aP  himself  purged  ours,  sat  down
1  rjf*  2n*  'r  10  lls  °'An  S<J if  hare  our  s.  in  his  body
1  John  1.  9.  if  we  confess  our  s.  he  is  faithful  and

o  o  1  t0  for§!>’ei  us  0,!r  s-  and  to  cleanse  us

2.  2.  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  s.  4.  10.

3.  5.  he  was  manifested  to  take  away  our  s.

tiev.  1.  5.  washed  us  from  our  s.  in  his  own  blood
r  lheir  SINS.

01'  u  i1!6'  because  ot  their  transgress,  in  their  s.

21.  shall  confess  over  the  live  goat  all  their  x.

34.  to  make  atonement  tor  their  s.  once  a  year
Num.  16.  26.  lest  ye  be  consumed  in  all  their  s.

14>  22-  ,the>'  provoked  him  with  their  s.
st  1  n  P  P.rovo,ke  me  to  anger  with  their  s.

Teh'Sj  ?•  i  srael  stood  and  confessed  their  s.

Isa.  58.  1  shew  the  house  of  Jacob  their  x.

Jer.  14.  10.  and  visit  their  s.  llos.  8.  13. 1  9.  9

AJni  1'  9ast  all  7/iezr  x.  into  the  depth  of  the  sea
Mat.  1.  ~1.  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  s.
f,  've!®  baPtized,  confessing  then  s.  Mark  1.  5
yJ.a/^.4-  ' apd  their  s.  should  be  forgiven  them
Vn  Vi  1;°  salvation  by  the  remission  of  theirs.
Roni.  11.  2(.  when  I  shall  take  away  their  s
l^T/iess.  2.  16.  to  fill  up  their  s.  alway
in  i8-  12-  tor  1  will  be  merciful  to  their  x.

10. 1 1 .  theirs,  and  iniquities  I  will  remem.  no  more
r  Jour  SINS.

ye  may  be  c!ean  from  aH  pour  x.

20.  18.  punish  you  yet  seven  times  for  yours.  24
rf1'  1  will  bring  plagues  on  you  accord,  to  v our  s'
Deut.  g.  is.  nor  drink  water,  because  of  your  s
Jcx/i  24.  -19.  is  an  holy  God,  will  not  forg&«rx
1-  18'ho  Vws.  be  as  scarlet,  shall  be  afVnow
?/•  2-  and  pour  x.  have  Ind  his  face  from  you
iir;i5'oi5'ofOUr.i-  have  withholden  good  things
4m, V"io' '  r°  thiai  ln  al  1  your  doings  yours,  appear
5. .12.  for  1  know  your  transgr.  and  miahtv  x
?•  -1'  ye  sball  seek  me,  and  die  in  your  s.  24.'

\  Cnr3U 'hdt  your  X.  may  be  blotted  out
Co  o  Chhnst  be  not  raised,  ye  are  in  your  x.

,  ' jnr  being  dead  in  yours,  hath  he  quick.

1  John  2.  12.  because  your^s.  are  forgiven  you

AlZ‘  &  S‘  v  ?  ?amf  at  brst  time  to  buy  food

01  'in3,h  7'  •'  ^ llJSt  not  thoV  sow  good  seed  in  field  ?

21.  30.  he  said,  I  go  x.  and  went  not

rl'ml  wef.emember  that  that  deceiver  said
John  4.  11.  s.  thou  hast  nothing  to  draw  witl

15.  x.  give  me  this  water  that  I  thirst  not
19.  x.  I  perceive  that  thou  art  a  prophet
^49.  the  nobleman  saith,  x.  come  ere  my  child  die
f 1  ha\e  no  man  to  put  me  into  the  pool
on  TV  certaln  Greeks  saying,  x.  we  would  see  Je.

20.  15.  x.  if  thou  have  borne  him  hence,  tell  me
Rev.  7.  14.  I  said  unto  him,  x.  thou  know  est

l6‘  ■■  ye  are  brethren,  why  do  ye  wrong
i«‘  In'  ln.^,out»  s;  why  do  ye  these  things?

In  nih  tle  said,  X.  what  must  1  do  to  be  saved  >

19.  25.  x.  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have  '
l\  p„f;, !  Pfce,ve  ‘bis  voyage  will  he  with  hurt
or  ‘  f u  said,  s.  ye  should  liave  hearkened  to  me

20.  wherefore,  x.  be  of  good  cheer,  1  believe  God

SI  R  N  A  M  F,.

Isa.  44.  5.  and  x.  himself  by  filename  of  Israel
,,  ,  T  S1RNAME.

a  -Lebbeus,  whose  x.  was  Thaddeus

?■  Simon,  whose  x.  is  Peter,  32.  111.  13
1”.  John,  wliose  x.  was  Mark,  25.  1 15  37
.  SI  RN  AM  FI).

4',  ‘  have  .f.  thee,  tho’  thou  hast  not  known  me

1  '  ^lrnon  he  s.  Peter,  Acts  10.  18.

r  T  ‘f,  ™.eip  Boanerges,  the  sons  of  thunder

J  entered  into  Judas,  x.  Iscariot

■acfi  1.  .3  Joseph  called  Barsahas,  who  was*.  Jus.


S  1  s

V1'?  by  the  apostles  was  x.Parnaoas
15.  — .  to  scud  Judas,  x.  Barsabas,  and  Silas
rr,.  .  SISTER.

Hits  name  has  much  the  same  latitude  as  that  of

mother'  huHYf.ft T,  ,s“ter  *V  fther  and


SIT


,  ”  - y  wrcij/  jui  HO  J di

™nt,T\uru\  a  S°JUrnef  ls  only  a  near  relation.
I  us  Sarah  is  called  sister  to  Abraham,  though

she  was  only  his  niece  according  to  some*  or  his
fern  %!  h\p'ierlo

brothers  and  sisters  of  Jesus  Christ  are  no  other
than  his  cousins ,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  the
sisters  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  Mat.  13.56.  Mark
I71.  Lev,  18.  18.  it  is  forbidden  to  take  a
m  lie  to  her  sister  ;  that  is ,  according  to  some
to  marry  two  sisters,  ,  r,  according  'to  the  Ge¬
nerality  of  interpreters,  to  marry  a  second  wife
when  one  has  one  before ;  so  that  this  passage
forbids  polygamy.  Sometimes  the  word  sister
shows  a  resemblance  of  conditions  and  inclinations
1  he  prophets  call  Jerusalem  the  sister  of  Sodom
and 'Samaria,  because  it  delighted  in  the  imitation
oj  their  idolatry  and  iniquity,  Jer.  3.  8  10

Ezek.  16.  46.

In  the  Song  ot  Solomon,  the  name  of  sister,  given
to  the  spouse,  is  a  name  of  tenderness,  love,  and
affection,  and  shews  the  great  affection  which
Christ  has  for  his  church,  which  cannot  be  suffi¬
ciently  expressed  by  any  one  relation,  but  must
borrow  the  perfections  and  affections  of  all,  to  de¬
scribe  it  :  this  name  may  likewise  shew  that  Christ
and  his  church  have  but  one  f  ather,  to  wit,  God
so  that  the  church  is  every  way  royal ;  the
daughter  ^  a  king,  the  sister  *./  a  king.  Cant.
4.  9,  10,  1  In  Cant.  8.  8.  the  spouse  speaking
to  her  beloved,  says,  We  have  a  little  sister,
and  she  hath  no  breasts,  what  shall  we  do  for
oui  sister  in  the  day  when  she  shall  be  spoken
for.  I  he  believers  of  the  Jewish  church,  who
here  consult  with  Christ,  as  it  were,  tell  him  that
they  had  a  little  sister,  meaning  the  Gentile  church
which  as  yet  was  not  ripe  for  marriage  with
cm  1st :  how  shall  we  promote  their  conversion,  say

I  todlvm?71  116  ten^ers  °f  reconciliation  are  made

Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  says,  Mat.  12.  50.  Who¬
soever  shall  do  the  will  of  my  Father  who  is  in
heaven,  the  same  is  my  brother,  and  sister,  and
mothei  .  that  isf  Whosoever  shall  give  real  evi-
deyiee  of  true  faith  hy  sincere  obedience ,  shall  be
as  dear  to  me  as  my  nearest  natural  relations  •
of,  as  the  nearest  relations  are  to  any  person.
Job,  in  his  afflictions,  exclaims,  1  have  said  to
the  worm,  thou  art  my  mother,  and  my  sister  •
thou  art  near  akin  to  me,  we  are  of  the  same  ori-
g via/,  and  thou  art  continually  with  me.  Job  17.

foe  wise  man  advises  his  pupil  to  say  to
Htsdom,  thou  art  my  sister;  that  is,  acquaint
and  delight  thyself  with  her,  and  let  her  have  the
command  oj  thy  heart,  and  the  conduct  of  thy
life  Prov.7  4.  As  Christians  were  used  to  sa-

Lute  07ie  another  by  the  name  oj  brothers  or  bre
thren,  so  they  called  Christian  women,  who  pro¬
fessed  the  same  faith  in  Cliist,  by  the  name  of
sisters,  Jam.  2.  15,  16,  If  a  brother  or  sister  be
naked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food,  &c.

n4,  59'  they  sent  away  Rebekah  their  x.

60.  thou  art  our  x.  be  thou  mother  of  thousands
V^*T3V^L.n .Laban  heard  of  Jacob  his  s .  son
f/'  }•  Pachel  envied  her  x.  and  said  unto  Jacob
34.  13.  because  he  had  defiled  Dinah  their  x.  27.

14.  w-e  cannot  give  our  x.  to  one  uncircumcised
jS«OU  >  •  deal  vvlth  our  s-  as  with  an  harlot?


ip  .  - ,  .  ~  v*vi“  vui  .  ao  wnii  (iii  uariot

2\4,  ,11S  j.  Stood  afar  off  to  wit  what  would
1  -  ~n\  4,n.lram  took  Jochebed  his  father’s  x.  to  wife

10.  .0  Miriam  x.  of  Aaron  took  a  timbrel  in  hand
Jev.  18.  9.  shalt  not  uncover  the  nakedness  of  thv  x

11.  she  is  thy  x.  ||  18.  not  take  a  wife  to  her  x  '
on  •,1i°-rnakedness,  of. father's  x.  ||  13.  mother’s  x.
~0.  1  ( .  if  a  man  take  his  s.  and  see  her  nakedness

19.  nor  nakedness  of  thy  father’s  x.  mother’s  x
-i.  3.  for  his  x.  a  virgin,  tor  her  may  he  be  defiled
y  um.  6.  *.  a  Nazante  shall  not  be  defiled  for  hisx
Deut.  27.  22.  cursed  be  he  that  lieth  with  his  x
Judg.  15.2.  is  not  her  younger  x.  fairer  than  she  ?

~  namf  13‘ -Absalom  had  a  fair  x.  named  Tamar
~.  Amnon  so  vexed  that  he  fell  sick  for  his  x.

4.  I  love  Jamar,  my  brother  Absalom’s  x/amai
A.  because  he  had  forced  hisx.  Tamar,  32
21.  +8.  the  king  took  the  five  son’s  of  Michal’s  x
2  KtnS>f1  L  2.  but  Jehosheba  x.  of  Ahaziah  took
Joash,  they  hid  him  and  his  nurse,  2  Chron.

Cant.  8.  8.  we  have  a  little  x.  and  she  hath  no  breasts
r  „  „  what  shall  we  do  for  our  x.  in  the  dav  >
01  a,Pd  ber. treacherous  x.  Judah  saw  it
on  ,or‘V  frared  *,10t  11  IP-,  ber  x.  hath  not  turned
^-2.18.  shalt  not.  lament  for  him,  saying,  ah,  myx.
Ar  ’*ud‘  1  A'  thou  art  the  x.  of  thy  sisters  who  loath
4b.  thy  elder  x.  is  Samaria,  thy  younger  x.  Sodom

48.  Sodom  thy  x.  hath  not  done  as  thou  hast  done

49.  this  was  the  iniquity  of  thy  x.  Sodom,  pride
Ob.  tor  thy  x.  Sod.  was  not  menlioned  in  the  dav

I1- an«tber  in  thee  hath  humbled  his  x.

23.  4.  Aholah  the  elder,  and  Aholibah  her  x.

11.  and  when  her  x.  Aliolibah  saw  this

18.  like  as  my  mind  was  alienated  from  herx.

31.  thou  hast  walked  in  the  way  of  thy  x.

32.  shalt  drink  of  thy  x.  cup  deep  and  large,  33.

44.  25.  tor  x.  that  hath  no  husband  they  may  defile

Mat.  12.  50.  the  same  is  my  brother,  x.  and  mother
Luke  10.  39.  she  had  ax,  called  M ary,  John  11.1,5.
John  11.  3.  therefore  his  x.  sent  unto  him,  saying,  L.
19.  2o.  there  stood  by  the  cross  his  mother’s  x.

Acts  23. 16.  Paul’s  x.  son  heard  of  their  lying  in  wait
Lorn.  16.  1.  1  commend  to  you  Pbebe  ourx.  aserv.

‘  L or.  7 . 15.  a  brother  or  a  x.  is  not  under  bondage
9.  5.  have  we  not  power  to  lead  about  a  x.  a  wife  ?
Col.  4.  10.  Marcus  x.  son  to  Barnabas saluteth  you
Jam.  2.  15.  if  a  brother  or  x.  be  naked  and  destitute
2  John  13.  the  children  of  thy  elect  x.  greet  thee


.  SISTER-,’ n-law.

Ruth  1. 15.  Denold,  thy  s.-tn-law  is  gone  back  to  he«
people  and  gods,  return  thou  after  thy  -in-law

12u-  13-  .say>  1  Pfay  thee,  thou  art  my  x.

19.  why  saidst,  she  is  my  s.  ?  20.  2, 5,  12  I  °6  7  o
30.  8.  1  have  wrestled  with  mys.  and  pi  evaded'

Z  bam.  1.3.  5.  say  to  him,  let  my  x.  '1  amar  come,  6

on’  Arr  Sald  It0i  co,ne  be  with  me,  mys.
r20-  Absalom  said,  hold  now  thy  peace,  mys
p  l7gl4-  1  have  said  to  the  worm,  thou  art  mys
rrov.  t  4.  say  to  wisdom,  thou  art  mys.  and  call
Caw/.  4. 9.  hast  ravished  my  heart,  my  x.  my  spouse
10.  how  fair  is  thy  love,  mys.  my  spouse
i z.  a  garden  inclosed  is  my  s.  my  spouse,  a  sprin<>

O.  I.  1  am  come  into  my  garden  my  x.  my  snouse
M"?p„en„rt0  ,ne-  mP  '•  'ID'  love,  my  undefiled

rftleu i3rnSaim*  I?  Iny  brother,  my  s.  and  mother
Luke  10.  40.  dost  thou  not  care  that  my  x.  left  me  ?

J\°Chrm  o?’w'Veau  ie  Wil1  SaVe  alive  my  fath .mys,
r/t  a  °’  Y|b°iS5  '•  were  Zeruiah  and  Abigail
J4°  Vi4’mey  ‘ a  ed  fnr,their  three  'y- t0  eat  and  drink
llls  brethren  and  all  his  x.
Lxek  \b.  45.  and  thou  art  the  sister  of  thy  x.

51.  thou  hast  justified  thy  x.  in  all  thy  abom.  52

fit %hMtVhy  h  anb  daughters  shall  return
bl.  shalt  be  ashamed  when  thou  receive  thy  x

Mn'i  i’<,hJay  ye  u!nf  your Puhamah
Ivlat.  13.  56.  ai e  not  Ins  x.  with  us  ?  Mm Z  fi  3

19.  29.  that  hath  forsaken  x.  or  father,  or  mother,  or
„ .  "  i»e,  for  niy  sake,  Mark  10.  °9  I vke  14  or,

^'o0'  S,l,al1  receive  10<-»  fold,  houses,  bi  etli.  x?*

1  fun.  5. 2.  mtreat  younger  women,  as  x.witli  purity

Ar/w.32.  6.  shall  brethren  go  to  war  and  ye  x.  here  >

JRutii  3’  2*  SPc^knye  that  '•  ‘l1  Judgment  and  walk
ail3*  18’  ,•  stlll>  my  'laughter,  till  thou  know
1  i’  ‘  n’  mC1  a  one  turn  aside,  x.  down  here,  2.

1  bam  9.  22.  and  made  them  x.  in  the  chiefest  place

on’  WI,  1  110t  s-  down  ‘bl  be  come  hither

U).  5.  I  should  not  tail  to  x.  with  the  king

8i  behold,  the  king  doth  x.  in  the  gate

I  K\ m^x  1. 1.3 .  Solomon  shall  x.  on  mv  thrcne,  17
48-,wb°  bath  given  one  to  x.  on  my  throne,  3.  6.

8.  25.  theie  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  to  x.  on  the
throne  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  6.  16.  Jer.  33  17
7-  3-  why  x.  we  here  till  we  die  ?  4.

10  nl1'  thy  sons  shall  x.  on  the  throne,  15  12
d  ,  L'/ent  Ine  t0  men  who  x.  on  wall,  Isa  36'  1»
fio^jo26’^’  a!!d  wil>.  no,t  '•  wifh  the  wicked  '
‘bey  that  x.  in  the  gate  speak  against  me

II  A'  1  '  s- ,  j  as  s ■  111  'larkn.  and  shadow  of  death
iio'  03SaU- t0  my  Lord,  x.  thou  at  mv  right  hand

Pitue.es  also  did  x.  and  speak  against  me

130’  VhJr  nf  y°u  lto1,;ise  eai'ly  and  x.  up  late
?/32;  ‘r-  their  children  shall  x.  upon  thy  throne

7~V2At0lly  V1  dlpjity ,  and  rich  x.  in  low  place
sx'h'i-  desolate,  shall  x.  on  the  ground

ia'  w;iJ  p  uP°n  mount  of  the  congregation

16.  5.  he  shall  x.  upon  the  throne  in  truth
'ini’  u  have  cried,  their  strength  is  to  x.  still
[■  bung  them  thatx.  in  darkness  out  of  prison
c  L  [’ 111  me  dust,  x.  on  the  ground,  52  0

5.  x.  thou  silent,  get  thee  into  darkness,  6  (laughter
8.  thou  that  say est,  1  shall  not  x.  as  a  widow
14.  there  shall  not  be  <t  lire  to  s.  before  it

13' iV?'  ^ny(An°AVe  s-  ffi11  '  assemble  yourselves
13. 13.  1  will  fill  them  that  x.  on  David’s  throne

3«83n  u°W,n  'PP’  38 •  15.  il  48.  18.  and  x.  in  thirst
3b.  30.  he  shall  have  none  to  x.  upon  the  throne
i.  1.  how  doth  city  x.  solitary  \us  full  of  peo

^;A°-oiair*f0(  Zl01]  s-,?n  ground  and  keep  silence
Lzek.  _6.  16.  they  shall  x.  upon  the  ground
28.  2  because  thou  hast  said,  I  x.  in  seat  of  God
33.  31.  and  they  x.  before  thee  as  my  people
44-  3.  prince  shall  x.  in  it  to  eat  bread  before  Lord
^  beheld  till  the  ancient  of  days  did  x

r2^'3bu,tnthnJudgninntTShaI1  they  sha11  take  away
J°e!  3;  12.  there  will  I  x.  to  judge  the  heathen

Mtc  4.  4.  they  shall  x.  every  man  under  his  vine
7.  8.  when  l  x.  in  darkness,  Lord  shall  be  a  light
Zech  ?>  \j.  thou  and  thy  fellows  thatx.  before  me
o.  J3.  he  shall  x.  and  rule  upon  his  throne
Mai.  3. 3.  he  shall  x.  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  ofsilver
Mat.  8.  11.  many  shall  x.  down  with  Abraham
19.  28.  when  Son  of  man  shall  x.  on  throne  of  his
glory,  ye  shall  x.  on  twelve  thrones,  25
31.  Luke  22.  30.

2ni2?’  my  two  sons  may  one  on  thy  right  hand
23.  hut  to  x.  on  my  right  hand,  Mark  10.  37,  40

22.  44.  x.  thou  on  my  right  hand  till  1  make
thy  enemies  thy  footstool,  Mark  12.  36
Luke  20.  42.  Heb.  1.  13.

23.  2.  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  x.  in  Moses’  seat
26.  36.  x.  ye  here  while  I  pray  yonder,  Mark  14.  32

Luke  9.  14.  make  them  x.  by  fifties  in  a  company
1~.  37.  make  them  to  x.  dovyn,  and  will  serve  them
13.  29.  and  shall  x.  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God
‘4.8.  when  bidden  x.  not  down  in  highest  room
16. 6.  take  thy  bill,  y.  down  quickly,  and  write  fifty
}“,•  ®ay  t°  him,  go,  and  x.  down  to  meat

John  6.  10.  Jesus  said,  make  the  men  x.  down
Acts  2.  30.  would  raise  up  Christ  to  x.  on  his  throne
8.  31.  that  he  would  come  up  and  x.  with  him
l  Cor.  8. 10.  to  see  theex.  at  meat  in  the  idol’s  temple
Lph.  2.  6.  hath  made  us  x.  in  heavenly  places
Jam.  2.  3.  and  say,  x.  thou  here  in  a  good  place
Rev.  3. 21.  will  I  grant  to  x.  with  me  in  my  throne

17.  3.  1  saw  a  woman  x.  on  scarlet-coloured  beast

18.  7.  for  she  saith  in  her  heart,  I  x.  a  queen

SITH.

Ezek.  35.6.  x.  thou  hast  not  hated  blood,  even  blood

SITTEST  Slml1  pursue  tllee
Exod.  18.  14.  why  x.  thou  thyself  alone  s
Deut.  6.7.  thou  shalt  talk  of  them  when  thou  x.  in
D.  /  Kn  nn  a  thine  house,  and  walkest,  11. '19
tfsal'  50. 20.  thou  s •  and  speakest  against  thy  broth
Drov.  23.  1.  when  thou  x.  to  eat  with  a  ruler
Jer.  22.2.  hear,  O  king  of  J  udah,  that  x.  on  the  throne
Acts  23.3.  x.  thou  to  judge  ine  after  the  Uwl

449


8  IX


8  K  1


SLA


SITTETH.  ,  u

Exod.  11.  5.  from  the  first-born  that?,  on  his  throne
Lev.  15. 4. every  thing  whereon  he.?,  shall  be  unclean

6.  whereon  he  or  she  s.  be  unclean,  CO,  ^3,  ’26.

Deut.  17.  18.  when  he  s.  on  the  throne  he  shall  write
1  Kings  1.  46.  Solomon  s.  on  throne  of  the  kingdom
Esth.  6.  10.  do  so  to  Mordecai  that  ?.  at  the  gate
Psal.  1.  1.  nor  s.  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful
2.  4.  he  that ?.  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh

10.  8.  he  s.  in  the  lurking  places  of  the  villages
29  10.  Lord  s.  on  the  Hood  ;  yea,  the  Lord  ?.  king
for  ever,  the  L.  will  give  Strength  to  his  people
47.  8.  G~d  s.  on  the  throne  of  his  holiness
Q9.  1.  Lord  reigneth,  he  s.  between  the  cnen  Dims
Prov.  9.  14.  for  she  .9.  at  the  door  of  her  house
20.  8.  a  king  that  .9.  in  the  throne  of  judgment

31  03  when  he  .9.  among  the  elders  ot  the  land

Cant.  1.  12.  while  king?,  at  his  table  my  spikenard
ha.  28. 6.  spirit  of  judgm.  to  him  that.?,  injudgm.

40.  22.  it  is  he  that  s.  on  the  circle  of  the  heavens
Jer.  17.  11.  as  the  partridge.?,  on  eggs
oq,  16.  saith  of  the  king  that  s.  upon  the  throne
Lam.  3.  28.  he  .?.  alone  and  keepeth  silence
Zech.  1.11.  behold,  all  the  earth  ?.  still,  and  is  at  rest

5.  7.  a  woman  that .?.  in  the  midst  ot  the  epbah
Mat.  23.  22.  sweareth  by  him  that  ?.  thereon
Luke  14.  28.  s.  not  down  first  and  counteth,  31.

22.  27.  whether  is  greater,  he  that  ?.  at  meat  or  he
that  serveth  ;  is  not  he  that  s.  at  meat .

1  Cor.  14. 30. if  any  thing  be  reveal,  to  anoth.  that?.  by
Col.  3. 1.  where  Christ  .?.  on  the  right  hand  of  God

2  Thess.  2.  4.  he,  as  God,  ?.  in  the  temple  ot  God
Rev.  5.  13  power  to  him  that  s.  upon  the  throne

6.  16.  from  the  face  of  him  that/,  on  the  throne

7.  10.  salvation  to  our  God  which  .?.  on  the  throne

15.  he  that  .?.  on  throne  shall  dwell  among  them
17.  1.  the  whore  that .?.  upon  many  waters,  15.

9  are  seven  mountains,  on  which  the  woman  s.
SITTING.

Deut.  22.  6.  and  the  dam  .?.  on  the  young  or  eggs

Judg  3.  20.  Eglon  was  .?.  in  a  summer-parlour

1  Kings  10.  5.  she  saw .?.  of  his  servants,  2  Chr.  9.  4.

13.  14.  found  the  man  of  God  ?.  under  an  oak
22.  19.  I  saw  the  T.ord  .?.  on  his  throne,  and  all  the
"'host'of  heaven  standing,  2  Chr.  18.  18.  Isa.  6.  1.

2  Kings  4. 38.  sons  of  the  prophets  were .?.  before  hnn
9.  5.  behold,  the  captains  of  the  host  were  ?.

Neh.  2.  6.  the  king  said,  the  queen  also  s.  by  him
Esth.  5.  13.  so  long  as  1  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  .?.
Psal.  139-  2.  thou  knowestmy  down-.?,  and  up  rising
Jer.  17.  25.  kings  s.  on  throne  of  David,  22.  4,  30.

38.  7.  the  king  then  .?.  in  the  gate  ot  Benjamin
Lam.  3.  63.  behold  their  ?.  down  and  rising  up
Mat.  9.  9.  s.  at  receipt  of,  Mark  2.  14.  Luke  5.  27.

11.  16.  like  children  ?.  in  the  markets,  Luke  7-.  32-
20  30.  behold,  two  blind  men  ?.  by  the  way  side
2l!  5.  thy  king  cometh,  s.  on  an  ass,  John  12.  .15

26.  64.  ye  shall  see  the  Son  of  man  s.  on  the  right
hand  or  God,  coming  in  the  clouds,  Mark  14.  62.

27.  36.  and  s.  down,  they  watched  him  there
61.  the  other  Mary  s.  over  against  the  sepulchre

Mark  5.  15.  they  see  him  that  was  possessed  .?.

16.  5.  they  saw  a  young  man  s.  on  the  right  side
Luke  2.  46.  they  found  him  ?.  in  midst  of  doctors

5.  17.  the  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law  ?.  by

8.  35.  found  him  s.  clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind
10.  13.  had  repented,  in  sackcloth  and  ashes
John  2.  14.  he  found  the  changers  of  money  s.

20.  12.  Marv  seeth  two  angels  in  white?.

Aces 2.  2.  it  filled  the  house  where  they  were  s.

8  °8.  eunuch  was  returning,  and  .?.  in  his  chariot
Rev  4.  4.  upon  the  seats  1  saw  twenty-four  elders  ?.
SITTING-PLACE.

2  Chron.  9.  18.  and  stays  on  each  side  of  s.-place
SITUATE.

Ezek  27.  3.  Tyrus,  O  thou  that  art?,  at  entry  of  sea
Kah  3.  8  populous  No  that  was  ?.  among  rivers
SITUATION.

2  Kings  2.  19  behold,  the  ?.  ot  the  city  is  pleasant
Psal  48.  2. beautiful  for?,  joy  of  earth  is  mount  Zion

SIX.

Lev.  24.  6.  ?.  cakes  on  a  row  on  the  pure  table
Mum.  7.  3.  ?.  covered  waggons,  and  twelve  oxen
2  Ham.  21 . 20.  man  of  great  stature  that  had  on  every
hand  .?.  fingers,  every  foot .?.  toes,  1  Chr.  20.  6.

1  Chr.  4.  27.  Shimei  had  sixteen  sons  and  ?.  daught.

26  17.  eastward  were  .?.  Lev ites,  northward  four
Ezek.  46.  4.  the  burnt  offering  that  the  prince  shall
offer  to  the  Lord,  shall  be?,  lambs  without  blemish
6.  in  the  day  of  the  new  moon  shall  be  ?.  lambs
SlX  boards.

Exod.  26.  22.  westward  thou  shalt  make  ?.  boards
36.  27'  for  the  sides  of  tabernacle  he  made  ?.  b.

See  Branches.

SlX  brethren.

Acts  11. 12.  moreover  these.?,  brethren  accompanied
SIX  cities.

Num.  35.  6.  there  shall  be  ?.  cities  for  refuge,  13,  15.
SIX  cubits.

1  Sam.  17.  4. Goliath's  height  was?,  cubits  a.n<\  a  span
1  Kings  6. 6.  the  middle  chamber  was .?.  cubits  broad
F.zek.  40. 5.  a  measuring-reed  of?,  cubits  long.

12.  the  little  chambers  were .?.  cubits  on  this  side
41.  1.  he  measured  posts  .?.  cubits  broad  on  one  side
3.  door  .?.  cubits  ||  5.  wall  of  the  house  ?.  cubits
8*.  foundations  were  a  full  reed  of  ?.  great  cubits
Dan.  3.  1.  the  breadth  of  the  image  of  gold  ?.  c.
SIX  curtains.

Exod.  26.  9.  couple  ?.  curtains  by  themselves,  36. 16.
See  Days,  Hundreds.

S 1 X  measures.

Ruth  .3.  15.  Poaz  gave  Huth  of  barley  s.  measures

17. she  said,  these  >.  m.  of  barley  gave  he  me
SI  X  men.

Ezek.  9.  2.  ?.  men  came  from  way  of  the  higher  gate
SIX  months.

2  Sam.  2.  11.  the  time  David  was  king  in  Hebron,
was  seven  years,  ?.  months,  5.  5.  1  Chron.  3.  4.

1  Kings  11.  16.  ?.  months  Joab  remained  in  Edom

2  Kings  15.8.  Zachariah  reigned  ?.  m.  over  Israel
Esth.  2.  12.  purifying  ?.  months  with  oil  ot  myrrh,

an.  1  ?.  months  with  sweet  odours  and  other  things

450


Luke  A.  25.  when  heaven  was  shut  up  three  years
and  .?.  months,  and  great  famine,  Jam.  5.  17-
Acts  18.  11.  Paul  continued  at  Corinth  a  year?,  m.
SIX  names.

Exod.  28.  10.  ?.  of  their  names  on  one  stone,  and
the  other  ?.  names  of  the  rest  on  the  other  stone
SIX  paces.

2  Sam.  6.  13.  when  Levites  gone  ?.  p.  he  sacrificed
SIXSCORE.  .  ,,

1  Kings  9. 14.  Hiram  sent  Solomon  ?.  talents  ot  gold

SlX  sheep.

Neh.  5.  18.  prepared  for  me  daily  ?.  choice  sheep
SIX  sons.

Gen.  30.  20.  will  dwell  with  me,  I  have  born  ?.  sons
1  Chron.  3.  22.  and  the  ?ow?  of  Sliechamah  ?.

8.  38.  and  Azel  had  .?.  sons,  whose  names  are,:9.  44.
SIX  steps.

1  Kings  10.  19.  the  throne  had  ?.  steps,  top  round

20.  twelve  lions  on  the  ?,  steps,  2  Chron.  9.  18.

SIX  things.

Prov.  6.  16.  these  ?.  things  doth  the  Lord  hate
SIX  times.

2  Kings  13. 19.  shouldst  have  smitten  five  or?,  times

SIX  troubles.

Job  5. 19.  shall  deliver  thee  in  ?.  troubles,  in  seven
SIX  uiater-pots.

John  2.  6.  there  were  set  there  ?.  water-pots  ot  stone
SIX  wings.

Isa.  6. 2.  stood  the  seraphims,  each  one  had  ?.  icings
Rev.  4.  8.  four  beasts  had  each  ?.  wings  about  him
SIX  year?.

Gen.  31.  41.  I  served  thee  ?.  years  for  thy  cattle
Exod.  21.  2.  ?.  year? he  shall  serve,  and  in  seventh  he
shall  go  out  free,  Deut.  15.  12.  Jer.  34.  14.
23. 10.  ?.  years  thou  shalt  sow  thy  land  and  gather
Lev.  25.  3.  ?.  years  thou  shalt  prune  thy  vineyard
Deut.  15.18.  double  hired  servant  in  serving  ?.  years
Judg.  12.  7.  and  .lephthah  judged  Israel  s.  years

1  Kings  16.  23.  Omri  reigned  s.  years  in  I  lrzali

2  Kings  11.  3.  .loash  was  hid  with  his  nurse  in  the
house  of  the  Lord  ?.  years,  2  Chron.  22. 12.

SIXTH.  ,

Gen.  30.  19.  Leah  conceived,  bare  Jacob  the  ?. son
Exod.  26.  9.  thou  shalt  double  ?.  curtain  in  tabern.
Lev. 25.  21.  will  command  my  bless,  on  you?,  year
Josh.  19.  32.  the  ?.  lot  came  out  for  Naphtali
2  Sam.  3.  5.  Ithream,  David’s  ?.  son,  1  Chron.  3.  3.

2  Kings  18.  10.  in  ?.  year  of  Hezek.  Samaria  taken
Ezra  6. 15.  house  was  finished  in  ?.  year  of  Darius
Ezek.  A.  11.  drink  water  by  measure,?,  part  of  him

8.  1.  in  the  ?.  year  the  hand  of  Lord  fell  upon  me
39.  2.  I  will  leave  but  the  ?.  part  of  thee

45.  13.  the  oblation  the?,  part  of  an  ephah

46.  14.  a  meat  offering  the  ?.  part  of  an  ephah
Mat.  20.  5.  again  he  went  out  about  the  ?.  hour

27.45.  there  was  darkness  ever  all  the  land  from
the  ?.  to  ninth  hour,  Mark  15.  33.  Luke  23. .44.
John  4.  6.  about  the  ?.  hour  .1  esus  sat  on  the  well
19.  14.  and  he  was  crucified  about  the  ?.  hour
Acts  10.  9.  Peter  went  to  pray  about  the  ?.  hour
Rev.  6.  12.  when  he  opened  ?.  seal,  an  earthquake

9.  13.  the  ?.  angel  sounded,  and  l  heard  a  voice

14.  sav  ing  to  the  .?.  angel,  loose  the  four  angels
16.  12.  ?.  angel  poured  out  vial  on  river  Euphrates

21.  20.  the  ?.  foundation  of  the  wall  wassardius

See  Day,  Month.

SIXTEEN.

Gen.  46.  18.  Zilpah  bare  to  Jacob  ?.  souls
Exod.  26.  25.  sockets  of  silver,  ?.  soc  kets,  36.  30.

2  Kings  13.  10.  Jehoash  reigned  .?.  years  in  ‘■•a.maria
14.21.  and  made  Azariah,  when  ?.  years  old,  king

15.  33.  Jotham  reigned  over  Judah  ?.  years  in  Je¬
rusalem,  2  Chron.  27-1,  8.  I  28.  1.

1  Chr.  A.  27.  Shimei  had  ?.  sons  and  six  daughters

24.  4.  among  sons  of  Eleazar  were  .?.  chief  men
o  Chr  13.  21.  Abijah  begat  sons  and  ?.  daughters

SIXTEENTH.

1  Chron.  24.  14.  the  ?.  lot  came  forth  to  Immer

25.  23.  the  ?.  lot  came  forth  to  IJananiah

SIXTY.  [Jared

Gen.  5.  15.  Mahalaleel  lived  ?.  years,  and  begat
21.  Enoch  lived  .?.  five  years,  and  begat  Methusel.

_  .  •  .  •  C  i  I  1  . .  i- . -.  n  %-**»  4  ,  it  n  r\  t  u  r  A  i*


Lev.  13.  4.  if  bright  spot  be  white  in  ?.  of  his  desk
5. "if  the  plague  spread  not  in  the  ?.  6,  22,  28.

7.  if  scab  spread  abroad  in  the  .?.  8,27,  35,  36.

10.  if  the  rising  be  white  in  the  ?.  it  is  a  leprosy

11.  it  is  an  old  leprosy  in  the  ?.  of  his  flesh
56.  then  he  shall  rend  it  out  ot  garment  or  .?.

15.  17.  every  ?.  whereon  is  seed  washed  with  watef
Nvm.  19.  5.  burn  heifer,  her  ?.  and  flesh  and  blood
Job  2.  4.  ?.  for.?,  all  a  man  hath  will  he  give  lor  life
7.  5.  my  ?.  is  broken,  and  become  loathsome
10  11  thou  hast  clothed  me  with  ?.  and  flesh
16*  15  I  sewed  sackcloth  on  my  ?.  and  defiled
18.  13.  it  shall  devour  the  strength  of  his  ?.

19  20  bone  cleaveth  to  my  s.  and  to  my  flesh,.

and  1  am  escaped  with  the  ?.  of  my  teeth
26.  though  after  my  ?.  worms  destroy  this  body
30  .30  my  ?.  is  black  upon  me,  bones  are  burnt
4E  7.  canst  thou  fill  his  .?.  with  barbed  irons
Psal.  102.  5.  my  groaning  my  bones  cleave  to  my  ?.
Jer.  13.  23.  can  the  Ethiopian  change  his?.?

Lam.  3.  4.  my  flesh  and  ?.  hath  he  made  old

4.  8.  their  ?.  cleaveth  to  their  bones,  is  withered

5.  10.  our  ?.  was  black  like  an  oven  for  famine
Ezek.  37.  6. 1  will  cover  you  with  ?.  put  breath,  8.
Mic  3  2.  who  pluck  off  their  ?.  and  their  flesh

3.  who  eat  flesh,  and  flay  their  ?.  from  off  them
Mark  1.  6.  John  had  a  girdle  of  ?.  about  his  loins
SKINS.

Gen.  3.  21.  Lord  made  c  oats  of  ?.  and  clothed  them


XI.  ILir./CIl  mcu.n  n't

Lev .  27.  L  estimation  ot  the  male  from  twenty  to.-
7.  if  it  be  from  ?.  years  old  above  thy  estimation
Num.  7-  88.  offer  ?.  rams,  ?.  lie-goats,  ?.  lambs
Mat.  13.8.  brought  forth  ?.  told,  23.  Mark  A.  8,  20.
SIZE.

Exod.  36.  9.  the  curtains  were  all  of  one  ?.  15.

1  Kings  6. 25.  both  eherubims  of  one  measure  and  ?.
7.  37.  all  the  bases  of  one  measure  and  of  one  .?.

1  Chr.  2.3.  29.  for  all  manner  of  ?.  David  left  charge
SKILL.

1  Kings  5.  6.  thou  knowest  there  is  not  any  that  ran

?.  to  hew  timber  like  the  Sidonians,  2  t  /iron.  2. 8.

2  Chron.  2.  7.  send  me  a  man  that  can  ?.  to  grave
34  12  all  that  could  ?.  of  instruments  ot  music

SKILL.

Eccl.  9.  11.  nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  ?.  but  time
Dan.  1. 17.  G.  gave  them  knowledge  and  ?.  in  wisd.


uan.  1 .  1 1  ■  v.  go'  ■■  -

q  00  T  am  now  come  to  give  thee  ?.  and  understan.
SKILFUL.

1  Chr.  5. 18.  sons  of  Reuben  and  Gadites  s.  in  war
15.  22.  Chenaniah  instructed,  because  he  was?.

28.  21.  there  shall  be  with  thee  every  willing?,  man

2  Chr.  2. 14.  I  have  sent  a  cunning  man .?.  to  work
jsa.  3.  +3.  the  Lord  taketh  away  the  .?.  of  speech
Ezek.  21.  31.  give  you  into  the  hand  ot  ?.  to  destroy
Dan.  1.  4.  children  .?.  in  all  wisdom  and  cunning
Amos  5.  16.  such  are  ?.  onamentation  to  wailing

P?  33.  3.  sing  a  new  song,  play  ?.  with  loud  noise
SK  I  LFU  LN  ESS.

Psal  78.72.  and  guided  them  by  ?.  of  his  hands
SKIN.

Exod.  22.  27.  his  covering,  it  is  his  raiment  for  ?.

29.  14.  bullock’s  flesh,.?,  and  dung  burn,  Lev.  4. 11.
34.  29.  Moses  wist  not  that  ?.  ot  face  shone,  30,  35.
Lev.  7.  8.  the  priest  that  offereth  shall  have  the  1.

11.32.  if  dead  fall  on  ?.  or  sack,  it  shall  be  unclean
13.  2.  shall  have  in  the  ?.  a  rising  like  the  plague
3.  the  priest  shall  look  on  the  plague  in  the  ?.  •
the  flesh,  and  if  deeper  than  the  ?.  of  his  He*.


Vjcrl.  .1.  XI.  IjUIU  * 1 1  ,  •  1  1

27.  16.  she  put  ?.  of  kidsot  goats  upon  Ins  hands
Exod  35  23  every  man  with  whom  wrere  found  real
?.’  of  rams  and  badgers’  ?.  brought  them
Lev.  13.  59-  this  is  the  law  of  the  plague  of  r.

16.  27  they  shall  burn  in  fire  their  .?.  and  flesh
Num.  31.  20.  purify  your  raiment,  all  made  ot  ?.

Ileb  11.  37.  wandered  about  in  sheep  ?.  and  goat?

SKIP.

Psal  °9.  6.  he  maketh  them  also  to  ?.  like  acalt
SK  1PP  ED.

Psal  114.  4.  the  mountains  ?.  like  rams,  6.
SK1PPEDST.

Jer.  48.  27. 'since  thou  spakest  of  him,  thou  ?.  for  joy-
SKIPPING.

Cant.  2.  8.  behold,  he  cometh  ?.  upon  the  hills
SKIRT  .

Is  the  part  of  a  garment  below  the  waist.  Ruth
says  to  Boaz,  Cast  thy  skirt  over  me,  Ruth  3.

9.  that  is,  Take  me  into  thy  protection,  by  taking
me  to  be  thy  wife.  It  is  spoken  in  allusion  to-
the  ancient  custom  or  ceremony  of  the  bridegroom  s
spreading  the  skirt  of  his  garnient  over  t.ie  bnde ;
to  signify  his  right  to  her,  his  authority  over  her,
and  his  obligation  to  protect  her.  So  also  in  Ezek.
16.  8.  I  spread  my  skirt  over  thee  :  1  betrothed
thee,  and  engaged  by  covenant  to  love,  cheush,
protect,  and  guard  thee.  I  he  prophet  Jeremiah
says,  that  the  filthiness  of  Jerusalem  is  in  her
skirts,  Lam.  1.  9.  Her  wickedness  is  evident,  she
is  not  ashamed  to  expose  it  to  the  view  oj  all.  I  he
Lord  threatens  to  discover  the  skirts  0/  Israel  ana
Judah  upon  their  faces,  Jer.  1.3.  26.  J  will  dis¬
cover  thy  skirts  upon  thy  face  ;  I  will  throw  thy
skirts  upon  thy  face  ;  and  so  discover  thy  naked¬
ness  ;  that  is,  I  will  bring  thee  into  a  most  dis¬
graceful,  contemptible  condition,  by  those  judg¬
ments  which  I  will  inflict  upon  thee.  Jt  is  said
in  Deut.  22.  30.  A  man  shall  not  discover  Ins-
father’s  skirt ,  the  skirt  of  the  mother's  garment,
that  is,  her  nakedness;  which  is  called  his  fa¬
ther’s  skirt ;  because  his  father  and  mother  were
one  flesh,  or  because  his  father  alone  had  the  right

to  uncover  it.  .  ,  ,

Deut.  22.  .30.  man  snail  not  uncover  his  father  s  ?.
27.  20.  because  he  uncovereth  his  father’s  ?.

Ruth  3.  9.  spread  therefore  thy  ?.  over  thine  handm.

1  Sam.  15.  27.  he  laid  hold  on  the  ?.  of  his  mantle
24.  4.  David  cut  off  the  .?.  of  Saul’s  robe  privily

5  heart  smote  him,  because  he  cut  off  Saul  s  ?.

11  father,  see  the  ?.  of  thy  robe  in  my  hand
Ezek.  16.  8.  behold,  I  spread  my  .?.  over  thee
Hag  2  12.  if  one  bear  holy  flesh  in  the  ?.  and
w  ith  his  ?.  do  touch  bread,  pottage,  wine,

or  oil  .  t

Zech  8.  23.  shall  take  hold  of  ?.  of  him  that  is  a  Jew
SKIRTS.

Psal.  133.  2.  that  went  down  to  ?.  of  his  garments
Jer.  2.  34.  in  .?.  is  found  blood  of  poor  innocents
13  2°  for  thy  iniquity  are  thy  ?.  discovered
26.  therefore  will  1  discover  thy  ?.  Nah  3.  5.
Lam.  1.  9.  her  filthiness  is  in  her  ?.  remembered  not
Ezek  5.  3.  shall  take  and  hind  a  few  hairs  in  thy?.
SKULL.

Judg.  9.  53.  cast  a  piece  of  millstone  to  break  his  r_

2  Kings  9.  35.  they  found  no  more  of  Jezebel  than  ?.
Mat.  27.  33.  when  come  to  Golgotha,  that  is  to  say,

the  place  of  a  ?.  Mark  15.  22.  John  19.  17
SKY.

Dent.  33.  26.  who  rideth  in  his  excellency  on  ?.

Job  37.  18.  hast  thou  with  him  spread  out  the?..
Mat.  16.  2.  it  will  be  fair  weather,  for  ?.  is  red,  3.
Luke  12.  56.  ye  can  discern  face  ot  the  ?.  and  earth
Ileb  11.  12.  so  many  as  the  stars  of  ?.  in  multitude
SKIES.

2  Sam.  22.  12.  he  made  thick  clouds  of  the  ?.  his-
pavilions  round  about  him,  Psal.  18.  11-
P.sal.  77.  17.  clouds  poured  out .?.  sent  out  a  sound
Isa.  45.  8.  and  let  the  ?.  pour  down  righteousness
ler.  51.  9.  for  her  judgment  is  lifted  up  even  to  ?.

SLACK.  .

Dent.  7.10.  he  w  ill  not  be  .?.  to  him  that  hateth  lum
Josh.  18.  3.  how  long  are  ye  ?.  to  go  to  possess  land  .
Prov.  10.  4.  become  poor  thatdealet'n  with  a?,  hand
Zeyh.  3.  16.  shall  be  said  to  Zion,  let  not  hands  be?
2  Pet.  3.  9.  Lord  is  not  ?.  concerning  his  promise
SLACK.

Deut  23  21.  when  vow  a  vow  thou  shalt  not?,  to  pay

Josh.  \0.  6.  saying,  ?.  not  thy  hand  from  servants
2  Kings  4.  24.  ?.  not  riding  for  me  except  I  bid  tnee
SLACKED.  ,

Hah  1.  4.  law'  is  ?.  judgment  doth  never  go  toitn
SLACKNESS.

2  Pet.  3.  9.  Lord  is  not  slack,  as  some  men  couni .?/


SLA


^  SLATN,  Active.

•  23.  for  I  have  y.  a  man  to  my  w  junding

V*.  16-  therefore  he  hath  y.  them  in  wildern.
2C.  33.  surely  now  I  had  y.  thee,  saved  her  alive
!fnt'  *•  1-  ,atter  he  had  y.  Sihon  kins  of  Amorites
.1.  1.  and  it  be  not  known  who  hath  y.  him
Judy.  9.  IH.  and  have  s.  his  sons  upon  one  stone
lo.  lf>.  jaw  bone  of  an  ass  have  1  ,v.  |(H)0  men
»t).  5.  the  men  ot  Gibeah  thought  to  have  y.  me
««  i?'  Saul  hath  y.  his  thousands,  21.  11.

-!•  shewed  Dav.  that  Saul  had  y.  Lord’s  priests
?Y  Sa>’in§'.  I  have  y.  the  Lord’s  anointed

3.  .30.  Abner,  because  he  had  y.  their  broth.  Asahel
;•  il-  l  en  w*cked  men  have  y.  righteous  person
,5’  oA  *  £  ■ Uriah  with  the  sword  of  Ammon
13  30.  Absalom  hath  s.  all  king’s  sons,  none  left
32.  tliey  have  not  y.all,  for  Amnononly  is  dead
21-  ,lle  Philistines  had  s .  Saul  in  Gilboa

16.  Isubi-benob  thought  to  have  s.  David
n  iKJ'  19.  Adonijah  hath  y.  oxen  and  sheep,  25.

16.  1  haraoh  had  gone  up  and  r.  the  Canaaniteo
13.  26.  therefore  the  lion  hath  torn  and  y.  him
]6-  16.  people  heard  say,  Zimri  hath  y.  the  king
if*  L  Ahab  told  how  he  had  s.  all  the  prophets
10.  tor  Israel  have  s.  thy  prophets,  14.
i.  Kings  14.5.  he  slew  his  servants  who  had  s.  king
±  t/iron.  21.  13.  hasty.  thy  breth.  betterthan  thyself
2~-  ••  Jor  me  band  of  men  had  y.  all  the  eldest
no’  eI?  they  had  s.  Ahaziah,  they  buried  him

23.  21.  city  was  quiet  after  they  had  y.  Athaliah
28.  9.  have  y.  them  in  rage  that  reacheth  to  heaven
rl\  9,V12.,  th|  Iews  have  y.  500  men  in  Shushan
Jon  l.  lo.  the  Sabeens  have  s.  the  servants,  17.
jrov-T-  26-  many  strong  men  have  been  y.  by  her
r  ’  *U2°.  because  thou  hast  destroyed  and  s.  people
Jer.  33.5.  bodies  of  men  whom  1  have y.  jn  my  aiver
41.  4.  day  after  he  had  s.  Gedaliah,  9,  16,  lg.

-Ko/n.  2.  21.  hast  s.  them  in  day  of  thy  angler,  3.  43
Ezek.  16.  21.  that  thou  hast  s.  my  children
23.  39.  when  they  had  y.  their  children  to  idols
nos.  6.  5.  I  have  s.  them  by  words  of  my  mouth
DmosA.  10.  your  young  men  have  1  y.  with  sword
Acts  23.  ye  have  taken,  by  wicked  hands  have  y.

I .  o2.  have  s.  them  that  shewed  coming  of  just  One
23.  14.  we  will  eat  nothing  till  we  haver.  Paul
SLAIN,  Passive.

■ue)i  34.  27.  trie  sons  of  Jacob  came  upon  the  s.

dip  theIn  i»i  the  blood  of  the  y.  bird
*0.  1|.  and  ye  shall  be  s.  before  your  enemies

1 1  •  22.  shall  the  flocks,  and  the  herds  be  y.  ?

19.  16.  whosoever  toucheth  any  s.  18  I  31  19
23.  24.  eat  of  prey,  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  y.

-0.  14.  name  of  the  Israelite  that  was  s.  was  Zirnri

15.  name  of  woman  that  was  s.  was  Cozbi,  18
31.  8.  besides  the  rest  of  them  that  were  y.

21-  1.  if  one  be  found  y.  in  land  giveth  thee
no  «,e  e*6ersof  the  city  next  to  the  y.  man
.8.  31.  thine  ox  shall  be  s.  before  thine  eyes
52.  42.  make  mine  arrows  drunk  with  blood  of  y.
'7"'- 1L6.  will  1  deliver  them  up  all  r.  before  Israel
in.  -2.  Halaam  also  among  them  that  were  s.

00  7  Vl  f2+-  the  destroyer  who  multiplied  our  y.

*■6.  4.  the  husband  of  the  woman  that  was  s

1  Saw. 4. 11.  ark  taken,  Hophni  and  Phinehas  werer.
'9-  6.  as  the  Lord  liveth.he  shall  not  be  s.

1L  if  thou  save  not,  to-morrow  thou  shad  s

20.  32.  wherefore  shall  he  be.  y.  what  hath  he  aone
U.  L  men  of  Israel  fled  before  the  Philistines,  and

fell  down  y  in  mount  Gilboa,  1  C/iron.  lo.  1.

8.  when  the  Philistines  came  to  strip  the  s.

2  „"mr- 1-  19.  heauty  of  Israel  is  s.  on  high  places

of'  s •  from  fat  of  the  mighty

„  •  U  Jonathan,  thou  wast  s.  in  thy  high  places

,  §--7’  when  Israel  were  y.  before  David’s  servants
1  ntngs  11.  15.  when  Joab  was  gone  to  bury  they
v  K nigs  3.  23.  this  is  blood,  the  kings  are  surely  s
o’  ?’ s}u  e  J°ash  from  among  them  that  were  y.

8.  he  that  cometh  within  ranges  let  him  be  y.

1  A/’  ’tl1 laluJ  ha?d®  <jn  her,  and  there  was  she  y.

i  ni'  ,o2^rn  feli  d°wn  s-  war  was  of  G.

•2  C/ir.  13.  17.  felly,  of  Israel  500,000  chosen  men
Est/i.  ’i.A.  for  we  are  sold,  I  and  my  people,  to  be  y.

9.  11.  number  of  the  y.  in  Shushan  the  palace
Job  39.  30.  and  where  the  s.  are,  there  is  she

62- 3.  ye  shall  be  y.  all  of  you,  as  bowing  wall
88.  5.  like  the  y.  that  lie  in  the  grave
89-  10.  thou  hast  broken  Rahab  in  pieces  as  one  y
PoT;?-;  L?-,the  sl?thful  niPJi  saith,  I  Shall  bey.

24.  11.  to  deliver  those  that  are  ready  to  be  y.

Isa.  10.  4.  and  they  shall  fall  under  the  s.

14.  19.  and  as  the  raiment  of  those  that  are  y.

22-  2.  thy  y.  men  were  not  s.  with  sword  or  dead
^  u  ear™  Hiso  shall  no  more  cover  her  s
2,  .  ,.  is  he  y.  according  to  slaughter  of  y.  by  him

le,!Aia  so  stia  l)e  “Stout,  stink  come  up
66.  16.  and  the  y.  of  the  Lord  sh-dl  be  many

V^at  I.mi?,’t  w.eeP  s.  of  my  people
10'  i?'  f  *  *u°- ln*°  * ie  6eld,  behold  s.  with  sword
18.  21.  let  their  young  men  bey.  by  sword  in  battle
»o.  33.  y.  of  the  Lord  be  from  one  end  of  earth
41.  9.  and  Ishmael  hlled  the  pit  with  the  y.

5L  4.  thus  the  y.  shall  fall  in  land  of  Chaldeans
4i.  and  all  her  y.  shall  tall  in  the  midst  of  her
49.  as  Babylon  hath  caused  s.  of  Israel  to  fall,  so
r  nni  Babylon  shall  fall  they,  of  all  the  earth
Eaw.q  20.  shall  priest  and  prophet  be  y.  in  sanct.

4.  9.  they  that  be  y.  with  sword,  are  better  than  they
that  be  y.  with  hunger,  for  these  pine  away
Ezek.  6.7-  and  they,  shall  tall  in  the  midst  of  you
13.  when  they,  men  shall  be  among  their  idols
9-  1 -defile  the  house  and  fill  the  courts  with  y.

11.  6.  ye  have  multiplied  your  y.  in  the  city,  ye
have  filled  the  streets  with  the  y.

7.  your  y.  are  the  flesh,  and  this  city  the  caldron
?word  ^  *•  ls  fba  sword  of  great  men  y.
u  rlll?  Biee  upon  necks  of  them'  that  are  y.

26.  6.  her  daughters  in  field  shall  be  y.  by  sword
28.  8.  thou  shalt  die  deaths  of  them  that  are  y.

30.  4  great  pain  when  they,  shall  fall  in  Egypt
11.  tney  shall  fill  the  land  with  they.

10 17,  W.el?t  lnt?  beB  with  him  unto  them  that  be  y.
to.  shit*t  lie  with  them  s.  with  sword,  32.  C9.


s  L  A

32.  20.  they  shall  fall  in  the  midst  of they.  25.
21.  they  lie  y.  by  the  sword,  22,  23,  24.

25.  all  of  them  uncircumcised  y.  by  sword,  26, 30.
o’-  h e\en -nbar.  and  all  his  army  y.  by  sword, 32.
35.  8.  I  will  fill  his  mountains  with  Ins  y.  men
37-  9.  come,  O  breath,  breathe  upon  these.?
l)an.  2. 13.  decree  went  forth  that  wise  men  should
_  be  y.  they  sought  Daniel  and  his  fellows  to  be  y
o.  30.  in  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  kin"-  ?

7;  il.  1  beheld,  even  till  beast  was  y.  and  destroyed
J7*\  overrt°w,  and  many  shall  tall  down  s.

3.3.  there  is  multitude  of  .v.  number  of  carcases
Zef/i.  2.  12.  ye  Ethiopians  shall  be  s.  by  my  sword
i.vke  9.  22.  vSon  ot  man  must  be  and  be  raised
*  lets  5.  36.  I  hernias  was  s.  as  many  as  obeyed  him
7.  42.  O  Israel,  have  ye  offered  to  me  y.  beasts  >
13.  28.  yet  desired  they  Pilate  that  he  should  be  y.
1  Vh-  2.  16.  by  the  cross,  having  y.  enmity  thereby
Deb.  11.  37.  they  were  stoned,  were  y.  with  sword
hev.  2.  13.  Antipas,  who  was.?,  among  you
o.  6.  in  the  midst  stood  a  Lamb,  as  it  had  been  y.

9.  thou  wast  y.  i|  12.  the  Lamb  that  w'as  y.  13.  8.

6.  9.  souls  ot  them  that  were  s.  for  word  of  God
11.  13.  in  the  earthquake  were.?,  of  men  7000

18.  24.  in  her  found  the  blood  of  all  that  were  y.

19.  21.  remnant  y.  with  sword  of  him  that  sat

SLANDER.

Num.  14.  36.  to  murmur  by  bringing  up  ay.  on  land
!  sal.  31. 13.  for  1  have  heard  the  s.  of  many
Erov.  10. 18.  he  that  uttereth  a  y.  is  a  fool

„  SLANDERED.

2  Sam.  19.  27-  be  hath  y.  thy  servant  to  my  Lord
_  SLA  N  DEREST..

/  sal.  50.  20.  thou  r.  thine  own  mother’s  son
„  ,  SLANDERETII.

Esal.  101.5.  whoso  y.  his  neigh,  him  will  I  cut  off

slanderers.

1  Lim.  3.  11.  their  wives  must  be  grave,  not  y.
SLANDEROUSLf.

Horn.  3. 8.  and  not  rather,  as  we  be  y.  reported
SLANDERS.

Jer.  6.  28.  they  are  all  revolters  walking  with  y.

9.  4.  and  every  neighbour  will  walk  with  y.

_  SLANG.

1  Kam.  17.  49.  Dav.  took  from  his  bag  a  stone  and  y.  it
r  .  SLAVE,  S.

Jer.  2. 14.  is  Israel  a  servant  ?  is  he  home-born  y.  ?
nev.  18.  13.  nomanbu  veth  the  merchandise  of  s.
SLAUGHTER.

1  Sam.  14.  14.  the  first  y.  which  Jonathan  made
30.  tor  had  there  not  been  now  much  sreater  y.

17.  57.  as  David  returned  from  y.  of  Philistine,  A  b-
ner  brought  him  before  Saul,  18.  6.  2  Saw.  1.  1.
Saw. 17.  9.  isy.among  people  who  follow  Absalom
~  t/iron.  25.  14.  Amaziah  was  come  from  the  y.

Esal.  44.  22.  we  are  counted  as  sheep  for  the  y.

/  rov.  7 .  22.  he  goeth  after  her,  as  an  ox  to  the  y.

Isa.  10.  26.  according  to  the  .?.  of  Midian  at  Oreb


SLE


- - - — iuioiandi  k/ieu

14.  21.  prepare  y.  tor  his  child,  for  iniquity  of  fath

27.  7.  according  to  y.  of  them  that  are  slain  by  him
34.  2.  he  hath  destroyed,  and  delivered  them  to  y.
53.  7.  he  is  brought  as  a  lamb  to  y.  Jer.  11.  19.

65.  12.  and  ye  shall  all  bow  down  to  the  y.

Jer.  7.  32.  no  more  Tophet,  but  valley  of  y.  19  6
12.  3.  thou  hast  seen  and  tried  my  heart,  pull  them
out  sheep  for  y.  prepare  them  for  day  of  y.
25-  34.  for  the  davsofyour  s.  are  accomplished
48.  15.  his  chosen  young  men  are  gone  down  to  y.
50-  27.  let  them  go  down  to  the  y.  woe  to  them
ol.  40.  I  will  bring  them  down  like  lambs  to  the  y
Ezek.  9.  2.  and  every  man  a  s.  weapon  in  his  hand
*•1*  10.  it  is  sharpened  to  make  sore  y.  it  is  furbished

15.  it  is  made  bright,  it  is  wrapped  up  for  the  y.
22.  was  divination  to  open  the  mouth  in  the  y.

28.  the  sword  is  drawn,  for  the  y.  it  is  furbished

26.  15.  when  the  y.  is  made  in  the  midst  of  thee
nos.  5.  2.  and  revolters  are  profound  to  make  y.
Vbad.  9.  of  the  mount  of  Esau  may  he  cutoff  by  y
Eech.  11.4.  thus  saith  Lord,  feed  the  flock  of  y.

7-  I  will  teed  flock  of  s.  O  poor  flock
Acts 8.  32.  eunuch  read,  he  was  led  as  a  sheep  toy
9.  1.  Saul  yet  breathing  out.?,  against  the  disciples
hum.  8.  36.  we  are  counted  as  sheep  to  the  y.

Ileb.  7.1.Melch.met  A  bra. returning  from  s.  of  kin"s
Jam.  5. 5. have  nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  day  of  y.
See  Great.

_  SLAY.

Den.  4. 14.  that  every  one  thatfindeth  me  shall  y.  me
29.  4  Lord,  wilt  thouy.  also  a  righteous  nation,1 ’
11.  and  they  will  y.  me  for  my  wife’ssake

27.  41.  then  will  1  y.  my  brother  Jacob

34.  30.  they  shall  gather  together  ag.  me  and  y.  me
37.  20.  come  now  therefore  and  let  us  y.  him

26.  .1  udah  said,  what  profit  is  it  if  we  y.  brother  >

42.  37.  •'’..my  two  sons  if  I  bring  him  not  to  thee

43.  16.  bring  these  men  home,  y.  and  make  ready
Lxod.  4.  2.3.  behold,  I  will  y.  thy  son,  even  first-born
23.  7-  the  innocent  and  righteous  y.  thou  not

29. 16.  thou  shalt  y.  ram  and  sprinkle  his  blood
32_.  12.  tor  mischiet  did  he  bring  them  out  to  y.  them

27.  y.  every  man  his  brother  and  companion

™  A’  '•?’  sin-offering,  .3.3.  ||  14.  13.  y.  the  lamb
20.  15.  if  a  man  he  with  a  beast,  ye  shall  y.  beast
19.  3.  one  shall  s.  re<l  heifer  before  his  face
-5.5.  y.  ye  every  one  his  men  joined  to  Baal  peor

35.  19.  revenger  ot  blood  shall  y.  the  murderer,  21 .
Dent.  19.  6.  lest  avenger  of  blood  pursue  ami  s.  him
Josh.  13.  22.  Israel  did  s.  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor
fudg.  8.  19.  had  saved  them  alive,  would  noty.  you

20.  he  said  to  .1  ether  his  first- born,  up  and  y.  them
9.54.  y.  me,  that  men  say  not.  a  woman  slew  him

1  Sam.  2.  25.  because  the  Lord  would  y.  them

5.  11.  send  away  the  ark  of  God  thatit  y.  us  not

14.  34.  bring  any  man  his  ox,  and  y.  here,  sin  not

15.  3. spare  them  not,  buty.  both  man  and  woman

19.  15.  bring  lum  up  to  me,  that  1  may  y.  him

20.  8.  if  there  be  in  me  iniquity,  y.  me  thyself
22.  17.  king  said,  turn  and  y,  the  priests  of  the  L.

2  L  9.  Saul  said  to  me,  stand  upon  me  and  y.

1  Kings  1. 51.  let  king  swear  to  me  he  will  not  y.

3.  26.  give  her  li  ving  child,  in  no  wise  y.  it,  27.
15.28.  Nadad  did  Baasha  y.  and  reigned  instead


1  K  mgs  18  12.  when  he  cannot  find  thee,  he  shall .?  me

19.  17-  escapeth  sword  of  Hazael  shall  Jehu  y  that
™  escapeth  sword  of  Jehu  shad  Elisha  y.

20.36.  as  soon  as  thou  artdeparted,  lion  shall  v  thee

2  Kings?,.  12.  and  their  young  men  wilt  thou  y

10.  25.  go  in  and  y.  them,  let  none  come  forth  ’

17.  26.  God  hath  sent  lions,  and  they  y.  them

2  Citron .  23.  1 4.  y.  her  not  in  the  house  of  the  Lord
29.  34.  priests  too  few  to  .?.  all  the  burnt  offering
Kelt.  4.  11.  we  will  ,v.  them  and  cause  work  cease
job  9.  23.  if  the  scourge  .v.  suddenly,  he  will  lHii"h

13.  15.  though  he  s.  me,  yet  will  l  trust  in  him
-0.  16.  shall  suck  poison,  viper’stongueshall  y.  him
>^al.  34.  21.  evil  shall  s.  wicked  that  liate  righteous
59.  IL  y.  them  not,  lest  my  people  forget,  scatter
94.6.  tliev  y.  the  w  idow  and  the  stranger
109.  16.  that  he  might  y.  the  broken  in  heart
139.19.  surely  thou  wilt  the  wicked,  O  God

/  rov.  1. 32.  turning  away  of  the  simple  shall  y.  them
Ga.  11.  4.  with  breath  of  his  lips  shall  hey.  wicked

14.  30.  with  famine,  and  he  shall  y.  thy  remnant
aV  l-orfl  sha  1  y.  the  dragon  that  is  in  the  sea
65.  15.  for  Lord  God  shall  y.  thee,  call  his  serv.

Jer.  5.  6.  a  lion  out  of  the  forest  shall  y.  them

on’ A  ,  Sna11  ACurrLy  1  u<tah  captive  and  y.  them
•^9*  -1 .  shal  1  s.  Ahab  and  Xedekiah  before  your  eves
40. 15.  let  me  go,  I  pray  thee,  and  I  will  v.  IshmaeJ
son  of  Nethamah  ;  wherefore  should  he  y  thee  ^
41.  8.  ten  men  were  found  that  said,  y.  us  not
o°.  27  s.  all  her  bullocks,  woe  to  them,  day  is  come
s'  W  °lri  and  young,  both  maids  and
2|.  47.  they  shall  y.  their  sons  and  daughters
26.  B-  he  shall  y.  with  sword  thy  daughters  in  field

11.  he  shall  y.  thy  people  by  the  sword
44.  11.  they  shall  y.  the  burnt-offering  and  sacrifice
Dos.  2.  3.  set  like  a  dry  land  and  y.  her  with  thirst
9.  16.  tho’  they  bring  forth,  yet  will  1  y.  the  fruit

Amos  2.  3.  I  will  y.  all  princes  thereof  with  him
9.  1.  I  will  y.  the  last  of  them  with  the  sword
4.  will  1  command  sword,  and  it  shall  y.  them
/iech.  11.5.  whose  possessors  y.  them  and  hold
Luke  11. 49.  some  ot  them  they  shall  y.  and  persec
19.  27.  bring  hither,  and  y.  them  before  me
To  SLAY.

Den.  18.  25.  that  be  far  from  thee  to  s.  the  righteous
22.  10.  Abraham  stretched  his  hand  to  s.  his  son

37.  18.  they  conspired  against  him  to  s.  him
Exod.  2.  15.  Pharaoh  sought  to  s.  Moses,  but  he  fled

5.  21.  to  put  a  sword  in  their  hand  to  s.  us

21.  14.  if  a  man  come  on  neighbour  to  s.  with  guile
Deut.  9. 28.  brought  them  out  to  s.  them  in  wilderness
27.  25.  cursed  that  taketh  reward  to  s.  innocent

1  Sam.  5.  10.  they  have  brought  the  ark  to  s.  us
19.  5.  why  then  sin,  to  s.  David  without  a  cause  ?

11.  Saul  went  To  watch  him  and  y.  him  in  mornin"
20. 33.  it  was  determined  of  his  father  to  s.  Dav  id  °

2  Sam.  3.  37-  it  was  not  of  the  king  to  s.  Abner
2L2.  Saul  sought  to  s.  them  in  his  zeal  to  Israel

1  A  mgs  17.  18.  O  man,  art  thou  come  to  s.  my  son  5

18.  9.  delivered  me  into  the  hand  of  Ahab  to  s.  me

2  Chron.  20.  23.  utterly  to  s.  and  destroy  them
Neb.  6. 10.  they  will  come  to  s.  thee,  in  night  Toy.  th.
Esth.  8.  11.  to  s.  the  power  that  would  assault  them
Esal.  37.  14.  Toy.  such  as  be  of  upright  conversation

32.  watcheth  righteous,  and  seeketh  to  s.  him
Jer.  15.  3.  will  appoint  the  sword  to  s.  dogs,  to  tear
18.  23.  thou  knowest  all  their  counsel  to  s.  me
40.  14.  that  Baalis  hath  sent  Ishmael  to  s.  thee
Ezek.  13.  19.  to  s.  the  souls  that  should  not  die
40.  39.  two  tables  to  s.  thereon  the  burnt  offerin"
Dan.  2.  14.  Arioch  was  gone  forth  Toy.  wise  men”
Dab.  1.  17.  and  not  spare  continually  to  s.  nations
Jo/iw5.16.Jews  persecute  Jesus,  and  sought  t«s.  him
Acts  5.  33.  tliey  took  counsel  to  s.  the  apostles
9.  29.  but  they  went  about  To  y.  him
Rev.  9.15.  angels  prepared  to  s.  the  third  part  ofmen
SLAYER.

Slum.  35. 11.  shall  appoint  cities  of  refuge  that  the  y
may  flee  thither,  Deut.  4.  42.  I  19. 3,  A.  Josh.  20  3*

24.  shall  judge  between  y.  and  revenger  of  blood

25.  congregation  shall  deliver  r.  from  revenger

26.  if  the  y.  shall  at  any  time  come  without  city

27.  and  the  revenger  of  blood  find  and  kill  the  y

28.  but  after  the  death  of  high  priest,  the  y.  shall
return  into  the  land  of  his  possession.  Josh.  20.  6.

Deut.  19.6.  lest  the  avenger  of  blood  pursue  they  ’
Josh.  20.  5.  then  they  shall  not  deliver  the  y.  up
21.  13.  gave  Hebron  to  be  a  city  of  refuge  for  y
21 .  gave  Shechem  ||  27. Golan  ||  32.  Kedesh  for  they.

38.  Bamoth  in  Gilead  to  be  a  city  of  refuge  for  y.
Ezek.  21. 11.  the  sword  is  furbished  to  be  given  to  s

SLAYETH.

Den.  4. 15.  the  Lord  said  to  him,  whosoever  y.  Cain
Deut.  22.  26.  riseth  against  his  neighbour  and  y.  him
Job  5.  2.  wrath  killeth  and  envy  y.  the  silly  one
Ezek.  “28.9.  wilt  thou  say  before  liim  thaty.  thee,l  am
God  ?  shalt  be  a  man  in  hand  of  him  thaty.  thee
SLAYING.

Josh.  8.  24.  when  Tsrael  made  an  end  of  y.  10.  20.

Judg.  9. 56.  God  rendered  wickedness  in  s.  his  breth.

1  Kings  17. 20.  brought  evil  on  widow  by  s.  her  son
Isa.  22.13.  behold,  y.  oxen,  killing  sheep',  eating  flesh
57.  5.  y.  the  children  in  the  valleys  under  the  rocks
Ezek.  9.  8.  while  they  were  y.  them,  and  I  was  left
SLEEP.

Sleeping,  slumbering,  is  taken  either  for  the  sleep,
or  repose  of  the  body,  or  for  the  sleep  of  the  soul ’
which  is  supineness ,  indolence ,  stupidity  ;  or  for
the  sleep  of  death.

Ahasuerus  could  not  sleep ,  Esth.  6.  1.  I  will  both
lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  sleep,  says  David,
Psal.  4.  8.  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise
from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light
lie  speaks  to  those  that  were  dead  in  sin  and  infi¬
delity,  who  were  going  on  securely  in  sin,  without
sense  of  danger.  I  sleep,  but  my  heart  waketh
says  the  spouse,  Cant.  5.  2.  that  is.  The  flesh,  the
unrenewed  part,  prevails  to  make  me  slothful  and
secure ,  and  to  lay  aside  the  exercise  of  grace  at  pre¬
sent ;  but  the  renewed  part  is  sensible  of,  and  strives
against,  t hi*  distemper.  This  is  a  sleep  of  sloth,
ease,  and  secur  ity,  which  even  the  godly  may  fall

431


SLE


SLE


SLU


j nto.  There  is  also  the  sleep  of  death.  You  shall
sleep  with  your  fathers,  you  shall  die  as  they  are
dead,  1  Kings  \.  21.  That  they  may  sleep  a  per¬
petual  sleep,  Jer.  51.  39.  Many  that  sleep  in
the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake,  Dari.  1~.  2.
And  in  John  11.  11.  Lazarus  sleepeth,  but  1  go
that  1  may  awake  him  out  ot  sleep  :  He  is  dead ,
hut  1  will  go  and  raise  him  vp.  St.  Peter  says  oj
the  wicked ,  their  damnation  slumbereth  not,  2  Pet-
2.  3.  God  is  not  asleep,  he  will  riot  forget  to  punish
them  in  his  own  due  time.  And  Solomon  says,
Prov.  23.  21.  Drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man  with
rags  :  The  slurnberer,  the  slothful,  shall  come  to
poverty.  .  .  .  .

Isaiah  .-peaks  of  a  superstitious  practice  among  the
Pagans,  who  went  to  sleep  in  the  temples  of  their
idols,  to  obtain  prophetic  dreams.  Isa.  65.  4.
Which  remain  among  the  graves,  and  lodge
in  the  monuments.  'The  word  monuments  signifies
places  kept,  or  observed.  Some  interpret  it  of  idol
temples  ;  some  of  caves  and  dens,  m  which  the
heathens  used  to  worship  their  idols,  and  some  of
tombs,  or  monuments  for  dead  persons.  The  pro¬
phet  speaks  of  the  superstitions  and  ido/at  rows  .1  e  ws,
who,  in  contempt  of  the  prophets  of  the  temple  of
the  Lord,  and  in  imitation  of  the  heathen,  went
into  the  tombs  and  temples  of  idols,  to  sleep  there,
and  to  have  dreams  that  might  discover  future
events  to  them.

Gen.  2. 21. God  caused  adeep s.  to  tall  upon  Adam
15.  12.  sun  going  down,  a  (Jeep  s.  tell  on  Abram

28. 16.  Jacob  awaked  out  of  his  9.  and  he  said

31 .  40.  thus  I  was,  my  s.  departed  from  mine  eyes
Tudg.  16.  14.  Samson  awaked  out  ot  his  9.  20.

1  Sam.  26.  12.  adeep  s.  from  God  fallen  on  them
Job  4.  13.  when  deep  s.  falleth  on  men,  33.  15.

14.  12.  shall  not  awake,  nor  raised  out  ot  their  s.
Psal.  13.  3.  lighten  my  eyes,  lest  1  s.  the  s.ot  death
76.  5.  the  stout-hearted  have  slept  their  9.

6.  both  chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into  a  deep  .9.

78.  65.  then  the  Lord  awakened  as  one  out  ot  s.

90.  5.  thou  earriest  them  away,  they  are  as  a  s.
127.2.  for  so  he  giveth  to  his  beloved  s.

132.4.  1  will  not  give  s.  to  mineeyesor  slumber
Prov.  3.  24.  shalt  lie  down,  and  thy  .9.  shall  be  sweet

4. 16.  their  9.  is  taken  away ,  unless  they  cause  some

to  tall

6. 4.  give  not  s.  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumb.  to  eyelids
9.0  sluggard,  when  wi't  thou  arise  out  ot  thy  s.  ?

10.  vet  a  little  s.  a  little  slumber,  24.  33.

19.  15.  slothfulness  caste.th  into  a  deep  s.

20.  13.  love  not  j.  lest  thou  come  to  poverty
Led.  5.  12.  the  s.  of  a  labouring  man  is  sweet

8.  16.  there  is  that  neither  day  nor  night seeth  9.

Jsa.  29.  10.  Lord  poured  out  on  you  spirit  of  deep  s.
Jer.  31 . 26.  1  awaked,  and  my  s.  was  sw'eet  to  me
51.  39.  that  they  mav  sleep  a  perpetual  .9.  57.  .

Dan.  2. 1.  spirit  troubled,  and  his  9.  brake  from  him
6.  18.  passed  the  night  and  his  j.  went  from  him
8.  18.  1  was  in  a  deep  s.  on  my  face,  10.  9.

Zech.  4. 1.  as  a  man  that  is  wakened  out  ot  9.

Mat.  1.24.  then  Joseph  being  raised  from  s.  did
Luke  9.  32.  they  with  him  were  heavy  with  s.

John  11.  11.  1  go  that  I  may  awake  him  out  of  s.

13.  that  he  had  spoken  of  taking  of  rest  in  s.

Acts  16.  27.  the  keeper  awaking  out  of  his  s.

20.  9.  there  sat  F.utychus  being  fallen  into  a  deep  5
Horn.  13. 11.  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  9.
SLEEP,  Verb.

Gen.  28.  11.  Jacob  lay  down  in  that  place  to  s.

Ezod.  22.  27.  it  is  his  raiment,  wherein  shall  he  s.  ?
Dent.  24.  12.  thou  shalt  not  s.  with  his  pledge
13.  he  may  s.  in  his  ow  n  raiment  and  bless  thee
31.  16.  thou  shalt  s.  with  thy  fathers,  2  Sam.  7.  12.
Judg.  16.  19.  and  she  made  him/.  upon  her  knees
1  Sam.  3.  3.  and  Samuel  was  laid  dowm  to  .9.

1  Kings  1.  21.  lord  the  king  shall  .9.  with  his  fathers
Esth.  6.  1.  on  that  night  could  not  the  king  s.

Job  7.  21.  for  now  shall  1  s.  in  the  dust
Psal.  4.  8.  I  will  lay  me  down  in  peace  and  s.

13.  3.  lighten  my  eyes,  lest  I  s.  the  sleep  ot  death
121.  4.  thatkeep  Israel  shall  neither  slumber  nor  9.
Prov.  4. 16.  they  s.  not  except  have  done  mischief

6.  9.  how  long  wilt  thou  .9.  O  sluggard  ?

10.  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  to  s.  24.  33.

Eccl.  5-  12.  the  .9.  of  a  labouring  man  is  sweet,  but
abundance  of  the  rich  will  not  suffer  him  to  9.
Cant.  5.  2.  I  s .  but  my  heart  waketh,  it  is  the  voice

7. >rt.5.27.  none  shall  stumble,  none  shall  slumb.  nor  .9.
Jer.  51.  39.  they  may  s.  a  perpetual  sleep,  57.

Ezek.  34.  25.  and  they  shall  .9.  in  the  woods

Dan.  12.  2.  many  that  s.  in  the  dust  shall  awake
Mat.  26.  45.  9.  on  now,  and  take  rest,  Mark  14.  41.
Mark  4.  27.  and  should  .9.  and  the  seed  should  spring
Luke  22.  46.  he  said,  why  .v.  ye  ?  rise  and  pray
John  11.  12.  Lord,  if  he  .9.  he  shall  do  well
1  Cor.  11.  30.  for  this  cause  many  among  you  s.
15.51.  we  shall  not  all  .9.  but  we  shall  all  be  changed
1  Thess.  4.  14.  them  who9.  in  Jesus,  will  God  bring
5.  6.  therefore  let  us  not  .9.  as  do  others,  but  watch
7.  for  they  that  .9.  .9.  in  the  night
10.  who  died  for  us,  that  whether  we  wake  or  s.
SLEEPER.

Jon.  1. 6. what  meanest  thou,  ( )  .9.  arise,  call  on  thy  G.
SLEEP  ESI'.

Psal.  44.  23.  awake,  why  /.  thou,  O  T.ord  ?  arise
Prov.  6.  22.  when  thou  s.  it  shall  keep  thee
Mark  14. 37.  Simon,  s.  thou  ?  couldst  not  watch  one
Eph.b.  14.  he  saith,  awake,  thou  that  s,  and  arise
SLEEPETH.

1  Kinas  18.  27.  Elijah  said,  peradventure  he  s.
Prov. ‘lO.  5.  he  that  s.  in  harvest  is  son  causeth  shame
Dos.  7.  6.  their  baker  .9.  all  night,  in  morning  burns
Mat.  9.  24.  he  said  to  them,  give  place,  tor  the
maid  is  not  dead  but  s.  Mark  5.  .39.  Luke  8.  52.
John.  11.  11.  he  saith,  our  triend  Lazarus  s
SLEEP  IMG.

1  Sam.  26.  7.  behold,  Saul  lay  s.  within  the  trench
Isa.  56.  10.  watchmen  blind,  .9.  loving  to  slumber
Mark  13.  36.  lest  coming  suddenly  he  find  you  s.
14.  37.  he  cometh  and  findeth  them  s.  and  saith
Acts  12.  6.  Peter  was  s.  between  two  >oldiers

452


SLEIGHT.

Eph.  4.  14.  and  carried  about  by  the  r.  of  men
SLENDER.  .

Lev.  «T.  t  20.  a  man  too  s.  not  come  nigh  to  otter
SLEPT.

Gen.  2.  21.  Adam  .9.  ||  41.5.  Pharaoh  .9.  and  dreamed
2  Sam.  11.  9.  Uriah  s.  at  door  of  the  king  s  house
1  Kings  3. 2-r.  took  my  son  while  thine  handmaid  s.

19.  5.  as  he  lay  and  .9.  an  angel  touched  Inm
Job  3.  13.  now  should  1  have  been  quiet  and  have  9.
Psal.  3.  5.  1  laid  me  down  and  s.  1  awaked,  tor  1,.

76.  5.  the  stout  hearted  have  s.  their  sleep
Mat.  13.  25.  while  men  .9.  his  enemy  sowed  tares
25.  5.  while  bridegroom  tarried,  they  slumb.  and  .9.

27  .  52.  many  bod ies  of  saints  which  9.  arose
28.  ’3.  his  disciples  stole  him  away  while  we  s.

1  Cor.  15.  20.  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  s.

See  Esthers.

SLEW.  .

Gen.  4.  25.  another  seed  inst.  of  Abel,  whom  Cain  s.

34.  25.  they  .9.  all  the  males  ||  26.  they  s.  Hamor
49.  6.  for  in  their  anger  they  .9.  a  man  and  digged
Exod  2.  12.  Moses  .9.  the  Egyptian,  and  hid  him

13.  15.  the  Lord  .9.  all  the  first  born  in  Egypt
Lev.  8.  15.  he  .9.  bullock  and  took  the  blood,  23.

9.  8.  Aaron  .9.  the  calf  of  the  sin  offering,  15.

12.  he  9.  the  burnt  offering,  presented  the  blood

Num.  31.  7.  they  s.  all  the  males  of  Midian

8.  they  s.  kings  of  Midian,  Ralaam  also  they  s.
Josh.  8.  21.  they  turned  and  .9.  the  men  of  Ai

9  26.  delivered  the  Gibeonites,  they  .9.  them  not

10.  26.  Joshua  s.  the  five  kings  and  hanged  them
Judg.  1.  4.  they  .9.  of  them  in  Bezek  10,000  men

10.  they  .9.  Sheshai  ||  17-  they  .v.  the  Canaanites

3.  29.  they  9.  of  Moab  10,000  men,  all  lusty

31.  Shamgar  s.  of  the  Philistines  600  men
7.  25.  they  .9.  Oreb  and  Zeeb  the  two  princes
8. 17.  he  s.  men  of  Penuel  |1 21 .  .9.  Zebali,  Zalmu-nna

18.  what  manner  of  men  were  they  whom  yes.?

9.  5.  Abitnel.  s.  his  breth.70  persons  on  one  stone

14.  19.  Samson  .9.  thirty  men  of  Ashkelon

15.  15.  w  ith  the  jaw-bone  Samson  .9.  1C00  men
16  24  hathdelivered  our  enemy ,  who  .9.  many  of  us

30.  the  dead  which  he  .9.  at  his  death  were  more

1  Sam.  1.  25.  Elkanah  and  Hannah  .9.  a  bollock

4.  2.  the  Philistines  9.  of  Israel  4000  men

11.  11.  Israel  s.  the  Ammonites  until  heat  of  day
14.  13.  and  his  armour-bearer  .9.  after  him

32.  the  people  .9.  oxen  and  calves  on  the  ground
34.  every  man  brought  his  ox  and  s.  them  there
17.36.  thy  servants",  both  the  lion  and  the  bear
19.  5.  put  his  life  in  his  hand,  and  .9.  the  Philistine
22.  18.  Doeg  s.  85  persons  that  did  wear  an  pphod

29.  5.  of  w  hom  they  sang,  Saul  .9.  thousands

30.  2.  the  Amalekites  s.  not  any  great  or  small
31  2.  the  Philistines  s.  Jonathan  and  Abinadab

2  Sam.  3.  30.  Joab  and  Abishai  his  brother  .9.  Abner
4.  12.  David  s.  them  and  cut  off  their  hands
8.  5.  David  9.  of  the  Syrians  22,000  men
10.  18.  David  s.  the  men  of  700  chariots  of  Syrians
21.  1.  for  Saul,  because  he  .9.  the  Gibeonites
23  20.  he  s.  two  lion-like  men  of  Moab,  he  s.  lion

in  midst  of  a  pit  in  time  of  snow,  1  Chr.  1 1.  22.
21.  he  .v.  an  Egyptian,  a  goodly  man, l  Chr.  11. 23.

1  Kings 2.  5.  did  to  Abner  and  Amasa,  whom  he  s.

16.  11.  Zimri  on  the  throne  .9.  all  house  of  Raasha
18.  13.  what  1  did  when  Jezebel  s.  prophets  ot  L.

40.  they  took  them,  and  Elijah  .9.  proph.  ot  Baal

2  Kings  9.  31 .  had  Zimri  peace,  who  s.  his  master  ?

10.  9.  behold,  I  .9.  him,  but  who  .9.  all  these  ?

17.  he  .9.  all  that  remained  to  Ahab  in  Samaria

11.  18.  the  people  .9.  Mattan  the  priest  of  Baal

20.  they  .9.  Athaliah,  2  Chron.  23.  15,  17-

14.  5.  when  kingdom  was  confirmed  Amaziah  .9.
servants  that  had  slain  his  father,  2  Chron.  25.  3.

6.  but  their  children  he  s.  not,  2  Chron.  25.  4.

7.  he  .9.  of  Edom  in  valley  of  salt,  1  Chron.  18.  12.
16.9.  king  of  Assyria  took  Damascus  and  s.  Rezin

17.  25.  the  Lord  sent  lions  which  s.  some  ot  them

21.  2.3.  the  servants  of  Amon  conspired  and  .9.  him
24.  people  of  the  land  9.  them,  2  Chron.  33.  25.

23.  20.  .iosiah  s.  all  the  priests  of  the  high  places
25.7.  Nebuchadnezzar  .v.  sons  ot  Zedekiah  before
liis  eyes,  and  bound  Zedekiah,  Jer.  39.  6.  I  52.  10.

1  Chron.  7.  21.  whom  men  of  Gath  in  that  land  .9.

2  Chron.  21. 4.  Jehoram  5.  all  his  breth.  with  sword

22.  8.  Jehu  found,  and  .9.  the  princes  ot  Judah
28.  6.  Pekah  .9.  in  Judah  in  one  day  120,000
Neh.  Q.  26.  they  .9.  thy  prophets  which  testified
Esth.  0.  16.  the  Jews  9.  of  their  foes  75,000
Psal.  78.  31.  wrath  of  God  .9.  the  fattest  of  them

34.  when  he  .9.  them,  then  they  sought  him
105.  29.  turned  waters  into  blood,  and  9.  their  fish
135.  10.  who  .9.  great  kings  H  136. 18.  .9.  famous  kings
Isa.  66.  3.  he  that  killeth  an  ox  is  as  if  he  j.  a  man
Jer.  20.  17.  because  he  .9.  me  not  from  the  womb

41.  3.  Tshmael  .9.  all  the  Jews  that  were  with  him
8.  he  forbare,  and  .9.  them  not  among  their  breth.

Lam.  2.  4.  and  .9.  all  that  were  pleasant  to  the  eye
Dan.  3.  ?2.  fire  j.  the  men  that  took  up  Shadrach
5.  19.  whom  he  would  he  .9.  he  kept  alive
Mat.  2.  16.  Herod  sent,  and  s.  all  the  children

22.  6.  the  remnant  took  his  servants  and  .9.  them

23.  35.  whom  ye  s.  between  the  temple  and  altar
Luke  13.4.  on  whom  tower  in  Siloam  tell  and  .9.
Acts  5.  30.  raised  Jesus,  whom  s.  and  hanged  on  tree

10.  39.  Jesus  whom  they  .9.  and  hanged  on  a  tree
Rom.  7.  11.  for  sin  by  the  commandment  .9.  me
1  John  3.  12.  not  as  Cain  w  ho  s.  his  brother
SLEW  him.

Gen.  4.  8.  Cain  rose  up  against  Abel  and  j.  him
38.  7-  Er  was  wicked,  and  the  T.ord  s.  him
10.  the  thing  displeased  the  Lord,  and  he  s.  him
Judg.  9.  54.  that  men  say  not  of  me,  a  woman  s.  him
12.  6.  they  took  and  .9.  him  at  passages  ot  Jordan

1  Sam.  17.  35.  1  caught  him  by  beard  and  a.  him
50.  David  smote  the  Philistine  and  .9.  him

2  Sam.  1.  10.  so  I  stood  upon  him  and  s.  him
4.  7.  they  smote  Ish-bosheth  and/,  him

10.  1  took  hold  of  him,  and  .9.  him  in  Ziklag
18. 15.  ten  young  men  compassed  Absal.  and  s.  him
21.  21.  Jonathan  the  son  of  Shimeah  s.  him


2  Sam  23. 21 .  went  down  and  .9.  him  with  ownspear
I  Kings  2.34.  Benaiah  fell  upon  Joab  and  .9.  him
13. 24.  lion  met  him  by  th  way, and  s.  him,  20.  .36.

2i  Kings  10.  9.  I  consp.  against  my  master  and  s.  him

14.  19.  Amaziah  tied,  but  they  sent  after  him  to

Lachish,  and  s.  him  there,  2  Chron.  25.  27.

15.  10.  Shallum  conspired  against  him,  and  s.  him
14.  Menahim  smote  Shallum,  and  s.  him

30.  Lloshea  conspired  against  Pekah  and  s.him

23.  29.  Pharaoh  necho  s.  him  at  Megiddo

1  Chr.  10. 14.  enquired  not  of  L.  therefore  s.  he  him

2  Chr.  22. 11.  hid  Joash,  so  that  Athaliah  s.  him  nc  t

24.  25.  his  own  servants  s.  him  on  his  bed

32.  21 .  they  that  came  forth  of  his  own  bowels  s.  h.

33.  24.  his  servants  s.  him  in  his  own  house

Jer.  26. 23.  fetched  Urijah  to  Jehoiakimwho  s.him
41.  2.  Ishmael  s.  him  whom  king  made  governor
Mat.  21 . 39.  they  cast  him  out  of  vineyard  and  s.  him
Act-'00  20.1  kept  the  raiment  of  them  that  s.  him
SLEWEST.

1  Sam.  21.  9.  the  sword  of  Goliath  w'hom  thou  s.
SLIDE.

Deut.  32.  35.  their  foot  shall  .9.  in  due  time
Psal.  26.  1.  I  have  trusted  in  the  Ld.  1  shall  not  s.
37.  31  law  of  God  in  his  heart,  none  of  his  steps
SUDDEN.  [shall  s.

Jer.  8.  5.  why  then  is  this  people  of  Jerus.  s.  back  *
SLIDE!  H.

Hos.  4.  16.  Israel  s.  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer
SLIGHTLY.

Jer.  6. 14.  have  healed  hurt  of  my  people  9.  8. 11.
SLIME.

Gen.  11 .  3.  they  had  brick  for  stone,  j.  for  mortar
Exod.  2.  3.  she  daubed  the  ark  with  9.  and  pitch
S  LIM  Epits.

Gen.  14. 10.  the  vale  ofSiddim  was  full  of  s.-pits
SLING,  Verb.

Judg.  20.  16.  every  one  could  s.  stones  at  an  hair
1  Sam.  25.  29.  thine  enemies,  them  shall  he  .9.  out
Jer.  10.  18.  1  will  s.  out  the  inhabitants  at  once
SLING

Is  an  instrument  of  cords,  made  use  of  to  throw
stones  with  the  greater  violence.  J  he  Hebrews
heretof  ore  made  great  use  of  them.  I  hose  of  the
tribe  if  Benjamin  had  so  much  skill  and  dexterity
in  managing  the  sling,  that  they  could  hit  their
mark  to  a  hair,  without  the  least  error.  This  must
be  owned  to  be  an  hyperbolical  expression ;  how¬
ever,  it  proves  their  great  abilities  in  the  manage¬
ment  of  the  sling,  Judg.  20.  16.  It  is  known  what
glory  David  obtained,  when  he  knocked  down  by  a
stroke  of  his  sling  the  giant  Goliath,  who  was  the
terror  of  all  Israel,  1  Sam.  17.  49.  The  Scripture
takes  notice ,  that  when  David  was  at  Ziklag,  there
came  to  him  a  company  of  able  slingers,  who  could
use  their  left  hands  with  the  same  facility  as  their
right,  1  Chron.  12.  2.  Uzziah  king  of  .1  udah  made
great  collections  of  arms  in  his  magazines,  and
particularly  there  were  bows  and  slings  for  casting
of  stones,  2  Chron.  26.  14.

1  Sam.  17.40.  David  had  s.  in  his  hand,  he  drew  near
50.  David  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a  s.

‘lb.  29.  sling  enemies  as  out  of  the  middle  ot  a  .9.
Prov.  26.  8.  as  he  that  bindeth  stone  in  a  j-.  so  is  he
SLINGS.

2  Chron.  26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  s.  to  cast  stones
SLINGERS.

2  Kinas  3.  25.  the  9.  went  about  it  and  smote  it
SLING-STONES.

Job  41.28.  s.  are  turned  with  him  into  stubble
SLIP..

2  Sam.  22.  37.  that  tr.y  feet  did  not  s.  Psal.  18.  36.
Job  12.  5.  he  that  is  ready  to  s.  with  his  feet
Psal.  17.  5.  hold  up,  that  my  footsteps  9.  not
Jer.  37.  +  12.  Jeremy  went  to  .9.  away  from  thence
Heb.  2.  1.  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  them  s.
SLIPPERY.

Psal.  35.  6.  let  their  way  be  dark  and  s.  let  ange.
73.  18.  surely  thou  didst  set  them  in  s.  places
Jer.  23.  12.  their  way  shall  be  to  them  as  s.  ways
SLIP  PETTI.

Dent.  19.  5.  and  the  head  s.  from  the  helve
Psal.  38.  16.  when  my  foot  9.  they  magnify  them
94.  18.  when  1  said,  my  foot  s.  thy  mercy  held  me
SLIPS.  [up

Isa.  17. 10.  therefore  thou  shalt  set  it  with  strange  9.
SL1PT.

1  Sam.  19.  10.  David  9.  out  of  Saul’s  presence
Psal.  73.  2.  as  for  me,  my  steps  had  well  nigh  9.
SLOTHFUL.

Judg  18.  9.  be  not  .9.  to  go  to  possess  the  land
Prov.  12.  24.  but  the  .9.  shall  be  under  tribute


A-  s.  roasteth  not  that  lie  took  in  hunting
15. 19.  the  way  of  the  s.  is  as  a  hedge  ot  thorns

18.  9.  the  9.  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  waster

19.  24.  the  9.  hideth  his  hand  in  his  bosom,  26.  15.

21.  25.  the  desire  of  .9.  killeth  him,  refuse  to  labour

22.  1.3.  the  9.  man  saith,  there  is  a  lion,  26. 13.

24.  30.  1  went  by  field  of  the  s.  and  the  vineyard

Mat.  25.26.  his  lord  said,  thou  wicked  and  s.  serv.
Rom  12.  11.  not  9.  in  business,  fervent  in  spirit
Heb  6.  12.  that  ye  be  not  v.  but  followers  ot  them
SLOTHEULN  ESS.

Prov.  19. 15.  .9.  casteth  into  deep  sleep,  an  idle  sou)
Eccl.  10.  18.  by  much  9.  the  building  decayeth
SLOW.

Exod.  4.  10.  I  am  9.  of  speech,  and  of  a  9.  tongue
Neh.  9.  17.  but  thou  art  a  God  .9.  to  anger
Prov.  14. 29.  is. 9.  to  wrath,  is  of  great  understanding
Luke  l-i.  25.  O  fools  and  s.  of  heart  to  believe
Tit.  1.  12.  the  Cretians  are  liars,  .9.  bellies
Jam.  1.19.  every  man  .9.  to  speak,  9.  to  wrath
See  Anger.

SLOWLY.

Acts  27.  7.  when  we  had  sailed  .9.  many’  days
SLUGGARD.

Prov.  6.  6.  go  to  the  ant,  thou  9.  consider  her  way  s
9.  how  long  wilt  thou  sleep,  O  .9.  when  wilt  arise
10.  26  as  smoke  to  the  eyes,  so  is  the  s.  to  them
13.  4.  the  soul  of  the  9.  desireth,  and  hath  nothin,
20.  4.  9.  will  not  plow,  theref.  shall  he  beg  in  har  .

26. 16.  9.  is  wiser  in  his  own  conceit  than  seven  m<u.


S  M  l

SLUICES.

Isa.  19.  10.  all  that  make  s.  and  ponds  for  .ish
SLUMBER,  Substantive.

/fa/.  1.32.4.  I  will  not  give  s.  to  mine  eyelids
rrov.  0.  4.  give  not  si.  to  thine  eves,  nor  s .  to  eye-lids
10.  yet  a  little  sleep,  little  .v.  little  folding,  24.  33.
Rom.  11.8.  God  hath  given  them  the  spirit  off
„  ,  SLUMBER.

/  sat.  121.3.  he  that  keepeth  thee  will  not  s.

4.  he  that  keepeth  1  srael,  shall  neither  f.  nor  sleep
Jsa.  5.  27 _.  none  shall  s.  nor  sleep  among  them
56.  10.  his  watchmen  lying  down,  loving  to  s.
Nah,  3. 18.  thy  shepherds  s.  O  king  of  Assyria
.  SLUMBERED.

Mat.  25.  5.  while  the  bridegroom  tarried  they  allf.

.  SLUM  BERE  I'll.

2  /  et.  2.  3.  lingereth  not,  and  their  damnation  s .  not
SLUMBER1NGS.

Job  33.  15.  God  speaketh  in  s.  upon  the  bed
.  SMALL.

Gen.  30. 15.  is  it  a  s.  matter  thou  hast  taken  my  hus.
41.  +  23.  behold,  seven  ears  s.  and  blasted
Exod.  9.9.  it  shall  become  s.  dust  in  all  land  of  Egypt

16. 14.  a  f.  round  thing,  as*.  as  the  hoar  frost

18.  22.  every  f.  matter  they  shall  judge,  26.

30.  36.  thou  shalt  beat  the  spices  very  s.

Lev.  16. 12.  his  hands  full  of  sweet  incense  beaten  s .
Num.  16.  9.  a  f.  thing  that  God  hath  separated  you
13.  is  it  a  s.  thing  that  thou  hast  brought  us  up  •
32.  41.  .Jair  went  and  took  the  s.  towns  thereof
Dent.  9.  21.  I  ground  the  calf  s.  even  as  s.  as  dust
32.  2.  my  doctrine  shall  distil  as  s.  rain,  speech  as
2  Sam.  7.  19.  and  this  was  yet  a  s.  thing  in  thy  sight,
is  this  the  manner  of  man,  O  Lord,  1  Chr.  17. 17.
17.  13.  till  there  be  not  one  s.  stone  found  there
22.  43.  I  beat  them  as  s .  as  the  dust,  Psal.  18.  42.

1  A  ings  2.  20.  I  desire  one*.  petition  of  thee,  say  not

19.  12.  and  after  the  tire,  a  still  s.  voice

2  Kings  19.  26.  therefore  their  inhabitants  were  of

f.  power,  they  were  dismayed,  Isa.  37.  27:
23.6.  grove  and  high  place  he  stampt  s.  to  powd.  15.

2  Chr.  24.  24.  the  Syrians  came  with  a  f.  company’

35.  8.  gave  for  passover  offerings  2600  s.  cattle
9.  to  chief  of  I.evites  gave  5000  f.  cattle

Job  8.  7.  though  thy  beginning  was  s.  yet  thy  end
15.  11.  are  the  consolations  of  God  s.  with  thee  3

36.  27.  for  he  maketh  *.  the  drops  of  water
Psal.  119.  141.  1  am  s.  yet  do  not  1  forget  precepts
/  rov.  24. 10.  it  thou  faint  in  adversity,  strength  is  f.
Isa.  1.9.  except  the  Lord  had  left  to  us  a  f.  remnant

7.  13.  is  it  a  f.  thing  for  you  to  weary  men  3

16. 14.  the  remnant  shall  be  very  s.  and  feeble
22.24.  shall  hang  upon  him  all  vessels  off.  quantity
29.5.  moreover,  thy  strangers  shall  be  like  s.  dust
40.  15.  the  nations  are  counted  as  the  s.  dust

41.15.  shalt  thresh  the  mountains,  and  beat  them  s.

43.  23.  thou  hast  not  brought  me  the  f.  cattle
54.  7.  for  a  s.  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee
60.  22.  a  s.  one  shall  become  a  strong  nation

Jer  30.19.  will  glorify  them,  and  they" shall  not  be  f.

44.  28.  yet  a  f.  number  shall  return  out  of  Egypt
49.  15.  1  will  make  thee  s.  among  the  heathen

Ezek.  16.  20.  is  this  of  thy  whoredoms  a  s.  matter 3
+  47.  but  that  was  lothed  as  a  s.  thing
34.  18.  seem,  it  f.  to  have  eaten  the  good  pasture  3
Van.  11.23.  and  shall  become  strong  with  a  s.  people
Amos  7.  2.  by  whom  shall  Jacob  ari-e  3  for  he  is  f.  5
Goad.  2.  I  have  made  thee  s.  among  the  heathen
Zech.  4.  10.  for  who  hath  despised  day  off.  thin°-s  5
Marks.  7.  they  had  a  few  f.  fishes,  and  he  blessed
John  2.  15.  when  he  had  made  a  scourge  of  s.  cords

6.  9-  who  bath  five  barley-loaves  and  two  s.  fishes
Acts  12. 18.  there  was  no  *.  stir  among  the  soldiers

In-  2.  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no  s.  dissension
19.  23.  there  arose  not.  stir  about  that  way

24.  Demetrius  brought  no  s.  gain  to  the  craftsmen
27.  20.  and  no  s.  tempest  lay  on  us
1  Cor. 4.3.  very  f.  thing  that  I  should  be  judged  of  you
Jam.  3.  4.  the  ships  are  turned  with  a  very  *.  helm
See  Great.

SMALLEST.

1  Sam.  9.  21.  am  not  I  a  Benjamite,  of  f.  of  tribes  3
1  Cor.  6.  2.  are  ye  unworthy  to  judge  thef.  matters?
SMART.

Prov.  11. 15.  he  that  is  surety  for  stran.  shall  s.  for  it
.  SMELL.

See  Signification  on  Savour.

Gen.  27.27.  Isaac  smelled  the  s.  of  his  raiment,  see,
the*,  of  my  son  is  as  r.of  afield  T.ord  hath  blessed
Cant.  1.12.  my  spikenard  sendeth  forth  the  s.  thereof
2. 13.  the  vines  with  the  tender  grape  give  a  good  *.

4. 10.  the  f.  of  thy  ointment  better  than  all  spices'

11.  the  *.  of  thy  garments  is  like  the  s.  of  Lebanon

7.  8.  and  the  f.  of  thy  nose  like  apples
13.  mandrakes  give  a  *.  and  at  our  gates  all  fruits

Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  sweet.*,  there  shall  be  stink
Van.  3. 27.  nor  the  f.  of  the  fire  had  passed  on  them
Vos.  14. 6.  his  beauty  as  the  olive,  his  s.  as  Lebanon
Phil.  4.  18.  the  things  sent  an  odour  of  sweet  f
_  SMELL,  Verb.

Exod.  30.38.  who.  shall  make  like  to  that  to*,  thereto
Lev.  26.  31.  I  will  not  f.  the  savour  of  your  odours
Vent.  4.28.  shall  serve  gods,  which  neither  see  nor*.

1  Sam.  26.  +  19.  if  the  Lord  stirred  thee,  let  him  *

/  f.  45.  8.  all  thy  garm.f.  of  myrrh,  aloes  and  cassia
115.  6.  ears,  hear  not,  noses  have  they,  they*,  not
Amos  5.  21.  1  will  not  f.  in  your  solemn  assemblies
SMELLED.

Gen.  8.  21.  L.  *.  a  sweet  savour  and  said  in  his  heart
27.27.  Isaac  f.  smell  of  his  raiment  and  blessed  him
,  SMELLETH.

Job  39.  25.  he  s.  the  battle  afar  off  and  the  shouting
„  SMELLING.

Cant.  5.5.  my  fingers  with  sweet  s.  myrrh  on  handles
13.  his  lips  like  lilies  dropping  sweet*,  myrrh
Eph.  5.2.  himself  sacrifice  to  ( iod  for  sweet  *.  savour
^  .  SMELLING.

1  Cor.  12.  17.  if  whole  hearing,  where  were  the  *.  ?

SM 1  I  e:

I  0  smite  signifies,  to  strike  or  beat.  Mat.  26.  67.
Others  smote  him  with  the  palms  of  their
hands.  Acts  23.  2.  The  high-priest  command-


S  M  \


ed  to  smite  Paul  on  the  mouth.  It  is  often
™ed  J or  to  put  to  death.  David  smote  the
Philistine  '.he  put  Goliath  to  death,  1  Sam.  17.

,  L'ord  smote  Nabal  ;  he  smote  Uzzah  ;
that  is  y  he  put  them  to  death,  l  Sam.  °5.  38.  2  Sam
2*  - And-  l-'xc>d.  12.  12.  j  I  will  smite  all  the

o  Sr  ,n  ,to  smite,  is  also  put  for  to

afflict,  to  strike  with  fear,  with  the  pestilence,
with  poverty,  with  ulcers,  with  distempers,  with
wounds,  Num.  14. 12.  Deut.  28.  22,27,  28  35  To
smite  an  army,  is  to  beat  it,  to  rout  it  'entirely.
Deut.  29.  7-  Sihon  and  Og  came  out  against  us
unto  battle,  and  we  smote  them,  we  obtained  a
victory  over  them,  God  smote  the  Philistines
in  the  hinder  parts,  Psal.  78.  66.  lie  sent  them
t tie  piles,  or  hemorrhoids,  or  other  diseases  of
the  Jundament.  J  o  smite  with  the  tongue,  Jer
18.  18.  Gome,  let  us  smite  him  with  the
tongue.  Let  us  overwhelm  him  with  injuries  and
reproaches  ;  let  us  load  him  with  all  sorts  of  scan¬
dalous  reproaches.

To  smite  the  thigh,  denotes  indignation,  trouble
astonishment.  Jer.  31.  19.  After  l  was  instructed’

1  smote  upon  my  thigh.  Being  made  sensible  of
my  sms,  1  was  brought  to  a  sorrow  fur  them,  arid
detestation  of  them.  To  strike  hand  against
hand,  may  either  be  a  token  of  amazement,  sor¬
row,  and  trouble  ;  or  it  may  he  a  token  of  joy  and
pleasure  in  seeing  justice  executed  on  obstinate
sinners.  Ezek.  21.  14.  Prophesy,  and  smite
ffline  hands  together.  He  shall  smite  the  earth
with  the  iod  of  Ins  mouth,  Isa.  11.4.  He  shall
destroy  ungodly,  earthly-minded  men,  who  are
enemies  to  his  church  and  people,  by  the  word  of
/«*  mouth.  David  s  heart  smote  him  for  having
cut  off  the  lappet  of  Saul’s  garment;  he  had’a
remorse,  his  conscience  being  tender,  checked  him
jor  it,  l  bam.  24.  5.

Gen.  32.  8.  if  Esau  come  to  one  company  and  it
11.  I  fear  him,  lest  he  will  come  and  *.  me
Lxod  7-  17.  1  will  *.  upon  the  waters  in  the  river
t0  ,Aaron,  s-  the  dust  of  the  land
12.  2.3.  he  will  not  suffer  the  destroyer  to  *.you
17.6.  behold,  thou  shalt  *.  the  rock  in  Iloreh
21.  is.  if  men  strive  together,  and  one  *.  another
20.  it  a  man  *.  his  serv.  and  he  die  under  his  hand
2b.  if  a  man  *  the  eye  of  his  servant  or  his  maid

a Voer  rd  hnmaa  Sf;ndints’s  or  maids  tooth
oi  K 22.  6.  I  shall  prevail,  that  we  may  *.  them
-A.  17.  a  sceptre  out  of  Isr.  shall  *.  corners  of  Moab
£?•  JJ*.Ye,x  the  Midianites  and  *.  them
i4  **  he  *.  him  with  an  instrument  of  iron

17.  and  it  he*,  him  with  throwing  a  stone

18.  or  if  he*,  him  with  a  hand-weapon  of  wood

fW°7r o\?nmiiy  f;  hl>  with-his  hand  that  lie  die
Ueut.  i ...  thou  shalt  *.Canaamtes  and  destroy  them
in’ ,.tJlou  shalt  surely  *.  inhabitants  of  that  city
on  U‘  uany  his  neighbour  mortally  that  he  die
r  ,  „•  mou  shalt  *.  every  male  thereof  with  sword
in1’?'  hut  let  two  or  three  thousand  *.  Ai
10.  4.  come  and  help  me  that  we  may  *.  Gibeon
, ^,9* Pp i*sue  after,  and  *.  the  hindmost  of  them

12.  6.  then  did  Moses  and  Israel*.  13.  12.

,d' J tt,ou  shalt  *.  the  Midianites  as  one  man
~0.  31.  then  Benj.  began  to  *.  as  at  other  times,  39
.1.  10.  go  and  *.  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-gj lead
\5'  3-i?°  a?d  A™alek,  and  spare  them  not
J7.4o.  1  will*,  thee, and  take  thine  head

18.  11.  Saul  said,  1  will  *.  David  to  the  wall

19.  10.  Saul  sought  to*.  David  to  the  wall

20.  3.3.  Saul  cast  ajav'elin  at  him  to  *.  him

23.  2. shall  l  go  and  *.  Philistines  . 3  Go*. Philist
2b.  8.  therefore  let  me  *.  him  to  the  earth  at  once'

„  c  „  I  P'-aythee,  I  will  not  *.  the  second  time
^  Sam.  2.  22.  why  should  1  *.  thee  to  the  ground  3

13.  28.  when  1  say,*.  Amnon,  then  kill  him
15.  14.  lest  lie  #.  city  with  the  edge  of  the  sword
17.  2.  people  shall  flee,  and  1  will  *.  the  kin°-only
18. 1 1.  .loab  said,  why  didst  thou  not*,  him  there  3

1  Kings  20.  .35.  he  said  in  the  word  of  the  L.  *.  me

!  P'  ay  thee,  and  the  man  refused  to  *.  him,  .37!
-Nrrigs  .3.  19.  shall*,  every  fenced  city,  choice  city
6- father,  shall  1  *.  them  3  shall  I  *.  them  3
thou  shalt  not  *.  them,  wouldest  thou  *.  those
9- /  •  thou  shalt  *.  the  house  of  Ahab  thy  master
2<  .  Jehu  said,  *.  him  also  in  the  chariot

I. 3. 17. shall  *. Syrians, till  thou  have  consumed  them

18.  he  said  to  the  king,  *.  upon  the  ground

19.  whereas  now  thou  shalt  *.  Syria  but  thrice
121-6.  sun  shall  not  *.  thee  by  day  nor  moon

141.0.  let  righteous  *.  me,  it  shall  be  a  kindness
rrov.  19.  25.  *.  a  srorner,  the  simple  will  beware
Isa.  10.  24.  he  shall  *.  thee  with  a  rod  and  lift  up
49.  10.  neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun  *.  them
58.  4.  ye  fast  to*,  with  the  fist  of  wickedness
Jer.  18.  18.  come,  let  11s  *.  him  with  the  tongue
21.7-  Nebuchadrezzar  kingof  Baby l.shall *. J udali
4.3.  11.  he  shall  *.  the  land  of  Egypt,  46.  1.3.

49.  28_.  Kedar,  Ilazor,  Nebuchadrezzar,  shall  *.
Ezek.  5.2.  take  a  third  part  of  hair,  and  *.  about  it
6.  11.  *.  with  thy  hand,  and  stamp  with  thy  foot
9.  0.  go  ye  after  him  through  the  city  and  *.

21.  12.  son  of  man  *.  therefore  upon  thy  thigh

14.  prophesy,  and  *.  thine  hands  together
Amos.  9.  1.  he  said  *.  the  lintel  of  the  door
Mrc.5.  1.  they  shall  *.  judge  of  Israel  on  the  cheek
Nuh.  2.  10.  the  heart  melteth,  the  knees  *.  together
Zech.  10. 11.  and  shall  *.  the  wai  es  in  the  sea

II.  6._deliver  the  men,  and  they  shall  *.  the  land
Mat.  5.  39.  whoso  shall  *.  thee  on  thy  rightcheek

24.  49.  shall  begin  to  *.  his  fellow-servants  to  eat
Luke  22.  49.  Lord,  shall  we*,  with  the  sword  3
Acts  2.3.  2.  commanded  to  *.  Paul  on  the  mouth

2  Cor .  11. 20.  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  *.  you  on  the  face
Lev.  11.  6.  two  witnesses  have  power  to  *.  the  earth

SMITE,  referred,  to  God,  expressly  or  implicitly .

Gen.  8.  21.  nor  will  I  *.  any  more  every  living  thing
Exod.  .3.  20.  1  will  stretch  out  my  hand  and  *.  Egypt
8. 2._behold,  I  will  *.all  thy  borders  with  frogs
9.  15.  that  1  may  *.  thee  and  thy  people  with  pestil.

12.  12.  I  will*. all  the  first-born  in  land  of  Egypt
13.  will  pass  over  you,  when  1  *.  land  of  Egypt  23.


S  M  O

Num.  14.  12.  1  will*,  them  with  the  pestilence
Vent,  it 8.  22.  L.  shall  *.  with  consumption  and  fever
27.  L.  shall  *.  with  the  botch  ||  28.  *.  with  madness
3o.  Lord  shall*,  thee  in  the  knees  and  thelcs
3.3.  11.*.  thro’  the  loins  of  them  that  use  ag.  him

1  Sam.  26.  10.  David  said,  the  Lord  shall  *.  him

2  Ham.  5.  24.  then  bestir  thyself,  for  then  shall  the

L.  go  out  to  *.  the  Philistines,  1  Chron.  14.  15
1  Lings  14.  15.  L.shall  *.  Israel  as  a  reed  is  shaken
~  Kings  (j.  18.  Elisha  said,*,  this  people  with  blind.
2.  Chr.  21.  14.  with  a  great  plague  will  the  Lord  *’
Isa.  3.  17.  L.  will  *.  v  ith  a  scab  daughters  of  Zion*
11.  4.  he  shall  *.  the  earth  with  rod  of  his  mouth
15.  and  shall  *.  Egypt  in  the  seven  streams,  19.  22.
j/'  21.  6.  1  will  *.  the  inhabitants  of  this  city
Ezek.  21.  17.  I  will  also  *.  mine  hands  together
3„.  15.  when  1  shall  *.  them  that  dwell  in  Egypt
39.  3.  I  will  *.  thy  bow  out  of  thy  left  hand
Amos  3.15.  I  will  *.  the  winter-house  with  the  sum-
mer-house,  and  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  perish
v  II-  Lord  will  *.  the  21'eat  house  with  breaches
9-  L  the  Lord  will  *.  her  power  in  the  sea
1-.  4.  in  that  day  1  will  *.  every  horse  and  his  rider
13.  7.  awake,  O  sword,  *.  the  shepherd,  and  sheep
,  .  Shall  be  scattered,  Mat.  26.  31.  Mark  14.  27.

7\  f,  ,  Pmgue  wherewith  L.  will  *.  the  people,  18.

I  come  and*,  the  earth  with  a  curse
iiev.  19.  15.  that  with  it  he  should  *.  the  nations
r  SM  ITERS.

Jsa.  50.  6.  I  gave  my  back  to  the  *.  and  my  cheeks
.  SMI  TEST.

Ti’.Z'  1‘?-.he  said,  wherefore  s.  thou  thy  fellow  3
John  18.  23.  if  1  have  spoken  well,  why  *.  thou  me  3
r  ,  SMITETH.

Exod.  21. 12.  he  that  *.  man  so  he  die,  be  put  to  death
rv  'ather  and  mother,  surely  put  to  death

Veut.  ^5. 1 1.  and  wife  of  one  dra weth  near  to  deliver
her  husband  out  of  hand  of  him  that  *.  him
27.  24.  cursed  be  he  that*,  his  neighbour  secretly
Josh.  \5.  16.  he  that*,  lvirjath-sepher,  Judy.  1.  12.

2  Ham.  5. 8.  that  *.  the  Jebusites,  1  Chron.  11.  6.

Job  2b.  12.  by  understanding  he  *.  thro’  the  proud
Isa.  9.  13.  the  people  turn  not  to  him  that  *.  them
Lam.  3.  30.  he  giveth  his  cheek  to  him  that  *.  him
ri'l'n' shall  know  that  l  am  the  Lord  that  *.
.Luke  o.  29.  that  s.  thee  on  one  cheek,  turn  the  other
,  c  SMITH.

1  Ham.  1.3. 19.  there  was  no  *.  found  in  land  of  Isr.
cf’ 45.  the  with  Lings  worketh  in  the  coals
54.  16.  1  have  created  the  *.  that  bloweth  the  coals

"  19.  24.  certain  man  named  Demetrius,  silver*.

2  J  im.  4. 14.  Alexander  copper*,  did  me  much  evil

SM  E1HS.

*  Kings  24.  14.  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  away  all
the  princes,  the  craftsmen  and  *.  16.  Jer.  24.  1.
Jer.  29.  2.  after  the  *.  were  departed  from  Jerusal.
r,  ,  SMI11NG.

Exod.  2. 11  Moses  spied  an ’Egyptian  *.  an  Hebrew
~  Ham.  8.  13.  when  he  returned  from  *.  the  Syrians
1  Kings  20.  37 .  smote  him,  so  that  in  *.  wounded  him
the>'  went  forward  *.  the  Moabites
Mic.S.  13.  therefore  1  will  make  thee  sick  in*,  thee
SMITTEN.

Exod.  7.  25.  seven  days  after  the  L.  had  *.  the  river
y.  .31.  and  the  flax  and  the  barley  was  s .

32.  but  the  wheat  and  the  rye  were  not  *.

22.  2.  if  a  thief  be  found,  and  be  *.  that  he  die
™-14-  r12-  SO  not  up,  that  ye  be  not  *.  Veut.  1.  42.
oA*  iWaa- !ave  (^one  to  thee  that  thou  hast*,  me?
3_.  wheret.  hast  thou  r.  thine  ass  these  three  times 3
33.  4.  Egyptians  buried  their  first-born  Lord  had  *.
-8.  7-  Lord  shall  cause  thine  enemies  to  be  *.


,  -  T  I*  1, - - M..UU  V.UUIII1C3  ID  UC  J

o.  J*.  shall  cause  thee  be  s,  betore  thine  enemies


--  —  •  ,  T  .  .  .  *  mine  enemies

‘MJciah  had  j-.  Jerusal.  and  set  it  on  tire
U).  3^.  1  enjain.  said,  they  are  i*.  bet*,  us  as  at  first
36.  saw  they  were  *.  ||  .39.  surely  they  are*,  down

1  4.  2.  isr.  was  *.  betore  the  Philistines  ?  10
.3.  why  hath  Lord  *.  us  to-day  before  Philistines’.3
o.  12.  the  men  that  died  not,  were  .v.  with  emerods

6.  19.  people  lamented  because  Lord  had*,  many

7.  10.  the  Philistines  were  *.  before  Israel

13.  4.  Saul  had  *.  a  garrison  of  the  Philistines
30. 1.  Amalek.  had  *.  Ziklag,  and  burnt  it  with  fire

2  Ham.  2.  31.  David’s  serv.  had  *.  of  Abner’s  men
».  9-  when  loi  heard  (hat  David  had  *.  the  host  of

IJadadezer,  he  sent  to  Dav.  10.  1  Chr.  18.9  10.

10. 15.  when  the  Syrians  saw  that  they  were  *.’  19*
11.  15.  retire  ye  from  him,  that  he  may  be*,  anddie

1  Kings?,.  3.3.  when  thy  people  Israel  be*,  down
11.  15.  after  he  had  *.  every  male  in  Edom

2  Kings  2.  14.  and  when  he  also  had  *.  the  waters
3.  23.  the  kings  have  surely  s.  one  another

13.  19.  thou  shouldest  have*,  five  or  six  times,  then
hadst  thou  *.  Syria  till  thou  hadst  consumed  it

14.  10.  thou  hast  indeed  *.  Edom,  2  Chron.  25.  19.

2  Chron.  20.  22.  Moab  and  mount  Seir  were  *

25.  16.  forbear,  why  shouldest  thou  be  *.  ?

26.  20.  Uzziah  hasted,  because  the  L.  hall)  *  him
28.17.  the  Edomites  had  come  and  *.  Judah’

Job  16.  10.  they  have  *.  me  upon  the  cheek
I  s.  3. 7.  save  me,  tor  thou  hast*,  all  mine  enemies
69.  26.  they  persecute  him  whom  thou  hast  *.

102.  4.  my  heart  is  *.  and  withered  like  grass
143.  3.  he  hath  *.  my  life  down  to  the  ground
Isa.  5.  25.  therefore  the  Lord  hath  *.  his'people
24.  12.  and  the  gate  is  *.  with  destruction

27.  7.  hath  he  *.  him,  as  he  smote  those  smote  him?
53.  4.  yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  *.  of  God

Jer.  2.  30.  in  vain  have  1  *.  your  children
14. 19.  why  hast  thou  *.  us,  and  there  isnohealin01
37. 10.  for  tho’  ye  had  *.  whole  army  of  Chaldeans
Ezek.  22. 13. 1  have  *.  my  hand  at  thy  dishonest  gain
33.  21.  one  came  to  me,  saying,  the  city  is  *.

40.  1.  in  the  fourteenth  year  after  the  city  was  *.
IIos.  6. 1.  he  hath  *.  and  he  will  bind  us  up
9.  16.  Ephraim  is  *.  their  root  is  dried  up
Amos 4.  9.  1  have  *.  you,  yethave  notreturned  to  m*
sicts  ^3.  3.  and  commanded  me  to  be  s ,  against  law  ?
Rev.  8.  12.  and  the  third  part  of  the  sun  was  *
SMOKE

Is  the  black  exhalation  which  ascends  from  fire
Gen.  19.  28.  I  he  smoke  of  the  city  went  up  a?

453


SMO


S  N  A


s  o


•ti.e  smoke  of  a  furnace.  Solomon  observes,  that
as  smoke  if  hurtful  and  offensive  to  the  eyes,  so  is
a  sluggish  messenger  unserviceable  and  vexatious

■  to  them  that  send  him,  Prov.  10.  26.  The  anger

■  and  wrath  of  God  are  signified  by  smoke.  Tsai.

18.  8.  There  went  up  a  smoke  out  of  his  nqstrils  ;
God  manifested  his  great  displeasure  against  my
adversaries.  It  is  spoken  after  the  manner  if  men  ;
it  being  usual  for  persons  transported  with  great
anger  to  show  their  rage  by  their  breathing .  Smoke
denotes  a  grievous  judgment  or  calamity  ;  either
because  smoke  is  generally  accompanied  with  fire,
or  because  it  causeth  a  great  darkness  in  the  air.
Isa.  14.  31.  There  shall  come  from  the  north  a
smoke.  To  create  a  cloud  and  smoke  upon
Mount  Zion,  denotes  that  God  wou'd  not  only  di¬
rect  his  people,  as  he  did  the  Israelites  by  a  pillar
of  cloud,  but  that  he  would  also  be  their  protector
and  their  glory,  Isa.  4.  5.

The  smoking  flax  shall  he  not  quench,  Isa.  42.  3.
Mat.  12.  20.  Christ  will  not  deal  roughly  and
rigorously  with  those  that  come  to  him,  hut  will
use  all  gentleness  and  kindness  to  them,  passing
by  their  greatest  sins,  bearing  with  their  present
infirmities,  cherishing  and  encouraging  the  small¬
est  beginnings  of  grace  ;  and  comforting  and  heal¬
ing  wounded  consciences .  In  the  Revelation,

the  perpetuity  and  eternity  of  the  torments  of  the
damned,  is  thus  expressed,  The  smoke  of  their  tor¬
ment  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever,  Rev.  14.  11.
Gen.  19.  28.  Abraham  looked  toward  Sodom,  and

10,  the  s.  of  the  country  went  up  as  s.  of  a  furnace
Exod.  19.  18.  Mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a  s.
Josh.  8.  20.  the  s.  of  Ai  ascended  up  to  heaven,  21.
Judy.  20.  38.  they  should  make  s.  rise  out  of  city

40.  when  pillar  of  s.  began  to  rise  out  of  the  city
2  Sam.  22.  9.  there  went  up  a  s.  out  of  his  nostrils,
and  fire  out  of  his  mouth  devoured,  Psal.  18.  8.
Job  41.  20.  out  of  his  nostrils  goeth  .v.  as  caldron
Psal.  3?.  20.  the  wicked  shall  consume  into  s.

68.  2.  as  s.  is  driven  away,  so  drive  them  away
102.  3.  my  days  are  consumed  like  s.  and  bones
119.  83.  for  1  am  become  like  a  bottle  in  the  s.

Prov.  10.  26.  as  s.  to  eyes,  so  is  a  sluggard  to  them
Gant.  3.  6.  that  cometh  out  of  wild,  like  pillars  of  s.
Isa.  4.  5.  I,,  will  create  on  her  assemblies  s.  by  day

6.  4.  the  posts  moved,  the  house  was  filled  with  s,

9.  18.  they  shall  mount  up  like  the  lifting  upofs.
14. 31.  for  there  shall  come  from  the  north  a  s.

34.  10.  the  s.  thereof  shall  go  up  for  ever
51  6.  for  the  heavens  shall  vanish  away  like  s.

65.  5.  these  are  as.  in  my  nose,  a  fire  that  burnetii
Has.  13.  3.  they  shall  be  as  the  s.  out  of  chimney
Joel  2.  30.  in  earth  blood, and  fire,  and  pillars  off.
fiJah.  2.  13.  1  will  burn  her  chariots  in  the  s.

Acts  2.  19.  blood,  fire,  and  vapour  of s.  shew  wond.
Eev.  8.  4.  s.  of  the  incense  ascended  up  before  God
9.  2.  there  arose  a  s.  out  of  the  bottomless  pit
3.  there  came  out  of  they  ,  locusts  on  earth

17.  out  of  their  mouths  issued  fire  and  s.

18.  the  third  part  of  men  killed  by  the  fire  and  s.

14.  11.  the  s.  of  their  torment  ascended  up  for  ever
15.8.  temple  was  filled  with  s.  from  glory  of  God

18.  9.  kings  shall  lament  for  her  when  they  see  s.

18.  cried  when  they  saw  thes.  of  her  burning

19.  3.  and  her  s.  rose  up  for  ever  and  ever

SMOKE.

Dent.  29.  20.  angerof  Id.  shall  s.  against  that  man
Psal.  "4.  1.0  God,  why  doth  thine  anger  s.  ?

104.  32.  he  toucheth  the  hills,  and  they  s.

144.  5.  touch  the  mountains,  and  they  shall  s.
SMOK1  NG.

Gen.  15.  17.  when  it  was  dark,  behold,  a  s.  furnace
Exod.  20.  18.  all  the  people  saw  the  mountain  s.

Isa.  7.4.  for  the  two  tails  of  these  s.  firebrands
42.  3.  the  s.  flax  shall  he  not  quench.  Mat.  12.  20.
SMOOTH.

Gen.  27.  11.  Esau  is  a  hairy  man,  and  I  am  s.  man
16.  she  put  the  skins  of  kids  on  the  s.  of  his  neck
1  Sam.  17.  40.  David  chose  him  five  s.  stones
Isa.  30.  10.  who  say,  speak  unto  us  s.  things
57.  6.  among  s.  stones  of  the  stream  is  thy  portion
Luke  3.  5.  and  the  rough  ways  shall  be  made  s.
SMOOTH.

Jer.  23.  t  31.1  am  ag.  prophets  that  s.  their  tongues
SMOOTHER.

Psal.  55.  21.  words  of  his  mouth  were  s.  than  butter
Pi  ov.  5.  3.  and  her  mouth  is  s.  than  oil
SMOO  I'HETH.

Isa.  41.  7.  he  that  s.  with  hammer  him  that  smote
SMOTE.

Gen.  19.  11.  they  s.  the  men  at  door  with  blindness

36.  35.  s.  Midian  in  field  of  Moab,  1  Chron.  1.46.
Exod."!.  20.  he  lift  up  the  rod,  and  s.  the  waters

8.  17.  he  s.  the  dust  i|  9-  25.  the  hail  '.  every  herb
12.  27.  who  passed  over  when  he  s.  the  Egyptians

29-  the  Ed.  v.  all  the  first  born  in  land  of  Egypt
Num.  3.  13.  I  8.  17.  Ps.  78.  51.  |  lo5.  36.  |  135.  8.
Num.  11.  33.  Ed.  s.  the  people  with  a  great  plague
14.  45.  the  Amalekites  came  down  and  s.  them

20.  11.  Moses  s.  the  rock  twice,  Psal.  78.  20.

22.  23.  Balaam  s.  the  ass  to  turn  her,  25.  27.

24.  10.  Balak  s.  his  hands  together,  and  said

32.  4.  the  country  the  Lord  s.  is  a  land  for  cattle
Dent.  25.  18.  Amalek  s.  ihe  hindmost  of  thee
29.  7.  Sihon  and  Og  came  ag.  us.  and  we  s.  them
Josh.  7.  5.  the  men  of  Ai  v.  of  them  about  36  men

9.  18.  s.  them  not,  because  the  princes  had  sworn

11.  11.  they  s.  all  the  souls  that  were  therein

12.  and  s.  all  the  kings  with  the  sword,  17 .

20.  5.  because  he  s.  his  neighbour  unwittingly
.Judg.  4.  21.  .lae!  ,v.  the  nail  into  Sisera’s  temples

5.  26.  with  hammer  she  s.  Sisera,  she  s.  off  his  head

7.  13.  came  unto  a  tent,  and  s.  it  that  it  fell

15.8.  Samson  s.  them  hip  and  thigh  with  slaughter
20.  35.  the  Lord  s.  Benjamin  before  Israel
fl  Sum.  4.  8.  these  are  the  gods  that  s.  fhe  Egyptians

6.  9-  we  shall  Know  it  is  not  his  hand  that  s.  us

19.  he  s.  the  men  of  Beth  shemesh.s.  the  people

17-  49-  David  s.  the  Philistine  in  his  forehead

19.  10.  Saul  s.  the  javelin  into  the  wall  :  Pav.  fled
■'25.  38.  that  the  Lord  £  Mahal  that  he  died

454


1  Sam.  30. 17.  Da.  s.  them  from  twilight  to  next  day

2  Sam.  14.  7-  deliver  him  that  s.  his  brother

1  Kings  22.  24.  Zedekiah  s.  Micaiah.2  C ’hr.  18.23.

2  Kings 2.8.  Elijah  s.  waters  |]  14.  Elisha  s.  waters
6.  18.  and  he  s.  them  with  blindness

15.  5.  the  Lord  .».  the  king,  so  that  he  was  a  leper
16.  opened  not  to  Menahem,  therefore  he  s.  it
19.  35.  angel  of  the  Lord  s.  185, IXW),  Isa.  37  .  36.

2  Chron.  13.  15.  God  .9.  Jeroboam  and  all  Israel
14.  12.  the  Lord  s.  the  Ethiopians  before  Asa
Seh.  13.25.  and  cursed  them,  and  .v.  certain  of  them
Psal.  78.  31.  and  s.  down  the  chosen  men  of  Isiael
66.  he  s.  his  enemies  in  the  hinder  parts
Gant.  5.  7.  the  watchmen  found  me,  they  s.  me
Isa.  10.  20.  shall  no  more  stay  on  him  that  s.  them
14.  6.  he  who  s.  the  people  is  persecuted
29.  because  the  rod  of  him  that  s.  thee  is  broken

30.  31.  the  Assyrian  shall  be  beaten  down  which  s.
41.  7.  encouraged  him  that  s.  the  anvil

60.  10.  in  my  wrath  I  s.  thee,  but  in  my  favour
Jer.  20.  2.  then  Pashur  s.  Jeremiah  the  prophet

31.  19.  after  I  was  instructed  1  s.  upon  my  thigh
41.  2.  then  arose  Ishmael  and  s.  Gedaliah

46.  2.  Pharaoh  necho,  which  Nebuchadrezzar  s.  _
Dan.  2.  34.  a  stone  cut  out,  which  s.  the  image,  35.

5.  6.  Belshazzar’s  knees  s.  one  against  another
8.  7.  the  he  goat  moved  with  choler  s.  the  ram

donah  4.  7.  a  worm  s.  the  gourd,  that  it  withered
Hag.  2.  17.  I  s.  you  with  blasting  and  mildew
Mat.  26.  51.  Peter  drew  his  sword,  s.  off  his  ear
68.  prophesy,  who  is  he  that  s.  thee,  Luke  22.  64.
f.uke  18.  13.  but  the  publican  s.  upon  his  breast
23.  48.  many  beholding  Jesus,  s.  their  breasts
Acts  12.  7.  angel  s.  Peter  on  side  and  raised  him  up
SMO  I  E  him,

F.xod.  21.  19.  then  shall  he  that  s.  him  be  quit
Num.  35.  21.  lie  that  s.  him  shall  surely  die

1  Sam.  24.  5.  afterwards  David’s  heart  s.  him

2  Sam.  2.  23.  s.  him  under  the  fifth  rib,  3.  27.  I  4.  6.

6.  7.  God  s.  him  there  for  his  error,  1  Chr.  13.  10.

1  Kings  20.  37.  man  .'.  him,  so  that  he  wounded  him

2  Kings  19. 37 .  his  sons  s.  him  with  sword ,  Isa.  37  38.

2  Chron.  28.  5.  Syria  s.  him,  king  of  Israel  s.  him
Isa.  27. 7.  hath  be  smitt.  as  he  smote  those  that  s.  him
57.  17.  for  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  I  s.  him

Jer.  37.  15.  princes  were  wroth  with  Jer.  and  s.  him
Mat.  26.  67.  others  s.  him  with  palms  of  their  hands
27.  30.  they  took  the  reed  and  s.  him  on  the  head,
Mark  15.  19.  Puke  22.  63.  John  19.  3.
Acts  12.  23.  immediately  angel  of  the  Lord  s.  him
SMO  I  ES  I’.

Exod.  17.  5.  take  rod  wherewith  thou  s.  the  river
SM  AIL.

Lev.  11.  30.  the  lizard,  the  s.  and  mole  are  unclean
Psal.  58.  8.  as  a  s.  let  every  one  of  them  pass  away
S  N  A  R  E.

Exod.  10.  7.  how  long  shall  this  man  be  .f.  unto  us  ?

23.  33.  for  if  thou  serve  their  gods,  it  will  surely

be  a  s.  unto  thee,  Dent.  7.  16.  Judg.  2.  3.
34.  12.  make  no  covenant  with  the  inhabitants  of
the  land,  lest  it  be  a  s.  in  midst  of  thee
Judg.  8.  27.  which  thing  became  a  s.  unto  Gideon
1  Sam.  18.  21.  will  give  him  her,  that  she  may  be  a  s.
28.9.  wherefore  then  layest  thou  a  s.  for  my  life  ?
Job  18.  8.  he  is  cast  into  a  net,  he  walketh  on  a  s.

10.  the  s.  is  laid  for  him  in  the  ground  and  a  trap
Psal.  69.  22.  let  their  table  become  a  s.  unto  them,
anti  that  for  their  welfare  a  trap,  Horn.  11.9.
91.  3.  he  shall  deli'  er  thee  from  s.  of  the  fowler
106.  36.  served  their  idols,  which  were  s.  to  them
119.  110.  wicked  have  laid  s.  for  me,  yet  erred  not
124.  7.  our  soul  is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the  s.  of
the  fowder ;  the  s.  is  broken  and  we  are  escaped

140.  5.  proud  have  hid  at.  for  me,  spread  a  net

141.  9.  keep  me  from  the  s.  which  they  have  laid

142.  3.  in  the  way  have  they  privily  laid  s.  forme
Prov.  7.  23.  as  a  bird  hasteth  to  s.  and  knoweth  not

18.  7.  a  fool’s  lips  are  the  s.  of  his  soul
20.  25.  s.  to  man  w  ho  devoureth  that  which  is  holy
22.  25.  lest  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  s.  to  thy  soul
29.  6.  in  the  transgression  of  an  evil  man  is  a  s.

8.  scornful  men  bring  a  city  into  s.  but  wise  men
25.  the  fear  of  man  brineeth  a  s.  w’hoso  put.  trust
Eccl.  9.  12.  as  the  birds  that  are  caught  in  the  s.
Isa.  8.  14.  for  a  s.  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem

24.  if.  fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  s.  are  upon  thee,

O  inhabitant  of  the  earth,  18.  Jer.  48.  43,  44.
29.  21.  that  lay  a  s.  for  him  that  reproveth  in  gate
Jer.  50.  24.  1  have  laid  a  s.  for  thee,  O  Babylon
Lam.  3.  47.  fear  and  a  s.  is  come  upon  us
F.zek.  12.  13.  he  shall  be  taken  in  my  s.  17-.  20.

Has.  5.  1.  because  ye  have  been  a  s,  on  Mizpal
9.  8.  but  the  prophet  is  a  s.  of  a  fowler  in  his  ways
Amos  3.  5.  can  a  bird  fall  in  a  s.  upon  the  earth
where  no  gin  is  for  him  5  shall  one  take  up  a  s.  ?
Luke  21. 35.  for  as  a  s.  shall  it  come  on  all  that  dwell
1  Cor.  7.  35.  not  that  1  may  cast  a  s.  upon  you

1  Tim.  3.  7-  lest  he  fall  into  the  s.  of  the  devil

6  9.  they  that  will  be  rich,  fall  into  a  s.  and  lusts

2  Tim  2.  26.  they  may  recover  out  of  s.  of  the  devil

SNARED.

Deut.  7.25.  not  take  the  silver  of  idols,  lest  s.  therein
12.  30.  take  heed  that  thou  be  not  s,  by  them
Psal.  Q.  16.  wicked  is  s.  in  work  of  his  own  hands
Prov.  6.  2.  art  .v.  with  words  of  thy  mouth,  12.  13.
Feel.  9. 12.  so  are  the  sons  of  men  s.  in  an  evil  time
Isa.  8.  15.  many  shall  stumble  and  fall  and  be  s.
28.  13.  that  they  might  fall,  and  be  s.  and  taken
42  22  they  are  all  of  them  .v.  in  holes,  hid  in  prison
SNARES.

Josh.  23.  13.  they  shall  be  s.  and  traps  unto  you
2  Sam.  22.  6.  s.  of  death  prevented  me,  Psal.  18.5.
Job  22.  10.  therefore  s.  are  round  about  thee
40.  24.  behemoth's  nose  pierceth  thro’ s.

Psal.  1 1.  6.  on  wicked  he  shall  rain  s.  and  brims.
38.  12.  they  that  seek  after  my  life  lay  s.  for  me
64.  5.  they  commune  of  laying  s.  privily
Prov.  13.  14.  to  depart  from  the  s.  of  death,  14.  27.
22.  5.  thorns  and  s.  are  in  the  way  of  the  froward
Feel.  7 .26.  the  woman  whose  heart  is  s.  and  nets
Jer.  5.  26.  they  lay  wait  as  he  that  setteth  .9.

18.  22  for  they  have  digged  and  hid  s.  for  my  feet


SNATCH.

Isa.  9.20.  lie  shall  s.  on  right  hand  and  be  hungry
SNOR  TING.

Jer.  8.  16.  the  s.  of  his  horses  w  as  heard  from  Dan
SNOUT.

Prov.  11. 22.  as  ajewel  of  gold  in  a  swdne’s  s.  so  fair

SNOW.

F.xod.  4.6.  behold  his  hand  was  leprous  as  s.

Num.  12.  10.  Miriam  became  leprous,  white  as  s.

2  Sam.  23.  20.  slew  lion  in  midst  of  a  pit,  in  time  of  s
2  Kings  5.  27.  Gehazi  went  out  a  leper  white  as  s.
Job  6.  16.  are  blackish,  and  wherein  the  s.  is  hid
9.  30.  if  I  wash  niys.in  s.wat.  and  make  hands  clean

24.  19.  heat  consutneths.  waters,  so  grave  sinned

37.  6.  he  saith  to  the  v.  be  thou  on  the  earth

38.  22.  hast  thou  entered  into  treasures  of  the  s.
Psal.  51.  7.  wash  me,  and  1  shall  be  whiter  thans.
68. 14.  it  was  white  ass.  in  Salmon

147.  16.  hegiv.  s.  like  wool,  scattereth  hoar  frost

148.  8.  fire,  hail,  s.  and  vapour  fulfilling  his  word
Prov.  25. 13.  as  the  cold  of  .9.  in  time  of  harvest
26.  1.  as  .9.  in  summer,  so  honour  is  not  seemly

31.  21.  she  is  not  afraid  of  the  s.  for  her  household
Isa.  1.  18.  tho’  sins  be  as  scarlet  shall  be  white  as  s.
55.  10.  as  the  .9.  from  heaven  returneth  not  thither
Jer.  18.  14.  will  a  man  leave  the  s.  of  Lebanon
Lam.  4.7. her  Nazar,  purer  than  .9.  whiter  than  milk
Dan.  7.  9.  garment  was  white  as  s.  hair  like  wool
Mat.  28.  3.  his  raiment  white  as  s.  Mark  9.  3.

Rev.  1.  14.  his  head  and  his  hairs  as  white  as  s.
SNOWY.

1  Chron.  11.  22.  he  slew  a  lion  in  a  pit  in  a  s.  day

SNUFFED.

Jer.  14.6.  the  wild  assess,  up  the  wind  like  dragons
Mai.  1.  13.  ye  have  s.  at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts
SN  U  FF -dishes.

Exod.  25.  38.  s.-dishes  shall  be  of  pure  gold,  37-  23.
Num.  4.9.  take  a  cloth,  anti  cover  his  s.  dishes
SNUFFERS.

Exod.  37-23. s. of  pure  gold,l  Kings  7-  50.  2  CTr.4.22.

2  Kings  12.  13  9.  made  of  money  that  was  brought
25.  14.  pots  and  s.  took  they  away,  Jer.  52. 18.

SNUFFEfH.

Jer.  2. 24.  a  wild  ass  that  s.  up  the  wind  at  pleasure
SO.

Gen.  12.  4.  so  Abraham  departed,  as  L.  had  spoken

15.  5.  as  the  stars,  solshall  thy  seed  be,  Rom.  4.  18.

25.  22.  Rebekahsaid,  if  it  be  so,  why  am  I  thus
31.  28.  thou  has*  now  done  foolishly  in  so  doing
43.  11.  if  it  must  best?  now  do  this,  take  fruits
Exod.  6.  9.  Moses  spake  so  to  the  children  of  Israel

10.  10.  let  Lord  be  so  with  you,  as  I  will  let  you  go
25.  9.  after  the  pattern,  even  so  shall  ye  make  it

39.  43.  as  the  L.  commanded, so  had  they  done  it
Lev.  7.  7.  as  the  sin  offering,  so  is  trespass  offering

8.  35.  for  so  I  am  commanded,  10.  13.

24.  19.  as  he  hath  done,  so  shall  be  done  to  him,  20.
Num.  4.  26.  bear  all  that  is  made,  so  shall  they  serve

15.  15.  as  ye  are,  so  shall  the  stranger  be  before  L.

25.  8.  so  the  plague  was  stayed,  Psal.  106.  30.
Dent.  7.  19.  so  shall  the  Lord  do  to  all  the  nations
8.  20.  as  nations  Lord  destroyeth,  so  shall  ye  perish
17.  7.  so  thou  shalt  put  the  evil  away  from  among

you,  19.  19-.  1  21.21.  I  22.21,22,24.
22. 26.  for  as  when  man  riseth,  even  so  is  this  matt.
33.  25.  and  as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be
Josh.  14. 11.  as  strength  then,  even  so  is  strength  now
Judg.  1.  7.  as  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me
5.  31.  so  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  O  Lord
8.  18.  they  answered,  as  thou  art,  so  were  they

21.  for  as  the  man  is,  so  is  his  strength

15.  11.  as  they  did  to  me,  so  have  1  done  to  them

1  Sam.  9.  21.  wherefore  tiienspeakest  thou  so  tome  {

11.  7.  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  his  oxen

15.  .3.3.  so  shall  thy  mother  be  child! .  among  women

19.  17.  Saul  said,  why  hast  thou  deceived  me  so
25.  25.  as  his  name  is,  so  is  he,  Nabal  is  his  name
30. 24.  so  shall  his  part  be  that  tarrieth  by  the  stuff

2  Sam.  7.  8.  so  shalt  thou  say  to  my  servant  David
13. 35.  king’s  sons  come,  as  thy  servants  said,  so  it  is

16.  10.  so  let  him  curse.  Who  shall  then  say,

wherefore  hast  thou  done  sol  1  A ings  1.  6.

22,  4.  so  shall  I  be  saved  from  my  enemies,  Ps.  18.3.
24  .  25.  so  the  Lord  was  entreated  for  the  land

1  Kings  1. 30.  even  so  will  1  certainly  do  this  day
36.  the  Lord  God  of  my  lord  the  king  say  so  too

20.  40.  the  king  said,  so  shall  thy  judgment  be

22.  8.  he  said,  let  not  king  say  so,  2  Chron.  18.  7.

2  Kings  7.  20.  so  it  fell  out  to  him,  peo.  trode  on  him
2  Chr.  20.  20.  so  be  established,  so  shall  ye  prosper

35.  6.  so  kill  the  passover  and  sanctify  yourselves
Ezra  4. 24.  so  itceased  to  the  second  year  of  Darius
Neh.  2.  4.  so  1  prayed  ||5.  13.  so  God  shakeout

8.  17.  to  that  day  had  not  children  of  Israel  done  so
9. 10.  so  didst  tliou  get  thee  a  name,  as  it  is  this  day
Fsth.  4. 16.  and  so  will  I  go  in  onto  the  king
Job5. 27.  so  it  is,  hear  it  U  21.  4.  and  if  it  were  so

9.  2.  I  know  it  is  so  of  truth,  but  how  should  man  be

23.  7.  so  should  I  be  deliv.  for  ever  from  my  judge
32.  22.  in  so  doing,  my  maker  would  take  me  away
Psal.  21. 13.  so  will  w  e  sing  and  praise  thy  power
35.  25.  let  them  not  say,  so  would  we  have  it

37. 3.  do  good,  so  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land
42. 1.  so  panteth  my  soul  after  thee,  O  God
45.  11.  so  shall  the  King  desire  thy  beauty
48.  8.  as  we  have  heard, so  have  we  seen  in  the  city

10.  so  is  thy  praise  to  the  ends  of  the  earth
63.  2.  to  see  thy  glory,  so  asseen  thee  in  sanctuary
73.  22.  so  foolish  was  1 ,  and  ignorant,  as  a  beast
78.  72.  so  he  fed  them  ||79.  13.  so  we  thy  people

80.  18.  so  will  not  we  go  back  from  thee,  qmcKen

81.  12.  so  1  gave  them  up  II  90.  11.  so  is  thy  w  rath
103. 13.  so  the  T.ord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him
10Q.  17.  so  let  it  come,  so  let  it  be  far  from  him
115.  8.  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them.  135. 18.
147.  20.  he  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation

Prov.  3.  4.  so  shall  find  favour  and  good  understand  .
22.  so  shall  they  be  life  to  thy  soul,  grace  to  neck
6.  11.  so  shall  thy  poverty  come,  24.  34.

10.25.  as  the  whirlwind,  so  is  the  wicked  no  more
23.  7.  as  he  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he
Eccl.  3.  19.  as  the  one  dieth,  so  dieth  the  other


so


so  c


Eccl.  5. 16.  that  in  al.  points  as  ne  came,  so  sh.  he  go

9.  2.  as  is  the  good  so  is  sinner,  he  that  sweareth
Isa.  14.  €4.  so  shall  it  come  to  pass,  to  shall  it  stand

IB.  4.  for  o  Lord  said  to  me,  l  will  take  my  rest

24.  2.  as  with  the  people,  so  with  the  priest
‘.6.  17-  so  have  we  been  in  thy  sight,  O  Lord
36  6.  so  is  i  har.  king  of  Egypt  to  all  trust  in  him
47-  1”.  w!  erein  thou  hast  laboured,  if  so  be  thou
shalt  be  aide  to  protit ;  if  so  thoumayest  prevail

53.  7.  as  a  lamb,  so  he  openeth  not  his  mouih

62.5.  so  shall  thysons;  so  shall  G.  rejoice  over  thee
63.  8.  they  are  my  people,  so  he  was  their  Saviour

66. 13.  sj  will  l  comfort  you,  ye  shall  be  comforted
22.  saith  L.  0  shall  your  seed  and  name  remain

Jer.  5.  31.  and  my  people  love  to  have  it  so

10.  18.  will  distress  them,  that  they  may  find  it  so
11  •  4.  so  shall  be  my  people,  1  your  G.  Ezek.  37.  23.
19. 11.  saith  L.  so  will  1  break  this  pei  pie  and  city
35.  11.  come,  let  us  go,  so  we  dwell  at  Jerusalem
38.  20.  obey  the  Lord,  so  shall  it  be  well  unto  thee
30.  14.  so  he  dwelt  among  the  people

42.  17.  so  shall  be  with  all  men  that  set  their  faces
Lam.  3.29.  mouth  in  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  hope
Ezek.  12.  11.  as  I  have  done,  so  shall  be  done  to  them

16.  44.  saying,  as  is  the  mother,  so  is  the  daughter

18.  30.  rrpent,  so  iniquity  shall  not  be  your  ruin

28.  14.  cherub  that  covereth,  1  have  set  thee  so
45.  20.  so  thou  shalt  do,  jo  shall  ye  reconcile  house

Dan.  3. 17.  if  it  be  so,  our  God  is  able  to  deliver  us
Dos .  3.  3.  shalt  abide  for  me,  so  will  1  be  for  thee

13. 6.  so  were  they  filled  ||  Joel  2. 4.  so  shall  they  run
Amos  5.  14.  so  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  with  you
Zeph.  3.  7.  so  their  dwelling  should  not  be  cut  off
blag.  2.  5.  fomy  Sp.  remaineth  among  you,  fear  not

14.  fois  this  people,  so  is  this  nation  before  me
Ztch.  1.  6.  to  our  doings,  re  hath  he  dealt  with  us

8.  13.  so  will  I  sa\  e  you,  and  ye  shall  be  a  blessing
14.  15.  so  shall  be  plague  of  horse,  as  this  plague

Mat.  3.15.  Jes.  said,  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now,  it  becom.

5.  12.  for  so  persecuted  they  prophets  before  you
16.  let  your  light  so  shine  ||  19.  shall  teach  men  so
0.  80.  it  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field

8. 13.  as  thou  hast  believed,  so  be  it  done  unto  thee

9.  33.  marvelled,  saying  it  was  never  so  seen  in  lsr.

11.26.  even  so,  Lath,  for  so  it  seemed,  Luke  10.  21.

12.  40.  so  shall  Son  ofman  be,  Luke  11.  30.  |  17.  24.

19.  10.  if  the  case  of  the  man  be  so  with  his  wife
24.46.  when  cometh  shall  find  so  doing,  Luke  12.43.

Mark  7.  18.  are  ye  so  without  understanding  also  f

10.  43.  but  so  shall  it  not  be  among  you

Luke  12.  38.  if  he  come  in  watch  and  find  them  so

54.  and  so  it  is  ||  24.  24.  found  it  so  as  women  said
John  3.  16.  G  od  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his

12.  50.  even  as  the  Father  said  to  me,w  1  speak

13.  13.  ye  say  w  ell,  tor  .so  1  am  ||  14.  .31.  jo  1  do

15.8.  ye  bear  much  fruit,  jo  shall  be  my  disciples
9.  as  Father  hath  loved  me,  jo  have  1  loved  you

17. 18.  jo  have  I  also  sent  them  into  w  orld,  20.*21.
18.22.  saying,  Answerest  thou  tne  high  priest  so?

Acts  1.  11.  this  Jesus  shall  jo  come  in  like  manner

3. 18.  he  hath  so  fulfilled  ||  7.  1.  are  these  things  so  ?

8.  32^as  a  lamb  dumb,  so  opened  he  not  his  mouth

13.  47.  for  jo  hath  the  Lora  commanded  us

14. 1.  they  jo  spake,  thata  great  multitude  believed
16. 5.  so  were  the  churches  established  in  the  faith
19. 20.  jo  mightily  grew  word  of  God  and  prevailed

20.  13.  for  jo  had  appointed,  minding  to  go  a-foot
24.  14.  jo  worship  1  the  God  of  my  fathers
27.44.  jo  came  to  pass  they  escaped  all  safe  to  land

Rom.  5.  15.  but  not  as  the  offence,  so  also  is  free  gift

8.8.  jo  they  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God

9. 16.  jo  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth  nor  run.

11.26.  jo  all  Israel  shall  t.  saved,  as  it  is  written
12.  20.  jo  doing  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head

14.  12.  jo  every  one  shall  give  account  to  God

1  Cor.  3.  15.  he  hims.  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire

4. 1.  let  man  jo  account  of  us,  as  ministers  of  Chr.

5.  3.  concerning  him  that  hath  jo  clone  this  deed

6.  5.  is  it  jo  that  there  is  not  wise  man  among  you  >

7.  17-  Jo  let  him  walk,  jo  ordain  1  in  all  churches
26.  I  say  that  it  is  good  for  a  man  so  to  be

40.  but  she  is  happier  if  s'.:e  so  abide,  my  judgm.

8.  12.  when  ye  sin  so  against  the  brethren

9.  14.  even  so  hath  Lord  ordained  to  live  by  gospel
24.  jo  run,  26.  )|  11.  28.  jo  let  him  eat  that  bread
12.  12.  all  members  are  one  body,  so  also  is  Christ

15.  11.  so  we  preach,  and  jo  ye  believed

2  Cor.  10.  7.  as  he  is  Christ’s,  so  are  we  Christ’s
11.9.  jo  w  ill  1  keep  mys.  from  being  burdensome

22. are  they  Hebrews  ?  jo  am  I  ;  Israelites  r  jo  am  1
12.  16.  but  be  it  so,  I  did  not  burden  you
Cal.  4.  29.  but  as  then  persecuted,  even  so  it  is  now

6.  2.  bear  burdens,  and  jo  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ
Lpli.  2.  15.  of  twain,  one  new  man,  so  making  peace
P nil.  3.  17.  brethren,  mark  them  which  walk  so

4.  1.  my  brethren,  jo  stand  fast  in  the  Lord
Go/.  2.  6.  asye  receive  Christ  Jes.  so  walk  ye  in  him
1  lhess.  2.  4.  even  so  we  speak,  not  as  pleasing  men
4.  17.  and  jo  shall  we  ever  be  w  ith  the  I.ord
Heb.  3.  11.  jo  1  sware  in  my  wrath,  shall  notenter

7.  9.  as  1  may  so  say,  Levi  paid  tithes  in  Abi  aham
1  Pet.  1.  15.  jo  be  ye  holy  |[2. 15.  jo  is  the  will  of  G.

3. 17.  it  is  better,  it  the  will  of  God  be  so,  to  suffer

1  John  2.  6.  he  ought  hims.  jo  to  walk  as  he  walked
4.  11.  G.  jo  loved  us,  we  ought  to  love  one  another

17 .  because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world
Rev.  1.7.  even  jo  amen  ||  22.  20.  even  jo  come,  L.  Jes.

SO  be  it.

/oj/<.2.21.  Rahabsaid.  accor.  to  your  words,  so  be  it
Jer.  11.  5. 1  answered  and  said,  jo  be  it,  O  Lord
See  Hid,  Hied,  Do,  Great,  Long,  Much.
Not  SO.

Gen.  1 9-  7 .  do  not  so  wickedly  ||  18. 0I1  not  so,  my  L.

29.  26.  it  mustwor  be  jo  done  in  our  country
48.  18.  not  so  my  father,  this  is  the  first  born
Exod.  10. 11.  n.  so  go  ye  that  are  men  and  serve  L.
Sum.  12. 7- servant  Moses  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful
Judg.  2.  17.  obeying  the  Lord,  but  they  did  not  so
14. 15.  is  it  not  so  ?  ||  1  Sam.  20.  2.  it  is  not  so

2  oa m.  20.21.  the  matter  is«.  jo,  but  a  man  lift,  up
23.  o.  Mtho  my  house  be  not  so  with  God, yet  hath

Job  9.  35.  and  not  fear  him.  but  it  is  not  so  w  ith  me


Job  24. 25.  if  it  be  not  so,  w  ho  will  make  me  a  liar

35. 15.  but  now  because  it  is  not  so  he  hath  visited
Petti.  1.  4.  ungodly  are  not  so,  but  are  like  the  chaff
Prov.  15.  7  •  the  heart  of  the  foolish  doeth  not  so
Isa.  10. 7 .  howbeit  meaneth  not  so,  nor  heart  think  so

16.6.  the  pride  of  Moab,  but  his  lies  shall  not  be  jo
Jer.  48.  30  not  be  so,  his  lies  shall  not  so  effect  it
Mat.  19.  8.  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so
20.  26.  but  it  shall  not  be  jo  am.  you,  who  will  be
25. 9.  not  so,  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us
Luke  1.  60.  not  so,  but  he  shall  be  called  John

22.  26.  exerc.  lordship  over  them,  but  shall  n.  be  so
John  14.  2.  if  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told  you
Acts  10.  14.  but  Peter  said,  not  so,  Lord,  11.8.
Rom.  5.  3.  not  only  so,  but  we  glory  in  tribulations

11.  not  only  jo,  but  we  also  joy  in  God  thro’  Jesus
Lph.  4.  20.  but  ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ
Jam.  3.  10.  these  things  ought  not  so  to  be
SO  that.

Gen.  21. 6.  so  that  all  that  hear  will  laugh  with  me
28.  21.  so  that  1  come  again  to  my  father’s  house
47.  13.  so  that  land  of  Egypt  and  Canaan  fainted
Exod.  10.  20.  so  that  he  would  not  let  lsr.  go,  11. 10.
21. 12.  he  that  smiteth  a  man,  jo  that  he  die
Dent.  28. 34.  j.  t.  thou  shalt  be  mad  for  sight  of  eyes
Judg.  2.  14.  jo  that  they  could  not  longer  stand
1  Sam.  4.  5.  shouted,  jo  that  the  earth  rang  again
18.  30.  jo  that  -his  name  was  much  set  by

1  Kings 8. 25.  j.  t.  thy  child,  take  heed,  2  C'hron.  6  16

2  R  tugs  8. 15.  spread  it  on  his  face,  so  that  he  died

9.  37.  jo  that  they  shall  not  say,  this  is  Jezebel
18.  5.  jo  that  after  him  was  none  like  him  of  kin»s

Ezra  9. 14.  so  that  there  should  be  no  remnant  °
Job  1.3.  jo  that  this  man  w  as  greatest  in  the  east
7- 20.  set  as  a  mark,  jo  that  1  am  a  burden  to  myself
Psal.  40. 12.  jo  that  1  am  not  able  to  look  up
58.  11.  so  that  a  man  shall  say,  there  is  a  reward
78.  53.  he  led  them  safely,  jo  that  they  feared  not
106.  32.  j.  t.  it  went  ill  with  Moses  tor  their  sakes
Eccl.  6.  2.  jo  that  he  wanteth  nothing  for  his  soul
Isa.  47 .7.  j.  t. .  thou  didst  not  lay  these  things  to  heart

60. 15.  been  forsaken,  j.  t.  no  man  went  thro’  thee
Jer.  33.  26.  so  that  1  w  ill  not  take  any  of  his  seed

44.  22.  so  that  the  Lord  could  no  longer  bear
Ezek.  21 . 24.  so  that  in  all  your  doings  sins  appear
31.  9.  jo  that  all  the  trees  in  Eden  envied  him
Dan.  8.  4.  jo  that  no  beast  might  stand  before  him
Zech.  1.  21.  jo  that  no  man  did  lift  up  his  head
Mark  15. 5.  Jes.  answered  not,  sot.  Pilate  marvelled
Luke  16.  26.  so  that  they  which  would  pass  to  you
Rom.  1.  20.  jo  that  they  are  without  excuse

15.  19.  jo  that  from  Jerus.  I  have  preached  gospel
2  Cor.  2.  7.  jo  that  contrariwise  ye  should  foigive

7-  7.  so  that  1  rejoiced  the  more
Gal.  5. 17.  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  ye  would
1  'lhess.  1.7. jot.  ye  were  ensamples  to  all  that  bel
Heb.  13. 6.  jo  t.  we  may  boldly  say,  L.  is  my  helper
Was  SO,  or  SO  was.

Gen.  1.7.  and  it  was  so,  9,  11,  15,  24,  30.

41.  13.  as  he  interpreted  to  us,  jo  it  was
Num.  9.  .16.  jo  it  was  always,  cloud  covered  it  by  nig

20.  jo  it  was  when  cloud  was  on  tabernacle

21.  jo  it  was  when  cloud  abode  from  even
Judg.  6.  38.  dew  be  on  the  fleece  only  and  it  was  so

19.30.  it  to.  jo  that  all  who  saw  it  said,  no  such  deed

1  Sam.  5.  7.  when  men  of  Ashdod  saw  that  it  was  so

10.  9.  it  teas  so  that  when  he  turned  from  Samuel
30.  25.  it  was  so  from  that  day  forward  made  a  stat.

2  Sam.  15.  2.  it  was  so  when  any  came  to  the  kin°

5.  it  was  so  that  when  any  man  came  nigh  to  him

16.  2.3.  so  was  all  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel

1  Kings  13.  9.  Jo  was  it  charged  me  by  word  of  T  ord

2  Kings  17-7.  so  it  was  that  Israel  had  sinned  ag.  L

23.  jo  was  1  sr.  carried  away  to  Assyria  to  this  day
2  Citron.  29.  25.  jo  was  the  commandment  of  I.ord
Luke  2.  6.  and  so  it  was  that  while  they  *ere  there

21.  Jesus,  who  was  so  named  of  the  angel
5.  10.  and  so  was  also  James  and  John  astonished
Acts  12. 15.  Rhodaconstantly  affirmed  itaajeven so
SO  B  Ell ,

2  Cor  5.  13.  whether  w  e  be  j.  it  is  for  your  cause
1  'Lhess. 5.6.  let  usnotsleep,  but  let  us  watch  and  bej
8.  but  let  us  who  are  of  the  day  be  j.  putting  on
1  Tim.  3.  2.  a  bishop  then  must  be  j.  Tit.  1.  8?

11.  deacons’  wives  must  be  j.  faithful  in  all  things
Tit.  <2.  2.  that  aged  men  be  j.  grave,  temperate  &

4.  they  may  teach  the  young  women  to  be  j.

1  Pet.  1.  13.  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  j
4.  7.  be  ye  therefore  j.  and  watch  unto  prayer
5.8.  be  j.  be  \  lgilant,  because  your ad \  ersary  devil
SOBERLY.

Rom.  12. 3  but  to  think  j.  accord,  to  measure  of  faith
Tit.  2.  12.  teaching  us  that  w  e  should  live  j.  -  joht
SO  B  Lli-minded.

Tit.  2.  6.  likewise  exhort  young  men  to  be  s.-minded
SOB E K N  ESS.

Acts  26.  25.  but  speak  forth  the  words  of  j.
SOBRIETY.

Rom.  12.  +  3.  every  man  ought  to  think  to  j.

1  Tim.  2.  9.  that  women  adorn  themselves  with  j.

15.  if  they  continue  in  faith  and  holiness  with  j.
SOCKET.

Exod.  38.  27.  an  hundred  talents,  a  talent  for  a  j
SOCKETS.

Exod.  26.  19.  make  forty  j.  of  silver,  21.  |  36.  24  26.

two  j.  under  one  board  for  two  tenons]
two  j.  under  another  board,  21,  25.  I  36’
24,  26.  ’  1

25.  and  their  j.  of  silver,  sixteen  j.  36.  30,  36.

37.  thou  shalt  cast  five  j.  of  brass  for  them,  36.  38
27. 10.  their  twenty  j.  shall  be  of  brass,  38.  10, 1 1.  ’

12.  on  west  side  pillars  ten,  their  j.  ten,  38.  12.

14.  the  hangings  on  one  side,  their  j.  three

15.  on  the  other  side  shall  be  three  j.  38.  14, 15.

16.  their  pillars  shall  be  four,  their  j.  four

17.  hooks  shall  be  of  silver  and  their  j.  brass,  18.
35.  11.  make  bars,  pillars,  s.  of  the  tabernacle

17.  hangingsof  the  court,  pillars,  and  their  j.

38.  27VJ.  ot  the  sanctuary,  j.  of  the  veil,  hundred  s.

30.  ot  the  brass  of  the  offerings  he  made  s.

31.  j.  of  the  court,  and  the  s.  of  the  court  gate
40.  18.  reared  the  tabernacle  and  fastened  his  s.


SOL

Num.  3.  36.  under  the  custody  and  charge  of  th*~
sons  of  Meran  shall  be  the  j.  37.  |  4.  3]  32
Cant.  5.  15.  as  pillars  otjnarble  set  on  j.  of  gold

Gen  25. 29.  Jacob  j.  pottage,  Esau  came  from  field
2  Citron.  35.  13.  other  ho  y  offerings  j.they  in  pots-

ov/  1J  \J  LiN  •

Exod.  12.  9.  eat  not  of  it  raw,  nor  j.  w  ith  wafer
Lev.  6. 28.  earthen  vessel  wherein  it  is  j.  shall  be
broken,  if  it  be  j.  in  brasen  pot,  it  shall  be  scoured
Num.  6.  19.  the  priest  shall  lake  the  j.  shoulder
1  Sam. Q.  15.  will  not  have  j.  flesh  of  thee,  but  raw
Lam.  4.  10.  the  women  have  j.  their  own  children
SO  DERI  KG.

Isa.  41.  7.  it  is  ready  tor  j.  he  fastened  it  with  nails

Job  23. 16  for  G.  maketh  my  heart  j.  and  troubleth
4!.  3.  will  he  speak  j.  words  unto  thee  J
Peat.  60.  10.  thou  makest  it  s.  with  showers
1*  a  s •  answer  turneth  away  wrath
.5.  15.  and  a  j.  tongue  breaketh  the  bone
Mat.  11.  8.  a  man  clothed  in  j.  raiment:  they  that!
wear  j.  clothing  are^inkjng’s  houses,  Luke  7.  25.

Ps.  55.  21.  words  were  j.  than  oil,  yet  drawn  swords-
SOI  PLY.

Tnl  l'lc  !W.iU  ^eafd  as  cattle,  children  be  able
ft  i'  21VlaeI  "ent  ^  hi™,  and  smote  the  naii
irt.  3.  7.  she  came  s.  and  uncovered  his  feet
1  Rmgs_2l.p.  Ahab  fast,  lay  in  sackcloth,  went  j.
Is“‘  6t-  refusetb  the  waters  of  Shiloah  that  go  j.

38.  15.  1  shall  go  j.  all  my  years  in  bittern,  of  sou)
Acts  ~7*  lo.  when  soufli^wind  blew  j.  they  sailed

Psal  37.  t  35.  like  a  tree  growing  in  his  own  j.

Rzek.  17.  8.  it  was  planted  in  a  good  j.  bv  areaf--
^  SOJOURN.  [water*

10-  Abraham  went  down  into  Egypt  to  s

19.  9.  they  said,  this  one  fellow  came  in  to  j
26.  3.  j.  in  this  land,  and  I  will  be  with  thee

,17 -4.  they  said,  tor  to  j.  in  the  land  are  we  come
Exod.  12.  48.  v  hen  a  stranger  will  j.  with  thee,  and  -
keep  passover,  Lev.  19.  33.  Num.  9. 14.  |  15  14'
Lev.  17. 8.  ot  strangers  who  j.  that  offereth  sacrifice'

10.  ot  strangers  that  j.  that  eateth  any  blood
n,,  who  j.  among  you  that  hunteth  any  beast

20.  2.  of  strangers  that  j.  that  giv.  seed  to  Molecb
.5.  45._of  strangers  that  j.  ot  them  shall  ye  buy

Judg.  17.  8.  a  Levite  went  tor.  where  lie  could

itorrlca.h’ !  §0  t0/’  wh.ere  1  may  find  place
Rtnji  1. 1  Elimelech  went  to  j.  in  country  of  Moab
1  Kings  17.20.  evil  on  the  widow  with  whom  i  j
~  Kings 8. 1.  arise,  j.  wheresoever  thou  canst  j
Psal.  15.  +  1.  who  shall  j.  in  thy  tabernacle  ?

120. 5.  woe  is  me,  that  I  j.  in  Mesech,  dwell  in  tents
Isa.  23. 7.  her  own  feet  shall  carry  her  afar  off  to  j

£M’”YLP:f0ple  W  d°wn  into  Egypt  to  j.  there
Jei .  42.  Id.  if  ye  wholly  set  your  faces  to  enter  into
Egypt,  and  go  to  s.  there,  17.  |  44,  12,  14  «8
...  ye  shall  die  in  place  whither  ye  desire  to  j.~
Lam.  4.  15.  they  said,  they  shall  no  more  j.  there
20.  38.  1  will  bring  them  from  where  they  j
4t  22.  divide  it  to  you  and  strangers  who  j.  among
Acts  ,.  6.  that  his  seed  should  j.  in  a  strange  land
^  SOJOURNED.  6

Gen.  20. 1.  from  thence  Abraham  j.  in  Gerar

21.  34.  and  j.  in  the  Philistines’  land  many  days

: '  4-  !  with  Laban,  and  stayed  there  until  now

35.27.  Hebron,  where  Abraham  and  Isaac s.

Deut.  18.  6.  if  a  Levite  come  from  where  he  s'

26.  5.  j.  in  Egypt  with  a  few,  and  became  a  nation
Judg.  17.  /.a  Levite  j.  in  Bethlehem-J uriah
19.  16.  an  old  man  of  Ephraim  j.  in  Gibeah
2 \  Rings  8.  2.  she  j.  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines

1  sal.  105.  23.  and  Jacob  j,  in  the  land  of  Ham
tleb.  11.  9.  by  faith  he  j.  in  the  land  of  promise

SOJOURNER.

r  oo’iV  am/’  ^it4h  }’°u, give  me  burying-place
Lev.  22. 10.  j.  of  priest  shall  not  eat  of  holy  thing

25.  35.  a  j.  fallen  in  decay  thou  shalt  relieve  *’

40.  thy  brother  shall  be  as  a  s.  with  thee

47.  J.  was  rich  by  thee,  and  bi  other  sell  hims.  to  j
Num.  35.  15.  these  six  cities  a  refuge  for  lsr.  and/
Ps.  39-  12. 1  am  a  stranger,  s.  as  all  my  fathers  w  ere

Lev.  25.  2.3.  for  ye  are  strangers  and  j.  with  me

2  Sam.  4.  3.  the  Beerothites  were  j.  in  Gittaim

1  Chron.  29.  15.  we^  are^.v.^as^vere  all  our  fathers

Exod.  3.  22.  every  woman  shall  borrow  of  her  that  j
12.  49.  one  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  home-born
and  to  stranger  that  j.  among  you,  Lev  16  °9
^17.  12, nor  shall  any  stranger  that  j.  eat  blood

18.  26.  that  j.  among  you  shall  keep  my  statutes
25.  6.  sabbath  of  the  land  meat  for  stranger  that  j
Num.  15.  15.  one  ordinance  shall  be  for  you  and  for
the  stranger  that  j.  w  ith  you,  16.  29.  I  19.  lo

26.  and  it  shall  he  forgiven  the  stranger  that  j
Josh.  20.  9.  these  cities  of  refuge  for  stranger  that  j
Ezra  1.  4._\vhoso  remaineth  in  any  place  where  he  j!
Ezek.  14.  7.  every  one  that  j.  in  lsr.  who  separated}

47.  23.  that  in  w  hat  tribe  stranger  j.  there  «ive

SOJOURNING.

Exod.  12.  40.  the  j.  of  lsr.  in  Egypt  was  4.30  years
Judg.  19.  1.  a  certain  Levite  j.  on  mount  Ephraire
1  Pet .  1 .  17 .  pass  the  time  of  your  j.  here  in  fear
SOAKED.

Isa.  34.7.  their  land  shall  be  j.  with  blood,  their
SOLACE.

Prov.  7.  18.  come,  let  us  j.  ourselves  with  loves
SOLD,  Actively,  Passively.

Gen.  25.  33.  Esau  j.  his  birthright  unto  Jacob
31. 15.  our  fathei  hath  s.  us, devoured  our  money.
3L  f:  Joseph  to  the  Ishmaelites  tors,  t--

30.  the  Mid'amtes  j.  him  into  Egypt  to  Potn.liar

41.  5u. Joseph  j.  corn  unto  the  Egyptians

42.  6.  he  it  was  that  j.  to  all  the  people  of  land

40.4.  1  am  Jos.  your  broth,  whom  ye  j.  into  IT  sot
5.  b.-  not  angry  with  yours,  that  ye  j.  me  biffier
00  1  3r  che  Egyptians  j.  every  man  his  field

22.  wTerefore  the  priests  j.  not  their  lands
Lxoa.  .2’.  3.  it  he  have  noth,  then  shall  be  j.  for  thci'c-

455


SOM


S  O  M


SON


Lev.  25  23.  the  and  shall  not  he  *.  for  ever
25.  then  shall  he  redeem  that  which  his  brother  *.

33.  house  that  was  *.  shall  go  out  in  year  of  jubilee

34.  but  the  field  of  the  suburbs  may  not  be  *.

42.  brethren  shall  not  be  *.  as  bond-men

27-  28.  no  devoted  thing  shall  be  *.  or  redeemed
Dent.  15.  12.  and  if  thy  brother  be  *.  unto  thee

28.  68.  there  shall  ye  be  *.  unto  your  enemies
32. 30.  excepttheir  Rock  had  5.  them  and  shut  them
Judg.  2.  14.  he  *.  them  into  hands  of  their  enemies

3.  8.  *.  them  to  Chushan-rishathaim  II  4. 2.  to  .labin

10.  7.  *•  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines

1  Sam,  12.  9.  he  s.  them  into  the  hand  of  Sisera

1  Kings  21.  20.  thou  hast*,  thyself  to  work  evil

2  Kings  6.  25.  ass's  head  was  *.  for  80  pieces  ot  silver

7.  1.  a  measure  of  fine  flour  s.  for  a  shekel,  16.

17. 17.  Israel  *.  themselves  to  do  evil  in  sight  of  Ld.

Neh.5. 8.  have  redeemed  our  brethren  who  were  *.

to  the  heathen,  or  shall  they  be  *.  unto  us  i
13.  15.  I  testified  in  day  wherein  they  *.  victuals

16.  who  brought  ware  and  *.  on  the  sabbath
Esth.  7.  4.  for  we  are  *.  1  and  my  people  to  be  slain
and  perish ;  but  if  we  had  been  s.  for  bond-men
Psal.  105.  17.  Joseph  who  was  *.  for  a  servant
Isa.  50. 1.  which  of, my  creditors  is  it  to  whom  I  s.

you?  for  your  iniquities  have  ye  *.  yourselves
52.  3.  ye  have  s.  yourselves  for  nought,  be  redeemed
Jer.  34.  14.  let  go  his  brother  who  bath  been  s.

Lam.  5.  4.  water  for  money,  our  wood  is  s.  unto  us
Ezek.  7. 13.  seller  shall  not  return  to  that  which  is  *.
Juel  3.  3.  and  they  have  *.  a  girl  for  wine  to  drink
6.  children  of  Judah  have  ye  s.  to  the  Grecians
7.1  will  raise  them  outof  place  whither  ye  *.  them
Amos  2. 6.  they  *.  tne  righteous  for  silver  and  poor
Mat.  10. 29.  are  not  two  sparrows  *.  for  a  farthing  ?
13.  46.  went  and  *.  all  that  he  had  and  bought  it

18.  25.  his  lord  commanded  him  to  be  *.

21. 12.  cast  out  them  that  *.  and  bought,  overthrew
seats  of  them  that*.  Mark  11.  15.  Luke  19.45.

26.9.  for  this  ointment  might  have  been  s.  for  much
and  given  to  the  poor,  Mark  14.  5.  John  12.  5.
Luke  12.  6.  are  not  five  sparrows  *.  for  two  farthings
17.28.  they  bought,  they  *.  they  planted,  they  built
John  2. 14.  found  in  the  temple  those  that  *.  oxen
16.  said  to  them  that*,  doves,  take  these  hence
Acts  2.  45.  and  s.  their  possessions  and  goods,  4.  34.

4.  37.  Joses  having  land  *.  it,  and  brought  money

5.  1.  Ananias  *.  ||  8.  ye  *.  the  land  for  so  much  ?

4.  after  it  was  *.  was  it  not  in  thine  own  power  ?

Rom.  7. 14.  law  is  spirit,  but  1  am  carnal,*,  under  sin

1  Cor.  10.  25.  whatsoever  is*,  in  shambles,  that  eat
Heb.  12. 16.  for  one  morsel  of  meat  *.  his  birthright

SOLDIER.

John  19.  23.  and  made  four  parts,  to  every  *.  a  part
Acts  10.7. Cornelius  called  a  devout*,  that  waited  on
28.  16.  suffered  Paul  to  dwell  by  himself,  with  a  *.

2  Tim.  2.3.  endure  hardness  as  a  good  *.  of  Christ
4.  may  please  him  who  hath  chosen  hint  to  be  a  *.

SOLDIERS.

2  Chron.  25.  13.  the  *.  fell  upon  the  cities  of  .Tudah
Ezra  8.  22.  I  was  ashamed  to  require  of  the  king*.
Isa.  15.  4.  the  armed  *.  of  Moab  shall  cry  out
Mat.  8.  9.  having  *.  under  me,  Luke  7.  8.

27  .  27.  the  *.  took  Jesus  and  gathered  to  him*.

28.  12.  they  gave  large  money  unto  the  *.

Luke  3. 14.  *.  demanded,  saying,  what  shall  we  do  ?

23.  36.  the*,  mocked  him, offered  him  vinegar
John  19.  2.  *.  platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  put  it  on

23.  the  *.  took  his  garments,  and  also  his  coat

24.  these  things  the  *.  did  ||  32.  *.  brake  the  legs
.34.  but  one  of  the  *.  with  a  spear  pierced  his  side

Acts  12.4.  delivered  Peter  to  four  quaternions  of  *.

6.  same  night  Peter  was  sleeping  between  two  *.

18.  there  was  no  small  stir  among  the  *.

21.  32.  when  they  saw  the  chief  captain  and  *.

35.  so  it  was,  that  he  was  borne  of  the  *.

23.  23.  make  ready  200  *.  to  go  to  Cesarea
27.  31.  Paul  said  to  the  *.  except  these  abide
32.  then  the  *.  cut  off  the  ropes  of  the  boat
42.  the  *.  counsel  was  to  kill  the  prisoners
SOLE.

Gen.  8.  9.  dove  found  no  rest  for  the  *.  of  her  foot
Dent.  28.  35.  with  a  sore  botch  from  *.  of  thy  foot
56.  would  not  set  the  #.  of  her  foot  upon  ground
65.  neither  shall  the  *.  of  thy  foot  have  rest
Josh.  1.  3.  every  place  *.  of  your  foot  shall  tread  on
26’flW.14. 25.  from  *.  of  foot  to  crown  was  no  blemish
John.  7.  Satan  smote  Job  from  the  *.  of  his  foot
Isa.  I.  6.  from  *.  offootto  head  there  is  nosoundness
Ezek.  1.  7.  *.  of  their  feet  like  the  *.  of  a  calf’s  foot
See  Feet.

SOLEMN.

Num.  10. 10.  in  your  *.  days  ye  shall  blow  trumpets
Psal.  92.  3.  to  sing  praise  with  a  *.  sound
Isa.  1.  1.3.  it  is  iniquity,  even  the  *.  meeting
Lam.  2.22.  thou  hast  called  asitia*.  day,  my  terr.
Hos.  9.  5.  what  will  ye  do  in  *.  day,  in  day  of  feast  ?
Zech.  8.  +  19.  the  fast  shall  be  joy  and  *.  times
See  Assem  bly.  Feast,  Feasts.
SOLEMNITY.

Deut.  31.  10.  in  the  *.  of  the  year  of  release
Isa.  30.29.  shall  have  song,  as  when  a  holy  *.  is  kept
SO  LEM  N  I  T1  ES.

Isa.  33.  20.  look  upon  Zion,  the  city  of  our  *.

Ezek.  45.  17-  prince  give  burnt  offerings  in  *.  of  Tsr.
46.  11.  in  the*,  meat  offering  shall  be  an  ephah
SOLEMNLY.

Gen.  43.  .3.  the  man  did  *.  protest  unto  us,  saying
1  Sam.  8.  9.  yet  protest  *.  to  them,  and  shew  them
SOLITARY.

Num.  23.  +  .3.  Balaam  went  *.  and  God  met  him
Job  3.  7-  let  that  night  be  *.  let  no  joyful  voice  come
30.  3.  for  want  arid  famine  they  were  *.

Psal.  68.  6.  God  settetb  the  *.  in  families
107.  4.  they  wandered  in  the  wilderness  in  a  *.  way
ha. 35. 1.  wildern.  and  *.  place  shall  be  glad  forthem
Lam.  1.  1.  how  doth  city  sit  *.  that  was  full  of  peop.
Mark  1.  35.  Jesusdepart.intoa*.  place, and  prayed
SOLI  l'AEIEY.

Mic.  7.  14.  feed  thy  people  which  dwell*,  in  wood
SOME.

Gen  19.  19.  Lot  said,  lest  *.  evil  take  me,  and  I  die

45fi


Gen.  .33.  15.  let  me  now  leave  with  thee  *.  of  folk
37.20.  come,  let  us  slay  him,  and  cast  him  into*. pit,
and  we  w  ill  say,  *.  evil  beast  hath  devoured  him
47. 2.  took  *.  of  his  brethren  and  presented  to  Pha.
Lzod.  16.  17.  and  they  gathered  *.  more,  *.  less

20.  but  *.  of  them  left  of  it  till  the  morning

27.  *.  went  out  on  se'  enth  day  to  gather,  found
Leo.  4. 7.  shall  put  *.  of  blood  onhorusof  altar,  18.

1*.  the  priest  stial  1  dip  his  finger  in  *.  of  the  blood
Num.  21.  1.  Arad  took  *.  of  them  prisoners

27.  20.  thou  shalt  put  *.  of  thine  honour  upon  him
Deut.  21.  1.  bee.  he  hath  found  *.  uncleanness  in  her
Ruth  2.  16.  let  fall  *.  of  handfuls  of  purpose  for  her

1  Sam.  24.  10.  *.  bade  me  kill  thee,  but  spared  thee

2  Sam.  17.  9.  he  is  hid  in  *.  pit,  or  in  *.  other  place

1  Kings  14.  13.  in  him  there  is  found  *.  good  thing

2  Kings  7.  9.  *.  mischief  will  come  upon  us

2  Chron.  12.  7.  but  I  will  grant  *.  deliverance
16.  10.  Asa  oppressed  *.  of  people  the  same  time
Ezra  10.  44.  *.  had  wives  by  whom  they  had  childr.
Nsh.  5.  3.  *.  said,  we  have  mortgaged  our  lauds

I. 3.  15.  saw  I  *.  treading  wine  presses  on  Sabbath
19.  and  *.  of  my  servants  set  l  at  the  gates

Job  24.  2.  *.  remove  land-marks,  take  aw  ay  flocks
Psal.  20.  7.  *.  trust  in  chariots,  *.  in  horses
69.  20.  1  looked  for  *.  to  take  pity,  there  was  none
Prov.  4.16.  sleeptaken  away  .unless  theycause  *.fall
Jer.  49.  9.  would  they  not  leave  *.  gleaning-grapes  ?
Dan.  8.  10.  and  it  cast  dowm  *.  of  the  host  and  stars

II.  35.  *.  of  them  of  understanding  shall  fall
12.  2.  *.  to  everlasting  life,  and  *.  to  shame

Amos  4. 11.  overthrown  *.  as  God  overthrew  Sodom
Chad.  5.  would  they  not  leave  *.  grapes  ?

Mat.  13.  4.  *.  fell  by  way  side,  Mark  4.  4.  Luke 8.  5.
5.*.  fell  on  stony  places,  not  much  earth,  Mark  4. 5.

7.  and  *.  fell  aniong  thorns,  Mark  4.  7.  Luke  8.  7-

16.  14.  *.  say  thou  art  John  the  Baptist,  *.  Elias,

others  Jeremias,  Mark  8.  28.  Luke  9.  19.

28.  there  be  *.  standing  heie,  who  shall  not  taste
of  death  till  Son  of  man,  Mark  9.  1.  Luke  9. 19.

19.  12.  *.  eunuchs  which  were  so  born,  #.  made
2.3.3  4.  *.  ye  shall  kill  and  crucify,  *.  ye  shall  scourge

28.  17.  they  worshipped  him,  but  *.  doubted
Luke  8.  6.  *.  fell  upon  a  rock,  and  withered  away

21.  16.  and  *.  of  you  shall  cause  to  be  put  to  death
John  6.  64.  there  are  *.  of  you  that  believe  not
Acts  5.  15.  shadow  of  Peter  overshadow  *.  of  them

8.  9.  giving  out  that  himself  was  *.  great  one

31.  how  can  1  except  *.  man  should  guide  me  ?

I. 3.  11.  seeking  *.  to  lead  him  by  the  hand

17.  4.  *.  of  them  believed  II  21.  hear  *.  new  thing

32.  *.  mocked  |l  27.  34.  1  pray  you  take  *.  meat
19.  32.  *.  cried  one  thing,  *.  another,  21.  34.

27.  44.  *.  on  boards,  *.  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship

28.  24.  *.  believed  and  *.  believed  not

Rom.  1.  11.  that  1  may  impart  to  you  *.  spirit,  gift
13.  that  I  might  have  *.  fruit  among  you  also

3.  3.  for  what  if  *.  did  not  believe  ?

8.  as  *.  affirm  that  we  say,  let  us  do  evil  that  good

5.  7.  for  a  good  man  *.  would  even  dare  to  die

II.  14.  if  by  any  means  1  might  save  *.  of  them
17.  and  if  *.  of  the  branches  be  broken  off

1  Cor.  4.  18.  now  *.are  puffed  up  as  though  not  come

6.  11.  such  were  *.  of  you,  but  ye  are  washed

8.  7.  for  *.  with  conscience  of  the  idol  eat  it  ^

9.  22.  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  *.

10.  7.  neither  be  idolaters  as  were  *.  of  them

8.  commit  fornication,  as  *.  of  them  committed

9.  as  *.  tempted  Christ  and  were  destroyed

10.  nor  murmur  ye  as  *.  of  them  murmured
12.  28.  and  God  hath  set  *.  in  the  church

15.  6.  greater  part  remain,  but  *.  are  fallen  asleep
12.  how  say  *.  that  there  is  no  resurrection  ?

.34.  for  *.  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God

2  Cor.  10.  2.  1  think  to  be  bold  ag.  *.  who  think  of  us

12.  for  we  dare  not  compare  ourselves  with  *.
Gal.  1.  7.  but  there  be  *.  that  trouble  you
Pph.  4.  11.  lie  gave  *.  prophets,  *.  evangelists
Phil.  1.  15.  *.  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  envy
2  Thess.  3.11 .  there  are  *.  among  youwalk  disorderly

1  Tim.  1.  .3.  charge  *.  that  they  teach  no  other  doct.
6.  from  which  *.  having  swerved,  have  turned

19.  *.  having  put  away,  have  made  shipwreck  _

4.  1.  that  in  latter  times  *.  shall  depart  from  faith

5.  15.  *.  are  already  turned  aside  after  Satan

24.  *.  men’s  sins  open  before-hand,  *.  men  follow

25.  the  good  works  of  *.  are  manifest  before  hand
6. 10.  which  while  *.  coveted  after,  they  have  erred

2  'Tim.  2.  18.  and  overthrew  the  faith  of  *.

20.  *.  vessels  to  honour  and  *.  to  dishonour
Heb.  3.  4.  for  every  house  is  builded  by  *.  man

16.  for  *.  when  they  heard,  did  provoke

4.  6.  itremaineth,  that  *.  must  enter  therein

10.  25.  not  forsaking  as  the  manner  of  *.  is

11.  40.  having  provided  *.  better  thing  for  us

13.  2.  for  thereby  *.  entertained  angels  unawares
2  Pet.  3.  9.  T.ord  is  not  slack,  as  *.  count  slackness

16.  in  which  are  *.  things  hard  to  be  understood
.hide  22.  of  *.  have  compassion,  making  a  difference
Rev.  2. 10.  the  devil  shall  cast*,  of  you  into  prison
SOM  EBODY.

Luke  8.  46.  Jesus  said,  *.  hath  touched  me
Acts 5.  36.  rose  up  Theudas,  boasting  hiins.tobe*.
SOM  E  III  1  NG.

1  Sam.  20.  26.  for  he  thought,  *.  hath  befallen  him
Mark  5.  43.  that  *.  should  be  given  her  to  eat
Luke  11.  54.  and  seek,  to  catch  *.  out  of  his  mouth
John  13.  29.  or  that  he.  should  give  *.  to  the  poor
Acts  3.  5.  he  gave  heed  expect,  to  receive  *.  of  theni
2.3.  15.  as  though  ye  would  inquire  *.  more  perf.
18.  this  young  man  who  hath  *.  to  say  to  thee
Gal.  6.  3.  for  if  a  man  think  himself  to  be  *.
SOMETIMES.

Eph.  2.  1.3.  ye  who  were  *.  afar  off  are  made  nigh

5.  8.  for  ye  were  *.  darkness,  but  now  light  in  L.
Col.  1.  21.  you  that  were  *.  alienated  and  enemies

3.  7.  in  which  ye  walked  *.  when  ye  lived  in  them
Tit.  .3.  .3.  we  ourselves  also  were  *.  foolish,  deceiv.
1  Pet.  3.20.  who  *.  were  disobedient  in  days  of  Noe
SOMEWHAT.

Lev.  4. 13.  have  done*. against  commandments,  27.
22.  when  a  ruler  hath  done  *.  through  ignorance


Lev.  13.  6.  if  the  plague  be  *.  dark,  21,  26,  28,  56.

19.  there  be  a  bright  spot,  and  *.  reddish,  24.

1  Sam.  2.  t  .36.  put  me  s.  about  the  priesthood

1  Kings  2. 14.  he  said,  1  have  *.  to  say  unto  thee

2  Kings  5.20.  1  will  run  after  him, and  take  of  him
2  Chron.  10.4.  ease*,  grievous  servitude  of  thy  father

9.  ease  *.  the  yokefl  10.  make  it  *.  lighter  for  us
Luke  7.  40.  Simon,  1  have  *.  to  say  unto  thee
Acts  2.3.  20.  as  to  inquire  *.  of  him  more  perfectly

25.  26.  O  king,  that  1  might  have  *.  to  write
Rom.  15. 24.  if  first  I  be  *.  filled  with  your  company
2  Cor.  5.  12.  that  you  may  have  *.  to  answer  them

10.  8.  tho’  l  should  boast  *.  more  of  our  authority
Gal.  2.  6.  but  of  those  who  seemed  to  be  *.

Ileb.  8.  3.  of  necessity  this  man  have  *.  also  to  offer
Rev.  2.  4.  nevertheless,  l  have  *.  against  thee
SON.

This  name  is  given  to  a  male  child  considered  in
the  relation  he  bears  to  his  parents.  Seth  teas
the  son  of  Adam,  and  Enos  teas  son  to  Seth,
Gen.  4.  25,  26.  It  is  given  also  to  a  grandson  ;
Mephibosheth  is  called  the  son  of  Saul,  2  Sam.

19.  24.  though  he  was  the  son  of  Jonathan,  who
teas  Saul’s  son,  2  Sam.  9.  6.  It  is  put  for  a
successor,  or  the  descendant  of  a  man,  I  am  the
son  of  the  wise,  the  son  of  ancient  kings,  Isa.
19.  11.  Thus  the  posterity  of  Jacob  aie  called
frequently  the  children  of  Israel.  Son  is  a  name
given  by  masters  and  teachers  to  their  scholars  ;
Eli  called  Samuel  his  son,  1  Sam.  3.  6.  And
Solomon  frequently  calls  his  pupil  son,  Prov.  1.

8.  And  this  name  they  gave  them  to  shew  their
paternal  authority  and  affection,  and  to  make
them  more  attentive  and  obedient.  St.  Paul  calls
Timothy  his  own  son,  1  Tim.  1.  2.  To  Timothy
my  own  son  in  the  faith  ;  who  truly  resembles
me,  and  has  been  confirmed  in  the  faith  by  my
means.  Obed  is  called  the  son  of  Naomi.  Ruth
4.  17.  There  is  a  son  born  to  Naomi;  one  who
will  nourish,  comfort,  and  assist  her,  as  a  dutiful
son  succours  his  parents.  Ilazael  calls  Benhadad
Elisha’s  son,  one  that  honoured  him  as  a  son  does
his  father,  2  Kings  8.  9.  God  calls  the  posterity
of  Jacob  his  son.  Exod.  4.  22.  Israel  is  my  son,
even  my  first  born.  'They  are  the  first  and  only
nation  that  I  have  chosen  for  my  peculiar  peo¬
ple.  Ezekiel  is  called  Son  of  man  about  eighty-
nine  times :  And  Christ  about  eighty  times  in  the
Evangelists.

SONS  of  God.  See  on  Child.

Gen.  17.  + 12.  he  that  is  *.  of  eight  days  be  circume

16.  I  will  give  tbee  a  *.  of  Sarah,  19. 1  18.  10, 14.
21.  2.  Sarah  bare  Abraham  a  *.  in  his  old  age,  7«

10.  cast  out  this  bond  woman  and  her  *.

24.  36.  Sarah  my  master’s  wife  bare  a  *.

44.  the  Lord  hath  appointed  for  my  master’s  *.
51.  and  let  her  be  thy  master’s  *.  wife

29.  3.3.  he  hath  therefore  given  me  this  *.  also

30.  6.  God  hath  heard  me,  and  given  me  a  *.

24.  the  Lord  shall  add  to  me  another  *.

35.  17.  fear  not,  thou  shalt  have  this  *.  also
+ 18.  the  *.  of  my  sorrow  ;  #.  of  the  right  hand
37.  3.  because  he  was  the  *.  of  his  old  age
Exod.  1. 16.  if  it  be  a  *.  then  ye  shall  kill  him
22.  every  *.  that  is  born  ye  shall  cast  into  river

2. 10.  the  child  grew,  and  he  became  her  *.

4.  25.  Zipporah  cut  off  the  foreskin  of  her  *.

12. 1 5.  your  lamb  shall  be  *.  of  a  year,  Lev.  12.  +  6.
21.  31.  whether  he  have  gored  a  *.  or  a  daughter

23. 12.  the  *.  of  thy  handmaid  may  be  refreshed
29.  30.  that  *.  that  is  priest  in  stead  put  them  on

Lev.  12. 6.  the  days  of  her  purifying  for  a  *.

24. 10.  the  *.  of  an  Israelitish  woman  strove  in

11.  the  Israelitish  woman’s  *.  blasphemed

25. 49.  his  uncle,  or  his  uncle’s  *.  mayr  redeem  hint
Num.  23. 18.  hearken  unto  me  thou  *.  of  Zippor

27.  4.  because  he  hath  no  *.  ||  8.  if  die  and  have  no*.
Deut.  13. 6.  if  *.  of  thy  mother  entice  thee  secretly

21. 16.  that  he  may  not  make  the  *.  qf  the  beloved,

first-born,  before  the  *.  of  the  hated,  17
18.  if  a  man  have  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  *.

20.  this  our  *.  is  stubborn  and  rebellious,  not  obey

28.  56.  eye  shall  be  evil  towards  her*,  and  daught.
Josh.  6.  26.  in  his  youngest  *.  set  up  the  gates  of  it

15.  8.  border  went  by  the  valley  ot  *.  of  Hinnom
Judg. 5. 12.  arise,  lead  captive,  thou  *.  of  Abinoam

9.  18.  have  made  the  *.  of  his  maid  ser\  ant  king
28.  Gaal  said,  is  not  he  the  *.  of  Jerubbaal  ?

11. 2.  for  thou  art  the  *.  of  a  strange  woman
.34.  besides  her  he  had  neither  *.  nor  daughter

13.  3.  but  thou  shalt  conceive  and  bear  a  *.  5,  7.
24.  the  woman  bare  a  *.  and  called  him  Samson
Ruth  4.  13.  Ruth  bare  a*.  I|  17.  a  *.  born  to  Naora

1  Sam.  1. 2.3.  Hannah  gave  her  *.  suck  until  weaned
4. 20.  women  said,  fear  not,  for  thou  hast  born  a  *.

9.2.  Kish  had  *.  whose  name  was  Saul  a  young  m.

10.  11.  what  is  this  that  is  come  to  *.  of  Kish  ?

13.  + 1.  Saul  the  *.  of  one  year  in  his  reigning
16. 18.  I  have  seen  the  *.  of  Jesse  that  is  cunning

17.  55.  whose  *.  is  this?  ||  58.  whose  *.  art  thou  ?

18.  +  17.  only  be  thou  *.  of  valour  for  me  and  fight
20. 27.  wherefore  eometh  not  the  *.  of  Jesse?

.30.  thou  *.  of  the  perverse  rebellious  woman

31.  for  as  long  as  the  *.  of  Jesse  liveth  on  ground
22.  7.  will  *.  of  Jesse  gL e  you  fields  and  vineyards
9.  Doeg  said,  1  saw  the  *.  of  lesse  coming  to  Nob

12.  Saul  said,  hear  now,  thou  *.  of  Ahitub

25. 10.  who  is*,  of  Jesse?  ||  17.  he  is  such  a*,  of  Bel.

2  Sam.  1.  1.3.  he  said,  1  am  the  *.  of  a  stranger

9.  .3.  Jonathan  hath  yet  *.  who  is  lame  on  his  feet

9.  given  thy  master’s  *.  all  that  pertained  to  San.

10.  that  master’s  *.  may  have  food  to  eat ;  Me¬

phibosheth  thy  master’s  *.  shall  eat  at
my  table

10.  2.  I  will  shew  kindness  to  the  *.  of  Nahash

16.  .3.  king  said,  and  where  is  thy  master’s  *.  .

18. 12.  not  put  forth  my  hand  against  the  king  s  *

18.  1  have  no  *.  to  keep  my  name  in retnembrancj

20.  shall  bear  no  tidings,  because  king's  *.  is  dead
20. 1.  nor  have  we  inheritance  in  the  *.  of  Jesse
1  Kings  3. 6.  thou  hast  given  him  a  *.  to  sit  on  throne
26.  for  her  bowels  yearned  upon  her  *.


SON


tugs. 5. 7 .hath  given  Dav  a  wise  .?.over  this  people

7 .  14.  Hiram  was  a  widow's  s.  ot’  tribe  of  N  aphtali
1‘2.  10.  no  inheritance  in  s.  of  Jesse,  C  Cl non.  10.  id.

14.  1.  Abijah  the  s.  of  Jeroboam  fell  sick

5.  she  cometh  to  ask  a  thing  ot  thee  for  her  s.

*7.  17.  the  .v.  of  the  mistress  of  the  house  fell  sick
*0.  biougl  t  evil  on  the  widow,  by  slavimr  her  s

22.  Co.  cairy  him  to  Joash  king’s  y.  2  C’/</\18.  25.’

' ’  n.-.lehoram  reigned, because  he  had  no s.
sIle  said  tu  ,iei  ’  ,)r'n?nie  yet  a  vessel

16.  about  this  season  thou  shalt  embrace  a  y.

1" •  a'ld  the  woman  bare  a  y.  at  that  season
28.  did  L  desire  a  y.  ot  my  lord  ?  ||  37.  took  up  her  y
0-29-  8>ve  s.  to  eat  him,  and  she  hath  hid  her  y.

3v.  see  ye  how  this  s.  of  a  murderer  hath  sent

8.  1.  the  woman  whose  y.  he  had  restored  to  life
5.  this  is  her  s.  whom  Elisha  restored  to  life

11. 1.  Athaliah saw  her  y.  was  dead,  2  C hr.  22.  10.

4.  Jehoiada  shewed  them  the  k  inn’s  y.

12.  he  brought  forth  the  king's  s.  and  put  crown

1  C/irnti.  12.  18.  and  on  thy  side,  thou  .v.  of  Jesse
'**•  d'i_a!-ldJle  a's0  "as  d,e  •*’•  of  the  giant

-2-9.  behold,  a  >.  shall  be  born  to  thee,  a  man  of  rest

2  C7 'iron.  21.  17.  so  that  there  was  i ever  a  y.  left  him

22.  9.  buried  him,  because  lie  is  v.  of  Jehoshapliat

23.  3.  he  said,  behold,  the  king’s  y.  shall  reinn

their  overseer, y.  of  greatn  en
Job  18.  19.  he  shall  neilher  have.?,  nor  nephew
Psa/.°.  12.  kiss  the  s.  lest  lie  be  angry,  and  ye  perish
oO.  .0.  thou  slanderest  thine  own  mother’s  s.

72.  L  and  thy  righteousness  unto  the  king’s  y.
t  17.  as  a  s.  to  continue  his  father’s  name
86.  16.  and  save  the  y.  of  thifie  handmaid
^9-  22.  nor  sliall  the  >.  of  wickedness  afflict  him
116.  16.  I  am  the  y.  of  thine  handmaid
rny.  S.  12.  as  a  father  .1.  in  whom  he  i'elighteth
4.  3. 1  was  my  fathei’s.r.  only  beloved  of  my  mother
e’  a,wlse  s-  maketh  a  glad  father,  15.  20.

0.  he  that  gathereth  in  summer  is  a  wise  y.  sleep-
eth  in  harvest,  s.  causeth  shame,  17.  2.  I  19.  °6

13.  1.  a  wise  f.  heareth  his  father's  instruction  ~

10'  {•  ‘s  .a  grief  to  his  father,  and  bittern.

19.  13.  a  foolish  y.  is  the  calamity  of  his  father
28.7.  whoso  keepetli  the  law,  is  a  wise  s.

31.  2.  and  what,  the.?,  ot  my  womb,  .y.  of  my  vows  ?

1  a  he  begetteth  a  .?.  nothing  in  his  hand

10.  17 .  blessed  land,  when  king  is  the  .s.  of  nobles

Isa.  0.  + 1.  a  vineyard  in  the  li  rn  of  the  s.  of  oil

7.  4.  not  afraid  of  the  anger  of  the  s.  of  Remaliah
6.  let  us  set  a  king  111  it,  even  the  y.  of  1  abeal
9*  the  head  ot  Samaria  is  Remaliah’sy.

14.  behold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive  and  bear  a  s.

us  a  clldd.  is  born,  unto  us  a  y.  is  given
14. 12. how  art  thou  fallen,  O  Lucifer,.?.  ofinornin,r
22.  I  t  1  cutoft  trom  Babylon.?,  and  nephew  n

O,  i  .A  ,a,m  °/  th?.wlse*  they,  of  ancient  kinas

21.  t  10.  O  my  threshing,  and  the  y.  of  my  floor'

49.  Id.  not  have  compassion  on  the  y.  of  her  womb
r  *  2*  n|lt^ier  s.ot  the  stranger  speak

no'  n\  u  ni,a,  tlje,e  mourning,  as  for  an  only.?.
iw‘iiSooU  !  n0ti  hf,v?  I-  '-  to  r?’”n  on  his  throne
10  .  14-2P’  '-hey  sha11  deliver  neither  y.nordauoht
iA4LS?Uu  the  1S  'nine,  soul  that  sins  shalLdie
10.  it  he  beget  y.  thatis  a  robber,  shedderof  blood
14;  a  that  seeth  his  father’s  sins  and  doeth  not
1 9.  why  doth  not  y.  bear  iniquity  of  the  father  5
when  the  y.  hath  done  what  is  lawful  and  ri°ht

20.  y.  not  bear  iniquity  of  father,  nor  father  of°y.

4-4.  2d.  for  y.  or  daughter  they  may  defile  thems.

?•  ae  took  homer,  which  bare  him  a  y.  8
13.  13.  he  is  an  unwise  y.  for  he  should  notstay  lon«

a  in  ‘  V14-  !nvas  V°  l?roPhe,>  nor  was  1  a  prophet’s  s.
iv.10-  i_w,V1  make  it  as  mourningofan  only  y
Mic.7.6.  for  they,  dishonoureth  the  fattier
f,aJ:  6  r.hon°uretli  Ids  father  a  servant  his  master
Mat.  1  21.  she  shall  bring  forth  a  y.  Luke  1.  31.

9.  -/esus  said,  y.  be  of  good  cheer,  Mark  2.  5.

10.  3J.  be  that  loveth  y.  or  daughter  more  than  me
^'r-2,.’uno  man  knoweth  y.  but  Father,  nor  any  the
.0  tatner>  save  y.  and  he  to  whom  s.  Luke  10  00

13.  5d.  the  carpenter’s  y.  Mark  6.  3.  Luke  4.  00  '

16.  16.  thou  art  Christ  the  y.  of  the  living  Cod"’

l  •  an  ,  sair|.  -f.  go  work  to  day  in  my  vineyard
38.  but  when  liusbandmen  saw  they,  they  said

A?'  t2i'oVVi’ait  th-ink  ye  Christ  ?  whose  y.  is  he  }

6.1  hav.lnr,  ^et  one  his  well-beloved

12.  father  shall  betray  the  y.  children  rise  up

32.  that  hour  knoweth  not  the  y.  but  Father  '

14.  61.  art  thou  the  Christ,  the  y.  of  the  blessed  >

i1-  p*'sabeth  shall  bear  thee  y.  name  John
h-  1)®.?ha11  be  called  the  y.  of  the  Highest

o3an  ^1Stlbe,h  ^nceiv,ecl  1157-  brought  forth  y.

5'  to'  pother  swd,  s.  why  hast  thou  dealt  with  us  '

3.  .3.  Jesus ;  about  30  years,  being,  as  was  supposed,

_  ,  mey.  of  Joseph,  who  was  the  y.  of  Heli

in  -r?a(  ?an  car’  led,  out,  only  s.  of  his  mother

10.  6  if  y.  of  peace  be  there  your  peace  shall  rest
.i’  »a/- shall  ask  bread  of  any  of  you

ic’^o’  father  shall  be  divided  against  the  y

15.  13.  the  younger  y.  gathered  all  together
31.  y  thou  art  ever  with  me,  all  is  thine

16.  25._  y.  remember,  that  thou  in  thy  life  time

19.  9.  forasmuch  as  lie  also  is  the  .r.  of  Abraham
John  1 . 18.  only  begotten  y.wlio  is  in  bosom  of  Father
o40o=wteuhape,lf0un,d  Jes'is  ofMazareth  y.  of  Joseph

3.  35,  the  father  loveth  they,  given,  5  20
36.  that  believeth  on  the  y.  that  beli’eveth  not  y.

4.  46.  a  certain  nobleman  whose  y,  was  sick
5’  19/u’’V7ci?n  d,°  nothing  of  himself,  what  things

seeth  father  do,  these  things  doth  the  y.  likewise

21.  even  so  the  y.  quickeneth  whom  he  will
no’  ?uUt*  n  coirimmed  a|l  judgment  to  the  s.

23.  that  all  men  should  honour  the  y.  he  that  I10-
noureth  not  the  y.  honoureth  not  the  Father
.6.  so  hath  he  given  to  y.  to  have  life  in  himself
ind  eVery-  ?u?  who  seeth  y.  and  believeth  on  him
42._they  said,  is  not  this  Jesus  the  y.  of  Joseph  ?

8  Jo.buty  ahideth  for  ever  ||  9.  19.  is  this  your  y.  c
nontf-'  tl,eref-  shall  make  you  free,  shall  be  free
9.  20.  his  parents  said,  we  know  thatthis'is  our  y.

14.  3.  tliat  the  father  may  be  glorified  in  they.

17.  12.  none  ot  them  is  lost  but  they,  of  perdition


SON

Jfb*  21.15.  Simon  y.  of  Jonas,  lov.  thou  me  more  th.
-  ,  l>al'nabas,  s.  ot  consolation,  a  Levjte

{•2*-  took  hmi  up,  and  nourished  for  her  own  y.
II  I2’, ',ia'^.  t,;.l,nd  Vav>d  the  .v  of  Jesse,  a  man
ait]  l- I,a]  lsee>  ^le  s-  ot  a  Pharisee
16.  Paul  s  sisters  y.  heard  of  their  lying  in  wait
Row.  9.  9.  at  this  time  Sarah  shall  have  a  y.

^  2d’  dle" shall  v.  also  himself  be  subject

on  4’  7;n°!T'e.a  ST'- l,ut  and  if*,  then  an  heir
30.  cast  out  the  bond- woman  and  hery.  for  the  t
Of  the  bond-woman  shall  not  be  heir  »  ith  the  y’

Cnl  d'uf'  aSiVi'  Wlth  fa,he':’  he  served  in  -.-ospel
Co/.  4.  U).  ami  Marcus  sister  sy  to  Barnabas

?  rl/,ess;  S-.  thaJ ,nan  ?f  si"  the  y.  of  perdition
1/ */»:  1  •  Id*  this  charge  1  commit  to  thee  y.  1  imothv
Hen.  \ .  5. 1  will  be  a  tath.  and  lie  shall  be  to  me  a  y

8.  but  to  the  y.  he  saith,  thy  throne  is  for  ever
3.  6.  but  Christ  as  a  s .  over  his  own  house

2'  ng  tL1“’  were  a  J.  yet  learned  lie  obedience
7.28.  but  the  word  of  the  oath  maketli  the  y
11. 24.  refused  to  be  cal  led  y.  of  Pharaoh's  daughter
12.  6.  and  scourgeth  every  y.  whom  he  leceiveth
n  iV  1S.  he  whom  father  chasteneth  not  ?

2ft(.2.15.  following  the  way  of  Balaam,  s.  of  Bozor

1  John  2.  22.  is  antichrist  that  denieth  Father  and  y

23.  whosoever  denieth  they,  the  same  hath  not  the

f  ather,  but  he  that  acknowledgeth  the  y.

24.  ye  alsoshaH  continue  in  the  y.  and  in  Father
4*  {4*  rather  sent  the  s.  to  be  (he  Saviour  of  world
o.  1^.  he  that  hath  the  hath  life  ;  and  he  that

r  .  hath  not  they,  of  God  hath  not  life

2  ^  fr°m  Lord  Jesus  Christ  y.  of  the  Father

9.  he  that  abideth  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  y

See  Da  vip.

SON  oj  Hod.

Dan.  3.  2d.  form  of  the  fourth  is  like  the  y.  of  God
Mat.  4.  3.  it  thou  be  they,  of  Hod ,  command  that
o  ™se  st.ones. be  niade  bread,  27.  40.  Luke  4.  3,  9.
8.  29.  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus  thou  y.  of  H.  /  art  thou
oome  to  torment  us  before  the  time  ?  Luke  8.  28
32’  say  "lg,  of  a  truth  thou  art  the  y.  of  Hod'

oo’  i’i'  -e  .us  whether  thou  be  Christ  the  s.of  God
27  .  43.  ror  lie  said,  1  am  the  s.  of  Hod
54.  truly  this  was  the  y.  of  Hod,  Mark  15.  39.
Mark  1.  1.  the  gospel  ot  Jesus  Christ  the  y.  of  God
3.  11.  saying,  thou  art  the  y.  of  Hod,  John  1.  49.

55.  that  holy  thing  shall  be  called  y.  of  Hod

3.  38.  was  the  s.  of  Adam,  which  was  the  s.of  God

4.  41.  devils  came  out  ot  many,  cryingout,  thou  art
00  u  Christ  the  s.  of  Hod,  John  0.  69.  |  11.  27.

( 0 .  tfiey  said,  art  thou  then  the  y.  of  Hod  f
John  1.  34. 1  hare  record,  that  this  is  the  y.  of  Hod
3.  18.  not  believed  in  the  only  begotten  y.  of  Hod

5.  25.  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  y.  of  Hod


9.  35.  he  said,  dost  thou  believe  on  the  y  of  Hod  ?

10.  36.  because  1  said,  1  am  the  y.  of  Hod
11.4.  that  the  s.of  Hod  might  beglori/ied  thereby
19.  (.  because  lie  made  himself  the  y.  of  Hod

-0.  31.  believe  that  Jesus  is  Christ,  the  s.of  Hod
nn\°\  37 ’  1  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  y.  of  Hod
9.  20.  he  preached  Christ,  that  he  is  the  y.  of  Hod
Lorn.  1.4.  declared  to  be  the  y.  of  Hod  with  power
~  Cor.  1. 19.  for  the  y.  of  God  was  not  yea  and  nay
Hal  2.  20.  1  live  by  the  faith  of  the  s.of  Hod  *
i/‘f  1'  13’  COme  ln  u.nity  °f  knowledge  of  y.  of  God


Heb.  4  14.  a  great  high  priest,  Jesus  the  y.  of  God
6.  6.  they  crucify  to  themselves  y.  of  God  afresh

L3nnUt  Tale  ‘,lke  t0,  ,the  '•  Gt,d  abideth  a  priest
10.29.  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  s.of  Hod
l  John  3.  8.  tor  this  purposey.  of  God  was  manifested

4.  15.  whoso  shall  confess  Jesus  is  they,  of  Hod

5.  d.  he  that  believeth  Jesus  is  the  y.  of  Hod

10.  he  that  believeth  on  the  y.  of  God  hath  witness
1 3.  that  ye  may  believe  on  the  name  of  y.  of  Hod
20.  and  we  know  that  the  s.  of  God  is  come
Lev.  2.  18.  .write  these  things,  saith  the  y.  of  God
His  SON.

n  ca’,led  the  city  after  name  of  hiss.  Enoch

J.  24.  JNoali  knew  what  hrs  younger  y.  had  done
'  }}■  thing  was  verv  grievous  because  of  his s.
22.  10.  Abraham  took  the  knife  to  slay  his  s
13.  offered  him  for  burnt  offering  instead  of  'his  s

24.  48.  take  my  master’s  brother’s  daughter  to  his  s

25.  6.  sent  from  Isaac  hiss,  while  he  yet  lived  *

ilcath  of  Abram,  God  blessed  his  s.
34.  20.  Shechem  his  s.  came  to  gate  of  their  city
26.  they  slew  Hamor  and  Shechem  his  s.

37.  34.  Jacob  mourned  tor  his  s.  many  days
Lxod.  21.  9.  if  he  hath  betrothed  her  to  his  s.

32.  29.  consecrate,  even  every  man  upon  his  s
Lev.  21.  2.  but  for  his  s.  he  may  be  detiled
Lum.  20.  26.  and  put  them  on  Eleazar  his  s.  28.
Heut.  1 . 31.  God  bare  thee,  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  s.
i .  3.  thy  daughter  thou  shalt  not  give  to  his  s.

8.  5.  as  a  man  chasteneth  his  s.  so  the  L.  chasteneth
18.  10.  not  any  maketh  his  s.  to  pass  thro’  the  fire
~  Sam.  13.  37.  David  mourned  for  his  s.  every  day
16.  IQ.  should  I  not  serve  in  presence  of  his  s.  ?

19- .2.  how  the  king  was  grieved  for  his  s.

1  Kings  11.  35.  take  kingdom  out  of  his  s.  hand
36.  and  to  his  s.  will  I  give  one  tribe,  that  David

15-  4.  give  him  a  lamp,  to  set  up  his  s.  after  him
16.  13.  tor  all  the  sins  of  FI  ah  his  y.  they  sinned
~  A  nigs  3  27.  took  his  eldest  y.  should  havereigned
n2'  nG^az  ,nade  s-  to  i>ass  thro’  the  fire
_•  b.  JVtanasseh  made  his  s.  pass  through  the  fire
(.  of  which  Lord  said  to  David  and  to  Solomon
his  y.  will  I  put  my  name,  2  Chrvn.  33.  7.
*3.  10.  no  man  might  make  his  s.  pass  through  fire

2  thron.  24.  22.  thus  Joash  the  king  slew  his  s.

,13V21;  t1*5  that  spareth  his  rod,  hateth  his  s.

^J.  ^1.  sliall  have  him  become  hiss,  at  length
3  4.  what  is  his  s.  name,  if  thou  canst.  tell

Jer.QT.T.  all  nations  shall  serve  his  s.  and  his  son’s  s.

I  >an.  5.  22.  thou  his  s.  O  Belshaz.  hast  not  humbled
Mai.  3. 17.  spare  them,  as  a  man  spareth  his  s.

Mat.  7.  9.  what  man,  whom  if  his  s.  ask  bread

21.  37.  last  of  all  lie  sent  unto  them  his  s.

22.  2.  a  king  who  made  a  marriage  for  his  s.

45.  how  is  he  then  hiss.?  Mark  12.  37.  Luke  20.  44.
John  3.  16.  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  y.

17-  God  sent  not  his  s.  to  condemn  the  world


S  O  N

Ja**  4-  5.  ground  that  Jacob  gave  to  his  s.  Josepn

A  cTu1'1  ,<  <>,IU'  d.own  and  heal  his  s.

xXct.s  13.  od  hath  iiloritied  his  s  Jesus

26.  God  having  raised  up  his  s.  Jesus,  sent  him
Kom.\.  9.  whom  1  serve  in  the  gospel  of  his  s.

5.  10.  were  reconciled  to  God  by  death  of  his  s.

8A  ?\G9d  sending  his  own  y.  in  likeness  of  Hesh

29.  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  f
32.  he  that  spared  not  his  own  .v.  hut  delivered
1C 1-9.  called  to  the  fellowship  of  his  s  lesus
Hal  1  16.  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  s.  in  me
4.  4.  Consent  forth  his  s.  made  of  a  woman

6.  Go  t  sent  the  spirit  of  hiss,  into  your  hearts
Co/.  1.  1.3.  translated  us  into  kingdom  of/ffydear  y.

1  7/ieyy.  1.  it),  and  to  wait  for  his  s.  from  heaven

11  2;f’’  V1  •astdays  hath  spoken  to  us  by  his  s.

ll.  17.  Abraham  ottered  up  his  only  begotten  y
Jam  2.  21.  when  had  offered  Isaac  his  y.  on  altar
1  John  1 . 3.  our  fellowsh.  is  with  Fath.  and  his  s.  Jes.
o  00  °.i  .  ',ets- -  his  .v.  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin
1  A‘1Vrlat  we  believe  on  the  name  of  his  s.  Jesus
■4.  9.  God  sent  fits  only  begotten  s.  into  the  world
a.lld  his  s.  to  he  propitiation  for  our  sins
"I’bifiss*  which  he  hath  testified  of  his  s.

10.  that  believeth  not  God,  made  him  a  liar,  he
.  believeth  not  record  God  gave  of  hiss.

11.  this  life  is  in  his  s.  ||  20.  we  are  in  his  s.  Jesus
SON

Gew.  19^  12.  bast  thou  here  any  besides  s. -in-law ?
ine  l6*o.  Samson  the  s. -in-law  of  the  Timnite
19.  5.  the  damsel’s  father  said  unto  his  y. -in-law
1  2an>cs  ^  should  be  s. -in- law  to  the  king, 23.

~1.  Saul  said,  thou  shalt  this  day  be  my  s.-in  lau

22.  now  therefore  be  the  king's  s.-in  law
26.  it  pleased  David  well  to  be  king’s s.-in-law
2* .  that  he  might  be  the  king's  s.-in-law

22. 14.  who  is  so  faithful  as  the  king's  s.-in-law  ?

8-  27.  .lehoram  was  y.-m-/.  of  house  of  Aliab
Ae/i.  6.  18.  1  obiah  was  s.-in- law  to  Sliechaniah

13.28.  was  s.-in-law  to  Sanballat  the  lioronite
See  Bei.oveu.

„  My  SON.

Gen.  21.  10.  Islimael  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  s

23.  swear  that  thou  wilt  not  deal  falsely  with  my  y.
^2.7.  my  father,  and  he  said,  here  am  I,  my  s

8.  my  y.  God  will  provide  himself  a  lamb

24. 3.  shalt  not  take  wife  to  my  y.  of  Canaanites,  37.
4.  go  to  my  kindred,  and  take  wife  to  my  s.  7  38

6.  that  thou  bring  not  my  s.  thither  again,  8.

27.  8.  now  therefore,  my  s.  obey  my  voice,  43.

13.  his  mother  said,  upon  me  be  thy  curse,  my  s.

18.  he  said,  here  am  1 ,  who  art  thou,  my  y.  ?

21.  whether  thou  be  my  very  s.  Esau,  or  not,  24.
2f.  St*e,  the  smell  of  my  s.  is  as  smell  of  a  held
37-  and  what  shall  I  do  now  unto  thee,  my  s.  ?

34.  8.  the  soul  of  my  s.  longeth  for  your  daugiiter
’Va’V-  a''d  lle  knew  it.  and  said,  it  is  my  s.  coat
3d.  1  will  go  into  the  grave  to  my  s.  mournin'*

38.  11.  remain,  till  Shelah  iny  s.  be  grown
C6  becnnse.that  I  gave  her  not  to  Shelah  my  .?.

To  i?8ie  sald>  n‘Vs-  sliall  not  go  down  with  vou

43.29.  lie  said,  God  be  gracious  to  thee,  my  s.

4d.  28.  it  is  enough,  Joseph  my  y.  is  yet  alive

48.  19.  Jacob  said,  I  know  it,  my  s.  1  know  it

49.  9.  from  the  prey,  my  s  thou  art  gone  up
Lxod.  A.  22.  Israel  is  my  s.  even  my  first-born

23.  let  my  s.  go,  that  he  mav  serve  me
Jo.sh.  7.19.  rny  s.  give  glory  to  the  God  of  Israel
Judg.  8.  23.  neither  shall  my  y.  rule  over  you

17.  2.  mother  said,  blessed  be  thou  of  the  E.  my  s.

3.  dedicated  for  my  s.  to  make  a  graven  image

1  oam.  3.  6.  I  called  not  my  s .  lie  down  again
4.  lo.  and  he  said,  what  is  there  done,  my  s.  ?

10.  2.  sorroweth,  saying,  what  shall  1  do  for  my  s.  ?

14.  39.  though  it  he  in  Jonathan  my  y.  he  shall  die

40.  I  and  Jonathan  my  s.  will  be  on  the  other  side
42.  cast  lots  between  me  and  Jonathan  my  s.

22.  8.  that  my  s.  hath  made  a  league,  with  son  ot
Jesse,  or  that  my  s.  hath  stirred  up  my  servant
~  L  lo.  is  this  thy  voice,  my  s,  David  1  26.  1*.

26.  21.  I  have  sinned,  return,  my  s.  Damd
25.  Saul  said,  blessed  be  thou,  my  s.  David

2  W  7 r  U.  I.  will  be  his  father,  he  shall  be  mys.
13.  .5.  king  said,  nay,  my  s.  let  us  not  all  now  go
14- 11.  not  suffer  revengers,  lest  they  destroy  my  s.

16.  destroy  me  and  my  s.  out  of  the  inheritance

16.  11.  behold  mys.  who  came  forth  of  my  bowels

18.  22.  Joab  said,  wherefore  wilt  thou  run,  my  s.  ?

33.  the  king  was  moved,  and  wept,  thus  he  said,
y  n,V  s-  Absalom,  my  s.  my  s.  Absalom,  19.  4,

1  Kings  1.21.  1  and  mys.  be  counted  offenciers
3.  20.  she  arose  and  took  my  s.  from  beside  me

21.  behold,  it  was  not  my  s.  which  1  did  bear

22.  the  woman  said,  nay,  but  the  living  is  my  s.

23.  thy  son  is  the  dead,  and  my  s.  is  the  living

17.  12.  that  i  may  dress  it  for  me  and  my  s.

18.  she  said,  art  thou  come  to  me  to  slay  my  s.  ?

2  K  ings  ft.  28.  and  we  will  eat  my  .c.  to-morrow
29.  so  we  boiled  my  s.  and  did  eat  him,  give  thy  s.

14.  9.  give  thy  daughter  to  my  s.  2  Chron.  25.  18.

1  Chron.  17.  13.  and  he  shall  be  my  y.  22.  10.

22‘  ll-«ow>  tny  s.  L.  will  be  with  thee,  and  prosper

28.  6.  I  have  chosen  him  to  be  mys.  will  be  his  fath.

9.  thou,  Solomon,  my  s.  know  God  of  thy  fath"”  *

29.  1.  Solomon  mys.  whom  Gd.  alone  hath  chosen

19.  give  to  Solomon  my  s.  a  perfect  heart  to  keep
/  y.  2.  7.  L.  said  to  me,  thou  art  my  s.  this  day  have

I  begotten  thee,  Acts  13.  33.  Heb.  1.  5.  |  5.  5.
Hrov.  3.  11.  my  s.  despise  not  the  chastening  of  the
Lord,  nor  be  weary  of  his  correction,  Heb.  12.  5.
6.3.  do  this  now ,  my  s.  and  deliver  thyself
23. 26.  my  s.  give  me  thine  heart,  observe  my  ways

24.  21.  my  s.  fear  thou  the  Lord  and  the  king
27.  11.  my  s.  be  wise,  and  make  my  heart  glad
31.  2.  what,  my  s.  and  what,  the  son  of  my  vows
Eccl.\2.  12.  further,  by  these  mys.  be  admonished
Jer.  31.20.  is  Ephraim  my  dear  y.  ?  is  pleasautchild  >
Lzek.  21.  10.  itcontemneth  rod  ot  my  y.  as  every  tree
Hos.  11.  1.  1  called  mys.  out  of  Egypt,  Mat.  2.  15.
Mat.  3.  17 .  voice  saying,  this  is  my  beloved  y.  17.  5.

17-  15.  Lord,  have  mercy  on  my  s.  he  is  lunatic
21.  37.  they  will  reverence  my  y.  Mark  ln  6

4o?


SON


SON


S  O  N


JMark  g.  17.  Master,  T  have  brought  to  thee  my  s.
Litkeg.  38.  Master,  l  beseech  thee,  look  upon  m.yx.

15.  24.  tor  this  my  x.  was  dead  and  is  alive  again
j  Tim.  1.2.  to  Timothy  my  own  a.  in  the  faith
*2  Tim.  2. 1.  my  s.  be  strong  in  grace  thatis  in  Chr
Tit  1.  4.  to  Titus  mine  own  a.  after  common  faith
Philem.  10.  I  beseech  thee  for  my  s.  Onesimus
Rev  21.  7.  I  will  be  his  God,  he  shall  be  my  s.

Thy  SON .

Gen.  22.  2.  take  now  thy  s.  thine  only  a.  Isaac

12.  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  a.  thine  only  a.  16.

24.  5.  must  I  needs  bring  thy  s.  again  to  the  land .

27  .  32.  he  said,  1  am  thy  x.  thy  first-born  Lsau
37.  32.  know  now  whether  it  be  thy  x.  coat  or  no
48!  2.' behold,  thy  x.  Joseph  cometh  unto  thee

Exod.  4.  23.  I  will  slay  thy  s.  even  thy  first-born

10.  2.  tell  in  the  ears  of  thy  x.  and  son  s  a.

13.  8.  thou  shalt  shew  thy  x.  in  that  day,  saying

14.  when  thy  x.  asketh  thee,  what  is  this '  shalt  say,
by  strength  brought  from  Egypt,  Dent.  6.  20.

20.  10.  not  do  any  work,  thou,  nor  thy  s.  seventh
day  is  the  sabbath,  thou  shalt  not  do,  Dent.  5.  14.
Deut.  6.  21.  then  thou  shalt  say  unto  thy  x.

7.  3.  nor  his  daughter  shalt  thou  take  unto  thy  x.

4.  they  will  turn  away  thy  x.  from  following  me
12. 18.  eat  them  before  I.d.  thou  and  thy  x.  16.11,14.

13.  6.  if  thyxs.  entice  thee  secretly,  saying
Judg.  6.  30.  bring  out  thy  x.  that  he  may  die

8.  22.  rule  over  us,  thou,  thy  x.  and  thy  son  s  s.

1  Sam.  16.19.  Saul  said,  send  me  David  thy  x.

25.  8.  give  to  thy  servants,  and  to  thy  x.  David

2  Sam.  14. 11.  there  shall  not  one  hair  of  thy  x.  fall
1  Kings  1.  12.  s  ive  thy  life  and  life  of  thy  s.  Solom.

13.  thy  s.  Solomon  shall  reign  after  me,  17,  30.

3.  22.  the  dead  is  thy  x.  ||  23.  and  thy  x.  is  the  dead

5.  5.  thy  s.  whom  I  will  set  upon  thy  throne

11.  12.  1  will  rend  it  out  of  the  hand  of  thy  s.

13.  I  will  give  one  tribe  to  thyx.  for  David’s  sake

17.  13.  and  after  make  for  thee  and  for  thy  a.

19.  give  me  thy  x.  ||  23.  Elisha  said,  see,  thys.  liveth
ZKings  4.  36.  when  she  came,  he  said,  take  \i\Uhy  s.

6.  28.  give  thy  s.  that  we  may  eat  him  to-day,  29.

16.  7.  saying,  1  am  thy  servant,  and  thy  x.

1  Chr.  28. 6.  Solomon  thy  x.  shall  build  me  my  house,

I  have  chosen  him  to  be  my  a.  2  Chr.  6.  9
Prov.  19.  18.  chasten  thy  s.  while  there  is  hope
29.  17.  correct  thy  s.  and  he  shall  give  thee  rest
Luke  9.  41 .  Jesus  said,  bring  thy  s.  hither

15.  19.  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thyx.  21.

30.  as  soon  as  this  thy  s.  was  come  who  devoured

John  4.  50.  go  thy  way,  thy  s.  liveth,  51, 53.

17.  1.  glorify  thyx.  that  thy  x.  also  may  glorify  thee
19.  26.  lie  saith  to  his  mother,  woman,  behold  thys

SON  of  man.

Ezek.  2. 1.  he  said,  a.  of  man,  stand  upon  thy  feet
3.  s.  of  man,  I  send  thee  to  the  children  of  Israel
6.  and  thou,  x.  of  man,  be  not  afraid  of  them
8.  thou  s.  of  man,  hear  what  I  say  unto  thee
3.  1.  s.  of  man,  eat  that  thou  findest,  eat  this  roll

3.  a.  of  man,  cause  thy  belly  to  eat,  fill  thy  bowels

4.  s.  of  man,  go  get  thee  to  the  house  of  Israel

10.  s.  of  man,  all  the  words  that  I  speak  receive

17.  s.  of  matt,  I  have  made  thee  a  watchman
25.  O  s.  of  m  an,  they  shall  put  bands  upqn  thee

4. 1.  thou  also,  s.  of  man,  take  thee  a  tile  before  thee

16.  s.  of  man,  I  will  break  staff  of  bread  in  J erus.

5.  1.  thou  s.  of  man,  take  thee  a  sharp  knife

6.  2.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  towards  mountains

7.  2.  thou  a.  0/  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God

8.  5.  s.  of  man,  lift  up  thine  eyes  toward  north
6.  he  said,  s.  of  man,  seestthou  what  they  do  ?

8.  he  said,  s.  of  man,  dig  now  in  the  wall

12.  x.  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  what  ancients  do  5
15.  he  said,  hast  thou  seen  this,  Of.  of  man?  17

11.  2.  a.  of  man,  these  are  the  men  that  devise
4.  prophesy  against  them,  prophesy,  O  x.  of  man

15.  a.  of  man,  thy  brethren  are  they  unto  whom

12.  2.  a.  of  man,  thou  dwellest  in  a  rebellious  house

3.  therefore  thou  s.  of  man,  prepare  thee  stuff

9.  a.  of  man,  hath  not  the  house  of  Israel  said

18.  s,  of  man,  eat  thy  bread  with  quaking

22.  s.  of  man,  what  is  that  proverb  that  ye  have

27.  s.  of  man,  behold,  they  of  house  of  Israel  say

13.  2.  x.  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  prophets

17.  thou  s.  of  man, set  thy  face  against  thy  people

14.  3.  s.  of  man,  these  men  have  set  up  their  idols

13.  s.  of  man,  when  the  land  sinneth  against  me

15.2.  s.  of  man,  what  is  vine-tree  more  than  any  tree

16.  2.  s.  of  man,  cause  Jerus.  know  her  abominat

17. 2.  s.  of  man,  put  forth  a  riddle  and  speak

20.3.  s.  of  man,  speak  to  the  elders  of  Israel

4.  s.  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  them  ?  cause  to  know

27.  therefore  s.  of  man,  speak  to  house  of  Israel
46.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  the  south

21.  2.  x.  of  man,  set  thy  face  toward  Jerusalem
6.  sigh  therefore,  thou  a.  of  man,  with  bitterness

9.  s.  of  m.  prophesy  and  say ,  a  sword,  a  sword,  28.
12.  cry  and  howl,  .v.  of  m.  forit  shall  be  on  people

14.  s.  of  man,  prophesy  and  smite  thine  hands

19.  also  thou  a.  of  man,  appoint  thee  two  ways

22.  2.  thou  s.  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  the  city  ?

18.  s.  of  man,  house  of  1  sr.  is  to  me  become  dross

24.  s.  of  man,  say  to  her,  thou  art  the  land  that

23.  2.  s.  of  m.  there  were  two  women  of  one  mother
36.  s,  of  m.  wilt  thou  judge  Aholah  and  Aholibah  ?

24.  2.  s.  of  man,  write  thee  the  name  of  the  day
16.  x.  of  man,  1  take  away  the  desire  of  thine  e3’es

25.  s.  of  man,  shall  it  not  be  in  the  day  when

25.  2.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Ammonites

26.  2.  x.  of  man,  because  tnat  Tyrus  hath  said

27.  2.  s.  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation,  28.  12

28.  2.  s.  of  man,  say  unto  the  prince  of  Tyrus
21.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Zidon

29.  2.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Pharaoh

18.  x.  of  man,  Nebuchadrezzar  caused  his  army

30.  2.  a.  of  mart,  prophesy,  and  say,  thus  saith  L.
21.  s.  of  man,  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaoh

31.  2.  s.  of  man,  speak  to  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt

32.  2.  s.  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  Pharaoh

18.  s.  of  man,  wail  for  the  multitude  of  Egypt

S3.  2.  s.  of  man,  speak  to  children  of  thy  people

7.  thou,  O  x.  of  man  1  have  «et  thee  a  watchman

4.58


38.  2.  s.. of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Gog

14.  theref.  s.  of  man,  prophesy  and  say  unto

39.  1.  thou  s.  of  man,  prophesy  ag.  Gog  and  s
17.  thou  s.  of  man,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  43.  1


Ezek.  .3.3. 10.  O  s.  of  man,  speak  to  the  house  of  Tsr .

12  thou  x.  of  man,  say  to  the  children  of  Israel
24. a.  of  man,  they  that  inhabit  those  wastes  of  lsr.
3o.  s.  of  man,  thy  people  still  are  talking  ag.  thee
34. 2.  x.  of  man,  prophesy  against  the  shepherds

35.  2.  a.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  mount  Seir

36.  1.  thou  s.  of  man,  prophesy  to  the  mountains
17.  x.  of  man,  when  the  house  of  Israel  dwelt

37.  3.  he  said,  s.  of  man,  can  these  bones  live  .

9.  prophesy,  s.  of  man,  and  say  to  wind,  come
11.  s.  of  man,  these  bones  are  the  house  of  Israel
16.  x.  of  man,  take  thee  one  stick,  and  write  on  it

38.  2.  s.  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  Gog

•  •  ;  ■ - 1  ""*0  Gog

say

,  II1UU  0.  VJ  mitf.,  Wiuw  ........  - - '  ,

40.  4.  x.  of  man,  behold  with  thine  eyes,  and  hear

43.  7.  he  said,  s.  of  man,  the  place  of  my  throne

10.  s.  of  man,  shew  the  house  to  house  of  Israel

44.  5.  a.  of  man,  mark  well,  behold  with  thine  eyes
47.  6.  fie  said,  s.  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  this  .

See  Man.

SONG.

We  find  in  Scripture  several  songs  composed  upon
important  occasions ;  for  example,  Moses  made
one  after  the  passage  through  the  Red  sea,  to
thank  Cod  for  the  deliverance  of  his  people,  and
celebrate  the  greatness  of  this  miracle,  Exod.  1j.

1,  2,  Ac.  David  composed  a  mournful  song  upon
the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan,  and  another  upon
the  death  of  Abner,  2  Sam.  1.18,  19-  13.  33.  Je¬
remiah  wrote  his  Lamentations,  which  aie  a.
song,  wherein  he  deplores  the  calamities  and
ruin  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  he  made  another  upon  the
death  of  Josia'n  king  of  Judah,  2  Chron.  35.  25.
Deborah  and  Barak  made  a  triumphant  hymn
after  the  defeat  of  Sisera,  Jridg.  5.  1,  2,  3,  O'C-
The  Canticles,  or  Solomon’s  Song,  and  the  45th
Psalm,  are  songs  to  celebrate  a  spiritual  arid  di¬
vine  wedding,  such  sort  of  pieces  as  the  Gieeks
call  Epithalamia.  Hannah  themother  of  Samuel,
and  king  llezekiah,  returned  thanks  to  God  for
the  favours  they  had  received,  in  solemn  and  spi¬
ritual  songs,  1  Sam.  2.  1,2,  <vc.  Isa.  38.  10,  11,
&c.  The  songs  composed  by  the  l  irgin  .Mary,  by
Zacharias  the  father  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  old
Simeon,  are  of  the  same  nature  ;  they  are  thanks-
givings  to  God  fox  blcssiyigs  received  f tom  him,
Luke  1.  46,  68.  12.  29,  30
The  Song  of  Songs,  in  Hebrew,  Schir  Has-
chirim,  the  most  excellent  of  all  songs.  lhe
Christian  church,  as  well  as  the  synagogue,  has
always  received  this  book  of  Canticles  among  the
Scriptures  as  generally  owned  to  be  canonical.
The  form  of  it  is  dramatical,  wherein  several
parts  of  it  are  uttered  by,  or  in  the  name  of,
several  persons  ;  which  are  chiefly  four ,  the  bride¬
groom  and  bride,  and  the  friends  or  companions
of  the  one,  and  of  the  other.  The  design  of  the
book  in  general,  is  to  describe  the  passionate
loves  and  happy  marriage  of  two  persons,  their
mutual  satisfaction  therein,  and  the  blessed  fruits
and  effects  thereof.  But  then  it  is  not  to  he  un¬
derstood  carnally,  concerning  Solomon  and  Pha¬
raoh’s  daughter,  although  the  inspired  author
may  allude  to  that  j  but  they  who  would  pene¬
trate  the  meaning ,  and  comprehend  the  whole
mystery  of  it,  must  raise  their  conceptions  above
things  relating  to  flesh  and  blood ,  and  contem¬
plate  in  it  the  espousals  of  Christ  with  the  church,
and  with  every  believer.  So  that  this  book  is  a
continued  allegory,  wherein,  under  the  terms  of  a
common  wedding ,  a  divine  and  supernatural  mar¬
riage  is  expressed .  ,  .  ...  ,

rlhe  Hebrews,  apprehending  it  might  he  under¬
stood  171  a  gross  aiid  carnal  mariner,  forbade  the
reading  of  it  before  the  age  of  thirty  ;  and  in¬
deed  nothing  is  more  dangerous  than  to  read  it
with  carnal  thoughts  and  dispositions  ;  people  not
only  being  liable  to  the  hazard  of  losing  thereby
all  the  esteem  which  they  ought  to  have  for  this
book,  but  of  even  wounding  the  soul  instead  of

Such^as  ''deny  this  spiritual  book  to  be  canonical,
say,  that  neither  Christ,  nor  his  Apostles,  have
ever  cited  it,  and  that  the  name  of  God  is  not
once  to  be  found  in  it.  To  this  it  is  leplied,
that  there  are  several  other  sacred  books,  which
our  Saviour  has  not  expressly  quoted /  and  that  in
an  allegory }  wherein  the  Son  of  God  is  concealed
under  the  figure  of  an  Elusband,  it  is  not  neces¬
sary  that  he  should  be  expressed  by  his  proper
name.  If  he  were  by  name  mentioned,  it  would
cease  to  be  an  allegory.

Exod.  15.  1.  then  sang  Moses  and  the  children  of
Israel  this  a.  unto  the  Lord,  Num.  21.  17.
2.  the  Lord  is  my  strength  and  s.  and  he  is  be¬
come  my  salvation,  Psal.  118.  14.  Isa.  12.  2.
Dent  31.  19.  write  this  a.  that  this  a-,  may  be  witness
21.  this  s.  shall  testify  ||  22.  Moses  wrote  this  a.

30.  Moses  spake  the  words  of  this  s.  32.  44.

Judg.  5.  12.  awake,  awake,  Deborah,  utter  a  s.

2  Sam.  22.  1.  David  spake  to  Lord  words  of  this  s.

1  Chr.  6.  31.  they  whom  David  set  over  service  of  a.

1 5.  22.  Chenaniah  chief  of  Levites  was  for  a  a.  27.
<25.  6.  these  were  under  their  father  for  s.  in  house

2  Chron.  29.  27-  a.  of  the  Lord  began  with  trumpets
Job  30.  9.  now  1  am  their  a.  I  am  their  by-word
Psal.  28.7.  and  with  my  a.  will  I  praise  him
33.  3,  sing  unto  him  a  new  a.  Isa.  42.  10.

40.  3.  and  he  hath  put  a  new  a.  in  my  mouth
42.  8.  and  in  the  night  his  a.  shall  be  with  me
69.  12.  and  I  was  the  a.  of  the  drunkards

30.  I  will  praise  the  name  of  God  with  a  a.

77.  6.  I  call  to  remembrance  my  a.  in  night
06.  1.  O  sing  to  the  Lord  a  new  a.  98.  1.1  149:  1.
i.37.  3.  for  there  they  required  of  us  a  a.  and  mirth
4.  how  shall  we  sing  I.ord’s  a.  in  a  strange  land  ?
144.  9.  I  will  sing  a  new  s.  unto  thee,  O  God
h  eel.  I.  5-  than  for  a  man  to  hear  the  a.  of  tools
Cant.  1.  1.  the  a.  of  songs  which  is  Solomon’s
ha.  5.  1.  now  will  I  sing  a  a.  of  my  beloved


Jxa  °4  9.  they  shall  not  drink  wine  wifln  a  a.

26  1.  in  that  day  shall  this  a.  be  sung  in  Judah
30.  29.  ye  shall  have  a  a.  as  in  the  night
Lam.  .3.  14.  I  was  a  derision  and  their  a.  all  the  day
Ezek.  .33.  32.  thou  art  to  them  as  a  very  lovely  a.
Rev.  5.  0.  tlvey  sung  a  new  a.  thou  art  worthy,  14.  3.
14.  3.  no  man  could  learn  that  a.  but  the  144,000
1 5  3  thev  sing  the  a.  of  Moses  and  a.  of  the  Lamh
SONGS.

Gen.  31.  27.  I  might  have  sent  thee  away  with  a.
Judg.  Q.'t  27.  they  trod  the  grapes  and  made  a.

1  Kings  4.  32.  his  a.  were  a  thousand  and  five
1  Chron.  13. +8.  David  prayed  before  God  with  a.

25.  7.  that  were  instructed  in  the  a.  ot  the  Lord
Neh.  12.  46.  in  the  days  of  David  there  \vere  a.

Job  .35.  10.  God  my  maker,  who  giveth  a.  in  night
Ps.  32.  7.  shall  compass  about  with  a.  of  deliverance
119.  54.  have  been  my  a.  in  house  of  pilgrimage
137.  3.  saying,  sing  us  one  of  the  a.  of  Zion
Prov.  25.  20.  so  is  he  that  singeth  a.  to  heavy  heart
Cant'.  1.1.  the  song  of  a.  which  is  Solomon's
Jxa.  2.3.  16.  make  sweet  melody,  sing  many  s.

24.  16.  from  utter,  part  of  earth  have  we  heard  a.

.35.  10.  the  ransomed  shall  come  to  Zion  with  a.

38.  20.  will  sing  my  a.  to  the  stringed  instruments
Ezek.  26.  )3.  1  will  cause  the  noise  of  thy  a.  to  cease
Imos  5.  23.  take  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy  a.

8.  3.  a.  of  the  temple  shall  be  howlings  in  that  day

10.  1  w  ill  turn  all  your  a.  into  lamentation
flab.  3.  t  1.  a  prayer  according  to  variable  a.

Eph.  5.  19.  speak,  to  yours,  in  psalms  and  spirit,  s.
Col  3.  16.  admonish,  one  anoth.  in  hymns,  spirit,  a.

‘SONS.

Gen.  7.  13.  the  a.  of  Noah  entered  into  the  ark

9.  18.  the  a.  of  Noah  that  went  forth  of  the  a'ic

19.  these  are  the  three  a.  of  Noah,  and  ot  them

10.  1.  and  to  them  were  a.  born  after  the  flood
19!  14.  Lot  went  out  and  spake  to  his  A.-in-law

2.3.  11.  in  the  presence  of  the  a.  of  my  people
27.  29.  and  let  thy  mother’s  a.  bow  down  to  thee
.34!  27.  a.  of  Jacob  came  upon  slain  and  spoiled
.37.  2.  and  the  lad  was  with  the  a.  of  Bilhah

42.  5.  and  the  a.  of  Israel  came  to  buy  corn

11.  we  are  all  one  man's  v.  we  are  no  spies,  32.

46.  5.  the  a.  of  Israel  carried  Jacob  in  waggons
Exod.  29. 1 30.  he  of  his  a.  that  is  priest  in  his  stead

.32.  2.  break  off  ear-rings  in  the  ears  of  your  a.

Lev.  26.  29.  ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  your  a.

Sum.  16.  7.  ve  take  too  much  on  you,  ye  a.  of  Levi

27.  stood  in  door  of  their  tents  their  wives  and  a.
27.  3.  our  father  died  in  his  own  sin,  and  had  no  a.
36.  3.  if  they  be  married  to  a.  of  other  tribes
Deut.  2.3.  17.  nor  a  sodomite  of  the  a.  of  Israel
.32.  8.  when  he  separated  the  a.  of  Adam

Josh.  15.  14.  Caleb  drove  3  a.  of  Anak,  Judg.  1. 20.
Judg.  8.  19.  there  were  even  the  a.  of  my  mother
.30.  Gideon  had  70  a.  ||  10.  4.  Jair  had  thirty  a.

12.  14.  Abdon  had  forty  a.  and  thirty  nephews

19.  22.  certain  a.  of  Belial  beset  house  round  about
Ruth  1.11.  are  there  yet  any  more  a.  in  my  womb  ?

1  Sam.  1.  8.  am  not  l  better  to  thee  than  ten  s.?

2.  12.  a.  of  Eli  were  a.  of  Belial,  knew  not  Lord

8.  11.  will  take  your  a.  and  appoint  them  for  hims.
26. 1 16.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  ye  are  the  a.  of  death

2  Ham.  2. 18.  there  were  three  x.  of  Zeruiali  there
.3.  39.  these  men  a.  of  Zeruiali  be  too  hard  tor  trie

9.  11.  Mephibosheth  eat  as  one  of  the  king’s  a.

13.  23.  and  Absalom  invited  all  the  king’s  a.

.30.  saying,  Absalom  hath  slain  all  the  king  s  a.

16. 10.  whattodo  with you,  ye  a.  of  Zeruiali '.  19.22.

23.  6.  but  a.  of  Belial  shall  be  as  thorns  thrust  aw'ay

1  Kings  1.  9.  he  called  all  the  king’s  a.  19.  25.

2.  7.  but  shew  kindness  to  a.  of  Barzillai  Gileadite
4.  31.  for  he  was  wiser  than  the  a.  of  Mahol

20.  .35.  a  certain  man  of  the  a.  of  the  prophets

21.  10.  set  two  men,  a.  of  Belial,  before  him

2  Kings  4.  5.  she  shut  door  upon  her  and  upon  her  a.

10.  3.  look  out  the  meetest  of  your  master's  a.

8.  they  have  brought  the  heads  of  the  king’s  a.

11.2.  stole  him  from  the  king’s  a.  2  Chron.  22.  11.
25.  7.  they  slew  a.  of  Zedekiah  before  his  eyes,  and
putout  eyes  of  Zedekiah,  Jer.  39.  6.  |52.  10.

1  Chr.  5.  1.  his  birth  right,  was  given  to  a.  of  Joseph
21.  20.  Oman  and  his  four  a.  with  him  hid  thems.

24.  28.  of  Mahli  came  Eleazar,  who  had  no  a.

28.  4.  among  the  a.  of  my  fathers,  he  liked  me

2  Chron.  2.3.  .3.  the  T.ord  said  of  the  a.  of  David

24.  25.  for  blood  of  the  a.  of  Jehoiada  the  priest

25.  t  1.3.  a.  of  the  band  fell  on  the  cities  of  Judah

28.  +  6.  Pekah  slew'  in  one  day  120, 000  a.  of  valour
Neh.  1.3.  28.  one  of  the  a.  of  Joiada  was  son-in-law
Esth.  9.  10.  the  ten  a.  of  Haman  slew  they

1.3.  let  Hainan’s  ten  a.  be  hanged  on  gallow’S,  14.
Job  5.  +  7.  the  a.  of  the  burning  coal  lift  up  to  fly
Psal.  18.  t  44.  a.  of  stranger  shall  yield  obedience

29.  +  1.0  ye  a.  of  mighty  give  to  the  Lord  glory
89.  6.  who'among  a.  of  mighty  can  be  likened  ?

144.  12.  that  our  a.  may  be  as  plants  grown  up

Prov.  31.  +  5.  pervert  judgment  of  all  a.  of  affliction
+  8.  in  the  cause  of  such  as  are  a.  of  destruction
Feel.  2.  +7.  I  got  maidens,  and  had  a.  of  my  house
Cant.  2.  3.  as  apple  tree  so  is  my  beloved  among  a.
Jxa.  51.  18.  there  is  none  to  guide  her  among  all  a

56.  6.  a.  of  stranger  that  join  themselves  to  Lord

57.  3.  draw  near  hither,  ye  a.  of  the  sorceress

60.  10.  the  a.  of  the  stranger  shall  build  thy  walls

14.  the  a.  of  them  that  afflicted  thee  shall  come

61.  5.  the  a.  of  the  alien  shall  be  your  plowmen

62.  8.  a.  of  the  stranger  shall  not  drink  thy  wune
Jer.  6.  21.  the  fathers  and  a.  shall  fall  upon  them

1.3.  14.  even  fathers  and  a.  together  will  I  dash

19.  5.  they  built  the  high-places  to  burn  their  a.

29.  6.  take  wives,  beget  a.  take  wives  for  your  a.
35.  5.  I  set  before  a.  of  Bechabites  pots  full  of  wine

6.  ye  shall  drink  no  wine,  ye,  nor  your  a.  for  ever
49.  1.  hath  Israel  no  a.  ?  hath  he  no  heir.

Lam.  .3.  +  13.  caused  a.  of  his  quiver  to  enter  my  reins
4.  2.  precious  a.  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine  gold
Ezek.  5.  10.  fathers  shall  eat  their  a.  a.  their  fathers

20.  31.  when  ye  maxe  your  a.  pass  through  the  nre
23  37.  they  caused  their  a.  to  pass  through  the  me
Hox.  1. 10.  ye  are  the  a.  of  the  living  God


SON


s  o  o


\hr  V V  r  'i  n'?e<  U|)  ot-  >’our  s-  f°r  prophets
yjfh  6i  +6ijhi|  W®,  w,th  calves  ,jr.  of  a  year  old
+.14-  he  said,  these  are  the  two  4.  of  oil
rule  6  shall  purify  j. of  Levi,  and  purse  them
Jlvihfe,^ruye  '•  of  ,iiCoh  are  not  consumed
l£*u  io  K?,iinf,rgeS'I  which  is,  the  s. of  thunder
Luke  11.  19.  by  whom  do  \  our  4.  cast  them  out

r^/  ;  Vli.  b.Ut  as  my,  beloved  t.  I  warn  you
<r?'\4-  5-  ,hat  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  4.

/ i'h  are  s'  God  hath  sent  forth  Spirit

11  of-  |1a°-  ;r!r?'-  n’a?y '• t0  «l°>y  to  make  captain
io  ~  ;r  k  9  blessed  both  s.  ot  Joseph  and  worship.

»'  Ifnotelf tc?ed’i(’.ul1  dealeth  w«h you  as  with  v.
8.  it  not  chastened,  then  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  4

&ee  Aaron.  Daughter.

-  *  „  .u  SONS  of  Go**

V  tw-e/‘  °f  God  ?aw  the  daughters  of  men
Tl,i  .“5  oJ,God  cam«  "1  to  the  daughters  of  men
qu  V  ,'£•  °J tjf^came  to  present  themselves,  2.  l.
38.  7.  when  all  the  s.  oj  God  shouted  for  joy
j0°l-  V  JO.  shall  be  said,  ye  are  s.  of  the  living  God
n  Vi  gavf  them  power  to  become  4.  of  God

K1cT  ‘  w£  iimaSrareued  by  sPlnt  of  G°d,  are  s.  of  God
PA  7  oal1t|tl?,for  die  manifestation  of  s.  of  God
/  rVA  V'  d,at  Vc  may  be  harmless,  the  4.  of  God
1  John  .3.  1.  that  we  should  be  called  the  4.  of  God
2.  beloved,  noware  we  the  4.  of  God,  not  appear
r*  -  -  xt  ,  H**  SONS.

r  Vr'  ’7' :\0ah  wAnt  n‘t0  ark  and  his  s.  and  his  wife
o*  9^1  went  and  his  s.  and  his  wife

ok  n  /  •  blessed  ^oah  and  his  s.  and  said  to  them
in*  S‘  Isaa.cand.  lshmael  buried  him  in  cave
m  /•  eav®  them  into  the  hands  of  his  s.
ao  «  u  'sau  and  Jacob  buried  him
ly  ,  •  ma7e  an  end  of  commanding  his  s.

,  •  12.  hiss,  did  unto  him  as  he  commanded

m  s  Cw[ led  hlm  i,lt0  the  land  of  Canaan
9R  i  Vl'u.; '  Athr°  canie  with  Aw.r.and  wife  to  Moses
28. 1.  take  A ai on  and  hiss,  to  minister  to  me

on  Via  U  ? l,  1  Putthe  garments  on  hiss.  2Q  8.

29j  '?himUVb  n°d  °n  !h,e  ‘IP  of  the  right  earofMwj.

07'  MnU*va,i  sl>r'nhle  the  blood  upon  his  s.
r5^"«aoo^y-tbat  winch  is  for  hiss.  Lev.  8.  30
^hr:eSt  nl  fVthat  is  ano‘nted  shall  offer
Dent’  o'ri3'  t,,ey  smote  Og  and  his  s.  and  people

18  5  'f  A3rli  h  mmi?te  hts  s-  anit  his  people

21 '  ffi  Vhlfh11  Chf|Sen  h,lm  and  hls  s-  to  minister
JndoQ  Rhl  £ieJ|nake  h  11 S  S‘  t0  lnherit  what  hath
9  18.  have  slain  hiss.  70  persons  on  one  stone

\  i  flip  Wf°nSeCrate[ *.one  01  ,ns  s-  became  priest
i1-  the  Levite  was  to  him  as  one  of  his  s.

1  wo'oand  hts  i-,  were  priests  to  tribe  of  Dan
o  iv'i?*  n°w  ^^Rrd  all  that  his  s.  did
3. 13.  because  his  s.  made  themselves  vile

3  old  made  his  s.  judges  over  Israel

18  ?  l  L  d  not  111  his  ways,  but  turned  aside
If.  1.  1  have  provided  me  a  king  among  his  s.
■u'othi  P^P'ewns  grieved,  every  man  for  his  s.

3  'fn‘hn  latines  to, llowed  hard  upon  Saul  and
o  o  “P°“  VV;and  slew  Jonathan,  1  Chron.  10.  2.

T  Kin'n'  io3'.  1  ?aven  nien  °r  ,n.s  s\  be  delivered  to  us
1  19  f/cV’b cfne  and  told  him  all  works
oVoo  hfV -ad7S-een  Y'hat  way  the  man  of  G.  went
o' if AUoinT^iW  s'  days  will  1  bring  the  evil
~io  n£s  9,-  '6-  1  ha''e  seen  blood  of  Naboth  and  hiss.

2P/,r  11  i/jSm°Ke  hlnl  "7th  sword,  Isa.  37  .  38.

I!.'  14  •  Jeroboam  and  hts  s.  had  cast  them  off
13.  5.  e\  en  to  him  and  his  s .  by  a  covenant  of  salt
217  Virrfi')6  all»bt.to  him,  and  to  hiss,  for  ever

38  00  whero  may  m  S' save  the  youngest  of  hiss.

' -0-  where  they  were  servants  to  him  and  hiss.

Fsth  o  o°r!  thdrl>ray  V[  hfeuof  the  ki‘ig  and  his  s.
r;  /  .•  V  25.  that  he  and  his  s.  be  hanged  on  gallows

J14  o,4;aad  hlss-  7'eut  atld  feasfed  m  their  houses
ir‘  to  rlf  S'  c7n?,e  to  honour,  he  knoweth  it  not


io'  W  thou  guide  Arcturus  with  his  s.  ?
7 If  of"  f!te!  thl^’  Job  saw  his  s.  and  his  s.  sons
ilek  i«  ^?fnadab  comtn-  hi.y-  not  to  drink  wine

Dan  if"  in  /f  P  K6  nTe  a  krlft  to  any  of  his  s.
Van.  11.  10.  his  s.  shall  bestirred  up  and  assemble
^ee  Man.

^  T  My  SONS.

1  Zm  W£teph  said  -t°  his  father,  they  are  my  s.
lo7^m;?i  3’’7V0f  }t 1S  no  g°0<1  report  [  hear
1  rv,fl?d75Uc  said,  behold,  my  s.  are  with  you

o  clr  2028ii5-rTf  aV'Wiy  i,e  hath  chosen  Solomon
1  '  a9"i  ll'  -5z®klab  said,  my  s.  be  not  negligent

Isa  48  Vi  blald’ 11 W  be  that  ”>»*•  have  sinne.l
IGrV  1  k  ?1COf  th!nTs  come  concern,  mys.
1  cor.  4.  14.  but  as  my  beloved  s-.  I  warn  you

See  Seven.

/-  a  L  '£hy  SONS.

8  tfi  «roVrh*hU  rhal,t  co.me  int0  ark’  thou  and  *•
Fxod'to  o°irtb  ark’  tho,u’  thy  wife,  and  thy  s.

rf2Q1first,horn'I10/  ‘°  the.e  a.ndJ s-  AW  18.  8
•ij"  '  brst  born  of  thy  s.  shalt  thou  give  to  me

on  r"  S°  a  whoring  after  their  gods

lev'  in  Qh,l!n  tb|rn  s’  thou  shalt  redeem
ia"  k°".9'  do.nPt  dnnk  wine,  nor  My  4.  with  thee
14-  because  it  is  thy  due,  and  thy  f.  due

«  hnlVhA  thou  a,j<i  tto.s-  shall  bear  the  iniquity
t  0li  a,nd  !  f-  with  thee  shall  minister
o'  Si  k  ‘ ,y  s.hall  keep  your  priests’  office
9.  shall  be  most  holy  for  thee  and  for  thy  s
11.1  have  given  them  to  thee  and  to  thy  s.

in  V  lbut  Vach  theni  tkV  s'  and  thy  s.  sons
1  W  2.  29.  and  honourest  thy  s.  above  me
ff  5.  thou  art  old,  and  thy  s.  walk  not  in  thy  ways
28  19.  to-morrow  shalt  thou  and  thys.  be  with  me

l  S£Z:  h10:  thK°V  »“d  thV  '■  shal I  till  land  for  him
2|  (  \o  4'.s,halt  shut  door  upon  thee  and  thy  s.
io.  12.  L.  said  to  Jehu,  thy  s.  shall  sit  on  throne  of
on  is  V  Innrth  generation,  1  Chron.  17.  11
20.  18.  thy  s.  shall  be  eunuchs  in  Babyl.  Isa.  39  7

7M'2n  /2‘  aind  tbry  sha,11  bring  thys.  in  their  arms
fin’d  ih#«"  ,haVe  ^amted,  they  lie  at  head  of  streets
60.4  they  come  to  thee,  t.  s.  shall  come  from  far  Q

Tf'r'  4Rad/°,U/ng man  marrieth  virgin,  so  shall  thys.
Zech\  IV  and  daughters  are  taken  captives
£<ch.  9. 13.  and  raised  up  thys.  O  Zion,  a g.  thy  s.

_  I  wo  SONS.

Cten.  10.  25.  to  Eber  were  born  two  s.  1  Chr.  1.  19.


the  1-  of  Jacob  slew  the  males
V39"  *7  ,0SfePh  were  born  two  s.  before  famine
,7"  />-'  s  a^  my  i?0.s-  d  I  bring  him  not  to  thee
4)1’  T'  ’  yei  ,  no,w  that  my  wife  bare  me  two  s.
Av'J",oll(lbi  t.7ok  with  him  his  two  s.  5.
f  x0  j,  \  3;  a®1  IV0  took  /ipporah  and  her  two  s
Lev.  U)  1.  aftei  the  death  ot  the  two  s.  of  Aaron
Ruth  1. 1.  he.his  wife,  two  s.  Mahlon  and  Chilion  0

1  Sam^'fi  th  1n\  If  tW°  S'  11  5'  iettof  her  two  's'.
1  i  —  '  that  shall  come  upon  thy  two  s.

i~4'n!ie  fW°  S'xi  V  1  wtre  tllere  with  the  ark
17.  thy  twos Hophni  and  Phinehas  are  dead
jT;  If  6.  thy  handmaid  had  twos,  thev  strove
36Vthey  bad.  there  with  them  their  two  s
21.  8.  but  the  king  took  the  two  s.  of  Rizpah
\ytnf>s  4- 1.  creditor  to  take  two  s.  to  be  bond  men
^v?*oQd"  ”ra,lt  d,at  these  my  two  s.  may  sit
~\.  28.  a  certain  man  had  two  s.  Luke  15.  11.

7  •  JJ.  took  with  him  Peter  and  two  s.  of  Zehed

C’Jf  a  oV'  S-ranger  iI7  Midian>  where  he  begat  two  s
Gal.  4.  22.  it  is  written^  that  Abraham  had  two  s.

F.xod.  ~.  18.  how  is  it  that  ye  are  come  so  s.  to-day  t
J,ebko'oo'\n^  y,eshal1  s-  utterly  perish  from  land
pl/V nh  o  S°  <UlMt]?my  Maker  r.  take  me  away
k"  Mbey  shall  f.  be  cut  down  like  the  grass
68.  31.  shall  s.  stretch  out  her  hands  unto  God
no  1  i  -Tpd  s.  have  subdued  their  enemies
mA  U  1S  •flcut  °!T'  and  we  fly  away

PrV  Vi  *17  if"  Vr?at  his  works,  they  waited  not
Mnt Vi4'on  "khe  that-  ?nsr>’  dealeth  foolishly

ratf  C  V  bow  'v;  !s  fhe  fig-tree  withered  away
Gal  1.6.  I  marvel  that  ye  are  soj.  removed  from
2-  2-  ye  be  not  s.  shaken  in  mind  or  troubled
lit.  1.7.  not  self-will,  not  s  angry,  not  given  to  wine
f  j  on  a  As  so°N  as.
r  /  o  1  a  '  as  s'  as  be  came  nigh  unto  the  camp
Josh.  8.  19.  ran  as  s.  as  he  had  stretched  his  hand
-  oam.  2v.  45.  as  s.  as  they  hear  they  shall  be  obe-
_  dientto  me,  strangers  shall  submit,  Psal.  18  44
Fsal.  58.  3.  they  go  astray  as  s.  as  they  be  born
m  -f  V  r.v  as  s ■  as  h*s  ministration  were  accompi
rail.  2.  —i.  as  s.  as ^I^setGi o w  it  will  go  with  me

Heb.  1.3.  19.  that  I  may  be  restored  to  vou  the  s.
Jam.  l.  11.  sums  no  r.  risen,  but  it  withereth  grass
tx-  hOOlHSAYER,

Diviner,  or  Magician.  Some  derive  this  word  from
llaanan,  which  signifies  a  cloud ;  because  this
kind  oj  diviners  raised  their  conjectures  from  the
various  figures  and  motions  of  the  clouds  and  skv
°/J!i °m  iMflfy'l1  and  chattering  of  birds  and  fowl’s
m  the  air.  Others  derive  the  word  from  llaajin
an  eye,  to  signify  astrologers,  who  foretell  future
contingent  things,  by  the  superstitious  observation
oj  the  stars  and  planets.  Others  think,  that  the
word  signifies  such  magicians,  who,  by  playing
hocus-pocus  tricks,  endeavour  thereby  to  impose
upon  the  eyes  and  understanding  of  the  specta¬
tors :  making  things,  by  their  magical  skill,  ap¬
pear  otherwise  than  in  truth  they  are.  Others
again  understand  by  it  such  as  give  answers  to
wse  that  repair  to  them  for  advice  and  direction
in  their  affairs,  deriving  it  from  a  word  that
signifies  to  answer.  La  tly,  some  suppose  it
”‘ay  be  derived  from  a  word  which  signifies  a
set-time,  and  by  it  understand  such  as  observe
,  a&i  an“  times,  as  good  or  bad ,  lucky  or  unlucky  •

^sth  7™  t/lUt  dld  CaSt  otS  before  Hainan’

In  Exod.  7.  11.  there  is  mention  made  of  Pharaoh’s
sorcerers  or  magicians,  who  acted  by  the  power  of
the  devil,  whom  by  certain  rites  and  ceremonies  they
engaged  to  their  assistance,  resisted  Moses,  and
oy  their  enchantments  counterfeited  his  true
miracles  before  Pharaoh.  Of  these  the  two  chief
were  Jamies  and  Jambres,  2  Tim.  3.  8.  These  names
are  not  to  be  found  m  the  story  of  the  Old  Testa¬
ment,  but  are  taken  out  of  other  records  of  the  lews
°r  were  known  in  St.  Paul’s  time  by  tradition.

1  he  /  araphrast  Jonathan  says,  that  they  were  the
two  sons  '/Balaam,  who  accompanied  him,  when
he  went  to  Balak  king  of  Moab.

1  hese  mag icians  wrought  no  true  miracle,  but  only
in  shew  and  appearance,  which,  by  the  permission
7  ('fd’  Fas  difficult  for  the  devil  to  do,  either
oy  altering  the  air  and  the  spectator's  sight,  and  by
causing  their  rods  both  to  look  and  move  like  ser¬
pents  ;  or  by  a  sudden  and  secret  conveyance  of
>eal  serpents  thither,  and  removing  the  rods
Moses  however  expresses  himself  throughout  in  such


-  -  '  IU,  uuyntrui  in  SUCH

a  manner  as  ? night  persuade  one ,  that  Pharaoh's
magicians  really  operated  the  same  effects  as  he
himself  produced  :  so  that  Pharaoh  and  his  whole
court  were  persuaded,  that  the  power  of  their  ma¬
gicians  was  equal  to  that  of  Moses,  till  the  F°yp.
tians,  not  being  able  to  produce  lice,  as  Moses  had
(tone,  were  constrained  to  own,  that  the  finger  of
Dod  was  concerned  in  it,  Exod.  8.  18,  19.  Till
then  they  bad  acknowledged  nothing  divine  or
supernatural  m  any  thing  he  did.  And  it  is  agreed
that  magic  and  juggling  tricks,  evil  angels  and
sorcerers,  may  sometimes  imitate  very  nearly  true
miracles  and  the  operations  of  the  Almighty
Moses  s  manner  of  expressing  himself  is  a  great
evidence  of  the  truth  of  scripture  story ,  and  that  it
a/'ar  not  written  by  fiction  and  design.  For  if
Moses  had  written  these  boons  to  deceive  the  world
and  to  advance  his  own  reputation,  as  some  take  the
liberty  to  say,  it  is  ridiculous  to  think  that  he  would
have  put  m  this  and  many  other  passages,  which
might  seem  so  much  to  eclipse  his  honour,  and  the
glory  of  his  works.

Daniel  also  speaks  of  magicians,  and  the  diviners
that  were  in  Chaldea  under  king  Nebuchad¬
nezzar.  He  names  four  sorts  of  them,  Dan.  2.  2.
1.  Chartunum,  which,  according  to  Theodotion’
signifies  enchanters ;  according  to  the  Septua-
gint,  sophists:  according  to  Ft.  Jerom,  Ariolos,
diviners,  fortune-tellers,  casters  of  nativities.

psaphim.  Hits  word  has  a  great  resemblance
to  the  Greek  word  crotpoi,  wise  men.  Grotius


S  O  R

thinks  u  u  derived  from  the  Greek.  J  heodotioc

Zi  eWm  Te  rr\dc,ed  u  b“  magicians,  and  Te
Feptuagmt  by  philosophers.  III.  Mecasphim

nv  ViH  St‘ ,  erom  and  ‘be  Greeks  is  translated
mallhci,  enchanters ;  such  people  as  make  me  ot
noxious  herbs  and  drugs,  the  blood  of  victims  and

tions°neS\  V  ‘c-  de,fd’S°r  ‘be‘r  superstitious  opera-
tions  I  }  •  Lasdun,  ot-  Chaldeans.  This  word
has  two  different  significations.  The  first  inti-
c'hJdt  116  Chaldean  people,  who  had  then  Nebu¬
chadnezzar  for  their  monarch.  The  second  ex¬
presses  a  sort  of  philosophers  called  also  Chaldeans
who  dwelt  m  a  separate  part  of  the  city,  and  were

rfiTir*  /Tnm  *  PULbllC  oddices  and  employments.
foreZ//l»t,V  jf’^/bys'c,  astrology,  divination,  the
thZZ’.Z  future  events  by  the  observation  of
tne  stars,  the  interpretation  of  dreams,  the  science
of  auguries  ,  the  worship  of  the  gods,  Sec.
nu  these  inquisitive  and  super stiti,  us  arts  are

SZt£Z  lden  by  the  law.  °f  Gt,d’  a!l  wherein
Tiled  -  ^  °fi  tnff°eations  of  the  devil  are

Zfd’\n  a  word\  aU  ‘be  black  art,  and  all  super-
cerers  enZh emomes  made  use  of  by  magicians,  sor-
eJorctsts  i TtlrZirS'  WUches\ zards’  necromancers,
dreZ™!'  V  !  ,? '  soo‘bsayers,  interpreters  of

dreams,  fortune-tellers,  casters  of  nativities  &:c

hurTmnTT3 Tmr  diaholical  arts1,  whether  it  be  to
TtherT,k  kT,d'  01  U\  procure  them  health,  or  any
such  ZiZ  geS'  God  hath  forbidden  to  consult
such  persons  upon  pain  of  death.  Lev.  20.  6.  Saul

JVS  ZU  d  %drsve  Zem  01“  °{  ‘be  country
0}  Israel  1  Sam.  28.  3.  But,  for  all  this  maun
were  still  to  be  found ;  and  the  Israelites  were  al-

TTh  Z UCh  addlctedt0  ‘bese  sorts  of  .superstitions .
-lnti  the  same  prince  who  had  been  so  eager  in

consult  onTl  ‘mt  If  domm,ons>  at  last  went  to
V  I  V  AT.nv  pT6/’  1  Sam’  28’  7'  8’  &c-  Dl-

viNATiON,  Exorcists.

Josh.  13.  22.  Balaam  son  of  Reor  4.  did  Israel  slay
SOOTHSAYERS.  [ares

Dan  o  wTk*  forsaken  tl0  people,  because  they
5  7'  L-’ino  ’ tbe 5ec'?'et  cannot  the  s.  shew  to  the  king
j  7 '  Jn=  ci  led  aloud  to  bring  Chaldeans  and  s.

Mt  1 ,  a1' 1  the,  k.lnf-r  madc  master  of  the  .r.
mtc-  3-  12.  and  thou  shalt  have  no  more  s

(Jr,  .  SOOTHSAYING.

-Jets  16.16.  who  brougln  her  masters  much  gain  by  s.

J°hZ  V'  rV-  he  't ‘I to  Whom  I  Shall  give  a  r.  when

27  arte/lhePedsthce  f'  h®  ga'’e.it  to  J  udas  Iscariot
Ci .  atter  the  s.  Satan  entered  into  him,  30.

Y  SOAP.

Vh  tb°  thou.  wash  and  take  thee  much  r,
Mai.  3. ...  who  may  abide  his  com.  ?  is  like  fuller’s s.
a  - 0  c  c  o(J  KChREH.

a  hlHef  f°Und.  certain  v-  a  fiilse  prophet,  a  Jew
8.  but  Eiymas  the  t.  withstood  them,  seeking
r  .  _  ,  ,  SORCERERS.

Jer<h 1  VVil?  Phrr'  a,ls<)  called  wise  men  and  4.
n‘  a  a  K-erLeore  hearken  not  to  your  s.

/WwTa  1  eV,lchadnezzarcommande(l  to  call  4.
p*,  n\  3q  V  l,e  a  svvitt  witness  against  the  4.

00  iV'f8’  ap1  r‘  S  la  have  their  part  in  the  lake
2—  15.  for  without  are  dogs  and  4  murderers
j  _  SORCERESS.

lsct.  07.  3.  but  drawnear  hither,  ye  sons  of  the  4.

Acts  8.  9.  a  man  Simon,  who  before-time  used  4.
r  a  SORCERIES,
in  .  9  ,  ey  sha11  come  on  thee  for  thy  s.

D.  stand  now  with  the  multitude  of  thy  4.

Dm  8.  11.  that  of  long  time  bewitched  them  with  4
V-  nkelt  'uer  repented  they  of  their  4
lo.  ^3.  ror  b>  thy  s.  were  all  nations  deceived
n  ,  SOKE.

qZ'JZi9'  fhey  Puressed  f.  upon  the  man,  even  Lot
|!*  79-  because  thou  s.  longest  after  father’s  house
41 .  56.  the  amine  waxed  .v.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
-f7 ia  lu  a  ^ands  II  43.  1.  4.  in  Canaan,  47.  4, 13.

1)1 1  rnou™ed  with  a  4.  lamentation

V/  .'-  mri  V  shewed  signs  great  and  4.011  Egypt
-8.35.  the  T. on  I  shall  smite  thee  with  a  s.  botch


rn  •  . . u,au'  Clinic  nice  wmi  (is.  D<

rjy  1Akness,es,  and  of  long  continuance
iii-  9'  91  s°  lhat  Israel  was  4.  distressed
if  i.7-  he  told  her,  because  she  lay  s.  upon  him
on'  V’ ,  anis°n  was  4.  athirst,  and  called  on  Lord
-0.  34.  ten  thousand  came  ag.  Gibeah,  battle  was
01  o  *f"  1  h,  2  Sam.  2.  17.  2  Kings  3.26.

.1.  ..  the  people  lifted  up  their  voices,  and  wept  4.
1  'mu  '  b-  her  adversary  also  provoked  her  4.

10.  Hannah  prayed  to  the  Lord,  and  wept4.

11  m.i  Is  s'  on  ,js.  and  on  Dagon  our  God
ol’  Y-"  Verie  was  war  against  the  Philistines
-8.  l0-  ^au I lanswered,  1  am  4.  distressed,  21 .
f  ■  15.  36.  the  king  and  his  servants  wept  4.

o^'  V'l?" sickn-  SO  f-  no  breath  was  left  in  hirr
oa  •‘'  a  merewas  a  4  famine  in  Samaria

Vi^nu  '  t  le  kl‘G  ot  Syria  was  4.  troubled
^0.  3,  and  Hezeluah  wept  4.  Isa.  38.  3.

'oi  Zn’  a V‘ ,9-  so-Jehoram  died  of  4.  diseases
KT  lo'  ,  a2  transgressed  4.  against  Lord
TT'  -3-  have  me  away,  for  I  am  4.  wounded
Fff  a  10.  1.  for  the  people  wept  very  4.

r  lo  »"!■*  grieved  me  s.  therefore  1  cast  forth
Satan  smote  Job  with  4.  boils
V,  *•  J-  and  vex  them  in  his  4.  displeasure
6  3.  my  soul  is  4.  vexed,  hut  thou,  O  L.  how  long
10.  let  mine  enemies  be  ashamed,  and  4.  vexed
38.  2.  arrows  stick  fast,  thine  hand  presseth  me  c
8'  am  feebRnnd  j.  t’rokeu.  I  roared  by  disquiet
44. 19.  tho  hast  4.  broken  us  in  place  of  dragons
£?'  4'nniy  heart 's  f-  Pained  within  me,  and  terrors

ir  '  I  m°U  kast,!kew!d  me  great  and  •  doubles
11°-  I3.  thou  hast  thrust  4.  at  me,  that  I  might  fall
18.  L.  hath  chastened  me  4.  but  not  given  me  ovei

rw’Vi’l  Vk-he  Vat  1S  iSkre!y  ^hal1  .be  broken

llccI.  1.  13.  this  s.  travail  hath  God  given.  4.  R.

5.  13.  there  is  s.  evil  I  have  seen  under  sun,  16
Da.  27.  1.  with  r  and  great  sword  punish  leviathan
o9.  H.  we  roar  like  bears,  mourn  4.  like  doves
1  a9’  b  nn.<?t  wroth  very  4. 0  Lord,  nor  remember
1~.  wilt  thou  hold  thy  peace,  afflict  us  very  4

459  ‘


SOR


SOU


~er.  13.  1".  mine  eye  shalt  weep  a.  and  run  down
00.  10.  but  weep  a.  for  him  that  goeth  away
52.  6.  famine  was  a.  in  city,  there  was  no  bread
Lam.  1.  2.  she  weepethA.  in  the  night  and  her  tears

3.  52.  mine  enemies  chased  me  a.  like  a  bird
Ezek.  14.  21.  when  I  send  my  four  a.  judgments
21.  10.  it  is  sharpened  to  make  a  a.  slaughter
Dan.  6.  14.  the  king  was  a.  displeased  with  himself
Mic.  2. 10.  it  shall  destroy  you  even  with  a.  destruct.
Zech.  1.2.  the  Lord  hath  been  a.  displeased,  15.

Mat.  17.  15.  for  he  is  lunatic,  and  a.  vexed
21.  15.  saying,  Hosanna,  they  were  a.  displeased
Mark  6.  51.  they  were  a.  amazed  in  themselves
9  26.  spirit  cried,  rent  him  a.  and  came  out  of  him
14.  3.3.  Jesus  began  to  be  a.  amazed  and  heavy
Acts  20.  37.  they  all  wept  a.  and  kissed  Paul
See  Afk  aid.

SO  HE.

Gen.  34.  25.  on  the  third  day,  when  they  were  a.

Job  5.  18.  he  maketh  a.  and  bindeth  up,  woundeth
SOKE.

Lev.  13.  42.  if  a  white  reddish  a.  it  is  a  leprosy
43.  if  rising  of  a.  be  white  reddish  in  his  head
2  C/iron.  6.  28.  whatsoever  a.  or  sickness  there  be
29*  when  every  one  shall  know  his  own  a.  grief
Psal.  38.11.  my  friends  stand  aloof  from  my  a.

77.  2.  my  a.  ran  in  the  night  and  ceased  not
Rev  16.  2.  there  fell  a  grievous  a.  upon  the  men
SORES.

Isa.  1.  6.  but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putnfying  a.

Ezek  47.  +12.  leaf  thereof  shall  be  for  bruises  and  a.
Luke  16.20.  beggar  Lazarus  at  his  gate  full  of  a.  21.
Rev.  16.  ll.blasphemecHL  bec.of  their  pains  and  a.

Gen.  49. 23.  archers  a.  grieved  him  and  shot  at  him
Isa.  23. 5.  so  shall  be  a.  pained  at  the  report  of  Tyre
SORER.

Heb  10  29.  of  how  much  a.  punishment  suppose  ye
SORROW

Is  a  passion  that  contracts  the  heart,  sinks  the  spi-
rits,  anil  spoils  the  health  of  the  body.  St.  Paul
advises  the  Thessaloniaus,  not  to  suffer  themselves
to  be  overcome  with  sorrow  for  the  god  y  that  are
dead,  not  to  sorrow  after  a  heathenish  manner,  as
those  that  had  no  hope  of  a  future  resurrection ,  1
Thess.  4.  13.  The  apostle  here  does  not  condemn
their  sorrow,  but  only  the  excess  of  it.  Grace
destroys  not  nature,  but  regulates  it ;  nor  takes  it
away  the  affections,  but  moderates  them,  for  to
mourn  for  the  dead ,  especially  those  that  die  in  the
Lord,  is  a  duty  that  both  nature,  grace,  and  the
practice  of  godly  men,  teach,  and  which  God  re-
quireth.  Abraham  mourned  and  wept  for  Sarah
his  wife,  Gen.  23.  2.  Jacob  for  Ins  son  Joseph,
supposing  he  had  been  torn  by  wild  beasts,  Gen.

37  34.  And  Joseph  and  his  brethren  for  their

father  Jacob,  Gen.  50.  10.  The  contrary  is  re¬
proved  by  God  himself.  Isa.  57.  1 .  ^  be  righteous
perisheth,  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart;  and
merciful  men  are  taken  away,  none  considering
.'nat  the  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  evil
to  come  :  and  to  die  unlamented  is  reckoned  as  a
cuts 6.  .1 6r.  18.  rl  hey  slut  11  not  lftnicnt  tor

Jehoiakim,  saving,  ah  my  brother,  or  ah  my  sis¬
ter,  &rc.  It  is  only  then  immoderate  sorrow  the
apostle  here  means  ;  which  is  likewise  forbidden  m
the  Old  Testament,  Lev.  19.  28.  Dent.  14.  1.
Ye  shall  not  make  any  cuttings  in  your  flesh  for
the  dead  ;  which  was  a  practice  among  the  hea¬
then,  both  in  the  worship  of  their  idols,  and  in  their
solemn  mournings.  .  ,

The  apostle  in  2  Cor.  7-  10.  distinguishes  two  sorts
of  sorrow,  one  a  godly,  and  the  other  a,  worldly,
sorrow.  Godly  sorrow  is  that  which  is  wrought
in  the  soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  arises  from
a  sense  of  sin  ;  the  root  of  it  is  a  love  to  Goa,  ana
the  manner  of  it  such  as  was  agreeable  to  the  will
of  God.  The  apostle  in  the  following  verse  makes
it  appear  that  this  sorrow  of  the  Corinthians  was
<rodly,  by  the  excellent  fruits  and  effects  of  it.
Behold,  says  he,  what  carefulness  it  wrought  in
you  to  amend  what  had  been  amiss  l  What  clear
ing  of  yourselves.  You  shewed  that  you  did  not
approve  of  the  fault  of  other  members  of  your
church.  Yea,  what  indignation  !  namely,  against
the  offender,  and  yourselves  for  your  neglect.  Yea,
what  fear  !  namely,  of  divine  vengeance,  ij  you
should  persist  in  that  neglect,  or  oj  transgressing
again.  Yea,  what  vehement  desire!  'Jo  take
away  the  scandal,  and  to  give  every  good  man  satis¬
faction.  Yea,  what  zeal!  For  the  glory  of  God,
and  to  perform  what  1  had  commanded  in  my  for¬
mer  epistle  concerning  the  incestuous  person.  He
adds,  yea,  what  revenge  it  wrought  in  you  against
the  offender,  by  punishing  of  him  !

Worldly  sorrow  is  a  sorrow  occasioned  by  worldly
troubles,  and  carnal  considerations,  which,  the
apostle  says,  worketh  death  ;  while  men  bow  down
under  their  burdens,  and  through  impatience  de¬
stroy  themselves,  as  Ahithophel,  Judas, _&c.  Or
when  men  fix  their  thoughts  upon  sad  objects,  and
so  afflict  themselves  with  them,  that  they  bring
themselves  into  diseases  which  issue  in  death.

Gen.  3.  16. 1  will  greatly  multiply  thy  a.  and  con
ception,  in  a.  thou  sha.lt  bring  forth  children
17-  in  a.  shalt  thou  eat  of  it  all  days  of  thy  life
35.  +  18.  she  called  his  name,  the  son  of  my  a.

42.  38.  if  mischief  befall  him,  then  shall  ye  bring
down  my  gray  hairs  with  a.  to  grave,  44.  29,  31.
Exod.  15. 14.  a.  take  hold  of  inhabitants  of  Palestina
Le zi.26.  16.  terror  shall  cause  a.  ot  heart
Dent.  28.  65.  the  Ixird  shall  give  thee  a.  of  nund
1  Chron.  4.  9.  saying,  because  I  bare  hjm  with  a
Neh.  2.  2.  this  is  nothing  else  but  a.  of  heart
Esth.  9.  22.  the  month  was  turned  from  a.  to  joy
Job  3.  10.  because  it  hid  not  a.  from  mine  eyes
6.  10.  yea,  I  would  harden  myself  in  s.

17.7-  mine  eye  is  dim  by  reason  of  a.  my  members
41.  22.  and  a.  is  turned  into  joy  before  him
Psal.  13.  2.  having  a.  in  my  heart  daily

38.  17.  and  my  a." is  continually  before  me

39.  2.  1  held  my  peace,  and  my  a  was  stirred

460


SOR

Psal.  55.  10.  mischief  also  and  a.  are  in  midst  of  it
90.  10.  yet  is  their  strength  labour  and  a.

107.  39.  again  they  are  brought  low  through  a.
116.  3.  I  found  trouble  and  a.  called  I  on  tne  Lord
Prov.  10.  10.  he  that  winketh  with  eye,  causeth  a.
22.  Lord  maketh  rich,  he  addeth  no  a.  with  it
15.  13.  but  by  a.  of  heart  the  spirit  is  broken
17.  21.  he  that  begetteth  a  fool,  doth  it  to  his  a.

23.  29.  who  hath  woe?  who  hath  a.  ?  conteniions
Eccl.  1.  18.  he  that  increaseth  knowl.  increaseth  a.
5.  17.  he  hath  much  a.  and  wrath  with  sickness
7.  3.  a.  is  better  than  laughter,  heart  made  better
11.  10.  therefore  remove  a.  from  thy  heart
Isa.  5.  30.  if  one  look  unto  the  land,  behold  a.

.1  1  .  .  1  _  I-  II  „L...  iLnn  I'npf  f  rAIYI


s.


IJit,  kJ •  .J\r»  11  w iiv,  a

14.  3.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  rest  from  thy  ..

17.  11.  shall  be  an  heap  in  the  day  of  desperate  a

29.  2.  1  will  distress  Ariel,  and  there  shall  be  a.

35.  10.  and  a.  and  sighing  shall  dee  away
50.  11.  this  shall  ye  have,  ye  shall  he  down  in  a.
51.11.  and  a.  and  mourning  shall  nee  away
65. 14.  my  servts.  shall  sing,  but  ye  shall  cry  for  a.

Jer.  8. 18.  when  I  would  comfort  myself  against  a.

20.  18.  out  of  womb,  to  see  labour  and  s.?

30.  15.  why  criest  thou  ?  thy  a.  is  incurable
31  13  1  will  make  them  rejoice  from  their  a.

45!  3.  for  the  Lord  hath  added  grief  to  my  a.

49.  23.  there  is  a.  on  the  sea,  it  cannot  be  quiet

Lam  1. 12.  see  if  there  be  any  a.  like  unto  my  a.

18.  behold  my  a.  I|  3.  65.  give  them  a.  of  heart
Ezek.  23.  3.3.  thou  shalt  be  hi  led  with  drunk,  and  a.
Luke  22.  45.  he  found  them  sleeping  for  a.

John  16.  6.  said  these  things,  a.  filled  your  heart

20.  sorrowful,  but  your  a.  shall  be  turned  to  joy

21.  a  woman  when  she  is  in  travail,  hath  a.

22.  and  ye  now  therefore  have  a.  but  1  will  see

you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice
Rom.  9.  2.  that  J.  have  continual  a.  in  my  heart
2  Cor.  2.  3.  when  I  came,  1  should  have  a.  from  them
7.  lest  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  a.

7  10  for  godly  a.  worketh  repentance  to  salvation,
but  the  a.  of  the  world  worketh  death
Phil.  2.  27.  but  on  me  also,  lest  1  have  a.  upon  a.

Rev.  18.  7.  so  much  a.  give  her,  and  shall  see  no  a.

01  4  there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  a.
SORROW,  Verb.

Jer.  31.  12.  and  they  shall  not  a.  any  more  at  all
51  29.  and  the  land  shall  tremble  and  a.

Uos  8.  10.  they  shall  a.  a  little  for  the  burden

1  Thess.  4.  13.  that  ye  a.  not  as  others  have  no  hope

SORROWS.

Exod.  3.7.  I  have  heard  their  cry ,  for  I  know  their  a.

2  Sam.  22.  6.  a.  of  hell  compassed  me  about,  snares

of  death  prevented  me,  Psal.  18.  4,  5. 1  116.  3.
Job  9.  28.  1  am  afr.  of  all  my  a.  not  hold  me  innoc.

21.  17.  God  distributed!  a.  in  his  anger
39.  3.  they  bow  themselves,  they  cast  out  their  a.
Psal.  16.  4.  a.  shall  be  multiplied  that  hasten  after
32. 10.  many  a.  shall  be  to  wicked  but  he  that  trust.
127.  2.  it  is  vain  to  rise  up,  to  eat  the  bread  of  a.
Ecd.  2.  23.  for  ail  his  days  are  a.  and  his  travel  grief
Isa.  13.  8.  pangs  and  a.  shall  take  hold  ot  them
53.  3.  a  man  of  a.  and  acquainted  with  grief
4.  surely  he  hath  borne  griefs  and  carried  our  a
Jer.  13.  21.  shall  not  a.  take  as  a  woman  in  travail
49.  24.  a.  have  taken  her  as  a  woman  in  travail
Dan.  10.  16.  by  vision  my  a.  are  turned  upon  me
Ilos.  13. 13.  a.  of  travail,  woman  shall  come  on  him
Mat.  24.  8.’  these  are  beginning  of  a.  Mark  13.  8.

1  Tim  6.  10.  pierced  themselves  thro’  with  many  a

SORROWED.

2  Cor.  7.  9.  now  1  rejoice  that  ye  a.  to  repentance
11.  self-same  thing  that  ye  s.  after  a  godly  sort

SORROW  ETH.

1  Sam.  10.  2.  and  lo.  thy  father  a.  for  you
SORROWFUL.

1  Sam.  1. 15.  my  lord,  1  am  a  woman  of  a  a.  spirit
Job  6.  7.  things  my  soul  refused  are  as  my  a.  meat
Psal.  69.  29.  1  am  poor  and  a.  let  salvat.  set  me  up
Prov.  14.  13.  even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  a.

Jer.  31.25.  I  have  replenished  every  a.  soul
Zeph.  3.  18.  1  will  gather  them  that  are  a.

Zech.  9.  5.  Gaza  also  shall  see  it,  and  be  very  a.
Mat.  19.  22.  he  went  away  s.  Luke  18.  23,  24.

26.  22.  and  they  were  exceeding  a.  Mark  14.  19.

37.  and  he  began  to  be  a.  and  very  heavy
38  my  soul  is  exceed,  a.  unto  death,  Mark  14.  34.
John  16. 20.  ye  shall  be  a.  but  sorrow  shall  be  turned

2  Cor.  6.  10.  as  a.  yet  always  rejoicing,  as  poor  yet
Phil  2.  28.  may  rejoice  and  I  may  be  the  less  a.

SORROWING.

Luke  2.  48.  behold,  thy  father  and  T  sought  thee  a.
Acts  20.  .38.  a.  they  shonhUsee  his  face  no  more

1  Sam.  22.  8.  there  is  none  of  you  that  is  a.  for  me
Neh.  8. 10.  tliis  day  is  holy  to  Lord,  neither  be  ye  a.
Psal.  38. 18.  declare  iniquity,  1  will  be  a.  for  my  sin
Isa.  51 .  19.  two  things  come,  who  shall  be  a.  tor  thee
Mat.  14.  9.  and  the  king  was  a.  Mark  6.  26.

17.  23.  and  they  were  exceeding  a.  .

2  Cor.  2.  2.  if  1  make  you  a.  same  which  is  made  a.

7.  8.  tho’  I  made  you  a.  same  epistle  made  you  a.

9  1  rei.  not  that  ye  were  made  a.  for  ye  were  a.
SORT.

Gen.  6.  19.  two  of  every  a.  shalt  bring  into  ark,  20.
7.  14.  every  bird  of  every  a.  into  the  ark
1  Sam.  15.  +  9.  they  spared  of  second  a.  and  lambs
1  Chron.  24.  5.  they  divided  one  a.  with  another
29. 14.  that  we  should  be  able  to  offer  after  this  f.
Ezra  1.  10.  basons  of  gold,  silver  basonsof  second  a.
4.  8.  they  wrote  to  Artaxerxes  king  after  this  a.
Neh.  6.  4.  yet  sent  to  me  four  times  after  this  a.
Ezeic.  23.  42.  with  men  of  the  common  a.  Sabeans
39.  4.  1  will  give  thee  to  ravenous  birds  of  every  a.
44]  30.  the  first  of  every  oblation  of  every  a.

Dan.  1.  10.  worse  liking  than  children  of  your  a.

3.  29.  there  is  no  other  G.  can  deliver  after  this  a.
Acts  17.  5.  but  took  lewd  fellows  ot  the  baser  s.
Rom.  15.  15.  I  have  written  more  boldly  in  some  a.

1  Cor.  3.  13.  try  every  man’s  work,  of  what  a.  it  is

2  Cor.  7.  11.  that  ye  sorrowed  after  a  godly  a.
o  Tim.  3.  6.  of  this  a.  are  they  who  creep  into  houses

3  John  6.  bring  on  their  journey  after  a  godly  a.


SORTS.

Deut.  22. 11.  shalt  not  wear  a  garment  of  divers  1
Neh.  5.  18.  once  in  ten  days  store  ot  all  .1.  of  wine
Psal.  78.  45.  he  sent  divers  a.  ot  dies.  105.  31.

Eccl.  2.  8.  I  gat  musical  instrum,  and  that  of  all  a.
Ezek.  27.  24.  were  thy  merchants  in  all  a.  of  things
‘58  4  all  of  them  clothed  with  all  a.  of  armour
SOTTISH.

Jer.  4.  22.  my  people  is  foolish,  they  are  a.  children

sough  r.

Gen.  43.  30.  he  a.  where  to  weep,  entered  his  eham.
Exod.  2.  15.  when  Pharaoh  heard,  lie  a.  to  slay  Mo.

4.  19.  for  all  the  men  are  dead  which  a.  thv  ate

24.  that  the  Lord  met  b.im  and  a.  to  kill  him

33  7.  every  one  that  a.  Lord  went  out  to  tabern.

Lev.  10.  16.  Moses  diligently  a.  goat  of  sin-ottering
Num.  35.  23.  was  not  his  enemy,  nor  a.  his  harm
Deut.  13.  10.  beca.  he  a.  to  thrust  thee  away  tr.  L.
Josh.  2. 22.  pursuers  a.  the  spies,  but  found  them  not
JiVg.  14.  4.  Samson  a.  occasion  against  Philistines
18.  1.  Danites  a.  them  an  inheritance  to  dwell  in

1  Sam.  19.  10.  Saul  a.  to  smite  David  to  the  wall

27.  4.  Saul  a.  no  more  again  for  him

2  Sam.  3. 17.  ye  a.  for  David  in  times  past  to  be  king
4.  8.  the  head  of  thine  enemy  that  a.  thy  life

21.  t  1.  and  David  a.  the  face  of  the  Lord

2.  Saul  a.  to  slay  them  in  his  zeal  to  Israel  e  1

1  Kings  1.  3.  they  a.  for  a  fair  damsel  thro  Israel

10.  24.  all  the  earth  a.  to  Solomon  to  hear

11.  40.  Solomon  a.  therefore  to  kill  Jeroboam

2  Kings  2.  17.  a.  threedaysfor  Elijah,  found  him  not

1  Chron.  26.  31.  among  the  Hebromtes  were  a.  for

2  Chron.  14.  7.  because  we  have  a.  the  Lord  our  G

16.  12.  yet  in  his  disease  he  a.  not  to  the  Lord

17.  3.  Jehoshaphat  a.  not  unto  Baalim
4.  but  a.  to  the  Lord  God  of  his  father

22. 9.  he  a.  Ahaziah,  and  they  caught  him  ;  because
Jehoshaphat  a.  the  Lord  with  all  Ins  heart

25.  15.  why  hast  thou  a.  after  gods  of  Edom  ?  20.

°6.  5.  he  a.  God  in  the  days  ot  Zechariah  ;  as  long

as  he  a.  the  Lord  God  made  him  to  prosper
Ezra  2.  62.  these  a.  their  register,  Neh.  7.  64.

Neh.  12.  27.  they  a.  the  Levites  out  ot  all  places
Esth.  2.  21.  they  a.  to  lay  hand  on  the  king,  6.  2.

3.  6.  wherefore  Hainan  a.  to  destroy  all  the  Jews
9.  2.  to  lay  hand  on  such  as  a.  their  hurt

Psal.  34.  4.  I  a.  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me,  77.  2.

86  14.  assemblies  of  violent  men  a.  after  my  soul
111.  2.  a.  out  of  all  that  have  pleasure  therein
119.  10.  with  my  whole  heart  have  1  a.  thee
94.  save  me,  for  I  have  a.  thy  precepts
Prov.  28.  +  12.  but  when  wicked  rise,  man  is  a.  for
Eccl.  7.  29.  they  have  a.  out  many  inventions

12.  9.  preacher  a.  out  and  set  in  order  many  prov.

10.  the  preacher  a.  to  find  acceptable  words

Isa.  62.  12.  shalt  be  called,  a.  out,  city  not  forsaken
65.  1.  I  am  a.  of  them  that  asked  not  for  me  ;  lam
found  of  them  that  a.  me  not,  Rom.  10.  20.

10.  shall  be  a  place  for  my  people  that  have  a.  me
Jer.  8.  2.  before  sun  and  moon,  whom  they  have  a.

10!  21.  for  the  pastors  have  not  a.  the  Lord

26.  21.  the  king  a.  to  put  him  to  death
44.  30.  1  gave  Zedekiah  to  Nebu.  that  a.  Ins  life
50.  20.  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  a.  for,  be  none
Lam.  1 .  19.  while  they  a.  meat  to  relieve  their  souls
Ezek.  22.  30.  and  1  a.  for  a  man  among  them
26.  21.  tho’  a.  yet  shalt  thou  never  be  found  again
34.  4.  neither  have  ye  a.  that  which  was  lost
Dan.  2.  13.  they  a.  Daniel  and  his  fellow's  to  be  slam

4.  36.  my  counsellors  and  my  lords  a.  unto  me
6.  4.  the  princes  a.  occasion  against  Daniel
8  15.  wdien  1 ,  even  1 ,  had  a.  tor  the  meaning

Chad.  6.  how  are  Esau’s  hidden  things  a.  up
Zeph.  1.  6.  and  those  that  have  not  a.  the  Lord
Zech.  6.  7-  and  the  bay  went  forth  and  a.  to  go
Mat.  2.  20.  they  are  dead  which  a.  the  child  s  life
21.  46.  a.  to  lay  hands.  Mark  12.  12.  Luke  20.  19.
26.  16.  covenanted  with  him,  and  from  that  tune
he  a.  opportunity  to  betray  him,  Luke  22.  0.

59  they  a.  false  witness  against  Jesus  to  put  him
to  death,  hut  found  none,  Mark  14.  55
Mark  11.  18.  the  scribes  heard  it,  and  a.  how  they
might  destroy  him,  14.  1.  Luke  19.  47-  1  22.  2.
Luke  2.  48.  thy  father  and  I  a.  thee  sorrowing
49.  how  is  it  that  ye  a.  me  ?  wist  ye  not  that  1  must

5.  )8.  and  they  a.  means  to  bring  him  in
6  19.  the  whole  multitude  a.  to  touch  him
11  16  others  a.  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven

13.  6.  he  a.  fruit  thereon,  and  found  none
19  3.  Zaccheus  a.  to  see  Jesus  wdio  he  was

John  5.  16.  the  Jews  a.  to  slay  him,  18. 1  7.  L
7.  11.  then  the  Jews  a.  him  at  the  feast,  11.  00.

30.  then  they  a.  to  take  him,  10.  39.

11.8.  Master,  the  Jews  of  late  s.  to  stone  thee
19.  12.  from  thenceforth  Pilate  a.  to  release  him
Acts  12.  19.  and  when  Herod  had  a.  tor  Peter
17.  5.  they  a.  to  bring  them  out  to  the  people
Rom.  9.  32.  because  a.  it  not  by  faith  but  by  works

1  Thess.  2.  6.  nor  of  men  a.  we  glory,  neither  of  you

2  Tim.  1.  17.  in  Rome  he  a.  me  out  very  diligently
Heb.  8.  7.  no  place  should  have  been  a.  tor  second

1°  17.  though  he  a.  it  carefully  with  tears
'  '  SOUGHT  him.  _  .

1  Sam.  10.  21.  when  a.  him  he  could  not  be  found
13.  14.  the  Lord  hath  a.  him  a  man  to  be  captain
23.  14.  Saul  a.  him  every  day,  God  delivered  him

1  Chron.  15.  13.  we  a.  him  not  after  the  due  order

2  Chron.  14.  7-  have  s.  him,  he  hath  given  us  rest
15  4.  when  they  a.  him,  he  was  found  of  them

15.  for  they  a.  him  with  their  whole  desire
Psal.  37  .  36.  I  a.  him,  but  he  could  not  be  found
78.  34.  when  he  slew  them,  then  they  a.  him
Cant.  3.1 .  by  night  on  my  bed  I  a.  him  whom  my  sou
loveth  ;  I  a.  him  but  I  found  him  not,  2.1  5.  0.
Luke  2.  44.  and  they  a.  him  among  their  kinsfolk
4  42.  ami  the  people  a.  him,  and  came  unto  h
SO ULDIER,  See  Soldier.

SOUL.  ,  .  ,  ,  .  ,

This  word  in  Scripture,  especially  in  the  style  }
the  Hebrews,  is  very  equivocal.  It  ts  taken,
1.  For  that  spiritual,  reasonable,  and ’
substance  in  man,  which  is  the  ongi  f


sou


SOL

°f  °UT  defireL  "four  reasonings;  which
US  Jrom  c!,fi  brute  creation,  amt

Ma/*  \Qar°A°vL7\e"thla\l™/°-  “s  divine  Maker.
t>oth  coni'  n  i e  kP  11,11  ls  abl«  to  destroy

i  nd  b0<l>/-  ,  Jht*  Stance  must  he
,  because  it  thinks  ;  it  must  he  immortal
because  u  ,s  spiritual.  The  Scripture  indeed

Tation  SJhirhaSt'  a  k°Ul'  a  Spirit'  /l-fe'  nnd  re'Pt-
ward  'n!  ^  ?'ay  he  °  iecunei  acceptation  of  the

Cth’thP  Ii”  n(:en-  h'4--  J  et  the  earth  firing
s  nl  V  ,  '  creature,  tn  Hebrew,  the  living

the  souf° of  Hit'n  7’11’  Th,e  *£?>  *»  Hebrew"

Eccl  3  91  wifSlVS  1,1  fhe,bl00(i-  rind  in

CjLci,  ,5.  z\.  Who  knoweth  the  spirit  of

beast  that  goeth  downward  ?  7//i>  soul  thp

animal  ‘fife  AreatJ1’  ,whjch  «  the  principle  of
x  T  a  ij  ’  Vl<^  which  common  to  men  and
brutes,  tint  the  Scripture  a  lions  to  man  alone
‘keprtmleges  of  understanding,  the  knowledge  of
-rod,  wisdom,  immortality,  the  hope  of  future

mfnwith  tfed  0f  -TW  lfr-  ltu7lly  threatens
pa  tn?  of  hell,  Pnnuhment  "J  another  life  and  the

and'iodl  ■ak\v/°LJhte\  Wh°le  person'  both  smd
una  ooay ,  iiive  me  the  persons  lUhmur

S?UiS,^an<^  *a  e  **,e  “°°^s  to  thyself,  says  the  ki?ia

that  they  hacV  ga1heS?end,1t"1i  the  'souls  U^thZ
had  gotten  in  Hat  an  ;  that  is,  theienoZ  12

tthZ  aS€d'  0r  tUK  ChiIdnn  that  had  bo?n

‘  Xj  11  ls  takeii  sometimes  for  death,  or  a  d»ad  hndu

ot-Tni'-  ;s:

^dy^  Hebrew,  dead"  std‘  PsaM?

«  RTgiz&  ss  &

(be  grave,  or  in  a  state  of  death.  SometZes  ft  7
taken  for  a  living  body.  Psal  10*5  u/1  ,,,

K,'D  «  Hebrew,  b£  Z\  'Lf,e  S

Vq  I\c  V?ed-f°r  desirep  love<  inclination,  Gen  23
?■  11  he  your  tnmd  ;  m  Hebrew,  if  it  please  or

be  agreeable  to  your  soul.  ]  Sam.  18.  1  The  soul

^Ji^ a  man

i  30  toe?.‘J,hef^OV,nf  creature  that  hath  *.
o  7-r”jkyo",n-  wherein  there  is  a  living  *

34  8 'the  tbr!?  Ied  and  man  became  a  living8*  ’

3.5  ?ftthac  he7fcn°'S0-  loJ,,geth  for  your  daughler
i^oV!l2  f  16  sa^tlw  departing,  for  she  died

23.  +  9.  for  ye  know  the  7.  of  ;9TAAeVmUSt  eat

Uf  27  ?nd if  f;sha11  fit  ,hrou§h  ignorance
27.  and  if  any  *.ot  the  common  people  sin

V’  tf**-  Sln’  and  hear  the  voice  of  swearimr
4.'  ?fa  /‘swear  ri5Uffaean  thin?’-sha11  be  “"dean


17  fid  it  fa-  ii  a  *.  commit  a

6  2  if  I  s‘  linin'  m  mmit  ay  of  these  things

17  i  i  if  ic  t 11 1? •  le;  n?  f-  of  J  on  shall  eat  blood
lo’  n  '  jf  t?  bIon.d  oiaketh  an  atonement  for  the  *
J?'  30*  '>riest  bu/  any  with  his  money
26  is  or  ;a/S°eVer  do‘h  any  work  in  that  day

01  “  your  *.  abhor  my  judgments  y

qCai 3SeethelIf.V-  abhorred  ™y  statutes

2?  4  the  f  of  th  the  Sa>me  "•  sha11  be  cutoff
?a‘  a  tfle  ■*’  ob  the, People  was  much  discouraged
30.  4.  every  bond  wherewith  she  hath  bound  her
3i  or  „  *  shaJ> i  stand,  5,  6,7,  8,  9,  10, 11  13

Ow28Hn'a7ue  hundred  for  the  Lord  *’  '  '

18  ve  shal’l  1.7  SmVe  h,m  w,th  :dl  your*.

,4°  Ve  snail  lay  un  these  my  words  in  vour  ?

^vour  r  °w1th  ynU  *cnow  whether  you  love  the  ‘r  d
y  our  (.t.  with  all  your*.  Josh  »?  i  1  retd  n  d

J\S?m  ’?8+  Pi  onfell<thS  bi,tei:ofV.  run  oifthee4'
oq±  o  p' I',  f'  of  lonathan  was  knit  to  v.  of  David

^0'  6^  l^'  'ofr^y>J,®rd1  hound  u'p^rinind/e  o'f  Ufe

Aij  $$$&  -

17  lei  thisHf  h  lSr  returnt0  thee  With  all  their*
2A W  fi:  L(i!',ll(l  s  coTe  >nto  him  again
03  _  r  '* •  let  her  alone  tor  her  s.  is  vexed

1  'Chrorl ^ooeeiPohlS  commandments  with  all  their*

2  Chr  Se7  yo,lr  v- ,0  seek  the  Lord

15  lor38,  ‘hey  return  to  thee  with  all  their  t

f$vf

H  ?2’ifayf}[;-  W7efn  soul?sVst7adVingthing

S!  few  to  expire

&  l7  +  ort,mdl^fh  youth,  and  their  life  s

19  7  the  law  of  T  o,7l  ?,y  enlmies  a^inst  the  *.

00  Jfw  ot  L°’.d  Is  Perfect  converting  the  c

34*  no' m pdf  lv?r  them*,  from  death  and  keeValhe
4Q*  22;, the  Lord  redeemeth  the  *.  of  his  servan  ts
70  i!i  h6  VedemPtion  of  their  *.  is  precious  '

-4’  ii-  ns,'af  redeem  their*,  from  deceit  and  viol
4«  i9;  P  dehvei;  not  the  *.  of  thy  turtle  dove
t8.  50.  he  spared  not  their  *.  from  death

94‘ 21  X vVahth  ^  °f  •hy  seurvanf-  O  Lord

?ather  gainst  the*,  of  the  righteous
06.  15  but  he  sent  leanness  into  their  £ghteOUS
U  7- 5.  hungry  and  thirsty  their  *.  fainted  in  them
?r  hti,!f3ISbef,u  lon?mg  *.  and  filleth  hungry  *  W
or’  ti  abhorreth  all  manner  of  meat
Prov  m''?  1S  fme  d  because  of  trouble

U  25  libera?  *S^T.  lhe  '•  ^'teous  to  famish
llDeral  r.  shall  be  mr.de  fat  that  watereth


Pn*  a'/  transgressors  shall  eat  violence
Jo  ,?  ■‘•  or  the  sluggard  desireth  aud  hath  not

1 6J  24  I  re, acco  1  ’]  p 1  ,sl1  ed  is  sweet  to  the*.

10’  o  ’,1,  ' easft,it  words  are  sweet  to  the*.

;;  2-  he  without  knowledge  it  is  not  good
5  and  an  idle*,  shall  suffer  hunger  B°°d
oq  no‘  t b?  sl  °Uhe  wicked  desireth  evil

25.  a  ,We  ^?»Htmssss the,n

25.  ns  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  *.  so  is  good  news
-7-  1.  the  full  *.  loatheth  an  honey-comb:  but  fo
+  0  c„  thc  h,un/ry  *•  every  bitter  thing  2s  sweet
3?  9+ 6  a;,mans  tnend  hy  the  counsel  of  the  *

La'  3  VloVf111,'?  °  the,!‘  that  are  hitter  of*.  ’
t  SO*  I’,  '??  ,t'V  lPr  diey,  have  rewarded  evil
10+10  Y/lhnk  a"ay  th,?  houses  of  the  *.
ro.  t  18.  it  shall  consume  from  the  *.  to  the  flesh

46  ?ot0,  mak,e  ?,nP'-v  ,he  of  the  hungry
40  !  n  buUt  the.11'  *.  ,s  gone  into  captivity^

55'  o  7,’  hus  saith  ,Ld-  to  him  (hat  is  despised  in  *

•>'  y°"r  *•  delight  itself  in  fatness
3.  come  unto  me,  hear,  and  your  *.  shall  live

66  3  VlW  5h?-11  ,SatlP>’  the  afflicted  *.

/??'  4'  i  f’  delighteth  in  their  abominations

20  13  ]he  ShfSa1-theS7?.rd  ,  eachetl1  to  the  '-

31  Vo  tL  dehyered  the  *.  of  the  poor
ii  jbeu  s.  shall  he  as  a  watered  warden

05'  fiffd  Li'fh  ,|SaVate),h,elf-of  the  P'^sts

'  anrl  1  L°rdi’  1  satiateci  the  weary

t  r?  &s  at  ss uTsr  -

tt  h  "T  mF>  ,h'ir  *•  >°  r«“ra

o  To  V„ v1,  1  atl?  "lveu  for  meat  to  relieve  the  *

T  05'  the  LoS'iVo’in’fi  'T.Ured  Vut  into  bosom
Ezek  ’ih  a Tm  1S ",ood  t0  the  *.  that  seeketh  him
nf  cPi8'  4'  a  so,uls  are  lmne,  as  *.  of  father  so  *
°4fo?  J?n]lne’ the  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die  2o’

to 6  w«tt?ourff  pitleth  sl,al1  ,al>  by  sword  °
~?'J  take  tiom  them  the  lifting  up  of  the  *

Mat.  40.  28.

ss  j4i  "0- ®  at.  zla,thf

3  oT’p'?,'  tedr  came  on  every  *.  many  wonuersdone
4.'  ^rnulttteffib^S

IThess^  k  7  be  subject.  t°  the  higher  powers
11  r  ,‘  ?A  23‘  that  your*,  and  body  be  nrese>v«,i

0  Pet ’  o’  «  T  desdily  lusts  which  war  ag.  the  *

lie?  tf  J:  Jffi  ^te^h?ii^?^a^oday

Afflicted,  Bitterness.
r>  o  Jits  SOUL.

4o” 2? ' a're  t0  Dillah  -'acob’s  daughter

f  'xod'  3n  iV?  .Gi’  •  hen  we  saw  anguish  of  hiss
N?m  30  o'Vfr  c11  81Ve  a  ra»som  for  hiss,  to  Lord
Lent'  04'  -  or  swear  an  oath  to  hind  his  s.  to  Lord

Jnda'to  iV /’■  1S  poor:  and  Hftefh  hiss,  to  it

-  T ,fu  p; j  asr  rh  51  fT'Si,  t,°

'  ” '

03  an|°d,1Y  <  let1  in  bitterness  of  his  *.

07  h  Vh»  h  1  b/s  s:  desireth,  even  that  he  doeth
3  ’  T/  Tvi  Pocrite,  when  God  faketh  away  hiss
31.  30.  neither  to  sin,  by  wishing  a  curse  to  it?

iH|pVUStAe<[/"V';  ra,l|er  than  God
on  1Tni/-  pe  il  hack  hiss,  from  the  pit
20.  and  /ns  s.  abhorreth  dainty  meat  1

rr'  ?^a’  .|if  draweth  near  unto  the  grave
28.  he  will  deliver  his  s.  from  (he  pit,  .30
,Y‘  ■  ^  /  :]■  the  wicked  boasteth  of  his  *  desme

a-  ,  l,tte‘l  “P  A"  ».  to  vanity

-a.  U.  /tut.  shall  dwell  at  ease,  and  seed  shall

»  « ststrr  "e  iive,‘  Cifr

mi  i,oT  ,  deliver  his  *.  from  the  <mave  >

•  f  fB.  feet  hurt  with  fetters,  his  *.  came  into  iron
AS  6  I6a«ifr0m  those  that  condemn  /Ts  *

30  if  hi  i?’  s.e'en  a.le.  ai1  abomination  to  his  *

13  'or  ,  pS  a  /°  satl3fy  biss.  when  he  is  hungry
3.  o.  the  righteous  eateth  to  satisfying  of  his  *  ^

16.  17.  he  that  keepeth  his  way ,  preserveth  his  s'

If  Jo  s , 1 1  PS  are  the  snare  of  his  s.

00  5  ’t.'  I  ]' °Te,epetl h,h.ls  mouth, keepeth  hiss.

23*  T4  and  s£lt  I'm  hu  V  •8halj.  l)c  far  from  them
00’  10  if*  deliver  hiss,  from  hell

Ecel  i  «ethlSKht|  ',,ut  ,be  -iM«t  seek  his  s.

6  o  cf  5, t  he  should  make  Ins  s.  enjoy  good
A  2V,m  i  at  \e  wantetli  nothing  for  his  *.
r '  •  ‘‘Pf  hiss,  he  not  filled  with  good
La.  -9.  8.  but  be  awaketh  and  his  *.  is  empty

44  "n  thbethh  d  16  18  fail?f  and  Ms  s.  hath  appetite
44  20  that  he  cannot  deliver  his  *.  nor  say'  '

i  i  1  eshifl  seeof  t',Ilak-iy<V  an  offering  for  sin

1*0  u  shaM  ste  of  ti  avail  of  hiss,  and  be  satisfied

/*rA  ?9US|A?  'i?U|i  k0lit  /ns-  s-  unt0  death
.f, '  5°vy-  ,llss-  shall  be  satished  on  mount  Enhr

E-ek  \n%^\{  d*tllvfr  ever>'  45?  P  '

S3  A  heVh’at  telh  *u  ,at  1S  r.‘-ht’  he  shall  save  his  s.

dim  os' SVpiiph  sha11  deliver  his  *.

71/m  7*+3  O.pTr'  Sha"  tl,e  ,niShty  deliver  his  s.

Hah  o  4  3/.}}f  oi'f- rTla,n  “ttereth  mischief  of  his  s.

Mai  IK  OR  if '  ■'  1  ted  up,  IS  not  upright  in  him

“K  u -ain.  whole  world,  and  lose  /m  own  *

/m/lfTTi  /"-911  glve  111  exchange  for*,  f  Mark  8  37
Acts  2.  31.  his  s.  was  miHGt  in  hell  nor  flesh  did’see

Pu^’oiVvi  T  fnd  Tnp  s'  sbaP  live  because  of  thee
en‘  4*  i|Pf  6  escapc  fh'ther,  and  my  s.  shall  live
7* 4-  that  my  *.  may  bless  thee  before  1  die,  25.


s  u  u


C2 leP  ”,S/S-P h^t' tffid^dtwStea,

;d

oi'o\L7et  thou  huntestwy  *.  to  take  it  ’

*6.  -1.  because  my  s.  was  precious  in  thine  eves
*  6am.  4.  9.  David  answered  Rechab  as  th*.  "t^-d
T  .  ',vcth-  who  hath  redeemed  my  *.  1  Kings!  go

Job  6  7.  the  things  my  *.  refused,  are  as  mTm^at

Q  If  tf  thau  my  i-  chooseth  Strangling  and  death
m  1  il’0U?h  ptrfeCt'  ii1  would  F  not  know  my  ,

19  2  Tow  '|SonTauyi?  t6’ Speak  bitterness  of  my  *'
07  o'  n°'.v  ,  n?  ,u  1 ! ^  >’e  v©x  my  s,  with  words  '*

30  1  whl*le  Almighty,  who  hath  vexed  my  *

30  15.  they  pursue  my  s.  as  the  wind

05  and  no,w  7"y  “•  1S.  Poured  out  upon  me
/,J  'f  o  ,  !i  my  '-/Heved  for  the  poor  f

*  3.  ..  wtio  say  of  my  *.  there  is  no  help  in  God

vssa«saS'

!3:  j feTsSfAip  sftr sal.- “t-  *

3l  ’,n  *5°“  hast  brought  up  my  *.  from  the  Aave
31  7"  *if*  *1®  s\  may  sin§  Praise  to  thee  °
o'  7’thou  b:lst  known  my  *.  in  adversities

34*2  wt/TshaTlJi^  buellykare  consumed
a...  my  s.  shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord

3f-  h  say  unto  my  s.  l  am  thy  salvation

7’  be  Potto  shame  that  seek  after  mg  *

7*  without  cause  they  have  di°<»ed  a  nit  fVx»-  ^  '

9.  and  mVs.  shall  be  j’oyfSl  i In  the  ^  mV  *'
G.  they  rewarded  me  to  the  spoiling  of  mv  *

13.  as  tor  me,  1  humbled  my  *.  with  fastiim
407‘l4  l?tetimy  T.  from  their  destructions  °

41 ' 44"hliithem  T  confounded  thatseek  after  mv  *

40  1  b  iy  s:  tor  1  have  sinned  against  thee^  '

A*  •  35  the  hart,  so  panteth  my  s.  after  thee  O  c
2.  my  s.  hirsteth  for  the  living  God,  143  A  °  °’

5  whvna ,l/,l,r7ember’iI  pour  oat  my  *.  in  me

6  O  t’nf'f'  ?U  °aSt  down,  O  my  s.?  11.  |  43  5

49  15  God  T  llT^V''  15  cast  down  within  me

54  3  ^0d  wiU  redeem  my  s.  from  the  grave
54.  3  and  oppressors  seek  after  my  *  h

55  18*  hfhuth  Yrh  the!P  ,hat  uphold  my  *.

7  t-  truly  rny  *.  waiteth  upon  God  mv  salvutm
5.  my  s  wait  thou  only  upon  God,  my  on

03. 1.0  God,  my  *.  thirsteth  for  thee  in  a  drv  TmH
5.  my  s.  shall  be  satisfied  as  with  marrov  and  A
8-  mys  followeth  hard  after  thee,  thy TiTithanH

66  ?6 '  Ivifn  Hlaf  St:ek  i'y  s-  t°  destroy  it  shall  oy
60  fi'f  ldeCare  what  God  hath  done  for my,

84.  2.  my  *.  longeth  for  the  courts  of  the  T  o  d

9l4q17'  7h  ■*’  ,h a(? a^n  1  ost ?t welt  in 'si'lence ld est ' ho u
J  -  hiessfthe  3?^^  -  1^7?

lift  oa  ”ou  hast  delivered  my  s.  from  death
119.  20.  mys.  breaketh  for  the  longing  it  hath

og’  ™y  *’  mpftV  thhf°  iflle  dusf’  quicken  thou  me

i  sit attes,

>|  ;e'  ,,otforg‘,

16/.  mys.  hath  kept  thy  testimonies

fono}vys-  ,lve>  and  it  shall  praise  thee
UO.  2.  deliver  my  *  O  Lord,  from  lying  lips
130 Tf  l,at.h  ^welt  with  him  that  hateth  peace
T.,,'  o’  '  "alt.  601  the  Lord,  my  s.  doth  wait  6
1 00’  o'  ™y,s\ls  ev?n  as  a  Weaned  child  ’

138.  .3.  and  strengthen  me  with  strength  in  mv  *
at?d  'hat  my  *.  knoweth  right  well
1 40 '  T  l  'J166 1  'T'T  'rust,  leave  not  my  *.  destitute
142.  4.  refuge  failed  me,  no  man  cared  for  mi  s
ll'bnu?  rny  s.  out  of  prison,  that  I  may  prais^tiiv
/i  O  M,eke^my  lla,h  Persecuted  mys  Uy
1 1I'  9  "Crd,  bring  my  s.  out  of  trouble
Aw  j’  S  t Se  the  Lord,  praise  the  Lord,  O  my  *

,  £  4-  ?•.  fur  whom  do  1  bereave  my  *.  of  oood  5

C«*?’l  7*  O  T9  Wy\S‘  seeketh;  but  1  find  not  d  ‘
cant.  1.7.  O  thou  whom  mys.  loveth,  .3.  ],  o  3  4

6  ?j  Ls  'f/S  V**  1  »Jt h'im  '

t'V  Tf  lle  l,ke  chariots  of  A  mmi-nadib

26'  o’  '  ith  nTW  mo,OI1ls  alKi  feasts  my  *.  hateth
3H  A  0  'V  f'-have  I  desired  thee  in  the  night
38  17  thou  hast  in  love  to  mys.  delivered  it  8  1

fiT"  Vnbeh°  d  mJnn  feet,  in  whom  my  *.  deli^hteth
ir'i  io  LTAhal1  9  Joyful  in  my  God  "  '6  ''

31  4:,19’  haSt  heard,  i)  my  *.  sound  of  the  frumnet
31.  my  *  is  wearieo  because  of  murderers  P
0\shall  not  my  s.  be  avenged  ?  29  I  o  u

i  Ifjtw  ^.‘gr^sgr . . .

Lam.  1.  16.  the'  com  1  oile  r  ‘t  1 1  at  Th  o  ii  I  d  TfievAA/F

461


sou


sou

r  am  3.  17  thou  hast  remov ed  mys.  far  off  from  pe
20  '.mys.  hath  them  still  in  remembrance
24.  Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  mys.  will  1  hope
58.  O  Lord,  thou  liast  pleaded  the  causes  of  my  s.
h'zek  4  14  behold,  my  a.  hatli  not  been  polluted
Jonah 2 .7 ‘  when  my  s.  fainted  within  me,  1  remem
Mtc.  6.7.  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  .
7  l.  mys.  desired  the  first  ripe  fruit

lech.  11.8.  three  shepherds  1  cut  off,  "'f/w Ilf Ideas
.1 1 at.  12.18.  my  beloved,  in  whom  wy  a.  is  v.  ell  pit  •
<26  38  my  .v.  is  exceeding  sorrowtul,  Mark  14.  .3  .
Luke  l’.  46.  my  s.  doth  magnify  the  Lord
io  in  i  will  say  to  my  s.  soul,  eat,  orinK
J,-/m  1°  °7  is  my  v.  troubled,  and  what  shall  I  say  .
£ Cor  1  25  1  call  (foil  for  a  record  upon  my  s.
Heb.  10.  38.  my  s.  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him
Our  SOU  L.

Num  11.6.  our  s.  is  dried  away ,  nothing  but  manna
215.  no  bread,  ours,  loatheth  this  light  bread
f>.al  33  20.  our  s.  waiteth  tor  Lord, he  is  our  help
35. 1 25.  let  them  not  say,  ah,  ours  would have


+  V.) ,  lei  llicui  uwi  ,  j

44"  05  for  ours,  is  bowed  down  to  the  dust
u  bless  our  God,  who  holdeth  our  s.  in  life

123.  4.  ours,  is  exceedingly  tilled  with  scorning

124.  4.  the  stream  had  gone  over  our  s.  5.

7.  ours,  is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  thesnaie

La.  26.  8.  the  desire  of  our  s.  is  to  thy  name
Own  SOUL.  .

Deut  13.  6.  if  a  friend  is  as  thine  owns,  entice  tnee
»  Sam.  18.  1.  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  to  Da
vid,  and  he  loved  him  as  his  own s.  3. 1  20. 17
P<al  0,°  °9  and  none  can  keep  alive  nis  oowi*?.

Prov  6  32.  he  that  doeth  it,  destroyeth  his  owns
8  36.  but  he  that  sinneth,  wrongeth  his  owns.

11  17  the  merciful  man  doeth  good  to  his  own s
15  3«!  he  thatrefuseth  instruction  despis.  his  ozawa.

19  8.  he  that  getteth  wisdom,  lovefh  ms  owns.

16.  he  that  keep,  commandments  keep,  his  own  s.

20  2.  that  provokethking,  sinneth  against  Ins  own  i .

29  24.  whoso  is  partner  with  thief,  hateth  own  s.

Mat  16.  26.  what  is  a  man  profited, it  he  shall  gain

'  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  a.  ?  Mark  8.  36.
Luke  2. 35.  sword  shall  pierce  thro’  thy  owns,  also

That  SOUT,.  ~

Gen.  17-  14.  not  circumcised,  thats.  shall  be  cut  off
from  Ins  people,  Exod.  31.  14.  Lev.  7-  20,  21,

25,  27. 1  19.  8.  Num.  15.  30.  ,

r,,j  10  15  vvhoso  eateth  leavened  bread,  thats.

£  shall  be  cut  off  from  Israel  Num.  19  13

19.  whoso  eateth  leavened  bread,  ‘hats,  shall  be
cut  off  from  congregation  of  Israel,  Num.  19.  20.

Lev-  17.  10.  1  will  set  my  face  against  that  s.  20.  o.

90  3  that  s.  shall  be  cut  off  from  my  presence
23’ 30  that  s.  will  I  destroy  from  his  people
Num.  15.  31.  that  a.  shall  utterly  be  cut  off
Thy  SOU  L.

Gen.  27. 19.  eat,  that  thy  J.  may  bless  me,  31.

Deut.  4.  9.  take  heed,  and  keep  thy  s.  diligently

20.  shalt  find  him,  it  seek  him  with  all  thys.

6.  5.  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  My  j.  30.  0.

10.  12.  to  serve  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  s.

12.  15.  whatsoever  thy  s.  lusteth  after,  14.  -0.

26. 16.  do  with  all  thy  a.  |1  30. 2.  obey  with  all  thy  s.

30.  2.  obey  his  voice  with  all  thy  heart  and  thy  s.

10  if  thou  turn  unto  the  Lord  with  all  thy  s.

1  Sam.  2.  16.  then  take  as  much  as  thy  s.  desireth
20.  4.  whatsoever  thy  s.  desireth,  1  will  do  for  thee
23!  20.  come  according  to  all  the  desire  of  thy  s.

95  29.  yet  a  man  is  risen  to  pursue  and  seek  thy  s.

1  Kings 11. 37.  shalt  reign  according  all  My  a.  desir.
Psal.  121.  7.  the  Lord  shall  preserve  thy  s.

Prov  2.  10.  when  knowledge  is  pleasant  to  thy  s.

3.  22.  so  shall  be  life  to  thy  s.  and  grace  to  thy  neck
19.  18.  and  let  not  thy  s.  spare  tor  his  crying
22.  25.  learn  his  ways,  and  get  a  snare  to  thy  s.

24.  12.  he  that  keepeth  thy  s.  doth  not  he  know  it  r
14.  so  shall  the  knowledge  of  wisdom  be  to  thy  s.

29.  17.  yea,  he  shall  give  delight  to  thy  s.

Isa.  51.23.  which  have  said  to  thy  s.  bow  down
58  10.  if  thou  draw  out  thys.  to  the  hungry
11.  the  Lord  shall  satisfy  thys.  in  drought
Jer.  14. 19.  hath  thy  s.  loathed  Zion  ?  why  smitten  us
38.  17.  go  forth  then,  thy  s.  shall  live,  20.

Ezek.  3. 19.  thou  hast  delivered  thys,  21. 1  33.  9.
Hah.  2.  10.  and  thou  hast  sinned  against  thy  s.

Mat.  22.  37.  thou  shalt  love  Lord  with  all  thy  hemt
and  with  all  thy  s.  Mark  12.  30.  Luke  10.  27  ■
luke  12. 20.  this  night  thys.  shall  be  required  of  thee
3  John<Z.  thou  mayest  prosper,  even  as  thy  s.  prosp.
Rev  18. 14.  the  fruits  thy  s.  lusted  after  are  departed
See  Liveth.

SOULS.  ,  .  „

Gen.  12.  5.  Abraham  took  s.  they  had  got  in  Uaran
14  t21  give  me  the  j.  and  take  goods  to  thyself
36.  +  6.  Esau  took  all  the  a.  of  his  house
46. 15.  the  .v.  by  Leah  were  thirty  and  three
18  by  Zilpah  sixteen  s.  1122.  by  Kacliel  fourteen  s.

25.  all  the  s.  Jacob  had  by  Bilhah  were  seven

26.  all  the  s.  that  came  into  Egypt,  sixty  and  six

27.  the  sons  of  Joseph  in  Egypt  were  two  a.  all  the
,s.  of  house  of  Jacob  were  seventy  s.  Eiod.  1.5.

Exod.  12.  4.  take  a  lamb  according  to  number  of  a.
16.  +  16.  an  homer  according  to  the  number  of  a.
30.  15.  an  offering  to  Lord,  to  make  an  atonement
for  your  s.  16.  Lev.  17-  IE  Num.  31.  50.
Lev.  18. 29.  even  .9.  that  commit  them  shall  be  cut  ott
20.  25.  ye  shall  not  make  your  s.  abominable
Num.  16.  38.  of  these  sinners  against  their  own  s.
30  9.  every  vow  wherewith  have  bound  their  s.
Josh.  10.  28.  he  utterly  destroyed  them  and  all  the
s.  that  were  therein,  30,  32.  I  11.  11.
23. +  11.  take  gocd  heed  therefore  unto  your  s.

14.  ye  know  in  all  your  hearts  and  in  al  yours.
1  Sam.  25.  29.  s.  of  thine  enemies  shall  he  sling  out
i.  C hr 07i.  5.  +  21.  they  took  of  .9.  of  men  100,000
Esth.  9.  +  31.  these  davs  they  had  decreed  for  their  .9.
Psal.  72.  13.  and  shall  save  the  a.  of  the  needy
97.  10.  he  preserveth  the  a.  of  his  saints
Prov.  11.  30.  and  he  that  winnetb  a.  is  wise
14.  25.  a  true  witness  delivereth  a.

Isa.  47.  +  14.  they  shall  not  deliver  their  a.

57  16.  spirit  shorn!  fail,  and  a.  which  1  made

462


SOU

Ter.  2.  34.  in  thy  skirts  is  found  the  blood  of  a.

6.  16.  ye  shall  find  rest  tor  your  a.  Mat  11.  .9.
ok  19  thus  might  we  procure  great  evil  ag.  our  a.
37.  t  9  thus  saith  the  Lord,  deceive  not  your  a.

42  +  20  ye  have  used  deceit  against  your  a.

44;  7.  wliy  commit  this  great  evil  against  your  a.  ?
Lam.  1.  19.  they  sought  meat  to  relieve  their  a.

Ezek  7  19.  they  shall  not  satisfy  their  a.

13  18  to  hunt  a.  will  ye  hunt  a.  of  my  people,  20.
will  ye  save  the  a.  alive  that  come  unto  you

19.  to  slay  the  a.  that  should  not  die

14  14  they  should  deliver  but  their  own  a.

4  all  v  are  mine  II  22.25.  they  have  Devoured  a.
Jo'  27  her  princes  are  like  wolves  to  destroy  a.
Luke  21.  19.  in  your  patience £

Sets  2.  41.  there  were  added  to  them  3000  a.

7  11  lip  called  Jacob  and  his  kindred  (0  a.

14.  22.  confirming  the  a.  of  the  disciples,  exhorting

15.  24.  have  troubled  you,  subverting  your  a.

°7  37.  we  were  in  all  in  the  ship  2(6  a.

2  Cor  12.  +  15-  I  would  be  spent  tor  your  s.

1  7 'hess .  2.  8.  to  have  imparted  our  own  a.  to  you
Heb.  13.  17.  obey  them,  for  they  watch  tor  you  •
Jani  1.  21.  the  word  which  is  able  to  save  your  a.

\  Pet  1  9  end  of  your  faith  the  salvation  of  your  a.

22  seeing  have  purified  your  a.  in  obeying  truth
O  "5  are  returned  to  the  Shepherd  of  your  a
3'  °0.  wherein  few,  that  is,  eight  a.  were  saved
4!  19.  commit  the  keeping  of  their  s.  to  him
9  Pet  °.  14.  cannotcease  from  sin  beguil.  unstable  a.
~Rev.  6.  9.  I  saw  und  '  the  altar  the  a.  of  them  slain
18.  13.  no  man  bu>eth  slaves  and  a.  of  men
20  4  1  saw  the  a.  of  them  that  were  beheaded
See  Afflict.

SOUND,  Substantive.  .

Exod.  28.  35-  his  a.  shall  be  heard  when  he  goeth  in
Lev.  25.  +  9.  cause  the  trumpet  loud  of  a.  to  sound
26.  36.  the  a.  of  a  shaken  leaf  shall  chase  them
Josh.  6.  5.  when  ye  hear  the  a.  of  the  trumpet,  20.
2  Sam  5.  24.  when  thou  hearest  the  a.  of  a  going  m
*  the  tops  of  the  mulberry-trees,  1  Chron.  14.  15.
6.  15.  they  brought  up  the  ark  with  shouting  and
the  a.  of  the  trumpet,  1  Chion.  15.  -8.

15.  10.  when  ye  hear  the  a.  say.

1  Kings  1.  40.  the  earth  rent  with  the  a.  of  them
41.  when  Joab  heard  the  a.  of  the  tiumpet
14.  6.  wi.en  Ahuah  heard  the  a.  of  her  feet
18.  41.  for  there  is  a  a.  of  abundance  of  lain


Kings  6.32.  is  not  a.  of  his  master  s  feet  behind  him
1  Churn.  16.  5.  bnt  Asaph  made  a  a.  with  cymbals
42.  with  trumpets  and  those  that  should  make  a  a.

,  Chmv  5  13  as  one,  to  make  one  a.  to  be  heaid
~Neh.  4.  20.  in  what  place  ye  hear  a.  of  the  trumpet
Job  15.  21.  a  dreadful  a.  in  his  ears,  in  prospenty
21.  12.  and  rejoice  at  the  a.  of  the  organ
37.  2.  hear  the  a.  that  goeth  out  of  his .mouth
30.  24.  nor  believeth  he  it  is  the  a.  of  the  trumpet
Psal.  47.  5.  the  L.  gone  up  with  the  s.  of  a  trumpet
77.  17.  cloud  poured  out  water,  skies  sent  out  a  s.

89.  15-  blessed  are  people  that  know  the  joyful  s.

92.  .3.  sing  upon  the  harp  with  a  solemn  a.

98.  6.  sing  with  trumpets  and  a.  of  cornet
150  .3.  praise  him  with  the  a.  of  the  trumpet
Ecci  7  t  6.  as  the  a.  of  thorns  under  a  pot
12  4.  when  the  a.  of  the  grinding  is  low
jer? 4.  19.  hast  heard,  (J  my  soul,  the  a.  of  trumpet
21.  how  long  shall  1  hear  the  a.  of  the  trumpet .

6.  17.  saying,  hearken  to  the  a.  of  the  trumpet .
b!  16.  the  land  trembled  at  the  a.  of  the  neighing
05  10  I  will  take  from  them  a.  of  the  millstones
4°  14.  where  we  shall  hear  no  a.  of  the  trumpet
5(V  22  a  of  battle  is  in  the  land,  and  of  desti  uction
51"  54  a  a.  of  a  cry  cometh  from  Babylon
v'ek  10  5  the  a.  of  the  cherubim’s  w  mgs  was  heard

26.  13.  the  a.  of  thy  harps  shall  be  no  more  heard
15.  shall  not  the  isles  shake  at  the  a.  of  thy  fall

27.  28.  suburbs  shall  shake  at  a.  of  cry  of  thy  pi  ots
.31  16.  1  made  nations  to  shake  at  a.  of  nis  tall
33  4  heareth  the  .'.  and  taketh  r.o  warning

5!  he  heard  a.  of  trumpet  and  took  not  warning
Dan.  .3.  5.  at.  what  time  ye  hear  the  a.  7 ,  10,  15.

Amos  2.  2.  Moab  shall  die  with  a.  of  trumpet
6.  5.  that  chaunt  to  the  a.  of  the  viol,  and  invent
jv] at  04.  31.  he  shall  send  his  angels  with  a  greats.
John  .3.  8.  hearest  the  s.  but  c'anst  not  tell  whence
Acts  2.  2.  suddenly  there  came  a  a.  from  heaven
Rom.  10.  18.  verily  their  a.  went  into  all  the  earth
1  Cor  14  7.  even  things  without  life  giving  a.

8.  for  if  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  a
Heb  12  19.  ye  are  not  come  to  the  a.  of  a  trumpet
Rev  1.  15!  and  his  voice  as  the  a.  of  many  waters
9.  9.  the  a.  of  their  wings  was  as  the  9.  of  chariots
18  22  the  a.  of  a  millstone  shall  be  heard  no  more
SOUND,  Adjective.

Psal  119.  80.  let  my  heart  be  a.  in  thy  statutes
P,ov.  2.  7.  he  layeth  up  a,  wisdom  for  the  righteous
.3  21.  my  son,  keep  a.  wisdom  and  discretion
8-.  14.  counsel  is  mine  and  a.  wisdom,  1  am  unders.
14  30.  a  a.  heart  is  the  life  of  the  fiesh,  but  en  y
Luke  15.  27.  because  hath  received  him  sate  and  a.

\  'Tim.  1.  10.  if  any  other  thing  contrary  to  a.  doct.

9  Tim.  1. 7-  for  God  hath  given  us  spirit  of  a.  mind
~  13.  hold  fast  the  form  of  a.  words  thou  hast  heard
4  3  when  they  will  not  endure  a.  doctnne
Tit  1.  9.  he  may  be  able  by  a.  doctrine  to  exhort
13.  rebuke  them,  that  they  may  be  a.  in  the  faith
2  1  speak  the  things  which  become  a.  doctrine
~2  that  the  aged  men  be  a.  in  faith,  in  charity
8'  a.  speech  that  cannot  be  condemned
SOUND,  Verb.

Lev.  25.  9.  trumpet  of  jubilee  to  a.  in  day  of  atone¬
ment  make  the  trumpet  a.  through  all  the  iand
Num.  10. 7.  shall  blow,  but  you  shall  not  a.  an  alarm
1  Chr.  15.  19.  lleman  and  Asaph  were  appoint,  to  a.
Isa.  16.  1L  wherefore  my  bowels  shall  a.  for  Moab
jer.  48.  .36.  my  heart  shall  a.  for  R.oab  like  pipes
Joel  2.  1.  and  a.  an  alarm  in  my  holy  'mountain
Mat.  6.  2.  therefore  do  not  a.  a  trumpet  beforethee
1  Cor.  15.  52.  for  the  trumpet  shall  a.  dead  be  raised

Rev.  8. 6.  the  seven  angels  prepared  themselves  t  a.
13.  trumpet  of  the  three  angels  who  are  yet  to  s.
10.  '7.  when  the  seventh  angel  shall  begin  to  a.


SOUNDED.

Prod  19.  19-  when  the  voice  of  the  trumpet  a.  Ion®-

1  Sam.  20. 12.  Jonathan  said,  when  1  have  a.  father

2  C 'broil.  7.  6.  the  priests  a.  trumpets,  13.  14.

2.3. 13.  the  people  rejoiced,  and  a.  with  trumpets
09'  28'.  the  singers  sang,  and  the  trumpeters  a.

Neh  *4.  18.  he  that  a.  the  trumpet  was  by  me
Luke  1. 44.  as  soon  as  voice  of  salutat.  a.  in  ray  ears
1  Thess.  1. 8.  from  you  a.  out  the  woid  of  the  I.ord
Rev  8.  7-  the  first  angel  a.  and  there  followed  hail
8*  the  second  a.  ||  10.  third  a.  ||  12.  fourth  angel  a.

9.  1.  the  fifth  a.  H  13.  sixth  a.  ||  11. 15.  seventh  a.

SO  U  N  D  L  D .

Acts  27  .  28.  they  a.  and  found  it  twenty  fathoms  ;

they  a.  again  and  found  it  fifteen  fathoms
SOUNDETH.

Exod.  19.  13.  when  the  trumpet  a.  long,  come  up
SOUNDING.

1  Chr.  15.  16.  singers  with  instruments  of  music,  a.

2  Chron.  5.  12.  and  with  them  120  priests  a.

13.  12.  his  priests  with  a.  trumpets  to  cry  alarm
Psal.  150.  5.  praise  him  upon  the  high  a.  cymbals
Isa.  63.  15.  where  is  thy  zeal  and  a.  of  thy  bowels
Ezek  7.7.  and  not  the  a.  again  of  mountains
1  Cor  13. 1.  and  have  not  charity,  I  am  as  a.  brass
SOUNDNESS.

Pa.  38.  3.  there  is  no  a.  in  my  flesh  for  thy  anger,  7.
Isa  1  6  there  is  no  a.  in  it,  but  wounds  and  bruises
Acts  3  16.  hath  given  him  this  perfect  a.  before  you
SOUNDS.  .  .  .  .

1  Cor.  14.  7.  except  they  give  a  distinction  in  the  s.

La.  18.  5.  when  the  a.  grape  is  ripening  in  the  flower

Jer  31.29.  the  fathers  have  eaten  a. 9.  grape,  and  the
children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge,  Ezek.  18.  2.
.30.  every  man  that  eateth  the  a.  grape,  teeth  be
lios.  4.  18.  their  drink  isA^they  have  committed

Gen.  12.  9-  and  Abram  journeyed  towards  the  a.

1.3.  1.  Abram  went  up  into  the  a.  ||  3.  went  from  a.
2b!  14.  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  north  and  a.
Exod.  26.  35.  on  side  of  the  tabernacle  toward  the  a.
Num  1.3.29.  Amalekites  dwell  in  the  land  of  the  a.
Deut.  33.  23.  O  Naphtali,  possess  thou  west  ana  a.
josh  10  40.  Joshua  smote  the  couptry  of  the  s.

18.  5.  J  udah  shall  abide  in  their  coast  on  the  a.

I  Judo  A.  9.  to  fight  against  the  Canaanites  in  the  a.

1  Sam.  °0.4L  David  arose  out  of  a  place  toward  A
27.  10.  against  the  s.  of  . I  udah,  s.  ot  Jerahrueelites


30.  1.  the  Amalekites  had  invaded  the  a.  14.

2  Sam.  24.  7.  they  went  out  to  the  a.  of  Judah
1  Kings  7.  25.  three  looking  towards  s.  2  Chr.  4.  4
1  Chron.  9.24.  the  porters  were  toward  the  a.

9  Chron  28.  18.  Philistines  invaded  the  a.  of  Judah
job  9  9.  which  maketb  the  chambers  pf  the  a.

.37.  9.  out  of  the  a.  cometh  the  whirlwind
.39.  26.  and  stretch  her  wings  toward  the  s.

Psal.  75.  6.  promotion  cometh  not  from  east  nor  9,

89.  12.  the  north  and  a.  thou  hast  created  them
107.  3.  and  gathered  them  trom  the  noith  and  j.

120.  4.  turn  our  captivity  as  the  streams  in  the
Ecci.  1.  6.  the  wind  goeth  toward  the  a.

11  3.  if  the  tree  talleth  toward  the  a.  01  the  noith
Isa.  21. 1.  as  whirlwinds  in  the  a.  pass  through
30  6.  the  burden  of  the  beasts  of  the  a.

43.  6.  and  l  will  say  to  the  a.  keep  not  back
Jer  13.  19-  the  cities  of  the  a.  shall  be  shut  up
17  26.  from  the  a.  bringing  burnt  ofl  eiings
32.  44.  men  shall  buy  fields  m  the  cities  of  the  a.

.3.3.  1.3.  in  the  cities  of  the  a.  shall  the  fl°cks  Pass
Ezek  20.  46.  set  thy  face  toward  the  .9.  and  drop  thy
word  toward  the  a.  prophesy  against  the  a.  field
47.  say  to  forest  of  a.  faces  from  a.  to  nor.  be  bunot
01  4<  my  sword  against  all  flesh  from  $,  to  noith

40  2.  by  which  was  as  the  frame  of  a  city  on  a.

24  .'after  that  he  brought  me  toward  the  a.

44.  and  their  prospect  was  toward  the  a.

41  11.  ami  another  door  was  toward  the  a.

46'.  9.  shall  go  out  by  way  of  the  a  gate;  and  h
I  that  entereth  by  the  way  of  a.  go  forth  by  nor th
Dan  8  9.  a  little  horn  waxed  great  toward  the  a.

'  ll.  5.  and  the  king  of  the  a.  shall  be  strong
6.  king’s  daughter  of  the  a.  shall  come  to  nortl
9.  king  of  the  a.  shall  come  into  his  kingdom
11.  king  of  the  a.  shall  be  moved  with  choler
15.  and  the  arms  of  the  A.sha  not  withstand
25.  and  the  king  of  the  a.  shall  be  stirred  up
29.  he  shall  return,  and  come  toward  the  a.

40.  the  king  of  the  a.  shall  push  at  him

Chad  19  they  of  a.  shall  possess  the  mount  of  Esau

20  the  captivity  shall  possess  the  cities  of  the  a.
Hab  3.  +  3.  God  came  from  a.  from  mount  Phi  an
Zec/i  7.7.  when  men  inhabited  the  a.  and  the  plain

q  14  God  shall  go  with  whirlwinds  ot  the  a.

14.  4'.  half  of  the  mountain  remove. toward  the  f.
Mat.  12.  42.  queen  ot  the  a.  shall  rise  m  judgment
juke  13. 29.  come  from  a.  to  sit  down  with  Abral.an
Arts  8  26.  saying,  arise,  ami  go  toward  the  a.

Rev  21  13.  on  the  a.  the  gates,  on  the  west  three
SOUTH-Wer.

Non,  34  3  s. -border  the  outmost  coast  ot  salt-sea
Josh  15.  2.  the  s. -border  of  Judah  from  the  shore
SOUTPI-cowwfr.y.

Gen.  20.  1.  Abraham  sojourned  toward  the  a.-  1  (

°4.  62.  for  Isaac  dwelt  in  the  s. -country
Tosh  11.  16.  Joshua  took  al l  the  s.-country,  I  -  y-
Zecii.  6.  6.  the  grisled  go  forth  toward  the  a.-c  -  V
SOUTIJ-Aa/c.  ^  ,  j-.jj

Ezek.  20.  46.  prophesy  ag.  the  forest  of  the  .-A
SOU  \W-land.  ,

Josh.  15. 19.  thou  hast  given  mes.-land,  Judy.  .

SOU  in -quarter  _

Num.  34.  .3.  s.-quarter  from  Zll|1  o^Kimth-je^rim
Josh.  18.  ^.s,quarteT  from  end  of  Ivirjatbje

1  Sam.  30.  27.  to  them  which  were  in  a. -.Raw
SOU  I  H-AtaA.  ,

Fxod  °6  18.  twenty  boards  on  the  A.-AWA..*-'*

Num.  2?10.  on  , -(^a  shall  ’ be  sta  otKeuto

10  6.  camps  which  lie  on  the  a.  AitfAgo
E*ek  42. 18.  he  measured  the  s.-sule  500 1  ,

47  1.  the  waters  came  at  the  s.-side  of  the  altar


s  o  w

*£tek.  48.  16.  and  the  s.-side  4500  measures,  33
.  T  SOU']  H-ward.

13-  14.  I  onl  said  to  Abraham  look  s.-ward
-V'"',-,3-.'.9-  Kohat  •  P^ch  on  side  of  tabern.  ,v
13.  17.  Moses  said,  get  ye  up  this  way  s.-ward
Dan.  8.  4.  1  saw  the  ram  pushing  s.-ward
SOU  I  II -west.

Acts  2 7.  12.  Pheniee  lying  towards  the  s.-west
r  i  o-  .  .SOU  I  Yl-wind.

ok'  he  q,'-Ufcteth  ,hf  earth  by  the  s.-wind
‘A  by  us  p?wer  he  brought  in  the  s.-wind
/  /'  ‘  fx  *?:  come,  thou  s.-wmd ,  blow  on  my  garden
a//, l ^  when  see  s.-w.  blow  there  will  be  heat
Acts  .  13.  and  when  the  s.-wind  blew  softly

sow.

v  /  et.  2.  22.  the  s.  washed,  to  her  wallowing  in  mire

Slofilfi,eo’  1'°  flatter  seeds  on  the  earth,  Gen.

Mat^i^io  2f  A  [2]  To  Preach  the  gospel,
A>  J  '  4  t  or.  9.  11.  [3]  To  disperse

worldly  goods  among  the  poor,  2  Cor.  9.  6  N1

iXit6,  h.unef’  and  laid  hke  wed  in  the  earth,
42  43?  1  Tottenness  and  putrefaction,  1  Cor.  15.

'He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh,  Gal.  6.  8.  One  that
leads  such  a  course  of  life  as  , s  agreeable  to  las
XT'  that  la?tth  0Ut  )lis  estate,  and
tt'J  g  f  l  Uj  tUne  a!“  pnms  m  the  service  of
vie  flesh,  and  so  makes  provision  only  for  this

JU6S(27lt  i?j6,

tie  that  soweth  to  the  spirit,  Gal.  6.  8.  He  that
layeth  out  his  estate,  or  spendeth  his  time,  strength
and  talents  for  the  glory  of  God,  in  obedience  to
the  commands,  motions,  and  dictates  <  f  the  Spirit  ■
and  particularly  that  useth  his  estate  for  the
t°‘r“’ and

lie  that  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth,  John  4.  36

th/ZP  ‘e<ir  aUd,  °hn  the  Baptist-  mho  hare  sowed
X  feeds  of  instruction  among  the  people formerly ,
and  taught  them  the  principles  of  saving  truth;
and  you,  my  disciples,  that  succeed  them,  whose
ministry  J  will  use  tn  bringing  people  to  embrace
me  and  my  doctrine,  thereby  to  perfect  those
ting  meW/UC  ‘  Jor™erly  taught  them  concern-

'Ge*1-,  47 •  23.  here  is  seed  for  you  and  ye  sh  f  the  land

Je  \a\AV  S/,X  y?ars  :'•>  l-n<l,  ir.  25  3  ^

Tev .1 9. 1  O  s h  a  1 1  no  t  # .  w  j  t  li  mingled  seed.  Dent. 22  9
ok4’  n  u  enSeventl  >'ear  thou  sl.alt  not  #.  n
-0.  we  sha  1  not  s.  nor  gather  in  our  increase
or^'ir  6  Shall  #  the  eighth  year
2b.  1 6.  ye  shall  f.your  seed  in  vain,  for  enemies
■2  Rings  19.  29.  in  the  third  year  #.  ye, //a  37  3n
r  p  th7  ,t  iat  s-  wickedness  reap  the  same
p]-f-  1t*’®n„(et  m|  s;  and  let  another  eat
1  Of!’ ffields  and  p*ant  vineyards
Frri  A  AA,  If1  tears  shall  reap  in  joy
6  hAY  4‘  he  tbat  obscrveth  the  wind,  shall  not#

it,  or  ol  \thy  seed-  and  111  the  evening

qn’no'24'  dotl?  tb?  Plowman  plow  all  day  to  "

3°'  In'  fd' e  ra,ln  of  seed. thou  shalt  -v.  ground  withal

Je'r  4  3b  hreA  f  Ti  ye  that  '■  beside  all  waters
, •  A  I  -n  fall°w-§ round, #.  not  among  thorns
31 . 2< .  I  will  #  the  house  of  Israel  with  seed

Hoi  'o'ot  'Cr  ?h,a  -i,e  bu.lld  house  nor  #.  seed
in  m'  2'1  w*11  L  her  unto  me  in  the  earth

AUr  iVt0fi  °UrSf  \es  "?  righteousn.  reap  in  mercy

tech  m50  t‘l0AnaltA  but  thou  shalt  not  reap  *
•“frA.  lO.  9.  l  will  .v.  them  among  the  oeonle  F

Mat.  6.  26.  the  fowls  of  the  air  , Aot  ArTeap

13.  3.  a  sower  vvent  forth  to  s.  when  he  sowed  some

seeds  tell  by  the  way-side,  Mark  4.  3.  Luke  8  T

/'}' d‘'*1n0tthT  f'  good  seed  in  thy  field  '

AQ  o\  -  24'  c°nsl,lcr  ravens  they  ueithei  o.  nor  rean
19.  21.  reapest  that  thou  didst  not  f  °o  p

,  SOW  I'D.  '  *'

'y™-  X  ’2.  Isaac  s.  in  that  land  same  year  received
I5'  ^bimelech  i.  Shechem  with  salt

M  \l3c4‘  Yh1n  he  fell  by  the  way -side  and

the  fowls  devoured  them,  Mark  4.  4.  'Luke  8  5
24.  which  r.  good  seed  ||  25.  the  enemy  .v.  tares,  39
8U\v.  ,See  Sew.

_  SO  WEDS  r.

Veut.  11.  10.  not  as  where  thou  s.  thy  seed

11*  37-  if  a  carcase  fall  on  sowing  seed  to  be  c
HoUtn  V'hl0  ?  rongh  valley  neither  eared  nor  s
OQ  oi  6St  tbe  ^ruit  of  f*1^  seed  be  defiled
29.  23  generation  see  that  land  is  not#,  nor  bear

pit;  o-  3i'1W|bem'Sra?1  had  ‘he  Midianites  came
Ten  \  0*1 1 *eht  is  #.  tor  the  nghteous.  and  gladness
4n'  os'  ll  iier>f  llng,  '-  >y  t,le  brooks  shall  withei
6  n  A  t  n0t  b,e  ‘)lanted  yea,  shall  not  be  s
rJ;  00  ,1"  garden  causeth  the  things  #.  to  sprint

13  2t'|‘b°h  Wen,eSf  af,er  me  in  a  land  notl  *
have  #.  wheat,  but  shall  reap  thorns
Lzeh.  ob.g  ]  am  for  you,  and  ve shall  be  tilled  and  t
■fe8j7jihetl  h.ave  •'•the  wind,  shall  reap  whirlwind
1,  }'  i4'  ‘  '.a*  no  more  of  thy  name  be  .1

Mat'  36joe|at'T  Y/nnch,  and  bring  in  little
o£eoi  catcheth  away  that  was  a.  Mark  4  15

itrVs  1«hmrd  "’an- reaping  where  thou  hast  not#
ir^4'  16'thesf  are  they  which  .v.  onstonv  ground
18.  .v.  among  thorns  ||  20.  are  #.  in  good  ground

1  Cor  Ohlli  Wi A0  13  ’• 13  less  than  all  the  seeds
15  4«Vil  have  t°  you  spiritual  things

44  VA  l  corruption  1:  43.  is  #.  in  dishonour

2  ct’/  Q  m  'm^ltln1^  b°d-V’  raised  a  spiritual  body

Jarnf  m  t  ,  fr  %y?UrSred  J'- alld  increase  fruits
Jam.X  18.  the  frult  righteousness  is  #.  in  peace

Jer  %  \°f,  give  seed  to  the  #.  and  bread

Main  3  L  S  ‘rom  Babylon,  and  him  that
-that.  13.  .3.  behold,  a  s.  went  forth  to  sow,  v  hen  he

18U heaSr°^eme<  Srby  Wry  side’  Hark  4.3  Luke  8.5
M  therefore  the  parable  of  the  .1.

-2  Cor  u  1?n'f'A°Wvt  l,!  lf;  "0rd*  these  by  way  side
■3  Cot.  9.  10.  now  he  that  ministereth  seed  to  the  .1.

n  oUWEST.

1  A  mi5'  36'  which  thou  s.  is  not  quickened
37. thou  r.not  that  body  that  shall  be, but  bare  grain


SPA

„  „  SOWETH

u  uAJm  he(i^'  d iscord  ||  19.  he  that  #.  discord
in'  to]'nn  that#,  righteousness  be  a  sure  reward

^'8  he  hatV#r<  ni‘anf'  Slrifr  and  a  whisperer
Imnc' 013  /  rnqciitv  Shall  reap  vanity

Vaf  t6-  **/ ^^ring h’ M  whl!?' bountifully
/■  foi  whatsoever  a  man  #.  that  shall  lie  rear.
8.  that  #.  to  his  flesh,  shall  reap  corruption  ;  but  lie
that#,  to  the  Spirit,  shall  reap  life
everlasting.

,  ,,  „„  SOWING.

a*’}1'  3T-  !r  tn.elr  carcase  fall  on  any  #.  to  be  sown
26.  5.  and  the  vintage  shall  reach  to  the#,  time
. ,  T  SPACE.

39*m9A4j  Jac:obab?de  with  him  the  #.  of  a  month
,  ld.  and  put  a  #.  between  drove  and  drove

30  if  it  he  nnt  of.seven  Sabbat hs  of  years  shall  be
loth  3  a  n  not  *;ed|eenied  in  the  #.  of  a  full  year
1  Ram  'od  be  r>f"  between  you  and  it

/•zA  9  i  '  fnr  a  ^e/tYeen  Dav.  company  and  Saul’s
fer  o?{  A  f<Y-a.  grace  hath  been  shewed

r  ,  eeH-  within  the#,  of  two  full  years
Luke  22.  59.  about  the  #.  of  one  hour  after

5*  '  •  about  #  of  three  hours  his  wife  came  in
734-o c0!2man(^ 'c( !. t°  put  the  apostles  forth  a  little#
join  °dered  s,lain  bLeasts  by  ‘be  #.  of  forty  years
A  eld  eer  fs  about,tbe  '•  Of450  years3
to1  r Gi?d  g  Y  tuei,r‘,,i5aul  for  the  #.  of  40 years
19  8.  he  spake  boldly  the  #.  of  three  months
10.  and  this  continued  by  the  #.  of  two  years

°0  31  bl  thrinl if  ab°uU'  tvvo  ho  15  cried

be  J-.ot  ,tbree  years  I  ceased  not

ttr'o-o] 7 j ’1  ral"ed  not  by  the  #.  of  three  years
«  i’Vi"1'  §ave;  her#,  to  repent  of  her  fornication
14  lo^andlf  s'lence  nbout  the  #.  of  half  an  hour
7'  In'  li  blood  ca!ne  by  the#,  of  1600  furlongs
17.  10.  when  come,  he  must  continue  a  short  #

1  c7"  *  _  c-  P  A  C  tiS «

w/Tl'it5"t'  an.d  Pillars  were  square  in  prospect
fX  oJ'X a  ,n0U;  t[u  Clfy  was  broad  in  f.  V  P

I?-  ‘'c  sbaH  toss  thee  into  country  large  of#
33.  f  21.  the  Lord  will  be  to  us  a  place  broa°d  of' s
n  SPAKE.

G4W3n9;.14;  L°twent  out,  and  #.  to  his  sons  in-law
^4.30.  saying,  thus#,  the  man  unto  me

30  in'  iTL'i®  hf  yeU’  witb  ,bern-  “  ache  I  came
\o  1/  lt,c<irPe.to  Pass  as  she  s.  to  Joseph  day  by  dav
23 1  f'  b|at  “  P'lat‘  s-  to  y  ou,  saying,  ye  are  spies
4.T5o-01,,  e  ■*;  ,unto  tbcm  by  an  interpreter
on  ■  0  d  man  of  whom  ye  #.  is  he  yet  alive  3
509' .^“nsy'ouryoungerhrotherof  whom  ye  #  ?
Num\oni  Airpb  wept  when  they  #.  unto  him'
o[  k  '' /d  3  ,  iani  and  Aar°n  w  against  Moses
/in  ti  1  PA'  agamst  God  and  Moses
28  68  T4Ad  U  f°.you’  and  ye  would  not  hear
j,  ?ba,l  bring  thee  by  way  whereof  1  #

S'lVh,  fh?AA°  ‘be  master  Of  die  house
ttuth  4.  1.  behold,  the  kinsman  of  whom  Boaz  c

j'Ao'i  ;,  h I  hi°nW  IIannah  s-  in,her  heart,  lips  moved
civ  or'  to  d  him,  saying,  on  this  manner  #.  David
-0.  *6.  nevertheless  Saul  #.  not  anv  thing  that  day
30.  6.  for  the  people  #.  of  stoning  Him  y

~  12.  18.  while  child  was  alive,  we  #.  to  him

3Ar‘2^th.'is4d'pW  11  ehhr  yels-  bel'?ld’  Jonathan
„‘r~.  dlus  they  #.  before  king  Solomon

'9 T'#  i2' aCiTrt1ing  t0  fayin”  vvhich  Elisha.  #.

lVvA'ot  in  n  A  tbus  and  thus#,  he  to  me
0  CAron' m  Went  "P  at  saying  which  Gad  #.

\o  00  J,8'  1  b  °,ne'f-  saying  after  this  manner
in  ;x-  Hezekiah  #.  comfortably  to  them,  32  6
Ad 1  o',0hlS  serva.nts#.  yet  more  ag.  the  Lord  God
,‘9j  ley  f  a8.ainst  the  God  of  Jerusalem
yf,  ‘iVoAY-  fo  Manasseli  in  the  name  of  Lord
‘l-sti,  3 V  ;  AemCfhl  dr' ,5''  hflf  ni  speech  of  Ashdod
T„h  o  V o4Vu  cat11e  U;  ‘>;  ss>  when  they  #.  daily  to  him
10  j'o13|' they  Sat  dpwn,  and  none  #.  a  word  to  him
00'  00'  faiose>  and  they  against  me
3«‘  Iny  woids  they  #.  not  again

30  3  my  k*  n0t>  i’uf  stood  still,  answered  not
-h  in39'3'h  f  burned,  then  #.  I  with  my  toivme

106  33 3so ’tl  TP'  again?,G°d,  they  said,  can  G.
Pvt;  ?‘fi  1  'e  ^  ""advisedly  with  his  lips
rZt'o°v}'  the.n!an  #.  to  Ithiel  and  Ucal
-  A  ^  10-  my  beloved  #.  and  said,  rise  up, my  love
/r'A  fi3’ /T  lailed  when  he  #.  I  sought  him
0!;  S'  forASfi? rkTeneT  Hnd  leard’ tbey  not  aright
/-A  A  ir  in  }  S'  l  Ted  °ut’. 1  cned  vi°Ience
f)an  7n18;rnP  rt0  ,bf  Pe0P,e  111  the  morning
ij  j  I  Cp°  f-eat  words  which  the  horn A.

Vai  ?'  iit?f?P  !iT  #.  tremNing,  exalted  him.

Tint  o'  R  ti  -t,fetlred  pord  •*'•  often  one  to  another
M  l'  9ii#  8’/  J11 1®. be  these  to  them,  17.5.  I  £6.  47.
Mark  5.  35.  I  14.  43.  Luke  8.  49.  1  22.  47,  60

AVAA  WaS  cast.0ut>  dumb#.  12.  22.  Luke  11.  14'

A  4o.  they  perceived  that  be  #.  of  them

o'A  hA'  as  be  t0  .our  fathers,  to  Abraham
5'  n'  vbey  understood  not  the  saying  which  he  #.

9.  H.  he  #.  unto  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God

cc  °/J"S  decease  to  be  at  Jerusalem

65.  other  things  blasphemously  #.  they  ag  him
.4.  6.  remember  how  he  #.  to  s  ou  in  Galilee
as  .lbey  tbus  •'•.  esus  stood  in  midst  of  them
dohn  l.  15.  John  said,  this  was  he  of  whom  1  #

aAVAiA11  '•  °P?nly  of  bim  for  fear  of  Jews
A  07  fh°fficer,S  Sa.ld-  "ever  man  #.  like  this  man

nVo  whAT  erstn°d  ,l0ttllat  he  ’•  of  the  Father

10.  6.  svhat  things  they  were  which  he  #.  to  them


G  ..li  li  f  t  i  "etc  wiutii  ne  #.  to  tnem

I?1  jo' 'I  tblI{"s  that  John  #.  of  this  man  were  true
,4;  13-  bosvheit  Jesus  #.  ot  his  death

O  oonm  bc  n0-tiOf  hims-  *3e  prophesied  that  Jes.
*.9.  others  said ,  an  s.  to  him

38.  saying  might  be  fulfilled  which  he  #.  18.  9  3°
,41*  when  ne  saw  bis  glory,  and  #.  of  him
0#  2u'  disciples  looked,  doubting  of  svhom  he  #.
24.  he  should  ask  who  it  should  be  of  whom  he  #.

uo  man  knew  for  what  intent  he#,  this
”!•  this  #.  he,  signifying  by  what  death  he


SPA

Acts  6.  10.  not  able  to  resist  spirit  by  which  he  s
A6i,gaVA.enJt0  those  things  whicn  Philip#

10.  44.  while  Peter  yet  .(.these  words,  1 1 .  Ghost  fell

14'  f5'an(eiso  v'  fh  tth°Se  tb,ngs  that  were  spoken
10  (V  f  !  f-.tbat  a  great  multitude  believed
on'  qo  but  ,i'  e3'1  ot  that  way  before  the  multitude
20.  38  sorrowing  most  tor  the  words  which  be  #
h-  they  beard  not  voice  of  him  that  #.  to  me
Oft'ow,  ne  t  LUS,'ii  Inr  himself,  Festussaid
l  r'.A 3i'S'  lHe  ri°  y  Gh°stby  Esaiasthe  proph
14  5  Was  I*.  chlld-  I  #.  as  a  child

J4)  A  1  'v0"  d  that  ye  all  #.  with  tongues

hA'  4*  A'  Ylleir-  I3  tb,en  the  blessedness  ye  #.  of -
14,’  ot  which  tribe  Moses  #.  nothing  of  jiriest
o  p  ?5i  0  ’°i  used  birn  that  on  earth  1
/?Af  Ail  'r1?  y  me>n  of  Go(l  s‘  as  tbey  were  moved

13  iV  Vhih  nned  n  Se1  the  voice  tbat  with  me

13.  11.  1  beheld  another  beast  #.  as  a  dragon
,,  ,  ,  God  SPAKE.

Lrod^n1^  JrAb  caiVnd  P'ace  where  Gods.  Beth  el
/  w7  1  c1;/'  ,ds-  ,a“  tbfeSe  words  saying,  1  am  1  d
r/*rtV  Atlle  Pord  °ur  God  s.  to  us  in  Horeh
To#/i  3. 14.  notone  thing  failed  of  good  things  G  s
ff’AA26'  llo,w  in  the  bush  Gods,  to  him  '
John  9.  29.  we  know  that  God  #.  unto  Moses

ileb  1  6i  Tld  fh  S‘  °n  tbis  u  ise’  that  bis  seed
tieb.  1.  1.  God  whe >  #.  in  time  past  to  the  fathers

oee  Lord,  expressly.

Gen  04  VrX Gorf  SPAKE,  implicitly.
i  ,t0  me>  and  sware  to  me,sayin«

y-  J7-  behold  the  man  whom  I  #.  to  thee  of  "
-8.  17.  and  the  L.  hath  done  to  him  as  he  #  bs  me

AAA'  VI'/'  ■  f  Yi?rd  w,itb  any  0‘  tribes  of  Israel  3
23,  3.  God  said  the  rock  of  Israel  #.  to  me

1  K  ings  6  _  12.  word  which  I  #.  unto  David  thy  father
o°I\6'  hatb  fulfilled  that  which  he  #

o'"/24-  b®f- to  him,  and  gave  him  a  sign

00  7  L9'  he  1*  a,nd  lt-was  d°ne,  he  commanded
Unt°  jbYm  ln  the  cloudy  pillar
105.  3L  he  #  and  there  came  flies  and  lice
/  34'A  slo anA^ ‘be  locusts  came,  and  caterpillars
Ter'  76  1 3  T  Wh.en  1  >'?  d,d  "ot  hear,  66.  4.

00  7i  13'  AA40  you,  rising  up  early  and  speakino
14  1  i  'i  l°Atiiy0Ur  father-s’, 1  brought  them  °
lo  I4'  .sent  them  not,  neither  #.  unto  them
00'  ti  which  I  commanded  not,  nor#,  it  •

31  on  !/'  Pnt0 .tbee  in  thy  prosperity,  but  saidst
JA’/0.’  ‘A  ,‘Y'e  1  i'  gainst  him,  1  remember  him
inn  V  4  beald  a  voice  of  one  that  #  2  0
Dan  'c  V'///  man,  clothed  with  lrien"
r,o  ‘v-fb  cAfiriI?ed  'ns  words  which  he  #.
nos.  12.  4.  found  him  in  Beth  el,  there  he  #  with  n

L/xeAs  1/  aS  heJ'i  by  m0Ah  of  bis  holy'  Prophets
24.  44.  these  are  the  words  which  1  #.  to  you

Heh.  4.  4.  he  #.  in  a  certain  place  on  this  wise
T  ,  SPAKE8T.

\i°0  ‘AAi’iAr  A011  tbe  ?’ain  s’- to  tbe  woman  3
17-  the  silver  thou  #,  of  also  in  mine  ears

1  Ram.  28.  21.  hearkened  to  words  which  thou  #

1  Aiwg#8.  24.  thou  #.  also  with  thy  mouth,  and  hast
oe.  1  .  fulfilled  it  with  thine  hand,  2  Chron  6  15
26.  let  thy  word  be  verified  which  thou  #.  to  Dav

aS'  0ldiS3  Sepa,rate  as  tbou  by  Moses
Psal  ro  h'AA  V’lth  them  A.om  heaven
A,  ( R9A9'  -then  L 10u  s‘  ln  Vlsicn  to  thy  Holy  One
Jei .  48.  27.  since  thou  #  .of  him,  skippedst  for  jov

th  Sha11  A  fhe  le??th>  and  a  #.  the
t>]  eadth  of  the  brenst-plate  of  judgment  o

\Sam  17.  4.  Goliath's  height  six  cubits  and  V#9'  9'

r'Lto'  In'  Rhn  ha,h  meted  out  heaven  with  the#  f
Law.S.^O.shaH  women  eat  their  childr.  of  a  #  lone-
£zek.  43. 13.  tbe  Ixmler^of  the^altar  shall  be  a  #.  S

ha.  48.  13.  my  righHiand^hath  #.  the  heavens

Isa.  3.  f  19.  I  will  take  away  the  #.  ornaments
„  SPARE.

06  S'en4!  All'  fhenPJhCe  f?r  ‘A  fifA  n^teous
45  t  nl,  J'  the  plate  tor  their  sakes
+  *et  n°t  your  eye  s.  your  stuff

°gU0Q^i  »'  jh°u  shalt  not#,  nor  conceal  him
-9.  '0.  Lord  will  not#,  him,  but  anger  of  lord

XNefn\%500' ///’  g°’  destrov;  Amale.k,  #.  them  not
j/h  ‘3-  2.2;  and  #.  me  according  to  thy  mercy
■r?  13  hiAl  a,n  u0t  '  have  not  concealed  words
A'  I-'  iA  .fTeth  re!n.s  asunder,  doth  not  #.

07'  00  though  he  #  it  and  forsake  it  not
30  jo  vJ  God  shall  cast  upon  him,  and  not  #.
o°'  z1  Athey  SA  not  t0  SP“  111  my  face

10  iq39!,  13i  9/'  that  I  may  recover  strength

13  he  shall  #  the  poor  and  needy,  and  save

9^9«6j34'  he/111  'A  #.  in  the  dav- of  vengeance
19.  18.  let  not  thy  soul  #.  for  his  crying

iq'  A  \9i'  people  as  fue‘,  "0 man  shalf#.  brother

13.  18.  their  eye  shall  not#,  children

oO.  14.  and  he  shall  break  it,  he  shall  not#.

54.  2.  #  not  lengthen  cords,  strengthen  stakes

Jer'  A  a  rd,'/'  n,0t’  I'A  up  V?ice  likfc  a  trumpet
Jo\-  i3'.  14’,  |Y‘“  not  s-  them,  Ezek.  24.  14.

7-  he  shall  not  #.  them  ||  50.  14.  #.  no  arrows
ye  "other  young  men,  destroy  her  host
L  {‘/d  -ii  ‘.Y*11  dmun.  thee,  nor  shall  inineeve  #

o  5  1  baVC  any  pity’,7‘  4*  9-  I  8. 18.  |  9.  10.

9.  5.  let  not  your  eye  #.  neither  have  ye  pity

Joel  2.  17.  let  them  say,  #.  thy  people,  O  Lord
./owa/i  4.  l  L  should  not  I  #.  N  ineveh  that  great  city  3

rJ  Git) .  1.  17.  min  not  c  rnutmiw#  1 1 ..  „  l .  . .  Yi  .  •  J


i  iV  V  ^  1  AC,J  maltreat  city  '

Mai  \  andr?rtA,COntinually  t0  slay  the  nations
,/■  jV  Wl|l, s-  them  as  a  man  spareth  his  son
Luke  15.  17.  hired  servants  have  bread  enough  to  s
Rom.  11 .  21.  take  heed,  lest  he  also  #.  not  tffee

2  Cor  AA^’hqtn  S*lad  iaVe  trouble,  but  1  #.  you
-//  tbatto  you  I  came  not  as  yet  to  Corinth
13.  that  it  1  come  ajrain,  I  will  not  s
,  c  ,  SPARED.

1  Ram.  15.  9.  but  Saul  and  the  people  #.  Aea»

15.  for  the  people  #.  the  best  of  the  sheep  °

24.  10.  some  bade  me  kill  thee,  but  mine  eye  #

20i)arrZ\J.2'u;  S'  t0  of  ‘ds  own  flock  and  herd"

21.  7.  the  king  # .  Mephibosheth  son  of  lonathan
pt  ^/H5.  20.  master  hath  .#.  Naaman  this  Syrian
Psal.  78.  50.  he  s%  not  their  soul  from  death

463


S  P  E


S  P  E


S  P  E


Ezek.  20. 1*.  mine  eye  .?.  them  from  destroying
Jonah  4.  t  10.  Lord  said,  thou  hast  s.  the  gourd
Horn.  8.  82.  he  that  s.  not  his  own  Son  but  dehveied

11.  21.  if  God  s.  not  the  natural  branches
2  Pet.  2.  4.  if  God  s.  not  the  angels  that  sinned

*  5.  and  s.  not  the  old  world,  but  saved  Noah

SPARK  l  II.

Prov.  13.  24.  he  that  .?.  his  rod,  hateth  his  son
17.  27.  he  that  hath  knowledge  s.  his  words

21.  26.  but  the  righteous  giveth,  and  s.  not  _

Mai.  3.  17.  1  will  spare  them,  as  a  man  s.  his  son
SPARING..

Acts  °0  29.  wolves  shall  enter  in,  not  s.  the  nock
SPARINGLY.

2  Cor.  9.  6.  this  I  say,  he  who  soweth  s.  shall  reap  s.
SPARK.

Job  18.  5.  and  the  s.  of  his  fire  shall  not  shine
Isa.  1.  31.  and  the  maker  of  it  shall  be  as  a  s.
SPARKS.

Job  5.  7.  man  is  born  to  trouble,  as  s.  fly  upward
41.  19.  out  of  mouth  go  burning  lamps,  .s',  ot  hre
Prov.  26. 1 18.  as  madmen  who  casteth  s.  and  death
Isa.  50.  11.  that  compass  yourselves  about  with  s.
Dan.  3.  t  22.  the  y.  of  the'fire  slew  those  men
SPARK  LED.

Ezek.  1.  7.  s.  like  the  colour  of  burnished  brass
SPARROW.

Psal.  84.  3.  vea,  the  s.  hath  found  an  house
102.  7.  I  am  as  a  s.  alone  upon  the  house-top
SPARLtOWS.

Lev.  14.  +  4.  take  for  him  two  s.  alive  and  clean
Mat.  10.  29.  are  not  two.?,  sold  fora  farthing?

31.  are  of  more  value  than  many  .?.  Luke  12.  7.
Luke  12.  6.  are  not  five  y.  sold  for  two  farthings  .
SPAT.

John  9.  6.  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  s.  on  ground
SPEAK.

Gen.  18.  27.  I  have  taken  on  me  to  s.  to  God,  31.

24.  50.  we  cannot  v.  unto  thee  bad  or  good

31.  24.  take  heed  thou  s.  not  to  .lacob  good  or  bad

32.  4.  thus  shall  ye  s.  to  my  lord  Esau,  19.

44.  16.  what  shall  we  say  :  what  shall  we  s.  ?

Exod.4.  14.  Aaron.  I  know  that  he  can  r.  well
5  23.  since  l  came  to  s.  to  Pharaoh  in  thy  name
7!  2.  thou  shalt  s.  all  that  I  command  thee

*  23.  2.  shalt  not  s.  in  a  cause  to  decline  atter  many
29.  42.  where  1  will  meet  you,  to  r.  there  to  thee
32.  12.  wherefore  should  Egyptians  .?.  and  say  ?

3t.  35.  until  he  went  in  to  s.  with  the  Lord
Num.  12.  8.  were  ve  not  afraid  to.>.  against  Moses

14.  15.  who  have  heard  the  fame  of  thee  will  s.

21.  27.  why  they  that  .r.  in  proverbs  say,  come
2°.  8  l  will  bring  word,  as  the  Lord  shall  s.  tome
*35.  the  word  1  y.  to  thee,  that  thou  shalt  r.

23.  5.  return  to  Balnk,  and  thus  thou  shalt  s .

12.  must  1  not  take  heed  to  .v.  that  which  the  Lord

27.  7.  the  da iu» liters  of  Zelopheliad  s.  right

Dent.  18.  19.  words  which  he  shall  s.  in  my  name
20.  who  shall  presume  toy.  a  word  in  my  name

26.  5.  and  thou  shalt  y.  and  say  before  the  Lord
Josh  22.  24.  your  children  might  s.  to  our  children

1  Sam.  25.  I?',  a  son  of  Belial  that  a  man  cannot  y.  to

2  Sam.  3.  19.  and  Abner  went  also  to  s.  to  David

27.  Joab  took  him  aside  to  s.  with  him  quietly

7.17.  accord,  to  this  vision  so  did  Nathans',  to  Dav.
19.  10.  why  s.  ye  not  one  word  of  bringing  back
20.16.  come  near  hither  that  1  may  s.  with  thee
18.  they  were  wont  to  s.  in  old  time,  saying
4  Kings  2. 19.  she  went  to  s.  to  him  for  Adonijah
12.7.  wilt  s.  good  words  to  them,  2  Chron.  10.  7-

10.  saying,  thus  shalt  thou  s.  to  this  people

22.  24.  spirit  from  me  to  s.  to  thee,  2  Chr.  18.  23.

2  Kings  18.27.  hath  my  mastersent  me  to  thy  master
and  to  thee  "to  s.  these  words  ?  Isa.  36.  12.

1  Chron.  17. 18.  whatcan  David  s.  more  to  thee?

2  Chron.  32.  17.  wrote  letters  to  rail  and  s.  ag.  God
Neh.  13.  24.  and  could  not .«.  in  the  lews’  language
Esth.  6.  4.  to  s.  to  the  king  to  hang  Mordecai

Job  8.  2.  how  long  wilt  thou  s.  these  things  ?

11.5.  but,  oh  that  God  would  s.  against  thee

13.  7.  will  ye  s.  wickedly  for  G.  and  talkfor  him  ?
18.  2.  mark,  anti  afterwards  we  will  s.

27-  4.  my  lips  shall  not .?.  wickedness  nor  deceit
32.  7.  I  said,  days  should  s.  and  teach  wisdom

36.2.  shew  that  1  have  yet  to  s.  on  God’s  behalf
37  .  20.  if  a  man  .?.  he  shall  be  swallowed  up

41.  3.  will,  he  s.  soft  woids  unto  Jliee  J
Psal.  2.  5.  then  shall  he  s.  to  them  in  his  wrath

5.  6.  thou  shalt  destroy  them  that  s.  leasing
12.  2.  they  s.  vanity,  they  s.  with  a  double  heart
.  17.  10.  with  their  mouth-  they  s.  proudly

28.3.  which  s.  peace  to  their  neighbours

29.  9.  in  his  temple  doth  ever}'  oiie  s.  of  his  glory
31.  18.  which  s.  grievous  things  proudly  ag.  right.
35.  20.  for  they  s,  not  peace,  but  devise  deceitful

28.  my  tongue  shall  s.  of  thy  righteousness
38.  12.  they  s.  mischievous  things  all  day  long
40.  5.  if  I  would  declare  and  y.  of  them

41.5.  enemies  .'',  evil  of  me,  when  shall  he  die  ?

49.3.  my  mouth  shall  .c.  of  wisdom  and  meditation
52.  3.  lovest  lying  rather  than  to  s.  righteousness
59.  12.  and  for  cursing  and  lying  which  they  y.

63.  11.  mouth  of  them  that  s.  lies  shall  be  stopped
69.  12.  they  that  sit  in  the  gate  s.  against  me

71.  10.  for  mine  enemies  s.  against  me
73.  8.  they  are  corrupt,  they  s.  wickedly,  5.  loftily
85.8.  1  will  hear  what  the  Lord  will  s.  he  will  s.
peace  to  his  people,  but  let  them  not  turn  to  folly
94.  4.  how  long  shall  they  utter  and  s.  hard  things  ?
109.  20.  let  this  be  the  reward  of  them  that  s.  evil
115.  5.  they  have  mouths,  but  they  s.  not,  135.  16.
119.  23.  princes  also  did  sit  and  s.  against  me
172.  my  tongue  shall  s.  of  thy  word
127.  5.  they  shall  s.  with  the  enemies  in  the  gate
139.20.  for  they  s.  against  thee  wickedly
145.  6.  men  shall  s.  of  might  of  thy  terrible  acts

11.  they  shall  s.  of  the  glory  ot  thy  kingdom
21.  my  month  shall .?.  the  praise  of  the  Lord
Prov.  8. 7- my  mouth  shall  s.  truth,  and  wickedness

23.  16.  my  reins  rejoice,  when  lips  s.  right  things
Eccl.  3.  7-  a  time  to  be  silent,  and  a  time  to  s.
Cant.  7.  9.  causing  lips  of  those  that  are  asleep  to  *,

464


Isa.  8.  20.  if  they  s.  not  according  to  this  word
14.  10.  all  they  "shall  s.  and  say  unto  thee
19. 18.  five  cities  in  Egypt  shall  s.  tang,  ot  Canaan
28. 11-  with  another  tongue  shall  he  s.  to  this  peop.
29.  4.  and  thou  shalt out  ol  ihe  ground
32.4.  tongue  of  the  stammerers  shall  .?.  plainly
32.6.  for  the  vile  person  will  y.  villany
50.  4.  that  1  should  know  how  to  s.  in  season
52.  6.  they  shall  know  that  I  am  he  that  doth  s.

59.  4.  trust  in  vanity,  and  s.  lies,  conceive  nusch.
Jer.  1.7.  whatsoever  l  command  thee,  thou  shalt  s.

5. 14.  saith  the  Lord,  because  ye  y.  this  word
7.27.  thou  shalt  s.  all  these  words  to  them
9.5.  they  will  not  s.  the  truth,  taught  to  s.  lies
10.  5.  i  lols  are  upright  as  palm-trees,  they  s.  not
12.  6.  believe  not,  tho’  they  x.  fair  words  unto  thee
13. 12.  therefore  thou  shalt  s.  this  word  to  them
18.  7  at  what  instant  l  shall  s.  about  a  nation,  9.

20.  I  stood  before  thee  to  x.  good  tor  them
20.  9.  1  said,  I  will  not  s.  any  more  in  his  name

23.  16.  they  s.  a  vision  of  their  own  heart

26  2  s.  all  the  words  1  commanded  thee  to  x.  8.

*15.  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  s.  these  words
29.  24.  thus  shalt  thou  also  x.  to  Shemaiah
32!  4.  and  shall  x.  with  him  mouth  to  mouth
34*  3  he  shall  x.  with  thee  mouth  to  mouth
Peek.  2.7.  and  thou  shalt  s.  my  words  to  them
3.  10.  all  my  words  that  I  shall  x.  receive  in  heart
20.  49.  they  say  of  me,  doth  he  not  s.  parables  ?

24.  27.  and  thou  shalt  s.  and  be  no  more  dumb
32.21.  strong  among  the  mighty  shall  s.  to  him
33.  8.  if  dost  not  .v.  to  w  arn  wicked  from  his  way

10.  thus  ye  x.  ||  30.  and  s.  one  to  another

.37.  18.  when  the  children  of  thy  people  shall  s.
Dan.  2.  9.  ye  have  prepared  corrupt  words  to  x.

3.  29.  .?.  anv  thing  amiss  ag.  trie  God  of  Shadrach
7  25.  he  shall  s.  great  words  agst.  the  Most  High

11.  27.  shall  x.  lies  at  one  table,  but  not  prosper
Hab.  2.  3.  but  at  the  end  it  shall  s.  and  not  lie
Zech.  y.+  17.  corn  shall  make  the  young  men  x.

Mat.  10.  19.  how  or  w  hat  ye  shall  s.  Mark  13.  11.

20.  for  it  is  not  ye  that  x.  Mark  13.  11.

12.  34.  how  can  ye  being  evil  x.  good  things  ?

36.  every  idle  word  that  men  shall  x.  give  account
46.  his  mother  stood  without,  desiring  toy.  with

Mark  2.  7.  why  doth  this  man  thus  x.  blasphemies  ?

9  39.  shall  do  a  miracle,  that  lightly  x.  evil  ot  me
1 1. 7"l.  saying,  I  know  not  this  man  of  whom  ye  s.
It.  17.  in  my  name  they  shall  x.  with  new  tongues
Luke  1 . 19.  1  am  sent  to  x.  to  thee  and  to  shew  thee

20.  not  able  to  x.  till  these  shall  be  performed
22.  when  he  came  out  he  could  not  s.  to  them

4.  41.  he  rebuking  them,  suffered  them  not  to  s.
6.26.  woe  to  you,  when  all  men  shall x.  well  of  you
11.53.  and  to  provoke  him  to  s.  of  many  things
12.  10.  whosoever  shall  x.  a  word  ag.  Son  of  man

John  3. 11.  verily  wet.  that  we  do  know,  and  testify

9.  21.  he  is  of  age,  ask  him,  he  shall  5.  for  himselt
16.  1.3.  he  shall  not  s.  of  himself,  that  shall  he  x.

25.  when  1  shall  no  more  5.  to  you  in  proverbs
Acts  2.  7.  are  not  all  these  which  x.  Galileans  ?

11.  we  do  hear  them  x.  in  tongues  works  of  God
4.  17.  that  they  x.  to  no  man  in  this  name

18.  not  to  .v.  at  all,  5.  40.  II  20.  we  cannot  hut  x.
29.  that  with  all  boldness  they  may  x.  thy  word
6.  11.  we  have  heard  him  s.  blasphemous  words
1.3.  this  man  ceaseth  not  to  x.  blasphemous  words

10.  32.  when  he  cometh  shall  x.  unto  thee

11.  15.  as  l  her-an  to  x.  11 14.  9-  same  heard  Paul  s.

21.  .39.  I  beseech  thee  suffer  me  to  x.  to  people
2.3.  5.  thou  shalt  not  s.  evil  of  ruler  of  thy  people
26. 1.  Paul,  thou  art  permitted  to  x.  for  thyself

25.  I  s.  forth  the  words  ot  truth  and  soberness
Bom.  15.  18.  I  will  not  dare  to  x.  of  any  of  those  tli.

1  Cor.  1.10.  that  ye  all  v.  same  thing  and  no  divisions
2. 13.  which  things  also  we  s.  not  in  man’s  wisdom
.3.  1.  I  could  not  s.  to  you  as  to  spiritual  but  carnal

12.  30.  do  all  s.  with  tongues  ?  H  14.  2.3.  if  all  s.

14.  35.  it  is  a  shame  for  women  to  s.  in  church

.39.  and  forbid  not  to  x.  with  tongues

2  Cor.  2.  17.  in  the  sight  of  God  x.  we  in  Christ

4.  1.3.  we  also  believe  and  therefore  s.

12. 19.  we  s.  before  God  in  Christ,  but  for  edifying
Eph.  5. 12.  it  is  a  shame  to  s.  of  those  things  done
Col.  4.  4.  that  1  may  make  manifest,  as  1  ought  to  s.

1  Thess.  1.  8.  so  that  we  need  not  to  a-,  any  thing
2.  4.  even  so  we  s.  not  as  pleasing  men  but  God
16.  forbidding  us  to  s.  to  the  Gentiles
Tit.  .3.  2.  put  them  in  mind  to  x.  evil  of  no  man
Heb.  2.  5.  the  world  to  come,  whereof  we  s.

6.  9.  tho’  we  thus  s.  |l  9.  5.  of  which  we  cannot  s.
Jam.  1. 19.  brethren,  let  every  man  be  slow  to  s.

1  Pet.  2. 12.  whereas  they  s.  against  you  as  evil-doers
3. 10.  let  him  refrain  his  lips  that  they  x.  no  guile

16.  whereas  they  s.  evil  of  you,  as  ot  evil-doers

2  Per.  2. 10.  they  are  not  afraid  to  s.  evil  of  dignities
12.  s.  evil  of  the  things  that  they  understand  not

18.  for  when  they  x.  great  swell,  words  of  vanity
1  John  4. 5.  are  of  world,  therefore  s.  they  of  world
Jvde  8.  these  filthy  dreamers  s.  evil  of  dignities

10.  but  these  s.  evil  of  those  things  they  know  not
Bev.  2.  24.  not  known  depths  of  Satan,  as  they  s.
1.3.  15.  that  the  image  of  the  beast  should  both  s.

SPEAK,  Imperatively.

Exod.  20. 19.  s.  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  hear
Nvm.  20.  8.  x.  ye  to  the  rock  before  their  eyes
Dent.  .3.  26.  L.  said,  x.  no  more  to  me  of  this  matter

5.  27.  x.  thou  to  us  all  that  Lord  shall  s.  to  thee
Jvdg.  5. 10.  x.  ve  that  ride  on  white  asses

19.  .30.  consider,  take  advice,  and  x.  your  minds

1  Sam.  3.  9.  s.  Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth,  10.

2  Sam.  17.  6.  shall  we  do  after  his  say.  if  not  s.  thou
!  Kings  22.  1.3.  s.  that  which  is  good,  2  Chron.  18.  12.
2  Kings  18.  26. in  Syrian  language,  Isa.  .36.  11.
Esth.  5.  14.  and  to-morrow  s.  thou  to  the  king
Job  12.  8.  or  x.  to  t  e  earth,  and  it  shall  teach  thee

1.3.  22.  or  let  me  s.  and  answer  thou  me
.3.3.  32.  .v.  for  I  desire  to  justify  thee
34.  .33.  therefore  s.  what  thouknowest
Ps.  75.  5.  lift  not  your  horn,  .y.  not  with  a  stiff  neck
Prov.  23.  9.  s.  not  in  the  ears  of  a  fool
Isa.  8. 10.  s.  word,  it  shall  not  stand,  God  is  with  ns


Isa.  30.  10.  wl  o  say,  s.  unto  us  smooth  things

40.  2.  s.  ye  comfortably  to  .lerusal.  and  cry  to  bet

41.  1.  let  them  come  near,  then  let.them  .y.

56.  .3.  neither  let  the  son  of  a  stranger  .y.  saying
Jer.  1.  17.  s.  to  them  all  that  1  command  thee

2.3.  28.  hath  my  word,  let  him  s.  word  faithfully
Dan.  10.  19.  and  1  said,  let  my  lord  s.

Zech.  8.  16.  .y.  every  man  the  truth,  Eph.  4.  25.

Mat.  8.  8. only  .y.  word,  my  servant  shall  be  healed
10.27.  what  I  tell  in  darkness,  that  .y.  ye  in  light
Mark  13.  11.  what  shall  be  given  in  that  hour,  .r.  ye
Luke  12. 1.3.  s.  to  my  brother,  that  he  divide  inherit.
Acts  2.  29.  let  me  freely  s.  to  you  of  patriarch  David
5  2d.  go,  stand  and  s.  in  the  temple  to  the  people
J8.  9.  be  not  afraid,  but  .y.  hold  not  thy  peace
l  Cor.  14.  28.  let  him  s.  to  himself  and  to  God

29.  let  prophets  x.  two  or  three,  the  ether  judge
Tu.  2.  1.  .y.  the  things  that  become  sound  doctrine

15.  these  things  s.  and  exhort,  and  rebuke

Jam.  2.  12.  soy.  ye  and  do,  as  they  that  shall  be  judg.
4.  11.x.  not  evil  one  of  another,  brethren
1  Pet.  4.11.  let  him  .y.  as  the  oracles  of  God
1  SPEAK.

Exod.  19.  9.  that  the  people  may  hear  when  Is.
23.22.  but  if  thou  shalt  obey  and  do  all  that  Is.
Shim.  22.  .38.  G.  putteth  in  my  mouth  that  shal  1  /  .r.
Deut.  5. 1.  hear  judgments  which  7  ,y.  in  your  ears
11.  2.  Is.  not  with  your  childr.  whohavenot  known
1  Kings  22.  14.  what  the  Lord  saith,  that  will  I  s.

Job  9.  19.  if  I  s.  of  strength,  lo,  he  is  strong
.35.  then  would  I  x.  and  not  fear  him

1.3.  .3.  surely  I  would  .v.  to  the  Almighty

13.  hold  your  peace,  let  me  alone,  that  7  may  .<

16.  4.  1  also  could  s.  as  ye  do,  I  couid  heap  words

6.  though  7  y.  my  grief  is  not  assuaged

37.  20.’shall  it  be  told  him  that  7  .r.  I  if  a  man  sp
Psal.  45.  1.  Is.  of  things  which  1  have  made
77.  4.  1  am  so  troubled  that  7  cannot  y.

120.  7.  but  when  I  s.  they  are  for  war
Isa.  45. 19.  7  the  Lord  y.  righteousness,  T  declare

6.3.  1.  I  that  y.  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save
Jer.  1.6.  ah,  Lord,  /cannot  s.  for  1  am  a  child

6. 10.  to  whom  shall  Is.  and  give  warning  ?

28.7.  hear  this  word  that  7  y.  in  thine  ears
.38.  20.  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  which  7  y.

Ezek.  .3.27.  when  7  s.  with  thee,  I  will  open  moutl
Dan.  10. 11.  O  Daniel,  understand  words  that  7  s.
Mat.  1.3. 13.  therefore  y.  7  to  them  in  parables
John  4.  26.  Jesus  saith,  7  that  y.  to  thee  am  he

6.  63.  the  words  that  7  s.  to  you,  they  are  spirit

7.  17.  whether  it  be  of  G.  or  whether  I  s.  ot  mys

8.  26.  1  s.  to  the  world  those  things  1  heard  of  hit.

28.  as  my  Father  taught  me,  7  y.  these  things
.38.  I  s.  that  which  1  have  seen  with  my  Father
12. 49.  he  gave  commandment,  what  I  should  y.

50.  what  I  s.  as  the  Father  said  to  me.  so  7  s.

13.  18.  Is.  not  of  all,  1  know  whom  I  have  chosen

14.  10.  the  words  that  I  s.  7  y.  not  of  myself

17.  1.3.  and  these  things  Is.  in  the  world

Acts  21. 37.  may  Is.  to  thee  ?  ||  26.  26. 1  also  y.  freely
Bom.  .3.  5.  is  God  unrighteous  ?  7  y.  as  a  man

6.  19.  I  s.  after  the  manner  of  men,  Gal.  3. 15.

7.  1.  for  l  y.  to  them  that  know  the  law

11.  13.  I  s.  to  you  Gentiles,  l  am  apostle  of  Gent.

1  Cor.  6.  5.  Is.  to  your  shame,  15.  34.

7.  6.  7  y.  this  by  permission,  not  of  commandment

12.  but  to  the  rest  y.  7,  not  the  Lord
35.  and  this  Is.  for.  your  own  profit

10.  15.  I  s.  as  to  wise  men,  judge  ye  what  I  say

13.  1.  though  1  y.  with  tongues  of  men  and  angels

14.  6.  except  7  shall  y.  to  you  by  revelation

18.  7  s.  with  tongues  more  than  you  all

19.7  had  rather  y.  five  words  with  understanding

2  Cor.  6.  13.  7  y.  as  to  my  children,  be  ye  enlarged
7.  3.  7  y.  not  this  to  condemn  you,  for  I  have  said

11.  I",  that  which  1  s.  I  s.  it  not  after  the  Lord
21.  7  y.  as  concerning  reproach.  I  y.  foolishly

2.3.  are  they  ministers  ?  Is.  as  a  fool,  1  am  more
Eph.  5.  .32.  but  Is.  concerning  Christ  and  church
6.  20.  that  therein  7  mays,  boldly,  as  I  ought  toy.
Phil.  4.  11.  not  that  7  s.  in  respect  of  want

1  Tim.  2.  7.  I  s.  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not

7  will  SPEAK,  or  will  I  SPEAK.

Gen.  18.  .30.  let  not  Lord  be  angry,  and  I  will  s.  32.
Nnm.  12.  6.  and  I  will  s.  to  him  in  a  dream

8.  with  him  will  I  s.  mouth  to  mouth  apparently

24.  13.  but  what  L.  saith  that  will  I  s.  cannot  go
beyond  command,  1  Kings  22.  14.  2  Chr.  18. 13.
Deut.  32.  1.  give  ear,  O  ye  heavens,  and  l will  s.
Judg.  6.  .39.  Gideon  said,  7  will  s.  but  this  once

2  Sam.  14.  15.  thy  handmaid  said,  I  will  s.  to  king
1  Kings  2.  18.  well,  7  will  s.  for  thee  to  the  king
Job  7.  11.  7  wills,  in  the  anguish  of  my  spirit

10.  1.  7  will  s.  in  the  bitterness  of  my  soul
.32.  20.  7  will y.  that  1  may  be  refreshed

3.3.  31.  mark  well,  hold  thy  peace,  a.nd  I  wills.

42.  4.  hear,  l  beseech  thee,  and  I  will  s.

Psal.  50.  7.  hear,  O  my  people,  and  7  wills.

7.3.  15.  if  I  say,  7  will  s.  thus,  1  should  offend
119.  46.  7  will  s.  of  thy  testimonies  before  kings
145.  5.  7  will  s.  of  the  honour  of  thy  majesty

Prov.  8.  6.  hear,  for  I  will  s.  of  excellent  things
Jer.  5.  5.  1  will  get  me  to  great  men,  and  I  wills.
Ezek.  2.  1 .  stand  on  thy  feet,  and  7  will  s.  to  thee

12.  25.  7  will  s.  and  word  1  s.  shall  come  to  pass
Hos.  2. 14.  7  w.  allure  her,  and  x.  comfortably  to  her
1  Cor.  14.  21.  with  other  lips  will  1  s.  to  this  people

SPEAKER.

Ps.  140. 11.  let  not  an  evil  s.  be  established  in  earth
Acts  14. 12.  because  he  was  the  chief  s.

SP  EA  K  EST.

1  Sam.  9.  21.  wherefore  then  y.thou  so  to  me  ?

2  Sam.  19.  29.  why  y.  thou  any  more  ot  thy  matter.*

2  Kings  6.  12.  the  words  thou  s.  in  thv  bed-charnbtr
Job  2.  10.  thou  s.  as  one  of  the  foolish  women
Psal.  50.  20.  thou  sittest  and  x.  against  thy  brother

51.  4.  that  thou  mightest  be  justified  when  thou.?.
Isa.  40.  27.  why  y.  thou,  ()  Israel,  my  way  is  hid
Jer.  40.  16.  for  thou  s.  falsely  of  Ishmael

43  2.  thou  s.  falselv,  the  Lord  hath  not  sent  thee
Ezek.  .3.  18.  thou  givest  him  not  warning,  nor  x.
Zech.  13.  3.  for  thou  s.  lies  in  the  name  of  the  lord


S  P  E

Mat.  13.  10.  why  s.  thou  to  them  in  parables  >

*?•  4l-  L-  s-  t,lou  th‘S  parable  to  us  or  to  all
***•&  ?0w  •t1tl?0l|  P*»*nly.  and  t.  no  proverb

i  saith  to  him,  s .  thou  not  unto  me  1
/lets  lj.  19.  may  we  know  this  whereof  thou  v  ?

_  SPEAKETH.

(’en-  45.  12.  that  it  is  mV  mouth  that  r.  to  you
Xt'  'H'  J*-  S|)ake  to  Moses  as  a  man  .?.  to  friend

nUm,‘  i2« ‘oo6‘  a  tbat  the  Vord  *•  that  must  1  (io

*'uhen  »  Prophets,  in  the  name  of  Ld.
Joi  17.  5.  he  that  s.  Mattery  to  his  friends

D  ,71t«  or  u  !/•  onc?.>  >ea>  twice,  yet  man
%ial‘ 12-  ?•  sna  1  cut  oft  tongue  that  s.  proud  things

15.  ...  and  he  that  s.  the  truth  in  his  heart
SJ.  30.  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  j.  wisdom
41.  b.  and  it  he  come  to  see  me,  he  ,?.  vanity
144.  8.  whose  mouth  s.  vanity,  11.

P/w.  2.  12.  from  the  man  that  s.  froward  things
13-  "e/»  w!th  Ins  feet,  he  teacheth  with  fingers
W-  a  false  witness  that  .?.  lies  and  soweth  discord
)„•  32 •  *"e  mouth  of  the  wicked  .?.  frowardness
1r*  ij .•  be  that  j.  truth,  sheweth  forth  righteousn.
t8.  there  is  that  s.  like  the  piercings  of  a  sword
14.  25.  but  a  deceitful  witness  s.  lies

16.  13.  and  they  love  him  that  j.  right

o,  oo.aV;Llles  not  escape  ||  9.  f.  lies  shall  perish
'*•  28-  but  the  man  that  heareth,  r.  constantly
»0.  25.  when  he  s.  fair,  believe  him  not

y-  l/.w»  evil-doer,  and  every  mouth  j.  folly
7.  to  destroy,  even  when  the  needy  .?.  right

33.  15.  he  that  s.  uprightly  shall  dwell  on  iiigh

io‘  i9'  i?‘  1  '!ur  ton"He  s;  .deceit ;  one  j.  peaceably
o  "uear  the  word  which  the  Lord  s.  to  you
~8*  ...  thus  s.  the  Lord  the  God  of  Israel,  29.  25.
r  ,  ,  I  30.  2.  Hag.  1.  2.  Zech.  6.  12.  I  7.  9!

A?Ln\  l0’in  oS  v0lcle,',t  Almighty  God  when  he  s.
Amos  5.  10.  they  abhor  him  that  s.  uprightly

10  ™°*  2i°'  but  Spirit  ot'>'our  1'ather  who  s.  in  you
U.  3-.  whoso  s.  a  word  against  the  Son  of  man  •

.  but  whosoever  »  against  the  Holy  Ghost

34.  how  can  ye  being  evil  speak  good  ?  for  out  of
t  1  abundance  of  the  heart  mouth  j.  Luke  6.  45

3-  oL  he  that  is  of  the  earth,  s.  of  the  earth
.34.  he  whom  God  sent,  s.  the  words  of  God
‘j,,18;  .,tha1t  °l  bimself,  seeketli  his  own  glory

8  44  whe°n  he  b°idly,’ they  ?ay  nothing  to  hiin
d-  44.  when  he  s.  a  he,  he  s.  of  ins  own

maketb  bimself  a  king,  a g.  Cesar

Acts  8.  of.  1  pi  ay,  of  whom  s.  the  prophet  this  '
Rom  10.  6.  righteousness  of  faith  a.  on  this  wise
ICti/.  14.  2.  he  that  a.  111  an  unknown  tongue'

«,  i,o(i  *  bowbeit  in  the  Spirit  he  s.  mysteries

4'  !,e  dlat  prophesieth,  s.  unto  men  to  edification
4.  that  s.  in  an  unknown  tongue  edifieth  himself

11  i  H  ieM1Su  he  f  '?1  Prophesieth,  than  he  that  j.

11.  1  shall  be  to  him  that  s.  a  barbarian

7», .*  hini  thart  s.  in  an  unknown  tongue

i?i,aVl4A1,«nHWKSl?iri.t  V e-xpreJss|y  in  latter  times

in  *  V  4-  ®nd  by  it  he  being  dead,  yet  s.

,g0tten  the  exhortation  which  s.  to  you
~4.  that  s.  better  things  than  that  of  Abel
.3.  see  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  s.  much  more

To  J tdV?itUirn,kW,ay  fro,m  bi,n  that  from  heaven
I4'  U'  that  evil  of  Ills  brother  and  judgeth
rbi*  S°tb51’f1;  evl1  of  tbe  law  and  judgeth  the  law
Jude  16>  dnd  thdr^momh  s.  great  swelling  words

15- bef«r.e  be  had  done  j.  Rebekah  came
nJ  f  ^one  s*  ln  niine  heart

ifv,?’  26V  Vu0d  (,)ut  °f  the  midst  of  the  fire

J.- of.Pem  when  thou  sittest  in  thine  house
k^uth  1.  18.  then  she  left  s.  unto  her

r  / 1  ^  3- and/-  peace  to  all  his  seed
a  o 'k  ;  u  e  be  wa®yet-f-  another  came,  17, 18,
';buiwh0  can  withhold  himself  from  s.  ?
p7; /5o  ,th,ey  answered  no  more,  they  left  offs.

-rsa/.  34.  13.  and  thy  lips  from  s.  guile

ft  Vo  aSfi^  a!  SLoon  as  th®y  be  born,  s.  lies
,  •  n8-  R  thou  take  away  fron-  thee  s  vanity
13.  nor  s  thine  own  words  on  my  holy  day
o9.  13.  in  lying,  and  s.  oppression  and  revolt
t;  g4-and.  while  they  are  yet  a.  I  will  hear
V  i  3'  nS1?g  UP. em'ly.  and  a.  25.  3.  I  35.  14.

4;  be  weakeneth  the  hands  in  s.  such  w  ords
71'i'  -  e,^  tett  off  s.  the  niatter  was  not  perceived
H  1*0*  T8u  anj  a  mou.th  -f.  great  things,  liev.  13.  5.
o"  ^  uMard.  one  sal|it  s.  and  another  said

ii  q1  a  ^  was  s.  praying  and  confessing,  21.

%n4'  3'  tlley  abof  e'  boldly  in  the  Lord

i/'iPlVerse  thl.n^!>  to  draw  away  disciples
o  (>'  10*  o’  n?  niaiw-  by  Spirit  calleth  Jesus  accur.

^  S!ek  ?  Proof  of  C,irist  '■  in  me
'iin 4'  ,5’  but  s’  ,t  le  truth  in  love  may  grow  up

irl  'io°cly"n!iSelv^m  psahns,  hymns,  and  songs
l  iiw.4 ^.shaU  depurtfrom  faith,  jr.  lies  in  hypocrisy

l5p3/3'4bUaSytn°u  16S  tlllnfeTS  which  they  ought  not
1  1  et.  4.  4.  to  the  same  excess  of  riot,  s.  evil  of  you
•'ee  End.

nr  r  -  ,  .  ,  SPEAKING.
f*!-  6L  t  •  f'nnh  they  shall  be  heard  for  much  a.

Lph.  4.  31.  let  al pWd^ ^be^pii t  away  from  you

1  Pet.  2. 1.  laying  aside  aU  guile,  envies,  and  evil  s.

Josh.  8  18.  the  Lord  said,  stretch  out  thy  a.  26
1  ^/bere  a  f.  seen  among  40,000  in  Isr.

irr'inH^.  ffh  ?ny.  but  with  Saul  and  .Iona.

17.  7-  and  the  staff  ot  his  s.  was  like  a  weaver’s

a*  bea,n’-  r  lSam ■  21  •  19-  1  Citron.  20.  5

45.  thou  comest  with  a  sword,  and  with  a  r.

01  o-  4i0rd  Sav®tb  not  with  sword  and  ,s\

1S  7' ®re  ^7  here  under  thy  hand  s.  or  sword
7‘.and  8aVi  S  ',  stuck  at  his  bolster,  n.

8.  let  me  smite  him,  1  pray  thee,  with  the  j.

O  wTc6!'!11!?  cthu  ,k!n-’s  *•  is.  and  the  cruse
a’i8’  behold,  Saul  leaned  upon  his  s.
on  ^b"er'Vth  tbe  end  of  the  s.  smote  Asahel
H  L  Uf  . be  ftunced  with  iron  and  staff  of  a  a.
i«  l  i  i;i>dnUp  bls  r-  a?ainst  800,  whom  he  slew
o,  K®  vtte(l,,p  J.  against  .300, 1  Citron.  11. 11,  go.

,'A  e,S  eW  %yPRan  with  his  own  a.  1  Chr.  11.23.

Job  39.  23.  quiver  rattleth,  glittering  f.  and  shield


S  P  K

evirnmi1!*"1  rian  lay®th  at  bim  cannot  hold
g>Zn)  Vl'  lathan  laugheth  at  the  shaking  of  a  s
Arnu  ?*  ui aw  also  out  the  .*.  stop  the  wav

Jer  6  «3  bthpi*Jh  imV  a‘!d  IcJ,tteth  '■  in  sunder
JNai.b\  2|* }}  y,  shal1  lay,  bold  011  bow  and  j.

Hah  \  3.  the  horseman  litteth  up  tbe  sword  andr
JoAnio  Vi  ^fbcsbming  ot  the  glittering  r.

John  19.  34.  a  soldier  with  a  j.  pierced  his  side

o  fc  ii  in^ Hebrews  make  them  swords  or  r.
z  10;, 10  captains  did  priest  give  kin"-  Da-

o  nt  fhat  were  in  the  temple,  2  Chr  23  9

7  ev- several ‘city,  be  put  shields  and  7.
Neh  V*  Vf2  a  '  PreP^ed  for  them  shields  and

}•  13 v  slet,tbe  l)e°ple  with  their  ,y.  and  bows
16.  the  other  half  of  them  held  the.f.  21.
jfa 5j  •  4.  whose  teeth  are  s.  and  arrows
fjt  2- 4.shaH  bent  i.mto  pruning  books,  Mic.  4.  .3.
fc4V'otUfr)‘Sh  h,,Vnd  Put  on  the  brigandines
JoIl\3?n  9h»thf  yS  ,a  1  burn  s .  with  fire  seven  years
Joel  3. 10.  beat  your  pruning-hooks  into  s.

D  c  SPEARMEN.

V’  reb-uke  the  company  of  a.  the  bulls
Acts  ~3.  ,3.  saying,  make  ready  two  hundred  s.
r,  ,  _  -  T  ,  SPECIAL.

Mai  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  .f.  people

Ar/t'?o  M7’  h®n  niiike  UP  n,y  treasure  1
Acts  19.  11.  j'.  miracles  done  by  the  hand  of  Paul
See  Especially.
n  SPECKLED.

3?* ^  the2;  71mi?uinifrom  thence  t,ie  *-  cattle
j}r-  iotho  ’  ■  ’  1  be-4thy  wages,  the  cattle  bare  .f.
y  ‘,X r  mine  heritage  is  to  me  as  a  s.  bird

Zech.  1.  8.  behind  were  red  horses,  s.  and  white
in  A  O  r  SPECTACLE.

J  cor.  4.  9.  tor  we  aremade  a  s.  to  the  world

Judg.  5. 30.  have  they  no_t  j*  have  they  not  divided

?w4i2mhxiark- t0  nY  f  Jl  b-'b  earth  was  of  one  r.
Dent  oo1-Jlo,Sf  sald’  °  my  Lord,  1  am  slow  of  a.
JJeut.  22.  14.  and  give  occasions  of  s.  against  her

l3^;;  ’Ilf  tV  'a  d,stll.  as  dew,  as  the  small  ram
1  Jaw.  10.  t  18.  a  son  ot  Jesse,  and  prudent  in  s
'in^Ti'  14'  to,  fetch  about  this  form  of
Iff,  H .  seeing  the  a.  of  all  Israel  is  come  to  kin-
WeY'rf  o\  ,7  and  s,)j°mon  s  ij.  pleased  the  Lord

^ri33oo4ht  ,  .lrcllildr-spake  ,alt  ins-  of  Ashdod

lV  r°'  be.removeth  away  the  f.  of  the  trusty
13.1/.  heal  diligently  my  j.  and  my  declaration,

,  .r1-  -  Pfal.  17.  G.  ha.  28.  23.  |  32.  9
1,  f  4.  and  thou  restramest  before  God
00  on"  ,  j°  wiL  make  my  nothing  worth  ?

•  '*•  an(f  my  dropped  upon  them

cV/  i'o  o,e,ic'annof,orflerour  s-  ‘,,y  reason  of  darkn.

tj  f®'-".d‘ll  unto  day  uttereth  s.  night  unto  night
ri  +  Vrfi 1S  110  where  their  voice  is  not  heard
64.  t  0.  they  encourage  themselves  in  an  evil  j.

V  1-  t  6.  to  understand  an  eloquent  s.
ii  ~L  with  her  tair  j-.  she  caused  him  to  yield
17.  7.  excellent  s.  becometh  not  a  fool


S  PI


/jw  V+V  iVJ  ,  l  llke  scarlet,  thy  s.  is  comely
or.'  3:J  ,l11  take  away  the  skilful  of  s.

00  1  1  u  7?y  [laVe  Poured  out  a  secret  .r.

29nfmla  /  bf  brought  down,  thy  s.  shall  be  low  out
33°io  7  ’  1  ly  s" 4Suha  .whisper  out  of  the  dust

Jer  ii*  ooa  deepei;  than  thou  canst  perceive
p  23- as  yet  they  shall  use  this  s.  in  Judah
Lzek.  1.  ^.4.  the  voice  ot  j.  as  the  noise  of  an  host

Haf/ mnT  /h”  l°.a  PTP,le  of  a  strange  a.  6.

oa2'7(o  Ld; 1  t,av(;.  beard  thy  s.  and  was  afraid
AIarkf\o 'foueuf  them,  thy  f  bewray,  thee
iT  £0' 3r  !■  that  had  an  impediment  in  his
Tn/n/o'  iV  a  Caljlean,  and  thy  s.  agreetli  thereto
John  8.  43.  why  do  ye  not  understand  my  ?
^14-1L  their  voice,  saying  in  the  f.  of  Lycaonia
12CAr  'f,eT  ed  and  continued  his  f.  till  niidnight
1  Cot .  2.  1.  1  came  not  with  excellency  of  .c.  or  wisd

a4  Vo  TdS  ‘'ill."'1'11  enticing  words  of  man’s  wisdom
I  will  know,  not  the  v.  but  the  power
~„,r‘  3-  1--  we  use  great  plainness  ofA-.

V-4- great  is  my  boldness  of  f.  toward  you
n’  F,°+h^dl  V  .Presence  \yeak,  his  s.  is  contemptible
cV/  4  A  l  J  1  be  r,ude1ln  f-  yet  not  in  knowledge

Tie'  o  U  1:  y,  ri:  S;  'eiahVHyr,Vlth  grace,  seasoned
J“.  8.  -Ound  L^thdt  carniot  be  condemned

Vnh^'  or'  8‘  f  o’11  Sp?ak  with  him  not  in  dark  s.

Job  6.  26.  and  the  of  one  that  is  desperate
l%-  3-  °r  with  j.  wherewith  lie  can  do  no  good  ?
3r\-4’oneither  will  I  answer  him  with  your  s
t  lo.  they  removed  s.  from  themselves

Jr0-,18-  by  fair  A',  deceive  the  hearts  of  simple
Jude  15.  to  convince  them  of  all  their  hard  s  *

^  _  SPEECHLESS.

,  Tool%  npf  a.  wedding  garment,  and  he  was  a.

1.22.  Zachanas  beckoned  them  and  remained  a.
Acts  9.  7-  men  which  journeyed  with  him  stood  j.

^  SPEED.

pirab4io2h  0  Lordt’  1  ?ray  thee,  send  me  good  j.

7cl  <V'or2'ha^ ,  e,51“?e  adecree,  let  it  be  done  with

a  ;  'ivVcbeJ'ol<i’  they  sball  come  with  s.  swiftly
Acts 17. 15.  tor  to  come  to  him  with  all  s.

~  oohn  10.  receive  him  not,  nor  bid  him  God  s.

11.  that  biddeth  him  God  j.  is  partaker  of  evil
See  Make,  Made.

SPEEDY.

Zeph.  1. 18.  shall  make  even  a^.f .  riddance  of  all  them

1  Sam.  2J.  1.  than  that  I  should  s.  escape  to  Philist

o  kZ-  1t-7i  0<,P  r?ot,  ’n  Plains,  butj.  pass  over
y  C hton.oo.  13.  other  lioly  offerings  divided  they  s.
Eyfa  G.  13.  as  the  king  had  sent,  so  they  did  ,s-.

7' ,-*7 -that  thou mayest  buy  a.  with  this  mone3r
21.  that  what  Ezra  shall  require,  it  be  done  s.

-6.  let  judgment  be  executed  s.  upon  him

pJni  fi  Vnfi:gave  her  ‘,!er  things  for  purification
70  Q  3|L.2:,dellver  me  s.  ||  69. 17-  hear  me  j.  143.  7.

■  7y  tender  mercies  ^  prevent  us
10„.  2.  in  the  day  when  I  call,  answer  me,i.
r  eon  ‘  because  sentence  is  not  executed  s.

Isa.  08.  8.  and  thy  health  shall  spring  forth  s.


Z°f/A4'oTljf  ye  recompense  me,  r.  will  1  return

/alt'  ni  v/vVn  g0  J,4kndL  prey  before  the  Lord
Luke  18.8.1  tellyou^that  he  will  avenge  them  s.

JoTli  3vt  tha  1  ■’  mine  arrows  upon  them

3fi  Vi  13fi  bey  S;JhtlrA  day?  ln  weaith,  and  go  down
/]  • /!•  they  -7*  their  days  ill  prosperity,  and  years
haks°o  9'  EVe  *'  °Ur  y  cars  as  a  tale  that  is  told
Jct\  o5,;  2j^Ly  rn01,!ey  tor,t  lat  which  is  not  bread  ?
on?' ft  16.  because  he  would  not  s.  time  in  Asia
*  Cnr.12.10.1  will  very  gladly  j.and  bespent  for  you
T  SPEND  EST.

Luke  10.  35.  whatsoeverthou  s.  more,  I  will  repay

Poa0Vn  Zl  42?’  but  a  foolish  man  i.  it  up
Ecch  11  c°m.  with  harlots, substance

J^ci/.G.  12.  day  s  ot  vain  life,  which  he  j.  as  a  shadow
n  SPEN1.

47W'iH1-Jf'  al?^  ‘be  water  was  j.  in  the  bottle
rl)  Ofi  00  w,1i  not  hlde  >t  bow  that  our  money  is  r.
Tuda'm  1  '  Pd  y4?Ur  strength  shall  be  r.  in  vain

1  Sam9 O1?  fch '7  WC[-  by  ■’■ebus’  day  was  tar  a
r,/ 7  V9'  '  fi0r  1  e  bread  is  r.  in  our  vessels
Job  7.  6.  my  days  are  r.  without  hope
pJ'J  i;  7y  spmR  isr.  niy  days  are  extinct
V  s';;11',11'  t°r  my  life  is  r.  With  grief
hr  ‘I7  4i  \  mVlum*  strength  for  nought

MnvtJr’  or'  )  U  ibe  bVfad  111  the  city  was  s.
Matkj.  G.  and  had  s.  all  that  she  had,  Luke  8.  43.
6.  3o.  when  the  day  was  tar  a,  Luke  24.  29

//rffi75'oi4’  W]]el-  7e  Frodiga!  had  a.  all  '

Ln„,  1?‘i  2io  lelr  J*m-e  J°  tell  sonie  new  thing
„X  3’  Ibej'.'gb  »  tar  r.  the  day  is  at  hand
-  Cor.  U.  lo.  1  will  gladly  spend  and  be  a.  for  you
SPEW ,  dee  Seue.

„  SPICE.

Lxod  .35.28.  rulers  brought  a.  and  oil  for  the  light
Cant.  5. 1.  1  have  ga^iunedmy  myrrh  with  my  a.

peJh4k  1}'  Car,ry  <lovvn  man  a  present,  balm  and  r.
noCm0’/'’  and  ,'f-  tor  anointing  oil,  35.  8
JO.  t  7.  Aaron  shall  burn  thereon  incense  of  r

e5  1 10Ui  U7°  tllee  principal  r.  of  myrrh,  34.
37-  ~9- he  made  the  pure  incense  of  sweet  r.

39.  t  08.  they  brought  incense  of  sweet  .f
1  o-URS  10,’  camels  that  bare  a.  10.  2  Chr  on.  9  1
2o.  they  brought  to  Solomon.?.  2  Chr  on.  9  24

~  J-Xii'ti  ]t'  IIe?ekla,b. shewed  them  .?.  ointment
and  all  that  was  found  111  Ins  treasures,  Isa.  39  0

1  off' ’  eo'  SOm-e  were  appointed  to  oversee  j.  ’
on,'  sons  of  the  priests  made  the  ointment  off.

9'  9-  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave  Solomon  r.
no’  07’  dlverf  L. Prepared  for  the  burial  of  Asa
3„.  -7.  llezekiah  made  treasures  for  s.  and  gold
Cant  4.  10.  the  smell  ot  thine  ointments  than  all  s
14.  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the  chief.?.

J^-oh^w  uPonmy  garden,  that  a.  may  flow  out
5.  13.  his  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  s.  as  sweet  flowers
0.  my  beloved  is  gone  down  to  the  beds  of  a
v  1  ’on  a  y°ung  hart  upon  the  mountains  of.?.

4/ari-  i2I’i22MOCCUPle1dkln  fairs  with  chief  of  all
reon'rr  M*ry  bought  sweet  .5.  Luke  24.  1

Tot  it  ao  lhiUlned  a“d.Prepared  and  ointments
John  19.  40.  they  wound  it  m  linen  with  the  a.
r  ,  SPICE.

Lzek.  24. 10.  consume  the  flesh  and  j.  it  well
,  ,  _  SPICE -merchants.

1  Rings  10.  lo.  ot  th^rifffic  °f  the  s.-merchants

Cant.  8.  2.  I  would  caus^^thee  to  drink  of  s.  wine

F^;,3!vV5'J1S.llmueliteSJ  bearing.?. balm  and  myrrh
~  Kings  ^0.  t  lo.  she^d^hmise  of  his  s\  Isa .  39.  £.

J°h  8- H-  an<l  whose  trust  shal'l  be  a  j.  web
7  rer- 39-.-8-  the  s.  taketh  hold  with  her  hands
Isa.  o9.  o.  hatch  cockatrice  eggs  and  weave  s.  web
8P1L,  See  8ey.

^  SPIKENARD.

C.an.%  L-Vr  n,1y  -f'  sendeth  forth  the  smell  thereof
4  13.  with  pleasant  fruits,  camphire  with  s.  14

Invif  3-;i^re  calI!e  a  woman  having  an  alabaster
box  ot  ointment  offs\^yery  precious,  John  12.  3.

ntfariPo'oo’  K : n,4in  bis  seed  on  the  ground
Mark - bottles  bursty  and  wine  isr.  Luke  5.  37,

2  Sam.  14. 14.  we  are  as  water  f .  on  the  ground

Af°?'ro'i}25*  i  w°me>i  that  were  wise-hearted,  did  j.
Mat.  0.  ^8.  they  toil  not,  neither  s .  Luke  1°  °7

„  ,  SPINDLE.  ’

Prov.  31.  19.  she  layetli  her  hands  to  the  s
T  TT  L  T,  SPIRIT.
hi  Hebrew,  Ruacb;  in  Greek,  nveupa.  In  Scrip -
tute  the  word  Spirit  w  taken,  [1]  For  the  Holy
(rhost,  the  third  person  of  the  holy  Trinity,  who
implied  the  prophets ,  animates  good  men ,  pours
his  grace  into  our  hearts,  imparts  to  us  light  and
comfort ,  m  whose  Name  ue  are  baptized,  as  well
as  in  those  of  the  1*  ather  and  Son  ;  that  enliven -
nig  S  P  u  i  t  who  proceeds  from  the  Father  and  Son
Mat.  o.  16.  John  3.  8.  |  15.  26.  The  Holy
G  host  is  called  Spirit,  being,  as  it  were,  breathed
and  proceeding  from  the  Father  and  Son,  who
inspire  and  move  our  hearts  by  him ;  or  be¬
cause  he  breatheth  where  he  listeth  ;  stirring  uo
spiritual  motions  in  the  hearts  of  believers,  pun-
lying  and  quickening  them ;  or  because  he  is  a
spiritual,  invisible,  and  incorporeal  essence.  He
is  called  holy,  both  because  he  is  most  holy  in
himself ,  and  the  Sanctifier,  the  Worker  of  holi¬
ness  in  the  creature.  He  is  called  a  person
because  whatsoever  belongs  to  a  person  ai  to
understand,  to  will,  to  give,  to  call,  to  do,  to
subsist  of  himself,  doth  agree  to  the  Spirit  •  who
appeared  m  a  visible  shape,  Luke  .3.  22.  Acts  °

3.  gave  the  Apostles  sundry  tongues.  Acts  °  4*

v,  Prl°er  t0  cov/er-  and  bestow  »n  church
the  gift  of  tongues,  of  miracles,  of  faith,  of  healing

of  prophecy,  tfc.  1  Cor.  12.  8,  9,  10. 11  i«  which
cannot  be  attributed  to  any  quality  or  motion  cre-

E  46.5


SP1


S  P  I


S  P  1


at  fid.  Lastly,  he  is  called  the  third  person,  not
in  order  of  time,  or  dignity  of  nature,  but  in  order
and  manner  of  subsisting.  ....

'2]  Spirit  is  taken  for  the  immediate  inspiration,
and  extraordinary  help,  of  the  Spirit  of  God. .Mat.
22.  43.  How  then  doth  David  in  Spirit  call  him
Lord,  that  is,  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  1  Cor.  14.  15.  I  will  pray  with  the  Spirit,
that  is,  by  the  immediate  gift  and  extraordinary
help  of  the  Spirit.  [3]  for  the  extraordinary  gifts
and  graces  of  the  Spirit,  Gal.  3.  2.  [4]  for  the
counsels,  motions,  and  directions  of  the  Spnit.
Rom  8.  1.  Who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but
after  the  Spirit.  [5]  Spirit  is  taken  for  the  re¬
newed  nature ,  or  spiritual  part  in  man.  Mat.  -0.
41.  The  Spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak,
rgj  For  spiritual  zeal.  1  I  i m  •  4.  12.  Be  thou  an
example  of  believers  in  spirit.  [71  for  judgment,
authority,  and  consent,  1  Cor.  5.  4.  [8]  It  signi¬

fies  pure,  holy,  and  spiritual.  John  3.  O.  that
which  is  born  oi  the  Spirit,  is  spirit  ;  tjia^  */»  that
which  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God  is  of  a
spiritual  nature,  and  so,  suitable  to  the  kingdom
of  God.  [9]  It  is  taken  for  the  gospel,  which  is
the  ministration  of  the  Spirit,  and  by  -chose  in-
fiu6uc6  it  becomes  effectual  to  chayige  the  heaits
of  sinners,  to  turn  them  from  the  power  of  Satan
unto  God,  and  to  make  them  truly  spiritual  and
holy.  2  Cor.  3.  6,  8.  Who  hath  made  us  able
ministers  of  the  new  testament,  not  ot  the  letter,
but  of  the  spirit.  [10]  For  the  thoughts,  affection,
and  care.  Col.  2.  5.  1  hough  I  be  absent  in

the  flesh,  yet  I  am  with  you  in  the  spirit.  [11]
For  a  temper,  frame,  or  disposition  of  soul  or
spirit.  Psal.  51.  10.  Renew  a  right  spirit  with¬
in  me,  ,  ,  ...

12]  Spirit  signifies  the  reasonable  soul,  which  con¬
tinues  in  being  even  after  the  death  of  the  body  ;
that  spiritual,  reasoning,  and  choosing  substance,
capable  of  eternal  happiness.  Acts  7.  59.  Lord
Jesus,  receive  my  spirit,  or,  my  soul.  [13]  Good,
angels  are  called  spirits,  immaterial  and  intelli¬
gent,  but r created  and  dependent  beings..  Heb-  1.

14.  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits?  [14]
The  devils  are  often  called  unclean  spirits,  evil
spirits,  Mark  5.  13.  Luke  7-  21.  So  in  1  Sam.  18.
10.  The  evil  spirit  from  God  came  upon  Saul.
[15]  Spirit  signifies  an  apparition  or  ghost.  Mat.

14.  26.  When  the  disciples  saw  Jesus  walking
on  the  sea,  they  were  troubled,  saying,  it  is  a
spirit.  And  our  Saviour,  after  his  resurrection,
appearing  to  his  disciples,  they  were  affrighted,
and  supposed  they  had  seen  a  spirit,  or  ghost ;
but  he  said  to  them,  handle  me,  and  see,  for  a
SDirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  ye  see  me  have,
Luke  24.  37,  39.  [16]  It  is  taken  for  a  person
that  pretended  to  be  inspired,  or  for  a  doctrine
offered  as  the  immediate  revelation  of  the  Spirit.

1  John  4.  1.  Believe  not  every  spirit.  [17]  For
passion,  wrath,  or  anger.  Eccl.  10.  4.  If  the
spirit  of  the  ruler  rise  up  against  thee.  [18]
For  the  breath,  the  respiration,  the  animal  hit
that  is  in  beasts.  Eccl.  3.  21.  The  spirit  ot  the
beast  that  goeth  downward.  [19]  Spirit  is  also
taken  for  the  wind.  Amos  4.  13.  He  that  cre-
ateth  the  wind,  or  spirit.  These  are  the  tour
spirits  of  the  heavens,  in  Hebrew,  winds,  Zech.

6.  5.  And  in  John  3.  8.  The  wind  bloweth
where  it  listelh,  in  Greek,  nvevp.a,.the  spirit.

The  spirit  of  a  sound  mind ;  the  spirit  of  wisdom
and  understanding;  the  spirit  of  knowledge;
the  spirit  of  grace  and  prayer  ;  the  spirit  of  pro¬
phecy,  and  the  like,  signify  several  effects,  works,
and  gifts,  together  with  the  author  and  cause,
which 'is  the' Holy  Spirit  infusing  them.  On  the
contrary,  the  spirit  of  pride,  covetousness,  fury,
uncleanness,  do  signify  these  vices,  and  the  devil,
that  wicked  spirit,  the  author  of  them.

Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit,  Eph.  4.  30.  Men  may
be  said  to  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  by  withstand¬
ing  his  holy  inspirations,  the  motions  of  his
grace,  or  by  living  in  a  lukewarm  and  negligent
manner.  Also  by  despising  his  gifts,  or  neglect¬
ing  them ;  by  abusing  his  favours,  either  out  oj
vanity,  curiosity,  or  negligence.  And  in  a  con¬
trary  sense,  we  stir  up  the  Spirit  of  God  which  is
in  us  (as  St.  Paul  advises  Timothy,  2  Tim.  1.
6  J  by  the  practice  of  godliness,  by  our  exactness
in  complying  with  his  motions,  by  fervour  in  his
service,  by  renewing  our  gratitude,  (kc .  See  the
SigiUfications  on  DISCERN,  Earnest,  Prison,
Quench,  Sow.

Gen.  7.  -t  22.  in  whom  was  breath  of  the  s.  of  life
26.  +  35.  which  were  a  bitterness  of  s.  to  Isaac
41.  8.  Pharaoh’s  s.  was  troubled  in  the  morning
45.  27.  the  .9.  of  Jacob  their  father  revived  _

Exod.  6.  9.  hearkened  not  to  Moses  for  anguish  of  s.
35.  21.  every  one  whom  his  s.  made  willing
Num.  11.  17.  I  will  take  of  s.  that  is  on  thee,  25.

26.  the  s.  rested  upon  them  and  they  prophesied
29.  that  the  Lord  would  put  his  s.  upon  them

14.  24.  Caleb,  because  he  had  another  #.  with  him

27. 18.  take  Joshua,  a  man  in  whom  is  the  s.

Deut.  2.  30.  for  the  Lord  thy  God  hardened  his*.
Tosh.  5.  1.  nor  was  there  s.  in  them  any  more
Jndg.  8.  t  3.  then  their  #.  was  abated  toward  him

15.  19.  when  he  had  drunk  his  s.  came  again

1  Sam.  30. 12.  when  he  had  eaten  his#.  came  to  him

1  Kings  10.  5.  there  was  no  s.  in  her.  2  Chron.  9.  4.

21.  5.  Jezebel  his  wife  said,  why  is  thy  s.  so  sad  ?

22.  21.  there  came  forth  ai.  2  Chron.  18.  20.

2  Kings  2.  9-  let  a  double  portion  of  thy  s.  be  on  me

15.  they  said,  s.  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  Elisha

1  Chron.  5.  26.  the  Lord  stirred  up  the/,  of  Pul

12.  18.  then  the  s.  came  upon  Amasai,  and  said
28.  12.  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the  j.

2  Chron.  21.  16.  against  Jehoram  s.  of  Philistines
Ezra  1.  5.  with  them  whose  s.  God  raised  to  go  up
Nek.  9.  30.  testifiedst  by  the  s.  in  thy  prophets
Job  4.  15.  then  a  s.  passed  before  my  face

15. 13.  that  thou  turnest  thy  s.  against  God
20.3.  s.  of  my  understanding  causeth  me  to  answer

466


Job  26.  4.  anu  whose  s.  came  from  thee  ?

13.  by  his  j-.  he  garnished  the  heavens,  his  hand
32.  8.  there  is  a  #.  in  man,  inspiration  of  Almighty
18.  the  s.  within  me  constrained!  me
34.  14.  if  he  gather  to  hims.  his  s.  and  his  breath
Psal.  32.  2.  and  in  whose  s.  there  is  no  guile

51. 10.  a  clean  heart,  renew  a  right  s.  within  me

12.  and  uphold  me  with  thy  free  s.

76.  12.  he  shall  cut  off  the  #.  of  princes

78.  8.  and  whose  #.  was  not  stedfast  with  God
104.  30.  thou  sendest  forth  thy  s.  they  are  created
106.  33.  so  t.hey'provoked  his  s.  so  that  he  spake
unadvisedly  with  his  lips
139.  7.  whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  #.  ?'

143. 10.  s.  is  good,  lead  me  to  land  ot  uprightness
Prov.  14.  29.  he  that  is  hasty  of  s.  exalteth  tolly

15.  4.  but  perverseness  therein  is  a  breach  in  the  s.

16.  18.  and  an  haughty  .1.  goeth  before  a  fall  .

32.  that  ruleth  #.  better  than  he  that  taketh  city

18.  14.  the  #.  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity

20.  27.  the  #.  of  man  is  the  caudle  of  the  Lord
25.  2ff.  that  hath  no  rule  over  his  #.  is  like  a  city

Eccl.  3.  21.  who  knoweth  the  s.  of  man,  s.  of  beast

7.  9.  be  not  hasty  in  thy  #.  to  be  angry

8.  8.  110  man  hath  power  over  s.  to  retain  the  s.

10.  4.  if  the  #.  of  the  ruler  rise  against  thee
11.5.  thou  knowest  not  what  is  the  way  of  the  #.

12. 7.  and  the  s.  shall  return  to  God  who  gave  it

Isa.  19.  3.  the  .9.  of  Egypt  shall  fail  in  midst  thereof
29.  10.  L.  hath  poured  on  you  the  s.  of  deep  sleep
24.  they  that  erred  in  s.  shall  come  to  understand.
31.  3.  and  their  horses  flesh  and  not  s.

32. 15.  till  the  s.  be  poured  upon  us  from  on  high
34.  16.  and  his  s.  it  hath  gathered  them

37.  +7.  behold,  I  will  put  a  #.  into  him
42.  5.  he  that  giveth  .1.  to  them  that  walk  therein
48.  16.  the  Lord  God  and  his  s.  hath  sent  me
54.  6.  as  a  woman  forsaken  and  grieved  in  s.

57. 16.  s.  shall  fail  before  me  and  souls  I  have  made
61. 1.  the  s.  of  Lord  God  is  on  me,  Luke  A.  18.

3.  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  #.  ot  heaviness
Jer.  51.  11.  Lord  raised  tire  #.  of  king  of  Medes
Ezek.  1. 12.  whither  #.  was  to  go,  they  went,  20.

21.  for  the  s.  was  in  the  wheels,  10.  17.

2. 2.  s.  entered  into  me  when  he  spake  to  me,  3. 24.

3. 12.  then  the  s.  took  me  up  and  1  heard,  11.  24.

14.  so  s.  lifted  me  up,  and  took  me  away,  and  I

went  in  the  heat  of  my  s.  8.  3. 1  11. 1.

13.  3.  woe  to  prophets  that  follow  their  own  s.

21.  7.  ev.  #.  shall  faint,  all  knees  be  weak  as  water
Dan.  2. 1.  Nebuchadnezzar’s  #.  was  troubled

4. 8.  and  in  whom  is  the  s.  of  the  holy  gods,  before
him  I  told  the  dream,  9- 18.  I  5. 11, 14.

5. 12.  an  excellent  s.  were  found  in  Daniel,  6.  3.
Hos.  0.  +  7.  prophet  is  a  fool,  man  of  the  s.  is  mad
Amos  4. 1 13.  for  lo,  he  that  createth  the  #.

Mic.  2. 11.  if  man  walking  in  #.  and  falsehood  do  lie
Hag.  1. 14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  the #.  of  Zerubbabel
Zech.  7. 12.  hath  sent  in  his  #.  by  former  prophets
12.  1.  and  formeth  s.  of  man  within  him
Mai.  2.  15.  yet  had  he  the  residue  of  the  s.  there¬
fore  take  heed  to  your  j’.  that  ye  deal  not
treacherously,  16.

Mat.  4.  1.  Jesus  was  led  up  of  the  s.  Luke  4.  1.

14. 26.  were  troubled  ;  say  mg  it  is  a  s.  Mark  6.  49.

22.  43.  how  then  doth  David  in  #.  call  him  Lord  ?
26.  41.  the  s.  indeed  is  willing,  Mark  14.  38.

Mark  1. 10.  the  #.  descending  on  him,  John  1.  32.

12.  the  s.  driveth  him  into,  the  wilderness

8.  12.  and  he  sighed  deeply  in  his  #.  and  saith
Q.  20.  #.  tare  him  ll  26.  the  #.  cried  and  rent  him
Luke  1. 17.  he  shall  go  before  him  in  the  s.  of  Elias
80.  and  the  child  waxed  strong  in  .f.  2.  40.

2.  27.  and  he  came  by  the  s .  into  the  temple  #

4. 14.  Jesus  returned  in  power  of #.  into  Galilee

8.  55.  her  s.  came  again,  and  she  arose  straightway

9.  55.  ye  know  not  what  manner  ot  s.  ye  are  of
10.21.  in  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  s.  and  said
13. 11.  a  woman,  who  had  a  s.  of  infirmity

24.  37.  they  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  s.

39.  for  a  s.  hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  I  have
John  1.  33.  on  whom  thou  shalt  see  #.  descending

3.  34.  God  giveth  not  the  s.  by  measure  to  him

4.  23.  worship  the  Father  in  s.  and  in  truth

24.  G.  is  ai.  they  must  worship  him-  in  j.  and  truth

6.  63.  it  is  the  s.  that  quickeneth  ;  words  that  I

speak  unto  you,  they  are  .1.  and  they  are  life

7.  39.  this  spake  he  of  #.  ||  11.  33.  he  groaned  in  #.

13.  21.  he  was  troubled  in  s.  and  testified  and  said
Acts  2. 4.  they  spake  as  #.  gave  them  utterance

6.  10.  and  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the  s.

8. 29.  then  the  #.  said  to  Philip,  go  near  and  join
10. 19.  the  #.  said  unto  Peter,  11.  12.

11 .  °8.  Agabus  signif.  by  5.  there  should  be  dearth
16.  7.  they  assayed,  but  the  #.  suffered  them  not
17. 16.  his was  stirred  within  him  when  he  saw
18.  5.  Paul  was  pressed  in  #.  ||  25.  being  fervent  in  s.

20.  22.  now  1  go  bound  in  the  s.  to  Jerusalem

21.  4.  the  disciples  said  to  Saul  through  the  s.

23.  8.  Sadducees  say  that  there  is  no  angel  nor  s.

9.  but  if  a  s.  or  an  angel  hath  spoken  to  him

Rom.  1.  4.  Son  of  God  according  to  the  #.  of  holiness
2.  29.  circumcision  is  that  of  heart  in  the  s.

8.  l!  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  #.  4.

2.  the  law  of  the  #.  of  life  hath  made  me  free
5.  they  that  are  after  the  .1.  the  things  of  the  s.

9.  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh  but  s.  if  so  be  that  s.

10.  but  the  s.  is  life  because  ot  righteousness

11.  if  #.  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead,

shall  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  his  s.
13  but  if  ye  thro’  the  s.  mortify  deeds  ot  body
16.  the  v.  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  #.

23.  but  ourselves  who  have  first-fruits  ot  the  s.

26.  the  also  helpeth  our  infirmities  ;  but  therj.

maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings

27.  he  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  s.

12. 11.  fervent  in  s.  ||  15. 30.  for  the  love  of  the  s.

1  Cor  2. 4.  but  in  demonstration  of  s.  and  of  power

10.  but  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  his
j-.  for  the  #.  searcheth  all  things,  the  deep  things
of  God

11.  save  the  #  ora  man  which  is  in  him


1  Cor.  2. 12.  not #.  of  world,  but  r.  who  is  ot  God

5.  3.  1  verily  as  absent  in  body,  but  present  in#.

5.  that  s.  may  be  saved  in  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus

6.  17.  lie  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  s.

20.  glorify  God  in  vour  body  and  in  vour  s.

7.  34.  that  she  maybe  holy  both  in  body  and  s.

12.  4.  are  diversities  of  gifts,  but  same  s.  8,  9,  11.

8.  to  one  is  given  by  the  #.  the  word  of  wisdom

13.  for  by  one  s.  are  we  all  baptized  into  one

body  ;  have  been  all  made  to  drink  into  one  s.

14.  2.  howbeit  in  the  s.  he  speaketh  mysteries

15.  I  will  sing  with  s.  I|  16.  shalt  bless  with  flier.

15.  45.  the  last  Adam  was  made  a  quickening  s.

2  Cor.  3.  6.  ministers  of  new  testament,  not  of  letter

but  of  the  s.  letter  killetli,  but  the  s.  giveth  lite
8.  how  shall  notministrat.  of  s.  be  rather  glorious

17.  the  Lord  is  that  s.  where  the  s.  of  Lord  is

4. 13.  we  having  the  same  #.  of  faith,  we  believe

7.  1.  cleanse  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and

13.  because  his  .1.  was  refreshed  by  you  all
11.4.  another  s.  which  ye  have  not  received

12.18.  walked  we  not  in  the  same  s.  and  same  steps
Gal.  3.  2.  received  ye  the  #.  by  the  works  of  the  law

3.  are  ye  so  foolish,  having  begun  in  the  s.  ?

5.  he  therefore  that  ministereth  to  you  the  s.

14.  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  s.  thro’  faith

4.  6.  God  hath  sent  forth  the #.  of  his  son

5.  5.  for  we  thro’ s.  wait  for  hope  of  righteousness

16.  walk  in  the  s.  ||  18.  but  if  ye  be  led  by  the  s.

17.  for  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  s.  and  the  #

[  against  the  flesh,  and  these  are  contrary
25.  if  we  live  in  the  s.  let  us  walk  in  the  s.

6.  8.  soweth  to  s.  shall  of  the  s.  reap  life  everlasting

18.  grace  of  our  Lord  be  with  your  #.  Pliilem.  25
Eph.  <2.  2.  the  s.  that  now  worketn  in  the  children

18.  we  have  access  by  one  s.  to  the  Father

22.  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  s.

3.  5.  as  it  is  now  revealed  to  his  apostles  by  the  s.

16.  strengthened  with  might  by  his  s,  in  inner  man

4.  3.  to  keep  unity  of  the  #.  in  the  bond  of  peace
4.  there  is  one  body,  and  one  s.  as  ye  are  called

23.  and  be  renewed  in  the  s.  ot  your  mind

5. 18.  be  not  drunk  with  wine,  but  be  filled  with  #.
6. 17.  take  sword  of  the  s.  which  is  word  of  God

18.  praying  always  with  all  prayer  in  the  s.

Phil.  1.  19.  and  the  supply  of  the  #.  of  Jesus  Christ
27.  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  s.  with  one  mind

2.  1.  if  there  be  any  fellowship  of  the  s.  if  bowels

3.  3.  the  circumcision,  which  worship  G.  in  the#.
Col.  1.  8.  who  declared  to  us  your  love  in  the  #.

2.  5.  tho’  absent  in  flesh,  yet  am  I  with  you  in  s.

1  Thess.  5. 19.  quench  not  s.  despise  not  prophesyin.

23.  pray  your  s.  soul,  and  body,  be  preser.  blamel.

2  Thess.  2.2.  or  be  troubled,  neither  by  s.  nor  word

8.  Lord  shall  consume  with  the  s.  of  his  mouth
13.  chosen  you  thro’  sanctification  of  s.  and  belief

1  Tim.  3.  16.  God  manifest,  justified  in  #.  seen  of

angels

4.  1.  now  the  s.  speaketh  expressly  in  latter  times

12.  be  thou  an  example  in  s.  in  faith,  in  purity

2  Tim.  4.  22.  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  thy  s.
Heb  4.  12.  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  #.

9. 14.  who  thro’  the  eternals,  offered  himself  to  Gd.
Jam.  2.  26  for  as  the  body  without  the  s.  is  dead
4.5.  the  .v.  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to  envy
1  Pet.  1.  2.  thro’  sanctification  of  the#,  to  obedience
22.  ye  have  purified  in  obeying  truth  thro’  the  s.

3.  4.  even  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  .1.

18.  being  put  to  death  in  flesh,  but  quickened  by  s

4.  6  but  live  according  to  God  in  the  s.

1  John  3.  24.  by  the  #.  which  he  hath  given  us  .  _

4.  1 .  beloved,  believe,  not  every  #.  buttry  the  spirits

2.  every  s.  that  confessed!  Jesus  Christ  iscome

3.  every  #.  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  iscome

13.  dwell  in  him, because  hath  given  usot  his#.

5.  6.  it  is  the  #.  that  beareth  witness,  #.  is  truth

8.  witness  in  earth,  the  #.  the  water,  and  the  blood
Jude  19.  these  he  sensual,  not  haying  the  #.

Rev.  1. 10.  I  was  in  the  #.  on  the  Lord  s  day

2  7  hear  what  #.  saith  to  churches,  he  that  hath  an

ear,  let  him  hear,  11,  17.  29. 1  3.  6,  13,  22.
4  o  and  immediately  1  was  in  the  #.  and  behold
11.  il.  the  #.  of  life  from  God  entered  into  them
ll!  13.  blessed  are  the  dead,  yea,  saith  the

17.  3.  so  lie  carried  me  away  in  the  #.  21 .

22.  17.  and  the  #.  and  the  bride  say,  come

SPIRIT  of  adoption.

Rom.  8.  15.  but  ye  have  received  the  #.  of  adoption
SPIRIT  of  antichrist.

1  John  4.  3.  and  this  is  that  #.  of  antichrist  ye  heard
SP 1 RIT  of  bondage.

Rom.  8.  15.  ye  have  not  received  the  #.  of  bondage
Born  of  the  SPIRIT.

John  3.  5.  except  man  be  born  of  the  #.  he  cannot  enter

6.  that  which  is  born  of  the  s.  is  spirit
8.  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  s.

Gal  4  29.  persecuted  him  that  was  bom  after  the  s.
Broken  SPI  RIT.

Psal.  51. 17.  the  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  s.
Prov.  15.  13.  by  sorrow  of  the  heart  the  #.  is  broken
17  22.  but  a  broken  #.  drieth  the  bones
See  Contrite.

SPIRIT  of  burning.

Isa  4.  4.  the  blood  of  Jerusal.  by  the

SPIRIT  of  Christ.  .

Rom.  8.  Q.  if  any  man  have  not  the  #.  of  Christ
1  Pet.  1.11.  what  the  #.  of  Christ  m  them  did  signify
SPIRIT  of  counsel.

Isa.  11.2.  the#,  of  counsel  shall  rest  upon  him
SPIRIT  of  divination.  ,  .

Acts  16. 16.  a  damsel  possessed  with  #.  of  divination
Dumb  SPIRIT.

Mark  9. 17. 1  brought  my  son,  who  hath  a  dumb  s.
25.  thou  dumb  s.  I  charge  thee,  come  out  ot  him
Earnest  of  the  SPIRI I .

0  Cor  1  22.  who  hath  given  us  the  earn,  of  the  s.o.  0.
SPIRIT  of  error.

1  John  4.  6.  hereby  know  we  the  #.  of  truth  and  ernr
See  Evil.

Faithful  SPIRIT.

Prov  11. 13.  he  that  is  of  faithful  #.  concealed!  mat
See  Familiar.


10.


of  burning


SP  1


SPO


S  P  o


SPIRIT  of  fear.

t  Tim.  1,  7.  God  hath  not  given  ns  the  s.  of  fear
Foul  SPIRIT.

Mark  9.  25.  he  rebuked  the  foul  s.  saying  to  him
Rev.  18.  2.  Babyl.  isbecomedie  hold  of  every  fouls.
Fruit  of  the  SPIRIT.

Gal.  5.  22.  the  fruit  of  the  s.  is  love,  joy,  peace
Eph.  5.  9.  for  the  fruit  of  the  s.  is  in  all  goodness
^  Good  SPIRIT.

Neh.  0-  20.  thou  gavest  thy  good  s.  to  instruct  them
Psal.  143. 10.  thy  s.  is  good,  lead  me  into  the  land
SPIRIT  of  God.

Gen.  1.2.  s.  of  God  moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters
41.  38.  as  this  is,  a  man  in  whom  the  s.  of  God  is
Fxod.  31. 3.  have  filled  Bezaleel  withf.  of  God,  35.31.
Num.  24.  2.  and  the  s.  of  God  came  on  Balaam

1  Sam.  10.  10.  the  s.  of  God  came  on  Saul,  and  he

prophesied  among  them,  11.  6. 1  19.  23.

19.  20.  s.  of  God  came  on  the  messengers  of  Saul

2  Chron.  15.  1.  the  s.  of  God  came  upon  Azariah
Job  27.  3.  and  the  s.  of  God  is  in  my  nostrils

33.  4.  s.  of  God  hath  made  me,  breath  of  Almighty
Ezek.  11. 24.  in  vision  by  the  s.  of  God  into  Chaldea
Mat.  3.  16.  he  sawi.  of  God  descending  like  a  dove

12.  28.  but  if  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  s.  of  God
Horn.  8.  9.  if  so  be  that  the  s.  of  God  dwell  in  you

14.  for  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  s.  of  God

15.  19.  mighty  signs  by  the  power  of  the  s.  of  God
a  Cor.  2.  11.  knoweth  no  man,  but  the  s.  of  God

14.  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  s.  of  God
3.  16.  and  that  the  s.  of  God  dwelleth  in  you

6.  11.  ye  are  sanctified  by  the  s.  of  our  God

7.  40.  I  think  also  that  I  have  the  s.  of  God

12.  3.  no  man  speaking  by  the  s.  of  God,  calleth
2  Cor.  3.  3.  written  with  the  s.  of  the  living  God
Eph.  4.  30.  and  grieve  not  the  holy  s.  of  God
1  Pet.  4.  14.  for  the  s.  of  God  resteth  on  you
1  John  4.  2.  hereby  know  ye  the  s.  of  God
SPIRIT  of  glory.

1  Pet.  4.  14.  for  the  s.  of  glory  resteth  on  j’ou
SPIRIT  of  grace.

Zech.  12.10.1  willpouronnouseofDavid^.e/^r^ce
Jleb.  10. 29.  and  hath  done  despite  to  the  s.  of  grace
See  Holy.

Humble  SPIRIT.

Prov.  16.  19.  better  it  is  to  be  of  an  humble  s.

29.  23.  but  honour  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  s.
Isa.  57.  15.  with  him  also  that  is  of  an  humble  s.

SPIRIT  of  jealousy.

Num.  5.  14.  and  s.  of  jealousy  come  upon  him,  30.
SPIRIT  of  judgment.

Isa.  4.  4.  purged  blood  of  Jerusalem  by  s.  of  judgm.
28. 6.  the  Lord  shall  be  for  a  s.  of  judgment  to  him
SPIRIT  of  knowledge.

Isa.  11.  2.  the  s.  of  knowledge  shall  rest  upon  him
See  Lord,  Lying.

SPIRIT  of  meekness.

lCor.4. 21.  shall  I  come  to  you  in  the  s.  of  meekness?
■Gal.  6.  1,  restore  such  an  one  in  the  s.  of  meekness
My  SPIRIT.

Gen.  6.  3.  my  s.  shall  not  always  strive  with  man
Job  6.  4.  the  poison  whereof  drinketh  up  my  s.

7.  11.  I  will  speak  in  the  anguish  of  my  s.
lO.  12.  and  thy  visitation  hath  preserved  my  s.

21.  4.  if  so,  why  should  not  my  s.  be  troubled
Psal.  31.  5.  into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  s.

77-  3.  I  complained,  and  my  s.  was  overwhelmed

6.  and  my  s.  made  diligent  search

142.  3.  when  my  s.  was  overwhelmed  in  me

143.  4.  therefore  is  my  s.  overwhelmed  in  me

7.  hear  me  speedily,  O  Lord,  my  s.  faileth
Prov.  1.23.  benold,  1  will  pour  out  my  s.  unto  you
Isa.  26.  9.  yea,  with  my  s.  will  I  seek  thee  early

30.  1.  that  cover  with  a  covering,  but  not  of  my  s.
38.  16.  in  all  these  things  is  the  life  of  my  s.

42.  1.  I  have  put  my  s.  upon  him,  shall  bring  forth
44.  3.  I  will  pour  my  s.  upon  thy  seed
59.  21.  my  s.  that  is  upon  thee  shall  not  depart
Ezek.  3.  14.  and  I  went  in  the  heat  of  my  s.

36.  27.  and  1  will  put  my  s.  within  you,  37.  14.

39. 29.  for  I  have  poured  out  my  s.  on  house  of  Isr.
Dan.  2. 3.  my  s.  was  troubled  H  7. 15.  grieved  in  my  s.
Joel  2.  28.  I  will  pour  out  my  s.  upon  all  flesh,  your
sons  and  daughters  shall  prophesy,  29.  Acts  2.

1  j ,  18.

Hag.  2.  5.  so  mys.  remaineth  among  you,  fear  ye  not
Zech.  4.  6.  not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  s.

6.  8.  these  have  quieted  my  s.  in  the  north  country
Mat.  12.  18.  I  will  put  my  s.  upon  him,  shall  shew
Luke  1.  47.  my  s.  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour

23.  46.  Father,  into  thy  hands  1  commend  my  s.
Acts  7.  59.  Stephen  said,  Lord  Jesus,  receive  mys.
Rom.  1.  9.  whom  1  serve  with  my  s.  in  the  gospel

1  Cor.  5.  4.  when  ye  are  gathered  together  and  my  s.

14.  14.  my  s.  prayeth,  but  my  understanding  is

16.  18.  for  they  have  refreshed  my  s.  and  yours

2  Cor.  2.  13.  1  had  no  rest  in  my  s.  bee.  I  found  not

New  SPIRIT.

Ezek.  11. 19.  I  will  put  a  new  s.  within  you,  36. 26.

18.  31.  and  make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  s.
Newness  of  SPIRIT.

Horn.  7.  6.  that  we  should  serve  in  newness  of  the  s.
Patient  SPIRIT.

Eccl.  7.  8.  patient  in  s.  is  better  than  proud  in  spirit
Perverse  SPIRIT.

Isa.  19.  14  the  Lord  hath  mingled  a  perverse  s.

Poor  SPI  It  I  T.

Mat.  5.  3.  blessed  are  the  poor  in  s.  theirs  the  kingd.
SP  1 R  IT  of  promise.

Eph.  1. 13.  were  sealed  with  that  holy  s.  of  promise
SPIRIT  of  prophecy.

Rev.  19. 10.  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  s.  of  prophecy
SPIRIT  of  slumber.

Rom.  11.  8.  God  hath  given  them  the  s.  of  slumber
sorrowful  SPIRIT.

1  Sam.  1. 15.  my  lord,  1  am  a  woman  of  a  sorrouf.  s.
SPI  RIT  of  truth.

John  14.  17.  s.  if  truth  whom  world  cannot  receive

15.  26.  even  the  s.  of  truth  which  proceedeth

16.  13.  when  s.  of  truth  is  come,  will  guide  you
1  John  4  6  hereby  know  we  s.  of  truth  and  error

See  Vexation.


Unclean  SPIRIT.

Zech.  13.  2.  I  will  cause  unci.  s.  to  pass  out  of  land
Mat.  12.  43.  when  the  unclean  s.  is  gone  out  of  a
man,  he  walked)  thro’  dry  places,  Luke  II.  24.
Mark  1.  23.  in  their  synagogue  a  man  with  an  un.  s.
26.  and  when  the  unclean  s.  had  torn  him
3.  30.  because  they  said,  he  hath  an  unclean  s.

5.  2.  there  met  him  a  man  with  an  unclean  s.

8.  come  out  of  the  man,  thou  unclean  s.  Luke  8. 29.

7.  25.  whose  young  daughter  had  an  unclean  s.
Luke  9.  42.  Jesus  rebuked  uncleans,  and  healed  him

SPIRIT  of  understanding.

Isa.  11.  2.  the  s.  of  understand,  shall  rest  upon  him
SPIRIT  of  whoredoms.

Hos.  4.  12.  for  the  4'.  of  whoredoms  caused  them  to  err
5.  4.  for  s.  of  whoredoms  is  in  the  midst  of  their
SPIRIT  of  u’isdom.

Exod.  28.  3.  whom  1  have  filled  with  s.  of  wisdom
Dent.  34.  9.  Joshua  was  full  of  the  s.  of  wisdom
Isa.  11.2.  the  s.  of  wisdom  shall  rest  upon  him
Eph.  1.  17/ that  God  may  give  to  you  s.  of  wisdom
Wounded  SPIRIT.

Prov.  18. 14.  but  a  wounded  s.  vrho  can  bear?
SPIRITS.

Num.  16.  22.  O  God,  the  Q.  of  s.  of  all  flesh,  27- 16.
Psal.  104.  4.  who  maketh  his  angels  s.  lleb.  1.  7.
Prov.  16.  2.  but  the  Lord  weigheth  the  s.

Zech.  6.  5.  these  are  the  four  .y.  of  the  heavens
Mat.  8.  16.  and  he  cast  out  the  s.  with  his  word
10.  1.  he  gave  them  power  ag.  unclean  s.  Mark  6. 7.
Mark  1.  27.  for  with  authority  commandeth  he  the
unclean  s.  and  they  obey  him,  Luke  4.  36.

3.  11.  unclean  s.  fell  down  before  him,  and  cried
5.  13.  the  unclean  r.  entered  into  the  swine

Luke  10.  20.  rejoice  not  that  s.  are  subject  to  you
Acts  5.  16.  were  vexed  with  unclean  s.  were  healed

8.  7-  for  unclean  s.  crying,  came  out  of  many
1  Cor.  12.  10.  to  another  discerning  of  s.

14.  32.  s.  of  the  prophets  are  subject  to  the  proph.
Eph.  6.  f  12.  for  we  wrestle  against  wicked  s.

1  Tim.  4. 1.  depart  from  faith,  giving  heed  to  seduc.  s.
Heb.  1.  14.  are  they  not  all  ministering  s.

12. 9.  be  in  subjection  to  Father  of  s.  sent  tominister
23.  and  to  the  s.  of  just  men  made  perfect
1  Pet.  3. 19.  he  went  and  preached  to  the  s.  in  prison
1  John  4.  1.  try  the  s.  whether  they  are  of  God
Rev.  16. 13.  I  saw  three  unci.  s.  like  frogs  come  out

14.  they  are  the  s.  of  devils,  working  miracles

See  Evil,  Familiar,  Seven.
SPIRITUAL.

Hos.  9.  7-  the  prophet  is  a  fool,  the  s.  man  is  mad
Rom.  1.  11.  that  I  may  impart  to  you  some  s.  gift
7.  14.  we  know  that  the  law  is  s.  but  I  am  carnal

15.  27.  have  been  made  partakers  of  their  s.  things
1  Cor.  2.  13.  we  speak,  comparing  j.  things  with  .y.

15.  but  he  that  is  s.  judgeth  all  things

3. 1. 1  could  notspeakto you asuntor.  butas carnal

9.11.  if  we  have  sown  unto  you  y.  things
10.  3.  and  did  all  eat  the  same  s.  meat

4.  drink  of  the  same  s.  drink,  drank  of  that  s.  rock
12.  1.  now  concerning  s.  gifts,  brethren

14.  1.  desire  s.  gifts  ||  12.  ye  are  zealous  of  s.  gifts
37.  if  any  man  think  himself  a  prophet  or  s.

15.  44.  it  is  raised  a  s.  body,  there  is  a  s.  body
46.  that  was  not  first  which  is  s.  but  that  which  is

natural ;  and  afterwards  that  which  is  y.
Gal.  6. 1.  ye  which  are  s.  restore  such  an  one  in  meek.
Eph.  1.  3.  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  s.  blessings
5. 19.  speaking  to  yourselves  in  psalms  and  s.  songs

6. 12.  wrestle  against  y.  wickedness  in  high  places
Col.  1.  9.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  ali  s.  under¬


standing

3. 16.  admonish,  one  anothei  in  psalms  and y.  songs
1  Pet.  2.5. are  built  upas,  house,  to  offer  s.  sacrifices
SPIRITUALLY.

Rom.  8.  6.  but  to  be  s.  minded  is  life  and  peace
1  Cor.  2. 14.  nor  know  them,  because  are  s.  discerned
Rev.  11.  8.  which  s.  is  called  Sodom  and  Egypt
SPIT.


Lev.  15.  8.  that  hath  the  issue,  s.  on  him  that  is  clean
Num.  12.  14.  if  her  father  had  but  s.  in  her  face
Dent.  25.  9.  she  shall  s.  in  his  face  and  shall  say
Job  30.  10.  and  they  spare  not  to  s.  in  my  face
Mat.  26.67.  they  did  y.  in  his  face,  and  buffeted  him

27.  30.  and  they  s.  upon  him  and  smote  him
Mark  7.  33.  and  he  s.  and  touched  his  tongue

8.  23.  when  he  had  s.  on  his  eyes,  he  asked  him
10.  34.  they  shall  s.  upon  him  and  shall  kill  him

14.  65.  and  some  began  to  s.  on  him,  15.  l9.
SPITE.

Psal.  10. 14.  for  thou  beholdest  s.  to  requite  it
SPITEFU  LLY.


Mat.  22.  6.  they  entreated  them  s.  and  slew  them
Luke  18.  32.  he  shall  be  s.  entreated  and  spitted  on
SPITTED.


Zuke  18.32.  he  shall  be  spitefully  entreated  and  s.
SPITTING.

Isa.  50.  6.  I  hid  net  my  face  from  shame  and  s.
SPITTLE.


1  Sam.  21. 13.  he  let  his  s.  fall  down  on  his  beard
Job  7 .  19.  let  alone,  till  1  swallow  down  my  s.

30. 1 10.  they  withhold  not  s.  from  my  face
John  9.  6.  he  made  clay  of  s.  and  anointed  the  eyes
SPOIL,  Substantive.

Gen.  49.  27.  and  at  night  he  shall  divide  the  s.
Exod.  15.  9.  the  enemy  said,  I  will  divide  the  s.
Num.  31.  9.  Israel  took  the  s.  of  their  cattle,  11.

12.  and  they  brought  the  prey  and  s.  to  Moses
Dent.  2.  35.  cattle  we  took  tor  prey  and  the  s.  of  the
cities  which  we  took,  3.  7.  Josh.  8.  27.  1  11.  14.

13.  16.  thou  shalt  gather  all  the  s.  and  burn  it
20.  14.  the.?,  thou  shalt  take  to  thyself,  Josh.  8.  2.

Judy.  5.  30.  meet  for  the  necks  of  them  that  take  s.

14.  19.  Samson  slew  thirty  men  and  took  their  y.

1  Sam.  14.  30.  if  had  eaten  freely  to-day  of  the  s.

32.  the  people  flew  upon  the  s.  and  took  sheep

15.  19.  but  didst  fly  upon  the  s.  and  didst  evil

21.  but  the  people  took  of  the  s.  sheep  and  oxen
30.  16.  because  the  great  y.  that  they  had  taken

19.  neither  y.  nor  any  thing  was  lacking

20.  took  the  flocks  and  said,  this  is  David’s s.

22.  we  will  not  give  them  ought  of  the  s.


1  Sam.  30. 26.  he  sent  of  s.  to  elders  of  Jud.  and  hi»

triends  ;  behold  a  present  of  the  s.  of  enemies

2  Sam.  3.  22.  Joab  brought  in  a  great  y.  with  diem

12.  30.  he  brought  forth  of  the  v.  of  Rabbali
2  Kings  .3.  23.  now,  therefore,  Moab,  to  the  v.

21,  14.  they  shall  become  a  s.  to  their  enemies

1  Chron.  20.  2.  from  Rabbah  he  brought  much  s.

2  C 'hr.  14.  13.  they  carried  away  s.  fromEthiop  14.

15.  11.  they  offered  to  Lord  at  same  time  of  the  s.
20. 25.  when  Jehoshaphat  came  to  take  the  .y.  they

were  three  days  in  gathering  dies',  it  was  so  much

24.  23.  the  Syrians  sent  s.  to  the  king  of  Damascus

25.  13.  smote  3000of  them, and  took  much  s.

28.  8.  they  took  much  s.  and  brought  s.  to  Samaria

14.  so  the  armed  men  left  the  captives  and  the  s.

15.  with  they.  they  clothed  all  that  were  naked
Ezra  9.  7^our  kings  have  been  delivered  to  a  s.
Esth.  3. 13.  to  take  the  s.  of  them  for  a  prey,  8. 11.

9.  10.  but  on  they.  laid  they  not  their  hand
Job  29. 17.  1  plucked  the  s.  out  of  his  teeth
P s.  68.  12.  she  that  tarried  at  home  divided  the  s.
119. 162.  rejoice  at  thy  word,  as  one  findeth  great  y.
I  rov.  1.  13.  we  shall  till  our  houses  with  s.

16.  19.  than  to  divide  the  s.  with  the  proud

31.  11.  so  that  he  shall  have  no  need  of  s.

Isa.  3.14.  the  s.  of  the  poor  is  in  your  houses

8.  4.  the  s.  of  Samaria  shall  be  taken  away

9.  3.  and  as  men  rejoice  when  they  divide  the  s

10.  6. 1  will  give  him  a  charge  to  take  the  y

33  4.  your  y.  shall  be  gathered,  like  the  gathering

23.  then  is  the  prey  ot  a  great  y.  divided

42.  22.  they  are  for  a s.  and  none  saith,  restore

24.  who  gave  Jacob  for  a  y.  ?  did  not  the  Lord
53.  12.  he  shall  divide  the  y.  with  the  stron^

Jer.  2.  +  14.  is  isr.  a  servant  ?  why  is  Isr.  become  s.  ?
6.  7.  violence  and  s.  is  heard  in  her,  before  me  mder

15.  13.  thy  substance  and  treasures  will  I  give  to  s.

17.3. 1  will  give  thy  substance  and  treasures  to  y

20.  8.  since  1  spake,  1  cried  violence  and  y.

30.  16.  and  they  that  s.  thee  shall  be  a  y.

49.  32.  the  multitude  of  their  cattle  shall  be  a  s.

50.  10.  and  Chaldea  shall  be  a y.  saith  the  Lord
Ezek.  7-  21. 1  will  give  it  to  the  wicked  for  a  .y

25.  7.  Ammonite  tor  a  y.  [|  26.  5.  Tyrus  a  y.  10

.  29. 19.  N ebuchadrezzar  shall  take  s.  of  Egypt
■  S°  UP  to  take  a  s.  and  to  take  a  prey

13.  shall  say  to  thee,  art  thou  come  to  take  a  s.

45.  9.  O  princes  of  Israel,  remove  violence  and  s.

Dan.  11.  24.  he  shall  scatter  among  them  the  y
33.  yet  they  shall  fall  by  s.  many  days
Hos.  9.  t  6.  for  lo,  they  are  gone,  because  ot  s
Amos  3.  +  10.  who  store  upy.  in  their  palaces
5.  +  9.  that  strengtheneth  .y.  against  the  strong
Nah.  2.  9.  take  the  s.  of  silver,  take  the  .y.  of  gold
Hab.  2.  17.  the  s.  of  beasts  shall  cover  thee
Zech.  2.  9.  they  shall  be  a  5.  to  their  servants

14.  1.  thy  s.  shall  be  divided  in  the  midst  of  thee
SPOIL,  Verb.

Exod.  3.  22.  and  ye  shall  s.  the  Egyptians

1  Sam.  14. 36.  and  s.  them  until  morning  light

2  Sam.  23.  10.  people  returned  after  him  only  to  s.
Psal.  44. 10.  and  they  who  hate  us  y.  for  themselves

89.  41.  ail  that  pass  by  the  way  s.  him
109.  11.  and  let  the  stranger  s.  his  labour
Prov.fl2.Jl3.  will  s.  soul  of  those  that  spoiled  them
24.  15.  O  wicked  man,  s.  not  his  resting-place
Cant.  2. 15.  take  us  the  foxes  that  s.  the  vines
Isa.  11.  14.  they  shall  s.  them  of  the  east  together
37  •  14.  this  is  the  portion  of  them  that  y.  us
33.  1.  when  shalt  cease  to  y.  thou  shalt  be  spoiled
Jer.  5.  6.  a  wolf  of  the  evening  shall  s.  them

20.5. 1  will  give  Jerusalem  to  them  that  shall  y.it
30. 16.  and  they  that  s.  thee  shall  be  a  .y.

47.  4.  the  day  that  cometh  to  y.  the  Philistines

49.  28.  go  up  to  Kedar,  and  s.  the  men  of  the  east

50.  10.  all  that  y.  her,  shall  be  satisfied,  saith  Lord
Ezek.  14.  15.  and  they  s.  it,  so  that  it  be  desolate

32.  12.  and  they  shall  s.  the  pomp  of  Egypt
39. 10.  they  shall  s.  those  that  spoiled  them

Hos.  10.  2.  shall  break  their  altars,  y.  their  images
13.  15.  he  shall  s.  the  treas.  of  all  pleasant  vessels
Hab.  2.  8.  all  the  remnant  of  the  people  shall  s.  thee
Zeph.  2.  9.  the  residue  of  my  people  shall  .y.  them
Mat.  12.  29.  or  else  how  can  one  enter  into  a  strong
man’s  house,  and  s.  his  goods  ?  Mark  3.  27^.
Col.  2.  8.  beware  lestanv  many,  you  thro’  philosou
SPOILED.

Gen.  34.  27-  the  sons  of  Jacob  came  and  s.  the  city

29.  they  y.  all  that  was  in  Hamor’s  house
Exod.  12.  36.  and  they  s.  the  Egyptians

Dent.  28. 29.  thou  shalt  be  only  oppressed  and  s.
Judy.  2. 14.  into  the  hand  of  spoilers  thaty.  them

16.  out  of  the  hand  of  those  that.y.  them

1  Sam.  14.  48.  delivered  Isr.  from  them  that.y.  them
17-  53.  and  they  s.  the  Philistines’  tents

2  Kings'!.  16.  Israel  s.  the  tents  of  the  Syrians
2  Chron.  14. 14.  Asa  s.  all  the  cities  of  Gerar
Job  12. 17.  he  leadeth  counsellors  away  s.

19.  leads  princes  awa3T  s.  overthrows  mightv
Psal.  76. 5.  the  stout-hearted  are  s.  they  have  slept
Prov.  22. 23.  and  spoil  the  soul  of  those  that  y.  them
Isa.  13. 16.  their  houses  shall  be  s.  their  wives  ravis.

18.  2.  a  nation  whose  land  the  rivers  have  s.  7.

24.  3.  the  land  shall  be  utterly  emptied  and  s.

33.  1.  woe  to  thee  that  spoilest,  and  wast  not  s.

42.  22.  but  this  is  a  people  robbed  and  s.

Jer.  2. 14.  is  Israel  a  servant  ?  why  is  he  s.  ?

4. 13.  woe  unto  us,  for  we  are  y.

20.  for  whole  land  is  s.  suddenly  my  tents  are  s.

30.  and  when  thou  art  s.  what  "wilt  thou  do  ?

9. 19.  how  are  we  s. !  ||  10.  20.  m3'  tabernacle  is  s

21.  12.  and  deliver  him  that  is  s.  22.  3.

25.  36.  for  the  Lord  hath  s.  their  pasture

48.  1.  Nebo  is  s.  ||  15.  Moab  is  s.  and  gone,  20.

49.  3.  howl,  for  Ai  is  s.  10.  Esau,  his  seed  is  s.

51.  55.  because  the  Lord  hath  s.  Babylon
Ezek.  18. 7-  and  hath  s.  none  by  violence,  16.

12.  hath  oppressed,  hath  ,y.  63' violence,  18.

23.  46. 1  will  give  them  to  be ‘removed  and  s.

39. 10.  they  shall  spoil  those  that  them
Hos.  10. 14.  and  all  thy  fortresses  shall  be  s.

Amos  3.11.  and  thy  palaces  shall  be  s.

R  2  467


SPO


SPO


S  PR


Amos  5.  9.  that  strengthened  the  4.  agst.the  strong
Mic.  2.  4.  shall  lament,  and  say,  we  be  utterly  s.
Hab.  2.  8.  because  thou  hast  s.  many  nations
Zech.  2.  8.  he  sent  me  to  the  nations  which  s.  you
11.  2.  howl,  because  the  mighty  are  s.

3.  their  glory  is  ?.  for  the  pride  of  Jordan  is  s.
Col.  2. 15.  and  having  s.  principalities  and  powers
SPOILER.

Isa.  16.  4.  be  thou  a  covert  front  face  of  s.  the  s.  cease.
21.  2.  the  s.  spoileth,  go  up,  O  Elam  ;  besiege
Jer.  6.  26.  for  the  s.  shall  suddenly  come  on  us

15.  8.  1  have  brought  upon  them  a  s.  at  noon-day
48.  8.  the  s.  shall  come  upon  every  city
18.  for  the  s.  of  Moab  shall  come  upon  thee
32.  the  .?.  is  fallen  upon  thy  summer  fruits
51.  56.  because  the  .?.  is  come  upon  Babylon
SPOILERS.

Jud< 7.2.  14.  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot,  and  he  deli¬
vered  them  into  the  hand  of  the  ?.  2  Kings  17.  20.
1  Sam.  13. 17.  the  came  out  of  camp  of  Philistines
14.  15.  the  garrison  and  the  .r.  they  also  trembled
Jer.  12. 12.  the  s.  are  come  upon  all  high  places
51.  48.  for  the  s.  shall  come  to  her  from  the  north
53.  yet  from  me  shall  .?.  come  to  her,  saith  Lord
SPO  I  LEST.

Isa.  33. 1.  woe  to  thee  that  .v.  and  thou  wast  not  spoil.
SPOILETH.

Psal.  35. 10.  who  deliverest  needy  from  him  that  s.
Isa.  21. 2.  the  spoiler.?.  ||  Hos.  7. 1.  troop  of  robbers?.
Nah.  3. 16.  the  canker-worm  s.  and  flieth  away
SPOILING.

Psal.  35. 12.  me  evil  for  good,  to  the  .?.  of  my  soul
Isa.  22. 4.  because  of  the .?.  of  the  daughter  of  people
Jer.  48. 3.  a  voice  from  Horonaim  ?.  and  destruction
Hah.  1.  .3.  for  .?.  and  violence  are  before  me
Heb.  10.  .34.  for  ye  took  joyfully  the.?,  of  your  goods
SPOILS.

Josh.  7.  21.  T  saw  among  the  s.  a  goodly  garment
1  Chron.  26.  27.  out  of  ?.  in  battle  did  they  dedicate
Isa.  25. 11.  shall  bring  down  their  pride  with  the  .?.
Luke  11.  22.  he  taketh  his  armour  and  divideth  his .?.
Heb.  7.  4.  Abraham  gave  the  tenth  of  the  s.
SPOKEN.

Gen.  18. 19.  Lord  may  bring  what  he  hath .?.  of  him
Nurn.  14.  28.  as  ye  have .?.  in  mine  ears,  so  will  I  do

21.7-  for  we  have  s.  against  the  Lord  and  thee
23.  19.  hath  he  ?.  and  shall  he  not  make  it  good  ?

Deut.  5.  28.  I  have  heard  the  words  they  have  s.  to
thee,  they  have  well  said  all  that  they  have  s.

13.  5.  because  he  hath  .?.  to  turn  you  away  from  L.
18. 17.  they  have  well  ?.  that  which  they  have  ?.

1  Sam.  25.  30.  the  Lord  hath  done  all  he  hath  s.

2  Sam.  2.  27.  unless  thou  hadst .?.  people  had  gone  up

14.  19.  turn  from  ought  my  lord  the  king  hath  s.
17-.6.  Ahithophel  hath  .?.  after  this  manner

1  Kings  2.  2.3.  if  Adonijah  have  not  s.  this  word
12.  9.  what  counsel  give  ye,  that  we  may  answer

this  people  who  have  s.  to  me  ?  2  Chron.  10.  9.
18t  24.  and  all  the  people  said,  it  is  well  .?.

2  Kings  A.  1.3.  wouldst  thou  be  .?.  for  to  the  king?
Job  3.3_.  2.  behold,  my  tongue  hath  .?.  in  my  mouth

34.  .35.  Job  hath  .?.  without  knowledge  and  wisdom
42.  7-  ye  have  not?,  of  me  as  my  servant  Job,  8.
Psal.  66. 14.  my  mouth  hath  .?.  when  in  trouble
87-  3.  glorious  things  are  ?.  of  thee,  O  city  of  God
109.  2.  they  have  ?.  against  me  with  a  lying  tongue
Prov.  15.  2.3.  a  word  ?.  in  due  season,  how  good  is  it !
25.  11.  a  word  fitly  ?.  is  like  apples  of  gold
Eccl.  7.  21.  take  no  heed  to  all  words  that  are  ?.
Cant.  8.8.  in  the  day  when  she  shall  be  .?.  for
Isa.  23.  4,  for  the  sea  hath  ?.  1|  38.  15.  he  hath  .?.

59.  3.  your  hands  are  defiled,  your  lips  have  ?.  lies
Jer.  26. 16.  he  hath  ?.  to  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
29.  23.  and  have  ?.  lying  words  in  my  name

33. 24.  considerest  thou  not  what  this  people  have  ?.

44. 25.  ye  and  your  wives  have  ?.  with  your  mouths
Ezek.  13.  7.  have  ye  not  ?.  a  lying  divination

8.  because  ye  have  ?.  vanity,  and  seen  lies
Dan.  4.  31.  O  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  to  thee  it  is  ?.
Hos."l.  13.  yet  they  have  ?.  lies  against  me
10.  4.  they  have  .?.  words,  swearing  falsely
Amos  5.  14.  Lord  shall  be  with  you,  as  ye  have  ?.
Obad.  12.  nor  shouldst  thou  have  ?.  proudly  in  distr.
Mic.  6. 12.  the  inhabitants  thereof  have  ?.  lies
Zech.  10.  2.  for  the  idols  have  ?.  vanity  and  diviners
Mai.  3. 1.3.  what  have  we  .?.  so  much  against  thee  ?
Afar.  26. 65.  high  priest  saying,  he  hath  ?.  blasphemy
Mark  14.  9.  shall  be  ?.  of  for  a  memorial  of  her
Luke 2. 33.  marvelled  at  things  which  were.?,  of  him
34.  and  for  a  sign  which  shall  be?,  against
12.  .3.  what  ye  have  ?.  in  darkness,  what  ?.  in  ear

18.  34.  nor  knew  they  the  things  which  were  .?.

John  15.  22.  if  I  had  not  come  and  .?.  to  them
Acts  3. 24.  as  many  as  have  .?.  foretold  of  these  days

8.  24.  none  of  these  things  ye  have  ?.  come  on  me

1.3.  40.  lest  that  come  on  you  ?.  of  in  the  prophets
46.  the  word  should  first  have  been  s.  fo  you

16.  14.  Lydia  attended  to  the  things  that  were  .?.

19.  36.  seeing  that  these  things  cannot  be  ?.  against

2.3.  9.  but  if  a  spirit  or  angel  hath  ?.  to  him
27.11.  more  than  those  things  that  were  ?.  by  Paul

.35.  when  had  thus  ?.  took  bread  and  gave  thanks
28.  22.  we  know  that  every  where  it  is  ?.  against
Rom.  1.8.  your  faith  is?,  of  thro'  the  whole  world
4. 18.  according  to  that  which  was  ?.  so  thy  seed  be

14.  16.  let  not  then  your  good  he  evil  s.  of

15.  21.  to  whom  he  was  not  ?.  of  they  shall  see

1  Cor.  10.  30.  why  am  I  evil .?.  of  for  that  for  which
14.9.  how  shall  it  be  known  what  is  s.?

Heb.  1.2.  hath  in  these  last  days.?,  to  us  by  his  Son
2.2.  for  if  the  word  .?.  by  angels  was  stedfast
3.  5.  for  a  testimony  of  those  things  to  be  ?.  after
4. 8.  lie  would  not  afterward  have  ?.  of  another  day
7.  13.  lor  he  of  whom  these  things  are  .?,  perfaineth
8. 1.  of  things  which  we  have  ?.  this  is  the  sum
12. 19.  intreatcd  the  word  should  not  be .?.  any  more

1.3.7-  who  have  .?.  unto  you  the  word  of  God
Pet.  4. 14.  on  their  part  he  is  evil  ?.  of

2  Pet.  2.  2.  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  .?.  of

3.  2.  ye  may  be  mindful  of  words  which  were  .?.  be.
Jude  15.  which  ungodly  sinners  have  .?.  against  him

17.  remember  the  words  which  were  ?.  before
4fi8


SPOKEN  with  God,  expressly.

Gen.  21.  2.  at  set  time  of  which  God  had  .?.  fo  him
Deut.  26.  19.  an  holy  people  to  thy  G.  as  he  hath  .?.
Psal.  60.  6.  God  hath  .?.  in  his  holiness,  108.  j.

62.  11.  God  hath  ?.  once,  twice  have  I  heard
Mat.  22.  31.  that  which  was  ?.  to  you  by  God
Acts  3.  21.  which  God  hath.?,  by  his  holy  prophets
See  Lor  n.

1  have,  or  have  I  SPOKEN.

Gen.  28.  15.  I  have  (lone  which  I  have  s.  to  thee
41.  28.  this  is  the  thing  I  have  .?.  to  Pharaoh
Exod.  32.  13.  all  this  land  1  have  .?.  of  will  I  give
34.  lead  people  to  the  place  of  which  I  have  ?.

1  S'am.  1.  16.  out  of  my  grief  have  Is.  hitherto
3.  12.  perform  ag.  Eli  all  things  which  1  have  .?.
20.  2.3.  as  touching  the  matter  which  T  have  s.

Job  21.  3.  and  after  that  I  have  ?.  mock  on
40.  5.  once  have  1  s.  but  I  will  not  answer
Psal.  116. 10.  I  will  walk  before  L.  in  land  of  living,
1  believed,  therefore  have  I  s.  2  Cor.  4.  1.3.
Isa.  45.  19.  1  have  not .?.  in  secret,  48.  16.

46.  11.  1  have  .?.  it,  I  will  also  bring  it  to  pass

48.  15.  1,  even  I,  have  s.  yea  1  have  called  him
Jer.  4.  28.  1  h.  ?.  it,  I  have  proposed  it,  will  not  rep.

2.3.  21.  I  have  not  ?.  to  them  yet  they  prophesied

25.  3.  I  h.  s.  to  you  rising  early,  and  speak.  35.  14.
.30.  2.  write  thee  all  words  I  have  s.  to  thee,  .36.  2.
35.  17.  because  I  have  .?.  but  they  have  not  heard

Ezek. 12. 28.  but  word  which  1  have  s.  shall  be  done

13.  7.  yc  say,  Lord  saith  it,  albeit  1  have  not  ?.

26.  5.  for  1  haves,  it,  saith  the  Lord,  28.  10.

.36.  5.  surely'  in  the  fire  of  my  jealousy  have  Is.  6.
38.  17.  art  thou  he  of  whom  7  have  s.  in  old  time
19-  for  in  jealousy  and  fire  of  my  wrath  have  1  ?.
.39.  8.  it  is  come,  this  is  the  day  whereof  1  have  s.
Hos.  12. 10.  I  have  also  .?.  by'  the  prophets
John  12.  48.  the  word  that  1  have  s. shall  judge  him

49.  for  1  have  not  ?.  of  myself  but  the  Father

14.  25.  these  things  have  7?.  15.  11.  I  16.1,25,33.

15.  .3.  ye  are  clean  thro’  the  word  I  have  s.  to  you
18.  23.  if  I  have  s.  evil,  bear  wilnessof  the  evil

Had  SPOKEN.

Gen.  44.  2.  according  to  the  word  Joseph  had  s.
Num.  23.  2.  and  Balak  did  as  Balaam  had .?.

1  Stags  13.  11.  told  father  words  he  hads.  to  king
Cl.  4.  which  Naboth  the  .Jezreelite  had  s.  to  him

2  Kings  1. 17.  according  to  word  which  Elijah  had  s.
7.  18.  it  came  to  pass  as  the  man  of  God  had  ?.

Ezra  8.  22.  because  we  had  s.  unto  the  king
Neh.  2.  18.  I  told  also  king’s  words  that  he  had  .?.
Esth.  7.  9.  Mordecai,  who  had  s.  good  for  the  king
Job  .32.  4.  now  Elihu  had  waited  till  Jot)  had  s.

Jer.  36.  4.  Baruch  wrote  words  L.  had  ?.  by  Jerem.
Dan.  10.  11.  and  when  he  had  s.  this  word  to  me
15.  when  he  had  s.  such  voids,  I  became  dumb
19.  when  he  had  s.  untome,  I  was  strengthened
Mark  l.  42.  as  soon  as  he  had s.  the  leprosy  departed
12.  12.  for  they  knew  that  he  had  s.  the  parable
against  them,  and  they  left  him,  Luke  20.  19.
Luke  19.  28.  when  he  had  thus  ?.  24.  40.  John  9  6
I  11.  43.  I  18.  22.  Acts  19.  41.  I  20.  36. 1  26.  30.’
John  4.  50.  the  man  believed  word  that  Jesus  hads.
11.  1.3.  they  thought  he  hads.  of  taking  rest
21.  19.  when  he  had  s.  this,  he  saith,  follow  me
Acts 9. 2 1 .  Barnabds declared  that  he  had s.  unto  him
28.25.  departed,  after  Paul  had  ?.  one  word
Heb.  9. 19.  when  Moses  hads.  every  precept  to  peo.
SPOKEN  with  prophet.

Dent.  18.  22.  but  prophet  hath  .?.  it  presumptuously
Ezek.  14.  9.  if  prophet  be  deceived  when  he  hath  .?.
Mat.  2. 17.  what  was?,  by  Jeremy'  the  prophet,  27. 9.
23.  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  ?.  by  the
prophet ,  be  called  a  Nazarene,  1.3.  35.  I  27.  35.
.3.  3.  this  is  he  that  was .?.  of  by  the  prophet  Esaias
4.  14.  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  .?.  by
Esaias  the  prophet,  8.  17.  |  12.  17.  |  21.4.
24.  15.  when  yeshall  see  the  abomination  of  deso¬
lation.?,  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  Mark  13. 14.
Luke 24.  25.  to  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  ?
Acts  2.  16.  this  was?,  of  by  the  prophet  Joel
Jam.  5.  10.  take,  my  brethren, prophets  who  have?.
Thou  hast  SPO  K  EN.

Gen.  19.21.  this  city  for  the  which  thou  hast .?.

Exod.  4. 10.  nor  since  thou  hast  s.  to  thy  servant
10.  29.  Moses  said,  thou  hast .?.  well,  not  see
3.3.  17.  I  will  do  this  thing  that  thou  hast  ?.

Num.  14.  17.  power  of  Lord  be  great,  as  thou  hosts.
Dent.  1.  14.  the  thing  which  thou  hast  s.  is  good
Ruth  2. 1.3.  thou  hast  s.  friendly  to  thine  handmaid
2  Sam.  6.  22.  the  maid-servants  which  thou  hast  ?.  of
7. 19.  but  thou  hosts,  also  of  thy  servant's  house  for
a  great  while  to  come,  25.  1  Chron.  17. 17,  2.3
2  Kings  20.  19.  then  said  Hezekiah  to  Isaiah,  good
is  the  word  of  T.ord  which  thou  hosts.  Isa.  39.  8
Esth.  6.  10.  let  nothing  fail  of  all  that  thou  hast  s.

Job  3.3.  8.  surely  thou  hast  s.  in  my  hearing
Jer.  .3.5.  behold,  thou  hast  ?.  and  done  evil  things
.32.  24.  and  that  which  thou  hast  s.  is  come  to  pass
44.  16.  as  for  the  word  that  thou  hast  .?.  unto  us
51. 62.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  s.  against  this  place
Ezek.  .35.  12.  I  have  heard  blasphemies  thou  hast  s.
SPOKES.

1  Kings  7.  3.3.  their  felloes  and  .?.  were  all  molten
SPOKESMAN.

E.rod.  4.  16.  he  shall  be  thy  ?.  unto  the  people
SPOON.

Num.  7.  14.  one  ?.  of  ten  shekels  of  gold,  full  of
incense,  20,  26,  32,  38,  44,  50,  56,  62.
SPOONS.

Exod.  25.  29.  make  the  dishes  thereof  and  .?.

.37.  16.  he  made  his  dishes  and  his?,  and  bowls
Num.  4.  7.  and  put  thereon  the  dishes  and  the?.

7-  84.  twelve  silver  bowls,  twelve  .?.  of  gold,  86.

1  Kings  7.50.  the?,  were  of  pure  gold,  2  Chr.  4.  22.

2  Kings  25.  14.  the  ?.  took  he  away,  Jer.  52.  18,  19.

2  Chron  24.  14.  of  rest  of  the  money  ?.  were  made

SPORT,  Substantive.

Jvdg.16. 25.  that  Samson  may  make  ?.  and  he  made  ?.

27.  thousand  that  beheld  while  Samson  made  ?.
Prov.  10.  2.3.  it  is  a.v.  to  a  fool  to  do  mischief
21.  t  17.  lie  that  loveth  .?.  shall  be  a  poor  man
26.  19.  that  deceiveth  and  saith,  am  not  I  in  .?.  ?


SPORT.

Isa.  57.  4.  against  whom  do  ye  1.  yourvlv?s  ‘
SPORTING.

Gen.  26.8.  Tsaac-  was  ?.  with  Hebekah  his  wife
*  ^  13*  J.themselvfs  with  their  own  deceiving

spo  r,

Num.  19.  2.  bring  thee  a  red  heifer  without.?.

28.  .3.  two  lambs  without .?.  9.  11.  |  29.  17,  26
Deut.  .32.  5.  their  ?.  is  not  the  ?.  of  his  children
Job  11.  15.  thou  shalt  lift  up  thy  face  without  ?
Cant.  4.  7-  thou  art  all  tair,  there  is  no  .?.  in  thee
Lph.  5.  27.  a  glorious  church,  not  having  ?.

1  Tim.  6. 14.  keep  this  commandment  without .?.
Heb.  9. 14.  who  offered  himself  without  .?.  to  God

1  Pet.  1. 19.  as  of  a  lamb  without  ?.  or  blemish

2  Pet.  3.  14.  that  ye  may  be  found  without?.

See  Bright.

*  SPOTTED.

Gen.  30.  .32.  removing  from  thence  all  the  ?.  cattle
.3.3.  every  one  that  is  not  ?.  shall  be  counted  stolen
39.  the  flocks  brought  forth  cattle  speck  led  and  ?.
Jude  23.  hating  even  the  garment  ?.  by  the  flesh
r  SPOTS.

Jer.  1.3.  2.3.  or  can  the  leopard  change  his  .?.  ?

2  Pet.  2.  13.  ?.  they  are  and  blemishes,  sporting
Jude  12.  these  are  ?.  in  yrour  feasts  of  charity
SPOUSE.

Cant.  4.  8.  come  with  me  from  Lebanon,  my  .?.

9.  thou  hast  ravished  my'heart,my  sister,  my  s.

10.  how  fair  is  thy  love,  my  sister,  my  ?.

11.  thy  lips,  O  my  .?.  drop  as  the  honey-comb

12.  a  garden  inclosed  is  my  sister,  my  ?.

5.  1.  1  am  come  into  my  garden,  my  sister,  my  ?.
Tr  SPOUSES.

IIos.  4.  1.3.  and  your  ?.  shall  commit  adultery
14-  1  will  not  punish  your  ?.  when  they  commit
SPOUTS.  See  Water-spouts.

„  SPRANG.

Mark  4.  8.  and  did  yield  fruit  that .?.  up,  Luke  8. 8.
Acts  16.  29.  then  lie  called  fora  light  and?,  in
Heb.  7.  14.  for  it  is  evident  our  Lord  .?.  out  of  Juda

11.  12.  therefore  there.?,  of  one  so  many  as  the  stars

See  Sprung.

_  SPREAD.

Gen.  .3.3. 19.  field  where  Jacob  had  ?.  his  tent,  35. 21.
Lev.  1.3. 5.  and  the  plague  ?.  not  in  the  skin,  6, 23, 28
.32.  and  behold,  if  the  seal!  ?.  not,  34.

35.  but  if  the  scall  ?.  much  in  the  skin,  36.

51.  if  the  plague  be  .?.  in  a  garment,  14.  .39,44.

5.3.  and  it  the  plague  be  not .?.  55.  |  14.  48.

Num.  4.  7.  on  the  table  they  shall  ?.  cloth  of  blue,  1 1.
8.  they  shall  ?.  a  scarlet  cloth  ||  13.  ?.  a  purple  cloth
14.  they  shall  .?.  on  it  a  covering  of  badgers'  skins
Deut.  22.  17. .?.  the  cloth  before  the  elders  of  city
Judg.  8.  25.  they  .?.  a  garment,  and  cast  in  ear-rings
15.  9.  then  the  Philistines  .?.  themselves  in  Lehi

1  Sam.  4.  J  2.  and  when  the  battle  was?.

2  Sam.  5.  18.  the  Philistines  also  came  and  .?.  them¬

selves  in  valley  of  Rephaim,  22.  1  Chr.  14.  9, 1.3.
16.22.  they?.  Absalom  a  tent  on  top  of  the  house
17.  19.  woman  s.  a  covering  on  the  well’s  mouth
2L  10.  Rizpah.r.  sackcloth  for  heron  the  rock

1  K  ings  6.  .32.  carved  upon  them  carvings  of  cheru
buns,  and  ?.  gold  upon  cherubims  and  palm-trees

8.  54.  he  arose,  with  his  hands?,  up  to  heaven

2  Kings 8.  15.  IJazael  ?.  a  thick  cloth  on  his  face
19.  14.  ?.  the  letter  before  the  Lord,  Isa.  37.  14.
Psal.  105.  .39.  he  ?.  a  cloud  for  a  covering

140.  5.  they  have  ?.  a  net  by  the  way-side
Prov.  1.  17.  surely  in  vain  net  is?,  insight  of  fowler
Isa.  14.  11.  worm  is  ?.  under  thee,  worms  cover  thee
19.8.  they  that .?.  netson  the  waters  shall  languish
.3.3.  2.3.  they  could  not  ?.  the  sail,  lame  take  the  prey
58.  5.  and  to  .?.  sackcloth  and  ashes  under  him
Jer.  8.  2.  and  they  shall  ?.  them  before  the  sun
10.  9.  silver  ?.  into  plates  is  brought  from  Tar.diish
Lam.  1 . 13.  he  hath  ?.  net  for  my  feet, turned  me  back
Ezek.  2.  10.  and  he  ?.  the  roll  before  me

12.  13.  my  net  also  will  I  ?.  upon  him,  17.  20.

26.  14.  thou  shalt  be  a  place  to  ?.  nets  upon

Dos.  5. 1.  because  ye  have  been  a  net?,  upon  Tabor
7.  12.  when  they  shall  go,  I  will  .?.  my  net  on  them
14.  6.  his  branches  shall  ?.  his  beauty  as  olive-tree
Joel  2.  2.  as  the  morning.?,  upon  the  mountains
Hah.  1. 8.  their  horsemen  shall  .?.  themselves
Mai.  2.  .3.  behold,  I  will  s.  dung  upon  your  facts
Mat.  21.8.  and  a  very  great  multitude  ?.  their  gar
ments  in  the  way,  Mark  11.8.  Luke  19.  .36.
Acts  4. 17.  but  that  it  ?.  no  further  among  the  people
SP  R  E  A  D  abroad.

Gen.  10. 18.  families  of  the  Canaanites  were  s. abroad
28. 14.  thou  shal  t  ?.  abroad  to  the  west  and  east
Exod.  9.  29.  1  will  ?.  abroad  my  hands  to  the  Lord
.3.3.  Moses  .?.  abroad  his  hands  to  the  T.ord
40.  19.  he  .?.  abroad  the  tent  over  the  tabernacle
Lev.  1.3.  7-  but  if  the  scab  ?.  much  abroad,  22.  27.
Num.  11.  .32.  they  ?.  abr.  the  quails  round  the  camp

1  Sam.  .30.  16.  they  were  ?.  abroad  on  the  earth

2  Sam. 22.43.1  did  stamp  and  .?.  abroadm'me  enemies

1  Chron.  14. 13.  the  Philistines  ?.  themselves  abroad

2  Chron.  26.8.  Uzziah’sname  ?.  abroad.  15.

Zech.  1.  17.  my  cities  thro’  prosperity  be.?,  abroad

2.  6.  I  have  ?.  you  abroad  as  the  four  winds
Mat.  9.  31.  but  they  when  departed  .?.  abroad  his
fame  in  all  that  country,  Mark  1. 28.  I  6.  14.

1  Thess.  1.  8.  your  faith  to  God-ward  is  ?.  abroad
SPREA  D  forth.

Num.  24.  6.  as  valleys  are  they  ?.  forth  as  gardens
1  Kings  8.  7.  the  cherubims  ?.  forth  their  two  \\  ings
22.  .Solomon  ?.  forth  his  hands,  2  Chron.  6.  12, 1.3.
38.  know  the  plague  of  his  own  heart,  and  .?.  forth
his  hands  towards  this  house,  2  Chr.  6.29
La.  1. 15.  when  yes.  forth  your  hands,  I  will  hide
25.11.  he  shall  s.  forth  hands,  as  he  that  s\\  immeth
42.  5.  thus  saith  God,  he  that  ?.  forth  the  earth
Ezek.  47 •  10.  they  shall  he  a  place  to  s.  forth  nets
SPREAD  over.

Num.  4.  6.  they  shall  .?.  over  ita  cloth  wholly  of  blue
Ruth  .3.9.?.  therefore  thy  skirt  over  thine  handmaid
La.  25.  7-  and  the  vail  that  is  ?.  over  all  nations
Jer.  4.3.  10.  he  shall  .?.  his  royal  pavilion  over  them
48.  40.  and  he  shall  ?.  his  wings  over  Moah


SPR


ST  A


ST  A


Jer.  49.  22.  and  lie  shall  s.  his  wings  over  Bozrah
Ezek.  16.  8. 1  s.  my  skirt  over  thee  and  covered  thee
19.  8.  then  the  nations  s.  their  net  over  him
SPREAD  out.

Ezod.  37.  9.  cherubitns  s.  out  wings,  1  Chr.  28. 18.
Ezra  9.  5.  1  s.  out  my  hands  to  the  Lord  my  God
Job  29.  19.  my  root  was  s.  out  by  the  waters
37.  18.  hast  thou  with  him  ).  out  the  sky  i
Isa.  48.  t  13.  palm  of  my  hand  hath  s.  out  heavens
65.  2.  have  s.  out  my  hands  to  a  rebellious  people
Lam.  1.  10.  the  adversary  hath  s.  out  his  hand
Ezek.  32.  3.  1  will  therefore  s.  out  my  net  over  thee
SPREADES  T.

Ezek.  27.7.  fine  linen  which  thou  s.  forth  for  thy  sail
.  SPREADETH.

Lev.  1.3.  8.  if  the  priest  see  that  scab.?,  in  the  skin
JJeut.  32.  11.  as  an  eagle  ).  abroad  her  wings
Job  9.  8.  God  who  alone  s.  out  the  heavens

26.  9.  and  he  ).  his  clpud  upon  it
36.  30.  behold,  he  s.  his  light  upon  it,  and  covereth
41.  30.  he  s.  sharp-pointed  things  on  the  mire
Prov.  29.  5.  a  man  that  ttattereth  his  neighb.  s.  a  net
Isa.  25.  11.  as  he  that  swimmeth  s.  forth  his  hands
40.  19.  and  the  goldsmith  s.  it  over  with  gold
22.  that  s.  the  heavens  as  a  tent  to  dwell  in

44.  24.  1  the  Ld.  that  s.  abroad  the  earth  by  tnyself
Jer.  4.  31.  the  daughter  of  Zion  ).  her  hands
17.  8.  a  tree  that  s.  out  her  roots  by  the  river
Lam.  1.17.  Zion  s.  forth  her  hands,  hone  comfort  her
SPREADING.

Lev.  13.  57-  and  if  it  appears,  it  is  a  s.  plague
Psal.  37.  35.  1  have  seen  the  wicked  s.  himself
Ezek.  17.  6.  and  it  grew,  and  became  a  s.  vine
SPREADING.

Ezek.  26.  5.  it  shall  be  a  place  for  the  s.  of  nets
SPREADINGS.

Job  36. 29.  can  any  understand  the  s.  of  the  clouds  '
SPRIGS.


Isa.  18.  5.  for  afore  harvest  he  shall  cut  off  the  s.
Ezek.  17.  6.  it  became  a  vine,  and  shot  forth  ).
SPRING.

2  Kings  2.  21.  he  went  forth  to  the  s.  of  the  water;
Prov.  25.  26.  is  as  a  troubled  fountain  and  corrupt  )
Cant.  4.  12.  my  sister,  my  spouse,  is  a  ).  shut  up
/ra.58.11.  shalt  be  like  s.  of  water,  whose  waters  fai
Hos.  13.15.  his  s. shall  become  dry  and  fountain  driei
SPRINGS.

Dent.  4.  49.  to  the  plain  under  the  s.  of  Pisgah
Josh.  10.  40.  Joshua  smote  all  the  country  of  the  s
12.  8.  the  kings  in  the  plains  and  in  the  ).

15.19.  give  me  ).  of  water,  gave  upper.?.  Judg.  1.15
Job  38.  18.  hast  thou  entered  into  the  s.  of  the  sea  :
Psal.  87-  7.  all  my  s.  are  in  thee
104.  10.  he  sendeth  the  s.  into  the  valleys
107  .  33.  heturneth  the  water  s.  into  drv  ground
35.  he  turneth  dry  ground  into  water
Isa.  35.  7.  and  the  thirsty  land  become  s.  of  water
41.  18.  I  will  make  the  dry  land  s.  of  water
49.  10.  even  by  the  ).  of  water  shall  he  guide  them
Jer.  51.36. 1  will  dry  up  her  sea  and  make  her).  drv
SPRING.  y

1  Sam.  9. 26.  about  ).  of  the  day  Samuel  called  Saul
See  Day  spring.

SPRING.


Ezek.  17. 9.  it  shall  wither  in  all  the  leaves  of  her  )
SPRING.

Num.  21. 17.  Israel  sang,  s.  up,  O  well,  singye  to  it
Deut.  8.7-  and  depths  that.?,  out  of  valleys  and  hills
Judg.  19.  25.  when  the  day  began  to  ).  they  let  her  go
Job  5.  6.  neither  doth  trouble  ).  out  of  the  ground
38.  27-  to  cause  bud  of  the  tender  herb  to  s.  forth
Psal.  85.  11.  truth  shall  s.  out  of  the  earth
92.  7.  when  the  w icked  s.  as  the  grass
Isa.  42.  9.  before  they  j.  forth,  l  tell  you  of  them
43.  19.  I  will  do  a  new  thing,  now  it  shall  s.  forth
44.4.  they  shall  s.  up  as  among  the  grass,  as  willows
45.  8.  and  let  righteousness  ).  up  together
58.  8.  and  thine  health  shall  s.  forth  speedily
61.  11.  as  garden  causeth  things  that  are  sown  to  )
Lord  will  cause  praise  to  s.  forth  before  nations
Joel  2.  22.  be  not  afraid,  for  the  pastures  do  .?.
Mark  4.  27-  the  seed  should  ).  he  knoweth  not  how
SPR1NGETH.


1  Krngs  4.  .33.  even  to  hyssop  that  s.  out  of  the  wall

2  Kings  19.29.  ye  shall  eat  in  the  second  year  that

which  s.  of  same,  and  in  third  sow,  Isa.  37.  30
Hos.  10.  4.  thus  judgment ).  up  as  hemlock  infield
SPRINGING.

Psal.  65.  10.  thou  blessedst  the  s.  thereof
SPRINGING.

Gen.  26.  19.  they  found  there  a  well  of  s.  water
2  Sam.  23.  4.  as  the  tender  grass  ).  out  ot  the  earth
John  4.  14.  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  s.  up
Heb.  12,15.  lest  any  root  of  bittern,  ).  up  ti  ouble  you
SPRINKLE.

Exod.  9.8.  let  Moses  ).  the  ashes  toward  the  heaven
Lev.  14.  7.  he  shall  s.  on  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed
16.  the  priest  shall  j.  of  the  oil  with  his  finger

27 .  priest  shall  s.  of  the  oil  with  his  right  finger
51.  and  shall  s.  the  house  seven  times
16.  14.  he  shall  ).  on  the  mercy-seat  eastward,  15.
Num.  8.  7.  s.  water  ot  purifying  upon  them
19. 18.  shall  s.  it  upon  the  tent,  and  all  the  vessels
19.  the  clean  person  shall  s.  it  on  the  unclean
Isa.  52.  15.  so  shall  he  ).many  nations,  kings  shall
Ezek.  36.  25.  then  will  I  ).  clean  water  upon  you
SPRINKLED.


Exod.  9.  10.  Moses  s.  the  ashes  up  toward  heaven
Num.  19.  13.  because  water  was  not  s.  on  him,  20.
Job  2.  12.  and  ).  dust  on  their  heads  toward  heaven
Isa.  59;  t  5.  that  which  is  s.  as  if  there  brake  out  a
viper,  their  webs  shall  not  become  garments
Hos.  7.  t  9.  grey  hairs  are  s.  here  anti  there
Heb.  9.  19-  lie.?,  both  the  book  and  all  the  people
10.  22.  having  our  hearts  s.  from  an  evil  conscience
See  Blood.

T  .  SPRI N  KLETII.

Lev.  7. 14.  it  shall  be  the  priest’s  that  s.  the  blood
Eum.  19.  21.  he  that  s.  the  water  of  separation
,  SPRINKLING.

Heb.  9.  13.  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  s.  the  unclean
J 1  28.  through  faith  he  kept  the  s.  of  the  blood


Heb.  12.  24.  we  are  come  to  blood  of .?.  that  speak.

1  Pet.  1.  2.  and  the  s.  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ

SPROUT.

Job  14. 7-  there  is  hope  of  a  tree  that  it  will  s.  again
SPRUNG.

Gen.  41.  6.  seven  thin  ears.?,  up  after  them,  23.
Lev.  13.  42.  it  is  a  leprosy  s.  up  in  his  bald  head
Mat  A.  16.  them  who  sat  in  shad,  of  death,  lights’,  up
13.  5.  and  forthwith  they  s.  up,  Mark  4.  5.

7.  the  thorns  ).  up  and  choked  them,  Luke  8.  7.
26.  but  when  blade  was  s.  up  and  brought  fortli
Luke  8.  6.  as  soon  as  it  was  s.  up,  it  withered  awav
SPUE.

Lev.  18.  28.  that  the  land  s.  you  not  out  also,  20.  22.
Jer.  25.  27-  drink,  s.  and  fall,  and  rise  no  more
Rev.  3.  16.  so  then  I  wills,  thee  out  of  my  mouth
SPUED.

Lev.  18.  28.  as  it  s.  out  nations  that  were  before  you
SPEWING.

Ilab.  2.  16.  and  shameful  s.  shall  be  on  thy  glory
SPUN.

Exod.  35.  25.  women  brought  that  which  they  had  s.
26.  and  all  the  women  s.  goats’  hair
SPUNGE.

Mat.  27.  48.  one  of  them  took  a  s.  and  filled  it  with
vinegar,  gave  him  to  drink,  Mark  15.36.  John  19.29.
SPY.

Num.  13.  16.  men  which  Moses  sent  tor.  land,  17.
21.  32.  and  Moses  sent  to  .?.  out  Jaazer
Josh.  2.  1.  Josh,  sent  two  men  to  s.  secretly,  6. 23,  25.
Judg.  18.  2.  the  Danites  sent  to  s.  the  land,  14,  17.

2  Sam.  10.  3.  David  hath  sent  his  servants  to  s.  out

the  city,  and  overthrow  it,  1  Citron.  19.  3.
2  Kings  6.  13.  lie  said,  go  and  s.  where  he  is
Gal.  2.  4.  who  came  in  privily  to  s.  out  our  liberty
SPIED.

Exod.  2.  11.  he  s.  an  Egyptian  smiting  an  Hebrew
2  Kings  9.  17-  a  watchman  s.  the  company  of  Jehu

13.  21.  behold,  they  s.  a  band  of  men

23.  16.  he  s.  sepulchres  that  were  there  in  mount

See  Espy,  Espied.

SP  l  ES.

Gen.  42.  9.  Joseph  said  to  them,  ye  are  s.  14.  16.
11.  eve  are  no .?.  31.  ||  30.  the  man  took  us  for  );

34.  then  shall  I  know  ye  are  no  ).  but  true  men
Num.  21.  1.  Israel  came  by  the  way  of  the  s.

Josh.  6.  23.  the  young  men  that  were  s.  went  in
Judg.  1.  24.  the  s.  saw  a  man  come  out  of  the  city

1  Sam.  26.4.  David  theref.  sent  out ).  and  understood

2  Sam.  15.  10.  Absalom  sent thro’  tribes  of  Israel
Luke  20.  20.  they  watched  him  and  sent  forth  s.
Heb.  11.  31.  when  Rahab  had  receiv.  s.  with  peace

SQUARE.

1  Kings!. 5.  all  doors  and  posts  were  s.  with  window
Ezek.  45.  2.  s.  round  about,  and  50  cubits  round  at).
See  Foun-sy u are.

SQUARED.

Ezek.  41.  21.  the  posts  of  the  temple  were  s.
SQUARES.

Ezek.  43. 16.  twelve  broad,  square  in  four  s.  thereof
17.  and  fourteen  broad  in  the  four  s.  thereof
STABILITY.

Isa.  33.  6.  knowledge  shall  be  the  s.  of  thy  times
STABLE,  Substantive.

Ezek.  25.  5.  I  will  make  Rabbah  a  s.  for  camels
STABLE.

1  Chr.  16.  30.  world  also  shall  be  ).  not  to  be  moved
ST  A  BLEN  ESS.

Psal.  37.  t  3.  in  truth  and  ).  thou  shalt  be  fed
See  Establish,  ed,  eth.

STACKS.

Exod.  22.  6.  so  that  the  ).  of  corn  be  consumed
STACIE.

This  Greek  word  signifies  the  gum  that  distils
from  the  myrrh-trees.  Moses  speaks  of  stacte  in
the  enumeration  of  the  drugs  that  were  to  enter
into  the  composition  of  the  perfume,  which  was  to
bf  offered  in  the  holy  place  upon  the  golden  altar.
The  Hebrew  reads  Neteph,  which  signifies  liquid
■myrrh,  or  the  purest  and  most  valuable  part  of
the  myrrh,  which,  as  some  think,  was  brought
from,  it  by  contusion.  Some  take  it  for  balm.
Exod.  30.  34.  take  to  thee  sweet  spices,  s.  and  onycha
STAFF.

Gen.  32.  10.  with  my  s.  I  passed  over  this  Jordan
38.  18.  she  said,  give  me  thy  signet  and  s.  25.

Exod.  12.  11.  eat  it,  with  your  ).  in  your  hand

21.  19.  if  he  rise  again,  and  walk  abroad  on  his  s.
Num.  13.  23.  they  bare  grapes  between  two  on  a  s.

22.  27.  Baalam  smote  the  ass  with  a  s.

Judg.  6.  21.  the  angel  put  forth  the  end  of  his  s.

1  Sam.  17.  7.  the  s.  of  his  spear  was  like  a  weaver’s
beam,  one  bare  a  shield  before  him,  2  Sam.  21. 19.
40.  David  took  his  ).  in  his  hand,  and  his  sling

2  Sam.  3.  29.  let  there  not  fail  one  that  leaneth  on  a  s’.

23.  7.  he  must  be  fenced  with  the  s.  of  a  spear
21.  he  went  down  to  him  with  ns.  1  Citron.  11. 23.

2  Kings  4.  29.  take  my  s.  lay  my  .?.  on  child’s  face
31.  Gehazi  laid  the  s.  on  the  face  of  the  child
18.  21.  thou  trustest  on  .v.  of  this  reed,  Isa.  36.  6.
Psal.  23.  4.  thy  rod  and  thy  s.  they  comfort  me
Isa.  3.  1.  the  Lord  will  take  from  Judah  the  s.

9.  4.  for  thou  hast  broken  the  s.  of  his  shoulder

10.  5.  and  the  s.  in  their  hand  is  mine  indignation
15.  or  as  if  the  .r.  should  lift  up  itself  as  no  wood

24.  and  shall  lift  up  his  s.  against  thee

14.  5.  the  Lord  hath  broken  the  s.  of  the  wicked
28.  27.  but  the  fitches  are  beaten  out  with  a  s.

30.  32.  in  every  place  where  grounded  s.  shall  pass
Jer.  48.  17-  say,  how  is  the  strong  .r.  broken
Ezek.  29.  6.  have  been  a.v.  of  reed  to  house  of  Israel
Hos.  4.  12.  and  their  s.  declareth  unto  them
Zech.  8.  4.  every  man  with  his  s.  in  his  hand  for  age

11.  10.  and  1  took  my  s.  even  beauty,  and  cut  it

14.  then  I  cut  asunder  my  other  ).  even  bands
Mark  6.  8.  take  nothing  for  journey,  save  a  .?.  only
Heb.  11.21.  worshipped,  leaning  on  the  top  of  hiss'.

See  BREAD.

STAGGER.

Job  12.  25.  to  s.  like  a  drunken  man,  Psal.  107 .  27.
Psal.  99.  t  1.  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  s.

Isa.  29.  9.  they  s.  but  not  with  strong  drink


STAGGERED.

Rom.  4.  20.  he  s.  not  at  the  promise  of  God
STAGG  E  RET  FI.

Isa.  19. 14.  as  a  drunken  man  s.  in  his  vomit
STAGGERING.

1  Sam.  25.  t  31.  that  this  shall  be  no  s.  unto  thee
STAIN.

Job  3.  5.  let  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death  s.  it
Isa.  23.  9.  Lord  purposed  to  ).  the  pride  of  all  glory
63.  3.  their  blood  sprinkled,  1  will  s.  my  raiment
STAIRS.

1  Kings  6.  8.  and  they  went  up  with  winding  s.

2  A  mgs  9.  13.  and  put  it  under  him  on  top  or  the  s
Neh.  9.  4.  then  stood  on  the  s.  .leshua  and  Rani
Cant.  2.  14.  that  art  in  the  secret  places  of  the  s.
Ezek.  43.  17.  and  his  s.  shall  look  towards  the  east
Jets  21.  40.  Paul  stood  on  the  s.  and  beckoned

_  STAKES.

Isa.  .33.  20.  not  one  of  the  s.  shall  ever  be  removed
54.  2.  lengthen  thy  cords  and  strengthen  thy  s.

„  STALK.

Gen.  41.  5.  seven  rank  ears  came  up  on  one  s.  22.
Jer.  11.  f  19.  let  11s  destroy  the  s.  with  his  bread
Hos.  8.7.  it  hath  no  s.  the  bud  shall  yield  no  meal
STALKS.

Josh.  2.  6.  and  she  hid  them  with  the  s.  of  tlax
STALL.

Jer.  46.  t  21.  her  hired  men  like  bullocks  of  s.
Amos  6.  4.  eat  the  calves  outof  the  midst  of  the  s.
Mai.  4.  2.  ye  shall  grow  up  as  calves  of  the  s.

Luke  13.  15.  on  sabbath  loose  his  ox  from  the  ).
STALLS.

1  Kings  4.  26.  Solomon  had  forty  thousand  ).  of

horses,  and  12,000  horsemen,  2  Citron.  9.  25.

2  Citron.  32.  28.  Ilezekiah  had  s.  for  all  manner  of

beasts,  and  cotes  for  flocks
Ilab.  3. 17.  although  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the.v.
STALLED.

Prov.  15.  17.  than  a  s.  ox  and  hatred  therewith
STAMMERERS.

Isa.  32.  4.  the  tongue  of  the  s.  shall  speak  plainly
STAMMERING.

Isa.  28. 11.  with  v.lips  and  anothertongue  will  speak
33. 19.  thou  shalt  not  see  a  people  of  a  s.  tongue
STAMP.

2  Sam.  22. 43.  I  did  s.  them  as  the  mire  of  the  street
Ezek.  6. 11.  smite  with  thy  hand,  s.  with  thy  foot
STAMPED.

Deut.  9.  21.  I  s.  the  calf  and  ground  it  very  small
2  Kings  23.  6.  Josiah  ).  the  grove  small  to  powder
15. ).  high  places  small  to  powder  and  burnt  grove
2  Citron.  15.  16.  Asa  cut  down  her  idol  and  s.  it
Ezek.  25.  0.  because  thou  hast  s.  with  the  feet
Dan.  7. 7.  a  fourth  beast  s.  residue  with  the  feet,  19.
8.  7-.tfie  he-goatcast  down  and  s.  upon  the  rant
10.  it  cast  down  some  of  stars,  and  s.  upon  them
STAMPING.

Jer.  47.  3.  at  noise  of  the  s.  of  the  hoofs  of  the  horses
STANCHED.

Luke  8.  44.  immediately  woman’s  issue  of  blood  s.
STAND.

Ezek.  29.  7.  thou  madest  their  loins  to  be  at  a  s.
STAND,  Verb.

Exod.  33.  10.  people  saw  cloudy  pillar  r.  at  door
Lev.  27. 14.  as  priestshall  estimate  it,  so  shall  it  s.  17.
Num.  30.  4.  then  all  her  vows  shall  s.  5,  7,  11.

12.  then  her  vows  or  bond  shall  not  s.  her  husband
Deut.  18,  5.  God  hath  chosen  him  to  s.  to  minister
25.  8.  if  he  s.  to  it  and  say,  I  like  not  to  take  her
Josh.  20.4.  when  he  shall  s.  at  entering  gate  of  city
1  Sam.  12.  16. now  s.  and  see  this  great  thing  Ld.  will
19.  3. 1  will  go  out  and  ).  before  my  father  in  field

1  Kings  8.  II.  cloud  filled  the  house,  priests  could
not),  to  minister,  because  of  cloud,  2  Chr.  5. 14.

17. 1.  Elijah  said  to  Ahab,  as  the  Lord  liveth,  be-
fore  whom  1  s.  18.  15.  2  Kings  3.  14.  I  5. 16.

2  Kings  5. 11. 1  thought  he  will  come  out  and  ).

10.  4.  two  kings  stood  not,  how  then  shall  we  s.?

1  Chr.  21.  16.  David  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  f.
23.  30.  to  ).  every  morning  to  thank  and  praise  Ld.

2  Chron.  34. 32.  he  caused  all  present  to  s.  to  it
Ezra  10. 14.  let  all  the  rulers  of  congregation  ).

Esth.  3.4.  to  see  if  Mordecai’s  matters  would  ).

8.  11 .  to  gather  themselves,  and  to  ).  for  their  life

Job  8.  15.  he  shall  lean  on  his  house,  it  shall  not  ).

19.  25.  and  that  he  shall  s.  at  the  latter  day  on  earth
38.  14.  it  is  turned,  and  they  ).  as  a  garment
Psal.  38.  11.  and  my  kinsman  ).  afar  off

45.  9.  on  l  ight  hand  did  s.  queen  in  gold  of  Ophir
78.  13.  and  he  made  the  waters  to  s.  as  an  heap
102.  t  26.  they  shall  perish,  but  thou  shaft  .r.

107.  t  25.  he  maketh  to).  the  stormy  wind
109.  6.  and  let  Satan  s.  at  his  right  hand
31.  he  shall  ).at  the  right  hand  of  the  poor
122.  2.  our  feet  shall ).  within  thy^  gates,  O  Jerus.
130.  3.  if  mark  iniquities,  O  Lord,  w  ho  shall  s.  ?
Prov.  12.  7.  but  the  house  of  the  righteous  shall  ).

19.21.  nevertheless  counsel  of  the  Lord  shall).

25.  6.  and  ).  notin  place  of  great  men

Eccl.  8.  3.  s.  not  in  an  evil  thing,  lie  doeth  what

pleaseth

Isa.  7.  7-  thus  saith  Lord  (:od,  it  shall  not).  8.  10.

11.  10.  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  shall  s.  for  an  ensign
14.  24.  and  as  I  have  purposed,  so  it  shail  s.

21.8.  my  lord,  I  ).  continually  on  watch-tower

28.  18.  and  your  agreement  with  hell  shall  not  ).

32.  8.  and  by  liberal  things  shall  he  ).

40.  8.  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  ).  for  ever

46.  10.  counsel  shall  ).  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleas.

47.  12.  ).  now  with  thine  inchantm.  and  sorceries
61.  5.  and  strangers  shall),  and  feed  your  flocks

Jer.  6. 16.  s.  ye  in  the  ways  and  see,  ask  tor  old  paths
44.  28.  know  whose  word  shall  ).  mine  or  theirs

46.21.  did  not). because  day  was  come  on  them
Ezek.  17.  14.  but  by  keeping  of  his  cov.  it  might  ).
Dan.  2.  44.  and  the  kingdom  shall  ).  for  ever

11.  6.  king  ofthe  north  shall  not),  nor  his  arm
25.  but  the  king  ofthe  south  shall  not  s.

Amos  2. 15.  nor  shall  he  ).  that  bandleth  the  bow
Mic.  5.  4.  he  shall  s.  and  feed  in  strength  of  the  Ld.
Nah.  2.  8.  ).).  shall  they  cry,  none  shall  look  back
Mai.  3.  2.  and  who  shall  ).  when  he  appeareth

469


ST  A


ST  A


ST  A


Mat.  12.25.  a  house  or  kingdom  divided  ag.  itself
shall  not  s.  26.  Mark  3.  24,  25.  Luke  11. 18.
Mark  11. 25.  and  when  ye  s.  praying,  forgive
Acts  1.  11.  why  s.  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven  ?

5.  20.  go,  5.  and  speak  in  the  temple  to  the  people

25. 10.  Paul  said,  I  s.  at  Cesar’s  judgment-seat

26.  6.  now  1  s.  and  am  judged  for  hope  of  promise
Mom.  5.  2.  have  access  into  this  grace  wherein  we  s.

9. 11.  purposed  of  G.  according  to  election  might  9.

14.  4.  for  God  is  able  to  make  him  s.

1  Cor.  15. 1.  1  declare  the  gospel  wherein  ye  s.

30.  and  why  s.  we  in  jeopardy  every  hour
£  Cor.  1. 24.  are  helpers  of  your  joy ,  for  by  faith  ye  s.
Eph.  6. 13.  to  withstand  and  having  done  all  to  s.

14.  s.  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth
1  Pet.  5. 12.  this  is  true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  s.
Mev.  3.20.  behold,  I  s.  at  the  door  and  knock

6.  17.  great  day  is  come,  who  shall  be  able  to  s.  ?
18. 15.  merchants  s.  afar  off  for  fear  of  her  torm.

STAND  abroad.

Dent.  24. 11.  s.  abroad ,  man  shall  bring  the  pledge
STAND  against.

Lev.  19. 16.  nor  shall  s.  ag.  blood  of  thy  neighbour
Num.  30.  9.  every  vow  of  a  widow  shall  9.  ag.  her
Jer.  44.  29.  that  my  words  shall  s.  ag.  you  for  evil
Eph.  6. 11.  that  may  be  able  to  s.  ag.  wiles  of  devil
STAND  aloof.

Psal.  38. 11.  my  lovers  and  my  friends  s.  aloof
STAND  back.

Gen.  19. 9.  said,  s.  back,  this  fellow  came  in  to  sojo.
STAND  before.

Exod.  8.  20.  rise  up  early,  s.  before  Pharaoh,  9. 13.

9.  11.  the  magicians  could  not  9.  before  Moses
17-  6. 1  will  .y.  before  thee  on  the  rock  in  Horeb

Lev.  18.  23.  nor  snail  any  woman  s.  before  a  beast
26. 37.  and  ye  shall  have  no  power  to  9.  before  your
enemies,  Josh.  7.  12,  13.  Judg.  2.  14.
Mum.  16.  9.  to  9.  before  the  congregation  to  minister

27.  21.  and  he  shall  s.  before  Eleazar  the  priest
35. 12.  till  he  s.  before  congregation,  Josh.  20. 6.

Deut.  7.  24.  there  shall  no  man  be  able  to  s.  before
thee,  11.  25.  Josh.  1.  5.  I  10. 8. 1  23.  9.
9. 2.  who  can  s.  before  the  children  of  Anak  ?

10.  8.  tribe  of  Levi  to  s.  before  the  Lord  to  minister

to  him,  2  Chron.  29. 11.  Ezek.  44. 11, 15.
19. 17-  both  the  men  shall  .9.  before  the  Lord

29. 10.  ye  s.  this  day  all  of  you  before  the  Lord

1  Sam.  6.  20.  who  is  able  to  s.  before  holy  Lord  G.  ?

16.  22.  let  David,  I  pray  thee,  s.  before  me

1  Kmgs  1.  2.  let  a  young  virgin  s.  before  the  king

10.  8.  happy  are  these  thy  servants  who  9.  before

thee  and  hear  thy  wisdom,  2  Chron.  9.7.

19. 11.  go,  and  s.  on  the  mount  before  the  Lord

2  Chron.  20. 9.  we  9.  before  this  house  in  thy'  presence
Ezra  9. 15.  we  cannot  s.  before  thee  because  of  this
Job  41.  10.  who  then  is  able  to  s.  before  me  ?

Psal.  5.  +  5.  the  foolish  shall  not  s.  before  thine  eyes

147. 17.  cast  forth  ice,  who  can  s.  before  his  cold  ?
Prov.  22.  29.  a  man  diligent  in  business,  he  shall  9.

before  kings,  he  shall  not  s.  before  mean  men
27.  4.  but  who  is  able  to  9.  before  envy  ?

Jer.  7. 10.  come  and  s.  before  me  in  this  house

15.  19.  if  thou  return,  thou  shalt  s.  before  me

35. 19.  Jonadab  shall  not  want  a  man  to  9.  before  me
40. +  10.  1  will  dwell  at  Mizpah  to  s.  before  Chald.

49. 19.  who  is  like  me  ?  who  will  appoint  ?  who  is
that  shepherd  that  will  s.  before  me  ?  50.  44.

Dan.  1.  5.  that  at  the  end  they  might  s.  before  king
8.  4.  so  that  no  beast  might  s.  before  him

7.  there  was  no  power  in  the  ram,  to  .9.  before  him

11.  16.  none  shall  s.  before  him,  he  shall  stand
Mali.  1.  6.  who  can  s.  before  his  indignation  ?

Luke  21.  36.  and  worthy  to  s.  before  the  Son  of  man
Mom.  14. 10.  all  shall  s.  before  judgment-seat  of  Ch.
Mev.  20. 12. 1  saw  dead  small  and  great  s.  before  G.

STAND  by.

Gen.  24.  43.  behold  I  s.  by  the  well  of  water
Exod.  7- 15.  and  thou  shalt  s.  by  the  river’s  brink

18. 14.  and  all  the  people  s.  by  thee  unto  even
Num.  23.  3.  .9.  by  thy  burnt-offering,  and  I  will  go
Neh.  7.  3.  while  they  s.  by  let  them  shut  the  doors
Isa.  65. 5.  who  say',  s.  by  thyself,  I  am  holier  than  th.
Jer.  48. 19-  s.  by  the  way  and  ask,  what  is  done
Ezek.  46.  2.  prince  shall  s.  by  the  post  of  the  gate
Zech.  3. 7-  give  places  to  walk  among  these  that  9.  by

4.  14.  are  two  anointed  ones  that  s.  by  the  Lord
John  11.  42.  but  because  of  the  people  which  9.  by

STAND  fast.

Psal.  WAR-  and  my'  covenant  shall  s.fast  with  him
111.  8.  all  his  command,  s.  fast  for  ever  and  ever
Jer.  46.  14.  say  ye,  s.fast,  and  prepare  thee
1  Cor.  16.  13.  watch  ye,  s.  fast  in  faith,  be  strong
Gal.  5. 1.: 9.  fast  therefore  in  liberty  Christ  made  us
Phil.  1. 27.  s.fast  in  one  spirit  j|  4.1.  s.fast  in  Lord

1  Thess.  3.  8.  for  now  we  live,  if  ye  s.fast  in  Lord

2  Thess.  2. 15.  s.fast,  and  hold  traditions  taught

STAND  forth.

Jer.  46.  4.  get  up,  and  s.  forth  with  y'our  helmets
Mark  3. 3.  he  saitli  to  the  man,  s.  forth,  Luke  6.  8.
STAND  here.

Gen.  24. 13.  behold,  I  s.  here  by  the  well  of  wafer
Num.  23. 15.  he  said,  s.  here  by  thy  burnt-offering
Dent.  5.  31.  but  as  for  thee,  s.  thou  here  by'  me
2  Sam.  18.  30.  the  king  said,  turn  aside,  and  9.  here
Mat.  20.  6.  saith  to  them,  why  s.  xehereoW  day  idle  ?
Mark  9. 1.  some  .9.  here  who  shall  not  taste  of  death
Acts  4. 10.  even  by  him  doth  this  man  s.  here  whole
STAND  in.

Judg.  4.  20.  s.  in  the  door  of  the  tent,  and  say
2  Chr.  35. 5.  s.  in  hoi  v  place  according  to  divisions
Psal.  1.  5.  the  ungodly  shall  not  .9.  in  the  judgment
.  4. 4.  s.  in  awe,  sin  not,  commune  with  your  heart

5.  5.  foolish  shall  not  s.  in  thy  sight,  thou  hatest

24.  3.  and  who  shall  s.  in  his  holy  place  3
33.8.  let  all  inhabitants  of  the  world  s.in  awe
76.  7.  who  may  s.  in  thy  sight  when  once  angry  J
89.  43.  and  hast  not  made  him  to  s.  in  the  battle
134.  1.  who  by  night  .9.  in  house  of  Lord,  135.  2.

Jer.  7-  2.  s.  hi  gate  of  Lord’s  house  and  proclaim
14.6.  the  wild  asses  did  s.in  the  high  places

17.  19.  s.in  the  gate  of  the  children  of  the  people
26.  2.  s.  in  the  court  of  the  Lord’s  house  and  speak

470


Ezek.  13.  5.  ye  have  not  gone  up  to  .9.  in  the  battle
22.  30.  that  should  s.  in  gap  before  me  for  the  land
44.  24.  in  controversy  they  shall  s.  in  judgment
Dan.  1.  4.  as  had  ability  in  them  to  .9.  in  king’s  pal.

11.  16.  and  he  shall  s.  in  the  glorious  land

12.  13.  and  shall  s.  mthy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days
Zech.  14.  4.  feet  s.  in  that  day  on  Mount  of  Olives
Mat.  24.  15.  when  ye  see  about,  s.  in  holy  place
Luke  1. 19.  I  am  Gabriel,  that  s.  in  presence  of  God

1  Cor.  2. 5.  your  faith  should  not  s.  in  wisdom  of  men
Gal.  4. 20. to  change  my  voice,  for  1  s.  in  doubt  of  you

STAND  on.

Exod.  17.  9.  to-morrow  I  will  .9.  on  top  of  the  hill

2  Kings  6.  31.  if  the  head  of  Elisha  shall  s.  on  him
Dan.  11.  17.  she  shall  notf.  cn  his  side  nor  be  for  him

31.  arms  shall  .s.  on  his  part,  pollute  the  sanctuary
Mev.  15.  2.9.  on  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps  of  G.
STAND  out.

Psal.  73.  7.  their  eyes  .9.  out  with  fatness,  have  more
STAND  perfect.

Col.  4. 12.  may' s. perfect  and  complete  in  will  of  G.
STAND  still.

Exod.  14.  13.  Moses  said,  fear  ye  not,  .9.  still  and
see  the  salvation  of  God,  2  Chron.  20.  17.
Num.  9.8.  .9.  still,  l  will  hear  what  L.  will  comm.
Josh.  3.  8.  that  bear  ark,  ye  shall  s.  still  in  Jordan

10. 12.  sun  s.  still  upon  G  ibeon,  and  moon  inAjalon

1  Sam.  9.  27.  s.  thou  still  awhile,  that  I  may  shew

12.  7.  now  s.  still  that  1  may  reason  with  you
14.  9.  then  we  will  s.  still  in  our  place  and  not  go

Job  37.  14.  s.  still  and  consider  the  works  of  God  1
Jer.  51.  50.  ye  that  have  escaped  sword  s.  not  still
Acts  8.  38.  eunuch  commanded  the  chariot  to  s.  still
STAND  strong.

Psal.  30.  7.  thou  hast  made  mountain  to  s.  strong
STAN  D  there.

Num.  11. 16.  that  they'  may  s.  there  with  thee
Deut.  18.  7.  as  Levites  who  s.  there  before  the  Lord
Jam.  2.  3.  and  say  to  the  poor  5.  thou  there
STAND  together.

Isa.  50.  8.  let  us  s.  together,  who  is  mine  adversary
STAND  up.

Exod.  9.  t  16.  for  this  cause  1  made  thee  to  s.  up
Neh.  9.  5.  s.  up  and  bless  Lord  your  God  for  ever
Job  30.  20.  I  s.  up,  and  thou  regardest  me  not
33.  5.  set  thy  words  in  order  before  me,  s.  up
Psal.  35.  2.  take  hold  of  shield,  s.  up  for  my  help
94. 16.  who  will  9.  up  forme  against  the  workers
Eccl.  4.  15.  with  child  that  shall  s.  up  in  his  stead
Isa.  27.  9.  the  groves  and  images  shall  not  s.  up
44. 11.  let  them  s.up  yet  they  shall  fear

47.  13.  let  the  monthly'  prognosticators  s.  up

48.  13.  when  I  call  to  them,  they  .9.  up  together
51. 17-  awake,  awake,  s.  up,  O  Jerusalem

Ezek.  31.  14.  nor  their  trees  .9.  up  in  their  height
Dan.  8.  22.  four  kingdoms  shall  .9.  up  out  of  nation
2.3.  a  king  of  fierce  countenance  shall  s.  up

25.  he  shall  also  s.  up  against  prince  of  princes
11.2.  behold ,  there  shall  s.  tip  three  kings  in  Persia
3.  and  a  mighty  king  shall  .9.  up  and  shall  rule,  4.
7-  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall  one  s.  up
14.  many7  shall  s.  up  against  king  of  the  south

20.  then  shall  s.  tip  in  his  estate  a  raiser  of  taxes

21.  and  in  his  estate  shall  s.  up  a  vile  person
12.  1.  and  at  that  time  shall  Michael  s.  up

Nah.  1.  +  6.  who  s.  up  in  the  fierceness  of  his  anger
ActslO.  26.  Peter  said,  .9.  up,  1  myself  also  am  a  man
ST' AND  upon.

Exod.  33.  21.  Lord  said,  thou  shall  s.  upon  a  rock
Deut.  27. 12.  these  shall  s.  upon  mount  Gerizim

13.  these  shall  s.  upon  mount  Ebal  to  curse
Josh.  3.  13.  and  they  shall  9.  upon  an  heap

2  Sam.  1.  9-  Saul  said,  s.  upon  me,  pray  thee  slay  me
1  Kings  19.  11.  s.  upon  the  mount  before  the  Lord
Ezek.  2.  1.  son  of  man,*,  upon  thy  feet,  Acts  26. 16.

27.  29.  the  pilots  of  the  sea  shall  s.  upon  the  land
33.  26.  ye  s.  upon  sword,  ye  work  abominations
47.10.  fishes  shall  .9.  up.  it  from  En-gedi  to  Eneglaim
Dan.  7.  4.  and  made  s.  upon  the  feet  as  a  man

8.  1 18.  and  he  made  me  s.  upon  my  standing
Ilab.  2.  1.  1  will  s.  upon  my  watch,  set  me  on  tower
Zech.  14.  12.  flesh  consume,  while  they  s.  upon  feet
Mev.  10.  5.  angel  I  saw  9.  upon  sea,  lift,  up  his  hand
STAND  upright.

Psal.  20.  8.  but  we  are  risen  and  s.  upright
Dan.  10. 1 1.  O  Daniel,  understand  words,  s.  upright
Acts  14.  10.  he  said  to  the  cripple,  s.  upright  on  feet
STAND  with.

Num.  1.  5.  names  of  the  men  that  shall  9.  with  you
STAND  without.

Ezra  10.  13.  and  we  are  not  able  to  .9.  without
Mat.  12.  47-  s.  without,  desiringto  speak,  Luke  8.  20.
Luke  13.  25.  ye  begin  to  s.  without,  and  to  knock
STANDARD.

Num.  1.  52.  and  every  man  by  his  own  s.  2.  2,  17.

2.  3.  on  the  east-side  shall  the  s.  of  .1  udah  pitch
10.  on  the  south-side  shall  be  the  s.  of  Reuben

18.  on  the  west-side  shall  be  the  .9.  of  Ephraim
25.  on  the  north-side  shall  be  the  s.  of  Dan
10.  14.  in  the  first  place  went  the  s.  of  Judah
Isa.  49.  22.  behold,  1  will  set  up  my  s.  to  people
59.  19.  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a*,  against  him
62.  10.  go  through,  lift  up  a  s.  for  the  people
Jer.  4.  6.  set  up  .9.  toward  Zion,  retire,  stay  not
21.  how  long  shall  1  see  the  s.  and  hear  trumpet
5o.  2.  set  ye  up  a  s.  in  the  land,  51. 12,  27.

ST  A  N  DA  R  D-bearer.

ha.  10.  18.  they  shall  be  as  when  a  s.-bearer  fainteth
STANDARDS.

Num.  2.  31.  Dan  shall  go  hindmost  with  their  s.

34.  so  they7  pitched  by  their  .9.  and  set  forward
STANDEST.

Gen.  24.  31.  come  in,  wherefore  s.  thou  without?
Exod.  3.  5.  put  off  thy7  shoes,  the  place  whereon
thou  .9.  is  holy  ground,  Josh.  5.  15.  Acts  7.  33.
Psal.  10.  1.  why  s.  thou  afar  off,  O  Lord  r
Mom.  11.  20.  they7  were  broken  off,  thou  9.  by  faith
STANDEE  If.

Num.  14.  14.  and  that  thy7  cloud  s.  over  them
Deut.  1.  38.  but  Josh,  son  of  Nvm,  who  s.  bef.  thee
17.  12.  that  will  not  hearken  to  the  priest  that  s.

29  15.  but  with  him  that  s.  here  with  us  this  day


Judg.  16.  26.  to  feel  pillars  whereon  the  house  s.
I'.sth.  6.  5.  behold  Unman  s.  in  the  court

7.  9.  behold  also  the  gallows  .9.  in  Hainan’s  house
Psal.  1.1.  nor  s.  in  the  way  of  sinners,  nor  sitteth

26.  12.  my  toot  9.  in  an  even  place,  in  cong.  bless  L
33.  11.  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  s.  forever

82.  1.  God  9.  in  the  congregation  of  the  mighty
119.  +  90.  thou  hast  established  the  earth,  and  ft  s.
161.  but  my  heart  s.  in  awe  of  thy  word
Prov.  8.  2.  wisdom  .9.  in  the  top  of  high  places
Cant.  2.  9.  behold,  he  .9.  behind  wall,  he  look,  forth
Isa.  3. 13.  Lord  9.  up  to  plead,  s.  to  judge  people
46.  7.  they  set  him  in  his  place, and  he  s.

59. 14.  justice  s.  afar  off,  truth  is  fallen  in  street
Dan.  12. 1.  the  great  prince  who  .9.  for  thy7  people
Zech.  11.  16.  nor  shall  he  feed  that  that  .9.  still
John  1.  26.  .9.  one  among  you,  whom  ye  know  not

3.  29.  the  friend  of  the  bridegroom  .9.  and  heareth
Mom.  14.  4.  to  his  own  master  he  s.  or  falleth

1  Cor.  7. 37.  nevertheless  he  that  9.  stedlast  in  heart

8.  13.  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  s.

10.  12.  let  him  that  thinketh  he  s.  take  heed

2  Tim.  2.  19.  the  foundation  of  God  s.  sure

Ileb.  10. 11.  ev.  priests,  daily  minister,  and  offering
Jam.  5.  9.  behold,  the  judge  s.  before  the  door
Mev.  10. 8.  angel  who  .9.  on  the  sea  and  the  earth
STANDI  N  G ,  Substantive .

1  Kings  10.  +5.  queen  saw  the  s.  of  his  ministers

2  Chr.  30.  +  16.  they  stood  in  9.  according  to  law
Neh.  13. t  11.  I  gather,  them,  and  setthem  in  their.?.
Psal.  69.  2. 1  sink  in  deep  mire  where  there  is  no  s.
Dan.  8.  t  18.  but  he  made  me  stand  upon  my  .9.

10.  t  11.  O  Dan.  understand  and  stand  upon  thy  s.
Mic.  1.  11.  he  shall  receive  of  y7ou  his  s.

STANDING.

Lev.  26. 1.  make  no  idols,  nor  rear  ye  up  aj.  image
Num.  22.  23.  angel  of  the  Lord  s.  in  the  way,  31.

1  Sam.  19.  20.  and  Samuel  s.  as  appointed  over  them

22.  6.  all  his  servants  were  s.  about  him

1  Kings  13.  25.  and  the  lion  s.  by  the  carcase,  28.

14.  t  23.  they  also  built  them  s.  images  and  groves
22.  19.  host  of  heaven  9.  by  him,  2  Chron.  18.  18.

2  Chron.  9.  18.  and  two  lions  .9.  by  the  stays
Esth.  5.  2.  when  king  saw  Esther  queen  .9.  in  court
Psal.  107.  35.  heturneth  wilderness  into  a  .9.  water

114.  8.  which  turned  the  rock  into  a  9.  water
Amos  9. 1.  I  saw  the  Lord  s.  upon  the  altar
Mic.  5. 13. 1  will  cut  off  thy  s.  images  from  thee
Zech.  3.  1.  Satan  9.  at  his  right  hand  to  resist  him

6.  5.  which  go  forth  from  s.  before  Lord  of  earth
Mat.  6.  5.  they  love  to  pray  s.  in  the  synagogues
16.28. 1  say7  to  you,  there  be  some  s.  here,  Luke  9.27,
20.  3.  he  saw  others  s.  idle  in  the  market,  6.

Mark  3.  31.  his  brethren  and  his  mother  s.  without

13. 14.  the  abomination  9.  where  it  ought  not
Luke  1.  11.  an  angel  s.  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar

18. 13.  the  publican  9.  afar  off  smote  on  his  breast
John  8.  9.  Jesus  was  alone,  and  woman  s.  in  midst

20. 14.  she  saw  Jesus  s.  knew  not  that  it  was  .1  esus
Acts  2.  14.  but  Peter  9.  up  with  eleven,  said  to  them

4. 14.  and  beholding  the  man  healed  9.  with  them
5.  23.  saying,  we  found  the  keepers  s.  without

25.  men  are  s.  in  the  temple  teaching  the  people
7-55.  and  Jesus  s.  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  56.

22.  20.  1  was  .9.  by  and  consenting  to  his  death
Deb.  9.  8.  while  the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  s.

2  Pet.  3.  5.  earth  s.  out  of  the  water  and  in  water
Mev.  7.1.  four  angels  9.  on  four  corners  of  the  earth
11.4.  two  candlesticks  9.  before  the  God  of  earth

18.  10.  9.  afar  off  for  the  fear  of  her  torment

19.  17.  I  saw  an  angel  s.  in  the  sun,  and  he  cried

See  Corn.

STANK.

Exod.  7.  21.  fish  in  theriver  died,  and  the  river  9.

8. 14.  they  gathered  frogs  on  heaps,  and  land  9.

16.  20.  left  of  it,  the  manna  breu  worms  and  9.

2  Sam.  10.  6.  Ammon  saw  they7  9.  before  David
STARE.

Psal.  22. 17.  may  tell  my  bones,  look  and  9.  on  me
STAR,

In  Hebrew  233,  Cochab.  Under  the  name  of  stars,
the  ancient  Hebrews  comprehended  all  the  heavenly
bodies,  constellations,  planets,  and  all  the  lumi¬
naries,  except  the  sun  and  moon.  The  idolatrous
Israelites  called  the  sun  and  moon,  the  king  and
queen  of  heaven  ;  and  the  stars  were,  as  it  were,,
their  army  or  militia,  Deut.  4.  19.  I  17.  3.  Jer.  7.
18.  The  beauty  and  splendour  that  men  have  ob¬
served  in  the  stars,  and  the  great  advantages  that
they  derive  from  thence  ;  the  wonderful  order  that
they  have  discovered  in  their  courses  ;  the  influence
that  has  been  ascribed  to  them  in  the  production
and  preservation  of  animals,  of  fruit,  plants,  and
minerals,  have  prevailed  with  a  great  number  of
people  in  the  world  to  impute  to  them  life,  know¬
ledge,  power,  and  to  pay  them  a  sovereign  worship
and  adoration.

To  give  the  Hebrews  a  caution  against  the  idolatry
that  prevailed  through  almost  all  the  East,  of  wor-
.  shipping  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  Moses  informs
them,  that  God  gave  them  their  being,  and  that
he  separated  them  from  that  mass  of  matter  which
he  had  produced  out  of  nothing,  Gen.  1.  14,  15, 16.
And  in  Deut.  4.  19.  he  tells  them  that  they  were
not  made  for  the  worship,  but  for  the  use,  of  men.,
even  of  the  meanest  and  most  barbarous  people
under  heaven ;  which  the  Lord  hath  divided  to
all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven.

The  number  of  the  stars  was  looked  upon  as  infi¬
nite  :  and  the  Psalmist,  to  exalt  the  power,  magni¬
ficence,  and  infinite  knowledge  of  God,  says,  that'
he  numbers  the  stars,  and  calls  them  by  their
names,  lie  is  described  as  a  king,  taking  a  re¬
view  of  his  army,  and  gives  every  one  of  his  soldiers
such  a  name  as  he  thinks  fit.  When  the  Scripture
would  express  a  very  extraordinary  increase  and
multiplication,  it  uses  the  similitude  of  the  stars
of  heaven,  or  of  the  sand  of  the  sea  ;  I  will
multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and
as  the  sand  which  is  upon  the  sea  shore,  Gen.
15.  5.  I  22.  17.  |  26.  4.  Bildad,  Job’s  friend,,
says,  that  in  the  eyes  of  God  the  stars  themselves


S  T  A


ST  A


ST  A


are  immure  ;  that  he  can  discern  many  spots  and
blemishes  tn  them  which  we  cannot  see.  Job  25.  5.
And  in  chap.  ‘J.  ver.  7.  it  is  said ,  that  God  locks
them  up  as  with  a  key,  and  hinders  them  from  ap¬
pearing,  but  when  he  pleases.  Where  the  Scrip¬
ture  describes  a  time  of  public  calamity ,  of  sor¬
rows,  fears,  troubles,  and  perplexities,  it  is  said,
tiff  stars  withhold  their  light,  and  are  covered
with  darkness,  that  they  fall  from  heaven  and
disappear,  Ezek.  32.  7.  Mat.  24.  29.
she  sacred  books  sometimes  seem  to  ascribe  know¬
ledge  to  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  :  they  are  excited
to  praise  the  Lord,  Psal.  148.  3.  The  moon  is
said  to  withdraw  her  light,  Ezek.  32.7.  to  obey  the
voice  of  Joshua,  Josh.  10.  12.  That  the  sun
stopped  its  course,  at  the  command  of  this  general
off  iod's  people  :  that  the  sun  rises  as  a  bridegroom,
that  comes  out  of  his  nuptial  chamber,  Psal.  19.  5.
Moses  seems  to  favour  their  opinion,  who  impute
influences  to  the  sun  and  moon,  when  he  promises
to  Joseph  the  precious  fruits  brought  forth  by  the
sun,  and  the  precious  things  put  forth  by  the
moon,  Dent.  33.14.  The  Psalmist  sags,  that  the
suu  knows  the  time  and  place  of  his  sitting,  Psal.
104.  19.  And  Solomon,  that  the  sun  also  riseth,
and  the  sun  goeth  down,  and  hasteth  to  his  place
where  he  arose,  Eccl.  1.  5.  But  these  expres¬
sions,  which  are  merely  popular,  are  not  to  be  under¬
stood  literally  ;  for  then  it  must  be  said,  that  the
earth,  the  trees,  and  the  waters  are  animated,
there  being  expressions  in  Scripture  that  would  in¬
sinuate  as  much.  All  the  creatures  glorify  God,
bless  the  Lord,  and  obey  him,  each  in  its  way.
If  any  thing  more  be  allowed  to  the  sun,  the  moon,
or  the  stars,  it  is  because  they  are  creatures  of
greater  perfection,  and  by  which  the  glory  and
majesty  of  God  shine  forth  in  a  more  eminent  and
conspicuous  manner .

Amos,  speaking  of  the  idolatry  of  the  Israelites  in
the  wilderness,  informs  us,  that  they  carried  along
with  them  the  star  of  their  God,  Amos  5.  26.  St.
Stephen,  in  Acts  7.  43.  quoting  this  passage  of
Amos  according  to  the  Septuagint,  says,  Ye' took
up  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch,  and  the  star  of  your
god  Remphan.  This  last  word  has  given  occasion
to  a  great  number  of  conjectures.  Grotius  thinks  it
to  have  been  the  same  deity  as  Rimmon,  an  idol
of  the  people  of  Damascus.  Rimmon  signifies
high,  which  Grotius  takes  for  Saturn,  because  this
planet  is  the  most  elevated  of  all;  but  others  take
ttfor  the  sun.  Some  derive  Remphan  from  the
Hebrew  word  Rapha,  to  be  negligent,  soft,  or
slothful;  because  Saturn  is  the  slowest  or  most
slothful  of  all  the  planets.  The  Arabic  word
Reph,  signifies  voracity,  a  quality  very  well  agree¬
ing  to  Saturn,  who,  according  to  the  fable,  devour¬
ed  his  own  children.  Vossius  believes  Rephan,
or,  as  Amos  has  it,  Chium,  was  the  moon.
Others  think  Remphan  to  be  the  name  of  a  king  of
Egypt,  who  was  placed  by  his  people  in  the  rank
of  the  gods.  Diodorus  Siculus,  lib.  1.  page  39.
says  that  king  Remphis  succeeded  Proteus.  But
this  author  does  not  say  that  he  ever  had  been
deified,  and  speaks  of  him  as  a  prince  very  un¬
worthy  of  having  divine  honour  paid  to  him.  The
opinion  that  is  most  common  is,  that  it  was  a
representation  of  the  planet  Saturn.

The  star  foretold  by  Balaam  in  Rum.  24. 17.  There
shall  come  a  star  out  of  Jacob,  and  a  sceptre
shall  arise  out  of  Israel,  and  shall  smite  the
corners  of  Moab,  and  destroy  all  the  children  of
Sheth.  By  this  star  is  meant  a  ruler,  a  conqueror ,
a  great  prince,  which  according  to  some  was  king
David,  who  conquered  the  Moabites  ;  but  it  pri¬
marily  and  chiefly  points  at  Jesus  Christ,  the
Messiah,  who  is  of  the  seed  and  posterity  of  Jacob,
who  is  the  true  star  which  fills  the  world  with  its
brightness,  and  who  is  called  the  bright  and  morn¬
ing  star,  Rev.  22.  16.  Some  have  thought,  that
tn  this  place  Balaam  foretold  the  appearance  of
that  real  star,  which  arose  at  the  time  of  our
Saviour’s  birth,  and  which  guided  the  Magi  into
Judea,  to  see  the  person  whose  birth  was  declared
by  that  star.  ■  But  this  star  did  not  come  out  of
J  acob  ;  and  that  cannot  be  applied  to  this  star,
which  is  said  there ;  which  plainly  points  at  a
ruler,  a  king,  a  conqueror.

The  star  that  appeared  to  the  Magi,  or  wise  men,  and
conducted  them  to  Beth-lehem,  where  our  Saviour
was  born,  has  furnished  matter  for  many  conjec¬
tures.  Some  ancient  authors  hate  asserted,  that  it
was  a  new  star  purposely  created  to  declare  to  men
the  birth  of  the  Messiah.  Others  take  it  for  a
kind  of  comet,  which  appeared  preternaturally  in
the  air.  Lightfoot  thinks,  that  the  same  light
which  appeared  to  the  shepherds  near  Beth-lehem,
might  also  be  visible  afar  off  to  the  Magi,  hanging
over  Judea,  and  so  he  their  guide  to  find  our
Saviour.  Others  have  pretended  that  it  was  an
angel  clothed  with  a  luminous  body  in  form  of  a
star,  which  taking  his  course  towards  Judea,  deter¬
mined  the  Magi  to  follow  him  :  they  found  their
opinion  upon  this ;  that  this  star  appeared  to  be
-ational  and  intelligent,  appearing  and  disappear¬
ing ,  stopping ,  and  going  forward,  in  such  manner
as  was  necessary  for  the  conduct  of  the  Magi,  to
the  proper  place.  It  is  said,  that  some  writers  be¬
lieved  this  star  was  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  appear¬
ed  to  the  Magi  under  the  form  of  a  star,  as  he  ap¬
peared  at  the  baptism  of  Christ  under  the  form  of
a  dove.  Lastly,  Calmet  says,  that  this  star
was  an  inflamed  meteor,  in  the  middle  region  of
the  air,  which  having  been  observed  by  the
Magi  with  miraculous  and  extraordinary  cir¬
cumstances,  was  taken  by  them  for  the  star  so
long  foretold  by  Balaam;  and  that  afterwards
they  resolved  to  follow  it,  and  to  seek  the  new¬
born  king,  whose  coming  it  declared.  It  was
therejore,  says  he,  a  light  that  moved  in  the  air
before  them,  something  like  the  pillar  of  cloud
®  Aie  desert.  _  Inward  inspiration,  the  light


•  *  ,  .  •  I'tc  ay  ill

■oj  the  llo/y  Ghost,  the  solicitation  of  grace.


were  the  motives  which  engaged  them  to  follow  this
phenomenon.

I  he  time  which  the  Magi  took  up  in  their  journey  to
J  udea,  is  a  point  that  has  much  exercised  the
cbronologers.  1  hose  who  suppose  they  came  from
the  remotest  part  of  Persia,  allow  them  two  years
for  their  journey  ,  supposing  that  the  Star  appeared
to  them  two  years  before  the  birth  of  our  Saviour.
In  this  the  text  of  the  gospel  seems  something  fa¬
vourable  to  them,  saying  that  Herod  put  to  death
the  children  of  Beth-lehem,  from  two  years  old
and  under,  according  to  the  time  that  the  Mam
had  shewed  him,  Mat.  2.  16.  Others  will  have
it,  that  the  star  did  not  arise  till  the  moment  cf
our  Saviour’s  birth ;  and  these  are  yet  divided  ■
think  that  ike  .Magi  did  not  arrive  at
Beth-lehem  till  two  years  after  the  birth  of  our
Saviour.  Others  make  them  arrive  there  thirteen
days  after  his  birth  ;  and  that  they  might  make
the  greater  haste,  they  assign  them  dromedaries
to  ride  upon.  There  are  those  that  think  that
the  star  appeared  from  the  moment  of  Christ’s
tncar nation,  or  even  from  the  conception  of 'John
the  Baptist.  But  the  exact  time  of  their  de¬
parture  is  not  fixed;  though  most  have  agreed
that  the  day  of  their  arrival  at  Beth-lehem
should  be  on  the  thirteenth  day  from  our  Lord's
birth.

There  are  still  some  difficulties  started,  whether  this
star  was  seen  by  every  body,  or  only  by  the  Magi
Some  think  that  every  body  saw  it,  that  all  the  people
were  witnesses  of  this  phenomenon  ;  that  some
nut  knowing  the  mystery  of  it,  contented  themselves
to  wonder  at  it  ;  and  that  it  was  to  the  Magi
only  that  God  revealed  the  signification  of  it
and  gave  them  an  inclination  to  follow  it.  Others’
on  the  contrary,  believe  that  Jew  people  saw  it’;
that  the  Magi  themselves  only  saw  it  by  Jits,  and
jrom  time  to  time,  when  it  was  necessary  to  them
as  a  guide ,  and  to  encourage  them  to  persevere
in  their  resolution.  Lastly,  the  generality  will
nave  it,  that  the  Magi  saw  it  fur  the  greatest
part  oj  their  journey,  and  that  it  disappeared  to
them  only  when  they  arrived  at  Jerusalem  ;  then
they  found  themselves  under  a  necessity  of  inquir¬
ing,  where  they  might  find  the  new-born  Kina  of
the  Jews.  J

By  stars  are  sometimes  meant  the  princes  and  no¬
bles. of  a  kingdom.  Dan.  8.  10.  Pastors  or  minis¬
ters  of  the  gospel,  who  ought  to  shine  like  stars  in
respect  of  the  brightness  and  purity  of  their  lives
and  doctrine,  are  also  called  stars,  Rev.  1.  20.  In
Job  38.  7.  the  angels  are  called  stars,  who  joined
together  in  extolling  and  praising  God  fur  his
wonderj’ul  work  of  creation,
by  day-star,  2  Pet.  1.  19.  is  meant  either  a  more
Jull,  clear,  and  explicit  knowledge  of  Christ,  and
the  mysteries  of  the  gospel,  which  in  comparison  of
the  dark  shadows  and  prophetical  writings,  was  a
morning-star,  bringing  a  fuller  manifestation  of
the  truths  of  God,  than  the  prophets  did,  whose
predictions  are  now  accomplished.  Or,  by  day-
star  may  be  understood  that  full  and  perfect  know¬
ledge  which  believers  shall  have,  when  in  heaven
they  shall  see  God  face  to  face  ;  and  this  day  is
1  opposed  to  the  u’hole  time  of  this  life,  which,  not¬
withstanding  all  endeavours  after  knowledge,  may
be  called  a  night  of  error  and  ignorance.

Rum.  24.  17.  there  shall  come  a  j.  out  of  Jacob
Amos  5. 26.  but  ye  have  borne  the  f.  of  your  god
Mat.  2.  2.  for  we  have  seen  his  s.  in  the  east
7.  Herod  enquired  of  them  what  time.*,  appeared

9.  lo,  .9.  which  they  saw  in  east,  went  before  them

10.  when  they  saw  .9.  they  rejoiced  with  great  joy
Acts  7.  43.  ye  took  up  the  s.  of  your  god  Remphan

1  Cor .  lo.  41.  one  s.  differeth  from  another  s.  in  glory
Rev.  8. 10.  there  fell  a  great  s.  from  heaven,  11.

9.  1.  a  s.  fell  from  heaven  unto  the  earth
_  Uay-STAR.

2  Pet.  1.  19.  till  the  day-s.  arise  in  your  hearts

Morning  STAR.

Rev.  2.  28.  and  I  will  give  him  the  morning  s.

22.  16.  I  am  the  bright  and  morning  s.

S'L'AR-gazers.

Isa.  47.  13.  let  the  s. -gazers  stand  up  and  save  thee
^  STARS.

Gen.  1.  16.  God  made  two  lights,  he  made  .9.  also
15.  5.  tell  the  £.  if  thou  be  able  to  number  them
37-  9.  sun,  moon,  and  eleven  s.  made  obeisance
Veut.  4. 19.  when  seest  s. should  be  driven  to  worship
Judg.  5.  20.  the  s.  in  their  courses  fought  ag.  Sisera
Neh.  4.  21.  from  the  morning  till  the  s.  appeared
Job  3.  9.  let  the  j.  of  the  twilight  thereof  be  dark
9.  7.  who  commandeth  sun,  and  sealeth  up  the  s.

22. 12.  behold  height  of  the  how  high  they  are
25.  5.  yea,  the  s.  are  not  pure  in  his  sight
38.  7.  when  the  morning  s.  sang  together
Psal.  8.  3.  moon  and  s.  which  thou  hast  ordained
136.  9.  the  moon  and  s.  to  rule  by  night

147.  4.  he  telleth  number  of  the  s.  he  calleth  them

148.  3.  praise  him,  sun,  moon,  all  ye  s.  of  light
Eccl.  12.  2.  while  the  sun  or  s.  be  not  darkened
Isa.  14.  13.  I  wilPexalt  my  throne  above  s.  of  God
Jer.  31.  35.  givetli  the  .9.  for  a  light  by  night
Ezek.  32.  7.  I  will  make  the  s.  thereof  dark
Van.  8. 10.  it  cast  down  some  of  the  s.  to  ground

12.  3.  they  shall  shine  as  the  s.  for  ever  and  ever
Joel  2.  10.  s.  shall  withdraw  their  shining,  3. 15.

Obad.  4.  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among  the  s.

Luke  21.  25.  there  shall  be  signs  in  sun,  moon,  and  s.
Acts  27 .20.  when  neither  sun  nor  s.  appeared
1  Cor.  15.  41.  and  another  glory  of  s.  for  one  star
Heb.  11.  12.  so  many  as  s.  of  the  sky  in  multitude
Jude  13.  those  are  raging  waves,  wandering  f.  whom
Rev.  8.  12.  the  third  part  of  the  s.  was  smitten
12.  1.  and  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  s.

See  Heaven,  Seven.

STATE.

Psal.  39. 5.  ev.  man  at  his  best  s.  is  altogether  vanity
Mat.  12.  45.  seven  spirits  more  wicked,  the  last  s.
of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first,  Luke  11.  26.

See  Estate.


I  STATELY.

Ezek.  23.41.  sattest  upon  a  s.  bed  and  table  prepares
I  STATION.

2  C /iron.  35.  t  15.  sons  of  Asaph  were  in  theii  a
La.  22.  19.  I  will  drive  thee  from  thy  a.  and  state
SJAIURE.

Rum.  13.  32.  the  people  we  saw  are  men  of  great  j

1  Sam.  16.  7.  look  not  on  the  height  of  bis  .9.

28.  f  20.  Saul  fell  with  the  fulness  of  his  s.

2  Sam.  21.  20.  a  man  ot  great  s,  with  six  fingers
and  with  six  toes,  1  Chron.  11.  23.  |  20.  6.

Cant.  7.7.  this  thy  s.  is  like  a  palm-tree  and  breasts"
^:e  higli  ones  of  s.  shall  be  hewn  down
45.  14.  men  of  s.  shall  come  over  unto  thee
Ezek.  13.  18.  make  kerchiefs  on  head  of  every  s.
17.  6.  it  grew  and  became  a  spreading  vine  of  low  s.
19.  11.  her  s.  was  exalted  among  thick  branches
31.  3.  the  Assyrian  was  a  cedar  of  an  high  s.

Mat.  0.  27.  not  add  one  cubit  to  his  s.  Luke  12. 25
Ema*  2.  52.  Jes.  increased  in  wisdom  and  s.  in  fav.
19.  3.  /accheus  little  of  s.  climbed  up  to  see  Jesus
Bp/i.  4.  13.  measure  of  the  s.  of  fulness  of  Christ
E,  ,  .  STATUTE.

Exod.  15.  25.  there  he  made  a  s.  and  ordinance
~9.  J.  priests  office  shall  be  theirs  for  perpetual  s.
E^.3  17.aperpetL.au.  16.34.  |  24.  9.  AW  19.21.
Rum.  27.  11.  it  shall  be  tor  a  s.  of  judgment,  35  °Q
Josh.  24.  25.  and  he  set  them  a  a.  in  Shechem
1 Sam.  30.  25.  David  made  it  a  a.  for  Isr.  to  this  day
Psal.  81.  4.  for  this  was  a  a.  for  Israel  and  a  law
Van.  b.  7.  captains  consulted  to  establish  a  royal  a.
lo.  that  no  s.  king  established  may  be  changed
STATUTES.

Exod.  18.  16.  I  do  make  them  know  the  s.  of  God
Lev.  10.  11.  that  ye  may  teach  Israel  all  the  s.
Rum.  30.  16.  these  are  the  s.  the  Lord  commanded
Veut.  4.  6.  which  shall  hear  all  these  s.  and  sayings
6.  24.  the  Lord  commanded  us  to  do  all  these  a.°
16.  12.  and  thou  shalt  observe  and  do  these  a.

17- 19.  that  he  may  learn  to  keep  these  s.  to  do  them

1  Kings  3.  3.  walking  in  the  a.  of  David  his  father

2  Kings  17.  8.  and  walked  in  a.  of  the  heathen,  19.
34.  neither  do  they  after  their  s.  or  ordinances
37.  the  .9.  he  wrote,  ye  shall  observe  to  do

2  Chron.  33.  8.  that  they  take  heed  to  do  the  s.

Neh.  9.  14.  thou  commandest  them  s.  and  laws
Ejal- 19.  8.  s.  of  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart
Ezek.  20.  25.  I  gave  them  a.  that  were  not  good
33.  15.  it  the  wicked  walk  in  the  a.  of  life
Mic.  6. 16.  for a.  ofOmri  are  keptand  worksof  Ahab
See  Statute  for  Ever.

.  Ilis  STATUTES.

Exod.  15.  26.  if  thou  wilt  give  ear  to  hiscommandm
and  keep  all  his  s.  Veut.  6.  17. 1  10.  13.  I  11.  l.
Veut.  27. 10.  shalt  do  hiss,  which  I  command  thee
28.  15.  if  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do  his  s.

2  Sam.  22.  23.  his  s.  I  did  not  depart  from  them

1  Kings 8. 61.  let  your  hearts  be  pert,  to  walk  in  hiss.

2  Kings  17.  15.  they  rejected  his  s.  and  his  covenant
23.  3.  made  a  covenant  to  keep  his  a.  2  C 'hr.  34.  31.

Ezra  7.  11.  to  Ezra  even  a  scribe  of  his  s.  to  Israel"
Psal.  18.  22.  1  did  not  put  away  his  s.  from  me
105.  45.  that  they  might  observe  his  s.  and  laws
Jer.  44.  23.  nor  walked  in  his  law,  nor  in  his  s.

See  Judgments.

My  STATUTES.

Gen.  26.  5.  because  Abraham  kept  my  s.  and  laws
Lev.  18.  5.  ye  shall  theref.  keep  my  s.  26.  |  19.  19.

25.  18.  ye  shall  do  my  s.  ||  26.  3.  if  ye  walk  in  my  s.

26.  15.  if  ye  despise  my  .9.  j|  43.  they  abhorred  my  s.

1  Kings  3.  14.  if  thou  wilt  keep  my  s.  as  David  did

9.  6.  will  not  keep  my  s.  ||  11. 11 .  hast  not  kept  my  s
11.  34.  he  kept  my  s.  ||  2  Kings  17-  13.  keep  my  s.

2  Chron.  7.  19.  it  ye  turn  away,  and  forsake  my  s.
Psal.  50.  16.  what  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare  my  s.
89.  31 .  if  they  break  my  s.  keep  not  commandments

Jer.  44.  10.  neither  have  they  walked  in  my  s.

Ezek.  5.  6.  hath  changed  my  s.  more  than  nations
7-  Ed.  saith,  because  ye  have  not  walked  in  my  s
11.  20.  they  may  walk  in  my  s.  and  do  them
18.  19.  when  the  sun  hath  kept  all  my  s.

36.  27.  and  I  will  cause  you  to  walk  in  my  s.

Zech.  1.  6.  my  s.  did  take  hold  of  your  fathers

Thy  STATUTES.

IClr,  29. 19.  give  him  a  perfect  heart  to  keep  thy  s.
Psal.  119.  IQ.  blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord,  teach  me
T  thV  f-  26,  33,  64,  68,  124,  135.

10.  1  will  delight  myself  in  thy  s.  not  forget  word
23.  but  thy  servant  did  meditate  in  thy  s.

48.  and  I  will  meditate  in  thy  s.

54.  thy  s.  have  been  my  songs  in  my  pilgrimage
71.  1  have  been  afflicted,  that  I  might  learn  thy  s.

80.  let  my  heart  be  sound  in  thy  s.  be  not  ashamed
83.  I  am  like  a  bottle,  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy  .y.

112.  I  inclined  my  heart  to  perform  thy  s.  alway

117.  I  will  have  respect  to  thy  s.  continually

118.  hast  trodden  down  them  that  err  from  thy  s.

155.  for  the  wicked  seek  not  thy  s.

171.  my  lips  praise,  when  thou  hast  taught  thy  s.
STAVES.

Exod.  25. 13.  thou  shalt  make  .9.  of  shittim-wood  and
overlay  with  gold,  28. 1  27-  6.  |  30.  5.  |  37.  4.

14  put  j.  into  rings,  15. 1  27.  f.  \  37.  5.  |  .38.  7.

37.  15.  he  made  s.  of  shittim-wood,  28.  I  38.  5.

40.  £0.  he  set  s.  on  the  ark  and  put  mercy-seat
Rum.  4.  6.  they  shall  put  in  .9.  thereof,  8,  11,  14.

21.  18.  nobles  of  the  people  digged  with  their  .9.

1  Sam.  17.43.  am  I  a  (log,  that  comest  to  me  with  .9.  ?

1  Chron.  15.  15.  the  Levites  carried  the  ark  with  a.
Ilab.  3.  14.  thou  didst  strike  through  with  his  a.

Zech.  11.  7.  I  took  unto  me  two  s.  I  fed  the  flock
Mat.  10.  10.  nor  take  two  coats  nor  a.  Luke  9.  .3.

26.  47.  Judas  came  and  with  him  a  great  multi¬
tude  with  .v.  from  chief  priests,  Mark  14.  43.

55.  are  ye  corneas  against  thief  with  swords  and  s

tor  to  take  me  ?  Mark  14.  48.  Luke  22  52
STAY.

Lev.  1.3.  5.  behold,  if  plague  in  his  sight  be  at  a  s.

37.  but  if  the  scall  in  his  sight  be  at  a  s.

2  Sam.  22.  19.  but  the  Lord  was  my  9.  Psal.  18. 18.

Isa.  3.  1.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  the  .9.  and  staff,

the  whole  s.  ot  bread,  and  the  whole  s.  of  water

471


STE


S  T  E


STE


Jsa.  19.  13.  even  they  that  are  the  a.  of  tribes  thereof
1  Tint.  3. 1 15.  cliurch  of  God,  pillar  and  a.  of  truth
STAYS.

1  Kings  10.  19.  there  were  s.  on  either  side  throne  ;

two  lions  stood  beside  the  a.  2  Chr.  9.  18.
Jer.  50.  +  36.  a  sword  is  upon  the  chief  s.

STAY.

Gen.  19.  17.  neither s.  thou  in  all  the  plain,  escape
Exod.  9.  28.  I  will  let  you  go,  ye  shall  s.  no  longer
Lev.  13.  23.  if  bright  spot  s.  in  his  place,  28.

Josh.  10.  19.  s.  not,  but  pursue  after  your  enemies
ltuih  1.  13.  would  ye a.  for  them  from  hav.  husbands

1  Sam.  15. 16.  a.  and  1  will  tell  thee  what  Lord  said
20.  38.  .Jonathan  cried,  make  speed,  haste,  s.  not

2  Sam.  24. 16.  a.  now  thine  hand,  1  Chr.  21.  15.

Job  37. 4.  he  will  not  a.  them  when  his  voice  is  heard

38.  37.  or  who  can  s.  the  bottles  of  heaven
Psal.  59.  t  15.  let  them  wander  for  meat  if  they  be
not  satisfied,  then  they  will  s.  all  night
Prov.  28.  17.  shall  fiee  to  pit,  let  no  man  a.  him
Cant.  2.  5.  s.  me  with  flagons,  l  am  sick  of  love
Isa.  10.  20.  shall  no  more  s.  on  him  that  smote  him

29.  9.  s.  yourselves  and  wonder,  cry  ye  out  and  cry

30.  12.  because  ye  trust,  and  s.  on  oppression

31.  1.  woe  to  them  s.  on  horses,  trust  in  chariots
48.  2.  for  they  s.  themselves  on  the  God  of  Israel
50.  10.  let  him  trust  in  Lord,  and  s.  on  his  God

Jer.  4.  6.  a.  not,  for  I  will  bring  evil  from  north
20.  9.  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  I  could  not  s.
Dan.  4.  35.  none  can  s.  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him
Hos.  13.  13.  not  s.  in  the  place  of  breaking  forth
STAYED.

Gen.  8.  10.  and  Noah  s.  yet  other  seven  days,  12.

32.  4.  with  Laban,  and  1  have  s.  there  until  now
Exod.  10.  24.  only  let  your  tiocks  and  herds  be  s.

17.  12.  and  Aaron  and  Hur  s.  up  Moses’  hands
Num.  16.  48. stood  between  dead  and  living,  plague
was  s.  50. 1  25.  8.  2  Sam.  24.  25.  Psal.  106.  30.
Dent.  10.  10.  1  s.  in  mount  forty  days  and  nights
Josh.  10.  13.  and  sun  stood  still,  and  the  moon  s.

1  Sam.  20.  19.  and  when  thou  hast  s.  three  days
24.  7.  David  s.  his  servants  with  these  words
30.  9.  where  those  that  were  left  behind  s.

2  Sam.  17.  17.  now  Jonathan  s.  by  En  rogel

24.  21.  that  the  plague  may  be  a.  1  Chron.  21.  ,22.

1  Kings  22.  35.  the  king  was  a-,  up  in  his  chariot,  and
died,  and  blood  ran  into  the  chariot,  2  Chr.  18.34.

2  Kings  4.  6.  there  is  not  a  vessel  more,  and  oil  s.
13. 18.  smite  on  ground,  and  he  smote  thrice,  and  s.
15.  20.  the  king  of  Assyria  s.  not  in  the  land

Job  38.  11.  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  s.
Isa.  26.  3.  wilt  keep  him  whose  mind  is  s.  on  thee
Lam.  4.  6.  that  was  overthrown,  no  hands  s.  on  her
Ezek.  31. 15.  and  the  great  waters  were  s.

Hag.  1.  10.  heaven  is  s.  the  earth  is  s.  from  her  fruit
Luke  4.  42.  the  people  came  to  him  and  s.  him
Acts  19.  22.  but  he  himself  s.  in  Asia  for  a  season
STAY  ET II.

Isa.  27-  8.  he  s.  his  rough  wind  in  day  of  east-wind
Jer.  48.  I  30.  those  on  whom  he  a.  do  not  right
STEAD.

Gen.  2.  21.  he  closed  up  the  flesh  in  a.  thereof

4.  25.  God  appointed  me  another  seed  in  a.  of  Abel
22. 13.  Abraham  offered  the  ram  in  a.  of  his  son

30.  2.  am  I  in  God’s  a.  ||  44.  33.  abide  in  a.  of  the  lad
Exod.  4.  16.  he  shall  be  thy  spokesman,  he  shall  be  to

thee  in  a.  of  a  mouth  ?  shall  be  to  him  in  a.  of  God
5. 12.  people  scattered  to  gather  stub,  in  a.  of  straw
29.  30.  that  son  that  is  priest  in  his  a.  Lev.  16.  32.
Num.  3. 12.  I  have  taken  the  Levites  in  a.  of  all  first¬
born,  the  Levites  shall  be  mine,  41.  45.  |  8.  16.
41.  cattle  of  the  Levites  in  a.  of  cattle  oflsr.  45.

5.  19.  with  another  in  s.  of  thy  husband,  20.  29.

10.  31.  and  thou  mayest  be  to  us  in  a.  of  eyes

32.  14.  behold,  ye  are  risen  up  in  your  father’s  s.
Deut.  2.12.  the  children  of  Esau  dwelt  in  their  s.

21.  the  Ammonites  dwelt  in  their  a.  22.  23.

10.  6.  Eleazar  Aaron’s  son  ministered  in  his  a.
Josh.  5.  7.  their  children  whom  he  raised  in  their  a.
Judg.  15.  2.  take,  I  pray,  her  sister  in  a.  of  her
2  Sam.  16.  8.  Saul,  in  whose  a.  thou  hast  reigned
17;. 25.  he  made  Amasa  captain  in  a.  of Joab

1  Kings 1. 30.  Solom.  shall  sit  on  my  throne  in  my  a.
35.  siton  my  throne,  for  he  shall  be  king  in  my  a.

3.  7-  Lord,  thou  hast  made  me  king  in  a.  of  David
14.  27.  Renoboam  made  in  their  a.  brasen  shields

2  Kings  17.24.  placed  in  cities  of  Samaria  in  a.  oflsr.
Esth.  2.  4.  let  her  be  queen  in  a.  of  Vashti,  17.

Job  16.  4.  if  your  soul  were  in  my  soul’s  a.

31.  40.  if  my  land  cry  against  me,  let  thistles
grow  in  a.  of  wheat,  and  cockle  in  a.  of  barley

33.  6.  behold,  I  am  accord,  to  thy  wish  in  God’s  a.

34.  24.  and  he  shall  set  others  in  their  a.

Psal.  45. 16.  in  a.  of  thy  fathers  shall  be  thy  children
Prov.  11.  8.  and  the  wicked  cometh  in  Ins  a.

Eccl.  4. 15.  with  the  child  that  shall  stand  up  in  his  a.
Isa.  3.  24.  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  in  a.  of  sweet
smell  there  shall  be  stink,  in  a.  of  a  girdle  a  rent
55.  13.  in  a.  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  fir-tree,  and
in  a.  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  myrtle-tree
Esek.  16.  32.  who  taketh  strangers  in  a.  of  her  husb.
Hos.  1. 1 10.  in  a.  of  that  where  it  was  said  to  them
2  Cor.  5. 20.  we  pray  you  in  Christ’s  a.  be  ye  reconc.
P hi lern. 13; that  in  thy  a.  might  have  ministered  to  me
See  Reigned.

STEADS.

1  Chr.  5.  22.  they  dwelt  in  their  a.  till  the  captivity

STEADY.

Exod.  17. 12.  Moses’  hands  were  a.  going  down  of  sun

2  Tim.  2.  f  TJ.  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  a.

STEAL.

Among  the  Hebrews  theft  was  not  punished  with
death.  Prov.  6.  30,  31.  Men  do  not  despise  a
thief,  if  he  steal  to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is
hungry.  But  if  he  be  found,  he  shall  restore
seven-fold  ;  he  shall  give  all  the  substance  of  his
house.  The  taro  allowed  the  killing  of  a  night
robber,  Exod.  22.  2.  because  it  teas  supposed  his
intention  was  to  murder  as  well  as  to  rob  :  it  con¬
demned  a  common  thief  to  make  double  restitution,
if  the  beast  he  stole  were  found  in  his  hand  alive,
Exod.  22.  4.  If  he  stole  an  ox  and  killed  it,  he


•was  to  restore  it  five-fold,  if  a  sheep,  only  four¬
fold,  Exod.  22.  1.  It  is  thought  that  the  theft
of  an  ox,  or  of  any  of  that  kind,  was  punished
the  more  severely,  because  this  animal  is  of  more
use  than  others,  and  likewise  because  it  argued  a
greater  boldness  and  customariness _  in  the  thief
to  steal  that  which  more  easily  might  be  disco¬
vered.  If  the  thief  did  not  make  restitution,  they
seized  what  was  in  his  house,  put  it  up  to  sale,
and  even  sold  himself,  if  he  had  not  wherewithal
to  make  satisfaction,  Exod.  22.  3.  In  the  passage
just  now  quoted,  Prov.  6.  3.  the  wise  man  says,
that  the  thief  was  to  restore  seven  fold  the  valve
of  the  thing  stolen.  Rut  seven-fold  may  be
here  put  for  manyfold,  he  shall  make  abundant
satisfaction.

Though  there  was  no  penalty  annexed  to  the  law
forbidding  theft,  except  restitution  ;  yet  to  steal
away  a  freeman,  or  an  Hebrew,  and  to  reduce
him  to  the  state  of  servitude,  teas  punished  with
death,  Exod.  21.  16.  He  that  stealeth  a  man
and  selleth  him,  or  if  he  be  found  in  his  hand,
he  shall  surely  be  put  to  death.  The  Jews  do
not  think  that  the  stealing  of  a  man  of  any  other
nation  deserves  death,  but  only  the  theft  of  a  free
Hebrew.  If  it  be  a  stranger  that  is  stole,  they
were  only  condemned  to  restitution.  They  found
this  distinction  upon  a  law  in  Deut.  24.  7-
which  limits  this  law  concerning  man-stealing  :
If  a  man  be  found  stealing  any  of  his  brethren
of  the  children  of  Israel  ;  which  exception  the
Septuagint  and  Onkelos  have  inserted  in  the  text
of  Exod.  21.  16.  This  crime  is  called  Plagium.
See  Sell.

Some  have  thought  that  mere  theft  among  the  He¬
brews  had  no  particular  mark  of  infamy  an¬
nexed  to  it  hi  some  cases.  Solomon  says,  Prov.
6.  30.  Men  do  not  despise  a  thief,  if  he  steal
to  satisfy  his  soul  when  he  is  hungry.  The
law  inflicts  no  peculiar  punishment  on  him,  and
he  is  not  made  to  undergo  any  shameful  or  ig¬
nominious  penalty  :  If  he  is  found,  he  shall  re¬
store  seven-fold,  he  shall  give  all  the  substance
of  his  house.  This  is  all  the  danger  he  is  ex¬
posed  to  in  stealing,  except  he  had  not  where¬
withal  to  make  restitution,  in  which  case  he
was  reduced  to  bondage.  Many  people  inhabit¬
ing  round  about  Judea,  seem  to  have  made  rob¬
bery  a  kind  of  profession.  Isaac  foretold  to
Esau,  that  he  should  live  by  his  sword,  that  is,
that  he  should  maintain  himself  by  plundering ,
Gen.  27.  40.  Ishmael,  the  son  of  Abraham,  had
no  other  trade  than  war  and  rapine  ;  he  was  a  wild
man  and  an  archer,  he  was  always  at  war  with  his
neighbours.  His  hand  will  be  against  every  man,
and  every  man’s  hand  against  him,  Gen.  16.  12.

I  21.  20.'  Ilis  posterity  the  Ishmaelites  followed
the  example  of  their  father,  and,  as  some  affirm,
made  no  scruple  to  rob  upon  the  high-way.

When  the  Israelites  were  just  upon  the  point  of
departing  out  of  Egypt,  they  borrowed  of  their
Egyptian  neighbours,  valuable  garments,  vessels
of  gold  and  silver,  and  carried  them  along  with
them  into  the  wilderness.  Exod.  11.  2,  3.  Speak
now  in  the  ears  of  the  people,  and  let  every
man  borrow  of  his  neighbour,  and  every  wo¬
man  of  her  neighbour,  jewels  of  silver,  and
jewels  of  gold.  And  the  Lord  gave  the  peo¬
ple  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  Egyptians.  It
is  inquired,  whether  the  Hebrews  couid  lawfully
borrow  these  things  of  the  Egyptians,  which  they
had  no  intention  to  restore  to  them  again  ?  and
whether  this  was  not  to  commit  a  manifest  theft
and  injustice  '!  Commentators  give  several  an¬
swers  to  this  question.  Some  say,  that  upon  this
occasion,  God  plainly  dispensed  with  that  law ;
by  which  he  had  obliged  the  Hebrews  not  to  com¬
mit  any  theft ;  or  rather,  that  being  the  absolute
Master  of  every  thing,  he  transferred  to  the  He¬
brews  that  right  that  the  Egyptians  had  to  these
things.  Others  insinuate  another  reason,  which  is,
that  God  would  recompense  the  Hebrews  for  the
labours  that  they  had  suffered  in  Egypt,  and  al¬
lowed  them  to  pay  themselves  by  their  own  hands,
by  detaining  what  they  borrowed  of  the  Egyptians.
This  way  of  paying  oneself  cannot  be  allowed  re¬
gularly  ;  but  in  these  circumstances,  having  no
other  way  of  doing  themselves  justice,  and  being
authorized  by  the  express  command  of  God,  they
might  have  recourse  to  this  expedient.

Others  look  upon  this,  not  as  a  theft,  but  as  a  fair
booty  got  in  a  just  war.  The  Egyptians  were  ene¬
mies  to  the  Hebrews;  they  had  unjustly  perse¬
cuted  them  for  a  long  time,  and  took  from  them
the  means  of  defending  themselves,  and  of  reco¬
vering  their  liberty.  They  might  therefore  law¬
fully  deprive  them  of  their  goods  by  a  wile,  and  a
kind  of  stratagem ,  by  pretending  to  borrow  of  them
what  they  never  intended  to  return.

Some  here  distinguish  between  such  Israelites  who
acted  in  the  simplicity  of  their  hearts,  and  sin¬
cerely  obeyed  the  commands  of  God,  and  those
that  followed  the  motions  of  their  own  covetous  de¬
sires.  The  first  are  excused  from  sin  by  the  up¬
rightness  of  their  intentions,  but  not  the  second,
who  were  ready  enough  to  rob  the  Egyptians,  if  they
could  do  it  with  impunity,  even  though  God  had
not  allowed  them  to  borrow  any  thing  from  them.

Others  observe,  that  the  Egyptians  were  indebted
to  the  Hebrews,  not  only  for  their  goods,  but  for
their  lives  also,  because  of  the  benefits  they  had
received  from  the  Patriarch  Joseph,  when  they
were  under  the  greatest  necessity.  The  Israelites
were  unjustly  oppressed  by  a  cruel  slavery  in
Egypt  :  the  Egyptians  exercised  all  kinds  of
violences  against  them,  and  overwhelmed  them
with  calamities,  even  to  the  rendering  their  lives
uneasy  to  them.  The  Hebrews  had  built  them
cities,  and  had  very  much  improved  the  riches
of  these  inhuman  masters  :  who,  instead  of  ac¬
knowledging  these  services,  intended  even  to  take
uway  their  lives  from  them.  What  injustice


therefore  could  there  be,  if  the  Israelites  should
take  again  a  small  part  of  that  which  they  had  pro¬
cured  for  the  Egyptians  ?  And  if  they  should  re¬
ceive  a  small  recompence  for  so  many  services  they
had  done  them?  They  came  poor  out  of  Egypt,
whereas  they  ought  to  have  got  much  riches  together,
if  they  had  not  been  reduced  into  an  unjust  servi¬
tude  :  and,  just  as  a  freeman,  who  had  been  stolen
away  and  sold  for  a  slave,  might,  without  injustice,
set  himself  at  liberty,  and  pay  himself  for  his  la¬
bour,  by  taking  from  his  master  a  small  reward  Jbr
his  service  :  so  the  Israelites,  at  their  departure  out
of  Egypt,  might  receive  something  as  a  recom¬
pence,  since  a  great  deal  was  due  to  them.

Gen.  31.27.  wherefore  didst  thou  a.  away  from  me
44.  8.  how  then  should  we  a.  silver  or  gold  ?

Exod.  20. 15.  thou  shalt  not  a.  Lev.  19.  11.  Deut.  5.

19.  Mat.  19.  18.  Rom.  13.  9.
22. 1.  if  a  man  a.  an  ox,  he  shall  restore  five
2  Sam.  19.  3.  as  people  a.  away  when  flee  in  battle
Prov.  6.  30.  if  he  a.  to  satisfy  his  soul  whefi  hungry

30.  9.  or  lest  I  be  poor  and  a.  and  take  name  of  G.
Jer.  7.  9.  will  ye  a.  murder,  and  commit  adultery

23.  30.  I  am  against  the  prophets  that  a.  my  words
Mat.  6. 19.  ami  where  thieves  break  through  and  a.
20.  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor  s.

27.  64.  lest  his  disciples  come  and  a.  him  away
Mark  10.  19.  do  not  kill,  do  not  a.  Luke  18.  20.
John  10.  10.  the  thief  cometh  not,  but  for  to  a.
Rom.  2.  21.  that  preach,  man  sho.  not  a.  dost  thou  a.
Eph.  4.  28.  let  him  that  stole  a.  no  more,  but  labour
STEALERS.

1  Tim.  1.  10.  but  the  law  was  made  for  men-A.

STEALETH.

Exod.  21. 16.  he  that  a.  a  man,  and  selleth  him
Job  21.  t  18.  and  as  chaff  that  the  storm  a.  away
27.  20.  a  tempest  a.  him  away  in  the  night
Zech.  5.  3.  for  every  one  that  a.  shall  be  cut  off
STEALING.

Deut.  24. 7-  if  a  man  be  found  a.  any  of  his  brethr.
Hos.  4.  2.  by  swearing  and  a.  they  break  out
STEALTH.

2  Sam.  19.  3.  the  people  gat  them  by  a.  into  the  city
Job  4.  t  12.  now  a  thing  was  by  a.  brought  to  me

STEDFAST.

Job  11.  15.  yea,  thou  shalt  be  a.  and  shalt  not  fear
Psal.  78.  8.  whose  spirit  was  not  a.  with  God
37.  neither  were  they  a.  in  his  covenant
Dan.  6.  26.  he  is  the  living  God,  and  a.  for  ever

1  Cor.  7.  37.  he  that  stand,  in  hisheart  a.  doeth  well

15.  58.  therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye  a.

2  Cor.  1.  7 -.and  our  nope  of  you  is  a  a.  knowing
Heb.  2.  2.  for  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels  was  a.

3.  14.  if  we  hold  our  confidence  a.  to  the  end
6. 19.  which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  sure  and  A.

1  Pet.  5.  9.  whom  resist  a.  in  the  faith,  knowing

STEDFASTLY.

Ruth  1 .  18.  when  she  saw  that  she  was  a.  minded

2  Kings  8.  11.  and  he  settled  his  countenance  a.
Luke  9.  51.  lie  a.  set  his  face  to  go  tp  Jerusalem
Acts  1.  10.  while  they  looked  a.  behold,  two  men  '

2.42.  they  continued  a.  in  the  apostles’ doctrine

6.  15.  they  all  looking  a.  on  him,  saw  his  face  as  if

7.  55.  Stephen  looked  up  a.  into  heaven,  saw  glory
14.  9.  who  a.  beholding  him,  and  perceiving  he  had

2  Cor.  3.  7-  Israel  could  not  a.  behold  face  of  Moses
13.  could  not  a.  look  to  the  end  of  that  abolished
STEDFAST  NESS.

Psal.  5.  +  9.  for  there  is  no  s.  in  fheir  mouth
Col.  2.  5.  beholding  the  a.  of  your  faith  in  Christ
2  Pet.  3.  17.  beware  lest  ye  fall  from  your  own  a.
STEEL.

2  Sam.  22.  35.  a  bow  of  a.  is  broken,  Psal.  18.  34.
Job  20.  24.  the  bow  of  a.  shall  strike  him  through
Jer.  15.  12.  shall  iron  break  northern  iron  and  a.  ?
STEEP.

Ezek.  38.  20.  the  a.  places  shall  fall,  and  every  wall
Mic.  1.  4.  as  waters  that  are  poured  down  a.  place
Mat.  8.  32.  the  swine  ran  violently  down  a  a.  place,
and  perished  in  waters,  Mark  5. 13.  Luke  8. 33.
STEM.

Jsa.  6.  +  13.  as  teil-tree  and  oak  whose  a.  is  in  them
11.  1.  there  shall  come  a  rod  out  of  the  a.  of  Jesse
STEP.

1  Sam.  20.  3.  there  is  but  a.  between  me  and  death
Job  31.  7.  if  my  a.  hath  turned  out  of  the  way

STEPPED.

John  5.  4.  whosoever  first  a.  in  was  made  whole

STEPP  ETH.  [fore  me

John  5.  7-  while  I  am  coming,  another  a.  down  be-
STEPS.

Exod.  20.  26.  neither  go  up  by  a.  to  mine  altar

2  Sam.  22.  37-  thou  hast  enlarged  my  a.  Pa.  18.  36.

1  Kings  10.  19.  the  throne  had  six  s.  2  Chron.  9. 18.
20.  twelve  lions  stood  on  the  a.  2  Chron.  9.  19.

Job  14.  16.  for  now  thou  numberest  my  a.

18.  7-  the  a.  of  his  strength  shall  be  straitened
23.  1 1.  my  foot  hath  held  his  a.  his  way  have  I  kept
29.  6.  when  I  washed  my  a.  with  butter,  and  rock

31.  4.  doth  not  he  see  my  ways  and  count  my  a.
37.  I  would  declare  to  him  the  number  of  my  a.

Psal.  17. 11.  they  have  now  compassed  us  in  our  a.
37.  23.  a.  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord
31.  the  law  in  his  heart,  none  of  his  a.  shall  slide
44. 18.  nor  have  our  a.  declined  from  thy  way

56.  6.  they  mark  my  a.  when  they  wait  for  my  soul

57.  6.  they  have  prepared  a  net  for  my  a.

73.  2.  but  as  for  me,  my  a.  had  well  nigh  slipped
85. 13.  and  shall  set  us  in  the  way  of  his  a.

119. 133.  order  my  a.  in  thy  way,  let  not  iniquity
Prov.  4. 12.  when  goest  thy  a.  shall  not  be  straitened
5.  5.  her  feet  go  down  to  death,  a.  take  hold  on  hell

16.  9-  but  the  Lord  directeth  his  a.

Isa.  26.  6.  the  a.  of  the  needy  shall  tread  it  down
Jer.  10.  23.  it  is  not  in  man  that  walk,  to  direct  his  a.
Lam.  4. 18.  they  hunt  our  a.  we  cannot  go  in  streets
Ezek.  40.  22.  they  went  up  to  it  by  seven  a.  26.

31.  and  the  going  up  to  it  had  eight  a.  34.  37.

49.  he  brought  me  by'  a.  whereby  they  went  up  to  it
Dan.  11.  43.  the  Ethiopians  shall  be  at  his  a.

Rom.  4. 12.  but  walk  in  a.  of  that  faith  of  Abraham

2  Cor.  12. 18.  walked  we  not  in  the  same  s.?


STO


STI


STO


I  Pet.  2.  21  an  example  that  ye  should  follow  his  s.
A  STERN.

Acts  £7.  29.  they  cast  four  anchors  out  of  the  s.
STEWARD.

Gen.  15.  2.  and  the  s.  ot  my  house  is  this  Eliezer
43*  19.  they  came  near  to  the  s.  of  Joseph's  house
t  Kings  16.  9.  drinking  drunk  in  the  house  of  his  s.
Van.  1.  +  11.  then  said  Daniel  to  the  r.

Aza/.  20.  8.  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  saith  to  his  s.
Luke  8.  3.  Joanna  the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod’s  s.

12.  42.  who  then  is  that  faithful  and  wise  .v.

36.  1.  there  was  a  certain  rich  man  who  had  a  s .

give  account,  for  thou  mayest  be  no  longer  s.
8.  and  the  Lord  commended  the  unjust  s.
lit.  1. 7.  a  bishop  must  he  blameless  as  the  s.  of  G
,  STEWARDS.

1  Chr.  28.  1 .  and  David  assembled  captains  and  s.
1  Cor.  4.  1.  as  ministers  and  j.  of  mysteries  of  God

2.  it  is  required  in  that  a  man  be  found  faithful

1  Pet.  4.  10.  as  good  s.  of  manifold  grace  of  God

.  STEWARDSHIP.

Luke\6.  2.  he  said  to  him,  give  an  account  of  thy  s.

3.  for  my  lord  taketh  away  from  me  the  s.  4

_  .  „  #  STICK.

Job  33.  21.  his  bones  that  were  not  seen,  s.  out

41.17.  his  scales  are  joined,  they  s.  together
Psal.  38.  2.  for  thine  arrows  *.  fast  in  me
Ezek.  29.  4.  I  will  cause  the  fish  to  j.  to  tby  scales
_  STICKETH.

Ptov.  18.  24.  there  is  a  friend  s.  closer  than  a  brother
„  r.  STICK.

2  Kings  6.  6.  cut  down  a  j.  and  cast  it  in  thither
Earn.  4. 8.  their  skin  is  withered  and  become  like  a  r.
jLzek,  37.  16.  take  one  s.  write  on  it,  take  another  s .

17.  and  join  them  one  to  another  into  one  s.  19.

__  STICKS.

Eum.  15.  o2.  a  man  that  gathered  s.  on  the  sabbath
33.  they  that  found  him  gatherings,  brought  him
4  .17. jlO-  the  widow  woman  was  gathering  s.

12.  behold,  1  am  gathering  two  s.  to  go  in
Ezek.  37.  20.  and  the  s.  whereon  thou  writest
Acts  28.  3.  when  Paul  had  gathered  a  bundle  of  s
_  _  STIFF.

Jer.  17. 23.  they  obej’ed  not,  but  made  their  neck  s.
S'L  IFF-hearted.

Ezek.  2. 4.  they  are  impudent  children  and  s. -hearted
STIFF  neck.

Pent  31 .  27  T  know  thy  rebellion  and  thy  s.  neck
Psal.  <5.  5.  lift  your  horn,  speak  not  with  a  s.  neck
_  ST1F  F -necked.

•fnk  9‘  beho,d- this  People  is  a  s. -necked  people

33.  3.  thou  art  a  s.-necked  people,  Deut.  9.  6.

5.  say  to  Israel,  ye  are  a  s.-necked  people

34.  9.  for  it  is  a  s.-necked  people,  Deut.  9.  13

Deut.  10. 16.  circumc.  your  heart,  be  no  more  s.-nec.
a  .  8'  be  not  s.-necked  as  your  fathers  were

Jicts  1.51.  ye  J.-zwwrf^y^aKvays  resist  Floly  Gh.

2  Chron.  36.  13.  he  s.^ns^neck  and  harden,  his  heart

24  •  bu*  they  were  s.  Ill-favoured  as  at  first
Exod.  9.  2^  if  thou  refuse,  and  wilt  hold  them  s.

13.  57*  and  if  it  appear  s.  in  the  garment

14.  38.  but  Joshua  and  Caleb  lived  s.

Josh.  24.  10.  therefore  Balaam  blessed  you  s
1£a*i  !2-  25.  but  if  ye  shall  s.  do  wickedly'

-6.  25.  Saul  said,  thou  also  shalt  s.  prevail

32.  it  had  been  good  to  have  been  there  s.
16v5.  Shimei  came  forth,  and  cursed  s.  as  he  came
~i 4*  arjd  14  we  sit  f.  here,  we  die  also
12. 3.  the  people  sacrificed  s.  and  burnt  incense  in
«  m  *''e  blph  P,aces,  15.  4,  35.  2  Chron.  33.  17.
22’  ?'  lmud  «° .Power  to  keep  s.  the  kingdom
2.  3.  and  s.  he  holdeth  fast  his  integrity
9.  his  wife  said,  dost  thou  s.  retain  thine  integrity  ?
3- !3- f°r  now  should  1  have  lain  j.  and  been  quiet

P?,71a'otn°*i?lue  ^.eepijt  f: .within  his  mouth
Pra/,49. 9-  that  heshould  s.  live  for  ever  and  notsee

-o  ■*'  ?ucb  n  ?,n-e  a,s  80e.tb  on  s-  in  his  trespasses
<8.  32.  tor  all  this  they  sinned  s.  and  believed  not
oo’  f;in,tby  boi>se  they  will  be  .f.  praising  thee
?2*  14-  tlle>'  shall  -f.  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age
139.  18.  when  1  awake,  1  am  s.  with  thee
-7,cc‘"  12.  9.  lie  s.  taught  the  people  knowledge
Isa.  5.  ~5.  Ins  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his
hand  is  stretched  out  s.  9.  12,  17,  21.  10.  4.
ol"  44,-  why  do  we  sit  s.  ?  assemble  yourselves
>3.  17.  they  say  f.  unto  them  that  despise  me

!lofe  will  I  let  remain s.  in  their  own  land
lin  ,2'-c  <  0  earnestly  remember  him  s.  my  bowels
4,.  10.  if  ye  will  s.  abide  in  this  land,  will  build  vou
Earn.  3.  ~0.  my  soul  hath  them  s.  in  reniembrance
a,6*  ‘lu*  30’  ,ly  People/.  are  talking  against  thee
41.  7.  there  was  a  winding  about  j.  upward
r,.J  1-  16,‘  nor  teed  .that  that  sfandeth  s.

John  7.  9.  when  had  said  these  words,  abode  r.  11. 6.
Acts  15.  34.  it  pleased  Silas  to  abide  j.  17.  14.

Kom.  11.23.  if  they  abide  not  s.  in  unbelief,  be  grafif
V  ,m-  V?*  }  besought  thee  to  abide  *.  at  Ephesus
Kev.  22.  11.  let  him  be  unjust  r.  filthy  5.  holy  j-.

iee  Stand,  Stood.

_  STILL.

Exod.  15. 16.  they  shall  be  as.r.  as  astone,  till  people
Jttdg.  18.  9.  the  land  is  very  good,  and  aye  ye  s  f
1  19.  12.  and  after  the  fire  a  *.  small  voice

2^..  3.  Ramoth  m  Gilead  is  ours,  and  we  be  s.

Job  A.  1 16.  there  was  silence,  i  heard  s.  voice,  say.
Psal.  4.  4.  commune  with  your  heart  and  be  j-.

8.  2.  that  thou  mightest  5.  the  enemy  and  avenger
23.  2.  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  ,v.  waters
46.  10.  be  s.  and  know  that  I  am  God
76.  8.  the  earth  feared,  and  was  s.

83.  1.  bold  not  thy  peace,  and  be  not  .r.  O  God
107.  29.  storm  a  calm,  so  that  waves  thereof  are  s
Isa.  23.  2.  be  s.  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle
30.  7.  I  have  cried,  their  strength  is  to  sit  r.

4+,.  14.  I  nave  been  s.  and  refrained  myself
J.ef-  47-  6.0  thou  sword  of  the  Lord,  rest  and  be  s.
Mark  4.  o9.  he  arose  and  said  to  the  sea,  peace,  be  s
„  STILLED.

■VrWr?‘,  I'3"  80-  4  a*eb  s-  the  people  before  Moses
Keh.  8.  11.  so  the  Levites  f.  all  the  people


STILLEST

Psal.  89.  9.  when  the  waves  arise  thou  s.  them
o  1  m  1  ST1LLETH.

Psal.  65.  7-  who  s.  the  noise  of  the  seas,  of  waves
STING.

1  Cor.  15. 55.  where  i|th^.^|  56.  r.  of  death  is  sin

Rev,  9. 10.  were  s.  in  their  tails,  power  to  hurt  men
„  „  STING ET1I.  •

Prov.  »3.  32.  at  the  last  it  s',  like  an  adder
SI  INK,  Substantive.

Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  sweet  smell,  there  shall  be  r
34.  3.  their  s.  shall  come  out  of  their  carcases
Joel  ‘2,  20.  his  s .  shall  come  up,  and  illsav.  come  up
Amos  4. 10.  have  made  s.  ofyour  camps  to  come  up
STINK.

Gen.  34.  30.  ye  have  made  me  to  j.  of  the  land
Exod.  5. 1 21.  have  made  our  savour  to  s.  in  the  eyes
7.  18.  the  fish  shall  die,  and  the  river  shall  s.

16.  24.  the  manna  that  was  laid  up  did  not  s.

I  Sam.  13.  t  4.  Israel  did  s.  with  the  Philistines
27 •  +  12.  he  hath  made  his  people  Israel  to  s.

1  C'«r.  19.  f  6.  Ammon  saw  they  made  them  to  s.
Psal.  38.  5.  my  wounds  s.  and  are  corrupt

r  _  ,  .  STINKETH.

Isa.  50.  2.  their  fish  s.  because  there  is  no  water
John  11.  39.  Martha  said,  Lord,  by  this  time  he  s.
D  ,  STINKING.

Psa'-  14.  t  3.  they  are  become  s.  all  together
Eccl.  10. 1.  cause  ointment  to  send  for tlf  a  s.  savour
_ T  STIR.

JSum.  24.9.  he  lay  as  a  lion,  who  shall  s.  him  up?
Job  17.  8.  innocent  r.  up  himself  ag.  the  hypocrite
41.  10.  none  is  so  fierce  that  dare  r.  him  up
4®'^'  23*  /•  up  thyself,  and  awake  to  judgment
10.  38.  and  he  did  not  v.  up  all  his  wrath
80.  2.  s.  up  thy  strength,  and  come  and  save  us
irov.  15.  1.  but  grievous  words  s.  up  anger
Cant.  2.  7.  that  ye  s.  not  up  my  love,  3.  5.  |  8.  4.

, A?' ,'h-  tbe  Lord  shall  s.  up  a  scourge  for  him
kn’  .J  behold,  1  will  s.  up  the  ]\ledes  against  them
4..  13.  he  shall  s.  up  jealousy  like  a  man  of  war
Vnl1,  ,n-  T  h,?  sha11  s-  up  all  against  realm  of  Grecia
25.  he  shall  j.  up  his  power  against  the  king

2  lim.  1.  6.  that  thou  up  the  gift  of  God  in  thee
2  Pet.  1.  13.  1  think  it  meet  to  j.  you  ui  3.  1.

.  STIR.

Acts  12. 18.  there  was  no  small  s.  among  ti.e soldiers
19.23.  there  arose  no  small  s,  about  that  wav
_  STIRS.

Isa.  22.  2.  thou  that  art  full  of  f.  a  tumultuous  city
„  STIRRED.  J

Exod.  35.  21.  whose  heart  s.  him  up,  26. 1  36.  2.

1  bam.  22.  8.  that  my  son  hath  s.  up  my  serv.  ag.  me
26. 19.  if  the  Lord  have  r.  thee  up  against  me
1  A  mgs  11.14.  Lord  s.  up  an  adversary  to  Solomon
23.  God  s.  him  up  another  ad  versary,  Rezon
.1.25.  none  like  Aliab,  whom  Jezebel  his  wife  s.  up
1  Chron.  5.  26.  and  God  s.  up  the  spirit  of  Pul
~.,r  hn°n1' t21-  J6-  L-  s-  uP  a£-  Jehoram  the  Philistines
36.  22.  Lord  s.  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  Ezra  1.  1.
Psal.  39.  2.  I  was  dumb,  and  my  sorrow  was  s
Dan.  11. 10.  but  his  sons  .shall  be  5.  up  and  assemble
25.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  up  to  battle
Hag.  1.  14.  the  Lord  s.  up  the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel
Ads  6.  12.  they  j.  up  the  people,  17.  13.  |  21.  27.

13.  50.  but  the  Jews  f.  up  the  devout  women

14.  2.  the  unbelieving  Jews  s.  up  the  Gentiles
17-  10.  at  Athens,  Paul  his  spirit  was  s.  in  him

ST1RRE1H.

Deut. 32.11.  as  an  eagle  s.  up  her  nest,  fluttereth  over
Prov.  10.  12.  hatred  s.  up  strifes,  but  love  covered)
15. 18.  a  wrathful  man  j-.  up  strife,  29.  22.

28.  25.  he  that  is  of  a  proud  hearts,  up  strife
Isa.  14.  9-  hell  from  beneath  s.  up  the  dead  for  thee

64.  i .  none  s.  up  himself  to  take  hold  on  thee
Euke  23.  5.  he  r.  up  people  teaching  thro’  all  Jewry
r  _  STOCK.

Atfr.  25.  47*  or  to  the  r.  of  the  stranger’s  family
Job  14.  8.  though  the  s.  thereof  die  in  the  ground
Isa.  40.24.  yea,  their  i.  shall  not  take  root  in  earth
44.  19.  shall  l  fall  down  to  the  s.  of  a  tree  ?

Jer.  2.  27.  saying  to  a  s.  thou  art  my  father
10.  8.  are  brutish,  the  s.  is  a  doctrine  of  vanities
Acts  13.  26.  children  of  the  of  Abraham
Phil.  3.5.ot  the  s.  of  Israel,  an  Hebrew  of  Hebrews
T  STOCKS.

Job  13.  27.  thou  puttest  my  feet  also  in  the  j.

33.  11.  he  putteth  my  feet  in  f.  market!)  my  paths
Prov.  7-  22.  or  as  a  tool  to  the  correction  of  the  s.
Jer.  3.  9.  she  committed  adultery  with  stones  and  $■.
20.  2.  then  Pashurput  Jeremiah  in  the  r.  3.

29.  26.  that  thou  shouldst  put  him  in  prison  and  s
Ilos.  4. 12.  my  people  ask  counsel  at  their r.

Acts  16.  24.  who  made  their  feet  fast  in  the  s.

Gazing-  STOCK.

3.  6.  and  I  will  set  thee  as  a  gazings.

Deb.  10.  33.  ye  were  made  a  gazing-s.  by  reproaches
r,r  STOICS

Here  a  sort  of  heathen  philosophers,  who  took  their
name  from  the.G  reek  word  Sroa,  signifying  a
porch  or  entry ,  because  Zeno,  the  head  of  the  Stoics,
kept  his  school  in  a  porch  of  the  city  of  Athens.
They  held,  that  a  a  ise  man  ought  to  be  free  from  all
passions,  never  to  be  moved  either  with  joy  or  grief,
esteeming  all  things  to  be  ordered  by  an  inevitable
necessity  and  fate.  Josephus  says,  that  the  Pha¬
risees  approach  very  near  to  the  sentiments  of  the
Stoics,  'l  hey  affected  the  same  stiffness, patience,
apathy ,  austerity ,  and  insensibility.  The  sect  of
Ike  Stoics  was  still  considerable  at  Athens,  when
St.  Paul  came  thither,  since  he  had  conferences
with  them.  Acts  17. 18.

STOLE.

Gen.  31.  20.  Jacob  r.  away  unawares  to  I.aban
2  Sam.  15.  6.  so  Absalom  the  hearts  of  Israel
2  Kings  11.2.  Jehosheba  s.  Joash  from  among  king’s
sons,  they  hid  him  from  Athaliah.  2  Chron. 22.  11.
Mat.  28.  13.  his  disciples  s.  him  while  we  slept
Eph.  4.  28.  let  him  that s.  steal  no  more,  but  labour
STOLEN.

Gen.  30.  33.  that  shall  b*2  counted  s.  with  me


Gen.  31. 19.  and  Rachel  had  s.  her  father’s  imag.  32.
26.  that  thou  hast  s.  away  unawares  to  me
30.  yet  wherefore  hast  thou  s.  my  gods  ?

39.  didst  require  it,  wheth.  j.  by  day,  or  s.  by  night
40.  15.  indeed  l  was  s.  away  out  of  the  land
Exod.  22. 7-  if  the  stuff  be  s.  out  of  the  house
12.  it  it  be  s.  from  him,  he  shall  make  restitution
Josh.  7.  11.  they  have  s.  and  dissembled  also
2  Sam.  19.  41.  why  have  men  of  Judah  .r.  thee  away
21.  12.  the  men  of  Jabesh  had  j.  the  bones  of  Saul
Prov.  9.  17.  s.  waters  are  sweet,  bread  eaten  in  sec.
Chad.  5.  would  they  not  have  r.  till  they  had  enough  J
STOMACH.  '

1  Tim.  5.  23.  but  use  a  little  wine  for  thy  s.  sake
.  STOMACHER.

Isa.  3.  24.  instead  of  at.a  girding  of  sackcloth
.  STONE

Is  a  mtne-al  well  known,  of  which  there  are  divers
kinds.  As  to  the  precious  stones,  or  gems,  of  which
mention  is  made  in  Scripture,  all  that  can  be
found  concerning  them  in  the  Commentators ,  is  not
much  to  be  relied  on,  since  neither  the  Jews,  nor
even  the  cmcient  Greek  interpreters,  seem  to  have
had  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  proper  signijica-
,  tion  of  the  original  terms.

Ihe  corner-stone,  or  the  head-stone  of  the  corner,
I  sal.  118.  22.  This  is  that  which  is  put  as  the
angle  oj  a  building ,  whether  at  the  foundation ,  or
at  the  top  of  the  wall.  Jesus  Christ  is  that  corner¬
stone  which  was  rejected  by  the  Jews,  but  is  be¬
come  the  corner-stone  of  the  church,  and  the  stone
that  binds  and  unites  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  the
union  of  the  same  faith,  Mat.  21.  42.  Eph.  2.  15,
2°.  And  as  corner-stones  and  foundation-stones
in  buildings  use  to  be  chosen  with  care,  and  to  be
thoroughly  examined  by  the  builder ;  so  Christ
is  called  a  tried  stone,  a  sure  foundation.  Isa
28.  16.  I  lay  in  Zion  a  tried  stone,  a  sure  foun¬
dation.  1  have  tried,  I  have  approved  of  him  as
every  way  sufficient  lobe  the  foundation  and  head
of  the  church.  And  because  this  stone  is  not  set
up  by  man,  but  sent  by  God,  therefore  he  is  said
to  be  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands,  Dan.
2.  45.  And  because  unbelievers  refuse  to  be  laid
upon  this  stone  and  so  perish,  therefore  it  is  called
a  stone  of  stumbling,  a  rock  of  offence,  that  is,
an  occasion  of  sin  and  ruin,  at  whom  they  will
take  offence  and  stumble,  so  as  to  fall  and  be  broken,
Isa.  8.  14,  15.  1  Pet.  2.  8.  This  was  accom¬
plished  at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  whom  the
Jews  rejected  to  their  own  destruction,  as  not
answering  their  carnal  expectations,  not  suiting
with  their  way  of  building  :  that  is,  not  to  be  made
use  of  for  promoting  and  carrying  on  their  worldly
projects  and  interest.  Christ  is  likewise  called
a  precious  stone,  because  of  his  excellency,  glory,
and  beauty  ;  he  is  called  a  chosen,  an  elect  stone,
because  he  was  chosen  and  appointed  by  the  lather
to  the  work  of  redemption  before  the  foundation  of
the  world,  1  Pet.  1.  20. !  2.  4,  6.  De  is  likewise
termed  a  Jiving  stone,  1  Pet.  2.  4.  De  communi¬
cates  spiiitual  life  to  those  that  close  with  him,
and.  are  built  upon  him.  Lastly,  this  stone  is  said
to  have  seven  eyes,  Zech.  3.  9.  to  note  that  the
Messiah  should  be  endued  with  perfect  wisdom  and
knowledge,  to  order  all  things  in  the  church,  to
watch  over  it,  and  to  take  care  of  all  the  concerns
thereof.

As  Christ  the  Dead  is  called  a  stone,  so  also  his
members,  true  believers,  who  are  built  upon,  and
derive  spiritual  life  from  the  foundation,  Christ
are  called  stones.  1  Pet.  2.  5.  Ye  also  as  lively
stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house.  As  the
law  was  engraven  on  two  tables  of  stones,  so  be¬
lievers  have  the  law  written  m  their  hearts.  They
are  stones  for  their  constancy,  strength,  and  un-
movableness  in  all  the  storms  of  life.  They  are
stones  for  continuance  and  durableness.  As  stones
are  dug  out  of  a  quarry,  so  believers  are  selected
and  chosen  from  the  rest  of  mankind.  They  are
united  with  Christ  and  true  Christians  in  one  body  ;
like  the  stones  of  a  house,  compact  among  them¬
selves,  and  upon  the  foundation.

A  heart  ot  stone.  Job,  speaking  of  the  Leviathan,
says,  that  his  heart  is  as  firm  as  a  stone,  yea,  as
hard  as  a  piece  of  the  nether  millstone,  Job  41.

24.  That  is,  he  is  of  a  very  extraordinary
strength,  boldness,  and  courage.  It  is  said,  1  Sam.

25.  37.  that  N  atial’s  heart  died  within  him,  and  he
became  as  a  stone,  when  he  was  told  of  the  danger
he  had  incurred  by  his  imprudence.  Dis  heart
became  immovable  like  a  stone,  it  was  contracted,
or  convulsed,  and  this  convulsion  was  the  occasion
of  his  death.  Ezekiel  says,  that  the  Lord  will
takeaway  from  his  people  their  heart  of  stone,
and  give  them  a  heart  of  flesh,  Ezek.  36.  26.  that
he  will  take  away  the  stubborn,  senseless,  and  un-
tractable  disposition  of  the  heart,  that  receives  no
kindly  impressions  from  the  word,  providence,  or
Spirit  of  God  in  his  ordinary  operations  and  in¬
fluences,  that  hardens  itself  in  a  day  of  provoca¬
tion,  that  is  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin
he  will  take  this  away,  and  give  a  tender,  tractable
temper  and  disposition.  Much  to  the  same  sense
is  that  which  John  the  Baptist  said.  Mat.  3.  9.
that  God  is  able  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abra¬
ham  even  ot  stones;  that  is, from  among  the  hea¬
then;  or  even  of  the  stones  oj  the  desert,  God  was
able  to  raise  up  a  spiritual  seed  to  Abraham.

A  stone  is  sometimes  put  for  an  idol  of  stone,  Dab.

2.  19.  Woe  unto  him  that  saith  to  the  wood,
awake,  and  to  the  dumb  stone,  arise,  it  shall
teach.  Hezekiah  in  his  prayer  says.  The  kings
of  Assyria  have  cast  the  gods  of  the  nations  into
the  fire;  for  they  were  no  gods,  but  the  work  of
men’s  hands,  wood  and  stone,  Isa.  37.  19.  And
in  Jer.  2.  27.  Saying  to  a  stock,  thou  art  my
father,  and  to  a  stone,  thou  hast  brought  me  forth.
rI  o  be  reduced  to  an  heap  of  stones,  is  said  of  a
city  or  house  which  is  entirely  ruined  and  demo¬
lished.. Mic.  1.  6.  1  will  make  Samaria  as  an
heap  ot  the  field,  and  as  the  plantings  of  a  vine

473


STO

yard.  So  tn  Isa.  1“.  1.  Damascus  is  taken  away
lio:n  being  a  city,  and  it  shall  be  a  ruinous  heap.
Thus  also  our  Saviour,  speaking  of  the  destruction
of  J  erusalem,  says ,  that  one  stone  shall  not  re¬
main  upon  another.  Mat.  24.  2.

The  white  stone.  Rev.  2.  17.  I  will  give  him  a
white  stone  ;  1  will  give  him  a  full  and  public
pat  don  and  absolution.  It  is  spoken  in  allusion  to
an  ancient  custom  of  delivering  a  white  stone  to
such  as  they  acquitted  in  judgment.  They  used
likewise  to  give  a  white  stone  as  a  reward  to  such
as  conquered  in  their  games ;  such  as  allude  to
this,  make  this  the  sense  ;  I  will  give  him  a  full
and  ample  reward.

Solomon  says  in  Proverbs  26.  8.  As  he  that  bind-
,eth  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so  is  he  thatgiveth  honour
to  a  fool.  When  a  stone  is  fastened  to  the  sling,
the  sling er  hinders  his  own  design  of  throwing  it,
He  loses  his  labour;  so  does  the  man  who  gives
honour  to  a  fool.  But  the  words  may  he  otherwise
rendered,  as  he  that  putteth  a  precious  stone  in
an  heap  ot  stones,  where  it  is  obscured  and  lost :
and  as  this  little  stone  does  not  augment  the  heap,
nor  is  so  much  as  seen  upon  it ;  so  honour  heaped
upon  a  fool  does  not  render  him  wore  worthy  of  con¬
sideration.  Others  translate  it,  to  tie  a  stone  in  a
piece  of  purple,  is  to  give  honour  to  a  fool.  As
nothing  can  be  so  ill  placed  as  a  stone  in  a  piece  of
fine  cloth  ;  so  are  honours  ill  placed  upon  a  fool.
Great  heaps  of  stones,  raised  up  for  a  witness  of  any
memorable  event,  and  to  preserve  the  remembrance
of  some  matter  of  great  importance,  are  the  most
ancient  monuments  among  the  Hebrews.  In  those
elder  ages,  before  the  rise  of  writing,  these  monu¬
ments  were  instead  of  inscriptions,  medals,  or  his¬
tories.  Jacob  and  Laban  raised  such  a  monument
upon  mount  Gilead,  in  memory  of  their  covenant,
Gen.  31.  46.  Joshua  erected  one  at  Gilgal,  made
of  stones  taken  out  of  the  Jordan,  to  preserve  the
memorial  of  his  miraculous  passage  over  this  river.
Josh.  4,  5,  6,  7.  'The  Israelites  that  dwelt  beyond
Jordan  also  raised  one.  upon  the  banks  of  the
river,  as  a  testimony  that  they  constituted  but  one
nation  with  their  brethren  on  the  other  side.  Josh.
22.  10.

The  Hebrews  also  give  the  name  of  stones  to  the
weights  they  use  in  commerce.  Lev.  19.36.  Just
weights  shall  ye  have:  the  Hebrew  says,  just
stones.  And  in  Deut.  25.  13.  Thou  shalt  not
have  in  thy  bag  divers  weights,  a  great  and  a
small :  the  Hebrews  say,  A  stone  and  a  stone.
Also  Prov.  11.  1.  A  just  weight  is  his  delight ;
in  Hebrew,  a  perfect  stone,  idee  also  Prov.  16.
11.  I  20.  10.  Stones  are  likewise  taken  for  a  vio¬
lent  shower  of  hail.  Josh.  10.  11.  The  Lord  cast
down  great  stones  from  heaven  upon  them.  The
punishment  of  stoning  ;  Bee  Punishment.

Gen.  11.  3.  they  had  brick  for  s.  and  slime  for  mortar

28. 18.  Jacob  set  up  a  s.  for  a  pillar,  22. 1  31.  45.
29.  3.  they  rolled  s.  from  the  well’s  mouth,  8,  10.
35.  14.  Jacob  set  up  a  pillar  of  s.  in  the  place

49.  24.  from  thence  is  the  shepherd,  the  s.  of  Isr.

Exod.  4.  25.  Zipporah  took  a  sharp  s.  and  cut  off

15.  5.  they  sank  into  the  bottom  as  a  s.

16.  by  great,  of  thine  arm  they  shall  be  as  still  as  s.
17-  12.  and  they  took  a  s.  and  put  it  under  him

20.  25.  if  thou  wilt  make  me  an  altar  of  s.

21. 18.  and  if  one  smite  another  with  a  s.

28. 10.  six  of  their  names  on  one  s.  six  on  other  s.

11.  with  the  work  of  an  engraver  in  s.

Lev.  26.1.  nor  shall  ye  set  up  any  image  of s.  in  land
Num.  35. 17.  if  he  smite  him  with  throwing  a  s.  2.3.
Dent.  25. 1 13.  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag  a  s.  and  a  .9.
Josh.  4.  5.  take  ye  up  every  man  of  you  9.  onshoul.

15.  6.  the  border  went  up  to  the  s.  of  Bohan

18. 17.  the  border  descended  to  the  s.  of  Bohan

24.  27.  behold,  this  s.  shall  be  a  witness  unto  us
Judy.  9.  5.  he  slew  seventy  persons  on  one  s.  18.

1  Sam.  6. 18.  which  s.  remaineth  unto  this  day

7.  12.  Samuel  set  up  a  s.  and  called  it  Eben-ezer

17.  49.  David  took  from  his  bag  a  s.  and  slang  it,
the  s.  sunk  into  the  Philistine’s  forehead

50.  David  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a  s.

20.  19.  and  thou  shalt  remain  by  the  s.  Ezel

25.  37.  Kabul's  heart  died  in  him,  he  became  as  a.?.

2  Sam.  5.  i  11.  Hiram  sent  hewers  of  s.  of  the  wall
17;  13.  till  there  be  not  one  small  s.  found  there

1  Kings 6. 7.  house  was  built  of  9.  made  ready  before

18.  all  was  cedar,  there  was  no  s.  seen

2  Kings  3.  25.  on  good  land  cast  every  man  his  9.

1  Chron.  22. 15.  there  are  with  thee  hewers  of  s.

2  Chron.  2.  14.  skilful  to  work  in  gold,  silver,  and  s.
Neh.  9. 11.  thou  threwest  as  a  s.  into  mighty  waters
Job  28.  2.  and  brass  is  molten  out  of  the  s.

38.  30.  waters  are  hid  as  with  a  s.  deep  is  frozen

41.  24.  his  heart  is  as  firm  as  a  s.  yea,  as  hard  as
Psal.  91.  12.  angels  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  thou
dash  thy  foot  against  a  .9.  Mat.  4.  6.  Luke  4.  11.
118.  22.  s.  which  the  builders  refused,  is  become
head  9.  of  the  corner,  Mat.  21.  42.  Mark  12.  10.
Prov.  11.  + 1.  but  a  perfect  s.  is  his  delight

20.  +  10.  a  s.  and  a  s.  are  alike  abomination  to  L.

26.  8.  as  he  that  bindeth  a  s.  in  a  slinu,  so  is  he
27-  ns  he  that  rolleth  a  s.  it  will  return  upon  him

27.  3.  a  s.  is  heavy,  a  fool’s  wrath  is  heavier
Jer.  2.  27.  and  to  a  s.  thou  least  brought  me  forth

51.  26.  they  shall  not  take  of  thee  a  9.  for  a  corner,
nor  a  9.  for  foundations,  but  shalt  be  desolate
Lam.  3.  53.  they  have  cast  a  s.  upon  me
Dan.  2.  34.  a  s.  was  cut  out  of  the  mountain,  45.

6. 17.  and  a  s.  was  laid  upon  the  mouth  of  the  den
Amos  9. 1 9.  .yet  shall  not  the  least  s.  fall  on  earth
Dab.  2.  11.  for  the  9.  shall  cry  out  of  the  wall

19.  woe  to  him  that  saith  to  the  dumb  s.  arise
Hag.  <2. 15.  from  before  s.  was  laid  upon  a s.  in  tern.
Zech.  3.  9.  for  behold,  the  s.  that  1  have  laid  be¬
fore  Joshua,  upon  one  s.  shall  be  seven  eyes

4.  7.  he  shall  bring  torth  the  head  s.  thereof
7-  12.  they  made  their  hearts  as  adamant  s.

Mat.  7.  9.  il  ask  bread,  will  he  give. 9.  ?  Luke  11. 11.

21.  44.  whosoever  shall  fall  on  this  r.  shall  be
broken,  but  on  whoms.  it  shall  fall,  Luke  20. 18.

474


STO

Mat.  24.  2.  verily  I  say,  there  shall  not  be  left  one
s.  upon  another,  Mark  13.  2.  Luke  19.  44.  I  21.  6.
27.  66.  sealing  the  s.  ||28.  2.  angel  rolled  back  s.
Luke  4.  3.  command  this  s.  that  it  be  made  bread

20.  17.  s.  which  the  builders  rejected,  is  become
the  head  of  the  corner,  Acts  4.  11.  1  Pet.  2.  7.

22.  41.  he  was  withdrawn  from  them  a  s.  cast
24.  2.  found  9.  rolled  away  ,  Mark  16. 4.  John  20. 1.
John  1.  42.  Cephas,  which  is  by  interpretation  a  s.
2.  6.  and  there  were  set  there  six  water-pots  of  9.

8.  7-  that  is  without  sin,  let  him  first  cast  s.  at  her

11.  38.  it  was  a  cave,  and  a  s.  lay  upon  it

39.  take  ye  away  9.  ||  41.  they  took  away  the  s.
Acts  17.  29.  that  the  Godhead  is  like  to  s.  graven
Rev.  16.  21.  hail  fell  every  s.  the  weight  of  a  talent

18.  21.  an  angel  took  up  a  9.  like  a  great  millstone

Burdensome  SI  ON  E.

Zech.  12.  3.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  burdensome  s.
Bee  Corner,  Great,  Hewed.

Hewn  STO  N  E.

Exod.  20.  25.  thou  shalt  not  build  altar  of  hewn  s.

2  Kings  22.  6.  to  builders  and  masons,  to  buy  timber
and  hewn  s.  to  repair  the  house,  2  Chron.  34.  11.
Lam.  3.  9-  lie  hath  enclosed  my  ways  with  hewn  s.
Ezek.  40.  42.  the  four  tables  were  of  hewn  s.

Amos  5.  11.  ye  have  built  houses  of  hewn  s,  but  not
Luke  23.  53.  laid  it  in  sepulchre  that  was  hewn  in  9.
Living  STONE.

1  Pet.  2. 4.  to  whom  coming  as  to  liv.  s.  chosen  of  G.
Precious  STON  E.

Prov.  17.  8.  a  gift  is  a  precious  s.  to  him  that  hath  it

26.  t  8.  putteth  a  precious  s.  in  an  heap  of  stones
Cant.  5.  t  12.  his  eyes  are  set  as  a  p.  9.. in  a  ring
Isa.  28.  16.  I  lay  in  Zion  a  p.  corner  s.  1  Pet.  2.  6.
Ezek.  28.  13.  every  precious  s.  was  thy  covering
Rev.  17.  4.  she  was  decked  with  gold  and  p.  s.

21.  11.  her  light  was  like  to  a  s.  most  precious

See  Stumbeing.

SION  E-squarers.

1  Kings  5.  18.  builders  and  s.-s.  did  hew  them
Tables  of  STON  E.

Exod.  24.  12.  I  will  give  thee  tables  of  s.  31.  18.

34. 1.  L.  said,  hew  thee  two  tables  of  s.  Dent.  10.  1.

4.  and  he  hewed  two  tables  of  s.  Deut.  10.  3.
Dent.  4.  13.  he  wrote  on  the  two  tables  of  s.  5.  22.

9.  9.  wt  n  I  was  gone  up  to  receive  the  tables  of  s.

10.  the  Lord  delivered  to  me  two  tables  of  s.

11.  th  Lord  gave  me  the  two  tables  of  s.

1  Kings  o.  9.  was  nothing  in  ark  save  two  tables  ofs.

2  Cor.  3-  3.  not  in  t.of  s.  but  in  fleshly  tables  of  heart

Tried  STON  E.

Isa.  28.  16.  behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  stone,  a  tried  s.
White  STONE.

Rev.  2.  17.  I  will  give  him  a  whites,  and  new  name
STON  E,  joined  with  wood.

Exod.  7.  19.  may  be  blood  in  vessels  of  wood  and  s.
Deut.  4.  28.  there  serve  gods  the  work  of  men’s
hands,  wood  and  s.  28.  36,  64.  |  29.  17.  2  Kings

19.  18.  Isa.  37.  19.  Ezek.  20.  32.

Dan.  5.  4.  praised  the  gods  of  gold,  wood  1  s.  23.
Rev.  9.  20.  should  not  worship  idols  of  wood  and  s.
STONE  of  Zoheleth.

1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep  by  s.  of  Zoheleth
See  Wale.

STONE,  Verb.

Exod.  8.26.  shall  we  sacrifice,  and  will  they  not  s.  us  ?
17. 4.  whatshall  I  do I  they  be  almost  ready  to  s.  me
Lev.  20.  2.  people  of  land  shall  s.  him  with  stones

27.  they  shall  s.  the  wizards  with  stones

24.  14.  let  congregation  s.  him  that  cursed,  16,  23.
Num.  14.  10.  congregation  bade  s.  them  with  stones

15.  35.  they  shall  s.  the  sabbath-breaker,  36.

Deut.  13.  10.  shalt  s.  with  stones  enticers  to  idolat.
17.  5.  shalt  s.  idolateis  ||  21.  21.  s.  rebellious  son

22.  21.  they  shall  9.  her  that  playeth  the  whore
24.  ye  shall  s.  adulterers  with  stones,  that  they  die

1  Kings  21.  10.  carry  N  aboth  out,  s.  him  that  he  die
Ezek.  16.  40.  and  they  shall  s.  thee  with  stones

23.  47.  the  company  shall  s.  them  with  stones
Luke  20.  6.  if  we  say,  of  men,  the  people  will  s.  us
John  10.  31 .  the  Jews  took  up  stones  again  to  s.  him

32.  for  which  of  those  good  works  do  ye  s.  me  ?

33.  say  ing,  for  a  good  work  we  s.  thee  not
11.8.  Master,  the  Jews  of  late  sought  to  s.  thee

Acts  14.  5.  there  was  an  assault  made  to  s.  them
STONED.

Exod.  19.  13.  he  shall  surely  be  s.  or  shot  through

21.  28.  then  the  ox  shall  be  surely  s.  29,  32.

Josh.  7.  25.  all  Israel  s.  Achan  with  stones

1  Kings  12.  18.  all  Israel  s.  Adoram,  2  Chr.  10. 18.

21.  13.  they  s.  Naboth  with  stones,  14,  15.

2  Chron.  24.  21.  they  s.  Zechariah  in  the  court
Mat.  21.  35.  the  husbandmen  beat  one,  s.  another
John  8.  5.  Moses  commanded  that  such  should  be  s.
Acts  5.  26.  they  feared  lest  they  should  have  been  s.

7-  58.  they  s.  Stephen,  calling  upon  God,  59.

14.  19.  having  s.  Paul,  drew  him  out  of  the  city
2  Cor.  11.  25.  thrice  was  I  beaten,  once  was  I  s.
Heb.  11. 37.  they  were  s.  they  were  sawn  asunder

12.  20.  if  a  beast  touch  the  mount  it  shall  be  s.

STONES.

Gen.  31. 46.  Jacob  said  to  his  brethren,  gather  s.
Exod.  28.  11.  thou  shalt  engrave  the  two  s.  12.

17.  set  in  it  settings  of  s.  even  four  rows  of  s.

21.  the  s.  shall  be  with  the  names  of  Israel
39. 7-  that  they  should  be  s.  fora  memorial  to  Israel
Lev.  14.  40.  command  that  they  take  away  the  s.

42.  shall  put  other  s.  in  the  place  of  those  s.

45.  he  shall  break  down  the  house,  the  s.  of  it

19.  +  36.  just  s.  a  just  ephah,  and  hin  shall  ye  have
21.  20.  or  hath  his  .?.  broken,  shall  not  offer

Deut.  8.  9.  a  land  whose  s.  are  iron,  and  out  of  hills

23.  1.  that  is  wounded  in  the  s.  shall  not  enter
27-  4.  ye  shall  set  up  these  s.  in  mount  Ebal

5.  build  an  altar  of  9.  ||  8.  write  on  the  s.  words
Josh.  4.  3.  and  take  you  hence  twelve  9.  9.

6.  saying,  what  mean  you  by  these  s.  ?  21.

8.  and  took  twelve  s.  out  of  the  midst  of  Jordan

20.  those  twelve  s.  did  Joshua  pitch  in  Gilgal
8.  32.  he  wrote  on  the  s.  a  copy  of  the  law

Judg.  20.  16.  every  one  could  sling  .9.  at  an  hair-brea.
1  Bam.  17.  40.  David  chose  him  five  smooth  s.


STO

2  Sam.  16.  6.  Sliimei  cast  .9.  at  David  and  serv.  13.

1  Kings  5. 18-so  they  prepared  timber  and  .9.  to  build

7.  10.9.  of  eight  cubits,  and  9.  of  ten  cubits

10.  27.  king  made  silver  to  be  in  Jerusalem  as  s.  and
cedars  as  sycamore  trees,  2  Chr.  1.  15.  |  9.  27.

15.  22.  took  away  the  s.  of  Ramah,  2  Chr.  16.  6.
18.  31.  Elijah  took  twelve  s.  according  to  number

32.  with  the  s.  he  built  an  altar  in  name  of  Lord

2  Kings  3. 19.  mar  every  good  piece  of  land  with  9.
25.  only  Kir-haraseth  left  they  the  9.  thereof

16.  17.  and  put  it  upon  a  pavement  of  9.

1  Chron.  12.  2.  in  hurling  of  s.  and  shooting  arrows

2  Chron.  26.  14.  Uzziah  prepared  slings  to  cast  9.
Neh.  4.  2.  will  they  revive  the  s.  out  of  the  heap's  f
Job  5. 23.  thou  shalt  be  in  league  with  s.  of  field

6.  12.  is  my  strength  the  strength  of  s.  ?

8.  17.  hisroptsare  wrapped,  andseeth  place  of  s.
14.  19.  the  waters  wear  the  ,9.  thou  washest  away

22.  24.  the  gold  of  Ophir  as  the  s.  of  the  brooks

28.  6.  the  s.  of  it  are  the  place  of  sapphires

40.  17.  the  sinews  of  his  9.  are  wrapped  together
Psal.  102.  14.  thy  servants  take  pleasure  in  her  s.
137.  9.  that  dasheth  thy  little  ones  against  the  9.
Prov.  16.  t  11.  all  the  s.  of  the  bag  are  his  work
Eccl.  3.  5.  a  time  to  cast  away  s.  a  time  to  gathers

10.  9.  whoso  remoyeth.9.  shall  be  hurt  therewith
Isa.  5.  2.  he  fenced  it  and  gathered  out  tiles',  thereof

14.  19.  that  go  down  to  the  s.  of  the  pit

27.  9.  he  maketh  the  s.  of  the  altar  as  chalk  s.

54.  11.  behold,  1  will  lay  thy  s.  with  fair  colours

12.  I  will  make  the  borders  of  pleasant  s.

57.  6.  among  the  smooth  9.  of  the  stream

60.17.  bring  for  s.  iron  ||  62.  10.  gather  out  the  s.
Jer.  3.  9.  she  committed  adultery  with  s.  and  stocks

43.  10.  and  I  will  set  his  throne  on  these  s.

Lam.  4.  1.  the  s.  of  the  sanctuary  are  poured  out
Ezek.  26.  12.  they  shall  lay  thy  s.  in  the  water

28.  14.  thou  hast  walked  in  midst  of  the  9.  of  fire

16.  1  will  destroy  thee  from  midst  of  the  s.  of  fire

Mic.  1.  6.  I  will  pour  down  the  9.  into  the  valley
Zech.  5.  4.  shall  consume  it  with  the  9.  thereof

9.  16.  for  they  shall  be  as  a  s.  of  a  crown  lifted  up
Mat.  3.  9.  of  these  9.  to  raise  up  children,  Luke  3.  8.

4.  3.  command  that  these  .9.  be  made  bread
Mark  5.  5.  crying,  and  cutting  himself  with  s.

12.  4.  and  at  him  they  cast  s.  and  wounded  him

13.  1.  Master,  see  what  manner  of  s.  are  here
Luke  19.  40.  the  s.  would  immediately  cry  out
John  8. 59.  they  took  up  s.  to  cast  at  him,  10.  31.

2  Cor.  3.  7.  if  ministration  engraven  in  .9.  was  glori.
1  Pet.  2.  5.ye  as  lively  9.  are  built  up  spiritual  house
Bee  Stone,  Verb.

Corner-  STON  ES.

Psal.  144. 12.  that  our  daughters  may  be  as  corners.
Bee  Costly.

STON  ES  of  darkness.

Job  28. 3.  he  searcheth  out  the  s.  of  darkness
STON  ES  of  emptiness.

Isa.  34.  11.  he  shall  stretch  out  upon  it  s.  of  emptin.
Glistering  STON  ES.

1  Chr.  29.  2. 1  have  prepared  glistering  s.  for  house

Gravel  STON  ES.

Lam.  3. 16.  he  hath  broken  my  teeth  with  gravels.
See  Great.

Heap  of  STONES.

Josh.  7.  26.  they  raised  a  great  heap  of  s.  on  Achan
8.  29.  and  raise  a  great  heap  ofs.  on  the  king  of  Ai

2  Sam.  18.  17.  they  laid  a  heap  of  s.  on  Absalom

Hewed  STONES.

1  Kings  5. 17-  they  brought  hewed  s.  to  lay  foundat.

7.  9.  according  to  the  measures  of  hewed  s.  11.

Hewn  STONES.

Isa.  9.  10.  bricks  fallen,  but  we  will  build  with  h.  s.
Marble  STONES.

1  Chron.  29.  2. 1  have  prepared  m.  s.  in  abundance

Precious  STONES.

2  Sam.  12.  30.  was  a  talent  of  gold  with  precious  s.
1  Kings  10.  2.  queen  of  Sheba  came  with  precious  s.

11.  navy  of  Hiram  brought  prec.  s.  2  Chr.  9.  10.

1  Chron.  29.  2. 1  prepared  all  manner  of  precious  s.

8.  with  whom  precious  s.  were  found,  gave  them

2  Chr.  3.  6.  he  garnished  the  house  with  precious  s.
32.  27.  he  made  himself  treasuries  for  precious  s.

Ezek.  27.  22.  they  occupied  in  thy  fairs  with  prec.  s.
Dan.  11.  38.  a  god  shall  he  honour  with  precious  s.
1  Cor.  3. 12.  if  any  man  build  on  this  foundation p.  s.
Rev.  18.  12.  for  no  man  buyeth prec.  s.  any  more

16.  that  great  city  decked  with  gold  and  prec.  s.

21.  19.  foundations  garnished  with  precious  s.

Whole  STON  ES.

Deut.  27. 6.  shalt  build  the  altar  of  w.  s.  Josh.  8.  31.
Wrought  STONES.

1  Chron.  22. 2.  he  set  masons  to  hew  wrought  s.
STONEST.

Mat.  23.  37.  s.  them  that  are  sent  to  thee,  Luke  13.34.
STONY.

Ps.  141.  6.  when  judges  are  overthrown  in  .9.  places
Ezek.  11.  19.  I  will  take  the  s.  heart,  36.  26.

Mat.  13. 5.  some  fell  on  s.  places,  20.  Mark  4. 5, 16.
STONING.

1  Sam.  30.  6.  for  the  people  spake  of  s.  David
STOOD.

Gen.  18.  22.  but  Abraham  s.  yet  before  the  Lord
29. 1 35.  his  name  J  udah,  and  Leah  .9.  from  bearing
Exod.  14.  19.  the  pillar  of  cloud  9.  behind  them
Num.  16.  48.  he  s.  between  the  dead  and  the  living
Deut.  4.  11.  ye  came  near  and  s.  under  the  mount.

5.  5.  1 .9.  between  the  Lord  and  you,  to  shew  you
Josh.  3.  16.  the  waters  s.  and  lose  up  on  an  heap

4. 3.  take  twelve  stones  where  the  priests’  feet  .9.  9.
Judg.  6.  31.  Joash  said  to  all  that  s.  against  him

16.  29.  two  middle  pillars  on  which  the  house  s.

1  Sam.  3.  10.  the  L.  s.  and  called  Samuel,  Samuel
4.  1 15.  Eli’s  eyes  s.  that  he  could  not  see

10.  23.  when  he  s.  among  the  people,  he  was  higher

17.  8.  Goliath  .9.  and  cried  to  the  armies  of  Israel

22.  7-  Saul  said  to  the  servants  that  s.  about  him

17, -  -the  king  said  to  footmen  that  9.  about  him

1  Kings  8.  14.  the  king  blessed  all  the  congregation,
and  all  congregat.  of  Israel,  s.  2  Chr.  6.  3.  |  7.  0.

55.  Solomon  s.  and  blessed  all  the  congregation

14.  t  4.  Abijah,  his  eyes  s.  for  hoariness


S  T  0


STO


STO


M  Kings  2.  7.  sons  of  the  prophets  .?.  to  view  afar  off

2.!.  3.  and  all  the  people  ?.  to  the  covenant
£  Chr.  6. 13.  and  on  the  brasen  scaffold  Solomon  s.
Nell.  9.2.  they  s.  and  confessed  their  sins  and  their
Esth.  9.  16.  tlie  other  .lews  s.  for  their  lives
Psal.  33.  9.  lie  commanded  and  it  s.  fast
Jsu.  6. 2.  above  it  s.  the  Seraphims  each  had  six  win.
Jer.  46. 15.  they  s.  not  because  Lord  did  drive  them
48.  45.  they  s.  under  the  shadow  of  lleshbon
Ezek.  1.  21.  and  when  those  s.  these  s.  10.  17.

24.  when  they  s.  they  let  down  their  wings

25.  and  there  was  a  voice  when  they  s.

Dan.  8.  17.  Gabriel  came  near  where  I  s.

10.  11.  when  he  had  spoken  this,  1  .?.  trembling

11.  1.  1  .v.  to  confirm  and  to  strengthen  him
12.5.  1  looked,  and  behold,  theie  s.  other  two

Jonah  l.t  15.  and  the  sea  s.  from  her  raging
Hah.  3-  6.  he s.  and  measured  the  earth,  he  beheld
Zech.  1.3.  lie  s.  among  the  myrtle-trees,  10,  11.
Mat.  12.  46.  his  mother  and  brethren  s.  without
Luke  6.  K.  he  that  had  the  withered  hand  .?.  forth
18.  11.  the  Pharisee  s.  and  prayed  thus  with  hints.
John  18.  25.  Simon  Peter  s.  and  warmed  himself

20.  11.  hut  Mary  s.  without  at  sepulchre  weeping
Acte  3.3.  the  lame  man  leaping  up  s.  and  walked

9.  7.  the  men  which  journ.  with  him  ?.  speechless
16.  9.  there  s.  a  man  of  Macedonia  and  prayed
27.  21.  but  Paul  s.  forth  in  the  midst  of  them

Ileh.  9. 10,  s.  only  in  meats,  and  drinks,  and  washin.
STOOD  above.

Gen.  28. 13.  behold,  the  Lord  s.  above  the  ladder
2  Chron.  24.  20.  Zec.hariah  s.  above  the  people
Psal.  104.. 6.  the  waters  s.  above  the  mountains
STOOD  ajar.

Exod.  2.  4.  his  sister  s.  afar  off,  to  wit  what  be  done
20. 18.  the  people  removed  and  s.  afar  off,  21.
Luke  17. 12.  ten  that  were  lepers,  who  s.  afar  off
23.49.  all  his  acquaintance  s.afar  off  beholding
Rev.  18. 17.  as  many  as  trade  by  sea  s.  afar  off
STOOD  at.

Exod.  19. 17-  they  s.  at  the  nether  part  of  the  mount
33.  8.  they  s.  every  man  at  his  tent-door
9.  the  cloudy  pillars,  at  the  door  of  the  tabernac.

2  Kings  5.  9.  N  aaman  s.  at  door  of  house  of  Elisha
2  Chron.  5.  12.  singers  s.  at  the  east  end  of  the  altar

23.  13.  the  king  s.  at  his  pillar,  at  the  entering  in
Ezek.  10.  19.  cherubims  .?.  at  door  of  the  east  gate

21.  21.  the  king  s.at  the  parting  of  the  way
Luke 7.  38.  woman  s.  at  Ins  feet  behind  him,  weep.
John  18.  Id.  but  Peter  s.  at  the  door  without
Rev.  8.  3.  another  angel  came  and  s.at  the  altar

STOOD  before.

Gen.  19.  27.  to  the  place  where  he  s.  before  the  Lord

43. 15.  went  down  to  Egypt,  and  .?.  before  Joseph
Exod.  9. 10.  they  took  ashes  and  .y.  before  Pharaoh
Lev.  9.  5.  the  congregation  s.  before  the  Lord
Num.  27.  2.  daughters  of  Zeiophehad .?.  before  Mos.
Josh.  20.  9.  until  he  s.  before  the  congregation
Judg.  20.  28.  Phinehas  s.  before  ark  in  those  days

1  Sam.  16.  21.  David  came  and  s.  before  Saul

1  Kings  1.  28.  Bath-sheba  s.  before  king  David

3. 15.  Solomon  s.  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant
16.  two  women  that  were  harlots  s.  before  him

8.  22.  Solomon  s.  before  the  altar,  2  Chron.  6.  12.

12.  6.  old  men  that s.  before  Solomon,  2  Chr.  10.  6.

8.  young  men  that  s.  before  him,  2  Chron.  10.  8.

22.  21.  spirit  .v.  before  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  18.  20.

2  Kings  4.  12.  the  Shunammite  s.  before  Elisha
5.  15.  N aaman  returned  and  s.  before  Elisha

25.  Gehazi  went  in  and  s.  before  his  master

8.9.  Hazael  came  and  s.  before  Elisha

10.  4.  behold,  two  kings  s.  not  before  him
Esth.  8.  4.  so  Esther  arose,  and  .?.  before  the  king
Psal.  106. 23.  had  not  Moses  his  chosen  1.  before  him
Jer.  15. 1.  though  Moses  and  Samuel  s.  before  me

18. 20.  1  s.  before  thee  to  speak  good  for  them
52.  +  12.  captain  which  s.  before  king  of  Babylon
Ezek.  8.  11.  there  s.  before  them  seventy  men
Dan.  1.  19.  therefore  they  s.  before  the  king,  2.  2.

2.  31.  O  king,  this  great  image,  s.  before  thee

3.  3.  they  s.  before  the  image  Nebachadnez.  set  up

7. 10.  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousands-,  before  him
8.  3.  behold,  there  s.  before  the  river  a  ram

15.  there  s.  before  me  as  the  appearance  of  a  man
Zech.  3.  3.  now  Joshua  s',  before  the  angel

4.  and  he  spake  to  those  that  s.  before  him
Mat.  27.  11.  and  Jesus  s.  before  the  governor
Acts  10.  17.  behold,  three  men  s.  before  the  gate
30.  a  man  s.  before  me  in  bright  clothing
12.  14.  she  told  how  Peter  s.  before  the  gate

24.  20.  let  these  say,  while  I  s.  before  the  council
Rev.  7.  9.  I  saw  great  multitude  s.  before  the  throne

8.  2.  1  saw  the  seven  angels  which  s.  before  God
12.  4.  and  the  dragon  ,v.  before  the  woman
STOOD  beside.

2  Sam.  15.  2.  Absalom  s.  beside  the  way  of  the  gate
1  Kings  10. 19.  and  two  lions  s.  beside  the  stays
Jer.  36.  21.  the  princes  which  s.  beside  the  king
Ezek.  9.  2.  the  six  men  s.  beside  the  brasen  altar

10.  6.  then  he  went  in  and  s.  beside  the  wheels

STOOD  by.

Gen.  18.  2.  he  looked,  and  lo,  three  men  s.  by  him
24.  30.  behold,  lie  s',  by  the  camel?  at  the  well
41.  1.  Pharaoh  dreamed,  and  lo,  he  s.  by  the  river
45.  1.  not  refrain  himself  before  all  that?.  by  him
Exod.  18.  13.  Moses  sat,  and  the  people  ,y.  by  Moses
Num.  23.  6.  Balak  s.  by  his  burnt-sacrifice,  17.

Judg.  3. 19.  all  that  .?.  by  him  went  out  from  him
18.  16.  the  men  s.  by  the  entering  of  the  gate

1  Sam.  1.  26.  the  woman  that  s.  by  thee,  praying

2  Sam.  13.  31.  servants  s.  by  with  clothes  rent

1  Kings  13. 1.  and  Jeroboam  .v.  by  the  altar  to  burn
24.  ass  s.  by  it,  the  lion  also  s.  by  the  carcase

2  Kings  2.  7-  and  they  two  s.  by  Jordan,  13.

11.  14.  behold,  the  king  s.  by  a  pillar,  23.  3.

18.  17.  they  s.  by  conduit  of  upper  pool,  Z?«.36.2.

1 Chron.  21.  15.  the  angel  s.  by  the  threshing-floor
Jer.  44.  15.  then  the  women  that  s.  by  answered
Ezek.  43.  6.  and  the  man  s.  by  me  and  said
Dan.  7.  16.  I  came  near  to  one  of  them  that  s.  by
Zech.  3.  5.  and  the  angel  of  the  Lord  r.  by
Mark  14.  47.  one  of  them  that  s.  by  drew  a  sword  j


Mark  15.35.  some  of  them  that  s.  by  when  they  heard
Luke  5.  1.  he  s.  by  the  lake  of  Gennesareth
19.  24.  lie  said  <0  them  that  s.  by,  take  from  him
24.  4.  two  menr.  by  them  in  shining  garments
John  18.  22.  an  officer  that?.  by  struck  Jesus
19.  25.  there  j.  by  the  cross  of  Jesus  his  mother
Acts  1.  10.  two  men  .?.  by  them  in  white  apparel
9.  39.  and  all  the  widows  s.  by  him  weeping

22.  25.  Paul  saiil  to  the  centurion  that  s.  by

23.  2.  commanded  them  that  s.  by  to  smite  him

4.  they  that?.  by  said,  revilest  thou  the  high  priest  ?
11.  the  night  following  the  Lord  s.  by  him
27.  23.  there  j.  by  me  this  night  the  angel  of  God
STOOD  in.

Exod.  5.20.  met  Moses  and  Aaron,  who  s.  in  the  way
32.  26.  then  Moses  s.  in  the  gate  of  the  camp
Num.  12.  5.  Lord  s.  in  the  door  of  the  tabernacle
16.  18.  they  laid  incense  thereon,  and  .?.  in  the  door

27.  Dathan  and  Abiram  s.  in  door  of  their  tents

22.  22.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  s,  in  the  way,  24.

26.  angel  went  further  and  s.  in  a  narrow  place

Josh.  3.  17.  the  priests  s.  in  midst  of  Jordan,  4. 10.
Judg.  9.  7.  Jotham  ,r.  in  the  top  of  mount  Gerizim
35.  Gaal  s.  in  the  entering  of  the  gate  of  the  city
44.  Abimelech  ||  18. 17-  the  priests  .?.  mtlie  entering
2  Sam.  23.  12.  he  s.  in  the  midst  of  the  ground

1  Kings  19.  13.  and  he  s.  in  entering  in  of  the  cave

2  Kings  3.  21.  they  gathered,  and  s.  in  the  border
4.  15.  the  Shunammite  s.  in  the  door,  and  he  said

2  Chron.  30.  16.  and  they  s.  m  their  place,  35.  10.
34.31.  kings,  in  his  place,  and  made  a  covenant
Neh.  8.  7-  and  all  the  people  s.  in  their  place
Esth.  5.  1.  Esther  s.  in  the  inner-courtof  the  house
Jer.  19.  14.  Jeremiah  s.  m  court  of  the  Lord’shouse

23.  18.  for  who  hath  s.  in  counsel  of  the  Lord
22.  but  if  they  had  s.  in  my  counsel  and  caused

Ezek.  8. 11.  Jaazaniah  s.  in  the  midstof  them
Obad.  14. nor  shouldest  s.  in  cross-way  to  cut  off  those
LukeH.  36.  Jesus  himself  s.  in  the  midstof  them,  and
saith  to  them,  peace  be  to  you,  John  20.  19, 26.
Acts  17.  22.  then  Paul  s.  in  the  Miidst  of  Mars-hill
Rev.  5.  6.  in  the  midst  of  the  elders  s.  a  lamb
STOOD  on.

1  Sam.  17-  3.  Philistines  s.  on  a  mountain  on  the  one

side,  Israel  s.  on  a  mountain  on  the  other  side
26. 13.  then  David  s.  on  the  top  of  an  hill

2  Sam.  2.  25.  Benjamin  s.  on  the  top  of  an  hill

1  Chron.  6.  39.  Asaph,  who  s.  on  his  right  hand
44.  the  sons  of  Merari  s.  on  the  left  hand

2  Chron.  3. 13.  the  cherubims  s.  on  their  feet
F.zek.  10.  3.  the  cherubims  s.  on  the  right  side
Mat.  13.  2.  the  whole  multitude  s.  on  the  shore
John  21.  4.  when  morning,  Jesus  s.  on  the  shore
Acts  21.  40.  Paul  s.  on  stairs  and  beckoned  to  people
Rev.  14. 1.  and  lo,  a  lamb  s.  on  the  mount  Sion

STOOD  over.

Num.  7.  t  2.  who  s.  over  them  that  were  numbered
Deut.  31. 15.  the  pillar  of  cloud  s.  over  the  door
Josh.  5.  13.  behold, a  mans,  over- against  him
Ezek.  10.  4.  glory  of  the  Lord  s.  over  the  threshold
18.  glory  of  the  Lord  s.  over  cherubims
Mat.  2. 9.  the  star  s.  over  where  the  young  child  was
Luke  4.  39.  he  s.  over  her  and  rebuked  the  fever
STOOD  round.

Gen.  37.  7-  behold,  your  sheaves  s.  round  about
Acts  14.20.  as  the  disciples  s.  round  about  him

25.7.  Jews  .s-.  roundabout  Paul,  and  laid  complaints
Rev.  7. 11.  all  the  angels  s.  round  about  the  throne

STOOD  still.

Josh.  10. 13.  the  sun  s.  still,  and  the  moon  stayed
11.  13.  as  for  cities  that  j.  still  in  their  strength
2  Sam..  2.  23.  as  many  as  came  to  the  place  a-,  still

28.  .Toab  blew  a  trumpet  and  all  the  people  .s-.  still
20.  12.  when  the  man  saw  that  all  people  s.  still
Neh.  12.  39.  and  they  .?.  still  in  the  prison-gate
Job  4.  16.  a  spirit  s.  still  but  I  could  not  discern

32. 16.  for  they  spake  not,  but  .s-.  still
Elab.  3.  11.  sun  and  moon  s.  still  in  their  habitation
Mat  AO.  32.  and  Jesus  s.  still  and  called  them
Mark  10.49.  Jesus  s.  still  and  commanded  him
Luke  7 ■  14.  and  they  that  bare  him  s.  still
STOOD  there.

Exod.  34.  5.  the  L.  descended  and  s.  with  him  there
1  Sam.  6. 14.  the  ark  came  into  the  field  and  s.  there
1  Kings  10.  20.  twelve  lions  s.  there,  2  Chron.  9.  19.
Ezek.  3.23.  behold,  the  glory  of  the  Lord#,  there
Hos.  10.  9.  from  the  days  of  Gibeah  there  they  s.
Mat.  27.  47.  some  of  them  that.?,  there,  Mark  11.  5.
John  18.  18.  the  servants  and  officers  s.  there
STOOD  up.

Gen.  23.  3.  Abraham  s.  up  from  before  his  dead
7.  Abraham  j.  up  and  bowed  himself  to  people
Exod.  2. 17.  but  Moses  s.  up  and  helped  them
Num.  11.  .32.  the  people  s.  up  all  that  day  and  night

1  Chroti.  21. 1.  Satan  s.  up  ag.  Israel  and  provoked
28.  2.  then  David  the  king  .?.  up  upon  his  feet

2  Chron.  13.  4.  Abijah  s.  up  and  said,  hear  me
20. 19.  the  Levites  s.  up  to  praise  the  Lord  God

23.  Ammon  and  Moab  .?.  up  against  mount  Seir
28.  12.  s.  up  against  them  that  came  from  the  war
Ezra  2.  63.  not  eat  of  holy  things  till  there  s.  up  a
priest  with  Urim  and  Thummim,  Neh.  7.65.
Neh.  8.  5.  when  he  opened  the  book  people  s.  up

9.  3.  they  s.  up  in  their  place  and  read  the  law
4.  then  s.  up  upon  the  stairs,  of  the  Levites

Esth.  5.  9.  Hamansaw  that  Mordecai  s.  not  up
7.  7.  Haman  s.  up  to  make  request  for  his  life
Job  4. 15.  a  spirit  passed,  the  hair  of  my  flesh  s.  up

29. 8.  young  men  saw  me,  and  aged  arose  and  s.  up
30.  28.  I  s.  up  and  cried  in  the  congregation

Ps.  106.  30.  then.?,  up  Phinehas  and  executed  judg.
Ezek.  .37.  10.  they  lived,  and  s.  up  upon  their  feet
Dan.  8.  22.  that  being  broken,  whereas  four  s.  up

for  it

Luke  4.  16.  Jesus  s.  up  to  read  in  the  synagogue

10.  25.  a  certain  lawyer  s.  up  and  tempted  him
Acts  1.  15.  in  those  days  Peter  s.  up  and  said

4.  26.  the  kings  of  the  earth  s.  up  against  the  Lord

5.  34.  then  s.  up  one  Gamaliel,  a  doctor  of  law

11.  28.  Agabus  s.  up,  and  signified  by  the  spirit
1.3.  16.  Paul  s.  up,  and  beckoning  with  his  hand
25. 18.  against  whom  when  the  accusers  .?.  up


STOOD  upon.

Gen.  41. 17-  benoM,  l  s.  upon  the  bank  of  the  river

1  Sam.  17.  51.  David  ran  and.?,  upon  the  Philistine

2  Sam.  1.  10.  so  I  s.  upon  Saul,  and  slew  him

1  Kings  7.  25.  sea  s.  upon  twelve  oxen,  2  Chroti.  4.  4.

2  Kings  13.  21.  he  revived,  and  s.v.pon  his  feet
Neh.  8. 4.  Ezra  the  scribe  s.  upon  a  pulpit  of  wood
Ezek.  11.  23.  glory  of  the  Lord  s.  upon  the  mount
Amos  7-  7-  the  Lord  .?.  upon  a  wall  made  by  a  line
Rev.  11.  11.  the  two  prophets  s.  upon  their  feet

13. 1.  and  1  s.  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea,  and  saw
STOOD  with.

Gen.  45.  1.  there  s.  with  him  no  man,  while  Joseph
2  A  ingsW.  1 1.  every  man  s.  w.  his  weapons  in  hand
2  Chron.  29.  26.  the  Levites  s.  with  instruments
Ezra  3.  9.  then  Joshua  s.  with  his  sons  and  brethren
Lam  A.  4.  he  s.  with  his  right  hand  as  an  adversary
Luke  9.  32.  they  saw  the  two  men  that  s.  with  him
John  18.  5.  Judas  who  also  betrayed  ?.  with  them
18.  Peter.?,  with  them,  and  warmed  himself
2  Tim.  4. 16.  no  man  s.  with  me  II 17.  Lord  s.  with  m
STOODEST.

Num.  22.  .34.  I  knew  not  that  thou  s.  in  the  way
Deut.  4.  10.  the  day  that  thou  s.  before  the  Lord
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  thou  s.  on  the  other  side
.  STOOL.

2  Kings  4. 10.  let  us  set  for  him  a  bed,  table,  and  s.
STOOLS.

Exod.  1.  16.  he  said,  when  ye  see  them  upon  the  s
STOOP.

Job  9.  13.  the  proud  helpers  do  s.  under  him
Prov.  12.  25.  heaviness  maketh  the  heart  of  man  s.
Isa.  46.  2.  they  j.  they  bow  down  together
Mark  1.  7.  1  am  not  worthy  to  s.  down  and  unloose
STOOPED.

Gen.  49.  9.  Judah  s.  down,  he  couched  as  a  lion
1  Sam.  24.  8.  David  s.  ||  28. 14.  Saul  s.  to  the  ground
£ '.  Chron.  36.  17.  had  no  compassion  on  him  that  s.
John  8.  6.  Jes.  s.  down  and  wrote  with  his  finger,  8.

20. 11.  and  as  she  wept,  she  s.  down,  and  looked

STOOPETH.

Isa.  46.  1.  Bel  boweth  down,  ISiebo  s.  their  idols
STOOPING.

Luke 24. 12.  s.  down  saw  linen  clothes,  John  20.  5.
STOP.

1  Kings  18.  44.  get  down,  that  the  rain  s.  thee  not

2  Kings  3. 19.  ye  shall  s.  all  wells  of  water,  25.

2  Chron.  32.  3.  he  took  counsel  to  s.  the  waters
Psal.  35.  3. .?.  the  way  ag.  them  that  persecute  me

107.  42.  and  all  iniquity  shall  s.  her  mouth
Ezek.  .39.  11.  it  shall  s.  the  noses  of  the  passengers
2  Cor.  11.  10.no  man  shall  s.  me  of  this  boasting
STOPPED.

Gen.  8.  2.  and  the  windows  of  heaven  were  s.

26.  15.  the  Philistines  had  s.  the  wells,  18.

Lev.  15.  .3.  or  his  flesh  be  s.  from  his  issue
2  Chr.  .32. 4.  who  s.  all  the  fountains  and  the  brook
30.  Ilezekiah  .?.  the  water-course
Neh.  4.  7.  and  that  the  breaches  began  to  be  .?.

Ps.  63.  11.  the  mouth  that  speaketn  lies  shall  be  s,
Jer.  51.  32.  and  that  the  passages  are  s.  and  reeds
Zech.  7.  11.  but  they  refused,  and  s.  their  ears
Acts  7.  57.  they  s.  their  ears,  and  ran  upon  him
Rom.  3. 19.  that  every  mouth  may  be  s.  and  be  guil.
lit.  1.  ll.  whose  mouths  must  be  s.  who  subvert
Heb.  11.  33.  who  thro’  faith  s.  the  mouths  of  lions
STOPPERS.

Ezek.  27. 1 9.  the  wise  men  were  thy  s.  of  chinks
STOPPETLI.

Job  5. 16.  poor  hath  hope,  and  iniquity  s.  her  mouth
Psal.  58.  4.  like  the  deaf  adder  that  s.  her  ear
Prov.  21. 13.  whoso  s.  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the  poor
Isa.  33. 15.  and  s.  his  ears  from  hearing  of  blood
STORE.

Amos  3.  10.  saith  the  Lord,  who.?,  up  violence  and

robbery  in  their  palaces
STORE.

Gen.  26. 14.  Isaac  had  flocks  and  great  s.  of  servants
41.  36.  that  food  shall  be  for  s.  to  land  in  famine
Lev.  25.  22.  ye  shall  eat  of  the  old  s.  26. 10.

Deut.  28.  5.  blessed  shall  be  thy  basket  and  thy  s.
17.  cursed  shall  be  thy  basket  and  thy  s.

32.  34.  is  not  this  laid  up  in  s.  with  me  and  sealed

1  Kings  10. 10.  she  gave  king  of  spices  very  great  s.

2  Kings  20. 17.  fathers  have  laid  up  in  s.  to  this  day

1  Chron.  29. 16.  all  this  s.  cometh  of  thine  hand

2  Chron.  11.  11.  he  put?,  of  victuals,  wine  in  them
31.  10.  and  that  which  is  left  is  this  great .?.

Neh  5.  18.  s.  of  all  sorts  of  wine  was  prepared
Ps.  144.  1.3.  our  garners  affording  all  manner  of?.
Isa.  39. 6.  that  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  s.
Nah.  2.  9.  for  there  is  none  end  of  the  s.  and  glory
1  Cor.  16.2.  letevery  one  of  you  lav  by  him  in  ?.

1  Tim.  6.  19.  laying  up  in  s.  a  gooff  foundation

2  Pet.  3. 7.  which  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  s.

STORR-cities.

1  Kings  9. 19.  cities  of  .?.  Solomon  had,  2  Chr.  8.  6

2  Chron.  8.  4.  and  all  the s.-cities  which  he  built
16.  4.  they  smote  all  the  s.-cities  of  Naphtali

17. 12.  Jehoshaphat  built  s.-cities  in  Judah

STORE-/jcM?e.

Mai.  3.  10.  bring  all  the  tithes  into  the  s.-house
Luke  12.  24.  the  ravens  have  no  s.-house  nor  barn
ST  O  RR-houses .

Gen.  41. 56.  Joseph  opened  all  the  s.-h.  and  sold
Deut.  28.  8.  command  blessing  on  thee  in  thy  s.-h.

1  Chron .27.  25.  over  the  s.-house  was  Jehonathan

2  Chron.  .32.28.  Ilezekiah  made  s.-houses  also
Psal.  33.  7.  he  layeth  up  the  depth  in  s.-houses
Jer.  50.  26.  open  her  s.-houses,  cast  her  up  as  heaps

STORK,

A  kind  of  bird;  the  Hebrews  call  it  Chaseda,  or
Chasidah,  which  signifies  pity  or  mercy ,  probably
because  of  the  tenderness  it  shows  to  its  dam,
whom  it  never  forsakes,  but  feeds  and  defends,
even  to  death.  The  stork  is  a  bird  of  passage,
which  in  winter  goes  into  the  hot  countries,  Jer.

8.  7.  The  stork  in  the  heaven  knoweth  her  ap¬
pointed  time,  and  the  turtle,  and  the  crane,  and
the  swallow,  observe  the  time  of  their  coming.
Jerom  and  the  Septuagint  sometimes  render  the
Hebrew  word  Chasidah  by  Herodius  the  heron.

475


ST  R


S  T  K


S  T  R


and  sometimes  by  pelican  or  kite  ;  but  interpreters
are  pretty  well  agreed,  that  it  signifies  a  stork.
Moses  places  it  among  unclean  birds.  Lev.  11.  19.
The  Psalmist  says.  As  for  the  stork,  the  fir-trees
are  her  house,  Psal.  101.  17-  They  for  ordinary
make  their  nests  upon  some  high  tower,  or  the  top
of  an  house  ;  but  in  Palestine,  where  the  cover¬
ings  of  their  houses  were  fiat,  they  built  in  the
highest  trees.

The  stork  has  its  beak  and  its  legs  long  and  red ;  it
feeds  upon  serpents,  frogs,  and  insects.  Its
plumage  would  be  quite  white,  if  it  was  not  that,  the
extremity  of  its  wings  are  black,  and  also  some
small  part  of  its  head  and  thighs.  It  sits  for  the
space  of  thirty  days,  and  lays  but  four  eggs.
Formerly  they  would  not  eat  the  stork,  but  at  pre¬
sent  it  is  much  esteemed  for  the  deliciousness  of
its  flesh.  They  go  away  in  the  midst  of  August,
and  return  at  Spring.  Bellonius  says,  that
when  they  go  away,  the  stork  that  comes  last  to
the  place  of  rendezvous  is  killed  upon  the  spot.
They  go  away  in  the  night  to  the  southern
countries.

Lev.  11. 19.  the  s.  thou  shalt  not  eat,  Deut.  14.  18.
Job  39.  f  13.  gavest  thou  feathers  to  the  ;. '{

Psal.  104.  17.  as  for  the  s.  the  fir-trees  are  her  house
Jer.  8.  7.  the  s.  knoweth  her  appointed  times
Zech.  5.  9.  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  s.
STORM.

Job  21.  18.  and  as  chaff  that  the  s.  carrieth  away

27.  21.  and  as  s.  hurleth  him  out  of  his  place
Psal.  55. 8.  I  would  hasten  my  escape  from  windy  s.

83.  15.  and  make  them  afraid  with  thy  s.

107  .  29.  hemaketh  the;.  a  calm,  waves  are  still
Isa.  4.  6.  and  for  a  covert  from  s.  and  from  rain
25.  4.  for  thou  hast  been  a  refuge  from  the  s.

28.  2.  which  as  destroying;.  shallcast  down  to  earth

29.  6.  thou  shalt  be  visited  with  s.  and  tempest
Ezek.  38.  9.  thou  shalt  ascend  and  come  like  a  s.

If  ah.  1 . 3.  Lord  hath  his  way  in  the  whirlwind  and  s.
Mark  4.  37.  and  there  arose  a  greats,  of  wind
Luke  8.  23.  there  came  down  a  s.  of  wind  on  the  lake

STORMY.

Psal.  107  .  25.  he  commandeth  and  raiseth  the  s.

wind

148. 8.  snow  and  vapour,  s.  wind  fulfilling  his  word
Ezek.  13. 11.  hail-stones  shall  fall,;,  wind  shall  rend

13.  I  will  even  rend  it  with  a  s.  wind  in  my  fury

STORY.

2  Chron.  13.  22.  the  acts  of  Abijah  in  the  s.  of  Iddo
24.  27.  written  in  the  s.  of  the  book  of  the  kings
STORIES.

Gen.  6.  16.  with  second  and  third  s.  make  the  ark
Ezek.  41.16.  galleries  threes,  over-against  the  door
42.  3.  was  gallery  against  gallery  in  three  s.  6.
Amos  9.  6.  it  is  he  that  buildeth  hiss,  in  the  heaven
STOUR,  See  Stoop.

STOUT.

Job  4.  11.  the  s.  lion’s  whelps  are  scattered  abroad
Isa.  10.  12.  I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  ;.  heart
Dan.  7. 20.  whose  look  was  more  s.  than  his  fellows
Mai.  3.  13.  your  words  have  been  s.  against  me
STOUT -hearted.

Psal.  76.  5.s.-h.  are  spoiled,  they  slept  their  sleep
Isa.  46.  12.  hearken  unto  me,  y e.  s. -hearted
STOUTNESS.

Isa.  9.  9.  that  say  in  the  pride  and  s.  of  heart
STRAIGHT.

Josh.  6.  5.  shall  ascend  every  man  s.  before  him,  20.

1  Sam.  6.  12.  the  kine  took  s.  way  to  Beth-shemesh
Psal.  5.  8.  make  thy  way  s.  before  my  face
Pro v.  4.  25.  let  thine  eye  lids  look  s.  before  thee
Eccl.  1.  15.  that  which  is  crooked  cannot  be  made  s.
7. 13.  for  who  can  make  that  s.  he  made  crooked  ?
Isa.  40.  3.  make  s.  in  desert  a  highway  for  our  God

4.  tlie  crooked  shall  be  made  s.  and  the  rough
places  plain,  42.  16. 1  45.  2.  Luke  3.  5.
Jer.  31.  9. 1  will  cause  them  to  walkin  a;,  way
Ezek.  1. 7.  and  their  feet  were;,  feet,  they  sparkled

9.  they  went  every  one  s.  forward,  12.  1 10.  22.

23.  under  the  firmament  were  their  wings  ;.

Mat.  3.3.  prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  his
paths  s.  Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  23.
Luke  13.  13.  she  was  made  s.  and  glorified  God
Arts  9. 11.  arise  and  go  into  street  which  is  called  s.
Heb.  12. 13.  and  make  s.  paths  for  your  feet
STRAIGHTWAY.

1  Sam.  9.  13.  ye  shall  s.  find  him  before  he  go  up
28.  20.  then  Saul  fell  s.  all  along  on  the  earth
Prov.  7-  22.  he  goeth  after  her  ;.  as  an  ox  goeth  ■
Dan.  10.  17.  ;.  there  remained  no  strength  in  me
Mat.  3.  16.  .lesus  went  ;.  out  of  water,  Mark  1.  10.

4.  20.  and  they  s.  left  their  nets,  Mark  1.  18.

21.  3.  ye  shall  say,  the  Lord  hath  need  of  them,

and  s.  he  will  send  them  hither,  Mark  11.  3.
27.  48.  s.  one  of  them  ran  and  took  a  spunge
Mark  5. 29.  j.the  fountain  of  her  blood  was  dried  up
6.  54.;.  they'  knew  him  ||  Luke  5.  39.;.  desireth  new
Luke  14.  5.  will  not  ;.  pull  him  out  on  sabbath-day  ?
John  13.32.  and  God  shall  s.  glorify  him
Acts5.l0.  then  fell  she  down  ;.at  his  feet  and  yielded
9.  20.  and  ;.  he  preached  Christ  in  the  synagogues

16.  33.  the  jailer  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his  ;.

22.  29.  then  ;.  they  departed  from  him

23.  30.  when  it  was  told  me,  I  sent  s.  to  thee
Jam.  1. 24.  s.  forgetteth  what  manner  of  man  he  was

STRAIN.

Mat.  23. 24.  guides  ;.  at  a  gnat  and  swallow  a  camel
STRAIT.

1  Sam.  13.  6.  when  Israel  saw  that  they  were  in  a  ;.

2  Sam.  24. 14.  I  am  in  a  great  ;.  1  Chron.  21.  13.
Job  36.  16.  would  have  removed  thee  out  of  the  s.
Dan.  9.  f  25.  the  street  and  wall  built  in  ;.  of  times
Phil.  1.  23.  for  1  am  in  a  ;.  betwixt  two,  desire

STRAITS.

Job  20. 22.  in  fuln.  of  his  sufficiency  he  shall  be  in  ;.
Lam.  1.  3.  persecutors  overtook  her  between  the
STRAIT.

2  Kings  6. 1 .  behold,  place  we  dwell  is  too  s.  for  us
Isa.  49. 20.  the  place  is  too  s.  for  me,  give  place  to  me
Mat.  7. 13.  enter  ye  in  at;,  gate,  for  wide  is  the  gate

14.  because  ;.  is  gate  and  way  narrow, Luke  13.24.

476


STRAITEN.

Jer.  19.9.  they  that  seek  their  lives,  shall  ;.  them
STRAITENED.

Job  18.7.  the  steps  of  his  strength  shall  be  ;.

37.  10.  and  the  breadth  of  the  waters  is  ;.

Prov.  4. 12.  when  thou  goest.thy  steps  shall  not  be  ;.
Ezek.  42. 6.  therefore  the  building  was  ;.  more  than
Mic.  2.  7.  is  spirit  of  Lord  ;.  ?  these  his  doings
Luke  12.  50.  how  am  1  ;.  till  it  be  accomplished  !

2  Cor.  6. 12.  ye  are  not  ;.  in  us,  are  ;.  in  your  bowels
STRAITEN  ETH.

Job  12.  23.  he  enlargeth  nations  and  ;.  them  again
STRAITEST.

Acts  26.  5.  after  the  most  ;.  sect  of  our  religion
STRAITLY.

Gen.  43.  7.  man  asked  us  ;.  of  our  state  and  kindred
Exod.  13.  19.  for  Joseph  had;,  sworn  Israel
Josh.  6.1.  Jericho  was  ;.  shut  up,  none  went  out,  and
1  Sam.  14.28.  thy  father;,  charged  people  with  oath
Mat.  9.  30.  he  ;.  charged  them,  saying,  see  that  no
man  know  it,  Mark  3. 12. 1  5.  43.  Luke  9.  21.
Mark  1.  43.  he  ;.  charged  him  and  sent  him  away
Acts  4.  17.  but  let  us  ;.  threaten  them  not  to  speak

5.  28.  did  not  we  ;.  command  you  not  to  teach  ?
ST  R  ATTN  ESS.

Exod. 6. 1 9.  they  hearkened  not  to  Moses  for  ;.  of  spi.
Deut.  28.53.  shalt  eat  flesh  of  thy  child r.  in  ;.  55.  57.
Job  36.  16.  into  a  broad  place  where  there  is  no  ;.
Isa.  42.  t  16.  I  will  make  crooked  things  into  ;.
Jer.  19.  9.  they  shall  eat  flesh  of  his  friend  in  the  ;.
Heb.  1. 1  8.  a  sceptre  of;,  is  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom
STRAKE.

Acts  27.  17.  they  fearing  ;.  sail, and  so  were  driven
See  Struck..

S  1' RAKES.

Gen.  30.  37-  Jacob  pilled  white  in  rods  of  hasel
Lev.  14.  37.  if  plague  be  in  the  walls  with  hollow  ;.
STRAN  G  E.

Gen.  42.  7-  but  Joseph  made  himself  ;.  unto  them
Job  19.  3.  not  ashamed  that  ye  make  yours.  ;.  to  me

17.  my  breath  is  ;.  to  my  wife,  tho’  l  entreated
Prov.  21.  8.  the  way  of  man  is  froward  and  ;.

Jer.  18. 1 14.  will  man  leave  snow  of  Lebanon  ?  shall

running  waters  be  forsaken  for  the  ;.  cold  water .'
1  Pet.  4.4.  wherein  they  think  it ;.  ye  runnot  with  th.
12.  think  it  not;,  concerning  trial,  as  tho’  ;.  thing
STRANGE  act.

Isa. 28.21 .  that  ye  may  bring  to  pass  his  act,  his  ;.  act
STRANGE  apparel.

Zeph.  1.8.  punish  such  are  clothed  with  ;.  apparel
See  Children.

STRANGE  cities.

Acts  26. 11.  I  persecuted  them  even  to  ;.  cities
STRANGE  country.

Heb.  11.  9-  he  sojourned  as  in  a  ;.  country
STRANGE  doctrines.

Heb.  13.  9.  be  not  carried  about  with  ;.  doctrines
STRANGE  fire.

Lev.  10.  1.  Nadab  and  Abihu  offered;,  fire  before
the  Lord,  and  they  died,  Num.  3.  4.  |  26.  61.
STRANGE  flesh.

Jude  7-  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  going  after;,  flesh
See  God,  Gods.

STRANGE  incense.

Exod.  30.  9-  ye  shall  offer  no  ;.  incense  thereon
STRANGE  land.

Exod.  2.  22.  have  been  a  stranger  in  a  ;.  land.  18.  3.
Psal.  137-  4.  how  shall  we  sing  Lord’s  song  in  a  ;.  1.
Acts  7.  6.  that  his  seed  should  sojourn  in  a  ;.  land.
STRANGE  language.

Psal  114.  1.  Israel  went  from  a  people  of  ;.  1.
STRANGE  nation.

Exod.  21.  8.  to  sell  her  to  a  ;.  n.  he  hath  no  power
SI  RA  N  G  E  punishment.

Job  31.3.  a  ;.  punishm.  to  the  workers  of  iniquity
STRANGE  lips.

Isa.  17.  10.  and  thou  shalt  set  it  with  ;.  lips
S  I  RANGE  speech.

Ezek.  3.  5.  thou  art  not  sent  to  a  people  of;.  ;.  6.
ST  RANGE  th  ing .

Dos.  8.  12.  but  they  were  counted  as  a  ;.  thing

1  Pet.  4. 12.  as  tho’  some  ;.  thing  happened  to  you

ST  RANGE  things.

Luke  5.  26.  saying,  we  have  seen  ;.  things  today
Acts  17.20.  thou  bringest  certain  s.  things  to  our  ears
STRANGE  vanities.

Jer.  8. 19.  why  provoked  me  to  anger  with  ;.  v.  ?
ST  RANGE  vine.

Jer.  2.21.  how  turned  into  degener.  plant  of  a  ;.  vine
STRANGE  waters.

2  Kings  19.  24.  I  have  digged  and  drunk  ;.  waters

STRANGE  wives.

1  Kings  11.8.  and  likewisedid  he  for  all  his  ;.  wives
Ezra  10.  2.  we  have  taken  ;.  wives,  10,  14, 17,  44.
11.  and  separate  yourselves  from  the  ;.  wives

18.  sons  of  priests  were  found  to  have  taken;,  w.
Neh.  13.  27.  to  transgress  ag.  God,  in  marrying  ;.  w.

STRANGE  woman.

Judg.  11.  2.  for  thou  art  the  son  of  a  ;.  woman
Prov.  2.  16.  to  deliver  thee  from  the  ;.  woman

5.  3.  the  lips  of  a  s.  woman  drop  as  an  honey-comb
20.  why  wilt  thou  be  ravished  with  a  ;.  woman

6.  24.  to' keep  thee  from  flattery  of  ;.  woman,  7.  5.

20. 16.  take  a  pledge  of  him  for  a;,  woman,  27. 13.
23.  27.  and  a  ;.  woman  is  a  narrow  pit

S  I'R A NGE  women.

1  Kings  11.  1.  king  Solomon  loved  many  ;.  women
Prov.  22.  14.  the  mouth  of;,  women  is  a  deep  pit
23.  33.  thine  eyes  shall  behold  ;.  women,  heart  utter
STRANGE  work.

Isa.  28. 21.  that  he  may  do  his  work,  his  ;.  work
STRANGER.

[1]  One  that  is  in  a  strange  land,  being  at  a  dis¬
tance  from  the  place  of  his  nativity.  Gen.  23.  4.
1  am  a  stranger  with  you.  [2]  One  that  is
not  a  Jew,  but  of  some  other  nation,  Isa.  14.  1.
The  strangers  shall  be  joined  with  them  ;  that
is,  many  of  the  Gentiles.  [3]  Any  one  that  was
not  of  Aaron’s  seed,  notwithstanding  he  were  an
Israelite.  Num.  3.  10.  The  stranger  that  cometli
nigh  shall  be  put  to  death.  See  Num.  16.  40.  |
18.  4.  [4]  One  that  uses  this  world  as  if  he  used


it  not,  who  does  not  think  himself  at  home  while
in  this  world,  but  has  his  mind  and  eye  fixed  on
his  country  which  is  above.  Psal.  39.  12.  1  am  a
stranger  with  thee,  and  a  sojourner,  as  all  my
fathers  were.  Heb.  11.  13.  They  confessed  that
they  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  earth.  [5]
Such  as  were  without  all  title  to,  or  interest  in,
either  the  outward  privileges,  or  saving  blessings,
of  the  covenant  of  grace.  Eph.  2.  12.  At  that
time  ye  were  strangers  from  the  covenant  of  pro¬
mise,  namely,  during  your  heathenism.  [6]  One
who  is  not  of  the  king's  stock  and  family.  Mat.

17.  25,  26.  Of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth
take  custom  or  tribute  ?  of  their  own  children,
or  of  strangers  ?  [7  ]  One  who  being  made  a  cap¬
tive,  has  lost  his  former  liberty  and  dignity,  which
he  enjoyed  in  his  own  country.  Obad.  12.  Thou
shouldest  not  have  looked  on  the  day  of  thy  bro¬
ther,  in  the  day  that  he  became  a  stranger.  [8]
A  woman  that  is  not  a  man's  own  wife.  Prov.  5.
20.  Why  wilt  thou  embrace  the  bosom  of  a
stranger  ?  [9]  Profane  or  unclean  persons.  Joel
3.  17.  There  shall  no  strangers  pass  through  her
any  more.  None  of  the  enemies  of  the  church
shall  invade  and  subdue  it  any  more,  nor  profane
persons  mingle  themselves  with  it,  so  as  to  cor¬
rupt  her  doctrine  or  worship.  [10]  Persons  of
a  perfidious  and  barbarous  disposition,  who,  though
of  the  same  nation,  yet  carry  themselves  as  if
they  were  void  of  all  piety  and  humanity.  Thus
David  calls  the  Ziphites,  though  Israelites,
strangers,  Psal.  54.  3.  [11]  Persecuted,  or  ba¬
nished  Christians.  Heb.  13.  2.  Be  not  forgetful
to  entertain  strangers.  [12]  False  teachers,  such
as  are  strangers  to  sound  doctrine.  John  10.

5.  And  a  stranger  will  they  not  follow.  As  to
the  two  sorts  of  strangers  among  the  Jews,  name¬
ly,  Advena  justitias,  and  Advena  portas,  See
Proselyte.

Gen.  15.  13.  know  that  thy  seed  shall  be  a  ;.  in  a  land

17.  8.  give  land  wherein  thou  art  a  ;.  28.  4. 1  37.  1.
12.  or  that  is  bought  with  money  of  any  ;.

27.  bought  with  money  of  the  ;.  were  circumcised
23.  4.  I  am  a  ;.  with  you,  Psal.  39.  12. 1  119.  19.
Exod.  2.  22.  1  have  been  a  ;.  in  a  strange  land
12.  19.  shall  be  cut  off,  whether  a  s.  or  born  in  the
land,  Lev.  16.  29.  I  17-  15.  Num.  15.  30.
43.  there  shall  no  ;.  eat  thereof,  29.  33.

48.  when  a  ;.  will  keep  the  passover,  Num.  9.  14.

49.  one  law  shall  be  to  him  that  is  home-born  and
the  ;.  Lev.  24.  22.  Num.  9. 14. 1  15. 15, 16,  29.

18.  t  3.  the  name  of  the  one  was  a  ;.  there

20. 10.  nor  ;.  that  is  within  thy  gates,  Deut.  5. 14.

22.  21.  thou  shalt  not  vex  or  oppress  a  ;.

23.  9-  ye  know  heart  of  a  ;.  seeing  ye  were  strangers
12.  shalt  rest,  that  the  ;.  may  be  refreshed

30.  33.  whosoever  putteth  any  of  it  upon  a  ;.

Lev.  17. 12.  neither  shall  any .?.  atnongyou  eat  blood

19.  10.  thou  shalt  leave  them  for  ;.  23.  22.  |  25.  6.

33.  if  a  ;.  sojourn  in  the  land  ye  shall  not  vex  him

34.  the  ;.  be  as  one  born  among  you,  Num.  15. 15.

22.  10.  there  shall  no  1.  eat  of  the  holy  thing,  13.
12.  if  she  be  married  to  a  ;.  she  may  not  eat

25.  neither  from  a  hand  shall  ye  offer  the  bread

24.  16.  as  well  ;.  when  blasphemeth  put  to  death

25.  35.  yea,  tho’  he  be  a  ;.  thou  shalt  relieve  him
47.  if  a  s.  wax  rich  by  thee,  and  thy  poor  brother

sell  himself  to  the  ;.  or  his  family
Num.  1.  51.  Levites  set  up  tabernacle,  the  ;.  that
cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death,  3.  10,  38.

15.  14.  and  if  a  ;.  sojourn  and  will  offer  an  offering

16.  40.  that  no;,  come  near  to  offer  incense  bef.  L.

18.  4.  and  a  ;.  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  you

7.  the  ;.  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death

19.  10.  it  shall  be  to  Israel  and  ;.  a  statute  for  ever

35.  15.  six  cities  of  refuge  for  ;.  Josh.  20.  9.

Deut.  1.  16.  hear  and  judge  righteously  betw.the;.

10.  18.  the  Lord  loveth  the  in  giving  him  food

19.  love  the  ;.  for  ye  were  strangers  in  Egypt

14.  21.  shalt  give  that  which  dieth  of  itself  to  ;.

17. 15.  not  set  a  ;.  over  thee  who  is  not  thy  brother

23.  7*  because  thou  wast  a  ;.  in  his  land

20.  unto  a  ;.  thou  mayest  lend  upon  usury
25.  5.  the  wife  shall  not  marry  without  to  a  ;.

26. 11.  thou  shalt  rejoice,  thou,  and  the;,  amongyou

28.  43.  the  ;.  shall  get  up  above  thee  very  high

29.  11.  and  thy  ;.  to  enter  into  covenant  with  God
22.  ;.  shall  say,  why  hath  the  Lord  done  thus

31.  12.  gather  thy  ;.  that  he  may  hear  and  learn
Josh.  8.  33.  the  ;.  stood  to  hear  words  of  law  read
Judg.  19. 12.  we  will  not  turn  aside  to  city  of  a
PuthZ.lO.  why  have  I  found  grace,  seeing  1  am  ns.f
2  Sam.  1.  13.  I  am  the  son  of  a  ;.  an  Amalekite

15.  19.  for  thou  art  a;,  and  also  an  exile

1  Kings  3.  18.  there  was  no  ;.  with  us  in  the  house

8.  41.  moreover  concerning  a  ;.  2  Chron.  6.  32.

43.  do  according  to  all  the  ;.  calleth,  2  Chr.  6.  33.
Job  15.  19.  and  no  ;.  passed  among  them

19.  15.  and  my  maids  count  me  for  a  ;.
t  27.  whom  mine  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  a  ;.
31.  32.  the  ;.  did  not  lodge  in  street,  but  1  opened
Psal.  69-  8.  I  am  become  a  ;.  to  my  brethren
94.  6.  they  slay  the  widow  and  the  ;.  and  murder
109.  11.  and  let  the  ;.  spoil  his  labour
137. 1 4.  how  shall  sing  Lord’s  song  in  land  of;..’
Prov.  2.  16.  to  deliver  thee  even  from  the  ;.

5.  10.  and  thy  labours  be  in  the  house  of  a  ;.

:20.  why  wilt  thou  embrace  the  bosom  of  a  ;.  /

6.  1.  if  thou  hast  stricken  thine  hand  with  a;.

7.  5.  they  may  keep  thee  from  the  ;.  who  flatters

11.  15.  he  that  is  surety  for  a  ;.  shall  smart  for  it
14.  10.  and  a;,  dotli  not  intermeddle  with  his  joy

20. 16.  take  his  gartn.  that  is  surety  fora  ;.  27.  13.
27.  2.  let  a;,  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own  lips

Eccl.  6. 2.  not  power  to  eat  thereof,  but  a  ;.  eateth  it
Isa.  56.  3.  neither  let  the  son  of  a  ;.  speak,  saying

6.  the  sons  of  the  ;.  that  join  themselves  to  Lord
62.  8.  the  sons  of  the  ;.  shall  not  drink  thy  wine

Jer.  14.  8.  why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  ;.  in  the  land
Ezek.  14.  7-  every  ;.  that  setteth  up  his  idols
22. 7.  they  dealt  by  oppression  with  the;.  29.

44.17.  brought  into  my  sanctuary  children  of  a  s.


S  T  R


ST  R


STR


Eatk.  44.  9.  no  j.  micircumc.  shall  enter  my  sanct
4“.  23.  that  in  what  tribe  the  a.  sojourueth
Chad.  12.  in  the  day  that  he  became  a  a.

Mai.  3.  5.  and  that  turn  aside  the  a.  from  his  right
Mat.  ‘.6.  .‘55.  1  was  a  a.  and  ye  took  me  in,  43.

38.  when  saw  we  thee  a  a. and  took  thee  in  :  44.
Luke  ](.  18.  not  found  that  returned,  save  this  a.

24.  18.  art  thou  only  a  a.  in  .lerus.  and  not  known
John  lo.  5.  a.  will  they  not  follow,  but  flee  from  him
Act*  7.  29.  Closes  was  a  a.  in  the  land  of  Midian

See  l-'ATHKH  less.

S  IRANGEllS.

(Jen.  31.  15.  are  we  not  counted  of  him  s.?

3d.  7.  the  land  wherein  they  were  a.  Exod.  6.  4.
Exod.  22.  21.  for  ye  were  a.  in  the  land  of  Egypt,

23.  9.  Lev.  19.  34.  |  25.  23.  Dent.  10. 19.
Lev.  17.  8.  .1.  that  offer  an  oblation,  22.  18.

10,  whatsoever  of  the  a.  that  eateth  any  blood

13.  the  a.  that  huuteth  shall  pour  out  the  blood

2o.  2.  of  the  a.  that  give  his  seed  to  Molech

25.  45.  of  the  children  of  the  a.  shall  ye  buy
Dent.  24.  14.  thou  shalt  not  oppress  a  serv.  tno’  of  a.

31.  Id.  will  go  a  whoring  after  gods  of  the  a.  of  land

Josh.  8.  35.  the  a.  that  were  conversant  among  them
Judy.  10.  t  Id.  they  put  away  the  gods  of  a.
2«S<j/m.22.45.  a. shall  submit  themselves  unto  me
40.  a.  shall  fade  away  and  be  afraid,  Ps.  18.  44,45.

1  Chr.  Id.  19.  when  ye  were  a.  in  it,  Psal.  105.  12.
22.  2.  David  commanded  to  gather  the  a.  in  Israel

29.  15.  for  we  are  a.  as  were  all  our  fathers

2  Chron.  2.  17.  and  Solomon  numbered  all  the  a.

15.  9.  and  Asa  gathered  all  Judah  and  the  a.

30.  25.  the  a.  of  Israel  and  all  Judah  rejoiced
Neh.  9,  2.  seed  of  Isr.  separated  tbems.  from  all  s.

13.  30.  thus  cleansed  1  them  from  all  a.  and  appoin.
Ps.  54.  3.  for  a.  are  risen  up  ag.  me,  and  oppressors

146.  9.  the  Lord  preserveth  the  a.  he  relieveth
Prov.  5.  10.  lest  a.  be  tilled  with  thy  wealth

17.  let  them  be  only  thine  own,  not  a.  with  thee
Isa.  1.7.  your  cities  burnt,  your  land  a.  devour  it  in
your  presence,  it  is  desolate,  as  overthrown  by  a.

2.6.  they  please  themselves  in  the  children  of  a.

5. 17.  the  waste  places  of  the  fat  ones  shall  a.  eat

14.  1.  and  the  .v.  shall  be  joined  with  them

25.  2.  thou  hast  made  a  palace  of  a.  to  be  no  city
5.  thou  shalt  bring  down  the  noise  of  a.

29.  5.  multitude  of  thy  a.  shall  be  like  small  dust

60.  10.  the  sons  of  a.  shall  build  up  thy  walls
61.5.  and  a.  shall  stand  and  feed  your  flocks

Jer.  2.  25.  1  have  loved  a.  and  after  them  will  1  go

3.  13.  thou  hast  scattered  thy  ways  to  the  a.

5.  19.  so  shall  ye  serve  a.  in  a  land  that  is  not  yours

30.  8.  a.  shall  no  more  serve  themselves  of  him
35.  7.  that  ye  may  live  in  the  land  where  ye  be  a.
51.51.  for  a.  are  come  into  the  sanctuaries  of  lord

Lam.  5.  2.  our  inherit,  is  turned  to  a.  houses  to  aliens
Ezek.  7.  21.  I  will  give  it  into  hand  of  a.  for  a  prey

11.  9.1  will  deliver  you  into  the  hands  of  a.

16.  32.  a  wife  who  taketh  a.  instead  of  her  husband

28.  7.  behold  therefore  I  will  bring  a.  upon  thee

10.  thou  shalt  die  the  deaths  by  the  hand  of  a.

30. 12.  I  will  make  the  land  waste  by  the  hand  of  a.

31.  12.  a.  have  cut  him  off  ,  and  have  left  him
44. 7.  in  that  ye  have  brought  into  my  sanctuary  a.
47.  22.  for  an  inheritance  to  you  and  to  the  a.

Dos.  7. 9.  a.  have  devoured  his  strength,  know,  it  not
8.7*  it  sm  be  it  yield,  the  a.  shall  swallow  it  up
Joel  3.  17.  there  shall  no  a.  pass  thro’  her  any  more
Obad.  11.  in  the  day  that  a.  carried  away  captive
Mat.  17. 25.  of  whom  take  tribute  ?  of  childr.  or  of  a.

26.  Peter  saith  to  him,  of  a.  ||  2?.  7.  to  bury  a.  in
John  10.  5.  for  they  know  not  the  voice  of  a.

Acts  2. 10.  and  a. of  Home,  Jews  anil  proselytes

13.  17.  when  they  dwelt  as  a.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
Eph .  2.  12.  were  a.  from  the  covenants  of  promise

19.  thereforeye  are  no  more  a.  but  fellow-citizens
1  Tint.  5. 10.  if  she  have  lodged  a.  if  she  have  washed
Jleb.  11 .  13.  confessed  they  were  a.  and  pil.  on  earth

13.  2.  be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  a.  for  some
1  Pet.  1.  1.  to  the  a.  scattered  thro’ Pontus,  Galatia

2.  11.  1  beseech  you  as  a.  pilgrims,  abst.  from  lusts

3  John  5.  dost  faithfully,  whatsoever  thou  dost  to  a.

STRANGELY.

Dent.  32.  27.  lest  adversaries  should  behave  them.  a.
STRANGLED.

Nah.  2.  12.  the  lion  did  tear  and  a.  for  his  lionesses
Acts  15.  20.  that  they  abstain  from  things  a.  29.  |
STRANGLING.  ”  [21.25.
Job  7.  15.  so  that  my  soul  chooseth  a.  and  death
ST  It  AW.

Gen.  24.  25.  we  have  both  a.  and  provender  enough

32.  he  gave  a.  and  provender  for  the  camels
Exod.  5.  7.  ye  shall  no  more  give  a.  10,  16, 18.

11.  go  ye,  get  you  a.  where  you  can  find  it
Judff.  19.  19.  yet  there  is  both  a.  and  provender

1  Rings  A.  28.  brought  barley  also,  and  a.  for  horses
Job  41. 27.  esteemeth  iron  as  a.  brass  as  rotten  wood
Isa.  11.7.  and  the  lion  shall  east  a.  like  the  ox,  65.25.

25.  10.  Moab  shall  be  trodden  down,  even  as  a.

ST  RAWED.

Exod.  32.  20.  he  ground  the  calf,  a.  it  on  the  water

2  Chron.  34.  4.  he  a.  upon  the  graves  of  them  that
Mat.  21.  8.  cut  down  branches  and  a.  th.  Mark  11,8.

25.  24.  and  gathering  where  thou  hast  not  a.

26.  and  gather  where  1  have  not  a.

STREAM.

Num.  21.  15.  what  he  did  at  the  a.  of  the  brooks
Job  6.  15.  and  as  the  a.  of  brooks  they  pass  away
Psal.  124.  4.  then  the  a.  had  gone  over  our  soul
Isa.  27. 12.  the  Ld.  shall  beat  off  to  the  a.  of  Egypt
30.  28.  his  breath  as  an  overflowing  a.  shall  reach
3.3.  like  a  a.  of  brimstone,  doth  kindle  it
57.  6.  among  smooth  stones  of  the  a.  is  thy  portion
66.  12.  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a  flowing  a.
Dan.  7. 10.  fiery  a.  Issued  and  came  forth  before  him
Amos  5.  24.  and  righteousness  as  a  mighty  a.

Luke  6.  48.  the  a.  be.  t  vehemently  on  that  house,  49.
STREAMS.

Exod.  7.  19.  stretch  out  thine  hand  on  their  a.  8.  5.
Psal.  46.  4.  a.  whereof  shall  make  glad  city  of  G.
78.  16.  he  brought  a.  also  out  of  rock,  and  waters

20.  the  waters  gushed  out,  the  a.  overflowed


Psal.  126.  4.  turn  ag.  our  'aptiv.  as  a.  in  the  south
Cant.  A.  15.  well  ot  living  waters,  a.  from  Lebanon
Isa.  11. 15.  the  Lord  shall  smite  it  in  the  seven  a.

30.  25.  on  every  high  hill  shall  be  a.  of  waters

33.  21.  will  be  to  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  a.

34.  9.  the  a.  thereof  shall  be  turned  into  pitch

35.  6.  waters  break  out  and  a.  in  the  desert

STREET.

Gen.  19.  2.  but  we  will  abide  in  the  a.  all  night
Dent.  13. 16.  thou  shalt  gather  all  the  spoil  into  a.
Josh.  2.  19-  any  go  out  of  thy  house  into  the  a.
Judy.  19.  15.  he  sat  down  in  a  a.  of  the  city,  17.

20.  the  old  man  said,  only  lodge  not  in  the  a.

2  Saw.  21.  12.  had  stolen  from  the  a.  of  Eeth-shan
22.  43.  I  did  stamp  them  as  the  mire  of  the  a.

2  Chr.  29.  4.  and  gathered  them  in  the  east  a.  32.  6.
Ezra  10.  9.  all  the  people  sat  in  a.  of  house  of  God
Neh.  8.  1.  the  people  gathered  as  one  man  into  the  a.

3.  he  read  therein  before  the  a.  that  was  before
16.  so  people  made  booths  in  the  a.  of  water-gate
Esth.  6.  9.  bring  him  on  horseback  thro’  the  a.  11.
Job  18.  17.  and  he  shall  have  no  name  in  the  a.

29.  7-  when  1  prepared  my  seat  in  the  a.

31.  32.  stranger  did  not  lodge  in  the  a.  but  I  open.
Prov.  7.  8.  passing  thro’  the  a.  near  her  corner
Isa.  42.  2.  his  \  oice  not  heard  in  a.  Mat.  12.  19.

51.23.  and  thou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the  a.

59. 14.  for  truth  is  fallen  in  the  a.  and  equity

Jer.  37.  21.  give  him  daily  bread  out  of  bakers’  a.
Lam.  2.  19.  that  faint  for  hunger  in  top  of  every  a.

4.  1.  stones  are  poured  out  in  the  top  of  every  a.
Esek.  16.  24.  made  thee  an  high  place  in  every  a.  31.
Dan.  9.  25.  the  a.  shall  be  built  again  and  the  wall
Acts9.  H.  and  go  into  the  a.  called  Straight

12. 10.  Peter  went  on,  and  passed  througli  one  a.
Lev.  11.8.  their  dead  bodies  shall  lie  in  the  a.  of  city

21. 21.  and  the  a.  of  the  city  was  pure  gold
22.  2.  in  the  midst  of  the  a.  was  the  tree  of  life
STREETS.

Num.  22.  +  39.  and  they  came  to  a  city  of  a.

2  Ham.  1. 20.  publish  it  not  in  the  a.  of  Askelon
1  Kings  20.  34.  thou  shalt  make  a.  in  Damascus
Psal.  18.  42.  1  did  cast  them  out  as  dirt  in  the  a.

55. 11.  deceit  and  guile  depart  not  from  her  a.

144. 13.  sheep  may  bring  forth  ten  thous.  in  our  a.

14.  that  there  be  no  complaining  in  our  a.

Prov.  1.  20.  wisdom  uttereth  her  voice  in  the  a.

5.  16.  and  rivers  of  waters  in  the  a.

7.  12.  now  is  she  without,  now  in  the  a.  and  lieth

22. 13.  there  is  a  lion  without,  1  shall  be  slain  in  a.
26.  13.  the  slothful  man  saith,  a  lion  is  in  the  a.

Eccl.  12.  4.  and  the  doors  shall  be  shut  in  the  a.

5.  and  the  mourners  go  about  the  a.

Cant '.  3.  2.  I  will  go  about  the  city  in  the  a.

Isa.  5.  25.  and  their  carcases  were  torn  in  midst  of  a.

10.  6.  to  tread  them  down  like  the  mire  of  the  a.

15.  .3.  in  their  a.  they  shall  gird  themselves

24.  11.  there  is  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  a.

51.  20.  thy  sons  lie  at  the  head  of  all  the  a.

Jer.  5.  1.  run  ye  to  and  fro  thro’  the  a.  of  Jerusalem

7.  17.  seest  thou  not  what  they  do  in  a.  of  Jerusalem
34.  cause  to  cease  from  the  a.  of  Jerusalem  mirth

9.  21.  death  come,  cut  oft’  young  men  from  the  a.

11.  6.  proclaim  these  words  in  the  a.  of  Jerusalem

13.  according  to  the  number  of  the  a.  of  Jerusalem
14. 16.  people  shall  be  cast  out  in  the  a.  of  Jerusalem

33. 10.  mirth  shall  be  heard  in  the  a.  of  Jerusalem

44. 6.  my  anger  was  kindled  in  the  a.  of  Jerusalem

9.  wickedness  they  have  committed  in  a.  of  Jerus.

21.  the  incense  that  ye  burn  in  a.  of  Jerusalem
48.  38.  there  shall  be  lamentation  in  the  a.  of  Moab
49,26.  her  young  men  shall  fall  in  her  a.  50.  30.
51.  4.  and  they  that  are  thrust  through  in  her  a.

Lam.  2. 11 .  sucklings  swoon  in  the  a.  of  the  city,  12.

21.  the  young  and  the  old  lie  on  ground  in  the  a.

4.  5.  they  thatdid  teed  delicately,  are  desolate  in  a.

8.  her  Nazarites  are  not  known  in  the  a.

14.  they  have  wandered  as  blind  men  in  the  a.

18.  they  hunt  our  steps  that  we  cannot  go  in  our  a.

Esek. 7. 19.  they  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the  a.

11.  6.  ye  have  filled  the  a.  thereof  with  the  slain

26. 11 .  with  the  hoofs  of  his  horses  tread  down  thy  a.

28.23.  1  will  send  pestilence  and  blood  into  her  a.
Amos  5. 16.  wailing  be  in  all  a.  and  say,  alas,  alas !
Mic.  7 ■  10.  shall  be  trodden  down  as  mire  of  the  a.
Nah.  2.  4.  chariots  shall  rage  in  the  a.  shall  justle

3. 10.  were  dashed  in  pieces  at  the  top  of  the  a.
Zeph.  3.  6.  I  made  their  a.  waste  and  none  passeth
Zech.  8.  4.  old  men  and  old  women  shall  dwell  in  a.

5.  the  a.  of  the  city  shall  be  full  ot  boys  and  girls

9.  3.  Tyrus  heaped  up  hue  gold  as  mire  in  the  a.

10.  5.  who  tread  down  their  enemies  in  the  a.

Mat.  6.  2.  do  notsound  a  trumpet  before  thee  in  a.

5.  tor  they  love  to  pray  standing  in  corners  of  a.
Mark  6.  56.  they  laid  the  sick  in  the  a.  Acts  5. 15.
Luke  10. 10.  go  out  into  the  a.  of  the  same,  and  say-

13.  26.  shall  begin  to  say,  thou  hast  taught  in  our  a.

14.  21.  go  out  quickly  into  a.  and  lanes  of  the  city

STRENGTIL

Gen.  4. 12.  ground  shall  not  henceforth  yield  her  a.
Exod.  13.  3.  by  a.  the  Lord  brought  you  out,  14. 16.
Num.  23. 22.  he  hath  the  a.  of  an  unicorn,  24.  8.
Judy.  5. 21.  O  my  soul,  thou  hast  trodden  down  a.

1  Saw.  2.  4.  they  that  stumbled  are  girt  with  a.

9.  wicked  be  silent,  for  by  a.  shall  no  man  pie  vail

10.  he  shall  give  a.  unt-o  his  king,  and  exalt  horn

15.  29.  the  a.  of  Israel  will  not  lie,  nor  repent

28.  22.  and  eat,  that  thou  mayest  have  a.  in  goingon

2  Ham.  22.40.  thou  hast  girded  me  with  a.  to  battle,

hast  subdued  them  under  me,  Psal.  18.  32,  39.

1  Kings  7.  +  21.  he  set  up  pillars  in  the  temple,  he

cal  leu  the  left  pillar,  in  it  is  a.  2  Chron.  3.  f  17.

2  A  inys  2. 1 16.  there  be  with  us  fifty  sons  of  a.
18.20.  1  have  counsel  and  a.  for  war,  Isa.  36.5.

19.  3.  and  there  is  no  a.  to  bring  forth,  Isa.  37.  3.

1  Chron.  16.  27.  a.  and  gladness  are  in  his  place
28.  give  to  Lord  glory  and  a.  Psal.  29. 1.  1  96.  7.

26.  8.  they,  their  sons,  and  brethren,  able  men  for  a.

29. 12.  in  thine  hand  it  is  to  give  a.  unto  all
114.  that  we  should  obtain  a.  to  offer  willingly

2  Chr.  2. 1 6.  hath  obtained  a.  to  build  him  an  house
13.  20.  neither  did  Jeroboam  recover  a.  again


2  Chr.  30.  +  21.  singing  with  instruments  of  t.  to  Lora
Ezra  4.  t  13.  thou  shalt  endamage  the  a.  of  kings
Neh.  4.  10.  a.  of  the  bearers  of  burdens  is  decayed
Job  9.  t  13.  the  helpers  of  a.  do  stoop  under  him
19.  if  1  speak  of  a.  lo,  he  is  strong,  if  of  judgment

12. 13.  with  him  is  wisdom  and  #.  hath  counsel,  16.
21.  and  he  weakcneth  the  a.  of  the  mighty

17-  t  9.  lie  that  hath  clean  hands,  shall  add  a.

18.  13.  it  shall  devour  the  a.  of  his  skin

22.  t  25.  and  thou  shalt  have  silver  of  a.

23.  6.  no,  blithe  would  put  a.  in  me

30.  2.  whereto  might  a.  of  their  hands  profit  me
+  21.  with  a.  of  thy  hand  thou  opposestag.  me

31.  f  39.  if  eaten  the  a.  thereof  without  money
36. 19.  lie  will  not  esteem  all  the  forces  of  a.

39.  19-, hast  thou  given  the  horse  a.?

41. 22.  in  his  neck  remaineth  a.  sorrow  turned  to  j  >y
Psal. .8.  2.  out  of  mouth  of  babes  hast  ordained  a.

20.  6.  with  the  saving  a.  of  his  right  hand

27.  1.  Lord  is  the  a.  of  my  life,  of  whom  be  afraid

28.  8.  and  he  is  the  saving  a.  or  his  anointed

29.  11.  the  Lord  will  give  a.  to  his  people

30.  +7.  thou  hast  settled  a.  for  my  mountain

31 .  t  2.  be  thou  to  me  for  a  rock  of  a.  a  defence
33.  16.  the  mighty  is  not  delivered  by  much  a.

39. 13.  ()  spare  me,  that  1  may  recover  a.  before  I  go
46.  1.  God  is  our  refuge  and  a.  a  help,  81.  1.

60.  7.  Ephraim  is  the  a.  of  mine  head,  108.  8.
t  9.  who  will  bring  me  into  the  city  of  a.  ?

62.  t  11.  I  heard  this  that  a.  belongeth  unto  God
68.  34.  ascribe  ye  a.  unto  God,  his  a.  is  in  clouds
35.  God  of  Israel  is  he  that  giveth  a.  and  power

73.  26.  but  God  is  the  a.  of  my  heart  and  portion

74.  +  15.  thou  driedstup  rivers  of  a.

81.  1.  sing  aloud  unto  God  our  a.  make  a  noise
84.  5.  blessed  is  the  man  whose  a.  is  in  thee
7.  they  go  from  a.  to  a.  every  one  of  them  in  Zion
90.  10.  and  if  by  reason  of  a.  they  be  fourscore
93.  1.  the  Lord  is  clothed  with  majesty  and  a.

95.  4.  the  a.  of  the  hills  is  his  also

96.6.  a.  and  beauty  are  in  his  sanctuary
99.  4.  the  king’s  a.  also  loveth  judgment
138.  3.  thou  strengthenedst  me  with  a.  in  my  soul
140.  7.  O  God  the  Lord,  the  a.  of  my  salvation
Prov.  8.  14.  1  have  a.  ||  10.  29.  way  of  Lord  is  a.

14.  4.  but  much  increase  is  by  the  a.  of  ox

21. 22.  a  wise  man  casteth  down  the  a.  thereof

24.  5.  yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  increased)  a.

31.  17.  she  girdeth  her  loins  with  a.  strengtheneth

25.  a.  and  honour  are  her  clothing,  she  shall  rej.
Eccl.  9.  16.  then  1  said,  wisdom  is  better  than  a.

10.  10.  if  iron  be  blunt,  then  must  put  to  more  a.

17.  princes  eat  for  a.  and  not  for  drunkenness
Isa.  5.  22.  and  men  of  a.  to  mingle  strong  drink

10. 1.3.  by  the  a.  of  my  hand  1  have  done  it
23.  4.  the  sea  hath  spoken,  even  the  a.  of  the  sea

25.  4.  thou  hast  been  a  a.  to  the  poor,  a  a.  to  the
needy  in  his  distress,  a  refuge  from  the  storm

26.  4.  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  a.

28.  6.  tor  a.  to  them  that  turn  the  battle  to  gate

30.  3.  the  a.  ot  Pharaoh  shall  be  your  shame

33.  6.  wisdom  shall  be  stability  and  a.  of  salvation

40.  9.  O  Jerusalem,  lift  up  thy  voice  with  a.

29.  to  them  that  have  no  might,  he  increaseth  a.

42.25.  he  hath  poured  on  him  the  a.  of  battle

44.  12.  lie  worketh  it  with  the  a.  of  his  arms

45.  24.  in  the  Lord  have  1  righteousness  and  a.

51.  9.  awake,  awake,  put  on  a.  O  arm  of  Lord

Jer.  20.  5.  moreover  1  will  deliver  all  a.  of  this  city

51.  5.3.  tho’  she  should  fortify  the  height  of  her  a.
Lam.  1.  6.  they  are  gone  without  a.  before  pursuer"
Ezek.  30.  15.  will  pour  my  fury  on  sin,  a.  of  Egypt

18.  the  pomp  of  her  a.  shall  cease  in  her,  33.°28.
Dan.  2.  37.  God  hath  given  thee  power,  a.  glory

41.  but  there  shall  be  in  it  of  the  a.  of  the  iron
3.  t  20.  he  commanded  the  mighty  of  a.  to  bind

11.  15.  neithershall  there  be  any  a.  to  withstand
17.  to  enter  with  the  a.  of  his  whole  kingdom

31.  they  shall  pollute  the  sanctuary  of  a.

Joel  3.  16.  the  Lord  the  a.  of  the  children  of  Israel
Amos  6. 13.  have  we  not  taken  horns  by  our  own  a  ?
Nah.  1.  t  7.  the  Lord  is  a.  in  thedav  of  trouble
3.9. Ethiopia  and  Egypt  were  her  a.  Put  and  Lubim

11.  thou  also  shalt  seek  a.  because  of  the  enemy
Hag.  2. 22. 1  will  destroy  a.  of  kingdoms  of  heathen
Luke  1.  51.  he  hath  shewed  s.  with  his  arm

Acts  3.  7.  his  feet  and  ancle  bones  received  a.

Horn.  5.  6.  when  yet  without  a.  Christ  died

1  Cor.  15.  56.  sting  is  sin,  the  a.  of  sin  is  the  law

2  Cor  .1.8.  we  were  pressed  out  of  measure,  above  a.
Heb.  11.  11.  Sara  herself  received  s.  toconceive  seed
llev.  3.  8.  for  thou  hast  a  little  a.  hast  kept  my  word

5.  12.  worthy  is  Lamb  to  receive  a.  and  honour

12.  10.  a  voice  saying,  now  is  come  salvation  and  a.
17.  13.  these  shall  give  their  power  and  a.  to  beast

His  STRENGTH.

Exod.  14.  27.  and  the  sea  returned  to  his  s.

Dent.  21.  17.  he  is  the  beginning  of  his  s.

Judff.  8.  21.  rise  thou,  for  as  the  man  is,  so  is  his  s.

16.  5.  entice  him,  see  wherein  his  great  a.  lieth
9 .  his  a.  was  not  know  n  || 19.  hiss,  went  from  him
2  Kings 9.  24.  Jehu  drew  a  bow  with  his  full  a.

1  Chr.  16.  11.  seek  the  Lord  and  his  s.  Psal.  105. 4
Job  18.  7.  the  steps  of  his  s.  shall  be  straitened

12.  h.  a.  shall  be  hunger-bitten,  destruction  ready

13.  even  first-born  of  death  shall  devour  his  s.

21.  23.  one  riieth  in  his  full  a.  being  wholly  at  "ease
37.  6.  he  saith  to  the  great  rain  of  his  s.

39.  11.  wilt  thou  trust  him  because  his s. is  great ?

21.  rejoiceth  in  hiss.  ||  40.  16.  his  s.  is  in  his  loins
Psal.  33.  17-  nor  shall  he  deliver  any  by  his  greatA

52.  7-  this  is  the  man  that  made  not  God  hiss.

59.  9.  because  of  his  s.  will  1  wait  upon  thee

65.6.  who  by  his  s.  setteth  fast  the  mountains
68.  34.  ascribe  a.  to  God,  his  s.  is  in  the  clouds
78.  4.  shewing  to  the  generation  to  come  his  s

61.  delivered  his  s,  into  captivity  and  his  glory
Isa.  31.  +  9.. he  shall  pass  over  to  his  s.  for  fear

44.  12.  he  is  hungry,  and  his  s.  faileth

62.  8.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  arm  of  his  s

63.  1.  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  s.

Dan.  11.  2.  by  his  s.  shall  stir  up  all  aaainst  Grecia

477


S  T  R


ST  It


S  T  R


Hos.  "■  9.  strangers  devoured  hiss,  he  knoweth  not

12.  3.  and  by  his  he  had  power  with  God
liev.  1.  16.  Ins  countenance  was  as  the  sun  in  his  s.
hi  SIREN  GUI.

Gen.  49.  24.  but  his  bow  abode  in  s.  and  the  arms

1  Kings  19.  8.  went  in  the  s.  of  that  meat  forty  days
Job  3.  t  17-  and  there  the  wearied  in  s.  be  at  rest

9.  4.  he  is  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  s.  36.  5.
Psal.  71. 16.  I  will  go  in  the  s.  or  the  Lord  God
103.  20.  bless  Lord,  ye  his  angels  that  excel  in  s.
147.  10.  he  delighteth  not  in  the  s.  of  an  horse
Prov.  24.  t  5.  a  wise  man  is  in  s.  yea  increaseth  st.
Isa.  8.  t  11.  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  in  .?.  or  hand

30.  2.  to  strengthen  themselves  in  s.  of  Pharaoh
Mic.  5.  4.  and  lie  shall  feed  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord
Acts  9.  22.  but  Saul  increased  the  more  in  s.

Mg  STRENGTH.

Gen.  49.  3.  Reuben,  thou  art  the  beginning  of  my  s.
Exod.  15.  2.  Lord  is  my  s.  and  song,  2  Sam.  22.  33.

Psal.  18.  2.  !  28.  7.  1  118. 14.  Isa.  12.  2.
Josh.  14. 11.  as  my  s.  was  then,  even  so  is  my  s.  now
Judg.  16. 17-  if  I  be  shaven,  my  s.  will  go  from  me
Job  6.  11.  what  is  my  s.  that  l  should  hope  r

12.  is  my  s.  of  stones  ?  or  is  my  flesh  of  brass  ?
Psal.  18.  1.  I  will  love  thee,  O  Lord my  s.

19. 14.  O  Ld.  my  s.  22. 19.  ||  22. 15.  my  s.  is  dried  up

31.  4.  pull  me  out  of  the  net,  for  thou  art  my  s.

10.  my  s.  fails  bee.  of  my  iniquity,  38.  10.  I  7).  9.

43. 2.  thou  art  the  God  of  my  s.  why  go  I  mourning P
59.  17.  to  thee,  O  my  s.  will  I  sing ;  God  is  defence

62.  7.  art  rock  of  my  s.  ||  102.  23.  he  weakened  my  s.
139. 1 15.  my  s.  was  not  hid  from  thee,  when  I  was
144. 1.  blessed  be  L.  my  s.  who  teacheth  my  hands

Isa.  27.  5.  let  him  take  hold  of  my  s.  to  make  peace
49.  4.  1  have  spent  my  s.  for  nought,  and  in  vain
5.  yet  1  shall  be  glorious,  my  God  shall  be  my  s.
Jer.  16.  19.  O  Lord  my  s.  ||  Hah.  3.  19.  God  is  my  s.
Lam.  1.  14.  they  are  wreathed,  hemade  my  s.  to  fall

3.  18.  I  said  mys.  and  hope  is  perished  from  Lord
Zech.  12. 5.  shall  be  mys.  in  Lord  of  hosts  their  God

2  Cor.  12.  9.  for  my  s.  is  made  perfect  in  weakness

See  No.

Their  STRENGTH.

Josh.  11.  13.  as  for  cities  that  stood  still  in  their  s.
Psal.  37.  39.  he  is  their  s.  in  the  time  of  trouble

73.  4.  are  no  bands  in  their  death,  their  s.  is  firm
78.  51.  he  smote  the  chief  of  their  s.  105.  36.

89.  17.  for  thou  art  the  glory  of  their  s.

90.  10.  yet  is  their  s.  labour  and  sorrow
Prov.  20.  29.  the  glory  of  young  men  is  their  s.
Isa.  30.  7-  1  have  cried,  their  s.  is  to  sit  still

40.  31.  they  that  wait  on  Lord  shall  renew  their  s.

41.  1.  and  let  the  people  renew  their  s.

63.  6.  I  will  bring  down  their  s.  to  the  earth
Ezek.  24.  25.  when  I  take  from  them  their  s.

Joel.  2.  22.  the  fig-tree  and  vine  do  yield  their  s.

Thy  STRENGTH.

Exod.  15.  13.  thou  hast  guided  them  in  thy  s.

Deut.  33.  25.  and  as  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  s.  be
Judg.  16.  6.  tell  me  wherein  thy  s.  lieth,  15.

2  Chron.  6.  41.  thou  and  ark  of  thy  s.  Psal.  132.  8.
Psal.  21. 1.  the  king  shall  joy  in  thy  s.  O  Lord

13.  be  thou  exalted,  O  Lord,  in  thine  own  .?.

54.  1.  save  me  by  thy  name,  judge  me  by  thy  s.
68.  28.  thy  God  hath  commanded  thy  s.

71.  18.  until  I  have  shewed  thy  s.  to  this  generation

74.  13.  thou  didst  divide  the  sea  by  thy  .?.

77.  14.  thou  hast  declared  thy  s.  among  the  people
80.  2.  stir  up  thy  s.  and  come  and  save  us
86.  16.  O  turn  to  me,  give  thy  s.  to  thy  servant
110.  2.  Lord  shall  send  rod  of  thy  s.  out  of  Zion
Prov.  5.  +  10.  lest  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  s.

24.  10.  if  faint  in  day  of  adversity,  thy  s.  is  small
31.  3.  give  not  thy  s.  unto  women,  nor  thy  ways
Isa.  17. 10.  hast  not  been  mindful  of  rock  of  thy  s.
52.  1.  awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  s.  O  Zion
63.  15.  where  is  thy  zeal  and  thy  s.  the  sounding
Amos  3.  11.  he  shall  bring  dowm  thy  s.  from  thee
Mark  12.  30. 'thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with
all  thy  heart  and  with  all  thy  s.  33.  Luke  10.  27.
Your  STRENGTH.

Lev.  26.  20.  and  your  s.  shall  be  spent  in  vain
Neh.  8.  10.  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  s.

Isa.  23.  14.  howl,  ye  ships,  your  s.  is  laid  waste
30.  15.  in  quietness  and  confidence  will  be  yours.
Ezek.  24.  21.  my  sanctuary,  excellency  of  your  s.

.  STRENGTHEN.

Lev.  25.  +  35.  if  t)iy  brother  be  poor  s.  him
Deut.  3. 28.  but  charge  Joshua,  encourage  and  s.  him
Judg.  16.  28.  s.  me,  1  pray  thee,  only  this  once

19.  t  5.  s.  thine  heart  with  a  morsel  of  bread
1  Kings  20.  22.  go  s.  thys.  mark  and  see  what  dost
Ezra  6.  22.  to  .?.  their  hands  in  the  work  of  house
Neh.  6.  9.  now  therefore,  O  God,  s.  my  hands
Job  16.  5.  but  1  would  s.  you  with  my  mouth
Psal.  20.  2.  Lord  send  thee  help,  s.  thee  out  of  Zion
27.  14.  wait  on  Lord,  he  shall  s.  thy  heart,  31.  24.

41.  3.  Lord  will  s.  him  on  the  bed  of  languishing
68.  28.  s.  that  which  thou  hast  wrought  for  us
89.  21.  "be  established,  mine  am  also"  shall  s.  him
119.  28.  s.  thou  me  according  to  thy  word
Isa.  22.  21.  and  I  will  s.  him  with  thy  girdle
30.  .2.  to  s.  themselves  in  the  strength  of  Pharaoh

33.  23.  they  could  not  well  s.  their  mast

35.  3.  *.  ye  the  weak  hands  I!  41. 10. 1  will  s.  thee
54.  2.  lengthen  thy  cords,  and  s.  thy  stakes
Jer.  4.  f  6.  set  up  the  standard,  s.  stay  not
23.  14.  they  s.  also  the  hands  of  evil'doers
Ezek.  7.  13.  nor  shall  any  s.  himself  in  iniquity
1C.  49.  neither  did  she  s.  hand  of  poor  and  needy
30.  24. 1  will  s.  arms  of  the  king  of  Labylon,  25.

34.  16.  and  I  will  s.  that  which  was  sick

Dan.  11. 1.  even  I  stood  to  confirm  and  to  s.  him
Amos  2.  14.  and  the  strong  shall  not  s.  his  force
Zech.  10.  6.  and  I  will  s.  the  house  of  Judah
12. 1  will  s.  them  in  the  Lord,  they  shall  walk
Duke  22.  32.  when  thou  art  converted,  s.  brethren
1  Pet.  5.  10.  God  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  s.  you
Lev.  3.  2.  be  watchful  and  s.  things  which  remain

STRENGTHENED,  Actively,  Passively.

Gen.  48.  2.  Israel  s.  himself,  and  sat  upon  the  bed
Judg.  3. 12.  the  Lord  s.  Eglon  against  Israel

478


Judg.  7.  11.  and  afterwards  shall  thine  hands  be  s.

9.  t  21.  which  his  hands  to  kill  his  brethren

1  Sam.  23.  16.  Jonathan  went  and  s.  hand  in  God

2  Sam.  2.  7-  therefore  now  let  your  hands  be  s.

1  Chron.  11.  10.  who  .?.  themselves  with  David

2  Chron.  1.  1.  and  Solomon  was  .?.  in  his  kingdom

11.  17.  so  they.?.  the  kingdom  of  Judah

12. 1.  when  Rehob.  had  s.  himself,  he  forsook  law

13.  7.  and  have  s.  themselves  against  Rehoboam
17-  1.  Jehoshaphat  s.  himself  against  Israel

21.  4.  Jehoram  £.  himself  and  slew  all  his  brethren
23.  1.  Jehoiada  .?.  himself  and  took  the  captains
24. 13.  they  set  house  of  God  in  his  state,  and  s.  it

25.  11.  Amaziah  s.  himself,  and  led  forth  people

26.  8.  for  Uzziah  ;?.  himself  exceedingly

28.  20.  came  and  distressed  Ahaz,  but  .?.  him  not

32.  5.  Ilezekiah  s.  himself,  and  built  the  wall
Ezra  1.  6.  all  that  were  about  them  s.  their  hands

7.  28.  1  was  s.  as  hand  of  my  God  was  upon  me
Neh.  2.  18.  they  s.  their  hands  for  this  good  work
Job  4.  3.  and  thou  hast  .?.  the  weak  hands

4.  and  thou  hast  s.  the  feeble  knees
Psal.  52.  7-  and  s.  himself  in  his  wickedness
1-17. 13.  for  he  hath  .?.  the  bars  of  thy  gates
Prov.  7.  +  13.  she  s.  her  face  and  said  to  him

8.  28.  when  he  s.  the  fountains  of  the  deep

Isa.  45.  +  1.  saith  to  Cyrus,  whose  rig.  hand  I  have  s.
Ezek.  13.  22.  ye  have  s.  the  hands  of  the  wicked
34.  4.  the  diseased  have  ye  not  s.  nor  healed  sick
Dan.  10.  18.  one  touched  me,  and  s.  me,  19.

11.  6.  he  that  begat  her  and  s.  her  in  these  times

12.  shall  cast  down  many,  but  he  shall  not  be  s.  by
Hos.  7.  15.  tho’  1  have  bound  and  .?.  their  arms
Acts  9.19.  Saul  was  j.  H  Eph.  3.16.  to  be.?.  with  might
Col.  1.  11.  f.  with  all  might  according  to  his  power
2  Tim.  4.  17.  the  Lord  stood  with  me  and  s.  me

STRENGTH  ENEDST.

Psal.  138.  3.  and  s.  me  with  strength  in  my  soul
STRENGTHENETH.

Job  15.  25.  he  s.  himself  against  the  Almighty
Psal.  104. 15.  and  bread  which  s.  man’s  heart
Prov.  24.  f  5.  yea,  a  man  of  knowledge  s.  might
31.  17.  she  girdeth  her  loins,  and  s.  her  arms
Eccl.  7- 19.  wisdom  s.  the  wise  more  than  ten  men
Isa.  44. 14.  the  cypress  and  oak  he  s.  for  himself
Amos  5.  9.  that  s.  the  spoiled  against  the  strong
Phil.  4. 13. 1  can  do  all  things  thro’  Christ  who  s.  me
STRENGTHENING.

Luke  22.  43.  there  appeared  an  angel  s.  him
Acts  18.  23.  Paul  went  to  Galatia,  s.  all  the  disciples
STRETCH.

Exod.  7. 19.  s.  out  thy  hand  upon  waters  of  Eg3'pt
8. 5.  s. forth  thine  hand  over  streams  and  rivers
16.  s.  out  thy  rod  and  smite  dust  of  land

25.  20.  cherub,  shall  s.  forth  their  wings  on  high
Josh.  8.  18.  s.  out  spear  that  is  in  thy  hand  to  Ai

2  Kings  21.13. 1  will  s.  over  Jerus.  line  of  Samaria.

1  Chron.  21.  t  10.  I  s.  out  three  things,  choose  one
Job  11.  13.  if  thou  s.  out  thine  hands  toward  him

39.  26.  doth  the  hawk  s.  her  wings  toward  south  ?
Psal.  68.  31.  shall  soon  s.  out  her  hands  to  God
Isa.  28.  20.  shorter  than  that  a  man  can  i.  himself
34.  11.  he  shall  s.  upon  it  the  line  of  confusion

54. 2.  s.  forth  the  curtains  of  thy  habitat,  let  them
Jer.  10.  20.  there  is  none  to  s.  forth  my  tent
Ezek.  30.  25.  king  of  Babvl.  shall  .?.  out  my  sword
Amos  6.  4.  and  s.  themselves  upon  their  couches
Mat.  12.  13.  Jesus  said  to  man,  s.  forth  thy  hand
John  21 . 18.  thou  shalt  s.  forth  thy  hands

2  Cor.  10.  14.  for  we  s.  not  ourselves  beyond  meas.

STRETCHED,  Actively ,  Passively .

Gen.  22. 10.  Abraham  s.  forth  hand  to  slay  his  son
48.  14.  Israel  .?.  out  right  hand,  laid  it  on  Ephraim
Exod.  8.  6.  Aaron  s.  out  of  his  hand  over  waters,  17.

9.  23.  Moses  s.  forth  his  rod  toward  heaven,  10.  13.

10.  22.  Moses  s.  forth  hand  to  heaven,  14.  21,  27.
Josh.  8.  18.  and  Joshua  s.  out  the  spear,  26.

19.  they  ran  as  soon  as  he  had  s.  out  his  hand
2  Sam.  6.  t  17.  set  ark  in  tabernacle  David  had  s.

1  Kings  6.  27-  cherubims  s.  forth  their  wings
17-  21.  he  s.  himself  on  child,  2  Kings  4.  34,  35.

1  Chron.  21.  16.  angel  with  a  sword  s.  over

Jerusalem

Job  38.  5.  who  hath  s.  the  line  upon  it  ?

Psal.  44.  20.  or  s.  our  hands  to  a  strange  god
88.  9.  1  have  s.  out  my  hands  unto  thee
136.  6.  to  him  that  s.  out  the  earth  above  waters
Prov.  1.  24.  because  I  have  s.  out  my  hand
Isa.  3. 16.  because  they  walk  with  s.  forth  necks

5.  25.  he  hath  s.  forth  his  hand  against  them  ;
his  hand  is.?,  out  still,  9. 12,  17,  21.  |  10.  4.

14.  26.  this  is  the  hand  that  is  s.  out  on  all  nations

27.  hand  is  s.  out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back  t

16.  8.  her  branches  are  s.  out,  are  gone  over  sea
23.  11.  he  f.  out  his  handover  sea,  shook  kingdom

42.  5.  that  s.  out  the  heavens,  45.  12.  |  51. 13.

Jer.  6.  4.  the  shadows  of  the  evening  are  s.  out

10.  12.  he  s.  out  the  heavens  by  his  discretion
51.  15.  he  s.  out  heaven  by  his  understanding
Lam.  2.  8.  the  Lord  hath  s.  out  a  line
Ezek.  1. 11.  and  their  wings  were  s.  upward
10. 7.  one  cherub  .?.  forth  his  hand  to  the  fire
16.  27.  behold,  I  have  s.  out  my  hand  over  thee
Dos.  7.  5.  he  s.  out  his  hand  with  scorners
Amos  6.  7.  that  s.  themselves  shall  be  removed
Zech.  1.  16.  a  line  shall  be  s.  forth  upon  Jerusalem
Mat.  12. 13.  and  he  s.  forth  his  hand,  Mark  3.  5.
Luke  22.  53.  ye  s.  forth  no  hands  against  me
Acts  12.  1.  Herod  s.  his  hands  to  vex  the  church
Rom.  10.  21.  all  day  long  I  have  s.  forth  my  hands
See  Arm.

STRETCH  EDST.

Exod.  15. 12.  thou  s.  out  thy  right  hand,  earth  swal.
STRETCH  EST.

Psal.  104.  2.  who  s.  out  the  heavens  like  a  curtain
STRETCH ETH.

Job  15.  25.  for  he  s.  out  his  hand  against  God

26.  7.  he  s.  out  the  north  over  the  empty  place
Prov.  31.  20.  she  s.  out  her  hand  to  the  poor
Isa.  40.  22.  that  s.  out  the  heavens  as  a  curtain

44.  13.  the  carpenter  s.  out  his  rule,  market!)

24.  that  s.  forth  the  heavens  alone,  Zech.  12. 1.


STRETCHING.

Isa.  8.  8.  s.  ot  his  wings  shall  fill  thy  land,  O  Im.
Acts  4.  30.  by  s.  forth  thy  hand  to  heal
STRIFE.

Gen.  13.7.  there  was  a  s.  between  the  herdmen
8.  Abram  said,  let  there  be  no  f.  between  me
Exod.  17-  t  7.  he  called  the  name  of  the  placer.
Num.  20.  +  13.  this  is  the  water  of  s.  because  Israel

27.  14.  ye  rebelled  in  the  •?.  of  the  congregation
Deut.  l.  12.  how  can  1  myself  alone  bear  your  s.f
Judg.  12.2.  I  and  people  were  at  great  s.  with  Amm.

2  Sam.  19.9.  all  the  people  were  at  s.  thro’  Israel
Psal.  31.  20.  shalt  keep  them  from  r.of  tongues
55.  9.  for  I  have  seen  violence  and  s.  in  the  city
80.  6.  thou  makest  us  a  s.  to  our  neighbours

106.  32.  they  angered  him  at  the  waters  of  s.

Prov.  15.  18.  a  wrathful  man  stirreth  up  s.  29.  22,
but  he  that  is  slow  to  anger  apneaseth  s.

16.  28.  a  froward  man  soweth  s.  and  a  whisperer

17.  1.  than  a  house  full  of  sacrifices,  with  s.

14.  beginning  of  s.  is  as  when  one  letteth  out

19.  he  loveth  transgression,  that  loveth  s.

20.  3.  it  is  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from  r
22.  10.  cast  out  the  scorner,  and  s.  shall  cease
26. 17.  he  that  meddleth  with  s.  belong,  not  to  him

20.  where  there  is  no  tale-bearer,  the  s.  ceaseth

21.  so  is  a  contentious  man  to  kindle  s.

28.  25.  he  that  is  of  a  proud  heart  stirreth  up  s .

30.  33.  the  forcing  of  wrath  bringeth  forth  s .

Isa.  41.  t  11.  the  men  of  thy  s.  shall  perish
58.  4.  behold,  ye  fast  for  s.  and  debate,  to  smite
Jer.  15.  10.  that  thou  hast  born  me  a  man  of  s.

Ezek.  47.  19.  even  to  the  waters  of  s.  48.  28.

Hab.  1.  3.  there  are  that  raise  up  s.  and  contention
Luke  22.  24.  there  was  a  s.  among  the  disciples
Rom.  13.  13.  walk  honestly,  not  ins.  and  envying
1  Cor.  3.  3.  there  is  among  you  s.  and  envying
Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  s.  wrath
Phil.  1.15.  some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  s.

2.  3.  let  nothing  be  done  thro’ s.  or  vain  glory

1  Tim.  6.  4.  whereof  cometh  envy,  s.  railings
Ileb.  6.  16.  and  an  oath  is  to  them  an  end  of  all  s.
Jam.  3.  14.  but  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  s.

16.  where  s.  is,  there  is  confusion  and  evil  work

STRIFES.  .  »

Prov.  10. 12.  hatred  stirreth  up  s.  love  covers  sins

2  Cor.  12.  20.  lest  there  be  envyings,  wraths,  s.

1  Tim.  6.  4.  doting  about  questions  and  s.  of  words

2  Tim.  2.  23.  knowing  that  they  do  gender  s.

STRIKE.

Exod.  12.  7-  and  s.  blood  on  the  two  side-posts,  22.
Deut.  21.  4.  and  shall  s.  off  the  heifer’s  neck  there
2  Kings  5.  11.  will  come  and  s.  his  hand  over  the

place

Job  17.  3.  who  is  he  that  will  s.  hands  with  me  ?

20.  24.  and  the  bow  of  steel  shall  .?.  him  through
Psal.  110.  5.  shall  s.  thro’  kings  in  day  of  his  wrath
Prov.  7.  23.  till  a  dart  s.  through  his  liver

11.  t  15.  that  hateth  those  that.?,  hands  is  sure
17.  26.  it  is  not  good  to  s.  princes  for  equity

22.  26.  be  not  thou  one  of  them  that  s.  hands
Jer.  40.  t  14.  hath  sent  Ishmael  to  .?.  thee  in  soui
Ezek.  39.  t2.  I  will  s.  thee  with  six  plagues
Hos.  14.  +5.  he  shall  s.  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon
Dab.  3.  14.  thou  didst  s.  through  with  his  staves
Mark  14.  65.  did  s.  Jesus  with  palms  of  their  hands

STRICKEN,  Actively,  Passively.

Gen.  18. 1 1.  Abram  and  Sarah  well  s.  in  age.  24. 1.
Josh.  13.  1.  now  Joshua  was  s.  in  years,  23.  1,  2.
Judg.  5.  26.  when  Jael  had  s.  through  his  temples
1  Kings  1.  1.  king  David  was  old  and.?,  in  years
Prov.  6. 1.  if  thou  hast  s.  thy  hand  with  a  stranger

23.  35.  they  have  .?.  me,  and  I  was  not  sick

Isa.  1.5.  why  should  ye  be  s.  any  more  Prevolt  more
16. 7.  surely  they  are  s.  H  53.  4.  did  esteem  him  s.
53.  8.  for  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  he  s.
Jer.  5.  3.  thou  hast.?,  them,  they  have  not  grieved
Lam.  4.  9..?.  through  for  want  of  the  fruits  of  field
Luke  1. 7.  Zach.  and  Elisabeth  well  s.  in  years,  18.
STRIKER.

1  Tim.  3. 3.  a  bishop  must  be  sober,  no  s.  Tit.  1.7.
STR1KETH.

Job  34.  26.  he  s.  them  as  wicked  men  in  sight
Prov.  17.  18.  a  man  void  of  understanding  s.  hands
Rev.  9. 5.  as  torment  of  scorpion,  when  he  .?.  a  man
STRING.

Psal.  11.  2.  they  make  ready  their  arrow  upon  .?.
Mark 7.  35.  s.  of  his  tongue  was  loosed,  he  spake
STRINGS.

Psal.  21. 12.  shalt  make  ready  their  arrows  upon.?.
92.  3.  sing  to  him  with  the  psaltery,  with  an  in
strument  of  ten  s.  33.  2.  1 144.  9.
STRINGED.

1  Sam.  18.  I  fi.  women  came  with  three  s.  instrum.
Ps.  150.  4.  praise  him  with  s.  instruments  and  org.
Isa.  38.  20.  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  s.  instruments
Hab.  3.  19.  to  chief  singer  on  my  s.  instruments

STRIPE.

Exod.  21.25.  shalt  give  wound  for  wound,  s.  for  s.
STRIPES.

See  the  Signification  of  Scourge.

Deut.  25.  3.  forty  s.  he  may  give  him,  and  not  ex¬
ceed  ;  if  he  beat  him  above  these  with  many  s.

2  Sam.  7.  14.  and  with  s.  of  the  children  of  men
Psal.  89.32.  then  will  l  visit  their  iniquity  with  s.
Prov.  if.  10.  than  an  hundred  i.  into  a  fool

19.  29.  and  s.  are  prepared  for  the  back  of  fools

20.  30.  so  do  s.  the  inward  parts  of  the  belly
Isa.  53.  5.  with  his  s.  we  are  healed,  1  Pet.  2.  24.
Luke  12.  47.  he  who  knew,  be  beaten  with  many  s.

48.  he  who  knew  not  shall  be  beaten  with  few  s.
Acts  16.  23.  when  they  had  laid  many  s.  upon  them

33.  took  them  same  hour,  and  washed  their  s.

2  Cor.  6.  5.  in  s.  in  imprisonments,  in  tumults

11.  23.  in  s.  above  measure,  in  prisons,  in  deaths

24.  of  Jews  five  times  received  1  forty  s.  save  one
STRIP

Num.  20. 26.  and  .?.  Aaron  of  his  garments
1  Sam.  31.  8.  Philist.  came  to .?  .  slain,  1  Chr.  10.  8.
Isa.  32. 11.  s.  ye,  make  ye  bare,  gird  sackcl.  on  loins
Ezek.  16.  39.  they  shall  s.  the  ?  ot  thy  clothes,  23. 26.
Hos .  2.  3.  lest  1  s.  her  naked ,  and  set  her  as  in  day


ST  R


S  T  R


ST  U


STRIPPED.

Gen.  37.  23.  that  they  .v.  Joseph  out  of  his  coat
Exod.  33.6.  Israel  *.  themselves  of  their  ornaments
Ntan. 20.  28.  Moses  #.  Aaron  of  his  garments

1  Sam.  18.  4.  Jonathan#.  himself  of  the  robe  on  him
19.  24.  Saul  #.  off  his  clothes  also,  anti  prophesied
31.  9.  the  Philistines  s.  Saul  of  his  armour

2  C '/iron.  CO.  25.  precious  jewels  which  they  #.  off
Job  19.  9.  lies',  me  of  my  glory, and  taken  crown

22.  6.  for  thou  hasts.  naked  of  their  clothing
Mic.  1.8.  therefore  I  will  go  s.  and  naked
Mat.  27.  28.  they  s.  Jesus,  put  on  him  scarlet  robe
Luke  10.  30.  thieves,  which  s.  him  of  his  raiment
S  I  R1PEI  NG.

1  Sam.  17. 56.  king  said,  inquire  whose  son  the  s.  is

STRIVE.

Gen.  6.  3.  my  spirit  shall  not  always  s.  with  man
26.  20.  the  herdtnen  of  Gerar  did  #.  with  Isaac’s
Exod.  21.  18.  if  men  s.  together,  and  one  smite  an.
22.  if  man  s.  and  hurt  a  woman  with  child,  he
shall  be  surely  punished,  Deut.  25. 11.
Dent.  33.  8.  with  whom  thou  didst  s.  at  Meribah
Judy.  11.  25.  did  he  ever  s.  ag.  Isr.  or  fight  ag.  them
Job  33.  13.  why  dost  thou  s.  against  him  ?

Ps.  35.  1.  plead  my  cause  with  them  thats.  with  me
Prov.  3.  30.  s.  not  with  a  man  without  cause

25.  8.  go  not  forth  hastily  to  s.  lest  thou  know  not
Isa.  41.  11.  and  they  that  s.  with  thee  shall  perish
45.  9.  let  the  potsherd  #.  with  potsherds  of  earth

Jios.  4.  4.  let  no  man  s.  thy  people  are  as  they  that  s.
Mat.  12. 19.  he  shall  not  s.  nor  shall  any  hear  voice
Luke  13.  24.  s.  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate
Rom.  15.  30.  s.  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  G.  for  me

2  Tim.  2.  5.  and  if  a  man  also  s.  for  masteries

14.  that  they  s.  not  about  words  to  no  profit

24.  and  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  s.

STRIVED.

Rom.  15.  20.  so  have  I  s.  to  preach  the  gospel
STRIVEN.

Jer.  50.  24.  because  thou  hast #.  against  the  Lord
STRIVETH.  •

Isa.  45.  9.  woe  to  him  that  s.  with  his  Maker

1  Cor.  9.  25.  ev.  man  that  s.  for  mastery  is  temperate

STRIVING.

P/iil.l.  27.  with  one  mind  s.  for  faith  of  the  gospel
Col.  1. 29.  s.  accord,  to  his  working,  which  worketh

4.  t  12.  always  #.  fervently  for  you  in  pravers
Heb.  12.  4.  ye  have  not  resisted  to  blood,  s.  ag.  sin
STRIVINGS.

2  Sam.  22.  44.  hast  delivered  me  from  the  s.  of  the
people,  and  made  head  ofheathen,  Psal.  18.  43.

Tit.  3.  9.  avoid  contentions  and  s.  about  thelaw
.  STROKE.

Deut.  17.  8.  if  a  matter  too  hard  between  s.  and  s.
19.  5.  and  his  hand  fetcheth  a  s.  with  the  axe  to  cut
21.  5.  by  their  word  shall  every  #.  be  tried
2  Sam.  20.  t  10.  Joab  doubled  not  his  .r.  Amasadied
2  Chr .  21. 1 14.  with  a  great  s.  will  the  Lord  smite
Esth.  9.  5.  Jews  smote  their  enemies  witli  the  s.

Job  23.  2.  my  s.  is  heavier  than  my  groaning

36.  18.  beware  lest  he  take  thee  away  with  his  s.
Psal.  38.  til.  my  friends  stand  aloof  from  my  s.

39-  10.  remove  thy  #.  away  from  me
-fa.  14. 6.  he  smote  the  people  with  a  continual  s.

.  30.  26.  the  Lord  healeth  the  f.  of  their  wound
53.  t  8.  for  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land,  for  the
transgression  of  my  people  was  the  s.  upon  him
Ezek.  24.  16.  I  take  desire  of  thine  eyes  with  a  s .
STROKES.

Prov.  18.6.  a  fool’s  mouth  calleth  for  s.

STRONG.

Gen.  49.  14.  Issachar  is  a  s.  ass,  couching  down
24.  and  the  arms  of  his  hands  were  made  s.

Exod.  6.  1.  with  a  f.  hand  shall  letthem  go,  13.  9.

10.  19.  the  Lord  turned  a  hiighty  s.  west  wind
14.  21.  L.  caused  sea  to  go  back  by  a  s.  east  wind

Num.  20.  20.  Edom  came  against  him  with  a  f.  hand

21.  24.  border  of  the  children  of  Ammon  was  s.
24.  21.  Balaam  said,  s.  is  thy  dwelling-place
28.  7.  the  f.  wine  to  be  poured  out  to  the  Lord

Deut.  2.  36.  there  was  not  one  city  toof.  for  us
22. 1 25.  if  man  take  #.  hold  other,  and  lie  with  her
28.  50.  a  nation  f.  of  face,  which  shall  not  regard
Josh.  14.  11.  as  yet  I  am  as  s.  this  day ,  as  I  was  day

17.  13.  when  Israel  were  waxen  s.  Judy.  1.  28.

23.  9.  Lord  hath  driven  out  great  nations  and  s.
Judy.  6.  f2.  the  hand  of  Midian  was  s.  ag.  Israel

t  26.  build  an  altar  on  the  top  of  this  s.  place

9.  51.  but  there  was  a  f.  tower  within  the  city

14.  14.  out  of  the  s.  came  forth  sweetness

18.  26.  Micah  saw  that  they  were  too  s.  for  him

1  Sam.  14.52.  when  Saul  saw  any  f.  man,  he  took  him

2  Sam.  2.  t  16.  that  place  was  called  field  of  f.  men
3.  6.  Abner  made  himself#,  for  the  house  of  Saul

10. 11.  if  the  Syrians  be  too  #.  for  me,  if  Ammon

be  too  s.  for  thee,  1  will  help,  1  Chron.  19.  12.

11.  25.  make  thy  battle  more  #.  against  the  city

15.  12.  the  conspiracy  was  #.  the  people  increased

22.  18.  he  deliv.  me  from  my  s. enemy,  that  hated
me,  tor  they  were  too  s.  for  me,  Tsai.  18.  17.

1  Kings  2.  t  8.  Shimei,  who  cursed  me  with  #.  curse

8.  42.  tor  they  shall  hear  of  thy  name  and  #.  hand

19.  11.  a  great  and  #.  wind  rent  the  mountains

2  Chron.  11.  12.  he  made  the  cities  exceeding  #.

17-  so  they  made  Rehoboam  s.  three  years

16.  9.  eyes  run  to  shew  himself  #.  in  behalf  of  them

26.  16.  when  Uzziah  was  s.  he  was  lifted  up
Neh.  1.  10.  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy  #.  hand

9.  25.  and  they  took  #.  cities  and  a  fat  land
Job  8.  2.  words  of  thy  mouth  be  like  a  #.  wind

9.  19.  if  I  speak  of  strength,  lo,  he  is  s.

30.  21.  with  thy  #.  hand  thou  opposest  thyself

37.  18.  hast  thou  spread  out  the  sky  that  is  s.

40.  18.  bones  are  as  #.  pieces  of  brass,  like  bars

Psal.  19.  5.  and  rejoiceth  as  a  s.  man  to  run  a  race

24.  8.  Lord  #.  and  mighty,  Lord  mighty  in  battle

30.  7-  thou  hast  made  my  mountain  to  stand  #.

31.  2.  be  thou  my  #.  rock,  and  house  to  save  me
21.  he  hath  shewed  me  his  kindness  in  a  #.  city'

35.  10.  the  poor  from  him  that  is  too#,  for  him
t  18.  1  will  praise  thee  among  #.  people
38. 19-  mine  enemies  are  lively  and  they'  are  #.


Psal.  60.  9.  who  will  bring  me  into  #.  city  l  108. 10.
61.  3.  thou  hast  been  a  #.  tower  from  the  enemy
71.  .3.  be  my  jr.  habitation  11 7.  thou  artmy  #.  refuge
80.  15.  the  branch  thou  madest  #.  for  thyself,  17.
89.  8.  O  Lord,  who  is  a  #.  I  ord  like  unto  thee

13.  #.  is  thy  hand,  and  high  is  thy  right  hand
136.  12.  with  a  #.  hand  and  a  stretched  out  arm

thou  brought  them  out,  Jer.  32.  21.
Prov.  7.  26.  yea,  many  #.  men  have  been  slain  by  her

10.  15.  rich  man’s  wealth  is  his#,  city,  18.  11.

11.  16.  woman  retains  honour,  and  #.  men  retain
14.  26.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a#,  tower

18.  10.  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  #.  tower
19-  a  brother  is  harder  to  be  won  than  a  #.  city

21.  14.  a  reward  in  the  bosom  pacifieth  #.  wrath

24.  5.  wise  man  is  #.  ||  30. 25.  ants  are  a  people  not  #.
Eccl.  9.  11.  1  saw  that  the  battle  is  not  to  the  #.

12.  3.  when  the  #.  men  shall  bow  themselves
Cant.  8.  6.  set  me  as  a  seal,  for  love  is  #.  as  death
Isa.  1.  31.  the  j.  shall  be  as'  tow,  maker  as  a  spark
8.  7.  Lord  bringeth  on  them  waters,#,  and  many

11.  the  Lord  spake  thus  to  me  with  a  #.  hand

17.  9.  his  #.  cities  shall  be  as  a  forsaken  bough

25.  3.  therefore  shall  the  #.  people  glorify  thee

26.  1.  shall  this  song  be  sung,  we  have  a  #.  city

27.  1.  with  his  #.  sword  shall  punish  Leviathan

28.  2.  behold  the  Lord  hath  a  mighty  and#,  one
22.  be  ye  not  mockers,  lest  your  bands  be  made  #.

31.  1.  that  trust  in  horsemen,  because  they  are  #.

40.  10.  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  a  #.  hand

26.  for  that  he  is  #.  in  power,  not  one  faileth
41.21.  bring  forth  vour#.  reasons, saith  Kingof  Jac.
53.  12.  and  he  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the  #.

56. 1 11.  yea  they  are  #.  of  appetite
60.  22.  a  small  one  shall  become  a#,  nation
Jer.  5.  +  6.  because  their  backslidings  are  #.

21.  5. 1  will  fight  against  you  with  a#,  arm

48.  14.  how  say  ye,  we  are  mighty,  s.  men  for  war
17.  all  about  him  say,  how  is  the  #.  staff  broken  !

49.  19.  he  shall  come  against  habitation  of  the  #.

50.  34.  their  Redeemer  is  #.  the  Lord  of  hosts

44.  lie  shall  come  up  unto  the  habitation  of  the  #.

51. 12.  make  the  watch  #.  set  up  the  watchmen
Ezek.  3.  8.  I  have  made  thy  face  #.  thy  forehead  s.

14.  but  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was#,  upon  me
7-  24.  I  will  make  the  pomp  of  the  #.  to  cease
19. 11.  had  #.  rods  for  sceptres  of  them  that  rule

12.  her  #.  rods  were  broken  and  withered

14.  so  she  hath  no  #.  rod  to  be  a  sceptre  to  rule
26.  11.  thy  #.  garrisons  shall  go  down  to  ground
17.  the  renowned  city  which  wast#.  in  the  sea
30.  21.  to  bind  it,  to  make  it  #.  to  hold  the  sword

22.  and  1  will  break  the  #.  arms  ofPharaoh

32.  21.  #.  shall  speak  to  him  out  of  midst  of  hell
34.  16.  but  I  will  destroy  the  fat  and  the#.

Uaw._4._ll.  tlie  tree  grew  and  was  #.  20.

22.  it  is  thou,  O  king,  art  grown  and  become#.

7.  7.  the  fourth  beast  terrible,  #.  exceedingly
8. 8.  when  he  was  #.  the  great  horn  was  broken
11.  23.  he  shall  become  #.  with  a  small  people

Joel  1.  6.  for  nation  is  come  up  on  my  land,  #.2. 2.

2.  5.  as  the  noise  of  a  #.  people  set  in  battle-array

11.  for  he  is#,  that  executetli  his  word

3.  10.  let  the  weak  say,  I  am  #.

Amos  2.  9.  the  Amorite  was  #.  as  the  oaks
14.  and  the  #_.  shall  not  strengthen  his  force
+  16.  he  that  is  #.  of  heart  shall  flee  away

5.  9.  that  strengthened)  the  spoiled  ag.  the#.

Mic.  4.  3.  he  shall  rebuke  #.  nations  afar  off

7-  I  will  make  her  that  was  cast  far  off,  #.  nations

6.  2.  hear,  ye  #.  foundations  of  the  earth
Nah.".  1.  make  thy  loins  #.  fortify  thy  power
Zech. 6.  t  3.  in  fourth  chariot grisled  and  #.  horses

8.  22.  #.  nations  shall  come  to  seek  the  Lord
Mat.  12.  29.  how  can  one  enter  into  a  #.  man’s  house

except  he  first  bind  the  #.  man  ?  Mark  3.  27;

14.  t  30.  but  when  he  saw  wind  #.  he  was  afraid
Luke  1.  80.  the  child  grew  and  waxed  #.2.40.

11.  21.  when  a  #.  man  armed  keepeth  his  palace
Acts  3.  16.  thro’  faith  hath  made  this  man  #.

Rom.  4.  20.  was  #.  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God

15.  1.  we  that  are#,  ought  to  bear  infirm,  of  weak

1  Cor.  4.  10.  we  are  weak,  but  ye  are  #.

2  Cor.  12.  10.  for  when  1  am  weak,  then  am  I  #.

13.  9.  we  are  glad  when  we  are  weak,  and  ye  are  s.
2  Tliess.  2.  11.  God  shall  send  them  #.  delusion
Heb.b.  7-  when  had  offered  up  prayers  with  #. crying

12.  such  as  have  need  of  milk,  and  not  of  #.  meat

14.  #.  meat  belongs  to  them  that  are  of  full  age

6.  18.  we  might  have  a  #.  consolat.  who  have  fled
11.  34.  who  out  of  weakness  were  made  #.

1  John  2.  14.  ye  are  #.  word  of  God  abideth  in  you
Rev.  5.2.  I  saw  a  #,  angel  proclaim  with  loud  voice
18.2.  he  cried  with  a  #.  voice,  Babylon  is  fallen
8.  for  s.  is  the  Lord  God  who  judgeth  her
Be  STRONG.

Num.  13.  18.  see  whether  they  bes.  or  weak
28.  the  people  be  #.  that  dwell  in  the  land
Deut.  11.8.  keep  commandments,  that  ye  may  be  s.
12.123.  only  be  s.  that  thou  eat  not  the  blood
Josh.  17. 18.  drive  out  Canaanites,  though  they  be  s.

1  Sam.  4.  9.  bes.  and  quit  yourselves  like  men

2  Sam.  16.  21.  the  hands  of  all  with  thee  shall  be  s.
1  Kings  2.  2.  be  thou  #.  and  shew  thyself  a  man

1  Chron.  19.  12.  if  the  Syrians  be  too  #.  for  me,  if

Ammon  be  too  #.  for  thee  I  will  help  thee
28.  t  7.  if  he  be  s.  to  do  my  commandments

10.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  thee,  be  #.  and  do  it

2  Chron.  15.  7.  be  s.  your  work  shall  be  rewarded

25.  8.  if  thou  wilt  go,  do  it,  be  s.  for  the  battle
Ezra  9.  12.  that  ye  may  be  #.  and  eat  good  of  land
Psal.  144.  14.  that  our  oxen  may  be  s.  to  labour
Isa.  35.  4.  say  to  them  of  a  fearful  heart,  be  s.

Ezek.  22.  14.  can  thy  hands  be  s.  in  the  days  I  deal
Dan.  2.  40.  the  fourth  kingdom  shall  be  s.  as  iron

42.  the  kingdom  shall  be  partly  #.  partly  broken

10.  19.  he  said,  peace  be  to  thee,  be  #.  yea,  be  s.

11.  5.  the  king  of  the  south  shall  be  s.  and  he  shall

be  s.  above  him  and  have  dominion

32.  but  people  that  know  their  God  shall  be  #.
Hag.".  4.  be  s.  O  Zerubbabel,  be  s.  O  Joshua,  £e#.
all  ye  people  of  land,  saith  the  Lord,  and  work


Zech.  8. 9.  let  hands  be  s.  ye  that  hear  in  these  days

13.  fear  not  but  let  your  hands  be s.  [bes.

1  Cor.  16. 13.  stand  fast  in  faith,  quit  you  like  men,
Eph.  6.  10.  finally,  brethren,  bes.  in  the  Lord

2  Tim.  2. 1.  my  son,  bes.  in  grace  that  is  in  Christ

See  Courage,  Drink.

STRONG  hold  and  holds.

Num.  13. 19.  whether  in  tents  or  in  #.  holds
Judg.  6.  2.  Israel  made  them  caves  and  #.  holds

1  Sam.  23.  14.  David  abode  in  wilderness  in  #.  holds
19.  doth  not  Dav.  hide  himself  with  us  in  #.  holds  l

29.  and  David  dwelt  in  #.  holds  at  En-gedi

2  Sam.  5.  7-  David  took  the  #.  hold  of  Zion
24.  7.  and  came  to  the  #.  hold  of  Tyre

2  Kings  8. 12.  their  #.  holds  wilt  thou  set  on  fire
2  Chron.  11.11.  Rehoboam  fortified  the  #.  holds
Psal.  89.  40.  thou  hast  brought  his  #.  holds  to  ruin
Isa.  23. 11.  to  destroy  the  #.  holds  thereof
31.  9.  and  he  shall  pass  over  to  his#,  holds  for  fear
Jer.  48. 18.  the  spoiler  shall  destroy  thy  #.  holds

41.  Kerioth  is  taken,  the  s.  holds  are  surprised
Lam.  2.  2.  he  hath  thrown  down  #.  holds  of  J  udah

5.  the  Lord  hath  destroyed  his  #.  holds
Dan.  11. 24.  forecast  his  devices  against  the  s.  holds
39.  thus  shall  he  do  in  tlie  most  #.  holds
Mic.  4. 8.  the  #.  hold  of  the  daughter  of  Zion
Nah.  1.7.  Lord  is  a  #.  hold  in  the  day  of  Rouble

3. 12.  all  thy  s.  holds  shall  be  like  fig-trees

14.  draw  thee  waters  for  siege,  fortify  thy  #.  hold
Hab.  1.  10.  they  shall  deride  every  #.  hold
Zech.  9.  3.  and  Tyrus  did  build  herself  a  s.  hold

12.  turn  ye  to  the  #.  hold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope
2  Cor.  10.  4.  but  mighty  to  pulling  down  of  #.  holds
STRONG  ones.

Psal.  10.  10.  that  the  poor  may  fall  by  his  s.  ones
Jer.  8.  16.  at  sound  of  the  neighing  of  his  #.  ones
STRONGER.

Gen.  25.  23.  one  people  shall  be  #.  than  the  other

30.  41.  whensoever  the  #.  catfle  did  conceive

42.  so  the  feebler  were  Laban’s,  and  #.  Jacob’s
Num.  13.  31.  we  be  not  able,  they  are  #.  than  we
Judg.  14.  18.  the  men  said,  what  is  s.  than  a  lion  ?

2  Sam.  1.  23.  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  #.  than  lions

3.  1.  but  David  waxed  #.  and  #.  and  Saul  weaker

13. 14.  but  Amnon  being  #.  than  she,  forced  her

1  Kitty s  20. 23.  their  gods  are  gods  of  hills,  therefore
s.  surely  we  shall  be  #.  than  they,  25.
Job  17.  9.  he  that  hath  clean  hands  shall  be  #.  and  #.
Psal.  105.  24.  he  made  them  #.  than  their  enemies
142.  6.  deliver  me,  for  they  are  #.  than  1
Jer.  20.  7.  thou  art  #.  than  l,  and  hast  prevailed

31.  11.  ransomed  from  him  that  was  #.  than  he
Luke  11.  22.  when  a#,  than  he  shall  come  upon  him
1  Cor.  1.25.  the  weakness  of  God  is  #.  than  men

10. 22.  do  we  provoke  Lord  ?  are  we  #.  than  he  f
.  STRONGEST.

Prov.  30.  30.  a  lion  which  is  #.  among  beasts
STRONGLY.

Judg.  8.  +  1.  Ephraimites  did  chide  Gideon  #.

1  Chron.  11. + 10.  these  men  held  #.  with  David
Ezra  6.  3.  let  the  foundation  thereof  be  s.  laid

STROVE.

Gen.  26. 20.  called  Ezek.  bee.  they  #.  with  him,  21.

22.  digged  another  well,  and  for  that  they  #.  not
Exod.  2. 13.  two  men  of  the  Hebrews  #.  together
Lev.  24.  10.  and  a  man  of  Israel  #.  in  the  camp
Num.  20. 13.  the  children  of  Israel  #.  with  the  Lord

26.  9.  this  is  that  Dathan,  who  #.  against  Moses

2  Sam.  14.  6.  they  two  #.  together  in  the  field
Dan.  7.  2.  the  four  winds  #.  upon  the  great  sea
John  6. 52.  the  Jews  #.  among  themselves,  saying
Acts  7.  26.  Moses  shewed  himself  to  them  as  they  s.

23. 9.  and  s.  saying,  we  find  no  evil  in  this  man

.  STRUCK.

1  Sam.  2. 14.  he  #.  it  into  the  pan  or  kettle  or  pot

2  Sam.  12. 15.  the  Lord  #.  the  child,  and  it  was  sick

20. 10.  Joab  #.  him  not  again,  and  Amasa  died

2  Chron.  13. 20.  the  Lord  #.  Jeroboam,  and  he  died
Mat.  26. 51 .  one  of  them  #.  a  servant  of  high-priest’s
Luke  22.  64.  they  #.  Jesus  on  the  face,  John  18.  22.
STRUGGLED.

Geti.25.  22.  the  children  s.  together  within  her
STUBBLE.

Exod.  5. 12.  scattered  to  gather  #.  instead  of  straw

15.  7-  sentest  thy  wrath  which  consumed  them  as#.
Job  13.  25.  and  wilt  thou  pursue  the  dry  s.  ?

21.  18.  they  are  as  #.  before  the  wind,  and  as  chaff
41.  28.  sling-stones  are  turned  with  him  into  #.

29.  darts  are  counted  as  #.  he  laugheth  at  a  spear
Psal.  83.  13.  make  them  as  #.  before  the  wind
Isa.  5.  24.  as  fire  devoureth  the  #.  so  their  root  be

33. 11.  she  shall  conceive  chaff  and  bring  forth  r.
40.  24.  whirlwind  shall  take  them  away  as  #.
41.2.  he  gave  them  as  driven  #.  to  his  bow

47. 14.  they  shall  be  as  #.  the  fire  shall  burn  them
Jer.  13.  24.  therefore  will  I  scatter  them  as  s.

Joel  2. 5.  like  noise  of  a  flame,  that  devoureth  the  #.
Obad.  18.  and  the  house  of  Esau  shall  be  for  #.
Nah.  1. 10.  they  shall  be  devoured  as  #.  fully  dry
Mai.  4. 1.  all  that  do  wickedly  and  proud  be  #.

1  Cor.  3.  12.  on  this  foundation  gold,  wood,  hay,  #.
STUBBORN.

Deut.  21. 18.  if  a  man  have  a  #.  and  rebellious  son
20.  and  they  shall  say  to  elders,  this  our  son  is  s.
Judg.  2. 19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  _#.  way
Psal.  78.  8.  and  might  not  be  as  their  fathers,  a

#.  generation

Prov.  7. 11.  she  is  loud  and  s.  her  feet  abide  not
STUBBORNNESS.

Deut.  9.  27.  look  not  to  #.  of  this  people  nor  sin
29. 1 19.  peace,  tho’  I  walk  in  #.  of  mine  heart
1  Sam.  15. 23.  and  #.  is  as  iniquity  and  idolatry
Jer.  3. 1 17-  nor  walk  after  the  #.  of  their  heart
7. 1 24.  but  they  walked  in  #.  of  their  evil  heart,
9. +  14.  1 11. +  8.  I  13. 1 10.  |  16.  tie.
23.  + 17-  say  to  them  that  walk  in  s.  no  evil  come
STUCK.

1  Sam.  26. 7.  his  spear  #.  in  the  ground  at  his  bolster
Psal.  119.  31.  1  have  s.  unto  thy  testimonies
Acts  27.41.  for  part  of  the  ship  #  fast  and  remained
STUDS.

Cant.  1. 11.  will  make  borders  of  gold  with  s.  of  silv.

479


STU


S  IJ  B


sue


STUDY.

The  chief  study  of  the  Hebrews  was  always  the  law
of  the  Lord.  The  practice  of  this  is  recommended
throughout  the  whole  Old  Testament.  Moses
commanded,  that  the  law  of  the  Lord  should  always
be  in  their  months  day  and  night ;  that  it  should
be  as  a  memorial  before  their  eyes,  and  a  signal  in
their  hands:  he  would  have  them  engrave  it  on
their  hearts ;  that  they  should  teach  it  their  chil¬
dren  :  that  they  should  always  meditate  upon  it,
whether  sitting  in  their  houses,  walking  in  the
fields,  in  the  night  time,  while  they  slept,  and  when
they  awoke  in  the  morning  ;  that  they  should  wear
it  as  a  bracelet  to  their  arm,  and  write  it  upon
their  door-posts.  This  teas  the  study  of  the  prophets,
the  patriarchs,  and  all  good  Israelites,  Exod.  13.

9.  Deut.  6.  7-

But  their  study  was  not  confined  only  to  their  laws
and  ceremonies  prescribed  by  Moses  :  they  studied
their  histories,  and  even  their  genealogies  ;  so  that
the  children  of  the  Jews,  according  to  Jerom,
knew  at  their  finger-ends  all  the  genealogies  that
are  found  in  the  Chronicles.  From  their  tenderest
infancy,  as  Josephus  relates,  they  were  accustom¬
ed  to  study  the  laws  of  God,  to  learn  them  by
heart,  to  practise  them,  and  they  were  so  addicted  to
them,  that  they  'were  ready  to  lay  down  their  lives
for  their  observation.  After  they  had  the  writings
of  the  prophets,  they  applied  themselves  very
earnestly  to  know  the  sense  of  the  prophecies,  and
to  study  the  hidden  meaning  of  them.  We  see  it
by  Daniel,  who  applied  himself  with  so  much  care
to  unfold  the  meaning  of  his  own  revelations,  and
of  those  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  who  fixed  the  time
for  the  completing  the  captivity  of  the  people  of
God,  Dan.  7.  28.  1  9.  2,  3,  22,  23,  24.  And  the
apostle  Peter  informs  us,  what  was  the  study  of
the  prophets.  '1  hey  searched  what  times  and  what
other  circumstances  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  wjio  spoke
in  them,  had  marked  out,  when  they  predicted  the
sufferings  of  our  Saviour,  and  the  glory  that  was
to  follow,  1  Pet.  1.  11.

After  the  conquests  of  Alexander  the  Great,  the
Jews,  who  were  mingled  with  the  Grecians,  in  the
greatest  part  of  the  provinces  of  the  East,  began  to
have  a  taste  for  their  language  and  their  studies.
In  imitation  of  the  Grecian  philosophers,  they
divided  themselves  into  different  sects.  Some  of
them,  as  the  Pharisees,  espoused  some  of  the
opinions  of  the  Stoics  and  Platonicians  ;  others,  as
the  Sadducees,  embraced  some  of  the  notions  of
the  Epicureans  ;  others,  as  the  Essenians,  says
Philo,  had  a  contempt  for  logic,  physics,  and  meta¬
physics  ;  which  they  thought  useless,  and  matter
of  mere  curiosity.  They  only  applied  themselves
to  morality  and  the  laws  of  God,  which  they
explained  after  a  sublime  and  allegorical
manner.

In  our  Saviour's  time  it  appears,  that  the  main
study  of  the  Jewish  doctors  was  chiefly  the  tradi¬
tions  of  their  fathers.  Christ  upbraids  them
frequently  with  having  forsaken  the  law  of  God
and  its  true  meaning,  to  ascribe  meanings  and
applications  to  it,  contrary  to  the  sense  of  the  law
and  the  intention  of  the  lawgiver.  St.  Paul,  who
had  been  bred  up  in  these  principles,  shows  also
the  absurdity  of  them,  in  his  Epistles,  always
calling  back  the  laws  to  their  original  and  to  their
true  sense .  But  all  this  was  not  able  to  cure  the
spirit  of  the  Jews  upon  this  article  ;  at  this  day
they  are  more  bigoted  to  their  traditions  than  ever,
and  they  make  them  the  greatest  part  of  their
study.

Eccl.  12. 12.  and  much  s.  is  a  weariness  of  the  flesh

1  Thess.  4.  11.  that  ye  f.  to  be  quiet  and  to  work

2  Tim.  2.  15.  s',  to  shew  thyself  approved  unto  God

STUDIETH.

Prov.  15.  28.  heart  of  the  righteous  s.  to  answer

24.  2.  for  their  heart  f.  destruction,  their  lips  talk

STUFF.

Gen.  31.  37.  whereas  thou  hast  searched  all  my  s.

45.  20.  regard  not  your  s.  good  of  Egypt  is  yours
Exod.  22.  f.  if  a  man  deliver  money  or  s.  to  keep

36.  7-  the  s.  they  had  was  sufficient  for  the  work
Josh.  7.  11.  they  have  put  it  even  am.  their  owns.

1  Sam.  10.  22.  he  hath  hid  himself  among  the  s.

25.  13.  and  two  hundred  abode  by  the  s.

30.  24.  so  shall  his  part  be  that  tarrieth  by  s.

Etek.  12.3.  prepare  thee  s.  for  removing  and  remove

4.  then  shaltthou  bring  forth  thy  s.  by  day,  7.
Luke  17.  31.  be  on  house-top,  and  his  s.  in  house
STUMBLE.

Prov.  3.  23.  shaltwalk,  and  thy  foot  nots.  4.  12.

4.  19.  the  wicked  know  not  at  what  they  s.

Isa.  5.  27.  none  shall  be  weary,  nor  s.  among  them
8.  15.  and  many  among  them  shall  s.  and  fall

28.  7.  they  err  in  vision,  they  s.  in  judgment
59.  10.  we  grope,  we  s.  at  noon-day  as  in  night
63.  13.  that  lea  them  that  they  should  not  s.

Jer.  13.  16.  before  your  feet  s.  on  dark  mountains
18.  15.  they  have  caused  them  to  s.  in  their  ways
20. 11.  theref.  my  persecutors  shall  s.  not  prevail

31.  9.  to  walk  in  a  way  wherein  they  shall  not  s.

46.  6.  they  shall  s.  and  fall  toward  the  north
50.  32.  and  the  most  proud  shall  s.  and  fall
Dan.  11.  19.  but  he  shall  s.  and  fall,  not  be  found
Nah.  2.  5.  they  shall  s.  in  their  walk

3.  3.  multitude  of  slain,  they  s.  upon  their  corpses
Mai.  2.  8.  ye  have  caused  many  to  s.  at  the  law
1  Pet.  2.  8.  a  rock  of  offence  to  them  that  s.  at  word
STUMBLED.

1  Sam.  2.  4.  and  they  that  s.  are  girt  with  strength
1  Chron.  13.  9.  to  hold  the  ark,  for  the  oxen  s.

Ps.  27.2.  when  they  came  to  eat  up  my  flesh,  they  s.
Jer.  46.  12.  for  the  mighty  man  hath  s.  ag.  mighty
Rom.  9.  32.  for  they  s.  at  that  stumbling-stone
11.  11.  I  say  then,  nave  they  f.  that  th.  should  fall  ?
STUMBLETH.

Prov.  24. 17.  and  let  not  thy  heart  be  glad  when  her.
John  11.  9_.  if  any  man  walk  in  the  day,  he  s.  not

10.  but  if  a  man  walk  in  the  night,  he  s.
Rcm.14.21.  nor  to  eat  any  thing  whereby  thy  broth.r.


STUMBLING.

1  John  2. 10.  and  there  is  none  occasion  of  s.  in  him
STUM  BLI M  G-B  LOCK.

See  Signification  on  Offence.

Lev.  19.  14.  thou  shalt  not  put  as.  before  the  blind
Ps.  1 19- 1 165.  that  love  thy  law  they  shall  have  no  s.
Isa.  57-14.  take  up  the  r.out  of  the  way  of  my  people
Ezek.  3.  20.  and  I  lay  a  s.  before  him,  he  shall  die
7-  19.  because  it  is  the  r.  of  their  iniquity

14.  3.  they  put  the  s.  of  their  iniquity,  4,  7.

44. 1 12.  they  were  a  r.  of  iniquity  to  Israel
Rom.  11.  9.  let  their  table  be  made  a  trap,  a  s.

14.  13.  that  no  man  put  a  s.  in  his  brother’s  way
1  Cor.  1.  23.  we  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  Jews  a  s.
8.  9.  take  heed  lest  this  liberty  of  yours  become  as.
Rev.  2.14.  who  taught  Balak  to  cast  a  r.  before  Israel
STUMBLING-BLOCKS.

Jer.  6.  21.  behold,  I  will  lay  s.  before  this  people
Zeph.  1.  3.  I  will  consume  the  f.  with  the  wicked
STUM  B  LI  N  G-stone.

Isa.  8.  14.  he  shall  be  for  a  stone  of  s.  to  Israel
Rom.  9.  32.  for  they  stumbled  at  that  s.-stone

33.  behold,  1  lay  in  Sion  a  s.-st.  and  rock  ofoffence
l  Pet.  2.  8.  a  stone  of  s.  to  them  that  stumble  at  word
STUMP.

1  Sam.  5.  4.  only  the  s.  of  Dagon  was  left  to  him
Dan.  4.  15.  yet  leave  the  s.  in  the  earth,  23,  26.
SUBDUE.

Gen.  1.  28.  God  said,  replenish  the  earth  and  s.  it
1  Chr.  17-  10.  moreover  I  will  s.  all  thine  enemies
Psal.  47-  3.  he  shall  s.  the  people  under  us
127.  t  5.  they  shall  s.  their  enemies  in  the  gate
Isa.  45.  1.  1  have  holden,  to  s.  nations  before  him
Dan.  7.  24.  another  rise,  and  lie  shall  s.  three  kings
Mic.  7- 19.  he  will  turn  again,  he  will  s.  our  iniquit.
Zech.  9. 15.  they  shall  devour  and*,  with  sling  stones
Phil.  3.  21.  he  is  able  to  s.  all  things  to  himself
SUBDUED.

Num.  32.  22.  and  the  land  be  before  the  Lord

29.  and  the  land  shall  be  f.  before  you
Deut.  20.  20.  thou  shalt  build  bulwarks,  until  be  s.
33.  f  29.  and  thine  enemies  shall  be  s.  unto  thee
Josh.  18.  1.  and  the  land  was  f.  before  them
Judg.  3.  30.  so  Moab  was  s.  |[  4.  23.  God  f.  Jabin
8.  28.  thus  Midian  was  s.  H  11.  33.  Ammon  wasf.

1  Sam.  7.13.  the  Philistines  were.?,  hand  of  Lord  was

against  them,  2  Sam.  8.  1.  1  Chr.  18.  1.  |  20.  4.

2  Sam.  8.11.  silver  and  gold  of  all  nations  which  he  s.
22.  40.  girded  me  with  strength,  them  that  rose  up

against  me  hast  thou  s.  under  me,  Psal.  18.  39.

1  Chron.  22.  18.  and  the  land  is  s.  before  the  Lord
Psal.  81.  14.  I  should  soon  have  s.  their  enemies
1  Cor.  15.  28.  and  when  all  things  shall  bef.  untohim
Heb.  11.  33.  who  through  faith  s.  kingdoms
SUBDUEDST.

Ne/t.  9.  24.  thou  s.  the  inhabitants  of  the  land
SUBDUETH.

Ps.  18.  47.  it  is  G.  that  s.  the  people  under  me,  144. 2.
Dan.  2. 40.  forasmuch  as  iron  breaks  and  s.  all  things
SUBJ  ECT.

Gen.  3.  t  16.  thy  desire  shall  be  s.  to  thy  husband

4.  t7.  his  desire  shall  be  s.  to  thee,  thou  shalt  rule
Luke  2.  51.  Jesus  went  down,  and  was  s.  to  them

10.  17.  saying,  Lord,  even  the  devils  are  s.  to  us
20.  rejoice  not  that  the  spirits  are  f .  to  you
Rom.  3.  t  19.  world  may  be  s.  to  the  judgment  of  G.
8.  7.  for  it  is  not.?.  to  the  law  of  God,  nor  can  be
20.  for  the  creature  was  made  s.  to  vanity
13.  1.  let  every  soul  be  f.  to  the  higher  powers

5.  wherefore  ye  must  needs  be  s',  not  only  for  wrath
1  Cor.  14.  32.  the  spirits  of  prophets  are  s.  to  prophets

15.  28.  then  shall  the  Son  also  himself  be  s.  to  him
Eph.  5.24.  as  the  church  isf .  to  Christ,  so  let  the  wives
Col.  2.  20.  why ,  as  tho’  living,  are  ye  s.  to  ordinances
Tit.  3.  1.  put  them  in  mind  to  be  s.  to  powers
Heb.  2.  15.  who  were  all  their  life-time  s.  to  bond¬
age

Jam.  5.  17-  Elias  was  s.  to  like  passions  as  we  are
1  Pet.  2.  18.  servants  be  s.  to  your  mast,  with  all  fear
3.  22.  angels  and  powers  being  made  s.  to  him

5.  5.  yea,  all  of  you  be  s.  one  to  another

SUBJECTED.

Rom.  8.  20.  of  him  who  hath  s.  the  same  in  hope
SUBJECTION.

Psal.  106.  42.  their  enemies  were  brought  into  s.
Jer.  34.  11.  and  they  brought  them  into  .r.  16.

1  Cor.  9.  27.  I  keep  under  and  bring  my  body  intof.

2  Cor.  9.  13.  they  glorify  God  for  your  professed  s.
Gal.  2.5.  to  whom  we  gave  place  by  s.  not  for  an  hour
1  Tim.  2.11.  let  the  woman  learn  in  silence  with  alls.

3.  4.  having  his  children  in  s.  with  all  gravity
Heb.  2.  5.  hath  he  not  put  in  s.  the  world  to  come
8.  thou  hast  put  all  things  in  s.  under  his  feet
12.  9.  rather  he  in  s.  to  the  Father  of  spirits  and  live

1  Pet.  3.  1.  wives,  be  in  s.  to  your  husbands,  5.

SUBMIT.

Gen.  16.  9.  return,  and  s.  thyself  under  her  hands

2  Sam.  22.  45.  strangers  shall  f.  themselves  to  me,  as

soon  as  they  hear,  shall  be  obed.  to  me,  Ps.  18.  44.
Ps.  66.  3.  thine  enemies  shall  s.  themselves  to  thee
68.  30.  till  every  one  s.  himself  with  pieces  of  silv.

1  Cor.  16.  16.  that  ye  s.  yourselves  unto  such
Eph.  5.  22.  wives,  s.  yourselves  to  your  own  hus¬
bands,  as  unto  the  Lord,  Col.  3.  18.
Heb.  13.  17-  f.  yourselves  for  they  watch  for  souls
Jam.  4.  7-  s.  yourselves  therefore  to  G.  resist  devil
1  Pet.  2.  13.  s.  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man

5.  5.  likewise,  ye  younger,  s.  yourselves  to  the  elder
SUBMITTED.

1  Chron.  29.  24.  the  sons  of  David  s.  to  Solomon
Ps.  81.  15.  the  haters  of  the  L.  should  have  .?.  to  him
Rom.  10.  3.  have  not  s.  to  the  righteousness  of  God
SUBMITTING.

Eph.  5.  21.  s.  yourselves  one  to  anoth.  in  fear  of  G.
SUBORNED.

Acts  6. 11.  then  they  s.  men  whosaid,  we  have  heard
SUBSCRIBE.

Isa.  4-4.  5.  another  shall  with  his  hand  s.  unto  the  Ld.
Jer.  32.  44.  men  shall  .?.  evidences,  and  seal  them
SUBSCRIBED.

Jer.  32.  10.  I  f.  the  evidence,  and  sealed  it
12.  in  presence  of  the  witnesses  that  s.  the  book


SUBSTANCE.

Gen.  7.  4. 1  will  destr.  every  living  s.  from  off  earth
23.  every  livings,  was  destroyed,  man  and  cattle
12.  5.  Abram  took  all  the  s.  they  had  gathered
13.6.  their  f.  was  great,  so  that  they  could  not  dwell
15. 14.  afterward  they  shall  come  out  with  great  s.

34.  23.  shall  not  their  cattle  and  their  s.  lie  ours  i
36.  6.  and  Esau  took  his  cattle  and  all  his  s.

Deut.  11.  6.  the  earth  sw  allowed  them  up,  all  then  s.
33.  11.  bless,  Lord,  his  ,r.  and  accept  the  work
Josh.  14.  4.  they  gave  to  the  Levites  cities  for  their  s.
I  Sam.  9.  +  1.  his  name  was  Kish,  a  mighty  man  off

1  Chron.  27.  31.  all  these  were  the  rulersof  the  s.
28.  1.  the  stewards  over  all  the  s.  of  the  king

2  Chr.  21. 17.  they  carr.  away  all  s.  in  king’s  house

31. 3.  he  appointed  also  the  king’s  portion  of  bis  s.

32.  29.  God  bad  given  Hezekiah  s.  very  much

35.  7.  Josiah  gave  bullocks,  these  were  of  king’s s.
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  him  a  right  way  for  our  .v.

10.  8.  would  not  come,  all  his  s.  should  be  forfeited
Job  1.  3.  Job’s  s.  also  was  seven  thousand  sheep
10.  and  his  s.  is  increased  in  the  land

5.  5.  and  the  robber  swalloweth  up  their  .?.

6.  22.  did  I  say,  give  a  reward  for  me  of  your  ?
15.  29.  he  shall  not  be  rich, nor  shall  his  j.continue
20. 18.  according  to  his  s.  shall  the  restitution  be
22. 20.  whereas  our.?.  is  not  cut  down,  but  remnant

30.  22.  thou  liftest  me  up,  and  dissolvest  my  s.
Psal.  17-  14.  they  leave  their  s.  to  their  babes

105.  21.  he  made  Joseph  ruler  over  ail  his  ,c.

139.  15.  my  s.  was  not  hid  from  thee,  when  made

16.  thine  eyes  did  see  my  s.  yet  being  unperfect
Prov.  1. 13.  we  shall  find  all  precious  s.  we  shall  fill
3.  9.  honour  the  L.  with  thy  s.  and  the  first-fruits

6.  31.  he  shall  give  all  the  s.  of  his  house

8.  21.  that  1  may  cause  those  that  love  me  inherit  .?.

10.  3.  but  he  casteth  away  the  s.  of  the  wicked
12.  27.  but  the  .v.  of  a  diligent  man  is  precious
28.  8.  he  that  by  usury  increaseth  his  .v.

29.3.  keeps  company  with  harlots,  spendeth  his.?.
Cant.  8.  7.  if  a  man  would  give  all  his  s.  for  love
Isa.  6.  13.  as  a  teil-tree  and  as  an  oak  whose  s.  is

in  them,  so  the  holy  seed  shall  be  s.  thereof
Jer.  15. 13.  thy  s.  will  1  give  to  the  spoil,  17.3.
Hos.  12.  8.  I  am  become  rich,  1  have  found  me  outf.
Obad.  13.  nor  laid  hands  on  their  s.  in  their  calamity
Mic.  4.  13.  1  will  consecrate  their  s.  to  L.  of  eaith
Luke  8.  3.  which  ministered  to  him  of  their  s.

15. 13.  the  prodigal  wasted  his  f.  with  riotous  liv.
Heb.  10.  34.  knowing  that  ye  have  in  heav.  better  s.

11.  1.  now  faith  is  the  s.  of  things  hoped  for

SUBTIL.

Gen.  3. 1.  now  serpent  was  more  s.  than  any  beast
2  Sam.  13.  3.  and  Jonadab  was  a  very  s.  man
Prov.  7. 10.  with  attire  of  an  harlot,  and  s.  of  heart
.SUB TILLY.

1  Sam.  23.  22.  for  it  is  told  me  that  he  dealeth  very  s.
Psal.  105.  25.  to  deal  s.  with  his  servants

Acts  7-  19.  the  same  dealt  .f.  with  our  kindred
SUBTILTY.

Gen.  27.  35.  he  said,  thy  brother  came  with.r.

2  Kings  10.  19.. Jehu  did  it  inf.  that  he  mightdestr
Prov.  1.  4.  to  give  s.  to  the  simple,  to  the  young  man
8.  1 12.  1  wisdom  dwell  with  s.  and  find  out
Mat.  26. 4.  they  might  take  Jesus  byf.  and  kill  him
Acts  13. 10.  Paul  said,  O  full  of  all  s.  and  mischief
2  Cor.  11.  3.  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve  thro’  his  f.

SUBVERT.

Lam.  3.  36.  to  s.  a  man  the  Lord  approved)  not
Tit.  1.  11.  who  s.  whole  houses,  teaching  things
SUBVERTED.

Tit.  3.  11.  he  that  is  such  is  s.  and  sinneth

SUBVERTING.

Acts  15.  24.  have  troubled  you  with  words,.?,  souls
2  Tim.  2. 14.  words  to  no  profit,  but  to  s.  of  hearers
SUBURBS.

Lev.  25.  34.  but  the  field  of  the  s.  may  not  be  sold
Num.  35.  3.  the  s.  of  them  shall  be  for  their  cattle

7.  forty-eight  cities  shall  ye  give  with  their  s.

Josh.  14.  4.  save  cities  with  s.  for  their  cattle,  21.  2.

2  Kings  23.  1 1 .  he  took  away  horses  by  cham her  in  s.

2  Chr.  11. 14.  Levites  left  their  s.  and  came  to  J  ud.
Ezek.  27.  28.  the  s.  shall  shake  at  the  sound  of  pilots
45.  2.  fifty  cubits  round  about  for  the  s.  thereof
48. 15.  be  a  profane  place  for  dwelling  and  for  s.

17.  the  s.  ot  the  city  shall  be  toward  the  north
See  Cities.

SUCCEED.

Deut.  25.  6.  the  first-born  shall  s.  his  brother  dead

SUCCEEDED.

Deut.  2.  12.  but  the  children  of  Esau  s.  them,  22.
21.  Ammonites  j.  them,  and  dwelt  in  their  stead
SUCCEEDEST.

Deut.  12. 29.  when  thou  s.  them  in  their  land,  19. 1.
SUCCESS.

Josh.  1 . 8.  for  then  thou  shalt  pros,  and  have  good  s.
Job  22.  f  2.  not  be  profitable  to  God,  if  he  may  be
profitable,  doth  his  good  s.  depend  thereon  3
Ps.  111.  +  10.  good  s.  have  they  thatdohiscomman.
Prov.  3.  +  4.  so  shalt  thou  find  favour  and  good  s.
SUCCOUR.

2  Sam.  8.  5.  when  Syrians  came  to  s.  Hadadezer
18.  3.  it  is  better  that  thou  s.  us  out  of  the  city
Heb.  2.  18.  he  is  able  to  s.  them  that  are  tempted
SUCCOURED.

2  Sam.  21.17.  Abishaif.  him,  and  smote  Philistines
2  Cor.  6.  2.  and  in  the  day  of  salvation  have  1 s.  thee
SUCCOURER.

Rom.  16.  2.  she  hath  been  a.?,  of  many  andofmyseli
SUCH.

Gen.  4.  20.  Jabal  was  father  of  s.  as  dwell  in  tents
21.  Jubal  was  the  father  of  f.as  handle  the  harp
27.  4.  make  me  savoury  meat,  s.  as  I  love,  9.  14.
46.  Jacob  take  wife  of  daugh.  of  Heth,  s.  as  these
30.  32.  speckled  and  spotted,  off.  shall  be  my  hire
41.  19.  f.  as  I  never  saw  in  Egypt  for  badness
44.  15.  wotye  notthat  f.  a  man  as  I  can  divine  ■
Exod.  9.  18.  f.  hail  as  hath  not  been  in  Egypt,  24.

10.  14.  were  no  s.  locusts  as  they,  nor  shall  be  s.  _
11.6.  shall  be  great  cry,  s.  as  there  was  none  like  it

18.  21.  thou  shalt  provide  able  men,  f.  as  fear  G.
34.  10.  f.  as  have  not  been  done  in  all  the  earth


sue


SUF


SUJ)


Lev.  11.. 14.  meat  on  which  .?.  water  enmeth  be  un¬
clean,  all  drink  that  he  drunk  in  every  s.  vessel
14. 22.  two  pigeons  .?.  as  he  is  able  to  get,  30,  31.
20.0.  the  soul  that  turueth  after  .f.  I  will  cut  off

22.  6.  soul  that  hath  touched  any  .?.  shall  be  unclean
27-  9.  giveth  ot  s.  to  the  Lord,  shall  be  holy

Num.  8. 16.  instead  of  .v.  as  open  every  wotnb
Dent.  4.32.  whether  there  hath  been  any  a.  tiling
5.29. 0  that  there  were  s.  an  heart  in  them  to  fear  me

13.  11.  shall  do  no  more  any  s.  wickedness,  19.  20.

14.  that  a.  abomination  is  wrought  am.  you,  17.  4.
16.  9.  v.  time  as  thou  beginnest  to  put  the  sickle
Judg.  3.  2.  at  least.?,  as  before  knew  nothing  thereof
19. 30.  there  was  no a.  deed  done  or  seen  to  this  day

1  Sam.  4.  7.  hath  not  been  .?.  a  thing  heretofore
25. 17.  he  is  a.  a  son  of  Belial,  a  man  cannot  speak

2  Sam.  9. 8.  thou  shouldest  look  <  n  a.  a  dead  dog  as  1
11.  +  25.  for  the  sword  devoureth  so  and  .?.

13.  18.  for  with  s.  robes  were  virgins  apparelled

14. 13.  wherefore  then  hast  thou  thought .?.  a  thing
16.  2.  that  .v.  as  be  faint  in  wilderness  may  drink

19.  36.  why  should  recompense  me  with  .v.  reward  ?

1  Kings  10.10.  there  came  no  more.?,  abund.  of  spices

12.  there  came  no  s.  almug-trees,  2  Chron.  9.  11.

2  Kings 6.  9.  beware  that  thou  pass  not  s.  a  place

7.  19.  if  Lord  make  windows,  might.?,  a  thing  be  ?

21.  12.  am  bringings-,  evil  on  Jerusalem  and  Judah

23.  22.  surely  there  was  not  holden  s.  a  passover

1  Chron.  12.  33. .?.  as  went  forth  to  battle,  36.

29. 25.  the  Lord  bestowed  on  him  ,?.  royal  majesty

2  G '/iron.  1. 12.  s.  as  none  of  the  kings  have  had

9. 9.  nor  was  any  s.  spice  as  the  queen  gave  Solomon
11.16.  a.  as  set  their  hearts  to  seek  the  Lord  God

23. 13..  people  rejoiced,  and  s.  taught  to  sing  praise
24. 12.  gave  it  to  s.  as  did  the  work  of  the  house
30. 5.  they  had  not  done  it  of  a  long  time  ins.  sort

Ezra  4.  10.  peace,  and  at .?.  a  time,  11,  17.  I  7-  12.

6.  21.  all  s.  as  had  separated  themselves  to  them

7.  25.  all  s.  as  know  the  laws  of  thy  God

27.  which  hath  put  a.  a  thing  in  the  king’s  heart

8.  31.  and  of.?,  as  lay  in  waif  by  the  way

9.  13.  and  hast  given  us  s.  deliverance  as  this

10.  3.  put  away  the  wives,  and  s.  are  born  of  them
Neh.  6.  11.  I  said,  should  s.  a  man  as  1  flee  <

Esth.  A.  ,11.  except .?.  to  whom  the  king  shall  hold  out

14.  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  s.  a  time
9.2.  to  lay  hand  on  .?.  as  sought  their  hurt

27-  and  upon  all  .?.  as  joined  then. selves  to  them
Job  15. 13.  and  lettest .?.  words  go  out  of  thy  mouth
18.  21.  surely  s.  are  the  dwellings  of  the  wicked
PsalAo. 10.  to.?,  as  keep  his  covenant,  103.  18.

27.  12.  s.  as  breathe  out  cruelty  risen  up  ag.  me

37. 14.  to  slay  .?.  as  be  of  upright  conversation

22.  s.  as  be  blessed  of  him  shall  inherit,  earth
40. 4.  respectefh  not  proud  nor  s.  turn  aside  to  lies

16.  let .?.  as  love  thy  salvation  say,  70.  4.

55.  20.  his  hands  against.?,  as  be  at  peace  with  him

73. 1.  God  is  good  to  .?.  as  are  of  a  clean  heart
307. 10.  s.  as  sit  in  darkness,  anti  shadow  of  death
125.  5.  as  for  s.  as  turn  aside  to  crooked  ways
139.  6.  .?.  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me
144.  15.  happy  is  that  people  that  is  in  s.  a  case

Prov.  11.  20.  but .?.  as  are  upright  are  his  delight

28.  4.  but.?,  as  keep  the  law  contend  with  thern
31. 8.  in  cause  off.  as  are  appointed  to  destruction

Eccl.  4. 1 .  behold,  the  tears  of  s.  as  were  oppressed
Isa.  9. 1.  dimness  shall  not  be  s.  as  was  in  her  vexat.

10. 20.  and  .?.  as  are  escaped  of  the  house  of  Jacob
20.  6.  behold, .?.  is  our  expectation,  whither  we  flee
?<7.  30.  ye  shall  eat  this  year .?.  as  groweth  of  itself
58.  5.  is  it  s.  a  fast  that  1  have  chosen  ?

66.  8.  who  hath  heard  s.  a  thing  ?  who  hath  seen  .?.
Jer.  2. 10.  consider,  and  see  if  there  be  s.  a  thing
5. 9.  my  soul  be  avenged  on  s.  a  nation,  29.  I  9.  9.

15.2. . ?.  as  are  for  death  to  death,  s.  as  are  for  sword,
.?.  as  are  for  famine,  s.  as  are  for  captivity,  43.  l  ] .

21. 7-  l  will  deliver  s.  as  are  left  in  this  city  for  pest.
38.  4.  in  speaking  .?.  words  unto  them

44.14.  for  none  shall  return,  but .?.  as  shall  escape
Dan.  1.4..?.  as  had  ability  in  them  tostand  in  palace

10. 15.  and  when  he  had  spoken  s.  words  to  me

11.  32.  .?.  as  do  wickedly  shall  he  corrupt

12. 1.  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  .?.  asnev.was
Amos 5. 16.  they  shall  call .?.  as  are  skilful  to  wailing
Mic.  5. 15.  in  anger  and  fury.?,  they  have  not  heard
Zeph.  1. 8. .?.  as  are  clothed  with  strange  apparel
Mat.  9.8.  glorified  G.who  had  given .?.  power  to  men

18.  5.  whoso  shall  receive  one  .?.  little  child  in  my
name,  receiveth  me,  Mark  9.37.

19. 14.  suffer  little  children  to  come  to  me,  for  of.?,
is  the  kingdom  of  God,  Mark  10.  14.  Luke  18.  16.

24.21.  then  shall  be  great  tribulation,  s.  as  was
npt  since  beginning  of  the  world,  Mark  13.  19.

44.  in  .?.  an  hour  as  ye  think  not,  the  Son  cometh
26. 18.  he  said,  go  into  the  city  to .?.  a.man  and  say
Mark  4. 18.  sown  among  thorns, .?.  as  hear  the  word

20.  sown  in  good  ground,  are  .?.  as  hear  the  word
33.  with  many  s.  parables  spake  he  to  them

John  4.  23.  for  the  Father  seeketh  s.  to  worship  him

8.  5.  Moses  commanded  that  s.  should  be  stoned
9. 16.  can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner  do  ?.  miracles  ?
Acts  2.  47.  the  L.  added  daily  s.  as  should  be  saved
3.6.  s.  as  1  have,  give  I  thee,  rise  up  and  walk

15.24.  to  whom  we  gave  no  .?.  commandment

16. 24.  who  having  received  s.  a  charge  thrust  them

18. 15.  for  l  will  be  no  judge  of.?,  matters

21.25.  have  concluded,  that  they  observe  no.?,  thing
22.  22.  said,  away  with  .?.  a  fellow  from  the  earth

25.  20.  because  1  doubted  of.?,  manner  of  questions

26.  29.  were  almost  and  altogether  .?.  as  1  am
Ron 1. 16. 18.  they  that  are a.  serve  not  our  L.  Jesus

1  Cor.  5.  1.  s.  fornication  as  is  not  so  much  as  named
6. 11.  and'.?,  were  some  of  you,  but  ye  are  washed
7-  15.  brother  or  sister  is  not  under  bond,  in  s.  cases

28.  s.  shall  ha\  e  trouble  in  flesh,  but  1  spare  you

10.  13.  no  temptation,  but  s.  as  is  common  to  man

11.  16.  seem  to  be  contentious,  we  have  no.?,  cust.

15.  48.  s.  are  they  that  are  earthy, .?.  are  they  that

16.16.  thatye  submit  you  (selves  to.?,  and  every  one
18.  therefore  acknowledge  ye  them  that  are  .?.

2  Cor .  2-  6.  sufficient  to  s.  a  man  is  this  punishment
3.  4. .?.  trust  have  we  through  Christ  to  God-ward


2  Cor.  3. 12.  seeing  then  that  we  have  s.  hope,  we  use

10.  11.  let  s.  an  one  think,  s.  as  we  are  in  word  by
letters,  s.  will  we  lie  indeed  when  we  are  present

11.  13.  for  s.  are  false  apostles,  deceitful  workers

12.  20.  I  fear,  I  shall  not  find  you  s.  as  I  would  ;
and  that  1  shall  be  found  to  you.?,  as  ye  would  not

Gal.  5.  23.  meekness  against  s.  there  is  no  law
Eph.  5.  27- not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  .?. thing
Phil.  2.  29.  receive  him,  and  hold  .?.  in  reputation

1  Thess.  4. 6.  because  the  Ld.  is  the  avenger  of  all  .?.

2  Thess.  3.  12.  now  them  that  are  .?.  we  command

1  Tim.  6.  5.  corrupt  men,  from  s.  withdraw  thvself

2  Tim.  3.  5.  traitors,  heady,  from  a-,  turn  away
Tit.  3.  11.  that  he  that  is  .?.  is  subverted  and  sinneth
Heb.  5.  12.  ye  are  become  s.  as  have  need  of  milk

7.  26.  s .  an  high  priest  became  us,  who  is  holy

8.  1 .  have  s.  an  high  priest,  who  is  set  on  right  hand

12.  3.  him  that  endured  s.  contradiction  of  sinners

13.  16.  for  with  s.  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased
Jam.  4.  13.  to  morrow  we  will  go  into.?,  a  city

16.  in  your  boastings,  all  .?.  rejoicing  is  evil

2  Pet.  1.  17.  when  there  came  a.  a  voice  to  him

3  Johns,  we  therefore  ought  to  receive  s.  to  be
Rev.  5.  13.  and  s.  as  are  in  the  sea  heard  1 ,  saying

16.  18.  .?.  as  was  not  since  men  were  on  the  earth
20.  6.  on  s.  the  second  death  hath  no  power
SUCH  like.

Esek.  18.  14.  and  considered),  and  doeth  not .?.  like
Gal.  5.  21.  drunkenness,  revellings,  and  s.  like
SUC II  an  one.

Gen.  41.  38.  he  said,  can  we  find  .?.  an  one  as  this  is  :
Ruth  4.  1.  ho,.?,  an  one,  turn  aside,  sit  down  here
Job  14.  3.  dost  thou  open  thine  eyes  on  .?.  an  one  /
Psal.  50.  21.  thoughtestthat  1  was a.  a  one  as  thyself
68. 21.  hairy  scalp  of  a.  a  one  as  goeth  on  in  trespass.

1  Cor. 5.  5.  to  deliver.?,  an  one  unto  Satan

11.  if  a  drunkard,  with  a.  an  one  no  not  to  eat

2  Cor.  2.  7.s.  a  owe  should  be  swallowed  up  withsorr.

10.  11.  let  s.  an  one  think  this,  that  such  as  we  are

12.  2.  s.  an  one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven
5.  of  a.  an  one  will  I  glory,  yet  not  ofmyself

Gal.  6.  1.  restore  a.  an  one  in  the  spirit  of  meekness
Phile/n.  9.  1  beseech,  being  a.  a  one  as  Paul  the  aged
SUCH  and  SUCH.

1  Sam.  21. 2. appointed  my  servants  to .?.  and s.  place

2  Sam.  12.  8.  1  would  have  given  a.  and  s.  things

2  Kings  6.  8.  in  a.  and  s.  a  place  shall  be  my  camp
SUCH  things.

Exod.  12.  36.  they  lent  a.  things  as  they  required

1. ev.  10.  19.  and  a.  things  have  befallen  me
Deut.  25.  16.  they  that  do  a.  things  are  an  abominat.
Judg.  13.  23.  nor  have  told  us  a.  things  as  these

1  Sam.  2.  23.  Eli  said  to  them,  why  do  ye  a.  things  ?

2  Kings  19.  29.  shall  eat  a.  things  as  grow  of  themsel.
25. 15.  the  captain  took  a.  things  as  were  of  gold
A  eh.  6.  8.  there  are  no  a.  things  done  as  thou  sayest
Esth.  2.  9.  with  a.  things  as  belonged  to  her

Job  12.  3.  yea,  who  knoweth  not  a.  things  as  these  ?
16.  2.  Job  said,  I  have  heard  many  a.  things
23.  14.  and  many  a.  things  are  with  him
Jer.  IK.  13.  ask  ye  now  who  hath  heard  a.  things
Ezek.  17-  15.  shall  he  escape  that  doth  .?.  things  ?
Dan.  2.  10.  there  is  no  king  that  asked  a.  things
Mark  7.  8.  many  other  a.  like  things  ye  do,  13.

13.  7.  be  not  troubled,  a.  things  must  needs  be
Luke  9.9.  but  who  is  this  of  whom  1  hear  a.  things

10.7-  remain,  eating  a.  things  as  they  give,  8.

11.  41.  but  give  alms  of  a.  things  as  ye  have

13.  2.  were  sinners,  because  they  suffered  a.  things
John  7.  32.  that  the  people  murmured  a.  things
Acts  25.  18.  they  brought  no  accusation  of  a.  things
28.  lO.they  laded  us  with  s. things  as  were  necessary
Rom.  1. 32. who  commit  a.  things  are  worthy  ofdeath

2.  2.  judgment  against  them  who  commit.?,  things
3.  O  man,  that  judgestthem  which  do  a.  things

Gal.  5. 21.  that  do  a.  things  shall  not  inherit  kingdom
Heb.  11.  14.  they  that  say  a.  things  declare  plainly
13.  5.  be  content  with  a.  things  as  ye  have
2  Pet.  3. 14. beloved,  seeing  thatye  look  for  a.  things
SUCK,  Substantive.

Gen.  21 . 7-  fhat  Sarah  should  have  given  children  a.

1  Sam.  1.  23.  so  Hannah  abode  and  gave  her  son  s.

1  Kings  3.21.  when  I  rose  to  give  my  child  s.

Isa.  40.  +  11.  he  shall  gently  lead  those  that  give  .?.
Lam.  4.  3.  the  sea-monsters  give  a.  to  their  young
Mat.  24.  19.  woe  to  them  with  child,  and  to  them
that  give  a.  in  those  days,  Mark  13.  17.  Luke
21. 23.

Luke  23.  29.  blessed  are  the  paps  that  never  gave  a.
SUCK.

Dent.  32.  13.  he  made  him  to  a.  honey  out  of  the  rock
33.  19.  they  shall  a.  of  the  abundance  of  the  seas
Job  3.  12.  or  why  the  breast  that  1  should  s.?

20.  16.  he  shall  a.  the  poison  of  asps
39.  30.  her  young  ones  also  a.  up  blood
Isa.  60. 16.  thou  shalt  a.  the  milk  of  the  Gentiles,  and
shah  a.  the  breast  of  kings  and  know  the  Lord
66. 11.  thatye  may  a.  and  lie  satisfied  with  breasts

12.  then  shall  ye  a.  ye  shall  be  borne  on  her  sides
Ezek.  23.  34.  thou  shalt  even  drink  it  and  a.  it  out
Joel  2.  16.  gather  children  and  those  that  a.  breasts

SUCKED.

Cant.  8.  1.  that  a.  the  breasts  of  my  mother
Luke  11.  27.  blessed  are  the  paps  that  thou  hast  s.
SUCKING.

Nnm.  11.  12.  as  a  nursing  father  beareth  the  a.  child
1  Sam.  7.  9.  Samuel  took  a  a.  lamb  and  offered  it
Isa.  11.  8.  a.  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp
49.  15.  can  a  woman  forget  her  a.  child  ?

Lam.  4.  4.  tongue  of  the.?,  child  cleaveth  to  mouth
SUCKLING.

Deut.  32.  25.  the  a.  also  with  the  man  of  grey  hairs
1  Sam.  15.  3.  slay  both  man  and  woman, infant  and .?.
Jer.  44. 7.  to  cut  off  from  you  child  and  a.
SUCKLINGS.

1  Sam.  22.  19.  Doeg  smote  children  and  .?.  of  Nob
Psal.  8. 2. out  ofmouth  of  babes  and  a.  Mat.  21.  16.
Lam.  2.  11.  the  a.  swoon  in  the  streets  of  the  city
SUDDEN.

Job  22.  10.  therefore  .?.  fear  troubled)  thee
Prov.  3. 25.  be  not  afraid  ot  a.  fear  nor  of  desolation
1  Thess.  5.  3.  then  1.  destruction  cometh  uuon  them


SUDDENLY.

Kum,  6.  9.  and  it  any  man  die  very  s.  by  him
12.  4.  the  Lord  spake  a.  unto  Moses  and  Aaron
35.  22.  but  if  he  thrust  him  a.  without  enmity
Dent.  7.  4.  the  anger  of  the  L.  will  destroy  you  a
Josh.  10.  9.  Joshua  came  unto  them  a.  11. 7.

2  Sam.  15.14.  lest  he  overtake  us  a.  and  smite  the  city
2  Chron.  29.  36.  rejoiced,  for  the  thing  was  done  s.
Job  5.  3.  taking  root,  butA.  I  cursed  his  habitation
9.  23.  if  the  scourge  slay  a.  he  will  laugh  at  trial
Psal.  6.  10.  let  them  return  and  be  ashamed  a.

64.  4.  a.  do  they  shoot  at  him  and  fear  not

7.  with  an  arrow  a.  shall  they  be  wounded
Prov.  6.  15.  therefore  his  calamity  shall  come  a.

he  shall  be  broken  s.  without  remedy
7-  t  22.  lie  goeth  after  her  a.  an  ox  to  the  slaughter
24.  22.  for  their  calamity  shall  rise  a.

29.1. shall  a.  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy
Etc/.  9.  12.  when  it  falleth  a.  upon  them
Isa.  29.  5.  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  instant  a.

30.  13.  as  a  breach,  whose  breaking  cometh  a.

4“.  11.  and  desolation  shall  come  upon  thee  a.

48.  3.  I  did  them  a.  and  they  came  to  pass

Jer.  4.  20.  a.  are  my  tents  spoiled  and  my  curtains

6.26.  for  the  spoiler  shall  a.  come  upon  us

15.  8.  I  have  caused  him  to  fall  upon  it  a.

18.22.  when  thou  shalt  bring  a  troop  a.  on  them

49.  19.  but  1  will  ,?.  make  him  run  away,  50.  44.
51.  8.  Bab.  is  s.  fallen  and  destroyed,  howl  for  her

IJab.  2.  7.  shall  they  not  rise  up  a.  that  shall  bite  thee
Mat.  3.  1.  the  Lord  shall  a.  come  to  his  temple
Mark  9.8.  a.  saw  no  man  any  more,  save  Jesus  only
13.  36.  lest  coming  a.  he  find  you  sleeping
Luke  2.  13.  a.  there  was  with  the  angel  a  multitude
9.  39.  a  spirit  taketh  him,  and  he  a.  crieth  out
Acts  2.  2.  and  a.  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven
9.  3.  .?.  there  shined  a  light  from  heaven,  22.  6.

16.  26.  and  a.  there  was  a  great  earthquake

28.  6.  when  he  should  have  fallen  clown  dead  .?.

1  Tim.  5.22.  lay  hands  a.  on  no  man,  keep  thys.  pure

8  U  E.

Mat.  5.  40.  and  if  any  man  will  a.  thee  at  the  law
SUFFER.

Exod.  12.  23.  the  Ld.  will  not  a.  the  destroyer  to  come
22.  18.  thou  shalt  not  a.  a  witch  to  live
Lev.  2.  13.  norshalt  a.  salt  of  the  cov.tobe  lacking
19.17  thou  shalt  rebuke  him, and  not  a.  sin  upon  him
22.  16.  or  a.  them  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  trespass
Num.  21.  23.  Sihon  would  not  a.  Israel  to  pass
Dent.  21.  +  12.  and  she  shall.?,  her  nails  to  grow
Josh.  10.  19.  a.  them  not  to  enter  their  cities
Judg.  1. 34.  not  a.  them  to  come  down  to  the  vallev

15.  1.  but  her  father  would  not  a.  him  to  go  in

16.26.  Samson  said, .?.  me  that  I  may  feel  the  pillars

2  Sam.  14. 11.  not  a.  the  revengers  of  blood  any  more
1  Kings  15.  17.  that  he  might  not  a.  any  to  go  out
Esth.  3.  8.  it  is  nor  for  the  king’s  profit  to  a.  them

6.  t  10.  a.  not  a  whit  to  fail  of  all  thou  hast  spoken
Job  9.  18.  he  will  not  a.  me  to  take  my  breath

21.  3.  a.  me  that  I  may  speak,  after  that  mock  on
24.  11.  tread  their  wine-presses,  and  a.  thirst
36.  2.  a.  me  a  little,  and  I  will  shew  thee
Psal.  9.  13.  consider  my  trouble  which  I  a.  of  them
16. 10.  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul,  nor  wilt  thou  a.
thine  holy  One  to  see  corruption,^Jm2.27.  |  13.35.
34.  10.  the  young  lions  do  lack  and  a.  hunger
55.  22.  he  will  never  a.  the  righteous  to  be  moved
88. 15.  while  1  .?.  thy  terrors,  1  am  distracted
89.  33.  nor  will  1  a.  my  faithfulness  to  fail
101.  5.  an  high  look  and  a  proud  heart,  will  not  T  a.
121.  3.  he  will  not  a.  thy  root  to  be  moved
Prov.  10.  3.  L.  will  notA.  soul  of  righteous  to  famish
19.  15.  and  an  idle  soul' shall  a.  hunger

19.  a  man  of  great  wrath  shall  a.  punishment
Eccl.  5.  6.  a.  not  thy  mouth  to  cause  thy  flesh  to  sin

12.  the  abundance  of  the  rich  not  a.  him  to  sleep
Ezek.  44.  20.  nor .?.  their  locks  to  grow  long
Hos.  5.  t  4.  theirdoings  will  not  a.  them  to  turn  toG.
Mat.  3.  15.  Jesus  said  to  him,  s.  it  to  be  so  now

8.  21.  a.  me  first  to  bury  my  father,  Luke  9.  59

31.  a.  us  to  go  away  into  the  swine,  Luke  8.  32.

16.  21.  that  he  must  a.  many  things  of  the  elders,

17.  12.  Mark  8.  31 .  |  9.  12.  Luke  9.  22.  |  17.  25.

17.  17-  how  long  shall  I  a.  you  ?  bring  him  hither

to  me,  Mark  9- 19.  Luke  9.  41.
19. 14.  a.  little  children,  Mark  10.  14.  Luke  18.  16.

23. 13.  neither  a.  ye  them  that  are  entering  to  go  in
Mark  7.12.  ye  a.  him  no  more  to  do  ought  for  his  fat.

11.  16.  Jes.  would  notA.  any  man  to  carry  a  vessel
Luke  22.  15.  desired  to  eat  this  passover  before  I  a.

51.  a.  ye  thus  far,  he  touch,  his  ear  and  healed  him
24.  46.  it  behoved  Christ  to  a.  Acts  3.  18.  I  26.  23.
Acts  3.  18.  God  before  shewed  that  Christ. should  a.

5.  41.  they  were  counted  worthy  to  a.  shame

7. '24.  seeing  one  of  them  a.  wrong  he  defended  him

9.  16.  how  gr.  things  he  must.?,  for  my  name’s  sake

21.  39.  I  besech  thee,  a.  me  to  speak  to  the  people
Rom.  8.17-  if  so  be  that  we  s.  wit-h  him  th.  we  may  be

1  Cor.  3.15.  if  any  man’s  work  be  burnt,  he  sh.  j.loss

4. 12.  being  reviled,  we  bless  ;  being  persecut.  we  a.

6.  7.  why  not  rather  a.  yourselves  to  be  defrauded  ?

9.  12.  we  have  not  used  this  power  but .?.  all  things

10. 13.  God  will  not  a.  you  to  be  tempted  above  that

12.  26.  if  one  member  a.  all  members  a.  with  it

2  Cor.  1.6.  the  same  sufferings  which  we  also  a.

11. 19.  for  ye  a.  fools  gladly,  seeing  ye  are  wise

20.  for  ye  a.  if  a  man  bring  you  into  bondage  ?

Gal.  5.  11.  if  I  preach,  why  do  I  yet  a.  persecution

6.12.  lest  they  should  a.  persecution  for  cross  of  Ch.
Phil.  1.29.  given  you  to  believe  and  to  a.  for  his  sake
4.  12.  1  am  instructed  to  abound  and  to  s.  need

1  Thess.  3. 4.  we  told  you  before,  that  we  should  a.
iThess.  1.  5.  the  kingdom  of  God  for  which  ye  also  a

1  Tim.  2. 12.  1  a.  not  a  woman  to  teach  nor  to  usurp
4.  10.  for  therefore  we  both  labour  ami  a.  reproach

2  Tim.  1 .12.  for  the  which  cause  I  also  a.  these  things

2.  9.  wherein  1a.  trouble  as  an  evil  doer  to  bonds
12.  if  we  a.  we  shall  also  reign  with  him

3.  12.  all  that  live  godly  shall  s.  persecution
Heb.  11.  25.  choosing  rather  to  s  affliction  with  pco-

13.  3.  remember  them  who  s.  adversity  [plo

22.  brethren,  s.  the  word  of  exhortation

-181


SUF


SUN


S  U  N


Ja  >n.  5. +  7-  s.  therefore  with  long  patience,  brethren
1  Pet.  2.  20.  but  if  when  ye  do  well,  and  s.  for  it
3.14.  but  if  ye  s.  for  righteousn.  sake,  happy  are  ye
1".  it  is  better  that  ye  s.  for  well  doing  than  evil

4.  15.  but  let  none  of  you  s.  as  a  murderer  or  thief

16.  yet  if  any  man  s.  as  a  Christian,  not  be  asham.
19.  let  them  that  j'.  according  to  the  will  of  God

Rev.  2.  10.  fear  none  of  those  things  thou  shalt  s.
11.  9.  not  s.  dead  bodies  to  be  put  in  their  graves
SUFFERED.

Gen.  20.  6.  therefore  s.  I  thee  not  to  touch  her

31.  7-  but  God  s.  him  not  to  hurt  me
28.  and  hast  not  .v.  me  to  kiss  my  sons  and  daught.
Dent.  8.  3.  he  humbled  thee,  and  s.  thee  to  hunger

18.  14.  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  not  s.  thee  so  to  do
Judg.  3.  28.  and  they  s.  not  a  man  to  pass  over

1  Sam.  24.  7.  David  s.  them  not  to  rise  against  Saul

2  Sam.  21 .  10.  and  not  the  birds  to  rest  on  them

1  Citron.  16.  21.  he  r.  no  man  to  do  them  wrong,  he

reproved  kings  for  their  sakes,  Psal.  105.  14.
Job  31.  30.  neither  have  1  s.  my  mouth  to  sin
Jer.  15.  15.  know  that  for  thy  sake  1  s.  rebuke
Mat.  3.  15.  les.said,  suff.  it  to  be  so  ;  then  he  s.  him

19.  8.  Moses  s.  you  to  put  away  your  wives

24.  43.  nor  s.  his  house  to  be  broken,  Luke  12.  39.

27.  19.  1  have  s.  many  things  this  day  in  a  dream
Mark  1 . 34.  he  s.  not  the  devils  to  speak,  Luke  4.  41.

5.  19.  howbeit,  Jesus  s.  him  not,  but  said  to  him
26.  and  had  s.  many  things  of  many  physicians
37.  and  he  s.  no  man  to  follow  him,  save  Peter

10.  4.  Moses  s.  to  write  a  bill  of  divorcement
Luke  8.  32.  he  $.  them  to  enter  into  the  swine

51.  he  s.  no  man  to  go  in,  save  Peter,  James,  John

13.  2.  were  sinners,  because  they  s.  such  things
24.  26.  O  fools,  ought  not  Chr.  have  s.  these  things  ?

Acts  13.  18.  about  forty  years  s.  he  their  manners
14. 16.  who  s.  all  nations  to  walk  in  their  own  ways

16.  7.  they  essayed,  but  the  Spirit  s.  them  not

17.  3.  alleging  that  Christ  must  needs  have  s.

19.  30.  disciples  s.  him  not  to  enter  in  unto  people

28.  16.  but  Paul  was  .r.  to  dwell  by  himself

2  Cor.  7.  12.  1  did  it  not  for  his  cause  that  s',  wrong

11.  25.  once  was  I  stoned,  thrice  I  s.  shipwreck
Gal.  3.  4.  have  ye  s.  so  many  things  in  vain  ?

P/nil.  3.  8.  for  whom  1  have  s.  the  loss  of  all  things
1  Thess.  2.  2.  but  even  after  that  we  had  s.  before

14.  ye  haves,  like  things  of  your  own  countrymen
Deb.  2. 18.  for  in  that  he  hims.  baths,  being  tempted

5.  8.  he  learned  obedience  by  things  which  he  s.

7-  23.  they  were  not  s.  continue  by  reason  of  death

?.  26.  for  then  must  he  often  have  s.  since  foundat.

3.  12.  wherefore  Jesus  also  s.  without  the  gate
1  Pet.  2.  21.  Chr.  s.  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example
23.  when  he  s.  he  threatened  not,  but  committed
3.  18.  for  Chr.  hath  once  s.  for  sins,  just  for  unjust

4.  1.  as  Christ  hath  s.  for  us  in  the  flesh,  he  that
hath  s.  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin

5.  10.  after  ye  have  s.  a  while,  make  you  perfect
SUFFEREST.

Rev.  2.  20.  because  thou  s.  that  woman  Jezebel
SUFFER ETH.

Psal.  66.  9-  bless  G.  who  s.  not  our  feet  to  be  moved
107. 38.  blessetb,  and  s.  not  their  cattle  to  decrease
Mat.  11.  12.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  s.  violence
Acts  28.  4.  yet  vengeance  s.  him  not  to  live
1  Cor.  13.  4.  charity  s.  long  and  is  kind,  euvieth  not
SUFFERING.

Acts  27. 7.  the  wind  not  s.  us,  we  sailed  under  Crete
Jam.  5. 10.  for  an  example  of  s.  affliction,  and  patie.

1  Pet.  2.  19.  if  a  man  endure  grief,  s.  wrongfully
Jude 7.  an  example,  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire
SUFFERING.

Deb.  2.  9.  for  the  r.  of  death,  crowned  with  glory
SUFFERINGS.

Rom.  8.  18.  I  reckon  that  the  s.  of  this  present  time
2  Cor.  1 . 5.  for  as  the  s.  of  Christ  abound  in  us

6.  enduring  the  same  J-.  which  we  also  suffer

7.  ye  are  partakers  of  the  s.  so  of  the  consolation
Phil  3.  10.  that  I  may  know  the  fellowship  of  his  s.
Col.  1.  24.  who  now  rejoice  in  my  s.  for  you
Deb.  2. 10.  make  captain  of  salvation  perfect  thro’ s.

1  Pet.  1. 11.  it  testified  before-hand  the  s.  of  Christ
4.  13.  in  as  much  as  ye  are  partakers  of  Christ’s  s.

5. 1. 1  am  a  witness  of  the  s.  of  Christ,  and  partaker
SUFFICE.

Num.  11. 22.  shall  herds  be  slain  tor.  them  ?  or  shall
the  fish  of  the  sea  be  gathered  together  to  r.  them  ?
Dent.  3.  26.  let  it  r.  thee,  speak  no  more  to  me  of  this
1  Kings  20. 10.  if  dust  of  Samaria  shall  r.  for  people
Ezek.  44.  6.  let  it  r.  you  of  all  your  abomin.  45.  9.
Dos.  12.  +  8.  Ephraim  said,  all  my  labours r.  menot
1  Pet.  4. 3.  for  the  time  past  may  s.  to  have  wrought
SUFFICED.

Judg. ‘A.  14.  gave  them  wives,  yetso  they  r.  them  not
Ruth  2.  14.  she  did  eat,  and  was  r.  ancl  left

18.  gave  her  that  she  had  reserved,  after  she  was  r.

SUFFICETII.


John  14.  8.  Lord,  shew  us  the  Father  and  it  s.  us
SUFFICIENCY.

Lev.  5.  +  7.  if  his  hand  cannot  reach  to  the  r.  of  a
Iamb,  then  two  turtle  doves  or  pigeons,  12.  t  8.
25.  t  26.  if  his  hand  hath  found  r.  to  redeem  it
Job  20.22.  in  fulness  of  hisr.  he  shall  be  in  straits
2  Cor.  3.  5.  we  are  not  sufficient,  but  our  s.  is  ofGod
9.  8.  r.  in  all  things,  ye  may  abound  in  good  work
SUFFICIENT.

Eiod.  36.  7.  for  the  stuff  they  had  was  r.  for  work
Dent.  15.  8.  thou  shalt  lend  him  r.  for  his  need
33. 7.  let  his  hand  be  r.  for  him,  thou  an  help  to  him
Prov.  25.  16.  eat  so  much  honey  as  is  s.  for  thee
Isa.  40.  16.  and  Lebanon  is  not  s.  to  burn,  nor  the
beasts  thereof  r.  for  a  burnt  offering

Mat.  6.  34.  s.  to  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof
Luke  14.  28.  whether  he  have  r.  to  finish  it
John  6.7.  two  hundred  penny-worth  of  bread  is  not  s.
2  Cor.  2.  6.  s.  to  such  a  man  is  this  punishment
16,  we  are  a  savour,  and  who  isr.  for  these  things?
3.  5.  not  that  we  are  f ,  of  ourselves  to  think
12.  9.  he  said  to  me,  mv  grace  is  s.  for  thee
SUFFICIENTLY.

2  Citron.  3C.3.  pnests  had  not  sanctified  themselves s.
Isa.  23.  18.  that  dwell  before  the  Lord  to  eat  s.

482


SUIT.

Judg.  17.  10.  T  will  give  thee  a  s.  of  apparel
2  Sam.  15.  4. that  ev.  man  who  hath  any  s.  or  caus*
Job  11.  19.  yea,  many  shall  make  f.  unto  thee
SUITS.

Isa.  3.  22.  will  take  away  changeable  s.  of  apparel
SUM,  Substantive.

Exod.  21.  30.  if  there  be  laid  on  him  a  s.  of  money
30.  12.  when  thou  takest  the  s.  of  children  of  lsr.
38.  21.  this  is  the  s.  of  the  tabernacle  of  testimony
Num.  1.  2.  take  the  s.  of  all  the  congregation,  26.  2.
49.  thou  shalt  not  take  the  s.  of  the  Levites
4.  2.  take  the  s.  of  the  sons  of  Kohath
22.  take  also  the  s.  of  the  sons  of  Gershon
26.  4.  take  the  s.  of  people  from  twenty  years  old
31. 26.  take  the  r.  of  the  prey  that  was  taken
49.  have  taken  the  s.  otf  the  men  of  war
2  Sam.  24.  9-  Joab  gave  up  s.  to  king,  1  Chr.  21.  5
Esth.  4.7.  the  s.  of  money  that  Hainan  promised
Psal.  139. 17.  how  great  is  the  s.  of  them  !

Ezek.  28.  12.  thou  sealest  up  the  f.  full  of  wisdom
Dan.  7.  1.  Daniel  told  the  s.  of  the  dream
Acts";.  16.  Abraham  bought  for  a  s.  of  money
22.  28.  with  a  great  .f.  obtained  I  this  freedom
Deb.  8.  1.  of  the  things  we  have  spoken  this  is  ther.

SUM.

2  Kings  22.  4.  that  he  may  s.  the  silver  brought

SUMMER.  [cease

Gen.  8.  22.  s.  and  winter,  day  and  night,  shall  not
Psal.  32. 4.  my  moisture  is  turned  into  drought  of  s.
74.  17.  thou  hast  made  f.  and  winter
Prov.  6.  8.  which  provideth  her  meat  in  s.  30.  25.
10.  5.  he  that  gathereth  in  s.  is  a  wise  son
26.  1.  as  snow  in  r.  and  as  rain  in  harvest
Isa.  28.  4.  and  as  the  hasty  fruit  before  the  s.

Jer.  8.  20.  the  harvest  is  past,  the  s.  is  ended
Dan.  2.  35.  as  the  chaff  of  the  s.  threshing-floors
Zech.  14.8.  in  s.  and  in  winter  shall  it  be
Mat.  24.  32.  when  fig-tree  puts  forth  leaves,  ye
know  that  s.  is  nigh,  Mark  1.3.  28.  Luke  21.  30.
SUMM  ER  chamber.

Judg.  3. 24.  surely  he  covers  his  feet  in  his  r.  chamber
SUMME  R-j fruit.

2  Sam.  16. 2.  bread  and  s. -fruit  for  young  men  to  eat
Amos  8.  1.  behold,  a  basket  of  s. -J'ruit-,  2.

S  U  M  M  E  R-fmits.

2  Sam.  16. 1.  Ziba  brought  100  bunches  of  s. -fruits
Isa.  16.9.  for  the  shouting  for  thy  s. -fruits  is  fallen
Jer.  40. 10.  but  ve,  gather  ye  wine  and  s.-fmits,  12.
48.  32.  the  spoiler  is  fallen  on  s.-fmits  and  vintage
Mic.  7. 1.  1  am  as  when  they  have  gathered  s.-fruits
SUMME  R ,-lumse.

Amos  3.  15.  I  will  smite  winter  house  with  s. -house
S  U  M  M  ER  -parlour.

Judg.  3.  20.  Eglon  was  sitting  in  a  s.-parlour
SUMMER.

Isa.  18.  6.  and  the  fowls  shall  s.  upon  them
SUMPTUOUSLY.

Luke  16.  19.  the  rich  man  fared  s.  every  day

SUN.


This  is  the  great  luminary  that  God  created  at  the
beginning,  to  preside  over  the  day,  as  also  he  cre¬
ated  the  moon  to  rule  over  the  night,  Gen.  1.  16.
The  sun  has  been  the  object  of  nor  ship  and  adora¬
tion  to  the  greatest  part  of  the  people  of  the  East.
It  is  thought  to  be  the  sun  that  the  Phenicians
worshipped  under  the  name  of  Baal,  the  Moabites
under  the  name  of  Chemosh,  the  Ammonites  by
that  of  Moloch,  and  the  Israelites  by  the  name
of  Baal,  and  by  the  king  of  the  host  of  heaven.
They  did  not  separate  his  worship  from  that  of
the  moon,  whom  they  called  Astarta,  and  the
queen  of  heaven.  They  paid  this  worship  upon
high  places,  in  groves,  and  upon  the  roofs  of  their
houses.  The  Israelites  had  a  caution  against  this
worship.  Dent.  4.  15, 19.  Take  ye  therefore  good

heed  unto  yourselves, - lest  thou  lift  up  thine

eyes  unto  heaven,  and  when  thou  seest  the  sun,
and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  even  all  the  host  of
heaven,  shouldest  be  driven  to  worship  them,
and  serve  them,  whicn  the  Lord  thy  God  hath
divided  unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  hea¬
ven.  And  in  Dent.  17 .  3,  4,  5.  such  are  con¬
demned  to  death,  as  shall  be  perverted  to  the  wor¬
ship  of  strange  gods,  of  the  sun,  or  of  the  moon.
Josiah  king  of  Judah  took  away  out  of  the  temple
of  the  Lord,  the  horses,  and  burnt  the  chariots,
t  ’at  the  kings  his  predecessors  had  consecrated  to
the  sun,  2  Kings  23.  11.  Job  says,  that  he  looked
upon  it  as  a  very  great  crime,  and  as  renouncing
the  God  that  is  above,  to  kiss  his  hand  as  a  token
of  adoration,  when  he  saw  the  sun  in  all  its  glory
and  splendour.  Job  31.  26,  27, 28.  Ezekiel  saw  in
the  ■Spirit,  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord ,  Jive  and
twenty  men  of  Judah,  who  turned  their  backs  upon
the  sanctuary,  and  had  their  faces  towards  the
east,  w'orshipping  the  sun  at  his  rising,  Ezek.  8. 16.
The  sun  is  frequently  alluded  to  in  a  great  part  oj
the  noble  similitudes  that  the  sacred  authors  make
use  of.  To  represent  a  very  great  calamity,  they
say,  the  sun  was  obscured,  and  the  moon  with¬
drew  her  light,  Isa.  13.  10.  1  24.  23.  Jer.  15.  9.
Ezek.  32.  7.  Amos  8.  9.  To  express  a  long  con¬
tinuance  of  any  thing  that  is  glorious  and  illus¬
trious,  in  Scripture  style  it  is  said.  It  shall  con¬
tinue  as  long  as  the  sun  endures,  Psal.  72.  5, 17.
'The  compass  of  the  whole  earth  is  marked  out  by
those  words,  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  the
going  down  of  the  same,  Psal.  50.  1. 1  113.  3.
To  be  hung  upon  a  gibbet  in  the  face  of  the  sun,
to  be  exposed  in  the  fields  to  the  birds  of  the  air,
and  to  the  heat  of  the  sun,  expresses  a  particular
degree  of  ignominy,  Num.  25.  4.  Jer.  8.  2.  Un¬
der  the  sun  ;  that  is  to  say,  in  the  world,  Eccl.
1_.  9,  14,  &c.  Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  sun  or
righteousness,  Mai.  4.  2.  he  enlightens,  quickens ,
and  comforts  his  people.  A  woman  clothed  with
the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet,  signifies
the  church  clothed  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ ,
purity  of  doctrine,  and  a  holy  conversation ;  con¬
temning  and  undervaluing  worldly  things,  and  the
Mosaical  worship,  Rev.  12. 1.


1  he  . Scripture  acquaints  us  with  three  very  ext  root
atniiry  and  ntiraculoiis  things  relating  to  the  sun.

,  Afst  was,  when  it  stood  still  at  the  command
oj  Joshua,  Josh.  lo.  12.  13.  The  second,  when  it
returned  back  m  the  time  of  king  Hezekiah  2
Kings  20.  11.  And  the  third,  when  it  was  in¬
volved m  darkness,  though  the  moon  was  then  at
ths  Jnll,  at  the  time  of  our  Saviour’s  crucifixion ,
Mat.  27.  *15.  •

Gen.  15.  17-  it  came  to  pass  when  the  r.  went  down

19.  23.  the  s.  was  risen  when  Lot  entered  Zoar
28.  11.  Jacob  tarried  all  night,  bee.  the  was  set

32.  31.  as  he  passed  over  Penuel,  the  s.  rose  on  him
01 .  9.  the  s.  inoon,  and  stars  made  obeisance  to  me

fJod-  I?-  21.  and  when  the  r.  waxed  hot  it  melteu
3.  it  s.  be  risen,  blood  shall  be  shed  for  him
Lev. 22. 7.  and  when  ther.  is  down,  he  shall  be  clean
and  afterwards  eat  holy  things,  Dent.  23. 11
Lum.  23.  4.  hang  them  up  before  the  Lord,  ag.  the  5!
dJeut.  4.  19.  lest  when  tlu'u  seest  the  s.  and  moon
17.  3.  and  hath  worshipped  either  the  s.  or  moon
-.4.  lp.  nor  shall  the  s.  go  down  upon  it.  he  is  poor

33.  14.  tor  the  precious  fruits  brought  forth  by  f.
Josh.  1.  4.  to  sea,  toward  the  going  down  of  ther.

8. 29. as  soon  as  the  a.  was  down,  Joshua  commanded
]0.  1C.  s.  stand  thou  still  upon  Gibeon,  and  moon
13.  and  the  stood  still,  and  the  moon  stayed
Judg o\ .  Jet  them  that  love  him  be  as j.hismi^bt

8.  13.  Gideon  returned  before  the  s.  was  up  0

9.  33.  as  soon  as  the  s.  is  up,  thou  shalt  rise  earlv

14.  18.  they  said  to  him  belore  the  s.  went  down

19.  14.  s.  went  down  when  they  were  by  Gibeah

1  Sam.  11.9.  by  the  f.  be  hot,  ye  shall  have  help

2  3am.  2.24.  the  went  down,  they  were  at  Ammah
3.  3d.  if  taste  bread  or  ought  till  the  s.  be  down

V1-  t11  . } with  thy  wives  in  sight  of  this  r.

12.  but  I  will  do  this  thing  before  Israel  and  the  j.

23.  4.  as  the  light  of  morning  when  the  a.  riseth

2  Kings  3.  22.  they  rose,  and /.  shone  upon  the  water
—3.  D.  them  also  that  burn  incense  to  s.  and  moon
11.  and  burnt  the  chariots  of  the  s.  with  fire
2  Chron.  14.  t  5.  Asa  took  high  places  and  s.  images

34.  t  4.  Josiah  brake  down  the  s.  images  on  high

r  1  3-  let  ,not  gates  be  0Pened  till  the  s.  be  hot

J°b 8.  16.  the  hypocrite  is  green  before  the  s.

9.  7-  which  commandeth  the  s.  and  it  riseth  not

30.  28.  I  went  mourning  without  the  a.  1  stood

31.  26.  if  1  beheld  s.  when  itshined  or  the  moon
Psal.  19.  4.  in  them  hath  he  set  a  tabernacle  for  s.
58. 8.  pass  away  that  they  may  not  see  the  s.

72.  5.  shall  tear  thee  as  long  as  s.  and  moon  endure
17 .  his  name  shall  be  continued  as  long  as  the  s
74.  16.  thou  hast  prepared  the  light  and  the  s.

84.  11.  for  the  Lord  God  is  a  s.  and  shield
89.  36.  his  throne  shall  endure  as  the  a.  before  me
104.  22.  the  j.  ariseth,  they  gather  themselves
121.  b.  the  s.  shall  not  smite  thee  by  day

I. 36.  8.  to  him  that  made  the  s.  to  rule  by  day

148. 3.  praise  ye  him,  s.  and  moon,  and  stars  of  light
Eccl.  1.  5.  the  a.  also  ariseth,  and  the  j.  goethdown

0.  5.  moreover,  he  hath  not  seen  the  s.  nor  known
7,  11.  by  it  there  is  profit  to  them  that  see  the  s.

II.  7.  a  pleasant  thing  for  the  eyes  to  behold  the  s.

12.  2.  while  the  a.  or  the  stars  be  not  darkened

Cant.  1.  6.  because  the  s.  hath  looked  upon  me

6.  10.  that  looketh  forth,  fair  as  moon,  clear  as  the  s.
Isa.  19.  +  18.  one  shall  be  called  the  city  ofthe  s.

24.  23.  then  the  s.  shall  be  ashamed,  Ld.  shall  reign

30.  26.  the  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  lmhtot
the/,  and  the  light  of  the  a.  shall  be  sevenfold

38.  8.  is  gone  down  in  s.  dial,  so  the  s.  returned
49.  10.  nor  shall  the  heat  nor  s.  smite  them
60.  19.  the  s.  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day'

20.  s.  shall  no  more  go  down,  nor  moon  withdraw
Jer.  8.  2.  they  shall  spread  the  bones  before  the  s.

15.  9.  her  s.  is  gone  down  while  it  was  yet  day
19.  +  2.  which  is  by  the  entry  ofthe  a.  gate

31.  35.  which  p.vetli  the  a.  for  a  light  by  day
43.  +  13.  he  shall  break  the  house  ofthe  s.

Ezek.  8.  16.  they  worshipped  the  a.  toward  the  east

32.  7- 1  will  cover  the  s.  with  a  cloud

Joel.  2. 10.  the  s.  and  the  moon  shall  be  darkened  3
15.  Mat.  24.  29.  Mark  13.  24.  Luke  23.  45.
31.  s.  shall  be  turned  into  darkness,  moon  into
Amos.  8.  9. 1  will  cause  the  s.  to  go  down  at  noon
Jonah  4.  8.  when  the  a.  did  arise,  and  the  a.  beat  on
the  head  of  Jonah  that  he  wished  to  die
Mic.  3.  6.  the  s.  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets
Nah.  3.  17.  but  when  the  s.  ariseth,  they  flee  away
Dab.  3.  11.  a.  and  moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation
Mai.  4.  2._toyou  shall  the  s.  of  righteousness  arise
Mat.  5.  45.  he  maketh  his  s.  to  rise  on  evil  and  good
13.6. when  s.  was  up  they  were  scorched,  Mark  4.  6.
43.  then  shall  the  righteous  shine  as  the  s.

17.  2.  his  face  did  shine  as  the  s.  Rev.  1.  16.1  10. 1.
Mark  1.  32.  when  the  s.  did  set  they  brought  the  sick
Luke  4. 40.  now  when  the .?.  was  setting,  brought  sick

21.  25.  there  shall  be  signs  in  the  a.  and  the  moon
Acts  2.  20.  the  a.  into  daikness,  the  moon  into  blood

1.3.  11.  shalt  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  a.  foraseason
2r>.  13.  I  saw  a  light  above  the  brightness  of  the  s.

27 .  20.  when  neither  s.  nor  stars  appeared

1 Cor.  15. 41.  there  is  one  glory  of  the  s.  and  another
Eph.  4.  26.  let  not  the  s.  go  down  upon  your  wrath
Jam.  1.  11.  s.  is  no  sooner  risen  with  a  burning  hea
Rev.  6.  12.  the  a.  became  black  as  sackcloth  or  hair

7.  16.  nor  shal  l  the  s.  light  on  them  nor  any  heat
8. 12.  and  a  third  part  of  the  s.  was  smitten

9.  2.  the  s.  and  the  air  were  darkened  by  smoke
12.  1.  there  appeared  a  woman  clothed  with  the*.

16.  8.  the  fourth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  the  s.
19-  17-  1  saw  an  angel  standing  in  the  s.  he  cried
21.  23.  and  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  s.  22.5.

NeeGoETH,  Going,  Rising,

Under  the  SUN.

Eccl.  1.  3.  what  profit  of  all  labour  which  he  taketh
under  the  s.  ?  2.  18,  19,  20,  22.  |  5.  18.  |  9.  9.

9.  and  there  is  no  new  tiling  under  the  s.

14. 1  have  seen  ai.  tne  works  done  under  s.  all  is
vanity  and  vexation,  2.  17. 1  4.  3.  |  8.  17  1  9.  3.

2.  11.  and  there  was  no  profit  under  the  s.

3.  16.  I  saw  under  this,  the  place  of  judgment


SUP


S  U  R


S  U  R


Eccl.  4.1.  all  the  oppressions  that  are  done  un.  the  «.
7-  then  1  returned,  and  1  saw  vanity  under  the  t.
5. 13.  an  evil  I  have  seen  under  the  s.  6.  1.1  10.  5.
6.  12.  tell  what  shall  be  after  him  under  the  #.

8.  9. 1  applied  my  heart  to  every  work  under  the  #.

15.  mirth,  a  man  hath  no  better  thing  under  the  s.

9.  6.  nor  any  portion  in  any  thing  under  the  s.

9.  all  days  which  he  hath  given  thee  under  the  #.
11.  I  saw  under  the  s.  that  race  is  not  to  the  swift
13.  this  wisdom  have  1  seen  also  under  thes.
SUNDER.

Psal.  46. 9-  he  breaks  the  bow,  cutteth  the  spear  in  # .
107. 14.  and  he  brake  their  bands  in  #.

16.  and  he  hath  cut  the  bars  of  iron  in  s.

Tsa.  27-  9.  as  chalk  stones  that  are  beaten  in  s.

45.  2.  I  will  cut  in  #.  the  bars  of  iron

Nah.  1.  13.  for  now  I  will  burst  thy  bonds  in  #.
Luke  12. 46.  he  will  come  and  cut  him  ini.
SUNDERED.

Job  41. 17.  his  scales  stick  together,  they  cannot  be  .f.
Ps.  22.  f  14.  all  liiy  bones  are  s.  my  heart  is  like  wax
SUNDRY.

Heb.  1. 1.  God  who  at  #.  times  spake  to  the  fathers
SUNG.

Ezra  3. 11.  they  #.  together  by  course  in  praising  L.
Isa.  26.  1.  in  that  day  shall  this  song  be  s.  in  Judah
Mat.  26.  30.  when  they  had  s.  an  hymn,  they  went
out  into  the  mount  of  Olives,  Mark  14.  26.
Rev. 5.9-  they  s.  a  new  song,  saying,  thou  art  worthy
14.3.  they  #.  as  it  were  a  new  song  bef.  the  throne
SUNK,  Actively,  Passively.

Mum. 11. f 2.  when  Moses  prayed  to  the  L.  the  fire  s.

1  Sam.  17.  49.  that  the  stone  s.  into  his  forehead

2  Kings  9.  24.  and  Jehoram  s.  down  in  his  chariot
Psal.  9.15.  heathen  are#.  down  in  the  pit  they  made
Jer.  38.  6.  they  let  him  down,  so  Jer.  #.  in  the  mire

22.  thy  feet  are  s.  in  the  mire,  they  are  turned  back
Lam.  2.  9.  her  gates  are  s.  into  the  ground
Acts  20.  9.  Eutychus  s.  down  with  si  .“and  fell  down
SUP.

Isa.  42.+  14.  I  will  destroy  and  s.  up  at  once
Obad.i  16.  yea,.all  the  heathen  shall  drink  and  s.  up
Hab.  1.  9.  their  faces  shall  s.  up  as  the  east-wind
Luke  17.  8.  say,  make  ready  wherewith  1  may  s.
Rev.  3.  20.  I  will  s.  with  him,  and  he  with  me
SUPPED.

1  Cor.  11.  25.  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  s.

SUPERFLUITY.

Jam.  1.21.  lay  apart  all  filthiness,  s.  of  naughtiness
SUPERFLUITIES.

Amos  6.  +  4.  lie  on  beds  of  ivory  and  abound  with  s.
SUPERFLUOUS.

Lev.  21. 18.  whatsoever  man  hath  any  thin?  s.

22.  23.  a  bullock,  or  lamb,  that  hath  any  thing  s.

2  Cor.  9.1.  as  to  ministering  it  is  s.  for  to  write  to  you

SUPERSCRIPTION.

It  was  a  custom  among  the  Romans  to  write  the
crime  for  which  any  man  suffered  death,  in  a
table,  and  carry  it  before  him  to  execution;
and  as  of  other  kinds  of  death,  so  in  particular
of  those  that  were  crucified.  Whence  appears
the  propriety  of  all  these  expressions  in  the
Evangelists ,  kmypacpn  m?  curias,  the  super¬
scription  of  the  cause  of  his  crimes.  Mark  15.
26.  rj  aina  eTrava)  r t)s  Ke<pa\r)s  'ye'ypajuuevm
the  charge,  or  cause  written  over  his  head,
Mat.  27.  37-  And  simply  ew t~,pa<pn,  super¬
scription,  Luke  23.  38.  And  nr\os,  title,  John
19.  19.

Mat.  22.  20.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  whose  is  this
image  and  s.  ?  Mark  12.  16.  Luke  20.  24.
Mark  15.  26.  the#.  of  his  accusation,  Luke  23.  38.
SUPERSTITION.

Acts  25.19.  but  had  questions  ag.  him  of  their  own  s.
SUPERSTITIOUS.

Acts  17. 22. 1  perceive  that  in  all  thinssye  are  too  s.
SUPPER.

Mark 6. 21.  Herod  on  hisbirth-d.madea#.  to  lords
Luke  14. 12.  when  thou  vnakest  a  dinner  or  s.

16.  a  certain  man  made  a  great  #.  and  bade  many

17.  and  sent  his  servant  at#.  time  to  say  to  them
24.  none  of  those  were  bidden  shall  taste  of  my  s.

22.20.  likewise  also  the  cup  after  s.  saying,  this  cup
John  12.2.  there  they  made  Jesus  a  s.  Martha  served
13.  2.  and  s.  being  ended  ||  4.  Jesus  riseth  from  s.
21.  20.  disciple  who  also  leaned  on  his  breast  at#.
1  Cor.  11.  20.  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord’s  s.

21.  for  every  one  taketh  before  other  his  own  s.
Rev.  19.  9.  blessed  that  are  called  to  the  marriage  #.
17.  he  cried,  come  to  the  s.  of  the  great  God
SUPPING.

Hab.  1.  +  9.  the  s.  up  of  their  faces  as  the  east-wind
SUPPLANT.

Jer.  9.  4.  for  every  brother  will  utterly  s.
SUPPLANTED.

Gen.  27.  36.  for  he  hath#.  me  these  two  times
SUPPLANTER.

Gen.  27.  +  36.  he  said,  is  not  he  rightly  named  a  s.
SUPPLE.

Ezek.  16.  4.  neithet  wast  washed  in  water  to  #.  thee
SUPPLIANTS.

Zeph.  3.  10.  my  s.  shall  bring  mine  offering
SUPPLICATION.

1  Sam.  13.  12.  and  I  have  not  made  s.  to  the  Lord

1  Ktngs  8.  28.  have  respect  to  his  s.  2  Chron.  6.  19.
30.  hearken  thou  to  the  #.  45.  49.  2  Chron.  6.  35.
33.  and  make  s.  to  thee,  47.  2  Chron.  6.  24.

52.  that  thine  eyes  may  be  open  to  #.  of  thy  servant
54.  had  made  end  of  praying  all  this  prayer  and  s.
59.  these  mv  words  wherewith  I  have  made  s.

9.  3.  I  have  heard  thy  s.  that  thou  hast  made

2  Chron.  6.  29.  what#.  shall  be  made  of  any  man
33.  13..  Lord  heard  Manasseh’s#.  then  knew  the  L.

Esth.  4.  8.  and  should  make  #.  to  him  for  her  people
Job  8.5.  and  wouldest  make  thy  s.  to  the  Almighty
9.  15.  but  I  would  make  my  s.  to  my  judge
Ps.  6.  9.  the  L.  hath  heard  my  s.  receive  my  prayer
30.  8.  and  unto  the  Lord  I  made  my  #.  142.  1.

55. 1.  _give  ear,  and  hide  not  thyself  from  my  s.
119. 1J0.  let  my  s.  come  before  thee,  deliver  me
Isa.  45.  14  they  shall  make  #.  to  thee,  saying
Jer.  36. 7.  it  may  be  they  will  present  their  s.  to  Ld.


Jer.  37. 20.  O  king,  let  my  s.  be  accepted  before  thee

38. 26.  I  presented  my  s.  bef.  the  king  not  to  return
42.  2.  let  our#,  be  accepted  bef.  thee  and  pray  forus

9.  to  whom  ye  sent  me  to  present  your  s.  bef.  him
Dan.  6.  11.  then  these  men  and  Daniel  making  #.

9. 20.  while  I  was  presenting  my  s.  before  my  God
Jlos.  12.4.  he  wept  and  made  s.  unto  him,  found  him
Acts  1.  14.  continued  with  one  accord  in  prav.  and  s.
Eph.6.18.  with  all  prayer  and  s.  inspir.  for  all  saints
Phil.  4.  6.  but  in  every  thing  by  prayer  and  s.
SUPPLICATIONS.

2  Chr.  6.21.  hearken  to#,  of  thy  servant  and  people
39.  tnen  hear  thou  Iheir  prayer  and  their  #.

Job  41.  .3.  will  Leviathan  make  many  #.  unto  thee  ?
Psal.  2 H.  2.  hear  voice  of  my  #.  when  I  cry,  140. 6.

6.  he  hath  heard  voice  of  my  #.  31.  22.  1  116.  1.
86.  6.  give  ear  and  attend  to  the  voice  of  my  #.
130.2.  let  thy  ears  be  attentive  to  my  #.  143.  1.
Jer.  .3.  21.  weeping  and  #.  of  Israel  were  heard
31. 9.  come  with  weep,  and  with  #.  will  I  lead  them
Dan.  9.  3.  1  set  my  face  to  seek  by  prayer  and  #.

17.  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  servant  and  his  #.

18.  we  do  not  present  our  #.  for  our  righteousness

23.  at  the  beginning  of  thy  #.  the  command  came

Zech.  12. 10.  and  I  will  pour  the  Spirit  of  gr.  and  #.

1  Tim.  2.  1.  the  first  of  all  #.  be  made  for  all  men

5. 5.  she  continueth  in  #.  and  prayers  night  and  day
Heb.  5. 7.  w  hen  he  had  offered  up  prayers  and  s.

SUPPLY,  Substantive.

2  Cor.  8. 14.  that  your  abundance  may  be  a#,  fortheir

want,  that  their  abundance  a  #.  for  your  want
Phil.  1. 19.  thro’  prayer  and  the  #.  of  the  Spir.  of  Jes.
SUPPLY,  Verb.

Phil.  2.  30.  not  regarding  his  life  to  #.  lack  of  serv.
4. 19.  but  my  G  shall  #.  all  your  need  by  Chr.  Jes.
SUPPLIED.

1  Cor.  16. 17.  what  lacking  on  your  part,  they  have  #.

2  Cor.  11. 9.  what  was  lacking  to  me,  the  brethren  #.

SUPPL1ETH.

2  Cor.  9. 12.  not  only  #.  the  want  of  the  saints
Eph.  4. 16.  compelled  by  that  which  every  joint  #.
SUPPORT,  ED.

Gen.  27.  +  37.  with  corn  and  wine  nave  I  #.  him
Psal.  20.  +  2.  the  Lord  #.  thee  out  of  Zion
Acts  20. 35.  ye  ought  to  #.  the  weak,  1  Thess.  5. 14.
SUPPOSE.

2  Sam.  13.  32.  let  not  my  lord#,  that  they  have  slain
LukeJ.  43.  I  #.  that  he  to  whom  he  forgave  most

12.  51.  #.  ye  that  I  am  come  to  give  peace  on  earth

13.  2.  #.  ye  that  these  Galileans  were  sinners
John  21.  25.  I  #.  the  world  could  not  contain  books
Acts  2.  15.  for  these  are  not  drunken,  as  ye  #.

1  Cor.  7. 26.  I  #.  that  this  is  good  for  the  present

2  Cor.  11.5.  1  #.  I  was  not  behind  the  ehiefest  apost.
Heb.  10.  29.  of  how  much  sorer  punishment  #.  ye
1  Pet.  5. 12.  b}-  Silvanus,  a  faithful  brother,  as  I  #.

SUPPOSED.

Mat.  20. 10.  they  #.  they  should  have  received  more
Mark  6. 49.  they  #.  it  had  been  a  spirit,  and  cried  out
Luke  3. 23.  Jesus  being,  as  was  #.  the  son  of  Joseph

24.  37.  terrified  and  #.  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit
Acts  7. 25.  for  he  #.  his  brethren  "would  have  underst.

21. 29.  whom  they#,  that  Paul  had  brought  to  temp.

25. 18.  brought  none  accusat.  of  such  things  as  I  #.
Phil.  2. 25.  I  #.  it  necess.  to  send  to  you  Epaphrodit.

SUPPOSING.

Luke  2.  44.  they  #.  him  to  have  been  in  the  company
John  20. 15.  she  #.  him  to  be  gardener,  saith  to  him
Acts  14. 19.  who  drew  Paul  out,  #.  he  had  been  dead

16. 27.  jailer  #.  that  the  prisoners  had  been  fled

27.  13.  #.  that  they  had  obtained  their  purpose

Phil.  1.  16.  #.  to  add  affliction  to  my  bonds
1  Tim.  6. 5.  men  of  corrupt  minds,  s.  gain  is  godlin.
SUPREME.

1  Pet.  2.  13.  submit,  whether  it  be  to  the  king  as  #.
SURE.

Gen.  23.17.  borders,  field,  and  cave  were  made  #.  20.
Exod.  3. 19.  I  am  #.  the  king  will  not  let  you  go
Num.  32.  23.  and  be  #.  j  our  sin  will  find  you  out
Deut.  12.  23.  only  be  #.  that  thou  eat  not  the  blood

1  Sam.  2.  35.  and  I  will  build  him  a  #.  house
20.  7-  then  be  #.  that  evil  is  determined  by  him

25.  28.  for  the  Lord  will  make  my  Lord  a  #.  house

2  Sam.  1 .  10.  because  1  was  #.  that  he  could  not  live

23. 5.  with  me  covenant  ordered  in  all  things  and  #.

1  Kings  11. 38.  that  I  will  build  thee  a  #.  house
Ezra  9.  +  8.  and  to  give  us  a  constant  and  #.  abode
IS  eh.  9.  38.  we  make  a  s.  covenant,  and  write  it

II .  +  23.  that  a#,  ordinance  should  be  for  the  singers
Job  24.  22.  he  riseth  up  and  no  man  is  #.  of  life
Psal.  19. 7- the  testimony  of  the  L.  is#,  making  wise

93. 5.  thv  testimonies  are  very  #.  O  Lord

III.  7.  all  his  commandments  are  #.

Prov.6.  3.  humble  thyself  and  make  #.  thy  friend

11. 15.  and  he  that  hateth  suretiship,  is  #.

18.  to  him  soweth  righteousness  shall  be  #.  reward
Isa.  22. 23. 1  will  fasten  him  as  a  nail  in  a  #.  place,  25.

28. 16.  behold,  I  laj-  in  Zion  tor  a  #.  foundation

32. 18.  my  people  shall  dwell  in  #.  dwellings

33. 16.  bread  shall  be  given  him,  waters  shall  be  #.
55.  3.  even  the  #.  mercies  of  David,  Acts  13.  34.

Jer.  15.  +  18.  thou  be  to  me  as  waters  that  be  not#.  ?
Dan.  2.  45.  and  the  interpretation  thereof  is#.

4.  26.  thy  kingdom  shall  be  #.  unto  thee
Mat.  27  .  64.  that  the  sepulchre  be  made  #.  66.

65.  he  said,  go  your  way,  make  it  as  #.  as  you  can
Luke  10. 11.  bej.ofthis  the  kiugdomof  God  is  come
John  6. 69.  we  believe  are  #.  and  that  thou  art  Christ
16.  30.  now  are  we  #.  that  thou  knowest  all  things
Rom.  2.2.  we  are  #.  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  true

4. 16.  to  end  the  promise  might  be  #.  to  all  the  seed
15.  29.  I  am  #.  that  when  1  come  unto  you

2  Tim.  2. 19.  the  foundation  of  God  standeth  #.
Heb.  6.  19.  hope  we  have  as  anchor#,  and  stedfast
2  r-ei.  1, 10.  give  all  diligence  to  make  your  call.  #.

19.  we  have  also  a  more  #.  word  of  prophecy

SURELY.

Gen.  2. 17-  in  day  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt#.die

3. 4.  serpent  said  to  the  woman,  ye  shall  not  #.  die

9. 5.  and  #.  your  blood  of  your  lives  will  I  require
18.  18.  Abraham  shall  #.  become  a  great  nation

20.  7.  if  thou  restore  her  not,  thou  shalt  #.  die


Gen.  20.  11.  #.  the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  this  place

28. 16.  Jac.  said,#.  Ld.  is  in  this  place,  I  knew  it  not

22.  I  will  #.  give  the  tenth  unto  thee

29. 14. 1. aban  said,  #.  thou  art  my  bone  and  my  flesh

32.  #.  the  Lord  hath  looked  upon  my  affliction

30.  16.  come  in  unto  me,  for  #.  1  have  hired  thee

31.  42.  #.  thou  hadst  sent  me  away  now  empty

32.  12.  and  thou  saidst,  I  will  #.  do  thee  good

42. 16.  #.  ye  are  spies  !!  44.  28.  #.  he  is  torn  in  pieces
43.  10.  #.  now  we  had  returned  this  second  time
46.  4.  and  I  will  also  #.  bring  thee  up  again

50.  24.  I  die,  G.  will  #.  visit  you,  25.  Exod.  13.  19.
Exod.  2.  14.  Moses  said,  #.  this  thing  is  known

3.  7-  1  have  #.  seen  the  affliction  of  Israel,  16.

4.  25.  she  said,  #.  a  bloody  husband  art  thou  to  me

11. 1.  he  shall  s.  thrust  you  out  hence  all  together

18. 18.  thou  wilt  #.  wear  away,  thou  and  this  people

19.  13.  but  he  shall  #.  be  stoned,  or  shot  through

21.  20.  if  he  die,  he  shall  be  #.  punished,  22.

28.  if  an  ox  gore,  then  the  ox  shall  be  #.  stoned
36.  he  shall  #.  pay  ox  for  ox,  dead  shall  be  his  own

22.  6.  he  that  kindleth  fire  shall  #.  make  restitution

14.  if  it  be  hurt  or  die,  he  shall  #.  make  it  good
16.  if  lie  with  her,  shall  #.  endow  her  to  be  his  wife

23.  if  they  cry  at  all  to  me,  I  will  #.  hear  their  cry

23.  4.  thou  shalt  #.  bring  it  back  to  him  again
5.  it  thou  see,  thou  shalt  #.  help  him

33.  if  serve  their  gods,  will#.  besnare,l  Kings  11.2.
40.15.  anointing  shall  #.be  an  everlasting  priesthood

JSum.  13.  27.  and  #.  it  floweth  w  ith  milk  and  honey

14.23.  #.  they  shall  not  see  the  land  which  I  sware
35.  I  will  #.  do  it  to  all  this  evil  congregation

18.  15.  the  first-born  of  man  shalt  thou  #.  redeem

22.  33.  #.  now  I  had  slain  thee,  and  saved  her  alive

23.  23.  >.  there  is  no  enchantment  against  Jacob

26.  65.  L.  had  said,  they  shall  #.  die  in  the  wildern.
27.7.  thou  shalt#.  give  them  a  possession  ofinherit.

32. 11.  #.  none  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward,

shall  see  the  land  I  sware  to  Abraham,
Deut.  1.  35.

Deut.  4.  6.  #.  this  great  nation  is  a  wise  people
8. 19.  1  testify  this  day  that  ye  shall  #.  perish,  30. 18.
13,9.  but  thou  shalt  #.  kill  the  idolater

15.  thou  shalt  #.  smite  the  inhabitants  of  that  city

15.  8.  thou  shalt  #.  lend  him  sufficient  for  his  need

10.  shalt  #.  give  thy  poor  brother  not  to  be  grieved

16.  15.  thou  shalt  #.  rejoice  in  the  feast  of  taberna.

22.  4.  thou  shalt  #.  help  him  to  lift  them  up  again

23.  21.  the  Lord  will  #.  require  thy  vow  or  thee
31.  18.  and  l  will  #.  hide  my  face  in  that  day

Josh.  14.  9.  #.  the  land  shall  be  thine  inheritance
Judg.  3.  24.  they  said,  #.  he  covereth  his  feet

4.  9.  and  Deborah  said,  1  will  #.  go  with  thee

6. 16.  the  L.  said  to  Gideon,  #.  I  will  be  with  thee

11 . 31.  cometh  forth  to  meet  me,  shall  #.  be  the  L.’s
15.  13.  we  will  bind,  but  #.  we  will  not  kill  thee

20.  39.  #.  they  are  smitten  down  before  us  as  in  fast

1  Sam.  9.  6.  all  that  he  saith  cometh  #.  to  pass

15.  32.  Agag  said,  #.  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past

17.  25.  they  said,  #.  to  defy  Israel  is  he  come  up
20.  26.  for  Saul  thought,  #.  he  is  not  clean

22.  22.  I  knew  it  that  Doeg  would  #.  tell  Saul

24.  20.  I  know  well  that  thou  shalt  #.  be  king

25.  21.  #.  in  vain  have  I  kept  all  this  fellowliath

34.  #.  there  had  not  been  left  to  Nabal  any

28.  2.  #.  thou  shalt  know  what  thy  servant  can  do

29.  6.  #.  as  the  Lord  livet’n.  thou  hast  been  upright

30.  8.  pursue,  for  thou  shalt  #.  overtake  them

2  Sam.  2.  27.  #.  the  people  had  gone  up  everyone
9. 7-  I  will  #.  shew  thee  kindn.  for  Jonathan  s  sake

11.  23.  he  said,  #.  the  men  prevailed  against  us
15.  21.  #.  where  the  king  shall  be,  there'will  I  be

18.  2.  I  will  #.  go  forth  with  you  myself  also

20.  18.  she  spake,  they  shall#,  ask  counsel  at  Abel

24.24.  nay,  but  I  will#,  buy  it  of  thee  at  a  price

1  Kings 8. 1.3.  1  have#,  built  thee  house  to  dwell  in
11.  11.  I  w*ill  #.  rend  the  kingdom  from  thee

13.  32.  saying  ?  gainst  the  altar  shall  #.  come  to  pass
18.  15.  1  will  #.  shew  myself  unto  him  tOKlay
20.  23.  and  #.  we  shall  be  stronger  than  they",  25.

22.32.  they  said,  #.  it  is  the  king  of  Israel

2  Kings  3.  14.  #.  were  it  not  I  regard  Jehoshaphat
23.  they  said,  this  is  blood,  the  kings  are  #.  slain

5.  11.  behold,  1  thought,  he  will  #.  come  out  to  me

8.  14.  he  told  me  that  thou  shouldest  #.  reco\er

9.  26.  #.  I  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of  Naboth
18.  30.  the  Lord  wifi  #.  deliver  us.  Isa.  36.  15.

23.  22.  #.  there  was  not  holden  such  a  passover

24.  3.#.  at  command  of  the  LI.  came  this  on  Judah
Esth.  6.  13.  not  prevail,  but  shalt  #.  fall  before  him
Job  8.  6.  if  pure  and  upright,  s.  would  awake  for  thee

13.  3.  #.  I  would  speak  to  the  Almighty

10.  he  will  #.  reprove  you,  if  ye  accept  persons

14.  18.  #.  the  mountain  falling  cometh  to  nought
18.  21.  #.  such  are  the  dwellings  of  the  wicked
20.  20.  #.  he  shall  not  feel  quietness  in  his  belly

28. 1.  #.  there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver,  place  for  gold
31. 36.  #.  take  it  upon  my  shoulder,  and  hind  it
3.3.  8.  #.  thou  hast  spoken  in  mine  hearing

34.12.  yea,  #.  G.will  not  do  wickedly,  norAlmighfy
.35. 13.  #.  God  will  not  hear  vanity  nor  regard  it "

Psal.  32. 6.  #.  in  the  floods  they  shall  not  come  nigh
39.  6.  #.  every  man  walketh  in  vain  shew

11.  his  beauty  consumes,  #.  every  man  is  vanity
73.  18.  #.  thou  didst  set  them  in  slippery  places

76.  10.  #.  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  thee

77.  11.  #.  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  old
85.  9.  #.  his  salvation  is  nigh  them  that  fear  him
91.  3.  #.  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  snare  of  fowler
112.  6.  #.  he  shall  not  be  moved  for  ever

131.2.  #.  have  behaved  and  quieted  myselfasachild
132.  3.  #.  1  will  not  come  into  m3’  house

139.  19.  #.  thou  wilt  slav  the  wicked,  O  God

140.  13.  #.  righteous  shall  give  thanks  to  thy  name
Prov.  1. 17.  #.  in  vain  the  net  isspread  in  sight  of  bird
3.  34.  #.  scorneth  the  scorners,  but  giveth  grace  to

10.  9.  he  that  walketh  uprightly,  walketh  #.

22.  16.  that  giveth  to  the  rich,  shall  #.  come  to  want

23. 18.  #.  there  is  an  end  1  30.  2.  #.  I  am  more  brutish
30.  33.  #.  the  churn,  of  milk  bringeth  forth  butter

Eccl.  4. 16.  #.  this  is  also  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit
7.  7  #•  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  mad

483


SLK


S  W  A


S  W  A


Ecci.  8. 12.  ?.  it  shall  he  well  with  them  (hat  fear  God
10. 11.  ?.  the  serpent  will  bite  without  enchantment
Isa.  7. 9.  will  not  believe, s.  ye  shall  not  be  establish
14.24.  s.  as  1  have  thought  so  shall  it  come  to  pass

16.  7-  for  Kir-hareseth  ye  shall  mourn ,s. are  stricken
19.  11.  s.  the  princes  of  Zoan  are  fools

22. 14.  s.  this  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged  from  you

17.  behold,  the  Lord  will  s.  cover  thee

18.  he  will  s.  violently  turn  and  toss  thee  like  ball
29. 16.  ?.  your  turning  of  things  upside  down
40.  7.  the  grass  withereth,  ?.  the  people  is  grass

45.  14.  ?.  Clod  is  in  thee,  and  there  is  none  else
24.  s.  in  the  L.  have  1  righteousness  and  strength

49.  4.  yet  s.  my  judgment  is  with  the  Lord

53. 4.  ?.  he  hath  borne  our  griefs, and  carried  our  sor.
54.  15.  they  shall  s.  gather  together,  but  not  by  me
60.  9.  s.  the  islesshall  wait  for  me,  ships  of  Tarshish

62.  8.  s.  I  will  no  more  give  thy  corn  to  thy  enemies

63.  8.  he  said,?.  they  are  my  people,  childr.  not  lie
Jer.  2.35.  thou  sayest,  ?.his  anger  shall  turn  from  me

3.  20.  s.  as  a  wife  treacherously  depart,  from  husb

4.  10.  s.  thou  hast  greatly  deceived  this  people

5.  2.  ?.they  swear  falsely  ||  4.  1  said, s .these  are  poor
8.  13.  1  will  ?.  consume  them,  saith  the  Lord

16.  19.  s.  our  fathers  have  inherited  lies,  vanity
22.  6.  yet  s.  I  will  make  thee  a  wilderness

22.  s.  thou  shalt  be  ashamed  for  thy  wickedness
24.  8.  s.  saith  the  Lord,  so  will  1  give  Xedekiah

26. 15. ye  shall  .v. bring  innocent  blood  on  yourselves
31.  18.  have  ?.  heard  Ephraim  bemoaning  himself

19.  s.  after  that  1  was  turned,  1  repented

20.  therefore  I  will  s.  have  mercy  on  him,  saith  L.
34.  3.  but  thou  shalt.?.  be  taken  and  delivered

36.  16.  we  will  ?.  tell  the  king  of  all  these  words

37.  9.  the  Chaldeans  shall  ?.  depart  from  us

38.  3.  this  city  shall  s.  be  given  to  the  king  of  Bab.

39.  18.  1  will  ?.  deliver  thee,  thou  shalt  not  fall
44.  25.  we  will  ?.  perform  our  vows  that  we  vowed

29.  that  my  words  shall  s.  stand  ag.  you  for  evil

46.  18.  ?.  as  Carmel  by  the  sea,  so  shall  become
49.12.  thou  shalt  not  go  unpunished,  but*. drink  it

20.  s.  the  least  of  the  flock  shall  draw  them,  50.  45.
51.  14.  saying,  s.  1  will  fill  thee  with  men
56.  for  the  L.  G.  of  recompences.  shall ?.  requite
Ezek. 3.  21.  he  shall  s.  live,  because  he  is  warned

18.  9,  17,  19,  21,  28.  1  33.  13,  15,  16.
5.  11.  s.  because  thou  hast  defiled  my  sanctuary

17.  16.  s.  in  the  place  where  the  king  dwellcth
20.  33.  s.  with  a  mighty  hand  will  1  ruleoveryou
31.  11.  he  shall  s.  deal  with  him,  1  havedriven  him

33.  27.  ?.  they  in  the  wastes  shall  fall  by  the  sword

34.  8.  as  I  live,.?,  because  my  flock  became  a  prey

36. 5.  ?.  in  the  fire  of  my  jealousy  have  I  spoken

7.  s.  the  heathen,  they  shall  bear  their  shame

38. 19.  ?.  in  that  day  there  shal  I  be  a  great  shaking
Eos.  5.  9. 1  have  made  known  that  which  shall  be

12.  11.  ?.  they  are  vanity,  they  sacrifice  bullocks
Amos  3.  7*.  ■?.  the  I..  will  do  nothing,  but  he  reveals

5.5.  forGilgal  shall.?,  go ipto captivity, and  Bethel

7.  11.  Israel  shall.?,  be  led  away  captive,  17.

8.  7-  ?.  1  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works
Mic.  2. 12. 1  will?,  assemble,  O .lacob,  all  of  thee,  T

will?,  gather  remnant  of  Isr.as sheep  of  Bozrah
Eab.  2.  3.  because  it  will  s.  come,  it  will  not  tarry
Zepk.  2.  9.  as  1  live  s.  Moab shall  be  as  Sodom
•  3.  7.  ?.  thou  wilt  fear  me,  and  receive  instruction
Met.  26.  73.  s.  thou  art  one  of  them,  Mark  14.  70.
Evkel.  1.  things  which  are  most  ?. believed  among  us
4.23.  ye  will  ?.  say  unto  me  this  proverb.physician
John  if.  8.  have  known  s.  that  1  came  out  from  thee
Heb.  6. 14.  saying,  ?.  blessing,  1  will  bless  thee
i?er.22.20.saith,?.I  come  quickly , even  so  come  L.J.
See  Die.

SURELY  be  pvt  to  death.

Gen.  26.  11.  toucheth  this  man,  shall  ?.  be  put  to  d.
Exod.  19.  12.  toucheth  mount,  shall  ?.  he  pvt  to  d. '

21.  12.  he  that  killeth  a  man,  shall  ?.  he  put  to  d.

15.  he  that  smiteth  his  father,  shall  .?.  be  put  to  d.

16.  he  that  stealeth  a  man  shall  s.  be  put  to  death

17.  thatcurseth  his  father  shall  s.p.  to  d.  Lev.  20  9.

22.  19.  whosoever  lieth  with  a  beast,  shall  ?.  be  put

,  ,  to  death ,  Lev.  20.  15,  16.

31.  14.  that  dehleth  the  sabbath  .?.  be  put  to  d.  15.
Lev.  20.  2.  giveth  his  seed  toMolech,  .?.  be  put  to  d.

10.  adulterer  and  adulteress  shall  ?.  be  put  to  d

11.  lieth  with  father’s  wife,  both  shall  ?.  bep.  to  d

12.  lie-with  his  daught.-in  law,  both  ?.  be  put  to  d

13.  if  a  man  lie  with  mankind,  both  .?.  be  put  to  d.
24.  16.  lie  that  blasphemeth,  shall  s.  be  pvt  to  d.

17.  and  he  that  killeth  any  man,  shall  s.  be  put
to  death,  Num.  35.  16,  17,  18,  21,  31.
27.  29.  not  be  redeemed,  but  shall  .?.  be  put  to  d.
Judg.  21.  5.  who  came  not  up,  shall  ?.  be  pvt  to  d.
Jer.  38.  15.  wilt  thou  not .?.  put  me  to  death
SURELY

Is  one  who  undertakes  to  pay  another  man's  debt,
m  case  the  principal  debtor,  either  through  un¬
faithfulness  or  poverty  should  prove  insolvent.  It
was  an  ancient  custom  in  suretiship  for  the  surety
to  give  his  hand  to,  or  strike  hands  with  the  creditor,
thereby  obliging  himself  to  the  payment  of  the  debt ’
m  case  oj  the  insolvency  of  the  principal  debtor.

I  bus  it  is  said  in  .lob  17.  3.  Who  is  he  that
will  strike  hands  with  me  ?  And  in  Prov.  6.  1,
y-  My  son,  if  thou  be  surety  for  thy  friend;  if
thou  hast  stricken  thy  hand  with  a  stranger  *
thou  art  snared  with  the  words  of  thy  mouth.'
‘Solomon  in  this  passage  does  not  condemn  sureii-
ship,  which  tn.  some  cases  is  not  only  lawful,  but
even  an  act  of  justice,  of  prudence,  and  charity  ;
thus  Judah  became  surety  to  his  father  for  his

A  4  /*  n  JV  a  .  _  ...  .  .  .  ’  _  .  -4  /~\  r,  a  1  .  .


brother  Benjamin,  Gen.  42.  37.  I  44.  32.  and
J  aul  to  Philemon  for  Ones  ini  vs,  Philem.  18,  19
Solomon  only  forbids  his  disciple  to  become
surety  rashly,  without  considering  for  whom,
or  how  Jar  he  does  oblige  himself,  or  how  he
could  discharge  the  debt,  if  occasion  should  re¬
quire  it.

In  Ileb.  7-  22.  Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  surety
7 ; a,  j  V?1'  testament.  Bins  are  by  analogy
called  debts  :  for  as  a  debt  obliges  the  debtor  to
payment ,  so  sin  doth  the  sinner  to  punishment

484


Christ,  according  to  the  covenant  of  redemption,
or  agreement  between  the  Father  and  him,  inter¬
posed  as  our  surety  ;  and  entering  into  this  re-
latum,  he  sustained  the  persons  of  sinners,  (for
in  the  estimate  of  the  law,  the  surety  and  debtor
are  but  one  person,  J  and  being  judicially  one  with
them,  according  to  the  order  of  justice,  he  was
liable  to  their  punishment.  For  though  the  dis¬
pleasure  of  God  was  primarily  and  directly  against
the  sinner,  yet  the  effects  of  it  fell  upon  Christ,
7E/K)  undertook  for  him .  Find  accorauty  to  th/s
undertaking,  Christ  as  our  surety ,  fulfil 'ed  the
preceptive  part  of  the  moral  law,  by  the  inno-
cency  and  holiness  of  his  life  ;  and  he  underwent
the  penalty  of  the  law  when  he  offered  up  himself
a  sacrifice  to  satisfy  divine  justice,  and  recon¬
cile  us  to  God.  And  in  consequence  of  the  atone¬
ment  made  by  this  sacrifice,  the  Eoly  Spirit  is
given,  to  enable  man  to  perform  what  is  required
of  him  in  the  gospel ;  namely,  to  repent,  to  be¬
lieve,  and  obey  the  Redeemer,  and  wholly  to  rely
upon  his  sacrifice  for  obtaining  the  favour  if
God ;  and  Christ,  by  his  intercession,  secures  to
believers  all  the  blessings  of  God's  covenant  for
time  and  eternity.  To  which  the  Psalmist  al¬
ludes,  Psal.  119.  122.  Be  surety  for  thy  servant
for  good  :  do  thou  undertake  and  plead  my  cause
against  all  mine  enemies,  as  a  suiety  rescues  the
poor  persecuted  debtor  from  the  hands  of  a  severe
and  merciless  creditor.

Gen.  43.9.  I  will  be  s.  for  him,  shalt  require  him  of
44.  32.  for  thy  servant  became  .?.  for  the  lad
Job  17.3.  lay  <town  now,  put  me  in  a  .?.  with  thee
Psal.  119.  122.  be.?,  tor  thy  servant  for  good
Prov.  6.  1.  my  son,  if  thou  be?,  for  thy  friend
11. 15.  he  that  is  ?.  for  a  stranger  shall  smart  for  it

17.  18.  and  becometh  s.  in  presence  of  bis  friend
20.  16.  his  garment  (hat  is?,  tor  a  stranger,  27.  13.

Ileb.  7.  22.  was  Jesus  made  ?.  of  a  better  testament
.SURETIES.

Prov.  22. 26.  be  not  one  of  them  that  are  ?.  for  debts
Of  a  SURETY.

Gen.  15. 13.  know  of  a  s.  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger

18.  13.  shall  1  of  a  s.  bear  a  child,  who  am  old  i
26.9.  Abimelech  said,  behold,  of  as.  she  is  thy  wife

Acts  12. 11.  1  know  of  a  s.  the  L.  hath  sent  his  angel
SURETYSHIP.

Prov.  11. 15.  and  he  that  hateth  s.  is  sure
SUKEEIT1NG.

Luke  21.  .34.  lest  your  hearts  he  overcharged  with  s.

„  SURM  USINGS.

1  Tim.  6.  4.  whereof  cometh  envy,  strife,  evil  s.

SURNAME.  Bee  Sir  name.

_  SUKPLUSAGE.

Exod.  26.  i  13.  a  cubit  on  the  other  side  in  the  s.
SURPRISED.

Isa.  33. 14.  sinners  afraid,  fearfulness  s.  hypocrites
Jer.  48.  41.  Kerioth  is  taken,  the  strong  holds  are  .?.
51. 41.  how  is  the  praise  of  the  whole  earth  s.J
SUSPENSE.

Luke  3. 1 15.  as  people  were  in  s.  and  all  men  mused
12.  +  29.  seek  not  what  shall  eat,  live  not  in  caret.  ?
SUSTAIN.

a ,fn0s  17.9. commanded  a  widow  woman  to?,  thee
Leh.  9.  21.  yea,  forty  years  didst  thou?,  them
Ps.  o5.  22.  cast  thy  burden  on  Lord,  he  shall  ?.  thee
Prov.  18.  14.  the  spirit  of  a  man  will  ?.  his  infirmity
SUSTAINED.

Gen.  27.  37.  and  with  corn  and  wine  have  I  ?.  him
Psal.  3.5.  1  awaked,  for  the  Lord  ?.  me
Isa.  59.  16.  and  his  righteousness,  it  ?.  him
SUSTENANCE.

Judg.  6.4.  Midianites  left  no  ?.  for  Israel,  nor  sheep
2 Bam.  19.32.  Barzillai  had  provided  the  king  of?.
Acts'}.  11. dearth  in  Canaan,  our  fathers  found  no  ?.
SWADDLED.

Earn.  2.  +  20.  women  eat  children  ?.  with  their  hands
2.  22. those  that  1  have.?,  hath  my  enemy  consumed
Ezek.  16.  4.  thou  wast  not  salted  at  all,  nor  ?.  at  all
SWADDLING.

Job  .38.  9-  1  made  thick  darkness  a  ?.  band  for  it
Luke  2.  7.  and  she  wrapped  him  in  ?.  clothes,  12.

swallow.

In  Hebrew,  Sis,  is  a  plaintive  bird,  and  a  bird  of
passage.  Mention  is  made  of  the  swallow  in  Isa.
38.  14.  Like  a  crane  or  a  swallow,  so  did  1  chat¬
ter.  My  complaint  and  cry  were  like  to  the  noise
oj  a  swallow,  quick  and  frequent  ;  and  like  that
of  a  crane,  loud  and  frightful.  And  in  Jer.  8.  } .
'Hie  stork  in  the  heaven  knoweth  her  appointed
times,  and  the  turtle,  and  the  crane,  and  the
swallow,  observe  the  time  of  their  coming.

The  swallow  is  of  a  black  colour,  with  some  spots  of
a  dirty  black  under  her  belly  j  its  flight  is  very
unequal,  and  its  sight  is  very  quick.  It  appears
in  spring  and  summer,  and  goes  away  in  autumn.

It  is  thought  that  it  passes  the  sea,  and  withdraws
into  hotter  climates,  where  it  either  hides  itself  in
holes  in  the  earth,  or  even  in  marshes,  and  under
the  water,  wherein  sometimes  great  lumps  e/ swal¬
lows  have  been  fished  up,  fixed  one  to  another  by
the  claws  and  beak :  and  when  they  are  laid  in  a
warm  place,  they  move  and  recover,  though  before
they  seemed  to  be  dead.  It  is  called  xeXe«W  in
Greek,  whence  comes  the  name  of  the  herb  Cheli-
done,  in  English  Celandine, or  swallow-wort,  be¬
cause  it  is  pretended,  that  with  this  herb  the  swal¬
low  opens  the  eyes  of  her  young  ones,  though  they
should  even  he  blinded  on  purpose.  It  is  said  that
the  flesh  of  these  birds,  burnt  to  ashes,  is  excellent
for  distempers  of  the  eyes.  The  swallow  is  said  to
breed  twice  ayear,  once  in  the  climate  to  which  she
transports  herself  while  our  winter  lasts  :  and  again
iii  those  six  months  she  continues  in  this  country.
Their  chief  food  are  the  flies  that  they  catch  as
they  fly.  They  commonly  make  their  nest  in  chim¬
neys,  and  every  year  return  to  the  same  place.
Their  nests  are  made  of  clay,  mingled  with  bits
of  straw  or  chaff  :  and  it  is  said,  that  when  they
wav.t  clay  or  mud,  they  plunge  themselves  in  water,
then  rolling  in  the  dust,  make  clay  for  themselves.
Psal.  84.  3.  the  ?.  hath  found  a  nest  for  herself


/  rov.  26. 2.  as  the  ?.  by  flying,  so  the  curse  causeless
Isa.  38.  14.  like  a  crane  or  a  ?.  so  did  1  chatter
Jer .  8.  }.  crane  and  ?. observe  time  ot  then'  coming
SWALLOW,  Verb.

Bum .  16.  30.  it  the  earth  open  and  s.  them  up
34.  for  they  said,  lest  the  earth  ?.  us  up  also
2  Bam.  20. 19.  why  wilt  thou  ?.  up  inheritance  of  L.

20.  far  be  it  from  me,  that  I  should  ?.  up  or  destroy
Job  2.+  3.  thou  movedst  me  to?,  him  up  without  cause

7.  19.  nor  let  me  alone  till  I  ?.  <fown  my  spittle
20.  18.  he  shall  restore,  and  not  ?.  it  down
Psal.  21.  9.  the  Lord  shall  ?.  them  up  in  his  wrath

56.  1.  be  merciful  to  me,  O  G.  man  would  ?.  me  up
2.  mine  enemies  would  daily  ?.  me  up

57 .  3.  from  the  reproach  of  him  that  would  ?.  me  up

69. 15.  neither  let  the  deep?,  me  up
Prov  1.  12.  let  us  ?.  them  up  alive  as  the  grave
Led.  10.  12.  butthe  lips  of  a  fool  will?,  uphimself
Isa.  3. 1 12.  they  lead  me,  ?.  up  the  way  of  thy  paths

19.  t  3.  and  I  will  ?.  up  the  counsel  thereof
25.  +  7.  he  will  .?.  up  the  face  of  the  covering

8.  will  ?.  up  death  in  victory,  Ld.  will  wipe  away
42.  +  14.  I  will  destroy  and  ?.  up  at  once

Eos.  8.  7 .  if  so  be  it  yield,  the  strangers  shall  ?.  it  up
Amos  8.  4.  hear  this,  O  ye  that  ?.  up  the  needy
(  had.  16.  they  shall  drink,  and  they  shall?,  down
Jonah  1.  17.  the  Lord  prepared  a  fish  to  ?.  up  Jonah
Mat.  23.24.  guides  who  strain  at  a  gnat,  and  ?.  came?
SWALLOWED.

Exod.  7. 12.  but  Aaron's  rod  ?.  up  their  rods

15.  12.  stretchedstthy  right  hand,  the  earth  ?.  them
Blum.  16.  32.  earth  opened  and  ?.  26. 10.  Deut.  11.6.

V-  J6‘  but  pass  over>  J?st  tee  king  be  ?.  "up
Job  o.  3.  heav.  than  sand,  theref.  iny  words  are  s.  up

20.  15.  lie  hath?,  down  riches,  he  shall  vomit  them
37.20.  if  a  man  speak,  surely  he  shall  be  .?.  up

Psal.  35.  25.  let  them  not  say,  we  have?,  him  up

106.  17.  the  earth  opened  and  ?.  up  Dathan

107.  f  27.  stagger,  and  all  their  wisdom  is?,  up
124.  3.  then  they  had  ?.  us  up  quick

Isa.  9.  t  16.  they  that  are  led  of  them  are  ?.  up
28.  7.  the  priest  and  the  prophet  are  ?.  up  of  wine
49.  19.  they  that  ?.  thee  up,  shall  be  far  away
Jer.  51.  34.  lie  hath  ?.  me  up  like  a  dragon
44.  will  bring  out  of  his  mouth  that  which  hath  ?.
Lam.  2.  2.  Lord  hath  ?.  up  all  the  habitat,  of  Jacob
5.  lie  bath  .?.  up  Israel,  he  hath  ?.  up  all  her  palaces

16.  they  hiss  and  say,  we  have  ?.  her  up

Ezek.  36.  3.  because  they  have  s.  you  up  on  ev.  side
Eos.  8.8.  Israel  is  ?.  up  among  the  Gentiles

1  Cor.  15.  54.  death  is  ?.  up  in  victory

2  Cor.  2.  7.  lest  such  one  should  be  ?.  up  with  sorrow
5.  4.  that  mortality  might  be  ?.  up  of  life

Rev.  12.  16.  the  earth  opened  and  ?.  up  the  flood
SWA  LLO  W  El.  f  I.

Job  5.5.  and  the  robber  ?.  up  their  substance
39.  24.  he  ?.  the  ground  with  fierceness  and  rage
SWAN.

Lev.  11. 18.  the  ?.  the  pelican,  unclean,  Dent.  14  16
SWA  RE.

Gen.  21 .  .31.  Beersheba,  because  they  ?.  both  of  them

24.  7.  the  Lord  God  of  heaven  that?,  to  me

9.  the  servant  ?.  to  him  concerning  that  matter

25.  33.  Jacob  said,  swear  to  me,  and  he?,  to  him
26.3.  I  will  perform  the  oath  which  1  ?.  to  Abraham

31.  Abimelech  and  Isaac  ?.  to  one  another
31.  53.  and  Jacob  ?.  by  the  fear  of  his  father  Isaac

47.  31.  Joseph.?,  to  Jacob  his  father
50.24.  God  will  bring  you  to  land  he.?,  to  Abrab.
Exod.  13. 5.  tlie  land  which  the  Lord  ?.  to  thy  fathers
to  give  thee,  11.1  33.  1.  Num.  14.  16,  30.  I  32
11.  Dent.  1. 8,  35. 1  6.  10,  18,  23.  1  7.  13.  |  8.  1.

I  11. 9, 21. 1  26.  3. 1  28.  11.  1  30.  20.  I  31.  21,  23. 1
34.  4.  Josh.  1.  6. 1  5.  6. 1  21.  4.3.

Num.  32. 10.  the  Lord’s  anger  was  kindled,  and  he  ?.

saying,  noneot  the  men  shall  enter,  Deut.  1.  34.
Deut.  Cl.  14.  till  men  of  war  were  wasted,  as  Ld.  ?.

4.  21.  Lord  .?.  that  I  should  not  go  over  Jordan
31.  he  will  not  forget  the  covenant  which  he  ?.

7.  12.  keep  mercy  which  lie  .?.  to  thy  salvation

8.  18.  may  establish  his  covenant  which  he  ?.  9.5.
Josh.  6.  22.  bring  out  Rahab,  as  ye  ?.  unto  her

9.  15.  princes  of  congregation  ?.  to  the  Gibeonites
20.  because  of  the  oath  which  we  ?.  to  them

14.  9.  Moses?,  on  that  day,  saying,  surely  the  land
21 . 44.  Ld.  gave  them  rest  according  to  all'  that  he  ? .
Judg.  2. 1.  brought  to  land  which  I  ?.  to  your  fatl.ei  s
1  Bam.  19.  6.  Saul  ?.  that  David  shall  not  be  slain
20.  3.  David  ?.  moreover  to  Jonathan,  and  said
24.  22.  David  ?.  to  Saul,  and  Saul  went  home
28.  10.  Saul  ?.  by  the  Lord  to  the  witch  at  Eu-doi
ISam.3.35.  Dav.  ?.he  would  not  eat  till  sun  be  down

19.  23.  king  David  s.  to  Shimei,  1  Kings  2.  8.

1  Kings  1.29.  king  David  ?.  to  Bath  sheba,  30.

2.  23.  Solomon  ?.  that  Adonijah  should  die

2  Kings  25.  24.  Gedaliah  ?.  to  them,  Jer.  40.  9.

2  C/m.  15.  14.  they  ?.  to  the  Lord  with  a  loud  voice
Rzra  lo.  5.  they  ?.  to  put  away  the  strange  wives
Psal.  95.11.  to  whom  I  ?.  in  my  wrath,  Eeb.  3.  11
132.  2.  how  he.  ?.  to  Ld.  and  vowed  to  G.  of  Jacob
Jer.  38.  16.  so  the  king  ?.  secretly  to  Jeremiah
Ezek.  16.  8.  1  ?.  and  entered  into  covenant  with  thee

20.  t  5.  when  I  ?.  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  47.  +  14.

Dan.  12. 7.  ?.  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever,  Rev.  10.  6.
Mark  6.  23.  Herod  ?.  to  the  daughter  of  Herodias
Luke  1.  73.  to  remember  oath  which  lie  ?.  to  Abrah.
Eeb.  3.  18.  to  whom  ?.  he  that  they  should  not  enter
6. 13.  lie  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  ?.  by  himself
7.  21.  that  said,  the  Lord  .?.  and  will  not  repent

Bee  Their  Lath  Elis.

SWA  REST.

Exod.  32.  13.  to  whom  thou?,  by  thine  own  self
Num.  11.  12.  carry  them  to  land  thou?,  to  fathers
Dent.  26.  15.  land  given  us,  as  thou  ?.  to  our  fathers
1  Kings  1.  1".  thou  ?. that  Solomon  shall  reign
Psal.  89.  49.  kindnesses  thou  ?.  to  David  in  truth
SWARM.

Exod.  8.  24.  there  came  a  grievous  ?.  of  flies
Judg.  14. 8.  a?,  of  bees  and  honey  in  carcase  of  lion
SWARMS.

Exod.  8.  21.  I  will  send  .?.  of  flies  upon  thee,  houses
of  the  Egyptians  shall  be  full  of?,  of  file*


S  VV  E


S  W  1


s  w  o


Erod.  8.  22.  that  no  .?.  of  Hies  shall  be  in  Goshen
2V.  that  the  ?.  of  Hies  may  depart  from  Pharaoh
31.  he  removed  the  ?.  of  Hies  from  Pharaoh
SWEA  R.

God  hath  prohibited  all  false  oaths,  and  all  useless
and  customary  swearing  ;  but  zvhen  necessity  and
the  impottance  of  the  matter  require  it,  he  allows
us  to  swear  by  his  name,  but  not  in  the  name  of
any  false  gods,  or  in  the  name  of  inanimate
things,  whether  on  earth,  or  in  heaven,  or  by  the
stars,  or  by  the  life  of  any  man  whatever.  Lev.  19.

12.  Exod.  20.  7. 1  23.  13.  Deut.  6.  13.  Jer.  4.  2.
Our  Saviour,  who  came  into  the  world  not  to  de¬
stroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfil  it,  forbids  all  kinds
of  oaths,  Mat.  5.  34.  And  the  primitive  Chris¬
tians  understood  and  observed  this  command  in  a
literal  sense,  as  may  be  seen  from  Tertullian,  Eu-
sebizts,  Chrysostom,  Basil,  Jerom,  &c.  However,
it  is  acknowledged ,  that  neither  the  apostles  nor
fathers  have  absolutely  condemned  swearing,  or
the  use  of  oaths  upon  every  occasion,  and  all  sub¬
jects.  There  are  circumstances  wherein  we  cannot
morally  be  excused  from  it :  but  we  never  ought  to
swear  but  upon  urgent  necessity,  and  to  do  some
considerable  good  by  it.

That  a  person  swear  lawfully,  he  must  have  a  re¬
gard,  [1]  To  the  object;  that  he  swear  by  the
Lord  alone  ;  for  seeing  we  deify  and  snake  that
our  God  which  we  swear  by,  therefore  we  forsake
the  true  God  if  u'e  swear  by  that  which  is  no  God,
Jer.  5.  7*  [2]  To  the  manner  ;  that  he  szvear  in
truth,  in  judgment,  and  in  righteousness,  Jer.  4.
2.  that  lie  swear  not  falsely,  or  deceitfully,  but
that  which  is  agreeable  to  truth  ;  that  he  swear
not  rashly,  but  upon  due  consideration  of  all  cir¬
cumstances  :  and  that  he  swear  nothing  but  what
is  agreeable  to  justice  and  equity.  [3]  He  must
have  a  regard  to  the  end  ;  that  God  may  be  glori¬
fied,  our  dzity  discharged,  controversies  appeased,
our  brethren  satisfied,  or  our  own  or  others'  inno-
cency  cleared.

Gen.  21. 23.  Abimelech  said  to  Abraham  s.  to  me

24.  and  Abraham  said,  I  will  s,

24.  3.  and  I  will  make  thee  s.  by  the  Lord  God
37.  my  master  made  me  s.  saying,  not  take  a  wife

25.  33.  Jacob  said,  .v.  to  me,  and  he  sware  to  him

47.  31.  Jacob  said  unto  Joseph,  s.  unto  me
50.  5.  father  made  me  s.  ||  Lev.  5.  4.  if  a  soul  ?.

Exod.  6.8.  faring  to  land  concerning  which  1  did  s.
Lev.  19. 12.  and  ye  shall  not  s.  by  my  name  falsely
Num.  30. 2.  if  a  man  s.  an  oath  to  bind  his  soul
Dent.  6. 13.  and  thou  shalt  s.  by  his  name,  10.  20.
Josh.  2. 12.  Rahabsaid  to  spies,  s.  to  me  by  the  Lord

17.  this  thy  oath  which  thou  hast  made  us  s.  20.
23. 7-  nor  cause  to  s.  by  their  gods  nor  serve  them

Judg.  15. 12.  j.  to  me  that  ye  will  not  fall  upon  me

1  Sam.  20. 17.  Jonathan  caused  David  to  s.  again
24.21.  s.that  thou  wilt  not  cut  off  my  seed  after  me

30. 15.  s.  by  God  that  thou  wilt  neither  kill  me

2  Sam.  19.  7- 1  ?.  by  the  Lord,  if  thou  go  not  out

1  Kings  1. 13.  didst  not  thou  s.  Solomon  shall  reign
51.  saying,  let  king  Solomon  s.  unto  me  to  day

2.  42.  did  1  not  make  thee  to  s.  by  the  Lord  ?

8.  31.  if  any  man  trespass,  and  an  oath  be  laid  on
him  to  cause  him  to  s.  2  Chron.  6. 22.

2  Chron.  36. 13.  Nebuchadnezzar  made  him  s.  by  G.
Ezra  10. 5.  then  Ezra  made  Levites  and  all  lsr/to  s.
Keh.  13.  25.  and  I  made  them  s.  by  God,  saying
Isa.  3. 7.„  in  that  day  sh.  he .».  I  will  not  be  an  healer

19. 18.  five  cities  in  Egypt  shall  .v.  to  the  Lord
45.  23.  word  gone  thatto  me  every  tongue  shall  s.

48.  1.  which  s.  by  the  Lord,  but  not  in  truth

65. 16.  that  sweareth,  shall  ?.  by  the  God  of  truth
Jer.  4.  2.  thou  shalt  s.  the  Lord  liveth  in  truth

5.  2.  tho’  they  say,  the  Lord  liveth,  they  s.  falsely
7.  9.  will  ye  steal,  murder,  commit  adultery,  and  s.
12.  16.  if  they  will  learn  the  ways  of  my  people,
to  s.  by  my  name,  as  they  taught  people
to  s.  by  Baal

22. 5.  I  s.  by  myself,  saith  Ld.  this  house  become
32.  22.  hast  given  them  this  land  thou  didst  ?.

Hos.  4. 15.  neither  go  ye  up  to  Beth-aven  nor  s.
Amos  8.  14.  they  that  ?.  by  the  sin  of  Samaria
Zeph.  1.  5.  that  .y.  by  the  Lord,  that?.  by  Malcham
Mat.  5.  34.  s.  not  at  all  ||  36.  s.  not  by  thy  head
23.  16.  shall  s.  by  the  temple,  s.  by  gold  of  temple

18.  whoso  shall  s.  by  the  altar,  it  is  nothing

20.  whoso  therefore  shall  ?.  by  the  altar,  sweareth

21.  shall  ?.  by  the  temple  ||  22.  shall  s.  by  heaven
26.74.  then  began  he  tocurse  and  s.  Mark  14.  71.
Heb.  6. 13.  he  could  s.  by  no  greater,  he  s.  by  himself

16.  for  men  verily  s.  by  the  greater,  and  an  oath
Jam.  5. 12.  above  all  things,  my  brethren,  s.  not
SWEA  RERS.

Mai.  3.  5. 1  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  false  s.
SWEARETH.

Lev.  6.  3.  or  have  found  what  was  lost,  and  s.  falsely
Psal.  15.  4.  that  ?.  to  his  hurt,  and  changeth  not
63. 11.  every  one  that  .?.  by  him  shall  glory
Eccl.  9.  2.  and  lie  that  s.  as  he  that  feareth  an  oath
Isa.  65. 16.  he  that  s.  shall  swear  by  God  of  truth
Zech.5.  3.  and  every  one  that  s.  shall  be  cut  off
4.  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  him  ?.  falsely
Mat.  23. 18.  whosoever  s.  by  the  gift,  he  is  guilty
20.  s.  by  the  altar  ||  21.  s.  by  temple,  and  by  him

22.  s.  by  throne  of  God,  and  by  him  that  sitteth

SWEARING.

Lev.  5. 1.  if  a  soul  sin,  and  hear  the  voice  of  s.

Jer.  23. 10.  for  because  of  s.  the  land  mourneth
Hos.  4. 2.  by  s.  and  lying,  and  steal,  they  break  out
10.  4.  spoken  words,?.  falsely  in  making  a  covenant
Heb.  7-121. those  priests  were  made  without  s. an  oath
SWEAT.

Gen.  3. 19-  in  the  s.  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  bread
Ezek.  44. 18.  shall  gird  with  any  thing  that  causeth  s.
Luke  22.44.  his  s.  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood
SWEEP.

Isa.  14. 23. 1  will  s.  it  with  the  besom  of  destruction
28. 17-  the  hail  shall  s.  away  the  refuge  of  lies
Luke  15. 8.  doth  not  s.  the  house  and  seek  diligently
SWEEPING.

Prov.  28. 3.  is  like  a  s.  rain  which  leaveth  no  food


SWEEP.

Exod.  15. 25.  tree  cast  into  waters,  waters  made  s.

30. 23.  take  of  myrrh  and  s.  cinnamon  half  so  much
2-S«wj.1. 1 23.  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  s.  in  their  lives
23. 1.  David  the  s.  psalmist  of  Israel  said
Neh.  8. 10.  go  your  wav,  eat  the  fat,  and  drink  the  s.
Job  20.  12.  though  wickedness  be  s.  in  his  mouth
21.  33.  the  clods  of  the  valley  shall  be  s.  to  him
38.  31.  canst  thou  bind  the*.  inHuencesof  Pleiades  ?
Psal.  55. 14.  we  took  s.  counsel  together  and  walked
104.  34.  my  meditation  of  him  shall  be  s.

119.  103.  how  s.  are  thy  words  unto  my  taste  !
141.6.  they  shall  hear  my  words,  for  they  are  s.
Prov.  3.  24.  shall  lie  down,  and  thy  sleepshall  be  s.
9.  17-  stolen  waters  are  s.  bread  in  secret  is  pleasant

13. 19.  the  desire  accomplished  is  s.  to  the  soul

16.  24.  pleasant  words  are*,  to  the  soul  and  health
20.  17.  bread  of  deceit  is  s.  to  a  man,  but  afterwards

23.  8.  thou  shalt  vomit  up,  and  lose  thy  s.  words

24.  13.  eat  the  honey-comb,  which  is  s.  to  thy  taste
27.  7.  to  the  hungry  soul  every  bitter  thing  is  s.

Eccl.  5.  12.  the  sleep  of  a  labouring  man  is  ?.

11.  7.  truly  the  light  is  a  s.  and  a  pleasant  thing
Cant.  2.  3.  nis  fruit  was  s.  ||  14.  for  s.  is  thy  voice
5.  5.  my  fingers  dropped  with  ?.  smelling  myrrh

13.  his  cheeks  are  as  a  bed  of  spices,  as  s.  Howers,
his  lips  like  lilies,  dropping.?,  smelling  myrrh
16.  his  mouth  is  most.?,  yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely
Isa.  3.  + 19.  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  s.  balls

24.  instead  of.?,  smell,  there  shall  be  stink
5.  20.  woe  to  them  that  put  bitter  for?.  and.?,  for  bit.
23.  16.  make  s.  melody,  sing  songs  to  be  remember.
Jer.  6.  20.  nor  your  sacrifices  .?.  unto  me
31.  26.  1  awaked,  and  my  sleep  was  .?.  unto  me
Jam.  3.  11.  send  at  same  place  .?.  water  and  bitter?
Rev.  10.  9.  it  shall  be  in  thy  mouth  s.  as  honey,  10.

18.  t  12.  no  man  buyeth  their  .?.  wood  any  more

SWEET  calamus.

Exod.  30.  23.  take  of  s.  calamus  250  shekels
SW  EET  cane.

Isa.  43. 24.  thou  hast  brought  me  no .?.  c.  with  money
Jer.  6.  SO.  the  s.  cane  came  from  a  far  country
See  Incense,  Odours,  Savour.
SWEEP  spices.

Exod.  30.  34.  take  to  thee  s.  spices  with  frankincense
37  .  29.  lie  made  the  pure  incense  of.?,  spices
Mark  16.  1.  bought  ?.?.  that  they  might  anoint  him
SWEET  wine.

Isa.  49.  26.  be  drunken  with  blood  as  with  .?.  wine
Amos  9.  13.  the  mount  shall  drop  s.  wine,  hills  melt
Mic.  6. 15.  and  s.  wine,  but  shalt  not  drink  wine
SWEETER.

Judg.  14. 18.  men  of  city  said,  what  is  s.  than  honey  ?
Psal.  19.  10.  thy  word  is  s.  than  the  honey-comb
119.  103.  thy  words  are.?,  than  honey  to  my  mouth
SWEETLY.

Job  24.  20.  worm  shall  feed  s.  on  him,  not  rememb.
Cant. 7 .  9.  like  the  best  wine,  that  goeth  down?.
SWEETENED.

Psal.  55.  f  14.  we  ?.  counsel  together  and  walked
SWEETNESS.

Judg.  9.  11 .  should  1  forsake  my  .?.  and  good  fruit?

14.  14.  and  out  of  the  strong  came  forth  .?.

Prov.  16.  21.  the  s.  of  the  lips  increased)  learning
27. 9.  so  doth  s.  ot  a  man’s  friend  by  hearty  counsel

Ezek.  3.  3.  the  roll  was  in  my  mouth  as  honey  for  s.
SWELL.

Num.  5.  21.  thy  thigh  to  rot,  and  thy  belly  to?.  22.

27.  her  belly  shall?,  and  her  thigh  shall  rot
Deut.  8.  4.  nor  did  thy  foot  ?.  these  forty  years
SWELLED.

Neh.  9.  21.  yea,  forty  years  their  feet  ?.  not
SWELLING.

Psal.  46.  3.  though  mountains  shake  with  ?.  thereof
Isa.  30.  13.  as  a  breach  ?.out  in  a  high  wall
Jer.  12.  5.  then  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the?,  of  Jordan  ?

49. 19.  like  a  lion  from  the  ?.  of  Jordan,  50. 44.

2  Pet.  2.  18.  speak  great .?.  words  of  vanity
Jude  16.  and  their  mouth  speaketh  great  ?.  words

SWELLINGS.

2  Cor.  12.20. 1  fear  lest  there  be  ?.  tumults  among  you
SWEPT.

Judg.  5.  21.  the  river  of  Kishon  ?.  them  away-
Jer.  46. 15.  why  are  thy  valiant  men  ?.  away  ?

Mat.  12.  44. 1  will  return  to  my  house,  when  come,
he  findeth  it  empty,  ?.  and  garnished,  Luke  11.  25.
SWERVED.

1  Tim.  1.  6.  which  some  having  ?.  have  turned  aside
SWIFT.

Deut.  28.  49.  shall  bring  a  nation  as  ?.  as  the  eagle
1  Kings  4.  t  28.  straw  for  the  horses  and  ?.  beasts

1  Chr.  12.  8.  were  as  ?.  as  roes  on  the  mountains
Job  9.  26.  they  are  passed  away  as  the  ?.  ships

24. 18.  he  is?,  as  the  waters,  he  beholdeth  not
Prov.  6.  18.  feet  that  be  ?.  in  running  to  mischief
Eccl.  9.  11.  I  saw  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  ?.

Isa.  18.  2.  go,  ye  ?.  messengers,  to  a  nation  peeled

19.  1.  behold  the  Lord  rideth  upon  a  ?.  cloud

30.  16.  but  ye  said,  no,  for  we  will  ride  on  the  ?.

therefore  shall  they  that,  pursue  you  be  ?.
66.  20.  they  shall  bring  your  brethren  on  ?.  beasts
Jer.  2. 23.  thou  art  a  ?.  dromedary  tracers,  her  ways
46.  6.  let  not?.  Hee  away,  nor  mighty  men  escape
Amos  2. 14.  therefore  the  flight  shall  perish  from  ?.

15.  he  that  is?,  of  foot  shall  not  deliver  himself
Mic.  1.  13.  O  Lachish,  bind  the  chariot  to  ?.  beast
Mai.  3.  5.  I  will  be  ?.  witness  against  the  sorcerers
Rom.  3.  15.  their  feet  are  ?.  to  shed  blood

Jam.  1. 19.  let  every  man  be  ?.  to  hear,  slow  to  speak

2  Pet.  2.  1.  shall  bring  on  themselves  ?.  destruction

SWIFTER.

2  Sam.  1. 23.  were  ?.  than  eagles,  stronger  than  lions
Job  7.  6.  my  days  are  ?.  than  a  weaver’s  shuttle
9.25.  now  my  days  are?,  than  a  post,  they  Hee  away
Jer.  4.  13.  his  horses  are  ?.  than  eagles,  woe  unto  us
Lam.  4.  19-  our  persecutors  are  s.  than  the  eagles
flab.  1.  8.  their  horses  are .?.  than  the  leopards
SWIFTLY.

Psal.  147.  15.  his  word  runneth  very  ?.

Isa.  5.  26.  behoLd,  they  shall  come  with  speed  ?.
Dan.  9. 21.  Gabriel  being  caused  to  Hy  ?.  touched  me
Joel  3.  4.  if  ye  recompense  me  ?.  and  speedily


SWIM.

2  Kings  6.  6.  he  cast  in  the  stick,  and  the  iron  did  s.
Psal.  6.  6.  all  the  night  make  1  my  bed  to  ?.

Isa.  25. 11.  thatswimmeth  spread,  forth  hands  to  ?.
Ezek.  47.  5.  for  the  waters  were  risen,  waters  to  ?.  in
Acts  27-  42.  lest  any  of  them  should  .?.  out  and  escape
43.  and  commanded  that  they  which  could  ?.

SW  I  MM  ES  P.

Ezek.  32.  6.  I  will  water  the  land  wherein  thou  ?.

SW1MMETH.

Isa.  25. 11.  as  he  that?,  spreadeth  forth  his  hands
SWINE

Is  an  animal  well  known,  the  use  of  which  was
forbid  to  the  Hebrews,  Lev.  11.  7.  L  is  said,
they  had  the  fiesh  of  this  animal  in  such  detesta¬
tion,  that  they  would  not  so  much  as  pronounce
its  name,  but  instead  of  it  said,  That  beast,  That
thing,  in  2  Macc.  6.  18,  dec.  when  old  Eleazar
was  taken  by  the  servants  of  Antiochus  Epipha-
nes,  he  was  vehemently  uryed  to  taste  swine's
fiesh,  or  at  least  to  pretend  to  taste  it.  They
opened  his  mouth  by  force,  to  compel  him  to  eat
of  it ;  but  he  chose  rather  to  suffer  death  than  to
break  the  law  of  God,  and  to  give  offence  to  the
weaker  people  of  his  nation.

Porphyry  affirms,  that  the  Hebrews  and  Phenicians
abstained  from  pork,  because  there  was  none  in
their  country.  He  might  rather  have  said,  there
was  none,  or  but  very  little,  because  they  bred  no
hogs,  by  reason  of  that  abhorrence  they  had  con¬
ceived  for  them:  for  it  is  certain  they  might
have  had  them  if  they  had  pleased  ;  and  that  there
zvere  herds  of  swine  in  our  Saviour's  time,  is  evi¬
dent  from  Mat.  8.  30,  31.  Mark  5.  11.

Our  Saviour  in  Mat.  7-  6.  forbids  his  disciples  to
cast  their  pearls  before  swine,  lest  they  trample
them  under  their  feet,  and  turn  again  and  rend
you.  He  zvou/d  have  them  to  use  discretion  in
dispensing  holy  things,  especially  by  way  of  ad¬
monition,  or  reproof.  Preach  not  the  gospel  to
those  that  persecute  you  for  your  message,  neither
apply  the  promises  to  the  profane.  The  prodigal
son,  m  Luke  15.  15.  when  he  had  spent  all,  was
reduced  to  such  distress  as  to  be  glad  to  feed  szvine  ;
this  denotes  the  base  work  and  drudgery  that  sin¬
ners  employ  themselves  about .  It  is  said  in  Prov.
11.  22.  As  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  swine’s  snout,  so
is  a  fair  woman  who  is  without:  discretion.  Both
the  Jewish  and  Arabian  women  sometimes  used
to  wear  rings  in  their  nostrils  to  adorn  themselves.
But  nothing  can  be  more  ridiculous  than  to  put
a  gold  ring  or  a  jewel  in  a  swine's  snout.  St.
Peter  compares  those  sinners  that  frequently  re¬
lapse  into  their  former  sins,  to  a  sow  that,  as  soon
as  she  is  washed,  goes  again  to  wallow  in  the  mire,
2  Pet.  2.  22.

Lev.  11.  7.  the  ?.  is  unclean  to  you,  Deut.  14.  8.
Prov.  11.22.  as  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a  ?.  snout,  so  is
Isa.  65.  4.  which  eat  ?.  flesh  and  broth  ofabominable
66.  3.  an  oblation,  as  if  he  offered  ?.  blood
17.  eating  ?.  flesh,  and  abomination,  and  the  mouse
Mat.  7.  6.  neither  cast  ye  your  pearl.)  before  ?.

8.  30.  an  herd  of?,  feeding,  Mark  5. 11.  Luke  8.  32.

31.  suffer  us  to  go  into  the  herd  of .?.  Mark  5. 12.

32.  they  went  into  the  ?.  Mark  5. 13.  Luke  8.  33.

the  whole  herd  of  ?.  ran  violently  down
Mark  5.  14.  and  they  that  fed  the  ?.  fled  and  told

16.  they  told  them  also  concerning  the  .?.

Luke  15.  15.  he  sent  him  into  his  fields  to  feed  ?.

16.  have  filled  his  belly  with  husks  the  ?.  did  eat

SWOLLEN.

Acts  28.  6.  they  looked  when  he  should  have  ?.

SWOON.

Lam.  2.  11.  because  tht  children  ?.  in  the  streets

SWOONED.

Lam.  2.  12.  when  they  ?.  as  the  wounded  in  streets

SWORD.

The  sword  in  Scripture  is  often  used  for  zvar.  Lev.

26.  25.  I  will  bring  a  szvord  upon  you  ;  I  will
cause  war  to  come.  By  the  sword  shait  thou
live,  Gen.  27  .  40.  Thou  shalt  support  thyself  by
war  and  rapine.  By  sword  is  understood  the
vengeance  and  judgments  which  God  inflicts  upon
sinners.  Deut.  32.  41,42.  If  I  whet  my  glittering
sword.  My  sword  shall  devour  flesh.  Also  the
instrument  which  God  uses  to  employ  for  executing
his  judgments,  Psal.  17.  13.  Deliver  my  soul
from  the  wicked,  which  is  thy  sword.  Sword  is
figuratively  put  for  power  and  authority.  Rom.
13.  4.  He  beareth  not  the  szvord  in  vain.  The
magistrate  hath  not  received  his  power  to  no  pur¬
pose  ;  but  that  he  may  punish  offeziders,  and
defend  the  good.  'The  apostle  alludes  to  the  cus¬
tom  of  princes,  who  had  certain  officers  going
before  them,  bearing  the  ensigns  of  their  autho¬
rity.  All  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish
with  the  sword.  Mat.  26.  52.  They  that  take  zip
the  sword  by  their  own  authority,  and  would  do
justice  to  themselves,  deserve  to  be  pzit  to  death
by  the  sword  of  authority.  Or,  those  that  take
the  szvord  to  smite  another,  generally  suffer  by
it  themselves.  The  word  of  God  is  called  the
sword  of  the  Spirit,  Eph.  6.  17-  It  is  a  spiritual
sword,  or  a  means  provided  by  the  Spirit  of  God,
and  made  effectual  by  him  to  cut  the  sinews  of
the  strongest  temptations,  to  kill  or  mortify  tile
inward  lusts  and  corruptions  of  the  heart,  to
subdue  the  most  fixed  obstinacy  of  the  mind,  and
the  most  resolute  purposes  of  the  will,  Heb.  4.  12.
Moses  calls  God  the  sword  of  Israel’s  excel¬
lency,  Deut.  33.  29.  He  is  their  strength,  the
author  of  all  their  past  or  approaching  victories,
by  whose  assistance  they  did  excel,  arid  gloriously
conquer,  and  triumph  over  their  enemies.  Ozir
Saviour  says,  Mat.  10.  34.  1  came  not  to  send
peace,  but  a  sword.  My  coming  and  preaching
the  gospel  will  prove  in  the  event,  through  the
devil's  malice,  the  coiqrvptions  of  men's  hearts,
and  their  madness  on  their  idolatry  and  super¬
stition,  an  occasion  of  much  variance  and  di¬
vision,  even  betzveen  nearest  relations,  yea,  and  of
bodily  death,  and  many  ca, amines  and  persecutions

485


swo


s  w  o


s  w  o


Gen.  3.  24.  lie  placed  cherubims,  and  a  flaming  s.

34. 25.  took  each  man  his  s.  and  came  on  the  city
Exod.  5.  21.  to  put  a  s.  in  their  hands  to  slay  us

32.  27-  he  said,  put  every  man  hisr.  by  his  side
Lev.  26.  6.  nor  shall  the  s.  go  through  your  land

25.  1  will  bring  a  s.  upon  you,  Ezek.  5.  17. 1
6.  3.  I  14.  17.  I  29.  8.  1  33.  2.

33.  and  I  will  draw  out  a  s.  after  you
37.  they  shall  fall  as  it  were  before  a  s.

Num.  22.  23.  the  angel’s  s.  drawn  in  his  hand,  31.

29.  I  would  there  were  a. f.  in  mine  hand
Dent.  32.  25.  the  s.  without,  and  terror  within

33.  29.  and  who  is  the  s.  of  thy  excellency
Josh.  5.  13.  stood  with  hisj.  drawn  in  his  hand
1  24.  12.  but  not  with  thy  s.  nor  with  thy  bow
Judg.  7.  14.  this  is  nothing  save  the  s.  of  Gideon

18.  say,  the  J.  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon,  20.

22.  and  the  Lord  set  every  man’s  s.  against  his
fellow  through  all  the  host,  1  Sam.  14.  20.

8.  10.  for  there  fell  120, 000  men  that  drew  s.

20.  the  youth  drew'  not  his  s.  for  he  feared

9.  54.  he  said  unto  him,  draw  thy  s.  and  slay  me
20.  2.  four  hundred  thousand  that  drew  s.  17.

15.  twenty  and  six  thousand  men  that  drewr.

25.  eighteen  thousand  men  ;  all  these  drew  the  s.
35.  Israel  destroyed  25,100  men  that  drew  the  s.
46.  all  that  fell  were  25,000  that  drew'  the  s.

1  Sam.  13.  22.  neither  s.  nor  spear  was  found

15.  33.  as  thy  s.  hath  made  women  childless,  so

17.  39.  David  girded  his  s.  on  his  armour,  25. 13.

50.  but  there  was  noi.  in  the  hand  of  David

51.  David  ran  and  took  his  s.  and  slew  him
18. 4.  even  to  his  s.  and  to  his  bow  and  girdle

21. 8.  is  there  not  here  under  thy  hand  a  spear  or  s.
9.  the  s.  of  Goliath  is  here  wrapt  in  a  cloth

22. 10.  and  he  gave  him  the  .?.  of  Goliath
13.  in  that  thou  hast  given  him  bread,  and  as.

25.  13.  David  said,  gird  ye  on  every  man  his  s.

and  they  girded  on  every  man  his  s.
31.  4.  draw  thy  s.  and  thrust  me  through  therewith,
therefore  Saul  took  ai.  and  fell  upon  it

5.  his  armour  bearer  fell  also  upon  his  s.  and  died

2  Sam.  1.  22.  the  s.  of  Saul  returned  not  empty

2.  16.  and  thrust  his  s.  in  his  fellow’s  side

26.  Abner  said,  shall  the  r.  devour  for  ever  ?

3.  29.  not  fail  one  that  falleth  on  the  s.

11.  25.  the  s.  devourethone  as  well  as  another

12.  10.  the  s.  shall  never  depart  from  thy  house

18.  8.  and  the  wood  devoured  more  than  the  s.

20.  10.  Amasa  took  no  heed  to  the  s.  in  his  hand
23.  10.  and  his  hand  clave  unto  the  s.

24^  9.  in  Israel  800,000  men  that  drew  the  j
1  Kings  3.  24.  bring  me  a  s .  and  they  brought  a  s.

19.  17-  him  that  escapeth  the  s.  of  llazael

1  Chron.  5. 18.  men  able  to  bear  buckler  and  s.

10.  4.  draw  thy  .y.  and  thrust  me  through  therewith,

so  Saul  took  a  s.  and  fell  upon  it
5.  his  armour-bearer  fell  likewise  on  the  s.

21.  5.  an  hundred  thousand  men  that  drew  r.  and

Judah  was  470,000  that  drew  s.
12.  while  that  the  j.  of  thine  enemies  overtake,
or  else  three  days  the  s.  of  the  Lord

16.  the  angel  having  a  s.  drawn  in  his  hand

27.  and  he  put  up  his  s.  again  into  the  sheath

30.  he  was  afraid,  because  of  the  s.  of  the  angel

2  Chron.  20.  9.  as  when  the  s.  or  judgment  cometh
Ezra  9.  7-  we  and  our  kings  are  delivered  to  the  s.
Neh.  4.  18.  every  one  had  his  j.  girded  by  his  side
Esth.  9.  5.  Jews  smote  all  their  enemies  with  the  r.
Job  5.  20.  in  war  to  deliver  from  power  of  the  s.

15.  22.  and  he  is  waited  for  of  the  s.

19.  29.  be  ye  afraid  of  the  s.  for  wrath  bringeth

the  punishment  of  the  s.

20. 25.  the  glittering  s.  cometh  out  of  his  gall
27.  14.  if  children  be  multiplied,  it  is  for  the  s.

40.  19.  can  make  his  s.  to  approach  unto  him

41. 26.  the  r.  of  him  that  layeth  at  him  cannot  hold
Psal.  7. 12.  if  he  turn  not  he  will  whet  his  s.

17.  13.  deliver  from  the  wicked,  which  is  thy  s.
37.  14.  the  wicked  have  drawn  out  the  s.

15.  their  s.  shall  enter  into  their  own  heart
45.  3.  gird  thy  s.  on  thy  thigh,  with  thy  glory
57.  4.  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  s.

64.  3.  who  whet  their  tongue  like  a  s.  and  bend
76.  3.  there  brake  he  the  shield  and  the  s.

78.  62.  he  gave  his  people  over  unto  the  s.

149.6.  and  a  two-edged  s.  in  their  hand
Prov.  5.  4.  but  her  end  is  sharp  as  a  two-edged  s.

12.  18.  that  speaketh  like  the  piercings  of  a  s.

25. 18.  a  man  that  beareth  false  witness  is  a  j.
Cant.  3.  8.  every  man  hath  his  s.  upon  his  thigh
Isa.  2.  4.  nation  shall  not  lift  up  s.  against  nation

31.  8.  the  s.  not  of  a  mean  man  shall  devour  him

34.6.  the  s.  of  the  Lord  is  filled  with  blood

41.  2.  he  gave  them  as  the  dust  to  his  s.

49.  2.  he  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  s.

51.  19.  the  famine  and  the  are  come  to  thee

65.  12.  therefore  will  I  number  you  to  the  s.

66.  16.  by  his  s.  will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  flesh
Jer.  2. 30.  your  own  s.  devoured  your  prophets

4.  10.  whereas  the  s.  reacheth  unto  the  soul

5.  12.  neither  shall  we  see  s.  nor  famine,  14.  13.

6.  25.  for  the  s.  of  the  enemy  is  on  every  side

9.16.1  will  send  a  s.  after  them  till  I  have'eonsumed
„„  Jhem>  24.  10.  |  25.  27.  I  29.  17-  1  49.  37.

12. 12.  for  the  s.  of  the  Lord  shall  devour

14. 13.  the  prophets  say,  ye  shall  not  see  the  s.

15.  say  s.  and  famine  shall  not  be  in  this  land

16.  shall  be  cast  in  the  streets  because  of  the  s.

15.  2.  such  as  are  for  the  .v.  to  the  r.  43. 11.

3.  1  wiil  appoint  the  s.  to  slay,  and  dogs  to  tear
9.  the  residue  of  them  will  1  deliver  to  the  s.

18.  21.  pour  out  their  blood  by  the  force  of  the  s.

20.  16.  and  they  shall  be  mad  because  of  the  s.

29.  tor  1  will  call  for  a  s.  Ezek.  38.  21.

31.  he  will  give  them  that  are  wicked  to  the  s.

31.  2.  the  people  left  of  the  s.  found  grace

32.  24.  the  city  is  given  because  of  the  s.

34.  lj.  I  proclaim  a  liberty  for  you  to  the  s.

42. 16.  the  s.  ye  feared  shall  overtake  you  then
44.  28.  yet  a  small  number  which  escape  the  s.

46. 10.  the  s.  shall  devour  and  be  satiate,  14.

486


Jer.  47-  6.  O  thou  s.  of  the  Lord,  how  long  ere  quiet
48.2.  O  madmen,  the  s.  shall  pursue  thee
10.  cursed  that  keepeth  back  his  s.  from  blood
50.16.  for  fear  of  the  oppressing  s.  they  shall  turn

35.  a  s.  is  on  the  Chaldeans,  saith  the  Lord

36.  as.  is  on  the  liars,  a  r.  is  on  her  mighty  men

37.  a  s.  is  on  their  horses,  a  s.  on  her  treasures

51.  50.  ye  that  have  escaped  the  s.  go  away
Lam.  5.  9.  we  gat  bread  by  peril  because  of  the  s.
Ezek .  5.  2.  I  will  draw  out  a  s.  after  them,  12.

17.  and  1  will  bring  the  s.  upon  thee,  6.  3.

6.8.  ye  may  have  some  that  shall  escape  the  s.

7.  15.  the  s.  is  without,  the  pestilence  within

11.8.  ye  have  feared  the  s.  and  I  will  bring  ar.
14.  17-  if  1  bring  a  s.  and  say,  s.  go  through

21.  when  1  send  my  four  sore  judgments,  the  s.
21.  9.  prophesy  and  say,  at.aj.  is  sharpened,  11

12.  terrors,  by  reason  of  the  s.  on  my  people

13.  and  what  if  the  s.  contemn  even  the  rod  ?

14.  let  theirs,  be  doubled,  the  s.  of  the  great  men

slain,  it  is  the  s.  of  great  men  that  are  slain

15.  set  the  point  of  the.?,  against  the  gates

19.  appoint  two  ways,  that  the  s.  may  come

20.  appoint  a  way,  that  s.  may  come  to  Rabbath
28.  the  r.  the  s.  is  drawn  for  the  slaughter

30.  4.  and  the  s.  shall  come  upon  Egypt

21.  tobind  it,  to  make  itstrongto  hold  the  s.

22.  I  will  cause  the  .v.  to  fall  out  of  his  hand

32.  11.  the  s.  of  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  come

33.  3.  if  when  he  seeth  the  s.  come  on  the  land
4.  if  the  s.  come  and  take  him  away,  6.

6.  but  if  the  watchmen  see  the  s.  come,  if  the  s.

come  and  take  any  person  from  among  them
26.  ye  stand  upon  your  s.  and  ye  defile

35.  5.  thou  hast  shed  blood  by  the  force  of  the  s.
Hos.  2.  18.  and  1  will  break  the  bow  and  the  s.

11.  6.  and  the  s.  shall  abide  on  his  cities
Amos  9.  4.  thence  will  1  command  the  s.

Mic.  4.  3.  nation  shall  not  lift  up  ,r.  aaainst  nation
6.  14.  thou  deliverest,  will  I  give  up"to  the  s.

Nah.  2. 13.  the  .r.  shall  devour  the  3’oung  lions

3.  3.  the  horsemen  lifteth  up  both  the  bright  s.
r  15.  there  the  s.  shall  cut  thee  off

Zech.  9.  13.  made  thee  as  the  s.  of  a  mighty  man
11.  17.  the  s.  shall  be  upon  his  arm,  ana  his  eye
13.  7-  awake,  O  f.  against  my  shepherd
Mat.  10.  34.  1  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  s.
26.51.  one  of  them  drew  his  s.  and  struck  a  ser¬
vant,  Mark  14.  47.  John  18.  10.

52.  put  up  again  thy  r.  John  18.  11.

Luke  2.  35.  a  r.  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul
22.  36.  he  that  hath  no  s.  let  him  buy  one
Acts  16.  27.  he  drew  his  s,  and  would  have  killed
Pom.  8.35.  shall  s.  separate  us  from  love  of  Christ

13.  4.  for  he  beareth  not  the  .c.  in  vain

Eph.  6.  17.  s.  of  spirit  which  is  the  word  of  God
Heb.  4.  12.  and  sharper  than  any  tw’o-edged  s.

Pev.  1.  16.  out  of  his  mouth  went  a  two-edged  s.

2.  12.  which  hath  the  sharp  r.  with  two  edges
6.  4.  and  there  was  given  to  him  a  great  s.

19. 15.  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  s.  21.

By  the  SWORD.

Gen.  27.  40.  by  the  s.  thou  shalt  live  and  serve
Lev.  26.  7.  they  shall  fall  before  you  by  the  s.  8.

2  Sam.  1.  12.  because  they  were  fallen  by  the  s.

2  Chron.  29.  9.  our  fathers  have  fallen  by  the  s.

Job  33.  18.  and  his  life  from  perishing  by  the  s.

36.  12.  they  obey  not,  they  shall  perish  by  the  s.
Psal.  44.  3.  they  got  not  the  land  by  their  s.

78.  64.  their  priests  fell  by  the  s.  their  widows
Jer.  11.22.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  their  young  men
shall  die  by  thes.  18.  21.  Lam.  2.21.

14.  12.  but  I  will  consume  them  by  the  s.

15.  by  s. and  fam.  shall  those  prophets  be  consumed
16.  4.  shall  be  consumed  by  the  s.  44.  12,  18,  27.

19.  7.  and  l  will  cause  them  to  fall  by  the  s.

21.  9.  abideth,  shall  die  by  the  s.  38.2.  |  42.  17,  22.

27.  13.  why  will  ye  die  by  the  s.  by  the  famine  ?
32.36.  this  city  shall  be  delivered  by  the  s.

33.  4.  houses  which  are  thrown  down  by  the  s.

34.  4.  O  Zedekiah,  thou  shalt  not  die  by  the  s.

44.  13.  as  I  have  punished  Jerusalem  by  the  s.

Ezek.  26.6.  her  daughters  shall  be  slain  by  the  s.

11.  he  shall  slay  thy  people  by  thes.

28.  23.  the  wounded  shall  he  judged  in  her  by  the  s.
31.  18.  lie  with  them  that  be  slain  by  thes.  32.  20,

21,  22,  25,  .30.  1  .3.3.  27.

39.  23.  they  trespassed,  so  they  fell  all  by  the  s.
Hos.  1.7.  1  will  not  save  them  by  bow  nor  j.
Amosl.  11.  Jeroboam  shall  die  by  the  s.

9.  10.  the  sinners  of  my  people  shall  die  by  the  s
Hag.  2.  22.  every  one  by  the  s.  of  his  brother
Rev.  13. 14.  had  the  wound  by  a  s.  and  did  live
See  Edge,  Fall.

From  the  SWORD.

Exod.  18.  4.  delivered  me  from  the  s.  of  Pharaoh
Lev. 26.  36.  they  shall  flee  as  fleeing  from  a  s.

1  Kings  19-  17-  him  that  escapeth  from  the  s.  of  Jehu

2  Chron.  36.  20.  that  escaped  from  the  s.  carried  he
Job  5.  15.  but  he  saveth  the  poor  from  the  s.

39.  22.  neither  turneth  he  back  from  the  s.

Psal.  22.  20.  deliver  my  soul  from  the  s.  my  darling
144. 10.  who  delivered)  David  from  the  hurtful  s.
Isa.  21.  15.  for  they  fled  from  the  drawn  s.

31.  8.  but  he  shall  flee  from  the  s.

Jer.  21.  7-  such  as  are  left  from  the  s.  from  famine
46.  16.  arise,  let  us  go  from the  oppressing  .f.

Ezek.  12.  16.  I’ll  leave  a  few  men  of  them  from  s.

38.  8.  the  land  that  is  brought  back  from  the  s.

My  SWORD.  '

Gen.  48.  22.  which  I  took  from  Amorite  with  my  s.
Exod.  15.  9.  I  will  draw  my  s.  my  hand  shall  destroy
Dent.  32.  41.  and  if  I  whet  my  glittering  s.

42.  and  my  s',  shall  devour  flesh
1  Sam.  21. 8.  neither  brought  my  s.  nor  my  weapons
Psal.  44.  6.  neither  shall  my  s.  save  me
Isa.  34.5.  mys.  shall  be  bathed  in  heaven
Ezek.  21.  3.  1  will  draw  my  s.  out  of  his  sheath

4.  therefore  my  s.  shall  go  out  of  his  sheath

5.  1  the  Lord  have  drawn  mys.  out  of  his  sheath
30.  24.  I  have  pottny  s.  in  his  hand,  25.

32.  10.  be  afraid,  when  1  shall  brandish  mys.


Zeph.  2.  12.  Ethiopians,  ve  shali  be  slain  by  my  s.
With  the  SWO  It  D.

Gen.  31. 26.  daughters  as  captives  taken  uith  the  s.
Exod.  5.  3.  lest  he  fall  on  us  uith  the  s.  or  pestilence

22.  24.  and  I  will  kill  you  uith  thes.

Num.  19.  16.  whoso  touched)  one  slain  uith  the  s.

20.  18.  lest  1  come  out  against  thee  uith  thes.

31.  8.  Balaam  also  they  slew  uith  the  s.

Dent.  28.  22.  the  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  thes.
Josh.  10.  11.  whom  Jsrael  slew  with  thes.  13.  22.

li.  10.  he  smote  the  king  of  1  lazor  with  the  s.

1  Sam.  17.  45.  thou  comest  to  me  with  a  s.  and  spear
47.  the  Lord  saveth  not  with  s.  and  spear

2  Sam.  12.  9.  thou  hast  killed  Uriah  with  the  s.

Co.  8.  a  girdle  with  a  s.  fastened  upon  his  loins

21.  16.  Jshbi-benob  being  girded  with  a  s.

1  Kings  1.51.  will  not  slay  his  servant  with  the  s.

2.  8.  I  will  not  put  thee  to  death  with  thes.

32.  better  than  he,  and  slew  them  with  thes.

19.  1.  how  he  had  slain  all  the  prophets  with  the  s.
10.  and  slain  thy  prophets  with  the  s.  14.

2  Kings  8.  12.  young  men  wilt  thou  slay  with  the  s.
11. 15.  have  Athaliah  forth,  and  him  that  followeth

her,  kill  with  the  s.  2  Chron.  23. 14.

20.  they  slew  Athaliah  with  thes.  2  Chron.  23.21.
19. 37.  his  son  smote  Sennacherib  king  of  Assyria

with  the  s.  2  Chron.  32.  21.  Isa.  37.  38.
2  Chron.  21. 4.  and  slew  all  his  brethren  with  thes.
36. 17-  who  slew  their  young  men  with  the  s.

Ps.  42. 10.  as  with  a  s.  in  my  bones  enemies  reproach
Fa.  1. 20.  rebel,  ye  shall  be  devoured  with  the  s.

14.  19.  that  are  slain, thrust  through  with  as.

22.  2.  thy  slain  men  are  not  slain  with  the  s.

27.  1.  the  Lord  with  his  strong  s.  shall  punish

Jer.  5.  17.  shall  impoverish  thy  cities  with  the  s
14.  18.  then  behold  the  slain  with  the  s.

20.  4.  and  he  shall  slay  Judah  with  the  s.

26.  23.  who  slew  Urijah  with  the  s.  and  cast

27.  8.  that  nation  will  1  punish  uith  the  s.

29.  18.  I  will  persecute  them  with  the  s.

41.  2.  smote  Gedaliah  with  the  s.  and  slew  him
I. am.  4.  9.  they  that  be  slain  with  the  s.  are  better
Ezek.  7. 15.  he  that  is  in  the  field  shall  die  with  the  s.

23.  10.  the  Assyrians  slew  her  with  thes.

26.  8.  shall  slay  the  daughters  of  Tyrus  with  the  s.

31.  17.  they  also  went  down  to  hell  with  them  that

be  slain  with  thes.  32.  28,  32.  |  35.  8.
Amos  1.  11.  he  did  pursue  his  brother  with  the  s.

4. 10.  your  young  men  have  1  slain  with  thes.

7.  9.  rise  against  house  of  Jeroboam  with  thes.

9.  1.  I  will  slay  the  last  of  them  with  the  s.

Mic.  5.  6.  shall  waste  the  land  of  Assyria  with  the  s.
Mat.  26.  52.  that  take  the  s.  shall  perish  with  the  s.
Luke  22.  49.  Lord,  shall  we  smite  with  the  s.  1
Acts  12.  2.  Herod  killed  James  with  thes.

Heb.  11.  37.  were  tempted,  were  slain  with  the  s.
Pev.  2.  16.  I  will  fight  against  them  with  the  s.

6.  8.  and  power  to  kill  with  s.  and  with  hunger

13.  10.  that  killeth  withs.  must  be  killed  withs.

19  21.  the  remnant  were  slain  with  thes.

SWORDS.

1  Sam.  13.  19.  lest  the  Hebrews  make  themr.

2  Kings  3.  26.  took  with  him  700men  that  drew  s.
Neh.  4.  13.  I  even  set  the  people  with  their  s.

Psal.  55.  21.  yet  his  words  were  drawn  s.

59.  7-  behold,  they  belch  out,  s.  are  in  their  lips
Prov.  30.  14.  a  generation,  whose  teeth  are  as  s.
Cant.  3.  8.  they  all  hold  s.  being  expert  in  war
Isa.  2.  4.  and  they  shall  beat  their  s.  into  plough
shares,  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks,  Mic.  4.  3.

21.  15.  they  fled  from  the  s.  and  "from  the  bow
Ezek.  16.  40.  shall  thrust  thee  through  with  their  s.

23.  47.  and  shall  despatch  them  with  their  s.

28.  7.  strangers  shall  draw  their  s.  and  defile

30. 11.  they  shall  draw  their  s.  against  Egypt

32.  12.  by  the  s.  of  the  mighty  will  I  cause  to  fall
27-  they  have  laid  their  r.  under  their  heads

Joel  3.  10.  beat  your  plough-shares  into  j.

Mat.  26.  47.  with  Judas  whs  a  great  multitude  with
s.  from  the  chief  priests,  Mark  14.  43.
55.  are  ye  come  out  as  against  a  thief  with  s.  anti
staves  to  take  me  i  Mark  14.  48.  Luke  22.  52.
Luke  22.  38.  Lord,  behold  here  are  two  s.

SWORN.

Gen.  22.  16.  by  myself  have  I  .r.  saith  the  Lord,
Isa.  45.  23.  Jer.  49.  13.  1  51.  14.  Amos  6.  8.
Exod.  13.  19.  Joseph  had  straitly  s.  Israel
17-  16.  the  Lord  hath  .c.  that  he  will  have  w'ar'

Lev.  6.  5.  that  about  which  he  hath  s.  falsely
Dent.  7.8.  would  keep  the  oath  he  had  s.Jer.  11.5.
13.  17.  multiply  thee,  as  he  hath  s.  to  thy  fathers

19.  8.. if  he  enlarge  thy  coast,  as  he  hath  s.

28.  9.  shall  establish  thee,  as  he  hath  s.  29.  13.

31.  7.  bring  thee  to  land  Lord  hath  s.  Neh.  9.  15.

Josh.  9.  18.  because  the  princes  had  s.  to  them
19.  we  have  r.  to  them  by  the  Lord,  2  Sam.  21. 2.
Judg.  2.  15.  against  them  for  evil,  as  Lord  had  s.

21.  l.now  the  men  of  Israel  had  s.  in  Mizpeh

7.  wre  have  s .  not  to  give  them  wives,  18.

1  Sam.  3.  14.  I  have  s.  unto  the  house  of  Eli

20.  42.  go  in  peace,  forasmuch  as  we  have  s.

2  Sam.  3.  9.  except  as  the  Lord  hath  s.  to  David

21. 2.  children  of  Israel  had  s.  to  Gibeonites

2  Chron.  15.  15.  they  had  s.  with  all  their  hearts
Neh.  6.  18.  there  v'ere  many  in  Judah  s.  to  him
9.  15.  the  land  which  thou  hadst  r.  to  give  them
Psal.  24. 4.  who  hath  not  ,v.  deceitfully

89. 3.  I  have  s.  unto  David  my  servant

35.  once  have  I  s.  by  my  holmess,  Amos  4. 2.

102.  8.  that  are  mad  against  me,  are  .y.  against  me
110.  4.  the  Lord  hath  s.  and  will  not  repent
119.  106.  I  have  r.  and  I  will  perform  it

132. 11.  the  Lord  hath  s.  in  truth  to  David
Isa.  14.  24.  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  s.  saying

45.  23.  I  have  s.  by  myself,  the  word  is  gone  out
54. 9. 1  have  s.  that  waters  of  N  oah  no  more  go  over
the  earth,  so  have  I  s.  I  would  not  be  wrath
62.8.  the  Lord  hath  s.  by  his  right  hand
Jer.  5. 7-  they  have  s.  by  them  that  are  no  gods
44.  26.  behold,  I  have  j.  by  my  great  name
Ezek.  21 .  23.  to  them  that  have  s.  oaths
Amos  8.7.  Lord  hathr.  by  the  excellency  of  Jacob


S  Y  N


S  Y  N


S  Y  N


Mic.  7.  CO.  wilt  perform  the  mercy  thou  hast  s.
Acts  ‘ 2 .  .'to.  knowing  God  hath  s.  by  an  oath  to  him
7.  17-  time  of  promise  drew  nigh  which  God  had
Heb.A.  3.  1  have  s.  in  my  wrath,  if  they  enter
SYCAMINE.

Luke  17.  (3.  say  to  this. r.  tree,  be  thou  plucked  up
SVGA MOKE

Is  a  tree  called  the  Egyptian  Jig-tree  ;  its  name  is
composed  of  ovkos,  a  Jig  tree,  and  uuopos,  a  mul¬
berry-tree.  It  partakes  of  the  nature  of  each  of
these  trees  ;  of  the  mulberry-tree  in  its  leaves,  and
of  the  Jig-tree  in  its  fruit,  zvhich  is  pretty  like  a
Jig  in  its  shape  and  bigness.  This  fruit  grows
neither  in  clusters,  nor  at  the  ends  of  the  branches ,
but  sucking  to  the  trunk  of  the  tree.  Its  taste  is
pretty  much  like  a  wild  Jig.  Amos  says,  I  was
no  prophet,  neither  was  1  a  prophet’s  son,  but  I
was  an  herdman,  and  a  gatherer  of  sycanfore
fruit,  or  wild  Jigs,  Amos  7  ■  14.  Pliny  and  other
naturalists  observe,  that  this  fruit  does  not  grow
ripe  till  it  is  rubbed  with  iron  combs,  after  which
rubbing  it  ripens  in  four  days.  And  Jerom  upon
Amos  says,  that  without  this  management  the  Jigs
cannot  be  eaten,  because  of  their  intolerable  bit¬
terness.

To  make  this  tree  fruitful,  they  made  chinks  and
clefts  in  the  bark,  through  which  a  kind  of  milky
liquor  continually  distils.  This,  they  say,  causes
a  little  bough  to  be  formed,  sometimes  having  six
or  seven  Jigs  upon  it.  They  are  hollow,  without
grains,  and  there  is  found  a  little  yellow  matter
which  is  generally  a  nest  of  grubs.  These  Jigs  are
sweet,  but  not  good  for  the  stomach  :  they  weaken
it,  and  create  a  loathing,  but  at  the  same  time
moisten  and  refresh.  A  great  many  of  these  syca¬
mores  grow  in  Egypt  ;  and  some  of  them  are  said
to  be  of  such  substance,  that  three  men  can  hardly
grasp  t'sm.  There  were  also  some  in  Judea,  as
appears  from  Luke  19.  4.  where  Zaccheus  is  said
to  have  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore-tree  to  see
Jesus  pass  by,  being  of  so  low  a  stature  that  he
could  not  otherwise  see  him  because  of  the  mul¬
titude.

SYCAMORE-/n«r.

Amos  7.  14.  an  herdman  and  a  gatherer  of  s.-fruit

SYCAMORE-tree.

Luke  19.  4.  Zaccheus  climbed  up  into  a  s.-tree

SY  C  A  M  O  R  E-trees.

1  Kings  10. 27-  Solomon  made  cedars  to  be  as  s.-trees
for  abundance,  2  Chron.  1.  15. !  9-  27.

1  Chron.  27-  28.  over  the  s.-trees  was  Baal-hanan
Psal.  78.  47.  he  destroyed  their  s.  trees  with  frost
SYCAMORES.

Isa,  9.  10.  the  s.  are  cut  down,  but  we  will  change
SYMPHONY.

This  word  is  taken  for  the  agreement  of  several '
voices,  and  a  concert  of  several  instruments,  or
for a  particular  sort-of  instrument .  St.  Luke  takes
it  in  the  first  sense,  when  he  says,  that  the  brother
of  the  prodigal  son,  returning  out  of  the  field,
heard  in  his  father' s  house  a  concert  of  instruments ,
and  the  rejoicing  of  those  that  danced,  or  the  voices
of  those  that  sung,  n xscre  ayixtjiuivias  Kai  xopoov,

‘  Luke  15.  25.  Daniel  takes  it  in  the  second  sense,
for  an  instrument  of  music,  Dan.  3.  5.  which  some
think  was  a  viol,  or  some  instrument  approaching
thereto. — In  our  English  translation  it  is  called  a
dulcimer.

Dan.  3.  f  5.  at  what  time  ye  hear  sound  of  the  cor¬
net,  tiute,  harp,  s.

SYNAGOGUE.

In  Greek  o-uvaycoyri’  of  crwayeiv,  to  gather  together,
signifies  an  assembly,  as  in  Rev.  2.  9.  1  3.  9.  where
St.  John  calls  the  false  and  hypocritical  professors
in  Smyrna  and  Philadelphia,  the  synagogue  of
Satan,  a  congregation  or  assembly  of  men,  who
worship  and  serve  the  devil  by  errors  and  profane¬
ness,  and  yet  pretend  they  are  the  only  true  church
of  God.  But  most  commonly  the  word  synagogue
is  used  to  denote  the  place  where  the  Jews  assem¬
bled  to  pray,  to  read,  and  to  hear  the  reading  of
the  holy  books,  and  other  instructions.  It  is  often
mentioned  in  the  Gospels  and  the  Acts,  because
Christ  and  his  apostles  generally  went  to  preach  in
the  synagogues.

Authors  are  not  agreed  about  the  time  when  the
Jews  first  began  to  have  synagogues.  Some  will
have  it  that  they  are  as  ancient  as  the  ceremonial
law.  It  cannot  be  denied,  say  they,  that  the  Jews
did  worship  God  publicly  every  sabbath,  and  on
other  holy  occasions,  even  then  when  they  neither
did  nor  could  go  up  to  Jerusalem  ;  it  is  therefore
very  presumable  that  both  conscience  and  pru¬
dence  did  direct  them  to  appoint  convenient  places
for  that  purpose.  Some  footsteps  of  them  were  to
be  seen  so  early  as  in  the  time  of  Elisha.  Devout
persons,  in  the  time  of  this  prophet,  assembled
themselves  to  him  on  the  sabbath-day ,  to  hear  the
law  read  to  them,  2  Kings  4.  23.  And  the  author
o/’Psal.  74th,  desci  oing  the  havoc  that  the  army  of
“Nebuchadnezzar  had  made  in  Jerusalem,  says,
they  have  burned  up  all  the  synagogues  of  God  in
the  land,  Psal.  74.  8.

On  the  contrary,  many  learned  men  have  thought
them  of  but  a  late  institution.  Dr.  Prideaux
affirms,  that  they  had  no  synagogues  before  the
Babylonish  captivity,  for  the  main  service  of  the
synagogue,  says  he,  being  the  reading  of  the
{aw  unto  the  people,  where  there  was  no  book  of
the  law  to  be  read,  there  certainly  could  be  no
synagogue.  But  how  rare  the  book  of  the  law
was  through  all  Judea  before  the  Babylonish
captivity,  many  texts  of  Scripture  tell  us.  When
Jehoshaphat  sent  teachers  through  all  Judea,  to
instruct  the  people  in  the  laze  of  God,  they  carried
a  book  of  the  laze  with  them,  2  Chron.  17.  9.
which  they  needed  not  have  done,  if  there  had
been  any  copies  of  the  laze  in  those  cities  to  which
they  went ;  which  certainly  there  would  have
been,  had  there  been  any  synagogues  in  them.
And  when  Hilkiah  found  the  laze  in  the  temple,

2  Kings  22.  8.  neither  he  nor  king  Josiah  needed


to  have  been  so  surprised  at  it,  had  books  of  the  law
been  common  in  those  times.  Their  behaviour  on
that  occasion  sufficiently  proves  they  had  never
seen  it  before,  which  could  not  be  the  case,  had
there  then  been  any  other  copies  of  it  to  be  found
among  the  people.  And  if  there  were  no  copies
of  the  law  at  that  time  among  them,  there  could
then  be  most  certainly  no  synagogues  for  them  to
resort  to,  for  the  hearing  of  it  read  unto  them.
From  whence  he  concludes,  there  could  be  no  sy¬
nagogues  among  the  Jews,  till  after  the  Baby¬
lonish  captivity.

This  learned  author  says,  that  if  it  be  examined
into,  bozo  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Jews  were
so  prone  to  idolatry  before  the  Babylonish  cap¬
tivity,  and  so  strongly  and  cautiously,  even  to
superstition,  fixed  against  it  after  that  captivity,
the  true  reason  hereof  will  appear  to  be,  that
they  had  the  law  and  the  prophets  every  zceek
constantly  read  unto  them  after  that  captivity,
which  they  had  not  before.  For  before  that  cap¬
tivity,  they  having  no  synagogues  for  public  zcor-
ship,  or  public  instrziction ,  nor  any  places  to  re¬
sort  to  for  either,  unless  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,
or  the  cities  of  the  Levites,  or  to  the  prophets,
when  God  zeas  pleased  to  send  such  among  them,
Jor  want  hereof  great  ignorance  grew  among  the
people:  God  was  little  known  among  them,  and
his  laws  in  a  manner  wholly  forgotten.  And  there¬
fore  as  occasions  offered,  they  were  easily  dr azen
into  all  the  superstitious  and  idolatrous  usages  of
the  neighbouring  nations  ;  till  at  length,  for  the
pzaiishment  hereof,  God  gave  them  zip  to  a  dismal
destruction  in  the  Babylonish  captivity :  but  after
that  captivity,  and  the  return  of  the  Jews  from
it,  synagogues  being  erected  among  them  in  every
city,  to  which  they  constantly  resorted  for  public
zcorship,  and  where  every  week  they  had  the  law
from  the  first,  and  after  that  from  the  time  of
Antioclius' s  persecution,  the  prophets  also  read  un¬
to  them,  and  were  by  sermons  and  exhortations
there  delivered,  at  least  every  sabbath,  instrzicted
in  their  duty,  and  excited  to  the  obedience  of  it:
this  kept  them  in  a  thorough  knowledge  of  God
and  his  laws.  And  the  threats  they  found  in
the  prophets  against  the  breakers  of  them,  after
these  also  came  to  be  read  among  them,  deterred
them  from  transgressing  against  them.  So  that
the  law  of  Moses  was  never  more  strictly  ob¬
served  by  them  than  from  the  time  of  Ezra
I  when  synagogues  first  came  into  use  among
them J  to  the  time  of  our  Saviour ;  and  they
would  have  been  unblamable  herein,  had  they  not
overdone  it,  by  adding  corrupt  traditions  of  their
own  devising,  zi:  here  by,  at  length,  they  made  the
laze  itself  of  none  effect,  as  our  Saviour  chargeth
them.  Mat.  15.  6.

As  to  Psal.  74.  8.  They  have  burned  up  all  the
synagogues  of  God  in  the  land  :  in  the  original,
Col  moadhe  El,  that  is,  all  the  assemblies  of
God  ;  by  which,  says  Dr.  Prideaux,  I  acknow¬
ledge  must  be  understood  the  places  where  the
people  did  assemble  to  worship  God.  But  this
doth  not  infer  that  those  places  were  synagogues ;
and  there  are  none  of  the  ancient  versions,  except¬
ing  that  of  Aquila,  that  so  render  this  passage.
The  chief  place  where  the  Israelites  assembled
for  the  worship  of  God,  was  the  temple  at  Jeru¬
salem,  and  before  that  was  built,  the  tabernacle ;
and  the  open  court  before  the  altar  zvas  that  part,
in  both  of  them,  zohere  the  people  assembled  to
offer  up  their  prayers  unto  God.  But  those  that
lived  at  a  distance  from  the  tabernacle,  while
that  zvas  in  being,  and  afterwards  from  the  tem¬
ple,  zohen  that  was  built,  not  being  able  at  all
times  to  resort  thither,  they  built  courts,  like
those  in  which  they  prayed  at  the  tabernacle  and
at  the  temple,  therein  to  offer  up  their  prayers
uuto  God,  which  in  aftertimes  we  find  called  by
the  name  of  proseuchas.  Into  one  of  them  our
Saviour  is  said  to  have  gone  to  pray,  and  to  have
continued  therein  a  whole  night,  Luke  6.  12.
What  our  English  translation  there  renders,  and
continued  all  night  in  prayer  to  God,  is  in  the
orzginal  kcu  nv  diavuKre pei/tor  er  xr\  T\pooev%>i
too  Oeoo,  that  is,  And  he  continued  all  night  in
a  proseucha  of  God.  In  another  of  them,  St.
Paul  taught  the  people  of  Philippi,  Acts  16.  13,
16.  In  these  two  verses,  what  zee  render  in  our
English  version  by  the  word  prayer,  is  in  the  ori¬
ginal  a  proseucha,  or  place  of  prayer.

The  proseuchas  differed  from  the  synagogues  in  se¬
veral  particulars.  [1]  In  synagogues  the  prayers
were  offered  up  in  public  forms  in  common  for  the
whole  congregation ;  but  in  the  proseuchas  they
prayed,  as  in  the  temple,  every  one  apart  for  him¬
self;  and  so  our  Saviour  prayed  in  the  proseuchae
he  went  into.  [2]  The  synagogues  were  covered
houses  ;  but  the  proseuchae  were  open  courts  ;  they
had  no  covering,  except  perhaps  the  shade  of  some
trees,  or  some  covered  galleries.  [3]  The  syna¬
gogues  were  all  bziilt  on  elevated  places,  within
the  cities  to  which  they  did  belong  ;  but  the  pro¬
seuchas  were  zeithout  the  cities;  izi  the  fields,  espe¬
cially  near  rivers.  So  this  author  concludes,  that
when  the  Psalmist  says,  that  they  burned  up  the
synagogues  of  God,  he  may  be  understood  of  the
proseuchae,  or  of  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  or
the  places  zohere  the  Levites  taught  the  people  in
their  cities.

After  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,  synagogues  be¬
came  frequent  in  Israel.  It  is  ajjirmed,  that  in
the  city  of  Jerusalem  alone,  were  no  less  than
four  hundred  and  sixty,  or  even  four  hundred
and  eighty’ ;  but  herein  they  are  supposed  to  have
spoken  hyperbolic  ally ,  and  to  have  expressed  an
uncertain  large  number  by  a  certain  one.  Every
trading  fraternity  had  a  synagogue  of  their
own,  and  even  strangers  built  some  for  those  of
their  own  nation.  Hence  it  is,  that  in  Acts
6.  9.  mention  ii  made  of  the  synagogues  of  the
Libertines,  Cyrenians,  Alexandrians,  Cilicians,


and  As  tics ;  which  were  appointed  for  the  use
of  such  of  the  inhabitants  of  these  cities,  or  of  these
nations,  as  should  at  any  time  he  at  Jerusalem.
The  Jewish  authors  give  this  general  rule  for  the
construction  of  synagogues.  Wherever  there  are
ten  batelnim,  a  synagogue  ought  to  be  built.
The  signification  of  the  word  batelnim  has  been
much  controverted.  Buxtorf  thinks  them  to  be
persons  receiving  a  stipend  for  duly  assisting  at
divine  service,  that  there  may  be  always  ten  per¬
sons,  at  least,  to  assemble  together.  Lightfoot
imagines  them  to  have  been  ministers  and  officers
of  the  synagogue.  Others  think  this  the  matt
probable  opinion,  namely,  that  they  were  persons
of  a  mature  age,  free,  and  in  a  condition  to  assist
constantly  at  the  service,  on  all  days  of  assembling ,
which  were,  at  least,  two  days  a  zceek,  beside  the
sabbath :  so  that  always  upon  these  days  there
were  present  that  number  of  assistants,  without
which  the  service  could  not  be  performed.  When
there  zeere  ten  such  persons  in  a  town  or  city,
they  called  it  a  great  city,  and  here  they  might
build  a  synagogue.

As  the  synagogue- service  was  to  he  on  three  days
every  zceek,  for  the  sake  of  hearing  the  law  :  so
it  zcas  to  be  thrice  on  those  days,  for  the  sake  of
their  prayers.  For  it  was  a  constant  rule  among
them,  that  all  zeere  to  pray  unto  God  three  times
every  day,  that  is,  in  the  morning,  at  the  time  of
the  morning  sacrifice  ;  and  in  the  evening,  at  the
time  of  the  evening  sacrifice  ;  and  at  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  night,  because  till  then  the  evening
sacrifice  was  still  left  burning  upon  the  altar.  It
was  anciently  among  God's  people  the  steady
practice  of  good  and  religious  persons,  to  offer
up  their  prayers-  to  God  thrice  every  day.  'This
zee  find  David  did.  Psal.  55.  17.  Evening,  morn¬
ing,  and  at  noon,  will  1  pray.  And  Daniel,
notzvithstanding  the  king's  decree  to  the  contrary,
says,  that  he  kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times
a  day,  and  prayed,  and  gave  thanks  unto  his
God,  Dan.  6.  10.  By  which  it  is  implied,  that
he  did  not  only  at  that  time  thus  pray,  but  that  it
was  alzcays  his  constant  custom  so  to  do.

When  synagogues  were  erected  among  the  Jews,
the  hours  of  public  devotion  in  them  on  their
synagogue  days,  were,  as  to  morning  aiid  even¬
ing  prayers,  the  same  hours  in  which  the  morn¬
ing  and  evenizig  sacrifices  were  offered  up  at  the
temple.  And  the  same  hours  were  also  observed
in  their  private  prayers  zcherever  performed.  For
the  offering  of  incense  on  the  golden  altar  in
the  holy  place,  at  ecery  morning  and  evening
sacrifice  in  the  temple,  was  instituted  on  purpose
to  offer  up  unto  God  the  prayers  of  the  people,
zoho  were  then  without,  praying  unto  him.  Hence
it  was,  that  St.  Luke  tells  us,  that  while  Zaeha-
rias  went  into  the  temple  to  burn  incense,  the
whole  multitude  of  the  people  were  praying
without  at  the  time  of  incense,  Luke  1 .  9,  10.
And  for  the  same  reason  it  is  that  David  prayed.
Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before  thee  as  in¬
cense,  and  the  lifting  up  of  my  hands  as  the
evening  sacrifice,  Psal.  141.  2.  And  according
to  this  usage  is  to  be  explained  what  we  find  in
Rev.  8.  3,  4,  5.  zohere  it  is  said,  that  an  angel
came  and  stood  at  the  altar,  having  a  golden
censer,  and  there  was  given  unto  him  much
incense,  that  he  should  offer  it  up  with  the
prayers  of  all  saints,  upon  the  golden  altar,
which  was  before  the  throne :  and  the  smoke  of
the  incense,  which  came  with  the  prayers  of  the
saints,  ascended  up  before  God  out  of  the  angel’s
hand.  The  angel  hfre  mentioned,  is  the  angel
of  the  covenant.  Christ  our  Lord,  zoho  intercedes
for  us  with  God,  and,  as  our  Mediator,  constantly
offers  up  ozir  prayers  unto  him.  And  the  manner
of  his  doing  this  is  set  forth  by  the  manner  of  the
typical  representation  of  it  in  the  temple.

For  as  there,  at  every  morning  and  evening  sacri¬
fice,  the  priest,  in  virtue  of  that  sacrifice,  enter¬
ing  into  the  holy  place,  and  presenting  himself  at
the  golden  altar,  which  stood  directly  before  the
mercy-seat,  ( the  throne  of  God's  visible  presence
aznung  them  during  the  tabernacle  and  the  first
temple,  j  did  burn  incense  thereon,  while  the  peo¬
ple  zeere  at  their  prayers  without,  thereby,  as  an
intercessor  to  God  for  them,  to  offer  up  their
prayers  to  him  for  his  gracious  acceptance,  and
to  make  them  ascend  up  before  him  from  out  of
his  hands  as  a  sweet-smelling  savour  in  his  pre¬
sence  ;  so  Christ,  our  true  priest,  and  most  power¬
ful  intercessor,  by  virtue  of  that  one  sacrifice  of
himself  once  offered  up,  being  entered  into  the
holy  place,  the  heaven  above,  is  there  continually
present  before  the  throne  of  mercy,  to  be  a  constant
intercessor  for  us  unto  God  ;  and  while  zee  are  here
in  the  outer  court  of  his  church  in  this  world,
offering  up  our  prayers  unto  God ;  he  there  pre¬
sents  them  unto  him  for  us,  and  through  his  hatids
they  are  accepted  as  a  sweet-smelling  savour  in
his  presence.

And  it  being  well  understood  among  the  Jews  that
the  offering  up  of  the  daily  sacrifices,  and  the  burn¬
ing  of  incense  upon  the  altar  of  incense,  at  the  time
of  those  sacrifices,  was  for  the  rendering  of  God
propitious  to  them,  and  making  their  prayers  to
be  acceptable  in  his  presence .  they  were  very  care¬
ful  to  make  the  times  of  these  offerings,  and  the
times  of  their  prayers,  both  at  the  temple ,  and
every  where  else,  to  be  exactly  the  same.

The  most  pious  and  devout  persons  that  zeere  at  Jeru¬
salem,  chose  on  those  times  to  go  up  into  the  tern
pie,  and  there  to  offer  up  their  prayers  unto  God  .
thus  Peter  and  John  are  said  to  go  up  into  th<
temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  being  the  ninth
hour  of  the  day,  zehich  zvas  at  three  in  the  after
noon,  the  time  of  the  offering  i/p  the  evening  sacri
fice.  Acts  3.  1.  Those  who  zvere  in  other  places,
or  being  at  Jerusalem,  had  not  leisure  to  go  up
to  the  temple,  performed  their  devotions  elsewhere.
If  it  were  a  synagogue-day,  they  went  into  the

487


S  YN


TAB


TAB


synagogue,  and  there  prayed  with  the  congrega¬
tion:  and  if  it  were  not  a  synagogue-day  they
then  prayed  in  private  by  themselves  ;  and  if  they
had  leisure  to  go  to  the  synagogue,  they  chose  that
for  the  place  to  do  it  in,  thinking  such  a  holy
place  the  propercst  for  such  a  holy  exercise,  though
performed  there  in  their  private  persons  only ;
but  if  they  had  not  leisure  to  go  to  such  a  holy
place,  then  they  prayed  wherever  they  were  at
the  hour  of  prayer,  though  it  were  in  the  street  or
market-place.  And  for  this  it  was  that  our  Sa¬
viour  found  fault  with  them,  when  he  told  them,
Mat.  6.  5.  that  they  loved  to  pray  standing  in
the  synagogues,  and  in  the  corners  of  the  streets,
thereby  affecting  more  to  be  seen  of  men,  than  to
be  accepted  of  by  God.  But  many  of  them  had
upper  rooms  in  their  houses,  which  were  as
chapels,  particularly  set  apart,  and  consecrated
for  this  purpose.  In  such  a  one  Cornelius  was
praying  at  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day,  that  is,  at
the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice,  when  the  angel
appeared  unto  him.  Acts  10.  .30.  And  such  a
one  Peter  went  up  into  to  pray  about  the  sixth
hpur  of  the  day.  Acts  11).  9.  when  he  had  the
vision  of  the  great  sheet,  that  is,  at  half  an  hour
past  twelve  or  thereabout  ;  for  then  the  evening
sacrifice  dad  begin  on  great  and  solemn  days,  and
such  a  one  it  seems  hereby  that  was.  And  in
such  an  upper  room  where  the  apostles  assembled
together  in  prayer,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  de¬
scended  upon  them,  Acts  1.  13.

In  the  synagogue  was  the  ark  or  chest,  wherein  lay
the  book  of  the  law,  that  is,  the  Pentateuch,  or
five  books  of  Moses.  This  chest ,  they  say,  was
made  after  the  model  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
and  always  placed  in  that  part  of  the  synagogue
which  looked  towards  the  Holy  Land,  if  the  syna¬
gogue  was  out  of  it ;  but  if  it  was  within  it,  then
the  chest  was  placed  towards  Jerusalem  ;  and  if
the  synagogue  stood  in  this  city,  the  chest  was
set  towards  the  holy  of  holies.  Out  of  this  ark  it
was  they  took,  with  a  great  deal  of  ceremony,
and  before  the  whole  congregation,  the  book  of  the
law,  when  they  were  to  read  it.  In  the  midst  of
the  synagogue  teas  a  desk  or  pulpit,  upon  which
the  book  or  roll  of  the  law  rvas  read  very  solemnly.
There  likewise  he  stood  who  intended  to  harangue
the  people.

As  to  the  seats  or  pews  whereon  the  people  sat  to
hear  the  law  read  and  expounded ;  of  these  some
were  more  honourable  than  others.  The  former
were  for  those  who  were  called  Elders,  not  so  much
upon  the  account  of  their  age  as  of  their  gravity,
prudence,  and  authority.  These  Elders  sat  with
their  backs  towards  the  forementioned  chest,  and
their  faces  towards  the  congregation,  who  looked
towards  the  ark.  These  seats  of  the  Elders  are
those  which  are  called  in  Mat.  23.  6.  the  chief
seats,  and  which  our  Saviour  ordered  his  disciples
not  to  contend  for,  or  affect,  as  the  Pharisees  did.
The  women  were  therein  distinct  from  the  men,
and  seated  in  a  gallery  enclosed  with  lattices,  so
that  they  might  see  and  hear,  but  not  be  seen.

To  regulate  and  take  care  of  all  things  belonging  to
the  synagogue  service,  there  was  appointed  a
council,  or  assembly  of  grave  and  wise  persons,
well  versed  in  the  la-v,  over  whom  was  set  a  presi¬
dent,  who  is  called  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue,
Luke  8.  41.  He  presided  in  the  assemblies,  and
in  judicial  affairs  that  were  sometimes  decided
there,  against  those  who  had  given  any  scandal,
and  transgressed  the  law  in  any  important  matter.
As  for  scourging,  some  are  of  opinion,  that  it  was
a  punishment  not  falling  under  the  jurisdiction  of
the  rulers  of  the  synagogues,  but  belonging  to  the
civil  courts,  which  they  take  to  be  meant  by  the
synagogues,  where  our  Saviour  tells  his  disciples
they  should  be  scourged.  Mat.  10.  17.  Others,  on
the  contrary,  maintain,  that  by  the  word  syna¬
gogues  in  the  place  here  quoted,  we  are  to  under¬
stand  synagogues  properly  so  called.  As  to  the
manner  of  scourging,  see  Scourge.

The  same  presidents  invited  those  to  speak  in  the
synagogue,  whom  they  thought  capable  of  it,  and
offered  that  honour  to  strangers,  if  there  were  any
that  seemed  to  have  the  gift  of  speaking.  St.  Paul
being  at  Antioch  of  Pisidia,  was  invited  by  the
rulers  of  the  synagogue  to  make  a  discourse  to
them  for  their  edification.  Acts  13.  14,  15.  And
it  is  very  probable,  that  whenever  our  Saviour
preached  in  the  synagogues  it  was  not  without  the
permission  of  the  president,  or  chief  ruler,  though
it  be  not  expressly  said  so  in  the  gospel,  because  it
was  a  known  custom.

The  rulers  of  the  synagogue  were  likewise  bound  to
take  care  of  the  poor.  There  were  in  every  syna¬
gogue  two  treasury  chests,  one  for  poor  strangers,
and  the  other  for  their  own  poor.  Those  xoho  were
charitably  inclined,  put  their  alms  into  these
chests  at  their  coming  into  the  synagogue  to  pray.
Upon  extraordinary  occasions  they  sometimes
made  public  collections  ;  in  which  cases,  the  rulers
of  the  synagogue  ordered  the  person  whose  busi¬
ness  it  was  to  collect  the  alms,  to  ask  every  body
for  their  charity.  Every  one  promised  according
as  he  was  disposed,  and  afterwards  they  gathered
from  house  to  house  what  had  been  promised ,  for
the  Jews  meddled  not  with  money  on  their  sab-
bath-day.

These  rulers  likewise  taught  the  people.  This  they
did  sometimes  by  way  of  dispute  and  conference,  by
questions  and  answers,  or  else  by  continued  dis¬
courses  like  sermons.  All  these  different  ways  of
teaching  they  called  by  the generalname  of  search¬
ing  ;  the  discourse  they  styled  a  search,  or  inqui-
Sdion,  and  him  that  made  it,  a  searcher.  The
Hebrew  word  darafch,  signifies,  to  dive  into  the
sublime,  profound,  mystical,  allegorical,  and
prophetical  senses  of  holy  Scripture.

-i he  synagogue  of  tne  Libertines,  or  freed  men,
Acts  6.  9.  was,  according  to  many  interpreters,
than  of  those  Jews,  who  having  been  led  away


captive  by  Pompey  and  by  Sosias,  had  afterwards
recovered  their  liberty,  and  were  retired  to  Jerusa¬
lem,  when  Tiberias  drove  away  the  Jews  out  of
Italy.  _  Others  will  have  it,  that  St.  Luke  wrote
Libystinorum,  and  not  Libertinorum  ;  and  that
the  Libystini  were  people  of  Libya,  joining  to
Egypt.  Others  by  these  Libertines  understood  the
sons  of  such  Jews  as  were  free  denizens  of  Rome.
Mat.  12.  9.  when  departed,  he  went  into  their  s.
13.  54.  he  taught  them  in  their  s.  Mark  6.  2.

Mark  1.  23.  and  there  was  in  their  r.  a  man  with
an  unclean  spirit,  Luke  4.  33.
29.  when  they  were  come  out  ot  s.  Luke  4.  38.

5.  22.  Jairus  by  name,  one  of  the  rulers  of  the  s.

besought  Jesus,  36.  38.  Luke8.  41,  49.
Luke  4.  16.  as  his  custom  was,  he  went  into  the  s.

on  the  sabbath-day
20.  the  eyes  of  all  in  the  s.  were  fastened  on  him

7.  5.  he  loveth  our  nation  and  hath  built  us  a  s.
John  6.  59.  these  things  said  he  in  the  s.

9.  22.  that  he  should  be  put  out  of  the  s.

12.  42.  lest  they  should  be  put  out  of  the  s.

18.  20.  1  ever  taught  in  the  s.  and  temple

Acts  6.  9.  then  arose  certain  of  the  s.  which  is  called
the  s.  of  Libertines,  disputing  with  Stephen

13.  14.  they  went  into  the  s.  on-  the  sabbath-day,

and  sat  down

15.  the  rulers  of  the  s.  sent  to  them,  saying
42.  and  when  the  Jews  were  gone  out  of  the  s.

14.  1.  Paul  and  Barnabas  went  both  into  the  s.

17. 1.  to  Thessalonica  where  was  a  s.  of  the  Jews

17.  therefore  he  disputed  in  the  s.  with  the  Jews
and  with  devout  persons
18.  4.  and  he  reasoned  in  the  s.  every  sabbath
7-  Justus,  whose  house  joined  hard  to  the  s.

8.  Crispus  the  chief  ruler  of  the  s.  believed
17.  Greeks  took  Sosthenes  chief  ruler  of  the  f.

26.  A  polios  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  s.

22.  19.  beat  in  every  s.  such  as  believed,  26.  11.
Jam.  2.  +  2.  if  there  come  into  your  s.  a  man
Rev.  2.  9.  but  are  the  s.  of  Satan

3.  9.  I  will  make  them  of  the  s.  of  Satan
SYNAGOGUES.

Psal. 74.  8.  they  have  burned  up  all  the  s.  of  G.
Mat.  4.  23.  Jes.  went  teaching  in  theirs,  and  preach¬
ing  the  gospel,  9.  35.  Mark  1.  39.  Luke  13. 10.

6.  2.  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the  j.

5.  for  they  love  to  pray  standing  in  the  s.

10.  17.  they  will  scourge  you  in  their  f.  23.  34.

23.  6.  and  love  the  chief  seats  in  the  s.  Mark  12.

39.  Luke  11.  43.  120.46.
Mark  13.  9.  and  in  the  ye  shall  be  beaten
Luke  4. 15.  he  taught  in  the  being  glorified
44.  and  he  preached  in  the  s.  of  Galilee

12.  11.  and  when  they  bring  you  unto  the  s.

21.  12.  delivering  you  up  to  the  and  prisons

John  16.  2.  they  shall  put  you  out  of  the
Acts  9.  2.  Saul  desired  of  him  letters  to  the  s.

20.  straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  s.

13.  5.  Paul  and  Barnabas  preached  in  the  s.

15.  21.  being  read  in  the  .9.  every  sabbath-day

24.  12.  neither  raising  up  the  people  in  the  s.

T.

TABERNACLE

Signifies,  [1]  A  tent  or  pavilion  raised  on  posts  to
lodge  under,  Num.  24.  5.  Mat.  17.  4.  [2]  A  house
or  dwelling.  Job  11.  14.  |  22.  23.  [3]  A  kind  of
tent  to  take  up  and  down,  as  occasion  required ;
which  was  as  it  were  the  palace  of  the  Most  High,
the  dwelling  of  the  God  of  Israel ;  wherein  the
Israelites,  during  their  journeyings  in  the  wilder¬
ness,  performed  the  chief  of  their  religious  exer¬
cises,  offered  their  sacrifices,  and  worshipped  God.

It  was  thirty  cubits  in  length,  and  ten  in  breadth
and  in  height.  It  was  divided  into  t7Co  partitions  :
the  first  was  called,  The  Holy  Place,  which  was
twenty  cubits  long,  and  ten  wide  :  here  were  placed
the  table  of  shew-bread,  the  golden  candlestick,  and
the  golden  altar  of  incense.  The  second  teas
called.  The  most  Holy  Place,  whose  length  was
ten  cubits,  and  breadth  ten  cubits,  wherein,  before
the  building  of  the  temple,  the  ark  of  the  cove¬
nant  was  kept,  which  was  a  symbol  of  God's  gra¬
cious  presence  with  the  Jewish  church.  The  most
Holy  was  divided  from  the  Holy  Place  by  a  cur¬
tain,  or  veil  of  very  rich  cloth,  which  hung  upon
four  pillars  of  shittim-wood,  that  were  covered
with  plates  of  gold,  Exod.  26.  1.  Heb.  9.  2,  3.

[4]  Christ's  human  nature,  of  which  the  Jewish
tabernacle  was  a  type,  wherein  God  dwells  really,
substantially ,  and  personally,  Heb.  8.  2.  1  9.  11.

[5]  The  true  church  militant,  Psal.  15.  1.  [6]
Our  natural  body,  in  which  the  soul  lodges  as
in  a  tabernacle,  2  Cor.  5.  1.  2  Pet.  1.  13.  [7]
The  tokens  of  God's  gracious  presence.  Rev.

21.  3.

The  feast  of  tabernacles,  Lev.  23.  34.  was  so  called,
because  the  Israelites  kept  it  under  green  tents  or
arbours,  in  memory  of  their  dwelling  in  tents  in
their  passage  through  the  wilderness.  It  was  one
of  the  three  great  solemnities,  wherein  all  the
males  xuere  obliged  to  present  themselves  before  the
Lord.  It  was  celebrated  after  harvest,  on  the  1 5th
day  of  the  month  Tisri,  which  answers  to  our
month  of  September.  The  feast  continued  eight
days ;  but  the  first  day  and  the  last  were  the  most
solemn.  Herein  they  returned  thanks  to  God  for
the  fruits  of  the  earth  they  had  then  gathered  in,
and  were  also  put  in  mind  that  they  were  but  pil¬
grims  and  travellers  in  this  world.

Exod.  25.  9.  make  it  after  the  pattern  of  the  t.

26.  1.  thou  shalt  make  the  t.  with  ten  curtains

6.  couple  the  curtains,  and  it.  shall  be  one  t.  36. 13.

7.  thou  shalt  make  curtains  of  goats'  hair  to  be  a

covering  upon  the  t.  35.  11.  |  36.  14.
15.  shalt  make  boards  for  the  t.  of  shittim  wood,
17,  20,  26.  1  36.  20,  22,  23,  28,  31,  32.
26.  make  bars  for  the  t.  27.  1  30.  rear  up  the  t.

27.  9.  and  thou  shalt  make  the  court  of  the  t.


Exod.  27. 19.  all  the  vessels  of  the  t.  of  brass,  39.  40,
29.  43.  the  t.  shall  be  sanctified  by  my  glory
31.  7.  they  may  make  all  the  furniture  of  the  t.
33.7-  Moses  pitched  the  t.  without  the  camp
11.  but  Joshua  departed  not  out  of  the  t.

35.  18.  the  pins  of  the  t.  38.  20,  31.

36.  8.  them  that  wrought  the  work  of  the  t.

39.  32.  thus  was  the  work  of  the  t.  finished

33.  and  they  brought  the  t.  to  Moses,  the  tent

40.  2.  thou  shalt  set  up  the  t.  ||  9.  anoint  the  t.

17.  on  the  first  month,  on  the  first  day,  the  t.  was

reared  up,  18.  Num.  7.  1.

19.  he  spread  abroad  the  tent  over  the  t.

21.  he  brought  tne  ark  into  the  t.  and  set  up

33.  he  reared  up  the  court  round  about  the  t.

34.  the  glory  ot  the  Lord  filled  the  t.  35.

36.  the  cloud  was  taken  up  from  over  the  t.

Num.  9.  17.  I  10.  11.  1  12.  10.
38.  for  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  was  on  the  t.  bv
day,  and  fire  by  night,  Num.  9.  18,  19,  22.
Lev.  8.  10.  Moses  anointed  the  t.  and  all  therein

15.  31.  that  they  die  not  when  they  defile  my  t.
17.  4.  bringeth  not  an  offering  before  the  t.

26.  11.  1  will  set  my  t.  among  you,  not  abhor  you
Num.  1.  50.  appoint  J^evites  over  the  t.  shall  bear
the  t.  shall  encamp  round  about  the  t.  53.
51.  and  when  the  t.  setteth  forward,  and  when
the  t.  is  to  be  pitched,  Levites  set  it  up
53.  the  Levites  shall  keep  the  charge  of  the  /.  ol
testimony,  3.  7,  25.  |  18.  3.  I  31.  30,  47.

3.  7.  before  the  t.  to  do  the  service  of  the  t.

23.  the  Gershonites  shall  pitch  behind  the  t.

35.  the  Merarites  shall  pitch  northward  of  the  t.
38.  those  that  encamp  before  the  t.  eastward

4.  16.  the  oversight  of  the  t.  pertaineth  to  Eleazar

25.  they  shall  bear  the  curtains  of  the  t.

31.  shall  bear  the  boards  of  the  t.  and  bars  thereof
'  5.  17.  the  priest  shall  take  of  the  dust  of  the  t.

7.  3._they  brought  their  offering  before  the  t.

9.  15.  on  the  day  that  the  t.  was  reared  up,  the
cloud  covered  the  t.  namely  the  tent  of  testimony

10.  21.  the  Kohathites  did  set  up  the  t.

11.  24.  Moses  set  seventy  elders  round  about  the  t.

26.  but  they  went  not  out  unto  the  t.

16.  9.  seemeth  it  small  to  do  the  service  of  the  t.

24.  get  you  up  from  about  the  t.  of  Korah,  27.

17.  13.  whoso  cometh  near  to  the  t.  shall  die
Dent.  31.  15.  L.  appeared  in  t.  in  a  pillar  of  cloud
Josh.  22.  19.  wherein  the  Lord’s  t.  dwelleth

1  Sam..  2.  t  32.  see  the  affliction  of  the  t.

2  Sam.  6.  17.  they  set  the  ark  in  the  midst  of  the  t.
7-6.  but  1  have  walked  in  a  tent  and  in  a  t.

1  Kings  1.  39.  Zadok  took  a  horn  of  oil  out  of  the  t.

2.  28.  Joab  fled  to  the  t.  of  the  Lord  and  altar

8.  4.  vessels  in  the  t.  were  brought  up,  2  Chr.  5.  5.

1  Chron.  &.  48.  the  Levites  for  the  service  of  the  t.

9. 19.  Korahites  were  keepers  of  the  gates  of  the  t.

23.  they  had  the  oversight  of  the  house  of  the  t.

16.  39.  the  priests  before' the  t.  of  the  Lord

17.  5.  but  have  gone  from  one  t.  to  another

21.  29.  for  the  t.  which  Moses  made  in  wilderness
23.  26.  they  shall  no  more  carry  the  t.

2  Chron.  1.  5.  he  put  the  brazen  altar  before  the  t.

Job  5.  24.  shalt  know  that  thy  t.  shall  be  in  peace

18. 6.  the  light  shall  be  dark  in  his  t.  and  his  c  andle

14.  his  confidence  shall  be  rooted  out  of  his  t.

15.  destruction  shall  dwell  in  his  t.  because  not  his
19. 12.  his  troops  encamp  round  about  my  t.

20.  26.  it  shall  go  ill  with  him  that  is  left  in  his  t.
29.  4.  when  the  secret  of  God  was  upon  my  t.

31.  31.  if  the  men  of  my  t.  said  not,  oh  that

36.  29.  can  any  understand  the  noise  of  his  t.  ?
Psal.  15.  1 .  Lord,  who  shall  abide  in  thy  t.  ?

19.  4.  in  them  hath  he  set  a  t.  for  the  sun

26.  +8.  I  have  loved  the  t.  of  thy  honour

27.  5.  in  the  secret  of  his  t.  shall  he  hide  m
6.  1  will  offer  in  his  t.  sacrifices  of  joy

61.  4.  I  will  abide  in  thy  t.  for  ever
76.  2.  in  Salem  is  his  t.  his  dwelling-place  in  Zion
78.  60.  so  that  he  forsook  the  t.  of  Shiloh
67.  moreover  he  refused  the  t.  of  Joseph
132.  3.  I  will  not  come  into  the  t.  of  my  house,  7.
Prov.  14.  11.  the  t.  of  the  upright  shall  flourish
Isa.  4.  6.  there  shall  be  a  t.  for  a  shadow  from  heat
16. 5.  he  shall  sit  upon  it  in  the  t.  of  David
33.  20.  a  t.  that  shall  not  be  taken  down
Jer.  10.  20.  my  t.  is  spoiled,  all  my  cords  broken
Lam.  2.  4.  he  slew  all  that  were  pleasant  in  the  t.

6.  he  hath  violently  taken  away  his  t.

Ezefc.  37-  27.  my  t.  also  shall  be  with  them

41.  1.  which  was  the  breadth  of  the  t.

Amos  5.  26.  but  ye  have  borne  the  t.  of  Moloch

9.  11.  in  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the  t.  of  David
Acts  7.  43.  ye  took  up  the  t.  of  Moloch
46.  who  desired  to  find  a  t.  for  the  God  of  .1  acob
15. 16.  and  will  build  again  the  t.  of  David
2  Cor.  5.  1.  if  our  house  of  this  t.  be  dissolved

4.  we  that  are  in  this  t.  do  groan,  being  burdened
Heb.  8.  2.  the  true  t.  which  the  Lord  pitched

5.  when  Moses  was  about  to  make  the  t.

9.2.  there  was  a  t.  made,  called  the  sanctuary

3.  the  t.  which  is  called  the  holiest  of  all

6.  the  priests  went  always  into  the  first  t.

B.Uvhile  as  the  first  t.  was  yet  standing

1 1.  an  high  priest  by  a  greater  and  more  perfect  t.

21.  he  sprinkled  with  blood  the  t.  and  \  essels

13.  10.  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  t.

2  Pet.  1. 13.  think  it  meet,  as  long  as  1  am  in  this  t.

14.  knowing  that  shortly  I  must  put  off  my  t.

Rev.  13.  6.  to  blaspheme  his  name  and  his  t.

15.  5.  behold  the  temple  of  the  t.  was  opened
See  Congregation,  Door.
TABERNACLE  of  witness.

Num.  17.  7.  Moses  laid  up  the  rods  in  the  t.  of  w
8.  on  the  morrow  Moses  went  into  the  t.  of  w.

18.  2.  shall  minister  before  the  t.  of  witness

2  Chron.  24.  6.  to  bring  the  collection  for  t.  of  w.
Acts  7.  44.  our  fathers  had  the  t.  of  witness
TABERNACLES.

Num.  24.  5.  how  goodly  are  thy  t.  O  Israel
Job  11.  14.  let  not  wickedness  dwell  iu  thy  t.

12.  6.  the  t.  of  robbers  prosper,  and  thev'that


TAB


TAK


Job  15.  34.  ami  fire  shall  consume  the  t.  of  bribery

22.  2.3.  thou  shall  put  away  iniquity  far  from  thy  t.
Psal.  43.  3.  let  them  bring  me  unto  thy  t.

46.  4.  make  glad  the  holy  place  ofr.  of  Most  High
78.  51.  smote  chief  of  their  strength  in  t.  of  Ham
83.  6.  the  t.  of  Edom  have  consulted  together
84. 1.  how  amiable  are  thy  t.  ()  I.ord  of  Hosts
118.  15.  salvation  is  in  the  t.  of  the  righteous
132.  7.  we  will  »o  into  his  t.  and  worship
Dan.  11.  45.  he  shalt  plant  the  t.  of  his  palaces
Hos.  9-  6.  thorns  shall  be  in  their  t.

12.  9.  will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in  t.

Mai.  2.  12.  Lord  will  cut  off  the  man  out  of  the  t.
Mat.  17.  4.  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  let  us  make  here
three  t.  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33.
Uto.  11  9.  Abraham  dwelling  in  t.  with  Isaac
See  Feast.

TABLE

Signifies,  [1]  A  frame  of  wood,  made  for  several  uses,
1  Kings  2.  7-  [2]  The  altar  of  God,  Mai.  1.  7, 12.
[3]  Provision  for  food,  either  for  body  or  soul,
PsaJ.  69.  22.  [4]  The  two  tables  of  stone  whereon
the  law  was  written,  Exod.  32.  15.

That  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table,  Luke  22.

30.  That  ye  may  partake  of  the  highest  delights
which  I  have  prepared  for  you,  and  enjoy  the  near¬
est  communion  with  me  in  glory.

To  serve  tables,  Acts  6.  2.  To  provide  for  the
poor,  that  they  may  have  whereof  to  eat  at  their
tables.

Exod.  25.  23.  shalt  also  make  a  r.of  shittim  wood

27.  places  of  staves  to  bear  the  t.  28.  |  37. 14.

26.  35.  thou  shalt  set  the  t.  without  the  veil

30.  27.  thou  shalt  anoint  the  t.  and  all  his  vessels

31.  8.  Bezaleel  shall  make  the  t.  and  the  altar

37.  10.  he  made  the  t.  ||  16.  the  vessels  on  the  t.

39.  33.  they  brought  the  t.  unto  Moses,  the  tent

40.  4.  thou  shalt  bring  in  the  t.  and  set  in  order
22.  put  the  t.  in  the  tent  of  the  congregation

Lev.  24.  6.  shalt  set  six  on  a  row  on  the  pure  t.
Num.  3.  31.  the  Kohathites’  charge  shall  be  the  t.
Judg.  1.  7-  kings  gathered  their  meat  under  my  t.

1  Sam.  20.  29.  he  cometh  not  to  the  king’s  t.

34.  Jonathan  arose  from  the  t.  in  fierce  anger

2  Sam.  9.7.  Dav.  said,  Mephibosheth  shall  eat  bread

at  my  t.  continually.  10.  11,  13.  |  19.  28.

1  Kings  2.  7.  let  them  be  of  those  that  eat  at  thy  t.

4.  27.  for  all  that  came  to  king  Solomon’s  t.

10.  5.  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  saw  the  meat  of
his  t.  and  the  attendance,  2  Chron.  9.  4.

13.  20.  as  they  sat  at  t.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came

18.  19.  the  prophets  which  eat  at  Jezebel's  t.

2  Kings  4. 10.  let  us  set  for  him  a  t.  and  a  stool
Neh.  5.  17.  there  were  at  my  t.  150  Jews

Job  36.  16.  that  which  should  be  set  on  thy  t.

Psal.  23.  5.  thou  preparest  a  t.  before  me
69.  22.  let  their  t.  become  a  snare  before  them
78.  19.  can  God  furnish  a  t.  in  the  wilderness
128.  3.  thy  children  like  olive  plants  about  thy  t.
Prov.  3.  3.  write  them  on  the  t.  of  thy  heart,  7.  3.

9.  2.  wisdom  hath  also  furnished  her  t.

Cant.  1.  12.  while  the  kingsitteth  at  his  t.

Isa.  21.  5.  prepare  the  t.  eat,  watch,  drink,  arise
30.  8.  now  go  write  it  before  them  in  a  t.

65.  11.  that  prepare  a  t.  for  that  troop
Jer.  17.  1.  it  \s  graven  on  the  t.  of  their  heart
Ezek.  23.  41.  and  a  t.  prepared  before  it
39.  20.  thus  ye  shall  be  tilled  at  my  t.  with  horses
41. 22.  this  is  the  t.  that  is  before  the  Lord
44.  16.  and  they  shall  come  near  to  my  t.

Dan.  11.  27.  they  shall  speak  lies  atone  t.

Mai.  1. 7.  the  t.  of  the  Lord  is  contemptible

12.  ye  say,  the  t.  of  the  Lord  is  polluted
Mat.  15.  27-  she  said,  yet  the  dogs  eat  the  crumbs
which  fall  from  their  master’s  t.  Mark  j.  28.
Luke  16.  21.  crumbs  which  fell  from  rich  nan’s  t.
22.  21.  that  betrayeth  me,  is  with  me  .;n  the  t.

30.  that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  t.

John  12.  2.  Lazarus  was  one  of  6  em  that  sat  at  t.

13.  28.  no  man  at  the  t.  knew  for  what  intent
Rom.  11.  9.  let  their  t.  be  made  a  snare  and  a  trap
1  Cor.  10.  21.  cup  of  Lord  and  cevils,  ye  cannot  be
partakers  of  the  Lord’s  t.  and  of  the  t.  of  devils
See  Shew-Bread.

Writing  TA  B  L E.

Luke  1.  63.  Zacharias  asked  for  a  w.  t.  and  wrote
TABLES.

Exod.  32.  15.  the  t.  were  written  on  both  sides

16.  t.  were  the  work  of  God,  graven  on  the  t.

19.  he  cast  the  t.  out  of  his  hands,  and  brake  them
34.  1. 1  will  write  on  these  t.  the  words  in  first  t.

Dent.  10.  4.  he  wrote  on  the  t.  according  to  first

5.  and  put  the  t.  in  the  ark,  Ileb.  9.  4.

1  Chr .  28.  16.  David  gave  gold  for  t.  of  shew-bread

2  Chr.  4.  8.  Solomon  also  made  ten  t.  and  placed

19.  the  t.  whereon  the  si  vw-bread  was  set

Isa.  IQ.  8.  all  t.  are  full  0  vomit  and  filthiness
Ezek.  40.  41.  eightr.  wheret  pon  they7  slew  sacrifices
42.  four  t.  were  of  hewn  stone  for  burnt  offering
Bab.  2.  2.  write  the  vision,  and  make  it  p.ain  on  t.
Mat.  21.  12.  he  overthrew  the  '.  of  the  money¬
changers,  and  sellers  of  doves.  Mark  11.  15.
Mark  7.  4.  as  the  washing  of  cups,  pots,  and  of  t.
John  2.  15.  drove  them  out  and  overthrew  the  t.
Acts  6.  2.  leave  the  word  of  God  and  serve  t.

2  Cor.  3.  3.  not  in  t.  of  stone,  but  fleshly  t.  of  heart
See  Stone,  Two.

TABLETS.

Exod.  35.  22.  they  brought  t.  all  jewels  of  gold
Num.  31.  50.  we  brought  t.  to  make  an  atonement
Isa.  3.  20. 1  will  take  away  the  t.  and  ear-rings
TAB  RET.

Gen.  31.  27.  have  sent  thee  away  with  t.  and  harp
1  Sam  10.  5.  ccming  from  the  high  place  with  a  t.
Job  37.  6.  a  by-word,  and  aforetime  1  was  as  a  t.
Isa.  5.  12.  the  t.  pipe,  and  wine  are  in  their  feasts
TAB  RETS.

1  Sam.  18.6.  women  came  to  meet  Saul  with  t.

Isa.  24.  8.  the  mirth  of  t.  ceaseth,  joy  ceaseth
30.  32.  it  shall  be  with  t.  and  harps
Jer .  31.  4.  thou  shalt  again  be  adorned  with  thy  t.
Ezek.  28.  13.  the  workmanship  of  thy  t.  and  pipes


TA  BERING.

Nah.  2.  7-  the  voice  of  doves  t.  on  their  breasts
TACHES.

Exod.  26.  6.  thou  shalt  make  fifty  t.  of  gold
11.  thou  shalt  make  fifty  t.  of  brass,  35.  11.

33.  thou  shalt  hang  up  the  vail  under  the  t.

36.  13.  he  made  fifty  t.  of  gold  and  brass,  18.

39.  33.  they  brought  his  t.  his  boards,  and  bars

TACKLING.

Acts  27.  19.  third  day  we  cast  out  the  t.  of  the  ship
TACKL1NGS.

Isa.  33.  23.  thy  t.  are  loosed,  could  not  strengthen
.  .  .  TAIL

Signifies,  [1]  The  train  of  a  beast,  fowl,  or  fish,  Exod.

4.  4.  [2]  Low,  base,  or  contemptible,  Deut.  28.

13.  [3]  The  power ,  policy ,  and  flatteries,  by  which
the  devil  and  his  instruments  corrupt  and  allure
ministers  of  the  church  from  the  simplicity  and
purity  of  their  doctrine,  to  error,  superstition,  and
profaneness,  Rev.  12.  4.  [4]  An  army,  Isa.  7.  4.
Exod.  4.  4.  put  out  thine  hand,  take  it  by  the  t.
Deut.  28.  13.  make  thee  the  head,  not  the  t.  44.
Josh.  10. 1 19.  pursue,  cut  off  the  t.  of  them
Judg.  15.  4.  Samson  caught  foxes,  and  turned  t.  to  t.
Job  40.  17-  behemoth  moveth  his  t.  like  a  cedar
lsaL  9. 14.  Lord  will  cut  off  from  lsr.  head  and  t.

15.  the  prophet  that  teacheth  lies,  he  is  the  t.

19.  15.  no  work  which  the  head  or  t.  may  do
Rev.  12.  4.  his  t.  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars

TAILS.

Judg .  15.  4.  and  put  a  firebrand  between  two  t.
Isa.  7.  4.  for  the  two  t.  of  these  smoking  firebrands
Rev.  9. 10.  t.  like  to  scorpjons,  stings  in  their  t.

19.  power  in  their  t.  their  t.  were  like  serpents
...  ,  TAKE

Signifies,  [1]  To  lay  hold  on,  or  seize,  1  Kings  18.

40.  [2]  To  receive  from  another,  2  Kings  5.  15.

[3]  To  yield,  2  Thess.  1.  f  8.  [4]  To  bear,  John
L  t  29.  [5]  To  give,  Deut.  1.  f  13.  [6]  To  spoil,
Deut.  20.  I  14.  [7]  'To  possess  or  impoverish,

Judg.  14.  t  15.  [8]  To  be  chosen,  1  Tim.  5.  f  9.

[9]  To  remove,  John  2.  16.

Gen.  13.  9.  if  thou  wiltf.  the  left  hand  I  will  go
14. 21.  give  me  the  persons,  t.  the  goods  to  thyself

19.  15.  arise,  t.  thy  wife  and  thy  two  daughters

22.  2.  t.  now  thy  son,  thine  only  son  Isaac

24.  3.  thou  shalt  not  t.  a  wife  to  my  son  of,  37.

48.  to  t.  my  masler’s  brother’s  daughter  to  his  son

31.  32.  discern  what  is  thine  with  me,  t.  it  to  thee
50.  it  thou  t.  other  wives  besides  my  daughters
34.  9.  and  t.  our  daughters  unto  you

16.  and  we  will  t.  your  daughters  to  us

38.  23.  let  her  t.  it  to  her,  lest  we  be  shamed

Exod.  6.  7.  I  will  t.  you  to  me  for  a  people

10.  26.  for  thereof  must  we  t.  to  serve  the  Lord

17.  5.  and  thy  rod  t.  in  thine  hand,  and  go

20.  7-  thou  shalt  not  t.  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy

God  in  vain,  not  hold  guiltless,  Deut.  5.  11.

21.  14.  t.  him  from  mine  altar,  that  he  may  die

23.  8.  and  thou  shalt  t.  no  gift,  Deut.  16.  19.

34.  9.  pardon  and  t.  us  for  thine  inheritance
16.  lest  thou  /,  of  their  daughters,  Deut.  7.  3.

Lev.  18. 17.  neither  shalt  thou  t.  her  son’s  daughter

18.  neither  shalt  thou  t.  a  wife  to  her  sister

20.  14.  and  if  a  man  t.  a  wife,  and  her  mother

21.  7.  the  priests  shall  not  t.  a  wife  that  is  a
whore,  nor  t.  a  woman  put  away,  Ezek.  44.  22.

13.  he  shall  t.  a  wife  in  her  virginity

25.  36.  t.  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase

46.  ye  shall  t.  them  as  an  inheritance  for  children
Num.  8.  6.  t.  the  Levites  from  among  Israel

11.  17.  1  will  t.  of  the  spirit  that  is  on  thee

16.  3.  Korah  said,  ye  t.  too  much  upon  vou,  7.

35.  31.  ye  shall  t.  no  satisfaction  for  the T i fe ,  32.
Deut.  1.  13.  t.  ye  wise  men  and  understanding

4.  34.  and  t.  him  a  nation,  from  the  midst  of  nation

15.  17.  then  thou  shalt  t.  an  awl,  and  thrust

22.  18.  the  elders  of  that  city  shall  t.  that  man
30.  a  man  shall  not  t.  his  father’s  wife

24.  4.  may  not  t.  her  again  to  be  his  wife

6.  no  man  shall  t.  a  millstone  to  pledge
17-  nor  t.  a  widow’s  raiment  to  pledge

25.  8.  if  he  say,  I  like  not  to  t.  her

Jvsh.  6.  18.  when  ye  t.  of  the  accursed  thing

7.  14.  the  family  which  the  Ld.  shall  t.  theTiouse-

fiold  which  the  Lord  shall  t.  shall  come

8.  29.  they  should  t.  his  carcase  down  from  the  tree
10.42.  their  land  did  Joshua  t.  at  one  time

20.  4.  they  shall  t.  him  into  the  city  to  them

22.  19.  then  t.  ye  possession  among  us,  rebel  not
Judg.  5.  30.  for  the  necks  of  them  that  t.  spoil

14.  3.  that  thou  goest  to  t.  a  wife  of  uncircumcised

15.  have  ye  called  us  to  t.  that  we  have  ?

19.  30.  consider,  t.  advice,  and  speak  your  minds
Ruth  2.  10.  thou  shouldest  t.  knowledge  of  me

1  Sam.  2.  16.  then  t.  as  much  as  thy  soul  desireth,

and  if  not  I  will  t.  it  by  force

8.  11.  he  will  t.  your  sons  for  himself,  his  chariots
13,  he  will  t.  your  daughters,  ||  14.  t.  your  fields
15.  <.the  tenth  of  your  seed  ||  16.  t.  men-servants

17.  18.  how  thy  brethren  fare,  and  t.  their  pledge
46.  and  t.  thine  head  from  thee

19.  14.  Saul  sent  messengers  to  t.  David,  20.

21. 9.  if  thou  wilt  t.  that,  t.  it,  there  is  no  other
24. 11.  yet  thou  huntest  my  soul  to  t.  it

25.  11.  shall  I  then  t.  my  bread  and  my  water

26.  11.  t.  now  the  spear  that  is  at  his  bolster

2  Sam.  12.  4.  he  spared  to  t.  of  his  own  flock
11.  J  will;,  thv  wives  before  thine  eyes

28.  t.  :r,  lest  I  t.  the  city,  and  it  be  called

16.  9-  let  me  go  over,  and  t.  off  his  head

19.  19.  the  king  should  t.  it  to  his  heart,  13.  33.

30.  Mephibosheth  said,  yea,  let  him  t.  all

1  Kings  11.  31.  he  said  to  Jeroboam,  t.  ten  pieces

34.  I  will  not  t.  the  whole  kingdom

14.  3.  t.  ten  loaves  j|  18.  40.  t.  prophets  or  Baal

20.  18.  come  for  war  or  peace,  t.  them  alive

21.  15.  arise,  t.  possession  of  the  vineyard,  16.

22.  26.  t.  Micaiah,  carry  him  back,  2  Chr.  18.  25.

2  Kings  4.  1.  the  creditor  is  come  to  t.  my  sons

29.  t.  my  staff  and  go  ||  5.  15.  t.  a  blessing

5.  16.  urged  him  to  t.  it  |1  20.  1  will  t.  somewhat


TAK

C  Kings  5.  23.  t.  two  talents  ||  8. 8.  t.  a  present  and  go

9.  1.  t.  this  box  of  oil  in  thine  hand,  3.

10.  6.  t.  ye  the  heads  of  your  master’s  sons

14.  t.  them  alive  ||  12.  5.  let  the  priests  t.  it

13.  15.  Elisha  said,  t.  bow  and  arrows,  18.

19.  30.  shall  yet  t.  root  downward,  Isa.  37.  31.

1  Chron.  21.  24.  1  will  not  t.  that  which  is  thine
Ezra  5.  14.  those  did  Cyrus  t.  ||  15.  t.  vessels

9.  12.  not  t.  their  daughters,  Neh.  10.  30.  1  13.  25.
Esth.  6.  10.  t.  the  apparel,  and  do  so  to  Mordecai
Job  23.  10.  he  knoweth  the  way  that  1  t.

24.  3.  they  t.  the  widow’s  ox  for  a  pledge

9.  and  they  t.  a  pledge  of  the  poor

30.  17.  and  my  sinews  t.  no  rest

31.  36.  surely  I  would  t.  it  upon  my  shoulder

41.  4.  wilt  thou  t.  him  for  a  servant  for  ever  ?

42.  8.  therefore  t.  to  you  now  seven  bullocks
Psal.  2.  2.  the  rulers  t.  counsel  against  the  Lord

7.  5.  let  the  enemy  persecute  my  soul,  and  t.  it

50.  9.  1  will  t.  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house
16.  shouldest  t.  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth

51.  11.  and  t.  not  tny  Holy  Spirit  from  me
7L  11.  t.  him,  for  there  is  none  to  deliver  him
75.  +  2.  when  I  shall  t.  a  set  time,  I  will  judge
81.  2.  t.  a  psalm  ||  83.  12.  t.  the  houses  of  God
89.  33.  my  kindness  will  I  not  utterly  t.  from  him
109.  8.  and  let  another  t.  his  office

116.  13.  I  will  t.  the  cup  of  salvation  and  call
119.  43.  t.  not  the  word  of  truth  utterly  out
139.  9.  if  I  t.  the  wings  of  the  morning

20.  and  thine  enemies  t.  thy  name  in  vain
Prov.  5.  22.  his  own  iniquities  shall  t.  the  wicked
6.  25.  neither  let  her  t.  thee  with  her  eyelids

27.  can  a  man  t.  fire  in  his  bosom,  not  be  burned
7-  18.  let  us  t.  our  fill  of  love  till  the  morning

20.  16.  t.  his  garment  that  is  surety  for  stranger,
t.  a  pledge  of  him  fora  strange  woman,  27.  13.

30.  9.  and  t.  the  name  of  my  God  in  vain
Eccl.  5.  15.  and  shall  t.  nothing  of  his  labour
19.  and  to  t.  his  portion  and  rejoice  in  his  labour
Cant.  2.  15.  t.  us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes
Isa.  27.  6.  he  shall  cause  them  of  Jacob  to  t.  root

28.  19.  from  the  time  it  goeth,  it  shall  t.  you
30.  14.  not  a  sherd  to  t.  fire  from  the  hearth

33.  23.  the  prey  is  divided,  the  lame  t.  the  prey
40.  24.  their  stock  shall  not  t.  root  in  the  earth
44.  15.  he  will  t.  thereof  and  warm  himself
47.  2.  t.  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal
3.  1  will  t.  vengeance,  1  will  not  meet  as  a  man

57.  13.  vanity  shall  t.  them,  wind  carry  them

58.  2.  they  t.  delight  in  approaching  to  God

66.  21.  I  will  also  t.  of  them  for  priests  and  Levites
Jer.  2.  22.  t.  thee  much  soap  ||  3.  14.  t.  one  of  a  city

13.  4.  t.  the  girdle  that  thou  hast  got,  6.

21.  shall  not  sorrows  t.  thee  as  a  woman  in  travail

15.  19-  if  thou  t.  forth  the  precious  from  the  vile

16.  2.  thou  shalt  not  t.  thee  a  wife  in  this  place

18.  22.  for  they  have  digged  a  pit  to  t.  me

19.  1. 1.  of  the  ancients  of  the  people  of  the  priests

20.  10.  and  we  shall  t.  our  revenge  on  him

25.  9.  I  will  t.  all  the  families  of  the  north

10.  1  will  t.  from  them  the  voice  of  mirth

28.  if  they  refuse  to  /.  the  cup  at  thine  hand

29.  6.  t.  ye  wives,  and  beget  sons  and  daughters

32.  24.  they  are  come  to  the  city  to  t.  it

25.  buy  the  field  for  money,  and  t.  witnesses,  44.

28.  Nebuchadrezzar  king  of  Babylon  shall  t.  it

39.  12.  t.  Jeremiah,  and  look  well  to  him

46.  1 1.  go  up  into  Gilead,  and  t.  balm,  51.  8.

50. 15.  t.  vengeance  upon  her  ;  as  she  hath  done,  do
51. 26.  they  shall  not  t.  of  thee  a  stone  for  a  corner

36.  behold  I  will  t.  vengeance  for  thee
Lam.  2.  13.  what,  thing  shall  I  t.  to  witness  for  thee  ?
Ezek.  4.  1.  t.  thee  a  tile  ||  3.  t.  an  iron  pan
9.  t.  unto  thee  wheat,  barley,  and  beans

5.  1.  t.  a  sharp  knife,  t.  arasor,  t.  balances

10.  6.  t.  fire  from  between  the  vdieels

11.  19.  I  will  t.  the  stony  heart  out  of  their  flesh

14.  5.  that  1  may  t.  the  house  of  Israel

15.  3.  will  men  t.  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any  vessel

21.  26.  remove  the  diadem,  t.  off'  the  crown

22.  16.  thou  shalt  t.  thine  inheritance  in  thyself
24.  5.  t.  the  choice  of  the  flock,  and  burn  bones

8.  it  might  cause  fury  to  come  up  to  t.  vengeance
25.  w'hen  1  t.  from  them  their  strength

29.  19.  t.  a  multitude,  t.  her  spoil,  t.  her  prey

33.  2.  if  people  of  the  land  t.  a  man  of  their  coasts

36.  24.  1  will  t.  you  from  among  the  heathen

37.  16.  t.  thee  one  stick,  t.  another  stick,  write
19.  I  will  t.  the  stick  of  Joseph,  and  will  put

38. 12.  to  t.  a  spoil  and  to  t.  a  prey
13.  art  thou  come  to  t.  prey,  to  t.  a  great  spoil
46.  18.  the  prince  not  t.  the  people’s  inheritance
Dan.  7.  18.  but  the  saints  shall  t.  the  kingdom

11.  15.  the  king  shall  t.  the  most  fenced  cities
18.  he.  shall  turn  to  the  isles,  and  shall  t.  many
Hos.  1. 2.  go  t.  unto  thee  a  wife  of  whoredoms
11.4.  I  was  as  they  that  t.  off  the  yoke  on  jaws

14.  2.  t.  with  you  words,  and  turn  to  the  Lord
Amos  5.  11.  ye  t.  from  him  burdens  of  wheat

12.  they  afflict  the  just,  they  t.  a  bribe

9.  2.  thence  shall  mine  hand  t.  them,  3.

Jonah  4.  3.  t.  1  beseech  thee,  my  life  from  me
Mie.  2.  2.  they  covet  fields  and  t.  them  by  violence

6.  shall  not  prophesy,  that  they  shall  not  t.  shame
Nah.  1 .  2.  the  Lord  will  t.  vengeance  on  adversaries
2.  9.  t.  ye  the  spoil  of  silver,  t.  the  spoil  of  gold
Bab.  1.  10.  for  they  shall  heap  dust  and  t.  it
Hag.  1.  8.  build  the  house,  I  will  t.  pleasure  in  it
2.23.  will  I  t.  thee,  O  Zerubbabel  my  servant
Zech.  6.  10.  t.  of  them  of  the  captivity,  of  Heldai

11.  15.  t.  yet  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd
Mat.  1.  20.  fear  not  to  t.  unto  thee  Mary  thy  wife
2. 13.  and  t.  the  young  child  and  its  mother

6.  25.  t.  no  thought  for  your  life,  28,  31,  34.  |  1<\

19-  Mark  13.  11.  Luke  12.  11,  22,  26.
11.  12.  and  the  violent  t.  the  kingdom  by  force

29.  t.  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me

15.  26.  not  meet  to  t.  children’s  bread,  Mark  7-  27.

16.  5.  they  had  forgotten  to  t.  bread,  Mark  8. 14.

17  25.  of  whom  the  kings  of  the  earth  t.  custom

18. 16.  then  t.  with  thee  one  or  two  more

489


>


TAK


T  A  K


TAK


Mat.  2 0.  )4.  r.  that  thine  is  ami  go  thy  way
£4  i7.  let  him  on  house  top  not  come  down  to  t.

any  thing  out  of  his  house,  Mark  13.  15.

25.  £8.  t.  therefore  the  talent  from  him,  give  it
£6.  4.  that  they  might  t.  Jesus,  Mark  14.  1,  44-

£6.  Jesus  took  bread  and  said,  t.  eat,  this  is  my
body,  Mark  14.  2£.  1  Cor.  11.24.
45.  sleep  on  now,  and  t.  your  rest,  Mark  14.  41.
52.  they  that  t.  the  sword  shall  perish  by  sword
55.  with  swoi  ds  and  staves  to  t.  me,  Mark  14.  48.
Mark  6.  8.  t.  nothing  for  their  journey,  Lvke  y.  3.
12.  19.  his  brother  should  t.  his  wife,  Luke  £0.  28.

15.  24.  casting  lots  what  every  man  should  t.

36.  whether  Elias  will  come  to  t.  him  down
Luke  6.  4.  David  did  t.  and  eatshew-bread

29.  forbid  him  not  to  t.  thy  coat  also

10.  35.  t.  care  of  him  ||  12.  19.  soul,  t.  thine  ease

14.  9.  then  begin  with  shame  to  t.  the  lowest  room

16.  6.  t.  thy  bill,  7.  ||  22.  17.  r.this  and  divide  it
19.  24.  t.  from  him  the  pound,  and  give  it  to  him
22.36.  he  that  hatha  purse,  let  him  t.  it

John  2.  16.  Jesus  said  to  them,  t.  these  things  hence
6.7-  that  every  one  of  them  may  t.  a  little

15.  that  they  would  come  and?,  him  by  force

7.  30.  they  sought  to  ;.  him,  32.  |  10.  39.  I  11.  57.

10.  17.  therefore  my  father  loveth  me,  because  I
lay  down  my  life,  that  I  might;,  itagain,  18.

16.  lo.  he  shall  ;.  of  mine,  and  shew  it  unto  vou

17.  15.  thou  shouldest  ;.  them  out  of  the  world
!8.  31.  ;.  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to  your
19.  o.  Pilate  saith,  t.  ye  him,  and  crucify  him

Acts  1.  20.  and  his  bishoprick  let  another  ;.

12.  3.  Herod  proceeded  further  to  ;.  Peter  also

15.  14.  to  ;.  out  of  them  a  people  for  his  name

37.  Barnabas  determined  to  ;.  with  them  John

38.  Paul  thought  not  good  to  him  with  them
£0.  13.  sailed  to  Assos,  there  intendingto  ;.  in  Paul

26.  wherefore  1 ;.  you  to  record  this  day

21.  24.  them  ;.  and  purify  thyself  with  them

27.  33.  Paul  besought  them  to  /.  meat,  34.

1  Cor. 6.  7.  why  do  you  not  rather;,  wrong?

15.  shall  I  then  ;.  the  members  of  Christ"

9.  9.  doth  God  ;.  care  for  oxen  ?

2  Cor.  8.  4.  and  ;.  upon  us  the  ministeringto saints

11.  20.  for  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  t.  of  you

12.  10.  therefore  I  ;.  pleasure  in  infirmities
Eph.  6.  13.  ;.  to  you  the  whole  armour  of  God

17.  and  ;.  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  sword

1  Tim.  3.5.  how  shall  he  ;.  care  of  the  church

2  Tim.  4.  11.  ;.  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee
Heb.  7.  5.  a  commandment  to  ;.  tithes  of  people
Jam.  5. 10.  ;.  my  brethren,  the  prophets  an  example
1 -Pet.  2.  20.  if  ye  ;.  it  patiently,  it  is  acceptable
Kev.  3. 11.  hold  fast,  that  no  man  ;.  thy  crown

5.  9.  thou  art  worthy  to  ;.  the  book,  and  to  open

6.  4.  power  given  him  to  ;.  peace  from  the  earth

10.  8. ;.  the  little  book  ||  9.  t.  it  and  eat  it

22.  17.  let  him  ;.  the  water  of  life  freely

TAKE  away.

Gen.36. 15.wouldestthou  ;.  aw.  my  son’s  mandrakes
42.  36.  and  ye  will  Benjamin  away
Exod.  2.  9. ;.  this  child  array,  and  nurse  it  for  me

8.  B.^that  he  may  ;.  away  the  frogs  from  me
10. 17-  that  he  may  ;.  aw.  from  me  this  death  only

23.  25.  and  I  will  ;.  sickness  away,  Deut.  7.  15.

33.  23. 1  will  ;.  aw.  mine  hand,  and  thou  shalt  see

Lev.  3.  4.  it  shall  be  ;.  away ,  10,  15.  |  4.  9.  |  7.  4.

4.  31.  he  shall  ;.  away  all  the  fat  thereof,  35.

14.  40.  command  that  they' ;.  away  the  stones

Eum.  4.  13.  shalt  t.  away  the.  ashes  from' the  altar

17.10.  thou  shalt  quite  ;.  away  their  murmurings
-1.  7.  pray  that  he  may  ;.  aw.  the  serpents  from  us

Josh.  7.  13.  until  ye  ;.  away  the  accursed  thing
~  Sam.  4.  1 1.  shall  I  not  ;.  you  away  from  the  earth
o.  6.  except  thou  t.  away  the  blind  and  the  lame

24.10.  ;.  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant
1  lungs  2.  31.  mayest  ;.  away  the  innocent  blood

14. 10.  ;.  aw.  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Jeroboam

16.  3.  t.  aw.  the  posterity  of  Baasha  ||  21.  21.  of  Ahab
19.  4.  it  is  enough  now,  O  Lord,  ;.  away  my  life

10.  and  they  seek  my  life,  to  ;.  it  array,  14.

£0.  6.  what  is  pleasant,  shall  my  servants  ;.  away

24.  ;.  the  kings  a.  and  put  captains  in  their  rooms
~  Kings  2.  3.  the  Lord  will  ;.  away  thy  master,  5
6.  32.  see  how  he  hath  sent  to  ;.  away  mine  head
18-  32.  till  L  come  and  ;.  you  away,  Isa.  36.  17.

17 . 13. 1  will  not ;.  my  mercy  away  from  him
Lsth.  4.  4.  sent  to  ;.  away  his  sackcloth  from  him
Job  7.  21.  why  dost  thou  not  ;.  arraymine  iniquity
9.34.  let  him  ;.  his  rod  away  from  me

24.  2.  they  violently  ;.  away  flocks
10.  they  ;.  away  the  sheaf  from  the  hungry

32.  22.  in  so  doing,  my  Maker  would  soon  ;.me  a.
36.  18.  beware,  lest  he  ;.  thee  away  with  his  stroke
“sal.  26.  t  9.  ;.  not  away  my  soul  with  sinners

31. 13.  they  devised  to  ;.  away  my  life
52.  i_^e  t.  thee  away  and  pluck  thee  out
58.  9.  he  shall  ;.  them  away  as  with  a  whirlwind
102.  24.  ;.  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  days

Prov.  £2. 27.  why  should  he  t.  aw.  thy  bed  from  thee

25.  4.  ;.  away  the  dross  from  the  silver

5.  ;.  away  the  wicked  from  before  the  kin<>-
Isa.  1.  25.  and  1  will  ;.  away  all  thy  tin

3.  1.  ;.  away  the  stay  and  staff  ||  18.  ;.  away  bravery

4. 1.  to ;.  aw.  our  reproach  H  5. 5. 1  will ;.  aw.  hedge
5.  23.  ;  away  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous
10.  2.  to  ;.  away  the  right  from  the  poor
25.  8.  the  rebuke  of  his  peopleshall  he  ;.  away
27.  9.  this  is  all  the  fruit,  to  ;.  away  his  sin
39.7.  and  of  thy  sons  shall  they  ;.  away
40.  24.  the  whirlwind  shall  ;.them  away
58.  9.  if  thou  ;.  away  from  the  midst  of  thee
JOT.  4. 4. ;.  away  the  foreskins  of  your  heart

5. 10.  destroy  and  ;.  away  her  battlements
15. 15. ;.  me  not  away  in  thy  long-suffering

1 . 18.  shall ;.  away  the  detestable  things
-3. 25.  they  shall ;.  away  thy  nose  and  thine  ears

otray  thy  fair  jewels  ||  29.  t.  array  thy  labour
~4.  16..  behold,  I;.  away  the  desire  of  thine  eyes

33.  4t  it  trie  sword  come  and  ;.  him  away,  6.

36.  £0.  and  I  will  ;.  away  the  stony  heart  out  of
45.  9.  ;.  array  your  exactions  from  my  people


Dan.  7.  26.  and  they  shall  ;.  away  his  dominion
11.  31.  they  shall  ;.  away  the  daily  sacrifice
Hos.  1.  6.  but  I  will  utterly  ;.  them  away
2.  9.  and  ;.  away  my  corn  in  the  time  thereof
17.  for  1  will  ;.  away  the  names  of  Baalim
4. 11.  whoredom,  wine,  and  new  wine  ;.  a.  the  heart
5.  14.  1  will  ;.  away  and  none  shall  rescue
14.  2.  say  unto  him  /.  a.  all  iniquity,  receive  us
Amos  4.  2.  that  lie  will  ;.  you  away  with  hooks
5.  23.  ;.  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy  viols
Mtc.  2.  2.  they  covet  houses,  and  ;.  them  away
Zeph.  3.  11.  1  will  ;.  away  out  of  the  midst  of  thee
Zech.  3.  4.  ;.  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him
9.  7.  1  will  ;.  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth
•37a/.  2.  3.  and  one  shall  ;.  you  away  with  dung
Mat.  5.  40.  and  ;.  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have  thy

22.  13.  ;.  away  and  cast  him  into  outer  darkness
Mark  14.  36.  Father,  ;.  away  this  cup  from  me
Luke  1.  25.  to  ;.  away  my  reproach  among  men

17.  31.  let  him  not  come  down  to  ;.  it  away
John  11.  39.  Jesus  said,  t.  away  the  stone
48.  the  Botnans  shall  /.  a.  our  place  and  nation
Pom.  11.27.  when  I  shall  ;.  away  their  sins
Heb.  10.  4.  that  blood  of  bulls  should  ;.  away  sins
1 John  3.  5.  he  was  manifested  to  t.away  our  sins
Kev.  22.  19.  it  any  man  ;.  away  from  the  words  of
the  book,  God  shall  ;.  a.  Iris  part  out  of  book
See  Counsel.

T  A  K  E  heed.

Gen.  31 . 24.  t.  heed  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob,  29.
Exod.  10.  28.  ;.  heed  to  thyself,  34.  12.  Deut.  4.  0
12.  13,  19,  30.  1  Sam.  19.  2.  1  Tim.  4.  16.
19.  12. ;.  heed  to  yourselves,  Deut.  2.  4. 1  4. 15,  23.
,T  I  H.  16.  Josh.  23.  11.  Jer.  17.21.

JSum.  23. 12.  must  I  not. ;.  heed  to  speak  that  which
Ueut.  24.  8.  ;.  heed  in  the  plague  of  leprosy
27.  9. ;.  heed  and  hearken,  O  Israel,  this  day
Josh.  22.  5.  ;.  diligent  heed  to  do  the  commandment
1  Kings  2.  4.  if  thy  children  t.  heed  to  their  way,  8.

,  25.  2  Chron.  6.  16.

O  r'r  '  28‘  10-  ,ieed  for  tlle  Lord  hath  chosen  thee
~  C/<r.  19.  6.  ;.  heed  whatye  do,  ye  judge  not  for  men
( .  Jet  the  fear  ot  the  Lord  be  on  you, ;.  heed
33.  8.  so  that  they  will ;.  heed  to  do,  Ezra  4.  22
Job  36.  21.  ;.  heed,  regard  not  iniquity
*  fal.  39.  1.  I  said,  1  will  t.heed  to  my  ways
Eccl.^1 .  21.  ;.  no  heed  to  all  words  that  are  spoken
Isa.  ( .  4.  say  unto  him, ;.  heed  and  be  quiet,  fear  not
Jer.  9.  4.  ;.  ye  heed  every  one  of  his  neighbour
Idas.  4.  10.  they  have  left  off  to  t.  heed  to  the  Lord
nr  ‘  'lS"  therefore  ;.  heed  to  your  spirit,  16.

Mat.  6.  1.  ;.  heed  that  you  do  not  alms  before  men
16.  6.  t./i.  of  the  leaven  of  Pharisees,  MarkQ.  15.
18.  10.  ;.  heed  that  ye  despise  not  one  of  these
-4.  4.  ;.  heed  that  no  man  deceive  you,  Mark  13.5.
Mark  4.  24.  he  said  to  them,  ;.  heed  what  you  hear
13.  9.  ;.  heed  to  yourselves,  Luke  17.  3.  121.  34.
„„  ,  T  ,  „  diets  5.  35.  |  20.  28.

23.  ;.  h.  I  have  foretold  you  ||  3.3.  t.  h.  watch,  pray
Luke  8.  18.  ;.  heed  therefore  how  ye  hear

11. 35. ;.  heed  that  the  light  in  thee  be  not  darkness
12. 15.  ;.  heed  and  beware  of  covetousness
£1.  8.  he  said,  ;.  heed  that  ye  be  not  deceived
Acts  22.  26.  saying,  ;.  heed  what  thou  doest
Pom-  11.  21.  t.  heed  lest  he  also  spare  not  thee
1  C or.  3. 10.  let  every  man  ;.  heed  how  he  buildeth
8.  9.  t.heed  lest  this  liberty  of  yours  become
10. 12.  let  him  that  standeth  ;.  heed  lest  he  fall
Gal.  6. 15.  t.heed  ye  be  not  consumed  one  of  another
Ca/.4.  17.  ;.  heed  to  the  ministry  thou  hast  received
Heb.  3. 12.  ;.  heed  of  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief
-  Pet.  1.  19.  whereunto  ye  do  well  to  t.  heed
TA  k  E  hold.

Exod.  15. 14.  sorrow  shall  ;.  hold  on  the  inhabitants
15.  trembling  shall ;.  hold  upon  them

26.  5.  that  the  loops  may  ;.  hold  one  of  another
Deut._31.  41.  and  if  mine  hand  t.  hold  of  judgment
Job  27.  £0.  terrors  ;.  hold  on  him  as  waters

36. 17.  judgment  and  justice  t.  hold  on  thee
38.  13.  it  might  ;.  hold  on  the  ends  of  the  earth
I  sal.  35.  2.  ;.  hold  of  shield  and  buckler,  and  help
69.  24.  let  thy  wrathful  anger  ;.  hold  of  them
/  rov.  2.  19.  nor  ;.  thee  holdoi  the  paths  of  life

4.  13.  ;.  fast  hold  of  instruction,  let  her  not  go

5.  5.  her  feet  go  down,  her  steps  ;.  hold  on  hell
Eccl.  7.  18.  it  is  good  that  thou  ;.  hold  of  this
Cant.  7-  8.  1  will  ;.  hold  of  the  boughs  thereof
Isa.  3.  6.  when  a  man  shall  t.  hold  of  his  brother

4.  1.  seven  women  shall  ;.  hold  of  one  man,  saying
13.  8.  pangs  and  sorrows  shall  ;.  hold  of  them'

27.  5.  or  let  him  ;.  hold  of  my  strength,  and  make
06.  4.  to  the  eunuchs  that  ;.  hold  of  my  covenant
64.  7.  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  ;.  hold  of  thee

Mtc.  6.  14.  thou  shalt  ;.  hold  but  shalt  not  deliver
Zech.  1.  6.  did  they  not  ;.  hold  of  your  fathers  ?

8.  23.  ten  men  shall  ;.  hold  of  him  that  is  a  Jew
Luke  20.  20.  that  they  might  ;.  hold  of  his  words

26.  and  they  could  not  ;.  hold  of  his  words
T A  K  E  up.

Gen.  41.  34.  ;.  up  the  fifth  part  of  the  land  of  Egypt
Lev.  6.  10.  and  the  priest  shall  t.  up  the  ashes
is  uni .  16.  37.  ;.  up  the  censers  out  of  the  burning
Josh.  3.  6.  ;.  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  6.  6.

4.  5. ;.  up  every  man  a  stone  out  of  Jordan’

Kings  2.  1.  when  the  Lord  would  ;.  up  Elijah
4.  36.  he  said  ;.  up  thy  son  ||  6.  ~.  t.  up  the  iron

9.  25.  ;.  up  and  cast  him  into  the  portion  of  field
Ech.  5.  2.  we ;.  up  corn  for  them  that  we  may  eat
1  sal.  16.  4.  nor  ;.  up  their  names  into  my  lips

27.  10.  then  the  Lord  will  ;.  me  up

Isa.  14.  4.  that  thou  shalt  ;.  up  this  proverb
57.  14.  ;.  up  the  stumbling-block  out  of  the  way
Jer.  7.  29.  ;.  up  a  lamentation  on  the  high  places
9.  10.  for  the  mountains  will  ;.  up  weeping
18.  t.up  wailing  for  us  ||  38.  10.  t.  up  Jeremiah
Ezek.  19.  1.  ;.  up  a  lamentation  for  the  princes
26.  17.  ;.  up  a  lamentation  for  Tyrus,  27.  2,  32.

28.  12.  ;.  up  a  lamentation  upon  king  of  Tyrus
32.  2.  ;.  up  a  lamentation  for  Pharaoh

Amos  3.5.  shall  one  t.  up  a  snare  from  the  earth
5. 1.  hear  this  word  which  I  t.up  against  you
6.  10.  and  a  man’s  uncle  shall  ;.  him  up


Jonah  1. 12.  ;.  me  up  and  cast  me  forth  into  the  sea
Mtc.  2.  4.  m  that  day  shall  one  t.  up  a  parable
Hah.  1  15.  they  t.  up  all  of  them  with  the  angle
£.  6.  shall  not  all  these  ;.  up  a  parable  against  him
Mat.  9.  b.  Jesus  saith,  arise,  t.  up  thy  bed,  Mark  2
,,  ....  9-  11  .  Luke  5.  24.  John  5.  8,  11,  12.

16.  24.  let  him  ;.  up  his  cross  and  follow  me,  Mark
8.  34.  I  10.  21.  Luke  9.  23.

17.  27.  and  ;.  up  the  fish  that  first  cometh  up
Mark  16.  18.  they  shall  ;.  up  serpents

TAKEN.

Gen.  2.  22.  rib  which  Lord  God  had  ;.  from  man
23.  called  woman,  because  she  w'as  ;.  out  of  man

3. 19.  for  out  of  the  ground  wast  thou  ;.  2:3.

4. 15.  vengeance  shall  be  ;.  on  him  seven  fold
12.  15.  the  woman  was  ;.  into  Pharaoh’s  house
19.  so  1  might  have  ;.  her  to  me  to  wife

14. 14.  Abram  heard  that  his  brother  was  ;.

18.  27.  1  have  ;.  upon  me  to  speak,  to  the  Lord
20.  3.  for  the  woman  which  thou  hast  ;.  is  a  wire
£7-  3.3.  who,  where  is  he  that  hath  /.  venison

31.  16.  the  riches  God  hath  ;.  from  our  father
34.  now  Rachel  had  ;.  the  images,  and  put  them
Exod.  25.  15.  staves  shall  not  be  ;.  from  the  rings
Lev.  7.  .34.  the  heave  shoulder  have  1  ;.  of  Israel
Aum.  3.  12.  behold,  I  have  ;.  the  Levites  for  the
.  ...  first-born  of  Israel,  8.  16,  18. 1  18.  6.

5.  13.  neither  she  be  ;.  with  the  manner
10.  17.  and  the  tabernacle  was  ;.  down
16. 15. 1  have  not ;.  one  ass  from  them,  nor  hurt
31.  49.  we  have  t.  the  sum  of  the  men  of  war
36.  3.  their  inheritance  be  ;.  from  the  lot
Dent.  4.  20.  Lord  hath  ;.  you  out  of  the  iron  furnace
20.  7.  hath  betrothed  a  wife,  and  hath  not  t  her

24. 1.  when  a  man  hath  t.  a  wife,  and  married

5.  when  a  man  hath  ;.  a  new  wife,  he  shall  be  free
at  home,  and  cheer  up  his  wife  which  he  hath ;
Josh.  7.  11.  they  have  t.  of  the  accursed  thing

15.  lie  that  is  ;.  shall  be  burnt  with  fire

16.  and  the  tribe  of  .Tudah  was  t.

17.  Zabdi  was  t.  ||  18.  and  Achan  was  t.

Judg.  11.  36.  as  the  Lord  hath  ;.  vengeance

14.  9.  he  told  not  them  that  he  had  ;.  the  honey

15.  6.  because  he  had  t.  his  wife,  and  given  her
17-  2.  the  1100  shekels  that  were  t.  from  thee

1  Sam.  4. 11.  the  ark  of  God  was  ;.  17, 19,  21  22.

7. 14.  the  cities  which  the  Philistines  had  ;.

10.  21.  Saul  was  t.  ||  12.  3.  whose  ox  have  It.9

12. 4.  nor  hast  thou  t.  ought  of  any  man’s  hand
14.41.  and  Saul  and  Jonathan  were  t.

42.  Saql  said,  cast  lots,  and  Jonathan  was  t.

30. 5.  and  David’s  two  wives  were  ;.  captives

19.  was  nothing  lacking  that  they  had  ;.  to  them

2  Sam.  12.  9.  hast  t.  his  wife  to  be  thy  wife,  10.

27.  and  I  have  t.  the  city  of  waters

16.  8.  behold,  thou  art  t.  in  thy  mischief
23.  6.  because  they  cannot  be  t.  with  hands

1  Kings  16. 18.  when  Zimri  saw  that  the  citv  was  ;.

21. 19.  hast  thou  killed  and  also  ;.  possession5

2  Kings  2. 10.  if  thou  see  me  when  I  am  ;.  from  thee

18.10.  the  ninth  year  of  Llosea,  Samaria  was  ;.

1  Chron.  24.  6.  one  principal  household  being  ;.  foi

om  ,  Eleazar,  and  one  ;.  for  Ithamar

2  Chron.  28. 11.  deliver  the  captives  you  have  ;.

30.  2.  king  had  t.  counsel  to  keep  the  passover

Ezra  9.  2.  for  they  have  t.  of  their  daughters

10.2.  and  we  have  ;.  strange  wives,  14,  17,  18.

44.  all  these  had  ;.  strange  wives

Kelt.  5. 15.  and  had  t.  of  them  bread  and  wine
Esth.  2. 15.  who  had  ;.  Esther  for  bis  daughter
16.  so  Esther  was  t.  to  king  Ahasuerus

8. 2.  king  took  off  his  ring  he  had  ;.  from  Hainan
Job  J6.  12.  he  hath  also  t .  me  by  my  neck

19. 9.  he  hath  ;.  the  crown  from  mine  head

22.  6.  thou  hast  ;.  a  pledge  from  thy  brother
24.24.  they  are  ;.  out  of  the  way,  as  all  other

28. 2.  iron  is  ;.  out  of  the  earth,  brass  is  molten
Esal.  9. 15.  in  the  net  they  hid  is  their  own  foot ;.

10.  2.  let  them  be ;.  in  the  devices  that  they  have

59. 12.  let  them  even  be  ;.  in  their  pride

83.  3.  have  ;.  crafty  counsel  against  thy  people
119.  111.  thy  test,  have  I  ;.  as  an  heritage  tor  ever
Prov.  3. 26.  the  L.  shall  keep  thy  foot  from  bein«- 1

6.  2.  thou  art  ;.  with  the  words  of  thy  mouth  &
7.20.  he  hath  ;.  a  bag  of  money  with  him

11.  6.  transgressors  shall  be  ;.  in  their  own  naught.
Eccl.  2. 18.  1  hated  my  labour  which  1  had  c

3. 14.  nothing  put  to  it,  nor  any  thing  ij  om  it

7.  26.  but  the  sinner  shall  be  ;.  by  her

9.  12.  as  the  fishes  that  are  ;.  in  an  evil  net
Isa.  J.  5.  have  ;.  evil  counsel  against  thee

8. 15.  many  shall  be  broken,  and  snared,  and  ;.

23.  8.  who  hath  t.  this  counsel  against  Tyre
24. 18.  shall  be  ;.  in  the  snare,  Jer.  48.  44.

28. 13.  that  they  might  be  broken,  snared,  and  ;.

33.  20.  a  tabernacle  that  shall  not  be  t.  down
41.  9.  thou  whom  1  have  ;.  from  ends  of  the  earth
49.  24.  shall  the  prey  be  t.  from  the  mighty

51.  22.  behold,  I  have  ;.  the  cup  of  trembling
53.  8.  he  was  ;.  from  prison  and  from  judgment
Jer.  6. 11.  the  husband  with  the  wife  shall  be  ;.

8.  9.  the  wise  men  are  ashamed,  dismayed,  and  t.

12.  2.  thou  hast  planted,  they  have  t.  root

34.  3.  but  thou  shalt  surely  be  ;.  38.  23.

38.  28.  till  the  day  that  Jerusalem  was  ;.

39.5.  when  they  had  ;.  him,  they  brought  him

40. 1.  when  he  had  ;.  him,  being  bound  in  chains

10.  and  dwell  in  your  cities,  that  ye  have  ;.

48. 1.  Kiriathaim  is  t.  ||  7.  thou  shalt  be  ;.

33.  joy  and  gladness  is  ;.  from  the  plentiful  field
41.  Ivirioth  is  1. 1|  46.  thy  sons  are  ;.  captives

49.  20.  hear  the  counsel  he  hath  ;.  against  Edom

24.  anguish  and  sorrows  have  ;.  Damascus

30.  Nebuchadnezzar  hath  ;.  counsel  against  vou

50.  2.  publish  and  say,  Babylon  is  ;.  24.  |  51 . 31, 4
Earn.  4.  20.  the  anointed  of  the  Lord  was  ;.

Ezek.  12.  13.  the  prince  of  Israel  be  ;.  in  my  snare

15.  o.  shall  wood  be  ;.  thereof  to  do  any  work  t

16.  17-  thau  hast  also  ;.  thy  fair  jewels  of  gold

20.  thou  hast  ;.  thy  sons  and  thy  daughters

17.  12.  is  come,  and  hath  ;.  the  king  thereof
13. ;.  ot  the  king’s  seed,  hath  ;.  an  oath  of  him


T  AK


T  A  L


T  A  R


Ezek.  17.  CO.  anil  he  shall  he  /.  in  my  snare
J8.  8.  not  upon  usury,  neither  hath  /.  any  increase

13.  hath  given  upon  usury,  and  hath  /.  increase
1“.  that  hath  /.  off  his  hand  from  the  poor
19.  4.  heard  of  him,  lie  was  /.  in  their  pit,  8.

£1. 23.  call  to  remembrance,  that  they  may  be  /.
£2.  12.  in  thee  have  they  /.  gifts,  hast  /.  usury

25.  15.  have  /.  vengeance  with  a  despiteful  heart
Dan.  5.  2.  vessels,  which  his  father  had  /.  out,  3.
Joel  3.  5.  because  ye  have  /.  my  silver  and  gold
Amos  3.  4.  will  ye  cry  out,  if  ye  have  /.  nothing,  5.

12.  so  shall  Israel  be  /.  that  dwell  in  Samaria
,  6.  13.  have  we  not  /.  to  us  horns  by  our  strength
Zech.  14.  2.  the  city  shall  be  /.  and  houses  rifled
Mat.  9.  15.  the  bridegroom  shall  be  t.  from  them
16.  7-  it  is  because  we  haver,  no  bread
£1.  43.  the  kingdom  of  God  sliall  be  t.  from  you

24.  40.  one  shall  be  t.  Luke  17.  34,  35,  36.

28. 12.  and  had  t.  counsel,  they  gave  large  money
Mark  4.  25.  from  him  t.  even  that  which  lie  hath
6.  41.  when  he  had  /.the  five  loaves  he  looked  up

9.  36.  when  he  had  t.  him  in  his  arms,  he  said
Luke  5.  5.  we  toiled  all  night,  and  have  t.  nothing

9.  at  the  draught  of  fishes  which  they  had  t.

19.  8.  if  I  have  t.  any  thing  from  any  man
John  7.  44.  and  some  of  them  would  have  t.  him

8.  3.  brought  to  him  a  woman  /.  in  adultery',  4.
Acts  2. 23.  ye  have  t.  and  by  wicked  hands  crucified

8.  33.  for  his  life  is  t.  from  the  earth

23.  27-  this  man  was  t.  of  the  Jews

27.  3.3.  and  continued  fasting  having  t.  nothing
Horn.  9.  6.  not  as  tho’  the  word  hath  t.  none  effect
1  Cor.  10.  13.  there  hath  no  temptation  t.  you

1  Thess.  2.  17-  being  t.  from  you  for  a  short  time

2  Thess.  2.  7.  will  let,  until  he  be  t.  out  of  the  way

1  Tim.  5.  9.  let  not  a  widow  be  t.  into  the  number

2  Tim.  2.  26.  who  are  t.  captive  by  him  at  his  will
Heh.  5.  1.  every  high  priest  t.  from  amorigmen

2  Pet.  2. 12.  made  to  be  t.  and  destroyed,  speak  evil
Lev.  5.  8.  and  when  he  had  t.  the  book,  the  beasts
11.  17.  thou  hast  t.  to  thee  thy  great  power

19.  20.  and  the  beast  was  t.  anil  with  him

TAKEN  away.

Gen.  21.25.  a  well  A  bimelech’s  servants  had  t.  a.
27.35.  Jacob  came  and  hath  t.  away  thy  blessing

36.  behold  now  he  hath  t.  away  my  blessing
30. 23.  Rachel  said,  God  hath  t.  away  my  reproach

31.  1.  Jacob  hath  t.  away  all  that  is  our  father’s

9.  thus  God  hath  t.  away  the  cattle  of  your  father
Exod.  14. 11.  hast  thou  t.  us  a.  to  died  in  wilderness
Lev.  4.  31.  as  the  fat  is  1.  a.  from  the  sacrifice,  35.

6.  2.  trespass  in  a  thing  t.  away  byr  violence

14.  43.  after  that  he  hath  t.  away  the  stones
Deut.  26. 14.  nor  t.  away  ought  for  any  unclean  use

28.  31.  thine  ass  shall  be  violently  t.  atoay  from
Judy.  18.  24.  ye  have  t.  a.  my  gods  which  1  made
1  Sam.  21.  6.  m  the  day  when  it  was  t.  away

1  Kings  22.  43.  the  high  places  were  not  t.  away.

2  Kings  12.  3.  1  14.  4.  2  Chr.  15.  17.  I  20.  33.

2  Kings  2.  9.  ask,  before  I  be  t.  away  from  thee
18.  22.  and  whose  altars  Hezekiah  hath  t.  away,

2  Chron.  32.  12.  Isa.  36.7.
2  Chron.  19-  3.  in  that  thou  hast  t.  away  the  groves
Job  1.  21.  the  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  t.  away
20.19.  hath  violently  t.  a.  an  house  he  built  not

27.  2.  as  God  liveth  who  hath  t.  a.  my  judgment
34.  5.  and  God  hath  t.  away  my  judgment

20.  and  the  mighty  shall  be  t.  away  without  hand
Psal.  85.  3.  thou  hast  t.  away  all  thy  wrath
Prov.  4.  16.  their  sleep  is  t.  away  unless  they  cause
Isa.  6.  7-  thine  iniquity  is  t.  away,  thy  sin  purged

8.  4.  the  spoil  of  Samaria  shall  be  t.  away

10.  27.  the  burden  shall  be  t.  a.  from  the  shoulder
16. 10.  gladness  is  t.  a.  ||  17. 1.  Damascus  is  t.  away
49.  25.  the  captives  of  the  mighty  shall  be  t.  away
52.  5.  that  my  people  is  t.  away  for  nought

57.  1.  merciful  men  are  t.  away,  righteous  is  t.  a.
64.  6.  our  iniquities  like  wind  have  r,  us  away
Jer.  16. 5. 1  have  t.  away  my  peace  from  this  people
Lam.  2.  6.  hath  violently  t.  away  his  tabernacle’
Ezek.  33.  6.  he  is  t.  away  iniiis  iniquity
Van.  7. 12.  they  had  their  dominion  /.” array
8. 11.  by  him  the  daily  sacrifice  was  t.  a.  12.  11.
Hos.  4.3.  the  fishes  of  the  sea  also  shall  be  t.  away
Amos  4.  10.  and  I  have  t.  away  your  horses
Mic.  2.  9.  ye  haver,  away  my  glory  forever
Zeph.  3.  15.  the  Lord  hath  t.  away  thy  judgments
Mat.  13. 12.  from  him  shall  be  t.  array  even  that  he
hath,  25.  29.  Luke  8.  18. 1  19.  26.
Mark  2.  20.  the  bridegroom  shall  be  t.  a.  Luke  5.  35.
Luke  10.  42.  that  good  part  which  shall  not  be  t.  a.

11.  52.  ye  have  t.  away  the  key  of  knowledge
John  19.  31.  and  that  they  might  be  t.  azvay

20.  1.  seeth  the  stone  t.  away  from  the  sepulchre
2.  they  have  t.  away  the  Lord  ||  13.  t.  a.  my  Lord
Acts  8.  33.  in  his  humiliation  his  judgment  was/.  a.
27.  20.  all  hope,  that  we  should  be  saved  was  t.  a.

1  Cor. 5.  2.  he  that  hath  done  this,  might  be  t.  away

2  Cor.  3.  16.  nevertheless  the  veil  shall  be  t.  away

TAKEN  hold.

1  Kings  9.  9.  and  have  t.  hold  upon  other  gods
Job  30.  16.  days  of  affliction  have  t.  hold  upon  me
Psal.  40.  12.  mine  iniquities  have  t.  hold  upon  me
119.  143.  trouble  and  anguish  have  t.hold  on  me
Isa.  21.  3.  pangs  have  t.  hold  on  me,  as  of  a  woman
Jer.  6.  24.  anguish  hath  t.  hold  on  us,  and  pain
TAKEN  up.

Exod.  40.  36.  cloud  was  t.  up  from  over  tabernacle

37.  if  the  cloud  were  not  t.  up  till  it  was  t.  up
Num.  9.  17-  whea  the  cloud  was  t.  up,  21.

22.  but  when  it  was  t.  up  they  journeyed,  10.  11.

2 Sam.  18.  9.  Absalom  was  t.  up  between  heaven
Isa.  10.  29.  they  have  t.  up  their  lodging  atGeha
Jer.  29.  22.  of  them  shall  be  t.  up  a  curse  by  Judah
Ezek.  36.  3.  ye  are  t.  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers
Van.  6.  23.  so  Daniel  was  t.  up  out  of  the  den
Luke  9. 17-  there  was/,  up  of  the  fragments
Acts  1.  2.  till  the  day  in  which  he  was  t.  up

9.  while  they  beheld,  he  was  t.  up,  and  a  cloud
11.  this  same  Jesus  which  is  /.  up  from  you

22.  unto  that  same  day  he  was  t.  up  from  11s
20.  9.  Eutychus  fell  down,  and  was  /.  up  dead


ActsV.7.  17.  had  /.  up  the  boat  ||  40.  /.  up  the  anchors
TAKEST.

Exod.  4.  9.  the  water  thou  /.  out  of  the  river
30.  12.  when  thou  /.the  sum  of  children  of  Israel
Judg.  4.  9.  journey  thou  /.  not  be  for  thy  honour
Ps.  104.  29.  thou  /.  away  their  breath,  they  die
144.  3.  what  is  man,  that  thou  /.  knowledge  of  him  ?
Isa.  58.  .3.  afflicted  our  soul,  and  thou  /.  no  knowl.
Luke  19.  21.  thou  /.  up  that  thou  layedst  not  down
TAKEST  heed.

1  Chr.  22.  1.3.  if  thou  /.  heed  to  fulfil  the  statutes
TAKETII.

Exod.  20.  7.  that  /.  his  name  in  vain.  Dent.  5.  11.
Vent.  10.  17.  regardeth  not  persons,  nor  /.  reward
24.0.  for  he  t.  aman’s  life  to  pledge

25.  11.  putteth  her  hand  and  /.  him  by  the  secrets
27-25.  cursed  be  he  that  /.  reward  to  slayr  innocent

32.  ]  1.  as  an  eagle  /.  them,  beareth  them  on  her
Jos/1.7.  14.  the  tribe  which  the  Lord  /.  shall  come

15.  16.  smiteth  Kirjath-sepher,  and  /.it,  Judg.  1.12.
1  Sam.  17.  26.  and  /.  away  reproach  from  Israel

1  Kings  14. 10.  as  man  /.  away  dung,  till  all  be  gone
Job  5.  5.  and  /.  it  even  out  of  the  thorns
13.  he  /.  the  wise  in  their  craftiness.  1  Cor.  .3.  19.

9.  12.  behold,  he  /.  away’,  who  can  hinder  him'

12.  20.  and  /.  away  the  understanding  of  the  aged

24.  he  /.  away  the  heart  of  the  chief  of  the  people
27.  8.  what  is  the  hope  when  God  /.  away  his  soul  ?
40.  24.  he  /.  it  with  his  eyes,  his  nose  pierceth
Psal.  15.  3.  nor/,  up  reproach  against  his  neighb.
5.  nor  /.  reward  against  the  innocent
118.  7.  Lord,  /.  mv  part  with  them  that  help  me
137.  9.  happy  shall  he  be  that/. and  dasheth  little
147.  10.  he  /.  not  pleasure  in  the  legs  of  a  man
11.  the  Lord  /.  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him
149.  4.  for  the  Lord  /.  pleasure  in  his  people
Prov.  1. 19.  which  /.  away  the  life  of  the  owners

16.  .32.  rules  his  spirit,  is  better  than  he  that  /.  city

17.  2.3.  a  wicked  man  /.  gift  out  of  the  bosom
25.20.  as  he  that  /.away  a  garment  in  cold  weather

26.  17.  is  like  one  that  /.  a  dog  by  the  ears

Eccl.  1 .  .3.  of  al  1  his  labour  which  he  /.  under  the  sun
2.  23.  his  heart  /.  not  rest  in  the  night
Isa.  1.3.  14.  and  as  a  sheep  that  no  man  /.  up
40.  15.  he  /.  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing
44.  14.  the  carpenter  /.  the  cypress  and  the  oak
51. 18.  nor  is  there  any  that  /.  her  by'  the  hand
Ezek.  16.32.  who  /.  strangers  instead  of  her  husband

33.  4.  and  /.  not  warning  ||  5.  he  that  /.  warning
Amos  3.  12.  as  the  shepherd  /.  out  of  mouth  of  lion
Mat.  4.  5.  the  devil  /.him  up  into  the  holy  city

8.  t.  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high  mountain
9. 16.  /.  from  garment,  and  rent  worse,  Mark  2.  21 .

10.  38.  that  /.  not  his  cross,  and  followeth  after  me
12.  45.  he  goeth,  /.  seven  other  spirits,  Luke  1 1.  26.
17. 1.  Jes.  /.  Peter,  James,  and  John,  and  bringeth

into  an  high  mountain,  Mark  9.  2.  I  14.  3.3.
Mark  4.  15.  Satan  cometh,  and  /.  away  the  word
that  was  sown  in  their  hearts,  Luke  8.  12.
5.  40.  he  /.  the  father  and  mother  of  the  damsel
9.  18.  wheresoever  he  /.  him,  he  teareth  him
Luke  6.  29.  him  that/.  away  thy  cloak,  forbid  not
30.  and  of  him  that  /.  thy  goods,  ask  them  not

9.  39.  a  spirit  /.  him,  and  he  suddenly  crieth  out

11.  22.  a  stronger  /.  from  him  all  his  armour
16.  3.  my  lord  /.away  from  me  the  stewardship

John  t .  29.  Lamb  of  God,  who  /.  away  sin  of  world

10.  18.  noman/,  it  from  me,  I  lay  itdownofmys.

15.  2.  branch  that  beareth  not  fruit,  he  /.  away

16.  22.  and  your  joy  no  man  t.  from  you

21. 13.  Jes.  then  cometh,  /.  bread,  and  giveth  them
Rom.  3.  5.  is  God  unrighteous,  who /.  vengeance?

1  Cor.  11.21.  in  eating,  every  one  /.  before  another
Tleb.  5.  4.  no  man  /.  this  honour  to  himself  but  he

10.  9.  he  /.  awav  the  first  that  he  may  establish
Taketh  HOLD.

Job  21.  6.  afraid,  and  trembling  /.  hold  on  my  flesh
Prov.  30.28.  the  spider  /.  hold  with  her  hands
Isa.  56.  6.  every  one  that  t.hold  of  my  covenant
TAKING.

2  Chroti.  19.  7-  with  God  there  is  no  /.  of  gifts
Job  5.  3.  1  have  seen  the  foolish  /.  root,  but  cursed
Psal.  119.9.  by  /.  heed  thereto,  according  to  thy
Jer.  50.  46.  at  noise  of  /.  of  Babylon  earth  moved
Ezek.  25.  12.  dealt  against  Judah  by  /.  vengeance
Has.  11.3.  I  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  /.  them  by

their  arms,  but  they  knew  not  that  1  healed  them
Mat.  6.  27.  which  of  you  by  /.  thought,  l.uke  12. 25.
Mark  13.  34.  Son  of  man  is  as  aman  /.  a  far  journey
Luke  4.5.  the  devil  /.  him  up  into  a  high  mountain
19. 22.  /.up  that  1  laid  not  down,  and  reaping  that
John  11.  13.  he  had  spoken  of  /.  rest  in  sleep
Rom.  7. 8.  sin  /.  occasion  by  the  commandment,  11.

2  Cor.  2.  13.  /.my  leave  of  them,  I  went  to  Maced.
11.8.  /.  wages  of  them  to  do  you  service
Eph.  6. 16.  above  all,  /.  the  slneld  ot  faith

2  Thess.  1.  8.  in  flaming  fire  /.  vengeance  on  them
l  Pet.  5.  2.  /.  the  oversight  thereof  willingly

3  John  7.  they  went  forth  /.  nothing  of  the  Gentiles

TALE.

Psal.  90.  9.  we  spend  our  years  as  a  /.  that  is  told
TAKE- bearer.

Lev.  19. 16.  shalt  not  go  up  and  down  as  a  t.-bearer
Prov.  11. 13.  a  t.-bearer  revealeth  secrets,  20.  19.

18.  8.  the  words  of  a  t.-b.  are  as  wounds,  26.  22.

26.  20.  where  there  is  no  t.-bearer  strife  ceaseth
T  A  LES.

Ezek.  22.  9.  are  men  that  carry*  /.  to  shed  blood
Luke  24.  11.  their  words  seemed  to  them  as  idle  /.
TALE.

Exod.  5.  8.  the  /.  of  bricks  which  they  did  make

18.  no  straw,  yet  shall  he  deliver  the  /.  of  bricks
1  Sam.  18.  27.  gave  the  foreskins  in  full  /.  to  king

1  Chron.  0.  28.  should  bring  vessels  in  and  out  by  /.
TALENT

Signifies.  [1]  A  weight  among  the  Jews,  containing
3000  shekels  ;  which,  computing  the  shekel  at  .3
shillings  sterling,  amounts  to  450  pounds  for  a
talent  of  silver  :  and  allowing  the  proportion  of
gold  to  silver  to  be  as  sixteen  to  one,  a  talent  of
gold  will  amount  to  7200  pounds.  Others,  making
the  shekel  of  less  value,  compute  a  talent  <>/  silver


to  oe  in  English  money,  342  pounds,  3  shillings,
and  9  pence.  The  talent  of  gold  5,475  pounds,
Exod.  25.  39.  I  38.  25.  [2]  The  gifts  of  God  be¬
stowed  on  men,  Mat.  25.  15.

Exod.  25. 39.  of  a  /.  of  pure  gold  make  it,  37.  24.

38.  27.  an  hundred  sockets,  a  /.  for  a  socket
2  Sam.  12.  30.  the  weight  of  the  crown  was  a  /.

1  Kings  20.  39.  else  thou  shalt  pay  a  /.  of  silver

2  Kings  5.  22.  give  them  a  /.  of  silver  and  changes

23.  .33.  a  tribute  of  a  /.  of  gold,  2  Chron.  36.  3.

Zech.  5.  7.  behold,  there  was  lifted  a  /.  of  lead
Mat.  25.  25.  1  went  and  hid  thy  /.  in  the  earth

28.  take  therefore  the  /.  from  him  and  give  it
Rev.  16.  21.  every  stone  about  the  weight  of  a  /.
TALENTS.

Exod.  38.  24.  the  gold  of  the  offering  was  29  /.

27.  of  100  /.  of  silver  were  cast  the  sockets

1  Kings  16. 24.  bought  the  hill  Samaria  for  two  /.

2  Kings  5.  5.  Naaman  took  ten  /.  ||  23.  take  two  /.
15.  19.  Menahem  gave  Pul  1000  /.  of  silver

18.  14.  appointed  to  Hezekiah  300  /.  and  30  of  gold
2.3.  33.  land  to  a  tribute  of  100  /.  2  Chron.  36.  .3.

1  Chron.  19.  6.  Ammonites  sent  1000  /.  of  silver

29.  4.  David  gave  3000  /.  of  gold  to  the  house

7.  gave  of  gold  5000  /.  and  of  silver  10,000  /.

2  Chron.  25.  9.  what  shall  we  do  for  the  100  /.  ?

27.  5.  the  children  of  Ammon  gave  him  100  t.

Mat.  18.  24.  one  which  owed  him  10,000/.

25.  15.  to  one  he  gave  five  /.  to  another  two

See  Gold,  Silver.

TALK.

Job  11.  2.  should  a  man  full  of  /.  be  justified  ?

15.  3.  should  he  reason  with  unprofitable  /.  ?

Prov.  14.  23.  the  /.  of  the  lips  tendeth  to  penury*
Eccl.  10.  13.  end  of  his  /.  is  mischievous  madness
Mat.  22.  15.  they  might  entangle  him  in  his  /.

TALK.

Num.  11. 17.  I  will  come  down  and  /.  with  thee
Deut.  5.  24.  have  seen  that  God  doth  /.  with  man
6.  7.  shalt  /.  of  them  when  thou  sittest  in  thy  house

1  Sant.  2.  3.  /.  no  more  so  exceeding  proudly

2  Kings  18.  26.  /.  not  with  us  in  the  Jews’  language
1  Chron.  16.  9.  sing  unto  him,  sing  psalms,  /.  ye°of

all  his  wondrous  works,  Psal.  105.  2
Job  13.  7.  and  will  ye  /.  deceitfully  for  him  ?

Psal.  69.  26.  they  /.  to  the  grief  of  them  whom
7L  24.  my  tongue  shall  /.  of  thy  righteousness
77.  12.  I  will  meditate  and  /.  of  thy  doings
119.  27.  so  shall  I  /.  of  thy  wondrous  works
145.  11.  speak  of  thy'  kingdom  and  /.  of  thy  power
Prov.  6.  22.  when  thou  a\vakest  it  shall  /.  with  thee
24.2.  heart  studieth,  and  their  lips  /.  of  mischief
Jer.  12. 1.  let  me  /.  with  thee  of  thy  judgments
Ezek.  3.  22.  arise  and  I  will  there  /.  with  thee
Dan.  10.  17.  how  can  thy  servant  /.  with  my  lord
John  14.  30.  I  will  not/,  much  with  you,  for  prince
TALKED.

Gen.  45. 15.  after  that  his  brethren  /.  with  him
Exod.  20. 22.  seen  that  I  have  /.  with  you,  Deut.  5. 4.

33.  9.  and  the  Lord  /.  with  Moses

34.  29.  the  skin  of  his  face  shone  while  he  /.

1  Sam.  14.  19.  while  Saul  /.  unto  the  priest

2  Chron.  25.  16.  it  came  to  pass  as  he  /.  with  him
Jer.  38.  25.  if  the  princes  hear  that  I  have  /.

Luke  9.  30.  /.  with  him  two  men,  Moses  and  Elias

24.  32.  heart  burn  while  he  /.  with  us  by  the  way
John  4.  27.  marvelled  that  he  /.  with  the  woman
Acts  10.  27.  as  Peter  /.  with  Cornelius  he  went  in
20.  11.  and  /.  long,  even  till  break  of  day

26.  31.  they  /.  between  themselves,  saying
Rev.  21.  15.  he  that  /.  with  me  had  a  golden  reed

TALKERS.

Ezek.  36.  3.  ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  /.

Tit.  1. 10.  there  are  many  unruly  and  vain  /.
TALlvEST.

Judg.  6.  17.  shew  me  a  sign  that  thou  /.  with  me
1  Kings  1.  14.  while  thou  yet  /.  with  the  king
John  4.  27.  no  man  said,  why  /.  thou  with  her  ?
TALKETII.

Psal.  37.  30.  and  his  tongue  /.  of  judgment
John  9.  37.  seen  him,  anddt  is  he  that  /.  with  thee
TALKING.

Gen.  17.  22.  and  he  left  off  /.  with  him

1  Kings  18.  27.  he  is  a  god,  he  is  /.  or  pursuing
Esth.  6.  14.  while  they  were  /.  with  him
Ezek.  33.  30.  thy  people  are  still  /.  against  thee
Mat.  17.  3.  Moses  and  Elias  /.  with  him,  Mark  9.  4.
Rev.  4.  1.  as  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  /.  with  me

TALKING.

Job  29-  9.  the  princes  refrained  /.  and  laid  their  hand
Eph.  5.  4.  neither  filthiness,  nor  foolish  /.

TALL.

Deut.  2.  10.  a  people  /.  as  the  Anakims,  21. 1  9.  2.

2  Kings  19.  2.3.  and  will  cut  down  the  /.  cedar  trees

and  the  choice  fir  trees  thereof,  Isa.  37.  24.
TALLER.

Deut.  1.  28.  the  people  is  greater  and  /.  than  we
TAME.

Mark  5.4.  often  bound,  neither  could  any  man  /.  him
Jam.  3.  8.  but  the  tongue  can  no  man  /,  is  unruly
TAMED.

Jam.  3.  7*  things  of  the  sea  is  /.  and  hath  been  /.
TANNER.

Acts  9-  43.  Peter  tarried  with  one  Simon  a  /.

10.  6.  he  lodged  with  one  Simon  a  /.  32.
Tapestry,  See  Coverings.

TARE.

2  Sam.  1.3.  31.  the  king  arose  and  /.  his  garments
2  Kings  2.  24.  two  she-bears  /.  forty-two  children
Mark  9. 20.  straightway  the  spirit  /.  him,  Luke  9.42.
TARES

Signify,  A  kind  of  pulse  noxious  and  hurtful  to
corn.  Mat.  13.  29.  To  which  are  compared.  The
wicked  in  the  world,  but  especially  hypocrites.
Mat.  13.  38.

Mat.  13.  25.  his  enemy  sowed  /.  among  the  wheat
26.  the  blade  sprung  up,  then  appeared  the  /.  also
27-  sow  good  seed,  from  whence  then  hath  it  /.  ?

29.  lest  while  you  gather  up  the  t.  you  root  up
36.  declare  to  us  the  parable  of  the  /.  of  the  field
.  TARGET.

1  Sam.  17.  6.  Goliath  had  a  /.  of  brass

491


T  AS


TEA


TEA


1  King  10. 16.  beaten  gold,  six  hundred  shekels  o'
gold  went  to  one  /.  2  Chron.  9.  15.
TARGETS.

1  Kings  10.  16.  Solomon  made  two  hundred  t.

£  CM.  14.  8.  Asa  had  an  army  that  bare  /.  and  spears
TAHHV


put  off,  Gen.  45.  9.  [5]  To  be  established,  Psal.
101.  f  7.  [6]  To  guard ,  1  Sam.  30.24.  [7]  To

lodge,  Gen.  19.  2.

Gen.  19.  2.  and  /.  all  night,  and  wash  your  feet

27.  44.  and  t.  with  Laban  a  few  days  till  fury
30.  27.  if  1  have  found  favour  in  thine  eyes  t.

45.  9.  thus  saith  thy  son,  come  down  to  me,  /.  not
Exod.  12.  39.  they  were  thrust  out,  and  could  not/.

24.  14.  t.  ye  here  for  us  till  we  come  again  to  you
Lev.  14.  8.  the  leper  shall  /.  out  of  his  tent  seven  days
Num.  22.  19.  I  pray  you  t.  here  also  this  night
Judg.  5.  28.  why  /.  the  wheels  of  his  chariots  ?

6.  18.  he  said,  I  will  t.  until  thou  come  again

19.  6.  /.  all  night,  9.  ||  10.  the  man  would  not  t.

Ruth  1. 13.  wouldye  /.for  them  till  they  were  grown

3.  13.  /.  this  night,  and  it  shall  be  in  the  morning

1  Sam.  1.  23./.  until  thou  have  weaned  him

10.  8.  seven  days  shalt  thou  /.  till  1  come  to  thee
14.9.  it  they  say,  /.  till  we  come  to  you

2  Sam.  10.5.  /.  at  Jericho  till  your  beards  be  grown,

and  then  return,  1  Chron.  19.  5.

11.  12.  /.  here  to-day  ||  15.  28.  I  will  /.  in  the  plain

18.  14.  Joabsaid,  I  may  not  /.  thus  with  thee

19.  7.  there  will  not  /.one  with  thee  this  night
2  Kings  2.  2.  /.  here  the  Lord  sent  me,  4.  6.

7.  9.  the  lepers  said,  if  we  /.till  the  morning  light

9.  3.  then  open  the  door  and  flee,  and  /.  not

14.  10.  smitten  Edom,  glory  of  this,  and  /,  at  home
Psal.  101.  7-  a  liar  shall  not  /.  in  my  sight.

Prov.  23.  30.  they  that/,  long  at  the  wine
Jsa.  46. 13.  not  far  off,  and  my  salvation  shall  not  /.
Jer.  14.  8.  that  turneth  aside  to  /.  for  a  night
Hah.  2.  3.  though  it  /.  wait  for  it,  for  it  will  not  /.
Mat.  26.  .38.  /.  ye  here  and  watch,  Mark  14.  34.
Luke  24.  29.  and  he  went  in  to  /.  with  them

49.  but  /.  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  till  endued
John  4.  40.  besought  that  he  would  /.  with  them
21.  22.  if  I  will  that  he  /.  till  1  come,  23.

Acts  10.  48.  they  prayed  Peter  to/,  certain  days
18.20.they  desired  Paul  to  /.  longer  time  with  them

28.  14.  were  desired  to  /.  with  them  seven  days
1  Cor.  11.  33.  wherefore  /.  one  for  another

16.  7.  1  trust  to  /.  a  while  with  you,  if  Lord  permit

8.  but  1  w’ill  /.  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost

1  Tim.  '. 3  15.  but  if  I  /.  long  that  thou  mayest
Heb.  10.  .37.  he  that  shall  come,  will  come,  and  not  /.
TARRIED.

Gen.  24.  54.  Abraham’s  servant  /.  all  night

28. 11.  Jacob  /.  there  all  night  and  took  stones
31.  54.  Jacob  and  Laban  /.  all  night  in  the  mount
Num.  9.  19.  when  the  cloud  /.  long,  22.

Judg.  3.  25.  they  /.  till  they  were  ashamed

26.  Ehud  escaped  while  they  /.  and  passed
19.8.  they/,  till  afternoon  and  did  eat  both  of  them
Ruth  2.  7-  save  that  she  /.  a  little  in  the  bouse

1  Sam.  13.  8.  he  /.  seven  days  accordingto  set  time

2  Sam.  11. 1.  but  David  /.  still  at  Jerusalem

15.  17.  the  king  /.  in  a  place  that  was  far  off

29.  Zadok  and  Abiathar  /.  at  Jerusalem
.20.  5.  but  he  /.  longer  than  the  set  time

Kings  2.  18.  when  they  came,  for  he  /.  at  Jericho
Psal.  68. 12.  and  she  that  /.  at  home  divided  the  spoil
Mat.  25.  5.  while  the  bridegroom  /.  they  all  slept
Luke  1.  21.  the  people  marvelled  that  lie/,  solon^

2.  43.  the  child  Jesus  /.  behind  in  Jerusalem  °
John  .3.  22.  then  he  /.  with  them,  and  baptized
Acts  9. 4.3.  Peter  /.  many  days  in  Joppa  with  Simon
15.  .3.3.  Judas  and  Silas  exhorted  and  /.at  Antioch
18.  18.  Paul  /.  a  goo'1  while  at  Corinth  and  sailed

20.  5.  these  going  before  /.  for  us  at  Troas

21.  4.  and  finding  the  disciples,  we  /.  seven  days

10.  as  we/,  many  days  at  Cesarea  came  Agabus

25.  6.  Festus  /.  at  Jerusalem  more  than  ten  days

27.  3.3.  this  is  the  fourteenth  day  ye  have  /.  fasting-

28.  12.  landing  at  Syracuse,  we  /.  three  days

TARRIEST.  y

Acts  22. 16.  and  now^vby  /  Hhou  ?  arise,  be  baptized

1  Sam.  30.  24.  so  shall  his  part  be  that/,  by  stuff
Mic.  5.  7.  that/,  not  for  a  man,  nor  waiteth  for
TARRYING.

Psal.  40.  17.  make  no  /.  O  my  God,  70  5
TASK.

Exod.  5.  19.  ye  shall  not  minish  from  your  daily  /.
TASKS.

Exod.  5.  13.  saying,  fulfil  your  works, your  daily  /

14.  why  not  fulfilled  your  /.  in  making  brick
TA  SK -masters.

Exod.l.  11.  set  over  them  t. -masters  to  afflict  them
■>.  < .  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  their  t. -masters
5.  6.  and  1  haraoh  commanded  t .-masters,  sayin<*

10.  t. -mas tersto\<\  them  ||  13.  t. -masters  hastened  them
14.  officers  which  the/.-wm.v/erAhad setoverthem
TASTE

Signifies,  [1]  To  prove,  or  try  the  relish  of  any
thing  by  the  palate,  or  tongue.  Job  .34.  .3.  [2]  l'o
have  an  inward  experimental  knowledge  of  a  thing .
Psal.  .34.  8.  [3]  To  eat  a  little,  1  Sam.  14.  29,
4.3.  [4]  Jo  drink,  Dan.  5.  2.

Have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  Heb. 6.4.  Have
had  some  transient  experience  of  the  power  and
efficacy  of  the  lloly  Ghost  from  heaven,  in  gos¬
pel  administration  and  worship,  so  as  to  relish
comfort  and  sweetness  in  the  doctrine  and  promises
of  the  gospel.

To  taste  death,  Heb.  2.  9.  To  feel  the  bitterness  of
death,  yet  not  to  be  long  detained  under  it.

I  AS I'E,  Substantive.

Exod.  16.  .31.  the  /.  of  manna  was  like  wafers
fum.  11.8.  the  /.  of  it  was  as  the  /.  of  fresh  oil
Job  6.  0.  is  there  any  /.  in  the  white  of  an  egg?

.30.  cannot  my  /.  discern  perverse  things  ?

Psal.  119.  10.3.  how  sweet  are  thy  words  to  my  /.  /

4.Q2


Prov.  24.  1.3.  the  honey-comb  is  sweet  to  the  /.
Cant.  2.  .3.  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  /.

Jer.  48.  11.  therefore  his  /.  remained  in  him
TASTE,  Verb.

1  Sam.  14.  4.3.  I  did  but  /.  a  little  honey,  and  lo
2Sam.3.35.  if  1  /.  bread  or  ought  else  till  sun  be  down
19.  35.  can  thy  servant  /.  what  1  eat  or  drink  r
Job  12. 11.  doth  not  the  mouth  /.  his  meat
Psal.  .34.  8.  O  /.  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good
Jonah  3.  7.  neither  herd  nor  flock  /.  any  thing
Mat.  16.  28.  there  be  some  standing  here  which
shall  not  /.  of  death,  Mark  9.  1.  Luke  9.  27.
Luke  14.  24.  none  bidden  shall  /.  of  my  supper
John  8.  52.  keep  my  saying,  he  shall  never/,  death
Col.  2.  21.  touch  not,  /.  not,  handle  not
Heb.  2.  9.  that  he  should  /.  death  for  every  man
TASTED.

1  Sam.  14.  24.  so  none  /.  any  food  ||  29.  I  /.  honey
Dan.  5.  2.  Belshazzar  whilst  he  /.  wine,  commanded
Mat.  27.  34.  when  he  had  /.  thereof,  he  would
John  2.  9.  the  ruler  had  /.  the  water  made  wine
Heb.  6.  4.  and  have  /.  of  the  heavenly  gift
5.  have  /.  the  good  word  of  God  and  powers  of
1  Pet.  2.  3.  if  ye  have  /.  that  the  Lord  is  gracious
TASTETH.

Job  .31.  .3.  ear  trieth  words  as  the  mouth  /.  meat
Prov.  31.  f  18.  /.  that  her  merchandise  is  good
TATLERS.

1  Tim.  5.  1.3.  not  only  idle  but/,  and  busy  bodies

TAVERNS.

Acts  28.  15.  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  the  three  /.
TAUGHT.

Deut.  4.  5.  I  have  /.  you  statutes  and  judgments
31.  22.  Moses/,  the  children  of  Israel  this  song
Judg.  8.  16.  with  them  he  /.  the  men  of  Succoth

2  Kings  17.  28.  and  /.  them  how  to  fear  the  Lord
2  Chron.  6.  27.  thou  hast  /.  them  the  good  way

17.  9.  the  Levites  /.  the  people  in  Judah
23.  13.  people  rejoiced,  such  as  /.  to  sing  praise
•30.  22.  that  /.  the  good  knowledge  of  the  Lord
35.  3.  Josiah  said  to  the  Levites  that  /.  all  Israel
Neh.  8.  9.  the  Levites  that  /.  the  people  said
Psal.  71.  17.  O  God,  thou  hast/,  me,  119. 102.

119. 17L  when  thou  hast  /.  me  thy  statutes
Prov.  4.  4.  he  /.  me  also,  and  said,  let  thine  heart
11.  I  have  /.  thee  in  the  way  of  wisdom

31.  1.  the  prophecy  that  his  mother  /.  him
Eccl.  12.  9.  he  still  /.  the  people  knowledge
Isa.  29.  13.  their  fear  is  /.  by  the  precepts  of  men

40.  1.3.  or  being  his  counsellor  hath  /.  him,  14.

54.  13.  all  thy  children  shall  be  /.  of  God
Jer.  2.  .33.  therefore  hast  thou  /.  the  wicked

9.  5.  they  have  /.  their  tongues  to  speak  lies
14.  after  Baalim,  which  their  fathers  /.  them

12.  16.  as  they  /.  my  people  to  swear  by  Baal

13.  21.  for  thou  hast/,  them  to  be  captains

28.  16.  thou  hast  /.  rebellion  against  the  Lord

29.  .32.  he  hath  /.  rebellion  against  the  Lord

32.  33.  though  1  have  /.  them,  rising  up  early
Ezek.  2.3.  48.  women  /.  not  to  do  after  lewdness
Has.  10.  11.  Ephraim  is  as  a  heifer  that  is  /.

11.  .3. 1  /.  Ephraim  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  arms
Zech.  1.3.  5.  for  man  /.  me  to  keep  cattle  from  youth
Mat.  7.  29.  he  /.  them  as  one  having  authority,  and
not  as  the  scribes,  Mark  1.  22
28.  15.  they  took  money,  and  did  as  they  were  /.
Mark  ft.  30.  told  him  all  things  they  had  done  and  /.

10.  1.  as  he  was  won»t  he  /.  them  again

I.  uke  11.  1.  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John  /.  his  disciples
13.  26.  and  thou  hast  /.  in  our  streets

John  6.  45.  and  they  shall  be  all  /.  of  God

7.  14.  Jesus  went  up  into  the  temple,  and  /.  28.

Mark  12.  35.  Luke  19.  47.  |  20.  1.

8.  2.  all  the  people  came,  he  sat  down  and/,  them
28.  as  my  father  hath  /.me,  1  speak  these

18.  20.  I  ever/,  in  the  synagogue  and  temple
Acts  4.  2.  being  grieved  that  they  /.  the  people

5.  21.  they  entered  into  the  temple  early  and  /.

II. 26.  Paul  and  Barnabas /.  much  people,  14.  21.
15. 1.  certain  men  /.the  brethren,  and  said,  except
18.  25.  A  polios /.  diligently  the  things  of  the  Lord
20.  20.  I  have  shewed  you,  and  /.  you  publicly
22.  .3.  /.  according  to  the  perfect  manner  of  the  law

Gal.  1.  12.  nor  was  1  /.  it  but  by  revelation

6.  6.  let  him  that  is  /.  in  the  word  communicate
Eph.  4.  21.  if  so  be  ye  have  been  /.  by  him  as  truth
Col.  2.  7-  stablished  in  the  faith,  as  ye  have  been  /

1  Thess.  4.  9.  ye  are  /.  of  God  to  love  one  another

2  Ihess.  2.  15.  hold  the  traditions  ye  have  been  /

Tit.  1.  9.  holding  the  word,  as  he  hath  been  /.

1  John  2.  27.  even  as  the  anointing  hath  /.  you
Rev.  2.  14.  who  /.  Balak  to  cast  astumbling-block

TAUNT.

Jer.  24.  9.  I  will  deliver  them  to  be  a/,  and  a  curse
Ezek.  5.  15.  so  it  shall  be  a  reproach  and  a  /.
TAUNTING.

Isa.  14.  +4.  thou  shalt  take  up  this  /.  speech
Hah.  2.  6.  all  these  take  up  a  /.  proverb  against  him
TAXATION.

2  Kings  23.  .35.  exacted  of  every  one  according  to  /.

TAXED,  Active,  Passive.

2  Kings  2.3.  .35.  but  Jehoiakim  /.  the  land  to  give
Luke  2. 1.  a  decree  that  all  the  world  should  be  /.

3.  all  went  to  be  /.  |i  5.  Joseph  went  to  be  /.
TAXES.

Dan.  11.  20.  then  shall  stand  up  a  raiser  of  /.
TAXING.

Luke  2.  2.  and  this  /.  was  first  made  when  Cyrenius
Acts  5.  37.  rose  up  Judas  in  the  days  of  the  /.
TEACH

Signifies,  [1]  To  instruct  or  cause  to  learn,  Psal.  119.
25.  Mat.  28.  19.  [2]  To  accustom  to,  Jer.  9.  5.
[3]  To  admonish,  Mark  8.  .31.19.  .31.  [4]  To

suggest  or  put  into  one's  mind,  Luke  12.  12.  [5]
l'o  signify  and  give  notice,  Prov.  6.  13.  [6]  To
counsel  and  direct,  Hab.  2.  19.

Exod.  4. 15.  and  1  will  /.  you  what  ye  shall  do
.35.  .34.  God  hath  put  in  his  heart  that  he  may  /.

Lev.  10.  11.  that  ye  may  /.  Israel  all  the  statutes
14.  57-  to  /.  when  it  is  unclean  and  when  clean
Dent.  4.  1.  hearken  to  the  judgments  which  I  /.  you
10.  and  that  they  may  /.  their  children


Deut.  4. 14.  the  Lord  commanded  me  to  /.  you,  6. 1.
20. 18.  they  t.  you  not  to  do  after  their  aborpinations
24.8.  to  al  l  that  the  priests  the  Levites  shall /.  you
.31. 19.  write  and  /.  the  children  of  Israel  this  song
.3.3.  10.  they  shall  /.  Jacob  thy  judgments
Judg.  1.3.  8.  /.  us  what  we  shall  do  to  the  child

1  Sam.  12.  2.3.  1  will  /.  you  the  good  and  right  way

2  Sam.  1.  18.  bade  them  /.  the  use  of  the  bow
2  Chron.  17.  7.  to  /.  in  the  cities  of  Judah
Ezr a  7. 10.  and  to  /.  in  Israel  statutes  and  judgments
Job  21.  22.  shall  any  /.  God  knowledge

27-  11.  I  will  /.  you  by  the  hand  of  God
.32.7.  and  multitude  of  years  should  /.  wisdom
.37.  19.  /.  us  what  we  shall  say  unto  him,  for  we
Psal.  25. 8.  therefore  he  will  /.  sinners  in  the  way*

9.  the  meek  will  he  guide  and  /.  his  way

12.  him  that  feareth  Ixrrd  shall  he  /.  in  the  way
34.  11.  I  will  /.  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord
51.  1.3.  then  will  1  /.  transgressors  thy  ways

90. 12.  so  /.  us  to  number  our  days  that  we  may
105. 22.  to  bind  princes,  and  /.  his  senators  wisdom

Prov.  9.  9.  /.  a  just  man,  and  he  will  increase  in
Isa.  2.  3.  and  he  will  /.  us  of  his  ways,  Mic.  4.  2.
28.  9.  whom  shall  he  /.  knowledge,  and  to  unders.

26.  for  his  G.  doth  instruct  and  /.  him  discretion
Jer.  9.  20.  and  /.  your  daughters  wailing  and  lam.
31.  .34.  they  shall  /.  no  more  every  man  his  neigh¬
bour,  tor  all  shall  know  the  Lord,  Heb.  8.  11.
Ezek.  44.  2.3.  /.  my  people  the  difference  between
Dan.  1.  4.  whom  they  might  /.  learn,  of  Chaldeans
Mic.  3.  11.  priests  thereof  /.  for  hire  and  prophets
Hab.  2.  19.  saith  to  the  dumb  stone,  arise,  it  shall  /.
Mat.  5. 19.  shall  /.  men  so  ||  28.  19.  /.  all  nations
Luke  11. 1.  Lord,  /.  us  to  pray,  as  John  taught  his

12. 12.  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  /.  you  what  to  say
John  7.  35.  /.  the  Gentiles  ||  9.  .34.  dost  thou  /.  us  ?

14.  26.  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  /.  you  all  things
Acts  1.1.  treatise  of  all  that  Jes.  began  to  do  and  /

4.  18.  to  speak  nor  /.  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  5.  28.

5.  42.  they  ceased  not  to  /.  and  preach  Jesus  Chr

16.  21.  /.  customs  which  are  not  lawful  for  us

1  Cor.  4. 17.  as  I  /.  every  where  in  every  church

11.  14.  doth  not  even  nature  itself/,  you
14.  19.  that  by  my  voice  I  might  /.  others

1  Tim.  1.  3.  charge  some  they  /.  no  other  doctrine
2.  12.  but  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  /.  nor  usurp
.3.  2.  a  bishop  must  be  apt  to  /.  2  Tim.  2.  24.

4.  11.  these  things  command  and  t.

6.  2.  these  things  /.  and  exhort
.3.  if  any  man  /.  otherwise,  he  is  proud

2  Tim.  2.  2.  faithful  men  who  shall  be  able  to  /.  oth.
Tit.  2.  4.  that  they  /.  young  women  to  be  sober
Heb.  5. 12.  ye  have  need  that  one  /.  you  again

1  John  2.  27.  and  need  not  that  any  man  /.  you
Rev.  2.  20.  thou  sufferest  that  woman  Jezebel  to  /.
See  Began.

TEACH  me.

Job  6.  24.  /.  me  and  I  will  hold  my  tongue
.34.  .32.  that  which  I  see  not,  /.  thou  me
Psal.  25.  4.  /.  me  thy  paths  ||  5.  lead  me  and  /.  me

27.  11.  /.  me  thy  way,  O  L.  and  lead  me,  86.  11.

119. 12.  /.  me  thy  statutes,  26,  .3.3,  64,68. 124,  1.35.

66.  /.  me  good  judgments  |j  108.  /.  me  thy  judgm.

143.  10.  /.  me  to  do  thy  will,  for  thou  art  my  God
TEACH  thee.

Exod.  4.  12.  I  will  /.  thee wvhat  thou  shalt  say
Deut.  17. 11.  the  sentence  which  they  shall  /.  thee
Jobs.  10.  thy  fathers,  shall  not  they  /.  thee  1

12.7.  but  ask  the  beasts,  and  they  shall  /.  thee
8.  or  speak  to  the  earth,  and  it  shall  /.  thee

3.3.  .33.  hold  thy  peace,  1  shall  /.  thee  wisdom
Psal.  .32.  8.  I  will  /.  thee  in  the  way  thou  shalt  go
45.4.  thy  right  hand  shall  /.  thee  terrible  things
TEACH  them.

Exod.  18.  20.  thou  shalt  /.  them  ordinances  and  laws

24. 12.  1  have  written  that  thou  mayest  /.  them
Deut.  4.  9.  /.  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons’  sons

5.  .31.  the  judgments  which  thou  shalt  /.  them

6.7.  /.  them  diligently  to  thy  children,  11.  19.

Judg.  .3.  2.  that  Israel  might  know  to  /.  them  war

1  Kings  8.  .36.  that  thou  /.  them  the  good  way  where.

2  Kings  17.  27.  let  him  /.  them  the  manner  of  the  G.
Ezra  7.  25.  and  /.  ye  them  that  know  them  not
Psal.  1.32. 12.  keep  my  testimony  that  I  shall  /.  them
Mat.  5.  19.  whosoever  shall  do  and  /.  them  shall  be
Mark  6.  .34.  he  began  to  /.  them  many  things
8.  31.  to  /.  them  that  the  son  of  man  must  suffer

TEACHER
Signifies,  [1]  A  tutor,  master,  or  instructor,  1  Chron.
25.  8.  [2]  A  public  minister,  who  by  wholesome
doctrine  instruct eth  the  church,  Eph.  4.  11.  [3]
Such  as  privately  instruct  others  in  the  knowledge
of  spiritual  things.  Tit.  2.  .3.

1  Chron.  25.  8.  cast  lots,  as  well  the  /.  as  the  scholar
Joel 2.  +  23.  hath  given  you  a  /.  of  righteousness
Hab.  2. 18.  what  profiteth  the  image,  a  /.  of  lies
John  .3.  2.  we  know  thou  art  a  /.  come  from  God
Rom.  2.  20.  confident  that  thou  art  a  /.  of  babes
1  Tim.  2.  7.  I  am  a  /.  of  the  Gentiles,  2  Tim.  l  11
TEACHERS.

Psal.  119.  99.  more  understanding  than  all  my  /.

Prov.  5.  13.  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  /.

Isa.  .30.  20.  yet  shall  not  thy  /.  be  removed  into  a
corner  any  more,  but  thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  /.

4.3.  27.  thy  /.  have  transgressed  against  me
Dan.  12.  t  .3.  they  that  be  /.  shall  shine
Acts  1.3. 1.  at  Antioch  were  certain  prophets  and  /.

1  Cor.  12.  28.  hath  set  prophets,  /.  ||  29.  are  all  /.  ?

Eph.  4.  11.  he  gave  some  evangelists,  pastors,  and  /.

1  Tim.  1.7.  desiring  to  be  /.  of  law,  understanding
J  4-  T  the v  shall  heap  to  themselves  /.  having

1  it.  2.  .3.  that  the  aged  women  be  /.  of  good  things
Heb.  5.  12.  when  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be  /.

2  Pet.  2.  1.  as  there  shall  be  false  /.  among  you

TEACHEST.

Psal.  94.  12.  blessed  is  the  man  whom  thou  /.

Mat.  22.  16.  we  know  that  thou  art  true,  and  /.  the
way  of  God  in  truth,  Mark  12. 14.  Luke  20. 21.
Acts  21.  21.  thou  /.  the  Jews  to  forsake  Moses
Rom.  2.  21.  thou  that  /.  another,  /.  thou  not  thyself?

0  TEACHETH.

2  Sam.  22.  35.  he  /.  my  hands  to  war.  Psal.  18.  34.


T  E  M


TEE

Job  15.  f  5.  thy  mouth  /.  thine  iniquity
$?•  ),}.•  ^  /.  us  more  than  the  beasts  of  the  earth

ij'i'n  Hodexalteth,  who  /.  like  him  ?

i  ,lle  tllat  *■  man  knowledge,  not  know
"*•  „,c'1  cmy  hands  to  war,  and  lingers

J'\a  'V,CM  '»«!»  /.  with  his  fingers
lo.  ..1.  the  heart  of  the  wise  /.  his  mouth

.  ,hs  Pr°f)liet  that  /.  lies,  he  is  the  tail
•to.  17.  lam  thy  God  which  /.  thee  to  profit
ijCts  ~}u  the  man  that  /.  all  men  every  where
J,**  ?'  01  le  l*iat  t.  on  teaching
1  C or.  ..  13.  we  speak  not  in  the  words  which  man's
-  ,w,sd°i>i  t.  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost  /.
i  r  /  let  him  communicate  to  him  that  /.
ljo/m  2. 27.  as  the  same  anointing  /.you  all  things
„  n,  r  TEACHING.

*  C//7VIM  lo  3.  Israel  hath  been  without  a  /.  priest
Jer.  32. 33. 1  taught  them  rising  up  early  and  /.  them
Mat.  4.  23.  Jesus  went  about  Galilee,  t.  in  their
synagogues,  preaching  gospel,  9.  35.  Luke  13. 10.
15.  9.  in  vain  they  do  worship  me,  t.  for  doctrines
<->,  the  commandments  of  men,  Mark  7.7.
or  c-  r  le  ehters  came  unto  him  as  he  w  as  t.
no  o'  t  Sftt  daily  with  you,  t.  in  the  temple
.0.  20.  t.  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever
-Luke  23. o.  t.  throughout  all  Jewry  from  Galilee


TEL


a  .  .  ;,r  an  ,iew i  v  nom  ciauiee

xfm  5.  ‘*5.  the  apostles  t.  the  people  in  the  temple
if?”  ,«  v,au  and  Barnabas  in  Antioch  t.  preaching
no' .! } '  1  *'  ^,e  w°i'd  of  God  at  Corinth

-0.31.  Paul  /.at  Rome  with  all  confidence
Lorn.  12.  7.  or  he  that  teachetli  on  /.

•j  )'  warn'n=  ail(t  every  man  in  all  wisdom
3.  16.  t.  and  admonishing  one  another  in  psalms
Jit.  1.  11.  /.  things  which  they  ought  not

12.  t.  us,  that  denying  ungodliness  and  lusts
.  .  r  TEAR
k'pmfies,  [1]  To  read,  or  pull  in  pieces,  Hos.  13.  R
1-2]  Jo  destroy ,  Psal.  7.  2.  Amos  1.  11.  [31  To
slander  or  reproach,  Psal.  35.  15.  [4]  To  thresh,
Judg.  8.  t  7.

J^dg.  8.  7.  then  will  I  t.  your  flesh  with  thorns
oi  ,  •  r  lest.l,e  l-  my  soul  like  a  lion,  rending  it
35.  lo.  they  oid  /.  me,  and  ceased  not
,50.  22.  consider  this,  lest  I  t.  you  in  pieces
Jer.  15.  3.  I  will  appoint  over  them  the  dogs  to  t
10.  /.  nor  shall  men  /.  themselves  for  them

^P' 3  ^,ir  pillows  I  will  (.  from  your  arms
tj  *  *lour  kerchiefs  will  I  t.  and  deliver  my  people
Jrlos.  o.  14.  I,  even  I,  will  t.  and  go  awav
13.  8.  1  will  devour,  the  wild  beast  shall  /.  them
Amos  \.  11.  castoff  pity,  his  anger  did  /.  perpetual
,,a,'  -•  12.  the  lion  did  /.  enough  tor  his  whelps
Z,ech.  11.  16.  the  shepherd  shall  /.  their  claws
TEA  RETIE
Dent.  ?,?,.  20.  Gad  dwelleth  as  a  lion,  and  /.  the  arm
,0  ,9-  he/,  me  in  his  wrath,  who  liateth  me

18.  4.  he  /.himself  in  his  anger,  shall  the  earth  be
Mic.  p.Q.  as  a  young  lion  /.  in  pieces, none  deliver
Mark  9.  18.  w  heresoever  he  taketh  him,  he  /.  him,
and  he  foameth  and  pineth  away,  Luke  9.  39
c-  t  P  ,  r,  TEARS

^.gmty,  [1J  Drops  of  water  issuing  out  of  the  eyes,

nSa  1  -Pnr  I  r~’  [2]  Sorrow  and  affliction,

Psal.  126.5.  Isa.  25.  8.

2  .W.  16.  t  12.  may  be  the  Lord  will  look  on  my  /.

~  Kings  20.  5.  I  have  seen  thy  /.  Isa.  38.  5.
job  16.  20.  but  mine  eye  pouretl.  out  /.  unto  God
\scf  w  ater  my  couch  with  my  /.  all  night

'10'  ^ O  Tcrd,  hold  not  thy  peace  at  my  /.

;2-  -3.  my  /.  have  been  my  meat  day  and  night
£?•  8.  put  thou  my  /.  in  thy  bottle,  are  in  thy  book
80.  j.  thou  teedest  them  with  the  bread  of  /.  and

nr  o  .u  glv.est  *■  to  in  greatmeasure
delivered  mine  eyes  from  t
1  *.0.  5.  they  that  sow  in  t.  shall  reap  in  joy
r.cr/.  4.  1.  behold  the  t.  of  such  as  were  oppressed

<!-•  ItW|1,1  w.a!er  ?llee  with  >■  0  Heshbon

ffj  I^jrd  will  wipe  away  t.  from  all  faces

'  e'.\  ‘  mine  eyes  were  a  fountain  of  /.  /

18.  our  eyes  may  run  down  with  t.  and  eye-lids
,4  i*  ,anc  nune  eyes  shall  run  down  with  t.

*7'  }}■  lef.  m.m®.  eyes  run  with  /.  night  and  day
31.  lo.  retrain  from  weeping,  thine  eyes  from  /.
J,am  1.  2.  she  weeps,  and  her  /.  are  on  her  cheeks
101  F*ine  63  e?  c*°  wit*1  L  niy  bowels
IB.  let  t.  run  down  like  a.  river  day  and  night
Lzek.  24.  16.  neither  shall  thy  /.  run  down

,2.  13.  covering  the  altar  of  the  Lord  with  /.
Mark.  Q.  24.  the  father  said  with  /.  Lord,  I  believe

*AlAk,e1'  aP‘*  s'le  heffao  to  wash  his  feet  with  her  t
44.  butshe  hath  washed  my  feet  with  /.

.4m  20. 19.  serving  the  Lord  with  many  /.

31.  1  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  with  /.
n  ri?-r’  ^  wr°te  to  you  with  manj’ t.
nlnr  l'  '4'.t0  s7fe  heinS  mindful  of  thy  t.
r o'S,'  I:  whe,n  Ie  °Wered  up  supplications  with  t.

12.  17.  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  t.

-tree,  t .  1/ .  God  shall  wipe  away  all  /  °1  4.

T  TEATS.

7>«.  32. 12.  they  shall  lament  for  the  t.

Lzek.  23.  3.  there  they  bruised  the  t.  21.

„  TEDIOUS.

Acts  24.  4.  that  I  be  not  further  t.  to  thee

TEETH

Signifies,  [1]  That  wherewith  a  creature  chews  its
food,  Nuin.  11.  .3.3.  [2]  Slanderous  speeches  and
pernicious  calumnies,  Psal.  57.  4.  Prov  30  14
Break  their  teeth,  Psal.  58.  6.  Take  away  their
power  and  instruments  of  doing  mischief,  and  dis-
.able  them  from  hurting  me.

Gerz.  49,  jo.  and  his  /.  shall  be  white  with  milk
Sum.  1 1 . 3.3.  while  the  flesh  was  yet  between  their  t.
Dent.  32.  24. 1  will  send  the  t.  of  beasts  upon  them
1  Sam.  2. 13.  came  with  aflesh-hook  of  three  t.

1  A  mgs  10.  +  22.  bringing  elephants’  t.  2  Chr.  9.  f  21.

■  t.-  the  young  lions  are  broken

13. 14.  wherefore  do  1  take  my  flesh  in  my  t.  ?

19.20.  1  am  escaped  with  the  skin  of  my /.

29.  17.  and  plucked  the  spoil  outof  /.of  wicked
14.  Leviathan's  /.  are  terrible  round  about
Tsai.  3.  7.  thou  hast  broken  the  t.  of  the  ungodly
5< .  4.  whose  t.  ye  spears  and  arrows,  and  tongue


Psal.  58.  6.  break  their  /.  O  God,  in  ftieir  mouth
*24.  6.  hath  not  given  us  as  a  prey  to  their  /.

'  rov.  10.  26.  as  vinegar  to  the  t.  so  the  sluggard
30.  14.  whose  /.  are  swords,  jaw-/,  as  knives
Cant.  4.  2.  thy  /.  are  like  a  flock  of  sheep,  6.  6
Isa.  41.  15.  make  thee  an  instrument  having  t.

Jer.  31. 29.  children’s  /.  are  set  on  edee,  Lzek.  18  2.

30.  eateth  sour  grapes,  his  /.  shall  be  set  on  ed<V
Lam.  3.  16.  hath  broken  my  /.  with  gravel-stones
Dan.  7.  5.  it  had  three  ribs  between  the  t.  of  it
7.  a  fourth  beast  had  great  iron  t.  19.

Joel  1.  6.  lie  hath  the  cheek  /.  of  a  great  lion
Amos  4.  6.  1  have  given  you  cleanness  of  t.

Mic.  3.  5.  that  bite  with  their  t.  and  cry  pence
Zecli.  9.  7-  his  abominations  from  between  his  /.
Mat.  27.  44.  was  crucified,  cast  the  same  in  his  /
Lev.  9.  8.  their  /.  were  as  the  /.  of  lions
See  Gnash.

C-  TELL

Signifies,  ll]rTo  count,  number,  or  reckon,  Gen.
15.5.  [2]  To  declare  or  make  knoicn,  Gen.  12.  18
121.  26.  [3]  To  teach,  Exod.  10.  2.  Deut.  17

11.  [4]  To  confess,  Josh.  7-.  19.  [5]  To  publish,
..  Sam.  1.  20.  [6]  To  explain  and  unfold,  Ezek.
24.  J9.  Dan.  2.  36.

Gen.  15.  5.  /.  the  stars  if  thou  he  able  to  number
32.  5.  and  I  have  sent  to  /.  my  Lord  to  find  grace
43.  6.  as  to  /.  the  man  whether  ye  hail  a  brother
22.  we  cannot /.  who  put  our  money  in  our  sacks
45.  13.  /.  my  father  of  all  my  glory  in  Egypt
Exod.  10.  2.  mayest  /.  in  the  ears  of  thv  son
Lev.  14.  35.  t.  the  priest,  saving,  it  seemeth  to  me
Sum.  14.  14.  they  will  t.  it  to  the  inhabitants

1  Sam.  6.  2.  t.  us  wherewith  we  shall  send  it  to  his
9.  8.  give  to  the  man  of  God,  to  /.  us  our  way
17-  55.  as  the  soul  liveth,  O  king,  I  cannot  /

22.  22.  1  knew  that  he  would  surely  /.  Saul

2.3.  11.0  God  of  Israel,  1  beseech  thee  /.  thy  sen-
27.  11.  lest  they  should  /.  on  11s, saying,  so  did  Dav’

2  Sam.  1.  20.  /.  it  not  in  Gath,  publish  it  not  in

7.  5.  go  t.  my  servant  David,  1  Chron.  17.  4
12.  18.  feared  to  /.  him  that  the  child  was  dead

22.  while  the  child  was  alive,  I  said,  who  can  /
15.  .35.  thou  shalt  /.  to  Zadok  and  Abiathar
18.  21.  go  /.  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen

1  Kings  1.  20.  that  thou  shouhlest  /.  who  shall  reDn
18.  8.  go,  /.  thy  lord,  Elijah  is  here,  11.  14.

12.  when  I  come  and  /.  Ahab,  he  will  slay  me
20.  9.  /.my  lord  the  king,,  all  thou  didst  send

him,  let  not  him  that  girdeth  on  his  harness

2  A  ivgs  7.  9.  that  we  may  t.  the  king’s  household

9.  12.  and  they  said,  it  is  false  ;  /.  us  now
15.  let  none  escape  to  go  to/,  it  in  Jezreel

22.  15.  /.  the  man  that  sent  you,  2  Chron.  .34.  2.3.
Psal.  22. 17-.  I  may  /.  all  my  hones,  they  stare  on  me
26.  7.  publish  and  /.  of  all  thy  wondrous  works
48.  12.  go  round  about  her,  /.  the  towers  thereof

1.3.  that  ye  may  /.  the  generation  following
Prov.  .30.  4.  what  his  son’s  name,  if  thou  canst  /.
Lccl.  6.  12.  who  can  /.  what  shall  be  after,  10.  14.

8.  7-  tor  who  can  t.  him  when  it  shall  be  ?

10.  20.  that  which  hath  wings  shall  /.  the  matter
Cant.  5.  8.  /.  him  that  I  am  sick  of  love
Isa.  6.  9.  go  and  /.  this  people  ||  48.  20.  /.  this
Jer.  15.  2.  /.  such  as  are  for  death,  to  death

2.3.  27.  by  their  dreams  which  they  /.  28.  .32.

36.  16.  we  will  /.  the  king  of  all  these  words
17.  t.  us  now  how  thou  didst  write  these  words

48.  20.  /.  in  Arnon,  that  Moab  is  spoiled
Lzek.  24. 19.  wilt  thou  not  /.  us  what  things  are  ?
Dan.  2.  4.  O  king,  /.  thy  servants  the  dream,  7,  9.

36.  we  will  /.  the  king  the  interpretation  thereof
Joel  1.  .3.  t.  ye  your  children,  let  vour  children  /.
Jonahs.  9.  who  can  /.  if  God  will  turn  and  repent
Mat.  8.  4.  see  thou  /.  no  man,  Mark  8.  26,  .30.  |  9.

9.  Luke  5.  14. 1  8.  56.  Acts  23.  22*

16.  20.  he  charged  his  disciples  that  they  should  /.

.  .  no  man,  Mark  7.  .36.  Luke  9.  21.

17.  9.  /.  the  vision  to  no  man,  urwtil  the  Son  of  man

18.  15.  /.  him  his  fault  |1 17.  /.  it  unto  the  church
21.  5.  /.  ye  the  daughter  of  Sion,  behold  thy  king
24.  .3.  /.  us  when  shall  these  things  be,  Mark  1.3.  4.
26.  63.  that  thou  /.  us,  whether  thou  be  the  Christ

the  Son  of  God,  Luke  22.  67.  John  10.  24.

28.  7.  go  and  /.  his  disciples  that  he  is  risen

9.  as  they  went  to/,  his  disciples,  Mark  16.  7.
Mark  1.  .30.  and  anon  they  /.  him  of  her
5.  19.  /.  them  how  great  things  the  T.ord  hath  done

11.  .3.3.  we  cannot  /.  Mat.  21.  27.  Luke  20.  7.
iMke  7-  22.  /.  John  what  things  ye  have  seen

13.  32.  go  ye,  /.  that  fox,  I  cast  out  devils
John  .3.  8.  but  canst  not  /.  whence  it  ccmeth

4.  25.  when  he  is  come,  he  will  /.  ns  all  things
8.  14.  ye  cannot/,  whence  I  come,  and  whither  I  go
16.  18.  a  little  while  i  we  cannot  /.  what  he  saith
18.  .34.  or  did  others  /.  it  thee  of  me  ?

Arts  15.  27.  who  shall  /.  you  the  same  things
17-  21.  but  either  to  /.  or  hear  some  new  thing
2.3.  17.  he  hath  a  certain  thing  to  /.  him
~CV)r.  12.  2.  whether  out  of  the  body  I  cannot  /.  .3.
lieb.  11.  .32.  for  the  time  svonld  fail  to  /.  of  Gideon
TELL  me.

Gen.  12.  18.  why  didst  not  t.  me  she  was  thy  wife  ?
21.  26.  nor  didst  thou  /.  me,  nor  heard  I  of  it
24.  23.  /.  me  whose  daughter  art  thou  ?

49.  /.  me,  and  if  not.  /.  me  that  1  may  turn

29.  15.  /.  me  what  shall  thy  wages  be  r
.31.  27.  steal  away  from  me.  and  didst  not  /.  me
32.  29.  /.  me  thy  name  ||  .37. 16.  /.  me  where  they  feed

Josh.  7.19.  t.me  now  what  thou  hast  done,  hide  it  not
J\«Ji 7.  16.  6.  t.  me  wherein  thy  great  strength  lieth
huth  4.  4.  it  thou  wilt  not  redeem  it,  /.  me

1  Sam.  9.  18.  /.  me  where  the  seer's  house  is
10.  15.  /.  me  I  pray  thee  what  Samuel  said  to  you

14.  4.3.  Saul  said,  /.  me  what  thou  hast  done
20.  10.  David  said  to  Jonathan,  who  shall  /.  me?

2  Kam.  1.  4.  how  went  the  matter,  /.  me,  I  pray  thee
13.  4.  why  art  thou  lean,  wilt  thou  not  /.  me?

1  Kings  22.  16.  that  thou  /.  me  nothing  but  the  truth

2  Kings  4.  2.  what  shall  I  do  for  thee,  /.  me
8  4.  /.  me  the  great  things  that  Elisha  hath  done

Job  : 34.  .34.  let  men  of  understanding  /.  me


Cant.  1.7.  t.  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth
Mat.  21.24.  ask  you  one  thing,  which  if  you  /.  me
Luke 7.  42.  /.  me  which  of  them  will  love  most
John  20.  15.  /.  me  where  thou  hast  laid  '


— . ;  .-nsi  mm  him

Acts  5. 8.  /.  me,  whether  ye  sold  the  land  for  so  much
22.  27.  /.  me  art  thou  a  Roman  ?  he  said,  yea
2.3. 19.  asked  him  what  is  that  thou  hast  to  /.  me  9
Gal.  4.  21.  /.  me,  ye  that  desire  to  be  under  the  law
TELL //zee.

Gen.  22.  2.  on  one  of  the  mountains  T  will  /.  thee  of
26.2.  dwell  in  the  land  which  I  will  t.  thee  of
Lxod.  14. 12.  this  is  the  word  we  did  /.  thee  in  Egypt
Kum.  2.3.  3.  whatsoever  he  sheweth  me,  1  will  /.  thee
Dent.  17.  11.  the  judgment  which  they  shall  /.  thee
32.  7.  ask  thy  elders,  and  they  will  /.  thee
Jidg-  14.  16.  1  have  not  told  it  and  shall  1  /.  it  thee?
Luth  3.  4.  he  will  /.  thee  what  thou  shalt  do
1  9. 19.  I  will  t.thee  all  that  is  in  thine  heart

15.  16.  I  will  /.  thee  what  the  Lord  hath  said  to  me

19.  3.  and  what  1  see,  that  l  will  /.  thee

20.  9.  if  I  knew,  then  would  not  I  /.  it  thee?

*  £  trigs  14.3.  /.  thee  what  shall  become  of  the  child

18.  did  1  not/,  thee  that  he  would  prophesy  no
good  thing  of  me,  hut  evil,  2  Chr.  18.  17.
V  ai  '  i10-  1  r'  ,,,ee  that  l-or<i  will  build  thee

Job\.  lo  l  am  escaped  alone  to  /.  thee,  16,  17,  19.
8.  10.  shall  not  thy  fathers  teach  thee  and  /.  thee
12.  7-  ask  fowls  ot  the  air,  and  they  shall  t.thee
!  sal.  oO.  12.  it  I  were  hungry  I  would  not  /.  thee
Isa.  19.  12.  let  thy  wise  men  /.  thee  now  and  know
Jer.  19.  2.  proclaim  tile  words  that  1  shall  /.  thee
J  uke  12.  59.  1  /.  thee,  thou  shalt  not  depart  thence
22.  .34.  I  /.  thee,  the  cock  shall  not  crow  twice  till
-Sets  10.  6.  /.  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do,  11.  14.
Lev.  17.  7.  I  will  /.  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman
/TELL  you,  or  I  ELL  1  von.

Gen.  49.  1.  that  J  may  /.  you  what  shall  befall  you
Jsa.  5.  5.  /will  /.  you  what  1  will  do  to  my  viney
42.  9.  before  they  spring  forth,  1  /.  you  of  them
*7-  what  J  t.you  in  darkness,  that  speak
-1.27.  neither  /.  J  you  by  what  authority  I  do
these  things,  Mark  11.  .33.  Luke  20.  8.
Mark  11.  29.  1  will  /.  you  by  what  authority  1  do
Luke  4.  25.  hut  1 1.  you  of  a  truth,  9.  27.

3*?-24.  I  t.  you  that  many  prophets  and  kings

12.  51.  /  t.you  nay,  but  rather  division

13.  3.  1 1.  you  nay,  but  except  ye  repent,  5.

27.  It.  you  I  know  you  not  whence  you  are

17.  34.  J /.  you  there  shall  be  two  in  one  bed
18.8.  It.  you  that  he  will  avenge  them  speedily

14.  /  t.you  this  man  went  to  his  house  justified

19.  40.  1 1.  you  that  if  these  should  hold  their  peace
22.  67.  he  said,  if  /  /.  you  ye  will  not  believe
John  3.  12.  how  shall  ye  believe  if  It.  y.  of  heavenly
8.  45.  because  I  t.you  the  truth,  Gal.  4.  16.

1.3.  19.  now  1  t.  you  before  it  come,  that  when  it  is
Jb.  7-  J  t.  you  the  truth,  it  is  expedient  for  you
ui  'i  21  ‘  >vbich  /  /.  you  before,  as  1  have  told
Lhil.  3.  18.  ot  whom  I  now  /.  you  even  weening
D  7  TELLEST.

/  sal.  56.  8.  thou  /.  my  wanderings,  put  my  fear.
Jsa.  40.  t  9.  O  thou  that  /.  good  tidings
0  TELLETH.

~Sam.  7.  11.  the  Lord  /.  thee  that  he  will  build
2 Kings  6.12.  Elisha/,  the  king  of  Israel  the  words
Psal.- 11.  6.  when  he  goeth  abroad  he  /.  it
101.  7.  he  that  /.  lies  shall  not  tarry  in  my  sight
147.  4.  he  /.  the  number  of  the  stars,  calleth  them
Jer.  .33.  1.3.  under  the  hands  of  him  that  /.  them
John  12. 22.  Philip cometh  and/.  Andrew
'ELLIN G,  Substantively.

Judg.  7.  15.  when  Gideon  heard  the  /.  of  the  dream
0  TELLING.

2  Sam.  11.19.  hast  made  an  end  of  /.  the  matters

2  A  mgs  8.  5.  as  he  was  t.  the  king  how  he  restored

TEMPERANCE.

■Sets  24.  25.  as  he  reasoned  oft.  and  judgment
Gat-  5.  2.3.  meekness,  /.  against  such  there  is  no  law
-  t  et.  1.  6.  add  to  knowledge  /.  and  to  /.  patience
_  TEMPERATE.

\  G°r .  9.  25.  that  striveth  for  the  mastery,  is  /.

Jit.  1.  8.  a  bishop  must  be  /.  II  2.  2.  aged  men  t.

,  .  TEMPER.

Lzek.  46.  14.  an  bin  of  oil  to/,  with  fine  flour
„  TEMPERED.

Lxod.  29.2.  take  cakes  and  unleavened  /.  with  oil
30.  35.  a  perfume  /.  together,  pure  and  holy
1  C or.  12.  24.  but  God  hath  /.  the  body  together
c.  TEMPEST

Signifies,  [1]  A  most  violent  commotion  of  the  air.
either  with  or  without  rain,  hail,  or  snow,  Acts  27.

18,  20.  [2]  Grievous  and  unexpected  afflictions,
Job  9.  17.  [3]  God's  terrible  judgments  on  the
wicked,  Psal.  11.  6.  |  8.3.  15.

Job  9.  17.  lor  he  breaketh  me  with  a  /.

27.  20.  a  /.  stealeth  him  away  in  the  night
Psal.  11.  6.  on  the  wicked  shall  he  rain  a  /.

55.  8^  I  would  hasten  from  the  windy  storm  and  /.
83.  15.  so  persecute  them  with  thy  /.  and  make
Jsa.  28.  2.  hath  a  strong  one,  which  as  a  /.  of  hail
29.  6.  thou  shalt  be  visited  with  storm  and  /.

.30.  .30.  the  Assyrian  shall  he  beaten  with  a  /.

32.  2.  and  a  man  shall  be  a  covert  from  the  /.

54.  11.0  thou  afflicted,  tossed  with  /.  behold
Amos  1.  14.  with  a  /.  in  the  day  of  the  whirlwind
Jonah  1. 4.  there  was  a  mighty  /.  in  the  sea
12.  for  my  sake  this  great  /.  is  come  upon  you
Mat.  8.  24.  there  arose  a  great  /.  in  the  sea
Acts  27*  18.  being  exceedingly  tossed  with  a  /.

20.  no  small  /.  lay  on  us,  hope  was  taken  aw  ay
Heb.  12.  18.  ye  are  not  come  to  darkness  and  /.

2  I3et.  2.  17.  clouds  that  are  carried  with  a  /.
TEMPESTUOUS.

Psal.  50.  3.  it  shall  be  very  /.  round  about  him
Jonah  1.  11.  the  sea  wrought  and  was  /.  13.

Hah.  .3.  f  14.  they  were  /.’to  scatter  me
Acts  27.  14.  there  arose  against  it  a  /.  wind
TEMPLE

Signifies,  A  house  or  dwelling  of  God,  a  building
erected  and  set  apart  for  the  worship  of  the  true
God.  Jt.is  spoken,  lirst,  Of  that  magyiiji-
cent  building  erected  by  Solomon  at  Jerusalem -

493


TEM


TEM


TEN


he  foundations  whereof  uere  laid  in  the  year  of  the
world 2992,  before  Christ  1(X>8,  before  the  vulgar <zra
1012  ;  and  it  teas  finished  in  the  year  of  the  world
3000,  and  dedicated  in  3001  ;  before  Christ,  999,  be¬
fore  the  vulgar  era,  1003.  The  glory  of  this  temple
was  nut  in  the  bigness  of  it ;  for  that  alone  was  but
a  small  pile  of  building ,  as  containing  no  more  than
an  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  length,  and  an  hundred
and  five  in  breadth,  taking  the  sanctuary,  the  sanc¬
tum,  and  the  porch  or  entrance,  from  out  to  out.
The  main  grandeur  and  excellency  of  it  consisted,
[1]  In  its  ornaments  ;  its  workmanship  being  every
where  exceeding  curious,  and  its  overlayings  rich
and  costly.  [2]  In  its  materials  ;  being  built  of
new  large  stones,  hewn  out  in  the  most  curious  and
artful  manner.  [3]  In  its  out-buildings  ;  which
were  large,  beautiful,  and  sumptuous.  But  what
still  was  the  main  glory  of  this  temple,  were  those
extraordinary  marks  of  the  divine  favour  with
which  it  was  honoured,  namely,  [1]  The  ark  of  the
covenant,  in  which  were  put  the  tables  of  the  law,
and  the  mercy-seat  which  was  upon  it ,  from  whence
the  divine  oracles  were  given  out  by  an  audible
voice,  as  often  as  God  was  consulted  in  behalf  of
his  people.  [2]  The  Shechinah,  or  the  divine  pre¬
sence,  manifested  by  a  visible  cloud  resting  over
the  mercy-seat .  [3]  The  Urim  and  Thummim,

by  which  the  high  priest  consulted  God  in  difficult
and  momentous  cases  relating  to  the  public  interest
of  the  nation,  and,  [4]  The  holy  fire  which  came
down  from  heaven  upon  the  altar  at  the  consecrat¬
ing  of  the  temple,  1  Kings  18.  38.  2  Chron.  7.  1.
It  is  spoken,  Secondly,  Of  the  tabernacle,  which
was  of  the  same  use  and  significancy  as  the  temple
was,  1  Sam.  1.  9.13.  3.  'thirdly,  Of  Christ's
body  or  human  nature,  in  which  the  fulness  of  the
Godhead  dwells  bodily,  as  the  glory  of  God  did
visibly  in  the  temple,  John  2.  19,  21  Coi.  2.  9.
Fourthly,  Of  heaven,  which  is  God's  throne,  Psal.
11. 4.  Rev.  7. 15.  Fifthly,  Of  the  church  of  God,  [1]
Distributive ly,  considered  in  the  particular  mem¬
bers  thereof,  who  are  set  apart  from  profane  uses,
and  dedicated  to  the  service  of  God ;  and  to  whom
he  manifests  his  gracious  presence  by  his  Spirit,
1  Cor.  3.  16.  [2]  Collectively,  in  respect  of  the

whole,  Eph.  2.  21.

1  Sam.  ].  9.  Eli  sat  on  a  seat  by  a  post  of  the  t.

2  Sam.  22.  7.  he  did  hear  -my  voice  out  of  his  t.

and  my  cry  did  enter  into  his  ears,  Psal.  18.  6.

1  Kings  6. 17.  the  t.  before  it  was  40  cubits  long

2  Chron.  35.20.  when  Josiah  bad  prepared  the  t.

36.  7.  and  put  the  vessels  in  his  t.  at  Babylon

Ezra  4.  1.  that  they  builded  the  t.  unto  the  Lord
5. 14.  vessels  took  out  of  the  t.  brought  to  t.  6.  5.
Neh.  6. 10.  hid  ourselves  in  the  t.  shut  doors  of  the  t.
Psal.  27.  4.  Deauty  of  L.  and  to  inquire  in  his  t.

29.  9.  in  his  t.  doth  every  one  speak  of  his  glory
48  9.  we  have  thought  of  thy  loving  kindness,  O
God,  in  the  midst  of  thy  t.
68.  29.  because  of  thy  t.  at  Jerusalem  shall  kings
Isa.  6. 1.  and  lifted  up,  and  his  train  filled  the  t.

44.  28.  and  to  the  t.  thy  foundation  shall  be  laid
66.  6.  a  voice  from  the  t.  a  voice  of  the  Lord
Jer.  50.  28.  declare  the  vengeanceof  his  t.  51. 11.
Lzek.  41. 1.  afterward  he  brought  me  to  the  t.

Dan.  5.2.  the  golden  vessels  taken  out  of  the  t.  3.
Amos  8.  3.  songs  of  the  t.  shall  be  bowlings  that  day
Zech.  8.  9.  let  your  hands  be  strong,  that  the  t.

might  be  built

Mai.  3.  1.  the  Lord  shall  come  suddenly  to  his  t.
Mat.  4.  5.  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  t.  Luke  4.  9.

12.  6.  that  in  this  place  is  one  greater  titan  the  t.

23.  16.  blind  guides,  who  say,  whosoever  shall

swear  by  the  t.  or  by  the  gold  of  the/.  17.  21.
35.  whom  ye  slew  betaveen  the  t.  and  the  altar
£4. 1.  to  shew  him  the  buildiagsof  the  t.  Luke  21.  5.
26.  61. 1  am  able  to  destroy  the  /.  of  God
27  .  40.  thou  that  destroyest  the  t.  Mark  15.  29.

51.  behold  the  vail  of  the  /.  was  rent  in  twain,
Mark  15. 38.  Luke  23.  45.
Mark  11. 16.  should  carry  any  vessel  thro’  the  t.

14.  58.  I  will  destroy  this  t.  made  with  hands
Luke  2.  37.  Anna  a  widow  departed  not  from  the  t.
John  2. 15.  he  drove  them  all  out  of  the  t.  and  sheep

1 9.  destroy  this  1. 1|  21 .  he  spake  of  /.  of  his  body

20.  forty  and  six  years  was  this  /.  in  building
Acts  3.  2.  whom  they  laid  daily  at  the  gate  of  the

t.  to  ask  alms  of  them  that  entered  the  t.  10.
19.  27.  the  /.  of  goddess  Diana  should  be  despised

21.  30.  they  took  Raul  and  drew  him  out  of  the  t.

24.  6.  who  also  hath  gone  about  to  profane  the  t.

25.  8.  neither  against  the  t.  nor  against  Cesar

1  Cor.  3. 16.  know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  t.  of  God

17.  if  any  man  detile  the  t.  of  God,  him  shall  G.

destroy,  for  the  t.  of  G.  is  holy,  which  t.  ye  are
6. 19.  your  body  is  the  t.  of  the  llolv  Ghost

8. 10.  see  these  sit  at  meat  in  an  idol’s  /.

9.  13.  they  who  minister  live  of  the  things  of  the  t.

2  Cor.  6.  16.  what  agreement  hath  the  t.  of  God

with  idols  ?  for  ye  are  the  t.  of  the  living  God
Lev.  7.  15.  and  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his/.

11. 1.  saying,  rise  and  measure  the  /.  of  God

19.  the  /.  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,  and  the
ark  of  the  testament  was  seen  in  his  /.
14. 15.  another  angel  came  out  of  the  /.  17.

15.  5.  the  /.  of  the  tabernacle  was  opened
6.  and  the  seven  angels  came  out  of  the  /.

8.  /.  was  filled  with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God

16. 1.  and  l  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  the  /.  17.

21.  22.  and  1  saw  no  /.  therein,  for  the  Lord  God

Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  /.  of  it
See  Holy,  Lord.

In  or  into  the  TEMPLE.

2  Kings  11. 10.  king  David’s  spears  that  were  in  t.

1  Chron.  6.  10.  executed  the  pnesPs  office  in  the  t.

10.  10.  and  fastened  his  head  in  the  t.  of  Dagon

2  Chron.  4.  7.  he  set  ten  candlesticks  in  the  t.  8.

Ezra  5.  15.  go  carry  these  vessels  into  the  t.

Kelt.  6.  11.  would  go  into  the  t.  to  save  his  life
Alar.  12.  5.  the  priests  in  the  t.  profane  the  sabbath

21.  12.  went  into  the  t.  cast  out  all  them  that  sold

and  bought  m  the  t.  Alark  11.  15.  Luke  19.  45.

491


Mat.  21. ,14.  the  blind  and  lame  came  to  him  inthe  t.

15.  children  crying  in  the  t.  and  saying.  Hosanna

26.  55.  1  sat  daily  teaching  in  the  t.  Luke  21.  37.
27.5.  he  cast  down  the  pieces  of  silver  in  the  t.
Alark  14.  49.  I  was  daily  teach,  in  the  t.  Luke  22.  53.
Luke  1. 21.  marvelled  that  he  tar.  so  long  in  the  t.

22.  they  perceived  that  he  had  seen  a  vision  in  /.

2.  27.  and  he  came  by  the  spirit  into  the  t.

46.  they  found  him  in  the  t.  sitting  in  the  midst

18. 10.  two  men  went  up  into  the  t.  to  pray
24.  53.  and  were  continually  in  the  t.  praising  God
Acts  2.46.  continuing  with  one  accord  in  the  t.

3. 1.  Peter  and  John  went  up  together  into  the  t.

3.  about  to  go  into  t.  ||  5.  20.  stand  and  speak  in  t.
5.  25.  the  men  are  standing  in  the  t.  and  teaching
21 . 26.  Paul  entered  into  1. 1|  27.  saw  him  in  the  t.
28.  and  further,  brought  Greeks  also  into  the  t.  29.

22. 17.  even  while  1  prayed  in  t.  1  was  in  a  trance
24. 12.  they  neither  found  me  in  the  t.  disputing

18.  certain  Jews  found  me  purified  in  the  /.

26.  21.  for  these  causes  the  Jews  caught  mo  in  t.

2  11 tess.  2. 4.  so  that  lie  as  God  sitteth  in  the  t.  of  God
Lev.  3. 12.  him  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  t.  of  my  G.

15.8.  and  no  man  was  able  to  enter  into  the  t.

TEMPLES.

Jndg.  4.  21.  Jael  smote  the  nail  into  his  /.  22.

5.  26.  when  she  had  stricken  througli  his  /.

Cant.  4.  3.  thy  /.  like  a  piece  of  pomegranate,  6.  7.
TEMPLES.

Dos.  8. 14.  for  Isr.  forgot  his  Maker,  and  buildeth  /.
Joel  3. 5.  ye  carried  into  your  /.  my  goodly  things
Acts  7.  48.  howbeit  the  Most  High  dwelleth  not
in  /.  made  with  hands,  17.  24.
TEMPORAL.

2  Cor.  4.  18.  for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  /.
TEMPT

Is  spoken,  [I]  Of  God,  Gen.  22.  1.  who  does  not
tempt  or  try  men  in  order  to  know  their  tempers
and  dispositions,  as  if  he  were  ignorant  of  them;
but  to  exercise  their  graces,  to  prove  their  faith,
love,  and  obedience ;  to  confirm  and  strengthen
them  by  such  trials,  and  to  give  succeeding  ages
patterns  of  obedience,  to  shew  them  his  satisfac¬
tion  with  such  as  obey,  and  his  displeasure  at
such  as  do  not.  [II]  Of  men,  who  are  said  to
tempt  the  Lord,  [1]  When  they  unseasonably  re¬
quire  of  him  sensible  proofs  of  his  divine  presence,
of  his  power,  or  of  his  goodness.  Thus  the  Israel¬
ites  in  the  desert  often  tempted  the  Lord,  Exod.
17-  2,  7.  as  if  they  had  had  reason  to  have  doubted
of  his  presence  among  them,  of  his  goodness  or
power,  after  all  he  had  done  in  their  favour.  [2]
When  men  expose  themselves  to  such  dangers,
from  which  they  cannot  escape  hut  by  the  mira¬
culous  interposition  of  his  providence  ;  for  God
requires  of  men  the  performance  only  of  such
actions  as  are  within  the  ordinary  measures  of
their  strength,  being  under  no  obligation  to  work
miracles  in  their  favour,  Mat.  4.  7.  [3]  When

men  set  themselves  to  commit  sin  so  impudently ,
as  if  they  did  it  on  purpose  to  try  whether  God
was  just  or  powerful  enough  to  punish  them  for
it,  Mai.  3.  15.  [Ill]  Of  Satan,  who  tempts  us
to  bring  us  to  evil,  to  sin,  to  distrust,  to  a  con¬
tempt  of  God  and  his  laws,  to  pride,  vanity,  S$c.
He  lays  snares  for  us,  even  in  our  best  actions,
to  make  us  lose  the  benefit  of  them,  by  imputing
the  merit  of  them  to  ourselves  only,  and  not  to
God.  He  tempted  David,  and  prevailed  with
him  to  number  the  people  out  of  confidence  and
vain  curiosity,  1  Chron.  21.  1.  He  tempted
our  Saviour  in  the  wilderness,  and  in  vain  en¬
deavoured  to  infuse  into  him  sentiments  of  pride
and  ambition,  Luke  4.  2,  3,  4.  He  tempted
Ananias  and  Sapphira,  to  make  them  lie  to  the
Holy  Ghost,  Acts  5.  3.

Gen.  22.  1.  God  did  /.  Abraham  and  said  unto  him
Exod.  17. 2.  Moses  said,  wherefore  do  ye  t.  the  L.  r
Deut.  6.  16.  ye  shall  not  /.  the  Lord  your  God
Isa.  7. 12.  I  will  not  ask,  nor  will  I  /.  the  Lord
Mai.  3. 15.  yea,  they  that  /.  God  are  delivered
Mat.  4.  7.  Jesus  said,  it  is  written  again,  thou  shalt
not  t.  the  l  ord  thy  God,  Luke  4.  12.

22. 18.  why  /.  ye  me  ?  Mark  12.  15.  Luke  20.  23.
Acts  5.  9.  ye  have  agreed  together  to  t.  the  Spirit

15. 10.  now  therefore  why  t.  ye  God  to  put  a  yoke
1  Cor.  7.  5.  that  Satan  t.  you  not  for  your  incontin.

10. 9.  neither  let  us  /.  Chr.  as  some  of  them  tempted

TEMPTATION

Signifies,  [1]  Those  means  and  enticements  which
the  devil  makes  use  of  to  ensnare  and  allure
mankind,  Mat.  6.  13.1  26.  41.  [2]  Those  afflic¬

tions  and  troubles,  whereby  God  tries  his  peo¬
ple,  Jam.  1.  2,  12.  [3]  Persecution  for  religion,
Luke  8.  1.3.-

Exod.  17.  +  7-  called  the  name  of  the  place  /.

Psal.  95.  8.  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,
as  in  the  day  of  t.  in  the  wilderness,  Heb.  3. 8.
Alat.  6. 13.  and  lead  11s  not  into  t.  Luke  11.4.

26.  41.  watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  /.

Mark  14.  38.  Luke  22.  40,  46.
Luke  4.  13.  when  the  devil  had  ended  all  his  /.

8. 13.  have  no  root,  and  in  a  time  of  /.  fall  away
1  Cor.  10. 13.  no  t.  hath  taken  you  ;  will  with  t.

Gal.  4. 14.  and  my  /.  in  my  flesh  ye  despised  not
1  Tim.  6.9.  they  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  /.

Jam.  1. 12.  blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  t.

Lev.  3. 10. 1  will  keep  thee  also  from  the  hour  of  /.
TEMPTATIONS.

Dent.  4.  34.  take  a  nation  out  of  a  nation  by  t.

7. 19.  the  great  /.  thine  eyes  saw,  and  signs,  29. 3.
Luke  22. 28.  ye  have  continued  with  me  in  my  /.
Acts 20. 19.  serving  God  with  many  tears  and  /.
Jam.  1.2.  count  it  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers  /.

1  Pet.  1.  6.  ye  are  in  heaviness  thro’  manifold  /.
2Pet.2.9.  L.  knows  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of/.
TEMPTED.

Exod.  17.7 ■  and  because  they  t.  the  Lord,  saying
Num.  14.  22.  and  have  t.  me  now  these  ten  times
Deut.  6. 16.  not  tempt  God  as  ye  /.  him  in  Massah
Psal.  78. 18.  and  they  /.  God  in  their  heart,  41.

56.  yet  they  /.  and  provoked  the  most  high  God


Ps.  95.  9.  when  fathers  /.  me,  proved  me,  Heb.  3.  9.
106.  14.  but  lusted,  and  /.  God  in  the  desert
Mat.  4. 1.  to  be  /.  of  the  devil,  Mark  1.  13.  Luke  4.  2.
Luke  10.  25.  a  lawyer  /.  him,  saying.  Master
1  Cor .  10,  9.  as  some  of  them  t.  and  were  destroyed

13.  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  /.  above  that
Gal.  6.  1.  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  /.

1  Thess.  3. 5.  lest  by  some  means  the  tempter  /.  you
Heb.  2.  18.  he  himself  hath  suffered,  being  /.

4.  15.  but  was  in  all  points  /.  like  as  we  are,  yet

11.  37.  they  were  sawn  asunder,  were  t.  were  slain
Jam.  1.13.  let  no  man  say  when  he  is  /.  1  am  /.  ot
God.forGod  cannot  be/,  with  evil,  nortempteth

14.  but  every  man  is  /.  when  he  is  drawn  ol  lust

TEMPTER.

Alat. .4.  3.  when  the  /.  came  to  him,  he  said
1  Thess.  3.  5.  lest  by  some  means  the  /.  have  tempt.
TEMPTETH.

Jam.  1.  13.  cannot  be  tempted,  neither /.  any  man
TEMPTING.

Alat.  16.  1.  the  Pharisees  /.  Christ,  and  seeking  a
sign,  Alark  8.  11.  Luke  11.  16.

19.  3.  the  Pharisees  also  came  to  him,  /.  him
22.  35.  the  lawyer  asked  him  a  question,  t.  him

Mark  10.  2.  a  man  to  put  away  his  wife,  /.  him
John  8.  6.  this  they  said,  t.  him,  that  they  might

„  ten.

Gen.  16.  3.  Abraham  dwelt /.  years  in  Canaan
18.  32.  peradventure  /.  shall  be  found  there,  and
he  said,  1  will  not  destroy  it  for  /.  sake

24.  10.  the  servant  took  /.  camels  of  his  masters
22.  took  bracelets  for  her  hands  of  /.  shekels

32.  15.  Jacob  took  /.  bulls  and  /.  foals  for  Esau
42.  3.  Joseph’s  /.  brethren  went  to  buy  corn
45.  23.  Joseph  sent  /.  asses  and  /.  she-asses
Exod.  26.  1.  make  a  tabernacle  with  /.  curtains
27. 12.  their  pillars  /.  and  their  sockets  /.

34.  28.  wrote  /.  commandments,  Deut.  4. 13. 1  10. 4.
Lev.  26.  26.  t.  women  shall  bake  your  bread

27.  5.  and  for  the  female  t.  shekels,  7.

Num.  7.  14.  one  spoon  of  /.  shekels,  20.  26.

11.  32.  he  that  gathered  least  gathered  /.homers
£9.  23.  and  on  the  fourth  day  /.  bullocks

Josh.  17.  5.  there  fell  /.  portions  to  Manasseh

21.  5.  Kohath  had  by  lot  out  of  Ephraim,  Manas¬

seh,  and  Dan,  /,  cities,  1  Chron.  6.  61.

22.  14.  Israel  sent  with  Phinehas  /.  princes
Judg.  6.  27.  Gideon  took  /.  men  of  his  servants

12.  11.  Elon  a  Zebulonite  judged  Israel  /.  years

17.  10.  I  will  give  thee  /.  shekels  of  silver  *

20.  10.  we  will  take  t.  men  of  an  hundred
Ruth  1.  4.  they  dwelt  in  Moab  about  /.  years

4.  2.  Boaz  took  /.  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city

1  Sam.  1.  8.  am  not  I  better  to  thee  than  /.  son's  ?

17.  17-  take  these  /.  loaves,  and  run  to  the  camp

18.  carry  these  /.  cheeses  to  the  captain

25.  5.  David  sent  out/,  young  men  to  Nabal

2  Sam.  15. 16.  David  left  /.  concubines  to  keep  house

18.  11.  and  1  would  have  given  thee  /.  shekels

15.  /.  young  men  smote  Absalom,  and  slew  him

19.  43.  they  said,  we  have  /.  parts  in  the  king

20.  3.  the  king  took  his/,  concubines,  and  put  them

1  Kings  4.  23.  /.  fat  oxen  in  one  day  for  Solomon
7. 24.  /.  knots  in  a  cubit  cornpassing  the  sea  round

27.  and  he  made  /.  bases  of  brass,  37.

38.  he  made  /.  lavers  of  brass,  43.  2  Chron.  4.  6.
11.31.  take  thee  /.  pieces  ;  I  will  give  /.tribes,  35.

14.  3.  take  with  thee  /.  loaves  to  Ahijah

2  Kings 5.  5.  Naaman  took  t.  talents,  t.  changes

13.  7-  leave  but  fifty  horsemen  and  /.  chariots

15.  17.  Menahem  reigned  /.  years  in  Samaria
25.  25.  Ishmael  came,  and  t.  men  with  him,  and

smote  Gedaliah,  Jer.  41.  1,  2.

2  Chron.  4.  7-  he  made  t.  candlesticks  ||  8.  t.  tables
Ezra  8.  24.  and  /.  of  their  brethren  with  them
Neh.  11. 1.  bring  one  of  /.  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem
Lsth.  9.  10.  the  /.  sons  of  Hainan  slew  they,  12.

13.  and  let  Hainan’s  /.  sons  be  hanged,  14.

Psal.  33.  2.  instrument  of /.  strings.  92.  3.  1 144.  9.
Eccl.  7.  19.  more  than  /.  mighty  men  in  the  city
Isa.  5.  10.  t.  acres  of  vineyard  shall  yield  one  bath
Lzek.  45. 14.  an  homer  of  /.  baths,  t.  baths  an  homer
Dan.  7-  7-  the  fourth  beast  had  /.horns,  20,  24.
Amos  5.  3.  shall  leave  /.  to  the  house  of  Israel
6.  9.  if  /•  men  remain  in  one  house,  they  shall  die
llag.  2. 16.  since  those  days  when  one  came  to  an
heap  of  twenty  measures,  there  were  but  t.
Zech.  5.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  roll  is  /.  cubits
8.  23.  /.  men  shall  take  hold  of  him  that  is  a  Jew
Alat.  20.  24.  and  when  the  /.  heard  it,  Alark  10. 41.

25.  1.  the  kingdom  shall  be  likened  to  /.  virgins

28.  and  give  it  to  him  that  hath  /.  talents

Luke  15.  8.  what  woman  having  /.  pieces  of  silver
17.  12.  there  met  him  /.  men  that  were  lepers
17.  Jesus  said,  were  there  not  /.  cleansed  ?

19.  13.  and  delivered  them  /.  pounds,  and  said

16.  Lord,  thy  pound  hath  gained  /.  pounds
•  17.  well,  have  thou  authority  over/,  cities

24.  and  give  it  to  him  that  hath  /.  pounds

25.  they  said,  Lord,  he  hath  /.  pounds

Rev.  12.3.  a  dragon  having/,  horns,  13. 1.  1 17.  3.
17-7-  woman  and  beast  of  seven  heads  and  /.  horns
12.  and  the  /.  horns  thou  sawestare  the  /.  kings

16.  the  /.  horns  thou  sawest  shall  hate  the  whore
See  Cubits,  Days,  Degrees,  Thousand,

Thousands.

TEN  times.

Gen.  31. 7-  and  hath  changed  my  wages  /.  times,  41.
Num.  14.  22.  and  have  tempted  me  now  these  /.  tun.
Neh.  4. 12.  when  Jews  canie,  they  said  unto  us,  /.  /.
Job  19.  3.  these  /.  times  have  ye  reproached  me
Dan.  1.  20.  he  found  them  /.  times  better  than  all
TENS.

Exod.  18. 21.  place  such  over  them  to  be  rul.  of  /.  25.
Deut.  1. 15. 1  made  them  beads,  captains  over  /.
TENTH.

Gen.  28.  22.  1  will  surely  give  the  /.  to  thee
Lev.  27 •  32.  the  t.  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord
Num.  18.  21.  1  have  given  children  of  Levi  the  /.
Deut.  23.2.  a  bastard  not  enter  to  /.  generation,  3.

1  Sam.  8.  15.  king  will  take  the  /.  of  your  seed

17.  he  will  take  the  /.  of  your  sheep  and  vineyards


TEN


T  E  R


T  E  S


1  Chr.  1C.  13.  /.  captain  of  sons  of  Gad,  Jeremiah
24.  1J.  the/,  lot  came  forth  to  Shecaniah
25. 1”.  the  /.  lot  came  forth  to  Shimei

27. 13.  the  /.  captain  for  the  /.  month,  Meharai
Isa.  6.  13.  but  yet  in  it  shall  be  a  /.  and  return
Jer.  32.  1 .  in  the  /.  year  of  Zedekiah  king  of  J  udah
John  1.  39.  for  it  was  about  the  /.  hour

Rev.  21.  20.  the  /  foundation  a  chrysoprasus
See  Day,  Dual,  Month,  Part.
TEND.

Prov.  21.  5.  thoughts  of  diligent/,  to  plenteousness
TENDETH.

Prov.  10. 16.  the  labour  of  the  righteous  /.  to  life
11.  19.  as  righteousn.  /.  to  life,  so  lie  that  pursues
24.  there  is  that  withholdeth,  but  it  /.  to  poverty

14.  23.  the  talk  of  the  lips  /.  only  to  penury
19.  23.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  /.  to  life

TENDER

Signifies,  [1]  Weak  and  feeble ,  Gen.  33.  13.  [2]
Nice  and  delicate ,  Dent.  28.  56.  [3]  Young

and  carefully  educated,  Prov.  4.  3.  [4]  Pitiful,

or  of  a  compassionate  and  forgiving  temper.
Eph.  4.  32.

Gen.  1.  +  ll.  let  the  earth  bring  forth  //grass
18.  7-  Abraham  ran  and  fetched  a  calf  /.  and  good

33. 13.  m>'  Lord  knoweth  that  the  children  are  /.
41. 1 43.  they  cried  before  him,  /.  father

Vent.  28.  54.  so  the  man  that  is  /.  among  you
56.  the  /.  and  delicate  woman  among  you
32.  2.  shall  distil  as  the  small  rain  on  the  /.  herb
2  Sam.  3.  t  39.  I  am  this  day  /.  tho’  anointed  king
23.  4.  as  the  /.  grass  springing  out  of  the  earth
2  Kings  22. 19.  because  thy  heart  was  /.  2  Chr.  34. 27.

1  Chron.  22.  5.  Solomon  is  young  and  /.29.  1.

Job  1.4.  7.  that  the/,  branch  will  not  cease

38.  27.  to  cause  the  bud  of  the  /.  herb  to  spring
Psal.  23.  t  2.  to  lie  down  in  pastures  of  /.  grass
Prov.  4.  3.  /.  and  beloved  in  sight  of  my  mother
27  -  25.  hay  appears,  and  the  /.  grass  sheweth  itself
Cant.  2. 13.  the  vines  with  t.  grape  give  a  good  smell

15.  foxes  spoil  vines,  for  our  vines  have/,  grapes
7.  12.  let  us  see  whether  the  /.  grape  appear

Isa.  7 .  +  4.  fear  not,  neither  let  thy  heart  be  /.

47.  1.  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  /.  and  delicate
53.  2.  he  shall  grow  up  before  him  as  a  /.  plant
Ezek.  17.  22.  I  will  crop  off  a  /.  one  and  plant  it
Van.  1.9.  now  God  brought  Daniel  into  /.  love
4. 15.  leave  the  stump  in  earth,  in  the  /.  grass,  23.
Mat.  24.  32.  when  his  branch  is  /.  Mark  13.  28.
Luke  1.  78.  through  the  /.  mercy  of  our  God
Jam.  5.  11.  the  Lord  is  pitiful,  and  of  /.  mercy
TENDE  R -hearted.

2  Chr.  13.  7-  when  Rehoboam  was  young  and  t.-h.
Eph.  4.  32.  be  kind  and  t. -hearted  one  to  another

See  Mercies.

TENDERNESS.

Deut.  28.  56.  to  set  her  foot  on  the  ground  for  /.
TENONS.

Exod.  26.  17.  two  /.  in  one  board,  19. 1  36.  22,  24.
TENOR.

Gen.  43.  7.  according  to  the  /.  of  these  words
Exod.  34.  27.  after  /.  of  these  words  I  made  a  coven.
TENT


Signifies,  [1]  An  apartment,  or  lodging-place  made
of  eanvasi t  or  other  cloth  on  poles,  Gen.  4.  20.
Num.  1.  52.  [2]  The  covering  of  the  tabernacle
Exod.  26. 11.  [3]  The  church.  Cant.  1.  8.

Gen.  9.  21.  and  Noah  was  uncovered  in  his  /.

12.  8.  Abram  removed  and  pitched  his  /.  13.  3.

13.  12.  Lot  pitched  his /.  towards  Sodom

18.  Abram  removed  his  /.  and  dwelt  in  the  plain

18.  1.  lie  sat  in  /.  door||6.  he  hastened  into  the  /.

9.  where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  r  he  said,  in  the  /.

24.  67.  he  brought  her  into  his  mother  Sarah’s  /.
26.  17.  and  Isaac  pitchedjiis  /.  in  the  valley

25.  built  an  altar,  and  pitched  his  /.  at  Beer-sheba
31. 25.  Jacob  had  pitched  his  t.  in  the  mount
33. Laban  went  into  Jacob’s  /.  Leah’s  /.  Rachel’s  /.
33.  18.  Jacob  pitched  his  /.  before  Shalem,  19.

35.  21.  Israel  spread  his/,  beyond  the.tower
Exod.  18.  7-  Moses  and  Jethro  came  into  the  /.

26.  11.  couple  the  /.  together  that  it  may  be  one
33.  8.  stood  every  man  at  his  /.  door,  and  looked

10.  they  worshipped  every  man  in  his  /.  door

35.  11.  make  the  tabernacle  his  /.  and  covering

36.  18.  he  made  taches  to  couple  the  /.  together
19-  he  made  a  covering  for  the  /.  of  rams’  skins

39.  3.3.  and  they  brought  the  /.  to  Moses
40. 19.  he  spread  abroad  the  /.  over  the  tabernacle,
and  put  the  covering  of  the  /.  above  upon  it
Lev.  14.  8.  leper  shall  tarry  out  of  his  /.  seven  days
Num.  3.  25.  the  charge  of  Gershon  shall  be  the  /.
9. 15.  the  cloud  covered  the  /.  of  the  testimony

11.  10.  heard  the  people  weep  every  man  in  his  /.
19. 14. the  law  when  a  man  dieth  in  a  /.all  that  come
into  the  /.  and  is  in  the  /.  shall  be  unclean
18.  and  a  clean  person  shall  sprinkle  the  /.

25.  8.  he  went  after  the  man  of  Israel  into  the  /.
Josh.  7.  21.  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  /.

22.  they  ran  into  the  /.  and  it  was  hid  in  his  /.

23.  they  took  them  out  of  the  midst  of  the  /.

24.  all  Israel  burnt  his  /.  and  all  that  he  had
Judg.  4.  17.  Sisera  fled  on  his  feet  to  the  /.  of  Jael

20.  he  said  toiler,  stand  in  the  door  of  the  /.

21.  Jael  took  a  nail  of  the  /.  and  an  hammer
5.  £4.  blessed  shall  she  be  above  women  in  the  /.

7.  8.  he  sent  the  rest  of  Israel  every  man  to  his  /.
7.  13.  a  cake  of  barley-bread  came  unto  a  /.

19.  t  9.  that  to-morrow  thou  mayest  go  to  thy  /.

20.  8.  saying,  we  will  not  any  of  us  go  to  his  /.

1  Sam.  4.  lu  and  they  fled  every  man  into  his  /.


2  Sam.  18.  17.  I  19.  8.
13. 2.  rest  cf  the  people  he  sent  every  man  to  his  /.
17-  54.  David  put  Goliath’s  armour  into  his  /.

2  Sam.  7.  6.  but  1  have  walked  in  a  /.  1  Chr.  17.  5.
16.  22.  they  spread  Absalom  a  /.  on  the  top  of  house
30.  22.  and  they  retired  every  man  to  his  /.

2  Kings  7.  8.  these  lepers  went  into  one  /.  another  /.
1  Chron.  15.1.  David  pitched  a  /.  for  the  ark  of  God
16.  1 .  they  set  it  in  the  midst  of  the  /.  2  Chron.  1.4.
%  Chron.  25.  22.  and  they  fled  every  man  to  his  /.
Job  21.  f  28.  wiier$  is  the  /.  of  the  tabernacle  of


Psal.  78.  60.  me  /.  which  he  placed  among  men
Isa.  13.  20.  nor  shall  the  Arabian  pitch  /.  there
38.  12.  mine  age  is  removed  as  a  shepherd's  /.

40.  22.  spreadeth  them  out  as  a  /.  to  dwell  in
54.  2.  enlarge  the  place  of  thy  /.  let  them  stretch
Jer.  10.  20.  there  is  none  to  stretch  forth  my  /.

37.  10.  they  should  rise  up  every  man  in  his  /.
TENT-wnz/terj.

Acts  18. 3.  by  their  occupation  they  were  t. -makers
TENTS.

Gen.  4. 20.  Adah  was  the  father  of  such  as  dwell  in  /
9.  27.  Japheth  shall  dwell  in  the  /.  of  Shem
13.  5.  Lot  also  had  flocks,  and  herds,  and  /.

25.  27.  Jacob  was  a  plain  man,  dwelling  in  /.
31.33.  Laban  went  into  the  maid-servants’  /.
Exod.  16.  16.  gather  ye  for  them  that  are  in  /.
Num.  1.  52.  children  of  Israel  shall  pitch  their/.

9.  17.  where  the  cloud  abode,  they  pitched  /.

18.  cloud  abode,  they  rested  in  their  /.  20,  22,  23.

13.  19.  whether  they  dwell  in  /.  or  strong  holds
16.  26.  depart  from  the  /.  of  these  wicked  men

27.  came  out,  and  stood  in  the  door  of  their  /.

24. 2.  and  Balaam  saw  Israel  abiding  in  his  /.

5.  how  goodly  are  thy  /.  O  Jacob,  and  thy  tabern.
Deut.  1.  27.  and  ye  murmured  in  your  /.  and  said
33.  to  search  you  out  a  place  to  pitch  your  /.  in
5.  30.  go  say  to  them,  get  ye  into  your'/,  again
11.  6.  the  earth  swallowed  them  up  and  their  /.
16.  7-  and  thou  shalt  turn  and  go  unto  thy  /.

33.  18.  he  said,  rejoice  Issachar,  in  thy  /.

Josh.  22.  4.  return  ye,  and  get  you  into  your  /.  6.

8.  return  with  much  riches  unto  your  /.

Judg.  6.  5.  the  Midianites  came  with  their  /.

8.  11.  went  by  the  way  of  them  that  dwelt  in  /.

1  Sam.  17.  53.  they  spoiled  the  Philistines’  /.

2  Sam.  11.  11.  ark,  Israel  and  Judah  abide  in  /.

20. 1.  every  man  to  his/.  1  Kin.  12. 16. 2  C/ir.  10. 16.

1  Kings  8.  66.  Israel  went  to  their  /.  2  Chron.  7.  10.
20.  +  12.  was  drinking,  he  and  the  kings,  in  /.

2  Kings  7.  7.  and  the  Syrians  left  their  /.  10.

16.  Israel  spoiled  the  /.  of  the  Syrians

8.  21.  and  the  people  fled  into  their  /.  14.  12.

13.  5.  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  in  their  /.

1  Chron.  4.  41.  they  came  and  smote  the  /.  of  Ham

5.  10.  and  they  dwelt  in  the  Hagarites’  /.

2  Chron.  14.  15.  they  smote  also  the  /.  of  cattle
31.  2.  to  praise  in  the  gates  of  the  /.  of  the  Lord

Ezra  8. 15.  at  Ahava  we  abode  in  /.  three  days
Psal.  69.  25.  and  let  none  dwell  in  their  /.

78.  55.  made  tribes  of  Israel  to  dwell  in  their  /.

84.  10.  than  to  dwell  in  the  /.  of  wickedness
106.  25.  murmured  in  their  /.  and  hearkened  not
120.  5.  woe  is  me,  that  I  dwell  in  the  /.  of  Kedar
C«»/.  1.5.  Iam  black,  but  comely,  as  the/,  of  Kedar
8.  and  feed  thy  kids  beside  the  shepherds’  /.

Jer.  4.  20.  suddenly  are  my  /.  spoiled,  and  curtains

6.  3.  they  shall  pitch  their  /.  against  her  round  about
30. 18.  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Jacob’s  /.
35.  7-  but  all  your  days  ye  shall  dwell  in  /.

10.  but  we  have  dwelt  in  /.  and  have  obeyed
49.  29.  their  /.  and  flocks  shall  they  take  away

Ilab.  3.  7.  1  saw  the  /.  of  Cushan  in  affliction
Zech.  12.  7.  the  Lord  shall  save  the  /.  of  J  udah  first

14.  15.  so  shall  be  the  plague  of  all  in  these  /.

TERMED.

Isa.  62.  4.  thou  shalt  no  more  be  /.  forsaken,  nei¬
ther  shall  thy  land  any  more  be  /.  desolate
TERRESTRIAL.

1  Cor.  15.  40.  there  are  bodies  /.  the  glor\r  of  the  /.
TERRIBLE.

Exod.  34. 10.  for  it  is  a  /.  thing  that  I  will  do
Deut.  1.  19-  went  thro’  that  /.  wilderness,  8.  15.

7-  21.  the  Lord  thy  God  is  a  mighty  God  and  /.

10.  17.  Neh.  1.  5.  |  4.  14.  |  9.  32.
10.  21.  hath  done  for  thee  /.  things,  2  Sam.  7.  23.
Judg.  13.  6.  was  like  an  angel  of  God,  very  /.

Job  37.  22.  with  God  is  /.  majesty
39.  20.  the  glory  of  his  nostrils  is  /.

41.  14.  his  teeth  are  /.  round  about
Psal.  45.  4.  thy  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  /.  things
47.  2.  for  the  Lord  Most  High  is  /.  he  is  king  over

65.  5.  by  /.  things  in  righteousness  wilt  answer  us

66.  3.  say  unto  God,  how  /.  art  thou  in  thy  works !
5.  /.  in  his  doing  towards  the  children  of  men

68.  35.  thou  art  /.  out  of  thy  holy  places
76.  12.  he  is  /.  to  the  kings  of  the  earth
86.  t  14.  assemblies  of  /.  men  sought  my  soul
99.  3.  let  them  praise  thy  great  and  /.  name
106.  22.  who  had  done  /.  things  by  the  Red  sea
145.  6.  men  shall  speak  of  the  might  of  thy  /.  acts
Cant.  6.  4.  thou  art  /.  as  an  army  with  banners
Isa.  13.  11.  1  will  lay  low  the  haughtiness  of  the  /.
18.  2.  go  to  a  people  /.  ||  7-  from  a  people  /.

21.  1.  it  cometh  from  the  desert,  from  a/,  land
25.  3.  the  city  of  the  /.  nations  shall  fear  thee

4.  when  the  blast  of  the  /,  ones  is  as  a  storm

5.  the  branch  of  the  /.  ones  shall  be  brought  low
29.  5.  the  multitude  of  the  I.  ones  shall  be  as  chaff

20.  for  the  /.  one  is  brought  to  nought
49.  25.  and  the  prey  of  the  /.  shall  oe  delivered
64.  3.  when  thou  didst  /.  things,  which  we
Jer.  15.  21.  redeem  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  the  /.

20.  11.  the  Lord  is  with  me  as  a  mighty  /.  of  one
Lam.  5.  10.  skin  was  black,  because  of  /.  famine
Esek.  1.  22.  was  as  the  colour  of  the  /.  crystal

28.  7-  behold  therefore  1  will  bring  the  /.  of  the
nations  upon  thee,  30.  11. 1  31.  12.
32. 12. 1  will  cause  to  fall  the  /.  of  the  nations
Dan.  2.  31.  the  form  of  the  image  was  /.

7-  7. 1  saw  a  fourth  beast  dreadful  and  /.  and  strong
Joel  2. 11.  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  great  and  very  /.

•  31.  before  the  great  and  /.  day  of  the  Lord  come
Hab.  1.  7.  the  Chaldeans  are  /.  and  dreadful
Zeph.  2.  11.  the  Lord  will  be  /.  unto  Moab
Heb.  12.  21.  so  /.  was  the  sight  that  Moses  said
TERRIBLENESS.

Deut.  26.  8.  the  Lord  brought  us  out  with  great  /.

1  Chr.  17.  21.  to  make  thee  a  name  of  greatness  and  /.
Jer.  49.  16.  thy  /.  hath  deceived  thee  and  the  pride
TERRIBLY.

Isa.  2.  19.  he  ariseth  to  shake  /.  the  earth.  21.

Nah.  2.  3.  and  the  fir-trees  shall  be  /.  shaken


TERRIFY.

Job  3.  5.  let  the  blackness  of  the  day  /.  it
9-  34.  let  him  take  his  rod,  and  Jet  not  his  fear  t.

31.  34.  or  did  the  contempt  of  families  /.  me  ?
Psal.  10.  t  18.  man  of  the  earth  may  no  more  /.

2  Cor.  10.  9.  seem  as  if  I  would  /.  you  by  letters
TERRIFIED.

Gen.  45.  t  3.  for  they  were  /.  at  his  presence
Deut.  20.  3.  fear  not  nor  be  /.  because  of  them

1  Sam.  16.  t  14.  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Ixird  /.  him
Luke  21.  9.  when  ye  shall  hear-of  wars,  be  not  /.

24.  37.  but  they  were  /.  and  affrighted
Phil.  1.  28.  and  in  nothing  /.  by  your  adversaries
TERRIFIES!.

Job  7. 14.  then  thou  /.  me  through  visions
TERRACES.

2  Chron.  9. 11.  made  of  algum-trees  /.  to  the  house

TERROR

Signifies,  [1]  Great  fear  or  dread,  Gen.  35.  5.  [2]
Dreadful  and  unexpected  judgments,  Psal.  73. 19.
[3J  An  example  striking  terror  into  others,  Ezek.
27,.  36.  [4]  Those  threatenings,  whereby  the

wicked  endeavour  to  affect  good  men  with  fear,  1
Pet.  3.  14.  [5]  The  great  and  terrible  day  of  judg
ment,  2  Cor.  5.  11.

Gen.  35.  5.  and  the  /.  of  God  was  upon  the  cities
Lev.  26.  16.  I  will  even  appoint  over  you  /.

Deut.  32.  25.  the  sword  without  and  /.  within
34.  12.  in  all  the  great  /.  which  Moses  shewed
Josh.  2.  9.  and  that  your  /.  is  fallen  upon  us
Job  31.  23.  destruction  from  God  was  a  /.  to  me
33.  7.  behold,  my  /.  shall  not  make  thee  afraid
Psal.  91.  5.  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  /.  by  night
Isa.  10.  33.  the  Lord  will  lop  the  bough  with  /.

19.  17.  the  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a  /.  to  Egypt
33.  18.  thine  heart  shall  meditate  /.  where  is
54.  14.  thou  shalt  be  far  from  /.  it  shall  not

Jer.  17. 17.  be  not  a  /.  to  me  ||  20.  4.  a  /.  to  thvself

32.  21.  and  hast  brought  forth  Israel  with  great  /.
Ezek.  26.  17.  cause  /.  to  be  on  all  that  haunt  it

21.  1  will  make  thee  a/.  27.  36.  i  28.  19.

32.  23.  which  caused  /.  in  the  land,  24,  25,  26,  27.
30.  with  their/,  they  are  ashamed  of  their  might
32.  1  have  caused  my  /.  in  the  land  of  the  living
Rom.  13.  3.  for  rulers  are  not  a  /.  to  good  works
2  Cor.  5. 11.  knowing  therefore  the  /.  of  the  Lord
1  Pet.  3.  14.  be  not  afraid  of  their  /.  nor  troubled
TERRORS.

Deut.  4.  34.  assayed  to  take  a  nation  by  great  t.

Job  6.  4.  the  /.  of  God  do  set  themselves  in  array
18. 11.  /.  shall  make  him  afraid  on  every  side
14.  and  it  shall  bring  him  to  the  king  of  /.

20.  25.  the  sword  cometh,  /.  are  upon  him

24.  17.  they  are  in  the  /.  of  the  shadow  of  death
27.20.  /.  take  hold  on  him  as  waters,  a  tempest
30.  15.  /.  are  turned  upon  me,  they  pursue  me
39.  t  20.  the  glory  of  his  nostrils  are  /.

Psal.  55.  4.  the  /.  of  death  are  fallen  upon  me
73.  19.  they  are  utterly  consumed  with  /.

88.  15.  while  I  suffer  thy  /.  I  am  distracted
16.  wrath  goeth  over  me,  thy  /.  have  cut  me  off
Jer.  15.  8.  1  caused  /.  to  fall  upon  the  city
Lam.  2.  22.  thou  hast  called  my  /.  round  about
5.  +  10.  our  skin  black  as  an  oven,  because  of  /.
Ezek.  21. 12.  /.  by  reason  of  the  sword  shall  be  on
TESTAMENT


Signifies,  [I]  An  act  of  the  last  will  of  a  person  who
hath  death  in  his  view,  and  disposes  of  his  estate,
and  gives  orders  as  to  what  he  would  have  done  after
his  decease,  Heb.  9.  17-  [II]  The  covenant  which
God  was  graciously  pleased  to  make  known  after
the  fall  of  Adam,  which  contains  the  method  in
which  sinners  may  be  saved ;  namely,  by  the  blood
of  Christ  only.  This  covenant  is  called  old,  Heb.
8.  13.  not  because  it  differed  in  substance  from
the  new  ;  for  it  did  not  bind  such  as  were  under
it  to  obtain  justification  by  works :  for  its  being
delivered  with  blood,  Exod.  24.  8.  taught  them  that
justification  was  to  be  had  only  by  faith  in  Christ's
blood, ;  but  it  is  called  old  in  regard  of  the  manner
of  its  dispensation,  because  it  was  administered  to
the  Jews  in  many  figures,  shadows,  rites,  and
sacrifices,  with  other  obscure  and  dark  revelations
and  prophecies :  and  also  in  regard  it  was  to  be
abrogated,  and  the  New  Testament  or  Covenant
to  come  in  its  stead,  which  is  so  called,  [1]  Be¬
cause  it  is  ratified  by  the  blood  and  actual  suffer¬
ings  of  Christ,  which  were  typified  by  the  sacri¬
fices  and  sprinkling  of  blood,  under  the  old  dispen¬
sation.  [2]  It  contains  a  more  full  and  clear
revelation  of  the  mysteries  of  religion,  and  is
attended  with  a  larger  measure  of  the  gifts  and
graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  Joel  2.  28.  2  Tim.  1.
10.  [3]  It  is  propounded  and  extended  to  all,  and
not  confined  to  one  nation  only,  as  it  was  to  the
Jews  under  the  legal  dispensation.  Mat.  28.  19.
[4]  It  is  never  to  wax  old  or  be  abolished.  [Ill]
The  books  or  inspired  writings  of  Moses  and  the
prophets,  which  contain  the  substance  of  God's
covenant  with  the  Jews  under  the  legal  dispensa¬
tion,  2  Cor.  3.  14.

Mat.  26.  28.  this  is  my  blood  in  new  /.  Mark  14.  24.

Luke  22.  20.  this  cup  is  the  new  /.  1  Cor.  11.  25.

2  Cor.  3.  6.  who  made  us  able  ministers  of  the  new  /.
14.  remains  the  same  vail,  in  reading  the  old  /.

Gal.  3.  f  15.  tho’  it  be  but  a  man’s  /.  yet  if  confirmed

Heb.  7.  22.  was  Jesus  made  a  surety  of  a  better  /.

9.  15.  he  is  the  mediator  of  the  new  /.  for  the  re¬
demption  of  the  transgressions  under  the  first  /.

16.  where  a  /.  is  there  must  also  he  the  death

17.  for  a  /.  is  of  force  after  men  are  dead
20.  this  is  the  blood  of  the  /.  God  enjoined

12.  t  24.  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  t.

13. 1 20.  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  /.

Rev.  11. 19.  seen  in  his  temple,  the  ark  of  his  /.

TESTATOR.

Heb.  9.  16.  must  of  necessity  be  the  death  of  the  /.
17.  it  is  of  no  strength  at  all  while  the  /.  liveth
TESTIFY


Signifies,  [1]  To  bear  witness,  Acts  20.  24. 1  26.  5
[2]  To  avouch,  or  affirm,  John  3.  11.  [3]  To

publish  and  declare  freely  and  boldly.  Acts  20.

495


T  ES


T  H  a


TH  A


21.  [1]  To  declare,  a  charge,  or  indictment  against
one,  Psal.  50.  7-  [5]  To  protest,  or  speak  against,
Is' eh.  13.  15.

Num.  35.  30.  one  witness  not  t.  against  any  person
Deut.  8.  19.  I  t.  against  you  that  ye  shall  perish

19.  16.  if  a  false  witness  t.  against  any  man
31.21.  this  song  shall  t.  against  them  as  witness

32.  46.  set  your  hearts  to  the  words  which  1  t.

Neh.  9.  34.  wherewith  thou  didst?,  against  them
Job  15.6.  yea,  thine  own  lips  t.  against  thee
Psal.  50.  7-  O  Israel,  1  will  ?.  against  thee,  81.  8.
Isa.  59. 12.  before  thee,  and  our  sins  t.  against  us
Jer.  14.  7.  though  our  iniquities?,  against  us
Ilos.  5.  5.  the  pride  of  Israel  doth  ?.  to  his  face
Amos  3.  13.  hear  ye,  and  ?.  in  the  house  of  Jacob
Mic.  6.3.  O  people,  what  have  1  done*  ?.  against  me
Luke  16.  28.  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  ?.  to  them
John  2.  25.  needed  not  that  any  should  ?.  of  man

3.  11.  and  ?  that  we  have  seen  ||  5.  39.  they  ?.  ot  me
7.  7-  because  I  ?.  of  it  ||  15.  26.  he  shall  ?.  of  me
Acts  2.  40.  with  many  other  words  did  he  t.

10.  42.  to  ?.  that  it  is  he  who  was  ordained  of  God

20.  24.  to  ?.  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God

26. 5.  my  manner  of  life  know  they,  if  they  would  t.
Gal.  5.  3.  1  ?.  to  every  man  that  is  circumcised
Eph.  4. 17.  this  1  say,  and  ?.  in  the  Lord,  that  ye

1  John  4.  14.  and  we  have  seen  and  do  ?.  that
Rev.  22.  16.  1  Jesus  have  sent  my  angel  to  t.

18.  1  ?.  to  every  man  that  heareth  the  words
TESTIFIED.

Exod.  21.  29.  and  it  hath  been  ?.  to  his  owner
Deut.  19.  18.  hath  ?.  falsely  against  his  brother
Ruth  1.21.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  ?.  against  me

2  Sam.  1.  16.  thy  mouth  hath  ?.  against  thee
2  Kings  17.  13.  yet  the  Lord?,  against  Israel

15.  his  testimonies  which  he  ?.  against  them

2  Ohr.  24.  19.  prophets  ?.  against  them,  Neh.  9.  26.
Neh.  13.  15.  I  ?.  against  them  when  they  sold,  21.
Jer.  42.  +  19.  know  certainly  I  have  ?.  against  you
John  4.  39.  for  the  saying  which  the  woman  ?.

44.  Jesus  himself  ?.  that  a  prophet,  13.  21.

Acts  8.  25.  when  they  had  ?.  and  preached  the  word
18.  5.  Paul  ?.  to  the  Jews,  that  Jesus  was  Christ
23.  1 1 .  for  as  thou  hast  ?.  of  me  at  Jerusalem
28.  23.  to  whom  he  ?.  the  kingdom  of  God
1  Cor.  15.  15.  are  false,  because  we  have  ?.  of  God
1  Thess.  4.  6.  as  we  have  forewarned  you  and  t.

1  Tim.  2.  6.  who  gave  himself,  to  be  ?.  in  due  time
Ileh.  2.  6.  but  one  in  a  certain  place  ?.  saying
1  Pel.  1.  11.  when  it  ?.  beforehand  the  sufferings
1  John  5.  9.  the  witness  which  God  hath  ?.  of  his  Son

3  John  3.  and  ?.  of  the  truth  that  is  in  thee

TEST1FIEDST.

Neh.  9.  29.  and  ?.  against  them  by  thy  Spirit,  30.
TEST  1  FIFTH.

Ilos.  7. 10.  the  pride  of  Israel  ?.  to  his  face
John  3.  32.  what  he  hath  seen  and  heard  that  he  ?.

21.  24.  the  disciple  which  ?.  of  these  things
Ileb.  7-  17.  for  he  ?.  thou  art  a  priest  for  ever
Rev.  22.  20.  he  which  ?.  these  tilings,  saith

TESTIFYING.

Acts  20.  21.  ?.  both  to  the  Jews  and  to  the  Greeks
Ileb.  11.4.  obtained  witness,  God  ?.  of  his  gifts

1  Pet.  5. 12.  ?.  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of  God

TESTIMONY

Signifies,  [1]  A  witnessing  evidence,  or  proof.  Acts
14.  3.  [2]  The  whole  scripture,  or  word  of  God,
which  declares  what  is  to  be  believed,  practised,  and
expected  by  us,  Psal.  19.  7-  [3]  The  two  tables  of
stone,  whereon  the  law  or  ten  commandments  were
written,  which  were  witnesses  of  that  covenant  made
between  God  and  his  people,  Exod.  25. 16,  21.  1  31.
Id.  [4]  'The  book  of  the  law  which  testifies  of
God's  will  and  man' s  duty ,  2  Kings  11.  12.  [5]

T  gospel,  which  testifies  of  Christ,  and  declares
the  will  of  God  concerning  the  way  of  saving
sinners,  1  Cor.  1.  6.12.  1.  2  Tim.  1.  8.  [6]
The  ark,  m  which  the  law  was  deposited,
Exod.  16.  34.

Exod.  16.  34.  laid  the  pot  of  manna  before  the  ?.

25.  16.  thou  shaltput  into  the  ark  the  ?.  21.

27.  21.  without  the  vail  which  is  before  the  t.

30.  6.  mercy-seat  that  is  over  the?.  Lev.  16.  13.

36.  beat  it  small,  and  put  it  before  the  ?.

31.  18.  and  he  gave  unto  Moses  two  tables  of  ?.

32.  15.  the  two  tables  of  ?.  were  in  his  hand,  34. 29.
38.  21.  this  is  the  sum  of  the  tabernacle  of  ?.

Num.  1.  50.  the  I.evites  over  the  tabernacle  of  ?.

53.  Levites  shall  pitch  about  the  tabernacle  of  ?.

9.  15.  the  cloud  covered  the  tent  of  the?.

10.  1 1.  the  cloud  was  taken  off  the  tabernacle  of  t.
17.  4.  thou  shalt  lay  up  the  rods  before  the  ?.

10.  bring  Aaron’s  rod  again  before  the  ?.

Ruth  4.  7.  gave  his  shoe,  and  this  was  a  ?.  in  Israel

2  Kings  11.  12.  gave  the  king  the  ?.  2  Chr.  23.  11.
Psal.  78.  5.  for  he  established  a  ?.  in  Jacob

81.  5.  thus  he  ordained  in  Joseph  for  a  ?.

1 19.  88.  so  shall  1  keep  the  ?.  of  thy  mouth
122.  4.  the  tribes  go  up  to  the  ?.  of  israel
132.  12.  if  thy  children  will  keep  my  ?.

Isa.  8.  16.  bind  up  the  ?.  ||  20.  to  the  law  and  to  the  ?.
Mat.  8.  4.  offer  the  gift  Moses  commanded  for  a  ?.

Mark  1.  44.  Luke  5.  14.

10.  18:  for  a  ?.  against  them,  Mark  13.  9.

Mark  6.  11.  shake  off  the  dust  for  a  ?.  Luke  9.  5.
Luke  21.  13.  and  it  shall  turn  to  you  for  a  ?.

John  3.  32.  and  no  man  received)  his  ?.

33.  he  that  received  his  ?.  hath  set  to  his  seal
8.  17.  it  is  written,  the  ?.  of  two  men  is  true
21.24.  and  we  know  that  his  ?.  is  true

Acts  1.3.  22.  to  whom  also  he  gave  ?.and  said
14.  3.  who  gave  ?.  to  the  word  of  his  grace

22.  18.  for  they  will  not  receive  thy  ?.  of  me

1  Cor.  1.  6.  as  the  ?.  of  Christ  was  confirmed  in  you
2.  1.  1  came,  declaring  unto  you  the  ?.  of  God

2  Cor.  1.  12.  the  ?.  of  our  conscience,  in  simplicity
2 Thess.  1.10.  because  our  ?.  among  you  was  believed
1  Jim.  2.  t  6.  gave  himself  to  be  a?,  in  due  time;

2V  im.  L  8.  be  not  ashamed  of  the  ?.  of  our  Lord
Ileb.  3.  5.  for  a  ?.  of  those  things  which  were

11.  5.  Enoch  had  this  ?.  that  he  pleased  God
Rev.  1.  2.  who  bare  record  of  the  t.  of  Jesus  Christ

496


Rev.  1.9.  I  was  in  the  isle  of  Patmos  for  ?.  of  Jesus
6.  9.  the  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  the  ?.

11.7-  when  they  shall  have  finished  their  ?

12.  11.  they  overcame  by  the  word  of  their  ?.

17.  make  war  with  them  which  have  ?.  of  Jesus
15.  5.  tabernacle  of  the  ?.  in  heaven  was  opened

19.  10.  of  thy  brethren  that  have  the  ?.  of  Jesus
for  the  t.  of  Jesus  is  the  Spirit  of  prophecy
See  Ark.

TESTIMONIES.

Deut.  4.  45.  these  are  the  ?.  which  Moses  spake
6. 17.  you  shall  diligently  keep  the  /.  of  your  God

20.  what  mean  the  ?.  which  God  commanded  you

1  Kings  2.  3.  to  keep  his  statutes  and  his  ?.  2  Kings

23.  3.  1  Citron.  29-  19.  2  Chron.  34.  31.

2  Kings  17.  15.  rejected  his  ?.  and  followed  vanity
Neh.  9.  34.  nor  have  our  kings  hearkened  to  thy  ?.
Psal.  25. 10.  to  such  as  keep  his  covenant  and  his  ?.

78.  56.  and  kept  not  his  t.  11  93.  5.  thy  t.  are  sure

99.7-  they  kept  his  ?.  and  the  ordinance  he  gave

1 19. 2.  blessed  are  they  that  keep  his  ?.  and  seek  him

14.  I  have  rejoiced  in  the  way  of  thy  t.  as  much

22.  for  1  have  kept  thy  t.  167,  168.

24.  thy  ?.  are  my  delight  ||  31.  1  stuck  to  thy  ?.
36.  incline  my  heart  to  thy  ?.  not  to  covetousness
46.  1  will  speak  of  thy  ?.  also  before  kings
59.  and  1  turned  my  feet  to  thy  ?.

79.  let  those  that  have  known  thy  ?.  turn  to  me
95.  the  wicked  waited,  but  I  will  consider  thy  t.
99.  I  have  underst.  for  thy  ?.  are  my  meditation
111.  thy  ?.  have  I  taken  as  an  heritage  for  ever
119.  1  love  thy  ?.  ||  125.  that  1  may  know  thy  t.
129.  thy  ?.  are  wonderful,  therefore  doth  mysoul
138.  thy  ?.  are  righteous  and  very  faithful
144.  the  righteousness  of  thy  ?.  is  everlasting
146.  I  cried,  save  me,  and  l  shall  keep  thy  ?.
152.  concerning  thy  ?.  1  have  known  of  old
157.  yet  do  1  not  decline  from  thy  ?.

Jer.  44.  23.  because  ye  have  not  walked  in  his  t.

T  El  L-tree.

Isa.  6. 13.  as  a  t.-tree  and  as  an  oak  whose  substance
THANK.

Luke  6. 32.  that  love  you,  what  ?.  have  you  ?  33, 34.
THANK.

1  Chron.  16.4.  he  appointed  Levites  to  ?.  the  Lord
7-  David  delivered  this  psalm  to  ?.  the  Lord

23.  30.  to  stand  every  morning  to  ?.  the  Lord
29.  13.  we  ?.  thee  and  praise  thy  glorious  name
Dan.  2.  23.  1  ?.  thee  and  praise  thee,  O  God
Mat.  11.  25.  at  that  time,  Jesus  said,  I  ?.  thee,  O
Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  Luke  10.  21.
Luke  17.  9.  doth  he  t.  that  servant?  I  trow  not

18.  11.  God,  I  ?.  thee,  that  I  am  not  as  other  men
John  11.  41.  Father,  I  ?.  thee,  that  thou  heardest  me
Rom.  1 . 8. 1  ?.  my  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  7.  25.

1  Cor.  1.  4.  1 1.  my  God  always  on  your  behalf

14.  I  ?.  God  that  I  baptized  none  of  you,  but
14.  18.  I  ?.  my  God  1  speak  with  tongues  more
Phil.  1.  3.  1  ?.  God  on  every  remembrance  of  you

1  Thess.  2. 13.  for  this  cause  also  ?.  we  God

2  Thess.  1.  3.  we  are  bound  to  ?.  God  always  for  you

1  Tim.  1. 12. 1  ?.  Jesus  Christ  who  hath  enabled  me

2  Tim.  1. 3. 1  ?.  God,  whom  1  serve  with  pure  consc.
Philem.  4.  1  ?.  my  God,  making  mention  of  thee

See  Offer  INC.

THANKED.

2  Sam.  14.  22.  .Toab  bowed  himself  and  ?.  the  king

1  Kings 8.  +  66.  and  the  people  ?.  the  king,  and  went
Acts  28.  15.  Paul  t.  God  and  took  courage

Rom.  6. 17.  but  God  be  ?.  that  ye  were  the  servants
THANKFUL.

Psal.  100. 4.  be  ?.  to  him,  bless  his  name.  Col.  3. 15.
Rom.  1.21.  they  glorified  him  not,  neither  were  ?.
THANKFULNESS.

Acts  24. 3.  we  accept  it,  most  noble  Felix,  with  all  ?.
THANKING.

2  Chron.  5. 13.  the  singers  were  as  one  in  ?.  the  Lord

TH  A  N  Iv -worthy.

1  Pet.  2. 19.  for  this  is  t.-w.  if  a  man  endure  grief
THANKS.

Neh.  12.  31.  T  appointed  companies  that  gave  ?.

40.  so  stood  the  two  companies  that  gave  ?.

Dan.  6.  10.  he  prayed  and  gave  ?.  before  his  God
Mat. 26. 27.  he  took  the  cup  and  gave  t.  Luke  22. 17.
Marks.  6.  he  took  the  seven  loaves  and  gave  t.

14.  23.  when  he  had  given  ?.  he  gave  it  to  them
Luke  2.  38.  Anna  gave  t.  to  the  Lord,  and  spake

22. 19.  he  took  bread,  and  gave  ?.  and  brake  it
John  6. 11.  when  he  had  given  ?.  he  distributed
23.  they  did  eat  bread,  after  the  L.  had  given  ?.
Acts  27.35.  Paul  took  bread,  and  gave  ?.  to  God
Rom.  14. 6.  he  that  eateth,  eateth  to  the  Lord,  for  he
giveth  God  ?.  he  eateth  not,  and  giveth  God  ?.

1  Cor.  11.24.  when  he  had  given  ?.  lie  brake  it

14. 17.  for  thou  verily  givest  ?.  well,  but  the  other

15.  57.  ?.  be  to  God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory

2  Cor.  1. 11.  ?.  may  be  given  to  many  on  our  behalf
2. 14.  ?.  be  to  God  who  causeth  us  to  triumph

8.  16.  t.  to  God,  who  put  the  same  care  in  Titus

9.  15.  ?.  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  gift
Eph.  5.  20.  giving  ?.  always  for  all  things  to  God
1  Thess.  3.  9.  what  ?.  can  we  render  to  God  again
Heb.  13. 15.  offer  sacrifices  of  praise,  giving  t.

Rev.  4.  9.  give  ?.  to  him  that  sat  on  the  throne

See  Give,  Giving.
THANKSGIVING

Signifies,  [1 1  An  acknowledging  and  confessing,
with  gladness,  the  benefits  and  mercies,  which
God  bestows  either  upon  ourselves  or  others,  Phil.

4.  6.  1  Tim.  2.  1.  [2]  The  sacrifice  of  thanksgiv¬
ing,  Lev.  7.  12,  15.  [3]  Psalms  of  thanksgiving,
Neh.  12. +  8.  We  are  to  give  thanks  to  God,  [1]
For  spiritual  blessings,  such  as  willing  hearts  to
do  works  of  piety  and  charity,  1  Chron.  29.  13,  14.
[2]  For  moral  blessings,  as  wisdom  and  knowledge,
Dan.  2.  23.  [3]  For  saving  graces,  Horn.  1.  8.

1  Cor.  1.  4.  [4]  For  the  judgments  of  God  upon
the  wicked,  Psal.  9.  1,  2,  3.  [5]  For  the  enlarg¬
ing  of  Christ's  kingdom.  Rev.  11.  17-  [6]  For

deliverance  from  the  body  of  death,  Rom.  7-  25.

1  Cor.  15.  57.  [7]  For  temporal  deliverances,

Exod.  15.  1,  2.  [8]  For  Christ,  the  unspeakable


gift  of  God,  Luke  2.  38.  [9]  For  the  deliverance
of  God's  ministers,  2  Cor.  1.  11.

Lev.  7.  12.  if  he  offer  it  for  a  ?.  13,  15.  |  22.  29.

Neh.  11.  1”.  the  principal  to  begin  the  ?.  in  prayer
12.  8.  which  was  over  the  ?.  he  and  his  brethren
46.  there  were  songs  of  praise  and  ?.  to  God
Psal .  26.  7-  that  1  may  publish  with  the  voice  of  ?.
50.  14.  offer  unto  God  ?.  and  pay  thy  vows  to  mo6t
69.  30.  and  I  will  magnify  him  with  t.

95.  2.  let  us  come  before  his  face  with  ?.

100.  4.  enter  into  his  gates  with  ?.  and  praise
107  .  22.  let  them  sacrifice  sacrifices  of  ?.

116.  17.  I  will  offer  to  thee  sacrifices  of  t.

147.  J7-  sing  to  the  Lord  with  ?.  sing  praise

Isa.  51.3.  t.  and  melody  shall  be  found  therein
Jer.  30.  19.  and  out  of  them  shall  proceed  ?.

Amos  4.  5.  offer  a  sacrifice  of  ?.  with  leaven
Jonah  2.  9.  1  will  sacrifice  to  thee  with  voice  of?.

2  Cor.  4.15.  thro’  ?.  of  many  grace  might  redound

9.  11.  which  causeth  through  us?,  to  God

Phil.  4.  6.  with  ?.  let  your  requests  be  made  known
Col.  2.  7-  in  the  faith,  abounding  therein  with  ?.

4.  2.  continue  and  watch  in  the  same  with  t.

1  Tim.  4.  3.  God  created  to  be  received  with  t.

4.  every  creature  is  good  if  it  be  received  with  t.
Rev.  7.  12.  ?.  and  honour  be  to  our  God  forever
THANKSGIVINGS.

Neh.  12.  27.  to  keep  the  dedication  with  t.

2  Cor.  9.  12.  but  is  abundant  by  many  t.  to  God

THANK  offerings.

Fzek.  43.  +  27.  the  priests  shall  make  your  ?.  offer.
45.  t  15.  and  for  ?.  offeiings  to  make  reconciliation

1 17.  shall  prepare  the  sin  offering  and  t.  offerings
Amos  5.  t22.  neither  will  I  regard  the  ?.  offerings

THAT.

Gen.  2.  11.  ?.  is  it  which  compasseth  the  land

19.  what  Adam  called,  ?.  was  the  name  thereof

18.  25.  ?.  be  far  from  thee,  to  slay  the  righteous
30.  33.  t.  shalt  be  accounted  stolen  with  me

Exod.  30.  38.  whosoever  shall  make  like  to  t.

Lev.  10.  20.  when  Moses  heard  ?.  he  was  content

26.  44.  yet  for  all  ?.  I  will  not  cast  them  away
Num.  6.  21.  besides  ?.  ?.  his  hands  shall  get

22.  20.  the  word  which  1  say,  ?.  shalt  thou  do

24.  13.  Lord  saith  ?.  will  1  speak,  1  Kings  92.  14.
Judg.  8.  3.  anger  was  abated,  when  he  had  said  t.
11.  36.  do  according  to  ?.  which  proceeded

1  Sam.  9.  24.  behold,  ?.  which  is  left,  set  it  before

21.  9.  Goliath's  sword,  if  thou  wilt  take  ?.  take  it
24. 19.  for  ?.  thou  hast  done  to  me  this  day

30.  23.  with  /.  which  the  Lord  hath  given  us

2  Sam.  12.  8.  if?,  had  been  too  little,  I  would
19.6.  in  ?.  thou  lovest  thine  enemies  and  hatest
24  24.  offer  of  ?.  which  doth  cost  me  nothing

2  Kings  14.  6.  according  to  ?.  which  was  written  in
the  law  of  Moses.  2  Chron.  35.  26.

19.  20.  ?.  which  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against
2  Chron.  6.  15.  ?.  which  thou  hast  promised,  16.
Ezra  6.  9.  t.  which  they  have  need  of  be  given
7-  18.  ?.  do  after  the  will  of  your  God

Job  3.  25.  ?.  which  1  was  afraid  of  is  come  to  me

15.  17.  ?.  which  I  have  seen  I  will  declare

20.  20.  he  shall  not  save  of  ?.  which  he  desired

23.  13.  what  his  soul  desireth  even  ?.  he  doeth
34.  32.  t.  which  I  see  not,  teach  thou  me

Psal.  27-  4.  ?.  will  I  seek  after,  that  I  may  dwell
69.  4.  then  1  restored  ?.  which  I  took  not  away

10.  when  1  wept,  ?.  was  to  my  reproach

Eccl.  1.  9.  the  thing  ?.  hath  been,  it  is  ?.  which  shall
be  ;  ?.  which  is  done,  is  ?.  which  shall  be  done
15.  ?.  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  numbered

2.  3.  see  what  was  ?.  good  for  the  sons  of  men

3.  9.  what  profit  in  ?.  wherein  he  laboureth  ?

15.  and  God  required)  t.  which  is  past

5.  4.  when  thou  vowest,  pay  ?.  thou  hast  vowed

11.  6.  thou  knowest.  not  whether  this  or?,  prosper
Isa.  21.  10.  ?.  which  I  have  heard  of  the  Lord
52.  15.  for  ?.  which  had  not  been  told  them  shall
they  see,  ?.  they  had  not  heard  shall  consider
Jer.  15.  4.  for  ?.  which  Manasseh  did  in  Jerusalem
45.  4.  ?.  which  I  have  built,  ?.  which  I  planted
Dan.  6.  13.  ?.  Daniel  regarded)  not  thee,  O  king
11.  36.  for  ?.  ?.  is  deterniined  shall  be  done
Zech.  11.  9.  ?.  ?.  dieth,  let  it  die,  ?.  is  to  be  cut  off
Mat.  1.  20.  for  ?.  which  is  conceived  in  her  is  of

9.  22.  woman  was  made  whole  from  ?.  hour,  15. 28.

10.  15.  for  Sodom  than  for  t.  city,  Mark  6.  11.

13.  12.  taken  away  ?.  he  hath,  25.  29.  Mark  4.  25.

20.  7.  ?.  shall  ye  receive  ||  23.  3.  ?.  observe  and  do

27.  4.  they  said,  what  is  ?.  to  us  ?  see  thou  to  ?.
Mark  7.  20.  ?.  which  cometh  out,  ?.  defileth  man

13.  11.  what  shall  be  given  in  ?.  hour,  ?.  speak
Luke  4.  6.  all  will  I  give,  for  ?.  is  delivered  to  me
8.  18.  shall  be  taken,  even  t.  he  seemeth  to  have

11.  40.  did  not  he  ?.  made  ?.  which  is  without

make  t.  which  is  within  also  ?

16.  12.  not  faithful  in  t.  which  is  another  man’s

16.  15.  ?.  which  is  highly  esteemed  among  men
17. 10.  we  have  done  ?.  which  was  our  duty  to  do

24.  12.  wondering  at?,  which  was  come  to  pass
John  1.  8.  he  was  not  t.  light  ||  9.  ?.  was  the  light

3.  6.  ?.  which  is  born  of  flesh,  ?.  born  of  the  Spirit

11.  we  speak  ?.  we  know,  testify  ?.  we  have  seen

4.  18.  is  not  thy  husband,  in  ?.  s'aidst  thou  truly
37.  herein  is  ?.  saying  true,  one  sow-eth  another

5.  12.  whatman  is?,  which  said  to  thee,  take  up

6.  27.  labour  for?,  meat  which  endureth

32.  Moses  gave  you  not  ?.  bread  from  heaven
48.  1  am  ?.  bread  of  life  ||  58.  this  is  ?.  bread
8.  38.  1  speak  ?.  1  have  seen  with  my  father ;  ye
do  ?.  which  ye  have  seen  with  your  father
13.  27.  ?•  thou  doest,  do  quickly  ||  14.  13.  ?.  will  1  do

16.  13.  what  he  shall  hear,  ?.  shall  he  speak

21.  22.  what  is  ?.  to  thee,  follow  thou  me,  24.

23.  went  abroad,  ?.  ?.  disciple  should  not  die
Acts  2.16.  this  is  ?.  which  wasspokenby  prophet  Joel

4.  21.  all  glorified  God  for  ?.  which  was  done

24.  when  they  heard  ?.  they  lifted  up,  5.  21.  33.

7.  37-  this  is  ?.  Moses  which  said  unto  Israel
10.  37-  ?.  word  you  know,  which  was  published

Rom.  1.  19.  because  ?.  which  may  be  known  of  God
4.  18.  according  to  ?.  which  was  spoken,  so  shall


THE


THE


THE


tiom.  6. 10.  in  r.  lie  died,  in  Lhe  liveth,  liveth  toGod

7.  6.  L  being  dead  wherein  we  were  held,  L  we
IS.  was  then  t.  which  is  good  made  death  to  me  -
15.  L  I  do,  1  allow  not  ||  19.  L  I  would  not,  t.  do  1

1  Cor.  5. 13.  put  away  from  you  t.  wicked  person
6.8.  nay,  you  defraud,  and  t.  your  brethren

10.  4.  L  spiritual  rock,  and  t.  rock  was  Christ

30.  spoken  of,  for  t.  for  which  I  give  thanks

11.  23.  t.  which  also  I  delivered  unto  you

28.  let  him  eat  of  t.  bread,  anil  drink  of  t.  cup

13.  10.  t.  which  is  perfect,  L  which  is  in  part

14.  21.  and  yet  for  ail  t.  they  will  not  hear  me

15.  37.  and  t.  which  thou  so  west  thou  sowest  not

t.  body  that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain
46.  c.  was  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  t.  which

2  Cor.  3.  11.  if  t.  which  is  done  away  was  glorious

8.  12.  it  is  accepted  according  to  t.  a  man  hath
11. 12.  what  I  do,  t.  1  will  do,  that  I  may  _ut  off

Gal.  6.  7.  what  a  man  soweth,  t.  shall  he  reap
P/ul.  3.  12.  that  1  may  apprehend  1.  for  which  I  am
1  Thess.  3.  10.  might  perfect  t.  which  is  lacking

5.  21.  prove  all  things,  hold  fast  t.  which  is  good

1  Tim.  4. 8.  life  L  now'  is,  and  ot' t.  which  is  to  come

6.  20.  keep  t.  which  is  committed  to  thy  trust
P/iilem.  18.  if  he  oweth  put  t.  on  mine  account
Heb.  5.  7.  and  was  heard  in  t.  he  feared

6.  19.  which  entereth  into  t.  within  the  veil

12.  20.  could  not  endure  t.  which  was  commanded
1.3.  17.  for/,  is  unprofitable  for  you

Jam.  A.  15.  if  L.  will,  we  shall  live,  and  do  this  or  t.

I  Pet.  3.  13.  who  is  lie  t.  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be
followers  of  t.  which  is  good?  3  John  1 1 .
1  John  1.  1.  t.  which  was  from  the  beginning
3.  t.  which  we  have  seen  and  heard,  2.  24.

2.  24.  let  t.  abide  in  you  which  ye  have  heard
Rev.  2.  25.  t.  which  ye  have,  hold  fast  till  l  come
See  After,  Day,  Man,  Place,  So,  Soul,
Thing,  Time.

THEATRE.

Acts  19. 29.  they  rushed  with  one  accord  into  the  t.

31.  that  he  would  not  adventure  himself  into  t.

THEE.


Gen.  7.  1.  t.  have  1  seen  righteous  before  me

17.  2.  and  1  will  multiply  t.  exceedingly
22. 17.  that  in  blessing  1  will  bless  t.

23.  11.  the  field  gave  1  t.  and  the  cave  gave  I  t.
39.  9.  neither  kept  back  any  thing  from  me  but  t.
Deut.  28.  43.  the  stranger  shall  get  above  t.

1  Sam.  8.  7.  they  have  not  rejected  t.  but  me
20.  22.  behold  the  arrows  are  beyond  t.  37.

2  Sam.  18.  12.  the  king  charged  t.  and  Abishai
Psal.  86.  14.  they  have  not  set  t.  before  them
Jer.  15.  11.  1  will  cause  enemy  to  entreat  t.  well
Ezek.  7.  9.  1  will  recompense  t.  according  to  thy

29.  5.  1  will  leave  t.  and  all  the  fish  of  thy  rivers
Mat.  25. 37.  when  saw  wre  t.  an  hungred,  and  fed  t.

38.  when  saw  we  t.  a  stranger  ||  39.  saw  t.  sick
Luke  It.  9.  he  that  bade  t.  and  him  come  and  say
Rom.  11.  18.  but  the  rootL  ||  21.  lest  he  spare  not  t.
About  TH  EE.

Job  11.  18.  thou  shalt  dig  about  t.  and  take  thy  rest
Isa.  26.20.  shut  thy  doors  about  t.  hide  thyself
Jer.  46.  14.  sword  devour  round  about  t.  Ezek.  5. 12.
49.  5.  bring  fear  from  all  those  that  be  about  L
Ezek.  5.  14.  among  nations  that  are  round  about  t.

15.  an  astonishment  to  the  nations  round  about  l.
Luke  19.  43.  thy  enemies  shall  cast  a  trench  about  t.
Acts  12.  8.  cast  thy  garment  about  t.  and  follow  rne
After  THEE.

Gen.  17-  7-  to  thy  seed  a.  t.  8,  9, 10.  |  35.  12.  |  48.  4.
Deut.  4.  40.  with  thy  children  after  t.  12.  25,  28.
Judg.  5.  14.  after  t.  Benjamin  among  thy  people
2  Sam.  7. 12.  and  I  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  t.

1  Kings  1. 14. 1  also  will  come  in  after  t.  and  confirm
3.  12.  nor  a.  t.  shall  any  arise  like  thee, 2  Chr.  1.  12.
Psal.  42.  1.  so  panteth  my  soul  after  t  fJ  God
63.  8.  my  soul  followeth  hard  after  t.  thy  right  hand
143.  6.  my  soul  thirsteth  after  t.  as  a  thirsty  land
Cant.  1.  4.  draw  me,  we  will  run  after  t.

Isa.  45.  14.  they  shall  come  after  t.  in  chains
Jer.  12.  6.  they  have  called  a  multitude  after  t.
Dan.  2.  39.  after  t.  shall  rise  another  kingdom
Hos.  5.  8.  cry  at  Beth-aven,  after  t.  O  Benjamin
Against  THEE.

Exod.  15.  7.  overthrowm  them  that  rose  against  t.
23.  29.  lest  the  beast  of  the  field  multiply  against  t.
Num.  21.7.  we  have  sinned,  for  we  have  spoken  ag.t.
Deut.  6. 15.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  be  kindled  ag.  t.
15.  9.  and  he  cry  to  the  Lord  against  t.  24.  15.

23.  4.  because  they  hired  Balaam  against  t.  to  curse
28.  7.  they  shall  come  out  ag.  Lone  way,  and  flee
48.  enemies  which  the  Lord  shall  send  ag.  t.  49.
31.  26.  that  it  may  be  there  for  a  witness  against  t.
Judg.  9.  31.  behold  they  fortify  the  city  against  t.

10.  10.  we  have  sinned  ag.  t.  Neh.  1. 6.  Jer.  14.  7,20.

11.  27.  I  have  not  sinned  against  t.  1  Sam.  24.  11.

1  Sam.  19.  4.  because  he  hath  not  sinned  against  t.

2  Sam.  1. 16.  for  thy  mouth  hath  testified  against  t.

12.  11.  behold,  1  will  raise  up  evil  against  t.

18.  31.  avenged  thee  of  all  that  rose  upuj.  L  32.

1  Kings  8.  33.  because  they  have  sinned  against  t.

35.  2  Chron.  6.  24,  26.
46.  if  they  sin  against  t.  and  repent,  2  Chr.  6.  36.

50.  forgive  thy  people  that  have  sinned  against  t .

and  all  their  transgressions,  2  Chron.  6.  39.
20.  22.  the  king  of  Syria  will  come  up  against  t.

2  Kings  19.  9.  he  is  come  out  to  fight  against  t.

2  Chron.  14.  11.  O  Lord,  let  not  man  prevail  ag.  t.
18.  22.  and  the  Lord  hath  spoken  evil  against  t.

20.  2.  there  cometh  a  great  multitude  against  t.

35. 21.  I  come  not  against  t.  this  day,  but  against
Neh.  1.  7.  we  have  dealt  very  corruptly  against  t.
9.  26.  nevertheless  they  rebelled  against  t.

fob  7.  20.  why  hast  thou  set  me  as  a  mark  against  t.
11.  5.  but,  oh  that  t  oil  would  open  his  lips  ag.  t.
15.  6.  yea,  thine  own  lips  testify  against  t.

42.  7.  my  wrath  is  kindled  against  Land  thy  friends
Psal.  5.  10.  cast  them  out,  they  have  rebelled  ag.  t.

21.  11.  for  they  intended  evil  ag.  t.  they  imagine
41.4.  Lord,  heal  my  soul,  for  1  have  sinned  ag.  t.
50.7.  hear,  O  Israel,  and  1  will  testify  against  t.

51.  4.  against  t.  have  1  sinned,  and  done  this  evil


Ps.  74.  23.  that  rise  up  against  1. 139.  21.  Eccl.  10.  4.
119. 11.  thy  word  1  hid,  that  1  might  not  sin  ag.  t.
139.  20.  for  they  speak  against  t.  wickedly
Isa.  7 •  5.  have  taken  evil  counsel  against  t.  saying
10.24.  the  Assyrian  shall  lift  up  his  staff  against  t.
Jer.  1.  19.  they  shall  tight  against  t.  but  they  shall
not  prevail  against  t.  for  1  am  with  thee,  15. 20.
21.  13.  behold,  1  am  against  t.  50.  31.1  51  -  25.
Ezek.  5.  8.  I  21.3.  |  26.  3. 1  28.  22.  I  29.  3, 10.

I  35.  3.  |  38. 3.  |  39.  1.  Nah.  2.  13.  1  3.  5.
Lam.  2.  16.  thy  enemies  opened  their  mouth  ag.t.
Ezek.  33.  30.  thy  people  still  are  talking  against  t.
Amos7.  10.  saying,  Amos  hath  conspired  against  t.
Mai.  3.  13.  what  have  w  e  spoken  30  much  against  t.
Mat.  5.  23.  that  thy  brother  hath  aught  against  t.

18.  15.  if  thy  brother  trespass  ag.  t.  Luke  17.  3,  4.

26.  62.  which  these  tv  itn.  ag.  t.  Mark  14.  60.  |  15.  4.
Rev.  2.4.  nevertheless,  1  hat  e  somewhat  against  t.

14.  but  1  have  a  few  things  against  t.  20.

At  I  II  EE.

2  Kings  19.  21.  hath  shaken  her  head  at  t.  Isa.  37-22.
Isa.  14.  8.  yea,  the  fir  trees  rejoice  at  t.  and  cedars
52.  14.  astonish,  at  t.  Ezek.  26.  16.  I  27.  35.  |  28.  19.
Lam.  2.  15.  all  that  pass  by  clap  their  hands  at  t.
Ezek.  27.  36.  the  merchants  shall  hiss  at  t.

32.  10.  1  will  make  many  people  amazed  att.

Before  1  11  EE.

Gen.  13.  9.  is  not  the  whole  land  before  t.  separate
17.  18.  said,  O  that  lshmael  might  live  before  t.
20. 15.  behold  my  land  is  bef.  t.  dwell  where,  47. 6.

24.  7- the  I  oril  God  of  heaven  shall  send  his  angel

before  t.  Exod.  23.  20,  23.  1  32.  34.  |  33.  2.
51.  behold,  Rebekah  is  before  t.  take  her  and  go
31 . 35.  let  it  not  displease,  I  cannot  rise  up  before  t.

33.  12.  I  will  go  b.  t.  Isa.  45.  2.  1  43.  9.  set  him  bef.  t.
Exod.  17-  6.  behold,  1  will  stand  before  t.  there

23.  27.  I  will  send  my  fear  before  t.  and  destroy
28.  I  will  send  hornets  before  t.  which  shall dnve
out  the  Canaamte  before  t.  29,  30,  31.  |

31.  11.  Deut.  4.  38. 1  9.  4,  5.  I  18.  12.

33.  19-  I  w  ill  make  all  my  goodness  pass  before  t.
and  I  w  ill  proclaim  the  name  of  the  \A.btfore  t.

34.  24.  I  will  cast  out  b.  t.  Deut.  6. 19.  1 7-  L  I  9. 4.
Num.  10.  35.  let  them  that  hate  thee  flee  before  t.
Deut. 7 .24.  no  man  able  to  st.  b.  t.  Josh.  1.5.  110.8.
28.  7-  they  shall  flee  before  (.  seen  ways

30.  15.  1  have  set  before  t.  this  day  life  and  good

31.  3.  and  Joshua,  he  shall  go  over  before  t.  8.

32.  52.  yet  thou  shalt  see  the  land  before  t.

33. 10.  shall  teach,  they  shall  put  incense  before  t.
Judg.  4.  14.  is  not  the  Lord  gone  out  before  t.  ?

6.  18.  bring  forth,  and  set  it  before  t.  1  Ram.  9.  24.

1  Ram.  28.  22.  let  me  set  amoisel  of  bread  before  t.

2  Ram.  5.  24.  then  shall  the  Lord  go  out  before  t.

7.  15.  as  I  took  it  from  Saul,  whom  1  put  away  A.  t.
Ifi.be  established  forever  bef.  t.  26.  1  Chr.  17.24.

1  Kings  .3. 6.  as  lie  walk.  b.  1. 1|  12.  none  like  thee  b.  t.

8.  23.  thy  servants  that  walk  before  t.  2  Chr.  6.  14.

10.  8.  which  stand  continually  before  t.  2  Chr.  9.  7-
14.  9.  hast  done  evil  above  all  that  were  before  t.

2  Kings  20.  3.  how  1  have  walked  before  t.  Isa.  38.  3.
1  Chr.  14.  15.  go  out,  for  God  is  gone  forth  before  t.

17.  13.  as  I  took  it  from  him  that  w  as  before  t.
Ez/a  9.  15.  behold,  we  are  before  t.  in  our  tres¬
passes,  we  cannot  stand  before  t.  because  of  this

Neh.  4.  5.  let  not  their  sin  be  blotted  out  before  t.
9.8.  and  foundest  his  heart  faithful  before  t.

32.  let  not  all  the  trouble  seem  little  before  t.

Ps.  .38.  9.  L.all  my  desire  is  before  t.  and  groaning

39.  5.  and  mine  age  is  as  nothing  before  t.

69.  19.  mine  adversaries  are  all  before  t.

7-3.  22.  so  foolish  was  I ,  I  was  as  a  beast  before  t.
79.  11.  let  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner  conie  before  t.
88.  2.  let  my  pray er  come  before  t.  incline,  141.  2.
90.  8.  thou  hast  set  our  iniquities  before  t.

119.  168.  my  ways  are  b.  L||  169-  let  cry  come  b.  t.
Prov.  23.  1.  consider  diligently  w  hat  is  before  t.
Isa.  9.  3.  they  joy  before  t.  as  men  when  they  divide
58.  8.  and  thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  t.

Jer.  17. 16.  came  out  of  my  lips,  was  right  before  t.

18.  20.  I  stood  before  t.  to  turn  away  thy  wrath
28.  8.  the  prophets  that  have  been  before  t.  of  old

40.  4.  all  the  land  is  before  t.  go  whither  it  seemeth
Lam.  1.  22.  let  all  their  wickedness  come  before  t.
Ezek.  33.  31.  and  they  sit  before  t.  as  my  people
Dan.  6.  22.  also  before  t.  O  king,  have  1  done  no  hurt
Mic.  6.  4.  I  sent  before  t.  Moses',  Aaron,  and  Miriam
Zech.  3.  8.  thou  and  thy  fellows  that  sit  before  t.
Mat.  6.  2.  do  not  sound  a  trumpet  before  t.

11.  10.  behold,  1  send  my  messenger,  which  shall
prepare  thv  w  ay  before  t.'Mark  1. 2.  Luke  7-  27.

Luke  15.  18.  I  will  say ,  father,  I  have  sinned  bef.  t.
Acts  23.  30.  to  say  before  t.  what  they  had  ag.him
24. 19.  who  ought  to  have  been  here  bef.  t.  to  object

25.  26.  and  especially  before  t.  O  king  Agrippa
Rev.  3.  8.  behold,  I  have  set  before  t.  an  open  door

Behind  1  11  E E.

Gen.  19.  17.  escape  for  thy  life,  look  not  behind  t
Deut.  25.  18.  Amalek  smote  the  feeble  behind  t.
Ps.  50.  17.  seeing  thou  castest  my  words  behind  t.
Isa.  30.21.  thine  ears  shall  hear  a  word  behind  t.
Beside  T H EE.

Ruth  4.  4.  for  there  is  none  to  redeem  it  beside  t.

1  Ram.  2.  2.  for  there  is  none  beside  t.  2  Sam.  7.  22.

1  Chron.  17.  20.

Psal.  73.  25.  none  on  earth  that  I  desire  beside  t.
Isa.  26.  13.  other  lords  beside  t.  have  had  dominion
64.  4.  neither  hath  the  eye  seen.  O  God,  beside  t.
Between  TH  EE.

Gen.  3.  15.  T  will  put  enmity  bet.  t.  and  the  woman
17.  2.  I  will  make  my  covenant  betw.  me  and  t.  7.
31.  44.  let  it  be  for  a  witness  bet.  me  and  t.  48. 50.
49.  Lord  watch  b.  me  and  t.  when  we  are  absent
1  Saw.  20. 23.  the  Lord  be  b.  t.  and  me  forever,  42.
Ezek.  4.  3.  set  it  for  a  wall  of  iron  b.  t.  and  the  city
Mai.  2.  14.  the  Lord  hath  been  witness  bet.  t.  and
J,  at.  18.  15.  tell  him  his  fault  bet.  t.  and  him  alone
By  THEE.

Exod.  18.  14.  the  people  stand  byt.  from  morning

1  Ram.  1.26.  1  am  woman  that  stood  by  t.  praying
9. 23.  portion  of  which  I  said  to  thee,  set  it  by  t.

2  Ram.  22.30.  by  1. 1  ran  thro’  a  troop,  Psal.  18.  29.


Psal.  71. 6.  byt.  have  l  been  hoi  pen  from  the  won
Prov.'S.  28.  w  hen  hast  it  by  1. 1[ 29.  dwell  securely  by  t.
Isa.  26.  13.  by  t.  we  will  make  mentionof  thy  name
Ezek.  16.  6.  when  I  passed  by  t.  and  saw  thee,  8.
Acts  24.  2.  seeing  that  by  t.  we  enjoy  quietness
Philem .  7.  the  bowels  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by  t.
Concerning  THEE.

Josh.  14.  6.  the  thing  the  L.  said  concern,  t.  and  me

1  Ram.  25.  30.  the  good  that  he  hath  spoken  con.  t.

2  Ram.  14.8.  the  king  said,  1  will  give  charge  cow.  t.

1  Kings  22.  23.  the  Lord  hath  spoken  evil  concern,  t.
Nah.  1.  14.  the  L.  hath  given  commandment  con.  t.
Mat.  4.  6.  shall  give  his  angels  charge  concern,  t.
Acts  28.  21.  neither  received  we  letters  concern,  t.

For  TH  EE.

Gen.  6.21. food  fort,  and  them  H  20. 7.  shall  pray  fort.
Exod.  9.  30.  but  as  for  t.  and  thy  servants,  I  know
Lev.  25.  6.  sabbath  shall  be  meat  for  t.  and  them
Num.  18.  9.  shall  be  most  holy  for  t.  and  thy  sons
Deut.  5.  31  .as  for  t.  stand  by  me,  18. 14.  2 Ram  13.13.
Judg.  7. 4  and  I  will  try  them  for  t.  there

I. 3.  15.  till  we  shall  have  made  ready  a  kid  for  e.
18. 19.  better/br  t .  to  be  a  priest  to  house  of  one  man

Ruth  .3. 1 .  shall  I  not  seek  rest/or  1. 1|  4.  8.  buy  it  for  t.

1  Sam.  9.  24.  to  this  time  hath  it  been  kept  for  t.

20.  4.  what  thy  soul  desireth,  I  will  do  it  for  t.

2  Sam.  1. 26.  1  am  distressed  for  t.  brother  Jonathan
10.  11.  if  the  Syrians  be  too  strong  for  t.  help  me

18.  .33.  would  God  l  had  died  fort.  O  Absalom

19.  38.  what  thou  requirest,  that  I  will  do  for  t.

1  Kings  2.  18.  1  will  speak  for  t.  unto  the  king

17.  13.  and  after  make  for  t.  and  for  thy  son

20.  34.  thou  shalt  make  streets  fort,  in  Damascus

2  Kings  2.  9.  Elijah  said,  ask  what  1  shall  do  for  t.  4.

4.  1.3.  say  now  unto  her,  what  is  to  be  done  for  t.c2.
2  Chron.  “.  17-  and  as  for  t.  Dan.  2.  29.  Zech.  9.  1 1
Job  8. 6.  if  upright,  surely  now  he  would  awake  fo/ 1.

18.  4.  shall  the  earth  be  forsaken  for  t.  7

Psal.  63.  1.  O  God,  my  soul  thirsteth  for  t.  my  flesh
65.  1.  praise  waiteth  for  t.  O  God,  in  Sion
119.  126.  it  is  time  for  t.  O  Lord,  to  work
Cant.  7. 13.  fruits  1  have  laid  up  for  t.  O  my  beloved
Isa.  14.  9.  hell  from  beneath  is  moved  for  t.  to  meet

26.  8.  O  Lord,  we  have  waited  for  t.  33.  2.

43.  3.  I  gave  Ethiopia  and  Seba  for  t.

4.  I  loved  thee,  therefore  will  1  give  men  for  t.
48.  9.  and  for  my  praise  will  1  refrain  for  t.

51.  19.  these  are  come,  who  shall  be  sorry  for  t.
Jer.  32.  17.  behold,  there  is  nothing  too  hard/er  t
34.  5.  so  shall  they  burn  odours  for  t.  and  lament
48.  32. 1  will  weep  for  t.  |i  50.  24.  I  laid  a  snare  fort.
51.  36.  therefore  w  ill  I  take  vengeance  for  t.

Lam.  2.  13.  what  thing  shall  I  take  to  witness  for  t,

14.  thy  prophets  have  seen  for  t.  false  burdens
Ezek.  7.  6.  it  watcheth  for  t  behold,  it  is  come

32.  10.  their  king  shall  be  horribly  afraid  for  t.
Hos.  3.  3.  shalt  not  be  for  another,  so  will  1  be  for  t.

6.  11.  also,  O  Judah,  he  hath  set  a  harvest  for  t.
Nah.  .3.  7.  whence  shall  I  seek  comfort  for  t.

Mat.  5.  29.  for  it  is  profitable  for  t.  : 30.

II.  24.  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  than/or  t.

14.  4.  it  is  not  lawful  for  t.  to  have  her,  Mark  6. 18.
17. 4.  one  for  t.  one  for  Moses,  Mark  9. 5.  Luke  9.33.
18. 8.  better/cT- 1.  to  enter  into  life,  9.  Mark  9. 43,45.

Mark  1.  37.  they  said  unto  him,  all  men  seek  fort.
3.  .32.  thy  mother  and  thy  brethren  seek  for  t.

5.  19.  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  fort.
Luke  22.  32.  but  1  have  prayed  for  t.  that  thy  faith
John  11.  28.  the  master  is  come,  and  calleth/0/L
Acts  9.  5.  hard  for  t.  to  kick  against  pricks,  26.  14.

10.  22.  to  send  for  t.  into  his  house  and  to  hear

24.  25.  have  a  convenient  season,  I  w  ill  call  for  t.
2  Cor.  12.  9.  he  said,  my  grace  is  sufficient/;/-  t.
From  THEE.

Gen.  18.25.  that  be  far  from  t.  to  slay  the  righteous

27.  45.  until  thy  brother’s  anger  turn  away  from  t.
30.2.  hath  withheld  from  t.  the  fruit  of  the  womb

Exod.  8. 29.  and  Moses  said,  behold,  1  go  out ft om  t.

33.  5.  therefore  now  put  off  thy  ornaments  from  t.
Deut.  12.  21.  if  the  place  be  too  Lav  from  t.  14.24.

15.  12.  thou  shalt  let  him  go  free  from  t.  1.3,  18.

16.  I  will  not  go  away  from  t.  |[  20.  15.  cities  far

from  t.

30.  11.  it  is  not  hidden  from  t.  neither  is  it  far  off
Judg.  17.  2.  the  shekels  that  were  taken  from  t.

1  Sam.  1 . 14.  Eli  said  to  her,  put  away  thy  wine/.L
15.28.  hath  rent  the  kingdom  fromt.  1  Kings  11.11.

17.  46.  smite  thee,  1  will  take  thine  head  fromt.
20.  9.  far  be  it  from  t.  Mat.  16.  22.

2  Ram.  1.3.  13.  for  he  will  not  withhold  me  from  t.

2  Kings  2.  9.  what  I  shalldo,  before  1  be  taken  fr.  t.

20. 18.  of  thy  sons  that  shall  issue  from  t.  Isa.  39. 7.
Ezra  4.  12.  the  Jews  which  came  up  from  t.  to  us
Job  42.  2.  no  thought  can  be  withholden  from  t.
Psal.  .38.  9.  and  my  groaning  is  not  hid //w/i  t.

69.  5.  O  God,  my  sins  are  not  hid  from  t.

73.  27.  they  that  are  far  from  t.  shall  perish
80.  18.  so  will  not  we  go  back  fromt.  quicken  us
139.  12.  yea,  the  darkness  hideth  not  from  t.

15.  my  substance  was  not  hid  from  t.  w  hen  I  was
Isa.  54.  8.  in  a  little  wrath  1  hid  my  face  from  t.

10.  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  t.

Jer.  6.  8.  be  instructed,  lest  my  soul  depart  /tv  m  t.
Ezek.  21.  3.  I  will  cut  off  from  t.  the  righteous,  4.
22.  5.  those  that  be  far  from  t.  shall  mock  thee

24.  16.  1  take  away  from  t.  the  desire  of  thine  eyes

28.  .3.  there  is  no  secret  that  they  can  hide  from  t.
Mic.  1. 16.  for  they  are  gone  into  captivity  from  t.
Zech.  3.  4.  I  have  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass  fr.  t.
Mat.  5.  29.  pluck  it  out  and  cast  it  fr.t.  3  >.  I  18.  8,  9.
John  17.  8.  known  surely  that  1  came  out  from  t.
Acts  23.  21.  ready,  looking  for  a  promise  from  t.

Ree  Depart,  ed.

In  THEE.

Gen.  12.  3.  in  t.  shall  all  families  he  blessed,  28.  14.
48.  20.  in  t.  shall  Israel  bless,  saying,  God  make
Exod.  9. 16.  I  raised  thee  up,  to  shew  m  t.  my  pow  er
Deut.  23.  14.  that  he  see  no  unclean  thing  in  t.

21.  it  would  be  sin  in  1. 1|  22.  shall  be  no  sin  in  t.

1  Sam.  18.  22.  behold  the  king  hath  delight  in  t.

25.  28.  evil  hath  not  been  found  in  t.  29-  6.

2  Ram.  15.  26.  but  if  he  say,  1  have  no  del  iuht  in  t.

s  497


T  H  £


THE


THE


£  C/iron.  19.  .3.  there  are  good  things  found  in  i.
Psal.  5.  11.  put  trust  in  t.  7.  1. 1  9.  10.  I  16.  1. 1  17.
7. 1  25.  2,  20.  |  31.  1,  19.1  55.  23.  let  them  that
love  thy  name  be  joyful  in  t.

9.  2.  rejoice  in  t.  40.  16.  |  70.  4.  |  85.  6.  Cant.  1.  4.

22.  4.  our  fathers  trusted  in  t.  they  trusted,  5.
31.14.  1  trusted  in  1. 1|33.  22.  hope  in  t.  38.15.  |  39.7.

56.3.  trust  in  t.  57.  1.  I  84.12.  |  86.2.  I  141.8.  |  143.8.
81.  9-  there  shall  no  strange  god  be  in  t.

84.  5.  blessed  is  the  man  whose  strength  is  in  t.
87.  7-  all  my  springs  are  in  t.

Cant.  4.  7-  thou  art  all  fair,  there  is  no  spot  in  t.
Isa.  26.  3.  keep  him  because  he  trusteth  in  t.

45.  14.  surely  God  ism  t.  and  there  is  none  else
62.  4.  Ilephzibah,  for  the  Lord  delighteth  in  t.

Jer.  2.  19.  an  evil  thing,  that  my  fear  is  not  in  t.
Ezek.  5.  9.  1  v  ill  do  in  t.  what  1  have  not  done

10.  and  I  will  execute  judgments  in  t.  15.

16.  34.  the  contrary  is  in  t.  from  other  w  omen

20.  47.  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  t.  it  shall  devour

22.  6.  were  in  t.  to  their  power  to  shed  blood

7.  in  t.  have  they  set  light  by  father  or  mother

9.  in  t.  are  men  that  carry  tales  to  shed  blood

12.  in  t.  have  they  taken  gifts  to  shed  blood

25.4.  they  shall  set  their  palaces  int.  dwel lines  in  t.

27.  8.  thy  wise  men,  O  1'yrus,  that  were  in  t.  9.

28.  15.  was  perfect,  till  iniquity  was  found  in  t.
38.  16.  when  1  shall  be  sanctified  in  t.  O  Gog

Dan.  4.  9.  spiritof  the  holy  gods  is  in  t.  18.  I  5.14.
Dos.  14.  3.  for  in  t.  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy
Mic.  1. 13.  for  transgressions  of  Isr.  were  found  in  t.

4.  9.  why  dost  thou  cry  ?  is  there  no  king  in  t.  ?
Mat.  6.  23.  if  the  light  that  is  int.  be  darkness

11.  23.  mighty  works  which  have  been  done  in  t.
Luke  3.  22.  my  beloved  Son,  int.  1  am  well  pleased
11.  35.  the  light  which  is  in  t.  be  not  darkness
19.  44.  not  leave  in  t.  one  stone  upon  another
John  17.  21.  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  1  in  t.
Horn.  9.  17.  that  I  might  shew  my  power  int.

Cal.  3.8.  int.  shall  all  nations  be  blessed

1  Tim.  4.  14.  neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  t.

2  Tim.  1.  5.  the  unfeigned  faith  that  is  in  t.  first  in

Lois  and  Kunice,  and  1  am  persuaded  in  t.  also
6.  that  thou  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  which  is  in  t.

3  John  3.  brethren  testified  of  the  truth  that  is  in  t.
Rev.  18.  22.  shall  be  heard  no  more  at  all  in  t.

23.  a  candle  shall  shine  no  more  at  all  in  t.

Into  TH  E  E.

Isa.  52.  1.  no  more  come  into  t.  the  uncircumcised
Of  TH  EE.

Gen.  12.  2.  1  will  make  of  t.  a  great  nation,  17.  6.

I  35.  1 1 .  |  46.  3.  |  48.  4.  Exod.  32.  10.

13.  and  my  soul  shall  live  because  of  t.

41.  15.  1  have  heard  say  oft.  that  thou  canst
Num.  14.  15.  which  have  heard  the  fame  of  t.

Deut.  2.  25.  begin  to  put  the  dread  of  t.  and  the

fear  of  t.  tremble  and  be  in  anguish  because  oft.

10.  12.  what  doth  the  L.  require  of  t.  Mic.  6.  8.
Ruth  2.  19.  he  that  did  take  knowledge  of  t.

1  Sam.  19.  3.  I  will  commune  with  my  father  oft.

24.  12.  Lord  judge,  and  the  I.ord  avenge  me  oft.

2  Sam.  3.  13.  but  one  thing  I  will  require  of  t.

24.  24.  but  1  will  surely  buv  it  of  t.  at  a  price

1  Kings  2.  16.  and  now  I  ask  one  petition  oft.  20.

11.  11.  Lord  said,  forasmuch  as  this  is  done  of  t.

1  Chron.  22.  11.  build  the  house  as  he  said  oft.

29.  12.  both  riches  and  honour  come  of  t.

14.  all  things  come  of  t.  of  thine  have  we  given
Job  11.6.  that  God  exacteth  of  t.  less  than  thine

38.  3.  for  1  will  demand  of  t.  40.  7.  j  42.  4.

42.  5.  1  have  heard  of  t.  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear
Psal.  22.  25.  my  praise  shall  be  of  t.  71.6.

87.  3.  glorious  things  are  spoken  of  t.  Ocitv  of  G.
Prov.  25.  17.  lest  he  be  weary  of  t.  and  hate  thee
30.7.  two  things  have  I  required  of  t.  deny  me  not
Jsa.  58.  12.  they  that  shall  be  oft.  shall  build  places
64.  7.  none  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  oft.

Jer.  30.  11.  1  will  not  make  a  full  end  of  t.  46.  28.

34.  4.  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  t.  thou  shalt  not  die
51.  26.  they  shall  not  take  of  t.  a  stone  for  a  corner
Ezek.  29.  8.  1  wdll  cut  off  man  and  beast  out  of  t.

32.  6.  and  the  rivers  shall  be  full  oft.

Dan.  2.  23.  hast  made  known  what  we  desired  cf  t.

6.  7.  shall  ask  a  petition,  save  of  t.  O  king,  12.

Mic.  2.  12.  1  will  surely  assemble  all  oft.

5.  2.  yet  out  of  t.  shall  come  forth  the  ruler

7.  17-  and  they  shall  fear  because  of  t.

.A  ah.  1.11.  one  is  come  out  of  t.  a  wicked  counsellor
Zeph.  3.  18.  who  are  of  t.  to  whom  the  reproach
at.  2.  6.  for  out  of  i.  shall  come  a  governor

3.  14.  saying,  I  have  need  to  be  baptized  cf  t.

5.  42.  and  from  him  that  would  borrow  of  t.

Alark  11.  14.  no  man  eat  fruit  oft.  hereafter
Luke  1.  35.  holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  oft.

6.  30.  give  to  every  rnan  that  asketh  of  t.

12.20.  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  oft.

16.  2.  he  said,  how  is  it  that  I  hear  this  of  t.  ?

John  17-7.  w  hatsoever  thou  hast  given  me  are  of  t.
Acts  10.  22.  send  for  thee,  and  to  hear  words  of  t.

28.  21.  neither  shewed  nor  spake  any  harm  of  t.

22.  we  desire  to  hearo/r.  w  hat  thou  tldnkest
1  Cor.  12.  21.  say  to  the  hand,  I  have  no  needo/f.
Phi/em.  20.  let  me  have  joy  of  t.  in  the  Lord
See,  In  the  Ml dst.

^  Off  THEE.

Gen.  40. 19-  Pharaoh  shall  lift  up  thy  head  from  off
t.  and  the  birds  shall  eat  thy  flesh  from  off  t.
Aah.  1.  13.  now  will  1  break  his  yoke  from  off  t.

On  or  upon  TH  EE.

Gen.  16.5.  my  wrong  be  u.  t.  ||  38.  29.  this  breach  u.t.
Exod.  15.26.  I  will  put  none  of  these  diseases  upon  t.
Lev.  19.  19.  nor  linen  nor  woollen  come  upon  t.
Mum.  6.  25.  the  Lord  make  his  face  shine  upon  t.

26.  the  Lord  lift  up  his  countenance  upon  t.

11. 17.  1  "'ill  take  of  the  spirit  which  is  upon  t.
Deut. ^4.  30.  all  these  things  are  come  upont.  30.  1.

13. 17.  the  Lord  may  have  compassion  upon  t.  30.  3.
19.10.so  blood  be  upon  1. 1|  28.  2.  blessings  come  on  t.
28.  15.  all  these  curses  shall  come  upon  t.  20.  45.

Judg.  16.  9-  the  Philistines  be.upon  t.  12. 14,20.

1  Sam.  9.  20.  is  it  not  upon  t.  and  thy  father’s  house
24.  12.  but  mine  hand  shall  not  be  upon  t.  13.

498.


1  Kings  1. 20.  the  eyes  of  all  Israel  are  upon  .

13.  2.  O  altar,  upon  t.  shall  he  offer  the  priests,  and
men’s  bones  shall  be  burnt  upon  t.
21.  21.  behold,  1  w  ill  bring  ev  d  upmt.  and  take

2  kings  4.  4.  thou  shalt  shut  door  upon/,  and  pour
2  Chron.  14.  1 1.  help  us,  O  Lord,  for  we  rest  upont.

19.  2.  therefore  is  wrath  upon  t.  from  the  Lord
20. 12.  we  know  not  what  to  do,  but  our  eyes  upont.
Job  4.  5.  but  now  it  is  come  upont.  and  thou  faintest
Psal.  17.  6.  1  have -called  upon  t.  31. 17.  i  86.  5,  7.

188.9.  Lam.  3.  57.
22.10.1  wras  cast  up.  1. 1|  25.  3.  wait?/p.r.5,21.  1  59.9.
63. 6.  meditate  on  t.  104.27.  these  wait  u.  t.  145.15.
Cant.  6.  13.  return,  return,  that  we  may  look  upon  t.
1  a.  ]  ,\15.  and  I  w  ill  turn  my  hand  upon  t.  and  purge
24.  17.  fear,  and  the  pit,  and  the  snare  are  upon  t.
26.  3.  wilt  keep  him,  whose  mind  is  stayed  upon  t.
47.  9.  they  shall  come  upont.  in  their  perfection
11.  evil  and  desolation  shall  come  upont.  13.

49. 18.  and  bind  them  on  t.  as  a  bride  doth

54.  8.  with  kindness  will  [  have  mercy  out.  10.

59.  21.  my  spirit  that  is  upon  t.  shall  not  depart

60.  I.  and  the  glory  of  the  I.ord  is  risen  upont.  2.
Jer.  14. 22.  therefore  we  will  wait  upon  t.  for  thou

15.  5.  for  w  ho  shall  have  pity  upon  t.  O  Jerusalem  ?
30. 16.  all  that  prey  upon  t.  will  1  uive  for  a  prey
Ezek.  3.  25.  behold,  they  shall  put  bands  upont.  4.8.
5.  17.  and  1  will  bring  the  sword  upont.  29.8.
29.7-  wh  -n  they  leaned  upon  t.  thou  brakest

Mot.  18.  33.  had  compassion,  even  as  1  had  pity  vp.t.

21.  19.  let  no  fruit  grow  ant.  henceforward
Luke  1.  35.  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upont.

19.  43.  for  the  days  shall  come  upon  t.  that  thine
Acts  13.  11.  behold,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  t.
18.  10.  no  man  shall  set  on  t.  to  hurt  thee

22. 19.  they  know  that  I  beat  them  that  believ.  on  t.

1  Tim.  1.  18.  prophecies  which  went  before  on  t.
Rev.  3.  3.  1  will  come  on  t.  as  a  thief,  and  thou

shalt  not  know  what  hour  1  will  come  upon  t
Over  TH  EE.

Gen.  3.  16.  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  t.
Deut.  15.  6.  but  they  shall  not  reign  over  t.

17.  15.  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  set  him  kingorert.

thou  mayest  not  s’et  a  stranger  over  f.  28.  36.
30.  9.  the  Lord  will  again  rejoice  overt,  for  good
Psal.  91.11.  give  his  angels  charge  over  t.  Luke  4.10.
Isa.  (si.  5.  so  shall  thy  God  rejoice  overt.

Jer.  1.3.  21.  hast  taught  them  to  be  chief  over  t.
Lam.l.  17.  caused  thine  enemy  to  rejoice  over  t.
Ezek.  16.  8.  I  spread  my  skirt  over  t.  and  covered

32.3.  I  will  therefore  spread  out  my  net  over  t.
Dan.  4.  25.  and  seven  times  shall  pass  over  t.  .32.
Nah.  3.  19.  all  that  hear  shall  clap  the  hands  over  t.
Zeph.  3. 17.  he  will  rejoice  over  t.  he  will  joy  over  t.

Through  THE  E.

Psal.  44.  5.  thr.  t.  will  we  push  down  our  enemies
To  or  unto  TH  EE.

Gen.  4.  7.  unto  t.  shall  be  his  desire,  thou  shalt  rule
13.  15.  to  t.  will  1  give  it,  17.  1 17.  8.  |  26.  3.  |  28.

4,13.135.12.

18.  10.  he  said,  I  will  certainly  return  unto  t.  14.

20.  16.  behold,  he  is  to  t.  a  covering  of  the  eyes

27.  29.  let  people  and  nations  bow  down  to  t.

28.  15.  done  that  which  1  have  spoken  to  t.  of

22.  1  will  surely  give  the  tenth  of  all  unto  t.

29.  19.  better  1  give  her  to  t.  than  to  another
.31.  12.  I  have  seen  all  that  Laban  doth  untot.

16.  now  then  whatsoever  God  hath  said  unto  t.  do
32.  discern  what  is  thine  with  me,  and  take  tot.

39.  that  w  hich  was  tom  I  brought  not  unto  t.

52.  that  I  will  not  pass  over  this  heap  to  t.

38.  16.  go  to,  1  pray  thee,  let  me  come  in  unto  t.

42.  .37.  if  I  bring  linn  not  to  t.  43.  9.  |  44.  .32.

44.  8.  behold,  the  money  we  brought  again  unto  t.
50. 17.  forgive,  I  pray  thee,  for  they  did  unto  t.  evil
Exod.  .3.  12.  and  this  shall  be  a  token  unto  t.

4.  16.  he  shall  be  to  t.  instead  of  a  month

1.3.  9.  it  shall  be  unto  t.  for  a  sign,  2  Kings  19.  29.

Isa.  38.  7.

18.  22.  a  great  matter  they  shall  bring  unto  t.

28.  1.  take  untot.  Aaron  thy  brother  and  his  sons

30.23.  take  thou  also  unto  i.  principal  spices
33.  5.  that  l  may  know  what  to  do  unto  t.

Lev.  21.8.  he  shall  be  holy  unto  t.  for  I  am  holy
24.  2.  that  they  bring  untot.  pure  oil  olive

Num.  6.  25.  the  Lord  be  gracious  unto  t.

1 1 . 23.  whether  my  word  shall  come  to  pass  unto  t.

18.2.  thatthe  tribeof  Levi  may  be  joined  unto  t.  4.

19.  it  is  a  covenant  of  salt  unto  t.  and  to  thy  seed
22.  38.  Balaam  said  to  Ealak,  lo,  I  am  com  £  untot.
Deut.  4.35.  unto  t.  it  was  shewed  that  thou  mightest
7.  25.  shalt  not  take  the  gold  of  their  gods  unto  t.

15.  9.  he  cry  to  Lord  and  it  be  sin  untot.  24.  15.

18.  15.  the  Lord  will  raise  up  unto  t.  a  prophet

18.  L  will  raise  them  up  a  prophet  like  untot.

22.  7.  let  the  dam  go,  and  take  the  young  to  t.

23.  15.  servant  escaped  from  his  master  untot.

33.  29.  who  is  like  unto  t.  1  Sam.  26.  15.  Psal.

,  35.  10.  |  71.  19.

Josh.  1.  17.  as  to  Moses,  so  will  we  hearken  unto  t.

2.  18.  bring  all  thy  father’s  household  home  unto  t.
Judg. ~.  A.  of  whom  1  say  untot.  this  shall  not  go
17.  3.  now  therefore  1  will  restore  it  untot.

Ruth  .3.  13.  if  he  will  perform  unto  1.  the  part  of
4. 15.  he  shall  b  eunto  t.  a  restorer  of  thy  life,  daugh¬
ter  in-law  who  is  better  to  t.  than  seven  sons
1  Sam.  1.  8.  am  not  I  better  to  t.  than  ten  sons  ?

8.7.  in  all  that  they  say  unto  1. 1|  8.  so  do  they  unto  t.

9- 17-  behold  the  man  1  speak  to  t.  of  shall  reign

11.  .3.  and  then  we  will  come  out  to  t.

16.3.  thou  shalt  anoint  him  whom  I  name  unto  t.

17.  45.  but  I  come  to  t.  in  the  name  of  the  I  ord
20.21.  for  there  is  peace  to  1. 1|  25.  6.  peace  be  to  t.

28.  8.  bring  me  him  up  whom  I  shall  name  unto  t.

10.  there  shall  no  punishment  happen  to  t.

ISam.  3.  12.  to  bring  about  all  Israel  untot.

12.  14.  the  child  that  is  born  untot.  shall  surely  die
17.  3.  and  I  will  bring  back  all  the  people  untot.

19. 7.  that  will  be  worse  unto  t.  than  all  the  evil
20.  21.  his  head  shall  be  thrown  to  t.  over  the  wall
22.  50.  1  will  give  thanks  unto  t.  Psal.  18.  49. 1

30.  12.  |  75.  1.1  119.  62.


2  Sam.  24.  12.  choose  thee  one  that  T  may  do  it  u.  »

1  lungs  3.  12.  neither  shalt  any  arise  liketwW  t.

8.  52.  hearken  in  all  that  they  call  for  unto  t.

11.  .31.  and  I  will  give  ten  tribes  unto  t.

.38.  1  will  be  with  thee,  and  will  give  Israel  unto  t,

14.  6.  for  I  am  sent  to  t.  with  heavy  tidings

19.  £0.  go  back  again,  for  what  have  J  done  to  t .

20.  6.  1  will  send  my  servants  unto  t.  tomorrow

21.  3.  give  the  inheritance  of  my  fatneis  unto  t.

22.  24.  went  the  spirit  from  me  to  speak  unto  t.  ?

2  Kings  2.  10.  if  thou  see  me,  it  shall  be  so  unto  K

5.  6.  now  when  this  letter  is  come  unto  t.  behold

27.  the  leprosy  of  Naaman  shall  cleave  unto  t

6.  7.  take  it  up  to  t.  ||  8.  14.  what  said  F Hsha  to  t.

9.  5.  he  said,  1  have  an  errand  to  t.  O  captain
1 1.  wherefore  came  this  mad  fellow  to  t.  ?

20.  14.  from  whence  came  they  unto  1. 1  Isa.  .39.  3;

1  Chr.  12.  18.  peace  be  unto  t.  and  thine  helpers'

16.  18.  unto  t.  will  I  give  the  land,  Psal.  105.  11.

2  Chr.  26.  18.  it  appertaineth  not  unto  t.  Uzziah
Ezra  10.  4.  arise,  tor  this  matter  belongeth  unto  t.

A' eh.  9.  26.  testified  against  them  to  turn  them  to  r.
Esth.  .3.  11.  the  silver  is  given  to  t.  the  people  also
Job  7.  20.  I  have  sinned,  what  shall  1  do  unto  t.  ?
Ps.  5.  2.  hearken  unto  me,  for  unto  t.  will  I  pray,  3,

10. 14.  the  poor  committeth  himself  unto  t.

16.  2.  my  Lord,  my  goodness  extendeth  not  to  t.

22.  5.  they  cried  unto  t.  and  were  delivered

25.1.  untot.  O  L.  do  l  lift  up  my  soul, 86. 4.  1 1 43. Bi

27.  8.  my  heart  said  unto  t.  thy  face  w  ill  1  seek

28.  1.  unto  t.  will  I  cry,  2.  1 .30.  8.  t  .31.  22.  |  56.  9-.

I  61.  2.  (  86.  3.  I  88.  1.3.  )  130.  1.  |  141.  1.

30.  12.  may  smg  praise  to  t.  56.  12.  I  59.  17.  |  66*

4.  171.  £2,  23

32.  5.  T  acknowledged  my  sin  unto  t.  and  iniquity
62.  12.  also  unto  t.  O  Lord,  belongeth  mercy
65.  1.  and  unto  t.  shall  the  vow  be  performed

2.  thou  hearest  prayer,  unto  t.  shall  all  flesh  come
69.  13.  my  prayer  is  unto  t.  in  an  acceptable  time-
86.  8.  among  the  gods  there  is  none  like  unto  t.

89.  8.  O  Lord  G.  who  is  a  strong  Lord  like  unto  t.T
101.  1.  unto  t.  O  Lord,  will  1  sing,  108.  3. 1  1.38.  1

I  144.  9.  Ileh.  2.  12.

102. 1 .  hear  my  prayer,  and  let  my  cry  come  unto  t.
120.  .3.  what  shall  he  given  unto  t.  thou  false  tongue-
123.  1.  unto  t.  will  1  lift  up  mine  eyes,  141.  8.

I. 39.  12.  darkness  and  light  are  both  alike  to  t.

Prov.  22.  19.  made  known  to  t.  this  day,  even  to  t*

23.  7.  eat  and  drink,  saith  he  to  t.  but  his  heart

25.  7-  better  it  be  said  unto  t.  come  up  hither
Isa.  14. 10.  all  they  shall  speak  and  say  unto  t.

30.  19.  he  will  be  very  gracious  unto  t~.  at  thy  cry
36.  12.  hath  my  master  sent  me  to  t.  to  speak
47:  9.  but  these  two  things  shall  come  to  t.

15.  thus  shall  they  he  untot.  with  whom  thou
49-  18.  all  these  gather  together  and  come  to  1.

51.  19.  these  two  things  are  come  unto  t.

55.  5.  nations  that  knew  not  thee  shall  run  unto  t.
60.  19.  neither  shall  the  moon  give  light  unto  t.  the
J>ord  shall  be  unto  t.  an  everlasting  lighfr
Jer.  2.  .31 .  we  are  lords,  we  will  come  no  more  unto  t.

3.  22.  behold,  we  come  unto  t.  for  thou  art  our  God

10.  6.  forasmuch  as  there  is  none  like  unto  t.

7.  who  would  not  fear,  for  to  t.  doth  it  appertain-?

II. 20.  for  unto  t.  have  I  revealed  my  cause,  20. 12.

15.  19.  let  them  return  unto  t.  but  return  not  thou-
20.  15.  man  child  is  born  untot.  making  him  glad

22.  21.  1  spake  unto  t.  in  thy  prosperity,  but  thou

30.  15.  I  have  done  these  things  unto  t.

38.  20.  which  1  speak  un.  t.  so  it  shall  be  well  un.  t.
40.  4.  if  thou  come  with  me,  I  will  look  well  un.  f.
44. 16.  as  for  the  word,  we  will  not  hearken  unto  i
45.  5.  but  thy  life  will  I  give  unto  t.  for  a  prey
48.  27.  for  was  not  Israel  a  derision  unto  t.  ?

Lam.  2.  13.  what  thing  shall  1  liken  to  t.  O  Jems,
what  shall  I  equal  to  t.  that  1  may  comfort  thee  ?

4.  21.  the  cup  also  shall  pass  through  unto  t.

5.  21.  turn  thou  us  unto  t.  and  we  shall  be  turned
Ezek.  3.  6.  they  would  have  hearkened  unto  t.

7.  the  house  of  Israel  would  not  hearken  unto  1.

16.  5.  no  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these  unto  s

6.  1  said  unto  t.  when  thou  wast  in  thy  blood,  live
34.  givest  a  reward,  and  no  reward  is  given  unto  t

60.  I  will  establish  untor.  an  everlasting  covenan

61.  and  I  will  give  them  unto  t.  for  daughters
Dan.  4.  26.  thy  kingdom  shall  be  sure  unto  t.

31.  to  t.  it  is  spoken,  the  kingdom  is  departed
9.  7-  O  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth  unto  t.

Has.  6.  4.  O  Ephraim,  what  Shall  1  do  unto  t.?

Joel  1.  19.  to  t.  will  1  cry  |j  20.  the  beasts  cry  unto  t.
Amos  4.  12.  thus  will  1  do  unto  1. 1  will  do  this  unto  t.
Jonah  1.11.  they  said,  what  shall  we  do  unto  t.  ?

2.  7.  my  prayer  came  in  unto  t.  into  thy  temple
Alic.  2.  11.  saying,  1  will  prophesy  unto  t.  of  win*

4.  8.  un.  t.  shall  it  come  ||  6.  3.  what  have  I  done  u.  i.

7.  12.  he  shall  comew  t.  even  from  Assyria
Hab.  1.  2.  1  even  cry  out  unto  t.  of  violence

2.  16.  cup  of  the  Lord’s  right  hand  be  turned  unto  t.
Zech.  2.  1 1.  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  t.

9.  9.  behold,  thy  king  cometh  unto  t.  Mat.  21.  5.
Alat.  8.  13.  as  thou  hast  believed,  so  be  it  done  unto  t.

16.  17.  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  t.

18.  and  I  say  also  unto  t.  that  thou  art  Peter

19.  1  will  give  unto  t.  the  keys  of  the  kingdom
22.  be  it  far  from  thee,  this  shall  not  be  unto  t.

18. 17-  let  him  be  unto  t.  as  an  heathen  and  publican
22.  Jesus  saith,  1  say  not  unto  t.  till  seven  times

20.  14.  I  will  give  unto  this  last  even  as  unto  t.

23.  37.  thou  stonest  them  sent  unto  t.  Luke  13.  34.
25.  44.  or  in  prison,  and  did  not  minister  unto  t.

Alark  5.  41.  I  say  unto  t.  arise,  Luke  5.  24.  |7.  14.

10.  51.  what  wilt  thou  that  l  Jo  untot.  l.ttke  \8.  41.  J
Luke  1.19.  I  am  sent  to  speak  un.  1.  and  shew  thee

7-7-  1  thought  not myself  woi  thy  to  come  unto  t.

40.  I  have  somewhat  to  say  u.  t.  be  saith,  say  ou

8.  39.  how  great  things  God  bath  done  unto  t.

John  4.  26.  Jesus  saith,  1  that  speak  unto  t.  am  be

5.  14.  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  tiling  come  unto  t

9.  26.  w  hat  did  be  to  1. 11  11. 40.  said  1  not  unto  t.

17-  11.  these  are  in  world,  and  1  am  cotne  to  t.  13.

18  ’to.  we  would  not  have  delivered  him  unto  t.

19.  11.  he  that  delivered  me  u.  t.  hath  the  great,  sin


T  H  E


T  h  E


T  H  E


John?  1.  22.  what  is  that  to  t.  follow  thou  me,  23.
Acts  9.  17.  Jesus  that  appeared  unto  t.  sent  me

10.  32.  who  when  he  comelh,  shall  speak  unto  t.

33.  immediately  therefore  1  sent  to  t.

21.  37.  lie  sail!  to  tlie  captain,  may  1  speak  unto  t.  ?

26.  16.  for  I  have  appeared  u.ito  t.  for  tl  is  purpose

Rom.  15.  9.  for  this  cause  will  l  confess  to  t.

2  Ti'n.  1.  14.  that  good  thing  committed  unto  t.  keep
Philem.  11.  hut  now  profitable  tot.  and  me

16.  a  brother  to  me,  but  how  much  more  to  t.
Ret.  11.  17.  thou  hast  taken  to  t.  thy  great  power
Towards  1  HER,

1  Sam.  iy.4.  his  works  have  been  \  ery  good  toward >  t.

2  l\ini 7.v3.  14.  I  would  not  look  towards  t.  nor  see  thee
Jer.  12.  3.  thou  hast  tried  mine  heart  towards  t.
Ezek.  16.  42.  so  will  1  make  my  fury  tow  a  ids  /.to  rest

63.  because  of  shame,  when  1  am  pacified  t.  t.
Rom.  11.  22. but  towards /.goodness, it  thou  continue
Under  1  II  EE.

Dent.  28.  23.  the  earth  that  [sunder  t.  shall  be  iron
Psal.  45.5.  arrows  whereby  the  people,  fall  under  t.
Prov.  22.  27.  why  should  he  take  thy  bed  fr>  m  und.t.
r  Isa.  14.  11.  w  orm  is  spread  und.  t.  worms  cover  thee
I  Gbad.  7.  that  eat  thv  bread  have  laid  a  wound  vn.  t.
With  HIKE.

I  •Gen.  6.  18.  with  t.  will  1  establish  my  covenant

17.  4.m>  covenant  is  with  t.  Ex.  34.27.  Pent. 29.12.

19.  9.  now  will  we  deal  worse  with  t.  than  with  them
21.22.  saying,  God  is  with  t.  in  all  that  thou  doest

24.  40.  the  Lord  will  send  his  angel  u’ith  t.

26.  3.  I  will  be  with  t.  ||  24.  I  am  with  t.  28.  15.  |

31.  3.  1  46.  4.  Exod.  3.  12.  Pent.  31.  23.  Josh.
1.  5.  I  3.  7.  1  Kings  11.  38.  La.  43.  2.

28.  we  saw  certainly  that  the  Lord  was.  with  t.
Exod.  18.  19.  hearken,  and  God  shall  be  with  t.

25.  22.  and  there  1  will  meet  with  t.  30.  6,  36.

33.  14.  my  presence  shall  go  with  t.  Dent.  31.  6.  8.

Judg.  6.  16.

Lev.  19.  1.3.  w'ages  shall  not  abide  with  t;  all  night
Xum.  5.  19.  if  no  man  hath  lien  with  t.  he  thou  free

20.  some  man  hath  lien  with  t.  beside  thy  husband

22.  9.G  .said  to  Balaam,  what  men  are  these  with  t.?
dJeut.  2.  7.  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  been  with  t.

4.  40.  that  it  may  go  well  with  t.  5.  16. 1  6.  .3,  18.  I
12.25,28.|19.13.|22.7.
15.  16.  it  he  will  not  go  because  he  is  well  with  t.
20. 1.  the  Lord  thy  God  is  with  t.  Josh.  1.  9.  Judg.

6.  12.  2  Sam.  7 .  3.

20.  against  the  city  that  maketb  war  tvith  t.

23.  16.  lie  shall  dwell  with  t.  even  among  you
Judg.  4.  9.  and  she  said,  1  will  surely  go  with  t.

7.2.  the  people  that  are  with  t.  are  too  many

4.  this  shall  go  with  1. 1|  19-20.  peace  be  with  t.
Ruth  3.  1.  rest  for  thee,  that  it  may  be  well  with  t.

1  Sa/n.  10.  7-  for  God  is  with  t.  Luke  1.  28.

14.  7-  behold,  I  am  with  t.  according  to  thine  heart

17.  37.  the  Lord  be  with  t.  20.  1.3. 1  Chr.  22.  11.  16.

21.  1.  why  art  thou  alone,  and  no  man  with  t.

28.  19.  I  will  deliver  Israel  with  t.  to  Philistines

29.  8. hast  thou  found,  so  long  as  1  have  been  with  t.

2  Sam.  3.  12.  and  behold  my  hand  shall  be  with  t.
7.9.1  was  w.t.  1  Chr.  17.8.  ||  13.  20.Amnon  been  w.  t.
13.  26.  king  said  to  him,  w  hy  should  he  go  with  t.
14. 17.  Lord  thy  God  will  be  with  t.  1  Chr.  28.20.

15.  20.  return  thou,  mercy  and  truth  be  with  t.

28.  14.  then  said  Joab,  1  may  not  tarry  thus  with  t.
19.  7.  there  will  not  tarry  on 0  with  t.  this  night

!  '3  h  ings  2. 8.  thou  hast  with  t.  Shimei  who  cursed  me

3.  6.  as  he  walked  in  uprightness  of  heart  with  t.

•6.  12.  then  will  1  perform  my  word  with  t.

13.  8.  1  will  not  go  in  with  t.  nor  eat  bread,  16.

17-  18.  what  have  l  to  do  with  t.  2  Kings  3.  13.

2  Chron.  .35.  21.  Mark  5.  7-  Luke  8.  28.  John  2. 4.
2  Kings  4.  26. is  it  well  w.  r. 115.26. went  not  heart  w.  t.

14.  10.  even  thou  and  Judah  with  t.  2  Chron.  25.  19.

2  Chron.  14.  11.  Lord,  it  is  nothing  with  t.  to  help

18.  3.  and  we  will  be  with  t.  Ezra  10.  4.

25.  7.  O  king,  let  not  the  army  of  Israel  go  with  t.
Jo6  5.  23.  the  beasts  shall  be  at  peace  with  t.

10.  13.  I  know  that  this  is  with  t.

14.  3.  and  bringest  me  into  judgment  with  t.

5.  seeing  the  number  of  his  months  are  with  t.

•15.  11.  are  the  consolations  of  God  small  witht.?

is  there  any  secret  thing  with  t.
36.  4.  he  that  is  perfect  in  know  ledge  with  t.

40.  15.  behold  now  behemoth,  which  1  made  with  t.
Psal.  5.  4.  neither  shall  evil  dwell  with  t.

36.  9.  for  with  1.  is  the  fountain  of  life

39.  12.  I  am  a  stranger  with  t.  and  a  sojourner

73.  23.  nevertheless  1  am  continually  with  t.

•94.  20. shall  iniquity  have  fellowship  with  t.

116.  7.  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with  t.

128.  2.  happy  shalt  thou  be,  it  shall  be  well  with  t.
130.  4.  but  tneie  is  forgiveness  with  t.

139.  18.  when  I  awake,  1  am  still  with  t.

Prov.  2.  1.  and  hide  my  commandments  with  t.

5.  17..  be  only  thine  own  and  not  strangers  with  t.

6.  2G.it slia.ll  talk  with  t.  [|  23. 7.  his  heart  is  not  w.  t .
Cant.  6.  1.  that  we  may  seek  him  with  t.

Isa.  16.  4.  let  mine  outcasts  dwell  with  t.  Moab
41. 10.  1  am  with  t.  43.  5.  Jer.  1 . 8, 19.  1  15.  20.  1  30.

11.1  46.  28.  Acts  18.  10.

11.  they'  that  strive  with  t.  shall  perish,  12.

49.25.  contend  with  him  that  contended)  with  t.

54.  9.  1  havesworu  that  1  would  not  be  wroth  w.  t.

Jer.  2.35.1  will  plead  with  /.j|  12.1. when  I  plead  w.t.

34.  3.  and  he  shall  speak  with  t.  mouth  to  mouth
51.  20.  with  t.  will  1  break  in  pieces  the  nations

2 1 .  with  t.  will  I  break  in  pieces  horse  and  rider

22.  with  t.  will  1  break  in  pieces  old  and  young

23.  with  t.  will  I  break  shepherd  and  husbandman
Ezek.  2.  6.  though  briars  and  thorns  be  with  t.

3.  22.  go  into  the  plain,  1  will  there  talk  with

16.  8.  and  I  entered  into  a  covenant  with  t.

59.  1  will  even  deal  with  t.  as  thou  hast  done
62.  and  1  will  establish  my  covenant  witht.

22.  14.  in  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with  t.

27.  21.  thev  occupied  with  t.  in  lambs  and  rams
32.  4.  I  w  ill  fill  the  beasts  of  the  earth  with  t.

38.  6.  his  bands  and  many  people  w.  t.  9.15.  1  39.  4.
Hos.  4.  5.  the  prophet  shall  fall  with  t.  in  the  night
Ams.  s6.  10.  and  shall  say,  is  there  yet  any  with  t.


Chad.  7.  die  men  that  were  at  peace  witht.

Zech.  14.  5.  shall  come,  and  all  the  saints  with  t.
Mat.  1 .8. will  he  he  pleased  with  t.  or  accept  persons  •
Mat  8.29.  behol  I,  they  cried  out,  what  have  w  e  to
do  witht.  Mark  1.  24.  Luke  4.  34.

12.  4| .  stand  without,  desiring  to  speak  with  t.

18.  16.  then  take  witht.  one  or  two  more
26.35.  Peter  said,  tho’  1  sh.  diewifh  t.  Mark\4.3\.

Luke  22.  .33.  1  am  ready  to  go  w.  t.  both  into  prison
John  3.26.  he  that  was  witht.  beyond  Jordan
9.  37.  seen  him,  and  it  is  lie  that  talked)  witht.
17.5.  with  the  glory  which  1  .vad  witht.  before

21.3.  they  say  unto  him,  we  a’so  go  witht.

Acts  8.20.  Peter  said,  thy  money  perish  witht.
Eph.  6.  3.  hon.  thy  father  that  it  may  be  well  with  t.

I  l'im.  6. 21.  grace  be  w.  t  H  2  Tim.  4. 11.  bring  zr./.13.

Within  1  HER.

Prut.  28.  43.  the  stranger  within  t.  shall  get  above
Psal.  122.  8.  1  will  now  say,  peace  be  within  t.

147.  13.  he  hath  blessed  thy  children  within  t.
Prov.  22. 18.  is  pleasant,  if  thou  keep  ‘hem  within  t.
Jer.  A.  14.  shall  thy  vain  thoughts  loc  ge  within  t.
Luke  19-44.  and  they  shall  lay  thy  children  within  t.
Without  111  R  R.

Gen.  41. 44.  without  t.  shall  no  man  lift  t  p  his  hand
See  Teach,  Tel.l.

Til  EFT,  S.

Exod.  22.  3.  then  he  shall  be  sold  for  bis  t.

4.  if  the  t.  be  certainly  found  in  his  hand  alive
Mat.  15.  19.  out  of  the  heart  proceed  t.  Mark  7.  22.
Rev.  9.21.  neither  repented  they  of  their  t.
THEIRS.

Gen.  15. 13.  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  that  is  not  t.

34.  23.  shall  not  every  beast  of  t.  be  ours  i

43.  34.  mess  was  five  times  as  much  as  any  of  t.
Exod.  29.  9.  and  the  priests'  office  shall  be  t.

Lev.  18.  10.  for  t.  is  thine  own  nakedness
Xum.  16.  26.  depart  and  touch  nothing  of  t.

18. 9.  every  oblation  of  t.  every  meat  offering  of  1.
Josh.  21.  10.  for  t.  was  the  first  lot,  1  Chron.  6.  54.

2  Chron.  18.  12.  let  thy  word  be  like  one  of  t.

Jer.  44.  28.  whose  words  shall  stand,  mine  or  t.
Ezek.  7.  11.  none  shall  remain,  nor  any  of  t.

44.29.  every  delicate  thing  in  Israel  shall  be  t.
Hah.  1. 6.  to  possess  dwelling  places  that  are  not  t.
Mat.  5.  3.  for/,  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  10.

1  Cor.  1.  2.  call  on  our  Lord,  both  t.  and  ours

2  Tim.  3.  9.  folly  shall  be  manifest,  as  t.  was

1  11  EM.

Gen.  1.  27-  male  and  female  created  he  t.

Xum.  14.  31.  your  little  ones,  t.  w  ill  1  bring  in
Peut.  28.61.  t.  will  the  Lord  bring  upon  thee
1  Sam.  2.  30.  t.  that  honour  me,  I  will  honour
25;  29.  t.  shall  he  sling  out,  as  out  of  a  sling

1  Kings  13.  11.  f.  they  told  also  to  their  father

2  Kings  23.  5.  t.  that  burned  incense  unto  Raal

1  Chron.  15.  2.  t.  hath  the  Lord  chosen  to  carry

2  Chron.  8.  8.  /.did  Solomon  make  to  pay  tribute
Psal.  5.  11.  let  t.  shout  for  joy,  let  t.  that  love

35.  19.  nor  let  t.  wink  with  eye  that  hate  me
68.  1.  let  t.  also  that  hate  him  flee  before  him

Isa.  41.  12.  even  /.  that  contended  with  thee
56.  7- even/,  will  1  bring  to  my  holy  mountain
Pan.  6.  24.  they  cast  t.  into  the  den  of  lions
Zeph.  1.5./.  that  worship  the  host  of  heaven
3. 11.  take  away  /.  that  rejoice  in  thy  pride
Mat.  13.41.  shall  gather  out  /.  which  do  iniquity

24.  16.  then  let  /.  which  be  in  Judea  flee  into  the
mountains,  Mark  13.  14.  Luke  21.  21.
Mark  16.  13.  they  told  it,  neither  believed  they  /.
Luke  4.  18.  to  set  at  liberty  /.  that  are  bruised
1 1. 52.  and  /.  that  were  entering  in  ye  hindered

19.  45.  cast  out  /.  that  sold  and  /.  that  bought

24.  33.  found  the  eleven,  and  /.  that  were  with  /.
John  10. 16.  other  sheep  1  have,  /.  also  must  1  bring
Acts  15.  19.  my  sentence  is,  that  we  trouble  not  /.
21.24.  /.  take  and  purify  thyself  with  /.

22. 19-  that  1  beat  /.  that  believed  on  thee
Rom.  8.  30.  morepver,  /.  he  also  called,  /.  he  also
justified,  and  /.  he  also  glorified

11.  14.  provoke  to  emulation  /.  which  are  my  flesh
1  Cor.  5. 12.  to  judge  /.  also  that  are  without

13.  but  /.  that  are  without  God  judged)

16.  18.  therefore  acknowledge  ye  /.  that  are  such

1  Thess.  4.  14.  even  so  /.  also  that  sleep  in  Jesus

2  Thess.  3.  12.  now  /.  that  are  such,  we  command

1  Tim.  4. 16.  shalt  save  thyself  and  /.  that  hear  thee
5.20.  /.  that  sin  rebuke  before  all,  that  others
Heh.  10. 14.  hath  perfected  /.  that  are  sanctified

13.3.  remember  t.  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound

1  Pet.  A.  19- let /.  that  suffer  according  to  will  of  G.
Rev.  9.  17-  thus  1  saw  horses  and  /.  that  sat  on  /.

11.1.  and  measure  /.  that  worship  therein
13.  6.  to  blaspheme  /.  that  dwell  in  heaven

19.  20.  beast  was  taken,  and  /.  that  worshipped
Above  THEM.

Exod.  18.  11.  they  dealt  proudly,  he  was  above  t.
Xum.  3.  49.  of  them  that  were  over  and  above  t.

2  Sam.  22.  49. lifted  above  t.  that  rose  against  me
2  Chr.  34. 4.  images  that  were  above  t.  he  cut  down

About  I  HEM.

Gen.  35.  5.  terror  was  on  the  cities  round  about  t.
Ruth  1.  19.  that  all  the  city  was  moved  about  t
2  kings  17.  15.  after  the  heathen  that  were  about  t.

2  Chron.  14.  7.  and  make  about  t.  walls  and  towers
R.zra  1.  6.  all  about  t.  strengthened  their  hands
Ezek.  1.  18.  were  full  of  eyes  round  about  t.  four
28.26.  all  those  that  despise  them  round  about  t.
Mark  9. 14.  he  saw  a  great  multitude  about  t.

Luke  1.65.  fear  came  on  all  that  dwelt  round  about t.
2.  9.  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  t.
Jude  7.  and  the  cities  about  t.  in  like  manner
After  THEM.

Gen.  41.  3.  seven  other  kine  came  up  after  1. 19.  27.

23.  and  seven  ears  withered  sprung  up  after  t.

30.  shall  arise  after  t.  seven  years  of  famine
48.  6.  thy  issue  which  thou  begettest  after  t.

Exod.  10. 14.  neither  after  t.  shall  be  such  locusts
t4.  4.  he  shall  follow  after  t.  and  I  will  be  honoured
Lev.  20.  6.  that  turneth  to  go  a  whoring  after  t.

Pent.  1. 8.  to  give  it  to  them  and  their  seed  after  t.

4. 37.  therefore  he  chose  their  seed  after  1. 10.  15.


I  hut.  12.t  30.  take  heed,  that  thou  be  not  soared  a.  t
Josh.  2.5,  pursue  after  t.  quickly  yeshal.  overtake

7.  the  men  pursued  of.t.  8.  16.  judg.ii.  12.  120.45.
Judg.  2.  10.  mere  arose  another  generatioa  after  l.
Ruth  2.  9.  the  field  that  they  reap,  go  thou  ajter  t.

I  Sa/n.  6.  12.  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  went  a.  t.

14.  22.  they  followed  hard  after  t.  in  the  battle

1  Kings  9.  21.  upon  the  children  that  were  left

after  t.  did  Solomon  levy  tri.iute,  2  Chron.  8.  8.

2  Kings  7.  15.  they  w  ent  after  t.  to  Jordan,  and  lo
10.  29.  Jehu  departed  not  from  after  t.  to  wit

1  Chr.  14. 14.  go  not  up  a.  1. 1|  A  eh.  12.  38.  and  I  a.  t.
Job  30.  5.  they  cried  after  /.  as  after  a  thief

Jer.  2.  25.  I  loved  sti angers,  and  after  t.  will  I  go
9.  16.  1  will  send  a  sword  after  t.  49.  37.  Ezek.

5.  2,  12. |  12.  14.

25.  26.  the  king  of  Sheshach  shall  drink  after  t.

32. 18.  thou  1  ecompensest  the  iniquit.s  of  the  fathers
into  the  bosom  of  their  diildren  after  t.
39.  fear  me,  for  the  good  of  their  children  after  t.
39.  5.  but  the  Chaldeans’  army  pursued  after  t.

50.  21.  waste  and  utterly  destroy  after  t.

Ezek.  29.  16.  when  they  shall  look  aft*1'  t.

3 1.  6.  was  scattered,  none  did  search  or  seek  after  t.
Dan.  7.  24.  and  another  king  shall  rise  after  t.
Zech.  6.  6.  and  the  white  horses  go  forth  after  t.

7.  14.  thus  the  land  was  desolate  after  t.

Luke  17.  23.  see  here,  or  see  there,  go  not  a.  t.  21.  8.
Acts  20.  30.  to  draw  away  disciples  after  t.

Against  I  II  EM.

Gen.  14. 15.  he  divided  himself  against  t.  by  night
Exod.  32.  10.  that  my  wrath  may  wax  hot  against  /.

Xum.  12.  9.  Dent.  2.  15.  |  31.  17.  Judg.  2.  15.
Num.  16.  19.  Korah  gathered  the  congregation  ag.  t.

21.  33.  Og  king  of  Bashau  went  out  against  t.
Peut.  CO.  19.  destroy  trees  by  forcing  an  axe  ag.  /.

28.  25.  thou  shalt  go  out  one  way  ag.  t.  and  Hee
31.  21.  this  song  shall  testify  ag.  t.  as  a  witness

28.  and  call  heaven  and  earth  to  record  ag.  :.
Josh.  8.22.  the  other  issued  out  of  the  city  ag.  t.

22.  33.  did  not  intend  to  go  up  ag.  /.  in  battle
Judg.  11.  25.  did  he  ever  strive  or  fight  against  t.

2  Sam.  24.1.  he  moved  Dav.  ag.  t.  to  say,  gonumber
2  Kings  17. 15,  testimonies  which  he  testified  ag.  t.

1  C/u on.  5.  11.  children  of  Gad  dwelt  over  ag.  t.

20.  they  were  helped  ag.  /.  for  they  cried  to  God

2  Chron.' 20.  16.  to-morrow  go  ye  down  ag.  t.  17.

24.  19.  prophets  testified  ag.  t.  Neh.  9.  26,29,  30,34.
28.  12.  stood  up  ag.  t.  that  came  from  the  war
Ezra  4.  5.  hired  counsellors  against  t.  to  frustrate

8.  22.  but  his  wrath  is  against  t.  that  forsake  him
A  eh.  4.  9.  we  set  a  watch  against  t.  day  and  night
5.  7-  and  I  set  a  great  assembly  against  t.

9.  10.  knewest  that  they  dealt  proudly  against  t.

12.  9.  brethren  were  over  ag.  t.  in  the  watches

13.  2.  hired  Balaam ag.t.  ||  15.  1  testified  ag.t.TA,
Psal.  17.  7.  savest  from  those  that  rise  up  ag.  /.

34.  16.  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  t.  that  do

evil,  1  Pet.  3.  12
La.  3.  9.  their  countenance  doth  witness  against  t
5.  25.  he  hath  stretched  forth  his  hand  against  t.
13.  17.  behold,  I  will  stir  up  the  Medes  against  1.
14.22.  I  w ill  rise  up  ag.  t.  |j  63. 10.  he  fought  ag.  t.
Jer.  1.  16.  and  I  will  utter  my  judgments  ag.  t.

4.  12.  I  W)ll  give  sentence  a.  /.  ||  23.  32.  I  am  a.  t.

25.  30.  prophesy  a.  t.  Ezek.  6.  2. 1  13.  17.  |  25.  2.

26.  19.  evil  he  pronounced  ay.  t.  35.  17.  |  36.  31.
Lam.  1.  13.  he  sent  fire,  and  it  prevaileth  ag.  t.
Ezek.  15.  7-  and  I  will  set  my  face  against  t.

20.  8.  to  accomplish  my  anger  ag.  t.  in  Egypt

35.  11.  thou  hast  used  out  of  thy  hatred  ag.  /.

38.  17.  that  1  would  bring  thee  against  t.

Pan.  7.  21.  and  the  same  horn  prevailed  against  t.
Hos.  8.  5.  mine  anger  is  kindled  against  t.

1  >.  10.  the  people  shall  be  gathered  against  t.

Mat.  10.  18.  for  a  testimony  against  t.  Mark  o.  11

1  13.  9.  Luke  9.  5
Mark  12. 12.  spoken  that  parable  ag.  /.  Luke  20.  19
Acts  13.  51 .  shook  off  the  dustof  their  feet  against  t
16.  22.  the  multitude  rose  up  together  against  t.

19.  16.  in  whom  evil  spirit  was,  prevailed  ag.  t.

26.  10.  I  gave  my  voice  a.  t.  ||  11.  being  mad  a.  ..
Rom.  2.  2.  judgment  of  God  is  ag.  t.  that  commit
Col.  3.  19-  love  your  wives,  and  be  not  hitter  ag.  t.
2  Pet.  2.  11.  bring  not  railing  accusation  against  t.
Rev.  11.  7.  the  beast  shall  make  war  against  t.

See  Fight,  Over.

Among  or  amongst  THEM.

Gen.  47.  6.  knowest  any  man  of  activity  among  t.
Exod.  7.  5.  bring  children  of  Israel  from  amoug  t.

10.  2.  tell  my  signs  which  I  have  done  amongst  t.

25.  8.  that  I  may  dwell  a.  t.  29.  46.  Psal.  68.  18.
30.  12.  that  there  be  no  plague  a.  t.  when  numbered
Lev.  15.  31.  defile  my  tabernacle  that  is  among  t.
Xum.  1.  47.  the  Levites  were  not  numbered  am.  t.

11.  1.  and  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  t.  3.

4.  the  mixt  multitude  among  /.  fell  a  lusting

16.  3.  and  the  Lord  is  among  t.  Psal.  68.  17.

18.  20.  Aaron  shall  have  no  part  a.  t.  Josh.  14.  3.

23.  21 .  and  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among  t.

Peut.  7.  20.  the  Lord  will  send  the  hornet  among  t.
Josh.  8.  33.  the  stranger,  as  he  that  was  born  a.  1.
35.  the  strangers  that  were  conversant  among  t.

9.  16.  they  understood  that  they  dwelt  among  t.

20.  4.  give  him  a  place  that  he  may  dwell  am.  t.

24.  5.  according  to  that  which  1  did  amongst  t.
Judg.  1.  30.  but  the  Canaanites  dwelt  among  t.

10. 16.  put  away  the  strange  gods  from  among  t.

1  Sam.  6.  6.  when  he  wrought  among  t.  Neh.  9.  17

9.  22.  made  them  sit  in  the  chiefest  place  among  t.

10.  10.  prophets  met  him,  and  he  prophesied  a.  t.

2  Sam.  19.  28.  set  thy  servant  am.  t.  that  did  eat
2  Kings  17.  25.  therefore  the  Lord  sent  lions  a.  t.

1  Chr.  21.  6.  Levi  and  Benjamin  not  counted  a./.

26.  31.  there  were  found  mighty  men  among  t.

2  Chron.  20.  25.  found  am.  t.  abundance  of  spoil
28.  15.  and  clothed  all  that  w'ere  naked  among  t.
Ezra  2.  65.  there  were  among  t.  200  singing  men
Neh.  4.  11.  till  we  come  in  die  midsta.  /.  and  sla*
Esth.  9.  21.  wrote  to  establish  the  Purim  among  t.
Job  1.  6.  and  Satan  came  also  among  t.  2.  1.

15.  19.  and  no  stranger  passed  among  t.

s  2  499


THE


THE


THE


Vial.  22.  18.  they  part  my  garments  among  t.  and
cast  lots  on  my  vesture,  Mat.  27-  35.  John  19.  24.
55.  15.  let  death  seize  them,  wickedness  is  a.  t.

57.  4.  and  l  lie  even  among  t.  that  are  set  on  fire
68.  25.  a.  t.  were  damsels  playing  with  timbrels
78.  45.  he  sent  divers  sorts  of  dies  among  t.

49.  trouble,  by  sending  evil  angels  among  t.

99-  6.  and  batnuel  a.  t.  that  call  upon  his  name
105.  27.  they  shewed  his  signs  a.  t.  and  wonders
136.  11.  and  brought  out  Israel  from  among  t.
Cant.  4.  2.  and  none  is  barren  among  t.  6.  6.

Isa.  5.  27-  none  shall  be  weary  or  stumble  among  t.

8.  15.  and  many  among  t.  shall  stumble  and  fall

41.  28.  for  l  beheld,  and  there  was  no  man  a.  t.

43.  9.  who  a.  t.  can  declare  this,  and  shew  things
18.  14.  which  among  t.  hath  declared  these  things
66.  19.  1  will  set  a  sign  among  t.  and  will  send

Jer.  6.  15.  they  shall  fall  among  t.  that  fall,  8.  12.
18.  and  know,  O  congregation,  what  is  among  t.
12.  11.  pluck  out  the  house  of  Judah  from  a.  t.

24.  10.  1  will  send  famine  and  pestilence  among  t.

25.  16.  because  of  the  sword  that  I  will  send  a.  t.
.37  10.  there  remained  but  wounded  men  among  t.
41.8.  ten  men  found  among  t.  that  said,  slay  us  not

Lam.  I.17.  lerusalem  as  a menstruous  woman  a.  t.
Ezek.  2.  5.  there  hath  been  a  prophet  a.  t.  .33.  .33.

3.  15.  and  remained  there  among  t.  seven  days
25.  and  thou  shalt  not  go  out  among  t.

9.  2.  and  one  man  among  t.  had  a  writer’s  inkhorn

12.  10.  concerneth  all  Israel  that  are  among  t.

12.  and  the  prince  that  is  among  t.  shall  bear

22.  26.  1  am  profan.  a.  t.  ||  30.  1  sought  a  man  a.t.

33.  33.  they  shall  know  that  a  prophet  been  a.  t.

34.  24.  and  my  servant  David  a  prince  among  t.

35.  11.  I  will  make  myself  known  among  t.

Dan.  1.  19.  among  t.  was  found  none  like  Daniel

7.  8.  there  came  up  among  t.  another  little  horn
II.  24.  lie  shall  scatter  among  t.  the  prey’  and  spoil
it  os.  7.7.  there  is  none  among  t.  that  callethto  me
Zech.  12.  8.  that  is  feeble  a.  t.  shall  be  as  David

14.  13.  tumult  from  the  Lord  shall  be  among  t.
Mat.  11.  11.  I  say,  a.  t.  that  are  born  of  women
Mark  6.  41.  and  the  two  fishes  divided  he  a.  t.
I.vke  9.  46.  then  there  arose  a  reasoning  among  t.

22.  21.  and  there  was  also  a  strife  among  t.

55.  Peter  sat  down  among  t.  in  the  hall
John  9.  16.  and  there  was  a  division  among  t.

15.  24.  if  1  had  not  done  among  t.  the  works  which
Arts  A.  31.  nor  was  there  any  among  t.  that  lacked

17.  3.3.  so  Paul  departed  from  among  t.

18.  11.  continued,  teaching  the  word  of  God  a.  t.

20.  32.  inheritance  a.  t.  that  are  sanctified,  26.  18.
Rom.  11.  17.  a  wild  olive  tree,  were  grafted  in  a.  t.

1  Cor.  2.  6.  we  speak  wisdom  a.  t.  that  are  perfect

2  Cor.  6.  17.  come  out  from  a.  t.  and  be  ye  separate

2  Pet.  2.  8.  that  righteous  man  dwelling  among  t.

3  John  9.  who  lovqth  the  pre-eminence  among  t.
Jude  15.  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  among  t.
Rev.  7.  15.  suteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  a.  t.

At  TH  F.M.

Num.  21 . 30.  we  have  shot  at  t.  Heshbon  is  perished
Dent.  7.  21.  thou  shalt  not  be  affrighted  at  t.

Psal.  10.  5.  as  for  all  his  enemies,  he  puffeth  at  t.
59.  8.  but  thou,  O  lord,  shalt  laugh  at  t.

6+.  7-  but  God  shall  shoot  at  t.  with  an  arrow
Jer.  10.  2.  for  the  heathen  are  dismayed  at  t.

Before  TH  EM.

Gen.  18.8.  and  set  it  A.  t.  II 33.  .3.  he  passed  over  h.  t.
Erod.  10.  14.  before  t.  there  were  no  such  locusts

13.  21.  the  Lord  went  before  t.  by  day,  Num.  14. 14.

21.  1.  judgments  which  thou  shalt  set  before  t.
Num.  10.  33.  and  the  ark  of  the  Lord  went  before  t.

27.  17.  to  go  out  and  in  before  t.  1  Sam.  18.  16.
Dent.  2.  12.  destroye  I  them  from  before  t.  21,  22.

1  l' hr  on.  5.  25.  Neb.  9.  24.

28.  25.  and  thou  shalt  flee  seven  ways  before  t.
Josh.  6.  13  armed  men  went  before  t.  rereward  after

18.  Land  the  land  was  subdued  before  t.

21.  44.  stood  not  a  man  of  their  enemies  before  t.
Jndg.  3.  27-  Lhud  before  t.  ||  7-  24.  take  b.  t.  waters

1  Sam.  10.  5.  with  a  tabret,  a  pipe  and  harp,  before  t.

2  Sam.  1(1.  16.  and  Shobach  went  b.  t.  1  Chr.  19.  16.
20.  8.  when  they  were  in  Gibeon,  Amasa  went  b.  t.

1  Kings  8. 50.  give  them  compassion  b.  t.  2  Chr.  30.9.

22.  10.  prophets  prophesied  before  t.  2  Chr.  18.  9.

2  Kings  3.  24.  so  that  the  Moabites  fled  before  t.

4.  31.  Gehazi  passed  on  b.  t.  ||  44.  so  he  set  it  b.  t.
6. 22.  set  bread  and  wafer  bef.  t.  that  they  may  eat
17.  11.  whom  the  Lord  carried  away  before  t.

2  Chron. 7.  6.  the  priest  sounded  trumpets  before  t.
Neh.  12.  36.  and  Ezra  the  scribe  before  t.

Psal.  22.  25.  I’ll  pay  my  vows  before  t.  that  fear  him
54.  3.  they  have  not  set  God  before  t.  86.  14.

78.  55.  he  cast  out  the  heathen  also  before  t.

105.  17.  he  sent  a  man  before  t.  even  Joseph
Eccl.  4.  16.  no  end  of  all  that  have  been  before  t.

9.  1.  either  love  or  hatred  by  all  that  is  before  t.
Isa.  30.  8.  now  go  write  it  before  t.  in  a  table

42.  16.  1  will  make  darkness  light  before  t.

63.  12.  that  led  them,  dividing  the  water  before  t.
Jer.  1.  17.  not  dismayed,  lest  1  confound  thee  bef.  t.
9-  13.  have  forsaken  my  law  which  I  set  before  t.

32.  13.  and  1  charged  Baruch  before  t.  saying

33.  24.  they  should  no  more  be  a  nation  before  t.
49.  37.  to  be  dismayed  before  t.  that  seek  their  life

Ezek.  8.  11.  and  there  stood  before  t.  seventy  men

16.  18.  hast  set  mine  oil  and  incense  before  t.  19.

23.  24. 1  will  set  judgment  before  t.  they  shalljudge
32. 10.  when  I  shall  brandish  my  sword  before  t.

44.  11.  shall  stand  before  t.  to  minister  to  them
Joel  2.  3.  a  fire  devoureth  bef.  t.  and  behind  them,

the  land  is  as  the  garden  of  Eden  before  t.
10.  the  earth  shall  quake  before  t.  the  sun  be  dark
Amos  2.  9.  yet  1  destroyed  the  Amorite  before  t.
Mic.  2. 13.  the  breaker  is  come  up  bef.  t.  and  their
king  shall  pass  b.  t.  and  1  orci  on  head  of  them
Zech.  12  8.  David  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  before  t.
Mat.  2.  9.  lo,  the  star  which  they  saw  went  before  t.

14.  6.  she  danced  b.  t.  ||  26.  76.  but  he  denied  b.  t.
17.2.  and  was  transfigured  before  t.  Mark  9.  2.

Mark  6.  41.  gave  to  his  disciples  to  set  b.  t.  8.  6,  7.

10.  32.  Jesus  went  before  t.  and  they  were  amazed

500


Luke  22.  47.  Tudas  went  b.  1. 1|  24.  43.  he  did  eat  b.  t.
19.  28.  ascending  up  to  lerus.  Jesus  went  before  t.
John  10.  4.  shepherd  goeth  before  t.  sheep  follow

12.  37-  tho’  he  had  done  so  many  miracles  before  t.
Acts  16.  34.  he  set  meat  b.  t.  ||  22.  30.  set  Paul  b.  t.
Gal.  2,  14.  1  said  to  Peter  bef.  t.  all,  if  thou  being
Behind  TH  EM.

Eiod.  14.  19  the  pillar  removed  and  stood  behind  t.
Josh.  8.  20.  when  the  men  of  Ai  looked  behind  t.
Judg.  20.  40.  the  Benjamites  looked  behind  t.

2  Sam.  5.  23.  but  fetch  a  compass  behin  I  t.

2  Chron.  13.  13.  anambushment  to  come  about  b.  t.
Joel  2.  3.  b.  t.  a  flame  burneth,  b  t.  a  wilderness
Besides  1  H  EM

Job  1.  14.  and  the  asses  were  feeding  beside  t.

Ezek.  10.  16.  wheelsturned  not  fiom  b.t.  19.  I  11.22.
Mat.  25.  20.  1  have  gained  besides  t.  five  talents,  22.
Between  Til  EM.

Erod.  22.  11 .  an  oath  of  the  Ld.  shall  be  between  t.
28.  33.  and  bells  of  gold  between  t.  round  about
Josh.  8.  11.  now  there  was  a  valley  betw.  t.  and  Ai

1  Sam.  17.  3.  a  valley  between  t.  and  the  Philistines
26.  13.  David  stood,  a  great  space  being  between  t.

2  Sam.  14.  t  6.  and  there  was  no  deliverer  betw.  t.

21.  7.  because  of  the  Lord’s  oath  between  t.

1  Kings  18.  6.  so  they  divided  the  land  between  t.
Job  41.  16.  that  no  air  can  come  between  t.

Zech.  6.  13.  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  betw.  t.  both
Acts  15.  39-  the  contention  was  so  sharp  between  t.
By  IDEM.

Lev.  19.  31.  nor  after  wizards  to  be  defiled  by  t.
Josh.  23.  7-  nor  cause  to  swear  by  t.  nor  serve
Judg.  3.  l.the  Lord  left,  to  prove  Israel  by  t.  4.

2  Sarr..  15.  .36.  by  t.  ye  shall  send  to  me  every  thing
2  Chron.  24.  13.  and  the  work  was  perfected  by  t.
Job  .36.  .31.  for  by  t.  judgeth  he  the  people

Psal.  19.  H.  moreover  by  t.  is  thy  servant  warned
Isa.  7.  20.  namely  by  t.  beyond  the  river
Jer.  5.  7.  and  have  sworn  by  t.  that  are  no  gods
Ezek.  1.  19.  creatures  went,  the  wheels  went  by  t.
It.  3.  should  1  be  enquired  at  of  all  by  t.?

Hab.  1.  16.  because  by  t.  their  portion  is  fat
Mat.  5.  21.  that  it  was  said  by  t.  of  old,  27-  3.3.
Markd.  48.  he  cometh,  and  would  have  passed  by  t.
Luke  24. 4.  two  men  stood  by  t.  in  white,  Acts  1.  10.
Acts  4.  16.  a  notable  miracle  has  been  done  by  t.

15.  12.  what  wonders  God  had  wrought  by  t.

Rom.  10.5.  who  doeth  those  thing3  shall  live  by  t.

19.  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  by  t.

1  Cor.  1.  11.  by  t.  which  are  of  the  house  of  Chloe
1  Tim.  1.  18.  thou  by  t.  mightest  war  a  good  warfare
Heb.  2.  3.  confirmed  to  us  by  t.  which  heard  him
1  Pet.  1.  12.  which  are  now  reported  to  you  by  t.
Concerning  TLI  EM.

Num.  32.  28.  so  con.  t.  Moses  commanded  Eleazar
Judg.  15.3.  Samson  sai  l, row.  t.  1  shall  be  blameless
Neh.  11.  23.  it  was  the  king’s  commandment  con.  t.

1  Thess.  4.  13.  to  be  ignorant  c<m.  t.  which  are  asleep

1  John  2.  26.  have  1  written  con.  t.  that  seduce  you

For  TH  EM.

Gen.  6.  21.  it  shall  be  for  food  for  thee  and  for  t.

34.  21.  the  land,  behold,  it  is  large  enough  for  t.

4.3.  .32.  and  they  set  on  bread  for  t.  by  themselves
Erod.  14.  25.  let  11s  flee,  the  I  ord  fighteth  for  t.

Lev.  4.  20.  and  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement

for  t.  9.7.  I  10.  17.  Num.  8.  21.  1  16.  46.

7 '.  7-  there  is  one  law  for  t.  the  priest  shall  have  it
Num.  10.  .3.3.  to  search  out  a  resting-place  for  t.

1 1 . 22.  shall  herds  be  slain  for  t.  fishes  gather. Ter  t.
Deut.  28.  32.  fail  with  longing  for  t.  all  the  day

3.3.  2.  from  his  right  hand  went  a  fiery  law  for  t.
Josh.  18.  10.  Joshua  cast  lots  for  t.  in  Shiloh

19.  9.  the  part  of  Judah  was  too  much  for  t.

47.  the  coast  of  Dan  went  out  too  little  for  t.
Judg.  21.  16.  how  shall  we  do  for  wives  fort.?

17.  there  must  be  an  inheritance  for  t.  escaped
Ruth  1. 13.  wouldye  tarry  fort,  till  they  were  gro.

2  Chron.  30.  18.  but  Hezekiah  prayed  for  t.  saying
.34.  21.  go  enquire  of  the  I  ord  for  me  and  for  t.

Neh.  1.  5.  God  keepeth  mercy  for  t.  that  love  him
5.  2.  we  take  up  <  01  n  for  t.  that  we  may  eat  and  live

9.  15.  broughtest  forth  water  for  t.  out  of  the  rock
Esth.  5.  8.  come  to  the  banquet  I  shall  prepare  for  t.
Job  6.  19.  the  companies  of  Sheba  waited  fort.

22.  17.  and  what  can  the  Almighty  do  fort.  ?

24.5.  wilderness  yieldeth  food  for  t.  and  children
Psal.  31.  19.  which  thou  hast  laid  up  for  t.  that

fear  thee,  for  t  that  trust  in  thee
104.8.  to  the  place  which  thou  hast  founded  for  t.
106.  45.  and  he  remembered  for  t.  hisco-  enant
126.  2.  the  Lord  hath  done  great  things  fort.

Isa.  23.  13.  till  the  Assyrian  founded  it  jor  t.

18.  for  her  merchandise  shall  be  for  t.  that  dwell
34. 17.  he  hath  cast  the  lot  for  t.  he  divided  to  them

35.  1.  the  solitary  places  shall  be  glad  for  t.

Jer.  .3.  2.  in  the  ways  hast  thou  sat  for  t.  as  Arabian
7. 16.  neither  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  t.

16.  6.  nor  shall  men  lament  for  t.  nor  cut  themselv.
7.  neither  shall  men  tear  themsel  es  for  t.

18.  20.  I  stood  before  thee  to  speak  good  for  t.

28.  1.3.  but  thou  shalt  make  for  t.  yokes  of  iron
Ezek.  7.  11.  neither  shall  there  he  wailing  for  t.
11.21.  but  as  for  t.  whose  heart  walketh  after
16.  21.  to  cause  them  to  pass  thro’  the  fire  for  t.

20.  6.  to  bring  into  a  land  1  had  espied/  r  i.

.34.  10.  that  my  flock  may  not  be  meat  for  t.

29.  and  1  will  raise  up  for  t.  a  plant  of  renown
.36.  37.  I  will  yet  be  enquired  ot  to  do  it  for  t.

45.  15.  one  lamb  to  make  reconciliation  for  t.

46.  17.  but  his  inheritance  shall  be  his  son’s  for  t.

48.  10.  for  t.  even  for  the  priests  shall  be  oblation
Can.  2.  .35.  no  place  was  found  for  t.  Rev.  20.  11.
Has.  2. 18.  make  a  covenant  for  t.  with  the  beasts
Zech.  10.  8.  I  will  hiss  for  t.  and  gather  them,  for

10.  into  Lebanon  place  shall  not  be  found  for  t .
Mat.  5.  44.  pray  for  t.  which  despitefully  use  you,
and  persecute  you,  Luke  5.  28.
12.  4.  nor  lawful  for  t.  that  were  with  him
18.  19.  it  shall  be  done  for  t.  of  my  Father
Mark  10.  24.  how  hard  fort,  that  trust  in  riches
Lukel.  7.  there  was  no  room  for  t.  in  the  inn
John  6.  7.  is  not  sufficient  for  t.  that  every  one


John  17.  9. 1  pray /or  r.  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  20
Acts  8.  15.  Peter  and  John  prayed  for  t.  that  they

10.  24.  Cornelius  waited/,  t.  and  had  called  friends

17.  16.  now  while  Paul  waited  for  t.  at  Athens

1  Cor.  2.9.  things  which  God  hath  prepared  fort.
7.  8.  it  is  good  for  t.  if  they  abide  even  as  l

14.22.  but  prophesying  serveth  for  t.  that  believe

2  Cor.  5.  15.  should  live  unto  him  which  died  for  t.
Col.  2.  1.  1  knew  what  great  conflict  1  have  for  t.

4.  13.  hath  a  great  zeal  for  t.  that  are  in  l.aodicea
Heb.  1.  14.  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  fat  t.  heir?

7.  25.  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  t.

11.  16.  for  lie  hath  prepared  for  t.  a  city

2  Pet.  2.  21.  it  had  been  better  for  t.  not  to  known
1  John  5.  16.  give  life  for  t.  that  sin  not  to  death
From  IDEM.

Gen.  11.  6.  now  nothing  will  be  restrained  from  t.
42.  24.  he  took  fromt.  Simeon  and  bound  him
Num.  16.  15.  1  have  not  taken  one  ass  from  t.

18.  26.  the  tithes  which  1  have  given  yrou  from  t.
35.  8.  from  t.  that  have  many'  ye  shall  give  many  ;

but from  t.  that  have  few  ye  shall  give  few
Deut.  22.  1.  sheepgo  astray,  and  hide  thyself/,  t.4.
31. 17.  hide  my  face /.  t.  .32.  20.  Ezek.  7.22.  Mic.  3.4.
1  Sam.  6.  7,  and  bring  their  calves  home  from  t.

1  Chron.  14.  14.  go  not  after  them,  turn  away  from  t.

2  Chron.  20.  10.  but  they  turned  f.t.  and  destroyed
Psal.  31.  15.  deliver  me  from  t.  that  persecuterne
59.  1.  defend  me  from  t.  that  rise  up  against  me
84.  11.  no  good  thing  will  he  withhold  from  t.

Prov.  3.  27.  withhold  not  good  from  t.  to  whom

22.  5.  that  doth  keep  his  soul  shall  be  far  from  t.
Eccl.  2. 10.  what  mine  eyes  desired  1  kept  not  from  t.
Cant.  3.  4.  it  was  but  a  little  that  I  nassed  front  t.
Jer.  8.  13.  things  I  have  given  shall  oass  from  t.

9.  2.  that  1  might  leave  my  people  ana  go  from  t.
18.  20.  1  stood  to  turn  away  thy  wrath  from  t.

25.  10.  I  will  take  from  t.  the  voice  of  mirth

32.  40.  1  will  not  turn  away  fr.  /.to  do  them  good
Ezek.  7.  20.  therefore  I  have  set  it  far  from  t.

23.  17-  and  her  mind  was  alienated  from  t.

24.  25.  the  day  when  1  take  from  t.  their  strength

39.23.  therefore  hid  I  my  face  fromt.  24.

29.  neither  will  1  hide  my  face  any  more  fromt.
Hos.  5.  6.  he  hath  withdrawn  himself/row  t.

11.  2.  as  they  called  them,  so  they  went  from  t.

Alic.  2.8.  pull  off  the  robe  with  the  garment  from  t.
Mat.  9.  15.  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  from  t.

Mark  2.  20.  Luke  5.  35.

Mark  14.  52.  he  left  the  cloth,  and  fled  fr.  t.  naked
Luke  9.  45.  understood  not,  it  was  W\dfrom  1. 18.  34.
24.  51.  he  was  parted  from  t.  and  carried  to  hea'  en
John  12.  36.  departed,  and  did  hide  himself/row  t.
Acts  7.  .39.  would  not  obey,  but  thrust  him  from  t.
Rom.  15.  31.  that  1  may  be  delivered  from  i.  Ihat
2  Cor.  2.  3.  1  should  have  sorrow  from  t.  of  whom

11.  12.  I  may  cut  off  occasion  from  t.  which  desire
Heb.  7.6.  whose  descent  is  not  counted  from  t.

2  Pet.  2.  18.  clean  escaped  fromt.  who  live  in  erroi
Rev.  9.  6.  desire  to  die.  an  1  death  shall  doe.  from  /.
See  Depart,  ed.

In  THEM.

Eiod.  20.  11.  for  the  Lord  made  heaven  and  earth,
the  sea,  and  all  that  in  t.  is.  Acts  4.  24.
29.  29.  to  be  anointed  and  be  consecrated  in  t.
Lev.  10.  3.  1  will  be  sanctified  in  t.  that  come  nigh
18.  5.  he  shall  live  in  t.  Neh.  9.  29.  Ezek.  20.  11,

13,  21.  Gal.  .3. 12.

Num.  20.  13.  strove,  and  he  was  sanctified  in  t.
Deut.  5.  29.  O  that  there  were  such  an  heart  in  t.
.32.  28.  nor  is  there  any  understanding  in  t.

Josh.  5.  1 .  nor  was  there  spirit  in  t.  any  more
24.  13.  cities  which  ye  built  not,  and  ye  dwell  in  t.

2  Kings  5.  12.  may  1  not  wash  in  t.  and  be  clean  ?
Job  A.  21.  doth  not  their  excellency  in  t.  go  away
Psal.  19.  4.  in  t.  he  set  a  tabernacle  tor  the  sun
107-  5.  hungry,  thirsty,  their  soul  fainted  in  t.

115.  8.  so  is  every  one  that  trusts  in  t.  135.  18.

147.  11.  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  t.  that  fear  him
Prov.  8.  8.  there  is  nothing  fro  ward  or  perverse  in  t.
Eccl.  .3. 12.  I  know  there  is  no  good  in  t.

8.  11.  their  heart  is  fully  set  in  t.  to  do  evil

12.  1.  thou  shalt  say  1  have  no  pleasure  in  t.

Isa.  6.  1.3.  teil-tree  and  oak,  whose  substance  is  mi.
8.  20.  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  t.

Jer.  2.  3*.  and  thou  shalt  not  prosper  in  t.

5.  13.  the  word  is  not  in  /.||  8.  9-what  wisdom  is  in  t

10.  5.  cannot  do  evil,  nor  is  it  in  t.  to  do  good

14.  and  there  is  no  breath  in  r.  51.

29.5.  build  ye  houses,  and  dwell  in  t.  28.

Ezek.  5.  6.  my  statutes  they  have  not  walked  in  1.

13.  when  I  have  accomplished  my  fury  in  t.

10.  17-  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature  was  in  t.

18.24.  in  trespass  and  sin,  in  t.  shall  he  die,  26.

28.  25.  and  when  1  shall  be  sanctified  in  t.  in  sight

33.  10.  pine  away  in  1.  !|  37.  8.  was  no  breath  in  t.
Dan.  5.  .3.  his  wives  and  concubines  drank  in  t.  2.3.
Hos.  14.  9-  are  right  and  the  just  shall  walk  in  t.
Amos5.  11.  built  houses,  hutye  shall  not  dwell  in  t
Chad.  18.  they  shall  kindle  in  t.  and  devour  them
Mai.  2.  17-  that  doeth  evil,  he  delighteth  in  t.

Mat.  1.3.  14.  in  t.  is  fulfilled  the  prophecy  of  Esaias
Luke  13.  14.  in  t.  therefore  come  and  be  healed
John  5.  39;  in  t.  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life

17.  10.  thine  are  mine,  and  I  am  glorified  in  t.

2.3.  I  in  t.  thou  in  me  ||  26.  may  be  in  t.  and  I  in  t.
Rom.  1.  19.  may  be  known  of  God,  is  manifest  in  t
32.  but  have  pleasure  in  t.  that  do  them
2  Cor.  2.  15.  in  t.  that  are  saved,  in  t.  that  perish

6.  16.  God  said,  I  will  dwell  in  t.  and  walk  in  t.
Eph.  2.  10.  God  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  t
4.  18.  alienated  through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  r

Col.  .3.  7.  in  which  ye  walked,  when  ye  lived  in  t.

2  Thess.  2.  10.  all  decei'ableness  in  /.that  perish
1  Tim.  4.  16.  continue  int.  for  in  doing  this
Heb.  4.  2.  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  t.  that

1  Pet.  1.11.  the  spirit  of  Christ  which  was  int.

2  Pet.  .3.  16.  speaking  in  t.  of  these  things

Rev.  5. 1.3.  and  all  that  are  in  t.  heard  1,  saying

12.  12.  rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  dwell  in  •

15.  1 .  for  in  t.  is  filled  up  the  wrath  of  God
20.  13. ‘delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in  t.


T  H  E


T  H  E


T  H  E


Rev.  21. 14.  in  t.  tlie  names  of  tlie  twelve  apostles
Into  LH  EM.

Ezek.  .17.  10.  tlie  breath  ratne  into  t.  and  they  lived
Markb.  12.  send  that  we  may  enter  intot.  Luketi.  32.
Rev.  11.  11.  the  spirit  of  life  from  God  entered  into  t.
Of  1  11  EM.

Gen.  3. 7.  the  eyes  of  t.  both  were  opened  and  knew

19.  13.  the  cry  of  t.  is  waxen  great  before  God
Exod.  20.  5.  generation  of  t.  that  hate  me,  Dent.  5.  9.

6.  to  thousands  oft.  that  love  me,  Deut.  5.  10.

35.  35.  of  t.  that  do  any  work  and  that  devise
Lev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  shall  do  against  any  of  t.

11.4.  of  t.  ye  shall  not  eat  11  22.  oft.  eat,  Deut.  20. 19.

22.  22.  nor  make  an  offering  by  fire  of  t.  on  altar

25.  44.  of  t.  buy  bondmen  and  bondmaids,  45.

26.  43.  the  land  also  shall  be  left  of  t.  and  enjoy
A vrn.  1.  21.  thi.se  that  were  numbered  of  t.  23.  25.

|  2.  4,  13.  I  3.  22,  34.

3.  49.  took  money  of  t.  that  were  over  and  above
“.5.  take  it  oft.  II 11. 26.  were  of  t.  that  were  written

14.  23.  nor  shall  any  of  t.  that  provoked  me  see

16.  31.  fled  at  the  cry  oft.  II  26.  61.  not  a  man  of  t.

33.  55.  that  those  widen  ye  let  remain  of  t.

Deut.  1.  29.  neither  be  afraid  of  t.  7.  18. 1  20.  1, 3.

Josh.  11.6.  Is' eh .  4.  14.
2.6.  yesh.  buy  mea  toft,  buy  water  of  t.  formoney

33.  1 1.  loins  of  t.  that  rise,  and  of  t.  that  hate  him
Josh.  10.  8.  there  shall  not  a  man  of  t.  stand  before
2  Sam.  6.  22.  and  of  t.  shall  I  be  had  in  honour

2  Kings  10.  1 1.  and  slew  them,  nor  left  he  any  of  t.

1  Chron.  5.  20.  they  cried,  he  was  intreated  of  t.
Ezra  8.  20.  all  of  t.  were  expressed  by  name
Neh.  10.  31.  would  not  buy  it  of  t.  on  the  sabbath
Joh  14.  21.  are  low,  but  he  perceiveth  it  not  of  t.
Psal.  19.  11.  in  keeping  of  t.  there  is  great  reward

21.  12.  make  ready  arrows  against  the  face  of  t.

24.  6.  this  is  the  genera'ion  of  r.  that  seek  him

31.  19.  but  the  l.ord  delivered  him  out  of  t.  all

22.  none  of  t.  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  desolate

40.  5.  if  I  would  speak  of  t.  they  are  more  than
65.  5.  and  of  t.  that  are  afar  off  upon  the  sea
84.  5.  in  whose  heart  are  the  ways  oj  t.

102.  26.  all  of  t.  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment
Prov.  21.  6.  tossed  to  and  fro  of  t.  that  seek  death
Eccl.  7.  18.  that  feareth  God  shall  come  forth  of  t.
Isa.  9.  16.  they  that  are  led  of  t.  are  destroyed

17.  14.  this  is  the  portion  of  t.  that  spoil  us

19.  22.  he  shall  be  intreated  if  t.  an.l  heal  them

39.  2.  Hezekiah  was  glad  of  t.  and  shewed  them

41.  28.  that  when  1  asked  of  t.  could  answer

42.  9.  before  they  spring  forth  1  tell  you  of  t.

22.  spoiled,  they  are  all  of  t.  snared  in  holes

44.  9.  that  make  an  image,  are  all  of  t.  vanity

65.  1.  I  am  sought  oft.  that  asked  not  for  me,  1  am

found  of  t.  that  sought  me  not,  Rom.  10.  20.

66.  19.  and  I  will  send  those  that  escape  of  t.

21.  I  will  take  of  t.  for  priests  and  I.evites

Jer.  8.  19.  because  of  t.  that  dwell  in  far  country

10.  5.  be  not  afraid  oft.  t-.zek.  2.  6.  Luke  12.  4.

23.  14.  they  are  all  of  t.  unto  me  as  Sodom

25.  14.  great  kings  shall  serve  themselves  of  t.

29.  22.  an  I  of  t.  shall  be  taken  up  a  curse  by  all

30.  19.  and  out  of  t.  shall  proceed  thanksgiving

34.  9-  that  none  should  serve  himself  oft.  10.

42.  17.  aud  none  of  t.  shall  remain,  Ezek.  7.  11.

Ezek.  7. 16.  all  of  t.  mourning  every  one  for  iniquity

20.  40.  all  of  t.  in  the  land  shall  serve  me

23.  6.  all  of  t.  desirable  young  men,  12.  23.

15.  in  dyed  attire,  all  of  t.  princes  to  iook  to
38.  4.  all  of  t.  clothed  with  all  sorts  of  armour

11.  and  gates  all  oft.  dwelling  without  walls
Ilos.  13.  2.  they  say  oft.  let  the  men  kiss  the  calves
Amos  9.  1 .  ctd  in  the  head  all  of  t.  he  that  fleeth  of  t.
Mir.  3.  2.  who  pluck  off  their  skin  from  off  t.  3.

7- 13.  land  desolate  because  of  t.  tliat  dwell  therein
Zech.  11.  13.  goonly  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of  t.
Mat.  21.  31.  whether  of  t.  twain  did  the  will  of  his

45.  they  perceived  that  he  spake  of  t.

Mark  12.  23.  whose  wife  shall  she  be  of  t.  Luke 20.33.
Luke  6.  13.  oft.  he  chose  twelve  named  apostles

7.  42.  tell  me,  which  of  t.  will  love  him  most  i

9.  46.  which  of  t.  should  be  greatest  ?  22.  24.

22. 23.  which  of  t.  it  was  that  should  do  this  thing  ?
58.  another  saw  him  and  said,  thou  art  also  of  t.
John  A.  52.  then  inquired  he  of  t.  the  hour  when

16.  4.  ye  may  remember  that  l  told  you  of  t.

18.  9.  of  t.  which  thou  gavest  me,  have  I  lost  none
Acts  15.  14.  to  take  out  of  t.  a  people  for  his  name

23.  21.  there  lie  in  wait  of  t.  more  than  forty  men
Rom.  11.  12.  if  the  fall  of  t.  be  the  riches  of  world,

and  diminishing  of  t.  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles

15.  if  the  casting  away  oft.  be  the  reconciling

2  Tim.  3.  11.  out  of  t.  all  the  l.ord  delivered  me
Ileh.  10.  39.  we  are  not  of  t.  who  draw  back,  but  of  t.
Jam.  3.  18.  is  sown  in  peace  of  t.  that  make  peace
Rev.  22.  9.  of  t.  which  keep  the  sayings  of  this

See  Both,  One,  Some.

On  or  upon  TH  KM.

Gen.  31.  34.  Rachel  had  taken  images  and  sat u.  t.
48.  16.  .lacob  said,  let  my  name  be  named  on  t.
Exod.  15.  9.  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied  upon  1.

19.  22.  lest  the  lord  break  forth  upon  t.  24.

32.  21.  that  thou  hast  brought  so  great  a  sin  upon  t.
34.  nevertheless  l  will  visit  their  sin  npont.

Lev.  20.  1 1 .  their  blood  shall  be  upon  t.  12, 13,  16,  27.

26.  36.  upon  t.  that  are  left  will  1  send  a  faintness
A  nm.  II.  17.  and  1  will  put  of  the  spirit  upon  t.  29.

16.  33.  the  earth  closed  upon  t.  and  they  perished
Deut.  7.  16.  thine  eye  shall  have  no  pity  upon  t.

25.  shalt  not  desire  the  silver  or  gold  that  is  on  t.
9.  10.  on  t.  was  written  according  to  all  l.ord  spake

27.  5.  tbou  shalt  not  lift  up  any  iron  tool  upon  t.
32.  23  ’  will  heap  mischiefs  upon  t.  I  will  spend

.35.  oe  things  that  shall  come  upon  t.  make  haste
Josh.  10.  11.  the  l.ord  cast  down  great  stones  u.  t.
Judg.  9.  57-  and  upon  t.  came  the  curse  of  .lotham

1  Kings  18.  28.  till  the  blood  gushed  out  upon  t.

2  Kings  18.  23.  if  able  to  set  riders  «.  t.  Isa.  36.  8.
23.  20.  he  burnt  men’s  bones  upon  t.  and  returned

1  Chron.  9-  27-  because  the  charge  was  upon  t.

2  Chron.  29.  23.  and  they  laid  their  hands  on  t.

Acts  6.  6.  |  8.  17- 1  13.  3.


2  Chron.  32.  26.  so  that  wratn  of  Lord  came  not  u.  t.
3.3.  11.  Lord  brought  upon  t.  king  of  Assyria

36. 17.  he  brought  upon  t.  the  king  of  the  Chaldees
Ezra  3.  3.  for  fear  was  up.  t.  because  of  the  people
Esth. 8.  17.  for  the  fear  of  the  .lews  fell  upon  t.

9-  3.  because  the  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upon  t.

27.  .lews  took  upon  t.  to  keep  the  days  of  Purim
Joh  4.  19.  how  much  less  on  t.  that  dwell  in  houses

21.  9.  neither  is  the  rod  of  God  upon  t.

Psal.  33.  18.  eve  of  the  Lord  is  up.  t.  that  fear  him

48.  6.  fear  took  hold  upon  t.  there,  and  pain  as  of
62. 10.  if  riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  upon  t.
69. 24.  pour  out  thine  indignation  upon  t.

78.  24.  and  had  rained  down  manna  upon  t.  to  eat
27.  he  rained  flesh  also  up.  t.  as  dust  and  fowls
49.  he  cast  upon  t.  the  fierceness  of  his  anger
94.  2.3.  he  shall  bring  upon  t.  their  own  iniquity

103. 17.  mercy  to  everlasting  upon  t.  that  fear  him
106.  29.  and  the  plague  brake  in  upon  t.

118.  7-  therefore  shall  I  see  my  desire  upont.  that
Isa.  9.  2.  upon  t.  hath  the  light  shined

26.  16.  a  prayer,  when  thy  chastening  was  upon  t.
27-  11-  that  made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on  t.

49.  10.  he  that  hath  mercy  on  t.  shall  lead  them
Jer.  2.3.  evil  shall  come  upon  t.  saith  the  Lord

11.8.  1  will  bring  u.  t.  11.  |  23. 12.  |  36.  31.  |  49.  37.
12  15.  I  will  return,  and  have  compassion  on  t.

24.  6.  I  will  set  mine  eyes  up.  t.  for  good,  32.  42.
.33.  26.  to  return,  for  1  will  have  mercy  npont.

46.  21.  the  day  of  their  calamity  was  come  up.  t.
Ezek.  23. 16.  she  doted  up.  t.  ||  37-  8.  flesh  came  u.  t.
44.  17.  no  wool  shall  come  u.  t.  while  they  minister
Dan.  3.27.  nor  the  smell  of  fire  had  passed  on  t.
Hos.  5. 10.  1  will  pour  out  my  wrath  u.  t.  like  water

7.  12.  they  shall  go,  1  will  spread  my  net  upont.
Amos  9.  4.  I  will  set  mine  eyes  u.  t.  for  evil  and  not
Hah.  1.  13.  wherefore  lookest  thou  up.  t.  that  deal
Zech.  10.  6.  bring  them  again,  for  1  have  mercy  u.  t.

14.  17.  who  will  not  come  up  upon  t.  shall  be  no
Mat.  19.  13.  should  put  his  hands  u.  t.  Mark  10. 16.
Luke  1.  50.  and  his  mercy  is  on  t.  that  fear  him

2.  9.  and  lo,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  t.
John  20.  22.  when  he  said  this,  he  breathed  on  t.
Acts  4.  1.  as  they  spake,  the  Sadducees  came  u.  t.

3.  they  laid  hands  on  t.  I|  33.  great  grace  was  up.  t.

5.  5.  great  fear  came  on  all  t.  that  heard  these  things
11.15.  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  t.  as  on  us,  19. 6.

19.  13.  took  upon  t.  to  call  over  them  which  had
16.  and  the  man  leapt  on  t.  and  overcame  them

21. 23.  we  have  four  men  which  have  a  vow  on  t.
Rom.  1 1. 22.  on  t.  which  fell,  severity  ;  but  to  thee
Gal.  6. 16.  peace  be  on  t.  and  mercy,  and  on  Israel

1  Thess.  2.  16.  wrath  is  come  u.  t.  to  the  uttermost
5.  3.  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upont.

2  Theis.  1.  8.  taking  vengeance  on  t.  that  know  not
Ileh.  5.  2.  and  on  t.  that  are  out  of  the  way
Rev.  6. 10.  avenge  our  blood  on  t.  that  dwell  on
7.  16.  nor  shall  the  sun  light  on  t.  nor  any  heat
11.  1 1.  and  great  fear  fell  upon  t.  which  saw  them
16.2.  and  upont.  which  worshipped  his  image

Over  THEM.

Exod.  1.  11.  they  did  set  over  t.  task-masters
5.  14.  which  Pharaoh's  task-masters  had  set  over  t.

18.  21.  place  such  over  t.  to  be  rulers  of  thousands
Num.  7.  2.  and  were  overt,  that  were  numbered

14.  14.  have  heard  that  thy  cloud  standeth  overt.
Judg.  9.  8.  the  trees  went  to  anoint  a  king  over  t.

11.  11.  the  people  made  lephthah  captain  overt.

1  Sam.  8.  7-  rejected  me  that  I  sh.  not  reign  over  t.

9.  the  manner  of  the  king  that  shall  reign  overt.

19.  20.  and  Samuel  standing  as  appointed  over  t.

22.  2.  and  David  became  a  captain  overt.

2  Sam.  2. 7-  I  udah  ha>  e  anointed  me  kingcz  err.

1  Chron.  9.20.  Phinehas  was  the  ruler  overt.
27.26.  and  over  t.  that  did  the  work  was  Ezri

2  Chron i»  2.  1 1.  he  hath  made  thee  king  over  t.  9.  8.
Neh.  9.28.  so  that  they  had  the  dominion  overt.
Esth.  9.  1.  the  enemies  hoped  to  have  power  over  t.
Rsal.  49. 14.  the  upright  shall  have  dominion  over  t.

106.  41.  and  they  that  hated  them  ruled  over  t.
Rrov.  20.  26.  a  wise  king  bringet^  the  wheel  over  t.
Isa.  3.  4.  babes  shall  rule  o.  t.  ||  12.  women  rule  0.  t.
19.  4.  a  fierce  king  shall  rule  over  t.  saith  the  Lord
52.5.  they  that  rule  overt,  make  them  to  howl
Jer.  15.  3.  and  l  will  appoint  over  t.  four  kinds

23.  4.  I  will  set  shepherds  overt,  which  shall  feed
31.28.  like  as  1  have  watched  overt,  to  pluck  up,

so  will  I  watch  overt,  to  build  and  to  plant
32.  41.  yea,  I  will  rejoice  over  t.  to  do  them  good
44.  27.  I  will  watch  overt,  for  evil,  not  for  good
Ezek.  10. 1.  appeared  overt,  as  a  sapphire  stone
19.  glory  of  tlie  God  of  Israel  was  overt.  11. 22.

34.23.  and  I  will  set  up  one  shepherd  over  t.

37  .  24.  David  my  servant  shall  be  king  over  t.
Dan.  2.  38.  and  hath  made  thee  ruler  over  t.  all
Joel  2.  17-  that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  t.

Mic.  3.  6.  and  the  day  shall  be  dark  over  t.

4.  7-  the  Lord  shall  reign  overt,  in  mount  Zion
Hah.  1.  14.  creeping  things  that  have  no  ruler  over  t.
Zech.  9. 14.  and  the  Lord  shall  be  seen  overt.

Mat.  20.  25.  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles  exercise

dominion  over  t.  Mark  10.  42.  Luke  22.  25.
Luke  11.  44.  the  men  that  walk  over  1.  are  not  aware

19.  27.  who  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over  t.
Acts  19.  13.  to  call  overt,  that  had  evil  spirits
Rom.  5.  14.  even  overt,  that  had  not  sinned  after
Col.  2.  15.  a  shew  of  them,  ti  iutnphing  overt,  in  it
Rev.  9. 11.  they  had  a  king  over  t.  whose  name  is

11.  10.  earth  shall  rejoice  over  t.  and  make  merry
Through  THEM.

Judg.  2. 22.  that  thro' t.  1  may  prove  Israel  whether
Jer.  9. 10.  are  burnt  up,  so  that  none  can  pass  thro' t.
To  or  unto  Tf  I  EM.

Gen.  37.  13.  come,  and  I  will  send  thee  unto  t.

42.  7-  strange  unto  t.  and  spake  roughly  unto  t.

25.  give  them  provision,  thus  did  Joseph  unto  t.
50. 21 .  Joseph  comforted  them,  spoke  kindly  un.  t.
Exod.  2.  25.  and  G.  had  respect  un.  t.  2  Kings  13.  23.

3.  13.  what  shall  1  say  unto  1. 1|  14. 20.  darkness  to  t.
14.  22.  the  waters  were  a  wall  to  t.  on  the  right

20.  5.  thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  t.  nor

serve  them,  Josh.  23.  7.  2  Kings  17.  35.


Exod. 30.21.  shall  be  a  statute  forever  to  t.  Lev.  17  ”
Lev.  6.  17.  1  have  given  it  unto  t.  for  their  portion
A’tt/w.4.19.  but  thus  do  un.  1. 1|8. 22.  so  did  they  un.  t
16.  30.  swallow  up,  with  all  that  appertain  unto  t.
33.56.  I  shall  do  to  you,  as  I  thougnt  to  do  untut.

35.  6.  and  to  t.  ye  shall  add  forty  and  two  cities
Deut.  1. 8.  which  the  L.  sware  to  give  unto  t.  31.  23.

4.  7.  what  nation  who  hath  God  so  nigh  unto  t.  T
Josh.  9. 20.  this  we  will  do  un.  t.  \\  26.  so  did  he  un.  t.
Judg.  2.  17-  and  they  bowed  themselves  unto  t.

9.  33.  mayest  do  to  t.  as  thou  shalt  find  occasion

15.  11.  as  they  did  untome,  so  have  1  don  nunto  t.

I  Sam.  30.  19-  there  was  nothing  lacking  to  t.

27.  sent  spoil  to  t.  which  were  in,  28,  29,  30,  31.
°>Sam.  20.  3.  and  fed  them,  but  went  not  in  unto  t.

1  Kings  12.  7-  if  thou  wilt  speak  good  words  to  t.

2  Kings  9.  18.  saying,  the  messenger  came  to  t.  20.

12.  5.  let  the  priests  take  it  to  t.  every  man

1  Chron.  9.  27.  the  opening  thereof  pertained  to  t.

2  Chron.  32.  6.  and  spake  comfortably  to  t.

Ezra  4.  20.  tribute  and  custom  was  paid  unto  t.

6.  21.  such  as  had  separated  themselves  unto  t.

Neh.  5.  11.  restore  to  t.  this  day  their  lands,  houses
Esth.  9.  22.  month  was  turned  unto  t.  from  sorrow
Joh  24.  12.  yet  God  layeth  not  folly  to  t.

17.  morning  is  to  t.  even  as  the  shadow  of  death
Psal.  28.  4.  give  them,  render  to  t.  their  desert
34.  9.  for  there  is  no  want  to  t.  that  fear  him

44.  3.  because  thou  hadst  a  favour  unto  r.

83.  9.  do  unto  t.  as  to  the  Midianites,  as  to  Sisera
1 15.  8.  they  that  make  them  are  like  un.  t.  135.  18.
125.  4.  do  good  to  t.  that  are  upright  in  heart
Prov.  2.  7.  a  buckler  to  t.  that  walk  uprightly
3.  18.  a  tree  of  life  to  t.  that  lay  hold  on  her

8.  9.  they  are  right  to  t.  that  find  knowledge

10.  26.  so  is  the  sluggard  to  t.  that  send  him,

14.  22.  mercy  and  truth  be  to  t.  that  devise  good  \
25.  13.  so  is  a  faithful  messenger  to  t.  that  send

30.  5.  a  shield  unto  t.  that  put  their  trust  in  him  ,
Eccl.  7.  12.  wisdom  gives  life  to  t.  that  have  it
Isa.  19.  3.  seek  tot.  that  have  familiar  spirits

28.  13.  the  word  was untot.  precept  upon  precept

40.  29.  to  t.  that  have  n  >  might  he  increaseth

42.  5.  hath  given  spirit  tot.  that  walk  therein

16.  these  things  will  1  do  unto  t.  and  not  forsake
49.9.  tor.  that  are  in  darkness,  Mat.  4. 16.  Luke  1.79.

56.  5.  to  t.  will  I  give  in  my  house  a  place  and  name

57.  6.  to  t.  hast  thou  poured  a  drink-offering

59.  20.  to  t.  that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob
61. 7.  everlasting  joy  shall  be  unto  t.

Jer.  5.  13.  thus  shall  it  be  done  unto  t.

6. 10.  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  unto  t.  a  reproach

15.  19.  let  them  return,  but  return  not  thou  unto  t.

18.  8.  repent  of  the  evil  1  thought  to  do  unto  t.

31.  32.  brake  covenant,  tho’  I  was  husband  unto  t
Lam.  1 . 22.  and  do  unto  t.  as  thou  hast  done  to  me

3.  25.  the  Txird  is  good  unto  t.  that  wait  for  him
65.  give  them  sorrow  of  heart,  thy  curse  unto  f
Ezek.  2.  4.  1  do  send  thee  unto  t.  and  thou  shalt  say
3.  6.  had  I  sent  thee  unto  t.  they  had  hearkened

26.  and  thou  shalt  not  be  to  t.  arepiover

11.  16.  yet  will  1  be  to  t.  as  a  little  sanctuary

12.  11.  as  I  have  done,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  t.

20.  9.  in  whose  sight  I  made  myself  known  unto  t.
.33.  32.  lo,  thou  aft  unto  t.  as  a  very  lovely  song
39.  13.  and  it  shall  be  to  t.  a  renown

44.  12.  because  they  ministered  unto  t.  before  idols.
48.  12.  oblation  shall  be  unto  t.  a  thing  most  holy
18.  shall  be  for  food  untot.  that  serve  the  city
Dan.  4.  19.  the  dream  be  to  t.  that  hate  thee

6.  2.  that  the  princes  might  give  account  unto  t.

9.  4.  and  keeping  mercy  to  t.  that  love  him

11.  34.  but  many  shall  cleave  to  t.  with  flatteries
Hos.  4.  12.  and  their  staff  declareth  untot.

7.  13.  destruction  unto  t.  because  they  transgressed
11.  4.  1  was  to  t.  as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke

Jonah  3.  10.  evil  that  he  said,  he  would  do  unto  t.
Mic.  2.  6.  piophesy  ye  not,  say  they  to  t.  thaD
prophesy,  they  shall  not  prophesy  to  t.
Mat.  6.  8.  be  ye  not  like  unto  t.  lj  7 •  12.  do  ye  so  to  t*

17.  13.  that  he  spake  unto  t.  of  John  the  Baptist

21.  36.  other  servants,  they  did  unto  t.  likewise
25.  9.  but  go  ye  rather  tot.  that  sell,  and  buy
Mark  4.  11.  but  tot.  that  are  without  in  parables

10.  40.  shall  be  given  to  t.  for  whom  it  is  prepared
Luke  2.  51 .  he  wentdown,  and  was  subject  unto  t.

6.  .31 .  that  men  do  to  you,  do  ye  also  to  t.  likewise

.33.  if  ye  do  good  to  t.  that  do  good  to  you
34.  if  ye  lend  to  t.  of  whom  ye  hope  to  receive

11.  13.  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  t.  that  ask  him

16.  28.  that  he  may  testify  unto  t.  lest  they  come
20.  15.  whatshall  l.ord  of  the  vineyard  do  unto  t.?

23.  28.  Jesus  turning  unto  t.  said,  weep  not  for  me

24.  11.  their  words  seemed  unto  t.  as  idle  tales

27.  he  expounded  unto  t.  in  all  the  scriptures
John  1.  12.  to  t.  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons

of  God,  even  to  t.  that  believe  on  his  name

22.  we  may  give  an  answer  to  t.  that  sent  us
2.  24.  but  Jesus  did  not  commit  himself  unto  t.

8.  27.  that  he  spake  to  t.  of  the  Father

20.  23.  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  t.

Acts  1.  16.  who  was  guide  to  t.  that  took  Jesus
2.  .3.  there  appeared  unto  t.  cloven  tongues,  as  of  fire

41.  there  were  added  untot.  about  3,000  souls

5.  13.  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  to  t .

32.  w  horn  God  hath  given  to  t.  that  obey  him

14.  18.  that  they  had  not  done  sacrifice  unto  t.

16.  10.  had  called  us  to  preach  the  gospel  unto  t.
20.  34.  my  necessities,  and  to  t.  that  were  with  itiq

25.  11.  no  man  may  deliver  me  unto  t.  I  appeal
Rom.  1.  19-  is  manifest,  for  G.  hath  shewed  it  u.  t.

2.  7-  to  t.  who  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,

8.  28.  work  together  for  good  to  t.  that  love  Goif
10.  20.  made  manifest  unto  t.  that  asked  not  after  me

1  Cor.  1. 2.  untot.  that  are  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus

24.  unto  t.  that  are  called,  both  Jews  and  Greeks

9.  3.  my  answer  to  t.  that  do  examine  me,  is  this
14.  34.  for  it  is  not  permitted  unto  t.  to  speak

2  Cor.  4.  3.  if  gospel  hid,  it  is  hid  to  t.  that  are  lost
Gal.  1.  17.  to  t.  which  were  apostles  before  me

6.  10.  unto  t.  who  aie  of  the  household  of  faith
Eph.  2.  17  and  preached  peace  to  t.  that  were  nigh


THE


THE


THE


Phil.  1.  28.  is  to  t.  an  evident  token  of  perdition
2  Thess.  1.  6.  tribulation  to  t.  that  trouble  you

1  Tim.  4.  15.  meditate,  give  thyself  wholly  to  t.

2  Tim.  4.  8.  but  unto  all  t.  that  love  his  appearing
Tit.  3.  13.  that  nothing  be  wanting  unto  t

Heb.  3.  18.  not  enter,  but  to  t.  that  believed  not
4.2.  to  us  eyas  the  gospel  preached  as  well  as  unto  t.

8.  10.  I  will  be  to  t.  a  God,  they  tome  a  people

12.  11.  yieldethwn/o  t.  that  are  exercised  thereby

19.  word  should  not  be  spoken  to  t.  any  more
Jam.  1.  12.  Lord  promised  to  t.  that  love  him,  2.  5.

1  Pet.  4.  6.  gospel  preached  also  to  t.  that  are  dead

2  Pet.  1.  1.  to  t.  that  obtained  like  precious  faith

2.  22.  happened  unto  t.  according  to  the  proverb
Rev.  9ijl.  unto  t.  was  given  power  as  the  scorpions

5.  to  t.  it  was  given  that  they  should  not  kill  them

20.  4.  they  sat,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  t.
See  Say,  Wo.

Toward  THEM.

vsal.  103.  11.  so  great  his  mercy  toward  t.  that  fear
Mat.  14.  14.  Jesus  was  moved  with  compassion  to¬
ward  t.  and  healed  their  sick,  Mark  6.  34.
Col.  4.  5.  walk  in  wisdom  toward  t.  that  are  without
1  Thess.  4. 12.  honestly  toward  t.  that  are  without
Under  THEM.

Num.  16.  31.  ground  clave  asunder  that  was  under  t.
Job  26.  8.  and  the  cloud  is  not  rent  under  t.

With  THEM.

Gen.  19.  9.  we  will  deal  worse  with  thee  than  with  t.

34.  8.  Hamor  communed  with  t.  saying,  my  son
43.  16.  when  Joseph  saw  Benjamin  with  t.  he  said
Eiod.  6.  4.  1  have  established  m3’  covenant  with  t.

23.  32.  shall  make  no  covenant  with  t.  Deut.  7.  2.
Lev.  26.  39.  that  are  left  shall  pine  away  with  t.

44.  and  to  break  my  covenant  with  t.

ATww.22.12.  thou  shalt  not  go  w.  1. 1|  20.  arise,  go  w.  t.
32.  19.  we  will  not  inherit  with  t.  on  yonder  side
Deut.  2.  5.  take  good  heed,  meddle  not  with  t.  19.

5.  29.  would  fear  me,  that  it  might  be  well  witht.

7.  3.  neither  make  marriages  with  t.  Josh.  23.  12.
5.  thus  shall  3'e  deal  with  t.  destro3’  their  altars

9.  who  keepeth  covenant  with  t.  that  love  him
Josh.  9.  15.  and  Joshua  made  peace  with  t.  16.
Judg.  1.  22.  they  also  went,  and  the  Lord  was  with  t.

19.  24.  and  do  with  t.  what  seemeth  good  unto  you

1  Sam.  10.  6.  and  thou  shalt  prophesy  with  t.

15.  6.  go,  get  you  down,  lest  1  destroy  you  with  t.

2  Sam.  12.17.  he  would  not.nordid  he  eat  with  t.
15;  36.  they  have  there  with  t.  their  two  sons

1  Kings  8. 46.  and  thou  be  angry  with  t.  2  Chr.  6.  36.

2  Kings  6.  16.  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  t.

11.  9.  with  t.  that  should  go  out  on  the  sabbath,

and  came  to  Jehoiada,  2  Chron.  23.  8.
22. 7.  there  was  no  reckoning  made  with  t.

1  Chron.  9.  25.  their  brethren  w  ere  to  come  with  t.

2  Chron.  5.  12.  and  with  t.  120  priests  sounding
14.  11.  with  many,  or  with  t.  that  have  no  power
37 •  8.  with  t.  he  sent  Levites,  and  with  t.  Elishama

9.  had  the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord  with  t.

22.  12.  and  he  was  with  t.  hid  in  the  house  of  God
Ezra  5.  2.  with  t.  were  the  prophets  of  God  helping
Neh,  9.  13.  thou  spakest  with  t.  from  heaven

24.  that  they  might  do  with  t.  as  they  w’ould

13.  25.  and  1  contended  with  t.  and  cursed  them
Esth.  3.  11.  to  do  with  t.  as  it  seemeth  good  to  thee
Job  21.8.  their  seed  is  established  in  their  sight  w.  t.
Psal.  9.  6.  their  memorial  is  perished  with  t.

25.  14.  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  t.  that  fear  him

35.  1.  plead  my  cause  with  t.  that  strive  with  me

42.  4.  1  went  with  t.  to  the  house  of  God

54.  4.  the  Lord  is  with  t.  that  uphold  my  soul ,  1 18. 7.
88.  4.  I  am  counted  with  t.  that  go  down  into  pit
119.  93.  for  witht.  thou  hast  quickened  me
Prov.  1. 15.  my  son,  w-alk  not  thou  in  the  way  with  t.

24.  1.  evil  men,  neither  desire  to  be  with  t.

28.  4.  but  such  as  keep  the  law  contend  with  t.
Eccl.  8.  12.  it  shall  be  well  with  t.  that  fear  God
Isa.  14.  1.  and  the  stranger  shall  be  joined  witht.

20.  thou  shalt  not  be  joined  with  t.  in  burial
34.  7.  and  the  unicorns  shall  come  down  with  t.

57.  8.  enlarged  thy  bed  and  made  a  covenant  w.  i.

59.  21.  this  is  my  covenant  with  t.  saith  the  Lord

60.  9.  to  bring  their  silver  and  their  gold  with  t.

61.  8.  1  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  t.
65.  23.  blessed  of  Lord,  and  their  offspring  with  t.
Jer.  18.  23.  deal  thus  with  t.  in  time  of  thine  anger

27.  18.  and  if  the  word  of  the  Lord  be  with  t.

31.  8.  1  will  gather  with  t.  the  blind  and  the  lame

32.  40.  1  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  t.
Ezek.  16. 17.  thou  madest  images  of  men,  and  didst

commit  whoredoms  with  t.  28.  1  23.  7,  43.

26. 20.  bring  thee  dow  n  with  t.  that  go  down  to  pit
31.14.  w.  /.that  go  down  to  pit,  32.  18,24,25,29.

34.  25. 1  will  make  w.  t.  covenant  of  peace,  37. 26.
30.  1  the  Lord  their  God  am  with  t.  Zech.  10.  5.
37.27.  my  tabernacle  shall  be  with  1. 1  their  God
Hos.  5.  5.  Judah  also  shall  fall  with  t.

Mat.  9.  15.  can  the  children  fast  as  long  as  the
bridegmcin  is  with  t.?  Mark  2.  19.  Luke  5.  34.

13.  29.  lea1  ye  root  up  also  the  wheat  with  t.

23.  30.  we  would  not  have  been  partakers  with  t.

25.  3.  took  lheir  lamps,  and  took  no  oil  with  t.
Mark  16.  20.  they  preached,  the  L.  working  with  t.
Luke  15.  2.  he  eateth  w.  1. 1|  18.7.  tho’  he  bear  w.  t.

24.  33.  found  the  eleven  and  them  that  were  w.  t.
John  17.  12.  while  l  was  with  t.  in  the  w’orid,  1  kept

18.  5.  Judas  which  betrayed  him  stood  with  t.

20.24.  but  Ihcmas  was  not  w.  t.  when  Jesus  came
Acts  9.  28.  he  was  with  t.  coming  in  and  going  out
39-  w  hich  Dorcas  made  while  she  was  with  t.

10.  20.  arise,  and  go  with  t.  U  11.3.  didst  eat  with  t.

11.  12.  spirit  bade  me  go  with  t.  nothing  doubting

21.  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  t.

12.  25.  they  took  with  t.  John  surnamed  Mark

14.  27.  rehearsed  all  that  God  had  done  w.  1. 15.  4.

15.  38.  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with  t.

20.  36.  he  kneeled  down  and  prayed  with  t.  all

21.  24.  be  at  charges  with  t.  that  they  may  shave
Rom.  11.  17-  and  with  t.  partakest  of  the  root

12.  15.  bless  and  curse  not,  rejoice  with  t.  that
do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  t.  that  weep
Eph.  5  7.  be  net  ye  therefore  partakers  with  t.

502


Eph.  6.  24.  grace  be  with  t.  that  love  our  L.  Jes.  Chr.

1  Thess.  4.  17.  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  t.

2  Tim.  2.  22.  peace  be  with  t.  thatcail  on  the  Lord
lleb.  3.  17.  w  as  it  not  with  t.  that  had  sinned  /
8.8.  for  finding  fault  with  t.  he  saith,  behold

10.  16.  this  is  the  covenant  1  will  make  with  t.

11.  3).  the  harlot  Rahab  perished  not  with  t.

13.  3.  them  that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound  with  t.

1  Pet.  3.7-  ye  husbands,  dwell  with  t.  according
4.  4.  that  ye  run  not  with  t.  to  the  same  excess

2  Per.  2. 20.  latter  end  is  worse  w.  /.than  beginning
Rev.  9.  19.  had  heads,  and  with  t.  they  do  hurt
21.3.  tabernacle  with  men  will  dwell  with  t.

Without  THEM.

Lev.  26.  43.  while  she  lieth  desolate  without  t.

See  Teach .

THEMSELVES.

Gen.  19.  11.  they  wearied  t.  to  find  the  door

43.  32.  for  them  by  t.  for  the  Egyptians  by  t.

Exud.  5.  7.  let  them  go  and  gather  straw  for  t.

12.  39.  nor  had  they  prepared  for  t.  victual

32. 7.  tor  thy  people  have  corrupted  t.  Deut.  9. 12.

I  32.  5.  Judg.  2.  19.  llos.  9.  9.
A  urn.  8.  7.  let  them  wash,  and  so  make  t.  clean
Deut.  32.  31.  even  our  enemies  t.  being  judges
1  Sam.  3.  13.  because  his  sons  make  t.  vile,  and  he

14.  11.  both  ot  them  discovered  t.  to  the  garrison

1  Kings  8.  47.  if  they  shall  bethink  t.  2  Chr.  6.  37.

18.  23.  let  them  choose  one  bullock  for  t.

2  Kings  8.  20.  Edom  made  king  over  t.  2  Chr.  21.8.

17.  17-  sold  t.  todq  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord
32.  made  to  t.  of  the  lowest  of  them  priests

19.  29.  ye  shall  eat  such  things  as  grow  of  t.

1  Chron.  19.  6.  they  had  made  t.  odious  to  David

2  Chron.  7 . 14.  if  my  people  shall  humble  t.

12.  6.  the  princes  and  the  king  humbled  t.  7.

20.  25.  precious  jewels  which  they  striptoft'  for  t.
35.  14.  afterwar.  they  made  ready  for  t.  and  priests
Ezra  9.  2.  they  have  taken  of  their  daughters  for  t.
Esth.  9.  31.  and  as  they  had  decreed  for  t.  and  seed
Job  24.  16.  houses  w  hich  they  had  marked  for/.

30.  14.  in  the  desolation  they  rolled  t.  upon  me
41.  23.  they  are  firm  in  t.  they  cannot  be  moved
Psal.  2.  2.  the  kings  of  the  earth  set  t.  against  God

9.  20.  the  nations  may  know  t.  to  be  but  men

44.  10.  and  they  which  hate  us  spoil  for/.

57.  6.  into  the  midst  whereof  they  are  fallen  t.

106.  28.  they  joined  t.  also  to  Baal-peor,  and  ate
140.  8.  grant  not  their  desires,  lest  they  exalt  t.
Prov.  23.  5.  riches  make  t.  wings,  they  fly  away
Eccl.  3.  18.  they  might  see  that  they  t.  are  beasts
Isa.  2.  6.  and  they  please  t.  in  children  of  strangers

3.  9.  tor  they  have  rew’arded  evil  to  t.

46.  2.  but  t.  are  gone  into  captivity

47.  11.  they  shall  not  deliver  t.  from  the  flame

48.  2.  tor  they  call  /.  of  the  holy  city, and  stay
56.  6.  sons  of  the  stranger  that  join  t.  to  the  Lord

Jer.  2.  24.  all  they  that  seek  her  will  not  weary  t.

4.  2.  and  the  nations  shall  bless  t.  in  him

7.  19.  do  they  not  provoke  t.  ||  9.  5.  they  weary  t.
11. 17-  for  the  evil  they  have  done  against  t.

12.  13.  have  put  t.  to  pain,  but  shall  not  profit

16.  6.  nor  cut  t.  nor  make  t.  bald  for  them

27.  7-  and  great  kings  shall  sei  ve  t.  of  him
3u.  21.  and  their  nobles  shall  be  of  t.

34.  10.  that  none  should  serve  t.  of  them  any  more
Ezek.  10.  17.  they  were  lifted  up,  these  lift  up  t.

22.  was  the  same,  their  appearances  and/.

14.  18.  but  they  only  shall  be  delivered  /.

34.  2.  woe  to  shepherds  of  Israel  that  do  feed  /.

10.  nor  shall  the  shepherds  feed  /.  any  more
45. 5.  shall  also  the  Levites  of  the  house  have  for  /.
Hos.  4.  14.  for/,  are  separated  with  whores

7.  14.  they  assembled  /.  for  corn  and  wine

9.  10.  but  they  separated  /.  to  that  shame
Dab.  1.  7.  their  judgments  shall  proceed  of/.

2.  13.  the  people  shall  weary  /.  for  very  vanity
Zech.  4.  12.  which  empty  the  golden  oil  out  of  /.

11.  5.  who  slay  them,  and  hold/,  not  guilty
Mat.  14,2.  John  Baptist  is  risen,  therefore  mighty
works  do  shew  forth  /.  in  him,  Mark  6. 14.
16.  7.  reasoned  among  /.  Mark  8.  16.  Luke<20.  14.
19.  12.  there  be  eunuchs,  who  made /.  eunuchs

21. 25.  reasoned  with  /.  Mark  11.  31.  Luke  20.5.

23.  4.  but  they  /.  will  not  move  them  with  one
Mark  4.  17.  receive  it,  and  have  no  root  in  /.

9.  10.  and  they  kept  that  saying  with  /.

Luke  7 ■  30.  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  against  /.

18.  9.  he  spake  to  certain  who  trusted  in  /.

20. 20.  sent  spies  whLh  should  feign  /.just  men
23.  12.  for  before  they  were  at  enmity  between  /.
John  17.  13.  they  might  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  /.
18.  28.  they  /.  went  not  into  the  judgment  hall
Acts  15.  32.  Judas  and  Silas  being  prophets  also/.
16.  37.  but  let  them  come  /.  and  fetch  us  out
18.  6.  and  when  they  opposed  /.  and  blasphemed

21. 25.  that  they  keep  /.  from  thingsoffered  to  idols

23.  12.  certain  Jews  bound  /.  under  a  curse,  21.

24.  15.  a  resurrection  which  they  /.  also  allow

28 . 25.  and  when  they  agreed  not  among  /.

29.  the  Jews  had  great  reasoning  among  /.

Rom.  1.  22.  professing/,  to  be  wise,  they  beca.  fools
24.  to  dishonour  their  own  bodies  between  /.

27.  receiving  in  /.  that  recompence  of  their  error
2. 14.  these  having  not  the  law’,  are  a  law  to  /.

10.  3.  have  not  submitted  /.  to  righteousness  of  God

13.  2.  they  that  resist  shall  receive  to  /.  damnation

1  Cor.  6.  9.  nor  abusers  of/,  with  mankind

2  Cor.  5.  15.  should  not  henceforth  live  to  /.  but  to

8.  3.  beyond  their  power  they  were  willing  of /.

10.  12.  measuring  /.  by  /.  comparing  /.  with  /.

11.  13.  transforming  /.  into  the  apostles  of  Christ
Gal.  6.  13.  for  neither  do  they  /.  keep  the  law
Eph.  4. 19.  who  have  given  /.  over  to  lasciviousness
Phil.  2.  3.  let  each  esteem  other  better  than  /.

1  Thess.  1.  9.  for  they  /.  shew  of  us  what  manner

1  Tim.  1.  10.  them  that  defile /.  with  mankind

2.  9.  women  adorn  /.  in  modest  apparel,  1  Pet.  3.5.
3. 13.  they  purchased  to  t.  good  degree  and  boldn.

6.  19.  laying  up  in  store  for/,  a  good  foundation

2  Tim.  2.  25.  instructing  those  that  oppose  t.

26.  may  recover  /.  cut  of  the  snare  ot  the  devil


2  Tim.  4.  .3.  but  they  shalt  heap  to  /.  teachers,  having
Tit.  1.  12.  one  of  /.  even  a  prophet  of  their  own
Deb.  6.  6.  seeing  they  crucify  to  /.  the  Son  of  God

1  Pet.  1.  12.  that  not  to  /.  but  as  they  did  ministel

2  Pet.  2. 1.  and  bring  upon  /.  swift  destruction

13.  sporting/,  with  their  own  deceivings  while

19.  they  /.  are  the  servants  of  corruption

Jude  7.  giving  /.  over  to  fornication,  going  after
10.  they  corrupt  /.  ||  12.  feeding  /.  w  ithout  fear
19.  who  separate  /.sensual,  having  not  the  Spirit
See  Gather,  Hide,  Spread.

THEN.

Gen.  4.  26.  /.  began  men  to  call  upon  the  Loid

13.  7.  the  Canaanite  dwelt  /.  in  the  land
16.  /.  shall  thy  seed  also  be  numbered

27.  41.  /.  will  I  slay  my  brother  Jacob

28.  21.  /.  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God

44.  26.  if  our  brother  be  with  us  /.  will  we  go  down

49.  4.  /.  defijest  thou  it ;  he  went  up  to  my  couch
Lev.  26.  41.  if  /.  their  hearts  be  humbled,  anti  they
/.  accept  of  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity
42.  /.  1  will  remember  my  covenant  with  Jacob
Josh.  14.  11.  as  my  strength  was  /.  so  is  it  now

12.  if  the  Lord  be  with  me,  /.  1  shall  be  able
Judg.  5.  8.  they  choose  new  gods,  /.  w-as  war  in  gates
1  Sam.  15.  14.  what  meaneth  t.  this  bleating  of  sheep

25.  31.  /.  remember  thine  handmaid

1  Kings  8.  32.  /.  hear  thou  in  heaven, 34, 36, 39, 45, 49.

22.  47.  there  svas  /.  no  king  in  Edom,  a  deputy

2  Kings  1. 10.  /.  let  fire  come  dowm  from  heaven

8.  16.  Jehoshaphat  being  /.  king  of  Israel

9.  3.  /.  open  the  door  and  flee  and  tarry  not

1  Chron.  li.  16.  and  David  was  /.  in  the  hold

2  Chron.  33.  13.  /.  Manasses  knew  the  Lord  was  God
Ezra  5.  1.  /.  the  prophets  prophesied  to  the  Jews

2.  /.  rose  Zerubbabel  to  build  the  house  of  God
Esth.  5.  9.  /.  w’ent  Hainan  forth  that  day  joyful

14.  /.  said  Zeresh  his  wife,  and  his  friends  to  him

7.  10.  /.  was  the  king’s  wrath  pacified

Job  3.  13.  should  have  slept,  /.  had  1  been  at  rest

11.  11.  he  seeth  also,  will  he  not  /.  consider  it ;

22.  26.  /.  shalt  thou  have  delight  in  the  Almighty

29.  /.  thou  shalt  say  there  is  lifting  up

38.21.  knowest  thou  it,  because  thou  wast  /.  born
Psal.  27.  10.  /.  the  Lord  will  take  me  up
51.13.  /.  will  1  teach  transgressors  thy  ways
55.  12.  was  not  an  enemy,  /.  I  could  have  borne  it
69.  4.  /.  I  restored  that  which  I  took  not  away
106.  12.  /.  believed  they  his  words,  they  sang
119.  6.  /.  shall  I  not  be  ashamed,  when  I  have
Prov.  2.  5.  /.  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  Lord

9.  /.  shalt  thou  understand  righteousness

24.  14.  /.  there  shall  be  a  reward,  thy  expectation
Isa.  32.  16.  /.  judgtnentshall  dwell  in  the  wilderness
58.  8.  /.  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning

9.  /.  shalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  shall  answer
Jer.  4.  1.  /.  shalt  thou  not  remove

11.  15.  when  thou  dost  evil,  /.  thou  rejoicest
18.  /.  thou  shewedst  me  their  doings

23.  22.  /.  they  should  have  turned  them  from
33.  26.  /.  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of  Jacob
Ezek.  39.  28.  /.  shall  they  know  that  1  am  the  Lord
Dan.  5.  24.  /.  was  part  of  the  hand  sent  from  him
Mai.  3. 16.  /.  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often
Mat.  5.  24.  and  /.  come  and  offer  thy  gift

9.  15.  /.  shall  they  fast,  Mark  2.  20.  Luke  5.  35.

12.  29.  /.  will  he  spoil  his  house,  Mark  3.  27.

16.  27.  and  /.  he  shall  reward  every  man  according
17-  26.  Jesus  saith,  /.  are  the  children  free

19.25.  were  amazed,  saying,  who  /.  can  be  saved  ?

Mark  10.  26.  Luke  18.  26.

24.  14.  for  a  witness  to  all,  /.  shall  the  end  come

21.  for/,  shall  be  great  tribulation,  suchnotsince

26.  56.  /.  all  the  disciples  forsook  him  and  fled
Mark  12.  37.  and  whence  is  he  /.  his  son  ?

13.  14.  /.  let  them  that  be  in  Judea  flee  to  the

mountains,  Luke  21.  21.
Luke  6.  42.  /.  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  pull  out
John  1.  21.  asked  they  what  /.  art  thou  Elias  ?

25.  they  asked  him,  why  baptizest  thou  /. ?

7.  33.  and  /.  I  go  unto  him  that  sent  me

8.  28.  /.  shall  ye  know  that  1  am  he,  and  that  Ido
Acts  2.  38./.  Peter  said  to  them,  repent  and  be  bapt.

41. /.they  that  gladly  received  his  word  were  bapt.
11.  18./.  hath  God  to  the  Gentiles  granted,  26.  20.
Rom.  6.21.  what  fruit  had^ye  /.  in  those  things/

7.  7.  what  shall  we  say  /.  is  the  law  sin?  9.  14.

8. 17.  if  children,  /.  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  joint  heirs

1 1.  5.  so  /.  at  this  present  there  is  a  remnant

1  Cor.  4.  5.  /.  shall  every  man  have  praise  of  God

10.  19.  what  say  I  /.  that  the  idol  is  any  thing
13. 12.  but  /.  face  to  face,  now  1  know  in  part,  /.

shall  I  know  even  as  also  I  am  known
14. 15.  what  is  it  /.  ?  ||  2  Cor.  12.  10  /.  am  I  strong
Gal.  2.  21.  come  by  the  law,  /.  Christ  is  dead  in  vain

3.  29.  ifye  be  Christ’s, /.  are  ye  Abraham’s  seed

4.  29.  but  as  /.  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh

6.  4.  /.  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself

1  Thess. 5.  3. /.sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them

2  Thess.  2.  8.  /.  shall  that  wicked  one  be  revealed
Heb.  7.  27-  first  for  his  own  sins,  /.  for  the  people’s

12.  8.  /.  are  ye  bastards,  and  not  sons

1  Johns.  21.  /.  have  we  confidence  towards  God
THENCE.

Gen.  24.  7-  thou  shalt  take  a  wife  to  my  son  from  ,
27  .  45.  then  1  will  send  and  fetch  thee  from  /.

49.  24.  from  /.  is  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of  Israel
Num.  13.  23.  they  cut  down  from  /.  a  branch,  24.
23.  13.  Balak  said,  curse  me  them  from  /.  27.
Deut.  4.  29.  if  from  /.  thou  shalt  seek  the  Lord

5.  15.  the  Lord  brought  thee  out  /.  6.  23. 1  24.  18.

19.  12.  the  elders  shall  send  and  fetch  him  /.

30.  4.  lrom  /.  will  the  Lord  gather  thee,  a. id  from
/.  will  he  fetch  thee,  Nen.  1.  9
Judg.  19. 18.  to  mount  Ephraim,  from  /.  am  I
1  Sam.  4.  4.  might  bring  from  /.  the  ark  of  the  cove
nant  of  the  L.  of  hosts,  2  Sam.  6.  2.  1  Chr.  13.  6.

1  Kings  2.  36.  go  not  forth  from  /.  any  whither

2  Kings  2.  21.  shall  not  be  from  /.  any  more  death
23.  and  he  went  up  from/,  to  Beth  el

25.  from  /.  to  Carmel,  and  from  /.  to  Samaria

7.  8.  the  lepers  carried  /.  silver  and  gold  and  nid  it


T  H  E


T  H  E


T  Ii  E


2  Chi  on..  26.  CO.  they  thrust  oift  Uzziah  from  t.
Ezra  6.  6.  now  therefore,  be  ye  far  from  t.

Isa.  5C.  11.  depart  ve,  depart,  go  ye  out  from  4.
65.  20.  there  shall  be  no  more  4.  an  infant  of  days
Jer.  5.  6.  every  one  that  goes  t.  shall  be  torn

22.  24.  were  fhe  signet  yet  would  1  pluck  thee  4.
‘56.  29.  cause  to  cease  from  4.  man  and  beast

37.  12.  went  forth  to  separate  himself  t.

43.  12.  ami  he  shall  go  forth  from  t.  in  peace
49.  16.  as  the  eagle  I  will  bring  thee  down  from  t.
Ezek.  11.  18.  shall  take  all  abominations  from  t.
llos.  2.  15.  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  4.
Amos  6.  2.  from  t.  go  ye  to  Hamath  the  great

9.  2.  dig  into  hell,  t.  shallrrty  hand  take  them,  3.

4.  t.  will  1  command  the  swoiit,  it  shall  slay

Obad.  4.  among  stars,  4.  will  1  hiing  thee  down
Mat.  5.  26.  thou  shalt  by  no  means  come  out  t.

10.  11.  who  worthy,  atul  there  abide,  till  ye  go  t.
Mark  6.  11.  when  ye  depart  t.  shake  off  the  dust
Luke  16.  26.  that  would  come  from  t.  to  us  cannot

I'll  ENCEFOR  I  H.

Lev.  22.  27.  t.  it  shall  be  accepted  for  you
2  Chron.  32.  23.  Ilezekiah  was  magnified  from  t.
Mat.  5.  13.  is  t.  good  for  nothing,  but  to  be  cast  out
John  19.  12.  from  t.  Pilate  sought  to  release  him
THERE.

Gen.  2.  8.  t.  he  put  the  man  whom  he  had  formed

18.  28.  if  1  find  forty-five  t.  1  will  not  destroy  it

32.  29.  he  blessed  him  t.  ||  35.  7-  4.  God  appeared
49.  31.  t.  they  buried  Abraham  and  Sarah,  (.  they
\  buried  Isaac  and  Rebekah  his  w  ife

Eiod.  8.  22.  Goshen,  no  swarms  of  flies  shall  be  t.

15.  25.  t.  he  made  a  statute,  t.  he  proved  them

1 7.  6.  behold  1  will  stand  before  thee  t.  in  Horeb
24.  12.  come  up  into  the  mount,  and  be  t.  31.  2.

34.  28.  and  he  was  t.  with  the  I.ord  forty  days
Lev.  8.  31.  t.  eat  it  ||  16.  23.  shall  leave  them  t.
Num.  11.  17.  1  wdll  come  and  talk  with  thee  t.

13.  28.  moreover  we  saw  the  children  of  Anak  t.

33.  Dent.  1.  28.  Josh.  14.  12.
20  1.  and  Miriam  died  t.  and  was  buried  t.

26.  and  Aaron  shall  die  t.  28.  Dent.  10.  6.

Dent.  4.  28.  t.  ye  shall  serve  gods,  work  of  men’s
hands,  wood  and  stone,  28.  36,  64.  Jer.  16.  13.

10.  5  and  t.  they  be  unto  this  day,  Josh.  4.  9.

12.  yout  God  shall  choose  to  put  his  name  t.

14.  23.  |  16.  2,  11.  1  Kings  8.  29.  I  9.  3.

31.  26.  it  may  be  t.  fora  witness  against  thee
Judg.  5.  27.  where  he  bowed,  t.  he  fell  down  dead

7.  4.  bring  them  down.  I’ll  try  them  for  thee  t.

21.  9.  none  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-gilead  t.
Ruth  1.  17.  w  here  thou  diest,  t.  will  I  be  buried

1  Sam.  1.  3.  the  priests  of  the  Lord  were  t.  4.  4.

28.  and  Hannah  worshipped  the  Lend  t.

11.  14.  go  to  Gil  gal,  and  renew  the  kingdom  t.

15.  t.  they  made  Saul  king  before  the  I.ord,  t.

they  sacrificed,  and  t.  they  rejoiced

21.  7-  a  certain  man  of  the  servants  of  Saul  t.

22.  22.  1  knew  when  Doeg  the  Edomite  was

2  Sam.  3. 27.  Joab  smote  Abner  t.  under  the  fifth  rib

6.7.  God  smote  Uzzah  t.  and  t.  he  died  by  ark  ofG.
15.  21.  even  t.  also  will  thy  servant  be

35.  hast  thou  not  t.  Zadok  and  Abiathar

1  Kings  8.  8.  staves,  and  t.  they  are  to  this  day

11.  36.  1  have  chosen  to  put  my  name  t.  2  Kings

23.  27.  2  Chron.  6.  5,  6.  I  7-  16.  Neh.  1.  9.

17.  4.  1  commanded  the  ravens  to  feed  thee  t.

18.  10.  when  they  said  he  is  not  t.  he  took  an  oath

19.  3.  came  to  Beer  sheba,  and  left  his  servant  t.

2  Kings 2.  21.  Elisha  went,  and  cast  the  salt  in  t.

4.  11.  he  came  and  lay  1. 117-  4.  and  we  shall  die  t.
7-  5.  when  they  were  come,  t.  was  no  man  t.  10.

1  Chron.  14.  12.  when  they  left  their  gods,  t.

2  Chron.  28.  9.  but  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  was  t.

32.  21.  they  slew  Sennacherib  t.  with  the  sword
Ezra  6.  12.  God  hath  caused  his  name  to  dwell  t.
Job  3.  17.  t .  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and

t.  the  weary  be  at  rest

18.  t.  the  prisoners  t  est  together,  and  hear  not

19.  small  and  great  are  t.  the  servant  is  free  from

23.  7.  4.  the  righteous  might  dispute  with  him
35.  12.  t.  they  cry,  but  none  giveth  answer
39.  30.  and  where  the  slain  are,  t.  is  she

Psal.  14.  5.  t.  were  they  in  great  fear,  53.  5.

45.  12.  the  daughter  of  Tyre  shall  be  t.  with  a  gift
48.  6.  fear  to«k  hold  upon  them  t.  and  pain
66.  6.  went  through  flood,  t.  did  we  rejoice  in  him
69.  35.  will  build  cities  that  they  may  dwell  t.

87.  4.  Philistia  and  l  yre,  this  man  was  horn  t.  6.
7.  singers  and  players  on  instruments  shall  be  t,
104.  26.  t.  go  the  ships,  t.  is  that  Leviathan
133.  3.  t.  the  I  ord  commanded  the  blessing
139.  8.  thou  art  t.  ||  10.  t.  shall  thy  hand  lead  me
Prov.  8.  27.  I  was  t.  H  9.  18.  that  the  dead  are  t.

26.  20.  where  no  wood  is,  t.  the  fire  goeth  out
Eecl.  3.  16.  that  wickedness  was  t.  iniquity  was  t.

17.  for  there  is  a  time  t.  for  every  purpose

11.  3.  where  the  tree  falleth,  t.  it  shall  be
Cant.  8.  5.  t.  thy  mother,  brought  thee  forth

Isa.  13.  20.  nor  shall  shepherds  make  their  fold  t.

21.  but  wild  beasts  of  the  desert  shall  lie  t.

22.  18.  t.  shalt  thou  die,  and  t.  the  chariots

23.  12.  to  Chittim,  t.  also  shalt  thou  have  no  rest
28.  10.  line  upon  line,  here  a  little  and  t.  a  little

33.  21.  t.  glorious  Lord  will  be  a  place  of  rivers
35.  8.  and  an  highway  shall  be  t.  and  a  wray

9.  no  lion,  but  the  redeemed  shall  walk  t.

48.  16.  t.  am  I  11  65.  9.  my  servant  shall  dw  ell  t.
Jer.  8.  22.  is  t.  no  balm  in  Gilead,  no  physician  t.  ?

18.  2.  t.  will  1  cause  thee  to  hear  my  words

20.  6.  t.  thou  shalt  die,  and  shalt  be  buried  t.

22.  26.  another  country  t.  shall  ye  die,  42.  16.

27.  22.  and  t.  shall  they  be  till  1  visit  them

38.  28.  he  was  t.  when  Jerusalem  was  taken
42.  14.  will  go  into  Egypt,  and  t.  will  we  dwell
47.  7.  against  Ashkelon,  t.  hath  he  appointed  it
Ezek.  3.  22.  go  to  the  plain,  1  will  t.  talk  with  thee

12.  13.  he  shall  not  see  it,  though  he  shall  die  t.

17*  20.  I  will  plead  with  him  t.  for  his  trespass

20.  28.  and  they  offered  t.  their  sacrifices,  t.  they

J>re6euted  the  provocation  of  their  offering
t.  will  1  plead  with  you  face  to  face


Ezek.  20. 40.  t.  will  I  accept  them,  t.  requ.  offerings
22.20.  and  l  will  leave  you  t.  and  melt  you

23.  3.  t.  were  their  breasts  pressed,  t.  they  bruised

29.  14.  and  they  shall  be  t.  a  base  kingdom
32.  22.  Ashur  is  t.  and  all  her  company

35.  10.  we  will  possess  it,  whereas  the  Lord  was  t.
48.  35.  imme  or  the  city  shall  be,  the  Lord  is  t.
llos.  2.  15.  and  she  shall  sing  t.  as  in  her  youth
7.  9.  yea,  grey  hairs  are  here  and  t.  upon  him

9.  15.  t.  I  hated  them  ||  12.  4.  t.  he  spake  with  us
Joel  3.2.  1  will  plead  with  them  t.  for  my  people
Amos  6.  12.  will  one  plow  t.  with  oxen  '

7.  12.  into  Judah,  t.  eat  bread  and  prophesy  t.
Mic.  4.  10.  t.  be  delivered,  t.  Lord  shall  redeem  thee
Zeph.  1.  14.  the  mighty  man  shall  cry  t.  bitterly
Mat.  2. 13.  be  thou  t.  till  1  bring  thee  word

5.  23.  t.  rememberest  that  thy  brother  hath  ought

24.  leave  t.  thy  gift  before  the  altar

6.  21.  where  treasure  is,  t.  will  your  heart  be  also

8. 12.  t.  shall  be  gnashing  of  teeth,  22.  1.3.  |  24.  51.

12.  45.  they  enter  in,  and  dwelt  t.  Luke  11.  26.

18.  20.  in  my  name,  t.  I  am  in  the  midst  of  them

24.  23.  lo  here  is  Christ,  or  t.  Mark  13.  21.

25.  25.  1  hid  thy  talent,  t.  thou  hast  that  is  thine

27.  36.  and  sitting  down,  they  w-atched  him  t.

28.  7-  in  Galilee,  t.  shall  ye  see  him,  Mark  16.  7.
Mark  1.  38.  let  us  go,  that  1  may  preach  t.  also

6.  5.  and  he  could  t.  do  no  mighty  w’ork,save  that
Luke  10. 6.  and  if  the  sor.  of  peace  be  t.  your  peace

12.  18.  t.  will  1  bestow  all  my  fruits  and  goods
John  12.26.  where  1  am,  t.  shall  my  servant  be

14.  3.  that  w  here  I  am,  t.  ye  may  be  also
Acts  20.  22.  the  things  that  shall  befall  me  t.

22.  10.  t.  it  shall  be  told  thee  of  all  things  which
Rom.  9.  26.  4.  be  called  the  children  of  living  God
Rev.  21.  25.  for  there  shall  be  no  night  t.  22.  5.
THEREABOUT.

Luke  24.  4.  as  they  were  much  perplexed  t.

See  Abode,  Is,  None,  One,  Strand,  Stood,
Was.

THEREAT.

Exod.  30. 19.  wash  their  hands  and  feet  t.  40.  31.
Mat.  7.  13.  and  many  there  be  which  go  in  t.
THEREBY.

Gen.  24.  14.  t.  shall  I  know  thou  hast  shewed
Lev.  11. 43.  that  ye  should  be  defiled  t.

Job  22.21.  with  God,  t.  good  will  come  unto  thee
Prov.  20.  1.  whoso  is  deceived  t.  is  not  wise
Eccl.  10.  9.  cleaveth  wood,  shall  be  endangered  1.
Isa.  3.3.21.  nor  shall  gallant  ships  pass  t.

Jer.  18. 16.  passeth  t.  shali  be  astonished,  19.  8.

51. 43.  neither  doth  any  son  of  man  pass  t.

Ezek.  12.5.  dig  through  wall  and  carry  out  t.  12.

33. 12.  he  shall  not  fall  t.  ||  18.  he  shall  (lie  t.

19.  and  do  what  is  lawful,  he  shall  live  t.

Zech.  9.  2.  and  Hamath  also  shall  border  t.

John  11.  4.  that  Son  of  God  might  be  glorified  4.
Eph.  2.  16.  by  the  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  t.
lleh.  12.  11.  yields  to  them  who  are  exercised  t.

15.  root  springing  up,  and  t.  many  be  defiled

13.  2.  for  t.  some  nave  entertained  angels

1  Pet.  2.  2.  milk  of  the  word  that  ye  may  grow  t.

THEREFORE.

Gen.  2. 24.  t.  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother
17.9.  God  said,  thou  shalt  keep  my  covenant  t.

42.  21.  guilty,  t.  is  this  distress  come  upon  us
Exod.  1.20.  t.  God  dealt  well  with  the  midwives
4.  12.  t.  go  ||  5.  8.  they  be  idle,  t.  they  cry,  17.

12.  17.  t.  shall  ye  observe  this  day,  13.  10.

16.  29.  t.  he  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  day  bread
31.  14.  ye  shall  keep  the  sabbath  t.  for  it  is  holy
Lev.  11. 44.  ye  shall  t.  be  holy,  1  am  holy,  45.  I  21. 6.
18.25./.  1  do  v  isit  the  iniquity  thereof  upon  it

26.  ye  shall  t.  keep  my  statutes  and  judgments

30.  t.  keep  my  ordinances,  19.  37.  I  20.  22. 1  22.  9.
25.  17.  ye  shall  not  t.  oppress  one  another,  but  fear
Num.  3.  12.  t.  the  l.evites  shall  be  mine

Deut.  5.  15.  t.  the  Ix>rd  thy  God  commanded  thee  to
keep  the  sabbath  day,  15.  11,  15.  I  24.  18,  22.

28.  48.  t.  thou  shalt  serve  thine  enemies
Judg.  11.8.  t.  we  turn  again  to  thee  now

1  Sam.  1.  28.  t.  also  1  have  lent  him  to  the  Lord
28.  18.  t.  hath  the  Lord  done  this  thing  to  thee

2  Sam.  6.  23.  t.  Miclial  had  no  child  to  her  death

1  Kings2.2.  be  strong  t.  and  shew  thyself  a  man

20.  42.  t.  thy  life  shall  go  for  his  life,  and  people

2  Kings  1.6.  t.  thou  shalt  not  come  down,  16.

19.  18.  t.  they  have  destroyed  them

1  Chron.  10. 14.  t.  he  slew  Saul,  and  turned  kingdom

2  Chron.  7.  22.  t.  hath  he  brought  all  this  evil

30.7.  t.  gave  them  up  to  desolation,  as  ye  see
Neh.  2.  20.  t.  we  his  servants  will  arise  and  build

13.  28.  t.  1  chased  him  from  me

Job  21.  14.  t.  they  say  to  God,  depart  from  us

35.  14.  judgment  is  before  him,  t.  trust  in  him

42.  8.  t.  take  unto  you  seven  bullocks,  seven  rams
Psal.  16.  9.  t.  my  heart  is  glad  ||  31.  3.  t.  lead  me

36.  7-  t •  the  children  of  men  put  their  trust  in  thee
45.  2.  t.  God  hath  blessed  thee  for  ever

7.  t.  God  hath  anointed  thee  with  oil  of  gladness

17.  t.  shall  the  people  praise  thee  for  ever

55.  19.  have  no  changes,  t.  they  fear  not  God

63.7.  4.  in  shadow  of  thy  wings  I  will  rejoice
73.  10.  t.  his  people  return  hither

91. 14.  set  his  love  on  me,  t.  will  1  deliver  him
106.  23.  t.  he  said,  that  he  would  destroy  them
116.  10.  1  believed,  t.  have  1  spoken,  2  Cor.  4.  13.
119.  104.  t.  1  hate  every  false  way
129.  are  wonder,  t.  doth  my  soul  keep  them
1.39.  19.  depart  from  me  t.  ye  bloody  men
Prov.  17.  14.  t.  leave  off  contention  before  it  be
Eccl.  5.  2.  God  is  in  heaven,  t.  let  thy  words  be  few

8.  6.  t.  the  misery  of  man  is  great  upon  him
ll.r.  the  heart  of  men  is  set  in  them  to  do  evil

Isa.  .3.  17.  4.  the  Lord  will  smite  with  a  scab

10.  16. 4.  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  send  leanness

24.  6.  4.  hath  the  curse  devoured  the  earth

42.  25.  4.  he  hath  poured  the  fury  of  his  anger
59.  16.  4.  his  arm  brought  salvation  unto  him
Jer.  6.  15. 4.  they  shall  fall  among  them  that  fall
40.  3.  ye  obeyed  not,  4.  this  thing  is  come  on  you
Lam.  3. 24.  lord  is  my  portion  4.  will  1  hope  in  him


Jonah  4.  2.  4.  I  fled  before  unto  Tarsnish
Zech.  1.  16.  4.  i  am  returned  to  Jerus.  with  mercie*

7.  12.  4.  came  a  great  wrath  from  the  Lord
Mat.  3.  6.  4.  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed
Mat.  5.  48.  be  ye  4.  perfect  ||  10.  31.  fear  ye  not  t.

19.  6.  what  4.  God  hath  joined  t(  gether  let  not

27.  we  have  forsaken  all,  what  hall  we  have  4.

21.  42.  watch  4.  44.  |  25.  13.  Mark  1.3.  35.

28.  19.  go  ye  4.  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them
Mark  1.  .38.  4.  came  1  forth  ||  12.  27.  ye  4.  do  err
Luke  4.  43.  for  4.  am  I  sent  ||  6.  .36.  be  ye  4.  merciful

11.  19.  by  whom  4.  shall  they  be  your  judges
49.  4.  also  sail!  the  v  isdom  of  God,  1  will  send

14.  20.  I  married  a  wife,  and  4.  I  cannot  come

20.  15.  wf.vl-  t.  shall  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  do

unto  them  ?  Mai k  12.  9.
33. 4.  in  the  resurrection  whose  wife  of  them  is  she
John  .3.  29.  this  my  joy  4.  is  fulfilled

8.  47.  ye  4.  hear  them  not,  because  not  of  God

9.  41.  but  ye  say,  we  see,  t.  y  our  sin  remaineth

10.  17.  4.  doth  my  Father  love  me,  because  I  lay

12.  50.  what  1  speak  4.  as  Father  said,  so  1  speak

15.  19.  1  have  chosen  you,  t.  the  world  hatethyou
Acts  3.  19.  repent  ye  4.  anti  be  com  erted,  that  your
Rom.  4.  22.4.  it  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteous.

12.  20.  4.  if  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him

1  Cor.  6.  20.  4.  glorify  Godin  your  body  and  spirit

12.  15.  not  the  hand,  is  it  4.  not  of  the  body,  16.

15.  58.  4.  be  ye  stedfast,  unmovable,  alway  s

2  Cor.  8.  7-  4.  as  ye  abound  in  every  thing,  in  faith
Eph.  5.  7.  be  not  ye  4.  partakers  with  them

24.  4.  as  the  church  is  subject  to  Christ,  so  wdves
2  Tim.  1.8.  be  not  4.  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  L.
See  Now.

THEREFROM.

Josh.  2.3.  6.  that  ye  turn  not  aside  4.  to  right  or  left
2  Kin.  3.3.  sins  of  Jeroboam,  he  departed  not  4. 13. 2.
THEREIN.

Gen.  9.  7.  multiply  4.  ||  18.  24.  for  fifty  righteous 4.
23.  11.  the  cave  that  is  4.  1  give  it  to  thee,  17,  20.

34.  10.  the  land  before  you,  dwell  and  trade  4.  21.
Exod.  16.  24.  neither  was  there  any  worm  4.

31.  14.  doeth  any  work  4.  be  cut  off,  35.  2.

40.  3.  shalt  thou  put  4.  the  ark  of  the  testimony
9-  anoint  the  tabernacle  and  all  4.  Lev.  8.  10.

Lev.  6.  3.  sinning  4.  ||  7-  done  in  trespassing  4.

13.  21.  no  w  hite  hairs  4.  ||  37-  black  hairs  4.

18.  4.  ordinances  to  walk  4.  Judg.  2.  22.  ha.  42.  5

22.  21.  perfect,  there  shall  be  no  blemish  4.

23.  3.  ye  shall  do  no  work  4.  it  is  the  sabbath  ot
the  l  ord,  Dent.  16.  8.  Num.  29.  7-  Jer.  17.24

7.  ye  shall  do  no  servile  work  4.  8,  21,  25,  .35,  .36.

Num.  28.  18.  I  29.  35

25.  19.  shall  eat  your  fill  and  dwell  4.  in  safety
Num.  1.3.  20.  whether  there  be  wood  4.  or  not

16.  7.  put  fire  4.  and  put  incense  in  them,  46.

Deut.  7.  25.  nor  take  it,  lest  thou  be  snared  4.

13.  15.  destroy  all  that  is  4.  Josh.  10.  28,  .39.

15.  21.  if  there  be  any  blemish  4.  if  it  be  lame

17.  19.  he  shall  read  4.  all  the  days  of  his  life

20.  11.  peoide  that  is  found  4.  shall  be  tributaries

29.  23.  nor  beareth,  nor  any  grass  groweth  4.

Josh.  1.  8.  thou  shalt  meditate  4.  day  and  night

6.  17.  the  city  and  all  4.  shall  be  accursed, '24.

1  Kings  8.  16.  an  house,  that  my  name  might  be  4.

2  Kings  2.  20.  bring  me  a  new  cruse,  and  put  salt  4.
1  Chron.  16.  32.  let  the  fields  rejoice,  and  all  that

is  4.  Psal.  96.  12.-

Ezra  4.  19.  rebellion  and  sedition  been  made  4.
Neh.  6.  1.  wall,  that  there  was  no  breach  left  4.

7-  4.  city  was  large,  but  the  people  were  few  4.

5.  found  it  written  4.  13.  1.  ||  8.  3.  he  read  t.

9.  6.  made  the  earth,  the  seas,  and  all  that  is  4..

Psal.  24.  1.1  69.  34.  |  98.  7-
Job  .3.  7*  night  solitary,  let  no  joyful  voice  come  4.

20.  18.  restitution,  and  he  shall  not  rejoice  4.

Psal.  37.  29.  the  righteous  shall  dwell  4.  for  ever
69-  36.  and  they  that  love  his  name  shall  dwell  4.
107.  34.  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for  wick¬
edness  of  them  that  dwell  4.  Jer.  12.  4..

111.  2.  sought  out  of  all  that  have  pleasure  4.

119.  35.  thy  commandments,  4.  do  1  delight
146.  6.  God  w  ho  made  the  sea  and  all  that  4.  is,.

Acts  14.  15.  I  17-  24.  Rev.  10.  6-.
Prov.  22.  14.  shall  fall  4. 26.27.  Ter.  23.  12.  Hos.  14.9.
Isa.  7-  6.  ana  let  us  make  a  breac  h  4.  for  us

33.  24.  the  people  that  dwell  t.  shall  be  forgiven
.35.  8.  the  wayfaring  men,  tho’  fools,  shall  not  err  t.
51.  3.  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  found  4.

6.  they  that  dwell  4.  shall  die  in  like  manner
59.  8.  whosoever  goeth  4.  shall  not  know  peace

Jer.  6.  16.  good  way  and  walk  4.  we  will  not  walk  4.
9.  13.  have  not  obeyed  my  voice,  neither  walked  4.
44.  2.  and  no  man  dwelleth  4.  48.  9.  I  50.  .3,  40.

51.  48.  and  all  that  is  4.  shall  sing  for  Babylon
Ezek.  14.  22.  behold,  4.  shall  be  left  a  remnant

24.  6.  woe  to  bloody  city,  to  pot  whose  scum  is  4.
llos.  4.  3.  every  one  shall  mourn,  that  dwelleth  t.

Arnos  8.  8.  |  9.  5,

Zech.  13.  8.  Lord  saith,  two  parts  4.  shall  be  cut  oft
and  die,  but  the  third  part  shall  be  left  4.
Mark  10.  15.  he  shall  not  enter  4.  Luke  18.  17.

Acts  1.20.  be  des<late  and  let  no  man  dwell  4.
Rom. 1.  IT.  tort,  is  the  righteousness  of  G.  ie\ ealed
6.  2.  how  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  4.  ?

1  Cor.  7.  24.  wherein  he  is  called,  t.  abide  with  God
Eph.  6.  20.  that  4.  1  may  speak  boldly  as  1  ought
Phil.  1.  18.  and  1  4.  do  rejoice,  and  will  rejoice
Col.  2.  7-  taught,  abounding  4.  with  thanksgiving
Lleh.  4.  6.  it  remaineth  that  some  must  enter  4.

10.8.  offering  wouldest  not,  nor  hadst  pleasure  4.
Jam.  1.  25.  whoso  looketh  into — and  continueth  4.

2  Pet.  3.  10.  the  earth  and  works  4.  shall  be  burnt  up
Rev.  11.  1.  rise  and  measure  them  that  worship  4.

13. 12.  causeth  them  that  dwell  4.  to  worship  beast

21.  22.  and  1  saw  no  temple  t.  God  is  the  temple

See  Dwelt.

THEREINTO.

Luke  21. 21.  let  not  them  in  the  countries  enter  t.
THEREOF.

Gen.  2.  17.  in  the  day  thou  eatest  4.  surelv  die,  .3.  5.
Exod.3.20.  all  my  wonders  which  1  will  do  m  midst*.

503


THE


THE


T  H  I


Exod.  10.26.for  /.  must  we  take  to  serve  the  L.  our  G.

15.  43.  no  stranger  shall  eat  /.  45. 48.  2  Kings  7.  2.

44.  when  circumcised,  then  shall  he  eat  /.

Dent.  26. 14.  1  have  not  eaten  /.  in  my  mourning
2  Kings  4.  43.  they  shall  eat  and  leave  /.  44.

Job  24.  13.  they  know  not  the  ways  /.  nor  abide
Psal.  34.2.  the  humble  shall  hear  /.  and  be  glad
Prov.  16.  33.  the  whole  disposing  /.  is  of  the  Lord
Eccl.  6.  2.  God  giveth  him  not  power  to  eat/.
THEREON.

Exod.  20.  24.  shalt  sacrifice  /.  the  burnt  offerings
40.  35.  because  the  cloud  abode  /.  Num.  9.  22.

2  Sam.  17.  19.  the  woman  spiead  ground  corn  /.
19.26.  1  will  saddle  me  an  ass  that  I  may  ride  /.
1  Chron.  12.  17.  the  God  of  our  fathers  look  /.

Ezra  6.  11.  and  being  set  up,  let  him  be  hanged  t.
Esth.  7.  9.  then  the  king  said,  hang  Hainan  t.

Isa.  .30.  12.  and  trust  in  perverseness,  and  slay  t.
Ezek.  15.3.  will  take  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  a  vessel  t.
Mat.  21.  7-  they  set  him  t.  Luke  19.  35.  John  12.  14.

19.  and  found  nothing  /.  Mark  11. 13.  Luke  13.  6.
Mark  14.  72.  and  when  he  thought  t.  he  wept
1  Cor.  3. 10.  laid  the  foundation,  another  buildeth  t.
Rev.  5.  3.  was  not  able  to  open  book  or  look  t.  4.

6.  4  and  power  was  given  to  him  that  sat  t.

21. 12.  city  had  twelve  gates,  and  names  written  t.

1  HEREOUT.

Lev.  2.  2.  he  shall  take  t.  his  handful  of  flour
Judg.  15.  19.  in  the  jaw,  and  there  came  water  t.

1  HERETO.

Exod.  30.  38.  sl.all  make  like  unto  that  to  smell  t.
Lev.  5.  16.  add  the  fifth  pait  t.  6.  5.  I  27.  13,  31.

18.  23.  neither  stand  before  a  beast  to  lie  down  t.
Num.  19.  17-  running  water  shall  be  put  t.  in  a

vessel

Dent.  12.  32.  thou  shalt  not  add  t.  nor  diminish
Judg.  11. 17.  but  kingof  Edom  would  not  hearken  t.

1  Chron.  22.14.  1  prepared,  and  thou  mayest  add  t.

2  Chron.  10.  14.  your  yoke  heavy,  but  1  will  add  t.

21.  11.  Jehoram  compelled  Judah  t.

Psal.  119-  9.  by  taking  heed  t.  according  to  thy  word
Isa.  44. 15.  maketh  an  image,  and  fallethdown  t.
Mark  14.  70.  a  Galilean,  thy  speech  agreet-h  t.
■Gal.  3.  15.  no  man  disannulled  or  addeth  t.
THEREUNTO.

Exod. .32.8.  they  made  amolten  calf,  and  sacrificed  t.
Dent.  1.  7-  and  go  to  all  the  places  nigh  t.

Eph.  6.  18.  and  w  atching  t.  with  all  perseverance
1  These.  3.  3.  for  you  know  that  we  are  appointed  t.
Heb.  10.  1.  can  never  make  the  comers  t.  perfect
1  Pet.  3.  9.  knowing  that  ye  are  t.  called,  that  ye
I  HEREUPON.

Ezek.  16. 16.  thou  deckedst  and  playedst  the  harlot/,
Zeph.  2.  7-  the  remnant  of  Judah  shall  feed  t.

1  Cor.  3.  10.  take  heed  how  he  buildeth  t.

14.  any  man’s  work  abide  which  he  hath  built  t.
THEREWITH.

1  Sam.  12.  3.  any  bribe  to  blind  mine  eyes  t.

17.  51.  drew  his  sword,  and  cut  off  his  head  t.

31 . 4.  and  thrust  me  through  t.  1  Chron.  10.  4.

2  Kings  5.  6.  1  have  /.sent  Naaman  my  servant

12.  14.  anti  repaired  t.  the  house  of  the  Lord

Prov.  15.  16.  than  great  treasure  and  trouble  t.

17.  an  ox,  and  hatred  t.  ft  17.  1.  quietness  t.

25.  16.  lest  thou  be  tilled  t.  anti  vomit  it
Eccl.  1. 13.  hath  given  sore  travel  to  be  exercised  t.

10.  9.  whoso  removeth  stones  shall  be  hurt/.

Ezek.  4.  15.  and  thou  shalt  prepare  thy  bread  /.
Joel  2.  19-  corn,  oil,  wine,  ye  shall  be  satisfied  /.
Phil.  4.  11.  state,  1  have  learned  /.  to  be  content

1  Tim.  6.8.  food  and  raiment,  let  us  be  /.  content
Jam.  3.  9.  /.  bless  we  God,  and  /.  curse  we  men

3  John  10.  prating  against  us,  and  not  content  /.

9[’HESE.

■Gera. 10. 5.  by  /.  were  the  islesof  Gentilesdivided,32.
27.  46.  if  Jacob  take  a  wife  of  such  as  /.  what  good

31.  43. /.  daughters, /.  children,  /.  cattle  is  mine
32. 17.  asketh,  saying,  whose  are  /.  before  thee
43.  16.  Joseph  said,  bring  /.  men  home,  make

ready,  for  /.  men  shall  dine  with  me  at  noon
Exod.  14.20.  but  the  cloud  gave  light  by  night  to /.

21.  11.  and  if  he  do  not  /.  three  unto  her,  then  she

32.  4.  /.  be  thy  gods,  O  Israel,  which  brought,  8.
Lev.  5.  13.  his  sin  that  he  hath  sinned  in  one  of  /.

11.  4.  /.  ye  shall  not  eat  ||  29.  /.shall  be  unclean

9.  /.  shall  ye  eat,  21. 22.  Dent.  14.  9.

24.  and  for  /.  ye  shall  be  unclean,  whoso  toucheth

22.  22.  ye  shall  not  offer  /.  to  the  Lord,  25.

Num.  26.  53.  unto  /.  the  land  shall  be  divided,  for

64.  but  among  /.  there  was  not  a  man  of  them
Dent.  27.  12.  /.  stand  on  mount  Gerizim  to  bless

13.  and  /.  shall  stand  upon  mount  Ebal  to  curse

1  Sam.  16.  10.  Samuel  said,  the  L.  hath  not  chosen  /.
17.  39.  David  said  to  Saul,  1  cannot  go  with  /.

2  Sam.  16.2.  the  king  said,  what  meanest  thou  by  t.?

1  Kings  10.  10.  as  /.  which  the  queen  of  Sheba  gave

11.  2.  Solomon  clave  to  /.  strange  women  in  love
17.  1.  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain/,  years,  but
22.  11.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  with  /.  shalt  thou

push  the  Syrians,  2  Chron.  18.  10.
17.  T.ord  said,  /.  have  no  master,  2  Chron.  18.  16.

2  Kings  25.  20.  Nebuzar-adan  took  /.  and  brought
•2  Chron.  35.  7-  /•  were  of  the  king’s  substance

E  ’.ra  2.  62.  /.  sought  their  register  among  those
Neh.  7.  61.  /.  went  and  could  notshew  their  house
10. 1.  now  /.  that  sealed  the  covenant  were  Nehem .
Job  12.  3.  yea,  who  knoweth  not  such  things  as/.?
Psal.  104.  27.  /.  wait  all  on  thee,  that  thou  mayest
Eccl.  7-  10.  that  the  former  days  were  better  than  /.

12.  12.  further,  by  /.  my  son,  be  admonished
Isa.  34.16.  no  one  of  /.  shall  fail,  none  want  her  mate

39.3.  what  said  /.  men  ||  44. 21.  remember  t.O  Jacob
49.  12.  /.  shall  come  from  far,  /.  from  the  north,
and  from  the  west,  and  /.  from  Sinim
21.  who  hath  begotten  me  /.  who  brought  up  /.  ?

I  was  left  alone,  /.  where  had  they  been
57.6.  should  I  receive  comfort  in  t.?

Jer.  5.5.  but  /.  have  altogether  broken  the  yoke
38.  9.  /.  men  have  done  evil  in  all  they  have  done

16.  nor  will  l  give  thee  into  hand  of/,  men  that
52.  22.  and  the  ppmegranates  were  like  to  /.

Lam.  4.  9.  for  /.  pine  way ,  stricken  thro’  for  want

504


Ezek.  1.  21.  when  those  went,  /.  went,  and  when
those  stood,  /.  stood,  10.  17.

8.  15.  thou  shalt  See  greater  abominations  than  /.
14.3./.  men  have  set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart

16.  5.  none  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  /.  to  thee

20.  and  /.  hast  thou  sacrificed  unto  them  to  be

23.  10.  /.  discovered  her  nakedness,  they  took  her
27.  21.  in  /.  were  they  thy  merchants

37.  18.  saying,  shew  us  what  thou  meanest  by  /.
Dan.  3.  13.  they  brought  /.  men  before  the  king

21.  /.  men  were  bound  |i  27.  princes  saw  /.  men

6.  2.  over/.  Darius  set  three  presidents.  Daniel  first
11.  then  /.  men  assembled,  and  found  Daniel,  15.

7.  17-  /•  great  beasts,  which  are  four,  are  four  kings
Hag.  2.  13.  if  one  unclean  by  a  dead  body  touch  /.
Zech.  1.  9.  1  will  shew  thee  what  /.  be,  4.  5,  13.

19.  I  said  to  the  angel,  what  be  /. '{  21.  |  4.  12.
Mat.  5.  37.  what  is  more  than  /.  cometh  of  evil
6.  29.  Solomon  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  /.

21.  16.  they  said,  hearcst  thou  what  /.  say  ?

22.  40.  on  /.  commandments  hang  all  the  law

23.  23.  /.  oughtye  to  have  done,  and  not  leave  other

25.  40.  as  you  nave  not  done  it  to  the  least  of  /.

45.  as  ye  did  it  not  to  one  of  the  least  of  /.

46.  and  /.  shall  go  into  everlasting  punishment

26.  62.  what  is  it  which  /.  witness?  Mark  14.  60.
Mark  12.  31.  no  other  commandment  greater  than  /.

40.  /.  shall  receive  greater  damnation

13.  2.  Jesus  said,  seest  thou  /.  great  buildings  ?
Luke  1. 19.  and  am  sent  to  shew  thee  /.glad  tidings

3. 8.  that  God  is  able  of /.  stones  to  raise  u  p  children

9.  44.  let  /.  sayings  sink  down  into  your  ears
John  1.  50.  thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than  /.

5.  3.  in  /.  lay  a  great  multitude  of  impotent  folk

19.  what  he  doth,  /.  doth  the  Son  likewise

20.  he  will  shew  him  greater  works  than  /.

6.  5.  whence  shall  we  buy  bread  that  /.  may  eat'

7.  31 .  and  said,  will  he  do  more  miracles  than  /.  ?

17.  20.  neither  pray  1  for  /.  alone,  but  for  them
25.  and  /.  have  known  that  thou  hast  sent  me

18.  8.  if  therefore  ye  seek  me,  let  /.  go  their  way

21.  15.  Simon,  lovest  thou  me  more  than  t.?

Acts  1.  21.  of  /.  which  cornpanied  with  us

24.  shew  whether  of  /.  two  thou  hast  chosen

2.  13.  others  said,  /.  men  are  full  of  new’  w  ine

3.  24.  all  prophets  have  likewise  foretold  of/,  days

4.  16.  saying,  what  shall  we  do  to  /.  men  ?

5.  36.  before  /.  days  rose  up  Theudas,  boasting

38.  refrain  from  /.  men,  and  let  them  alone

10.  47.  can  any  forbid  that  /.  should  not  be  baptized
17.  6.  /.  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down

11.  /.  were  more  noble  than  those  in  1  hessalonica
Rom.  2. 14.  /.  having  not  the  law,  are  a  law  to  thems.

11.  24.  how  much  more  shall  /.  be  grafted
31.  even  so  have  /.  also  now  not  believed

1  Cor.  12.  23.  upon  /.  we  bestow  more  honour
1.3. 13.  /.  three,  but  the  greatest  of  /.  is  charity

2  Cor.  7.1. having  /.promises, let  us  cleanse  ourselves
Gal.  2.  6.  but  ot  /.  who  seemed  to  be  somewhat
Col.  4.  11./.  only  are  rny  fellow- workers  to  kingdom

1  Tim.  3.  10.  and  let/,  also  first  be  proved,  then

2  Tim.  2. 21.  if  a  man  purge  himself  from  /.  he  shall
Heb.  9.  23.  patterns  should  be  purified  with  /.  but

heavenly  things  with  better  sacrifices  than  /.
10. 18.  now  where  remission  of  /.  is,  there  is  no
2  Pet.  1.  4.  by  /.  might  be  partakers  of  divine  nature
2.  12.  but  /.  as  brute  beasts  made  to  be  taken
Jude  14.  Enoch  also  prophesied  of  /.  saying,  behold

19.  /.  be  they  who  separate  themselves,  sensual
Rev.  11.  6.  /.  have  power  to  shut  heaven,  that  it

14.  4.  /.  were  redeemed  ||  17.  13.  /.  have  one  mind

22.  6.  he  sai»l ,  /.  sayings  are  faithful  and  true

See  Abominations.

THESE  are,  or  are  THESE.

Gen.  38.  25. by  the  man  whose  t.are  ||  48. 8. whose/,  a.
Exod.  6.  26.  /.  are  that  Aaron  and  Moses,  to  whom

21.  1./.  are  the  judgments,  Lev.  26.46.  Deut.  6.  1.
Lev.  11.  31.  /.  are  unclean  H  23.  2.  /.  are  my  feasts,  4.
Num.  22.  9.  and  God  said,  what  men  are  t.  with  thee
Deut.  22.  17.  /•  are  the  tokens  of  her  virginity

1  Kings  9.  13.  what  cities  are  /.  thou  hast  given  me  ?

10.  8.  happy  are  t.  thy  servants,  which  stand

1  Chr.  2.  18.her  sons  are  /.  ||  4. 22.  t.are  ancient  things
Neh.  1.  10.  now  /.  are  thy  servants,  and  thy  people
Job  26.  14.  /.  are  part  of  his  ways,  but  how  little
Psal.73. 12.  behold,  /.  are  the  ungodly,  who  prosper
Isa.  60.  8.  who  are  t.  that  flee  as  a  cloud,  as  doves

65.  5.  /.  are  a  smoke  in  my  nose,  a  fire  that  burneth
Jer.  5.  4.  surely  /.  are  poor,  they  are  foolish
7.4.  saying,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  t.

Ezek.  11.  2.  /.  are  the  men  that  devise  mischief
36.  20.  they  said,  /.  are  the  people  of  the  Lord
Dan.  2.  28.  visions  of  thy  head  on  thy  bed  aret.
Mic.  2.  7-  is  the  spirit  straitened  ?  are  t.  his  doings  ?
Zech.  1.9.  then  said,  I,  O  my  Ld.  what  are/. 4. 4.  1  6.4.
Mark  4.  15.  and  /.  are  they  by  the  way  side
16.  on  stony  ||  18.  thorny  ||  20.  good  ground

13.  8.  famines  /.  are  the  beginnings  of  sorrows
Luke  8.  21.  my  mother  and  brethren  are  t.  which
John  10.  21.  /.  are  not  the  words  of  him  that  hath

17.  11.  but/,  are  in  the  world,  and  1  come  to  thee

20.  31.  but  /.  are  written  that  ye  might  believe

Acts  2.  15.  /.  are  not  drunken,  as  ye  suppose
Rom.  9.  8.  /.  are  not  the  children  of  God
Gal.  5.  17.  /.  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other
19.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are  t.

2  Pet.  2.  17.  /.  are  wells  without  water,  clouds
Jude  16.  /.  are  murmurers,  walking  after  their  lusts
Rev.  7.  13.  what  are  t.  which  are  arrayed  in  white.-

14.  /.  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulat.

14.  4.  /.  are  they  which  are  not  defiled  with  women
/.  are  they  which  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever

19.  9.  /.  are  the  true  sayings  of  God,  22.  0.

See  Things,  Words.

THEY.

Num.  14.  12.  of  thee  a  nation  mightier  than  /.

16.  33.  /.  and  all  theirs  went  down  into  the  pit

18.  3.  not  come  nigh  that  neither  /.  nor  you  also  die

22.  15.  sent  more,  and  more  honourable  than/.

1  Kings  20.  23.  surely  we  shall  be  stronger  than  /.  25.

2  Kings  6.  16.  are  more  than  /.  that  be  with  them
Psal.  69.  4.  /.  that  hate  me,  /.  that  would  destroy


Eccl.  5.  8.  regardeth,  and  there  be  higher  than
Isa.  9.  21.  and  /.  together  shall  be  against  ludah
23.  7.  but  /.  also  have  erred  through  wine

30.  16.  therefore  /.  that  pursue  you  be  swift

57.  6.  /.  are  thy  lot,  to  them  thou  hast  offered

58.  12.  /.  that  shall  be  of  thee  shall  build  the  old
Jer.  2.  26.  so  /.  their  kings  and  priests  ashamed

9.  16.  whom  neither  /.  nor  their  fathers  have

known,  19. 4. 1  44.  3.
49.  12.  /.  whose  judgment  was  not  to  drink  of  cup
Ezek.  2.  3.  /.  and  their  fathers  have  transgressed
16.  47.  Ihou  wast  corrupted  more  than  /.  in  ways
51.  multiplied  abominations  more  than  /.  52.

34.  30.  they  shall  know  that  /.  are  my  people
Mat.  12.  3.  v  hat  David  did  when  an  hungred,  and
t.  that  were  with  him,  Mark  2.  25.  Luke  6.  3.

19.  11.  receive  this,  save/,  to  whom  it  is  given

20.  25.  /.  that  are  great  exercise  authority  upon
Mark  2.  17.  /•  that  are  wh.  have  no  need,  Luke  5. 31.
8.  9.  and  /.  that  had  eaten  were  about  4000

10.  23.  how  hardly  shall  /.  which  have  riches
11.9./.  that  went  before  and  /.  that  followed  cried

Luke  7.  10.  and  /.  that  were  sent,  returning  to  house

8.  13.  /.  on  the  rock  are  /.  which  receive  the  word
22.  28.  ye  are  /.  which  have  continued  with  me

John  A.  45.  for  /.  also  went  unto  the  feast

5.  25.  dead  shall  hear,  and  /.  that  hear  shall  live

29.  /.  that  have  done  good,  /.  that  have  done  evil
39.  scriptures,  and  /.  are  /.  which  testify  of  me

6.  9.  two  fishes,  but  what  are  /.  amongst  so  many  }

9.  39.  1  am  come,  that  /.  which  see  not  might  see,

and  that  /.  which  see  might  be  made  blind
17. 16.  /.  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not
21.  that  /.  all  may  be  one,  as  thou  art  in  me

23.  that  /.  may  be  made  perfect  in  one

24.  Father,  I  will  that  /.  whom  thou  hast  given
me  be  with  me,  that  /.  may  behold  my  glory

18.  28.  /.  went  not  in,  lest  /.  should  be  defiled
Acts  11.  2.  /.  of  circumcision  contended  with  him
19.  now  /.  that  were  scattered  abroad  on  persec.
13.27.  /.  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  because  /.  knew

him  not

15.  11.  through  grace  we  shall  be  saved,  even  as /.

21.  12.  we  and  /.of  that  place  besought  him
Rom.  3.  9.  are  we  better  than  /.  ?  no,  in  no  wise

4.  14.  for  if  /.  which  are  of  the  law  be  heirs

8.  8.  /.  that  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  God
23.  not  only  /.  but  ourselves  also  groan  within

9.  8.  /.  which  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,  are  not

11.  23.  /.  also,  if  /.  abide  not  still  in  unbelief

16.  18.  for  /.that  are  such  serve  not  our  Ld.  Jesus
1  Cor.  7.29.  /.  that  have  wives,  as  tho’  /.  had  none

30.  /.  that  weep,  /.  that  rejoice,  /.  that  buy

31.  /.  that  use  this  world,  as  notabusing  it

9.  24.  that  /.  who  run  in  a  race  run  all,  but  one

11.  19.  that  /.  which  are  approved  may  be  made
15.  11.  whether  it  were  1  or/,  so  we  preach,  anti  so

18.  then  /.  also  which  are  lallen  asleep  in  Christ

23.  afterwards  /.  that  are  Christ’s,  Gal.  5.  24.

48.  as  is  earthy, sue  h  are  /.  that  are  earthy

Gal.  2.  6.  /.  who  seemed  somewhat  added  nothing
9.  /.  gave  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  me
3.7.  know  ye,  that  /.  which  are  of  faith,  9.

5.  12.  I  would  /.  were  cut  off  that  trouble  you
21.  /.  who  do  such  things  shall  not  inherit  kingd.

6.  13.  nor  /.  who  are  circumcised  keep  the  law

1  These.  1.9./.  shew  of  us  what  entering  in  we  had
5.  7-  for  /.  that  sleep,  /.  that  be  drunken

1  Tim.  3.  13.  /.  that  used  the  office  of  a  deacon

5.  17. /.who  labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine

25.  and  /.  that  are  otherwise  cannot  be  hid

6.  9.  f.  that  will  be  rich  fall  into  temptation

2  Tim.  3.  6.  of  this  sort  are  /.  w  hich  creep  into
Tit.  3.8.  that  /.  which  have  believed  in  God  might
Heb.  1.  4.  hath  obtain,  more  excellent  name  than  /.
4.  6.  seeing/,  to  whom  it  was  first  preached

11.  40.  that  /.  without  us  should  not  be  perfect

13.  17.  they  watch,  as  /.  that  must  give  account

24.  salute  all  the  saints,  /.  of  Italy  salute  you
Jam.  2.  12.  as  /.  that  shall  be  judged  by  the  law

1  John  2. 19.  they  went  out  that  t.  might  be  made

manifest,  that  /.  were  not  all  of  11s
4.5.  /.  are  of  the  world,  /.  speak  of  the  world
Jude  19.  these  be  /.  who  separate  themselv.  sensual
Rev.  1.7 •  /•  who  pierced  him,  kindreds  shall  wail
3. 4.  for  /.  are  worthy,  16.  6.  ||  7.  13.  whence  came  /
7. 14.  these  are  /.  who  came  out  of  great  tribulat.

14.  4.  for  /.  are  virgins,  these  are  /.  which  follow

the  Lamb  whithersoever  he  goeth

12.  here  are  /.  that  keep  the  commandments
21.  27.  but  /.  that  are  written  in  Lamb’s  book

THICK.

Deut.  32. 15.  thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art  grown  /.

2  Sqm.  18.  9.  the  mule  went  under  the  /.  boughs

2  KingsQ.  15.  he  took  a  /.  cloth,  and  dipt  it  in  water
Neh.  8.  15.  fetch  branches  of/,  trees  to  make  booths
Job  15.  26.  runneth  on  the  /.  bosses  of  his  bucklers
Psal.  74.  5.  as  he  lifted  up  axes  on  the  /.  trees
Ezek.  6. 13.  their  slain  shall  be  under  every  /.  oak
19-  11-  her  stature  was  exalted  among  /.  branches

31.  3.  his  top  was  among  the /.  boughs,  10,  14.

Hah.  2.  6.  to  him  that  ladeth  himself  with  /.  clav
Luke  11.  29.  when  people  were  gathered  /.  together

See  Clouds,  Darkness.
THICKER.

1  Kings  12.  10.  say  to  them,  my  little  finger  shall
be  /.  than  my  father’s  loins,  2  Chron.  10.  10.
THICKET.

Gen.  22.  13.  a  ram  caught  in  a  /.  by  his  horns
Jer.  4.  7-  the  lion  is  come  up  from  his  /.

THICKETS.

1  Sam.  1.3.  6.  Isr.  did  hide  themselves  in  /.  in  rocks
Isa.  9. 18.  wickedness  shall  kindle  in  the  /.  of  forest

10.  34.  he  shall  cut  down  the  /.  of  the  forest
Jer.  4.29.  the  whole  city,  shall  flee  and  go  into  /.

THICKNESS.

1  Kings  7.  +  46.  cast  them  in  the  /.  of  the  ground

2  Chron.  4.  5.  the  /.  of  the  sea  was  an  hand-breadth
Jgr.  52.  21.  the  /.of  the  pillars  was  four  fingers
Ezek.  41. 9.  the  /.  of  the  wall  was  five  cubits

42.  10.  the  chambers  were  in  the  /.  of  the  w  all
Zech.  14.  t  6.  the  light  shall  not  be  ,  lear,  nor  /.


T  H  I


TH  I


T  H  1


THIEF

Signifies,  [1]  One  that  takes  a  reap  any  thing  un¬
lawfully  from  another,  whether  privately  or  vio¬
lent  Ip,  Job  30,  5.  Luke  10.  30.  [2]  A  seducer
who  bp  false  doctrines  steals  from  the  church  of
God  the  true  meaning  of  the  scripture,  John
10.  10.  [3]  Such  as  exercise  fraudulent  dealing
and  unlawful  gain.  Mat.  21.  13.

Exod.  22.  2.  if  a  t.  be  found  breaking  up,  7-

8.  if  the  t.  be  not  found,  then  the  master  of  house
Deut.  24.  7-  be  found  stealing,  then  that  t.  shall  die
Job  24.  14.  the  murderer  in  the  night  is  as  a  t.

30.  5  they  cried  after  them  as  after  a  t.

Psal.  50.  18.  wheathou  sawest  a  t.  then  thou
Prov.  6.  30.  men  do  not  despise  t.  if  he  steal  to  satisfy

29.  24.  whoso  is  partner  with  a  t,  hateth  his  soul
Jer.  2.  26.  as  a  /.  is  ashamed  when  he  is  found
Dos.  7.  l.  the  t.  cometh  in,  and  robbers  without
Joel 2.  9.  they  shall  enter  at  the  windows  like  a  t.
Zech.  5.  4.  it  shall  enter  into  the  house  of  the  t.
Mat.  24. 43.  what  watch  t,  would  come,  Luke  12. 39.

26.  55.  are  ye  come  as  against  a  t.  with  swords  and
staves  to  take  me  !  Mark  14.  48.  Luke  22.  52.

Luke  12.33.  in  heaven,  where  no  t.  approacheth
John  10. 1.  by  the  door,  the  same  is  a  t.  and  a  robber
10.  the  t.  cometh  not  but  to  steal  and  to  kill

12.  6.  but  because  he  was  a  t.  and  had  the  bag
1  Thess.  5.  2.  day  of  Ld.  cometh  as  a  t.  2  Pet.  3. 10.

4.  that  that  day  should  overtake  you  as  a  t.

1  Pet.  4.  15.  but  let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  t.

Rev.  3.  3.  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  t.  16.  15.

I  II I  EVES.

Isa.  1.  23.  thy  princes  are  companions  of  t.

Jer.  48.  27.  was  not  Israel  found  among  t.  ?

49.  9.  if  t.  by  night,  they  will  destroy,  Ohad.  5.
Mat.  6.  19.  and  where  t.  break  through  and  steal

20.  and  where  t.  do  not  break  through  nor  steal

21.  13.  made  itaden  oft.  Mark  11.  17.  Luke  19.  46.

27.  38.  two  t.  crucified  with  him,  Mark  15.  27.

44.  the  t.  also  cast  the  same  in  his  teeth

Luke  10.  30.  went  down  to  Jericho  and  fell  among  t.

36.  which  w'as  neighbour  to  him  that  fell  among  t.  ?
John  10.  8.  all  that  ever  came  before  me  are  t.

1  Cor.  6.  10.  nor  t.  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God

THIGH.

Gen.  24.  2.  put  thy  hand  under  my  t.  9. 1  47.  29.

32.  25.  he  touched  the  hollow  of  Jacob’s  t.

31.  and  as  he  passed  he  halted  upon  his  t.

46.  +  26.  that  came  out  of  Jacob’s  t.  Exod.  1.  +  5.
Num.  5.  21.  the  Lord  makcth  thy  t.  to  rot,  22,27.
Judg.  3.  16.  Ehud  did  gird  a  dagger  on  his  right  t.

21.  Ehud  took  the  dagger  from  his  right  t.

8.  +  30.  Gideon  had  seventy  sons  going  out  of  his  t.
15.  8.  and  Samson  smote  them  hip  and  t.

Psal.  45.  3.  gird  thy  sword  on  thy  t.  O  most  mighty
Cant.  3.  8.  every  man  hath  his  sword  on  his  t.

Isa.  47.  2.  uncover  the  t.  pass  over  the  rivers
Jer.  31.  19.  1  was  instructed,  I  smote  upon  my  t.
Ezek.lX.  12.  cry  and  howl,  smite  therefore  upon  t.

24.  4.  gather  the  t.  and  shoulder  into  the  pot
Rev.  19.  16.  he  hath  on  his  t.  a  name  written

THIGHS.

Exod.  28. 42.  breeches  shall  reach  from  loins  to  the  t.
Cant.  7.  1.  the  joints  of  thy  t.  are  like  jewels
Dan.  2.  32.  his  belly  and  his  t.  were  of  brass
THIN.

Gen.  41.  6.  and  behold  seven  t.  ears,  7.  23,  24.

27.  the  seven  t.  kine  are  seven  years
Exod.  .39  3.  they  beat  the  gold  into  t.  plates
Lev.  13.  30.  and  there  be  in  it  a  yellow  t.  hair

2  Sam.  13.  +  4.  why  art  thou  t.  from  day  to  day  ?
i  Kings  I.  29.  certain  additions  made  of  t.  work
Isa.  17.  4.  the  glory  of  Jacob  shall  be  made  t.

THIN  E.

Gen.  14.  23.  T  will  not  take  any  thing  that  is  t.

20.  7-  thou  shalt  die,  thou  an  I  all  that  are  t.

31.  32.  discern  what  is  t.  with  me  and  take  it

33.  +  9.  Esau  said,  be  that  to  thee,  that  is  t.

48.  6.  anti  thy  issue  after  them  shall  be  t.

Lev.  10.  15.  it  shall  be  t.  and  thy  sons  with  thee,
Nnm.  18.  9,  11,  13,  14,  15,  18.
Num.  22.  30.  hast  ridden  on  ever  since  L  was  t.
Deut.  15.  3.  what  is  t.  with  thy  brother,  release

28.  +41.  shall  beget  sons,  but  they  shall  not  be  t.

30.  4.  if  any  of  t.  be  driven  into  outmost  parts
Josh.  17.  18.  but  the  mountains  shall  be  t.  and  the

out-goings  of  it  shall  be  t.
Judg.  15.  +  2.  her  younger  sister,  let  her  be  t.

1  Sam.  2.  33.  the  man  of  t.  whom  I  shall  not  cut  off
15.  28.  and  hath  given  it  to  a  neighbour  of  t.

2  Sam.  16.  4.  t.  are  all  that  pertained  to  Mephibosh.
1  Kings  3.  26.  let  it  neither  be  mine  not  t.  but  divide

20.  4.  O  king,  1  am  t.  and  all  that  1  have

21. 19.  in  the  placedogs  shall  lick  thy  blood,  even  t.
1  Chron.  12.  18.  1.  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  side

21.  24.  for  I  will  not  take  that  which  is  t.

29.  11.  t.  O  Lord,  is  the  greatness,  power,  and  the

glory,  the  earth  is  t.  t.  is  the  kingdom
Psal.  71. 16.  mention  thy  righteousness,  even  t.  only
74.  16.  the  day  is  t.  the  night  also  is  t.

89.  11-  the  heavens  are  t.  the  earth  also  is  t.

119.  94.  I  am  t.  save  me,  I  sought  thy  precepts
Isa.  45.  14.  the  labour  of  Egypt  shall  be  t.

63.  19-  we  are  t.  thou  never  barest  rule  over  them
Jer.  32.  8.  for  the  right  of  inheritance  is  t.

Mat.  6.  13.  1.  is  the  kingdom  ||  20.  14.  take  that  is  t.

25.  25.  hid  thy  talent,  lo,  there  thou  hast  that  is  t.
Luke  4.  7.  if  thou  wilt  worship  me,  all  shall  be  t.

5.  33.  but  t.  eat  anti  drink  ||  15.  31.  all  I  have  is  t.

22.  42.  nevertheless,  not  my  will  but  t.  be  done
John  17.  6.  t.  they  were  ||  9.  for  the}'  are  t.

10.  and  all  mine  are  t.  and  t.  mine
THING.

Gen.  21. 11.  the  t.  was  very  grievous  to  Abraham

24.  50.  the  t.  proceedeth  from  the  Lord

34.  7-  which  t.  ought  not  to  be  done,  2  Sam.  13.  12.
19.  the  young  men  deferred  not  to  do  the  t.

38. 10.  and  the  /,  which  he  did  displeased  the  T.ord,

2  Sam.  11.  27.

41. 32.  because  the  t.  is  established  by  God
F.xod.  10.  15.  remained  not  any  green  t.  in  the  trees
18.  11.  in  the  t.  wherein  they  dealt  proudly  he  was


Exod.  18. 17.  Jethro  said,  t.  that  thou  cioest  is  not  g.
22.  9.  for  any  manner  of  lost  t.  which  another
15.  if  it  be  an  hired  t.  it  came  for  his  hire
34. 10.  a  terrible  t.  that  l  will  do  with  thee
Lev.  2.  3.  a  t.  most  holy  of  your  offerings,  10.

4. 13.  and  the  t.  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  assembly

6. 2.  trespass  in  a  t.  taken  away  by  violence
4.  the  t.  deceitfully  gotten,  or  the  lost  t.

12.  4.  she  shall  touch  no  hallowed  t.  nor  come
20. 17.  it  is  a  wicked  t.  they  shall  be  cut  off
Num.  16.  30.  but  if  Lord  make  a  new  t.  earth  open
Deut.  1. 14.  the  t.  which  thou  hast  spoken  is  good

12.  32.  what  t.  soever  1  command  you,  observe

13. 14.  if  it  be  truth,  and  the  t.  certain,  17.  4.

18.  22.  if  the  t.  follow  not,  nor  come  to  pass

32.  47.  it  is  not  a  vain  t.  for  you,  it  is  your  life

Josh.  6.  18.  keep  yourselves  from  the  accursed  t.
22.33.  the  t.  pleased  the  children  of  Israel
Judg.  a.  27.  which  t.  became  a  snare  to  Gideon

19.  24.  but  unto  this  man  do  not  so  vile  a  t.

Ruth  3. 18.  till  he  have  finished  the  t.  to  day

1  Sam.  3. 11.  behold,  I  will  do  a  t.  in  Israel  at  which

17.  what  is  the  t.  that  the  I.ord  hath  said  to  thee  ?
4.  7.  there  hath  not  been  such  a  t.  heretofore

8.  6.  the  t.  displeased  Samuel,  when  they  said

14.  12.  come  up  to  us,  and  we  will  shew  you  a  t.
18.  20.  they  told  Saul,  and  the  t.  pleased  him

2  Sam.  13.  33.  let  not  my  lord  take  the  t.  to  heart

14. 13.  wherefore  hast  thou  thought  such  a  t.?

18.  hide  not  the  t.  that  1  shall  ask  thee

15.  35.  what  t.  thou  shalt  hear,  tell  to  Zadok

17-  19.  she  spread  corn,  and  the  t.  was  not  known

1  Kings  14. 5.  the  wife  of  Jeroboam  cometh  to  ask  t.

2  Kings  2.  10.  Elijah  said,  thou  hast  asked  a  hard  t.

7.  19.  make  windows  in  heaven,  might  such  a  t.  be

20.  9.  have  this  sign,  that  the  Lord  will  do  the  t.

1  Chron.  13.  4.  t.  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  people
17.23.  let  the  t.  thou  hast  spoken  be  established

2  Chron.  29.  36.  for  the  t.  was  done  suddenly
.30.  4.  the  t.  pleased  the  king  and  congregation

Ezra  7.27.  hath  put  such  a  t.  in  the  king’s  heart
Esth.  2.  4.  the  t.  pleased  the  king,  and  he  did  so

22.  the  t.  was  known  to  Mordecai,  who  told  it

5. 14.  the  t.  pleased  Hainan,  and  he  caused  gallows

8.  5.  and  if  the  t.  seem  right  before  the  king
Job  .3.  25.  the  t.  I  greatly  feared  is  come  upon  me

4.  12.  now  a  t.  was  secretly  brought  to  me

6. 8.  O  that  God  would  grant  me  the  t.  1  long  for

13.  28.  he  as  a  rotten  t.  consumeth,  as  a  garment

14.  4.  who  can  bring  a  clean  t.  out  of  an  unclean  ?

22.  28.  thou  shalt  decree  a  t.  it  shall  be  established

23.  14.  he  peformeth  the  t.  is  appointed  for  me

26.  3.  how  hast  plentifully  declared  the  t.  as  it  is?

42.7-  not  spoken  of  me  the  /.  that  is  right,  8.

Psal.  2. 1.  why  do  the  people  imagine  a  vain  t.?
.33.  17.  an  horse  is  a  vain  t.  for  safety

38.  20.  because  1  follow  the  t.  that  good  is
89.  34.  nor  alter  the  t.  that  is  gone  out  of  my  lips
101.  3.  1  will  set  no  wicked  t.  before  mine  eyes
Prov.  4.  7.  wisdom  is  the  principal  t.  therefore  get
22.  18.  for  it  is  a  pleasant  t.  if  thou  keep  them

25.  2.  it  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  t.

Eccl.  1.  9.  the  t.  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  which
shall  be,  and  there  is  no  new  t.  under  the  sun

7.  8.  better  is  the  end  of  a  t.  than  the  beginning

8.  1 .  and  who  knoweth  the  interpretation  of  a  t.  ?

15.  a  man  hath  no  better  t.  than  to  eat  and  drink

11.7-  a  pleasant/,  it  is  for  eyes  to  behold  the  sun
Isa.  7.  1.3.  is  it  a  small  /.  for  you  to  weary  men

15. 6.  there  is  no  green  /.  ||  17. 13.  a  rolling  /.

29. 16.  shall  the  /.  framed  say  of  him  that  framed  it
21.  that  turn  aside  the  just  for  a  /.  of  nought
40. 15.  he  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  /.

41.  12.  and  they  shall  be  as  a  /.  of  nought

4.3.  19.  I  will  do  a  new  /.  it  shall  spring  forth
55.  11.  it  shall  prosper  in  the  /.  whereto  I  sent  it
66.  8.  who  hath  heard  such  a  /.  who  hath  seen

Jer.  2.  10.  consider,  and  see  if  there  be  such  a  /.

5.  .30.  a  horrible  /.  is  committed  in  the.  land

11. 1.3.  ye  set  up  altars  to  that  shameful  /.  to  Baal

14. 14.  they  prophesy  unto  you  a  /.  of  nought
18.  1.3.  the  virgin  of  Israel  hath  done  a  horrible  /.

2.3.  14.  1  have  seen  in  the  prophets  a  horrible  /.
31. 22.  I.ord  hath  created  a  new  /.  in  the  earth
.38. 14.  1  will  ask  thee  a  /.  hide  nothing  from  me

42.  3.  that  God  niay  shew  us  the  /.  that  we  may  do
4.  that  whatsoever  /.  the  Lord  shall  answer  yon

44.  17.  we  will  do  what  /.  goeth  out  of  our  mouth
Lam.  2.  13.  what  /.  shall  1  take  to  witness  for  thee  ?

what  /.  shall  1  liken  to  thee  ?
Ezek.  14.  9.  if  deceived  when  he  hath  spoken  a  /.

16.  47.  but  as  if  it  were  a  very  little  /.

Dan.  2.  5.  the  king  said,  the  /.  is  gone  from  me,  8.
11.  and  it  is  a  rare  /.  that  the  king  requireth
15.  Arioch  made  the  /.  known  to  Daniel

17.  Daniel  made  the  /.  known  to  Hananiah

4.  .3.3.  the  same  hour  was  the  /.  fulfilled  on  Neb.

5.  15.  could  not  shew  the  interpretation  of  the  /.

26.  this  is  the  interpretation  of  the  /.  Mene

6.  12.  the  /.  is  true,  according  to  the  law

10. 1.  a  /.  w'as  revealed  to  Daniel,  and  the  /.  was
true,  and  he  understood  the  /.  and  the  vision
Hos.  6.  10.  1  have  seen  an  horrible  /.  in  Israel
8. 12.  but  they  w'ere  counted  as  a  strange  /.

Amos  6.  13.  ye  which  rejoice  in  a  /.  of  nought
Mai.  1.  14.  and  sacrificeth  to  the  Lord  a  corrupt  /.
Mark  1.27.  what  /.  is  this  ?  what  new  doctr.  is  this  ?
Luke  12. 11.  how  or  what  /.  ye  shall  answer
John  5.  14.  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  /.  come  to  thee

9.  30.  the  man  said,  herein  is  a  marvellous  /.

Acts  10. 28.  it  is  unlawful  /.  for  man  that  is  a  Jew

17.21.  but  either  to  tell  or  hear  some  new  /.

'  21. 25.  have  written,  that  they  observe  no  such  /.
2.3. 17-  for  he  hath  a  certain  /.  to  tell  him
25.  26.  of  whom  I  have  no  certain  /.  to  write

26.8.  why  should  it  be  thought  a  /.  incredible

10.  which  /.  1  also  did  in  Jerusalem,  and  many

Rom.  9.20.  shall  /.  formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it

1  Cor.  1. 10.  1  beseech  that  ye  all  speak  the  same  /.

4.  .3.  with  me  it  is  a  very  small  /.  that  I  be  judged
8.  7.  some  eat  it  as  a  /.  offered  unto  an  idol

2  Cor.  5. 5.  hath  wmought  us  for  the  self-same  t.  is  G.


2  Cor.  7.11.  this  self  same  /.  that  ye  sorrowed  aftei
Phil.  .3.  16.  nevertheless,  let  us  mind  the  same  t.

2  Thess.  1.  6.  seeing  it  is  a  righteous  /.  with  God
Heb.  10.  29.  the  blood  of  the  covenant  an  unholy  t
31.  a  fearful  /.  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  living  G
1  Pet.  4.  12.  as  though  some  strange  /.  happened
1  John  2.  8.  which  /.  is  true  in  him,  and  in  you
Rev.  2. 15.  doctrine  of  Nicolaitans,  which  /.  I  hate
See  Accursed.

Any  THING.

Gen.  14.  2.3.  I  will  not  take  any  t.  that  is  thine

18.  14.  is  anp  t.  too  hard  for  the  Lord

19.  22.  cannot  do  any  t.  till  thou  be  come  thither
22.  12.  neither  do  thou  any  t.  unto  the  lad

30.  31.  Jacob  said,  thou  shalt  not  give  me  anp  t.
39.  9.  neither  hath  he  kept  back  any  t.  from  me
2.3.  he  looked  not  to  any  t.  under  his  hand
Exod.  20.  4.  thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any
likeness  of  any  t.  Deut.  4.  18,  23,  25. 1  5.  8.
17.  nor  anp  t.  that  is  thy  neighbour’s,  Deut.  5 .21.
Lev.  6.  7-  forgiven  him  for  any  t.  he  hath  done

13.  48.  in  any  t  made  of  skin,  49,  52,  53,  57,  59.

15.  6.  thatsitteth  on  any  t.  whereon  he  sat,  23.

10.  who  toucheth  anp  t.  that  was  under  him,  22.

19.  26.  ye  shall  not  eat  any  t.  with  the  blood

21.  18.  or  that  hath  any  t.  superfluous,  22,  23.
Num.  20.  19. 1  will  go  thro’  without  doing  any  t.  else

22.  .38.  have  I  now’  any  power  at  all  to  sa}’  any  t.  7
35.  22.  cast  upon  him  any  t.  without  laying  wait
Deut.  4.  32.  if  there  hath  been  any  such  /.  as  this

8.  9-  thou  shalt  not  lack  any  t.  in  the  land

14.  3.  thou  shalt  not  eat  any  abominable  t.

21.  ye  shall  not  eat  any  t.  that  dieth  of  itselt

16.  4.  nor  shall  there  any  t.  of  the  flesh  remain
2.3. 19.  usury  of  any  t.  that  is  lent  upon  usury

24.  10.  when  thou  dost  lend  thy  brother  any  t.

.31.  13.  their  children  who  have  not  known  any  t.

Josh.  21.  45.  there  failed  not  ought  of  any  t.  spoken
Judg.  11.  25.  art  thou  any  t.  better  than  Balak  ?

18.  7-  that  might  put  them  to  shame  in  any  t.

10.  a  place  where  there  is  no  want  of  any  t.  19.  19.

1  Sam.  3.  17.  God  do  so  to  thee,  if  tho«  hide  any  t.

20.  26.  but  Saul  spake  not  any  t.  that  day

.39.  but  the  lad  knew  not  anyt.  only  Jonathan

21.  2.  let  no  man  know  any  t.  of  the  business

22. 15.  let  not  the  king  impute  any  t.  to  his  servant

25. 15.  we  were  not  hurt,  neither  missed  we  any  t.
30.  19.  there  was  not  lacking  any  t.  had  taken

2  Sam.  13.  2.  he  thought  it  hard  to  do  any  t.  to  her

15.  11.  they  went  insirnplicity ,  they  knew  no tanyt.

1  Kings  10.  .3.  there  was  not  a.  t.  hid  from  the  king

15.  5.  turned  not  aside  from  any  t.  commanded
20.  3.3.  whether  any  t.  would  come  from  him

2  Kings  4.  2.  hath  not  any  t.  save  a  pot  of  oil

1  Chron.  26.  28.  whosoever  hath  dedicated  any  t.

2  Chron.  9.  20.  silver  was  not  any  t.  accounted  of

2.3.  19.  that  none  unclean  in  any  t.  should  enter  in
Job  15.  11.  is  there  any  secret  /.  with  thee  ?

3.3.  .32.  if  thou  hast  any  t.  to  say,  answer  me
Psal.  .34.  10.  that  seek  L.  shall  not  want  any  good  /.
141.  4.  incline  not  my  heart  to  any  evil  /.

Eccl.  1. 10.  any  t.  whereof  it  may  be  said,  this  is  new
.3.  14.  nothing  be  put  to  it,  nor  any  t.  taken  from  it

5.  2.  heart  not  be  hasty  to  utter  any  t.  before  God

9.  5.  dead  know  not  any  t.  nor  have  they  a  reward
Jer.  .32.  27-  is  there  any  t.  too  hard  for  me  ?

.38.  5.  for  the  king  is  not  he  that  can  do  anp  t.

42.  21.  nor  any  t.  for  w’hich  he  hath  sent  me  to  you
Dan.  .3.  29.  which  speak  any  t.  amiss  against  God
Jonah  .3.  7.  let  neither  man  nor  beast  taste  any  t.
Mat.  18.  19.  if  two  shall  agree  touching  any  t.

24. 17.  to  take  any  t.  out  of  his  house,  Mark  13.15.
Mark  4.  22.  nor  was  any  t.  keptsecret,  Luke  8.  17.

9.  22.  if  thou  canst  do  any  t.  have  compassion  on  us
11.  13.  if  haply  he  might  find  any  t.  thereon

16.  8.  neither  said  they  any  t.  to  any  man
Luke  19,  8.  it  1  have  taken  any  t.  from  any  man

22.  .35.  lacked  ye  any  t.  ?  and  they  said,  nothing
John  1.  3.  and  without  him  was  not  any  t.  made

46.  can  there  any  good  /.  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?

7.  4.  there  is  no  man  that  doeth  any  t.  in  secret
14.  14.  if  ye  ask^wy/.  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it

Acts  10.  14.  1  have  never  eaten  any  t.  common

17.  25.  as  tho’  he  needed  any  t.  seeing  he  givetb

25.  8.  nor  against  Caesar  have  I  offended  anp  t.

11.  or  if  l  committed  anp  t.  worthy  of  death
Rom.  8.  3.3.  lay  any  t.  to  the  charge  of  God’s  elect

13.  8.  owe  no  man  any  t.  but  to  love  one  another

14.  21.  nor  any  t.  whereby  thy  brother  stumbleth

1  Cor.  2.  2.  nor  to  know  any  t.  save  Jesus  crucified
.3.  7.  neither  is  he  that  planted)  any  t.  nor  watered,

8.  2.  if  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth  any  t.

10.  19.  w  hat  say  I  then  ?  that  the  idol  is  any  t.

14.  35.  if  learn  “any  t.  let  them  ask  their  husbands

2  Cor.  2.  10.  to  whom  ye  forgive  any  1. 1  forgive,  for
if  1  forgave  anp  t.  1  forgave  in  the  person  of  Chr.

3’.  5.  not  sufficient  to  think  any  t.  as  of  oursel  ves

6.  3.  giving  no  offence  in  any  t.  that  the  ministrj’

7.  14.  for  if  I  have  boasted  <77/3/  /.  to  him  of  you
Gal.  5.  6.  neither  circumcision  availeth  anp  t.  nor
F.ph.  5.  27.  not  having  wrinkle,  or  a?/ysuch  /.

Phil .3. 15.  if  in  any  t.  ye  be  otherwise  minded

1  Thess.  1.  8.  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any  t.

1  Tim.  1.  10.  and  if  there  be  any  other/,  contrary
Jam.  1.7.  that  he  shall  receive  any  t.  of  the  Lord
1  John  5.  14.  if  we  ask  any  t.  according  to  his  will
Rev.  9.  4.  that  they  should  not  hurt  any  green  /.
21.27.  in  no  wise  enter  any  t.  thatdefileth
Every  THING.

Gen.  6.  17.  every  t.  that  is  in  the  earth  shall  die

8.  1.  God  remembered  Noah  and  every  living  /

9.  .3.  every  moving  /.  that  liveth  shall  be  meat
Lev.  15.  4.  every  t.  whereon  he  sitteth,  unclean

20.  every  t.  she  sitteth  on  shall  be  unclean

2.3.  37.  ye  shaN  offer  every  t.  upon  his  day

27.  28.  every  devoted  /.  is  most  holy  to  the  Lord
Num.  18.  14.  every  t.  devoted  in  Israel  shall  be

thine,  Ezek.  44.  29.

15.  every  t.  that  openeth  the  matrix  be  thine
.31. 23.  every  t.  that  may  abide  fire,  make  it  go
Deut.  23.  9.  then  keep  thee  from  every  wicked  /.
Josh.  4.  10.  the  priests  stood  till  eve-y  t.  was  finished

505


T  II  1


T  II  I


T  H  I


1  Sam.  15.  9  every  t.  that  was  vile  they  destroyed
8  Sam.  15.  36.  send  unto  me  every  t.  yt  can  hear
Esth.  6  13.  told  every  t.  that  had  befallen  him
Job  28.  10.  and  his  eyes  seeth  every  precious  t.

39.  8.  and  he  sear*  lieth  alter  every  green  t.

42.  2.  1  know  that  thou  canst  do  every  t.

Psal.  150.  6.  let  every  t.  that  hath  breath  praise  Lord
Prov.  27.  7.  to  the  hungry  every  bitter  t.  is  sweet
Eccl.  3.  1.  to  every  t.  there  is  a  season  and  a  time

11.  hath  made  every  t.  beautiful  in  his  time

12.  11.  work  into  judgment  with  every  secret  t.

Isa.  19.  7.  every  t.  sown  by  the  brook  shall  wither
Etek.  47.  o.  every  t.  shall  live  where  rivers  come
Mat.  8-  33.  to  hi  every  t.  and  what  was  befallen
1  Cor.  1.  5.  in  every  t.  ye  are  enriched,  2  Cor.  9.  11.
2 Cor.  8.7.  as  ye  are  bound  in  every  *.  in  faith,  in  love

10.  5.  and  every  high  t.  that  ex-dteth  itself

Eph.  5.  24.  be  subject  to  their  husbands  in  every  t.
Phil.  4.  6.  in  every  t.  by  prayer  and  supplication
1  Thess.  5.  18.  in  every  t.  give  thanks,  tor  this  is
See  Creepeth,  Creeping,  Evil,  Good,
Great,  IIoly,  Light,  Living,  One,
Small.

That  THING.

Gen.  18. 17.  hide  from  Abraham  that  t.  which  T  do
Exod.  9.  6.  and  the  Lord  did  that  t.  on  the  morrow
Lev.  5.  5.  shall  confess  that  he  hath  sinned  in  that  t.
Deut.  17.  5.  which  have  committed  that  wicked  t.
Luke  9.21.  he  charged  them  to  tell  no  man  thatt.
12.  26.  if  ye  be  not  able  to  do  that  t.  which  is  least
Rom.  14.  22.  not  himself  in  that  t.  which  he  alloweth
This  THING.

Gen.  19.  21. 1  have  accepted  thee  concerning  this  t.

20.  10.  sawest  thou  that  thou  hast  done  this  t.

21.  26.  I  wot  not  who  hath  done  this  t.  neither

22.  16.  done  this  t.  and  not  withheld  thy  son
30.  31.  if  wilt  do  this  t.  1  will  again  feed  Hock
34. 14.  we  cannot  do  this  t.  to  give  our  sister
41.  28.  this  is  the  t.  I  have  spoken  to  Pharaoh
44.  7.  that  we  should  do  according  to  this  t.

'Exod.  1.  18.  why  have  ye  done  thist.  and  saved

2.  14.  and  Moses  said,  surely  this  t.  is  known

15.  Pharaoh  heard  this  t.  he  sought  to  slay  Moses

9.  5.  to-morrow  the  Lord  shall  do  this  t.  in  land
12.  24.  observe  thist.  for  an  ordinance  to  thee

16.  16.  this  is  the  t.  which  the  Lord  commanded,

32.  I  35.  4.  Lev.  8.  5.  1  9.  6.  1  17-  2.  Num.  30.

1.  |  36.  6.  Deut.  15.  15.  I  24.  18,  22.

18.  14.  what  is  this  t.  thou  doest  to  the  people  ?

18.  this  t.  is  too  heavy  for  thee,  thou  art  notable

23.  if  thou  shaltdo  this  t.  and  God  command  thee
29.  1.  this  is  the  t.  that  thou  shalt  do  to  them

33.  17.  1  will  do  this  t.  that  thou  hast  spoken
Num.  32.20.  if  ye  willdo  thist.  if  ye  will  go  armed
36.  6.  this  t.  Lord  commands  about  daughters
Deut.  1.  32.  yet  in  this  t.  ye  did  not  believe  God

15.  10.  for  this  t .  the  1  .ord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee
22.  20.  if  this  t.  be  true,  and  tokens  be  not  found
32.  47.  thro’  this  t.  ye  shall  prolong  your  days

Josh.  9.  24.  we  were  afraid,  and  have  done  thist.
22.  24.  have  not  rather  done  it  for  fear  of  this  t.
Judy.  6.  29.  they  said  one  to  another,  who  hath
done  this  t.?  Gideon  hath  done  this  t.

11.  37-  let  this  t.  be  done  for  me,  let  me  alone
£0.  9.  this  shall  be  the  t.  which  we  will  do
21.  11.  and  this  is  the  t.  that  ye  shall  do

1  Sam.  20.  2.  why  should  my  father  hide  1. 1.  from  me

24.  6.  the  Lord  forbid  that  1  should  do  this  t.

26.  16.  this  t.  is  not  good  that  thou  hast  done

28.  10.no  punishment  happen  to  thee  for  this  t.
18.  Lord  hath  done  this  t.  unto  thee  this  day

2  Sam.  2.  6.  requite,  because  ye  have  done  this  t.

11.  11.  as  thysoul  livetb,  I  will  not  do  thist.

25.  say  to  joab,  let  not  this  t.  displease  thee

12.  5.  the  man  that  hath  done  thist.  shall  die

6.  because  he  did  this  t.  and  had  no  pity

12.  but  1  will  do  this  t.  before  all  Isr.  and  the  sun

I. 3.  20.  he  is  thy  brother,  regard  not  this  t.

14.  13.  the  king  doth  speak  thist.  as  one  faulty

15.  1  am  come  to  speak  of  this  t.  unto  the  king

20.  my  lord,  thy  servant  .loab  hath  done  this  t.

24.  3.  why  doth  my  lord  the  king  delight  in  this  t.?

1  Kings  1.  27-  is  this  t.  done  by  my  lord  the  king'
3.10.  pleased  I  ,ord  that  Solomon  had  asked  t.t.  11.

II.  10.  had  commanded  him  concerning  this  t.

12.  24.  return  every  man,  for  this  t.  is  from  me
30.  made  two  calves,  and  this  t.  became  a  sin

13.  33.  after  thist.  Jeroboam  returned  not

34.  this  t.  became  sin  to  the  house  of  Jeroboam

20.  9.  tell  my  lord  the  king  this  t.  I  may  not  do

24.  do  this  t.  take  the  kings  away,  every  man

2  Kings  5.  18.  in  this  t.  the  Lord  pardon  thy  serv.

6.  11.  the  king  of  Syria  was  troubled  for  this  t.

7-  2.  Lord  would  make  windows,  might  this  t.  be
11.  5.  this  is  the  t.  that  ye  shall  do,  2  Cliron.  23.  4.

17.  12.  the  Lord  had  said,  ye  shall  not  do  this  t.  .

1  Chron.  11.  19.  God  forbid  that  I  should  do  this  t.

21.  3.  why  then  doth  my  lord  require  this  t.  ?

7.  and  God  was  displeased  with  this  t.

8.  1  have  sinned,  because  1  have  done  this  t.

2  Chron.  11.4.  return  every  man,  this  t.  done  of  me

16.  10.  was  in  rage  with  him,  because  of  this  t.
Ezra  9.  3.  when  1  heard  this  t.  1  rent  my  garment

10.  2.  there  is  hope  in  Israel  concerning  this  t.

13.  we  are  many  that  have  transgressed  in  this  t.
Neh.  2.  19.  what  is  this  t.  that  ye  (to  ?  will  ye  rebel
Isa.  38.  7-  Lord  will  do  this  t .  that  he  hath  spoken
Jer,  7.23.  but  this  is  the  t.  that  I  command  them

22.  4.  if  ye  do  1. 1.  indeed,  then  shall  enter  in  kings

40.  3.  therefore  this  t.  is  come  upon  you

16.  Gedaliah  said,  thou  shalt  notdo  this  t.

44.4.  oh  do  not  this  abominable  t.  that  1  hate

Mark  5.  32.  he  looked  to  see  her  that  had  donethist.
Luke  2.  15.  and  see  this  t.  which  is  come  to  pass

22.  23.  which  of  them  it  was  that  should  do  this  t.
John  18.  34.  sayestthou  this  t.  of  thyself?

Acts  5.  4.  why  hast  thou  conceived  this  t.  in  heart  ?

26.  26.  for  this  t.  was  not  done  in  a  corner

Rom.  13.  6.  attending  continually  upon  this  very  t.

1  Cor. 9. 17- if  I  do  thist.  willingly,  1  havea  reward

2  Cor.  12.8.  for  this  1. 1  be-,o_ght  the  Lord  thrice
Phil.  1 .  6.  being  confident  in  this  very  t.  that  he  who


Phil.  3. 13.  but  this  one  t.  1  do,  1  press  tc  ward  mark
U nclean  P  H  1  N  G .

Lev.  5.  2.  or  if  a  sou  l  touch  any  unclean  t.  7-  21.

7.  19.  flesh  that  toucheth  unclean  t.  not  be  eaten
20  21.  take  his  brother’s  wife,  it  is  an  unclean  t.

Deut.  23.  14.  that  he  see  no  unclean  t.  in  thee
Judy.  13.  4.  and  eat  not  any  unclean  t.  7,  14.

Isa.  52.  11.  touch  no  unclean  t.  2  Cor.  6.  17.

64.  6.  we  are  all  as  an  unclean  t.  we  all  do  fade
Acts  10.  14.  have  never  eaten  any  t.  that  is  unclean

THINGS.

Gen.  45. 23.  ten  asses  laden  with  the  good  *.of  Egypt
Lev.  4.  2.  if  a  soul  sin  thro’  ignorance  concerning  t.

which  ought  not  to  be  done,  13,  22,  27.
Deut.  4.  9-  lest  thou  forget  t.  thine  eyes  have  seen
22.  3.  and  with  all  lost  t. of  thy  brother’s  he  hath  lost
29,  29.  the  secret  t.  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God

32.  35.  the  t.  that  shall  come  on  their,  make  haste

33.  15.  for  the  chief  t.  of  the  ancient  mountains
Judg.  18.  27-  took  the*.  which  Micah  had  made

1  Sam.  12.  21.  for  then  should  ye  go  after  vain  t.

15.  21.  but  the  people  took  the  chief  of  the  t.

2  Sam.  24.  12.  1  offer  thee  three  t.  1  Chron.  21.  10.

1  Kings' .  51.  Solomon  brought  in  the  t.  dedicated

15.  15.  Asa  brought  in  the  t.  2  Chron.  15.  18.

2  Kings  17.  11.  an  I  Israel  wrought  wicked  t. to  prov.

1  Chron.  4.22.  and  these  are  ancient  t.

9.  31.  the  office  over  t.  that  were  made  in  pans

29.  2.  prepared  gold  fort,  of  gold,  silver  for  t.  of
silver,  brass  for  t.  of  brass,  iron  for  t.  of  iron

2  Chron.  12.  12.  and  also  in  Judah  t.  went  well
Esth.  2.  .3.  let  t.  for  purification  be  given  them,  12.
Job 5.  9.  who  doth  marvellous  t.  without  number

6.  7.  the  t.  that  rny  soul  refuseth  to  touch
.30.  cannot  my  taste  discern  perverse  t.  ?

12.  22.  he  discovered!  deep  t.  out  of  darkness

1.3.  20.  only  do  not  two  t.  to  me,  then  will  I  not  hide
26.  for  thou  writest  bitter  t.  against  me

41.34.  he  behold  ell)  all  high  /.is  king  over  pride

42.3.  I  have  uttered  t.  too  wonderful  for  me
Psal.  12.  .3.  cut  off  tongue,  that  speaketh  preud  t.

17.  2.  thine  eyes  behofd  the*.  that  are  equal
.31.18.  which  speak  grievous  t.  proudly

.35.  11.  they  laid  to  my  charge  t.  I  knew  not
38.  12.  that  seek  my  hurt,  speak  mischievous  t.

45.  1.  I  speak  of  the  t.  which  I  have  made

4.  thy  right  hand  shall  teach  thee  teirible  t.

60.3.  thou  hast  shewed  thy  people  hard  t.

65.  5.  by  terrible  t.  wilt  thou  answer  us,  O  God
72.  18.  the  G.of  Israel,  who  only  doth  wondrous  t.
78.  12.  marvellous*.  did  he  in  Egypt,  98.  1.

86.  10.  thou  art  great,  and  dost  wondrous  t.

87.  3.  glorious  t.  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city  of  God
94.  4.  how  longshall  they  utter  and  speak  hard  t.  ?
106.  22.  who  had  done  terrible  t.  by  the  Red  sea

1 1.3.  6.  himself  to  behold  the  t.  that  are  in  heaven
119.  18.  I  may  behold  wondrous  t.  out  of  thy  law
131. 1.  in  great  matters,  or  in  t.  too  high  for  me

Prov.  2.  12.  from  the  man  that  speaketh  froward  t.

8.  6.  I  will  speak  of  excellent  t.  of  right  t.

16.  .30.  he  shutteth  his  eyes  to  devise  froward  t.

22.  20.  1  have  written  to  thee  excellent  t.

2.3.  16.  shalt  rejoice,  when  thy  lips  speak  rig-lit  t.

3.3.  and  thine  heart  shall  utter  perverse  t .

30.  7-  two  t.  have  I  required  of  thee,  deny  them  not

15.  there  are  three  t.  that  are  never  satisfied

18.  there  be  three  t.  that  be  too  wonderful

21.  for  three  t.  the  earth  is  disquieted

24.  four  t.  which  are  little  on  tiie  earth
29.  there  be  three  t.  which  go  well,  yea  four
Feel.  1.11.  nor  any  remembrance  of  t.  to  come
7.25.  to  seek  out  wisdom  and  the  reason  of  t.

Isa.  12.  5.  sing  to  Lord,  for  he  hath  done  excellent  t.

25.  I.sing  to  Lord,  for  thou  bast  done  wonderful  t.

6.  Ld.  shall  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat  t.
29.  16.  surely  your  turning  of  t.  upside  down

.30.  10.  which  say,  prophesy  not  to  us  right*.

.32.  8.  but  the  liberal  deviseth  liberal  t.  and  by

liberal  t.  shall  he  stand

41.  2.3.  shew  the  t.  that  are  to  come  hereafter

42.  9-  former  t.  come  to  pass,  and  new  t.  1  declare

16.  I  will  make  crooked  t.  straight

44.  7.  the  t.  that  are  coming  and  shall  come

45.  11.  ask  me  of  t.  to  come  concerning  my  sons

19.  I  the  Lord  speak,  l  declare  t.  that  are  right
48.6.  I  have  shewed  thee  new  t.  even  hidden  t.

56.  4.  the  eunuchs  that  choose  the  t.  that  please  me

64.  3.  thou  didst  terrible*,  we  looked  not  for

11.  and  all  our  pleasant  *.  are  laid  waste

65.  4.  broth  of  abominable  *.  is  in  their  vessels
Jer.  2.  8.  walked  after  *.  that  do  not  profit,  16.  19.

8.  1.3.  the*.  1  have  given  them  shall  pass  away
.31.  5.  the  planters  shall  eat  them  as  common  *.

1,  am.  1.  7.  Jerusalem  remembered  her  pleasant  *.
11.  they  have  given  her  pleasant*,  for  meat

2.  14.  thy  prophets  have  seen  foolish  *.  for  thee
Ezek.  11.  5.  1  know  the  *.  that  come  in  your  mind
16.  16.  like  f.  shall  not  come,  nor  shall  it  be  so
.38.  10.  at  the  same  time  shall  *.  come  into  thy  mind
Dan.  2.  22.  he  revealeth  the  deep  and  secret  *.

11.  .36.  shall  speak  marvellous  *.  against  G.  of  gods
Joel  3.  5.  carried  into  your  temples  my  goodly  *.
Obad.  6.  how  are  the  *.  of  Esau  searched  011  tl  how

are  his  hidden  *.  sought  up!
Mic.  7-  15.  T  will  shew  unto  him  marvellous*.
Zech.  4.  10.  for  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  *.
Mat.  6.  .34.  morrow  take  thought  for  *.  of  itself

1.3.  52.  brings  out  of  his  treasure  *.  new  and  old
16.  2.3.  savourest  not  *.  that  be  of  G.  Marktt.  .3.3.

22.  21.  render  therefore  to  Cesar  the  *.  that  are

Cesar’s,  and  to  God  the  *.  that  are  God’s,
Mark  12.  17.  Luke  20.  25.

Murkk.  19.  lustsof  other  *.  entering  in, choke  word

7.  15.  but  the  t.  which  come  out  of  him  defile
Luke  5.  26.  saying,  w'e  have  seen  strange  *.  to-day

6.  46.  call  me  Lord,  and  do  not  the  *.  which  I  say-

10.  2.3.  blessed  the  eyes  whi  h  see  tire  t.  that  ye  see

12.  15.  in  the  abundance  of  the*,  he  possesseth
48.  and  did  commit  *,  worthy  of  stripes

18.  27.  the  /.  which  are  impossible  with  men  are

19.  42.  hadst  known  the  *.  which  belong  to  thy  peace
22  37.  for  the  *.  concerning  me  have  an  end


Luke  2.3.48.  all  people  behold.  *.  whi,  h  were  done

24. 18.  hast  not  known  the  *.  which  are  come  to  pass

27.  he  expounded  the  /.concerning  himself

John  1.  50.  thou  shalt  see  greater  f.  than  these
.3  12.  if  1  have  told  you  earthly  *.  heavenly  *.

16.  13.  the  Spirit  will  shew  you  *.  to  come
Acts  1.  .3.  speaking  of  *.  pertaining  to  the  kingdom

4.  20.  we  cannot  but  speak  the  /.  we  have  seen
25.  and  why  did  the  people  imagine  vain  /.  ?

32.  that  ought  of  the  *.  he  possessed  was  his  own

8.  12.  preaching  the*,  concerning  the  kingd.of  God

15.  20.  that  they  abstain  from  *.  strangled,  29.

16.  14.  she  attended  to  the  /.spoken  of  Paul

18.  25.  A  polios  taught  diligently  the  /.  of  the  lx

19.  8.  persuading  *.  concerning  the  kingdom  of  G.

20.  22.  not  knowing  the  /.  that  shall  befall  me
30.  shall  men  arise, speaking  perverse  *.  to  draw

21.  25.  that  they  keep  from  *.  ottered  to  idols
24. 13.  neither  can  they  prove  the  *.  whereof

26.  22.  saying  none  other  *.  than  the  prophets

28.  24.  some  believed  the  *.  that  were  spoken

Rom.  1.  20.  the  invisible  /.  of  him  are  clearly  seen,
being  understood  by  the  *.  that  are  mace
2.  1.  for  thou  that  judgest  doest  the  same  /.

14.  Gentiles  do  by  nature  /.contained  in  tfie  law
18.  and  approvest  the  /.  that  are  more  excellent
8.5.  mind  the  *.  of  the  flesh,  mind  *.  of  the  Spirit
.38.  nor  /.  present,  nor  f.  to  come,  1  Cor.  3.  22,

12.  16.  mind  not  high  *.  ||  17.  provide  *.  honest

14.19.  follow  after  *.  that  make  for  peace,  and  edify

15.  4.  whatsoever*,  were  written  aforetime

27.  if  Gentiles  made  partakers  of  spiritual  *.  their

duty  is  to  minister  to  them  in  carnal  *.

1  Cor.  1.  27.  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  *.  of  the
world,  weak  *.  to  confound  *.  which  are  mighty

28.  base  *.  and  /.despised  hath  God  chosen
2.  9.  the  *.  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them

10.  the  Spirit  searched)  the  deep*,  of  God

11.  what  man  knoweth  *.  of  man,  so  the  /.  of  God

knoweth  no  man,  but  the  Spirit  of  God

12.  we  might  know  the  /.  that  are  freely  given  us

1.3.  which  *.  we  speak,  comparing  spiritual  *.

14.  man  received)  not  the  *.  of  the  Spirit  of  God

4.  5.  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden  /.  of  darkness
6.  .3.  much  more  *.  that  pertain  to  this  life,  4.

7-  32.  unmarried  caret!)  for  the  /.  of  the  I  ord,  34.
.3.3.  married  caret!)  for  the  /.  that  are  of  the  world

8.  1.  now  as  touching  *.  offered  to  idols,  we  know

9.  11.  if  we  have  sown  spiritual  *.  if  reap  carnal  *.

10.  20.  that  die  *.  which  the  Gentiles  sacrifice

I. 3. 11.  when  1  became  man,  I  put  away  childish*.
14.  7.  and  even*,  without  life  giving  sound

.37.  acknowledge  that  the  /.  that  I  write  to  you

16.  14.  let  all  your  *.  be  done  with  charity

2  Cor.  1.  13.  for  we  write  none  other  *.  unto  you

17.  or  the  *.  that  1  purpose,  do  1  purpose  according
4.  2.  but  have  renounced  the  hidden  *.  of  dishonesty

18.  while  w-e  look  not  at  the  *.  which  are  seen,  *.

seen  are  temporal,  *.  not  seen  are  eternal
5. 10.  every  one  may  receive  the  *.  done  in  his  body

17.  old  *.  are  passed  away, all  /.  are  become  new
8.  21 .  providing  for  honest  *.  in  sight  of  L.  and  men
10. 7-  do  ye  look  on  *.  after  the  outward  appearance

I. 3.  we  will  not  boast  of  *.  without  our  meas.  15.

16.  and  not  to  boast  in  another  man’s  line  of  /.

11.  .30.  I  will  glory  of  the  /.  which  concern  mine
Gal.  2.  18.  if  1  build  again  the  *.  which  1  destroyed

4.  24.  which  *.  are  an  allegory,  for  these  are  two

5.  17-  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  *.  that  ye  would
Eph.  6.9.  and  ye,  masters,  do  the  same*,  to  them
Phil.  1.  10.  that  ye  may  approve  *.  that  are  excellent

12.  *.  which  happened  unto  me  have  fallen  out
2.  4.  look  not  every  man  on  his  own  /.  but  every
man  also  on  the  /.  of  others
10.  of/,  in  heaven,  /.  in  earth,  /.  under  earth
21.  seek  not  t lie  *.  which  are  Jesus  Christ’s
.3.  1.  to  write  the  same  *.  ||  19.  who  mind  earthly  *.
4. 8.  whatsoev.  /.  are  true,  honest,  just,  pure,  lovely

18.  I  am  full,  having  received  the  /.sent  from  you
Col.  1.  20.  whether  *.  in  earth,  or  *.  in  heaven

2.  17.  which  are  shadow  of/,  to  come,  IJeb.  10.  1.
23.  which  /.  have  indeed  a  shew  of  wisdom
3.2.  setyour  affection  on  *.  above,  not  on  *.  on  earth

6.  for  which  *.  sake  the  wrath  of  God  comet!)

1  Thess. VAX.  foryealso  havesuffered  like/. of  your

2  Thess.  .3.4.  and  will  do  the  /.which  we  command

1  Tim.  5.  1.3.  speaking*,  which  they  ought  not

2  Tim.  2.  2.  the  *.  which  thou  hast  heard  of  me
.3.  14.  continue  in  /.  which  thou  hast  learned

Tit.  1. 5.  thou  shoukiest  set  in  order  the*,  wanting

II.  teaching  /.  they  ought  not  for  lucre’s  sake
2.  1.  speak  thou  /.  which  become  sound  doctrine
lleb.  2.  l.give  heed  to  the  *.  which  we  have  heard

17.  be  faithful  high  priest  in  /.  pertain,  to  G.  5.  1.

5.  8.  yet  learned!  he  obedience  by  the  *.  he  suflered

6.  9.  but,  beloved,  we  aie  persuaded  better  *.  ot

you,  and  *.  that  accompany  salvation

18.  that  by  tw'o  immutable  *.  in  which  it  was

8.  1.  of  the  *.  we  have  spoken  this  is  the  sum
5.  to  the  example  and  shadow  of  heavenly  *.

9.  23.  that  the  patterns  of  *.  in  the  heavens  be  pu

rified,  but  heavenly  *.  with  hetier  sacrifices

II.  1.  now  faith  is  the  substance  of  *.  hoped  for,

the  evidence  of  *.  not  seen

3.  t.  seen  were  not  made  of  t.  which  do  appear

7.  N  oah  being  warned  of  G.  of  *.  not  seen  as  yet

20.  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau  concerning  /.  to  come

12.  24.  that  speaketh  better  *.  than  that  of  Abel
Jam.  3.7.  and  *.  in  the  sea  are  tamed  of  mankind

1  Pet.  1. 12.  they  did  minister  /.  which  are  now  re¬

ported  ;  which  t.  the  angels  desire  to  look  into

18.  ye  were  no*  redeemed  with  corruptible  *.

2  Pet.  2.  12.  speak  evil  of*,  they  understand  not
1  John.  2.  15.  neither  the  *.  that  are  in  the  world
Rev.  1.  1.  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  to  shew  to

his  servants  t.  must  shortly  come  to  pass,  22.  6

19.  write  the  *.  which  thou  hast  seen,  the  t.

which  are,  and  t.  which  shall  he  hereafter

2.  14.  but  I  have  a  few  t.  against  thee,  to  eat  *.  sa¬
crificed  to  idols,  and  to  commit  fornication,  20

3.  2.  strengthen  the  *.  which  remain,  ready  to  die

4.  1.  1  will  shew  thee  the  *.  must  be  nerearter


T  H  I


T  H  I


Rer.  10.  6.  mnr]  sware  by  him  who  created  heaven,
earth,  sea,  and  all  t.  that  therein  are

21.  4.  for  the  former  t.  are  passed  away

22.  19.  take  his  part  from  t.  written  in  this  hook
See  Creeping,  Dedicate.  Detestable,

Former,  Precious.

All  FIJI  NOS.

Gen.  9.  3.  as  the  green  herb  have  I  given  you  all  t.

24.  1.  the  l  ord  hath  blessed  Abraham  in  all  r.

66.  the  servant  told  Isaac  all  t.  that  he  had  done
Eiod.  23.  13.  in  all  t.  I  have  said,  be  circumspect

29.  35.  do  according  to  all  t.  I  commanded  thee
Lei.  8.  36.  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  all  t.  commanded
Num.  1.  50.  the  l.evites  over  alt  t.  that  belong  to  it

31.  20.  and  purify  all  t.  made  of  wood  and  skins
Dent.  1.  18.  I  commanded  you  all  t.  ye  should  do

4.  7.  as  the  Ford  our  God  is  in  all  t.  we  call  for

12.  8.  ye  shall  not  do  after  all  t.  that  we  do  here

28.  47.  servedst  not  for  the  abundance  of  all  t.

48.  shalt  serve  thine  enemies  in  want  of  all  t.

57.  eat  them  for  want  of  all  t.  secretly  in  siege
Josh.  1.  17.  as  we  hearkened  to  Moses  in  all  e.

2.  23.  the  spies  told  him  all  t.  that  befell  them
Ruth  4.  7.  this  was  the  manner,  to  confirm  all  t.

1  Sam.  3.  12.  perform  all  L  concerning  Eli’s  house

17.  if  thou  hide  any  of  all  t.  he  said  to  thee

19.  7*  and  Jonathan  shewed  David  all  those  1.

2  Sam.  11.  18.  Joab  sent  and  told  David  all  the  t.

14.  20.  to  know'  all  t.  that  are  in  the  earth

23.  5.  he  made  a  covenant  ordered  in  all  t.  and  sure

1  Kings  21.  26.  he  did  all  t.  as  did  the  Amorites

2  Kings  11.9.  the  captainsdid  according  to  allt.  that

Jehoiada  the  priest  commanded,  2  Chr.  23.  8.

14.  3.  Amaziah,  according  to  all  t.  that  Joash  did

20.  15.  they  have  seen  all  t.  that,  are  in  my'  house

1  Chron.  29.  14.  all  t.  come  of  thee,  an  I  of  thine

2  Chron.  5.  1.  Solomon  brought  all  t.  dedicated

31.  5.  tithe  of  all  t.  brought  they  in  abundantly
A Teh.  9.  6.  the  Lord  made  all  t.  Acts  14.  15. 1  17.  24,

25.  Col.  1.  16.  Rev.  4.  11.
Job  41.  34.  he  beholdeth  all  high  t.  he  is  a  king
Psal.  8.  6.  thou  hast  put  all  t.  under  his  feet,  l  Cor.

15.  27.  Eph.  1.  22.

57.  2.  cry  to  God  that  performed!  all  t.  for  me
119.  128.  precepts  concerning  all  t.  to  be  l  ight
Prov.  3. 15.  wisdom  is  more  preciousthan  «// /.  8. 11.

16.  4.  the  Lord  hath  made  all  t.  for  himself

26.  10.  the  great  God  that  formed  all  t.  rewardeth

28.  5.  they  that  seek  the  Lord  understand  all  t.
Eccl.  1. 8.  all  t.  are  full  of  la'  our,  man  cannot  utter

7.  15.  all  t.  have  I  seen  in  days  of  my  vanity

9.  2.  all  t.  come  alike  to  all,  there  is  one  event

3.  this  is  an  evil  among  all  t.  done  under  the  sun

10.  19.  but  money  answereth  all  t.

Tsa.  44.  24.  I  am  the  Lord  that  maketh  all  t.  66.  2.
Jer.  10.  16.  for  he  is  the  former  of  all  t.  51.  19.
17.9.  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  t.  and  wicked

42. 5.  if  we  do  not  even  according  to  allt.  for  which
44.  18.  we  w'anted  all  1.  and  have  been  consumed
Ezek.  11. 25.  1  spake  all  t.  the  Lord  hath  she  wed  me

38.  20.  all  creeping  t.  shall  shake  at  my  presence
44.  30.  the  first  of  all  t.  shall  be  the  priest’s
Dan.  2.  40.  forasmuch  as  iron  subdueth  all  t.

Zepf .  1.  2.  1  will  consume  all  t.  from  off  the  land
Mat.  7. 12.  all t.  ye  W'ould  thatmen  should  do  to  you

11.  27.  all  t.  are  delivered  to  me,  LvJce  10.  22.

13.  41.  they  shall  gather  all  t.  that  offend

17.  11.  Elias  shall  restore  all  t.  Mark  9.  12.

19.  26.  with  man  this  is  impossible,  but  with  God

all  t.  are  possible,  Mark  10.  27,  |  14.  36.

21.  22.  all  t.  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer

22.  4.  tell  them  which  are  bidden,  behold  all  t.  are

ready,  come  unto  the  marriage,  Luke  14.  17.

23.  20.  sweareth  by  it,  and  by  all  t.  thereon

28.  20.  teaching  them  to  observe  all  1. 1  commanded
Mark  4.  34.  he  expounded  all  t.  to  his  disciples

6.  30.  they  told  him  all  t.  what  they  had  done

7.  37.  astonished,  saying,  he  hath  done  all  t.  well

9.  23.  all  t.  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth

13.  23.  take  heed,  1  have  foretold  you  all  t.

Luke  2.  20.  praising  God  for  all  t.  they  had  heard

39.  performed  all  t.  according  to  the  law  of  God

9.  43.  they  wondered  at  all  t.  which  Jesus  did

11.  41.  and  behold,  all  t.  are  clean  unto  you

18.  31.  all  t.  W'ritten  concerning  Son  of  man  shall
be  accomplished,  21.  22.  I  24.  44.  John  19.  28.

John  1.  3.  all  t.  were  made  by  him

3.  35.  and  hath  given  all  t.  into  his  hand,  13.  3.

4.  25.  when  he  is  come,  he  w  ill  tell  us  all  t.

29.  see  a  man  who  told  me  all  t.  that  ever  I  did

5.  20.  the  Father  sheweth  the  Son  all  t.  he  doeth

10.  41.  all  t.  that  John  spake  of  him  were  true

14.  26.  the  Comforter,  the  Holy  Ghost,  shall  teach
you  all  t.  and  bring  all  t.  to  your  remembrance

15.  15.  all  t.  1  have  heard,  1  have  made  known

16.  15.  all  t.  that  the  Father  hath,  are  mine

30.  we  now  are  sure  that  thou  knowest  all  t.

17-  7.  that  all  t.  thou  hast  given  me,  are  of  thee

18.  4.  Jesus  therefore  knowing  all  t  19.  28.

21.  17-  Peter  said,  Lord,  thou  knowest  a/l  t.

Acts  2.  44.  that  believed  had  all  t.  common,  4.  32.

3.  21.  till  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  t.

22.  him  shall  ye  hear  in  allt.  he  shall  say  to  you
10  33.  to  hear  all  i.  commanded  thee  of  God
39-  we  are  witnesses  of  all  t.  which  he  did

13.  39.  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  t.

14.  15.  G.  who  made  heaven,  earth,  sea,  and  all  t.

20.  35.  I  have  shewed  you  all  t.  how  ye  ought

22.  10.  and  there  it  shall  be  told  thee  of  all  t.

24.  14.  believing  all  t.  which  are  w  ritten

26.  2.  touching  all  the  t.  whereof  I  am  accused
Rom.  8.  28.  and  we  know  that  all  t.  work  for  good

32.  how  shall  he  not  also  freely  give  us  all  t.  ?

1 1.  36.  of  him,  and  thro’  him,  and  to  him,  are  allt.
14.2.  for  one  believeth  that  he  may  eat  all  t.

20.  all  t.  indeed  are  pure,  but  it  is  evil  for  him
*  Cor.  2.  10.  the  Spirit  searcheth  all  t.  deep  things

15.  but  be  that  is  spiritual  judgeth  all  t.

3.  21.  let  no  man  glory  in  men,  for  all  t.  are  vours

4.  13.  are  the  offscouring  of  all  t.  to  this  day”

6.  12.  all  t.  are  lawful  unto  me,  but  all  t.  are  not

expedient,  all  t.  are  lawful  for  me,  10.  23.


1  Cor.  8.  6.  one  God  the  Father,  of  w  hom  are  all  t.

*  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  are  all  t.

9. 12.  suffer  all  1. 1|  22.  I  am  made  all  t.  to  all  men

25.  every  man  that  striveth  is  temperate  in  all t.

10.  .33.  even  as  I  please  all  men  in  allt.

11.2.  I  praise  you  that  ye  remember  me  in  allt.

12.  but  all  t.  are  of  God,  2  Cor.  5.  18.

13.7.  charity  beareth  all  1.  believeth  all  t.  hopeth

all  t.  endureth  all  t.

14.  26.  let  all  t.  be  done  unto  edifying

40.  let  all  t.  be  done  decently  and  in  order
15.28.  when  all  t.  shall  be  subdued,  then  shall  the
Son  be  subject  to  him  that  put  all  t.  under  him

2  Cor.  2.9.  know  whether  ye  be  obedient  in  all  t.

4.  15.  for  all  t.  are  for  your  sakes,  that  grace

5.  17.  old  things  are  passed  away.^z.  t.  become  new

6.  4.  in  all  t.  approving  ourselves  as  ministers

10.  as  having  nothing,  yet  possessing  all  t.

7-  11.  in  all  t.  ye  have  approved  yourselves

14.  but  as  we  spake  all  t.  to  you  in  truth,  even  so

16.  that  1  have  confidence  in  you  in  all  t.

9.8.  that  ye  having  all  sufficiency  in  all  t.

11. 6.  we  have  been  made  manifest  to  you  in  all  t.

9.  in  allt.  I  kept  myself  from  being  burdensome

12.  19.  but  we  do  all  t.  for  your  edifying

Gal.  3.  10.  cursed  that  continued)  not  in  all  t.

Eph.  1.  10.  gather  together  in  one  all  t.  in  Christ

11.  worketh  all  t.  after  the  counsel  of  his  will
22.  gave  him  to  be  head  over  all  t.  to  the  church

.3.  9.  in  God,  who  created  all  t.  by  Jesus  Christ

4. 10.  he  ascended  up,  that  he  might  fill  allt.

I. 5.  grow  up  unto  him  in  all  t.  which  is  the  head

5. 13.  allt.  that  are  reproved  are  made  manifest

20.  giving  thanks  always  for  allt.  unto  God
6.  21.  shall  make  known  to  you  all  t.  Col.  4.  9.
Phil.  2.  14.  do  allt.  without  murmurings

3.  8.  1  count  allt.  but  loss  for  know,  of  Christ  my

Lord,  for  whom  1  have  suffered  the  loss  of  allt.

21.  he  is  able  even  to  subdue  allt.  to  himself

4.  12.  every  where,  and  in  all  t.  I  am  instructed

13.  1  can  do  all  t.  thro’  Ch.  who  strengthened)  me
Col.  1.  17.  he  is  before  allt.  by  him  all  t.  consist

18.  in  all  t.  he  might  have  the  pre-eminence
20.  and  by  him  to  reconcile  allt.  to  himself

3.  20.  children,  obey  your  parents  in  all  t.

22.  servants,  obey  in  allt.  your  masters

1  These.  5.21 .  prove  all  t.  hold  fast  that  which  is  good

1  Tim.  .3. 11.  their  wives  must  be  faithful  in  allt.

4.  8.  but  godliness  is  profitable  unto  allt.

6.  13.  in  the  sight  of  God  who  quickeneth  allt.

17.  living  God  who  giveth  us  richly  allt.  to  enjoy

2  Tim.  2.7.  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding  in  allt.

10.  therefore  1  endure  allt.  for  the  elect's  sake
4.  5.  but  watch  thou  in  all  t.  endure  afflictions
Tit.  1.  15.  unto  the  pure  allt.  are  pure

2.  7.  in  all  t.  shewing  thyself  a  pattern  of  good

9.  to  be  obedient,  and  please  them  well  in  all  t.

10.  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  in  all  t.
IJeh.  1.  2.  whom  he  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  t.

3.  upholding  all  t.  by  the  word  of  his  power

2.  8.  thou  hast  put  all  t.  in  subjection  under  his
feet ;  but  now  we  see  not  yet  all  t.  put  under  him

10.  for  whom  are  all  t.  and  by  whom  are  all  t.

17.  in  all  t.  it  behoved  him  to  Be  like  his  brethren

3.  4.  he  that  built  all  t.  is  God

4.  13.  all  t.  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes

8.  5.  make  all  t.  according  to  the  pattern  shewed

9.  22.  almost  all  t.  are  by  the  law  purged  by  blood
13. 18.  in  all  t.  willing  to  live  honestly

Jam.  5. 12.  above  all  t.  my  brethren,  swear  not

1  Pet.  4.  7.  the  end  of  all  t.  is  at  hand,  be  sober

8.  above  all  t.  have  fervent  charity  among  yours.

I I .  that  God  in  all  t.  may  be  g  lorified  thro’  Jestus

2  Pet.  1. 3.  hath  given  us  all  t.  that  pertain  to  life
.3.  4.  all  t.  continue  as  they  were  from  beginning

1  John  2.  20.  ye  have  an  unction,  and  ye  know  allt.

27.  as  the  same  anpinting  teacheth  you  allt.

3.  20.  God  is  greater  than  heart,  and  knoweth  allt.
3John  2.  1  wish  above  all  t.  that  thou  prosper
Rev.  1.2.  who  bare  record  of  allt.  that  he  saw

4. 11.  thou  hast  created  all  t.  and  for  thy  pleasure

21.  5.  I  make  all  t.  new  ||  7.  he  shall  inherit  all  t.

See  Evil,  IIoly,  Many,  Such.

These  THINGS.

Gen.  24.  28.  told  them  of  her  mother’s  house  these  t.
42.  36.  Jacob  said,  all  these  t.  are  against  me
Lev.  5.5.  when  he  shall  be  guilty  in  one  of  these  1. 17.

18.  24.  defile  not  yourselves  in  any  of  these  t.

20.  23.  for  they  committed  all  these  t.  therefore

26.  23.  and  if  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  these  t.
Num.  4.  15.  these  t.  the  burden  of  sons  of  Kohath

15. 13.  all  born  of  the  country  shall  do  these  t.

29.  39.  these  t.  ye  shall  do  to  the  Lord  in  feasts
.35  29.  these  t.  shall  be  for  a  statute  of  judgment
Dent.  4.  30.  when  all  these  t.  are  come  upon  me
18. 12.  all  that  do  these  t.  are  an  abomination

30.  1.  when  all  these  t.  are  come  upon  thee,  then
Josh.  2.  11.  we  heard  these  t.  our  hearts  did  melt
Judg.  13.  2.3.  nor  would  he  have  shewed  us  these  t.

1  Sam.  25.  37.  when  his  wife  had  told  him  these  t.

2  Sam.  23.  17.  these  t.  did  these  three  mighty  men,

1  Chron.  11.  19.

22.  these  t.  did  Benaiah,  1  Chron.  11.  24.

24.  23.  these  t.  did  Araunah  give  to  the  king

1  Kings  18.  36.  I  have  done  all  these  t.  at  thy  word

2  Kings  2.3.  17.  proclaimed  these  t.  thou  hast  done
2  Chron.  .3.  .3.  in  these  t.  was  Solomon  instructed
Neh.  13. 26.  did  not  king  Solomon  sin  by  these  t.  ?
Job  8.  2.  how  long  wilt  thou  speak  these  t.  ?

10. 1.3.  these  t.  hast  thou  hid  in  thine  heart

33.  29.  lo,  all  these  t.  worketh  God  with  man
Psal.  15. 5.  he  that  doeth  these  t.  shall  never  be  mov.
42.  4.  I  remember  these  t.  I  pour  out  my  soul
50.  21 .  these  t.  hast  thou  done  and  1  kept  silence
Prov.  6. 16.  these  six  t.  doth  the  I  .ord  hate,  yea  seven
24.  23.  these  t.  also  belong  to  the  wdse
F.ccl.  11.9.  for  these  t.  God  will  bring  thee  to  judgm.
Isa.  38. 16.  O  Lord,  by  these  t.  men  live,  and  in  all
these  t.  is  the  life  of  my  snirit
40.26.  and  behold,  who  hath  created  tlsese  t.f
42.  16.  these  t.  wi.l  1  do,  and  not  forsake  them

45.7.  I  form  the  light,  l  the  I-ord  do  all  these  t.


T  H  I

Isa.  47.  7-  so  that  thou  didst  not  lay  these  t  to  thy

heart

9.  these  two  t.  shall  come  to  thee  in  a  moment

13.  let  the  astrologers  save  thee  from  these  t.

48.  14.  which  among  them  hath  declared  these  t.
51.  19.  these  two  t.  are  come  unto  thee,  who  shall
64.  12.  wilt  thou  refrain  thyself  for  these  t.  O  Lord
Jer.  .3.  7-  I  sain,  after  she  had  done  all  these  t.

4.  18.  thy  doings  have  procured  these  t.  to  thee

5.  9.  shall  1  not  visit  for  these  t?  29- 1  9.  9.

25.  your  iniquities  have  turned  away  these  t.

9.  24.  for  in  these  t.  do  1  delight,  saith  the  Lord

13.  22.  if  thou  sav,  wherefore  come  these  t.  on  me

14.  22.  wait  on  thee,  thou  hast  made  all  these  t.

30.  15.  for  thy  sins  1  have  done  these  t.  to  thee
Lam.  1.  16.  for  these  t.  1  weep,  mine  eye  runneth

5.  17.  our  heart  is  faint,  for  these  t.  our  eyes  aie  dim
Ezek.  16.  30.  seeing  thou  dost  all  these  t.  17 .  18.

4.3.  because  thou  hast  fretted  me  in  all  these  t.

17.  12.  know  ye  not  what  these  t.  mean,  tell  them

18.  10.  that  doeth  the  like  to  any  one  of  these  t.

23.  30.  I  will  do  these  t.  unto  thee,  because  thou

24.  19.  wilt  thou  not  tell  what  these  t.  are  to  us  ?
Dan.  10.  21.  none  that  holdeth  with  me  in  these  t.

12.  7-  all  these  t.  shall  be  finished

8.  O  my  Lord, w hat  shall  be  the  end  of  these  t.  ?
Ilos.  14.  9.  who  is  wise,  he  shal  l  understand  these  t.
Zech.  8.  16.  these  are  the  t.  which  ye  shall  do

17-  for  all  these  are  t.  that  1  hate,  saith  the  Lord
Mat.  1.  20.  but  while  he  thought  on  these  t.

2.  3.  when  Herod  heard  these  t.  he  was  troubled

6.  32.  after  all  these  t.  do  the  Gentiles  seek,  knows

that  ye  have  need  of  all  these  t.  Luke  12.  30.
33.  all  these  t.  shall  be  added  to  you,  Luke  12.  .31.

11.  25.  hast  hid  these  1 .  from  the  wise,  Luke  10.  21.

13.  51.  Jesus  saith,  have  ye  understood  these  t.  ?
56.  whence  then  hath  this  man  these  t.  Mark  6.  2.

15.  20.  these  are  the  t.  which  defile  a  man

19.  20.  all  these  t.  have  l  kept  from  my  youth

21.  23.  by  what  authority  dost  thou  these  t.  Mark

11.  28.  Luke  20.  2.
24.  I  will  tell  you  by  what  authority-  l  do  these  t.

27.  Mark  11.  29,  33.  Luke  HO.  8.

23.  36.  all  these  t.  shall  come  on  this  generation

24.  2.  Jesus  said  to  them,  see  ye  not  all  these  t.?

3.  when  shall  these  t.  be?  Mark  13.  4.  Luke  21.7.

6.  all  these  t.  must  come  to  pass,  l.uke 21.  9,  28.
33.  when  ye  shall  see  all  these  t.  know  that  it  is

near,  Mark  13.  29.  Luke  21.  31.

31.  till  all  these  t.  be  fulfilled,  Mark  1.3.  30.

Luke  1.  20.  till  the  day  that  these  t.  be  performed

2. 19.  but  Mary  kept  these  t.  and  pondered  them

14.  6.  they  could  not  answer  him  to  these  t.

15.  26.  he  called,  and  asked  what  these  t.  meant?

18.  .34.  and  they  understood  none  of  these  t.

21.  36.  to  escape  all  these  t.  that  shall  come

23.  31.  for  if  they  do  these  t.  in  a  green  tree

24.  21.  to  day  is  third  day  since  these  t.  were  done

26.  ought  not  Christ  to  have  suffered  these  t.  f
48.  and  ye  are  witnesses  of  these  t.

John  2.  16.  he  said  to  them,  take  these  t.  hence
18.  what  sign,  seeing  that  thou  dost  these  t.

3.  9.  Nicodemus  said  to  him,  how  can  these  t.  be.'

10.  a  master  of  Israel,  and  knowest  not  these  t.  f
5. 16.  he  had  done  these  t.  on  the  sabbath-day

7.  4.  if  thou  do  these  t.  shew  thyself  to  the  worm

12.  16.  these  t.  understood  not  his  disciples,  they

remembered  that  these  t.  -were  written  of  him

41.  these  t.  said  Esaias,  when  he  saw  his  glory
13. 17-ifye  know  these  t.  happy  are  ye  ifye  do  them

15.  21.  all  these  t.  will  they  do  unto  you,  16.  3.

19.  24.  these  t.  therefore  the  soldiers  did

36.  these  t.  were  done,  that  the  scriptures  should  be
Acts  5.  32.  and  we  are  his  witnesses  of  these  t.

7.  1.  these  t.  so  ?  11 14.  15.  sirs,  why  do  ye  these  t.  ?
50.  hath  not  my  hand  made  all  these  t.  ?

54.  when  they  heard  theset.  they  were  cut  to  heart

8.  24.  pray  for  me,  that  none  of  these  t.  come  on  me
15. 17.  safth  the  Lord,  who  doth  all  these  t.

17.  20.  we  would  know  what  these  t.  mean

19.  36.  seeing  these  t.  cannot  be  spoken  against

20.  24.  none  of  these  t.  move  me,  neither  count  I

24.  9.  the  Jews  assented,  saying,  these  t.  were  so

25.  9.  and  there  be  judged  of  these  t.  before  me

26.  16.  to  make  thee  a  witness  of  these  t.

26.  the  king  knoweth  of  these  t.  before  whom
Rom.  8.  31.  what  shall  we  then  say  to  these  t.?

10.  5.  the  men  that  doth  these  t.  shall  live  by  them

14.  18.  for  he  that  in  theset.  serveth  Christ

1  Cor.  9.  8.  say  1  these  t.  as  a  man,  or  saith  not  law

15.  I  used  none  of  these  t.  nor  have  I  written

10.  6.  these  t.  were  our  examples,  to  the  intent

2  Cor.  2.  16.  and  who  is  sufficient  for  these  t.  ?

Eph.  5.6.  because  of  these  t.  cometh  wrath  of  God
Phil.  4.  8.  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  t.
Col.  3.  14.  and  above  all  these  t.  put  on  charity

1  Tim.  4.6.  put  brethren  remembrance  of  these  t.

1 1.  these  t.  command  ||  15.  meditate  on  these  t.

5.  7.  these  t.  give  in  charge  ||  21.  observe  these  t.

6.  2.  these  t.  exhort,  Tit.  2.  15.  ||  11.  flee  theset.

2  Tim.  2.  14.  of  these  t.  put  them  in  remembrance
Tit.  3.  8.  these  t.  I  will  that  thou  affirm  constantly,

these  t.  are  good  and  profitable  to  men
Beb.  7.  13.  for  he  of  whom  these  t.  are  spoken
Jam.  3.  10.  brethren,  these  t.  ought  not  to  be  so
2  Pet.  1.  8.  for  if  these  t.  be  in  you  and  abound

9.  but  he  that  lacketh  these  t.  is  blind

10.  for  if  ye  do  these  t.  ye  shall  never  fall

12.  1  will  put  you  in  remembrance  of  these  t.

15.  to  have  these  t.  always  in  remembrance

.3.  11.  seeing  all  these  t.  shall  be  dissolved,  what

16.  in  his  epistles,  speakingin  them  of  these  t.

17.  seeing  ye  know  these  t.  before,  bew'are
Rev.  22.  8.  the  feet  of  angel  who  shewed  me  these  i

16.  to  testify  to  you  these  t.  in  the  churches

20.  he  which  testifieth  these  t.  saith,  1  come
Those  THINGS.

F.xod.  29.  3.3.  eat  those  t.  wherewith  atonement  made
Lev.  22.  2.  in  those  t.  which  they  allow  unto  me
Dent.  29-  29.  those  t.  which  are  revealed  belong  to  us
2  Kings  17.  9.  children  of  Israel  did  secretly'  those  t
Ps.  107.  43.  whoso  will  observe  those  t.  they  shall

507


T  HI


T  H  I


T  H  1


Isa.  66.  2.  for  all  those  t.  hath  mine  hand  made,  and
all  those  t.  have  been,  saitli  the  Lord
Ezek.  42.  14.  approach  to  those  t.  that  are  for  people
Mat.  13.  17-  desired  to  see  those  t.  which  ye  see,  and
hear  those  t.  which  ye  hear,  Luke  10.  24.
Mark  1.44.  offer  More  t.  which  Moses  commanded
Luke  1.45.  a  performance  ot  those  t.  which  were  told

2.  18.  wondered  at  those  t.  told  them  by  shepherds

12.  20.  whose  shall  those  t.  be  thou  hast  provided
John  8.  29.  1  do  always  those  t.  that  please  him
Acts  3.  18.  but  those  t.  he  hath  so  fulfilled

8.  6.  gave  heed  to  those  t.  which  Philip  spake

13.  45.  spake  against  those  t.  which  were  spoken

17.  11.  they  searched  whether  those  t.  were  so

18.  17.  and  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  those  t.

26.  16.  of  those  t.  in  which  I  will  appear  to  thee

27.  11.  more  than  those  t.  spoken  by  Paul

Rom.  1.  28.  to  do  those  t.  which  are  not  convenient

4. 17.  calleth  those  t.  which  be  not,  as  though  were
6. 21.  what  fruit  had  you  in  those  t.  whereof  ye  are

now  ashamed,  for  the  end  of  those  t.  is  death

1.5. 17.  I  may  glory  in  those  t.  which  pertain  to  God
18.  I  will  not  dare  to  speak  of  any  of  those  t.

1  Cor.  8.  4.  eating  of  those  t.  offered  to  idols,  10.

2  Cor.  11.  28.  besides  those  t.  which  are  without
Eph.  5.  12.  it  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those  t.
Phil.  3. 13.  forgetting  those  t.  which  are  behind,  and

reaching  to  those  t.  which  are  before

4.  9.  those  t.  which  ye  have  learned  and  seen  do
Col.  2.  18.  intruding  into  those  t.  he  hath  not  seen

3.  1.  seek  those  t.  which  are  above,  where  Christ
He/>.  3.  5.  was  faithful  for  a  testimony  of  those  t.

12.  27.  the  removing  oft.  t.  which  are  shaken,  that
those  t.  which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain
Jam.  2.  16.  ye  give  not  those  t.  which  are  needful

1  John  3.  22.  do  those  t.  that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight

2  John  8.  we  lose  not  those  t.  we  have  wrought
Jude  10.  but  speak  evil  of  those  t.  they  know  not
Rev.  1.3.  blessed  are  they  that  keep  those  t.

2.  10.  fear  none  of  those  t.  which  thou  shalt  suffer

10.  4.  seal  up  those  t.  the  seven  thunders  uttered

20.  12.  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  t.  written

Unclean  THINGS.

Hos.  9.  3.  and  they  shall  eat  unclean  t.  in  Assyria
What  THINGS.

Exod.  10.  2.  tell  thy  son  what  t.  1  have  wrought
Mat.  6.  8.  Father  knows  what  t.  ye  have  need  of
Mark  9.  9.  should  tell  no  man  what  t.  they  had  seen

10.  32.  began  to  tell  them  what  t.  should  happen

11.  24.  what  t.  soever  ye  desire  when  ye  pray
Luke  7.  22.  go,  tell  John  what  t.  ye  have  seen

24.  19.  what  t.  they  said  to  him  concerning  Jesus

35.  and  they  told  what  t.  were  done  in  the  way
John  5.  19-  what  t.  he  doth,  these  doth  the  Son

10.  6.  they  understood  not  what  t.  they  were

11.  46.  some  told  them  what  t.  Jesus  had  done
Acts  21.  19.  what  t.  God  wrought  among  Gentiles
Phil.  3.  7-  what  t.  were  gain  to  me,  1  counted  loss

THINK.

Gen.  40.  14.  but  t.  on  me,  when  it  be  well  with  thee
Num.  36.  6.  let  them  marry  to  whom  they  t.  best
2  Sam.  13.  33.  to  t.  that  all  the  king’s  sons  are  dead
2  Chron.  13.  8.  ye  t.  to  withstand  kingdom  of  Lord
Neh.  5.  19.  t.  on  me,  my  God,  for  good,  according
6.  6.  reported,  that  thou  and  the  Jews  t.  to  rebel

14.  my  God,  t.  thou  on  Tobiah  and  Sanballat
Esth.  4. 13.  t.  not  thou  shalt  escape  in  king’s  house
Job  31.  1.  why  then  should  I  t.  upon  a  maid  ?

41.  32.  one  would  t.  the  deep  to  be  hoary
'Ztcl.  8. 17.  further,  though  a  wise  man  t.  to  know  it
Isa.  10.  7-  nor  doth  his  heart  t.  so,  but  in  his  heart
Jer.  23.  27-  t.  to  cause  my  people  forget  my  name
29.  11.  1  know  the  thoughts  that  I  t.  toward  you
Ezek.  38.  10.  and  thou  shalt  t.  an  evil  thought
Dan.  7.  25.  he  shall  t.  to  change  times  and  laws

11.  t  24.  t.  his  thoughts  against  the  strong  holds
Jonah  1.  6.  if  so  be  that  God  will  t.  upon  us
Zech.  11.  12.  if  ye  t.  good  give  me  my  price,  if  not
Mat.  3.  9.  and  t.  not  to  say  within  yourselves

5.  17.  t.  not  that  1  am  come  to  destroy  the  law

6.  7-  t.  they  shall  be  heard  for  much  speaking

9.  4.  why  t.  ye  evil  in  your  hearts  |f  18.  12.  how  t.  ye

10.  34.  t.  not  I  am  come  to  send  peace  on  earth

21.  28.  what  t.  you  ?  a  certain  man  had  two  sons

22.  42.  what  t.  ye  of  Christ?  26.  66.  Mark  14.  64.

24.  44.  in  such  an  hour  as  ye  t.  not,  Luke  12.  40.

Luke  13.  4.  /.  ye  that  they  were  sinners  above  all
John  5.  39.  in  them  ye/,  ye  have  eternal  life
45.  do  not  t.  1  will  accuse  you  to  the  Father

11.  56.  what/,  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to  feast  ?
16. 2.  killeth  you,  will  t.  that  he  doth  God  service

Acts  13.  25.  whom  /.  ye  that  1  am  ?  I  am  not  he

17.  29-  not  to  t.  that  the  Godhead  is  like  to  gold
26.  2.  I  t.  myself  happy,  king  Agrippa,  because
Rom.  12.  3.  not  to  t.  of  himself  more  highly  than  he
ought  to  t.  but  to  t.  soberly  as  God  hath  dealt

1  Cor.  4.  6.  ye  might  learn  in  us  not  to  t.  of  men

9.  I  /.  that  God  hath  set  forth  us  the  apostles
7-  36.  if  any  man  /.  that  he  behaveth  uncomely

40.  I  /.  also  that  1  have  the  Spirit  of  God
8.  2.  if  any  man  /.  that  he  knowethany  thing

12.  2.3.  of  body,  which  we  /.  to  be  less  honourable

14.  37.  if  any  man  /.  himself  to  be  a  prophet

2  Cor.  3.5.  of  ourselves  to  /.  any  thing  as  of  oursei  ves

10.  2.  1  /.  to  be  bold  against  some  which  /.  of  us

7.  that  he  is  Christ,  let  him  /.this  again,  11.

11.  16.  I  say  again,  let  no  man  /.  me  a  tool

12.  6:  lest  any  /.  of  me  above  what  he  seetli  me  to  be
Gal.  6.  3.  if  a  man  /.  himself  to  be  something
Eph.  3.  20.  is  able  to  da  above  all  that  we  ask  or  /.
Phil.  4.  8.  if  there  be  any  praise,  /.  on  these  things
Jam.  1.  7.  let  not  that  man  /.  he  shall  receive

4.  5.  do  ye  /.  that  the  scripture  saith  in  vain  ?

1  Pet.  4.  4.  wherein  they  /.  strange  that  ye  run  not

12.  /.  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial

2  Pet.  1.13. 1  /.  it  meet  as  longas  1  am  in  thistabern.

„  THIN  REST.

2  Sam.  10.  3.  t.  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thy
father,  in  sending  comforters '  1  Chron.  19.  3.
Job  35.  2.  /.  thou  this  right,  that  thou  saidst,  my
Mat  17.  25.  Jesussaid,  what  /.  thou  ?  22.  17.

26. 53.  t.  thju  that  I  cannot  pray  to  my  Father

508


Luke  10.  36.  which  /.  thou  was  neighbour  to  him?
Acts  28.  22.  we  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what  thou  /.
Rom.  2.  3.  t.  thou  this,  O  man,  that  judgest  them
THINK  El  II.

1  Sam.  20.  t  4.  whatsoever  thy  soul  /.  I  will  do

2  Sam.  18.  27-  me  /.  the  running  of  the  foremost  is
Psal.  40.  17.  I  am  poor,  yet  the  Lord  /.  on  me
Prov.  23.7.  for  as  he/,  in  his  heart,  so  is  he
Luke  8.  t  18.  be  taken  that  which  he  t.  he  hath

1  Cor.  10.  12.  let  him  that/,  he  standeth,  take  heed

13.  5.  charity  seeketh  not  her  own,  /.  no  evil
Phil.  3.  4.  if  any  other  man  /.  he  hath  whereof

THINKING.

2  Sam.  4.  10.  /.  to  have  brought  good  Tdings

5.  6.  t.  David  cannot  come  in  hither

THIRD.

Gen.  32. 19.  socommanded  he  the  second  and  the  /.
5".  23.  saw  Ephraim’s  children  of  /.  generation
Lxod.  20.  5.  to  the  /.  and  fouith  generation  of  them
that  hate  me,  34.7-  Num.  14.  18.  Deut.  5.  9.

28.  19.  and  the  /.  row  a  ligure,  an  agate,  39.  12.
Num.  2.24.  the  camp  of  Ephraim  in  the  t.  rank
Deut.  23.  8.  an  Edomite  shall  enter  in  /.  generation
Josh.  19.  10.  the  /.  lot  came  up  for  Zebulun

2  Kings  1.  13.  he  sent  again  a  captain  of  the  /.  fifty

1  Chron.  24.  8.  the  /.  lot  came  forth  to  Haram

25.  10.  the  /.  lot  came  forth  to  Zaccur

27.  5.  the  /.  captain  of  the  host  for  the  /.  month
Isa.  19.  24.  Israel  shall  be  the  /.  with  Egypt
Ezek.  10.  14.  and  the  /.  was  the  face  of  a  lion
Dan.  2.  39.  and  another  /.  kingdom  of  brass

5.  7-  and  shall  be  the  /.  ruler  in  the  kingdom,  16.  29.
Zech.  6.  3.  and  in  the  /.  chariot  white  horses
Mat.  20.  3.  and  he  went  out  about  the  /.  hour

22.  26.  likewise  /.  died,  Mark  12.21.  Luke  20.  31.
Mark  15.  25.  it  was  /.  hour,  and  they  crucified  him
Luke  12.  38.  come  in  the  /.  watch,  and  find  them  so

20.  12.  he  sent  the  /.  and  they  wounded  him
Acts  2.  15.  seeing  it  is  but  the  /.  hour  of  the  day

20.  9.  Eutychus  fell  down  from  the  t.  loft

23.  23.  be  ready  at  the  /.  hour  of  the  night

2  Cor.  12.  2.  such  an  one  caught  up  to  the  /.  heaven
Rev.  4.  7-  and  the  /.  beast  had  a  face  as  a  man

6.  5.  had  opened  the/,  seal,  1  heard  the/,  beast

8.  10.  the  /.  angel  sounded,  there  fell  a  star

11.  14.  and  behold,  the  /.  woe  cometh  quickly

14.  9.  and  the  /.  angel  followed  them,  saying

16.  4.  the  /.  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  the  rivers

21.  19.  the  /.  foundation  was  a  chalcedony

See  Day,  Month,  Part.

THIRD  time.

1  Sam.  3.  8.  the  Lord  called  Samuel  the  /.  time

19.  21.  Saul  sent  messengers  again  the  /.  time

1  Kings  Mb.  34.doitthe  /.  time,  they  did  it  the  /.  time
Ezek.  21.  14.  let  the  sword  be  doubled  the  /.  time
Mat.  26. 44.  and  he  prayed  the  /.  time,  Mark  14.  41.
John  21.  14.  the  /.  time  Jesus  shewed  himself

17.  saith  unto  him  the  /.  time,  lovest  thou  me?
Peter  was  grieved,  bee.  he  said  to  him,  /.  time

2  Cor.  12.  14.  the  /.  time  I  am  ready  to  come,  13. 1.

THIRD  year.

Deut.  26.  12.  /.  year,  which  is  the  year  of  tithing

1  Kings  15.  28.  in  t.year  of  Asa,  did  Baasha  slay,  33.

18.  1.  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Elijah  in  t.year
22. 2.  in  t.year,  Jehoshaphat  came  to  king  of  Israel

2  Kings  18.  1.  in  the  /.  year  of  Hoshea  son  of  Elah

19.  29.  in  the  t.year  sow  ye  and  reap,  Isa.  37.  30.

2  Chron.  17.  7.  in  t.year  of  Jehoshaphat’s  reign

27.  5.  the  Ammonites  paid  the  second  and  /.  year
Esth.  1.  3.  in  the  /.  year  of  the  reign  of  Ahasuerus
Dan.  1.  1.  in  the  /.  year  of  the  reign  of  Jehoiaaim
8.  1.  in  the  /.  year  of  the  reign  of  Belshazzar
10.  1.  in  the  t.  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia
THIR  DLY.

1  Cor.  12.28.  /.  teachers,  after  that  miracles

TH  I  RS  I',  Substantive.

Exod.  17.  3.  to  kill  us  and  our  children  with  /.

Deut.  28.  48,  thou  shalt  serve  thine  enemies  in  /.

22.  19.  itnagin.  of  heart,  to  add  drunkenness  to  /.
Judg .  15.  18.  and  now  I  shall  die  for  /.  and  fall

2  Chron.  32.  11.  doth  persuade  you  to  die  by  /.

Neh.  9. 15.  thou  broughtest  w  ater  for  their  /.  20.

Job  24.  11.  tread  their  wine  presses  and  suffer  /.
Psal.  69. 21.  in  my  /.  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  drink

104.  11.  the  w  ild  asses  quench  their /.

Isa.  5. 13.  and  their  multitude  dried  up  with  /.

41. 17.  and  when  their  tongue  faileth  for  /.

50.  2.  their  fish  stinketh,  and  dieth  for  /.

Jer.  2.  25.  and  withhold  thy  throat  from  /.

48.  18.  come  down  from  thy  glory  and  sit  in/.
Lam.  4.  4.  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth  for/.
Hos.  2.  3.  lest  I  strip  her  naked,  and  slay  her  with/.
Amos  8.  11.  not  a  /.  for  water,  but  of  hearing  words

13.  the  virgins  and  young  men  shall  faint  for  /.

2  Cor.  11.  27.  in  hunger  and  /.  in  fastings  often

THIRST,  Verb.

Isa.  49.  10.  they  shall  not  hunger,  nor  /.  nor  heat
Mat.  5.  6.  which  hunger  and  /.  after  righteousness
John  4.  13.  drinkethof  this  water,  shall  /.  again

14.  whosoever drinketh,  shall  never  /.  6.  35.

15.  sir,  give  me  this  water,  that  I  /.  not

7.  37.  if  any  /.  let  him  come  to  me  and  drink

19.  28.  after  this  Jesus  saith,  I  /.

Rom.  12.  20.  if  thine  enemy  /.  give  him  drink
1  Cor.  4.  11.  even  to  this  present  hour  we  l.

Rev.  7.  16.  and  they  shall  not  /.  any  more
THIRSTED.

Exod.  17.  3.  people  /.  there  for  water  and  murmured
Isa.  48.  21.  they  /.  not  when  he  led  them  through
TH1RSTETH.

Psal.  42.  2.  my  soul  /.  for  God,  63. 1. 1  143.  6.

Isa.  55.  1.  ho,  every  one  that  /.  come  to  the  waters
THIRSTY.

Judg.  4.  19.  give  me  a  little  water,  for  l  am  /.

2 Sam.  17.  29.  the  people  is  /.  in  the  wilderness
Psal.  63.  1.  my  fiesh  longeth  in  a  /.  land,  143.  6.
107.  5.  hungry  and  /.  their  soul  fainted  in  them
Prov.  25.  21.  if  thine  enemy  be  /.  give  him  drink

25.  as  cold  waters  to  a  /.  soul,  so  is  good  news

29.  10.  the  blood-/,  hate  the  upright,  but  the  just
Isa.  21.  14.  brought  water  to  him  that  was  /.

29.  8.  it  shall  be  as  when  a  /.man  dreameth


Isa.  32. 6.  he  will  cause  the  drink  of  the  /.  to  rail
35.  7.  the  /.  land  shall  become  springs  of  water
44.  3.  for  l  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  /.

65.  13.  my  servants  shall  drink,  but  >e  shall  be  /.
Ezek.  19.  13.  she  is  planted  in  a  dry  and  /.  ground
Mat.  25.  35.  for  1  was  /.  and  ye  gave  me  drink
37.  when  saw  we  thee  /.  and  gave  thee  drink  ?

42.  for  1  was  /.  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink
Till  R  TEEN.

Gen.  17.  25.  Ishmael  his  son  w  as  /.  years  old
Num.  29.  13.  ye  shall  offer  /.  young  bullocks,  14.

1  Kings'!.  1.  was  building  his  own  house/,  years
1  Chron.  26.  11.  the  sons  and  brethren  of  Ilosah/
Ezek.  40. 11.  the  length  of  the  gate  /.cubits
THIRTEENTH.

Gen.  14.  4.  and  in  the  /.  year  they  rebelled

1  Chron.  24. 13.  the  /.  lot  came  forth  to  Huppah
25.  20.  the  /.  lot  came  forth  to  Shubael

Jer.  1.  2.  in  the  /.  year  of  the  reign  of  Josiah
25.  3.  from  the  /.  year  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Amon
See  Day,.

THIRTIETH.

2  Kings  15.  13.  Shallum  to  reign  in  nine  and  /.  year

17.  in  the  nine  and  /.  year  of  king  Azariah

25.  27.  in  the  seven  and  /.year  of  the  captivity  of

Jehoiachin  king  of  Judah,  Jer.  52.  31.
2  Chr.  15.  19.  no  war  to  the  five  and  /.  year  of  Asa

16.  1.  in  the  six  and  /.  year  of  the  reign  of  Asa
Neh.  5.  14.  the  two  and  /.  year  of  Artaxerxes,  13.  6.
THIRTY.

Gen.  6.  15.  the  height  of  the  ark  was  /.  cubits

11.  14.  Salah  lived  /.  years,  and  begat  Eber

18.  Peleg  lived  /.years, and  begat  Reu

22.  Serug  lived  /.  years,  and  begat  Nahor

18.  30.  peradventure  there  shall  be  /.  found,  he
said,  I  will  not  do  it  if  I  find  /.  there
32.  15.  /.  milch  camels  with  their  colts,  forty  kine
41.  46.  Joseph  was/,  j’ears  old  when  he  stood
Exod.  21. 32.  shall  give  to  their  master  /.  shekels

26.  8.  the  length  of  one  curtain  /.  cubits,  36.  15.
Lev.  27.  4.  thy  estimation  shall  be  /.  shekels
Num.  4.  3.  from  /.  years  old  and  upwards  even  to

fifty,  23,  .30,  35,  39,  43,  47-  1  Chron.  23.  3.
Judg.  10.  4.  .1  air  had /.  sons,  and  they  had  /.  cities

12.  9.  ibzan  had  /.  sons  and  /.daughters  he  sent

abroad,  took  in  /.  daughters  for  his  sons
14.  Abdon  had  forty  sons  and  t.  nephews
14.  11.  they  brought  /.  companions  to  be  with  him

12.  give  you  /.  sheets,  /.  change  of  garments

13.  ye  shall  give  /.  sheets,  /.  change  of  garments

19.  Samson  slew  /.  men,  and  took  their  spoil

20.  31.  to  smite  about  /.  men  of  Israel,  39-

1  Sam.  9.  22.  Saul  sat  among  them,  about  /.  persons

2  Sam.  5.  4.  David  was  /.  years  old  when  he  began
23.  13.  and  three  of  the  /.  chief  went  down

23.  Benaiah  was  more  honourable  than  the  /.  1

Chron.  11.  15,  25.  |  27.  6.

24.  Asahel,  brother  of  Joab,  was  one  of  the  /.

1  KingsA.W.  provision  for  one  day  was/,  measures

6.  2.  height  ot  the  house  of  the  Lord  was  /.  cubits

7.  2.  height  of  the  house  of  the  forest  was  /.  cubits
6.  the  breadth  of  the  porch  was  /.  cubits

23.  a  line  of  /.  cubits  did  compass  it  about

2  Kings  18.  14.  appointed  to  Ilezekiah  /.  talents

1  Chron.  11.42.  Adina  a  captain,  and  t.  with  him
Ezra  1.  9.  the  number  of  them  was  /.  chargers
10.  /.  basons  of  gold,  silver  basons  410
Jer.  38.  10.  take  from  hence  /.  men  with  thee
Ezek.  40.  17.  /.  chambers  were  on  the  pavement
41.  6.  and  the  side  chambers  were  /.  in  order
46. 22.  there  were  courts  joined  of  /.  cubits  broad
Zech.  11.  12.  they  weighed  tormy  price  /.  pieces

13.  and  1  took  the  /.  pieces  of  silver.  Mat.  27.  9.
Mat.  13.  8.  brought  some  /.  fold,  23.  Mark  4.8,20.

26.  15.  they  covenanted  with  him  for  /.  pieces

27.  3.  Judas  brought  again  the  /.  pieces  of  silver
Luke  3.  23.  Jesus  began  to  be  about  /.  years  of  age
John  6.  19.  had  rowed  about  25  or  /.  furlongs

See  Days.

THIRTY  one.

Josh.  12.  24.  the  kings  Joshua  subdued  /.  and  one

1  Kings  16.  23.  in  the  /.  and  one  year  of  king  Asa

2  Kings  22.  1.  Josiah  eight  years  old,  and  reigned

t.  and  one  years  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  34.  1.
THIRTY  two.

Gen.  11. 20.  Reu  lived  /.  two  years,  and  begat  Serug
Num.  31.  40.  the  Lord’s  tribute  was  /.  two  persons

1  Kings  20. 1.  /.  two  kings  were  with  Ben-hadad,  16.
22.  31.  the  king  commanded  his  /.  two  captains

2  Kings  8.  17-  Jehoram  was  /.  two  y tYtrs  old  w  hen

he  began  to  reign,  2  Chron.  21.  5,  20
THIRTY  three.

Gen.  46.  15.  all  the  soulsof  sons  and  daughters,  /.  /.
Lev.  12.  4.  in  blood  of  purifying  /.  three  days
2  Sam.  5.  5.  David  reigned  in  Jerusal./.  and  three
years,  1  Kings  2.  11.1  Chron.  3.  4.  |  29.27.
THIRTY  four.

Gen.  11. 16.  Eber  lived  t.four  years  and  begat  Peleg
Till  RTY  five.

Gen.  11.  12.  Arphaxad  lived  five  and  /.  years

1  Kings  22.  42.  Jehoshaphat  was  /.  five  years  old

when  he  began  to  reign,  2  Chron.  20.  31.

2  Chron.  3.  15.  made  two  pillars  /.  five  cubits  high

THIRTY  Ax.

Josh.  7.  5.  the  men  of  Ai  smote  /.  six  men  of  Israel
THIRTY  seven.

2  Sam.  23.  39.  Uriah  the  Hittite  /.  seven  in  all
2  Kings  13. 10.  in  the  /.  and  seventh  year  of  Joash
THIRTY  eight.  [years

Deut.  2.  14.  till  come  over  brook  Zered  /.  eight

1  Kings  16.  29.  in  the  /.  and  eighth  year  of  Asa

2  Kings  15.  8.  in  the  /.  and  eighth  year  of  Azariah
John  5.  5.  which  had  an  infirmity  /.  eight  years

THIR  TY  nine.

2  Chron.  16.  12.  Asa  in  the  /.  and  n.  year  diseased
See  1  HousAND.

THIS.

Gen.  5.  29-  /.  same  shall  comfort  11s  concern,  work
15. 4.  saying,  /.  shall  not  be  thine  heir,  but  he  shall
18.32.  and  1  will  speak  yet  but  /.once

19.  9.  they  said,  /.  one  fellow  came  in  to  sojourn
29.  27.  we  will  give  thee  /.  also  roi  d:e  service


T  H  1


T  H  I


L'HI


Gen.  34  15.  but  in  /.  will  we  consent  unto  you

37.  32.  sent  the  coat,  and  said,  /.  have  we  found

38.  28.  bound  a  thread,  saying,  /.  came  out  first
44.  5.  is  not  /.  it  in  which  my  Lord  drinketh  i

29.  if  ye  take  /.  from  me,  and  mischief  befall  him
Exod.  3.  12.  /.  shall  be  a  token  that  l  sent  thee

7.  17.  in  /.  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  the  Lord

23.  neither  did  he  set  his  heart  to  /.  also

30.  13.  /.  they  shall  give,  each  half  a  shekel
Sum.  18.  9.  t.  shall  be  thine  of  the  most  Holy  things
from  the  fire,  Dent.  18.  3.

24.  23.  alas,  who  shall  live  when  God  doth  /.  ?
Oeut.  32.  29.  O  that  they  were  wise  and  underst.  /.

34.  is  not  /.  laid  up  in  store  with  me  and  sealed
Judg.  7.  4.  /.  shall  go  with  thee,  t.  shall  not  go

16.  18.  come  up  Z.  once,  for  he  hatli  shewed  all
4  Sam.  16.  8.  neither  hath  the  Lord  chosen  /.  9.

20.  3.  and  he  saith,  let  not  Jonathan  know  Z.

25.  31.  that  z.  be  no  grief  unto  thee

2  Sam.  7.  19.  /.  was  a  small  thing  in  thy  sight

19.  21.  shall  not  Shitnei  be  put  to  death  tor  /.  ?

23.  if.  is  not  /.  the  blood  of  the  men  that  went

1  Kings  3.  9.  to  judge  t.  thy  so  great  a  people

11.  27.  and  t.  was  the  cause  that  he  lift  iiis  hand

39.  I  will  for  /.  afflict  the  seed  of  David,  but  not

17.  24.  by  t.  1  know  that  thou  art  a  man  ot  God

2  Kings  4.  43.  should  1  set  t.  before  an  hundred  men

14.  10.  glory  of  /.  and  tarry  at  home

24.  3.  at  commandment  of  Lord  came  t.  on  Judah
2  Chr.  1.  11.  because  /.  was  in  thine  heart,  not  asked

25.  9.  the  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  more  than  t.
Ezra  b.  17-  let  him  send  his  pleasure  concerning  /.

<>.  11.  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  for  t.

7.  27.  put  such  a  thing  as  /.  in  the  king’s  heart

8.  23.  so  we  fasted,  and  besought  our  God  for  t.

9.  13.  and  hast  given  us  such  deliverance  as  t.

15.  we  cannot  stand  before  thee  because  of  /.

Seh.  13.  14.  remember  me  concerning  /.  22.

Est/i.  4. 14.  art  come  to  kingd.  for  such  a  time  as  /.
Job  5.  27.  lo,  t.  we  have  searched  it,  so  it  is

12.  9.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  wrought  /.

17.  8.  upright  men  shall  be  astonied  at  t.

2o!  2.  for  t.  I  make  haste  ||  4.  knowest  thou  not  t.

21.2.  hear  and  let  t.  be  your  consolation
33.  12.  in  /.  thou  art  not  just,  1  will  answer

35.  2.  thinkest  thou  t.  to  be  right,  that  thou  saidst
{•sal.  11.  6.  t.  shall  be  the  portion  of  their  cup

27.  3.  though  war  rise,  in  /.  will  I  be  confident
32.  6.  for  t.  shall  every  one  that  is  godly  pray
35.  22.  t.  thou  hast  seen,  keep  not  silence

41.  11.  by  /.  1  know  that  thou  favourest  me
44.  21.  shall  not  God  search  /.  out.'  he  knoweth

48.  14.  for  t.  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever

49.  13.  t.  their  way  is  their  folly,  yet  their

50.  22.  now  consider  Z.  ye  that  forget  God

56.  9.  shall  turn  back,  t.  I  know,  for  God  is  for  me
<52.  11.  twice  have  1  heard  /.  that  power  belongs
69.  31.  /.  also  shall  please  the  Lord  better  than  ox
32.  the  humble  shall  see  z.  and  be  glad,  your  heart
73.  16.  when  1  thought  to  know  /.  it  was  painful
78.  21.  the  Lord  heard  /.  and  was  wroth,  59.

81.  4.  for  /.  was  a  statute  for  Israel  and  a  law

5.  t.  he  ordained  in  Joseph  for  a  testimony
92.  6.  neither  doth  a  fool  understand  t.

109.  20.  let  /.  be  the  reward  of  mine  adversaries
119.  56.  t.  1  had,  because  I  kept  thy  precepts
149.  9.  Z.  honour  have  all  his  saints,  praise  Lord
Eccl.  4.  4.  for  t.  a  man  is  envied  of  his  neighbour

6.  5.  /.  hath  more  rest  than  the  other

7.  10.  thou  dost  not  inquire  wisely  concerning  t.

18.  it  is  good  that  thou  shouldest  take  hold  of  /.

yea  also  from  t.  withdraw  not  thine  hand

27.  /.  have  I  found  ||  29.  lo,  t.  only  have  I  found

11.  6.  whether  shall  prosper,  either  t.  or  that

Isa.  1.  12.  who  hath  required  /.  at  your  hand  ?

6.  7.  and  he  said,  lo,  /.  hath  touched  thy  lips
9.  7.  the  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  /.

22.  14.  surely  /.  iniquity  shall  not  be  purged

27.  9.  by  Z.  shall  the  iniquity  of  Jacob  be  purged

28.  29.  /.  also  cometh  forth  front  the  Lord

29.  11.  saying,  read  t.  I  pray  thee,  12.

30.  7.  therefore  have  1  cried  concerning  t.

43.  9.  who  among  them  can  declare  t.  '!  45.  21.

46.  8.  remember  /. 1|  48.  20.  declare  ye,  tell  /.

47.  8.  therefore  hear  now  t.  48.  1,  16.  I  51.  21.

50.  11.  t.  shall  ye  have  of  mine  hand,  ye  shall
56.  2.  blessed  is  the  man  that  doeth  t.

58.  5.  wilt  thou  call  t.  a  fast,  an  acceptable  day  ?

6.  is  not  /.  the  fast  that  1  have  chosen  t

66.  14.  when  ye  see  t.  your  hearts  shall  rejoice
ier.  2.  12.  be  astonished,  O  ye  heavens,  at  t.

17.  hast  thou  not  procured  /.  unto  thyself?

4.  8.  for  t.  gird  you  with  sackcloth,  lament

28.  for  t.  shall  the  earth  mourn,  and  heavens

5.  7.  how  shall  I  pardon  thee  for  t.  ?

9.  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation  as  t.  29.  I  9.  9.

9.  24.  but  let  him  that  glorieth,  glory  in  t.

16.21.  I  will  t.  once  cause  them  to  know  my  hand
22. 13.  was  not  /.  to  know  me,  saith  the  Lord  ?

21.  /.  hath  been  thy  manner  from  thy  youth

23.  26.  how  long  shall  t.  be  in  the  heart  of  prophets

31.  33.  t.  shall  be  the  covenant  that  I  will  make

32.8.  i  knew  that  /.  was  the  word  of  the  Lord

Lam.  3.  21.  /.  1  recall  to  mind,  therefore  I  hope

5. 17.  for  /.  our  heart  is  faint,  our  eyes  are  dim
Ezek.  8.  15.  he  said,  hast  thou  seen  /.  ?  17.  I  47-  6.

16.  49.  t.  was  tlve  iniquity  of  thy  sister  Sodom

20.  27.  in  t.  your  fathers  have  blasphemed  me

21.  26.  saith  the  Lord,  t.  shall  not  be  the  same

23.  11.  and  when  her  sister  Ahulibah  saw  t.

24.  24.  /.  cometh,  ye  shall  know,  33.  33.

36.  37.  I  will  yet  for  /.  be  inquired  of  by  Israel

44.  2.  /.  gate  shall  be  shut,  no  man  shall  enter
Dan.  6.5. shall  not  find  occasion  against /.Daniel, 28.
[[os.  7.  16.  /.  shall  be  their  derision  in  Egypt
Amos  4.  5.  /.  liketh  you,  O  children  of  Israel

7.  3.  the  Lord  repented  for  /.  it  shall  not  be,  6.

8.  8.  shall  not  the  land  tremble  for  /.  ?

9.  12.  saith  the  Lord  that  doth  /.

Jonah  4.  2.  was  not  /.  my  saying  in  my  country  ?
Zeph.  2.  10.  /.  shall  they  have  for  their  pride
Zech.  6. 15.  /.  shall  come  to  pass  if  ye  w  ill  obey  Lord


Zech.  14. 12.  z.  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith,  15.

19.  /.  shall  be  the  punishment  of  Egypt
Mai.  1.  9.  /.  hath  been  by  your  means

13.  should  I  accept  Z.  ot  your  hands  ?  saith  Lord

2.  12.  the  L.  will  cutoff  the  man  that  doth  /.

Mat.  12. 7.  but  if  ye  had  known  what  /.  meaneth
13.  55.  is  not  t.  the  carpenter’s  son  ?  Mark  6.  3.

Luke  4.  22.  John  6.  42.
16.  22.  saying.  Lord,  /.  shall  not  be  unto  thee
24.  43.  know  /.  that  if  the  good  man  of  the  house
had  known  in  what  watch,  Luke  12.  39.

26.  13.  shall  also  t.  that  /.  woman  hath  done
27-  54.  saying,  truly  /.  was  the  Son  of  God
28.  14.  and  it  z.  come  to  the  governor’s  ears
Mark  12.  31.  and  the  second  is  like,  namely,  /.

Luke  1.  18.  whereby  shall  l  know  /.  for  I  am  old
.34.  how  shall  /.  be,  seeing  1  know  not  a  man  ?

66.  saying,  what  manner  ot  child  shall  /.  be  ?

3. 20.  added  yet  z.  above  all,  that  he  shut  up  John

6.  3.  have  ye  not  read  so  much  as  /.  what  David

10.  11.  be  sure  of  /.  |i  20.  in  /.  rejoice  not

15.24.  /.  my  son  was  dead  and  is  alive  again

22. 17.  take  /.  and  divide  it  among  yourselves

37.  that  t.  must  yet  be  accomplished  in  me
23  .  47.  lertainly  /.  was  a  righteous  man
John  1.  15.  saying,  /.  was  he  of  whom  1  spake

2.  22.  his  disciples  remembered  he  had  said  /.

4.27.  on  /.  came  his  disciples,  and  marvelled

29.  is  not  /.  the  Christ  ?  J1  5.  28.  marvel  not  at  /.

6. 6.  /.he  said  to  prove  him,  for  he  himself  knew
7.25.  is  not  /.  he  whom  they  seek  to  kill  ?

8. 40.  /.  did  not  Abraham  ||  11.  26.  believest  thou  /.

11. 51.  /.  spake  he  not  of  himselt,  but  prophesied

12.  6.  /.  he  said,  not  that  he  cared  for  the  poor

13.  28.  for  what  intent  he  spake  /.  unto  him

35.  by  /.  shall  all  men  know  ye  are  my  discipies

15.  13.  greater  love  hath  no  man  than  /.

16.  30.  by  /.  we  believe  that  thou  earnest  from  God
Acts  1.11./.  Jesus  shall  so  come  in  like  manner

2  12.  what  meaneth/.?  ||  31.  he  seeing  /.  before

32.  /  Jesus  hath  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  all
3.3.  he  hath  shed  forth  /.  which  ye  now  see
37.  when  they  heard  /.  they  were  urieked

3.  12.  ye  men  of  Israel,  why  marvel  ye  at  /.  ?

5.24.  they  doubted  w  hereunto  /.  would  grow
6.14.  that/.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shalldestroy  /.  place
7.35.  /.  Moses  whom  they  refused, did  God  send

40.  as  for  /.  Moses,  we  wot  not  what  is  become

8.22.  repent  therefore  ot  /.  thy  wickedness
32.  the  place  of  scripture  w  hich  he  read  was  /.

9.  21.  is  not  /.  he  that  destroyed  them  which
13.  48.  w  hen  the  Gentiles  heard  /.  they  were  glad

15.  15.  to  /.  agree  the  words  ot  the  prophets

16.  18.  /.  did  she  many  days,  but  Paul  turned

19.5.  when  they  heard  /.  they  were  baptized
24.  14.  but/.  1  confess  to  thee,  that  after  the  way

Rom.  2.  3.  thinkest  thou  /.  O  man,  that  judgest

6.  6.  knowing  /.  that  our  old  man  is  crucified
9.  10.  not  only  /.  but  w  hen  Rebecca  conceived
15.  28.  when  therefore  1  have  performed  /.

1  Cor.  1.  12.  /.  I  say,  every  one  saith.  I  am  of  Paul

9.  3.  my  answer  to  them  that  examine  me  is  /.

11.  17.  in/,  that  1  declare  to  you,  I  praise  not

22.  shall  l  praise  you  in  /.?  I  praise  you  not

15.  34.  ha'  e  not  knowledge,  1  speak  /.  to  shame

2  Cor.  5.2.  in  /.  we  groan  earnestly,  desiring

7.  3.  I  speak  not  /.  to  condemn  you,  for  1  said

8.  5.  /.  they  did,  not  as  we  hoped,  but  first  gave

10.  7.  let  him  of  himself  think  /.  again,  11.

13.9.  and  /.  also  we  wish,  even  your  perfection

Gal.  3.  2.  /.  would  1  learn  of  you,  received  ye

5.  14.  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  even  in  /.
Lph.  4.  17.  /.  1  say  therefore,  and  testify  in  the  Lord
5.  5.  for  /.  ye  know-,  that  no  whoremonger
Phil.  1.9./.  1  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound
19.  I  know  that  /.  shall  turn  to  my  salvation
2  J'hess.  3. 10.  when  with  you,/,  we  commanded  you
1  Tim.  1.  9-  knowing  /.  Jam.  1. 3.  2  Pet.  1.20.  13.  3.

4.  16.  in  doing  /.  thou  shalt  both  sa'e  thy  self  and
Heb.  7.  21.  but/,  with  an  oath  ||  27.  /.  did  he  once

1  John  3.  10.  in  /.  the  children  of  God  are  manifest

4.  9.  in  /.  was  manifested  the  love  ot  God

5.2.  by  /.  we  know  that  we  love  children  of  God
Jude  5.  put  you  in  remembrance,  tho’  ye  once  kn.  /.
Rev.  2.6.  /.  thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  deeds
See  All,  After,  Book,  Cause,  Child,  City,
Day,  Doctrine,  Do,  Done,  Evil,  House,
Land,  Law,  Like,  Man,  Month,  People,
Thing,  Word,  World.

Is  THIS.

Gen.  3. 13.  Lord  said  to  the  woman,  what  if  /.  that
thou  hast  done  ?  12.  18.  I  26.  10.  |  29.  25.
24.65.  w  hat  man  is  t.  that  walketh  in  the  field  ?

42.  28.  what  is  t.  that  God  hath  done  unto  us  ?

43.  29.  is  t.  your  younger  brother,  of  whom

44.  15.  what  deed  is  t.  that  ye  have  done  ?

Exod.  13. 14.  saying,  what  is  t.  ?  Judg.  18.  24.

17.  3.  wherefore  is  t.  that  thou  hast  biought  us
Josh.  22.  16.  what  trespass  is  t.  ye  committed  ?
Judg.  15.11.  what  is  t.  thou  hast  done  '  2  Sam.  12.21.

20. 12.  what  wickedness  is  t.  done  among  you  ?

1  Sam.  10.  11.  what  is  t.  come  to  the  son  of  Kish  ?
24.  16.  Saul  said,  is  t.  thy  voice,  my  son  David  ?

2  Sam.  7.  19.  is  t.  the  manner  of  man,  O  Lord  God  ?

16.  17.  is  t.  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend  ?

2  Kings  18. 19.  what  confidence  1st.  wherein
Ezra  10. 13.  nor  is  t.  a  work  of  one  day  or  two
Job  .38.  2.  who  is  t.  that  darkeneth  counsel '

Cant.  3. 6.  who  is  t.  cometh  out  of  the  wilderness  ?

8. 5.  w  ho  is  t.  that  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness  ?
Isa.  23.7.  is  t.  your  joyous  city,  whose  antiquity
63.  1.  who  is  t.  that  cometh  from  Edom,  w  ith

Jer.  30.  21.  for  who  is  t.  that  engaged  his  heart  ?

46.  7.  who  is  t.  that  cometh  up  as  a  fiood  ?

Ezek.  16.  20.  is  t.  of  thy  whoredoms  a  smal  1  matter
Zech.  3.2.  is  not /.  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ?

5.  5.  and  see  what  is  /.  that  goeth  forth

Mat.  8.  27.  saying,  what  manner  ot  man  is  t.  that
the  winds  obey  him  ?  Mark  4.41.  Luke  8.25.

12.  23.  people  said,  is  not  /.  the  son  ot  David  ?

21 .  10.  who  is  t.  ?  ||  Mark  1 . 27  ■  what  thing  is  t  ?
Luke  1.  43.  whence  is  t.  to  me,  that  mother  of  my  L.


Luke  4.  36.  what  a  word  is  t.  with  auth.  he  t  pinnian.

5.  21.  who  is  t.  which  speaketh  blasphemies?

7.  49.  who  is  t.  that  torgiveth  sins  also  ?

9.  9.  but  who  is  t.  of  whom  I  hear  such  things?

20. 17.  he  said,  what  is  t.  then  that  it  is  written
John  7.  36.  what  manner  of  saying  is  t.  he  said
9.  19.  is  t.  your  son,  who  ye  say  was  born  blind  ?

16.  17.  what  is  t.  that  he  saith  unto  us?  18.

2  Cor.  1  12.  for  our  rejoicing  is  t.  the  testimony
Eph.  3. 8.  to  me  is  t.  grace  given,  to  preach  to  Gent.
Jam  1  27.  pure  religion  and  undefiled  1st.

THIS  is.

Gen.  2.  23.  Adam  said,  /.  is  now  bone  of  my  bones

20.  13.  /.  is  thy  kindness  which  thou  shalt  shew  me
28.  17.  Jacob  said,  /.  is  none  other  but  the  house
of  God,  and  /.  is  the  gate  ot  heaven

32.2.  when  Jacob  saw  them,  lie  said,  t,  is  God  s  host
41 . 38.  Pharaoh  said,  can  we  find  such  a  one  as  /.  is

48.  18.  not  so,  father,  for  /.  is  the  first  born
Exod  A  15. z.  is  my  name  for  ever,  and  my  memoria.

8.  19.  the  magicians  said,  t.  is  the  finger  of  God
16.  23.  /.  is  that  which  the  Lord  hath  said

Lev.  10.  3.  /.  is  that  the  Lord  spake,  saying
Num.  8.  24.  /.  is  it  that  belongeth  to  the  Levites

18.  11.  and  /.  is  thine,  the  heave  offering  of  gift
Ueut.  13.  11.  do  no  more  such  wickedness  as  /.  is
15.  2.  and  /.  is  the  manner  of  the  release
1  Sam.  16.  12.  arise,  anoint  him,  for  /.  is  he

1  Kings  11.  11.  forasmuch  as  /.  is  done  of  thee

13.  3.  /.  is  the  sign  which  the  Lord  hath  spoken

2  Kings  3.  18.  /.  is  but  a  light  thing  in  sight  of  L.

6.  19.  /.  is  not  the  way,  neither  is  this  the  city

8.  5.  O  king,  /.  is  the  woman,  and  /.  is  her  son

9.  37.  so  that  they  shall  not  say,  /.  is  Jezebel
2  Chron.  28.  22.  /.  is  that  king  Ahaz

Neh.  2.  2.  /.  is  nothing  but  sorrow  of  heart

9.  18.  /.  Hthy  God  that  brought  thee  out  of  Egyi*
Job  8.  19.  behold,  /.  is  (he  joy  of  his  way

10.  13.  1  know  that/,  is  with  thee

18.  21.  /.  is  the  place  of  him  that  knoweth  not  God

20.  29.  /.  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man,  27. 13.
Psal.  24. 6.  /.  L  the  generation  of  them  that  seek  hnn
68.  16.  /.  is  the  hill  God  desireth  tp dwell  in

77.  10.  /.  is  my  infirmity,  but  I  will  remember
109.  27.  that  they  may  know  that/,  if  thy  hand

118.  23.  /.  is  the  Lord’s  doing,  Mat.  21.  42.

119.  50.  /.  is  my  comfort  in  mine  affliction

132.  14.  /.  is  my  rest  for  ever,  here  will  l  dwell
Eccl.  1. 10.  whereof  it  may  be  said,  see,  t.  is  new

5.  19.  to  rejoice  in  labour,  /.  is  the  gift  ot  God

12.  13.  far  /.  if  the  whole  duty  ot  man

Cant.  5.  16.  /.if  my  beloved,  and  /.  is  my  friend
Isa.  12.  5.  sing  to  Lord,  /.  is  known  in  all  the  earth

25.  9.  lo,  /.  if  our  God,  we  have  waited  tor  him

27.  9.  /.  if  all  the  fruit,  to  take  away  his  sin

28.  12.  /.  if  the  rest,  and  /.  if  the  refreshing

30.  21.  saying,  /.  if  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it
54.  9.  for  /.  if  as  the  waters  of  Noah  unto  me

17.  /.  if  the  heritage  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord
59.21.  as  forme,  /.  is  my  covenant  with  them
Jer.  4.  18.  /.  if  thy  wickedness,  it  is  bitter

7.  28.  /.  if  a  nation  that  obeyeth  not  the  Lord

10.  19.  t.  if  a  grief  H  13.  25.  f.  if  thy  lot

23.  6.  /.  if  the  name  whereby  be  shall  be  called,
The  Lord  our  Righteousness,  33.  10.

30. 17.  /.  if  Zion,  whom  iio  manseeketh  alter
Ezek.  5.  5.  /.  if  Jerusalem,  I  set  it  in  the  midst  ot
19  14.  /.  if  a  lamentation,  and  shall  be  for  a  lain.

31.  18.  /.  if  Pharaoh  and  all  his  multitude
Dan.  5.  25.  /.  if  the  writing  that  was  written
Mic.  2.  10.  arise,  depart,  for  /.  if  not  your  rest
Zeph.  2.  15.  /.  if  the  rejoicing  city  that  dwelt
Zech.  5.  3.  /.  if  the  curse  that  goeth  forth

6.  he  said,  /.  is  an  ephah  ||  8.  Z.  is  wickedness
Mat.  3.  3.  for  /.  is  he  that  was  spoken  of  by  Esaias

17./.  if  my  beloved  Son,  17 .5.  Mark  9.7 .Luke  9.35.
7.  12.  tor  /.  if  the  law  and  the  prophets

1 1 . 10.  /.  if  he  of  whom  it  is  written,  Luke  7.  27 .

14.  /.  if  Elias  which  was  for  to  come

13.  19.  /.  if  he  had  received  seed  by  the  wav

19.  26.  Jesus  said,  with  men  /.  if  impossible

21.  38.  /.  is  the  heir,  Mark  12.  7-  Luke  20.  14.

22.  38.  /.  if  the  first  commandment,  Mark  12.
26.26.  Jesus  said,  take,  eat,  /.  is  my  body

28.  /.  if  my  blood,  Mark  14.  22,  24.  Luke  22.

20.  1  Cor.  11.  24.  25.
Mark  14.  69.  /.  if  one  of  them,  and  he  denied  auain
Luke  7.  39.  have  known  what  mannerof  woman  /.  is

22.  53.  /.  if  your  hour  and  the  power  ot  darkness
John  1.  19.  and  /.  if  the  record  of  John
30.  /.  is  he  of  whom  I  said,  after  me  cometh  a  man
34.  I  bare  record  that  /.  if  the  Son  ot  God

3.  19.  /.  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come

4.  42.  that  /.  if  indeed  the  Christ,  7.  26,  41.

6.  29.  /.  if  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe
39.  /.  is  the  Father's  will  which  sent  me,  40.

50.  /.  is  tlie  bread  which  cometh  from  heaven

58.  /.  if  that  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven
60.  /.  if  an  hard  saying,  who  can  hear  it 3
9.  9.  some  said,  /.  if  he  ||  20.  we  know  /.  if  our  son

15.  12.  /.  if  my  commandment,  that  ve  love

17.3.  /.  if  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know
Acts  2. 16.  /.  if  that  which  was  spoken  by  Joel

7.  37.  /.  is  that  Moses  which  said  unto  Israel

38.  /.  if  he  that  was  in  the  church  in  wilderness

9. 22.  Saul  increased,  proving  that  /.  if  very  Christ
Rom.  11. 27.  /.  if  my  covenant,  Heb.  8. 10.  |  10.  16.

1  Cor.  1 1.  20.  /.  if  not  to  eat  the  Lord’s  supper
Eph.  6.  1.  obey  vour  parents,  for  /.  is  right
Phil.  1.  22.  if  I  live,/,  if  the  fruit  ot  my  labour
l.  3.  20.  for  /.  if  well  pleasing  to  the  Lord
'J'hess.  4.  3.  for  /.  if  the  will  of  God,  5.  18.

Tim.  1.15.  /.  if  a  faithful  saying,  3. 1. 1  4.9.  Ti/.3.8
2.  3.  for  /.  if  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God
Pet.  2.  19.  /.  if  thank  worthy,  if  a  man  endure
20.  take  patiently,  /.  is  acceptable  with  God
John  1.5./.  is  the  message  w  e  have,  3.  1 1 .

2.  25.  and  /.  if  the  promise,  even  eternal  life

3.23.  /.  if  his  commandment,  that  we  should  believt

4. 3.  and  /.  if  that  spirit  of  antichrist

5.  3.  /.  if  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  com.
4.  and  /.  is  the  victory,  even  our  faith

509


30.

19,


T  H  O


T  H  O


THU


1  John  5.  6.  /.  is  he  that  came  by  water  anrl  blood
y.  t.  is  the  witness  of  God  which  he  testified

11.  /.  is  the  record,  that  God  hath  given  life
14.  t.  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  him

20.  t.  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life

2  John  6.  t.  is  love  that  we  walk  after  his  command.
7.  /.  is  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist

Rev.  20.5.  years  were  finished,  t.  is  the  first  restin'.
14.  into  lake  of  fire,  /.  is  the  second  death
TMISl'LE.

2  Kings  14.  9.  the  /.  that  was  in  Lebanon,  a  wild
beast  trod  down  the  /.  2  C '/iron.  25.  18.
Uos.  10. 8.  thorn  and  t.  shall  come  up  on  their  altars
THISTLES.

Gen.  3.  18.  thorns  and  t.  shall  it  bring  forth
Job  31.  40.  let  t.  grow  instead  of  wheat
Mat.  7.  16.  do  men  gather  figs  of  t.  ?

LTll  1  IIEK.

Gen.  19.  20.  this  city  is  near,  oh  let  me  escape  t.
22.  haste  thee,  escape  t.  till  thou  be  come  t.

21.  6.  that  thou  bring  not  my  son  t.  again,  8.
t'.xod.  26.  33.  that  thou  mayest  bring  in  t.  the  ark
Num.  35.  6.  that  the  slayer  may  flee  t.  11.  15.  Deut.

4.  42.  |  19.  3,  4.  Josh.  20.  3,  y.
Deut.  1.  37.  saying,  thou  shalt  not  go  in  t.  38,  39.

12.  5.  unto  his  habitation,  t.  thou  shalt  come
6  t.  ye  shall  bring  your  burnt-offerings,  11.

Judg.  8.  27.  Israel  went  t.  a  whoring  after  it

9.  51.  and  t.  fled  all  the  men  and  women

1  Sam.  2.  14.  so  they  did  to  Israelites  that  came  /.

5.  8.  and  they  carried  the  ark  of  God  about  t.

10.  22.  they  inquired  if  the  man  should  come  1.

1  Kings  6.  7.  make  ready  before  it  was  brought  t.

2  Kings  2.  8.  waters  were  divided  hither  and  t.  14.
4.8.  Elisha  turned  in  t.  to  eat  bread,  II.

5.  t  25.  she  said,  thy  servant  went  not  hither  and  1.

6.  9.  for  t.  tlie  Syrians  are  come  down

17.  27-  saying,  carry  t.  one  of  the  priests  whom
Neh.  4.  20.  resort  ye  t.  to  us,  God  shall  fight  for  us

13.  9.  t.  brought  1  again  the.  vessels  of  the  house
Job  6.  20.  they  came  t.  and  were  ashamed

Isa.  55.  10.  the  rain  returneth  not  t.  again
Jer.  22.  11.  he  shall  not  return  t.  any  more
27-  but  to  the  land,  t.  shall  they  not  return
Ezek.  1.  20.  they  went,  t.  was  their  spirit  to  go

11.  18.  Israel  shall  come  t.  and  shall  take  away
47.  9.  because  these  waters  shall  come  t.

Joel  3.  11.  t.  cause  thy  mighty  ones  to  come  dow  n
Mat.  2.  22.  he  was  afraid  to  go  t.  but  being  warned
Luke  17.  37.  t.  w  ill  the  eagles  be  gathered  together
John  7.  .34.  where  I  am,  t.  ye  cannot  come,  36.

11.  8.  to  stone  thee,  and  goest  thou  t.  again  f

18.  2.  Jesus  oft-times  resorted  t.  w  ith  his  disciples

3.  Judas  cometh  t.  with  lanterns  and  torches

Acts  8.  .30.  Philip  ran  t.  to  him,  and  heard  him

16.  13.  spake  to  the  women  which  resorted  t.

Till  THKItWAR D.

Judg.  18.  15.  turned  t.  and  came  to  Micah’s  house
Jer.  50.  5.  ask  the  way  to  Zion,  with  their  faces  t.
THONGS.

Acts  22.  25.  as  they  bound  him  with  t.  Paul  said
THORN

Is  a  prickly  shrub  well  known.  It  was  with  thorns
that  Gideon  chastised  the  men  of  Succor h,  who
refused  to  relieve  his  army,  when  they  were  pur¬
suing  Zebu  and  Zalmunna,  two  kings  of  Midian,
Judg.  8.  7,  16.  hither  he  chastised  or  beat  their
naked  bodies  with  thorny  rods  till  they  died ;  or
he  laid  them  down  upon  thorns,  on  the  ground,
and  brought  the  cart  wheel  upon  them,  which
did  both  tear  their  fiesh,  and  bruise  them  to
death.  Thoms  are  pvt  for  great  difficulties  and
impediments.  Job  5.  5.  Whose  harvest  the  linn
gry  eateth  up,  and  taketh  it  even  out  of  the
thorns.  And  m  Hos.  2.  6.  1  will  hedge  up
♦hy  way  with  thorns;  /  will  bring  th  e  into
traits  and  difficulties.  It  is  likewise  put  for  the
heat  of  a  fire  kindled  by  thorns.  Psal.  58.  9.
Before  your  pots  can  feel  the  thorns.  St.  Paul
says,  2  (  or.  12.  7-  that  lest  he  should  have  been
exalted  above  measure,  through  the  abundance  of
the  revelations  which  he  had,  there  was  given  to
him  a  thorn  in  the  fiesh,  that  is,  some  racking
pain  in  his  body;  or  terrors  of  conscience,  or
some  diabolical  violent  temptation.

The  Lord  told  the  Israelites;  that  such  of  the  in¬
habitants  of  Canaan,  as  the}  should  let  remain
in  the  land,  would  he  pricks  m  their  eyes  and
thorns  in  their  sides  ;  that  is,  they  would  be  very
hurtful  and  pernicious  to  them,  Num.  33.  55.
The  wicked  are  compared  to  thorns,  not  only  be¬
cause  of  their  barrenness,  and  unprofitableness  m
any  thing  that  is  good.  Mat.  ~.  16,  19.  Ho  men
gather  grapes  of  thorns '{  But  also  because  of
their  pernicious  hurtful  disposition  towards  the
church  and  people  of  God.  Josh.  2.3.  1.3.  Ezek.
28.  .21.  J  o  sow  among  thorns,  is  to  preach  the
word  to  worldly  and  carnal  hearts.  Mat.  13.  7,

22.  Many  are  deluded,  and  betrayed  to  a  neglect
oj  their  souls,  through  an  excessive  care  about
getting,  keeping,  and  managing  their  estates ;  so
that  prosperity  is  their  snare.  'The  soldiers,  to
insult  our  Saviour,  and  to  despise  his  royalty,
platted  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  put  it  upon  his
head,  Mat.  27.  29.  Thorns  were  the  fruit  of  the
curse  for  man's  sin.  Gen.  3.  18.  Christ  bears
our  curse,  and  takes  it  away  from  us.

2  Citron.  25.  t  18.  t.  in  Lebanon,  sent  to  the  cedar
Job  41 . 2.  caust  thou  bore  his  jaw  through  with  a  t.  ?
Drov.  26.  9.  as  a  t.  goeth  iuto  the  hand  of  a  drunkard
Jsa.  55.  13.  instead  of  the  t.  shall  come  the  fir-tree
Lzek.  28.  24.  there  shall  be  no  more  any  grieving  t.
Dos.  lo.  8.  the  t.  shall  come  up  on  their  altars
Mic.  7 .  4.  the  most  upright  is  sharper  than  a  t.  hedge
2  Cor.  12.  7.  there  was  given  to  me  a  t.  in  the  flesh
THORNS.

Gen.  .3.  18.  t.  arid  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  thee
Lxod.  22.  6.  il  fire  break  o>’t  and  catch  in  t.

Num.  33. 55.  they  shall  k. «.  in  your  sides,  Judg.  2.3.
Josh.  2  3.  13.  hut  they  shall  i-e  t.  in  your  eves
2  Sam.  23.  6.  the  sons  of  Pelial  shall  he  as  t.

£  Citron.  33.  II.  which  took  Alanasseh  among  the  t.

510


Ps.  58.  9.  before  your  pots  can  feel  the  t.  take  them

118.  12.  they  are  quenched  as  the  tire  of/.

Prov.  15.  19.  way  of  slothful  man  is  an  hedge  of  /.
22.  5.  t.  and  snares  are  in  the  way  of  the  fro  ward
24.  31.  and  lo  it  was  all  grown  over  with  /.

Eccl.  7.  6.  as  the  crackling  of  t.  under  a  pot
Cant.  2.  2.  as  the  lily  among/,  so  is  my  love

Isa.  7.  19.  they  shall  rest  upon  all  t.  and  bushes

33.  12.  as  t.  cut  up  shall  they  be  burnt  in  fire

34.  13.  and  t.  shall  come  up  in  her  palaces

Jer.  4.3.  break  your  ground,  and  sow  not  among/.

12.  1.3.  they  have  sown  wheat,  but  shall  reap  /.
Hos.  2.  6.  behold,  l  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  /.
9.  6.  /.  shall  he  in  their  tabernacles

Nah.  1. 10.  while  they  be  folden  together  as /.

Mat.  7.  16.  do  men  gather  grapes  of  /.  ?  Luke6.  44.

13.  7.  fell  among  /.  22.  Mark  4.  7,  18.  Luke  8.  7,  14.
27.  29.  when  they  had  platted  a  crown  of/,  they

put  it  on  Ins  head,  Mark  15.  17.  John  19.  2.
See  Briers.

THOROW,  See  Through.

L  HOSE.

Gen.  33.  5.  Esau  said,  who  are  /.  with  thee.'1
1  Kings  2.  7.  let  them  be  of/,  that  eatat  thy  table
9.  21.  upon  t.  did  Solomon  levy  a  tribute
Ezra  1.8.  t.  did  Cyrus  king  of  Persia  bring  forth
Esth.  9.  5.  did  w  hat  they  would  to  t.  that  hated  them
Job  5.  11.  to  set  up  on  high  /.  that  he  low
21.  22.  seeing  hejudgeth  t.  that  are  high
24.  13.  they  are  of  t.  that  rebel  against  the  light
19.  sodotli  the  grave  t.  whi  h  have  sinned
27. 15.  t.  that  remain  of  him  shall  be  buried  in  death
Psal.  .37.  9.  t.  1  hat  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  inherit

50.5. /.  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me
92.  13.  /.  planted  in  house  of  Lord  shall  flourish

119.  79.  let  /.  that  fear  thee  turn  to  me, and  /.  that

have  known  thy  testimonies
132.  as  thou  usedst  to  do  to  /.that  love  thy  name
139.  21.  am  not  1  grieved  w  ith  /.  that  rise  up
Prov.  8.  >7-  /.  that  seek  me  early  shall  find  me
Ectl.  1.  ll.  with/,  that  shall  come  after
Isa.  35.  8.  an  high  way,  hut  it  shall  be  for  /.

64.5.  /.  that  remember  thee  in  thy  ways,  in  those

is  continuance,  we  shall  he  saved
Jer.  27.  11.  /.  will  I  let  remain  in  their  land
Dan.  4.  37.  /.  that  walk  in  pride  he  is  able  to  abase
Zeph.  1 . 6.  and  /.  that  have  not  sought  the  l.ord
Mat.  16.2.3.  thou  savourest  /.  things  that  be  of  men
Luke  7-  28.  among  /.  that  are  born  of  woman

19.  27.  but  /.  mine  enemies  bring  hither  and  slay
John  8.  10.  woman,  where  are  /.  thine  accusers?

17.  11.  keep  thro’  thy  name  /.  thou  hast  given  me
12.  /.  that  thou  gavest  me  I  have  kept,  none  lost

Act -  3.  24.  from  Samuel  and  /.  that  follow  after
1  Cor.  14.2.3.  there  come  in  t.  that  are  unlearned
Phi}.  3.  7-  what  things  gain,  /.  I  counted  loss  for  Ch.

1  Tim.  4.  10.  Saviour,  especially  of /.  that  believe
Heb.  5.  14.  belongeth  to  /.  w  ho  by  reason  of  use

2  Pet.  2.  6.  an  ensample  to  /.  that  live  ungodly
18.  they  allure  t.  that  were  clean  escaped

See  Days,  Things.

I  HOU.  [me

Gen.  3.  12.  the  woman  whom  /.  gavest  to  be  with

20.  7.  if  not  restore,  know  thou,  that  /.  shalt  surely

die,  /.  and  all  that  are  thine,  1  Sam.  22.  16.
24.  60.  /.  art  our  sister,  be  /.  mother  of  thousands

26.  29.  t.  art  now  the  blessed  of  the  Lord

41.  .39.  there  is  none  so  discreet  and  wise  as  /.  art
40.  only  in  the  throne  will  1  be  greater  than /.

45.  10.  t.  shalt  be  near  to  me,  /.  and  thy  childr.

49.  8.  /.  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise
Prod.  19.  21.  /.  shalt  come  up,  t.  and  Aar.  with  thee
Num.  16.  11.  /.  and  all  the  company  are  gathered
16.  he  /.  and  they,  and  Aaron  before  the  Lord
Deut.  5.  14.  that  thy  servant  may  rest  as  well  as  /,

7.  1.  hath  cast  out  nations  mightier  than  /.  20.  1.

13.  6  t.  hast  not  known,/,  nor  thy  fathers,  28.  64.

30.  19.  that  both  /.  and  thy  seed  may  live

1  Sam.  15.28.  to  a  neighbour  that  is  better  than  /.

24.  17.  he  said,/,  art  more  righteous  than  1

25.  .3.3.  blessed  be  /.  that  kept  me  from  coming

2  Sam.  12.  7.  Nathan  said  to  David,  /.  art  the  man
15.2.  then  Absalom  said,  of  what  city  art  t.?

19.  29.  I  have  said,  /.  and  Ziba  divide  the  land

1  Kings  8.  39.  /.  even  /.  knowest  the  hearts  of  all

18.  18.  /.and  thy  father’s  house  trouble  Israel

20.  14.  w  ho  shall  order  the  battle  ?  he  said,  /.

2  Kings  9.  25.  that  when  I  and  /.  rode  after  Ahab

14.  10.  w  hy  meddle,  that  t.  shouldest  fall,  even  t.

and  Judah  with  thee  ?  2  Chron.  25.  19.

19.  15.  t.  art  the  God,  even  /.  alone  of  all  the

kingdoms,  19.  Neh.  9.  6.  Isa.  37  .  20.
Neh.  9.  17.  but  /.  art  a  God  ready  to  pardon
Esth.  4.  14.  but  /.  and  thy  father’s  house  shall  be
^destroyed,  who  knoweth  whether/.  art  come
Job  35.  5.  the  clouds  which  are  higher  than  /.

Psal.  23.  4.  1  will  fear  no  evil,  for  /.  art  with  me
55.  13.  but  it  was  /.  a  man,  mine  equal,  my  guide
71.6./.  art  he  that  took  me  out  my  mother’s  bowels
76.  7.  t.  even  /.  art  to  be  feared,  and  who  may
stand  in  thy  sight  when  once  /.  art  angry  3
83.  18.  /.  w  hose  name  is  Jehovah,  art  most  high
102.  27.  but/,  art  the  same,  thy  years  have  no  end
109.  27.  they  may  know,  that’/.  Ed.  hast  done  it

118.  28.  /.  art  my  God,  and  I  will  praise  thee

119.  114. /.  art  my  hiding-place  and  my  shield
132.  8.  arise  into  thy  rest,  /.  and  ark  of  thy  strength
139.  8.  if  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,  t.  art  there

Cant.  1.  7.  tell  mej  O  /.  whom  my  soul  loveth
l'a.  41.  9.  1.  art  my  servant.  I  have  chosen  thee

44.  17.  and  saith,  deliver  me,  for  t.  art  my  god

45.  15.  verily  /.  art  a  god  that  hidest  thyself

51 . 12.  who  art  t.  that  /.  shouldest  be  afraid  of  man
63.  16.  t.  art  our  father,  /.  O  Lord,  ai  t  our  father
65.  5.  come  not  near  to  me,  1  am  holier  than  /.

Jer.  17.  4.  /.  shalt  discontinue  from  thy  heritage

20.  6.  there  /.  shalt  die,  /.  and  all  thy  friends

27.  13.  why  will  ye  die,  /.and  thy  people,  by  sword
Lam.  5.  19.  /.  O  E.  remainest  for  ever,  thy  throne
Ezek. 7. 7.  ()  /.  thatdwellest  in  the  land,  the  *'me

16.  52.  they  are  more  righteous  than  /.

Dan.  4.22.  it  is  /.  O  king,  that  art  become  strong


Dan.  5.22.  /.  his  son  ,  bast  not  humbled  thine  heart
Jonah  1.  8.  whence  comest  /.of  what  peopleart  /.  ?
Mic.  2.  7-  O  /.  that  art  named  the  house  of  Jacob-

4.  8.  /. O  tower  of  the  flock,  to  thee  shall  it  come
Hah.  1.  12.  art  /.  not  from  everlasting,  O  Eord  ?
Zech.  4. 7.  who  art /.  O  great  mountain, before  Zerub-
Mat.  6.  6.  but  /.  when  /.  prayest,  enter  thy  closet

17.  but  /.  when  /.  fastest,  anoint  thine  heart
16.  16.  /.  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God-
Mark  8.  29.  Luke  4.  41.  John  \  1.  27  ‘

26.  39.  nevertheless,  not  as  1  will,  but  as  /  wilt
69.  saying  /.  also  wast  with  Jesus,  Mark  14  67
Luke  1.  28.  hail  /.  that  art  highly  favoured
7-  19.  saying,  art  /.  he  that  should  come  ?  20.

14.  8.  lest  a  more  honourable  than  /.  be  bidden
16.  5.  he  said,  how  much  owest  /.  unto  my  lord  -  7

25.  /.  in  thy  life  time  receivedst  thy  good  thing*
hut  now  he  is  comforted,  and  /.  art  tormentec

19.  42.  if/,  hadst  known,  even  /.  in  this  thy  dav
John  1.  19.  to  ask  him,  who  art/.  22.  I  8.25.  |  2).  12:

21.  they  asked,  art  /.  Elias  -  art/,  that  prophet
42.  /.  art  Simon,  thou  shalt  he  called  Cephas

3.  10.  art  /.  a  master  of  Israel,  and  knowest  not

4.  9.  that  /.  being  a  Jew,  askest  drink  of  me

7.  52.  they  said  to  him,  art  /.  also  of  Galilee  ?

8i  5.  but  what  sayest  /.  ?  ||  9.  28.  /.  art  his  disciple
9  37.  /.  hast  seen  him,  and  he  talketh  with  thee

17.23.  1  in  them,  and /.  in  me, that  they  may  be  perf

18.  17.  art  not  /.  one  of  this  man’s  disciples  •

Acts  1.24.  /.  Eord,  who  knowest  the  hearts  of  all

8.  23.  that  t.  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  bond

11.  14.  whereby  /.and  thy  house  shall  be  saved
13.  10.  /.  child  of  the  devil,  /.  enemy,  wilt  /.  not

cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  l.ord*
.33.  /.  art  my  son,  this  day  have  fhegotten  thee
21.. ‘38.  art  not /.  that  Egyptian  which  madest
22.27-  tell  me,  art  /.  a  Roman  ?  he  said,  yea

26.  29.  I  would,  that  not  only /.  but  all  that  hear
Kom.  2.  21.  /.  therefore  which  teachest  another

1  Tim.  4.  12.  but  be  /.  an  example  of  the  believer*
6.  11.  but  /.  O  man  of  God,  flee  these  things

2  ’Tim.  1.8.  be  not  /.  ashamed  of  the  testimony
2.  1.  /.  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  grace
Phi  tern.  12.  /.  therefore  receive  him  that  is  mine
Ileh.  l.  10./.  l  ord,  hast  laid  foundation  of  earth

12.  they  shall  be  changed,  but/,  art  the  same
Jam.  4.  12.  who  art  /.  that  judgest  another  3

Kev.  4.  11.  /.  art  worthy,  O  l.ord,  to  receive  glory

5.  9.  /.  art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  to  open

See  A  lon  e.

THOUGH.

Gen.  40. 10  and  the  vine  was  as  /.  it  budded
Lev.  5.  17.  t  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty

25.  .35.  thou  shalt  relieve  him,  /.  he  be  a  stranger
Deut.  29.  19%/.  i  walk  in  the  imagination  of  heart?
Josh.  17. 18.  for  thou  shalt  drive  out  Canaanites,  t.

they  have  iron  chariots  and  /.  they  be  strong-
Judg.  13.  16.  /.  thou  detain  me,  l  will  not  eat

15.  7.  /•  ye  have  done  this,  yet  will  I  be  avenged
Ruth  2.  13.  /.  not  like  one  of  thy  handmaidens

1  Sam.  14.  .39.  /.  it  be  in  Jonathan,  he  shall  die

20.  20.  1  will  shoot  arrows,  as  t.  1  shot  at  a  mark

21.  5.  /.  it  were  sanctified  this  day  in  the  vessel

2  Sam.  .3.  .39.  I  am  this  day  weak,  ’/.  anointed  kin«
18.  12./.  I  should  receive  a  thousand  shekels

Neh.  1.9.  t.  there  were  of  you  cast  out  to  uttermost
Job  \3.  15./.  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him
20.  12.  t.  wickedness  be  sweet  in  his  mouth

27.  8.  what  the  hypocrite’s  hope,  /.  he  hath  gained*

16.  /.  he  heap  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  prepare
Psal.  35.  14.  as  /.  he  had  been  my  friend  or  brother

37.24.  /.  he  fall,  he  shall  not  utterly  be  cast  down-
138.  6.  /.  the  Eord  be  high,  yet  hath  he  respect

Prov.  11.  21.  /.  hand  join  in  hand,  16.  5.

28.  6.  than  he  that  is  perverse,  /.  he  be  rich

29.  19.  /.  he  understand,  he  will  not  answer

Isa.  35.8.  the  way-faring  men  /.  tools,  shall  not  en
45.  4.  sirnatned  thee,  /.  thou  hast  not  known  me,  5,
lam.  .3.32.  /.  he  cause  grief,  he  will  have  com  pass  i’ot>
Ezek.  2.  6.  t.  briers  and  thorns  be  with  thee,  t.  thev
be  a  rebellious  house,  .3.  9.  |  12.  %
14.  14.  /.  these  three  men  were  in  it.  16,  18.  20.

26.  21.  /.  thou  be  sought  for,  yet  never  be  found
Dan.  5.  22.  not  humbled,  /.  thou  knewest  all  tins
Mic.  5. 2.  /.  thou  be  little  among  thousands  of  Juiiab
Nah.  1.  12./.  they  be  quiet,  and  likewise  many
llab.  1.  5.  ye  will  not  believe,  /.  it  be  told  vou

2.  3.  /.  it  tarry,  wait  for  it,  it  will  surely  come
Mat.  26.  35.  /.  I  should  die  with  thee,  yet  not  deny
Luke  9.53.  face  was  as  /.  he  would  go  to  Jerusalem
18.  7.  avenge  his  elect,  /.  he  bear  long  with  them
24.  28.  he  made  as  /.  he  would  have  gone  further
John  8.  6.  wrote  on  the  ground,  as  /.  he  heard  not
10.38.  /.  ve  believe  not  me,  believe  the  works

11.25.  t.  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live

Acts  3.  12.  as  /.  by  our  power  we  made  him  walk-

13.  41.  ye  shall  not  believe,  /.  a  man  declare  it
17-  25.  as  t.  he  needed  any  thing,  seeing  lie  gives

27.  t.  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us

23.  15.  as  t.  ye  would  inquire  something,  20.

28.  4.  whom  /.  he  hath  escaped  the  sea,  yet  veng
Kom.  4.  17.  things  which  be  not,  as  /.  they  were

7 . 3.  she  is  no  adulteress,  /.she  is  married  to  another*

1  Cor.  7.29.  that  have  wives,  be  as/,  they  had  none

30.  as  /.they  wept  not,  as  /.  they  rejoiced  not

2  Cor.  4.  16.  hut  /.  ouroutward  man  perish,  yet

8.  9.  t.  he  was  rich,  yet  for  us  he  became  poor

10.3.  tor  /.  we  walk  in  the  flesh,  we  do  not  war

12.  11.  in  nothin'/  am  I  behind.  /.  1  be  nothing

13.  7-  do  what  is  honest,  t.  we  he  as  reprobates
Gal.  1.8./.  we  or  an  angel  preach  another  gospe

4  1.  heir  differeth  nothing  /.  he  be  lord  of  all
Phil.  3.  4.  /.  I  might  also  have  confidence  in  flesh-
12.  not  as  t.  I  had  attained  or  were  perfect
Col.  2.  5.  for  /.  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh,  yet  am  ?

20.  why,  as  /.  I  iving,  are  ye  subject  to  ordinances
Heb.  5.  it.  /.  lie  were  a  son,  yet  learned  obedience

6.  9.  are  persuaded  better  things,  /.  we  thus  spenk
12.  17.  /.  he  sought  it  caiefnlly  with  tears

Jam.  2. 1 4. /.a  man  say  he  Imth  faith,  and  nor  wO'ks

1  Pet  4.  12.  as  r.  seme  strange  Ihing  happened

2  /V/. 1.12. put  y  on  in  remembrance,/. ye  know  then


THO


THO


THO

Jude  5.  put  vou  in  remembrance,  /.  ye  once  <new  th.

THOUGHT.  .  .

Oen.  CO.  11.1  /.  the  fear  of  God  is  not  in  this  place
38  15  Judah  saw  her,  lie  /.  her  to  be  an  harlot
48.  11.  Israel  said,  l  had  not  /.  to  see  thy  face
58.  ‘20.  but  as  for  you,  ye  t.  evil  against  me
Exod.  32.  14.  Lord  repented  ot  the  evil  he  t.  to  do
Num.  24. 11.  1  /.  to  promote  thee  to  great  honour
*33. 56.  1  shall  do  unto  you,  as  1  /.  to  do  to  them
Deni.  10.19.  shall  ye  do  to  him,  as  he  t.  to  havedone
Judy.  15.  2.  I  verily  /.  that  thou  hadst  hated  her

20.  5.  tlie  men  of  Gibeah  /.  to  have  slain  me

3  Sam.  1.  13.  therefore  EH  /.  she  had  been  drunken
18.25.  Saul  t.  to  make  David  fall  by  Philistines
2  Sam.  4.  10.  who  /.  I  would  have  given  him  a  rew.
13.2.  Amtion  /.  it  hard  to  do  any  thing  to  her

21.  16.  Ishbi-benob  /.  to  have  slain  David

2  Kings  5.  11.  1  /.he  will  surely  come  out  to  me
£  Chron.  11. 22.  Relvoboam  /.  to  make  Abijah  king
32.  1.  Sennacherib  /.  to  win  them  tor  himself
Neh.  6.  2.  but  they  t.  to  do  me  mischief
Esth.  .3.6.  he  t.  scorn  to  lay  hands  on  Morrlecai  alone
6. 6.  Hainan  /.  in  his  heart,  to  whom  would  the  king
Psal.  48.  9.  we  have  /.  of  thy  loving  kindness
7.3. 16.  when  1  /.  to  know  this,  it  was  too  painful
1 19. 59. 1  /.  on  my  ways,  and  turned  my  teet  to  test.
Prov.  .30.  32.  if  thou  hast  /.  evil,  lay  thine  hand
Isa.  14.  24.  as  I  have  /.  so  shall  it  come  to  pass
Jer.  18.8.  1  will  repent  of  the  evil  I  /.  to  do
Jonah  1.  +4.  so  that.  the.  ship  was  /.  to  be  broken
Zech.  1.6.  like  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  /.  to  do  to  us
8.  14.  as  l  (.  to  punish  you  l|  15.  1  /.  to  do  well
Mai.  .3.  16.  a  book  for  them  that  /.  on  his  name
Mat.  1.  20.  but  while  he  t.  on  these  things
Mark  14.  72.  and  when  he  t.  thereon  he  wept
j Luke  7.  7.  nor  t.  1  myself  worthy  to  come  to  thee
12. 17.  he  t.  within  himself,  what  shall  1  do

19. 11.  they  /.the  kingdom  of  God  should  appear
John  U.  13.  they  t.  he  had  spoken  of  taking  rest
Acts  8.  20.  t.  the  gift  of  God  ma.v  be  purchased
10. 19.  while  Peter  t.  on  the  vision,  Spirit  said
12.  9. wist  not  it  was  true,  but  t.  he  saw  a  vision
15.38.  Paul  t.  not  good  to  take  him  with  him
26.8.  why  should  it  be  /.  a  thing  incredible  ?

9. 1 1.  1  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  .1  esus
(1  Cor.  1.3. 11.  when  1  was  a  child,  1  /.  as  a  child
Phil. 2.  6.  t.  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God
Heb  10. 29.  much  sorer  punishment  he  be  t.  worthy

TI-IOUGHTEST.

Psal.  50.21.  thou  t.  1  was  such  a  one  as  thyself

THOUGHT,

Or  thinking,  is  not  always  taken  for  the  pure  ope¬
ration  of  the  mind  while  it  thinks ,  without  pass¬
ing  a  judgment,  or  taking  any  resolution.  The
thought  often  includes  a  formed  design  of  doing
something,  as  in  Psal.  56.  5.  All  their  thoughts
are  against  me  for  evil :  Their  purposes  and  reso¬
lutions  are  to  do  me  mischief.  Ho  in  Prov.  12.  5.
The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  are  right :  His  con¬
stant  purpose  is  to  deal  justly  and  truly.  And
Psal.  .3.3.  11.  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth
for  ever,  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  gener¬
ations :  All  Ins  purposes,  designs,  and  undertak¬
ings,  are  successful  and  irresistible.  And  Psal.
146.  4.  In  that  very  day  his  thoughts  perish  :  All
his  designs  and  endeavours,  either  for  himself  or
for  others.  St.  Paul  says,  Horn.  2.  15.  Their
thoughts  the  mean  while  accusing,  or  else  excus¬
ing,  one  another;  when  their  conscience  bears  tes¬
timony  to  them,  either  for  yood  or  evil,  't  hought
.is  put  for  inward  reasoning.  Luke  9.  46,  47.
't  here  arose  a  reasoning  among  them  :  and
Jesus  perceiving  the  thought  of  their  heart.  Also
for  immoderate  or  anxious  care.  Mat.  10. 19.  Take
-no  thought  what  ye  shall  speak.  It  is  taken  for
the  opinion.  Job  12.  5.  He  that  is  ready  to  slip
with  his  feet,  is  as  a  lamp  despised  in  the  thought
of  him  that  is  at  ease  ;  or,  in  the  opinion  of  such
as  are  in  a  plentiful  condition.

Dent.  15. 9.  that  there  be  not  a  /.  in  thy  wicked  heart

1  Sam.  9.5.  return,  lest  my  father  take  t.  for  us
Job  12.  5.  is  despised  in  the  t.  of  him  that  is  affease

42.  2.  that  no  t.  can  be  withholden  from  thee
Psal.  49.  11.  their/,  is,  their  houses  shall  continue
64.6.  the  inward  /.  of  every  one  of  them  is  deep
139.  2.  thou  understandest  my  /.  atar  oft
Prov.  24.  9.  tke  t.  of  foolishness  is  sin
Eccl.  10.  20.  curse  not  the  king,  no  not  in  thy  t.
Isa.  26.  +  .3.  keep  him  whose  t.  is  stayed  on  thee
Ezek.  38.  10.  and  thou  shalt  think  an  evil  t.

Amos  4.  13.  hedeclareth  to  man  what  is  his  t.

Mat. 6.  25.  I  say  to  you,  take  no /.  for  your  life,  .31 .

.34.  I  10.19.  Mark  13.  11.  Luke  12.  11,22.

27.  which  of  you  by  taking  /.  can  add  one  cubit

to  bis  stature  ?  Luke  12.  25.

28.  why  take  ye  t.  for  raiment  ?  Luke  12.  26.
Acts  8. 22.  if  the  t.  of  thy  heart  may  be  forgiven

2  Cor.  10.  5.  bring  into  captivity  every  t.  to  Christ

THOUGHTS.

Oen.  6. 5.  the  imagination  of  t.  ot  his  heart  was  evil
Judg.  5.  15.  for  Heuben  there  were  great  /.  of  heart
1  Kings  18. +  21.  how  long  halt  ye  between  two  t.?

1  Chron.  28.  9.  the  Lord  understandeth  the  t.

29.  18.  keep  this  in  the  imagination  of  the  /.

Job  4.  13.  in  t.  from  the  visions  of  the  night

17.  +  7.  mine  eye  is  dim,  all  my  /.  are  as  a  shadow
11.  my  purposes  are  bioken  off,  even  my  /.

20.  2.  therefore  do  my  t.  cause  me  to  answer
21.27.  1  know  your  /.  and  devices  ye  imagine
\sal.  10.4.  will  notseek  God,  God  is  not  in  all  his  t.

33. 11.  and  the  /.  of  his  heart  to  all  generations
40.  5.  thy  t.  cannot  be  reckoned  up  in  order
56.  5.  all  their  t.  are  against  me  for  evil

73.  +  7.  they  pass  the  /.  of  the  heart
92.  5.  how  great  are  thy  works !  thy  /.  very  deep
94.  11.  the  Lord  knoweth  the  /.  ot  man,  vanity-
19.  in  the  multitude  of  my  /.  within  me  thy
119.  113.  1  hate  vain  t.  but  thy  law  do  1  love
139. 17.  how  precious  are  thy  /.  to  me,  O  God
2.3.  search  me,  O  God,  try  me,  and  know  my  /.
146.  4.  in  that  very  day  his  t.  perish
Vror.  12  5.  tlie  t.  of  the  righteous  are.  right


Prov.  15.26.  the  /.of  the  wicked  are  an  abomination
16.  .3.  commit— and  thy  /.  shall  be  established
21.  5.  the  /.  of  the  diligent  tend  to  plenteousness
Isa.  55.  7.  let  the  unrighteous  man  torsake  his  /.

8.  for  my  /.  are  not  your  /.  saith  the  Lord
0.  so  are  my  /.  higher  than  your  /.

59.  7.  their  feet  run  to  evil,  their  t.  are  /.  of  iniquity
65.  2.  people  walketh  after  their  own  z.
f>6.  18.  for  1  know  their  works  and  their  t.

Jer.  4.  14.  how  long  shall  vain  /.  lodge  in  thee  ?

6.  19.  evil  on  people,  even  the  fruit  of  their  t.

23.  20.  till  he  have  performed  the  /.  of  his  heart
29!  11. 1  know  the  /.  that  1  think  towards  you./,  of

peace  and  not  evil,  to  give  an  expected  end
Dan.  2.  30.  thou  migbtest  know  the/,  ot  thy  heart

4.  5.  Nebuchadnezzar’s  /.  upon  bed  troubled  him
19.  Daniel  was  astonished,  and  bis /.  troubled  him

5.  6  then  king  I'elshazzar’s  /.  troubled  him
10.’ the  queen  said,  let  not  thy  /.  trouble  thee

11.  +24.  think  his  /.  against  the  strong  holds
Mic  4.  12.  but  they  know  not  the  /.  ot  the  lord
Mat.  9.  4.  Jesus,  knowing  their  /.  said,  12.  25.

Luke 5.  22. 1  6.  8. 1  9.  47.  I  U.  17.
15.  19.  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  /.  Mark 7.2L
/  uke  2.  .35.  the  /.  of  many  hearts  may  be  revealed

24.  .38.  and  why  do  /.  arise  in  your  hearts/

Pom.  2. 15.  their  /.  accusing,  or  else  excusing

14.  t  1.  but  not  to  judge  his  doubtful  /.

1  Cor.  3.  20.  the  Lord  knoweth  the  /.  of  the  wise
Ileb.  4.  12.  the  word  of  God  isadiscerner  of  the  /.
Jam.  2.  4.  ye  are  become  judges  of  evil  /.
THOUSAND.

Gen.  20.  16.  I  have  given  thy  brother  a  /.  pieces
Nnm.  31.  4.  of  every  tribe  a  t.  send  to  war,  5.  6.

.35  4.  suburbs  of  cities  are  /.  cubits  round  about
Dent.  1  11.  the  Lord  make  you  a/,  times  so  many
7.9.  God  who  keepeth  covenant  to  a  /.  generations
32  .  30.  how  should  one  chase  a  t.?  Josh.  2.3.  10.
Jvdg.  6.  t  15.  my  /.  is  the  meanest  in  Manasseh

9.  49.  the  men  of  Shechem  died,  about  a  /.  men

15.  15.  Samson  slew  a/,  men  therewith,  16.

20.  10.  an  hundred  of  a  /.  a  /.  out  of  ten  thousand

1  Sam.  17.  18.  ten  cheeses  to  the  captain  of  their  /.

18.  1.3.  Saul  made  David  his  captam  over  a  /.

25.  2.  Nabal  had  three  /.  sheep  and  a  /.  goats

2  Sam.  8.  4.  and  David  took  from  him  a  /.  chariots

and  seven  hundred  horses,  1  Chron.  18.  4.

18.  12.  though  I  should  receive  a  /.  shekels

19.  17.  there  were  a/,  men  of  Benjamin  with  hrn

1  Kings  3.  4.  a  /.  burnt-offerings  did  Solomon  offer

upon  that  altar,  2  Chron.  1. 6.

2  Kings  15.  19.  Menabem  gave  Pul  a  /.  talents
24.  16.  carried  away  craftsmen  and  smiths  a  /.

1  Chron.  12.  14.  and  the  greatest  was  over  a  t.

.34.  of  Naphtali  a  /.  captains,  and  with  them

16.  15.  word  he  commanded  to  a  /.  generations
19.  6.  the  children  of  Ammon  sent  a  /.  talents
29.  21.  they  sacrificed  sacrifices  unto  the  Lord  a  t.

bullocks,  a  /.  rams,  and  a  /.  lambs

2  Chron.  30.  24.  Hezekiab  did  give  a  /.  bullocks
Ezra  1.  9.  Cyrus  did  bring  forth  a  /.  chargers

10.  thirty  basons  of  gold,  and  other  vessels  a  /.

Job  9.  3.  he  cannot  answer  him  <  ne  of  a  /.

.33.  23.  if  there  be  an  interpreter,  one  of  a  /.

42.  12- Job  had  a  /.  voke  of  oxen,  a  /.  she  asses
Psal.  50.  10.  the  cattle  on  a  /.  bills  are  mine
84.  10.  a  day  in  thy  courts  is  better  than  a  t.

90.  4.  at.  years  in  thy  sight  are  but  as  yesterday

91.  7.  a  t.  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand
Eccl.  6.  6.  yea,  though  he  live  a  t.  years  twice  told

7.  28.  one  man  among  a  /.  have  1  found,  hut  a  worn.
Cant.  4.  4.  whereon  there  hang  a  /.  bucklers

8.  11.  for  the  fruit  was  to  bring  a  /.  pieces
12.  thou,  O  Solomon,  must  have  a /.

Isa.  7.23.  where  were  a/,  vines,  at  a /.  silverlings
.30.  17.  one  t.  shall  flee  at  the  rebuke  of  one
60.  22.  a  little  one  shall  become  a  /.  and  a  small  one
Ezek.  47.  3.  the  man  measured  a  /.  cubits
4.  again  he  measured  a  /.  and  brought  me  thro’,  5.
Dan.  5.  1.  Belshazzar  made  a  great  least  to  a  /.  of
his  lords,  and  drank  wine  before  the  /.
Amos  5.  3.  the  city  that  went  out  by  a/,  shall  leave
2  Pet.  3.  8.  be  not  ignorant,  one  day  is  with  the
Lord  as  a  /.  years,  and  a  /.  years  as  oue  day
Pev.  20.  2.  and  he  bound  Satan  at.  years
.3.  deceive  nations  no  more,  till  /.  years  be  fulfilled
4.  and  they  reigned  with  Christ  a  /.  years
7.  and  when  the  /.  years  are  expired

One  THOUS  AN  D  two  hundred  sixty.

Pev.  11.3.  they  shall  prophesy  one  t.  260  days
12.  6.  they  should  feed  her  ewe  /.  260  days
One  THO  USA  N  D  two  hundred  ninety.

Dan.  12.  11.  tl  ere  shall  be  one  t.  290  days

One  THOXJ SAN  D  three  hundred  thirty-five.
Dan.  12.  12.  blessed  that  cometh  to  the  t.  3.35  days
Owe  THOUSAND  six  hundred.

Pev.  14.  20.  by  the  space  of  one  t.  600  furlongs
Two  THOUSAND.

Nnm.  35.  5.  ye  shall  measure  on  the  east  side  two  t.

cubits,  on  the  west-side  two  t.  south-side  two  t.
Tosh.  .3.  4.  space  between  you  and  the  ark  two  t.

1  Kings  7.  26.  the  molten  sea  contained  two  t.  baths

2  Kings  18.  23.  and  1  will  deliver  thee  two  t.  horses

if  thou  be  able  to  set  riders  upon,  Isa.  36.  8.
Neh.1 . 72.  the  people  gave  two  t.  pounds  ot  silver
Mark  5.  13.  about  two  t.  swine  were  choked  in  sea
7'w  TIIOUSAND/w  ktiW.

Neh.  7.  71.  fathers  gave  two  t.  200  pounds  ot  silver
Tmo  THOUSAND  three  hundred.

Dan.  Q.  14.  to  two  t.  300  days,  sanctuary  cleansed
Two  hundred  THOUSAND.

2  Chron.  28.  8.  carried  captive  ot  brethren  200  /.

Two  hundred  eighty  1  HOUSAND.
o  Chr.  14.  8.  and  out  of  Benjamin  two  hun.

eighty  t.

Two  hundred  THOUSAND  THOUSAN  D.
Pev.  9.  16.  the  number  of  horsemen  were  two  hun¬
dred  thousand  thousand
Three  THOUSAND.

Exod.  32.  28.  there  fell  of  the  people  three  t.

Josh.  7.  4.  there  went  to  Ai  about  three  t.  men
Jndg.  15.  11.  three  t.  went  to  bind  Samson


Jvdg.  16.  27.  there  were  upon  the  roof  th  eet.  men
1  Sam.  13.  2.  Saul  chose  three  t.  men  of  Israel

24.  2.  then  Saul  took  three  t.  chosen  men,  26.  2.

25.  2.  Naboth  had  three  t.  sheep  and  a  /.  goats

1  Kings  4.  32.  Solomon  spake  three  t.  proverbs

2  Chron.  4.  5.  the  molten  sea  held  three  t.  baths
Job  1.  3.  his  substance  was  three  t.  camels
Jer.  52.  28.  carried  away  captive  three  t.  Jews
Acts  2.  41.  were  added  to  them  three  t.  souls

Tour  THOUSAN  D.

1  Sam.  4.  2.  they  slew  of  Israel  about  fur  t.  men

1  Chron.  23.  5.  four  t.  porters,  four  t.  praised  Lord

2  Ch-on.  9.  25  Solomon  had  four  t.  stalls  for  horses
Mat.  15.  38.  t  hey  that  eat  were  four  t.  Mark  8.  9.

16.  10.  seven  loaves  among  four  t.  Mzrk  8.  20.

Acts  21.  38.  leddesf  into  the  wilderness  four  t.  men
Tour  1  HOUSAND  five  hundred.

Ezek.  48.  16.  on  the  north-side  of  the  city  four  /.
500  measures,  east-side,  south-side,  west  side
Jour  t.  500  measures,  30,  32,  .33,  34.

lire  THOUSAND.

Josh.  8.  12.  and  lie  took  about  five  t.  men
Jvdg.  20.  45.  they  gleaned  of  them  five  t.  men

1  Chron.  29.  7.  anu  gave  ot  gold  five  t.  talents

2  Chron.  .35.  9.  for  offerings  five  /.small  cattle
Ezra  2.  69.  they  gav  e  fire  t.  pounds  of  silver
Mat.  14.  21.  they  that  had  eaten  were  about  five  t.

16.  9.  nor  remember  the  five  loaves  of  the  five  t.

Mark  6.  44.  1  8.  19:  Luke  9.  14.  John  6.  10.
Acts  4.  4.  number  that  believed  were  about  five  t.

l  ive  1  HOUSAND  four  hundred.

Ezra  1. 11.  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  five  t.  400
Six  1  HOUSAN  D.

1  Sam.  1.3.  5.  against  Israel  with  six  t.  horsemen

2  Kings  5.  5.  Naaman  took  six  t.  pieces  of  gold

1  Chron.  23.  4.  and  six  1.  were  officers  and  judges
Job  42.  12.  for  Job  had  six  t.  camels
Six  THOUSAND  seven  hundred  and  twenty.
Ezra  2.  67.  their  asses,  six  t.  seven  hundred  and

twenty,  Neh.  7.  69.
Seven  THOUSAND.

1  Kings  19. 18.  yet  have  1  left  me  seven  t.  in  Israel

who  have  not  bowed  to  Baal,  Rom.  11.  4.
20.  15.  children  of  Israel,  being  sevent.

2  Kings  24.  16.  carried  away  men  of  might  sev.  t.

1  Chron.  12.25.  of  Simeon,  mighty  men,  seven  t.

18.  4.  David  took  from  him  seven  t.  horsemen

19.  18.  David  slew  of  the  Sjrians  seven  t.  men

29.  4.  1  prepared  seven  t.  talents  of  silvei

2  Chron.  15.  11.  they  offered  seven  t.  sheep

30.  24.  Hezekiab  gave  congregation  seven  t.  sheep
Job  1.  3.  his  substanc  e  also  was  seven  t.  sheep
Pev.  11.  1.3.  in  earthquake  were  slain  seven  t.  men

Seven  THOUSAND  seven  hundred.

2  Chron.  17.  11.  Arabians  brought  Jehoshaphat
seven  t.  700  rams,  seven  t.  700  he  goats
Ten  THOUSAND.

Lev.  26.  8.  an  hundred  shall  put  tent,  to  flight
Num.  10  4  36.  return  to  the  ten  t.  thousands  of  Isr
Den,  32.  30.  how  should  two  put  ten  t.  to  flight  <

3.3.  2  lord  came  with  tent,  ot  saints,  Jude  14.
Judg.  1.  4.  they  slew  of  theip  in  Bezek  ten  t.  men

3.  29.  they  slew  of  Moab  ten  t.  men,  all  lusty

4.  6.  Barak,  go,  and  take  tent,  men  of  N'aphlali
10.  he  went  up  with  ten  t.  men  at  his  feet,  14.

7.  .3.  and  there  remained  to  Gideon  ten  t.

20.  34.  there  came  up  against  Gibeah  ten  t.  men
2  Sam.  18.  3.  but  now  thou  art  worth  ten  t.  of  us

1  Kings  5. 14.  sent  them  to  Lebanon,  ten  t.  a  month

2  Kings  13.  7-  leave  to  Jehoahaz  ten  t.  footmen
14.  7.  Ainaziah  slew  of  Edom  in  the  valley  tent.
24.  14.  he  carried  away  even  ten  t.  captives

2  Chron.  25.  1 1 .  smote  of  the  children  of  Seir  tent.

12.  other  tent,  left  alive,  did  Judah  carry  away
27.  5.  the  Ammonites  gave  Jotham  the  same  year
ten  t.  measures  of  wheat,  and  ten  t.  of  barley
.30.  24.  Hezekiab  gave  congregation  ten  t.  sheep
Esth.  3.  9. 1  will  pay  ten  /.  talents  of  silver
Psal.  91.7.  tent,  shall  fall  at  thy  right  hand
Cant.  5.  10.  my  beloved  is  the  chiefest  among  ten  t.
Ezek.  45.  1.  the  breadth  of  the  land  shall  be  ten  t.

.3.  5.  1  48.  9,  10,  1.3,  18.

Dan.  7.  10.  ten  t.  times  ten  t.  stood  before  him
Mat.  18.24.  which  ow  ed  him  ten  t.  talents
Luke  14.  31.  whether  he  be  able,  with  ten  t.  to  meet
1  Cor.  4.  15.  for  though  you  have  tent,  instructors
14.  19.  than  tent,  words  in  an  unknown  tongue
Rev  5  11  number  of  them  was  ten  t.  times  ten  t.
Ten  1  HOUSAN  DS.

Dent.  33.  17.  they  are  the  ten  t.  or  Ephraim
1  Sam.  18.  7.  Dav.  slain  Lis  tent.  8  I  21.  11.  I  29.5.
Psal.  .3.  6.  1  will  not  be  afraid  of  ten  t.  ot  people
144.  1.3.  that  out  sheep  may  bring  forth  ten  t.

Dan.  11.12.  he  shall  cast  dow  n  many  ten  t.

Mic.  6.  7.  or  be  pleased  with  ten  t.  livers  of  oil
Twelve  1  HOUSAND.

Josh.  8.  25.  all  that  fell  of  Ai  were  twelve  t.

Judg.  21.  10.  sent  twelve  t.  men  to  Jabesh-gilead
1  Kings  4.  26.  Solomon  had  twelve  t.  horsemen,
10.26.  2  Chron.  1.  14.1  9.  25
Pev.  7. 5.  of  tribe  of  J  uda,  Heuben,  Gad,  sealed  /.  /.

6.  of  Aser,  Naphtbalim,  Manasses,  sealed  tw.  t.

7.  of  Simeon,  Levi,  lssachar,  w  ere  sealed  tw.  t.

8.  of  7abulon,  Joseph,  Benjamin,  sealed  tw.  t.
°1.  16.  be  measured  the  city  twelve  t.  turlougs

fourteen  THOUSAND.

Job  42. 12.  for  Job  hod  fourteen  t.  sheep

fourteen  THOUSAND  seven  hundred.

Num.  16.  49.  that  died  in  the  plague  fourteen  t.  7T0
Sixteen  THOUSAND.

Num.  31.  40.  the  persons  were  sixteen  t.  46.

Sixteen  'THOUSAND  seven  hundred  fifty.
Num.  .31.  52.  gold  of  offering  sixteen  t  seven  hun¬
dred  and  fifty  shekels
Seventeen  THOUSAND  two  hundred.

1  Chron. 1.  11.  sons  of  Jediel  seventeen  t.  two  hund.

Eighteen  THOUSAN  D.

Judg.  20.  25.  destroyed  of  Israel  eighteen  t.  men
44.  there  fell  of  Benjamin  eighteen  t.  men
1  Chr.  12.  31.  of  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  eighteen  t.
18.  12.  Abishai  slew  of  the  Edomites  eighteen  /.
29.  7.  they  gave  of  brass  eighteen  t  talents


THO


THR


T  H  R


Twenty  THOUSAND.

2  Sam.  8.  4.  David  took  from  Haaadezer  king  of
Zobah,  twenty  t.  footmen,  1  Chron.  18.  4.

10.  6.  the  children  of  Ammon  hired  Syrians  20  t.

18.  7-  slaughter  of  Absalom’s  company  twenty  t.

1  Kings  5.  11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  twenty  t.  mea¬

sures  of  wheat,  2  Chron.  2.  10.
A  eh  7-  7  fathers  gave  to  work  txeen.  t.  drams,  72.
Fsal.  68.  17.  the  chariots  of  God  are  twenty  t.

Luke  14.  31.  to  meet  him  that  cometh,  with  twenty  t.

THOUSAND.

Num.  3.  39.  the  number  of  Levites  twenty-two  t.

43.  the  first  born  males  were  twenty-two  1.

26.  14.  of  families  of  Simeonites  twenty-two  t.

Judy.  7-  3.  there  returned  of  Gideon's  army  22  t.

20.  21.  Benjamin  destroyed  of  Israel  twenty-two  t.

2  Sam.  8.5.  David  slew  of  the  Syrians  twenty-two  t.

men,  1  Chron.  18.  5.

1  A  mgs  8  63.  Solon.on  offered  twenty  two  t.  oxen,

..  2  Chron.  7.  5.

1  Chron.  7. 2.  of  foie  twen.-two  t.  H  7.  of  Bela22/.

Twenty  i'll  °e  THOUSAND.

Num.  26.  62.  numbered  of  Levites  twenty-three  t.

1  Cor.  10.  8.  and  fell  in  one  day  three  and  twenty  t.

Twenty-four  THOUSAND.

Num.  25.  9.  died  in  the  plague  twenty-four  t.

1  Chron.  23.  4.  24  t.  Levites  to  forward  the  work

27.  1.  the  officers  that  served  were  twenty  four  t

Twenty  Jive  THOUSAND.

Judg.  20.  35.  destroyed  ofBenjamites  tw.-Jivet.  46.
Ezek.  45.  1.  holy  portion  of  land  twenty  Jive  t.  reeds
in  length,  3,  5,  6.  |  48.  8,  9,  10,  13.
Twenty-sir.  I  HOUSA  N  D.

Judg.  20.  15.  Benjamin  numbered  twenty-six  t .

1  Chron.  7.  40.  of  Asher,  apt  to  war,  twenty-six  1.

Twenty-seven  THOUSAND.

1  Kings  20.  30.  a  wall  fell  on  twenty-seven  t.  men
Twenty-eight  THOUSA N D.

1  Chron.  12.  35.  Danites,  expert  in  war,  28  t.

Thirty  THOUSA  N  D.

Num.  31 .  39.  and  the  asses  were  thirty  t.  45.

Josh.  8.  3.  Joshua  chose  thirty  t.  mighty  men

1  Sam.  4.  10.  there  felt  of  Israel  thirty  t.  footmen
11.8.  and  the  men  of  Judah  were  thirty  t.

13.  5.  Philistines  gathered  thirty  t.  chariots

2  *am.  6.  1.  David  gathered  thirty  1.  chosen  men
1  kings  5.  13.  and  the  levy  was  thirty  t.  men

TAiV/y-tw  THOUSAND.

Num.  31.  35.  thirty-two  t.  women  taken  captives

1  Chron.  19-  7-  Ammon  hired  thirty  two  t.  chariots

1  hirty-two  THOUSAND  two  hundred.

Num.  1.  35.  number  of  Manasseh  32  t.  200,  2.  21
Thirty-two  THO  USA  N  D  five  hundred.

Num.  26.  37.  pf  Ephraim  were  numbered  32  t.  500
Thirty-three  THOUSAND

2  Chron.  35.  7-  gave  thirty -three  t.  bullocks

Thirty-Jive  I  HOUSAND,

Num.  1.  37-  of  Benjamin  were  thirty-jive  t.

Th  irty-six  THOUSAND.

\um.  31.  38.  the  beeves  were  thirty  and  six  t.

44.  pertained  to  congregation  thirty-six  t.  beeves
1  Chron.  7.  4.  the  bands  of  soldiers  were  thirty-six  t
Thirty-seven  THOUSAN  D.

1  Chron.  12.  34.  of  Naphtali  thirty  and  seven  t.
Thirty-eight  THOUSAND.

1  Chron.  23.  3.  Levites  from  thirty  years,  38  t

Forty  THOUSAND.

Josh.  4.  13.  about  forty  t.  prepared  for  war
Judy.  5.  8.  was  there  a  shield  seen  amon  &  forty  t.  ?

2  Sam.  10.  18.  David  slew  forty  t.  horsemen

1  Kings  A.  26.  .Solomon  bad  forty  t.  stalls  of  horses
1  Chron.  12.  36.  of  Asher,  expert  in  war,  forty  t

19.  18.  David  slew  of  Syrians,  forty  t.  footmen
Forty  THOUSAND  Jive  hundred.

Num.  1.  3.3.  of  Ephraim  were  forty  t.  5<>9,  2.  19.

26.  18.  of  Gad  were  numbered  forty  t.  anti  500  *
Forty-one  THOUSAND  Jive  hundred.

Num.  1.  41.  of  Asher  numbered  41  t.  5oo,  2.  28
Forty-two  'THOUSAND.

Judg.  12.  6.  fell  of  Rphraimites  forty-two  1.

Ezra  2.64.  whole  congregation  forty-two  t.  Neh  7  66
Forty-three  THOUSAND  seven  hundred  thirty.'
Num.  26.  7.  of  Reuben ites  forty -three  t.  730
Forty-four  I  HOUSAND  seven  hundred  si  rty.

1  Chron.  5.  18.  of  Reubenites  to  war  44  t.  760
Forty-Jive  I  HOUSAND  four  hundred.

Num.  26  50.  of  Naphtali  were  forty  Jive  f.  400
Folly -Jive  THOUSAND  six  hundred.

Num.  26.41.  numbered  of  Benjamin/bm/  Jive  t  600
forty-jive  THOUSAND  sir  hundred  fifty
Num.  1.  25.  were  numbered  of  Gad  45  *  650  2  15
Forty-six  THOUSAND  five  hundred.

Num. T.  21.  of  Reuben  forty -six  t.  and  500,  2.  11
Fifty  THOUSAND.

1  Sam.  6. 19.  the  Lord  smote  fifty  t.  and  seventy  men

1  Chron.  5.21.  took  of  the  Hagarites’  sheep  fifty  t.

12.  33.  of  Zebulun  fifty  t.  could  keep  rank

-Jets  19;  19.  the  price  of  the  book  fifty  t.  pieces
fifty-two  1  HOUSAND  seven  hundred.

Num.  26.  34.  of  Manasseh  fifty-two  t.  and  seven  h
fifty-three  THOUSA  N  D  four  hundred.

Num.  1.  43.  of  N aphtali  fifty-  t,  ee  t.  400,  2.  30
Fifty-four  THOUSAND  four  hundred.

Num.  1.  29.  of  Issachar  fifty-four  t.  four  h.  2.  6
Fifty-seven  THOUSA  N  D  four  hundred.

Num.  1.  31.  of  Zebulun  fifty-seven  t.  four  h.  2  8
Fifty-nine  THOUSA  N  D  three  hundred.

Num.  1.  23.  of  Simeon  fifty-nine  t.  three  h.  2.  13
Sixty  THOUSAND.

2  Chron. 12.  3.  Shishak  came  with  sixty  t.  horsemen

Sixty  1  HOUSAND  five  hundred.

Num.  26.  27.  of  Zebulunites,  sixty  t.  and  five  liun.

Sixty-one  THOUSAND.

Num.  31 .  34.  the  booty  was  sixty  one  t.  asses
Ezra  2.  69.  they  gave  sixty  one  t.  drams  of  gold
Sixty  two  i  HOUSA  ND  seven  hundred.

Num.  1.  39.  of  tribe  of  Dan  sixty-two  t.  700,  2.  26.

. .  'THOUSAND  three  hundred.

Sum.  J5.  25.  of  Issachar  sixty-four  t.  and  three  h.

43.  of  the  Shuhanutes  sixty-four  t.  four  hundred
Seventy  THOUSAND.

2  Sam.  21.  15.  there  died  of  the  people  seventy  t.

0 1  jL


1  Kings  5.  1.5.  Solomon  had  seventy  t.  that  bare
burdens,  2  Chron.  2.  2,  18.
1  Chron.  21.  14.  there  fell  of  Israel  seventy  t.

Seventy-two  TIIO USA N  D.

Num.3\.  33.  booty  of  beeves  was  seventy-two  t.

Seventy-Jour  1  HOUSA NDrir  hundred.
Num.  1.  2?.  number  of  Judah  74  t.  and  600,  2.  4.

Seventy -five  T 11 0  U  S  A  N  D .

Nnm.  31.  32.  the  booty  was  seventy- fi,  e  t.  sheep
Est/i,  9.  16  Jews  slew  of  their  foes  seventy  five  t.

Seventy  six  THO  USA  N  D  five  hundred.

Num.  26.  22.  numbered  of  Judah  seventy-six  t.  500
Eighty  THOUSAND.

1  Kings  5.  15.  Solomon  had  eighty  t.  hewers  in  the
mountains,  2  Chron.  2.  2, 18.
^  Eighty-seven  THOUSAND.

1  Chron.  7.  5.  of  Issachar,  reckoned  eighty-seven  t
THOUSAND  THOUSAND.

1  Chron.  21.  5.  all  they  of  Israel  were  a  1. 1.

22.  14.  1  have  prepared  a  t.  t.  talents  of  silver

2  Chron.  14.  9.  the  Ethiopian  came  with  a  t.  t.

Two  hundred  THOUSAND  THOUSAN  D.
Rev.  9.  16.  army  of  horsemen  two  hundred  t.  t.
THOUSANDS.

Gen.  24.  60.  be  thou  the  mother  of  t.  of  millions
hxod.  18.  21.  place  such  over  them  rulers  of  t.  25,

20.  6.  shewing  mercy  to  t.  of  them,  Dent.  5.  10.

34.  7.  keeping  mercy  for  t.  forgiving  iniquity
Num.  1.  16.  there  were  the  princes  of  tribes,  heads

of  t.  in  Israel,  10.  4.  Josh.  22.  14,  21, 30
10.  36.  return,  O  l,ord,  to  the  many  t.  of  Israel
31.  5.  there  were  delivered  out  of  the  t.  of  Israel
Deut.  1.  15.  so  1  made  them  captains  over  t.

3.3.  17.  and  they  are  the  t.  of  Manasseh

1  Sam.  8.  12.  he  will  appoint  him  captains  over  t
10.  19.  therefore  present  yourselves  by  your  t.

18.  8.  and  to  me  they  have  ascribed  but  t.

22. 7  .will  the  son  of  I  esse  make  you  captains  of  t.  ?
23.23.  I’ll  search  him  throughout  the  /.of  Judah
29.  2.  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  passed  on  by  t.

2  Sam.  18.  4.  and  all  the  people  came  out  by  t.

Tsai.  119.72.  thy  law  is  better  than  /.of  gold
Jer.  32.  18.  thoushewest  loving-kindness  to  t.

Dan.  7.  10.  thousand  /.  ministered  unto  him
Mic.  5.  2.  tho’  thou  be  little  among  the  /.of  Judah
6.  7.  will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  /.  of  rams  r

Acts  21.  20.  how  many  /.  of  Jews  which  believe
Rev.  5.  11.  the  number  of  them  was  /.  of  /.

See  Captains,

THREAD.

Gen.  14.  23.  T  will  not  take  from  a  /.  to  a  latchet
38.  28.  she  bound  on  his  hand  a  scarlet  /.  30.

Josh.  2.  18.  shalt  bind  this  scarlet  /.  in  the  window
Judg.  16.  9.  he  brake  the  withs  as  a  /.  of  tow
12.  he  brake  the  ropes  from  his  arms  as  a  f.

Cant.  4.  3.  thy  lips  are  like  a  /.  of  scarlet
THREA  TEN,  ED.

Acts  4. 17.  butlet  ussfraitly  /.them  not  tospeak,21.

1  Ret.  2.  23.  when  he  suffered  he  /.  not
THREA  TEN  I  NG,  INGS.

Acts  4.  29.  Lord,  behold  their  /.  and  grant  thy  serv.
9.  1.  Saul  yet  breathing  out  /.  and  slaughter
Eph.  6.  9.  do  the  same  things  to  them,  forbearing  /.
THREE.

Gen.  18.  2.  he  looked,  and  lo,  /.  men  stood  by  him
Exod .  21 .  1 1 .  and  it  lie  do  not  these  t .  unto  her
25.  32.  /.  branches  of  the  candlestick,  37.  18.

33.  /.  bowls  made  like  unto  almonds,  37.  19.

27.  1.  the  height  of  the  altar  shall  be/,  cubits,  38.  1.
14.  pillars  /.  their  sockets  /.  15. 1  38.  14,  15.

Lev.  14. 10.  shall  take  /.  tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  for
a  meat-offering,  Num.  15.  9.  |  28.  12.

27.  6.  thy  estimation  for  the  female,  /.  shekels
Num.  12.  4.  come  out,  ye  /.  and  they  /.  came  out

28.  20.  /.  tenth  deals  for  a  bullock.  28.  |  29.  3,9.  14.
35.  14.  ye  shall  give  /.  cities  on  this  side  Jordan
Deut.  4  41.  Moses  sev  ered  /.  cities,  19.  2,  3,7,  9.

17.  6.  at  the  mouth  of  /.  witnesses,  19.  15.

Josh  15.  14.  and  Caleb  drove  thence  the  /.  sons  of

Anak,  Judg.  1.  20.

18.  4.  /.  men  of  each  tribe  to  describe  the  land
Judg.  7.  20.  the /.  companies  blew  the  trumpets

9.  43.  he  divided  the  people  into  /.  companies

1  Sam.  1.  24.  Hannah  took  with  her  /.  bullocks

2.  13.  servant  came  with  a  flesh-hook  of  /.  teeth

21.  Hannah  bare  /.sons  and  two  daughters

10.  3.  there  shall  meet  thee  /.  men,  one  carrying /.

kids,  another  carrying  /.  loaves  of  bread

11.  11.  Saul  put  the  people  in  /.  companies

17. 13.  the  /.  eldestof.lesse’ssons  followed  Saul,  14.

20.  20.  I  will  shoot  /.  arrows  on  the  side  thereof
31.  6.  Saul  died,  and  his  /.  sons,  1  Chron.  10.  6.

8.  they  found  Saul  and  his  /.  sons  fallen

2  Sam.  14.  27.  to  Absalom  there  were  born  /.  sons
18.  14.  Joab  thrust  /.  darts  through  Absalom

23.  9.  E'Jeazar  one  of  the  /.  mighty,  1  Chr.  11. 12.

13.  /.  of  the  thirty  chief  went  down  to  David
16.  /.  mighty  brake  through  the  Philistines,  17.

18.  Abishai  brother  of  Joab  chief  among  /.  19.

19.  howbeif,  he  attained  not  to  the  first  /.  23.

22.  Benaiah  had  the  name  among  /.  mighty  men

24.  12.  1  offer  thee/,  things,  1  Chron.  21.  10.

1  Kings  6.  36.  he  built  the  inner  court  with  /.  rows
7- 4.  and  there  were  windows  in  /.  rows

25.  it  stood  upon  /.  oxen  looking  toward  the  north,

/.  to  the  west,  /.  to  the  south,  /.  to  the  east
10.  17.  /.  pound  of  gold  went  to  one  shield

2  Kings  3.  10.  Lord  hath  called  these  /.  kings,  13.

1  Chron.  2.  16.  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  were  /.

3.  23.  sons  of  Neariah  /.  ||  23.  23.  sons  of  Mushi  /.
25. 5.  God  gave  Heman  fourteen  sons  and  /.  daugli.
Ezra  6.  4.  let  the  foundations  be  laid  with  /.  rows
Job  1.  2.  were  born  to  Job  /.  daughters,  42.  13.

17-  the  Chaldeans  made  out  /.  bands  and  fell
2.  11.  Job’s  /.  friends  heard  of  all  this  evil
Prov.  30.  15.  /.  things  which  are  never  satisfied
18.  there  be  /.  things  too  wonderful  for  me

21.  for  /.  things  the  earth  is  disquieted

29.  there  be  /.  things  which  go  well,  yea  four
La.  17.  6.  two  or  /.  berries  in  the  top  of  the  bough
Ezek.  14.  14.  though  these  /.  men  were  in  it,  16,  18 .
40.  10.  the  little  chambers  were  /.  on  this  side,  21


Ezek.  41.6.  side  chambers  were  /.  one  over  anotne;
48.  31.  /.  gates,  after  names  of  tribes,  32,  33,  34.
Dan.  3.  24.  did  not  we  cast/,  men  bound  into  fire.’
6.  2.  and  Darius  set  over  these  /.  presidents
7.5.  it  had  /.  ribs  in  the  mouth  between  the  teetK

8.  /.  of  the  first  horns  were  plucked  up,  20,  24.

10.  2.  I  Daniel  was  mourning  /.  full  weeks’  3.
11.2.  there  shall  stand  up  /.  kings  in  Persia’

Amos  1.  3.  for  t.  transgressions  of  Damascus
6.  of  Gaza  ||  9.  Tyrus  ||  11.  Edom  ||  13.  Ammon
2.  1.  /.  transgressions  of  Moab  ||  4.  Judah  ||  6.  Israel
4.  8.  so  two  or  /.  cities  wandered  to  one  city
ZecA.  11.8.  /.  shepherds  I  cutoff  in  one  month
Mat.  13.  33.  hid  in  /.  measures  of  meal,  Luke  1.3.  21.

17.  4.  it  thou  wilt,  let  us  make  here  /.  tabernacles,

.  .  _  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33.

18.  16.  m  mouth  of  two  or /.  witnesses,  2  Cor  13  ]

20.  where  two  or  /.  are  gathered  in  my  name  ’

Luke  10.  36.  which  of  these  /.  was  neighbour  to  him  •

11.  5.  shall  say  to  him,  friend,  lend  me  /.  loaves

12.  52.  divided,  /.  against  two,  and  two  against  /.
Acts  o.  7.  t.  hours  after,  when  his  wife  came  in

10.  19.  behold,  /.  men  seek  thee,  11.  II.

28.  15.  come  to  meet  us  as  far  as  the  /.  taverns
1  Cor.  13. 1.3.  now  abideth  these  /.faith,  hope,  charity

14.  27.  by  two,  or  at  most  by  /.  and  that  by  course

29.  let  the  prophets  speak  two  or/,  and  other
1  Jim.  5.  19.  but  before  two  or  /.  witnesses
Heb.  10.  28.  died  under  two  or  /.  witnesses

1  John  5.  7.  there  are  .  that  bear  record  in  heaven
8.  /.  bear  witness  in  earth,  and  these  ,.  agree

Rev.  6.  6.  and  /.  pleasures  of  barley  fora  penny

8. 13.  trumpet  of  /.  angels  who  aie  vet  to  sound

9.  18.  by  these  /.  was  the  third  part 'of  men  killed

16.  13.  1  saw  /.  unclean  spirits  like  frogs  come
19-  the  great  city  was  divided  into  /.  parts

21. 13.  on  the  east  /.  gates,  on  the  north  /.  gates,  on
the  south  /.  gates,  and  on  the  west  /.  gates

See  Days.

THREE  months.

Gen.  38.  24.  about  /.  months  after,  it  was  tola
Exod.  2.  2.  was  agoodly  child,  she  hid  him  /.  months

2  Sam.  6.  11.  the  ark  of  the  I/trd  continued  in  the

house  of  Obed-edom  t.  months,  1  Chron.  13.  14.

24. 13.  wilt  thou  flee  /.  months  before  thine  enemies,

while  they  pursue  thee  /  1  Chron.  21.  12.
2  Kings  23.  .31.  Jehoahaz  son  ofjosiah  reigned  /.

months  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  36.  2.
24.8.  Jehoiachin  reigned  /.  months,  2  Chr.  36.  9.
Amos  4.  7-  there  were  yet  /.  months  to  harvest
Acts  7.  20.  Moses  was  nourished  up  /.  months

19.  8.  Paul  spake  boldly  the  space  of  t.  months
23*  Paul  abode  in  Greece  t.  months

Heb.  ll.  23.  JV1  oses  was  hid  t.  months  of  his  parents
Tl  IHEE  times.

Exod.  23.  14.  /.  times  thou  shalt  keep  a  feast  to  me

17.  /.  times  in  the  year  all  thy  males  shall  appear
XT  before  the  Lord  God,  Deut.  lti.  16.

N urn.  22.  28.  thou  hast  smitten  me  these  /.  times,  32.
33.  the  ass  turned  from  me  these  /.  limes

24.  10.  thou  hast  blessed  them  these  /.  times
Judg.  16.  15.  thou  hast  mocked  me  these  /.  times
1  Sam.  20.  41.  David  arose  and  bowed  /.  times

1  K  mgs  9.  25.  Solomon  offered  /.  times  a  vear

17.  21.  Elijah  stretched  himself  on  the  child  /.  times

2  Kings  13.  25.  /.  times  A  id  Joash  beat  Hazatl
2  Chron.  8.  13.  offering  /.  times  in  the  year

Dan.  6.  10.  he  kneeled  on  his  knees  /.  times  a  day

13.  Daniel  maketh  his  petition  /.  times  a  day
Acts  11. 10.  this  was  done  t.  times ,  and  drawn  up

TH  R  EE  years.

Gen.  15.  9.  fake  an  heifer  o  ft.  years  old.ashe-goat
/.  years  old,  and  a  ram  t.  years  old
Lev.  19.  2.3.  fruit  as  uncircumcised  t.  years

25.  21.  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  /.  years
Deut.  14.  28.  at  the  end  of/,  years  bring  the  tithe
Judg.  9.  22.  when  Ahimelech  had  reigned  /.  years
2  Sam.  13.  38.  Absalom  was  in  Geshur  /.  years

21.  1.  wasa  famine  in  the  daysofDavid  /.  years

1  King v  2.  39.  at  end  of  /.  years  Shitnei’s  serv.  ran

10.  22.  once  in  /.  years  came  the  navy  of  1  harshish,

bringing  gold  and  silver,  2  Chron.  9.  21.

15.  2.Abijam  reigned  /.  years  in  Jerus.  2  Chr.  13.  2.

22.  1.  they  continued  /.  years  without  war

2  Kings  17.  5.  Assyrians  besieged  Samaria/,  years

18.  10.  and  at  the  end  of  /.  years  they  took  it
24.  1.  Jehoiakim  became  his  servant  /.  years

1  Chron.  21. 12.  choose  thee  either  /.  years'  famine,

or  three  months  to  bedestroved,  &c.

2  Chron.  11. 17 .  made  Rehoboam  strong  t.' years,  t
years  they  walked  in  way  of  David  and  Solomon

1.3.  2.  Abijah  reigned  /.  years  in  Jerusalem
31. 16.  males,  from  t.  years  old  and  upward
Isa.  15.  5.  unto  Zoar,  an  heifer  of  /.  years  old

16.  14.  within  /.  years  as  years  of  an  hireling

20.  .3.  as  Isaiah  walked  baref  ot  t.  years

Jer.  48.  34.  as  an  heifer  of  /.  years  old
Dan.  1.  5.  so  nourishing  them  t. years
Amos  4.  4.  and  bring  your  tithes  after  /.  years
Luke  4.  25.  heaven  shut  up  t.  years,  Jam.  5.  17.

13.7.  these  t.  years  I  come  seeking  fruit,  find  none
Acts  20.  31.  t.  years  I  censed  not  to  warn  every  one
Gal.  1.  18.  after  /.  years  1  went  up  to  Jerusalem
See  H unur  ed.

THREEFOLD.

Feel.  4.  12.  and  a  /.  cord  is  not  quickly  broken
THREESCORE.

Gen.  25.  26.  Tsaac  /.  years  old  when  she  bare  them
Deut.  3.  4.  took  from  them  /.  cities,  Josh.  13.  30.

2  Sam.  2.  31.  so  that  three  hundred  and  /.  died

1  Kings  4.  13.  to  him  pertained  /.  great  cities
22.  his  provision  was  /.  measures  of  meal

6.  2.  the  length  of  the  Lord’s  house  was  /.  cubits
and  breadth  thereof  twenty  cubits,  2  Chr.  3.  3.

2  K  ings  25.  19.  and  he  took  /.  men  of  the  people

1  Chron.  2.  21.  Uezron  married  when  /.  years  old

2  Chron.  11.21.  Rehoboam  took  /.concubines
Ezra  6.  3.  height  of  temple  /.  cubits  breadth  t.

Cant.  3.  7-  /.  valiant  men  are  about  it

6.  8.  there  are  /.  queens  fourscore  concubine
Jer.  52.  25.  put  to  death  /.  men  of  the  people
Dan.  3.  1.  an  image,  whose  height  was  /.  cubit*


T  H  R


TIIR


T  H  R


Lukeil.  IS.  from  Jerusalem  about  /.  furlongs
]  Tim.  5.  9.  let  not  a  widow  l>e  taken  under  /.

See  Sixty.

THREESCORE  and  one.

Sum.  31.  39.  lord's  tribute  of  asses,  /.  and  one
THREESCORE  and  two.

1  Chron.  26.  8.  able  men  t.  and  two  of  Obed  edom
Dan.b.  31.  Darius  about  t.  arid  two  year^  old
9-  Co.  in  t.  and  two  weeks  the  street  shall  be  built
26.  after  t.  and  two  weeks  Messiah  be  cut  off
l  HREESCORE  and  five.

Isa. 7-  8.  within  t.  and  five  years  Ephraim  broken
THREESCORE  and  tie.

Gen.  1^.26.  the  souls  that  came  with  Jacob  t.  and  six
Lev.  12. 5.  in  bJooa  of  her  purifying  t.  and  six  days
THREESCORE  and  seven.

Neh. 72-  peo.  gave  t.  and  seven  priests  garments
1  H  REESCOKE  and  eight.

1  Chr.  16.  38.  Obed-edom  with  brethren  t.  and  eight

TIIR E ESCO R  E  and  ten.

Gen.  46.  27.  all  the  souLof  the  house  of  Jacob  which
came  into  Egypt,  were  t.  and  ten,  Deut.  10. 22.
50.  3.  they  mou;  ned  for  Israel  t.  and  ten  days
Exod.  15  27-  in  Elim  were  twelve  wells  of  water,
and  t.  and  ten  palm-trees.  Sum.  33.  9-
Judg.  1.7 .  t.  and  ten  kings,  their  thumbs  cut  off
8.30.  and  Gideon  had  / .  and  ten  sons,  9-  2.

9.  4.  they  gave  him  t.  and  ten  pieces  of  silver

5.  he  slew  t.  and  ten  persons  on  one  stone,  18.  24.
12.  14.  sons  and  nephews,  that  rode  on  t.  a.  t.  ass-c.

2  Chron.  29.  32.  brought  t.  and  ten  bullocks

36.  21.  land  kept  sabbath,  to  fulfil  t.  and  ten  years
Psal.  9  '.  10.  the  days  or  our  years  are  t.  and  ten
Zech.  1.  12.  hast  had  indignation  t.  and  ten  years
Acts  23.  23.  make  ready  t.  and  ten  horsemen

TI 1 REESCOR E twelve.

Sum.  31.  38.  I  xml's  tribute  t.  and  twelve  beeves
I  HREESCORE  and  fifteen.

Acts  7. 14.  Joseph’s  kindred  t.  and  fifteen  souls
THREESCORE  and  seventeen.

Judg.Q.  14.  the  elders  of  Succoth  t.  and  seventeen
THR  ESH.

Judg. S. +  7 .  then  1  will  t.  your  flesh  with  thorns
Isa.  41. 15.  thou  shah  t.  the  mountains  and  beat
Jer.  51.  S3,  is  like  a  floor,  it  is  time  to  t.  her
Alic.  4.  13.  arise,  and  /.  O  daughter  of  Zi  n
Hah.  3.  12.  thou  didst  t.  the  heathen  in  anger
THRESHED.

Judg.  6.  11.  Gideon  t.  wheat  by  the  wine  press
Isa.  25.  t  IO.  Moab  shall  he  t.  down  under  him
28.  27.  fitches  not  t.  with  a  threshing  instrument
Amos  1.  3.  because  thev  t.  Gilead  with  instruments
THRESH  El  H.

Deut.  25.  +4.  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he  t.  com

1  Cor.  9.  10.  t.  in  hope,  be  partaker  of  his  hope

THR  ESHI  NG.

Lev.  26.  5.  your  t.  shall  reach  unto  the  vintage

2  Sam.  24.  22.  here  be  /.  instruments,  1  Chron.  21.  23.
2  Kings  13.7.  had  made  them  like  the  dust  by  /.

1  Chron.  21.  20.  now  Oman  was  t.  w  heat
Isa.  21.  lo.  O  m.v  t.  arxl  the  corn  of  my  floor
28.  28.  be  ausehe  will  not  ever  be  /.  it
41.15.  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp  t.  instrument
Joel  3. 1 14.  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  t.

Zee  Floor,  Floors.

THR  ESI  1  OLD.

Judg.  19. 27-  behold,  her  hands  were  upon  the  t.

1  Sam.  5.  4.  the  palms  of  his  hands  cut  off  on  the  t.

5.  5.  tread  not  on  the/,  of  Dagon  unto  this  day

1  Kings  14.  17-  when  she  came  to  t.  the  child  died

2  Kirtgs  12. 1 9.  keeper  of  t.  22.  4  4.  1  25.  +  18  Esth.

2.  t  21 . 1  6.  +  2.  Jer.  .35.  4  4.  !  52.  +  24.
Psal.  84.  +  10. 1  would  rather  choose  to  sit  at  the  t.
Jsa.  6.  +4.  the  posts  of  the  t.  moved  at  the  voice
Ezek.  9.  3.  the  glory  of  God  was  gone  up  to  1. 10.  4.

10.  18.  the  glory  of  God  departed  from  the  t.

43. 8.  in  their  setting  of  their  t.  by  my  thresholds
46. 2.  the  prince  shall  worship  at  the  t.  of  the  gate

47.  1 .  waters  issued  out  from  under  the  t.  eastward

Zeph.  1.  9.  1  will  punish  all  that  leap  on  the  t.
THRESHOLDS.

1  Chron.  9. 1 19.  keepers  of  the  /.  2  Chron.  23.  +  4.

Seh.  12.  25.  keeping  ward  at  the  t.  of  the  gates
Ezek.  43. 8.  in  setting  of  their  threshold  by  my  t.
Zeph.  2.  14.  desolation  shall  be  in  the  t.  for  he  shall

THREW.

2  Sam.  16. 13.  Shimei  t.  stones  at  David  and  cast
2  Kings  9.  33.  they  t.  Jezebel  down,  and  he  trod  her
2  Chron.  31. 1.  and  they  t.  down  the  high  places
Mark  12.  42.  there  came  a  certain  poof  widow  and

she  t.  in  two  mires,  which  make  a  farthing
Luke  9.  42.  the  devil  t.  him  down,  and  tare  him
Acts  22.  23.  as  thev  cried,  and  t.  dust  in  the  air
i  DREW  ESI.

Seh.  9. 11.  their  persecutors  thou  t.  into  the  deeps
THRICE.

Exod.  34.  23.  t.  in  the  year  shall  all  appear,  24.

2  Kings  13.  18.  and  Joash  smote  t.  and  stayed
19.  whereas  now  thou  shalt  smite  Syria  but  t.

Job  33. 1 29.  these  things  worketh  Got!  twice  and  t.
Mat.  26.  34.  thou  shalt  denv  me  t.  75.  Mark  14.

3.1,72.  Luke  22.  34.  61.  John  13.  38.
Acts  10. 16.  this  was  done  t.  vessel  was  received  up
2  Cor.  11. 25.  t.  was  1  beaten  with  rods,  once  «as  1
stoned,  t.  I  suffered  shipwreck
*  12.  8.  for  this  thing  I  besought  the  Lord  t.
TI1ROA  T.

Psal.  5.9.  their  t.  is  an  0|>en  sepulchre.  Rom.  3. 13.
69.  3.  1  am  weary  iff  my  crying,  mv  /.  is  dried
115.7-  neither  s|>eak  they  through  their  t.

149. +  6.  let  the  high  praises  of  God  be  in  their  t.
Prox.  23. 2.  put  a  knife  to  thy  t.  if  given  to  appetite
Jsa.  58. 1 1.  cry  with  ther.  lift  up  thy  voice
Jer.  2.  25  and  withhold  thy  t.  from  thirst
Mat.  18.  28.  the  servant  to«.k  him  bv  the  t.
THRONE,

Is  used  for  that  magnificent  seat  w hereon  sovereign
princes  usual/]/  sit,  to  receive  the  homage  0/  their
subjects ,  or  to  give  audience  to  ambassadors  ;  where
they  appear  with  pomp  and  ceremony,  and  from
whence  they  dispense  justice.  The  Scripture  de¬


scribes  the  throne  of  Solomon,  as  the  finest  and
richest  throne  in  the  world,  1  Kings  10.20.  There
was  not  the  like  made  in  any  kingdom.  It  was
all  of  ivory,  and  plated  with  pure  gold.  The  as¬
cent  was  by  sti  steps  ;  the  hack  was  round,  and  two
arms  supported  the  .seat.  'Twelve  golden  lions,
one  on  each  side  of  every  step,  made  a  principal
part  of  its  ornament .  1  hrone  is  also  pm  for  sove¬

reign  power  arid  dignity,  it  being  the  symbol  of
royalty  and  regal  authority  ;  thus  Pharaoh  tells
Joseph.  Gen.  41.  40.  Only  111  the  throne  will  1  be
greater  than  thou.

Heaven  is  the  throne  of  God.  Isa.  66.  1.  The  high¬
est  heavens  are  the  place  where  he  most  manifests
his  power  and  glory,  and  shews  himself  in  his  ma
jetty.  Justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation
of  the  throne  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  89.  !4.  Just
judgment,  or  justice  in  judging,  is  the  basis  or
foundation  of  all  his  proceedings,  and  the  stabi¬
lity  of  his  throne  and  government .  Christ  Jesus
is  set  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of
God,  Heb.  12.  2.  and  from  thence  he  discovers
himself  in  his  * tate  and  glory,  as  the  great  Ruler
of  the  world,  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lord  >.
Our  Saviour,  to  express  the  rest  and  satis] action,
the  glory,  honour,  and  dignity,  which  the  saints
of  Ood  shall  be  possessed  of  in  heaven,  tells  his
disciples,  Luke  22.  3o.  That  ye  may  sit  on
thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.
The  cherubims  that  were  upon  the  ark  of  the  co¬
venant,  were  also  considered  as  a  kind  of  throne
of  God  :  from  whence  it  is  said  in  many  places,
that  God  dwelleth  between  the  cherubims,  1
Sam.  4.  4.  2  Sam.  6.  2.  2  Kings  19.  15.  Angels
are  called  thrones.  Col.  1.  16.  ax  having  kingly
power ;  and  they  are  also  called  chier  princes.
Dan.  10.  13.

Gen.  41.  40.  onlv  in  the  t.  will  T  be  greater
Deut.  17.  18.  when  he  sitteth  on  t.  of  his  kingdom

1  Sam.  2.  8.  to  make  them  inherit  the  t.  of  glory

2  Sam.  3.  h  >.  to  set  up  the  t.  or  David  over  Israel

7.  13.  1  will  stablish  t.  of  his  kingdom  for  ever.  16.

1  Kings  1. 13.  Soli  >m.  shall  sit  on  my  1. 17, 24,  30,35.

48.  hath  given  one  to  sit  on  my  t.  this  day

2.  4.  there  shall  not  fail  thee  a  man  on  the  t.  of
Israel,  8.  25.  |  9.  5.  2  Chron.  6.  16.  Jer.  33.  17.
12.  Solomon  sat  on  t.  of  David  his  father,  24.  1

8.  20. !  10.  9. 1  Chron.  29-  23.  2  Chron.  6.  lo.

10.  18.  the  king  made  a  great  t.  2  Chr<  n.  9  !?•

2  Kings  10.  3.  set  him  on  his  father’s  /  and  fight
30.  to  fourth  generatv  n  shall  sit  on  (he  t.  15. 12.

11.  19.  Joash  Sat  on  the  t.  2  Chron.  23.  20.

Xeh.  3.  7.  repaired  to  the  t.  of  the  go  •  emor
Job  36.  7  but  with  kings  are  they  on  the  /.

Psal.  9.  4.  thou  satlest  in  tire  t.  judging  right

11.  4.  the  Lord's  /.  is  in  heaven.  Iris  eyes  behold
45.  6.  thy  t.  O  G.  is  fore  er,  Lam.  5.  19-  Heb.  1.  8.
47.  8.  God  sitteth  on  the  t.  of  his  holiness
89.  4.  1  will  build  thy  t.  to  all  generations^

14.  justice  and  judgment  are  habitation  of  thy  /.
94.  20.  shall  /.  of  iniq.  have  fellowship  with  thee  :
132.  11.  of  fruit  of  thy  body  will  1  set  on  thy  1.

12.  their  children  shall  sit  on  thy  t.  for  ever
Prov.  20.  8.  a  king  that  sitteth  in  t.  of  judgment
ha.  6.  1.  1  saw  also  the  Lord  sitting  upon  a  t.

9.  7-  on  t.  of  David  and  his  kingdom,  to  order  it
14. 13. 1  will  exalt  my  t.  above  the  stars  of  God
22.  23.  Eliakim  shall  be  for  a  glorious  t.

47-  1.  there  is  no  t.  O  daughter  of  Chaldeans
66.  1.  the  heaven  is  my  t.  and  earth.  Acts  7-  49.
Jer.  3.  17-  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  t.  ot  the  Ixrrd

13.  13.  1  will  fill  the  kings  that  sit  on  David's  t.

14.  21.  do  not  disgrace  the  t.  of  thy  glory
17.  12.  a  glorious  high  t.  from  the  beginning

25.  kings  sitting  on  the  t.  of  David,  22.  4.  30.

22.  2.  O  king,  that  sittest  upon  the  t.  29.  16.

36.  30.  he  shall  have  none  to  sit  on  the  /.  or  David

49.  38.  I  will  set  my  t.  in  Elam,  and  will  destroy
Ezek.  1.  26.  was  the  likeness  of  a  t.  10.  1.

43.  7.  the  place  of  my  t.  shall  Isr.  no  more  defile
Hag.  2.  22.  1  will  overthrow  the  t.  of  kingdoms
Mat.  5.  34.  by  heaven,  for  it  is  God's  t.  2:L  22.
19.28.  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  in  the  t.  25.  31.
Luke  1.  32.  the  Lord  shall  give  him  the  t.ot  David
Heb.  4. 16.  let  us  come  boldly  to  the  t.  or  gra  e
8. 1.  on  the  right  hand  the  t.  of  God,  12.  2.

Rev.  3.  21.  to  him  will  I  grant  to  sit  in  my  t.

4.  2.  a  t.  was  set  in  heaveD,  and  one  sat  on  the  t.

3.  there  was  a  rainbow  round  about  the  t.

4.  about  the  t.  were  four  and  twenty  seats

5.  and  out  of  the  t.  proceeded  lightnings  and
thunderings,  there  were  seven  la  r  ps  l>etore  t.

6.  before  the  /.  there  was  a  sea  of  glass,  in  t.  and
round  about  the  t.  were  four  beasts  full  of  eyes

9.  beasts  gave  thanks  to  him  that  sat  on  the  t.

10.  fall  before  him  that  sat  on  the  t.  7.  11.

5.  1.  in  the  hand  of  him  that  sat  on  the  t.  a  book

6.  and  lo,  in  the  midst  of  the  /.stood  a  T-amb

7.  took  the  book  out  of  hand  of  him  that  sat  on  t.

11.  the  voice  of  many  angels  about  the  /.

13.  glorv  be  to  him  that  sitteth  on  tire  /.

6.  16.  hide  us  from  him  that  sitteth  on  the  /.

7.  9-  a  great  multitude  stood  before  the  /.

10.  salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  on  the  /.

15.  thev  are  before  the  /.of  God, and  serve  him,
he  that  sitteth  on  the  /.  shall  dwell  among  them

17.  the  Lamb  in  midst  of  the  /.  shall  feed  them
8.3.  the  golden  altar  which  was  before  the  /.

14  3.  they  sung  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the  /.
5.  they  are  without  fault  before  the  /.  ot  God
16. 17,'there  came  a  voi.e  from  the  /.  19.  5.

19.  4.  they  worshipped  God  that  sat  on  the  /.

CO.  11.  I  saw  a  great  white  /.and  him  that  sat  on  it
21. 5.  he  thatsat  on  /.  said,  behold,  1  make  all  new
22.  1 .  a  pure  ri'  er  proceeding  out  of  the  t .

3.  the  /.  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it
His  THRON  E.

Exod.  11. 5.  from  first  born  tl  at  sitson  his 1. 12.  29.

I  2  Sam.  14.  9.  and  the  king  and  his  t.  be  guiltless
i  1  Kings  1. 37.  the  Lord  make  his  t.  greater.  47.

|  2.  19'  he  bowed  himself,  and  sat  down  on  his  t.
33.  upon  his  seed,  and  on  his  t.  shall  be  pe.ee


1  Kings  16. 11.  as  soon  as  Zimnsaton  his  t.  he  sltw
22.  10.  the  king  of  Israel,  and  Jehoshaphat  King

of  Judah,  sat  each  on  his  t.  2  Chron.  18.  9.

19.  I  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  hist.  2  Chron.  18.  18

2  Kings  13.  13.  and  Jeroboam  sat  upon  hist
25.  28.  set  his  t.  above  /.  of  kings,  Jer.  52.  32.

Job  26.  9.  he  holdeth  back  the  face  of  his  t.

Psal.  9.  7.  he  hath  prepared  hist,  for  judgment
89-  29-  his  t.  to  endure  as  the  days  ot  heaven
36.  nts  t.  shall  endure  as  the  sun  before  me
44.  thou  hast  cast  his  t.  down  to  the  ground
97.  2.  and  judgment  the  habitation  of  his  t.

103.  19.  Lord  hath  prepared  his  t.  in  the  heavens
Prov.  20.  28.  and  his  t.  is  upholden  by  mercy
Jer.  1.  15.  set  each  his  t.  at  the  gates  of  Jerusalem
33.  21.  that  David  should  not  have  a  son  on  his  t.
43.  10.  and  1  will  set  his  t.  upon  these  stones
Dan.  5.  2U.  he  was  deposed  from  his  kingly  /.

7.  9.  his  t.  was  like  the  fiery  flame,  his  wheels
Jonah  3.  6.  the  king  of  N  ineveh  rose  from  his  t.
Zech.  6.  13.  he  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  t.  and  he

shall  be  a  priest  on  his  t.  and  counsel  of  peace
Acts  2.  30.  would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his  t.
Rev.  1.  4.  from  seven  spi  its  which  are  before  his  t.

3.  21.  as  l  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in  his  t.

12.  5-  her  child  was  caught  up  to  God,  to  his  /.

Zee  Establish,  Established.

1  H  RONE-s.

Psal.  122.  5.  for  there  are  set  t.  of  judgment
Isa.  14.  9.  it  hath  raised  up  from  their  r.  the  kings
Ezek.  26. 16.  princes  shall  come  down  from  their  /.
Dan.  7.  9.  1  beheld,  till  the  /.  were  cast  down
Mat.  19.  28.  ye  shall  sit  upon  twelve  /.  lodging
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  Luke  22.  30.
Col.  1.  16.  all  created  by  him,  whether  they  be  t.
Rev.  20.  4.  and  1  saw  /.  and  they  sat  upon  them
THRONG.

Mark  3.  9.  the  multitude,  lest  they  should  /.  him
Luke  8.  45.  the  multitude  /.  thee  and  press  thee
1  H  RON  G  ED.

Mark  5.  24.  and  much  people  /.  him,  Luke  8.  42.

1  HRONGING.

Mark  5.  31.  thou  seest  the  multitude  /.  thee
1  HROUGIl.

Aum.  25.  8.  Phinehas  thrust  both  of  them  /.

2  Kings  1.  2.  Ahaziah  tell/,  lattice,  and  was  sick
Job  14.  9.  yet  /.  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud
Psal.  73.  9.  their  tongue  walketh  /.  the  earth
Eccl.  10.  18.  t.  idleness  the  house  droppeth  /.

Cant.  2.  9- he  looketh.  shewing  himself  /.  the  lattice
Isa.  27.  4.  1  would  go  /.  them,  l  would  burn  them
43.  2.  when  thou  passest  /.  waters,  /.  the  fire
62.  10.  go  /.  go  /.  the  gates,  pr  epare  the  way
Ezek.  46.  19  after  he  brought  me  /.  the  entry-
47 .  4.  he  measured,  and  brought  me  /.  waters
Zech.  13.  9.  I  will  bring  the  third  part  /.  fire
Mat.  12.  43.  he  walketh  /.  dry  places,  seeking  rest
Luke  5.  19.  they  let  him  down  /.  the  tiling
John  15.  3.  ye  are  clean  /.  the  word  I  have  spoken
17.  11.  keep/,  thine  own  name  those  given  me

17.  sanctify  them,  /.  thy  truth,  tl.v  word  is  truth

20.  31.  believing  ye  might  have  life  /.  his  name
Rom.  5.  1.  we  have  peace  with  God  /.  our  Lord

Jesu&

6. 23.  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  /.  Jesus  Christ

8.  13.  but  if  ve  /.  the  spirit  mortify  the  deeds

11.  36.  of  him,  /.  him.  to  him,  are  all  things

16.  27.  to  God  only  wise  be  glory  /.  Jesus  Christ
2  Co-.  4.  15.  /.  the  thanksgiving  of  many  redound
Gal.  2.  19.  for  1  /.  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law
A/»/f.2.7.  in  his  kindness  towards  us/.  Christ  Jesus-
22.  for  an  habitation  of  God  /.  the  Spirit

4.  6.  one  God,  who  is  above  all,  and  /.  all,  in  all

18.  /.  the  ignorance  that  is  in  them  because  of

1  Jim.  6.  10."  pierced  themselves  /.  with  sorrows
Heb.  Q.  14.  who/,  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself

10.  20.  /.  the  vail,  that  is  to  say  ,  his  flesh

13.  20.  /.  the  bhxxl  of  the  everlasting  covenant

THROUGHLY.

Exod.  21. 19.  and  shall  cause  him  to  be  /.  healed

2  Kings  11.  18-  his  images  brake  they  in  pieces  /.
Job  6.  2.  oh  that  mv  grief  were  /.  weighed

Psal.  51.  2.  wash  me  /.  from  mine  iniquity,  cleanse
Jer.  6.  Q.  thev  shall  /.  glean  the  remnant  of  Israel
7.  5.  if  ye  /.'amend  yo.  r  ways  and  y  our  doings,  if
ve  /.  execute  judgment  between  man  and  man

50. *34.  lie  shall  /.  plead  their  cause  to  give  rest
Ezek.  16.  9.  1  /.  washed  away  thy  blood  from  thee
Mat.  3.  12.  he  will  /.  purge  his  floor,  Luke  3.  17.

2  Cor.  11.6.  but  we  have  been  /.  made  manifest
2  'Rim  3  17  man  of  G.  /.  furnished  to  all  good  works
THROUGHOUT.

Josh.  24.  3.  T  led  Abraham  /.the  land  of  Canaan

1  ■''am.  23.  23.  search  him  /.thousands  of  Judah

2  Chron.  31.  20.  thus  did  Hezekiah  /.  all  J  udah
Mark  14.Q.  this  gospel  shall  be  preached  /.  the  world
John  10.  23.  without  seam,  woven  from  the  top  /.
Rom.  1.  8.  y  our  faith  is  spoken  of  /.  the  world

See  Generations.

THROW.

Judg.  2. 2.  ye  shall  /.  down  their  altars,  but  have  not

6.  25.  /.down  the  altar  of  Baal  thy  father  hath
2  Kings  9. 33.  /.  her  down,  so  they  threw  her  down
Jer.  ].  10.  1  set  thee  over  the  nations  to/,  down
31.  28.  as  1  have  watched  over  them,  to  /.  dowi.
Ezek  16  30.  thev  shall  /.  down  thine  eminent  place
Vic  5  it.  1  will  /.  down  all  thy  strong  holds
Mai  1.  4.  they  shall  build,  but  i  will  /.  down
THROWING.

Xum  35  17.  if  he  smite  him  with  /.  a  stone
THROWN.

Exod.  15.  1.  the  horse  and  hisri  ler  hath  he  /.  21.
Judo.  6.  32.  because  he  hath  /.  down  his  altar
o  Sam .  2o.  21.  his  head  be  /.  to  thee  oyer  the  wall
1  Kings  19.  10.  Israel  have  /.  down  thine  altars,  14.
Jer.  31.  40.  it  shall  not  be  /.  down  any  more
*50.  15.  foundations  fallen,  her  walls  are  /.  down
Eam- 2.  2-  the  Lord  hath  /.  down  in  his  wrath

17.  he  hath  /.  down,  and  hath  not  pitied
Ezek  29. 5.  1  will  leave  thee  /.  into  the  wilderness
38.  20.  and  the  mountains  shall  be  /.  down
X'ah.  1.  6.  and  the  rocks  are  /.  down  by  him

513


THU


THU


THU


Mai.  24.  2.  not  one  stone  left  u»>on  another,  that
shall  not  be  /.  down,  Mark  li.  2.  Luke  21.  6.
Lute  4.  .35.  when  the  devil  had  /.  mm  in  the  midst
tiev.  18.  21.  the  city  of  Bab>  Ion  shall  be  /.  down
THRUST.

Exod.  11.  1.  he  shall  surely  t.  you  out  hence

12.  .39.  because  they  were  t.  out  of  Egypt
Num.  22.25.  Balaam’s  ass  /.  herself  to  the  wall
25.  8.  Phinehas  /.  both  of  them  through

35.  20.  but  if  he  /.  him  of  hatred,  that  he  die

22.  but  if  he  /.  him  suddenly  without  enmity
Deut.  13.  5.  hath  spoken  to  /.  thee  out  of  the  way
10.  because  he  sought  to  /.  thee  from  the  Lord

15.  17-  t.  the  awl  through  his  ear  to  the  door

33.  t  14.  precious  things  t.  forth  by  the  moon
27.  he  shall  /.  out  the  enemy  from  before  thee

Judg.  3.  21.  Ehud  t.  the  dagger  into  his  belly

6.  38.  he  /.  fleece  together,  an  1  wringed  the  dew

9.  41.  and  Zebul  /.  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren
54.  his  young  men  /.  Abimelech  through

11.2.  wives’ sons  grew  up,  and  they  /.  out  Jeph.
t  Sam.  11.2.  that  1  may  /.  out  all  your  right  eyes
31.  4.  Saul  said,  /.  me  through  therewith,  lest  these
uncircumcised  come  and  /.  me,  1  Chron.  10.  4.
2  Sam.  2.  16.  and  /.  his  sword  in  his  fellow’s  side

15.  t  14.  lest  Absalom  overtake  us,  and  /.  upon  us

18.  14.  Joab  /.  3darts  through  the  heartof  Absalom

23.  6.  the  sons  of  Belial  shall  be  as  thorns  /.  away

1  Kings  2.27.  Solomon  t.  out  Abiathar  from  priesth.
•2  Kings  4.  27.  but  Gehazi  came  near  to  /.  her  away

2  C 'Aron.  26.  20.  they  /.  Uzziah  out  from  thence
Psal.  118.  13.  thou  hast  /.  at  me,  that  1  might  fall
Isa.  13.  15.  every  one  found  shall  be  t.  through

14.  19.  as  the  raiment  of  those  that  are  /.  through
Jer.  51.  4.  they  that  are  t.  through  in  her  streets
Ezek.  16.  40.  they  shall  /.thee  through  with  swords
21.  t  12.  princes  are  /.  down  to  the  sword  with

34.  21.  because  ye  have  /.  with  side  and  shoulder

46.  18.  to  /.  them  out  of  their  possessions

Joel  2.  8.  neither  shall  one  /.  another,  shall  walk
Zech.  13.  3. shall  /.  him  through  when  he  prophesieth
Mat.  11.  t  12.  they  that  t.  men  take  it  by  force
Luke  4.  29.  they  rose  and  /.  him  out  of  the  city
5.3.  and  prayed  him  he  would  t.  out  a  little

10.  15.  thou  Capernaum,  shalt  be  t.  down  to  hell

13.  28.  Jacob  in  heaven,  and  you  yourselves  t.  out
John  20.  25.  and  t.  my  hand  into  his  side,  27.

Acts  7.  27.  he  that  did  the  wrong  t.  him  away

39.  but  our  fathers  t.  him  front  them

16.  24.  who  t.  them  into  the  inner  prison
37.  and  now  do  they  t.  us  out  privily  ?

27  .  39.  minded,  if  it  were  possible,  to  t.  in  the  ship
Heb.  12.  20.  it  shall  be  stoned  or  t.  through  with
Rev.  14.  15.  t.  in  thy  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  ripe
16.  he  sat  on  the  cloud,  t.  in  his  sickle  on  the  earth

18.  t.  in  thy  sharp  sickle  and  gather  the  clusters

19.  the  angel  t.  in  his  sickle  into  the  earth

THRUST  ETH.

Job  32.  13.  God  t.  him  down,  not  man
THUMB.

• Exod.  29.  20.  then  shalt  thou  put  it  on  the  t.  of  their
right  hand,  Lev.  8.  23,  24.  |  14.  14,  17,  25,28.
THUMBS.

fudg.  1.  6.  they  caught  him  and  cut  off  his  t.

7.  seventy  kings  having  their  t.  and  toes  cutoff

THUMMIM.

Grim  and  Thummim  ;  According  to  the  Hebrew ,
Exod.  28.  30.  the  literal  signification  of  these  two
words  is,  light  and  perfection,  or  the  shining  and
the  perfect.  According  to  St.  Jerome,  doctrine
and  judgment.  According  to  the  LXX,  declara¬
tion  or  manifestation,  and  truth.  Some  will  have
it,  that  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  only  epithets
or  explanations  of  the  stones  of  the  breastplate  of
the  high  priest  ;  as  if  it  were  said.  Thou  shalt  put
therein  stones  that  are  shining  and  perfect.
Others,  to  prove  that  the  Urim  and  Thummim
were  not  the  same  thing  with  the  twelve  stones  in
the  breastplate,  give  the  following  reasons.  (1)
Because  the  stones  were  set  and  engraven  in  the
breastplate,  Exod.  28.  17, 21 .  the  Urim  and’V hum
■mim  only  put  into  it,  which  is  a  word  of  quite
different  and  more  loose  and  large  signification,
■and  therefore  probably  does  not  design  the  same
thing.  (2)  h  is  not  likely  ,  that  in  such  a  brief
account  of  the  sacred  utensils,  the  same  command
would  be  repeated  again  ;  especially  in  more  dark
and  general  words  than  it  was  mentioned  before.
And  how  could  Moses  put  it  in,  when  the  work¬
men  had  fastened  it  there  before?  Or,  why  should
he  be  required  to  put  it  in  the  breastplate,  when
dt  was  fastened  to  it  already,  and  could  not,
without  violence,  be  taken  from  it  ?  (3)  Because
■the  stones  were  put  in  by  the  workmen,  Exod.
39.  10.  the  Urim  and  Thummim  by  Moses  him¬
self,  Lev.  8.  8.  It  is  objected,  that  where  the
stones  are  mentioned,  there  is  no  mention  of  Urim
■and  '1  hummim,  as  in  Exod.  39.  10.  And  that
where  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  mentioned,
there  is  no  mention  made  of  the  stones,  as  in  l  ev.
6.  8.  which  seems  to  shew  they  were  one  and  the
same  thing.  To  which  they  answer,  that  there  is
an  evident  reason  for  bath  these  omissions ;  of
the  former  in  Exodus,  because  Moses  mentions
■only  those  things  which  were  made  by  the  work¬
men,  whereas  the  Urim  and  1  hummim  seems
to  have  been  made  immediately  by  God,  or  by
Moses  with  God's  direction :  of  the  latter  in
I.eviticus,  because  the  stones  are  implied  in  the
breastplate  as  a  part  of  it,  and  fastened  to  it,
whereas  there  Moses  only  mentions  what  was  put
in  by  himself.  Some  say,  that  the  Urim  and
1  hummim  were  two  little  golden  figures  which
■gave  responses,  which  were  shut  up  in  the  breast
plate  as  in  a  purse,  and  which  answered ,  with  an
■articulate  voice,  to  all  such  questions  as  were  put
io  them  by  the  high  priest.  Others  think,  that  the
name  .1  EH  O  v  A  H  written  upon  a  /  late  of  gold,  was
that  the  Scripture  calls  Urim  and  I  hummim.
there  are  various  other  conjectures  concerning  the
Urim  and  1  hummim,  but  nothing  certain,  be¬
cause  the  Scuptu-e  is  silent  in  this  matter.  It

514


may  suffice  us  to  know,  that  t  his  was  a  singular  piece
of  uivtne  workmanship,  which  the  high  priest  uas
obliged  to  wear  upon  solemn  occasions,  as  one  of  the
conditions  upon  which  God  engaged  to  give  him  an¬
swers.

There  is  a  great  diversity  of  opinions  likewise  o  n
t e ruing  the  manner  in  which  God  was  consulted
by  Urim  and  I  hummim.  It  is  agreed,  that  this
way  of  consultation  was  used  only  in  aff  airs  of
very  great  importance  :  that  the  high  prie  t  was
the  only  officiating  minister  in  this  ceremony ;
and  that  for  this  he  was  to  be  clothed  in  all  his  ponti
fical  habits  ;  particularly  he  was  to  have  on  his
breastplate,  to  which  the  Urim  and  1  hummim
was  affixed ;  and  lastly,  that  he  was  not  allowed
to  perf  rm  this  solemn  consultation  for  a  private
person,  but  only  for  the  king,  for  the  president  oj
the  Sanhedrim,  for  the  general  of  the  army  oj
Israel,  or  for  other  public  persons  :  and  even  then,
not  upon  any  affair  of  a  private  nature,  but  for
things  that  relate  to  the  pubtic  u  elf  are  of  church  or
state.

When  the  Urim  and  Thummim  was  to  be  consulted,
the  high  priest  put  on  his  robes,  and  presented
hinue/f  not  in  the  sanctuary,  where  he  could  not
enter  but  once  a  year,  but  in  the  holy  place,  be¬
fore  the  curtain  that  parted  the  most  holy  from
the  holy  place.  There  standing  upright,  and
turning  his  face  toward  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
upon  which  the  divine  presence  reposed,  he  proposed
the  matter  jor  which  he  had  been  consulted.  Be
hind  him,  at  some  distance  out  of  the  holy  place,
stood  the  person  for  whom  God  was  consulted,  ex¬
pecting  with  humility  and  reverence,  the  answer
that  it  should  please  the  Lord  to  give  him.  ’The
Bobbins,  who  are  Ji  llowed  by  Josephus,  Philo,  and
several  of  the  ancient  fathers,  are  of  opinion  that
the  high  priest  having  then  his  eyes  fixed  upon  the
stones  of  the  breastplate ,  which  was  before  him,  he
there  read  the  answer  of  the  Lord.  The  letters
that  raised  themselves  out  of  theii  places,  and  that
shined  with  more  than  ordinary  lustre,  were  formed
into  the  answer  desired.  Lor  example,  when  David
inquired  of  God,  whether  he  should  go  up  to  one  of
the  cities  of  Judah,  2  Sam.  2.  1.  it  was  answered
him,  A  lah,  go  up.  The  three  letters,  Ain,  Lamed,
and  He,  came  out  of  their  places,  as  it  were,  and
raised  themselves  above  the  rest,  to  compose  that
word  which  contained  the  answer.

But  there  are  some  difficulties  in  this  opinion.  All
the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet  were  not  f  und
in  the  breastplate  :  there  were  j  ,  ,r  wanting,  Ileth.
leth,  Zade,  and  Koph.  jo  supply  these,  the
Bobbins  pretend  that  the  names  of  Abraham,
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  were  also  upon  the  breastplate  :
but  for  all  that,  1  eth  would  be  still  wanting,
j  here  fore  they  say ,  that  this  title  also  was  readthere.
Col  elle-schibte- Israel.— See  here  all  the  tribes
of  Israel.  But  all  this  is  advanced  without  proof ,
and  without  the  least  probability.  A  second  dif¬
ficulty  is  this,  that  though  one  should  admit  all
that  the  Hebrew  doctors  suggest  in  this  affair,  yet
by  what  rules  did  the  high  priest  make  a  combi¬
nation  of  these  letters,  and  how  put  he  them  to¬
gether  ?  Lor  it  is  not  said  that  they  came  out  of
their  places,  but  that  they  only  raised  themselves
above  the  rest.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  any  six
of  the  letters  should  hate  swelled  and  shined  with
more  than  ordinary  lustre  ;  how  must  the  high
priest  dispose  them,  which  must  be  first  or  last ?  It
is  answered,  that  in  this  circumstance,  he  was
always  inspired  and  filled  with  the  spirit  of  pro¬
phecy  ;  but  if  it  were  so,  then  the  U  rim  and  1  hum¬
mim  would  have  been  unnecessary:  for  why
must  miracles  be  multiplied  without  any  occasion  ?
The  high  priest  needed  only  speak  himself.  And
perhaps  the  whole  use  of  the  Urim  and  I  hummim
was  this,  to  be  a  sign  to  the  high  priest  that  the
Lord  would  replenish  him  with  an  internal  and
supernatural  light,  and  make  him  know  his  will
in  what  was  inquired  after.

Others  think ,  with  a  great  deal  of  probability,  that
God  then  gave  his  answers  in  articulate  voices,
which  were  heard  within  the  sanctuary ,  and  from
between  the  cheruhims,  which  coieied  the  ark  or
the  propitiatory.  When  the  Israelites  made  peace
with  the  Gibeonites,  they  were  blamed  Jor  not
having  inquired  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  Josh.
9.  14.  which  insinuates  that  he  had  been  used  to
make  his  voice  heard  when  he  was  consulted.

If  it  be  inquired  how  long  the  custom  of  consulting
God  by  Urim  and  Thummim  subsisted  in  Israel ;
the  Rabbins  think,  that  it  continued  no  longer
than  under  the  tabernacle.  It  is  a  maxim  among
them,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  spake  to  the  children  of
Israel  by  Urim  and  1  hummim  while  the  taber¬
nacle  remained ;  and  under  the  first  temple,  that
is,  the  temple  of  Solomon,  by  the  prophets  ;  and
under  the  second  temple,  or  after  the  captivity  of
Babylon,  by  the  Bath-kol,  or  the  daughter  of  the
voice.  By  this  they  mean  a  voice  sent  from  heaven,
as  that  which  was  heard  at  the  baptism  of  Christ,
and  at  his  transfiguration,  Mat.  3.  17-  I  17-  5.

Sjencer  has  adopted  this  opinion,  and  endeavours
to  support  it  by  these  two  arguments.  The  first  is,
that  the  Urim  and  1  hummim  were  a  consequence
of  the  divine  government ,  or  of  the  Theocracy  of
the  Hebrews.  While  the  Lord  immediately  go¬
verned  his  people,  it  was  necessary  that  there
should  always  be  a  means  at  hand  to  consult  him,
and  to  have  recourse  lo  him.  Secondly,  that  this
method  was  established  to  consult  God  upon  af¬
fairs  that  concerned  the  common  interest  of  the
whole  nation.  But  the  'Theocracy  ceased,  says
he,  when  the  kingdom  became  hereditary  in  the
person  and  family  of  Solomon.  'I he  interests  of
the  nation  ceased  to  be  common,  after  the  di¬
vision  of  Israel  into  two  monarchies ;  one  go¬
verned  by  Behoboam  and  the  other  by  Jeroboam .
Lastly,  what  seems  to  be  more  convincing  than
any  reasons  drawn  from  a  conformity  of  things,
it  does  not  appear  from  the  sacred  history,  that


there  are  any  footsteps  of  consulting  the  Lord  by
Urim  and  I  hummim,  after  the  construction  < j
the  temple  of  Solomon  to  the  time  of  its  destruc¬
tion;  and  after  its  distinction,  all  are  agreed,  that
this  was  net  er  restored  to  them  again.

Exod.  23.  30.  thou  shalt  put  on  the  breastplate  01
judgment,  the  urim  and  the  t.  Lev.  8.8.
Dent.  3.3.  8.  let  thy  t.  and  urim  be  with  thy  holy  one
Ezra  2.6 3 .  stood  u p  priest  w it h  urim  and  t . Neh .7.67.
1  HUM  HER.

Exod.  9.  23.  the  Lord  sent  t.  and  hail,  the  fire  ran
29.  the  t.  shall  cease,  nor  shall  there  be  hail
1  Sam.  7.  10.  the  Lord  thundered  with  great  t.

12.  17.  he  shall  send  t.  ||  18.  the  Lord  sent  t.

Job  26.  14.  the  t.  of  his  power  who  can  understand  ?
28.  26.  a  way  for  the  lightning  of  the  t.  38.  25.

39.  19.  hast  thou  clothed  his  neck  with  t.?

25.  he  smelleth  the  t.  of  the  captains  afar  off

Psal.  77-  18.  the  voice  of  thy  t.  was  in  the  heavens
81. 7-  1  answered  thee  in  the  secret  place  of  t.

104.  7.  at  the  voice  of  thy  t.  they  hasted  away
Isa.  29.6.  thou  shalt  be  visited  of  the  Lord  with  t
Marks.  17.  Boanerges,  which  is,  the  sons  of/.

Rev.  6. 1.  I  heard,  as  it  were,  the  noise  of  t.

14.  2.  1  heard  a  voice,  as  the  voice  of  a  great  /.

I  II  UN  HER.

1  Sam.  2.  10.  out  of  heaven  shall  he  /.  upon  them
Job  40.  9.  or  canst  thou  t.  v,  ith  a  voice  like  him  f
THUNDERS.

Exod.  9.  3.3.  and  the  /.  and  hail  ceased,  34.

19. 16.  there  were  t.  and  lightnings,  Rev.  16.  18.

See  Seven.

THUNDER  BOLTS.

Psal.  78.  48.  he  gave  their  Hocks  to  hot  t.

THUNDERED.

1  Sam.  7. 10.  the  Lord  t.  witu  a  great  thunder

2  Sam.  22. 14.  the  1  .ord  t.  from  heaven,  Psal.  18. 13.
John  12.  29.  they  that  heard  it,  said  that  it  /.

THUNDER  ETH.

Job  37.  4.  he  t.  with  the  voice  of  his  excellency
5.  God  t.  marvellously  with  his  voice
Psal.  29.3.  the  God  of  glory  /.  the  Lord  is  on  waters
THUN  DER 1 N GS.

Exod.  9.  28.  that  there  be  no  more  mighty  /.

20.  18.  and  all  the  people  saw  the  t.

Rev.  4.  5.  out  of  the  throne  proceeded  t.  19.  6.

8.5.  and  there  were  voices  and  f..  11.  19.

THUS.

Gen.  6. 22.  t.  did  Noah,  according  as  G.  commanded

20. 16.  /.she  was  reproved  ||  25.22.  why  am  I  t.?
Exod.  5. 15.  wherefore  dealest  thou  /.  with  us  ?

12.  11.  /.  shall  ye  eat  it,  with  your  loins  girded
14.  11.  wherefore  hast  thou  dealt  /.  with  us  ?

l  ev.  15.  31.  /.  separute  the  children  of  Israel

16.3.  /.  shall  Aaron  come  into  the  holy  place
Num.  8. 14.  /.  shalt  thou  separate  the  I.evites

11.  15.  if  thou  deal  /.  with  me,  kill  me
Deut.  29.24.  wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  t.

Josh.  7. 10.  wherefore  liest  thou  /.  on  thy  face  t
Judg.  8.  1.  men  said,  why  hast  thou  served  us  /. 7

13.  18.  why  askest  thou  /.  after  my  name :

1  Sam.  14.  9-  if  they  say  /.  to  us,  tarry  till  we  come
10.  but  if  they  say  /.  come  up  to  us,  then  we  w  ill

20.  7-  if  he  say  t.  it  is  well,  2  Sam.  15.  26.

2  Sam.  6.  22.  I  will  yet  be  more  vile  than  /.

18.  14.  Joab  said,  1  may  not  tarry  /.  w  ith  thee

.33.  as  he  went/,  he  said,  O  my  son  Absalom

1  Kings  3.  22.  /.  they  spake  before  the  king

2  Chron.  .32. 22.  /.  the  l  ord  saved  Hezekiah
Ezra  5.  11.  and  t.  they  returned  us  answer

6.  2.  and  therein  was  a  record  /.  written
Neh.  5.  13.  even  /.  be  he  shaken  out  and  emptied
Esth.  6.  9.  t.  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  whom,  11.
Job  27.  12.  why  then  are  ye  /.  altogether  vain  r
Psal.  73.  15.  if  1  say  I  will  speak  /.  behold

21.  /.my  heart  was  grieved,  and  1  was  pricked
128.  4.  /.  shall  the  man  be  blessed  that  feareth  Lord

Isa.  24.  13.  when  /.  it  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  land

47.  15.  /.shall  they  be  unto  thee  with  whom
Jer.  4.27-  for  /.  hath  the  Lord  said,  6.  6.

5.  13.  /.  shall  it  be  done  unto  them
18.23.  deal  /.  with  them  in  time  of  thine  anger

22.  8.  why  hath  the  Lord  done  /.  to  this  great  city  ?
26.  19.  t.  might  we  procure  evil  against  our  souls
Ezek.  31. 18.  to  whom  art  thou  /.  like  in  glory  f
Amos  2.  11.  is  it  not  even  /.  O  children  of  Israel
Mai.  1.  1.3.  /.  ye  brought  an  offering  should  1  accept
Mat.  2.  5.  /.  it  is  written  of  the  prophet,  l.uke  24.  46.
3.  15./.  it  becomes  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness
26.  54.  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that  /.  it  must  be
Luke  1. 25.  /.  hath  Lord  dealt  with  me  in  the  days
2.  48.  son,  why  hast  thou  /.  dealt  with  us  ?

11. 45.  master,  /.  saying,  thou  reproachest  us  also

17.  30.  /.  shall  it  be  when  Son  of  man  is  revealed

18.  11.  Pharisee  prayed  /.  God.  1  thank  thee
22.  51.  Jesus  answered  and  said,  suffer  ye  /.  far

2.3.  46.  Jesus  having  said  /.  he  gave  up  the  ghost

24.  .36.  as  they  /.  spake,  Jesus  himself  in  the  midst

40.  when  he  had  /.  spoken,  he  shewed  his  hands
46.  /.  it  is  written,  /.  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer

John  4.  6.  Jesus  wearied  with  journey,  sat  /.on  well

1 1 . 4.3.  when  had  /.  spoken,  he  cried,  Lazarus  come

48.  if  we  let  him  /.  alone,  all  will  believe

Acts’?  1. 11.  he  said,  /.  saith  the  Holy  Ghost
Rom.  9. 20. thing  formed  say,  why  hast  made  me/./

1  Cor.  14.  25.  /.  are  secrets  ot  his  heart  made  manifest

2  Cor.  5.  14.  for  the  love  of  Christ  constrains  us,  be¬

cause  we  /.  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,
then  all  dead

Phil.  3. 15.  let  as  many  as  be  perfect,  be  t.  minded
Heb  6.  9.  better  things  of  you,  though  we  /.  speak
Rev.  9.  17-  /•  I  saw  horses  in  vision,  them  that  sat

16.5.  art  righteous,  because  thou  hast  judged  /.

See  Did,  Do,  Lord.

THUS  and  THUS.

Josh.  7.  20.  Achan  said  /.  and  t,  have  I  done
Judg.  18.4.  /.  and  t.  dealeth  Micah  with  me
2  Sam.  17. 15.  /.  and  t.  did  Ahithophel  counsel  Ab¬
salom,  and  /.  and  t.  have  I  counselled

1  Kings  14.  5.  /.  and  t.  shalt  say  to  Jeroboam’s  wife

2  Kings  5.  4.  /.  and  t.  said  the  maid  of  Israel

9.  12.  he  said,  t.  and  t.  spake  he  to  me,  sav»  g


T  I  M


T  1  M


TIM


THYINE.

Rev.  18.  <2.  none  buy  the  merchandise  of  /.  wood
TIDINGS.

Erod.  33.  4.  when  the  people  heard  these  evil  /.

1  Sam.  4.  19.  when  Phinehas'  wife  heard  the  /.

11.  4.  they  told  the  /.  of  the  men  of  labesh,  6-
27-  11.  David  saved  none  alive  to  bring  /.  to  Gath

2  Sam.  4.  4.  when  /.  came  of  Saul  and  Jonathan

13.  30.  /.  came,  saying,  Absalom  hath  slain  the

18.  19.  let  me  now  run  and  bear  the  king  /.

20.  Joab  said,  thou  shalt  not  bear  /.  this  day
22.  why  wilt  thou  run  *  thou  hast  no  /.  ready
31.  Cushi  came,  Cushi  said,  /.  my  lord  the  king

1  Kings  2.  28.  then  /.  came  to  Joab  and  Joab  fled

14.  6.  for  1  am  sent  to  thee  with  heavy  /.

1  Chron.  10.  9.  and  sent  to  carry  /.  to  their  idols
Psal.  112.  7.  he  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  /.

Jer.  20.  15.  cursed  be  the  man  that  brought  /.

49.  23.  for  they  have  heard  evil  /.  faint-hearted
Ezek.  21.  7.  that  thou  shalt  answer  for  the  /.

Dan.  11.  44.  /.  out  of  the  east  shall  trouble  him
Luke  1.19.  I  am  sent  to  shew  thee  these  glad  t.  2.  10.

8.  1.  shewing  the  glad  /.  of  the  kingdom  of  God
Acts  11.  22.  t.  of  these  things  came  to  the  church

13.  32.  and  wedeclare  unto  you,  glad  t.  the  promise

21.  31.  t.  came  to  the  chief  captain  of  the  band
Rom.  10.  15.  that  bring  glad  t.  of  good  things

HE.  [See  Good.

1  Sam.  6.  7.  and  t.  the  kine  to  the  cart,  10.

1  Kings  18.  +  44.  t.  thy  chariot,  and  get  thee  down
20.  +  14.  who  shall  t.  the  battle  ?  he  said,  Thou
Prov.  6.  21.  bind  on  thy  heart  and  t.  about  thy  neck

TIED.

Erod.  39-  31.  and  they  t.  to  it  a  lace  of  blue

2  Kings  7.  10.  no  man  there,  but  horses  t.  asses  t.
Mat.lX.  2.  ye  shall  find  an  ass  t.  and  a  colt  with  her,

bring  them  to  me,  Mark  11.  2.  4.  Luke  19.  30.
TILE.

Ezek.  4.  1.  thou  also,  son  of  man,  take  thee  a  t.
TILING.

Luke  5. 19.  they  let  him  down  thro’  the  t.  with  couch
TILL.

Gen.  19.  22.  do  any  thing  t.  thou  be  come  thither

1  Sam.  22.  3.  t.  I  know  what  God  will  do  for  me

2  Sam.  3.  35.  if  I  taste  bread  t.  the  sun  be  down
2  Chron.  26.  15.  he  was  helped  t.  he  was  strong

36.  16.  t.  the  wrath  arose,  t.  there  was  no  remedy
Ezra  2.  63.  t.  there  stood  up  a  priest,  Neh.  7.  65.

9.  14.  be  angry  with  ns  t.  thou  hadst  consumed  us
Job  14.  14.  all  days  will  I  wait  t.  my  change  come

27.  5.  t.  I  die  ||  Isa.  22.  14.  not  purged,  t.  ye  die
Psal.  10.  15.  seek  his  wickedness  <.  thou  find  none
Prov.  29.  11.  a  wise  man  keepeth  it  in  t.  afterwards
Eccl.  2.  3.  t.  I  might  see  what  was  that  good
Cant.  2.  7-  stir  not  up  my  love  t.  he  please,  3.  5.
Isa.  5.  8.  that  lay  field  to  field,  t.  there  be  no  place

62.  j.  and  give  him  no  rest,  t.  he  establish,  and  t.

he  make  Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth
Jer.  49.  9.  destroy  t.  they  have  enough,  Chad.  5.

52.  3.  t.  be  had  cast  them  out  from  his  presence
Lam.  3.  50.  t.  the  Lord  look  down  from  heaven
Ezek.  28.  15.  was  perfect  t.  iniquity  was  found  in
Dan.  4.  23.  t.  sever,  times  pass  over  him

12.  13.  but  go  thou  thy  way  t.  the  end  be
Dos.  5.  15.  t.  they  acknowledge  their  offence

10.  12.  t.  he  rain  righteousness  upon  you

Mat.  1.  25.  /.she  had  brought  forth  her  first-born

5.  18.  /.  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one  jot  not  pass
Luke  12.  50.  I  am  straitened  t.  it  be  accomplished

15.  8.  doth  not  seek  diligently  /.  she  find  it

19.  13.  he  said  unto  them,  occupy  /.  I  come
John  21.  22.  if  I  will  that  he  tarry  /.  1  come,  23.
Acts 7. 18.  t.  another  kingarose  who  knew-  not  Joseph

23.  12.  not  eat,  /.  they  had  killed  Paul,  14,  21.
Eph.  4.  13.  /.  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  faith
Phil.  1.  10.  without  offence,  /.  the  day  of  Christ

1  Tim.  4.  13.  /.  1  come,  give  attendance  to  reading
Rev.  2.  25.  that  which  ye  have,  hold  fast  ,.  I  come

7.  3.  /.  we  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  God
15.  8.  /.  the  seven  pkagues  were  fulfilled

20.  3.  /.  the  thousand  years  should  be  fulfilled

See  Consumed,  Morning,  Until.
TILL,  Verb.

Gen.  2.  5.  was  not  a  man  to  /.  the  ground,  3.  23.

2  'am.  9.  10.  and  thy  servants  shall  /.  the  land
Jer.  27.  11.  they  shall  /.  it,  and  dwell  therein

Tl  LI. AGE.

1  Chron.  27.  26.  Ezri  w-as  over  them  that  were  for  t.
.V eh.  10.  .37.  I  .evites  might  have  the  tithes  of  t.
Prov.  13.  23.  much  food  is  in  the  /.  of  the  poor
Tl  LLED.

Ezek.  36.  9.  I  am  for  you,  ye  shall  be  /.  and  sown
36.  31.  and  the  desolate  land  shall  be  /.

TILLER.

Gen.  4.  2.  but  Cain  was  a  /.  of  the  ground
TIL  LEST.

Gen.  4.  12.  when  thou  /.  ground,  it  shall  not  yield
T1LLETH.

Prov.  12.  11.  he  that  /.  land  shall  be  satisfied

28.  19.  he  that  t.  his  land  shall  have  plenty

TIMBER.

Lev.  14.  45.  he  shall  break  down  the  t.  thereof

1  Kings  5.  18.  so  they  prepared  t.  and  stones  to  build

the  house,  1  Chron.  22. 14.  2,  Chron.  2.  9.
15.  22.  and  they  took  away  the  /.  of  Ramah
Ezra  5.  8.  /.  is  laid  in  the  walls,  work  prospereth

6.  11.  let  /.  be  pulled  down  from  his  house
Neh.  2.  8.  that  he  may  sive  me  t.  to  make  beams
Ezek.  26.  12.  they  shall  lay  thy  /.  in  the  water
llab.  2.  11.  the  beam  out  of  the  /.  shall  answer
Zech.  5.  4.  it  shall  consume  it  with  the  /.  thereof

T1MBR  EL.

F.xod.  15.  20.  and  Miriam  took  a  /.  in  her  hand
Job  21.  12.  they  take  the  t.  and  harp,  and  rejoice
Psal.  81.  2.  take  a  psalm,  bring  hither  the  /.

149.  3.  let  them  sing  praises  to  him  with  the  /.

150.  4.  praise  him  with  the  t.  and  dance,  praise

TIMBRELS.

Erod.  15.  20.  all  the  women  went  out  after  her  with  t.
Jvdg.  11.  34.  bis  daughter  came  out  with  t.

2  Sam.  6.  5  David  and  house  of  Israel  played

before  the  Lord  on  /.  1  Chron.  12.  8.


|  Psal.  68.  25.  were  the  damsels  playing  with  /.

Jer.  31.  t  4.  thou  shalt  be  adorned  w  ith  thy  /.
TIME.

This  term  is  commonly  taken  for  the  measure  of
motion,  or  for  the  duration  of  any  thing.  It  is  also
taken  for  opportunity,  or  the  favourable  moment  of
doing  or  omitting  any  thing.  Keel.  8.  5.  A  wise
man’s  heart  disrerneth  both  time  and  judgment  :
he  knows  both  what  he  ought  to  do,  and  what  are  the
fittest  seasi  ns  for  doing  it.  Our  Saviour  says,  m
John  7.  6,  8.  My  time  is  not  yet  come  ;  by
which  some  understand ,  the  time  of  his  death  ;
others,  the  season  of  his  appearing  publicly  in  the
world;  and  others,  the  time  of  his  going  up  to  the
feast  of  tabernacles :  that  is,  l  know  my  time  to
go,  when  it  will  be  most  safe  and  proper  for  me.

1  shall  be  there  some  time  during,  the  feast,  but
my  time  is  not  yet  come.  7 'he  time  of  the  ven¬
geance  of  Gcd  is  sometimes  called  the  time  of  the
Lord,  the  time  of  his  visiting.  Jer.  50.  27,  31.
V  oe  unto  them,  for  their  day  is  come,  the  time
of  their  visitation.

To  gain  the  time,  is  mentioned  in  Dan.  2.  8.  1

know  of  certainty  that  ye  would  gain  the  time.
"The  magicians  required  a  length  of  time  from  the
king  to  explain  his  dream,  hoping  that  his  desire
of  knowing  might  have  passed  away,  or  that  the
dream  might  have  come  into  his  memory .  St.  Paul
advises  the  faithful  to  redeem  the  time,  because
the  days  are  evil,  I  ph.  5.  16.  lime  is  redeemed
when  we  carefully  embrace  and  improve  all  the
occasions  and  opportunities  which  the  Lxird  pre¬
sents  unto  us  for  his  glory,  and  the  good  of  our¬
selves  and  others  ;  not  suffering  these  seasons  to  be
stolen  from  us,  and  lost  by  cares  and  thought .>
about  the  world :  and  whereas  we  have  lost  and
misimproved  much  time,  we  ought  therefore  to
double  our  diligence,  and  do  the  more  good  in  time
to  come.

King  fihasnerus  consulted  with  the  wise  men  who
knew  the  times,  Esth.  1.  13.  'That  is,  he  advised
with  his  counsellors  that  understood  the  history,
the  customs,  and  the  laws  of  the  Persians.  The
knowledge  of  history  is  one  of  the  principal  quali¬
fications  of  a  statesman.  For  how  should  he  know
the  interest  of  his  country,  if  he  is  ignorant  of  its
times,  revolutions,  and  remarkable  occurrences  ’!
St.  Jerom  has  it  in  his  translation ,  he  consulted  the
sages  that  were  always  near  his  person,  according
to  the  custom  of  kings.  'The  Chaldee  paraphrast
will  have  it,  that  he  consulted  the  children  oj
Jssachar,  who  were  skilful  in  the  knowledge  of
times  and  seasons.  This  tribe  was  noted  for  their
knowledge  of  the  times.  1  Chron.  12.  32.  Of  the
children  of  Issaehar,  which  were  men  that  had
understanding  of  the  times,  to  know  what  Israel
ought  to  do.  Some  by  this  understand  their  know¬
ledge  of  tl‘3  stars,  and  of  the  several  seasons  and
changes  of  the  air  ;  which  might  be  of  good  use  in
husbandry ,  to  which  this  tribe  was  addicted.  Others
think,  that  by  this  is  to  be  understood  their  point
cal  prudence  in  discerning  and  embracing  the  fit

,  seasons  for  all  their  actions.

Christ  Jesus  says  'to  his  apostles,  who  asked  him  if  he
was  si  on  to  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel,  1 1  is
not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  seasons,  which
the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power,  Acts  1.  7.
They  still  thought  that  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah
was  to  be  a  temporal  kingdom  :  but  afterwards  they
were  undeceived,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  they
received  at  the  time  of  Pentecost,  instructed  them ,
that  the  complete  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  the
renewing  of  all  things,  was  not  to  take  place  before
the  end  of  the  world.  Acts  3.  20,  21.  where  St.
Peter,  speaking  to  the  Jews,  calls  this  time,  a  time
of  refreshing,  and  the  times  of  the  restitution  of
all  things.  St.  Paul,  1  Thess.  5.  1,2.  makes  use
of  almost  the  same  terms,  in  which  our  Saviour
expressed  himself  to  his  apostles,  concerning  his
last  coming.  But  of  the  times  and  seasons  ye
have  no  need  that  I  write  unto  you  :  for  ye  know
that  the  day  of  the  Lord  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the
night.

1  ime  is  put  for  a  year.  Seven  times,  that  is,  seven
years,  Dan.  4.  16.  Acceptable  time,  is  the  time
of  the  favour,  of  the  goodness,  and  of  the  mercy,  of
God,  Psal.  69.  13.  My  prayer  is  unto  thee  in  an
acceptable  time.  I  pray  in  a  time  of  grace.  I
seek  thee  when  thru  mayest  be  found  in  a  good  day,
in  the  day  of  grace  and  mercy.  The  devils  com¬
plained,  Mat.  8.  29.  that  Christ  was  come  to  tor¬
ment  them  before  the  time  :  that  is,  before  the  last
judgment,  at  which  the  devils  will  be  thrown  for
ever  into  the  fire  prepared  for  them.  The  fulness
of  time,  is  the  time  which  God  had  appointed  and
predicted  as  the  fittest  season  for  the  coming  of  the
Messiah,  Gal.  4.  4.  The  Psalmist  says ,  Psaf.  31 .
15.  My  times  are  in  thy  hand  :  that  is,  the  time
of  my  life,  how  long  1  shall  live  ;  or  all  the  affairs
and  events  of  my  life  are  wholly  in  thy  power,  to
dispose  and  order  as  thou  seest  fit .

Gen.  18.  10.  return  according  to  the  t.  of  life,  14.
24.  11.  the  /.  that  women  go  out  to  draw  water
39.5.  from  the/,  he  had  made  him  overseer
47.  29-  the  /.  drew  nigh  that  Israel  must  (lie
Erod.  21.19.  only  he  shall  pay  for  lossofhis/.

Lev.  15.  25.  if  beyond  the  /.  of  her  separation
18.  18.  a  wife  besides  the  other  in  her  life-/.

Num.  13.  20.  the  /.  was  the  /.  of  first  ripe  grapes
26.  10.  what  /.  the  fire  devoured  250  men
Devt.  16.  9.  such  /.  thou  put  the  sickle  to  the  corn
Josh.  10.27.  at  the  /.  of  the  going  down  of  the  sun
Joshua  commanded,  2  Chron.  18.  34.
42.  and  their  land  did  loshua  take  at  one  /.

Judg.  18.31.  all  the  /.  the  house  of  God  was  in  Shiloh

2  Sam.  7.  11.  since  the  /.  1  commanded  judges
11.  1.  at  the  /.  when  kings  go  forth  to  battle
23.  8.  against  eight  hundred  he  slew  at  one  /.

2  Kings  5.  26.  is  it  /.  to  receive  money  and  garments
1  Chron.  9.  25.  were  to  come  from  /.  to  /.  with  them
Ezra  4.  10.  peace,  and  at  such  a/.  17. 1  7.-  12.

10.  13.  people  are  many,  and  it  is  a  /.  of  rain


Neh.  2.6.  when  wilt  thou  return  ?  and  I  set  nim  a  ».
Job  6.  17.  what  /.  they  wax  warm  they  vanish
9. 19.  if  of  judgment,  who  shall  set  me  a  /.  to  plead

15.  32.  it  shall  be  accomplished  before  his  /.

22.  16.  wic  ked,  which  were  cut  down  out  of  /.

38.23.  which  1  reserved  against  the  /.  of  trouble
39.  1.  knowestthou  the  /.  they  bring  forth  r  2.

Psal.  32.  6.  in  a  t.  when  thou  mayest  be  found
37.  19.  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  m  the  evil  /.

41.  1.  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  t.  of  trouble
56.3.  what  /.  1  am  atraid,  1  will  trust  in  thee
69.  13.  my  prayer  is  to  thee  in  an  acceptable/.

81.  15.  their  /.  should  have  endured  tor  ever
89-47.  remember  how  short  my  /.  is

105.  i9.  until  the/,  that  Ins  word  came
Ecct.  3.  1.  there  is  a  /.  to  every  purpose,  17.  I  8.  <k
2.  At.  to  be  born,  and  a  /.  to  die  ;  a  /.  to  plant

7.  1?.  why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  /.  /

8  5.  a  wise  man’s  heartdiscerneth  /.  and  judgment
9.  11.  but  /.  and  chance  happened]  to  them  all
12.  so  are  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil  t.

Isa.  26.  17-  that  drawetli  near  the  /.of  her  delivery
28.  19  from  the  /.  it  goeth  forth  it  shall  take  j  ou
-15.  21.  who  hath  declared  this  from  ancient  /.

48  16.  from  the  t.  that  it  was,  there  am  1
49.8.  in  an  acceptable  /.  have  1  heard  thee,  and
in  a  day  of  salvation  helped  thee,  2  Cor.  6.  2-
60.  22.  I  the  Loro  will  hasten  it  in  his  t.

Jer.  6.  15.  at  the/.  I  visit  they  shall  be  cast  down

8.  7.  crane  and  swallow  observe  the  /.of  coming

15.  looked  for  a  /.  ol  health,  and  behold  trouble
14.  8.  the  .Saviour  thereof  in  t.  of  trouble

19.  and  f  r  the  /.  oi  healing,  and  behold  trouble
30.  7.  it  is  even  the  /.of  Jacob’s  trouble
46.  21.  and  the  /.  of  their  visitation,  50.  27.

49.  8.  the  /.  that  l  will  visit  him,  50.  31.

19.  and  v  ho  w  ill  appoint  me  the  /.  ?  50.  44.

51.  33.  Babylon  like  a  iloor.  it  is  /.  to  thresh  her
Ezek.  4  10.  from  /.  to  /.  shalt  thou  eat  it

16.  8.  thy  t.  was  the  /.  of  love,  1  spread  my  skirt
57.  as  at  the  /.  of  thy  reproach  of  daughters

30.  3.  day  is  near,  it  shall  be  the  /.  of  the  heathen
Dan.  2.  8.  1  know  that  ye  would  gain  the  /.

9.  to  speak  before  one,  till  the  /.  be  changed

16.  Daniel  desired  that  he  would  give  him  /.

3.5.  at  what  /.  ye  hear  the  sound  or  cornet,  15.

7.  12.  j  et  their'lives  were  prolonged  for  a  t.

22.  the  /.  c  ame  that  the  saints  possessed  kingdom*
25.  until  At.  and  the  dividing  of/.  12.  7.

8.  17.  at  the  /.  of  the  end  shall  be  the  vision

9.  21.  touched  me  about  1  he  t.  of  evening  oblation.

11.24.  he  shall  forecast  his  devices  for  a/.

35  to  make  them  white,  to  the  /.  of  the  end

4.1.  at  the  t  of  the  end  shall  tl >e  king  of  the  south*

12.  1.  and  there  shall  be  a/,  of  trouble

4.  seal  the  book,  even  to  the  /.  of  the  end,  9.

11.  from  the  /.  the  dailj’  sacrifice  betaken  away
It  os.  10.  12.  it  is /.  to  seek  the  Lend,  till  he  come
Mic.  5.  3.  till  the  /.  that  she  which  travaileth
Hag.  1.4.  is  it  /.  to  dwell  in  your  ceiled  houses  ?
Zech.  14.  7-  that  at  evening  /.  it  shall  be  light
Mai.  3.  11.  nor  vine  cast  her  fruit  before  the  /.

Mat.  1.  11.  about  the  /.  they  were  carried  away
2.  7.  Herod  enquired  what  /.star  appeared

8.  29.  art  thou  come  to  torment  us  before  the  t.  T
21.34.  and  when  the  /.  of  the  fruit  drew  near
£6.  18.  the  master  saith,  my  /.  is  at  hand
Mark  1.  15.  the  /.  is  fulfilled,  repent  and  believe
4.  17.  have  no  root,  and  so  endure  but  for  a  /.

6.  35.  this  is  a  desert,  and  now  the  /.  is  far  passed
11.  13.  for  the  /.  of  figs  was  not  yet

13.  33.  watch,  for  ye  know  not  when  the  t.  is
Luke  1.57.  Elisabeth’s  full  /.  came  to  he  delivered.

4.  5  shewed  him  all  kingdoms  in  a  moment  ot  /.
7-  45.  but  this  woman,  since  the  /.  1  came  in

8.  13.  which  in  /.  of  temptation  fall  away

13.  35.  ye  shall  not  see  me  till  the  /.  come  when
19.  44.  thou  knewest  not  the  /.  of  thy  visitation
John  7 . 6.  my  /.  is  not  come,  your  /.  is  al  way  s  read y
16.  2.  the  /.  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth  j’ou
25.  the  /.  cometh  when  I  shall  no  more  speak
Acts  1.  21.  all  the  /.  the  Lord  went  in  and  out

7.  17-  but  u  hen  the  /.  of  the  promise  drew  nigh

20.  in  vv  hich  /.  Moses  was  born,  and  was  fair
17.21.  spent  their  /.  in  nothing  else,  but  to  teli

Rom.  13.  ll.it  is  high  /.to  awake  out  of  sleep
1  Cor.  4.  5.  therefore  judge  nothing  before  the  /.

7-5.  defraud  not,  except  with  consent  for  a  /.

29-  but  this  I  saj’,  brethren,  the  /.is  short
Eph.  5.  16.  redeeming  the  /.  Col.  4.  5.

1  Thess.  2. 17.  being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  t.

2  Thess.  2.  6.  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  /.

2  Tim.  4.  3.  /.  come,  when  they  will  not  endure

6.  and  the  /.  of  my  departure  is  at  hand
Heh.  4.  16.  may  find  grace  to  help  in  /.  of  need

5.  12.  when  for  the  /.  ye  ought  to  be  teachers

9.  9.  which  was  a  figure  for  the  /.  then  present

10.  imposed  on  them  till  the  /.  of  reformation

11.  32.  the  /.  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  Gideon

Jam.  4.  14.  a  vapour  that  appeareth  a  little  /.

1  Pet.  1.  11.  what  manner  or  /.  the  spirit  of  Christ

17.  pass  the  /.  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear

4.  2.  he  should  no  longer  live  the  rest  of  his/.

Rev.  1.  3.  for  the  /.  is  at  hand,  22.  10.

10.  6. sware,  that  there  should  be/,  no  longer

11.  18.  /.  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  be  judged

12.  12.  he  knovveth  that  he  hath  but  a  short/.

14.  she  is  nourished  fora  /.  and  times,  and  half  a  >
Any  TIME.

lev.  25.  32.  the  Levites  may  redeem  at  any  t.

Num.  35.  26.  if  the  slayer  at  any  t.  come  without
1  Sam;  20.  12.  sounded  my  father  to  morrow  any  t.

1  Kings  1.6.  father  had  not  displeased  him  at  any  t.
Mat.  4.  6.  angels  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  at  any  t „
thou  dash  thy  loot  against  a  stone,  Luke  4.  11.

5.  25.  lest  at  any  t.  the  adversary  deliver  thee

13.  15.  lest  at  any  t.  they  should  see,  Mark  4.  12.
Luke  15.  29.  nor  transgressed  l  at  any  t.  thy  com.
21. 34.  lest  at  any  t.  your  hearts  be  overcharged

John  1.  18.  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  t.

5.  37.  nor  have  ye  heard  his  voice  at  any  t.

Acts  11.8.  nothing  unclean  hath  at  any  t.  entered

515


T  I  M


T  1  1


TOE


2  Cor.  9. 7  •  who  goeth  a  warfare  any  t.  at  his  charges
1  l'hess.  2.  5.  nor  at  any  t.  used  we  flattering  words
Heb.  1. 5.  to  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  t.  13.

2.  1.  lestatawy  /.  we  should  let  them  slip

1  John  A.  12.  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  t.

See  Appointed,  Before,  Come,  Day,  Due.
In  the  T  l  M  E.

■Gen.  38.  27.  came  to  pass  in  the  t.  of  her  travail
Exod.  34.  18.  commanded  in  the  t.  of  month  A  bib
Judy.  10.  14.  let  them  deliver  in  the  t.  of  tribulation

15.  1.  in  the  t.  of  wheat  harvest  Satnson  visited

1  Kings  15.  23.  in  the  t.  of  old  age  he  was  diseased

2  Chron.  28.  22.  in  the  t.  of  distress  did  he  tres¬

pass

Neh.  9.27.  in  the  t.  of  their  trouble  thou  heantest
Psal.  4.  7-  more  than  in  the  t.  when  corn  increased
21.  9.  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  t.  of  thine  anger

27.  5.  in  the  t.  of  trouble  he  shall  hide  me
37  .  39.  he  is  their  strength  in  thet.  of  trouble
71.  9.  cast  me  not  off  in  the  t.  of  old  age
Prov.  25.  13.  as  the  cold  of  snow  in  the  t.  of  harvest

19.  confidence  in  unfaithful  man  in  the  t.  of  trouble
Isa.  33.  2.  be  thou  our  salvation  in  the  t.  of  trouble
Jer.  2.  27.  in  the  t.  of  trouble  they  will  say

28.  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  t.  of  tiouble
8  12.  in  the  t.  of  visitation  they  shall  be  cast  down
10.15.  in  the  t.  of  visitation  they  perish,  51.  18.

11.  12.  shall  not  save  them  at  all  in  the  t.  of  trouble

14.  I  will  not  hear  them  in  the  t.  that  they  cry

15.  11.  veCly  l  will  cause  enemy  to  entreat  thee
well  in  the  t.  of  evil,  and  in  the  t.  of  affliction

18.  23.  deal  thus  with  them  in  the  t.  of  thine  anger

50.  16.  handleth  the  sic  kle  in  the  t.  of  harvest
Ezek.  27  -  34.  in  the  t.  when  thou  shalt  be  broken

35.  5.  had  a  perpetual  hatred,  in  the  t.  of  their
calamity,  in  the  t.  that  their  iniquity  had  an  end
■ Has.  2.  9.  I  will  take  away' my  corn  in  the  t.  thereof
Zech.  10.  1.  ask  rain  in  thet.  of  the  latter  rain
Mat.  13.  30.  in  the  t.  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  reapers
Luke  A.  27.  were  many  lepers  in  the  t.  of  Eliseus
■See  Last,  Long,  Many,  Old,  Past,  Process.
Same  T I M  E.

Num.  32.  10.  Lord’s  anger  was  kindled  the  same  t.
Dent.  9.  20.  I  prayed  tor  Aaron  also  the  same  t.

•2  Kings  8.  22.  yet  Edom  revolted,  then  Libnah
revolted  at  the  same  t.  2  Chron.  21.  10.
-2  Chron.  15.  11.  they  offered  the  same  t.  700  oxen

10.  10.  Asa  oppressed  the  people  at  the  same  t.
Ezra  5.  3.  at  the  same  t.  came  to  them  Tatnai
Jer.  39.  10.  gave  them  vineyards  at  the  same  t.
Ezek.  38.  10.  at  the  same  t.  shalt  thou  think  evil
Dan.  4.  36.  at  the  same  t.  my  reason  returned

12.  1.  trouble,  such  as  never  was  to  that  same  t.
Acts  19.  23.  the  same  t.  there  arO'  no  small  stir

See  Second,  Set.

That  TIME.

Judg.  11.  26.  why  did  ye  not  recover  in  that  t.

1  Sam.  11.  9.  to-morrow  by  that  t.  the  sun  be  hot
Ezra  5.  16.  since  that  t.  hath  it  been  in  building
Neh.  4.  16.  to  pass  from  that  t.  forth,  13.  21.

Isa.  16.  1.3.  spoken  concerning  Moab  since  that  t.

18.  7-  in  that  t.  shall  the  present  be  brought
44. 8.  have  1  not  told  thee  from  that  t.  and  declared
45.  21.  who  hath  told  it  from  that  t.  ?

48.  8.  from  that  t.  that  thine  ear  was  not  opened
Jer.  50.  4.  that  t.  Israel  shall  come  weeping

20.  in  that  t.  the  iniquity  of  Israel  not  be  found
Amos  5.  13.  the  prudent  keep  silence  in  that  t.

Mat.  4.  17.  from  that  t.  Jesus  began  to  preach

16.  21.  from  that  t  began  to  shew  his  disciples

26.  16.  from  that  t.  Judas  sought  opportunity

Luke  16.  16.  since  that  t .  kingdom  of  G.  is  preached
John  6.  66.  from  that  t.  many  disciples  went  back
Acts  12.  1.  about  that  t.  Herod  stretched  to  vex
At  that  TIME.

Num.  22.  4.  Balak  was  king  of  Moab  at  that  t.
Dent.  1.  9.  and  I  spake  to  you  at  that  t.  saying

16.  I  charged  your  judges  at  that  t.  saying
18.  I  commanded  you  at  that  t.  3. 18.

3.  21.  I  commanded  Joshua  at  that  t.  saying
23.  I  besought  the  Lord  at  that  t.  saying

5.  5.  I  stood  between  the  Lord  and  you  at  that  t.

9.  19.  the  Ix>rd  hearkened  to  me  at  that  t.  10.  10.
t  Sam.  14.  18.  the  ark  was  at  that  t.  with  Israel

2  Chron.  13.  18.  Israel  brought  under  at  that  t.

30.  3.  they  could  not  keep  the  passover  at  that  t.
35.  17.  Israel  kept  the  passover  at  that  t.

fer.  3.  17-  at  that  t.  they  shall  call  Jerusalem

8.  1.  at  that  t.  they  shall  bring  out  the  bones

33.  15.  at  that  t.  cause  the  branch  of  righteousness
Dan.  12.  1.  at  that  t.  shall  Michael  stand  up
Mic.  3.  4.  will  hide  his  face  from  them  at  that  t.
Zeffi.  1.  12.  at  that  t.  1  will  search  Jerusalem
3.  19.  at  that  t.  I  will  undo  all  that  afflict  thee
20.  at  that  t.  will  1  bring  you  again,  in  time
Luke  23.  7.  himself  was  at  Jerusalem  at  that  t.

Acts  8.  1.  at  that  t.  was  a  great  persecution
Eph.  2.  12.  at  that  t.  ye  were  without  Christ
See  Third.

This  TIME.

Jen.  29.  34.  this  t.  will  my  husband  be  joined
Exod.  8.  32.  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart  at  this  t.

9.  14.  I  will  at  this  t.  send  all  my  plagues

18.  to-morrow  about  this  t.  1  will  cause  it  to  rain

27.  and  Pharaoh  said,  I  have  sinned  this  t.

Num.  23.  23.  according  to  this  t.  it  shall  be  said  '
Judg.  13.  23.  nor  would  as  at  this  t.  have  told  us

21.  22.  for  ye  did  not  give  unto  them  at  this  t.

1  Sam.  9.  13.  for  about  this  t.  ye  shall  find  him

2  Sam.  17.  7  the  counsel  is  not  good  at  this  t.

\  Kings  2.  26.  1  will  not  at  this  t.  put  thee  to  death
19.2.  to-morrow  this  t.  20.6.  filings 7.  1,  18.  I  10.6.
Neh.  13.  6.  in  all  this  t.  was  not  1  at  Jerusalem
Esth.  4.  14.  for  if  thou  boldest  thy  peace  at  this  t.

art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  t.  as  this
Psal.  113.  2.  blessed  be  the  Lord  from  this  t.  forth
115.  18.  we  will  bless  the  Lord  from  this  t.  forth
121.  8.  he  will  preserve  thee  from  this  t.  forth
Isa.  48.  6.  1  have  shewed  new  things  from  this  t.
'er.  3.  4.  w  ilt  ihou  not  from  this  t.  cry  unto  me  ?

51.  6.  this  is  the  t.  of  the  Lord's  vengeance
Mic.  2.  3.  nor  go  haughtily,  for  this  t  is  evil

516


Mat.  24.  21.  tribidation  such  as  was  not  since  the
beginning  of  the  world  to  this  t.  Mark  13.  19.
Mark  10.  30.  but  he  shall  receive  an  hundred-fold
now  in  this  t.  and  etfei  nal  life,  Luke  18.  30.
Luke  12.  56.  how  is  it  ye  do  not  discern  this  t.?
John  11.  39.  Lord,  by  this  t.  he  stinketh
Acts  1.6.  wilt  thou  at  this  t.  restore  the  kingdom  ?
24.  25.  Felix  answered,  go  thy  way  for  this  t.

Rom.  3.26.  to  declare  at  this  t.  his  righteousness

8.  18.  that  the  sufferings  «f  this  present  t.

9.  9.  at  thist.  will  1  come,  Sara  shall  have  a  son

11.  5.  so  at  this  present  t.  there  is  a  remnant

1  Cor.  16.  12.  his  wii‘1  was  not  to  come  at  this  t.

2  Cor.  8.  14.  that  now  at  this  t.  your  abundance

'J  1MES.

Gen.  27  .  36.  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  two  t.
Lev.  19.  26.  ye  shall  not  observe  t.  Deut.  18.  10,  14.
Dent.  4.  42.  the  slayer  hated  him  not  in  t.  past
Judg.  13.  25.  the  Spirit  began  to  move  him  at  t.

16.  20.  I  will  go  out  as  at  other  t.  and  shake

20.  30.  put  themselves  in  array  as  at  other  t.

31.  the  Benjamites  began  to  kill  as  at  otker/.

1  Sam.  3.  10.  the  Lord  called  as  at  other  t.  Samuel
18.  10.  David  played  with  his  hand  as  at  other  t.
SO.  25.  the  king  sat  on  his  seat  as  at  other  t.

2  Kings  19.  25.  hast  thou  not  heard  long  ago  how  of

ancient  t.  that  I  have  formed  it  r  Isa.  37.  26

21.  6.  Manasseh  observed  t.  2  Chron.  33.  6.

1  Chr.  12.  32.  men  that  had  understanding  of  the/.

29.  30.  the  t.  that  went  over  him  and  over  Israel

2  Chron.  15.  5.  in  those  t.  there  was  no  peace
Esth.  l.  13.  the  wise  men  which  knew  the  t.

Job  24.  1.  t.  are  not  hidden  from  the  Almighty
Psal.  9.  9.  Lord  will  be  a  refuge  in  t.  of  trouble

10.  1.  why  hidest  thou  thyself  in  /.  of  trouble  ?
31.15.  my  t.  are  in  thy  hand, deliver  me  from  enem.
44.  1.  what  works  thou  didst  in  the  t.  of  old

77-  5.  I  have  considered  the  years  of  ancient  t.
Isa.  33.  6.  knowledge  shall  be  the  stability  of  thy  t.
46.  10.  from  ancient  t.  things  not  yet  done
Ezek.  12.  27.  he  prophesied  of  the  t.  far  off
Dan.  2.  21.  hechaneeth  the.  t.  and  the  seasons

7.  25.  he  shall  think  to  change  t.  and  laws
9.  25.  the  streets  shall  be  built  in  troublous/.

11.  14.  in  those  /.  there  shall  many  stand  up

12.  7.  for  a  time,  /.  and  an  half,  Rev.  12.  14.

Mat.  16  3.  but  can  ye  notdiscern  the  signs  of  the  /.  ?
Luke  21 .  24.  till  the  /.  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled
Acts  1.  7.  it  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  /.  or  seasons

3.  19-  when  the  /.  of  refreshing  shall  come
21.  till  the  /.  of  restitution  of  all  things

14.  16.  who  in  /.  past  suffered  all  nations  to  walk

17.  26.  hath  determined  the  /.  before  appointed

30.  the  /.  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at
Rom.  11. 30.  as  ye  in/,  past  have  not  believed  God
2Cer.ll  .24. of  the  Jews  five /.  received  I  forty  stripes
Gal.  1.  23.  that  he  which  persecuted  us  in  /.  past

4.  10.  ye  observe  days  and  months,  /.  and  years
Eph.  1.10.  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of /.

1  Thess.  5.  1 .  of  the  /.  ye  have  no  need  that  1  write

1  Tim.  A.  1 .  in  latter /.  some  shall  depart  from  faith
6.  15.  which  in  his  /.  he  shall  shew  who  is  king

2  Tim.  3.  1.  in  last  days  perilous  /.  shall  come
Tit.  1. 3.  hath  in  due  /.  manifested  his  word

Heb.  1.  1.  God  who  at  sundry  /.  spake  to  the  fathers
All  TIMES.

I.ev.  16.  2.  that  he  come  not  at  all  t.  within  the  vail
1  Kings  8.  59.  maintain  cause  of  his  people  at  all  t.
Psal.  34. 1.  I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all  t.  his  praise
62.  8.  trust  in  him  at  all  t.  ye  people  pour  out  heart
106.  3.  blessed  is  he  that  doth  righteousness  at  all  t.

1 19. 20.  for  longing  it  hath  to  thy  judgments  at  all  t.
Prov.  5.  19.  let  her  breasts  satisfy  thee  at  all  t.

17. 17-  a  friend  lovetli  at  all  t.  a  brother  is  born  for
See  Appointed,  Many,  Seven,  Ten,  Three.
TINGLE.

1  Sam.  3.  11.  at  which  the  ears  of  eveiiy  one  that
hears  it  shall  /.  2  Kings  21.  12.  Jer.  19.  3.
TINKLING.

Isa.  3.  16.  mincing  and  making  a  /.  with  their  feet

18.  take  away  the  bravery  of  their  /.ornaments

1  Cor.  13.  1.  1  am  become  as  a  /.cymbal

TIN.

Num.M  .22.  /.  that  may  abide  fire,  make  go  thro’  fire
Isa.  1.  25.  and  l  will  take  away  all  thy  /.

Ezek.  22.  18.  all  they  are  brass,  and  /.  and  iron
20.  as  they  gather  lead  and  /.  into  the  furnace
27.  12.  Tarshish  was  thy  merchant  in  /.  and  lead
TIP.

Luke  16.  24.  may  dip  the  /.  of  his  finger  in  water
See  Right  Ear.

TIRE.

Ezek.  24.  17-  bind  the  /.  of  thy  head  upon  thee
TIRED.

2  Kings  9.  30.  Jezebel  /.  her  head  and  looked

T!  R  ES.

Isa.  3. 18.  the  Lord  will  take  away  their  /.

Ezek.  24.  23.  and  your  /.  shall  be  on  s  our  heads
TITHE.

The  practice  of  paying  tithes  is  very  ancient  ;  for
vie  find.  Gen.  14.  20.  that  Abraham  gave  tithes  to
Melthizedek,  king  of  Salem,  at  his  return  from  his
expedition  against  Chedorlaomer,  and  the  four
kings  in  confederacy  with  him.  Abraham  gave
him  the  tithe  of  all  the  booty  taken  from  the  enemy .
Jacob  imitated  this  7  iety  of  his  grandfather  when
he  vowed  to  the  Lord  the  tithe  of  all  the  substance
he  might  acquire  in  Mesopotamia.  Gen.  28.  22.
Of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me,  I  will  surely
give  the  tenth  unto  thee  ;  for  the  main¬
tenance  of  thy  worship,  and  other  pious  uses.
Under  the  law,  Moses  ordained,  I.ev.  27.  30,

31,  32.  All  the  tithe  of  the  land,  whether
of  the  seed  of  the  land,  or  of  the  fruit  of
the  tree,  is  the  Lord’s  ;  it  is  holy  unto  the
Lord,  &c.

There  were  three  sorts  of  tithes  to  be  paid  from  the
people,  (besides  those  from  the  Leiites  to  the
priests,)  Num.  28.  26,  27,  &c.  'j  To  the  Le
sites  for  their  maintenance,  N .7. .  ,8.  21,  24.
(2)  For  the  Lord's  feasts  and  orifices,  to  be
eaten  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  should  choose


to  put  his  name  there  ;  to  wit,  where  the  ark
should  be,  the  tabernacle  or  temple.  This  tenth
part  was  either  sent  to  Jerusalem  in  kind,  or,  if
it  was  too  far,  they  sent  the  value  in  money,
which  was  to  be  laid  out  for  oxen,  sheep,  wine,  or
what  else  they  pleased,  Deut.  14.  22,  23,  24,  &rc.
(3)  Besides  these  two,  there  was  to  be,  every  third
year,  a  tithe  for  the  poor,  to  be  eaten  at  their  own
dwellings,  Deut.  14.  28,  29.  Some  are  of  opinion
that  this  third  tithe  was  not  different  from  the
second  before  taken  notice  of,  except  that  in  the
third  year  it  was  not  brought  to  the  temple,  but
was  used  upon  the  spot  by  every  one  in  the  city
of  his  habitation.  Ho  that  there  were  only,  ac¬
cording  to  them,  two  sorts  of  tithes,  that  which
was  given  to  the  Leiites  and  priests,  and  tha
which  was  applied  to  making  feasts  of  charity
either  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  or  in  other
cities.

Tithes  were  paid  to  God  as  a  sign  of  homage  and
gratitude  :  .thus  Abraham' s  giving  tithes  of  the
spoil  to  Melchizedek,  was  a  token  that  he  owned
his  victory  and  success  to  be  from  God ;  and
when  tithes  were  kept  back  from  the  priests,  the
Lord  complained  that  he  was  robbed,  Mai.  3.  8.
The  paying  of  them  was  an  honouring  of  God,
Prov.  3.  9.  Hence  the  apostle  proves  the  supe¬
riority  of  Melchizedek  and  his  priesthood  above
the  patriarch  Abraham,  and  the  priesthood  of
Levi,  because  Abraham,  and  Levi  in  his  loins,
paid  tithes  unto  him,  as  the  lesser  unto  the  great¬
er,  Heb.  7.  4,  5,  6,  K’c.

In  the  New  Testament,  neither  our  Saviour  nor
his  apostles  have  commanded  any  thing  in  this
affair  of  tithes :  only  when  our  Lord  sent  his
apostles  to  preach  in  the  cities  of  Israel,  he  forbad
them  to  carry  their  purse  or  provisions  along  with
them,  but  to  enter  into  the  houses  of  those  that  were
willing  to  receive  them,  and  to  eat  what  should  be
set  before  them  ;  for  the  labourer,  says  he,  is
worthy  of  his  hire,  and  of  his  maintenance,  Mat.

10.  10.  Luke  10.  7,  8.  At.  Paul  would  have  it.
that  he  that  receives  instruction,  should  administer
some  of  his  good  things  to  him  that  gives  it  him.
Gal.  6.  6.  It  is  agreeable  to  nature  and  reason,
that  they  which  wait  at  the  altar  should  live  by
the  altar,  1  Cor.  9.  1.3.  And  as  God,  under  the
law,  ordained  and  appointed  a  living  or  mainte¬
nance  for  his  ministers,  so  as  they  needed  not,  as
other  men,  to  labour  with  their  hands  to  get  bread
to  eat ;  so  under  the  New  Testament,  God  has
ordained,  that  those  who  are  taken  off  from  wot  Idly
employments,  and  spend  their  time  in  the  study
and  preaching  of  the  gospel,  should  have  a  liveli¬
hood  for  their  labour.  1  Cor.  9.  14.  Ev  en  so  hath
the  l  ord  ordained,  that  they  which  preach  the
gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel.  And  in  the  1th
„  verse.  Who  goeth  a  warfare  at  his  own  charges?
The  most  barbarous  nations,  and  the  heathen
Greeks  and  Romans,  out  of  a  principle  of  reli¬
gion  common  to  all  men,  have  often  dedicated
their  tithes  to  their  gods.  Some  have  made  it  a
standing  obligation,  others  have  done  it  upon  par¬
ticular  occasions,  and  by  the  impulse  of  a  tran¬
sient  devotion.  Laertius  says,  that  when  Pisis-
tratus,  tyrant  at  Athens,  wrote  to  Solon,  to
persuade  him  to  return  to  Athens,  he  tells  him,

“  that  every  one  there  pays  the  tithe  of  his  goods
for  the  offering  of  sacrifices  to  the  gods,"  I  aert.
Lib.  1.  Pliny  says,  that  the  Arabian  merchants
who  traded  in  spices  durst  not  sell  any  till  they
had  paid  the  tithe  to  their  god  Sabis.  And  Plu¬
tarch,  in  more  places  than  one,  mentions  a  custom
of  the  Romans,  of  offering  to  Hercules  the  tithe
of  what  they  took  from  their  enemies.

Lev.  27.  30.  all  the  /.  of  the  land  is  the  Lord’s

32.  concerning  the  /.  of  the  herd  of  the  Hock
Num.  13.  26.  ye  shall  offer  a  tenth  part  of  the  /.
Deut.  12.  17.  not  eat  within  thy  gates  the  /.  of  corn
14.  23.  eat  /.  in  the  place  the  Lord  shall  choose

28.  at  the  end  of  three  years  bring  forth  the  /.

2  Chron.  31. 5.  they  brought  in  the  first-fruits  of  corn
and  the  /.  of  all  things,  6,  12.  Neh.  13.  12.
Neh.  10.  38.  the  Levites  shall  bring  up  /.  of  tithes
Mat.  23.  23.  ye  pay  /.  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin
TITHE,  Verb.

Dent.  14.22.  thou  shalt  surely  /.  increase  of  thy  seed
Luke  11.  42.  for  ye  /.  mint,  and  rue,  and  all  herbs
TITHES.

Gen.  14.  20.  Abraham  gave  Melchizedek  /.  of  all
Lev.  27-  31.  if  a  man  will  redeem  ought  of  his  /.
Num.  18.  24.  the  /.  1  have  given  to  the  Levites
26.  when  ye  take  of  the  children  of  Israel  /.

28.  offer  an  heave  offering  to  Lord  of  all  your  /.
Deut.  12.  6.  thither  ye  shall  bring  your  /.  1 1.

26.  12.  thou  hast  made  an  end  of  tithing  the  /.

Neh.  10.  37.  that  the  Levites  might  have  the  /.

12.  44.  and  some  were  appointed  for  the  /.

13.  5.  where  aforetime  they  laid  the  /.  of  corn
Amos  A.  A.  bring  your  /.  after  three  years,  Mai.  .3.  It?
Mai.  3.  8.  ye  have  robbed  me  of  /.  and  offerings
Luke  18.  12.  I  give  /.  of  all  that  I  possess

Heb.  7.  5.  the  priests  have  commandment  to  take  /.

6.  he  received  /.  of  Abraham,  and  blessed  him

8.  and  here  men  that  die  receive  /.

9.  Levi  who  received  /.  paid  /.  in  Abraham

TITHING.


Deut.  26.  12.  made  end  of  /.  third  year  is  year  of  /
TITLE.


2  Kings  23.  17-  he  said,  what  /.  is  that  that  1  see
John  19.  19.  Pilate  wrote  a  /.  and  put  it  on  the  cross
20.  this  /.  then  read  many  of  the  Jews
TITLES.


Job  .32.  21.  nor  let  me  give  flattering  /.  to  man
22.  for  1  know  not  to  give  flattering  /.
TITTLE.


Mat.  5.  18.  one  /.  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law
Luke  16.  17.  than  for  one  /.  of  the  law  to  fail
r,’0  and  1RO.  See  Fro.

TOE.

Exod.  29.  20.  upon  the  great  /.  of  their  right  foot
Lev.  8.  23,  24. 1  14.  14,  17,  25,  28.


T  O  L


TON


T  O  N


TOES.

judg.  1.  6.  cut  oft  his  thumbs  and  his  great  /.

7.  seventy  kings  having  thumbs  and  /.  cut  oft
I  Chron.  20.  6.  whose  fingers  and  /.  were,  24.

Dan.  2.  41.  thou  sawest  the  /.  part  ot'  iron,  42.

JOG  ETHER.

Pent.  22. 10.  thou  shalt  not  plow  with  ox  and  ass  /.
Judy.  10.29.  he  divided  her,  /.  with  her  bones
l  Sam.  31. 6.  all  his  men  died  that  same  day  /.

1  kings  3. 18.  and  we  were  /.  there  was  no  stranger

11.1.  women,  /.  with  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh

2  Kings  9.  25.  when  thou  and  1  rode  /.  after  Ahab
Ezra  4.  .3.  we  ourselves  /.  will  build  to  the  Lord
Seh.  6.7.  let  us  take  counsel  /.  ||  10.  let  us  meet  t.
Job3.  18.  there  the  prisoners  rest  /.  they  hear  not

10.  8.  have  fashioned  me  t.  round  about

1".  16-  shall  go  down,  when  our  rest  /.  is  in  the  dust

24.  4.  the  poor  of  the  earth  hide  themselves  /.

34. 15.  all  fiesh  shall  perish /.man shall  turn  to  dust
P sal.  2.2.  the  rulers  take  counsel  /.  against  the  L.

14.3.  they  are  all  /.  become  filthy,  Horn.  3.  12.

34.3.  magnify  the  L.  and  let  us  exalt  his  name  t.
37.  38.  the  transgressors  he  destroyed  t.  Isa.  1. 28.
Plot.  22. 2.  the  rich  and  poor  meet  /.  Lord  is  maker
29.  13.  the  poor  and  the  de.  eitfnl  man  meet  /.

Eccl.  4.  1 1.  if  two  lie  /.  then  they  have  heat

Isa.  9.  21.  and  they  /.  shall  be  against  Judah
26.  19.  /.  with  my  dead  body  shall  they  arise
41.23.  do  i>ood  or  evil,  that  we  may  behold  it/.

52.  8.  with  the  voice  /.  shall  they  sing,  9.

65  25.  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  /.

Ezek.  37.  7.  the  bones  came  /.  bone  to  his  bone
Amos  1.  15.  go  into  captivity,  he  and  his  princes  /.

3.  3.  can  two  walk  /.  exc  ept  they  be  agreed  ?

Mat.  18.20.  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  /.

19.  6.  what  God  hath  joined  /.  Mark  10.  9.

Luke  15.  6.  he  calleth  /.  his  friends  and  neighbours
Acts  2.  44.  and  all  that  believed  were  /.  and  had
5.9.  that  ye  have  agreed  t.  to  tempt  the  Spirit
Rom.  8.  28.  we  know  that  all  things  work  /.  for  good
Eph.  2.  5.  hath  quickened  us  /.  |1  6.  hath  raised  us  /.

21.  in  whom  all  the  building  fitly  framed  /.  22.
Phil.  1.  27.  striving  t.  for  the  faith  ot  the  gospel
3. 17.  breth.  be  followers  /.  of  me,  and  mark  them
Col.  2. 2.  be  comforted,  being  knit  /.  in  love,  19.

13.  you  being  dead  in  sins,  hath  he  quickened  /.

1  Thess.  4.  17.  shall  be  caught  up  /.  ||  5.  10.  live  /.

2  Thess.  2.  1.  we  beseech  you  by  our  gathering  t.

1  Pet.  3. 7.  as  being  heirs  /.  of  the  grace  of  life

See  Dwell.

TOIL.

Gen.  5.  29.  comfort  us  concerning  our  work  and  t.
41. 51.  God,  said  he,  hath  made  me  forget  my  /.
TOIL,  Verb.

Mat.  6.  28.  they  /.  not  nor  spin,  Luke  12.  27.
TOILED.

Luke  5.  5.  Simon  said,  Master,  we  have  /.  all  night
TOILING.

Mark  6.  48.  and  he  saw  them  /.  in  rowing
TOKEN.

Gen.  9.  12.  this  is  the  /.  of  the  covenant,  13,  17.

17. 11.  and  it  shall  be  a  /.  ot  the  covenant
Exod.  3. 12.  this  shall  be  a  /.  that  1  sent  thee
12.  13.  the  blood  shall  be  for  a  /.  on  the  houses

13. 16.  it  shall  be  for  a  /.  upon  thine  hand
Num.  17. 10.  to  be  kept  for  a  /.  against  the  rebels
Josh.  2.  12.  swear  unto  me,  and  give  me  a  true  /.
Psal.  86. 17.  shew  me  a  /.  for  good,  that  they
Mark  14.  44.  Judas  had  given  them  a  /.  saying
Phil.  1.28.  is  to  them  an  evident  /.  of  perdition

2  Thess.  1. 5.  a  manifest  /.  of  righteous  judgment
3.  17.  of  Paul,  which  is  the  /.  tn  every  epistle

TOKENS.

Devt.  22. 15.  being  /.  of  damsel's  virginity,  17,  20.
Job  21. 29.  and  do  ye  not  know  their  /.  ?

Psal.  65.  8.  they  also  are  afraid  at  thy  /.

135.  9.  w  ho  sent  t.  in  the  midst  of  thee,  O  Egypt
La.  44. 25.  that  frustrated)  the  z.  of  the  liars
TOLD.

Gen.  3. 11.  who  t.  thee  that  thou  wast  naked
9.22.  and  Ham  t.  his  two  brethren  w  ithout

24.  33.  1  will  not  eat  till  I  have  t.  mine  errand
37.  5.  Joseph  /.  his  brethren  the  dream,  9.

10.  he  t.  it  to  his  father  and  his  brethren
Num.  23.26.  t.  not  l  thee,  all  that  the  Lord  speaketh
Deut.  17.4.  it  be  /.  thee,  and  behold  it  be  true
Judg. 5.  13.  his  miracles  which  our  fathers  /.  of

7.  13.  there  was  a  man  that/,  a  dream  to  his  fellow
13.6.  I  asked  not,  neither  /.  he  me  his  name

23.  nor  would  at  this  time  have  /.  such  things

14.  2.  he  came  up,  and  /.  his  father  and  mother

6.  but  he /.  not  his  father,  9,  16.  1  Sam.  14.1.

17.  on  the  seventh  day  he  t.  her,  she  /.  the  riddle

16. 17.  she  urged  him,  he  /.  her  all  his  heart,  18.

1  Sam.  10. 16.  he  /.  us  that  the  asses  w  ere  found

25.  19.  but  Abigail  /.  not  her  husband  Nabal

2  Sam.  11.  5.  and  the  woman  sent  and  /.  David
17-  17.  a  wench  went  and  /.  them,  they  /.  David

1  Kings  10.  3.  Solomon  /.  her  all  her  questions,  not

any  thing  which  he  /.  not,  2  Chron.  9.  2.
[  13. 11.  the  words  they  /.  also  to  their  father

25.  /.  in  the  city  where  old  prophet  dwelt
I  Ch*on.  17.25.  hast  t.  thou  w  ilt  build  an  house
Lira8.  17.  I  /.  them  what  they  should  say  to  iddo
Esth.5.  11.  Daman  /.of  the  glory  of  his  riches

8.  1.  for  Esther  had  /.  what  he  was  unto  her
Job  15. 18.  which  wise  men  have  /.  from  fathers
Psal.  44. 1.  and  our  fathers  have  /.  us,  78.  3.

Isa.  44.  8.  have  not  l  /.  thee  from  that  time  ?

45.  21.  who  hath  /.  it  from  that  time  ?  have  not  I  ?

52. 15.  what  had  not  been  /.  1  hem,  shall  they  see
lonah  1. 10.  the  men  knew,  because  he  had  /.  them
Mat. 8. 33.  they  went  into  the  city  and  /.  every  thing

14. 12.  took  up  the  body,  and  went  and  /  Jesus
Mark  16.  13.  they  went  and  /.  it  to  the  residue
John  5.  15.  the  man  /.  the  Jew's  it  w:as  Jesus
Acts  9.  6.  be  /.  thee  what  thou  must  do,  22.  10.

23. 16.  he  entered  into  the  castle  and  /.  Paul

2  Cor.  7.  7.  when  he  /.  us  your  earnest  desire

TOLD  him.

Gen. 22.  3.  the  place  of  which  God  had  /.  him,  9.

1  Sam.  3. 13.  I  have  /.  him  l  will  judge  his  house


1  Sam.  3.  18.  Samue.  /.  him  every  whit  and  hid  notn

10.  16.  of  the  matter  of  the  kingdom  lie/,  him  not
25.  36.  she  /.  him  nothing  till  morning  light

2  Kings  6.  10.  to  the  place  the  man  of  God  /.  him
Job  37.  20.  shalt  it  be  t.  him  that  1  speak
Mark  5.  33.  but  the  woman  t.  him  all  the  truth

TOLD  me.

Jvdg.  16. 10.  thou  hast  mocked  me  and  /.  me  lies,  13

15.  hast  not  /.  me  wherein  thy  strength  lieth

1  Sam.  23.  22.  it  is  /.  me  that  he  dealeth  subtil ly

2  Sam.  4.  10.  when  one  /.  me,  say  ing  8aul  is  dead

1  Kings  10.  7-  the  half  was  not  /.  me,  2  Chron.  9.  6.

14.  2.  /.  me  1  should  be  king  over  this  people

2  Kings  4.  27.  hid  it  from  me  and  hath  not  /.  me
8.  14.  he  /.  me  that  thou  shouhiest  surely  recover

John  4.  29.  see  a  man  which  /.  me  all  things,  39.

Acts  27.  25.  it  shall  be  ev  eu  as  it  was  /.  me
TOLD  you.

Isa.  40.  21.  hath  it  not  been/,  you  from  beginning/
Hab.  1.  5.  ye  will  not  believe  though  it  be  /.  you
Mat.  24.  25.  behold,  1  have  /.  you  before
28.  7-  there  ye  shall  see  him,  lo,  I  have  /.  you
John  3.  12.  it  1  have  /.  you  earthly  things

8.  40.  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that  hath  /.  you  truth

9.  27.  he  said,  I  have  t.yoii  already,  lo.  25.

14.2.  if  it  were  not  so,  1  would  have  /.  you

29.  now  1  have  /.  you  beioie  it  come  to  pass

16.  4.  these  things  have  I  /.  you,  that  when  time
shall  come,  ye  may  rememb.  that  1  /.  y  zzofthem

18.  8.  Jesus  said,  l  have  t.  you  that  1  am  he
2  Cor.  13.  2.  1  /.  you  before,  and  foretell  you
Gal.  5.  21.  as  1  have  also  t.you  in  time  past
Phil.  3.  18.  many  walk  of  whom  I  have  t.  you

1  Thess.  3.  4.  we  /.  you  that  w  e  should  suffer

2  'Thess.  2.  5.  when  with  you,  I  /.  yaw  these  things
Jude  18.  they  /.  you  there  should  be  mockers

IOLD,  Passne.

Josh.  9.  24.  it  was  certainly  /.  thy  servants

1  Kings  H.  5.  the  sheep  and  1  xen  could  not  be  /.

18.  13.  was  it  not  /.  my  lord,  what  I  did  when

2  Kings  12.  11.  and  they  gave  the  money ,  being  /.
Psal.  90.  9.  we  spend  our  years  as  a  tale  that  is  /.
Isa.  7.  2.  it  was  /.  the  house  of  David,  say  mg
LJan.  8.  26.  and  the  vision  which  is  /.  is  true
Mat.  26.  13.  there  shall  this  be  /.  for  a  memorial
Luke  1.45.  a  performance  of  things  which  were  /.

2.  18.  wondered  at  those  things  /.  by  shepherds
TOLERABLE.

Mat.  10.  15.  it  shall  be  more  /.  for  Sodom  and  Go¬
morrah,  11.  24.  Mark  6.  11.  Luke  10.  12.

11.  22.  more  /.  for  Lyre  and  Sidon,  Luke  10.  14.

LOLL.

Ezra  4.  13.  then  will  they  not  pay  /.  and  custom
20.  /.  tribute  and  custom  was  paid  to  them

7.  24.  it  shall  not  be  law  ful  to  impose  /.  on  them
IOMB.

Job  21.  32.  and  he  shall  remain  in  the  /.

Mat.  27.  60.  Joseph  laid  the  body  in  hisown  new  /.
Mark  6.  29.  his  disciples  laid  John’s  corpse  in  a  /.
TOMBS.

Mat.  8.  28.  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils,
coming  out  of  the  /.  Mark  5.  2,  3,  5.  Luke  8.  27-
23.  29.  because  ye  build  the  /.  of  the  prophets
1  ONGS.

Exod.  25.  38.  shalt  make  thee  /.  thereof  of  pure  gold
Num.  4.  9.  they  shall  cover  his  /. w  it h  a  cloth  ot  blue
1  Kings  7.  49.  lamps  and  /.  of  gold,  2  Chron.  4.  21.
Isa.  6.  6.  a  coal  which  he  had  taken  with  the  /.

44.  12.  the  smith  with  the  /.  woiketh  in  coals
TONGUE.

This  word  is  taken  in  three  different  senses.  (1)
For  the  material  tongue,  or  organ  of  speech,  Jam.
3.  5.  lhe  tongue  is  a  little  member.  (2)  Tor  the
tongue  or  language  that  is  spoken  in  any  country.
Deut.  28.  49.  lhe  Lord  shall  bring  a  nation
against  thee,  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  under¬
stand.  (3)  Lor  good  or  bad  discourse.  Prov.  12.
18.  But  the  tongue  of  the  w  ise  is  health  :  His  dis¬
course  is  sound  and  wholesome  in  itselj,  and  tends
to  the  comfort  and  benefit  of  others.  On  the  con¬
trary,  He  that  hath  a  perverse  tongue  falleth  into
mischief,  Prov.  17-  20.  that  is,  He  that  speaks
decitfully  or  wickedly.  Many  questions  are  pro
posed  about  tongues,  taken  in  the  second  sense,  or
for  language.  It  is  asked.  Cl)  1J  God  was  the
author  of  the  first  tongue  /  and  if  he  gate  it  to
Adam  by  infusion  ?  or  if  Adam  invented  it,  and  ac
quired  it  by  industry  and  labour  /  (2)  If  this  lan¬
guage  is  still  in  being  ?  And,  (3)  If  so,  then  which
is  it  ?

Profane  authors,  and  such  as  had  no  knowledge  of  the
Holy  Scriptures,  or  of  the  hi.  lory  of  the  creation  of
the  world,  imagined  that  men  were  produced  by
chance  in  differ  ent  parts  of  the  world,  and  came  out
of  the  ground,  as  also  all  other  animals  besides  ;  that
at  first  they  had  no  language,  nor  any  notions  oj
things  ;  that  first  of  all  mere  necessity,  and  after¬
wards  conveniency,  taught  them  to  invent  certain
sounds,  or  words,  by  which  to  communicate  their
notions  to  one  another:  that  hence  languages  were
formed,  which  became  different  from  each  other,
because  they  were  invented  separately,  and
their  authors  had  no  communication  with  one
another.  ..

But  the  knowledge  we  have  now  oj  the  origin  of  man¬
kind  does  not  leave  us  any  room  to  doubt,  but  as
God  created  Adam  perfect,  so  he  endued  him  with
language  to  express  his  thoughts  and  conceptions.
Therefore  we  find,  that  the  first  man,  presently
after  his  creation,  returns  answers  to  God,  speaks
to  his  wife,  and  gives  names  to  the  brute  creatures.
His  children  and  successors  probably  spake  the
same  language  as  him.se  J ,  down  to  the  deluge  ,
and  alter  the  deluge,  till  the  confusion  oj  tongues
that  happened  at  Babel.

Men  are  not  agreed  as  to  the  manner  in  which  this
famous  conjusion  was  brought  about.  It  is  doubted
whether  all  of  a  sudden  God  might  not  make  alt
men  forget  their  own  language,  and  give  them
a  new  one,  entirely  different  from  the  former  :
or,  whether  by  confounding  their  ideas,  and  dis¬
turbing  their  imaginations,  he  put  into  their  mouths


different  dialects  of  the  first  language:  so  that  the
primitive  tongue  remaining  uncorrupt  in  some
families  became  at  once  a  foreign  tongue  to  those
that  spoke  it  before  ;  as  also  that  the  dialects  of  the
primitive  language  became  barbarous  and  unknown
to  those  who  were  the  depositaries,  as  it  were,  of
the  ancient  language.  Or,  whether  God  might  not
permit  that  men  should  be  perplexed,  and  become
unintelligible  to  each  other,  and  therefore  separate,
and  that  their  separation  should  give  occasion  to
this  change  of  language,  by  the  necessary  conse¬
quence  of  distance  of  place,  and  want  of  communi
cation  with  each  ottar.  These  several  (pinions
have  each  had  their  patrons  and  maintainers.

As  to  the  first  tongue  which  God  communicated  to
Adam  at  his  creation,  there  have  been  but  few  na
lit  ns  in  the  uorld  which  have  not  had  the  ambition
of  having  it  for  their  own  tongue  ;  but  the  gene
rainy  of  critics  have  declared  for  the  Hebrew
tongue,  and  given  it  the  preference  before  all
others.  The  conciseness,  simplicity ,  eneigy,  and
fertility  if  it,  and  the  relation  it  has  to  the  most
ancient  oriental  languages,  which  seem  to  derive
their  origin  from  it,  the  etymology  of  the  names
whereby  the  first  of  mankind  were  called,  u  Inch
naturally  occurs  in  this  language :  the  names  oj
animals  which  are  all  significant  in  the  Hebrew
tongue,  and  describe  the  nature  and  property  of
these  very  animals,  ;  articulars  which  are  lit  t  to
be  observed  in  any  other  language :  all  these  cha¬
racters  meeting  together,  raise  a  prejudice  1  ery
much  in  favour  of  its  primacy  and  excellency.  It
has  further  another  privilege,  namely,  that  the
most  ancient  and  venerable  books  in  the  world  are
written  ,n  Hebrew.

Nevertheless  several  other  very  able  critics  me  of
opinion,  that  the  Hebrew  tongue,  such  as  we  see
it  at  present  in  the  Bible,  and  as  it  was  in  the
time  of  Moses,  is  not  the  piimitive  language,  pure
and  unconupted  ;  they  observe  many  words  in  the
Bible,  the  originals  whereof  are  not  to  be  Jound
m  Hebrew.  They  are  willing  to  allow,  that
there  are  more  footsteps  of  Adam's  langua  e  pre¬
served  m  the  Hebrew  than  in  any  other  tongue  ;
but  this,  they  say,  has  undergone  divers  changes
and  alterations,  and  in  the  series  of  so  many  ages,
from  Adam  down  to  Moses,  many  roots  of  this
language  were  lost ,  and  others  of  a  foreign  extrac¬
tion  received.

To  gnaw  one’s  tongue,  is  a  token  if  fury,  despair,
and  torment.  The  men  that  worship  the  beast  are
said  to  gnaw  their  tongues  for  pain,  Lev.  16.  10.
A  tongue  of  the  sea,  a  tongue  ot  land,  are  terms
used  in  Scripture  for  the  extremity  or  point  ■  f  the
Head  sea  ;  as  in  Josh.  15.  J  2.  1  heir  south  bor¬

der  was  from  the  shore  of  the  salt  sea,  from  the
tongue  that  looketh  southward.  Ur,  for  a  penin¬
sula,  a  cape,  a  promontory  of  land,  stretching  out
into  the  sea.  Josh.  18.  t  19.  'Lhe  scourge  ot  the
tongue.  Job  5.  21.  By  this  are  to  be  understood ,
malicious  discourses,  scandal,  calumny,  insulting
and  offensive  speeches.

1  he  gift  of  tongues,  which  God  granted  to  the  apos¬
tles  and  disciples  assembled  at  Jerusalem ,  on  the
day  of  Pentecost,  Acts  2.  3,  4,  &c.  u  as  communi¬
cated  to  the  faithful,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  epistles
of  St.  Paul,  which  regulate  the  manner  in  which
this  great  privilege  was  to  be  made  use  of  in  their
assemblies,  1  Cor.  12.  10.  I  14.  2.  fcc.  It  con¬
tinued  in  the  church  as  long  as  God  thought  it  ne¬
cessary ,  for  the  conversion  of  the  heathen,  and  the
confirming  of  believers.  In  1  Cor.  13.  1.  At  Paul
says,  \  hough  1  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men
and  of  angels,  and  have  not  charity,  1  am  be¬
come  as  sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal.
By  which  is  not  to  be  understood  that  the  angels
have  any  sensible  tongue,  either  common  or  pro¬
per :  the  apostle  intends  to  use  a  kind  of  bpper-
bole  ;  that  is,  I  would  have  every  one  set  a  due
value  upon  the  gift  of  tongues  ;  but  though  a  man
should  have  all  the  eloquence  that  can  be  imagined,
could  he  speak  as  well  as  angels  themselves,  this
inestimable  gift  would  be  of  httle  use  to  him  as  to
salvation,  if  he  is  without  charity,  or  a  principle
of  true  love  to  God  and  man  in  his  heart.

Exod.  11.7.  against  Isr. shall  not  adog  move  his  /.
Josh.  10.21.  none  moved  his  /.  against  Israel
Judg.  7.  5.  that  lappeth  of  the  w'ater  with  his/.

■lob  5.  21.  shall  be  hid  from  the  scourge  of  the  /.

15.  5.  and  thou  choosest  the  /.  of  the  crafty
20.  12.  though  he  hide  wickedness  under  his  /.

16.  poison  of  asps,  the  viper’s  /.shall  slay  him
29.  10.  their  /.cleaved  to  roof  of  their  mouth
Psal.  5.  9.  they  flatter  with  their  /.

10.  7.  under  his  /.  is  mischief  and  vanity

12.  3.  shall  cut  off  /.  that  speaketh  proud  things
4.  who  have  said,  with  our  /.  will  we  prevail

15.  3.  he  that  backbiteth  not  with  his  t.  nor  doth
34.  13.  keep  thy  /.  from  evil,  1  Pet.  3.  10.

37.  30.  and  his  /.  talketh  of  judgment
50.  19.  and  thy  /.  frameth  deceit
52.  2.  thy  /.  deviseth  mischiefs  like  a  razor
57.  4.  ami  their  /.  is  a  sharp  sword
64.  3.  who  whet  their/,  like  a  sword,  and  bend

8.  shall  make  their  /.  to  fall  on  themselves
68.  23.  /.  of  thy  dogs  may  be  dipped  in  the  same
73.  9.  and  their/,  walketh  through  the  earth
1(  9.  2.  they  have  spoken  against  me  with  lying  /.
120.  3.  what  shall  be  done  to  thee,  thou  false  /.  /
126.  2.  then  was  our  /.  filled  with  singing
Prov.  6.  17.  God  hateth  a  proud  look,  a  ly  ing  /.

24.  from  the  flattery  of  the  /.  of  a  strange  woman
10.  20.  the  /.  of  the  just  is  as  choice  silver
31.  but  the  froward  /.  shall  be  cut  out
12.  18.  but  the  /.  of  the  wise  is  health

19.  but  a  Iving  /.  is  but  for  a  moment

15.2.  the  /.of  the  wise  useth  knowledge  aright
4.  a  wholesome  /.  is  a  tree  of  life,  but  perverseness

16.  Land  the  answer  of  the  /.  is  from  the  Lord

17.  4.  and  a  liar  giveth  ear  to  a  naughty  /.

20.  he  that  hath  a  perverse/,  falls  into  mischief

18.  21.  death  and  life  are  in  the  power  of  the  /.

517


TOO


TOO


T  O  P


Piov.  21. 6.  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  /.  is  van.
23.  whoso  keepeth  his  /.  keepeth  his  soul  from

25.  15.  and  a  soft  /.  breaketh  the  bone

23.  so  doth  an  angry  countenance  a  backbiting  /.

26.  28.  a  lying  /.  nateth  those  afflicted  by  it
28.  23.  than  he  that  Hattereth  with  the  /.

30.  f  10.  hurt  not  with  thy  /.  a  servant  to  master

31.  26.  and  in  her  /.  is  the  law  of  kindness
Eccl.  10.  til.  the  master  of  the  /.  is  no  better
Cant.  4.  il.  honey  and  milk  are  under  thy  t.

Isa.  3.  8.  because  their  t.  is  against  the  Lord
5.  t  21.  as  the  t.  of  fire  devoureth  the  stubble

30.  27.  and  his  t.  is  as  a  devouring  fire

32.  4.  the  t.  of  the  stammerers  shall  speak  plainly

33.  19.  thou  shalt  not  see  a  people  of  stammering  t.
35.  6.  then  shall  the  t.  of  the  dumb  sing

41.  17.  and  when  their  t.  faileth  for  thirst

45.  23.  that  unto  me  every  t.  shall  swear

50.  4.  the  Lord  hath  given  me  the  /.  of  the  learned

54.  17.  every  t.  that  shall  rise  against  thee

57.  4.  against  whom  draw  ye  out  the  t .?

59.  3.  your  t.  hatli  muttered  perverseness
Jer.  9.  3.  they  bend  their  t.  like  their  bow  for  lies

5.  they  have  taught  their  t.  to  speak  lies

8.  their  t.  is  as  an  arrow  shot  out,  it  speaketh

18.  18.  come,  and  let  us  smite  him  with  the  t.
Lam.  4.  4.  the*,  of  the  sucking  child  cleaveth
Ezek.  3. 1 5.  art  not  sent  to  a  people  heavy  of  t.

26.  I  will  make  thy  t.  cleave  to  roof  of  thy  mouth
Hot  7,  16,  princes  shall  fall  for  the  rage  of  their  t.
Hab-  1.  13.  boldest  thy  t.  when  wicked  devoureth
1®*  their  t.  shall  consume  in  their  mouth
Mark  7.  33.  and  he  spit,  and  touched  his  t.

35.  and  straightway  his  t.  was  loosed,  Luke  1.  64.
Jam.  1.26.  seemeth  religious,  and  bridleth  not  hist.

3.  5.  so  the  t.  is  a  little  member,  and  boasteth

6.  the  t.  is  a  fire  ||  8.  the  t.  can  no  man  tame
1  John  3.  18.  nor  let  us  love  in  t.  but  in  truth

See  Deceitful,  Hold.

.  My  TONGUE.

ZKam.  23. 2.  Spirit  spoke,  and  his  word  was  in  my  t.
Est/i.  7.  4.  if  we  had  been  sold,  I  had  held  my  t.
Job  6.  30.  is  there  iniquity  in  my  t.

27.4.  not  speak  wicked n .  nor  shal  1  my  t.  utter  deceit
33.  2.  behold,  my  t.  hath  spokpn  in  my  mouth
Psal.  22.  15.  and  my  t.  cleaveth  to  my  jaws
35.  28.  and  my  t.  shall  speak  of  thy  righteousness
,  .f.nh  Praise  all  day  long,  51.  14.  171.  24.

39  1.  1  will  take  heed  that  l  sin  not  with  my  t.

3.  my  heart  was  hot,  then  spake  1  with  my  t.

45.  1.  my  t.  is  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer
66.  17.  and  God  was  extol  led  with  my  t.

119.  172.  my  t.  shall  speak  of  thy  word
137 .  6.  let  my  t.  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth
139.  4.  not  a  word  in  my  t.  but  thou  knowest  it
Luke  16.  24.  may  dip  his  finger,  and  cool  my  t.

/icis  2.  26.  my  heart  did  rejoice,  my  t .  was  glad
,  TONG  UR.

Josh.  7.  f  21.  1  saw  a  t.  of  gold,  and  coveted  it
f  TO  N  G  U  R.

Josh.  15.  f  2.  from  the  t.  that  looked  southward
18.  t  19._out-goings  at  the  north  t.  of  the  salt-sea
lsa.  1 1.  lo.Lord  shall  destroy  the  t.  of  Rgy  ptian  sea
rON G UE  for  Language.  Speech.

G en.  10.  5.  isles  were  divided  every  one  after  his  t.
LxoA.  4.  10.  I  am  slow  of  speech,  and  of  a  slow  t.
Deut.  2 8.  49.  a  nation  whose  t.  shall  not  understand
Ezra  4.  7.  the  wilting  of  the  letter  was  written  in
7  „„tbe  s>'Jlan  and  interpreted  in  the  Syrian  t.
Isa.  .18.  11.  for  with  another  t.  will  he  speak
t  T'  flight  teach  the  t.  of  the  Chaldeans

j  .  ,7,  a  R0<?U Galled  in  the  Hebrew  t.  Bethesda

dots  1.  19.  afield  called  111  their  proper  t.  Aceldama
A  8.  and  how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  t  ?
26. 14.  a  voice  saying  in  the  Hebrew  t.  Saul,  Saul
Lorn.  14. 11  and  every  t.  shall  confess  to  God
lCer.14.2.  thatspeaks  in  unknown  t.  4,  13, 14  19  27

9.  except  ye  utter  by  the  t.  words  easy  understood
2b  every  one  of  you  hath  a  psalm,  hath  a  t.
tV.iL  2.  1 1  that  every  /.  confess  that  Jesus  is  Lord
Lev.  5.  9.  thou  hast  redeemed  us  out  of  every  t

9.  11.  whose  name  in  the  Hebrew  t.  is  Abaddon
14.  6.  having  the  gospel  to  preach  to  every  t.

16.  16.  called  in  the  Hebrew/.  Armageddon

,  TONGUED.

1  rim.  3.  8.  deacons  must  be  grave,  not  double-/

_  TONGUES.

G en.  10.  20.  the  sons  of  Ham,  af'er  their  /

31.  these  are  the  sons  of  Shem,  after  their  /.

Ls.  31.  20.  thou  shalt  keep  them  from  the  strife  of  /
55.  9.  destroy,  O  lord,  and  divide  their  /.

78.  36.  and  they  lied  to  him  with  their  /.

140.  3.  they  sharpened  their  /.  like  a  serpent
/s«.  66. 18.  shall  come,  1  will  gather  all  nations  and  /
Jer.  23.  31.  that  use  their  /.  and  say,  he  saith
Mark  16.  17.  they  shall. speak  with  new  /.

Acts  2.  3.  there  appeared  to  them  cloven  /.

4.  and  they  began  to  speak  with  other  /.

I1*  * e  bea>;  111  ?ur  L  the  wonderful  works  of  God

10.  46.  tor  they  heard  them  speak  with  /

19.  6.  and  they  spake  with  /.  and  prophesied
Lom.  3.  13.  with  their  /.  they  have  used  deceit
1  Lor.  12.  10.  to  another  divers  kinds  of  /.  28.

30.  do  h11  speak  with  t.  ?  do  all  interpret?

13.  1.  though  1  speak  with  the  /.  of  men  and  angels

8.  whether  there  be  /.  they  shall  cease
*  1  i,  would  ye  all  spake  with  /.  but  rather
6  brethren,  if  I  come  to  you  speaking  with  /.

.8.  1  thank  God,  1  speak  with  /.  more  than  you  all

21.  with  men  of  other  /.  will  1  speak  to  people

22.  /.  are  for  a  sign  |i  23.  if  all  speak  with  t.

39.  brethren,  forbid  not  to  speak  with  /.

Lev.  7-  9.  people  and  /.  stood  before  the  throne

10.  11.  must  prophesy  again  before  nations  and  /.

11.  9.  /.  and  nations  shall  see  their  dead  bodies
13.  7.  and  power  was  given  him  over  alt  /.

h-  10.  and  they  gnawed  their  /.  for  pam
*b  15.  the  waters  thou  sowest  are  nations  and  /

~  „  TOOK.

2U  and  Enoch  was  not,  for  God  /.  him
“•  21.  his  mother  t.  him  a  wife  out  of  Egypt
24.  7.  God,  which  /.  me  from  my  father’s  house
518


Gen.  42.  30.  the  lord  of  the  land  /.  us  for  spies
Num.  3.  49.  Moses /.the  redemption-money,  50.
11. 25.  the  Lord  /.  of  the  Spirit  that  was  on  him

21.  1.  king  Arad  /.  some  of  them  prisoners

23.  11.  1  /.  thee  to  curse  mine  enemies,  and  lo
Deut.  1.  15.  so  I  /.  the  chief  of  your  tribes

2.  35.  only  the  cattle  we  /.  for  a  prey  to  ourselves
3.4.  there  w’as  not  a  city  we  /.  not  from  them

9.  21.  I  /.  your  sin,  the  calf  which  ye  had  made

22.  14.  I  /.  this  woman  and  found  her  not  a  maid
Josh.  7.  21.  then  1  coveted  them,  and  /.  them

9.  14.  the  men  /.  of  their  victuals,  and  asked  not

24.  3.  I  /.  your  father  Abraham  from  other  side
Judg.  16.  21.  Philistines  /.  Samson,  putouthiseyes

17.  2.  behold,  the  sil  er  is  with  me,  1/.  it

19-  15.  no  man  /.  them  into  his  house  to  lodging
25.  the  man  /.  his  concubine,  and  brought  her°
20.  6.  1  /.  my  concubine,  and  cut  her  in  pieces

1  Sam.  2.  14.  brought  up,  the  priest  /.  for  himself

5.  1.  and  the  Philistines  /.  the  ark  of  God,  2.

10.  1.  Samuel  /.  a  vkl  of  oil  and  poured  on  Saul

14.  47.  so  Saul  /.  the  kingdom  over  Israel

15.  21.  the  people  /.  of  the  spoil,  sheep  and  oxen

16.  13.  Samuel  /.  horn  of  oil  and  anointed  David

18.  2.  Saul  /.  him,  would  not  let  him  go  home
26.  12.  David  /.  the  spear  from  Saul's  bolster

2  Sam.  1.  10.  I  /.  the  crown  and  brought  it  hither

6.  6.  Uzzah  /.  hold  ot  it  for  the  oxen  shook  it
7-  8.  I  /.  thee  from  the  sheep-cote,  to  be  ruler

15.  my  mercy  shall  notdepart,  as  I  /.  it  from  Saul

12.  4.  but/,  the  poor  man  s  lamb  and  dressed  it

1  Kings  1.  39.  Zadok  the  priest  /.  an  horn  of  oil

3.  20.  she  arose  and  /.  my  son  from  beside  me

20.  34.  the  cities  my  father  /.  I  will  restore

2  Kings  10.31.  but  Jehu  /.  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law
1  Chron.  11.  5.  yet  David  /.  the  castle  of  Zion
1C  hr  on.  3.3.  11.  which  /.  Manasseh  among  thorns
Ezra  5.  14.  vessels  which  Nebuchadnezzar  /.  6.  5.
E.sth.  2.7.  whom  Mordecai  /.  for  his  own  daughter
6.  11.  then  /.  Hainan  the  apparel  and  the  horse

9.  27-  /•  on  them,  that  they  would  keep  Purim
Job  10  t  8.  thine  hands  /.  pains  upon  me

Psal.  22.  9.  he  that/,  me  out  of  the  womb,  71.  6.

48.  6.  fear  /.  hold  on  them  there,  and  pain
55.  14.  we  /.  sweet  counsel  together,  and  walked
78.70.  he  chose  David,  and  /.  from  the  sheep-folds
Isa.  8.  2.  1  t.  me  faithful  witnesses  to  record
40.  14.  with  whom  /.  he  counsel,  who  instructed
Jer.  25.  17.  then  /.  1  the  cup  at  the  Lord’s  hand
.31.  32.  in  the  day  I  /.  them  by  the  hand,  Heb.  8.9.
39.  14.  even  they  /.  Jeremiah  out  of  prison
Ezek.  8.  3.  and  he  /.  me  by  a  lock  of  mine  head

10.  7.  he  /.  fire  from  between  the  cherubims
33.  5.  he  heard  the  trumpet, and  /.  not  warning

Amos  7.  15.  the  Lord  /.  me  as  1  followed  the  flock
Zech.  n.  7.1.  /.me  two  staves,  beauty  and  bands

13.  I  /.  the  thirty  pieces  and  cast  to  the  potter
Mat.  8.  17.  himself  t.  our  infirmities,  and  bare

1.3.  .33.  like  leaven  which  a  woman  /.  Luke  1.3.  21.
25.  .3.  the  foolish  virgins/,  no  oil  ||  .35.  ye  /.  me  in
43.  I  was  a  stranger  and  ye  /.  me  not  in
Mark  12.20.  the  .first  /.  a  wife,  and  left  no  seed

21.  the  second  /.  her  and  died,  Luke  20.  29,  30.
14.49.  in  the  temple  teaching,  and  ye  /.  me  not

John  19.  27.  that  disciple  /.  her  to  his  own  home
Acts  1.  16.  who  was  guide  to  them  who  /.Jesus

9.  27.  but  Barnabas  /.  him,  and  declared  to  them
12.  25.  /.  with  them  John  whose  sirname  was  Mark
19.  1.3.  /.  on  them  to  call  over  them  which  had

24.  6.  w'hom  we  /.  and  would  have  judged  bv  law
28.  15.  Paul  thanked  God  and  /.courage
Gal  2.  1.  1  went  up  and  1  /.  Titus  with  me  also
Ghil.  2.  7.  and  /.  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant
if  ?:lt0ljt  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  cross

neb.  2. 14.  he  also  himself  /.  part  of  the  same

10.  .34.  ye  /.  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your  goods
Lev.  5.  7-  he  /.  the  book  11  8.  5.  angel  /.  the  censer

10.  10.  1  /.  the  little  book  out  of  the  angel's  hand
TOOK  away.

Gen.  <21.  .36.  he  /.  away  my  birth  right,  behold
Erod.  10.  19.  a  west- wind  /.  away  the  locusts

I. 3.  22.  he  /.not  away  the  pillar  of  cloud  by  day
Lev.  6.  4.  he  shall  ru  ore  that  which  ye  /.  away
Judg.  8.  21.  Gideon  /.  away  their  ornaments

II.  13.  Israel  /.  away  my  land  whpn  they  came  up
15.  Israel  /.  not  away  the  land  of  Moab

1  Sam.  27.  9.  David  /.  away  the  sheep  and  oxen

1  Kings  14.  26.  Shishak  /.  away  the  treasures

15.  12.  Asa  /.  away  the  Sodomites  out  of  the  land

22.  and  they  /.  away  the  stones  of  Hamah

2  K  ings  2.3.  11.  Josiah  /.  away  the  horses  of  the  sun
2d.  14.  all  the  vessels  wherewith  they  ministered,

the  Chaldeans/,  away.  15.  Jer.  52.  18,  19.

<2  Chron.  14.  .3.  Asa  /.  away  the  altars  |l  5.  images
17.  6.  Jehoshaphat  /.  away  the  high  places
•jO.  Hezekiah  /.  away  the  altars  in  Jerusalem

33.  15.  Manasseh  /.  away  the  strange  gods
Psal.  69.  4.  1  restored  that  which  I  /.  not  away

1  ant  D.7.  the  keepers  /.  away  my  vail  from  me
L~.ek.  16.  50.  I  /.  them  away  as  1  saw  good
'Jos.  1.3.  11.  and  I  /.  the  king  away  in  my  wrath
Mat.  24.  39.  the  flood  came  and  /.  them  all  away
John  11.  41.  then  they  1.  away  the  stone  from  place
He  TOOK.

Gen.  34.  2.  Shechem  saw  her,  he  t.  her,  and  lay  with
\  w,ben  be  t.  jt  out,  his  hand  was  leprous
24.  7.  he  /.  the  book  of  the  covenant  and  read
"2-  20.  and  he  t.  the  calt  which  they  had  made

34.  31.  he  t.  the  vail  off,  until  he  came  out
Lev.  8.  16.  he  t.  all  the  fat  on  the  inwards,  25.
Judg.Q.  16.  he  t.  the  elders  of  the  city  and  thorns
Ixnth  4.  2.  he  t.  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city

1  &am.  11  •  7 •  he  t,  a  yoke  of  oxen  and  hewed  them

14.  52.  Saul  saw  any  valiant  man,  he  t.  him  to  him

15.  8.  he  t.  A  gag  king  of  the  Amalekites  alive

17.  40.  he  t.  his  staff  in  his  hand  and  chose  him

2  Sam.  1.3.  11  .he  t.  hold  of  her,  and  said,  lie  with  me

18.  14.  he  t.  three  darts,  and  thrust  them  through
22^17.  he  sent  from  above,  he  /.me,  Psal.  18.  16.

1  Kings  17.  19.  he  t.  her  son  out  of  her  bosom


2  Kings  2.  14;  he  t.  the  mantle  of  Elijah  that  fell
3.  27.  he  t.  his  eldest  son  and  offered  him  for  a


I


2  Kings  5.  24.  he  t.  them  from  their  hand  and  b<

8.  15.  he  t.  a  thick  cloth  and  dipped  it  in  watt

13.  15.  and  he  t.  unto  him  bow  and  arrows
Job  2.  8.  he  t.  him  a  potsherd  to  scrape  himself
Prov.  12.  27.  slothful  roasteth  not  that  which  he
H°s.  12.  .3.  he  t.  his  brother  hy  the  heel  in  the  wo
Mat.  15.  36.  he  t.  the  seven  loaves,  Mark  8.  6.

26.  27.  he  t.  the  cup,  Luke  22.  17 .  l  Cor.  1 1 . 25.
37  -he  t.  with  him  Peter,  James,  John,  Luke  9

27.  24.  he  t.  water  and  washed  his  hands,  say  in
Mark  8.  2.3.  and  he  t.  the  blind  man  by  the  ham

9.  36.  he  t.  a  child  and  set  him  in  the  midst
Luke  9.  16.  he  t.  the  five  loaves  and  two  fishes

10.  .35.  he  t.  out  two  pence  and  gave  to  the  hos
22.  19.  and  he  t.  bread,  24.  30.  Acts  27.  35.

Acts  16.  .33.  he  t.  them  the  same  hour  and  wash.
21.  11  .het.  Paul’s  girdle  and  bound  his  hands
Heb.  2.  16.  he  t.  not  on  him  the  nature  of  au°el
9. 19.  he  t.  the  blood  of  calves  and  of  goats  °
They  TOOK.

Gen.  6.  2.  they  t.  them  wives  which  they  chose

14.  11.  and  theyt.  all  the  goods  of  Sodom

12.  and  they  t.  Lot,  Abram’s  brother’s  son

Num.  16.  18.  and  they  t.  every  man  his  censer
Dent.  1.  25.  and  they  t.  of  the  fruit  of  the  land
Josh.  6.  20.  the  people  went  up  and  they  t.  the  ci
8.  23.  the  king  of  Ai,  they  t.  alive  and  brought  I

11.  19.  save  Hivites(  all  other  theyt.  in  battle
Judg.  3.  6.  they  t.  their  daughters  to  be  wives

2  Kings  10.  14.  they  t.  them  alive  and  slew  then
Lam.  5.  1.3.  they  t.  the  young  men  to  grind
Ezek.  2.3.  13.  1  saw  that  they  t.  both  one  way
Httn.  5.  20.  and  they  t.  his  glory  from  him
Mat.  21.  46.  because  they  t.  him  for  a  prophet

28.  15.  so  they  t.  the  money,  and  did  as  taught
Mark  12. 8.  they  t.  him,  and  killed  him,  and  cast  I
Luke  22.  54.  they  t.  him,  and  led  him,  John  19.  11
Acts  4.  1.3.  and  they  t.  knowledge  of  them  that

13.  29.  they  t.  him  down  from  the  tree  and  laic
18. 26.  they  t.  him,  and  expounded  the  way  of  C
TOOK  up.

Num.  23.  7.  Balaam  /.  up  his  parable  and  s<
r  .  „  „  .  .  18.  1  24.  .3.  15,  20,  21,

Josh.  3. 6.  the  priests  /.  up  the  ark,  6.  12. 1  Kings  I
Judg.  19.  28.  then  the  man  /.  up  his  concubine

1  Sam.  9.  24.  and  the  cook  /.  up  the  shoulder

2  Sam.  2.  32.  they  /.  up  Asahel  and  buried  him
4.  4.  Mephibosheth’s  nurse  /.  him  up  and  fled

1  K  ings  13.  29.  and  the  prophet  t.up  the  carcasi

2  Kings  2.  1.3.  he  /.  up  also  the  mantle  of  Elijah
4.  37.  the  Shunammite  /.  up  her  son  and  went
10.  15.  and  he  /.  him  up  to  him  into  the  chariol
Kelt.  2.  1.  1  t.up  the  wine  and  gave  it  to  the  ki
Jer.  38.  1.3.  they  /.  Jeremiah  gpout  of  the  dunge
Ezek.  .3.  12.  then  the  Spirit  /.  me  up,  11.  24.  }  43.
Dan.  .3.  22.  the  flame  slew  men  that  /.  up  Shadra
Jonah  1.  15.  so  they  /.  up  Jonah,  and  cast  him  fc
Mat.  14.  12.  they  /.  up  the  body  of  John,  Mark 6

20.  they  /.  up  of  the  frag  uents  that  remained,
37.  Mark  6.  43.  |  8.  8,
16.  9.  and  how  many  baskets  ye  /.  up,  10.
Mark  2.  12.  and  he  /.  up  the  bed  and  went  forth
10.  16.  he  /.  them  up  in  his  arms  and  blessed  the
Luke  2.  28.  /.  him  up  in  his  arms  and  blessed  G<
John  8.  59.  /.  up  stones  to  cast  at  him,  10.  31.
Acts  7.  21.  Pharaoh’s  daughter  /.  Moses  up
43.  yea,  ye  /.  up  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch
10.  26.  but  Petei  1.  him  up,  saying,  stand  up
21.15.  we  t.up  our  carriages  and  went  to  Jerusal
Kev.  18.  21.  and  a  mighty  angel  t.  up  a  stone
TOOKEST.

Esal.  99  8.  tho’  thou  /.  vengeance  of  their  inventit
Ezek.  16.  18.  and  /.  thy  broidered  garments
^  TOOL.

Exod.  20.  25.  if  lift  up  thy  /.  thou  hast  polluted

32.  4.  and  he  fashioned  it  with  a  graving  /.
Deut.  27 •  5.  thou  shalt  not  lift  u  p  any  iron  /.  on  tin
1  Kings  6.  7.  nor  any  /.  of  iron  heard  in  the  hoc
TOOTH

Is  a  useful  member  of  the  body  known  by  evi
body.  The  Hebrews  call  ivory,  tooth,  or  ,
elephant’s  tooth,  1  Kings  10.  t  22.  They  sot.
times  also  called  the  prominence  of  a  rock
the  name  of  tooth,  1  Sam.  14.  t  4.  Between  t
passages  there  was  a  sharp  rock  ;  in  Hebrt
the  tooth  ot  a  rock.  And  the  rock  from  wht
God  caused  the  water  to  gush  out,  for  qvenchi
Samson's  thirst,  is  called  maktesh,  that  is,  1
jaw-tooth,  Judy.  15.  19.  It  was  ordered  by  1
law  of  retaliation,  that  they  should  give  tooth  t
tooth,  Exod.  21.  24.  This  law  is,  by  most  1
terpreters,  reckoned  only  minatory  ;  yet  so
that  it  was  literally  to  he  inflicted,  except  t
injuring  party  would,  give  such  satisfaction
the  injured  person  accepted,  or  the  judges  dett
mined.

To  gnash  the  teeth  is  a  token  of  sorrow,  rage ,  t
■Lair,  hatred,  and  passion.  The  Psalmist  sal
Psal.  35.  16.  That  his  enemies  gnash  upon  hi
with  their  teeth,  out  of  rage  and  hatred.  And  i
gospel  m  several  places  speaks  of  the  gnashing
the  teeth  of  the  damned  out  of  ' rage  and  despot
God  breaks  the  teeth  of  the  wicked,  Psal.  3.
he  puts  it  out  oj  thetr  power  to  injure  good  me
I  he  wicked  complain,  that  the  fathers  have  eat<
sour  grapes,  and  their  children’s  teeth  are  set  <
edge,  Ezek.  18.  2.  As  if  they  had  said,  “  Ot
fathers  have  sinned,  and  we  are  obliged  to  under 1
the  punishment  thereof,  though  we  are  not  guilty.
Amos  tells  the  idolatrous  Jews,  that  God  lit
sent  them  cleanness  of  teeth,  that  is,  f am  tit
I  hey  should  not  have  wherewithal  to  defile  the.
teeth,  Amos  4.  6.

Exod.  21.  24.  thou  shalt  give  /.  for  /.  Lev.  24.  21
„  ....  .  Deut.  19.  21.  Mat.  5.  .1

27.  it  he  smite  out  his  man  servant  s  or  his  mail
servant  s  Z.  he  shall  let  him  go  tree  for  his /.  sail
Prov.  25.  19.  is  like  a  broken  /.  a  foot  out  of  joint
TOP.

Gen.  11.4.  tower  whose  /.  may  reach  unto  heaven

28.  12.  the  t.  ut  the  ladder  reached  to  heav  en
18.  Jacob  poured  oil  on  the  /.  of  the  stone


TOP


TOO


T  O  W


tod.  10. 20.  Lord  came  down  on  /.  of  mount  Sinai,
and  called  Moses  to  /.  of  the  mount,  34.  2.
’4.  17-  like  devouring  fire  on  the  /.  of  the  mount
.’8.  32.  there  shall  be  an  hole  in  the  /.  of  it
tit.  3.  shall  overlay  the  /.  with  pure  gold,  37.  26.
urn.  14.  40.  They  gat  into  the  t.  of  the  mountain
;0.  28.  Aaron  died  there  in  the  /.  of  the  mount
O.  for  from  the  /.  of  the  rocks  1  see  him
)eut .  3.  27-  get  up  into  the  /.  of  Pisgali,  34.  1.

.’8.  35.  from  sole  of  foot  to  the  /.  of  thy  head

13.  16.  on  /.  of  the  head  of  him  that  was  separated
ttdg.  6.  26.  build  an  altar  on  the  /.  of  this  rock

L  51.  the  people  gat  up  to  the  /.  of  the  tower
,5.  8.  Samson  dwelt  in  the  t,  of  the  rock  Etam
Ham.  9.  25.  communed  on  the  /.  of  the  house,  26.
Sam.  16.  22.  spread  a  tent  on  the  /.  of  the  house
Kings  10.  19.  the  /.  of  the  throne  round  behind
U.  t  9.  and  set  Naboth  on  the  /.  of  the  people
Kings  9.  13.  put  it  under  him  on  /.of  the  stairs
Chron.  25.  12.  cast  them  from  the  /.  of  the  rock
\sth.  5.  2.  Esther  touched  the  /.  of  the  sceptre
'sal.  72.  16.  handful  of  corn  on  /.  of  mountains
102.  7.  I  am  as  a  sparrow  alone  on  the  house-/.
\rov.  8.  2.  she  standeth  in  the  /.  of  high  places
!1.  9.  better  dwell  in  corner  of  house-/.  25.  24.

’3.  34.  or  as  he  that  lieth  on  the  /.  of  a  mast
ant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  /.  of  Amana,  from  the  /.
sa.  2.  2.  the  Lord’s  house  shall  be  established  in
the  /.  of  the  mountains,  and  be  exalted,  Mic.  4.  1.

7.  6.  two  or  three  berries  in  the  /.  of  the  bough
k).  17.  left  as  a  beacon  on  the  /.  of  a  mountain

12.  11.  let  them  shout  from  the  /.of  the  mountains
,am.  2.  19.  that  faint  for  hunger  in  /.  of  every  street
1.  1.  the  stones  are  poured  out  in  /.  of  every  street
)zek.  17.  4.  he  cropt  oflf  the  /.  of  his  young  twigs
22.  1  will  crop  off  from  the  /.  of  his  young  twigs

14.  7.  her  blood,  she  set  it  on  the  /.  of  a  rock

8.  1  have  set  her  blood  on  the  /.  of  a  rock

16.  4.  I  will  make  her  like  the  /.  of  a  rock,  14.
tl.  3.  his  /.  was  among  the  thick  boughs,  10,  14.

13.  12.  law  of  the  house  on  the  /.  of  the  mountains
7 ah.  3.  10.  her  children  dashed  at /.  of  all  the  streets
lat.  24.  17.  let  him  who  is  on  the  house-/,  not

come  down,  Mark  13.  15.  Luke  17.  31.

17.  51.  vail  rent  from  /.  to  the  bottom,  Mark  15.  .‘18.
,uke  5.  19.  they  went  on  the  house-/,  and  let  down
ohn  19.  23.  was  woven  from  the  /.  throughout
leb.  11.21.  and  worshipped, leaning  on/. ofhis  staff

See  Cab  yiel,  Hill,.

I  OPS.

en.  8.  5.  the  /.  of  the  mountains  were  seen
Sam.  5.  24.  Yvhen  thou  hearest  the  sound  of  a  going
in  the /.of  the  mulberry  trees,  1  Chron.  14.  15.
Kings  19.  26.  were  as  the  green  herb,  as  the  gl  ass
upon  the  house-/.  Psal.  129.  6.  Isa.  37.  27.
■>b  24.  24.  and  cut  off  as  the  /.  of  the  ears  of  corn
sa.  2.  21.  to  go  into  the  /.  of  the  ragged  rocks
5.  3.  on  the  /.  of  houses  every  one  shall  howl
!2.  1.  that  thou  art  wholly  gone  up  to  the  house-/.
er.  48.  38.  there  shall  be  lamentation  on  all  house-/.
'.sek.  6.13.  their  slain  men  shall  be  in  /.  of  mountains
{os.  4.  13.  they  sacrifice  on  the  /.  of  the  mountains
’eph.  1.  5.  worship  the  host  of  heaven  on  house-/.
'lat.  10.  27-  that  preach  ve  upon  the  house  /.

,uke  12.  3.  shall  be  proclaimed  on  the  house-/.

LOPAZ.

n  Hebrew,  Pitdath.  The  Seventy,  St.  Jerom,
Junius,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  modern  in¬
terpreters,  translate  Pitdath  by  Topaz  ;  the  Para¬
phrasis,  Unkelos,  and  Jonathan,  by  a  green  stone  ;
which  agrees  perfectly  well  with  the  Topaz,  of
which  the  finest  are  green,  as  Pliny  observes,
lib.  37.  cap.  8.  Yet  others  maintain,  that  the
most  beautiful  Topazes  are  of  the  colour  of  gold.
It  is  pretended  this  stone  took  its  name  of  1  opaz
from  an  island  in  the  Red  sea,  which  has  the
same  name.  Pliny  will  have  Juba,  king  of  Mau¬
ritania,  to  have  been  the  first  that  found  them.
But  if  it  was  known  to  Moses,  it  must  be  much
more  ancient  than  Juba.  Job  speaks  of  the  Pit¬
dath  of  Cush,  or  Ethiopia,  Job  28.  19.  which  may
confirm  their  opinion  who  make  the  Topaz  to  come
from  the  Red  sea  ;  because  there  wa  >•  a  country
of  Cush  lying  upon  the  eastern  shore  of  this  sea.
This  stone  was  the  second  of  the  first  row  in  the
breast  plate,  and  had  the  name  of  Simeon  upon
it,  Exod.  28.  17.

'.rod.  28.  17.  the  first  row  a  sardius,  a  /.  39.  10.
ob  28.  19.  the  /.  of  Ethiopia  shall  not  equal  it
,zek.  28.  13.  the  sardius,  the  /.  was  thy  covering
lev.  21.  20.  the  eighth,  beryl,  the  ninth  a  /.

TOP  HEP.

/  is  thought  that  Tophet  was  the  butchery,  or  place
of  slaughter,  at  Jerusalem,  lying  to  the  south  of
the  city,  in  the  valley  of  the  children  of  Ilin-
nom.  7/  is  also  said,  that  a  constant  fire  used
to  be  kept  there,  for  burning  the  carcases,  and
other  filthiness,  that  were  brought  thither  from
the  city.  It  was  in  the  same  place  that  they  cast
away  the  ashes  and  remains  of  the  images  of  false
gods,  when  they  demolished  their  altars,  and  broke
down  their  statues.  Isaiah  seems  to  allude  to  this
custom,  of  burning  dead  carcases  in  1  ophet,  when
speaking  of  the  defeat  of  the  army  of  Sennacherib,
he  says;  For  'I ophet  is  ordained  of  old  ;  yea,
for  t Ive  king  it  is  prepared  ;  he  hath  made  it
deep  and  large.  1  he  pile  thereof  is  fire  and
much  wood  ;  the  breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a
stream  of  brimstone,  doth  kindle  it.  Though
this  may  he  figuratively  understood  e/hell.

It  hers  think  the  name  of  Tophet  is  given  to  the
valley  of  Ihnnom,  because  of  the  sacrifices  that
were  offered  there  to  the  g--d  Moloch,  by  beat  of
drum,  which  in  Hebrew  is  called  loph.  It  was
in  this  manner  that  these  sacrifices  were  offered.
The  statue  of  Moloch  was  of  brasst  hollow  within,
with  its  arms  extended,  and  stooping  a  little  for¬
ward.  They  lighted  a  great  fire  within  the  statue,
and  another  before  it.  They  put  upon  its  arms
the  child  they  intended  to  sacrifice,  which  soon  fell
into  the  fire  at '  the  foot  of  the  statue,  putting
forth  cries,  as  may  easily  be  imagined.  To  stifle


the  noise  of  these  cries  and  howttngs,  they  made  a
great  rattling  of  drums  and  other  instruments,  that
the  spectators  might  not  he  moved  with  compassion
at  the  clamours  of  these  miserable  victims,  find
this,  as  they  say,  was  the  manner  of  sacrificing  in
Tophet.

Jeremiah  upbraids  the  Israelites  with  having  built
temples  to  Moloch,  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  in
Tophet,  to  burn  their  children  there  in  the  fire,
Jer.  7 •  31 .  'The  same  prophet  shews,  that  1  ophet
was  a  polluted  and  unclean  ;  lace,  where  they  used
to  throw  the  carcases  to  which  they  refused  burial,
Jer.  7.  32.  |  19.  11,  12,  13.  King  Jostah  defiled  the
place  of  T'  phet,  where  the  temple  of  Moloch  stood,
that  nobody  might  go  thither  any  more  to  sacrifice
their  children  to  that  cruel  heathenish  deity,  2
Kings  23. 10.

2  Kings  23.  10.  Josiah  defiled  /.  in  the  valley
Isa.  30.  33.  for/,  is  ordained  of  old,  for  the  king
Jer.  7.  31.  they  have  built  the  high  places  of  /.

32.  that  it  shall  no  more  be  called  /.  19.  6.

19.  11.  they  shall  bury  in  /.till  there  be  no  place

12.  saith  the  Tx>rd,  I  will  even  make  this  city  as /.

13.  Jerusalem  shall  be  defiled  as  /.

14.  then  came  Jeremiah  from  /.  whither  sent

TORCH.

Zecli.  12.  6.  make  the  governors  of  Judah  like  a  /.
TORCH  ES.

Judg.  7. 1 16.  he  put  /.  within  the  pitchers

15.  +  4.  Samson  caught  300  foxes  and  took  /.

Nah.  2.  .3.  the  chariots  shall  be  with  flaming  t.

4.  the  chariots  shall  seem  like  /.they  shall  run
John  18.  .3.  Judas  cometh  with  lanterns  and  /.
TORMENT.

Luke  16.  28.  lest  they  come  into  this  place  of  /.

1  John  4.  18.  no  fear  in  love,  because  fear  hath  /.
Rev.  9.  5.  their  /.  was  as  the  /.  of  a  scorpion

14.  11.  the  smoke  of  their  /.  ascendeth  for  ever

18.  7.  so  much /.  and  sorrow  give  her,  1  sit  a  queen
10.  standing  afar  off  for  the  tear  of  her  /.  15.
TORMENT,  Verb.

Mat.  8.  29.  art  thou  come  to  /.  us  before  the  time
Mark  5.  7.  that  thou  /.  me  not,  Luke  8.  28.
TORMENTS.

Mat.  4.24.  that  were  taken  with  divers  diseas,  and  /.
Luke  16.  23.  in  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes  being  in  /.
TORM  EN  J  EL).

Mat.  8.  6.  Lord,  my  servant  lieth  grievously  t.
Luke  16.  24.  send  Lazarus,  for  1  ain  /.  in  this  flame
25.  but  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  /.

Heb.  1 1. 37.  wandered,  being  destitute,  afflicted,  t.
Rev.  9. 5.  but  that  they  should  be  /.  five  months
11. 10.  because  these  two  prophets/,  them  that
14.  10.  he  shall  be  /.  with  fire  and  brimstone

20.  10.  and  shall  be  /.  day  and  night  for  ever

TORMENTORS.

Mat.  18.  34.  his  lord  delivered  him  to  the  /.
TORN.

Gen.  31 . 39.  that  which  was  /.  of  beasts  T  brought  not
44.28.  and  1  said,  surely  he  is  /.  in  pieces
Exod.  22.  1.3.  if  /.  in  pieces,  let  him  bring  it  for  wit¬
ness,  he  shall  not  make  good  what  was  /.
31.  be  holy,  nor  shall  eat  any  flesh  /.  of  beasts
Lev.  7.  24.  fat  of  that  which  is  /.  may  be  used

17.  15.  if  any  eat  that  which  was/,  he  shall  wash
22.  8.  dieth  of  itself,  or  /.  of  beasts, shall  not  eat

1  Kings  1.3.26.  to  the  lion, which  hath  /.him

28.  the  lion  had  not  eaten  carcase,  nor  /.  the  ass
Isa.  5.  25.  carcases  /.  in  the  midst  of  the  streets
Jer.  5.  6.  every  one  that  goeth  out  shall  be  /.

Ezek.  4.  14.  1  nave  not  eaten  of  that  which  is  /.

4  4.  31 .  the  priests  shall  not  eat  any  thing  that  is  t.
Hos.  6.  1.  for  he  hath  /.  and  lie  will  heal  us
Mai.  1.  13.  and  ye  brought  that  which  was/.

Mark  1.26.  when  the  unclean  spirit  hath  /.  him
TORTOISE,

In  Hebrew,  Choled,  which  the  Septuagint  translate
by  land  crocodile,  others  by  green-frog.  It  is
numbered  among  the  unclean  animals.  Lev.  11.

29.  This  land  crocodile  is  a  sort  of  lizard,  which
feeds  upon  the  sweetest  flowers  it  can  find  ;  this
makes  its  entrails  to  he  very  much  valued  for  their
agreeable  smell.  St.  Jerome  says,  that  the  Syrians
used  to  eat  crocodiles  of  this  kind,  which  live  upon
the  land  only.

Lev.  11.29.  the  /.shall  be  unclean  unto  you
TORTURED.

Acts  22.  29.  departed,  who  should  have  /.  him
Heb.  11. 35.  others  were/,  not  accepting  deliverance
TOSS.

Isa.  22.  18.  he  will  turn  and  /.  thee  like  a  hall
Jer.  5.22.  though  the  waves  thereof  /.  themselves
TOSSED.

Psal.  109.2.3.  I  am  /.  up  and  down  as  the  locust
Prov.  21.  6.  is  a  vanity,  /.  to  and  fro  of  them  that
Isa.  54.  11.0  thou  afflicted,  /.  with  tempest
Mat.  14.  24.  but  the  ship  was  now  /.  with  waves
/lets  27.  18.  being  exceedingly  /.  with  a  tempest
Eph.  4.  14.  we  be  no  more  children  /.  to  and  fro
Jam.  1.  6.  for  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  /.
TOSSINGS.

Job  7.  4.  J  am  full  of/,  to  the  dawning  of  the  day

2  Cor.  6.  t  5.  approving  ourselves  in /.  in  labours

TOTTERING.

Psal.  62.  3.  ye  shall  be  all  of  you  as  a/,  fence
TOUCH.

Gen.  3.  .3.  not  eat  of  it,  nor  shall  ye  /.  it  lest  ye  die
20.  6.  therefore  suffered  I  thee  not  to  /.  her
Exod.  19. 12.  that  ye  /.  not  the  border  of  it
13.  there  shall  notan  hand/,  it,  but  shall  die
Lev.  5.  2.  or  if  a  soul  /.  any  unclean  thing
3.  or  if  he  /.  the  uncleanness  of  man,  7  ..21.

6.  27-  whatsoever  shall  t.  the  flesh  thereof
11.8.  their  carcase  ye  shall  not/.  Devi.  14.  8.

31.  whosoever  doth  /.  them  when  dead.be  unclean
12.  4.  he  shall  /.  no  hallowed  thing,  nor  come
Num.  4.  15.  they  shall  not  /.  any  holy  thing

16.  26.  depart  and  /.  nothing  of  theirs
Josh.  9. 19.  now  therefore  we  may  not  /.  them
Ruth  2,  9.  1  charged  that  they  should  not  /.  thee
2  Sam.  14.  10.  and  he  shall  not  /.  thee  any  more

18.  12.  beware  that  none  /.  theyoungman  Absalom


2  Sam.  23.  7.  man  thatshall  /.  them  must  be  fenced
1  Chr.  16.22.  /.  not  mine  anointed,  Psal.  105. 15.

Job  1.  11.  but/,  all  he  hath,  anil  he  will  curse  thee
2.  5.  /.  his  hone  and  his  flesh,  he  will  curse  thee

5.  19.  in  seven  there  shall  no  evil  /.  thee

6.  7.  the  things  that  my  soul  reruseil  to  /.

Ps.  144.  5.  /.  the  mountains,  and  they  shall  smoke
Isa.  6.  t7.  he  caused  it  to  /.  my  mouth,  and  said
52.  11.  /.  no  unclean  thing,  2  Cor.  6.  17 •

Jer.  12.  14.  that  /.  the  inheritance  of  my  people
Lam.  2.  f  2.  strong  holds  he  hath  made  to  /.  ground
4.  14.  so  that  men  could  not  /.  their  garments
15.  they  cried,  it  is  unclean,  depart,  /.  not
Hag.  2.  12.  if  one  with  his  skirt  do  /.  bread
13.  if  one  that  is  unclean  /.  any  of  these
Mat.  9.  21 .  if  1  may  but  /.  his  garment,  Mark  5. 28.

14.  .36.  besouiiht  him  that  they  might  /.  the  hem  ol
his  garment,  Mark  5.  28.  |  6.  56.  I  8.  22.
Mark3.  10.  they  press,  on  him  to  /.  him,  Luke  6. 19.

8.  22.  they  besought  him  to  /.  the  blind  man
Luke  11.  46.  ye  yourselves  /.  not  the  burdens

18.  15.  brought  infants,  that  he  would  /.  them
John  20.  17.  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  /.  me  not

1  Cor.  7.  1.  it  is  good  for  a  man  not  to  /.  a  woman
Col.  2.  21.  /.  not,  taste  not,  handle  not
Ileb.  11.  28.  that  destroy  first-horn,  should  /.  them
12.  20.  if  so  much  as  a  beast/,  the  mountain
TOUCHED.

Gen.  26.  29.  do  us  no  hurt,  as  we  have  not  /.  thee
.32.  25.  he  /.  the  hollow  of  Jacob’s  thigh,  .32.

Lev.  22.  6.  the  soul  which  hath  /.  any  such
Num.  .31.  19.  and  whosoever  hath  /.  any  slain
Judg.  6.  21.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  /.  the  flesh
1  Sam.  10.  26.  a  band,  whose  hearts  God  had  1.

1  Kings  6.  27.  wings  of  the  cherubims  /.  one  anoth.

19.  5.  an  angel  /.  him,  and  said,  arise,  eat,  7.

2  Kings  1'3.  21.  when  the  man  /.  the  bones  of  Elisha
Esth.  5.  2.  so  Esther  /.  the  top  of  the  sceptre

Job  19.  21.  pity  me,  for  the  hand  of  G.  hath  /.  me
Isa.  6.  7.  lo,  this  hath  /.  thy  lips,  thy  sin  is  purged
Jer.  1.  9.  then  the  L.ord  /.  my  mouth,  and  said
Dan.  8.  5.  and  the  he  goat  /.  not  the  ground

18.  but  he  /.  me,  9.  21.  |  10.  10,  16,  18.

Mat.  8.  3.  and  Jesus  /.  him,  Mark  1. 41.  Luke  5  13.

15.  and  he  /.  her  hand,  and  the  fever  left  her

9.  20.  a  woman  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood  /.
the  hem  of  his  garment,  Mark  5.  27.  Luke  8.  44.

29.  then  /.  he  their  eyes,  saying,  20.  34.

14.  36.  as  many  as  /  him  made  whole,  Mark  6.  56.
Mark  5.  30.  who  /.  my  clothes,  31.  Luke  8.  45,  47.

7.  3.3.  was  deaf,  and  he  spit,  and  /.  his  tongue
Luke  7.  14.  he  came  and  /.  the  bier,  they  stood  still

8.  47.  she  declared  for  what  cause  she  had  /.  him
22.  51.  and  Jesus  /.  his  ear  and  healed  him

Acts  27.  3.  and  the  next  day  we  /.  at  Sidon
Heb.  4.  15.  not  an  high  priest  which  cannot  be  /.

12.  18.  not  come  to  the  mount  that  might  be  /.
TOUCHETH.

Gen.  26.  11.  he  that  /.  this  man  shall  surely  die
Exod.  19.  12.  whosoever  /.the  mount,  shall  die
29.37.  whatsoever/,  the  altar  shall  be  holy
.30.  29.  that  /.  them,  shall  be  holy,  Lev.  6.  18.

Lev.  7.  19.  the  flesh  that  /.  any  unclean  thing
11.  24.  whosoever  /.  their  carcase,  27,  36,  39.

26.  every  one  that  /.  them  shall  be  unclean

15.  5.  whoso  /.  his  bed,  shall  wash  his  clothes
7.  /.  his  flesh  ||  10.  /.  any  thing  under  him

11.  whomsoever  lie  /.  that  hath  the  issue

12.  the  vessel  of  earth  that  he  /.  shall  be  broken

19.  Yvhoso  /.  her  ||  21.  whosoever  /.  her  bed

22.  whosoever  /.  any  thing  that  she  sat.  upon

23.  if  on  her  bed,  when  he  /.  it,  he  shall  be  uncleaa.

till  the  even,  27.  1  22.  4,  5.  Num.  19.  22
Num.  19.  11.  he  that /.  the  dead  body,  13.  16.

18.  /.  a  bone  ||21.  •/.  the  water  of  separation
Judg.  16.9.  as  a  thread  is  broken  when  it  /.  fire
Job  4.  5.  now  it  /.  thee,  and  thou  ai  t  troubled
Psal.  104.  32.  he  /.  the  hills  and  they  smoke
Prov.  6.  29.  whosoever  /.  her,  shall  not  be  innocent
Ezek.  17.  10.  shall  wither,  when  the  east  wind  /.  it
Hos.  4.  2.  they  break  out,  and  blood  /.  blood
Amos  9.  5.  the  l.ord  of  hosts  is  lie  that  /.  the  land
Zech.  2.  8.  he  that  /.  you  /.  the  apple  of  his  eye
Luke  7.  .39.  known  svhat  woman  this  is  that  /.  him

1  John  5.  18.  and  that  wicked  one  /.  him  not

TOUCHING.

Gen.  27.  42.  Esau,  as  /.  thee,  doth  comfort  himself
Lev.  5. 13.  for  him,  as  /.  his  sin  that  lie  hath  sinned
Num.  8.  26.  thus  do  to  the  l.evites  /.  their  charge
'  Sam.  20.  2.3.  /.  matter  thou  and  1  have  spoken  of

2  Kings  22.  18.  /.  the  words  which  thou  hast  heard
Job  37.23.  /.  the  Almighty,  we  cannot  find  him  out
Psal.  kb.  1.  things  which  l  have  made  /.the  king
Isa.  5.  1.  a  song  of  my  beloved,  /.  his  vineyard
Jer.  1.  16.  utter  judgments  /.  all  their  wickedness

21. 11.  /.  the  house  of  the  king  of  Judah,  say
22.  11.  thus  saith  Lord  /.  Shallum  king  of  Judah
Ezek.  7. 13.  the  vision  is  /.  the  whole  multitude
Mat.  18. 19.  as  /.  any  thing  that  they  shall  ask
22.  31.  but  as  /.  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  have
ye  not  read,  Mark  12.  26.  Acts  24.  21.
Luke  23.  14.  /.  those  things  whereof  ye  accuse  him
Acts  5.  .35.  what  ye  intend  to  do  as  /.  these  men
21.25.  as  /.  the  Gentiles  who  believe,  have  written
Rom.  11.28.  as  /.  the  election,  they  are  beloved  /

1  Cor.  8. 1.  now  as  /.  things  off  ered  unto  idols

16.  12.  /.  our  brother  Apollos,  1  desired  him

2  Cor.  9.  1.  as/,  the  ministering  to  the  saints
Phil.  3.  5.  of  the  Hebrews,  as  /.  the  law,  a  Pharisee

6.  /.  the  righteousness  in  the  law,  blameless
Col.  4.  10.  /.  whom  ye  received  commandments

1  Thess.  4.  9.  /.  brotherly  love,  ye  need  not  that

2  Thess.  3.  4.  we  have  confidence  in  the  Ld.  /.  you

TOW.

Judg.  16.  9.  break  withs,  as  a  thread  of  /.  is  broken
Isa.  1.  31.  and  the  strong  shall  be  as  /.and  the  maker
43. 17.  they  are  extinct,  they  are  quenched  as  /.

TOWARD,  or  TOWARDS.

Gen.  48. 13.  Joseph  took  them  both,  Ephraim  /.  Is¬
rael’s  left  hand,  Manasseh  /.  Israel’s  right  hand
Num.  24.  1.  he  sethis  face  /.  the  wilderness
Veut.  28.  54.  his  eye  shall  be  evil  /.  his  brother

519


T  O  W


Tli  A


T  K  A


Pent.  28.  56.  shall  be  evil  /.  her  husband,  son,  daug.
^udg.  5.  9.  niy  heart  is  /.  the  governors  of  Israel
1  .Sam.  20.  12.  behold,  if  there  be  good  /.  David
1  Kings 8.  29.  mayest  hearken  to  the  prayer  thy  ser¬
vant  shall  make  /.  this  place,  30.  35.  2  Chr.f).  21.
2C '/iron.  24.  16.  because  lehoiada  had  done  good  in
Israel,  both  /.  God,  and  /.  his  house
Ezra  3.  11.  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  t.  Israel
Psal.  5  7-  I  wiH  worship  /.  thy  holy  temple,  138.  2.

25.  15.  mine  eyes  are  ever  t.  the  Lord,  for  he  shall
28.  2.  when  I  lift  my  hands  /.  thy  holy  oracle
Prov.  14.  35.  the  king  s  favour  is  t.  a  wise  servant
ha.  63.  7.  the  great  goodness  t.  house  of  Israel
Jer.  15,  1.  my  mind  could  not  be  t.  this  people
Van.  6.  10.  his  windows  being  open  t.  Jerusalem
8.  9.  the  lift  e  horn  waxed  great  t.  the  south
Jonah  2.  4.  yet  I  will  look  /.  thy  holy  temple
Mat.  28.  1.  as  it  began  to  dawn  t.  first  day  of  week
Luke  2.  14.  on  earth  peace,  good  will  t.  men

12.  21.  that  layeth  up  treasure,  and  not  rich  t.  God
24.  29.  saying,  abide  with  us  for  it  is  t.  evening
Acts  20.  21.  testifying  to  Jews  and  Greeks  repent¬
ance  t.  God,  and  faith  t.  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
24.  16.  conscience  void  of  offence  t.  God  and  t.  men
Philem.  5.  hearing  of  thy  love  and  faith  which  thou
hast  t.  the  Lord  Jesus  1  hrist,  and  t.  all  saints
See  11  e a ven,  Him,  Me,  Thee,  l  hem,  Us,  You.
TOWEL.

John  13.  4.  he  riseth,  and  took  a  t.  and  girded  hims.
5.  he  began  to  wash,  and  wipe  their  feet  with  the  t.
TOWER,

In  Hebrew,  Migdal.  [1]  It  is  pvt  for  prove!  lofty
men,  Isa.  2.  15.  I  30.  25.  [2]  The  Lord  Jesus
C/nistf  Psal.  61.  3.  Prov.  18.  10.

The  Scripture  mentions  several  towers.  The  tower  of
Si  loam  mentioned  in  Luke  13.  4.  was  probably  near
the  fountain  of  that  name,  to  the  east  of  Jerusa¬
lem  :  or,  as  others  think,  it  was  over  the  fountain ,
and  felt  upon  the  people  who  had  come  thither  to
wash  themselves,  or  to  receive  benefit  by  the  waters.
The  tower  of  the  dock,  Mic.  4.  8.  Koine  refer  this  to
the  tower  of  Edar,  which  was  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Beth  lehem,  Gen.  35.21.  They  say  likewise,
that  the  shepherds,  to  whom  the  angel  revealed  the
birth  of  our  Saviour,  were  near  to  this  tower,
Luke  2.  8,  15.  Many  interpreters  assert  that  the
passage  of  Micah,  wherein  mention  is  made  of  the
tower  of  the  Hock,  stood  for  the  city  of  Beth-'ehem,
out  of  which  our  Saviour  was  to  come.  Others
maintain,  that  the  prophet  intended  it  for  the  city
of  Jerusalem,  in  which  there  was  a  tower  of  this
name,  through  which  the  flocks  of  sheep  were
driven  into  the  sheep-market.

The  tower  of  the  watchman,  2  Kings  17.  9.  From
the  tower  of  the  watchman  to  the  fenced  city;
this  form  of  speaking  expresses  in  general  all  the
places  of  the  country,  from  the  least  to  the  great¬
est.  'The  towers  of  the  watchmen,  or  of  the  shep¬
herds,  stood  alone  in  the  midst  of  the  plain,  to  lodge
the  shepherds  and  herdmen,  who  looked  after  the
flocks,  or  to  set  watchmen  in  to  keep  the  fruits  of
the  darth,  or  to  give  notice  of  the  approach  of  ene¬
mies.  King  Uzziah  caused  several  towers  to  be
built  f>r  the  shepherds  in  the  desert,  and  made
many  cisterns  there ,  because  he  had  a  great  num¬
ber  of  flocks,  2  Chron.  26.  10.  The  tower  ijdar
mentioned  before,  and  that  which  Isaiah  takes
notice  of,  which  was  built  in  the  midst  of  a  vine¬
yard,  Isa.  5.  2.  were  of  the  same  kind
The  tower  of  Shechem,  Jndg.  9.  46,  4'c.  This  tower
was  as  a  citadel  or  fortress ,  standing  upon  higher
ground  than  the  rest  of  the  city,  and  capacious
enough  to  receive  above  a  thousand  persons.  After
A bimelech  had  taken  and  rased  the  city  of  She-
cheni,  he  endeavoured  to  take  possession  of  this
tower,  to  which  a  great  part  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  city  had  retired :  but  as  he  could  not  take  it,
because  it  was  exceeding  strong,  he  resolved  to
set  it  on. fire.  To  this  purpose  he  went  up  to  mount
Zalman,  cut  down  an  arm  of  a  tree,  and  laid  it
upon  his  shoulders,  and  commanded  all  his  people
to  follow  his  example.  'They  therefore  brought
with  them  a  great  quantity  of  fuel,  filled  the  ditch
with  it.  and  set  it  on  fire :  so  that  all  those  who
had  taken  refuge  in  the  tower  either  perished  by
'  the  flames,  or  were  stifled  by  the  smoke.

’The  Scripture  speaks  of  the  tower  of  Phanuel,  of  the
tower  of  Succoth,  of  Babel,  and  of  some  others,
which  were  also  a  kind  of  citadels  and  fortresses  of
these  cities.  Let  us  build  us  a  city  and  a  tower,
Gen.  11.  4,  5.

Gen.  11.  4.  go  to,  let  us  build  us  a  city  and  a  r.

5.  the  Lord  came  down  to  see  the  city  and  t.

35.  21.  Isr.  spread  his  tent  beyond  the  t.  of  Edar
Judg.  8.  9.  when  1  come,  1  will  break  down  this  t.
17.  he  beat  down  the  t.  of  Penuel  and  slew  men
9.  46.  men  of  the  t.  of  Shechem  entered  an  hold
51.  but  there  was  a  strong  1.  within  the  city
2  Sam.  22.  51.  he  is  the  t.  of  salvation  for  his  king
2  Kings  5.  24.  when  he  came  to  the  t.  he  took  them
Psal.  61.3.  hast  been  a  strong  t.  from  the  enemy
Prov.  18.  10.  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  t.
Cant.  4.  4.  thy  neck  is  like  the  t.  of  David
7.  4.  thy  neck  is  as  a  t.  of  ivory,  thy  nose  is  as  the
t.  of  Lebanon,  looking  towards  Damascus
Isa.  5.  2.  he  built  a  t.  in  the  midst  of  the  vineyard
Jer.  6.  27-  1  have  set  thee  for  a  t.  and  a  fortress

31.  38.  the  city  shall  be  built  from  t.  of  Hananeel
Esek.  29.  10.  Egypt  desolate,  from  the  t.  of  Syene
30.  6.  from  the  t.  of  Syene  shall  they  fall  in  it
Mic.  4.  8.  thou,  O  t.  of  the  Hock,  to  thee  shall  it  come
Hab.  2.  1.  1  will  set  me  upon  the  t.  and  watch
Zech.  14. 10.  shall  be  inhabited  from  t.  of  Ilapaneel
A/ <xr21..3.3.  built  a  t.  let  it  out  to  hush.  Mark  12.  1.
L.uke  13.  4.  those  18  on  whom  the  t.  in  Siloam  fell
14.  28.  which  of  you  intending  to  build  a  t.

High  I  OWE  It.

2  Sam.  22.  3.  God  is  my  high  t.  Psal.  18.  2.  I  144.  2.
Isa.  2.  15.  the  day  of  the  Lord  on  every  high  t.

TOWERS.

2  Chron.  14.  7.  let  us  build  cities  and  make  t.

26.  9.  moreover  Uzziah  built  t.  in  Jerus.

520


2  Chron.  26.  10.  he  built  t.  in  desert  and  dig.  weiis

27.  4.  Jotbam  built  castles  and  /.  in  the  forests

32.  5.  Hezekiah  raised  up  the  wall  to  the  t.

Psal.  48.  12.  go  round  about  Zion  and  tell  her  t.
Cant.  8.  10.  1  am  a  wall,  and  my  fireasts  like  t.
Isa.  2.3.  13.  the  Assyrian  set  up  the  t.  thereof
30.  25.  on  every  high  hill  rivers,  when  the  t.  fall

32.  14.  the  forts  and  t.  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever

33.  18.  where  is  lie  that  counted  the  t.f
Ezek.26.  4.  they  shall  break  down  her  t.  9.

27.  11.  and  the  Gammadims  were  in  thy  t.

Zegh.  3.  6.  th.-ir  t.  are  desolate,  streets  waste
TO  WIT.

Gen.  24.  21.  to  wit  whether  Lord  made  journey  pr.
Exod.  2,  4.  to  wit  what  would  be  done  to  him
2  Cor.  5.  19.  to  wit,  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling
8.  1.  we  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  of  God  bestowed
TOWN.

Josh.  2.  15.  Rahab's  house  was  on  the  t.  wall
1  Sam.  16.  4.  and  the  elders  or  the  t.  trembled
23.  7.  shut  in,  by  entering  into  a  t.  that  hath  gates
27.5.  let  them  give  me  a  place  in  some  t.

Hah. 2.  12.  woe  to  him  that  builds  a  t.  with  blood
Mat.  10.  11.  into  whatsoever  t.  ye  shall  enter
Mark  8. 2.3.  he  led  the  blind  man  out  of  the  t.

26.  nor  go  into  the  t.  nor  tell  it  to  any  in  t.

John  7.  42.  Christ  cometh  out  of  the  t.  of  Bethlehem
11.  1.  the  t.  of  Mary  and  her  sister  Martha
30.  now  Jesus  was  not  yet  come  into  the  t.
TOWNS.

Esth.  9. 19-  the  Jews  that  dwelt  in  unwalled  t.

Jer.  19.  15.  1  will  bring  on  all  her  t.  the  evil
Zech.  2.  4.  Jerus.  be  inhabited  as  t.  without  walls
Luke  9.6.  they  departed  and  went  through  the  t.

*  12.  that  they  may  go  into  the  t.  and  lodge
TOWN-CLERK.

Acts  19.  35.  when  the  t.  had  appeased  the  people
TRADE.

Gen.  46.  32.  their  t.  hath  been  about  cattle,  34.
TRADES.

Tit.  3. 1 14.  let  ours  also  learn  to  profess  honest  t.

I  HADE,  E erb.

Gen.  34.  10.  dwell  and  t.  you  therein,  21.

Rev.  18.  17.  as  manv  as  t.  by  sea,  stood  afar  off

Traded.

Ezek.2J.  12.  Tarshish  t.  in  thy  fairs  with  tin

13.  Ja\  an,  T  ubal,  Meshech,  t.  the  persons  of  men

14.  they  of  house  of  I  ogarmah  t.  with  horses
17.  Judah  and  Israel  t.  in  thy  market  wheat

Mat. 25.  16.  received  five  talents,  went  and  t.
TRADING.

Luke  19. 15.  how  much  every  man  had  gained  by  t.
TRADE!  ION.  .

[1]  Is  put  for  a  doctrine  first  delivered  by  speech
from  God,  and  afterwards  writ  in  his  book  for  the
use  of  the  church.  This  is  an  object  of  our  faith,
1  Cor.  11.  t‘2.  2  Thess.  2.  15.  [2]  A  human  or¬
dinance  or  ceremony ,  handed  down  from  one  to
another,  as  the  Jews'  oral  Law.  The.e  are  good
or  had,  according  as  they  agree  with,  or  deviate
from,  the  word  of  God,  which  is  our  only  rule  of
faith  and  practice.

Our  Saviour  in  the  gospel  has  often  declared  against
the  traditions  of  the  Pharisees,  Mat.  15.  2,  3.
The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  said  to  Jesus,  Why
do  thy  disciples  transgress  the  tradition  of  the
elders'  for  tney  wash  not  their  hands  when  they
eat  bread.  This  washing  was  a  ceremony  not
contrary  to  the  law  of  God,  but  rather  a  matter  of
decency,  which  they  might  freely  use,  in  a  civil
way,  so  long  as  they  placed  nothing  of  religion  in
it :  but  in  this  they  were  to  be  condemned,  because
they  placed  religion  in  it,  and  had  no  divine  war¬
rant  for  it.  Our  Saviour  answers  them  by  an¬
other  question;  Why  do  ye  also  transgress  the
commandment  of  God  by  your  traditions?  And
though  Christ  does  not  say  that  this  tradition  of
washing  was  contrary  to  the  command,  C  though
others  were,)  yet  by  an  instance  which  he  gives
in  the  following  verses ,  he  shews  that  none  of
their  traditions  were  binding ;  for  itherwi.se  his
reply  would  be  invalid.  The  law  he  instances  in,
is  the  fifth  commandment.  Honour  thy  father  and
mother  ;  which  includes  maintenance  and  relief ;
but  by  your  traditions,  says  he,  ye  warrant  children
to  give  this  answer  to  their  parents  who  are  poor,
and  seek  relief  and  support  ftom  them.  It  is  a
gift  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be  profited  by
me ;  that  is,  I  have  consecrated  all  the  overplus
of  my  estate,  more  than  will  serve  for  my  own
maintenance,  as  a  religions  offering  or  gift  to
God,  and  therefore  you  must  excuse  me  ;  this  you
think  frees  them  from  any  obligation  to  relieve
their  parents,  and  consequently  from  any  trans¬
gression  of  the  law  ;  but  1  tell  you,  that  thus  ye
have  made  the  commandment  of  God  of  none  effect
by  your  tradition.

The  Jews  call  their  traditions  the  Oral  T,aw,^re-
tending  that  God  delivered  them  to  Moses  by  word
of  mouth  upon  Mount  Sinai,  at  the  same  time  that
he  gave  him  the  written  law  :  That  this  lawgiver
taught  them  to  the  elders  of  the  people,  and  com¬
mitted  them  to  them  as  a  trust,  which  they  were  to
convey  down  to  their  successors ,  and  so  on.

The  church  of  Rome  is  very  near  akin  to  the  Jews
m  this  matter.  She  holds,  that,  besides  what  we
have  in  the  New  Testament,  the  apostles  delivered
many  things  to  the  primitive  church  only  by  word
of  mouth,  which  have  since  that  time  been  im¬
parted  to  succeeding  churches  ;  to  the  observation
of  which,  Christian v  are  as  much  obliged  as  to
the  written  word.  The  council  of  Trent  says  con¬
cerning  traditions,  “  That  the  truth  and  discipline
of  the  Catholic  Church  are  comprehended  both  in
the  sacred  books  and  in  the  traditions,  which  have
been  received  from  the  mouth  of  Jesus  Christ  him¬
self,  or  of  his  apostles,  and  which  have  been  pre
served  and  transmitted  to  us,  by  an  uninterrupted
chain  and  succession."

The  doctrine  of  the  reformed  churches  concerning  tra¬
ditions  is,  “  That  the  Holy  Scripture  containeth  all
things  necessary  to  salvation  ;  so  that  whatsoever


is  net  read  therein,  nor  may  he  proved  thereby,  tt
not  to  be  required  of  any  man,  that  it  should  be  be¬
lieved  as  an  article  of  faith,  or  be  thought  requisite
or  necessary  to  salvation."

Mat.  15.  2.  why  do  thy  disciples  transgress  the/,  of
the  elders,  not  wash  their  hands :  Mar k  7-  5.
3.  Jesus  said  to  them,  why  do  you  transgress  the
commandment  of  God  by  your  t.?  Mark  7.  9.
6.  thus  ye  have  made  the  commandment  of  God
of  none  effect  by  your  t.  Mark  7.  13.
Mark  7.  3.  holding  the  t.  of  tire  elders,  8,  9.

Col.  2.  8.  lest  any  spoil  you  al  ter  the  t.  of  mien
2  Thess.  3.  6.  not  after  the  t.  which  he  received  of  us
1  Ret.  1.  18.  received  by  t.  from  your  fathers
TRADITIONS.

1  Cor.  11. +  2.  keep  the  t.  as  I  delivered  them
Gal.  1.  14.  being  zealous  of  the  t.  of  my  fathers

2  Thess.  2.  15.  hold  the  t.  ye  have  been  taught

TRAFFJCK.

Gen.  42. 34.  your  brother,  and  ye  shall  t.  in  the  land
TRA  FF1CK,  Substantive.

1  Kings  10.  15.  besides  that  bad  of  t.  of  merchants
Ezek.  17.  4.  he  carried  it  into  a  land  of  t.

28.  5.  by  thy  t.  bast  thou  increased  thy  riches
18.  hast  defiled  thy  sanctuaries  by  iniquity  of  t.
TRAFFICKERS.

Isa.  23.  8.  whose  t.  are  the  honourable  of  the  earth
TRAIN.

1  Kings  10.2.  she  came  to  Jerusalem  with  a  great  t.
Isa.  6.  1.  Lord  lifted  up,  and  his /.  filled  the  temple

TRAIN.

Prov.  22.  6.  t.  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go
TRAINED.

Gen,  14.  14.  Abram  armed  liis  r.  servants,  318.

'I  R  A  1TOR.

Luke  6.  16.  and  Judas  Iscariot  which  was  the  t.

THAI  LOUS.

2  Tim.  3.  4.  in  the  last  days  shall  men  be  t.  heady

TRAMPLE.

Psal.  91.  13.  the  dragon  shalt  thou  t.  under  feet
104.  +  20.  all  the  beasts  do  t.  on  the  finest
Isa.  63.  3.  for  1  will  t.  them  in  my  fury
Mat.  7.  6.  pearls,  lest  they  /.  them  under  their  foot
1  RAMPLINGS.

+Judg.  5.  t  22.  the  horse-hoofs  broken  by  their  t.

TRANCE.

Num.  24.  4.  saw  the  vision  falling  into  a  t.  16.

Acts  10. 10.  he  fell  into  a/,  and  saw  heav  en  opened
11.  5.  I  was  praying,  and  in  a  t.  I  saw  a  vision
22.17.  while  1  prayed  in  the  temple,  I  was  in  a/.
TRANQUILLITY.

Dan.  4.  27.  if  it  may  be  a  lengthening  of  thv  t.
TRANSFERR ED.

1  Cor.  4.  6.  these  things  1  have  in  figure  /.  to  myself

TRANSFIGURED.

The  history  of  Christ's  transfiguration  is  recorded
by  St.  Matthew,  Mark,  and  Luke.  All  three
agree  that  this  transfiguration  was  celebrated  upon
a  mountain,  which  most  interpreters  think  to  be
mount  Tabor.  Matthew,  chap.  17.  1.  says,  hut
six  days  ;  l.uke,  9.  28.  mentions  eight  days  after
the  promise  our  Saviour  made,  that  some  of  them
should  not  taste  of  death,  till  they  saw  the  Son
of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom.  Some  think  it
probable,  that  St.  Luke  counted  inclusively,
reckoning  the  day  of  the  promise ,  (.taking  the  Son
of  man’s  coming  in  his  kingdom,  to  mean  his  I
transfiguration,)  and  the  day  of  the  execution:  \
whereas  St.  Matthew  had  regard  only  to  the  six
intermediate  days.

It  is  thought  that  this  transfiguration  happened  in
the  night  ;  and  from  thence  proceeded  the  sleep,
with  which  the  apostles  were  oppressed.  Moreover
St.  Luke  observes,  that  the  next  day  they  came
down  from  the  mountain,  Luke  9.  37.  therefore
they  had  passed  the  preceding  night  there.  Ti  t
fathers  say,  that  the  design  of  this  transfiguration
was,  to  fulfil  the  promise  which  Christ  had  made
some  days  before,  that  he  would  let  some  of  his'  dis¬
ciples  see  a  glimpse  of  his  glory  before  their  death  ;
and  to  fortify  them  against  the  scandal  of  the  cross,
and  of  the  death  he  was  to  suffer,  by  giving  them  this
convincing  proof  that  he  was  the  Messiah.  It  is  ob¬
served,  that  the  condition  in  which  Jesus  Christ  ap¬
peared  among  men,  humhle,  poor,  despised,  was  a
true  and  continual  transfiguration  ;  whereas  the
transfiguration  itself,  in  which  he  shewed  himself
in  the  real  splendour  of  his  glory ,  was  his  true  and
natural  condition.

As  to  the  appearing  of  Moses  and  Elias,  it  is  asked
how  the  apostles  could  know  them  ?  To  which  it  is
answered,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  might  call
them  by  their  names,  or  that  he  might  tell  them
afterwards,  that  they  were  those  two  gieat  men  ;
or  they  knew  them  by  immediate  revelation.  It  is
observed  in  this  apparition,  that  the  law  represent¬
ed  by  Moses,  and  the  prophets  represented  by  Elias,
give  testimony  to  our  Saviour.

Mat.  17.  2.  and  he  was  t.  before  them,  Mark  9.  2.
TRANSFORMED

Rom.  12.  2.  but  be  ye  t.  by  renewing  of  your  mind

2  Cor.  11.  14.  for  Satan  is/,  into  an  angel"  of  light

15.  it  is  no  great  thing  if  his  ministers  also  be  /.

I  R  A  NSFORMING.

2  Cor.  11.  13.  /.  themselves  into  apostles  of  Christ
TRANSGRESS.

Num.  14.  41.  wherefore  now  do  ye  t.  the  command¬
ment  cf  the  Lord  ?  not  prosper,  2  Chron.  24.  20.

1  Sam.  2.  24.  ye  make  the  Lord’s  people  to  /.

Neh.  1.  8.  if  ye  /.  1  will  scatter  you  abroad
13.  27.  shall  we  hearken  to  you  to  /.  against  God  j
Psal.  17.  3.  I  am  purposed  my  mouth  shall  not/.  1
25.  3.  let  them  be  ashamed  who  /.  without  cause  I
Prov.  28.  21.  for  a  piece  of  bread  that  man  will  /.  j
Jer.  2.  20.  burst  bands,  and  thousaidst  1  will  not  /  1
Ezek.  20.  38.  1  will  purge  out  them  that  t.

Amos  4.  4.  come  to  Beth-el  and  /.  bring  your  tithe-
Mat.  15.  2.  why  dothy  disciples  /.  the  tradition  ?

3.  why  do  ye  also  /.  the  commandment  of  God  *
Rom.  2.  27.  who  by  circumcision  dost  /.  the  law
TRANSGRESSED.

Deut.  26. 13.  I  have  not  /.  thy  commandments


T  It  A


T  It  A


T  it  E


Josh.  7.  11.  Israel  hath  sinned,  and  they  have  also
/.  my  covenant  l  commanded  them,  15.

23.  16.  when  ye  have  /.  covenant  of  Lord  your  G.
I  Sam.  14.  33.  ye  have  /.  roll  a  stone  unto  me

15.  24.  1  have  /.  the  commandment  of  the  Lord
1  Kings  8.  50.  wherein  they  have  /.  against  thee

1  Chron.  2.  7-  Achar,  who/.  in  the  thing  accursed

5.  25.  they  /.  against  the  God  of  their  fathers

10.  t  13.  Saul  died  for  his  transgression  which  he  t.

2  Chron.  12.  2.  because  they  /.  against  the  Lord
26.  16.  Uzziah  t.  against  the  Lord  his  God

28.  19.  and  Ahaz  /.  sore  against  the  Lord
36.  14.  the  priests  and  the  people  t.  very  much
Ezra  10.  10.  ye  have  /.  and  taken  strange  wives

13.  we  are  many  that  have  /.  in  this  thing
Isa.  24.  5.  because  they  have  /.  the  laws

43.  27-  and  thy  teachers  have  t.  against  me

66.  24.  shall  look  on  men's  carcases  that  have  t.
Jer.  2.  8.  the  pastors  t.  against  me  and  prophets

29.  why  will  ye  plead  ?  ye  all  have  1.  against  me

3.  13.  only  acknowledge  that  thou  hast  t.

33.  8.  I  will  pardon  iniquities  whereby  they  t.

34.  18.  I  will  gi\e  the  men  that  /.  my  covenant
Lam.  3.  42.  we  have  /.  and  have  rebelled

Ezek.  2.  3.  they  and  their  fathers  have  /.  against  me

18.  31.  castaway  your  transgressions  whereby  ye  /.
Dan.  9.  11.  yea,  all  Israel  have  /.  thy  law

Hos.  7-  13.  destruction  to  them,  because  they  have  /.
Zeph.  3. 11.  not  ashamed  for  doings  w  herein  thou  /.
Luke  15.  29.  nor  t.  I  at  any  time  thy  commandm.
See  Covenants.
TRANSGRESSES!?.

Esth.  3.  3.  why  /.  thou  the  king's  commandment?

TRANSGRESSETH.

Prov.  16.  10.  his  mouth  t.  not  in  judgment
Hab.  2.  5.  because  he  t.  by  w  ine,  he  is  a  proud  man

1  John  3.  4.  whoso  committeth  sin,  t.  the  law

2  John  9.  whoso  /.  and  abideth  not  in  doctrine

TRANSGRESSING.

Deut.  17  2.  any  that  wrought  wickedness  in  t.  coven.
Isa.  59.  13.  in  t.  and  lying  against  the  Lord
TRANSGRESSION.

Exod.  34.  7.  forgiving  /.  and  sin,  Num.  14.  18.
Josh.  22.  22.  or  if  it  be  in  /.  against  the  l  ord
1  Sam.  24.  11.  that  there  is  nor.  in  my  hand

1  Chr.  9.  1.  who  were  carried  to  Babylon  for  their  t.
10.  13.  so  Saul  died  for  his  t.  he  committed

2  Chron.  29.  19.  vessels  which  Ahaz  cast  away  in  t.
Ezra  9-  4.  because  of  /.  of  those  carried  away

10.  6.  for  he  mourned  because  of  their  t.

Job  7.  21.  and  why  dost  thou  not  pardon  my  t.

8.  4.  and  he  have  cast  them  away  for  their  t.

13.  23.  make  me  to  know  my  t.  and  my  sin

14.  17.  my  /.  is  sealer!  up  in  a  bag,  thou  sewest

33.  9.  I  arn  clean  without  t.  I  am  innocent

34.  6.  my  wound  is  incurable  without  /.

Psal.  19-  13.  I  shall  he  innocent  from  the  great  t.
32.  1.  blessed  is  he  whose  /.  is  forgiven,  whose  sin
36.  1.  the  t.  of  the  wicked  saith  within  my  heart
59.  3.  they  lie  in  wait  for  my  soul,  not  for  my  t.
89.  32.  then  will  I  visit  their  t.  with  a  rod
107.  17-  fools  because  of  their  t.  are  afflicted
Prov.  12.  13.  the  wicked  is  snared  by  /.  of  his  lips

17.  9.  he  that  covereth  a  t.  seeketh  love
19.  he  loveth  /.  that  loveth  strife

19.  11.  and  it  is  his  glory  to  pass  over  a  /.

28.  2.  for  the  /.  of  a  land  many  are  the  princes

24.  whoso  robbeth  father,  and  saith,  it  is  no  t.

29.  6.  in  the  t.  of  an  evil  man  there  is  a  snare

16.  when  the  wicked  are  multiplied,  t.  increaseth
22.  and  a  furious  man  aboundeth  in  t.

Isa.  24.  20.  the  t.  thereof  shall  be  heavy  on  it
53.  8.  for  the  t.  of  my  people  was  he  stricken

57.  4.  are  ye  not  children  of  t.  a  seed  of  falsehood  ?

58.  1.  cry  aloud,  and  shew  my  people  their  t.

59.  20.  and  to  them  that  turn  from  t.  in  Jacob
Ezek.  33. 12.  shall  not  deliver  him  in  theday  of  his  t.
Dan.  8.  12.  against  the  daily  sacrifice  by  reason  of/.

13.  concerning  sacrifice,  and  the  /.  of  desolation

9.  24.  seventy  weeks  are  determined  to  finish  the  t.
Amos  4.  4.  at  Gilgal  multiply  /.  bring  your  tithes
Mic.  1.  5.  for  the  /.  of  Jacob  is  all  this,  and  for  the

sins  of  Israel  ;  what  is  the  /.  of  Jacob  ?

3.  8.  I  am  full  of  power  to  declare  to  Jacob  his  t.

6.  7.  shall  I  give  my  first-born  for  my  /.  and  sin  ?

7.  18.  that  passeth  by  the  /.  of  the  remnant  of  his
Acts  1.  25.  ministry  from  which  Judas  by  /.  fell
Rom.  4.  15.  for  where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  /.

5.  14.  had  not  sinned  after  similitude  of  Adam’s  r.
1  Tim.  2.  14.  the  woman  being  deceived  was  in  the  /.
Heb.  2.  2.  every  t.  received  just  recompence  of  rew.
I  John  3.  4  for  sin  is  the  /.  of  the  law
TRANSGK  ESSIONS.

Exod.  23.  21 .  for  he  will  not  pardon  your  /.  for  my
Lev.  16. 16.  shall  make  atonement  because  of  their  /.

21.  Aaron  shall  confess  over  the  goat  all  their  /.
Josh.  24.  19.  he  will  not  forgive  your  /.  nor  sins

1  Kings  8.  50.  forgive  thy  people  all  their  /.

Job  31.  33.  if  I  covered  my  /.  as  Adam,  by  hiding
35.6.  if  thy  /.  be  multiplied,  what  dost  thou  to  him  ?
36.  9.  then  he  sheweth  them  their  work  and  /.
Psal.  5.  10.  cast  them  out  in  multitude  of  their  /.
25.7-  remember  not  the  sinsofmy  youth,  nor  my  /.
32.  5.  I  said  I  will  confess  my  /.  unto  the  Lord
39.  8.  deliver  me  from  all  my  /.  and  make  me  not
51.  1.  have  mercy  upon  me,  blot  out  all  my  /.

3.  for  I  acknowledge  my  t  my  sin  is  before  me
65.  3.  as  for  our  /.  thou  shalt  purge  them  aw  ay
103.  12.  so  far  hath  he  removed  our  /.  from  us
Isa.  43.  25.  I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  /.

44.  22.  1  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  /.
50.  1.  and  for  your  /.  is  your  mother  put  a  way-
53.  5.  but  he  was  wounded  for  our/,  he  was  bruised
59.  12.  our  /.  are  multiplied  before  thee,  and  our

sins  testify  against  us,  for  our  /.  are  w  ith  us
Jer.  5.  6.  shall  be  torn  because  their  /.  are  many
Lam.  1.  5.  for  the  multitude  of  her  /.  gone  into

14.  the  yoke  of  my  /.  is  bound  by  his  hand

22.  do  to  them,  as  hast  done  to  me  for  all  my  /.
Ezek.  14.  11.  nor  be  polluted  any  more  w  ith  their  /.

18.  22.  all  his  /.  they  shall  not  be  mentioned
28.  because  he  turneth  awav  from  all  his  /.


Ezek.  18.  30.  repent,  and  turn  yoursel.  from  your  /.
31.  cast  away  all  your  /.  whereby  ye  transgressed

21. 24.  in  that  your  /.  are  discovered  that  your  sins
33.  10.  if  our  /.  be  upon  us,  and  we  pine  away
37.  23.  nor  defile  themselves  any  more  with  /.

39.  24.  according  to  their  /.  have  I  done  to  them
Amos  1.  3.  for  three  /.  of  Damascus,  and  for  four
6.  for  three/,  of  Gaza  ||  9.  Tyrus  ||  11.  Edom
13.  for  three  /.  of  Ammon  H  2.  1  Moab  ||  4  Judah
2.  6.  Israel  ||  3.  14.  1  will  visit  the  /.  of  Israel

5.  12.  I  know  your  manifold  /.  and  your  sins
Mic.  1.  13.  for  the  /.  of  Israel  were  found  in  thee
Gal.  3.  19.  the  law  was  added  because  of  /.  till  see
Heb.  9.  15.  for  the  redemption  of  the  /.  that  were

TRANSGRESSOR.

Prov.  21.  18.  the  /.  shall  be  ransom  for  the  upright

22.  12.  he  overthroweth  the  words  of  the  /.

Isa.  48.  8.  thou  wast  called  a  /.  from  the  womb
Gal.  2.  18.  if  1  build  again,  I  make  myself  a  /.
Jam.  2.  11.  yet  if  thou  kill,  thou  art  become  a  /.
TRANSGRESSORS.

Psal.  37.  38.  but  the  /.  shall  be  destroyed  together
51.  13.  then  will  I  teach  /.  thy  ways,  and  sinners
59-  5.  be  not  merciful  to  any  wicked  /.

Prov.  2.  22.  and  the  /.  shall  be  rooted  out  of  it

11.3.  but  the  perverseness  of /.  shall  destroy  them
6.  but  /.  shall  betaken  in  their  own  naughtiness
13.  2.  but  the  soul  of  the  /.shall  eat  violence

15.  giveth  favour,  but  the  way  of/,  is  hard

23.  28.  and  she  increaseth  the  /.  among  men

26.  10.  the  great  God  rewardeth  the  fool  and  the  /.
Isa.  1.  28.  the  destruction  of /.shall  be  together
46.  8.  remember,  bring  it  again  to  mind,  O  ye  /.
53.  12.  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  /.  and  he
bare  the  sin  of  many,  and  made  intercession
for  the  /.

Dan.  8.  23.  when  the  /.  are  come  to  the  full,  a  king
llos.  14.  9.  but  the  /.  shall  fall  therein,  just  walk
Mark  15.  28.  he  was  numbered  with  /.  Luke  22.  37.
Jam.  2.  9.  ye  are  convinced  of  the  law  as/.
TRANSLATE.

2  Sam.  3.  10.  to  /.  the  kingdom  from  house  of  Saul
TRANSLATED.

Col.  1.  13.  /.  us  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son
Heb.  11.5.  Enoch  was  /.  that  he  should  not  see  death
TRANSLATION.

Heb.  11.  5.  before  his  /.  he  had  this  testimony
I  RANSPAREN T.

Rev.  21.  21.  street  of  city  w  as  as  it  were  /.  glass
TRANSPORTATION.

Ezra  1.  +  11.  these  did  Sheshbazzar  bring  of  the  /.

4.  t  1.  the  sons  of  the  /.  builded  the  temple

6.  f  16.  the  sons  of  the  /.  kept  the  dedication

TRAP,  S.

Josh.  23.  13.  but  they  shall  be  /.  and  snares  to  you
Job  18.  10  and  a  /.  is  laid  for  him  in  the  way
Ps.  69.  22.  have  been  for  welfare,  let  it  become  a  /.
Jer.  5.  26.  they  lay  wait,  set  a  /.  they  catch  men
Rom.  11.19.  let  their  table  be  made  a  snare,  a  /.
TRAVAIL.

Gen.  38.  27.  in  the  time  of  her  /.  behold,  twins
Psal.  48.  6.  fear  and  pain  took  hold  upon  them  as
of  a  woman  in  /.  Jer.  6.  24.  1  13.  21.  |  22.  23.

|  49.  24.  I  50.  43.  Mic.  4.  9,  10.

Isa.  23.  4.  I  /.  not  H  53.  1 1 .  see  the  /.  of  his  soul
5).  1.  sing,  thou  that  didst  not  /.  with  child
Jer.  4.  31.  I  have  heard  a  voice  as  of  a  woman  in  /.

30.  6.  see  whether  a  man  doth  /.  why  every  man
w  ith  his  hands  on  his  loins  as  of  a  w  oman  in  /.
John  16.21.  a  woman  when  she  is  in  /.  hath  sorrow
Gal.  4.  19.  my  children,  of  whom  1  /.  in  birth
1  l'hess.  5.  3.  destruction  cometh,  as  /.  on  a  woman
IRA  VAILED.

Gen.  35.  16.  Rachel  /.  I|  38.  28.  Tamar  /.

1  Sam.  4.  19.  Phinehas'  wife  bowed  herself,  and  /.
Isa.  66.  7.  before  she  /.  she  brought  forth

8.  as  soon  as  Zion  /.  she  brought  forth  children
TRAVAILESP.

Gal.  4.  27.  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that/,  not
TRA  VAILETII.

Psal.  7.  14.  behold,  he  /.  with  iniquity,  conceived
Isa.  13.  8.  they  shall  be  in  pain  as  a  w  oman  that  /.
21.  3.  as  the  pangs  of  a  woman  that  /.

Jer.  31.8.  and  with  them  her  that  /.  with  child
Mic.  5.  3.  till  she  who  /.  hath  brought  forth
Rom.  8.22.  the  whole  creation  /.  in  pain  until  now
TRAVAILING.

Isa.  42.  14.  now  will  I  cry  like  a  /.  woman
Hos.  13.  1.3.  the  sorrows  of  a  /.  woman  shall  come
Rev.  12.  2.  a  woman  cried,  /.  in  birth  and  pained
TRAVEL.

Exod.  18.  8.  Moses  told  Jethro,  the  /.  by  the  way
Num.  20.  14.  thou  knowest  the  /.that  hath  befallen
Eccl.  1.  13.  this  sore  /.  hath  God  given  to  men
2.  23.  for  all  his  days  are  sorrow  s,  his  /.  is  grief
26.  but  to  the  sinner  he  giveth  /.  to  gather*

3. 10.  I  have  seen  the  /.  God  hath  given  to  men

4.  4.  again  1  considered  all  /.  and  every  work

6.  than  both  the  hands  full  w  ith  /.  and  vexation
8.  this  is  also  vanity,  yea,  it  is  a  sore  /.

5.  14.  but  those  riches  perish  by  evil  /.

l.am.  3.5.  he  hath  compassed  me  w  ith  gall  and  /.
Acts  19.  29.  Gaius,  Paul’s  companion  in  /.

2  Cor.  8.  19.  was  chosen  of  churches  to  /.  with  us

1  l'hess.  2.  9.  for  ye  remember  our  labour  and  /.

2  Thess.  3.  8.  but  wrought  with  /.  night  and  day

TRAVELLED.

Acts  11. 19.  /.  as  far  as  Phenice  and  Cyprus
TRAVELLER.

2  Sam.  12.  4.  there  came  a  /.  to  the  rich  man
Job  31.  32.  but  1  opened  my  doors  to  the  /.
TRAVELLERS.

Judg.  5.  6.  and  the  /.  w  alked  through  by-ways
TRAVELLER!!.

Josh.  15.  20.  wicked  man  /.  with  pain  all  his  days
Prov.  6.  11.  poverty  come  as  one  that  /.  24.  34.
TRAVELLING.

Isa.  21.  13.  in  Arabia  lodge,  O  ye  /.  companies
63.  1.  who  is  this  /.  in  the  greatn.  of  his  strength  ?
Mat.  25.  14.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  as  a  man  /.
TRAVERSING.

Jer.  2.  23.  thou  art  a  swift  dromedary  /.  her  ways


TREACHEROUS.

Isa.  21.  2.  /.dealer  dealeth  treacherously,  24.  16.
Jer.  3.  7.  turned  not,  and  her  /.  sister  Judah  saw  it
8.  yet  her  /.  sister  Judah  feared  not,  but  played

10.  her  /.  sister  Judah  hath  not  turned  to  me

11.  Israel  hath  justified  herself  more  than /.  Judah

9.  2.  for  they  be  an  assembly  of /.  men

Zeph.  3.  4.  her  prophets  are  light  and  /.  persons
TREACHEROUSLY.

Judg.  9.  23.  men  of  Shechem  dealt  /.  with  Abimelech

1  Sam.  14. +  33.  ye  have  dealt  /.  roll  a  great  stone
Isa.  33.  1.  thou  dealest  /.  they  dealt  not  /.  with  thee

48.  8.  for  1  knew  that  thou  wouhiest  deal  very  /.
Jer.  3.  20.  as  a  wife  /.  departeth  from  her  husband

5.  11.  the  house  of  Judah  hath  dealt  /.  Mai.  2.  11.

12.  1.  why  are  all  they  happy  that  deal  very  /.  f

6.  even  they  have  dealt  /.  with  thee
Lam.  1.  2.  all  her  friends  have  dealt  /.  with  her
llos.  5.  7.  they  have  dealt  /.  against  the  Lord

6.  7-  there  have  they  dealt  /.  against  me

Mai.  2.  10.  why  do  we  deal  /.  every  man  against

14.  thy  wife  against  whom  thou  hast  dealt/.

15.  let  none  deal  /.  against  the  wife  of  his  youth

16.  take  heed  to  your  spirit,  that  ye  deal  not  /.

TREACHERY.

2  Kings  9.  23.  Joram  said,  there  is  /.  O  Ahaziah

TREAD.

Dent.  11. 24.  whereon  the  soles  of  your  feet  /.

25.  the  dread  of  you  on  all  the  land  that  ye  /.
33.29.  thou  shalt  /.  upon  their  high  places

1  Sam.  5.  5.  none  /.  on  the  threshold  of  Dagon
Job  24. 11.  /.  their  wine  presses,  and  suffer  thirst

40.  12.  and  /.  down  the  wicked  in  their  place
Psal.  7.  5.  let  him  /.  down  my  life  on  the  earth
44.5.  through  thy  name  will  we  /.  them  under
60.  12.  he  shall  /.down  our  enemies,  108.  13.

91.  13.  thou  shalt  /.  upon  the  lion  and  adder
Isa.  1.  12.  who  hath  required  this,  to  /.  my  courts  ?

10.  6.  to  /.  them  dow  n,  like  the  mire  of  the  streets

14.25.  and  upon  my  mountains  /.  him  under  foot

16.  lo.  treaders  shall  /.  out  no  wine  in  presses

26.  6.  the  foot  shall  /.  it  down,  feet  of  the  poor
63.  3.  for  I  will  /.  them  in  mineangei,  6.

Jer.  25.  30.  a  shout,  as  they  that/,  the  grapes
48.  33.  wine  to  fad,  none  shall  /.  with  shouting
50.  t  26.  /.  her  as  heaps,  and  destroy  her  utterly
Ezek.  26.  11.  with  hoofs  ofhis  horses  shall  he/.

.34.  18.  but  ye  must  /.  the  residue  with  your  feet
Dan.  7.  2.3.  the  fourth  beast  shall  /.  it  down
Hos.  10.  11.  Ephraim  loveth  to  /.  out  the  corn
Mic.  1.  .3.  the  Lord  w  ill  /.  on  the  high  places

5.  5.  when  the  Assyrian  shall  /.  in  our  palaces

6.  15.  thou  shalt  /.  olives,  but  not  anoint  thee
Nah.  3.  14.  /.  the  mortar,  make  strong  brick-kiln
Zech.  10.  5.  as  mighty  men  which  /.  their  enemies
Mai.  4.  3.  and  ye  shall  /.  down  the  wicked

Luke  10.  19.  1  will  give  v»u  power  to  /.  on  scorpions
Rom.  16.  +20.  find  shall  /.  Satan  underyour  feet
Rev.  11.  2.  the  holy  city  shall  they  /.  under  foot
1  READER,  S.

Isa.  16.  10.  the  /.  shall  tread  out  no  wine  in  presses
Amos  9.  13.  the  /.  of  grapes  shall  o\<ertake  thesouer
TREADETH.

Deut.  25.  4.  thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  when  he
/.  out  the  corn,  1  Cor.  9.  9.  1  Tim.  5.  18
Job  9-  8.  w  hich  /.  upon  the  waves  of  the  sea
Prov.  27.  +7-  full  soul  /.  under  foot  an  honey  com..
La.  18.  +  2.  a  nation  that  metethout  and  /.  down

41. 25.  he  shall  come  as  the  potter  /.  clay

6.3.  2.  thy  garments  like  him  that  /.  in  the  wine-fat
Amos  4.  13.  he  that  /.on  the  high  places  of  the  earth
Mic.  5.  6.  and  w  hen  he  /.  within  our  borders
8.  if  he  go  through,  he  both  /.  dow  n  and  teareth
Rev.  19. 15.  he  /.  the  wine- press  of  the  wrath  of  God
1R  LADING.

2  Chr.  22.  +7- the/,  down  of  Ahaziah  was  of  God
Neh.  1.3.  15.  I  saw- some/,  winepresses  on  sabbath
Isa.  7.  25.  it  shall  be  for  the  /.  of  lesser  cattle

22.  5.  it  is  a  day  of  trouble  and  oft.  down
42.  +  22.  they  are  for  a  /.  and  none  saith,  restore
Amos  5.  11.  forasmuch  as  your  /.  is  on  the  poor
TREASON.

1  Kings  16.  20.  the  rest  of  acts  of  Zimriand  his  /.

2  Kings  11.  14.  Athaliah  cried  /.  /.  2  Chr.  23.  13.

TR  EASURE,

In  Hebrew,  Ozer.  The  word  treasure,  among  the
Hebrews,  signifies  any  thing  collected  together,
provisions,  magazines.  So  they  say,  a  treasure  of
corn,  of  wine,  of  oil,  of  honey,  Jer.  41.8.  So  also
treasures  of  gold,  silver,  brass,  Ezek.  28.  4.  Dan.

11.  4.3.  Snoxv,  winds,  hail,  rain,  waters,  are  in
the  treasuries  of  God,  Job  .38.  22.  Psal  1.35.  7.
This  denotes  that  God  hath  them  as  much  at  his
disposal  as  any  man  hath  that  which  he  hath  laid
up  in  his  stores.  The  wise  men  opened  their  trea¬
sures,  that  is,  their  packets  or  bundles,  to  offer
presents  to  our  Saviour,  Mat.  2.  11.

Lay  up  treasures  in  heaven,  Mat.  6.  20.  Lay  out
your  wealth  upon  the  poor  members  of  Christ,  for
he  that  hath  pity  upon  the  poor,  lendeth  unto  the
Lord,  and  he  will  pay  him  again,  Prov.  19,  17.
Or,  let  heavenly  and  spiritual  things,  sue  h  as  the
light  of  God's  countenance,  the  graces  of  his  Spirit
and  those  things  which  accompany  salvation,  be
of  greater  account  with  you  than  all  -worldly
things  ;  make  them  the  treasure  on  which  ye  set
your  hearts.  The  steward  of  Joseph's  house  ac¬
quainted  his  brethren,  when  they  found  their
money  returned  in  their  sacks,  that  God  had
given  them  treasure  in  their  sacks  ;  by  Ins  power
and  providence  secretly  putting  it  there,  Gen.  43.

2.3.  Treasures  of  wickedness  stand  for  all  ill-got
riches,  Prov.  10.  2.  Treasures  of  w  ickedness  will
bring  no  man  prifit.

'Treasure  is  often  used  to  express  any  thing  whatever
in  great  abundance  ;  as  in  Col.  2.  3.  In  Jesus
Christ  are  hid  all  the  tieasures  of  wisdom  and
know  ledge.  St.  Paul  says,  Rom.  2.  5.  T  hou
treasurest  up  w  rath  against  the  day  of  wrath  :
that  is.  Thou  provokest  more  and  more  the  wrath
of  God  against  thee ;  by  heaping  up  sins,  thou
heapest  up  the  judgment  of  God  upon  thyself:


T  R  E


T  R  E


T  R  E


as  men  add  to  their  treasure  of  wealth ,  so  dost  thou
add  to  thy  treasure  of  punishment.  It  is  yvt  foi  the
knowledge  of  the  gosjel,  and  the  ministry  thereof.
2  Cor.  4.  7-  We  have  this  treasure  in  earthen
vessels.  'I  he  good  treasure  of  the  heart,  is  a
holy  frame  of  heart,  together  with  that  stock  and
plenty  of  holy  thoughts  and  affections  that  are
there.  Mat.  12.  35.  The  l.ord  tells  the  children
of  Israel,  Exod.  19.  5.  If  ye  will  obey  my
voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then  ye
shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me.  Ye  shall
he  highly  prized  and  loved,  and  carefully  kept  by
me,  as  mens  treasures  generally  are.

Ben.  43.  23.  God  hath  gi'  en  you  t.  in  your  sacks
Exod.  19. 5.yeshall  be  a  pecufiar  t.  to  me,  Ps.  135.4.
Dent.  28.  12.  the  Lord  shall  open  to  thee  his  gooti  t.

1  Chron.  29.  8.  gave  them  to  the  t.  of  house  of  l.ord
Ezra  2.  69.  gave  after  their  ability  to  t.  of  work
Neh.  7.  70.  the  Tirshatha gave  to  t.  lOOOdrams

7.  71.  the  fathers  ga\e  to  the  t.  of  the  work
Psal.  17.  14.  whose  belly  thou  fi  1  lest  with  hid  t.
135.  4.  Lord  hath  chosen  Israel  for  his  peculiar  t.
Prov.  15.  6  in  house  of  the  righteous  is  much  t.

16.  a  little,  than  great  t.  and  trouble  therewith

21.  20.  there  is  a  t.  to  be  desired,  and  oil  in  dwell.
Eccl.  2.  8.  1  gathered  the  peculiar  t.  of  kings

Isa.  .33.  6.  the  fear  of  the  l.ord  is  his  t.

Ezek.  22.  25.  have  taken  the  t.  and  precious  things
Hos.  13.  15.  he  shall  spoil  t.  of  all  pleasant  vessels
Mai.  3.  t  17-  be  mine,  when  1  make  up  my  special  t.
Mat.  6.  21.  for  w  here  your  /.  is,  there,  Luke  12.  34.

12.  35.  a  good  man  out  of  the  good  t.  of  his  heart,

an  evil  man  out  of  the  evil  t.  Luke  6.  45.

13.  44.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  t.  hid
52.  who  brinpth  out  of  his  t.  things  new  and  old

19.  21.  go  and  sell  that  thou  hast,  and  thou  shalt

have  t.  in  heaven,  Mark  10.21.  Luke  18.  22.
Luke  12.21.  so  is  he  that  layeth  up  t.  for  himself
33.  provide  a  t.  in  the  heavens,  which  faileth  not
Acts  8.  27-  an  eunuch,  w  ho  had  charge  of  all  her  t.

2  Cor.  4.  7.  we  have  this  t.  in  earthen  vessels,  that
Jam.  5.  3.  ye  have  heaped  t.  for  the  last  days

TR  EA  S  U  R  E -cities.

Exod.  1.  11.  and  they  built  for  Pharaoh  t.-cities
T  R  E  A  S  U  R  E-house.  .

Ezra  5. 17.  let  search  be  made  in  the  king’s  t. -house
7-  20.  bestow  it  out  of  the  king's  t. -house
Seh.  10.  38.  the  Levites  bring  the  tithe  into  t. -house
Van.  1.2.  brought  vessels  into  t. -house  of  his  god
TREASURED.

Isa.  23.  18.  Tyre,  it  shall  not  be  t.  nor  laid  up
TREASURER.

Ez-a  1.  8,  Cyrus  brought  forth  the  vessels  by  the  t.
Isa.  22.  15.  get  thee  unto  this  t.  even  unto  Shebna
TREASURERS.

Ezra  7-  21 .  I  Artaxerxes  make  a  decree  to  all  t.
Neh.  13.  13.  and  1  made  t.  over  the  treasuries
Dan.  3.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  gathered  the  t.  3.

TREASURES.

Deut.  32.  34.  is  not  this  sealed  up  among  my  t.

33.  19.  they  shall  suck  of  t.  hid  in  the  sand

1  Kings  7.51.  he  putdedicated  things  among  the  t.

14.  26.  Shishak  took  away  the  t.  of  the  house

15.  18.  Asa  took  gold  left  in  the  t.  2  Chr.  16.  2.

2  Kings  12.  18.  .lehoashtook  gold  found  in  t.  14.  14.

16.  8.  Ahaz  took  gold  that  was  found  in  the  t.

18.  15.  Hezekiah  gave  him  silver  found  in  the  t.

20.  13.  Hezekiah  shewed  them  silver  and  gold  and

all  that  was  found  in  his  t.  15.  Isa.  39.  2,4.
24.  13.  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  out  thence  all  the
t.  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  t.  of  the
king’s  house,  2  Chron.  36.  18.

1  Chron.  26.  20.  Ahijah  was  overt,  of  the  house

22.  Joel  ||  24.  Shebuel  was  ruler  of  the*.

26.  Shelomith  and  his  brethren  were  over  the  t.

27.  25.  and  over  the  king’s  t.  W'as  Azmaveth

S  8.  15.  king’s  commandment  concerning  the  t.
Neh.  12.  44.  some  were  appointed  for  the  t.

Job  3.  21.  which  dig  for  it  more  than  forbid  t.

38.  22.  hast  thou  entered  into  the  /.  of  the  snow  ?

_  or  hast  thou  seen  the  t.  of  the  hail  ?
Prov.  2.  4.  if  thou  searchest  for  her  as  ft  /  id  t.

8.  21.  I  will  fill  the  t.  of  those  that  love  me

10.  2.  t.  of  wickedness  profit  nothing

21.  6.  the  getting  of  t.  by  a  lying  tongue  is  vanity
Isa.  2.  7-  neither  is  there  any  end  of  their  /

10.  13.  for  he  saith,  1  have  robbed  their  t.

30.  6.  they  will  carry  their  t.  on  bunches  of  camels
45.  3.  and  I  will  give  thee  the  t.  of  darkness
Jer.  10.  13.  he  bringeth  wind  out  of  his  t.  51.  16.

15. 13.  thy  t.  I  will  give  to  the  spoil,  17.  3.  |  20.  5.

41.  8.  slay  us  not,  for  we  have  t.  in  the  field
48-7-  because  thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  t.

49.  4.  backsliding  daughter,  that  trusted  in  her  t.

50.  37.  a  sword  is  on  her  t.  they  shall  be  robbed

51. 13.  thatdwellest  on  many  waters  abundant  in  t.
Ezek.  28.  4.  hast  gotten  silver  and  gold  into  thy  t.
Dan.  11.43.  he  shall  have  power  over  the  t.  of  gold
Mic.  6.  10.  are  there  yet  the  t.  of  wickedness  in

house  ?

Mat.  2.  11.  and  when  they  had  opened  their  t.

6.  19.  lay  not  up  for  yourselves  t.  on  earth

20.  but  lay  up  for  yourselves  t.  in  heaven
Col.  2.  3.  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  t.  of  w  isdom
lieh.  11.  26.  greater  riches  than  the  t.  in  Egypt

TREASURES'!’.

Bom.  2.5.  t.  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath
TREASURY.

Josh.  6.  19.  gold  and  silver  shall  come  into  t.  24.

Jer.  38.  11.  went  into  the  house  under  the  t.

Mat.  27-  6.  it  is  not  lawful  to  put  them  into  the  t.
Mark  12.  41.  Jesus  sat  over-against  the  t.  and  be¬
held  how  the  people  cast  money  into  the  t.
LukeIX.  1.  Jesus  saw  rich  men  casting  gifts  into  t.
John  8.  20.  these  words  spa^e  Jesus  in  the  t.

TR  EASUR1ES.

1  Chron.  9.  26.  these  Levites  w'ere  over  the  t.

28.  11.  David  gave  Solomon  pattern  of  the  t.  12.

S!  Chron.  32.  27.  Hezekiah  made  t.  for  silver
Neh.  13.  12.  Judah  brought  the  tithe  unto  the  t.

13.  and  I  made  treasurers  over  the  t.

Esth.  3.  9. 1  will  pay,  to  bring  it  into  the  king's  t.

522


Esth.  4.  7.  that  Ilaman  promised  to  pay  to  king’s  t.
Psal.  135.  7-  he  bringeth  the  wind  out  of  his  t.

I  REALISE.

Acts  1. 1.  the  former  t.  have  I  made,  O  '1  heoplwlus

TREE.

Both  good  and  uicked  men  are  compared  to  frees.
The  godly,  says  the  Psalmist,  shall  be  like  a
tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bi  ing-
eth  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season,  Psal.  1.  3.  His
soul  shall  be  plentifully  fed  from  heaven  with  the
never  falling  influences  of  grace  and  consolation,
whereby  he  shall  he  made  fruitful  in  ex  ery  good
word  and  work.  John  the  Baptist  says.  Mat.  3.

10.  The  axe  is  laid  to  the  root  of  the  trees:
therefore  every  tree  which  bringeth  not  forth
good  fruit,  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire  ;
that  is,  “  The  judgment  of  God  hangs  over  your
heads,  ready  to  seize  upon  you,  if  ye  he  either
barren,  or  do  not  bring  foith  go<  d  fruit:  Ven¬
geance  is  as  nigh  unto  you,  as  the  tree  is  to  fall¬
ing,  to  whose  root  the  are  is  already  applied."
Our  Saviour  speaks  to  the  same  purpose  m  the
latter  part  of  his  sermon  upon  the  mount.  Mat.  7.
19.  The  godly  are  called  trees  of  righteousness,
that  is,  persons  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  right¬
eousness,  Isa.  6l.  3.  Hie  wicked  are  called  trees
whose  fruit  withered);  whose  lives  are  full  of
all  wickedness,  Jude  12.  ’The  king  <f  Assyria  s
army  are  called  trees.  Isa.  10.  19.  The  rest  of
the  trees  of  his  forest  shall  be  few,  that  a  child
may  write  them  ;  The  remainder  of  his  mighty
host  shall  be  so  few,  that  the  meanest  accomptant
may  he  their  muster-master.

There  is  mention  made  in  Scripture  of  several  kinds
of  trees  and  plants,  but  there  is  hardly  any  thing
less  certain,  than  the  Hebrew  names  of  them,
ll  hen  the  Jews  had  planted  a  vine  or  fruit-tree,
they  were  not  allowed  to  eat  of  the  fruit  for  the
first  three  years.  'They  offered  to  God  that  of  the
fourth  year,  and  afterwards  might  use  whatever
those  trees  produced  at  their  discretion.  Lev.  19

23.  See  Fruit.

I  fee  of  life,  Gen.  2.  9.  so  called,  because  it  was  a
natural  means  if  preserving  man's  life,  and  free¬
ing  him  from  all  infirmities,  diseases,  and  decays,
during  his  abode  on  earth  ;  and  also  a  sacramental
pledge  of  his  continuance  in  that  life,  upon  con¬
dition  of  his  perfect  obedience.  But  this  tree  of
life  was  to  him  a  tree  of  death,  because  of  his  in
fidelity  and  disobedience.

The  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  Gen.  2.
9,  17.  so  calltd,  because  hy  the  eating  oj  it  man
came  to  know  experimentally  the  vast  difference
between  good  and  evil ;  and  the  greatness  of  that
good  he  formerly  enjoyed,  by  the  loss  of  it  ;  and
the  greatness  of  that  evil  he  had  brought  upon  him-
selj,  by  the  feeling  oj  it.  And  this  was  another
sacramental  pledge,  which  sealed  death  spiritual,
temporal,  and  eternal,  in  case  of  disobedience.
Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  tree  of  life.  Rev.  2.  7.  |

22.  2.  He  will  be  to  all  his  members  as  a  tree
of  eternal  life,  satisfying  and  refreshing  them
with  fellowship  and  communion  with  himself.

Gen.  1.  29.  1  have  given  you  every  t.  for  meat

2.  9.  God  made  every  t.  to  grow,  the  t.  of  life  also,
and  the  /.  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil
16.  of  every  t.  of  the  garden  thou  mayest  eat

2.  17 .  hut  of  the  t.  of  knowledge  shalt  not  cat,  3.  3

3.  6.  w  hen  the  woman  saw  that  the  t.  was  good

11.  and  he  said,  hast  thou  eaten  of  the  t.  ?  17.

12.  the  woman  gave  me  of  the  t.  and  1  did  eat

22.  and  now  lest  he  take  also  of  the  t.  of  life

24.  cherubims,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  t.  of  life

18.  4.  wash  your  feet,  rest  yourselves  under  the  t.

8.  he  stood  by  them  under  the  t.  they  did  eat

21.  t  33.  and  Abraham  planted  a  t.  in  Beer-sheba
40.  19.  in  three  days  Pharaoh  shall  hang  thee  on  a  t.
Exod.  9.  25.  the  hail  brake  every  t.  of  the  field

10.  5.  the  locusts  shall  eat  every  t.  which  groweth
15.  25.  he  cried,  and  the  Lord  shew'ed  him  a  t.

Lev.  27.  .30.  tithe  of  land,  seed  or  fruit  of  t.  is  Lord’s
Deut.  19.  5.  fetched)  a  stroke  to  cut  down  the  t.

29.  19.  for  the  t.  of  the  field  is  man’s  life

21.  22.  and  if  thou  hang  him  on  a  t.

23.  his  body  shall  not  remain  all  night  on  the  t.

22.  6.  if  a  bird’s  nest  chance  in  the  way  in  any  t.
Josh.  8.  29.  take  the  king  of  Ai  down  from  the  t.

1  *S am.  22.  6.  now  Saul  abode  under  a  t.  in  Ramah

31.  13.  they  buried  them  under  a  t.  at  Jabesh

2  Kings  3.  19.  and  shall  fell  every  good  t.

Esth.  2.  23.  they  were  both  hanged  on  a  t.

5.  +  14.  let  a  t.  be  made  of  fifty  cubits  high

7.  +  9.  behold  also  the  t.  fifty  cubits  high

./"»  14.  7.  there  is. hope  of  a  t.  if  it  be  cut  down

19.  10.  and  mine  hope  hath  he  removed  like  a  t.

24.  20,  and  wickedness  shall  be  broken  as  a  t.

I  sal.  1.  3.  like  a  t.  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water
trov.S.  18.  she  is  a  t.  of  life  to  them  lay  hold  on  her

1 1.  30.  the  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a  1.  of  life

13.  12.  but  w  ben  the  desire  cometh,  it  is  a  t.  of  life
15.  4.  a  wholesome  tongue  is  a  t.  of  life
Lccl.  II.  3.  if  the  t.  fall  toward  the  south  or  the
north  ;  where  the/,  tailed),  there  shall  it  be
Isa.  30.  t  17 .  ye  be  left  as  a  t .  bereft  of  branches
40.  20.  he  chooseth  a  t.  that  will  not  rot
44.  19.  shall  I  fall  dow  n  to  the  stock  of  a  t.?

56.  3.  neither  let  the  eunuch  say,  I  am  a  dry  t.

65.  22.  as  days  of  a  t .  are  the  days  of  my  people
00.  17.  that  purify  themselves  behind  one  t.

Jer.  10.  3.  for  < ue  cutteth  a  t.  out  of  the  forest

11.  19.  let  us  destroy  the  t.  with  the  fruit
'7-  8.  he  shall  be  as  a  t.  planted  by  the  waters
r  zek.  15.  2.  what  is  the  vine  /,  more  than  any  /.

17.  24.  brought  down  the  high  /.  exalted  the  low  /.

dried  up  the  green  /.  made  dry  /.  to  flourish
-1.  10.  it  contemnetb  rod  of  my  son,  as  every  t.

31.  8.  nor  aoy  /.  in  the  garden  of  God  was  like  him
34.  27.  /.  of  the  field  shall  yield  her  fruit
36.  30.  I  will  multiply  the  fruit  of  the  /.

Van.  4.  !0.  and  beheld  a  /.  ||  11,  the  /.  grew,  20.

14.  lie  cried,  and  said  thus,  hew  down  the  /.  23.
Joel  Q9  UKr  not  for  the  /.  beareth  her  fruit


Mat.  3.  10.  every  f.  that  bringeth  not  forth  goi
fruit  is  cast  into  the  fire,  7. 19  Luke.  3.
7. 17.  every  good  t.  brimreth  forth  good  fruit,  b
a  corrupt  l.  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit.  LukeQ.  4

18.  a  good  t.  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit

12.  '33.  either  make  the  /.  good  and  his  fruit  goot

for  the  /.  is  known  by  his  fruit,  Luke  6.  4

13.  32.  mustard  seed  becometh  a  /.  Luke  13.  19,
Luke  17.  6.  ye  might  say  to  the  sycamine  /.

Acts  5.  3  ).  Jesus  whom  ye  slew  and  hanged  on  a

10.  39.  Jesus,  whom  they  slew,  and  hanged  rna

13.  29.  they  took  him  down  fiom  the  /.  and  laid
Gal.  3.  13.  cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a
1  Ect.  2.  24.  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the
Rev.  2.  7.  to  him  will  1  give  to  eat  of  (he  /.  of  lif
7.  1.  that  the  wind  should  not  blow  on  any  t.
9.4  they  should  not  hurt  any  green  thing,  non

22.  2.  in  tl  e  midst  was  there  the  /.  of  life

14.  that  they  may  have  right  to  tiie  /.  of  life

See  Green.

TREES.

Gen.  3.  8.  hid  themselves  amongst  the  /.  of  garde

23.  17.  all  the  /.  were  made  sure  to  Abraham
Exod.  10.  15.  the  locusts  did  eat  the  fruit  of  the
Lev.  19.  23.  ye  shall  have  planted  all  manner  of;

23.  40.  ye  shall  take  the  boughs  of goodlv  /.

26.  4.  and  the  t.  of  the  field  shall  yield  their  fru

20.  neither  shall  the  /.  of  the  land  yield  fruits
Num.  24.  6.  as  /.  of  lign  aloes  which  the  Lord  ha!

planted,  and  as  cedar  /.  beside  the  w  ate
Deut.  16.  21.  thou  shaltnot  plant  a  grove  of  any
20.  19.  thou  shalt  not  destroy  the  /.  thereof  by  a>
20.  the  /.  thou  knowest  not  to  he  /.  for  meat
28.  42.  all  thy  /.  and  fruit  shall  the  locust  consurr
Josh.  10.  26.  Joshua  hanged  them  on  five  /.

27-  and  they  took  them  down  off  the  /.

Judg.  9.  8.  the  /.  went  forth  to  anoint  a  king
9-  and  go  to  be  promoted  over  the  /.  11.  13.

10.  die  /.  said  to  the  tig  tree,  reign  over  us

12.  /.  said  to  the  vine  ||  14.  /.  said  to  the  hrambl
48.  Abimelech  cut  down  a  bough  from  the  /.

1  Kings  4.  33.  he  spake  of  /.  from  cedar  in  Lebanc

2  Kings  3.  25.  anil  they  felled  all  the  good  /.

I  Chron.  16.  .33.  then  shall  the  /.  of  the  wood  sit.

at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  Psal.  96.  1
Neh.  13.  35.  to  bring  the  first-fruits  of  all  /.  37.
Job  40.  21.  he  lieth  under  the  shady  t.  22.

Psal.  74.  5.  as  he  had  lifted  up  axes  on  thick  /.
78.  47.  he  destroyed  their  sycamore  /.  with  frost

104.  16.  the  /.  of  the  l.ord  are  full  of  sap

105.  33.  and  brake  the  /.  of  their  coasts
148.  9.  fruitful  /.  and  cedars  praise  the  Lord
Eccl.  2.5.  I  planted  /.  of  all  kinds  of  fruit
Cant.  2.  3.  as  the  apple-tree  among  the  /.  of  the  woe

4.  14.  with  all/,  of  frankincense,  myrrh,  aloes
Isa.  7,2.  his  heart  was  moved  as  the  /.of  the  woe
+  19.  they  shall  l  est  upon  all  commendable  /.

10,  19.  the  rest  of  the  /.  of  his  forestshall  be  tew
44.  14.  which  he  strengtheneth  among  the  /.

55. 12.  all  the  /.  of  the  fiehisshall  clap  their  hand
61.  3.  they  might  be  called  t.  of  righteousness
Jer.  6.  6.  Lord  said,  hew  down  /.  and  cast  a  morn

7.  20.  my  fury  shall  be  poured  out  upon  the  /.
Ezek.  17.  24.  all  the  /.  of  the  field  shall  know

20.  28.  they  saw  all  the  thick  /.and  ofered

31.  5.  his  height  was  exalted  above  all  *he /.

9.  so  that  all  the  /.of  Eden  envied  him

47.  7-  many  /.  on  the  one  side  and  on  the  other
12.  by  the  rivers  shall  grow  all  /.  for  meat
Joel  1.  12.  all  the  /.  of  the  field  are  withered

19.  the  flame  hath  burnt  all  the /.of  the  field
Mat.  3.  10.  the  axe  is  laid  to  the  root  of  /.  Luke  3.  1

21.  8.  others  cut  down  branches  from  the  /.  an

strewed  them  in  the  way,  Mark  11.  1
Mark  8.  24.  he  said,  1  see  men  as  /.  walking
Luke  21. 29.  behold  the  fig  tree  and  all  the  /.

Jude  12.  they  are  /.  w  hose  fruit  w  ithered)

Rev.  7.  3.  hurt  not  the  /.till  we  have  sealed

8.  7-  and  the  third  part  of  the  t.  was  burnt  up

See  Palm.

TREMBLE.

Deut.  2.  25.  the  nations  shall  /.  because  of  thee

20.  3.  fear  not  and  do  not  /.  because  of  them
Ezra  10.  3.  of  those  that  /.  at  the  commandment
Job  9.  6.  shaketh  the  earth,  the  pillars  thereof  /.
26.  11.  the  pillars  of  heaven  /.  and  are  astouishe
Psal.  60.  2.  thou  hast  made  the  earth  to  /.

99.  1.  tire  l.ord  reigneth,  let  the  people  /.

114.  7.  /.  thou  earth  at  tl>e  presence  of  the  Lord
Eccl.  12.  3.  when  the  keepers  of  the  house  shall  t
Isa.  5.  25.  the  hnis  did  /.  their  carcases  were  tore
14.  16.  is  this  the  man  that  made  the  earth  to  /.

32.  11./.  ye  women  that  are  at  ease,  be  troubled
64.  2.  that  the  nations  may  /.  at  thy  presence
66.  5.  hear  word  of  Lord,  ye  that  /.  at  his  word

Jer.  5.22.  will  ye  not  /.  atmy  piesence  w  ho  place'

10.  10.  at  his  wrath  the  earth  shall  /.  and  nations

33.  9.  and  they  shall  /.  for  all  the  goodness

51.  29-  the  land  of  Babylon  shall  /.  and  sorrow
Ezek.  26.  16.  they  shall  /.  at  every  moment,  32.  1C

18.  now  shall  the  isles  /.  in  the  day  of  thy  fall
Dan.  6.  26.  that  men  /.  before  the  God  of  Daniel
Hos.  11.  10.  then  the  children  shall  /.  from  the  wes

11.  they  shall  /.  as  a  bird  out  of  Egypt,  asadovt
Joel  2.  1.  let  all  the.  inhabitants  of  the  land  /.

10.  the  earth  shall  quake,  the  heavens  shall  /.
Amos  8.  8.  shall  not  the  land  /.  for  this  and  mourn
Ilab.3.7.  the  captains  of  the  land  ofMidiandidi
Jam.  2.  19.  the  devils  also  believe  and  /.

TREMBLED.

Gen.  27.  33,  Tsaac  /.  very  exceedingly,  and  he  said
Exod.  19.  16.  the  people  that  was  in  the  camp  /.
Judg.  5.  4.  the  eartli  /.  and  the  heavens  dropped
2  Sam.  22.  8.  Psal.  18.  7.  |  77-  18.  1  97.  4
1  Sam.  4.  13.  Eli’s  heart  /.  for  the  ark  of  God
14.  15.  the  spoilers  /.  ||  16.  4.  the  eldersof  town  /.
28.  5.  Saul  was  afraid,  and  his  heart  greatly  /.
F.zra  9-  4.  were  assembled  to  me  every  one  that  t.
Jer.  4.  24.  and  lo  the  mountains  /.  Hab.  3.  10.

8.  ;i6.  whole  land  /.  at  the  sound  of  the  neighin,

of  his  strong  one

Dan.  5.  19.  all  people  and  nations  /.  before  him


Till


T  II  I


TRI


4.  3.  16.  when  1  heard  my  belly  t.  and  T  t.  in

myself  that  1  might  rest  in  the  day  of
trouble

rk  16.  8.  tied  from  the  sepulchre,  for  they  t.
s  7.  32.  then  Moses  t.  1124. 23.  Felix  t.

THEM BLETH.

37  1.  at  this  also  my  heart  and  is  moved
(/.  104.  32.  he  looketh  on  earth  and  it  t.

).  120.  my  flesh  t.  for  fear  of  thee  and  am  afraid
.66.2.  I  will  look  to  him  that  t.  at  my  word

TREMBLING.

>.  2?.  t  33.  Isaac  trembled  with  a  great  t.

'd.  13.  15.  t.  take  hold  on  the  mighty  men  of  Mo.
it  . ‘28.  63.  the  Lord  shall  give  thee  a  t.  heart
i m.  13.7.  ana  all  the  people  followed  him  t.

15.  in  the  host  there  was  a  very  great  t.

a  10.  9.  all  people  sat  t.  because  of  this  matter
4. 14.  fear  came  upon  me  and  t.  which  made
,  6.  I  am  afraid  and  t.  taketh  bold  on  my  flesh
r/.  2. 11.  serve  Lord  with  fear  and  rejoice  with  t.

5.  fearful  ness  and  t.  are  come  upon  me

.51.  17.  hast  drunken  the  dregs  or  the  cup  of  t.

1.  I  have  taken  out  of  thy  hand  the  cup  of  t.
.30.5.  we  have  heard  a  voice  of  t.  of  fear
iL  12. 18.  son  of  man,  drink  thy  water  with  t.

16.  they  shall  dothe  themselves  with  t.

1. 10.  11.  when  he  had  spoken  this,  1  stood  t.
.13.  1.  when  Ephraim  spake  t.  he  exalted

h.  12.2.  1  will  make  Jerusalem  a  cup  of  t.

rk  5.  33.  the  woman  fearing  and  t.  Luke  8.  47.
s  9.  6.  Saul  t.  said,  L.  what  wilt  have  me  to  do  ?
29.  gaoler  came  t.  and  fell  down  before  Paul
>r.  2.  3.  1  was  with  you  in  fear  and  much  t.
ir.  7-  15.  how  with  fear  and  t.  ye  received  him

l.  6.  5.  servants,  be  obedient  with  fear  and  t.
7.2. 12.  work  out  vour  salvation  with  tear  and  t.

1  BENCH.

im.  17.20.  David  came  to  the  t.  and  shouted
5.  Saul  lay  sleeping  within  the  t.  7.
ings  18.  32.  Elijah  made  a  t.  about  the  altar

i.  and  he  filled  the  t.  also  with  water,  38.

le  19. 43.  thy  enemies  shall  cast  a  t.  about  thee
TRESPASS.

i.  31.  36.  what  is  my  t.  that  thou  hast  pursued

17.  we  pray  thee  forgive  the  t.  of  thy  servants
•d.  22.  9.  for  all  manner  of  t.  whether  for  ox

'.  5.  15.  he  shall  bring  for  his  t.  to  the  Lord  a  ram
40.  if  they  shall  confess  their  t.  trespassed

m. 5.  6.  when  any  do  a  t.  against  the  Lord

he  shall  recompense  his  t.  with  the  principal
if  he  have  no  kinsman  to  recompense  the  t.

if  she  have  done  t.  against  her  husband
im.  25. 28.  forgive  the  t.  of  thine  handmaid
fir.  21.  3.  whj'  will  he  be  a  cause  of  t.  to  Israel  ?
iron.  24.  18.  wrath  came  on  .1  udah  for  their  t.

13.  ye  intend  to  add  more  to  our  sin  and  t.

19.  Manasseh’s  prayer  and  t.  are  written
1  9.  2.  the  rulers  have  been  chief  in  this  t.
and  our  t.  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens
we  have  been  in  a  great  t.  to  this  day  13.

10.  taken  strange  wives,  to  increase  t.  of  Israel
.  they  offered  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  t.

k.  17.' 20.  I  will  plead  with  him  there  for  his  t.
24.  in  his  t.  he  hath  trespassed,  he  shall  die

«.  9.  7.  because  of  their  t.  they  trespassed

TRESPASSES.

a  9. 15.  behold,  we  are  before  thee  in  our  t.

11.  68.  21.  such  a  one  as  goeth  on  still  in  his  t.

•k.  39-  26.  they  have  borne  their  shame  and  t.
t.  6. 14.  for  if  ye  forgive  men  their  t.

5.  but.  if  ye  forgive  not  men  their  t.  neither  will
your  Father  forgive  your  t.  18.  35.
rk  11.  25.  your  Father  may  forgive  you  your  t.
5.  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  your  t.
nr.  5. 19.  not  imputing  their  t.  unto  them

l. 2.1.  you  quickened  who  were  dead  in?. and  sins
.2. 13.  he  quickened,  having  forgiven  you  all  t.

See  Commit,  Committed,
Offering.
TRESPASS-otowcio
ings  12. 16.  the  t. -money  was  not  brought
TRESPASS.

ings  8.  31.  if  any  man  t.  against  his  neighbour
hron.  19. 10.  warn  that  they  t.  not  against  Lord
.  22.  Ahaz  did  t.  yet  more  against  the  Lord
t.  18. 15.  if  brother  e.  tell  him  his  fault
kelT.  3.  if  thy  brother  t.  against  thee,  rebuke  him
if  he  t.  against  thee  seven  times  in  a  day
TRESPASSED.

.5. 19-  he  hath  certainly  t.  against  the  Lord
.  40.  if  they  confess  their  trespass  which  they  t.

m.  5. 7-  recompensed  to  him  against  whom  he  t.
ut.  32.  51.  because  ye  t.  against  me  among  Israel
hron.  26. 18.  go  out  of  sanctuary,  for  thou  hast  t.

.  6.  for  our  fathers  have  t.  and  done  evil  in  eyes
.  7.  be  not  like  fathers  who  t.  against  Lord  God
1.23.  but  Amon  t.  more  and  more
a  10. 2.  we  have  t.  against  our  G.  strange  wives
>.k.  17. 20.  his  trespass  that  he  t.  against  me
i.  23.  because  they  t.  against  me,  26.

n.  9. 7-  their  trespass  that  they  t.  against  thee
s.  8. 1.  because  they  have  t.  against  my  law

TRESPASSING.

■>. 6.  7-  for  any  thing  that  he  hath  done  in  t.

’.k.  14. 13.  the  land  sinneth  against  me  by  t.
TRIAL.

9. 23.  he  will  laugh  at  the  t.  of  the  innocent
rk.  21. 13.  because  it  is  a  t.  what  if  the  sword
‘Jr.  8.  2.  how  that  in  a  great  t.  of  affliction
b.  11.  36.  others  had  t.  of  cruel  mockings
'et.  1.7.  that  the  t.  of  your  faith  might  be  found

12.  think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery  t.

TRIBE.

ob  having  twelve  sons,  who  were  the  heads  of  so
1  any  great  families,  which  altogether  formed  a
real  nation  :  every  one  of  these  families  was  call-
d  a  tribe.  But  Jacob  on  his  death  bed  adopted
■'.phrairn  and  Manasseh,  the  sons  of  Joseph,  and
ould  have  them  also  to  constitute  two  tribes  of  Is-
ael,  Gen.  48.  5.  Instead  of  twelve  tribes,  there
1 ere  now  thirteen,  that  of  Joseph  being  divided
*to  two  However,  in  the  distribution  of  lands


to  the  people  made  by  Joshua,  by  the  command  of
God,  they  counted  but  twelves  tribes,  and  made
but  twelve  lots.  For  the  tribe  of  Levi,  which  was
appointed  to  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  of  the
fiord,  had  no  share  in  the  distribution  of  the  land,
but  only  some  cities  to  dwell  in,  and  the  first-fruits,
tithes,  and  oblations  of  the  people,  which  was  all
their  subsistence,  N  um.  35.  2.  Josh.  13.7,8, 14,  3.3.

The  twelve  tribes,  while  they  were  in  the  desert,  en¬
camped  round  about  the  tabernacle  of  the  cove¬
nant,  every  one  according  to  its  order.  To  the
east  were  those  of  Judah,  Zebulun,  and  Issachar.
To  the  west  were  Ephraim,  Manasseh,  and  Ben¬
jamin.  To  the  south,  Reuben,  •Simeon,  and  Gad.
And  to  the  north  were  Dan,  Asher,  and  Naphta/i.
The  Levites  were  distributed  round  about  the  ta
bepiade,  nearer  the  holy  place  than  the  other  tribes,
Num.  2.  2,  .3,  &c.

In  the  marches  of  the  army  of  Israel,  the  twelve
tribes  were  divided  into  four  great  bodies,  each
composed  of  three  tribes.  The  first  body,  which
was  the  front  of  the  army,  was  made  up  of  the  tribes
of  Judah,  Issachar,  and  Zebulun.  The  second
was  composed  of  Reuben,  Simeon,  and  Gad.  Be¬
tween  the  second  and  third  body  of  troops,  came
the  Levites  and  the  priests,  with  the  ai  k  of  the
Lord,  the  curtain,  the  planks,  the  pillars,  and  all
the  other  furniture  of  the  tabernacle.  The  third
body  of  the  army  was  composed  of  the  tribes  of
Ephraim,  Manasseh,  and  Benjamin.  The  fourth
and  last,  which  brought  up  the  rear ,  was  made  up  of
the  tribes  of  Dan,  Asher,  and  Naphtali,  N  um.  10.

5,  6,  14,  &c.  li  e  have  an  account  of  the  division
of  the  land  of  Canaan  among  the  twelve  tribes  in
the  book  of  Joshua.

The  twelve  tribes  continued  united  under  one  head,
making  but  one  state,  one  people ,  and  one  monarchy ,
till  after  the  death  of  Solomon.  Then  ten  of  the
tribes  of  Israel  revolted  from  the  house  of  David,
and  received  for  their  king  Jeroboam,  the  son  of
Nebat  ;  and  only  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benja¬
min  continued  under  the  government  of  Rehoboam,
1  Kings  12.  16,  20.  This  separation  may  be
looked  upon  as  the  chief  cause  of  those  great  ca¬
lamities  that  afterwards  happened  to  those  two
kingdoms,  and  to  the  whole  Hebrew  nation.  For
it  was  the  cause  of  the  alteration  and  change  of
the  old  religion,  and  of  the  ancient  worship  of  their
forefathers.  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  sub¬
stituted  the  worship  of  golden  calves  instead  of
the  worship  of  the  Lord  ;  which  was  the  occasion
of  the  ten  tribes  forsaking  the  temple  of  the  Lord,
1  Kings  12.  26,  27,  &c.  This  schism  likewise
caused  an  irreconci/eable  hatred  between  the  ten
tribes  and  those  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and
created  a  great  number  of  wars  and  disputes  between
them.  The  Lord  being  provoked,  delivered  them
up  to  their  enemies,  Tiglath-pileser  first  carried
away  captives  of  the  tribes  of  Reuben,  Gad,  Naph¬
tali,  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  which  were
beyond  Jordan,  and  carried  them  beyond  the  Eu¬
phrates,  2  Kings  15.29.  1  Chron.  5.  26.

Some  years  after,  Shalmaneser,  king  of  Assyria,
took  the  city  of  Samaria,  destroyed  it,  took  away
the  rest  of  the  inhabitants  of  Israel,  carried  them
beyond  the  Euphrates,  and  sent  other  inhabitants
into  the  country  to  cultivate  and  possess  it,  2
Kings  17.  6,  24.  |  18.  10,  11.  Thus  ended  the
kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel.  It  has  been  a
great  question  among  the  Fathers  and  Interprete,  ?,
whether  these  ten  tribes  still  continued  in  their
settlement  beyond  the  Euphrates,  or  whether  they
returned  again  into  their  own  country.  The
greatest  part  are  of  opinion,  that  they  never  did
return.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  think  they  did
return,  but  at  the  same  time  acknowledge,  that
this  return  is  not  clearly  made  out  by  history,  be¬
cause  it  was  performed  by  insensible  degrees :
and  was  not  so  complete  and  entire,  but  that  a
gi eat  number  of  Israelites  still  remained  beyond
the  Euphrates.

As  to  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  who  re¬
mained  under  the  government  of  the  kings  of  the
family  of  David,  they  continued  a  much  longer
time  in  their  own  country  :  but  at  last,  after  they
had  fulfilled  the  measure  of  their  iniquity,  God  de¬
livered  them  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  Ne¬
buchadnezzar  took  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  entirely
ruined  it,  and  burnt  the  temple,  and  took  away  all
the  inhabitants  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  to  Baby¬
lon,  and  to  the  other  provinces  of  his  empire.
This  captivity  continued  for  seventy  years .  as  the
prophet^  had  foretold  them,  Jer.  25.  11,  12.  |  29.
10.  The  return  from  this  captivity  is  plainly  as¬
signed  in  2  Chron.  36.  20,  21,  22,  23.  and  in  the
books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.

Chronologers  fix  the  end  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten
tribes  in  the  year  of  the  world  3283,  before  Christ
717-  And  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  in
the  year  of  the  world  3416,  before  Christ  584.

Num.  1.  4.  and  with  you  there  shall  be  a  man  of
every  t.  head  of  house  of  his  fathers,  13.  2. 1
34.  18.

4. 18.  cut  ye  not  off  the  t.  of  the  Kohathites

18.  2.  the  t.  of  thy  father  bring  thou  with  thee
31.  4.  of  every  t.  a  thousand  sent  to  war,  5,  6.

36.  5.  the  t.  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  said  well

6.  they  shall  marry  only  to  the  family  of  the  t.  8.
9.  neither  shall  the  inheritance  remo\  e  from  one  t.

to  another  t.  but  keep  to  his  own  inheritance

Deut.  1.  23.  I  took  one  of  a  t.  Josh.  3. 12.  1  4.  2,  4.
29.  18.  family  or  t.  w  hose  heart  turneth  away

Josh.  7. 14.  t.  which  the  Lord  taketh  shall  come
18.  4.  give  out  from  you  three  men  for  each  t.

Judg.  18. 19.  or  that  thou  be  a  priest  to  a  t.

21.  .3.  there  should  be  one  t.  lacking  in  Israel,  6.

1  KingsU.  13.  but  willgiveone  t.  tothyson,  32.36.

1  Chr.  6.  61.  who  were  left  of  the  family  of  that  t.

Ezek.  47.  23.  in  what  t.  the  stranger  sojourneth

Heb.  7.  13.  for  he  pertaineth  to  another  t.

14.  of  Juda  ;  of  which  t.  Moses  spake  nothing
See  Reuben,  Simeon,  and  the  rest.


TRIBES.

Exod.  28.  21.  his  name  according  to  the  12  t.  39.  14
Num.  24.  2.  abiding  in  tents  according  to  their  t.

3.3. 54.  according  to  t.  of  your  fathers  shall  inherit
34.  13.  to  give  to  the  nine  t.  Josh.  13.  7.  |  14.  2.

15.  the  two  t.  and  the  half  have  received  their  in¬
heritance  on  this  side  Jordan,  Jos h.  14.3.
Deut  1.  13.  take  ye  wise  men,  known  among  your/.
12.  5.  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose  out
of  all  your  t.  to  put  his  name  there,  14
18.  5.  thy  God  hath  chosen  him  out  of  all  thy  t.
Josh.  7 . 14.  ye  shall  be  brought  according  to  your  t,
1  Sam.  10.  19.  present  yoursel.  before  Lcf.  by  yourt
1  Kings  11.  .31.  and  1  will  give  ten  t.  to  thee
18.  31.  twelve  stones  according  to  number  of  the  t.
Psal.  105.  .37.  was  not  one  feeble  among  their  t.
122.  4.  whither  the  t.  go  up,  the  t.  of  the  Lord
Isa.  19.  13.  they  that  are  the  stay  of  t.  thereof
49.  6.  be  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  t.  of  Jacob
63.  17  return  for  the  t.  of  thine  inheritance
Ezek.  45.  8.  give  to  Israel  according  to  their  t.

Hab.  .3.  9.  according  to  the  oaths  of  the  t.

Mat.  24.  30.  then  shall  all  the  t.  of  the  earth  mourn
Acts  26.7-  unto  which  promise  our  12 1.  hope  to  come
Jam.  l.'l.  to  the  twelve  t.  which  are  scattered
Rev.  7.  4.  were  seale  I  144,000  of  all  the  t
See  Israel.

TRI  BULATION.

Deut.  4.  30.  when  thou  art  in  t.  if  thou  turn  to  I.d.
Judg.  10.  14.  let  them  deliver  you  in  the  time  of  t.

1  Sam.  26.  24.  let  him  deliver  me  out  of  all  t.

Mat.  13.21.  W'hen  t.  ariseth.he  is  offended
24.  21.  then  shall  be  great  t.  such  as  was  not

29.  immediately  after  the  t.  Mark  13.  24.

John  16.  33.  in  the  world  ye  shall  have  t.  but  be
Acts  14.  22.  we  must  thro'  much  t.  enter  kingdom
Rom.  2.  9.  t ■  and  angu.  on  every  soul  that  doth  evil
5.  3.  knowing  that  t.  worketh  patience
8.  35.  shall  t.  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?
12.  12.  rejoicing  in  hope,  patient  in  t.

2  Cor.  1.  4.  who  comforteth  us  in  all  our  t.

7.  4.  1  am  exceeding  joyful  in  all  our  t.

1  Thess.  3.  4.  we  told  you  that  we  should  suffer  t.

2  Thess.  1.  6.  recompense  t.  to  them  that  trouble  you
Rev.  1.  9.  John  who  am  your  companion  in  t.

2.  9.  I  know  thy  works,  and  t.  and  poverty
10.  behold,  ye  shall  have  t.  ten  days
22.  I  will  cast  them  into  great  t.  except  repent
7.  14.  these  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  t.
TRIBULATIONS.

1  Sam.  10. 19.  himself  saved  you  out  of  all  your  t.
Rom.  5.  3.  not  only  so,  but  we  glory  in  t.  also
Eph.  3.  13.  1  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at  my  t.

2  Thess.  1.  4.  for  your  faith  in  all  t.  that  ye  endure

TRIBUTARY.

Isa.  .31.  t  8.  and  his  young  men  shall  be  t.

Lam.  1. 1.  she  that  was  great,  how  is  she  become  t.  !
TRIBUTARIES.

Deut.  20.  11.  the  people  found  therein  shall  be  t.
Judg.  1.  30.  the  Canaanites  became  t.  33,  35.

TRI  BU  I  E,

In  Greek  fop  os  ‘  in  Hebrew,  Mass  ;  which  is  de¬
rived  from  the  verb  Masas,  to  melt,  or  liquefy.
The  Hebrews  acknowledged  none  for  sovereign
over  them  but  God  alone  :  whence  Josephus  calls
their  government  a  Theocracy,  or  divine  govern¬
ment.  They  acknowledged  the  sovereign  dominion
of  God  by  a  tribute,  or  capitation,  of  half  a  she¬
kel  a  head,  which  every  Israelite  paid  him  yearly,
Exod.  30.  13.  Gut  Saviour,  in  Mat.  17.  25.
thus  reasons  with  Peter  ;  What  thinkest  thou,
Simon  ?  Of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth
take  custom  or  tribute?  of  their  own  children,
or  of  strangers  ?  Meaning,  that  as  he  was  the
Son  of  God,  he  ought  to  be  exempt  from  the  capi¬
tation.

Tribute  is  a  sum  of  money  paid  to  princes,  or
rulers,  in  token  of  the  duty  and  subjection  which
subjects  owe  unto  them,  and  as  a  recompense  for
their  care  and  protection,  and  in  order  to  support
them  in  their  authority  and  dignity.  After  the
Jews  were  conquered  by  the  Romans,  they  still
continued  very  tenacious  of  their  liberty,  and
gloried  much  in  the  right  they  had  to  it  ;  as  ap¬
pears  from  John  8.  .33.  They  made  it  a  question,
whether  it  was  agreeable  to  the  law  of  God,  to  pay
taxes  to  a  pagan  conqueror,  and  therefore  they  ask
our  Saviour,  Mat.  22.  17.  What  thinkest  thou?
Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  unto  Cesar  or  not?
Christ  in  his  answer  plainly  shews  them,  that  re¬
ligion  did  not  exempt  them  from  their  civil  duties,
and  obedience  to  princes  in  things  wherein  they
have  a  1  ower  to  command  ;  R  ender  unto  Cesar  the
things  that  are  Cesar's.  And  the  apostle  Paul
recommends  and  inculcates  to  the  faithful  Chris¬
tians  submission  and  obedience  to  princes,  and  a
conscientious  discharge  of  their  duty  in  paying
them  their  tributes.  Rom.  13.  7-  Render  to  all
their  dues  ;  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due,  cus¬
tom  to  whom  custom.

Solomon,  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  compelled
the  Canaanites,  who  were  left  in  the  country,  to
pay  him  tribute,  and  to  perform  the  drudgery  of
the  public  works  he  had  undertaken  :  and  as  to
the  children  of  Israel,  he  would  not  suffer  them  to
be  employed  therein,  but  made  them  his  soldiers,
his  ministers,  his  chief  officers,  to  command  his
armies,  his  chariots,  and  his  horsemen,  1  Kings
9.  21,  22,  23.  2  Chron.  8.  9.  Yet,  however,  to¬
wards  the  end  of  his  reign,  he  imposed  a  tribute
upon  them,  and  made  them  work  at  the  public
buildings  ;  which  much  alienated  their  minds  from
him,  and  sowed  the  seeds  of  that  discontent  which
afterwards  appeared  in  an  open  revolt,  by  the  re¬
bellion  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat,  1  Kings  5.
13,  14. 1  9.  15.|  11.  27..  Jeroboam  was  at  first
obliged  to  take  shelter  in  Egypt  ;  but  afterwards
the  defection  became  general,  by  the  total  revolt  of
the  ten  tribes.  It  was  upon  account  of  these  taxes
and  levies,  that  the  Israelites  said  to  Rehoboam  the
son  of  Solomon,  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  griev¬
ous  ;  now  therefore  make  thou  the  grievou.

523


TRO


r  r  o


T  R  U


service  of  thy  father,  and  his  heavy  yoke  which
he  put  upon  us,  lighter,  and  we  will  serve  thee,

1  Lings  1C.  4.

Gen.  49.  15.  Issachar  became  a  servant  to  /.

Kvm.  31.  28.  levy  a  /.  to  the  Lord  of  men  ot  war

37.  the  Lord’s  /.  of  the  sheep  was  675

38.  beeves,  Lord’s  /.  7C.  ||  39-  asses,  Lord's  /.  61.
4.1.  the  persons  16,000,  the  Lord’s  /.  3C  persons

Dent.  16.  10.  with  a  /.  of  a  free-will  offering
Josh.  16.  10.  Canaanites  sene  under  /.  17-  13.  .

C  Sam.  £0.  24.  and  Adoram  was  over  the  t.  1  Kings

4.  6.  I  12.  18.  2  Chron.  10.  18.

1  Kings  9.  21.  upon  these  did  Solomon  levy  a  /.

2  kings  17.  t  3.  iloshea  became  servant  and  gave  t.
23.  33.  Pharaoh  neclio  put  the  land  to  a  /.

2  ('/iron.  8.  8.  them  did  Solomon  make  to  pay  t.

17.  11.  some  of  the  Philistines  brought  /.  silver
Ezra  4.  13.  then  will  they  not  pay  /.  and  custom

20.  and  toll,  t.  and  custom  was  paid  to  them

6.  8.  of  the  t.  expenses  be  given  to  these  men
".  24.  not  lawful  to  impose  /.  on  the  Levites
Neh.  5.  4.  we  hav  e  borrowed  money  for  king’s  t.
Prov.  12.24.  but  the  slothful  shall  be  under  t.

J\a.  31.  f  8.  and  his  young  men  shall  be  for/.

A I  at.  17.  24.  they  that  received  /.  money  came  to
Peter  and  said,  doth  not  your  master  pay  t.  ?

25.  of  whom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth  take  t.  ?

22.  17.  what  thinkest  thou  r  is  it  lawful  to  give  /.
to  Cesar,  or  no  ?  Mark  12.  14.  Luke  20.  22.

19.  shew  me  the  /.  money  ;  they  brought  a  penny
I.uke  2.3.  2.  and  forbidding  to  give  /.  to  Cesar
Eom.  1.3.  6.  for  this  cause  pay  ye /.  also

7.  render  therefore  /.  to  w  hom  /.  is  due,  custom
TRICKLETII.

l.am.  3.  49.  mine  eye  /.  down,  and  ceaseth  not
TR I  F.,  See  Fry.

TRIMMED.

2  Sam.  19.  24.  Mephibosheth  had  not  /.  his  beard
Mat.  25. 7.  all  those  virgins  arose  and/,  their  lamps
TR1MMES  L.

Jcr.  2.  33.  why  /.  thou  thy  way  to  seek  love  ?
TRIPPING.

Isa.  3.  t  16.  walking  and  /.  nicely  as  they  go
TRIUMPH.

2  Sam.  1. 20.  lest  daughters  of  the  uncircumcised  /.
Psal.  25.  2.  let  not  mine  enemies  /.  over  me
41.  11.  because  mine  enemy  doth  not  /.  over  me
60.  8.  Philistia,  /.  thou  because  of  me
92.  4.  I  will  /.  in  the  works  of  thy  hands
94.  3.  Lord,  how  long  shall  the  wicked  /.  ?

11)6.47.  gather  us  to  give  thanks  and  1 .  in  thy  praise
108.9.  Moabismy  wash-pot,  over  Philistia  will  I  /.

2  C 'or.  2.  14.  which  always  causeth  us  to  /.  in  Christ
TRIUMPH.

Psal.  4”.  1.  shout  unto  C.od  with  the  voice  of  /.
TRIUMPHED.

Exod.  15.  1  for  he  hath  /.  gloriously,  21.

TRIUMPHING,  Substantive.

Job  20.  5.  that  the  /.  of  the  wicked  is  slioit
TRIUMPHING.

Col.  2.  15.  made  a  show  of  them,  /.  over  them  in  it
TROD  F.

Jndg .  9.  27.  they  /.  the  grapes  and  cursed  Abimelech

20.  4.3.  Israel  /.  the  Benjamites  down  w  ith  ease

2  Kings 7.  17-  the  people  /.  upon  him  in  the  gate,  20.

9.  33.  Jehu  /.  Jezebel  under  foot

14.  9-  a  beast  /.  down  the  thistle,  2  Chron.  25.  18.
Luke  12.  1.  insomuch  that  they  /.  one  on  another
TRODDEN.

Deut.  1.  36.  to  Caleb  will  1  give  the  land  that  he
hath  /.  upon,  because  he  followed  Lord,  Josh.

14.  9.

Jvdg.  5.  21.  O  my  soul,  thou  hast  /.  down  strength
Job  22.  15.  the  old  w  ay  which  wicked  men  have  /.

28.  8.  the  lion’s  whel  ps  have  not  /.  it,  nor  fierce  lion
Psal.  119.  118.  thou  hast  /.  down  all  that  err
Isa .  5.  5.  and  the  vineyard  shall  be  /.  down
14.  19-  art  cast  out,  as  a  carcase  /.  under  feet

18.  2.  go  to  a  nation  meted  out  and  /.  down,  7.

25.  10.  Moab  shall  be  /.  under  him  as  straw  is  /.

28.  3.  the  drunkards  of  Ephraim  shall  be  /.  under

18.  scourge  pass  through  then  ye  shall  be  /.  down
63.3.  I  have /.  the  wine  press  alone,  of  people  none

18.  our  adversaries  have  /.  down  thy  sanctuary
Jer.  12.  10.  they  have  /.  iny  portion  under  foot
Lam.  1.15.  the  Lord  hatli  /.  under  foot  the  mighty

men,  he  hath  /.  the  virgin  the  daughter  of  Judah
Ezek.  16.  +  6.  when  I  saw  thee  /.  under  foot
27.  +  6.  they  have  made  hatches  of  ivory  well  /.

34.  19.  my  flock  eat  what  ye  have  /.  under  feet
Van.  8.  13.  give  the  sanctuary  and  host  to  be  /.
Mic.  7.  10.  now  shall  she  be  /.  as  mireof  the  streets
Mat.  5. 13.  salt  unsavoury  to  be  /.  under  foot  of  men
Luke  8. 5.  some  fell  by  the  way-side  and  was  /.  down

21.  24.  Jerusalem  shall  be /.  down  of  the  Gentiles
Ueb.  10.  29.  who  hath  /.  under  foot  the  Son  of  God
Lev.  14.  20.  the  wine-press  was  /.  without  the  city

TROOP.

Gen.  30.  11.  a  /.  cometh  ;  fshe  called  his  name  a  /.
49.  19-  Gad,  a  /.  shall  overcome  him,  lie  at  last

1  Sam.  30.  8.  saying,  shall  1  pursue  after  this  /.  ?

2  Sam.  2.  25.  children  of  Benjamin  became  one  /.

3.  22.  behold,  Joabcame  from  pursuing  a  /.

22.  30.  by  thee  have  1  run  thro’  a  /.  Psal.  18.  29.

23.  H.  the  Philistines  were  gathered  into  a/.

13.  the  /.  pitched  in  the  valley  of  Rephaim

Isa.  65.  11.  are  they  that  prepare  a  table  for  that  /.
Jer.  18.  22.  when  shalt  bring  a  /.  suddenly  on  them
IIos.  7.  1.  the  /.  of  robbers  spoileth  without
Amos  9.  6.  he  hath  founded  his  /.  in  the  earth
TROOPS.

Exod.  38. 1 8.  looking-glasses  of  women  assemb.  b}'  /.
Job  6.  19.  /.  of  Tenia  looked,  companies  of  Sheba

19.  12.  his  /.  come  together  and  raise  their  way
Jer.  5.  7-  they  assembled  by  /.  in  the  harlots’  houses
Jlos.  6.  9.  and  as  /.  of  robbers  wait  for  a  man
Mic.  5.  1.  gather  thyself  in  /.  O  daughter  of /.

Hab.  3.  16.  he  will  invade  them  with  his  /.

TROUBLE.

1  Chron.  22.  14.  in  my  /.  I  prepared  for  house  of  L.

2  Chron.  15.  4.  wdien  they  in  /.  did  turn  and  sought

the  Lord,  he  was  found  of  them,  Neh .  9.  27.

524


Neh.  9.  32.  iet  not  all  the  /.  seem  little  before  thee
Job  3.  26.  neither  was  1  quiet,  yet  /.  came

5.  6.  neither  doth  /.  spring  outof  the  ground

7.  yet  man  is  born  to  /.  as  the  sparks  fly  upward

14.  1.  man  is  of  a  few  days  and  full  of  /.

15.  24.  /.  and  anguish  shall  make  him  afraid
27.  9.  will  God  hear  his  cry  when  /.  cometh  ?

30.  25.  did  not  1  weep  for  him  that  was  in  /.  ?

31.  29.  lie  giveth  quietness,  who  can  make  /.  ?

38.  23.  which  1  reserved  against  the  time  of/.

Psal.  9.  9.  Lord  will  be  a  refuge  in  times  of  /.

13.  O  Lord,  consider  my  /.  which  I  sutler

10.  1.  why  hidest  thou  thyself  in  times  ol  t.  ?

22.  11.  be’ not  far  from  me,  for  /.  is  near

27.  5.  for  in  time  of  /.  he  shall  hide  me

31.  7.  I  w  ill  be  glad,  thou  hast  considered  my  /.

9.  have  mercy  upon  me,  O  Lord,  for  I  am  in  /.

32.  7.  thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  /.  and  compass
37.  .39.  he  is  their  s'rength  in  the  time  of  /.

41.  1.  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  /.

46.  1.  God  is  our  refuge,  a  present  help  in  /.

54.  7.  for  he  hath  delivered  me  out  of  /.

60.  11.  give  us  help  from  /.  vain  is  the  help  of  man
6fi!  14.  my  mouth  hath  spoken  when  I  was  in  /.

69.  17.  hide  n  t  thy  face  rrom  me  for  I  am  in  /.

73.  5.  they  are  not  in  /.  as  other  men

78.  33.  and  their  years  did  he  consume  in  /.

49.  he  cast  upon  them  indignation  and  /.

81. 7.  thou  calledst  in  /.  and  1  delivered  thee

91.  15.  1  will  be  with  him  in  /.  1  will  deliver  him
102.  2.  hide  not  thy  face  from  rue  when  1  am  in  /.
107.  6.  they  cried  to  the  Lord  in  their  /.  13.  19.

26.  their  soul  is  melted  because  of  /.

28.  then  they  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  /.

1 16.  3.  the  pains  of  hell  gat  hold  on  me,  1  found  /.
119.  143.  /.  and  anguish  have  taken  hold  on  me

I. 38.7-  tho’  I  walk  in  midst  of/,  thou  wilt  revive  me

142.  2.  1  poured  out  my  complaint  before  him,  I

shewed  before  him  my  /.

143.  11.0  I.ord,  bring  my  soul  out  of  /.

Prov.  11.  8.  righteous  is  delivered  out  of/.  12.  13.

15.  6.  but  in  the  revenues  of  the  wicked  is/.

16.  little,  than  great  treasure  and  /.  therewith

25.  19.  confidence  in  an  unfaithful  man  in  /.  is  like
Isa.  1.14.  your  new-moons,  they  are  a  /.  to  me

8. 22.  they  shall  look  to  the  earth  and  behold  /.

17.  14.  and  behold,  at  evening  tide  /.  and  before

26.  16.  T-.  in  /.  have  they  visited  thee,  poured  out
30.  6.  into  the  land  of  /.  they  will  carry  riches

33.  2.  be  thou  our  salvation  also  in  time  of  /.

46.  7.  yet  can  he  notsave  him  out  of  his  /.

65.  2.3.  they  shall  not  bring  forth  for  /.  are  seed
Jer.  2.27.  in  time  of  /.  they  will  say,  save  us
28.  if  they  can  save  thee  in  the  time  of  thy  /.

8.  15.  we  looked  for  health,  and  behold  /

11.  12.  but  shall  notsave  them  at  all  in  time  of  /.

14.  in  the  time  that  they  cry  to  me  for  their  /.

14.8.  the  Saviour  of  Israel  in  time  of/.

19.  we  looked  forMime  of  healing,  and  behold  /.

30.  7.  that  day  is  great,  it  is  the  time  of  Jacob’s  /.
Lam.  1. 21.  all  mine  enemies  have  heard  of  my  /.
Dan.  12.  1.  and  there  shall  be  a  time  of  /.  such  as

1  Cor.  7.  28.  such  shall  have  /.  in  the  flesh

2  Cor.  1.  4.  be  able  to  comfort  them  which  are  in  /.
8.  w  e  would  not  have  you  ignorant  of  our  /.

2  Tim.  2.  9.  wherein  I  suffer  /.  as  an  evil-doer

See  Day.

TROUBLFS.

Dent.  31 . 17.  many  evils  and  /.  shall  befal  them,  21.
Job  5.  19.  he  shall  deliver  thee  in  six  /.  yea  in  seven
Psal.  25.  17.  the  /.  of  mine  heart  are  enlarged

22.  redeem  Israel,  O  God,  out  of  all  his  /.

31.  6.  the  Lord  saved  him  out  of  all  his  t.

71.  20.  thou  which  hast  shewed  me  sore  /.  shall
88.  3.  incline  thine  ear,  for  my  soul  is  full  of  /.
Prov.  21 . 23.  his  tongue,  he  keepeth  his  soul  from  /.
Jsa.  65.  16.  because  former/,  are  forgotten  and  hid
Mark  13.  8.  and  there  shall  he  famine  and  /.
TROUBLE.

Josh.  6.  18.  lest  ye  /.  the  camp  of  Israel
7.  25.  Joshua  said,  the  Lord  shall  /.  thee  this  day
Jvdg.  11.  35.  thou  art  one  of  them  that  /.  me
2  C/n .  32.18.  they  cried  in  Jews’  language  to  /.  them
Psal.  2.  +  5.  and  /  them  in  his  sore  displeasure

3.  1.  Lord,  how  are  they  increased  that  /.  me  ?

13.  4.  those  that  /.me,  rejoi  e  when  1  am  moved
Ezek.  32.  13.  neither  shall  the  foot  of  man  /.  them
any  more,  nor  the  hoofs  of  beasts  /.  them
Dan.  4.  19.  let  not  the  interpretation  /.  thee
5.  10.  O  king,  let  not  thy  thoughts  /.  thee

II.  44.  but  tidings  out  of  the  north  shall/,  him
Mat.  26.  10.  why  /.  ye  the  woman  ?  Mark  14.  6.

I. uke  7. 6.  T/ird,  /.  not  thyself,  for  1  am  not  worthy

II. 7.  he  shall  say,  /.  me  not,  the  door  is  shut
Acts  15.  19.  that  we  /.  not  Gentiles  turned  to  Got!

16.  20.  these  men  do  exceedingly  /.  our  city

20.  10.  /.  not  yourselves,  for  his  life  is  in  him
Gal.  1.  7.  but  there  be  some  that  /.  you  and  pervert

5.  12.  1  would  they  were  cut  off  who  /.  you

6.  17.  from  henceforth  let  no  man  /.  me,  for  I  bear
2  Thess.  1.  6.  tribulation  to  them  that  /.  you
Ueb.  12.  15.  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  /.  you

TROUBLED.

Gen.  31.  30.  ye  have  /.  me,  to  make  me  to  stink
41.  8.  in  the’morning  Pharaoh’s  spirit  was  /.

45.  3.  his  brethren  were  /.  at  his  presence
Exod.  14.24.  the  Lord  /.  the  host  of  Egyptians
Josh.  7.  25.  Joshua  said,  why  hast  thou  /.  us  r

1  Sam.  14. 29-  Jonath.  said,  my  father  hath  /.  the  land
16.  14.  and  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  /.  him
28.  21.  the  woman  sawr  that  Saul  was  sore  /.

2  Sam.  4.  1.  Abner  dead,  all  the  Israelites  were  /.

1  Kings  18.  18.  1  have  not  t.  Israel,  but  thou  and

2  Kings  6.  11.  the  king  of  Syria  was  sore  /.  for  this
Ezra  4.  4.  then  the  people  /.  them  in  building
Job  4.  5.  now  it  toucheth  thee  and  thou  art  /.

21 . 4.  if  it  were  so,  why  should  not  my  spirit  be  /.  ?

23.  15.  therefore  am  1  /.  at  his  presence

34.  20.  and  the  people  shall  be/,  at  midnight
Psal.  .30.  7.  thou  didst  hide  thy  face  and  1  was  i.
38.6.  1  am  /  H  77.4. 1  am  so/,  that  1  cannot  speak

39.  +  2.1  held  m>  peace  and  my  sorrow  was  /.


Psal.  46.  3.  though  the  waters  thereof  roar  and  t
48.  5.  for  the  kings  were  /.  and  hasted  away
77-3.  I  remembered  God  and  was  /.  1  complaf

16.  the  waters  were  afraid,  the  depths  also  wer
83.  17.  let  them  be  confounded  and  /.  for  ever
90.  7.  consumed  by  anger,  by  thy  wrath  are  w
104.  29.  thou  hidest  thy  lace,  they  are  /.

Prov.  25.  26.  is  as  a  /.  fountain  amt  corrupt  spr
Isa.  32.  10.  many  days  and  years  shall  ye  he  /.

1 1.  tremble,  ye  women,  be  /.  ye  careless  ones
57  .  20.  but  the  wicked  are  like  the  /.  sea

Jer.  31.  20.  therefore  my  bowels  are  /.  tor  him
Lam.  1.  20.  I  am  in  distress,  my  bowels  are  /.  2.
Ezek.  7.  27.  the  hands  of  the  people  shall  be  /.

26.  18.  the  isles  that  are  in  the  sea  shall  be  /.

27.  35.  their  kings  shall  be  /.  in  countenance
Dan.  2.  1.  Nebifchadnezzar’s  spirit  was  /.  3.

4.  5.  and  the  visions  of  my  head  /.  me,  7.-  15
19.  Daniel  astonished,  his  thoughts  /.  him

5.  6.  Belshazzar’s  thoughts  /.  him,  9.

7.  28.  as  for  me,  my  cogitations  much  /.  me
Zech.  10.  2.  were  /.  because  there  was  no  shephe
Mat.  2.  3.  Herod  was  /.  and  all  Jerusalem  with  1

14.  26.  saw  him  on  sea,  they  were  /.  Mark  6.
24.  6.  see  that  ye  be  not  /.  tor  all  these  things  rr

come  to  pass,  Mark  13.  7-  John  14.  1,
Luke  1.  12.  Zacharias  was  /.  II  29.  Mary  was  /.
10.  41.  Martha,  thou  art  /.  about  many  things

24.  38.  why  are  ye  /.  and  why  do  thoughts  aris
John  5.  4.  an  angel  went  down  and  /.  the  watei

7.  I  have  no  man  when  water  is  /.  to  put  me
1 1. 3.3.  Jesus  groaned  and  was  /.  12.  2 7.  |  13.  2

Acts  2.  t  6.  the  multitude  were  /.  in  mind

15.  24.  some  that  went  from  us  have  /.  you

17.  8.  and  they  /.  the  people  and  the  rulers
2  Cor.  4.  8.  we  are  /.  on  every  side,  7-  5.

2  Thess.  1.  7-  and  to  you  that  are  /.  rest  with  m
2.  2.  that  ye  be  not  /.  neither  by  spirit,  by  wor
1  Pet.  3.  14.  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  nor  be  /.
TROUBLFDST.

Ezek.  32.  2.  and  thou  /.  the  waters  with  thy  fee
TROUBLFR.

I  Chr.  2. 7.  Achar,  the  /.  of  Israel,  who  transgres
TROUBLESOM  E.

Job  16.  +  2.  T  have  heard  /.  comforters  are  ye  a

20.  t  22.  every  hand  of  the  /.  shall  come  on  hii
1  ROUBLES'!’.

Mark  5.  35.  why  /.  thou  the  Master  any  furthe.
TROUBLETH.

1  Sam.  16.  15.  an  evil  spirit  from  God  /.  thee

1  Kings  18.  17 .  A  hab  said,  art  thou  lie  that /.  Isri
Job  22.  10.  therefore  sudden  fear  /.  thee,  snares, ,

23.  16.  God  maketh  my  heart  soft,  Almighty  /.
Prov.  11.  17.  he  that  is  cruel  /.  his  ow  n  flesh

29.  he  that  /.  his  own  house  shall  inherit  win

15.  27-  he  that  is  greedy  of  gain  /.  his  own  hoi
Dan.  4.  9.  1  know  that  no  secret /.  thee,  tell  im
Luke  18.  5.  because  this  widow  /.  me  I  w  ill  ave
Gal.  5.  10.  he  that  /.  you  shall  bear  his  judgnu
TROUBLING.

Job  3.  17.  there  the  wicked  cease  from  /.  and  we
John  5.  4.  who  stepped  in  first  after  /.  of  the  w ,
J  ROUBLOUS.

Dan.  9.  25.  the  wall  shall  be  built  again  in  /.  ti
I  ROUGH,  S.

Gen.  24.  20.  she  emptied  her  pitcher  into  the  /.

30.  38.  Jacob  set  the  rods  in  the  watering  /.
Exod.  2.  16.  they  filled  the  /.  to  water  theii  flon

8.  3.  the  frogs  shall  go  into  thy  kneading-/.

12.  34.  their  kneading-/,  bound  up  in  theii  clo

TROW.

Luke  17.  9.  doth  he  thank  that  servant  ?  I  /.  no
T R  U C  E-breakers .

2  Tim.  3.  3.  in  the  last  davs  men  shall  be  t.  brea

TRUE.

See  Signification  on  Troth.

Gen  42. 11.  we  are  /.  men,  31.  II  19.  if  ye  be  /.  1
33.  hereby  shall  1  know  that  ye  are  /.  men,  3
Deut.  17.  4.  if  ye  be  /.  and  thing  certain.  22.  2t
Josh.  2.  12.  swear  unto  me,  and  give  me  a  /.  tc
lluth  3.  12.  it  is  /.  that  1  am  thy  near  kinsman
2  'am.  7.  28.  thou  art  that  God,  and  thy  words  I

1  Kings  10.  6.  it  was  a  /.  report  1  heard.  2  Chr.  9
£2.  16.  tell  me  nothing  but  that  which  is  /.
Neh.  9.  13.  thou  gavest  them  /.  law  s,  good  stat
Psal.  19.  9.  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  /.
119.  160.  thy  word  is  /.  from  the  beginning
Prov.  14.25.  a  /.  witness  delivereth  souls
Jer.  42.  5.  the  Lord  be  a  /.  witness  between  ns
Ezek.  18.  8.  he  that  hath  executed  /.judgment
Dan.  3.  14.  is  it  /.  O  Shadrach,  do  not  \e  serv«

24.  /.  O  king  l|  6.  12.  king  said,  the  thing  is  /
8.  26.  vision  which  is  told  is  /.  shut  up  vision
10.  1.  a  tiling  was  revealed  and  the  thing  w'as
'/.ech.  7.  9.  execute  /.  judgment  and  shew  men
Mat.  22. 16.  we  know  that  thou  art  /.  Mark  12
I.uke  16. 11.  will  commit  to  your  trust  the  /.  rf
John  1.  9.  that  was  the  /.  light  which  lighteth  ev

4.  23.  w  hen  the  /.  worshippers  shall  worship  Fa
37.  and  herein  is  that  saying  /.  one  soweth

5.  .31.  if  1  witness  of  myself,  my  witness  is  no
32.  the  witness  which  he  witnessed)  of  me  is

6.32.  but  my  Father  giveth  you  the  t.  bread

7.  18.  the  same  is  /.  |l  8.  13.  thy  record  is  not  1

28.  he  that  sent  me  is  /.  w  horn  ye  know  not,  8

8.  14.  yet  my  record  is  /.  II  16.  my  judgment
17.  it  is  written,  the  testimony  of  two  men  i;

10.41.  all  thingsthat  John  spake  of  this  man  wt
15. 1.  1  am  the/,  vine,  my  Father  the  husband
19.  35.  he  bare  record,  and  his  record  N  t.  21. '.
Acts  12.  9.  wist  not  that  it  was  /.  which  was  d

2  Cor.  1.  18.  but  as  God  is  /.  our  word  was  not

6.  8.  approving  ourselves,  as  deceivers,  and  >
Eph.  4.  24.  new'  man  after  G.  is  created  in  /.  ho) i
Phil.  4.  3.  1  entreat  thee  also,  t.  yoke  fellow,

8.  whatsoever  things  are  /.  think  on  these  _

1  Tim.  3.  1.  this  is  a  /.  saying,  if  a  man  desin
Tit.  1.  13.  this  witness  is’/,  w  herefore  rebukt
Ueb.  8.  2.  /.  tabernacle  which  the  Lord  pitche
9  24.  holy  places  which  are  the  figures  of  the
10.  22.  let  us  draw  near  with  a  ..  neart  in  ful
1  Pet.  5.  12.  that  this  is  th“  /.  grace  of  God  whi


T  I?  V


TRU


T  R  L'


2  /V«  2.  22.  according' to  the  /.  proverb,  the  doe  is

1  John  2.  8.  which  tiling  is  /.  in  him  and  in  you,  be¬

cause  darkness  past,  the  /.  light  now  shineth

5.  20.  that  we  may  know  him  that  is  /.  and  we  are

in  him  that  is  /.  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ

3  John  12.  and  we  know  that  our  record  is  /.

Rev.  3.  7-  these  things  saith  the  holy,  he  that  is  /.

14  these  things  saith  the  faithful  and  /.  witness

6.  10.  they  cried,  how  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  /.  ?
In.  3.  just  and  /.  are  thy  ways,  thou  king  of  saints
16.  7.  /•  and  righteous  are  thy  judgments,  19.  2.
19. 9.  these  are  the  /.  sayings  of  God,  22. 6.

1 1 .  he  that  sat  upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  T.

21.5.  write,  for  these  words  are  /.  and  faithful
T HUE  God.

2  Chron.  15.  3.  Israel  hath  been  without  the  /.  God
Jer .  10.  lo.  the  Ix>rd  is  the  /.  God,  the  living  God
John  17.  3.  this  eternal  life,  to  know  the  only  t.  God
1  Thess.  1 . 9.  turned  from  idols  to  serve  the  /.  God

1  John  5.  20.  this  is  the  /.  God  and  eternal  life
TRULY.

Gen.  24.  49.  and  now  if  ye  will  deal  /.  47.  29.

48.  19.  /.  his  younger  brother  shall  he  greater
Nu m.  14.21.  as  /.  as  1  live,  saith  the  Lord,  28.
Dent.  1  4.  22.  thou  shalt  /.  tithe  the  increase  of  seed
Josh.  2.  14.  that  we  will  deal  /.  and  kindly  with  thee

24.  /.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  all  the  land
Judg.  9. 16  if  ye  have  done  /.  and  sincerely,  19.

1  Sam.  20. 3.  /.  there  is  but  step  between  me  and  dea.
Job  36-  4.  for  /.  my  words  shall  not  be  false
Psal.  62. 1.  /.  my  soul  waiteth  upon  God,  from  him
73.  1. /.  God  is  good  to  Israel,  even  to  such  as  are
116. 16.  /.  1  am  thy  servant,  1  am  thy  servant
P/oi  .  12.22.  they  that  deal  /.  are  his  delight
Eccl.  11.7.  /•  the  light  issweet.and  pleasant  thing
Jer.  3.  23.  /.  in  vain  is  salvation  hoped  for  from  hills,

/.  in  the  Lord  God  is  the  salvation  of  Israel
10. 19.  /.  this  is  a  grief  and  l  must  bear  it

28.  9.  he  known  that  the  Lord  hath  /.  sent  him
Ezek.  18.  9.  hath  kept  my  judgments  to  deal  /.
Mic.3.H.  but  /.  I  am  full  of  power  to  declare
Mat.  9.  37.  the  harvest  t.  is  plenteous,  Luke  10.  2.

17. 11.  Elias  t.  shall  first  come  and  restore  all  things
27  .  54.  saying,  t.  this  was  the  Son  of  God
Mark  14.  38.  the  spirit  t.  is  ready,  the  flesh  is  weak
Luke  20.21.  but  thou  teachest  the  way  of  God  t.

22. 22.  t.  Son  of  man  goeth  as  it  was  determined
John  4. 18.  I  have  no  husband,  in  that  saidst  thou  t.
17-  +  19.  that  they  also  might  be  t.  sanctified
Acts  1.  5.  for  John  t.  baptized  with  water,  ye  shall
3.  22.  for  Moses  t.  said  to  the  fathers,  a  prophet

5.  23.  the  prison  t.  found  we  shut  with  safety

2  Cor.  12. 12.  t.  signs  of  an  apostle  were  wrought
Heb.  7.  23.  and  they  t.  were  many  priests,  because

11.  15.  t.  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that  country
1  John  1. 3.  t.  eur  fellowship  is  with  the  Father
TRUMP.

1  Cor.  15.  52.  at  the  last  t.  the  dead  shall  be  raised

1  Thess.  4.  16.  Lord  shall  descend  with  the  t.  of  God

I  RUMPEL

See  Signification  on  Feast.

Exod.  19.  16.  the  voice  of  the  t.  exceeding  loud
2<>.  18.  the  people  heard  the  noise  of  the  t.

Sum.  10.  4.  and  if  they  blow  but  with  one  t.
Iudg.“.  16.  and  he  put  a  t.  in  every  man’s  hand

18.  when  I  blow  with  a  t.  then  blow  ye  also
Psal.  81.  3.  blow  up  the  t.  in  the  new  moon
Isa.  18.  3.  and  when  he  bloweth  a  t.  hear  ve

27. 13.  that  the  great  t.  shall  be  blown  and  come

58.  1.  cry  aloud,  lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  t.

Jet.  4.5.  blow  ye  the  t.  in  the  land,  cry,  gather

6.  1.  blow  the  t.  in  Tekoah  and  set  up  a  sign
51.2?.  blow  the  t.  among  the  nations,  prepare
Ezek.  7. 14.  they  have  blown  the  t.  to  make  ready
33.  3.  if  he  blow  the  t.  and  warn  the  people

6.  but  if  the  watchman  blow  not  the  1.

Hoc.  5.  8.  blow  ye  the  t.  in  Hamah,  cry  aloud

8.  1.  set  the  t.  to  thy  mouth,  he  shall  come
Joel  2.  1.  blow  the  t.  in  Ziou,  sound  alarm,  15.
Amos  3. 6.  shall  at.  be  blown,  and  people  not  afraid  ?
Zeph.  1. 16.  a  day  of  the  t.  against  fenced  cities
Zech.  9. 14.  and  "the  Lord  God  shall  blow  the  t.
Rev.  1. 10.  1  heard  a  great  voice,  as  of  a  t.  4.  1.

8.  13.  by  reason  of  the  other  voices  of  the  t.

9.  14.  saying  to  the  sixth  angel  which  had  the  t.

See  Blew,  Sound,  Subst.  Verb.
TRUMPETS.

Lev.  23.  24.  a  memorial  of  blowing  t.  Sum.  29. 1.
Sum.  10.  2.  make  two  t.  of  silver  of  a  whole  piece

8.  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  blow  with  the  t.

9.  then  ve  shall  blow  an  alarm  with  the  t.

10.  shall  blow  with  t.  over  your  burnt-offerings
31.  6.  and  with  the  t.  to  blow  in  his  hand

Josh.  6.  4.  the  priests  shall  blow  with  the  t.

8.  priests  bearing  the  seven  t.  of  rams’  horns

9.  the  priests  that  blew  with  the  t.  13,  16,  20.
Judg.  7.8.  the  two  hundred  men  took  t.  16.

!8.  when  I  blow,  then  blow  ye  the  t.  on  every  side

19.  they  blew  the  t.  brake  the  pitchers,  20,  22.

2  Kings  9. 13.  they  blew  with  t.  saying,  Jehu  is  king

11.  14.  and  trumpeters  blew  with  t.  and  cymbals

12.  13.  were  not  made  for  house  of  the  Lord  t.

1  Chron.  13.8.  played  with  cymbals  and  with  t.
15.24.  the  priests  did  blow  with  t.  before  ark  of

God,  16.  6,  42.  2  Chr.  5.  12.  |  7.  6.  I  13.  12,  14.

28.  all  Israel  brought  up  the  ark  with /.  and  cymb.

2  Chron.  5.  13.  when  they  lift  up  their  voice  w  ith  t.

29.  27.  the  song  of  the  Lord  began  with  the  t.

Job  39.  25.  the  horse  saith  among  the  t.  ha.  ha
Psal.  98.  6.  with  t.  make  a  joyful  noise  before  Lord

See  Seven.

TRUMPETERS.

2  Kings  1 1 .  14.  princes  and  t.  stood  by  the  king
2  Chum.  5. 13.  as  the  t.  and  singers  were  as  one
'."9.  28.  the  singers  sang,  and  the  t.  sounded
Rev.  18.22.  the  voice  of  t.  shall  be  heard  no  more
TRUST.

1  Chron.  9.  +  22.  whom  David  did  ordain  in  their  t.

+  26.  the  four  chief  porters  were  in  their  t.

+  31.  Mattithiah  had  the  t.  over  things  in  pans
Job  8.  14.  and  whose  t.  shall  be  a  spider’s  web
15.  15.  behold,  he  putteth  no  t.  in  his  saints


Psal.  40.  4.  blessed  is  he  that  maketh  the  Lord  his/.
71.  5.  O  Lord  God,  thou  artmy  t.  from  my  youth
141.  8.  in  thee  is  my  t.  leave  not  my  soul  destitute
Prov.  22.  19.  th.it  thy  1 .  may  be  in  the  Lord

28.  25.  that  puts  his  t.  in  the  Lord  shall  be  made  fat

29.  25.  who  putteth  his  t.  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe
Isa.  30.  3.  the  t.  in  Egypt  shall  he  your  confusion
57.  13.  that  putteth  /.  in  me  shall  possess  the  land
Luke  16.  11.  commit  to  your  t.  the  true  riches  ?

2  Cor.  3.  4.  such  t.  have  we  thro’  Christ  to  God-ward

1  Tim.  1.  11.  gospel,  which  was  committed  to  my  t.
6.  2J.  keep  that  which  is  committed  to  thy  t.

See  Put.

TRUST,  Verb.

Ruth  2  12.  under  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to  t.

2  Sam.  22.  3.  in  him  will  1 1.  Psal.  18.  2.  I  91.  2.

31.  a  buckler  to  all  that  t.  in  him,  Psal.  18.  30.

2  Kings  18.  20.  now  on  whom  dost  thou  t.  that  re-
bellest  against  me  ?  2  Chr.  32.  10.  Isa.  36.  5.

21.  so  is  Pharaoh  to  all  that  t.  in  him,  Isa.  36.  6.

22.  if  ye  say,  we  t.  in  Lord  our  God,  Isa.  36.  7-

30.  neither  fet  Hezekiah  make  you  t.  in  the  Lord,

saying,  Lord  will  deliver  us,  Isa.  36.  15.
Job  13.  15.  though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  1  t.  in  him
15.  31.  let  not  him  that  is  deceived  t.  in  vanity
35.  14.  judgment  is  before  him,  therefore  t.  in"  him
39-  11.  wilt  thou/,  him  because  he  is  strong'

Psal.  20.  7.  some  /.  in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses

25.  2.  I  /.  in  thee,  31.  6.  |  55.  23.  1  56.  3.  I  143.8.

31.  19.  thou  hast  wrought  for  them  that  /.  in  thee
34.  22.  none  that  /.  in  him  shall  he  desolate

37.  3.  /.  in  the  Lord,  5. 1  40.  3. 1  62.  8. 1  1 15.  9,  10,
11.  Prov.  3.  5.  Isa.  26.  4.

40.  he  shall  save  them,  because  they  /.  in  him
44.  6.  I  will  not  /.  in  my  bow,  nor  shall  sword  save

49.  6.  they  that  /.  in  their  wealth,  and  boast
52.  8. 1  /.  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and  ever

61.  4.  I  will  /.  in  the  covert  of  thy  wings

62.  10.  /.  not  in  oppression,  become  not  vain
64.  10.  the  righteous  shall  be  glad,  and  /.  in  him
91.  4.  and  under  his  wings  shalt  thou  /.

118.  8.  it  is  better  to  /.  in  the  Lord  than  to  put,  9.

119.  42.  I  shall  have  to  answer,  for  1  /.in  thy  word
125.  1.  that  /.in  the  Lord  shall  he  as  mount  Zion
144.  2.  my  fortress,  my  shield,  and  he  in  whom  I  /.

Prov.  31.  11.  the  heart  of  her  husband  doth  /.  in  her
Isa.  12.2. God  my  sal  vation,  I  will /.and  not  be  afraid
14.  32.  Zion,  and  the  poor  of  his  people  shall  /.  in  it

30.  2.  and  to  /.  in  the  shadow’  of  Egypt

12.  because  ye/,  in  oppression  and  perverseness

31.  1.  and  /.  in  chariots,  because  they  are  many
42.  17.  be  ashamed  that/,  in  graven  images

50.  10.  let  him  /.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  stay

51.  5.  wait  on  me,  and  on  mine  arm  shall  they  /.

59.  4. they  /.  in  vanity  and  speak  lies,  they  conceive

Jer.  7. 4.  /.  ye not  in  lying  words,  saying,  the  temple
8.  ye  /.  in  lying  words  thatcannot  profit
14.  which  is  called  by  my  name,  wherein  yet.

9.  4.  take  ye  heed,  and  /.  ye  not  in  any  brother
28.  15.  makest  this  people  to  /.  in  a  lie,  29.  31 .

46.  25.  I  will  punish  Pharaoh  and  all  that  /.  in  him
49.  11.  them  alive,  and  let  thy  widows /.in  me
Esek.  16.  15.  but  thou  didst  /.  in  thy  beauty
33.  13.  if  he  /.to  his  own  righteousness  and  commit
Hos.  10.  13.  because  thou  didst  /.  in  thy  way
Amos  6.  1.  them  that  /.  in  the  mountain  of  Samaria
Mic.  7-  5.  /.  ye  not  in  a  friend,  put  not  confidence
Nah.  1.  7.  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  /.  in  him
Zeph.  3.  12.  they  shall  /.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
Mat.  12.  21.  and  in  his  name  shall  the  (’entiles  /.

Rom.  15.  12.

Mark  10.  24.  how  hard  for  them  that  /.  in  riches
Johnb.  45.  one  thataccuseth  Moses,  in  whom  yet.
Rom.  15.24.  for  1  /.to  see  you  in  my  journey

1  Cor.  16.  7-  but  I  /.  to  tarry  a  while  with  you

2  Cor.  1. 9.  that  we  should  not  /.  in  ourselv.but  in  G.

10.  in  whom  we/,  that  he  will  yet  deliver  us

13.  1  /.  you  shall  acknowledge  even  to  the  end
5. 11.  1  /.  are  made  manifest  in  your  consciences

10.  7.  if  any  man  t.  to  himself,  that  he  is  Christ’s

13.  6.  1  /.ye  shall  know  we  are  not  reprobates

Phil.  3.  4.  if  any  thinketh  he  hath  whereof  to  /.

1  Tim.  4.  10.  because  we  /.  in  the  living  God

6.  17.  that  they  /.  not  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in
Heb.  13.  18.  for  we  /.  we  have  a  good  conscience

2  John  12.  but  1  /.  to  come  unto  you  and  speak

3  John  14.  but  1  /.  I  shall  shortly  see  thee  and  speak

TRUSTED.

Petit.  32.37.  where  is  their  rock  in  whom  they  t.?
Judg.  11.  20.  Sihon  /  not  Israel  to  pass  through

20.  36.  because  they  /.  to  the  liers  in  wait
2  Kings  18.  5.  he  /.  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel
Ps.  13.5.  but  1  have  /.  in  thy  mercy,  my  heart  shall
22.  4.  our  fathers/,  in  thee;  they  have  /.  and  thou

didst  deliver  them,  5.

8.  he  /.on  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him

26.  1.  1  have  /.  also  in  the  Lord,  28.  7- 1  31.  14.

33.  21.  because  we  haye /.  in  Ids  holy  name

41.  9.  mine  own  familiar  friend  in  whom  1  /.
52.7-  but  /.  in  the  abundance  of  his  riches
78.22.  because  they  /.  not  in  his  salvation
Isa.  47-  1".  for  thou  hast  /.  in  thy  wickedness
Jer.  13.  25.  because  thou  hast  /.  in  falsehood

48.  7.  tor  because  thou  hast  /.  in  thy  works

49.  4.  O  daughter  that  /.  in  her  treasures,  saying
Dan.  3.  28.  G.  delivered)  his  servants  that  /.  in  him
Zeph.  3.  2.  she  /.  not  in  the  I  .ol  d,  she  drew  not  near
I\iat.  27-  43.  he  /.  in  God,  let  him  deliver  him  now
Luke  11.22.  taketh  all  his  armour  wherein  he  /.

18.  9-  he  spake  to  certain  which  /.  in  themselves
24.  21.  we  /.  it  had  been  he  that  redeemed  Israel
Eph.  1.  12.  praise  of  his  glory,  who  first  /.  in  Christ
13.  in  whom  ye  also/,  alter  ye  heard  the  word
2  Tim.  1.  +  12.  for  1  know  whom  1  have/.

1  Pet.  3.  5.  holy  women  who  /.  in  God,  adorned

TRUSTEDST.

Peut.  28.  52.  thv  walls  come  down  wherein  thou  /.
Jer. 5. 17-  shall  impoverish  thy  cities  whereinthou  /.

12.  5.  if  in  the  land  of  peace  wherein  thou  /.
THUS  I  ES  I  .

2  Kings  18.  19.  thus  saith  the  king  of  Assyria,  what

confidence  is  this  wherein  thou  /.  '!  Isa  36.  4.


2  Kings  18.21./.  on  staff  of  brulseo  reed  Isa.  30.  e*

19.  10.  let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou  t.  La.  37.  lt>.

.TRUST El  II.

Job  24.  1 22.  he  riseth  up  and  /.  not  his  own  life
40.  23.  he  /.that  he  can  draw'  up  Jordan  into  his
Psal.  21. 7-  for  the  king  /.  in  the  Lord  thro’  mercy

32.  10.  that  /.  in  the  Lord  mercy  shall  compass  him
34.  8.  Lord  is  good,  blessed  is  the  man  that  /.  iis
him,  84. 12.  Prov.  16.  20.  Jer.  17.  7
57.  1.  be  merciful  unto  me,  for  my  soul  /.  in  tiiee-
86.  2.  O  my  God,  save  thy  servant  that  /.  in  thee
115.  8.  so  is  every  one  that/,  in  them.  135.  18.
Prov.  11.  28.  he  that  /.  in  his  ri,  lies  shall  fall
28.  26.  he  that  /.  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool
Isa.  26.  3.  will  keep  him  in  peace  bee.  he  /.  in  thee-
Jer.  17.  5.  cursed  he  the  man  that  /.  in  man
llah.  2.  18.  the  maker  of  his  work  /.  therein

1  Tim.  5.  5.  she  that  is  a  w  idow  indeed,  /.  in  God'

TRUSI1NG.

Psal.  112.  7- his  heart  is  fixed, /.in  the  Lord

TRUS'l  Y.

Job  12.  20.  he  removeth  away  the  speech  of  the  /.

I  H  U  ’l  II

Is  taken,  fl)  For  what  is  opposed  to  a  falsehood,  us
lie,  a  deceit.  Prov.  12.  17.  lie  that  speaketb
truth,  showeth  forth  righteousness  ;  hut  a  false
witness  deceit.  And  St.  Paul  says,  I  speak  the
truth  in  Christ,  1  lie  not.  (2)  lor  fidelity,  sin¬
cerity,  and  punctuality  in  keeping  promises.  Ge¬
nerally  to  truth,  taken  in  this  sense,  is  joined
mercy,  or  kindness,  as  in  Gen.  24.  27.  I.liezer ,
the  servant  of  Abraham ,  gives  thanks  to  God,  that
he  had  not  left  destitute  his  master  of  his  mercy
and  his  truth  :  he  hath  showed  him  his  mercy  w
giving  him  plenty  of  good  things,  and  his  truth  in
fulfilling  and  performing  all  his  promise >  to  him.
Or,  mercy  and  truth  may  express  a  stable,  con¬
stant,  and  permanent  meicy,  or  kindness  ;  that
is,  “  Blessed  he  the  Lord,  who  has  favoured  my
master  Abraham  in  so  constant  and  uniform  a
manner."  The  Psalmist  in  several  places  extols
the  mercy  and  truth  if  God.  It  is  his  mercy  that
prevents  and  promises,  and  it  is  his  truth  that  exe¬
cutes  and  performs.  In  Psal.  57-  10.  he  says,
Thy  mercy  is  great  unto  the  heavens,  and  thy
truth  unto  the  clouds.  This  expresses  their  great¬
ness,  immensity,  and  extent  ;  and  that  all  crea¬
tures  partake  of  them.  (.3)  Truth  is  put  for  the
true  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Gal.  3.  1.  W  ho  hath
bewitched  you,  that  you  should  not  obey  the
truth?  (4)  1  ruth  is  put  for  the  substance  of  the
types  and  ceremonies  of  the  law.  John  1.  17 .
'1  he  law  was  given  by  Moses,  hut  grai  e  and  truth
came  by  Jesus  Christ :  the  fulfilling  of  all  the  types
and  prophecies  in  the  law,  was  by  and  in  Christ.  So
in  John  14.  6.  1  am  the  truth.  “  1  am  the  truth
and  substance  of  all  the  types  and  shadows  of  the
law:"  or,  say  others,  “  1  am  the  great  doctor  of
my  church,  who  teach  them  what,  course  to  take  to ■
get  to  heaven."  {5)  True  is  put  for  reality,  and
is  opposed  to  that  which  is  not  original  and  of  it¬
self  Eph.  4.  21.  John  1.  9.  That  was  the  true
light  :  Christ  has  light  in  himself,  and  from  him¬
self  ;  he  is  the  original  fountain-light ,  from
whence  light  is  derived  to  all  others.  (63  I  rue
is  opposed  to  hypocrisy ,  dissimulation,  or  formal¬
ity.  Heh.  10.  22.  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true
heart  ;  that  is,  with  uprightness,  integrity,  and
sincerity  of  heart.

Gen.  24. 27.  hath  not  left  destitute  master  of  his  /.
32.  10.  I  am  not  wortny  of  the  least  of  all  the  /.

42.  16.  he  proved,  whether  there  be  any  /.  in  you
Exod.  18.  21.  men  of  /.  1 1 34 .  6.  Lord  abundant  in  /,
Peut.  13.  14.  behold,  if  it  be  /.  ||  32.  4.  a  God  of  /.

2  6 am.  2.  6.  the  Lord  shew  kindness  and  /.  to  you

15.  20.  return  thou,  mercy  and  /.  he  with  thee

1  Kings  17.24.  the  word  of  the  L.  in  thy  mouth  is  t..

2  K  in.  20. 19.  if  peace  K. /.  be  in  my  days,  Isa.  39. 8.
2  Chron.  18. 15.  that  thou  say  nothing  hut  the  /.

31.  20.  Hezekiah  wrought  that  which  w  as  /.

Neh.  9.  +  13.  and  thou  gavest  them  law  s  of  /.

Esth.  9.  30.  sent  letters  with  w  ords  of  peace  and  /.
Psal.  15.  2.  he  that  speaketh  the  /.  in  his  heart
25.  10.  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  /.

31.  5.  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  O  Lord  God  of/.
45.  4.  ride  thou  prosperously,  because  of  /.

51. 6.  thou  desirest/.  in  the  inward  parts

57.  3.  God  shall  send  forth  his  mercy  and  his  /.

60.  4.  banner  may  he  displayed  because  of  the /.

61. 7.  O  prepare  mercy  and  /.  which  may  preserve

85.  10.  mercy  and  /.  are  met  together,  righte.  peace

11./.  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth,  and  righteousn..

86.  15.  thou  art  plenteous  in  mercy  and  /.

89.  14.  mercy  and  /.shall  go  before  thy  face
91.  4.  his /.  shall  be  thy  shield  and  buckler
96.  13.  he  shall  judge  the  people  with  his/.

98.  3.  he  hath  remembered  his  mercy  and  his  /.
100.5.  his /.  endureth  to  all  generations,  117.2.
119-30.  1  have  chosen  the  way  of /.  thy  judgments

142.  and  thy  law  is  the  /.  151.

146.  6  the  T.ord  is  God  who  keepeth  /.  for  ever
Prov.  3.3.  let  not  mercy  and  /.  forsake  thee
8.  7-  for  my  mouth  shall  speak  /.  wickedness  abom..

12.  17-  he  that  speaks  /.  sheweth  righteousness
19-  the  lip  of  /.  shall  be  established  forever

14.  22.  mercy  and  /.  be  to  them  that  devise  good

16.  6.  by  mercy  and  /.  iniquity  is  purged,  by  fear

20.  28.  mercy  ami  /.  preserve  the  king,  his  throne
22.  21.  might  make  thee  know  the  certainty  of  t lie-

words  of /.  thou  mightest  answer  the  words  of  /.
2.3.  23.  buy  the  /.  and  sell  it  not,  also  wisdom
Eccl.  12.  10.  w  hat  was  written  were  w’ords  of  /.
l-a.  25.  1.  thy  counsels  are  faithfulness  and  /.

26  2.  the  nation  which  keepeth  /.  may  enter  in.

42.  3.  he  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto /.

43.  9-  or  let  them  hear,  and  say,  it  is  /.

59.  <•  nor  any  pleadeth  for  /.  they  speak  lies

14.  for  /.  is  fallen  in  the  street,  and  equity  canno/

15.  yea,  /,  faileth,  and  he  that  departed)  from  evil
Jer.  5.  1.  if  there  he  any  that  seeketh  the  /.

3.  <  >  Lord,  are  not  thine  eyes  upon  the  /.  ?

7.  28.  /.  is  perished  *nd  cut  ofl  trom  their  mouth

525


TRU


TUR


T  U  R


fer.  g.  3.  they  are  not  valiant  for  the  /.on  the  earth

5.  they  will  deceive  and  will  not  speak  the  /.

10.  t  10.  hut  the  lx>rd  is  the  God  of  /.

14.  t  13.  I  will  give  you  peace  of  /.  in  this  place
33.  6.  revealed  to  them  abundance  of  peace  and  /.
Dan.  4.37.  the  king  of  heaven,  all  whose  works  are/.

7.  16.  I  asked  him  the  /.  of  all  this,  10.

8.  12.  and  it  cast  down  the  /.  to  the  ground

10.  21.  which  is  noted  in  the  scripture  of  /.

11.  2.  and  now  will  1  shew  thee  the/,  behold
Hus.  4.  1.  there  is  no  /.  nor  mercy  in  the  land
Mic.  7.  20.  tliou  wilt  perform  the  /.  to  Jacob
Zech.  7.  t  9.  saying,  judge  judgment  of  /.  and  shew

8.  3.  Jerusalem  shall  be  called  a  city  of  /.

16.  speak  ye  every  man  the  /.  Eph.  4.  25.  execute

the  judgment  of  /.  and  peace  in  your  gates

19.  therefore  love  the  /.  and  peace
Mai.  2.  6.  the  law  of  /.  was  in  his  mouth
Jl/«/.15.27.she  said,  /.  Lord,  yet  dogs  eat  the  crumbs
Mark  5.  33.  the  woman  fearing  told  him  all  Ihe  /.

12. 32.  scribes  said, well,  Master,  thou  hast  said  the /.
John  l.  14.  the  only-begotten,  full  of  grace  and  /.

17.  but  grace  and  /.  came  by  Jesus  Christ

5.  33.  ye  sent  John,  he  bare  witness  unto  the  /.

8.32.  ye  shall  know  the  /.  the  /.  shall  make  you  free
40.  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that  told  you  the  /.

44.  abode  not  in  /.  because  there  is  no  /.  in  him

45.  because  1  tell  you  the  /.  ye  believe  me  not

46.  and  if  1  say  the  /.  why  do  ye  not  believe  ?

14.  6.  I  am  the  way,  and  the  /.  an  1  the  life

16.  7-  l  tell  you  /.  it  is  expedient  that  1  go  away

13.  the  Spirit  of  /.  will  guide  you  into  all  /.

17.  19.  they  might  be  sanctified  through  the  /.

18.  37-  1  came  that  I  should  bear  witness  to  the  /.

every  one  that  is  of  the  /.  heai  eth  my  voice
38.  Pilate  saith  unto  him,  what  is  /.  f
Acts  26.  25.  but  I  speak  forth  the  words  of  /.

Horn.  1.  18.  who  hold  the  /.  in  unrighteousness
25.  who  changed  the  /.  of  God  into  a  lie

2.  2.  the  judgment  of  God  i3  according  to  /.

8.  but  unto  them  that  do  not  obey  the  /.

20.  which  hast  the  form  of  the  t.  in  the  law

3.  7.  for  if  the  /.  of  God  hath  more  abounded

9.  1.  I  say  the  /.  in  Christ,  1  lie  not,  my  conscience

15.  8.  was  a  minister  of  circumcision  tor  /.  of  God

1  Cor.  5.  8.  but  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  /.
ZCor.AA.  but  by  manifestation  of  the  /.  commending

7.  14.  even  so  our  boasting  1  made  is  found  a  /.

11.  lo.  as  the  /.  of  Christ  is  in  me  none  shall  stop

12.  6.  1  shall  not  be  a  fool,  for  1  will  say  the  /.

13. 8.  we  can  do  nothing  against  /.  but  for  the  /.

Gal.  2.  5.  the  /.  of  the  gospel  might  continue  with

14.  they  walked  not  according  to  /.  of  the  gospel

3.  1.  that  ye  should  not  obey  the  /.  5.  7.

4.  16.  your  enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  t.  ?
Eph.  4.  15.  but  speaking  the  /.  in  love,  may  grow

21.  have  been  taught  by  him  as  the/,  is  in  Jesus
t  24.  after  God  is  created  in  holiness  of/.

5.  9.  for  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  /.

6.  14.  stand  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  /.

2  Thess.  2.  10.  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  /.

12.  might  be  damned,  who  believed  not  /.

1.3.  hath  chosen  to  salvation,  thro’  belief  of  the  /.

1  Tim.  2.  4.  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  /.

7.  I  speak  the  /.  in  Christ  and  lie  not

3.  15.  the  church,  the  pillar  an  I  "round  of  /.

4.  3.  to  be  received  of  them  which  know  the  /.

6.  5.  men  of  corrupt  minds,  and  destitute  of  the  /.

2  Tim.  2.  18.  who  concerning  the  /.  have  erred
25.  give  repentance  to  acknowledging  of  the  /.

3.  7-  not  able  to  come  to  the  knovviedgeof  the  /

8.  as  Jaunes  and  Jambres,  so  do  these  resist  the  /.

4.  4.  they  shall  turn  away  their  ears  from  the  /.
Tit.  1.  1.  according  to  the  acknowledging  of  /.

14.  commandments  of  n  en  that  turn  from  the  /.
Heb.  10.  26.  after  we  received  knowledge  of  the  /.
Jam.  3.  14.  glory  not,  and  lie  not  against  the  /.

5.  19.  brethren,  if  any  of  you  err  from  the/.

1  Pet.  1. 22.  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying  /.

2  Pet.  2.  2.  the  way  of  /.  shall  be  evil  spoken  of

4  John  1.  6.  walk  in  darkness  we  lie  and  do  not  the  /.
8.  we  deceive  ourselves,  the  /.  is  not  in  us
2.  4.  the  /.  is  not  in  him  ||  27-  is  /.  and  is  no  lie
21.  I  have  not  written,  because  ye  know  not  the  /.

but  because  ye  know  it,  and  no  lie  is  of  the  /.

5.  19.  and  hereby  we  know  that  we  are  of  the  /.

5.  6.  beareth  witness,  because  the  Spirit  is  /.

Z  John  l.  but  also  all  they  that  have  known  the  /.

2.  for  the  /.  sake  that  dwelled)  in  us,  and  with  us
?  John  3.  came  and  testified  of  the/,  that  is  in  thee
8.  that  we  might  be  fellow-helpers  to  the  /.

12.  hath  good  report  of  all  men  and  of  the  /.

In  TRUTH.

Josh.  24.  14.  serve  him  in  t.  1  .Sam.  12.  24.

Judg.  9.  15.  if  in  t.  ye  anoint  me  king  over  you
!  Kings  2.  4.  walk  in  t.  ||  3.  6.  as  he  walked  in  t.

Z  Kings  20.  3.  remember  how  I  have  walked  in  /.

1 Psal.  33.  4.  all  his  works  are  done  in  t  *11.  8.

37.  t  3.  shaltdwell,  and  in  t.  thoushalt  be  fed
132.  11.  the  Loid  hath  sworn  in  t.  to  David
145.  18.  Lord  is  nigh  to  all  that  call  upon  him  in  t.
Isa.  10. 20.  shall  stay  on  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  t.

16.  5.  he  shall  sit  upon  it  in  t.  judging  and  seeking
48.  1.  make  mention  of  God  of  Israel,  but  not  in  /.
61.  8.  I  will  direct  their  work  int.  and  make
Jer.  4.  2.  thou  shalt  swear,  the  Lord  liveth  in  t.

32.  t  41.  1  will  plant  them  in  this  land  in  t.

Zech.  8.8.  I  will  be  their  God  in  /.-and  righteousness
Mat.  22.16.  teachest  the  way  of  G.  in  t.  Mark  12.14.
John  4.  23.  shall  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  t.  24.
2  Cor.  7.  14.  as  we  speak  all  things  to  you  in  /.

Phil.  1.  18.  whether  in  t.  Christ  is  preached
Gol.  1.  6.  since  ye  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  t.

1  Thess.  2.  IS.  but  as  it  is  in  t.  the  word  of  God

1  John  3.  18.  let  us  not  love  in  tongue,  but  in  t.

2  John  3.  the  Son  of  the  Father,  in  t.  and  love

4. 1  rejoiced,  that  1  found  of  thy  children  walking
in  t.  as  commanded  from  the  Father,  3  John  A.
In  the  TRUTH.

Psal.  69.  13.  hear  me  in  the  t.  of  thy  salvation
John  8.  44.  he  was  a  murderer  and  abode  not  in  t.

I  Cor.  13.  6.  but  charity  rejoiceth  in  the  t.

526


2  Pet.  1. 12.  tho’  ye  be  established  in  the  present  /.

2  John  1 .  elect  lady,  whom  1  lo  e  in  the  /.  3  John  1.

3  John  3.  even  as  thou  walkest  in  the  t.

Of  a  TRUTH.

1  Sam.  21.  5.  of  a  /.  women  have  been  kept  from  us

2  Kings  19.  17.  of  a.  t.  Lord,  the  kings  of  Assyria

have  destroyed  the  nations,  Isa.  37.  18.
Job  9.  2.  1  know  it  is  so  of  a  t.  but  how  should  man
Isa.  5.  9.  of  a  t.  many  houses  shall  be  desolate
Jer.  26.  15.  for  of  a  t.  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  you
Dan.  2.  47-  of  a  t.  it  is,  your  God  is  a  God  of  gods
Mat.  14.  33.  of  a  /.  thou  art  the  Son  of  God
Luke  4.  25.  but  l  tell  you  of  a  t.  9.  27.

12.  44.  of  at.  I  say  unto  you  he  will  make,  21.  3.

22.  59.  of  a  t.  this  fellow  also  was  with  him
John  6.  14.  this  is  of  a  /.that  prophet,  7  •  40.

Acts  4.  27 .  of  a  t.  aeainst  thy  holy  child  Jesus
10. 34.  of  a  /.  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter

1  Cor.  14.  25.  will  report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a.  t.

See  Spirit.

Thy  TRUTH.

Psal.  25.  5.  lead  me  in  thy  t.  and  teach  me
26.  3.  before  my  eyes  and  1  have  walked  in  thyt.
30.  9.  shall  the  dust  praise  and  declare  thy  t.  ?

40.  10.  and  thy  t.  from  the  great  congregation
11.  let  thy  t.  continually  preserve  me
43.  3.  send  out  thy  light  and  thy  /.  let  them  lead
51.  5.  to  mine  enemies,  cut  them  off  in  thy  /.

57.  10.  and  thy  t.  unto  the  clouds,  108.  4.

71.  22.  1  will  praise  thy  1. 1|  86. 1 1.  will  walk  in  thy  t.
89.  49.  which  thou  swarest  to  David  in  thy  t.

115.  I .  to  thy  name  give  glory  for  thy  t.  sake,  138.  2.
Isa.  38.  18.  that  go  into  the  pit  cannot  hope  for  thy  /.

19.  the  father  to  children  shall  make  known  thy  /.
Dan.  9.  13.  that  we  might  understand  thy  t.

John  17. 17.  sanctify  them  through  thy  /.  thy  word
IVord  of  TRUTH.

Psal.  119.  43.  take  not  word  oft.  out  of  my  mouth

2  Cor.  6.7.  approving  ourselves  by  the  word  of  t.
Eph.  1.  13.  after  him  that  ye  heard  the  word  if  t.  '
Col.  1,5.  whereof  ye  hearo  before  in  the  word  of  t.

2  Tim.  2. 15.  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  t.

Jam.  1. 18.  of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  by  wordof  t.
TRY.

Judg.  7.  4.  and  I  will  /.  them  for  thee  there
2  Chron. 31.  31.  howbeit  God  left  him  to  /.  him
Job  7. 18.  that  thou  shouldest  /.  him  every  moment
12.  11.  doth  not  the  ear  /,  words  and  mouth  taste  i
Psal.  11.  4.  his  eye  lids  /.  the  children  of  men
26.  2.  /.  my  reins  and  my  heart  ||  139.  23.  /.  me
Jer.  6.  27.  that  thou  mayest  know  and  /.  their  way

9.  7-  I  will  melt  them  and  /.  them,  Zech.  13.  9.

17.  10.  1  the  Lord  search  the  heart,  /.  Ihe  reins
Lam.  3.  40.  let  us  search  and  /.  our  ways,  and  turn
Dan.  11.35.  some  of  them  shall  fall  to  /.  them
1  Cor.  3.  13.  the  fire  shall  /.  every  man’s  work
Phil.  1.  f  10.  ye  may  /.  things  that  are  excellent
l  Pet.  A.  12.  the  fiery  trial  which  is  to  /.  you

1  John  4.  1.  /.  the  spirits  whether  they  are  of  God
Rev.  3. 10.  hour  of  temptation  to  /.  them  on  earth

TRIED.

Dent.  21.  5.  by  the  Levites  shall  every  stroke  be  /.

2  Sam.  22.  31 .  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  /.  Psal.  18.  30.
Job  23. 10.  when  he  hath  /.  me,  1  shall  come  as  gold

34.  36.  my  desire  is  that  Job  may  be  /.  to  the  end
Psal.  12.  6.  as  silver  is  /.  in  a  furnace  of  earth
17  -  3.  thou  hast  /.  me  and  shalt  find  nothing
66.  10.  for  thou,  O  God,  hast  /.  us,  as  silver  is  /.
105.  19.  the  word  of  the  Lord  /.  him  *

119.  +  140.  thy’  word  is  /.  therefore  1  love  it
Isa.  28.  16.  behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  /.  stone
Jer.  12.  3.  thou  hast  /.  mine  heart  towards  thee
Dan.  12. 10.  many  shall  be  purified  and  /.

Zech.  13.  9.  and  1  will  try  them  as  gold  is  /.

Heb.  11. 17.  by  faith  Abraham  when  he  was  /.

Jam.  1.  12.  when  /.  he  shall  receive  the  crown
1  Pet.  1.7.  than  of  gold,  though  it  be  /.  with  fire
Rev.  2.  2.  hast/,  them  which  say  they  are  apostles

10.  cast  some  of  ymu  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be  /.
3. 18. 1  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  /.  in  the  fire
Till  EST.

1  Chron.  29. 17-  I  know  that  thou  /.  the  heart
Jer.  11.  20.  O  Lord,  that  /.  the  reins  anil  heart

20.  12.  but,  O  Lord  Qf  hosts,  that  /.  the  righteous
TRI  ETH.

Job  34.  3.  ear  /.  words,  as  the  mouth  tasteth  meat
Psal.  7.9.  the  righteous  God  /.  the  hearts  and  reins
11.5.  the  Lord  /.  the  righteous,  hateth  the  wicked
Prov.  1".  3.  furnace  for  gold,  but  Lord  /.  the  hearts
1  Thess.  2.  4.  not  men,  but  God  who  /.  our  hearts
TRY  IMG.

Jam.  1.  3.  the  /.  of  your  faith  worketh  patience

TUMBLED.

Judg.  7. 13.  a  cake  of  barley  bread  /.  into  the  host
TUMULT.

1  Sam.  4.  14.  what  meaneth  the  noise  of  this  /.  ?

2  Sam.  18.  29.  I  saw  a  /.  but  knew  not  w  hat  it  was
2  Kings  19. 28.  because  they  rage  against  me  and  thy

/.  is  come  up  into  mine  ears,  Isa.  37.  29.
Psal.  65.  7-  which  stilleth  the  /.  of  the  people
74.  23.  the  /.  of  those  that  rise  up  against  thee
83.  2.  for,  lo,  thine  enemies  make  a  /.

Isa.  33.  3.  at  the  noise  of  the  /.  the  people  fled
Jer.  11.  16.  with  noise  of  a  great  /.  he  kindled  fire
llos.  10. 14.  therefore  shall  /.  rise  among  thy  people
Amos’!. 1.  and  Moab shall  die  with  /.  with  shouting
Zech.  14.  13.  a  great  /.  from  the  Lord  among  them
Mat.  27-  24.  but  rather  a/,  w  as  made,  he  took  water
Mark  5.  38.  he  seeth  the  /.  and  them  that  wept
Acts  21.34.  he  could  not  know  the  certainty  tor  /.
24. 18.  neither  with  multitude,  nor  with  t.

TUM  ULTS.

Amos  3.  9.  behold  the  great  /.  in  the  midst  thereof
2  Cor.  6.  5.  approving  ourselves  as  ministers  in  /.

12.  20.  lest  there  be  whisperings,  swelliirgs,  /.

TUMULTUOUS.

Isa.  13.  4.  a  /.  noise  of  the  kingdoms  gathered
22.2.  thou  that  art  a  /.  city,  a  joyous  city
Jer.  48.  45.  shall  devour  the  head  of  the  /.  ones
TURM.

Esth.  2. 12.  when  every  maid’s  /.  was  come  to  go  in
15.  now  when  the/,  of  Esther  was  come  to  go  in


TURN,  Kerb.

Gen.  24.  49.  that  1  may  /.  to  the  right  hand  or  left
Exod.  23.  27.  make  thine  enemies  /.  their  backs
32.  12.  /.  from  thy  fierce  w  rath  and  repent  of  evil
Lev.  19.  4.  /.  ye  not  unto  idols,  nor  make  gods
Num.  14.  25.  tomorrow  /.  you,  get  to  wilderness

20.  17.  we  will  not/,  to  the  right  hand  nor  left

21.  22.  we  will  not./,  into  the  fields  or  vineyards

22.  23.  he  smote  the  ass  to  /.  her  into  the  way

26.  where  was  no  way  to  /.  to  the  right  or  left
Dent.  1.7. /.you,  and  go  to  the  mount  of  the  Amorites

40.  and  /.  ye,  take  you  journey  into  the  w  ilderness

13.  17.  that  Lord  may  /.  from  fierceness  of  his  anger

14.  25.  then  shalt  /.  it  into  money  and  bind  it  up

30.  3.  then  the  Lord  will  /.  their  captivity

31.  20.then  will  they  /.  to  other  gods  and  serve  them
Josh.  1.7./.  not  from  it  to  the  right  hand  or  left

22.  23.  an  altar  to  /.  from  following  the  Lord,  29.
24.  20.  then  lie  will  /.  and  do  you  hurt  and  consume
Judg.  20.  8.  nor  w  ill  any  of  us  /.  into  his  house

1  Sam.  14.  7-  t.  thee,  behold,  I  am  with  thee
22.  17.  /.  and  slay  the  priests  of  the  Lord,  18.

2  Sam.  14.  19.  none  can  /.  to  the  right  or  left  hand
24.  the  king  said,  let  him  /.  to  his  ow  n  house

15.  31.  Lord,  /.  Ahithophel’s  counsel  to  foolishness

1  Kings 8.35./. from  their  sin, 2  C7uow.6.26,37.  |  7.14
9.  6.  if  you  shall  at  all  /.  from  following  me

17.3.  get  hence,  /.  thee  eastward  and  hide  thyseli

22.  34.  he  said,  /.thine  hand,  2  Chron.  18.  33.

2  Kings  9.  18.  and  Jehu  said,  /.  thee  behind  me,  19.
17.  13.  /.  ye  from  your  evil  ways  and  keep  my

commandments,  Jer.  18.  8. 1  26.  3.  Zech.  ) .  3.  4.

1  Chron.  12.23.  to/,  the  kingdom  of  Saul  to  him

2  Chron.  .35.  22.  but  Josiah  would  not  /.  his  face
Neh.  1.  9.  if  ye  /.  and  keep  my  commandments,

Ezek.  3.  20.  |  18.  21.  I  33.  11,  14,  19.
4. 4.  and  /.  their  reproach  on  their  own  head
9.  26.  prophets  w  Inch  testified  to  /.  them  to  thee
Job  5.  1.  and  to  which  of  the  saints  wilt  thou  /.  ?
14.  6.  /.  from  him  that  he  may  rest  till  he  shall

23.  13.  but  he  is  in  one  mind,  and  who  can  /.  him  ?

24.  4.  they  /.  the  needy  out  of  the  way  ,  the  poor
Psal.  4.  2.  how  long  will  y  e  /.  my  glory  into  shame  ?
7.  12.  it  he  /.  not,  he  will  whet  his  sword

20.  i  3.  the  Lord  /.  to  ashes  the  burnt  sacrifice

21.  12.  thou  shalt  make  them  /.  their  back

25.  16./.  thee  unto  me,  69.  16.  |  86.  16.

85.  4.  /.  us,  O  God  of  pur  salvation,  and  cause
119.79.  let  those  that  fear  thee  /.  unto  me
132.  11.  Lord  hath  sworn  to  David,  he  will  not  /.*
Prov.  1.23.  /.  you  at  my  reproof,  l  wdll  pour  out
4.  15.  pass  not  by  it,  /.  from  it  and  pass  away

27.  /.  not  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left
Eccl.  3.  20.  all  are  ot  dust,  and  all  /.  to  dust  again
Cant.  2. 17.  /.  ray  beloved,  and  be  thou  like  a  roe
La.  1.  25.  I  will  /.  my  hand  on  thee  and  purge

13.  14.  they  shall  every  man  /.  to  his  own  people
19.  6.  and  they  shall/,  the  rivers  faraway
22. 18.  he  will  violently  /.  and  toss  thee  like  a  ball
23.  17.  she  shall  /.  to  her  hire,  and  shall  commit
28.  6.  for  strength  to  them  that  /.  the  battle

30.  21.  when  ye  /.  to  the  right  hand  and  left

31.  6.  /.  ye  to  him  from  whom  Israel  hath  revolted
59.20.  to  them  that/,  from  transgression  in  Jacoo

Jer.  2.  35.  surely  his  anger  shall  /.  from  me

3.  7.  and  1  said,  /.  unto  me,  but  returned  not,  14.

13.  16.  before  he  /.  it  into  the  shadow  of  death
31.  13.  for  1  will/,  their  mourning  into  joy

18.  /.  tliou  me,  and  1  shall  be  turned,  thou  art
44.  5.  hearkened  not  to/,  from  their  wickedness
50.  16.  they  shall  /.  every  one  to  his  people

Lam.  5.  21.  /.  us  unto  thee,  O  L.  we  snail  be  turned
Ezek.  3.  19.  he  /.  not  from  his  wickedness,  33.  9.

4.  8.  shalt  not  /.  thee  from  one  side  to  another

7.  22.  my  face  will  I  /.  also  from  them

14.  6.  repent  and  /.  yourselves  from  your  idols,  18.

30,  32. 1  33.  9,  11.  I  Jos.  12.  6.  Joel  2.  12.
36.  9.  I  will  /.  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  tilled
38.  12.  to/,  thine  hand  upon  the  desolate  places
Dan.  9- 13.  that  we  might  /.  from  our  iniquities

11.  18.  shall  he  /.  his  face  unto  the  isles,  and  take

many  ;  shall  cause  reproach  /.  upon  him

19.  then  he  shall/,  his  face  toward  the  fort

12.  3.  and  they  that  /.  many  to  righteousness
llos.  5.  4.  they  will  not  frame  their  doings  to  /.

12.  6.  therefore  /.  thou  to  thy  God,  keep  mercy
Amos  1.  8.  and  1  will  /.  mine  hand  against  Ekron

5.  7-  ye  who  /.  judgment  to  wormwood

8.  10.  and  l  will  /.  your  feasts  into  mourning
Jonah  3.8.  let  them  /.  every’  one  from  his  evil  way
Zeph.  3.  9.  then  will  1  /.  to  people  a  pure  language
Zech.  9.  12.  /.ye  to  strong  hold  ye  prisoners  of  hope

13.7.  1  will  /.  mine  hand  upon  the  little  ones
Mai.  4.  6.  he  shall  /.  the  heart  of  fathers  to  children
Mat.  5.  39.  on  thy  right  cheek,  /.  to  him  the  other
Luke  1.  17.  to /.  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  children
21.  13.  and  it  shall  /.  to  you  for  a  testimony
Acts  13.  46.  of  life,  lo  we  /.  to  the  Gentiles

14.  15.  that  ye  should  /.  from  these  vanities

26.  18.  and  to  /.  them  from  darkness  to  light

20.  that  they  should  repent  and  /.  to  God
Phil.  1.  19.  I  know  this  shall  /.  to  my  salvation
Jit.  1. 14.  commandments  of  men  that /.  from  truth
Jam.  3.  3.  and  w  e  /.  about  their  whole  body

2  Pet.  2.21.  to  /.  from  the  holy  commandment
Rev.  11.  6.  and  have  power  to  /.  waters  to  blood
1  URN  again.

Lev.  13.  16.  if  the  raw  flesh  /.  again  and  be  changed
Judg.  11.8.  therefore  we  /.  again  to  thee  now
Ruth  1.  11.  she  said,  t.  again,  my  daughters,  12.

1  Sam.  15.  25.  1  pray  thee,  /.  again  with  me,  30.

1  Kings 8.  33.  when  Israel  shall  t.  again  to  thee
12.  27.  heart  of  this  people  t.  again  to  their  lord

1.3.  9.  eat  not,  nor  /.  again  by  the  same  way,  17.

2  Kings  1.  6.  go  /.  again  to  the  king  that  sent  you
20.  5.  /.  again  and  tell  Hezekiah  the  captain

2  Chron.  30.  6.  /.  again  to  the  Lord  ||  9.  if  ye  /.  again
Job  34.  15.  and  man  shall  /.  again  into  dust
Psal.  18.  37. nor  did  1  t.ag.  till  they  were  consumed
60.  1.  hast  been  displeased,  O  /.  thyself  to  us  again
80.  3.  /.  us  again,  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,  7,  19.

85. 8.  speak  peace,  but  let  them  not  /.  again  to  folly


T  U  II


TUR


TWA


Psal.  104.  9.  that  they  /.  not  again  to  cover  the  earth
ICG.  4.  /.  again  our  captivity,  as  streams  in  south
Jer. 15.  5.  /.  ye  again  every  one  from  his  evil  way
31. 21.  t.  again,  O  virgin  of  Israel,  /.  again  to  cities
Lam.  .3.  40.  let  us  try  our  ways  and  t.  again  to  the  L.
Etek.  8.  6.  /.  again  anil  thou  shalt  see,  13.  15.

Mic.  7. 19.  lie  will  /.  again,  he  will  have  compassion
Zech  10.  9.  shall  live  with  their  children  and  /.  ag.
Mat.  6.  lest  they  t.  again  and  rend  you
Luke  10.  6.  if  not,  it  shall  t.  to  you  again

17.  4.  and  seven  times  in  a  day  t.  again  to  thee
Gal.  4.  9.  how  t,  ye  again  to  the  weak  elements

TURN  aside.

Exod.  3.  3.  I  will  now  t.  aside  and  see  this  sight
Deut.  5.  3C.  shall  not  t.  aside  to  the  right  hand
11.  16.  and  ye  t.  aside  fpid  serve  other  gods,  C8.

17-  CO.  that  he  t.  not  aside  from  commandment
31. 29.  after  my  death  ye  will  t.  aside  from  the  way
Josh.  23.  6.  that  ye  t.  not  aside  therefrom  to  the
right  hand  or  the  left,  1  Sam.  12.  20,21.
Ruth  4.  1.  ho,  such  a  one,  t.  aside,  sit  down  here
2  Sam.  2.  21.  Asahel,  t.  aside  and  take  his  armour
23.  howbeit  he  refused  to  t.  aside

18.  .30.  the  king  said,  t.  a  ide,  and  stand  here
Job  36.  +  18.  a  great  ransom  cannot  t.  thee  aside
Psal.  40.  4.  respecteth  not  such  as  t.  aside  to  lies

101.  3.  I  hate  the  work  of  them  that  t.  aside
125.  5.  as  for  such  as  t.  aside  to  crooked  ways
Isa.  10.  2.  to  t.  aside  the  needy  from  judgment

29.  21.  t.  aside  the  just  for  a  thing  of  nought

30.  11.  get  out  of  the  way,  t.  aside  out  ofthe  path
Lam.  3.  35.  to  t.  aside  the  right  of  a  man  before  thee
Amos  2.  7-  and  that  t.  aside  the  way  of  the  meek

5.  12.  and  they  t.  aside  the  poor  in  the  gate
Mai.  3.  5.  and  that  t.  aside  the  stranger  from  right
TURN  away.

Gen.  27.  44.  tarry  till  thy  brother's  fury  t.  away
45.  till  thy  brother’s  anger  t.  away  from  thee
Num.  32.  15.  for  if  ye  t.  away  from  after  him,
Deut.  30.  17.  Josh.  22.  16.  2  Chron.  7.  19.
Deut.  7.  4.  they  will  t.  away  thy  son  from  following

13.  5.  he  hath  spoken  to  t.  you  away  from  the  Lord

17.  17.  multiply  wives,  that  his  heart  t.  not  away
23.  14.  that  he  see  no  unclean  thing  and  t.  away

1  Kings  2.  t  16.  I  ask  one  petition,  t.  not  aw.  my  face
11.  2.  surely  they  will  t.  away  your  heart

2  (sings  18.24.  how  wilt  thou  t.  away  the  face  of  one

captain  and  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt ?  Isa.  36.  9.

1  Chron.  14.  14.  go  not  up,  t.  away  from  them

2  Chron.  6.  42.  0  Lord  God,  t.  not  away  the  face  of
thine  anointed,  remember  mercies,  Psal.  132.  10.

25.  27.  Amaziah  did  t.  away  from  following  Lord

29.  10.  to  make  a  covenant  with  God  of  Israel,  that
wrath  may  t.  away,  30.  8.  Ps.  106. 23.  Prov.  24. 18.

30.  9.  the  Lord  will  not  t.  away  his  face  front  you
Job  9.  t  12.  who  can  /.  him  away  ?  11.  t  10.

Ps.  119.37.  t.  away  mine  eves  from  beholding  vanity

39.  t.  away  my  reproach  which  1  fear
Prov.  25.  10.  and  lest  thine  infamy  t.  not  away
29.  8.  but  wise  men  t.  away  wrath
Cant.  6.  5.  t.  away  thine  eyes  from  me,  for  they
Isa.  47.  +  10.  thy  wisdom  caused  thee  to  t.  away
58.  1.3.  if  thou  t.  away  thy  foot  from  the  sabbath
Jer.  2.24.  in  her  occasion  who  can  t.  her  awhy  ?

3.  19.  and  thou  shalt  not  t.  away  from  me

8.  4.  saith  L.  shall  he  t.  away  and  not  return  ?

18.  20.  I  stood  to  t.  away  thy  wrath  from  them
29.  14.  I  will  t.  away  your  captivity’,  Zeph,  2.  7.

32.  40.  that  I  will  not  t.  away  from  them

Lam .2.  14.  not  discovered  iniquity,  to  t.  a.  captivity’
Etek.  14.  6-  t.  away  your  faces  from  abominations
Amos  1.3.  and  for  four  1  will  not  /.  away  the  punish¬
ment  thereof,  6.  9,  11,  13. 1  2.  1,  4,  6.
Jonahs.  9.  God  will  t.  away  from  his  fierce  anger
Mai.  2.  6.  and  did  t.  many  away  from  iniquity
Mat.  5.  42.  would  borrow  of  thee,  t.  not  thou  away
Acts  13.  8.  seeking  to  t.  away  the  deputy  from  faith
Rom.  11.  26.  shall  t.  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob
2  Tim.  3.  5.  traitors,  heady,  from  such  t.  array

4.  4.  they  shall  t.  away  their  ears  from  truth
Heb.  12.  25.  how  escape,  if  we  t.  awayf rom  him?

TURN  back.

Deut.  23. 13.  t.  i.and  cover  that  which  comes  fr.  thee
2  Kings  19.  28.  I  will  put  a  hook  in  thy  nose  and  t.

thee  back  by  the  way  thou  earnest,  Isa.  37.  29.
Psal.  44.  10.  makest  us  to  t.  back  from  the  enemy
56.  9.  w  hen  1  cry7,  then  shall  mine  enemies  t.  back
Isa.  14.  27.  his  hand  stretched,  who  shall  t.  it  back  ?
Jer.  4.  28.  neither  will  1  t.  back  from  it
6.  9.  t.  back  thine  hand  as  a  grape-gatherer

21.  4.  behold,  1  will  t.  back  the  weapons  of  war
49.  8.  flee  ye,  t.  back,  dw’ell  deep,  ()  inhabitants

Ezek.  38.  4.  and  1  will  t.  thee  back,  39.  2.

Zeph.  3.  20.  when  I  t.  back  your  captivity
Mark  13.  16.  note,  hack  to  take  up  his  garment
Gal.  4.  f  9.  how  t.  ye  hack  to  beggarly  elements  ?
TURN  in.

Gen.  19.  2.  behold  now,  my  lords,  t.  in,  T  pray  you
Judg.  4.  18.  t.  in,  my  lord,  t.  in  to  me,  fear  not

19.  11.  let  us  t.  in  to  this  city  of  the  Jehusifes

2  Kings  4.  10.  that  the  man  of  God  shall  t.  mthith.
Prov.  9.  4.  whoso  is  simple,  let  him  t.  in  hither,  16.
TURN  to  the  Lord.

Deut.  4.  30.  if  thou  t.  to  the  Lord  thy  God,  30.  10.

2  Chron.  15.  4.  in  their  trouble  did  t.  to  the  Lord
Psal.  22.  27-  ends  of  the  world  shall  t.  to  the  Lord
Lam.  3.  40.  let  us  try  our  ways  and  t.  to  the  Lord
Hos.  14.  2.  take  with  you  words  and  t.  to  the  Lord
Joel  2.  13.  rend  your  heart  and  t.  to  the  Lord
Luke  1.  16.  many  of  Israel  shall  he  t.  to  the  Lord
£  Cor.  3. 16.  nevertheless  when  it  shall  t.  to  the  Lord
TURN  ED.

Gen.  3.  24.  a  flaming  sword  which  t.  every  way
42.  24.  Joseph  t.  about  from  them  and  wept
Exod.  7. 15.  the  rod  which  was  t.  to  a  serpent
7. 17.  the  waters  which  are  in  the  river  shall  be  t.

to  blood,  20.  Psal.  78.  44.  |  105.  29.

14.  5.  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  t.  against  the  people
Lev.  13.  3.  when  the  hair  is  t.  white,  10.  17,  20,  25.
Num.  21,  33.  they  t.  and  went  by  way  of  Bashan

22.  33.  ttie  ass  saw  me  and  t.  Irom  me  three  times
Deut.  23.  5.  t.  the  curse  into  a  blessing,  Neh.  13.  2.


Deut.  .31. 18.  in  that  they  are  t.  unto  other  go
Josh.  7.  26.  Lord  t.  from  the  fierceness  of  his  a

L.  n  1  •>’  tlw...  .  _  1  1  ■  1'  .  1


1


unto  other  gods

-  . —  - . .  ...c  .ic.ceness  of  his  anger

Judg.  2.  17-  they  t.  quickly  out  of  the  way
15.4.  Samson  took  fire-brands  and  t.  tail  to  tail
20.  42.  therefore  they  t.  their  backs  before  Israel

I. Saw.4.t  19.  travailed,  for  her  pains  were  t  on  her
10.  6.  and  thou  shalt  be  t.  into  another  man

14.  21.  even  they  also  t.  to  be  with  the  Israelites
47.  whithersoever  he  t.  himself  he  vexed  them

15.27.  as  Samuel  t.  about  to  go  away,  he  laid
17.  30.  and  David  t.  from  him  towards  another
2  .Sam.  2. 19;  Asahel  t.  not  from  following  Abner

19.  2.  the  victory  that  day  was  t.  into  mourning
Rings 2.  15.  howbeit  the  kingdom  is  t.  about
28.  Joab  t.  after  Adonijah,  tho’  not  after  Absalom

8. 14.  the  king  t.  his  face  about,  and  blessed  Israel

II. 9.  because  his  heart  was  t.  from  the  Lord

2  h  ings  5.  12.  so  N  aaman  t.  and  went  away  in  rage
16.  18.  Ahaz  t.  the  covert  from  the  house  of  the  Ld.

20.  2.  t.  hi*  face  to  the  wall ,  and  prayed,  Isa.  .38.  2!
23.  16.  as  Josiah  t.  himself  he  spied  sepulchres

25.  was  no  king  that  t.  to  the  Lord  like  him

26.  Lord  t.  not  from  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath

1  Chron.  10.  14.  he  t.  the  kingdom  unto  David

2  Chron.  12. 12.  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  t.  from  him

20. 10.  they  t.  from  them  and  destroyed  them  not

29.  6.  for  our  fathers  have  t.  their  backs
Ezra  6.  22.  /.  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria

10. 14.  until  the  wrath  of  our  God  be  t.  from  us
Xeh.  9.  35.  neither  t.  they  from  their  wicked  works
Lsth.  9. 1.  though  it  was  t.  to  Ihe  contrary  that  Jews

22.  the  month  which  was  t.  to  them  from  sorrow
Job  16.  11.  God  t.  me  into  the  hands  ofthe  wicked

19.  19.  and  they  whom  1  loved  are  t.  against  me

20.  14.  yet  his  meat  in  his  bowels  is  t.  the  gall

28.5.  and  under  it  is  t.  up  as  it  were  fire

30.  15.  terrors  are  t.  upon  me,  they  pursue  my  soul
31.  my  harp  is  t.  to  mourning,  and  my  organ

31.7.  it  my  step  hath  t.  out  of  the  way,  my  heart
38.  14.  it  is  t.  as  clay  to  the  seal,  they  stand  as

41.  22.  and  sorrow  is  t.  into  joy  before  him

42.  10.  and  the  Lord  t.  the  captivity  of  Job
Psal  9.  17.  the  wicked  shall  be  t.  into  hell

30. 11.  thou  hast  t.  my  mourning  into  dancing
66.  6.  he  t.  the  sea  into  dry  land,  they  went  througl
81.  14.  and  t.  my  hand  against  their  adversaries
105.  25.  he  t.  their  heart  to  hate  his  people

114.8.  which  t.  the  rock  into  a  standing  water
119.59.  I  t.  my  feet  unto  thy  testimonies

Lccl.  2. 12.  and  1  t.  myself  to  behold  wisdom
Isa.  21.  4.  night  of  my  pleasure  he  t.  into  fear
29.  17-  Lebanon  shall  be  t.  into  a  fruitful  field
34.  9.  the  streams  thereof  shall  be  t.  into  pitch
53.  6.  we  have  t.  every  one  to  his  own  way
63. 10.  therefore  he  was  t.  to  be  their  enemy
Jer.  2.  21.  how  art  thou  t.  into  a  degenerate  plant?

27.  they  have  t.  their  back  tome,  not  their  face

3.  10.  Judah  hath  not  t.  to  me  with  her  whole  hear
6.  12.  their  houses  shall  be  t.  unto  others

8.  6.  no  man  repented,  every  one  t.  to  his  course
23.22.  they  should  have  t.  them  from  their  evil  wav
31. 18.  and  I  shall  be  t.  ||  19.  after  that  I  was  t.

32.  33.  they  t.  unto  me  the  back,  and  not  the  face
31. 15.  and  ye  were  now  t.  and  had  done  right

16.  butye  t.  and  polluted  my  name  and  caused
48.  39.  how  hath  Moab  t.  thee  back  with  shame  ?
Lam.  1. 20.  behold,  Lord,  mine  heart  is  t.  within  me
3.  3.  surely  against  me  is  he  t.  he  turneth  his  hand
5.  2.  our  inheritance  is  t.  to  strangers,  our  houses

15.  joy  is  ceased,  our  dance  is  t.  into  mournin»

21.  turn  us  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  and  we  shall  bet.
Ezek.  1.  9.  they  t.  not  w  hen  they  went,  12.  I  10.  11.’

17.6.  a  vine,  whose  branches  t.  toward  him
26.  2.  she  is  t.  unto  me,  1  shall  be  replenished
Dan.  10.  8.  my  comeliness  was  t.  into  corruption

16.  by  the  vision  my  sorrows  are  t.  upon  me
Hos.  7 . 8.  among  the  people  Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  t.

11.8.  Ephraim,  mine  heart  is  t.  within  me

Joel  2.  31.  sun  shall  be  t.  into  darkness,  Acts  2.20.
Amos  6.  12.  for  ye  have  t.  judgment  into  gall
Jonah  3. 10.  that  they  t.  from  their  evil  way
llab.  2. 16.  the  cup  of  Lord’s  right  hand  be  t.  to  thee
Zech.  14.  10.  all  the  land  shall  be  t.  into  a  plain
Mark  5.  30.  Jesus  t.  about  in  the  press,  and  said
Luke 22.61.  the  Lord  t.  and  looked  upon  Peter
John  16.20.  but  your  sorrow  shall  be  t.  into  joy
Acts  7. 42.  God  t.  and  gave  them  up  to  worship

9.  35.  all  at  Lydda  saw  him  and  t.  to  the  Lord
11.21.  a  great  number  believed  and  t.  to  the  Lord
15.  19.  which  from  the  Gentiles  are  t.  to  God
17-  6.  these  that  have  t.  the  world  upside  down

1  Thess.  1.9.  shew  how  ye  t.  to  God  from  idols

2  Tim.  4.  4.  and  they  shall  be  t.  unto  fables
Heb.  11.  34.  t.  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens

12.  13.  lest  that  which  is  lame  be  t.  out  of  the  way
Jam.  3.  4.  j  et  are  they  /.  with  a  very  small  h'lm
4.9.  let  your  laughter  be  7.  to  mourning
2  Pet.  2.  22.  the  dog  is  t.  to  his  own  vomit  again
TURNED  again.

Exod.  4.  7-  behold  it  was  t.  again  as  his  other  flesh
Judg.  3.  19.  Ehud  t.  again  from  the  quarries
8.  33.  Israel  t.  again,  went  a  whoring  after  Baalim
20.41.  when  Israel  t.  again,  Benjamites  amazed

1  -S am.  15.  31 .  so  Samuel  t.  again  after  Saul,  and  S.

2  Sam.  22.  38.  I  t.  not  again  till  I  had  consumed

2  Kings  5.  26.  when  the  man  t.  again  from  his  chariot
Psal.  126.  1.  when  Lord  t.  again  the  captiv.  of  Z1011
TURNED  aside.

Exod.  3.  4.  the  Lord  saw  that  he  t.  aside  to  see

32. 8.  they  have  t.  aside  quickly,  Deut.  9. 12, 16.
Judy.  14.  8.  he  t.  aside  to  see  the  lion’s  carcase

1  Ham.  6. 12.  the  kine  t.  not  aside  to  the  right
8.  3.  but  t.  aside  after  lucre,  and  took  bribes

1  Kings  15.  5.  David  t.  not  aside  from  any  thing
20.  39.  a  man  t.  aside  and  brought  a  man  to  me

2  Kings  11.1.  Josiah  t.  not  aside  to  right  hand  or  left
Job  6.  18.  the  paths  of  their  way  are  t.  aside
Psal.  78.  57.  they  were  t.  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow
Cant.  6. 1.  whither  is  thy  beloved  /.  aside?

Isa.  44.  20.  a  deceived  heart  hath  t.  him  aside
Lom  3. 11.  he  hath  t.  aside  my  ways  and  pulled
1  Tim.  1.6.  have  t.  aside  unto  vain  jangling


1  Tim,  5.  15.  for  some  are  already  t.  aside  after
TURNED  away.  [Satan

A  um.  14.43.  because  ye  are  t.  away  from  the  Lord

20.  21.  wherefore  Israel  t.  away  from  him

25.  4.  that  the  anger  ofthe  Lord  may  be  t.  away
11.  Phinehas  hath  t.  my  wrath  away  from  Israel

1  Kings  11.  3.  ami  his  wives  t.  away  his  heart,  4.

21.  4.  and  Aliab  t.  away,  and  would  eat  no  bread1

2  Chron.  29-  6.  our  fathers  t.  away  their  faces
Psal.  66.  20.  which  hath  not  t.  away  my  prayer
78.38.  yea,  many  a  time  t.  he  his  anger  away

Isa.  5.  25.  for  all  this  his  anger  is  not  t.  away ,  but
his  hand  is  stretched  out  still,  9.  12,  17,21.  |  10.  4.
12.  1.  thy  anger  is  t.  away  ||  50.  5.  nor  t.  I  away
59.  14.  and  judgment  is  t.  away  back  ward
Jer.  5.  25.  your  iniquities  have  t.  away  these  things
38.  22.  thy  feet  are  sunk,  they  are  t.  away  back

40.  5.  wherefore  have  1  seen  them  t.  away  back  ?
50.  6.  shepherds  have  t.  them  away  on  mountains
Dan.  9.  16.  jet  thy  fury  be  t.  away  from  Jerusalem
f™.  14.  4.  for  mine  anger  is  t.  away  from  him
Eah.  2.  2.  the  L.  hath  t.  away  excellency  of  Jacob-
Acts  19,  eg  this  Paul  hath  t.  away  much  people

~  1  tm.  1.  15.  all  they  in  Asia  be  t.  away  from  me
I  URN  ED  iacJ,

Josh.  8.  20.  the  people  t.  hack  upon  the  pursuers
11.  10.  Joshua  at  that  time  t.  hack,  and  took

1  ‘'ram.  15.  II.  Saul  is  t.  back  from  following  me

2  ogm.  1.  22.  the  how  of  Jonathan  t.  not  back

1  Rings  18.  .37.  that  thou  hast  /.  their  heart  back

22.  33.  saw  it  was  not  king  of  Israel,  they  t.  bach
^  Rings  1.  5.  when  messengers  t.  back,  why  t.  back

2.  24.  he  t.  back  and  looked  on  them,  and  cursed

15.  20.  so  the  king  of  Assyria  t.  back  and  stayed

1  Chron.  21.  20.  Oman  t.  hack  and  saw  the  angel
Job  34.  27.  because  they  t.  back  from  him

Psal.  9.  .3.  when  mine  enemies  are  t.  back,  shall  falj
35.  4.  let  them  be  t.  back  that  devise,  70.  2,  3.

44. 18.  our  heart  is  not  t.  back  from  thy  way
78.  9.  children  of  Ephraim  t.  back  in  day  of  battle

41.  yea,  they  t.  back  and  tempted  God,  57.

129.  5.  an  t  let  them  be  t.  back  that  hate  Zion

Isa.  42.  17.  they  shall  be  t.  back  that  trust  in  images
Jer.  4.  8.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  is  not  t.  back
11.  10.  they  are  t.  back  in  iniquities  of  fathers
46.  21.  they  also  are  t.  back,  and  are  fled  away
Lam.  1. 13.  he  hath  t.  me  back,  and  made  me  tain*
Zeph.  1.  6  them  that  are  t.  back  from  the  Lord
Luke  2.  45.  t.  back  again  to  Jerusalem  seeking  him.
17. 15.  one  of  the  lepers  t.  back  and  glorified  God
John  20.  14.  she  t.  herself  back  and  saw  Jesus
Acts  7.  39.  in  their  hearts  t.  back  again  into  Egypt
TURNED  in.

Gen.  19.  3.  the  two  angels  t.  in  unto  I.ot
38.  1.  Judah  t.  in  to  llirah  the  Adullamite
Judg.  4.  18.  when  S-isera  had  t.  in  unto  Jael
18.  3.  the  Danites  t.  in  thither  and  said  to  him

2  Kings  4.  8.  Elisha  t.  in  thither  to  eat  bread
11.  he  t.  into  the  chamber  and  lay  there

TUR  NEST.

1  Kings  2.  3.  mayest  prosper  whithersoever  thou  i.

Job  15.  13.  that  thou  t.  thy  Spirit  against  God
Psal.  90.3.  thou  t.  man  to  destruction,  and  sayesi
_  TURNETH.

Lev.  20.  6.  soul  that  t.  after  wizards  to  go  after  them.
Deut.  29. 18.  whose  heart  t.  away  this  clay  from  God
Josh.  7.  8.  what  shall  1  say,  when  lsr.  t.  their  backs?

2  Kings  21.  1 13.  he  wipeth  and  /.  it  upon  the  face
Job  .39.  22.  the  horse  /.  not  back  from  the  sword
Psal.  107.  33.  he  t.  rivers  into  a  wilderness

35.  he  t.  the  wilderness  into  a  standing  water
146.  9.  the  way  of  the  wicked  he  t.  upside  down
Prov.  15.  1.  a  soft  answer  t.  away  wrath,  hut  words
17.  8.  a  gift,  whithersoever  it  t.  prospereth
21.  1.  he  t.  the  king’s  heart  whithersoever  he  will

26.  14.  as  the  door/,  upon  his  hinges,  so  doth
28.  9.  that  t.  away  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law
30.  30.  a  lion  that  /.  not  away  for  any
Eccl.  1.  6.  the  wind  /.  about  unto  the  north
Cant.  1.  7.  why  should  I  be  as  one  that  /.  aside  ?

Isa.  9.  13.  the  people  t.  not  to  him  that  smitetli
24.  1.  the  Lord  /.  the  earth  upside  down
44.  25.  that  /.  wise  men  backward,  and  maketh
Jer.  14.  8.  that  /.  aside  to  tarry  for  anight
49.  24.  Damascus  is  feeble,  and  /.  herself  to  flee
Lam.  1.  8.  yea,  she  sigheth  and  t.  backward
3.  3.  he  /.  his  hand  against  me  all  the  day
Ezek.  18.  24.  when  righteous /.  away,  26.  |  3.3.  18.

27.  when  the  wicked  man  /.  away,  28.  I  33.  12.
Amos  5. 8.  t.  the  shadow  of  death  into  mourning
TURNING.

2  Kingsll.  13.  I  will  w  ipe  Jerusalem  as  a  dish,  t.  U
2  Chron.  36.  13.  he  hardened  his  heart  from  /.  to  L.
Prov.  1.32.  the  t.  away  of  simple  shall  slay  them
Isa.  29.  16.  your  t.  of  things  upside  down  as  clay
57.  +  17-  1  nid  me  and  was  wroth,  went  on  /.  away
Mic.  2.  4.  t.  away  he  hath  divided  our  fields
Acts  3.  26.  to  bless  you  in  t.  you  from  your  iniquit.
Jam.  1.  17.  with  whom  is  no  shadow  of  t.

2  Pet.  2.  6.  t.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  into  ashes
Jude  4.  t.  the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness
TURTLE,  S.

Gen.  15.  9.  take  a  /.  dove  and  a  young  pigeon
Lev.  1.14.  shall  bring  his  offering  of  /.  doves
5.7.  he  shall  bring  for  his  trespass  two  /.-doves  or
y  oung  pigeons,  11.  8.  I  14.  22,  30.  I  15.  14,  2<».
11.  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  two  /.  doves
12.  6.  she  shall  bring  a  /.-dove  for  a  sin-offering
Num.  6.  10.  on  eighth  day  he  shall  bring  two  /.

Psal.  74.  19-  O  deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  /.-dove
Cant.  1.  12.  the  voice  of  the  /.  is  heard  in'our  land
Jer.  8.  7-  R  and  crane  observe  the  time  of  coming
Luke  2.  24.  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  a  pair  of  /.-doves
TUTORS.

Gal.  4.  2.  the  heir  while  a  child  is  under  /.  and  gov.
TWAIN.

1  Sam.  18.  21.  be  my  son  in  law  in  the  one  of  the  i.

2  Kings  4.  33.  shut  the  door  on  them  /.and  prayed’
Isa.  6.2.  the  seraphims,  with  /.  he  covered  his  face,

with  /.  he  covered  his  feet,  and  with  /.  he  did  fly
Jer.  .31.  18.  when  they  cut  the  calf  in  /.and  passed
Ezek.  21. 19.  both  /.  shall  come  out  of  one  land

527


T  YV  E


T  YV  O


T  YV  O


Mat.  5.  41.  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with  him  e.  |

19.  5.  cleave  to  wife,  and  they  t.  shall  be  one  flesh

6.  wherefore  they’  are  no  more  /.  Mark  10.  8.

21.  31.  whether  of  t.  did  the  will  of  his  father  ?

•27-  21.  whether  of  the  t.  will  ye  that  1  release  ?

51.  the  vail  of  temple  was  rent  in  t.  Mark  15.  38.
Eph.  2.  15.  to  make  in  himself  of  t.  one  new  tnan
I  W  ELF  I  H.

I  Kings  19.  19.  twehe  yoke  of  oxen,  he  with  the  t.

1  Chron.  21.  12.  the  t.  lot  came  forth  to  Jakim

25.  19.  the  t.  lot  came  foith  to  Hashahiah

27.  15.  the  I.  captain  for  the  t.  month,  Heldai

2  Citron.  34.  3.  in  the  t.  year  of  Josiah’s  reign
Esth.  3.  7.  in  the  t.  year  of  king  Ahasi  erus
Ezek.  32.  1.  in  the  t.  year,  in  the  t.  month

17.  in  the  t.  year  and  fifteenth  day  of  the  month
33.  21.  in  the  ’/.  year  of  our  captivity,  tenth  month
Rev.  21.  20.  the  t.  foundation  was  an  amethyst
See  Day,  Month.
flWKl.Vf.

Gen.  14.  4.  t.  years  they  served  Chedorlaomer

17.  20.  t.  princes  shall  lshtnael  beget,  25.  16.

35.  22.  now  the  sons  of  Jacob  were  t.

42.  1.3.  they  said,  thy  servants  are  t.  brethieu,  32
49-  28.  all  these  are  the  t.  tribes  of  Israel
Exvd.  15.27.  they  came  to  Klim,  where  weie  1.  wetis
24.  4.  t.  pillars  according  to  the  t.  tribes  or  Israel

28.  21.  shall  be  t.  precious  stones,  39.  14.

Lev.  24.  5.  and  thou  shalt  hake  t.  cakes  thereof
Num.  1.  44.  t.  princes  ||  7 -  3.  they  brought  /.  oxen
7-  84.  t.  chargers,  t.  silver  bowls,  t.  spoons

87.  t.  bullocks,  t.  rams,  1.  lambs  of  the  first  year

17.  2.  t.  rods,  according  to  house  of  fathers,  6.

29.  17-  on  second  day  offer  t.  young  bullocks
Dent.  1.  23.  1  took  t.  men  of  you,  one  of  a  tribe
Josh.  3.  12.  take  ye  t.  men  out  of  the  tribes,  4.  2.

4.  3.  take  ye  t.  stones  out  of  Jordan,  8,  9,  20.

2  Sam.  2.  15.  theie  arose  and  went  over  by  number
t.  of  Benjamin,  and  t.  of  the  servants  of  David
1  Kings  4-7.  Solomon  had  t.  officers  over  all  Israel

7.  25.  the  sea  stood  on  t.  oxen,  44.  2  C/tron.  4.  15.

10.  20.  r.  lions  on  the  one  side,  2  Chrcm.  9.  19.

11.  30.  Ahijah  rent  Jeroboam’s  garm.  in  t.  pieces

18.  31.  !•  lijah  took  t.  stones  and  built  an  altar

19.  19.  found  Elisha  plow  ing  with  t.  yoke  of  oxen
l  Chr.  25.  9.  with  brethren  and  sons  t.  So  to  the  end.
Ezra  6.  17-  for  a  sin  offering  t.  lie-goats,  8.  35.

8.  24.  there  1  separated  t.  of  the  chief  of  priests
Neh.  5.  14.  t.  years  not  eaten  bread  of  the  governor
Job  .38.  +  32.  canst  thou  briny  forth  the  t.  signs  ?

Jer.  52.20.  t.  brazen  bulls,  N  ebuzar-adan  took  away
E.zek.  43. 16.  the  altar  shall  be  t.  cubits  long,  t.  broad

47.  13.  inherit  the  land  according  to  the  t.  tribes
Dan.  4.  29.  at  end  of  t.  months  he  walked  in  palace
Mat.  9-  20.  a  woman  was  diseased  w  ith  an  issue  of
blood  t.  years,  n  ark  5.  25.  Luke  8.  43.

10.  2.  the  names  of  the  t.  apostles  Luke  6.  13.
14.20.  they  took  up  of  fragments  t.  baskets,  Mark

6.  43.  [8.  19.  Luke  9.  J7.  John  6.  13.

19.  28.  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  t.  thrones,  judging

(he  t.  tribes  of  Israel,  Luke  22,  30.

26.  20.  now  when  even  was  come,  lie  sat  down

with  the  t.  Mark  14.  17.  Luke  22.  14.
47.  while  he  yet  spake,  Judas  one  of  the  t.  came,
Mark  14.  10,  43.  Luke  22.  47.  John  6.  71.
53.  shall  give  me  more  than  t.  legions  of  angels
Mark  5.  42.  she  was  of  the  age  of  t.  years,  Luke  8.42.

14.  20.  it  is  one  of  the  t.  that  dippeth  with  me
Luke  2.  42.  and  w  hen  Jesus  was  t.  years  old
John  6.  70.  Jesus  said,  have  I  not  chosen  you  t.  ?

11.9.  are  there  not  t.  hours  in  the  day  r

20.  24.  1  hontas  one  of  the  t.  was  not  with  them
Acts  7-  8.  and  Jacob  begat  the  t.  patriarchs

19.  7-  prophesied,  and  all  the  men  were  about  t.
24.  11.  but  t.  days  since  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem
26.  7.  to  which  promise  our  t.  tribes  hope  to  come
1  Cor.  15.  5.  he  w  as  seen  of  Cephas,  then  of  the  t.
Jam.  1.  1.  to  the  t.  tribes  which  are  scattered  abroad
Rev.  12.  1.  and  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  t.  stars

21.  12.  the  city  had  t.  gates,  at  the  gates  t.  angels

14.  the  wall  of  the  city  had  t.  foundations,  and  in
them  the  names  of  the  t.  apostles  of  the  l  amb

21.  the  t.  gates  were  t.  pearls,  street  pure  gold

22.  2.  the  free  of  life  bare  t.  manner  of  fruits

See  Hundred,  Thousand.
TWENTY.

Gen.  18.  31.  peradventure  there  shall  be  t.  found
there,  he  said,  I  will  not  destroy  it  for  t.  sake

31.  38.  this  t.  years  have  I  been  with  thee,  41.

32.  14.  for  a  present  for  Esau,  t.  lie-goats,  t.  rams

15.  and  ten  bulls,  t.  she  asses,  and  ten  foals
37.  28.  they  sold  Joseph  for  t.  pieces  of  silver
Exod.  30.  13.  a  shekel  is  t.  gerahs,  Lev.  27.  25.

Num.  3.  47.  I  18.  16.  Ezek.  45.  12.
14.  from  t.  years  old  and  above,  38.  26.  Num.  1.
3,  18,  20.  |  14.  29.  I  26.  2.  I  32.  11.  1  Chron.  23.
24,  27.  2  Chron.  25.  5.  |  31.  17-  Ezra  3.  8.

Lev.  27.  3.  thy  estimation  of  the  male  from  /.  years

5.  from  five  years  old  to  t.  years,  t.  shekels
Num. 1 1.19.  shal  I  not  eat  neither  ten  days,  nor  t.  days

18.  16.  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary  is  t.  gerahs
Judg.  4.  3.  Jabin  mightiiy  oppressed  Israel  t.  years

11.  33.  Jephthah  smote  from  Aroer  even  t.  cities

15.  20.  Samson  judged  Israel  t.  years,  16.  31.

1  Sam.  7-  2.  the  aik  was  in  Kirjath-jearim  t.  years
14. 14.  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer  slew  t.  men

2  Sam.  3.  20.  Abnn  came  to  David  with/,  men

9.  10.  Ziba  had  titteen  sons  and  /.  servants,  19.  17-

1  King-  4  23.  Solomon’s  provision  daily,  t.  oxen

9.  10.  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  /.  3  ears,  when

Solomon  had  built  the  two  houses,  2  Chron.  8. 1.
11.  bolotnon  gave  Hiram  t.  cities  in  Galilee

2  Kings  4.  42.  brought  the  man  of  God  /.  loaves
Ezra  8.  27.  1  even  weighed  /.  basons  of  gold
Ezek.  4.  10.  thy  meat  by  weight,  t.  shekels  a  day

40.  49.  the  length  of  the  porch  was  t.  cubits

41. 2.  the  breadth  of  the  door  was  /.  cubits
Hag ..2.  16.  when  one  came  to  an  heap  of  t.  mea¬
sures,  to  draw  out  fifty  vessels,  there  were
but  /.

Zsch.  5.  2.  the  length  of  the  flying  roll  t.  cubits
Acts  27.  28.  and  sounded,  and  found  it  t.  fathoms
528


TWENTY  -two.

Judg.  10.3.  Jatr  judged  Israel  t.  //rcyears

1  Kings  14.20.  Jeroboam  reigned  t.  two  years

16.  29.  Ahat>  reigned  over  Israel  t.-two  years

2  Kings  8.  26.  Ahaziah  was  /.and  tuo  years  old
21.  19.  Atnon  t.  /:.  0  3  ears  old,  when  began  to  reign

1  Chron.  12.  28.  of  his  father’s  house  t.-tzvo  captains

2  Chron.  13.  21.  but  Abijah  begat  /.  and  two  sons

TW  EN  1 Y -three.

Judg.  10.  2.  Tolajudged  Israel  t. -three  years
2  Kings  23.  31.  Jehoahaz  was  t. -three  years  old

1  Chron.  2.  22.  Jair  had  t.-three  cities  in  Gilead
Jer.  25.3.  from  l.'ith  year  of  Josiah  to  /.  third  year

52.30.  in  the  t. -third  3  ear  of  N  ebuchadnezzar
TWEN 1Y  Jour.

Num.  7-  88.  the  offeiings  were  /.  and  four  bullocks

2  3Vztw.21.20.  fingers  and  toes  t.J'our  in  number

1  Kings  15.33.  Baaslia  reigned  /.  and  Jour  years
Hag ,2. 18. consider  from  t.  fourth  day  and  ninth  mon.
Rev  4.  4.  round  about  the  throne  were  t. -four  seats ,
and  on  the  seats  I  saw  t.  four  elders  sitting

5.  8.  the  t.-ivur  elders  fell  down,  11.  16.  1  19.  4.

*  W  EN  i  Y  -five.

Num.  8.  2a.  \..m  .-Jhe  years  old  and  upward

1  Kings  22.  42.  Jchoshaphat  reigned  /.  .nd  Jive

years  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  20.  31.

2  Kings  14.2.  Aniaziah  was  t.Jive  years  old  when

he  began  to  reign,  2  Chon.  25.  1.
15  33.  Jotham  t.-fiie  years  old,  2  Chron.  27.  I,  8.

18.2.  Hezekiah  t.-Jive  yearsold,2  Chron.  29.  1.

23.  36.  .lehoiakim  t.Jive  years,  2  Chron.  36.  5.

A«/i.  6.  15.  the  wall  finished  in  t. -fifth  day  of  Elul
Jer.  52.  31.  t  -fifth  day  Evil-merodach  lifted  up

l  ’vy  EN1  Y  -six.

1  Kings  16.8.  in  t. -six  of  Asa,  Etah  began  to  reign
T W  EN  1  Y -seven.

Gen.  8. 14.  t.-sev.  day  of  second  month,  earth  dried

1  Kings  16.  10.  t. -seventh  of  Asa,  Zimri  reigned,  15.

2  Kings 25.  27.  on  t. -seventh  day  of  twelfth  month

1  WEN 'I  Y -eight.

Exod.  26.  2.  length  of  curtain  t. -eight  cubits  36.  9.

2  Kings  10.  36.  Jehu  reigned  /.  and  eight  years
2  Chron.  11.  21.  Rehoboam  begat  t. -eight  sons
T  W  EN  1  Y  -nine.

Gen.  11.  24.  Nahor  lived  t.-nine  years  and  begat
2  Kings  14.  2.  Amaziah  reigned  t.-nine  years

18. 2.  Hezekiah  t.-nine  years,  2  Chr.  25.  1. 1  29.  1.
See  I  housan  D.

TWICE.

Gen.  41. 32.  for  that  the  dream  was  doubled  /.

43.  t  10.  surely  now  we  had  returned  /.  by  this
Exod.  16.  5.  and  it  shall  be  /.  as  much,  22.

Num.  20.  1 1.  with  his  rod  he  smote  the  rock  /.

1  Sam.  18.11.  David  avoided  out  of  his  presence  t.

1  Kings  11.9.  which  had  appeared  unto  him  t.

2  Kings  6.  10.  saved  himselt  there  not  once  nor  /.
Neh.  13.  20.  lodged  without  Jerusalem  once  or  t.
Job  .33.  14.  for  God  speaketh  once,  yea/,  yet  man

40.  5.  yea  /.  but  1  will  proceed  no  further

42. 10.  Lord  gave  Job  /.  as  much  as  he  had  before
Psal.  62.  II.  /.  have  1  heard,  power  belonged)  toG.
Eccl.  6.6.  though  he  live  a  thousand  years  /.  told
Mark  14.  30.  cockcrow  /.  thou  shaltdeny  me,  72.
Luke  18.  12.  1  fast  /.  in  the  week,  I  give  tithes
Jude  12.  /.  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots

TWIGS.

Ezek.  17.  4.  he  cropped  off  the  top  of  his  young  /.

22.  1  will  crop  off  from  the  top  of  his  young  t.
TWILIGHT.

1  Sam.  30.  17.  and  David  smote  them  from  the/.

2  Kings"!. 5.  the  lepers  rose  in  the  /.  to  go  to  the  camp
7.  the  Syrians  arose  and  tied  in  the  /.  left  tents

Job  3.  9.  let  the  stars  of  the  /.  thereof  be  dark
24. 15.  the  eye  of  the  adulterer  waiteth  for  the  /.
I’rov.  7.9-  he  went  the  way  to  her  house  in  the  /.
Ezek.  12.  6.  in  sight  thou  shalt  carry  it  forth  in  the  /.
7.  1  digged,  and  brought  it  forth  in  the  /.  and  bare

12.  the  prince  shall  bear  it  in  the  /.  and  go  forth
TW  I N  ED,  See  Fine,
TWINKLING.

I  Cor.  15.  52.  be  all  changed,  in  the  /.  of  an  eye
TWINS.

Gen.  25.  24.  Ilebekah  had  /.  ]|  38.  27.  Tamar  had  t.
Cant.  4.  2.  whereof  every  one  bear  /.  6.  6.

5.  thy  breasts  like  two  roes  that  are/.  7-  3.

TWO.

Gen.  4.  19-  and  Lamech  took  unto  him  /.  wives

6.  19.  /.  of  every  sort  shalt  thou  bring  into  the  ark

7.  2.  of  beasts  that  are  not  clean  by  /.  9.  15.

25.  23.  /.  nations  are  in  thy  womb,  and  /.  manner
of  people  shall  be  separated  from  thy  bowels
27-  36.  he  hath  supplanted  me  these  /.  times

32. 10.  over  Jordan,  and  now  I  am  become  /.  bands
49-  14.  Issachar  is  an  ass  couching  between  /.  burd.
Exod.  16.  22.  they  gathered  /.  omers  for  one  man

21.  21.  if  he  cont  inue  a  day  or  /.  not  be  punished
Lev.  5.  7-  shall  bring  /.  turtle-doves  or  /.  pigeons,

12.  8.  1 14.  22. 1  15.  14,  29.  Num.  6.  10.
11.  if  he  be  notable  to  bring/  turtle-doves
12.5.  if  a  maid,  then  she  shall  be  unclean  /.weeks

16.  7-  Aaron  shall  take  /.  goats  |j  8.  cast  lots  upon/.

24.  6.  shalt  set  the  cakes  in  /.  row  s,  six  on  a  row
Num.  7.  3.  brought  a  waggon  for  /.  of  the  princes

17./.  oxen,  23,  29,  .35,  41,  47,  53,  59,  05,71-

10.  2.  make  thee/,  trumpets  of  silver  for  calling

22.  22.  his  ass,  Balaam's/,  servants  were  with  him
29.  14.  the  /.  rams.  17,  20,  23,  26,  29,  32.

31. 27.  and  div  ide  the  prev  into  /.  parts
Dent.  3.  8.  /.  kings,  21.  I  4. '47.  Josh.  2.  10. 1  9.  10.

17.  6.  at  the  mouth  of  /.  or  three  w  itnesses  be  put

to  death,  19.  15.  Mat.  18.  16.  2  Cor.  13.  1.
21.  15.  if  a  man  have  /.  wives,  one  beloved
32.  30.  how  should  /.  put  ten  thousand  to  Might  ?
Josh.  14.  3.  /.  tribes,  4.  |  21.  16.  ]1  21.  25.  /.  ciiies
Judg.  5.  30.  divided  to  every  ma/11  a  damsel  or  /.
II.37.  let  me  alone /.  months,  that  1  may  bewail
16.  28.  that  I  may  be  av  enged  for  my  /.  eyes
Ruth  1. 19.  they  /.  went  till  they  came  to  Beth  lehem
4.  1 1.  which  /.  did  build  the  house  of  Israel

1  Sam.  1.2.  /.  wives,  27.  3.  |  30.  5,  18.  2  Sam.  2.  2.

2  Sam.  8.  2.  even  with  /.  lines  measured  he  to  p*it
1  Kings  2.  5  and  what  he  did  to  the  /.  captains


1  Kings  3.  18.  there  was  none  save  we  /.  in  the  house
5.  12.  Hiram  and  Sol.  /.  made  a  league  together

14.  and  /.  months  they  were  at  home

11.  29.  aud  they  /.  were  alone  in  the  held

12.  28.  Jeroboam  made  /.  calves,  2  Kings  17. 16

17.  12.  1  am  gathering  /.  sticks  to  dress  it

18.  21.  how  long  halt  ye  between  /.  opinions  ?

20.  27.  Israel  pitched  like  /.  little  ho, ks  of  kids

2  Kings  1.  14.  tire  burnt  up  the  /.  former  captains

2.  6.  they  /.  went  on  ||  24.  came  forth  /.  she-bears

5.  22.  give,  I  pray,  thee,  /.  changes  of  garments
2.3.  be  content,  take  /.  talents,  and  he  urged  him

7.  1.  /.  measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel,  16,  18.

10.  4.  behold,/,  kings  stood  not  before  him

1  Chron.  4.  5.  Ashur,  father  of  Tekoa,  had  /.  wives
11. 21.  of  three,  he  w  as  more  honourable  than  the  /

2  Chron.  24.  3.  Jehoiada  took  for  Joash  /.  wives
Job  13.  20.  only  do  not  /.  things  unto  me,  then

42.  7.  my  wrath  is  kindled  against  thy  /.  friends'
I’rov.  30.  7-  /.things  have  1  required  of  thee
Eccl.  4.  9.  /.are  better  than  one,  because  they  have

11.  if  /.  lie  together  ||  12.  /.  shall  withstand  him
Cant.  4. 5.  thy  /.  breasts  are  like  /.  young  roes,  7.  3.

6.  13.  .shulamite,  as  it  were  company  of  /.  armies
Isa.  17.  6.  /.  or  three  berries  in  top  ot  the  bough

47.  9.  but  these  /.  things  shall  come  to  thee
51.  19.  th“se  /.  things  are  come  unto  thee
Jer.  2.  13.  nv  pe.ple  have  committed  /.  evils

3.  14.  I  will  take  one  of  a  city,  and  /.  of  a  family
Ezek.  21.  19.  thou  son  of  man  appoint  thee  /.  ways

23.  2.  there  were  /.  women,  daughters  of  one

mother

35.  10.  hast  said,  these  /.  nations  shall  be  mine
37  .  22.  and  they  shall  be  no  more  /.  nations
47.  13.  tribesot  lsr.  Joseph  shall  have  /.  portions
Dan.  12.  5.  looked,  and  behold,  there  stood  other /.
Arnos  3.  3.  can  /.  walk  together,  except  they  be

agreed

4.  8.  so  /.  or  three  cities  wandered  unto  one  city
Zech.  4.  3.  /.  olive  trees  by  it,  11,  12.

14.  these  are  the  /.  anointed  ones  that  stand

5.  9.  there  came  out  t.  women  who  had  wings

6.  1.  four  chariots  from  between  /.  mountains
11.7.  I  took  unto  me  /.  staves  and  fed  the  Hock

13.  8.  /.  parts  therein  shall  be  cut  off  and  die
Mat.  6.  24.  no  mancan  serve  /.  masters,  Luke  16. 13.

18.  8.  than  having/,  hands  or  /.  feet,  Mark  9.  43.

9.  rather  than  having  /.  eyes,  Mark  9.  47.

16.  not  hear,  then  take  w  ith  thee  one  or  /.  more

19.  that  if  /.  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth  touching

20.  where  /.  or  three  are  gathered  in  my  name
22.  40.  on  these  /.  hang  all  the  law  and  prophets

24.  40.  then  shall  /.  be  in  the  held,  one  taken

25.  17.  he  that  had  received  /.  he  gained  other  /.
Mark  6.  7-  he  began  to  send  them  forth  by  /.  and  1.

11.  1.  he  sendeth  /.  disciples,  14.  13.  Luke  19.  29.

12.  42.  she  threw’  in  /.  mites,  which  make  a  farthing
16. 12.  after  that  Jesus  appeared  to  /.of  them

Luke  3.  11.  he  that  hath /.  coats,  let  him  impart

7.  41.  a  certain  creditor  which  had  /.  debtors

9.  3.  neither  take  money,  nor  have  /.  coats  apiece

10.  35.  took  out  /.  pence  and  gave  them  to  the  host
Acts  1.  24.  shew  whether  of  these  /.  thou  hast  chosen
1  Cor.  6.  16.  for  /.  shall  be  one  Hesh,  Eph.  5. 31.

14.  27.  let  it  be  by  /.  or  at  the  most  by  three

29.  let  prophets  speak  /.  or  three,  and  Jet  other
Gal.  4.  24.  an  allegory,  for  these  are  the  /.  covenants
Phil.  1.  23.  for  1  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  /.  a  desire
1  Tim.  5.  19.  but  before  /.  or  three  witnesses
Ileb.  6.  18.  that  by  /.  immutable  things  we  might

10.  28.  died  without  mercy  under/,  or  three  witn.
Rev.  9-  12.  thei  e  come  /.  w  oes  more  hereafter

11.  3.  1  will  give  powrer  to  my  /.  witnesses
4.  these  are  /.  olive  trees  and  /.  candlesticks
10.  because  these  /.  prophets  tormented  them

12.  14.  and  to  the  woman  weie  given  /.  wings

13.  11.  and  he  had  /.  horns  like  a  lamb,  spake  as
See  Daughters,  Days,  Kidneys,  Lambs,


1  yr  mt/t.

Exod.  2.  13.  /.  men  of  the  Hebrews  strove  together
Num.  11. 26.  there  remained  /.  men  in  the  camp
Josh.  2.  1.  he  sent  out  /.  men  to  spy  secretly
4.  Rahab  hid  the  /.  men  ||  23.  the  /.  men  returned

1  Sam.  10.  2.  find  t.rnen  by  Rachel’s  sepulchre

2  Sam.  12.  1.  there  were  /.  m.  inonocity,  one  rich
1  Kings  2.  32.  fell  on  /.  m  more  righteous  than  he

21.  10.  set  t.  m.  sons  of  Belial  before  Naboth,  13.
Mat.  9.  27.  t.  blind  men  followed  him,  crying
L.uke  9.  30.  behold,  there  talked  with  him  /.  men
17.  34.  /.  men  in  one  bed  H  36./.  men  in  the  field
18. 10.  /.  men  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray
24.  4.  as  they  were  perplexed,  behold,  /.  men
stood  by  them  in  shining  garments,  Acts  1.  10.
John  8.  17.  that  the  testimony  of  /.  men  is  true
Acts  9.  38.  they  sent  /.  men  to  Peter,  desiring  him
TWO  tables.


Exod.  31.  18.  gave  to  Moses  /.  tables  of  testimony
32.  15.  the  /.  tables  were  in  his  hands,  34.  29.

34. 1.  hew  thee  /.  tables  of  stone,  Dent.  10.  1.

4.  he  hewed  /.  tables  of  stone,  Dent.  10.  3.

Deut.  4.  13.  he  wrote  upon  the  /.  tables,  5.  22.

9.  10.  the  Lord  delivered  unto  me  /.  tables ,  11.

1  Kings  8.  9.  there  was  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the!

/.  tables  of  stone  put  at  Iloreb,  2  Chron.  5.  10.1
Ezek.  40.  39.  t.  tab.  on  this  side  ||  40.  /.  tab.  on  that
TWO  pears.

Gen.  11.  10.  begat  Arphaxad  /.  pears  after  the  hood
45.  6.  these  t.  pears  hath  the  famine  been  in  land  !

1  Sam.  13.  1.  when  Saul  had  reigned  /.  pears

2  Sam.  2.  10.  lsh-bosheth  Saul’s  son  reigned  t.pears>,

13.  23.  after  /.  pears,  Absalom  had  sheep  shearers

14.  28.  Absalom  dwelt  t.  pears  in  Jerusalem

1  Kings  15.25.  Nadab  reigned  over  Israel  /.  yeari
16.  8.  Klah  ||  22.  51.  Ahaziah  reigned  /.  pears

2  Kings  15.23.  Pekahiah  ||21.  19.  Amon,  2&/n'. 3.3.21.
2  Chron.  21.  19.  after  /.  pears  his  bowels  fell  out
Jer.  28.3.  w  ithin /.y.  I’ll  bring  again  vessels,  11.
Amos  1.  1.  words  of  Amos  t.p.  before  earthquake  1
Mat.  2.  16.  slew  children  from  /.  pears  and  under
Acts  19.  10.  /.  pears  they  in  Asia  heard  the  word

28.  30.  Paul  dwelt/,  pears  in  his  hired  housa


TJ  N  C


UNC


U  N  D


TWOFOLD.

Mat.  23. 1ft.  ye  make  him  t.  more  the  child  of  hell
See  Twenty.  Thirty,  Forty,  Fifty,  Hun¬
dred,  Thousand.

TYPES.

1  Cor.  10. 1 11 .  these  things  happened  to  tiiem  for  t.


U.


UMPIRE.

Job  9.  t  33.  neither  is  there  any  u.  betwixt  us
U  N  A CCUS 1 OMED.

Jer.  31.  18.  Ephraim,  as  a  bullock  u.  to  the  yoke
UNADVISEDLY.

Psal.  106.  33.  so  that  he  spake  ?/.  with  his  lips
UNAWARES.

Gen.  31.20.  Jacob  stole  away  u.  to  Laban,  26
Num.  35.  11.  slayer  may  flee  thither,  who  killeth
any  person  u.  15.  Dent.  4.  42.  Jonh.  20.  3, 9
Psal.  35.  8.  let  destruction  come  on  him  at  ?/.
Luke  21.  34.  and  sj  that  day  come  upon  you  u.
Gal.  2.  4.  because  of  false  brethren  v.  brought  in
Jleb.  13.2.  for  some  have  entertained  angels  u.
Jude  4.  for  there  are  certain  men  crept  in  u.
UNBELIEVERS.

Luke  12.46.  will  appoint  him  his  portion  with  n.

1  Cor.  6. 6.  but  brother  goeth  to  law  before  u.

14.  23.  and  there  come  in  those  that  are  u.

2  Cor.  6. 14.  be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  with  u.

UNBELIEVING.

Acts  14.  2.  the  u.  Jews  stirred  up  the  Gentiles
1  Cor.  7-  ,14.  for  the  u.  husband  is  sanctified  by  the
wife,  the  u  wire  is  sanctified  by  the  husband
r  15.  but  if  the  u.  depart,  let  him  depart,  a  brother
Tit.. 1.  15.  unto  them  that  are  ?/.  is  nothing  pure
llev.  21. 8.  the  u.  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake
UNBELIEF
Is  taken  sometimes  for  ueak  faith ,  as  in  Mark  9.
24.  Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  mine  unbelief.  It
is  a  capital  and  fountain  evil ;  and  generally  it
is  taken  for  a  privation  and  utter  want  of  faith,
when  the  promises  and  threatenings  in  God's  word
are  wholly  distrusted.  Those  Jews  who  did  not
rely  on  God's  word,  but  rejected  the  promises,  re¬
belled  against  the  precepts,  and  murmured  against
the  providence  of  God,  could  not  enter  into  the
promised  land,  but  were  consumed  in  the  wilder
ness,  Ueb.  3.  19.  And  this  nation  was  after¬
wards  rejected  by  God,  because  of  their  unbelief;
they  would  not  accept  of  Christ ;  nor  acknowledge
him  for  the  Messiah,  Rom.  11.  20.  because  of
unbelief,  they  were  broken  off.  And  as  the  Is¬
raelites,  by  reason  of  unbelief,  were  not  allowed
to  enter  into  Canaan,  so  unbelievers  shall  not  en¬
ter  into  heaven.  The  law  of  faith  is  unalterable .
John  3.  36.  He  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall
not  see  life.

Unbelief  renders  the  benefits  of  Christ  fruitless  and
ineffectual ;  it  is  said,  Mark  6.  5,  6.  that  Christ
could  do  no  mighty  works  in  his  own  country,  be¬
cause  of  their  unbelief ;  it  made  them  unfit  for
receiving  benefit  from  his  miracles,  and  therefore
he  suspended  his  miraculous  power.  Unbelief  often
begets  confusion,  and  disables  men  to  do  that
which  otherwise  they  would  have  been  able  to  do,
i  t  they  had  believed ;  thus  when  the  man  brought
his  son,  who  was  a  lunatic,  to  the  apostles,  to  be
cured  by  them  ;  they  seeing  his  condition  so  bad,
by  reason  of  the  devil  that  possessed  him,  and  that
for  so  long  a  time  together,  questioned  whether  the
power  they  had  received  would  enable  them  to
cast  him  out  and  cure  the  man.  Mat.  17.  16.  Un¬
belief  hath  often  corporal  punishment  attending
it  :  Zacharias,  because  he  believed  not  the  words
o)  the  angel,  was  struck  dumb  for  a  season,  Luke
1.  20.  Unbelievers  have  their  part  in  the  lake
that  burns  with  fire  and  brimstone.  Rev.  21.  8.
Christ  died  not  to  expiate  final  infidelity.  This
sin  charges  all  the  guilt  of  sinners  upon  them¬
selves.  It  renders  the  sufferings  of  Christ  fruit¬
less  as  to  them :  Lor  it  is  not  the  preparation
of  a  sovereign  remedy  that  cures  the  disease
but  the  application  of  it.  As  our  sins  were  im¬
puted  to  Christ,  upon  account  of  his  union  with
us  in  nature,  and  his  consent  to  become  our
surety  ;  so  his  righteousness  is  meritoriously  im¬
puted  unto  us,  upon  our  union  with  him  by  a
true  and  lively  faith.  It  is  not  from  any  defect
oj  mercy  m  God,  or  righteousness  in  Christ,  but
Jor  the  obstinate  refusal  of  it,  that  men  certainly
perish  in  unbelief.

Rdat.  fi.  58.  he  did  not  many  works,  because  of  u.

7i  7'  c?u  ^  not  cast  him  out,  because  of  your  u.
■Mark  marvelled  because  of  their  u.

9.-4.  Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  mine  u.

16.  14.  and  upbraided  them  with  their  u.

Rom.  3.  3.  shall  their  u.  mane  faith  without  effect  ?
4.20.  he  staggered  not  at  the  promise  through  u.

-G;  20.  ^ell>  because  of  u.  they  were  broken  off
23.  it  they  abide  not  still  in  u.  shall  be  grafted
30.  yet  have  now  obtained  mercy  thro’  their  u.

I  God  hath  concluded  them  all  in  u.

Rph.  5.  +  6.  the  wrath  of  God  on  the  children  of  u
'  L  because  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  u.

neb.  3. 12.  lest  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  of  u.

19.  they  could  not  enter  in  because  of  u.  4.  6.

4. 11.  lest  any  fall  after  the  same  example  of  ?/

.  ,  UN  B  LAM  FABLE.

Ce/  L  22.  to  present  you  holy,  u.  in  his  sight
1  Thess.  3. 13.  he  may  stablish  your  hearts  u
UN  B  L A  M  KA B LY.

1  lhtss.  2. 10.  how  u.  we  have  behaved  ourselves
..  UNCERTAIN.

l  Cor.  14.8.  if  the.  trumpet  give  an  u.  sound
i  lim.  6. 17.  nor  trust  in  u.  riches,  but  in  God
UNCERTAINLY.

1  c or .  9.  26. 1  therefore  so  run,  not  as  u.  so  fight  I

„  .  „  „  ,  unchangeable.

but  this  man  hath  an  u.  priesthood

,,  „  UNCI  HCUMCISEI).

W».  17.  14.  the  u.  man-child  shall  be  cut  off


Gen.  34.  14.  cannot  give  our  sister  to  one  that  is  u.
Exod.  6.  12.  Pharaoh  hear  trie  who  am  of  u.  lips,  30
12.  48.  tor  no  v .  person  shall  eat  of  the  passover
Lev.  19.  23.  shall  count  the  fruit  u.  three  years
26.  41.  if  then  their  u.  hearts  be  humbled
Josh  5.7.  Joshua  circumcised,  for  they  were  u.
Judg.  i4.  3.  that  thou  goest  to  take  a  wife  of  the  u.
15.  18.  now  shall  l  fall  into  the  hands  of  these  u.

1  Sam.  14.  6.  let  us  go  to  the  garrison  of  the  u.

17.  26.  for  who  is  this  u.  Philistine  ?  36.

31.  4.  lest  these  u.  come  and  abuse  me,  1  Chr.  10.  4.

2  Sam.  1.  20.  lest  the  (laughters  of  the  u.  triumph
Isa.  52.  1 .  there  shall  no  more  come  into  thee  the  u.
Jer.  6.  10.  their  ear  is  u.  they  cannot  hearken

9.  25.  I  will  punish  the  circumcised  with  the  n.

26.  these  nations  are  u.  all  house  of  Israel  are  u.

Ezek.  28.  10.  thou  slialt  die  the  death  of  the  u.

31.  18.  thou  shalt  lie  in  the  midst  of  the  u.  32.  19

21, 24,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30,  32

44.  7.  ye  have  brought  strangers  ?/.  in  heart  and  u

in  flesh  into  my  sanctuary  to  pollute  it,  9,
Acts  7.  51.  ye  stiff  necked  and  u.  in  heart  and  ears

11.  3.  thou  wentest  in  to  men  7/.  and  didst  eat
Rom.  4.  11.  faith  which  he  had  yet  being  u.  12.

1  Cor."!.  18.  circumcised,  let  him  not  become  u.

;  UNCI RCUMC1S ION.

Rom.  2.  25.  it  a  breaker,  thy  circumcision  is  made  u

26.  if  the  u.  keep  the  righteousness  of  the  law

shall  not  his  u..  be  counted  for  circumcision

27.  shall  not  u.  which  is  by  nature  judge  theer

3.  30.  which  shall  justify  the  u.  through  faith

4.  9.  cometh  this  blessedness  on  circumcision  or  u.

10.  how  was  it  then  reckoned  ?  when  he  was  in  cir
^  cumcision  or  in  u.  not  in  circumcision  but  n

1  Cor.  J.  18.  is  any  man  called  in?/.  ?  let  him  notbt

19.  circumcision  is  nothing,  and  u.  is  nothing
Gal.  2. 7.  when  saw  the  gospel  oft/,  committed  to  m<

5.  6.  neither  circumcision  availeth  nor  ?/.  6.  15.
Eph.  2.  11.  who  are  called  u.  by  that  called  circum
Col.  2. 13.  and  you  being  dead  in  the  u.  of  your  flesl

3.  11.  neither  circumcision  nor  u.  but  Christ  is  all
UNCLE.

Lev.  10.  4.  the  son  of  Uzziel,  the  u.  of  Aaron

20.  20.  if  a  man  lie  with  his  u.  wife,  he  hath  unco
vered  his  u.  nakedness,  they  shall  hear  their  sir
25.  49.  either  his  u.  or  ?/.  son  may  redeem  him
1  Sam.  10.  14.  and  Saul's  u.  said  unto  him,  15.

14.  50.  captain  was  Abner,  son  of  Ner,  Saul’s  u.

1  Chron.  27.  32.  Jonathan  David’s  ?/.  a  counsellor
Esth.  2.7.  Mordecai  brought  up  his?/.  daughter,  15,
Jer.  32.  7.  Hanameel  the  son  of  Shallum  thine  u.

8.  so  Hanameel  my  u.  son  came  onto  me,  9.  12.
Amos  6.  10.  and  a  man’s  u.  shall  take  him  up
UNCLEAN.

Lev.  5.  2.  if  a  soul  touch  any  u.  thing  the  carcase
of  u.  cattle  or  u.  things,  be  shall  he  u.  H.  26.

10.  10.  putdifference  between  u.  and  clean,  11.47.

11.  4.  it  is  11.  to  you,  5,  6,  7,  29,  Dent.  14. 19.

8.  they  are  7/.  unto  you,  26, 27  ,  28,  31.  Deut.  14.  7.
24.  tor  these  ye  shall  be  u.  u.  until  the  evening,
25,  28,  31,  32,  33,  39,  40.  |  14.  46.  |  15.  5,  f),
7.  8,  10,  11,  16,  17,  18,  19,  21,  22,23,  27.  I  17.
15.  |  22.  6.  Num.  19.  7,  8,  10,  21,  22.

32.  it  shall  be  u.  33,  34,  35,  36,  38.  |  15.  4,  9,  20,

24,  26.

12.  2.  then  she  shall  be 7/.  seven  days,  5.  1 15.  25.
13.3.  priest  shall  look  on  him  and  pronounce  him

8,  11,  15,  20,  22,  25,  27,30,  44,  59.

11.  for  he  is  u.  14.  36,  44,  46.  |  15.  2,  24.

45.  the  leper,  in  whom  the  plague  is,  shall  cry,?/.  ?/.
14.40.  they  shall  cast  them  intoan  ?/.  place,  41. 45.

57.  to  teach  when  it  is  u.  and  when  it  is  clean
22.  5.  whoso  toucheth,  whereby  he  may  be  made  ?/.
Num.  6.  7.  he  shall  not  make  himself?/,  for  father
Deut.  12.  15.  ?/.  and  clean  eat  thereof,  22.  1  15.  22.
Josh.  22.  19.  if  the  land  of  your  possession  be  ?/.
Ezra  9.  11.  the  land  ye  go  to  possess  is  an  ?/.  land
Job  36.  14.  the  life  of  hypocrites  is  among  the  u.
Eccl.  9.  2.  there  is  one  event  to  the  clean  and  7/.

Isa.  6.  5.  1  am  undone,  I  am  a  man  of  ?/.  lips,  I
dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  ?/.  lips
35.  8.  be  a  way,  the  ?/.  shall  not  pass  over  it
52. 1.  there  shall  no  more  come  into  thee  the?/.
Lam.  4.  15.  depart  ye,  it  is  u.  depart,  dep.  touch  not
Ezek.  22.26.  put  no  difference  between  clean  and  u.
44.  23.  cause  them  discern  between  the  clean  and  u.
Dos.  9.  3.  they  shall  eat  u.  things  in  Assyria
Dag.  2.  13.  if  one  that  is  ?/.  touch  it,  shall  it  be  u.

14.  and  that  which  they  offer  there  is  ?/.

Isike  4.  33.  a  man  who  had  a  spirit  of  an  ?/:  devil
Acts  10.  28.  not  call  any  man  common  or  u.  11.  8
Rom.  14.  14.  nothing  is  ?/.  of  itself,  but  to  him  that
esteemeth  any  thing  to  he  u.  to  him  it  is  u.

1  Cor.  7-  14.  else  were  your  children  ?/.  but  now

2  Cor.  6.  17.  touch  not  ?/.  thing,  I  will  receive  you
Eph.  5.  5.  that  no  u.  person  hath  any  inheritance
Deb.  9.  13.  the  ashes  of  an  heifer  sprinkling  the  ?/.
Rev.  18.  2.  Babvl.  is  become  a  cage  of  every  u.  bird

See  Beast,  Spirit,  Thing.
UNCLEAN  Spirits.

Mat.  10.  1 .  he  gave  power  against  ?/.  spir.  Mark  6.7.
Mark  1.  27.. he  conimandeth  ?/.  spirits,  Luke  4.  36.

3.  11.  and  u.  spirits,  when  they  saw  him,  cried
5.  13.  the  u.  spirits  went  out  and  entered  into  swine
Acts  5.  16.  them  which  were  vexed  with  u.  spirits
8.  7- for  ?/.  spirits  came  out  of  many  possessed
Rev.  16.  13.  1  saw  three  ?/.  spirits  like  frogs  come
UNCLEANNESS.

Lev.  5.  3.  if  he  touch  the  ?/.  of  man,  whatsoever  u.

it  he,  a  man  shall  be  defiled,  7.  21 .  I  22.  5.
7.  20.  that  eateth,  haying  his  ?/.  on  him,  22.  3.

14.  19.  for  him  that  is  to  be  cleansed  from  his  u.

15.  31.  thus  ye  shall  separate  Israel  from  their  u.

18.  49.  as  long  as  she  is  put  apart  for  her  u.

Rum.  5.  19.  it  thou  hast  not  gone  aside  to  u.

19.  13.  he  shall  be  unclean,  his?/,  is  yet  upon  him
Deut.  23.  10.  by  reason  of  u.  that  chanceth  him
24.  1.  because  he  hath  found  some  ?/.  in  her

2  S am.  11.4.  for  she  was  purified  from  her  ?/.

2  Chron.  29.  16.  the  priests  brought  out  all  the  u.
■Ezra  9.  11.  they  have  filled  the  land  with  their?/.
Ezek.  36.  17.  wav  as  the  ?/  of  a  removed  woman


Ezek. 39.24. according  to  their  ?/.  have  1  done  to  them
Zech.  13.  ].  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  u
Mat.  23.  27.  but  are  within  full  of  hones,  and  all «.
Rom.  1.  24.  wherefore  God  also  gave  them  up  tou.

6.  19.  ye  have  yielded  your  members  servants  tot/.
2  Cor.  12.21.  and  have  not  repented  of  the  u.

Gal.  5. 19.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  these,  v.  strife
Eph.  4.  19.  to  work  all  u.  with  greediness

5  3.  all  u.  let  not  be  once  be  named  among  you
Col.  3.  5.  mortify  therefore  fornication,  ?/.  and  covet.

1  Thess.  2.  3.  for  our  exhortation  was  not  of  u.

4.  7-  God  hath  not  called  us  to?/,  but  to  holiness

2  Ret.  2. 10.  them  that  walk  in  the  lust  of  u.

UN  CLEAN  NESSES.

Ezek.  36.  29.  1  will  save  you  from  ail  your  u.
UNCLOTHED.

2  Cot .  5.  4.  not  for  that  we  would  be  u.  but  clothed
UNCOMELY.

I  Cor.  7.  36.  that  lie  beliaveth  u.  towards  his  virgin

12.  23.  our  u.  parts  have  more  abundant  comeliness
UNCONDEMN  ED.

Acts  16.  37.  they  have  beaten  us  openly  u.  Romans
22.  25.  to  scourge  a  man  that  is  a  Roman  and  u.  ,
UNCORRUPTNESS.

Tit. 2.  7.  in  doctrine  shewing?/,  gravity,  sincerity
UNCOVER.

Lev.  10.  6.  u.  not  your  heads  neither  rend  clothes
18.  6.  not  u.  nakedness  of  one  that  is  near  of  kin

7.  the  nakedness  of  thy  father  shalt  thou  not  ?/.

8.  nakedness  of  thy  father’s  wife  ||9.  of  thy  sister

10.  nakedness  of  thy  son’s  daughter  shalt  not  ?/.

11.  the  nakedness  of  thy  father’s  wife’s  daughter

12.  father’s  sister  ||  13.  mother’s  sister,  20.  19.

14.  not  u.  the  nakedness  ofthy  father’s  brother

15.  thy  daughter-in  law  ||  16.  thy  brother's  wile

17.  not  w.the  nakedness  of  a  woman  and  her  da  ugh.

18.  shalt  not  u.  the  nakedness  of  thy  wife’ssister
19-  not  7/.  nakedness  of  a  woman  put  apart,  20.  18.

21.  10.  the  high  priest  shall  not  u.  his  head
Num.  5.  18.  the  priest  shall  u.  the  woman’s  head
Ruths.  4.  and  thou  shalt  go  in  and  u.  his  feet

1  Sam.  20.  +  2.  he  will?/,  mine  ear||  t  12.  ?/.  thine  ear
Isa.  47.2.  ?/.  thy  locks,  u.  the  thigh  passover

UNCOVERED.

Gen.  9.  21.  and  Noah  was  ?/.  within  his  tent
Lev.  20.  11.  he  hath  ?/.  his  father’s  nakedness

17.  ?/.  his  sister’s  ||20.  u.  his  uncle’s  nakedness

18.  she  hath  ?/.  the  fountain  of  her  blood

Ruth  3.  7.  she  came  softly  and  u.  his  feet  and  laid

2  Sam.  6.  20.  who  u.  himself  as  the  vain  fellow's
Isa.  20.  4.  led  away  even  with  their  buttocks  ?/.

22.  6.  Elam  bare  the  quiver,  and  Kir  ?/.  the  shield
47.  3.  thy  nakedness  shall  be  u.  thy  shame  seen

Jer.  49.  10.  but  I  have?/,  his  secret  places
Ezek.  4.  7.  and  thine  arm  shall  he  ?/.  shalt  prophesy
Dab.  2.  16.  drink,  and  let  thy  foreskin  be  ?/.

Mark  2.  4.  they  u.  the  roof  where  he  was  ,

1  Cor.  11.  5.  that  prophesieth  with  her  head  ?/.

13.  is  it  comely  that  a  woman  pray  unto  God  n  4

UN COVER EPH.

Lev.  20.  19.  lor  he  u.  his  near  kin,  hear  their  iniquity
Deut.  27.  20.  because  he  ?/.  his  father’s  skirt

1  Sam.  22.  +8.  there  is  none  that 7/.  mine  ear

2  Sam.  6.  20.  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  u.  himself
Job  33.  f  16.  he  ?/.  the  ears  of  men  and  sealeth

UNCTION.

1  John  2.  20.  but  ye  have  an  u.  from  the  Holy  One
UNDEFILED.

Psal.  1 1 9.  1.  blessed  are  the  u.  in  the  way
Cant.  5.  2.  open  to  me  my  love,  my  dove,  my  ?/.

6.  9.  my  dove,  my  ?/.  is  one ;  she  is  the  only  one
Deb.  7.  26.  an  high  priest  who  is  holy,  harmless,?/.

13.  4.  marriage  is  honourable  in  all,  and  the  bed?/.
Jam.  1.  27.  pure  religion  and  ?/.  before  God
1  Pet.  1.4.  to  an  inheritance  incorruptible,?/.

„  .  UNDER.

Gen.  49.  25.  blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  ?/.

Exod.  6.  6. 1  will  bring  you  out  from?/,  the  burdens
Josh.  7.  21 .  in  the  midst  of  my  tent  and  silver  u.  it
Ruth  2.  12.?/.  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to  trust
1  Sam.  21 . 3.  what  is  u.  thy  hand  give  me  five  loaves

1  King i  18.  23.  Jay  it  on  wood,  and  put  no  fire  ?/.

2  Kings  8.  20.  Edom  revolted  from  u.  hand  of  Judah

13.  5.  Israel  went  out  from  u.  the  Syrians

2  Chr.  28. 10.  ye  purpose  to  keep  ?/.  Jud-*h  for  bond.
Psal.  44.  5.  through  thy  name  will  wc  tread  them  u.
Cant.  8.  3.  his  right  hand  should  be  ?/.  my  head
Isa.  57.  5.  with  idols?/,  every  green  tree,  Jer.  2.  20.
Jer.  10.  11.  the  g odft,  they  shall  perish  from  the
earth,  a^d  rrom  u.  these  heavens,  Lam.  3.  66.
Dan.  4.  14.  let  the  beasts  getaway  from  u.  it

9.  12.  ?/.  the  whole  heaven  hath  not  been  done
Dos.  4.  12.  have  gone  a  whoring  from  u.  their  God
Mat.  2.  16.  slew'  children  from  two  years  old  and  ?/.
8.  9.  1  am  ?/.  authority,  having  soldiers  u.  me

Luke  7.  6.  that  thou  shouldst  enter  ?/.  my  roof
John  1 . 48.  when  thou  wast  ?/.  the  fig-tree,  I  saw  thee
Rom.  3.  9.  we  have  proved  that  they  are  all  ?/.  sin
6. 15.  because  we  are  not?/,  the  law,  but?/,  grace
7.14.  the  law  is  spiritual,  but  1  am  carnal,  sold  ?/.sin
1  Cor.  6.  12.  1  w'ill  not  be  brought?/,  power  of  any
9-  20.  to  them  that  are  a.  the  law',  as  ?/.  the  law
27.  I  keep  ?/.  my  body  and  bring  it  into  subjection

10.  1.  how  that  all  our  fathers  were  ?/.  the  cloud
Gal.  3. 10.  ?/.  the  curse  ||  22.  concluded  all  ?/.  sin

23.  before  faith  came,  we  were  kept  ?/.  the  law
25.  faith  is  come,  we  are  no  longer?/,  a  school,  mas.

Phil.  2. 10.  of  things  inearth  and  things?/.  *he  earth
1  Tim.  6.  1.  as  many  servants  as  are  ?/.  the  yoke
Deb.  7.  11.  for  ?/.  it  the  people  received  the" law
Judef i.  he  hath  reserved  m  chains  u.  darkness
See  Feet,  Him,  Law,  Me,  Sun,  Thee,  Them
Us.

UNDERGIRDING.

Acts2J.  17.  they  used  helps,  u.  the  ship,  fearing
UNDERNEATH.

Deut.  33.  27.  and  ?/.  are  the  everlasting  arms
UNDERSETTERS.

1  Kings  7.  30.  the  four  corners  thereof  had  u.  34.
UNDERSTAND.

Gen.  11.7-  they  may  not  u.  one  another’s  speed'

41.  15.  I  heard  sav  that  thou  canst  u.  a  dream

T  .529


UND


V  N  I


U  N  D


\’um.  16.  30.  ye  shall  ?/.  that  these  have  provoked
Deut.  28.  49.  a  nation  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  ?/.

2  Kings  18.  26.  speak,  l  pray  thee,  to  thy  servants  in
the  Syrian  language,  tor  we  u.  it,  ha.  80.  11.

]  Chron.  28.  19-  the  Lord  made  me  u.  in  writing
Kelt.  8.  *3.  he  read  before  those  that  could  u.

7  the  Levites  caused  the  people  tow.  the  law, 8, 13.
Job  6.  24.  cause  me  to  u.  wherein  1  have  erred
23  5  1  would  ?/.  what  he  would  say  unto  me
26.  14.  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  can  u.?

32.  9.  neither  do  the  aged  u.  judgment
.36.  29.  can  any  u.  the  spreadings  of  the  clouds  r
Dsai  14.  2.  it  there  were  any  that  did  u.  53.  2.

19  12.  who  can  u.  his  errors:  cleanse  thou  me
82’  5.  they  know  not,  neither  will  they  u.

92.  6.  knoweth  not,  neither  doth  a  fool  u.  this
94’  8  m  ye  brutish  among  the  people,  and,  ye  fools
107  .  43.  they  shall  u.  the  loving  kindness  of  the  L.
119.  27-  make  me  «.  the  way  of  thy  precepts
100.  I  v.  more  than  the  ancients,  because  I  keep
prut,  2.  5.  then  shalt  thou  it.  the  fear  of  the  Lord

9.  then  shalt  thou  u.  righteousness  and  equity

8.  5.  O  ye  simple,  u.  wisdom,  and,  ye  fools,  be  of

14.  8.  the  wisdom  of  the  prudent  is  to  u.  his  way

19.  25.  reprove  one,  amt  he  will  u.  knowledge

20.  24.  how  can  a  man  then  ?/.  his  own  way  r

28.  5.  evil  men  ?/.  not  judgment,  but  they  that  ^

seek  the  I  ord  u.  all  things

29.  19.  for  though  he  u.  he  will  not  answer
Isa.  6.  9.  he  said,  hear  ye  indeed,  but  u.  not

10.  lest  they  it.  with  their  heart,  John  12.  40.

28.  9.  whom  shall  he  make  to  u.  doctrine  ?

19.  it  shall  be  a  vexation  only  to  u.  the  report

32.  4.  the  heart  of  the  rash  shall  u.  knowledge

33.  19.  a  stammering  tongue  that  thou  canst  not  u.

40.  +  14.  and  who  made  him  u  and  taught  him  ?  [

41.  20.  u.  together  that  the  Lord  hath  done  this
43  10.  that  ye  may  know  and  u.  that  1  am  he
44.  18.  he  hath  shut  their  hearts,  that  they  cannot  u.
56.  11.  and  they  are  shepherds  that  cannot  ?/.

Jer.  9.  12.  who  is  the  wise  man  that  may  u.  this?
Ezek.  3.  6.  to  people  whose  words  thou  canst  not  u.
Dan.  8.  16.  make  this  man  to  ?/.  the  vision  ,

17  but  he  said  unto  me,  u.  O  son  of  man

9.  13.  and  u.  thy  truth  II  23.  u.  the  matter,  25.  1

10  12.  from  the  day  thou  didst  set  thy  heart  to  u.
14.  I  am  come  to  make  thee  u.  what  shall  befall

11.  3.3.  and  they  that  11.  shall  instru  t  many

12.  10.  the  wicked  shall  not?/.  the  wise  shall  ?/.
Dos.  4.  14.  the  people  that  doth  not  u.  shall  fall

14.  9.  who  is  vvise,  and  he  shall  it.  these  things  ?
Mic.  4.  12.  neither  u.  they  the  counsel  of  the  Lord
Mat.  1.3.  1.3.  they  hear  not,  neither  do  they  u.

14.  hear  and  not  u.  ||  15.  10.  hear  and  u.  Mark  7.1  A.

15.  17.  do  not  ye  yet  u.  ?  16.  9,  11.  Mark  8.  17,  21.
24.  15.  whoso  readeth,  let  him  u.  Mark  1.3.  14.

Mark  12.  and  not  perceive,  that  hearing  they
m*ay  hear  and  not  u.  Luke  8.  10.  Acts  28.  26.
14.  68.  I  know  not  nor  u.  I  what  thou  savest
Luke  24.  45.  that  they  might  it.  the  scriptures
John  8.  43.  why  do  y  e  not  u.  my  speech  3
Rom.  15.  21.  they  that  have  not  heard  shall  u.

1  Cor.  1.3.2.  and  tho’  1  u.  all  mysteries  am  nothing
Deb.  11.3.  thro’  faith  we  it.  the  worlds  were  framed

2  Pet.  2.  12.  but  these  speak  evil  of  things  they  u.  not

UN  D  ERSTA  N  D  EST.

Job  15.  9.  what  u.  thou,  which  is  not  in  us  ?

Psal.  1.39.  2.  thou  it.  rr.v  thoughts  afar  off
Jer.  5.  15.  neither  u.  thou  what  they  say
Acts  8.  30.  Philip  said,  it.  thou  what  thou  readest
UK  DERSTAKDETH.

1  Chron.  28.  9.  Lord  ?/.  the  imaginations  of  thoughts
Job  28.  2.3.  God  u.  the  way  thereof  and  knoweth
Psal.  49.  20.  man  that  is  in  honour  and  u.  not
Proi 1.  8.  9.  they  are  all  plain  to  him  that  it.

14.  6.  but  knowledge  is  easy  unto  him  that  it.

Jer.  9.  24.  let  him  glory  in  this,  that  he  it.  me
Mat.  1.3.  19.  when  any  heareth  the  word  and  u.  it  not
2.3.  is  he  that  heareth  the  word  and  u.  it
Rom.  3.  11.  there  is  none  that?/,  none  eeketh  God
1  Cor.  14.  2.  speaketh  not  to  men,  for  no  man  u.

16.  say  amen,  seeing  he  ?/.  not  what  thou  sayest
UNDERSTAN  DING.

Eiod.  31.3. 1  have  filled  Bezaleel  with  wisdom  and
it.  and  in  knowledge,  .35.  31.  1  36.  1.
Dent.  4.  6.  for  this  is  your  wisdom  and  your  u.

32.  28.  neither  is  there  any  it.  in  them
1  Kings  .3.  1 1 .  but  hast  asked  for  thyself?/,  to  discern

4.  29.  and  God  gave  Solomon  wisdom  and  11.

7.  14.  Hiram  was  filled  with  wisdom  and  it.

1  Chron.  12.  32.  were  men  that  had  u.  of  the  times
22.  12.  only  the  Lord  give  thee  wisdom  and  u.

2  C 'hr.  2.  12.  given  David  a  wise  son  endued  with  u.
26  5.  Zechariah  had  u.  in  the  visions  of  God

Ezra  8.  16.  for  .loiarib  and  Elnathan  men  of  u.
Kelt.  8.  2.  before  all  that  could  hear  with  u.

10.  28.  every  one  having  knowledge  and  having u.
Job  12.  .3.  but  1  have  u.  as  well  as  you
12.  in  length  of  days  is  it.  ||  1.3.  he  hath?/.

20.  he  taketh  away  the  11.  of  the  aged

17.  4.  for  thou  hast  hid  their  heart  from  u.

20.  .3.  the  spirit  of  my  11.  causeth  me  to  answer
26.  12.  and  by  his  u.  he  smiteth  through  the  proud
28.  12.  and  wheie  is  the  place  of  u.T  20.

28.  t"  man  he  Said,  to  depart  from  evil  is  u.

32.  8.  t<  e  inspiration  of  Almighty  giveth  them  u.

34.  10  therefore  hearken  to  me,  ye  men  of  u.

16.  if  now  thou  hast  it.  hear  this,  hearken
.34.  let  men  of  u.  tell  me,  let  a  wise  man  hearken

38.  4.  where  wast  thou  ?  declare,  if  thou  hast  u.
36.  or  who  hath  given?/,  to  the  heart?

39.  17-  neither  hath  he  imparted  to  her  it.

Psal.  .32.  9.  be  ye  not  as  the  mule  that  hath  no  u.

47.  7.  God  is  the  King,  sing  ye  praises  with  ?/.

49.  3.  the  meditation  of  my  heart,  shall  be  of  u.
119.  34.  give  me  u.  73,  125,  144,  169.

99.  1  have  more  u.  ||  1.30.  thy  word  giveth  u.

104.  thro’ thy  precepts  I  get  it.  therefore  I  bate
147.  5.  great  is  our  Lord,  ids?/,  is  infinite
Prov.  1.  2.  to  know  wisdom,  to  perceive  words  of  u

2.  2.  so  that  thou  apply  thine  heart  to  ?/.

3.  and  if  thou  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  u


Prov.  2.  6.  out  of  his  mouth  cometh  knowled.  and  u.

11.  discretion  preserve  thee,  ?/.  shall  keep  thee
.3.  5.  trust  in  the  Lord  and  lean  not  to  thine  own  u.

1.3.  happy  is  the  man  that  getteth  ?/.

19.  by  11.  hath  he  established  the  heavens

4.  1.  ye  children,  attend  to  know  u.  ||  5.  get?/.  7.

5.  1.  my  son,  bow  thine  ear  to  my  ?/.

6.  .32.  whoso  committeth  adultery,  lacketh  u.

7.  4.  thou  art  my  sister,  and  call  u.  thy  kinswoman

8.  1.  and  doth  not  ?/.  put  forth  her  voice  ?

14.  I  am  u.  II  9.  6.  and  go  in  the  way  of  11.

9.  4.  as  for  him  that  wanteth  u.  she  saith.  16.

10.  and  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  is  ?/.

10.  13.  in  lips  of  him  that  hath  //.  wisdom  is  found

14.  29.  he  that  is  slow  to  wrath  is  of  great  u.

.33.  wisdom  resteth  in  heart  of  him  that  hath  u.

15.  14.  heart  of  him  that  hath  //.seeks  knowledge
.32.  but  he  that  heareth  reproof  getteth  u.

16.  16.  to  get  11.  rather  to  be  chosen  than  silver
22.  it.  is  a  well-spring  of  life  to  him  that  hath  it

17.24.  wisdom  is  before  him  that  hath  11.

18. 2.  a  fool  hath  no  delight  in  ?/.  but  thathis  heart
19,8.  he  that  keepeth  it.  shall  find  good

25.  reprove  one  that  hath  ?/.  he  will  understand
21.  16.  a  man  that  wandereth  out  of  the  way  ot  u.

30.  there  is  no  11.  nor  counsel  against  the  Loid
23.2.3.  buy  also  wisdom,  and  instruction,  and  it.

24.  .3.  and  by  it.  an  house  is  established
28.  1 1.  the  poor  that  hath  it.  searcheth  him  out
16.  the  prince  that  wanteth  11.  is  an  oppressor
30.  2.  and  have  not  the  u.  of  a  man
Eccl.  9.  11.  bread  to  wise  nor  yet  riches  to  men  of  u.
Isa.  11.  2.  the  spirit  of  ?/.  shall  rest  upon  him
.3.  make  him  of  quick  ?/.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord
27.  11.  for  it  is  a  people  of  no  it.  therefore  he  that
29. 14.  tlie  v.  of  their  prudent  men  shall  be  hid

16.  say  ol  him  that  framed  it,  he  had  no  u.  ?

24.  they  also  that  erred  in  spirit  shall  come  to  ?/.

40.  14.  and  who  shewed  to  him  the  way  of  it.  ?

28.  the  Lord,  there  is  no  searching  of  his  11.

44.  19.  neither  is  there  knowledge  nor  ?/.  to  say
Jer.  .3. 15.  give  pastors  which  shall  feed  you  with  it.

4.  22.  for  my  people  is  foolish,  they  have  no  u.

5.  21.  hear,  O  foolish  people,  and  without  u.

51.  15.  he  hath  stretched  out  the  heaven  by  his  11.
Ezek.  28.  4.  with  thy  ?/.  thou  hast  got  riches
Dan.  1.  17.  Daniel  had  ?/.  in  visions  and  dreams

20.  in  all  matters  of  7/.  he  found  them  better
2.21.  he  giveth  knowledge  to  them  that  know  u.

4.  34.  mine  u.  returned  to  me,  I  blessed  Most  High
5. 11.  light  and  u.  was  found  in  him,  12,  14.

9.  22.  1  am  now  come  forth  to  give  thee  u.

10.  1.  and  Daniel  had  it.  of  the  vision

11. 35.  some  of  them  of  ?/.  shall  fall,  to  try  them
Hos.  1.3.2.  havemade  idols  according  to  their  own?/.

;  Chad.  7.  a  wound  under  thee,  there  is  no  ?/.  in  him
8.  shall  I  not  destroy  u.  out  of  the  mount  of  Esau  ?
Mat.  15. 16.  are  ye  also  yet  without?/.  !  Mark  7.  18.
Mark  12.  33.  and  to  love  him  with  all  the  ?/.

Luke  1.  .3.  to  me,  having  had  perfect  it.  of  things
2.47.  all  that  heard  were  astonished  at  his  11.

24.  45.  then  opened  he  their  it.  that  they  might
Rom.  1.31.  without  ?/.  covenant-breakers

1  Cor.  1. 19.  bring  to  nothing  the  ?/.  of  the  prudent
14.  14.  my  spirit  prayeth,  but  my  v.  is  unfruitful

15.  1  will  pray  with  the  u.  sing  with  the  it.

19.  1  had  rather  speak  five  words  with  my  ?/.

20.  be  not  children  in  u.  but  in  it.  be  men
Eph.  1. 18.  the  eyes  of  your  ?/.  being  enlightened

4.  18.  having  the  it.  darkened,  being  alienated
Phil.  4.  7.  the  peace  ot  God  which  passeth  all  11.
Col.  1.  9.  thatye  might  be  filled  with  all  spiritual  u.

2.2.  to  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of?/.

2  Tim.  2.  7.  the  l.ord  give  thee  ?/.  in  all  things

]  John  5.  20.  the  Son  of  God  hath  given  us  an  it.
Rev.  13. 18.  him  that  hath  it.  count  number  of  beast
See  Good.

Man  of  UK  D  E  R  ST  A  K  D I K  G .

I  Ezra  8. 18.  and  they  brought  us  a  man  of  u.

Prov.  1. 5.  a  man  of  11.  shall  attain  unto  wise  counsels
|  10.2.3.  but  a  man  of  11.  hath  wisdom
'  11.  12.  but  a  man  of  u.  holdeth  his  peace
j  15.  21.  but  a  man  of  11.  walketh  uprightly

17.  27.  a  man  of  u.  is  of  an  excellent  spirit

28.  that  shutteth  his  lips,  is  esteemed  a  man  of  u.

20.  5.  but  a  man  of  u.  will  draw  out  counsel

28.2.  by  a  man  of  it.  the  state  shall  be  prolonged

Void  of  UND  ERSTAK  DIKG.

|  Prov.  7.  7.  1  discerned  a  young  man  void  of  11.

10. 1.3.  a  rod  for  back  of  him  that  is  void  of  u.

12.  11.  that  followed?  vain  persons  is  void  of  u.

I  17.  18.  a  man  void  of  it.  striketh  hands,  is  surety

24.  30.  by  the  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  u.

UK  D  ERSTAK  DIN  GS.

Job  32. 1 11.  behold,  I  gave  ear  to  your  u.

Isa.  40. 1 14.  and  who  shewed  to  him  the  way  of  u.

U  K  D  ER  ST  A  K  D I K  G ,  Adjective.

Vent.  l.*1.3.  take  ye  wise  men  and  u.  and  known
4.  6.  surely  this  great  nation  is  an  u.  people
1  Kings  3.  9.  give  thy  servant  an  ?/.  heart  to  judge
12.  io,  I  have  given  thee  a  wise  and  an  11.  heart
Prov.  8.  5.  and,  ye  fools,  be  ye  of  an  11.  heart
Dan.  1.  4.  it.  science  ||  8.  23.  it.  dark  sentences
Eph.  5. 17-  but  u.  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is
1  Tim.  1.  7.  teachers,?/,  neither  what  they  say
UK  DERSTOOD.

Gen.  42.  23.  they  knew  not  that  Joseph  ?/.  them
Deut.  32.  29.  O  that  they  were  wise,  that  they  u.

1  Sam.  4.  6.  they  u.  that  the  ark  of  Lord  was  come

26.  4.  David  u.  that  Saul  was  come  in  deed

2  Sam.  3.  37 .  peo.  it.  it  w'as  not  of  Dav.  to  slay  A  bn.
Neh.8.  +  2  the  law  before  all  that  it.  in  hearing

12.  they  had  u.  the  words  that  were  declared
1.3.7.  I  it.  of  the  evil  Eliashib  did  for  Tobiah
lob  13.  1.  lo,  mine  ear  hath  heard  and  u.  it
42.  3.  therefore  have  1  uttered  that  1  u.  not
Psal.  73.  17.  went  to  sanctuary ,  then  u.  I  their  end
81 . 5.  where  I  heard  a  language  that  1  u.  not
106.  7.  our  fathers?/,  not  thy  wonders  in  Egypt
ha.  40.  21 .  have  ye  not  u.  from  foundations  of  earth
44.  18.  not  known  nor  ?/.  for  he  shut  their  eyes
Dan.  8. 2" .  was  astonished  at  the  vision,  but  none  u. 1


Dan.  9.  2.  I  Dan.  it.  by  books  ||  10.  1.  he  ?/.  visiou
12.  8.  I  heard,  but  I  u.  not,  then  said  I.OmyL,
Mat.  13.  51.  have  ye  it.  all  these  things  :  yea,  Lord

16.  12.  then  ?/.  they  how  he  bade  them  not  beware

17.  1.3.  they  it.  that  he  spake  of  John  the  Baptist
Mark  9.  .32.  but  they  u.  not  that  saying,  Luke  2.

50. 1  9.  45.  John  8.  27.  1  10.  6.
Luke  18.  31.  and  they  u.  none  of  these  things
John  12.  16.  these  things  11.  not  his  disciples
Acts  7.  25.  he  supposed  they  would  have  ?/.  that  G.

by  his  hand  would  deliver  them,  but  they  u.  not
2.3.  27-  I  rescued  him,  having  ?/.  he  was  a  Roman
34.  and  when  I  u.  that  he  was  of  Cilicia
Rom.  1.  20.  being  u.  by  the  things  that  are  made

1  Cor.  13.  11.  when  1  was  a  child,  1  u.  as  a  child
14.  9.  except  ye  utter  by  tongue  words  easy  to  be  u

2  Pet.  3.  16.  in  which  are  some  things  hard  to  be  u.

UNDERTAKE.

Isa.  38.  14.  O  Lord,  1  am  oppressed,  u.  for  me
UNDERTOOK.

Esth.  9.  23.  the  Jews  u.  to  do  as  they  had  begun
UNDO.

Isa.  58.  6.  is  not  this  the  fast  3  to  ?/.  heavy  burdens
Zeph.  3.  19.  at  that  time  I  will  u.  all  that  afflict  thee
UKDOKE.

Num.  21.  29.  thou  art  it.  O  people  of  Chemosh
Josh.  11.  15.  Josh,  left  nothing//,  of  all  commanded
Isa.  6.  5.  woe  is  me,  for  1  am  ?/.  am  of  unclean  lips
Mat.  2.3.  23.  not  to  leave  the  other  u.  Luke  11.  42
UK  DRESSED.

Lev.  25.  5.  nor  gather  grapes  of  thy  vine  u.  11.

UK  EQUAL.

Ezek.  18. 25.  hear,  now,  are  not  vour  ways  ?/.  ?  29.
UNEQUALLY.

2  Cor.  6. 14.  be  not?/,  yoked  with  unbelievers
UNFE1GKED.

2  Cor.  6.  6.  by  kindness,  by  Holy  Ghost,  by  love  ?/.

1  Tim.  1. 5.  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  faith  it

2  Tim.  1.5.  when  1  call  to  remembrance  the //.  faith
1  Pet.  1.  22.  thro’  Spirit  unto//,  love  of  the  brethren

UK  FAITHFUL.

Prov.  25.  19.  confidence  in  an  it.  man  in  trouble
UNFAITHFULLY.

Psal.  78.  57.  they  dealt  ?/.  like  their  fathers
Mai.  2.  1 14.  let  none  deal  ?/.  against  the  wife
UNFRUITFUL.

Mat.  13.  22.  the  care  of  this  world,  and  the  deceit¬
fulness  of  riches,  choke  the  word,  and  he
becometh  u.  Mark  4.  19

1  Cor.  14. 14.  spirit  prays,  butmy  understand,  is  u.
Eph.  5.  11.  have  no  fellowship  with  the  u.  works
Tit.  3.  14.  to  maint.  good  works,  that  they  be  not  u.

2  Pet.  1.  8.  ye  shall  neither  be  barren  nor  u.  in  the

UN  GIRDED.

Gen.  24.  32.  the  man  u.  the  camels,  and  gave  straw
UNGODLY.

2  Sam.  22. 5.  when  waves  of  death  compassed  me,
the  floods  of  it.  men  made  me  afraid,  Psal.  18.4.

2  Chr.  19.  2.  Jehu  said,  shouldest  thou  help  the  u.

Job  16.  11.  God  hath  delivered  me  to  the  u.

34.  18.  is  it  fit  to  say  to  princes,  ye  are  u.  ?

Psal.  1. 1.  that  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the?/.

4.  the  u.  are  not  so  ||  5.  ?/.  not  stand  in  judgment
6.  but  the  way  of  the  ?/.  shall  perish
,3.  7.  thou  hast  broken  the  teeth  of  the  u.

43.  1 .  and  plead  my  cause  against  an  u.  nation
73.  12.  these  are  the  u.  who  prosper  in  the  world
Prov.  16. 27-  ?/•  man  diggeth  up  evil,  and  in  his  lips
19.28.  an  u.  witness  scorneth  judgment
Rum.  4.  5.  but  believeth  on  him  that  justifieth  the  n.

5.  6.  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  u.

1  Tim.  1.  9.  the  law  is  for  the?/,  and  for  sinners

1  Pet.  4. 18.  where  shall  the  ?/.  and  sinner  appear  ?

2  Pet.  2.  5.  bringing  in  the  Hood  on  world  ot  the  u.

6.  ensample  to  those  who  after  should  live  11.

3.7.  to  day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of?/,  men
Jude  4.  ?/.  men  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into
15.  to  convince  all  that  are  u.  of  their  ?/.  deeds

18.  who  should  walk  after  their  own  u.  lusts
UK  GODLINESS.

Rom.  1.  18.  the  wrath  of  G.  revealed  against  all  u.
11.26.  and  he  shall  turn  away  u.  from  Jacob
2  Tim.  2.  16.  they  will  increase  unto  more  u.

Tit.  2. 12.  that  denying  ?/.  and  worldly  lusts
UNHOLY.

I.ev.  10. 10.  may  put  difference  between  holy  and  ?/.

1  Tim.  1. 9-  the  law  was  made  for  the  ?/.  and  profane

2  Tim.  .3.  2.  for  men  shall  be  unthankful,  u.

Deb.  10. 29.  counted  blood  of  covenant  an  u.  thing
UNICORK,

In  Greek,  novoKepos  ‘  in  Hebrew,  Reem.  It  if
much  disputed  among  the  learned,  whether  there
be,  or  ever  was,  such  a  creature  as  we  call  the
unicorn;  or  whether  this  Reem  be  the  rhinoceros,
as  some  would  have  it  ;  or  a  certain  kind  of  wild
goat,  called  Oryx,  which  is  very  large  and  strong,
and  untr actable  ;  or  one  of  that  kind  of  wild
oxen,  or  bulls  called  Uri ;  which  some  think  the
most  probable  opinion,  as  best  agreeing  with  the
Scripture  accounts  of  it.  It  is  said  lo  have  but
one  horn ,  growing  out  of  its  forehead  between  its
eye-lids,  but  as  hud  as  iron.  Job  39. .10.  Canst
thou  bind  the  unicorn  with  his  band  in  the  fur¬
row  3  Moses,  magnifying  the  strength  of  Joseph,
says,  that  his  horns  are  like  the  horns  of  uni-  ;
corns  ;  that  is,  his  strength  and  power  shall  be
very  great,  Deut.  33.  17.  And  the  Psalmist  \
says.  Thou  hast  heard  me  from  the  horns  of  the
unicorns  ;  thou  hast  delivered  me  when  I  was  in
great  danger  of  being  destroyed  by  the  power  oj
mine  enemies,  Psal.  22.  21.

Num.  2.3.  22.  as  it  were  the  strength  of  an  u.  24. 8.
Job  39.  9.  will  the?/,  be  willing  to  serve  thee  3
10.  canst  thou  bind  the  ?/.  in  the  furrows  3
Psal.  29.  6.  Lebanon  and  Sirion  like  a  young  u
92.  10.  my  horn  shall  exalt  like  horn  of  an  ?/.

UK  ICORNS.

Deut.  .33.  17.  his  horns  are  like  the  horns  of  ?/.

Psal.  22.  21.  heard  me  from  the  horns  of  the  ?/.

Isa.  34.  7-  and  the  u.  shall  come  down  with  them
UK  ITE.

“  Psal.  86.  11.?/.  my  heart  to  tear  thy  name


UNR


UNT


U  P  R


UNITED.

Gen.  49. G.  to  their  assembly, mine  honour.be  not  n.
UNITY.

rsal.  133. 1.  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  u.
Eph.  4.  3.  endeavouring  to  keep  the  u.  of  the  Spirit

13.  till  we  come  in  the  u.  of  the  faith

UNJUST.

Psal.  43. 1.  0  God,  deliver  me  from  the  «.  man
Prov.  li.  7.  and  the  hope  of  u.  men  perisheth

28.  8.  who  by  ?/.  gain  Increaseth  his  substance

29.  27.  an  u.  man  is  an  abomination  to  the  just
Zeph.  3.  5.  but  the  u.  knoweth  no  sliame
Mat.  5.  45.  he  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  u.

Luke  16.  8.  the  Lord  commended  the  it.  steward

10.  he  that  is  it.  in  the  least,  is  w.  also  in  much

18.  6.  the  Lord  said,  hear  what  the  u.  judge  saith

11.  I  thank  thee,  l  am  not  as  other  men  are,  u.

Acts  24.  15.  a  resurrection  both  of  the  just  and  u.

1  Cor.  6.  1.  dare  any  of  you  «o  to  law  before  the?/. '!

1  Pet.  3.  18.  Christ  suffered,  the  just  for  thew.

2  Pet.  2.  9.  reserve  the  u.  to  the  day  of  j  udgment
Rev.  00  ji  |)e  that  is  ?/.  let  him  be  u.  still

UNJUSTLY.

Psal.  8'.  2.  how  long  will  ye  judge  ?/.  and  accept
Isa.  26.  tO.  in  land  of  uprightness  will  he  deal  u.
UN  KNOW  N.

Acts  17.  23.  as  1  beheld  your  devotions,  I  found  an
altar  with  this  inscription,  to  the  u.  God

1  Cor.  14.  2.  that  speaketh  in  an  u.  tongue,  4, 13,  27.

14.  if  1  pray  in  an  u.  tongue,  my  spirit  prayetb

19.  than  ten  thousand  words  in  an  u.  tongue

2  Cor.  6.  9.  as  u.  and  yet  well  known ;  as  dying
Gal.  1.22.  1  was  u.  by  face  unto  the  churches

UNLADE.

Acts  21.  3  there  the  ship  was  to  ?/.  her  burden
U  N  LAW  EU  L.

Acts  10.  28.  an  u.  thing  for  a  man  that  is  a  Jew
2  Pet.  2.  8.  vexed  his  soul  witli  their  n.  deeds
UNLEARNED.

Acts  4.  13.  they  perceived  that  they  were  w.

1  Cor.  14.  16.  he  that  occupieth  the  room  of  the  u.
23.  and  there  come  in  those  that  an:  n.  24.

2  Tim.  2.  23.  but  foolish  and  u.  questions  avoid

2  Pet.  3.  16.  which  they  that  are  u.  wrest  to  their
UN  LEAVEN  ED.

Exod.  12.  39.  they  baked  u.  cakes  of  the  dough
Lev.  2.  4.  it  shall  be  an?/.  cake  of  tine  flour  mingled
with  oil,  or  u.  wafers  anointed  with  oil,  5.

7.  12.  he  shall  offer  ?/.  cakes  mingled  with  oil

8.  26.  and  Moses  took  one  u.  cake,  and  wafers
Hum.  6.  19.  the  priest  shall  take  one  ?/.  cake,  one  u.

wafer,  and  put  them  on  the  hands  of  the  Nazarite
Josh.  5.  11.  they  did  eat  of  old  corn  of  the  landw.
Judy.  6.  19.  Gideon  made  ready  a  kid  and  u.  cakes

20.  take  the  flesh  and  u.  cakes,  and  lay  them

21.  the  angel  touched  the  flesh  and  71.  r  Oces ;  tire
out  of  the  rock  consumed  the  flesh  and  u.  cakes

1  Citron.  23.  29.  their  office  for  flour  and  ?/.  cakes

1  Cor.  5.7.  that  ye  may  be  a  new  lump,  as  ye  are  u.

See  Bread.

UNLESS.

I.ev.  22. 6.  be  unclean  71.  he  wash  his  flesh  with  water
Hum.  22.  33. ?/.  she  had  turned  from  me,  1  had  slain

2  Sam.  2.  27-  ?/.  thru  hadst  spoken,  people  had  gone
Psal.  27.  13.  1  had  fainted.  71.  I  had  believed  to  see
94.  17.  7t.  the  Lord  had  been  my  help,  my  soul  had
119.  92.  v.  thy  law  had  been  my  delight,  1  should

Prov.  4.  16.  sleep  not, ?/.  they  cause  some  to  fall
1  Cor.  15.  2.  ye  are  saved,  71.  ve  have  believed  in  vain
UNLOOSE.

Mark  1 .7.  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy
to  stoop  down  and  71.  Luke  3.  16.  John  1.  27.
UNMARRIED.

1  Cor.  7-  8.  I  say  to  the  u.  ||  11.  let  her  remain  u.

32.  he  that  is?/.  II  34.  the  u.  woman  careth  for
UNMERCIFUL.

Psal.  43.  t  1.  plead  my  cause  against  an?/.  nation
Rom.  1. 31.  without  natural  affection,  implacable,  u.
UNMINDFUL.

Pent.  32.  18.  of  rock  that  begat  thee  thou  ai  t  71.
UN  MOVABLE.

Acts  27- 41.  and  the  forepart  of  the  ship  remained  u.

1  Cor.  15.  58.  my  brethren,  be  ye  stedfast,  71.

UNOCCUPIED.

Judy.  5.  6.  in  days  of  Shamgar,  high-ways  were  u.
UNPER  FECT.

Psal.  139.  16.  did  see  mv  substance,  yet  being  u.

.  UNPREPARED.

2  Cor.  9.  4.  if  they  come  with  me,  and  find  you  71.

UNPROFITABLE.

Job  15.  3.  should  he  reason  with  u.  talk  ?

Mat.  25.30.  cast  the  u.  servant  into  outer  darkness
Luke  17.  10.  likewise  say  ye,  we  are  ?/.  servants
Rom.  3.  12.  they  are  altogether  become  71.

Tit.  3.  9.  genealogies,  for  they  are  7t.  and  vain
Philem.  11.  which  in  time  past  was  to  thee  u.

Heb.  13.  17-  not  with  grief,  for  that  is  u.  for  you
UNPROFI  I  ABLENESS.

Heb.  7. 18.  for  the  weakness  and  71.  thereof
UN  PUN  LSI!  ED.

Prov.  11. 21.  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  hew.

16.  5.  hand  join  in  hand,  the  proud  shall  not  bet/.

17.  5.  that  is  glad  at  calamities,  shall  not  be  u.

19.  5.  a  false  witness  shall  not  her/.  9.

28.  t  20.  maketh  haste  to  be  rich  shall  not  be  u.
Jer.  25.  29.  should  ye  be  utterly  u.  shall  not  be  u.

30.  11.  I  will  not  leave  thee  altogether  u.

46.  28.  yet  will  T  not  leave  thee  wholly  71.

49.  12.  shalt  thou  go  u.  ?  thou  shalt  not  go  u.

UNQUENCHABLE.

Mat.  3  12.  gather  his  wheat  into  the  garner,  but
burn  up  the  chaff  with  71.  fire,  Luke  3.  17.
LIN  REASONABLE.

Acts  25.  27.  it  seemeth  to  me  u.  to  send  a  prisoner
2  T/tess.  3. 2.  that  we  may  be  delivered  from  w.  men
UNREBUKABLE.

1  Tim.  6.  14  that  thou  keep  this  commandment  u.

UNR  EP BUYABLE.

Col.  1  22.  to  present  vou  holv,  u.  in  his  sight
UN  RIGHTEOUS.

Exod.  23.  1.  put  not  thy  hand  to  bean  u.  witness
Job  27.  7-  that  riseth  against  me  be  as  the  u  *


Psal.  ?1.  4.  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  ?/.
Isa.  10.  1.  woe  unto  them  that  decree  it.  decrees
55.7.  let  the?*,  man  forsake  his  thoughts
Luke  16.  11.  not  been  faithful  in  thew.  mammon
Rum.  3.  5.  is  God  v.  who  taketh  vengeance  ?

1  Cor.  6.  9.  the  w.  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom
Heb.  6.  10.  for  God  is  not  v.  to  forget  your  works

UN  RIG II  I  EO US LY.

Deut.lb.  16.  all  that  do  w.  are  an  abomination
UN  RIG II  I’EOUSN  ESS.

Lev.  19.  15.  ye  shall  do  now.  in  judgment,  35.
Psal.  92.  15.  he  is  my  rock,  there  is  no  w.  in  him
Jer.  22.  13.  to  him  that  buildeth  his  house  by  w.
Luke  16.  9.  make  triends  of  the  mammon  of  w.
John  7.  18.  the  same  is  true,  and  no  71.  is  in  him
Rom.  1.  18.  all  w.  of  men  who  hold  the  truth  in  u.
29.  being  filled  with  all  71.  fornication,  envy

2.  8.  but  to  them  that  obey  w.  indignation,  wrath
3.5.  if  our  w.  commend  the  righteousness  of  God
6.  13.  now  yield  members  as  instruments  of  w.

9.  14.  is  there  71.  with  God  ?  God  forbid

2  Cor.  6.  14.  what  fellowship  righteousness  with  w.  ?
2  Thess.  2.  10.  and  with  all  decei' ableness  of  u.

12.  who  believed  not,  but  had  pleasure  in  71.

Heb.  8.  12.  for  I  will  be  merciful  to  their  71.

2  Pet.  2.  13.  and  shall  receive  the  reward  of  7 1.

15.  the  way  of  Balaam  who  loved  the  waves  ofw.
1  John  1.  9.  is  faithful  to  cleanse  us  from  all  7i.

5.  17.  all  71.  is  sin  ;  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death
UNRIPE.

Job  15.  .33.  he  shall  shake  off  his  w.  grape  as  vine
UN  RULY.

1  Thess.  5.  14.  brethren,  warn  them  that  are  w.

Tit.  1  6.  children,  not  accused  of  riot,  or  n.

10.  for  there  are  many  u.  and  vain  talkers
Jam.  .3.  8.  the  tongue  is  an  it.  evil,  full  of  poison
UN  SATIABLE.

Ezek.  16.  28.  with  Assyrians,  because  thou  wast  u.
UNSAVOURY.

Job  6.  6.  can  what  is  w.  be  eaten  without  salt  ?

Jer.  23.  +  13.  1  have  seen  an  w.  thing  in  prophets
UNSEARCHABLE.

Job  5.  9.  God  who  doth  great  things  and  11.

Psai.  145.  3.  great  is  the  Lord,  his  greatness  is  w.
Prov.  25.  3.  and  the  heart  of  kings  is  71.

Pom.  11. 33.  how  71.  are  his  judgments,  and  Ins  ways
Eph.  3.  8.  1  should  preach  the?/,  riches  of  Christ
UNSEEMLY.

Rom.  1.  27.  men  with  men  working  that  which  is  ?/.

1  Cor.  13.  5.  charity  doth  not  behave  itself  w.

UNSHOD.

Jer.  2.  25.  withhold  thy  foot  from  being  u.
UNSKILFUL.

Heb.  5.  13.  babe  is  u.  in  the  word  of  righteousness
UNSOCIABLE.

Rom.  1.  *  31.  covenant-breakers,?/,  implacable
UNSPEAKABLE.

2  Cor.  9.  15.  thanks  be  to  God  for  his  ?/.  gift
12.4.  caught  up  into  paradise  and  heard  it.  words

1  Pet.  1.  8.  in  whom  ye  rejoice  with  joy  u.  full  of

UNSPOTTED.

Jam.  1.27-  to  keen  himself  11.  from  the  world
UNSTABLE.

Gen.  49.  4.  it.  as  water,  thou  shalt  not  excel
Jam.  1.  8.  adouble  minded  man  is  it.  in  all  his  ways

2  Pet.  2. 14.  cannot  cease  from  sin,  beguiling?/,  souls

3.  16.  which  thev  that  are  unlearned  and  */.  wrest

"UN. STOPPED.

Isa.  35.  5.  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  ?/.
UNTAKEN.

2  Cor.  3.  14.  remaineth  the  same  vail  ?/.  away
UNTEMPERED.

Ezek.  13.  10.  one  built  up  a  wall,  and  lo  others
daubed  it  with  11.  mortar,  11,  14,  15.  I  22.  28.
UNTHANKFUL.

Luke  6.  35.  for  he  is  kind  to  the  it.  and  to  the  evil
2  Tim.  3.  2.  men  shall  be  blasphemers,  ?/.  unholy
UNTIL.

Gen.  28.  15.  u.  I  have  done  that  1  have  spoken
32.  4.  I  have  sojourned  and  stayed  there  it.  now
46.  34.  our  trade  from  our  youth,  even  ?/.  now
49.  10.  nor  a  lawgiver  depart,  it.  Shiloh  come
Hum.  14.  19.  hast  forgiven  this  people?/,  now
Judy.  18.  30. sons  were  priests  to  Dan  ?/.the  captivity

1  Sam.  9.  13.  for  the  people  will  not  eat?/,  become
15.  .35. Samuel  came  no  more  to  see  Saul  ?/. his  death

2  Sam.  19.  7-  that  befell  thee  from  thy  youth  ?/.  now
24.  nor  trimmed.  ?/.  the  day  he  came  in  peace

1  Kings  22.  27.  feed  him  with  bread  and  water  ®f

affliction,  ?/.  1  come  in  peace,  2  Citron.  18.  26.

2  Kings  8.6.  restore,  since  slie  left  the  land  it.  now
Ezra  4.  21.  city  be  not  built,  ?/.  another  command

5.  16.  since  then  u.  now  hath  it  been  building

10.  14.  it.  the  fierce  wrath  of  God  be  turned
Job  14.  1.3.  keep  me  secret  ?/.  thy  wrath  be  past
Psal.  .36.  2.  it.  his  iniquity  be  found  to  be  hateful
73.  17-  ?/.  I  went  into  the  sanctuary  of  God

132.  5  .u.  I  find  out  a  place  for  the  Lord,  an  habit.
Cant  A.  l~.it.  the  daybreak  and  the  shadows  flee,  4. 6.
Isa.  .32.  15.  ?/.  the  spirit  be  poured  upon  us
.36  17.  u.  I  come  and  take  you  away  to  a  land
62.1.  ?z.the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth
Jer.  .32.  5.  and  there  shal  I  he  be  ?/.  1  visit  him
44.  27-  be  consumed  ?/.  there  bean  end  of  them
Ezek.  21.  27.  overturn,  ?/.  he  come  whose  right  it  is
Mic.  7-  9.  bear  indignation  ?/.  he  plead  my  cause
Mat.  2.  13.  be  thou  there  ?/.  1  bring  thee  word

11.  13.  for  all  the  law  and  the  prophets  prophesied

u.  John,  this  is  Elias,  Luke  16.  16.
Luke  21.  24.  Jerusalem  be  trodden  down?/,  the  times
of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled,  Rom.  11.25.
24. 49.  u.  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high
Acts  1.2.  11.  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken  up
Rom.  5.  13.  for  u.  the  law  sin  was  in  the  world

1  Cor.  4.  5.  judge  nothing?/,  the  Lord  come

Phil.  1. 6.  will  perform  it  it.  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ

2  Thess.  2.  7.  will  let  ?/.  he  be  taken  outof  the  way
1  Tim.  6. 14.  ?/.  the  appearing  of  our  Turd  Jesus
Rev.  17-  17.  u.  the  words  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled
20.  5.  lived  not  ?/.  the  1000  years  were  finished

UNTIMELY.

Job  3.  16.  01  as  an  hidden  ?/.  birth  T  had  not  been


Psal.  58.  8.  pass  away  like  the  11.  birth  of  a  wom  an
Eccl.  6.  3.  I  say  that  an  ?/.  birth  is  better  than  i.e
Rev.  6.  1.3.  even  as  a  fig-tree  casteth  her  u.  figs
UNTOWARD.

Acts  2.  40.  save  yourselves  from  this?/,  generation.

unwalled.

Dent.  .3.  5.  we  took  sixty  cities,  beside  u  towns
J  '.stlt.  9.  19.  the  Jews  that  dwelt  in  the  it.  towns
Ezek.  38. 11.  I  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  it.  villages
UN  WA-II  EN.

Mat.  15.  20.  these  things  defile  a  man,  but  to  eat
with  it.  hands  defileth  not  a  man,  Mark  7.  2,5.
UN  W  EIGHED.

1  Kings  7.  47.  Solomon  left  all  the  vessels  u.
UNWISE.

Dent.  .32.  6  do  ye  thus  requite  the  L.  O  ?/.  people  ?
Hos.  1.3.  1.3.  he  is  an  u.  son,  he  should  not  stay  long
Rom.  1.  14.  I  am  debtor  to  the.  wise  and  to  the  u.
Eph.  5.  17.  wherefore  be  ye  not  ?/.  but  understanding
UNWITTINGLY.

Lev.  22.  14.  if  a  man  eat  of  the  holy  thing  ?/.

Josh.  20.  .3.  the  slayer  that  killeth  any  person  u.  5.
UNWORTHY.

Acts  1.3.  46.  seeing  we  judge  ourselves  it.  of  life
1  Cor.  6.  2.  are  ye  u.  to  judge  the  smallest  matter  ?
UNWORTHILY.

1  Cor.  11.  27.  shall  drink  this  cup  of  the  Turd  u.

29.  for  he  thateateth  and  drinketh  u.  eateth
UP,  Verb.

Gen.  19. 14.  Lot  said,  up,  get  ye  out  of  this  place
44.  4.  Joseph  said,  up,  follow  after  the  men
Exod.  32.  1.  up,  make  us  gods  that  shall  go  before  tis
Josh.  7.  13,  up,  sanctify  the  people,  and  say,  sanctify
Judg.  4.  14.  up,  for  this  is  the  day  in  which  the  Lord

8.  20.  he  said  to  his  first-born, up  and  slay  them

9.  32.  up,  thou  and  the  people  that  is  with  tiiee
19.  28.  up,  and  let  us  be  going,  but  none  answered

1  Sam.  9.  26.  saying,  up,  that  I  may  send  thee  away

UP.

Num.  14.  40.  they  rose  up  early  and  gat  them  up,  say¬
ing,  we  be  here  and  will  go  up,  for  we  have  sinned
42.  go  not  up,  for  the  Lord  is  not  among  you
44.  they  presumed  to  go  up  unto  the  hill  top
Juclg.8.  13.  Gideon  returned  from  battle  before  sun  up
9.  33.  as  soon  as  sun  is  up  thou  shalt  rise  early

1  Sam.  29.  10.  as  soon  as  ye  be  up  early,  depart

2  Sam.  24.  11.  when  David  was  up,  the  word  came
Mat.  13.  6.  and  when  the  sun  was  up  they  were

scorched,  because  they  had  not  root,  Mai-k  4.  6.

UP.

Psal.  88.  15.  I  am  ready  to  die  from  my  youth  up
Ezek.  41.  16.  from  the  ground  up  to  the  windows
Mat.  19.  20.  these  things  I  kept  from  my  youth  up
Luke  18.  21.  all  these  I  kept  from  my  youth  up
John  2.  7.  and  they  filled  them  up  to  the  brim
See  Down.

UPBRAID.

Jitdg.  8.  15.  Zebahand  Zal.  with  whom  ye  did  ?/.  me
Mat.  11.  20.  then  began  be  to  it.  the  cities  wherein
UPBRAIDED.

Mark  16.  14.  he  it.  them  with  their  unbelief

UFBRAIDETH.

Jam.  1.5.  tliatgivett  to  all  men  liberally  and?/,  not
UPHELD.

Isa.  63.  5.  arm  brought  salvat.  and  my  fury  it?/,  me
UPHOLD.

Job  36.  +  17.  judgment  and  justice  should  ?/.  thee
Psal.  51.  12.  and  it.  me  with  thy  free  Spirit
54.  4.  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  u.  my  soul
119.  116.  ?/.  me  according  to  thy  word
Prov.  29.  23.  honour  shall  it.  the  humble  in  spirit
Isa.  41.  10.  I  will  u.  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my
42.  1.  behold  my  servant  whom  1  ?/,  mine  elect
63.5.  and  1  wondered  that  there  was  none  to  «.
Ezek.  30.  6.  they  also  that  u.  Egypt  shall  fall
UPHOl DEN.

Job  4.  4.  thy  words  have'*,  him  that  was  falling
P~ov.  20.  28.  the  king’s  throne  is  it.  by  mercy
UPHOl, DEST.

Psal.  41. 12.  as  for  me,  thou  it.  me  in  mine  integrity
UPHOl  DETH.

Psal.  37.  17.  but  the  Lord  ?/.  the  righteous
24.  for  the  Lord  it.  him  with  his  hand
63.  8.  my  soul  followeth,  thy  eight  hand  it.  me
145.  14.  the  Lord  it.  all  that  fall,  and  raiseth  up
UPHOLDING.

Heb.  1.  3.  u.  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power
UPPER.

Exod.  12.  7-  shall  strike  blood  on  the  ?/.  door-posts
Lev.  13.  45.  he  shall  put  a  covering  on  his  it.  lip
Dent.  24.  6.  no  man  take  the?/,  millstone  to  pledge
Josh.  15.  19.  he  gave  her  the  ?/.  springs,  Judg.  1.  15.
2  Kings  18. 17.  when  they  were  come  up,  they  stood
by  the  conduit  of  the  it.  pool,  Isa.  7-  3. 1  36.  2.
Ezek.  24.  +  17-  and  cover  not  thy  ?/.  lip
Zeph.  2.  14.  cormorant  shall  lodge  in  the  u.  lintels
Mark  14.  15.  he  will  shew  you  u.  room.  Luke  22.  12.
Acts  1.  13.  they  went,  up  into  an  ?/.  room
19.  1.  Paul  having  passed  through  the  u.  coasts
See  Chamber.

UPPERMOST.

Gen.  40.  17.  in  the  ?/.  basket  were  all  bakemeats
Isa.  17.  6.  two  or  three  in  the  top  of  the  u.  bough
9.  his  strong  cities  shall  be  as  an  ?/.  branch
Mat.  23.  6.  they  love  the  it.  rooms  at  feasts  and  chief
seats  in  synagogues,  Mark  12.  39.  Luke  11.  43.
UPRIGHT.

Gen.  6.  t  9.  Noah  was  an?/,  man  in  his  generations
17.  +  1.1  am  God,  walk  before  me  and  be  thou  u.
37.  7-  and  lo,  my  sheaf  arose  and  also  stood  u.

Lev.  26. 13.  broken  your  yoke  and  made  you  go  u.
Josh.  10.  +  13.  in  the  book  of  the  ?/.  2  Sam.  1.  +  18,

1  Sam.  29-  6.  said  to  David,  surely  as  Lord  liveth,

thou  hast  been  u.  with  me,  2  Citron.  29.  34.

2  Sam.  22  24.  1  was  also  ?/.  before  him,  Psal.  18.  2.3
26.  with  the  merciful  merciful,  and  with  the  ?/

man  thou  wilt  shew  thyself  u.  Psal.  18.  25.
2  Chron.  29.  .34.  for  Levites  were  more?/,  in  heart
Job  1.  1.  Job  was  a  perfect  and  u.  man,  8. 1  2.  .3.

8.  6.  if  thou  wert  ?/.  lie  would  awake  for  thee
12.4.  the  just  ?/.  man  is  laughed  to  srorr.

17.  8.  u.  men  shall  be  astonished  at  thh

T  2  531


U  R1


(j  S


u  s


Psal.  11.  7-  his  countenance  doth  behold  the  u.

19.  13.  then  shall  1  be  w.  1  shall  be  innocent
25.  8.  the  l.ord  is  good  and  u.  92.  15.

33.  1.  rejoice,  for  praise  is  comely  for  the  u.

37-  14.  to  slay  such  as  be  of  u.  conversation
18.  the  l.ord  knoweth  the  days  of  the  it.

37.  mark  the  perfect  man  and  behold  the  u.

49.  14.  the  u.  shall  have  dominion  over  them
111.1.1  will  praise  the  1 ,.  in  the  assembly  of  the  «.
112.  2.  the  generation  of  the  it.  shall  be  blessed
4.  unto  the  ?/.  there  arisetli  light  in  darkness
119-  137.  art  righteous  and  ?/.  are  thy  judgments
125.  4.  do  good  to  them  that  are  u.  in  their  hearts
140.  13.  the  ?/.  shall  dwell  in  thy  presence
Prov.  2.  21.  for  the  u.  shall  dwell  m  the  land

10.  29.  the  way  of  the  Lord  is  strength  to  the  u.

11.  3.  the  integrity  of  the  ?/.  shall  guide  them

6.  the  righteousness  of  the  ?/.  shall  deliver  them
11.  by  the  blessings  of  the  ?/.  the  city  is  exalted
20  such  as  are  ?/.  in  their  way  are  his  delight

12.  6.  the  mouth  of  the  ?/.  shall  deliver  them

13.  6.  righteousness  keepeth  the  ?/.  in  the  way

14.  11.  the  tabernacle  ot  the  u.  shall  flourish

15.  8.  but  the  prayer  of  the  ?/.  is  his  delight

16.  17.  the  highway  of  the  u.  is  to  depart  from  c\  i

21.18.  the  transgressor  shall  be  a  ransom  for  the  n.
29.  but  as  for  the  ?/.  he  directeth  his  way

28.  10.  the  it.  shall  have  good  things  in  possession

29.  10.  the  bloodthirsty  hate  the  ?/.  but  the  just
27.  he  that  is  ?/.  is  an  abomination  to  the  wicked

'  F.ccl.  7-  29.  have  found  that  God  hath  made  man  u.
12.  10.  what  was  written  was?/.  words  of  rruth
Cant.  1.  4.  remember  thy  love,  the  n.  love  thee
l.\a,  26.  7.  thou  most  it.  dost  weigh  the  path  of  just
Jer.  10.  5.  they  are  it.  as  palm-tree,  but  speak  not
Pan.  8.  18.  but  he  touched  me  and  Set  me  it.

II.  17.  set  his  face  to  enter  and  u.  ones  with  him
Mic.  7.  2.  is  none  n.  among  men,  all  lie  in  wait

4.  the  most  v.  is  sharper  than  a  thorn  hedge
Hab.  2.  4.  behold,  his  soul  lifted  up  is  not?/.  in  him
See  Ueaht,  Stand,  Stood.

UP  RIG  II  I  LY.

Psal.  15.  2.  walketh  ?/.  shall  abide  in  thy  tabernacle
58.  1.  do  ye  judge  u.  'i  ||  7.5.  2.  I  will  judge  u.

84. 11.  w  ithhold  no  good  from  them  that  walk  u.
Prov.  2.  7-  he  is  a  buckler  to  them  that  walk  u.

10.  9-  he  that  w'alketh  u.  wg.keth  surely
15.  21.  but  a  man  of  understanding  walketh  u.

28.18.  whoso  w  alketh  it.  shall  be  saved,  but  perv  erse
Isa.  33.  15.  he  that  speaketh  u.  shall  dwell  on  hiuh
Amos  5.  10.  they  abhor  him  that  speaketh  it.

Mic.  2.7.  my  words  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  v.
Gal.  2.  14.  when  1  saw  that  they  walked  not  u.

UPRIGHTNESS.

1  Kings  3.  6.  as  he  walked  before  thee  in  u.  of  heart
1  Citron.  29. 17.  1  know  that  thou  hast  pleasure  in  n.
Job  4.  6.  is  not  this  thy  hope  and  the  u.  of  thy  w  ays
3.3.  23.  an  interpreter,  to  shew  unto  man  his  v.
Psal.  9. 8.  he  shall  minister  judgment  unto  people  it.
25.  21.  let  integrity  and  ?/.  preserve  me,  I  w  ait

III.  8.  they  stand  fast  for  ever  and  are  done  in  it.
143.  10.  thy  spirit  good,  lead  me  into  land  oft,.

Prov.  2.  13.  who  leave  the  paths  of  u.  to  walk
14.  2.  he  that  walketh  in  it.  feareth  the  Lord
28.  6.  better  is  the  poor  that  walketh  in  his  u.

Isa.  26.  7-  the  way  of  the  iust  is  u.  thou  dost  weigh
10.  in  the  land  of  11.  will  he  deal  unjustly
57.  2.  rest  in  their  beds  each  one  walking  in  his  it.
Dan.  11. 1 17.  set  his  face  to  enter,  and  u.  w  ith  him
See  Heart.

UPRISING.

Psal.  139.  2.  thou  know  est  my  down -sitting  and  u
UPROAR.

1  Rings  1.  41.  this  noise  of  the  city  being  in  an  u.
Mat.  26.5.  lest  there  be  an  it.  Mark  14.  2.

Acts  17.  5.  the  .lews  set  all  the  city  on  an  u.

19.  40.  to  be  called  in  question  for  this  day’s  u.

20.  1.  atterthe  u.  was  ceased,  Paul  called  to  him

21.  31.  tidings  came  that  all  Jerusalem  was  in  an  u.
38.  art  not  thou  the  Egyptian  who  madest  an  u.  ?

UPS1DL  down.

2  Kings  21.  13.  wiping  Jerusalem  as  a  man  wipeth

a  dish,  turning  it  u.  down
Psal.  146.  9.  way  of  the  wicked  he  turneth  it.  down
Isa.  24.  1.  the  Lord  turneth  the  earth  u.  down
29-  16.  surely  your  turning  of  things  it.  down
Acts  17.  6.  that  have  turned  the  world  it.  down
UPWARD.


Ezod.  38.  26.  from  twenty  years  old  and  it.  Nvm.

3,  20,  22,  24,  26,  28.  |  14.  29.  1  Citron.  2
24.  2  Citron.  31.  17.  Ezra  3.  8.

Nvm.  3. 15.  shalt  number  every  male  from  a  mon
old  and  11.  22,  28,  34,  39,  40,  43.  |  26.  6

4.  3.  from  thirty  years  old  and  it.  even  to  f j  ft

23,  30,  35,  39,  4.3,  47.  1  Citron.  23.'

8.  24.  from  twenty  and  five  years  <  hi  and  11.

1  K'am.  0.  2.  Saul  was  higher  from  shoulders  w.  10.2

2  Kings  19.  30.  remnantshall  bear  fruit?/.,  ha.  37.3
2  Citron.  31.  16.  males  from  three  years  olu  and  ,
Job  5.  7.  man  is  born  to  trouble  as  sparks  fly  ?/.
Ecci.  3.  21.  the  spirit  of  man  that  goeth  v.

Isa.  8.  21.  curse  their  king  and  (tod,  and  look  11.
38.  14.  mine  eyes  fail  with  looking  ?/.  undertake
Ezek.  1.  27.  from  appearance  of  his  loins?/.  8.  2.
41.  7.  and  there  was  a  winding  about  still  u.
Hag.  2.  15.  consider  from  this  day  and  u.  18.
URGE.

Luke  11.  53.  scribes  and  pharisees  began  to  u  hit
URGED.

Gen.  33.  11.  Jacob  it.  Esau,  and  he  took  it
Judg.  16.  16.  Delilah?/.  Samson,  and  he  told  all

19.  7-  rose  to  depart,  his  father  in-law  u.  him
2  Rings  2.  17.  when  they  11.  him  till  he  was  ashame

5.  16.  Naaman  it.  Klisha  ||  23.  he  u.  Gehazi

„  URGENT.

Exod.  12.  33.  the  Egyptians  were  v.  on  the  people
Pan.  3.  22.  the  king’s  commandment  was  u
URIM.

See  Signification  on  Thdmmim.

Exod.  28.  30.  thou  shalt  put  in  the  breast-plate  c
judgment,  the  u.  and  the  thummim,  Lei-.  8.  1
Nutn.  2J.  21.  ask  counsel  after  the  judgment  of  w


|  Dent.  33.8.  let  tny  ?/.  be  with  thy  Holy  One
I  1  Sam.  28. 6.  neither  by  dreams,  by  ?/.  nor  prophets
Ezra  2.  63.  not  eat  till  theie stood  up  a  priest  with
u.  and  with  thummim,  Kelt.  7-  65.
US.

Deut.  5.3.  with  its  even  vs  who  are  all  of  its  alive
Luke  23.  39.  if  thou  be  Christ,  save  thyself  and  us
Rom.  9.24.  even  vs  whom  he  hath  called,  not  only

1  Cor.  4.  9.  God  hath  set  forth  vs  the  apostles

6.  14.  and  will  also  raise  up  us  by  his  ow  n  power

2  Cor.  1. 14.  you  have  acknowledged  vs  in  part
21.  he  which  establisheth  its  with  you,  is  God

5.  18.  who  hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  Christ
Phil.  3. 17.  brethren,  as  ye  have  us  for  an  ensatnple
1  Thess.  5.  8.  let  us  who  are  of  the  day  be  sober

9.  for  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath
Jam.  1.  18.  of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  by  the  word
About  US.

Num.  22.4.  lick  up  all  that  are  round  about  us
Neh.  5.  17-  that  came  from  heathen  that  are  about  vs
6. 16.  the  heathen  about  us  saw  these  things
Dan.  9. 16.  thy  people  a  reproach  to  all  about  us
After  US.

Josh.  8.  6.  for  they  will  come  out  after  us
22.  27.  it  may  be  witness  to  our  generations  after  us
Mat.  15.  23.  send  her  away,  for  she  crieth  after  us
Against  US.

Gen.  43.  18.  that  he  may  seek  occasion  against  us
Exod.  1.  10.  join  our  enemies  and  fight  against  11s
16.7-  what  are  we  that  ye  murmur  against  us ?

8.  your  murmurings  <qe  not  against  us  but  God
Deut.  2.32.  Sihon  came  out  against  u.\, 29. 7.  |  3.1.  Og
Josh.  8.  5.  when  the  men  of  Ai  came  out  against  us

10.  6.  the  kings  of  the  Amorites  gathered  against  us
22. 19.  rebel  not  against  the  Lord,  nor  against  us
Judg.  15.  10.  said,  why  are  ye  come  up  against  us

1  Sam.  30.  23.  delivered  company  that  came  aga.  us

2  Sam.  1 1. 23.  surely  the  men  prevailed  against  us
21.5.  the  man  that  devised  against  us

2  Kings £2.  1.3.  great  is  the  wrath  of  Lord  against  us
|  2  Citron.  2o.  12.  this  great  company  that  cometh  ag.us

Psal.  44.  5.  tread  them  under  that,  rise  against  us

79.8.  remember  not  against  us  former  iniquities
124.2.  Lord  for  us,  when  men  rose  up  against  us

3.  when  their  wrath  was  kindled  against  us
Isa.  14.8.  no  feller  is  come  up  against  us

59. 12.  and  our  sins  testify  against  us,  Jer.  14.  7.
Jer.  16. 10.  Lord  pronounced  all  this  evil  against  us
21.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  inaketh  war  against  us

13.  which  say,  who  shall  comedown  against  us  ?
43.3.  but  Baruch  setteth  tiiee  on  against  us
Lam.  3.46.  have  opened  their  mouths  against  us
5.22.  rejected  us,  thou  art  very  wroth  against  us
Dan.  9.  12.  confirmed  his  words  he  spake  against  us
Mark  9.40.  Jesus  said,  forbid  him  not,  he  that  is
not  against  us  is  on  our  part,  Luke  9.  50.
Rom.  8.  31 .  it  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  l
Col. 2.  14.  blotting  out  the  hand-writing  against  us

3  John  10.  prating  against  us  with  malicious  words

Among  or  Amongst  US.

Gen.  23.6.  thou  art  a  mighty  prince  among  us
Exod.  17-7-  saying,  is  the  Lord  among  us  or  not?

34.9.  let  my  lord,  I  pray  thee,  go  among  us
Deut.  31.  17.  because  our  God  is  not  among  us
Josn.  9.  7.  peradventure  ye  dwell  among  Us,  22.

22. 19.  pass  over  and  take  possession  amongus
31.  we  perceive  the  Lord  is  among  us
Judg.  18.  25.  let  not  thy  voice  be  heard  among  us
1  Sam.  4.  3.  when  it  cometh  among  us  it  may  save
1  A  ings  5.  6.  not  among  us  any  can  skill  to  hew  timb.
Job  34.37.  he  clappeth  his  hands  amongst  us
Psal.  74.  9.  not  among  us  any  that  knoweth  how  long
Prov.  1.  14.  cast  in  thy  lot  among  vs  let  us  have
Isa .  33.  14.  who  amongus  shall  dwell  with  the
devouring  fire  ?  who  with  everlasting
burnings  ?

Mic.  3.  11.  they  will  say,  isnotthe  l.ord  amongus?
Lukel.  16.  a  great  prophet  is  risen  up  among  us
John  1.14.  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us
Acts  1.21.  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  amongus
15.7-  God  made  choice  amongus  that  Gentiles
At  US.

1  Pet.  4.  17.  if  it  first  begin  at  us  what  the  end  be
Before  US.

Exod.  32.  23.  for  they  said  unto  me,  make  us  gods
which  shall  go  before  us,  Acts  7.  40.
Deut.  1. 22.  ye  said,  we  will  send  men  before  us

2.  33.  the  Lord  our  God  delivered  him  before  us
Josh.  4.23.  which  he  dried  up  from  before  us

8.  6.  they  flee  befoieus  [|  24.  18.  drave  out  before  us
Judg.  11.24.  the  Lord  shall  drive  out  before  us

20.  32.  smitten  down  before  us  as  at  the  first,  39.

1  Sam.  8. 20.  king  may  judge  us  and  go  out  beforeus

9.  27.  Samuel  said,  bid  thy  servant  pass  on  beforeus

2  Citron.  14.7.  while  the  land  is  yet  beforeus

Isa.  .30. 1 1.  cause  Holy  One  of  Israel  cease  beforeus
Dan.  9.  10.  to  walk  in  his  laws  which  he  set  before  us
Deb.  6. 18.  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  beforeus

12.  1.  let  us  run  the  race  that  is  set  beforeus
Behind  US.

Gen.  32.  18.  and.  behold,  also  he  is  behind  us,  20.

Between  or  betwixt  US.

Gen.  26.  28.  let  there  be  now  an  oath  betwixt  us
31.  37.  that  they  may  judge  betwixt  us  both
53.  the  God  ot  Abraham  judge  betwixt  us
Josh.  22. 25.  Lord  made  .1  ordan  a  border  between  us
27.  that  it  may  be  a  witness  between  us,  28,  34.
Judg.  11. 10.  Lord  be  witness  between  us,  Jer.  42.  5.
Job  9.  33.  neither  is  there  any  days  man  betwixt  us
Luke  16.  26.  between  11s  and  you,  is  a  great  gulf
Acts  15.  9.  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them
Eph.2. 14.  the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  us
By  US.

Num.  12. 2.  hath  not  the  Lord  spoken  also  by  us?

2  Kings  4.  9.  this  is  a  man  of  G.  which  passeth  by  us
2  Cor.  1. 19.  Jesus  was  preached  among  you  by  us
20.  are  in  him  amen,  to  the  glory  of  God  by  us

2.  14.  manifest  the  savour  of  his  knowledge  by  us

3.  3.  to  be  the  epistle  of  Christ,  ministered  by  us
5.  20.  as  tho’  God  did  beseech  you  by  us  we  pray

7.  9.  ye  might  receive  damage  by  us  in  nothing

8.  19.  which  is  administered  by  us  to  glory  of  L.  20.


Concerning  US.

2  Kings  22.  13.  do  according  to  all  written  con.  us
For  U  S.

Gen.  26.  22.  now  the  Lord  hath  made  room  for  wi
31.  14.  is  there  yet  any  inheritance  for  us  ?

Exod.  14.  12.  better  for  us  to  serve  the  Egyptians

24.  14.  tarry  ye  here  for  ?/>  until  we  confe  again
Num.  14.  3.  better  for  us  to  return  '.nto  Egypt

9.  fear  not  the  people,  for  they  are  bread  for  us
Deut.  2.  36.  there  was  not  one  city  too  strong//?/-  us
3d.  12.  say,  who  shall  go  up  fur  us  to  heaven  ?

13.  shouldest  say,  who  shall  go  over  sea  for  us?
Josh.  5.  1.3.  art  thou  for  us  or  for  our  adversaries  ?
22.  17.  is  the  iniquity  of  Peor  too  little  fur  us  ?
J'.utg.  1.  1.  who  go  up  for  us  against  the  Canaanitt-s  ?

1  Sam.  7.  8.  cease  not  to  cry  unto  the  Loid  for  u-
9-  5.  come,  lest  my  father  take  thought  for  us

14.  6.  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  work  for  us

2  Sam.  18.  3.  if  we  fiee  they  will  not  care  for  us

21.  4.  neither/nr  us  shalt  thou  kill  any  man

2  Rings  4.  13.  behold,  thou  hast  been  careful /??•  u
6.  1.  the  place  where  we  dwell  is  too  strait  for  ns
2  Chron.  13.  10.  as  for  us,  the  Lord  is  our  Clod
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  him  a  right  way  for  us
Neh.  4.  20.  resort,  our  God  shall  figlit  for  vs
Psal.  47.  4.  he  shall  choose  our  inheritance  for  us
62.  8.  trust  in  him,  God  is  a  refuge  for  us
68.  28.  strengthen  that  thou  hast  wrought  fonts
126.  3.  the  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us
Isa.  6.  8.  whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go/,  vs
26.  12.  Lord,  thou  wilt  ordain  peace//??- us
Jer.  9.  18.  let  them  take  up  a  wailing  for  us

14.  19.  hast  smitten,  and  there  is  no’  healing  for  us
21.  2.  inquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the  Lord  for  us

37.  3.  pray  to  the  Lord  our  God//??-  us,  42.  2,  20.
Lam.  4.  17.  as  for  us,  our  eyes  as  yet  failed

Mat.  17.4.  Peter  said  to  Jesus,  Lord.it  is  goo/I  for
us  to  be  here,  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33.

25.  9.  not  so,  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us
Mark  14.  15.  upper  room,  there  make  ready  for  us
Luke  1.  69.  hast  raised  up  horn  of  sal  vation  for  us

9.  50.  for  he  that  is  not  against  us  is  for  us
Rom.  4.  24.  for  us  to  whom  it  shall  be  imputed

5.  8.  while  we  were  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us
8.26.  the  Spirit  maketh  intercession  for  us

31.  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?

32.  spared  not,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all
34.  Christ  also  maketh  intercession  forus

1  Cor.  5.  7-  even  Christ  is  sacrificed  for  us

2  Cor.  1.  11.  helping  together  by  prayer  for  us
4. 17.  our  light  affliction  worketh  forus

5.  21.  he  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  forus
Gal.  3.  13.  Christ  redeemed  us,  mane  a  curse  for  us
Eph.  5.  2.  hath  loved  us,  and  given  himself  forus
Col.  4.  3.  withal,  praying/?/-  us,  that  God  would
1  Thess.  5.  10.  who  died  for  its,  1  John  3. 16.

25.  pray  for  us,  2  Thess.  3.  1.  Deb.  13. 18.
lit.  2. 14.  who  gave  himself/??- us,  that  he  might
Deb.  6.  20.  whither  the  forerunner  is  forus  entered

9. 12.  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us
24.  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  ns

10.  20.  living  way,  which  he  hath  consecrat.  /??•  us
11.40.  G.  having  provided  some  better  thing/??-  us

1  Pet.  2.  21.  because  Chi-,  hath  suffered  for  us,  4.  1.

_  From  US.

Gen.  26.  16.  Abimelech  said  to  Isaac,  go  from  ns

1  Sam.  6.  20.  and  to  whom  shall  he  go  up  from  ?/. >  ?

14.  17.  number  now,  and  see  who  is  gone  from  ns

2  Chr.29.  10.  his  wrath  turn  from  us,  Ezra  10.  14.
Psal.  2.  3.  let  us  cast  away  their  cords  from  us
103.  12.  hath  removed  our  transgressions frumus

Isa.  59.  9.  therefore  is  judgment  far  from  us

11.  we  look  for  salvation,  but  it  is  far  from  us
64.  7.  for  thou  hast  hid  thy  face/?-/???/  .  ?/*

Jer.  4.  8.  the  anger  of  the  Ld.isnot  turned/?-/?????/*
21.  2.  that  Nebuchadrezzar  may  go  up  from  us

38.  25.  hide  it  not  from  us,  we  will  not  kill  thee
Acts  1. 22.  to  the  day  he  was  taken  up frornus

15.  24.  heard  that  certain  who  went  out  from  us

2  Thess.  2.  2.  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  from  us
1  John  2.  19.  they  went  out  from  us,  but  not  of  us
See  Depart.

In  US.

Num.  14.  8.  if  the  L.  delight  in  us,  he  will  bring  us
Job  15.  9.  what  understand,  thou,  which  is  not  in  vs
Isa.  26.  12.  thou  hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us
John  17.  21.  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us
Rom.  8.  4.  that  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  vs
18.  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  in  us

1  Cor.  4.  6.  ye  might  learn  in  us  not  to  think

2  Cor.  1.  5.  as  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  inus
4.  12.  so  death  worketh  inus,  but  life  in  you

6. 12.  ye  are  not  straitened  in  us,  but  in  vourselv.
Eph.  3.  20.  according  to  power  that  worketh  inus

2  Tim.  1.14.  by  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  inus
Jam.  4.  5.  the  spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth

1  John  1.8.  truth  is  not  in  us  ||  10.  his  wmrd  not  in  us

3.  24.  hereby  we  know  that  he  abideth  in  us

4.  12.  if  we  love,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  13.

2  John  2.  for  the  truth's  sake  which  dwelleth  in  us

Of  US.

Gen.  3.  22.  behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us
Num.  31.  49.  and  there  lackethnot  a  man  of  us
Josh.  2.  24.  the  inhabitants  faint  because  oj  us
Judg.  16.  24.  our  enemy,  which  slew  many  of  us
20.  18.  which  of  us  shall  go  up  first  to  the  battle  ?

2  Rings  6.  11.  which  of  us  is  for  thekingof  Israel  ?
En  a  8.  23.  we  besought  G.  he  was  entreated  of  us
Psal.  115.  12.  the  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  us
Isa.  53.  6.  he  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniqu.  of  us  all
63.  16.  our  father,  tho’  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us
Jer.  6.  24.  anguish  hath  taken  hold  of  us,  and  pain
14.  9.  yet  thou,  O  Lord,  art  in  the  midst/?/?/*

Acts  17.  27.  tho’  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us
Rom.  4.  16.  Abraham,  who  is  the  father  of  us  all

1  Cor.  4.  1.  so  account  of  us  as  ministers  ot'  Christ

2  Cor.  2. 1 1 .  lest  Satan  get  an  advantage  of  us,  for  we

4.  7.  that  the  power  may  be  of  God,  and  not  of  us

10.  2.  some  who  think  of  us,  as  if  we  walked

Gal.  4.  26.  Jerusalem,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all
Eph.  4.7.  but  to  every  one  of  us  is  gjven  grace
l  Thess.  1.6.  ye  became  followers  of  us  anti  of  Ld.


USE


U  S  U


l  Thess.  1.  9.  they  thems.  shew  <>/  vs  what  entering  in

2.  13.  ye  received  the  word  which  ye  heard  of  us

3.  6.  ye  have  good  remembrance  of  us  always

4.  1.  that  as  ye  have  received  of  vs  how  to  walk
»  Tfiess.  3.  6.  not  after  tradition  iie  received  of  vs
i  Pet.  3.  2.  the  commandment  of  vs  the  apostles

l  John  2. 19.  they  were  not  of  us.  for  if  they  had  been
of  us  they  might  shew  they  were  not  all  of  us
On  US, or  upon  US.

Gen.  26.  10.  shouldest  have  brought  guilt,  upon  vs

42.  21.  therefore  is  this  distress  come  upon  us

43.  18.  fall  uponzis  and  take  us  for  bond-men
Exod.  5.  3.  lest  he  fall  upon  vs  with  pestilence
Sum.  12.  11.  1  beseech  thee,  lay  not  the  sin  upon  us
Dent.  31.  17-  are  not  these  evils  come  upon  us?
Josh.  9.  20.  let  them  live  lest  wrath  be  upon  us
Judg.  8.  21.  they  said,  rise  thou  and  fall  upon  us

1  Sam.  5.  7 .  his  hand  is  sore  upon  us  and  Dagon

1  Kings  12.  4.  make  thou  this  heavy  yoke  which  he

put  upon  us  lighter,  9. 2  Chron.  10.  4,  9.

2  Kings 7-  9.  some  mischief  will  come  upon  us

1  C/ir.  15.  13.  Lord  our  God  made  a  breach  upon  vs

2  Chr.  20.  9.  if  when  evil  cometh  upon  us  as  sword
34.  21.  for  great  is  the  wrath  poured  upon  us

Ezra  8. 18.  by  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon  us,  .31.

9.  13.  after  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil
Neh.  9.  32.  the  trouble  little  that  hath  com e upon  us

33.  thou  art  just  in  all  that  is  brought  upon  vs

13.  18.  did  not  our  God  bring  all  this  evil  vponus?
Job  9.  33.  that  might  lay  his  hand  upon  us  both
Psal.  4.  6.  lift  up  light  of  thy  countenance  uponus

33.  22.  let  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  be  upon  us

44.  17.  all  this  is  com enpon  us  yet  have  we  not
67.  1.  God  bless  us,  cause  his  face  to  shine  uponus
90.  17.  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  he  upon  us
123.  2.  our  eyes  wait  on  L.  till  he  have  mercy  up.  us

3.  have  mercy  upon  us,  O  L.  have  mercy  upon  us
Mat.  9.  27.  1  20.  30,  31.  Luke  17.  13.
Isa.  32. 15.  until  the  Spirit  be  poured  upon  us
Lam.  3.  47.  fear  and  a  snare  is  come  upon  sis

5.  1.  remember,  O  Lord,  what  is  come  upon  us
Ezek.  33. 10.  if  our  transgressions  and  sins  be  uponus
Dan.  9.  11.  therefore  the  curse  is  poured  upon  us

12.  by  brinaing  uponus  a  great  evil,  13,  14.

Hos.  10.  8.  they  shall  say  to  mountains,  cover  us,
and  to  hills,  fall  on  us.  Luke  23.  30.  Rev.  6.  16.
Jonah  1.  7-  for  whose  cause  this  evil  is  on  us,  8.
Mic.  3. 11.  they  will  say,  none  evil  can  come  uponus

7.  19.  he  will  turn  and  have  compassion  upon  ns
Mat.  27.  25.  his  blood  be  on  vs  and  our  children
Acts  3.  4.  look  on  us  ||  5.  28  this  man’s  blood  up.  us

12.  or  why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us  as  though

11. 15.  Spirit  fell  on  them,  as,  onus  at  the  beginning
Rom.  16. 6.  Mary ,  who  bestowed  much  labour  on  us
Tit.  3.  6.  which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly  thro’  Jes.
1  John  3.  1.  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  on  us

Over  US.

Gen.  37.  8.  said,  shalt  thou  indeed  reign  over  us?
Exod.  2. 14.  who  made  thee  judge  over  us,  Acts  7. 27.
Num.  16.  13.  thou  make  thyself  a  prince  over  us
Judg.  8.  22.  Israel  said  to  Gideon,  rule  over  us

9.  8.  the  trees  said  to  the  olive-tree,  reign  over  us

10.  to  the  fig-tree  ||  12.  to  vine  |]  14.  to  bramble

1  Sam.  8.  19.  but  we  will  have  a  kingocer7«,  10. 19.

11.  12.  who  said,  shall  Saul  reign  over  us?

2  Sam.  5.  2.  in  time  past,  when  Saul  was  kin  governs

19.  10.  and  Absalom  whom  we  anointed  over  us
Neh.  9.  37.  the  kings  whom  thou  hast  set  over  us
Psal.  12.  4.  lips  are  our  own,  who  is  Lord  over  us
Isa.  26.  13.  other  lords  have  had  dominion  over  ns
Lam.  5. 8.  servants  have  ruled  overus  none  todeliver
Luke  19.  14.  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us

Through  US.

2  Cor.  9. 11.  caused)  through  us  thanksgiving  to  God
To  or  unto  US.

Gen.  19.  31.  there  is  not  a  man  to  come  in  unto  ns

20.  9.  said,  what  hast,  thou  done  unto  ns  ?  26.  10.

34.  21.  let  us  take  their  daughters  to  71s  for  wives
39.  14.  brought  an  Hebrew  unto  us  to  mock  us

42.  28.  afraid,  saying  one  to  another,  what  is  this

that  God  hath  done  unto  us?  Jer.  5.  19.
Num.  10.  31.  thou  rnayest  be  to  us  instead  of  eyes
32.  what  goodness  Lord  shall  do  unto  vs,  the  same
Deut.  5.  27.  speak  thou  unto  us  and  we  will  hear

29.  29.  but  the  things  reveale  !  belong  unto  us
30. 12.  go  up  to  heaven  and  bring  it  unto  71s

13.  shall  go  over  the  sea  and  bring  it  7mto  71s
Josh.  9.  25.  we  are  in  thy  hand,  as  it  seemeth  good

and  right  to  thee  to  do  unto  us  do,  Judg.  10.  15.
Jtidg.  13.  8.  let  the  man  of  God  come  again  7tnio  vs

10.  10.  we  come  to  do  to  him,  as  he  hath  done  to  71s
18.  19.  go  with  us,  and  be  to  7 is  a  father  and  a  priest

1  Sam.  4.  8.  woe  unto  71s,  Jer.  4. 13.  I  6.  4.  Lam.  5.  16.

14.  9.  if  they  thus  say  7 into  us,  tarry  till  we  come

25.  15.  but  the  men  were  very  good  zintons

16.  they  were  a  wall  unto  7ts  by  night  and  by  day
1  Chron.  13.  3.  bring  again  the  ark  of  God  to  us
Ezra  4.  12.  the  Jews  which  came  from  thee  to  us
Neh.  5.  8.  shall  your  brethren  be  sold  unto  us
Job  34.  4.  let  us  choose  to  71s  judgment,  let  us  know
Psal.  60.  1.  hast  scattered,  O  turn  thyself  to  71s  ag.
115.1.  not  unto  us,  (J  Lord ,  not  unto  us  but  thy  name
Isa.  1.  9.  except  had  left  7into  71s  a  very  small  remn.

9.  6.  unto  7is  a  child  is  born,  7into  us  a  son  is  given

14.  10.  they  shall  say,  art  thou  become  like  unto  us?

28. 15.  the  scourge  shall  not  come  unto  71s

30.  10.  prophesy  not  unto  71s  right  things,  speak

unto  us  smooth  things,  prophesy  deceits
33.  21.  Lord  will  be  7777/0  71s  a  place  of  broad  rivers
36.  1 1 .  speak  not  to  71s  in  the  J ews’  language
Jer.  5.24.  he  reserved)  to  71s  the  appointed  weeks

26.  16.  hath  spoken  to7/rin  the  name  of  the  Lord
42.  5.  for  whic-h  the  Lord  shall  send  thee  to  71s
44.  16.  as  for  the  word  thou  hast  spoken  7into  us

Lam.  5.  4.  water  for  money,  our  wood  is  sold  un.  us
Ezek.  11.  15.  unto  ns  is  this  land  given  in  possession
24.  19.  tell  us  what  these  things  are  to  vs  ?

Dan.  9.  7-  hut  7tnto  71s  confusion  of  faces,  8.

Hos.  6.  3.  he  shall  come  unto  us  as  the  rain

10.  3.  what  then  should  a  king  do  to  71s  ?

Jonah  1.11.  that  the  sea  may  be  calm  unto  71s
Zech.  1.  6.  like  as  the  Lord  thought  to  do  7/71  to  tis


Mat.  20.  12.  thou  hast  made  them  equal  unto  us
25.  11.  saying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us,  Luke  1.3.25.

27.  4.  what  is  that  to  us?  see  thou  to  that
Luke  1.  2.  even  as  they  delivered  them  7mto  7 is
2.  15.  which  the  Ix>r<l  hath  made  known  7777*0  us
10.  17.  even  the  devils  are  subject  unto  u s

12.  41.  speakest  thou  this  parable  unto  us  ?

16.  26.  neither  can  they  pass  to  71s  that  would

John  2.  18.  what  sign  snewest  thou  7777*0  7 is  ?

14.  22.  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself  unto  7 is?

16.  17.  what  is  this  that  he  saith  unto  us  ?

Acts7.  38.  who  received  the  oracles  to  give  zintous?

10.  41.  to  vs  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him

11.  17.  God  gave  them  the  like  gift  as  unto  us

13.  33.  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  zintozis

Rom.  5.  5.  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  7 into  us

1  Cor.  1.  18.  but  unto  us  it  is  the  power  of  God

30.  in  Christ,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  71s  wisdom
2.  10.  God  revealed  them  7mto  7 is  by  his  Spirit

8.  6.  but  to  71s  there  is  but  one  God,  the  Father

2  Cor.  5.  19.  committed  to  us  word  of  reconciliation
8.  5.  gave  themselves  7tnto  77s  by  the  will  of  God

7.  therefore  as  ye  abound  in  your  love  to  us
Co/.  1.  8.  who  declared  7into  us  your  love  in  Spirit

4.  3.  that  God  would  open  7into  us  a  door  of  utter.
Heb.  4.  2.  for  7777*0  71s  was  the  gospel  preached

1  Pet.  1.12.  but  unto  Jw  they  did  minister  the  things

To  US-WARD.

Psal.  40.  5.  thy  thoughts  which  are  to  us-tvard
Eph.  1. 19.  the  greatness  of  his  power  to  zis-zoard

2  Pet.  3.  9.  but  his  long-suffering  to  us- w.  not  will.

Toward  US.

Psal.  85.  4.  cause  thine  anger  toward  us  to  cease
117.  2.  his  merciful  kindness  is  great  toward  71s
Rom.  5.  8.  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  71s
Eph.  1.  8.  wherein  he  hath  abounded  toward  us
2.  7-  in  his  kindness  toward  71s  through  Christ
l  John  4. 9.  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  toward  71s
Under  US.

Psal.  47.  3.  he  shall  subdue  the  people  7 inder  us
With  US.

Gen.  31.  50.  no  man  is  with  us,  see,  God  is  witness
34.  9.  and  make  ye  marriages  with  71s  and  give
10.  ye  shall  dwell  w.  71s  ||  23.  they  dwell  with  us

43.  4.  if  thou  send  our  brother  with  us,  44.  26.

44.  30.  seeth  that  the  lad  is  not  with  71s,  31.

Exod.  3. 18.  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  met  with  71s,  5.3.

14.  11.  wherefore  hast  thou  dealt  thus  with  us?

20. 19.  speak  thou  with  7 is,  let  not  God  speak  with  71s
33.  16.  is  it  not  in  that  thou  goest  with  us  ?

Num.  10.29.  come  thou  with  z/s,  we  will  do  thee  good
32.  it  shall  be,  if  thou  go  zoith  71s  that  goodness

11.  18.  for  it  was  well  with  us  in  Egypt
14.  9.  and  the  Lord  is  with  us,  fear  them  not
22.  14.  Balaam  refused)  to  come  with  us
Dezit.5.  2.  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with  us  3.

29.  15.  but  with  him  that  standeth  here  with  zts,  also
with  him  that  is  not  here  with  zts  this  day
Josh.  9.  6.  therefore  make  a  league  with  us,  11.
Judg .  6.  13.  ()  my  lord,  if  the  L,ord  be  with  us
11.8.  we  turn  again,  that  thou  rnayest  go  zoith  zts
18.  19.  they  said,  hold  thy  peace  and  go  with  us

1  Sam.  5.  7-  the  ark  of  God”  shall  not  abide  with  zts

2  Sam.  13.  26.  let  my  brother  Amnon  go  with  zts

21.  17.  shall  go  no  more  out  with  ztsto  battle

1  Kings  3. 18.  there  was  no  stranger  with  zts  in  house

8.  57.  the  Lord  our  God  be  with  us  as  he  was

2  Kings  6.  16.  fear  not,  they  that  be  with  us  are  more

than  they  that  be  with  them,  2  Chron.  32.7.
2  Chron.  13.  12.  behold,  God  is  with  zts,  32.  8.

Ezra  4.  3.  you  have  nothing  to  do  zoith  zts  to  build

9.  14.  wouldst  not  thou  be  angry  with  zts  till  thou
Job  15.  10.  with  7 is  are  the  grey-headed  and  aged
Psal.  46.  7-  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  zoith  zts,  11.

85.  5.  wilt  thou  be  angry  zoith  zts  for  ever?

103.  10.  he  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins
Prov.  1.11.  come  with  zts  ||  Isa.  8. 10.  God  is  with  us
Isa.  59.  12.  for  our  transgressions  are  zoith  ns
Jer.  8.  8.  we  are  wise,  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  with  zts

14.  21.  remember,  break  not  thy  covenant  with  zts
42.  6.  that  it  may  be  well  with  zts  when  we  obey
Hos.  12.  4.  found  in  Bethel,  there  he  spake  with  us
Zech.  1.  6.  as  our  doings,  so  hath  he  dealt  with  zts
Mat.  1.  23.  being  interpreted,  is,  God  with  zts

13.  56.  his  sisters  are  all  with  us,  Markd.  3.

22.  25.  now  there  were  with  us  seven  brethren
Luke  2.  48.  son,  why  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  zts?
9.  49.  forbad  him,  because  he  followeth  not  zoith  zts
24.  29.  abide  zoith  zts  ||  32.  while  he  talked  with  zts

Acts  l.  17.  for  he  was  numbered  with  us  and  had
2.  29.  his  sepulchre  is  with  zts  unto  this  day

1  Cor.  16.  16.  to  every  one  that  helpeth  zoith  zts

2  Cor.  8.  19.  who  was  chosen  to  travel  with  us

2  Thess.  1.  7.  to  you  who  are  troubled,  rest  with  us
2  Pet.  1.1.  have  obtained  like  precious  faith  zoith  zts

1  John  1.  3.  that  ye  may  have  fellowship  with  zts
2.  19.  would  no  doubt  have  continued  zoith  us

2  John  2.  the  truth  shall  be  zoith  us  for  ever

Within  US.

Lztke  24.  32.  did  not  our  hearts  burn  zoithin  zts  while
he  opened  to  us  the  scriptures  ?
Without  US.

1  Cor.  4.  8.  ye  have  reigned  as  kings  zoithozit  zts
Heb.  11.  40.  that  they  withozit  zts  not  be  made  perfect

USE.

Lev.  7-  24.  the  fat  may  be  used  in  any  other  71.
Ueztt.  26.  14.  nor  taken  ouaht.  for  any  unclean  zt.

2  Sam.  1.  18.  hade  them  teach  Judah  zt.  of  the  how

1  Chron.  28. 15.  according  to  the  zt.  of  candlestick
Rom.  1.  26.  for  women  did  change  the  natural  zt.

27.  the  men  leaving  the  natural  zt.  of  the  woman
Eph.  4.  29.  which  is  good  to  the  zt.  of  edifying

2  Tim.  2.  21.  shall  be  a  vessel  meet  for  master’s  zt.
Heb.  5.  14.  by  zt.  have  their  senses  exercised  to

.  USES.

Tit.  3. 14.  to  maintain  good  works  for  necessary  zt.
USE,  Passive.

L,ev.  19.  26.  neither  shall  yev.  enchantment
Nztm.  10.  2.77.  trumpets  for  calling  of  the  assembly

15.  39.  after  which  ye  u.  to  go  a  whoring

Deut.  2.  +  9.  v.  no  hostility  against  Moab  nor  contend
1  Chron.  12.  2.  could  u.  both  right  hand  and  left


Jer.  23.  31.  that  u.  their  tongues,  and  say,  he  saith
31. 23.  as  yet  they  shall  zt.  this  speech  in  Judah
46. 11.  in  vain  shalt  thou  zt.  many  medicines
Ezek.  12.  2.3.  they  shall  no  more  u.  it  as  a  proverb

16.  41.  shall  zt.  this  proverb  against  thee,  saying
18.  2.  what  mean  ye,  that  ye  u.  this  proverb.'

3.  ye  shall  not  have  occasion  to  zt.  this  proverb
21.  21.  the  king  of  Babylon  stood  to  u.  divination
Joel  2. 1 17.  should  zt.  a  by-word  against  them
Mat.  5.  44.  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  pray  for
them  that  despitefully  zt.  you,  Lztke  6.28.

6.  7.  when  ye  pray,  zt.  not  vain  repetitions
Acts  14.5.  assault  made  to  zt.  apostles  despitefully

1  Cor.  7. 21.  if  thou  rnayest  be  made  free,  u.  it  rather

31.  they  that  zt.  this  world  as  not  abustng  it

2  Cor.  1. 17.  when  thus  minded,  did  1  zt.  lightness?

3.  12.  have  hope,  we  77.  great  plainness  of  speech
13. 10.  lest  bemg  present,  I  should  zt.  sharpness

Gal.  5.  13.  zt.  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh
1  Tim.  1. 8.  the  law  is  good  if  a  man  zt.  it  lawfully
3.  10.  then  let  them  zt.  the  office  of  a  deacon

5.  23.  zt.  a  little  wine  for  thy  stomach’s  sake

1  Pet.  4.  9.  t7.  hospitality  one  to  another  without

USED.

Exod.  0.1. 36.  if  the  ox  hath  zt.  to  push  in  time  past
Lev.  7.  24.  the  fat  may  be  zt.  in  any  other  use
Jztdg.  14.  10.  for  so  u.  the  young  men  to  do
20.  whom  Samson  had  zt.  as  his  friend

2  Kings  17. 17.77.  enchantments,  21 . 6.  2  Chron.  33.0.
Jer.  2.  24.  a  wild  ass  zt.  to  the  wilderness  that
Ezek.  22.  29.  the  people  of  land  have  zt.  oppression

35.  11.  according  to  thy  envy  which  thou  hast  77.
Hos.  12. 10.  and  v.  simditudes  by  the  prophets
Mark  2.  18.  the  disciples  of  John  zt.  to  fast
Acts  8.  9.  Simon  Magus  before-time  zt.  sorcery
19. 19.  many  also  of  then)  which  u.  curious  arts
Rom.  3. 13.  with  their  tongues  they  zt.  decett
1  Cor.  9. 12.  we  have  not  77.  this  power,  but  suffer

15.  but  I  have  zt.  none  of  these  things
1  Thess.  2. 5.  nor  at  any  time  u.  we  flattering  words
1  Tim.  3.  13.  they  that  have  zt.  the  office  of  a  deacon
Ileb.  10.  33.  companions  of  the'm  that  were  so  u.
USEST.

Psal.  119. 132.  as  thou  zt.  to  those  that  fear  thy  name
USELH.

Dezit.  18. 10.  not  be  found  any  that  zt.  divination
Esth.  6. 8.  apparel  which  the  king  u.  to  wear
Prov.  15.2.  the  tongue  of  the  wise  zt.  knowledge
18.  23.  the  poor  77.  entreaties,  but  rich  answereth
Jer.  22. 13.  zt.  his  neighbour’s  service  without  wages
Ezek.  16. 44.  that  77.  proverbs,  shall  use  this  proverb
Heb.  5. 13.  every  one  that  u.  milk  is  unskdful  i
USING.

Col.  2.  22.  which  all  are  to  perish  with  the  zt.

1  Pet.  2. 16.  and  not  77.  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of
USURP.

1  Tim.  2. 12.  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  zt.  authority
USURER.

Exod.  22.  25  thou  shaft  not  be  to  him  as  an  zt.
USURY.

By  usury7  is  generally  understood  the  gain  of  any
thing  above  the  principal,  or  that  which  was  lent,
exacted  only  in  consideratiozi  of  the  loan,  whether
it  be  i?i  money,  corn,  wares,  or  the  like.

It  is  most  commonly  taken  for  an  unlawful  profit,
which  a  person  makes  of  his  money  or  goods.

The  Hebrew  word  for  usury  signifies  biting.  The
law  of  God  prohibits  rigorozts  imposing  condi¬
tions  of  gain  for  the  loan  of  money  or  goods,  and
exacting  them  without  respect  to  the  condition  of
the  borrower,  whether  he  gain  or  lose ;  whether  po¬
verty  occasioned  his  borrozving,  or  a  visible  pros¬
pect  of  gain  by  employing  the  borrowed  goods.

It  is  said  in  Exod.  22.  25,  26.  If  thou  lend  mo¬
ney  to  any7  of  my7  people  that  is  poor  by  thee,
thou  shalt  not  be  to  him  as  an  ziszirer,  neither
shalt  thou  lay  upon  him  usziry,  &c.  And  in
Lev.  25.  35,  36  ,  37.  If  thy  brother  be  waxen
poor,  and  fallen  in  decay  with  thee,  then  thou
shalt  relieve  him,  yea,  though  he  be  a  stranger,
or  a  sojourner,  that  lie  may  live  with  thee :
Take  thou  no  usury  of  him,  4'C-  This  law  forbids
the  taking  of  usury  from  a  brother  that  teas  poor,
an  Israelite  reduced  to  poverty,  or  from  a  prose¬
lyte.  But  in  Deut.  23.  20.  God  seems  to  tolerate
usury  towards  strangers ;  Unto  a  stranger  thou
rnayest  lend  upon  usury.  By  strangers,  in  this
passage,  some  understand  the  Gentiles  in  general,
or  all  szich  as  were  not  Jews,  excepting  proselytes.
Others  think  that  by  strangers  are  meant  the  Ca-
naanites,  and  the  other  people  that  were  devoted  to
.  slavery  and  subjection  ;  of  these  the  Hebrews  were
permitted  to  exact  usury,  but  not  of  szich  strangers
with  whom  they  had  no  quarrel,  and  against  whom
the  Lord  had  not  denounced  his  judgments.

The  Hebrews  were  plainly  commanded  in  Exod.
22.  25,  & c.  not  to  receive  usury  for  money  from
any  that  borrowed  for  necessity,  as  hi  that  case
in  Neh.  5.  5,  7.  And  szich  provision  the  law
made  for  the  preserving  of  estates  to  their  fami¬
lies  by  the  year  of  Jubilee;  for  a  people  that
had  little  concern  m  trade ,  could  not  be  supposed
to  borrow  money  but  ozit  of  necessity ;  but  they
were  allowed  to  lend  upon  usury  to  strangers,
rchom  yet  they  must  not  oppress.  This  law  there¬
fore,  in  the  strictness  of  it,  seems  to  have  been
pecziliar  to  the  Jewish  state  ;  bzit  in  the  eqziity
of  it,  it  obligeth  zis  to  shew  mercy  to  those  we
have  advantage  against,  and  to  be  content  to
share  zoith  those  we  lend  to  in  loss,  as  well  as
profit,  if  Providence  cross  them.  And  upon  this
condition,  a  valuable  commentator  says,  “  It
seems  as  lawful  for  me  to  receive  interest  for
money,  which  another  takes  pains  with,  improves,
but  runs  the  hazard  of  in  trade,  as  it  is  to  re¬
ceive  rent  for  my  land  which  another  takes  pains
with,  improves,  but  runs  the  hazard  of  izi  hus¬
bandry."

Exod.  22.  25.  neither  shalt  thou  lay  upon  him  u.
Lev.  25.  36.  take  thou  no  77.  of  him  or  increase,  37.
Dezit.  23.  19.  shalt  not  lend  on  77.  to  thy  brother
20.  unto  a  stranger  thou  rnayest  lend  upon  u,

533


UTT


VAX


VAI


Neh.  5.  7-  ye  exact  u.  ||  10.  let  us  leave  off  this  u.
Psal.  15.  5.  he  that  putteth  not  his  money  to  u.
Prov.  28.  8.  he  that  by  u.  increaseth  substance
Isa.  24.  2.  as  with  taker  of  u.  so  with  giver  of  u.
Jer.  15.  10.  1  have  neither  lent  on  u.  nor  men  have
lent  to  me  on  u.  yet  every  one  doth  curse  me
Ezek.  18.  8.  that  hath  not  given  forth  on  u.  17.

13.  given  forth  on  u.  ||  22.  12.  thou  hast  taken  n.
Mat.  25.  27.  received  mine  own  with  u.  Luke  10. 23.
UTMOST,  OUTMOST.

Gen.  49.  26.  to  the  v.  bound  of  the  ever  .asting  hills
i \7um.  22.  41.  might  see  the  u.  of  the  people,  23.  13.
Dent.  30.  4.  if  any  of  you  be  driven  out  to  o.  parts
Jer.  9.  26.  1  will  punish  Egypt,  Judah,  Edom,  and
all  that  are  in  the  u.  corners,  25.  23.  |  49.  32.
Luke  11.  31.  she  came  from  u.  parts  to  hear  Solomon
UTTER,  Vetb.

Lev.  5.  1.  if  he  do  not  w.  it  then  he  shall  bear  iniquity
Josh.  2.  14.  our  life  if  ye  n.  it  not  this  our  business

20.  if  thou  u.  it,  we  will  be  quit  of  thine  oath
Judg.  5. 12.  awake,  Deborah,  u.  song,  arise,  Barak
Job  8. 10.  shall  not  they  u.  words  out  of  their  heart
15.  2.  should  a  wise  man  u.  vain  knowledge  ?

27.  4.  nor  shall  my  tongue  u.  deceit
33.3.  and  my  lips  shall  u.  knowledge  clearly
Psal.  78.  2.  1  will  u.  dark  sayings  of  old
94.  4.  how  long  shall  they  m.  hard  things
106.  2.  who  can  u.  the  mighty  acts  of  the  Lord  ?

119.  171.  my  lips  shall  u.  praise,  when  thou  hast
145.  7-  they  shall  u.  the  memory  of  thy  goodness
Prov.  14.  5.  but  a  false  witness  will  u.  lies
23.  33.  thine  heart  shall  u.  perverse  things
Eccl.  1.  8.  all  things  full  of  labour,  man  cannot  u.  it
5.  2.  let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  tow.  before  God
Isa.  32.  6.  a  vjle  person  will  u.  error  against  Lord
48.  20.  tell  this,  v.  it  even  to  the  end  of  the  earth
Jer.  1.  16.  I  will  «.my  judgments  against  them

25.  30.  u .  his  voice  from  his  holy  habitation
51.  t  14.  they  shall  11.  a  shout  against  Babylon

Ezek.  24.  3.  u.  a  parable  unto  the  rebellious  house
Joel  2.  11.  Lord  shall  u.  his  voice  before  his  army

3.  16.  u.  his  voice  from  Jerusalem,  Amos  1.  2.
Mat.  13.  35.  I  will  u.  things  have  been  kept  secret

1  Cor.  14.  9.  except  u.  words  easy  to  be  understood

2  Cor.  12.  4.  which  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  u.

UTTER,  Adjective.

Num.  21.  +  3.  he  called  the  place,  u.  destruction
1  Kings  20.  42.  a  man  I  appointed  to  u.  destruction
Nali.  1.  8.  he  will  make  an  u.  end  of  the  place
Zech.  14.  11.  there  shall  be  no  more  u.  destruction
UTTER,  OUTER.

Ezek.  10.  5.  the  sound  was  heard  to  the  0.  court
42.  1.  he  brought  me  forth  into  the  u.  court
UTTERANCE.

Acts  2.  4.  they  spake,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  u.

1  Cor.  1.  5.  that  ye  are  enriched  by  him  in  all  u.

2  Cor.  8.7.  as  ye  abound  in  u.  and  knowledge
Eph.  6.  19.  praying,  that  u.  may  be  given  to  me
Col.  4.  3.  that  God  would  open  to  us  a  door  of  u

UTTERED.

Num.  30.  6.  if  she  had  a  husband  when  she  u.  8.
Judg.  11.11.  Jephthah  u.  all  his  words  before  Lord
"Sam.  22. 14.  the  Most  High  u.  his  voice,  PsalA6.  6.
Job  26.  4.  to  whom  hast  thou  u.  words  ?

42.  3.  therefore  have  1  u.  that  I  understood  not
P sol.  66.  14.  which  my  lips  u.  when  in  trouble
Uab.  3.  10.  deep  u.  his  voice  and  lifted  his  hands
Rom.  8.  26.  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  u.

Heb.  5. 11.  many  things  to  say  and  hard  to  be  u.

Rev.  10.  3.  had  cried, seven  thunders  u.  their  voices

4.  when  the  seven  thunders  had  u.  their  voices

UTTERETH.

Job  15.  5.  for  thy  mouth  u.  thine  iniquities
Psal.  19.  2.  day  unto  day  u.  speech,  night  unto  night
Prov.  1.  20.  wisdom  u.  her  voice  in  the  streets

21.  in  the  city  she  u.  her  words,  saying,  how  long

10.  18.  and  he  that  u.  a  slander,  is  a  fool

29.  11.  a  fool  u.  all  his  mind,  but  a  wise  man  keeps
Jer.  10.  13.  when  he  u.  his  voice,  51.  16.

Mic.  7.  3.  the  great  man  u.  his  mischievous  desire
UTTERING.

Isa.  59.  13.  u.  from  the  heart  words  of  falsehood
UTTERLY.

Exod.  17. 14.  u.  put  out  remembrance  of  Amalek

22.  17.  if  her  father  u.  refuse  to  give  her  to  him

23.  24.  thou  shalt  u.  overthrow  their  idols

Lev.  13.  44.  priest  shall  pronounce  him  u.  unclean
26.44.  in  land  of  enemies  i  will  not  destroy  u.
Num.  15.31.  thatsoul  shall  u.  be  castoff,  hisiniquity
21.  2.  then  ]  will  u.  destroy  their  cities

30.  12.  if  her  husband  hath  u.  made  them  void
Deut.  3.6.  u.  destroying  men,  women,  and  children
4.  26.it  ye  corrupt  yourselves,  ye  shall  u.  perish
7-2.  thou  sha.t  u.  destroy  the  Canaanites,  20.  17.

26.  shalt  u.  detest  the  silver  and  gold  of  images

12.  2.  ye  shall  «.  destroy  the  high  places

13. 15.  destroying  u.  the  city  of  idolaters  with  sword
31 .29.  after  my  death  ye  will  u.  corrupt  yourselves
Josh.  11.  20.  that  he  might  u.  destroy  them
17.  13.  the  children  ot  Isr  put  Canaanites  to  tri¬
bute,  but  did  not  u.  drive  them  out,  Judg.  1  28
Judg.  15.  2.  I  thought  thou  hadstw.  hated  her
21.  11.  ye  shall  y.  destroy  every  male  and  woman
lj>am.  15.  3.  smite,  u.  destroy  the  Amalekites,  18

27.  12.  he  hath  made  Israel  u.  to  abhor  him
2  Sam.  17.  10.  he  that  is  valiant  shall  u.  melt
23. 7 .  the  sons  of  Relial  as  thorns  shall  be  u.  burnt

1  Lings  9.  21.  the  Canaanites  Isr.  could  not m.  destr.

2  kings  19.  11.  what  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  done

to  all  lands,  by  destroying  them  u.  Isa.  37.  11
2  Chron.  20.  23.  u.  to  slay  them  of  mount  Seir
Seh  9.  31.  thou  didst  not  u.  consume  them
'sal.  37 .  24.  though  he  fall  shall  not  u.  be  cast  down

1 3.  19-  the  wicked  are  u.  consumed  with  terrors

^Tjoj  'HK-kindness  not  u.  take  from  him
Mo'  W1‘  ^eeE  statutes,  O  forsake  me  not  u.

43.  take  not  the  word  of  truth  u .  out  of  my  mouth
kant .  8. 7 •  substance  for  love,  it  would  u.  be  contem.

sa.  2.  18.  and  the  idols  fe  shall  u.  abolish
6.  II.  he  answered,  until  the  land  be  u.  desolate
1  j .  15.  lxird  u.  destroy  the  tongue  of  Egyptian  sea
'"*•  3.  land  be  u.  emptied  ||  19.  earth  is  u.  broken
5o4


Isa.3J.  11.  Assyria  have  done  by  destroy,  them  u.
40.  30.  and  the  young  men  shall  u.  fall,  but  they
56.  3.  Lord  hath  u.  separated  me  from  his  people
60.  12.  yea,  those  nations  shall  be  u.  wasted
Jer.  9.  4.  for  every  brother  will  u.  supplant
12.  17.  it  they  will  not  obey,  1  will  u.  pluck  up
14.  19.  hast  thou  u.  rejected  Judah,  loathed  Zion
23.  39.  behold,  I,  even  1,  will  u.  forget  you
25.  9.  I  will  n.  destroy  them,  50.  21, 26.  1  51.  3,  58.
29.  and  should  ye  be  u.  unpunished  ?

Lam.  5.  22.  but  thou  hast  u.  rejected  us,  art  wroth
Ezek.  9.  6.  slay  u.  old  and  young,  maids,  children
17.  10.  being  planted,  shall  it  not  u.  wither?

27.  31.  and  they  shall  make  themselves  u.  bald
29.  10.  1  will  make  the  land  of  Egypt  u.  waste
Dan.  11.  44.  shall  go  forth  u.  to  make  away  many
Dos.  1.  6.  but  1  will  u.  take  them  away
10.  15.  shall  the  king  of  Israel  be  u.  cutoff
Amos  9-  8.  I  will  u.  destroy  the  house  of  Jacob
Mic.  2.  4.  that  day  shall  one  say,  we  bew.  spoiled
Na/t.  1.  15.  for  the  wicked  he  is  n.  cut  off
Zeph.  1.  2.  I  w  ill  u.  consume  all  things  from  land
Zech.  11.  17.  his  right  eye  shall  be  u.  darkened

1  Cor.  6.  7-  now  there  is  u.  a  fault  among  you

2  Pet.  2.  12.  shall  u.  perish  in  their  own  corruption
Rev.  18.  8.  Babylon  shall  be  u.  burnt  with  fire

See  Destroyed.

UTTERMOST.

2  Kings 7.  5.  when  lepers  came  to  u.  partofcamp,8.
Neli.  1.  9.  there  were  of  you  cast  out  to  u.  part
Psal.  2.  8.  I  will  give  u.  parts  for  thy  possession
Mat.  5.  26.  till  thou  hast  paid  the  u.  farthing
12.  42.  she  came  from  the  u.  parts  to  hear  Solomon
Mark  13.  27.  shall  gather  his  elect  from  the  u.  part
Acts  24.  22.  I  w  ill  know  the  11.  of  your  matter
1  These.  2.  16.  wrath  is  come  on  them  to  the  u.

Heb.  7.  25.  is  able  to  save  them  to  u.  that  come  to  G.
See  Utmost.

V.

VAGABOND.

Gen.  4.  12.  a  fugitive  and  v.  shalt  thou  be  in  earth
14.  1  shall  be  a  fugitive  and  v.  in  the  earth
Acts  19.  13.  then  certain  v.  Jews  took  on  them
VAGABONDS.

Psal.  109.  10.  let  his  children  be  v.  and  beg
VAIL,  or  VEIL.

A  curtain,  or  cover,  which  the  Jewish  women  wore
over  tlieir  heads  and  faces,  in  token  of  modesty,
of  reverence,  and  subjection  to  thiir  husbands,
Gen.  24.  65.  1  Cor.  11.  3,  6,  7,  10.  The  Lord
commanded  Moses  to  make  a  vail  of  blue,  and
purple,  and  scarlet,  and  therewith  to  divide  the
holy  of  holies,  which  represented  the  highest
heaven,  from  the  holy  place,  where  the  church
militant,  or  its  representatives,  met  and  served
God,  Exod.  26.  31,  32,  33.  This  vail  typified  the
human  nature  of  Christ,  adorned  with  excellent
gifts  and  graces,  by  which  he  has  opened  for  us  a
way  into  heaven,  Heb.  10.  19,  20.  It  signified
also  the  separation  between  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,
which  is  now  removed  by  Christ,  Eph.  2.  14.  and
therefore,  at  the  death  of  Christ,  this  vail  was  rent
in  twain,  Mat.  27.  51.  which  shewed  that  the  /  ar-
tition  wall  betwixt  Jews  and  Gentiles  was  pulled
down  ;  that  God  was  leaving  his  temple,  and  abo¬
lishing  all  legal  and  ceremonial  worship.  The
apostle  speaks  of  the  vail  of  ignorance,  blindness,
and  hardness  of  heart,  which  keeps  the  Jews
from  understanding  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Tes¬
tament,  the  spiritual  sense  and  meaning  of  the  law,
and  from  seeing  that  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law
for  righteousness ;  this  vail  was  cast  over  them,
for  their  wilful  and  malicious  rejecting  the  gospel-
light,  John  9.  39.  2  Cor.  3.  13,  15.

Gen.  24.  65.  Rebekah  took  a  v.  and  covered  herself
38.  14.  Tamar  covered  herself  with  a  v.  wrapped
Exod.  26.  31.  and  thou  shalt  make  a  v.  of  blue
34.  33.  Moses  put  a  v.  on  his  face,  35.

36.  35.  and  he  made  a  v.  of  blue,  2  Chron.  3.  14.
40.  3.  thou  shalt  cover  the  ark  with  the  v.

Lev.  16.  2.  come  not  into  holy  place  within  the  v.
15.  and  bring  his  blood  within  the  v.

21.  23.  only  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  v.  nor  come
24.  3.  without  the  v.  shall  Aaron  order  it
Ruth  3.  15.  bring  the  v.  that  thou  hast  upon  thee
Cant.  5.  7.  keepers  of  the  walls  took  away  my  v.
Isa.  25.  7.  destroy  the  v.  spread  ov'er  all  nations
Mat.  27.  51.  the  v.  of  the  temple  w'as  rent  in  twain
from  top  to  bottom,  Mark  15.  38.  Luke  23.  45.

2  Cor.  3.  13.  not  as  Moses  which  put  a  v.  over  face

14.  for  to  this  day  remaineth  the  same  v.  untaken
away,  which  v.  is  done  away  in  Christ

15.  but  even  to  this  day  the  v.  is  upon  their  heart

16.  nevertheless,  the  v.  shall  be  taken  away
Heb.  6.  19.  w  hich  entereth  into  that  within  the  v.

9.  3.  and  after  the  second  v.  the  tabernacle,  called

10.  20.  through  the  v.  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh

VAILS.

Isa.  3.  23.  in  that  day  the  Lord  will  take  away  the  v.
VAIN,

And  vanity ,  are  taken  in  several  senses  in  Scrip¬
ture.  (1)  For  that  which  is  unprofitable  without
fruit.  Eccl.  1.  2.  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is
vanity.  All  worldly  things,  and  all  men's  de¬
signs,  and  studies,  and  works  about  them,  are  ab¬
solutely  vain,  and  insufficient  to  procure  satisfac¬
tion  and  happiness.  (2)  It  signifies  empty,  with¬
out  any  substance  ;  as  emptiness  is  opposed  to  that
which  is  full,  or  heavy,  or  true.  1.  To  fulness;
so  promises  not  fulfilled  are  said  to  be  vain  pro¬
mises.  And  Job  calls  the  days  of  his  affliction
months  of  vanity  ;  that  is,  empty  of  solid  joy.
Peace,  or  comfort,  Job  7.  3.  And  in  Psal.  2.  1.

W  hy  do  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing  ?  that
is,  an  empty  thing,  without  reason  or  hope.  2.  As
it  is  opposed  to  gravity  ;  as  light  and  inconstant
men  are  called  vain  men  ;  in  which  sense  idolaters
are  culled  vain  persons,  like  the  wind,  and  idols  are
called  vanity,  because  of  their  nothingness  and  im¬


potence.  2  Kings  17.  15,  They  followed  vanity
and  became  vain.  Ho  in  Isa.  41.29.  1  hey  are
all  vanity,  their  works  are  nothing  ;  their  molten
images  are  wind  and  confusion.  3.  As  it  is  op.
posed  to  truth  ;  as  deceitjul  men  and  liars  are
called  vain  men,  lies  at  e  called  vanity ,  /'sal.
4.  2.  How  long  will  ye  lo\e  vanity  and  seek
after  leasing  ?  And  in  2  K  ings  18.  20.  1  hey  are
but  vain  words  :  thy  words  come  not  from  thy
heart;  thou  speakesl  against  thy  knowledge.
Vain  is  often  put  for  false.  Exod.  20.  n  Thou
shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in
vain.  “  Thou  shalt  not  swear  to  confirm  a  thing
that  is  false ;  thou  shalt  not  appeal  to  the  Lord
as  a  witness  of  thy  lies  ;  or,  thou  shalt  not  take
uselessly,  needlessly,  and  without  very  good  and
substantial  reasons,  the  name  of  God  to  witness
what  thou  affirmest."  The  Hebrew  word  shave,
which  is  here  translated  by  vain,  is  put  for  false
in  some  places  of  Scripture ;  as  Exod.  20.  16.
rlos.  10.  4.  (3)  Vanity  is  taken  for  that  which

Jrustrates  and  disappoints  a  person  of  his  end  ;
m  this  sense  the  hope  and  confidence  of  every
unregenerate  man  may  justly  be  called  vain,  be¬
cause  it  will  deceive  and  disappoint  him  at  the
last,  when  he  shall  stand  in  most  need  of  help  and
comfort.  It  is  said,  Psal.  60.  11.  Lain  is  the
help  of  man  ;  that  is,  a  deceitful  safeguard,  a
disappointing  help,  only  feeding  the  expectation
with  a  fruitless  hope.  (4)  It  signifies  that  which
tf  weak,  and  obnoxious  to  change  and  corruption,
thus  all  worldly  things  are  but  vanity,  Eccl.
1.  2.  And  the  creature  was  made  subject  to
vanity,  to  disorders  and  destruction,  Rom.  8.  20.
Mai  also,  as  to  his  continuance  in  the  world,  is-
like  vanity,  he  is  like  a  vapour  or  breath,  which
is  gone  m  an  instant.  (.5)  It  signifies  iniquity .  Psal.
119.  37,  turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding
vanity,  that  is,  iniquity,  and  the  deceitfulness  of
sin,  whereby  I  may  be  ensnared,  and  drawn  away
front  the  truth.  It  signifies  foolishness,  joined
with  ignorance  and  blindness.  Job  11.  12.  For
vain  man  would  be  wise ;  that  foolish  creature
man,  who  since  the  fall  is  void  of  all  true  wisdom
and  solid  knowledge,  and  judgment  of  the  things
oj  God.

Vain  man,  does  not  only  signify  men  puffed  up  with
pride,  and  full  of  vanity,  but  also  worthless  and
insignificant  persons,  without  religion,  without
rule  or  conduct,  as  in  2  Chron.  13.  7.  1  here  are
gathered  to  Jeroboam  vain  men,  the  children  of
Belial.  The  Hebrew  says,  men  void  of  sense,  or-
beggars  ;  miserable  children,  without  a  yoke,
worthless  children.

Exod.  5.  9.  and  let  them  not  regard  v.  words
Dent.  32.  47.  fi  r  it  is  not  a  v.  thing  for  you
Judg.  9.  4.  wherewith  Abimelech  hired  v.  persons

11.  3.  there  were  gathered  v.  men  to  Jephthah
1  kam .12.  21.  for  then  should  ye  go  after  v.  things,
which  cannot  profit  nor  deliver,  tor  they  are  but  v.

~  6.  20.  as  one  of  the  v.  fellows  uncovereth

x  kings  17.  15.  became  v.  and  went  after  heathen
lo*  20.  but  they  are  butt),  words,  Isa.  36.  5.

~  Ghron.  13.  7.  aregathered  to  Jeroboam  v.  men
in11!?  11-  ile  knoweth  v.  men,  he  seeth  wickedness -

12.  for  ti.  man  would  be  wise,  tho’  man  be  born
lo.  2.  should  a  wise  man  utter  v.  knowledge  ?

16.  3.  Job  said,  shall  v.  w  ords  have  an  end  '.

27.  12.  why  thenareye  thus  altogether v.  ?

Esal.  2.  1.  the  people  imagine  a  v.  thing,  Acts  4.  25
^6. 4^  1  have  not  sat  with  v.  persons
33.  17 .  an  horse  is  a  v.  thing  for  safety'

39.  6.  surely  every  man  walketh  inac.  shew
60.  11.  for  v.  is  the  help  of  man,  108.  12.

62. 10.  become  not  v.  in  robbery,  if  riches  increase
119.  113.  I  hate  v.  thoughts,  but  thy  law  do  1  love
127 .  2. it  is  d.  for  you  to  rise  up  early,  to  sit  up
Prov.  12.11.  followeth  v.  persons  is  void  of  unders.
-8.  19.  that  tolloweth  v.  persons  shall  have  poverty

31.  30.  favour  is  deceitful  and  beauty  is  v.

Eccl.  6.  12.  all  days  of  his  v.  life  which  he  spends
Isa.  1.  13.  bring  no  morew.  oblations,  incense  ts
36.  5.  they  are  but  v.  words,  1  have  counsel
Jer.  2.  5.  walked  after  vanity,  and  are  become  v.

4. 14.  how  long  thy  v.  thoughts  lodge  within  thee  t
10.  3.  for  the  customs  of  the  people  are  v.

23.  16.  the  prophets  make  you  v.  they  speak
Lam  A.  14.  thy  prophets  have  seen  v.  things
4.  17.  as  for  us,  our  eyes  failed  for  our  v.  help
EzeL  12.24.  there  shall  be  no  more  any  v.  vision

13.  7-  have  ye  not  seen  a  v.  vision  and  spoken
Mfil-  3. 14.  ye  have  said,  it  is  v.  to  serve  God
Mat.  6.7.  w  hen  ye  pray,  use  not  v.  repetitions
Rom.l.  21.  but  became  v.  in  their  imaginations
1  Cor.  3.  20.  the  thoughts  of  the  wise  are  v.

15.14.  and  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preach-

r  ,  ing  v.  and  your  faith  is  also  v.  17.

Eph.  5.  6.  let  no  man  deceive  you  with  v.  words
Col.  2.  8.  lest  any  spoil  you  thro’ philos.  and  v.  deceit
1  lim.  1.  6.  have  turned  aside  ton. jangling

6.  20.  avoiding  prof,  and  v.  babblings,  2  Tim.  2.  16.
lit.  1.  10.  there  are  many  unruly  and  v.  talkers
3.  9.  for  they  are  unprofitable  and  v.

Jam.l.  26.  deceives  his  heart,  this  man’s  relig.  is  v.

2.  20.  wilt  thou  know,  O  v.  man,  that  saith
1  Pet.  1.  18.  redeemed  from  your  v.  conversation
In  VAIN.

Exod.  20.  7.  thou  shalt  not  take  name  of  Lord  in  v „

Deut.  5.  11,

Lev.  26.  16.  and  ye  shall  sow' your  seed  in  v.

20.  and  your  strength  shall  be  spent  in  v.

1  Sam.  25.  21.  in  v.  have  1  kept  all  Nabal  hath
Job  9.  29.  if  I  be  wicked,  why  then  labour  I  inv.f
21.  34.  how  then  comfort  ye  me  in  v.  seeing
35.  16.  therefore  dqth  Job  open  his  mouth  in  v.

39.  16.  her  labour  is  in  v.  without  fear
41.9.  behold,  the  hope  of  him  is  in  v.

Psal.  39.  6.  surely  they  are  disquieted  tnv.

73. 13.  verily  1  have  cleansed  my  heart  mv.

89.  47 .  wherefore  hast  thou  made  all  men  m  v.  f
127.  1.  they  labour  inv.  watchmen  waketfi  .a  v.  .

139.  20.  and  thine  enemies  take  thy  name  in  v.


V  A  L


V  A  L


VAN


•J Prov.  1.  1“-  surely  in  v.  the  net  is  spread  in  sight

30.  Q.  lest  1  take  the  name  ot'  my  God  in  v.

Isa.  ‘W.  ?.  for  tile  Egyptians  shall  help  in  v.

45.  18.  he  Treated  it  not  in  v.  he  formed  it

19.  I  said  not  to  seed  of  Jacob,  seek  ye  me  in  v.

49.  4.  then  l  said,  I  have  laboured  in  v.  I  have

spent  my  strength  for  nought  and  in  v.
05.  23.  they  shall  not  labour  in  v.  nor  bring  forth
Jer.  2.  30.  in  v.  have  1  smitten  your  children

3.  23.  in  v.  is  salvation  hoped  for  from  hills

4.  30.  in  v.  shalt  thou  make  thyself  fair

6.29.  bellows  burnt,  the  founder  melteth  in  y.

8.  8.  how  do  ye  say  we  are  wise,  lo,  certainly  in  v.

made  he  it,  the  pen  of  the  scribes  is  in  v.

46.  11.  inv.  shalt  thou  use  many  medicines

50.  9.  their  arrows,  none  shall  return  in  v.

51.58.  and  the  people  shall  labour  in  v.

Ezek.  6.  10.  shall  know  that  1  have  not  said  in  v.
Heb.  2.  1 13.  people  shall  weary  themsehes  in  v.
Zech .  10.  2.  and  the  diviners  comfort  in  v.

Mat.  15.  9.  but  in  v.  they  worship  me,  Mark  7  ■  7.
Morn.  13.  4.  for  he  beareth  not  the  sword  in  v.

1  Cor.  15.  2.  unless  ye  have  believed  in  v.

10.  his  grace  bestowed  upon  me  was  notm  v,

58.  that  your  labour  is  not  in  v.  in  the  Lord
£  Cor.  6.  1.  ye  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  v.

9.  3.  lest  our  boasting  of  you  should  be  in  v.
Gal.£.  2.  lest  by  any  means  1  should  run  in  v.

21.  come  by  the  law,  then  Christ  is  dead  in  v.

3.  4.  are  ye  so  foolish  ?  have  ye  suffered  so  many
things  in  v.  ?  if  it  be  yet  in  v.
4  11.  lest  I  have  bestowed  on  you  labour  in  v.
■Phil.  2.  16.  holding  forth  word  of  life,  that  l  may
rejoice  that  1  have  not  run  in  v.  nor  laboured
in  v.

1  The.is.  2.  1.  our  entrance,  that  it  was  not  in  v.

3.  5.  have  tempted  you,  and  our  labour  be  in  v.
Jam.  4.  5.  do  ye  think  the  Scripture  saith  in  v.?
VAIN  glory.

Gal.  5.  26.  let  us  not  be  desirous  of  v.  glory
Phil.  2.  3.  let  nothing  be  done  through  v. glory
\  AIN  LY.

Col.  2.  18.  v.  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind
VALE.

Gen.  14.  3.  kings  were  joined  in  v.  of  Siddim,  8.
10.  the  v.  of  Siddim  was  full  of  slime  pits
37.  14.  he  sent  Joseph  out  of  the  v.  of  Ilebron
Dent.  1.  7.  go  to  all  places  in  the  hills  and  in  the  v.
Josh.  10.40.  Joshua  smote  the  country  of  the  v.

1  Kings  10.  27-  Solom.  made  silver  to  be  as  stones,
and  cedars  as  sycamore-trees  in  v.  2  Chr.  1.  15.
Jer.  33. 13.  in  the  cities  of  the  v.  shall  flocks  pass
VALIANT.

1  Sam.  14.  52.  when  Saul  saw  any  tunan,  he  took
16.  18.  I  have  seen  a  son  of  Jesse,  a  mighty  v.  man
18.  17-  be  v.  forme,  and  fight  the  Lord’s  battles
26.  15.  David  said  to  Abner,  art  not  thou  a  v.  man  ?

31.  12.  all  the  v.  men  took  the  body  of  Saul

*2  Sam.  2.  7.  be  ye  v.  13.  28.  ||  17-  10.  he  that  is  v.
11.  16.  to  Uriah,  where  he  knew  that  v.  men  were
23.  20.  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  the  son  of  a
v.  man  of  Kabzeei,  1  Chron.  11.  22.
1  Kings  1.42.  come  in,  for  thou  art  a  v.  tnan

1  Chron  7.  2.  the  sons  of  Tola  were  v.  men

11.  26.  the  v.  men  of  the  armies  were  Asahel

2  Chr.  £6.  17-  and  with  him  eighty  priests,  v.  men
Cant.  3. 7.  behold  his  bed  which  is  Solomon’s,  three¬
score  v.  men  are  about  it,  of  the  v.  of  Israel

Isa.  10.  13.  put  down  inhabitants  like  a  v.  man
33.  7-  behold,  their  v.  ones  shall  cry  without
Jer.  9.  3.  but  they  are  not  v.  for  the  truth
46.  15.  why  are  thy  v.  men  swept  away  ?

SNah.  2.  3.  the  v.  men  are  in  scarlet,  the  chariots
3.  +  18.  thy  v.  ones  shall  dwell  in  the  dust
Heb.  11.  34.  who  through  faith  waxed  v.  in  fight
VA  LI  AN  TEST.

-Judg.  21. 10.  sent  to  Jabesh  12,000  men  of  the  v.
VALIANTLY.

Num.  24.  18.  Edom  a  possession,  Israel  shall  do  v.
1  Chron.  19.  13.  and  let  us  behave  ourselves  v.

Psal.  60.  12.  through  God  we  shall  do  v.  108.  13.
118.  15.  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  doeth  v.  16.
VALLEY.

There  are  several  valleys  mentioned  in  Scripture  ;
as  the  valley  of  Berachah,  or  of  blessing,  in  the
tribe  of  Judah,  to  the  west  of  the  Dead  sea,  2
Chron.  20.  26.

The  vale  of  Siddim,  Gen.  14.  3.  In  the  Hebrew
it  is  the  valley  of  1 1  ash  bedim,  which  some  trans¬
late  the  vale  of  the  fields,  others  the  vale  of
chalk  ;  the  Septuagint,  the  vale  of  salt.  It  was
in  this  vale  that  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomor¬
rah  were  built  ;  and  where  afterwards  the  lake
Asphaltites,  or  the  Dead  sea  was  formed.

The  valley  of  Shaveh,  or  otherwise,  the  king’s  dale,
Gen.  14.  17.  2  Sam.  18.  18.  Shaveh  is  a  city
lying  in  the  king's  dale,  over-against  Jerusalem,
according  to  Eusebius.  It  was  in  this  valley
that  Melchizedek  met  Abraham,  at  his  return
from  his  victory  over  the  five  kings.  But  some
think  this  interview  was  at  the  foot  of  mount
Tabor.

The  valley  of  Eshcol ,  or  the  valley  of  grapes,
Num.  32.  9.  This  name  was  given  to  the  val¬
ley  of  the  land  of  promise,  wherein  the  spies  of
the  children  of  Israel  gathered  the  bunch  of
grapes,  which  they  brought  to  the  camp  of  Ka-
desh,  upon  a  pole  between  two  men,  Num.  13.
23.  24.  This  valley  was  to  the  south  of  the  pro¬
mised  land

The  valley  of  Jezreel,  Josh.  19.  18.  This  valley
extends  itself  east  and  west  from  Scythopolis  to
the  foot  of  mount  Carmel ;  in  it  there  was  a  cele¬
brated  city  built,  of  the  same  name,  which  be¬
longed  to  the  tribe  of  Issachar.  Ahab  had  a  pa¬
lace  there,  1  Kings  21.  1,23.  and  this  city  became
famous  on  the  score  of  Naboth's  vineyard,  and  the
vengeance  which  God  executed  on  Jezebel  at  Jez¬
reel,  2  Kings  9.  33,  Sgc.

■The  valley  of  Achor,  Josh.  7.  24.  This  valley
was  in  the  territory  of  Jericho,  and  in  the  tribe  of
Benjamin,  where  Achan ,  his  sons  and  daughters,


were  stoned  to  death.  Cod  says,  that  he  will
give  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope,  Hos.

2.  15.  that  is,  some  beginnings  of  mercy  and  bless¬
ings,  as  the  earnest  and  pledges  of  future  favours.
As  this  valley  was  a  door  of  hope  to  Israel  of
then  enjoyment  of  the  promised  land,  so  would
God  deal  with  repenting  Israel  at  the  times  there
pointed  out.

T  rie  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  Joel  3.  2.  Some  are  of
opinion  that  this  valley  is  that  where  king  Jeho¬
shaphat  obtained  so  signal  a  victory,  and  with  so
much  ease,  against  the  Moabites,  Ammonites,
and  their  confederates,  2  Chron.  20.  1,  2,  &c.
This  valley  lay  towards  the  Dead  sea,  beyond  the
wilderness  of  Tekoah ;  and  after  this  event  it
was  called  the  valley  of  blessing,  2  Chron.  20.
26.  because  of  the  solemn  blessings  and  praises  that
were  given  to  God  in  it  upon  this  occasion.  Others
think,  that  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  lies  be¬
tween  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  and  the  mount  of
Olives,  and  that  it  is  watered  with  the  br  >ok  Ki-
dron,  which  runs  through  the  midst  of  lis  vale.
There  are  likewise  some  who  maintain,  that  the
ancient  Hebrews  had  no  distinct  knowledge  of  any
particular  place  under  the  name  of  the  valley  of
Jehoshaphat ;  and  that  Joel  intended  by  it  to  shew
in  general  the  place  where  God  was  to  execute  his
judgments  against  the  nation.,  and  will  appear
at  the  last  judgment  with  all  ihe  brightness  of
his  majesty.  Jehoshaphat,  in  Hebrew,  signifies
the  judgment  of  God.  And  it  is  very  probable,
that  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  or  God’s  judg¬
ment,  mentioned  in  Joel,  is  symbolical.  Prom
this  passage  the  Jews,  and  many  Christians,  have
been  of  opinion,  that  the  last  judgment  will  be
solemnized  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat .

The  valley  of  Hinnoin,  in  Hebrew,  it  is  Gehen-
non,  whence  comes  the  word  Gehenna.  See  T’o-
PHET.

The  valley  of  vision,  Isa.  22.  1.  in  the  prophetical
and  figurative  style,  signifies  Jerusalem.  It  is
called,  a  valley  by  antiphrasis,  because  it  stood
upon  a  mountain ;  or,  according  to  others,  it  is
called  a  valley  comparat.cely  to  those  higher
mountains  wherewith  it  was  encompassed.  And
the  additional  name  of  vision  was  given  to  it,  be¬
cause  of  the  many  and  clear  visions  and  revelations
of  God's  mind  in  that  place  above  all  other  parts
of  the  world ;  or,  as  others  will  have  it,  because  the
temple  of  Jerusalem  was  built  upon  mount  Mo¬
riah,  which  is  the  mountain  of  vision,  Gen.
22.  14.

The  fat  valleys,  Isa.  28.  1.  are  those  which  lie
below  and  about  the  city  of  Samaria.  This  coun¬
try  was  very  fat  and  fruitful.  Samaria  stood  upon
a  rising  ground  that  commanded  these  valleys.

The  valley  of  passengers,  Ezek.  39.  11.  It  is
thought  that  this  stands  for  the  great  road,  which
was  at  the  foot  of  mount  Carmel,  to  go  from  Ju¬
dea,  Egypt,  and  the  country  of  the  Philistines,
into  Phoenicia ;  and  back  from  Phoenicia  into
those  countries.  ’This  road  was  to  the  east  of  the
Mediterranean  sea.

The  valley  of  Succoth,  was  beyond  Jordan,  and  near
the  city  of  Succoth.  The  Psalmist  puts  the  valley
of  Succoth  for  the  whole  country  beyond  Jordan,
Psal.  60.  6.

The  valley  of  Elah,  1  Sam.  17.  2.  Saul  was  here
encamped  with  the  army  of  Israel,  when  the  giant
Goliath  came  to  insult  the  troops  of  the  Hebrews.
This  valley  was  to  the  south  of  Jerusalem,  towards
Sochoh  and  Azekah.

Gen.  14.  17.  king  of  Sodom  met  him  at  v.  of  Shaveh
Num.  32.  9.  for  when  they  went  up  to  v.  of  Eshcol
IJeut.  1. 24.  they  came  to  v.  of  Eshcol,  searched  it  out

21.  4.  elders  shall  bring  the  heifer  to  a  rough  v.

and  strike  off"  the  heifer’s  neck  in  the  v.
34.3.  the  plain  of  v.  of  Jericho,  a  city  of  palm-trees

6.  he  buried  Moses  in  a  v.  in  the  land  of  Moab
Josh.  7-  24.  they  brought  them  to  the  v.  of  Achor
10. 12.  and,  thou  moon,  in  the  v.  of  Ajalon

15.  8.  which  is  at  the  end  of  the  v.  of  the  giants
Judg.  1.  19.  not  drive  out  inhabitants  of  the  v.

5.  15.  Barak,  he  was  sent  on  foot  into  the  v.

7-  8.  the  host  of  Midian  was  beneath  in  the  v.  12.

16.  4.  Samson  loved  a  woman  in  the  v.  of  Sorek

1  Sam.  6.  13.  reaping  their  wheat-harvest  in  the  v.

21.  9.  whom  thou  slewest  in  the  v.  of  Elah

2  Sam.  5.  18.  the  Philistines  also  came  and  spread

themselves  in  the  v.  of  Rephaim,  22.  |  23.  13.
8.  13.  from  smiting  the  Syrians  in  the  v.  of  salt
2  Kings  2.  16.  the  Spirit  hath  cast  him  into  some  v.

3.  16.  he  said,  make  this  v.  full  of  ditches

14.  7.  he  slew  of  Edom  in  the  z>.  of  salt,  1  C/i/\18. 12.
2  Chron.  20.  26.  they  assembled  in  v.  of  Berachah
28.  3.  Ahaz  burnt  incense  in  the  v.  of  Hinnom
35.  22.  Josiah  came  to  fight  in  v.  of  Megiddo
Job  21.  33.  the  clods  of  the  v.  shall  be  sweet  to  him

39.  21.  he  paweth  in  the  v.  and  rejoiceth  in  strength
Psal.  23.  4.  yea,  though  I  walk  thro’  the  v.  of  dealh
60.  6.  I  will  mete  out  the  v.  of  Succoth,  108.  7.

84.  6.  who  passing  thro’  v.  of  Baca,  make  it  a  well
Prov.  30.  17.  the  ravens  of  the  v.  shall  pick  it  out
Cant.  6.  11.  I  went  down  to  see  the  fruits  of  the  v.
Isa.  17.  5.  that  gathereth  ears  in  the  v.  of  Rephaim

22.  1 .  the  burden  of  the  v.  of  vision

5.  for  it  is  a  day  of  trouble  in  the  v.  of  vision
28.  4.  beauty  which  is  on  the  head  of  the  fat  v.

21.  he  shall  be  wroth  as  in  the  v.  of  Gibeon

40.  4.  every  v.  shall  be  exalted,  every  hill  made  low
65.  10.  v.  of  Achor  a  place  for  herds  to  lie  down

Jer.  2.23.  see  thy  way  in  the  v.  know  what  thou

7.  32.  v.  of  Hinnom,  but  v.  ot  slaughter,  19.  6.

21.  13.  I  am  against  thee,  O  inhabitant  of  the  v.

48.  8.  the  v.  also  shall  perish,  and  plain  destroyed

49.  4.  why  gloriest  thou  in  thy  flowing  v.  ?

Ezek.  37.  1.  in  the  v.  which  was  full  of  bones

Hos.  1.  5.  break  the  bow  of  Isr.  in  the  v.  of  Jezreel
2.  15.  give  the  v.  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope
Joel  3.  2.  bring  them  into  the  v.  of  Jehoshapliat
14.  multitudes,  multitudes  in  the  v.  of  decision
18.  a  fountain  shall  water  the  v.  of  Shittim


Zech.  12.  11.  as  the  mourning  in  the  7;.  ot  Megiddon

14.  4.  mount  cleave,  and  there  shall  be  a  great  v.
5.  ye  shall  flee  to  the  v.  of  the  mountains

Luke  3.  5.  every  v.  be  filled,  every  hill  brought  low
See  Gate.

VALLEYS.

Num.  24.  6.  as  the  v.  are  they  spread  forth
Deut.tt.l.  depths  that  spring  out  of  the  v.  and  hills

11.  II.  but  the  land  is  a  land  of  hills  and  v.

1  Kings  20.  28.  God  of  hills,  but  he  is  not  God  of  v
Job  30.  6.  to  dwell  in  clifts  of  v.  in  caves  of  earth

39.  10.  or  will  he  harrow  the  v.  after  thee?

Psal.  65.  13.  the  v.  are  covered  over  with  corn
104.  8.  they  go  down  by  the  v.  unto  the  place

10.  he  sendeth  the  springs  into  the  v.  which  run
Cant.  2. 1 .  I  am  the  rose  of  Sharon,  the  lily  of  the  v.
Isa.  22.  7-  thy  choicest  v.  shall  be  full  of  chariot3
24.  t  15.  wherefore  glorify  the  Lord  in  the  v.

28.  1.  which  are  on  the  head  of  the  fat  v.

41.  18.  1  will  open  fountains  in  midst  of  the  v.

57.  5.  slaying  the  children  in  the  v.  under  rocks
Jer.  49.  4.  wherefore  gloriest  thou  in  the  v.

Ezek.  6.  3.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  v.  36.  4,  6.

7.  16.  be  on  the  mountains  like  doves  of  the  v.
VALOUR.

Judg.  3. 29.  they  slew  of  Moab  10,0D0  men  of  v.

6.  12.  Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man  of  v.
11.1.  Jephthah  the  Gileadite,  a  mighty  man  of  v.

1  Sam.  18.  t  17-  only  be  thou  a  son  of  v.  for  me

2  Sam.  2.  +  7  -  and  be  ye  the  sons  of  v.  13.  t  28.

1  Kings  11.  28.  Jeroboam  was  a  mighty  man  of  v.
£  Kings  5.1 .  N  aaman  11 1  Chr.  12.28.  Zadok  man  of  v.

2  Chron.  17.  17-  Eliada  a  mighty  man  of  v.

See  M  ig  hty  Men.

VALUE.

Job  13.4.  forgers  of  lies,  ye  are  all  physicians  of  no  v.
Mat.  10.  31.  fear  ye  not  therefore,  ye  are  of  more
v.  than  many  sparrows,  Luke  12.  7.
VALUE.

Lev.  27.  8.  present  himself,  the  priest  shall  v.  him

12.  priest  shall  v.  it,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad
Mat.  27-  9.  whom  they  of  children  of  Israel  did  v.

VALUED.

Lev.  27.  16.  homer  of  barley-seed  v.  at  50  shekels
Job  28.  16.  wisdom  cannot  be  v.  with  gold  of  Opl/tr
19.  neither  shall  it  be  v.  with  pure  gold
Mat.  27.  9.  of  silver,  the  price  of  him  that  was  v.
VALUEST.

Lev.  27.  12.  as  thou  v.  it  who  art  priest,  so  shall  it  be
VANISH.

Job  6.  17-  what  time  they  wax  warm,  they  v.

Isa.  51.  6.  the  heavens  shall  v.  away  like  smoke

1  Cor.  13.  8.  whether  knowledge,  it  shall  v.  away
Heb.  8.  13.  which  waxeth  old,  is  ready  to  v.  away

VANISHED.

Jer.  49. 7-  saith  the  Ld.  of  hosts,  is  their  wisdom  v.  ?
Luke  24.  31.  and  he  v.  out.  of  their  sight
VANISHETH.

Job  7.  9.  as  the  cloud  is  consumed  and  v.  away
Jam.  4. 14.  life  is  even  a  vapour  that  v.  away
VAN  ITY.

See  Signification  on  Vain.

2  Kings  17.  15.  they  followed  7;.  and  became  vain
Job  7-  3.  so  am  I  made  to  possess  months  of  v.

16.  let  me  alone,  for  my  days  are  v.

15.  31.  let  not  him  that  is  deceived  trust  in  v.  for

v.  shall  be  his  recompense
35.  they  conceive  mischief  and  bring  forth  v.

31.  5.  if  I  have  walked  with  v.  or  hasted  to  deceit

35.  13.  surely  God  will  not  heai  v.  nor  regard  it
Psal.  4.  2.  O  sons  of  men,  how  long  will  ye  love  v.

10.7-  under  his  tongue  is  mischief  and  v.

12.  2.  they  speak  v.  every  one  to  his  neighbour
24  4.  who  hath  not  lift  up  his  soul  unto  v.

36.  t  4.  the  wicked  deviseth  v.  upon  his  bed

39.  5.  every  man  at  his  best  estate  is  altogether  v.

11.  every  man  is  v.  ||  94.  11.  thoughts  of  man  v.

41.  6.  come  to  see  me,  he  speaketh  v.  144.  8,  11.

62.  9.  men  of  low  degree  are  v.  lighter  than  v.

78.  33.  therefore  their  days  did  he  consume  in  v.
119.  37.  turn  away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  v.
144.  4.  man  is  like  to  v.  his  days  are  as  a  shadow

Prov.  13.11.  wealth  gotten  by  v.  shall  be  diminished

21.  6.  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue  is  v.

22.  8.  he  that  soweth  iniquity  shall  reap  v.

30.  8.  remove  from  me  v.  and  lies,  give  not  poverty
Eccl.  1.  2.  v.  of  vanities,  saith  the  preacher,  all  is
v.  14.  |  3.  19.1  11.8.  |  12.8.

2.  1.  this  is  also  v.  15,  19,  21,  23.  |  4.  8,  16.  I  5.  10.

16.2,9.17.6.  18.  10,  14.
11.  behold,  all  was  v.  and  vexation,  17,  26.  |  4.  4.

4.  7-  1  saw  v.  ||  6.  4.  for  he  cometh  in  with  v.

6.  11.  there  be  many  things  that  increase  v.

t  12.  the  number  of  the  days  of  the  life  of  his  v.

7.  15.  all  things  have  I  seen  in  the  days  of  my  v.

8.  14.  there  is  a  v.  that  is  done  on  the  earth

9.  9.  live  joyfully  with  wife  all  the  days  of  thy  v.
11.  10.  for  childhood  and  youth  are  v.

Isa.  5. 18.  wo  to  them  that  draw  iniq.  with  cords  of  v.
30.  28.  to  sift  the  nations  with  the  sieve  of  v.

40.  17.  all  nations  to  him  are  counted  v.

23.  he  maketh  the  judges  of  the  earth  as  v.

41.  29.  behold,  they  are  all  v.  44.  9.

57.  13.  wind  shall  carry  them,  v.  shall  take  them

58.  9  if  thou  take  away  v.  ||  59.  4.  they  trust  in  v.
Jer.  2.  5.  they  have  walked  after  become  vain

10.  t  3.  for  the  statutes  of  the  people  are  v.

15.  they  are  v.  and  the  work  of  errors,  51. 18.

16.  19.  surely  our  fathers  have  inherited  v.

18.  15.  my  people  have  burnt  incense  to  v.

Ezek.  13. 6.  they  have  seen  v.  and  divination,  22.  28.

8.  because  ye  have  spoken  v.  and  seen  lies

9.  psophets  see  v.  21. 29.  ||  23.  shall  see  no  more  v.
Hos.  12.  11.  surely  they  are  v.  they  sacrifice

bullocKS

Hab.  2.  13.  peo.  shall  weary  themselves  for  very  v.

3.  t  7.  1  saw  the  tents  of  Cushan  under  v.

Zech.  10.  2.  for  the  idols  have  spoken  v.

Rom.  8.  20.  the  creature  was  made  subject  to  v.
Eph.  4.  17.  not  as  Gentiles  walk  in  v.  of  their

mind

2  Pet.  2.  18.  they  speak  great  swelling  words  of  v.

535


V  E  R


v  t  k


VIL


VANITIES

Deut.  32.  21.  they  have  provoked  me  to  anger  with
their  v.  1  Kings  16.  13,  26.  Jer.  8.  19.
Psal.  31.  6.  1  have  hated  them  that  regard  lying  e.
Eccl.  1.  2.  vanity  of  ®.  saith  the  preacher,  12.  8.

5.  7*  in  the  multitude  of  dreams  there  are  ®.

Jer.  10.  8.  foolish,  the  stock  is  a  doctrine  of  ®.

14.  22.  are  any  among  the  ®.  that  can  cause  ra;^  ?
Jonah  2.  8.  they  that  observe  lying  v.  forsake  their
Ads  14.  15.  that  ye  should  turn  from  these  ®.

VAPOUR.

Juh  36.  27.  they  pour  down  rain  according  to  the  ®.

33.  the  cattle  also  concerning  the  ®.

Psal.  148.  8.  hail,  snow,  and  v.  fulfilling  his  word
Acts  2. 19.  will  shew  signs  in  the  earth,  ®.  of  stnoke
Jam.  4.  14.  for  what  is  your  life '  it  is  even  a  ».
VAPOURS.

Psal.  135.  7.  he  causeth  the  ®.  to  ascend  t.om  the
ends  of  the  earth,  Jer.  10.  13.  1  51.  16.
VARIAR  LE.

Hah.  3  +  1.  a  prayer  according  to  ».  songs

VARIABLENESS.

Jam.  1.  17.  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  ®.
VARIANCE.

Mat.  10.  35.  I  am  come  to  set  a  man  at  ».  ag.  father
Gal.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  hatred,  ®.
VAUNT.

Judg.  7-  2.  lest  Israel  v.  themselves  against  me
VAUNTETH.

1  Cor.  13.  4.  charity  v.  not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up

.  VEHEMEN  T.

Cant.  8.  6.  love  is  a  fire  that  hath  a  ®.  flame
Jonah  4.  8.  that  God  prepared  a  v.  east  wind

2  Cor.  7.11.  yea,  what  v.  desire  it  wrought  in  you  ?

VEHEMENTLY.

Mark  14.  31 .  but  Peter  spake  the  more  v.  not  deny
Luke  6.  48.  the  stream  beat  v.  on  that  house,  49.

11.  53.  the  Pharisees  began  to  urge  him  v.

23.  10.  the  scribes  stood  and  v.  accused  him

VEIN.

Job  28.  1.  surely  there  is  a  v.  for  the  silver
VENERABLE.

Phil.  4.  t  8.  finally,  whatsoever  things  are  v.
VENGEANCE.

Gen.  4.  15.  v.  shall  be  taken  on  him  seven-fo'd
Deut.  32.  35.  to  me  belonged)  v.  and  recomp*  ice,

Psal.  94.  1.  Jleb.  10.  30.
41.  1  will  render  ®.  to  mine  enemies
43.  for  he  will  render  ®.  to  his  adversaries
Judg.  11. 36.  the  Lord  hath  taken  v.  for  thee
Psal.  58.  10.  shall  rejoice,  when  he  seeth  the  v.

99.  8.  thou  tookest  v.  of  their  inventions
149.  7-  toexecute  v.  upon  the  heathen  and  punishm.
Prov.  6.  34.  he  will  not  spare  in  the  day  of  v.

Isa.  34. 8.  it  is  the  day  of  the  Lord’s  v.  and  the  year
of  recompences  for  Zion,  61.  2.  Jer.  51.  6.
35.  4.  behold  your  God  will  come  with  v.

47.  3.  I  will  take  v.  Jer.  51.  36.

59.  17- and  he  put  on  the  garments  of  v.  for  clothing
63.  4.  for  the  day  of  v.  is  in  mine  heart
Jer.  11.  20.  let  me  see  thy  v.  on  them,  20.  12.

46.  10.  a  day  of  v.  ||  50,  lo.  the  v.  of  the  Lord,  28.
50.  28.  the  v.  of  Lord,  the  v.  of  his  temple,  51. 11.
Lam.  3.  60.  thou  hast  seen  all  their  v.  against  me
Ezek.  24.  8.  might  cause  fury  come  up  to  take  v.

25.  12.  Edom  by  taking  v.  hath  greatly  offended
1'4.  I  will  lay  my  ®.  on  Edom  by  hand  of  Israel

15.  because  the  Philistines  have  taken  ®.

17.  when  1  shall  lay  my  v.  on  the  Philistines
Mac.  5.  15.  1  will  execute  great  v.  Ezek.  25.  17.
Nah.  1.  2.  Lord  will  take  v.  on  his  adversaries
Luke  21.  22.  for  these  be  the  days  of  v.  that  all
Acts  28.  4.  whom  v.  suffereth  not  to  live
Rom.  3.  5.  is  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  v.  ?

12.  19.  v.  is  mine,  1  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord

2  Thess.  1.8.  Lord  revealed  in  flaming  fire,  taking®.
Jude  7.  an  example,  suffering  the  v.  of  eternal  fire
VEN  ISON.

Gen. 25.28.  Isaac  loved  Esau,  because  he  eat  of  his®.
27.  3.  goto  the  field  and  take  me  some  ®.  7.

19.  arise,  I  pray  thee,  and  eat  of  my  ®.  31.

25.  bring  it  near,  and  I  will  eat  of  my  son’s  ®.
33.  Isaac  said,  where  is  he  that  hath  taken  ®.  7

VENOM.

Deut.  32.  33.  their  wine  is  the  cruel  ®.  of  asps
VENOMOUS.

Acts  28.  4.  the  barbarians  saw  the  ®.  beast  hang
VENT.

Job  32.  19.  my  belly  is  as  wine  which  hath  no  ®.
VENTURE.

1  Kings  22.  34.  a  certain  man  drew  a  bow  at  a  ®.
and  smote  the  king  of  Israel,  2  Chron.  18.  33.
VERIFIED.

Gen.  42.  20.  so  shall  your  words  be  v.  and  not  die
1  Kings  8.  26.  let  thy  word  be  ®.  2  Chron.  6.  T*
VERILY.

Gen.  42.  21 .  we  are  ®.  guilty  concerning  our  brother
Exod.  31.  13.  saying,  ®.  my  sabbaths  ye  shall  keep
Judg.  15.  2.  I  ®.  thought  thou  hadst  hated  her

1  Kings  1.  43.  v.  our  Lord  hath  made  Solomon  king

2  Kings  4.  14.  ®.  she  hath  no  child,  her  husb.  is  old
1  Chron.  21.  24.  1  will  ®.  bring  it  for  the  full  price
Job  19-  13.  my  acquaint,  are  ®.  estranged  from  me
Psal.  37.  3.  do  good,  and  ®.  thou  shalt  be  fed

39.  5.  v.  every  man  at  his  best  state  is  vanity
58.  11.  ®.  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous,  v.  he
is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth
66.  19.  but  v.  God  hath  heard  me,  hath  attended
73.  13.  v.  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in  vain
Isa.  45.  15.  v.  thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself
Jer.  15.  11.  ®.  it  shall  be  well  with  thy  remnant,  ®.

1  will  cause  the  enemy  to  entreat  thee  well
Mat.  5.  18.  v.  1  say  unto  you,  6.  2,  5,  16.  |  8.  10.

I  10.  15,  23,  42.  1  11.  ll.|  13.  17.  |  16.  28.  |
17-  20.  |  18.  3,  13,  18.  I  19.  23,  28.  |  21.  21,  31.

I  23.  36.  |  24.  2,  34,  47.  I  25.  12,  40,  45.  I  26.

13.  Mark  3.  28.  |  6.  11.  I  8.  12.  19.  1,  41.  1

10.  15,  29.  I  11.  23.  |  12.  43.  I  13.  30.  I  14.  9,
18,  25.  Luke  4.  24.  |  11.  51.  |  12.  37.  1  13.  35.
118.17,29.121.32.

26.  v.  I  say  unto  thee,  26.  34.  Mark  14.  30.  Luke


Matk  9.  12.  Elias  ®.  cometh  first  and  restoreth  all
Acts  16.  37.  nay  ®.  let  them  come  and  fetch  us
19.  4.  John  ®.  baptized  with  baptism  of  repentance
22. 3.  am  ®.  amau  which  am  a  Jew,  born  in  Tarsus
26.  9.  I  v.  thought  1  ought  to  do  many  things
Rom. 2.  25. for  circumcision  ®.  profiteth  if  thou  keep
10. 18.  ®.  their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth

15.  27.  it  hath  pleased  them  ®.  debtors  they’  are

1  Cor.  5.  3.  I  v.  as  absent  in  body,  present  in  spirit
Gal.  3.21.  v.  righteousness  had  been  by  the  law
Heb.  2. 16.  ®.  he  took  not  on  him  nature  of  angels

6.  16.  for  men  ®.  swear  by  the  greater,  an  oath
12.  10.  for  they  ®.  for  a  few  days  chastened  us
1  Pee  1.  20. who®,  was  foreordained  before  foundat.
1  John  2.  5.  in  him  ®.  is  the  love  of  God  verfected
VERILY,  VERILY.

John  1.  51.  ®.  ®.  I  say  unto  you,  5.  19.  24,  25.  1  6.
26,32,  47,  53. 1  8.  34,  51,58  '  10.  1,7-1  12.24.
1  1.3.  16,  20,  21.  |  14.  12.  1  16.  20,  23.

3.  3.  ®.  ®.  1  say  unto  thee,  5.  11.  1 13.  38. 1  21.  18.

VERITY.

Psal.  111.  7.  the  w’orks  ofhis  hands  are  ®.

1  Tim.  2.  7-  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  ®.
VERMILION.

Jer.  22.  14.  ceiled  with  cedar  and  painted  with  ®.
Ezek.  23. 14. images  of  Chaldeans  pourtrayed  with  ®.
VEllJ  T  E,  See  Virtue.

VERY,

Gen.  27.  21.  whether  thou  be  my  ».  son  Esau
Exod.  9.  16.  in  ®.  deed  for  this  t  raised  thee  up
Num.  12.  3.  now  the  man  Moses  was  v.  meek
Deut.  30.  14.  but  the  word  is  v.  nigh  unto  thee

1  Sam.  25.  34.  in  r.  deed  except  thou  hadst  hasted

26.  4.  understood  that  Saul  was  come  in  ®.  deed

2  Sam.  24.  10.  for  1  have  done®,  foolishly

2  Chron.  20.  35.  king  Ahaziah  did  ®.  wickedly
Neh.  1.7.  we  have  dealt  ®.  corruptly  against  thee
Psal.  5.  9.  their  inward  part  is  ®.  wickedness
35.  8.  into  that  v.  destruction  let  him  fall
71.  19.  thy  righteousness  also,  O  God,  is  ».  high
89.  2.  thy  faithfulness  establish  in  the®,  heavens

92.5.  O  Lord,  thy  thoughts  are  ®.  deep

93.  5.  * Ly  testimonies  are  v.  sure,  holiness  becomes
119-  138.  thy  testimonies  are  ».  faithful
140.  thy  word  is  ®.  pure,  therefore  l  love  it

146.4.  in  that  ».  day  his  thoughts  perish
147.  15.  his  word  runneth  ®.  swiftly

Prov.  17.  9.  repeats  a  matter,  he  separateth  ®.  friends
Isa.  10.  25.  for  yet  a  ®.  little  while,  29.  17.

33.  17.  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  v.  far  off
40.  15.  he  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  ».  little  thing
Jer.  2.  12.  be  ye  ®.  desolate,  saith  the  Lord

4.  19.  my  bowels,  I  am  pained  at  my  ®.  heart
Ezek.  2.  3.  they;  have  transgressed  to  this  ®.  day

16.  47.  but  as  if  that  were  a  ®.  little  thing

Ilab.  2.  13.  the  people  shall  labour  in  the  ®.  fire,  and
the  people  weary  themselves  for  ®.  vanity
Mat.  10.  30.  the  ®.  hairs  ofyour  head  are  numbered
24. 24.  if  it  were  possible,  shall  deceive  the  ®.  elect
John  7.  26.  that  this  is  the®.  Christ,  Ads  9.  22.

8.  4.  this  woman  was  taken  in  adultery,  in  ®.  act

14.  11.  else  believe  me  for  the  ®.  work's  sake

1  Thess.  5.  23.  the  ®.  God  of  peace  sanctify  you
Heb.  10.  1.  and  not  the  ®.  image  of  the  things
Jam.  5.  11.  the  Lord  is  v.  pitiful,  of  tender  mercy
See  Great,  Much.

VESSEL.

Deut.  23.  24.  eat  grapes,  but  not  put  any  in  thy  ».

1  Sam.  21.  5.  though  sanctified  this  day  in  the®.

1  Kings  17.  10.  fetch  me  a  little  water  in  a  v.

2  Kings  4.  6.  bring  yet  a  v.  there  is  not  a  ®.  more
Psal.  2.  9.  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter’s  ®.

31.  12.  1  am  forgotten,  1  am  like  a  broken  ».

Prov.  25.  4.  there  shall  come  forth  a  ®.  for  the  finer
Isa.  66.  20.  Israel  bring  an  offering  in  a  clean  ®.
Jer.  18.  4.  the  ®.  was  marred  in  hand  of  the  potter

22.  28.  is  he  a  ®.  wherein  is  no  pleasure  ?

25.  34.  and  ye  shall  fall  like  a  pleasant  ®.

48. 11.  Moab  hath  not  been  emptied  from  ®.  to  ®.
38.  for  I  have  broken  Moab  like  a  ®.

51 . 34.  Nebuchadnezzar  hath  made  me  an  empty  ®.
Ezek.  4.  9.  put  them  in  one  ®.  and  make  bread

15.  3.  or  will  men  take  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any  ».  ?
Has.  8.  8.  shall  be  as  a  ®.  wherein  is  no  pleasure
Mark  11.  16.  should  carry’  any  ®.  thro’  the  temple
Luke 8. 16.  no  man  covereth  a  candle  with  a®.

Acts  9.  15.  for  he  is  a  chosen  ®.  ifhto  me

10.  11.  Peter  saw  a  certain  ».  descending,  11.5.
Rom.  9.  21.  hath  power  to  make  one  ®.  to  honour

1  Thess.  4. 4.  know  to  possess  his  ®.  in  sanctification

2  Tim.  2.  21.  he  shall  be  a  ».  to  honour,  sanctified

1  Pet.  3.  7. dwell  with  them  according  to  knowledge,
giving  honour  to  wife  as  to  weaker  ®.
VESSELS.

Gen.  43.  11.  take  of  the  best  fruits  in  your  ®.

Exod.  40.  10.  anoint  the  altar  and  v.'Lev.  8.  11.
Num.  18.  3.  Levites  not  come  nigh  ®.  of  sanctuary

1  Sam.  9.  7-  for  the  bread  is  spent  in  our  ®.

21. 5.  and  the  ®.  of  the  young  men  are  holy

2  Kings  4.  3.  go  borrow  thee  ®.  abroad  of  all  thy

neighbours,  even  empty’  ®.  borrow  not  a  few
2  Chron.  29.  19.  the  ®.  king  Ahaz  did  cast  away
Ezra  1.7.  Cyrus  the  king  brought  forth  the  ».

5.  15.  take  these  ®.  ||  7-  19.  ®.  are  given  to  thee
8.  25.  he  weighed  the  silver  and  the  ®.  33.

Neh.  13.  9.  thither  brought  I  again  the  ®.  of  house
Isa.  18.  2.  even  in  ®.  of  bulrushes  on  the  waters
22.  24.  all  ®.  of  small  quantity’,  the  v.  of  cups
52.  11.  be  ve  clean  that  bear  the  ®.  of  the  l  ord
65.  4.  broth  of  abominable  things  is  in  their  ®.

Jer.  14.  3.  they  returned  with  their  ®.  empty

27.  16.  v.  of  the  Lord’s  house  brought  again,  28.  3.
Dan.  5.  23.  they  have  brought  the  ®.  ofhis  house
Hos.  13.15.  he  shall  spoil  treasure  of  all  pleasant  ®.
Hag.  2.  16.  to  draw  out  fifty  ®.  out  of  the  press
Mat.  13.  48.  they  gathered  the  good  into.®.

25.4.  but  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  ®.  with  lamps
Rom.  9.  22.  the  ®.  of  wrath  ||  23.  the  ®.  of  mercy
Rev.  2.  27-  as  ®.  of  a  potter  shall  they  be  broken

See  Brass,  Earthen,  Gold,  Silver.
VESTMENTS.

2  Kings  10.  22.  bring  forth  ®.  for  the  worshippers


VFY|’«  Y.

2  Kings  10.  22.  Jehu  said  to  him  that  wasovei  the  v.
VESTURE,  S.

Gen.  41. 42.  and  arrayed  Joseph  in  ®.  of  fine  linen
Dent.  22. 12.  make  fringes  on  the  quarters  ot  thy  ».
Psal.  22. 18.  they  part  my  garments,  they  cast  lots
upon  my  ®.  Mat.  27.  35.  John  19.  24.
102.  26.  as  a  ®.  shalt  thou  change  them
Heb.  1. 12.  and  as  a  ®.  shalt  thou  fold  them  up
Rev.  19. 13.  he  was  clothed  with  a  ®.  dipt  in  blood

16.  on  his  ®.  and  on  his  thigh  a  name  written

VEX.

Exod.  22.21.  thou  shalt  not  ®.  a  stranger,  I,cv.  19.  33.
Lev.  18.  18.  not  take  a  wife  to  her  sister  to  v.  her
Num.  25. 17.  v.  the  Midianites  and  smite  them
18.  for  they  ®.  you  with  their  wiles  and  beguiled
33.55.  those  which  ye  let  remain  shall  ®.  you
2  Sam.  12.  18.  how  will  he  ®.  himself  if  we  tell
2  Chron.  15.  6.  God  did  v.  them  with  adversity
Job  19.  2.  how  long  will  ye  v.  my  soul  and  break
Psal.  2.  5.  and  ®.  them  in  his  sore  displeasure
Isa.  7.  6.  let  us  go  up  against  Judah  and  ®.  it

11.  13.  and  Judah  snail  not  ®.  Ephraim
Ezek.  32.  9.  I  will  ®.  the  hearts  ot  many  people
Hab.  2.  7-  shall  they  not  awake  that  shall  ®.  thee  ?
Acts  12. 1.  llerod  did  ®.  certain  of  the  church
VEXATION.

Deut.  28.  20.  the  Lord  shall  send  on  thee  ®.

Eccl.  1.  14.  is  vanity  and  ®.  of  spirit,  2.  11,  17.

17.  this  also  is  ®.  of  spirit,  2.  26.  j  4.  4, 16.  I  6.  9.

2.  22.  what  hath  man  of  the  ®.  ofhis  heart  t

4.  6.  than  both  the  hands  full  with  ®.  of  spirit
Isa.  9.  1.  shall  not  be  such  as  was  in  her  ®.

28.  19.  be  a  ®.  only  to  understand  the  report
65.  14.  but  ye  shall  howl  for  ®.  of  spirit
VEXATIONS.

2  Chron.  15.  5.  great  ®.  w’ere  on  all  the  inhabitants
VEXED.

Num.  20. 15.  the  Egyptians  ®.  us  and  our  fathers
Judg.  2.  18.  by  reason  of  them  that  ».  them

10.  8.  that  year  the  Ammonites  ®.  Israel

16.  16.  so  that  his  soul  was  ®.  unto  death

1  Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  ®.  his  enemies  on  every  side

2  Sam.  13.  2.  Amnon  was  so  ®.  that  he  fell  sick
2  Kings  4.27.  let  her  alone,  for  her  soul  is  ®.

Neh.  9.  27.  thou  deliveredst  to  enemies  who  ®.  them
Job’Ll.  2.  the  Almighty,  who  hath  ®.  my  soul
Psal.  6.  2.  my  bones  are  ®.  ||  3.  my  soul  is  sore  ®.

10.  let  mine  enemies  be  ashamed  and  sore  v.

Isa.  63. 10.  they  rebelled  and  ®.  his  Holy  Spirit
Ezek.  22.  5.  which  art  infamous  and  much  ®.

7.  in  thee  they  v.  the  fatherless  ||  29.  ®.  the  poor
Mat.  15. 22.  my  daughter  is  grievously  ®.  with  devil

17.  15.  L.  have  mercy,  for  he  is  lunatic  and  sore  ®.
Luke  6.  18.  and  they  that  were  ®.  with  unclean  spi¬
rits,  and  they  were  healed,  Acts  5.  16,

2  Pet.  2.  7.  delivered  just  Lot  ®.  with  conversation

8.  ®.  his  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day

VIAL.

1  Sam.  10. 1.  Samuel  took  a  ®.  of  oil  and  poured  it
Rev.  16. 2.  the  first  angel  poured  his  ».  on  the  earth
3.  second  ®.  on  the  sea  ||  4.  third  ®.  on  the  rivers
8.  fourth  ®.on  sun  l|  10.  fifth  ®.  on  seat  of  beast

12.  sixth  ®.  on  Euphrates  ||  17.  seventh  ®.  into  air
VIALS.

Rev.  5.  8.  having  golden  ».  full  of  odours
15.  7.  gave  the  seven  angels  seven  golden  ®.

16. 1.  go  and  pour  out  the  ®,  of  the  wrath  of  God

17.  1.  one  of  the  angels  which  had  seven  ®.  21.  9.
VICTORY.

1  Sam.  15.  +  29-  also  the  ®.  of  Israel  will  not  lie

2  Sam.  19. 2.  ®.  that  day  was  turned  to  mourning
23. 10.  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  ®.  that  day,  12.

2  Kings  5.  + 1.  by  him  the  Lord  had  given  ®.  to  Syria
1  Chron.  29. 11.  thine,  O  Lord,  is  the  ®.  and  majesty
Psal.  98. 1.  his  holy  arm  hath  gotten  him  the  ®.
Prov.  21.  +  31.  day  of  battle,  but  ®.  is  of  the  Lord
Isa.  25.  8.  he  will  swallow  up  death  in  ®.  and  wipe
away  tears  from  all  faces,  1  Cor.  15.  54.
Mat.  12.  20.  till  he  send  forth  judgment  unto  ®.

1  Cor.  15. 55.  thy  sting,  O  grave,  where  is  thy  ®.  ?

57.  but  thanks  be  to  God,  who  giveth  us  the  ®.

1  John  5.  4.  and  this  is  the  ®.  even  our  faith
Rev.  15. 2.  them  had  gotten  the  ».  over  the  beast
VICTUAL,  S.

Gen.  14. 11.  they  took  the  goods  of  Sodom,  and  ®.
Exod.  12.  39.  neither  had  they  prepared  any  ».
I.ev.  25.  37.  nor  lend  him  thy  v.  for  increase
Deut.  23. 19.  usury  of  money’,  usury  of  ®.  of  any  tb.
Josh.  1. 11.  prepare  ®.  ||  9. 11.  take  ®.  with  you
9. 14.  the  men  took  of  their  ®.  and  asked  not
Judg.  17. 10.  I  will  give  a  suit  of  apparel  and  ®.

1  Sam.  22. 10.  he  gave  him  ».  and  sword  of  Goliath.
1  Kings  4.  7.  which  provided  w.  for  the  king,  27.

11.  18.  Pharaoh  appointed  him  ®.  and  gave  land
1  Chron.  12. 1 40.  they  that  were  nigh  brought  ®.
Neh.  10.  31.  if  the  people  bring  ®.  on  the  sabbath

13. 15.  I  testified  against  them  in  day  they  sold  ®.
Jer.  40.  5.  so  captain  gave  Jeremiah  ®.  and  a  reward
44.  17.  for  then  had  we  plenty  of  ®.  and  were  well
Mat.  14.  15.  went  into  villages  to  buy  ®.  Luke  9. 12,
VICTUALLED.

1  Kings  20.  t  27.  the  children  of  Israel  were  ».

VIEW.

Josh.  2.  7-  go  ®.  the  land  ||  7*  2.  ®.  the  country

2  Kings  2.  7.  the  sons  of  the  prophets  stood  to  ®.  15

VIEWED.

Josh.1 . 2.  the  men  ®.  Ai  ||  Ezra  8. 15.  I  ».  the  pecple
Neh.  2. 13.  and  1  ®.  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  15.
VIEWERS.

Isa .  47.  t 13.  let  the  v.  of  the  heavens  stand  up
VIGILANT.

1  Tim.  3.  2.  a  bishop  must  be  ®.  of  good  behaviour
1  Pet.  5.  8.  be  sober,  be  ®.  because  your  adversary
VIGOUR.

Dan.  10.  t8.  my  ®.  was  turned  into  corruption
VILE.

Deut.  25.  3.  lest  thy  brother  should  seem  ®.  to  thee.
Judg.  19.  24.  but  to  this  man  do  not  so  ®.  a  thing

1  Sam.  3. 13.  because  his  sons  made  themselves  ®.
15.  9.  every  thing  that  was  ®.  they  destroyed

2  Sam.  6.  22.  and  I  will  yet  be  more  ®  than  ihu»


V  I  N


V  I  N


V  I  O


Job  18.  3.  why  are  we  reputed  v.  in  your  sight  ‘
40.  4.  behold,  1  am  v.  what  shall  I  answer  tnee  ?
Psal.  15.  4.  in  whose  eyes  a  v.  person  is  contemned
Isa.  32.  5.  the  v.  person  he  no  more  called  liberal

6.  for  the  v.  person  will  speak  villany
Jer.  15.  19.  take  forth  the  precious  from  the  v.

29.  17-  and  I  will  make  them  like  v.  figs
J.am.  1.11.  see.  O  Lord,  for  1  am  become  v.

Dan.  11.  21.  in  his  estate  shall  stand  up  a  v.  person
Nali.  1.  14.  1  will  cut  off  the  graven  and  molten
image,  and  will  make  thy  grave,  for  thou  art  v.

3.  6.  I  w  ill  cast  filth  on  thee,  and  make  thee  v.
Rom.  1.  26.  God  gave  them  up  to  v.  affections
Phil.  3.21.  who  shall  change  our  v.  body  that  it  may
Jam.  2.  2.  there  come  in  a  poor  man  in  v.  raiment
VILELY.

2  Sam.  l.  21.  shield  of  the  mighty  is  v.  cast  away

VILER.

Job  30.  8.  of  base  men,  they  were  v.  than  the  earth

VILEST.

P-i.  12.  8.  the  wicked  when  the  v.  men  are  exalted

VILLAGE.

Mat.  21.2.  go  into  the  v.  over-against.you,  and  ye
shall  find  an  ass,  Mark  11.  2.  Luke  19.  3J.
Luke  24.  13.  two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to  a  v.
28.  they  drew  nigh  unto  the  v.  whither  they  went

VILLAGES.

Exod.  8.  13.  and  the  frogs  died  out  of  the  v.

Lev.  25.  31.  the  houses  of  the  v.  counted  as  fields
Judo.  5.  7.  the  inhabitants  of  the  v.  ceased
Neh.  6.  2.  let  us  meet  together  in  one  of  the  v.
Esth.  9.  19.  .lews  ofu.  made  the  14th  day  of  Adar
Cant.  7.  11.  come,  my  beloved.  Let  us  lodge  in  'he  v.
Ezek.  38.  11.  I  will  go  up  to  the  land  of  un  walled  v.
Hab.  3.  14.  thou  didst  strike  the  head  of  his  v.

Mat.  14.  15.  multitude,  that  they  may  go  into  the
v.  and  buy  themselves  victuals’,  Mark  f3.  36.

See  Cities.

VILLANY.

Isa.  9.  +  17.  and  every  mouth  speaketh  v.

32.  6.  for  the  vile  person  will  speak  v.

Jer.  29.  23.  they  have  committed  v.  in  Israel
Hos.iA  10.  and  now  will  I  discover  her  v.

VINE.

Vineyards.  There  were  in  Palestine  many  excel¬
lent  vineyards.  Jacob,  in  his  blessing  to  Judah,
says,  Binding  his  foal  unto  the  vine,  and  his  ass’s
colt  unto  the  choice  vine  ;  he  washed  his  gar¬
ments  in  wine,  and  his  clothes  in  the  blood  of
grapes,  Gen.  49.  11.  This  was  to  show  the  abun¬
dance  of  vines  that  should  fall  to  his  lot.  The
spouse  in  Cant.  1.  14.  compares  her  beloved  to  a
cluster  of  camphire,  or  cypress,  that  grows  in
the  vineyards  of  En-gedi.  The  cypress-tree  is  a
shrub  that  grows  as  high  as  a  pomegranate-tree  ;
its  leaves  are  like  tho'e  of  the  olive-tree,  its  blos¬
som  is  white  and  sweet,  and  its  fruit  hangs  like
clusters  of  grapes,  and  is  of  a  very  agreeable
scent.  Those  grapes  of  the  cypress  that  came
from  the  vineyards  of  En-gedi  were  of  great  re¬
putation.

God  compares  his  people  to  a  vine,  which  he  had
brought  out  of  Egypt,  and  planted  in  Palestine,
as  a  good  soil,  but  which,  instead  of  bringing  forth
good  fruit,  brought  forth  only  bitter  fruit  and  wild
grapes,  Psal.  80.  8.  Isa.  5.  1,<S c.  He  alludes  to
the  custom  of  transplanting  trees  for  their  more
advantageous  growth.  Cur  Saviour  says,  that  “  the
householder  having  let  his  vineyard  to  tenants,
who  ought  to  have  rendered  him  the  fruit  of  it,
instead  of  that  they  abused  his  servants,  and
killed  his  own  Son,  who  went  to  require  the  pay¬
ment  of  what  was  owing  to  him,"  Mat.  21.  33,  Sc.
In  this  parable,  the  householder  is  God  the
Father  ;  his  planting  a  vineyard,  denotes  his  es¬
tablishing  a  church  among  the  Jews,  and  furnish¬
ing  it  with  all  needful  helps  and  means  to  make
it  spiritually  fruitful ;  his  letting  it  out  to  hus¬
bandmen,  denotes  his  committing  the  care  of  it  to
the  public  pastors,  the  priests,  and  Levites,  and
governors  of  the  church  :  his  servants  are  the  pro¬
phets  and  apostles,  sent  to  stir  them  up  to  faith
and  obedience,  or  holiness  of  life  ;  his  Son  is  Je¬
sus  Christ  ;  and  the  scope  of  this  parable  is  to
show  the  Jews  their  obstinate  impenitency  under
all  means,  and  their  incurableness ,  in  their  evil
entreating  God's  messengers  from  time  to  time,
and  their  crucifying  of  Christ  ;  for  which  God
will  unchurch  them,  and  set  up  a  church  among
the  Gentiles,  and  ruin  the  commonwealth  of  the
Jews.  In  John  15.  1.  Christ  says,  T  am  the  true
vine,  and  my  Father  is  the  husbandman.  “  I  am
the  root,  fountain,  and  head  of  influence,  whence
my  people  and  members  derive  life,  grace,  fruit¬
fulness,  and  all  good  ;  and  my  Father  orders  all
things  concerning  my  branches  or  members,  by  in¬
grafting  them  into  me,  by  visiting,  defending ,  sup¬
porting,  pruning,  and  purging  them  continually ,
to  make  them  fruitful."

The  vine  of  Sodom,  Dent.  32.  32.  Their  vine  is
the  vine  of  Sodom  :  that  is,  a  vine  of  a  plant
from  Sodom,  which  brings  forth  only  bitter  grapes,
and  of  which  no  use  can  be  made.  It  is  afh-med,
that  the  fruits  which  grow  about  the  Dead  sea  are
all  rotten  within  :  and  wfien  they  are  opened,  are
full  only  of  dint.  Moses  by  this  would  show,  that
the  people  of  Israel  were  degenerated,  that  their
principles  and  practices  were  all  corrupt  and  abo¬
minable.  To  express  a  time  of  public  tranquillity ,

-of  profound  eace ,  it  is  said,  that  every  one  lives
in  quiet  under  his  own  vine,  and  under  his  own
fig-tree,  1  Kings  4.25.  Mic.  4.4.

Noah  planted  the  vine  after  the  deluge,  and  was
the  first  that  cultivated  it,  Gen.  9.  20.  Many
are  of  opinion,  that  wine  was  not  unknown  before
the  deluge,  and  that  this  patriarch  only  continued
to  cultivate  the  vine  after  this  great  catastrophe,
as  he  had  done  before:  but  the  fathers  think  that
he  knew  not  the  force  of  wine,  having  never  used
it  before,  nor  having  ever  seen  any  one  use  it.  He
is  supposed  to  be  the  first  that  pressed  out  the  juice
of  the  grape,  and  to  have  reduced  it  to  a  potable


liquor.  Before  him,  men  only  ate  the  grapes,
nke  other  fruit.

Gen.  40.  9.  in  my  dream,  behold,  a  v.  was  before  me
10.  and  in  the  a.  were  three  branches,  it  budded
49.  11.  Judah  is  a  lion’s  whelp,  binding  his  foal
to  the  v.  and  his  ass’s  coit  to  the  choice  v.
Lev.  25. 5.  nor  gather  grapes  of  thy  v.  undressed,  n.
A um.  6.  4.  he  shall  eat  .nothing  made  of  the  v.  tree
Deut.  32.  32.  for  their  v.  is  of  the  v.  of  Sodcm
Judg.  9.  12.  the  trees  said  to  the  v.  reign  over  us
13.  14.  not  eat  any  thing  that  cometh  of  the  v.

1  Kings  A.  25.  dwelt  safely  every  man  under  his  v

2  Rings  A.  39.  found  a  wild  v.  and  gathered  gourds

18.  31.  eat.  ye  every  man  of  his  own  v.  Isa.  36.  16.
Job  15.  33.  shall  shake  off  his  unripe  grape  as  the  v.
Tsai.  80.  8.  thou  hast  brought  a  p.  out  of  Egypt

14.  look  dow  n,  and  behold,  and  visit  this  v.

128.  3.  thy  wife  shall  he  as  a  fruitful  v.  by  sides
Cant.  6.  11.  to  see  whether  the  v.  flourished,  7.  12.
7-  8.  thy  breasts  shall  be  as  clusters  of  the  v
Isa.  5.  2.  he  planted  it  w  ith  the  choicest  v.

16.  8.  for  the  v.  of  Sibmah  languished]

9.  1  will  bewail  the  v.  of  Sibmah,  Jer.  48.  32.

24.  7.  the  new  wine  mournelh,  the  v.  languished)
32.  12.  they  shall  lament  for  the  fruitful  v.

34.  4.  as  the  leaf  falleth  off  from  the  v.  as  a  fig
Jer.  2.  21.  yet  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  v.  how
then  turned  into  degenerate  plant  of  strange  v.?
6.  9.  shall  glean  the  remnant  of  Israel  as  a  v.

8.  13.  there  shall  be  no  grapes  on  the  v.  nor  figs
k.zek.  15.  2.  what  is  the  v.  tree  more  than  any  tree  i

6.  as  the  v.  tree  which  1  have  given  for  fuel

17.  6.  it  became  a  spreading  1.  of  low  stature

7.  this  v.  did  bend  her  roots  tow  ards  him

19.  10.  thy  mother  is  like  a  v.  in  thy  blood
Ilos.  10.  1.  Israel  is  an  empty  v.  he  bringeth  fruit

14.  7-  they  shall  revive  as  corn,  grow  as  the  v.
Joel  1.  7.  he  laid  my  v.  waste,  barked  my  fig-tree

12.  the  v.  is  dried  up,  the  fig  tree  languished
2.  22.  the  fig  tree  and  the  v.  yield  their  strength
Mic.  4.  4.  they  shall  sit  every  man  under  his  v.

Hag.  2.  19-  as  yet  the  v.  hath  not  brought  forth
Zech.  3.  10.  shall  ye  call  every  man  under  the  v.

8.  IS.  the  v.  shall  give  her  fruit,  the  heavens  dew
Alai.  3.  11.  neither  shall  your  v.  cast  her  fruit
Mat.  26.  29.  1  will  not  drink  of  this  fruit  of  v.  till  in
my  Father’s  kingdom,  Mark  1A.  *25.  Luke  22.18
John  15.  1.  1  am  the  true  v.  my  Father  is  husband
.  ,  ,  ,  .  .  man,  5.

4.  branch  cannot  bear  fruit,  except  it  abide  in  v
Jam.  3.  12.  my  brethren,  can  a  v.  bear  figs?

Rev.  14.  18.  gathers  clusters  of  the  v.  of  the  earth
19.  the  angel  gathered  the  v.  of  the  earth
VINES.

Num.  20.  5.  it  is  no  place  of  v.  or  pomegranates
Deut.  8.  8.  a  land  ot  wheat,  barley,  and  v.  honey
Psal  78.  47.  he  destroyed  their  v.  with  hail
105.  33.  he  smote  their  v.  also  and  fig  trees
Cant.  2.  13.  and  the  v.  give  a  good  smell

15.  take  us  the  foxes,  the  little  foxes,  that  spoil

the  v.  for  our  v.  have  tender  grapes
Isa.  7.  23.  where  there  were  a  thousand  v.

Jer.  5.  17.  they  shall  eat  up  thy  v.  and  fig  trees
31.  5.  thou  shalt  yet  plant  v.  on  the  mountains
Hos.  2.  12.  I  will  destroy  her  v.  and  her  fig-trees
Hab.  3.  17.  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  v.

V I N  E -dressers.

2  Kings  25. 12.  the  captain  of  the  guard  left  the  poor
of  the  land  to  be  v. -dressers,  Jer.  52.  16.

2  Chr.  26. 10.  Uzziah  had  husbandm.  and  v.-dressers
Isa.  61.  5.  sons  of  alien  shall  be  your  v.-dressers
Joel  1.  11.  be  ashamed,  howl,  O  ye  v.-dressers
VINEGAR.

Is  made  of  wine,  beer,  cider,  and  even  of  water.
The  ancients  had  several  kinds  of  vinegar  which
they  made  use  of  for  drink.  Boaz  told  Ruth,  that
she  might  come  and  dip  her  morsel  in  the  vinegar,
along  with  Ins  people,  Ruth  2.  14.  Harvesters
made  use  of  this  liquor  for  their  refreshment :
And  this  was  a  custom  not  only  among  the  Jews,
but  also  among  the  Romans.  The  emperor  Pes-
cennius  Niger  gave  orders,  that  his  soldiers
should  drink  nothing  hut  vinegar  on  their  marches,
and  Constantine  the  Great  allowed  his  soldiers
wine  and  vinegar  alternately  every  day.

It  is  thought  that  the  vinegar  which  the  Roman
soldiers  offered  to  our  Saviour  at  his  crucifixion,
was  the  vinegar  they  made  use  of  for  their  own
drinking.  Mat.  27.  48.  This  vinegar  was  not
of  that  sort  we  make,  use  of  for  salads  and
sauces,  but  a  small  wine  called  pesca,  or  sera.
'They  make  great  use  of  it  in  Spain  and  Italy,  in
harvest-time.  They  use  it  likewise  on  shipboard,
to  correct  the  ill  taste  of  water.  The  Scripture  for¬
bids  the  Nazarites  to  use  vinegar,  and  all  sorts
of  liquors  that  come  from  the  vine,  and  which
are  capable  of  inebriating,  Num.  6.  3.

However,  there  was  a  kind  of  strong  vinegar,  which
was  not  proper  for  drinking,  or  which  was  not
used  till  it  was  well  diluted.  Solomon  says,
Prov.  10.  26.  As  vinegar  to  the  teeth,  so  is  the
sluggard  to  them  that  send  him.  “  As  vinegar
by  its  cold  and  sharpness  offends  the  teeth  and  the
palate,  so  a  sluggish  messenger  is  unserviceable
and  vexatious  to  those  who  employ  him."  And
in  Prov.  25.  20.  As  vinegar  upon  nitre,  so  is  he
that  singeth  songs  to  an  heavy  heart.  'That  is,

“  as  vinegar  being  thrown  upon  nitre  is  a  thing
improper,  for  it  renders  it  less  useful  and  not
so  effectual  to  take  out  spots  or  blemishes,  so
he  that  singeth  songs  to  an  heavy  heart,  does
that  which  is  unseasonable  and  offensive,  for  his
grief  is  thereby  rather  increased  than  diminish
ed"

Num.  6.  3.  a  Nazarite  shall  drink  no  v.  of  wine
Ruth  2.  14.  eat  bread  and  dip  thy  morsel  in  the  v.
Psal.  69.  21.  they  gave  me  gall  for  my  meat,  in  my
thirst  they  gave  me  v.  to  drink,  Mat.  07.  34.
Prov.  10.  26.  as  v.  to  the  teeth,  so  is  the  sluggard
25.  20.  as  v.  upon  nitre,  so  is  he  that  singeth
Mat.  27.  48.  they  took  a  spunge  and  filled  it  with
v.  Alark  15.  36.  Luke  23.  36.  John  19.  29,  30.


VINEYARD.

Gen.  9.  20.  Noah  planted  a  v.  and  drank  wdne
Exod.  22.  5.  if  a  man  shall  cause  a  r.  to  he  eaten

23.  11.  in  like  manner  thou  shalt  deal  with  thy  v,
lev.  19.  10.  and  thou  shalt  not  glean  thy  v.

25.  3.  and  six  years  thou  shalt  prune  thy  v.

4.  neither  sow  thy  field,  nor  prune  thy  v.

Deut.  20.  6.  Whatman  is  he  that  hath  planted  an./

22.  9.  thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  v.  with  divers  seeds,
lest  the  Iruit  of  thy  seed  and  v.  be  defiled’

23.  24.  when  thou  comest  into  thy  neighbour’s  v.

24.  21.  when  thou  gatherest  the  grapes  of  thy  v.
28.  30.  thou  shalt  plant  a  v.  and  not  gather  grapes

1  a  mgs  21 .  1.  Naboth  had  a  v.  hard  by  the  palace

2.  give  me  thy  v.  I  will  give  thee  a  better  v.  6.

7.  eat  bread,  1  will  give  thee  the  v.  of  Naboth
Psal.  80.  15.  the  v.  thy  right  hand  hath  planted
/  rov.  24.  30.  I  went  by  v.  ofthe  man  void  of  unders.
31.  16.  with  fruit  ot  her  hand  she  planteth  a  v.
Cant.  1.6.  but  mine  own  v.  have  1  not  kept

8.  11.  Solomon  had  a  v.  he  let  the  v.  to  keepers
12.  my  v.  which  is  mine,  is  before  me,  O  Solomon
i' 8.  daughter  of  Zion  is  'eft  as  a  cottage  in  a  v.

3.  14.  for  ye  have  eaten  up  the  v.  spoil  of  the  poor
-  V  sn}s  a  so.n£  my  beloved  touching  his  v.

I .  for  the  v.  of  Lord  ot  hosts  is  the  house  of  Israel

10.  yea,  ten  acres  of  v.  shall  yield  one  bath
-7.  2.  in  that  day  sing  ye  to  her,  a  v.  of  red  wine

Jer.  12.  10.  many  pastors  have  destroyed  my  v.

35.  7.  the  Rechabites  shall  not  plant  v.  9.

Mfc.  1.  6.  I  will  make  Samaria  as  plantingsof  a  v.
Mat.  20.  1.  went  early  to  hire  labourers  into  his  v.

4.  he  said  unto  them,  go  ye  also  into  the  p.  7.

21.  28.  he  said,  son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  v.

33.  a  certain  householder  planted  a  v.  and  let  it

out  to  husbandmen,  Mark  12.  1.  Luke  20.  9.
Euke  1.3.  6.  a  man  had  a  fig-tree  planted  in  his  v.

7.  then  said  he  unto  the  dresser  of  his  v.  behold
1  Cor.  9.  7.  who  planteth  a  v.  and  eateth  not  fruit J
VINEYARDS.

Num.  16.  14.  hast  not  given  us  inheritance  of  r.

20.  17.  we  will  not  pass  through  the  v.  21.  22.

22.  24.  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  in  a  path  of  the  v.
Dent.  6.  1 1.  he  swore  to  give  thee  v.  and  olive-trees

which  thou  plantedst  not,  Josh.  24. 13.  Neh.  9.  25.
28.  39.  thou  shalt  plant  v.  and  dress  them
Judg.  15.  5.  the  foxes  burnt  up  the  v.  and  olives
21. 20.  saying,  go  and  lie  in  wait  in  the  v.

1  Sam.  8.  14.  he  will  take  your  fields  and  your  v.

22.  7-  will  the  son  Jesse  give  every  one  of  you  v.  ?

2  Rings  5.  26.  is  it  a  time  to  receive  v.  and  sheep?
18.  32.  till  l  take  you  to  a  land  of  bread  and  v.
19-29.  in  the  third  year  sow,  reap,  and  plant  v.

1  Chron.  2~.  27.  over  the  v.  was  Shimei,  over  the
increase  ofthe  v.  for  the  wine  cellars  was  Zabdi
Teh.  5  3.  we  have  mortgaged  our  v.  and  houses

11.  restore  to  them  their  v.  and  olive-yards
Job  24.  18.  he  beholdeth  not  the  way  of  the  v.

Psal.  107.  37.  sow  the  fields  and  plant  v.  to  yield
Eccl.  2.  4.  I  builded  me  houses,  I  planted  me  v.
Cant.  1.  6.  they  made  rne  the  keeper  ofthe  v.

14.  as  a  cluster  of  camphire  in  the  v.  of  En-gedi
7.  12.  let  us  get  up  early  to  the  v.  let  us  see  if  vine
Isa.  16.  10.  in  the  v.  there  shall  be  no  singing
65.  21.  they  shall  build  houses  and  inhabit,  shall
plant  v.  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them,  Amos  9.  14.
Jer.  32.  15.  houses  and  v.  shall  be  possessed  again
39. 10.  Nebuzar-adan  gave  the  poor*;,  and  fields
Ezek.  28.  26.  they  shall  build  houses  and  plant  v.
Hos.  2.  15.  1  will  give  her  her  v.  from  thence
Amos  A.  9.  the  palmer- worm  devoured  your  v.

5.  11.  ye  have  planted  v.  but  ye  shall  not  drink
17.  and  in  all'p.  shall  be  wailing,  I  will  pass
Zeph.  1. 13.  they  shall  plant  v.  t  ut  not  drink  the  wine
VINTAGE.

Lev.  26.  5.  your  threshing  shall  reach  to  the  v.  and
the  v.  shall  reach  to  the  sowing  time
Judg.  8.  2.  is  it  not  better  than  the  v.  of  Abiezer  ?

Job  24.  6.  they  gather  the  v.  of  the  wicked
Isa.  16.  10.  1  have  made  their  v.  shouting  to  cease

24.  13.  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when  v.  is  done
32.  10.  the  v.  shall  fail,  gathering  shall  not  come

Jer.  48.  32.  the  spoiler  is  fallen  upon  thy  v.

Mic.  7.  1.  I  am  as  the  grape-gleanings  of  the  v.

Zech.  11.  2.  the  forest  of  the  v.  is  come  down
VIOL.

Isa.  5.  12.  harp  and  v.  and  wine  are  in  their  feasts
Amos  6.  5.  that  chant  to  sound  of  the  v.  and  invent
VIOLS.

Isa.  14.  11.  the  noise  of  thy  v.  is  brought  down
Amos  5.  23.  I  will  not  hear  the  melody  of  thy  v
VIOLATED.

Ezek.  22.  26.  her  priests  have  v.  my  law,  profaned
VIOLENCE.

Gen.  6.  11.  and  the  earth  was  filled  with  v.  12.

49.  +5.  their  swords  are  weapons  of  v.

Lev.  6.  2.  if  one  lie  in  any  thing  taken  away  by  p
2  Sam.  22.  3.  my  Saviour,  thou  savest  me  from  v.

1  Chron.  12.  +  17-  seeing  there  is  no  v.  in  my  hands
Job  19.  +7-  I  cry  out  of  v.  but  I  am  not  heard
Psal.  11.  5.  him  that  loveth  v.  his  soul  hateth
18.  t  48.  hast  delivered  me  from  the  man  of  v.

25.  +  19.  and  they  hate  me  with  hatred  of  v.

55.  9.  I  have  seen  v.  and  strife  in  the  city7’

58.  2.  you  weigh  the  v.  of  your  hands  in  earth

72.  14.  he  shall  redeem  their  soul  from  v.

73.  6.  therefore  v.  covereth  them  as  a  garment
Prov.  3.  t  31.  envy  thou  not  a  man  of  v.

4.  17.  for  they  drink  the  wine  of  v.

10.  6.  v.  covereth  the  mouth  of  the  wicked,  11.

13.  2.  the  soul  ofthe  transgressors  shall  eat  v.

28.  17.  a  man  that  doeth  v.  to  the  blood  of  any
Isa.  53.  9.  because  he  had  done  no  v.  nor  was  deceit

59.  6.  and  the  act  of  v.  is  in  their  hands

60.  18.  v.  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  land
Jer.  6.  7-  v.  and  spoil  is  heard  in  her,  before  me

20.  8.  for  since  1  spake,  I  cried  v.  and  spoil

22.  3.  and  do  no  wrong,  do  no  v.  to  the  stranger
17.  thine  eyes,  thy  heart  are  for  v  to  do  it

23.  +  10.  their  v.  is  evil,  their  force  not  right

51 .35.  v.  done  tome  and  my  flesh  be  upon  Babylon
46.  a  rumour,  v.  in  the  land,  ruler  against  ruler

.537


V  IK


V  IS


\  IR


Ezek.  7.  11.  v.  is  risen  up  into  a  rod  of  wickedness
23.  make  a  chain,  for  the  city  is  f  ull  of  v.

8.  17.  they  have  filled  the  land  with  v.  28.  16.

12. 19-  because  of  the  v.  ot  them  that  dvrell
18.  7.  if  a  man  hath  spoiled  none  by  v.  16.

12.  but  if  he  hath  spoiled  and  oppressed  by  v.  18.

22.  t26.  her  priests  have  offered  v.  tc  my  law
45.  9.  O  princes  of  Israel,  remove  v.  and  spoil
Joel  3.  19.  Edom  shall  be  a  wilderness  for  the  v.

Amos  3.  10.  who  store  up  v.  in  their  palaces

6.  3.  ye  that  cause  the  seat  of  v.  to  come  near
Obad.  10.  for  thy  v.  shame  shall  cover  thee
Jonah  3.  8.  let  them  turn  every  one  from  the  v.

Mic.  2.  2.  they  covet  fields,  and  take  them  by  v.

6.  12.  for  the  rich  men  thereof  are  full  of  v.

Hab.  1.  2.  how  long  shall  1  cry  out  to  thee  of  v.

3.  v.  is  before  mel|9.  they  shall  come  all  tor  v.

2.  8.  and  for  the  v.  of  the  land,  of  the  city
17.  v.  of  Lebanon  cover  thee,  v.  ot  the  land

Zeph.  1.  9.  fill  their  masters'  hous.  with  v.  and  deceit

3.  4.  her  priests  have  done  v.  to  the  law
Mai.  2.  16.  fbr  one  covereth  v.  with  his  garment_

Mat.  11.  12.  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffered!  v.

Luke  3.  14.  do  v.  to  no  man,  nor  accuse  any  falsely
Acts  5.  26.  the  captain  brought  them  without  v

21.  35.  Paul  borne  of  soldiers  for  v.  ot  people

27.  41.  the  hinder  part  was  broken  tor  v.  ot  waves
Heb.  11.  34.  through  faith  quenched  the  v.  ot  nre
Rev.  18.  21.  with  v.  shall  Baby  Ion  be  thrown  down
VIOLENT.

2  Sam.  22.  49.  thou  hast  lifted  me  up  on  high,  thou
hast  delivered  me  from  the  v.  man,  Psal.  18.  48.
Psal.  7.  16.  his  v.  dealing  come  on  his  own  pate
86. 14.  the  assemblies  of  v.  men  sought  my  soul
140.  1.  preserve  me  from  the  v.  man,  4.

11.  evil  shall  hunt  the  r.  man  to  overthrow  him
Ptov.  16.  29.  a  v.  man  enticeth  his  neighbour
Eccl.  5.  8.  if  thou  seest  v.  perverting  ot  judgment
Mat.  11.  12.  the  v.  take  it  by  force,  heaven
VIOLENTLY.

Gen.  21.25.  Abimelech’s  servants  had  ».  taken
Lev. 6.  4.  he  shall  restore  that  which  he  took  v.

Devt.  28.  31.  thine  ass  shall  be  z;.  taken  away
Job  20.  19.  he  hath  v.  taken  away  an  house
24  2  thev  v.  take  away  flocks,  and  teed  thereof
+  19.’ draught  and  heat  v.  take  the  snow  waters
Isa.  22.  18.  he  will  surely  v.  turn  and  toss  thee
Lam.  2.  6.  he  hath  v.  taken  away  his  tabernacle
Mat.  8.  32.  w  hole  herd  of  swine  ran  v.  into  the  sea,
and  perished  in  waters,  Mark  5.  13.  Luke  8.  33
VIOLET.

Esth.  1.  +  6.  where  were  green  and  v.  hangings
8. 1 15.  Mordecai  went  out  in  apparel  of  v.

VIPER.  .  ,  ,

A  serpent ,  about  half  a  yard  in  length,  but  the
most  poisonous  in  its  bite  of  all  the  fib  npean  ser -
pents.  It  is  called  vipera,  quasi  vivipara,  because
it  brings  forth  its  young  alive.  Generally  the  \ l-
per  is  not  very  long,  the  largest  being  not  above
half  an  ell  long,  and  its  thickness  not  above  an
inch.  It  has  a  flat  head,  u'ith  a  snout  rising  up,
like  that  of  a  pig.  The  male  has  only  two  teeth,
but  the  female  has  several  ;  and  the  male  is  said
to  be  commonly  blacker  than  the  female.  It  is
said,  that  when  the  viper  brings  forth,  the  young
ones  kill  the  dam  ;  but  this  is  contradicted  by
experience .  Though  she  brings  forth  hei  young

alive  they  are  inclosed  in  little  skins,  that  break
open  on  the  third  day.  The  poison  of  the  viper
is  very  dangerous ,  but  its  flesh  is  good  tn  many
distempers.  .  ,  c,  .

The  viper  is  mentioned  in  several  places  of  scrip¬
ture.  lob  20.  16.  The  viper's  tongue  shall  slay
him.  The  Hebrew  word  Peten,  they  say,  rather
signifies  the  asp  than  the  viper.  Isaiah  speaks
also  of  the  viper.  Isa.  30.  6.  where  the  Hebrew
has  Ephee  ;  which  is  thought  to  be  the  true  name
of  the  viper,  John  the  Baptist,  and  afterwards
our  Saviour,  called  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  a
generation  of  vipers,  a  wicked  brood  of  wicked
parents,  who  by  their  poisonous  doctrines  ruined
the  souls  if  men,  Mat.  3.  7-  1 12.  34.

Job  20. 16.  of  asps,  the  v.  tongue  shall  slay  him
Isa.  30.  6.  from  whence  come  the  v.  and  serpent
41.  +  24.  your  work  is  worse  than  of  a  v.

59.  5.  that  which  is  crushed  breaks  out  into  at;.
Acts 28.  3.  there  came  v.  and  fasten,  on  Paul  shand
VIPERS.

Mat.  3.  7.  O  generation^ of ^12.  34. 1  23.  33.  LrTe

In  Greek,  napOevos  ‘  in  Hebrew,  Almah.  lhese
words  properly  signify  an  unmarried  young  woman  ,
that  has  preserved  the  purity  of  her  body.  In  this
sense  we  meet  with  it  in  the  famous  passage  of
Isaiah,  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive  and  bear
a  son,  Isa.  7.  14.  meaning,  she  would  be  a  virgin
as  well  after  as  before  her  bringing  forth.  But
sometimes  virgin  is  made  use  of  to  express  a  young
woman,  whether  she  has  kept  her  virginity  or  no.
Joel  1.  8.  Lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sack
cloth  for  the  husband  of  her  youth.  The  more
precisely  to  express  the  state  of  virginity  ,  the  Scrip¬
ture  often  adds  to  the  words  maid  or  virgin,  these
or  such  like  words,  neither  had  any  man  known
her,  Gen.  24.  16.  Num.  31.  17..

The  Hebrew  word  Almah,  signifies  a  person  con¬
cealed  ;  for  young  unmarried  women  lived  m  re¬
tired  apartments,  where  the  men  did  not  use  to
go  ;  and  when  young  women  were  obliged  to  go
out,  they  were  always  veiled,  and  never  appeared
uncovered  but  before  their  nearest  relations.  U  hen
Amnon,  the  son  of  David,  had  conceived  a  vio¬
lent  passion  for  his  sister  'Tamar ,  he  could  not
get  private  converse  with  her  because  she  was  a
virgin,  and  kept  up  very  close.  2  Sam.  13.  2.  l  or
she  was  a  virgin,  and  Amnon  thought  it  hard
for  him  to  do  any  thing  to  her.  And  in  the  book
of  Maccabees,  it  is  said  that  when  Helwdorus
came  to  Jerusalem,  to  take  away  the  treasures  of
the  temple,  the  most  recluse  virgins  came  out  of
their  retirements ;  some  appeared  in  the  streets,
ome  at  their  windows,  and  others  upon  the  walls,

538


2  Macc.  3.  19.  And  it  is  well  known  that  young
women  in  the  East  do  not  appear  in  public,  bur
are  shut  up  in  their  houses  and  in  their  mothers
apartments.

Virgin  is  often  used  in  Scripture  for  a  people,  a  city ,
a  nation.  The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Babylon,
the  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the  virgin,  the.
daughter  of  Israel,  8;c.  7  hese  phrases  sigmjy  the

province,  the  land,  the  people  of  Babylon,  Zion,
Israel,  S,c.  The  professors  of  religion  in  general
are  called  virgins,  such  as  are  not  defiled  with  any
scandalous  sin,  nor  erroneous  opinion.  Mat.  25.

1.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  shall  be  likened  unto
ten  virgins,  which  took  their  lamps.  They  are
all  called  virgins,  because  they  made  profession  oj
holiness ;  yet  only  five  deserved  the  name,  they
having  not  only  a  profession,  but  a  true  faith  and
love  to  feed  their  profession  :  the  others  made  a
profession,  but  had  not  the  truth  of  grace  in  the
heart.  The  character  of  virgins  is  principally  given
to  those  that  adhere  stedfast/y  to  Christ,  and  abhor
every  thing  that  has  any  shew  of  violating  thei.
fidelity  to  him.  Rev.  14.  4.  These  are  they  w  hicti
are  not  defiled  with  women,  that  are  not  cor¬
rupted  with  the  erroneous  doctrine  and  idolatrous
worship  of  the  anti-christian  church,  for  they  are
virgins:  They  keep  close  to  Christ  in  all  his  or¬
dinances,  and  are  led  hy  his  word  and  Spirit.
The  apostle  says,  I  have  espoused  you  to  one
husband,  that  1  may  present  vou  as  a  chaste  vir¬
gin  to  Christ,  2  Cor.  11.2.

Gen.  24.  16.  Rebekah  was  fair  to  look  upon,  a  v.

43.  when  the  v.  cometh  forth  to  draw  wate.

Lev.  21.  3.  for  his  sister,  a  v.  he  may  be  defiled
14.  he  shall  take  a  v.  ofhis  own  people  to  wife
Deut.  22.  19.  he  brought  an  evil  name  upon  a  v.

23.  a  v.  betrothed  ||  28.  a  v.  not  betrothed
32.  25.  destroy  both  the  young  man  and  the  v.

2  Sam.  13. 2.  Amnon  fell  sick  for  Tamar, she  was  ar>.

2  Kings  19.  21.  the  v.  the  daughter  of  Zion  liathde
spised  thee  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn,  Isa.  37 •  22
Isa.  7.  14.  behold  a  v.  shall  conceive,  Mat.  1. 23.

23.  12.  shalt  no  more  rejoice,  O  thou  oppressed  v.
47.  1.  come  down  and  sit  in  the  dust,  O  v.  of  Bab.
62. 5.  for  as  a  young  man  marrieth  a  v.  so  thy  sons
Jer.  14.  17.  the  v.  daughter  of  my  people  is  broken
18.  13.  v.  of  Israel  hath  done  a  horrible  thing
31.  4.  and  thou  shalt  be  built,  O  v.  ot  Israel
13.  then  shall  the  v.  rejoice  in  the  dance
21.  turn  again,  O  v.  of  Israel,  to  these  thy  cities
46.  11.  take  balm.O  v.  the  daughter  of  Egypt
Lam.  1.  15.  Lord  hath  trodden  v.  daughter  ot  J  udah
2. 13.  that  I  may  comfort  thee.O  ^.daughter  ot  Zion
Joel  1.  8.  lament  like  a  v.  girded  with  sackcloth
Amos  5.  2.  the  v.  of  Israel  is  fallen,  no  more  rise
Luke  1.  27.  the  angel  was  sent  from  God  to  a  v.

1  Cor.  7.  28.  if  a  v.  marry,  she  hath  not  sinned
34.  there  is  difference  between  a  wife  and  a  v.

37.  decreed  that  he  will  keep  his  v.  doeth  well

2  Cor.  11.  2.  that  I  mav  present  you  as  a  chaste  v

VIRGINS.

Exod.  22.  17.  shall  pay  according  to  the  dowry  of  v.

2  Sam.  13.  18.  w  ere  kings’ daughters  v.  apparelled
Esth.  2.  17-  Esther  found  favour  above  all  then.
Psal.  45.  14.  the  v.  her  companions  that  follow  her
Cant.  1 .  3.  as  ointment,  therefore  do  the  v.  love  thee
6.8.  threescore  queens  and  v.  without  number
Isa.  23.4.  I  ti avail  not,  nor  do  1  bring  up  v.

Lam.  1.  4.  her  priests  sigh,  her  r.  are  afflicted
18.  my  v.  and  young  men  are  gone  into  captivity
2.  10.  the  v.  of  Jerusalem  hang  down  their  heads
21.  v.  and  young  men  are  fallen  by  the  sword
Amos  8.  13.  in  that  day  shall  the  fair  v.  faint
Mat.  25.  1.  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened  to  ten  v.
Acts2\.9.  Philip  had  four  daughters,  v.  prophesied
1  Cor.  7.  25.  concerning  v.  I  have  no  commandment
Rev.  14.  4.  which  are  not  defiled,  for  they  are  v.
Young  VIRGINS.

Judg.  21.  12.  at  Jabesh-gilead  were  four  hundred

young  v.

1  Kings  1.2.  let  there  be  sought  for  king  a  young  v.
Esth.  2.  2.  let  there  be  fair  young  v.  sought  tor  king
3.  they  may  gather  together  all  the  fair  young  7
VIRGINITY.

Lev.  21.  13.  he  shall  take  a  wife  in  her  v.

Deut  22.  15.  bring  the  tokens  of  her  v.  17.  20.

Judg.  11.  37.  that  I  may  bewail  my  v.  38.

Ezek.  23.  3.  they  bruised  the  teats  ot  their  v.  8.

Luke  2.  36.  Anna  lived  seven  years  from  her  v.
VIRTUE,

In  Greek,  aperr],  or  bvvagus .  It  is  in  opposition  to
vice,  and  is  taken,  O)  For  moral  virtue,  probity
of  manners  among  men,  as  the  genencal  word  that
contains  all  moral  and  Christian  virtues  under  it  ;
in  this  sense  it  is  used,  Phil.  4.  8.  If  there  be  any
virtue,  think  on  these  things.  If  there  be  any
other  commendable  practice  amongst  any,  dili¬
gently  consider  and  practise  it.  (2)  It  is  taken,
for  the  power,  the  wisdom,  the  goodness,  and  truth
of  God,  which  he  manifests  in  bringing  the  elect
out  of  a  state  of  ignorance  and  unbeliej  into  his  mar¬
vellous  light,  1  Pet.  2.  9.  That  ye  should  shew
forth  the  praises  [or  virtues]  of  him  who  hath  cal  led
you  out  of  darkness  intohismarvellous  light.  Also
in  Mark  5.  30.  virtue  is  put  for  power,  Jesus  know¬
ing  that  virtue  had  gone  out  of  him.  (3)  It  is
taken  for  Christian  courage  and  resolution  in  all
dangers  and  troubles  that  persons  may  meet  with.
2  Pet.  1.  5.  Add  to  your  faith,  virtue.  (4)  It  is
put  for  miracles.  Mat.  7.  22.  Have  we  not  done
many  wonderful  works  in  thy  name.  In  the
original  it  is  duvatieis  nuWas,  many  virtues.
Mark  5.  30.  v.  had  gone  outot  him,  Luke  6.19.  1.8.46.
Phil.  4.  8.  if  there  be  any  v.  think  on  these  things
2  Pet  1  3.  of  him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  ».
5.  add  to  your  faith  v.  and  to  v.  knowledge
VIRTUES.

l  Pet  0  +9  that  ye  should  shew  forth  the  v.  of  him
VIRTUOUS.

Ruth  3. 11.  all  know  that  thou  art  a  v.  woman
Prov  12  4.  a  v.  woman  is  a  crown  to  her  husband
31  10.  who  can  find  v.  woman  ?  price  above  rubies


VIRTUOUSLY.

Prov.  31. 29.  many  daughters  have  done  v.  but  fieum
VISAGE.

Isa.  52.  14.  his  v.  was  marred  more  than  any  man
Lam.  4.  8.  their  v.  is  blacker  than  a  coal
Dan.  3.  19.  and  the  form  ot  his  v.  was  changed
VISIBLE.

Col.  1.16.  by  him  were  all  things  created,  v.  and  tnv.
VISION.

See  the  Signification  on  Prophet,  Oracle,
Thummim,  Visit.

Num.  24.4.  which  saw  the  v.  of  the  Almighty,  16.

1  Sam.  3.  1.  word  was  precious,  there  w'as  no  open  v.

15.  and  Samuel  feared  to  shew  Eli  the  v.

2  Sam.  7. 17.  according  to  all  these  words  anil  thia-

v.  so  did  Nathan  speak  to  David,  1  Chr.  17-  ,15-
2  Chron.  32.  32.  they  are  written  in  the  v.  ot  Isaiah-
Job  20.  8.  be  chased  away  as  a  v.  of  the  night
Psal.  89.  19.  thou  spakest  in  v.  to  thy  Holy  One
Prov.  29.  18.  where  there  is  nor.  the  people  pensh
Isa.  1. 1.  the  r.of  Isaiah  ||  Chad.  1.  r.  ot  Obadnh

21.  2.  a  grievous  r.  is  declared  unto  me

22.  1.  the  burden  of  the  value  of  v.  5.

28.  7.  they  err  in  r.  they  stumble  in  judgment

29.  7.  they  shall  be  as  a  dream  of  a  night  r.

11.  the  v.  is  become  as  a  book  that  is  sealed

Jer.  14.  14.  they  prophesy  unto  you  a  false  r.

23.  16.  they  speak  a  r.  of  their  own  heart
Lam.  2.  9.  her  prophets  find  no  r.  from  the  Lord
Ezek.  I.  13.  r.  is  touching  the  whole  multitude

26.  then  shall  they  seek  a  r.  of  the  prophet

8.  4.  according  to  the  r.  that  I  saw,  11.  24. 1  43.  3.

12.  22.  days  are  prolonged  and  every  v.  faileth

23.  say  to  them,  the  effect  of  every  v.  is  at  hand

24.  there  shall  be  no  more  any  vain  v.  nor  divinat

27.  the  r.  that  he  seeth  is  for  many  days  to  com©

13.  7.  have  ye  not  seen  a  vain  v.  and  spoken  >

Dan.  2.  19.  was  revealed  to  Daniel  in  anight  v.

7. 2.  I  saw  in  my  r.  by  night,  the  four  winds  strove-

8.  1.  a  v.  appeared  unto  me,  even  unto  me  Daniel

13.  how  long  shall  be  the  v.  concerning  sacrifice  ?

16.  Gabriel,  make  this  man  to  understand  the  v.

17.  for  at  the  time  of  the  end  shall  be  the  v.

26.  shut  up  the  v.  ||  27.  I  was  astonished  at  the  r>.-

9.  21.  whom  1  had  seen  in  the  v.  at  the  beginning

23.  consider  the  v.  ||  24.  and  to  seal  up  the  v.

10. 1.  and  he  had  understanding  of  the  v.

7.  1  alone  saw  the  v.  men  with  me,  saw  note.  8..

14.  for  yet  the  v.  is  for  many  days
16.  by  the  v.  my  sorrows  are  turned  upon  me

11.  14.  shall  exalt  themselves  to  establish  the  v.
Mic.  3.  6.  night  to  you  that  ye  shall  not  have  a  v..
Nah.  1.  1.  the  book  of  the  v.  of  Nahum
Hab.  2.  2.  write  the  v.  and  make  it  plain  on  tables
3.  for  the  v.  is  yet  for  an  appointed  time,  at  end
Zech.  13.  4.  prophets  be  ashamed  every  one  ot  his  v.
Mat.  17.  9.  charged,  saying,  tell  the  v.  to  no  man
Luke  1.  22.  they  perceived  that  he  had  seen  a  v.

24.  23.  saying,  that  they  had  seen  a  v.  of  angels
Acts  10.  17.  while  Peter  doubted  of  the  v.  19.

11.  5.  in  a  trance  I  saw  a  a  vessel  descend

12.  9.  wist  not  it  was  true,  but  thought  he  saw  a  v.-

16.  9.  a  v.  appeared  to  Paul  in  the  night,  18.  9.

26.  19.  I  was  not  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  v.

Rev.  9.  17.  and  thus  I  saw  the  horses  in  the  v.

In  a  VISI ON .

Gen.  15. 1.  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Abram  in  a  v.
Num.  12.  6. 1  will  make  myself  known  to  him  inav..
Ezek.  11.  24.  brought  me  in  a  v.  by  the  Spirit  of  G:.
Dan.  8.  2. 1  saw  in  a  v.  and  I  was  by  the  river  l.  iai?
Acts  9.  10.  to  Ananias  said  the  Lord  in  a  v.

12.  Saul  hath  seen  in  a  v.  a  man  named  Ananias-

10.  3.  Cornelius  saw  in  a  v.  an  angel  of  God

VISIONS.

Gen.  46.  2.  God  spake  to  Israel  in  v.  of  the  night
2  Chron.  9.  29.  written  in  the  v.  of  Iddo  the  seer
26.  5.  Zechariah  had  understanding  in  v.  of  God
Job  4.  13.  in  thoughts  from  the  v.  of  the  night

7.  14.  then  thou  terrifiest  me  through  v.

Ezek.  1.  1.  heavens  opened,  I  saw  the  v.  of  Goa

8.  3.  he  brought  me  in  the  v.  of  God  to  Jerusalem-

13.  16.  prophets  which  see  v.  of  peace  for  her
40.  2.  in  v.  he  brought  me  to  the  land  of  Israel
Dan.  1.  17.  Daniel  had  understanding  in  all  v.

2.  28.  the  v.  of  thy  head  on  thy  bed,  are  these
4  5  and  the  v.  ot  my  head  troubled  me
7!  l!  Daniel  had  v.  of  his  head  upon  his  bed

7  I  saw  in  the  night  v.  and  behold,  13.

15.  and  the  v.  of  my  head  troubled  me
Has.  12. 10.  I  have  multiplied  v.  I  used  similitudes-
Joel  2. *28.  your  young  men  shall  see  v.  Acts  2.  17.
o  nor  12  1  I  will  come  to  v.  and  revelations
VISIT.

God  visits  men  both  in  mercy  and  in  wrath.  He
visited  Sarah  in  his  mercy,  and  gave  her  a  son,
Gen.  21.  1.  He  visited  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,
and  sent  Moses  to  deliver  them,  Exod.  3.  16.  He
visited  Hannah  the  mother  of  Samvel,  and  gave
her  sons  and  daughters .  1  Sam.  2.  21.  And  he
visited  and  redeemed  his  people  by  the  coming  of
the  Messiah.  Luke  1.  68.  God  visits  also  in  Jus
wrath  and  in  his  vengeance.  He  visits  the  ini¬
quity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  to  the
third  and  fourth  generations,  Exod.  20.  5.  visiting,
that  is,  remembering,  inquiring  into,  or  punishing.
He  threatens  to  visit  the  iniquity  of  the  worshipped
of  the  golden  calf  in  the  day  of  his  vengeance,
JExod.  32.  34.  Nothing  is  more  frequent  in  the
language  of  the  prophets,  than  the  verb  to  visit,
taken  in  the  sense  of  punishing,  chastising,  and
revenging.  To  visit  is  also  taken  foi  paying  visits
of  civility ,  friendship ,  or  duty,  Moses  went  to
visit  his  brethren ,  Acts  7-  23.  And  Paul  ana
Barnabas  went  to  visit  the  churches  they  haa
planted.  Acts  15.  36,  .

Vision  is  a  revelation  from  God,  which  among  the
Jews  were  of  four  sorts:  [D  By  the  Holy  Spun
immediately.  Acts  9.  10.  [2]  By  Unm  and  lhum-
mim.  ffl  By  a  voice  from  heaven  spoken  hy  an
angel,  Acts  10.  3.  [4]  By  prophecy ,  which  were
twofold,  either  in  dreams ,  or  when  awake,  in  c
trance,  or  ecstasy,  Acts  10.  3, 17 •  1 12.  9. 1  16.  9*


VOI


vox


VOI


-Gen.  50.  24.  God  will  surely  v.  you,  25.  Exod.  13. 10.
Jsxod.  32.  34.  when  I  r.  I  will  v.  their  sin  on  them
Jat.  18.  25.  I  do  e.  the  iniquity  thereof  upon  it
•  Job  5.  24.  thou  shalt  v.  thy  habitation  and  not  sin

7.  18.  that  thou  shouldest  v.  him  every  morning
Esnl.  59.  5.  O  Lord,  awake  to  v.  all  the  heatlien
80.  14.  look  down  from  heaven  and  v.  this  vine
89.  32.  then  will  I  v.  their  transgression  with  rods
106.  4.  remember  me,  O  v.  me  with  thy  salvation
Ira.  10.  +  12.  I  will  t>.  upon  the  stout  heart  of  king

23.  17.  the  Lord  will  v.  Tyre,  she  shall  turn

24.  t  21.  Lord  shall  v.  upon  the  host  of  high  ones
-  Jer.  3.  1 6.  neither  shall  they  v.  the  ark  of  the  Lord

4&.  9.  shall  I  not  v.  for  these  things?  29.  19.  9.

6.  15.  at  time  I  v.  them,  they  shall  be  east  down

9.  +  25.  I  will  v.  upon  all  that  are  circumcised

11.  +  22.  I  will  v.  upon  the  men  of  Anathoth

13.  y  21.  wilt  thou  say  when  he  shall  v.  on  thee

14.  10.  will  remember  iniquity  and  v.  their  sins

15.  15.  O  Lord,  thou  knowest’ remember  and  v.

23.  2.  I  M  ill  v.  on  you  the  evil  of  vour  doings

t  34.  I  M’ill  v.  upon  that  man  and  his  house
25. 1 12.  that  I  will  v.  upon  the  king  of  Babylon
27.  22.  and  there  shall  they  be  till  I  v.  them

29.  10.  I  will  e.  you  and  perform  my  good  word

32.  5.  and  there  shall  he  be  till  I  v.  him

49.  8.  the  time  I  will  v.  Esau||  50.  31.  v.  Babylon
.Lam.  4.  22.  he  M  ill  v.  thine  iniquity,  O  Edom
if «s.  2.  13.  I  will  e.  on  her  the  days  of  Baalim
8. 13.  remember,  noiv  will  he  v.  their  sins,  9.  9.
Arnos  3.  14.  I  will  also  v.  the  altars  of  Beth-el
Lierh.  2.  7.  Lord  shall  v.  and  turn  their  captivity
Lech.  11. 16.  who  shall  not  v.  those  that  be  cut  off
Acts  7.  23.  it  came  into  his  heart  to  v.  his  brethren

15.  14.  hath  declared  how  God  did  v.  the  Gentiles
36.  let  us  go  again  and  v.  our  brethren  in  every

Jam.  1.  27.  is  this,  to  v.  the  fatherless  and  widows

VISITATION.

Rum.  16.  29.  if  they  be  visited  after  the  v.  of  all  men
Job  10.  12.  thy  v.  hath  preserved  my  spirit
Jsa.  10.  3.  what  M’ill  ye  do  in  the  day  of  v.  ?

Jer.  S.  12.  in  time  of  their  v.  shall  be  cast  doum

10.  15.  in  the  time  of  v.  they  shall  perish,  51.  18.
11.23.  I  will  bring  evil  on  the  men  of  Anathoth,

eveivin  the  year  of  their  v.  23.  12.  I  48.  44.
46.  21.  the  time  of  their  v.  was  come,  50.  27.

50. 121.  go  up  against  the  inhabitants  of  v.

Hus.  9. 7-  the  days  of  v.  are  come,  Israel  shall  know
Mic.  7.4.  thy  v.  comet!),  now  shall  be  perplexity
Luke  19.  44.  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  v.

1  Pet.  2. 12.  they  may  glorify  God  in  the  day  of  v.
VISITED.

Gen.  21. 1.  and  the  Lord  v.  Sarah  as  he  had  said
Exod.  3.  16.  saying,  1  have  surely  v.  you

4.  .31.  they  heard  that  the  Lord  had  v.  Israel
Nvm.  16.  29-  if  they  be  v.  after  visitation  of  all  men
.Judy.  15.  1.  that  Samson  r.  his  wife  with  a  kid
Ruth  1.  6.  she  heard  how  the  Lord  had  v.  his  people
1  Sam.  2. 21.  the  Lord  v.  Hannah,  she  conceived
Job  35.  15.  now  it  is  not  so,  he  hath  u.  in  his  anger
Psal.  17.  3.  thou  hast  v.  me,  thou  hast  tried  me
Prov.  19.  23.  he  shall  not  be  v.  with  evil
Jsa. 24.  22.  after  many  days  shall  they  be  v.

26. 14.  therefore  hast  thou  v.  and  destroyed  them

16.  Lord,  in  trouble  have  they  v.  thee

29.6.  thou  shalt  be  v.  of  the  Lord  with  thunder
Jer.  6.6.  Jerusalem  is  the  city  to  be  v.  oppression
23.  2.  ye  scattered  my  flock  and  have  not  v.  them
Ezek.  .38.  8.  after  many  days  thou  shalt  be  v.

Zech.  10.  3.  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  v.  his  flock
Mat.  25.  36.  I  was  sick,  ye  v.  me  ||  43.  ye  v.  me  not
Luke  1.  68.  he  hath  v.  and  redeemed  his  people
78.  the  day-spring  from  on  high  hath  v.  us

7.  16.  saying,  that  God  hath  v.  his  people
V1SITEST.

•Psal.  8.  4.  son  of  man  that  thou  v.  him,  Heb.  2.  6.

65. 9.  thou  v .  the  earth  and  waterest  it,  enrichest
VIS1  I’ETH.

Job  31.  14.  M'hen  he  v.  what  shall  I  answer  him  ?
VISITING.

Excod.  20.  5.  v.  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the
children,  34.  7-  Num.  14.  18.  Deut.  3.  9.
VOCA  HON.

Eph.  4. 1.  I  beseech  that  ye  M’alk  worthy  of  the  v.
VOICE.

.By  this  word  is  not  only  understood  the  voice  of  a
man  or  beast ,  but  all  other  sorts  of  sounds,  noises,
or  cries.  And  even  thunder  has  often  the  name  of
the  voice  of  God  yiien  to  it.  Pharaoh  begged  of
Moses  to  entreat  the  Lord  that  there  might  be  no
more  mighty  thunderings,  in  Hebrew,  voices  of
God,  Exod.  9.  28.  Elihu  says.  Hear  attentiv  ely
’the  noise  of  his  voice.  And  in  Psal.  29.  the  voice
of  the  Lord  is  frequently  put  for  thunder.  To  heat¬
er  to  hearken  to  any  one’s  voice ,  is  to  obey  him.
Exod.  15.  26.  If  thou  wilt  diligently  hearken  to
the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  l  will  put  none  of
these  diseases  upon  thee,  which  1  have  brought
upon  the  Egyptians.  Our  Saviour  says,  that  his
sheep  hear  his  voice,  and  follow  nim  ;  that  is,
they  obey  him,  they  depend  upon  his  ministry,  and
imitate  his  example.  John  10.  27.  The  spouse
says.  Cant.  2.8.  The  voice  of  my  beloved;  I
hear  the  voice  of  Christ,  in  the  ministry  of  the
word  and  motions  of  his  Spirit.

To  change  the  voice,  Gal.  4.  20.  I  desire  to  change
my  voice.  The  apostle  was  forced  to  write  some¬
what  roughly  and  sharply,  as  in  chap.  3.  ver.  1.
Now  he  wishes  to  he  present  with  the  Galatians,

■  and  to  Older  matters  so,  that  if  possible,  he
might  have  occasion  to  rejoice  with  them  and
comfort  them,  instead  of  complaining  of  them
and  reproving  them.

Idle  daughter  of  the  voice,  called  in  Hebrew,
Bath  kol,  was,  as  the  Jewish  writers  say,  a  pre¬
ternatural  way  in  which  God  discovered  his  will
to  them,  after  the  word  of  prophecy  had  ceased
■in  Israel.  The  generality  of  their  traditions,  and
■the  customs  of  their  nation,  are  founded  on  this
Piaih-kol.  They  pretend  that  God  revealed  them
sto  their  elders,  not  by  any  articulate  prophecy,  but
<6*  some  secret  inspiration,  or  by  some  tradition


which  they  call  the  daughter  of  the  voice.  They
pretend,  that  the  daughter  of  the  voice,  is  a  voice
from  heavtn  heard  in  an  articulate  manner,  much
after  the  same  way  as  the  voice  which  , called
young  Samuel ,  when  God  revealed  to  him  what
was  to  befall  the  high  priest  Eli  and  his  family.
God  then  called  him  three  times  with  an  articulate
voice  ;  and  Samuel  replied  in  the  same  manner  as
he  would  have  answered  a  man,  not  knowing  as  yet
how  to  distinguish  the  voice  of  God,  1  Sain.  3.  4,
5,  Ac.  Or,  the  daughter  of  the  voice,  resembles
that  which  was  uttered  from  the  sanctuary,  when
the  Lord  spake  to  Moses,  or  answered  the  high
priest,  who  consulted  him  by  the  Urim  awrfThuin-
mim.  These  two  sorts  of  voices  were,  as  one  may
say,  the  mother  of  that  other  voice  which  succeed¬
ed  them,  and  was  called  Bath-kol,  daughter-w>*c£,
or  daughter  of  the  voice,  because  it  was,  as  it
were,  the  daughter  of  this  first  voice.

The  Bath-kol,  as  Dr.  Prideaux  shews,  was  a  fan¬
tastical  way  of  divination,  invented  by  the  Jews,
like  the  Sortes  Virgil ianas  among  the  heathens.
For  as  with  them  the  words  first  dipt  at  in  the  book
of  that  poet,  was  the  oracle  whereby  they  prognosti¬
cated  those  future  events  which  they  desired  to  be
informed  of ;  so  with  the  Jews,  when  they  appealed
to  Bath-kol,  the  next  words  which  they  should  hear
from  any  one's  mouth  we-e  the  same  oracle  to  them.
It  is  said  in  the  Talmud,  that  two  Rabbins,  de¬
sirous  of  visiting  their  friend  Rabbi  Samuel,  Doc¬
tor  of  Babylon,  said  one  to  another,  let  us  follow
the  directum  of  Bath-kol ;  as  they  were  passing  by
a  school,  they  heard  a  young  lad  reading  this  pas¬
sage  of  the  first  book  of  Samuel,  chap.  25.  ver.  1 .
And  Samuel  died.  From  thence  they  concluded
that  Samuel  was  dead.  The  event  justified  what
they  had  prognosticated,  for  they  found  that  at
that  time  Rabbi  Samuel  of  Babylon  had  departed
this  life.  These  casual  and  odd  oracles  were  es¬
teemed  as  voices  of  God's  appointment.

Gen.  4.  10.  the  v.  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth
27.  22.  the  v.  is  Jacob’s  v.  but  the  hands  are  Esau’s

29.  11.  and  Jacob  lifted  up  his  v.  and  M-ept

39.  15.  when  he  heard  that  1  lifted  up  my  v.

Exod.  4.  8.  they  will  believe  the  v.  of  the  latter  sign

19.  19.  Moses  spake,  God  answered  him  by  a  v.

23.  21.  beware  of  him,  obey  his  v.  provoke  not

24.  3.  and  all  the  people  answered  with  one  v.

32.  18.  it  is  not  the  v.  of  them  that  shout

Lev.  5.  1.  if  a  soul  hear  the  v.  of  swearing
Num.  14.  1.  the  congregation  lifted  up  their  v.
Deut.  4.  30.  if  thou  shalt  be  obedient  to  his  v.

8.  20.  because  ye  would  not  be  obedient  to  his  v.
Josh.  6.  10.  nor  make  any  noise  with  your  v.

Judg.  18.  3.  they  knew  the  v.  of  the  Levite

1  Sam.  24.  16.  is  this  thy  v.  my  son  David  ?  26.  17.

2  Sam.  22.  14.  and  the  Most  High  uttered  his  v.

1  Kings  18.  26.  was  no  v.  nor  any  that  answered,  29.

+  27.  at  noon  Elijah  said,  cry  with  a  great  v.

19.  12.  and  after  the  fire  a  still  small  v.

2  Kings  4.  31.  there  was  neither  v.  nor  hearing
7-  10.  there  was  no  v.  of  man,  but  horses  tied

19.  22.  against  whom  hast  thou  exalted  thy  v.  and
lifted  up  thine  eyes  on  high  ?  Isa.  37.  23.

1  Chron.  15.  16.  by  lifting  up  the  v.  with  joy

2  Chron.  24.  t  9.  made  a  v.  thro’  Judah  and  Jerus.
Ezra  1 .  +  1.  Cyrus  caused  a  v.  to  pass  thro’  kingdom
Job  2.  12.  Job’s  friends  lifted  up  their  v.  and  wept

3.  7.  to  be  solitary,  let  no  joyful  v.  come  there
29.  +  10.  the  v.  of  the  nobles  was  hid
.30.  31.  my  organ  into  the  v.  of  them  that  weep
37.  4.  a  v.  roareth,  he  thundereth  with  the  v.

5.  God  thundereth  marvellously  with  his  v.

40.  9.  or  canst  thou  thunder  with  a  v.  like  him  J
Psal.  18.  13.  and  the  Highest  gave  his  v.

26.  7-  I  may  publish  with  the  v.  of  thanksgiving
31.  22.  thou  heardest  the  v.  of  my  supplications
42.  4.  I  went  to  house  of  God  with  the  v.  of  joy
44.  16.  for  the  v.  of  him  that  reproacheth

46.  6.  he  uttered  his  v.  the  earth  melted

47.  1.  shout  unto  God  with  the  v.  of  triumph
66.  19.  he  hath  attended  to  the  v.  of  my  prayer
68.  33.  he  sendeth  out  his  v.  and  that  a  mighty  v.
74.  23.  forget  not  the  v.  of  thine  enemies

77-  1.  I  cried  unto  the  Lord  M'ith  my  v.  142.  1.

18.  the  v.  of  thy  thunder  was  in  heaven
86.  6.  attend  to  the  v.  of  my  supplications
93.  3.  O  Lord,  the  floods  have  lifted  up  their  v.

98.  5.  sing  unto  the  Lord  with  the  v.  of  a  psalm

102.  5.  by  reason  of  the  v.  of  my  groaning

103.  20.  hearkening  to  the  v.  of  his  word

104.  7-  at  v.  of  thy  thunder  they  hasted  avvay
118.  15.  v.  of  rejoicing  in  tabernacles  of  righteous
141.  1.  give  ear  to  my  v.  when  1  cry  unto  thee

Prov.  1.  20.  she  uttereth  her  v.  in  the  streets

2.  3.  if  thou  liftest  up  thy  v.  for  understanding
5.  13.  I  have  not  obeyed  the  v.  of  my  teachers

8.  1.  doth  not  understanding  put  forth  her  v.

4.  to  you,  O  men,  1  call,  my  n.  is  to  sons  of  men
26.  +  25.  when  he  maketh  his  v.  gracious
Eccl.  5.  3.  a  fool’s  v.  is  known  by  multitude  of  words

6.  M’herefore  should  God  be  angry  at  thy  v.  ?

10.  20.  for  a  bird  of  the  air  shall  carry  the  v.

12.  4.  he  shall  rise  up  at  the  v.  of  the  bird

Cant.  2.  8.  the  r;.  of  my  beloved,  behold,  he  cometh
12.  the  v.  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land

5.  2.  it  is  tire  v.  of  my  beloved  that  knoeketh
Isa.  6.  4.  posts  moved  at  the  v.  of  him  that  cried

13.  2.  exalt  the  v.  unto  them,  shake  the  hand

29.  4.  thy  v.  be  as  one-  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit

30.  19.  be  gracious  to  thee  at  the  v.  of  thy  cry

31.  4,  the  lion  will  not  be  afraid  of  their  v.

40.  3.  the  v.  of  him  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness,
Mat.  3.  3.  Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.

6.  r.  said,  cry  ||  48.  20.  with  the  v.  of  singing

50.  10.  that  obeyeth  the  v.  of  his  servant

51.  3.  joy,  thanksgiving,  and  the  v.  of  melody
52.8.  with  the  v.  together  shall  they  sing

65.  19-  I  will  joy  in  my  people,  the  v.  of  weeping
shall  be  no  more  heard  in  her,  nor  v.  of  crying

66.  6.  a  v.  of  noise,  a  v.  from  temple,  a  v.  of  Lord
Jer.  2.  +  15  the  young  lions  gave  out  their  v.


Jer.  4.  15.  a  v.  declareth  from  Dan  and  publisheth
16.  give  out  their  v.  against  the  cities  of  Judah
6.  2.3.  their  v.  roareth  like  the  sea,  50.  42.

7. 34.  the  v.  of  mirth,  v.  of  gladness,  v.  of  the  bride¬
groom,  v.  of  bride.  16.  9.  I  25.  10.  |  33.  11.
8.  19.  vi  of  the  cry  of  the  daughter  of  my  people
10.  13.  when  he  uttereth  his  v.  there  is  a  multitude
of  waters  in  the  heavens,  51.  16.

25.  36.  a  v.  of  the  cry  of  shepherds  andau  howling

30.  19.  and  the  v.  of  them  that  make  merry

31.  15.  a  v.  M-as  heard  in  Katnah,  lamentation

16.  saith  the  Lord,  refrain  thy  v.  from  weeping
46.  22.  the  v.  thereof  shall  go  like  a  serpent

48.  3.  a  v.  of  crying  shall  be  from  Horonaim

50.  28.  the  v.  ot  them  that  flee  and  escape

51.  55.  Lord  hath  destroyed  out  of  her  the  great  v.
Ezek.  1.  24.  I  heard  as  the  v.  of  the  Almighty

10.  5.  as  the  v.  of  Almighty  God  when  he  speaketh

23.  42.  and  a  v.  of  a  multitude  being  at  ease

33.  32.  a  lovely  song  of  one  that  hath  a  pleasant  v.
43.  2.  and  his  v.  was  like  the  noise  of  many  waters,

and  the  earth  shined  with  hi§  glory,  Rev.  1. 15.
Dan.  4.  31.  there  fell  a  v.  from  heaven,  saying
6.  20.  he  cried  with  a  lamentable  v.  to  Daniel
10.  6.  v.  of  his  words  like  the  v.  of  a  multitude
Joel  2.  11.  Lord  shall  utter  his  v.  before  his  army

3.  16.  shall  utter  his  v.  from  Jerusalem,  Amos  1.  2.
Jonah  2.  9.  1  will  sacrifice  with  v.  of  thanksgiving
Nah.  2.  7-  shall  lead  her  as  with  the  v.  of  doves
Mat.3.\7.  an.  from  heaven,  this  is  my  beloved  Sonin
whom  lam  well  pleased,  Mark  1.  11.  Luke  3.22.
17-  5.  a  v.  out  of  the  cloud,  this  is  my  beloved  Son
in  whom  I  am  wellpleased,J7ar^9.7.Twfo9.35.36
Luke  1.  44.  as  soon  as  v.  of  thy  salutation  sounded
John  1.  23.  the  v.  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness

3.  29.  rejoiceth  because  of  the  bridegroom’s  v.

10.  4.  the  sheep  follow  him,  for  they  know  his  v.

5.  for  they  know  not  the  v.  of  strangers

12.  28.  then  came  a  v.  saying,  I  have  glorified  it
30.  this  v.  came  not  because  of  me,  but  for  you

18.  37.  he  that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my  v.

Arts  9.  7*  hearing  a  v.  but  seeing  no  man

10.  13.  came  a  v.  saying,  rise,  Peter,  kill  and  eat
15.  and  the  v.  spake  unto  him  again,  11.  9.

12.  14.  when  she  knew  Peter’s  v.  she  opened  not
22.  it  is  the  v.  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man

19.  34.  all  with  one  v.  cried,  Great  is  Diana

24.  21.  except  it  be  for  this  one  v.  that  I  cried

26.  10.  put  to  death,  1  gave  my  v.  against  them
1  Cor.  14.  11.  if  I  know  not  the  meaning  of  the  v.

19.  that  by  my  v.  1  might  teach  others  also
Gal.  4.  20.  1  desire  now  to  change  my  v.

1  Thess.  4. 16.  Lord  descend  with  v.  of  the  archange
Heb.  12.  26.  whose  v.  then  shook  the  earth

2  Pet.  1. 17.  there  came  a  v.  from  the  excellent  glory
2.  16.  the  dumb  ass  speaking  with  man’s  v.

Rev.  1.  12.  1  turned  to  see  the  v.  that  spake
16.  17-  there  came  a  great  v.  saying,  it  is  done
VOICE  joined  with  hear.

Gen.  4.  23.  hear  my  v.  ye  wives  of  Lamech
Deut.  4.  33.  did  ever  people  hear  v.  of  God  and  live
36.  out  of  heaven  he  made  thee  to  hear  his  v.

5.  25.  if  we  hear  the  v.  of  God,  we  shall  die
3.3.  7-  he  said,  hear,  Lord,  the  v.  of  Judah
2  Sam.  19.  35.  can  1  hear  the  v.  of  singing-men  ?

22.  7.  and  he  did  hear  my  v,  out  of  his  temple
Job  3.  18.  they  hear  not  the  v.  of  the  oppressor
37-  2.  hear  attentively  the  noise  of  his  v.

Psal.  5.  3.  my  v.  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  morning
27-  7.  hear,  O  Lord,  when  I  cry  with  my  v.  28.2.

1  64. 1.  1  119.  149-  I  130.  2.  |  140.6.
55.  3.  hear  me,  because  of  the  v.  of  the  enemy

17.  1  M’ill  cry  aloud  and  he  shall  hear  my  v.

95.7-  to-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  v.  harden  not  your

hearts  as  in  the  M’ilderness,  Heb.  3.  7, 15.  |  4.  7.
Cant.  2.  14.  let  me  hear  thy  v.  for  SM-eetis  thy  v.
Isa.  32.  9-  hear  my  v.  ye  careless  daughters
Jer.  9.  10.  nor  can  men  hear  the  v.  of  the  cattle
Mat.  12.  19.  neither  shall  any  man  hear  his  v.

John  5.  25.  the  dead  hear  v.  of  Son  of  God,  28.

10.  3.  porter  opens,  and  sheep  hear  his  v.  16.  27.
Acts  22.  14.  and  shouldest  hear  the  v.  of  his  mouth
Rev.  3.  20.  if  any  man  hear  my  v.  and  open  door
See  Heard.

VOICE  with  hearken,  hearkened.

Gen.  3.  17.  because  hast  hearkened  to  ».  of  thy  wife
16.  2.  and  Abram  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  Sarai
21.  12.  in  all  Sarah  hath  said  hearken  to  her  v.
Exod.  3.  18.  and  they  shall  hearken  to  thy  v.

4.  1.  behold,  they  M’ill  not  hearken  unto  my  v.

8.  nor  hearken  to  the  v.  of  the  first  sign

9.  if  thy  will  not  hearken  to  thy  v.  shalt  take
15.  26.  if  diligently  hearken  to  the  v.  of  the  Lord

18.  19.  hearken  to  my  v.  1  will  give  thee  counsel
l  24.  and  Moses  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  Jethro
Num.  14.  22.  they  have  tempted  me  ten  times  and

not  hearkened  to  my  v.  Deut.  9-  23.  |  28.  45.
21.  3.  the  Lord  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  Israel
Deut.  1.  45.  the  Lord  would  not  hearken  to  your  1.

13.  18.  when  thou  shalt  hearken  to  the  v.  of  Lord
15.  5.  only  if  thou  carefully  hearken  to  the  v.  of  the

Lord  thy  God,  26.  17-  I  28.  1,  2. 1  30.  10.
28.  15.  if  thou  wift  not  hearken  to  the  v.  of  Lord
Josh.  10.  14.  the  Lord  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  a  man
Judg.  2.  20.  this  people  have  not  hearkened  to  my  v.
13.  9.  and  God  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  Manoah

20.  13.  Benjamin  would  not  hearken  to  v.  of  lsrae.

1  Sam.  2.  25.  they  hearkened  not  to  v.  of  their  father
8.  7.  hearken  to  the  v.  of  the  people,  9.  22.

12.  1.  I  have  hearkened  to  your  v.  in  all  ye  said

19.  6.  Saul  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  Jonathan

25.  35.  go  in  peace,  see,  1  have  hearkened  to  thy  v.
28.  22.  hearken  thou  to  the  v.  of  thy  handmaid

2  Sam.  12.  18.  he  would  not  hearken  to  our  v.

13.  14.  hoM’beit,  he  would  not  hearken  to  her  v .

1  Kings  20.  25.  Ben-hadad  hearkened  to  their  v.

2  Kings  10.  6.  if  ye  will  hearkeni  o  my  v.

Job  9.  16.  not  believe  he  had  hearkened  to  my  v.

34.  16.  hearken  to  the  v.  of  my  words

Psal.  5.  2.  hearken  to  the  v.  of  my  cry,  my  King
58.  5.  will  not  hearken  to  the  v.  of  charmers
81.  11.  my  people  would  not  hearken  to  my  v.

f>39


vow


W  A  F


W  A  1


Cunt.  8.  13.  the  companions  hearken  to  thy  v.

Jer.  18.  19.  hearken  to  v.  of  them  that  contend
See  Lift,  Lord,  Loud,  Obey,  Obeyed.
VOICES.

Exod.  9.  +  28.  that  there  be  no  more  v.  of  God
Luke  17.  13.  the  ten  lepers  lifted  up  their  v.

23.  23.  they  were  instant  with  loud  v.  that  he  might
be  crucified,  the  v.  of  them  and  priests  prevailed
Acts  13.  27.  because  knew  not  the  v.  of  the  prophets
22.  22.  they  lift  up  theirs,  and  said,  away  with
1  Cor.  14.  10.  there  are  so  many  v.  in  the  world
Rev.  4.  5.  out  of  the  throne  proceeded  v.  16.  18.

8.  5.  angel  cast  censer  into  earth  and  there  were  v.

13.  woe,  by  reason  of  the  other  v.  of  the  trumpet

10.  3.  the  seven  thunders  uttered  their  v.  4.

11.  15.  and  there  were  great  v.  in  heaven

19.  the  temple  was  opened,  and  there  were  v.

VOID.

Gen.  1.  2.  the  earth  was  without  form  and  v.

Num.  30. 12.  but  if  her  husband  made  them  v.  15.
Deut.  32.  28.  they  are  a  people  v.  of  counsel
1  Kings  22. 10.  kings  sat  in  a  v.  place,  2  Chr.  18.  9.
Neh.  5.  t  13.  even  thus  be  ye  shalten  out  and  v.

Job  15.  +  4.  makest  v.  fear  and  restrainest  prayer
Psal.  89.  39.  made  v.  the  covenant  of  thy  servant
107.  +  40.  causeth  them  to  wander  in  a  v.  place
119.  126.  for  they  have  made  v.  thy  law  _  ,

Prov.  11.  12.  v.  of  wisdom,  despiseth  his  neighbour
15.  +21.  folly  is  joy  to  him  that  is  v.  of  heart
Isa.  55.  11.  my  word  shall  not  return  to  me  v.

Jer.  4.  23.  the  earth  was  without  form  and  v.

19.  7.  I  will  make  v.  the  counsel  of  dudah
Nah.  2.  10.  Nineveh  is  empty,  v.  and  waste
Acts  24.  16.  to  have  a  conscience  v.  of  offence
Rom.  1.  +  28.  gave  them  over  to  a  mind  v.  of  judgm.

3.  31.  do  we  then  make  v.  the  law  through  faith  ?

4  14.  if  they  of  the  law  be  heirs,  faith  is  made  v.

1  Cor.  9. 15.  'lest  any  should  make  my  glorying  v.
Tit.  1.  +  16.  to  every  good  work  v.  of  judgment

See  Understanding.

VOLUME.

Psal.  40.  7.  then  said  I,  lo  I  come,  in  the  v.  of  the
book  it  is  written  of  me,  Heb.  10.  7-
VOLUNTARY.

Lev.  1.  3.  he  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  v.  will

7.  16.  a  v.  offering  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day
Ezek. Ad.  12. princes  shall  prepare  a  v.  burnt-offering
Col.  2.  18.  in  a  v.  humility  and  worshipping  angels
VOLUNTARILY.

Ezek.  46.  12.  prepare  offerings  v.  to  the  Lord
VOMIT'.

Job  20.  15.  he  swallowed  riches  and  shall  v.  them
Prov.  23.  8.  the  morsel  eaten  thou  shalt  v.  up
25.  16.  lest  thou  be  filled  with  honey  and  v.  it
VOMIT.

Prov.  26.  11.  as  the  dog  returnethto  his».  so  a  fool
Isa.  19.  14.  as  a  drunken  man  staggereth  in  his  v.

28.  8.  for  all  tables  are  full  of  v.  and  filthiness
Jer.  48.  26.  Moab  also  shall  wallow  in  his  v.

2  Pet.  2.  22.  the  dog  is  turned  to  his  own  v.  again

VOMITED.

Jonah  2.  10.  the  fish  v.  out  donah  on  dry  land
VOMITETH.

Lev.  18.  25.  the  land  v.  out  her  inhabitants
VOW

Is  a  promise  made  to  God  of  doing  some  good  thing
hereafter.  The  use  of  vows  is  observable  in  many
places  of  Scripture.  When  Jacob  went  into  Me¬
sopotamia  he  vowed  to  God  the  tenth  of  his  estate,
and  promised  to  offer  it  at  Beth  el  to  the  honour
and  service  of  God,  Gen.  28.  20,  22.  There  are
several  laws  for  the  regulation  and  due  execution  of
vows.  A  man  might  devote  himself,  or  his  chil¬
dren,  to  the  Lord.  Samuel  was  vowed  and  conse¬
crated  to  the  service  of  the  Lord,  and  was  offered
to  him,  to  serve  in  the  tabernacle,  1  Sam.  1.  22,  28.
If  a  man  or  woman  vowed  themselves  or  their
children  to  the  Lord,  they  were  obliged  to  adhere
strictly  to  his  service,  according  to  the  conditions
of  the  vow  ;  if  not,  they  were  to  be  redeemed.  The
price  for  redeeming  persons  of  such  and  such  an
age  is  particularly  limited.  Lev.  27-  2,  3,  &c.
Only  if  the  person  was  poor,  and  could  not  procure
the  sum  limited,  the  priest  imposed  a  ransom  upon
him  according  to  his  abilities.

If  any  one  had  vowed  an  animal  that  was  clean,  he
had  not  the  liberty  of  redeeming  it,  or  of  exchang¬
ing  it,  but  was  obliged  to  sacrifice  it  to  the  Lord,
or  give  it  to  the  priest  according  to  the  manner  of
his  vow.  If  it  was  an  unclean  animal,  and  such
as  was  not  allowed  to  be  sacrifit  ed,  the  priest  made  a
valuation  of  it  ;  and  if  the  proprietor  would  redeem
it,  he  added  a  fifth  part  to  the  value,  by  way  of
forfeit.  They  did  the  same  in  proportion,  when
the  thing  vowed  zvas  a  house  or  a  field.  See
Lev.  27-  9,  10,  &c.  They  could  not  devote  the
firstlings  of  beasts,  because  of  their  ozvn  nature
they  belonged  to  the  Lord,  Lev.  27  -  26.  What¬
soever  was  solemnly  devoted  to  the  Lord  could  not
be  redeemed,  of  whatever  nature  or  quality  it  was.
Lev.  27.  28.  Concerning  the  vows  of  the  Naza-
rites,  See  N  azarite.

The  vows  and  promises  of  children  were  void,  ex¬
cept  they  were  ratified,  either  by  the  express  or
tacit  consent  of  their  parents.  And  it  was  the
same  with  the  vows  of  married  women;  they
were  of  no  validity,  except  they  were  confirmed  by
the  express  or  tacit  consent  of  their  husbands,
Num.  30.  1,  2,  3,  &c.

Under  the  New  Testament,  a  vow  is  either  general
to  all  Christians,  as  that  which  is  made  at  our
baptism ;  or  particular  and  special,  as  when  zee
bind  ourselves  to  a  greater  endeavour,  to  leave  some
sm,  or  perform  some  duty.  A  vow,  as  one  ob¬
serves,  must  be  made  deliberately  and  devoutly,  for
a  sudden  passion  makes  not  a  vow  ;  and  we  ought
to  vow  nothing  but  what  is  in  our  power  to  per¬
form.  Some  vows  are  of  evil  things  to  an  evil
end  ;  such  vows  ought  neither  to  be  made  nor  kept  ;
of  this  kind  was  the  vow  or  curse  which  the  Jews
found  themselves  under,  who  conspired  to  murder
Paul.  Acts  23.  12.  Some  vows  are  of  good  things

540


in  an  evil  manner  ;  such  may  be  made,  and  ought
to  be  kept  in  respect  of  the  matter,  but  not  in  re¬
spect  of  the  end ;  thus,  we  may  vow  to  give  alms,
but  not  to  be  seen  of  men.  Other  vows  are  of
good  things  in  a  good  manner :  and  such  may  be
made,  and  ought  to  be  performed.  St.  Paul  made
a  vow  either  of  Nazafiteship,  or  by  way  of  grati¬
tude  for  some  particular  mercy ,  Acts  18.  18.  But
commentators  are  not  agreed  whether  this  be
spoken  of  Paul,  or  of  Aquila,  who  is  mentioned  in
the  same  verse.

The  performance  of  solemn  vows  is  strictly  enjoined
us  in  Scripture.  Eccl.  5.  4.  When  thou  vowest  a
vow  unto  God,  defer  not  to  pay  it :  Perform  it
while  the  sense  of  thy  obligation  is  fresh  and  strong
upon  thee,  lest  either  thou  seem  to  repent  of  thy
promises,  or  lest  delays  end  in  denials  and  resolu¬
tions  of  non-performance.  Solomon  adds,  For  the
Lord  hath  no  pleasure  in  fools  ;  that  is,  in  hypo¬
critical  and  perfidious  persons,  who,  when  they
are  in  distress,  make  liberal  vows,  and  when  the
danger  is  past,  neglect  and  break  them,  and  so
discover  the  highest  folly,  in  thinking  to  mock
and  deceive  the  All-seeing  and  Almighty  God.
Moses  speaks  almost  in  the  same  words.  Deut.
23.  21.  When  thou  shalt  vow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord
thy  God,  thou  shalt  not  slack  to  pay  it;  for
the  Lord  will  surely  require  it  of  thee.  The
Psalmist  in  several  places  declares  that  he
would  pay  his  vows  to  the  Lord,  Psal.  22.  25.  |
66.  13.

Gen.  28.  20.  .Jacob  vowed  a  v.  saying,  31.  13.

Lev.  7.  16.  if  the  sacrifice  be  a  v.  22.  18,  21.

22.  23.  but  for  a  v.  it  shall  not  be  accepted
27.  2.  when  a  man  shall  make  a  singular  v.

Num.  6.  2.  when  a  man  shall  vow  a  v.  of  a  N azarite
5.  the  days  of  the  v.  ||  21.  according  to  the  v.

15.  3.  ora  sacrifice,  in  performing  as.  8.

21.  2.  Israel  vowed  a  v.  to  the  Lord,  and  said
30.  2.  if  a  man  vow  a  v.  J|  3.  if  a  woman  vow  a  v.

4.  and  her  father  hear  her  v.  and  hold  his  peace

9.  every  v.  of  a  widow  shall  stand  against  her

13.  every  v.  her  husband  may  estab.  or  make  void
Deut.  23.  18.  not  bring  the  price  of  a  dog  for  a  v.

21.  when  thou  shalt  vow  a  v.  not  slack  to  pay  it
Judg.  11.  30.  .lephthah  vowed  a  v.  unto  the  Lord
39.  who  did  with  her  according  to  his  v.

1  Sam.  1. 11.  Hannah  vowed  a  v.  and  said,  O  Lord
21.  Elkanah  went  up  to  offer  to  the  Lord  his  v.

2  Sam.  15.  7.  I  pray  thee  let  me  go  and  pay  my  v.

8.  for  thy  servant  vowed  a  v.  at  Geshur  in  Syria

Psal.  65.  1.  to  thee  shall  the  v.  be  performed
Eccl.  5.  4.  when  thou  vowest  a  v.  defer  not  to  pay
Isa.  19.  21.  they  shall  vow  a  v.  unto  the  Lord
Acts  18. 18.  ha.’ing  shorn  his  head,  for  he  had  a  v.
21. 23.  we  have  four  men  which  have  a  v.  on  them
VOWS.

Lev.  22. 18.  fhatwill  offer  his  oblation  for  all  his  v.

23.  38.  beside  your  gifts  and  beside  all  your  v.
Num.  29.  39.  these  ye  shall  do  beside  your  v.

30.  4.  then  all  her  v.  shall  stand,  7,  9,  11.

5.  not  any  of  her  v.  or  bonds  shall  stand,  8,  12.

14.  then  he  establisheth  all  her  v.  or  bonds
Deut.  12.  6.  thither  bring  your  v.  11,  17,  26.

Job  22.  27.  and  thou  shalt  pay  thy  v.

Psal.  22.  25.  I  will  pay  my  v.  66. 13. 1  116.  14, 18.

50. 14.  pay  thy  v.  ||  56. 12.  thy  v.  are  upon  me,  O  G.
61.  5.  for  thou,  O  God,  hast  heard  my  v.

8.1  will  sing  praise  that  1  may  daily  perform  my».
Prov.  7.  14.  this  day  have  1  paid  my  v.

20.  25.  it  is  a  snare  after  v.  to  make  inquiry

31.  2.  what  my  son  ?  and  what  the  son  of  my  v.
Jer.  44.  25.  we  will  surely  perform  our  v.

Jonah  1. 16.  the  men  feared  the  Lord  and  made  v.
Nah.  1.  15.  keep  thy  solemn  feasts,  perform  thy  v.

VOW.

Num.  6.  2.  shall  separate  themselves  to  v.  a  vow
Deut.  23.  22.  if  forbear  to  v.  shall  be  no  sin  in  thee
Psal.  76.  11.  v.  and  pay  to  the  I.ord  yourGod
Eccl.  5.  5.  better  is  it  that  thou  shouldest  not  v.
VOWED.

Gen.  28.20.  .Jacob  v.  a  vow,  saying,  31.  13.

Lev.  27.8.  according  to  his  ability  that  v.  shall  priest
Num.  6.  21.  the  law  of  the  Nazarites  who  hath  v.

21.  2.  Israel  v.  a  vow  to  the  Lord  and  said

30.  6.  if  she  had  at  all  an  husband  when  she  v.

10.  and  if  she  v.  in  her  husband’s  house
Deut.  23.  23.  shalt  keep  according  as  thou  hast  v.
Judg.  11.  30.  .lephthah  v.  a  vow  unto  the  Lord
Psal.  132.  2.  and  v.  to  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob
Eccl.  5.  4.  defer  not,  pay  that  which  thou  hast  v.
Jonah  2.  9.  I  will  pay  that  that  I  have  v.

VOW  EST.

Eccl.  5.  A.  when  thou  v.  a  vow,  defer  not  to  pay'  it
VOWRTH.

Mai.  1.14.  who  v.  to  the  Lord  a  corrupt  thing
VOYAGE.

Acts  27.  10.  I  perceive  this  v.  will  be  with  hurt
VULTURE,

A  bird  of  prey,  which  was  declared  unclean,  T.ev.

11.  14.  It  is  said  that  vultures  feed  upon  human
flesh  ;  whence  it  was  that  the  ancients  placed  them
among  birds  of  ill  omen.  In  1  .eviticus  the  Hebrew
word  for  vulture  is  Doah,  of  flying  ;  but  in  Deut.
14.  13.  it  is  Eoah,  of  seeing,  because  the  vulture
sees  and  smells  her  prey  from  far  ;  hence  it  is  said,
that  in  Hieroglyphics,  the  vulture  signifies  sharp¬
ness  of  sight.  Job  speaks  of  the  vulture  as  having
a  very  quick  eye.  Job  28.  7.  There  is  a  path
which  the  vzi/ture's  eye  hath  not  seen.

Lev.  11.  14.  then.  and  the  kite  after  his  kind  shall
not  be  eaten,  Deut.  14.  13.
Job  28.  7.  a  path  which  the  v.  eye  hath  not  seen
Isa.  34.  15.  there  shall  then. also’  be  gathered,  every

one  with  her  mate


w.

WAFER.

Exod.  29.  23.  one  w.  out  of  the  basket  of  the  unlea¬
vened  bread  that  is  before  the  Lord,  Lev.  8.  26.


Num.  6. 19.  one  <_ake,  one  w.  on  hands  of  N  azarite
WAFERS.

Exod.  16.  31.  manna,  the  taste  of  it  was  like  w.

29.  2.  and  w.  unleavened  anointed  with  oil
Lev.  2.  4.  zt).  anointed  with  oil,  7.  12.  Num.  6.  15.

WAG.

Jer.  18.16.  every  one  that  passeth  by  shal  l  w.  his  head
Lam.  2.  15.  w.  their  heads  at  daughter  of  Jerusalem
Zeph.  2.  15.  every  one  that  passeth  shall  w.  his  hand
WAGES.

Gen.  29.  15.  tell  me  what  shall  thy  w.  be  ?

30.  28.  appoint  me  thy  w.  and  I  will  give  it

31.  7.  your  lather  changed  my  w.  ten  times,  41.

8.  the  speckled  shall  be  thy  w.  then  the  cattle

Exod.  2.  9-  nurse  this  child,  I  will  give  thee  w.

Lev.  19.  13.  w.  of  hired  not  abide  with  thee  all  night
Jer.  22.  13.  useth  neighbour’s  service  without  w.
Ezek.  29. 18.  yet  had  he  no  w.  nor  his  army
19.  her  spoil  shall  be  the  w.  for  his  army
Hag.  1 . 6.  earneth  w.  to  put  into  a  bag  with  holes
Mai.  3.  5.  that  oppress  the  hireling  in  hisa>.

Luke  3.  14.  and  be  content  with  your  w.

John  A.  36.  and  he  that  reapelh  receiveth  w.

Rom.  6.  23.  for  the  w.  of  sin  is  death,  but  gift  of  God
2  Cor.  11.  8.  taking  w.  of  them  to  do  you  service
2  Pet.  2.  15.  Balaam  loved  there,  of  unrighteousn.
WAGGING.

Mat.  27.  39.  and  they  that  passed  by  reviled  him,
w.  their  heads,  Mark  15.  29.
WAGGON.

Num.  7.  3.  brought  a  w.  for  two  of  the  princes
WAGGONS.

Gen.  45.  19.  take  you  w.  out  of  Egypt,  21.

27.  when  Jacob  saw  the  w.  Joseph  had  sent
Num.  7.  7-  two  w.  four  oxen  to  sons  of  Gershon

8.  four  w.  and  eight  oxen  to  the  sons  of  Merari
Ezek.  23.  24.  they  shall  come  against  thee  with  w.

WAIT,.

Ezek.  32. 18.  w.  for  the  multitude  of  Egypt
Mic.  1. 8.  therefore  l  will  w.  and  howl,  go  stript
Rev.  1.7.  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  w.  for  him
WAILED.

Mark  5.  38.  he  seeth  them  that  wept  and  w.  greatly
WAILING.

Esth.  A.  3.  whither  his  decree  came  there  was  w.

Jer.  9. 10.  for  the  mountains  will  1  take  up  w.

18.  let  them  take  upaai,  for  us  that  our  eyes

19.  fora  voice  of  w.  is  heard  out  of  Zion

20.  O  ye  women,  teach  your  daughters  w.

Ezek.  7- 1 1.  neither  shall  there  be  w.  for  them
27.  31.  they  shall  weep  for  thee  with  bitter  70.

Amos  5. 16.  w.  shall  be  in  all  streets,  and  say,  alas,
alas  !  such  as  are  skilful  of  lamentation  tow.
17.  and  in  all  vineyards  shall  be  70.  for  l  will  pass
Mic.  1. 8.  I  will  make  a  w.  like  the  dragons
Mat.  13.  42.  there  shal  I  be  w.  anil  gnashing  teeth,  50.
Rev.  18. 15.  the  merchants  stand  afar  off,  w.  19.
WAI  T,  Verb.

Num.  35.  20.  if  he  hurl  at  him  by  laying  of  w.

22.  or  cast  on  him  any  thing  without  laying  w.
Jer.  9.  8.  but  in  his  heart  he  layeth  his  w.

WAIT.

Num.  3.  10.  Aar.  and  sons  shall  w.  on  their  priest’s
office, 8. 24. 1  Chron.Q3i28.2Chron.5.  11.  !  13.10.
2  Kings  6.  .33.  should  I  w.  for  the  Lord  any  longer  (
Job  3.  +  21..  which  w.  for  death,  but  it  cometh  not
14.  14.  of  my  time  1  will  w.  till  my  change  come
17*  13.  if  I  w.  the  grave  is  my  house
Ps.  25.  3.  let  none  that  w.  on  thee  be  ashamed,  69. 6.
5.  art  God  of  salvation,  on  thee  do  I  w.  all  the  day

21.  let  integrity  preserve  me,  for  I  w.on  thee
27. 14.  w.  on  the  Lord,  37.  34.  Prov.  20.22.

37. 7.  w.  patiently  ||  52.  9.  1  will  w.  on  thy  name

9.  that  w.  on  the  Lord  shall  inherit  the  earth
38.+  15.  for  in  thee,  0  I.ord,  do  I  w.  thou  wilt
39  7-  I.ord,  what  70.  1  for  |j  62. 5. 70.  only  on  God
56.  6.  they  mark  my  steps  when  they  70.  for  my  soul
59.  9.  because  of  his  strength  will  I  70.  upon  thee
69.  3.  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  w.  for  my  God
104. 27-  these  all  w.  upon  thee,  145. 15.

123. 2.  so  our  eyes  w.on  the  Lord  our  God
130.  5.  I  w.  for  the  Lord,  my  soul  doth  70.

Isa.  8.  17-  I  will  w.  on  the  Lord  who  hideth  his  face
30.  18.  therefore  will  the  Lord  w.  to  be  gracious
to  you,  blessed  are  all  they  that  w.  for  birr,
40.  31.  they  that  w.  on  L.  shall  renew  their  strength
42.  4.  the  isles  shall  w.  for  his  law
49.  23.  shall  not  be  ashamed  that?/'.  for  me
51. 5.  and  the  isles  shall  70.  upon  me

59.  9.  we  w.  for  light,  but  behold  obscurity

60.  9.  surely  the  isles  shall  w.  for  me
Jer.  14.  22.  therefore  we  will  w.  upon  thee
Lam.  3.  25.  Lord  is  good  to  them  that  w.  for  him

26.  it  is  good  that  a  man  hope  and  quietly  w.

Hos.  6.  9.  as  troops  of  robbers  70.  for  a  man

12.  6.  keep  mercy  and  w  on  thy  God  continually
Mic.  7.7.1  will  70.  for  the  God  of  my  salvation
Hab.  2.  3. though  vision  tarry,  70.  for  it,  it  wil I  come
Zeph.  3.  8.  therefore  w.  ye  upon  me,  saith  the  Lord
Mark  3.  9-  that  a  small  ship  would  w.  on  him
Lzike  12.  36.  like  unto  men  that  re.  for  their  Lord
Acts  1.  4.  but  70.  for  the  promise  of  the  Father
Rom.  8.  25.  then  do  we  with  patience  w.  for  it

12.  7.  or  ministry,  let  us  70.  on  our  ministering
1  Cor.  9.  13.  w  hich  70.  at  the  altar  are  partakers
Gal.  5.  5.  we  through  the  Spiiit  w.  for  the  hope
1  Thess.  1. 10.  and  to  w.  for  his  Son  from  heaven
See  Lay,  Laid,  Liars.

WATTED.

Gen.  49.  18.  I  have  w.  for  thy  salvation,  O  I.ord

1  Kings  20.  38.  the  prophet  ze.  foi  king  by  the  way

2  Kings  5.  2.  a  little  maid  w.  on  Naaman’s  wife

1  Churn.  6.  32.  and  then  they  w.  on  their  office,  33.
9.  18.  porters  that  70.  in  king’s  gate,  2  Chr.  35.  15.

2  Chron.  7.  6.  and  the  priests  w.  on  their  offices
Neh.  12.  44.  for  the  priests  and  Levites  that  w.

Job  6.  19.  the  companies  of  Sheba  w.  for  them

15.  22.  and  he  is  w.  for  of  the  sword

29.  21.  to  me  men  gave  ear,  w.  and  kept  silence

23.  and  they  w.  for  me  as  for  the  rain

30.  26.  and  when  I  70.  for  light  darkness  came
32.4.  now  Elihu  had  w,  till  Job  had  spokeu


VV  A  L


WAL


Psal.  40. 1.  I  to.  patiently  for  the  Lotd,  he  heard

106. 13.  forget  Ins  works,  they  w.  not  tor  counsel
UP.  95.  the  wicked  have  w.  for  me  to  destroy  ine

Isa.  25.  9.  this  is  our  God,  we  have  w.  for  him
26.  8.  in  way  of  thy  judgments  have  we  ».  for  thee
33.2.  be  gracious  unto  us,  we  have  w.  for  thee
Ezek.  19.  5.  she  saw  that  she  had  w.  and  her  hope  lost
Mic.  1. 12.  for  the  inhabitantsof  Maroth  w. carefully
Zech.  11.11.  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  tv.  upon  me
Mark  15.43.  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  who  also  w. tor  the
kingdom  of  G.  craved  body  of  Jesus,  L?<X<t23.5l.
Luke  1.21.  the  people  t v.  for  Zacharias,  marvelled
Acts  10.7-  Cornelius  called  asoldier  that  w.  on  him

24.  Cornelius  w.  for  Peter  and  certain  brethren
17. 16.  while  Paul  W.  for  them  his  spirit  was  stirred
1  Pet.  3.20.  long-suffering  of  God  w.  in  days  of  Noah
WA1TETH.

Job  24.15  the  eye  of  the  adulterer  w.  for  the  twilight
Psa/.  33.20.  our  soul  tv.  for  Lord  our  help  and  shield
62.  1.  truly  my  soul  w.  upon  God,  130.  6.

65. 1.  praise  w.  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Zion
Prov.  27. 18.  he  that  tv.  on  his  master  be  honoured
Isa.  64.  4.  he  hath  prepared  for  him  that  w.  for  him
Dan.  12. 12.  blessed  that  to.  and  cqmeth  to  1335  days
Mic  5.7.  as  showers  that  a1,  not  for  the  sons  of  men
Pom.  8. 19.  w.  for  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God
Jam.  5. 7.  the  husbandman  to.  for  the  precious  fruit
WAITING.

Num.  8.  25.  from  the  age  of  50  years  shall  cease  to.
Prov.  8.  34.  10.  at  gates,  to.  at  posts  of  my  doors
Luke 2. 25.  Simeon  to.  for  the  consolation  of  Israel
John  5.  3.  folk  to.  for  the  moving  of  the  water
Rom.  8.  23.  we  ourselves  groan,  to.  for  the  adoption

1  Cor.  1. 7.  to.  for  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ

2  Thess.  3.  5.  and  into  the  patient  to.  for  Christ

'  WAKE.

Psal.  139. 18.  when  I  to.  I  am  still  with  thee
Jer.  51. 39.  may  sleep  a  perpetual  sleep  and  not  to.
Joel  3.  9.  prepare  war,  a;,  up  the  mighty  men
1  Thess.  5. 10.  whether  we  to.  or  sleep  live  with  him
WAKED.

Zech.  4. 1.  the  angel  came  again  and  to.  me
WAK  ENED.

Joel  3. 12.  let  heathen  be  to.  and  come  up  to  valley
Zech.  4. 1.  as  a  man  that  is  to.  out  of  his  sleep
WAKEN  ETH.

Isa.  50.  4.  to  speak  in  season,  he  to.  morning  by
morning,  he  to.  none  ear  to  hear  as  the  learned
WAKETH.

Psal.  127. 1.  except  Lord  keep  watchmen  to.  in  vain
Cant.  5.  2.  1  sleep  but  my  heart  to.  voice  of  beloved
WAKING.

Psal.  77.4.  thou  holdest  mine  eyes  to.  I  am  troubled

WALK.

To  walk  is  one  of  the  actions  of  the  body  that  de¬
notes  motion  from  one  place  to  another ,  and  is  often
used  in  Scripture,  for  the  conversation  or  manner
of  life,  Rom.  6.  4.  Eph.  4.  1,  17.  To  walk  in
darkness,  1  John  1.  6,  7-  is  to  live  in  a  course  of
ignorance,  error,  and  sin  ;  and  to  walk  in  the
light,  is  to  live  in  the  ways  of  truth  and  holiness.
To  walk  by  faith,  2  Cor.  5.  7.  is  to  rely  upon
Christ  for  salvation,  and  to  live  in  the  firm  belief
that  the  promises  of  the  word  will  be  fulfilled  and
accomplished.  To  walk  through  the  tire,  Isa.  43.

2.  is  to  be  exercised  wi.h  many  afflictions.  To
walk  after  the  flesh,  Rom.  8.  1.  is  to  be  guided  by
the  sensual  appetite,  and  the  principles  or  dictates
of  corrupt  nature.  To  walk  in  the  flesh,  2  Cor.

10.  3.  is  to  live  a  natural  life,  that  is  subject  to
many  infirmities  and  calamities.  To  walk  with
God,  Gen.  5.  24.  is  to  live  in  sweet  communion
with  God,  having  a  lively  sense  of  his  presence,
and  endeavouring  above  all  things  to  please  him.
and  to  be  approved  and  accepted  of  him.  To  walk
after  the  Spirit,  Rom.  8.  1.  is  to  be  led  and  guided
by  his  counsels  and  motions,  to  regulate  and
order  our  whole  conversation  according  to  the  rule
and  direction  of  God's  word  and  Spirit.

Gen.  24.40.  the  Lord  before  whom  1  w.  will  send
48.  15.  God  before  whom  my  fathers  did  w.  bless
Lxod.  16.  4.  whether  they  will  w.  in  my  law  or  no

18.  20.  shew  them  the  way  wherein  they  must  w.

21. 19.  if  he  w.  abroad,  he  that  smote  shall  be  quit
Lev.  18.  3.  nor  shall  w.  in  their  ordinances,  20.  23.

26.  3.  if  ye  w.  in  my  statutes  and  keep  my  com¬
mand.  1  K mgs  6. 12.  Lzek.  33. 15.  Zech .3.7.

12.  1  will  w.  among  you,  and  will  he  your  God

21.  if  ye  w.  contrary  to  me  1  will  bring,  23,  27.
24.  then  will  1  w.  contrary  to  you  and  punish,  28.
Deut.  5.  33.  you  shall  tv.  in  all  the  ways  of  the  Lord
that  ye  may  live,  13.  4.  |  28.  9-  Ezek.  37.  24.

8. 19.  if  ye  w.  after  other  gods  ye  shall  perish
29. 19-  tho’  I  w.  in  the  imagination  of  my  heart

Josh.  22. 5.  take  diligent  heed  to  w.  in  all  his  ways
Judg.  5.  10.  speak,  ye  that  w.  by  the  way
1  Sam.  2.  30.  thy  house  should  w.  before  me  for  ever

35.  he  shall  w.  before  mine  anointed  for  ever

8.  5.  thou  art  old,  thy  sons  w.  not  in  thy  ways

1  Kings  3.  14.  if  thou  wilt  w.  to  keep  my  command¬
ments  as  thy  father  David  did  w.  8.  25.  1  9.  4.
111.  38.  2  Chron.  7. 17.

8.23.  who  keepest  covenant  with  thy  servants  that
w.  before  thee  with  all  their  heart,  2  Chron.  6.  14.

36.  teach  them  the  good  way  wherein  they  should

w.  and  give  rain  on  thy  land,  2  Chron.  6.  27.
Psal.  12. 8.  the  wicked  tv.  on  every  side  when  vilest
23.  4.  tho’  I  w.  thro’  the  valley  ot  shadow  of  death

26. 11.  but  as  for  me,  1  will  w.  in  mine  integrity

56. 13.  that  1  may  w.  before  God  in  light  of  living
82.  5.  they  know  not,  they  w.  on  in  darkness

84. 11.  withhold  no  good  from  them  w.  uprightly

86.11.  teach  me,  O  Lord,  I  will  w.  in  thy  truth
89. 15.  they  shall  w.  in  light  of  thy  countenance

30.  if  his  children  to.  not  in  my  judgments
101.2.  1  will  w.  in  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart

115.7-  feet  have  they,  but  they  w.  not

116.  9.  I  will  w.  before  the  Lord  in  land  of  living
119.  3.  they  do  no  iniquity,  they  w.  in  his  ways
45.  I  will  a;,  at  liberty,  for  I  seek  thy  precepts

138.7-  tho’  1  ?c.in  midst  of  trouble,  thou  w  ilt  revive
143. 8.  cause  me  to  know  way  wherein  1  should  w.


Prov.  2.  7-  he  is  a  buckler  to  them  thatw.  uprightly

20.  that  thou  mayestza.  in  the  way  of  good  men

3.  23.  thenshalt  thou  to.  in  thy  way  safely
Isa.  2.  3.  we  will  w.  in  his  paths,  Mic.  A.  2.

5.  O  Jacob,  let  us  w.  in  the  light  of  the  Lord

3.  16.  they  w.  with  stretched-torth  necks

8.  11.  that  I  should  not  to.  in  the  way  of  this  people
35.  9.  but  the  redeemed  shall  w.  there
40.  3).  they  that  wait  on  Ld.  shall  w.  and  not  faint
42.5.  that  giveth  spirit  to  them  that  w.  therein

24.  for  they  wou  Id  not  w.  in  his  ways  nor  obedient
59.  9.  wait  for  brightness,  but  we  w.  in  darkness

Jer.  3. 17-  nor  w.  after  imagination  of  their  heart
18.  the  house  of  Judah  shall  w.  with  Israel

6.  16.  but  they  said,  we  will  not  w.  therein

7.  6.  if  ye  w.  not  after  other  gods  to  your  hurt

9.  will  ye  w.  after  other  gods  whom  ye  know  not?
9.4.  every  neighbour  will  w.  with  slanders

I. 3.  10.  this  evil  people,  which  w.  in  imagination  of
their  heart,  and  w.  after  other  gods,  16.  12.  I  18.12.

23.  14.  they  commit  aduliery,  and  w.  in  lies
42.  3.  God  may  shew  us  way  wherein  we  may  w.
Lam.  5.  18.  Zion  is  desolate,  the  foxes  w.  upon  it
Lzek.  11.  20.  that  they  may  w.  in  my  statutes
37.24.  they  shall  tv.  in  my  judgments  and  statutes
Dan.  4.  37.  those  that  w.  in  pride  he  is  able  to  abase
Llos.  11.  10.  shall  tv.  after  the  Lord,  roar  like  a  lion

14.  9.  ways  of  Lord  right,  the  just  shall  tv.  in  them
Joel  2.  8.  they  shall  w.  every  one  in  his  path
Amos3.3.  can  two  w.  together  except  they  be  agreed?
Mic.  4.  5.  every  one  will  w.  in  name  of  his  God,
and  we  will  w.  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God

6.  16.  and  ye  w.  in  the  counselsof  Omri  and  Ahab
Dab.  3.  15.  thou  didst  tv.  thro’  the  sea,  with  horses
Zeph.  1.  J7.  that  they  shall  w.  like  blind  men
Zech.  6.  7-  they  might  w.  to  and  fro  through  earth

10.  12.  they  shall  w.  up  and  down  in  his  name
Mat.  11.5.  the  lame  w.  lepers  cleansed,  Luke  7 .  22.
Mark  7.  5.  why  w.  not  thy  disciples  according  to
Luke  11.  44.  men  that  w.  over  them,  are  not  aware

13.  33.  I  must  w.  to-day  and  to-morrow  and  day
24. 17.  what  communications  as  ye  tv.  and  are  sad  ?
John 7.  1.  for  Jesus  would  not  w.  in  Jewry

8.  12.  shall  not  w.  in  darkness  but  have  light  of  life

II.  9.  if  any  man  w.  in  the  day,  he  stumbleth  not

10.  if  a  man  w.  in  the  night,  he  stumbleth

Rom.  4.  12.  who  w.  in  steps  of  that  faith  of  A  braham
6.  4.  even  so  we  should  tv.  in  newness  of  life

8.  1.  who  w.  not  after  flesh,  but  after  Spirit,  4.

2  Cor.  5.  7-  for  we  w.  by  faith,  not  by  sight

6.  16.  I  will  dwell  in  them  and  w.  in  them

10.  3.  tho’  we  w.  in  the  flesh,  not  war  after  the  flesh
Gal.  6.  16.  as  many  as  w.  according  to  this  rule
Eph.  2.  10.  God  hath  ordained  we  should  w.  in  them

4.  1.  that  ye  w.  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith

17.  that  ye  w.  not  as  other  Gentiles  in  vanity

5.  15.  see  then  that  ye  w.  circumspectly ,  not  as  fools
Phil.  3.  17.  brethren,  mark  them  which  w.  so

18.  many  tv.  of  whom  I  told  you,  and  tell  weep.
Col.  1.  107  that  ye  might  w.  worthy  of  the  Lord

unto  all  pleasing,  being  fruitful,  1  Thess.  2.  12.

1  Thess.  4. 12.  ye  may  w.  honestly  to  those  without

2  Thess.  3. 11.  some  which  w.  among  you  disorderly
2  Pet.  2.  10.  but  chiefly  them  that  w.  after  the  flesh

1  John  1 .6.  if  say  we  have  fellowship  and  w.  in  dark.

7.  hut  if  we  w.  in  the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light

2  John  6.  w.  after  his  commandments,  as  ye  have

heard  from  the  beginning  ye  should  w.  in  it

3  John  4.  to  hear  that  my  children  w.  in  the  truth
Jude  18.  mockers  should  w.  after  their  ungodly  lusts
Rev.  3.  4.  and  they  shall  w.  with  me  in  white

9.  20.  idols  that  cannot  see,  nor  hear,  nor  w.

16.  15.  blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  lesthe^i.  naked

21.  24.  the  nations  shall  w.  in  the  light  of  the  city
WALK,  Imperatively .

Gen.  13.  17.  arise,  w.  through  the  land.  Josh.  18.  8.
17-  1.  Almighty  God.rc.  before  me,  and  be  perfect
Psal.  48.  12.  tv.  about  Zion  and  go  round  about  her
Prov.  1.  15.  my  son,  w.  not  in  the  way  with  them
Eccl.  11.9.  w.  in  the  ways  of  thy  heart  and  eyqg
Isa.  2.  5.  O  Jacob,  let  us  w.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

30.  21.  a  voice  saying,  this  is  the  way,  w.  in  it
50.  11.  tv.  in  the  light  of  your  fire  and  in  sparks

Jer.  6.  16.  ask,  where  is  the  good  wa y,w.  therein

25.  go  not  forth  into  fields,  nor  w.  by  the  way

7.  23.  w.  ye  in  all  the  ways  1  commanded  you
Ezek.  20. 18.  w.  ye  not  in  statutes  of  your  fathers
Zech.  6.  7.  they  might  w.  to  and  fro  thro’  the  earth
Mat.  9.  5.  or  to  say,  rise  and  w.  Mark 2.9.  Luke  5.

23.  John  5.  8,  11,  12.  Acts  3.  6.
John  12.  35.  w.  while  ye  have  the  light,  lest  darkness
Pom.  13.  13.  let  us  w.  honestly  as  in  the  day
1  Cor.  7-  17-  as  Lord  called  every  one,  so  let  him  w.
Gal.  5.  16.  w.  in  the  Spirit,  and  not  fulfil  lusts,  25.
Eph.  5.  2.  w.  in  love  ||  8.  tv.  as  children  of  light
Phil.  3.  16.  let  us  w.  by  the  same  rule  and  mind  same
Col.  2.  6.  as  ye  have  received  Christ,  sozc.  in  him

4.  5.  w.  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without
To  WALK.

Lev.  18.  4.  to  w.  in  my  ordinances,  for  I  am  the  Lord
Deut.  8.  6.  to  w.  in  his  ways,  and  fear  him,  10.  12.

1  11.  22.  I  13.  5.  1  19.  9. 1  26.  17. 1  30.  16.  Josh.

22.  5.  Judg.  2.  22.  1  Kings  2.  3. 1  8.  58.

2  Chron.  6.  31.

1  Kings  2.  4.  take  heed  to  w.  before  me  in  truth

8.  61.  heart  perfect,  tow.  in  his  statutes,  Ez.  36.27.
16.  31.  a  light  thing  to  tv.  in  the  sins  of  Jeroboam

2  Kings  10.  31.  Jehu  took  no  heed  tow.  in  law  of  L.

23.  3.  Josiali  made  a  covenant  to  w.  after  the  Lord

to  keep  his  commandments,  2  Chron.  34.  31.
2  Chron.  6. 16.  that  children  take  heed  tow.  in  my  law
Neh.  5.  9.  ought  ye  not  to  w.  in  the  fear  of  God  ?

10.  29-  they  entered  into  an  oath  to  w.  in  God’s  iaw
Psal.  78.  10.  they  refused  to  w.  in  his  law
Prov.  2.  13;  leave  right  to  w.  in  ways  of  darkness
Eccl.  6.  8.  poor  that  knoweth  to  tv.  before  the  living
Jer.  18.  15.  to  w.  in  paths,  in  a  way  not  cast  up

26.  4.  if  ye  will  not  hearken  to  w.  in  my  iaw

31.  9.  I  will  cause  them  to  w.  in  a  straight  way
Ezek.  36.  12.  1  will  cause  men  to  w.  upon  you
Dan.  9.  10.  nor  have  we  obeyed  to  w.  in  his  laws
Mic.  6.  8.  and  to  w.  humbly  with  thy  God


WAL

llab.  3.  19.  he  will  make  me  to  w.  on  high  places
Zech.  1.  10.  whom  Lord  hath  sent  to  u.  to  and  fro
3.  7.  will  give  places  tow.  among  these  that  stand  by
Mat.  15.  31.  Saw  the  lame  tow.  they  glorified  God
Luke  20.  46.  the  scribes  desire  to  w.  in  lung  robes
Acts  3.  12.  as  though  we  had  made  this  man  to  w.
14. 16.  suffered  all  nations  to  w.  in  their  own  ways
21.  21.  to  circumcise,  nor  tow.  after  their  customs
1  Thess.  4.  1.  how  you  ought  to  w.  and  to  please  G
1  John  2.  6.  ought  himself  so  to  w.  as  he  walked
WALKED.

Gen.  5.  24.  Enoch  w.  with  God,  and  was  not,  22.

6.  9.  Noah  was  a  just  man,  and  w.  with  God
Exod.  14.  29.  Israel  w.  upon  the  dry  land  in  the  sea
Lev.  26.  40.  that  also  they  have  w.  contrary  to  me
Josh.  5.  6.  Israel  w.  forty  years  in  the  wilderness
Judg.  2.  17-  turned  outof  the  way  their  fathers  w.  in

5.  6.  in  days  of  Jael  the  travellers  w.  thio’  by-paths

11.  16.  when  Israel  w.  through  the  wilderness

1  Sam.  8.  3.  Samuel’s  sons  w.  not  in  his  ways

2  bam .  2.  29.  Abner  and  his  men  w.  all  that  night
1L  2.  David  w.  on  the  roof  of  the  king's  house

1  Kings  8.  25.  that  they  walk  bef.  me  as  thou  hast  rv.
9-  4.  as  David  thy  father  w.  2  Chron.  6.  16.  17. 17.

11.  33.  have  not  w.  in  my  ways,  to  do  right  in  my

eyes,  Ezek.  5.  6,  7.  |  11.  12.  I  20.  13,  16r  21.

15.  26.  he  w.  in  the  way  of  his  father,  22.  52.

34.  Baasha  did  evil  in  sight  of  Lord  and  w.  in  way
of  Jeroboam,  16.  2.  2  Kings  13.  6.  |  17.  22.

2  Kings  4.  35.  he  returned,  and  w.  in  house  to  and  fro
17-  8.  Hoshea  w.  in  the  statutes  of  the  heathen

19.  Judah  kept  not  commands  of  Lord,  butw.  in
statutes  of  Israel  which  they  made,  2  Chr.  21.  13.

21.  22.  Amon  forsook  the  Lord,  and  w.  not  in  way

of  Lord,  Jer.  9.  13. 1  32.  23.  |44.  10,2.3.

22.  2.  Josiah  tv.  in  the  ways  of  David,  2  Chr.  34.  2.
2  Chr.  11.  17.  for  three  years  they  tv.  in  way  of  Dav.

17.  4.  Jehoshaphat  w.  in  God’s  commandments

21 .  12.  hast  not  w.  in  the  ways  of  Jehoshaphat
Job  29-  3.  when  by  his  light  J  w.  thro’  darkness

31.7-  if  mine  heart  tv.  after  mine  eyes,  and  any  blot
Psal.  55.  14.  we  w.  to  the  house  of  God  in  company

81. 12.  to  hearts’  lusts,  they  w.  in  their  own  counsels
13.  ()  that  Israel  had  w.  in  my  ways!

142.  3.  in  the  way  I  w.  have  they  laid  a  snare
Isa.  9.  2.  people  that  w.  in  darkness  seen  great  light

20.  3.  as  my  servant  Isaiah  hath  w.  naked  for  a  sign
Jer.  2.  5.  that  they  have  w.  after  vanity,  8.

7.  24.  but  w.  in  counsels  of  their  evil  heart,  11.  8.

8.  2.  after  whom  they  have  w.  9.  14.  I  16.  11.

Ezek.  16.  47.  yet  hast  not  thou  w.  after  their  ways

18.  9.  hath  w.  in  my  statutes  and  judgments,  17.

23.  31.  thou  hast  w.  in  the  way  of  thy  sister
28.  14.  hast  w.  in  the  midst  of  the  stones  of  fire

Amos  2.  4.  after  the  way  which  their  fathers  w.
Nah.  2.  11.  where  the  lion,  even  the  old  lion,  u.
Zech.  1. 11.  we  have  w.  to  and  fro  thro’  earth,  6.  7.
Mai.  3.  14.  what  profit  that  we  ha\  e  w.  mournfully  ?
Mark  5.  42.  straightway  the  damsel  arose  and  w.

16.  12.  Jesus  appeared  to  two  of  them  as  they  w.
John  6.  66.  many  disciples  w.  no  more  with  him

11. 54.  Jesus  tv.  no  more  openly  among  the  Jews
Acts  3.  8.  and  lie  leaping  up,  stood  and  w.  14.  10.

14.  8.  a  cripple  from  the  womb,  who  never  had  w.
2  Cor.  10.  2.  who  think  as  if  we  w.  according  to  flesh

12.  18.  di<i  Titus  make  gain  of  you  ?  w.  we  not  in

the  same  spirit  ?  w.  we  not  in  the  same  steps  r
Gal.  2.  14.  but  when  I  saw  they  w.  not  uprightly
Eph.  2.  2.  wherein  in  time  past  ye  w.  Col.  3.  7.

1  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  w.  in  lasciviousness,  in  lusts
He  WALKED.

1  Kings  3.  6.  to  David,  as  he  w.  before  thee  in  truth

15.  3.  Abijam  w.  in  all  the  sins  of  his  father,  which

he  had  done  before  him,  2  Kings  21.  21.

16.  26.  for  he  w.  in  all  the  ways  of  Jeroboam

22.  43.  he  tv.  in  all  the  ways  of  Asa,  2  Chr.  20.  32.

2  Kings  8.  18.  and  he  w.  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of

Israel,  16.  3.  2  Chron.  21.  6.  |  28.  2.
27.  and  he  w.  in  the  way  of  the  kings  of  Israel  as
did  the  house  of  A  hab,  2  Chron.  22.  3,  5.
2  Chron.  17.  3.  he  tv.  in  the  first  ways  of  David
Dan.  4.  29.  Nebuchad.  w.  in  the  palace  of  Babylon
Hos.  5.  11.  he  willingly  w.  after  the  commandment
Mai.  2.  6.  he  w.  with  me  in  peace  and  equity
Mat.  14.  29.  Peter  tv.  on  the  water  to  go  to  Jesus
1  John  2.  6.  ought  himself  so  to  walk  even  as  he  w.
I  have  WALKED.

Lev.  26.  41.  and  that  1  have  w.  contrary'  to  them

1  Sam.  12.  2.  1  have  w.  before  you  from  childhood

2  Sam.  7-  6.  1  have  tv.  in  a  tent  and  tabernacle
7.  in  all  places  wherein  1  have  w.  with  Israel

2  Kings  20.  3.  remember  how  1  have  w.  before  thee
Job  31.  5.  if  I  have  w.  with  vanity  or  foot  hasted
Psal.  26.  1.  judge  me,  for  I  have  w.  in  my  integiity

3.  and  I  have  w.  in  thy  truth,  Isa.  .38.  3.

W  A  LK  EDS  f.

John  21.  18.  when  young,  tv.  whither  thou  wouldest
WALKEST.

Deut.  6.  7.  shalt  talk  of  them  when  thou  tv.  11.  19.
1  Kings  2.  42.  on  the  day  thou  w.  abroad  any  whither
Isa.  4.3.  2.  when  thou  w.  thro’  the  fire  not  be  burnt
Acts  21. 24.  thou  thyself  a.’,  orderly7  and  keepest  law
Pom.  14.  15.  if  brother  grieved  now  w.  notcharitably

3  John  3.  truth  in  thee  even  as  thou  w.  in  the  truth

WALK  ETH.

Gen.  24.  65.  what  man  is  this  that  w.  in  the  field  ?
Deut.  2.3.  14.  Lord  thy  God  w.  in  midst  of  the  camp
1  Sam.  12.  2.  behold,  the  king  tv.  before  you
Job  18.  8.  he  is  cast  into  a  net,  and  he  w.  on  a  snare
22.  14.  he  w.  in  the  circuit  of  heaven
34.  8.  goeth  in  company,  and  w.  with  wicked  men
Psal.  1.1.  blessed  that  w.  not  in  counsel  of  ungodly
15.  2.  he  that  w.  uprightly  shall  dwell  in  holy  hill
.39.  6.  surely  every  man  w.  in  a  vain  shew
73.  9.  and  their  tongue  w.  through  the  earth
9L  6.  nor  for  the  pestilence  that  tv.  in  darkness
101.  6.  he  that  w.  in  a  perfect  way  shall  serve  me
104.  .3.  who  w.  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind
128.  1.  blessed  is  every  one  that  w.  in  his  ways
Prov.  6.  12.  a  wicked  man  w.  with  a  froward  mouth
10.  9.  he  that  tv.  uprightly  w.  surely,  28.  18.

13.  20.  he  that  w.  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise

541


VV  A  L


WAN


WAR


Prov.  4.  2.  he  that  w.  in  uprightness  f'eareth  Lord
15.  21.  a  man  ot  understanding  w.  uprightly

19.  j.  better  ;s  poor  that  a;,  in  integrity,  28.  6.

20.  7*  just  man  w.  in  his  integrity ,  children  blessed
28.  26.  whoso  w.  wisely,  he  shall  be  delivered

Eccl.  2.  14.  but  the  fool  w.  in  darkness,  1  perceived
10.  .3.  when  he  that  is  a  fool  to.  by  the  way
Isa.  .33. 15.  he  that  it),  righteously  shall  dwell  on  high
50.  10.  that  io.  in  darkness  and  hath  no  light
65.  2.  which  w.  in  a  way  that  was  not  good
Jet .  10.  23.  it  is  not  in  man  that  w.  to  direct  his  steps
23.  17.  that  w.  after  the  imagination  of  his  heart
Ezek.  11.21.  heart  a;,  after  their  detestable  things
iWm.2.7.  my  words  do  good  to  him  that  to.  uprightly
Mat.  12.  43.  when  the  unclean  spirit  is  gone  out,  he
w.  thro’  dry  places,  seeking  rest,  Luke  11.  24.
John  12.  35.  he  that  to.  in  darkness  knoweth  not
2  Thess.  3.  6.  withdr.  from  brother  tha  to.  disorderly
1  Pet.  5. 8.  devil  ai.  about  seeking  whom  he  may  dev.
1  John  2.  11.  who  hateth  his  brother,  ro.  in  darkness
Rev.°  1.  a’. in  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks
WALKING.


Gen.  3.8.  they  heard  the  voice  of  Lord  w.  in  garden
Dent.  2.7-  Lord  knoweth  thy  to.  thro’  wilderness

1  Kings 3.  3.  Solomon  loved  the  Lord,  w.  as  David
16.  19.  Zimri  w.  in  the  way  of  Jeroboam

Job  1.  7.  from  to.  up  and  down  in  the  earth,  2.  2.
31.  26.  or  beheld  the  moon  to.  in  brightness
Eccl.  10.  7-  1  have  seen  princes  to.  as  servants
Isa.  3.  16.  haughty,  to.  and  mincing  as  they  go

20.  2.  and  he  did  so,  to.  naked  and  bare  foot
57.  2.  shall  rest,  each  one  to.  in  his  uprightness
Jer.  6.  28.  all  grievous  revolters,  to.  with  slanders
Dan.  3.25.  I  see  four  men  loose  to.  in  the  fire
Mic.  2.  11.  if  a  man  w.  in  spirit  and  falsehood  do  lie
Mat.  14.  25.  Jesus  went  to  them  to.  on  the  sea
26.  saw  him  to.  on  sea  were  troubled,  Mark  6.  48.
Marks.  24.  blind  man  said,  1  see  men  as  trees  tv.
Luke  1.  6.  to.  in  all  the  commandments  blameless
Acts  3. 8.  lame  man  to.  leaping,  and  praising  God,  9.
9.  31.  were  edified,  to.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord

2  Cor.  4.  2.  not  w.  in  craftiness,  nor  handling  word
2  Pet.  3.  3.  scoffers  to.  after  their  lusts,  Jude  16.

2  John  4.  that  1  found  thy  children  to.  in  truth

WALL.

Gen.  49.  6.  in  their  self-will  they  digged  down  aw.

22.  a  bough  whose  branches  run  over  the  to.

Exod.  14.  22.  and  the  waters  were  a  to.  to  them
Lev.  14.  37-  if  plague  in  sight  lower  than  the  to.
JS7um.  22.  24. a  to.  being  on  this  side,  a  to.  on  that  side

25.  the  ass  crushed  Balaam’s  foot  against  the  to.
Josh.  2.  15.  for  Rahah  dwelt  upon  the  town-w.

6.5.  the  to.  of  the  city  shall  fall  down  flat,  20.

1  Ham.  18.  11.  1  will  smite  David  to  the  to.  19.  10.

20.  25.  and  the  king  sat  upon  his  seat  by  the  to.
td.  16.  they  were  a  to.  to  us  both  by  night  and  day

22.  if  1  leave  by  the  morning  light  any  that  piss-
eth  against  the  to.  34.  1  Kings  14.  10. 1  16.

11.  I  21.  21. 2  Kings  9.  8.

31.  10.  and  they  fastened  Saul’s  body  to  the  to.

2  Sam.  1 1.  20.  knew  ye  not  they  would  shoot  from  to.

21.  millstone  from  the  to.  why  went  ye  nigh  the  to.

20.  15.  the  people  battered  the  to.  to  throw  it  down

21.  behold,  his  head  shall  be  thrown  over  the  w.

22.  30.  by  my  G.  have  leaped  over  a  to.  Psal.  18.  29.

1  kings  4.  33.  to  the  hyssop  that  spiingsout  of  the  to.
20.  30.  a  to.  fell  upon  27, (XX)  of  the  men  left

2L  23.  the  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  to.  of  Jezreel

2  kings  3.  27.  offered  him  for  burnt  offering  on  to.
4.  10.  let  us  make  a  little  chamber  on  the  to.

6.  26.  the  king  of  Israel  was  passing  by  on  the  to.

9.  33.  Jezebel’s  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  to.

18.  26.  talk  not  in  the  Jews’  language  in  ears  of
the  people  that  are  on  the  to.  Isa.  36.  11.
20.  2.  then  Hezekiah  turned  his  face  to  the  to.  and
prayed  to  the  Lord,  saying,  Isa.  38.  2.
2  Chron.  25.  23.  Joash  brake  down  the  to.  of  Jerus.
36.  19.  Nebuchadnezzar  brake  down  the  to.

Ezra  5.3.  who  hath  commanded  you  to  make  this  to  ‘
9.  9.  to  give  us  a  to.  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem
Neh.  1.  3.  the  to.  of  Jerusalem  is  broken  down
2.  15.  I  viewed  the  to.  ||  17.  let  us  build  the  to.

4.  3.  a  fox  shall  even  break  down  their  stone  to.

6.  so  built  we  the  to.  all  the  to.  was  joined  togethei
15.  that  we  returned  all  of  us  to  the  to.  every  on

6.  6.  for  which  cause  thou  huildest  the  to.  to  be
15.  so  the  to.  was  finished  in  the  month  Elul

12.  27.  at  the  dedication  of  the  to.  of  Jerusalem

13.  21.  I  said  to  them,  why  lodge  ye  about  the  to.
Psal.  62.  3.  a  bowing  to.  shall  ye  be,  as  a  tottering
Prov.  18.  11.  as  an  high  to.  in  his  own  conceit

24.  31.  the  stone  to.  thereof  was  broken  down
Cant.  2.  9.  my  beloved  standeth  behind  our  to

8.  9.  if  she  be  a  to.  will  build  ||  10.  lamas.’

Isa.  2.  15.  the  day  of  the  Lord  on  every  fenced  to.

5.  5.  I  will  break  down  the  to.  of  my  vineyard

25.  4.  when  the  blast  is  as  a  storm  against  the  to.

30.  13.  as  a  breach  swelling  out  in  an  high  to
59.  10.  we  grope  for  the  to.  like  the  blind

Jer.  15.  20.  I  will  make  thee  a  fenced  brasen  w.
49.27.  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  to.  of  Damascu
51.  44.  yea  the  to.  of  Babylon  shall  fall
Lam.  2.8.  to  destroy  the  to.  of  the  daughter  of  Zio
18.  their  heart  cried,  Oa.  of  the  daughter  of  Zio
Ezek.  4.  3.  for  a  to.  of  iron  between  thee  and  the  cit

8.  7*  a  hole  in  the  to.  ||  8.  dig  in  the  tv.  12.  5.

10.  the  idols  of  Israel  pourtrayed  on  the  to.

13  12.  to.  is  fallen,  15.  |f  38.  20.  every  to.  shall  fal

15.  then  1  will  accomplish  my  wrath  on  the  to.

41.  5.  after  he  measured  the  to.  of  the  house
43.  8.  in  setting  the  to.  between  me  and  them
Jan.  5.  5.  fingers  wrote  on  the  plaster  of  the  a).

9. 25.  street  shal I  be  built,  and  to.  in  troublous  time
ll°s.  2.  6.  I  will  make  a  to.  that  shall  not  find
Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  climb  the  to.  like  men  of  war

9.  they  shall  run  upon  the  to.  and  climb  up
Amos  1.  7.  I  will  send  a  fire  on  the  to.  of  Gaza

10.  oh  the  to.  of  Tyrus||  14.  in  the  to.  of  Rabbah
5.  19.  leaned  his  hand  on  the  70.  a  serpent  bit  bin

7.  7.  behold,  the  Lord  stood  upon  a  u.  made  by
Nah.  2.5.  they  shall  make  haste  to  the  to.  thereof
Ilab.  2.  1 1 .  foi  the  stone  shall  cry  out  of  the  to.

542


deb  9.  25.  then  the  disciples  by  night  let  Saul  down
by  the  to.  in  a  basket,  2  Cor.  11.  33.

23.  3.  God  shal  1  smite  thee,  thou  whited  to.

P.ph.  2.  14.  Christ  hath  broken  down  the  middle  to.
Rev.  21.  14.  the  w.of  the  city  had  twelve  foundations
18.  the  building  of  the  to.  of  it  was  of  jasper
See  Built.

WALLED.

Lev.  25.  29.  if  aman  sell  a  dwelling  house  in  to.  city
30.  the  house  in  the  to.  city  shall  be  established
Num.  13.  28.  cities  to.  and  very  great,  Dent.  1.  28.
WALLOW.

Jer.  6.  26.  gird  with  sackcloth,  to.  thvself  in  ashes
25.34.  ye  shepheids,  cry,  to.  yourselves  in  ashes

48.  26.  Moab  shall  to.  in  his  vomit,  be  in  derision
Ezek.  27  .  30.  they  shall  to.  themselves  in  the  ashes

WALLOWED.

2  Sam.  20.  12.  Amasa  to.  in  blood  in  the  high  way
Mark  9.  20.  he  fell  on  the  ground,  and  to.  foaming
WALLOWING.

2  Pet.  2.  22.  and  the  sow  washed  to  to.  in  the  mire
WALLS.

Lev.  14.  37-  if  plague  be  in  the  to.  of  the  house,  39.
25.31.  the  villages  having  no  to.  counted  as  fields
Dent.  3.5.  these  cities  were  fenced  with  high  to.

28.  52.  till  thy  high  fenced  to.  comedown
2  Kings ‘lb.  4.  the  men  of  war  fled  between  two  to.
10.  the  army  ot  the  Chaldees  brake  down  the  to.

of  Jerusalem  round  about,  Jer.  39.  8.
E_zt a  4.  1.3.  if  this  city  be  built,  and  to.  set  up,  16.

5.  8.  timber  is  laid  in  the  to.  work  goeth  fast  on
Neh.  4.  7-  beam  that  the  to.  of  Jerus.  w ere  made  up
Job  24.  11.  which  make  oil  within  their  to.

Psal.  51.  18.  build  thou  the  to.  of  Jerusalem

55.  10.  day  and  night  they  go  about  on  to.  thereof
122.  7-  peace  he  within  thy  to.  and  prosperity

Prov.  25.  28.  is  like  a  city  broken  down,  without  to.
Cant.  5.  7-  .the  keepers  of  the  to.  took  away  my  vail
Isa.  22.  5.  it  is  a  day  of  breaking  down  the  to.

25.  12.  the  fortress  of  thy  to.  shall  he  bringdown

26.  l.salvat.  will  G.  appoint  for  to.  and  bulwarks

49.  16.  behold,  thy  to.  are  continually  before  me

56.  5.  within  my  to.  a  place  and  a  name  better
6t).  10.  the  sons  of  strangers  shall  build  up  thy  to.

18.  thou  shalt  call  thy  to.  salvation,  and  gates
62.  6.  I  have  set  watchmen  on  thy  w.  O  Jerusalem
Jer.  1.  15.  set  their  thrones  against  the  to.  of  Jerus.
5. 10.  go  ye  up  upon  her  to.  and  destroy,  make  not

50.  15.  Babylon’s  to.  are  thrown  down,  51. 58.
Ezek.  26.  4.  they  shall  destroy  the  to.  of  Tyrus,  12.

27.  11.  the  men  of  Arvad  were  upon  thy  a;.

33.  30.  still  are  talking  against  thee  by  the  to.

38.  11.  allot  them  dwelling  without,  or  gates

Mic.  7-  11.  in  the  day  that  thy  to.  are  to  be  built
Zech.  2.  4.  Jerusal.  inhabited  as  towns  without  to.
Heb.  11.  30.  by  faith  the  to.  of  Jericho  fell  down
WANDER.

Gen.  20.  13.  when  God  caused  me  to  to.  from  my
Num.  14.  33.  your  children  shall  to.  in  the  wilder¬
ness  forty  years,  32.  13.  Psal.  107  .  40.
Dent.  27-  18.  cursed  is  he  that  causeth  blind  tow.
Job  12.  24.  he  causeth  them  to  to.  in  a  wilderness
.38.  41.  when  his  young  ravens  to.  for  lack  of  meat
Psal.  55.  7-  then  would  1  to.  far  off  and  remain
59.  15.  let  them  to.  up  and  down  for  meat
119.  10.  O  let  me  not  to.  from  thy  commandments
Isa.  47.  15.  they  shall  to.  every  one  to  his  quarter
Jer.  14.  10.  Lord  saith,  thus  have  they  loved  to  to.
48.  12.  send  wanderers  that  shall  cause  him  to  to.
Amos  8.  12.  and  they  shall  to.  from  sea  to  sea
WANDERERS.

Jer.  48.  12.  days  come  that  I  will  send  to  him  to.
Hos.  9.  17-  they  shall  be  to.  among  the  nations
WANDERED.

Gen.  21. 14.  Hagar  w.  in  the  wildern.  of  Beer-sheba
Psal.  107.  4.  they  to.  in  the  wilderness,  Isa.  16.  8.
Lam.  4.  14.  they  have  to.  as  blind  men  in  the  streets
Ezek.  .34.  6.  my  sheep  to.  through  all  the  mountains
Amos  A.  8.  two  or  three  cities  to.  to  one  city  to  drink
Heb.  11.  37.  w.  about  in  sheep-skins  and  goat-skins
38.  they  to.  in  deserts,  in  mountains,  and  in  dens
WAN  DERESL.

Jer.  2.  20.  when  under  every  green  tree  thou  to

WANDER  ETH.  [is  it  >

Job  15.  23.  he  to.  abroad  for  bread,  saving,  where
Prov.  21.  16.  that  to.  out  of  way  of  understanding

27.  8.  as  a  bird  that  to.  from  her  nest,  so  is  a  man

that  to.  from  his  place

Isa.  16. 3.  take  counsel,  bewray  not  him  that  to.

Jer.  49.  5.  and  none  shall  gather  up  him  that  to.
WANDERING.

Gen.  37. 15.  behold,  he  was  to.  in  the  field
Prov.  26.  2.  as  the  bird  by  to.  as  swallow  by  flying
Eccl.  6.  9.  better  is  the  sight  of  the  eyes  than  the  to.
Isa.  16.  2.  it  shall  be  as  a  to.  bird  cast  out  ofthe  nest

1  Tun.  5. 13.  to  be  idle,  to.  about  from  house  to  house
Jude  13.  to.  stars  to  whom  is  reserved  darkness

WAN  DERINGS.

Psal.  56.  8.  thou  tellest  my  to.  put  thou  my  tears
WANT.

Dent.  28.  48.  thou  shalt  serve  thy  enemies  in  to.

57.  she  shall  eat  them  for  to.  of  all  things  secretly
Judg.  18.  10.  a  place  where  is  now.  19.  19.

Job  24.  8.  they  embrace  the  rock  for  to.  of  shelter
30.  3.  for  to.  and  famine  they  were  solitary
.31.  19.  if  1  have  seen  any  perish  for  to.  of  clothing
Psal.  .34.  9.  there  is  no  to.  to  them  that  fear  him
Prov.  6.  11.  and  thy  to.  as  an  armed  man,  24.  34.

10.  21 .  but  fools  die  for  to.  of  wisdom

1.3.  2.3.  there  is  that  is  destroyed  for  to.  of  judgment

1 4. 28.  in  to.  of  people  is  destruction  of  the  prince

21.  5.  but  of  every  one  that  is  hasty  only  to  to.

22.  16.  that  gjveth  to  rich  shall  surely  come  to  to.
Lam.  A.  9.  stric  ken  thro’  for  to.  of  the  fruitsof  field
Amos  4.6.  I  have  giv.  you  to.  of  bread  in  your  places
Mark  12.  44.  she  of  her  to.  cast  in  all  she  had

Luke  15.  14.  a  famine  arose,  he  began  to  be  in  to.

2  Cor.  8.  14.  your  abundance  be  supply  for  their  to.

9.  12.  not  only  supplied)  the  to.  of  the  saints
Phil.  A.  11.  not  that  1  speak  in  respect  of  to.

WANTS.

Judg.  19.  20.  howsoever,  let  all  thy  to.  lie  on  me


Phil.  2.  25.  Epaphroditus  that  nwnisteied  to  my  •  1
WANT.

Psal.  23.  1.  the  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  1  shall  not
34.  10.  they  tl  at  seek  I  ord  shall  not  to.  any  gooc
Prov.  1.3.  25.  b.it  the  belly  of  the  wicked  shall  to.
Isa.  .34.  16.  no  one  shal!  fail,  none  shall  to.  her  ma
Jer.  3.3.  17.  David  not  to.  a  man  to  sit  on  the  throni.

18.  Levites  not  to.  a  man  ||  35.  19.  Jonadab  not  w.
Ezek.  4.  17.  that  thev  mav  v.  bread  and  water
WANTED.

Jer.  44.  18.  we  have  to.  all  things,  been  consumed
John  2.  .3.  when  they  to.  wine,  mother  of  Jesus  saith
2  Cor.  11.  9.  when  I  to.  I  was  chargeable  to  no  man
WANT  ETH.

Deut.  15.8.  shall  lend  him  for  his  need  in  that  hew.
Prov.  9.  4.  for  him  that  to.  understanding  she  saith

to  him,  16.

10.  19.  in  multitude  of  words  there  to.  not  sin
28. 16.  prince  that  w.  understanding  is  an  oppressor
Eccl.  6.  2.  so  that  he  to.  nothing  fur  his  soul
Catit.  7.  2.  like  a  round  goblet  that  to.  not  liquor
WANTING.

2  Kings  10. 19.  call  all  prophets  of  Baal  and  all  his
priests,  let  none  be  to.  whoso  be  to.  shall  not  live
Prov.  19.  7-  puisueth  with  words,  yet  they  are  w.  to
Eccl.  1.  15.  that  which  is  w.  cannot  be  numbered
Pan.  5.  27.  thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances  and

found  to.

Tit.  1 . 5.  shouldest  set  in  order  the  things  that  are  to
3.  13.  that  nothing  be  to.  unto  them
Jam.  1.  4.  ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  to.  nothing
WANTON.

Isa.  3.  16.  the  daughters  of  Zion  walk  with  tv.  eyes

1  Tim.  5.  11.  to  wax  to.  against  Christ,  they  marry
Jam.  5.  5.  ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  and  been  to.

WANTON  NESS.

Rom.  13.13.  walk  honestly,  not  in  chambering  and  to.

2  Pee  A.  18.  they  allure  through  lusts  and  much  to.

WAR.

When  the  Hebrews  drew  out  their  armies  and  went
to  war  against  their  enemies,  and  the  time  of
battle  was  at  hand,  the  high  priest  presented  him¬
self  at  the  head  of  the  army,  and  spoke  to  the  people
in  this  manner :  Hear,  O  Israel,  and  be  not  in
fear  of  your  enemies ;  for  the  Lord  your  God
fights  for  you.  After  which  the  officers  proclaim¬
ed  aloud  at  the  head  of  every  troop:  Is  there  any
one  here  that  hath  built  a  new  house,  and  has
not  yet  inhabited  it  ?  let  him  depart  and
return  to  his  house,  for  fear  that  anotiver  should
come  and  live  in  it  first,  &c.  as  in  Deut.  20.  2,
r  3,  4,  &c.

The  Hebrews  were  formerly  a  very  warlike  nation
'The  books  that  inform  us  of  their  wars  are  neither
flattering  authors,  nor  ignorant,  but  were  authors
inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  wisdom.  Their
warriors  were  none  of  those  fabulous  heroes,  or
professed  conquerors,  whose  business  it  was  to
ravage  cities  and  provinces,  and  to  reduce  foreign
nations  under  their  dominion,  merely  for  the  sake
of  governing  them,  or  for  purchasing  a  name.
They  were  commonly  wise  and  valiant  generals,
raised  up  by  God  to  fight  the  battles  of  the  Lord,
and  to  exterminate  his  enemies.  These  were  such
of  Joshua,  Caleb,  Gideon,  Jephthah,  Samson,
David,  and  Josiah,  whose  names  alone  are  a  sufi
ficient  encomium.

Their  wTars  were  not  undertaken  upon  slight  occa¬
sions,  nor  performed  with  a  small  number  of  people.
Under  Joshua,  the  affair  was  of  no  less  import¬
ance,  than  to  make  himself  master  of  a  large
country,  which  God  had  given  to  the  Israelites  ;  to
root  out  several  powerful  enemies,  which  God  haa
devoted  to  destruction  ;  and  to  vindicate  an  offend
ed  Deity,  and  human  nature,  which  had  been  de
based  by  a  wicked  and  corrupt  people,  who  had  fillea
up  the  measure  of  their  iniquities.  Under  the
Judges,  the  matter  was  to  assert  the  liberty  of  the
Israelites,  by  shaking  off  the  yoke  of  powerful  kings,
who  kept  them  in  subjection.  Under  Saul  and
David,  the  same  motives  prevailed  to  undertake
war  ;  and  to  these  were  added  a  further  motive,  the
making  a  conquest  of  such  provinces  as  God  had
promised  to  his  people  ;  so  far  was  it  from  their
intention  merely  to  reduce  the  power  of  the  Philis
tines,  the  Ammonites,  the  Moabites,  the  ldumeans,
the  Arabians,  the  Syrians,  and  the  several  princes
that  were  in  possession  of  those  countries.

In  the  latter  times  of  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and
Judah,  we  may  observe  their  kings  bearing  the
shock  of  the  greatest  kings  in  the  world,  namely,
those  of  Asia,  the  kings  of  Assyria  and  Chaldea,
Shalmaneser,  Sennacherib,  Esar-haddon,  and
Nebuchadnezzar  who  made  the  whole  east  tremble.
Under  the  Maccabees,  the  chosen  people,  with  an
handful  of  men,  opposed  the  whole  power  of  the
kings  of  Assyria,  and  against  all  their  power  up¬
held  the  religion  of  their  fathers,  and  shook  off  the
yoke  of  their  authority,  who  had  a  design  both
against  their  religion  and  liberty.  In  the  latter
times  of  their  nation,  with  what  courage,  with  what
intrepidity  and  constancy,  did  they  sustain  the
wars  against  the  Romans,  who  were  the  masters  of
the  world!

But  how  great  armies  did  they  bring  into  the  field ?
In  the  beginning,  under  Moses  and  Joshua,  they
were  all  soldiers,  and  men  bearing  arms.  They
came  out  of  Egypt  to  the  number  of  six  hundred
thousand  lighting  men.  When  Joshua  entered  into
the  land  of  Canaan,  he  fought  sometimes  with  de¬
tachments  of  his  troops,  and  sometimes  with  his
whole  army ,  according  as  exigencies  required.  God
would  often  give  the  victory  to  very  small  armies,  to
signalize  his  omnipotence,  and  to  humble  the  pride
oj  man.  For  example,  under  Gideon,  where  God
ordered  this  general  to  send  away  the  greatest  part
of  his  army,  and  only  to  keep  with  him  three  hun¬
dred  men,  with  which  he  defeated  an  innumerable
multitude  of  Midianites  and  Amalekites.  Some¬
times  numerous  armies  were  brought  into  the  field ,
Abigail,  king  of  Judah,  with  an  army  of  four
hundred  thousand  men,  made  war  with  Jeroboam


WAR


VV  A  R


WAS


king  of  Israel,  who  had  to  the  nnmkr~  of  eight  hun¬
dred  thousand.  And  of  these  eight  hundred  thou¬
sand,  there  u  ere  five  hundred  thousand  slain  in  one
battle  2  Chron.  13.  3-17.  Pekah,  son  of  Remo-
liah,  sing  of  Israel ,  in  one  dag  /.tiled  one  hundred
and  twenty  thousand  men  oj  the  troops  of  Judah,

2  Chron.  28.  6.  Asa  king  of  Judah,  having  an
army  of  five  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  men,
was  attacked  by  Zerah,  king  of  Cush,  who  had  an
army  of  a  million  of  men:  Zerah  was  entirely
routed  by  the  troops  of  Asa,  2  Chron.  14.  9 — 13.

We  may  distinguish  two  kinds  of  wars  among  the
Hebrews.  Home  were  of  obligation  as  being  ex¬
pressly  commanded  by  the  Lord ;  but  others  were
free  and  voluntary.  The  first  were  such  as  God  ap
pointed  them  to  undertake :  for  example,  against
the  Amalekites,  and  the  Canaanites,  which  were
nations  devoted  to  destruction  for  their  sins.  The
others  were  undertaken  by  the  captains  of  the  peo¬
ple,  to  revenge  some  injuries  offered  to  the  nation,
to  punish  some  insults  or  offences.  Such  was  that
which  the  Hebrews  made  against  the  city  of  Gi
beah,  and  against  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  which
would  uphold  them  in  their  fault,  Judg.  20.  8.
And  such  was  that  which  David  made  against  the
Ammonites,  whose  king  had  affronted  his  am¬
bassadors,  2  Sam.  10.  1—14.  Or  to  maintain  and
defend  their  allies  ;  as  that  of  Joshua  against  the
kings  of  the  Canaanites,  to  protect  the  Gibeonites,
josh.  10.  6—11.  Lastly,  whatever  just  reasons
may  authorize  a  nation  or  a  prince  to  make  war
mgainst  another,  seems  to  have  obtained  among
the  Hebrews.  War  is  threatened  by  God  in
Scripture  as  one  of  the  greatest  judgments,  and
may  justly  be  reckoned  among  the  many  dreadful
miseries  which  sin  has  entailed  on  mankind.

The  common  acceptation  of  war,  in  Scriptuie,  is  a
state  of  hostility  between  nations,  states,  provinces,
or  parties,  as  in  1  Kings  14.  30.  Luke  14.  31.
and  many  other  places.  But  it  is  taken  in  a  spirit¬
ual  sense  in  2  Cor.  10.  3.  where  the  apostle  says.
We  war  not  after  the  flesh,  that  is,  “  We  do  not
use  outward  force  and  strength  ;  but  as  the  end  <j
our  warfare  is  spiritual,  so  are  the  means :  the
gospel  we  preach  has  its  effects  on  the  minds  and
inward  part  of  men  ;  and,  through  the  power  of
divine  grace,  is  made  effectual  for  the  subduing,
and  sanctifying  their  corrupt  and  sinful  natures.''
Exod.  1.  10.  when  there  is  w.  they  join  our  enemies

13.  17.  lest  the  people  repent  when»they  see  w.

17.  16  the  Lora  will  have  w.  with  Amalek

'2.  17.  there  is  a  noise  of  w.  in  the  camp
Num.  1.  3.  from  twenty  years  old,  all  that  are  able
to  go  forth  to  w.  20.  22.  1  26.  2.  Deut.  3.  18.

10.  9.  if  ye  go  to  w.  ye  shall  blow  an  alarm

31.  3.  Moses  spake,  arm  some  of  yourselves  to  w.

4.  of  every  tribe  1000  shall  ye  send  to  w.

32.  6.  shall  your  brethren  go  to  w.  and  ye  sit  there  ?

20.  if  ye  will  go  armed  before  the  Lord  to  w.  27.

Dent.  4. 34.  hath  God  assayed  by  w.  to  take  a  nation
20.  12.  but  will  make  w.  against  thee,  19,  20.

21. 10.  when  thou  goest  forth  to  w.  against  enemies
24.  5.  when  hath  taken  a  wife  shall  not  go  to  w.
Josh.  11.  23.  and  the  land  rested  from  w.  14.  15.

14.  11.  so  is  my  strength  now  for  w.  to  go  out
Judg.  3.  2.  that  Israel  might  know  to  teach  them  w.

5.  8.  chose  new  gods,  then  was  w.  in  the  gates

11.  27.  but  thou  dost  me  wrong  to  w.  against  me
21. 22.  we  reserved  not  to  each  his  wife  in  the  w.

1  Sam.  14.  52.  was  sore  w.  against  Philistines,  19.  8.
28.  15.  for  the  Philistines  make  w.  against  me

2  Sam.  3.  1.  long  w.  between  house  of  Saul  and  Dav.
11.  7.  David  demanded  how  the  w.  prospered

1  Kings  2.  5.  shed  the  blood  of  w.  put  the  blood  of  w.
14.30.  w.  between  Rehoboam  and  Jeroboam,  15.  6.

15.  j.  there  was  w.  between  A  bijam  and  Jeroboam

16.  there  was  w.  between  Asa  and  Paasha,  32.

20.  18.  or  be  come  out  for  w.  take  them  alive
22.  1.  they  continued  three  years  without  w.

2  Kings  18.  20.  I  hsve  counsel  and  strength  for  w.

1  Chum.  5.  10.  they  made  w.  with  the  Hagarites,  19.

22.  many  slain,  because  the  w.  was  of  God

2  Chron.  15.  19.  no  w.  to  the  35th  year  of  Asa

35.  21.  but  against  the  house  wherewith  I  have  w.
Job  5.  20.  in  w.  redeem  from  power  of  the  sword

10.  17.  changes  and  w.  are  against  me
38.  23.  which  1  have  reserved  against  the  day  of  w.
Psal.  27.  3.  though  w.  should  rise  against  me
55.  21.  words  smooth,  but  w.  was  in  his  heart
68.  30.  scatter  thou  the  people  that  delight  in  w.
120.  7.  but  when  1  speak,  they  are  for  w.

140.  2.  continually  are  gathered  together  for  w.
Prov.  20.  18.  and  with  good  advice  make  w.

24.  6.  for  by  wise  counsel  thou  sha.lt  make  thy  w.
Eccl.  3.  8.  a  time  of  w.  and  a  time  of  peace

8.  8.  of  death,  there  is  no  discharge  in  that  w.

Isa.  2.  4.  nor  shall  they  learn  w.  any  more,  Mic.  4.  3.

3.  25.  thv  mighty  shall  tall  in  the  w.

21.  15.  they  fled  from  the  grievousness  of  w.

36.  5.  1  have  counsel  and  strength  for  w.

Jer.  4.19.  because  thou  hast  heard  the  alarm  of  w.

6.  4.  prepare  ye  w.  against  her,  arise,  let  us  go  up

23.  set  in  array  as  men  for  w.  against  thee
21.  2.  Nebuchadnezzar  maketh  w.  against  us
42.  14.  will  go  to  Egypt,  where  we  shall  see  no  w.

48.  14.  how  say  ye,  we  are  mighty  men  for  w.  ?

49.  2.  an  alarm  of  w.  to  be  heard  in  Rabbah
Ezek.  17.  17.  nor  Pharaoh  make  for  him  in  w.
Dan.  7.  21.  the  same  horn  made  zs.  with  the  saints

9.  26.  to  the  end  of  the  w.  are  desolations
JoelS.  9.  prepare  w.  wake  up  the  mighty  men
Mic.  2.  8.  that  pass  by,  as  men  averse  from  w.

3.  5.  they  even  prepare  w.  against  him
Luke  14.  31.  or  wh  t  king  going  to  make  w.  ?

Rev.  11.  7-  the  beast  shall  make  w.  against  them

12.  7-  there  was  w.  in  heaven  against  the  dragon

17.  to  make  w.  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed

13.  4.  who  is  able  to  make  w.  with  the  beast  ?

7.  given  to  him  to  make  w.  with  saints,  17.  14.

19.  11.  in  righteousness  doth  he  make  w.

19.  the  beast  and  kings  gathered  to  make  w.

See  Expert,  Man,  Men.


Weapons  of  WAR.

Deut.  1. 41.  when  ve  hail  girded  on  weapons  of  w.
Judg.  18. 11.  six  hundreo  with  weapons  ofw.  16, 17.

2  Sam.  1. 27.  how  are  the  weapons  of  w.  perished
Eccl.  9.18.  wisdom  is  better  than  weapons  of  w.

Jer.  21.  4.  1  will  turn  back  the  weapons  of  w.

51. 20.  thou  art  my  battle-axe  and  weapons  of  w.
Ezek.  32.  27 .  gone  down  to  hell  with  weapons  ofw.
WAR,  Verb.

2  Sam.  22.  35.  the  Lord  teacheth  my  hands  to  w.  a
bow  of  steel  is  broken  by  me,  Psal.  18.  34. 1  144. 1.

2  Kings  \(>.b.  the  kings  Rezin  and  Pekah  came  up
to  Jerusalem,  to  w.  against  it,  Isa.  7.  1.

2  Chron.  6.  34.  if  thy  people  go  to  w.  against  enemy
Isa.  41.  12.  they  that  w.  against  thee  be  as  nothing
2  Cor.  10.  3.  walk  in  flesh,  do  not  w.  after  the  flesh
1  Tim.  1.  18.  that  thou  mightest  w.  a  good  warfare
Jam.  4. 1.  of  your  lusts  that  w.  in  your  members
2.  ye  fight  and  to.  yet  ye  have  not  because  ask  not
1  Pet.  2.  11.  from  lusts  which  w.  against  the  soul
WARRED.

Num.  31.7.  and  they  w.  against  the  Midianifes
Josh.  24.  9.  Balak  king  of  Moab  w.  against  Israel

1  Kings  14. 19.  Jeroboam,  how  he  w.  and  reigned
22.  45.  acts  of  Jehoshaphat,  how  he  to.  are  written

2  Kings  6.  8.  the  king  of  Syria  w.  against  Israel
2  Chron.  26.  6.  Uzziah  w.  against  the  Philistines

WARRETH.

2  Tim.  2. 4.  no  man  that  w.  entangleth  himself  with
WARRING.

2  Kings  19.  8.  Rabshakeh  returned  and  found  the
king  of  Assyria  w.  against  Libnah,  Isa.  37.  8.
Rom.  7.  23.  but  I  see  a  law  in  my  members  w.
WARRIOR,  S.

1  Kings  12. 21 .  chosen  men  who  were  w.  2  Chr.  11.1.
Isa.  9.  5.  battle  of  the  w.  is  with  confused  noise

WARS.

Num.  21.  14.  it  is  said  in  book  of  the  w.  of  the  Lord
Judg .  3. 1.  as  had  not  known  all  the  w.  of  Canaan

2  Sam.  8.  10.  Toi  sent  Joram  to  David,  for  Uadad-

ezer  had  w.  with  Toi,  1  Chron.  18. 10.

1  Chron.  22.8.  hast  made  great  w.  shalt  not  build

2  Chron.  16.  9.  from  henceforth  thou  shalt  have  w.
Psal.  46.  9.  he  maketh  w.  to  cease  to  ends  of  earth
Ma*.  24. 6.  ye  shall  hear  of  ?e.  and  rumours  of  w.  see

thatyebe  not  troubled,  MarkiS.’l .  Luke  21.9.
Jam.  4.  1.  from  whence  come  w.  and  fightings?

WARD.

Gen.  40.  3.  Pharaoh  put  them  in  w.  4.  7.

41. 10.  Pharaoh  was  wroth  and  put  me  in  w.

42.  17.  Joseph  put  his  brethren  in  to.  three  days
Lev.  24.  12.  they  put  the  blasphemer  in  w.

Num.  15.  34.  they  put  the  gatherer  of  sticks  in  to.

2  Sam.  20.  3.  David  put  the  ten  concubines  in  w.

1  Chron.  12.29.  had  kept  the  w.  of  the  house  of  Saul

25.  8.  they  cast  losts,  w.  against  w.  small  as  great
26. 16.  lot  came  by  cause  of  w.going  up  w.  against  w.

Neh.  12.  24.  to  give  thanks  w.  over-against  w.

25.  were  porters  keeping  the  w.  at  the  gates
45.  kept  w.  of  their  God  and  w.  of  purification
Isa.  21.8.  I  am  set  in  my  w.  whole  nights
Jer.  37. 13.  Irijah  a  captain  of  the  w.  was  there
Ezek.  19.  9.  they  put  Zedekiah  in  w.  in  chains
Acts  12. 10.  when  they  were  past  first  and  second  w,
WARDS.

1  Chron.  9. 2.3.  kept  the  house  of  the  tabernacle  byre.

26.  12.  having  w.  one  aeainst  anqther  to  minister
Neh.  13.  30.  1  appointed  the  w.  of  the  priests

WARDROBE.

2  Kings  22.  14.  ITuldah  the  prophetess,  the  wife  of

Shallum,  the  keeper  ot  the  w.  2  Chron.  34.22.

WARE.

Luke  8.  27.  w.  no  clothes  nor  abode  in  any  house
WARE.

Mat.  24.  50.  Ld. shall  come  in  an  hour  he  is  not w. of
Acts  14.  6.  they  were  w.  of  it  and  fled  to  Lystra
2  Tim.  4.  15.  of  the  copper  smith  be  thou  w.  also
WARE,  Substantive.

Neh.  10.  31.  if  people  bring  w.  on  sabbath  to  sell
13.  16.  men  ot  Tyre  brought  all  manner  of  w.

20.  merchants  and  sellers  of  all  kind  of  w.  lodged
WARES.

Jer.  10. 17.  gather  up  thy  w.  out  of  the  land
Ezek.  27.  16^  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  to.  18.  3.3.
Jonah  1.  5.  the  mariners  cast  forth  w.  into  the  sea
WARFARE.

1  Sam.  28. 1.  the  Philistines  gathered  armies  for  w.
Johl.i  1.  is  there  not  a  w.  to  man  upon  earth  ?

Isa.  40.  2.  cry  to  her  that  her  w.  is  accomplished

1  Cor.  9.  7.  goeth  a  w.  any  time  at  his  own  charges  ?

2  Cor.  10. 4.  the  weapons  of  our  w.  are  not  carnal

1  Tim.  1.  18.  that  thou  mightest  war  a  good  w.

WARM.

2  Kings  4.  34.  and  the  flesh  of  the  child  waxed  w.
Job  6.  17.  what  time  they  wax  w.  they  vanish

37. 17.  how  thy  garments  are  w.  when  quitteth
Eccl.  4.  11.  two  have  heat,  how  can  one  be  w.  alone
Isa.  44. 15.  he  will  take  thereof  and  w.  himself
16.  warmeth  himself,  and  saith,  aha,  1  am  w.

47.  14.  there  shall  not  be  a  coal  to  w.  at  nor  fire
Hag.  1.6.  ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  none  w.
WARMLD.

Job  31.  20.  if  were  not  w.  with  fleece  of  my  sheep
Mark  14.  54.  Peter  w.  himself,  John  18.  18,  25.
Jam.  2. 16.  depart  in  peace,  be  you  w.  and  filled
WARMETH.

Job  39. 14.  the  ostrich  that  w.  her  eggs  in  the  uust
Isa.  44. 16.  he  w.  himself  and  saith,  aha,  1  am  warm
WARMING.

Mark  14.  67.  when  she  saw  Peter  w.  himself

WARN.

2  Chron.  19. 10.  shall  w.  them  that  they  trespass  .  ot
Ezek.  3. 18.  nor  speakest  to  w.  the  wicked,  33.  8.
19.  yet  if  thou  w.  the  wicked,  33.  9.

21 .  if  thou  to.  righteous  ||  33.  3.  w.  the  people,  7 •
Acts  20.  31.  I  ceased  not  to  w.  every  one  with  tears
1  Cor.  4.  14.  but  as  my  beloved  sons  1  w.  you

1  Thess.  5. 14.  brethren,  w.  them  that  are  unruly

WARNED.

2  Kings  6. 10.  sent  to  the  place  man  of  God  w.  him
Psal.  19.  11.  moreover  by  them  is  thy  servant  to.
Ezek.  3.  21.  he  shall  surely  live,  because  he  is  w.


Ezek.  3.3.  6.  if  watchman  see  and  the  people  be  not  to
Mat.  2.  12.  Joseph  being  w.  of  God  departed,  22.

3.  7.  O  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  w.  you  to
flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  '  Luke  3.  7
Acts  10.  22.  Cornelius  w.  from  God  by  an  angel
Heb.  11.  7.  by  faith  Noah  being  a),  prepared  aii  irk
WARNING.

Jer.  6.  10.  to  whom  shall  I  speak  and  give  w.?

Ezek.  3.  17.  hear  the  word  and  give  them  w.

18.  thou  givest  him  not  a1,  nor  speakest,  20.

3.3.  4.  taketh  not  w.  ||  5.  he  heard  and  took  not  a’.

Col.  1.  28.  w.  every  man,  and  teaching  every  man
WARP.

Lev.  13.  48.  plague  in  the  w.  or  woof,  49,51, 57,59.

52.  burn  w.  H  56.  rend  to.  |l  58.  wash  the  w.

WAS.

Gen.  5.  24.  Enoch  walked  with  God  and  w.  not
21.  20.  God  w.  with  the  lad,  he  grew  and  became
26.  28.  we  saw  certainly  the  Lord  w.  with  thee
29. 12.  Jacob  told  Rachel,  he  w.  her  father’s  brother
31.  40.  thus  1  w.  in  the  day,  drought  consumed  me
37.29.  and  behold,  Joseph  w.  not  in  the  pit
39.2.  Lord  a;,  with  Joseph,  he  was  prosperous,  22.
Exod.  20.  21.  and  Moses  drew  near  where  God  w.
Num.  27.  3.  he  w  not  in  the  company  of  Korah
Josh.  1.  5.  as  1  a  .  with  Moses,  so  1  will  be  with  thee
17.  Lord  thy  God  be  with  thee  as  he  w.  with  Moses
6.  27.  the  Ld.  w.  with  Joshua,  and  his  fame  noised

14.  11.  as  yet  1  am  as  strong  as  1  w.  for  war
Judg.  20.  3.  tell  us,  how  w.  this  wickedness  ?

1  Sam.  9.  10.  they  went  where  the  man  of  God  w.

2  Sam.  12.  3.  the  ewe  lamb  w.  unto  him  as  a  daugh.
16.  23.  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel  w.  as  if  a  man

1  Kings  3.  26.  woman  spake  whose  living  child  w.

8.  57.  God  be  with  us  as  he  w.  with  our  fathers

19.  11.  the  Lord  w.  not  in  the  wind,  the  Lord  w.

not  in  the  earthquake  ||  12.  a1,  not  in  the  fire

20.  41.  king  discerned  him  that  he  w.  of  prophets

2  Kings  10.  30.  done  to  Ahab  all  that  w.  in  my  heart
Esth.  8.  1.  Esther  had  told  what  he  w.  to  her

Job  3.  26.  I  w.  not  in  safety,  neither  had  1  rest
29.  4.  as  I  w.  in  the  days  of  my  youth  when  secret
Psal.  37  .  36.  he  passed  away  and  lo  he  w.  not
38.  14.  thus  I  w.  as  a  man  that  heareth  not

53.  5.  they  were  in  great  fear,  where  no  fear  w.

Isa.  9.  1.  the  dimness  shall  not  be  such  as  w.  in  her

23.  13.  this  people  w.  not  till  Assyrian  founded  it
Jer.  48. 11.  w.  not  Israel  a  derision  unto  thee  ?  w.  he
found  among  thieves  ?  thou  skippedst  for  joy
Amos  7.  14.  I  w.  no'prophet,  neither  w.  I  a  prophet  s
son,  but  I  w.  an  herdman  and  a  gatherer  ot  truit
Jonah  4.  2.1  pray  thee.  Lord,  w.  not  this  my  saying  ?
Mai.  1. 2.  w.  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother?  saith  the  L
Mat.  24.  21.  such  as  w.  not  since  the  beginning  01
the  world,  or  ever  shall  he,  Mark  13.  19.
Mark  2.  4.  they  uncovered  the  roof  where  he  w._

5.  5.  always  night  and  day  he  w.  in  the  mountains
11.  30.  the  baptism  of  John,  to.  it  from  heaven,  or

of  men  ’  answer  me,  Luke  20.  4.
John  1. 1.  the  Word  w.  with  God,  and  Word  w.  God

9.  that  w.  the  true  light,  that  lighteth  every  man

15.  John  cried,  saying,  he  to.  before  me,  30.

3.  26.  he  that  w.  with  thee  beyond  Jordan

6.  62.  Son  of  man  ascend  up  where  lie  w.  before
8.  58.  Jesus  said,  verily  before  Abraham  w.  I  am
11.  15.  1  am  glad  for  yoursakes  1  w.  not  there

16.  4.  these  things  1  said,  because  I  w.  with  you

17.  5.  the  glory  1  had  with  thee  before  the  world  w.

20.  24.  Thomas  one  of  the  twelve  w.  not  with  them

21.  11.  full  of  fishes,  yet  w.  not  the  net  broken
Acts  5.  4.  after  sold,  to.  it  not  in  thy  own  power  ?

7.  9.  with  envy  sold  Joseph,  but  God  w.  with  him
11.  17.  what  w.  I  that  I  could  withstand  God  ?

21 . 33.  the  captain  came  near,  demanded  who  he  w.
2  Cor.  1.  18.  our  word  w.  not  yea  and  nay,  19.

11 . 5.  1  w.  not  a  whit  behind  chief est  apostles

1  Thess.  2. 1.  our  entrance  unto  you  w.  not  in  vain
3.  our  exhortation  w.  not  in  deceit,  nor  in  guile

2  Tim.  .3.  9.  folly  shall  be  manifest  as  theirs  also*).
Heb.  7.  4.  now  consider  how  great  this  man  w.

11.  38.  of  whom  the  world  w.  not  worthy
Jam.  1.  24.  forgetteth  what  manner  of  man  he  w.
Rev.  1.  4.  from  him  which  is  and  which  w.  8.  |  4.  8.
17.8.  the  beast  thou  sawest  zc.  and  is  not,  yet  is,  11.
See  So.

It  WAS.

Gen.  41.13.  came  to  pass  as  he  interpreted,  so  it  w.
42.  6.  he  it  w.  sold  to  all  the  people  cf  the  land
45.  8.  now  it  w.  not  you  that  sent  me,  but  God
Exod.  16. 15.  manna  for  they  wist  not  what  it  w.
Josh.  11 . 20.  it  w.  of  the  Lord  to  harden  their  hearts
14.  7.  I  brought  Moses  word  as  it  w.  in  my  heart
Judg.  6.  3.  sofrw.when  Isr.  had  sown,  Midian  came
2  Sam.  3.  37.  it  w.  not  of  the  king  to  slay  Abner

18.  29.  saw  a  tumult,  but  1  knew  not  what  it  w.

1  Kings  2. 15.  is  my  brother’s  for  it  w.  his  from  Ld.
13.  6.  Jeroboam,  his  hand  became  as  it  w.  before

22.  33.  perceived  that  it  w.  not  the  king  of  Israel

2  Kings  7.  7-  left  the  camp  as  it  w.  and  fled  for  life
Esth.  4.  5.  Esther  gave  Ilatach  a  command  to  Mor-

decai  to  know  what  it  w.  and  why  it  w.
Eccl.  12.  7.  then  shall  dust  return  to  earth  as  it  w.
Cant.  3.  4.  it  w.  but  a  little  that  !  passed  from  them
Isa.  11.  16.  as  it  w.  to  Israel  in  the  day  he  came  up
48.  16.  from  the  time  that  it  w.  there  am  I
Ezek.  16.  15.  his  itw.  ||  19.  thus  it  10.  saith  the  Lord
Mark  5.  14.  went  to  see  what  it  w.  that  was  done
Luke  10.  7.  they  could  not  tell  whence  it  w.

22.  23.  they  began  to  inquire  which  of  them  it  w.
John  2. 9.  the  ruler  tasted  and  knew  not  whence  it  w.
5. 13.  he  that  was  healed  wist  not  who  it  w.

20.  14.  aud  knew  not  that  it  w.  Jesus,  21.  4.

21.  12.  the  disciples  knowing  that  it  w.  the  Lord
Rom.  5.  16.  not  as  it  w.  by  one  that  sinned,  so  gift

Behold  it  WAS.

Gen.  1.  31.  God  saw  every  thing,  behold  it  w.  good
6.  12.  God  looked  on  earth,  behold  it  w.  corrupt,
29.  25.  in  the  morning,  behold  it  w.  Leah
31.  2.  behold  it  w.  not  toward  Jacob  as  before
41.  7.  Pharaoh  awoke  and  behold  it  w.  a  dream
42'.  27.  for  behold  it  w.  in  the  sack’s  mouth
Lev.  10. 16.  and  behold  it  w.  burnt,  1  Sam.  30.  3.

543


VV  A  S


WAS


WAT


1  Kings  3.  21.  behold  it  re.  dead,  behold  it  w.  m3'  son
'l' he  re  WAS.

Gen.  1.  3.  let  there  he  light,  and  there  w.  light
2.  5.  and  there  70.  not  a  man  to  till  the  ground
20.  there  w.  not  found  an  help  meet  for  him
Exod.  12. 30.  there  w.  a  great  cry  in  Egypt,  for  there
70.  notan  house  where  there  70.  not  one  dead
Num.  26.  64.  there  zo.  not  a  man  Moses  numbered
Dent.  2.  36.  there  w.  not  one  city  too  strong,  3.  4.
32.  12.  there  zo.  no  strange  god  with  him
Josh.  8.  17.  thereto,  not  a  man  left  in  Ai  or  Beth-el
35.  there  zo.  not  a  word  .losltua  read  not  before  Isr.

11.  11.  there  zo.  not  any  left  to  breathe
19.  thereto,  not  a  city  that  made  peace  with  Israel
Judg.4.  16.  host  of  Sisera  fell,  there  zo.  not  a  man  left

1  Sam.  7.  17-  for  there  10.  his  house,  there  he  judged

2  Kings  10.  21.  there  zo.  not  a  man  that  came  not
11.  16.  laid  hands  on  her,  and  there  zo.  she  slain
Psal.  106.  11.  there  zo.  not  one  of  them  left
Hnh.  3.  4.  and  there  zo.  the  hiding  of  his  power

2  Cor.  8.  11.  that  as  there  zo.  a  readiness  to  will
See  None.

Behold  there  W  AS.

Exod.  9. 7.  behold  th.  zo.  not  one  of  cattle  of  Tsr.  dead
Judg.’J.  13.  behold  thereto,  a  man  told  a  dream

14.  8.  behold  there  zo.  a  swarm  of  bees  in  the  lion
1  Sam.  19.  1  6. behold  there  zo.  an  image  in  the  bed

1  Kings  1 9. 6.  behold  there  zo.  a  cake  Oaken  on  coals

2  Kings’!.  5.  behold  there  zo.  no  man  there,  10.

Zech.  5.7.  behold  there  zo.  lift  up  a  talent  of  lead
Mat.  28.  2.  behold  there  zo.  a  great  earthquake

WASH.

The  Orientals  zoere  used  to  wash  the  feet  of  strangers
who  came  off  a  journey ,  because  they  commonly
zoalked  with  their  legs  ziaked,  and  their  feet  only
defended  zoith  a  sandal.  Thus  Abraham  wash¬
ed  the  feet  of  three  angels ,  Gen.  18.  4.  The
feet  of  Eliezer,  Abraham's  stezoard,  and  those
that  accompanied  him,  were  washed,  zohen  they
arrived  at  the  house  of  Laban,  Gen.  24.  32.  And
likezoise  those  of  Joseph's  brethren,  their  feet  were
washed,  when  they  came  into  Egypt,  Gen.  43.
24.  This  office  zoas  commonly  performed  by  ser¬
vants  and  slaves.

Our  Lord  Jesus ,  to  give  his  apostles  an  example  of
humility,  washed  their  feet.  John  13.  5.  After
that,  he  poured  water  into  a  bason,  and  began
to  wash  the  disciples’  feet.  This  washing,  as  it
was  a  servile  employment,  denoted  our  Saviour's
humility,  which  Christians  ought  to  imitate  him
in ;  and  as  it  was  such  a  pa-ocular  act,  it  de¬
noted  his  washing  array  then  sins  by  his  blood,
as  he  himself  told  Peter  in  verse  8.  1  f  1  wash

thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me.  Washing,
in  Scripture,  is  frequently  taken  in  this  sense,  as
m  Psal.  51.  2,  7.  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine
iniquity  ;  that  is,  “  Cleanse  me  from  the  guilt  and
defilement  of  sin  by  thy  grace,  and  by  the  virtue
of  the  blood  of  Christ  which  teas  signified  by
the  ceremonial  washings  under  the  law.  And  our
Saviour,  in  the  forecited  passage,  John  13.  10.  tells
Peter,  He  that  is  trashed,  needeth  not  save  to
wash  his  feet,  but  is  clean  every  whit  ;  that  is,
“  Those  souls  that  are  washed  zvith  my  blood,
their  state  is  not  to  he  renewed ;  they  need  not  be
justified  a  second  time  ;  yet  in  regard  of  the  re¬
mainder  of  sin  and  lust  that  i'v  in  them,  and  will
be  so  tohile  they  are  in  the  world,  and  the  tempta¬
tions  which  every  where  lie  before  them,  as  snares
for  their  feet,  they  will  have  need  of  a  daily
washing,  by  repentance,  and  fresh  applications
of  their  souls  to  my  blood,  by  the  repeated  exer¬
cises  of  faith,  according  to  their  renezeed  and  re¬
peated  acts  of  sin."  See  also  1  Cor.  6.  11.  'J  it.  3.

5.  Rev.  1 . 5.

Wash,  to  purify,  cleanse,  and  whiten.  There  were
divers  sorts  of  washing,  [1]  Natural,  Gen.  18.  4.
[2]  Ceremonial,  Heb.  9.  10.  [3]  Miraculous,

2  Kings  5.  10,  13.  [4]  Moral,  Psal.  26.  6.  |  73.

13.  [5]  Spiritual,  Psal.  51.  2.  Ezek.  16.  9.  [6]
Superstitious,  Mat.  15.  2.  [7]  Sacramental ,  Acts
22.16.  Put  for,  [11  Plenty,  Job  29.  6.  [2]  Par¬
don  and  sanctification,  1  Cor.  6.  11.  Rev.  1.5.  |  7,

14.  [3]  Repentance,  Isa.  1.  16.  [4]  Reformation,
Prov.  30.  12.  To  wash  one’s  feet  in  butter,  Job
29.  6.  To  wash  one's  clothes  in  wine,  Gen.  49.

11.  To  wash  one’s  feet  in  the  blood  of  the  wicked^
Psal.  58.  10.  These  are  figurative  and  hyperboli¬
cal  expressions,  to  signify  the  great  abundance  of
butter,  or  wine,  and  the  vengeance  that  the  Just
obtain  over  the  wicked..  To  wash  the  hands  was  a
token  of  innocency,  Mat.  27.  24.

Gen.  18.4.  I  pray  you  w.  your  feet,  19.  2.  |  24.  32.
Exod.  2.  5.  the  daughter  ot  Pharaoh  came  to  zo.

29.  4.  Aaron  and  his  sons  thou  shalt  bring  and  w.

them  with  water,  30.  19.20,  21.  I  40.  12!
Lev.  6.  27.  shalt  w.  that  whereon  it  was  sprinkled"

13.  54.  w.  the  thing  wherein  the  plague  is

58.  whatever  thing  of  skin  it  be  thou  shalt  zo.  it

14.  8.  shave  and  w.  himself  in  water,  Deut.  23. 11.

9.  zo.  his  flesh  in  water,  15.  16. 1  16.  4,  24. 1  22.  6.

17.  16.  if  he  zo.  not,  he  shall  bear  his  iniquity
Deut.  21.  6.  shall  zo.  their  hands  over  the  heifer
Ruth  3.  3.  zo.  thyself  therefore  and  anoint  thee

1  Sam.  25.  41.  let  thy  handmaid  be  a  serv.  to  zo.  feet

2  Sam.  11.  8.  David  said,  go  down  anil  zo.  thy  feet
2  Kings 5. 10.  Elisha  said, go  re.  in  Jordan  seven  times

12.  may  I  not  zo.  in  them  and  be  clean  ?

13.  when  he  saith  to  thee,  w.  and  be  clean  ?

2  Chron.  4.6.  lavers  to  rc.in,  sea  for  the  priests  to  zo.  in
Job  9.  30.  if  I  w.  myself  with  snow-water  and  make
Psal.  26.  6.  I  will  zo.  my  hands  in  innocency
51.2.  w.  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity

7.  w.  me  and  1  shall  be  whiter  than  snow
58. 10.  he  shall  zo.  his  feet  in  the  blood  of  the  wicked
Isa.1.  16.  w.  ye,  make  you  clean,  put  away  evil
Jer.2.  22.  though  thou  zo.  thee  with  nitre  and  soap
4.  14.  O  Jerusalem,  w.  thy  heart  from  wickedness
Ezek.  23.40.  for  whom  thou  didst  to.  thyself
Mat.  6. 17.  but. when  thou  fastest,  zo.  thy  face

15.  2.  they  w.  not  their  hands  w  hen  they  eat
Mark  7.  3.  except  they  zo.  oft  they  eat  not.  4

544


Luke  7.  38.  a  woman  began  to  zo.  his  feet  with  tears
John  9.  7.  Jesus  said,  go  w.  in  the  pool  of  Siloain,  11.

13.  5.  Jesus  began  to  zo.  the  disciples’  feet

6.  Peter  saith,  Lord,  dost  thou  w.  my  feet  ?

8.  thou  shalt  never  zo.  my  feet,  if  1  w.  thee  not

14.  ye  also  ought  to  zo.  one  another's  feet

Acts  22.  16.  arise,  be  baptized,  and  w.  away  thy  sins
See  Cloth ks.  Feet.

WASHED.

Gen.  43.  24.  gave  them  water,  they  w.  their  feet
31.  Joseph  w.  his  face  and  went  out  and  said
49.  11.  Judah  w.  his  garments  in  wine  and  clothes
Exod.  40.  32.  w.  as  the  l  ord  commanded  Moses
Lev.  13.  55.  priest  shall  look  on  plague  after  it  is  w.

58.  then  it  shall  be  to.  the  second  time  and  be  clean
Jtidg.  19.  21.  the  Levite  and  concubine  zo.  their  feet
2  Sam.  12.  20.  then  David  arose  and  zo.  himself
1  Kings  22.  38.  one  w.  the  chariot  in  pool  of  Samaria
Job  29.  6.  when  I  w.  my  steps  with  butter
Psal.  73.  13.  1  have  w.  my  hands  in  innocency
Prov.  30.  12.  a  generation  not  zo.  from  filthiness
Cant. 5. 3.  I  have  w.  my  feet,  how  shall  I  defile  them?

12.  his  eyes  arew.  with  milk  and  fitly  set
Tsa.  4.4.  w.  away  the  filth  of  the  daughters  of  Zion
Ezek.  16.  4.  nor  wastw.  in  water  to  supple  thee

9.  I  throughly  w.  away  thy  blood  from  thee
Mat.  27.  24.  Pilate  took  water  a*nd  w.  his  hands
Luke  7.  44.  she  hath  w.  my  feet  with  her  tears

11.  38.  the  Pharisee  marvelled  he  had  not  first  zo.
John  9.  7.  he  went  and  w.  and  came  seeing,  11,  15.
13. 10.  is  w.  needeth  not  save  to  Wash  his’feet

14.  if  1  your  Ford  and  Master  have  zo.  your  feet
Acts  9.  37.  Dorcas  died,  whom  when  they  had  zo.

16.  33.  he  took  them,  zo.  their  stripes,  was  baptized
1  Cor.  6.  11.  but  ye  are  zo.  but  ye  are  sanctified

1  Tim.  5.  10.  if  she  have  a),  the  saints’  feet
Heb.  10.  22.  having  our  bodies  w.  with  pure  water

2  Pet .2.22.  sow  that  was  w.  to  wallowing  in  the  mire
Rev.  1.  5.  that  re.  us  from  our  sins  in  his  blood

7.  14.  have  w.  their  robes  and  made  them  white
See  Clothes.

WASHES'!'.

Job  14.  19.  thou  w.  awav  the  things  which  grow
WASHING.

2  Sam.  11.  2.  David  saw  a  woman  w.  herself
Luke  5.  2.  but  the  fishermen  were  w.  their  nets
WASHING,  S.

Lev.  13.  56.  the  plague  be  somewhat  dark  after  w.
Neh.  4.  23.  that  every  one  put  them  off  for  w.

Cant.  4.  2.  like  sheep  which  came  up  from  the  w.  6.6.
Mark  7.  4.  as  the  zo.  of  cups,  pots,  and  tables,  8.
Eph.  5.  26.  cleanse  it  with  zo.  of  water  by  word
Tit.  3.  5.  he  saved  us  by  the  zo.  of  regeneration
Heb.  9.  10.  which  stood  onl  v  in  meats  and  divers  w.
WASH-POT.

Pj.60.8.  Moab  is  my  w.  over  Edom  cast  shoe,  108.9.
WAS!’.

Deut.  5.  15.  fhou  w.  a  servant  in  land  of  Egypt

15.  15.  zo.  a  bondman  in  Egypt,  16.  12.  |  24l  18,  22.

23.  7.  because  thou  zo.  a  stranger  in  his  land
2  Sam.  5.  2.  thou  zo.  he  that  leddest  out  Israel
Job  38.4.  where  w.  when  1  laid  foundations  of  earth?
Jer.  50.  24.  thou  art  taken  and  zo.  not  aware
Ezek.  16.  6.  I  said  to  thee,  when  thou  zo.  in  thy  blood
Chad.  11.  even  thou  zo.  as  one  of  them

Mat.  26.  69.  a  damsel  came  to  Peter,  saying,  thou
also  w.  with  Jesus  of  Galilee,  Mark  14.  67.
John  1.  48.  when  thouzc.  under  fig-tree,  1  saw  thee
Rev.  11.  17.  who  art,  and  w.  and  art  to  come,  16.  5.
WASTE.

Jer.  49. 13.  have  sworn  that  Rozrah  shall  become  w.
Mat.  26.8.  to  what  purpose  is  this  w.  ?  Mark  14.  4.
WASTE.

Deut.  32.  10.  he  found  him  in  the  70.  wilderness
Job  30.  3.  solitary,  fleeing  into  the  w.  wilderness
38.  27.  to  satisfy  the  desolate  zo.  ground  and  cause
Isa.  24.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth  w.

42.  15.  1  will  make  zo.  mountains  and  hills
49. 17-  they  that  marie  the  w.  shall  go  forth
Jer.  2.  15.  young  lions  yelled  and  made  his  land  zo.
46.  19.  for  N'oph  shall  be  w.  and  desolate
Ezek. 5.14.  I  will  make  Jerusalem  zo.  and  a  reproach
29.  9.  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  be  zo.  10.  I  30.  12.

.38.  8.  the  mountains  which  have  been  always  w.
Nah.  2.  10.  Nineveh  is  empty,  and  void  and  w.
Zeph.  3.  6.  I  have  marie  their  streets  zo.  none  passeth
Hag.  1.  9.  because  of  mine  house  that  is  w.

See  Cities,  Lay,  I, aid.  Places.
WASTE.

1  Kings  17.  14.  the  barrel  ofmeal  shall  not  w.

1  Chron.  17.  9.  no  children  of  wickedness  zo.  them
Psal.  17.  t  9.  hide  me  from  the  wicked  that  w.  me
80.  13.  the  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth  w.  it
Jer.  50.  21.  w.  inhabitants  of  Pekod  saith  the  I.ord
Mic.  5.  6.  they  shall  w.  kantl  of  Assyria  with  sword
WASTED.

Num.  14.  33.  till  your  carcases  be  zo.  in  wilderness

24.  22.  nevertheless  the  Kenite  shall  be  zo.

Deut.  2. 14.  till  all  generat.  of  men  of  war  were  w.

1  Kings  17.  16.  and  the  barrel  of  meal  zo.  not
1  Chron.  20.  1.  Joab  zo.  the  country  of  Ammon
Psal.  137.  3.  they  that  w.  11s  required  of  ns  mirth
t  8.  O  daughter  of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be  w.

Isa.  6. 11.  till  the  cities  be  w.  without,  inhabitant
19.5.  and  the  river  shall  be  zo.  and  dried  up

60.  12.  yea,  those  nations  shall  be  utterly  zo.

Jer.  44.  6.  are  a),  and  desolate  as  at  this  day

Joel  1.  10.  field  is  zo.  corn  is  w.  new  wine  dried  up
I.uke  15.  13.  the  prodigal  son  w.  his  substance

16.  1.  was  accused  that  he  had  zo.  his  goods
Gal.  1.  1.3.  how  1  persecuted  the  church  and  zo.  it

WASTENESS.

Zeph.  1.  15.  a  day  of  w.  desolation  and  darkness
WASTER.

Prov.  18.  9.  is  brother  to  him  that  is  a  great  zo.

Isa.  54.  16.  1  have  created  the  w.  to  destroy
WASTES.

Isa.  44.  t  26.  T  will  raise  up  the  zo.  thereof

61.  4.  they  shall  build  the  old  w.  and  repair  cities
Jer.  49.  13.  the  cities  of  Bozrah  shall  be  perpetual  zo.
Ezek.  .33.  24.  they'  that  inhabit  those  70.  of  Israel

27.  su"ely  the.y  in  the  zo.  shall  fall  by  the  sword


Ezek.  .36.  4.  thus  saith  the  Ix>rd  to  the  desolate  to

10.  and  the  w.  shall  be  builded,  33.

_  WASTE  I  H.

Job  14.  10.  man  dieth  and  zy.away,  giveth  up  ghost
Ps.  91.  6.  nor  for  destruction  that  w.  at  noon-day
Prov.  19.  26.  he  that  w.  father  and  chaseth  mother
WASTING.

Isa.  59.  7.  to.  and  destruction  are  in  their  paths
60.  18.  not  heard  w.  nor  destruction  in  thv  borders

WATCH.

Exod.  14.  24.  in  morning  w.  L.  looked  to  Egyptians
Judg.  7. 19.  middle  zo.  they  had  but  newly  set  thezy.

1  Sam.  11.  11.  Saul  came  in  the  morning-zy.

2  Kings  11.  6.  so  shall  ye  keep  the  w.  of  the  house,

that  it  be  not  broken  down,  7.  2  Chron.  2.3.  6.
Neh.  4.  9.  prayed  to  God,  and  set  a  w.  against  them

7 .  3.  every  one  in  his  w.  and  over-against  his  house
Job  7.  12.  am  I  a  sea,  that  thou  settest  a  zc.over  me  ?
Psal.  90.  4.  a  thousand  years  asa».  in  the  night
141.  .3.  set  a  w.  O  Lord,  before  tny  mouth

Jer.  51.  12.  make  the  zo.  strong,  set  up  watchmen
Hab.  2.  1.  I  will  stand  upon  my  w.  and  will  watch
Mat.  14.  25.  in  the  fourth  w.  of  the  night  Jesus
went  to  them  walking  on  the  sea,  Mark  6.  48.
24.  43.  had  known  what  w.  the  thief  would  come

27.  65.  ye  have  aw.  ||  66.  sealing  stone,  setting  a  zo.

28.  11.  behold,  some  of  the  w.  came  into  the  city
Luke  2. 8.  the  shepherds  keeping  zo.  over  their  flock

12.  .38.  if  he  shall  come  in  the  second  w.  or  third
WATCHES.

Neh.  12.  9.  their  brethren  over  against  them  in  w.
Ps.  63.  6.  when  I  meditate  on  thee  in  the  night-zy.
119.  148.  mine  eyes  prevent  the  night-zy.

Lam.  2. 19.  in  beginning  of  the  zo.  pour  out  thy  heart
WAJCH,  Kerb.

Gen.  31.49.  the  Lord  zo.  between  me  and  thee
1  Sam..  19.  11.  Saul  sent  to  w.  David,  and  slay  him
Ezra  8.  29.  w.  ye,  keep  vessels  till  ye  V'eigh  them
Job  14.  16.  dost  thou  not  w.  over  my  sin  ?

Ps.  102.  7-  l  w.  and  am  as  a  sparrow  on  house-top
130.6.  more  than  they  that  zo.  for  morning,  6.

Isa.  21.  5.  w.  in  the.  watch-tower,  eat,  drink

29.  20.  and  all  that  w.  for  iniquity  are  cut  off
Jer.  5.  6.  a  leopard  shall  w.  over  their  cities

31.  28.  so  will  1  w.  over  them  to  build  and  plant
44.  27.  I  will  w.  over  them  for  evil,  not  for  good
Nah.  2.  1.  keep  the  munition,  w.  the  way
Hab.  2. 1.  I  will  w.  to  see  what  he  will  say  to  me
Mat.  24. 42.  w.  therefore,  ye  know  not  the  hour,  25.
1.3.  Mark  13.  35.  Luke  21.  36.  Acts  20.  .31.

26.  38.  Jesus  said,  tarry  ye  here,  and  w.  with  me

40.  could  ye  not  zo.  with  me  ?  Mark  14.  34,  37.

41.  zy.,and  pray,  Mark  13.  33.  |  14.38.  Col.  4.  2.
Mark  1.3.  34.  who  commanded  the  porter  to  w.

37.  and  what  1  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  w.

1  Cor.  16.  1.3.  zo.  ye,  stand  fast  in  faith,  be  strong

1  Thess.  5.  6.  let  us  zo.  and  be  sober,  1  Pet.  4. 7.

2  Tim.  4.  5.  w.  thou  in  all  things,  endure  afflictions
Heb.  13.  17.  obey  them,  for  they  w.  for  your  souls

WAJCH  ED.

Jer.  20. 10.  all  my  familiars  zo.  for  my  halting

31.  28.  like  as  1  have  zo.  over  them  to  pluck  up
Lam.  4.  17.  w.  for  a  nation  that  could  not  save  us
Dan.  9. 14.  Lord  to.  on  evil,  and  brought  it  on  us
Mat.  24.  43.  good-man  would  have  zo.  Luke  12.  .39.

27.  36.  and  sitting  down  they  w.  him  there
Mark  3.  2.  they  w.  him  whether  he  would  heal  him

the  sabbath-day,  to  accuse  him,  Luke  6.7. 1  14.  1.
Luke  20.  20.  they  w.  him  and  sent  forth  spies
Acts  9.  24.  w.  the  gates  day  and  night  to  kill  him
_  WATCHER,  S.

Jer.  4. 16.  published  that  zo.  come  from  far  country
Dan.  4.  13.  ary.  and  an  holy  one  came  from  heaven

17.  by  decree  of  the  w.  ||  23.  the  king  saw  a  w.
WATCHE'LH.

Ps.  37.32.  the  wicked  w.  the  righteous,  and  seeketh
Ezek.  7.  6.  end  is  come,  it  w.  for  thee,  it  is  come
Rev.  16. 15.  blessed  is  he  that  w.  and  keepetli  garm.
WATCHFUL.

Rev.  3.  2.  be  zo.  strengthen  the  things  that  remain
WATCHING.

1  Sam.  4.  13.  Eli  sat  on  a  seat  by  the  way-side  w.
Prov.  8.  34.  blessed  heareth  me,  w.  daily  at  my  gates
Lam.  4.  17.  in  our  w.  we  have  watched  for  a  nation
Mat.  27. 54.  the  centurion  w.  Jesus,  saw  earth-quake
Luke  12.  HI .  whom  Lord  when  he  cometh  find  zo.
Eph.  6. 18.  praying  and  w.  with  all  perseverance

WATCHINGS.

2  Cor.  6.5.  in  tumults, in  labours,  in  w.  in  fastings

11.  27.  in  w.  often,  in  hunger,  thirst,  fastings

WATCHMAN.

2  Sam.  18.  25.  the  zo.  cried,  and  told  the  king
26.  the  zo.  saw  another  man  running  alone
2  Kings  9.  18.  the  zo.  told,  he  cometh  not  again,  20.
Psal.  127.  1.  keeps  city,  the  w.  waketh  but  in  vain
Isa.  21. 6.  go  set  a  zo.  ||  11.  zo.  what  of  the  night  ?

Jer.  51.  12.  set  up  the  a>.  prepare  the  ambushes
Ezek.  3. 17-  son  of  man,  I  have  made  thee  a  w.  33.7.
.3.3.'  2.  if  the  people  set  him  up  for  their  zy.

Hos.  9.8.  the  w.  of  Ephraim  was  with  my  God
'  WATCHMEN.

Cant.  .3.  .3.  w.  that  go  about  the  city  found  me,  5.  7.
Isa.  52.  8.  thy  w.  shall  lift  upthe  voice,  shall  sing
56.  10.  his  w.  are  blind,  they  are  all  ignorant

62.  6.  I  have  set  w.  on  thy  walls,  O  Jerusalem
Jer.  6. 17.  also  1  setw.  over  you,  saying,  hearken
.31.  6.  io.  on  mount  Ephraim  shall  cry  ,  arise  ye
Mic.  7-  4.  the  day  of  thy  w.  and  visitation  cometh
WATCH-TOWER.

2  Chron.  20.  24.  wdien  Judah  came  toward  the  w.
ha.  21.  5.  watch,  in  the  w.  eat,  drink,  arise

8.  1  stand  continually  on  the  w.  in  day  time

32.  +  14.  the  w.  shall  be  for  dens  for  ever

WATER,

Or  waters,  in  Scripture,  is  put,  (1)  For  the  element
of  water,  Gen.  1.  10.  (2)  For  troubles  and  af¬

flictions.  Psal.  69.  1.  Save  me,  O  God,  for  the
tenters  are  come  in  unto  my  soul.  Often  in  the
Psalms  and  elsezohere  it  is  used  in  this  sense:
hence  is  the  phrase  in  Mat.  20.  22.  of  being  bap
tized  with  Christ’s  baptism  :  that  is,  "  dipped  and
plunged  m  afflictions,  as  lie  was."  (.3)  In  tie


WAT


WAT


WAT


language  of  the  prophets,  waters  often  denote  a
great  multitude  of  people.  Isa.  8.  7-  The  Lord
bringeth  upon  them  the  waters  of  the  river  ;  that
is  the  Assyrian  army.  And  in  Rev.  17.  15.  The
waters  which  thou  sawest.  where  the  whore  sit-
teth,  are  peoples,  and  multitudes,  and  nations,
and  tongues.  (4)  It  is  put  for  children  or  posterity .
Num.  24.  7.  He  shall  pour  the  water  out  of  his
buckets.  And  m  Isa.  48.  1.  Which  are  come
forth  out  of  the  waters  of  Judah.  (5)  I  'or  the
clouds.  Psal.  104.  3.  Who  layeth  the  beam%of
his  chambers  in  the  waters.  “  Who  founded,  as
tt  were,  the  heavens  upon  the  clouds."  (.6)  Waters
sometimes  stand  for  tears.  Jer.  9.  1.0  that  my
head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of
tears  (7)  For  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  Deut.
32-  2.  1  Cor.  3.  6.  (8)  For  the  ordinances  of  the
gospel,  where  the  graces  and  comforts  of  the  Holy
■Spirit  are  dispensed.  Isa.  55.  1.  Ho,  every  one  that
tnirsteth,  come  to  the  waters.  Or  by  waters  here
may  be  understood  the  graces  and  comforts  of  the
Spirit  themselves,  which  are  frequently  compared
to  waters,  as  in  Isa.  12.  3.  I  35.  0,  7-  John  7.  37,
38.  (9)  All  kinds  of  drink,  Exod.  23.  25.  (10)
Unlawful  pleasures,  Prov.  9.  17.

As  in  Scripture,  bread  is  put  for  all  sorts  of  food,
or  solid  nourishment,  so  water  is  used  for  all  sons
of  drink.  The  Moabites  and  Ammonites  are  re¬
proached  for  not  meeting  the  Israelites  with  bread
and  water,  that  is,  with  proper  refreshments,
Deut.  23.  4.  Saba!  says,  in  an  insulting  man¬
ner,  to  David's  messengers.  Shall  1  then  take  my
bread  and  my  water,  and  my  flesh  that  I  have
killed  for  my  shearers,  and  give  it  unto  men
whom  1  know  not  whence  they  be  i  1  Ham.  25.

11.  Stolen  waters  denote  unlawful  pleasures  with
strange  uornen,  Prov.  9.  17.  The  Israelites  are
upbraided  for  having  forsaken  the  fountain  of
living  waters,  and  hewing  out  broken  cisterns ;
that  is,  for  having  quitted  the  worship  of  God  for
the  worship  of  idols  and  false  gods,  Jer.  2.  13.  The
Hebrews  called  urine,  the  waters  of  the  feet,  that
they  may  drink  their  own  piss  ;  in  Hebrew,  the
water  of  their  feet,  2  Kings  18.  27.

The  waters  of  Meribah,  so  called ,  because  of  the
quarrelling,  the  contention,  and  murmuring,  of  the
Israelites  against  Moses  and  against  God.  Moses
tells  us,  that  when  the  Israelites  came  to  Kadesh,
and.  there  happened  to  be  in  want  of  water,  they
raised  a  sedition  against  him  and  his  brother
Aaron;  this  is  recorded  in  Mum.  20.  1,  2,  3,  &rc.
It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Moses  committed  that
sin,  with  which  God  was  so  displeased,  that  he  de¬
prived  him  of  the  honour  of  introducing  his  people
into  the  land  of  promise.  'The  Psalmist,  in  Psal.
106.  32,  3.3.  tells  us,  that  Moses  was  soured,  vexed,
)r  troubled  at  these  murmurs  of  the  people,  and
expressed  some  distrust  by  his  words.  He  shewed
some  doubt  in  the  promises  of  the  Lord.  God  had
absolutely  promised  him,  that  he  should  bring  water
out  of  the  rock.  Moses  made  some  scruple  to  be¬
lieve  it.  Must  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this
rock  ?  He  struck  the  rock  twice :  and  God  had
bid  him  only  speak  to  it.  He  was  afraid,  that
upon  this  occasion,  God  being  provoked  with  his
people,  should  refuse  to  fulfil  the  promises  he  had
made.  Moses  and  Aaron  did  not  sanctify  the
Lord,  they  did  not  pay  that  honour  that  was  due
to  him,  by  a  strict,  punctual,  and  faithful  obe¬
dience  to  his  words.  'They  did  not  sanctify  him
before  the  people.  They  gave  the  people  occasion
to  conceive  too  low  an  idea  of  the  power  and  good¬
ness  of  God ;  they  did  an  injury  in  some  measure
to  his  power,  by  shewing  so  little  confidence  in  it.
Gen.  16.  7-  angel  found  Hagar  by  a  fountain  of  w.

18.  4.  let  a  little  w.  I  pray  you,  be  fetched

21.  14.  Abraham  took  bottle  of  w.  and  gave  Hagar

24.  32.  Laban  gave  the  man  w.  to  wash  his  feet
43.  give  me,  1  pray  thee,  a  little  w.  to  drink

26.  20.  the  w.  is  ours  1|  32.  we  have  found  w.

43.  24.  the  steward  of  Joseph’s  house  gave  them  w.
49.  4.  unstable  as  w.  thou  shalt  not  excel
Exod.  12.  9.  eat  it  not  raw,  nor  sodden  with  w.

17.  6.  and  there  shall  corne  w.  out  of  the  rock

20.  4.  any  likeness  that  is  in  the  w.  under  the  earth
23.  25.  the  Lord  shall  bless  thy  bread  and  thy  w.

29.  4.  Aaron  and  his  sons  shall  wash  them  with  w.

30.  20.  1  40.  12.  Lev.  8.  6. 1  16.  4,  24.
32.  20.  burnt  the  calf  and  strawed  it  on  the  w.
Lev.  6.  28.  shall  be  scoured  and  rinsed  in  w.  15.  12.
11.  32.  whatever  vessel,  it  must  be  put  into  w.

38.  but  if  any  w.  be  put  upon  the  seed
Num.  5.  22.  this  w.  that  causeth  the  curse  shall  go

8.  7-  sprinkle  w.  of  purification  upon  them

19.  9.  for  a  70.  of  separation,  13,  20,  21.  |  31.  23.

20.  8.  thou  shalt  bring  forth  to  them  w.  out  of  the

rock,  10,  11.  Neh.  9.  15.  Psal.  114.  8.

13.  this  is  the  te.  of  Meribah,  24. 1  27.  14.

21. 5.  there  is  no  bread,  nor  is  any  to.

16.  gather  ye  the  people  and  1  will  give  them  w.
24. 1.  he  shall  pour  the  w.  out  of  his  buckets

31.  23.  ye  shall  make  go  through  the  w.

Deut.  8.  7.  Lord  brings  thee  to  a  land  of  brooks  of  w.

11.  11.  the  land  drinketh  w.  of  rain  of  heaven

12.  16.  shalt  pour  it  on  earth  a3  to.  24. 1  15.  23.

23.  4.  met  you  not  with  w.  in  way,  Neh.  13.  2.

Josh.  7. 5.  hearts  of  people  melted  and  became  as  to.
Judg.  5.  25.  he  asked  w.  and  she  gave  him  milk

7.  4.  bring  them  down  to  the  w.  and  l  will  try,  5.

15.  19.  w.  came  out  of  the  jaw  and  Samson  drank

1  Sam.  7-  6.  they  gathered  to  Mizpeh  and  drew  w.

25.  11.  shall  I  then  take  my  bread  and  my  w.?

26.  11.  take  now  the  cruse  ot  w.  and  let  us  go

30.  12.  nor  drunk  any  w.  three  days  and  nights

2  Sam.  14.  14.  we  must  die  and  are  as  to.  on  ground
17.  21.  arise  and  pass  quickly  over  the  w.

21.  10.  till  w.  dropped  on  them  out  of  heaven
1  Kings  13.  19.  he  did  eat  bread  and  drank  w.

22.  hast  eaten  bread  and  dr  unk  w.  in  the  place

14.  15.  smite  Israel  as  a  ree<»  is  shaken  in  the  w.

17.  10.  fetch  me,  I  pray  thee,  a  little  to.

18.  4.  Obadiah  fed  them  with  bread  and  to.  13.


1  Kings  18.35.  rr.ran  about  altar,  fill,  (rench  with  w.
38.  the  tire  of  the  Lord  fell  and  licked  up  the  w.

22.  27.  feed  him  with  bread  and  to.  of  affliction
till  1  return  in  peace,  2  Chron.  18.26.

2  Kings  2.19.  the  w.  is  naught,  and  ground  barren

3.  11.  Elisha  who  poured  w.  on  Elijah’s  hands

17.  yet  that  valley  shall  be  tilled  with  w.

22.  then  rose  up  early  and  the  sun  shone  on  the  w.

6.  5.  was  felling  a  beam,  the  ax-head  fell  into  to.

22.  set  bread  and  w.  before  them  to  eat  and  drink

8.  15.  lie  dipt  a  thick  cloth  in  to.  and  he  died
20.20.  made  a  conduit,  brought  w.  into  the  city

2  Chron.  32.  4.  the  king  of  Assyria  find  much  w.
Neh.  4.  +23.  every  one  went  with  weapon  for  w.
Job  8.  11.  can  the  flag  grow  without  w.?

14.  9.  yet  through  the  scent  of  w.  it  will  bud

15.  16.  is  man  who  drinketh  iniquity  like  to.

22.  7-  thou  hast  not  given  to.  to  the  weary  to  drink
34.  7.  who  like  Job,  who  drinketh  scorning  like  to.
Psal.  22. 14.  1  am  poured  out  like  w.  my  bones  out
63.  +  10.  they  shall  make  him  run  out  like  w.

65.  9.  with  the  river  of  God  that  is  full  of  w.

66.  12.  we  went  through  fire  and  through  w.

79.  3.  their  blood  have  they  shed  like  w.

88.  17-  they  came  round  about  me  daily  like  to.
109.  18.  so  let  it  come  into  his  bowels  like  w.

Prov.  17-  14.  strife  is  as  when  one  letteth  out  w.

20.  5.  counsel  in  the  heart  of  man  is  like  deep  w.

27. 19.  as  in  w.  face  answereth  to  face,  so  heart  of
.30.  16.  the  earth  that  is  not  filled  with  w.

Isa.  1.  22.  silver  is  dross,  thy  wine  mixed  with  to.

3.  1.  Lord  doth  take  away  the  whole  stay  of  to.

21.  14.  the  land  ofTema  brought^,  to  the  thirsty
30.  14.  not  found  a  sherd  to  take  to.  out  of  pit

20.  though  the  Lord  gave  you  the  to.  of  affliction
41.  17.  when  the  poor  seek  to.  and  there  is  none
44.  3.  I  will  pour  w.  on  him  that  is  thirsty
63.  12.  leu  (hem,  dividing  the  w.  before  them
Jer.  13.  1.  get  a  linen  girdle  and  put  it  not  in  w.

23.  15.  and  make  them  drink  the  w.  of  gall
Lam.  1.  16.  mine  eyes  run  down  with  w.  3.  48.

2. 19.  pour  out  thy  heart  like  w.  before  Lord
5.  4.  we  have  drunken  our  w.  for  money
Ezek.  4. 17.  that  they  may  want  bread  and  w

7.  17.  all  knees  shall  be  weak  as  w.  21.  7  ■

16.  4.  nor  wast  thou  washed  in  w.  to  supple  thee

9.  then  washed  1  thee  with  w.  and  anointed  him
.36.  25.  then  will  [  sprinkle  clean  to.  upon  you
Dos.  2.  5.  i  will  go  after  my  lov.  that  give  me  my  to.

5. 10.  1  will  pour  my  wrath  upon  them  like  w.

10.  7.  her  king  is  cut  off  as  foam  upon  w.

Amos  8. 11.  not’ a  famine  of  bread  nor  thirst  of  to.
Nah.2.&.  but  Nineveh  is  of  old  like  a  pool  of  w.
Hab.  3.  10.  the  overflowing  of  the  to.  passed  by
Mat. 3.  11.  1  indeed  baptize  you  with  w.  unto  re¬
pentance,  Markl.S.  Luke3.  16.  John  1.  26.

16.  Jesus  went  up  out  of  the  w.  Mark  1.  10.

10.  42.  whoso  giveth  a  cup  of  cold  w.  Mark  9.  41.
14.28.  Peter  said,  bid  me  come  to  thee  on  the  w.

17.  15.  for  he  falleth  oft  into  the  fire  and  w.

27.  24.  Pilate  took  w.  and  washed  his  hands

Mark  14. 13.  there  shall  meet  you  a  man  bearing  a
pitcher  of  w.  follow  him,  Luke  22.  10.
Luke 8. 23.  ship  was  filled  with  to.  were  in  jeopardy

24.  rebuked  the  w.  |[  25.  the  to.  pbeyeri  him
16.  24.  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  w.
John  2.  7-  Jesus  saith,  fill  the  water-pots  with  to.

3.  5.  except  a  man  be  born  of  to.  and  of  the  Spirit

23.  near  to  Salim,  because  there  was  much  w.  there

4. 10.  given  living  w.  11.  |]  15.  give  me  this  to.

46.  Jesus  came  again  where  he  made  w.  wine

5.  3.  halt,  withered,  waiting  for  moving  of  the  to.

4.  an  angel  went  down  and  troubled  the  w.

7.  38.  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  living  w.

13.  5.  after  that  he  poureth  w.  into  a  bason

19.  34.  forthwith  came  thereout  blood  and  w.

Acts  1. 5.  for  John  truly  baptized  with  to.  11.  16.

8.  36.  here  is  w.  ||  38.  they  went  down  both  into  w.

10.  47.  can  any  forbid  w.  these  be  not  baptized  ?
Eph.  5. 26.  might  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  w.
Heb.  9.  19.  he  took  the  blood  of  calves  with  w.

10.  22.  and  our  bodies  washed  with  pure  w.

Jam.  3. 12.  no  fountain  can  yield  salt  w.  and  fresh

1  Pet.  3. 20.  few,  that  is  eight  souls  were  saved  by  to.

2  Pet.  2. 17-  are  wells  without  a;.  |1  Jude  12.  clouds
3.  6.  world  being  overflowed  with  w.  perished

1  John  5.  6.  this  is  he  that  came  by  w.  and  blood

5.  8.  three  bear  witness,  Spirit,  to.  and  blood
Rev.  12.  15.  and  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth  to.
16.  12.  the  sixth  on  Euphrates,  and  to.  dried  up

21.  6.  L  will  give  of  the  fountain  of  the  w.  of  life
22. 1.  and  he  shewed  me  a  pure  river  of  w.  of  life

17.  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  w.  of  life  freely
See  Bathe,  Bitter,  Dr  a  w,  Drew,  Drink,

Well.  •

No  WATER.

Gen.  37. 24.  pit  was  empty,  there  was  no  to.  in  it
Exod.  15.  22.  they  went  three  days  and  found  no  to.

17.  1.  Num.  20.  2.  |  33. 14.  Deut.  8. 15.

1  Kings  13.  22.  L.  said,  eat  no  bread  and  drink  no  w.

2  Kings  3.  9.  there  was  no  w:  for  the  host  and  cattle
Psal.  63.  1.  in  a  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  w.  is
Isa.  1. 30.  ye  shall  be  as  a  garden  that  hath  no  w.

44. 12.  the  smith  drinketh  no  w.  and  is  faint
50.  2.  their  fish  stinketh  because  there  is  no  to.

Jer.  2.  13.  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  to.

14.  3.  they  came  to  the  pits  and  found  no  w.m
38.  6.  in  the  dungeon  there  was  no  w.  but  mire

Zech.  9. 1 1.  sent  prisoners  out  of  pit  wherein  is  now.
Luke  7. 44.  thou  gavest  me  no  to.  for  my  feet
WATER.

Gen.  2. 10.  a  river  went  out  of  Eden  to  w.  the  garden
29.  7-  w.  ye  the  sheep  and  go  and  feed  them,  8.
Psal.  6.  6.  I  w.  my  couch  with  my  tears
72.  6.  come  down  as  showers  that  w.  the  earth
Prov.  5.  +  19.  let  her  breasts  to.  thee  at  all  times
Eccl.  2. 6.  I  made  me  pools  of  water  to  w.  the  wood
Isa.  16.  9.  I  will  to.  thee  with  my  tears,  O  Heshbon
27.  3.  I  will  w.  it  every  moment,  lest  any  hurt  it
Ezek.  17.7.  he  might  w.  it  by  furrows  of  plantation
32.6.  1  will  w.  with  my  blood  the  land  wherein
Joel  3. 18.  a  fountain  shall  w  the  valley  of  Shittim


WATER  ED.

Gen.  2.  6.  a  mist  that  to.  the  face  of  the  ground

13.  10.  the  plain  of  Jordan,  that  it  was  well  to.

29.  2.  of  that  well  they  w.  flocks,  3.  ||  10.  Jacob  w.
Exod.  2.  17-  Moses  helped  and  w.  their  flocks,  19.
Prov.  11.  25.  he  that  watered!  shall  be  w.  himself
Isa.  58.  11.  and  thou  shalt  be  like  a  w.  garden
Jer.  31 .  12.  their  soul  shal  1  be  as  a  w.  garden

1  Cor.  3.  C.  I  have  planted,  A  polios  w.  but  God  gave
WA  1  ERE  1)81.

Deut.  11.  10.  to.  it  with  thy  foot  as  a  garden  ot  herhs
WA  I  EKES  1 .

Psal.  65.  9.  thou  visitest  the  earth  and  w.  it
10.  thou  w.  the  ridges  thereof  abundantly
W  A  1  EKE  1  11.

Psal.  104.  13.  hew.  the  hills  from  his  chambers
Prov.  11.25.  he  that  w.  shall  be  watered  himself
Isa.  55.  10.  rain  returneth  not,  but  w.  the  earth

1  Cor.  3.  7-  nor  he  that  planteth,  nor  w.  any  thing,  8.

WALE  RING.

Gen.  30.  38.  Jacob  laid  rods  in  the  to.  troughs
Job  37.  11.  by  to.  he  wearieth  the  thick  clouds
Prov.  3.  +  8.  it  shall  be  w.  to  thy  bones
Luke  13. 15.  doth  not  each  of  you  lead  his  ass  to  w.  f
WATER- BROOKS.

Psal.  42.  1.  as  the  hart  panteth  after  the  to.

W  ATER-COU  RSE.

2  Chron.  32.  30.  Hezekiah  stopped  the  upper  w.

Job  38.  25.  who  hath  divided  a  to.  for  overflowing

WA  I  ER-COURSES.

Isa.  44.4.  they  shall  spring  as  willows  by  the  w.
WA1  ER-ELOOD.

Psal.  69. 15.  let  not  the  to.  overflow  me,  nor  deep
WATEK-POf,  WA  I  ER-POTS.

John  2.  6.  there  were  set  there  six  to.  of  stone
7-  Jesus  saith,  fill  the  w.  with  water,  they  filled

4.  28.  the  woman  then  left  her  w.  and  went  to  city
WATER-SPOUTS.

Psal.  42.  7-  deep  calls  to  deep  at  noise  of  thy  w.
WATER-SPRINGS.

Psal.  107-  33.  he  turneth  the  to.  into  dry  ground
35.  he  turneth  dry  ground  into  w.

WATERS.

Gen.  1. 2.  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  face  of  to.

6.  let  the  firmament  divide  the  to.  from  the  w.  7.

9.  let  the  w.  be  gathered  |1  20.  w.  bring  forth

6.  17.  I,  even  I,  do  bring  a  flood  of  w.  on  earth
7-  17-  to.  increased  |1  18.  w.  prevailed,  19,  20,  24.

8.  1.  to.  decreased,  3,  5.  ||  13.  w.  were  dried  up

9.  11.  not  be  cut  off  anv  more  by  w.  of  a  flood
Exod.  7.17.  behold,  I  will  smite  the  w.  ||  20.  w.  blood
8.  6.  Aaron  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  to.
14.21.  by  a  strong  east-wind  the  w.  were  divided

22.  w.  were  a  wall,  29.  ||  28.  to.  returned,  15.  19

15.  8.  the  to.  were  gathered  together,  flood  stood

23.  they  could  not  drink  of  the  w.  of  Marah

27.  come  to  Elam,  they  encamped  there  by  the  w.
Num.  24.  6.  as  trees  planted,  as  cedar  trees  beside  w,
Deut.  10.7-  journeyed  to  Jotbath,  land  of  rivers  of  w.
32.51.  ye  trespassed  at  the  w.  of  Meribah-kadesh
33.  8.  with  whom  didst  strive  at  the  w.  of  Meribah
Josh.  3.  16.  the  w.  which  came  down  rose  up

4.  7-  the  to.  of  Jordan  were  cut  off  before  the  ark
23.  the  Lord  dried  up  the  to.  of  Jordan,  5.  1.

11.5.  they  came  and  pitched  at  the  w.  of  Merom
Judg.  5.  19.  the  kings  of  Canaan  by  w.  of  Meniddo

7.  24.  come  down  and  take  the  to.  before  them

2  Sam.  5.  20.  the  Lord  hath  broken  forth  as  a  breach
of  w.  upon  mine  enemies,  1  Chron.  ‘14.  II.
12.  27.  and  Joab  said,  l  have  taken  the  city  of  w.
2  Kings  2.  8.  and  Elijah  smote  the  w.  ||  14.  Elisha
21.  and  he  went  forth  unto  the  spring  of  the  to.

thus  saith  Lord,  l  have  healed  these  to.
5. 12. are  not  rivers  of  Damasc.  better  than  to.  of  Isr.
2  Chron.  32.  3.  he  took  counsel  to  stop  the  w.

Job  3.  24.  my  roarings  are' poured  out  like  the  w.

5.  10.  who  sendeth  w'.  upon  the  fields

11.  16.  remember  thy  misery  as  to.  that  pass  away

12.  15.  he  withholdeth  the  w.  and  they  dry  up

14.  11.  as  the  w.  fail  from  the  sea,  and  the  flood

19.  the  w.  wear  the  stones,  thou  washestaway

22.  11.  and  abundance  of  w.  cover  thee,  38.34.

24.  18.  he  is  swift  as  the  to.  thou  washest  away
26.  5.  dead  things  are  formed  from  under  the  w.

8.  he  bindeth  up  the  w.  in  his  thick  clouds

10.  he  hath  compassed  the  to.  with  clouds

27  .  20.  terrors  take  hold  on  him  as  w.  a  tempest

28.  4.  even  the  to.  forgotten  of  the  foot

25.  and  he  weigheth  the  w.  by  measure

29.  19.  tny  root  was  spread  out  by  the  to.

30. 14.  came  upon  me  as  a  wide  breaking  in  of  to.

37.  10.  and  the  breadth  of  the  to.  is  straitened

38.  30.  the  w.  are  hid  as  with  a  stone
Psal.  23.  2.  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  to.

33.  7.  he  gathereth  the  w.  of  the  seas  together
46.  3.  though  the  w.  thereof  roar  and  be  troubled
58.  7.  let  them  melt  away  as  w.  which  run

69.  1.  for  the  w.  are  come  in  unto  my  soul
73.  10.  to.  of  a  full  cup  are  wrung  out  to  them
77. 16.  the  w.  saw  thee,  O  God,  the  w.  saw  thee
78.  13.  he  made  the  w.  to  stand  as  an  heap

16.  and  caused  w.  to  run  down  like  rivers

20.  he  smote  the  rock  that  the  to.  gushed  out  and
streams  overflowed,  105.  41 . 1  114.8.  Ha.  48.  21.

81.  7-  1  proved  thee  at  the  w.  of  Meribah,  106.  32.

104.  6.  the  w.  stood  above  the  mountains

105.  29.  he  turned  their  w.  into  blood  and  slew

106.  11.  and  the  w.  covered  their  enemies

119.  136.  riversof  w.  run  down  mine  eyes  because
124.  4.  then  the  w.  had  overwhelmed  us

5.  then  the  proud  w.  had  gone  over  our  soul
136.  6.  him  that  stretched  the  earth  above  the  w.
147. 18.  he  causeth  the  wind  to  blow  and  w.  flow
148.  4.  ye  to.  above  the  heavens,  praise  him
Prov.  5.  15.  drink  w.  out  of  thine  own  cistern
16.  let  riversof  w.  be  dispersed  in  the  streets
8. 29.  that  the  w.  should  not  pass  his  commandment

9.  17.  stolen  w.  are  sweet,  and  bread  eaten  in  secret
25. 25.  as  cold  w.  toa  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  news

30.  4.  who  hath  bound  the  w.  in  a  garment
Eccl.  11.  1.  cast  thy  bread  upon  w.  thou  shalt  find
CantAAb.  a  well  of  living  w.  and  streams  from  Leb.

545


WAY


W  A  Y


WAY


Zsa.  8.  6.  as  this  people  refuseth  the  zo.  ofShiloah

7.  the  Lord  bringeth  on  them  w.  of  the  river

11.  9.  as  the  w.  cover  the  seas,  llab.l.  14.

15.  6.  for  the  w.  of  Nimrim  shall  be  desolate
9.  for  the  zo.  of  Dimon  shall  be  full  of  blood

17.  12.  a  rushing  like  the  rushing  of  mighty  w.

19.  5.  and  the  w.  shall  fail  from  the  sea

22.  9.  and  ye  gathered  the  w.  of  the  lower  pool

28.  17.  the  w.  shall  overflow  the  hiding-place

32.  20.  blessed  are  ye  that  sow  beside  all  w.

33.  16.  bread  be  given  him,  his  74.  shall  be  sure

35.  6.  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  w.  break  forth
40.  12.  who  hath  measured  the  zo.  in  his  hand
43.  2-  if  thou  pass  through  w.  I  will  be  with  thee

16.  and  maketh  a  path  in  the  mighty  w.

20.  I  give  w.  in  the  wilderness  and  rivers  in  desert
48.  1.  and  are  come  forth  out  of  the  w.  of.ludah

21.  he  caused  the  w.  follow  outof  the  rock
51. 10.  which  hath  dried  the  w.  of  the  great  deep

54.  9.  this  is  as  w.  of  Noah  unto  me,  w.  not  return

55.  1.  ho  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  w.

57.  20.  like  the  sea,  whose  74’.  cast  up  mire  and  dirt

58.  11.  like  a  spring  of  water,  whose  w.  tail  not
Jer.  2. 13.  have  forsaken  me  the  fountain  of  living  id.

18.  what  hast  thou  to  do,  to  drink  the  w.  of  Sihor  r
6.  7.  as  a  fountain  casteth  out  her  zo.  so  castethout

8.  14.  God  hath  given  us  w.  of  gall  to  drink

9.  1.  O  that  my  head  were  zo.  and  mine  eyes  tears

18.  eyes  run  with  tears,  eye  lids  gushout  with  zo.

10.  13.  is  a  multitude  of  zo.  in  the  heavens,  51.  16.

14.  3.  their  nobles  sent  little  ones  to  the  zo.

15.  18.  wilt  be  to  me  as  a  liar  and  as  zo.  that  fail

17.  8.  he  shall  be  as  a  tree  planted  by  the  zo.

13.  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  fountain  of  living  zo.

18.  14.  shall  the  cold  flowing  zo.  be  forsaken  ?

46.7.  whose  zo.  are  moved  as  the  rivets,  8.

47.  2.  behold,  zo.  rise  up  outof  the  north

48.  34.  for  the  zo.  of  Nimrim  shall  be  desolate

50.  38.  a  drought  is  upon  her  zo.  and  shall  be  dried
Lam.  3.  54.  zo.  flowed  over  mine  head,  T  am  cut  off
Ezek.  19.  10.  thy  mother  is  like  a  vine  by  the  zo.

31.  4.  zo.  made  him  great,  the  deep  set  him  on  high

14.  that  none  of  the  trees  by  7 0.  exalt  themselves

32.  2.  and  troublest  the  zo.  with  thy  feet

47.  1.  behold,  zo.  issued  from  under  the  threshold

3.  brought  me  through  zo.  the  zo.  were  to  ancles,  4.

5.  for  the  zo.  were  risen,  zo.  to  swim  in

8.  these  zo.  issue  out  toward  the  east  country,  12.

19.  even  to  the  zo.  of  strife  in  Kadesh,  48.  28.
Dan.  12.  6.  one  said  to  the  man  upon  there.  7.
Amos  5.  8.  calleth  for  zo.  of  sea,  and  poureth,  9.  6.

24.  but  let  judgment  run  down  as  re.  and  righte.
Jonah  2.  5.  the  zo.  compassed  me  about  to  the  soul
Mic.  1.  4.  as  zo.  that  are  poured  down  a  steep  place
Nah.S.  8.  No,  that  had  the  zo.  round  about  it

14.  draw  the  zo.  for  the  siege,  fortiry  thy  holds
Zech.  14.  8.  living  zo.  shall  go  from 'Jerusalem
2  Cor.  11. 26.  in  perils  of  w.  in  perils  of  robbers
Rev.  7.  17.  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of  zo.

8. 11.  a  third  part  of  the  zo.  became  wormwood,  and
many  died  of  the  zo.  because  bitter

11.  6.  have  power  over  zo.  to  turn  them  to  blood
14.  7.  worship  him  that  made  the  fountain  of  zo.

16.  4.  and  the  third  angel  poured  his  vial  on  the  zo.
5.  I  heard  angel  of  the  zo.  say,  thou  art  righteous

17.  15.  the  zo.  where  the  whore  sits,  are  peoples

See  Deep,  Great.

In,  or  into  WATERS.

Eiod.  15. 10.  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  zo.

25.  a  tree  when  cast  into  the  zo.  they  were  sweet
Lev.  11.  9-  these  shall  ye  eat,  of  all  that  are  in  zo.

what  hath  fins  and  scales  in  zo.  10.  46.  Dezit.  14.  9.

12.  hath  no  fins  nor  scales  in  the  zo.  unclean
Dent.  4.  18.  the  likeness  of  any  fish  izi  the  zo.  5.8.
Josh.  3.  13.  as  the  feet  of  priests  restrff  the  zo.

Neh.  9. 11.  threwest  a  stone  into  the  mighty  zo.
Psal.  74.  1.3.  bl  eakest  the  heads  of  dragons  in  zo.
104.  3.  layeth  the  beams  of  his  chambers  in  zo.
Mat.  8.  32.  the  swine  ran  and  perished  in  the  zo.
Mark  9.  22.  oft  it  cast  him  into  fire  and  into  zo.
Many  WA  TERS.

Num.  24.  7-  and  his  seed  shall  be  in  many  zo.
t  Sam.  22. 17-  drew  me  out  of  many  zo.  Psal.  18.  16.
Psal.  29.  3.  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  upon  many  zo.
93.  4.  Lord  mightier  than  the  noise  of  many  zo.
Cazit.  8.  7-  maziyzo.  cannot  quench  love,  nor  floods
Isa.  17.  13.  nations  like  the  rushing  of  many  zo.

Jer.  51.  13.  O  thou  that  dwellest  upon  many  zo.
Ezek.  19;  10.  she  was  fruitful  by  reason  of  many  zo.
43.  2.  his  voice  was  like  a  noise  of  many  to.  earth
shined  with  his  glory,  Rev.  1.  15.  I  14.  2.  |  19.  6.
Rev.  17.  1 .  the  great  whore  that  sitteth  on  many  zo.
WAVE.

Jam.  1.  6.  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  zo.  of  the  sea
WAVE,  Verb.

Exod. ‘19.  24.  thou  shalt  re.  them  for  a  wave  offering
before  the  Lord,  L.ev.  8.  27. 1  23.  20.  Num.  6.  20~.

26.  thou  shalt  zo.  the  breast  ||  27.  zo.  the  shoulder,

Lev.  7.  30.  |  8.  29. 1  9.  21. 1  10. 15.
Lev.  23. 11.  he  shall  zo.  the  sheaf  before  the  Lord,  12.
Num.  5.25.  the  priest  shall  zo.  the  jealousy-offering
WAVED.

Lev.  14.  21.  then  he  shall  take  one  lamb  to  be  zo.
See  Breast,  Loaves,  Offering.
WAVERETH.

Jam.  1.  6.  he  that  zo.  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea
WAVERING.

Heb.  10.23.  hold  fast  profession  of  faith  without  zo.
Jam.  1.  6.  but  let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  zo.
WAVES.

Psal.  42.  7.  all  thy  zo.  are  gone  over  me,  Jo na h  2.  3.
65.  7.  sti  1  let  h  the  noise  of  their  zo.  89.  9. 1  107.  29.
88.  7.  thou  hast  afflicted  me  with  all  thy  zo.

93.  3.  floods  lift  up  voice,  floods  lift  up  their  zo.

4.  the  Lord  on  high  is  mightier  than  mighty  zo.
107.  25.  the  stormy  wind  which  lifteth  up  the  zo.

Isa.  48.  18.  thy  righteousness  as  the  zo.  of  the  sea
51.15.  but  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  that  divided
the  sea,  whose  zo.  roared,  Jer.  31.  35.
Jer.  5.  22.  tho’  the  zo.  toss,  yet  can  they  not  prevail
51 . 42.  Babylon  is  covered  with  the  multitude  of  zo.
55.  lord  hath  spoiled  Babylon  when  her  zo.  roar
546


Ezek.  26.  3.  nations  come,  as  the  sea  causeth  his  zf.
27-  +  28.  zo.  shall  shake  at  cry  of  thy  pilots
Zech.  10.  11.  and  shall  smite  the  zo.  in  the  sea
Mat.  8.  24.  that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  zo.
14.  24.  but  the  ship  was  tossed  with  zo.  Mark  4.  37.
Luke  21.  25.  be  signs,  the  sea  and  the  zo.  roaring
Acts  27.  41.  the  hinder  part  was  broken  with  the  zo.
Jude  13.  raging  zo.  of  sea,  foaming  out  their  shame
WAX.

Psal.  22.  14.  my  heart  is  like  zo.  it  is  melted
68.  2.  as  zo.  melteth,  so  the  wicked  perish
97. 5.  the  hills  melted  like  zo.  at  presence  of  Lord
Mic.  1.  4.  the  valleys  cleft  as  zo.  before  the  fire

WAX.

Exod.  22.  24.  my  wrath  shall  zo.  hot,  32.  10.

32.  11.  Lord,  why  doth  thy  wrath  zo.  hot  against

22.  let  not  the  anger  of  my  lord  zo.  hot
Lev.  25.  47.  if  a  sojourner  or  a  stranger  zo.  rich  by
thee,  and  thy  brother  by  him  zo.  poor
1  Sam.  3.  2.  Eli  laid  down,  his  eyes  began  to  zo.  dim
Job  6.  17.  what  time  they  zo.  warm  they  vanish
14.  8.  though  the  root  thereof  zo.  old  in  the  earth
Psal.  102.  26.  all  of  them  shall  zo.  old  as  a  garment,
and  be  changed,  Isa.  50.  9. 1  51.  6.  Heb.  1.  11.
Isa.  17.  4.  the  fatness  of  his  flesh  shall  zo.  lean

29.  22.  neither  shall  his  face  now  zo.  pale
Jer.  6.  24.  our  hands  zo.  feeble,  anguish  hath  taken
Mat.  24.  12.  the  love  of  many  shall  zo.  cold
Luke  12.  33.  provide  bags  which  zo.  not  old

1  Tim.  5.  11.  begun  to  zo.  wanton  against  Christ

2  Tim.  3.  13.  seducers  shall  zo.  worse  and  worse

WAXED.

Gen.  26.  13.  Tsaac  zo.  great  ||  41.  56.  famine  zo.  sore
Exod.  1.  7.  Israel  zo.  exceeding  mighty,  20.

16.  21.  and  when  the  sun  zo.  hot,  it  melted

19.  19.  when  the  trumpet  zo.  louder  and  louder
32.  19.  Moses’  anger  zo.  hot,  and  he  cast  the  tables
Num.  11.  23.  is  the  Lord’s  hand  zo.  short  ?

Dent.  8.  4.  raiment  zo.  not  old,  29.  5.  Neh.  9.  21.
32.  15.  but  Jeshurun  zo.  fat  and  kicked
Josh.  23.  1.  that  Joshua  zo.  old  and  stricken  in  age

1  Sam.  2.  5.  she  that  hath  many  children  is  zo.  feeble

2  Sam.  3.  1.  but  David  zo.  stronger,  1  Chron.  11.9.

21.  15.  and  David  went  down,  fought,  and  zo.  faint

2  Kings  4.  34.  and  the  flesh  of  the  child  zo.  warm
2  Chron.  13.  21.  Abijah  zo.  mighty  and  married  wives
17-  12.  Jehoshaphat  i|  24.  15.  Jehoiada  zo.  old
Fsth.  9.  4.  Mordecai  zo.  greater  and  greater
Psal.  32.  3.  when  I  kept  silence  my  bones  zo.  old
Jer.  49.  24.  Damascus  is  zo.  feeble  and  tumetli
50.  43.  the  king  of  Babylon’s  hands  zo.  feeble
Dan.  8.  8.  the  he-goat  zo.  great  ||  9.  little  horn,  10.
Mat.  13.  15  this  people’s  heart  zo.  gross,  Acts  28.27 •
Luke  1.  80.  the  child  zo.  strong  in  spirit,  2.  40.

13.  19.  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  zo.  a  great  tree
Acts  13.  46.  Paul  and  Barnabas  id.  bold  and  said
Heb.  11.  34.  zo.  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight
Rev.  18.  3.  the  merchants  of  the  earth  are  zo.  rich
WAXEN,  WAXED.

Gen.  18.  12.  after  I  am  zo.  old  shall  I  have  pleasure  ?
19.  13.  because  the  cry  of  Sodom  was  zo.  great
Lev.  25.  25.  if  thy  brother  be  zo.  poor,  35,  39.

Dezit.  31.  20.  zo.  fat,  then  will  they  turn  toother  gods
Josh,  17.  13.  the  children  of  Israel  were  zo.  strong
Jer.  5.  27.  therefore  are  become  great  and  zo.  rich

28.  they  are  zo.  fat,  they  shine,  they  overpass
Ezek.  16.  7-  thou  hast  increased  and  zo.  great
WAXETH.

Psal.  6.  7.  mine  eye  w.  old  because  of  mine  enemies
Heb.  8.  13.  what  zo.  old,  is  ready  to  vanish  away
WAXING.

Phil.  1. 14.  many  brethren  zo.  confident  by  my  bonds

WAY,

Or  path,  is  taken  in  a  moral  sense,  (1)  For  con¬
duct.  Isa.  59.  8.  They  have  made  them  crooked
paths.  Psal.  1.  6.  The  Lord  knoweth  the  zoay  of
the  righteous.  (2)  Ways  are  put  for  the  lazos  of
the  Lord,  Gen.  18.  19.  They  shall  keep  the  zoay
of  the  Lord.  Psal.  18.  21.  I  have  kept  the  ways
of  the  Lord.  (3)  Way  is  put  for  custom,  man¬
ners,  and  way  of  life,  Gen.  6.  12.  All  flesh  had
corrupted  his  zoay  upon  the  earth.  And  in  Jer.
10.  2.  Learn  not  the  way  of  the  heathen.  (4)
The  way  of  the  Lord  expresses  his  conduct  in  re¬
spect  of  us,  Isa.  55.  8,  9.  My  thoughts  are  not
your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  zoays  my  ways,
saith  the  Lord.  For  as  the  heavens  are  higher
than  the  earth,  so  are  my  zoays  higher  than  your
zoays,  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts.  And
izi  Rom.  11.  33.  His  zoays  are  past  finding  out.

(5)  The  ways  of  God  are  put  for  his  zourks.
Job  40.  19.  He  is  the  chief  ot  the  zoays  of  God.

(6)  Divine  Providence,  Psal.  107-  7-  (7)  Death.

Josh.  23.  14.  (8)  The  method  of  salvation,  or

doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Acts  19.  9.

To  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth,  is  put  to  signify
dying  and  the  grave,  Josh.  23.  14.  A  hard  way,
is  put  to  represent  the  way  of  sinners,  a  way
of  impiety.  Judg.  2.  19.  They  ceased  not  from
their  stubborn  zoay ;  in  Hebrew,  hard  way.  It
is  so  called  to  signify,  that  although  it  seemed  at
first  very  soft,  and  easy,  and  pleasant,  yet  they
would  certainly  find  that  it  was  hard  and  difficult,
and  troublesome  to  them,  as  an  hard  way  is  to
the  traveller.  The  course  that  leadeth  to  destruc¬
tion  is  called  a  broad  way,  that  is  obvious  to  all,
and  in  which  many  zvalk  ;  on  the  contrary,  that
course  of  life  which  will  bring  a  man  to  heaven,
is  named  strait,  narrow,  difficult  to  find  and  to
walk  in.  A  course  of  holiness  is  unpleasing  to
flesh  and  blood,  it  does  not  at  all  gratify  men's
sensual  appetites  ;  it  is  a  narrow  way,  wherein
men  will  meet  zvith  many  crosses  and  tempta¬
tions,  Mat.  7.  13,  14.

Jesus  Christ  is  called  the  way,  John  14.  6.  because
it  is  by  him  alone  that  believers  obtain  eternal
life,  and  an  entrance  into  heaven.  He  is  the
way  to  heaven,  by  the  doctrine  zvhich  he  taught ;
by  his  death,  by  zvhich  he  purchased  this  hea¬
venly  inheritance  for  the  elect ;  by  his  holy  life
and  conversation,  setting  us  an  example,  that  we
should  follows  his  steps ;  and  by  the  influence  of


his  Spirit,  whereby  believers  are  sanctified,  and
made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inherit-
ance  of  the  saints  in  light.  The  Psalmist  says +
Thou  wilt  shew  me  the  path  of  life,  Psal.  16.  11
that  is,  "thou  wilt  raise  my  body  from  death  to
life,  and  conduct  me  to  the  place  and  state  of  ever¬
lasting  happiness."  In  Mat.  22.  16.  the  Pharisees
tell  our  Saviour  by  their  disciples.  Master,  we  know
that  thou  art  true,  and  teachest  the  zvayo'i  God  in-
truth  ;  that  is,  the  true  principles  of  religion,  tit.
Peter  says,  that  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil
spoken  of  by  false  teachers,  2  Pet.  2.  2.  that  is ,
the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  and  the  Christian  reli¬
gion.  In  J  ude  11.  it  is  said,  they  have  gone  in  the
way  of  Cain  ;  that  is,  they  have  folloued  his  exam¬
ple,  in  hating  and  persecuting  their  brethren.

Gen.  24.  42.  if  thou  prosper  my  w.  which  1  go
42.  25.  to  give  them  provision  for  the  w.  45.  21.
Exod.  13.  17.  led  not  thro’  the  w.  of  the  Philistines

18.  led  the  people  thro’  the  zo.  of  the  wilderness-
21.  in  a  pillar  of  cloud  to  lead  them  the  w.

18.  20.  shew  them  the  w.  Neh.  9.  19.  Psal.  107.  4.
Num.  21 . 4.  was  much  discouraged  because  of  the  an.

22.  26.  there  was  no  w.  to  turn  to  the  right  or  left
Deut.  1.  22.  by  what  w.  we  must  go,  Josh.  3.  4.

8.  2.  remember  the  w.  which  the  Lord  led  you
14.24.  if  the  w.  be  too  long  for  thee

17.  16.  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  w.

19.  3.  thou  shalt  prepare  thee  a  w.  ||  6.  the  w.  is  long-
28.  25.  thou  shalt  go  out  one  zv.  against  them

31.  29.  ye  will  turn  aside  from  w.  1  commanded
Josh.  23.  14.  behold,  I  am  going  w.  of  all  the  earth
24.  17.  Lord  preserved  us  in  all  the  w.  we  went
Judy.  2.19.  they  ceased  not  from  their  stubborn  w.

9.  25.  they  robbed  all  that  came  along  that  w.

18.  5.  whether  our  w.  we  go  shall  be  prosperous

6.  before  the  Lord  is  your  w.  wherein  ye  go

19.  9.  and  to-morrow  get  you  early  on  your  w.

1  Sam.  6.  12.  kine  took  straight  w.  to  Beth-shemesh

9.  6.  peradventure  he  can  shew  us  our  w.  to  go

8.  I  will  give  to  the  man  of  God  to  tell  us  our  w.

12.  23.  I  will  teach  you  the  good  and  the  right  w.

15.  20.  I  have  gone  the  zd.  which  the  Lord  sent  me
20. 1 19.  remain  by  the  stone  which  sheweth  the  zv.

2  Sam.  19.  36.  servant  will  go  little  w.  over  Jordan-

1  Kings  2. 2.  1  go  the  w.  of  all  the  earth,  be  strong
8.  36.  that  thou  teach  them  the  good  w.  to  walk

+  44.  pray  to  the  Lord  toward  the  w.  of  the  city

13.  9.  nor  turn  again  by  the  same  w.  thou  earnest

10.  he  went  another  w.  ||  12.  what  w.  went  he  ?

18.  6.  Ahab  went  one  w.  Obadiah  another  zv.

22.  24.  he  said,  which  w.  went  the  Spirit  of  Lord

from  me  to  speak  to  thee  ?  2  Chron.  18.  23.

2  Kings  3.  8.  which  w.  shall  we  go  ?  zd.  thro’  wildern.

5. 19.  so  he  departed  from  him  a  little  w.

7.  15.  all  the  w  full  of  garments  and  vessels
2  Chr.  6.  27.  when  thou  hast  taught  them  good  w.
Ezra  8.  21.  to  seek  of  him  a  right  zo.  for  us
Job  3.  23.  light  given  to  a  man  whose  w.  is  hid
12.  24.  to  wander  where  there  is  now.  Ps.  107-  40.

16.  22.  I  shall  go  the  w.  whence  1  shall  not  return
22. 15.  hasttTvu  marked  the  old  w.  which  wicked

23.  10.  but  he  xnoweth  the  w.  that  1  take

28.  23.  God  understands  the  w.  thereof,  and  knows

31.  +  32.  but  I  opened  my  doors  to  the  w.

38.  19.  where  is  the  w.  where  light  dwelleth  ?

Psal.  1.6.  Lord  knoweth  the  w.  of  the  righteous
2.  12.  kiss  the  Son,  lest  ye  perish  from  the  w.

36.  4.  he  setteth  himself  in  a  w.  that  is  not  good

37.  +  14.  bent  their  bow  to  slay  the  upright  of  w..
78.  50.  he  made  a  w.  to  his  anger,  he  spared  not
101.2.  1  will  behave  wisely  in  a  perfect  w.  6.

119.  27-  make  me  understand  the  zo.  of  thy  precepts*

29.  remove  from  me  the  w.  of  lying,  and  grant

30.  I  have  chosen  the  zv.  of  truth

32.  1  will  run  the  w.  of  thy  commandments

33.  teach  me,  O  Lord,  w.  of  thy  statutes,  143.  8.
104.  therefore  I  hate  every  false  zv.  128.

139.  24.  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  w.  in  me
146.  9.  the  w.  of  the  wicked  he  turns  upside  down
Prov.  2.  8.  he  preserveth  the  zo.  of  his  saints
12.  to  deliver  thee  from  the  w.  of  the  evil  man

4. 19.  the  w.  of  the  wicked  is  as  darkness

6.  23.  are  the  zo.  of  life,  15.  24.  Jer.  21.  8.

7.  8.  near  her  corner,  he  went  the  w.  to  her  house

27.  her  house  is  the  w.  to  hell  going  down  to  death-

12.  15.  the  w.  of  a  fool  is  right  in  his  own  eyes
26.  the  w.  of  the  wicked  seduceth  them

13.  15.  but  the  w.  of  the  transgressors  is  hard

14.  12.  there  is  a  w.  which  seemeth  right,  16.  25.

15.  9.  the  w.  ot  the  wicked  is  an  abomination

10.  is  grievous  to  him  that  forsaketh  the  w.  .

19.  the  w.  of  the  slothful  man  is  an  hedge  of  thorns,

but  the  zv.  of  the  righteous  is  made  plain
16.29.  leadeth  him  into  the  w.  that  is  not  good
21.  8.  the  w.  of  man  is  froward  and  strange

30.  19.  the  w.  of  an  eagle,  of  a  serpent,  of  a  ship

20.  such  is  the  w.  of  an  adulterous  woman
Eccl.  11.5.  knowest  not  what  is  the  w.  of  the  Spirit
Isa.  3.  12.  they  cause  thee  to  errand  destroy  the  w.

26.  7*  the  zo.  of  the  just  is  uprightness
35.  8.  an  highway  and  a  w.  called  w.  of  holiness
40.  14.  who  shewed  him  the  w.  of  understanding?-
4.3.  16.  Lord,  who  maketh  a  w.  in  the  sea,  51.  10.

19.  I  will  even  make  a  w.  in  the  w-ilderness
49. 11.1  will  make  all  my  mountains  a  zo.

57.  14.  prepare  a  zo.  ||  62. 10.  cast  up  the  high  w.

59.  8.  the  w.  of  peace  they  know  not,  Rom.  3.  17*
Jer.  6.  16.  where  is  the  good  zo.  and  walk  therein

10.  2.  learn  not  the  w.  of  heathen,  be  notdismaved
23.  I  know  that  the  w.  of  man  is  not  in  himself

12. 1 .  wherefore  doth  the  zo.  of  the  wicked  prosper ?  1
18.  15.  to  walk  in  paths,  in  a  w.  not  cast  up

32.  39.  1  will  give  them  one  heart  and  one  w.

42.  3.  that  the  Lord  thy  God  may  shew  us  the  zv.
50.  5.  they  shall  ask  the  w.  to  Zion  with  faces
Ezek.  21. 20.  appoint  a  zv.  that  the  sword  may  come

23.  13.  then  1  saw  that  they  took  both  one  w.

43.  2.  the  glory  of  G.  came  from  the  w.  of  the  east
Amos  2. 7-  and  turn  aside  the  w.  of  the  meek

Nah.  2.  1.  keep  the  munition,  watch  there.

Mai.  3  1.  he  shall  prepare  the  w  before  me


WAY


W  A  Y


WAY


'at. 7.  13.  broad  is  the  w.  that  leads  to  destruc  tion
1-1.  and  narrow  is  the  w.  which  leadeth  unto  life
.  28.  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  w.

0,5.  go  not  into  the  to.  of  the  Gentiles

2. 16.  we  know  thou  art  true,  and  teachest  the  re.

of  God  in  truth,  Mark  12.  14.  Luke  20.21.
ukeo.  10.  by  w  hat  to.  they  might  bring  him  in
0.  31.  there  came  down  a  certain  priest  that  w.

5.  20.  when  he  was  yet  a  great  w.  off,  father  saw
9. 4.  Zaccheus  ran  to  see  him,  was  to  pass  that  an
i hn  10. 1.  but  elimbeth  up  some  other  to.  is  a  thief

4.  4.  the  to.  ye  know  ||  6.  I  am  the  w.  the  truth

5.  Thomas  saith.  Lord,  how  can  we  know  the  to.  ?
cts  16.  17-  which  shew  to  us  the  to.  of  salvation

8.  26.  expounded  to  him  to.  of  God  more  perfectly

9.  9.  believeth  not,  but  spake  evil  of  that  to.

23.  there  arose  no  small  stir  about  that  to.

!4.  14.  after  the  to.  which  they  call  heresy

'am.  14. 13,  or  an  occasion  to  fall  in  brother’s  to.
Cor.  10.  13.  with  temptation  make  a  to.  to  escape

12. 31.  yet  shew  I  unto  you  a  more  excellent  to.
Thess.  3. 1 1 .  our  Lord  .1  esus  i  irect  our  to.  unto  you
leb.  9.8.  the  to.  into  the  holitst  not  yet  manifest

10.  20.  by  a  living  to.  which  he  hath  consecrated

12.  +  1?.  for  he  found  no  to.  to  change  his  mind
am.  2.  25.  she  had  sent  them  out  another  to.

Pet.  2.  2.  the  to.  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of

15.  which  have  forsaken  the  right  to.  and  are  gone
astray,  following  the  to.  of  Balaam  son  of  Bosor

21.  better  not  known  the  to.  of  righteousness
lev.  16.  12.  that  to.  of  kings  of  the  east  be  prepared
By  the  WAY.

ren.  42.  38.  if  mischief  befall  him  by  the  to.  ye  go
15.24.  Joseph  said, see  thatye  fall  notout  by  the  to.

19. 17.  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  to.  an  adder
hod.  4.24.  by  the  to.  in  the  inn  the  Lord  met  him
Jum.  14.  25.  turn  you,  get  you  into  the  wildern.  by

the  to.  of  the  It  ed  sea,  21.4.  Dent.  1.2, 40.  (2.1.
leut.6.  7.  talk  of  them  when  walkest  by  the  to. 11. 19.

25. 17.  what  Amalek  did  to  thee  by  the  to.

18.  how  he  met  thee  by  the  to.  1  Ham.  15.2.

28.68.  Lord  shall  bring  thee  by  the  to.  I  spake
osh.  5.  4.  even  all  the  men  of  war  died  by  the  to.

7.  because  they  had  not  circumc.  them  by  the  to.
Kings  13.9.  not  turn  aga.  by  the  w.  thou  earnest,  17.

24.  a  lion  met  him  by  the  to.  and  slew  him

38.  the  prophet  waited  for  the  king  by  the  to.
t\  tugs  3. 20.  there  came  water  by  the  to.  of  Edom
19.28.  put  my  bridle  in  lips,  1  will  turn  thee  back
by  the  to.  by  which  thou  earnest,  Isa.  37  .  29,  34.
Izra  8.  31.  and  of  such  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  to.
eb  21. 29.  have  ye  not  asked  them  that  go  by  the  to.  ?
ysal.  80. 12.  all  they  who  pass  by  the  to.  plucked  her
39.41.  all  that  pas’s  by  the  to.  spoil  him
•Iccl.  10.  3.  when  fools  walk  by  the  to.  wisdom  fails
sa.  42.  16.  bring  blind  by  the  to.  they  knew  not

48. 17.  the  Lora  God  that  leadeth  thee  by  the  to.

' er .  2. 17.  forsaken  God  when  he  led  thee  by  the  to.
6.25.  walk  not  by  the  to.  for  the  sword  of  the  enemy
Mm.  1. 1 12.  ye  that  pass  by  the  to.  behold  and  see
Izek.  43.  4.  glory  of  Lord  came  by  the  to.  of  gate
44. 3.  prince  shall  enter  by  the  to.  of  porch,  46.  2, 8.
46. 9.  he  that  enteretli  by  the  to.  of  north  gate
los.  13. 7.  as  a  leopard  by  the  to.  will  1  observe
1 lark  8. 3.  if  l  send  them  fasting,  they  faint  by  the  to.
27.  by  the  to.  he  asked  his  disciples,  saying
9.  33.  what  was  it  ye  disputed  by  the  to.?  34.
luke  10.  4.  carry  no  shoes,  salute  no  man  by  the  to.

24. 32.  heart  burn  while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  to.
Cor.  16. 7.  lor  1  will  not  see  you  now  by  the  to.

_  Every  WAY.

Jen.  3. 24.  a  flaming  sword  which  turned  every  to.
°sal.  219. 101.  refrained  my  feet  from  every  evil  to.
104.  therefore  I  hate  every  false  to.  128.

°rov.  21.2.  every  to.  of  man  right  in  his  own  eyes
'izek.  16.  31.  buildest  eminent  place  in  every  to.

Pom.  3.2.  much  every  to.  because  to  them  committed
Phil.  1. 18.  every  to.  whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth
See  Evil.

His  WAY.

7en.  6.  12.  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  to.  on  earth
:  6aw2.22.31.  as  for  God  his  to.  is  perfect,  Psal.  18.30.
KingsS.  32.  condemning  the  wicked,  to  bring  his
to.  on  his  own  head,  2  Chrvn.  6.  23.
Tubb.  19.  behold,  this  is  the  joy  of  his  to.

17-  9.  the  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  to.

21.  31.  who  shall  declare  his  to.  to  his  face?

23.  11.  his  w.  hav  e  1  kept  and  not  declined

36.  23.  who  hath  enjoined  him  his  to .  ?

Psal.  25.  9.  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  to.

37.  7.  because  of  him  who  prospereth  in  his  to.

23.  steps  of  good  man,  and  he  delighteth  in  his  to.

34.  wait  on  the  Lord  and  keep  his  to.  and  he  shall
119.  9.  wherewith  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his  to.
Prov.  8.  22.  I  ord  possessed  me  in  beginning  of  his  to.

11.  5.  righteousness  of  the  perfect  direct  his  to.

14.  8.  the  wisdom  of  prudent  is  to  understand  his  to.

16.  9.  a  man's  heart  deviseth  his  w.  but  I.,  directs
17.  he  that  keepeth  his  to.  preserveth  his  soul

19.  3.  the  foolishness  of  man  perverteth  his  to.

20.  14.  when  he  is  gone  his  to.  then  he  boasteth

21.  29.  as  for  the  upright,  he  directeth  his  to.

Isa.  48.  15.  he  shall  make  his  to.  prosperous

55. 7.  let  the  wicked  forsake  his  to.  and  his  thoughts
Jer.  4.  7.  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  is  on  his  to.
Ezek.  3. 18.  to  warn  the  wicked  from  his  wicked  to.
19.  and  he  turn  not  from  his  wicked  to.  33.  8,  9.

13.  22.  he  should  not  return  from  his  wicked  to.
Nah.  1.  3.  the  Lord  hath  his  to.  in  the  whirlwind
Jam.  1.24.  he  beholdeth  himself  and  goeth  his  to.

5. 20.  who  converteth  the  sinner  from  error  of  hi  >  to.
See  Went.

In  the  WAY.

Gen.  24.  27.  1  being  in  the  to.  the  Lord  led  me
48.  j.essed  be  the  Lord  who  led  me  in  the  right  to.

35.  3.  the  Lord  was  with  me  in  the  to.  I  went
19.  Rachel  buried  in  the  to.  to  Ephrath,  48.  7.

Exod.  5. ‘M.  Moses  and  Aaron  stood  in  the  to.

23.  -20  send  angel  before  thee  to  keep  thee  in  the  to.
Dent.  1. 33.  who  went  in  the  to.  before  you  to  search
23.  4.  because  they  met  you  not  with  bread  in  t.  to.
1  Kings  11.  29.  A lii >ah  found  Jeroboam  in  the  to.


I  1  Kings  13.  24.  his  carcase  was  cast  in  the  to.  25.  28

15.  26.  he  walked  in  the  to.  of  his  fathei ,  22.  52.

34.  he  did  evil  in  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  walken
in  the  to.  of  Jeroboam,  16.  2,  19,  26.  |  22.  52.

18.  7.  as  Obadiah  was  in  the  to.  Elijah  met  him
2  Kings  8.  18.  he  walked  in  the  to.  of  the  kings  of
Israel,  as  the  house  of  Ahab,  16.  3. 2  Chr.  21.6, 13.
27.  he  walked  in  the  to.  of  the  house  of  Ahab

21.  22.  and  walked  not  in  the  to.  of  the  Lord
2  Chrvn.  11.  17-  three  years  walked  in  the  to.  of  Dav.

20.  32.  he  walked  in  the  to.  of  Asa  his  father
Ezra  8.  22.  to  help  us  against  the  enemy  in  the  to.
Kelt.  9.  12.  to  give  them  light  in  the  to.  they  shall  go

19.  departed  not  by  day  to  lead  them  in  the  to.

Job  18.  10.  snare  laid  and  a  trap  for  him  in  the  to.
Psal.  1.1.  blessed,  nor  standeth  in  the  to.  of  sinners

25.  8.  therefore  will  he  teach  sinners  in  the  to.

12.  him  shall  he  teach  in  the  to.  32.  8.

85.  13.  and  shall  set  us  in  the  to.  of  his  steps
102.  23.  he  weakened  my  strength  in  the  to.

110.  7.  he  shall  drink  of  the  brook  in  the  to.

119.  1.  blessed  are  the  undefiled  in  the  to.

14.  1  have  rejoiced  in  the  to.  of  thy  testimonies
139. 24.  search  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  to.  everlasting
142.  3.  in  the  to.  have  they  privily  laid  a  snare
Prov.  1.15.  walk  not  thou  in  the  to.  with  them
2.  20.  that  thou  mayest  walk  in  the  w:  of  good  men

4.  11.  1  have  taught  thee  in  the  to.  of  wisdom
14.  and  go  not  in  the  to.  of  evil  men

8.  20.  I  lead  in  the  to.  of  righteousness

9.  6.  live,  and  go  in  the  to.  of  understanding

10. 17.  he  is  in  the  to.  of  life  that  keepeth  instruction

12.  28.  in  the  to.  of  righteousness  is  life

13.  6.  right,  keepeth  him  that  is  upright  in  the  w.

16.  31.  if  it  be  found  in  the  to.  of  righteousness
22. 5.  thorns  and  snares  are  in  the  to.  of  the  froward

6.  train  up  a  child  in  the  to.  he  should  go
23.  19.  be  wise,  and  guide  thy  heart  in  the  to.

26. 13.  the  slothful  man  saith  there  is  a  lion  in  the  to.

29.  27.  upright  in  the  to.  is  abomination  to  wicked
tlccl.  12.  5.  be  afraid,  and  fears  shall  be  in  the  to.
Isa.  8.  11.  should  not  walk  in  the  to.  of  this  people

26.  8.  in  the  to.  of  thy  judgments  we  waited  for  thee
57.  17.  went  on  frowardly  in  the  to.  of  his  heart
65.  2.  which  walked  in  the  to.  that  was  not  good

Jer.  2.  18.  what  heist  thou  to  do  in  the  to.  of  Egypt  ?

or  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  to.  of  Assyria  ?
Ezek.  23. 31.  thou  hast  walked  in  the  to.  of  thy  sister
Hos.  6.  9.  so  priests  murder  in  the  to.  by  consent
Amos  4.  +  10.  I  sent  pestilence  in  the  to.  of  Egypt
Mat.  5.25.  agree  quickly  whiles  thou  art  in  the  to.

21.  32.  John  came  in  the  to.  of  righteousness
Mark  11.  8.  many  spread  garments  in  the  to.  others

strewed  branches  in  the  to.  Mat.  21.8.  Luke  19.  36.
Luke  1.  79.  to  guide  our  feet  in  the  to.  of  peace

12.  58.  as  thou  art  in  the  to.  give  diligence
Acts  9.  17.  Jesus  that  appeared  to  thee  in  the  to.

27.  how  he  had  seen  the  Lord  in  the  to.

Jude  11.  they  have  gone  in  the  to.  of  Cain
See  Lord.

My  WAY.

Gen.  24.  56.  seeing  the  Lord  hath  prospered  my  to.

2  Sam.  22.  33.  he  maketh//?y  to.  perfect,  Psal.  18.  32.
Job  19.  8.  fenced  up  my  to.  that  1  cannot  pass
Isa.  40.  27.  why  sayest  thou,  my  to.  is  hid  from  Lord  ?
Ezek.  18.  25.  hear,  O  Israel,  is  not  my  to.  equal  ?
John.  8.21. 1  go  my  to.  \\Pom.  15.  24.  broughton  my  to.
2  Cor.  1.  16.  to  be  brought  on  my  to.  to  Jerusalem
Out  of  the  WAY.

Exod.  32.  8.  they  have  turned  aside  quickly  out  of  the
to.  1  commanded  them,  Ueut.  9.  12, 16.  Judy.
2. 17.

iVum.  22.  23.  the  ass  turned  aside  out  of  the  to.

Deut.  11.  28.  cursed  if  ye  turn  aside  out  of  the  to.

13.  5.  thrust  thee  out  of  the  to.  L.  God  commanded

27.  18.  that  maketh  blind  to  wander  out  of  the  to.
Job  24.  4.  they  turn  the  needy  out  of  the  to.

24.  they  are  taken  out  of  the  to.  and  cut  off
31.  7.  if  my  step  hath  turned  out  of  the  to.

Prov.  21.  16.  wandereth  out  of  the  to.  of  understand.
Isa.  28.  7.  and  thro’  strong  drink  are  out  of  the  to.

30.  11.  get  you  out  of  the  to.  turn  aside  out  of  path
57.  14.  take  stumbling-block  out  of  the  to.  of  people
Mai.  2.  8.  but  ye  are  departed  out  of  the  to.

Rum.  3. 12.  are  all  gone  out  of  the  to.  none  doth  good
Col.  2.  14.  he  took  the  hand-writing  out  of  the  to.

2  Thess.  2.  7.  will  let,  till  he  be  taken  out  of  the  to.
II eb.  5.  2.  compassion  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  to.

12.  13.  lest  that  wh  ich  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the  to.
Own  WAY.

Prov.  1.31.  shall  they  eat  the  fruitof  their  own  to.

20.  24.  how  can  a  man  understand  his  own  w.?
Isa.  53.  6.  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  w.
56.  11.  greedy  dogs,  they  all  look  to  their  own  to.
Ezek.  22.  31.  their  ownw.  have  I  recompensed
36.  17.  they  defiled  Israel  by  their  0.  w.  and  doings

W  A  V  -side.

Gen.  38. 21.  where  is  harlot  that  was  by  th e  w.-side?
1  Sam.  4. 13.  Eli  sat  on  a  seat  by  w.-side  watching
Psal.  140.5.  the  proud  have  spread  a  net  by  w.-side
Mat.  13.  4.  when  he  sowed,  some  seeds  fell  by  the  w.-
side,  fowls  came,  19.  Mark  4.4,15.  Luke  8.5,12.
20.  30.  two  blind  men  sitting  by  the  w.-side
Mark  10.  46.  as  he  went  out  of  Jericho,  blind  Bar-
timeus  sat  by  the  w.-side  begging,  Luke  18.  35.
Their  WAY.

1  Kings  2.  4.  if  thy  children  take  heed  to  their  w.  to
walk  before  me  in  truth,  8.  25.  2  C '/iron.  6.  16.
Job  6.  18.  the  paths  of  their  to.  are  turned  aside

19.  12.  his  troops  raise  up  their  w.  against  me
29.  25.  1  chose  out  their  w.  sat  chief  and  dwelt
Psal.  35.  6.  let  their  w.  be  dark  and  slippery
49.  13.  this  their  w.  is  their  folly,  yet  posterity
Jer.  3.  21.  they  have  perverted  their  w.  and  forgot
6.  27.  that  thou  mayest  know  and  try  their  w.

23.  12.  their  w.  shall  be  to  them  as  slippery  ways
Ezek.  7.27.  I  will  do  to  them  after  their  w.  and  judge
according  to  their  deserts,  9.  10. 1  11.  21.

14.  22.  ye  shall  see  their  to.  and  their  doings
33.  17.  as  for  them  their  w.  is  not  equal
36.  17.  their  w.  was  before  me  as  uncleanness  of

19.  according  to  their  w.  and  doings  1  judged  them


Acts  15.  3.  being  brought  on  their  w.  by  the  churcr
See  Went.

This  WAY.  _

Gen.  28.  20.  if  God  will  keep  me  in  this  w.  1  go
Exod.  2.  12.  Moses  looked  this  w.  and  that  way
Josh.  8.  20.  had  no  power  to  flee  this  w.  or  that
2  Kings  6.19.  Elisha  said,  this  is  not  the  w.  follow  me
Isa.  30.  21.  saying,  this  is  the  w.  walk  ye  in  it
Acts  9.  2.  if  lie  found  any  ot  this  w.  might  bring

22.  4.  I  persecuted  this  w.  unto  the  death
Thy  WAY.

Gen.  24.  40.  the  Lord  will  prosper  thy  w.

Exod.  33.  13.  therefore,  1  pray,  shew  me  thy  w.

Nu/n.  22.  32.  because  thy  w.  is  perverse  before  me
Josh.  1.  8.  then  thou  shalt  make  thy  to.  prospeious
1  Kings  19.  15.  return  on  thy  w.  to  the  wilderness
Psal.  5.  8.  make  thy  w.  straight  before  my  face
27-  11.  teach  me  thy  w.  O  Lord,  lead  me,  86.  11.

37.  5.  commit  thy  w.  unto  the  Lord,  trust  in  him
44.  18.  neither  have  our  steps  declined  from  thy  w.

67.  2.  that  thy  w.  may  be  known  upon  earth
77-  13.  thy  w.  O  God,  is  in  the  sanctuary

19.  thy  w.  is  in  the  sea,  thy  path  in  great  waters
119.  37.  and  quicken  thou  me  in  thyw.

Prov.  3.  23.  then  shalt  thou  walk  in  thy  w.  safely

5.  8.  remove  thy  w.  far  from  her,  come  not  nigh
Isa.  57.  10.  art  wearied  in  the  greatness  of  thy  w.

Jer.  2.  23.  see  thy  w.  in  the  valley,  what  hast  done

33.  why  trimmest  thou  thy  w.  to  seek  love

36.  why  gaddes*  thou  about  to  change  thy  to.  ?

4.  18.  thy  to.  have  procured  these  things  unto  thee
Ezek.  16.  43.  1  also  will  recompense  thy  w.

Hos.  2.  6.  I  will  hedge  up  thy  w._  with  thorns

10.  13.  because  thou  didst  trust  in  thy  w.

Hat.  11. 10.  behold,  1  send  my  messenger,  who  shall
prepare  thy  w.  before  thee,  Mark  1.  2.  Luke  7.  27.

WAYS.

Gen.  19.  2.  ye  shall  rise  early  and  go  on  your  w.

Deut.  5.  33.  walk  in  all  the  w.  Lora  commanded

1  Kings  22.  43.  he  walked  in  the  w.  of  Asa  his  fathei

2  Kings  21.  21.  he  walked  in  all  the  w.  of  Manasseh

22.  2.  he  walked  in  w.  of  David,  2  Chr.  17 .  3.  |  34.2.

2  Citron.  21.  12.  walked  not  in  w.  of  Jehoshaphat
22.  3.  he  walked  in  the  w.  of  the  house  of  Ahab
28.  2.  he  walked  in  the  w.  of  the  kings  of  Israel
Job  24.  13.  they  know  not  the  w.  of  the  light
30. 12.  they  raise  up  the  w.  of  their  destruction

34.  21.  for  his  eyes  are  upon  the  to.  of  man
40.  19.  Behemoth  is  the  chief  of  the  w.  of  God
Psal.  84.  5.  in  whose  heart  are  the  w.  of  them
Prov.  1.19.  so  are  the  w.  of  every  one  greedy  of  gain

2.  13.  to  walk  in  the  w.  of  darkness

15.  whose  w.  are  crooked,  and  they  froward

3.  17-  wisdom's  w.  are  w.  of  pleasantness  and  paths

5.  6.  her  w.  are  moveable,  canst  not  know  them

21.  the  w.  of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Loid

6.  6.  go  to  the  ant,  consider  her  w.  and  be  wise

7.  25.  let  not  thine  heart  decline  to  her  w.

14.  12.  the  end  thereof  are  the  a;,  of  death,  16.25.

16.  2.  the  w.  of  a  man  are  clean  in  his  own  eyes
7.  when  a  man’s  w.  please  the  Lord,  he  makes

17.  23.  taketh  a  gift  to  pervert  the  w.  of  judgment

31.  27.  she  looketh  well  to  the  to.  of  her  household  *

Eccl.  11.9.  O  young  man,  walk  in  the  w.  of  thy  heart

Isa.  49.  9  they  shall  feed  in  the  w.  and  pastures
Jer.  2.  23.  a  swift  dromedary  traversing  her  w.

3.  2.  in  the  w.  hast  thou  sat  for  them  as  Arabian

6.  16.  stand  in  the  w.  and  see,  ask  for  old  paths
7.3.  amend  your  w.  and  your  doings,  5.  1  26.  13.

23.  walk  in  all  the  w.  1  have  commanded  you
12.  16.  if  they  diligently  learn  the  w.  of  my  people

18.  11.  make  your  w.  and  your  doings  good

32.  19.  thy  eyes  are  open  on  the  to.  of  sons  of  men
Lam.  1.  4.  the  w.  of  Zion  do  mourn,  none  come

3.  40.  let  us  search  and  try  our  w.  and  turn  to  Lord
Ezek.  18.  25.  are  not  your  w.  unequal  ?  29.

20.  43.  there  shall.ye  remember  your  w.  and  doings

44.  not  according  to  your  wicked  w.  or  doings

21.  19.  son  of  man  appoint  thee  two  w.  that  sword

21.  stood  at  head  of  the  two  w.  to  use  divination
Hag.  1 .  5.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  consider  your  w.  7 ■

Zech.  1.  6.  do  to  us  according  to  our  w.  and  doings
Luke  3.  5.  and  the  rough  w.  shall  be  made  smooth
Acts  2.  28.  hast  made  known  to  me  the  w.  of  life

Any  WAYS.

Lev.  20.  4.  do  any  w.  hide  their  eyes  from  the  man
Num.  30.  15.  if  ye  shall  any  w.  make  them  void
2  Citron,  32.  13.  any  w.  able  to  deliver  their  lands
See  By-Wavs,  Evil,  High.

His  WAYS.

Deut.  8.  6.  shalt  keep  commandments  of  Lord  to
walk  in  his  w.  and  fear  him,  26.  17.  1  28.  9. 1
30.  16.  1  Kings  2.  3.

10.  12.  to  walk  in  all  his  w.  to  love  him  and  to
serve  the  Lord,  11.22.  Josh.  22.5. 1  KmgsQ.  58.

19.  9.  to  love  the  Lord  and  walk  ever  in  his  w.

32.  4.  all  hisw.  are  judgment,  Dan.  4.  37.

1  Sam.  8.  3.  Samuel’s  sons  walked  not  in  his  w.

18.  14.  David  behaved  wisely  in  his  w.  L.  with  him

1  Kings  8.  39.  hear  thou  in  heaven,  forgive  and  give

to  every  man  according  to  his  w.  2  Chron.  6.  30.

2  Chron.  13.  22.  Abijah’s  acts  and  his  w.  are  written

27.  6.  Jotham  prepared  bis  w.  before  the  Lord
7.  his  w.  are  written  in  book  of  the  kings,  28.  26.

Job  26.  14.  these  are  parts  of  hisw.  but  how  little
34. 11.  cause  every  man  find  according  to  his  w.

27.  and  would  not  consider  any  of  his  w.

Psal.  10.5.  his  w.  are  always  grievous
103.  7.  he  made  known  his  w.  unto  Moses
119.3.  they  do  no  iniquity,  they  walk  in  his  to.

128.  1.  blessed  is  every  one  that  walketh  in  his  w.

145.  17.  the  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  w.

Prov.  3.  31.  envy  not  and  choose  none  of  his  w.

10.  9.  he  that  perverteth  his  w.  shall  be  known
14.  2.  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  w.  despiseth  the  Ld,

19.  16.  he  that  despiseth  his  to.  shall  die

22.  25.  lest  thou  learn  his  w.  and  get  a  snare

28.  6.  is  better  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  w.

18.  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  w.  shall  fall  at  once

Isa.  2.  3.  he  will  teach  us  of  his  w.  Mic.  4.  2.

42.  24.  for  they  would  not  walk  in  his  to.

45.  13.  1  will  direct  all  his  w.  saith  the  Lord

547


V\  E


YY  E  A


VV  E  B


Is  a.  57.  18.  I  have  seen  nis  w.  ami  will  heal  him
Jer.  17.  10.  give  every  man  according  to  his  w.  32.19.
Ezek.  18.  2:1.  that  he  should  return  from  his  w.

30.  1  will  judge  Israel  according  to  his  w.  33.  20.
Eos.  9.  8.  is  a  snare  of  a  fowler  in  all  his  w.

12.  2.  Lord  will  punish  Jacob  according  to  his  tv.
Joel  2.  7.  they  shall  march  on  every  one  in  his  w.
Hah.  3.  6.  the  hills  did  bow,  his  w.  are  everlasting
Luke  1.76.  thoushalt  go  before  L.to  prepare  his  w.
Rom.  11.  33.  and  his  tv.  are  past  finding  out
Jam.  1.  B.uouble-minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  w.

11. so  shall  the  lich  man  fadeaway  in hisw.

See  Lord.

My  WAYS.

1  Kings  3.  14.  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  to.  as  thy
father  David  did  walk,  11.  38.  Zech.  3.  7-
11 .33. worshipped  Milcolm  and  not  walked  in  mytv.
Job.  31.4.  doth  not  he  see  my  w.  and  count  my  steps
Psal.  39.  1.  1  will  take  heed  to  thy  tv.  that  1  sin  not
81.  13.  O  that  Israel  had  walked  in  mytv.

95.  10.  they  have  not  known  my  tv.  lleh.  .3.  10.
119.5.0  that  my  tv.  were  direct,  to  keep  thy  statutes
26.  1  have  declared  my  tv.  and  thou  heartiest  me
59.  I  thought  on  my  tv.  and  tui  ned  my  feet  to  thy
168.  kept  testimonies,  all  my  tv.  are  before  thee
139.  3.  and  art  acquainted  with  all  mytv.

Prov.  8.  32.  blessed  are  they  that  keep  my  tv.
23.26.  my  son,  let  thine  eyes  observe  mytv.

Isa.  55.  8.  neither  are  your  ways  my  tv.  saith  the  Ld.

9.  so  are  my  tv.  higher  than  your  ways
58.  2.  seek  me  daily  and  delight  to  know  my  tv.
Lam.  3.  9.  he  hath  inclosed  mytv.  with  hewnstone

11.  he  turned  aside  mytv.  and  pulled  me  in  pieces
Ezek.  18.  29.  are  not  my  tv.  equal,  your  tv.  unequal?
Zeeh.  3.7.  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  my  w.  and  keep
Mai.  2.  9.  according  as  >  e  have  not  kept  my  tv.

1  Cor.  4.  17.  bring  you  into  remembrance  of  my  tv.

Own  WAYS.

Job  13.  15.  I  will  maintain  my  own  tv.  before  him
Prov.  14.  14.  the  backslider  be  filled  with  hisoaa  a’.
Isa.  58.  13.  honour  him,  not  doing  thine  otvn.tv.

66.  3.  yea,  they  have  chosen  their  own  tv.

Ezek.  36.  31.  then  remember  your  own  evil  tv.

32.  be  ashamed  for  your  own  tv.  ()  house  of  Israel
Acts  14.  16.  he  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  own  tv.
See  Seven.

'lheir  WAYS.

2  Chron.1. 14.  pray  and  turn  from  their  wicked  tv.
Job  24.  23.  yet  his  eyes  are  upon  their  tv.

Psal.  125.  5.  for  such  as  turn  to  their  crooked  to.
Prov.  9.  15.  call  passengers  who  go  right  on  their  w.
Jer.  15.  7.  since  they  return  not  from  their  tv.

16.  17.  for  mine  eyes  are  upon  all  their  tv.

18.  15.  they  caused  them  to  stumble  in  their  tv.
Ezek.  14.  23.  comfort  you  when  ye  see  their  w.

16.  47.  yet  hast  thou  not  walked  after  their  tv.

Eos.  4.  9.  I  will  punish  them  for  their  tv.

Rom.  3.  16.  destruction  and  misery  are  in  their  tv.

2  Pet.  2.  2.  many  shall  follow  their  pernicious  tv.
Thy  WAYS.

Dent.  28.  29.  thou  slialt  not  prosper  in  thy  tv.

1  Sam.  8.  5.  art  old,  thy  sons  walk  not  in  thy  tv.

2  Chron.  6.  31.  may'  fear  thee  to  walk  in  thy  tv.

Job  4.  6.  thy  hope  and  the  uprightness  of  thy  tv.

21.  14.  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  tv.

22.  3.  is  it  gain  to  him  thou  makest  thy  w.  perfect  ?

28.  and  the  light  shall  shine  upon  thy  tv.

Psal.  25.  4.  shew  m e  thy  tv.  O  Lord,  teach  me
51.  13.  then  will  I  teach  transgressors  thy  to.

91.  11.  charge  his  angels,  to  keep  thee  in  Mthyw.
119.  15.  I  will  have  respect  unto  thy  w.

Prov.  3.  6.  in  all  thy  w.  acknowledge  him,  he  direct

4.  26.  and  let  all  thy  to.  be  established

31.  3  nor  thy  tv.  to  that  which  destroy  eth  kings
Isa.  63.  17.  why  hast  thou  made  us  err  from  thy  tv.
64.  5.  those  that  remember  thee  in  thy  tv.

Jer.  2.  33.  thou  hast  taught  the  wicked  thy  w.

3.  13.  thou  hast  scattered  thy  tv.  to  the  strangers
Ezek.  7.  3.  judge  thee  according  to  thy  tv.  4. "8,  9.

16.  47.  corrupted  more  than  they  in  all  thy  to.

61.  then  remember  thy  tv.  and  be  ashamed
24.  14.  according  to  thy  w.  shall  they  judge  thee
28.  15.  thou  wast  perfect  in  thy  tv.  from  the  day
Dan.  5.  23.  the  God  in  whose  hand  are  all  thy  to.
Rev.  15.  3.  just  and  true  are  t.  tv.  thou  king  of  saints
WAY-FAKING.

Judg.  19-  17-  he  saw  a  tv.  man  in  the  street  of  city
2  Sam.  12.  4.  take  his  own  flock  to  dress  for  y/.  man
Isa.  33.  8.  high-ways  lie  waste,  the  a.  man  ceaseth
35.  8.  w.  men,  though  tools,  shall  not  err  therein
Jer.  9.  2.  oh  that  l  had  a  lodging  place  of  vs.  men

14.  8.  why  shouldest  thou  be  as  a  tv.  man  ?

WAY-MAKKS.

Jer.  31.  21.  set  thee  up  tv.  make  thee  high  heaps

WE.

Gen.  46.  34.  been  about  cattle,  we  and  our  fathers
Num.  13.  31.  we  not  able,  they  are  stronger  than  we
Deur.  1. 28.  the  people  is  greater  ami  taller  than  we
1  Sam.  8.  20.  that  we  may  be  like  all  the  nations
Ezra  10.  4.  we  will  be  with  thee,  be  of  courage
Neh.  2.  20.  toe  his  servants  will  arise  and  build

5.  2.  we  our  sons  and  our  daughters  are  many

8.  we  after  our  ability  have  redeemed  the  Jews

Job  8.  9.  we  are  but  of  yesterday,  know  nothing
Psal.  100.  3.  we  are  his  people,  sheep  of  his  pasture
Isa.  14.  10.  art  thou  also  become  weak  as  we  ?

63.  19.  we  are  thine  l|  Mark  5.  9.  for  we  are  many
Mark  9.  28.  why  could  not  we  cast  him  out  ?

Luke  1. 74.  that  we  being  delivered  from  enemies
John  8.  3.3.  we  be  Abraham's  seed,  never  in  bondage

9.  28.  thou  art  his  disciple,  we  are  Moses’ disciples
40.  are  ire  blind  also  ?  >1 17 . 11. may  be  one  as  we  22.

Acts  5.  32.  and  we  are  his  witnesses,  10.  39.

10.  47.  who  received  the  Holy  Ghost  as  well  as  we

14.  15.  we  are  men  of  like  passions  with  you

23.  15.  we  or  ever  he  come  are  ready  to  kill  him
Rom.  12.  5.  we  being  many  are  one  body  in  Christ

15.  1.  we  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  infirmities
1  Cor.  3.  9.  we  are  labourers  together  with  God

4.  10.  tee  are  tools,  but  ye  are  wise,  we  are  weak

12.  being  reviled,  we  bless,  persecuted,  rcesuffer  it
8. 6. one  God,  and  we  in  him  ;  one  Ld.and  we  by  him

548


1  Cor.  9.12.  are  not  we  rather  ||  10. 17.  we  are  one  bread
10.22.  do  we  provoke  Lord,  are  we  stronger  than  he  r

2  Cor.  1.  14.  that  we  are  your  rejoicing,  as  ye  ours

9.  4.  we  that  we  say  not  ye,  should  be  ashamed

10.  7-  that  as  he  is  Christ’s,  so  are  we  Christ’s

11.  12.  they  may  be  found  even  as  we

Gal.  1. 8.  though  we  or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach

4.  3.  we  when  we  were  children,  were  in  bondage

28.  now  we  as  Isaac,  are  the  children  of  promise
Eph.  2.  10.  tor  we  are  his  workmanship  in  Christ  Jes.
1  Thess.  4.  17.  we  which  are  alive  shall  be  caught  in

the  clouds,  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord
5. 5.  we  are  not  of  the  night  nor  of  darkness
lleb.  3.6.  whose  house  are  we  if  we  hold  fast  confiden.
10.39.  we  are  not  of  them  who  draw  back  to  perdition

1  John  4.6.  ?ce  are  of  G .  hereby  we  know  Spirit  of  truth

5.  19.  we  know  that  we  are  of  God  and  world  lieth

W  KAK.

Num.  13.  18.  and  see  w  hether  they  be  strong  or  w.
Judg.  16.  7.  then  shall  1  be  a/,  as  other  men,  11,17.

2  Sam.  3.  39.  1  am  this  day  tv.  though  anointed  king
2  Chron.  15.  7-  be  strong,  let  not  your  hands  be  w.
Job  4.  3.  thou  hast  strengthened  the  w.  hands
Psal.  6.  2.  I  am  w.  ||  109.  24.  my  knees  are  w.

Isa.  14.  10.  art  thou  also  become  w.  as  we  ?

35.  3.  strengthen  ye  the  tv.  hands
Ezek.  7 .  17.  all  knees  shall  be  w.  as  water,  21.  7.

16.  30.  how  w.  is  thy  heart,  saith  the  Lord  God
Joel  3  10.  let  the  w.  say,  I  am  strong
Mat. ‘Jb.  41.  but  the  flesh  is  w.  Mark  14.  38.

Acts  20.  35.  so  labouring  ye  ought  to  support  the  w.
Rom.  A.  19-  being  not  w.  in  faith,  he  considered  not

8.  3.  for  the  law  was  tv.  thro’  the  flesh,  God  sending

14.  1.  him  that  is  tv.  in  the  faith  receive  ye
2.  another  who  is  w.  eateth  herbs

21 .  whereby  thy  brother  stumbleth  or  is  made  to.
15. 1.  we  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  w.

1  Cor.  1. 27-  w.  things  to  confound  the  mighty
4.  10.  we  are  w.  |J  8.  7-  conscience  being  w.  10.

8. 12.  wound  their  w.  conscience,  sin  against  Christ

9.  22.  to  the  w.  1  be;ame  as  w.  that  1  might  gain

the  w.  I  am  made  all  things  to  all  men
11.30.  for  this  cause  many  are  tv.  and  sickly

2  Cor.  10.  10.  his  bodily  presence  is  w.  and  speech
11.21.  I  speak  as  though  vve  had  been  w.

29.  who  is  to.  and  1  am  not  tv.?

12.  10.  for  when  1  am  to.  then  am  1  strong

13.  3.  which  to  you  ward  is  not  w.  but  is  mighty
4.  for  we  are  w.  in  him,  but  shall  live  with  him

9.  are  glad  when  we  are  to.  and  ye  strong
Gal.  4.  9.  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  to.  elements  3

1  Thess.  5. 14.  support  the  tv.  be  patient  toward  all

WEAK-HANDED.

2  Sam.  17.  2.  I  will  come  on  him  while  he  is  to.

WEAKEN.

Isa.  14. 12.  how  cut  down,  which  didst  to.  nations }
WEAKEN  ED.

Ezra  4.  4.  then  the  people  of  the  land  tv.  Judah
Neh.  6. 9.  their  hands  shall  be  w.  from  the  work
Job  14.  +  10.  but  man  dieth  and  is  tv.

Psal.  102.23.  he  w.  my  strength  in  the  way
WEAKEN  ETH.

Job  12.  21.  he  w.  the  strength  of  the  mighty
Jer.  38.  4.  he  w.  the  hands  of  the  men  of  war
WEAKER.

2  Sam.  3.  1.  David  stronger,  Saul’s  house  w.  and  tv.

1  Pet.  3.1.  gEe  honour  to  the  wife  as  the  tv.  vessel
WEAKNESS.

Erod.  32. 1 18.  nor  voice  of  them  that  cry  for  w.

1  Cor.  1.  25.  the  w.  of  God  is  stronger  than  men
2.  3.  I  was  with  you  in  w.  and  in  fear

15.  4.3.  it  is  sown  in  w.  it  is  raised  in  power

2  Cor.  12.9.  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  to.

13.  4.  tho’  crucified  thro’  to.  yet  he  liveth  by  power
Heb.  7.  18.  a  disannulling  going  before  for  the  tv.

11.  34.  outof  w.  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant
WEALTH.

Gen.  34.  29.  the  sons  of  Jacob  took  all  their  w.
Deut.8.  if.  my  power  and  my  hand  got  me  this  to.

18.  the  Lord  giveth  thee  power  to  get  tv.

Ruth  2. 1.  Naomi  had  a  kinsman,  a  man  of  tv.

1  Sam.  2.  32.  thou  shalt  see  an  enemy  in  all  the  tv.

2  Kings  15. 20.  Menahem  exacted  money  of  men  of  a.

2  Chron.  1.11.  thou  hast  not  asked  w.  nor  honour

12.  1  will  give  thee  riches,  and  w.  and  honour
Ezra  9.  12.  nor  seek  their  peace  or  for  ever
Esth.  10.  3.  Mordeeai  seeking  the  tv.  of  his  people
Job  21.  13.  they  spend  their  days  in  w.  and  go  down

31.  25.  if  I  rejoiced  because  my  tv.  was  great
Psal.  44.  12.  and  dost  not  increase  to.  by  their  price

49.  6.  they  that  trust  in  w.  and  boast  in  riches

10.  wise  men  die  and  leave  their  to.  to  others
112.3.  tv.  and  riches  shall  be  in  his  house

Prov.  5.  10.  lest  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  tv.

10. 15.  the  rich  man's  at.  is  his  strong  city,  18.  1 1.

13.  ll.tr.  gotten  by  vanity  shall  be  diminished

22.  the  w.  of  the  sinner  is  laid  up  for  the  just

19.  4.  w.  maketh  many  friends,  the  poor  separated

Eccl.  5.  19.  to  whom  God  hath  given  w.  6.  2.

Isa.  60. 1 5.  w.  of  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thee ,  1 1.
Zech.  14. 14.  tv.  of  all  the  heathen  shall  be  gathered
Acts  19.  25.  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have  w.

1  Cor.  10.  24.  but  seek  every  man  another’s  w.
Common-W EA  ETH.

Eph.  2.  12.  being  aliens  from  the common-w.  of  Isr.

W  EA  LTHY.

Psal.  66. 12.  thou  broughtest  us  out  into  a  w.  place
Jer.  49.  31.  arise,  get  you  up  unto  the  w.  nation
WEAN  ED.

Gen.  21.  8.  Isaac  grew  and  was  w.  Abr.  made  feast
1  Sam.  1. 22.  1  will  not  go  up  till  the  child  be  w.

1  Kings  11. 20.  whom  Tahpenes  w.  in  Pharaoh’s  ho.
Psal.  131.2.  surely  l  behaved  myself  as  a  child
that  is  to.  of  his  mother,  my  soul  is  as  a  tv.  child
Isa.  11.8.  the  tv.  child  put  his  hand  on  c  ockatrice’  den
28.9-  them  that  are  w.  from  the  milk  and  drawn
Eos.  1.8.  when  she  w.  Lo-ruhama,  she  conceived
WEAPON.

Dent.  23.  13.  thou  shalt  have  a  paddle  upon  thy  tv.
Neh.  4.  17*  and  with  the  other  hand  held  a  w.

Job  20.24.  he  shall  flee  from  the  iron  w.

Isa.  54. 17.  no  w.  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper


Ezek.  9.  1.  with  his  destroying  tv.  in  his  hand,  2.

W  EAPONS.

Gen.  27.  3.  take,  1  pray,  thy  w.  thy  quiver,  and  bow

1  Sam.  21.  8.  neither  my  sword  nor  w.  with  me

2  Kings  11.8.  compass  the  king  round  about,  every

man  with  his  w.  in  his  hand,  11.2  Chr.  23.  7, 10.

2  Chron.  32.  t  5.  Hezekiah  made  w.  in  abundance
Isa.  13.  5.  Lord  cometh  and  the  tv.  of  his  indigna
tion  to  destroy  the  whole  land,  Jer.  50.  25.
Jer.  22.  7.  prepare  destroyers,  every  one  with  hisw.
Ezek.  39.  9.  they  shall  set  on  fire  and  burn  tv.  10.
John  18.  3.  Judas  cometh  with  lanterns  and  to.

Rom.  6.  +  13.  noryield  members  as  tv.  of  unrighteous.

2  Cor.  10.  4.  the  tv.  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal
See  War.

WEAR.

Exod.  18.  18.  wilt  surely  w.  away,  thou  and  people
Dent.  22.  5.  woman  not  w.  what  pertains  to  man

11.  thou  shalt  not  w.  garment  ot  divers  sorts
1  Sam.  2.  28.  burn  incense  to  w.  an  ephod  before  me

22.  18.  Doeg  slew  85  persons  that  did  tv.  an  ephod
Esth.  6.  8.  the  royal  apparel  the  king  useth  to  to.

Job  14.  19.  the  waters  w.  the  stones,  washest  away
Isa.  4.  1.  we  eat  our  own  bread  and  w.  our  apparel

65.  t  22.  mine  elect  shall  w.  out  the  work  of  hands
Dan.  1.25.  shall  to.  out  the  saints  of  the  Most  High
Zech.  13.  4.  nor  shall  they  tv.  a  rough  garment
Mat.  11.8.  that  w.  soft  clothing  are  in  kings’  houses
Luke  9.  12.  and  when  the  day  began  to  tv.  away
W  EA  R  E'l  H.

Jam.  2.  3.  ye  respect  him  that  tv.  the  gay  clothing
WEAR  ING.

1  Sam.  14.  3.  the  Lord's  priest  in  Shiloh  tv.  an  ephod
John  19.  5.  Jesus  came  forth  w.  the  purple  robe

1  Pet.  3.  3.  whose  adorning,  let  it  not  be  to.  of  gold

WEAR  Y.

Gen.  27.  46.  Rebekah  said,  I  am  tv.  of  my  life
Dent.  25.  18.  Amalek  smote  thee,  when  thou  wast.  w.
Judg.  4.  21 .  Jael  smote  Sisera  when  fast  asleep  and  tv.  I

8.  15.  we  should  give  bread  to  thy  men  that  are  tv.

2  Sam.  16.  14.  the  king  and  all  the  people  came  ai.
17-  2.  1  will  come  1  pon  him  while  he  is  w.

23.  10.  he  smote  Philistines  till  his  hand  was  tv.

Job  3.  17.  the  wicked  cease,  and  the  tv.  be  at  rest

It).  1.  my  soul  is  tv.  of  my  life,  leave  my  complaint

16.  7.  now  he  hath  made  me  tv.  made  desolate
2-2.  7.  thou  hast  not  given  water  to  w.  to  drink
Ps.  6.  6.  I  am  to.  with  groaning,  1  make  my  bed  swim
63.  +  1.  my  flesh  longeth  for  thee  in  a  to.  land

68.  9.  thou  didst  confirm  thy  inheritance  when  to.

69.  3.  1  am  to.  of  my  crying,  my  throat  is  dried
Prov.  3.  11.  my  son,  be  not  to.  of  Lord’s  correction
25.  17.  lest  he  be  tv.  of  thee,  and  so  hate  thee

Isa.  1.  14.  feasts  are  trouble,  I  am  w.  to  bear  them

5.  27.  none  shall  be  tv.  nor  stumble  among  them
7.  13.  hear,  O  house  of  David,  is  it  a  small  thing

for  you  to  w.  men,  but  will  ye  to.  my  God  also?
16.  12.  when  it  is  seen  that  Moabisa.  in  high  place
28.  12.  wherewith  ye  may  cause  the  w.  to  rest

32.  2.  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  zv.  land
40.  28.  God,  the  Lord,  fainteth  not,  neither  is  tv.

30.  even  the  youths  shall  faint  and  be  to.

31.  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  run  and  not  be  tv.
43.  22.  but  thou  hast  been  to.  of  me,  O  Israel

46.  1.  they  are  a  burden  to  the  to.  beast

50.  4.  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is  w.

Jer.  2.  24.  all  that  seek  her  will  not  tv.  themselves

6.  11.  I  am  to.  with  holding  in,  I  will  pour  it  out

9.  5.  they  tv,  themselves  to  commit  iniquity

15.  6.  will  destroy  thee,  1  am  tv.  with  repenting

20.  9.  1  was  zv.  with  forbearing,  1  could  not  stay
31.  25.  for  I  have  satiated  the  tv.  soul

51.  58.  the  folk  shall  labour  in  the  fire  and  be  tv.

64.  thus  shall  Rabylon  sink  and  they  shall  be  tv.

Eab.  2.  1.3.  people  shall  to.  themselves  for  vanity
Euke  18.  5.  lest  by  her  continual  coming  she  tv.  me
Gal.  6.  9.  let  us  not  be  tv.  in  well  doing, 2  Thess.  3.13.
WEARIED.

Gen.  19.  11.  they  zv.  themselves  to  find  the  door
Isa.  43.  23.  nor  have  I  tv.  thee  with  incense

24.  thou  hast  tv.  me  with  thine  iniquities

47.  13.  thou  art  tv.  in  the  multitude  of  thy  counsels
57.  10.  thou  art  tv.  in  the  greatness  of  thy  way

Jer.  4.  31.  my  soul  is  w.  because  of  murderers

12.  5.  if  run  with  footmen  and  they  w.  thee,  if  in
the  land  of  peace  wherein  trustedst  they  w.  thee
Ezek.  24.  12.  she  hath  tv.  herself  with  lies
Mic.  6.  3.  O  my  people,  wherein  have  1  to.  thee  ?
Mai.  2.  17.  ye  have  tv.  the  Lord,  yet  ye  say,  where¬
in  have  we  tv.  him  ?  every  one  that  doeth  evil
John  4.  6.  Jesus  being  w.  sat  thus  on  the  well
Heb.  12.  3.  lest  ye  be  to.  and  faint  in  your  minds
WE.  A  R 1  ETH.

Job  37.  11.  by  watering  he  w.  the  thick  cloud
Eccl.  10.  15.  the  labour  of  the  foolish  tv.  every  one
WEARINESS.

Eccl.  12.  12.  much  study  is  a  to.  of  the  flesh
Mai.  1.  13.  he  said,  what  aw.  is  it!  and  he  snuffed
2  Cor.  11.  27.  in  tv.  and  painfulness,  in  watchings
vVEARISOME.

Job  7-  3.  and  tv.  nights  are  appointed  to  me
WEASEL.

Lev.  11.  29.  the  w.  and  the  mouse,  unclean  to  you
WEATHER.

Job  37  .  22.  fair  tv.  cometh  out  of  the  north
Prov.  25.  20.  as  he  that  taketh  a  garment  in  cold  tv.
Mat.  16.  2.  it  will  he  fair  tv.  for  the  sky  is  red
3.  in  the  morning  it  will  be  foul  tv.  to-day
WEAVE.

Isa.  19-  9.  they  that  w.  net-woi  ks  be  confounded
59.5.  they  hatch  cockatrice’  eggs  and  to.  spider’s  wet
WEAVER.

Exod.  35.  35.  with  wisdom  to  work  the  work  of  w.

1  Sam.  17-  7-  the  staff  of  Goliath’s  spear  was  like  a
w.  beam,  2  Sam.  21.  19.  1  Chron.  11.  2.3.  I  20.  5.
Job  7.  6.  my  days  are  swifter  than  a  tv.  shuttle
Isa.  38.  12.  1  have  cutoff  like  a  w.  my  life
WEAVES  I'.

Judg.  16.  13.  if  thou  w.  seven  locks  of  my  head
WEB.

Judg.  16.  13.  if  thou  weavest  seven  locks  with  the  a

14.  and  went  aw  ay  with  pin  of  beam  and  the  to.


WEE


W  E  E


W  E  L


Job  8.  14.  and  whose  trust  shall  be  a  spider  s  w.

Isa.  59.  5.  they  weave  the  spider’s  w.

WEBS.

ls,i.  59.  6.  their  w.  shall  not  become  garments
WEDDING.

Mat.  22.  3.  to  call  them  that  were  bidden  to  w.

8.  the  w.  is  ready  ||  10.  the  w.  is  furnished
11.  he  saw  a  man  that  had  not  on  a  w.  garment
Luke  12.  36.  when  he  will  return  from  the  w.

14.  8.  when  thou  art  bidden  of  any  man  to  a  w.

WEDGE.

Jo-h.  7.  21.  Achan  saw  aw.  of  gold  of  50  shekels

24.  Joshua  took  Achan  and  the  w.  of  gold
Isa.  13. 12.  more  precious  than  golden  w.  of  Ophir
WEDLOCK.  [break  w.

Ezek.  16.  38.  I  will  judge  thee  as  women  that
WEEDS.

Job  31.  +  40.  let  w.  grow  instead  of  barley
Jonah  2.  5.  the  w.  were  wrapped  about  my  head

WEEDY.

Jer.  49.  t  21.  the  noise  was  heard  in  the  at.  sea

WEEK.  .

The  Hebrews  had  three  sorts  of  weeks.  (1)  Weeks
of  days,  which  were  reckoned  jrorn  one  sabbath  to
another.  (2)  Weeks  of  years,  which  were  reck¬
oned  from  one  sabbatical  year  to  another ,  and
which  consisted  of  seven  years.  (.3)  _  Weeks  of
seven  times  seven  years,  or  of  forty  nine  years,
which  are  reckoned  from  one  jubilee  to  another.

The  seventy  weeks,  in  Dan.  9.  24.  It  is  agreed
that  these  are  weeks  of  years,  and  not  of  days.
They  consist  of  seven  lunar  or  Hebrew  years:  by
which  reckoning  the  seventy  weeks  make  up  four
hundred  and  ninety  years.  This  way  of  reckoning
years  by  days  is  not  unusual  in  the  sacred  writ¬
ings,  See  Lev.  25.  8.  Ezek.  4.  4,  5.  Rev.  12.  6.  I
13.  5.  There  are  many  different  hypotheses  con¬
cerning  the  beginning  and  end  oj  Daniel's  seventy
weeks,  even  among  Christian  writers,  who  believe
this  prophecy  marks  out  the  time  of  the  birth  and
death  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Some  begin
them  from  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  Mede,
which  is  the  epocha  of  Daniel's  prophecy,  and
make  them  to  determine  at  the  profanation  oj  the
temple ,  which  happened  under  the  persecution  oj
Antiochus  Epiphanes.  Others  begin  them  from
the  first  year  of  Cyrus  at  Babylon,  and  place  the
end  of  them  at  the  destruction  of  the  temple  by
the  Romans.  Others  fix  the  beginning  at  the
first  year  of  Darius  the  Mede,  in  which  this  reve¬
lation  was  made  to  Daniel,  and  put  the  end  at  the
birth  of  Jesus  Christ.  Julius  Africanus  places
the  first  year  of  the  seventy  weeks  at  the  twentieth
year  of  king  Artaxerxes  Longimanus,  who  gave  a
commission  or  decree  to  Nehemiah,  to  rebuild  the
walls  of  Jerusalem.  From  thence  to  the  last  week,
in  which  the  Messiah  was  put  to  death,  are  reck¬
oned  seventy  weeks,  or  four  hundred  and  ninety
lunar  years.  This  hypothesis  or  system  seems  to
be  the  most  rational  of  any  that  have  been  pro¬
posed  by  the  ancients,  and  is  adhered  to,  some
small  particulars  excepted,  by  the  greatest  part  of
interpreters  and  chronologers.

The  greatest  difference  among  chronologers  in  the
calculation  of  these  years ,  does  not  exceed  nine  or
ten  years.  Petavius,  who  has  treated  oj  this  mat¬
ter  in  his  twelfth  book  De  Doctrina  Iemporum,
reconciles  all  these  differences  by  showing  that  the
words  of  the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  From  the  going
forth  ot  the  commandment  to  restore  and  to  build
Jerusalem,  ought  to  be  understood  oj  the  complete
execution  of  the  order  to  rebuild  Jerusalem,  which
was  not  performed  but  by  Nehemiah.  He  shows
also,  that  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes,  men¬
tioned  Nell.  2.  1.  ought  to  be  explained,  not  of  the
twentieth  year  of  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  alone ,
but  of  his  twentieth  year  beginning  from  the  time
that  his  father  associated  him  with  himselj  in  the
kingdom,  ten  years  before  his  death.  These  ten
years  being  deducted  from  the  number  of  years  that
elapsed  from  the  decree  of  Artaxerxes  in  favour  oj
Nehemiah ,  to  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  deliver
the  chronologers  out  of  their  perplexities ,  and  dis¬
pel  the  difficulties  that  arose  from  the  ten  supernu¬
merary  years,  given  by  their  calculation  of  the
four  hundred  and  ninety  years,  contained  in  the
seventy  weeks  of  Daniel.

The  modem  Jews  are  not  agreed  among  themselves,
fearing  to  be  convicted,  from  this  pro/hecy,  that
the  Messiah  is  already  come,  and  that  their  expec¬
tation  of  him  is  in  vain.  Some  pronounce  a  curse
against  them  that  compute  the  time ,  saying,  it  is  in
vain  to  expect  the  Messiah,  who  hath  been  come  a
long  while  ago:  others  say,  he  is  not  yet  come,  but
that  he  would  have  come  a  great  while  ago,  ij  the
sins  of  the  Jews  had  not  prevented  him.  Others
place  the  beginning  of  the  seventy  weeks  at  the  de¬
struction  of  the  first  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
and  the  end  at  the  destruction  of  the  second  temple
by  Titus.  Bern  een  these  two  events  they  reckon  but
two  hundred  and  ninety  years,  which  is  a  proof  oj
their  great  ignorance  in  matters  of  chronology .
Gen.  29.  27.  fulfil  her  w.  ||  28.  and  fulfilled  her  at.
Dan.  9.  27.  shall  confirm  the  covenant  with  many
for  one  w.  in  the  midst  of  the  w.  sacrifice  cease
Mat.  28.  1.  to  dawn,  toward  the  first  day  of  the  a'.

Mark  16.  2,  9.  Luke  24.  1.  John°0.  1,19.
Luke  18.  12.  1  fast  twice  in  the  w.  1  give  tithes
Acts  20.7.  the  first  day  of  the  w.  Paul  preached
1  Cor.  16.  2.  on  the  first  day  of  the  w.  let  every  one
WEEKS.

Lev.  12.  5.  if  a  maid  child  shall  be  unclean  two  w.
Num.  28. 26.  bring  new  meat  offering  after  your  w.
Jer.  5.  24.  reserveth  the  appointed  w.  of  harvest
Dan.  9. 24.  seventy  w.  are  determined  on  thy  people

25.  know,  after  threescore  and  twon).  26.

10.  2.  1  Daniel  was  mourning  three  full  w.

3.  nor  anoint  myself  till  three  w.  were  fulfilled
See  Feast,  Seven.

WEEP.

The  ancient  Hebrews  wept,  and  made  their  trouble
to  appear  openly,  in  mourning  and  affliction.


They  were  not  of  opinion,  that  courage  and  great¬
ness  of  soul  consisted  in  seeming  to  be  insensible  in
adversity,  or  in  restraining  their  tears.  It  was
even  looked  upon  as  a  great  disrespect  for  any  one
not  to  be  bewailed  at  his  funeral.  Job  says  of  the
wicked  man,  Ilis  widow  shall  not  weep,  Job  27-

15.  And  the  Psalmist,  speaking  of  the  death  of
Hophni  and  Phinehas,  says.  Their  priests  fell  by
the  sword,  and  their  widows  made  no  lamenta¬
tion,  Psal.  78.  64.  God  forbids  Ezekiel  to  weep,
or  to  express  any  sorrow  Jor  the  death  of  his  wife,
to  shew  that  the  Jews  should  be  reduced  to  so  great
calamities,  that  they  should  not  have  the  liberty
even  to  mourn  or  bewail  themselves,  Ezek.  24.  16.

Weeping  men,  and  weeping  w'otnen.  The  ancient
Hebrews  used  to  hire  men  and  women  to  weep  at
funerals,  Jer.  9.  17,  18.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts,  Consider  ye,  and  call  for  the  mourning
women  that  they  may  come,  and  send  for  cunning
women  that  they  may  come,  &c.  And  in  Amos
5. 16.  Wailing  shall  be  in  all  streets,  and  they  shall
say  in  all  the  highways,  alas !  alas  !  and  they
shallcall  the  husbandmen  to  mourning, and  such
as  are  skilful  of  lamentation  to  wailing.  All  the
weeping  men  and  women  of  Israel  heretofore  sung
the  Lamentations  that  Jeremiah  composed  for  the
death  of  the  pious  king  Josiah,  2  Chron.  35.  25.

Gen  A3.  2.  Abraham  came  to  mourn  and  w.  for  Sarah
43. 30. Joseph’s  bowels  did  yearn,  sought  where  to  w.
Num.  11. 10.  Moses  heard  the  peoples),  their  families
13.  they  w.  unto  me,  saying,  give  us  to  eat

1  Sam.  11.5.  what  aileth  the  people  that  they  w.  ?

34.  until  they  had  no  more  power  to  w.

2  Sam.  1.  24.  ye  daughters  of  Israel j  w.  over  Saul

12.  21.  thou  didst  w.  for  the  child  while  alive

2  Chron.  34.  27.  and  didst  rend  thy  clothes,  and  w.
Neh.  8.  9.  this  day  is  holy,  mourn  not,  nor  w.

Job  27.  15.  and  his  widows  shall  not  to.

30.  25.  did  not  I  w.  for  him  that  was  in  trouble  ?

31.  and  my  organ  into  the  voice  of  them  that  w.

31.  t  38.  if  the  furrows  likewise  (hereof  w.

Eccl.  3.  4.  a  time  to  w.  and  a  time  to  laugh
Isa.  15.  2.  he  is  gone  up  to  the  high  places  to  w.

22.  4.  1  will  w.  bitterly,  labour  not  to  comfort  me
30.  19.  thou  shalt  n>.  no  more,  he  will  be  gracious
33.  7.  the  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  w.  bitterly
Jer.  9.  1.  that  I  might  w.  day  and  night  for  slain

13.  17.  but  if  ye  will  not  hear  it,  my  soul  shall  w.  in
secret  places  for  your  pride,  mine  eyes  shall  w.  sore

22.  10.  w.  ye  not  for  the  dead,  nor  bemoan  him,  w.
sore  for  him  that  goeth  away,  he  shall  not  return

48.  32.  O  vine  of  Sibmah,  I  will  w.  for  thee
Lam.  1.  16.  for  these  things  1  w.  my  eye  runneth
Ezek.  24.  16.  nor  shalt  thou  mourn  nor  w.  23.

27.  31.  shall  w.  for  thee  with  bitterness  of  heart
Joel  1.  5.  awake,  ye  drunkards,  w.  and  howl
2.  17.  let  the  priests  w.  between  the  porch  and  altar
Mic,  1.  10.  declare  it  not  in  Gath,  w.  not  at  all
Zech.  7.  3.  should  I  w.  in  fifth  month,  as  ha\e  done
Mark  5.  39.  why  make  ye  this  ado,  and  w.  ?

14.  f  72.  when  he  thought  thereon,  he  began  to  w.
Luke  6. 21.  blessed  are  ye  that  w.  now,  for  ye  shall

25.  woe  to  you  that  laugh  now,  ye  shall  w.

7.  13.  Lord  saw  her  and  said,  w.  not, 8. 52.  Rev.  5. 5.

23.  28.  w.  not  for  me,  but  w.  for  yourselves
John  11.  31.  she  goeth  unto  the  grave  to  w.  there

16.  20.  ye  shall  w.  but  the  world  shall  rejoice
Acts  21.  13.  what  mean  ye  to  w.  and  break  my  heart
Rom.  12.  15.  and  w.  with  them  that  w.

1  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  w.  as  though  they  wept  not
Jam.  4.  9.  be  afflicted,  and  mourn,  and  w.

5.  1.  go  to  now,  ye  rich  men,  w.  and  howl
Rev.  18.  11.  merchants  of  earth  shall  w.  and  mourn
WEEPERS.

Judg.  2.  t  5.  they  called  the  name  of  that  place,  w.
WEEPEST.

iSam.  1.8.  Hannah,  why  w.  thou?  why  eat.  thou  not?
John  20.  13.  angels  said,  woman,  why  10.  thou  ?  15.
WEEPETH.

2  Sam.  19. 1.  it  was  told  .loab,  behold  the  king/g.

2  Kings  8.  12.  Hazael  said,  why  w.  my  lord
Psal.  126.  6.  he  that  goeth  forth  and  w.  bearing
Lam.\.‘Z.  she  w.  sore  in  night  her  tears  on  her  cheeks

WEEPING.

Gen.  35.  +  8.  name  of  it  was  called,  the  oak  of  w.
45.+  2.  Joseph  gave  forth  his  voice  in  w.

Num.  25.  6.  w.  before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle
Dent.  34.  8.  so  the  days  of  w.  for  Moses  were  ended
2  Sam.  3.  16.  her  husband  went  along  with  her  w.

13.  +  36.  king  and  servants  wept  with  aw.  greatly

15.  30.  they  went  up,  w.  as  they  went  up

2  Kings  20.  +  3.  remember  how  1  have  walked  before
thee,  Hezekiah  wept,  with  a  great  w.  Isa.  38.  +  3.
Ezra  3.  13.  not  discern  the  noise  of  joy  from  w.

10.  1.  when  Ezra  had  prayed  and  confessed,  w.
Esth.  4.  3.  in  every  province  was  fasting  and  zo..
Job  16. 16.  my  face  is  foul  with  w.  and  on  my  eyelids
28.  t  11.  he  bindeth  the  floods  from  w.

Psal.  6.  8.  the  Lord  hath  heart!  the  voice  of  my  w.

30.  5.  w.  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh
102.  9.  I  have  mingled  my  drink  with  w.

La.  15.  3.  in  their  streets  howl,  w.  abundantly

16.  9.  therefore  1  will  bewail  with  the  w.  of  Jazer,
the  vine  of  Sibmah,  O  Heshbon,  Jer.  48.  32.

22.14.  look  away  from  me,  1  will  be  bitter  in  w.

12.  in  that  day  did  the  Lord  of  hosts  call  to  w.

65.  19.  the  voice  of  w.  shall  be  no  more  heard
Jer.  3.  21.  the  w.  of  Israel  heard  on  high  places
9.  10.  for  the  mountains  will  I  take,  upatn.

31.  9.  they  shall  come  with  w.  and  su  pplications

15.  voice  heard  in  Hamah,  lamentation  and  hitter

w.  Rachel  w.  for  her  children,  Mat.  2.  18.

16.  thus  saith  Lord,  restrain  thy  voice  from  w.

41.  6.  lshmael  went  forth  to  meet  them  w.

48. 5.  continual  w.  shall  go  up,  aery  of  destruction
50.  4.  Judah  going  and  w.  to  seek  Lord  their  God
Ezek.  8.  14.  there  sat  women  at  lor  Taramuz
Joel  2.  12.  turn  ye  to  me  with  fasting  and  with  w.
Mai.  2. 13.  covering  the  altar  ot  the  Lord  with  to.
Mat.  8  12.  there  shall  be  w.  and  gnashing  of  teeth,
22.  13.  1  24.  51 .  1  25.  30.  Luke  13.  28.
Luke"!.  38.  a  woman  stood  at  his  feet  behind  himw.


John  11.33.  when  Jesus  saw  her  w.  and  the  Jews  also
w.  which  came  with  her,  he  groaned  in  spirit
20.  11.  Mary  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre,  w.
Acts  9.39.  and  all  the  widows  stood  by  him  w.
Phil.  3.  18.  1  have  told  you  often,  now  tell  vou  w.
Rev.  18.  15.  the  merchant  shall  stand  afar  off  w.

19.  every  ship  master  and  sailors  cried,  w.
WEIGH.

Exod.  22.  +  17-  if  father  refuse  he  shall  w.  money
1  Kings  20.  +  39  thou  shalt  w.  a  talent  of  silver
1  Chron.  20.  2.  David  found  his  crown  to  w.  a  talent
Ezra  8.  29.  keep  them  until  ye  w.  them  before

priests  and  the  Levites
Estli.  3.  +  9.  I  will  w.  10,000  talents  of  silver
Job  31.  +  6.  let  him  w.  me  in  balances  of  justice
Psal.  58.  2.  you  w.  violence  of  your  hand  in  earth
La.  26.  7.  thou  dostng  the  path  of  the  just
55.  t  2.  why  w.  ye  money  for  what  is  not  bread  ?
WEIGHED.

Gen.  23.  16.  Abraham  a;,  to  Ephraim  the  silver

1  Sam.  2.  3.  by  the  Lord  actions  are  w.

17-  7-  his  spear’s  head  w.  600  shekels,  2  Sam.  21.  16

2  Sam.  14.  26.  Absalom  w.  the  hair  of  his  head
Ezra  8.  25.  priests  w.  to  them  the  silver  and  gold

26.  I  w.  into  their  hands  the  silver  of  vessels,  33.
Job  6.  2.  oh  that  my  grief  were  thoroughly  w.

28.  15.  nor  shall  silver  be  w.  for  the  price  of  it
31.  6.  let  me  be  w.  in  an  even  balance
Psal.  78.  +  50.  he  w.  a  path  to  his  anger
Isa.  40.  12.  who  hath  w.  the  mountains  in  scales
Jer.  32.  9.  Jeremiah  w.  him  the  money,  17  shekets
Dan.  5.  27-  Tekel,  thou  art  w.  in  the  balances
Zech.  11.  12.  so  they  w.  for  my  price  thirty  pieces
WEIGHER.

Isa.  33.  +  18.  where  is  tire  scribe  ?  where  is  the  w.  ?
WEIGH  ETII.


Job  28.  25.  and  he  w.  the  waters  by  measure
Prov.  16.  2.  but  the  Lord  w.  the  spirits
WEIGHING.

Num.  7. 85.  each  charger  w.  ||  86.  golden  spoons  w.
WEIGHT.

As  the  Hebrews  had  not  the  use  of  coined  money,
which  was  of  a  certain  determined  weight,  they
weighed  all  the  gold  and  silver  they  used  in  trade,
'l'he  general  word  they  used  to  denote  a  weight  was
a  stone  ;  Deut.  25.  13.  Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy
bag  divers  weights ;  the  Hebrew  says,  a  stone
and  a  stone.  That  is,  they  were  forbid  to  keep  two
different  weights,  one  too  heavy,  to  buy  with,  and
another  too  light,  to  sell  with  ;  but  only  one  stone,
or  one  true  weight.  And  in  Prov.  20.  10.  God
condemns  fraud  and  injustice  in  traffic.  Divers
weights,  and  divers  measures,  both  of  them  are
alike  abomination  to  the  Lord.  The  shekel,  the
half  shekel,  and  the  talents,  are  not  only  denomi¬
nations  of  money  of  a  certain  value,  of  gold  and
silver,  but  also  oj  a  certain  weight.  When  Moses
expresses  the  drugs  which  were  to  compose  the  per¬
fume  to  be  burnt  upon  the  golden  altar,  he  says,
that  they  were  to  take  the  weight  of  five  hundred
shekels  of  myrrh,  &c.  Exod.  30.  23.  And  in  2  Sam.
14.  26.  it  is  said,  that  Absalom’s  hair  weighed  two
hundred  shekels.

The  shekel,  or  weight  of  the  sanctuary,  according
to  several  interpreters,  was  double  to  the  common
shekel ;  but  others  think  it  was  the  same  as  the
common  shekel,  and  the  words  of  the  sanctuary
are  added,  to  express  a  just  and  exact  weight,
according  to  the  standards  that  were  kept  in  the
temple,  or  tabernacle.

The  weight  of  glory,  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks,
2  Cor.  4.  17.  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal
weight  of  glory,  is  opposed  to  the  lightness  if  the
evils  of  this  life,  'lhe  troubles  and  afflictions  we
endure  are  of  no  weight  at  all,  if  compaied  to  the
weight  of  that  glory  which  is  to  be  revealed.
Weight  is  put  for  the  burden  of  sin, Hleb.  12.  1.
Gen.  43. 21.  man’s  money  in  mouth  of  sack  in  full  w.
Exod.  30.  31.  of  each  shall  there  be  a  like  w.

Lev.  19.  3~>.  ye  shall  do  no  unrighteousness  in  w.

26.  26.  they  shall  deliver  you  your  bread  by  w.
Dent.  25.  15.  thou  shalt  have  a  perfect  and  just  w.
Judg.  8.  26.  w.  of  golden  ear-rings  1,700  shekels
2  Sam.  12.  30.  w.  of  king’s  crown  a  talent  of  gold
1  Kings'!  A"! •  Solomon  left  vessels  unweighed  neither
was  the  w.  of  the  brass  found  out,  2  Kings  25.  16.

1  Chron.  28.  14.  he  gave  gold  by  w.  for  things  of
gold,  silver  also  by  w.  tor  instruments  ot  silver

Job  28.  25.  to  make  the  w.  for  the  winds
Prov.  11.  1.  but  a  just  w.  is  his  delight
16.  11.  a  just  w.  and  balance  are  the  Lord’s
Ezek.  4. 10.  thy  meat  shall  be  by  w.  twenty  shekels
16.  and  they  shall  eat  bread  by  to.  and  with  care
Zech.  5.  8.  he  cast  the  w.  of  lead  on  the  mouth

2  Cor.  4.  17.  worketh  for  us  a  more  exceeding  w.
Heb.  12.1.  let  us  lay  aside  every  w.  and  sin  that  besets
Rev.  16.  21.  every  stone  of  hail  the  w.  of  a  talent

WEIGHTS.

J,ev.  19.  36.  just  w.  shall  ye  have,  I  am  the  Lord
Deut.  25. 13.  thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  hag  divers  w.
Prov.  16.  11.  all  the  at. -of  the  bag  are  his  work
20.  10.  divers  w.  and  measures  are  abomination,  23
Mic.  6.  11.  and  with  the  bag  of  deceitful  w.
WEIGHTY.

Prov.  27.  3.  a  stone  is  heavy  and  the  sand  w.

Zech.  5.  +  7.  there  was  lift  up  a  w.  piece  of  lead
2  Cor.  10.  10.  for  his  letters  say  they,  are  w.
WEIGH  11  ER.

Mat  23.  23.  scribes  have  omitted  w.  matters  of  law
W  ELFA  R  E.

Gen.  4.3.  27.  he  asked  them  of  their  w.  and  said
Exod.  18.  7.  they  asked  each  other  of  their  w.

1  Chr.  18.  10.  Tou  sent  to  David  to  inquire  of  his  w.
Neh.  2.  10.  was  come  a  man  to  seek  then),  of  Israel
Job  30.  15.  and  my  w.  passeth  away  as  a  cloud
Psal.  69.  22.  that  which  should  have  been  for  their  a).
Jer.  38. 4.  this  man  seeketh  not  the  w.  of  this  people
WELL,  Substantive.

Gen.  21.  19.  she  saw  a  w.  of  water  and  she  went
30.  that  they  may  witness  1  have  digged  this  w.
24.  13.  behold,  1  stand  here  by  w,  of  water,  43.
49.  22.  Joseph  is  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  w.

549


WEL


WEN


W  E  N


~Snm.  21.  16.  that  is  the  w.  whereof  the  Lord  spake
17-  spring  up,  O  w.  ||  18.  princes  digged  the  w.
Sam.  17.  18.  a  man  that  had  are.  in  his  own  court

2.3.  15.  oh  that  one  would  give  me  drink  of  the  wa-
ter  of  the  w.  Bethlehem,  1  Chron.  11.  17,  18.
fsal.  84.  6.  who  passing  through  Baca  makeitaag
'Nov.  5.  15.  drink  waters  out  of  thine  own».

10.  11.  the  mouth  of  a  righteous  man  is  zv.  of  life
< 'ant.  4.  15.  a  w.  of  living  waters  from  Lebanon
John  4.  6.  now  Jacob’s  w.  was  there,  Jesus  being

wearied  with  his  journey  sat  thus  on  the  w.

11.  the  w.  is  deep  ||  12.  Jacob  gave  us  the  w.

14.  shall  be  in  him  a  w.  of  water  springing  up

WELLS.

Gen.  26.  15.  all  w.  Abraham’s  servants  had  digged

18.  and  Isaac  digged  again  the  zv.  of  water
Exod.  15.  27-  came  to  Elitn,  where  were  twelve  w.
Num.  20.  17.  nor  will  we  drink  of  the  water  of  w.
Dent.  6.  11.  and  w.  digged  which  thou  diggedstnot
2  Kings  3.  19.  and  ye  shall  stop  all  w.  of  water
25.  they  stopped  all  the  w.  of  water,  felled  trees
2  Chron.  26.  10.  Uzziah  built  towers  and  digged  w.
Isa.  12.  3.  shall  draw  water  out  ofthe  tv.  of  salvation
2  Pet.  2.17-these  are  w. without  water,  clouds  carried
W  ELL-sprizig.

Prov.  16.22.  understanding  is  a  w. -spring  of  life

18.  4.  the  w. -spring  of  wisdom  as  a  flowing  brook
WELL,  Adverb.

Gen.  4.  7-  if  thou  dost  not  w.  sin  lieth  at  the  door

12.  13.  that  it  may  be  w.  with  me  for  thy  sake

16.  he  entreated  Abram  tv.  for  ber  sake

13.  10.  Jordan  was  10.  watered  every  where

18. 11.  Abraham  and  Sarah  tv.  stricken  in  age,  24. 1.

29.  6.  Jacob  said,  is  he  w.  ?  and  they  said,  he  is  tv.
40.  14.  think  of  me,  when  it  shall  be  tv.  with  thee

43.  27.  is  your  father  zv.  ?  is  he  yet  alive  ?

Exod.  1.  20.  therefore  God  dealt  tv.  with  midwives

4.  14.  I  know  that  he  can  speak  zv.

Rum.  11.  18.  for  it  was  zv.  with  us  in  Egypt

13.  30.  Caleb  said,  we  are  zv.  able  to  overcome  it
36.  5.  the  tribe  of  the  sons  of  Joseph  hath  said  zv.

Deut.  1.  23.  and  the  saying  pleased  me  zv.

3.  20.  given  rest  to  your  brethren,  as  zv.  as  you

4.  40.  that  it  may  go  tv.  with  thee  and  thy  chil¬

dren,  5.  16.  |  6.3,  18.  |  12.  25,  28.  1  19.  13.  |  22.

7.  Ruth  3.  1.  Eph.  6.  3.

5.  14.  thy  maid-servant  may  rest  as  zv.  as  thou

28. 1  heard  words  of  peo.  they  have  w.said,  18.  17.
29-  that  it  might  be  zv.  with  them  and  theirs
33.  that  it  may  be  zv.  with  you,  Jer.  7.  23.

7.  18.  but  shalt  tv.  remember  what  the  Lord  did

15.  16.  wilt  not  go  away  because  he  is  zv.  with  thee
Judg.  9.  16.  if  thou  hast  dealt  zv.  with  Jerubbaal

14.  3.  get  her  for  me,  for  she  pleaseth  me  zv.  7.

20.  48.  as  zv.  the  men  of  every  city  as  the  beast

linth  3.  13.  tv.  let  him  do  the  kinsman’s  part

1  Sam.  16.  16.  he  shall  play  and  thou  shalt  be  zv.

20.  7.  if  he  say  thus,  it  is  zv.  thy  servant  hath  peace

24.  20.  I  know  zv.  thou  shalt  surely  be  king

2  Sam.  6.  19.  he  dealt  bread  as  zv.  to  women  as  men
18.  28.  Ahimaaz  called,  and  said,  all  is  zv.

1  Kings  8.  18.  the  Lord  said  to  David,  thou  didst  zv.
it  was  in  thy  heart  to  build  an  house,  2  Chron.  6.8.

18.  24.  all  the  people  answered,  it  is  zv.  spoken

2  Kings  4.  26.  is  it  zv.  with  thee  ?  is  it  zv.  with  thy

husband  ?  is  it  zv.  with  the  child  ?  it  is  zv.

5.  21.  is  all  zv.  9.  11.  I1  7-  9.  we  do  not  zv.

25.  24.  dwell  in  land,  serve  king  of  Babylon,  and
it  shall  be  zv.  with  you,  Psal. 128.  2.  Jer.  40.  9.

£  Chrozi.  12.  12.  also  in  Judah  things  went  zv.

Psal.  49.  18. men  praise  when  thou  dost  zv.  to  thyself
119.  65.  thou  hast  dealt  zv.  with  thy  servant,  O  L.
Prov.  11.  10.  when  it  goeth  zv.  with  the  righteous

14.  15.  the  prudent  man  looketh  zv.  to  his  goings
2t.  32.  then  I  saw  and  considered  it  zv.  looked  on  it

30.  29.  there  be  three  things  which  go  zv.  yea  four

31.  27.  she  looketh  zv.to  the  ways  of  her’household
Eccl.  8.  12.  it  shall  be  zv.  with  them  that  fear  God

13.  but  it  shall  not  be  zv.  with  the  wicked
Isa.  3.  10.  say  to  righteous,  it  shall  be  zv.  with  him
Jer.  1.  12.  the  Lord  said  to  me,  thou  hastw.  seen

15.  11.  Lord  said,  it  shall  be  zv.  with  thy  remnant

22.  15.  it  was  tv.  with  him,  he  judged  needy ,  16.

39.  12.  take  him,  look  zv.  to  him,  do  him  no  harm

40.  4.  come,  and  I  will  look  zv.  to  thee

42.  6.  that  it  may  be  zv.  with  us  when  we  obey

44.  17.  for  then  we  were  zv.  and  saw  no  evil
Ezek.  24.  5.  make  it  boil  zv.  seethe  bones  therein

10.  spice  it  tv.  ||  44.  5.  mark  tv.  behold  and  hear
33.  32.  of  one  that  can  play  zv.  on  an  instrument
Jonah  4.  4.  the  Lord  said, dost  thou  zv.  to  be  angry  ?

9.  I  do  zv.  to  be  angry,  even  untodeath
Mat.  15.  7.  ye  hypocrites,  zv.  did  Esaias  prophesy
of  you,  saying,  Mark  7.  6.  Acts  28.  25.
25.  21.  zv.  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant,
enter  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord,  23.  Luke

19.  17.

Mark  7.  37.  he  hath  done  all  things  zv.  deaf  to  hear

12.  28.  perceiving  that  he  had  answered  themw,
Luke  1.  7.  Zacharias  and  Elisab.  zv.  stricken  in  years

6.  26.  woe  unto  you  when  all  men  speak  zv.  of  you

13.  9.  if  it  bear  fruit,  zv.  if  hot,  cut  it  down

20.  39.  Master,  thou  hast  zv.  said,  JohnA.  17.

John  8.48.  say  we  notw.  thou  hast  a  devil

13.  13.  ye  call  me  Lord,  ye  say  zv.  for  so  1  am
18.  23.  but  if  zv.  why  smitest  thou  me  ?

1  Cor.  7.  37.  he  that  will  keep  his  virgin,  doth  tv.

38.  he  that  giveth  her  in  marriage,  doth  zv.

Gal.  4.  17..  they  zealously  affect  you,  but  not  tv.

5.  7-  ye  did  run  zv.  who  did  hinder  you  :

RhiJ-  4.  14.  ye  have  done  zv.  ye  did  communicate
1  Tim.  3.  4. one  that  ruleth  zv.  his  ownhouse
5.  17.  let  the  elders  that  rule  tv.  be  counted  worthy
'J'tt.  2.  9.  and  to  please  them  tv.  in  all  things
Jam.  2.  19.  believest  there  is  one  God,  thou  dost  zv.
See  As,  Do,  Doing,  Favoured,  Pleased.
WELL- BELOVED.

Cant.  1.  13.  a  bundle  of  myrrh  is  my  zv.  unto  me
Isa.  5. 1.  now  will  I  sing  to  tv.  a  song  of  my  beloved
Mark  12.  6.  he  sent  his  tv.  son  also  to  them
Jlom.  16.  5.  salute  w.  Epenetus  first-fruits  of  Achaia
3  John  1.  the  elder  to  the  zv.  Gaius,  1  love  in  truth

550


Very  WELL.

Acts  25  1C.  done  no  wrong,  as  thou  very  zv.  knowest
2  Tim.  1.  18.  he  ministered  to  me,  thou  knowest  v.  zv.
WELL  -nigh.

Psal.  73.  2.  as  for  me  my  steps  had  zv.-nigh  slipped
W  EN .

Lev.  22.  22.  maimed,  or  having  a  zv.  or  scurvy
WENCH.

2  Sam.  17.  17.  a  zv.  told  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz
WEN  T.

Gen.  35.  3.  the  Lord  was  with  me  in  the  way  T  zv.
Num.  10.  14.  in  the  first  place  w.  standard  of  Judah

14.  24.  him  will  l  bring  into  land  whereto  he  zv.

22.  22.  God’s  anger  was  kindled  because  Balaam  zv.

24.  1.  Balaam  tv.  not  to  seek  for  enchantments

25.  8.  Phinehas  zv.  after  the  man  of  Israel
Deut.  1.  31.  God  bare  thee  in  all  the  way  ye  tv.
Josh.  24.  17-  he  preserved  us  in  all  t lie  way  we  zv.
Judg.  1.  3.  so  Simeon  tv.  with  Judah

17.  and  Judah  zv.  with  Simeon  his  brother

16.  19.  Samson’s  strength  ic.  from  him

1  Sazn.  10.  14.  Saul’s  uncle  said,  whither  zv.  ye  ?
26.  there  zv.  with  Saul  a  band  of  men

17.  12.  the  man  zv.  for  an  old  man  in  days  of  Saul

15.  but  David  tv.  to  feed  his  father’s  sheep

23.  13.  Dav.and  his  men®,  where'  er  they  could  go
30.  22.  because  they  tv.  not  with  us,  will  not  give

2  Sam.  1.  4.  how  tv.  the  matter  ?  I  pray  thee  tell  me

8.  3.  as  he  zv.  to  recover  his  border,  1  Chron.  18.  3.

6.  Syrians  became  servants,  and  L,ord  preserved

David  whithersoever  he  to.  14.  1  Chr.  18.  6,  13.

15.  11.  to.  in  their  simplicity  and  knew  nothing

18.  33.  as  he  zv.  thus  he  said,  O  my  son  Absalom

1  Kings  11.  6.  Salomon  w.  not  fully  after  the  Lord
13.  12.  and  their  father  said,  what  way  tv.  he  ?

14.  he  zv.  after  the  man  of  God  and  found  him

22.  24.  he  said,  which  way  tv.  the  Spirit  of  the  Ld.

from  me,  to  speak  to  thee  ?  2  Chrozi.  18.  23.
48.  but  they  tv.  not  ||  2  Kings  2.  6.  they  two  zv.  on

2  Kings  5.  26.  he  said,  tv.  not  my  heart  with  thee  ?

6.  4.  so  he  zv.  with  them,  and  they  cut  down  wood

1  Chron.  7.  23.  when  he  zv.  in  to  his  wife,  she  concei.

16.  20.  when  they  tv.  from  nation  to  nation,  from
one  kingdom  to  another  people,  Psal.  105.  13.

2  Chron.  10.  16.  so  all  Israel  to.  to  their  tents

12.  12.  and  also  in  Judah  things  tv.  well

23.  17.  people  zv.  to  house  of  Baal  and  brake
Kelt.  2.  16.  the  rulers  knew  not  whither  I  zv.

FjSth.  2.  14.  in  evening  she  zv.  on  morrow  returned
Psal.  42.  4.  I  zv.  with  them  to  the  house  of  God

106.  32.  it  a;,  ill  with  Moses  for  their  sakes
Prov.  7-  8.  a  young  man  zv.  the  way  to  her  house
Isa.  57.  17.  he  zv.  on  fro  ward  ly  in  the  way  of  his  heart
Ezek.  1.  9.  they  tv.  every  one  straight  forward

12.  they  turned  not  when  they  zv.  10.  11.

17-  they  zv.  on  their  four  sides  and  returned  not

21.  when  those  tv.  these  zv.  those  stood,  these  stood

20.  16.  for  their  heart  w.  after  their  idols

llos.  2.  13.  she  tv.  after  her  lovers  and  forgat  the  Ld.
5.  13.  then  zv.  Ephraim  to  the  Assyrian  and  sent

9.  10.  they  zv.  to  Baal-peor  and  separated  thems.

11.  2.  as  they  called  them,  so  they  zv.  from  them

Hab.  3. 5.  before  him  zv.  the  pestilence,  burning  coals
1 1 .  at  the  light  of  thine  arrows,  they  zv.

Mat.  21.  29.  but  afterward  he  repented  and  zv.

.30.  he  answered  and  said,  I  go,  sir.  but  zv.  not

25.  10.  while  they  zv.  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  came
Mark  1.  20.  they  left  their  father  and  zv.  after  him
Luke  2.  .3.  all  tv.  to  be  taxed,  every  one  to  his  city

16.  .30.  but  if  one  zv.  to  them  from  the  dead
17-  14.  that  as  they  zv.  they  were  cleansed
2.3. 52.  Joseph  zv.  to  Pilate  and  begged  body  of  Jesus
John  4.  45.  the  Galileans  also  zv.  to  the  feast

7.  53.  every  man  zv.  to  his  own  house

9.  11.  I  zv.  and  washed  and  I  received  sight

13.  .3.  that  he  was  come  from  God  and  zv.  to  God

18.  6.  they  zv.  backward  and  fell  to  the  ground

21.  2.3.  then  zv.  this  saying  among  the  brethren
Acts  8.  4.  they  zv.  every  where  preaching  the  word

9.  1.  Saul  threatening  zv.  unto  the  high  priest

10.  9.  as  they  zv.  on  their  journey,  Peter  w.  to  pray

14.  1.  they  zv.  both  info  synagogue  of  the  Jews

15.  38.  and  zv.  not  with  them  to  the  work

16.  16.  a-  'v-  zv.  to  prayer,  a  damsel  met  us

26.  12.  as  1  zv.to  Damascus  with  authority

1  Pet.  3.  19.  which  he  zv.  preach,  to  spirits  in  prison

See  Along.

WENT  about.

Num.  11.8.  the  people  tv.  about  and  gathered  it

2  Kings  3.  25.  the  slingers  zv.  about  it  and  smote  it
2  Chron.  17.  9.  they  zv.  about  and  taught  the  people
Eccl.  2.  20.  I  zv.  about  to  cause  my  heart  despair
('ant.  5.  7.  the  watchmen  that  zv.  about  found  me
Mat.  4.  2.3.  Jesus  zv.  about  teaching,  9.  35.  Mark  6.  6.
Acts  9-  29.  they  zv.  about  to  slay  him,  21.  31.  |  26.  21.

10.  38.  Jesus  tv.  about  doing  good  and  healing

13.  11.  he  zv.  about  seeking  some  to  lead  him
See  Arose.

WEN  T  aside.

Luke  9.  10.  Jesus  took  them  and  zv.  aside  privately
Acts  23.  19.  the  chief  captain  zv.  aside  privately
WENT  astray.

Psal.  119.  67-  before  I  was  afflicted  I  zv.  astray
Ezek.  44.  10.  when  Israel  zv.  astray  after  idols,  15.
48. 11.  itshall  be  for  the  priests  which  zv.  not  astray
when  Israel  zv.  astray  as  T.evites  zv.  astray
Mat.  18.  13.  than  of  ninety-nine  which  zv.  not  astray
WENT  away.

Judg.  16.  .3.  Samson  zv.  atvay  with  doors  of  the  gates
14.  and  zv.  atvay  with  the  pin  of  the  beam

19.  2.  and  his  concubine  tv.  azvay  from  him

2  Sam.  18.  9.  the  mule  that  was  under  him  zv.  azvay
2  Kings  5. 1 1 .  but  N  aaman  was  wroth,  and  zv.  azvay
2  Chron.  9.  12.  queen  of  Sheba  zv.  away  to  her  land
Mat.  19-  22.  he  zv.  away  sorrowful,  Mark  10.  22.

26.  42.  he  zv.  away  the  second  time  and  prayed
44.  he  zv.  atvay  the  third  time,  Mark  14.  39.

John  12.  11.  by  reason  of  him  many  zv.  azvay

20.  10.  the  disciples  zv.  azvay  to  their  own  home
Acts  10.  23.  on  the  morrow  Peter  zv.  azvay

WENT  back.

1  Kings  13. 19.  so  he  zv.  back  and  did  eat  and  drink


2  Kings  8.  29.  king  Joram  zv.  back  to  be  healed
John  6.  66.  from  that  time  many  disciples  zv.  back
WENT  before.

Exod.  13.21.  the  Lord  zv.  before  them  in  a  cloud

14.  19.  the  angel  ot  God  which  zv.  before  the  camp
Num .  10. 3.3.  the  ark  of  covenant  zv.  before ,  Josh.  3.  6.
Josh.  6.  9.  the  armed  men  zv.  before  the  priests,  1.3.

1  Sam.  17. 7.  one  bearing  a  shield  zv.  before  him,  41.

2  Sam.  6.  4.  and  Ahio  tv.  bejore  the  ark

10.  16.  and  Shobach  zv.  before  them,  1  Chron.  19. 16.

20.  8.  when  at  Gibeon,  Amasa  zv.  before  them
J>b  18.  20.  as  they  that  zv.  before  were  affrighted
Psal.  68.  25.  the  singers  zv.  before  the  players
Mat.  2.  9.  the  star  which  they  saw  zv.  before  them

21.  9.  the  multitudes  that  zv.  before  them  cried,

Hosanna  to  the  son  of  David,  Mark  11.  9.
f.uke  18.  39.  they  which  zv.  before  rebuked  him

22.  47.  Judas  zv.  before  and  drew  near  to  kiss  him

1  Tim.  1. 18.  according  to  the  prophecies  which  tv.  b.
W  EN  T  behind.

Exod.  14.  19.  the  angel  removed  and  zv.  behind
W  EN  T  dozvn.

Gen.  12. 10.  Abram  zv.  dozvn  into  Egypt  to  sojourn

15.  17.  when  sun  zv.  dozvn,  a  smoking  furnace  and
burning  lamp  passed,  Judg.  19.  14.  2  Sam.  2.  24.

42.  .3.  Jos.  brethren  zv.  dozvn  ||  43. 15.  Benj.  zv.  dozvn
Exod.  19.  14.  Moses  w.  dozvn  from  the  mount  to  the
people,  and  sanctified  the  people,  25.  |  32.  lo.
Num.  16.  .33.  zv.  dozvn  alive  into  the  pit

20. 15.  how  our  fathers  zv.  dozvn  into  Eg.  and  dwelt
a  long  time,  Deut.  10.  22.  |  26.  5.  Josh.  24.  4.

Judg.  .3.  27-  Israel  zv.  dozvn  after  Ehud,  28.

4.  14.  Barak  zv.  down  from  mount  Tahor

7.  11.  Gideon  zv.  dozvn  with  Phuiah  his  servant

14.  1.  Samson  zv.  dozvn  to  Timnath  and  saw  a  wo¬
man  of  the  daughters  ofthe  Philistines,  5. 7.

18.  the  men  said  to  him  before  the  sun  zv.  dozvn

19.  Samson  zv.  down  to  Ashkelon  and  slew  30  men
'  Ruth  3.  6.  Ruth  w.  down  unto  the  floor  to  Boaz

1  Sam.  1.3.  20.  the  Israelites  w.  down  to  sharpen

22.  1.  David’s  father’s  house  zv.  down  to  him

2  Sam.  5.  17;  David  heard,  and  zv.  down  to  the  hold

11.9.  but  Uriah  zv.  not  dozvn  to  his  house,  10,  13.

17.  18.  a  well  in  his  court,  whither  they  w.  dozvn

21. 15.  David  z v.  dozvn  against  the  Philistines

23.  13.  three  of  the  thirty  chief  zv.  dozvn  and  came  to

David  to  cave  of  Adullarn,  1  Chron.  11. 15.

20.  Benaiah  zv.  rfoawand  slew  a  lion  in  time  of  snow

21.  Benaiah  a>.  down  to  the  Egyptian,  and  slew  him

with  his  own  spear,  1  Chron.  11. 22,  23,
2  Kings  1.15.  Elijah  zv.  down  with  him  to  the  king
2.  2.  Elijah  and  Elisha  w.  dozvn  to  Beth  el
5. 14.  N  aaman  zv.  dozvn  and  dipped  himself  in  Jord.

8.  29.  Ahaziah  zv.  d.  to  see  Joram,  2  Chron.  22.  6.

2  Chron.  18.  2.  Jehoshaphat  zv.  down  to  see  Ahab
Psal.  13.3.  2.  the  ointment  that  w.  down  to  the  skirts
Cant  6. 11.  I  zv.  down  into  the  garden  of  nuts

Isa.  52.  4.  my'people  w.  dozvn  aforetime  into  Egypt
Jer.  18.  3.  then  1  zv.  down  to  the  potter’s  house
Ezek.  31.15.  in  the  day  when  he  w.  down  to  the  grave
.31.  17.  they  also  w.dotcnXo  hell  with  him
Jonah  1.3.  Jonah  w.  down  to  Joppa  and  found
2.  6.  1  zv.  dozvn  to  the  bottoms  of  the  mountains
Luke  18.  14.  this  man  zv.  down  justified  rather
John  5.  4.  an  angel  zv.  down  and  troubled  the  water
Acts 7. 15.  so  Jacob  zv.  down  into  Egypt  and  died
8.5.  Philip  w.  down  to  Samaria,  preached  Christ
38.  and  they  both  w.  down  into  the  w'ater
10.  21.  then  Peter  zv.  down  to  the  men,  and  said

12.  19.  Herod  w.  down  from  Judea  to  Cesarea

20. 10.  Paul  w.  dozvn  and  embracing  him,  said

WENT  forth.

Gen.  8.  7-  a  raven  tv.  forth  ||  11.31.  w.  forth  from  Ur

18.  Noah  w.  forth,  his  sons  and  all  out  of  ark,  19.

10.  11.  out  ot  that  land  zv.  forth  Ashur

12.  5.  they  zV.  forth  to  go  into  land  of  Canaan
Num.  11.  .31.  there  w.  forth  a  wind  from  the  Lord
31.  13.  the  princes  w.  forth  to  meet  them,  33.  1.
Judg.  9. 8.  trees  w.  forth  to  anoint  a  king  over  them
2  Sam.  20.  8.  as  he  w.  forth  it  fell  out
2  kings  2.  21.  Elisha  w.  forth  into  the  waters
18.  7-  he  prospered  whithersoever  he  zv.  forth
Esth.  5.  9.  then  w.  Haman  forth  that  day  joyful
Job  1.12.  Satan  zv.  forth  from  presence  of  Lord,  2. 7.
Isa.  37  .  36.  angel  of  Ld.  w. forth  and  smote  185,000

48.3.  the  former  things  w.  forth,  1  shewed  them
Jer.  22.  11.  Shallum  who  w.  forth  out  of  this  place
Ezek.  16. 14.  thy  renown  zv.  forth  among  the  heathen

24.  12.  her  great  scum  w.  not  forth  out  of  her
Amos  5.  .3.  that  which  zv.  forth  by  an  hundred
Hab.  3.  5.  and  burning  coals  w.  forth  at  his  feet
Mat.  13.  3.  behold,  a  sower  w.  forth  to  sow

25.  1.  ten  virgins  w.  forth  to  meet  bridegroom
Mark  2.  12.  he  arose  and  took  up  bed  and  zv.  forth
.3  John7.  because  for  his  name’s  sake  they  w.  forth
Rev.  6.  2.  he  w. forth  conquering  and  to  conquer

WENT  her  zvay.

1  Sam.  1.18.  woman  tv.  her  way  and  was  no  more  sad
John 4.  28.  the  woman  of  Samaria  w.  her  way

11.  28.  when  Martha  had  so  said  she  w.her  zvay

WENT  his  way.

Gen.  18.  .33.  and  the  Lord  zv.  his  zvay  as  soon  as  had

24.  61.  the  servant  took  Rebekah  and  w.  his  way

25.  34.  Esau  did  eat  and  drink  and  zv.  his  way
Exod.  18.  27.  Jethro  w.  his  way  into  his  own  land
Num.  24.  25.  Balak  1|  1  Sam.  24.  7.  Saul  w.  his  way
1  Sam.  26.  25.  David  w.  on  his  way,  Saul  returned

I  Kings  1. 49-  every  guest  of  Adonijah  w.  his  way
EsthA.Yl .  so  Mordecai  w.  his  way,  did  as  Esth.  com.
Jer.  28.  11.  the  prophet  Jeremiah  w.  his  way
Mat.  13.  25.  his  enemy  sowed  tares  and  w.  his  way
Luke  4.  30.  he  passing  thro’  midst  of  them,  w.  hisw.

8.  39-  and  w.  his  way  and  published  great  things

22. 4.  .1  udas  w.  his  way  and  communed  with  priests
John  4.  50.  and  the  man  believed,  and  w.  his  zvay
Actsii.  39-  the  eunuch  w.  on  his  way  rejoicing

9.  17-  Ananias  zv.  his  way  and  entered  the  house

See  Jesus,  Went.

WENT  in,  or  into.

Gen. 7.7.  Noah  w.  into  the  ark  and  his  sons  with  hire

9.  w.  in  two  and  two  ||  16.  zv.  in  male  and  female

39.  11.  Joseph  zv.  into  the  house  to  do  business

•


WEN


W  EP


W  3  S


Exod.  5. 1.  Moses  and  Aaron  tv.  in  to  Pharaoh,  7 .  10.  I

)t  the  sea  on  dry  ground


14.22.  Israel  w.  into  midst  ot  the  sea  on  dry

23.  the  Egypt  ans  w.  in  after  them,  15.  19.

14.  35.  until  Moses  to.  in  to  speak  with  him
Lev.  16.  23.  when  Aaron  tv.  into  the  holy  place
Josh.  6.  23.  the  young  men  that  were  spies  w.  in
Judg.  3.  22.  the  haft  also  tv.  in  after  the  blade

17.  10.  so  the  Levite  w.  in  anil  dwelt  with  Micah

19.  15.  when  the  Levite  to.  in  to  lodge  in  Gibeah

1  Sam.  24.  3.  Saul  to.  in  to  cover  his  feet

2  Sant.  7.  18.  then  tv.  David  in  before  the  Lord

1  Kings  1.  15.  Bath-sheba  to.  in  unto  the  king
22.  30.  king  of  Israel  disguised  tv.  into  the  battle

2  Kings  4.  33.  Elisha  tv.  in  shut  the  door  and  prayed

37.  then  she  tv.  in  fell  at  his  ,eet  and  took  her  son
5.  4.  and  one  tv.  in  and  told  his  lord,  thus  and  thus

25.  Gehazi  to.  in  and  stood  before  his  master

10.  24.  when  they  tv.  in  to  offer  sacrifices
2  Chron.  26.  16.  Uzziah  tv.  into  the  temple  of  Lord
17.  Azariali  the  priest  to.  in  after  him
Neh.  9.  24.  so  the  children  to.  in  and  possessed
~Esth.  7.  7.  the  king  tv.  into  the  palace-garden
Psal.  73.  17.  until  1  w.  into  the  sanctuary  of  God
Jer.  26.  21.  Urijahfled  and  tv.  into  F.gypt
Ezek.  8.  10.  so  1  tv.  in  ||  9.  2.  six  men  tv.  in
10.  2.  the  man  clothed  with  linen  tv.  in,  3,  6.

25.  3.  when  they  tv.  into  captivity
39.  23.  Israel  tv.  into  captivity  for  their  iniquity
Dan,  2.  16.  Daniel  tv.  mand  desired  of  the  king
24t  to  Arioch  |[  6.  10.  he  tv.  into  his  house  to  pray
Mat.  8.  32.  the  devils  tv.  into  the  herd  of  swine
21. 33.  there  was  a  certain  householder  tv.  into  a  far
country,  Mark  12.  1.  Luke  19.  12.  I  20.9.
25.  10.  they  that  were  ready  to.  in  to  the  marriage
27. 53.  to.  into  the  holy  city ,  and  appeared  to  many
Mark  2.  26.  how  David  tv.  into  the  house  of  God,
and  did  eat  the  shew-bread,  Luke  6.  4.

15.  43.  Joseph  tv.  in  boldly  to  Pilate,  craved  body
Luke  1.  9.  Lot  was  to  burn  incense  when  he  tv.  in

39.  Mary  arose  and  tv.  into  the  hill  country

24.  29.  and  he  tv.  in  to  tarry  with  them
John  18.  15.  that  disciple  tv.  in  with  Jesus

20.  5.  he  saw  linen  clothes  lying,  yet  tv.  not  in

8.  then  tv.  in  also  that  other  disciple,  and  saw
Acts  1.  21.  all  the  time  the  Lord  tv.  in  and  out

10.  27.  as  Peter  talked  he  tv.  in  and  found  many

12.  17.  he  departed  and  tv.  into  another  place

13.  14.  they  tv.  into  synagogue  on  the  sabbath-day
17.  2.  Paul  tv.  into  the  synagogue,  10. 1  19.  8.

Rom.  10. 18.  their  sound  to.  into  all  the  earth
WENT  in,  as  to  a  woman.

Gen.  16.  4.  Abram  tv.  in  to  Hagar,  she  conceived

19.  33.  the  first-born  tv.  in  and  lay  with  her  father

29.  23.  Laban  brought  Leah  to  Jacob, he  w.  in  to  her

30.  he  tv.  in  also  unto  Rach.  ||  30.  4.  to.  in  to  Bill).

38.  2.  Judah  saw  Shuahand  to.  in  to  her

9.  when  Onan  to.  in  to  his  brother’s  wife
Judg.  16.  1.  Samson  saw  an  harlot  and  tv.  in  to  her
Ruth  4.  13.  Boaz  tv.  in  to  Ruth,  she  conceived
2  Sam.  12.  24.  David  comforted  Bath-sheba  his  wife,

and  tv.  in  unto  her,  she  bare  a  son,  Solomon

16.  22.  Absalom  tv.  in  to  his  father’s  concubines

17.  25.  Ithra  to.  in  to  Abigail,  Nahash’s  daughter

20.  3.  but  David  to.  not  in  to  them

1  Chron.  2.  21.  Hezron  to.  in  to  daughterof  Machir

7.23.  when  F.phraim  to.  in  to  his  wife,  she  conceived
Ezek.  23.  44.  yet  they  tv.  in  unto  her  as  a  harlot

WENT  over.

2  Sam.  2.  15.  there  arose  and  tv.  over  by  number
19.  17.  and  they  tv.  over  Jordan  before  the  king

31.  Barzillai  tv.  over  Jordan  with  the  king

2  Kings  2.8.  so  they  two  u.  over  on  dry  ground

14.  Elisha  smote  the  waters  and  tv.  over
1  Chr.  12.  15.  these  tv.  over  Jordan  when  overflown
29.  30.  David’s  reign,  and  times  that  to.  over  him
Neh.  12.  38.  other  company  tv.  over  against  them
Isa.  51.  23.  thy  body  as  a  street  to  them  that  tv.  over
WENT  out.

Gen.  4.  16.  Cain  tv.  out  from  presence  of  l  ord
24.  63.  Isaac  to.  out  to  meditate  in  the  field
34.  1.  Dinah  tv.  out  to  see  the  daughters  of  the  land

43.  31.  Joseph  washed  his  face  and  tv.  out

44.  28.  one  tv.  out  from  me  I  saw  him  not  since
Exod.  2.  11.  Moses  to.  out  to  his  brethren,  13.

8.  12.  Aaron  tv.  out  from  Pharaoh,  30.  1  9.  33.

12.  41.  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  tv. out,  14.  8.

15.  20.  all  the  women  tv.  out  after  Miriam

16.  27.  there  to.  out  some  people  on  sabbath-day

18.  7.  Moses  tv.  out  to  meet  his  father-in-law
33.7-  every  one  tv.  out  unto  the  tabernacle

Lev.  10.  2.  there  tv.  out  fire  from  the  Lord
Num.  10.  34.  cloud  was  on  them  when  they  to.  out

11.  26.  two  men  tv.  out  into  the  tabernacle

21.23.  Sihon  tv.  out  against  Israel  into  wilderness
33.  Og,  the  king  of  Bashan,  to.  out  against  them

22.  32.  behold,  I  to.  out  to  withstand  thee
Josh.  6. 1.  none  tv.  out,  and  none  came  in

8.  14.  the  men  of  Ai  tv.  out  against  Israel,  17-
11.  4.  the  Canaanite  to.  owtand  all  their  hosts

Judg.  2.  15.  they  to.  out,  the  Lord  was  against  them

3.  19.  all  that  stood  by  him  to.  out  from  him

19.  23.  the  master  of  the  house  tv.  out  unto  them
Ruth  1.  21.  I  tv.  out  full,  and  came  home  empty

1  Sam.  3.  3.  ere  the  lamp  of  <  lod  tv.  out  in  the  temple

17.  35.  1  tv.  out  after  the  bear,  and  smote  him

18.  5.  Dav.  to.  0.  where  Saul  sent  him,  13. 16.  119-  8.

2  Sam.  11.  13.  at  even  he  to.  out  to  lie  on  his  bed

13.  9.  they  to.  out  every  man  from  him

19.  19.  the  day  the  king  to.  out  of  Jerusalem

1  Kings  V 0.  16.  they  w.  out  at  noon  ||  17-  tv.  out  first

21.  the  king  of  Israel  to.  out  and  smote  the  horses

2  Kings  4. 18.  the  child  tv.  out  to  his  father  to  reapers
37.  she  went  in  and  took  up  her  son,  and  tv.  out

5.  27.  Gehazi  to.  out  from  his  presence  a  leper

9.  21.  they  tv.  out  each  in  his  chariot  and  met  him
24.  and  the  arrow  w.  out  of  Jehoram’s  heart

1  Chron.  12.  17.  David  to.  out  to  meet  them  and  said

14.  8.  David  heard  of  it,  and  w.  out  against  them

2  Chron.  15.  2.  Azariah  w.  out  to  meet  Asa
5.  was  no  peace  to  him  that  u>.  out  or  came  in

19.  2.  Jehu  w.  mi*  to  meet  Jehoshaphat
20. 21.  he  appointed  singers  to  praise  as  they  tv.  out


2  Chron.  35.  20.  Josiah  tv.  out  against  Pharaoh-necho
Esth.  7.8.  as  the  word  tv.  out  of  the  king’s  mouth
Job  29.  7.  when  l  tv.  out  to  the  gate  thro’  the  city
31.34.  did  fear  terrify  me  that  1  tv.  not  out  at  door
Psal.  81.  5.  when  he  tv.  out  thro’  the  land  of  Egypt
Jer.  37. 4.  Jeremiah  came  in  and  tv.  out  among  peop.
Ezek.  10.  7.  took  fire  from  the  cherub  and  tv.  out
Amos  5.  3.  the  city  that  tv.  out  by  a  thousand
Zech.  8.  10.  neither  any  peace  t®  him  that  tv.  out
Mat.  11.  7.  Jesus  said,  what  tv.  ye  out  into  the  wil
derness  to  see  i  8,  9.  Luke  7-  24,  25,  26.

20.  1.  a  man  who  tv.  out  early  tp  hire  labourers

3.  he  tv.  out  at  third  hour  ||  5.  sixth  ||  6.  eleventh
22.  10.  those  servants  tv.  out  into  the  high-ways

Mark  3.  21.  his  friends  tv.  out  to  lay  hold  on  him,

he  is  beside  himself
5.  13.  the  unclean  spirits  tv.  out  and  entered  into
the  swine,  and  ran  down,  Luke 8.  33.  ^Iers  l9.  12.

14.  they  that  fed  the  swine  told  it,  they  to.  out  to
see  what  it  was  that  was  done,  Luke  8.  35.
Luke  6.  19.  for  there  tv.  virtue  out  of  him
22.  62.  Peter  tv.  out  and  wept  bitterly
John  8.  9.  they  which  heard  it,  tv.  out  one  by  one
59.  Jesus  hid  himself  and  tv.  out  of  the  temple
11.  31.  Mary  rose  up  hastily,  and  tv.  out
13.  30.  Judas  having  received  the  sop  tv.  out
18.  16.  then  w.  out  that  other  disciple  known  to
Acts  1.  21.  all  the  time  the  Lord  tv.  in  and  out
15.  24.  certain  tv.  out  from  us  have  troubled  you
Heb.  11.  8.  Abraham  tv.  out,  not  knowing  whither
1  John  2. 19.  they  tv.  out  from  us,  but  not  of  us,  they
tv.  out  to  be  manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  us
WENT  their  way.

Judg.  18.  26.  the  children  of  Dan  tv.  their  way

1  Now. 30.2.  Amalekites  burnt  Ziklag  and  tv. their  way
Neh.  8. 12.  all  the  people  w.  their  way  to  eat
Zech.  10.  2.  therefore  they  tv.  their  way  as  a  flock
Mat.  8.  33,  that  kept  swine  fled  and  w.  their  way
20.4.  right  l  will  give  you,  and  they  tv.  their  way
22.  5.  they  made  light  of  it  and  w.  their  ways

22.  they  heard  these  words,  they  w.  theii  way
Mark  WA.w.  their  way  and  found  colt,  Luke  19.  32.
John  11.  46.  but  some  w.  their  ways  to  Pharisees
Acts  8.  36.  as  they  w.  on  their  way  came  to  water
WENT  through.

Neh.  9.  11.  thou  didst  divide  the  sea,  they  w.  thro ’
the  midst  of  the  sea  on  dry  land,  Psal.  66.  6.
Psal.  66.  12.  we  tv.  thro'  fire  and  through  water
Isa.  60.  15.  forsaken,  so  that  no  man  w.  thro'  thee
Mark  2.  23.  he  w.  through  the  corn  fields  on  the  sab
bath  day,  disciples  began  to  pluck  ears,  Luke  6. 1.
WENT  up.

Gen.  17.  22.  and  God  w.  up  from  Abraham
35.  13.  Godw.up  rrom  Jacobin  place  he  talked
49.  4.  w.  up  to  father’s  bed,  he  w.  up  to  my  couch
Exod.  17.10.  Moses,  Aaron,  &Hur  w.upXo  top  of  hill

19.  3.  Moses  tv.  up  to  God,  and  the  Lord  called  to

him,  20. 1  24.  13, 15.  |  34.  4.  Deut.  10.  3.
Num.  13.  21.  so  they  w.  up,  and  searched  the  land
31.  but  the  men  that  tv.  up  with  him  said

20.  27.  they  tv.  tip  into  mount  Ilor,  .33.  38.

Deut.  1.  43.  and  w.  up  presumptuously  into  the  hill
Josh.  6.  20.  so  that  the  peoples,  up  into  the  city

14.  8.  brethren  that  w.  up  with  me  made  heart  melt
Judg.  1.  4.  Judah  w.  up  and  the  I^ord  delivered
22.  the  house  of  Joseph  also  tv.  up  against  Bethel

4.  10.  Barak  and  Deborah  w.  up  with  10,000  men
8.  8.  Gideon  tv.  up  thence  to  Penuel,  11.

Sam.  1.  3.  Elkanah  w.  up  out  of  his  city,  7,  21.

22.  Hannah  tv.  not  up  until  child  be  weaned

5.  12.  the  cry  of  the  city  to.  up  to  heaven

2  Sam.  15.  30.  David  wept  as  he  w.  up  barefoot
24.  19.  David,  according  to  the  saying  of  Gad,  w.

upas  the  T.ord  commanded,  1  Chron.  21.  19.

2  Kings  2.  11.  Elijah  tv.  up  by  a  whirlwind  to  heav.

4.  34.  Elisha  w.  up  and  lay  on  the  child,  35.

19.  14.  Hezekiah  w.  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,

and  spread  it  before  the  Lord,  Isa.  37.  14.

23.  2.  Josiah  w.  tip  to  house  of  Lord,  2  Chr.  34.  30.

1  Chron.  11.6.  Joab  w.up  first  and  was  chief  captain
Ezra  2. 1.  these  are  the  children  of  the  province  that

w.up  out  of  the  captivity,  59.  Neh.  7.  6,  61.

4  .23.  they  w.  up  in  haste  to  Jerusalem  to  the  Jews

7.  6.  Ezra  w.  up\\  Neh.  12.  1.  the  priest  that  w.  up

8.  1.  this  is  the  genealogy  of  them  that  w.  up
Ezek.  1 .13.  it  ai.  tip  and  down  among  living  creatures
8.  11.  and  a  thick  cloud  of  incense  w.  up
10.  4.  the  glory  of  the  I-ord  w.  up,  11.  23,  24.

19.  6.  he  w.  up  and  down  among  the  lions

Mat.  3.  16.  Jesus  w.  up  straightway  out  of  the  water

5.  1.  and  seeing  the  multitudes  he  w.  up  into  a
mountain,  14.  23.  |  15.  29.  Luke  9.  28.

Luke  18.  10.  two  men  w.  up  into  the  temple  to  pray
John  7.  10.  then  w.  he  also  up  unto  the  feast
Acts  1.  10.  as  he  w.  up  two  men  stood  by  him
3.  1.  Peter  and  John  w.  up  into  the  temple
10.  9.  Peter  w.  up  upon  the  house-top  to  pray
24. 11.  Paul  w.  up  to  Jerusalem,  Gal.  1. 18. 1  2.  1,1
Gal.  1.  17.  neither  w.  1  up  to  Jerusalem  with  them
Rev.  20.  9.  they  w.  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth
WENT  a  whoring.

Judg.  2. 17.  Jsr.  w.  a  whoring  after  other  gods,  8.  33.
Psal.  106.  39.  w.  a  whoring  with  their  inventions
WEN  TEST.

Gen.  49.  4.  Reuben,  thou  w.  up  to  thy  father’s  bed
Judg.  5.  4.  Lord  when  thou  w.  out  of  Seir

2  Sam.  7.  9.  I  was  with  thee  whithersoever  thou  w.
16.  17.  why  w.  thou  not  with  thy  triend  ?

19.  25.  wherefore  w.  thou  not  with  me
Psal.  68.  7.  O  God,  when  thou  w.  before  thy  people
Isa.  57.  7-  even  thither  w.  thou  up  to  offer  sacrifice

9  thou  w.  to  the  king  with  ointment  and  increase
Jer.  2.  2.  when  thou  tv.  after  me  in  the  wilderness
31 ' 21.  set  thine  heart  toward  the  way  thou  w.
Hab.  3.  13.  thou  tv.  forth  for  salvation  of  thy  people
Acts  11.  3.  thou  w.  in  to  men  uncircumcised
W  EPT .

Gen.  21.  16.  Hagar  sat  and  w.  11  27.  38.  Esau  w.

29.  11.  Jacob  w.  33  .  4.  1  37  -  35..  Ups.  12.  4.

40  24.  Joseph  turned  from  bis  brethren  and  w.

43.  30. 1  45.  2,  14,  15. 1  46.  29. 1  50.  1,17-
50.  t  3.  the  Egyptians  v  for  Joseph  seventy  days


Exod.  2.  6.  she  saw  the  child,  and  behold,  babe  ww
Num.  11.  14.  and  the  children  of  Isr.  also  tv.  agaiia^
18,  20.  1  14.  1.  Deut.  1.  45.  |  34.8.  Judgv
2.  4.  |  20.  23,  26.  |  21.  2.

Judg.  14.  16.  Samson’s  wife  tv.  before  him
Ruth  1.  9.  Naomi  kissed  her  daughters,  and  w.  14-

1  Sam.  1.7.  Hannah  w.  and  did  noteat,  10.

11.  4.  all  the  people  w.  2  Sam.  3.  32,  34.

20.  41.  Jonathan  and  David  w.  one  with  another
24.  16.  Saul  w.  H  .30.  4.  David  w.  2  Sam.  1.  12.

2  Sam.  3.  32.  David  tv.  at  the  grave  of  Abner

12.  22.  while  child  was  yet  alive,  1  tasted  and  tv.

13.  36.  the  king  and  servants  w.  sore  for  Amnon

15.  23.  he  and  all  country  w.  ||  30.  w.  as  he  went

18.  33.  king  was  much  moved,  and  tv.  tor  Absalom
2  Kings  8.  1 1.  and  the  man  ot  God  to.

13. 14.  Joash  zd.  over  Elisha,  and  said,  O  my  father
20.  3.  remember,  Ld.  Hezekiah  w.  sore,  Isa.  38.  3-
22. 19.  because  the  king  of  .1  uilah  hath  w.  before  me
Ezra  3.  12.  priests  that  had  seen  the  first  house  w.
10.  1.  for  the  people  w.  very  sore,  Neh.  8.  9.

Neh.  1.4.  when  1  heard  these  words  l  tv.  before  God
Job  2.  12.  Job’s  friends  lifted  up  their  voice  and  w.
Psal.  69.  10.  w  hen  1  w.  and  chastened  m3'  soul
137.  1.  by  rivers  of  Babylon  we  sat  down  and  w.
Mat.  26.  75.  Peter  w.  Mark  14.  72.  Luke  22.  62.
Mark  5.  38.  J  esus  seeth  them  that  tv.  Luke  8.  52.

16.  10.  Mary  told  them  as  they  mourned  and  w.
Luke  7.  .32.  we  mourned  to  you  and  ye  have  not  w.

19.  41.  he  beheld  the  city  and  w.  over  it

John  11.  .35.  Jesus  w.  ||  20. 11.  Mary  tv.  at  sepulchre
Acts  20.  .37.  they  w.sore,  and  fell  on  Paul’s  neck
1  Cor.  7.  30.  they  that  weep  as  though  they  tv.  not
Rev.  5.  4.  I  w.  because  no  man  was  found  worthy
WERE.

Gen.  34.  14.  cannot  do  this,  for  that  tv.  a  reproach
25.  on  the  third  day,  when  they  w.  sore
35.  2.  Jacob  said  to  all  that  w.  with  him,  put  away
4.  gave  all  the  strange  gods  that  w.  in  their  hand
Exod.  5.  19.  Israel  saw  they  to.  in  evil  case
10.  6.  since  day  they  tv.  on  earth  to  this  day
Num.  12.8.  w.  ye  not  afraid  to  speak  against  Moses  ?
13.  .3.3.  there  we  saw  the  giants,  we  to.  in  our  own
sight  as  grasshoppers,  so  we  to.  in  their  sight

■r/i  it  r»r» f  hotter  fm*  nc  rpfnrn  info  I'.yv’nf.  4


14.  3.  w.  it  not  better  for  us  to  return  into  Egypt  i
Deut.  5.  29.  O  that  there  w.  such  an  heart  m  them

10. 19.  for  ye  w.  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt
28.  62.  whereas  ye  w.  as  the  stars  ot  heaven

.32.  27.  w.  it  not  that  I  feared  the  wrath  of  enemy
29.  O  that  they  w.  wise,  that  they  understood
Josh.ZA.  men  came  to  me,  1  wist  not  whence  they  w.
Judg.  9.  36.  thou  seest  mountains  as  if  they  to.  men

1  Sam.  9.  4.  passed  Shalim,  and  there  they  w.  not

2  Sam.  11.  16.  where  he  knew  that  valiant  men  w.

1  Kings  3.  18.  we  w.  togeth.  there  was  no  stranger

4.  28.  straw  brought  they  where  the  officers  w.

16.  .30.  Ahab  did  evil  above  all  w.  before  him,  33.

2  Kings  3.  14.  w.  it  not  that  1  regard  Jehoshaphat
7.  10.  but  horses  tied,  and  the  tents  as  they  w.

2  Chron.  29.  31.  as  many  as  w.  of  a  free  heart
Neh.  1.  9.  though  there  w.  of  you  cast  out  to  utmost

5.  2.  for  there  w.  that  said,  we,  our  sons,  3.  4.

7.61.  nor  their  seed ,  whether  they  w.  of  Israel

Job  29.  2.  oh  that  I  to.  as  in  months  past,  in  the  days
Psal.  39.  12.  a  sojourner,  as  all  my  fathers  w.

Isa.  14.  2.  take  them  captives  whose  captives  they  w.
.37.  19.  they  w.  no  gods,  but  work  of  men’s  hands
Jer.  .31.  15.  Rachel  weeping,  because  they  w.  not
Ezek.  14.  14.  tho’  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job  w.  in  it
should  deliver  but  their  own  souls,  16. 18,  20.
20.9.  before  the  heathen  among  whom  they'  tv.
Hag.  2.  16.  there  w.  but  ten,  there  w.  but  twenty
Mat.  5.12.  persecuted  prophets  which  w.  before  you

12.  3.  have  ye  not  read  what  David  did,  and  they
that  tv.  w  ith  him  t  4.  Mark 2.  25,  26.  Luke  6.  3,  4.
Luke  3.  15.  all  men  mused  w  hether  he  w.  Christ
7.  .39.  this  man,  if  he  w.  a  prophet,  would  known

17.  17.  w.  not  ten  cleansed,  where  are  the  nine  ?
John  9.  33.  if  this  man  w.  not  of  G.  could  do  nothing

11.  57.  that  if  any  man  knew  where  he  tv.

15. 19.  if  ye  w.  of  the  world,  world  would  love

17.  6.  thine  they  w.  thou  gavestthem  me

18.  30.  they  said,  if  he  w.  not  a  malefactor
Acts  20.  12.  and  w.  not  a  little  comforted

24.  9.  Jews  assented,  saying,  these  things  w.  so
Rom.  4.  17.  calleth  things  that  be  not  as  tho’  they  w.

9.  25.  I  will  call  them  my  people  that  w.  not

1  Cor.  12.  17.  if  whole  body  w.  an  eye,  where  w.  hear¬
ing  '  if  wholes,  hearing,  where  w.  smelling?

Gal.  2.  6.  what  they  w.  it  maketh  no  matter  to  me
F.ph.  2. 3.  w.  by  nature  children  of  wrath,  as  others

2  Thess  3.  10.  from  even  when  we  w.  with  you

2  Pet.  3.  4.  all  things  continue  as  they  w,  from  begin.
Rev.  6.  11.  till  brethren  killed  as  they  w.  fulfilled
As  it  WERE.

Lev.  14.  35.  it  seemeth  there  is  as  it  w.  a  plague
Cant.  6. 13.  as  it  w.  the  company  of  two  armies
Isa.5.  18.  that  draw  sin  as  it  w.  w  ith  a  cart-rope

10.  15.  as  if  staff  lift  up  itself  ai  it  w.  no  wood
26.  20.  hide  thyself  as  it  w.  for  a  little  moment
5.3.  3.  and  we  hid  as  it  w.  our  faces  from  him
Luke  22.  44.  his  sweat  as  it  w.  great  drops  of  blood
John  7. 10.  went  up  not  openly ,  but  as  it  w.  in  secret
Rom.  9.  32.  sought  it  as  it  w.  by  works  of  the  law

1  Cor.  4.  9.  apostles,  as  it  w.  men  appointed  to  death
Rev.  10. 1.  and  his  face  w-as  as  it  w.  the  sun

13.  3.  I  saw  one  of  his  heads  as  it  w.  wounded

14.  3.  they  sung  as  it  w.  a  new'  song  before  throne

15.  2.  1  saw  as  it  w.  a  sea  of  glass  with  fire

If  it  WERE.

Job  21.  4.  if  it  w.  so,  why  not  my  spirit  be  troubled  ?
Mat.  24. 24.  if  it  w.  poss’ible  to  deceive  the  very  elect
Mark  6.  56.  they  might  touch  if  it  w.  the  border
John  14.  2.  if  it  w.  not  so,  1  would  have  told  you
Acts  18.  14.  if  it  w.  a  matter  of  w'rong,  O  ye  Jews
W  ERT.

Cant.  8. 1.  O  that  thou  w.  as  my  brother  that  suckeA-
Rev.  3.  15.  nor  cold  nor  hot,  I  would  thou  w.  cold  ©
WEST.

Gen.  28.  14.  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  w.
Dent.  33.  23.  possess  thou  the  w.  and  the  south
l  Kings  7.25.  three  oxen  looking  towards  the  a.

">51


W  HA


W  H  A


L  Chron.  9.  24.  in  four  quarters  were  porters  toward
the  east,  at.  north  and  south,  2  Chron.  4,  4.
12. 15.  they  put  to  flight  them  toward  east  and  zv.
Psal.  75.  6.  promotion  cometh  not  from  the  at.

10.1.  12.  as  tar  as  the  east  is  from  the  70.  so  far
10“.  1.  gathered  them  from  the  east  and  at.

Isa.  11. 14.  shall  fly  on  the  Philistines  toward  the  at.
43.  5.  and  gather  thee  from  the  at.

45.  6.  that  they  may  know  from  the  at.

49.  12.  these  shall  come  from  the  north  and  iv.

59.  19.  they  shall  fear  the  Lord  from  the  tv.

Ezek.  48.  1.  for  these  are  his  sides  east  and  at.

Dan.  8.  5.  behold,  an  he-goat  came  from  the  7V.
Hos.  ,11.  10.  the  children  shall  tremble  from  the  at.
Zech.  8.  7.  I  will  save  my  people  from  the  at.

14.4.  the  mountof  Olives  shall  cleave  toward  the  tv.
Mat.  8.11.  many  shall  come  from  east  and  tv.  and  sit
down  with  Abrah.  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  Luke  13.29.
24. 27-  as  lightn.  cometh  from  east  and  shineth  to  w.
Luke  12.  54.  when  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of  the  7V.
Rev.  21.  13.  on  south  three  gates,  and  zv.  three  gates
WESE  border.

Num.  31.6.  great  sea  for  border,  this  shall  be  tv.bord.
Josh.  15.  12.  the  tv.  border  was  to  the  great  sea
Ezek.  45.  7-  to  the  tv.  harder  a  portion  for  prince
WESTERN.

Num.  34.  6.  as  for  the  tv.  border,  the  great  sea
W  EST  qtiarter.

Josh.  18.  14.  at  Kirjath  baal,  this  was  the  tv.  quarter
W  ES  T  side.

Exod. Cl.  12.  on  zv.  side  hanging  50  cubits,  38.  12.
Num.  2.  18.  on  their,  side  the  standard  of  Ephraim
35.  5.  measure  on  the  tv.  side  of  the  Levites’  cities
Ezek.  48.  3.  from  the  east  side  even  to  the  tv.  side
a  portion  for  N aphtali,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  23,  24.
WES  l' WARD.

Gen.  13.  14.  Abram  looked  eastward  and  tv.

Num.  3.  23.  pitch  behind  the  tabernacle  tv.

Devt.  3.  27.  lift  up  thine  eyes  zv.  and  behold  it
Ezek.  18.  18.  the  residue  shall  be  10,000  tv.

Dan.  8.  4.  1  saw  the  ram  pushing  tv.

WEST  wind.

Exod.  10. 19.  a  strong  tv.  wind  took  away  the  locusts
WE  I'.

Job  24.  8.  they  are  zv.  with  showers  of  the  mountains
Dan.  4.  15.  let  it  be  tv.  with  the  dew  of  heaven,
and  his  portion  be  with  the  beasts,  23.25.
33. 1  5.  21.

WHALE

Is  the  greatest  of  fishes  that  tee  know  of.  Profane
authors  have  given  extravagant  accounts  of  the
bigness  of  this  creature  ;  some  sag,  that  whales
have  been  seen  of  six  hundred  feet  long,  and  three
hundred  and  sixty  feet  thick.  Others  write,  that
there  have  been  seen  some  of  eight  hundred  feet
long.  Modern  writers  sag,  that  in  America  some
whales  measure  ninety  or  an  hundred  feet  from
head  to  tail:  and  it  is  ozvned,  that  the  whales
in  the  north  seas  are  yet  larger  than  those  that
are  found  upoti  the  coast  of  Guinea,  or  in  the
Mediterranean.

In  Scripture  there  is  mention  made  of  the  whale.
But  the  Hebrezv  zvord  Thannim  is  generally  used
for  all  large  fishes,  whether  of  rivers  or  of  the  sea.
The  Leviathan  mentioned  in  Job  41.  1.  is  thought
by  a  great  many  interpreters  to  be  the  whale,
though  others  think  it  is  the  crocodile.

The  whale  brings  forth  her  young  ones  alive,  as  other
perfect  animals:  but  it  brings  hut  one,  or  two  at
most,  and  nourishes  it  hy  the  breast,  with  great
care.  Whales  have  generally  no  teeth,  but  only
beards  or  whiskers  on  the  throat,  of  about  a  span  in
breadth,  and  fifteen  feet  long,  which  end  in  fringes,
like  hogs'  bristles  at  the  end,  which  at  top  are  set
in  the  palate,  and  ranged  in  order.  These  beards
serve  to  extend  or  contract  the  cheeks  of  this
creature.  Whales  are  maintained  by  a  water  or
froth  which  they  suck  from  the  sea  ;  and  by  some
lit  ties  fishes,  as  the  sea-flea,  the  sea-spider,  ancho¬
vies,  sea-weed,  Sfc.  Yet  some  of  them,  have  teeth,
and  in  their  bellies  have  been  found  thirty  or  forty
cod-fish.  'The  Whale  alzvays  keeps  its  young  one
under  its  fins,  arid  never  leaves  it  till  it  is  weaned.

It  has  no  udder,  but  it  has  nipples  and  teats,  which
contain  milk  in  such  abundance,  that  sometimes
there  have  been  drawn  from  it  to  the  quantity  of  two
hogsheads.

J obi- 12.  am  I  a  sea,  or  a  a;,  that  thou  settest  a  watch
41.  +  1.  canst  thou  draw  out  a  w.  with  a  hook  ?

Ezek.  32.  2.  Pharaoh,  thou  art  as  a  w.  in  the  seas
Mat.  12.  40.  Jonas  was  three  days  in  the  w.  belly
WHALES.

Gen.  1.  21.  Hod  created  great  zv.  after  their  kind
Psal.  74.  t  13.  thou  breakest  the  heads  of  the  w
„  WHAT.

Gen.  27.  37-  w.  shall  I  do  now  to  thee,  my  son  ?

39.  8.  my  master  wotteth  not  zv.  is  with  me
44.16.  w.  shall  wesay  to  my  lord  ?  at. shall  we  speak
Exod.  10.  26.  know  not  with  a),  we  must  serve  Lord
13. 14.  when  son  ask.  at.  is  this  ?  ||  16.  7.  w.  are  we  ?
16.  15.  it  is  manna,  for  they  wist  not  a;,  it  was
Lev.  25.  20.  if  ye  shall  say,  w.  shall  we  eat  ?

Num.  13. 18.  and  see  the  land  w.  it  is,  and  the  people
19.  zv.  the  land  is,  and  zv.  cities  they  be,  20.

15.  34.  it  was  not  declared  zv.  should  be  done

16.  11.  w.  is  Aaron  ?  ||  23. 17.  zv.  hath  Lord  spoken  ?
24.  13.  but  w.  the  Lord  saith,  that  will  1  speak,

I  Kings  22.  14.  2  Chron.  18.  13.
Dent.  4.  3.  zv.  the  Lord  did  because  of  Baal-peor
7.  18.  w.  Lord  did  to  Pharaoh  ||  11.  6.  to  Dathan
10.  12.  w.  doth  Lord  require  of  Israel?  Mic.  6.  8.
20.  5.  w.  man  is  there  ?  6.  7,  8.

Josh.  7.  8.  O  Lord,  w.  shall  1  say,  when  Israel
15.  18.  and  Caleb  said  to  her,  w.  wouldest  thou  ?

Judg.  1.  14.  1  Kings  1.  16.  Mat.  20.  21.
22.24.  zv.  have  you  to  do  with  the  Lord  of  Israel  ?
Judg.  7.  11.  thou  shalt  hear  zv.  they  say,  and  after.

11.12.  w.  hast  thou  to  do  with  me  to  field  in  my  land
18.  8.  w.  say  ye  ?  ||  18.  the  priest  said,  w.  do  ye  ?

24.  w.  have  1  more?  zv.  is  this?  zv.  aileth  thee?

Ruth  3.  4.  thou  shalt  mark  the  place,  and  he  will
tell  thee  zv.  thou  shalt  do,  1  Sam.  10.  8.

552


1  Sam.  3.  17.  w.  is  the  thing  Ld.  hath  said  unto  thee?

4.  16.  and  lie  said,  w.  is  there  done,  my  son  ?

2  'am.  16.  10.  w.  have  1  to  do  with  you  ?  19.  22.
17. 5.  Absalom  said,  let  us  hear  likewise  zv.  he  saith

18.  29.  I  saw  a  tumult  hut  I  knew  not  w.  it  was

1  kings  13.  12.  their  father  said,  w.  way  went  he  ?
14.14.  who  cut  off  house  of  Jeroboam  :  at. even  now?
17-  18.  w.  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  thou  man  of

God  t  2  Kings  3.  13.  2  Chron.  35.  21.  John  2.  4.

2  kings  A.  2.  Elisha  said,  w.  shall  I  do  tor  thee?  2.  9.
9.  18.  Jehu  said,  w.  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace  ?  19.
20.  14.  zv.  said  these  men,  from  whence?  Isa.  39.  3.

15.  zv.  have  they  seen  in  thine  house?  Isa.  39.  4.

2  Chron.  19.  6.  Jehoshaphat  said,  take  heed  w.  ye  do
20.  12.  nor  know  w.  to  do.  but  our  eyes  are  on  thee
25.  9.  zv.  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred'  talents  given  ?
Ezra  9.  10.  zv.  shall  we  say  after  this?  Job  37.  19.
Neh.  2.  4.  king  said,  for  zv.  dost  thou  make  request?

19.  they  said,  w.  thing  is  this  ye  do?  13.  17.

Esth.  4.  5.  to  know  zv.  it  was,  and  why  it  was

5.  3.  w.  wilt  thou,  queen  Esther  ?  zv.  is  thy  request  ?
it  shall  be  given  thee,  6.  I  7.  2.  |  9.  12.

Job  7-  17-  w.  is  man,  that  thou  shouldest  magnify
him  ?  15.  14.  Psal.  8.  4.  |  144.  3.  Heb.  2.  6.

20.  at.  shall  I  do  unto  thee,  O  thou  preserver  of  men
9.  12.  who  will  say  unto  him.  w.  dost  thou  }  Eccl.

,  ,  8.  4.  Ezek.  12.  9.  Dan.  4.  35!

13.  13.  let  me  speak,  anil  let  come  on  me  zv.  will
31.  14.  w.  then  shall  I  dor  w.  shall  1  answer  him?

Luke  10.  25.  |  12.  17.  |  16.  3

34.  4.  let  us  know  zv.  is  good  ?  Mic.  6.  8.

35.  6.  zv.  doest  thou  against  him  ?  zv.  doest  to  him  ?

7 •  if  thou  be  righteous,  zv.  givest  thou  to  him  ?

Psal.  25.  12.  w.  man  is  he  fears  Ld.  ?  34.  12.  I  89.  48.
85.  8.  1  will  hear  zv.  God  the  Lord  will  speak
120.  3.  zv.  shall  be  given  unto  thee,  zv.  done  to  thee
/  rov.  23.  1.  consider  diligently  zv.  is  before  thee
25.  8.  lest  thou  know  not  w.  to  do  in  the  end

30.  4.  w.  is  his  name  ?  w.  is  his  son’s  name  ?

31.  2.  zv.  my  son  ?  and  zv.  the  son  of  my  womb?
Eccl.  2.  2.  1  said  of  mirth,  zv.  doetli  it?

Isa.  21.  11.  he  calleth  watchman,  zv.  of  the  night?

22.  16.  tv.  hast  thou  here  r  and  whom  hast  thou  here  }
38.  15.  zv.  shall  1  say  ?  John  12.  27.

52.  5.  therefore  w.  have  I  here,  saith  the  Lord  ?

Jer. A.  30.  w.  wilt  thou  do  i1 1|  13.  21.  w.  wikthou  say  ’

8.  6.  zv.  have  1  done?  48.  19.  and  say,  zv.  is  done  ?
Hos.  6.  4.  O  Ephraim,  zv.  shall  I  do  unto  thee?

9.  14.  give  them,  O  Lord,  w.  wilt  thou  give  them  ?

14.  8.  w.  have  1  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?

Joel  3.  4.  yea,  and  zv.  have  ye  to  do  with  me  ?

Amos  4.  13.  and  declare  unto  man  zv.  is  his  thought
Zech.  1.  9.  O  my  Lord,  zv.  are  these  ?  4.  4.  |  6  4

19.  I  said,  zv.  be  these  ?  4.  5,  13.  ||  5.  6.  w.  is  it?
Mat.  5.  47.  zv.  do  you  more  than  others  ?

6.  25.  I  say  to  you,  take  no  thought  w.  ye  shall  eat,

or  w.  ye  shall  drink,  31.  Luke  12.  22,  29.

8.  29-  w.  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus  thou  Son

of  God  ?  Mark  1. 24. 1  5.  7.  Luke  4.  34.  I  8.  28.
12.  3.  have  ye  not  read  zv.  David  did,  when  he
was  an  hungered  ?  Mark  2.  25.  Luke  6.  3.
19.  27.  have  forsaken  all  zv.  shall  we  have  therefore  ?
27.  4.  they  said,  zv.  is  that  to  us  ?  see  thou  to  that
Mark  6.  30.  told  zv.  they  had  done,  and  zv.  they  taught

9.  6.  tor  he  wist  not  w.  to  sav,  they  were  afraid
14.  36.  this  cup,  not  zv.  1  will,  but  w.  thou  wilt

Luke  3. 10.  people  asked  zv.  shall  we  do  then  ?12. 17.

7.  31.  the  Lord  said,  unto  zv.  are  they  like  ?

12.  49.  zv.  will  1,  if  it  be  already  kindled  ?

23.  34.  forgive  them,  they  know  not  w.  thej*  do
John  1.  21.  w.  then  ?  |j  9.  26.  w.  did  he  to  thee

12.  49.  w.  I  should  say,  and  zv.  I  should  speak
16.  18.  w.  is  this  that  he  saith,  a  little  while?

21.  22.  zv.  is  that  to  thee  ?  follow  thou  me,  23.

Acts  2.  37.  brethren,  zv.  shall  we  do  ?  4.  16.

9.  6.  Lord,  zv.  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?  22.  10.

10. 4.  w.  is  it,  Lord  ||  1 1 . 17 .  zv.  was  I ,  that  withstand
16.  30.  zv.  must  I  do  ?  ||  21.  22.  w.  is  it  therefore  ?

19.  3.  he  said  to  them,  to  zv.  then  were  ye  baptized  ?
Rom.  3.  5.  w.  shall  we  say  ?  4.  1.  |  6.  1.  |  7.  7.

9.  w.  then  ?  6.  15.  I  8.  31.  |  9.  14,  30.  I  11. 7.  1  Cor.

10.  19.  I  14.  15.  Phil.  l.  18.

7-  15.  for  that  which  I  do  1  allow  nor,  w.  I  would
that  do  1  not,  but  w.  I  hate,  that  do  I
1  Cor.  4.  21.  w.  will  ye  ?  shall  I  come  with  a  rod  ?

2 Cor.  11. 12.  w.  Ido,  that  T  will  do,  1  cut  off  occasion
Phil.  1.  22.  yet  tv.  I  shall  choose  l  wot  not

1  Tim.  1.  7.  understanding  neither  w.  they  say

2  'Tim.  2.  7.  consider  zv.  I  say,  the  Lord  give  undersf.
Heb.  11. 32.  w.  shall  I  more  say  ?  time  would  fail
Jam.  4. 14.  ye  know  not  w.  shall  be  on  the  morrow,

for  w.  is  your  life  ?  it  is  even  a  vapour
1  Pet.  1.11.  searching  w.  or  zv.  manner  of  time
1  John  3.  2.  it  doth  not  appear  w.  we  shall  be
See  Th ings.

WHATSOEVER.

Gen.  31.  16.  now  zv.  God  hath  said  unto  thee,  do
Lev.  27.  32.  even  of  w.  passeth  under  the  rod
Num.  22.  17-  I  will  do  zv.  thou  sayest  unto  me
Dent .  2.  37-  nor  zv.  the  Lord  our  God  forbad  us
12.  32.  zv.  I  command  you,  observe  to  do  it
Judg.  10.  15._do  thou  to  us  zv.  1  Sam.  14.  36.

1  Kings  8.  37.  zv.  plague,  zv.  sickness  there  be
38.  zv.  supplication  be  made.  2  Chron.  6.  28.

Job  A 1.  11.  w.  is  under  the  whole  heaven  is  mine
Psal.  1. 3.  leaf  not  wither,  zv.  he  doth  shall  prosper

8.  8.  zv.  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  sea
115.  3.  but  our  God  is  in  the  heavens,  he  hath  done

zv.  he  pleased,  135.  6.  Eccl.  8.  3.
Eccl.  3.  14.  w.  God  doetli,  it  shall  be  for  ever
Jer.  1.7 •  zv.  T  command  thee,  thou  shalt  speak
15.  +  7.  I  will  bereave  them  of  zv.  is  dear
44.  17.  we  wil  l  do  w.  goeth  out  of  our  own  mouth
Mat.  5.  37,  zv.  is  more  than  these  cometh  of  evil
7.  12.  zv.  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you
14.  7.  whereupon  Ilerod  promised  with  an  oath  to
give  her  zv.  she  would  ask,  Mark  6.  22.

17.  12.  have  done  to  him  zv.  they  listed,  Mark  9. 13.

20.  4.  and  zv.  is  right  1  will  give  you,  7.

21.22.  all  things  w.  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,
ye  shall  receive,  Mark  11.  23,  24.  John  14.  13.

23.  3.  w.  they  bid  you  observe  that,  observe  and  do


VV  H  E

Mae.  28.  go.  observe  all  things  zv.  I  have  command.
John  2.  5.  his  mother  saith,  tv.  he  saith  to  you,  do  it
15.  14.  ye  are  my  friends,  if  do  zv.  1  command  you
16.  zv.  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  16.  23.

Acts  3.22.  him  hear  in  all  things  at.  shall  say  to  you
Rom.  14.  2.3.  for  w.  is  not  of  faith  is  sin
1  Cor.  10.  25.  w.  is  sold  in  the  shambles,  that  eat
27.  w.  is  set  before  you,  eat,  asking  no  questions
31.  or  at.  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God
Gal.  2.  6.  zv.  they  were,  it  maketh  no  matter  to  me
6.  7-  zv.  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap
Phil.  A.  8.  at.  thii  gs  are  true,  at.  things  are  pure
11.1  ha\e  learned  in  at.  state  I  am  to  be  content
Col.  3. 17.  at.  ye  do  in  word,  fcc.doall  in  name  of  Jes.

23.  at.  ye  do,  do  it  heartily  as  to  the  Lord
1  John  3.  22.  zv.  we  ask  we  receive  of  him,  5.  15.

3  Jolm5.  thou  doest  faithfully  at.  thou  doest
WHEAT.

Gen.  30. 14.  Reuben  found  mandrakes  in  zv.  harvest
Exod.  9.  32.  but  the  at.  and  rye  were  not  smitten
34.  22.  the  first-fruits  of  at.  harvest,  Num.  18. 12.
Dent.  32. 14.  goats,  with  the  fat  of  kidneys  of  at.
Judg.  6.  11.  and  Gideon  threshed  zv.  to  hide  it

15.  1.  time  of  zv.  harvest  Samson  visited  his  wife
Ruth  2.23.  to  glean  unto  the  end  of  at.  harvest

1  Sam.  6. 13.  they  of  Beth  shemesh  reaping  at.

12.  17.  is  itnot  at.  harvest  day  ?  I  will  call  to  Lord

2  Sam.  A.  6.  as  tho’  they  would  have  fetched  at.

1  Kings  5.  11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  w.  for  food
1  Chron.  21. 23.  I  give  the  at.  for  the  meat-offering
Ezra  6.  9.  give  what  they  have  need  of,  at.  salt,  wine
7-  22.  done  speedily,  to  an  hundred  measures  of  at.
Job  31.  40.  let  thistles  grow  instead  of  w.

Psal.  8 1.16.  he  should  have  fed  them  with  finest  of  at.
147. 14.  he  filleth  thee  with  the  finest  of  at.

Prov.  27.  22.  bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar  among  zv.

Cant.  7.  2.  thy  belly  is  like  a  heap  of  at.  set  about
Jer.  12.  13.  they  have  sown  at.  but  reap  thorns
23.  28.  what  is  the  chaff  to  the  at.  saith  the  Lord
31.  12.  How  together  for  at.  for  wine,  and  for  oil
Ezek.  27- 17-  Judah  traded  in  at.  of  Minnith
Joel 2.  24.  the  floors  shall  be  full  of  at.  fats  overflow
Amos  5.  11.  ye  take  from  him  burdens  of  at.

8.  5.  the  sabbath  gone,  that  we  may  set  forth  w.

6.  may  buy  the  poor,  and  sell  refuse  of  at.

Mat.  3.  12.  gather  his  at.  into  garner,  Luke  3. 17.
13.25.  the  enemy  sowed  tares  among  the  at.

29-  lest  ye  root  up  also  the  at.  with  them
30.  to  burn  them,  but  gather  the  at.  into  my  barn
Luke  16.  7.  owest  thou  ?  he  said  100  measures  of  at.

22.  31 .  desired  to  have  you,  that  he  may  sift  as  at.
John  12.  24.  except  a  corn  of  at.  fall  to  the  ground
Acts  Cl.  38.  and  cast  out  the  at.  into  the  sea

1  Cor.  15.37. itmay  chanceof  at.or  some  other  grain
Rev.  6. 6.  I  heard  a  voice,  a  measure  of  at.  fora  penn3’

18. 13.  the  merchandise  of  at.  is  departed  from  thee

See  Barley.

WH  EATEN.

Exod.  29. 2.  cakes  and  wafers  shalt  make  of  w.  flour
WHEEL.

Psal.  83.  13.  O  my  God,  make  them  like  a  at.

Prov.  20. 26.  a  wise  king  bringeth  the  at.  over  them
Eccl.  12.  6.  or  the  zv.  broken  at  the  cistern
Isa.  28.  28.  nor  break  it  with  the  at.  of  his  cart
Ezek.  1.  15.  behold,  one  at.  upon  the  earth

16.  was  as  it  were  a®,  in  the  midstof  a  at.  10.  10.

10. 13.  was  cried  to  the  wheels  in  my  hearing,  O  at.

WHEELS.

Exod.  14.25.  and  took  off  their  chariot  at.

Judg.  5.  28.  why  tarry  the  at.  of  his  chariots
Prov.  25.  +  11.  a  word  spoken  upon  his  at.  is  like
Isa.  5.  28.  and  their  at.  like  a  whirlwind
Jer.  18.  3.  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  at.

47.  3.  and  at  the  rumbling  of  his  at.

Ezek.  1. 16.  the  appearance  of  the  at.  their  work
3.  13.  at  the  noise  of  at.  over-against  them
10.  19.  the  at.  also  were  beside  them,  11,  22.

23.  24.  the  Babylonians  come  against  thee  with  at.

26.  10.  thy  walls  shake  at  the  noise  of  the  at.

Dan.  7.9.  throne  like  flames,  and  his  at.  a  burning  fire
Nah.  3.  2.  the  noise  of  the  rattling  of  the  at.

WHELP,  S.

2  Sam.  17. 8.  as  a  bear  robbed  of  her  at.  in  the  field
Prov.  17. 12.  let  a  bear  robbed  of  her  a>.  meet  a  man
Ezek.  19.  2.  she  nourished  her  at.  among  lions

3.  she  brought  up  one  of  her  at.  a  young  lion
5.  she  took  another  of  her  zv.  and  made  "him
IIos.  13.  8.  will  meet  them  as  a  bear  bereav.  of  her  zv.
Nah.  2. 12.  the  lion  did  tear  enough  for  his  zv.

See  I,io ns.

WHEN.

Lev.  14.57.  to  teach  at.  it  is  unclean  and  at.  clean
Deut.  6. 7-  talk  of  them  at.  thou  sittest  and  at.  thou
walkest,  at.  thou  liest  down,  and  at.  thou
risest  up,  11.  19.

1  Sam.  3.  12.  zv.  I  begin,  I  will  also  make  an  end

1  Kings 8.30.  hear  in  heaven  at.  thou  hearest,  forgive
Neh.  2.6.  the  king  said,  zv.  wilt  thou  return  ?

Psal.  94.  8.  and,  ye  fools,  at.  will  ye  be  wise?

Eccl.  8.  7.  for  who  can  tell  him  at.  it  shall  be?

Jer.  13.27.  Jerusalem  made  clean,  at.  shall  it  be
Zech.  7.5.  at.  ye  tasted  [|  6.  zv.  ye  did  eat,  and  at.  drink
Mat.  24.  3.  tell  us  at.  shall  these  things  be,  what  shall

be  sign  of  thy  coming?  Mark  1.3. 4.  Luke  21. 7.
John  4. 25. a>. he  is  come,  he  will  tell  ns  all  things, 16.8.

20.  20.  at.  he  had  so  said,  shewed  them  his  hands  I
Acts  2.  37.  zv.  they  heard  this,  they  said  to  Peter

2  7  'hess.  3.10.  at.  we  were  with  you,  this  wecommand

1  Jo'ml. 28.  at.  he  shall  appear,  we  may  haveconfid.

WHENCE.

Gen.  16.8.  the  angel  said,  Hagar,  w.  earnest  thou?

42.  7-  Joseph  said  to  them,  at.  come  ye  ?  Josh.  9.  8.
Dent.  11. 10.  is  not  like  Egypt,  from  at.  ye  came  out  j1
Josh.  2.  4.  men  came,  but  L  wist  not  at.  they  were
Judg.  1.3.6. 1  asked  him  not  at.  he  was,  nortold  heme  I
17.  9.  Micah  said,  at.  comestthou  ?  19- 17*  2  Sam.  1.  I
.3.  2  Kings  5.  25.  Job  1 . 7.  |  2.  2.  Jonah  1.  8.

2  Kings  20.  14.  Isaiah  said,  what  said  these  men  ?  j

from  at.  came  these  men  unto  thee?  Isa.  .39.  .3.
Job  10.21.  before  1  go  at.  1  shall  not  return,  16.22.
Isa.  47.  11.  thou  shalt  not  know  from  at.  it  riseth
51. 1.  look  to  the  rock  w.  ye  are  hewn,  and  pit


VVHI


W  H  I


WHO


Rat.  12.  44.  1  will  return  to  my  house  tv.  I  came
out,  he  findeth  it  empty,  and  swept  and
garnished,  Luke  11.  24.

j3.  54.  iv.  hath  this  man  this  wisdom  and  works  ?
56.  ic.  hath  this  man  all  these  thing*?  Mark  6.  2.
Mark  12.  37 .  calleth  him  Lord,  to.  is  he  then  his  son  ?
Luke  1. 43.  iv.  is  this  to  me  that  the  mother  of  Lord  ?
13.  25.  shall  answer,  I  know  you  not  iv.  ye  are, 27.
John  1.  48.  Nathanael  said,  tv.  knowest  thou  me?

7.  28.  ye  both  know  me.  and  ye  know  tv.  1  am

8.  14.  ye  cannot  tell  tv.  1  come  and  whither  1  go

9.  29.  we  know  not  from  tv.  he  is,  30.

Phil.  3. 20.  from  tv.  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  L.  Jes.
Heb.  11.  19.  from  tv.  he  received  him  in  a  figure
Jam.  A.  1.  front  tv.  come  wars  and  fightings  ?

Rev.  2.  5.  remember  from  tv.  thou  art  fallen
7. 13.  what  are  these  in  white  robes,  tv.  came  they
WHENSOEVER.

Mark  14.  7.  tv.  ye  will  ye  may  do  them  good
WHERE.

Gen.  3.  9.  tv.  art  thou  ?  ||  Job  38.  4.  tv.  wast  thou  ?
Exod.  2;  20.  tv.  is  he  ?  2  Sam.  9.  4.  Job  14.  10.

20. 24.  in  all  places  tv.  1  record  my  name  will  come
29.  42.  tv.  1  will  meet  you  to  speak,  30.  6,  36.

Ueut.  32.  37.  he  shall  say,  tv.  are  their  gods
Job  9.  24.  if  not,  tv.  and  who  is  he  ?

35. 10.  none  saith,  tv.  is  G.  my  maker  who  gives
Psal.  42. 3.  while  they  say  to  me,  tv.  is  thy  G .  ?  10.

79. 10.  why  say ,  tv.  is  their  God  ?  115. 2.  Joel  2. 17.
Isa.  49.  21.  was  left  alone,  these,  tv.  had  they  been  ?
Jer.  2.  6.  neither  said  they,  tv.  is  the  Lord  ?  8.

36. 19.  go  hide  thee,  let  no  man  know  tv.  ye  be
Hos.  1.10.  tv.  it  was  said  to  them,  ye  are  not  my  peo.
Zech.  1.5.  fathers,  to.  are  they  ?  do  they  live  for  ever?
Luke  17.  37.  tv.  Lord  ?  ||  John  7. 11.  tv.  is  he  ?  9.  12.
John  7.34.  to.  1  am,  12.  26.  |  14.  3.  |  17.  24.

WHEREABOUT.*

I  Sam.  21.  2.  let  no  man  know  tv.  I  send  thee
WHEIi  EAS.

I  Sam.  24.  17.  tv.  1  reward  thee  evil  for  good
l  Kings  8. 18.  tv.  it  was  in  thy  heart  to  build  a  house
Ezek.  13.  7.  tv-  ye  say,  the  Lord  saith  it

35. 10.  we  will  possess  it,  tv.  the  Lord  was  there
Jam.  4. 14.  tv.  ye  know  not  what  will  be  on  morrow

WHEREBY.

Jer.  33.8.  iniquity  tv.  they  have  sinned  against  me
Ezek.  18.  31.  transgressions  tv.  ye  have  transgressed
39.  26.  trespasses  tv.  they  have'trespassed  ag.  me
Luke  1.18.  to.  shall  1  know  this  ?  for  I  am  an  old  man
Sets  4. 12.  no  other  name  tv.  we  must  be  saved
Rom.Q.  15.  the  Spirit  to.  we  cry,  Abba,  Father
Lph.  4.  30.  tv.  ye  are  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption
WHEREFORE.

I  Sam.  12.23.  to.  should  I  fast,  can  I  bring  him  again
16.  10.  who  shall  then  say,  tv.  hast  thou  done  so  ?
Mai.  2. 15.  tv.  one  ?  that  he  might  seek  a  godly  seed
Mat.  14.31.  O  thou  of  little  faith,  tv.  didstthou  doubt
26.50.  Jesus  said,  friend,  tv.  art  thou  come  ?

Sets  10.  21.  what  is  the  cause  tv.  ye  are  come  ?
WHERETO.

Isa.  55.  11.  it  shall  prosper  in  things  tv.  I  sent  it
Phil.  3.  16.  to.  ye  have  already  attained,  let  us  walk
WHEREWITH.

Judff.6.  15.  O  my  Lord,  tv.  shall  I  save  Israel  ?
limps  22.  22.  the  Lord  said  to  him,  tv.  2  Chr.  18.  20.
\Chron.  35.  21.  but  against  the  house  tv.  1  havqywar
ful- 119.  42.  so  shall  I  have  a*,  to  answer  him
Mtc.  6.  6.  to.  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord  ?

Mat.  5.  13.  are  salt  of  earth,  if  salt  lose  its  savour,
tv.  shall  it  be  salted  ?  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  14.  34.
him  17.  26.  the  love  tv.  thou  hast  loved  me
Zph.  2.  4.  for  this  great  love  tv.  he  hath  loved  us
WHEREWITHAL.

Mat.  6.  31.  whatshall  we  eat  ?  or  tv.  we  be  clothed  >

;  WHET.

'Jeut.  6.  f  7.  thou  shalt  tv.  them  unto  thy  children
32.41.  if  1  tv.  my  glittering  sword,  I  will  reward
sal.  7.  12.  if  he  turn  not,  he  will  to.  his  sword
64.  3.  who  tv.  their  tongue  like  a  sword,  and  bend
Lccl.  10.  10.  if  iron  blunt,  and  he  a',  not  the  edge
|  .  WHETHER.

Kings  20.  18.  tv.  they  be  for  peace,  or  tv.  for  war
Zzra  2.  59.  to.  they  were  of  Israel,  Neh.  7.  61.

'izek.  2.  5.  tv.  they  will  hear  or  forbear, 7.  |  3. 11.
Mat.  21.31.  tv.  of  them  did  the  will  of  his  father?

23.  17.  tv.  is  greater,  the  gold  or  the  temple  ?

John  7- 17.  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  to.  it  be  of  G.
torn.  14.8.  tv.  w'e  live  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord’s
Cor.  15.  11,  it  were  I  or  they,  so  we  preach
:  Cor.  12.  2.  tv.  in  the  body,  or  tv.  out  of  the  body,  3.
John  4.  1.  but  try  the  spirits  tv.  they  are  of  God
WHICH.

Jen.  3.  17-  of  the  tree  tv.  I  commanded  thee,  sa3’ing
45.6.  in  tv.  there  shall  be  neither  earing  nor  harvest
yum.  19.  2.  a  heifer  upon  tv.  never  came  yoke
Luke  21. 6.  in  tv.  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone
John  8.  46.  tv.  of  you  convinced:  me  of  sin  ?

10. 32.  for  a;,  of  those  works  do  ye  stone  me  ?

Jets  26. 16.  in  the  tv.  I  will  appear  unto  thee
Jol.  3.  7.  in  the  to.  ye  also  walked  some  time
deb.  7. 19.  abetter  hope  by  tv.  we  draw  nigh  to  G.
9.  5.  of  tv.  we  cannot  now  speak  particularly
W.  14.  follow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holiness,
without  tv.  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord
am.  2.  7-  that  worthy  name,  by  w.  ye  are  cal  led
Pet.  3. 19.  by  tv.  he  preached  to  spirits  in  prison
WHILE.

Jeut.  31.  27.  to.  I  am  yet  alive  with  you  this  day
Sam.  20.  14.  not  only  tv.  yet  I  live  shew  kindness
|  Sam.  12.  18.  to.  the  child  was  yet  alive,  21. 22.

•  Chr.  15.  2.  Lord  is  with  you  tv.  ye  be  with  him
34.  3.  tv.  Josiah  was  yet  young,  he  began  to  seek  G.
L>i20.  23.  God  shall  rain  it  on  him  tv.  he  is  eating
Peal.  7.  2.  tear  my  soul  tv.  there  is  none  to  deliver
49.  18.  though  tv.  he  lived,  he  blessed  his  soul
63.  4.  thus  will  I  bless  thee  tv.  1  live,  146.  2.

104. 33.  will  praise  G.  tv.  I  have  my  being,  146.  2.
sa.  55.  6.  seek  ye  the  Lord  tv.  he  may  be  found
hr.  15. 9.  her  sun  is  gone  down  tv.  it  was  yet  day
40. 5.  now  tv.  he  was  not  yet  gone  back
Mat.  5.  25.  agree  s,  thou  art  in  the  way  with  him
27. 63.  that  deceiver  said,  tv.  he  was  yet  alive


Mark  2.  19.  can  the  children  of  birde-chamber  fast
w.  the  bridegroom  is  with  them  ?  Luke  5.  34.
Luke  24.  44.  1  spake  tv.  I  was  yet  with  you
John  9. 4.  do  work  of  him  that  sent  me  to.  it  is  day

1  Tim.  5.  6.  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  to.  she  liv.
Heb.3A5.tv.  it  is  said,  to-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice

A  WHILE.

Gen.  46.  29.  Joseph  wept  on  his  neck  a  good  to.
ISamJj.  27.  Samuel  said  to  Saul,  stand  thou  still  aw.

2  Sam.  7.  19.  thou  hast  spoken  for  a  great  tv.

Mat.  1.3.  21.  hath  not  root,  hut  dureth  for  a  tv.
Luke  8. 13.  which  fora  tv.  believe,  in  time  fall  awaj’

18.  4.  he  would  not  for  a  tv.  but  afterwards  he  said
1  Pet.  5. 10,  after  have  suffered  a  tv.  make  you  perfect
All  the  W  H I  LE.

1  Sam.  22.  4.  all  the  to.  David  was  in  the  hold
25. 7-  none  missing  all  the  tv.  they  were  in  Carm.  16.
27.  11.  so  will  be  his  manner  all  the  w.  he  dwelleth
Job  27.  3.  all  the  tv.  my  breath  is  in  me  and  Spirit  of
See  Little.  [God

^  Long  WHILE.

Acts  20.  11.  had  talked  a  long  tv.  even  till  break  of
_  WHIP.  [day

Prov.  26. 3.  a  to.  for  the  horse,  a  rod  for  a  fool’s  back
Nah.  3.  2.  the  noise  of  a  to.  the  noise  of  the  wheels
WHIPS.

1  Rings  12. 11.  my  father  chastised  you  with  tv. T  will

chastise  you  with  scorpions,  14.  2  Chr.  10. 11, 14.
WHIRLETH.

Eccl.  1.  6.  wind  tv.  continually  and  returneth again
Will  RLW1ND.

2  R  mgs  2.  1.  Lord  would  take  up  Elijah  by  a  tv.  1 1 .
Job  37.  9.  out  of  the  south  cometh  the  tv.  and  cold

38.  1.  the  Lord  answered  Job  out  of  the  tv.  40.  6.
Psal.  58.  9.  he  shall  take  them  away  as  in  a  tv.  both
living  and  in  wrath,  Prov.  10.  25.  Jlos.  1.3.3.
Prov.  1.  27.  when  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  tv.
Isa. 5.  28. counted  like  Hint  and  their  wheels  like  a  tv.

17.  13.  chased  like  a  rolling  thing  before  the  tv.

40.  24,  the  w.  shall  take  them  away  as  stubble
41. 16.  shalt  fan  them,  the  tv.  shall  scatter  them
66.  15.  Lord  come  with  chariots  like  arc.  Jer  A.  1.3,

Jer.  23.  19.  a  tv.  of  the  Lord  is  gone  forth  in  fury

25.  .32.  a  great  w.  shall  be  raised  up  from  earth
30.  23.  a  continuing  tv.  shall  fall  on  the  wicked

Ezek.  1.  4.  behold,  a  tv.  came  out  of  the  north
Dan.  11.  40.  king  shall  come  against  him  like  a  tv.
Dos.  8. 7. they  have  sown  wind,  they  shall  reap  the  w.
Amos  1.  14.  devour  palaces  in  the  day  of  the  tv.
Nah.  1.  3.  the  Lord  hath  his  way  in  the  tv.

Hab.  3. 14.  they  came  out  as  a  tv.  to  scatter  me
Zech.  7.  14.  but  1  scattered  them  with  a  to.
WHIRLWINDS.

Isa.  21.  1.  as  to.  in  the  south  pass  through
Zech.  9.  14.  Lord  shall  go  forth  with  tv.  in  the  south
WHISPER.

Psal.  41.  7.  all  that  hate  me  tv.  together  against  me
Isa.  29.  4.  thy  speech  shall  tv.  out  of  the  dust
WHISPERED.

2  Sam.  12. 19.  when  David  saw'  that  his  servants  tv.
WHISPERER.

Prov.  16.  28.  a  tv.  separateth  chief  friends

26.  t  20.  where  there  is  no  70.  strife  ceaseth

WHISPERERS.

Rom.  1.29.  full  of  envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit, tv.
WHISPERINGS.

2  Cor.  12.  20.  lest  there  be  to.  swellings,  tumults
WHIT.

1  Sam.  3.  18.  Samuel  told  Eli  every  tv.  hid  nothing
John  7.  23.  I  have  made  a  man  every  to.  whole

I. 3.  10.  save  to  wash  his  feet,  but  is  clean  every  to.

2  Cor.  11.  5.  I  was  not  a  tv.  behind  chiefest  apostles

WHITE.

Gen.  30.  37-  Jacob  made  the  tv.  appear  in  the  rods
49.  12.  and  his  teeth  shall  be  tv.  with  milk
Exod.  16.  31.  manna  was  like  coriander-seed,  to.
Lev.  13.  3.  if  the  hair  be  turned  tv.  4,  20,  25.

4.  if  the  bright  spot  be  w.  in  the  skin,  19,  24.

10.  if  the  rising  be  tv.  in  the  skin,  19.  43.

21.  but  if  there  be  no  a;,  hairs  therein,  26.

Num.  12.  10.  Miriam  became  leprous,  u>.  as  snow
Judo.  5.  10.  speak,  ye  that  ride  on  to.  asses
2  Kings  5.  27.  Gehazi  went  out  a  lej^er  to.  as  snow
2  Chr.  5.  12.  the  Levites  being  arrayed  in  tv.  linen
Esth.  8.  15.  Mordecai  went  out  in  tv.  apparel
Job  6.  6.  is  there  any  taste  in  the  tv.  of  an  egg  ?

Psal.  68.  14.  it  was  tv.  as  snow  in  Salmon
Eccl.  9.  8.  let  thy  garments  he  always  tv.

Cant.  5. 10.  my  beloved  is  tv.  and  ruddy,  the  chiefest
Zfc.1.18.  yoursinsas  scarlet,  they  shall  be  w.  as  snow
Ezek.  27.  18.  Damascus  traded  in  to.  wool
Dan.  7.  9.  whose  garment  was  to.  as  snow

II.  35.  some  of  them  shall  fall  to  make  them  tv.

12. 10.  many  shall  be  purified  and  made  tv.

Joel  1. 7.  the  branches  thereof  are  made  tv.

Zech.  1 . 8.  there  were  red  horses,  speckled  and  tv.
Mat.  5.  36.  thon  canst  not  make  one  hairtc.  or  black
17.  2.  his  raiment  was  tv.  as  the  light,  Luke  9.  29.
28.  3.  the  angel’s  raiment  was  to.  Acts  1.  10.

Mark  16.  5.  a  man  clothed  in  a  long  w.  garment
John  4.  35.  the  iields  are  to.  already  to  harvest
Rev.  1.14.  his  head  and  his  hairs  w ere  re.  like  wool

2.  17.  will  give  him  a  to.  stone  and  a  new  name

3.  4.  they  shall  walk  with  me  in  iv.  they  are  worthy

5.  lie  that  overcometh  shall  be  clothed  in  to.  rai¬

ment,  4.  4.  |  7.  9.  13.  I  15.  6.  I  19.  8,  14.

18.  buy  w.  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed

6.  2.  and  I  saw,  and  behold  a  to.  horse,  19.  11.

7.  14.  have  made  them  w.  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb

14.  14.  a  to.  cloud  ]|  20.  1 1 .  I  saw  a  w.  throne

WHITE.

Mark  9.  3.  so  as  no  fuller  on  earth  can  w.  them
WHITED.

Mat.  23.  27-  the  scribes  were  like  to  to.  sepulchres
Acts  23.  3.  God  shall  smite  thee,  thou  tv.  wall
WHITER.

Psal.  51.  7-  wash  me,  and  1  shall  be  w.  than  snow
Lam.  4.  7-  her  Nazarites  are  to.  than  milk
WHITHER.

Gen.  16.  8.  Hagar,  Sarai’s  maid,  to.  wilt  thou  go?

1  Sam.  10.  14.  Saul’s  uncle  said,  to.  went  ye  ?

2  Kings  5.  25.  and  he  said,  thy  servant  went  now.


Cant.  6.  1.  tv  is  thy  beloved  gone  ?  O  thou  fairest
Zech.  5. 10.  I  said,  tv.  do  these  hear  the  ephah  ?
Heb.  11.8.  Abrah.  obeyed  and  went,  not  know  ing  to.
See  Go,  Gof.st,  Goeth.
WHITHERSOEVER.

2  Sam.  8.6.  the  lord  preserved  David  a:,  he  went,
14.  2  Kings  18.  7-  1  Citron.  18.  6,  13.
P/w.17.8.  tv.  it  turneth  it  prospered:,  a  gift  precious
21.  1.  he  turneth  the  king's  heart  tv.  he  will
Mat.HA1).  I  will  follow  thee  a;  thou  goest, Luke  9.57
Rev.  14.  4.  these  follow  the  Lamb  tv.  he  goeth
WHO.

Gen.  27.  18.  tv.  art  thou,  my  son  ?  32.  Ruth  .3.  9, 16.

John  1.  19,  22.  |  8.25.  I  21.  12.
.33.  5.  Esau  said,  to.  are  those  with  thee  ?  48.  8.
Exod.  3.  11.  tv.  am  1  ?  1  Sam.  18.  18.  2  Sam.  7.  18.
5.  2.  tv.  is  the  Lord  ?  Prov.  30.  9.  John  ).  36.

15.  11.  u\  is  like  thee,  O  Lord,  among  the  gods '
Deut.  33.  29.  1  Sam.  26.  15.  Psal.  35.  10.
32. 26.  Moses  stood  and  said,a>.  is  on  Lord’s  side  ?

1  Sam.  25.  10.  w.  is  I)av  id  ?  and  to.  is  son  of  Jesse  ?

2  Kings  ).  32.  Jehu  said,  tv.  is  on  my  side,  tv.  ?
IO.9.  but  tv.  slew  all  these  ||  13.  Jehu  said,  tv.  are  veJ

Neh.  6.  11.  tv.  would  go  into  temple  to  save  bis  liter
Esth.  7.5.  tv.  is  he  ?  and  where  is  he  ?  Job  9.  24  I
17.  3.  I  42.  3.  Jer.  9.  12.  ilJa/.'26.  68.
Psal.  4.  6.  many  say,  tv.  will  shew  us  any  good  ?
59.  7-  they  belch  out,  for  tv.  say  they,  doth  hear?
Prov.  2.3.  29.  tv.  hath  woe  ?  tv.  hath  sorrow  r  tv.  hath
contentions  and  babbling  ?  tv.  hath  redness  of  eves?
Isa.  6.  8.  tv.  will  go  for  us  ?  ||  29.  15.  tv.  seeth  us?
Jer.  21.  13.  tv.  shall  come  down  against  us  ?

49.  4.  saying,  to.  shall  come  unto  me  ?

19.  to.  is  like  me  ?  tv.  will  appoint  me  time  ?  50.  44.
Lam.  2.  1.3.  O  daughter  of  Zion,  to.  can  heal  thee  i
3.  37.  tv.  is  he  that  saith,  and  it  cometh  to  pass
Mat.  21 . 10.  say,  auis  this  ?  Luke  5.  21.  |  7.  49.  |  9.  9.
Iuke  19.3.  Zaccheus  sought  to  see  Jesus  tv.  he  was  '
John  5.  13.  lie  that  was  healed,  wist  not  to.  it  was
13.  25.  Lord,  tv.  is  it  ?  ]|  Acts  19.  15.  tv.  are  ye
Act.:  9.  5.  lie  said,  tv.  art  thou,  Lord  ?  22.  8.  |  26.  15.
21 .33.  capt,  demanded  tv.  he  was,  what  he  had  done'

1  Cor.  .3.  5.  to.  then  is  Paul  ?  and  tv.  is  A  polios  ?

2  Cor.  2.  16.  and  to.  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?
11. 29.  tv.  is  weak  ?  to.  is  offended  and  1  burn  not  ?

Jam.  4.  12.  tv.  art  thou  that  judgest  another  ?

1  John  2.  22.  to.  is  a  liar,  but  he  that  denied:  Christ  ?
Rev.  6.  17,-  and  uk  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?

13. 4.  saying,  to.  is  like  unto  the  beast  ?  tv.  is  able  to

15.  4.  tv .  shall  not  fear  thee,  O  L.  glorify  thy  name  *

WHOLE.

Exod.  29. 18.  shall  burn  tv.  ram  on  altar,  Lev.  8.  21 .
Lev.  4.  12.  even  the  w.  bullock  shall  lie  carry  forth

10.  6.  let  the  to.  liouseof  Israel  bew  ail  the.  burning
Josh.  11.  23.  so  Joshua  took  the  tv.  land  and  save  it

2  Sam.  1 .  9.  because  my  life  is  yet  «>.  in  me

2  Chr.  15.  15.  Judah  sought  him  with  their  to.  desire-
Psal.  51. 19.  shalt  be  pleased  with  tv.  burnt  offering
Prov.  1.  12.  let  us  swallow  them  up  alive,  and  tv.

16.  33.  the  tv.  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord
Eccl.  12.  13.  for  this  is  the  tv.  duly  of  man

Isa.  54.5.  thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One,  the  God  of
w.  earth  shall  he  he  called,  Mic.  4. 13.  Zech  A.  14.
Jer.  19.  11.  a  vessel  that  cannot  be  made  tv.  again"

45.  4.  T  will  pluck  up  even  this  tv.  land
Ezek.  15.  5.  when  to.  it  was  meet  for  no  work
Mai.  3.  9.  ye  have  robbed  me,  even  this  to.  nation
Mat.  5.  29.  not  that  thy  tv.  body  be  cast  into  hell,  30.

8.  .32.  the  w.  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  down

13.  .33.  till  the  to.  was  leavened,  Luke  13,  21.

16.  26.  what  is  a  man  profited  if  he  gain  tv.  world
and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  Mark  8.  36.  Luke  9.  25.
Luke  2.3. 1 .  to.  multitude  of  them  arose  and  led  him
John  4.  53.  and  himself  believed,  and  Ids  tv.  house

11.  50.  is  expedient  that  the  tv.  nation  perish  not
Acts  13.  44.  came  almost  the  to.  city  to  hear  word
1  Cor.  12.  17.  if».  body  w'ere  an  eye,  w  here  hearing
1  Thess.5.  23.  T  pray  your  tv.  spirit  and  Body  preser.
Jam.  2.  10.  whosoever  shall  keep  the  tv.  law

1  John  2.  2.  hut  also  for  the  sins  of  the  tv.  woild

5.  19.  and  the  tv.  world  lieth  in  wickedness

See  Congregation,  Heart.

WHOLE  for  sound.

Josh.  5.  8.  they  abode  in  the  camp  till  they  were  a.
Job  5.  18.  he  woundetli,  and  his  hands  make  tv.

Mat.  9.  12.  they  that  be  tv.  need  not  a  physician,
but  they  that  are  sick,  Mark  2.  17.  Luke  5.  31,

21.  touch  liis  garment,  I  shall  be  tv.  Mark  5.  28."

22.  the  woman  was  made  a;,  from  that  hour

12.  13.  his  hand  was  made  w.  Mark  3.  5.  I.uke  6. 10.
15.  28.  her  daughter  was  made  to.  from  that  hour

31.  wondered  when  they  saw  the  maimed  to  be  tv.
Mark  5.  34.  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  tv.  go  in  peace
and  be  tv.  of  thy  plague,  Luke  8.  48.  I  17.  19_
T.uke  7.  10.  found  the  servant  w.  that  had  been  sick
John  5.  6.  Jesus  saith,  wilt  thou  be  made  tv.  ?

14.  behold,  thou  art  made  tv.  sin  no  more

7-  23.  because  i  have  made  a  man  every  whit  »c.
Acts  4.  9.  if  examined  by  vvliat  means  he  is  made  v>

9.  34.  Eneas,  Jesus  Christ  maketh  thee  to.

WHOLLY.

Lev.  6.  22.  it  is  a  statute,  it  shall  be  to.  burnt,  2.3.

19.  9.  thou  shalt  not  w.  reap  corners  of  thy  field
Num.  3.  9.  for  they  are  tv.  given  to  him  out  of  Israel

4.  6.  a  cloth  tv.  of  blue  ||  8.  16.  are  u>.  given  me
.32.  11.  because  they  have  not  w.  followed  me
Deut.  1.36.  to  Caleb’s  children  give  the  land,  because
he  hath  to.  followed  the  Lord,  Josh.  14.  8,  9,  14,
Judg.  17.  3.  1  had  to.  dedicated  the  silver  to  Lord
1  Sam.  7.  9.  Samuel  offered  a  sucking  lamb  v>.

1  Chr  on.  28.  21.  all  the  people  to.  at  thy  command1.
Job  21.  23.  one  dieth,  being  tv.  at  ease  and  quiet
Isa.  22.  1.  thou  art  to.  gone  up  to  the  house-tops
Jer.  2.  21.  yet  1  had  planted  tliee  tv.  a  right  seed

6.  6.  she  is  to.  oppression  in  the  midst  of  her

13.  19-  Judah  shall  be  to.  carried  away  captive
42.  15.  if  ye  tv.  set  your  faces  to  enter  Egypt

46.  28.  yet  will  1  not  leave  tliee  tv.  unpunished
50.  13.  Babylon  not  be  inhabited,  but  to.  desolate-.

j Ezek.  ll.  15.  all  the  house  of  Israel  to.  are  they
Amos  8.  8.  and  it  shall  rise  up  tv.  as  a  flood,  9.  5..
Acts  17.  16.  he  saw  the  city  tv.  given  to  idolatry

553


WHO


W  I  C


W  I  C


4  Thess.  5.  23.  the  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  w.

1  Tim.  4.  15.  meditate,  give  thyself  to.  to  them
WHOLESOME.

Prov.  15.  4.  a  to.  tongue  is  a  tree  of  life,  but  perv.

1  Tim.  6.  3.  if  any  man  consent  not  to  to.  words
WHOM.

Gen.  22.  2.  take  thy  only  son  Isaac  to.  thou  lovest
30.  26.  give  me  my  wives,  for  tv.  1  served  thee
43.  2?.  the  old  man  of  tv.  ye  spake,  is  lie  alive  ?  29.
Exod.  33.19.  will  be  gracious  to  to.  1  will  be  gracious
Lev.  1?.  7.  after  to.  they  have  gone  a  whoring
Num.  11.  21.  people,  amongst  to.  1  am,  are  600,000
Dent.  32.  20.  they  are  children  in  to.  is  no  faith
37.  where  their  gods  ?  their  rock  in  to.  they  trusted
Josh.  24.  15.  choose  you  this  day  to.  ye  will  serve
Judy.  7.4.  that  of  to.  1  say,  thisshall  go  with  thee

1  Sant.  6.  20.  and  toy.  shall  he  go  up  from  us?

9.  20.  and  on  to.  is  all  the  desire  of  Israel

29.  5.  David,  of  to.  thevsang  one  to  another

30. 13.  David  said  unto"  him,  to  y.  belongest  thou  ?

2  Sam.  16.  19.  and  again,  to.  should  l  serve  ?

1  Kings  20.  14.  Ahab  said,  by  to.  '/  22.  8.  Ezra  10.

44.  Rom.  1.  5.  15.  2,  11.  Gal.  6.14.
-.2  Kings  19. 10.  thy  G.  in  y.thou  trustest,  Isa.  37- 10.
Psal.  16.  3.  but  to  the  saints,  in  to.  is  all  iny  delight

18.  2.  my  God,  my  strength,  in  to.  1  will  trust
73.  25.  to.  have  1  in  heav.  but  thee  '  none  on  earth
146.  3.  not  trust  in  son  of  man,  in  to.  there  is  no  help
Prov.  3.  12.  as  a  father  the  son,  in  to.  he  delighteth
27.  withhold  not  good  from  them  to  to.  it  is  due

30.  31.  a  king  against  to.  there  is  no  rising  up
Eccl.  4.  8.  neither  saith  he,  for  to.  (to  1  labour  ?
■Gant. 3.  1.  1  soughthim  to.  my  soul  loveth,  2,3.

Isa.  6.8.  1  heard  a  voice  saying,  to.  shall  1  send  ?

10.  3.  what  in  visitation  ?  to  to.  will  ye  flee  for  help

22.  16.  what  hast  thou  here  ?  to.  hast  thou  here  ?

31.  6.  turn  to  him  from  to.  Israel  hath  revolted
40.  18.  to  to.  then  will  ye  liken  God  (  25.  1  46.  5.

42.  I.  behold  mine  elect,  in  to.  my  soul  delighteth
49.  3.  art  my  servant,  O  lsr.  in  y.  I  will  be  glorified
51.  19.  famine  and  sword,  by  y. shall  1  comfort  thee
57.  4.  aeainst  to.  do  ye  sport  yourselves  ?

11.  and  of  to.  hast  thou  been  afraid,  or  feared  ?
Jer.  8.  2.  to.  they  have  loved,  to.  they  have  served,
after  to.  they  have  walked,  and  to.  they  sought
Lam.  1.  14.  from  to.  1  am  not  able  to  rise  up
4.  20.  of  to.  we  said,  under  his  shadow  we  live
Ezek.  31.  2.  son  of  man  spake  unto  Phaiaoh,  &e.

to.  art  thou  like  in  thy  greatness?
18.  to  to.  art  thou  like  in  glory  and  greatness  ?
Dan.  5.  19.  to.  he  would  he  slew,  a;. he  would  he  kept
alive,  set  up,  and  to.  he  would  he  pulled  down
Amos  7.  2.  O  Lord,  by  to.  shall  Jacob  arise  ?  5.
Nah.  3.  19.  on  to.  hath  not  thy  wickedness  passed  ?
Mat.  3.  17.  this  is  my  beloved  Son,  iny.  I  am  well
pleased,  17.  5.  Mark  1.  11.  2  Pet.  2.  17.

11.  10.  this  is  he  of  to.  it  is  written,  John  1.  15,  30.

16.  15.  Jesus  saith  to  them,  but  to.  say  ye  that  1

am  ?  Mark  10.  29.  Luke  9.  20.
John  5.  21 .  10.  he  will  ||  45.  Moses  in  to.  ye  trust

6.  68.  Lord,  to  to.  shall  we  go  ?  ||  17.  3.  to.  thou  sent
Acts  8.  34.  of  to.  speaketh  the  prophet  this  ?

27.  23.  angel  of  God,  whose  l  am.  and  to.  I  serve
Pom.  15.  21.  to  to.  he  was  not  spoken  of,  shall  see

1  Cor.  1.  9.  God  is  faithful,  by  to.  ye  are  called

3.  5.  who  is  Paul  and  A  polios,  but  ministers  by  to. ye

7.  39.  she  is  at  liberty  to  be  married  to  to.  she  will

8.  6.  one  God,  of  to.  are  all  things,  Heb.  2.  10.

2  Cor.  1.10.  in  to.  we  trust  that  he  will  deliver  us
Evh.  1.  7.  in  to.  we  have  redemption  through  his

blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  Col.  1.  14.
11.  m  to.  also  we  have  obtained  an  inheritance
13.  in  to.  ye  also  trusted,  in  to.  ye  were  sealed

2.  3.  among  to.  also  we  all  had  our  conversation

21.  in  to.  the  building  groweth  to  a  temple

22.  in  to.  you  also  are  builded  together  for  habitat.

3.  12.  in  to. ye  have  boldness  and  access  with  confid.
Phil.  2.  15.  among  to.  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world

3.  8.  for  to.  1  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things
•Col.  1.28.y.we  preach  ||  2.  11. in  to. ye  are  circumcised

2.  3.  in  to.  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom
2  Thess.  2.8.  that  wicked,  to.  the  Lord  shall  consume

1  Ti/n.l.  15.  to  save  sinners,  of  to.  I  am  chief

20.  of  to.  is  Hymeneus  and  Alex.  2  Tim.  2.  17.

2  Tim.  1.  15.  ot  to.  are  Phygellus  and  Hermogenes

4.  15.  the  copper-smith,  of  to.  be  thou  ware  also
18.  preserve  to  his  heavenly  kingd.  to  to.  be  glory

for  ever,  amen,  Gal.  1.  5.  Heb.  13.  21.
1  Pet.  4.  11.

Heb.  3.  17.  with  to.  was  he  grieved  forty  years?

18.  to  a),  sware  he  they  should  not  enter  into  rest

4.  13.  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  to.  we  have  to  do

7.  2.  to  a).  Abraham  gave  the  tenth  part  of  all

11.  38.  of  to.  the  world  was  not  worthy

Jam.  1. 17.  fatherof  lights,  with  to.  is  no  variableness
1  Pet.  1. 12.  unto.ai.it  was  revealed,  that  did  minister
2.  4.  to  w.  coming,  as  unto  a  living  stone
’2  Pet.  2.  17.  to  w.  darkness  is  reserved,  Jude  13.

19.  for  ot  to,  a  man  is  overcome,  of  him  brought
Rev.  7-  2.  to  to.  it  was  given  to  hurt  the  earth

17.  2.  with  to.  kings  of  earth  committed  fornication

See  Before.

WHOMSOEVER.

Gen.  31.  32.  with  w.  thou  findest  thy  gods,  not  live
Judy.  11.  24.  w.  the  Lord  our  God  shall  drive  out
Dan.  4.  17.  he  giveth  it  to  vo.  he  will,  25.  32.  15.  21.
.Mat.  11.  27-  he  to  w.  the  Son  will  reveal  him

21.  44.  but  on  to.  it  shall  fall,  Luke  20.  18.

Luke  4.  6.  the  devij  said,  to  w.  1  will  1  give  it

12.  48.  to  to.  much  is  given,  much  shall  be  required
^cfr8.19.on*c.l  lay  hands, may  receive  Holy  Ghost
1  Cor.  16.  3.  to.  ye  shall  approve  by  your  letters

WHORE.

Lev.  19. 29.  do  not  cause  her  to  be  a  to.  lest  the  land
21.  7-  they  shall  not  take  a  wife  that  is  a  w,

9.  if  she  profane  herself  by  playing  the  to.

Dent.  22-  21.  to  play  the  to.  in  her  father’s  house
23. 17. there  shall  be  no  w.  of  the  daughters  of  Israel

18.  thou  shalt  not  bring  the  hire  ot  a  to.  or  price
Judy.  19.2.  his  concubine  played  they.  against  him
Prov.  23.  27.  mo.  is  a  deep  ditch  and  a  narrow  pit
Isa.  57-  3.  the  seed  of  the  adulterer  and  the  to.

554


Jer.  3.  3.  and  thou  hast  a  to.  forehead,  not  ashamed
Ezek.  16. 28.  thou  hast  plaj'ed  the  to.  also  with  Assyr.
Rev.  17. 1.  will  shew  judgment  of  the  great  to.  19.  2.

15.  the  waters  where  the  to.  sitteth,  are  peoples

16.  these  shall  hate  the  to.  and  make  her  desolate

WHORES.

Ezek.  16.  33.  they  give  gifts  to  all  to.  thou  hirest  them
Hos.  4. 14.  for  themselves  are  separated  with  to.
WHOREDOM.

Gen.  38. 24.  Tamar,  behold,  she  is  with  child  by  to.
Lev.  19.  29.  lest  the  land  fall  to  to.  and  be  wicked
Jer.  3.  9.  through  the  lightness  of  her  to.  she  defiled
13.27.  I  have  seen  the  lewdness  of  thy  to.

Ezek.  16. 33.  that  they  may  come  to  thee  for  thy  to.
23.8.  they  poured  their  to.  upon  her

17.  the  Babylonians  defiled  her  with  their  to.

43.7.  lsr.  shall  not  defile  my  holy  name  by  their  a/.

9.  let  them  put  aw  ty  their  to.  tar  from  me
Hos.  4.  11.  to.  and  wine  take  away  the  heart
5.3.0  Ephraim,  thou  committest  to.  lsr.  is  defiled
6.  10.  there  is  the  to.  of  Ephraim,  Israel  is  defiled
WHOREDOMS.

Num.  14. 33.  your  children  shall  wander  and  beary.

2  Kings  9. 22.  so  long  as  the  to.  of  thy  mother  Jezebel
2  Chron.  21.  13.  like  to  the  to.  of  the  house  of  Ahab
Jer.  3.2.  thou  hast  polluted  the  land  with  thy  to.
Ezek.  16.  20.  is  this  of  thy  to.  a  small  matter  ?

22.  in  all  thy  to.  hast  not  remembeied  days  of  youth
25.  hast  multiplied  thy  y.||  26. hast  increased  thy  to.
34.  the  contrary  from  other  women  in  thy  to.

23.35.  bear  thou  also  thy  lewdness  and  thy  to.

Hos.  1 . 2.  go  take  thee  a  wife  and  children  of  to.

2.  2.  let  her  put  away  her  to.  out  of  her  sight
4.  not  have  mercy,  tor  they  be  the  children  of  tv.

4. 12.  the  spirit  of  to.  hath  caused  them  to  err,  5.  4.
Nah.  3. 4.  because  of  the  multitude  of  to.  that  selletk
nations  thro’  her  10.  and  families  thro’  witcluraft
See  Commit.
WHOREMONGER.

Eph.  5.5.  no  to.  hath  any  inheritance  in  kingd.  of  Ch.

WHOREMONGERS.

1  Tim.  1. 10.  the  law  made  for  to.  for  liars
Heb.  13.  4.  but  to.  and  adulterers  God  will  judge
Rev.  21. 8.  to.  shall  hav  e  their  part  in  the  lake
22.  15.  for  without  are  to.  and  murderers
WHORING.  *ee  Go,  Gone,  Went.
WHORISH.

Prov.  6.  26.  for  by  means  of  a  to.  woman  a  man  is
Ezek.  6.  9.  because  I  am  broken  with  their  to.  heart
16.  30.  the  work  of  an  imperious  to.  woman
WHOSE.

Gen.  32. 17-  to.  art  thou  J  to.  are  these  before  thee  ?

1  Sam.  12.  3.  to.  ox,  or  to.  ass  have  1  taken  ?

2  Sam.  3.  12.  to.  is  the  land,  make  thy  league

.Ter.  44. 28.  a  remnant  shall  knowy.  word  shallstand
48.  15.  to.  name  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  51.  57.

Dan.  5. 23.  the  God  in  to.  hand  are  all  thy  ways
Amos  5.  27-  saith  Lord,  to.  name  is  the  God  of  hosts
Mat.  22.  20.  he  saith  to  them,  to.  is  this  image  and
superscription?  Mark  12.  16.  Luke  20.24.
42.  to.  son  is  he  ?  ||  John  19.  24.  to.  it  shall  be
Luke  12.  20.  then  y.  shall  those  things  be  ?

ActsTl.  23.  angel  of  God,  to.  I  am,  and  whom  1  serve
Hsb.  3.  6.  Christ  over  his  house,  to.  house  are  we
See  Heart.
WHOSESOEVER.

John  20.  23.  to.  sins  ye  remit,  to.  sins  ye  retain
WHOSOEV  ER.

1  Kings  13. 33.  w.  would  he  consecrated  him  a  priest
Mat.  11.6.  blessed  to.  shall  not  be  offended  in  me
13. 12.  to.  hath  to  him  shall  be  given,  to.  hath  not,
from  him  shall  be  taken  he  hath,  Luke  8.  18.
Rom.  2. 1 .  O  man,  to.  thou  art  that  judgest
1  Cor.  11.27.  to.  shall  eat  this  bread  unworthily
Gal.  5. 10.  shall  bear  his  judgment,  to.  he  be
Rev.  22. 17.  to.  will,  let  nim  take  of  water  of  life
WHY.

Gen.  25. 22.  Rebekah  said,  if  it  be  so,  to.  am  I  thus  ?
Judy.  11.7-  to.  are  ye  come  to  me  now  in  distress  ?

15.  10.  Judah  said,  to.  are  ye  come  up  against  us  ?
Ruth  1. 11.  turn  again,  to.  will  ye  go  with  me  J

1  Sam  A.  23.  Eli  said,®,  do  ye  such  things'1

21.  1.  to.  art  thou  alone,  and  no  man  with  thee  ?

2  Sam.  13. 26.  king  said,  to.  should  he  go  with  thee  ?

1  Kings  1.6.  in  saying,  to.  hast  thou  done  so  ?

2  C/inm. 25.16.  forbear,  to.  shouldest  thou  be  smitten  ?
E.\th.  4.5.  to  knowr  what  it  was  and  y.  it  was

Isa.  40.27.  to.  sayest  thou,  O  Jacob,  my  way  is  hid  ?
Jer. 8.  14.  to.  do  ye  sit  still  ?  assemble  yourselves
27.  13.  to.  will  ye  die  ?  Ezek.  18.  31.  |  3.3.  11.

Mat.  21.  25.  he  will  say  to  us,  to.  did  ye  not  then
believe  him  ?  Mark  11.  31.  Luke  20.  5.
Mark 5.  39.  he  saith,  to.  make  ye  this  ado,  and  weep  ?
Luke  2.  48.  to.  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  us  ?

John 7.  45.  they  said,  to.  have  ye  not  brought  him  ?
10. 20.  many  said,  he  is  mad,  and  to.  hear  ye  him  r1
ActsQA.he  fell  to  the  earth  and  heard  a  voice,  Saul,
Saul,  w.  persecutest  thou  me  ?  22.  7- 1  26.  14.
14.  15.  sirs,  w.  do  ye  these  things  ?  we  are  men
Rom.  9.  19.  thou  wilt  say,  w.  doth  he  yet  find  fault  ?

20.  thing  formed  say, w.  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ?
1  Cor.  10.  30.  to.  am  1  evil  spoken  of  for  that?
WICKED.

Gen.  18.  23.  wilt  thou  destroy  righteous  with  to.  f  25.
38.  7.  Er  was  y.  ||  Exod.  9.  27.  I  and  my  people  to.
Exod.  23.  7-  for  I  will  not  justify  the  to.

Lev.  20.  17.  it  is  a  to.  thing,  they  shall  be  cut  off
Dent.  15.  9.  there  be  not  a  thought  in  thy  to.  heart
17.  5.  who  have  committed  that  to.  thing

23.  9.  and  keep  thee  from  every'  to.  thing
25.  1.  and  condemn  the  to.  1  Kings  8  32.

1  Sam.  2.  9.  the  to.  shall  be  silent  in  darkness

24.  13.  wickedness  proceedeth  from  the  to.

2  Kings  17.  11.  Israel  wrought  to.  things  to  provoke
2  Chron.  6.23.  judge  thy  servant  by  requiting  the  to.

7.  14.  if  my  people  humble  themselves  and  turn
from  their  to.  ways,  Ezek.  18.  21.  |  33.  11,  19
24.  7.  the  sons  of  Athaliah  that  to.  woman
Neh.9.35.  our  kings  have  not  served  thee,  nor  turned
they  from  their  w.  wrays,  Ezek.  3.  19.  1 13.  22.
Esth.  7.  6.  the  adversary  is  this  to.  Haman
9. 25.  Hamau’s  to.  device  shall  return  on  his  head


Job  3.  17.  there  the  to.  cease  from  troubling

9.  22.  he  destroy eth  the  perfect  and  the  to.

29.  if  1  be  to.  why  then  labour  l  in  vain  ?  10.  15.

10.  7.  thou  kuowest  that  1  am  not  to.

21.  7.  wherefore  do  the  to.  live,  become  old  ?

30.  the  to.  is  reserved  to  the  day  of  destruction
27.  7-  let  mine  enemy  be  as  the  to.  and  unrighteous
34.  18.  is  it  fit  to  say  to  a  king,  thou  art  to.  ?

38.  13.  that  the  to.  might  be  shaken  out  of  it

15.  from  the  to.  their  light  is  withholden
40.  12.  and  tread  down  the  to.  in  their  place

Psal.  7.11.  God  is  angry  with  the  to.  every  day

9.  5.  thou  hast  destroyed  the  to.  for  eyer

16.  the  to.  is  snared  in  the  work  of  his  hands

17.  to.  shall  be  turned  into  hell  and  the  nations

10.  2.  the  to.  in  pride  doth  persecute  the  poor

3.  the  to.  boasteth  II  4.  the  to.  will  not  seek  God

I. 3.  wherefore  doth  the  to.  contemn  God  ?

11.  2.  to.  bend  their  bow,  make  ready  their  arrow

5.  but  the  to.  and  violence  his  soul  hateth

6.  upon  the  to.  he  shall  rain  snares,  fire  brimstone

12.  8.  the  to.  walk  on  every  side  when  vilest  men
17.  9.  keep  me  from  the  to.  that  oppress  me

13.  O  Lord,  deliver  my  soul  from  the  to.

26.  5.  and  1  will  not  sit  with  the  to.

27.  2.  when  the  to.  came  upon  me  to  eat  my  flesh

28.  3.  draw  me  not  away  with  the  to.

31.  17.  iet  the  to.  be  ashamed  and  silent  in  the  grave
34.  21.  evil  shall  slay  to.  they  that  hate  righteous
37.  7-  the  man  wbo  bringeth  to.  devices  to  pass

10.  yet  a  little,  the  to.  shall  not  be,  Prov.  10.  25.

12.  the  to.  plotteth  |1  20.  the  to.  shall  perish

14.  the  to.  have  drawn  out  the  sword,  they  bent
16.  is  better  than  the  riches  of  many  to.

21.  the  to,  borroweth,  and  payeth  not  again
32.  the  to.  watcheth  the  righteous  to  slay  him

34.  when  the  to.  are  cut  off,  thou  shalt  see  it

35.  1  have  seen  the  to.  in  great  power,  spreading
40.  he  shall  deliver  them  from  the  to.  and  save  them

39.  1.  keep  my  mouth,  while  the  to.  is  before  me

58.  3.  the  to.  are  estranged  from  the  womb

59.  5.  be  not  merciful  to  any  to.  transgressors
68.  2.  so  let  the  to.  perish  at  the  presence  of  God
75.  8.  the  to.  of  the  earth  shall  wring  them  out
92.  7.  when  the  to.  spring  as  the  grass,  and  flourish
94.  3.  Lord,  how  long  shall  the  to.  triumph?

13.  until  the  pit  be  digged  for  the  to.

101.  3.  I  will  set  no  to.  thing  before  mine  eyes

4.  I  will  not  know  a  to.  person

8.  I  will  early  destroy  all  the  to.  of  the  land
104. 35.  sinners  consumed  and  let  the  to.  be  no  more
106.  18.  the  flame  burnt  up  the  to.

112.  10.  the  to.  shall  see  it  and  be  grieved
119.  95.  the  to.  have  waited  for  me  to  destroy  me
110.  the  to.  laid  a  snare  for  me,  yet  I  erred  not
119.  thou  puttest  away  all  the  to.  like  dross
155.  salvation  is  far  from  the  to.  they  seek  not  thy

139.  19.  surely  thou  wilt  slay  the  to.  O  God
24.  and  see  if  there  be  any  to.  way  in  me

140.  8.  further  not  his  to.  device  lest  they  exalt

141.  4.  to  practise  to.  works  with  men  that  work
10.  let  the  w.  fall  into  their  own  nets

145.  20.  but  all  the  to.  will  he  destroy
147.  6.  he  casteth  the  to.  down  to  the  ground
Prov.  2.  22.  the  to.  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  earth

5.  22.  his  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  to.  himself

6.  18’.  a  heart  that  deviseth  to.  imaginations
10.  30.  but  the  to.  shall  not  inhabit  the  earth

II.  5.  the  to.  shall  fail  by  his  own  wickedness

7.  when  a  w.  mandieth,  his  expectation  perisheth

8.  righteous  delivered,  the  to.  cometh  in  his  stead

10.  and  when  the  to.  perish  there  is  shouting

18.  the  to.  worketh  a  deceitful  work
21.  the  to.  shall  not  be  unpunished,  31.

12.  2.  but  a  man  of  to.  devices  will  he  condemn

7.  the  to.  are  overthrown,  and  are  not,  21.  12.

12.  the  w.  desireth  the  net  of  evil  men

13.  the  to.  is  snared  by  the  transgression  of  his  lipsjl
21.  but  the  to.  shall  be  filled  with  mischief

13.  17.  ay.  messenger  falleth  into  mischief

14.  17.  and  a  man  of  to.  devices  is  hated

19.  the  to.  bow  at  the  gates  of  the  righteous
32.  the  w.  is  driven  away  in  his  wickedness

15.  29.  the  Lord  is  far  from  the  to.

16.  4.  yea,  even  the  to.  for  the  day  of  evil

17.  4.  a  to.  doer  giveth  heed  to  false  lips

15.  he  that  justified!  to.  is  an  abomination  to  Lord

18.  3.  when  the  to.  cometh,  then  cometh  contempt

20.  26.  a  wise  king  scattered!  the  to.  brings  wheel

21.  18.  the  to.  shall  be  ransom  for  the  righteous
27.  when  he  bringeth  it  with  a  to.  mind

24.  16.  but  the  w.  shall  fall  into  mischief
19.  neither  be  thou  envious  at  the  w.

25.  5.  take  away  the  to.  from  before  the  king

26.  a  righteous  man  falling  down  before  the  to.  ,

26.  23.  a  w.  heart  is  like  a  potsherd  covered

28.  1.  the  to.  flee  when  no  man  pursuetli
4.  they  that  forsake  the  law  praise  the  to.

12.  when  the  to.  rise,  28.  ||  15.  so  is  a  to.  ruler

29.  2.  when  the  to.  beareth  rule,  the  people  mourn.
7.  but  the  to.  regardeth  not  to  know  it

12.  his  servants  are  to.  ||  16.  the  to.  are  multiplied
Eccl.  3.  17.  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  they

7.  17.  be  not  overmuch  to.  neither  be  foolish

8.  10.  I  saw  the  to.  buried,  they  were  forgotten

13.  but  it  shall  not  be  well  with  the  to.

Isa.  5.  23.  which  justify  the  to.  for  reward

11.  4.  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  they  |
13.  11.  1  will  punish  they,  for  their  iniquity

.32.  7.  he  deviseth  to.  devices  to  destroy  the  poor
53.  9.  he  made  his  grave  with  the  to.  and  with  rich
55.  7.  let  the  to.  forsake  his  way,  let  him  return
57  .  20.  the  to.  are  like  troub.  sea  which  cannot  rest
Jer.  2.  .3.3.  thou  hast  taueht  the  to.  ones  thy  ways
6.  29.  for  the  to.  are  not  plucked  away

17.  9.  the  heart  is  deceitful  and  desperately  to.

25.  31.  he  will  give  the  to.  to  the  sword
Ezek.  .3.  18.  to  warn  the  to.  19. 1  33.  8,  9.

8.  9.  behold  the  to.  abominations  they  do  here
11.2.  these  men  give  to.  counsel  in  this  city

18.  23.  have  1  any  pleasure  that  the  to.  should  die

20.  44.  not  according  to  your  to.  ways  nor  doings


WIC


VV  I  D


i'j


u

■

I'

H

I


Etek.21.  3.  cut  of?  from  thee  the  right,  and  the  an  4-
25.  profane  an  prince  of  Israel  whose  day  is  come
.33. 15.  if  the  a\  restore  the  pledge,  he  shall  live
Dan.  12. 10.  but  the  zv.  shall  do  wickedly
Alic.6.  11.  shall  l  count  them  pure  with  an  balances  r
A 'ah.  1.  3.  the  Lord  shall  not  at  all  acquit  the  an

11.  there  is  one  come  out  of  thee  a  re.  counsellor

15.  for  the  an  shall  no  more  pass  through  thee
Hab.  1.  4.  the  n>.  doth  compass  about  the  righteous
13.  the  an  devoureth  the  man  more  righteous
Zeph.  1.  .3.  consume  stumbling-blocks  with  the  an
Mai.  3.  18.  shall  discern  between  righteous  and  zv.
4.  3.  and  ye  shall  tread  down  the  zv.  as  ashes
Mat.  12.  15.  more  zv.  than  himself,  even  so  shall  it
be  also  to  this  tv.  generation,  Luke  11.  26.
13.  49.  the  angels  shall  sever  the  zv.  from  the  just

16.  4.  a  zv.  generation  seeketh  after  a  sign

18.  32.  thou  an  servant,  25.  26.  Luke  19.  22.

Acts  2.  2.3.  and  by  zv.  hands  have  ye  slain  him
18.  14.  if  it  were  a  matter  of  zv.  lewdness,  O  lews

1  Cor.  5.  13.  therefore  put  away  that  zv.  person
Col.  1.  21.  were  enemies  in  your  mind  by  zv.  works

2  T/iess.  2.  8.  and  then  shall  that  zv.  be  revealed

See  Wan,  Men.

Of  the  WK'KED.

Job  8.  22.  the  place  of  the  zv.  shall  come  to  nought

9.  24.  the  earth  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  zv.

10. 3.  and  shouldest  shine  upon  the  counsel  ofthezv.
11.  20.  but  the  eye  of  the  zv.  shall  fail,  not  escape
16. 11.  God  turned  me  into  the  hands  of  the  zv.

18.  5.  the  light  of  the  zv.  shall  be  put  out

21.  surely  such  are  the  dwellings  of  the  zv.

20.  5.  the  triumphing  of  the  zv.  is  short

22.  every  hand  of  the  zv.  shall  come  upon  him

21.  16.  the  counsel  of  the  zv.  is  far  from  me,  22.  18.

17.  how  oft  is  candle  of  the  zv.  put  out,  and  eometh

destruction  on  them  ?  Prov.  13.  9.  I  24.  20.

28.  where  are  the  dwelling-places  of  the  zv.?

24.  6.  and  they  gathered  the  vintage  of  the  zv.

29.  17-  and  I  brake  the  jaws  of  the  zv.  and  plucked

36.  6.  he  preserveth  not  the  life  of  the  zv.

17.  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  judgment  of  the  zv.
Pjal.  1.  f  1.  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  zv.

7.  9.  let  the  wickedness  of  the  zv.  come  to  an  end

10.  15.  break  thou  the  arm  ofthezv.  man

22.  16.  the  assembly  of  the  zv.  have  inclosed  me
36. 1.  the  transgression  of  the  zv.  saith  in  my  heart

11.  let  not  the  hand  of  the  zv.  remove  me

37.  17.  the  arms  of  then-,  shall  be  broken
28.  but  the  seed  of  the  zv.  shall  be  cut  off

38.  the  end  of  the  zv.  shall  be  cut  off

55.  3.  because  of  the  oppression  of  the  zv.

58.  10.  he  shall  wash  his  feet  in  the  blood  of  the  zv.
64.  2.  hide  me  from  the  counsel  of  the  zv.

1 1.  4.  deliver  me  out  of  hand  of  the  zv.  and  unright-

.  ecus  cruel  man,  74.  19. 1  82.4.  |  97-  10.
73.  3.  when  I  saw  the  prosperity  of  the  zv.  ►

75.  10.  all  the  horns  ofthezv.  also  will  I  cut  off
82.  2.  how  long  will  ye  accept  the  persons  of  the  zv.  ?

91.  8.  behold,  and  see  the  reward  of  the  zv.

92.  11.  mine  ears  shall  hear  my  desire  of  the  zv.

109.  2.  the  mouth  of  the  zv.  is  opened  against  me
112.  10.  desire  of  the  zv.  shall  perish,  Prov.  10.  28.
119.  53.  because  of  the  zv.  that  forsake  thy  law
61.  the  bands  of  thezv.  have  robbed  me

125.  3.  the  rod  of  the  zv.  shall  not  rest  on  the  just
129.  4.  Lord  hath  cut  asunder  the  cords  of  the  zv.
140.  4.  keep  me,  O  Lord,  from  the  hands  of  the  zv.

8.  grant  not,  O  lord,  the  desires  of  the  zv.

146.  9.  the  way  of  the  zv.  he  turns  upside  down

Prov.  2.  14.  who  delight  in  frowardness  of  the  zv.

.3.  25.  be  not  afraid  of  the  desolation  of  the  zv.

3.3.  the  curse  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  house  of  the  zv
4.  14.  enter  not  into  the  path  of  the  zv.

19.  the  way  of  the  zv.  is  as  darkness,  they  know  nof
lO.  3.  he  casteth  a\yay  the  substance  of  the  zv.

6.  but  violence  covereth  the  mouth  of  the  zv.  11.

10.  7.  but  the  name  of  the  zv.  shall  rot
16.  the  fruit  of  the  zv.  tendeth  to  sin

20.  the  heart  of  the  an  is  little  worth

24.  the  fear  of  the  zv.  it  shall  come  upon  him

27.  but  the  years  of  thezv.  shall  be  shortened
32.  the  mouth  of  the  zv.  speaketh  frowardness

11.  11.  the  city  is  overthrown  by  mouth  of  the  zv.

23.  but  the  expectation  of  the  zv.  is  wrath

12.  5.  but  the  counsels  of  the  zv.  are  deceit

6.  the  Avords  of  the  zv.  are  to  lie  in  wait  for  blood
10.  but  the  tender  mercies  of  the  zv.  are  cruel
26.  but  the  way  of  thezv.  seduceth  them

13.  25.  but  the  belly  i  f  the  zv.  shall  want

14.  11.  the  house  of  thezv.  shall  be  overthrown

15.  6.  but  in  the  revenues  of  the  zv.  is  trouble

8.  sacrifice  of  the  zv.  is  an  abomination,  21. 27.

9.  the  W'ay  of  the  zv.  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord
26.  the  thoughts  of  the  zv.  are  an  abomination

28.  themouth  of  the  zv.  pouretb  out  evil  things
18. 5.  it  is  not  good  to  accept  the  person  ofthezv.

19.  28.  the  mouth  of  the  zv.  devoureth  iniquity

21.  4.  and  the  plowing  of  the  zv.  is  sin

7.  the  robbery  of  the  zv  shall  destroy  them

10.  the  soul  if  the  zv.  desireth  evil

12.  he  wisely  considered  the  house  of  the  zv.

Isa.  14.  5.  the  Lord  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  zv.
Jer.5.  28.  they  overpass  the  deeds  of  the  zv.

12.  1.  wherefore  doth  the  w'ay  of  the  zv.  prosper  ?

15.  21.  1  will  deliver  thee  out  of  hand  of  the  zv.

23. 19.  whirlwind  fall  on  head  of  the  an  .30.  23.

Ezek.  1.3.  22.  have  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  zv.

18.  20.  the  wickedness  of  the  zv.  shall  be  on  him
21.  29.  to  bring  thee  upon  the  necks  of  the  zv.

30.  12.  I  will  sell  the  land  into  the  hand  of  thezv.

3.3. 11 .  1  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  zv.

12.  as  for  the  wickedness  of  the  zv.

Dari.  12.  10.  none  of  the  zv.  shall  understand
Mzc.6.  10.  treasures  of  wickedness  in  house  oft.  zv.
Hab.  3.  13.  woundest  the  head  out  of  house  of  the  zv.
Eph.  6.  16.  able  to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  oft.  zv.

2  Pet.  2.  7.  vexed  with  the  conversation  of  the  zv.

3.  17.  lest  ye  be  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  zv.
See  One.

To  or  unto  the  WICKED.

>ob  31.  3.  is  not  destruction  to  the  zv.  ?


WIC


Psal.  .32.  10.  many  sorrows  shall  be  to  the  tv.

50.  16.  unto  the  zv.  G.  saith,  what  hast  thou  to  do '
/  rov.  24. 24.  he  that  saith  unto  the  zv.  thou  art  right.
29.  27.  the  upright  is  abomination  to  the  zv.

Eccl.  9.  2.  one  event  to  the  righteous  and  to  the  zv.
Isa.  .3.  11.  woe  unto  the  zv.  it  shall  be  ill  with  him
26.  lo.  let  favour  be  shewed  to  tv.  ye t  will  not  learn
48.  22.  no  peace,  saith  God,  unto  the  zv.  5~.  21.
Ezek.  .3.  18.  when  I  say  unto  the  zv.  3.3.8,  14
7.  21.  give  it  to  the  zv.  of  the  earth  for  a  spoil
WICKEDLY.

Gen.  19.  7-  Lot  said,  do  not  so  zv.  Judo.  19.  2.3.
Dent.  9-  18.  your  sins  w'hich  ye  sinned  in  doing  zv.

1  Sam.  12.25.  but  if  ye  shall  still  do  zv.  be  consumed

2  Sam.  22.  22.  I  have  kept  the  ways  of  the  Lord  and

have  not  tv.  departed  from  my  God,  Ps.  18.  21.

24.  17.  lo,  1  have  sinned  and  have  done  an

2  Kings  21.  11.  Manasseh  done  zv.  above  Amorites
2  Chr.  6.  .37.  we  have  sinned,  we  have  done  amiss,
dealt  zv.  Neh.  9.  .3.3.  Psal.  106.  6.  Dan.  9.  5,  15.
20.  .35.  Ahaziah  king  of  Israel,  did  very  zv.

22.  .3.  his  mother  w'as  his  counsellor  to  do  zv.

Job  1.3.  7.  will  you  speak  zv  for  God  ?

34.  12.  yea,  surely  God  will  notdo  zv.

Psal.  7-3.8.  they  speak  zv.  concerning  oppression
74.  3.  the  enemy  hath  done  xv.  in  the  sanctuary
1.39.  20.  for  they  speak  against  thee  zv.

Dan.  11.  .32.  such  as  do  zv.  against  the  covenant
12.  10.  many  purified,  but  the  wicked  shall  do  an
Mai.  4.  1.  all  that  do  zv.  shall  be  as  stubble
WICKEDNESS.

Gen.  6.  5.  God  saw  that  the  zv.  of  men  was  great
■39.  9.  how  can  I  do  this  great  zy.  and  sin  ag.  God  ?
Lev.  18.  17-  it  is  zv.  20.  14.  ||  19.  29.  land  full  of  zv.
20.  14.  that  there  be  no  zv.  among  you
Dent.  9.  4.  for  the  tv.  of  these  nations,  5.

I. 3.  11.  Israel  shall  do  no  more  any  such  zv.

17.2.  if  there  be  any  that  hath  wrought  zv.

28.  20.  because  of  the  zv.  of  thy  doings

Jvdg.  9.  56.  thus  God  rendered  the  zv.  of  Abimelech

20.  3.  Israel  said,  tell  us,  how  was  this  zv.  ?

12.  what  zv.  is  this  that  is  done  among  you  ?

1  Sam.  12.  17.  you  may  see  that  your  zv.  is  great
20.  ye  have  done  all  this  zv.  yet  turn  not  aside

-4.  1.3.  zv.  proceeded!  from  the  wicked

25.  .39.  returned  the  zv.  of  Nabal  on  his  own  head

2  Sam.  3.  .39.  reward  doer  of  evil  according  to  his  zv

7.  10.  neithei  shall  the  children  of  an  afflict  them

any  more  as  before-time,  Psal.  89.  22

1  K  mgs  1 . 52.  but  if  zv.  be  found  in  him,  he  shall  die
2.  44.  thou  knowest  all  the  zv.  thy  heart  is  privy  to

8.  47.  repent,  saying,  we  have  committed  zv.

21.  25.  A  hab  sold  himself  to  work  zv.

2  Kings  21. 6.  Manasseh  wrought  much  zv.

1 Chron.  17-9.  nor  the  children  of  zv.  waste  them
Job  A.  8.  they  that  sow  zv.  reap  the  same

II.  11.  he  seeth  zv.  ||  24.  20.  zv.  shall  be  broken

14.  let  not  zv.  dwell  in  thy  tabernacles

20. 12.  tho’an  be  sweet  in  his  mouth,  tlio’  he  hide  it
27  4.  my  lips  shall  not  speak  zv.  nor  tongue  deceit
34.  10.  far  be  it  from  God  that  he  should  do  zv.

P-'al.  5.  4.  art  not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  zv.

9.  their  inward  part  is  very  zv.  throat  a  sepulchre

7.  9.  let  the  an  of  the  wicked  come  to  an  end
10.  15.  seek  out  his  zv.  ||  45.  7-  thou  hatest  zv.

28. 4.  according  to  the  zv.  of  their  endeavours
52.  7.  he  strengthened  himself  in  his?i>.

55. 11.  zv.  is  in  the  midst  thereof,  deceit  and  guile

15.  zv.  is  in  their  dwellings  and  among  them
58.  2.  yea,  in  heart  you  work  zv.  weigh  violence
84.  10.  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  a;.

107.  34.  he  turns  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness
for  the  zv.  of  them  that  dwell  therein,  Jer.  12.  4.
Prov.  4.  17.  for  they  eat  the  bread  of  zv.

8.  7-  and  zv.  is  an  abomination  to  my  lips

10.  2.  treasures  of  zv.  profit  nothing

11.  5.  but  the  wicked  shall  fall  by  his  own  at

12.  3.  a  man  shall  not  be  established  by  an

13.  6.  but  zv.  overtliroweth  the  sinner

14.  .32.  the  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  an
16.  12.  it  is  abomination  to  kings' to  commit  zv.

21.  12.  God  overtliroweth  the  wicked  for  their  a).

26.  26.  his  zv.  shall  be  shewed  before  congregation

30.  20.  she  eateth  and  saith,  I  have  done  no  zv.
Eccl.?).  16.  saw  place  of  judgment,  that  w.  was  there
7-  15.  a  wicked  man  prolongeth  bis  life  in  zv.

25.  I  applied  my  heart  to  know  the  zv.  of  folly
8.  8.  nor  shall  zv.  deliver  those  that  are  given  to  it
Isa.  9.  18.  for  zv.  burnetii  as  the  fire

58.4.  behold,  ye  smite  with  the  fist  of  zv.

6.  the  fast  I  have  chosen,  to  loose  the  bands  of  zv.
Jer.  2.  19.  thme  own  zv.  shall  correct  thee
4.  14.  O  Jerusalem,  wash  thine  heart  from  zv.

6.  7.  so  she  casteth  out  her  a1,  continually
7-  12.  see  what  I  did  for  the  zv.  of  my  people

8.  6.  no  man  repented  of  his  zv.  what  have  I  done
14.  20.  we  acknowledge,  O  L.  our  zv.  and  iniquity
2.3.  14.  that  none  doth  return  from  his  zv.

.33.  5.  for  from  the  city*  whose  zv.  I  hid  my  face
44.  9..  have  ye  forgot  the  zv.  of  your  kings,  their
wives,  your  own  zv.  and  the  zv.  of  your  wives  '
Ezek.?,.  19.  if  he  turn  not  from  his  zv.  he  shall  die
5.6.  she  hath  changed  my  judgment  into  zv.

7-  11.  violence  is  risen  up  into  a  rod  ofzv.

18.  20.  the  zv.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  on  him

27.  turneth  from  the  zv.  he  hath  committed

31.  11.  I  have  driven  him  out  for  his  zv.

.3.3. 12.  in  the  day  he  turneth  from  his  zv.  19.

Hos.  7-  1.  the  zv.  of  Samaria  was  discovered

9.  15.  for  the  zv.  of  their  doings  I  will  drive  out

10.  13.  ye  have  ploughed  zv.  and  reaped  iniquity

15.  so  shall  Beth  el  do  to  you  because  of  your  zv.
Joel  3.  1.3.  the  fats  overflow  for  their  zv.  is  great
Mic.  6. 10.  are  treasures  pf  zv.  in  house  of  wicked  ?
Zech.  5. 8.  and  he  said ,  this  is  zv.  and  he  cast  it
Mai.  1.  4.  they  shall  call  them  the  border  of  zv.

3.  15.  yea,  they  that  work  zv.  are  set  up
Mark  7.  22.  out  of  the  heart  proceedeth  zv.  deceit
Luke  1 1 .  .39.  but  your  inward  part  is  full  of  zv.

Acts  25.  5.  and  accuse  this  man.  if  any  zv.  in  him
Rom.  1.  29.  being  filled  with  all  zv.  envy',  murder
1  Cor.  5.  8.  nor  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  zv.


Eph.  6.  12.  against  spiritual  tv.  in  high  places
1  John  5.  19.  we  know  the  whole  world  lieth  in  w*.

Their  W ICKEDN  ESS.

Dent.  9.  27.  look  not  to  their  zv.  nor  to  their  sin
Psal.  91. 2.3.  God  shall  cut  them  off  in  their  own  zv.
Prov.  21.  12.  God  overthrows  the  wicked  for  their  zv
Jer.  1.  16.  utter  judgments,  touching  all  their  zv
14.  16.  for  I  will  pour  their  zv.  upon  them

2.3.  11.  yea,  in  my  house  have  1  round  their  zv.

44.  3.  they  are  a  desolation,  because  of  their  zv.

5.  inclined  not  their  ear  to  turn  from  their  zv.
Lam.  1.  22.  let  all  their  zv.  come  before  thee
Hos.  7.  2.  consider  not  that  I  remember  all  their  zv.
3.  they  make  king  glad  with  their  zv.  and  princes
9.  15.  all  their  zv.  is  in  Gilgal,  there  1  hated  them
Jonah  1.2.  cry  against  Nine  vah,  for  th.zv.  is  come  up
Mat.  22.  18.  but  lesus  perceived  their  an  and  said
'Thy  WICKEDNESS.

1  Kings  2.  44.  the  Ld.  shall  return  thy  zv.  upon  thee
JeA22.5.is  not  thy  zv.  great  r  thine  iniquities  infinite  ?

.35.  8.  thyzv.  may  hurt  a  man  as  thou  art
Isa.  47.  10.  for  thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  zv.

Jer.  3.2.  thou  hast  polluted  the  land  with  thy  zv.

4.  18.  this  is  thy  zv.  for  it  is  bitter  to  thy  heart

22.  22.  thou  shalt  be  confounded  for  all  thy  zv.

Ezek.  16.  2.3.  it  came  to  pass  after  all  thy  zv.

57.  before  thy  zv.  was  discovered,  as  at  the  time
Nah.  3.  19.  upon  whom  hath  not  thy  zv.  passed
Acts  8.  22.  repent  therefore  of  this  thy  zv.  and  pray
WIDE.

Dent.  15.  8.  but  thou  shalt  open  thy  hand  an  11.

1 Chron.  4.  40.  the  land  was  zv.  quiet  and  pea’cea'ble
Job  29.  2.3.  they  opened  their  mouth  zv.  as  for  rain
.30.  14.  came  on  me  as  a  zv.  breaking  in  of  waters
Psal.  .35. 21 .  they  opened  their  mouth  zv.  against  me
81.  10.  open  thy  mouth  zv.  and  I  will  fill  it
104.  25.  so  is  this  great  and  zv.  sea,  wherein  are
Prov..  13.3.  he  that  openeth  an  his  lips, have  destruct.
21.  9.  it  is  better  to  dwell  in  a  corner,  than  to  du  eli
with  a  brawling  woman  in  a  an  house,  25.  24.
Isa.  57.  4.  against  whom  make  ye  a  zv.  mouth  ?

Jer.  22. 14.  that  saith,  I  will  build  me  a  zv.  house
Nah.  .3.  13.  thy  gates  be  set  zv.  open  to  thine  enemies
Mai.  7.  13.  zv.  is  the  gate  that  leadeth  to  destruction
WIDENESS.

j Ezek.  41.  10.  between  chambers  the  an  of  20  cubits
WIDOW.

Among  the  Hebrews,  even  before  the  lazv,a  widow
tv ho  had  no  children  by  her  husband,  was  allozved
to  marry  the  brother  of  her  deceased  spouse,  in
order  to  raise  up  children  n  ho  might  enjoy  his  in¬
heritance  and  perpetuate  his  name  and  family.
IVe  find  the  practice  of  this  custom  before  the
lazv,  in  the  person  of  Tamar,  zvho  married  suc¬
cessively  Er  and  Cnan,  the  sons  of  Judah,  and
zvho  was  likezvise  to  have  married  She  la  h,  the  third
son  of  this  patriarch,  after  the  two  former  u ere
dead  zvit hout  issue,  Gen.  38.  6,  8,  9,  11.  The  lazv
that  appoints  these  marriages  is  delivered  in  Dent
25.  5,  6,  &C.

The  motives  that  prevailed  to  the  enacting  of  this
lazv  zvere,  the  continuation  of  estates  in  the  tame
family,  and  to  perpetuate  a  man's  name  in  Israel.

It  was  looked  upon  as  a  great  unhappiness  for  a
man  to  die  zvit  hout  an  heir,  and  to  see  his  inherit¬
ance  pass  into  another  family.  This  lazv  was  not
confined  to  brothers  in  lazv  only,  but  zvas  extended
to  more  distant  relations  .of  the  same  line  ;  as  may
be  seen  in  the  example  of  Ruth,  who  married
Boaz,  after  she  had  been  refused  by  a  nearer  kins¬
man.  Widowhood,  as  zvell  as  barrenness,  was  a
kind  of  shame  and  reproach  in  Israel.  Isa.  54.

4.  Thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  youthj
passed  azvay  in  celibacy  and  barrenness,  and  shalt
not  remember  the  reproach  of  thy  widowhood
any  more.  It  was  presumed,  that  a  zvoman  oj
merit  and  reputation  might  haz  e  found  a  husband,
either  in  the  family  of  her  deceased  husband,
if  he  died  zvithout  children,  or  in  some  other  family .
r  if  he  had  left  children.

The  widows  of  kings  continued  in  their  zvidozv-
hood.  Adonijah  was  punished  with  death,  for
asking  in  marriage  Abishag  the  Shunamite,  who
had  been  married  to  David,  though  he  had  never
consummated  this  marriage,  1  Kings  2.  13  14
&c.  They  shut  up  in  the  palace  all  the  concu¬
bines  of  king  David,  who  had  been  defiled  by  Ab¬
salom,  there  to  spend  the  remainder  of  their  days.

2  Sam.  20.  3.

God  discovers  a  special  regard  for  widows,  and  fre¬
quently  recommends  to  his  people  to  be  very  care¬
ful  in  affording  relief  to  the  widow  and  orphan .
Exod.  22.  22.  Deut.  10.  18.  St.  Paul  would  have
vs  to  honour  widows  that  are  widozvs  indeed,  and
desolate,  that  is,  destitute  of  such  as  ought  to  help
and  relieve  them,  of  their  husbands  or  children,

1  Tim.  5.  3,  4,  5.  ’There  were  widftws  in  the
Christian  church,  who,  because  of  their  poverty,
were  maintained  at  the  charge  of  the  faithful,  and
who  were  to  attend  upon  the  poor  and  sick.  St.
Paul  did  not  allow  any  to  be  chosen  into  the  num¬
ber  of  these  widows,  unless  they  were  threescore
years  old  at  least  ;  they  must  be  such  as  had  not
parted  from,  their  husbands  and  married  again;
they  must  produce  ample  testimony  of  their  good
works  ;  that  they  had  given  good  education  to  their
children;  that  they  had  exercised  hospitality  ;  that
they  had  washed  the  feet  of  the  saints  ;  that  they
had  given  succour  to  the  miserable  and  afflicted
1  Tim.  5.  9,  10.

Gen.  38.  11.  remain  a  zv.  in  thy  father’s  house
14.  she  put  her  zv.  garments  off  from  her
Exod.  22.  22.  ye  shall  not  afflict  any  zv.  or  child
Lev.  21.  14.  a  zv.  or  an  harlot  shall  he  not  take
22.  13.  if  the  priest’s  daughter  be  a  a),  sheshall  eat
Nzim  .  30.  9.  every  vow  of  a  anshall  stand  against  her
Deut.  10.  18.  he  doth  execute  the  judgment  of  a  an
14.  29-  the  stranger,  fatherless,  and  an  shall  come
_and  eat,  and  be  satisfied,  16.  11,  14.  |  26.  12.

24.  17.  nor  take  a  an  raiment  to  pledge

19.  the  sheaf  in  the  field  shall  be  for  the  stranger,,
for  the  fatherless  and  the  zv  20.  21.  |  26.  13.

555


W  I  F


VVIF


W  I  L


Deut.  27. 19.  he  that  perverteth  the  judgment  of  w.

2  Sam.  14.  5.  1  am  a  w.  woman,  mine  Imsb.  is  dead
1  Kings  7.  14.  he  was  a  is.  son  of  tribe  of  Naphtali
11, 26.  Jeroboam’s  mother  Zeruah  was  a  w.  woman

17.  9.  !  have  commanded  a  a',  to  sustain  thee
Job  24.  3.  they  take  the  w.  ox  fora  pledge

21.  and  doeth  not  good  to  the  w.

29.  13.  I  caused  the  w.  heart  to  sing  for  joy
31.  16.  or  have  caused  the  eyes  ot  the  w.  to  fail
Psal.  94.  6.  they  slay  the  to.  and  the  stranger
109.  9.  let  his  children  be  fatherless,  his  wife  a  w.
146.  9.  he  relieveth  fatherless  and  the  w.

Prov.  15.  25.  he  will  establish  the  border  of  the  w.
Isa.  1.  17.  judge  the  fatherless,  plead  for  the  w.

23.  neither  (loth  the  cause  of  to.  come  unto  them
47.8.  I  shall  not  sit  as  aw.  nor  know  loss  of  childr.

Jer.  7.  6.  if  ye  oppress  not  the  w.  22.  3  Zech.  7. 10.
Lam.  1.  1.  how  is  she  become  as  a  w.  that  was  great
Ezek.  22.  7.  in  thee  have  they  vexed  the  w.

44.  22.  but  take  a  w.  that  had  a  priest  before
Mai.  3.  5.  against  those  that  oppress  the  10.

Mark  12.  42j  a  certain  poor  w.  threw  in  two  mites
43.  is.  cast  in  more  than  all,  Lake  21.  2,  3.

Luke  2.  37.  Anna  was  a  w.  about  84  years  old
7. 12.  the  only  son  of  his  mother,  and  she  was  a  10.

18.  3.  there  was  a  w.  in  that  city  came  unto  him

5.  because  this  w.  troubled!  me,  I  will  avenge  her
1  Tim.  5.  4.  if  any  w.  have  children  or  nephews
5.  she  that  is  a  w.  indeed  trusteth  in  God

9.  let  not  a  w.  be  taken  into  the  number  under  60
Rev.  18.  7.  she  saith,  1  sit  as  queen,  and  am  no  w.
WIDOWS.

Exod.  22.  24.  and  your  wives  shall  be  10.

Job  22.  9.  thou  hast  sent  w.  away  empty

27.  15.  be  buried  in  death,  and  zs.  shall  not  weep
Psal  68.  5.  a  judge  of  the  fatherless  and  is.  is  God
78.  64.  and  their  is.  made  no  lamentation
Isa.  9.  17.  neither  shall  he  have  mercy  on  their  is.

10.  2.  is.  may  be  their  prey,  that  they  may  rob
Jer.  15.  8.  their  w.  are  increased  above  the  sand

18.21.  let  their  wives  be  a’,  and  men  put  to  death

49.  11.  leave  thy  children,  let  thy  is.  trust  in  me

Lam.  5.  3.  we  aie  fatherless,  our  mothers  are  as  a).
Ezek.  22.  25.  they  have  made  her  many  is.

Mat.  23. 14.  woe  unto  you,  ye  devour  is.  houses,  for
pretence  make  long  prayers,  Mark  12.  40.
Luke  20.  47.

Luke  A.  25.  were  many  is.  in  Israel  in  days  of  Elias
Acts  6.1. murmuring  because  their  is:  were  neglected

9.  39.  all  the  is.  stood  by  him  weeping  and  shewing
41.  when  he  had  called  the  saints  and  is.

1  Cor.  7.8.  I  said  to  the  is.  it  is  good  if  they  abide  as  I

1  Jim.  5.  3.  honour  is.  that  are  is.  indeed

11.  but  the  younger  is.  refuse,  they  will  marry

16.  if  any  have  is.  let  them  relieve  them
Jam.  1.27.  pure  religion  is  to  visit  the  is.  in  affliction
WIDOWHOOD.

Gen.  38. 19.  Tamar  put  on  the  garments  of  her  is.

2  Ham.  20.  .3.  David’s  concubines  shut  up,  liv.  in  is.
Isa.  47.  9.  in  one  day  the  loss  of  children,  and  is.

54.  4.  shall  not  remember  the  reproach  of  thy  is.
WIFE.

Gen.  11.  29.  the  name  of  Abraham’s  is.  was  Sarai,
31.  1  12.  17.  20. 1  20.  18.  |  24.  36.

20.  3.  the  woman  thou  hast  taken  is  a  man’s  is.

21. 21.  Hagar  took  a  is.  for  fshmael  out  of  Egypt

24.  4.  thou  shalt  take  a  is.  to  my  son  Isaac,  38.

25.  1.  Abraham  took  a  is.  her  name  was  Keturah
27.  46.  if  Jacob  take  ms.  of  the  daughters  of  Ileth,

what  good  shall  my  life  do  me  ?  28.  1, 6.

38.  6.  Judah  took  a  is.  for  Er  his  first-born

8.  go  in  unto  thy  brother’s  is.  and  marry  her

39.  7.  his  master’s  is.  cast  her  eyes  upon  Joseph
Exod.  20. 17.  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour’s  is.

nor  any  thing  is  thy  neighbour’s,  Deut.  5.  21.

21.  4.  if  his  master  have  given  him  a  is.

10.  if  he  take  him  another  is.  her  food,  her  raiment

and  duty  of  marriage  shall  he  not  diminish
Lev.lQ.  8.  the  nakedness  of  thy  father’s  is.  shalt  thou
not  uncover,  20.  11.  Dent.  27.  20.

15.  of  thy  son’s  is.  ||  16.  thy  brother’s  is.  20.  21.

18.  neither  shalt  thou  take  a  is.  to  her  sister
20.  shalt  not  lie  with  thy  neighbour’s  is.  20.  10.

20.  14.  if  a  man  take  ms.  and  her  mother,  it  is  sin
20.  if  a  man  lie  with  his  uncle’s  is.  he  uncovereth

21.  7.  priests  shall  not  take  a  zs.  that  is  a  whole

13.  the  high  priest  shall  take  a  is.  in  her  virginity
Num.  5.  12.  if  any  man’s  is.  go  aside,  29.

36.  8.  shall  be  a  70.  to  one  «f  the  family  of  the  tribe
Deut.  13.  6.  or  if  the  is.  of  thy  bosom  entice  thee
20.  7.  what  man  hath  betrothed  a  is.  not  taken  her

22.  13.  if  any  man  take  a  is.  and  hate  her
24.  because  he  humbleth  his  neighbour’s  is.

30.  a  man  snail  not  take  his  father’s  is.

24.  1.  a  man  hath  taken  ms.  and  find  uncleanness
2.  she  may  go  and  be  another  man’s  zs.

5.  hath.taken  a  new  is.  he  shall  not  go  out  to  war

25.  5.  there. of  the  dead  shall  not  marry  a  stranger
7.  if  he  like  not  to  take  his  brother’s  is.

9.  then  shall  his  brother’s  is.  come  unto  him

11.  the  is.  of  theone  draweth  near  to  deliver

28.  30.  betroth  a  is.  and  another  lie  with  her

54.  his  eye  be  evil  toward  the  zs.  ot  his  bosom
Judg.  4.4.  Deborah,  is.  of  Eapidoth,  judged  Israel

17.  .Tael  the  w.  of  Ileberthe  Kenite,  21.  I  5.  24.

14.  3.  thou  goest  to  take  a  is.  of  the  uncircumcised

16.  Samson’s  is.  wept  before  him,  and  said
20.  but  his  is.  was  given  to  his  companion

"21. 18.  cursed  be  he  that  giveth  a  is.  to  Benjamin
Ruth  4.  5.  buy  it  of  Ruth  the  is.  of  the  dead
2  Sam.  12. 10.  thou  hast  taken  the  is.  of  Uriah

1  Kings  14.2.  be  not  known  to  be  the  is.  of  Jeroboam

6.  Ahijah  said,  come  in,  thou  is.  of  Jeroboam

2  Kings  5.  2.  and  she  waited  on  Naaman’s  is.

2  Chr.  22.  11.  is.  of  Jehoiada  hid  him  from  Athaliah
Prov.  5.  18.  rejoice  with  the  w.  of  thy  youth
•6.  29.  so  he  that  goeth  in  to  his  neighbour’s  is.

18.  22.  whoso  findeth  a  is.  findeth  a  good  thing

19.  13.  contentions  of  a  is.  a  continual  dropping
14.  and  a  prudent  is.  is  from  the  Lord

F.ccl.  9.  9.  live  joyfully  with  the  is.  of  thy  youth
is  a.  54.  1.  more  than  children  of  the  married  is.

556


Isa.  54.  6.  the  Lord  hath  called  thee  as  a  is.  of  youth
Jer.  3.  20.  surely  as  a  is.  treacherously  departeth
5.8.  every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour’s  is.

6.  11.  the  husband  and  the  is.  shall  be  taken
16.2.  thou  shalt  not  take  thee  a  is.  in  this  place

Ezek.  16.32.  as  a  is.  that  committeth  adultery

18.  6.  nor  hath  defiled  his  neighbour’s  is.  15.

11.  and  defiled  his  neighbour’s  to.  22. 11.  I  33. 26.
Hos.  1. 2.  take  unto  thee  a  is.  of  whoredoms

12.  12.  Israel  served  for  a  is.  and  kfpt  sheep
MalAAA.  Lord  hath  been  witness  between  thee  and
the  is.  of  thy  youth,  the  is.  of  thy  covenant

15.  let  none  deal  treacherously  against  his  is.

Mat.  1. 6.  of  her  that  had  been  the  is.  of  Urias

14.  3.  Herod  bound  John  for  sake  of  Philip’s  is.
19.29.  every  one  that  hath  forsaken  is.  or  children
for  my  name’s  sake,  Mark  10.  29.  Luke  18.  29.
22.25.  seven  brethren,  the  first,  when  he  had  mar¬
ried  a  is.  deceased,  Mark  12.  20.  Luke  20.  29.
Luke  14. 20.  I  have  married  a  is.  and  cannot  come
17.  32.  remember  Lot’s  is.

1  Cor.  5.  1.  that  one  should  have  his  father’s  is.

7.  3.  let  the  husband  render  to  the  is.  due  benevo¬

lence,  and  likewise  also  the  is.  to  the  husband
4.  the  is.  hath  not  power  over  her  own  body

10.  let  not  the  is.  depart  from  her  husband

12.  if  any  brother  hath  a  is.  that  believeth  not

14.  unbelieving  is.  is  sanctified  by  the  husband

16.  what  knowest  thou,  O  is.  if  thou  shalt  save
27.  art  thou  loosed  from  a  is.  seek  not  a  is.  _

34.  there  is  difference  between  ms.  and  a  virgin
39.  the  is.  is  bound  as  long  as  her  husband  liveth
Eph.  5.23.  for  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  is.

33.  let  every  one  love  his  is.  even  as  himself,  and
the  is.  see  that  she  reverence  her  husband
1  Tim.  3.2.  the  husband  of  one  is.  12.  Tit.  1. 6.

5.  9.  a  widow,  having  been  the  is.  of  one  man
1  Pet.  3. 7.  giving  honour  to  is.  as  the  weaker  vessel
Rev.  21.9. 1  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb’s  is.
Hit  WIFE.

Gen.  2.24.  a  man  shall  leave  father  and  mother,  and
shall  cleave  unto  his  is.  Mat.  19.  5.  Mark  10. 7.

25.  they  were  both  naked,  the  man  and  his  is.

12. 12.  they  shall  say,  this  is  his  is.  and  will  kill  me

19.  16.  the  men  laid  hold  on  the  hand  of  his  is.

26.  but  his  is.  looked  back  from  behind  him

20.  7.  now  therefore,  restore  the  man  his  is.

24.  67.  and  she  become  his  is.  1  Sam.  25.  42.

25.21.  and  Isaac  entreated  the  Lord  for  his  zs.

26.  7.  the  men  of  the  place  asked  him  of  his  a>.

11.  he  that  toucheth  this  man  or  his  w.  shall  die
39.9.  kept  back  thee,  because  thou  art  his  zs.

Exod.  21. 3.  then  his  is.  shall  go  out  with  him
22.  16.  he  shall  surely  endow  her  to  be  his  is.

Lev.  18. 14.  thou  shalt  not  approach  to  his  zs.

Num.  5. 14.  and  if  he  be  jealous  of  his  is.  30.

15.  the  man  shall  bring  his  zs.  to  the  priest
30. 16.  the  statutes  between  a  man  and  his  is.

Deut.  22.  19.  she  shall  be  his  is.  all  his  days,  29.

24.  5.  he  shall  cheer  up  his  is.  that  he  hath  taken

Judg.  13. 1 1 .  Manoah  arose  and  went  after  his  is.

15.  1.  Samson  visited  his  is.  with  a  kid

21. 21.  come  out,  and  catch  you  every  man  his  is.

1  Sam.  30.  22.  sa'  e  to  every  man  his  is.  and  children

2  Sam.  12.  9.  thou  hast  taken  his  is.  to  be  thy  wife

1  Kings  A.  25.  whom  Jezebel  his  is.  stirred  up

2  Kings  8. 18.  the  daughter  of  A  hah  was  his  is.

Esth.  5. 10.  Llaman  called  his  friends  and  his  is.
Psal.  109.  9.  and  let  his  is.  be  a  widow

Jer.  3.1.  if  a  man  put  awa y  his  w.  Mat.  5.  .31, 32.  I
19.  9.  Mark  10.  11.  Luke  16.  18.
Mat .8. 14.  he  saw  hisis.  mother  sick  of  a  fever
19.  3.  the  Pharisees  said,  is  it  lawful  for  a  man  to
put  away  his  is.  for  every  cause  ;  Mark  10.  2.

10.  if  the  case  of  a  man  be  so  with  hisis.

22.25.  seven  brethren,  the  first  deceased,  and  left

hisis.  to  his  brother,  Mark  12. 19.  Lukel  0.28.
Luke  14.  26.  and  hate  not  his  is.  and  children
Acts  5.2.  hisis.  also  being  privy  to  it
7.  his  is.  not  knowing  what  was  done,  came  in
18.2.  Paul  found  .nquila  with  hisis.  Priscilla
24.  24.  when  Felix  came  with  hisis.  Drusilla

1  Cor.  7.  2.  let  every  man  have  his  own  is.

11.  and  let  not  the  husband  put  away  his  w.

33.  he  careth  how  he  may  please  his  is.

Eph.  5.28.  he  that  loveth  hisis.  lov'eth  himself

31.  shall  be  joined  to  his  is.  ||  33.  so  love  his  is.
Rev.  19.7.  and  hisis.  hath  made  herself  ready
Mg  WIFE.

Gen.  20. 11 .  they  will  slay  me  for  mg  is.  sake

12.  she  became  mg  is.  ||  26.  7-  she  is  mg  zs.

29.  21 .  give  me  mg  is.  |)  Exod.  21 .  5.  I  love  mg  is.
JudgAb.  1.  Samson  said,  1  will  go  in  to  mg  is.

2  Ham.  3. 14.  saying,  deliver  me  mg  is.  Michal

11.  11.  shall  1  go  into  my  house  to  lie  with  mg  is.?
Job  19. 17.  my  breath  is  strange  to  mg  is.

31.  10.  then  let  mg  is.  grind  unto  another
Ezek.  24. 18.  so  I  spake,  and  at  even  mg  is.  died
Hos.  2.  2.  she  is  not  mg  is.  nor  am  1  her  husband
Luke  1.  18.  and  mg  is.  is  well  stricken  in  years
Thy  WIFE.

Gen.  3. 17-  hast  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  thy  is.

12. 18.  why  didst  thou  not  tell  me  she  was  thy  is.
19.  behold  thy  is.  take  her,  and  go  thy  way

17.  19.  Sarah,  thy  is.  shall  bear  thee  a  son,  18. 10.
19. 15.  arise,  take  thy  is.  and  thy  two  daughters
26.  9.  Abimelech  said,  of  a  surety  she  is  thy  is.

10.  one  might  lightly  have  lien  with  thy  zs.

Exod.  18.6.  1 ,  Jethro,  am  come  unto  thee,  and  thy  is.
Deut.  21.11.  that  thou  wouldest  have  her  to  thy  is.

13.  thou  shalt  go  in  to  her,  and  she  shall  be  thy  is.
2  Ham.  12. 10.  taken  the  wife  of  Uriah  to  be  thy  is.
Psal.  128.  3.  thy  is.  shall  be  as  a  fruitful  vine
Amos'! .  17.  thy  is.  shall  be  an  harlot  in  the  city

1  Cor.  7. 16.  whether  thou  shalt  save  thy  zs.

To  WIFE.

Gen.  12. 19. 1  might  have  taken  her  to  me  to  is.

34.  4.  Shechem  said,  get  me  this  damsel  to  is.

8.  I  pray  you,  give  him  her  to  is.  12.

38.  14.  she  was  not  given  to  Shelah  tow.

41.  45.  Pharaoh  gave  Joseph  to  is.  Asenath
I.ev.  21.  14.  take  a  virgin  of  his  own  people  to  is.


Dent.  22.  16.  I  gave  my  daughter  to  this  man  to  w.
Josh.  15.  16.  Caleb  said,  to  him  will  1  give  Achsab  :

my  daughter  to  is.  17.  Judg.  1.  12,  IS.  ;
Judg.  14.  2.  now  therefore  get  her  for  me  to  is.

1  Ham.  18.  17.  Merab,  her  will  I  give  thee  to  is.

1  Kings 2. 17.  give  me  Abishag  the  Shunamite,  to  w.

2  Kings  14.  9.  the  thistle  said  to  the  cedar,  give  thy

daughter  to  my  son  to  w.  2  Chron.  25.  18.

2  Chron.  21.  6. Jehoram  ha  1  daughter  of  Ahab  tow.  j
Mark\i.  23.  the  seven  had  her  to  is.  J  .nhelQ.33.
Luke  20.  30.  the  second  took  her  to  is.  and  died
WILL).

Gen.  16.  12.  Ishmael  will  be  a  is.  man
Rom.  11.  24.  the  olive-tree,  which  is  is.  by  nature
See  Ass,  Beast,  Beasts.

W1LDEKN  ESS,

Or  Desert,  in  Hebrew,  Midbar.  The  Hebrews  give
this  name  to  all  places  that  are  not  cultivated,
but  which  are  chiefly  destined  to  the  feeding  oj
cattle,  and  on  which  trees  grow  wild.  Ho  when  1
wilderness  is  mentioned  in  Scripture,  we  are  not  i
always  to  imagine  it  to  be  a  place  forsaken ,  aban¬
doned,  void  of  cities  or  inhabitants  ;  as  this  word
often  represents  the  soil  near  a  city  or  village
which  was  appointed  for  pasture,  and  where  the
plough  never  came.  'Thus,  in  Hcripture,  there  are  I
Jew  cities  which  had  not  their  wilderness,  that  is,
uncultivated  places  for  woods  and  pastures.

The  desert  of  Arabia,  wherein  the  Israelites  so-  1
journed  forty  years  after  their  departure  out  of
Egypt,  is  called  wilderness,  by  way  of  eminence,  l
Neb.  9.  19,  21.  Psal.  78.  40,  52.1  107.  4.  Jer.  1
2.  2.

The  wilderness  of  S'hur  lies  towards  the  point  of  the  ■
Red  sea.  Hagar  being  driven  from  Abraham' s
house,  wandered  in  this  wilderness,  Gen.  16.  7.  1
'The  Israelites,  after  their  march  through  the  ,
Red  sea,  went  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur,  Exod.  *

15.  22.  It  is  thought  there  was  a  city  of  this  name  I
anciently  in  these  parts.

The  wilderness  of  Paran  was  in  Arabia  Petrea,  in
the  neighbourhood  of  the  city  of  Paran.  Ishmael,  |
the  son  of  Abraham,  dwelt  in  the  borders  of  this  f
wilderness,  Gen.  21.  21.  The  Israelites  having  \
decamped  from.  Hinai,  retired  into  the  wilderness  s
of  Paran,  Num.  10.  12.  It  was  from  hence  that
Moses  sent  out  spies,  to  bring  intelligence  con -  ■
cerning  the  land  of  promise,  Num.  13.  3.  Moses
seems  to  place  mount  Hinai  in  the  country  of
Paran,  when  he  says,  that  the  Lord  appeared  to  :
the  Israelites  upon  the  mount  of  Paran,  Deut.
33.  2.  And  Hahakkuk  seems  to  say  the  same  t
thing.  Dab.  3.  3.  1  he  Holy  One  came  from
mount  Paran.

The  desert  of  Sin.  There  are  two  deserts  of  this  t
name  in  Scripture,  the  first  is  written  purely  Sin,  •
with  a  Samech,  and  lies  between  Klim  and  mount  I
Sinai,  Exod.  16.  1.  The  second  is  written  Zin,  f
or  Tzin  with  a  1'zade  :  it  is  near  Kadesh-bamea,  |
where  Miriam  the  sister  of  Moses  died,  Num.  1
20.  1.

The  desert  of  Sinai,  is  that  which  lies  about,  fid  is  1
adjacent  to,  mount  Sinai.  The  people  encamped  \
there  a  long  time,  and  received  the  greatest  part
of  those  laws  which  are  written  in  the  books  of
Moses,  Exod.  19.  2.

It  is  said  in  Isa.  41.  18.  I  will  make  the  wilder-
new  a  pool  of  water;  that  is,  “  these  people  that
are  like  a  dry  and  barren  wilderness,  l  will  abun¬
dantly  water  them  with  my  blessing,  and  make
them  fruitful  and  beautiful."  God  asks  his _ peo- j
pie  in  Jer.  2.  31.  Have  I  been  a  barren  wilder¬
ness  to  Israel  ?  Have  not  I  accommodated  you
with  all  necessaries  at  all  times  ?  Nay.  in  the
wilderness  itself  1  was  not  a  wilderness  to  you,
but  provided  plentifully  for  you.

Exod.  14.  3.  are  entangled,  th6  w.  hath  shut  them  in  f
Num.  14.  2.  or  would  God  we  had  died  in  this  w.  I

29.  your  carcases  shall  fall  in  this  w.  32.  35.

Deut.  1. 19.  went  through  all  that  terrible  w.  8.  15.  j]
32.  10.  he  found  him  in  the  waste  howling  w.

1  Kings  19.  15.  go  return  on  thy  way  to  w.  of  Dam.
Job  24. 5.  the  w.  yieldeth  food  for  them  and  children
Psal.  106.  9.  so"  he  led  them  through  the  depths  as
through  the  w.  136.  16.  Amos  2.  10. ,
107.  35.  he  turneth  the  w.  into  a  standing  water
Cant.  3.  6.  who  is  this  cometh  out  of  the  w.  ?  8.  5.  !
Isa.  14. 17-  is  this  the  man  that  made  world  as  a  w.  ?  .1
35.  1.  to.  and  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them  :
41.  18.  1  will  make  the  w.  a  pool  of  water
42. 11.  let  the  w.  and  cities  lift  up  their  voice

50.  2.  at  my  rebuke  I  make  the  rivers  a  w.

51.  3.  and  he  will  make  her  w.  like  Eden
64.  10.  thy  holy  cities  are  a  w.  Zion  is  a  w.

Jer.  2.  31.  have  1  been  a  w.  unto  Israel  ?

4.  26.  and  lo,  the  fruitful  place  was  a  10.

12.  10.  have  made  my  pleasant  portion  a  desol.  w.  ,

22.  6.  yet  surely  1  will  make  thee  a  w.  Hos.  2.  3.  A
Ezek.  6. 14.  make  the  land  more  desolate  than  the  10.  I
Joel  2.  3.  and  behind  them  a  desolate  w.

3.  19.  and  Edom  shall  be  a  desolate  w.

Zeph.  2.  13.  he  will  make  Nineveh  dry  like  a  w.

In  the  W  I  LDERNESS.

Num.  14.  22.  my  miracles  which  1  did  in  the  w.  I
32.  15.  he  will  yet  again  leave  them  in  the  W.  ancjl
ye  shall  destroy  all  this  people,  Ezek.  29.  5 -J
Deut.  8.  2.  thou  shalt  remember  the  l  ord  led  the*-  {
forty  years  in  the  w.  29.  5.  Josh.  5.  6. 1  14.  10l

16.  who  fed  thee  in  the  w.  with  manna
Neh.  9. 21.  forty  years  didst  thou  sustain  them  in  to
Psal.  95.  8.  as  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  w.
Prov.  21.  19.  better  dwell  in  thew.  than  with
Isa.  32.  16.  then  judgment  shall  dwell  in  the  w.

35.  6.  for  in  the  w.  shall  waters  break  out

40.  3.  the  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the  w.  Mat  ,

3.  .3.  Mark  1.  3.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  2Sjl

41.  19. 1  will  plant  in  thew.  the.  cedar  and  oil-treo  I
43.  19.  I  will  even  make  a  way  in  thew.

Jer.  2.  2.  when  thou  wentest  after  rue  in  the  w.

9.  2.  oh  that  1  had  in  the  w.  a  lodging-place

31.  2.  people  t hat  were  left  found  grace  in  the  W.
48.  6.  flee  and  bo  like  the  heath  in  the  w.


W  I  N


YV  I  L


VV  I  L


4.  19.  tney  laid  wait  for  us  in  the  w.

Ezek.  19.  13.  and  now  she  is  planted  in  the  to.

20.  13.  Israel  rebelled  against  mem  the  to.

15.  1  lifted  my  hand  to  them  in  the  to.  23.

34.  25.  and  they  shall  dwell  satel  y  in  the  to.

Hot.  9.  10.  1  found  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  to.

13.  5.  I  did  know  thee  in  the  to.  in  the  dry  land
Mat.  3. 1.  .John  came  preaching  in  the  to.  or  Judea
15.  33.  whence  should  we  have  so  much  bread  in

the  &>.  to  fill  so  great  a  multitude  Mark  8.  4.
l .nke  15.  4.  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  to.
icts 7.  30.  an  angel  appeared  to  him  in  the  to.  38.

!  Cor.  11.  26.  1  have  been  in  perils  in  the  u>.

Into  the  W  I  LL) K R N  IvSS.

Lev.  16.21.  shall  send  hint  by  a  fit  man  into  the  to.

22.  and  he  shall  let  go  the  goat  into  the  to.

Lzek.  20.  10.  and  1  brought  them  into  the  to.

35.  I  will  bring  you  into  the  to.  of  the  people
y«'.  2. 14.  1  will  allure  her  and  bring  her  into  thezo.
Mat.  1 1.  7-  what  went  ye  out  into  the  to.  to  see  ?  a

reed  shaken  with  the  wind  ?  Luke  ~.  24.
Luke  8.  29-  he  was  driven  of  the  devil  into  the  to.
icts  21.38.  which  leddest  into  the  to.  4000  men
'Lev.  12.6.  and  the  woman  tied  into  the  to.  14.

17.  3.  so  he  carried  me  in  the  spirit  into  the  to.
WILLS.

Vtim.  25. 18.  for  they  vex  you  with  their  to.

Lph.  Ct.  11.  able  to  stand  against  the  to.  of  the  devil
W[[.ILV.

'osh.  9.  4.  Gibeoniles  did  work  to.  and  took  old  sacks
WILL,

rs  that  faculty  of  the  soul  toherehy  toe  freely  choose
or  refuse  things.  It  is  of  the  nature  of  the  will,  to
will  freely  whatsoever  it  wills,  for  the  will  cannot
be  compelled:  hut  it  is  unable,  till  it  be  changed  by

!  grace,  to  move  itself  toward  Clod,  and  to  will  any
good  thing  pleasing  to  him,  Psal.  110.  3.  Simply  to
will  any  thing,  is  of  nature;  but  to  will  what  is
good,  is  of  grace:  our  will  being  free  in  respect  of
sinful  acts,  but  bound  in  respect  of  good  works,  till
it  be  made  free  by  Christ.  John  8.' 36.  If  the  Son
therefore  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free
indeed.  And  in  John  15.5.  Without  me  ye  can
do  nothing.  And  Phil.  2.  13.  It  is  God  who
worketh  in  you,  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good
pleasure.  And  St.  Austin  says,  Voluntas  libera,
quia  libertas  ;  libera  ad  peccatum,  serva  ad  jus-
titiam.  That  doctrine  therefore  which  teaches,

‘  that  when  grace  is  offered,  we  may  refuse  it,  if
a'e  will  ;  and  if  we  will,  we  may  receive  it;”  is  to
be  looked  upon  as  contrary  to  the  Scriptures,
he  will  of  God  is  taken,  (1)  lor  this  absolute  will,
which  nothing  can  withstand.  Rom.  9.  19.  l'or
who  hath  resisted  his  will?  (2)  For  his  purpose
and  decree.  Lph.  1.  11.  Who  worketh  all  things
after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will. ;  that  is,  as  he  has
most  wisely  and  freely  decreed.  (3)  For  his  laws
and  commands.  Mat.  7.  21.  He  that  doeth  the
will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  So  in
Rom.  12.2.  That  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good
and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God.  This  is
his  revealed  will  contained  in  his  word,  which  is
called  good,  because  it  enjoins  only  what  is  for  our
I  benefit :  it  is  acceptable,  by  obedience  thereunto
we  shall  be  accepted  ;  and  it  is  perfect,  the  observ¬
ance  thereof  will  make  us  perfect,  2  l  im.  3.  17.

>eut.  33. 16.  fot  good  w.  of  him  that  dwelt  in  bush
sal.  27.  12.  deliver  me  not  to  w.  of  mine  enemies
>1.2.  wilt  not  deliver  him  to  w.  of  his  enemies
zek.  16.  27.  delivered  thee  to  w.  of  them  that  hate
tal.o.  13.  or  receiveth  it  with  good  w.  at  vour  hand
'at.  7.  21.  that  doeth  the  w.  of  my  Father,  12.  50.
8.14.  it  is  not  the  w.  of  your  Father  in  heaven
L  31.  whether  of  them  did  the  w.  of  his  father?
nke  2.  14.  on  earth  peace,  good  w.  toward  men
,'3.  25.  but  he  delivered  Jesus  to  their  w.
dm  1.  1.3.  were  born,  not  of  the  w.  of  the  flesh
.  34.  meat  is  to  do  the  w.  of  him  that  sent  me
.  30.  I  seek  the  w.  of  my  Father  which  sent  me
.  39.  and  this  is  the  Father’s  w.  who  sent  me,  40.
cts  21. 14.  saying,  the  w.  of  the  Lord  be  done
oh.  5. 17.  understanding  what  the  w.  of  the  Lord  is
•  7.  with  good  w.  doing  service,  as  to  the  Lord
hil.  1.  15.  some  also  preach  Christ  of  good  w.
eb.  10.  10.  by  the  which  w.  we  are  sanctified
Cet.  4.  3.  suffice  to  have  wrought  the  tv.  of  Gentiles
i Pet.  1.  21.  the  prophecy  came  not  by  the  w.  of  man
WILL  of  God.

tra  7.  18.  that  do  after  the  w.  of  j’our  God
ark 3.35.  who  shall  do  the  w.  of  G.  is  my  brother
hn  1.  13.  born,  not  of  the  w.  of  man,  but  of  God
cts  13.  36.  served  his  generation  by  the  w.  of  God
om.  1.  10.  have  a  prosperous  journey  by  w.  of  G.

•  27-  makes  intercession  according  to  the  w.  of  G.

2. 2.  prove  that  acceptable  and  perfect  w.  of  God
j5.  32.  1  come  to  you  with  joy,  by  the  w.  of  God
Cor.  1.  1.  Paul  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the
•of  G.  2  Cor.  1.  1.  Lph.  1.  1.  Col.  1.1.2  Tim.  1.1.
Cor.  8.  5.  gave  themselves  to  us  by  the  w.  of  God
il.  1.4.  deliver  11s  from  evil  world  by  the  w.  of  G.
oh.  6.  6.  doing  the  w.  of  God  from  the  heart
il.  4.  12.  may  stand  complete  in  all  the  w.  of  God
Thess.  4.  3.  for  this  is  the  w.  of  God,  5.  18.
eb.  10.  36.  after  ye  have  done  the  w.  of  God
!>et.  2.  15.  so  is  the  w.  of  G.that  ye  put  to  silence
.  17.  for  it  is  better  if  the  w.  of  God  be  so
.2.  live,  not  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  w.  of  God
19.  them  that  suffer  according  to  the  w.of  God
Tohn  2.  17.  he  that  doth  the  w.  of  God  abideth
His  W  I  LL.

an.  4.  35.  and  he  doth  according  to  his  w.

■  4.  he  did  accord,  to  his  w.  ||  1 1 .  .3.  do  his w.  16,  .36.
ike  12.  47.  neither  did  according  to  his  w.
hn  7.  17.  if  any  man  will  do  his  w.  he  shall  know
"f4'22.  14.  that  thou  shouldest  know  hisw.
mi.  2. 18.  knowest  his  w.  ||  9.  19.  resisted  his  w.

Lor.  7.  .37.  he  that  hath  power  over  his  own  tv.

5.  12.  hisw.  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this  time
oh.  l.  5.  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  w.

)•  made  known  to  us  the  mystery  of  his  w.

2.  1.9.  might  he  filled  with  knowledge  of  his  w.
Tim.  2.  26.  were  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  u.


Tfeh.  13.  A .  perfect  in  e very  good  work  to  do  hit  w.
'  John  5.  14.  it  we  ask  according  to  his  w.  tie  hears
ttev.  1,.  17.  God  put  111  their  hearts  to  fulfil  his  w.

r  ,  , .  Mv  will.

Luke  22 .  42 .this  cup,  not  my  w.  but  thine  be  done
Acts  13.  22.  found  David,  who  shall  fulfil  all  my  w.
1  C or.  9.  17*  if  I  do  this  thing  against  my  w.

Own  WILL.

Lev.  1.  3.  be  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  voIuntar\r  w.
19.  5.  ye  shall  ofier  it  as  your  own  tv.  22.  19,  29.
l)an.  11.  16.  he  shall  do  according  to  his  own’ w.
John  5.  30.  because  i  seek  not  mine  own  w.

6.  .38.  1  came  from  heaven,  not  to  do  mine  own -w
Lph  1.  1 1.  who  worketh  after  counsel  of  his  own  w
JJeb.ZA.  gittsot  Holy  Ghost.according to  liis<w«a>.
Jam.  1. 18.  ot  his  own  w.  begat  he  us  by  word  of  truth
See  Self.

„  ,  .  Thy  WILL.

Psal.  40.  8.  T  delight  to  do  thy  w.  O  my  God
14.3.  10.  teach  me  to  do  thy  w.  thou  art  my  God
Mat.  6.  10.  thy  w.  be  done  in  earth,  Luke  11.2.

2f>.  42.  it  this  cup  may  not  pass,  thy  w.  he  done
Heb.  10.  7.  lo,  1  come  to  do  thy  w.  O  God,  9.

_  ,  „  WILLS,

Lph.  2.  t  .3.  fulfilling  the  w.  of  the  flesh  and  mind
WILL.

Lieut.  21 .  14.  thou  shalt  let  her  go  whither  she  w.
Job  1.3.  1.3.  let  me  alone,  let  come  on  me  what  w.

/  rov.  21.  1.  he  turneth  the  king's  heart  whither  he  tv.
Dan.  4.  17.  Clod  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men  and
giveth  it  to  whomsoever  he  w.  25,  32.  |  5.  21.
Mat.  8.  .3.  I  w.  be  thou  clean,  Mark  1.  41 .  Luke  5. 13!
20.15.  is  it  not  lawful  to  do  what  l  w .  with  my  own  ?
32.  what  w.  ye  that  l  shall  do  unto  you  r

26.  39.  not  as  1  w.  but  as  thou  wilt,  Mark  14.  36.

27.  17-  whom  w.  ye  that  1  release  unto  you,  Barab-

bas  or  Jesus  ?  21.  Mark  15.  9.  John  18.  39
6.25.  la). that  thou  give  me  John  Baptist’s  head

14.  i .  whensoever  ye  w.  ye  mav  do  them  good

15.  12.  what  w.  ye  then  that  l  should  do  to  him  ?
Luke  4.  6.  to  whomsoever  I  to.  1  give  it

12.49.  and  what  w.  I,  if  it  be  already  kindled?
John  5.  21.  even  so  the  Son  quickened)  whom  he  w.

27.  why  hear  it  again  ?  w.  ye  also  be  his  disciples  ?
lo.  7.  ye  shall  ask  what  ye  w.  it  shall  he  done  to  you
17.  24.  I  w.  that  they  be  with  me  where  I  am

21.  22.  it  I  tv.  that  he  tarrv  till  1  come,  23.

Acts  18.  21.  I  w.  return aga'in  to  you,  if  God  will

om.  7. 18. for  to  w.is  pr  esent  with  me, hut  to  perform
9.  18.  therefore  hath  he  mercy  on  whom  he  have
,  ~  mercy,  and  whom  he  tv.  he  hardeneth

1  Lor .  4. 19.  I  will  come  to  you  shortly,  if  the  Ld.  w
21.  what  tv.  ye,  shall  I  come  toyou  with  a  rod  ?

7.  36.  let  him  do  what  he  w.  he  sinneth  not

.39.  she  is  at  liberty  to  be  married  to  whom  she  w.
12.  11.  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  be  a;.

~  Lor.  8.  1 1.  that  as  there  was  a  readiness  to  w.

L  nil.  2.  1.3.  God  worketh  in  you,  both  to  w.  and  to  do
*  ltm.  2.8.  I  w.  that  men  pray  every  where
5.  14.  I  w.  that  the  younger  women  marry
Jit.  .3.  8.  these  things  l  w.  that  thou  affirm  constantly
Jam.  4.  15.  if  the  Lord  7g.  we  shall  do  this  or  that
hev.  11.6.  to  smite  the  earth  as  often  as  they  w.

22.  17.  whosoever  w.  let  him  takethe  waterof  life

W 1  LL  not.

2  Sam.  13. +  28.  w.  ye  wot,  since  I  have  commanded
/  sal.  80.  18.  so  w.  not  we  go  back  from  thee
Ezek.  20.  3.  I  w.  not  be  inquired  of  bv  you

Amos  6.  1 10.  w.  not  make  mention  of  name  of  Lord

7.  8.  I  w.  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more,  8.  2.
Mat.  21.  29.  he  answered  and  said,  I  w.not

26.  .35.  though  I  should  die,  yet  w.  I  not  deny  thee
Mark  14.  29.  tho’  all  shall  be  offended,  yeta>.  not
John  I).  AQ.ytw.not  come  to  me  that  ye  may  have  lif
W I  LL  LTH .

Rom.  9. 16. so  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  w.nor  runnetl
__  .  WILFULLY.

Heb.  10. 26.  if  we  sin  w.  after  we  have  received  trutl
_  WILLING.

Gen.  24.  5.  the  woman  will  not  be  w.  to  follow  m<

8.  if  the  woman  will  not  be  w.  to  follow  thee
Exod.  .35.  5.  whosoever  is  of  a  w.  heart,  21,  22,  29

1  Chron.  28.  9.  my  son,  serve  God  with  a  w.  mine
29.  5.  who  is  w.  to  consecrate  his  service  to  Lord

Job  3y.  9.  will  the  unicorn  be  tv.  to  serve  thee
LW.110.  3. thy  people  shall  be  zc.in  day  of  thypowei
Isa.  1.  19.  if  ye  be  w.  ye  shall  eat  good  of  the  lane
Mat.  1.19.  not  w.  to  make  her  a  public  example

26.  41._the  spirit  is  w.  but  flesh  is  weak
Mark  15.  15.  Pilate  w.  to  content  the  people
Luke  10.  29.  but  he  w.  to  justify  himself,  said

22.  42.  if  thou  be  w.  remove  this  cup  from  me

2.3.  20.  Pilate  therefore  w.  to  release  Jesus
John  5.  .35.  ye  were  w.  for  a  season  to  rejoice
Acts  24.  27-  Felix  w.  toshew  the  Jews  a  pleasure

25.  9.  but  Festus  w.  to  do  the  Jews  a  pleasure

27.  4.3.  but  the  centurion,  to.  to  save  Paul, kept  them
Rom.  9.  22.  what  if  God  w.  to  shew  his  wrath

2  Cor.  5.  8.  w.  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body

8.  .3.  they  were  w.  of  themselves  beyond  their  power
12.  if  there  be  first  a  w.  mind  it  is  accepted

1  Thess.  2.  8.  we  were  w.  to  have  imparted  unto  you

1  Tim.  6. 18. ready  to  distribute,  w.  to  communicate
Heb.  6.  17-  God,  to.  to  shew  to  the  heirs  of  promise

1.3.  18.  w.  to  live  honestly  in  all  things

2  Pet.  3. 9- not  w.tliat  any  should  perish, but  all  come

WILLINGLY.

Exod.  25.  2.  an  offering  of  every  man  that  gives  w.
Judy.  5.  2.  the  people  w.  offered  themselves,  9.

8.  25.  we  will  w.  give  the  ear-rings  of  our  prey

1  Chr.  29.  6.  the  princes  of  Israel  and  rulers  offered

tv.  9.  14,  17.  2  Chr.  35.  8.  Ezra  1.6.  |  .3.  5.

2  Chr.  17.  16.  Amaziah  tv.  offered  himself  to  God
A eh.  11 .2. blessed  the  men  that  offered  themselves
Prov.  .31.  1.3.  she  worketh  tv.  with  her  hands
Lam.  .3.  .33.  he  doth  not  afflict  w.  nor  grieve
llos.  5.11.  Ephraim  tv.  walked  after  commandment
John  6.  21.  they  w.  received  him  into  the  ship
ffW).8.20.the  creature  made  subject  to  vanity  not  w.

1  Cor.  9.  17.  if  I  do  this  thing  w\  I  have  a  reward
Philem.  14.  not  as  of  necessity,  hut  w.  1  Pet.  5.  2.

2  Pet.  3.  5.  for  this  they  tv.  are  ignorant  of


WILLOWS.

Lev.  2.3.  40.  ye  shall  take  w.  ot  the  brook  and  rejoice
Job  40.  22.  the  w.  of  the  brook  compass  him  about
Psal.  1.37.  2.  we  banged  our  harps  upon  the  w.

Isa.  15.7.  shall  carry  their  riches  to  the  brook  of  w.
44.4.  they  shall  spring  up  as  tv.  by  the  water-courses
WILLOW  tree.

Ezek.  17.  5.  by  great  waters,  and  he  set  it  as  a  tv.  t.
W  1  Lh-worship.

Col.  2.  23.  have  a  shew  of  wisdom  in  w  worship
W  1  LT.

Judg.  1.  14.  Caleb  said  to  her,  what  to  thou  ?  Esth.

5.  .3.  Mat.  20.  21.  Mark  10.  51.  Luke  18.  41.
1™*.  1.  11-  if  thou  tv.  look  on  thine  handmaid
Psal.  6  ).  10.  w.  not  thou,  O  God  ?  108.  11,

85.  5.  w.  thou  be  angry  with  us  for  ever  ?

6.  w.  thou  not  revive  us  again  to  rejoice  in  thee  ?

L  rov.  5.  20.  why  w.  thou,  my  son,  be  ravished  ?

Jer .  .3.  4.  w.  thou  not  from  this  time  cry  unto  me  ?
1.3.  27.  O  Jerusalem,  w.  thou  not  be  made  clean  ?
Ezek.  20.  4.  w.  thou  judge  them,  son  of  man  r  22.  2.
24.  19.  w.  thou  not  tell  us  what  these  things  are
28.  9.  w.  thou  yet  say  before  him  thatslayeth  thee  3
Mat.  8.  2.  a  leper  worshipped,  saying,  Ld.  if  thou  w.
thoucanst  make  me  clean,  Mark  1.  40,  Luke  5. 12.
13.  28.  w.  thou  then  that  we  go  and  gather  them  up?
15.  28.  O  woman,  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  w.
17.  4.  it  thou  tv.,  let  us  make  three  tabernacles
26.  17.  the  disciples  said,  where  to.  thou  that  we
prepare  the  passover Mark  14.  12.  Luke  22.9.
39.  not  as  l  will,  but  as  thou  w.  Mark  14.  .36.
Mark.  6.  22.  king  said,  ask  of  me  whatsoever  thou  w.
Luke  9.54.  w.  thou  that  we  command  fire  to  come  3
John  5.  6.  Jesus  said,  w.  thou  he  made  whole  ?
Acts  1.  6.  w.  thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom  3
WIMPLES.

Isa.  3.  22.  the  Lord  will  take  away  mantles  and  w.
WIN.

2  Chron.  32. 1.  he  thought  to  w.  them  for  himself
Phil.  3.  8.  count  them  dung  that  1  may  w.  Christ
WINN  El'll.

Prov.  11.  30.  and  he  that?#.  souls  is  wise
WIND.

The  Hebrews  acknowledged  four  principal  winds,  as
we  do,  Ezek.  42.  16,  17,  18.  He  measured  the
east  side,  in  Hebrew,  the  east  wind,  &c.  The
east  wind  is  called  in  Hebrew,  Kadim  ;  the  north
wind,  1  zaphon  ;  the  south  wind,  Darom  ;  and  the
west  wind,  or  from  the  Mediterranean  sea,  Rouach-
Hajam.  _  Solomon  says,  in  Prov.  25.  23.  That  the
north  wind  disperses  the  clouds  and  the  rain  ;
but  other  interpreters  translate  it,  It  produces
rain.  The  wind  Euroclydon,  see  EUROCLY-
DON.


The  powerful  operations  and  motions  of  Goa's  Spirit,
quickening  or  reviving  the  heart  toward  God,  are
compared  to  the  blowing  of  the  wind,  John  .3.  8.
For  as  it  is  with  the  wind,  man  perceives,  by  ’ the
effects  of  it,  that  there  is  such  a  thing,  and  that  it
does  blow,  yet  his  power  cannot  restrain  it,  neither
can  his  reason  reach  to  know  whence  it  rises,  or
from  how  far  it  comes,  or  how  far  it  reaches  ;  so  is
the  spiritual  change  wrought  in  the  soul ;  freely,
where,  in  whom,  when,  and  in  what  measure  the
Spirit  pleases  ;  and  also  powerfully,  so  as  to  make
an  evident  sensible  change,  though  the  manner
thereof  be  incomprehensible.  Elsewhere  the  mo¬
tions  of  the  Spirit  are  set  forth  by  wind,  as  in
Cant.  4.  16.  l'he  judgments  of  God  are  compared
to  wind,  as  in  Isa.  27-  8.  He  stayeth  his  rough
wind  in  the  day  of  his  east  wind.  He  assuages
the  fury  of  the  storm,  and  mitigates  the  severity  of
the  judgment.

It  is  said  in  Isa.  26.  18.  We  have  been  with  child
we  have,  as  it  were,  brought  forth  wind,  that  is'
JVe  have  been  in  expectation  of  help,  and  dc
liver ance  out  of  our  troubles,  but  our  hopes  hate
proved  empty  and  unsuccessful,  and  we  have  not
been  able  to  do  any  thing  towards  our  own  deliver¬
ance:'  So  in  Hos.  12.  1.  Ephraim  feedeth  on
wind  .*  “  The  ten  tribes  flatter  themselves  with  vain
deluding  hopes  of  help  from  the  Egyptians  and
Assyrians.  In  Mat.  7 ■  25.  all  sorts  of Tempta¬
tions  are  thus  described.  The  rain  descended,  the
Hoods  came,  the  winds  blew.  And  in  Jer.  4.  H,
12.  the  coming  in  of  an  army  swiftly  and  fiercely,
destroying  all  before  them,  is  expressed  by  a  dry
wind,  a  full  wind.

The  apostle  Caul  compares  vain  and  inconstant  opi¬
nions  and  doctrines  to  wind.  Eph.  4.  14.  Carried
about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine.  As  the  wind
is  a  subtile  body,  so  these  doctrines  are  subtile,  but
without  substance  of  truth.  7 he  wind  is  uncer¬
tain,  now  blowing  from  one  quarter,  now  from
another,  now  loud,  and  presently  silent ;  so  false
doctrines  are  uncertain,  now  making  a  great  noise,
and  suddenly  vanishing.  The  wind  likewise  car-
rieth  chaff,  stubble,  and  such  tike  things,  along
with  it,  but  houses  well  founded,  stand  still  ;  so  the
doctrines  of  false  teachers  carry  aside  unstable
per  soils  ;  but  he  that  is  rooted  in  faith  and  humility ,
knowing  his  misery  by  sin,  and  the  grace  of  God  in
Christ,  will  not  be  moved  with  them,

Gen.  3.  t  8.  walking  in  garden  in  the  w.  of  the  day

8.  1.  God  made  a  w.  to  pass  over  the  earth
Exod.  15.  10.  thou  didst  blow  with  thy  w.

Num.  11.  31.  the  w.  brought  quails  from  the  sea
2  Sam.  22.  11.  he  rode  upon  a  cherub,  he  was  ven
upon  the  wings  of  the  w.  Psal.  18.10.1  104.  3.

1  Rings  18.  45.  the  heaven  was  black  with  w.

19.  11.  Lord  passed  by,  a  great  and  strong  w.  rent
the  mountains,  but  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  w.

2  Kings  3.  17.  ye  shall  not  see  w.nor  shall  see  rain
Job  1.  19.  there  came  a  w.  from  the  wilderness

6.  26.  to  reprove  speeches  which  are  as  w.

7-  7-  O  remember  that  my  life  is  tv.

8.  2.  the  words  of  thy  mouth  be  like  a  strong  tv.

21.  18.  they  are  as  stubble  before  the  w.

30.  15.  terrors  pursue  my  soul  as  the  w.

22.  thou  liftestme  up  to  the  w.

37.  21.  men  see  not  light  in  the  clouds,  but  the  w
passeth  and  eleanseth  them,  Psal.  10.3.  16


5  *57


W  I  N


W  1  N


WIN


Psal.  1.  4.  like  chaff  which  the  w.  drives  away
78.  39.  w.  that  passeth  away  and  comes  not  again
135.  7.  he  bringeth  the  w.  out  of  his  treasuries
147.  18.  he  causeth  his  w.  to  blow,  and  waters  now
Prov.  11.  29.  troubleth  his  house,  he  shall  inherit  w.

25.  14.  is  like  clouds  and  tv.  without  rain
23.  the  north  w.  driveth  away  rain

27.  16.  whoso  hideth  her,  hideth  the  at.

30.  4.  who  hath  gathered  the  tv.  in  his  fists
Reel.  1.  6.  w.  goeth  toward  the  south,  and  turneth
about  to  the  north,  and  the  at.  returneth  again
5. 16.  what  profit  hatn  he  that  laboured  for  the  at.
11  4.  lie  that  obseneth  the  at.  shall  not  sow
Cant.  4.  16.  awake,  O  north-a>.  come,  thou  south
Isa.  7.  2.  as  trees  are  moved  witn  the  at.

11.  15.  with  his  at.  shake  his  handover  the  river

26.  18.  we  have  as  it  were  brought  forth  at.


J.  8.  he  stayeth  his  rough  at.  in  day  of  his  east  tv.


32.  2.  a  man  shall  be  as  a  hiding-place  from  the  at.

41.  16.  the  at.  shall  carry  them  away,  57-.  13.

29.  their  molten  images  are  w.  and  contusion
64.  6.  our  iniquities,  like  at.  have  taken  us  away
Jer.  4.  12.  a  full  at.  from  those  places  shall  come
5.  13.  prophets  shall  become  at.  word  not  in  them
10.  13.  brings  the  at.  out  of  his  treasuries,  51.  16.

22!  22.  the  at.  shall  eat  up  all  thy  pastures
Ez'ek.  5.  2.  a  third  part  thou  shalt  scatter  in  the  a>.

12.  14.  I  will  scatter  toward  every  tv.  all  about  him
37!  9.  prophesy  to  the  at.  son  of  man,  say  to  the  w.
Dan.  2.  35.  and  the  at.  carried  them  away
Hos.  4.  19.  the  at.  hath  bound  her  up  in  her  wings

8.  7.  they  have  sown  at.  and  shall  reap  whirlwind
12.  1.  Ephraim  feedeth  on  at.  he  follows  east  at.
Amos  4.  13.  for  lo,  he  that  createth  the  at.

Jonah  1.  4.  Lord  sent  out  a  great  at.  into  the  sea
Mic.  2.  +  11.  if  a  man  walk  with  the  at.  and  lie
Zech.  5.  9.  and  the  at.  was  in  their  wings
Mat.  11.7.  a  reed  shaken  with  the  at.  Luke  7-_24.

14.  24.  w.  was  contrary,  Mark  6.  48.  Acts  2".  4.

32.  the  at.  ceased,  Mark  4.  39. 1  6.  51.

John  3.  8.  the  at.  bloweth  where  it  listeth
Acts  2.  2.  a  sound  from  heaven,  as  of  a  mighty  at.
Eph.  4.  14.  carried  about  with  every  at.  of  doctrine
Jam.  1.  6.  like  a  wave  driven  with  the  at.  and  tossed
Rev'  6.  13.  when  she  is  shaken  of  a  mighty  at.

7  1  that  the  at.  should  not  blow  on  the  earth
WINDS.

Job  28.  25.  to  make  the  weight  for  the  at.

Ezek.  37.  9.  come  from  the  four  w.  O  breath
Mat.  7.  25.  the  tv.  blew,  and  beat  on  that  house,  27-
8.  26.  he  arose  and  rebuked  the  tv.  Luke  8.  24.

27.  what  manner  of  man  is  this  that  even  the  at.
and  sea  obey  him  '  Mark  4.  41.  Luke  8.  25.
Jam.  3.  4.  ships,  tho’  great,  are  driven  of  fierce  at.
Jude  12.  they  are  clouds  carried  about  of  tv.

See  East,  Fopk,  Scatter,  Stormy.
WINDY.

Psal.  55.  8.  I  would  hasten  from  the  tv.  storm
WINDOW.

Gen.  6.  16.  a  a.  shalt  thou  make  to  the  ark
8.  6.  Noah  opened  the  at.  of  the  ark  which  he  made
26.  8.  the  king  of  Gerar  looked  out  at  a  at.

Josh.  2.  15.  Rahah  let  the  spies  down  through  a  at

21.  she  bound  the  scarlet  line  in  the  at.

Judg.  5.  28.  Sisera’s  mother  looked  out  at  a  at.

2  Sam.  6.  16.  Michal  looked  through  a  w.  saw  David
2  KingsQ.  30.  Jezebel  painted,  an<i  looked  outat  aat.

13.  17.  and  he  said,  open  the  at.  eastward
Prov.  7.  6.  at  the  at.  of  my  house  1  looked  through
Acts  20.  9.  there  sat  in  a  at.  a  certain  young  man
2  Cor.  11.  33.  thro’  a  tv.  was  I  let  down  in  a  basket
WINDOWS.

Gen.  7.  11.  and  the  at.  of  heaven  were  opened
8.  2.  and  the  u>.  of  heaven  were  stopped
2  Kings  7.  2.  if  the  Lord  make  at.  in  heaven,  19.
Eccl.  12.  3.  those  that  look  out  of  the  at.  be  darkened
Cant.  2.  9.  my  beloved  looked  forth  at  the  at.

Isa.  24.  18.  for  the  at.  from  on  high  are  open
54.  12.  I  will  make  thy  at.  of  agates  .

60.  8.  who  are  these  that  flee  as  the  doves  to  their  at.
Jer.  9.  21.  for  death  is  come  up  into  our  tv.

22.  14.  woe  to  him  that  cutteth  him  out  at.

Dan.  6.  10.  his  tv.  being  open  in  his  chamber
Joel  2.  9.  they  shall  enter  in  at  the  at.  like  a  thief
Zepli.  2.  14.  their  voice  shall  sing  in  the  at.

Mai.  3.  10.  if  I  will  not  open  vou  the  at.  of  heaven

W I N  E.

Several  of  the  ancients  were  of  opinion,  that  wine  was
not  in  use  before  the  deluge,  and  that  JS'oah  7vas  the
first  who  used  this  liquor.  If  wine,  say  they,  had
been  known  before  the  flood ,  Abel  would  not  have
failed  to  bring  an  offering  of  it  to  the  Lord,  and
Noah  would  have  been  upon  his  guard,  so  as  not  to
hare  drank  of  it  to  excess.  But,  on  the  other  hand,
it  is  maintained  by  others,  that  it  is  much  more
probable  that  the  first  men  were  not  ignorant  of
the  use  of  wine,  which  is  a  liquor  so  generally  use¬
ful  and  agreeable,  that  it  could  scarcely  be  un¬
known  even  to  Adam  himself.  And  as  to  Noah,
they  say,  that  though  he  l  new  the  intoxicating
quality  of  w  ine,  yet  he  might  be  deceived  in  the
strength  of  it,  and  think,  that  the  quantity  he
drank  of  it  was  not  capable  of  causing  the  drunken¬
ness  in  him  that  he  afterwards  found  it  did.

'There  were  many  excellent  vineyards  in  Palestine  ;
and  to  shew  how  great  a  number  there  should  be
of  these  in  the  single  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of
Judah,  the  patriarch  Jacob  says  of  his  son  Judah,
He  washed  his  garments  in  wine,  and  his  clothes
in  the  blood  of  grapes,  Gen.  49.  11.  The  use
of  wine  was  forbidden  to  the  priests  during  all
the  time  they  were  in  the  tabernacle,  and  em¬
ployed  in  the  service  of  the  altar.  Lev  10.  9.
Drunkenness  is  so  odious  a  sin  in  itself,  espe¬
cially  in  a  minister }  and  most  of  all  in  the  time
of  his  administration  of  sacred  things,  that  the
use  of  wine  was  strictly  forbidden  on  those  occa¬
sions.  This  liquor  was  also  forbidden  to  the
Nazarites,  Num.  6.  3.  .

In  Gen.  27.  28,  37.  Corn  and  wine  denote  all
sorts  of  temporal  good  things,  smich  were  more
frequently  promised  and  bestowea  under  the  Old

5.58


Testament,  but  were  types  of  spiritual  blessings.

In  the  style  of  the  sacred  penmen,  the  wine,  or
the  cup,  often  represents  the  anger  of  God.  Psal.

60.  3.  Thou  hast  made  us  to  drink  the  wine  of
astonishment.  And  in  Jer.  25.  15.  lake  the
wine  cup  of  th.s  fury  at  my  hand,  and  cause  all
the  nations  to  whom  I  send  thee  to  drink  it.  ’lhey
were  used  to  administer  w  ine,  by  way  of  medicine,
to  such  as  were  in  trouble  and  sorrow.  Prov.  31.

6.  Give  strong  drink  to  him  that  is  ready  to
perish,  and  wine  to  those  that  be  of  heavy  hearts.
The  Rabbins  say,  that  they  used  to  give  wine
and  strong  liquors  to  those  that  were  condemned
to  die,  at  their  execution,  to  stupify  them,  and
take  off  some  part  of  the  fear  and  sense  of  their
pains.  There  were  certain  charitable  women  at
Jerusalem,  as  they  tell  us,  who  used  to  mix  cer¬
tain  drugs  with  w  ine,  to  make  it  stronger,  and
more  capable  of  extinguishing  the  sense  of  pain.
Some  think  it  was  such  a  kind  of  mixture  that
was  offered  to  our  Saviour  to  drink,  before  he  was
fastened  to  the  cross,  Mark  15.  2.3.  And  they  gave
him  to  drink  wine  mingled  with  myrrh,  but  he
received  it  not.  _

The  wine  of  Ilelbon.  Ezekiel  speaks  of  this  wine
that  was  sold  at  the  fairs  of  Tyre,  Kzek.  27.  18.
Some  say  that  this  wine  was  well  known  to  the
ancients  ;  they  called  it  Chalibonium  vinum.  It
was  made  at  Damascus,  and  the  Persians  had
planted  vineyards  there,  on  purpose,  as  Posidonius
affirms.  Others  make  it  a  common  name,  sweet
or  fat  wine ;  for  Ilelbon  comes  from  a  word  that
signifies  fat.

The  wine  of  Lebanon.  Hosea  speaks  of  this  wine,
IIos.  14.  7.  The  scent  thereof  shall  be  as  the
wine  of  Lebanon.  The  wines  of  those  sides  of
mount  Lebanon  that  had  a  good  exposition  to  the
sun,  were  heretofore  much  esteemed.  But  some
think,  that  the  Hebrew  text,  yvine  of  Lebanon
may  signify  a  sweet-scented  wine  ;  wine  in  which
perfumes  are  mixed,  or  other  drugs,  to  make  it
more  palatable,  and  of  a  better  flavour.  Odorife¬
rous  wines  were  not  unknown  to  the  Hebrews.
In  Cant.  8.  2.  mention  is  made  of  a  medicated
wine,  spiced  wine,  wine  mixed  with  perfumes.
The  wines  of  Palestine  being  heady,  they  used  to
qualify  them  with  water,  that  they  might  be  drunk
without  any  inconvenience.  Prov.  9.  2,  5.  She
hath  mingled  her  wine;  Come,  drink  of  the  wine
which  1  have  mingled.

The  wicked  eat  the  bread  of  wickedness,  and  drink
the  wine  of  violence,  Prov.  4,  17-  that  is,  “  they
are  maintained  with  ill-gotten  goods,  or  they  abuse
the  good  things  that  God  gives  them;  they  offend
him  by  the  bad  use  they  make  of  the  necessaries  of
life."  In  Amos  2.  8.  it  is  said,  They  drink  the
nine  of  the  condemned  in  the  house  of  their  god  :

“  They  drink  the  wine,  they  make  themselves
merry  at  the  expense  of  those  they  have  unjustly
condemned."  The  Septuagint  say,"  'lhey  drink
wine  earned  by  their  slanders."  Lhe  Chaldee,  the
wine  of  rapine.  In  Mat.  9.  14,  17.  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  tells  the  disciples  of  John  the  Baptist,
who  inquired  the  reason  why  they  and  the  Phari¬
sees  did  fast  often,  but  his  disciples  did  not  fast,
that  men  do  not  put  new  wine  into  old  bottles  .
else  the  bottles  break,  and  the  wine  runneth  out,
and  the  bottles  perish.  Our  Saviour  hereby  tells
us,  that  it  was  not  fit  for  him  to  impose  upon  his
disciples,  who  were  as  yet  but  weak  in  grace  and
spiritual  strength,  the  severe  exercise  of  frequent
and  extraordinary  fasting,  lest  they  should  be  dis¬
couraged  thereby ,  and  so  fall  off  ;  or  lest  it  should
produce  hatred  and  contempt  instead  of  obedience  :
But,  adds  he,  they  put  new  wine  into  new  bottles,
and  both  are  preserved  :  “  My  disciples  must  be
fitted  by  degrees,  and  strengthened  for  such  exer¬
cises,  and  then  they  will  perform  them  readily  and
acceptably."  Wine  is  put  for  gospel  provisions,
Isa.  25.  6.  For  consolations,  Prov.  31.  6.  And
for  the  blood  of  Christ,  Mark  14.  25.

Gen.  9.  24.  Noah  awoke  from  his  w.  and  knew

14.  18.  Melchisedek  brought  forth  bread  and  w.

49.  11.  he  washed  his  garments  in  w.  and  clothes  in

12.  his  eyes  were  red  with  w.  his  teeth  white
Eiod.  29.  40.  with  the  fourth  part  of  an  hin  of  w.

for  a  drink  offering,  Lev.  23.  13.  Num.  15.  5
Num.  6.  3.  he  shall  separate  himself  from  w.

15.  10.  for  a  drink-offering  half  an  hin  of  w.  28. 14.
28.  7 •  shalt  cause  the  strong  w.  to  be  poured  out

Dent.  32.  33.  their  w.  is  the  poison  of  dragons
Judg.  9.  13.  leave  w.  which  cheereth  God  and  man
19. 19.  there  is  also  bread  and  w.  for  me  and  handm.

1  Sam.  1.  14.  Eli  said,  put  away  thy  w.  from  thee
25.  37.  when  the  w.  was  gone  out  of  Nabal

2  Sam.  6.  19.  to  every  one  a  cake  of  bread,  a  good

piece  of  flesh,  and  a  flagon  of  w.  1  Chron.  16.  3
13.28.  when  Amnon’s  heart  is  merry  with  w.

16.  2.  the  w.  that  such  as  be  faint  may  drink
Neh.  2.  1.  w.  was  before  him,  1  took  up  the  w.

5.  15.  the  other  governors  had  taken  bread  and  w.
18.  and  once  in  ten  days  store  ot  all  sorts  of  w.

13.  15.  lading  asses  with  w.  and  grapes  and  figs
Esth.  1.  7.  they  gave  them  royal  w.  in  abundance

10.  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with  w.

5.  6.  king  said  to  Esther  at  the  banquet  of  w.  7-  2.
7.  7.  the  king  arising  from  the  banquet  of  w.

Job  1. 13.  drinking  w.  in  eldest  brother's  house,  18.
32.  19.  behold,  my  belly  isas  w.  that  hath  no  vent
Psal.  75.  8.  the  w.  is  red,  it  is  full  of  mixture
78.  65.  mighty  man  that  shouteth  by  reason  of  w
104.  15.  w.  that  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man
Prov.  9. 2.  killeth  her  beasts,  she  hath  mingled  her  w
20.  1.  w.  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is  raging
23.  30.  who  hath  woe  ?  who  hath  sorrow  ?  they  that
tarry  long  at  the  w .  they  that  go  to  seek  mixt  w,
31.  look  not  thou  on  the  zv.  when  it  is  red
31.  6.  give  w.  to  those  that  be  of  heavy  hearts
Eccl.  2.  3. 1  sought  in  my  heart  to  give  myself  tow.
10  19.  w.  maketh  merry,  but  money  answereth
Cant.  1.  2.  for  thy  love  is  better  than  w.  4.  10.

5.  1.  I  have  drunk  my  w.  with  my  milk,  eat


Cant.  7.  9.  and  the  roof  of  thy  mouth  like  the  besta.
Isa.  1 . 22.  thy  silver  dross,  thy  w.  mixt  with  water
5.  11.  that  continue  til  t  night  till  w.  inflame  them
12.  pipe  and  w.  are  in  their  feasts,  but  regard  nc]
22.  13.  eating  flesh  and  drinking  w.  let  us  eat
24.  11.  there  is  a  crying  for  w_in  the  streets

27.  2.  a  vineyard  of  red  w.  ||  55. 1.  come,  buy  w.

28.  1.  valleys  of  them  that  are  overcome  with  a?.

7.  they  have  also  erred  thro’  w.  and  thro’  stron
drink  out  of  the  way,  they  are  swallowedup  of  a

29.  9.  they  are  drunken,  but  not  with  w.  51.  21.  f
56. 12.  come  ye,  say  they,  I  will  fetch  w.

Jer.  23.  9.  like  a  man  whom  w.  hath  overcome
25. 15.  take  the  w.  cup  of  this  fury  at  my  hand  .
35,  5.  pots  full  of  w.  ||  40.  12.  Jews  gathered  w.  j
48.  33.  1  have  caused  w.  to  fail  from  wine-presses  ,
51.7.  nations  have  drunken  of  her  w.  are  mad
Ezek.  27. 18.  Damascus  traded  in  w.  of  Ilelbon  J
Dan.  1.  5.  the  king  gave  of  the  w.  which  he  drank

8.  but  purposed  not  to  defile  himself  with  the?i>
5.  1 .  Relshazzar  drank  w.  before  the  thousand,  4.

2.  whiles  he  tasted  w.  ||  23.  concubines  drunk  ®
10.  3.  neither  came  w.  nor  flesh  in  my  mouth
Hos.  2.  9.  take  away  my  w.  in  the  season  thereof
3.  1.  who  look  to  other  gods  and  love  flagons  oft

14.  7.  the  scent  shall  be  as  the  w.  of  Lebanon
Joel  1.5.  weep  and  howl,  all  ye  drinkers  of  w.  1
Mic.  2.  11.  saying,  I  will  prophesy  to  thee  of  w.
Hab.  2.  5.  yea  also,  because  he  transgresseth  by  a
Zech.  9. 15.  drink  and  make  a  noise,  as  though  w.
10.  7.  their  heart  shall  rejoice,  as  through  w.

Luke  7.  33.  for  John  came,  neither  drinking  w.  j
John  2.  3.  and  when  they  wanted  w.  the  mother  <
Jesus  saith  unto  him,  they  have  not

9.  had  tasted  the  water  that  was  made  w.  4.  46.  |

10.  every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set  forth  goo
w.  but  thou  hast  kept  good  w.  till  no

Eph.  5. 18.  be  not  drunk  with  w.  wherein  is  excess  1
1  Tim.  3.  3.  not  given  to  w.  8.  Tit.  1.7-  I  2.  3.

5.  23.  use  a  little  w.  for  thy  stomach’s  sake
1  Pet.  4.  3.  when  we  walked  in  excess  of  w.

Rev.  16. 19.  give  her  the  cup  of  the  w.  of  wrath  ^
17.  2.  drunk”  with  w.  of  her  fornication,  18.  3.

See  Bottle,  Corn,  Drink,  N ew .Offering
Oil,  Sweet,

WINE-BIBBER,  S.  jj

Prov.  23.  20.  be  not  with  w.-bibbers.  eaters  of  flesh
Mat.  11. 19.  behold  a  man  a  w.  bibber,  Luke  7 .  34.
W  IN  E -bottles.

Josh.  9.  4.  Gibeonites  took  w. -bottles  old  and  rent
13.  these  bottles  of  w.  which  we  filled  were  new
W  1  N  E-cellars.

1  Chron.  27.  27.  over  the  w. -cellars  was  Zabdi

W I N  E-fat.

Isa.  63. 2.  like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  tv. -fat
Mark  12. 1.  he  digged  a  place  for  the  w.-fat
W I N  E-press .

Num.  18.  27.  as  the  fulness  of  the  w.-press,  30.
Dent.  15. 14.  shalt  furnish  him  out  of  thy  w. -press
Judg.  6.  11.  Gideon  threshed  wheat  by  the  w.-prei
7.25.  Zeeb  they  slew  at  the  w.-press  of  Zeeb  1

2  Kings  6. 27. shall  1  help  thee  out  of  the  w.-press?
Isa.  5. 2.  a  v ineyard,  he  also  made  a  w.-press  there

65.3.  I  trodden  the  w.-press  alone,  none  with  me!
Lam.  1 . 15.  trodden  daughter  of  J  udah  as  in  a  w.
Hos.  9. 2.  the  floor  and  w.-press  shall  not  feed  thei
Mat.  21.  33.  digged  a  w.-press  in  it,  and  let  it  ou
Rev.  14. 19.  the  angel  cast  it  into  the  great  w.-pres
20.  the  w.-p.  was  trodden  without  the  city,  bio
came  out  of  the  w.-press  to  the  horse-brid
19.  15.  he  treadeth  w.-press  of  the  wrath  of  Goc
W  1 N  E-presses.

Neh.  13. 15.  T  saw  some  treading  w.-p.  on  sabba
Job 24.  11.  tread  their  w.-presses  and  suffer  thirst
Jer.  48.  33.  caused  wine  to  fail  from  the  w.-presses
Zech.  14. 10.  inhabited  upon  the  king’s  w. -presses
WINES.

Isa  25. 6.  make  a  feast  of  w.  on  the  lees  well  refim
WING.

By  the  name  wing,  the  Hebrews  understand  ;
only  the  wings  of  birds,  but  also  divers  thv  I
which  have  some  kind  of  resemblance  to  win,]
as,  (1)  The  lappet  or  skirt  of  a  garment,  Ruth
9.  Spread  thy  skirt  over  thine  handmaid,
Hebrew,  thy  wing.  And  in  Jer.  2.  34.  In  q
skirts,  Heb.  wings,  is  found  the  blood  ol  the  so  •
of  the  poor  innocents.  (2)  The  wings  of  an  arm
Isaiah  speaking  of  the  army  of  the  king  of  M
Syria,  that  was  coming  into  the  land  oj  Jud.
says,  The  stretching  out  of  his  wings  shall
the  breadth  of  thy  land,  O  Immanuel,  Isa.  8.1
See  also  Jer.  48.  40.  (3)  Wing  is  put  for  the  ,
tremity  or  utmost  part  of  a  country,  Job  38.  I
That  it  might  take  hold  ot  the  ends  of  f
earth,  in  Heb.  the  wings  of  the  earth.  00
Isa.  24.  16.  From  the  uttermost  part  ot  j
earth  have  we  heard  songs :  the  Hebrew  .«;■
from  the  wing  of  the  earth.  (4)  It  is  put  |
the  sails  of  a  ship,  Isa.  18.  1.  Woe  to  the  If  I
shadowing  with  wings:  meaning  F.gypt,wh\
abounded  with  ships,  whose  sails  are  like  win
that  shadow  the  sea.  (5)  The  name  of  wing:  1
given  to  the  sun-beams.  Mai.  4.  2.  Ihe  sun
righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing  in
Tinngs,  This  being  applied  to  Christ,  denotes  ty
he  should  appear  in  the  flesh,  and  by  his  doctrM
merit,  and  Spirit,  should  bring  a  remedy  jor  •<
spiritual  sicknesses  and  diseases.  Some  have  ■
served,  that  by  the  word  wings,  may  be  insmvt. 1
the  healing  virtue  that  went  jorth  from  C/iJ
to  such  as  by  faith  did  but  touch  the  hem  oj
garment,  Mat.  9.  20,  21,  22.  (6)  Wing  is  I
for  the  battlement  of  an  house.  Mat.  4.  0.  *
devil  set  our  Saviour  on  a  pinnacle  or  aj
of  the  temple.  (7)  Wings,  m  a  figurative  M
metaphorical  sense,  are  put  for  protection  .
defence.  God  says  in  Exod.  19.  4.  that-
bare  his  people  on  the  wings  ot  eagles ;
is,  “  that  he  had  brought  them  sajely  on*
Egypt,  as  an  eagle  carries  its  yowrw  ores  u .
its  zvings David  begs  of  God  to  hide  vim
der  his  wings,  to  protect  and  dej  ~nd  him,  ■


W1S


W1S


W1S


'  At 'i  doth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  Psal.  17-
Jt.  And  in  Psal.  36.  7-  he  says  that  the  children
of  men  put  their  trust  under  the  shadow  of  his
.  wings.

)en.  7.  +  14.  every  bird  of  every  w.  went  into  ark
Kings  6.  24.  lire  cubits  was  one  w.of  the  cherub,
five  cubits  the  other  w.  27.  2  Chron.  3.  11, 12.
£  °sal.  148.  +  10.  birds  of  w.  praise  the  Lord
sa.  10.  14.  and  there  was  none  that  moved  the  w.
f  24.  +  16.  from  the  w.  of  the  earth  we  heard  songs
VEzek.  17.23.  under  it  shall  dwell  fowl  of  every  to.
39. 1 17-  speak  to  the  fowl  of  every  w.

WINGS.  O.

loxod.  19.  4.  ye  have  seen  how  I  bare  you  on  eagles’
25.  20.  cherubims  stretch  forth  their  ui.  covering
the  mercy-seat  with  their  tv.  37.  9.  1  Kings
*  8. 7

lev.  1.  I?,  he  shall  cleave  it  with  the  tv.  thereof
Dent.  22.  t  12.  make  fringes  upon  the  four  tv.

32. 11.  as  an  eagle  spreadeth  abroad  her  tv.  taketh
her  young,  beareth  them  on  her  tv.

!Ruth  2.  12.  under  whose  to.  thou  art  come  to  trust
:  Ham.  22.  11.  he  was  seen  upon  the  tv.  of  the  wind
(oh  37.  t  3.  his  lightning  to  the  tv.  of  the  earth

38.  1 13.  it  might  take  hold  of  the  tv.  of  the  earth

39.  13.  gavest  thou  the  goodly  tv.  to  the  peacock  r1
or  tv.  and  feathers  to  the  ostrich  ?

:  0 sal .  1?.  8.  hide  me  under  the  shadow  of  thy  to.

18.  10.  he  did  fly  on  the  tv.  of  the  wind,  104.  3.

36.  7.  therefore  men  put  their  trust  under  the  sha¬
dow  of  thy  tv.  57.  1.  |  61.  4.  1  91.  4.
55.  6.  1  said,  O  that  1  had  tv.  like  a  dove
63.  7.  in  the  shadow  of  thy  tv.  will  1  rejoice
68.  13.  yet  shall  ye  be  as  the  tv.  of  a  dove
139.  9  if  1  take  the  tv.  of  the  morning,  and  dwell
°rov.  23.  5.  riches  make  themselves  tv.  they  fly
Eccl.  10.  20.  that  which  hath  tv.  shall  tell  matter
ha.  6.  2.  stood  the  seraphims,  each  one  had  six  tv.

8. 8.  the  stretching  out  of  his  tv.  shall  fill  thy  land

11.  t  12.  gather  Judah  from  the  tv.  of  the  earth
18.  1.  woe  to  the  land  shadowing  with  tv.

40.  31.  they  shall  mount  up  with  a),  as  eagles
let.  48.  9.  give  tv.  to  Moab,  it  may  fly  and  getaway
40.  behold,  he  shall  spread  his  tv.  over  Moab
49.22.  behold,  he  shall  spread  hisa>.  over  Bozrah
Ezek.  1.  6.  every  one  had  four  faces  and  foui  tv.

9.  their  tv.  were  joined  ||  10.  12.  tv.  full  of  eyes
24.  1  heard  the  noise  of  their  tv.  3.  13.  I  10.  5.

when  they  stood,  they  let  down  their  tv.  25.
17.  3.  a  great  eagle  with  great  tv.  long-winged

7.  there  was  also  another  great  eagle  with  great  tv.
Dan.  7.4.  the  first  was  like  a  lion,  and  had  eagles’
tv.  I  beheld  till  the  tv.  thereof  were  plucked

6.  another  having  on  the  back  four  a;,  of  a  fowl
Hus.  4. 19.  the  wind  hath  bound  her  up  in  her  to'.
Zech.  5.  9.  two  women,  and  the  wind  was  in  their  to.
Mai.  4.  2.  sun  of  right,  arise  with  healing  in  his  to.
Mat.  23.  37.  how  often  would  1  have  gathered  as  a
hen  gath.  her  chickens  under  her  tv.  Luke  13.  34.

I  Rev.  9.  9.  the  sound  of  their  tv.  as  of  many  horses
12. 14.  to  the  woman  were  given  two  to.  of  an  eagle
WINGED.

Den.  1. 21 .  God  created  every  to.  fowl  after  his  kind
Deut.  4.  17.  and  make  the  likeness  of  any  tv.  fowl
Ezek.  I".  3.  great  eagle  with  great  wings,  long-a>.  of
divers  colours,  full  of  feathers,  came  to  Lebanon
WINK.

Tob  15.  12.  and  whatdo  thine  eyes  tv.  at  ?

Psal.  35.  19.  neither  let  them  tv.  with  the  eye
WINKED.

Acts  17.  30.  and  times  of  this  ignorance  God  to.  at
W1NKETH.

Prov.6.  13.  a  wicked  man  tv.  with  his  eyes
10.  10.  he  that  to.  with  the  eye,  causeth  sorrow
WINNOWED.

Isa.  30.  24.  which  hath  been  to.  with  the  shovel
WIN  NOWEST.

Psal.  139.  t  2.  thou  tv.  my  path  and  lying  down
WINNOWETH.

Ruth  3.  2.  behold,  Boaz  tv.  barley  to-night  in  floor
WINTER.

Gen.  8.  22.  summer  and  to.  shall  not  cease
Psal.  74.  17.  thou  hast  made  summer  and  tv.

IProv.  20. 1 4.  sluggard  will  not  plow  by  reason  of  tv.
Cant.  2. 11.  for  lo,  the  tv.  is  past,  the  rain  is  over
Zech.  14.  8.  in  summer  and  in  tv.  shall  it  be
Mat.  24.  20.  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the
to.  nor  on  the  sabbath-day,  Mark  13. 18.
John  10.  22.  the  feast  of  dedication  was  in  to.

\l  Tim.  4.  21.  do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  tv.

I  WIN  TER- We.

Jer.  36.  22.  now  the  king  sat  in  the  tv.-kouse
Amos  3. 15.  I  will  smite  w. -house  with  summer-house
WINTER,  Verb.

Isa.  18.  6.  the  beasts  of  the  earth  shall  tv.  on  them
Acts  27.  12.  because  the  haven  was  not  commodi'  us
to  to.  in,  the  more  part  advised  to  to.  at  Phen.ce
1  Cor.  16.  6.  it  may  be  I  will  abide  and  to.  with  you
Tit.  3.  12.  for  I  have  determined  there  to  tv.

I  WINTERED.

Acts  28. 11.  in  a  ship  which  had  tv.  in  the  isle
WIPE.

?2  Kings  21. 13.  I  will  tv.  Jerusalem  as  a  dish
Neh.  13.  14.  to.  not  out  my  good  deeds  I  have  done
Isa.  25.  8.  he  will  swallow  up  death  in  victory,
Lord  will  tv.  away  tears  from  all  faces,  Rev.

I  7.17.121.4.

Luke  7-  38.  a  woman  did  to.  them  with  hairs  of  her
head,  and  kissed  his  feet,  44.  John  11.  2.  1  12.  3.
John  13.  5.  he  began  to  w.  them  with  the  towel
|  WIPED.

Prov.  6.  33.  his  reproach  shall  not  be  tv.  away
5  W1PETI1 .

2  Kings 21.13.  as  a  man  to.  a  dish,  turning  it
Prov.  30. 20.  she  eateth,  to.  her  mouth,  and  saith
!  WIPING.

2  Kings  21.  13.  tv.  it,  and  turning  it  upside  down
WIRES.

Exod.  39.  3.  they  cut  gold  plates  into  tv.  to  work  it
WISDOM,

in  Greek ,  aodna  *  in  Ilebretv,  Chachemah.  It  is
put.  I.  Fo*  that  prudence  and  discretion,  which


enables  men  to  perceive  rohat  is  Jit  to  be  done,
according  to  the  circumstances  of  time,  place,  per¬
sons,  manners,  and  end  of  doing,  Eccl.  2.  13,  14.
I  saw  that  wisdom  excelled)  folly,  for  the  wise
man’s  eyes  are  in  his  head.  “  The  wise  man  has
the  use  of  his  eyes  and  reason,  he  sees  his  way,
and  orders  all  his  affairs  with  discretion  ;  he
foresees ,  and  so  avoid  ,  many  dangers  and  mis¬
chiefs."  Knowledge  directs  a  man  what  is  to  be
done,  and  what  is  not  to  be  done ;  hut  wisdom
directs  him  how  to  do  things  duly,  conveniently,
and  fitly.  It  was  this  sort  of  wisdom  that  Ho  lo¬
rn  rm  entreated  of  God  with  so  much  earnestness,
and  which  God  granted  him  with  great  liberality,

1  Kings  3.  9;  12,  28.

II.  Wisdom  is  taken  for  quickness  of  invention,
and  dexterity  in  the  execution  of  several  works,
which  require  not  so  much  strength  if  body,  as  in¬
dustry  and  labour  of  the  mind.  Wisdom  is  the
gift  of  God,  who  told  Moses,  that  he  had  filled
with  wisdom,  and  understanding,  and  know¬
ledge,  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  to  invent  and  per¬
form  several  sorts  of  work  for  completing  the  ta¬
bernacle.  Exod.  31.  2.  3.

III.  Wisdom  is  used  for  craft,  cunning,  and  strata
gem,  and  that  whether  good  or  evil.  Exod.  1.  10.
Come  on,  said  Pharaoh,  let  us  deal  wisely  with
the  Israelites:  “  Let  us  fall  upon  some  stratagem,
whereby  we  may  exhaust  both  their  wealth  and
their  strength."  It  is  observed  of  Jonadab,  the
friend  of  Amnon,  and  nephew  of  David,  that  lie
was  very  wise,  that  is,  very  subtle  and  crafty,

2  Sam.  13.  3.  And  in  Job  5.  13.  it  is  said,  that
G01I  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness.

IV.  Wisdom  is  taken  for  doctrine,  learning,  and
experience.  Job  12.  12.  With  the  ancient  is  wis¬
dom.  And  in  Acts 7.  22.  it  is  said  of  Moses,  that
he  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  ;
“  Fie  was  instructed  in  the  knowledge  of  those  arts
and  sciences,  for  which,  in  those  times,  the  Egyp¬
tians  were  famous."

V.  It  is  taken  for  tiue  piety,  or  the  fear  of  God,
which  is  spiritual  wisdom.  Psal.  90. 12.  So  teach
us  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may  apply  our
hearts  unto  wisdom  ;  “  That  we  may  devote  our¬
selves  to  the  study  and  practice  of  true  piety."
And  in  Job  28.  28.  The  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is
wisdom.

VI.  Wisdom  t’.f  put  for  Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal,
essential  Wisdom,  the  word,  the  Son  of  God.  It
was  by  Wisdom  that  God  established  the  heavens,
and  founded  the  earth,  Prov.  3.  19.  It  was  this
Wisdom  that  the  Lord  possessed  from  everlasting,
from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was,  Prov.
8.  22,  23.  He  was  set  up,  he  was  anointed  from
everlasting ,  before  all  worlds,  to  be  the  person  by
whom  the  Father  resolved  to  do  all  his  works,  first
to  create,  and  then  to  uphold,  govern,  and  judge,
and  afterwards  to  redeem  and  save  the  world  ;  all
which  works  are  in  Scripture  particularly  ascribed
to  the  Son  of  God.  Solomon,  in  Prov.  8.  dis¬
courses  largely  and  profoundly  of  this  wis¬
dom.

The  Psalmist  says,  Psal.  37  -  30.  The  mouth  of
the  righteous  speaketh  wisdom.  When  the  dis¬
courses  of  other  men  are  either  wicked  or  vain,  his
are  pious  and  profitable,  they  flow  from,  and  are  so
many  evidences  of,  wisdom,  and  have  a  tendency
to  make  others  spiritually  wise.  In  Job  28.  12.
having  mentioned  several  hidden  things  which
man's  wisdom  has  found  out.  Job  asks  this  ques¬
tion,  But  whereshall  wisdom  he  found  t  He  means
that  sublime  and  eminent  wisdom,  which  consists
in  the  exact  knowledge  of  all  God's  counsels  and
ways,  and  of  the  several  manners  and  reasons  of  his
governing  the  world,  and  dealing  'pith  good  and
bad  men;  this  is  far  above  man's  reach,  and  is
the  prerogative  of  God  alone.  Job  says  to  his  three
friends;  chap.  12.  2.  No  doubt  but  ye  are  the  peo¬
ple,  and  wisdom .shall  die  with  you.  This  is  an
ironical  expression  ;  that  is  to  say,  “  You  are  the
only  people  for  eminency  of  wisdom  ;  you  have  en¬
grossed  all  the  reason  of  mankind ;  and  you  think
that  all  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  divine
things,  which  is  in  the  world,  lives  in  you,  and  will
die  and  be  utterly  lost  when  you  die."

Wisdom  is  put  for  natural  instinct  and  sagacity.
Job  39.  17-  The  ostrich  is  hardened  against  her
young  ones,  because  God  hath  deprived  her  of
wisdom  :  “  Because  God  hath  not  implanted  in  her
that  natural  instinct,  care,  and  affection,  which
he  hath  put  into  other  birds  and  beasts,  towards
their  young."  Wisdom  is  likewise  put  for  the
doctrine  of  the  gospel.  1  Cor.  2.  6,  7.  Howbeit
we  speak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  perfect :
yet  not  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  nor  of  the  princes
of  this  world,  that  come  to  nought:  that  is,
“  The  subject-matter  of  my  preaching  is  the  most
wise  contrivance  and  counsel  of  God,  concerning
the  salvation  of  man  by  Christ  crucified,  and  so  it
will  be  owned  to  be,  though  not  by  learned  philo¬
sophers,  yet  by  humble,  sincere  Christians;  and
such  who  have  attained  to  some  ripeness  of  under¬
standing  in  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel:  but  this
is  not  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  which  teaches
how  to  manage  our  temporal  affairs,  only  in  order
to  a  comfortable  life  here  ;  neither  is  it  the  maxims
of  state-policy ,  which  statesmen  count  the  only
wisdom,  who  yet  by  all  their  plots  and  policies
cannot  secure  themselves  from  ruin  ;  But  we
speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even  hid¬
den  wisdom  ;  it  is  such  as  no  creature  could  make
any  discovery  of,  and  was  hidden  formerly  under
holy  mysteries  and  Jewish  types  ;  it  was  but
darkly  spoken  of  by  the  prophets,  and  altogether
unknown  to  the  Gentiles.  ’

Christ  Jesus  is  said  to  be  made  of  God  unto  us
wisdom,  1  Cor.  1.  30.  “  He  reveals  the  will

and  knowledge  of  God  to  us,  and  makes  us
wise  unto  salvation."  In  Mat.  11.  19.  our  Sa¬
viour  speaking  of  the  bad  treatment  that  John
the  Baptist  and  himself  met  with  from  the  Jews,


says,  But  Wisdom  is  justified  of  he  <  fiildren.
Some  take  the  meaning  to  be  this  ;  “  1,  who  am  the
wisdom  of  God,  am  justified  by  you,  who  truly
believe  on  me  :  you  know  1  am  no  glutton,  no  wine-
bibber,  no  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners."
Others  thus,  “  Religion,  in  all  the  branches  and
duties  thereof,  enjoined  by  God,  or  the  various
methods  that  God  uses  to  reclaim  sinners,  is  owned
and  acknowledged  to  be  full  of  wisdom,  holiness,
and  equity,  and  also  vindicated  from  the  cavils
and  unjust  imputations  of  all  ungodly  persons,  by
those  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  the  study  and
practice  of  religion."

St.  James  speaks  of  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above,
which  comes  from  God,  and  teaches  us  to  be  humble
and  holy  in  all  our  conversation.  Jam.  3.  17.  It
is  known  and  expressed  by  several  properties  :  it  is
pure,  it  makes  men  careful  t-o  avoid  any  defilement
by  sin  and  error,  arid  to  adhere  b<  th  to  truth  and
holiness.  It  is  peaceable,  it  disposeth  men  to
peace,  both  as  to  the  making  and  keeping  it,  so  far  as
is  consistent  with  purity,  and  may  be  done  without
sin.  It  is  gentle,  it  disposes  men  to  bear  with  the
infirmities  of  others,  to  J  or  give  injuries,  to  interpret
all  things  for  the  best,  to  recede  from  their  own
right,  for  peace  sake.  It  is  easy  to  be  eutreated,
it  makes  men  yield  to  persuasions  of  the  word,  to
good  counsel,  good  reason.  It  is  full  of  mercy,  it
makes  us  pity  others  that  are  afflicted,  or  that
offend.  It  is  full  of  good  fruits,  of  beneficence,
liberality,  and  all  other  offices  of  humanity,  which
proceed  from  mercy.  It  is  without  partiality,  it
does  not  make  a  difference  between  person  and  per¬
son,  upon  carnal  accounts.  It  is  also  without
hypocrisy,  or  counterfeiting,  as  they  do  that  judge
others,  being  guilty  of  the  same  things  themselves  ;
it  is  unfeigned  and  sincere.  Wisdom  is  put  for  the
holy  scriptures,  Luke  11.  49.

Exod.  31.  3.  I  have  filled  him  with  the  Spirit  of  God
in  w.  and  in  understanding,  6.  |  35.  31,  35.

35.  26.  whose  heart  stirred  them  up  in  w.  36.  1,  2.
Deut.  4.  6.  for  this  is  your  w.  and  understanding

2  Sam.  14.  20.  according  to  w.  of  an  angel  of  God

20.  22.  the  woman  went  to  all  the  people  in  her  w.
1  Kings  3.  28.  they  saw  that  the  w.  of  G.  was  in  him

4.  29.  God  gave  Solomon  w.  5.  12.  2  Chum.  \.  12.

30.  Solomon's  w.  excelled  w.  of  Egypt,  34.  |  7.

14.  |  10.  4,  23,  24.  2  Chron''.  9.  3,  22,  23.

1  Chron.  22.  12.  only  Lord  give  thee  w.  and  underst.

2  Chron.  1.  10.  give  me  w.  ||  11.  but  hast  asked  w.
Ezra  7.  25.  thou  Ezra,  after  the  w.  of  thy  God
Job  4.  21.  they  die,  even  without  w.

12.  2.  ye  are  the  people,  w.  shall  die  with  you

13.  5.  hold  your  peace  and  it  should  be  your  w.

15.  8.  and  dost  tnou  restrain  w.  to  thyself  r

26.  3.  hast  thou  counselled  him  that  hath  no  w.  f

28.  12.  but  where  shall  w.  be  found  ?

20.  whence  cometh  w.  and  where  place  of  underst.
30.  +  22.  and  thou  dissolvest  my  w.

32.  7.  multitude  of  years  should  teach  w.

13.  lest  ye  should  say,  we  have  found  out  w.

33.  33.  hearken  to  me  and  I  shall  teach  thee  w.

34.  35.  Job's  words  were  without  w.

36.  5.  behold,  God  is  mighty  in  strength  and  w.

38.  37.  who  can  number  the  clouds  in  w.  ?

39.  17.  because  God  hath  deprived  her  of  w.

Psal.  37.  30.  the  mouth  of  the  righteous  speaks  w.
51.  6.  thou  shalt  make  me  to  know  w.

90.  12.  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  w.

104.  24.  in  w.  hast  thou  made  all  thy  works

105.  22.  and  teach  his  senators  w.

136.  5.  to  him  that  by  w.  made  the  heavens
Prov.  1.  2.  to  know  w.  ||  7.  fools  despise  w.  and

■  _  _  instruction

20.  w.  crieth,  8.  1.  ||  2.  2.  incline  thine  ear  to  w.

2.  6.  the  Lord  giveth  w.  |1  3.  21.  keep  sound  w.

7-  he  layeth  up  sound  w.  for  the  righteous
10.  when  w.  entereth  into  thine  heart

3.  13.  happy  is  the  man  that  findeth  w.  and  getteth
19.  the  Lord  by  w.  hath  founded  the  earth

4.  5.  get  w.  7.  ||  5.  1.  my  spn,  attend  to  my  w.

7.  4.  say  to  w.  thou  art  my  sister,  and  call  underst.

8.  5.  understand  w.  ||  9.  1.  w.  builded  her  house

12.  I  w.  dwell  with  prudence,  and  find  knowledge

14.  counsel  is  mine,  and  sound  w.  I  am  under¬

standing

10.  23.  but  a  man  of  understanding  hath  w.

31.  the  mouth  of  the  just  bringeth  forth  w.

12.  8.  a  man  is  commended  according  to  his  w.

14.  6.  a  scorner  seeketh  w.  and  findeth  it  not

8.  the  w.  of  the  prudent  is  to  understand  his  way
33.  w.  resteth  in  heart  of  him  that  hath  underst.

16.  16.  how  much  better  is  it  to  get  w.  than  gold

17.  16.  is  there  a  price  in  hand  of  a  fool  to  get  w.

18.  1.  thro’  desire  a  man  intermeddleth  with  all  w

19.  8.  he  that  getteth  w.  loveth  his  own  soul

21.  30.  there  is  no  w.  against  the  Lord

23.  4.  labour  not  to  be  rich,  cease  from  thy  own  w.

9.  for  a  fool  will  despise  the  w.  of  thy  words
23.  buy  w.  ||  24.  3.  thro’  w.  is  an  house  built

29.  3.  whoso  loveth  w.  rejoiceth  his  father

15.  the  rod  and  reproof  give  a),  but  a  child  left

30.  3.  I  neither  learned  w.  nor  have  1  knowledge

31.  26.  she  openeth  her  mouth  with  w.

Eccl.  1. 13.  I  gave  my  heart  to  search  out  by  w.

16.  I  have  gotten  more  to.  than  all  before  me

17.  J  gave  my  heart  to  know  w.  and  folly

18.  for  in  much  w.  is  much  grief,  he  that  increases
2.  3.  yet  acquainting  mine  heart  with  w.

9.  so  I  was  great,  and  my  w.  remained  with  me

12.  I  turned  myself  to  behold  w.  and  madness

13.  w.  excels  folly  ||21.  whose  labour  is  in  w.

26.  God  giveth  to  a  man  w. _||  7-  12.  w.  giveth  life

7.  19.  w.  stiengtheneth  the  wise  more  than  ten  men
23.  all  this  have  1  proved  by  w.  I  will  be  wise
25.  I  applied  mine  heart  to  know  and  seek  outa>

8.  1.  a  man’s  w.  maketh  his  face  to  shine
16.  when  I  applied  my  heart  to  know  w.

9.  10.  there  is  no  w.  in  the  grave  where  thou  goe
13.  this  w.  have  1  seen  also  under  the  sun

15.  poor  man  by  his  w.  delivered  the  city

10.  1.  a  little  folly  him  that  is  in  reputation  for  w


W  I  s


W  IS


WIT


Eccl.  10.  S.  his  zo.  faileth  him,  and  lie  saith  he  is  tool
ha.  10. 13.  by  my  zo.  1  have  done  it,  for  1  am  prudent
29.  14.  for  the  zo.  of  their  wise  men  shall  perish
33.  6.  zo.  shall  be  the  stability  of  thy  times
Jer.  9.  23.  let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  zo.

10.  12.  he  established  the  world  by  his  zo.  51.  15.
Dan.  1.  4.  children  who  were  skilful  in  all  zo.  17.

2.  14.  Daniel  answered  with  counsel  and  zo.

20.  blessed  be  God,  for  zo.  and  might  are  his

21.  he  giveth  to.  to  the  wise,  and  knowledge

23.  1  thank  thee,  O  God,  who  hast  given  me  to.
30.  this  secret  is  not  revealed  for  any  to.  1  have

5.  11.  to.  like  the  to.  of  the  gods  was  found  in  him
Mat.  12. 42.  the  queen  of  the  south  came  from  utmost
parts  to  hear  the  to.  of  Solomon,  Luke  11.  31.
13.  54.  whence  hath  this  man  this  zo.  and  works  ?
Luke  1. 17.  turn  the  disobedient  to  the  to.  of  the  just
2.  40.  Jesus  filled  with  to.  II  52.  increased  in  to.

11.  49.  therefore  also  said  the  to.  of  God,  will  send
21.  15.  for  1  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  to.

Acts6.  3.  look  out  seven  men  full  of  a;,  and  Holy  G.

10.  they  were  not  able  to  resist  the  to.  and  spirit
7.  10.  God  gave  Joseph  to.  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh

22.  was  learned  in  all  the?/),  of  the  Egyptians

1  Cor.  1.  17.  to  preach  gospel  not  with  to.  of  words

19.  I  will  destroy  the  to.  of  the  wise,  and  bring

20.  God  hath  made  foolish  the  to.  of  this  world

21.  after  that  jn  the  to.  of  God  the  world  by  to.
knew’  not  God,  it  pleased  God  bv  preaching

22.  require  a  sign,  and  Greeks  sepk  after  to.

24.  Christ  the  power  of  God  and  the  zo.  of  God
30.  who  of  God  is  made  to  usw.  and  righteousness

2.  4.  my  speed)  w  as  not  with  words  of  man’s  to.

5.  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  the  to.  of  men

6.  we  speak  to.  ||  7-  hut  we  speak  the  to.  of  God
13.  not  in  words  which  man’s  zo.  teacheth

3. 19.  the  to.  of  this  world  is  foolishness  with  God

2  Cor.  1.  12.  with  sincerity ,  not  with  fleshly  to.

Eph.  1.  8.  he  hath  abounded  towards  us  in  all  to.

3.  10.  might  be  know  n  the  manifold  to.  of  God
Col.  1.  9.  that  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  to.

28.  warning  and  teaching  every  man  in  all  to.

3.  16.  let  Christ’s  words  dwell  in  you  in  all  to.

4.  5.  walk  in  to.  toward  them  that  are  without
Jam.  1.  5.  if  any  lack  to.  let  him  ask  of  God

3.  15.  this  to.  descendeth  not  from  above

2  Pee.  3.  15.  according  to  the  to.  given  unto  him
Bev.  5.  12.  worthy  is  the  Lamb  to  receive  to.

7.  12.  blessing,  and  glory,  and  to.  be  to  our  God
17.  9.  and  here  is  the  mind  which  hath  to.

WISDOM,  joined  with  is.

Job  6.  13.  and  is  w.  driven  quite  from  me?

12.  12.  with  the  ancient  is  to.  13.  16.

28.  18.  the  price  of  to.  is  above  rubies,  Prov.  8. 11.
28.  fear  of  the  Lord  that  is  to.  to  depart  from  evil
Prov.  4.  7.  to.  is  the  principal  thing,  get  to.

10. 13.  with  him  that  hath  understanding  to.  is  found

II.  2.  but  with  the  lowly  is  to.

13.  10.  but  with  the  well-advised  is  to.

14.  8.  the  to.  of  prudent  is  to  understand  his  way

17.  24.  to.  is  before  him  that  hath  understanding
24.  7-  to.  is  too  high  for  a  fool,  he  opens  not

Eccl.  1.  18.  for  in  much  to.  is  much  grief
7.  11.  to.  is  good  with  an  inheritance,  and  by  it
12.  for  to.  ts  a  defence,  and  money  is  a  defence

9.  16.  to.  is  better  than  strength  ;  nevertheless,  the

poor  man's  to.  is  despised,  his  words  not  heard
18.  to.  is  better  than  weapons  of  war,  bht  one

10.  10.  but  to.  is  profitable  to  direct

Jer.  8.  9-  they  rejected  the  word,  what  to.  z'.fin  them  ?
49.  7-  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  is  to.  no  more
in  [emati?  is  their  to.  vanished?
Dan.  5.  14.  that  excellent  to.  is  found  in  thee
Mat.  11.  19.  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners,  hut
to.  is  justified  of  her  children,  Luke  7-  35.
Mark  6.  2.  what  to.  is  this  which  is  given  to  him  ?
Jam.  3.  17.  the  to.  that  is  from  above  is  first  pure
Bev.  13.  18.  here  is  to.  let  him  that  understands
Of  WISDOM.

Job  11.  6.  that  he  would  shew  thee  the  secrets  of  to.
28.  18.  for  the  price  of  to.  is  above  rubies
Psal.  49.  3.  my  mouth  shall  speak  of  70.  and  meditat.

III.  10.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  to.

his  praise  endureth  for  ever,  Prov.  9.  10.
Prov.  1.  3.  to  receive  the  instruction  of  to.  justice

4.  11.  1  have  taught  thee  in  the  way  of  to.  have  led

10.  21.  hut  fools  die  for  want  of  to.

11.  12.  he  that  is  void  of  to.  despiseth  his  neighbour

15.  21.  folly  is  joy  to  him  that  is  destitute  of  to.

33.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  instruction  of  to.

18.  4.  the  well  spring  of  to.  as  a  flowing  brook
24.  14.  so  shall  the  knowledge  of  to.  be  to  thy  soul

Eccl.  1.  16.  my  heart  hart  great  experience  of  to.
Ezek.  28.  12.  thou  sealest  up  the  sum  full  of  to.
Dan.  1.  20.  in  all  matters  of  to.  he  found  them  better
Mic.  6.  9.  the  man «/ a),  shall  see  thy  name
Bom.  1 1.  33.  O  the  depth  of  the  to.  of  God  !

1  Cor.  2.  1.  not  with  excellency  of  speech  or  of  to.

12.  8.  to  one  is  given  by  the  Spirit  tiie  word  of  to.
Col.  2.  3.  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures/)/ to.

23.  which  things  have  indeed  a  shew  of  to.

Jam.  3.  13.  shew  his  works  with  meekness  of  to.

See  Spirit.

Thy  WISDOM.

1  Kings  2.  6.  do  therefore  according  to  thy  to.

10.  6.  it  was  a  true  report  that  1  heard  of  thy  to.

7.  thy  to.  and  prosperity  exceedeth  the  fame

8.  happy  are  these  thy  servants  that  stand  before
thee  continually  and  hear  thy  to.  2  Chr.  9.  5,  7.

2  Chron.  9.  6.  the  half  of  thy  to.  was  not  told  me
Job  39.  26.  doth  the  uawk  Hv  by  thy  to.  ?

Isa.  47.  10.  thy  to.  it  hath  perverted  thee
Ezek.  28.  4.  with  thy  to.  hast  gotten  thee  riches,  5.
17.  thou  hast  corrupted  thy  to.  by  thy  brightness
WISE.

Gen.  3.  6.  and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  to.
41.  39.  there  is  none  so  discreet  and  to.  as  thou
Exod.  23.  8.  the  gift  blindeth  the  to.  Deut.  16.  19.
Deut.  4.  6.  surely  this  great  nation  is  a  to.  people
32.  29.  O  that  they  were  to.  that  they  understood
Judg.  5.  29.  Iter  to.  ladies  answered  her
2  Sam.  14.  20.  my  lord  is  to.  according  to  the  wisd.


1  Kings  3.  12.  1  have  given  thee  a  to.  heart

5.  7-  blessed  be  the  Lord  that  hath  given  David  a

to.  son  over  this  great  people,  2  Chron.  2.  12.

1  Chron.  26.  14.  fell  for  Zachariah  a  to.  counsellor
Job  5.  13.  he  taketh  the  to.  in  their  own  craftiness

9.  4.  he  is  to.  in  heart  and  mighty  in  strength

1 1. 12.  for  vain  man  would  be  to.  though  born  like

22.  2.  he  that  is  to.  may  be  profitable  to  himself
32.  9-  great  men  are  not  always  to.  nor  the  aged
37  -  24.  he  respecteth  not  any  that  are  to.  of  heart
Psal.  2.  10.  be  to.  now,  O  ye  kings,  be  instructed
19.7.  testimony  of  Ld.  is  sure,  making  zo.  the. simple
36.  3.  he  hath  left  off  to  be  to.  and  to  do  good

94.  8.  and  ye  fools,  when  will  ye  be  to. ?

107.  43.  whoso  is  to.  and  will  observe  those  things
Prov.  1.  5.  a  to.  man  shall  attain  to  to.  counsels

6.  to  understand  the  words  of  the  to.  and  sayings

3.  7-  be  not  to.  in  thine  own  eyes,  fear  the  Lord
35.  the  to.  shall  inherit  glory,  but  shame  shall  be

6.  6.  be  to.  8.  3.3.  |  2.3.  19.  I  27.  11.

9.  12.  if  thou  be  to.  thou  shalt  be  to.  for  thyself

10.  1.  a  to.  son  maketh  a  glad  father,  15.  20.

5.  he  that  gathereth  in  summer  is  a  to.  son

8.  the  to.  in  heart  will  receive  commandments

19.  but  he  that  refraineth  his  lips  is  to.

11.  29.  the  fool  shall  be  servant  to  the  to.  in  heart

30.  and  he  thatwinneth  souls  is  to.

12.  15.  but  he  that  hearkeneth  to  counsel  is  to.

18.  but  the  tongue  of  the  to.  is  health

13.  Lazo.  son  heareth  his  father’s  instruction

14.  the  law  of  the  to.  is  a  fountain  of  life

20.  he  that  walketh  with  to.  men  shall  be  to.

14.  3.  but  the  lips  of  the  to.  shall  preserve  them
24.  the  crown  of  the  70.  is  their  riches

35.  the  king’s  favour  is  toward  a  to.  servant
15.2.  tongue  of  the  to.  useth  knowledge  aright

7.  the  lips  of  the  to.  disperse  knowledge
12.  a  scorner  will  not  go  to  the  to.

24.  the  way  of  life  is  above  to  the  to.

31.  that  heareth  reproof  abideth  amongdhe  to.

16.  21.  the  to.  in  heart  shall  be  called  prudent

23.  the  heart  of  the  to.  teacheth  his  mouth
17-  2.  a  to.  servant  shall  have  rule  over  a  son

28.  a  fool  when  he  holdeth  his  peace  is  counted  to.

18. 15.  the  ear  of  the  to.  seeketh  knowledge

19.  20.  that  thou  mayest  be  to.  in  thy  latter  end

20.  1.  whosoever  is  deceived  thereby,  is  not  to.

26.  'A  to.  king  scattereth  the  wicked,  and  brings

21.  11.  scorner  punished,  simple  is  made  to.  when

the  to.  is  instructed  he  receiveth  knowledge

20.  there  is  oil  in  the  dwelling  of  the  to.

22.  17-  bow  thine  ear,  hear  the  words  of  the  to.

23.  15.  if  thy  heart  be  to.  my  heart  shall  rejoice

24.  he  that  begetteth  a  to.  son  shall  have  joy

24.  6.  for  by  to.  counsel  thou  shalt  make  thy  war
2.3.  these  things  also  belong  to  the  to.

25.  12.  so  is  a  to.  reprover  upon  an  obedient  ear

26.  5.  answer  a  fool  lest  he  be  to.  in  his  conceit
12.  seest  thou  a  man  to.  in  his  own  conceit

28.  7-  whoso  keepeth  the  law  is  a  to.  son
11.  the  rich  man  is  to.  in  his  own  conceit

30.  24.  there  be  four  things  that  are  exceeding  to.
Eccl.  2.  15.  1  said  in  my  heart,  why  was  1  more  v>.

16.  for  there  is  no  remembrance  of  the  to.

19.  my  labour  wherein  1  have  shewed  myself  to.

4.  13.  better  is  a  to.  child  than  a  foolish  king
6.  8.  for  what  hath  the  to.  more  than  the  fool  ?

7-  4. .the  heart  of  thezo.  is  in  the  house  of  mourning

5.  it  is  better  to  hear  the  rebuke  of  the  to.

16.  be  not  right,  overm.  neither  make  thys.  over  to.

19.  wisdom  strengthened)  to.  more  than  ten  men

23.  1  said,  1  will  be  to.  but  it  was  far  from  me

9.  1.  the  a),  and  their  w’orks  are  in  the  hand  of  God
11.1  saw  that  bread  is  not  to  the  to.  nor  riches
12.  9.  because  the  preacher  was  to.  he  taught
11.  the  words  pf  the  to.  are  as  goads  and  as  nails
Isa.  5.  21.  woe  to  them  that  are  to.  in  their  own  eyes
19.  11.  how  say  ye,  I  am  the  son  of  the  to.?

31.  2.  yet  he  also  is  to.  and  will  bring  evil

Jer  A.  22.  my  people  is  foolish,  they  are  to.  to  do  evil

8.  8.  how  do  ye  say,  we  are  to.  law  of  God  with  us
18.  18.  nor  shall  counsel  perish  from  the  to.

Dan.  2.  21.  God  giveth  wdsdom  to  to.  and  knowledge
12.  3.  they  that  be  to.  shall  shine  as  the  firmament

10.  wicked  shall  not,  but  the  to.  shall  understand
Hos.  14.  9.  the  to.  shall  understand  these  things
Zech.  9.  2.  though  Tyrus  and  Zidon  be  very  to.
Mat.  10.  16.  be  ye  therefore  zr.  as  serpents

11.  25.  because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  to.
and  prudent,  and  revealed  to  babes,  Luke  10.  21.

24.  45.  who  then  is  a  faithful  and  zr.  servant?

25.  2.  five  virgins  were  to.  and  five  foolish

4.  the  to.  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their  lamps
Luke  12. 42.  who  then  is  that  faithful  and  to.  steward
Bom.  1.  14.  1  am  debtor  to  the  to.  and  unwise
22.  professing  themselves  to.  they  became  fools

11.  25.  lest  ye  should  be  to.  in  your  own  conceits

12.  16.  be  not.  to.  in  your  own  conceits

16.  19.  1  would  have  you  to.  to  that  which  is  good

27.  to  God  only  to.  1  Tim.  1.  17-  Jude  25.

1  Cor.  1.  19.  1  will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  to.

20.  where  is  the  to.  ?  ||  27.  to  confound  the  to.

3. 10.  asazz).  master-builder,  I  laid  the  foundation

18.  if  any  manseemeth  to  be  to.  in  this  world,  let

him  become  a  fool  that  lie  may  be  to.

19.  he  taketh  the  to.  in  their  own  craftiness

20.  the  Lord  knows  the  thoughts  of  the  to.

4.  10.  we  are  fools,  but  ye  are  to.  in  Christ

2  Cor.  10.  12.  comparing  themselves,  are  not  to.

11.  19.  ye  suffer  fools,  seeing  ye  yourselves  are  to.
Eph.  5.  15.  that  ye  walk  not  as  fools,  but  as  to.

2  Tim.  3.  15.  the  scriptures  are  able  to  make  thee  to.

Anyyi  I SE.

Exod.  22.  23.  if  thou  afflict  them  in  any  to.

Lev.  19.  17.  shall  in  any  to.  rebuke  thy  neighbour

27.  19- if  he  will  in  any  to.  redeem  the  field
Deut.  17.  15.  shalt  in  any  to.  set  him  king  over  thee

21.  23.  thou  shalt  in  any  to.  bury  him  that  day

22.  7-  thou  shalt  in  any  to.  let  the  dam  go

Josh. 6.  18.  in  any  to.  keep  from  the  accursed  thing

23. 12.  else  if  ye  do  in  any  to.  go  back  and  cleave
1  Sam.  6.  3.  in  any  to.  send  a  trespass-offering


1  Kings  11. 22.  howbeit  let  me  go  m  any  to.

Psal.  37.  8.  fret  not  thyself  in  any  to.  to  do  evi.

Mark  14.  31.  1  will  not  deny  thee  in  any  to.

See  Man,  Men.

WISE-Aeartez/.

Exod.  28.  3.  speak  to  all  that  are  to.-hearted
31.6.  1  have  put  wisdom  in  all  that  are  to. hear  tea

35.  10.  every  to. -hearted among  you  shall  make  all
25.  all  the  women  that  were  to.-hearted  did  spin

36.  1.  then  wrought  every  to.-hearted  man

2.  Moses  called  Aholiaband  every  to. -hearted  man
8.  every  w.-hearted  man  made  ten  curtains
WISE  men.

Gen.  41.  8.  Pharaoh  called  for  all  the  magicians  of
Egypt,  and  all  the  to.  men,  Exod  A .  1 ..

In  no  WISE.

Lev.  7. 24.  the  fat  of  beasts  torn,  in  no  to.  eat  of  i*

1  Kings  3.  26.  give  the  child,  and  in  no  to.  slay  it,  27.
Mat.  5. 18.  one  tittle  shall  in  no  to.  pass  from  the  law

10.42.  he  shall  in  now.  lose  his  reward
Luke  13.  11.  a  woman  could  in  no  to.  lift  up  herself
18. 17.  shall  in  no  to.  enter  therein,  Bev.  21.  27.

John 6. 37.  he  that  cometh  to  me,  l  will  in  no  to.  cast
Acts  13.  41.  a  work  which  ye  shall  in  no  to.  believe
Rom.  3.  9.  are  wy  better  than  they  ?  no,  in  no  to.

On  this  W  I S  E.

Num.  6.  23.  on  this  to.  ye  shall  bless  Israel
Mat.  1 . 18.  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  on  this  to.
John  21.  1.  and  on  this  w.  shewed  he  himself
Acts  7.  6.  God  spake  on  this  to.  that  his  seed

13.  31.  he  said  on  this  to.  I  will  give  sure  mercies
Bom.  10.  6.  the  righteousness  speaketh  on  this  to.

Heb.  4. 4.  he  spake  of  the  seventh  day  on  this  to.

WISE  tvoman.

2  Sam.  14.  2.  and  Joab  fetched  thence  a  to.  woman

20. 16.  then  cried  a  to.  woman  out  of  the  city,  hear
Prov.  14.  1.  every  w.  woman  buildeth  her  house

WISELY.

Exod.  1. 10.  come  on,  let  us  deal  w.  with  them
1  Sam.  18.5.  David  behaved  himself  to.  14.  15,  30.

2 Chron.  11.23.  Rehoboam  dealt  to.  he  dispersed
Psal.  5 8.  5.  the  charmers,  charming  never  so  w.

64.  9.  for  they  shall  w.  consider  of  his  doings
101.  2.  I  will  behave  myself  w.  in  a  perfect  way
Prov.  16.  20.  he  that  handleth  a  matter  w.

21.  12.  he  zo.  considered)  the  house  of  the  wicked

28.  26.  whoso  walketh  zo.  shall  be  delivered
Eccl.  7. 10.  thou  dost  not  inquire  zo.  concerning  this
Luke  16.  8.  commended,  because  he  had  done  w.
WISER.

1  Kings  A.  31.  for  Solomon  was  zo.  than  all  men
Job  35. 11.  maketh  us  zo.  than  the  fowls  of  heaven
Psal.  119.  98.  thou  hast  made  me  zo.  than  my  enemies
Prov.  9.  9.  give  instruction,  and  he  will  be  yetzo.

26. 16.  the  sluggard  is  to.  in  his  own  conceit
Ezek.  28.  3.  behold,  thou  art  zo.  than  Daniel
Luke  16. 8.  the  children  are  in  their  generation  w.

1  Cor.  1.  25.  the  foolishness  of  God  is  zo.  than  men

WISH.

Job  33.  6.  T  am  according  to  thy  zo.  in  God’s  stead
Psal.  40. 14.  let  them  be  put  to  shame  that  zo.  evil
73.7-  they  have  more  than  heart  could  to.

Bom.  9.  3.  I  could  zo.  myself  accursed  from  Christ

2  Cor.  13.  9.  this  also  we  zo.  even  your  perfection

3  John  2.  1  zo.  above  all  things  thou  mayest  prosper

WISHED.

Jonah  4.  8.  Jonah  fainted,  and  zo.  himself  to  die
Acts  27  .  29.  they  cast  anchor,  and  zo.  for  the  day
WISHING.

Job  31. 30.  my  mouth  to  sin,  by  zo.  a  curse  to  his  soul
W 1  ST.

Exod.  16. 15.  it  is  manna,  for  they  zo.  not  what  it  was
34. 29.  Moses  to.  not  that  his  face  shone
Lev.  5. 17.  though  he  to.  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  18.

Josh  A.  4.  but  1  to.  not  whence  they  were
8.  14.  he  zo.  not  that  there  were  tiers  in  ambush
Judg.  16.  20.  he  zo.  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed
Mark  9. 6.  he  zo.  not  what  to  say,  they  were  afraid

14.  40.  neither  zo.  they  what  to  answer  him

Luke  2. 49.  zo.  ye  not  1  must  be  about  Father’s  busin,
John  5.  13.  he  that  was  healed  zo.  not  who  it  was
Acts  12. 9.  zo.  not  that  it  was  true  which  was  done

23.  5.  said  Paul,  I  zo.  not  he  was  the  high-priest
WITCH.

Exod.  22. 18.  thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  zo.  to  live
Deut.  18.  10.  there  shall  not  be  among  you  a  to.
WITCHCRAFT.

1  Sam.  15.  23.  for  rebellion  is  as  the  sin  of  w.

2  Chron.  33.6.  Manasseh  used  to.  and  enchantments
Gal.  5. 20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  idolatry,  zo.

WITCHCRAFTS.

2  Kings  9-  22.  so  long  as  Jezebel's  zo.  are  so  many
Mic.  5.  12.  1  will  cut  off  zo.  out  of  thine  hand
Nah.  3.  4.  the  mistress  of  w.  that  selleth  nations
through  her  whoredoms,  and  families
through  her  zo.

WITHAL.

1  Kings  19. 1.  zo.  how  Elijah  had  slain  all  the  proph.  (
Psal.  141. 10.  the  wicked  fall  whilst  that  I  to.  escape
Acts  25.  27.  and  not  zo.  to  signify  the  crimes
WITHDRAW.

1  Sam.  14. 19.  Saul  said  to  the  priest,  zo.  thine  hand
Job  9.  13.  if  God  will  not  zo.  his  anger,  the  proud

13. 21.  zo.  thine  hand  far  from  me,  let  not  thy  dread  j
33. 17-  that  he  may  zo.  man  from  his  purpose
Prov.  25. 17.  zo.  thy  foot  from  thy  neighbour’s  house
Eccl.  7.  18.  also  from  this  zo.  not  thine  hand
Isa.  60.  20.  neither  shall  thy  moon  to.  itself
Joel 2. 10.  the  stars  shall  zo.  their  shining,  3.  15.

2  J'hess.  3. 6.  zo.  yourselves  from  every  brother

1  Tim.  6.  5.  from  men  of  corrupt  minds  zo.  thyself
WITHDRAWN.

Deut.  13. 13.  have  zo.  the  inhabitants  of  their  city
Cant.  5.  6.  but  my  beloved  had  zo.  himself
Lam.  2.  8.  he  hath  not  zo.  his  hand  from  destroying
Ezek.  18.8.  that  hath  zo.  his  hand  from  iniquity
Hos.  5.  6.  the  Lord  hath  zo.  himself  from  them
Luke  22. 41.  was  zo.  from  them  about  a  stone’s  cast
WITH  DR  A  WEST.

Psal.  74. 11.  why  zo.  thou  thy  right  hand  ?
WITHDRAWETH.

Job  36. 7.  he  zo.  not  his  eyes  Siom  the  righteous


WIT


W  I  T


YV  IT


WITHDRAWING.,

Ve/i  9  t  29.  and  they  gave  a  w.  shoulder
WITHDREW.

Seh.  9. 29.  they  to.  the  shoulder  and  would  not  hear
Ezek.  20.  22.  nevertheless  1  to.  mine  hand
Mat.  12.  15.  when  Jesus  knew  it,  he  w.  himself
Mark  .3.7.  Jesus  to.  himself  from  thence,  Luke  5. 16.
ral.  2.  12.  but  when  they  were  come,  he  to.
WITHER.

°sal.  1.  3.  his  leaf  also  shall  not  to.  and  whatso
ever  he  doth  shall  prosper
,T7.  2.  and  they  shall  to.  as  the  green  herb
Isa.  19.6.  brooks  be  emptied,  reeds  and  liagsshall  to.
7.  every  thins  sown  by  the  brooks  shall  to.

40.  24.  he  shall  blow  upon  them,  and  they  shall  to.
fer.  12.  4.  how  long  shall  the  herbs  of  the  field  to.?
E zek.  1".  9.  shall  he  not  cut  off  the  fruit  thereof  that
it  to.  it  shall  to.  in  all  the  leaves  of  her  spring
10.  shall  it  not  utterly  to.  ?  it  shall  to.  in  furrows
Amos  1.  2.  and  the  top  of  Carmel  shall  to.
WITHERED.

Sen.  41.  23.  behold  seven  ears  w.  thin  and  blasted
Ps.  102.  4.  my  heart  is  smitten  and  to.  ||  11.  1  am  to.
Isa.  15.6.  the  hay  is  to.  away,  the  grass  faileth
27. 11.  when  bows  thereof  are  to.  be  broken  off
Lam.  4.  8.  the  N  azante’sskin  is  to.  like  a  stick
Ezek.  19.  12.  her  strong  rods  were  to.  and  consumed
Toel  1.  12.  the  trees  of  the  field  are  to.  joy  is  w.

17.  the  barns  are  broken  down,  for  the  corn  is  to.
Amos  4.  7.  the  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not  to.
Jonah  4.  7.  and  it  smote  the  gourd  that  it  to.4
Mat.  12.  10.  and  behold  there  was  a  man  which  had
his  hand  to.  Mark  3.  1,3.  Luke  6.  6,  8.
13.  6.  when  the  sun  was  up  theyr  were  scorched,  be¬
cause  having  no  root,  they  w.  away,  Mark  4.  6.

21.  19.  presently  the  fig-tree  to.  20.  Mark  11.  21.
Luke  8.  6.  it  to.  away  because  it  lacked  moisture
John  5. 3.  of  to.  folk  waiting  for  moving  of  the  water
15.  6.  he  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch  and  is  to.

W  Ti  ll  ERE  I II.

Job  8.  12.  the  flag  to.  before  any  other  herb
Psal.  90.  6.  in  the  evening  it  is  cut  down  and  to.

.  129.  6.  like  grass  that  to.  before  if  groweth  up
Isa.  40.  7-  grass  to.  the  flower  fadeth,  8.  1  Pet.  1.24.
Jam.  1. 11.  the  sun  no  sooner  risen,  but  it  to.  the  grass
JudeVZ. trees  whose  fruit  to.  without  fruit,  twice  dead
WITHHELD.

Gen.  20.  6.  for  I  to.  thee  from  sinning  against  me

22.  12.  seeing  thou  hast  not  10.  thy  son  from  me

30.  2.  who  vi.  from  thee  the  fruit  of  the  womb  ?
Ezra  9.  +  13.  hast  to.  beneath  our  iniquities

Job  31.  16.  if  I  have  to.  the  poor  from  their  desire
Eccl.  2.  10.  I  to.  not  my  heart  from  any  joy
-  WITI1HELDEST.

Neh.  9.  20.  to.  not  thy  manna  from  their  mouth
WITHHOLD.

Gen.  23.  6.  none  of  us  shall  to.  from  thee  his  sepulch.
2  Sam.  13.  13.  for  he  w  ill  not  to.  me  from  thee
Job  4.  2.  but  who  can  to.  himself  from  speaking  ?
30.  t  10.  they  to.  not  spittle  from  my  face
Psal.  40.  11.  to.  not  thy  tender  mercies  fron.  me
84.  11.  no  good  thing  will  he  to.  from  them  that
,  Prov.  3. 27.  to.  not  good  from  them  to  whom  it  is  due

23.  13.  to.  not  correction  from  the  child

30.  t7-  two  things  1  required,  to.  not  from  me
Eccl.  11.  6.  in  the  evening  to.  not  thy  hand
Jer.  2. 25.  to.  thy  foot  from  being  unshod  and  throat
WITH HOLDEN.

1  Sam.  25.  26.  Lord  hath  to.  thee  from  revenging
Job  22.  7.  thou  hast  to.  bread  from  the  hungry
38.  15.  from  the  wicked  their  light  is  to.

42.  2.  that  no  thought  can  be  to.  from  thee
Psal.  21.  2.  thou  hast  not  to.  the  request  of  his  lips
Jer.  3.  3.  therefore  the  showers  have  been  to.

5.  25.  your  sins  have  to.  good  things  from  you
Ezek.  18.  16.  hath  not  to.  the  pledge,  nor  spoiled
Joel  1.  13.  the  drink  offering  is  to.  from  God
Amos  4.7.  also  1  have  to.  the  rain  from  you
W1THHOLDETH.

Job  12.  15.  behold,  he  to.  the  waters,  they  dry  up
Prov.  11.  24.  there  is  that  to.  more  than  is  meet
26.  he  that  to.  corn,  the  people  shall  curse  him
2 Thess,  2.6.  and  now  ye  know  what  to.  that  he  might
WITHIN.


Gen.  39.  11.  none  of  the  men  of  the  house  was  to.
L>ev.  25.  29.  to.  a  full  year  he  may  redeem  it
Josh.  19.  l.the  inheritance  of  Simeon  was  to.  Judah
Judg.  11.  26.  why  not  recover  them  to.  that  time  ?

1  Sam.  13.  11.  thou  earnest  not  to.  the  days  appointed

1  Kings  6. 23.  to.  the  oracle  he  made  two  cherubims

2  Kings  7.  11.  they  told  it  to  the  king’s  house  to.
Ezra  10.8.  whoso  would  not  come  to.  three  days
Psal.  45.  13.  the  king’s  daughter  is  all  glorious  to.

I  101.2.  will  walk  to.  my  house  with  a  perfect  heart
Eccl.  9.  14.  there  was  a  little  city,  few  men  to.  it
Ezek.  3.24.  spirit  said,  go  shut  thyself  to.  thy  house
12.  24.  shall  be  no  more  any  vain  vision  to.  Israel
44. 17.  whiles  they  minister  in  the  gates  and  to.
Zeph. 3. 3. her  princes  to.  are  roaring  lions,  her  judges
Mat.  3.  9.  think  not  to  say  yourselves,  Luke  3.  8.
9.  21.  she  said  to.  herself,  if  1  but  touch  his  garment
23.  25.  to.  they  are  full  of  extortion  and  excess

26.  cleanse  first  what  is  to.  the  cup  and  platter

27.  are  to.  full  of  dead  men’sbones  and  unclean.

28.  to.  ye  are  full  of  hypocrisy  and  iniquity
Mark  7-  21.  for  from  to.  proceed  evil  thoughts

23.  ail  these  evil  things  come  from  to.  and  defile
Luke  11.  7.  he  from  tv.  shall  answer  and  say
12.  17.  he  thought  to.  himself,  16.  3. 1  18.  4.

John  20.  26.  after  eight  days  his  disciples  were  to.
Acts  5.  23.  when  we  opened,  wre  found  no  man  to.

1  Cor.  5.  12.  do  not  ye  judge  them  that  are  to.  ?

2  Cor.  7.  5.  without  were  fightings,  to.  wTere  fears
Rev.  4.  8.  and  they  were  full  of  eyes  to.  rest  not

5.  1.  a  book  written  to.  on  the  back  side  sealed
See  Gates,  Him,  Me,  Thee,  Them,  Us,
Without,  You.

WITHOUT.

Gen  24.  31.  come  in,  wherefore  standest  thou  to.  ?
Deut.  25.  5.  the  wife  of  the  dead  shall  not  marry  to.
2  Kings  10.24.  Jehu  appointed  eighty  men  to.

11.  15.  and  he  said,  have  her  forth  to.  the  ranges


2  Kings  18.  25.  am  I  now  come  up  to.  the  Lord
agamst  this  place  to  destroy  it  ?  Isa.  36. 10.
2  Chr.  15.  3.  Israel  hath  been  long  to.  the  true  God
21.20.  Jehoram  departed  a/,  being  desired
Psal.  31 .  11.  they'  that  did  see  me  to.  fled  from  me
Prov.  1.20.  wisdom  crieth  to.  she  uttereth  her  voice
7.  12.  now  she  is  to.  ||  22.  13.  there  is  a  lion  to.

24.  27.  prepaid  thy  work  ui.  make  it  fit  for  thee
Isa .  33.  7-  behold,  their  valiant  ones  shall  cry  to.

52.  3.  and  ye  shall  be  redeemed  to.  money
55.  1.  buy  wine  and  milk  to.  money'and  to.  price
Jer.  9.  21.  to  cut  off  the  children  from  to.

33.  10.  to.  man,  to.  beast,  and  to.  inhabitant,  12.
Hos.  3.  4.  Israel  to.  a  king,  to.  a  prince,  w.  a  sacrific  e,
to.  an  image,  to.  an  ephod,and  to.  a  teraphim
Mat.  10.  29.  a  sparrow  shall  not  fall  to.  your  father
Mark  4.  11.  to  them  that  are  to.  all  these  are  done
7.  18.  whatsoever  from  to.  entereth  into  the  man
Luke  1.  10.  the  whole  multitude  were  praying  to.

1  Cor.  5.  12.  what  to  do  to  judge  them  that  are  to.

13.  but  them  that  are  to.  God  judgeth
Eph.  2.  12.  having  no  hope,  and  to.  G.  in  the  world?
Col.  4.  5.  walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  to.
1  Thess.  4. 12.  walk  honestly  toward  them  that  are  to.
1  Tim.  3.  7.  have  a  good  report  of  them  that  are  to.
Heb.  7. 3.  Melchised.  to.  father,  to.  moth.  to.  descent
13.  12.  wherefore  Jesus  also  suffered  to.  the  gate

1  Pet.  3.  1.  that  they  also  may  to.  the  word  be  won
Rev.  22.  15.  for  to.  are  dogs  and  sorcerers

WITHOUT,  joined  with  within.

Gen.  6.  14.  pitch  the  ark  within  and  w.  with  pitch
Exod.  25. 11.  overlay  the  ark  within  and  w.  37. 2.
Lev.  13.  55.  if  the  garment  be  bare  within  or  w.
Deut.  32.  25.  the  sword  w.  and  terror  within
Ezek.  2.  10.  and  it  was  written  within  and  w.

7.  15.  the  sword  is  w.  and  famine  within
Luke  11.  40.  ye  fools,  did  not  he  that  made  that
which  is  w.  make  that  which  is  within  also  ?

2  Cor.  7.  5.  w.  were  fightings,  within  were  fears
See  Blemish,  Camp,  Cause,  City,  Fail,

Fear,  Him,  Knowledge,  Law,  Me,  Stand,
Stood,  Us,  You.

WITTIS.

Judg.  16. 7-  if  they  bind  me  with  seven  green  w.

8.  the  lords  brought  w.  ||  9.  he  brake  the  w.
WITHSTAND.


Num.  22.  32.  the  angel  went  out  to  w.  Balaam
2  Chr.  13.7.  Rehoboam  was  young  could  not  w.  them
8.  now  ye  think  to  w.  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord
20.  6.  power,  so  that  none  is  able  to  w.  thee
Esth.  9.  2.  and  no  man  could  to.  the  Jews
Eccl.  4.  12.  if  one  prevail,  two  shall  w.  him
Dan.  11.  15.  the  arms  of  the  south,  nor  his  people
shall  not  ai.nor  shall  there  be  any  strength  to  w.
Acts  11.  17.  what  was  l  that  1  could  to.  God  ?
Eph.  6. 13.  that  ye  may  be  able  to  w.  in  the  evil  day
WITHSTOOD.


2  Chron.  26.  18.  they  to.  Uzziah  the  king
Dan.  10. 13.  prince  of  Persia  w.  me  twenty -one  days
Acts  13.  8.  but  Elymas  the  sorcerer  w.  them
Gal.  2.  11.  at  Antioch  1  to.  Peter  to  the  face
2  Tim.  3.8.  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  w.  Moses
4.  15.  beware,  for  he  hath  greatly  w.  our  words
WITNESS

Is  one  that  gives  testimony  to  any  thing.  Thus  it  is
said,  you  are  witness,  a  faithful  witness,  a  false
witness,  God  is  witness,  &c.

Witness  in  Greek  is  txapivs,  or  paprip,  and  signi¬
fies  one  that  gives  testimony  to  the  truth  at  the  ex¬
pense  of  his  life.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  faithful  wit¬
ness,  Rev.  1.  5.  He  is  so  called,  because  as  the
great  Prophet  of  his  church,  he  hath  revealed  the
will  of  God  faithfully,  plainly,  and  fully,  so  far  as
is  necessary  to  the  salvation  of  men:  this  Isaiah
prophesied  of  him.  Isa.  55.  4.  I  have  given  him
for  a  witness  to  the  people,  to  be  a  Prophet  and
Teacher,  to  declare  the  counsel  and  will  of  God
concerning  the  duty  and  salvation  of  men,  to  bear
witness  unto  the  truth,  as  Christ  himself  affirms
before  Pontius  Pilate,  John  18.  37.  Wherefore
Paul  saith,  1  Tim.  6.  13.  that  Christ  witnessed  a
good  confession  before  Pontius  Pilate.  He  is
called  the  faithful  witness,  not  only  because  he  re¬
vealed  all  truth,  and  bare  record  to  the  truth  before
Pilate,  but  also  because  he  sealed  it  with  his  blood ;
he  died,  and  was  a  martyr  to  the  truth,  which
proves  him  to  be  a  faithful,  constant  witness.

The  law  appoints,  that  two  or  three  witnesses  should
be  sufficient  in  matters  of  judicature  ;  but  one
witness  only  was  not  sufficient,  Deut.  17.  6
When  any  one  was  condemned  to  die,  the  wit¬
nesses  were  the  first  that  began  the  execution.
They  threw  the  first  stone,  for  example,  if  the
party  was  to  be  stoned,  Deut.  17.  7-  The  law  con¬
demned  a  false  witness'  to  undergo  the  same  punish¬
ment  that  he  would  have  subjected  his  neighbour  to,
Deut.  19. 16,  17,  18,  19.  When  God  is  said  to  be  a
witness  to  sin,  as  in  Jer.  29.  23.  it  signifies,  that  he
not  only  knows  it,  but  he  will  also  punish  it :  he  is
both  judge  and  witness,  he  does  not  stay  for  any
one  to  accuse  the  wicked  to  him,  he  has  no  need  of
the  testimony  or  accusation  of  men,  to  know  the  de¬
merits  of  the  guilty.  He  accuses  them  himself,  he
punishes  them,  he  condemns  them,  he  knows  all
their  transgressions,  by  his  wisdom,  his  justice,
his  infinite  penetration.

In  Mai.  3.  5.  God  threatens  perjured  persons ,  adul¬
terers,  and  other  wicked  men,  with  vengeance,
I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  false  swear¬
ers,  §c.  This  is  spoken  of  Christ  the  Messiah,
to  whom  the  Father  hath  committed  all  judgment,
John  5.  22.  The  prophets  and  Old  'Testament
believers,  by  their  doing  and  suffering  for  God,
have  given  testimony  to  the  truth  of  our  holy  re¬
ligion.  Tne  apostle  calls  them  a  cloud  of  wit¬
nesses,  Heb.  12.  1.  The  apostles  also  are  still  more
witnesses,  of  the  coming,  the  mission,  the  doc¬
trine,  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  1  Cor.  15.  14,
15.  It  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  we  are  found  false
witnesses  of  God.  And  St.  Peter  says,  We  are  wit¬
nesses  of  all  things  which  he  did  in  Judea  and  in
Jerusalem,  Acts  10.  39.  He  chose  a  small  number


of  persons  to  be  witnesses  to  him,  and  when  they
took  upon  them  to  put  another  apostle  in  the  place
of  Judas,  they  thought  fit  to  appoint  one  who  had
been  a  witness  of  the  resurrection  along  with
them.  Acts  1.  22.

The  apostle  Paul,  in  Rom.  8.  16.  says,  that  the
Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that
we  are  the  children  of  God.  The  Spirit  of  God,
by  an  inward  and  secret  suggestion,  speaks  the  same
things,  gives  the  same  evidence,  concerning  the  truth
of  grace,  and  our  sonship,  and  so  ratifies  what  our
enlightened  and  renewed  consciences  say.  In
Heb.  11.  4.  it  is  said,  that  Abel  obtained  witness
that  he  was  righteous,  God  testify  ing  of  his  gifts.
'The  Spirit  of  God  testified  to  his  spirit  that  he
was  justified  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  and
God  witnessed  from  heaven  to  the  truth  of  his  state,
by  accepting  of  his  person  and  sacrifice,  and  by
giving  a  visible  sign  of  it,  so  as  that  Cain  could
observe  it.  It  is  thought  that  God  sent  fire  from
heaven  and  consumed  Abel's  sacrifice,  as  he  did
others  afterwards.

Job  says,  Ihou  re  newest  thy  witnesses  against  me,
Job  10.  17.  Thou  bringest  fresh  plagues  and
judgments  upon  me,  which  are  the  witnesses  and
evidences  both  of  my  sins,  and  of  thy  displeasure
against  me.  In  Psal.  89.  37.  it  is  said  that  the
house  and  kingdom  of  Dai  id  shall  be  established
tor  ev  er  as  the  moon,  and  as  a  faithful  witness
in  heaven  By  faithful  witness,  some  understand
the  moon,  which  is  called  a  witness  of  God's
covenant  of  the  night,  Jer.  33.  20.  so  the  meaning

is.  And  though  the  moon  be  subject  to  eclipses
and  manifold  changes,  yet  it  stilt  abides  in  hea¬
ven,  as  a  witness  of  my  covenant  of  the  night,  so
shall  the  house  and  kingdom  of  David,  who  was
a  type  of  the  Messiah,  continue  for  ever,  notwith¬
standing  the  changes  and  calamities  that  shall  befall

it.  Others  understand  by  this  the  rainbow,  which
is  God's  faithful  and  perpetual  witness,  Gen.  9.
12,  16.  Witness  is  put  for  the  miracles  of  Christ,
which  gave  testimony  to  his  Deity  and  Mediator-
ship,  John  5.  36. 1  10.  25.

Gen.  21.  30.  they  may  be  a  w.  that  1  digged  this  well

31.  44.  let  this  covenant  be  a  w.  between  us
48.  this  heap  is  a  w.  this  pillar  is  w.  52.

50.  God  is  w.  between  me  and  thee,  1  Thess.  2.  5.
Exod.  22.  13.  if  it  be  torn,  let  him  bring  it  for  a  w.

23.  1.  put  not  thine  hand  to  be  an  unrighteous  w.
Lev.  5.  1.  if  a  soul  sin,  and  is  a  w.  of  swearing
Num.  5.  13.  if  there  be  no  w.  against  her

35.  30.  one  w.  shall  not  testify  against  any  person

to  cause  him  to  die,  Deut.  17-  6.  1 19.  15.
Deut.  31.  19.  this  song  may  be  a  w.  21.  26.

Josh.  22.  27.  the  altar  is  a  w.  between  us,  28.  34.

24.  27-  behold  this  stone  shall  be  a  w.  to  us
Judg.  11.  10.  Lord  be  w.  between  us,  Jer.  42.  5.

1  .Sam.  12.  5.  the  Lord  is  w.  against  you  this  day
Job  16.  8.  my  wrinkles  which  is  a  w.  against  me
19.  behold,  tn>'  w.  is  in  heaven,  my  record  on  high
29.  11.  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave  w.  to  me
Psal.  89.  37.  established  as  a  faithful  w.  in  heaven
Proi  14.  5.  a  faithful  w.  will  not  lie,  but  a  false  w.

25.  a  true  w.  delivereth  souls,  but  a  deceitful  w.

19.  28.  an  ungodly  w.  scorneth  judgment

24.  28.  be  not  w.  against  thy  neighb.  without  cause
Isa.  19.  20.  it  shall  be  for  a  w.  to  the  Lord  of  hosts
55.  4.  I  have  given  him  for  a  w.  to  the  people
Jer.  29.  23.  1  know,  and  am  a  w.  saith  the  Lord

42.  5.  Lord  be  a  true  and  faithful  w.  between  us
Mic.  1.  2.  let  the  Lord  God  be  w.  against  you
Mai.  2.  14.  Lord  be  w.  between  thee  and  wife

3.  5.  I  will  be  a  swift  w.  against  the  sorcerers
Mat.  24.  14.  be  preached  for  a  w.  to  all  nations
Mark  14. 55.  the  council  sought  for  w.  against  Jesus

56.  but  their  w.  agreed  not  together,  59.

Luke  22.  71  •  they  said,  what  need  we  further  w.?
John  1.  7.  the  same  came  for  a  w.  to  bear  w.

3. 11.  we  speak  that  we  know,  ye  receive  not  our  w.

26.  to  whom  thou  bearest  w.  the  same  baptizeth
5.  31.  if  I  bear  w.  of  myself,  my  w.  is  not  true

32.  I  know  the  w.  he  witnesseth  of  me  is  true

36.  but  I  have  greater  w.  than  that  of  John

37.  Father  who  sent  me  hath  borne  w.  of  me

Acts  1.  22.  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  w.  with  us

4.  33.  gave  w.  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord

10.  43.  to  him  give  all  prophets  w.  whoso  believeth
14.  17.  he  left  not  himself  without  w.  he  did  good
22.  15.  for  thou  shalt  be  his  w.  to  all  men  of  what
26.  16.  to  make  thee  a  minister  and  a  w.  of  these
Rom.  1.9.  God  is  my  w.  whom  1  serve  in  the  gospel

2.  15.  their  conscience  also  bearing  w.  9.  1.

Tit.  1.  13.  this  w.  is  true,  rebuke  them  sharply
Heb.  2.  4.  God  also  bearing  them ,  w.  with  signs

10.  15.  whereof  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  w.  to  us

11.  4.  by  which  Abel  obtained  w.  was  righteous
Jam.  5.  3.  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  w.  against  you
1  Pet.  5.  1.  Peter  a  w.  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ

1  John  5.  9.  if  we  receive  the  w.  of  men,  the  w.  of
Goa  is  greater,  for  thi3  is  the  w.  of  God

10.  he  that  believeth  hath  the  w.  in  himself
3  John  6.  which  have  borne  w.  of  thy  charity
Rev.  1.  5.  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  faithful  w.

3.  14.  write  these  things,  saith  the  true  w.

20.  4.  that  were  beheaded  for  the  w.  of  Jesus
See  Bare,  Bear,  Beareth,  False,  Taber

NACLE.

WITNESSES.

Nvm.  35.  30.  murderer  put  to  death  by  mouth  of  w.
Deut.  17.  6.  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  w.  shall
he  be  put  to  death,  19-  15.  2  Cor.  13.

7.  the  hands  of  the  w.  shall  be  first  upon  him
Josh.  24.  22.  Joshua  said,  ye  are  w.  against  yourse.,
that  ye  have  chosen  Lord,  they  said,  we  are  a
Ruth  4.  9.  ye  are  w.  that  I  have  bought,  10.

11.  the  people  and  the  elders  said,  we  are  w.

Job  10.  17.  thou  renewestthy  w.  against  me
Isa.  8.  2.  I  took  to  me  faithful  w.  to  record

43.  9.  let  all  the  nations  bring  forth  their  w.

10.  ye  are  my  w.  saith  the  Lord,  12. 1  44.  8.

44.  9.  they  are  their  own  w.  they  see  not,  nor  <now
Jer.  32.  10.  1  sealed  the  evidence  and  took  w.  12.

U  561


W  I  V


w  o  r


Jer.  32. 25.  buy  the  field  for  money,  and  take  w.  44.
Mat.  18. 16.  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  tv.

23.  31.  wherefore  ye  be  iv.  to  yourselves  that  ye
26.  65.  what  further  need  of  to.?  Mark  14.  63.

Luke  94. 48.  and  ye  are  a),  of  these  things
Acts  1.  8.  ye  shall  be  tv.  to  me  in  Jerusalem

2.32.  Jesus  God  raised  up,  whereof  we  are  w.  3. 15.

5.32.  we  are  his  tv.  of  these  things,  10.  39.

7.  58.  tv.  laid  down  their  clothes  at  Saul’s  feet

10.  41.  but  unto  tv.  chosen  before  of  God  to  us

13.  31.  who  are  his  tv.  unto  the  people

1  Thess.  2.  10.  ye  are  tv.  and  God  also,  how  we

1  Tim.  5. 19.  receive  no  accusation  but  before  two  tv.
6. 12.  professed  a  good  profession  before  many  tv.

2  Tim.  2.2.  things  heard  of  me  among  many  tv.
Heh.  10.28. died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three  a).

12. 1 .  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  cloud  of  tv.
Rev.  11.3.  1  will  give  power  to  my  two  tv

See  False.

WITNESS,  Verb.

Dent.  4.26. 1  call  heaven  and  earth  to  tv.  againstyou
1  Sam.  12.  3.  behold,  here  l  am,  tv.  against  me
Isa.  3.  9.  their  countenance  doth  tv.  against  them
Lam.  2. 13.  what  thing  shall  l  take  to  to.  for  thee  ?
Mat.  26.  62.  answerest  thou  nothing  ?  what  is  it
that  these  tv.  against  thee  ?  Mark  14.  60.
27-  13.  Pilate  saith  to  him,  hearest  thou  not  how
many  things  they  tv.  against  thee,  Mark  15.  4.
WI  I'N  ESS  ED.

1  Kings 21. 1.3.  the  men  of  Belial  to.  against  Naboth
Rom.  .3.21.  being  to.  by  the  law  and  the  prophets
1  Tim.  6. 13.  who  before  Pilate  tv.  a  good  confession
Heb.  7.8.  of  whom  it  is  tv.  that  he  liveth
WITNESSETH.

John  5.  .32.  the  witness  that  he  tv.  of  me  is  true
Acts  20.  23.  save  that  Holy  Ghost  w.  in  every  city
WITNESSING.

Acts  96. 22.  v.  both  to  small  and  great,  saying
WITS.

Psal.  107-  27.  they  stagger  and  are  at  their  to.  end
W  l  TTY.

Prov.  8. 12. 1  find  out  knowledge  of  to.  inventions
WITTINGLY.

Gen.  48. 14.  Isr.  guided  his  hands  tv.  for  Manasseh
WIVES.

Gen.  4. 19.  Lamech  took  unto  him  two  tv.

6.  2.  they  took  them  to.  of  all  which  they  chose
30.  26.  give  me  my  tv.  and  children  and  let  me  go
31. 50.  if  thou  take  other  tv.  besides  my  daughters
Num.  14.3.  that  our  tv.  and  children  should  be  a  prey
Devt.  17.17-  nor  shall  he  multiply  tv.  to  himself
21. 15,  if  a  man  have  two  tv.  one  beloved,  another
Judg.  8. 30.  Gideon  had  seventy  sons,  had  many7  tv.

21.  7-  how  shall  we  do  for  tv.  for  them?  16.

18,  we  may  not  give  them  tv.  of  our  daughters

1  Sam.  1.2.  Elkanah  had  two  tv.  Hannah  and  Peninn.
25. 43.  they  were  also  both  of  them  David’s  tv.

2  Sam.  5. 13.  David  took  more  tv.  out  of  Jerusalem
12.  8.  I  gave  thee  thy  master’s  to.  into  thy  bosom

1  King'  11.3.  Solomon  had  700  tv.  princesses

4.  his  .  turned  away  his  heart  when  he  was  old
20.7.  he  sent  unto  me  for  my  tv.  and  children

1  Chron.  4.  5.  Ashur  had  two  tv.  Helah  and  N  aarah
7. 4.  the  sons  of  Uzzi  had  many7  tv.  and  sons
8.8.  Shaharaim  had  two  tv.  Hushim  and  Baara

2  Chron.  11. 21.  Reh.  loved  Maachah  above  all  his  tv.

23.  he  gave  them  victuals  ;  he  desired  many  tv.

24.  3.  Jehoiada  took  for  him  two  tv.  he  begat  sons
29.  9.  and  our  tv.  are  in  captivity  for  this

Ezra  10.  3.  a  covenant  to  put  away  all  the  to.  44.
Neb.  12.  4.3.  the  tv.  also  and  children  rejoiced
1.3.  23.  1  saw  Jews  that  had  married  tv.  of  Ashdod
Esth.  1.  20.  the  tv.  shall  give  to  husbands  honour
Jer.  29. 6.  take  ye  tv.  and  take  tv.  for  your  sons
.35.  8.  to  drink  no  wine,  we,  nor  our  tv.  nor  sons
Dan.  5.  2.  his  to.  and  concubines  drink  therein,  3.
Luke  17.  27.  they  eat,  drank,  they  married  tv.

Acts  21. 5.  they  brought  us  on  our  way  with  tv.

1  Cor.  7.  29  that  have  to.  be  as  tho’  they  had  none
Eph.  5.  22.  tv.  submit  yourselves  to  your  own  hus¬
bands  as  unto  the  Lord,  Col.  3. 18.  1  Pet.  3. 1.

24.  so  let  the  to.  be  to  their  own  husbands
1  Tim.  4.7.  refuse  profane  and  old  tv.  fables

1  Pet.  3. 1.  may  be  won  by  the  conversation  of  tv.

See  Strange.

Their  WIVES.

Gen.  34. 29.  all  their  wealth,  all  their  little  ones,  and
their  tv.  took  they  captive,  1  Sam.  30.  3.
Judg.  .3.  6/they  took  their  daughters  to  be  their  tv.

2  Chron.  20.  13.  all  Judah  with  their  to.  stood
Ezra  10. 19.  that  they  would  put  away  their  tv.

1 Veh.  5. 1.  a  great  cry  of  the  people  and  of  their  tv

1*0.  28.  their  to.  and  daughters  entered  into  an  oath
Isa.  13.16.  their  houses  spoiled,  and  their  tv.  ravished
Jer.  6. 12.  their  tv.  shal  l  be  turned  to  others,  8. 10.

14.  16.  1  hey  shall  have  none  to  bury  their  tv.

18-  21 .  let  their  tv.  be  bereaved  of  their  children

44.  9-  have  ye  forgotten  the  wickednessof  their  to.

15.  men  who  knew  their  tv.  had  burnt  incense
Ezek.  44.  22.  noi  take  tor  their  tv.  a  widow
Dan.  6.  24.  cast  them  and  their  tv.  into  den  of  lions
Zech.  12. 12.  their  tv.  shall  mourn  apart,  13,  14.
Eph.  5.  28.  to  love  their  tv.  as  their  own  bodies

1  Tim.  3. 11.  even  so  must  their  tv.  be  grave,  sober

Thy  WIVES.

2  Sam.  12.11.  T  will  take  thy  tv.  before  thine  eyes,

and  he  shall  lie  with  thy  tv.  in  sight  of  the  sun

19.  5.  who  saved  this  day  the  lives  of  thy  tv.

1  Kings90.3.  thv  silverand  gold  ismine.and  thytv.

5.  thou  shalt  deliver  me,  thy  tv.  and  children

2  Chron.  21.14.  Lord  will  smite  thy  people  and  thy  to.
Jer .  38. 23.  so  they  shall  bring  thy  tv.  and  children
Dan.  5. 23.  thy  tv.  and  concubines  have  drunk  wine

Lmr  WIVES.

Gen.  45. 19.  take  waggons  for  your  tv.  and  come
Exod.  19. 15.  said  to  people,  come  not  at  your  to.
22.24.yowra>.shall  be  widows,  children  fatherless

32.2.  break  off  the  golden  ear-rings  o t  your  w.
Deut.  3. 19.  your  to.  and  your  little  ones  and  your

cattle  shall  remain  in  your  cities.  Josh.  1. 14.
29.11  .your  tv.  shall  enter  into  covenant  with  Ix>rd
Keh.  4. 14.  fight  for  your  tv.  and  your  houses

562


W  O  M


Jer.  44.  9.  have  ye  forgotten  wickedness  of  your  re.

25.  Lord  saying,  ye  and  your  tv.  have  both  spoken
Mat.  19.  8.  Moses  suffered  you  to  put  away  your  tv.
Eph.  5.  25.  husbands,  lo vzyour  tv.  Col.  3.  19.
WIZARD.

Lev.  20.27.  a  tv.  shall  surely  be  put  to  death
Deut.  18. 11.  there  shall  not  be  found  among  you  tv.
WIZARDS.

Lev.  19.  31.  nor  seek  after  to  be  defiled  by  them

20.  6.  the  soul  that  turns  after  tv.  1  will  cut  off

1  Sam.  28.  3.  Saul  had  put  tv.  out  of  the  land,  9.

2  Kings  21.6.  Manasseh  dealt  with  tv.  9Chr.  33.  6.
23.  24.  Josiah  put  the  tv.  and  idols  out  of  the  land

7.fa.8. 19.  when  say,  seek  unto  tv.  that  peep  and  mut.

19.  3.  and  they  shall  seek  to  idols  and  tv.

WOE.

Num.  21.  29.  tv.  to  thee,  Moab,  Jer.  48.  46.

1  Sam.  4.  7-  u<.  unto  us,  for  there  hath  not  been
such  a  thing  heretofore,  8.  Jer.  4.  13. 1  6.  4.
Lam.  5.  16.

Prov.  23.  29.  who  hath  tv.  ?  who  hath  sorrow  ?

Eccl.  4.  10.  tv.  to  him  that  is  alone  when  he  falls

10.  16.  tv.  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  is  a  child
Isa.  3.  9.  tv.  to  their  soul,  for  they  rewarded  evil

11.  tv.  to  the  wicked,  it  shall  be  ill  with  him

17.  12.  tv.  to  the  multitude  of  many  people

18.  1.  to.  to  the  land  shadowing  with  wings

28.  1.  tv.  to  the  crown  of  pride,  to  the  drunkards

29.  1.  tv.  to  Ariel  ||  33.  1.  tv.  to  thee  that  spoilest

30.  1.  tv.  to  the  rebellious  children,  saith  the  Lord

45.  9.  tv.  to  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker

10.  uk  to  him  that  saith  to  fath.  what  begettest  thou
Jer.  1.3.  27.  tv.  unto  thee,  O  Jerusalem,  wilt  thou

22.  13.  w.  to  him  that  builds  by  unrighteousness

23.  1.  tv.  to  the  pastors  that  destroy  the  sheep
48.  1.  tv.  to  Nebo  ||  Esek.  16.  23.  tv.  tv.  to  thee

Ezek.  2.  10.  there  was  written,  mourning  and  tv.

13.  .3.  tv.  to  foolish  prophets,  that  follow  their  spirit

18.  to.  to  women  that  sew  pillows  to  all  armholes

24.  6.  tv.  to  the  bloody  city,  9.  Nah.  3.  1.

30.  2.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  howl,  tv.  worth  the  day
34.  2.  to.  be  to  the  shepherds  that  feed  themselves

Amos  5. 18.  tv.  toyouthat  desire  the  day  of  the  Lord
Hab.  2.  6.  tv.  to  him  that  increaseth  that  is  not  his
9.  tv.  to  him  that  coveteth  an  evil  covetousness

12.  tv.  to  him  that  buildeth  a  town  with  blood

15.  tv.  to  him  thatgiveth  his  neighbour  drink

19.  tv.  to  him  that  saith  to  the  wood,  aw'ake
Zeph.  2.  5.  tv.  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  sea-coasts

3.  1.  w.  to  her  that  is  filthy  and  polluted,  to  city
Zech.  11.  17.  tv.  to  the  idof  shepherd  that  leaveth
Mat.  11.21.W.  to  thee  Chorazin,  a’,  to  thee  Bethsaida,
for  if  the  works  had  been  done,  Luke  10.  13.
18.  7.  tv.  to  the  world  because  of  offences,  tv.  to  that
man  by  whom  the  offence  cometh,  Luke  17. 1.
Mat.  23.  13.  tv.  unto  you  scribes  and  Pharisees,  hy¬
pocrites,  14,  15,  2.3,  25,  27  ,  29.  Luke  11.  44.

16.  to.  unto  you,  ye  blind  guides,  which  say

26.  24.  but  tv.  unto  that  man  by  whom  the  Non  of
man  is  betrayed,  Mark\4.  21.  Luke  22.  22.
Luke  6.  24.  but  tv.  unto  you  that  are  rich,  for  ye  have

25.  tv.  to  you  that  are  full,  tv.  to  you  that  laugh

26.  tv.  to  you  when  all  men  spea’k  well  of  you

11.  42.  but  tv.  unto  you,  Pharisees,  43.

46.  he  said,  tv.  to  you  also,  ye  lawyers,  47.  52.
Rev.  8. 13.  I  heard  an  angel  flying,  saying,  tv.  w.  to.

to  the  inhabiters  of  the  earth,  12.  12.

9.  12.  one  to.  is  past  1(11.  14.  the  second  tv.  is  past

WOE  is  me.

Psal.  120.  5.  tv.  is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech
Isa.  6.5.  tv.  is  me,  1  am  undone,  1  am  of  unclean  lips
Jer.  4.  31.  to.  is  me  now,  for  my  soul  is  wearied
10. 19 .to.  is  me  for  my  hurt  ||  15. 10.  to.  is  me  my  mot.
45.  3.  to.  is  me,  for  the  Lord  hath  added  grief
Mic.  7. 1.  tv.  is  me,  I  am  as  when  they  gathered  fruit
WOEwwfcwie.

Job  10.  15.  if  I  be  wicked,  tv.  unto  me,  if  righteous
Isa.  24.  16.  but  I  said,  my  leanness,  to.  unto  me
1  Cor.  9.  16.  tv.  unto  me  if  1  preach  not  the  gospel
WOE  to  them.

Isa.  5.  8.  to.  to  them  that  join  house  to  house

11.  tv.  to  them  that  rise  up  early  in  the  morning
18.  uk  to  them  that  draw  iniquity  with  cords

20.  tv.  to  them  that  call  evil  good  and  good  evil

21.  uk  to  them  that  are  wise  in  their  own  eyes

22.  tv.  to  them  that  are  mighty  to  drink  wine

10.  1.  uk  to  them  that  decree  unrighteous  decrees
29.  15.  uk  to  them  that  seek  deep  to  hide  counsel

31.  1.  tv.  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help
Jer.  50.  27.  uk  to  them  for  their  day  is  come

H os.  7.  13.  u.  to  them,  for  they  have  fled  from  me
9.  12.  tv.  to  them  when  1  depart  from  them
Amos  6.  1.  w.  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion
Mic.  2.  1.  rv.  to  them  that  devise  iniquity
Mat.  24. 19.  a’,  to  them  which  are  with  child,  and  to
them  that  give  suck,  Mark  13. 17.  Luke  21 .  23.
Jude  11.  tv.  to  them ,  they  have  gone  in  way  of  Cain
\tfOES.

Rev.  9.  12.  behold,  there  come  two  zv.  more  hereafter
WOEFUL.

Jer.  17.  16.  neither  have  I  desired  the  tv.  day
WOLF.

In  Greek  Avkoc  ‘  in  Hebrew  Zeeb  ;  it  is  a  wild
creature  very  well  known.  The  Scripture  takes
notice  of  these  remarkable  things  of  the  wolf :
that  it  Hues  upon  rapine:  that  it  is  violent,  cruel,
and  bloody  :  that  it  ts  voracious  and  greedy  :  that
it  goes  abroad  by  night  to  seek  its  prey  :  that  it  is
the  great  enemy  of  flocks  of  sheep  .  that  Benja¬
min  shall  ravin  as  a  wolf:  that  false  teachers
are  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing:  that  the  perse¬
cutors  of  the  church,  and  false  pastors,  are  also
ravening  wolves.

The  prophets  Jeremiah ,  Ilabakkuk,  and  Zephaniah,
speak  of  the  wolves  of  the  evening.  It  hath  been
observed  that  towards  evening  wolves  are  most
dangerous,  as  being  then  more  hungry.  Instead
of  the  wolves  of  the  evening,  the  Septuagint
translate  it.  The  wolves  of  A  labia;  because  the
Hebrew  word  Arab  signifies  both  the  evening
and  Arabia.  Wolves  are  common  in  Arabia,
but  they  have  nothing  peculiar  in  that  country  ;


so  that  there  can  be  no  reason  to  have  recourse  ts
that  translation.

As  to  what  is  said  in  Gen.  49.  27.  that  Benjamin;
shall  ravin  as  a  wolf ;  this  denotes  the  warlike  and
fierce  disposition  and  carriage  of  this  tribe.  The
Chaldee  interpreters  explain  it  of  the  altar  of
burnt  offerings,  which  was  at  Jerusalem  in  the
tribe  of  Benjamin,  and  upon  which  they  burnt  the
morning  and  evening  sacrifices  to  the  Lord.
Others  refer  it  to  that  violent  seizure  which  was  •
made  by  the  children  of  Benjamin,  of  the  young
women  that  came  to  the  tabernacle  at  Shiloh,  J  udg.

21.  21,  23.  Others  again  refer  it  to  Mordecai ,  or
to  Saul,  or  to  Paul ,  who  were  of  the  tribe  of  Ben¬
jamin.

Isaiah  describing  the  tranquillity  of  the  reign  0)
the  Messiah,  jay .r.  The  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the
lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the
kid,  &c.  Isa.  11.  6.  This  is  to  be  understood
spiritually ,  and  metaphorically ;  that  is  to  say,

“  Men  of  fierce,  cruel,  and  ungovernable  disposi¬
tions,  shall  be  so  transformed  by  the  preaching  of
the  gc.pel,  and  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  that  they
shall  become  most  humble,  gentle,  and  tractable,
and  shall  no  more  vex  and  persecute,  but  shall  live
and  converse  in  the  same  church  with  other  poor
Christians  quietly  and  harmlessly."  Persecutors
are  elsewhere  compared  to  w'olves,  Mat.  10.  16.
Behold,  1  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  mids‘
of  wolves.  Both  Jews  and  Pagans  were  at  first
like  ravenous  and  voracious  wolves,  let  loose
against  the  faithful.  They  persecuted  and  put  to
a  violent  death  almost  all  the  apostles  and  dis¬
ciples  of  our  Saviour.  But  at  last  some  of  these  i
wolves  themselves  became  converts,  and  grew  to
be  lambs  ;  St.  Paul,  one  of  the  most  eager  perse¬
cutors  of  the  church,  was  afterwards  one  of  its  most
zealous  defenders.

The  wolf,  as  it  is  said,  is  a  fierce  creature,  abiding
in  forests,  an  enemy  to  cattle,  ravenous,  greedy,
crafty,  of  an  exquisite  quickness  of  smell,  having  ii
an  head  something  square,  and  his  hair  inclined  to
grey.  It  is  commonly  said,  that  what  makes  him
so  voracious  is,  that  he  has  but  one  very  large,  j
short  gut,  in  which  his  food  stays  but  a  little  time:  1
but  this  is  a  popular  mistake:  his  guts  are  as  long  \
as  any  other  animal s,  or  as  a  dog's,  being  himself
a  kind  of  wild  dog.

In  times  of  great  famine,  when  they  can  get  no  prey,
wolves  are  said  to  destroy  one  another  ;  for  when
they  meet  together,  bemoaning  themselves  one  to
another,  as  it  were  by  consent,  they  run  round  in  a
circle,  and  the  first  which,  through  giddiness,  fall-
eth  to  the  ground,  is  forthwith  devoured  by  the  rest.
They  are  frightened  at  the  throwing  of  stones,  at
fire,  at  the  sound  of  bells,  and  at  the  singing  of
men  or  women.  When  they  set  upon  sheep,  they
make  choice  of  a  dark,  cloudy  day,  that  they  may
escape  the  more  safely ;  and  they  go  against  the
wind,  to  prevent  the  dogs  smelling  them.  It  is
said  also,  that  the  female  bringeth  forth  one  the
first  year,  two  the  second,  and  so  on  till  the  ninth  :
year.  If  the  young  one  lap  as  a  dog,  she  rejecteth
it ;  if  it  suck  the  water  as  a  swine,  or  bite  as  a
bear,  she  nourishes  it.  Many  other  things  are  said
of  this  animal.

It  is  recorded  that  one  Gelon  of  Syracuse,  then  a
scholar  at  school,  was  thus  preserved:  a  wolf  en¬
tering  the  school,  seized  on  Gelon' s  wiiting  table
and  hasted  to  be  gone  ;  Gelon  pursued  after  his
table :  in  the  meantime  the  school-house  fell  down,
whereby  both  masters  and  scholars  were  all  killed,
Gelon  alone  being  preserved.  Many  other  things
are  reported  of  them.

Gen.  49.  27.  Benjamin  shall  ravin  as  a  w.

Isa.  11.  6.  the  w.  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb

65.  25.  the  w.  and  the  lamb  shall  feed  togethei

Jer.  5.  6.  a  to.  of  the  evenings  shall  spoil  them

John  10. 12.  but  he  that  is  an  hireling  seeth  the  a.
coming,  the  w.  catcheth  and  scattereth  the  sheep
WOLVES.

Ezek.  22.  27.  her  princes  are  like  to.  ravening

Hah.  1.8.  their  horses  fiercer  than  evening  w.

Zeph.  3.  3.  her  princes  lions,  her  judges  evening  u.

Mat.  7.  15.  but  in  wardly  they  are  raveninga;.

10.  16.  1  send  you  forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  w.

Luke  10.  3.  I  send  you  forth  as  lambs  among  w.

Acts  20.  29-  grievous  w.  shall  enter  in  among  you
WOMAN.

God  having  created  all  the  animals  in  pairs,  malt
and  female,  and  having  brought  them  to  Adam,
that  he  might  give  them  names  ;  in  this  review  that
Adam  made  of  all  living  creatures,  he  could  not
observe  that  any  one  of  them  was  like  himself,  or
created  far  him.  Gen.  2.  19,  .20.  But  God  was
pleased  to  give  him  a  companion  and  assistant,  as
he  had  done  to  all  the  other  creatures.  He  there-
fore  east  Adam  into  a  profound  sleep,  and  when  he
was  fast  asleep,  God  took  a  rib  out  of  his  side,  of
which  he  formed  the  woman.  When  Adam  awoke,
he  perceived  it,  and  cried  out,  This  is  bone  of  my
bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh;  she  shall  be  called  by
a  name  derived  from  that  of  man,  because  she  is
taken  out  of  man.  Wherefore  a  man  shall  for¬
sake  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave  to  his
wife,  and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh  ;  or,  “  1  hey
shall  be  but  one  in  two  different  bodies,  because  oj
the  production  of  children,  which  are  the  blood  o)
both,"  Gen.  2.  21,22,  <$rc.

Some  writers  have  thought,  that  Adam  was  created
of  both  sexes  ;  because  it  is  said  in  Gen.  1 . 26,  27
Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness
and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the
sea  :  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the
image  of  God  created  he  him  ;  male  and  female
created  he  them.  He  speaks  of  the  work  of  the
sixth  day.  And  in  the  following  chapter  he  relates
the  formation  of  the  woman  in  the  manner  before
mentioned.  It  is  therefore  affirmed,  that  man  was
already  formed  male  and  female,  before  Eve  was
created.  Others  think,  that  the  bodies  of  A  dam  and
Eve  were  created  even  from  the  sixth  day,  but  joined


W  O  M


W  O  M


W  O  N


and  fastened  sidewise  to  each  other ;  and  that
afterwards  God  sent  a  deep  sleep  on  Adam ,  and
then  separated  the  woman  from  him.  And  thus
they  explain  those  words,  Gen.  2.  21.  lie  took
one  ot  nis  ribs,  and  closed  up  the  flesh  instead
thereof;  they  translate  the  Hebrew  thus,  lie  took
one  C woman)  out  of  his  side,  and  put  flesh  in
its  place.  The  opinion  that  generally  pret  ails  is,
that  the  man  and  woman  were  created  on  the  sixth
day,  according  fo  Gen.  1.  27.  and  that  what  is
related  chap.  2.  20,  9cc.  is  only  a  recapitulation,
or  a  supplement ,  to  what  had  been  before  men
tioned  in  a  concise  manner.

Woman  was  created  to  be  a  companion  and  assist¬
ant  to  man.  She  was  equal  to  him  in  that  au¬
thority  and  jurisdiction  that  God  gate  them  over
all  other  animals.  But  after  the  fall,  God  made
her  subject  to  the  government  of  man.  Gen.  3.
16.  1  by  desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he
shall  rule  over  thee.  Besides  the  duties  prescrib¬
ed  by  the  law,  common  to  men  and  women,  there
were  certain  regulations  peculiar  to  this  sex  ;  as
were  those  legal  uncleannesses  which  they  con¬
tracted  during  the  times  of  their  ordinary  infir-
mitiest  Lev.  15.  19.  and  those  that  attended  their
lying-in.  Lev.  12.  2.  and  those  which  proceeded
from  certain  fluxes  of  humours ,  at  those  seasons
appointed  by  nature,  Lev.  15.  25.  The  law  also
made  them  liable  to  the  trial  of  the  waters  of
jealousy,  ij  their  husbands  had  entertained  any
well-grounded  suspicions  of  their  fidelity,  N  urn.

5.  14,  &c.  and  when  the  tokens  of  virginity  could
not  be  found  in  them,  they  were  stoned  to  death,
Deut.  22.  20,  21.

Ij  a  married  woman  made  a  vow,  of  whatever
nature  it  was,  she  could  not  be  obliged  to  keep  it,
if  her  husband  was  against  it,  and  contradicted  it
|  the  same  day.  But  if  he  staid  till  the  next  day
before  he  contradicted  it,  or  knowing  the  thing,  if
he  held  his  peace,  he  was  then  supposed  to  consent
to  it,  and  the  woman  was  obliged  to  perform  her
vow,  Num.  30.  6,  7,  8.  See  the  epistles  of  St.
Paul,  for  the  duties  of  women  towards  their  hus¬
bands,  ]  Cor.  7.  3,  4,  Sec.  Eph.  5.  22,  Sec.  See
;  also  1  it.  2.  4,  0.  and  1  Pet.  3.  1,  2,  3.  where  mo¬
desty  is  recommended  to  them,  and  a  great  care
'  in  avoiding  all  superfluous  ornaments,  and  un¬
necessary  finery  of  dress.

The  prophet  Isaiah  says.  As  for  my  people,  wo¬
men  rule  over  them  :  that  is,  weak  and  effeminate
men,  Isa.  3.  12.  And  in  chap.  19.  16.  In  that
day  shall  Egypt  be  like  unto  women;  that  is,
feeble  and  fearful.  The  prophet  Ezekiel  repre¬
sents  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah,  who
both  sprung  from  the  same  stock  by  two  women,
the  daughters  of  one  mother,  Ezek.  23.  2,  44.

'  And  in  Rev.  12.  1.  the  church  is  represented  by
'  a  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon
1  under  her  feet.  The  church  is  compared  to  a
\  woman,  as  she  is  the  spouse  of  Christ ;  and  as  the
woman  is  the  weaker  sex,  so  the  church  hath  al-
ways  been  the  weakest  part  of  the  world.  The
anlichristian  church  is  also  represented  as  a
'  woman  sitting  on  a  scarlet  coloured  beast,  full  of
;  names  of  blasphemy,  Rev.  17.  3.

Gen.  2.  22.  and  the  rib  of  the  man  made  he  a  w.

23.  she  shall  be  called  tv.  she  was  taken  out  of  man

3.  15.  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  w.

'  24.  5.  peradventure  the  w.  will  not  come,  39.

1  44.  let  the  same  be  the  w.  the  Lord  hath  appointed
Exod.  21.  22.  if  men  strive  and  hurt  a  w.  w  ith  child
Lev.  18.  23.  nor  shall  a  w.  stand  before  a  beast
20.  13.  it  a  man  lie  with  mankind  as  with  a  w.
Sum.  5.  18.  he  shall  set  the  w.  before  the  Lord,  30.

27.  the  w.  shall  be  a  curse  among  her  people

25.  6.  brought  a  Midianitish  70.  in  the  sight  of  Moses
;  8.  Phinehas  thrust  the  w.  through  her  belly

30.  3.  if  a  w.  vow  a  vow  to  Lord  and  bind  herself
31. 17.  now  kill  every  w.  that  hath  known  man
Deut.  22.  14.  1  took  this  w.  and  found  her  not  a  maid
Tosh.  2.  4.  the  u  .  took  the  two  men  and  hid  them

6.  22.  go,  and  bring  out  thence  (he  w.  Eahab
Judy.  4.  9.  Lord  shall  sell  Sisera  into  the  hand  of  w,

9.  53.  a  certain  w.  cast  a  piece  of  a  millstone  upon
Abimelech’s  head,  brake  his  scull,  2  Ham.  11.21.
54.  that  men  say  not  of  me,  a  w.  slew  him

13.  11.  art  thou  the  man  that  spakest  to  the  w.  ?

14.  3.  is  there  never  a  w.  among  all  my  people?

16.  4.  Samson  loved  a  w.  in  the  valley  of  Sorek

19.  26.  then  came  the  w.  in  the  dawning  of  the  day
Ruth  1.  5.  the  w.  was  left  of  her  sons  and  husband

3.  11.  for  my  people  know  thou  art  a  virtuous  w.

4.  11.  the  Lord  make  the  w.  like  Rachel  and  Leah
Sam.  1.15.  llannah  said,  1  am  w.  ofsorrowful  spirit

26.  1  am  to.  that  stood  by  thee  here,  praying

2.  20.  Lord  give  thee  seed  of  this  w.  for  the  loan

28.  7-  seek  me  a  w.  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit
:  Sam.  3.  8.  thou  chargest  me  concerning  this  w.
11.2.  from  the  roof  David  saw  a  w.  wasbiug  herself

13.  17.  put  now  this  w.  out  from  me  and  bolt  door
17-  19.  the  w.  spread  a  covering  over  the  well

20.  22.  then  w.  went  unto  all  people  in  her  w  isdom
Kings  3.  17.  1  and  this  w.  dwell  in  one  house

14.  5.  she  shall  feign  herself  to  be  another  w.

17. ,17-  the  son  of  the  w.  fell  sick  and  died

Kings  4.  8.  went  to  Shunem,  where  was  a  great  w .
6.26.  there  cried  a  w.  saying,  help,  my  lord,  O  king

8.  5.  this  is  the  w.  II  9.  34.  see  this  cursed  w.

'  Chron.  24.  7-  the  sons  of  Athaliah  that  wicked  w.
rob  31.  9.  if  my  heart  have  been  deceived  by  a  w.
°sal.  48.  6.  pain  as  of  a  w.  in  travail.  La.  13.  8  I
21.3.126.  17 -Jer.  4.  31.16.  24.113.  21.1

22.  23.130.  6.|31.  8.148.  41.149.  22,  24.

I  50.  43.

arot.  6.  24.  to  keep  thee  from  the  evil  w,

7.  10.  behold  there  met  him  a  w.  subtile  of  heart

9.  13.  a  foolish  w.  is  clamorous,  she  is  simple

12.  4.  a  virtuous  w.  is  a  crown  to  her  husband,  31. 10.
14.  1.  every  wisea.  buildeth  her  house  but  foolish

21.  9.  than  with  a  brawling  w.  in  a  wide  house,  19.

31.  10.  who  can  find  a  virtuous  to.  ?  price  rubies
30.  a  u.  that  fears  the  Lord  shall  be  praised


Eccl.  7.  26.  the  w.  whose  heart  ts  snares  and  nets
28.  but  a  w.  among  all  those  have  1  not  found
Isa.  42.  14.  now  will  1  cry  like  a  travailing  w.

45.  10.  or  to  the  w.  what  hast  thou  brought  forth  ?
49.  15.  can  a  w.  forget  her  sucking  child  ?

54.  6.  the  Lord  hath  called  thee  as  a  w.  forsaken
Jer.  6.  2.  likened  daughter  of  Zion  to  a  delicate  w.
31.  22.  created  a  new  thing,  a  w.  compass  a  man
Lam. 1.17 .Jerusalem  is  a  menstruous  to. among  them
Ezek.  16.  30.  the  woikofan  imperious  whorish  w.

23.  44.  they  weut  in  unto  her,  as  they  go  in  loazw.
36.  17 .their  way  as  the  uncleanness  ot  a  removed  w.

Hos.  3.  1.  go  yet,  love  a  w.  beloved  of  her  friend
13.  13.  the  sorrows  of  a  travailing  w.  shall  come
upon  him,  he  is  an  unwise  son,  Mic.  4.  9,  10.
Zech.  5.  7-  this  is  a  to.  that  sits  in  the  ephah
Mat.  5.  28.  whoso  looketh  on  a  w.  to  lust  after  her

9.  20.  a  w.  which  was  diseased  with  an  issue  of

blood  twelve  years,  Mark  5.  25.  Luke  8.  43.
13.  33.  leaven,  which  a  to.  took  and  hid  in  meal
15.  28.  O  w.  great  is  thy  faith,  he  it  to  thee  as  thou
22.27.  unto  the  seventh,  and  last  of  all  the  w.

died  also,  Mark  12.  22.  Luke  20.  32.
26.  10.  Jesus  said,  why  trouble  ye  the  w.  ?

13.  this  that  this  w.  hath  done  shall  be  told
Mark  10.  12.  if  a  w.  shall  put  away  her  husband
Luke  7-  39.  who  and  what  manner  of  w.  is  this  ?

44.  Jesus  said  unto  Simon,  seest  thou  this  w.  ?

13. 16.  ought  not  this  w.  being  a  daughter  of  Abrah.
John  2.  4.  w.  what  have  1  to  do  with  thee  ?

4.  9.  askest  drink  ot  me  who  am  a  w.  of  Samaria  ?
39.  many  believed  on  him  for  the  saying  of  the  w.
8.  3.  brought  to  him  a  w.  taken  in  adultery,  4.

10.  when  Jesus  saw  none  but  the  w.  he  said
19.  26.  he  saith  to  his  mother,  10.  behold  thy  son
Acts  9.36.  Dorcas,  this  to.  was  full  of  good  works
17.  34.  and  a  w.  named  Damaris  believed
Rom.  1.  27.  men  leaving  the  natural  use  of  the  w.

7.  2.  the  w.  that  hath  an  husband  is  bound
1  Cor.  7.  1.  it  is  good  for  a  man  not  to  touch  a  w.

2.  let  every  w.  have  her  own  husband

11.  5.  but  every  w.  that  prayeth  uncovered

6.  if  the  w.  be  not  covered,  let  her  be  shorn

7.  but  the  w.  is  the  glory  of  the  man

8.  man  is  not  ot  the  w.  but  the  w.  of  the  man

9.  man  not  for  the  w.  but  the  hi.' for  the  man

10.  the  w.  ought  to  have  power  on  her  head

11.  nevertheless,  neither  is  the  man  without  the

w.  nor  the  to.  without  the  man  in  the  Lord

12.  as  the  w.  is  of  the  man,  so  is  the  man  by  the  w.
13. is  it  comely  for  a  to.  to  pray  to  God  uncovered  ?
15.  it  a  w.  have  long  hair,  it  is  a  glory  to  her

Gal.  4.  4.  God  sent  forth  his  Son  made  of  a  to.

1  1'hess.  5.  3.  then  destruc.  cometh  as  travail  on  a  w.

1  Tim.  2.  12.  1  suffei  not  a  w.  to  teach  or  usurp

14.  the  w.  being  deceived,  was  in  the  transgression
Rev.  2.  20.  thou  sufferest  that  to.  Jezebel  to  teach

12.  1.  there  appeared  w.  clothed  w ith  the  sun
6.  the  w.  tied  ||  16.  the  earth  helped  the  w.

17.  and  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  to.

17.  3.  1  saw  a  w.  sit  on  a  scarlet-coloured  beast
6.  a  w.  drunken  ||  7.  1  will  tell  mystery  of  the  w.

See  Born,  Man,  Strange.

Young  WOMAN,

Ruth  4.  12.  let  thy  house  be  like  that  Of  Pharez,  of
the  seed  which  Ld. shall  give  thee  of  thisi'caw  w.
WOMANKIND.

Lev.  18.  22.  shalt  not  lie  with  mankind  as  with  w.
WOMB.

Gen.  25.  23.  Lord  said,  two  nations  are  in  thy  w.

24.  behold,  there  were  twins  in  her  w.  38.  27.

29.  31.  Lord  opened  Leah’s  w.  ||30.  22.  Rachel’s  a.
49.  25.  bless  with  blessings  of  breasts,  and  Of  w.

Exod.  13.  2.  whatsoever  openeth  the  w.  is  mine
Sum.  8.  16.  the  Levites  are  given  me,  instead  of
such  as  open  every  to.  even  of  the  first-bat  n
Judg.  13.  5.  he  shall  be  a  Nazarite  from  the  w.  7.
Ruth  1.  11.  are  there  yet  any  more  sons  in  rr.y  w.  ?

1  Sam.  1.  5.  but  the  Lord  had  shut  up  her  w.  6.

Job  3.  11.  why  died  I  not  from  the  w.?

10.  18.  why  hast  thou  brought  me  forth  of  the  w.  ?
24.20.  the  w.  shall  forget  him,  he  shall  be  no  more
31. 15.  did  not  he  that  made  thee  inw.  make  him  ?
38.  8.  brake  forth  as  if  it  had  issued  out  of  the  w.

29.  out  of  whose  w.  came  the  ice  ?

Psal.  22.  9.  but  thou  art  he  who  took  me  out  of  the  w.

10.  I  was  cast  upon  thee  from  the  w.  art  my  God
58.  3.  the  wicked  are  estranged  from  the  w.

71.  6.  by  thee  have  I  been  holden  up  from  the  w.
110.  3.  thy  people  willing,  from  w.  of  the  morning
Prov.  30.  16.  the  barren  to.  says  not,  it  is  enough
31.  2.  what,  my  son  ?  and  what,  the  son  of  my  to.  ?
Eccl.  11.5.  thou  knowest  not  how  bones  grow' in  w.
Isa.  44.  2.  Lord  formed  thee  from  the  w.  24.  1  49.  5.
46.  3.  O  Israel  which  are  carried  from  the  w.

48.  8.  wastcalled  a  transgressor  from  the  w.

49.  1.  the  Lord  hath  called  me  from  the  w.

15.  she  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of  her  w.

66.  9.  shall  1  cause  to  bring  forth,  and  shut  the  w.  ?

Jer.  1.  5.  before  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  w.

20.  17.  because  he  slew  me  not  from  the  to.  or  my
mother’s  to.  to  be  always  great  with  me

18.  why  came  I  forth  of  the  to.  to  see  labour  ?
Ezek.  20.26.  pass  thro’  the  fire  all  that  openeth  the  w.

1  Jos. 9. 11.  their  glory  shall  flee  from  the  birth  and  w.

14.  give  them  a  miscarrying  w.  and  dry  breasts
12.  3.  he  took  his  brother  hv  the  heel  in  the  w.

Luke  1.  31.  behold,  thou  shalt  conceive  in  thy  w,  \

41.  the  babe  leaped  in  her  w.  for  joy,  44.

2.  21 .  name  Jesus,  before  he  was  conceived  in  the  w.
23.  every  male  that  openeth  the  w.  shall  be  holy
See  Fruit,  Mother.

WOMBS.

Gen.  20.  18.  the  I,ord  had  fast  closed  up  all  the  w.
Luke  23.29.  blessed  are  the  w.  that  never  bare
WOMEN.

Gen.  24.  11.  the  time  that  w.  go  out  to  draw  water
Exod.  15.  20.  all  the  w.  went  out  after  Miriam
35.  25.  all  the  to.  that  were  wise- hearted  did  spin
26.  all  the  w.  whose  heart  stirred  them  up
lev.  26.  26.  ten  w.  shall  bake  your  bread  in  one  oven
Num.  31. 15.  Moses  said,  have  ye  saved  all  w. alive  ?


Deut.  20. 14.  the  w.  and  little  ones  fake  captives
Josh.  8.  35.  Joshua  read  the  law  before  the  a.

Judg.  5.  24.  blessed  above  to.  shall  Jael  wife  of  Heb.

21.  14.  they  saved  alive  of  the  w.  of  Jabesh-Gilead

1  Sam.  2.  22.  Eli  heard  how  they  lay  with  thew.

15. 33.  as  thy  sword  hath  made  to.  childless,  so  shal.

18.  6.  the  w.  came  out  of  the  cities  of  Israel

7-  the  w.  answered  one  another  as  they  played
21.  4.  if  the  young  men  kept  themselves  from  w.

5.  of  a  truth  w.  have  been  kept  from  us  three  day
30.  2.  the  Amalekites  had  taken  the  w.  captives

2  Sam.  1.  26.  thy  love  to  me  passing  the  love  of  w.

15.  16.  the  king  left  ten  w.  to  keep  the  house

1  Kings  3.  16.  then  came  two  w.  that  were  harlots

2  Kings  8. 12.  and  rip  up  their  w.  with  child,  15.  16.

23.  7.  where  the  w.  wove  hangings  for  the  grove
Neh.  13.  26.  even  him  did  outlandish  w.  cause  to  sis
Esth.  1.9.  Vashti  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  the  w

2.  17.  Ahashut-rus  loved  Esther  above  all  the  w.

3.  13.  to  slay  all  Jews,  little  children  and  w.  8.  11
Job  42.  15.  no  to.  found  so  fair  as  Job’s  daughters
Ps.  45.  9.  king’s  daughters  among  thy  honourab.  u.
Prov.  31.3.  give  not  thy  strength  to  to.

Cant.  1.  8.  O  thou  fairest  among  w.  5.  9.  1  6.  1.

Isa.  3. 12.  as  for  my  people,  w.  rule  over  them
4. 1.  in  that  day  seven  fo.  shall  take  hold  of  one  man

19.  16.  in  that  day  Egypt  shall  be  like  to  w.

27.  11.  the  BJ.cotne,  and  set  them  on  fire

32.  9.  rise  up, ye  w.  that  are  at  ease,  hear  my

10.  careless  w.  |l  1 1.  tremble,  ye  w.  be  troubled
Jer.  7. 18.  the  w.  knead  their  dough  to  make  cakes
9.  17- call  for  the  mourning  and  cunning  to.

20.  yet  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.  O  ye  w.

38.  22.  all  the  w.  left  shall  be  brought  to  the  king
44.  24.  Jeremiah  said  to  all  the  w.  hear  the  word
50.37.  they  shall  become  w.  and  shall  be  robbed
51.  30.  the  mighty  men  of  Babylon  became  as  w.
Lam.  2.  20.  shall  the  to.  eat  children  ot  a  span  long  ?

4.  10.  the  pitiful  w.  have  sodden  their  children

5. 11.  they  ravished  w.  in  Zion,  and  maids  in  Judaj
Exek.  8.  14.  there  sat  w.  weeping  for  Tammuz

9.  6.  slay  utterly  maids,  little  children,  and  w.

13.  18.  woe  to  to.  that  sew  pillows  to  all  arm-hole.

16.  34.  the  contrary  is  in  thee  from  other  w.

38.  I  will  judge  thee  as  w.  that  break  wedlock

23.  2.  there  were  two  w.  daughters  of  one  mother
45.  judge  after  the  manner  of  w.  that  shed  blood
48.  w.  may  be  taught  not  to  do  after  your  lewdnest

Dan.  11. 17.  he  shall  give  him  the  daughter  of  w.

37.  nor  shall  he  regard  the  desire  of  w.  nor  any  god
Hos.  13.  16.  their  to.  with  child  shall  be  ripped  up
Amos  1.  13.  bee.  they  have  ripped  up  to.  with  child
Mtc.  2.  9.  the  to.  of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out
Nah.  3.  13.  thy  people  in  the  midst  of  thee  are  to.
Zech.  5.  9.  there  came  out  two  to.  and  had  wings

8.  4.  old  to.  shall  dwell  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem
14.2.  the  houses  rifled,  the  w.  shall  be  ravished
Mat.  11.  11.  among  them  that  are  born  of  w.  not
risen  a  greater  than  John  Baptist,  Luke  7.  28.

14.  21.  Jesus  fed  5,000  men,  besides  to.  15.  38.

24.  41.  two  w.  grinding  at  the  mill,  I.uke  17.  35.

27 , 55.  and  many  w.  were  then  beholding  afar  oft
Luke  1.  28.  blessed  art  thou  among  w.  42.

24.  22.  certain  to.  also  made  us  astonished
24.  and  found  it  even  so  as  the  w.  had  said
Acts  1. 14.  these  all  continued  in  prayer  with  the  w.

13.  50.  but  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  devout  w.

16. 13.  we  speak  to  the  w.  which  resorted  thither

17.  4.  of  the  chief  w.  not  a  few  believed,  12.

Rom.  1.  26.  their  a1,  did  change  the  natural  use

1  Cor.  14.  34.  let  your  w.  keep  silence  in  churches
35.  it  is  a  shame  for  w.  to  speak  in  the  church
Phil-  4.  3.  help  those  w.  which  laboured  with  me

1  Tim.  2.  9.  w.  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel

10.  which  becometh  to.  professing  godliness

11.  let  the  to.  learn  in  silence  with  all  subjection

5.  2.  entreat  the  elder  w.  as  mothers,  younger  as

14.  I  will  therefore  that  the  younger  w,  marry

2  Tim.  3.  6.  lead  captive  silly  w.  laden  with  sins
lit.  2.  3.  the  aged  to.  behave  as  becometh  holiness

4.  they  may  teach  the  younger  w.  to  be  sober
Heb.  11.  35.  to.  received  their  dead  raised  to  lifeaga,

1  Pet.  3.  5.  after  this  manner  the  holy  ro.  adorned
Rev.  9.  8.  they  had  hair  as  hair  of  w.  their  teeth  as
14.  4.  these  are  they  that  are  not  defiled  with  w.
See  Children,  Men,  Singing,  Strange.

W  O  M  EN  -servants.

Gen.  20.  14.  Abimelech  gave  w.-servants  to  Abrah.
32.5.  Jacob  had  men  servants  and  w.-servants
WON.

1  Chron.  26.  27.  out  of  the  spoils  w.  in  battles
Prov.  18.  19.  a  brother  ofiended  is  harder  to  be  w.

1  Pet.  3. 1.  may  be  to.  by  the  conversation  of  wive*

WONDER.

Deut.  13.  1.  if  a  prophet  give  thee  a  sign  or  a  w.

2.  and  the  sign  of  the  to.  come  to  pass

28.  46.  they  shall  be  upon  thee  for  a  sign  and  a  to.

2  Chr.  32. 31.  who  sent  to  him  to  inquire  of  the  to.

Ps.  71.  7.  1  am  as  a  w.  to  many,  thou  art  my  refuge
Isa.  20.  3.  like  as  Isaiah  walked  barefoot  tor  a  w.

29.  14. 1  will  do  a  marvellous  work  and  a  to.

Acts  3. 10.  they  were  filled  with  to.  and  amazement
Rev.  12. 1.  there  appeared  a  great  w.  in  heaven.  3

WONDER,  Verb.

Isa.  13.  t  8.  they  shall  to.  one  at  another

29.  9.  stay  yourselves  and  to.  cry  ye  out.  and  cry
Jer.  4.  9.  the  priests  and  the  prophets  shall  to,

Hab.  1.  5.  behold  ye,  regard  and  w.  marvellously
Acts  13.  41.  behold,  ye  aespisers,  to.  and  perish
Rev.  17.  8.  they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  to.
WONDERFUL.

Deut.  28.  59.  the  Lord  will  make  thy  plagues  w.

2  Sam.  1.  26.  thy  love  to  me  was  w.  passing  love  of
2  Chron.  2.  9.  house  1  am  to  build  shall  be  a',  great
Job  42.  3.  1  have  uttered  things  too  w.  for  me
Ps.  119. 129.  thy  testimonies  w.  my  soul  keep  them
131. 1 1.  nor  do  I  exercise  myselt  in  things  too  w.
139.  6.  such  knowledge  is  too  w.  for  me
Prov.  30. 18.  there  be  three  things  that  are  too  w.

La.  9.  6.  his  name  shall  be  called  W.  Counsellor
25  1.0  Ld.  1  will  praise  thee,  hast  done  w.  thing?
2d  29.  from  the  Lord  of  hosts  who  is  v.  in  coutna

u  2  563


woo


W  O  R


W  O  R


r.  5.  .30.  a  tv.  tning  is  committed  in  tiie  land
an.  8. 1 13.  a  saint  said  to  the  w.  numberer
Mat.  21. 15.  when  they  saw  the  zc.  things  he  did
See  Works.
WONDERFULLY.

1  Sam.  6. 6.  when  he  had  wrought  tv.  among  them
Psal.  139. 14.  1  will  praise  thee  for  I  am  zc.  made
Lam.  1.  9.  therefore  Jerusalem  came  down  tv.

Dan.  8.  24.  lie  shall  destroy  zc.  and  shall  prosper
WONDERS.

Exod.  3.  20.  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand  and  smite
Egypt  with  all  my  tv.  7.  3. 1  11.  9.  Deut.  6.
22.  I  7.  19. 1  26.  8. 1  34. 11.

4.  21.  see  thou  do  those  zc.JI  11.  10.  did  these  tv.  ■
15.  11.  the  Lord  is  fearful  in  praises,  doing  tv.
Deut.  4.  34.  hath  God  assayed  to  take  a  nation  by  tv.
Josh.  3. 5.  to  morrow  the  Lord  will  do  zc.  among  you

1  Chron.  16.  12.  remember  his  tv.  Psal.  105.  5.

Neh.  9. 10.  thou  shew;edst  tv.  upon  Pharaoh

17.  nor  were  mindful  of  thy  tv.  Psal.  78.  11,  43.
Job  9. 10.  God  doth  tv.  without  number
Psal.  77. 11.  surely  l  will  remember  thy  tv.  of  old
14.  thou  art  the  God  that  dost  tv.

88.  10.  wilt  thou  shew  tv.  to  the  dead  ?

12.  shall  thy  zc.  be  known  in  the  dark  ?

89.  5.  the  heavens  shall  praise  thy  tv.  O  Lord
96.  3.  declare  his  tv.  among  all  people
105.27.  they  shewed  his  tv.  in  the  land  of  Ham
106.  7.  our  fathers  understood  not  thy  tv.  in  Egypt
107. 24.  these  see  his  works  and  his  tv.  in  the  deep

135.  9.  who  sent  tv.  into  the  midst  of  Egypt

136.  4.  to  him  who  alone  doth  great  tv.

Isa.  8. 18.  1  and  the  children  are  for  tv.  in  Israel
Jer.  32.  20.  who  hath  set  signs  and  to.  in  land  of  Eg.

21.  and  hast  brought  forth  thy  people  with  tv.
Dan.  4.  2.  1  thought  good  to  shew  the  signs  and  tv.

3.  how  great  are  his  signs  !  how  mighty  his  tv. !

6.  27.  he  worketh  tv.  in  heaven  and  in  earth

12.  6.  how  lone  shall  it  be  to  the  end  of  these  to.  ?
Joel  2.  30.  I  w  ill  shew  tv.  in  heaven.  Acts  2.  19.
Mat.  24.24.  there  shall  arise  false  Christs  and  false
prophets,  and  shall  shew  great  tv.  Mark  13.  22.
John  4.  48.  Jesus  said,  except  ye  see  signs  and  tv.
Acts 2.  22.  Jesus,  a  man  approved  of  God  by  tv.

43.  fear  came  on  every  soul,  many  signs  and  to.

were  done  by  the  apostles,  5. 12.  |  14.  3.  1  15.  12.
4.  30.  that  tv.  may  be  done  by  the  name  of  Jesus
6.8.  Stephen  did  great  tv.  among  the  people

7.  36.  after  he  had  shewed  tv.  in  the  land  of  Egypt
Horn.  15.  19.  to  make  Gentiles  obedient  through  tv.

2  Cor.  12. 12.  the  signs  of  an  apostle  wrought  in  to.

2  Thess.  2.9.  whose  coming  is  with  signs  and  lying  zc.
Heb.  2. 4.  God  also  bearing  witness  with  signs  and  tv.
Rev.  13. 13.  he  doth  great  tv.  in  the  sight  of  men
WONDERED.

Jsa.  59. 16.  he  tv.  there  was  no  intercessor
63.  5.  and  1  tv.  that  there  was  none  to  uphold
Zech.  3.  8.  hear  now,  for  they  are  men  to.  at
Luke  2. 18.  all  they  that  heard  it  tv.  at  things  told
4.  22.  they  all  to.  at  the  gracious  words
24.41.  while  they  believed  not  for  joy,  and  to.
ActsT.  31.  Moses  tv.  ||  8.  13.  Simon  Magus  a.’.

Rev.  13.3.  all  the  world  tv.  after  the  beast
17.  6.  when  1  saw  her,  I  tv.  with  great  admiration
WONDERING.

Gen.  24. 21.  the  man  ».  at  her,  held  his  peace
Luke  24. 12.  Peterzc.  at  that  which  was  come  to  pass
Acts  3. 11.  all  the  people  ran  together  greatly  tv.
WONDROUS.

1  Chron.  16.  9.  sing  psalms,  talk  you  of  all  his  tv.

wmrks,  Psal.  26.7-1  105.2.  |  119.27.1  145.5.
Job  37. 14.  consider  the  tv.  works  of  God
16.  dost  thou  know  the  to.  works  of  him  ?

Psal.  71. 17.  hitherto  have  1  declared  thy  to.  works
72.  18.  the  God  who  only  doth  tv.  things,  86.  10.

75. 1.  that  thy  name  is  near,  thy  tv.  works  declare
78.32.  they  believed  not  for  his  tv.  works
106.22.  who  had  done  tv.  wmrks  in  the  land  of  Ham

119. 18.  that  I  may  behold  tv.  things  out  of  thy  law
Jer.  21.  2.  he  will  deal  according  to  his  tv.  works

WONDEROUSLY.

Judg.  13.19.  the  angel  did  to.  Manoah  looked  on
Joel  2.  26.  the  Ixtrd  hath  dealt  tv.  with  you
WONT.

Exod.  21 . 29.  if  the  ox  were  tv.  to  push  with  his  horns
Num.  22.  30.  was  1  ever  tv.  to  do  so  to  thee  ?

1  Sam.  30.  31.  where  David  and  his  men  w.  to  haunt

2  Sam.  20. 18.  the}’  were  tv.  to  speak  in  old  time
Pan.  3. 19.  seven  times  more  than  to.  to  be  heated
Mat.  27- 15.  the  governor  was  tv.  to  release
Mark  10. 1.  as  he  was  tv.  he  taught  them  again
Luke  HQ,.  39.  he  went  as  he  was  tv.  to  the  mount
Acts  16. 13.  went  where  prayer  was  zc.  to  be  made

WOOD.

Gen.  22. 6.  Abraham  took  tv.  and  put  it  on  Isaac
7.  Isaac  said,  behold  the  fire  and  the  tv.

Num.  13.20.  whether  there  be  tv.  therein  or  not
31.  20.  purify  all  things  that  are  made  of  tv.

Deut.  10. 1.  come  up,  and  make  thee  an  ark  of  to.
19.  5.  when  a  man  goeth  into  the  tv.  to  hew  w.

29. 11.  from  the  hewer  of  thy  tv.  unto  the  drawer  of
thy  water,  Josh.  9. 21, 23,  27.  Jer.  46. 22.
Josh.  17-18.  the  mountain  is  a  to.  cut  it  down

1  Sam.  6.  14.  and  they  clave  the  to.  of  the  cart
14.  25.  all  they  of  the  land  came  to  a  to.

23.  16.  Jonathan  went  to  David  into  the  tv.

2  Sam.  18. 8.  the  tv.  devoured  more  people  that  day

1  K  ings  18. 23.  lay  the  bullock  on  u'.  and  no  fire  und.

2  Kings  2.24.  there  came  two  she-bears  out  of  the  tv.

1  Chron.  29.  2.  1  have  prepared  tv.  for  things  of  tv.
Psal.  80.  13.  tne  boar  out  of  the  to.  doth  waste  it

132.  6.  we  found  it  in  the  fields  of  the  to.

141.  7-  as  when  one  cleaveth  tv.  upon  the  earth
Prov.  26. 20.  where  no  tv.  is,  there  the  fire  goeth  out
21.  as  tv.  to  fire,  so  is  a  contentious  man  to  kin.  fire
Eccl.  10.  9.  he  that  cleaveth  to.  shall  be  in  danger
Jsa.  10.15.  staff  should  lift  up  itself  as  if  it  were  now).
30.  33.  the  pile  thereof  is  fire  and  much  to.

45.  20.  they  that  set  up  the  tv.  of  their  image
60. 17.  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  for  to.  brass
Jer.  5. 14. 1  will  make  my  words  fire,  this  people  to.

7. 18.  the  children  gather  sc.  the  fathers  kindle  fire

664


Jer.  28. 13.  thou  hast  L  oken  the  yokes  of  to.  but  shalt
Ezek.  15.  3.  shall  to.  be  taken  thereof  to  do  any  work  '

24.  10.  heap  on  to.  ||  39.  10.  no  tv.  out  of  the  field
Mic.  7.  14.  the  flock  which  dwell  solitary  in  the  to.
Hab.  2.  19.  woe  to  him  that  saith  to  the  tv.  awake
Hag.  1.  8.  go  up,  bring  tv.  and  build  the  house
Zech.  12.  6.  like  an  hearth  of  fire  among  the  to.

1  Cor.  3.  12.  if  any  build  on  this  foundation,  tv.  hay

2  Tim.  2.  20.  but  also  vessels  of  tv.  and  earth

See  Offeri ng,  Stone.

WOODS.

Ezek.  34.  25.  they  shall  sleep  safely  in  the  tv.
WOOF.

Lev.  13.  48.  if  the  plague  be  in  the  warp  or  zc.

51.  if  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  warp  or  the  tv.

52.  burnt  that  garment,  whether  warp  or  to.

53  if  the  plague  be  not  spread,  wash  the  tv.  58.

56  then  he  shall  rend  it  out  of  the  warp  or  tv.

59.  this  is  the  law  of  leprosy  in  the  warp  or  tv.

WOOL.

Judg.  6.  37.  1  w’ill  put  a  fleece  of  tv.  in  the  floor
2  Kings  3.  4.  Mesha  rendered  100,000  rams  with  tv.
Psal.  147.  16.  the  Lord  giveth  snow  like  tv.

Prov.  31.  13.  she  seeketh  tv.  and  flax,  and  worketh
Isa.  1.  18.  tho’ your  sins  like  crimson,  shall  be  as  to.
51.  8.  worm  shall  eat  them  like  tv.  but  my  right.
Ezek.  27-  18.  Damascu  was  thy  merchant  in  tv.

34.  3.  ye  eat  the  fiat,  ye  clothe  you  with  the  tv.

44.  17.  and  no  tv.  shall  come  upon  them
Dan.  7-  9.  the  hair  of  his  head  like  tv.  Rev.  1.  14.
IIos.  2. 5.  will  go  after  my  lovers  that  give  me  my»,
9.  1  will  recover  my  to.  and  my  flax  given  to  cover
WOOLLEN.

Lev.  1.3.  47.  the  garment,  whether  tv.  or  linen,  59.
48.  the  leprosy  be  in  the  warp  or  woof  of  tv.  52.
19- 19.  nor  shall  a  garment  mingled  of  linen  and  tv.

come  upon  thee,  Deut.  22. 11.
WORD,

In  Hebrew,  Dabar  ;  in  Greek,  'Puua,  or  Aoyor.  It
signifies,  1 .  The  eternal  Son  of  God,  the  uncre¬
ated  Wisdom,  the  second  Person  of  the  most  holy
Trinity ,  equal  and  consubstantial  with  the  Father.
The  evangelist  John,  chap.  1.1.  more  expressly
than  any  other,  has  opened  the  mystery  of  this
WORD,  when  he  tells  us,  In  the  beginning  was
the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the
Word  was  God.  The  same  was  in  the  beginning
with  God.  All  things  were  made  by  him,  and
without  him  was  not  any  thing  made  that  was
made.  Christ  Jesus  is  called  the  WORD,  (1)  In
respect  of  his  person,  he  being  the  express  image  of
the  Father,  as  we  are  told,  Heb.  1.  3.  as  our  words
are  of  our  thoughts.  (2)  In  respect  of  his  office,
because  the  Father  made  known  his  will  to  the
church  in  all  ages  by  him,  as  we  declare  our  minds
one  to  another  by  our  words,  John  3.  34.  (3)  Be¬
cause  the  Messiah  was  called  The  Word  of  God
by  the  Jews.  The  Chaldee  Paraphrases,  the  most
ancient  Jewish  writers  extant,  generally  make
use  of  the  word  MEMRA,  which  signifies  the
Word,  in  those  places  where  Moses  puts  the  name
Jehovah.  And  it  is  generally  thought,  that  under
this  term  the  Paraphrasis  would  intimate  the
Hon  of  God,  the  second  Person  of  the  Trinity.
Now  their  testimony  is  so  much  the  more  con¬
siderable,  as  having  lived  before  Christ,  or  at  the
time  of  Christ,  they  are  irrefragable  witnesses
of  the  sentiments  of  their  nation  concerning  this
article,  since  their  Targum,  or  Explication,  has
always  been,  and  still  is,  in  universal  esteem  among
the  Jews.  And  as  they  ascribe  to  Memra  all  the
attributes  of  the  Deity,  it  is  concluded  from  thence,
that  they  believed  the  divinity  of  the  WOR  D.

They  say,  that  it  was  MEMRA,  or  the  WORD,
which  created  the  world  ;  which  appeared  to  Moses
on  mount  Sinai  ;  which  gave  him  the  law  ;  which
spoke  to  him  face  to  face  ;  which  brought  Israel
out  of  Egypt :  which  marched  before  the  people;
which  wrought  all  those  miracles  which  are  re¬
corded  in  the  book  of  Exodus.  It  was  the  same
If  ORD  that  appeared  to  Abraham  in  the  plain
of  Mature  ;  that  was  seen  of  Jacob  at  Beth  el,  to
whom  Jacob  made  his  vow,  arid  acknowledged  as
God,  Gen.  28.  20.  If  God  will  be  with  me,  and
will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  &c.  then
shall  the  Lord  be  my  Goa.

II.  The  word  is  taken  for  what  is  written  in  the
sacred  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  Luke

11.  28.  Blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  word  of
God  and  keep  it.  Jam.  1.  22.  Be  ye  doers  of  the
word.  This  is  the  inspired  and  created  word.  111.
For  the  divine  law,  which  teaches  and  commands
good  things,  and  forbids  evil.  Psal.  119.  101.  I
have  refrained  my  feet  from  every  evil  way,  that
1  might  keep  thy  word.  This  is  the  word  of  pre¬
cept  or  commandment.  IV.  For  every  promise  of
God,  touching  any  good  things,  whether  tern;  oral  or
eternal.  Psal.  119.  25.  Quicken  thou  me  according
to  thy  word.  Bo  in  verses  38.  49-  Stablish  thy
word  unto  thy  servant,  who  is  devoted  to  thy
fear.  Remember  the  word  unto  thy  servant,  upon
which  thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope.  This  is  the
word  of  promise.  V .  For  prophecy,  or  vision.
Isa.  2.  1.  The  word  that  Isaiah  saw.  VI.  Word
also  signifies  the  command  of  God.  Psal.  147.18.
He  sendeth  out  his  word  and  melteth  them ;
speaking  of  the  ice.  One  word  shall  dissolve
them.  So  in  Luke  5.  5.  Nevertheless  at  thy  word
1  will  let  down  the  net.  It  was  thus  the  good
Centurion  said  to  Christ.  Wherefore  neither
thought  I  myself  worthy  to  come  uuto  thee  ;  but
say  in  a  word,  and  my  servant  shall  be  healed,
Luke  7*  7-  This  is  a  word  of  authority,  ordering
things  to  be  done  effectually.

In  Mat.  4.  3,  4.  the  devil  putting  our  Saviour  upon
an  nnecessary  proof  of  his  divinity,  and  a  dis¬
trust  of  God's  providence,  by  desiring  him  to  turn
the  stones  into  bread  ;  our  Saviour  answers  him,
that  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by
every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of
God  ;  that  is,  by  whatsoever  the  providence  of
God  shall  afford,  and  bless  for  out  support ;  yea,


a  man  may  live  by  Ins  power  and  will  only  wuhou
any  means  at  all,  if  God  so  please  ;  or  be  fed  by
raven  ,  as  Elijah  was ;  and  therefore  no  man
should  absolutely  rest  upon  the  means,  and,  with¬
out  warrant,  run  to  an  extraordinary  course  Jot
supply,  but  should  trust  in  God,  and  wait  on  him
to  provide  as  he  pleases.

Gen  37.  14.  go  and  bring  me  w.  again,  Mat.  2.  8.
44.  18.  O  ray  lord,  let  me  speak  a  w.  2  Sam.  14. 12.
Exod.  8.  13.  Lord  did  according  to  the  zc.of  Mosef

12.  35.  Israel  did  according  to  the  w.  of  Moses
32.  28.  Levi  did  according  to  the  w.  Lev.  10.  7.
Num.  13.  26.  they  brought  back  w.  unto  them

22.  8.  lodge  here,  I  will  bring  you  w.  Deut.  1.  22

20.  yet  the  w.  1  shall  say  to  thee,  that  do

35.  the  w.  I  shall  speak  [|  38.  the  w.  God  putteth

23.  5.  the  Lord  put  a  w.  in  Balaam’s  mouth
Deut.  1.  25.  they  brought  us  to,  again,  and  said

4.  2.  ye  shall  not  add  unto  the  to.  1  command  you
8.  3.  but  by  every  w.  that  proceedeth  out  of  the
mouth  of  God  doth  man  live,  1  at.  4.  4
15.  t  9.  beware  there  be  not  a  tv.  in  thy  heart

18.  20.  the  prophets  that  presume  to  speak  a  tv.

21.  how  shall  we  know  the  w.  ?  Jer.  28.  9.

21.  5.  by  their  w.  shall  every  controversy  be  tried
30.  14.  the  w.  is  nigh  thee,  Rom.  10.  8.

Josh.  1.  13.  remember  the  w.  Moses  commanded
8.  35.  there  was  not  a  w.  which  Joshua  read  not
14.  7.  1  brought  him  zc.  ||  22.  32.  brought  them  w.

1  Sam.  4.  1.  the  w.  of  Samuel  came  to  all  Israel  1

17.  +  30.  he  turned,  and  spake  after  the  same  w.

2  Sam.  3.  11.  he  could  not  answer  Abner  a  zc.

7.  7-  in  all  places  spake  1  a  zc.  1  Chron.  17.  6.

25.  the  zc.  thou  hast  spoken  concerning  thy  servant  1

15. 28.  till  there  come  zc.  from  you  to  certify  me

19.  10.  speak  ye  not  a  zc.  of  bringing  the  king

24.  4.  the  king’s  zc.  prevailed,  1  Chron.  21.  4.

1  Kings  2.  30.  Benaiah  brought  the  king  zc.  again,

2  Kings  22.  9,  20.  2  Chron.  34.  16,  28  I
42.  the  zc.  that  1  have  heard  is  good

8.  56.  hath  not  failed  one  zc.  of  all  his  promise

18.  21.  the  people  answered  not  a  zc.  Isa.  36.  21.

+  24.  all  tne  people  answered,  the  tv.  is  good

2  Kings  6.  18.  he  smote  according  to  the  zc.  of  Elisha
18.  28.  hear  the  zc.  of  the  great  king  of  Assyria

1  Chron.  16.  15.  mindful  of  the  zc.  which  he  com¬
manded  to  a  thousand  generations,  Fsal.  105.  8

21.  12.  advise  what  zc.  I  shall  bring  to  him
Neh.  l.  8.  remember  zc.  thou  commandedst  Moses
Esth.  1.  21.  he  did  according  to  w.  of  Memucan

7.  8.  as  the  zc.  went  out  of  the  king’s  mouth
Job  2.  13.  they  sat  down,  none  spake  a  zc.  to  Job
Psal.  17.  4.  by  zc.  of  thy  lips,  l  have  kept  me
68.  11.  the  Lord  gave  the  w.  many  published  it
119.  49.  remember  the  zc.  to  thy  servant,  on  which  ■

123.  mine  eyes  fail  for  the  zc.  of  thy  righteousness  i
139.  4.  there  is  not  a  zc.  in  my  tongue,  but  thou
Prov.  12.  25.  a  good  zc.  maketh  the  heart  glad

13.  13.  w;hoso  despiseth  the  zc.  shall  be  destroyed  j

14.  15.  simple  believeth  every  zc.  hut  the  prudent  ,

15.  23.  zc.  spoken  in  due  season,  how  good  is  it
18.  t  13.  he  that  returneth  a  zc.  before  he  hear  it

25.  11.  a  zc.  fitly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  isi

pictures  of  stive?  i
Etcl.  5.  +  2.  be  not  hasty  to  utter  any  ?c.  before  God  j

8.  4.  where  theze.  of  a  king  is,  there  is  power
Isa.  5.24.  they  despised  zc.  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel
8. 10.  speak  zc.  and  it  shall  not  stand,  God  with  us
9-  8.  the  L.  sent  azc.  to  Jacob,  it  lighted  on  Israe*  j

29.  21.  that  make  a  man  an  offender  for  a  zc.

30.  21.  thine  ears  shall  hear  a  zc.  behind  thee

41. 28.  there  was  no  counsellor  could  answer  a  zc.  I

44.  26.  that  confirmed)  the  zc.  of  his  servant

45.  23.  the  zc.  is  gone  out  of  my  mouth

50.  4.  T  should  know  how  to  speak  a  zc.  in  season
Jer.  5. 13.  become  wind,  and  the  zc.  is  not  in  them  !

9.  20.  let  your  ear  receive  zc.  of  his  mouth,  10. 1.  i
18.  18.  nor  shall  the  zc.  perish  from  the  prophet

23.  36.  for  every  man’s  zc.  shall  be  his  burden

26.  2.  speak  unto  them,  diminish  not  a  zc.

34.  5.  for  1  have  pronounced  the  zc.  saith  the  Lord
37.  17-  king  said,  is  there  any  zc.  from  the  Lord
44.  16.  as  for  the  zc.  thou  hast  spoken  unto  us
Ezek  3.  17.  therefore  hear  zc.  at  my  mouth,  33.  7.

12.  25.  the  zc.  that  I  shall  speak  shall  come  to  pass
28.  the  zc.  that  1  have  spoken  shall  be  done

13.  6.  that  they  would  confirm  the  zc.

33.30.  hear  what  is  zc.  that  cometh  from  the  Lord
Dan.  3.  28.  who  have  changed  the  king's  zc.

4.  17-  the  demand  is  by  the  tv.  of  the  holy  ones
31.  while  the  zc.  was  in  the  king's  mouth
Jonah  3.  6.  for  zc.  came  to  the  king  of  Nineveh
Hag.  2.  5.  according  to  the  zc.  1  covenanted  with  you
Mat.  8.  8.  speak  the  w.  only,  he  shall  be  healed’

12.  32.  whoso  speaketh  a  zc.  against  the  Son  of
man,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him,  Luke  12.10.

36.  of  every  idle  zc.  men  shall  give  account
13.19.  when  any  one  heat  eth  the  zc.  of  the  kingdom,

20.  22,23.  Murk  4.  16,  18,  20.  Luke  8. 15.

21.  for  when  tribulation  or  persecution  ariseth,
because  of  the  zc.  he  is  offended,  Mark  4.  17.
15.23.  Jesus  answered  Syropbenic .  woman  not  azc.
18.  16.  that  every  zc.  may  be  established,  HCor.  13. li.

22.  46.  no  man  w’as  able  to  answer  him  a  zc.

27.  14.  Jesus  answered  him  to  never  azc.

28.  8.  they  did  run  to  bring  his  disciples  zc.

Mark  4.  14.  the  sower  soweth  the  zc.

14.72.  Peter  called  to  mind  the  zc.  that  Jesus  sakVj

16.  20.  the  l.ord  confirming  the  zc.  with  signs
£«£e4.36.were  all  amazed,  say  ing.  what  azc.  is  thW
7.7-  say  in  a  w.  and  my  servant  shall  be  healed  j

24.  19.  Jesus  a  prophet  mighty  in  :c.  and  deed
John  1.  1.  in  the  beginning  was  the  IV.  and  the

W.  was  with  God,  and  the  IV.  was  God  '

14.  the  IV.  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us
2.  22.  they  believed  the  w.  that  Jesus  said,  4.  5 '.
12.  48.  zc.  1  have  spoken  shall  judge  him  in  last  day ,

14.  24.  the  zc.  which  you  hear  is  not  mine

15.  3.  ye  are  clean  through  the  zc.  1  spake  to  you
20.  remember  the  zc.  that  I  suid  unto  you

25.  that  zc.  might  be  fulfilled,  written  in  their  law

17.  20.  who  shall  believe  on  me  through  their  w.


WOR


W  O  R


WOR


Acts  10.  V>.  (lie  uk  which  God  sent  to  Israel
13.  15.  if  ye  have  any  tv.  of  exhortation,  say  on
26.  to  you  is  the  tv.  of  this  salvation  sent
15.  7- that  Gentiles,  by  my  mouth,  should  hearai.
17-  11.  they  received  the  tv.  with  ail  readiness
20.  .32.  1  commend  you  to  the  to.  of  his  grace
28.  25.  after  that  Paul  had  spoken  one  tv.

Horn.  10.  8.  that  is  the  w.  of  faith  which  we  preach
15.  18.  to  make  Gentiles  obedient  by  tv.  and  deed

1  Cor.  4.  20.  kingdom  of  G.  is  not  in  tv.  but  in  power
12.  8.  tv.  of  wisdom,  to  another  tv.  of  knowledge

2  Cor.  1 .  18.  our  tv.  toward  you  was  not  yea  and  nay

5.  19.  God  committed  to  us  the  tv.  of  reconciliation

10.  11.  such  as  we  are  in  tv.  by  letters  when  absent
Gal.  5.  14.  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  one  tv.

6.  6.  let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  7V.  communicate
Eph.  5.  26.  cleanse  with  washing  of  water  by  the  uk
Phil.  1.  14.  are  bold  to  speak  the  uk  without  fear

2.  16.  holding  forth  the  uk  of  life  to  rejoice  in  day
Co/.  1.  5.  heard  in  the  tv.  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel

3.  16.  let  the  tv.  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly
17.  whatsoever  ye  do  in  tv.  or  deed,  do  in  name

1  Thess.  1.  5.  our  gospel  come  not  to  you  in  uk  only
6.  having  received  the  tv.  in  much  affliction

2.  13.  ye  received  it  not  as  tv.  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in

truth  tv.  of  God  working  effectually  in  you

2  Thess.  2.  2.  or  be  troubled,  not  by  Spirit,  nor  by  tv.
15.  have  been  taught,  whether  by  tv.  or  our  epistle
17.  G.  comfort  and  stablish  you  in  every  good  w.

3.  14.  if  any  man  obey  not  our  tv.  by  tins  epistle

1  Tim.  4.  12.  be  thou  an  example  of  believers  in  tv.
5.  17-  they  who  labour  in  the  tv.  and  doctrine

2  Tim.  2.  17.  their  tv.  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker

4.  2.  preach  tv.  be  instant  in  season  out  of  season
Tit.  1.  9.  holding  fast  the  faithful  tv.  as  taught
Heb.  1.  3.  upholding  all  things  by  the  tv.  of  his  power

2.  2.  if  the  tv.  spoken  by  angels  was  stedfast

4.  2.  but  the  tv.  preached  did  not  profit  them

5.  13.  is  unskilful  in  the  tv.  of  righteousness

7. 28.  but  the  tv.  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  the  law

12.  19.  entreated  tv.  should  not  be  spoken  any  more

13.  22.  brethren,  suffer  the  to.  of  exhortation
Jam.  1.  21.  receive  with  meekness  the  ingrafted  tv.

22.  be  ye  doers  of  the  tv.  and  not  hearers  only

23.  if  any  be  a  hearer  of  the  tv.  and  not  a  doer

3.  2.  if  any  man  offend  not  in  tv.  is  a  perfect  man

1  Pet.  2.  2.  as  babes  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  tv.

8.  even  to  them  who  stumble  at  the  tv.  being
3.  1.  if  any  obey  not  the  tv.  may  without  the  tv.

2  Pet.  1.  19.  we  nave  a  more  sure  tv.  of  prophecy
3.  7.  the  heavens  by  the  same  tv.  are  kept  in  store

1  John  1.  1.  our  hands  have  handled  the  tv.  of  life

3.  18.  let  us  not  love  in  tv.  but  in  deed  and  truth
5.7.  the  Father,  the  TV.  and  the  Holy  Ghost  are  one

Rev.  3.  10.  because  thou  hast  kept  tv.  of  my  patience
12*11.  they  overcame  by  the  tv.  of  their  testimony
WORD  of  God.

1  Sam.  9.  27-  that  I  may  shew  thee  the  tv.  of  God
1  Kings  12.  22.  the  tv.  of  God  came  to  Shemaiah
1  Chron.  17.  3.  the  tv.  of  God  came  to  Nathan
Prov.  30.  5.  every  tv.  of  God  is  pure,  he  is  a  shield
Isa.  40.  8.  the  to.  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever
Mark  7.  13.  making  the  tv.  of  God  of  none  effect
Cuke  3.  2.  the  tv.  of  God  came  unto  John  in  wildern.

4.  4.  not  by  bread  alone,  but  by  ever}’  tv.  of  God

5.  1.  the  people  pressed  on  him  to  hear  the  tv.  of  G.
8.  11.  parable  is  this,  the  seed  is  the  tv.  of  God

21.  my  brethren  are  these  that  hear  the  tv.  of  God

11. 28.  blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  uk  of  God
John  10.  35.  if  he  called  them  gods  to  whom  tv.  of  G.
Acts  4.  31.  they  spake  the  uk  of  God  with  boldness

6.  2.  not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the  tv.  of  God
7-  the  tv.  of  God  increased  in  Jerusalem,  12.  24.

8.  14.  that  Samaria  had  received  the  tv.  of  God

11.  1.  the  Gentiles  had  received  the  tv.  of  God

13.  7.  Sergius  Paulus  desired  to  hear  the  tv.  of  God
44.  the  whole  city  came  to  hear  the  tv.  of  God
46.  uk  of  God  should  have  been  first  spoken  to  you
19. 20.  so  mightily  grew  the  tv.  of  God  and  prevailed
Rom.  9.  6.  not  as  tho’  uk  of  G.  hath  taken  none  effect

10.  17.  faith  by  hearing,  hearing  by  the  tv.  of  God

1  Cor.  14.  36.  came  the  tv.  of  God  out  from  you  5

2  Cor.  2.  17.  as  many  which  corrupt  the  tv.  of  God
4.  2.  not  handling  the  tv.  of  God  deceitfully

Eph.  6.  17-  take  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  the
sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  tv.  of  God
Col.  1.  25.  which  is  given  me  to  fulfil  the  tv.  of  God
1  Thess.  2.  13.  when  ye  received  the  tv.  of  God

1  Tim.  4.  5.  it  is  sanctified  by  tv.  of  God  and  prayer

2  Tim.  2.  9.  but  the  tv.  of  God  is  not  bound
Tit.  2.  5.  that  the  tv.  of  God  be  not  blasphemed
Heb.  4.  12.  the  tv.  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful

1  6.  5.  and  have  tasted  the  good  uk  of  God

11.  3.  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  tv.  of  God
13.  7.  who  have  spoken  to  you  the  tv.  of  God

1  Pet.  1.  23.  being  born  again  by  the  tv.  of  God

2  Pet.  3.  5.  by  thezc.  of  God  the  heavens  were  of  old
1  John  2. 14.  are  strong,  the  tv.  of  God  abideth  in  you
Rev.  1.  2.  who  bare  record  of  the  tv.  of  God

9.  I  was  in  the  isle  of  Patmos  for  the  tv.  of  God
6.  9.  the  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  for  tv.  of  God

19.  13.  his  name  is  called  the  tv.  of  God

20.  4.  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  tv.  of  God

See  Heard.

His  WORD.

Num.  27.  21.  at  his  tv.  shall  they  go  out,  and  at  hit
tv.  they  shall  come  in,  both  he  and  Israel
30.  2.  if  a  man  vow  a  vow,  he  shall  not  break  his  tv.

1  Sam.  1.  23.  only  the  Lord  establish  his  tv.

2  Sam.  23.  2.  and  his  tv.  was  in  my  tongue

1  Kings  2.  4.  that  the  Lord  may  continue  his  tv.

8.  20.  Lord  hath  performed  his  tv.  that  he  spake,  T
am  risen  up  in  room  of  my  father,  2  Chr.  6.  10.

2  Kings  1. 16.  no  God  in  Israel,  to  inquire  of  his  tv.
2  Chr.  10.  15.  that  the  Lord  might  perform  his  tv.
Psal.  56.4.  in  God  will  I  praise  his  w.in  him  trust,  10.

103.  20.  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  his  tv.

105.  19.  until  the  time  that  his  tv.  came
28.  and  the}’  rebelled  not  against  his  tv.

106.  24.  they  believed  not  his  w.  but  murmured

107.  20.  he  sent  his  uk  and  healed  them

130.  5.  1  wait  for  the  Lord  and  in  his  tv.  do  T  hope


Psal.  147-  15.  his  tv.  runneth  very  swiftly

18.  he  sendeth  out  his  tv.  and  melteth  them

19.  he  sheweth  his  tv.  unto  Jacob,  his  statutes
148.  8.  snow,  vapour,  stormy  wind  fulfilling  his  tv.

Isa.  66.  5.  hear,  ye  that  tremble  at  his  tv.

Jer.  20.  9.  but  his  tv.  was  in  my  heart  as  a  fire
Lam.  2.  17-  he  hath  fulfilled  his  tv.  he  commanded
Joel  2.  11.  he  is  strong  that  executeth  his  tv.

Mat.  8.  16.  he  cast  out  the  spirits  with  his  tv.

Luke  4.  32.  astonished,  for  his  tv.  was  with  power
John  4.  41.  many  believed  because  of  his  own  tv.

5.  38.  ye  have  not  his  tv.  abiding  in  you
Acts  2.  41.  they  that  gladly  receivecf  his  uk
Lit.  1.  3.  but  hath  in  due  times  manifested  his  tv.

1  John  2.  5.  whoso  keepeth  his  tv.  in  him  is  the  love
See  Lord.

My  WORD.

Num.  11.  23.  whether  my  tv.  shall  come  to  pass

20.  24.  because  ye  rebelled  against  my  tv.

1  Kings  6.  12.  then  will  I  perform  my  tv.  with  thee

17.  1.  no  dew  nor  rain,  but  according  to  my  tv.

Isa.  55.  11.  so  shall  my  uk  be  that  goeth  outof  mouth

66.  2.  1  will  look  to  him  that  trembleth  at  my  tv.

Jer.  1.  12.  I  will  hasten  my  tv.  to  perform  it
23.  28.  he  that  hath  my  tv.  let  him  speak  my  tv.

29.  is  not  my  tv.  like  as  a  fire,  saith  the  Lord  ?

30.  1  am  against  the  prophets  that  steal  my  tv.

29.  10.  I  will  perform  my  good  tv.  towards  you
Mat.  24.  35.  but  my  tv.  shall  not  pass  away
John  5.  24.  he  that  heareth  my  tv.  and  believeth

8. 31 .  continue  in  my  tv.  ye  are  my  disciples  indeed

37.  to  kill  me  bee.  my  uk  hath  no  place  in  you
43.  even  because  ye  cannot  hear  my  tv.

Rev.  3.  8.  thou  hast  kept  my  tv.  not  denied  my  name
This  WORD.

F.xod.  14.  12.  is  not  this  there,  that  we  did  tell  thee  J
Josh.  14.  10.  since  the  Lord  spake  this  uk  to  Moses

2  Sam.  19.  14.  they  sent  this  tv.  to  the  king

1  Kings  2.  23.  hast  not  spoken  this  tv.  against  his  life

2  Kings  19.  21.  this  is  the  tv.  that  the  Lord  hath

spoken  of  him,  Isa.  16.  13.  |  24.  3.  1  37.22.
Ezra  6.  11.  that  whosoever  shall  alter  this  tv.

10.  5.  swear  that  they  should  do  according  to  this  uk
Isa.  8.  20.  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  tv.

30.12. because  ye  despise  this  tv.  and  trust  inoppres.
Jer.  5.  14.  because  ye  speak  this  tv.  23.  38.

7-2.  proclaim  there  this  uk  and  say,  hear  word

13. 12.  thou  shalt  speak  unto  them  this  tv.

14. 17.  therefore  shalt  thou  say  this  tv.  to  them

22.  1.  Lord  said,  go  down,  and  speak  there  this  tv.

26.  1.  in  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim  this  tv.  came  from
the  Lord,  saying,  27.  1.  134.8. 1  36.  1.
28.  7.  hear  now  this  tv.  Amos  3.  1. 1  4.  1. 1  5.  1.
Dan.  10.  11.  when  he  had  spoken  thisw.  to  me
Zech.  4.  6.  this  is  the  tv.  of  the  Lord  to  Zerubbabel
Acts  22.  22.  they  gave  him  audience  to  this  tv.

Rom.  9.  9.  for  this  is  tv.  of  promise,  Sarah  have  a  son
Heb.  12. 27.  this  uk  yet  once  more  signifieth
1  Pet.  1.  25.  this  is  the  tv.  which  is  preached  to  you
Thy  WORD.

Gen.  30.34.  I  would  it  might  be  according  to  thy  tv.
41.  40.  according  to  thy  uk  shall  my  people  be  ruled
Exod.  8.  10.  he  said,  be  it  according  to  thy  tv.

Num.  14.  20.  1  have  pardoned,  accorejingto  thy  tv.
Dent.  33.  9.  have  observed  thy  tv.  and  kept  covenant
1  Kings  3. 12.  1  have  done  according  to  thy  tv.

8.  26.  let  thy  tv.  I  pray  thee,  be  verified

18.  36.  I  have  done  all  these  things  at  thy  uk

22.  13.  let  thy  tv.  I  pray  thee,  be  like  the  word  of
one  of  them  and  speak  what  is  good,  2  Chr.  18.  12.

Psal.  119.  9.  by  taking  heed  according  to  thy  tv.

11.  thy  tv.  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  not  to  sin

16.  will  delightin  statutes,  I  will  not  forget  thy  tv.

17.  that  l  may  live,  and  keept/iy  tv.  101.

25.  quicken  me  according  to  thy  tv.  107.  154.

28.  strengthen  thou  me  according  to  thy  tv.  116.

38.  stablish  thy  tv.  |j  42.  I  trust  in  thy  tv.

41.  even  thy  salvation  according  to  thy  tv.

50.  comfort  in  affliction,  for  thy  tv.  quickened  me
58.  be  merciful  tome  according  to  thy  tv.  65,  76.

67.  I  went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept  thy  tv.

74.  because  I  have  hoped  in  thy  tv.  147.

81.  1  hope  in  thy  tv.  114.  ||  140.  thy  tv.  is  pure

82.  mine  eyes  fail  for  thy  tv.  ||105.  thy  tv.  is  a  lamp
89.  for  ever,  O  Lord,  thy  tv.  is  settled  in  heaven
1.3.3.  order  my  steps  in  thy  tv.  let  not  iniquity
148. night-watches,  that  1  might  meditate  in  thy  tv.
158.  1  was  grieved,  because  they  kept  not  thy  uk

160.  thy  tv.  is  true  ||  162.  I  rejoice  at  thy  tv.

161.  but  my  heart  standeth  m  awe  of  thy  tv.

169.  give  me  understanding  according  to  thy  to.

170.  supplication,  deliver  me  according  to  thy  uk
172.  my  tongue  shall  speak  of  thy  tv.  for  thy  com.

138.  2.  thou  hast  magnified  thy  tv.  above  thy  name
Jer.  15.  16.  thy  tv.  was  to  me  the  joy  of  my  heart
Ezek.  20. 46.  drop  thy  tv.  toward  the  south,  prophesy

21. 2.  drop  thy  tv.  toward  the  holy  places,  prophesy
Amos  7.  16.  drop  not  thy  tv.  against  house  of  Isaac
Hab.  .3.  9.  thy  bow  was  made  naked,  even  thy  tv.
Luke  1.  38.  be  it  unto  me  according  to  thy  to.

2.  29.  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  thy  tv.
5.5.  nevertheless  at  thy  tv.  1  will  let  down  the  net
John  17.  6.  thine  they  were, and  they  have  kept  thy  tv.

14.  1  have  given  them  thy  tv.  ||  17.  thy  tv.  is  truth
Acts  4.  29.  with  all  boldness  they  may  speak  thy  tv.

See  Truth.

WORDS.

Gen.  11.  +  1.  the  whole  earth  was  of  one  tv.

Exod.  4.  + 10.  and  Moses  said,  I  am  not  a  man  of  tv.

15.  and  thou  shalt  put  tv.  in  his  mouth

5.  9.  more  work,  and  let  them  not  regard  vain  uk

19.  8.  Moses  returned  the  tv.  of  the  people

23.  8.  gift  perverteth  w.  of  righteous,  Lieut.  1 6.  19.
34.  1.  there,  which  were  in  the  first  tables

28.  Moses  wrote  the  to.  of  the  covenant,  Deut.  10.2.
Dent.  2.  26.  I  sent  to  Sihon  with  uk  of  peace

28.  14.  thou  shalt  not  go  aside  from  any  of  the  tv.

29.  9.  keep  there,  of  his  covenant  and  do  them,  that
ye  may  prosper,  2  Kings  2.3.  3,  24.  2  Chron.  34.  31 .

32.1.  give  ear,  O  heavens,  hear,  O  earth,  the  tv.  of
my  mouth,  Psal.  54.  2. 1  78.  1.  Prov.  7.  24.
1  Sam.  28.  20.  Saul  was  afraid  of  the  tv.  of  Samuel


2  Sam.  19.  4.3.  the  uk  of  men  of  Judah  were  fiercci

1  Kings  22.  1.3.  behold,  the  uk  of  prophets  declare

good  to  the  king  with  one  mouth,  2  Chr.  18.  12.

2  Kings  6.  12.  Elisha  telleth  the  tv.  thou  speakest

18.  20.  but  they  are  but  vain  tv.  Isa.  .36.  5.

2  Chron.  9.  t29.  Solomon’s  acts  written  in  tv.  of  Nat.

12.  +  15.  in  re.  of  Shemaiah  ||  20. +  34.  in  tv.  of  Jehu

29.  .30.  to  sing  praises  with  the  tv.  of  David
32.  8.  the  people  rested  on  the  tv.  of  Hezekiah
Esth.  9.  .30.  he  sent  letters  with  to.  of  peace  and  truth
Job  6. 26.  do  ye  imagine  to  reprove  tv.  and  speeches

8.2.  shall  the  tv.  of  thy  mouth  be  like  a  strong  wind  ;
12.  11.  doth  not  the  ear  try  tv. I  34.  .3.

15.  13.  thou  lettest  such  tv.  go  out  of  thy  mouth

16.  .3.  shall  vain  tv.  have  an  end,  or  what  emboldens
4.  1  could  heap  up  tv.  against  you  and  shake  my

18. 2.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  ye  make  an  end  of  tu.  ?

19. 2.  how  long  will  ye  break  me  in  pieces  with  to.  ?
23.  5.  1  would  know  the  tv.  he  would  answer  me

12.  I  have  esteemed  the  tv.  of  his  mouth  more
.35.  16.  he  multiplied!  tv.  without  knowledge

36.  +2.  shew  thee,  that  there  are  yet  tv.  for  God
.38.  2.  who  is  this  that  darkeneth  counsel  by  tv.  7
Psal.  19. 14.  let  the  w.  of  my  mouth  be  acceptable

22.  1.  why  so  far  from  the  uk  of  my  roaring  *

36.  3.  the  tv.  of  his  mouth  are  iniquity  and  deceit

52. 4.  thou  Invest  all  devouringa'.  O  deceitful  tongue
55.  21 .  tv.  of  his  mouth  were  smoother  than  butter
59.  12.  for  a;,  of  their  lips,  Jet  them  be  taken

65.  +  3.  tv.  of  iniquities  prevail  against  me
137.  t  3.  they  required  of  us  the  tv.  of  a  song
Prov.  1.6.  to  understand  the  tv.  of  the  wise
4. 5.  decline  not  from  the  tv.  of  my  mouth,  5.  7.

6.  2.  thou  art  snared  with  the  tv.  of  thy  mouth

10.  19.  in  multitude  of  tv.  there  wante"th  not  sin
12.  6.  uk  of  the  wicked  are  to  lie  in  wait  for  blood
15.  26.  the  tv.  of  the  pure  are  pleasant  uk

18.  4.  the  tv.  of  a  man’s  mouth  are  as  deep  waters
8.  the  tv.  of  a  tale-hearer  are  as  wounds,  26.  22.

19.7.  he  pursueth  them  with  tv.  they  are  wanting

27.  he  causeth  thee  to  err  from  tv.  of  knowledge

22. 12.  he  overthrows  the  tv.  of  the  transgressor

17.  bow  down  thine  ear,  hear  the  uk  of  the  wise

21.  make  thee  know  certainty  of  the  tv.  of  truth

that  thou  mightest  answer  the  tv.  of  truth

23.  8.  and  thou  shalt  lose  thy  sweet  tv.

29. 19.  a  servant  will  not  be  corrected  by  w.
Eccl.5. 3. fool’s  voice  known  by  multitude  of  tv.  10. 14.

10. 12.  the  uk  of  a  wise  man’s  mouth  are  gracious
12. 10.  the  preacher  sought  to  find  out  acceptable

u>.  what  was  written,  even  the  tv.  ot  truth

11.  the  uk  of  the  wise  are  as  goads  and  as  nails
Isa.  29.  11.  is  become  as  the  uk  of  a  book  sealed

37.  4.  it  may  be  God  will  hear  the  tv.  of  Rabshakeh
59.  13.  uttering  from  the  heart  tv.  of  falsehood

Jer.  11.2.  hear  ye  the  tv.  of  this  covenant,  6.

2.3.  9.  because  of  the  Lord  and  tv.  of  his  holiness
.35. 14.  tv.  of  Jonadab  son  of  Rechab  are  performed
44.  28.  remnant  shall  know  whose  uk  shall  stand
Ezek.  .3.  6.  whose  tv.  thou  canst  not  understand
Dan.  7-  25.  shall  speak  great  tv.  against  most  High

12.  4.  shut  up  the  tv.  ||  9.  the  tv.  are  closed  up
Hos.  6.5.  I  have  slain  them  by  the  tv.  of  my  mouth

14.  2.  take  with  you  uk  and  turn  to  the  Lord
Zech.  1 .  13.  answered  with  good  and  comfortable  tv.

7.7.  should  ye  not  hear  the  tv.  the  Lord  hath  cried-
Mat.  26.  44.  saying  the  same  tv.  Mark  14.  39.

Luke 4.  22.  all  wondered  at  gracious  uk  which  proe
John  6.  63.  the  tv.  1  speak  to  you  they  are  life

68.  to  whom  we  go  ?  thou  hast  the  tv.  of  eternal  life
17-8.  I  have  given  to  them  the  a>.  thou  gavest  me
Acts  2.  40.  with  many  other  tv.  did  he  testify

7.  22.  Moses  was  mighty  in  uk  and  in  deeds

10.  22.  Cornelius  was  warned  to  hear  tv.  of  thee

11.  14.  send  for  Peter,  who  shall  tell  thee  tv.

15.  15.  to  this  agree  the  tv.  of  the  prophets
24.  that  certain  have  troubled  you  with  uk

18.  15.  but  if  it  be  a  question  ot  tv.  and  names

20.  35.  to  remember  the  tv.  of  the  Lord  Jesus

38.  sorrowing  most  of  all  for  the  tv.  he  spake
26.  25.  but  1  speak  forth  uk  of  truth  and  soberness
Rom.  16.  18.  by  good  tv.  deceive  hearts  of  the  simple
1  Cor.  1. 17-  not  with  wisdom  of  uk  2.  4.  13.

14.  9-  except  ye  utter  uk  easy  to  be  understood

19.  I  bad  rather  speak  five  an  with  understanding
Eph.  5.  6.  let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain  u>.

1  Tim.  4. 6.  nourished  up  in  tv.  of  faith  and  doctrine

2  Tim.  2. 14.  that  they  strive,  not  about  tv.  to  no  profit-
4.  15.  for  he  hath  greatly  withstood  our  uk

2  Pet.  3.2.  be  mindful  of  the  tv.  spoken  by  prophets
Ret.  1.  3.  hear  the  tv.  of  this  prophecy,  22. 18.

22.  19.  take  away  from  the  tv.  of  this  propheev
All  the  WORDS.

Gen.  45.  27 ■  they  told  Jacob  all  the  uk  of  Joseph
Exod.  4. 28.  Moses  told  Aaron  all  the  tv.  of  the  Lord

24.  .3.  Moses  told  the  people  all  the  uk  Num.  1 1.  24.
4.  Moses  wrote  all  the  tv.  of  the  Lord  and  rose

Deut.  9-  10.  on  the  tables  were  written  all  the  tv.

17.  19.  keep  all  the  tv.  ||  29.  29-  may  do  all  the  tv.

27-  3.  write  on  stones  all  the  tv.  of  this  law,  8.

26.  cursed  is  he  that  confirmeth  not  all  the  tv.

28.  58.  if  thou  wilt  not  observe  to  do  all  the  tv.

31. 12.  and  observe  to  do  all  the  te.  of  this  law
.32.  44.  Moses  spake  all  the  tv.  of  this  song  in  ears

46.  set  your  hearts  to  all  the  to.  T  testify
Josh.  8.  34.  he  read  all  the  to.  of  the  law,  blessings

1  Sam.  8.  10.  Samuel  told  all  the  tv.  of  the  Lord

2  Kings  19.  4.  it  may  be  the  Lord  will  hear  all  the  to.
of  Rabshakeh  sent  by  king  of  Assyria,  Isa.  37.  17.

23.2.  Josiah  read  all  the  tv.  of  the  covenant  found

in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  .34.  .30.
Prov.  8.8.  all  the  tv.  of  my  mouth  are  righteousness
Eccl.  7.  21.  also  take  no  heed  unto  ali  the  u>.  spoken
Jer.  11.  8.  bring  on  them  all  the  tv.  of  this  covenant
26.  2.  speak  all  the  uk  that  1  command  thee

20.  according  to  all  the  to.  of  Jeremiah

30.  2.  write  all  the  to.  1  have  spoken,  36.  2.

36. 4.  Baruch  wrote  all  the  tv.  of  the  Lord,  32.

43. 1.  when  Jeremiah  had  ended  all  the  tv.  of  Lord

Acts  5.  20.  speak  to  the  people  all  the  uk  of  this  life
WORDS  of  God.

Num.  24.  4.  hath  said,  which  heard  Ihe  tv. of  God ,  16

565


VV  O  R


W  O  R


W  O  R


1  Chr.  25.  5.  I  reman  the  king’s  seer  in  the  to.  of  God
Ezra  9.  4.  every  one  that  trembleth  at  the  w.  of  God
Psal.  107.  11.  they  rebelled  against  the  w.  of  God
John  3.34.  he  whom  God  sent  speaketh  to.  of  God

8.  47-  he  that  is  of  God  heareth  the  to.  of  God
Rev.  17.  17.  until  the  to.  of  God  be  fulfilled
See  Heard.

His  WORDS.

Gen.  37.  8.  they  hated  him  yet  the  more  for  hit  to.
Dent.  4.  36.  thou  heardest  his  w.  out  of  the  fire
Judg.  11.  11.  Jephthah  uttered  all  his  to.  before  Ld.

1  Sam.  3. 19.  he  let  none  of  his  u>.  fall  to  the  ground

2  Chr.  36. 16.  but  they  despised  his  tv.  and  misused
Job  22.  22.  and  lay  up  his  to.  in  thine  heart

32.  14.  now  he  hath  not  directed  his  to.  against  me

34.  35.  and  his  to.  were  without  wisdom

37.  for  lie  multiplieth  his  to.  against  God

Ps.  55.  21.  his  to.  softer  than  oil,  yet  drawn  swords
106.  12.  then  believed  tliev  his  to.  sang  his  praise
Prov.  17.  27.  he  that  hath  knowledge  spareth  his  to.
29.  20.  seest  thou  a  man  that  is  hasty  in  his  to.

30.6.  add  thou  not  unto  his  to.  lest  he  reprove  thee
Isa.  31.  2.  the  Lord  will  not  call  back  his  to.

Jer.  18.  18.  let  us  not  give  heed  to  any  of  his  to.
Dan.  9-  12.  he  hath  confirmed  his  w.  he  snake
Amos  7.  10.  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  to.
Mark  10.  24.  the  disciples  were  astonished  at  his  to.

12.  13.  to  catch  him  in  his  to.  Luke  20.  20.

Luke  20.  26.  they  could  not  take  hold  of  his  to.

24.  8.  they  remembered  his  to.  and  returned

See  Lord.

My  WORDS.

Num.  12.  6.  he  said,  hear  now  my  tv.  Job  34.  2.
Deut.  4.  10.  1  will  make  them  hear  my  to.

11.  18.  therefore  lay  up  my  to.  in  your  heart

18.  18.  and  1  will  put  my  to.  in  his  mouth

19.  whosoever  will  not  hearken  to  my  to.  1  will
require  it  of  him,  Jer.  29. 19.  1  35.  13.
Neh.  6.  19.  and  they  uttered  my  to.  to  him
Job  6.  3.  therefore  my  to.  are  swallowed  up

19.  23.  O  that  my  to.  were  now  written  !

29.  22.  after  my  to.  they  spake  not  again

33.  1.  hearken  to  all  my  to.  34.  16.  Acts  2.  14.

3.  my  to.  shall  be  of  uprightn.  of  my  heart,  36.  4.
Psal.  5.  1.  give  ear  to  my  to.  O  Lord,  consider

50.  17.  seeing  thou  castest  my  to.  behind  thee

56.  5.  every  day  they  wrest  my  to.  thought  for  evil
141.  6.  they  shall  hear  my  to.  for  they  are  sweet
Prov.  1.  23.  1  will  make  known  my  to.  unto  you
2. 1.  my  son,  if  thou  wilt  receive  my  to.

4.  4.  let  thine  heart  retain  my  tv.  and  live

4.  20.  attend  to  my  to.  ||  7. 1.  keep  my  to.

Isa.  51.  16.  1  have  put  my  to.  in  thy  mouth,  and  say
to  Ziqn,  thou  art  my  people,  Jer.  1.  9.

59.  21.  my  to.  w  hich  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth
Jer.  5.  14.  1  w  ill  make  my  to.  in  thy  mouth  tire

6.  19.  they  have  not  hearkened  to  my  to.  nor  law

11.  10.  which  refused  to  hear  my  to.  13. 10.

18.  2.  there  I  will  cause  thee  to  hear  my  to.

19. 15.  that  they  might  not  hear  my  to.

23.  22.  if  they  caused  my  people  to  hear  my  to.

25.  8.  because  ye  have  not  heard  my  to.

13.  I  will  bring  upon  that  land  all  my  to.

39.  16.  1  will  bung  my  to.  on  this  city  for  evil
44.  29.  you  may  know  my  to.  shall  surely  stand
Eiek.  2.  7-  thou  shalt  speak  my  to.  to  them,  3.  4, 10.

12.  28.  there  shall  none  of  my  to.  be  prolonged
Mic.  2. 7.  do  not  my  tv.  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  ?
Zech.  1.  6.  my  tv.  did  they  not  take  hold  of  your  fath.?
Mark  8.  38.  whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and

my  to.  of  him  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  Luke  9.  26.

13.. 31.  but  my  to.  shall  not  pass  away,  LukeIX.  33.
Luke  1.  20.  because  thou  believest  not  my  to.  which

shall  be  fulfilled  in  their  season
John  5.  47.  how'  shall  ye  believe  my  tv.  ?

12.  47.  if  any  man  hear  my  to.  and  believe  not
48.  he  that  receiveth  not  my  to.  one  judgeth  him

14.  23.  will  keep  my  to.  ||  15. 7.  my  tv.  abide  in  you
Their  WORDS.

Gen.  34. 18.  their  to.  pleased  Hainor  and  Shechem
2  Chrun.  9.  6.  1  believed  not  their  to.  until  1  came
Ps.  19.  4.  their  line  is  gone  out  thro’  all  the  earth,
their  to.  to  the  end  of  the  world,  Rom.  10.  18.
Eiek.  2.  6.  son  of  man,  be  not  afraid  of  their  to.
Luke  24.  11.  their  to.  seemed  to  them  as  idle  tales
These  WORDS.

Gen.  39-  17-  she  spake  to  him  according  to  these  to.
43.  7.  we  told  according  to  the  tenor  of  these  tv.
Exad.  19.  6.  these  are  the  to.  thou  shalt  speak,  7.

20.  1.  God  spake  all  these  to.  Deut.  5.  22.

34.27.  Lord  said,  write  thou  these  to.  Jer.  36.  17 .

35.  1.  these  are  the  to.  which  the  Lord  hath  com¬

manded  you  to  do  them,  Deut.  6  6. 1  29.  1.
Num.  16. 31.  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  all
these  w.  ground  clave,  Deut.  32.  45. 1  Sam.  24. 16.
Deut.  12.  28.  observe,  hear  all  these  to.  Zech.  8.  9.

1  Sam.  21.  12.  David  laid  up  these  to.  in  his  heart

24.  7.  David  stayed  his  servants  with  these  to.

2  Sam.  7. 17.  according  to  all  these  to.  and  this  vision

so  did  Nathan  speak  to  David,  1  Chron.  17. 15.
2  Kings  18. 27.  hath  my  master  sent  me  to  thy  mas¬
ter  and  to  thee  to  speak  these  to.?  Isa.  36.  12.

23. 16.  the  man  of  God  proclaimed  these  to.

Ier.3.  12.  go  proclaim  these  to.  toward  the  north

7.  27.  speak  all  these  to.  unto  them,  26.  15.

16.  10.  shew  inese  ||  25.  30.  prophesy  all  these  to.
22.  5.  but  if  ye  will  not  hear  these  to.  1  swear

38.  24.  Zedekiah  said,  let  no  man  know  or  these  to.

45. 1.  when  he  had  written  these  to.  51.  60.

51.  61.  when  thou  shalt  read  all  these  to.

Luke  24.  44.  these  are  the  to.  1  spake  unto  you
John  9.  22.  these  tv.  spake  his  parents,  feared  Jews

10. 21.  these  are  not  to.  of  him  that  hath  a  devil
Acts  2.  22.  ye  men  of  Israel,  hear  these  to.  Jesus
10.  44.  while  Peter  yet  spake  these  to.  Holy  Ghost

13.  42.  besought  these  to.  might  be  preached  to  them
28.  29.  when  he  had  said  these  to.  Jews  departed

1  Thess.  4.  18.  comfort  one  another  with  these  w.
Rev.  21.  5.  for  these  to.  are  true  and  faithful
Thy  WORDS.

Deut.  33.  3.  every  one  shall  receive  of  thy  to.

Josh.  1.  18.  whosoever  will  not  hearken  to  thy  tv.

566


Judg.  11.  10.  if  we  do  not  according  to  thy  to

13.  12.  Manoah  said,  now  let  thy  to.  come  to  pass

1  Sam.  15.  24.  1  have  transgressed  thy  to.

28.  21.  behold,  l  have  hearkened  to  thy  to.

2  Sam.  7.21.  thy  tv.  sake  hast  thou  done  these  things
28.  thou  art  that  God,  and  thy  to.  be  true

1  Kings  l.  11.  1  will  come  in  and  confirm  thy  to.

A Teh.  9.  8.  for  thou  hast  performed  thy  to.

Job  4.  4.  thy  to.  upheld  him  that  was  falling
Psal.  119.  57-  l  said  that  l  would  keep  thy  to.

103.  how  sweet  are  thy  to.  to  my  taste  !

130.  the  entrance  of  thy  to.  giveth  light
139.  mine  enemies  have  forgotten  thy  to.

Prov.  23.  8.  thou  shalt  lose  thy  sweet  w.

9.  he  will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  to.

Eccl.  5. 2.  be  not  rash,  therefore  let  thy  to.  be  few
Jer.  15.  16.  thy  to.  were  found,  and  1  did  eat  them
Ezek.  33.  31.  hearth  to.  but  do  them  not,  32.

Dan.  10. 12.  fear  not,  Daniel,  from  the  first  day  thy
to.  were  heard,  and  l  am  come  for  thy  w.
Mat.  12.  37.  for  by-  thy  u\  thou  shalt  be  justified,
'  and  by  thy  to.  thou  shalt  be  condemned
Your  WORDS.

Gen.  42. 16.  kept  in  prison,  that  your  to.  be  proved
20.  bring  Benjamin,  so  shall  your  to.  be  verified
44.  10.  let  it  be  according  to  your  to.  Josh.  2.  21.
Deut.  1. 34.  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  your  to.  5.  28.
Job  32.  11.  behold,  I  waited  for  your  to.  1  gave  ear
Isa.  41.  26.  there  is  none  that  heareth  your  w.

Jer.  42-  4.  1  will  pray  to  God  according  to  your  to.
Ezek.35.  13.  ye  have  multiplied  your  to.  against  me
Mai.  2.  17.  ye  have  wearied  the  Lord  withyowrw.
3.  13.  your  to.  have  been  stout  against  me.saithLd.
Mat.  10.  14.  shall  not  receive  you  nor  hear  your  to.
WORK

Is  taken,  (1)  For  such  business  as  is  proper  to  every
man's  calling,  which  may  be  done  in  six  days.
Exod.  20.  9.  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour  and  do
all  thy  work.  (2)  tor  any  thought,  word,  or  out¬
ward  action,  whether  good  or  evil.  Eccl.  12.  It.
God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment.  C3J
Work  is  put  for  wages.  Lev.  19.  13.  The  wages,
in  Hebrew,  the  work,  of  him  that  is  hired,  shall  not
abide  with  thee  all  night.  So  in  Job  7.  2.  As  an
hireling  looketh  for  the  rew-ard  of  his  work,  lleb.
for  his  work.  (4)  Work  is  put  for  vengeance  or
judgment.  Isa,  5.  19.  Let  him  make  speed  and
hasten  his  work:  “  Let  him  begin  to  execute  ven¬
geance  as  soon  as  he  pleases."  And  in  Isa.  28.  21.
That  he  may  do  his  work,  his  strange  work :
“  That  he  may  execute  his  extraordinary  and  un¬
usual  judgment  against  Israel ;  a  judgment  con¬
trary  to  the  benignity  of  God's  nature,  and  to  his
usual  way  of  dealing  with  his  people."  (5J  Work
is  rut  for  miracle,  John  7.  21.  I  have  done  one
work,  and  ye  all  marvel.  The  miracle  our  Saviour
speaks  of,  is  his  healing  the  man  who  lay  at  the
pool  of  Bethesda.

The  works  of  God  denote,  Cl)  His  work  of  creation.
Gen.  2.  2.  On  the  seventh  day  God  ended  his
work.  (2)  His  works  of  providence  in  preserving
and  governing  the  world.  John  5.  17-  My  Father
worketh  hitherto.  (3)  The  work  of  redemption  is
called  God’s  work.  John  9.  4.  1  must  work  the
works  of  him  that  sent  me.  And  particularly^  the
faith  of  true  believers  is  called  the  work  of  God.
John  6.  29-  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  be¬
lieve  on  him  whom  he  hath  sent.  The  work  of
redemption  is  attributed  to  the  Three  Persons  of
the  Trinity,  and  their  acts  herein  are  of  the  same
extent :  The  Father  loves  those  that  are  given  to
Christ  in  the  covenant  of  redemption,  and  Christ
is  the  Saviour  of  those  that  are  loved  by  the  Father  ;
and  the  Spirit  sanctifies  those  that  are  justified
through  the  merits  of  Christ's  blood.  Thus  there
is  a  chain  in  salvation,  the  beginning  is  from  the
Father,  the  dispensation  through  the  Son,  and  the
application  by  the  Spirit.  So  in  looking  after  the
comfort  of  election,  believers  must  first  look  inward
to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  on  their  hearts,  then
outward  to  the  work  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  then
upward  to  the  everlasting  love  of  the  Father  in
heaven,  1  Pet.  1.  2.

By  good  works  are  to  be  understood  all  manner  of
duties  inward  and  outward,  as  well  thoughts,  as
words  and  actions,  toward  God  or  man,  which  are
commanded  in  the  law  of  God,  and  proceed  from  a
pure  heart  and  faith  unfeiyned,  and  are  referred
unto  God's  glory  ;  for  it  is  necessary  that  good
works  proceed  from  right  principles,  and  have
right  motives  and  ends,  namely,  a  principle  of  love
to  God,  the  motive  of  obedience  to  God's  law ,  and
the  glory  of  God  as  the  chief  end.  1  Cor.  10.  31.
WJiether  therefore  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever
ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  Eph.  2.  10.
For  we  are  his  workmanship,  created  in  Christ
Jesus  unto  good  works.

It  is  said,  James  2.  24.  You  see  that  by  works  a
man  is  justified.  The  apostle  does  not  there  treat
of  our  justification  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  of  the
justification  of  our  faith  in  the  sight  of  man,  and
therefore  asserts  that  justification  is  by  woiks,
ver.  18.  1  will  shew  thee  my  faith  by  my  works,
for  works  justify  our  J'aith,  and  declare  us  to  be
justified  before  men,  who  cannot  see  nor  know
our  faith  but  by  our  works.  St.  Paul,  in  his
Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  Galatians,  asserts,
by  many  arguments,  our  justification  by  faith,
that  receives  and  relies  upon  the  righteousness  of
Christ,  that  is,  his  obedience  and  sufferings,
Rom.  3.  24,  28.  And  surely  the  apostles,  being
inspired  by  the  same  Spirit,  cannot  be  supposed  to
contradict  one  another.

Man,  because  he  is  depraved  and  weakened  with
original  sin,  is  not  able  to  fulfil  the  law,  and  can¬
not  be  justified  or  accepted  before  God,  on  account
of  his  works,  for  by  the  works  of  the  law  shall
no  flesh  be  justified,  Rom.  3.  20.  Gal.  2.  16.
The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  the  sole  meritorious
cause  of  our  justification  ;  but  those  that  are  justi¬
fied,  are  also  sanctified,  and  will  be  careful
to  maintain  good  works,  for  without  holiness  no


man  shall  see  the  Lord,  lleb  .2.  14.  Chnst  t
righteousness  received  by  faith,  and  imputed  to
true  believers,  is  the  cause  of  their  justification,
and  gives  them  a  gracious  title  to  heaven,  and
sanctification  makes  them  meet  for  it,  Bernard
says.  Bona  opera  sunt  via  ad  regnum,  non
causa  regnandi ;  “  Good  works  are  the  way  to
the  kingdom,  not  the  cause  of  entering  the
kingdom."

Exod.  5.  9.  let  there  more  w.  be  laid  on  the  men

12. 16.  no  manner  of  w.  shall  be  done  in  them,  20.  !

10.  Lev.  16.  29.  1  23.  3,  28,  31.  Num.  29.  7.

18.  20.  shew  them  the  w.  that  they  must  do

31. 14.  whoso  doeth  any  w.  therein  shall  be  cut  oft
from  amongst  the  people,  15.  Lev.  23.  30.

35.  2.  six  days  shall  w.  be  done,  20.  9.

36.  7.  sufficient  for  all  the  w.  and  too  much
Lev.  23.  7.  in  seventh  day  an  hqly  convocation,  ye

shall  do  no  servile  w.  therein,  8.  21,  25,  35,  36.
Num.  28.  18,  25,  26. 1  29-  1,  12,  35.

Deut.  4.  28.  the  w.  of  men’s  hands,  27.  15.  2  Kings
19.  18.  2  Chron.  32.  19.  Psal.  115.  4.  |  135.  15.

5.  14.  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  in  it  thou
shalt  not  do  any  w.  16,  8.  Jer.  17.  22,  24.

14.  29.  that  the  L.  may  bless  thee  in  all  w.  of  thy
hand  which  thou  doest,  24.  19.  1  28.  12. 1  30.  9.

15.  19.  do  no  w.  with  the  firstling  of  thy  bullock
31.  29.  to  provoke  him  to  anger  through  the  w.  of

your  hands,  1  Kings  16.  7-  Jer.  32.  30.  '

3.3. 11.  bless  the  L.  and  accept  the  w.  of  his  hands

1  Kings  5.  16.  chief  of  Solomon’s  officers  which  were

over  the  w.  9.  23.  1  Chr.  29.  6.  2  Chr.  2.  18.

7-  8.  his  house  had  another  court  of  the  like  w. .

2  Kings  12.  11.  into  hands  that  did  the  w.  22.  5,  9.

1  Chron.  9.  33.  employed  in  that  w.  day  and  night

16.  37.  to  minister  as  every  day’s  w.  required

29.  1.  Solomon  young,  and  the  w.  is  great,

Neh.  4.  19.

2  Chron.  31.  21.  in  every  w.  that  he  began,  he  did  it  •

34.  12.  the  men  did  the  w.  faithfully

Ezra  4.  24.  then  ceased  the  w.  of  the  house  of  God

5.  8.  this  w.  goeth  fast  on,  prospered)  in  their  hands

6.  7.  let  the  w.  of  this  house  of  God  alone

22.  to  strengthen  their  hands  in  the  w.  of  house
10. 13.  neither  is  it  a  w.  of  one  day  or  two

Neh.  3.  5.  but  their  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to  w.

4.  11.  slay  them,  and  cause  the  w.  to  cease  -  I

6.  3.  why  should  the  w.  cease  whilst  1  leave  it  ?

16.  they  perceived  this  w.  was  wrought  of  God

7.  70.  the  chief  of  the  fathers  gave  to  the  w.

Job  1.  10.  thou  hast  blessed  the  w.  of  his  hands

10.  3.  thou  shouldest  despise  the  w.  of  thine  hands

14.  15.  thou  wilt  have  a  desire  to  w.  of  thy  hands
24.  5.  as  wild  asses  go  they  forth  to  their  w.

34. 11.  for  the  w.  of  a  man  shall  he  render  to  him,
cause  to  find  according  to  his  ways,  1  Pel.  1. 17-

19.  for  they  are  all  the  w.  of  his  hands
36.  9.  he  sheweth  them  their  w.  and  transgression
Psal.  8.  3.  when  I  consider  the  w.  of  thy  fingers,  6.  [
9.  16.  the  wicked  is  snared  in  the  w.  of  his  hands

19.  1.  the  firmament  sheweth  his  handy  w.

28.  4.  give  them  after  the  w.  of  their  hands

44.  1.  we  heard  what  w.  thou  didst  in  their  days
90.  17.  establish  thou  the  w.  of  our  hands  upon  us
95.  9.  when  your  fathers  proved  me  and  saw  my  w.

101.  3.  1  hate  the  w.  of  them  that  .turn  aside

102.  25.  the  heavens  are  the  w.  of  thy  hands
143.  5.  1  muse  on  the  w.  of  thy  hands

Prov.  11.  18.  the  w  icked  worketh  a  deceitful  w.

Eccl.  3. 17.  there  is  a  time  there  for  every  w.

5.6.  why  should  God  destroy  the  w.  ol  thine  hands  l

8.  9.  I  applied  my  heart  to  every  w.  under  the  sun
14.  to  w  hom  it  happeneth  according  to  to.  of  the

wicked,  according  to  the  w.  of  the  righteous
9. 10.  there  is  no  w.  in  grave  whither  thou  goest

12.  14.  God  will  bring  every  w.  into  judgment
Cant.  7.  1.  w.  of  the  hands  of  a  cunning  workman
Isa.  2.  8.  they  worship  the  w.  of  their  own  hands,

37.  19.  Jer.  1.  16. 1  10.  3,  9,  15.  I  51.  18.
17. 8.  fie  shall  not  look  to  the  w.  of  his  hands
19.  15.  neither  shall  there  be  any  w.  for  Egypt

25.  blessed  be  Assyria  the  w.  of  my  hands

28.  21.  that  he  may  do  his  w.  his  strange  w.

29.  16.  shall  the  w.  say  of  him  that  made  it

23.  he  seeth  his  children,  and  the  w.  of  my  hands

32.17.  the  w.  of  the  righteousness  shall  be  peace

45. 1 1 .  concerning  the  w.  of  my  hands  command  me  !
49.  4.  yet  surely  my  w.  is  with  my  God

60.  21.  they  shall  inherit  the  w.  ol  my  hands

61.  8.  and  I  will  direct  their  w.  in  truth
64.  8.  and  we  all  are  the  w.  of  thy  hands

65. 22.  mine  elect  shall  long  enjoy  w.  of  their  hands  !
Jer.  32.  19.  great  in  counsel  and  mighty  in  w.

50. 29.  recompense  her  according  to  w.  Lam.  3.  64.
Ezek.  15.  3.  shall  wood  be  taken  to  do  any  w.?

4.  is  it  meet  for  any  w.  ?  ||  5.  it  was  meet  for  no  w.  j

16.  30.  the  w.  of  an  imperious  whorish  woman
Hos.  13.  2.  all  of  it  the  w.  of  the  craftsman

14.  3.  will  say  no  more  to  the  w.  of  our  hands
Mic.  5. 13.  shalt  no  more  worship  w.  of  thine  hands  1
Ilab.  1.  5.  for  I  will  work  a  w.  in  your  days
Hag.  2.  14.  and  so  is  every  w.  of  their  hands
Mark  6.  5.  he  could  there  do  no  mighty  w.

John  7.  21.  1  have  done  one  a),  and  ye  marvel

17.  4.  I  have  finished  the  w.  thou  gavest  me  to  do
Acts  5.  38.  if  this  w.  be  of  men  it  will  come  to  nought  .

13.  2.  for  the  w.  whereunto  1  have  called  them
41.  behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  for  1  work  a

w.  in  your  days,  a  w.  which  ve  will  not  believe

14.  26.  for  the  w.  which  they  fulfilled

15.  38.  w  ho  went  not  with  them  to  the  w.

Rom.  2. 15.  which  shew  the  w.  of  the  law  written

9.  28.  a  short  w.  will  the  Lord  make  upon  the  earth

11. 6.  no  more  grace,  otherwise  w.  is  no  more  w.

1  Cor.  3.  13.  every  man’s  w.  shall  be  made  manifest
14.  if  any  man's  w.  abide  ||  15.  if  w.  be  burnt

9.  1.  are  not  ye  my  w.  in  the  Lord  ?  .

Eph.  4.  12.  he  gave  some  for  the  w.  of  the  mimstiy
Phil.  2.  30.  for  the  w.  of  Christ -he  was  nigh  death.

2  Thess.  1.11.  that  God  may  fulfil  the  w.  of  faith
2.  17.  establish  you  in  every  good  word  and  ».

2  Tim.  4.  5.  do  tne  w.  of  an  evangelist,  make  full


VV  O  R


W  O  R


WO  R


Jam.  1.  4.  let  patience  have  her  perfect  tv.

25.  but  a  doer  of  the  zv.  shall  be  blessed
See  Evil.

WORK  of  God,  WORKS  of  God.

Exod.  32.  16.  the  tables  were  the  tv.  of  God
Job  3*.  14.  consider  the  wondrous  w.  of  God
Psal.  64.  9.  all  men  shall  declare  the  w.  of  God
66.  5.  come  and  see  the  tv.  of  God,  he  is  terrible
r  78.  7.  that  they  might  not  forget  the  w.  of  God
ft  Eccl.  7.  13.  consider  the  to.  of  God  who  can  make

8.  17.  then  1  beheld  all  the  tv.  of  God

jj  11.  5.  even  so  thou  knowest  not  the  tv.  of  God
1  John  6.  28.  that  we  might  work  the  tv.  of  God
I  29.  this  is  the  tv.  of  God  that  ye  believe  on  me

9.  3.  that  tv.  of  God  might  be  made  manifest
1  Acts  2.  11.  we  hear  them  speak  the  tv.  of  God

Rom.  14.  20.  for  meat  destroy  not  the  tv.  of  God
See  Good,  Great.

His  WORK.

Gen.  2.  2.  God  ended  his  tv.  ||  3.  resteil  from  his  tv.
Exod.  36.  4.  they  came  every  man  from  his  tv.
Deut.  32.  4.  he  is  the  rock,  his  tv.  is  perfect
Judg.  19.  16.  an  old  man  came  from  his  tv.  at  even
1  Sam.  8.  16.  he  will  take  asses  and  put  to  his  tv.

1  Kings  7.  14.  Hiram  came  and  wrought  all  his  tv.

1  Chron.  4.  23.  they  dwelt  with  the  king  for  his  tv.

2  Chron.  8.  9.  of  Israel  he  made  no  servants  for  his  tv.

16.  5.  Baasha  let  his  tv.  cease,  he  left  off  building

Keh.  4.  15.  that  we  returned  every  man  to  his  tv.
Job  7.  2.  an  hireling  looketh  for  the  reward  of  his  tv.
36.  24.  remember  that  thou  magnify  his  tv.

(  37.  7.  that  all  men  may  know  his  tv.

Psal.  62.  12.  to  thee  mercy,  for  thou  renderest  to
every  man  according  to  his  tv.  Prov.  24.  29.
104.  23.  man  goeth  forth  to  his  tv.  and  labour
111.  3.  his  tv.  is  honourable  and  glorious
Prov.  16.  11.  all  the  weights  of  the  bag  are  his  tv.

.  20.  11.  whether  his  tv.  be  pure  or  whether  right

1  21.  8.  but  as  for  the  pure  his  tv.  is  right

t  Isa.  5.  19.  let  him  hasten  his  tv.  that  we  may  see  it
;  10.  12.  the  Lord  hath  performed  his  whole  tv.

28.  21.  that  he  may  do  his  tv.  his  strange  tv.

,(  40.  10.  behold,  his  tv.  is  before  him,  62.  11.

54.  16.  that  bringeth  forth  an  instrument  for  his  tv.
Jer.  22.  13.  that  giveth  him  not  for  his  tv.

Hab.  2.  18.  the  maker  of  his  to.  trusteth  therein
Mark  13.  34.  who  gave  to  every  man  his  tv.

John  4.  34.  my  meat  is  to  finish  his  to.

Gal.  6.  4.  let  every  man  prove  his  own  tv.

Rev.  22.  12.  to  give  every  man  as  his  tv.  shall  be
See  Lord,  Needle.

I  .  Our  WORK.

Gen .  5.  29.  this  shall  comfort  us  concerning  our  tv.
I  Thy  WORK.

Exod.  20.  9.  six  days  do  all  thy  tv.  23. 12.  Deut.  5. 13.
Ruth  2.  12.  the  Lord  recom pense  thy  tv.

Psal.  77-  12.  1  will  meditate  also  of  all  thy  tv.

90.  16.  let  thy  w.  appear  unto  thy  servants
92.  4.  thou,  Lord,  hast  made  me  glad  thro’  thy  tv.
Prov.  24.  27.  prepare  thy  tv.  without  and  make  it  fit
Isa.  45.  9.  or  shall  thy  tv.  say  he  hath  no  hands  ?
Jer.  31. 16.  for  thy  tv.  shall  be  rewarded,  saith  the  L.
Hab.  3.  2.  revive  thy  tv.  in  the  midst  of  the  years
Your  WORK.

Exod.  5. 11.  not  ought  of  your  tv.  shall  be  diminished

2  Chron.  15.  7-  for  your  tv.  shall  be  rewarded

Isa.  41.  24.  ye  are  of  nothing,  your  tv.  is  of  nought
1  Thess.  1. 3.  remember,  your  tv.  faith,  labour  of  love
Heb.  6.  10.  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  tv.
WORK  -fellow.

Rom.  16.  21.  Timothy  my  tv.-fellotv  saluteth  you
WORK,  Verb.

Exod.  5.  18.  go  and  tv.  ||  34.  21.  six  days  thou  shalt  tv.
35.  2.  whoso  doeth  w.  therein  shall  be  put  to  death
Josh.  9.  4.  they  did  tv.  wilily  and  went  and  made
1  Sam.  14.  6.  it  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  tv.  for  us
l  Kings  21.  20.  thou  hast  sold  thyself  to  tv.  evil,  25.
Keh.  4.  6.  for  the  people  had  a  mind  to  tv.

Job  23.  9.  on  the  left  hand  where  he  doth  tv,

Psal.  58.  2.  yea,  in  heart  you  tv.  wickedness
119.  126.  it  is  time  for  thee,  Lord,  tow.

Prov.  11.  18.  the  wicked  tv.  a  deceitful  work
Isa.  19.  9.  they  that  tv.  in  flax,  shall  be  confounded
43.  13.  1  will  tv.  and  who  shall  let  it
Ezek.  33.  26.  ye  tv.  abomination  and  ye  defile
Dan.  11.  23.  and  he  shall  tv.  deceitfully
I Mic.  2.  1.  woe  to  them  that  tv.  evil  upon  their  beds
Hab.  1. 5.  I  will  tv.  a  work  in  your  days,  which  ye
will  not  believe,  tho’  it  be  told  you,  Acts  13.  41.
Hag.  2.  4.  tv.  for  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord
Mai.  3.  15.  they  that  tv.  wickedness  are  set  up
Mat.  21.  28.  son,  go  tv.  to-day  in  my  vineyard
Luke  13.  14.  six  days  in  which  men  ought  to  tv.
John  5.  17.  my  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  1  tv.

6.  28.  that  we  might  tv.  the  works  of  God
30.  they  said  unto  him,  what  dost  thou  tv.  ?

9.  4.  I  must  tv.  the  works  of  him  that  sent  me  while
it  is  day,  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  to.
Rom.  7.  5.  sin  by  the  law  did  tv.  in  our  members
8.  28.  we  know  that  all  things  tv.  together  for  good
Eph.  4.  19.  to  tv.  all  uncleanness  with  greediness
Phil.  2.  12.  tv.  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear
1  Thess.  4.  11.  study  to  tv.  with  your  own  hands
!  Thess.  2.  7-  the  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  tv.

3.  10.  if  any  would  not  tv.  neither  should  he  eat
12.  we  exhort  that  with  quietness  they  tv.

See  1  n  ion  ity.

S  _  WORKER.

I  KingsJ .  14.  Hiram  of  Naphtali  was  a  tv.  in  brass
WORKERS.

I  Kings  23.  24.  tv.  with  familiar  spirits  and  wizards
l  Cor.  6.  1.  we  then  as  tv.  together  with  him
11;  13.  for  such  are  false  apostles,  deceitful  tv.
Phil.  3.  2.  bew  are  of  dogs,  beware  of  evil  u.

See  Iniquity.

I  WORKS.

Exod.  5.  13.  fulfil  your  tv.  and  your  daily  tasks
Num.  16.  28.  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  do  all  these  tv.
Deut.  2. 7.  the  Lord  blessed  thee  in  all  the  tv.  16.  15.
Tudg.  2.  10.  a  generation  which  knew  not  the  tv.
t  Sam.  8.  8.  according  to  all  the  tv.  they  have  done
1  Kings  13.  11.  told  him  all  the  w.  the  man  of  G.  did


2  Kings  22.17.  have  forsaken  me  and  provoked  me  to
anger  with  all  the  tv.  of  their  hands,  2  Chr.  34.  25.
heh.  9.  35.  nor  turned  they  from  their  wicked  to.
Psal.  14.  1.  corrupt,  they  have  done  abominable  tv.

17.  4. concerning  the  to.  of  men  by  word  of  thy  lips
92.  4.  I  will  triumph  in  the  tv.  of  thy  hands
111.  2.  the  u\  of  the  Lord  are  great,  sought  out

7.  the  tv.  of  his  hands  are  verity  and  judgment
138.  8.  forsake  not  the  tv.  of  thine  own  hands
141.  4.  to  practise  wicked  tv.  with  men  that
Prov.  31.  31.  let  her  own  w,  praise  her  in  the  gates
Eccl.  1.  14.  I  have  seen  the  tv.  that  are  done,  2. 11.
Isa.  26.  12.  thou  hast  wrought  all  our  tv  in  us
Jer.  7.  13.  because  ye  have  done  all  these  tv.

25.  6.  provoke  me  not  to  anger  with  the  tv.  of  your

hands  to  your  own  hurt,  7.  |  44.  8.
14.  recompense  them  according  to  their  deeds  and
the  tv.  of  their  hands.  Rev.  2. 23.
Ezek.  6.  6.  that  your  tv.  may  be  abolished
Dan.  4.  37.  honour  him  whose  to.  are  truth
Mic.  6.  16.  the  tv.  of  the  house  of  Aliab  are  kept
Mae.  11.  2.  John  heard  in  prison  the  tv.  of  Christ
John  5.  20.  he  will  shewhim  greater  iv.  than  these

36.  the  tv.  which  the  Father  hatl  given  me,  the

same  tv.  that  1  do  bear  witness  of  me

7.  3.  thy  disciples  may  see  the  w.  that  thou  doest
7 .  because  I  testify  that  the  tv.  thereof  are  evil

8.  39.  if  children,  ye  would  do  thear.  of  Abraham

9.  4.  1  must  work  the  tv.  of  him  fnat  sent  me

10.  25.  the  an  that  1  do  in  my  Father’s  name
32.  for  which  of  these  tv.  do  ve  stone  me  ?

37.  if  I  do  not  the  w.  ||38.  believe  the  tv.

14.  10.  he  doetli  the  tv.  ||  11.  believe  for  the  tv.

12.  the  tv.  that  l  do,  shall  he  do,  and  greater  tv.

15.  24.  if  l  had  not  done  among  them  the  tv.

Acts  7.  41.  they  rejoiced  in  the  tv.  of  their  hands

26.  20.  (-entiles  should  do  v.  meet  for  repentance
Rom.  3.  27.  by  what  law  r  of  tv.  ?  nay,  but  of  faith

4.  2.  for  if  Abraham  were  justified  by  tv.

6.  God  imputeth  righteousness  without  a;.

9.  11.  not  of  to.  but  of  him  that  calleth
32.  not  by  faith,  but  as  it  v/ere  by  the  tv.  of  the  law

11.  6.  if  by  grace,  then  is  itno  more  of  tv.  but  if  it

be  of  tv.  is  it  no  more  of  grace
13.  12.  let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  tv.  of  darkness
Gal.  2.  16.  knowing  a  man  is  not  justified  by  the  tv.
of  the  law,  for  by  the  tv.  of  law  no  flesh  is  justified

3.  2.  received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  tv.  of  the  law  5

5.  doeth  he  it  by  the  tv.  of  the  law,  or  by  faith  ?

10.  as  many  as  are  of  tv.  of  the  law,  under  curse

5.  19.  the  tv.  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  adultery
Eph.  2.  9.  not  of  a;,  lest  any  man  should  boast

5.  11.  with  the  unfruitful  tv.  of  darkness

Col.  1.  21.  and  enemies  in  your  mind  by  wicked  tv.

1  Thess.  5. 13.  to  esteem  in  love  for  their  vj,  sake

2  Tim.  1. 9.  saved  us,  not  according  to  our  tv.  Tit. 3.5.
Tit.  1.16.  but  in  tv.  they  deny  God,  abominable
Heb.  1.  10.  the  heavens  are  the  tv.  of  thy  hands

2.  7-  thou  didst  set  him  over  the  tv.  of  thy  hands
3. 9.  your  fathers  saw  my  tv.  forty  years  in  wildern.

4.  3.  although  the  tv.  were  finished  from  foundation

6.  1.  the  foundation  of  repentance  from  dead  tv.

9.  14.  purge  conscience  from  dead  tv.  to  serve  God
Jam.  2.  14.  if  he  have  not  tv.  can  faith  save  him  ?

17.  faith  without  tv.  is  dead,  being  alone,  20.  26.

18.  1  have  tv.  shew-  me  thy  faith  without  thy  zv.'

2.  21.  w  as  not  Abraham  justified  by  tv.  ?

22.  and  by  tv.  was  faith  made  perfect

24.  ye  see  then  that  by  to.  a  man  is  justified

25.  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  justified  by  w.  ?

2  Pet.  3.  10.  the  earth  and  the  tv.  therein  burnt  up
1  John  3.  8.  that  he  might  destroy  the  zv.  of  devil
Rev.  2.  26.  he  that  keepeth  my  tv.  to  the  end
9.  20.  yet  repented  not  of  the  tv.  of  their  hands
18.  6.  double  to  her  double,  according  to  herw.

See  Evil,  Good,  Work  of  God.

His  WORKS.

1  Sam.  19.  4.  his  tv.  have  been  to  thee  very  good

2  Chron.  32.  30.  Hezekiah  prospered  in  all  his  tv.
Psal.  33.  4.  and  all  his  tv.  are  done  in  truth

78.  11.  forget  his  tv.  and  his  wonders,  106.  13.

103.  22.  bless  the  Lord,  all  his  tv.  in  all  places
104.31.  the  Lora  snail  rejoice  in  his  to.

107.  22.  let  them  declare  his  tv.  with  rejoicing
111.6.  he  shewed  his  people  the  power  of  his  tv.
145.  9.  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  tv.

17.  the  Lord  is  holy  in  all  his  tv.

Prov.  8.  22.  the  Lord  possessed  me  before  his  tv.

24. 12.  shall  not  lie  render  to  every  man  according
to  his  tv.  ?  Mat.  16.  27-  2  Tim.  4.  14.
Eccl.  3.  22.  a  man  should  rejoice  in  his  own  tv.

Dan.  9. 14.  God  is  righteous  in  all  his  tv.

Acts  15.  18.  known  to  God  are  all  his  tv.

Heb.  4.  4.  rested  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  tv.

10.  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own  to.  ?

Jam.  2.  22.  seest  how  faith  wrought  with  his  tv.  ?

3.  13.  shew  out  of  a  good  conversation  his  tv.

See  Lord,  Marvellous,  Mighty.

Their  WORKS.

Exod.  5.  4.  why  do  ye  let  the  people  from  their  tv.
23.  24.  thou  shalt  not  do  after  their  tv.

Keh.  6. 14.  according  to  these  their  tv.

Job  34.  25.  therefore  he  knoweth  their  tv.

Psal.  3.3.  15.  he  considereth  all  their  tv.

106.  35.  and  they  learned  their  zv.

39.  thus  were  they  defiled  with  their  own  tv.

Eccl.  9.  1.  and  their  zv.  are  in  the  hand  of  God
Isa.  29.  15.  their  tv.  are  in  the  dark,  they  say
41.  29.  they  are  vanity,  their  zv.  are  nothing
59.  6.  nor  shall  they  cover  themselves  with  their  tv.

their  tv.  are  works  of  iniquity,  wasting
66.  18.  I  know  their  tv.  and  their  thoughts
Amos  8.7.  1  will  never  forget  any  of  their  tv.

Jonah  3.  10.  God  saw  their  tv.  that  they  turned
Mat.  23.  3.  but  do  not  ye  after  their  tv.

5.  all  their  tv.  they  do  to  be  seen  of  men

2  Cor.  11.  15.  w  hose  end  be  according  to  their  tv.

Rev.  14. 15.  and  their  tv.  do  follow  them
20.  12.  the  dead  judged  according  to  their  tv.  13.

Thy  WORKS.

Deut.  3.  24,  who  can  do  according  to  thy  tv.  ?

15.  10.  the  Lord  shall  bless  thee  in  all  thy  tv.


2  Chron.  20.  37-  the  Lord  hath  broken  thy  tv.

Psal.  26.  7.  tell  of  all  thy  wondrous  tv.  145.  4.

66.  3.  say  to  God,  how  terrible  art  thou  in  thy  u.
73.  28.  ti  ust  in  Lord,  that  1  may  declare  all  thy  xt
86.  8.  nor  are  there  any-  works  like  unto  thy  tv.

92.  5.  O  Lord,  how  great  are  thy  tv.

104.  13.  earth  is  satisfied  with  fruit  of  thy  w.

24.  O  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  to.?

143.  5.  1  remember,  1  meditate  on  all  thy  tv.

145.  10.  all  thy  tv.  shall  praise  thee,  (3  Lord
Prov.  16.  3.  commit  thy  tv.  unto  the  Lord
Eccl.  9.  7-  for  now  God  accepteth  thy  zv.

Isa.  57. 12.  1  will  declare  thy  tv.  shall  not  profit
Jer.  48.  7-  because  thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  w.

Jam.  2.  18.  shew  me  thy  faith  without  zt).

Rev.  2.  2.  1  know  thy  tv.  9,  13,  19.  13.  1,8,  15.

3.  2.  1  have  not  found  thy  tv.  perfect  before  God

Wonderful  W  ORKS.

Psal.  40.  5.  many  ,  O  Lord,  are  thy  wonderful  tv.

78.  4.  shewing  his  wonderful  to.  he  hath  done
107.  8.  would  praise  the  l  ord  for  his  wonderful  tv.

to  the  children  of  men,  15,  21,  31.
111.  4.  made  his  wonderful  w.  to  be  remembered
Mat.  7.  22.  in  thy  name  have  done  wonderful  tv.
Acts  2.  11.  Cretes  and  Arabians,  we  do  hear  them
speak  in  our  tongues  the  wonderful  w.  of  God
See  Wondrous.

T  WORKETH.

Job  33.  29.  lo,  all  these  things  w.  God  for  man
Psal.  15.  2.  he  that  walketh  uprightly,  and  w.

,  righteousness  shall  dwell
101.  7.  he  that  zv.  deceit  shall  not  dwell  in  my  ho.
Prov.  11.  18.  the  wicked  w.  a  deceitful  work
26.  28.  a  flattering  mouth  tv.  ruin
31.  13.  she  w.  willingly  with  her  hands
Eccl.  3.  9.  what  profit  hath  he  that  tv.?

Isa.  44. 12.  tl  e  smith  with  his  tongs  w.  in  the  coals,
and  heai.  it  with  the  strength  of  his  arms
64.  5.  thou  rneetest  him  that  zv.  righteousness
Dan.  6.  27.  he  w.  signs  and  wonders  in  heaven
John  5.  17-  my  Father  zv.  hitherto,  and  1  work
Acts  10.  35.  he  that  w.  righteousness  is  accepted
Rom.  2. 10.  glory  and  peace  to  every  one  that  zr.good

4.  4.  to  him  that  tv.  is  the  reward  not  of  grace
5.  to  him  that  w.  not,  but  believeth  on  him

15.  because  the  law  w.  wrath,  for  where  no  law
5.3.  knowing  that  tribulation  tv.  patience
13.  10.  love  tv.  no  ill  to  his  neighbour,  therefore

1  Cor.  12.  6.  it  is  the  same  God  that  w.  all  in  all
11.  all  these  w.  that  one  and  the  same  Spirit

16. 10.  for  he  w.  the  w  ork  of  the  Lord,  as  1  also  do

2  Cor.  L  12.  so  then  death  a.  in  us,  but  life  in  you
17.  tv.  for  us  a  more  exceeding  weight  of  glory

7. 10.  for  godly  sorrow  tv.  repentance  to  salvation,

but  the  sorrow  of  the  world  w.  death
Gal.  3.  5.  he  therefore  that  w.  miracles  among  y  ou
5.  6.  but  faith  which  w.  by  love
Eph.  1.  11.  who  tv.  all  things  after  the  counsel

2.  2.  the  spirit  that  now  tv.  in  the  disobedient

3.  20.  according  to  the  power  that  w.  in  us
Phil.  2. 13.  for  it  is  G.  that  tv.  in  you  to  will  and  do
Col.  1.  29.  his  working,  which  w.  in  me  mightily

1  Thess.  2.  13.  effectually  w.  in  you  that  believe
Jam.  1.  3.  that  the  trying  of  your  faith  w.  patience
20.  the  wrath  of  man  w.  not  righteousness  of  God
Rev.  21.  27 ..nor  whatsoever  ti)  abomination
WORKING,  Participle.

Psal.  52.2.  like  a  sharp  razor,  w.  deceitfully
74.  12.  w.  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the  earth
Ezek.  46. 1.  the  gate  shall  be  shut  the  six  w.  days
Mark  16. 20.  the  Lord  w.  with  them,  with  signs
Rom.  1.27.  men  with  men  tv.  that  which  is  unseem  Ity
7 .  13.  sin  w.  death  in  me  by  that  which  is  good

1  Cor.  4.  12.  and  labour,  tv.  with  our  own  hands
Eph.  4.  28.  w.  with  his  hands  the  thing  that  is  good

2  Thess.  3.  11.  tv.  not  at  all,  but  are  busy-bodies
Heb.  13.  21.  tv.  in  you  that  which  is  well  pleasing
Rev.  16. 14.  they  are  the  spirits  of  devils  w.  miracles

WORKING,  Substantive.

Isa.  28.  29.  from  the  Lord  who  is  excellent  in  w.

1  Cot.  9.  6.  have  not  we  power  to  forbear  w.  ?

12. 10.  to  another  the  w.  of  miracles

Eph.  1. 19.  according  to  the  to.  of  his  mighty  pOWer
3. 7-  given  me  by  the  effectual  w.  of  his  power
4. 16.  according  to  the  effectual  w.  in  the  measure
Phil.  3.  21.  according  to  the  w.  whereby  he  is  able
Col.  1.  29.  his  w.  which  worketh  in  me  mightily

2  Thess.  2.  9.  whose  coming  is  after  the  w.  of  Satan

WORKMAN.

Exod.  26.  +  1.  cherubims,  the  work  of  a  cunning  w,

35.  35.  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  with  wisdom  to  work
all  manner  of  work  of  the  cunning  w.  38.  23.
Cant.  7. 1.  like  jewels,  the  work  of  a  cunning  w.

Isa.  40. 19.  the  w.  melteth  a  graven  image
20.  he  seeketh  to  him  a  cunning  tv.  to  prepare
Jer.  10.  3.  the  work  of  the  w.  w  ith  the  axe
Hos.  8.  6.  the  tv.  made  it,  therefore  it  is  not  God
Mat.  10.  10.  the  w.  is  worthy  of  his  meat
2  Tim.  2.  15.  a  w.  that  needeth  not  be  ashamed
WORKMANSHIP.

Exod.  31.  3.  and  in  all  manner  of  tv.  5.  I  35.  31.

2  Kings  16. 10.  according  to  all  the  tv.  thereof
Ezek.  28.  13.  the  tv.  of  tafirets  was  prepared  in  thee
Eph.  2. 10.  for  we  are  his  w.  created  in  Christ  Jesus
WORKMEN.

2  K  ings  12. 14.  but  they  gave  that  to  the  w.  to  repair
the  house  of  the  Lord,  15.  2  Chron.  34.  10,  17.

1  Chron.  22.15.  there  area’,  with  il.ee  in  abundance
25. 1.  number  of  w.  ||  2  Chron.  24. 13.  w.  wrought
Ezra  3.  9.  to  set  forward  the  w.  in  the  house  of  God
Isa.  44.  11.  behold,  the  w.  they  are  of  men
Acts  19. 25.  called  with  the  w.  of  like  occupation
WORLD,

In  Greek ,  K ootxos  ;  in  Hebrew,  Thebal.  It  is
taken  for  the  whole  universe  ;  comprehending  the
heavens,  earth,  sea,  the  elements,  the  angels,  men,
animals,  in  a  word,  all  created  beings.  John  1.
10.  The  world  w  as  made  by  him.  It  is  also  put
for  the  race  of  mankind ;  sometimes  in  an  ex¬
tensive  sense,  for  all  the  posterity  of  Adam.
Rom.  5.  12.  By  one  man  sin  entered  into  the
world.  “  Sin  came  to  be  among  mankind  it  is  a


W  OR


W  O  R


W  U  R


metonymy ,  the  thing  containing  being  put  for  the
inhabitants  contained.  Sometimes  it  is  taken  m  a
more  restricted  sense,  as  in  John  15.  18.  it  is  put
for  the  wicked  in  the  world,  for  unregenerated,  un¬
renewed  persons.  1  f  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know
that  it  hated  me  before  it  hated  you.  The  wicked
are  called  the  world,  because  they  relish  and  sa¬
vour  nothing  but  worldly  things ,  and  pursue  no¬
thing  but  worldly  designs.  It  is  put  likewise  Jot
God's  chosen  people ,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles.  ~
Cor.  5.  19.  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the
world  to  himself.  And  in  John  3.  16.  God  so
loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten
Son  to  die  in  their  stead,  and  give  satisfaction  Jor
them  to  his  justice.  Believers  are  called  the
world,  both  because  they  are  taken  front  among
Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  do  participate  in  the  cor¬
ruption  of  the  world.  World  is  put  for  the  G en¬
tiles  only.  Rom.  11.  12.  If  the  fall  of  them  be
the  riches  of  the  world.  The  Jews  rejecting  the
gospel,  and  so  falling  from  being  Gods  people,
was  the  occasion  of  (rod  s  manifesting  his  abundant
grace  in  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  It  is  put
for  sensual  lusts  and  pleasures,  for  the  riches,
honours,  and  dignities  of  the  world.  1  John  2.  15.
Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in
the  world.  It  also  stands  for  the  good  things  of
this  world.  1  Cor  7.  31.  They  that  use  this  world,
as  not  abusing  it.  ,  ,

The  children  ot  this  world,  are  such  as  live  in  the
world,  whether  they  be  good  or  bad,  Luke  20.  34.
The  devil  is  called  the  prince  of  this  world,  John
12.  31.  and  the  god  of  this  world,  2  Cor.  4.  4.  He
boasted  to  our  Saviour  that  he  was  so,  Mat.  4.  9.
and  he  acteth  in  this  world  like  a  prince,  power
fully  working  in  the  children  oj  disobedience,  Eph.

2.  2.  In  Heb.  2.  5.  the  apostle  calls  the  gospel-
state  of  the  church  the  world  to  come.  It  is  put
for  the  Roman  empire,  Luke  2.  1.  .  ,

Concerning  the  creation  of  the  world,  it  is  asked  if
the  whole  mass  of  matter  was  created  all  at  once  :
and  if  all  corporeal  things  were  ranged  in  order  at
the  same  time  ;  or  only  in  the  space  of  seven  days,
as  Moses  describes  in  the  beginning  of  Genesis !
Some  interpreters  are  of  opinion  that  God  created
all  the  matter  of  the  universe  out  of  nothing  in
an  instant,  by  one  simple  act  of  his  almighty  will ;
but  they  are  not  agreed  about  the  other  question.
Some  maintain,  that  sensible  beings  were  not
brought  to  their  full  perfection,  till  after  the  space
of  seven  days  was  completed.  This  opinion  is
founded  upon  Moses’s  narration,  who  expresses  it
very  distinctly.  Besides,  it  cannot  be  easily  con¬
ceived.  that  the  chaos  should  settle  into  any  regie
■lar  order,  till  after  an  infinite  variety  of  different
motions  by  which  the  parts  of  the  matter  separated
from  one  another ,  which  were  of  different  and  incom¬
patible  qualities  ;  and  till  there  should  be  an  union
and  coalescence  of  those  which  were  of  the  same  form
and  nature  ;  and  that  all  those  motions  could  not  be
performed  till  after  a  sufficient  space  of  time.
Others,  fearing  that  consequences  contrary  to  the  im¬
mutability  and  omnipotence  of  the  Creator,  might
be  drawn  from  the  opinion  of  a  successive  creation,
have  thought,  that  nothing  should  he  inferred  from
Moses's  description,  but  a  mental  succession  of  or¬
der,  and  that  he  only  represents  the  creation  as
performed  in  supcession  of  time,  to  accommodate
himself  to  the  apprehensions  of  the  vulgar,  and  to
give  a  more  intelligible  account  of  it.  Matter,
always  obedient  to  the  commands  of  the  Almighty,
had  no  need  of  preparation.  But  the  first  opinion
has  the  greatest  number  of  followers.

It  is  also  inquired,  at  what  season  of  the  year  the
world  was  created  1  The  generality  of  the  fathers
think  it  was  created  in  the  spring.  But  a  great
number  of  others,  among  whom  are  the  most  learned
chronologists,  contend  that  the  world  was  created
in  autumn.  They  urge,  (1.)  That  the  Hebrews,
the  Egyptians,  and  most  of  the  Orientals,  began
their  year  at  autumn  ;  which  custom  they  had  re¬
ceived  from  their  ancestors,  and  they  from  the  first
men,  who  would  naturally  commence  their  year
from  the  time  when  the  world  began.  (2)  W  hen
•God  created  Adam  and  Eve,  and  all  other  ani¬
mals.  he  was  to  provide  them  with  necessary  nour¬
ishment.  (3)  There  was  fruit  upon  the  trees  in
the  garden  of  Eden,  Gen.  3.  2,  3.  It  was  there¬
fore  autumn,  say  they,  in  whatever  place  we  sup
pose  Adam  to  have  been  created.

1  Sam.  2.  8.  he  hath  set  the  w.  upon  them

2  Sam.  22.  16.  the  channels  of  the  se*  appeared  the

foundations  of  the  w.  were  discovered,  Psal.

18  15

1  Chron.  16.  30.  the  w.  also  shall  not  be  moved
Job  18.  18.  he  shall  be  chased  out  of  the  a;.

34.  13.  or  who  hath  disposed  the  whole  w.  ?

37  12.  that  they  may  do  on  the  face  ot  the  w.

Psal.  9.  8.  he  shall  judge  the  w.  in  righteousness,
minister  judgment  to  the  people,  96. 13.  1  98.  9
17.  14.  deliver  my  soul  from  the  menot  there.

19.  4.  their  words  to  the  end  of  the  w.  Rom.  10. 18
22.  27.  all  the  ends  of  the  w.  shall  remember
24!  1.  the  earth  and  the  w.  is  the  Lord’s,  and  they
that  dwell  therein,  98.  7 •  Rah.  1.  5
33. 8.  let  the  inhabitants  of  the  w.  stand  in  awe

49. 1.  give  ear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  w.

5()!  12.  for  tjae  w.  is  mine
77.  18.  the  lightnings  lightened  the  w.  97.  4.

89.  11.  thou  hast  founded  the  w.  and  its  fulness

90.  2.  hadst  formed  the  earth  and  the  w.

93. 1.  the  w.  also  is  established,  it  cannot  be  moved
96.  10.  w.  also  shall  be  established,  not  be  moved
Prov  8.  26.  while  he  had  not  made  dust  of  the  w.
Eccl.  3.  11.  also  he  hath  set  the  a;,  in  their  heart
Isa.  13. 11.  I  will  punish  the  w.  tor  their  evil

14.  17.  is  this  he  that  made  the  zo.  as  a  wilderness
21.  uor  fill  the  face  of  the  w.  with  cities
24.  4.  them,  languisheth  and  fadeth  away
27.  6.  Israel  shall  fill  the  face  of  the  w.  with  fruit
34.  1.  let  the  w.  hear,  and  all  that  come  forth
45  17.  ye  shall  not  be  confounded,  w.  without  end

568


Mat  4  8  the  devil  sheweth  him  all  the  kingdoms
of  thea>.  and  the  glory  of  them,  Luke  4.  5.

5.  14.  ye  are  the  light  of  the  w.  a  city  on  a  lull

13.  38.  the  field  is  the  w.  good  seed  are  children
40.  so  shall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this  w.  49.

16.  26.  what  profited,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  w.

and  lose  his  own  soul?  Marks.  36.  Luke  9.25.

18.  7-  woe  to  the  w.  because  of  offences
24.  14.  thisgospelof  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached
in  all  the  w.  for  a  witness  to  all,  Mark  14.  9.
Luke  1.70.  who  have  been  since  w.  began,  Acts  3.21 .

2.  1.  a  decree  that  all  the  w.  should  be  taxed
20.  35.  they  that  are  worthy  to  obtain  that  w.

John  1. 10.  he  was  in  the  w.  the  w.  was  made  byfflm,
and  the  zo.  knew  him  not,  Acts  17-  ~4.

29  the  Lamb  of  God  that  takes  away  the  sinota;.

3.  16.  God  so  loved  the  w.  that  he  gave  his  Son
17.  that  the  w.  through  him  might  be  saved

4  42.  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  w.  1  John  4.  14.

6.  33.  bread  of  God  is  he  thatgiveth  life  unto  them.

51.  my  flesh,  which  I  give  for  the  life  of  the  m.

7.  4.  if  thou  do  these  things,  shew  thyself  to  the  m.

7.  the  m.  cannot  hate  you,  but  me  it  hateth

8.  12.  Jesus  said,  1  am  the  light  ot  the  m.  9.  5.

12.  19.  behold,  the  m.  is  gone  after  him

47.  1  came  not  to  judge,  but  to  save  the  w.

14  17  the  Spirit,  whom  them,  cannot  receive
19.  a  little  while  and  the  m.  seeth  me  no  more
22.  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself
unto  us  and  not  unto  the  m.  f
27-  my  peace  I  give,  not  as  the  m.  giveth,  give  1

14.  31.  that  the  w.  may  know  1  love  Father

15.  18.  if  the  m.  hate  you,  1  John  3.  13.

19.  if  ye  were  of  the  w.  the  w.  would  love  lus  own

16.  20.  but  the  m.  shall  rejoice
28.  1  leave  the  m.  and  go  to  the  I  ather
33.  be  of  good  cheer,  1  have  overcome  the  m.

17.  5.  the  glory  1  had  with  thee  before  the  m.  was
6  thy  name  to  men  thou  gavest  me  out  ot  the  m.

9  1  pray  not  for  m.  but  for  them  hast  given  me

14.  m.  hated  them,  because  they  are  not  of  the  m.

15.  thou  shouldest  not  take  them  out  ot  the  w.

16.  they  are  not  of  the  m.  even  as  1  am  not  ot  m.

21  that  the  w.  may  believe  thou  hast  sent  me,  23.
25.  O  Father,  the  m.  hath  not  known  thee

18.  20.  Jesus  answered,  I  spake  openly  to  the  m.

21  25  1  suppose  m.  could  not  contain  the  books

Acts  17.  6.  these  that  turned  the  m.  upside  down

19.  27.  Diana,  whom  Asia  and  the  m.  worshipped
04  5  a  mover  of  sedition  thro’  the  w.  a  ringleader
Rom.  1.  8.  your  faith  is  spoken  of  thro’  the  whole  m.

3.  6.  for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  m.

19.  that  all  the  w.  may  become  guilty  before  God
4  13  the  promise  that  he  should  be  heir  ot  the  w.

11  12  if  the  fall  of  them  be  the  riches  ot  the  w.

15.  if  casting  away  of  them  be  reconciling  of  m.

1  Cor.  1.21.  the  w.  by  wisdom  knew  not  God

2.  7.  the  wisdom  which  God  ordained  before  the  w

12.  now  we  have  received  not  the  spirit  ot  the  w.

3.  22.  or  the  w.  of  life,  or  death,  all  are  yours

4.  9.  for  we  are  made  a  spectacle  to  w.  to  angels

13.  we  are  made  as  the  tilth  of  w.  and  offscounng

5.  10.  for  then  must  ye  needs  go  out  of  the  a;.

6.2.  do  ye  not  know  that  saints  shall  judge  the  w.  ?

7'.  33.  careth  for  the  things  that  are  in  the  w.  34.

8  13  1  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  w.  standeth
li.  32.  that  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  w.

2  Cor  5  19  God  in  Christ  reconciling  w.  to  himself
Gal.  6.  14.  glory  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  by

whom  the  w.  is  crucified  to  me,  ami  I  to  the  w.

2  Tim.  1.9.  in  Christ  before  the  w.  began,  lit.  1.2.
Heb.  2.  5.  he  put  not  in  subjection  the  w.  to  come

6.  5.  liave  tasted  the  powers  of  the  w.  to  come

11.  38.  of  whom  the  w.  was  not  worthy
Jam.  1.  27.  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  w.

3.  6.  the  tongue  is  afire,  a  w.  pf  iniquity

4  4.  the  friendship  of  thew.  is  enmity  with  God,
a  friend  of  the  w.  is  the  enemy  of  God

2  Pet  2.  5.  God  spared  not  the  old  w.  bringing  in
the  flood  on  the  w.  ot  the  ungodly
3.  6.  whereby  the  w.  that  then  was,  perished
1  John  2.  2.  he  is  the  propitiation  tor  the  sms  of  w.

15.  love  not  the  w.  11  16.  but  is  of  the  w.

17.  the  w.  passeth  away,  and  the  lusts  thereof
3  1.  the  zo.  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  him  not
4’  5  they  are  of  the  w.  therefore  speak  of  the  w.

5  4.  what  is  born  of  God,  overcometh  the  is.  5.

19.  we  are  of  God,  wholes,  lieth  in  wickedness

Rev  3.  10.  hour  of  temptation  shall  come  on  all  w.

12.  9.  called  Satan,  whodeceiveth  the  whole  w.

13".  3.  and  all  the  w.  wondered  after  the  beast

See  Foundation.

In,  or  into  the  WORLD.

Psal.  73.  12.  the  ungodly  who  prosper  in  the  w.
Mat.  26. 13.  this  gospel  be  preached  in  the  whole  w.
Mark  10.  30.  he  shall  receive  an  hundred-fold,  and
in  the  w.  to  come  eternal  life,  Luke  18.  30.
John  1.  9.  lighteth  every  man  that  comes  into  the  w.
10.  he  was  in  the  w.  and  the  w.  was  made  by  him
3.17.  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  w.  to  condemn  w.
19.  light  is  come  into  the  w.  men  loved  darkness
6.  14.  prophet  that  should  come  into  the  w.  11.  27.
9'.  5.  as  long  as  1  am  in  the  zo.  1  am  the  light  of  w.
12.  46.  1  am  come  a  light  into  the  w.  who.  believeth
16!  33.  in  zo.  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  in  me  peace
17.  11.  1  am  no  more  in  the  w.  these  are  m  the  w.

12.  while  1  was  with  them  in  the  w.  1  kept  them
18  37.  and  for  this  cause  came  I  into  them.

Rom.  5.  12.  as  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  w.

13.  for  until  the  law,  sin  was  in  the  w.

1  Cor.  8.  4.  we  know  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  w.
Eph.  2.  12.  having  no  hope,  without  God  m  the  w.
Col.  1. 6.  gospel  is  come  to  you  as  it  is  m  all  the  zo.

1  Tim.  1. 15.  Chr.  Jesus  came  into  w.  to  save  sinners

3.  16.  seen  of  angels  and  believed  on  in  the  w.

Heb  10.  5.  when  he  cometh  into  the  w.  he  saith
1  Pet.  5.  9.  the  same  afflictions  that  are  m  thew.

1  John  2. 15.  love  not  the  things  that  are  m  the  a.

4.  1.  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  w.

3.  antichrist,  even  now  already  is  it  in  the  w.

4.  because  he  is  greater  than  he  that  is  in  the  10.

9.  God  sent  his  Son  into  the  w.  that  we  might  live


2  John  7.  many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the  w.
This  WORLD.

Mat.  12.  32.  it  shall  not  be  forgiven  him  m  tins  zo.
13.  22.  cares  of  this  w.  choke  word,  Mark  4.  19.
Luke  16. 8.  for  the  children  of  this  w.  are  wiser  that,
20.  34.  Jesus  said,  the  children  of  this  w.  marry
John  8.  23.  ye  are  of  this  w.  1  am  not  of  this  w.

9.  39.  for  judgment  1  am  come  into  this  w.

12.  25.  he  that  hateth  life  in  this  w.  shall  keep  it
31.  Jesus  sail,  now  is  the  judgment  of  this  w.  now

shall  the  prince  of  this  w.  be  cast  out

13.  1.  he  should  depart  out  of  this  w.  to  the  Father

14.  30.  for  prince  of  this  w.  cometh,  nothing  in  me
16.  11.  because  the  prince  of  this  w.  is  judged

18.  36.  Jesus  answered,  my  Kingdom  is  not  of  this
w.  if  my  kingdom  were  of  this  w.
Rom.  12.2.  be  not  conformed  to  t.  zo.  but  transformed
1  Cor.  1.  20.  where  is  the  disputer  of  this  w.  ?  hath
not  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  w.  ?


2.  6.  yet  we  speak  not  the  wisdom  of  this  zo.

3.  18.  if  any  man  seemeth  to  be  wise  in  this  w.

19.  the  wisdom  of  this  w.  is  foolishness  with  God

5.  10.  yet  not  with  the  fornicators  of  this  w.

7.  31.  they  that  use  this  w.  as  not  abusing  it

2  Cor.  4. 4.  the  god  of  this  w.  hath  blinded  the  minds
Gal.  1.  4.  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  pres,  evil  w.
Eph.  1.  21.  not  only  in  this  w.  but  in  tiiat  to  come
2.  2.  ye  walked  according  to  the  course  of  this  w.

6.  12.  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  w.

1  Tim.  6.  7.  for  we  brought  nothing  into  this  zi>.

17.  charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this  w.

2  Tim.  4.  10.  Demas  having  loved  this  present  zo.

Tit.  2.  12.  we  should  live  godly  in  this  present  w.
Jam.  2.  5.  God  hath  chosen  the  poor  of  this  zo.

1  John  3.  17.  but  whoso  hath  this  w.  good  and  seetb
4. 17.  because  as  he  is,  so  are  we  in  this  w.
WORLDLY.

Tit.  2.  12.  denying  ungodliness  and  w.  lusts
Heb.  9.  1.  the  first  covenant  had  a  w.  sanctuary
WORLDS.

Heb.  1.  2.  by  his  Son,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  zo.
11.  3.  the  w.  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God
WORM.

When  the  Scripture  would  represent  to  us  a  person
that  is  weak,  mean,  and  despised  in  the  world,  it
compares  him  to  a  worm  of  the  earth,  because  no¬
thing  is  found  to  be  more  contemptible  than  this
creature.  Job  25.  6.  How  much  less  man  that  is  a
worm?  And  the  Psalmist  says,  1  am  a  worm ,  and
no  man,  Psal.  22.  6.  The  worm  of  the  damned
dies  not,  and  their  tire  shall  never  be  quenched,
Isa.  66. 24.  “  They  will  feel  a  worm  of  conscience
that  shall  never  die,  and  the  fiery  wrath  of  God
upon  their  souls  and  bodies  that  shall  never  go  out."
Exod.  16.  24.  neither  was  there  any  w.  therein
Job  17.  14.  I  said  to  the  w.  thou  art  my  mother

24.  20.  the  w.  shall  feed  sweetly  on  him

25.  6.  much  less  man  that  is  a  w.  and  son  of  man
Psal.  22.  6.  but  I  am  a  w.  and  no  man,  a  reproach
Isa.  14.  11.  thezr.  is  spread  under  thee,  and  worms

41.  14.  fear  not,  thou  w.  Jacob,  and  ye  men  of  Israel
51.  8.  and  the  w.  shall  eat  them  like  wool
66.  24.  for  their  w.  shall  not  die,  nor  their  fire  be
quenched,  Mark 9.  44,  46,  48.
Jonah  4.  7.  God  prepared  a  w.  it  smote  the  gourd
WORMS.

Exod.  16.  20.  their  manna  bred  w.  and  stank
Deut.  28.  39-  grapes,  for  the  w.  shall  eat  them
Job  7.  5.  my  flesh  is  clothed  with  w.  and  dust
19.  26.  tho’  w.  destroy  this  body,  yet  shall  1  see  G .
21.  26.  they  shall  lie  down,  and  w.  shall  cover  them
Isa.  14. 11.  worm  under  thee,  and  the  w.  cover  thee
Mic.  7. 17.  they  move  out  ot  their  holes  like  w.

Acts  12. 23.  Herod  was  eaten  of  zo.  and  gave  up  ghost
WORMWOOD.

Deut.  29.  18.  lest  there  he  a  root  that  beareth  w.
Prov.  5.  4.  her  end  is  bitter  as  w.  sharp  as  a  sword
Jer.  9.  15.  I  will  feed  them  with  w.  23.  15.

Lam.  3.  15.  he  hath  made  me  drunken  with  w.

19.  remembering  my  misery,  the  w.  and  the  gall
Amos  5.  7.  ye  who  turn  judgment  to  w.

Rev.  8.11.  the  name  of  the  star  is  called  w.  and  the
third  part  of  the  waters  became  w.
WORSE.

Gen.  19-  9.  we  will  deal  w.  with  thee  than  them
2  Sam.  19.7.  that  will  beztf.  than  all  that  befell  thee

1  Kings  16.  25.  Omri  did  w.  than  all  before  him

2  Kings  14.  12.  Judah  was  put  to  the  w.  before  Ls-

rael,  and  fled  to  their  tents,  2  Chron.  25.  22.

1  Chron.  19.  16.  the  Syrians  were  put  to  the  w.  19.

2  Chron.  6.  24.  if  thy  people  be  put  to  the  w.

33.  9.  Manasseh  made  Jerusalem  do  w.

Isa.  41.  t  24.  w.  than  nothing,  w.  than  a  viper
Jer.  7.26.  they  did  w.  than  their  fathers,  16.  12.
Dan.  1.  10.  why  should  he  see  your  faces  w.  liking  r
Mat.  9.  16.  the  rent  is  made  w.  Mark  2.  21.

12.  45.  wicked  spirits  dwell  there,  the  last  state  of
that  man  is  w.  than  the  first,  Luke  11.  26.
27.  64.  the  last  error  shall  be  w.  than  the  first
Mark  5.  26.  she  was  nothing  bettered,  but  grew  w.
John  2.  10.  men  have  drunk,  then  that  which  is  w.
5.  14.  sin  no  more,  lest  a  w.  thing  come  unto  thee
1  Cor.  8.  8.  neither  if  we  eat  not  are  we  the  a;.

11.  17.  you  come  not  for  the  better,  but  for  the  zc.

1  Tim.  5. 8.  denied  the  faith,  he  is  w.  than  an  infidel

2  Tim.  3.  13.  but  seducers  shall  wax  w.  and  w.

2  Pet  2.  20.  the  latter  end  is  zo.  with  them

WORSHIP.

Gen.  22.  5.  I  and  the  lad  will  go  yonder  and  w.
Exod.  24.  l.come  up  to  the  Lord,  and  w.  ye  afar  oft
34. 14.  for  thou  shalt  w.  no  other  god,  Lord  jealous
Deut  A.  19.  lest  thou  shouldest  be  driven  to  w.  them
8.  19.  if  thou  w.  other  gods,  11.  16.  |  30.  17-
26  10.  shalt  set  first-fruits  before  Lord.atid  w.  be¬
fore  the  Lord  thy  God,  Psal.  22.27,  29. 1  86.  9.
1  Sam.  1.  3.  this  man  went  up  yearly  to  w.

15.  25.  turn  again,  that  1  may  w.  the  Lord,  30.

1  Kings  12.  30.  the  people  went  to  w.  before  the  one

2  Kings  5.  18.  to  w.  in  the  house  of  Rimnion

17.  36.  the  Lord  shall  ye  fear,  and  him  shall  ye  zo.

18.  22.  hath  said  to  Judah,  ye  shall  w.  before  this
altar  in  Jerusalem,  2  Chron.  32.  12.  Isa.  36.  7


WOR


vv  o  u


W  R  A


1  Chron.  16.  29.  to.  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  hc.iness,
Psal.  29-  2.  I  66.  4.  |  96.  9.  Mat.  4.  10.  Luke  4.  8.
Psal.  5.  7-  I  will  to.  toward  thy  temple,  138.  2.

45.  11.  he  is  thy  Lord,  and  to.  thou  him
81.  9.  neither  shalt  thou  to.  any  strange  god
95.  6.  O  come,  let  us  to.  and  bow  down  and  kneel
97-  7.  tv.  him,  all  ye  gods;  Sion  heard,  was  glad
99.  5.  tv.  at  his  footstool,  for  he  is  holy,  132.  7.

9.  exalt  the  Lord,  and  to.  at  his  holy  hill
Isa.  2.  8.  they  tv.  the  work  of  their  hands,  20.  I  46.  6.

27.  13.  shall  to.  the  L.  in  holy  mount  at  Jerusalem
45.  7.  princes  also  shall  to.  because  of  the  Lord
66.  23.  all  flesh  shall  come  to  to.  before  me

I  Jer.  7.  2.  that  enter  in  at  these  gates  to  tv.  26.  2.

13.  10.  they  that  to.  other  gods,  be  as  this  girdle

25.  6.  go  not  after  other  gods  to  w.  them

44.  19.  did  we  to.  her  without  our  men  ?

Ezek.  46.  2.  he  shall  a',  at  the  threshold  of  the  gate

3.  the  people  of  the  land  shall  to.  at  the  door
9.  he  that  entereth  to  in.  by  the  north  gate
Dan.  3.  5.  ye  fall  down,?/;,  the  golden  image,  10, 15.

12.  not  to.  the  image,  18.  28.  J|  15.  if  ye  to.

14.  do  not  ye  to.  the  golden  image  T  have  set  up  ?
Mic.  5.  13.  no  more  to.  the  work  of  thine  hands
Zeph.  1.  5.  them  that  to.  the  host  of  heaven
2.  11.  men  shall  to.  him.  every  one  from  his  place
Zech.  14.  16.  to  to.  the  King  the  Lord  of  hosts,  17.
Mat.  2.  2.  we  have  seen  his  star,  and  come  to  to.  him

8.  that  1  may  come  and  to.  him  also

4.  9.  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  to.  me,  Luke  4.  7.
15.9.  butin  vain  they  do  to.  me,  teaching  the  comm.
John  4.  20.  ye  say  that  in  Jerusalem  is  the  place
where  men  ought  to  to.  Mark  7.  7.

22.  ye  re.  ye  know  not  what,  we  know  what  we

to.  for  salvation  is  of  the  Jews

23.  they  shall  to.  the  Father  in  spirit,  24.

12.  20.  certain  Greeks  came  to  to.  at  the  feast
Acts  7.  42.  God  gave  them  up  to  to.  the  host,  43.

8.  27.  an  eunuch  came  to  Jerusalem  to  to.

17.  23.  whom  ye  ignorantly  to.  him  declare  T

18.  13.  persuaded  men  to  to.  God  contrary  to  law

24.  11.  Paul  came  up  to  Jerusalem  to  to.  God

14.  they  call  heresy,  so  to.  1  the  God  of  my  fathers
1  Cor.  14.  25.  so  falling  down,  he  will  to.  God
Phil.  3.  3.  which  to.  God  in  spirit,  rejoice  in  Christ
Heb.  1.  6.  let  all  the  angels  of  God  to.  him

Rev.  3.  9.  make  them  come  and  to.  before  thy  feet
4.  10.  and  to.  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever

9.  20.  that  they  should  not  to.  devils  nor  idols

11.  1.  measure  temple  of  God,  and  them  to.  therein

13.  8.  all  on  the  earth  shall  to.  the  beast,  12.

15.  they  that  would  not  to.  the  image  of  the  beast

14.  7-  to.  him  that  made  heaven,  earth,  and  sea

9.  if  any  man  to.  the  beast  and  his  image

11.  who  to.  the  beast,  have  no  rest  day  and  night

15.  4.  all  nations  shall  come  and  to.  before  thee

19.  10.  I  fell  at  his  feet  to  to.  22.  8.  ||  22.  9.  to.  God

WORSHIPPED.

Gen.  24.  26.  Abraham  bowed  and  tv.  the  Lord,  48.

52.  Abraham’s  servant  to.  Lord,  bowing  to  earth
Exod.  4.  31.  Israel  bowed  and  to.  12.  27.  !  3.3.  10.

32.  8.  they  made  a  calf,  and  to.  it,  Psal.  106.  19.
34.  8.  Moses  to.  ||  Judg.  7.  15.  Gideon  to.

Deut.  17.  3.  hathgone  and  served  other  gods,  and
to.  29.  26.  1  Kings  9.  9.  2  Kings  21.  21. 2  Chron.

7.  22.  Jer.  1 .  16. 1  8.  2.  |  16.  1 1 .  |  22.  9.

1  Sam.  1.  19.  Elkanah  and  Hannah  to.  before  Lord

28.  Samuel  to.  ||  15.  31.  Saul  to.  the  Lord

2  Sam.  12.  20.  then  David  arose  and  to.  15.  32.

1  Kings  11. 3.3.  have  forsaken  me,  and  to.  Ashtaroth

16.  31.  Aliab  served  Baal  and  to.  him,  22.  53.

2  Kings  17.  16.  they  to.  all  the  host  of  heaven  and

served  Baal,  21.  3.  2  Chron.  33.  3.

1  Chron.  29.  20.  all  the  congregation  bowed  down

and  to.  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  7.  3.  I  29.  28,  29,  30.
Neh.  8.  6.  all  the  people  to.  the  Lord,  9.  3.

Job  1.  20.  Job  to.  ||  Ezek.  8.  16.  to.  the  sun
Dan.  1.  46.  king  to.  Daniel  ||  3.  7.  to.  golden  image
Mat.  2.  11.  the  wise  men  fell  down  and  to.  Christ

8.  2.  a  leper  came  and  to.  him  ||  9.  18.  a  ruler  to.

14.  33.  they  that  were  in  the  ship  to.  him

15.  25.  the  woman  of  Canaan  came  and  to.  him

18.  26.  the  servant  fell  down  and  to.  his  lord
28.  9-  they  held  him  by  the  feet  and  to.  him

17.  his  disciples  to.  him,  Luke  *4.  52.

Mark  5.  6.  the  man  ran  out  of  the  tombs  and  to.  him

15.  19.  they  spit  upon  him,  and  bowing,  to.  him
John  4.  20.  our  fathers  to.  in  this  mountain

9.  38.  the  blind  man  believed,  and  to.  him
Acts  10.  25.  Cornelius  fell  down  and  to.  Peter

16. 14.  Lydia  to.  God  ||  18.  7.  Justus  tv.  God

17.  25.  neither  is  to.  with  men’s  hands,  gives  life
Rom.  1.  25.  10.  the  creature  more  than  ihe  Creator

2  Thess.  2.  4.  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  to.
Heb.  11. 21  Jacob  to.  ||  Rev.  7-  11.  the  angels  to.  G.
Rev.  5.  14.  the  twenty-four  elders  to.  11. 16. 1  19.  4.

13.  4.  they  to.  the  dragon,  they  to.  the  beast

16.  2.  a  sore  fell  on  them  which  to.  his  image
19-  20.  he  deceived  them  that  to.  his  image

20.  4.  1  saw  the  souls  that  had  not  tv.  the  beast

WORSHIPPER.

John  9.  31.  if  any  man  be  a  a1,  of  God,  him  heheareth
Acts  19.  35.  the  city  of  Ephesus  is  a  to.  of  Diana
WORSHIPPERS.

2  Kings  10.  19.  Jehu  might  destroy  the  to.  of  Baal

21.  all  the  to.  of  Baal  came,  none  was  left
23.  that  there  be  none  but  the  to.  of  Baal  only
John  4.  23.  when  the  true  to.  shall  worship  in  spirit
Heb.  10.  2.  because  that  the  to.  once  purged
WORSHIPPED!!.

Neh.  9.  6.  and  the  host  of  heaven  to.  thee
ha.  44.  15.  yea,  he  maketh  a  god,  and  to.  it,  17.
Dan.  3  6.  and  whoso  falleth  not  down  and  to.  11.
Acts  19-  27-  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  to.

WO  It  SHIPPING.

2  Kings  19.  37.  as  he  was  to.  in  the  house  of  Nis-
roch  his  god.  his  sons  smote  him,  Isa.  37.  38.

2  Chron.  20.  18.  all  Judah  fell  down,  to.  the  Lord
Mat.  20.  20.  mother  of  Zebedee’s  children  came  to.
Col.  2.  18.  let  no  man  beguile  you  inn;,  of  angels
WORST.

Ezek.  7.  24.  I  will  bring  the  to.  of  the  heathen


WORTH.

Gen.  23. 9-  for  as  much  money  as  it  is  to.  give  it  me
15.  the  land  is  to.  four  hundred  shekels  of  silver
Lev.  27.  23  priest  shall  reckon  the  to.  of  estimation
Deut.  15.  18.  hath  been  to.  a  double  hired  servant
2  Sam.  18.  3.  but  thou  art  to.  ten  thousand  of  us
1  Kings  21.  2.  give  the  to.  of  thy  vineyard  in  money
Job  24.  25.  who  will  make  thy  speech  nothing  to.
Prov.  10.  20.  the  heart  of  the  wicked  is  little  to.
Ezek.  30.  2.  prophesy  and  say,  howl  ye,  woe  to.  day
WORTHY.

Gen.  32.  10. 1  am  not  to.  of  the  least  of  thy  mercies
Deut.  25.  2.  if  the  wicked  man  be  to.  to  be  beaten

1  Sam.  1.5.  but  to  Hannah  he  gave  a  to.  portion

26.  16.  as  the  Lord  liveth,  ye  are  to.  to  die

2  Sam.  22.  4.  who  is  to.  to  be  praised,  Psal.  18.  3.

1  Kings  1.  52.  if  he  will  shewhimselfa  tv.  man
Jer.  26.  11.  this  man  is  to.  to  die  ||  16.  he  is  not  to.
Mat.  3.  11.  whose  shoes  I  am  not  to.  to  bear

8.8.  the  centurion  said,  Lord,  1  am  not?/;,  that  thou
shouldest  come  under  my  roof,  Luke  7.  6.
10. 10.  for  the  workman  is  to.  of  his  meat
11.  inquire  who  in  it  is  to.  and  there  abide
13.  and  if  the  house  be  to.  but  if  it  be  not  to.

37.  loveth  more  than  me,  he  is  not  to.  of  me,  38.

22.  8.  but  they  which  were  bidden  were  not  to.
Mark  1.  7.  whose  shoes  I  am  not  a;,  to  unloose,  Luke
_  .  3.  16.  John  1.  27.  Acts  13.  25.

Luke  3.  8.  bring  forth  fruits  to.  of  repentance
7.  4.  that  he  was  to.  for  whom  he  should  do  this
7.  nor  thought  I  myself?/;,  to  come  to  thee

10.  7-  for  the  labourer  is  to.  of  his  hire

12.  48.  he  that  did  commit  things  to.  of  stripes

15.  19.  I  am  no  more  to.  to  be  called  thy  son,  21.

20.  35.  shall  be  accounted  to.  to  obtain  that  world

21.  36.  be  accounted  to.  to  escape  these  things
Acts  24.  2.  very  to.  deeds  are  done  to  this  nation
Rom.  8. 18.  are  not  to.  to  be  compared  with  the  glory
Eph.  4.  1.  that  ye  walk  to.  of  the  vocation

Col.  1.  10.  that  ye  might  walk  to.  of  the  Lord
1  Thess.  2.  12.  that  ye  would  walk  to.  of  God

1  Tim.  1.  15.  a  saying  to.  of  all  acceptation,  4.  9.

5.  18.  the  labourer  is  to.  of  his  reward

Heb.  10. 29. of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose
3’e,  shall  he  be  thought  to.  who  hath  trodden

11.  38.  of  whom  the  world  was  not  to.

Jam.  2.  7.  do  thev  not  blaspheme  that  to.  name  ;
Rev.  3.  4.  they  shall  walk  in  white,  for  they  are  to.

4.  11.  thou  art  to.  to  receive  glory,  and  power,  5.  12.

5.  2.  who  is zy.  to  open  the  book'  and  loose  the  seal*
4.  because  no  man  was  found  to.  to  open  the  book
9-  thou  art  to.  to  take  the  book,  and  open  the  seals

16.  6.  give  them  blood  to  drink,  for  they  are  to.

See  Count,  Counted,  Death.
WORTH  1  ES.

Nah.  2.  5.  he  shall  recount  his  to.  they  shall  stumble
WORTHILY.

Ruth  4.  11.  do  thou  to.  in  Ephratah  and  be  famous
WOT,  TETH.

Gen.  21.26.  T  to.  not  who  hath  done  this  thing
39.  8.  my  master  to.  not  what  is  with  me  in  house
44.  15.  to.  ye  not  that  such  a  man  as  1  can  divine  ?
Exod.  32.  1.  as  for  this  Moses,  we  to.  not  what  is  be¬
come  of  him,  23.  Acts  7.  40.
Num.  22.  6.  T  to.  he  whom  thOu  blessestis  blessed
Josh.  2.  5.  whither  the  men  went  l  to.  not
Acts  3.  17.  1  to.  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it
Rom.  11.2.  to.  ye  not  what  Scripture  saith  ?

Phil.  1.  22.  yet  what  I  shad  choose  I  to.  not
WOVE.

2  Kings  23.  7-  the  women  to.  hangings  for  the  grove

WOVEN.

Exod.  28.  32.  ephod  have  binding  of  to.  work,  39.  22.
39. 27.  made  coats  of  fine  linen  to.  work  for  Aaron
John  19.  23.  the  coat  was  without  seam,  to.
WOULD.

Gen.  30.  34.  I  to.  it  might  be  according  to  thy  word
Num.  22.  29.  I  to.  there  were  a  sword  in  mine  hand
1  Kings  13.  33.  whosoever  to.  he  consecrated  him
Neh.  9.  24.  they  might  do  with  them  as  they  to.

Esth.  9.  5.  Jews  did  what  they  to.  to  their  enemies
Psal.  81.  11.  not  hearken,  and  Israel  to.  none  of  me
Prov.  1.  25.  but  ye  to.  none  of  my  reproof
30.  they  to.  none  of  m3’  counsel,  despised  reproof
Dan.  5.  19.  whom  he  to.  he  slew,  and  whom  he  to.  he
kept  alive,  and  whom  he  to.  he  set  up,  and  to.
Mat.1.  12.  whatsoever  ■>  e  to.  that  men  should  do  to
you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them,  Luke  6.  31.
27. 15.  governor  wont  to  release  pris.  whom  they  to.
Mark  3.  13.  and  he  calleth  to  him  whom  he  to.  and

they  came  unto  him
10.  35.  tv.  thou  shouldest  do  for  us  what  we  desire
36.  what  to.  ye  that  I  should  do  for  you  ?

John  6.  11.  he  distributed  fishes  as  much  as  they  to.
Acts  18.  14.  reason  to.  that  I  should  bear  with  you
Rom.  7. 15.  what  I  to.  that  1  do  not,  but  what  I 'hate

19.  for  the  good  that  I  to.  1  do  not,  but  the  evil

1  Cor.  7.  7.  I  u).  that  all  men  were  even  as  1  myself
14.5. 1  to.  that  ye  all  spake  with  tongues

2  Cor.  12.  20.  1  shall  not  find  you  such  as  I  to.

Gal.  2.  10.  they  to.  that  we  remember  the  poor
5.  12.  I  to.  they  were  cut  off  which  trouble  you

17.  so  that  ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  to.

Col.  2.  1.  I  to.  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  I  have

3  John  10.  forbiddeth  them  that?/;.  cast  them  out
Rev.  3.  15.  1  know  thy  works.  I  to.  wert  cold  or  hot

WOULD  God.

Exod.  16.  3.  to.  God  we  had  died  in  Egypt,  when
we  sat  63'  the  flesh-pots,  Num.  14.  2.
Num.  11.  29.  tv. God n\\  Lord’s  people  were  prophets

20.  3.  to.  God  we  had  died  when  our  brethren  died
Deut .  28.  67.  to.  G.  it  were  even,  to.  G.  it  were  morn.
Josh.  7.  7.  to.  G.  we  had  dwelt  on  other  side  Jordan
Judg.  9-  29.  to.  G.  this  people  were  undermyhand
2  Sam.  18.  33. a1.  God  1  had  died  for  thee,  O  Absalom
2  Kings  5.  3.  to.  God  my  lord  were  with  the  prophet
Acts  26.  29.  to.  God  that  all  were  such  as  I  am

1  Cor.  4.  8.  and  I  to.  to  God  ye  did  reign

2  Cor.  11.  1.  to.  to  God  ye  could  bear  with  me

WOULD  not.

1  Sam.  20.9.  if  I  knew,  then  to.  not  I  tell  thee  ?

31. 4.  his  armour-bearer  to.  not,  1  Chr.  10.  4.


2  Sam.  12. 17-  he  to.  not,  nor  did  he  eat  with  then

13.  16.  but  Amnon  to. not  hearken  unto  tier

25.  howbeit  David  to.  not  go,  but  blessed  him

14.  29.  but  Joab  to.  not  comtf  to  Absalom

1  Kings  22.  49.  but  Jehoshaphat  to.  not

2  Kings  24.  4.  which  the  Lord  to.  not  pardon
Neh.  9. 30.  yet  tv.  they  not  give  ear,  therefore  gavest
Job  9. 16.  yet  to.  I  not  believe  he  had  hearkened
Isa.  30.  15.  and  ye  to.  not,  Mat.  23.  37.  Luke  13.  34.
Mat.  18. 30.  besought  him  to  have  patience,  he  to.  not

22.  3.  they  that  were  bidden  w.  not  come

23.  30.  w e  to.  not  have  been  partakers  with  them

24.  43.  w.  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be  broken
27  .  34.  when  he  had  tasted,  he  to.  not  drink
Mark  9.  30.  he  to.  not  that  any  man  should  know  it
Luke  15.  28.  and  he  was  angry ,  and  to.  not  go  in

18.  4.  he  to.  not  for  a  while,  but  afterwards  said

13.  he?/;,  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  to  heaven
19-27.  who  to.  not  that  I  should  reign  over  them

John  7-  1.  for  he  to.  not  walk  in  Jewry
Acts  9.  38.  that  he  to.  not  delay  to  come  to  them
21. 14.  and  when  he  to.  not  be  persuaded  we  ceased
Rom.  7.  16.  if  then  I  do  that  which  I  to.  not

19.  but  the  evil  that  I  to.  not  that  I  do

11.25. 1  to.  not,  brethren,  that  ye  should  be  ignorant
,  _  ,  of  this  mystery,  1  Cor.  10.  1.

1  C or.  10.  20.  I  to.  not  ye  should  have  fellowship
^  be  found  to  you,  such  as  ye  to.  not

1  lhess.2.  9.  because  we  to.  not  be  chargeable  to  you
Heb.  4. 8.  then  to.  he  not  afterward  have  spoken
WOULDEST.

Josh.  15. 18.  Caleb  said,  what  a;,  thou  J 1  Kings  1. 16.
John  21. 18.  thou  walkedst.  whither  thou  to
WOULDEST  not.

Jehn2\.  18.  shall  carry  thee  whither  thou  to.  not
Heb.  10.5.  sacrifice  and  offering  thou  to.  not.  8
WOUND.

Exod.  21.  25.  give  to.  for  to.  stripe  for  stripe

1  Kings 22.  35.  and  the  blood  ran  out  of  the  to.

Job  34. 6.  my  to.  is  incurable  without  transgression
Psal.  64.  f  7 •  suddenly  their  to.  shall  be

Prov.  6.  33.  a  to.  and  dishonour  shall  he  get

20.  30.  the  blueness  of  a  to.  cleanseth  away  evil
Isa.  30.  26.  he  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  to.

Jer.  10.  19.  woe  is  me,  for  my  to.  is  grievous

15.  18.  and  why  is  my  to.  incurable  ?

30.  12.  and  thy  to.  is  grievous,  Nah.  3. 19.

14.  1  wounded  thee  with  to.  of  an  enemy

Ilos.  5.  13.  J  udah  saw  his  to.  could  not  cure  your  to.
Obad.  7.  they  that  eat  have  laid  a  to.  under  thee
Mic.  1. 9.  her  to.  is  incurable,  it  is  come  to  Judah
Rev.  13.  3.  and  his  deadly  to.  was  healed,  12,  14.
WOUNDS.

2  Kings  8.  29.  king  Joram  went  to  be  healed  of  the

to.  the  Syrians  had  given  him,  9.  15.  2  Chr.  22.  6.
Job  9.  17.  he  multiplied  my  to.  without  cause
Psal.  38.  5.  my  a;,  stink,  are  corrupt  because  of  folly
147.  3.  he  healeth  and  bindeth  up  their  to.

Prov.  18. 8.  words  of  a  tale-bearer  are  as  to.  26.  22.

23. 29.  who  hath  woe  ?  who  hath  to.  without  cause  ?

27.  6.  faithful  are  to.  of  friend,  but  kisses  of  enemy
Isa.  1. 6.  there  is  no  soundness  in  it,  but  to.  bruises
Jer.  6.  7-  before  me  continually  is  grief  and  to.

30.17-  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  to.  saith  the  Lord
Zech.  13.  6.  what  are  these  to.  in  thy  hands  ?

Luke  10.  34.  the  Samaritan  bound  up  his  to.
WOUND.

Deut.  32.  39.  I  kill,  I  make  alive  ;  I  to.  and  I  heal
Psal.  68.  21.  God  shall  to.  the  head  of  his  enemies
110. 6.  he  shall  to.  the  heads  over  many  countries
Amos 9.  +  1.  and  to.  them  in  the  head  all  of  them
1  Cor.  8. 12.  when  ye  to.  their  weak  conscience
WOUND.

John  19.  40.  they  to.  body  of  Jesus  in  linen  clothes
Acts  5.  6.  young  men  w.up  Ananias,  buried  him
WOUNDED.

Deut.  23. 1.  he  that  is  to.  in  the  stones,  not  enter
Judg.  20.  J  31.  to  smite  of  the  people  to.  J  39.

1  Sam.  17.52.  the  tv.  of  the  Philistines  fell  down

31.  3.  Saul  was  to.  of  the  archers,  1  Chron.  10.  3.

2  Sam.  22.  39.  I  have  to.  mine  enemies,  Psal.  18.  38.

1  Kings  20.  37.  so  that  in  smiting  he  to.  him

22.  34.  carry  me  out,  for  1  am  tv.  2  Chron.  18.  33.

2  Kings  8.  28.  and  the  Syrians  to.  Joram

2  Chron.  35.23.  have  me  away,  for  1  am  sore  to.

Job  24.  12.  and  the  soul  of  the  w.  crieth  out
Psal.  64.  7.  shoot  at  them,  suddenly  shall  they  be  to.
69.26.  to  the  grief  of  those  whom  thou  hast  to.

109.  22.  1  am  poor,  and  my  heart  is  to.  within  me
Prov.  7.  26.  for  she  hath  cast  flown  many  to.

18.  14.  but  a  to.  spirit  who  can  bear  ?

Cant.  5.  7.  the  watchmen  found  me,  they  to.  me
Isa.  51 . 9.  art  thou  not  it  that  to.  the  dragon  ?

53.5.  but  he  was  to.  for  our  transgressions
Jer.  30.  14.  I  to.  thee  with  the  wound  of  an  enemy
37.  10.  there  remained  but  to.  men  among  them
51.52.  through  all  the  land  the  w.  shall  groan
Lam.  2.  12.  when  they  swooned  as  to.  in  the  streets
Ezek.  26.  15.  when  the  to.  cry,  shall  not  isles  shake  ?

28.  23.  the  to.  shall  be  judged  in  the  midst  of  her
30.  24.  with  the  groanings  of  a  deadly  to.  man

Joel  2. 8.  when  they  fall  on  the  sword,  shall  not  be  to.
Zech.  13.  6.  1  was  to.  in  the  house  of  my  friends
Mark  12. 4.  he  sent  another  servant,  they  cast  stones
and  they  to.  him  in  the  head,'Z.7/Te  20.  12.
Luke  10.  30.  he  fell  amongst  thieves,  which  tv.  him
Acts  19. 16.  they  fled  out  of  that  house  naked  and  to.
Rev.  13.  3.  1  saw  one  of  his  heads,  as  it  were  to.
WOUNDEDST.

Hab.  3.  13.  thou  to.  the  head  out  of  house  of  wicked
WOUNDETII.

Job  5.  18.  he  to.  and  his  hands  make  whole
Ezek.  28. +  9.  no  God,  in  the  hand  of  him  that  to.
WOUNDING.

Gen.  4.  23.  for  1  have  slain  a  man  to  my  to.
WRANGLING.

Jam.  3.  +  17.  the  wisdom  from  above  is  without  to.
WRAP.

Isa.  28.  20.  narrower  than  that  he  can  to.  himself  in  it
Mic.  7. 3.  judge  asketh  for  a  reward  ;  so  they  to.  it  up
WRAPPED,  or  WRAPT.

Gen.  38.  14.  Tamar  to.  herself  and  sat  in  open  place

.569


W  R  A


W  R  I


w  r  r


1  Sam.  21.  9.  Goliath’s  sword  iste.  in  a  cloth

1  Kings  19.  13.  Elijah  to.  his  face  in  his  mantle

2  Kings 2. 8.  Elijah  took  his  mantle,  and  w.  it  togeth.
Job  8.  17-  his  roots  are  to.  about  the  heap

40.  17.  the  sinews  of  his  stones  are  to.  together
Ezek.  21.  15.  the  sword  isw.  up  for  slaughter
Jonah  2.  5.  the  weeds  were  to.  about  my  head
Mat.  27.  59.  Joseph  uk  the  body  in  a  clean  linen
doth,  Mark  15.  46.  Luke  23.  53.
Luke  2.  7.  Mary  to.  him  in  swaddling  clothes

12.  ye  shall  find  the  babe  to.  in  swaddling  clothes
John  20.  7.  napkin  to.  together  in  a  place  by  itself

WRATH.

Gen.  49.  7.  cursed  be  their  a’,  for  it  was  cruel
Lev.  10.  6.  lest  to.  come  upon  all  the  people
Num.  1. 53.  that  no  to.  be  on  the  congregation,  18.5.

1  16.  46.  for  there  is  to.  gone  out  from  the  Lord
Deut.  9.  7.  how  thou  provokedst  the  Lord  to  to.  22.

29.  28.  the  Lord  rooted  them  out  in  anger  and  to.
32.  27-  were  it  not  I  feared  the  to.  of  the  enemy

Josh.  9.  20.  let  them  live,  lest  tv.  be  upon  us
'22.  20.  and  to.  fell  on  all  the  congregation

2  Sam.  11.  30.  if  sq  be  that  the  king’s  to.  arise

2  Kings  23.  26.  the  Lord  turned  not  from  great  to.

1  Chr.  27.24.  he  finished  not,  because  there  fell  to.

2  Chr.  19.  2.  therefore  is  to.  upon  thee  from  Lord

10.  they  trespass  not,  and  so  to.  come  upon  you

24.  18.  to.  came  upon  Judah  for  this  trespass

28.  13.  and  there  is  fierce  to.  against  Israel

29.  10.  that  his  fierce  u>.  may  turn  away  from  us
32.  25.  therefore  there  was  to.  upon  him

Ezra  5.  12.  our  fathers  had  provoked  God  to  to.

7.  23.  w  hy  should  there  be  tv.  against  the  realm  ?
Neh.  13.  18.  yet  ye  bring  more  tv.  upon  Israel
Esth.  1. 18.  thus  shall  there  arise  too  much  to.

2.  1.  when  the  tv.  of  the  king  was  appeased

3.  5.  Mordecai  bowed  not,  then  Hainan  full  of  tv.

7.  10.  then  was  the  king’s  to.  pacified

Job  5. 2.  for  tv.  killeth  foolish  man,  and  envy  slays

19.  29.  tor  to.  brings  the  punishments  of  the  sword
21.  20.  he  shall  drink  of  the  to.  of  the  Almighty
36.  13.  but  the  hypocrites  in  heart  heap  up  tv.

18.  because  there  is  tv.  beware  lest  he  take  thee
Psal.  37.  8.  forsake  tv.  ||  55.  3.  in  to.  they  hate  me

76.  10.  surely  the  to.  of  man  shall  praise  thee,  the
remainder  of  to.  shalt  thou  restrain
138.  7.  shalt  stretch  thy  hand  against  tv.  of  enemies
Prov.  11. 23.  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  is  to.

12. 16.  fool’s  to.  presently  known,  hut  prudent  men

14.  29.  that  is  slow'  to  tv.  is  of  great  understanding

15.  1.  a  soft  answer  turijeth  away  tv.  but  words

16.  14.  the  tv.  of  a  king  is  as  messengers  of  death

19.  12.  the  king’s  to.  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion

19.  a  man  of  great  to.  shall  suffer  punishment
21.  14.  a  reward  in  the  bosom  pacifieth  strong  tv.

24.  sterner  is  his  name,  who  dealeth  in  proud  to.
27.  3.  but  a  fool’s  to.  is  heavier  than  them  both

4.  u' .  is  cruel ,  and  anger  is  outrageous,  who  is  able

29.  8.  city  into  a  snare,  but  wise  men  turn  away  tv.

30.  33.  the  forcing  of  re.  bringeth  forth  strife
Eccl.  5.  17.  he  hatli  much  tv.  with  his  sickness
Isa.  13.  9.  the  day  of  the  Imrd  cometh  with  to.

14.  6.  he  who  smote  the  people  in  to.  with  a  stroke
54.  8.  in  a  little  to.  I  hid  my  face  from  thee
Jer.  21.  5.  I  myself  will  fight  against  you  in  tv.

32.  37.  whither  I  have  driven  them  in  great  to.

44.  8.  in  that  ye  provoke  me  to  to.  with  idols
Ezek.  7.  12.tr.  is  on  all  the  multitude  thereof.

Nah.  1.  2.  and  he  reserved)  to.  for  his  enemies
llab.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  in  to.  remember  mercy
Zeph.  1.  18.  gold  shall  not  deliver  in  the  day  of  tv.
Zech.  7. 12.  therefore  came  a  great  to.  from  the  Lord

8.  14.  when  your  fathers  provoked  me  to  to.

Mat.  3.  7.  to  flee  from  to.  to  come,  Luke  3.  7.

Luke  4.28.  they  were  filled  with  to.  Acts  19.28.

21.  23.  for  there  shall  be  to.  on  this  people
Rom.  2.  5.  but  treasurest  up  a',  against  the  day  of  to.

8.  but  to  them  that  obey  unrighteousness,  to.

4.  15.  because  the  law  worketh  to.  where  no  law  is

5.  9.  we  shall  be  saved  from  to.  through  him
9»22.  endured  the  vessels  of  to.  fitted  to  destruction
ft.  19.  avenge  not,  but  rather  give  place  to  to.

13.  4.  for  he  is  the  minister  of  God  to  execute  to.

5.  ye  must  needs  be  subject,  not  only  for  to.

Gat.  5.  20.  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  tv.  strife
Eph.  2.  3.  we  were  by  nature  the  children  of  tv.

4.  26.  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  to.

31.  let  all  w.  anger,  and  clamour  be  put  away

6.  4.  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  tv.

Col.  3.  8.  put  off  all  these,  to.  malice,  blasphemy

1  Thess.  1.  10.  who  delivered  us  from  the  to.  to  come

2.  16.  for  to.  is  come  on  them  to  the  uttermost

5.  9.  for  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  to.

1  Tim.  2.  8.  lifting  up  holy  hands  without  to.

Heb.  1 1.  27-  Moses  not  feat  ing  the  to.  of  the  king
Jam.  1.19.  let  every  man  beslow  tospeak,  slow  to  to.

20.  tv.  of  man  worketh  not  righteousness  of  God
Rev.  6.  16.  and  hide  us  from  the  to.  of  the  Lamb

12.  12.  the  devil  is  come  down,  having  great  tv.

14.  8.  she  made  all  nations  drink  wine  of  to.  18.  3.

Dap  of  W  RATH.

Job  30.  28.  his  goods  flow  away  in  the  dap  of  his  tv.
21.30.  the  wicked  brought  forth  to  the  day  of  tv.
Psal.  110.  5.  Lord  strike  thro’  kings  in  day  o/his  to.
Prov.  11.  4.  riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  to.

Zeph.  1.  15.  that  day  is  a  day  of  to.  and  trouble
Rom.  2.  5.  but  treasurest  up  to.  against  the  day  of  tv.
Rev.  6.  17.  foi  the  great  day  of  his  tv.  is  come
WRATH  of  God.

2  Chron.  28.  11.  the  fierce  to.  of  God  is  upon  you
Ezra  10.  14.  till  the  tv.  of  God  be  turned  from  us
Psal.  78.  31.  the  tv.  of  God  came  upon  them
John  3.  36.  but  the  to.  of  God  abideth  on  him
R.om.  1.  18.  the  to.  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven
Eph.  5.  6.  because  of  these  things  to.  of  God  cometh

on  the  children  of  disobedience.  Col.  3.  6.
Rev.  14. 10.  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  to.  of  God
19.  and  cast  it  into  wine-press  of  the  to.  of  God

15.  1.  for  in  them  is  filled  up  the  to.  of  God

7.  seven  golden  vials  full  of  the  to.  of  God

16.  1 .  pour  out  the  vials  of  the  to.  of  God  on  earth
19. 15.  he  treadeth  the  wine-press  of  the  tv.  of  God

570


His  WRATH.

Dent.  29.  23.  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  his  to.

1  Sam.  28.  18.  nor  executedst  his  to.  upon  Amalek

2  Kings 2.3.  26.  the  Lord  turned  not  fiom  his-to.

2  Chron.  29.  10.  his  fierce  to.  may  turn  away,  30.  8.
Ezra  8.  22.  his  w.  is  against  them  that  forsake  him
Esth.  7.  7-  king  arising  from  the  banquet  in  his  to.
Job  16-  9-  he  teareth  me  in  his  tv.  who  hateth  me

20.  23.  God  shall  cast  the  fury  of  his  to.  on  him
Psal.  2.  5.  then  shall  he  speak  to  them  in  his  tv.

21.  9-  the  Lord  shall  swallow  them  up  in- his  tv.

58.  9.  he  shall  take  them  away  in  his  to.

78.  38.  turned  away  anger,  did  not  stir  up  all  his  to.
49.  he  cast  on  them  the  fierceness  of  his  to.

106.  23.  had  not  Moses  stood  to  turn  aw$y  his  to.
Prov.  14.  35.  his  tv.  against  him  that  causeth  shame
24.  18.  lest  the  Lord  turn  away  his  to.  from  him
Isa.  16.  6.  we  heard  of  Moab’s  pride  and  his  to.

Jer.  7.  29.  Lord  hath  forsaken  generation  of  his  tv.
10.  10.  at  his  tv.  the  earth  shall  tremble
48.  30.  I  know  his  to.  saith  Lord,  shall  not  be  so
Lam.  2.2.  hath  thrown  down  in  his  to.  the  holds

3.  1.  1  have  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  his  tv.
Amos  1.  11.  because  he  kept  his  to.  for  ever
Rom.  9.  22.  what  if  God  willing  to  shew  his  to.

Rev.  16.  19.  the  cup  of  wine  of  fierceness  of  his  to.

See  Kindled;  Wrath  of  the  Lord.

My  WRATH.

Exod.  22.  24.  my  to.  shall  wax  hot,  I  will  kill  you

32. 10.  let  me  alone,  that  my  to.  may  wax  hot
Num.  25.  11.  Phiuehas  hath  turned  my  tv.  away

2  Chr.  Xl.’i.my  to.  shall  not  be  poured  out  on  Jerus.
Psal.  95.  11.  unto  whom  1  sware  in  my  to.

Isa.  10.  6.  send  him  against  the  people  of  my  to.

60. 10.  for  in  my  to.  1  smote  thee,  but  had  mercy
Ezek.  7.  14.  for  my  to.  is  on  all  the  multitude

13.  15.  thus  will  I  accomplish  my  to.  on  the  wall
21.31.  blow  against  thee  in  fire  of  my  tv.  22.  21.

22.  31.  1  consumed  them  with  the  fire  of  my  to.

38.  19.  for  in  the  fire  of  my  tv.  have  1  spoken

lies.  5.  10.  1  will  pour  out  my  to.  on  them  like  water
13.  1 1 .  1  gave  a  king,  and  1  took  him  away  in  my  to.
Heb.  3.  1 1 .  so  1  sware  in  my  to.  they  shall  not  enter

4.  3.  as  I  have  sworn  in  my  to.  if  they  shall  enter

Thy  WRATH.

Erod.  15.7.  thou  sentest  thy  tv.  which  consumed  them

32. 11.  why  doth  thy  tv.  wax  hotagainstthy  people  ?

12.  turn  from  thy  fierce  to.  and  repent  of  this
Job  14.  13.  keep  me  secret  until  thy  to.  be  past

40.  11.  cast  abroad  the  rage  of  thy  to.  behold  proud
Psal.  38.  1.  O  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in  thy  to.

79.  6.  pour  out  thy  to.  on  the  heathen
85.  3.  thou  hast  taken  away  all  thy  tv.

88.  7-  thy  to.  lieth  hard  on  me,  thou  hast  afflicted
16.  thy  fierce  to.  goeth  over  me,  thy  terrors

89.  46.  how  long  shall  thy  tv.  burn  like  fire  ?

90.  7.  and  by  thy  to.  are  we  troubled

9.  for  all  our  days  are  passed  away  in  thy  to.

11.  even  according  to  thy  fear,  so  is  thy  to.

102.  10.  because  of  thy  indignation  and  thy  to.

Jer.  18.  20.  1  stood  to  turn  away  thy  to.  from  them
Hab.  3. 8.  was  thy  to.  against  the  sea,  that  didst  ride
Rev.  11.  18.  thy  tv.  is  come,  and  time  of  the  dead
WRATHFUL.

Psal.  69.  24.  let  thy  to.  angei  take  hold  of  them
Prov.  15.  18.  a  to.  man  stirreth  up  strife
WRATHS.

2  Cor.  12. 20.  I  fear  lest  there  be  envyings,  tv.  strifes
WREATH.

2  Chr.  4. 13.  two  rows  of  pomegranates  on  each  to.
WREATHED.

Lam.  1.  14.  my  transgressions  area),  and  come  up
WREATH  EM.

Exod.  28.  14.  two  chains  at  the  ends,  of  tv.  work
shalt  make  them,  22,  24,  25. 1  39.  15,  17,  18.
2  Kings  25.  17.  pillat  of  to.  work  he  carried  away
WREATHS.

1  Kings  7.  17.  to.  of  chain  work  for  the  chapiters

2  Chron.  4.  12.  two  to.  to  cover  the  two  pommels

13.  four  hundred  pomegranates  on  the  two  to.

W  R  EST.

Exod.  23.  2.  not  decline  after  many,  to  to.  judgment

6.  thou  shalt  not  to.  the  judgment  of  thy  poor
Dent.  16.  19.  thou  shalt  not  to.  judgm.  nor  take  gift
Ps. 56.5.  every  day  they  to.  my  words,  their  thoughts
2  Pet.  3.  16.  which  they  that  are  unstable  to.
WRESTED.

Hab.  1.  +  4.  therefore  to.  judgment  proceedeth
WR  EST’  IMG.

Ezek.  9.  +  9.  the  city  is  full  of  to.  of  judgment
WRESTLE.

Eph.  6.  12.  for  we  to.  not  against  flesh  and  blood
WRESTLED.

Gen. 30.8.  with  great  wrestlings  have  1  to.  with  sister

32.  24.  Jacob  was  alone,  there  to.  a  man  with  him
25.  Jacob’s  thigh  was  out  of  joint  as  he  to.
WRESTL1MG.

Gen.  30.  t  8.  and  Rachel  called  his  name  to.

WR  EST  LINGS.

Gen.  30.  8.  with  great  to.  have  1  wrestled  with  sister
WRETCHED.

Row  .7 .24.0  to.  man  that  1  am,  who  shall  deliver  me
Rev.  3.  17-  and  knowest  not  that  thou  art  to.
WRETCHEDNESS.

Num.  11.  15.  kill  me  and  let  me  not  see  my  to.
WRING.

Lev.  1.  15.  the  priest  shall  tr.offhis  head,  5.  8.
Psal.  75.  8.  all  the  wicked  shall  to.  them  out
WRING  ED.

Judg.  6.  38.  Gideon  to.  the  dew  out  of  the  fleece
WRINGER.

Isa.  16.  t  4.  for  the  to.  is  at  an  end,  spoiler  ceaseth
WRINGING.

Prov.  30.  33.  the  tv.  of  the  nose  bringeth  forth  blood
WRINKLE.

Eph.  5.  27.  a  glorious  church  not  having  spot  or  to.
WRINKLES.

Job  16.  8.  and  thou  hast  filled  me  with  to.

WRINKLING.

Nah.  3.  f  19.  there  is  now.  of  thy  bruise
WRITE.

Exod.  34.  1.  I  will  to.  on  these  tables,  Deut.  10.  2.


Exod.  34.  27.  the  L.  said  to  Mos.  to.  thou  these  word
Num.  17.  2.  to.  thou  every  man’s  name  on  his  rod
3.  thou  shalt  to.  Aaron’s  name  on  the  rod  of  Levi
Deut.  6.  9.  to.  them  on  posts  of  thy  house,  11.  20.

24.  1.  then  let  him  tv.  her  a  bill  of  divorcement,

and  send  her  out  of  his  house,  3.  Mark  10.  4.
27.  3.  to.  ou  the  stones  the  words  of  this  law,  8.

31.  19.  now  therefore  to.  ye  this  song  for  you
2  Chron.  26.22.  the  acts  of  Uzziah  did  Isaiah  to.
Ezra  5.  10.  that  we  might  tv.  the  names  of  the  men
Neh .  9.  38.  we  make  a  sure  covenant  and  to.  it
Esth.  8.  8.  to.  ye  also  for  the  Jews  as  it  liketh  you  ■
Prov.  3.  3.  to.  them  on  the  table  of  thy  heart,  7.  3.  -
Isa.  8.  1.  to.  in  the  great  roll  with  a  man’s  pen

10.  1.  that  to.  grievousness  which  they  prescribed
19.  trees  shall  be  few,  that  a  child  may  to.  them

30.  8.  now  go  to.  it  before  them  in  a  table
Jer.  22.  30.  saith  the  Lord  tv.  ye  this  man  childless

30.  2.  to.  the  words  1  have  spoken,  36.  2,  17,  28.

31.  33.  I  will  to.  it  in  their  hearts,  Heb.  8.  10.

Ezek.  24.  2.  son  of  man,  to.  the  name  of  the  day

37.  16.  w.  upon  the  sticks  for  Judah  and  Israel
43.  11.  to.  it  in  their  sight,  that  they  may  keep  form
Hab.  2.  2.  tv.  the  vision,  make  it  plain  on  tables
Luke  1. 3.  it  seemed  good  to  me  tow.  to  thee  in  order
16.  6.  take  thy  bill  and  to,  fifty  ||  7.  u>.  fourscore
John  1.  45.  of  whom  Moses  and  the  prophets  did  to.
19.  21.  to.  not,  king  of  the  Jews,  but  that  he  said
Acts  15. 20.  that  we  to.  to  them  that  they  abstain  from

25.  26.  of  whom  I  have  no  certain  thing  to  to.  to

my  lord,  that  I  might  have  somewhat  to  to.

1  Cor.  4.  14.  1  tv.  not  these  things  to  shame  you

14.  37.  things  l  to.  are  the  commandments  of  Lord

2  Cor.  1.  13.  for  we  to.  none  other  things  to  you
2,  9.  to  this  end  also  did  l  to.  that  1  might  know

9.  1.  it  is  superfluous  for  me  to  to.  to  you

13.  2.  1  to.  to  them  w  hich  heretofore  have  sinned

10.  therefore  1  to.  these  things  being  absent
Gal.  1.  20.  now  the  things  I  to.  unto  you,  1  lie  not
Phil.  3.  1.  to  to.  the  same  things,  for  you  it  is  safe

1  Thess.  4.  9.  ye  need  not  that  1  to.  to  you,  5.  1.

2  Thess.  3. 17-  so  1  tv.  II 1  Tim.  3.  14.  these  things  I  to.
Heb.  10.  16.  and  in  their  minds  will  1  tv.  them

2  Pet.  3.  1.  1  now  to.  unto  you,  1  John  2. 1.

1  John  l.  4.  these  things  tv.  we  to  you  that  your  joy
2.  7.  brethren,  I  to.  no  new  commandment  to  you

8.  again,  a  new  commandment  1  tv.  unto  you

12.  1  to.  to  you,  little  children,  13.

13.  1  to.  to  you,  fathers,  1  to.  to  you,  young  men

2  John  12.  having  many  things  to  to.  unto  you

3  John  13.  1  will  not  with  ink  and  pen  to.  to  you
Jude  3.  when  1  gave  all  diligence  tow.  of  common

salvation,  it  was  needful  for  me  to  to.  to  you
Rev.  1.11.  what  thou  seest  to.  in  a  book,  19.

2.  1.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Ephesus,  to.

8.  in  Smyrna  ||  12.  inPergamus|l  18.  Thyatira

3.  1.  in  Sardis  ||  7-  Philadelphia  ||  14.  Laodicea
12.  1  will  to.  on  him  the  name  of  my  God  and  city

of  my  God,  I  will  tv.  on  him  my  new  name

10.  4.  as  1  was  about  to  to.  a  voice  said,  to.  not

14.  13.  tv.  blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord
19. 9.  tv.  blessed  are  they  which  are  called  to  supper

21.  5.  to.  for  these  words  are  true  and  faithful

See  Book.

WRITER.

Judg.  5.  14.  they  that  handle  the  pen  of  the  tv.

Psal.  45.  1.  my  tongue  is  the  pen  of  a  ready  to.
Ezek.  9.  2.  a  man  with  a  w.  inkhorn  by  his  side,  3.
WRITES'!’.

Job  13.  26.  for  thou  to.  bitter  things  against  me
Ezek.  37.  20.  the  sticks  whereon  thou  to.  shall  be
WRIT  El  II.

Psal.  87.  6.  the  Lord  shall  count  when  he  to.  up
WRITING.

Exod.  32.  16.  and  the  to.  was  the  to.  of  God
39.  30.  and  wrote  on  plate  of  the  holy  crown  a  to.
Deut.  10.  4.  he  wiote  according  to  the  first  to.

31. 24.  when  Moses  had  made  an  end  of  to.  the  law

1  Chron.  28. 19.  the  Lord  made  me  understand  in  to.

2  Chron.  2.  11.  Huram  king  of  Tyre  answered  in  to.
21.  12.  there  came  a  to.  from  Jehoram  to  Elijah

35.  4.  prepare  according  to  the  to.. of  David  king

36.  22.  Cyrus  put  the  proclamation  into.  Ezra  1. 1.
Ezra  4.  7-  the  to.  of  letter  was  in  the  Syrian  tongue
Esth.  1. 22.  for  he^ent  letters  unto  all  provinces  ac¬
cording  to  the  to.  thereof,  3.  12.  8.  9.  |  y.  27.

3.  14.  the  copy  of  the  to.  was  published  to  all
4.8.  Mordecai  gave  to  Hatach  a  copy  ot  the  to.

8.  8.  the  u.  in  the  king’s  name  may  no  man  reverse
Isa .  38.  9.  the  to.  of  Hezekiah  when  he  had  been  sick
Ezek.  13.  9.  not  written  in  the  to.  of  house  of  Israel
Dan.  5.  7.  the  king  said,  whoso  shall  read  this  to.

8.  could  not  read  the  to.  ||  15.  should  read  this  to.

16.  if  thou  canst  read  the  tv.  thou  snait  be  clothed

17.  yet  I  will  read  the  to.  to  the  king  and  make
24.  this  is  the  to.  that  was  written,  25.

6.  8.  sign  the  to.  ||  9.  king  Darius  signed  the  to.

10.  when  Daniel  knew  that  the  to.  was  signed
Mat.  5.  31.  give  her  a  to.  of  divorcement,  19.  7.
John  19.  19.  the  tv.  w'as,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  king
HW-WR1TING.

Col.  2. 14.  blotting  out  the  hand-tv.  of  ordinance*
WRl  TlNG-raM?.

Luke  l.  63.  Zacharias  asked  for  a  to. -table
WRITINGS.

John  5.  47.  if  ye  believe  not  his  to.  how  believe  ?
WRITTEN.

Exod.  31.  18.  to.  with  the  finger  of  God,  Deut.  9.  10.

1  Kings  21.  11.  elders  did  as  it  was  tv.  in  the  letter.

1  Chron.  4.41.  these  to.  by  name  smote  their  tents

2  Chron.  30. 5.  had  not  kept  the  passover  as  it  was  to.
Ezra  5.  7-  they  sent  a  letter,  wherein  was  to.  thus
6.  2.  and  therein  was  a  record  thus  tv.

8.  34.  the  weight  of  the  vessels  was  to.  at  that  time
Keh.  6.  6.  sent  an  open  letter,  wherein  was  to.

8.  14.  found  tv.  in  the  law  to  dwell  in  booths
13. 1.  waste.  Ammonite  not  come  into  congregation
Esth.  1.  19.  let  it  be  tv.  among  the  laws  of  the  Medes
3.  9.  let  it  be  to.  that  they  may  be  destroyed
12.  in  the  name  of  king  Ahasuerus  was  it  to.

6.  2.  found  H\.that  Mordecai  told  of  Bigthana
8.  5.  let  it  be  to.  to  reverse  Haman’s  letters


W  R  O

Psal.  69.  28.  let  them  not  be  to.  with  the  righteous
102.  18.  this  shall  be  w.  for  the  generation  to  come
149.  9.  to  execute  on  them  the  judgment  w.

Prov.  22.  20.  have  not  1  w.  to  thee  excellent  things  ?
Eccl.  12.  10.  that  which  was  to.  was  upright
Jer.  17.  13.  that  depart  from  me  shall  be  to.  in  earth
36.  29.  why  hast  to.  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  come
Ez eh.  2.  10.  the  roll  was  to.  within  and  without
13.  9.  nor  w.  in  the  writing  of  house  of .)  udah
Dan.  6.  24.  this  is  the  writing  that  was  to.  25.

Mat.  27  .  37.  they  set  up  his  accusation  to.

Mark-  11.  17.  is  it  not  to.  my  house  shall  be  Called

15.  26.  the  superscription  of  his  accusation  was  to.

the  king  ot  the  Jews,  Luke  23.  38.  John  19.  20.
Luke  4.  17.  he  found  the  place  where  it  was  to.

10.  20.  rejoice  that  your  names  are  to.  in  heaven

18.  31.  all  things  to.  shall  be  accomplished,  21.  22.
John  2.  17.  the  disciples  remembered  that  it  was  w.

10.  34.  is  it  not  to.  in  your  law,  1  said,  ye  are  gods

20.  31.  hut  these  are  to.  that  ye  might  believe

21.  25.  if  they  should  be  to.  every  one,  the  world

could  not  contain  the  hooks  that  should  be  to.
Acts  13.  29.  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  was  to.

21.  25.  as  touching  the  Gentiles,  we  have  to.

Rom.  2.  15.  which  shew  the  work  of  the  law  to.

4.  23.  now  it  was  not  to.  for  his  sake  alone

1  Cor.  10.  11.  they  are  to.  for  our  admonition

2 .Cor.  3.  2.  ye  are  our  epistle  to.  in  our  hearts

3.  to.  not  with  ink,  but  with  the  Spirit  of  God

7.  if  the  ministration  of  death  to.  in  stones
Philem.  19.  I  Paul  have  to.  with  mine  own  hand
lleb.  12. 23.  the  church  of  the  first  born  to.  in  heaven
Rev.  1.  3.  keep  those  things  which  are  to.  therein

2.  17.  and  in  the  stone  a  new  name  to.

13.  8.  whose  names  are  not  to.  in  the  book  of  life
14. 1.  having  his  Father's  name  to.  in  their  foreheads

17.  5.  upon  her  head  was  a  name  to.  Mystery

19.  12.  he  had  a  name  to.  on  his  thigh,  16.

21.  12.  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  to.  on  the  gates

Is  WRITTEN.

I  Josh.  1.  8.  observe  to  do  all  that  is  to.  therein

2  Kings  22.  13.  that  w hich  is  to.  concerning  us

|  Esth. 8.  8.  for  writing  which  is  to.  in  the  king’s  name
Isa.  4.  3.  every  one  that  is  to.  among  the  living
;  Jer.  17.  1.  sin  of  Judah  is  to.  with  a  pen  of  iron
Dan.  9.  11.  the  curse  and  oath  that  is  to.  in  the  law
i  Luke  10.  26.  what  is  to.  in  the  law  ?  how  readest  ?

20.  17.  he  said,  what  is  this  then  that  is  to.  ?

22.  37.  this  that  is  to.  must  be  accomplished
John  15.  25.  the  word  might  be  fulfilled  that  is  tv.

1  Cor.  4.  6.  to  think  of  men  above  that  which  is  to.
9-  10.  tor  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  this  is  to.

15.  54.  he  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that  is  to.

It  is  WRIT 'TEN.

Josh.  8.  31.  as  it  is  to.  in  the  law  of  Moses,  1  Kings
2.  3.  2  Chron.  23.  18.  I  25.  4.  |  31.  3.  |  35.  12.
Ezra  3.  2,  4.  1  6.  18.  Neh.  8.  15.  I  10.  34,  36.
Dan.  9.  13.

Psal.  40.  7-  in  the  volume  it  is  to.  of  me,  El  eh.  10.  7.
Isa.  65.6.  it  is  to.  before  me,  1  will  recompense
Mat.  2.  5.  thus  it  is  to.  by  the  prophet,  Luke  24.  46.

11.  10.  this  is  he  of  whom  it  is  to.  L  uke  7.  27.

26.  24.  as  it  is  to.  of  him,  Mark  9.  13. 1  14.  21.

31.  it  is  to.  Mark  14.  27-  Luke  4.  8.  Acts  23.  5.
Mark  9.  12.  and  how  it  is  to.  of  the  Son  of  man
Luke  2.  23.  as  it  is  to.  in  the  law  of  the  Lord
Rom.  11.8.  accord,  as  it  is  to.  1  Cor.  1.31.2  Cor.  4. 13.

12.  19.  for  it  is  to.  14.  11.  Gal.  3.  10.

15.  3.  Christ  pleased  not  himself,  but  as  it  is  to.

1  Cor.  15.  45.  so’  it  is  to.  the  first  man  Adam

1  Pet.  1.  16.  because  it  is  to.  be  ye  holy,  1  am  holy
1  have,  or  have  1  WRITTEN.

[  Exod.  24.  12.  will  give  thee  commandment,  I  hare  to.
Hos.  8.  12.  1  have  to.  to  him  great  things  of  my  law
John  19.  22.  Pilate  said,  wnat  7  have  to.  1  have  to.

1  John  2.  14.  1  have  to.  to  you  fathers,  young  men
26.  these  things  have  1  to.  unto  you,  5.  13.

■s  Were  WRITTEN.

Num.  11.  26.  and  they  were  of  them  that  were  w.
Job  19.  23.  O  that  my  words  were  now  to.

Luke 24.  44.  all  things  be  fulfilled  which  were  w.
John  12.  16.  that  these  things  were  w.  of  him
Rom.  ]5. 4.  whatsoever  things  were  to.  aforetime  were
w.  for  our  learning  that  we  might  have  hope
See  Book,  Ch  ronfc ld.

WRONG.

Gen.  16.  5.  Sarai  said,  my  to.  be  upon  thee
Exod.  2.  13.  Moses  said  to  him  that  did  the  to.
Deut.  19.  16.  to  testify  against  him  what  is  to.

Judg.  11.  27.  thou  dost  me  w.  to  war  against  me
1  Chron.  12.  17-  seeing  there  is  no  to.  in  my  hands

16.  21.  he  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  to.  he  re¬

proved  kings  for  their  sakes,  Psal.  105.  14.
Esth.  1. 16.  Vashti  hath  not  done  to.  to  the  king  only
Job  19.  7.  behold,  I  cry  out  of  w.  but  am  not  heard
Jer.  22.  3.  do  no  w.  do  no  violence  to  the  stranger

13.  woe  to  him  that  buildeth  his  chambers  by  to.
Lam.  3.  59.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  seen  my  w.  judge  thou
Hab.  1.  4.  therefore  w.  judgment  proceedeth
Mat.  20.  13.  he  answered,  friend,  I  do  thee  no  w.
Acts  7.  24.  and  seeing  one  of  them  suffer  w.

26.  ye  are  brethren,  why  do  ye  to.  one  to  another  ?

27.  he  that  did  his  neighbours,  thrust  him  away

18.  14.  if  it  were  a  matter  of  to.  or  lewdness

25.  10.  Paul  said,  to  the  Jews  have  I  done  no  w.

1  Cor.  6.  7-  why  do  ye  not  rather  take  w.  ?

8.  nay,  ye  do  to.  and  defraud  your  brethren

2  Cor.  7. 12.  I  did  it  not  for  his  cause  that  had  done

the  w.  nor  for  his  cause  that  suffered  w.
12.  13.  I  was  not  burdensome,  forgive  me  this  w.
Col.  3.  25.  he  that  doth  w.  shall  receive  for  the  w.
WRONGED.

2  Cor.  7.  2.  receive  us,  we  have  w.  no  man
Phir.em.  18.  if  he  hath  w.  thee,  or  oweth  ought
WRONGETH.

Prov.  8.36.  he  thatsinneth  against  mem.  his  own  soul
WRONGFULLY.

Job  21.  27-  the  devices  ye  w.  imagine  against  me
Psal.  35.  19.  let  not  mine  enemies  w.  rejoice
38.  19.  they  that  hate  me  w,  are  multiplied
69.  4.  would  destroy  me,  being  mine  enemies  w.
119.  86.  they  persecute  me  w.  help  thou  me


W  RO

Ezek.  22.  29.  the}’  have  oppressed  the  stranger  to.

1  Pet.  2.  19.  if  a  man  endure  grief,  suffering  to.
WROTE.

Exod.  24. 4.  Moses  to.  all  the  words  ofthe  I.ord,  and
rose  early  in  the  morning,  Deut.  31.  9.
34.  28.  Lord  to.  upon  the  tables  words  of  covenant,
ten  commandment  Deut.  4.  13. 1  5.  22.  1  10.  4.
Num.  33.  2.  and  Moses  to.  their  goings  out
Deut.  31.  22.  Moses  to.  this  song  the  same  day
Josh.  8.  32.  Joshua  to.  upon  the  stones  the  law

1  Sam.  10. 25.  Samuel  w.  the  manner  of  the  kingdom

2  Sam.  11.  14.  David  to.  a  letter  to  Joab,  15.

1  Kings  21.  8.  Jezebel  to.  letters  in  Ahab’sname,  9.

2  Kings  10. 1.  Jehu  to.  6.  |]  1  Chr.  24.  6.  Shemaiahzc.
2  Chron.  30.  1.  IJezekiah  w.  letters  to  Ephraim

32. 17.  Sennacherib  to.  to  rail  on  the  God  of  Israel
Ezra  4.  6.  they  w.  an  accusation  against  Judah
8.  Rehum  to.  9.  I|  Esth.  ft.  5.  the  letters  Daman  re.
Esth  8.  10.  Mordecai  w.  letters,  9.  20,  29.

Jer.  36.4.  Baruch  w.  from  Jeremiah,  18,  27,32.

51.  60.  so  Jeremiah  w.  in  a  hook  ail  the  evil
Dan.  5.  5.  fingers  of  a  man’s  hand  w.  on  the  wall

6.  25.  tner.  king  Darius  w.  unto  all  people

7.  1.  Daniel  haa  aaream,  and  he  w.  the  dream
Mark  10. 5.  for  your  hardn.  Mos.  rc.you  this  precept

12.  19.  Master,  Moses  w.  to  us,  Luke  20.  28.

Luke  1.  63.  Zacharias  w.  saying,  his  name  is  John
John  5.  46.  have  believed  me,  for  Moses  w.  of  me

8.  6.  Jesus  with  his  finger  w.  on  the  ground,  8.

19. 19.  Pilate  w.  a  title  and  put  it  on  the  cross

21.  24.  John  re.  and  testified  of  these  things
Acts  15.  23.  the  apostles  w.  letters  by  them

18. 27.  the  brethren  w.  exhorting  the  disciples

23.  25.  Lysias  w.  a  letter  after  this  manner
Rom.  16.  22.  I  Tertius,  who  to.  this  epistle,  salute

1  Cor.  5.  9.  Paul  w.  in  an  epistle.  2  Cor.  2.  3,  4.  |

7.  12.  Fph.  3.  3.  Philem.  21.
7.  1.  concerning  the  things  whereof  ye  w.  to  me

2  John  5.  not  as  though  1  to.  anew  commandment

3  John  9.  I  to.  to  the  church,  Diotr.  receives  us  not

WROTH.

Gen.  4.  5.  Cain  was  very  w.  ||  6.  why  art  thou  w.  ?
31.  36.  Jacob  was  w.  ||  34.  7-  Jacob's  sons  were  w.

40.  2.  Pharaoh  was  w.  with  two  officers,  41.  10.
Exod.  16.  20.  Moses  was  w.  Num.  16.  15.  |  31.  14.
Num.  16.  22.  wilt  thou  be.  w.  with  all  congregation  ?
Deut.  1.  34.  the  Lord  heard  your  words  and  wasa.

3.  26.  1  9.  19.  2  Sam.  22.  ft.  2  Chron.  28.  9.
Psal.  18.  7. 1  78.  21,  59,  62.

1  Sam.  18.  8.  and  Saul  was  very  w.  20.  7.

29.  4.  the  princes  of  Philistine's  were  to.  with  him

2  Sam.  3.  8.  Abner  was  to.  ||  13.  21.  David  was  to.

2  Kings 5.  11.  but  Naaman  was  w.  and  went  away

13.  19.  and  the  man  of  God  was  to.  with  him

2  Chron.  16.  10.  Asa  was  w.  ||  26.  19.  Uzziah  was  w.
Neh.  4.  1.  Sanballat,  7.  II  Esth.  1.  12.  Ahasuerus  ?c.
Esth.  2.  21.  Bigthan  and  Teresh  were  to.

Psal.  89.  38.  thou  hast  been  w.  with  thine  anointed
Isa.  C8.  21.  he  shall  be  a;,  as  in  the  valley  ofGibeon
47.  6.  I  was  w.  with  my  people,  1  have  polluted
54.  9-  I  have  sworn  I  would  not  be  w.  with  thee
57.  16.  1  will  not  contend,  nor  will  1  be  always  to.

17.  for  the  iniquity  of  his  covetousness  was  I  w.

and  smote  him,  1  hid  me,  and  was  w.
64.  5.  behold  thou  art  w.  for  we  have  sinned

9.  be  notw.  very  sore,  O  Lord  ;  we  are  thy  people
Jer.  37. 15.princes  were  w.  ||  Mat.  2,16.  Derod  was  w.
Lam.  5.  22.  rejected  us,  thou  ait  very  to.  against  us
Mat.  18.  34.  his  Lord  was  w.  and  delivered  him

22.  7-  king  was  a’.  II  Rev.  12.  17.  dragon  was  w.

WROUGHT.

Gen.  31.  7-  Shechem  had  to.  folly  in  Israel
Exod.  10.  2.  what  things  I  have  to.  in  Egypt
36.  1.  then  ai.Bezaleel  and  Aholiab,  L.  putwisd.

4.  all  the  wise  men  w.  the  work,  8. 1  39.  6.

Lev.  20.  12.  put  to  death,  they  have  to.  confusion
Num.  23.  23.  itshall  be  said,  what  hath  God  w.  ?
Deut.  17.2.  man  or  woman  that  hath  to.  wickedness
22.  21.  w.  folly  in  Israel,  Josh.  7.  15.  Judg.  20.  10.

31.  18.  for  the  evils  which  they  shall  have  to.

Ruth  2. 19.  shewed  with  whom  she  had  to.  the  man’s

name  with  whom  l  to.  to-day,  is  Boaz

1  Sam.  6.  6.  I.ord  had  to.  wonderfully  among  them
11.  13.  Lord  hatha),  salvationin  Israel,  19.  5.

14.  45.  for  Jonathan  hath  to.  with  God  this  day

2  Sam.  18.  13.  otherwise  I  should  havea>.  falsehood

23.10.  the  Lord  to.  a  great  v  ictory  that  day.  12.

1  Kings  5. 16. who  ruled  over  the  people  that  a>.9.  23.

16.  20.  the  acts  of  Zimri,  and  the  treason  he  w.

25.  but  Omri  w.  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord

2  Kings  3.  2.  Jehoram  w.  evil,  2  Chron.  21. 6.

17-  11.  Israel  to.  wicked  things,  Neh.  9.  18.

21. 6.  Manasseh  to.  much  wickedness,  2  Chr.  33.  6.

1  Chron.  4.  21.  the  families  that  to.  fine  linen

2  Chron.  3.  14.  and  he  w.  cherubims  thereon

24.  12.  they  hired  such  as  w.  iron  and  brass
13.  so  the  workman  to.  the  work,  .34. 10,  13.

32.  t  24.  the  I.ord  w.  a  miracle  for  IJezekiah
Neh.  4.  16.  half  of  my  servants  to.  in  the  work

17.  every  one  with  one  of  his  hands  w.  in  the  work
Job  12.  9.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  w.  this

36.  23.  or  who  canstsay,  thou  hast  w.  iniquity  ?
Psal.  .31.  19.  hastre.  for  them  that  trust  in  thee
68.  28.  strengthen  that  which  thou  hast  w.  tor  us
78.  43.  how  he  had  w.  his  signs  in  Egypt
Eccl.  2.  11.  1  looked  on  all  works  my  hands  had  to.
Isa.  26.  12.  for  thou  hast  w.  all  our  works  in  us

18.  we  have  not  w.  any  deliverance  in  the  earth

41.  4.  who  hath  w.  and  done  it  ?  1  the  Lord,  I  am
Jer.  11.  15.  seeing  she  hath  to.  lewdness  with  many

18.  3.  and  behold,  he  to.  a  work  on  the  wheels
Ezek.  20.  9.  I  w.  for  my  name’s  sake,  14,  22,44.

29.  20.  given  him  Egypt,  because  they  w.  forme
Dan.  4.  2.  the  wonders  that  God  hath  w.  toward  me
Jonah  1.11.  the  sea  to.  and  was  tempestuous,  13.
Zeph.  2.  3.  meek  of  earth  who  have  to.  his  judgment
Mat.  20.  12.  these  last  have  to.  but  one  hour

26. 10.  she  hath  re.  a  good  work  on  me,  Mark  14.  6.
Acts  15.  12.  what  wonders  God  hath  to.  21.  19.

18. 3.  Paul  of  same  trade, abode  with  Aquila  and  to.

19. 11.  God  w.  special  miracles  by  hands  of  Paul
Rom.  7-8.  w.  in  me  all  manner  of  concupiscence


YEA

Rom.  15.  18.  things  which  Christ  hath  not  w.  by  me
2  Cor.  5. 5.  he  that  hath  w.  us  for  same  thing,  is  God
7.  11.  what  carefulness  it  to.  in  you  ?

Gal.  2.  8.  for  he  that  w.  effectually'  in  Peter
F.ph.  l.  20.  which  he  w.  in  Christ,  when  he  raised
2  J’hess.  3. 8.  but  we  w.  with  labour  and  travail
Deb.  11.  .33.  who,  through  faith,  w.  righteousness
Jam.  2.  22.  seest  thou  bow  faith  w.  with  his  works  ?

1  Pet.  4.  .3.  to  have  w.  the  will  of  the  Gentiles

2  John  8.  lose  not  those  things  which  we  have  w.
Rev.  19.  20.  the  false  prophet  that  w.  miracles

W ROUGH T,  Passive!!/.

Num.  31.  51.  Moses  took  of  them  all  w.  jewels
Deut.  1.3.  14.  that  such  abomination  is  to.  17.  4.

2L  3.  take  an  heifer  which  hath  not  been  w.

1  Kings  7.  26.  the  brim  of  the  sea  was  w.  like

1  Chron.  22.  2.  he  set  masons  to  hew  w.  stones
Neh.  6.  16.  this  work  was  w.  of  our  God
Psal.  45.  1.3.  her  clothing  was  of  w.  gold

139.  15.  when  I  was  made  in  secret,  curiously  w.
Eccl.  2.  17.  the  works  to.  under  the  sun  is  grievous
Mat.  14.4  2.  John  the  Baptist  is  risen,  therefore
mighty  works  are  w.  by  him,  Mark  6.  2.
John  3.  21.  made  manifest  that  they  are  w.  of  God
|9.  f  23.  coat  was  without  seam,  w.  from  the  top
Acts  5.  12.  wonders  were  w.  among  the  people

2  Cor .  1. 1  6.  which  is  w.  in  enduring  sufferings

12. 12.  the  signs  of  an  apostle  were  w.  among  vou

WROUGHTEST.

Ruth  2. 19.  Naomi  said  to  her,  where  w.  thou  ?
WRUNG.

Ljev.  1.  15.  the  blood  shall  be  w.  out,  5.  9.

Psal.  73. 10.  waters  of  a  full  cup  are  w.  to  them
Isa.  51. 17.  thou  hast  w.  out  the  dregs  of  the  cup

Y.

YARN.

I  Kings  10.  28.  Solomon  had  linen  y.  out  of  F.gy’pt,

the  king’s  merchants  received  y.  2  Chron.  1.  16.
YCE,  or  rather  ICE.

Job  6.  16.  which  are  blackish  by  reason  of  y.

.38.  29.  out  of  whose  womb  came  the  y.  and  frost
Psal.  147.  17.  he  casteth  forth  his  y.  like  morsels
_  Y  E.

Gen.  3. 5.  ye  shall  be  as  gods  knowing  good  and  evil
Luke  16. 15.  ye  are  they  which  justify  yourselves

1  Cor.  6.  11.  but  ye  are  washed,  ye  are  sanctified,  ye

are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus
20.  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,  glorify  God  in  body

2  Cor.  3.  2.  ye  are  our  epistle  written  in  our  hearts

6. 12 . ye  are  not  straitened  in  us  but  in  your  own
Gal.  4. 12.  brethren,  be  as  I  am,  for  1  am  as  ye  are

6.  1  .ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  an  one
Eph.  2.  13.  ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  nigh
1-  Thess.  2. 19.  what  is  our  joy,  are  not  even  ye  ?

20.  ye  are  our  glory  ||  .3.  8.  if  ye  stand  fast  in  Lord
5.4.  but  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness
5.  ye  are  all  children  of  light  and  of  the  day
2  Thess.  3.  13.  but  ye,  brethren,  be  not  weary  ?

1  Pet.  2.  9.  but  ye  are  a  chosen  generation

YEA.

Gen.?,.  1.  y.  hath  God  said,  ye  shall  not  eat
Mat.  5.  37.  let  your  conversation  be  y.  y.  Jam.  5.  12.
9.  28.  they  said  unto  him,  y.  Lord,  1.3.  51.

Acts 5.  8.  Sapphira  said,  y.  for  so  much

22.  27.  tell  me,  art  thou  a  Roman  ?  he  said,  y.

2  Cor.  1.  17.  there  should  be  y.  y.  and  nay,  nay'

18.  our  word  toward  you  was  not  y.  and  nay'

19.  for  the  Son  of  God  was  not  y.  and  nay

20.  all  the  promises  of  God  in  him  are  y.  and  amen
Phil.  1. 18.  1  do  rejoice,  y.  and  will  rejoice

3. 8.  y.  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  excellency
2  Tim.  3.12.  y.  and  all  that  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus
Philem.  20.  y.  brother,  let  me  have  joy  of  thee
YEAR.

Concerning  the  Jewish  year,  see  Month.  It  is
said  in  Gen.  15.  13.  and  in  Acts  7.  6.  that  they
should  entreat  them  evil  tour  hundred  years:
but  in  Exod.  12.  40.  it  is  said,  The  sojourning
of  the  children  of  Israel  who  dwelt  in  Egypt,
w'as  four  hundred  and  thirty  years.  This  dif¬
ference  is  reconciled  by  distinguishing  the  begin¬
ning  of  the  account,  which,  if  taken  from  Abra¬
ham's  leaving  of  Chaldea,  arid  receiving  the  first
promire  of  Canaan,  when  his  sojourning  did  be¬
gin  ;  then  from  that  time  to  the  giving  of  the  law,
there  will  be  four  hundred  and  thirty  years,  as
it  is '  in  Exodus.  But  if  it  be  taken  from  Abra¬
ham's  seed,  that  is,  from  the  birth  of  Isaac,
which  was  in  the  hundredth  year  of  Abraham's
age,  and  so  thirty  years  after  his  departure  from
Chaldea,  then  it  must  consequently  be  thirty
years  less  from  thence  to  the  giving  of  the  law  ;
and  so  that  will  agree  exactly  with  the  Jour  hun¬
dred  years  mentioned  in  Genesis  and  in  the  Acts,
which  are  assigned  to  his  seed's  sojourning  in  a
strange  land ;  by  the  strange  land  both  Canaan
and  Egypt  being  to  be  understood ;  for  the  Chal¬
dee  Paraphrast,  and  the  generality  of  the  Jews,
determine  the  space  wherein  they  sojourned  in
Egypt,  to  be  but  two  hundred  and  ten  years;  only
Josephus  calls  them  two  hundred  and  fifteen.

Gen.  17.21.  whom  Sarah  shall  Lear  the  next  y.

26. 12.  Isaac  received  the  same  y.  an  hundred-fold
47.  17.  Joseph  fed  them  with  bread  that  y.

Exod.  12.  2.  it  shall  be  the  first  month  of  the  y.

23.  14.  keep  a  feast  to  me  in  the  y.  Lev.  2.3.  41.

17.  three  times  in  tue  y.  all  thy  males  shall  ap¬
pear  before  the  Lord  God,  34.  2.3,  24.
Deut.  16.  16.

29.  I  will  not  drive  them  out  from  thee  in  one  y.
lev.  16.  34.  to  make  an  atonement  once  a  y.

25.  5.  it  is  a  y.  of  rest  ||  29.  redeem  it  within  a  y.
Num.  9.  22.  if  it  were  a  y.  that  the  cloud  tarried
1J.  34.  each  day  for  a  y.  shall  ye  bear  iniquities
Deut.  15.  9.  saying,  the  y.  pf  release  is  at  hand

26. 12.  the  third  y.  which  is  the  y.  of  tithing
Josh.  5.  12.  they  did  eat  the  fruit  of  Canaan  that  y.
Judg.  10.  8.  that  y.  the  Ammonites  vexed  Israel

II  40.  they  went  to  lament  four  days  in  a  y.

571


YET


YEA


Y  O  K


"Wo.  17.  10.  I  will  give  thee  ten  shekels  by  the  y.

|  Sam.  27.  7-  David  dwelt  a  y.  and  four  months
£  Sam.  11.  1.  that  alter  the  y.  was  expired
14.  20.  it  was  at  every  y.  end  that  he  polled  it

1  Kings  9.  25.  three  tunes  in  a  y.  did  Solomon  otter

10.  14.  now  the  weight  of  the  gold  that  came  to

Solomon  in  one  y.  2  C/tron.  9.  13.

2  Kings  19.  29.  ye  shail  eat  this  y.  such  things  as

grow  ot  themselves  in  second  and  third  y .
Isa.  37  .  30.  .

2  Chron.  27.  5.  Ammon  gave  him  the  same  y.

Esth.  9.  27.  they  would  £eep  two  days  every  y.

Ps.  05.  11.  thou  crow  nest  the  y.  with  thy  goodness
Isa.  C.  1.  in  the  y.  that  king  Uzziah  died

14.  28.  in  the  y.  king  Ahaz  died  was  this  burden

21.  16.  in  a  y.  all  the  glory  of  Kedar  shall  fail
61.  2.  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  y.  of  the  Lord.

and  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God,  Luke  4. 19.
63.  4.  and  the  y.  of  my  redeemed  is  come
Jer.  11.  23.  bring  evil  on  the  men  of  Anathoth,  even
the  y.  of  their  visitation,  23.  12. 1  48.  44.

17.  8.  shall  not  be  careful  in  the  y.  of  drought

28.  16.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  thisy.  thou  shalt  die

17.  so  llananiah  the  prophet  died  the  same  y.

51.  46.  a  rumour  shall  both  come  in  one  y.

Ezek.  4.  6.  I  have  appointed  each  day  for  a  y.

46.  17.  it  shall  be  his  to  the  y.  of  liberty
Mic.  6.  6.  shall  I  come  with  calves  of  a  y.  old  r
Luke  2.  41.  his  parents  went  to  .1  erusalem  every  y.
13.  8.  he  said,  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  y.  also
John  11.49.  Caiaphas  being  high  priest  that  y.  said
one  man  should  die  for  the  people, 51.  1  18.  13.
Jets  11.  26.  a  whole  y.  they  assembled  themselves

18.  11.  Paul  continued  a y.  at  Corinth,  teaching
2  Cor.  8.  10.  but  also  to  be  forward  a  y.  ago

9.  2.  that  Achaia  was  ready  a  y.  ago,  your  zeal
Heb.  9.  7.  the  high  priest  went  in  once  a  y.  25.

10.  3.  there  is  a  remembrance  madeol  sins  every  y.
Jam.  4. 13.  we  will  continue  there  a  y.  and  buy
Rev.  9.  15.  who  were  prepared  fora  month  and  a  y.

YEAR  after  YEAR.

2&m.21.1.  there  was  a  famine  three  yearsy.  after  y.
YEAR  by  YEAR.

Deut.  14.22.  thou  shalt  tithe  the  increase  of  thy
seed  that  the  field  bringetli  forth  y.  by  y.

15.  20.  thou  shalt  eat  it  before  the  I.ord  y.  by  y.

1  Sam.  1. 7.  as  he  did  soy.  by.  y.  so  she  provoked  her

1  Kings  5.  11.  thus  Solomon  gave  to  Hiram  y.  byy.
10.  25.  they  brought  a  rate  y.  by  y.  2  Chron.  9.  24.

2  Kings  17.  4.  no  present  as  he  had  done  y.  by  y.
Neh.  10.  34.  to  bring  the  wood  offering  y.  by  y.

35.  bring  the  first  fruits  of  all  trees  y.  by  y.

Heb.  10.1.  those  sacrifices  which  they  offered  y.  byy.
YEAR  to  YEAR.

Exod.  13.  10.  keep  this  ordinance  from  y.  to  y.

1  Sam.  2.  19.  brought  a  coat  to  him  from  y.  to  y.

7.  16.  Samuel  went  from  y.  to  y .  in  circuit  to  Bethel
9t(C,hr.  24.  5.  repair  house  of  your  God  from  y.  toy.
Isa.  29.  1.  add  ye  y.  to  y.  let  them  kill  sacrifices
Zech.  14.  16.  shall  go  up  from  y.  to  y.  to  worship  L.
See  First,  Second,  Third,  Fifth,  Seventh.
YEARLY.

Lev.  25.  53.  as  a  y.  hired  servant  shall  he  be
Judg.  11.  40.  daughters  of  Israel  went  y.  to  lament
21.  19.  there  is  a  feast  of  the  Lord  in  Shiloh  y.

1  Sam.  1.  3.  Elkanah  went  up  y.  to  worship
21.  went  up  to  offer  the  y.  sacrifice,  2.  19.

20.  6.  there  is  ay.  sacrifice  there  for  all  the  family
Esth.  9.  21.  that  they  should  keep  the  14th  day  of
the  month  Adar,  and  fifteenth  of  the  same  y.
YEARS.


Gen.  t.  14.  let  them  be  for  seasons,  days,  and  y.

25.  7.  these  are  the  days  of  the  y.  of  Abraham

8.  Abraham  died  an  old  man  and  full  of  y.

17.  lshmael  was  an  hundred  thirty  seven  y.

47. 9.  few  and  evil  have  the  y.  of  my  life  been
Exod.  34.  22.  the  feast  of  in  gathering  at  the  y.  end
Lev.  25.  15.  according  to  number  of  y.  16,  50,  52.
27.  18.  the  money  according  to  the  y.  that  remain
Deut.  32.  7.  consider  the  y.  of  many  generations
Josh.  13.  1.  Joshua  was  old  and  stricken  in  y.

1  Sam.  29.  3.  David  who  hath  been  with  these  y.

1  Kings  1.1.  David  was  old  and  stricken  in  y.

17.  1.  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  these  y.

2  Chr.  14.6.  land  had  rest,  Asa  had  no  war  in  those  y.

18.  2.  after  certain  y.  he  went  down  to  Ahab

Job  10.  5.  are  thy  y.  as  man’s  days,  that  searchest  sin

15.  20.  the  number  of  y.  is  hidden  to  the  oppressor

16.  22.  when  a  few  y.  are  come,  1  shall  go  the  way
32.  7.  and  multitude  of  y.  should  teach  wisdom
36.  11.  they  shall  spend  their  y.  in  pleasures

26.  nor  can  number  of  his  y.  be  searched  out
Psal.  31.  10.  and  my  y.  are  spent  with  sighing
61.  6.  wilt  prolong  his  y.  as  many  generations

77.  5.  I  considered  the  y.  of  ancient  times
10.  I  will  remember  the  y.  of  the  right  hand

78.  33.  their  y.  did  he  consume  in  trouble

90.  4.  for  a  thousand  y.  in  thy  sight  are  but  as
yesterday  when  it  is  past,  2  Pet.  3.  8.

9.  we  spend  oury.  as  a  tale  that  is  told

10.  the  days  of  our  y.  are  threescore  y.  and  ten
15.  according  to  they,  wherein  we  have  seen  ev  il

102.  24.  thy  y.  are  throughout  all  generations

27.  thou  art  the  same,  thy  y.  shall  have  no  end
Prov.  4.  10.  they,  of  thy  life  shall  be  many,  9.  11.

5.  9.  lest  thou  give  thy  y.  unto  the  cruel
10.  27-  the  y.  of  the  wicked  shall  be  shortened
Eccl.  12.1.  while  evil  days  come  not,  nor  y.  draw  nigh
Isa.  21.  16.  according  to  the  y.  of  an  hireling
38.  10.  1  am  deprived  of  the  residue  of  my  y.

15.  I  shall  go  softly  all  my  y.  in  bitterness  of  soul
Ezek.  4.  5. 1  have  laid  on  thee  they,  of  their  iniquity
22.  4.  and  thou  art  come  even  unto  thy  y.

38.  8.  in  latter  y.  thou  shalt  come  into  the  land
Dan.  9.  2.  I  understood  by  books  the  number  of  y.
11.6.  in  the  end  of  y.  they  shall  join  together
8.  continue  more  y.  than  the  king  of  the  north
13.  the  king  of  north  shall  come  after  certain  y.
Joel  2.  2.  even  to  the  y.  of  many  generations
25.  T  will  restore  they,  the  locusts  hath  eaten
Hub.  3.  2.  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  y.
Mai.  3.  4.  the  offerings  pleasant  as  in  the  former  y.
.572


Luke  1.7.  both  were  well  stricken  in  y.  18.

Gal.  4.  10.  ye  observe  days  and  months,  and  y._

Heb.  1.  12.  thou  art  the  same,  thy  y.  shall  not  tail

11.  24.  by  faith  Moses  when  come  to  y.  refused
Rev.  20.  2.  an  angel  bound  Satan  a  thousand  y.

3.  till  the  thousand  y.  should  be  fulfilled

4.  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  athous.  y.

7.  when  the  thousand  y.  are  expired,  Satan  shall

See  Numeral  words  in  their  places,  as  Hundred,
Many,  Two,  Three,  Six,  Old.

YELL.

Jer.  51.  38.  like  lions,  they  shall  y.  as  lions’  whelps
YELLED.

Jer.  2.  15.  the  young  lions  n  ared  and  y.  on  him
YELLOW.

Lev.  13.  30.  behold,  if  there  be  in  it  '.y.  thin  hair
32.  behold,  if  there  be  in  it  noy.  hair

36.  priests  shall  not  seek  for  y.  hair,  is  unclean
Psal.  68.  J3.  her  feathers  covered  with  y.  gold

Y  EA  R  N  .

Gen.  43.  30.  for  his  bowels  did  y.  on  his  brother
YEARNED.

1  Kings  3.  26.  for  her  bowels  y.  upon  her  son
YESTERDAY.

Cen.  31.  +  2.  not  toward  him  asy.  and  day  before
Exod.  4.  +  10.  not  eloquent  since  y.  nor  third  day

5.  14.  why  have  ye  not  fulfilled  your  task  y.?
Deut.  19.  t  4.  hated  not  from  y.  the  third  day,  6.
Josh.  3.  t  4.  ye  have  not  passed  this  way  since y.?

1  Sam.  19.  t  7.  David  was  in  Saul’s  presence  as  y.

20.  27-  why  came  not  the  son  of  Jesse  to  meat  y.  /

2  Sam.  15.  20.  whereas  thou  earnest  but  y.

2  Kings 9.  26.  1  have  seen  y.  the  blood  of  Naboth
1  Chr.  11.  t  2.  y.  and  third  day,  when  Saul  was  king
Job  8.  9.  we  are  but  of  y.  and  know  nothing
Ps.  90.  4.  a  thousand  years  in  thy  sight  are  but  as  y.
ha.  30.  t  33.  Tophet  is  ordained  from  y.

Mic.  2.  t  8.  y.  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an  enemy
John  4.  52.  y.  at  the  seventh  hour  the  fever  left  him
Acts 7.  28.  kill  me  as  thou  didst  the  Egyptian  y.  ?
Heb.  13.  8.  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  y.  and  for  ever
YESTERNIGHT.

Gen.  19.  34.  behold,  1  lay  y.  with  my  father
31.  29.  the  God  of  your  father  soake  to  me  y.

42.  God  hath  seen  affliction,  and  rebuked  thee  y.

Y  ET.

Gen.  40.  23.  y.  did  not  the  butler  remember  Joseph
Exod.  9.  17.  asy.  exaltest  thyself  against  myr  people
10.  7.  k  no  west  thou  noty.  that  Egypt  is  destroyed
Lev.  26.  18.  if  ye  will  not  y.  hearken  unto  me
44.  y.  for  all  that,  when  they  be  in  the  land
Deut.  1.  32.  y.  in  this  thing  ye  did  not  believe

9.  29.  y.  they  are  thy  people  and  inheritance

12.  9.  ye  are  not  as  y.  come  to  the  inheritance

29.  4.  y.  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  eyes  to  see

Josh.  14. 11.  as  y.  I  am  as  strong  this  day  as  I  was
Judg.  7.  4.  Lord  said,  the  people  arey.  too  many

10.  13.  y.  ye  have  forsaken  me  and  served  gods

1  Sam.  15.  30.  y.  honour  me  now  before  the  elders

2  Sam.  23.  5.  y.  made  with  me  everlasting  covenant

1  Kings  14.  8.  y.  hast  not  been  as  my  servant  David

19.  18.  y.  I  have  left  me  seven  thousand  in  Israel

22.  8.  there  is  y.  one  by  whom  we  may  inquire

43.  asy.  the  people  did  sacrifice,  2  Kings  14.4.

2  Kings 8.  19.  y.  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  Judah

13.  23.  nor  cast  he  them  from  his  presence  as  y.

2  Chron.  20.  33.  as  y.  the  people  had  not  prepared

27.  2.  and  the  people  did  y.  corruptly

3  i.  18.  not  cleansed,  y.  did  they  eat  the  passover
Ezra  .3.  6.  the  foundation  of  temple  was  not  y.  laid
9.  9.  y.  our  God  hath  not  forsaken  us,  Neh.  9.  19.
Neh.  5.  18.  y.  required  not  1  bread  of  the  governor
13.  18  y.  ye  bring  more  wrath  upon  Israel
Esth.  5.  13.  y.  all  this  availeth  me  nothing  so  long  as
Job  1.  16.  while  he  was  y.  speaking,  17,  18.

6.  10.  then  should  1  y.  have  comfort

1.3.  15.  though  he  slay  me  y.  will  I  trust  in  him

20.  7.  y.  he  shall  perish  for  ever,  like  his  dung

29.  5.  when  the  Almighty  was  y.  with  me

35.  15.  y.  he  knoweth  it  not  in  great  extremity
Psal.  2.  6.  y.  have  I  set  my  king  on  my  holy  hill

37.  25.  y.  have  I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken
42.  5.  I  shall  y.  praise  him,  11.  1  4.3.  5.  I  71  •  14.

44.  17.  this  is  come,  y.  have  we  not  forgotten

119.  51.  y.  have  I  not  declined  from  thy  law,  157.
83.  y.  do  I  not  forget  thy  statutes,  109,  141.

Prov.  27.22.  y.  will  not  his  foolishness  depart  from

30.  12.  y.  is  not  washed  from  their  filthiness
Eccl.  4.  3.  better  is  he  which  hath  not  y.  been
Cant.  8.  1.  kiss  thee,  y.  I  should  not  be  despised
Isa.  10.  22.  y.  a  remnant  of  them  shall  return

14.1.  for  the  Lord  will  y.  choose  Israel  and  set  them
17.  6.  y.  gleaning  grapes  shall  be  left  in  it

28.  4.  while  it  isy.  in  his  hand,  he  eateth  it  up
12.  this  is  the  rest,y.  they  would  not  hear

31.  2.  y.  he  also  is  wise,  and  will  bring  evil

49.  5.  though  Israel  be  not  gathered,  y.  shall  I  be
15.  they  may  forget,  y.  will  I  not  forget  thee

5.3.  7.  he  wasoppressed.y.  he  opened  not  his  mouth
Jer.  2.  9.  I  will  y.  plead  with  you,  saith  the  Lord

3.  1.  y.  return  to  me||5.  28.  y.  they  prosper
15.  I .  y.  my  mind  coul  1  not  be  toward  this  people

23.  21.  prophets  y.  they  ran,y.  they  prophesied

36.  24.  y.  they  were  not  afraid ,  nor  rent  garments
Ezek.  8.  18.  tho’  they  cry,  y.  will  1  not  hear  them

11.  16.  y.  will  1  be  to  them  as  a  little  sanctuary
28.  2. said,  I  am  agod.y.thou  artaman.and  notG.
36.  .37.  1  will  y.  for  this  be  inquired  ot  by  Israel
Dan.  9. 13.  y.  made  we  not  our  prayer  before  God
1 1 . 35.  because  it  is  y.  for  a  time  appointed

45.  y.  he  shall  come  to  his  end,  none  shall  help  him
Hos.  7.  9.  grey  hairs  are  on  him,  y.  he  knoweth  not
13. 4.  y.  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  from  land  of  Egypt
Amos  4.  6.  I  have  given  you  want  of  bread,  y.  nave
ye  not  returned  to  me,  8,  9,  10,  11.  Hag.  2. 17.
6.  10.  he  shall  say,  is  there  y.  any  with  thee
Jonah  2.  4.  y.  1  will  look  toward  thy  holy  temple

3.  4.  y.  forty  days  and  N  ineveh  shall  be  overthrown

4.  2.  was  my  saying,  when  I  wasy.  in  my  country
Mic.  6.  10.  are  there  y.  the  treasures  of  w  ickedness
Nah.  .3.  0.  y.  was  she  carried  away  into  captivity
Halt.  3.  8.  y.  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  1  will  joy


Mat.  i.  14.  y.  is  she  thy  companion,  and  the  wife
Mat.  15. 17.  do  ye  not  y.  understand  that  whatsoevei
entereth  in  at  the  mouth,  16.  9.  Mark 8.

19.  20.  these  things  have  1  kept,  what  lack  1  y.

24.6.  but  the  end  is  not  y.  Mark  13.  7.

Mark  11.  13.  for  the  time  of  figs  w  as  not  y.

Luke  24.  44.  the  words  1  spake  while  y.  with  you
John  2.  4.  Jesus  saith  unto  her,  my  hour  is  not  j

come,  7-  6,  30.  1  8.  2(

7.  39.  for  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  y.  given
11.25.  though  he  were  dead  y.  shall  he  li'  e

20.  9.  for  as  y.  they  knew'  not  the  scripture
Acts  8. 16.  asy.  H.  Ghost  was  fallen  on  none  of  them
Rom.  4.  11.  he  Lad  y.  being  uncircurncised,  12.

5.6.  we  werey  without  strength  ||  8.  y.  sinners
8.24.  what  a  man  seeth,  why  doth  he  y.  hope  tor?

9.  19.  thou  wilt  say,  why  doth  he  y.  find  fault?

1  Cor.  3.  3.  ye  arey.  carnal '  ||  15.  y.  so  as  by  tire
7.  10.  to  the  married  1  comm.  y.  not  I ,  but  the  L

14.  21.  y.  for  all  that  w  ill  they  not  hear  me

15.  10.  y.  not  1,  but  the  grace  of  God  with  me
17.  your  faith  is  vain,  ye  are  y.  in  your  sins

2  Cor.  1.  10.  we  trust,  that  he  will  y.  deliver
23.  to  spare  you  l  came  not  as  y.  to  Corinth

6.  8.  as  deceivers,  y.  true  as  unknown,  y.  known
Gal.  2.  20.  y.  not  I ,  but.  Christ  liveth  in  me

3.  4.  have  ye  suffered  in  vain  ?  if  it  be  y.  in  vain
5.  11.  I,  brethren,  if  I  y.  preach  circumcision
2  Thess.  2.  5.  when  I  was  y.  witli  you,  1  told  you
2  Tim.  2.  5.  y.  is  he  not  crowned,  except  he  strive
Heb.  2.8.  we  see  noty.  all  things  put  under  him
4. 15.  was  tempted  like  as  we  are,  y.  without  sin

7.  10.  for  he  was  y.  in  the  loins  of  his  father
11.4.  and  by  it  he  being  dead,  y.  speaketh

7.  Noah,  being  warned  of  things  not  seen  as  y.
Jam.  2.10.  keep  the  whole  law,  y.  offend  in  one  point

11.  y.  if  thou  kill  ||  4.  2.  y.  ye  have  not

1  John  3. 2.  it  doth  not  y.  appear  what  we  shall  be
Rev.  17.  8.  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  and  y.  is

10.  and  one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  y.  come

12.  ten  kings  who  have  received  no  kingdom  as  y.

See  Alive.

YIELD.

Gen.  4. 12.  the  earth  not  henceforth  y.  her  strength
49.  20.  Asher’s  bread  be  fat,  shall  y.  royal  dainties
Lev.  19. 25.  that  it  may  y.  to  you  the  increase
26.  4.  the  land  shall  y.  her  increase,  trees  y.  truit
20.  for  your  land  shall  not  y.  her  increase

2  Chron.  30.8.  but  y.  yourselves  to  the  Lord
Psal.  67.6.  the  land  shall  y.  her  increase,  85.  12.

107.  37.  plant  vineyards  may  y.  fruits  of  increase
Prov.  7.21.  with  much  fair  speech  she  caused  himy.
Isa.  5.  10.  ten  acres  of  vineyard  shall  y.  one  bath,
and  the  seed  of  an  homer  shall  y.  an  ephah
Hos.  8.  7.  have  sown  the  w  ind,  the  bud  shall  y.

no  meal,  if  so  be  it  y.  the  stranger  shall
swallow  it  up

Joel  2.  22.  the  fig-tree  and  vine  y,  their  strength
Hab.  : 3.17.  altho’  fields  shally.no  meat,  joy  in  God
Acts  2.3.21.  but  do  not  thou  y.  unto  them
Rom.  6.  13.  nor  y.  ye  your  members  as  instruments
of  unrighteousness  to  sin,y.  yourselves  to  God
16.  that  to  whom  ye  y.  yourselves  servants
19.  y.  your  members  servants  to  righteousness
Jam.  3. 12.  no  fountain  y.  salt  w'ater  and  fresh
YIELDED.

Gen. 49. 33.  Jacob  after  commanding  his  sons,  y.  up
Num.  17.8.  behold  the  rod  of  Aaron  y.  almonds
Dan.  3. 28.  y.  their  bodies  that  they  might  not  serve
Mat.  27.  50.  Jesus  cried  again,  and  y.  up  the  ghost
Acts  5. 10.  then  Sapphira  y.  up  the  ghost
Rom  6. 19.  as  ye  have  y.  your  members  servants
YIELDETH.

Neh.  9.  37.  it  y.  much  increase  to  the  kings
Job  24.  5.  the  wilderness  y.  food  for  them
Heb.  12.  11.  y.  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness
YIELDING.

Gen.  1. 11.  bring  forth  herb y.  seed,  tree  y.  fruit,  12.

29.  1  have  given  you  every  tree  y.  seed
Eccl.  10.4.  for  y.  pacifieth  great  offences
tiee  Fruit.

YOKE.

Besides  the  common  acceptation  of  this  term,  for
an  instrument  put  about  the  necks  of  cattle,  to
couple  them  for  drawing,  the  Scripture  makes
mention  (1)  (f  the  yoke  of  bondage,  or  slavery.
Lev.  26.  13.  1  have  broken  the  bands  of  youryofo.
Deut.  28.  48.  He  shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  upon
thy  neck.  (2)  Of  the  yoke  of  afflictions  and
cro'.ses.  Lam.  ,3.  27.  It  is  good  for  a  man  that
he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth.  “  It  is  a  man's
duty,  it  is  profitable  to  him,  patiently  to  bear
■what  afflictions  God  will  please  to  lay  upon  him,
and  to  restrain  his  wanton  spirits  when  they  are
most  prone  to  be  too  brisk  and  lascivious .”  (3)  Of
the  yoke  of  punishment  for  sin,  which  the  prophet
Jeremiah  expresses  thus.  The  yoke  of  my  trans¬
gressions  is  bound  by  his  hand,  Lam.  1.  14.  “  The
punishment  and  bondage  I  undergo  for  my  sins  is
bound  so  fast  that  1  cannot  shake  it  off."  C4)  Of
the  yoke  of  God's  commandments.  Mat.  11.  29,
.30.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you  ;  for  my  yoke  is
easy.  The  service  of  God  to  flesh  and  blocd  is  a
yoke,  because  it  grates  upon  the  sensitive  appe¬
tites,  and  restrains  our  natural  motioiis  and  in¬
clinations  ;  yet  it  is  easy,  in  comparison  of  the
service  of  sin,  the  covenant  of  works,  and  the  cere¬
monial  law  ;  it  is  easy  to  them  that  love  God,  and
are  regenerated,  because  the  law  is  written  in
their  hearts,  Psal.  37-  31.  They  are  endued  with
faith,  Mark  9.  2.3.  And  they  are  strengthened  by
Christ,  Phil.  4.  13.  (5)  ’There  is  the  yoke  of  legal
ceremonies,  Acts  15.  10.  Gal.  5.  1.  They  are
called  a  yoke  in  respect  of  their  variety,  and  the
difficulty  in  performing  them  ;  in  respect  of  then
chargeableness,  and  inefflcacy,  being  only  shadows
ot  good  things  to  come,  lieb.  10.  1.

Gen.  27.  40.  that  thou  shalt  break  his  y.  Jer.  30. 8.
Lev.  26.  13.  I  have  broken  the  bands  of  youry.  and
made  you  go  upright,  Ezek.  34.  27-
Num.  19.  2.  bring  a  red  heifer  without  blemish,  on
which  never  came  y.  Deut.  21.3.  1  &* •■**.  6.  7


YOU


YOU


YOU


Deut.  28.  -16  he  shall  put  ay.  of  iron  upon  thy  neck,
until  he  have  destroyed  thee,  Jer.  28.  14.

I  Sam.  11.  T-  Saul  took  ay.  of  oxen  and  hewed  them

14.  14.au  half  acre,  which  ay.  of  oxen  might  plow
i  Kings  1C.  4. thy  father  made  oury  grievous,  make
his  heavy  y.  lighter,  10,  11.  14.2  Citron.  10.  4.
19.  19.  I  lisha  plowing  with  twelve  y.  of  oxen

21.  he  took  ay.  of  oxen,  and  slew  them
Job  1.  3.  Job  had  five  hundred  y.  of  oxen

42.  12.  he  had  a  thousand  y.  of  oxen
Isa.  9.  4.  thou  hast  broken  they,  of  his  burden,  and
the  staff  of  his  shoulder,  10.  27  .1  >4.  25.
4?-  6.on  ancient  thou  hast  very  heavily  laid  thyy.
56.  6.  oppressed  go  free,  and  that  ve  break  every  y.
Jer.  2.  20.  for  of  old  time  1  have  broken  thy  y.

5.  5.  but  these  have  altogether  broken  the  y.

27.  8.  that  will  not  put  their  neck  under  the  y.

11.  that  bring  their  neck  under  they.  12.

28.  2.  broken  they,  of  the  king  of  Babylon,  4,  11.

12.  llananiah  had  broken  they,  from  Jeremiah
31.  18.  as  a  bullock  unaccustomed  to  they.

51.23.  will  1  break  the  husbandman  and  hisy.

Jam.  1.14.  the  y.  of  my  transgressions  is  bound
3.  27-  it  is  good  for  man  to  bear  they,  in  his  youth
Host.  11.  4.  I  was  as  they  that  take  off  the  y.

Nah.  1.  13.  now  will  1  break  his  y.  from  off  thee
Mat.  11.  29.  take  my  y.  on  yon  ||  30.  my  y.  is  easy
Luke  14.  19.  1  have  bought  five  y.  of  oxen
Acts  15.  10.  to  put  a  y.  on  the  disciples’  neck
Gal.  5.  1.  be  not  entangled  with  the  y.  of  bondage

1  Tim.  6. 1.  let  asmany  servantsas  are  underthey.

YOKES.

Jer.  27-  2.  make  thee  bonds  and  y.  28.  13.

28.  13.  hast  broken  the  y.  of  wood,  makey.  iron
Ezek.  30.  18.  when  1  shall  break  they,  of  Egypt
YOKED.

2  Cor.  6. 14.  be  not  unequally  y.  with  unbelievers

YOKEFELLOW.

Phil  4.  3.  I  entreat  thee  also,  true  y. fellow
YONDER.

Gen.  22.  5.  I  and  the  lad  will  go  y.  and  worship
Kum.  16.  37.  and  scatter  thou  the  fire  y.

23.  15.  stand  here,  while!  meet  the  Lord  y.

2  Kings  4.  25.  behold, y.  is  that  Slmnamite
Mat.  17-20.  ye  shall  say,  remove  hence  to  y.  place
26.36.  lesus  saith,  sit  here,  while  I  go  and  pray  y.
YOU.

Josh.  3.  4.  there  shall  be  a  space  between  y.  and  ark
Neh.  Q.  20.  but  y.  have  no  portion  in  Jerusalem
Job  16-4.  I  could  shake  my  head  aty.

Tsa.  59.2.  your  iniquities  separate  hetw.  y.  and  O.
Ezek.  11.19.  will  put  anew  spirit  within  y. 36. 26,27.
36.  7.  the  heathen  that  are  about  y.  bear  shame,  36
Amos  2.  13.  behold,  1  am  [tressed  under  y.

3.  2.  y.  only  have  1  known  of  all  families  of  earth
Luke  10.  16.  he  that  heareth  y.  heareth  me,  he  that

despiseth  y.  despiselh  me  and  him  that  sent  me

13.  28.  and  y.  yourselves  thrust  out  of  the  kingdom
Rom.  2.  24.  the  name  of  God  is  blasphemed  thro’y.
2  Cor.  1.  11.  y.  also  helping  by  prayer  for  us

8.  13.  that  other  men  be  eased  and  y.  burdened

9.  4.  lest  we,  that  we  say  noty.  be  ashamed

10.  16.  to  preach  the  gospel  in  the  regions  beyond  y.

12.  14.  for  1  seek  not  yours  but  y .

Eph.  2.  l.y.  hath  he  quickened  who  were  dead

22.  in  whom  y.  also  are  builded  together
Col.  1.21.  y  that  were  some  time  alienated

2.  13.  y.  being  dead  in  sins  hath  he  quiil  etied
After  YOU.

Gen.  9.  9- establish  covenant  withyou,and  seed  a.y.
Lev.  25.  46.  _>e  shall  take  them  as  an  inheritance
for  your  children  after  y.  1  Chnm.  28.  8.
26.  33.  and  1  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  y.

Deut.  11.4.  to  overflow  them,  as  they  pursued  aft.y.
29.22.  the  generation  that  shall  rise  up  after  y.

1  Sam.  25.  19.  goon  before,  behold,  T  come  after y.
Jer.  42. 16.  the  famine  shall  follow  close  after  y.

2  Cor.  9.  14.  which  long  after  y.  Phil.  1.8.

Phil.  2.  26.  Epaphroditus  longed  after  y.

Against  YOU.

Fiod.  10.  16.  he  said,  1  have  sinned  against  y.

Ijev.  26.  17.  I  will  set  my  face  ag.  y.  Jer.  44. 11.
Num.  17.  5.  whereby  they  murmur  against  y.

Deut.  1.  44.  the  Antorites  came  out  against  y.

4.  26.  1  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness .  against  y.

this  day  ye  shall  soon  utterly  perish,  30.  19-

8.  19.  I  testify  ag.  y.  that  ye  shall  surely  perish

9.  19.  !  was  afraid  of  the  anger  wherewith  the
Lord  was  wroth  against  y.  11.  17.  Josh.  23.  16.

Josh.  24.11.  the  men  of  lericho  fought  against  y.

1  Saw.  12. 5.  the  Lord  is  witness  ag.  y.  Mic.  1.  2.
12.  Nahash  king  of  the  Ammonites  came  ag.  y.

15.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  shall  he  against  y.

1  Sam.  17.  21.  thus  Ahithophel  counselled  ag.  y.

2  Chron.  13.  12.  to  cry  alarm  against  y.  O  Israel
Job  16.4.  1  could  heap  up  words  against  y.

Jer.  18.  11.  behold,  1  de'  ise  a  device  against  y.

21.  5.  and  1  myself  w  ill  fight  against  y.  in  anger
26.13.  l  ord  will  repent  of  evil  pronounced  ag.  y.
37. 10.  army  of  the  Chaldeans  that  fight  against  y.
19.  the  king  of  Babylon  shall  not  come  against  y.
38.  5.  the  king  cannot  do  any  thing  against  y.

44.  29.  that  my  words  shall  stand  against  y.

49.  30.  Neb.  hath  conceived  a  purpose  against  y.
Ezek.  13.  8.  1  am  ag.  y.  !i  .36.  2.  enemy  said  ag.  y.
AmosS.l.  T.ord  hathspoken  ag.  y.  5.  1.  Zeph.  2.5.

6.  14.  behold,  T  w  ill  raise  up  against  y.  a  nation
Mic.  2.  4.  one  shall  take  up  a  parable  against y.
Mat.  5.  11.  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  y.
21.2.  go  into  the  village  over  against  y.  and  ye
shall  find  an  ass  tied.  Mark  11.2.  Luke  19.  30.
Luke  10.  11.  the  dust  of  your  city  we  wipe  off  ag.y.
Jam.  5.3.  the  rust  shall  he  a  witness  against  y.

1  Pet.  lb.  12.  whereas  they  speak  ag.  y.  as  evil  doers
Among,  0\  amongst  1  OU.

Gen.  35.  2.  put  away  the  strange  gods  that  are
arn.y.  and  he  clean.  Josh.  24.  23.  1  Sam.  7.  3.
Lev.  26.  1 1 .  1  will  set  my  tabernacle  amongst  y.
12.  I  will  walk  among  y.  and  will  be  your  God
22.  1  will  send  wild  beasts  am.  y.  !l  25.  pestilence
Sum.  11.20.  ye  have  desf  ised  the  1  ord  who  is  aw.

y.  1  4.  42.  Deut.  6.  15.  I  7.  21 .  Josh.  3.  10.


2  Chron.  30.  23.  who  is  there  among  y.  Ezra  1.  3.
Isa.  42.  23.  who  among  y.  will  give  ear  to  this?

50.  10.  who  is  among  y.  that  feareth  the  Lord  ?

Ezek.  20.  38.  purge  out  from  among  y.  the  rebels
Hag.  2.  3.  who  is  left  among  y.  that  saw  this  house  '.

/l  a/.  1.  10.  w  ho  is  there  among  y.  that  would  shut
Mat.  20.  26.  it  shall  not  be  so  among  y.  Mark  10.  43.

27.  and  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  y .  let  him

be  your  servant,  23.  11.  Luke  22.  26.

I, uke  9.  48.  he  that  is  least  among  y.  shall  be  great
22.  27.  but  1  am  among  y.  as  he  that  serveth
John  1.  26.  but  there  standeth  one  among  y.

8.  7.  he  that  is  without  sin  among  y.  let  him  cast
Acts  6.  3.  brethren,  look  ye  out  among  y.  seven  men
13.  26.  and  whosoever  among  y.  feareth  God

25.  5.  let  them  who  among  y .  are  able,  go  clown
Rom.  1.  13.  that  I  might  have  some  fruit  among  y.

12.  3.  1  say  to  every  man  that  is  among  y.

1  Cor.  1.  10.  that  there  be  no  divisions  among  y.

11.  there  are  contentions  among  y.  11.  18.

2.  2.  I  determined  not  to  know  any  thing  among y.

3.  3.  whereas  there  is  among  y.  envying,  strife
18.  if  any  man  among  y.  seetneth  to  be  wise

5.  1.  is  reported  that  there  is  fornication  among  y.

2.  that  he  might  be  taken  away  from  among  y.

15.  12.  how  say  some  among  y.  is  no  resurrection

2  Cor.  1.  19.  Christ  who  was  preached  among  y.

10.  1.  1  Paul,  w  ho  in  presence  am  base  among  y.
12.21.  lest  my  God  will  humble  me  among y.

Eph.  5.  3.  let  it  not  be  once  named  amongst  y.

1  Thess.  1. 5.  what  manner  of  men  we  were  aw.  y.
Jam.  1.  26.  if  any  man  among  y.  seem  religious
5.  13.  is  any  among  y.  afflicted  ?  II  14.  is  any  sick  ?

1  Pet.  5.  2.  feed  the  floc  k  of  God  which  is  among y.

2  Pet.  2.  1.  there  shall  be  false  teachers  among  y.
Rev.  2.  13.  Antipas,  who  was  slain  among  y.

See  SojoritNF.TH.

Pefore  YOU.

Gen.  34.  10.  and  the  land  shall  be  before  y.  dwell
45.  5.  God  did  send  me  before  y.  to  preserve  life,  7-
Exod.  10.  10.  look  to  it,  for  evil  is  before  y.

Lev.  18.  24.  in  all  these  the  nations  are  defiled  which
I  cast  out  before  y.  20.  2.3.  Sum.  .33.  52,  55.
Deut.  11.  23.  Josh.  3.  10.  |  9.  24. !  23.  5,  9.  1
24.  8,  12.  Jndg.  6.  9..

27-  men  of  land  done  which  were  before  y.  28,  30.

26.  7-  your  enemies  shall  fall  before  y.  8.

Sum.  14.  4.3.  the  C’auaanites  are  there  before  y.

32.  29.  and  the  land  shall  be  subdued  before  y.

Deut.  1.  8.  behold,  1  have  set  the  land  before  y.

30.  Lord  who  goeth  before  y.  shall  fight  for  you

4.  8.  which  I  set  before  y.  this  day,  11.  32.

11. 26.  J  set  before  y.  a  blessins  and  curse,  30.  19.
Josh.  4.  23.  the  Lord  dried  up  Jordan  before  y.

24.  12.  1  sent  the  hornet  before  y.  which  drave

1  Sam.  9.  12.  behol  1,  he  is  before  y.  make  haste

12.  2.  and  now  behold  the  king  walketh  before  y.

2  Chron.  7.  19.  if  ye  forsake  my  statutes  which  1

have  set  before  y.  Jer.  26.  4.  |  44.  10.
Tsa.  52.  12.  for  the  Lord  will  go  before  y.

Jer.  21.  8.  behold,  5  set  before  y  the  way  of  life
Mat.  5.  12.  so  persecuted  prophets  that  were  b.y.

21.  31.  go  ,nto  the  kingdom  of  God  before  y.

26.  32.  but  after  1  am  risen  again,  I  will  go  be¬
fore  y.  into  Galilee,  28.  7.  Mark  14.  28.  |  16  7-
Luke  10.  8.  into  whatsoever  city  ye  enter,  eat  such
things  as  are  set  before  y.  1  Cor.  10.  27.
Acts  4.  10.  this  man  stands  here  before  y.  whole
By  YOU.

Ezek.  20.  3.  I  will  not  be  inquired  ot  by  y.  31.
Rom.  15.  24.  I  trust  to  be  brought  on  my  way  byy.

1  Cor.  6.  2.  if  the  world  shall  be  judged  by  y.

2  Cor.  7.  13.  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  y.  all
10.  15.  we  hope  that  w  e  shall  be  enlarged  by  y.

Concerning  YOU.

Num.  9.  8.  what  T  ord  will  command  concerning  y .
Josh.  23.  14.  which  the  1  ord  spake  concerning  y.
.Ter.  42.  19.  the  T.ord  hath  said  concerning  y.

1  Thess.  5.  18.  this  is  the  will  of  God  concerning  y.
For  YOU.

Gen.  44. 17-  as  for  y.  50.  20.  Num.  14.  32.  Deut.  1.

40.  Josh.  23.  9.  Job  17.  10.
Num.  15.  15.  one  ordinance  shall  he  for  y.  16.

Deut.  1 . 30.  all  that  he  did  Jury.  4.  34.  1  Sam.  12.24.
Ezek.  20.  39.  as  for  y.  O  house  of  Israel,  34.  17.

36.  9.  behold  I  am  for  y.  and  I  will  turn  to  you
Dan.  2.  9-  there  is  but  one  decree  for  y.

Amos  5.  18.  the  day  of  Lord,  to  what  end  is  it  for  y.
Mic.  3.  1.  is  it  not  for  y.  to  know  judgment  ?

Hag.  1. 4.  is  it  time  for  y  .  to  dwell  in  ceiled  houses  *
Mai.  2.  1.  O  priests,  this  commandment  is  for  y.
Mat.  11. 22.  I  say  to  you,  it  shall  be  more  tolerable
for  Tyre  and  Sidon,  than/«ry.  Luke  10.  14.

25.  34.  come,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  fory.
Mark  10.  36.  what  would  ye  that  1  should  do  for  y.
Luke  22.  19.  this  is  my  body  which  is  given/or  y.

20.  my  blood  which  is  shed  for  y.  1  Cor.  11.  24.
John  >  t.  2.  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  y.  3.

16.  26.  1  say,  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for  y.
Acts  1.  7-  is  not  for  y.  to  know  the  times  or  seasons

28.  20.  for  this  cause  therefore  have  1  called  Jory.
Rom.  1.81  thank  my  God  through  Christ  for  y.  all

1  Cor.  1 .  13.  is  Chr.  divided  ?  was  Paul  cruc  ified/,  y.

2  Cor.  7-  12.  that  our  care  for  y.  appear,  8.  16.

9.  14.  by  their  prayer  for  y.  which  long  after  you,
Phil.  1.  4.  Co!.  1.  3.  9. 1  4.  12.  2  Thess.  1 .  11.
12.  15.  I  will  gladly  spend  and  be  spent  for  y.
Eph.  1.  16.  uheref.  1  cease  not  to  give  thanks/or  y.

1  Ihess.  1.2.|  3.  9.  2  Thess.  1.  3.  12.  13.

3.  13.  at  my  tribulations  for  y.  Col.  1.24.

Phil.  3.  1.  is  not  grievous,  but  t'ory.  it  is  sate
Col.  1.  5.  for  the  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  y.

25.  the  dispensation  which  is  given  to  me  for  y.
2.  1.  ye  knew  what  great  conflict  1  have  for  y

4.  13.  tiiat  he  hath  a  great  zeal  for  y.  ana  tor  them
lleb.  13.  17.  for  that  is  unprofitable  for  y.

1  Pet.  1. 4.  to  an  inheritance  reserved  m  heaven/or  y.

5.  7.  cast  your  care  on  him,  for  he  careth/ar  y.

From  YOU.

Gen.  26.  27.  seeing  ye  have  sent  me  away  from  y.
Josh.  9.  22.  saving  we  are  very  fa r  from  y.

1  .'•am.  6-  3.  w  hy  hit,  hand  is  not  removed  from  y.


2  Sam.  15.  28.  until  there  come  word  from  y.

2  Chron.  30.  8.  his  wrath  may  turn  awa y  fromy.

9.  the  Lord  will  not  turn  away  his  face// y.

Isa.  1.  15.  I  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  y.

59.2.  but  your  sins  have  hid  his  face  from  y.

Jer.  5.  25.  have  withholden  good  thing.', from  y.

34.  21.  king’s  army  which  are  gone  up  fromy.

42.  4.  I  will  keep  nothing  back  from  y.

Ezek.  18.  31.  cast  away  from  y.your  transgressions
JicDl.  20.  remove  far  fromy.  the  northern  army
Amos  4.7.  1  have  withholden  the  rain  from  y.

Mat.  21.  4.3.  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken/rowy.
John  16.  22.  and'your  joy  no  man  taketh //-<//«  y.
Acts!.  11.  who  is  taken  up  from  y.  into  heaven

13.  46.  but  seeing  you  put  it  from  y.  lo,  we  turn

1  Cor.  14.  36.  came  the  word  of  God  out Jrom  y.

2  Cor.  3.  1.  or  letters  of  commendation  from  y.

Eph.  4.  31.  let  evil  speaking  be  put  away  from  y.

1  I'/teJs.  1.  8.  for  Jrom  y.  sounded  out  the  word

2.  17.  but  we  being  taken  fromy  a  short  time
Jam.  4.  7.  resist  the  devil,  and  lit  will  flee  from  y.

In  YOU.

Gen.  42.  1 6.  whether  there  be  any  truth  in  y
Jua'g.  9.  19.  and  let  him  also  rejoice  in  y.

Ezek.  20.41.  1  w  ill  be  sanctified  iny.  36.23.

37.  6.  and  1  will  put  breath  my.  14.

Mai.  1.  10.  1  have  no  pleasure  my.  saith  the  Lord
Mat.  10.  20.  but  the  Spirit  which  speaketh  iny.

11.  21.  if  the  mighty  works  which  w/ere  done  in  y.
John  5.  38.  ye  have  not  his  word  abiding  in  y.

42.  that  ye  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  y.

6.  53.  except  ve  eat  the  flesh,  ye  have  no  life  iny.

14.  17.  he  shall  be  iny.  ||  20.  and  I  in  y.  15.  4.

15.  7.  if  my  words  abide  in  y.  1  John  2.  14, 24.

Rom.  8.  0.  the  Spirit  dwelleth  iny.  1  John  2.  27-

10.  and  if  Christ  be  in  y.  the  body  is  dead

12.  18.  as  much  as  lieth  in  y.  live  peaceably

1  Cor.  1.  6.  the  testimony  of  Christ  is  confirmed  iny.
6.19.  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  iny.

14.  25.  will  report  that  God  is  in  y.  of  a  truth

2  Cor.  2.  3.  I  wrote  this  to  you,  having  confidence

in  y .  all,  f  - 16- 1  8.  22.  Gal.  5.  10.

4.  12.  but  life  iny.  ||7.7.  he  was  comforted  iny.

8.  6.  he  would  finish  iny.  the  same  grace  also

9.  14.  for  the  exceeding  grace  of  God  iny.

13.  3.  w  hich  to  you  is  not  weak,  but  mighty  in  y.

5  know  ye  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  iny.

Gal.  4.  19.  I  travail,  till  Christ  be  formed  iny.

Eph.  4.  6.  one  God,  who  is  above  all,  and  my. all
Phil.  2. 5.  let  this  mind  be  in  y.  w hich  was  in  Christ
13.  it  is  God  which  worketh  iny.  to  will  and  do
Col.  1.  6.  w  hich  bringeth  fruit,  as  it  doth  also  in  y .
27.  which  is  Christ  iny.  the  hope  of  glory

3.  16.  let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  iny.  richly

1  Thess.  2.  13.  which  effectually  worketh  iny.

2  Thess.  1.  4.  so  that  we  glory  in  y.  in  the  churches

12.  the  name  of  Christ  may  be  glorified  iny.
Philem.  6.  acknowledging  every  good  thing  in  y.
Ileb.  13.  21.  working  in  y.  what  is  well-pleasing
V  Pet.  3. 15.  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  y.

2  Pet.  1.  8.  it  these  things  be  in  y.  and  abound
1  John  2.  8.  which  thing  is  true  in  him  and  in  y.

4.  4.  greater  is  he  that  is  in  y.  than  in  the  world

O/YOU.

Gen.  27.  45.  why  should  l  be  deprived  of  y.  both  .''
Exod.  12.  16.  that  only  may  be  done  of  y.

Deut.  1.  22.  ye  c^me  near  unto  me  every  one  of  y.
Josh.  2.  9.  the  inhabitants  faint  because  ofy.

23.  3.  hath  done  to  these  nations  because  of  y.

1  Sam.  22.  8.  that  all  ofy.  have  conspired  against  me
1  Kings  22.  28.  hearken,  O  people,  every  one  of  y.
Ezra  7.21.  what  Ezra  requires  of  y.  it  be  done
Neh.  1.  9.  though  there  were  of  y.  cast  out  to  heaven
Psal.  62.  3.  ye  shall  be  slain  all  ofy.  a  bowing  wall
Ezek.  6.  9.  they  that  escape  of  y.  shall  remember
Mic.  1.  11.  he  shall  receive  ofy.  his  standing
Mat.  6.  27.  w  hich  of  y.  by  taking  thought  can  add
one  cubit  to  his  stature  ?  I.uke  12.  25.
Jjiike  13.  15.  doth  not  each  one  of  y.  lead  his  ox
John  8.  46.  w  hich  of  y.  convinceth  me  of  sin  ?

13.  18.  1  speak  not  ofy.  all,  1  know  whom  1  chose
Acts  <2.  22.  which  God  did  by  him  in  the  midst  c/y.

3.  26.  in  turning  every  one  ofy.  from  his  iniquit.
4. 11.  which  was  set  at  nought  ofy.  builders
Rom.  1.  12.  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  y.  and  me

1  Cor.  1.  11.  it  hath  been  declared  to  me  ofy.

6.  11.  such  were  some  ofy.  but  ye  are  washed
12.  21.  the  head  to  the  feet,  I  have  no  need  ofy.

14.  26.  every  one  ofy.  hath  a  psalm,  a  doctrine

16.  2.  let  every  one  ofy.  lay  by  him  in  store

2  Cor.  1.7.  and  our  hope  ofy.  is  stedfast

7.  14.  if  1  have  boasted  any  thing  to  him  of  y.

1 1.  20.  tor  ye  suffer,  if  a  man  take  of  y.

12. 17. did  1  make  a  gain  of  y.  ?  ||  18.  or  did  Titus  c
Gal.  3.  2.  this  only  would  1  learn  ofy.  received  ye
27.  for  as  many  of  y.  as  have  been  baptized  into

4.  20.  to  change  my  voice,  for  1  stand  in  doubt  oj  y
Col.  4.  y.  a  beloved  brother,  who  is  one  ofy.  12.

1  Thess.  2.  6.  neither  of  y.  sought  we  glory
4.  4.  every  one  of  y.  should  know  how  to  possess
Tit.  2.  8.  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  ofy.

Jam.  5.  4.  the  hire  which  is  ofy.  kept  back  by  fraud
1  Pet.  3.  16.  whereas  they  speak  evil  ofy.  4.  4.
Over  YOU.

Lev.  26.  16.  I  will  even  appoint  overy.  terror

17.  they  that  hate  you  shall  reign  overy.

Deut.  28.6.3.  as  the  t.ord  rejoiced  over  y.  todoy.  u
good,  he  will  rejoice  overy.  to  destroy  >ou
Judg.  8.  23.  Gideon  said,  1  will  not  rule  overy.  not
my  son  rule  overy.  Lord  shall  rule  over  y.
9  2.  is  it  better  that  seventy  reign  overy.  or  one  \

15.  if  in  truth  ye  anoint  me  king  overy.

1  Sam.  8.  11.  manner  of  king  that  shall  reign  over  y.

12.  1.  behold,  1  have  made  a  kingorery.

13.  behold,  the  Lord  hath  set  a  king  over  y.

2  Sam.  3.  17.  ye  sought  David  to  be  king  over  y.

<2  Chron.  19.  11.  Amariah  the  chief  priest  is  over  y.
Jer.  6.  17.  also  1  set  the  watchmen  over  y.  saying
T.zek.  20.  33.  with  fury  poured  out  will  I  rule  overy.
Hag.  1.  10.  the  neaven  overy.  is  stayed  from  dew
Luke  12. 14.  man,  who  made  me  a  divider  over  y.t
Rom.  6.  14.  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  y.


YOU


YOU


ZE  A


1  Cor.  9. 12.  be  partakers  of  this  power  over  y.

2  Cor.  11.  2.  I  am  jealous  over  y.  with  godly  zeal

1  Then.  3.  ?•  we  were  comforted  over  y.  in  affliction

5.  12.  know  them  which  are  overy.  in  the  Lord
Heb.  13.  7.  remember  them  that  have  rule  over  y.

17.  obey  them  that  have  the  rule  over  y.

24.  salute  them  that  have  the  rule  overy.

See  Tell.

To  or  unto  YOU.

Gen.  1  29.  every  herb  toy.  it  shall  be  for  meat
34.  9-  and  take  our  daughters  unto  y.

Exod.6.7.  I  will  take  you  to  me,  and  will  be  to y  aG.

12.  26.  when  your  children  shall  say  unto  y.

20.  23.  ye  shall  not  make  untoy.  gods  of  gold
30.  36.  it  shall  be  unto  y.  most  holy

Lev.  26. 16.  I  also  will  do  thistle#.  appoint  terror
Num.  10.8.  they  shall  be  to  y.  for  an  ordinance

10.  be  to  y.  a  memorial  ||  15. 39.  untoy.  for  a  fringe
33.  56.  1  shall  do  unto  y.  as  1  thought  to  do  to  them

Josh.  23. 12.  if  ye  go  in  to  them,  and  they  to  y.

1  Sam.  4.  9.  be  not  servants,  as  they  have  been  to  y.
Prov.  8.4.  untoy.  O  men,  1  call,  and  my  voice  is
Isa.  30. 13.  this  iniquity  shall  be  toy.  as  a  breach
Dan.  3.  4.  toy.  it  is  commanded,  O  people
Alai.  4.  2.  but  unto  y.  that  fear  my  name  shall  sun
Mat.  7.  12.  that  men  should  do  to  y.  Luke  6.  31.

9.  29.  according  to  your  faith  be  it  unto  y.

13. 11.  because  it  is  given  untoy.  to  know  the  mys¬
teries  of  the  kingdom,  Mark  4. 11.  Luke  8.  10.
Mark  4.  24.  untoy.  that  hear  shall  more  be  given
Luke  2. 11.  unto  y.  is  born  this  day  a  Saviour

6.  33.  if  ye  do  good  to  them  which  do  good  toy.

22. 29.  and  1  appoint  unto  y.  a  kingdom  as  my  Fath.
Acts 2.  39.  for  the  promise  is  untoy.  and  children

3.  26.  untoy.  first,  God  having  raised  up  his  Son

10.29.  therefore  came  1  untoy.  without  gainsaying

13.  26.  to  y.  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent

1  Cor.  9.  2.  if  not  to  others,  doubtless  1  am  to  y.

14.  36.  or  came  the  word  of  God  unto  y.  only  ?

2  Cor.  10. 13.  a  measure  to  reach, even  unto  y.

14.  we  are  come  as  far  as  toy.  in  preaching

Phil.  1.28.  but  is  toy.  a  token  of  salvation

29.  unto  y.  it  is  given  not  only  to  believe

1  Thess.  1.  5.  our  gospel  came  not  unto  y.  in  word

2  Thess.  1.7 .  to  y .  who  are  troubled,  rest  with  us

1  Pet.  2.  7.  unto  y.  that  believe,  he  is  precious
Rev.  2.24.  but  unto  y.  1  say,  and  to  the  rest

See  Say,  Told.

Towards  YOU.

Jer.  29. 10.  1  will  perform  my  good  word  towards  y.

11.  1  know  the  thoughts  I  think  towards  y.

Hos.  5.  1.  give  ear,  for  judgment  is  towards y.

2  Cor.  1. 18.  our  word  towards y.  was  not  yea

7. 15.  inward  affection  is  more  abundant  towards  y.

9.  8.  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  towards y.

10.  1.  but  being  absent  am  bold  towardsy.

13.  4.  we  shall  live  by  the  power  of  God  towards  y.

1  Thess.  3. 12.  abound  in  love,  as  we  do  towards  y.

To  Y  O  U-u'ard.

2  Cor.  13.  3.  which  toy. -ward  is  not  weak
Eph.  3.2.  the  grace  of  God  given  me  toy. -ward

On,  or  upon  YOU.

Exod.  12. 13.  the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  y.

32.  29.  that  he  may  bestow  upon  y.  a  blessing
Lev.  10.  7.  the  anointing  oil  of  the  Lord  is  upon  y.
yum.  16.  3.  they  said,  ye  take  too  much  upon  y.  7.
Deut.  7. 7-  the  Lord  aid  not  set  his  love  upon  y.

Josh.  23. 15.  as  all  good  things  are  come  upon  y.
Neh.  4. 12.  from  all  places  they  will  he  upony.

Psal.  129.8.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  be  upon  y.

Isa.  29.  10.  Lord  hath  poured  upony.  spirit  of  sleep
30. 18.  he  may  have  mercy  upony.  Jer.  42.  12.

Jer.  2.3.  2.  1  will  visit  upon  y.  the  evil  of  your  doings
40.  3.  therefore  this  thing  is  come  upon  y.

Ezek.  22.21. 1  will  blow  upon  y.  in  the  fire  of  my  wr.
Amos  4.  2.  that  lo,  the  days  shall  come  upon  y.

Zeph.  2. 2.  before  day  of  Lord’s  anger  come  upon  y.
Mat.  23.  35.  upon  y.  may  come  the  righteous  blood
Luke  1 1. 20.  the  kingdom  of  God  is  come  upon  y.

21.  34.  and  so  that  day  come  upony.  unawares
24.  49.  1  send  the  promise  of  my  Father  upony.
John  12.  35.  walk,  lest  darkness  come  upon  y.

Acts  1^8.  after  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  y.  J
1 Cor.  7.  35.  not  that  1  may  cast  a  snare  upon  y.

Gal.  A.  11.  lest  1  bestowed  upony.  labour  in  vain
Jam.  5.  1.  howl  for  miseries  that  shall  come  ony.

1  Pet.  4.  14.  the  Spirit  of  God  resteth  upony.

Rev.  2.24.  1  will  put  upony.  none  other  burden
With  YOU.

Gen.  34. 16.  then  we  will  dwell  with  y.  be  one  people
48.21.  behold,  1  die,  but  God  shall  be  with  y.

Exod.  13.  19.  shall  carry  up  my  bones  hence  with  y.
20.22  ye  have  seen  tiiat  l  have  talked  withy.

24.  14.  tarry  ye  here,  Aaron  and  Hur  are  withy.
Num.  1. 4.  with  y.  shall  he  a  man  of  every  tribe
17.4.  the  testimony,  where  1  will  meet  with  y.
Deut.  5.  3.3.  and  that  it  may  be  well  with  y.

12. 12.  no  part  withy.  ||  20.  4.  God  goeth  withy.

29.  14.  nor  withy,  only  do  1  make  this  covenant
Josh.  7. 12.  neither  will  1  be  with  y.  any  more
Ruth  2.  4,  and  Boaz  said,  the  Lord  be  withy.

1  Sam.  22.  3.  let  my  father  and  mother  be  with  y.

23.  23.  come  again  to  me,  and  1  will  go  with  y.

2  Sam.  16. 10.  what  have  I  to  do  withy.?  19.  22.

18;  2.  I  will  surely  go  forth  withy,  myself

2  Kings  10. 2.  seeing  your  master’s  sons  are  with  y .

23.  see  there  be  withy,  none  of  servants  of  Lord
25.24.  and  it  shall  be  well  withy.  Jer.  40.  9.

1  Chron.  22. 18.  is  not  the  Lord  your  God  withy.?

2  Chron.  13.  8.  there  are  withy,  golden  calves

15.  2.  the  Lord  is  withy,  while  ye  be  with  him
19.  6.  for  the  Lord,  who  is  withy,  in  the  judgment
20. 17.  fear  not,  for  the  Lord  will  be  withy.

28. 10.  are  there  not  withy,  even  withy,  sins
Ezj  a  4.  2.  let  us  build  with  y.  we  seek  your  God
Job  42.8.  lest  1  deal  withy,  after  your  folly
Jer .  18.  6.  cannot  1  do  with  y.  as  this  potter  ?

42.  11.  for  I  am  withy.  Hag.  1.  13.  |  2.  4.

Etek.  20.  35.  there  will  l  plead  withy.  36.

44.  know  1  am  Lord  when  1  have  wrought  with  y
Amos  5.  14.  the  God  of  hosts  shall  be  with  y.

Zech.  8.  23.  we  will  go  with  y.  for  God  is  with  y.

574


Mat.  17.  17.  O  faithless> perverse  genei at. how  long
shall  I  be  withy.?  Mark  9.  19.  Luke  9.  41.

26.  11.  for  ye  have  the  poor  always  with  y.  but  me
ye  have  not  always,  John  12.  8.
29.  when  1  drink  it  new  w.  y.  in  my  Father’s  king.
28.  20.  I  am  withy,  always  to  the  end  of  the  world
Luke  24.  44.  1  spake  to  you,  while  l  was  with  y.
John  7.  33.  yet  a  little  while  am  I  with  y.  then  l  go
to  him  that  sent  me,  12.  35.  I  13.  3.3.

14.  9.  Jesus  said,  have  l  been  so  long  with  y.  ?

16.  Comforter,  that  he  may  abide  withy,  forever

17.  he  dwelleth  with  y.  ||  25.  being  present  with  y.

27.  peace  l  leave  with  y.  ||  16.  4.  1  was  withy.

Acts  18.  14.  reason  would  1  should  bear  with  y.

20.  18.  1  have  been  with  y.  at  all  seasons
Pom.  1.  12.  I  may  be  comforted  together  withy.

15.  32.  that  I  may  with  y.  he  refreshed

33.  new  the  God  of  peace  be  with  y.  all.  Amen,
2  Cor.  13.  11.  Phil.  4.  9.

16.  20.  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with y.
24.  1  Cor.  16.  23.  Phil.  4.  23.  Col.  4.  18.  1  Thess.
5.  28.  2  Thess.  3.  18.  2  Tim.  4.  15.  Tit.  3.  15.
Heb.  13.  25.  2  John  3.  Rev.  22.  21.

1  Cor.  2.  3.  I  was  with  y.  in  weakness  and  in  fear

4.  8.  that  we  also  might  reign  with  y.

16.  10.  see  that  he  may  be  with  y.  without  fear
24.  my  love  be  with  y.  all  in  Christ  Jesus

2  Cor.  1.21.  he  that  establisheth  us  withy,  is  God
4.  14.  shall  raise  us  up  and  present  us  with  y.

7.  3.  ye  are  in  our  hearts  to  die  and  live  with  y.

11.  9.  when  1  was  present  with  y.  Gal.  4.  18,  20.
Phil.  2.  17.  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  #.  all

Col.  2.  5.  yet  am  I  withy,  in  the  spirit,  joying
2  Thess.  3.  1.  word  may  be  glorified,  as  it  is  with  y.

16.  Lord  of  peace  give  peace,  the  Ld.  be  w.  y.  all
Heb.  12.  7-  God  dealeth  with  y.  as  with  sons

1  Pet.  5.  14.  peace  he  with  y.  all  that  are  in  Christ
2Pcr.2.13.  spots  and  blemish.es,  while  they  feast  w.y.

YOURS.

Gen.  45.  20.  the  good  of  the  land  of  Egypt  is  y.
Deut.  11.24.  the  soles  of  your  feet  tread  shall  be  y.
Josh.  2. 14.  the  men  answered  our  life  for#.

2  Chron.  20.  15.  the  battle  is  not  y.  but  God’s

Jer.  5.  19-  shall  serve  strangers  in  land  that  is  not  y.

Luke  6.  20.  for#.  is  the  kingdom  of  God

John  15. 20.  if  kept  my  saying,  they  •will  keep#.  also

1  Cor.  3. 21.  not  glory  in  men,  for  all  things  are#.  22.

8.  9.  lest  this  liberty  of  #.  become  a  stumbling
16.  18.  for  they  have  refreshed  my  spirit  and  y.

2  Cor.  12.  14.  for  1  seek  not  y.  but  you

YOUNG.

Gen.  31.  38.  thy  she-goats  have  not  cast  their  y.

.33.  13.  the  flocks  and  herds  with  y.  are  with  me
Exod.  23.  26.  there  shall  nothing  cast  their  y.

Lev.  22.  28.  shall  not  kill  it  and  her#,  both  in  one  day
Deut.  22.  6.  thou  shalt  not  take  the  dam  with  the  #.
7.  let  the  dam  go  and  take  the  #.  to  thee

28.  50.  which  will  not  shew  favour  to  the  #.

32.  11.  as  the  eagle  fluttereth  over  her#.

'2  Sam.  9.  12.  Mephibosheth  had  a#,  son  Micha

1  Chron.  22.  5.  Solomon  my  son  is  #.  29.  1.

2  Chron.  13.  7-  when  Rehoboam  was  #.  and  tender
34.  .3.  Josiah,  while  he  was  yet#,  began  to  seek  God
Psal.  78.  71.  from  following  ewes  great  with  #.

84.  3.  swallow  a  nest,  where  she  mav  lay  her#.

Isa.  40.  11.  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  #.
Jer.  31.  12.  shall  flow  together  for  the#,  of  the  flock
Ezek.  17.  4.  cropped  off  the  top  of  his  #.  twigs,  22.
Mark"!.  25.  whose#,  daughter  had  an  unclean  spirit
John  21.  18.  when  #.  thou  girdedst  thyself

See  Old.

YOUNG  ass,  or  asses.

Isa.  30.  6.  carry  riches  on  the  shoulders  of  #.  asses
24.  they,  asses  shall  eat  clean  provender
John  12.  14.  when  he  found  a  #.  ass  sat  thereon
See  Bullock.

YOUNG  bullocks.

Num.  28.  11.  shall  offer  two  #.  bullocks,  19.  27.

Ezra  6.  9.  give  what  they  need,  both  #.  bullocks
YOUNG  calf.

Lev.  9.  2.  take  thee  a  #.  calf  for  a  sin  offering
See  Child,  Children.

YOUNG  cow.

Isa.  7.  21.  that  a  man  shall  nourish  a  #.  cow
YOUNG  dromedaries.

Esth.  8.  10.  he  sent  letters  by  riders  on  #.  dromedaries
YOUNG  eagles.

Prov.  30.  17.  and  the  #.  eagles  shall  eat  it
YOUNG  hart.

Cant.  2.  9.  my  beloved  is  like  a#,  hart,  17.  |  8.  14.

See  Lion,  Lions,  Man,  Men.

YOUNG  one .

Dent.  28.  57.  her  eye  shall  be  evil  toward  her#,  one
Zech.  11.  16.  neither  shall  seek  the#,  one,  nor  heal
YOUNG  ones.

Deut.  22.  6.  whether  they  be  #.  ones  or  eggs
Job  38.  41.  when  his#,  ones  cry  to  God  they  wander
39.  3.  they  bow,  they  bring  forth  their  #.  ont*

4.  their#,  ones  are  in  good  liking,  they  grow  up
16.  the  ostrich  is  hardened  against  her  #.  ones

30.  the  eagles’  #.  ones  also  suck  up  blood
Isa.  11.  7-  their  #.  ones  shall  lie  down  together
Lam.  4.  3.  the  sea  monsters  give  suck  to  their  #.  ones
YOUNG  pigeon,

Gen.  15.  9-  take  me  a  turtle-dove,  and  a  #.  pigeon
Lev  12.  6.  bring  a  #.  pigeon  for  a  sin-offering
YOUNG  pigeons.

Lev.  1.  14.  he  shall  bring  his  offering  of  y.  pigeons

5.  7.  if  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb  he  shall  bring  two
#.  pigeons,  12.  8.  |  14.  22,  .30.  1  15.  14,  29.
Num.  6.  10.  Luke  2.  24.

11.  if  he  be  not  able  to  bring  two  #.  pigeons
YOUNG  ravens.

Psal.  147.  9.  he  giveth  food  to  #.  ravens  which  cry
YOUNG  roes.

Cant.  4.  5.  thy  bi easts  are  like  two  #.  roes,  7.  3.
YOUNG  virgin.

1  Kings  1.  2.  let  there  be  sought  for  my  lord  a  #.  v.
YOUNG  virgins.

Judg.  21.  12.  there  were  found  400  #  virgins
Esth.  2.  2.  let  fair#,  virgins  be  sought  for  the  king
3.  they  may  gather  together  all  the  #.  virgins


YOUNG  unicorn.

Psal.  29.  6.  Lebanon  and  Sirion  like  a#,  unicorn
YOUNG  woman.

Puth  4.  12.  Lord  shall  give  thee  of  this  #.  woman
YOUNG  women.

Tit.  2.  4.  they  may  teach  #.  women  to  be  sobei
YOUNGER.

Gen.  9.  24.  Noah  knew  what  this  #.  son  had  don*
19.  31.  and  the  first-born  said  to  the  #.  31.

38.  anti  the#,  she  also  bare  a  son  Benammi

25.  23.  the  elder  shall  serve  the  #.  Pom.  9.  12.

27-  15.  Rebekah  put  them  on  Jacob  her#,  son
42.  she  sent  and  called  Jacob  her  #.  son

29.  16.  the  name  of  the#,  daughter  was  Rachel

18.  I  will  serve  thee  seven  years  for  the  #.

26.  it  must  not  be  so  done  to  give  the  #.  first

4.3.  29.  is  this  your  #.  brother  of  whom  ye  spake
48.  14.  Israel  laid  his  right  hand  on  the  #.

19.  his  #.  brother  shall  be  greater  than  he
Judg.  1.  13.  Caleb’s#,  brother  took  it.  3.  9.

15.  2.  is  not  her#,  sister  fail  er  than  she  ?

1  Sam.  14.  49.  Saul's#,  daughter  was  Michal
1  Chr.  24.  31.  cast  lotsover-against  their#.  brethren
Job  30.  1.  that  are#,  than  1,  have  me  in  derision
Ezek.  16.  46.  and  thy  #.  sister  is  Sodom
61.  shalt  receive  thy  sisters,  thine  elder  and  #.
Luke  15. 12.  the  #.  said,  father,  give  me  the  portion'

13.  the  #.  gathered  all,  and  took  his  journey

22.  26.  he  that  is  greatest,  let  him  be  as  the  #.

1  Tim.  5. 1.  intreat  the#,  men  as  brethren
2.  the  #.  women  as  sisters,  with  all  purity

11.  the  #.  widows  refuse,  for  when  they  begin

14.  I  will  therefore  that  the  #.  women  marry
1  Pet.  5.  5.  likewise  ye  #.  submit  to  the  elder

_  YOUNGEST.

Gen.  42. 13.  the  #.  is  this  day  with  our  father,  32.

15.  except  your#,  brother  come,  20,  34.  1  44.23,26.

43.  33.  they  sat,  the  #.  according  to  his  youth

44.  2.  put  silver  cup  in  the  sack’s  mouth  of  the  #.

12.  he  began  at  the  eldest,  and  left  off  at  the  #.
Josh.  6.  26.  in  his  #.  son  set  up  gates,  1  Kings  16.  34.
Judg.  9.  5.  yet  Jotham  the  #.  son  was  left

1  Sam.  16.  11.  he  said,  there  remains  yet  the  #.

17-  14.  David  was#,  the  eldest  followed  Saul

2  Chron.  21.  17 .  none  left  save  Jehoahaz  the  #.

22.  1.  made  Ahaziah  his  #.  son  king  in  his  stead

YOUTH.

Gen.  8.  21.  the  imagination  is  evil  from  his  #.

43.  33.  and  the  youngest  according  to  his#.

46.  34.  about  cattle,  from  our#,  even  till  now
Lev.  22.  13.  in  her  father’s  house,  as  in  her#.

Num.  30.  3.  being  in  her  father’s  house,  in  her#.  16.
Judg.  8. 20.  the#,  drew  not  a  sword,  because  yet  a  #.

1  Sam.  17.  33.  thou  but  a#,  he  a  man  of  war  from#.
42.  for  he  was  but  a#.  ||55.  whose  son  is  this  #.  ?

2  Sam.  19.  7-  the  evil  that  befell  thee  from  thy  #.

1  Kings  18.  12.  but  I  fear  the  Lord  from  my  #.

Job  13.  26.  to  possess  the  iniquities  of  my  #."

20.  11.  his  bones  are  full  of  the  sin  of  his  #.

29.  4.  as  l  was  in  days  of  my  #.  when  secret  of  God

30. 12.  on  my  right  hand  rise  the  #.  they  push  away
31.  18.  from  my  #.  he  was  brought  up  with  me
33.  25.  he  shall  return  to  the  days  of  his  #.

36.  14.  hypocrites  die  in#,  and  their  life  is  unclean
Psal.  25.  7-  remember  not  the  sins  of  my  #.

71.  5.  O  Lord,  thou  art  my  trust  from  my  #.

17.  O  God,  thou  hast  taught  me  from  my  #.

88. 15.  1  am  afflicted,  and  ready  to  die  from  my  #.
89.  45.  the  days  of  his#,  hast  thou  shortened
103.  5.  so  that  thy  #.  is  renewed  like  the  eagle’s
110.  3.  from  morning,  thou  hast  the  dew  of  Ihy  #.
127.  4.  as  arrows,  so  are  the  children  of  thy  #.

129.  1.  they  have  afflicted  me  from  my  #.

144.  12.  that  our  sons  be  as  plants  grown  up  in#.
Prov.  2. 17.  which  forsaketh  the  guide  of  her  y.

5. 18.  and  rejoice  with  the  wife  of  thy  #.

Eccl.  11.  9.  rejoice,  O  young  man,  in  thy  #.

10.  for  childhood  and  #.  are  vanity

12.  1.  remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  #.
Isa.  47.  12.  wherein  thou  hast  laboured  from  thy  y.

15.  thy  merchants  from  thy  #.  shall  wander
54.  4.  thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of  thy  #.

6.  for  the  Lord  hath  called  thee  as  a  wife  of#.

Jer.  2.  2.  I  remember  the  kindness  of  thy  #.

3. 4.  my  Father,  thou  art  the  guide  of  my  #.

24.  devoured  the  labour  of  our  fathers  from  our#,

25.  we  and  our  fathers  from  our  #.  have  sinned

22.  21.  this  hath  been  thy  manner  from  thy  #.

31.  19.  1  did  bear  the  reproach  of  my  #.

32. 30.  have  only  done  evil  before  me  from  their  #.
48.  11.  Moab  hath  been  at  ease  from  his#.

Lam.  3.  27.  it  is  good  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his#.
Ezek.  4.  14.  my  soul  not  been  polluted  from  my  #.

16.  22.  thou  hast  not  remembered  days  of  thy  #.  43.
60.  I  will  remember  my  covenant  in  days  of  thy#.

23.  3.  they  committed  whoredoms  in  their  #.

8.  for  in  her#,  they  lay  with  her  and  bruised
19.  call  to  remembrance  the  days  of  her#.  21.

Hos.  2. 15.  she  shall  sing  there  as  in  the  days  of  her  #.
Joel  1.  8.  lament  as  virgin  for  the  husband  of  her  #.
Zech.  13. 5.  man  taught  rr.e  to  keep  cattle  from  my  #.
Mai.  2.  14.  between  thee  and  the  wife  of  thy#.

15.  let  none  deal  treacherously  ag.  wife  ot  bis #.
Mat.  19.  20.  all  these  have  I  kept  from  my  #.  what
lack  1  yet  ?  Mark  10.  20.  Luke  18.  21 .
Acts  26.  4.  my  manner  of  life  from  my  #.  know  all

1  Tim.  A.  12.  let  no  man  despise  thy  #.  be  an  examp.

YOUTHS.

Prov.  7.  7-  I  discerned  among  the#,  a  young  man

void  of  understanding

Isa.  40.  30.  even  the#,  shall  faint  and  be  wearv
YOUTHFUL.

2  Tim.  2.  22.  flee  also#,  lusts,  but  follow  faith

z.

ZEAL

Is  a  mixed  passion,  composed  of  grief  and  anger,
fervent  love  and  desire  ;  for  what  a  man  loves
earnestly,  he  is  ca’eful  to  see  it  honoured,  and
grieved  when  it  is  dishonoured.  Phinehas  is


ZE  A


Z  E  A


ZE  A


cent  mr  tided  for  having  expressed  much  zeal  against
those  wicked  persons  that  violated  the  law  of  the
lend ,  Num.  25.  11,  13.  Ana  in  Psal.  69.  9.  the
Psalmist  saps.  The  teal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten
me  up:  “  Mg  earnest  desire  to  have  all  things
duly  ordered  about  thy  worship,  and  my  just  dis¬
pleasure  and  indignation  at  all  abuses  therein,
have  overcome  me,  have  wasted  my  natural  mois¬
ture  and  vital  spirits.”

Zeal  is  taken  either  in  good  or  ill  part.  There  may
be  an  eagerness  in  pursuing  good  things ,  when  nei¬
ther  the  end  nor  manner  of  doing  it  is  good.  Such
was  the  zeal  of  Jehu,  2  Kings  10.  16.  He  was
eager  in  executing  the  commands  of  God,  but  he
did  it  to  be  seen  of  men  :  Come,  see  my  zeal  for
the  Lord.  Such  also  was  the  zeal  of  those  Jews
whom  St.  Paul  speaks  of,  Rom.  10.  2.  Thev  have


a  zeal  of  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge.
“  ’They  have  an  earnest  desire  to  maintain  the  law
and  worship  of  God  instituted  by  Moses,  thinking
thereby  to  promote  the  glory  of  God,  but  though
this  be  a  warm,  yet  it  is  a  blind  zeal :  they  know
not  the  will  of  God,  or  what  that  righteousness  is
whereby  a  person  is  justified  before  God.”

2  Sam,  21.  2.  Saul  sought  to  slay  them  in  his  s.

2  Kings  10.  16.  come  and  see  my  z.  for  the  Lord
19.  31.  tne  *.  of  the  Lord  shall  do  this,  Isa.  37.  32.

Psal.  69.  9.  the  s.  of  thy  house  hath  eaten  me  up,
and  reproaches  are  fallen  on  me,  John  2.  17.
119.  139.  my  z.  hath  consumed  me,  because  enemies

Isa.  9.  7.  the  z.  of  the  Lord  will  perform  this
59.  17.  and  he  was  clad  with  z.  as  a  cloak
63.  15.  where  is  thy  z.  and  thy  strength  ?

Ezek.  5. 13.  that  l  t«e  Lord  have  spoken  it  in  my  z.


Pom.  10.2.  1  bear  record,  that  they  have  z.  of  God
2  Cor.  7.11 .  ye  a  what  z.  ||9.  2.  your  s.  provok.  many
Phil.  3.  6.  concerning  z.  peisecuting  the  church
Col.  4.  13.  that  he  hath  a  great  z.  for  you
ZLA  LOUS.

Num.  25.  H.  while  he  was  z.  for  m v  sake
13.  he  was  s.  for  his  God  and  made  atonement
Acts  21. 20.  and  they  are  all  z.  of  the  law
22.3.  Paul  was  z.  towards  God,  Gal.  1.  14.

1  Cor.  14.  12.  as  ye  are  z.  of  spiritual  gifts

Tit.  2.  14.  purify  a  peculiar  people,  z.  of  good  works

liev.  3.  19.  as  many  as  1  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten ;

be  z.  therefore  and  repent
ZEALOUSLY.

Gal.  4.  17.  they  z.  affect  vou,  but  not  well
18.  it  is  good  to  be  *.  affected  in  a  good  tiring


A  COLLECTION  OF  THE  NAMES  AND  TITLES  GIVEN  TO  JESUS  CHRIST


A  DAM.  1  Cor.  15.  +5.

Advocate,  1  .John  2.  1.

Amen,  Rev.  3.  14.

Angel,  Isa.  63.  9.  Mai.  3.  1.

A  orient  of  Days,  Dan.  7.  22.
Anointed,  Psal.  2.  2.  |  45.  7.

Apostle,  Heb.  3.  1.

Apple-tree,  Cant.  2.  3.

Author  and  Finisher  of  faith,  J/ci.12.2.
Babe,  Luke  2. 16.

Beginning  of  Creat.  of  God,  Rev.  3  14.
Begotten  of  the  Father,  John  1.  14.
Beloved,  Cant.  1.  13.  Eph.  1.  6.
Bishop,  1  Pet.  2.  25.

Blessed,  1  Tim.  6.  15.

Branch  of  Righteousness,  Zech.  3.  8.
Brazen  Serpent,  John  3.  14.

Bread  of  Life,  John  6.  48,  51.
Bridegroom,  Mat.  9.  15.

Bright  Morning  Star,  Rev.  22.  16.
Brightness  of  Father’s  Glory,  Heb.  1. 3.
Bundle  of  Myrrh,  Cant.  1.  13.
Camphire,  Cant.  1.  14.

Captain,  Josh.  5.  14.  Heb.  2.  10.
Child,  Isa.  9.  6.

Chosen,  Mat.  12.  18.  Luke  23.  35.
Christ,  Mat.  1.  16.  |  2.  4.

Consolation  of  Israel,  Luke  2.  25.
Corner-Stone,  Eph.  2.  20. 1  Pet.  2.  7.
Covenant,  Isa.  42.  6.

Counsellor,  Isa.  9.  6.

Covert,  Isa.  32.  2.

Creator,  Era.  43.  15.

Creditor,  Luke  7.  41.

Cyrus.  Isa.  45.  1.

David,  .Ter.  30.9.  £z. 37.24,25.  Hos. 3.5.
Days-Man,  JoA  9.  33.

Day-Star,  2  P«r.  1.19.

Deliverer,  Rom.  11.  26.

Desire  of  all  Nations,  Hag.  2.  ?.
Dew,  7/o.r.  14.  5.

Diadem,  Isa.  62.  3.

Door  of  Sheep,  John  10.  7.

Eagle,  Deut.  32.  11.

Elect,  J.«a.  42.  1.

Emmanuel,  Isa.  7.  14.  Mat.  1.  23.
Ensign,  La.  11. 10.

Eternal  Life,  1  John  5.20.

Everlasting  Father,  Isa.  9.6.

Express  Image,  &c.  Heb.  1.3.


A  COLLECTION


ADOPTED  Sons,  Gal.  4.5.

Angels,  Luke  20.  36.

Assembly  of  Saints,  Heb.  10.  25.
Believers,  Rets  5.  14.

Beloved  of  God,  Psal.  60.  5. 1  108.  6.
Blessed,  Psal.  2.  12.  |  32.  1.  .
Blameless,  Phil.  2.  15.

Body  of  Christ,  Eph.  1.  23.

Branches  of  Righteousness,  John  15.  5.
Brethren,  Rom.  8.  29.  I  12.  1.

Bride,  Rev.  21.  2,  9.  I  22.  17.

Building  of  God,  1  Cor.  3.  9.

Called,  Isa.  62.  12.  Rom.  8.  28.
Candlestick,  Rev.  1.  12.  |  2.  5.

Cedars,  Psal.  92.  12.  Ezek.  31.  8.
Children  of  the  Kingdom,  Mat.  13.  38.
Christ,  1  Cor.  12.  12.

Christians,  Acts  11. 26.  1  Pet.  4. 16.
Church  of  God,  1  Cor.  1.  2.
Circumcision,  Phil.  3.  3.

City  of  God,  Heb.  12.  22.  Rev.  3.  12.
Citizens,  Eph.  2  19.1Comely  ,Ca«r.l  .5.
Companions,  Psal.  45.  14.  Cant.  1.7.
Complete,  Col.  2.  10.

Congregation  of  Saints,  Psal.  149.  1.
Contrite,  Isa.  57-  15.  |  66.  2.

Converts,  Isa.  l.  27.

Corner  Stones,  Psal.  144.  12.
Daughter  of  the  King,  Psal.  45.  13.
Dead  in  Christ,  1  Thess.  4.  16.

Dearly  Beloved,  Jer.  12.  7.

Delights,  Cant.  7.  6.

Dew,  Psal.  110.  3.  Mic.  5.  7-
Disciples,  Isa.  8.  16.  Mat.  5.  1.


Faithful  Witness,  Rev.  1.  5.  |  3.  14.
1 19.  11.

Fatted  Calf,  Luke  15.  23.

Father  of  Eternity,  Isa.  9-  +  6.
Feeder,  Isa.  40.  11.

Finisher  of  Faith,  Heb.  12.  2.
Fir-tree,  Hos.  14.  8.

F'irst-Begotten,  Rev.  1.5.

First-Fruits,  1  Cor.  15.  2.3.

First  and  Fast,  Rev.  2.  8.

Flesh,  John  1.  14.

Foundation,  Isa.  28. 16.

Fountain,  Zech.  13.  1.

Forerunner,  Heb.  6.  20.

Friend  of  Sinners,  Matt.  11.  19.

Gift  of  God,  2  Cor.  9.  15.

Glory  of  God,  Isa.  40.  5.

Glorious  Lord,  Isa.  3.3.  21.

God,  John  1.  1.  Rom.  9.  5.  1  Tim.  3.

16.  1  John  5.  20.

Gold,  Cant.  5.  1 1.

Golden  Altar,  Rev.  8.  3.

Governor,  Matt.  2.  6.

Gracious,  1  Pet.  2.  .3.

Guide,  Psal.  48.  14.

Habitation,  Psal.  91.  9.

Harmless,  Heb.  7.  26.

Head  of  the  Church,  Col.  1.  18.

Heir  of  ail  Things,  Heb.  1.  2.

Help,  Psal.  33.  20.  I  40.  17.

Heritage,  Isa.  58.  14.

Highest,  Psal.  18.  1.3.  Luke  1.32.

H igh  Priest,  Heb.  3.  1 .  |  7.  1 .

Most  High,  Luke  8.  28.

Holy  One  of  God,  Mark  1.  24.

Holy  One  of  Israel,  Isa.  41.  14.

Holy  Child,  Acts  4.  .30.
Honey-Comb,  Cant.  4.  11.

Hope,  Acts  28.  20.  1  Tim.  1.1.

Horn  of  Salvation,  Psal.  18.  2.
Husband,  Isa.  54.  5.  Jer.  31.  32.

I  am,  Exod.  .3.  14.  John  8.  58.

Jacob,  Isa.  41. 8.  I  44.  1.  5.

Jah,  Psal.  68.  4.

Jehovah,  Isa.  26.  4.  I  40.  +  .3.
.lerusalem,  Cant.  6.  4.

Jesus,  Matt.  1.21.  1  Thess.  1.  10.
Image  of  God,  Heb.  1.  3.  •

Immanuel,  Isa.  7.  14.  Mat.  1.  2.3.
Immortal,  1  Tim.  1.  17.


i  Inheritance,  Ezek.  44.28.

Invisible,  1  Tim.  1.  17.

Israel,  Isa.  44.  21. 1  49.3.

.1  udah.  Rev.  5.  5.

Judge,  Mic.  5.  1.  Acts  10.  42.

King,  Mat.  21.  5. 1  25.  34.

Ladder,  Gen.  28.  12.

Lamb,  John  1.  29.  Rev.  5.  6.
Lawgiver,  Isa.  .33.22.  James  4.  12.
Leader,  Isa.  55.  4.

Light,  John  1.  9.  I  8.  12.  I  12.  46.

Life,  John  14.  6.

Lion  of  the  Tribe  of  Judah,  Rev.  5.  5.
Lin  ing  God,  1  Tim.  .3.  15.
Long-suffering,  Exod.  34.  6.

Lord,  Rom.  1.  3.  Rev.  IT.  14.

Lovely,  Cant.  5.  16.

Man,  Acts  17.31.  1  Tim.  2.5.

Master,  Mat.  8.  19.  123.8.

Mediator,  1  Tim.  2.5.

Melchisedek,  Heb.  7.  1.

Merciful,  Wei.  2.17-
Messenger,  Mai.  2.  7-  I  3. 1.

Messiah,  Dan.  9.  25.  John  1.  41.
Michael.  Dan.  12.  1.  Rev.  12.7.
Mighty  God,  Isa.  9.6.  163.1.
Minister,  Heb.  8.  2.

Morning-star,  Rev.  2.  28.  1  22.  16.
Moses,  Acts  .3.  22.

Nazante.  Mat.  1. 23.

Offspring  of  David,  Rev.  22.  16.
Only-Regotten.  John  1.  14.

Ointment,  Cant.  1.  3.

Pass-over,  1  Cor.  5.  7.

Plant  of  Renown.  Ezek.  34.  29.
Potentate,  1  Tim.  6.  15.

Prince,  Acts  3.  15.  |  5.  31.

Prophet,  Luke  4. 19.  Acts  3.  22.
Propitiation,  1  John  2.  2.  14.  10.
Power  of  God,  1  Cor.  1.  24.

Purifier,  Mai.  3.  3.

Physician,  Mat.  9.  12.

Polis-.ed  Shaft,  Isa.  49.  2.

Priest,  Heb.  4.  14.  I  7.  26.

Ransom,  1  Tim.  2.6.

Reaper,  Rev.  14.  15.

Redeemer,  La.  59.  20.  1  60  16.
Resurrection,  John  11.  25.

Refiner,  Mai.  3.  3.

Refuge,  Isa.  25.  4.


Righteousness,  Jer.  23.  6.

Rock,  Deut.  32.  15.  1  Cor.  10.4.

Rod  and  Branch,  La.  11.  1.

Root  of  David,  Rev.  22.  16.

Roe  and  Hart,  Cant.  2.  9.

Rose  of  Sharon,  Cant.  2.  1.

Ruler  in  Israel,  Mic.  5.  2.

Sacrifice.  Eph.  5.2.

Salvation,  Luke  2.  30.

Samaritan,  Luke  10.  33.
Sanctification,  1  Cor.  1.  30.
Sanctuary,  Isa.  8.  14.

Seed  of  Abraham,  Gal.  3.  29.

Seed  of  the  Woman,  Gen  3.  15.

Seed  of  David,  2  Tim.  2.  8.

Second  Man,  1  Cor.  15.  47.

Servant,  La.  42.  1,  19.  1  44.  21.
Shepherd,  John  10.  11.  Heb.  13.20s.
Shield,  Gen.  15.  1.  Psal.  18.  35.
Shiloh,  Gen.  49.  10.

Solomon,  Cant.  3.  7.  |  8.  11,  12.

Son  of  God,  Mat.  4.  .3.  |  8.  29.

Son  of  Man,  Mat.  8.  20.

Sower,  Mat.  1.3.  .3.

Spirit,  1  Cor.  15.  45.  Heb.  9. 14.

Stone  Refused,  Mat.  21.42.

Strength  of  Israel,  1  Sam.  15.  29.
Strong  God,  Psal.&J-  8.  Ret'.  18.  8.
Substance,  Heb.  10.34.

Sun  of  Righteousness,  Mai.  4.  2.
Surety,  Heb.  7.  22.

Sharp  Sword,  Isa.  49.  2.

Tabernacle,  Heb.  8.  2.  1  9.  11.
Teacher,  John  3.  2.

Temple,  Mark  14.  58.

Testator,  Heb.  9.  16,  17.

Treasure,  Luke  12.  .3.3.

Tree  of  Life,  Rev.  2.  7.

Truth,  John  14.  6.

Vine,  John  15.  1.

Wall  of  Fire,  Zech.  2.  5.

Wav,  Isa.  .35.  8.  John  14.  6.

Well  of  Living  Water,  Cant.  4.  15.
Wedding  Garment,  Mat.  22. 12.
Wisdom  of  God,  1  Cor.  1.  24.

Witness,  Rev.  1.  5.  I  3.  14.

Wonderful,  Isa.  9.  6.  I  28.  29.

Word  of  God,  Rev.  19.  13.

Worthy,  Heb.  .3.  3.  Rev.  5.  12.
Yesterday, To-day,  For  ever, Wei. 1.3.8.


t

OF  THE  APPELLATIONS  GIVEN  TO  THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD
IN  THE  SCRIPTURES.


Dove,  Cant.  2.  14.  I  5.  2.

Eagles,  Psal.  103.  5.  Isa.  40.  31.
Elect,  Isa.  45.  4.  Mat.  24.  22.
Election,  stoni.  9.  11.  |  11.  5,  7.
Escaped,  Isa.  45.  20.  2  Pet.  1.  4
Excellent,  Psal.  16.  3.  Prov.  12.  26.
Fair,  Cant.  1.  15.  I  2.  10.  |  4.  10.
Faithful,  Eph.  1.  1.  Col.  1.  2.

Family  of  God,  Eph.  3.  15.

Fearful,  La.  .35.  4.  |  Fig-trees,  Cant.  2.
First-fruits,  Jam.  1.  18.  [13.

Flock  of  God,  Acts  20.  28.

First-born,  Heb.  12.  2.3.

Fold  of  Christ,  John  10.  16.

Followers  of  God,  Eph.  5.  1.
Fountain,  Cant.  4.  12.

Free  men,  1  C hr.  7.  22.

Friends  of  God,  Jam.  2.  23.

Fruitful,  Col.  l.  10.

Fulness  of  Christ,  Eph.  1.  2.3.

Garden  enclosed,  Cant.  4.  12.
Gathered,  Isa.  56.  8.

General  Assembly,  Heb.  12.  23.
Generation  of  the  U  pright,  Psal.  1 12.  2.
Glory  of  God,  La.  46.  1.3.

Glorious,  Ps.  45.  1.3.  1  Grapes,  Hos.  9.
Habitation  of  God,  Eph.  2.  22.  [10.

Heirs  of  God,  Rom.  8.  17.

Heritage  of  God,  Jer.  12.  7.

Hidden  Ones,  Psal.  8.3.  3.

Holy,  1  Cor.  .3.  17.  Eph.  1.  4,

House  of  God,  1  Tim.  3.  15.

Humble,  Psal.  9.  12. 1  34.  2.
Husbandry  of  God,  1  Cor.  3.  9.


Jacob,  Psal.  14.  7.  I  147.  19.
Jerusalem  above,  Gal.  4.  29.— heaven¬
ly,  Heb.  12.  22.— holy,  Rev.  21.  10.
Jewels  of  the  Lord,  Mai.  3.  17.

Image  of  God,  Rom.  8.  29.
Inhabitants  of  Zion.  La.  12.  6.

Joy  of  the  whole  Earth,  Psal.  48.  2.
Israel  ot  God,  Gal.  6.  16.

Justified,  Acts  13.  39.

Kings,  Rev.  1 .  6.  |  5.  10.

Kingdom  of  Heaven,  Mat.  13.  38.
Lambs,  Isa.  40.  11.  John  21.  15.
Lamb's  Wife,  Rev.  21.  9.

T  ight  of  the  World,  Mat.  5.  14.

Lily  among  Thorns,  Cant.  2.  2.

Tittle  Ones,  Zech.  13.  7.

Lively  Stones,  1  Pet.  2.  5.

Lot  or  G o<l’s  Inheritance,  Deut.  32;  9.
Love,  or  his  Love,  Cant.  4.  7.

Lowly,  Psal.  138.  6.  Prov.  3.  34.
Members  of  Christ,  Eph.  5.  30.
Merciful,  Mat.  5.  7.

Mighty,  Psal.  112.2.  Acts  18.  24.
Mount  Zion,  Heb.  12.  22.

Mourners,  Isa.  57.  18.

Needy,  Psal.  9.  18.  Isa.  25.  4. 1  41.  17.
Obedient,  1  Pet.  1.  14.

Palaces,  Psal.  45.  15.  I  48.  3,  13.
Palm-trees,  Psal.  92.  12.  Cant.  7 .  8.
Peaceable,  Gen.  34.  21.

Peculiar  People,  1  Pet.  2.  9.

Perfect,  2  Tim.  3.  ]?•  Heb.  12.  23.
Pilgrims,  Heb.  11.  1.3.

Pillar  of  Truth.  1  Tim.  3.  15.


I  Plants,  Psal.  144.  12.  Cant.  4.  13.
Poor,  Mat.  5.  3.  |  11.  5.

Portion  of  the  Lord,  Deut.  32.  9.
Precious,  Psal.  116.  15.  Isa.  43.4.
Princes,  1  Sam.  2.  8.  Psal.  45.  16
Pure  in  Heart,  Mat.  5.  8.

Ransomed,  Isa.  45.  10.  |  51.  11.
Redeemed,  Isa.  51.  Il  l  62.  12.
Sanctified,  1  Cor.  1.  2.  |  6.  11.

Saved  of  the  Lord,  Deut.  .33.29.
Sheep,  John  10.  .3,  4.  i  21. 16.

Sincere,  Phil.  1.  10.

Stones,  1  Pet.  2.  5.

Sister,  Spouse,  Cant.  4.  12.

Sons  of  God,  Rom.  8.  14.

Spiritual,  Gal.  6.  1.  1  Pet.  2.5.
Stars,  Psal.  148.  .3.  Rev.  3.  1.
Strangers,  Psal.  39.  12. 1  119.  9.
Temple  of  God,  1  Cor.  3.  16.
Treasure  of  God,  Psal.  135.  4.
Vessels  of  Mercv,  Rom.  9.  23.
Vineyard,  La.  o.  1.1  27.  2.

Virgins,  Jer.  .31.4.  Rev.  14.  4.
Undefiled.  Cant.  5.  2.  I  6.  9.

Upright,  Psal.  11. 7. 1  37.  37.
Watchman,  Isa.  52.  8.  I  62.  6.
Wayfaring-Men,  Isa.  35.8.

Wise  Men.  1  Cor.  6.  5.

Woman,  Rev.  12. 1.

Worshippers,  Heb.  10.  2.

Worthy  to  walk  with  Christ,  Rev.  3.  4.
Written  in  Heaven,  Heb.  12.  23.
Zealous  of  good  Works,  Tit.  2.  14
1  Zion.  Psal.  69.  35. 1  76.  2.  I  87.  2.  ’


Note.  —  The  +  denotes  that  the  reference  is  to  a  marginal  Reading.


AN  ALPHABETICAL


TABLE  OF  THE  PROPER  NAMES


IN  THE


OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT;


TOGETHER  WITH  THE


MEANING  OR  SIGNIFICATION  OF  THE  WORDS  IN  THEIR  ORIGINAL  LANGUAGES


Ndte,-


■Thcre  are  some  Proper  Names  in  this  TABLE  which  are  not  in  the  following  Part  of  the  CONCORDANCE,  being  seldom  mentioned
in  Scripture.  To  these,  a  reference  to  the  Place  in  which  they  are  found  it  here  annexed.


A  B  I

AARON,  signifies  lofty,  or  mountainous;  or
mountain  of  strength  ;  or  a  teacher,  or  teaching.
The  first  high  priest  of  the  Jews,  the  son  of  Am-
ram,  brother  to  Moses.  He,  at  the  desire  of  the
people,  made  a  calf,  which  they  worshipped,  and
thereby  committed  a  great  sin.  He  was,  with  his
sons,  anointed  and  consecrated  to  the  priest's  office,
Lev.  8.

AARONITES.

ABADDON,  the  destroyer.  Rev.  9.  11.

ABAGTHA,  father  of  the  wine  press.

ABANA,  made  of  stone,  or  a  building

ABAR1M,  passages,  or  passengers.

ABDA,  a  servant,  or  servitude.

ABDI,  he  is  my  servant.

ABDIEL,  the  servant  of  God  ;  or,  cloud  of  the
abundance  of  God.

ABDON  ,  a  servant,  or  cloud  of  judgment.

ABED-NEGO,  servant  of  light,  Dan.  3.  23.

ABEL,  Adam's  second  son,  signifies  vanity,  or
breath,  or  vapour,  Gen.  4.  4.

ABEL,  a  city,  signifies,  mourning.

ABEL-BE  l  H-MAACH  AH,  mourning  to  the
house  of  Maachah.

ABEL-MA1M,  the  mourning  of  the  waters;  or
the  valley  of  waters.

ABEL-MEHOLAH,  sorrow  or  mourning  of  weak¬
ness,  or  of  sickness.

ABEL-MIZRAIM,  the  mourning  of  the  Egyp¬
tians,  Gen.  50.  11.

ABEL-SI1ITTIM,  mourning  of  the  thorns.  It
was  a  city  near  the  river  Jordan  in  the  wilderness,
N  urn.  33.  49.

ABEZ,  an  egg,  or  muddy.  A  city  in  the  tribe  of
Issachar,  Josh..  19.  20.

ABI,  my  father.  The  mother  of  Hesekiah,^.  Kings
18.  2.

ABIAH,  the  Lord  is  my  father,  or  the  father  of
the  Lord.

ABI-ALBON,  most  intelligent  father,  or  the  fa¬
ther  over  the  building  ;  or  father  of  injury.

ABIATHAR,  excellent  father,  or  father  of  him
that  survived,  1  Sam.  22.  20.

A  BIB,  green  fruits,  or  ears  of  corn.

ABIDAH,  the  father  of  knowledge,  or  the  know¬
ledge  of  the  father.  One  of  the  sons  of  Midian,
Gen.  25.  4.

ABIDAN,  father  of  judgment,  or  my  father  is
judge.

ABIEL,  God  my  father,  or  my  God  the  father.
He  was  the  father  of  Kish,  1  Sam.  9.  1.

ABIEZER,  father  of  help,  or  help  of  the  father,
or  my  father  is  my  help.

A  BI-EZR1TE.

A  BIGAIL,  father  of  joy,  or  the  joy  of  the  father,

1  Sam.  25.  3.

ABIHAIL,  the  father  of  strength,  or  father  of
trouble.

AB1HU,  he  is  my  father,  or  his  father.

ABIJAH,  the  will  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Lord  is
my  father.

ABIJAM,  father  of  the  sea.

ABILENE,  the  father  of  the  apartment,  or  of
mourning.  A  province  between  Libanns  and
Antilibanus,  whereof  Lysanias  was  telrarch,
Luke  3  1.

ABIMAEL,  a  father  sent  from  God,  or  my  father
comes  from  God.  He  was  the  son  of  Joktan,
Gen.  10.  28.

AB1MELECH,  father  of  the  king,  or  my  father
the  king.

A  BIN  ADAB,  father  of  willingness  ;  or  my  father
is  a  prince.

AB1NOAM,  father  of  beauty,  or  comeliness  ;  or
my  father  is  beautiful.

ABI  RAM,  a  high  father,  or  father  of  fiaud.

ABISHAG,  ignorance  of  the  father.

AB1SHAI,  the  present  of  my  father,  or  the  father


ADA

of  the  present ;  otherwise,  the  father  of  the  sa¬
crifice,  or  the  sacrifice  of  my  father.

ABiSHALOM,  the  father  of  peace,  or  the  peace
of  the  father ;  or  the  recompence  of  the  father,
1  Kings  15.  2.

ABISI1UA,  father  of  salvation,  or  of  magnifi¬
cence,  or  the  salvation  of  my  father,  1  Chr.  6.  4.

ABISHUR,  the  father  of  the  wall,  or  of  upright¬
ness  ;  or  my  father  is  upright,  1  Chron.  2.  28i

ABITAL,  the  father  of  the  dew;  or  the  father
of  the  shadow,  according  to  the  Syriac.  One  of
David's  wives,  2  Sam.  3.  4.

ABI  I'UB,  father  of  goodness,  or  my  father  is
good,  1  Chron.  8.  11.

ABlHUD,  father  of  praise,  or  glory  of  my  father.

ABNER,  father  of  light,  or  the  lamp  of  the  fa¬
ther,  or  the  son  of  the  father.

ABRAM, a  high  father  ;  the  father  of  elevation.

ABRAHAM,  the  father  of  a  great  multitude.
At  the  command  of  God  Abraham  went  out  of
Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  his  native  country,  into  Ca¬
naan,  where  the  Lord  promised  to  give  that  land
to  hts  seed.  The  Messiah  was  promised  to  be  of
his  family ,  for  in  his  seed  all  the  families  of
the  earth  were  to  be  blessed.  Gen.  12.  3.  Acts  3.
25.  Gal.  3.  8.  He  was  circumcised  with  all  his
household,  and  taught  his  family  to  keep  the  com¬
mands  of  God.  His  faith  was  tried  in  being  com¬
manded  to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac  ;  but  the  angel
of  the  Lord  stayed  him,  and  Isaac  was  exchanged
with  a  ram.  Isaac  in  this  matter  was  an  eminent
type  and  figure  of  Christ,  who  in  the  time  appoint¬
ed  by  God,  was  to  he  offered  up  a  sacrifice  for  the
sins  of  those  that  believe  in  him.  The  spiritual
children %of  faithful  Abraham,  are  those  that  be¬
lieve  in  Jesus  Christ ,  and  do  the  works  of  Abra¬
ham,  John  8.  39.  Rom.  4.  16.  and  9.  7.  Gal.  3.
7»  29.

ABSALOM,  father  of  peace,  or  the  peace  of  the
father.

ACCAD,  a  vessel,  a  pitcher;  or  a  sparkle.  The
city  where  Nimrod  reigned ,  Gen.  10.  10.

ACClIO,  close,  enclosed,  pressed  together.

ACELDAMA,  the  field  of  blood,  Acts  1.  19.

ACH  A IA,  grief,  or  trouble.

ACHAICUS,  a  native  of  Achaia.

ACH  AN,  or  AC11AR,  he  that  troubles  and
bruises.

ACHBOR,  a  rat;  otherwise,  bruising  or  enclosing
the  well.  He  was  father  of  Baal-hanan,  the
seventh  king  of  Edom,  Gen.  36.  38.

AC  HIM,  preparing,  confirming,  or  revenging.

ACH  ISH,  tnus  it  is  ;  or  how  is  this  ?

ACH  MET  HA.  a  city.

ACHOR,  trouble.

ACHSAH,  adorned  ;  or  bursting  of  the  veil.

ACHSHAPH,  poison,  tricks;  or  one  that  breaks;
or,  the  lip  or  brim  of  any  thing.

ACHZIB,  liar,  lying;  or  that  runs;  or  that  de¬
lays.

ADADAII,  the  witness  or  testimony  of  the  as¬
sembly.  The  name  of  a  city,  losh.  15.  22.

ADAH,  an  assembly.’  The  wife  of  Lamech,  Gen.
4.  19.  Also  the  wife  of  Esau,  Gen.  36.  2.

ADA  1  ATI,  the  witness  of  the  Lord.  The  father
of  Jedidah  mother  of  Josiah,  2  Kings  22.  1.

ADALIAH,  one  that  draws  water;  or  poverty,
or  cloud,  vapour,  death.  One  of  Homan's  sons,
Esth.  9.  8.

ADAM,  earthy,  taken  out  of  red  earth.  The
name  of  the  first  man,  who  was  made  after  the
image  of  God,  in  a  holy  and  happy  estate,  but  by
his  fall  and  disobedience  broke  covenant  with  God,
and  thereby  brought  himself  and  all  his  posterity
into  an  estate  of  sin  and  misery ,  Rom.  5. 12.  But
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  is  the
Saviour  and  Redeemer  of  all  that  truly  believe  in
him,  Mark  16.  16.  Acts  4. 12.  and  16.  31.


AH  I

ADAMAH,  red  earth.  A  city,  Josh.  19.  36.

ADAMI,  my  man,  red,  earthy,  human.  A  city
Josh.  19.  33.

ADAH,  high,  or  eminent.

ADBEEL,  a  vapour,  a  cloud  of  God  ;  otherwise
a  vexer  of  God.  One  of  Ishmael's sons,  Gen.  25
13.

ADDI,  my  witness,  adorned,  passage,  prey.

ADDON,  basis,  foundation,  the  Lord.  The  name
of  a  place,  Neh.  7.  61.

ADl  EL,  the  witness  of  the  I/>rd.  1  Chron.  4.  36.

AD1N,  adorned,  or  voluptuous,  dainty.  Lira  8.  6.

ADITHA1M,  assemblies,  or  testimonies.  Josh.
15.  36.

A  DEAI,  my  witness,  my  ornament.  1  Chr.  FI.  29.

ADMAH,  earthy,  red  earth.

ADMATHA,  a  cloud  of  death,  a  mortal  vapour.
Esth.  1 .  14.

ADNAH,  rest,  or  testimony  eternal.  1  Chr.  12.

20.

ADONI-BEZEK,  the  lightning  of  the  Lord,  or
the  Lord  of  lightning ;  or  the  Lord  of  Bezek  ;
for  he  was  king  of  this  city.

ADON1JAH,  the  Lord  is  my  master.

ADON  IK  AM,  the  Lord  is  raised,  or  my  Lord
hath  raised  me.

ADON  1  RAM,  my  Lord  is  most  high,  or  the  Lord
of  might  and  elevation.  1  Kings  4.  6.

ADONI-ZEDEK,  justice  of  the  Lord,  or  the
Lord  of  justice.  He  was  king  of  Jerusalem,  Josh.
10.  1.

A  DOR  AM,  their  beauty,  their  power,  or  theiF
praise.  He  was  David's  tribute-gatherer,  2  Sam.
20.  24.

ADORAIM,  strength,  or  power  o'  the  sea.  2
Chron.  11.9.

ADRAMMELECH,  the  cloak,  glory,  grandeur,
or  power  of  the  king.

ADRAMYTTJUM,  the  court  of  death,  the  man¬
sion  of  death.

ADR  I  A,  the  name  of  a  city,  which  gives  name  to-
the  Adriatic  sea.  now  the  gulf  of  Venice.

ADULLAM,  theii  testimony,  their  prey,  or  their
ornament.

AG  A  BUS,  a  locust,  or  the  feast  of  the  father.

AG  AG,  roof,  floor.

AG  AGILE,  of  the  race  of  Agag.

AGAR.  See  HAG AR.

AGRIPPA,  this  word  is  Latin,  and  signifies  one
who  at  his  birth  causes  great  pain,  who  is  born-
with  his  feet  foremost,  ager  partus.

AG  UR,  a  stranger,  or  gathering,  or  gathered  to¬
gether.

AHAB,  the  brother  of  the  father,  une'e  or  father
of  the  brother.

AHASUERUS,  prince,  head,  or  chief.

AHAVA,  essence,  or  generation.

ATIAZ,  one  that  takes  and  possesses

AIIAZIAH,  seizure,  possession,  oi  vision  ot  tb?
Lord.

AH  I AII,  brother  of  the  T.ord.

AHIEZER,  brother  of  assistance.  A  prince  of  ihe-
tribe  of  Dan,  Num.  1.  12.

AHIJAH,  the  same  with  AIIIAH.

AII1KAM,  a  brother  that  raises  up.

AH1LUD,  a  brother  born.  H ;  was  secretary  to-
David,  2  Sam.  8.  16.

AHIMAAZ,  brother  of  the  council,  or  my  bro¬
ther  is  counsellor.

AIIIMAN,  a  brother  prepared,  or  brother  of  the
right  hand.

AH1MELECH,  my  brothzr  is  a  king,  or  the  bro¬
ther  of  my  king.

AHIMOTII,  brother  of  death,  or  my  brother  if;
dead.  1  Chron.  6.  25.

AH1NOAM,  the  beauty  and  comeliness  of  the
brother,  or  brother  of  motion.

AH  IO,  his  brother,  his  brethren.


577


Propbr  Names.]  ARC


BET


BAA


The

Gen.


All  IRA,  brother  of  iniquity;  otherwise,  brother
or  companion  of  the  shepherd.  Lie  was  due}  oj
the  tribe  of  Naphtali,  Num.  1.  15.

AIIISAMACH,  brother  of  strength  or  support,  or
my  brother  supports  me.

All  ISIIAR,  brother  of  a  prince,  or  brother  ot  a
song.  He  was  steward  of  Solomon' s  household,  I
Kings  4.  6.  „  ....

AH  1 1  HOPHEL,  brother  of  ruin  or  folly.

All  H  UB,  brother  of  goodness,  or  my  brother  is
good.  .  .  .  ,

AHIHUD,  brother  of  praise.  The  prince  oj  .he
tribe  of  Asher,  Num.  34  27-  .......

AHLAB,  which  is  ot  milk,  or  which  is  tat ;  other¬
wise,  brother  of  the  heart.  The  name  of  a  city,

.)  udg.  1.  31.

A H OLA H,  his  tabernacle,  his  tent.

A  HO  LI  A  B.  the  tent  or  tabernacle  of  the  father.

A  HO  LIBAH,  my  tent  and  my  tabernacle  in  her
A110L1BAMAH,  my  tabernacle  is  exalted.

Al,  or  HA  I,  mass,  or  heap.

A  1 OTH,  the  same  as  AI.

A  J  A  LON ,  a  chain  ;  otherwise,  strength,  or  a  stag
ALAMMELECH,  God  is  king.  A  city,  Josh

l'J.  26.  ,  .

ALEXANDER,  is  a  Greek  word,  and  signifies,
one  that  assists  men,  or  one  that  helps  stoutly  ;
or  one  that  turns  away  evil.

ALEXANDRIA,  a  city  in  Egypt.

ALLELUIA,  praise  the  Lord,  or  praise  to  the
Lord.

ALLON,  an  oak,  or  strong,  1  Chron.  4.  37-
ALLON-BACIIUTH.  the  oak  of  weeping.
place  where  Rebekah's  nurse  was  buried,

33  8

A  LMODAD,  measure  of  God,  Gen.  10.  26.
ALPHA,  the  first  letter  of  the  Greek  alphabet,
marked  A.  .

Al.PHEUS,  a  thousand  ;  otherwise,  learned,  or

AMALEK,  a  people  that  licks  up,  or  that  takes
away  all ;  otherwisey  a  people  that  strikes,  or  that
uses  ill.  „  „  ,  ,

AM  ALEKITES.  people  descended  from  Amalek.
AM  ANA,  integrity  and  truth.

AMAR1AH,  the  Lord  says,  or  the  excellency  of
the  Lord,  Zeph.  1.1.

AM  ASA,  a  forgiving  people,  or  sparing  the  peo
pie  ;  otherwise,  the  burden  of  the  people.
AMAZIAH,  the  strength  of  the  Lord.

AMMAI1,  my  people.

AMM1.  the  same  with  AMMAH.
AMM1-NADAB,  my  people  is  liberal,  or  prince
of  the  people,  or  a  people  that  vows.  _
AMM1HUD,  people  of  praise,  or  praise  is  with
me,  Num.  1.  10.  .......

AMM1SHADDAI,  the  people  of  the  Almighty,
or  the  Almighty  is  with  me.  Num.  1.  12.
AMMON,  a  people,  or  the  son  of  my  people.
AMMON  LI  ES,  a  people  that  descended  of  Ben-
ammi,  son  of  Lot  by  his  youngest  daughter.
AMNON,  faithful  and  true;  otherwise,  foster
father,  or  tutor  ;  or,  son  of  the  mother.

AMON.  faithful,  true.

AMOR1TE,  bitter,  a  rebel ;  otherwise,  a  babbler
or  prater.

AMOS,  loading,  weighty.

AMOZ,  strong,  robust.

AMPHIPOL1S,  a  city  encompassed  by  the  sea.
AMP  LI  AS,  large,  extensive.  A  Latin  word.
AMRAM.an  exalted  people  ;  or  their  sheaves,  or
handfuls  of  corn.

AMRAPHEL,  one  that  speaks  of  hidden  things;

or  one  that  speaks  of  judgment,  or  of  rum.

AN  AH,  one  who  answers,  or  who  sings;  other
wise,  poor,  or  afflicted.

A  N  AK,  a  collar,  or  ornament.

AN  AKIMS.  „  ,  ,  .

AN  AMMELECII,  answer,  or  song  of  the  king  and
cnunci  L

ANANIAS,  the  cloud  of  the  Lord.

A  N  A  I'HOTH,  answer,  song  ;  or,  affliction,  po-

A  N  DREW,  a  stout  and  strong  man.  A  Greek  word.
AN  DKON1CUS,  a  man  excelling  others,  a  vic¬
torious  man.  Greek.

AN  ER,  answer,  song,  affliction,  of  light
ANNA,  gracious,  merciful.

ANNAS,  one  that  answers,  that  afflicts  and  hum¬
bles,  or  gracious,  merciful.  A  high-priest  who
sent  Christ  bound  to  Caiaphas  his  father-in-law
A  N TI CH  R  1ST,  an  adversary  to  Christ.
ANTIOCH,  for  or  instead  of  a  chariot;  or  equal
in  speed  with  a  chariot.

AN  11PAS,  for  all,  or  against  all.  One  of  the
martyrs  slain  by  the  people  of  Petgamus,  Rev.
2.  13.

ANT1PATRIS,  for,  or  against  the  father.
APELLES,  a  Greek  word,  from  the  verb  aireXXo),

I  exclude,  1  separate.

APHEK,  a  stream,  a  rapid  torrent;  or  strength,
vigour.

APPOLLONI  A,  perdition,  destruction.

A  POL  LOS,  one  that  destroys  and  lays  waste.
APOLLYON,  one  that  exterminates  or  destroys.
APP  HI  A,  that  products,  oris  frui  fill.  Philem.  2.
APPU-FORUM,  a  town  so  colled  from  Appius
Claudius,  whose  statue  wasrerecied  there.

AQUl  LA,  an  eagle.  Latin.

AK,  awaking,  watching,  evacuation,  uncovering.
ARABIA,  evening,  or  a  place  wild  and  desert;
or  hostages,  ravens  ;  and  also,  mixtures  ;  because
this  country  was  inhabited  by  different  kinds  of
people.

ARABIAN.

ARAM,  highness,  magnificence;  otherwise,  one
that  deceives,  or  their  curse.  ARAM  signifies
Syria  in  Gen.  22.  21.  and  elsewhere.

ARARAT,  the  curse  of  trembling.

ARAUNAH,  ark,  song,  joyful  cry,  curse.

A  R  BA,  the  city  of  the  four.

ARCIIELAUS,  the  prince  of  the  people.  Greek.

578


ARCIIIPPUS,  a  governor  of  horses,  or  master  of
the  horse.  Greek.

ARC1URUS,  a  gathering  together.

ARD,  one  that  commands,  or  lie  that  descends.

A  son  of  Benjamin,  Gen.  46.  21.

AREL1,  the  light  or  vision  of  God.  Gen.  46.  16.
AREOPAG11E,  belonging  to  the  council  called
Areopagus.  ,  ,

AREOPAGUS,  the  hill  of  Mars;  a  place  wheie
the  magistrates  of  Athens  held  their  supreme
council;  from  upe. os,  Mars,  and  n a-yov,  iL
hill.  ,  ,

A  R  ETAS,  one  that  is  agreeable,  that  pleases,
that  is  virtuous.  „  c

ARGOB,  a  turf  of  earth,  or  tat  land,  or  curse  ot
the  well.  _  ,

ARIEL,  the  altar,  light,  or  lion  ot  God.
ARIMATHEA,  a  lion  dead  to  the  Lord ;  or  the
light  of  the  death  of  the  Lord  ;  or  simply  Ka-
math,  or  Ramah,  a  city  where  Samuel  dwelt,

1  Sam.  1.  19.  ,  .

ARIOCH,  long,  great,  tall;  or  your  drunken¬
ness  ;  or  your  lion.  .  .  ,

ARISTARCHUS,  a  good  prince,  the  best  prince.
(Jr  1'OOlc  %

AR1STOBULUS,  a  good  counsellor,  good  ad
vice.  Greek.  .  .

ARMAGEDDON,  the  mountain  ot  Megiddo,  or
the  mountain  of  the  gospel ;  otherwise,  the  moun¬
tain  of  fruits,  or  of  apples.  _

ARMENIA,  a  province  which  is  supposed  to  take
its  name  from  Aram.

ARNON,  rejoicing,  or  leaping  tor  joy;  or  their
chest  or  ark.  ,  .  ,  r

AROER,  heath,  tamarisk;  or  the  nakedness  ot
the  skin  ;  or  nakedness  ot  the  watch,  or  ot  the
enemy.  ..

ARPAD,  the  light  of  redemption;  or  that  lies
down,  that  makes  his  bed.

- -  —  •  —  ...  —  —  that  re-


BA  A  L-TAMAR,  master  of  the  palm  tree
BAAL-ZEBUB,  the  master  of  flies.
BAAL-ZEPHON,  the  idol,  or  possession  ofthe
north  ;  or  hidden,  secret.

BAANAH,  in  the  answer,  in  affliction.
BAASHAH,  in  the  work,  or  in  the  compression  ;

i  .1  J  .  . 1  J  „  I .»  ...  ,„Un  lrivw


in-


V.I u  >>  11)  umi  uianvu  mu

ARPIIAXAD,  one  that  heals;  or  one
leases.  .  ,  ,

ARTAXERXES,  in  Hebrew,  Artachsasta,  the
silence  of  light,  or  light  that  imposes  silence  ;
otherwise  joy,  that  is  in  haste.  A  Persian  name
ARTEMAS,  whole,  sound,  or  without  fault.

ASA,  physician,  or  cure.

ASA II EL,  the  work  or  creature  ot  God.

ASA  I  AH,  the  Lord  hath  wrought;  or  a  creature
of  the  Lord.  ,  ..

ASAPH,  one  that  assembles  together  ;  or  one  that
finishes  and  completes.

ASENATH,  peril,  or  misfortune.

ASHDOD,  inclination,  leaning;  or  a  wild  open
place  ;  or  pillage,  thett.

ASH  ER,  blessedness,  or  happiness.

ASII  IMA,  crime :  or  position  ;  or  fire  of  the  sea.

The  name  of  an  idol,  2  Kings  17.  30.
ASHKENAZ,  a  fire  that  distils  or  spreads.  (Jne
of  the  sons  of  Goiner,  Gen.  10.  3.
ASHTAROTH,  flocks,  the  sheep,  or  riches.
AS11UR,  one  that  is  happy,  that  walks  on  pros¬
perously.

ASIA,  muddy,  boggy.

ASKELON,  w'eight,  or  balance ;  or  fire  ot
famy.  .  c

ASNAPPER,  unhappiness,  misfortune  of
bull  or  calf  ;  or  fruitless,  or  increase
danger.

ASS1R,  prisoner,  fettered,  1  Chron.  3.  17
ASSOS,  approaching,  coming  near  to.  Acts  20
ASSYRIA.

ASSYRIAN.

ASYNCR1TUS,  incomparable.

ATAD,  a  thorn.

ATHALIAH,  the  time  of  ffle  Lord.
ATHENIANS,  inhabitants  of  Athens.
ATHENS,  so  called  from  Athene,  or  Atlienaia,
Minerva.

ATTALIA,  that  increases  or  sends.

AVEN,  iniquity,  force,  riches.

AUGUSTUS,  increased,  augmented;  or  royal,
majestic.  ,  ,  .  „  T

AZA  R  1  AH,  assistance,  or  help  of  the  Lord;  or
he  that  hears  the  Lord,  or  w  hom  the  Lord  hears.
AZEK AH,  strength  of  walls.

AZGAD,  a  strong  army,  or  the  strength  of  a
troop  ;  otherwise,  a  gang  of  robbers,  or  a  troop  of
soldiers.  Ezra  2.  12.  „  _  ,

AZN GTH-TABOR,  the  ears  of  Tabor  ;  or  the
ears  of  choice,  purity,  contrition.  Josh.  19.  34.
AZOTUS,  the  same  as  ASHDOD,  pillage,  thett.

Acts  8.  40.  .  .  .  _

AZUR,  he  that  assists,  or  he  that  is  assisted.  Jer.

28.  1.


confusion  of


the

of


.13.


B.


BAAL,  he  that  rules  and  subdues;  or  master,
lord,  or  husband.

BA  ALA  II,  her  idol  ;  or  she  that  is  governed  or
subdued,  a  spouse.  A  city,  Jo6h.  15.  9.

BAA  L-BER1TH,  idol  of  the  covenant;  or  he
that  possesses,  or  subdues  the  covenant.

BAAL-GAD,  the  idol  of  the  troop,  of  the  army,
or  of  felicity  ;  otherwise,  the  Lord  is  master  ot
the  troop.  Josh.  11. 17-

BAAL-HAMON,  one  that  possesses  or  ru.es  a
multitude  ;  a  populous  place.

BAAL-HERMON,  the  possessor  of  destruction  ;
or  of  a  thing  cursed,  devoted,  or  consecrated  to
God.  It  is  a  mountain,  Judg.  3.  3.

BAALI,  my  idol,  master,  or  lord  ovi|-  me.

BAALIM,  idols,  masters,  false  gods.

BAALIS,  a  rejoicing,  or  proud  lord.

BAAL-MEON,  the  idol,  the  master  of  the  house.

B A  AL-PEOR,  master  of  the  opening.

BAAL-PERAZIM,  master,  or  god  of  divisions,
or  he  that  possesses  and  enjoys  divisions  and  dis-

Ba‘aL°SH ALISHA,  the  third  idol,  the  third  hus¬
band  ;  or  that  governs  or  presides  over  three.


or  he  that  seeks  and  demands,  or  who  lays
waste.

BABEL,  confusion,  or  mixture.

BABYLON,  the  same  with  BABEL.
BABYLONIANS.

BABYLONISH.

BACA,  mulberry-tree.

BA  HU  It  IM,  choice,  warlike,  valiant.

BAJITH,  a  house.

BALAAM,  the  old  age  or  ancient  of  the  people,
or  their  destruction  ;  or,  without  the  people.
BALAK,  who  lays  waste  and  destroys  ;  or  wno
licks  and  laps.

BAMAII,  an  eminence,  or  high  place.
BARABBAS,  son  of  the  father,  or  of  the  master,
or  the  son  of  confusion  and  shame.

BARACHEL,  who  blesses  God,  who  bends  the
knee  before  God.  The  father  of  Elihu,  Joe
32.  2.

BARACHIAS,  the  same  with  BARACHEL.

BA  R  A  K,  thunder,  or  in  vain.

BAR-JESUS,  son  of  Jesus,  or  Joshua.

BA  R-JON  A,  the  son  of  Jona,  or  of  a  dove.
BARNABAS,  the  son  of  the  prophet,  or  ot  con
sol  at  ion.

BARSABAS,  son  of  return,  or  ot  conversion  ;  or
son  of  rest,  or  son  of  swearing.
BARTHOLOMEW,  a  son  that  suspends  the
waters.  ,

BARTIMEUS,  the  son  of  Timeus.  or  of  the  per¬
fect  and  honourable.

BARUCH,  who  is  blessed,  who  bends  the  knee.

BA  RZILLA1,  made  of  iron  ;  or  the  son  ot  con¬
tempt.  ...  ,

BASH  AN,  in  the  tooth,  or  in  the  ivory;  other¬
wise.  in  the  change,  or  the  sleep.

BASHEMATII,  perfumed  ;  or
death  ;  otherwise,  in  desolation.

B ATH-SIIEBA,  the  seventh  daughter,  or  the
daughter  of  an  oath.  .  „  .  J

BEDAD,  alone,  solitary  ;  or  m  friendship,  in  the
bosom,  or  the  nipple.  He  was  father  oj  lladad,
Gen.  36.  35.  .  ,

BED  AN,  only ;  or  in  the  judgment ;  or  accord¬
ing  to  judgment.

BEEL-ZEBUB,  the  same  with  BAAL-ZEBUB.
BEER,  a  well.  The  name  of  a  city,  Num.
21.  16.

BEER-LA II Al-ROI,  the  well  of  him  that  liveth
and  seeth  me.  Gen.  16.  14.

BEER-SHEBA,  the  well,  or  fountain  of  an  oat-h  ;
otherwise,  the  seventh  well,  or  the  weil  of
satiety.

BEKAH,  half  a  shekel.  .  ...

BEL,  ancient;  or  nothing,  vain,  or  what  is  sub¬
ject  to  change.  The  name  of  an  idol.

BELT  A  L,  wicked,  or  the  devil.

BELSHAZZAR,  master  of  the  treasure,  or  who
lays  up  treasures  in  secret.

BELTESHAZZAR,  who  lays  up  treasures  in
secret ;  or  he  that  secretly  endures  pain  ant
pressure.  ,  ,  .

BENAIAH,  son  of  the  Lord;  or,  the  under¬
standing  of  the  Lord  ;  or  the  Lord’s  building.
BEN-AMM1,  the  son  of  my  people.

BEN-HAD  AD,  the  son  of  Hadad,  or  of  noise,
clamour,  cry.

BENJAMIN,  the  son  of  the  right  hand.

BEN  J  AMITE.

BENONI,  son  of  my  grief,  pain,  sorrow
BEOR,  burning ;  otherwise,  foolish,  mad,  beast.
BERACHAII,  blessing,  or  bending  ot  the  knee.
BEREA,  heavy,  weighty  ;  from  /Sapor,  weight.
BERITH,  covenant.

BERNICE,  one  that  brings  victory.

BESOR,  glad  news,  or  incarnation.

BETAH,  confidence.  A  city,  2  Sam.  8.  8.
BETHABARA,  the  house  of  passage,  or  house
of  anger.  ,  .

BETHANY,  the  house  of  song,  or  of  affliction;
otherwise,  the  house  of  obedience,  or  the  house
of  the  grace  of  the  Lord.  .  .

BETH-AVEN,  the  house  of  vanity,  of  iniquity,
of  trouble,  of  strength.

BETH-B1REI,  the  house  of  my  Creator;  or  the
temple  of  my  Creator.  1  Chr.  4.  31.
BETH-CAR,  the  house  of  the  lamb  ,  or  the
house  of  knowledge.  A  city,  1  Sam.  7*  H.
BETH-DAGON,  the  house  of  corn;  or  the  habi¬
tation  of  the  fish  ;  or  the  temple  ot  the  god  Dagon.
Josh  19.  27*

BETH-DIBLATHAIM,  the  house  ot  dry  figs.
BETH-EL,  the  house  of  God.

BETH  ELITE.  .  .  u  t

BETHER,  division  ;  otherwise,  in  the  turtle,  or
in  the  trial,  or  perquisition.

BETHESDA,  the  house  of  effusion
house  of  pity,  or  mercy.

BETH-EZEL,  a  neighbour’s  house.
BETH-GAMUL,  the  house  of  recompence,  or  ot
the  weaneH  »  or  the  hou^e  of  the  camel.
BETH-HACCEREM,  the  house  of  the  vuie-fl

bM  iI-HORON,  the  house  of  wrath ;  or  th
house  of  the  hole,  or  ot  the  cave,  or  ot  liberty.
BETH  LEHEM,  the  house  ot  bread,  or  the
house  of  war.

BETH-LF.H  EM-EPHR  ATAII.

B  ET  H  -  LEII  EM  -J  U  D  A  H .

B  ETII-LEH  EM  1 T  E.

BETH-PEOR,  the  house  of  gaping  or  opening.
BETHPHAGE,  the  house  ot  the  mouth,  or  tti<
drain  of  the  valleys  ;  or,  the  house  of  early  tigs-
BETHSA1  DA,  the  house  of  fruits,  or  of  rood,  o
of  hunters,  or  of  snares.

BETH-SI1AN,  the  house  of  the  tooth,  or  o


or


the


D  I  O


ELI  [Pkoper  "Names.


CHE

ivory  ;  or  the  house  of  change  ;  or  the  dwelling
of  sleep.

BETH-SHEMESH,  the  house  of  the  sun  ;  or  the
house  of  service,  or  of  ministry.

BETHUEL,  filiation  of  God.

BEULAH,  married.

BEZALEEL,  in  the  shadow  of  God.

BEZEK,  lightning  ;  or  in  the  chains  or  fetters.
BICHRI,  fiist-born,  or  first-fruits;  otherwise,  in
the  ram  ,  or  the  sheep.

RIDKAR.in  compunction,  or  in  sharp  pain,  in
the  wound.

BIGTHAN,  giving  ..eat,  Estk.  2.  Cl.  called  also
Bigthana,  chap.  o.  C.

B1  LDAD,  old  friendship,  or  old  love.

BILHAH,  who  is  old,  troubled,  or  confused  ;  or
which  spreads  itself.

B1RSIIA,  in  evil;  or  son  that  beholds.  Gen.
14.  2.

BITHIAH,  daughter  of  the  Lord.  1  Chron.
4.  18.

BIT11RON,  division  ;  or  in  his  examination  ;  or
daughter  of  the  song  ;  or  the  habitation  of  the
song,  or  of  anger,  or  of  liberty.

BITHYNIA,  violent  precipitation,  from  the
Greek  word  /3<a,  violence,  and  the  vtrb  Ouvio,  I
make  haste.

BLASTUS,  one  that  sprouts  and  brings  forth.
BOAN  ERGES,  the  sons  of  thunder,  James  and
John  the  sons  of  Zebedee.

BOAZ,  or  BOOZ,  in  strength,  or  in  the  goat.
BOCHIM,  the  place  of  weeping,  or  of  mourners,
or  of  mulberry  trees.

BOZEZ,  mud,  bog  ;  or  in  him  the  flower.  The
name  of  a  rock,  1  Sam.  14.  4.

BOZRAH.in  tribulation  or  distress.

BU  L,  changeable,  perishing.  The  name  of  a  month.
BUZ,  despised,  or  plundered.

BUZI,  my  contempt.

BUZITE,  a  descendant  from  Buz.

c.

CABUL,  displeasing,  or  dirty.

CA1APHAS,  a  searcher;  or  he  that  seeks  with
diligence.

CAIN,  possession,  or  possessed.

CAINAN,  possessor  or  purchaser;  or  one  that
laments  ;  or  the  builder  of  a  nest.
CALAIl,.fav°urable,  opportunity  ;  or  as  the  ver¬
dure,  or  green  fruit.  A  city,  Gen.  10.  12.

CA  LEB,  a  dog,  or  a  crow,  or  a  basket ;  or  as  the
heart.

CALEB-EPIIRATAII,  a  place  so  called  hy  a
conjunction  of  the  names  Caleb  and  his  wife
Ephratah.  See  EPH  RATAH.

CALNEH,  our  consummation,  or  all  we;  or  as
murmuring.

CALN  O,  our  consummation  ;  according  to  others,
altogether  himself.

CALVARY,  the  place  of  a  scull.

CAMON,  his  resurrection,

CANA,  zeal,  or  emulation  ;  otherwise,  possession,
lamentation,  the  nest,  cane,  or  staff.

CANAAN,  a  merchant,  a  trader.  He  was  the
son  of  Ham,  and  gave  name  to  the  land  of
Canaan.  The  Canaanites  were  a  wicked  peo-
people,  for  they  descended  from  a  wicked  father ,
Gen.  13.  7.

CANAANITE.

CANDACE,  who  possesses  contrition;  or  pure
possession.

CAPERNAUM,  the  field  of  repentance,  or  cit3’
of  comfort  ;  otherwise,  the  propitiation  of  the
penitent ;  or  the  town  of  pleasure,  the  handsome
city.

CAPIITOR,  a  sphere,  a  buckle,  a  hand,  a  palm,
doves,  or  those  that  seek  and  inquire.
CAPPADOCIA,  in  Hebrew,  CAPIITOR,  which

see.

CARCAS,  the  coverin-gof  a  lamb  ;  or  the  lamb  of
the  throne,  Esth.  1.  10.

CA^RCIIEMISH,  a  lamb,  as  taken  away,  with¬
drawn,  or  carried  off.

CARMEL,  a  circumcised  lamb:  otherwise,  har¬
vest,  full  ears  of  corn,  vineyard  of  God,  excel¬
lent  vineyard.

CARMELITE.

CARM1,  my  vineyard  ;  or  the  knowledge  of  the
waters  ;  or  the  lamb  of  the  waters.

CA  RPUS,  fruit,  or  fruitful.  Greek.

CAS1PH1A,  money,  or  covetousness.

CEDRON,  black,  or  sad.

CENCIIREA,  millet,  small  pulse.

CEPHAS,  a  rock  or  stone.

CESAR,  a  Latin  name,  from  the  word  ca?do,  T  cut,
because  he  was  cut  out  of  his  mother's  womb  ;  or
from  the  word  Caesaries,  a  head  of  hair,  which  he
is  said  to  be  born  with.

CESAREA,  a  bush  of  hair.

:CHALCOL,  who  nourishes,  consumes,  and  sus¬
tains  the  whole.

CHALDEA,  as  demons,  or  as  robners,  or  beasts,
or  fields.

CHALDEAN.

CHALDEES.

CHAR  RAN,  a  singing,  or  calling  out,  or  the  heat
of  wrath.

CHEBAR,  strength,  or  power.  Ezek.  10.  15,  20.
CHEDORLAOMER,  as  a  generation  of  servi¬
tude  ;  otherwise,  the  roundness  of  the  sheaf,
Gen.  14.  4.

OH  EM  A  R I  MS,  the  name  of  Baal's  priests.
CHEMOSH,  as  handling  or  stroking,  or  as  with¬
drawing  or  taking  away.

CHEN  AN  I  A,  preparation,  or  disposition  or
Strength,  or  rectitude  of  the  Lord.
CIIERETHIMS,  who  cuts,  who  tears  away  and
exterminates.

CHERETU  ITES.  See  CIIERETHIMS.
CHERITII,  cutting,  piercing,  slaying.


CHESED,  as  a  devil,  or  as  a  destroyer,  or  as  a
breast  or  nipple,  Gen.  22.  22.

CII  l  LEA  B,  totality  of  the  father,  or  the  perfection
of  the  father,  2  Sam.  3.  3.

CIIl  LION,  finished,  complete,  perfect.

CHILMAD,  as  teaching  or  learning.

CIIIMHAM,  as  they,  or  like  to  them.

CHIOS,  open,  or  opening.

CHISLEU,  rashness,  confidence,  the  flanks.

CIIl  I'TIM,  those  that  bruise;  or  gold  ;  or  stain¬
ing  or  dying.

CH  I  UN,  an  Egyptian  god,  whom  some  think  to  be
Saturn.

CHLOE,  green  herb.

CHORAZIN,  the  secret,  or  here  is  a  mystery.

CHUSHAN-R ISHATHAIM,  Ethiopian;  or
blackness  of  iniquities.

CIHJZA,  the  seer,  or  prophet;  or  Ethiopian.
The  husband  of  Joanna.

CILICIA,  which  rolls  or  overturns.

CLAUDA,  a  broken  voice,  a  lamentable  voice.
It  is  an  island.  Acts  27.  16.

CLAUDIA,  lame,  2  Tim.  4.  21.

CLEMENT,  mild,  good,  modest,  merciful.  Phil.
4.  3.

CLEOPHAS,  the  whole  glory ;  or  glory  alto¬
gether.

COLOSSE,  punishment,  correction ;  from  the
word  KoXatoo,  1  punish.

CON1AH,  the  strength,  or  stability  of  the  Lord.

CORINTH,  vvhich  is  satisfied,  or  ornament,  or
beauty.

CORINTHIANS.

CORNELIUS,  of  an  horn.  Or  Kepr\\ios,  as  if
it  were  icepa?  too  u\ih,  the  beam  of  the  sun.
Having  a  vision,  he  sent  for  Peter,  who  first
preached  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  Acts  10.

COZBl.aliar;  or  as  sliding  away.

CRESCENS,  growing,  increasing.

CRETE,  carnal,  fleshly.

CRETES.

CRETIANS.

CRISPUS,  curled.

CUSH,  Ethiopians,  or  black.

CUSH  AN,  Ethiopia,  black,  blackness,  heat.

CUSH  I,  the  same.

CYPRUS,  fair,  or  fairness.

CYRENE,  a  wall,  or  coldness,  or  meeting,  or  a
floor.

CYRENIANS,  people  of  Cyrene.

CYTIENIUS,  who  governs.

CYRUS,  as  miserable,  or  as  heir ;  or  the  belly.


D.

DABBASHETIl,  flowing  with  honey  ;  or  causing
infamy.

DABERATH,  word,  thing;  ora  bee;  or  submis¬
sive  and  obedient.

DAGON,  corn  ;  or  a  fish.

DALMANUIIIA,  a  bucket ;  or  exhaustion,  lean¬
ness,  branch.  A  country,  Mark  8.  10.

DALMA  I  I  A,  deceitful  lamps,  or  vain  brightness.

DAMARIS,  a  little  woman.

DAMASCUS,  a  sack  full  of  blood  ;  or,  similitude
of  burning,  or  of  the  kiss,  or  of  the  pot.

DAN,  judgment,  or  he  that  judges.

DANIEL,  judgment  of  God;  or  God  is  my
judge.  A  prophet  descended  from  the  royal  fa¬
mily  of  David,  who  was  carried  captive  to  Baby¬
lon  when  he  was  very  young.  He  interpreted
Nebuchadnezzar' s  dreams,  teas  cast  into  the  lions'
den  and  saved,  but  his  adversaries  were  devoured.
He  was  favoured  with  the  vision  Of  the  four  beasts,
and  of  the  ram  and  he-goat  ;  Gabriel  informeth
him  of  the  seventy  weeks,  which  is  a  famous
prophecy  of  the  time  of  the  coming  of  the  great
Messiah.

DARA,  generation,  or  house  of  the  shepherd,  or
of  the  companion  ;  or  race  of  wickedness,  1
Chron.  2.  6.

DARIUS,  he  that  inquires  and  informs  himself.
The  king  of  the  Medes,  Dan.  5.  31.

DATIl  AN,  laws,  or  rites.

DAVID,  beloved,  dear.  The  son  of  Jesse,  the
king  of  Judah  and  Israel,  who  was  a  great  type
of  the  Messiah,  the  king  aad  spiritual  head  of  his
church.  It  is  taken  for  Christ  himself,  who  was
descended  of  the  family  of  David,  Jer.  30.  o.
Ezek.  34.  23.  and  37.  24,  25.

DEBORAH,  a  word,  or  a  bee.

DECAPOL1S,  a  Greek  word  compounded  of  two
others,  of  dena,  ten,  and  a  city,  because

this  country  contained  ten  cities.

DEDAN,  their  breasts,  or  their  friendship,  or
their  uncle  ;  or  a  judge.

DEDAN  IM,  the  descendants  of  Dedan.

DELILAH,  poor,  small,  or  head  of  hair;  or
bucket.

DEMAS,  popular.

DEMETRIUS,  belonging  to  Ceres,  or  to  corn.

DERBE,  a  sting.  The  name  of  a  city.  Acts  14.  6.

DEUEL,  the  knowledge,  or  science  of  God,  Num.
1.  14.

DIANA,  the  Latin  word  may  signify  luminous.
The  Greek  word  ixorems  signifies  perfect.

DI  BON ,  understanding,  abundance  of  knowledge,
or  of  building.

DIBON-GAD,  abundance  of  sons  happy  and
powerful  ;  or  happy,  or  great  understanding,  or
edifice.

DIDYMUS,  a  twin.

DIMON,  where  it  is  red.

DINAH,  judgment,  or  who  judges.

DINHABAII,  his  judgment  in  her,  or  she  gives
judgment;  or  who  gives  judgment.  Gen.  36.
32.

D I  ONYSTtTS.  divinely  touched  \from  bios,  divine,
and  vow,  1  strike.

DIOTREPHES,  nourished  by  Jupiter,  or  Ju¬


piter’s  foster-child  ;  from  dtot,  of  Jupiter,  and
to ed>or,  a  foster-child.

DO  Eli,  who  acts  with  uneasiness;  or  a  fisher¬
man.

DOIt,  generation,  or  habitation.

DORCAS,  the  female  of  a  roe-buck.  Greek.
DOTHAN,  the  law,  or  custom.

DRUS1LLA,  watered  by  the  dew,  from  bpoaoe
the  dew.

DUMA II,  silence,  or  resemblance.

DU  RAH,  generation,  or  habitation.

E.

EASTER,  tne  passover,  a  feast  of  the  Jews.
This  word  is  not  properly  translated,  for  is
the  original,  Acts  12.  4.  it  is  to  7raxa,  which
signifies  the  pass-over ;  which  was  a  yearly
feast  among  the  Jews,  established  in  commem-o.
ration  of  the  coming  forth  out  of  Egypt,  and
of  the  angel's  passing  by  and  sparing  the  houses
of  the  Israelites  sprinkled  with  blood ,  when  the
first-born  of  the  Egyptians  were  slain.  Easter
was  a  goddess  of  the  Savons,  in  honour  of  which
sacrifices  were  offered  about  that  time  of  the
yet»r .  The  word  Easter  seems  not  to  have  been
properly  used  in  the  English  Bib'e  or  English
Liturgy.

EBA  L,  a  heap,  or  collection  of  old  age  ;  or  a
mass  that  runs  away  and  disperses.

EBED,  a  servant,  or  labourer.

EBED-MELECII,  the  king's  servant.
KBEN-EZER,  the  stone  of  help.

EBER,  one  that  passes,  or  a  passage  ;  or  anger
wrath.

EBIASAPIT,  a  father  that  gathers  togethir,  or
adds;  or  my  father  who  has  added.  1  Chron.
6.  23.

ED,  witness.

EDEN,  pleasure,  or  delight.

EDOM,  red,  bloody,  earthy,  or  red  earth.
EDOMITE.

EDREI,avery  great  mass;  or  cloud,  death  of
the  wicked.  The  city  of  Og,  Deut.  1.  4.
EGLAH,  heifer,  chariot,  round.

EGLAlM,  drops  of  the  sea.

EG  LON,  the  same  as  EGLAII.

EGYPT,  in  Hebrew,  Mizraim  ;  that  binds  or
straitens  ;  or  that  troubles  or  oppresses.
EGYPTIAN.

EIIUD,  he  that  praises.

EKRON,  barrenness,  tore  away.

EK  RON  ITES.

ELAH,  an  oak,  a  curse,  oath,  imprecation.
ELAM,  a  young  man  a  virgin  ;  or  secret,  or  as-
age.

ELAMITES,

ELATH,  a  hind,  or  strength,  or  an  oak.
EL-BETHEL,  the  God  of  Bethel.

ELDAD,  loved  of  God,  or  favoured  of  God.
ELEALElI,  ascension  of  God,  or  burnt-offering
of  GOD.

ELEAZAR,  the  help  of  God,  or  court  ot  God.
EL-ELOIIE-ISRAEL,  God,  the  God  of  Israel.
ELHANAN,  grace,  gift,  or  mercy  of  God.

ELI,  ELI,  my  God,  my  God.

ELI,  the  offering,  or  lifting  up.

ELIAB,  God  my  father,  or  my  God  father.
ELIADA,  the  knowledge  of  God.

ELI  AKIM,  the  resurrection  of  God  ;  or  the  God>
of  the  resurrection,  or  of  strength  ;  or  God  the
revenger.

ELI  AM,  the  people  of  God,  or  the  God  of  the
people.

ELIAS.  Neo  ELIJAH.

ELI  A  SHI  B,  the  God  of  conversion  ;  or  my  God
will  bring  back.

ELIATHAH,  thou  art  my  God  ;  or  mj’  God
comes.  The  ton  of  Heman,  1  Chron.  25.  4.
ELIEZER,  help,  or  court  of  my  God.
ELIHORLPH,  the  God  of  winter  ;  or  the  God  of
you4h.

ELI  HU,  he  is  my  God  himself.

ELIJAH,  God  the  lord;  or  the  strong  Lord.
A  famous  prophet,  who  foretold  a  great  famine,
and  was  fed  hy  the  ravens,  1  Kings  17.  6.  He
was  raised  up  by  God  to  oppose  idolatry,  and
particularly  the  worship  of  Baal,  introduced
into  Israel  hy  Jezebel  and  Ahab,  1  Kings  18.
He  was  taken  up  into  heaven  in  a  whirlwind.
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  interprets  the  Elijah
promised  in  Mai.  4.  5.  to  be  John  the  Baptist,
Mat.  11.  10,  14.  who  came  in  the  spirit  and
power  of  Elijah.

ELIK  A,  pelican  of  God.  2  Sam.  23.  25.

ELIM,  the  rams  ;  or  the  strong,  or  the  stags,  or
the  valleys.

ELIMELECH,  my  God  is  king.

ELIOENAI,  towards  him  are  my  eyes;  or  to
wards  him  are  my  fountains  ;  or  towards  him
are  my  poverty  and  my  misery.  1  Chron.  3.
23.

ELIP1TALET,  the  God  of  deliverance  ;  or  my
God  who  puts  to  flight.

ET.1PHAZ,  the  endeavour  of  God.

ELISABETH,  God  hath  sworn,  the  oath  of  God,
or  the  fulness  of  God.

ELISHA,  salvation  of  God,  or  God  that  save*
The  name  of  a  prophet  whom  Elijah  anointed  in
his  room,  1  Kings  19.  16.

ELISHAII,  son  of  Javan,  Gen.  10.  4.  Or  the
isles  of  Elishah,  Ezek.  27.  7-  It  is  God  ;  or
the  lamb  of  God  ;  otherwise,  God  that  gives
help.

ELISTIAMAIT,  God  hearing.

EL1SHEBA.  See  ELISABETH.

ELI  SHU  A,  God  is  my  salvation.

ELI  HUD,  God  is  my  praise,  or  the  praise  of  my
God.

ELTZUR,Ood  is  my  strength,  my  rock  ;  or  store,
or  rock  of  God.  Num.  1-  5.

579


<?ropkr  Names. J  F  E  b


G  Ij  K.


H.  I  K


ELK  AN  All,  God  the  zealous;  or  the  possession,

or  the  reed  of  God.  .

ELMODAM,  the  God  of  measure;  or  the  God  ot

the  garment.  .  ,  .  c  n  „  ,

ELN  A  i  ll  AN  ,  God  has  given, or  the  gitt  ot  God.
ELON  ,  oak,  or  grove,  or  strong.

ELUL,  cry,  outcry.  Ike  sixth  month  of  the  He¬
brew  year.  ,  ,

CLUZA l,  God  is  my  strength.  1. Chiron.  12.  5.

ELY  MAS,  this  name  in  Arabic  signifies  a  magi-

EMlMS,  fears  of  terrors  ;  or  formidable,  or  peo-
pl6.

EMMA  US,  people  despised,  or  obscure.

EMMOR,  an  ass.  ,  , -

EN-DOll,  fountain;  or  eye  ot  generation,  or  nabi

tatiou.  ,  ,  _  ,  ,  |

ENEAS,  laudable,  from  the  Greek  vei  b  aivew,  I

fiisGEGLAlM,  the  fountain,  or  the  eye  ot  the
calves,  or  of  the  chariots,  or  ot  roundness.
EN-GED1,  fountain,  or  eye  ot  the  goat,  or  ot  nap-

E&'dVUSIl  PAT,  fountain  of  judgment,  Gen.  14.  7-
ENOCH,  dedicated,  or  disciplined,  and  well  re¬
gulated.  The  son  of  Jared,  and  Jat her  of  Methu  -
selaii.  Enoch  and  Elijah  were  translated  to  heaven
without  seeing  death.  It  is  stud,  that  Enoch
walked  with  God,  and  he  was  not :  tor  God  took
him.  “  He  lived  in  comfortable  communion  with
God;  God  manifesting  himself  to  him,  and  he
having  a  thely  sense  of  God's  presence  always
upon  his  spirit,  and  seeking  to  approve  himsef  to
God  in  all  things."  Gen.  5.  24.  1  leb.  11. 5.

ENON,  cloud  or  mass  ot  darkness  ;  or  his  foun¬
tain;  or  his  eye.  ,,  .  .  ,  c  ■>  :„

ENOS,  fallen  man,  subject  to  all  kind  of  evil  in

soul  and  body.  .

EN-ROGEL,  the  fuller  s  fountain.

EN -SH EM ESH,  fountain,  or  eye  of  the  sun,  Josh.

18  17

EPAPHRAS,  covered  with  foam.  Gjeek.
EPAPHRODl TUS,  agreeable,  handsome.  Une
whom  Paul  sent  to  the  Philippians.

EPEN  E TUS,  laudable,  worthy  ot  praise.  One
that  first  embraced  the  gospel  in  Asia.

EPHAH,  weary,  tired  ;  or  to  tty  in  the  air  as  a
bird.  The  son  oj  M/dian.  .

EP11ES-DAMM  IM,  the  portion  or  effusion  ot
blood,  or  drop  of  blood.

EP  H  ESI  AN  S,  the  people  of  F phesus.

EPHESUS,  desirable,  chief  city  of  Asia  Minor.
EPHPHATHA,  be  opened.

EPHRAIM,  that  brings  truit,  or  that  grows.

EPH RAIMI  LE.

EPHRATAH,  abundance,  or  bearing  truit,  or  in¬
creasing.  It  is  believed  that  the  city  hphratah,
otherwise  called  Beth-lehem,  took  its  name  from
Ephratah,  Caleb's  wife.

EP1IRA1H.  See  EPHRATAH.
EPHRATllITE,  an  inhabitant  0/ Ephratah,  or  a
descendant  from  Ephraim.

EPH  RON  ,  dust.  .

EPICUREANS,  who  give  assistance  ;  from  the
Greek  word  titutnpeio,  1  help,  1  assist.  A  sect  of
heathen  philosophers.

ER,  watch,  or  enemy.  .

ERASTUS,  lovely,  or  amiable.

ERECH,  length,  or  which  lengthens;  otherwise,
health,  physic.  A  city,  Gen.  10.  10.

ESAIAS.  See  ISAIAH.  ...  1

ESAR-H  ADDON,  that  binds  joy,  or  that  closes

the  point.  „  .

ESAU,  he  that  does,  or  acts,  or  finishes.

ESEK,  contention.  .

ESHBAAL,  the  tire  ot  the  idol.  1  Lhron.  8.  33.
ESHCOL,  a  bunch  of  grapes.  ,  „

ESH  1  AO  L,  stout,  strong  woman.  Josh.  15.  .53.
ESHTEMOA,  which  is  heard  ;  or  the  bosom  ot  a
woman.  A  city,  1  Sam.  30.  28.

ESLI,  near  me  ;  otherwise,  he  that  separates.
ESROM,  the  dart  of  joy  ;  or  division  of  the  song.
ESTHER,  secret  or  hidden.

ETAM,  their  bird,  or  their  covering,  1  Lhron.
4.3.

ETH  AM,  their  strength,  their  sign.

ETHAN ,  strong  ;  or  the  gift  ot  the  island.
ETHAN  IM,  strong,  or  valiant.  I  he  seventh
month  of  the  ecclesiastical  year  of  the  Hebrews.
ETH  BAAL,  towards  the  idol,  or  with  Baal  ;  or
he  that  rules  and  possesses,  1  Kings  10.  31.
ETHIOPIA,  in  Hebrew,  Cush,  blackness  :  in
Greek  it  signifies  heal,  burning;  from  aitJio,  1
burn,  and  o'l/is.  face.

ETHIOPIAN,  ETHIOPIANS.

EUBULUS,  a  prudent,  a  good  counsellor.  Gr.
EVE,  living,  or  enlivening.

EV1L-M ERODACH,  the  tool  of  Merodach,  or
despising  the  wickedness  of  the  tool ;  or  other¬
wise,  the  fool  grinds  bitterly.

EUNICE,  good  victory.

EUODIAS,  sweet  scent,  or  that  smells  well.
EUPHRATES,  that  makes  fruitful,  or  grows.
EUTYCHUS,  happy,  fortuuate  ;  from  e v,  good,

and  ti/Xh»  fortune.  „  _  ,  ,

EZEKIEL,  the  strength  of  God,  or  supported  ot
God,  or  God  is  my  strength.

EZEL,  going  abroad,  walk  :  or  distillation.
EZION-GEB ER,  the  wood  ot  the  man,  or  ot  the
strong  ;  or  counsel  ot  the  man.  A  city,  1  Kings
o  26.

EZR  A*  a  helper.  In  his  book  we  have  the  history
of  his  return  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem,  ajter
the  seventy  years'  captivity.  Zerubbabel 1  estored
the  temple  ;  Ezra  the  worship  of  God  ;  JSehemiah
the  city  of  Jerusalem.


FORTUNATUS,  happy,  or  prosperous.


G.


H.


or


F.


FELIX,  happy,  or  prosperous.
FES'i’US,  festival,  or  joyful.

580


GAAL,  contempt,  or  abomination.

GAASII,  tempest,  commotion,  tumult,  or  over¬
throw.  A  mountain,  Josh.  24.  30.

GABBATHA,  high,  or  elevated.  In  Greek
lit  host  rotos,  paved  with  stones  ;  from  \,dos,
a  stone,  and  arpuiTOS,  paved.

GABRIEL,  God  is  mv  strength,  or,  man  ot
God,  or  strength  ot  God,  or  my  strong  God.

GAD,  a  band,  or  happy,  or  armed  and  prepared.
GADARENES,  surrounded,  walled.

GADDI,  my  happiness,  my  army,  my  troop;
otherwise ,  a  kid.  -I he  son  oj  oust,  Num.

13  12.

GADDI  EL,  goat  of  God;  or  the  Lord  is  my
happiness,  or  my  army.  Num.  13.  10.

GAD  FEES.

G  A  1  US,  Lord  ;  or  an  earthy  man.

GALATIA,  white,  of  the  colour  of  nulk.
GALATIANS.

GALBANUM,  a  sort  of  gum,  or  sweet  spice.
GALLED,  the  heap  of  witness.

GALILEE,  wheel,  revolution,  or  heap;  or  revo¬
lution  of  the  wheel.

GALILEANS.  ,  ..

GALLIM,  who  !.ieap  up,  who  cover, who  roll.
GALLIC,  he  that  sticks,  or  lives  upon  milk.
GAMALIEL,  recommence  of  God,  or  camel  of
God,  or  weaned  of' God.

G  A  M  M  A  I)  IMS,  soldiers  placed  in  the  towers  of
Tyrus.  The  word  in  Hebrew  signifies  a  cubit,
whence  some  call  them  pigmies,  or  dwarfs.
Others  think  that  the  word  is  Syriac,  and  signi¬
fies  bold  and  courageous  men.  Others  say.  they
were  men  who  came  Jrom  Gammade,  a  town  of
Phenicia.  ....

GATAM,  their  lowing  ;  or,  their  touch;  or,  the
lowing  of  the  perfect.  Grandson  of  Esau,  Gen.
36.  It.

GA  TH,  a  press.  .  ,

GATH-R 1 MMON,  the  press  of  the  granite;  or,
exalted  press.  Josh .  21.  25.

GAZA,  strong,  or  a  goat.

G  EBA,  a  hill,  or  cup.

GKBAL,  bound,  or  limit.

GEBIM,  grasshoppers;  or  height.

G  EDA  LI  AH,  God  is  my  greatness  ;  or  fringe  of
the  Lord.  ,  ,  ,

GEHAZI,  valley  of  sight,  or  vale  of  the  breast.

G  EM  A  111  A1I,  completion,  or  accomplishment  of
the  Lord.  „  ,

GENNESARET,  the  garden  of  the  prince,
otherwise,  protection  of  the  prince,  or  ot  him
that  governs.

GENUBATII,  theft,  robbery  ;  or  garden,
protection  of  the  daughter.  I  Kings  11.20.
GERA,  pilgrimage  ;  or  combat,  dispute.

GERAII,  the  twentieth  part  of  a  shekel.

GERAR.  See  GERA.  ,  .

GERGESENES,  those  who  come  from  pilgrim¬
age,  or  from  fight.  A  people  beyond  Galilee
GERIZ1M,  cutters.

GEItSHOM,  a  strangei  there;  or  a  traveller  of
reputation.

GERSHON,  his  banishment;  or  the  change  ot
pilgrimage.  .  -

G  ESH  UR,  the  sight  of  the  valley  ;  the  vale  of
the  ox  ;  or  the  vale  of  the  wall.

G  ESH  U  RU  ES.

GETHER,  the  vale  of  trial,  or  of  searching  ; or
the  press  of  inquiry,  or  ot  contemplation.  Ihe
son  of  Aram,  Gen.  10.  23.

GETIISLMAN  E,  a  very  tat  valley  ;  or  the
valley  of  oil.  .  ,

GIAH,  to  guide,  draw  out,  produce;  or  a  sigh
or  groan.

GIBEAH,  a  hill.

G1BEON,  hill,  or  cup;  otherwise,  that  which  is
without,  or  that  which  is  litted  up ;  or  the
elevation  of  iniquity.

G I  B  EON  1TES,  people  of  Gibeon.

GIDEON,  he  that  bruises  and  breaks;  or  cutting
off  iniquity.

GIDEONL  See  GIDEON.

GIHON,  valley  of  grace;  or  breast,  or  1m-

G?LBO  A,  revolution  of  inquiry  ;  or  collection  of
swelling  and  inflammation.

G I  LEAD,  the  heap  or  mass  of  testimony.
GILEADITES.

GILGAL,  wheel,  revolution,  heap  ;  otherwise,  re
volution  of  the  wheel,  or  heap  ot  heap.

GILOII,  he  that  rejoices,  that  overturns,  that
passes,  that  reveals,  or  discovers.  A  city,
Josh.  15.  51.

GI  LON  TI  E.

GIRGASHITE,  who  arrives  from  pilgrimage.

GI  TL  TI  E,  a  wine  press.

GOB,  cistern,  or  grass-hopper,  or  eminence.

GOG,  roof,  covering.

GOLAN,  passage,  or  revolution.

GOLGOTHA,  an  heap  of  skulls.

GOLIATH,  passage,  revolution,  discovery,  heap.
A  giant  slain  by  David.

GOMER,  to  finish,  complete,  accomplish  ;  other-
tci'e,  consuming,  a  consumer.

GOMORRAH,  a  rebellious  people;  or  the
people  that  fear.

GOSH  EN,  approaching,  drawing  near.

GOZAN.  tieece,  or  pasture;  or  who  nourishes
the  body.  „  ,  „  ,

GRECIA,  the  country  of  the  Greeks.
GRECIANS.

GREECE.

GREEK.

GREEKS.  ,  .  ,  ...

GUR,  the  young  of  a  beast;  otherwise,  dwelling,

assembly,  or  tear.


HABAKKCJK,  he  that  embraces  ;  or  a  witshei
Hab.  1.1.  .  ,

HACIlAblAH,  who  waits  for  the  Lord;  or  the
hook  of  the  Lord.  A eh.  10.1.  *

H AC  11 1 LA  11,  my  hope  is  in  her;  or  hook  ia

her.  r

HA  DAD,  joy,  noise,  clamour,  cry  of  mariners.

Gen.  36.  35.  1  Lhron.  1.  30.

HAD  A  DLZ  ER,  the  beauty  of  assistance.

II A  DA  D  RIM  MON  ,  the  voice  ot  height.  .Kim
mon  was  a  god  of  the  Syrians  ;  the  invocation  or
the  god  llimnum.

H  ADASSA  II,  a  myrtle,  or  joy.

I1A  DO  RAM,  their  beauty  ,  their  power,  their
cloak  ;  or  praise,  or  a  cry  lifted  up.

HA  DR  AC  H,  point,  or  joy  of  tenderness;  or
your  chamber.

II  AG  AH,  a  stranger,  or  that  fears.

HAG  A  REN  ES,  of  the  family  of  II  agar.

HAG  A  RITES,  the  same.

1IAGGAI,  feast,  solemnity,  turning  round.

HAGG1TH,  rejoicing.

HALLELUIAH,  praise  the  Lord,  or  praise  to  the
Lord .

HAM,  hot,  heat,  or  brown.

I1AM  AN,  noise,  tumult;  or  lie  that  prepares.

II A  MATH,  anger,  heat,  or  a  wall.

HAMM  EDA  Til  A,  he  that  troubles  the  Uw  ;  or
measure.  „  _

HA  MON -GOG,  the  multitude  of  Gog.

H  AMOR,  an  ass,  or  clay,  or  wine.

HAMUTAL,  the  shadow  of  his  heat ;  or  the  heat
of  the  dew.  2  Kings  23.  31.

HAN  AM  EEL,  the  grace  that  comes  from  God;

or  pity,  or  gift  of  God.  .

HAN  AN  ELL,  grace,  mercy,  gift  ot  God.

HAN  AN  1,  my  grace,  my  mercy;  or  he  has
shewed  me  mercy.

11 A  N  A  N  l  AH ,  grace,  mercy  ;  gift  of  the  Lord.
HANNAH,  gracious,  merciful  ;  or  taking  rest.

The  wife  of  Elkanah,  and  mother  of  Samuel.
HANOCH,  dedicated.

HAN  UN,  gracious,  merciful :  or  he  that  rests.

HA  RAN,  mountain,  or  mountainous  country  ;  or
which  is  enclosed.  The  son  of  Ter ah,

II A  R  A  N  ,  a  place.  See  C1I  ARRAN.

11  4  R  BON  All,  his  destruction,  or  his  sword,  or
his  dryness  ;  or  the  anger  of  him  that  builds,  or
that  understands.

II A  ROD,  astonishment,  fear.

HA  RUSH  ETH,  agriculture,  silence,  deafness;

or  vessel  of  earth  ;  or  finest.

HASH  MON  AH,  diligence,  or  enumeration;  or
embassy,  or  present.  Sum.  33.  29.

11A  1  ACI1,  he  that  strikes.  Esth.  4.5.

I1A VILA H,  that  suffers  pain  ;  that  brings  forth  ;

or  that  speaks,  or  declares  to  her.  Gen.  10.  7-
I1AVOTH-JA1R,  the  villages  that  enlighten,  or
that  shew  forth  light.  Num.  32.  41.

I1AZAEL,  that  sees  God.

IIAZARMAVETH,  court,  or  entry,  or  dwelling
of  death.  The  son  of  Joktan ,  Gen.  10.  26.
HAZELELPON1,  shade,  and  sorrow  of  coun¬
tenance  ;  or  submersion  of  the  face.
HAZEROTH,  villages,  hamlets;  court,  or  porch.

II A ZOR,  court,  or  hay.

HEBER,  one  that  passes,  or  a  passage  ;  otherwise,
anger,  wrath.

HEBREWS,  descended  from  lie  ber.

HEBRON,  society,  friendship,  enchantment.

H  EGA  1,  or  HEGE,  meditation,  word,  taking
away,  separation,  groaning.

II  ELAM,  their  army,  or  their  trouble,  their
strength  ;  or  expectation  ;  or  dream.

I1ELBON,  milk,  or  fatness.

II  ELD  A  1,  the  world.

II  ELI,  ascending,  or  climbing  up.

I1ELKA  1TJ-11 AZURIM,  the  field
men,  or  of  rocks.

11  EM  AN  ,  their  trouble,  tneir  tumult.

Lotan,  Gen.  36.  22.

FIEMAN,  much,  or  in  great  number;  otherwise,
tumult.  1  Kings  4.  31.

FI  EN  ,  grace  ;  or  quiet,  or  rest.  .

HEPHZ1-B All,  my  pleasure,  or  delight  in  her.
The  mother  of  Manasseh^fL  Kings  21.  1.  Ihe  true
church  thus  called,  Isa.  62.  4.

HERMES,  Mercury,  or  gain,  or  refuge.  Greek.
IIERMOG  EN  ES,  begotten  of  Mercury,  or  gene¬
ration  of  lucre.  Greek.

HERMON,  anathema,  destruction.

IIERMON  TIES.  .  ,

HEROD,  the  glory  of  the  skin, /row  npos,  favoui.

glory,  and  5epar,  the  skin  ;  or  son  of  the  hero.
HERODIANS.  See  Appellatives.

II ERODI  AS,  the  wife  of  Herod.

I1ERODION,  song  ot  Juno;  from  Hpa,  June,
and  todn.  a  song ;  or  the  conqueror  of  heroes.
HESHBON,  invention,  industry,  or  thought;  or
he  that  hastens  to  understand,  or  to  build.
IIETH,  trembling,  or  fear.

HETHLON,  fearful  dwelling;  or  his  covering.

The  name  of  a  city,  Ezek.  47-  15.

HEZEKIAH,  strong  in  the  Lord  ;  or  taken  and
supported  by  the  Lord.

HEZRON,  the  dart  of  joy;  or  division  ot  the
song.

HIDDEKEL,  a  sharp  voice,  or  sound.

HI  EL,  God  lives,  or  the  life  of  God.
H1ERAPOL1S,  holy  city;  from  ttpu*,  holy,  am.  \
7r o\is,  a  city.  Col.  4.  13.

HIGGAION,  meditation,  consideration.
HILK1AH,  God  is  my  portion;  according
others,  the  Lord’s  gentleness.

H1LLEL,  he  that  praises;  or  tolly;  or  Lucifer.'

The  father  of  Abdon,  J  udg.  12.  13.  _

FI  1 N  NO  M,  there  they  are  ;  or  their  riches.
HIRAM,  exaltation  of  life;  or  then  whiteness,  ori


of  strong
The  soft  of


I  N  J)


J  E  H


I  S  H  [Proper  Names


their  libety  ;  or  he  that  destroys,  or  anathe¬
matizes.

HITTiTES,  who  is  broken,  or  tears.  Descend¬
ants  of  Heth  the  son  of  Canaan,  Gen.  10.  15.

Ill VI  I  ES.  wicked,  bad,  or  wickedness.

IIOBAB,  favoured  and  beloved.

HOB  A II,  love,  friendship,  or  secrecy.  Gen.
14.  15.

HOG  LA  II,  his  festival,  or  his  dance.

HO  Pills  I,  he  that  covers .  or  my  fist.

HOK,  who  conceives,  or  shews

I10KEB,  desert,  solitude,  destruction,  dryness.

HOR-H  AG  IDG  AD,  the  hill  of  felicity.

HORMAII,  devoted  or  consecrated  to  God  ;  utter
destruction.

HORON  AIM,  anger,  or  raging.

BORON  ITE,  anger,  fury,  or  liberty.

HOSEA  and  IlOSHEA,  saviour,  or  salvation.

HUL.  pain,  infirmity,  bringing  forth  children,
sand,  or  expectation.  The  son  of  Aram,  Gen.
10.  2.3.

HU  LDA  H,  the  world.  A  prophetess,  2  Kings  22. 14.

HUH,  liberty,  whiteness,  hole,  cavern.

HUSHAI,  their  haste,  or  their  sensuality,  or
their  silence.

HUZZAB,  molten.

IIYMENEUS,  nuptial,  or  marriage.

J.

JAALAM,  who  is  hidden;  or  young  man;  or
their  kids.  Hon  of  Esau,  Gen.  .36.  5.

JAAZAN1A,  whom  the  Lord  will  hear,  or  who
is  attentive  to  the  Lord  ;  or  the  balances,  the
arms,  the  nourishment  of  the  Lord.

JABAL,  which  glides  away;  or  that  brings,  or
that  produces

,ABBOK,  evacuation,  or  dissipation.

JABESH,  dryness,  confusion,  shame.

JABESH-G  1  LEAD.

JABEZ,  sorrow,  or  trouble.

JAB1N,  he  that  understands,  he  that  builds.

JABNEEL,  building  of  God;  or  understanding
of  God.  A  cup,  Josh.  19.  33.

JACHIN,  he  that  strengthens  and  makes  sted-
fast.

JACOB,  he  that  supplants  or  undermines  ;  or  the
he*l.  The  son  of  Isaac,  and  the  father  of  the
twelve  patriarchs ;  he  prevailed  in  prayer  with
God,  and  was  called  Israel  ;  he  went  in  the  time
of  the  famine  with  all  his  family  into  Egypt,  and
his  son  Joseph  gave  them  habitation  and  mainte¬
nance.  Jacob  blessed  his  children  before  his  death,
and  ordered  them  to  bury  him  in  Canaan.

JAEL,  he  that  asceuds,  or  a  kid.

JAH,  the  everlasting  God.

JAHAZ,  quarrel,  dispute ;  or  the  going  out  of
the  Lord.

JAHAZA,  the  same.

JAIR,  my  light;  or  who  diffuses  light;  or  is
enlightened.

JAIRUS,  the  same.

JAMBRES,  the  sea  with  poverty.

JAMES,  the  same  as  JACOB.

,  JAN  N  A,  who  speaks,  or  who  answers ;  otherwise,
affliction,  misery,  or  impoverished.

,  JAN  N  ES,  the  same.

JAPHETII,  he  that  persuades,  or  extends,  or
handsome.

!  JAPHIA,  which  enlightens,  appears,  or  shews;
or  which  groans.  The  son  of  David,  2  Sam.

,  5.  15.

JAREB,  a  revenger.

JARED,  hf  that  descends;  or  he  that  rules  or
commands.

JASHER,  righteous.

JASON,  he  that  cures,  or  that  give3  medicines;
from  ia<r.s,  health,  or  cure.

i  JAVAN,  he  that  deceives,  or  makes  sorrowful;
otherwise,  clay,  dirt.

JAZER,  assistance,  or  he  that  helps.

1BHAR,  election,  or  he  that  is  chosen.

I  ICHABOD,  where  is  the  glory  ?  or  woe  to  the
glory.

1  ICONIUM,  a  city,  from  <f«o,  I  come.

!  IDDO,  his  hand,  his  power,  his  praise,  his  witness,
his  ornament.

'  IDUMEA,  red,  earthy.

JEBUS,  which  treads  under  foot,  or  contemns
A  ctty,  the  same  as  Jerusalenc,  Judg.  19.  10.

JEBUSITES,  inhabitants  of  Jebus.

JECONIAH,  preparation  of  the  Lord,  or  sted fast¬
ness  of  the  Lord.

JEDIDAH,  well  beloved, or  amiable.  The  mother
of  Josiah,  2  Kings  22.  1.

JEDIDIAH,  beloved  of  the  Lord.

JEDUTHUN,  his  law  ;  or  who  gives  praise.

JEG  A  R-SAII ADUTH  A,  the  heap  of  witness.

TEHOAHAZ,  the  prize,  or  possession  of  the
Lord  ;  or  the  Lord  that  sees.

JEHOASH,  the  tire  of  the  Lord  ;  or  the  victim
of  the  Lord.

JEHOIACI1IN,  preparation,  or  strength  of  the
Lord.

JEHOI  ADA,  tne  knowledge  of  the  Lord.

JEHOIAKIM,  the  resurrection,  or  confirmation
of  the  Lord.

JEIIONADAB.  See  JON  ADAB.

JEHORAM,  exaltation  of  the  Lord;  or  rejected
of  the  I,ord.

JEHOSHAPIIAT,  God  judges,  or  the  judgment
of  the  Lord.

IEHOVAH,  the  incommunicable  name  of  God.
Self-existing.

JEHOV A H-J  1  REII ,  the  Lord  will  see  or  pro¬
vide  ;  the  Lord  will  be  manifested  or  seen.

IEIIOVAH-N1SS1,  the  Lord  my  banner.

IEHOVAU-SIIALOM,  the  Lord  send  peace.

IEHOVA.I-SHAMMA1I,  the  Lord  is  there.

JEHOVAF-TS1DKEN  U,  The  Lord  ovr

RIGHTEO  SNESS.


JEIIU,  he  that  is,  or  who  exists.

JEHUD1JAH.  the  praise  of  the  Lord.  The  wije
of  Ezra.  1  Chron.  4.  18.

JEMIMA,  handsome  as  the  day.  One  of  Job's
daughters,  Job  42.  14.

J EP 11  1  11  All ,  he  that  opens,  or  he  will  open.
JEPHUNN  EH,  he  that  beholds.

J  ERA  1 1,  the  moon,  or  month  ;  otherwise,  to  scent
or  smell.  Son  of  Joktan,  Gen.  10.  26.

JERAIIMEEL,  mercy'  of  God,  or  the  love  of
God.

JEREMIAH, exaltation  or  grandeur  of  the  Lord;
or  who  exalts,  or  gives  glory  to  he  Lord,  tie
was  called  to  the  extraordinary  office  of  a  prophet
in  his  younger  years,  and  continued  in  that  office
for  at  least  forty  years  together.  In  his  time  ini¬
quity  did  exceedingly  abound  in  the  land  of  Judah,
lie  earnestly  and  frequently  calls  the  people  to  re¬
pentance,  both  by  his  reproofs  and  threatenings  for
their  sins.  He  denounces  the  captivity  of  the
people  by  the  Babylonians,  for  which  he  was  put
in  prison  ;  he  lived  to  see  this  prophecy  fulfilled.
But  for  the  comfort  and  support  of  the  faithful,
he  foretells  their  return  after  seventy  years,  and
the  enlargement  of  the  church  by  Christ.  His
style  is  generally  the  most  plain  of  any  of  the
prophets.

JERICHO,  his  moon,  or  month  ;  or  L,s  sweet
smell.

JER1MOTH,  eminences;  or  he  that  fears,  that
sees,  that  rejects  death.  1  Chron.  '.  7.

JEROBOAM,  fighting  against,  or  increasing  the
people.

JERUBBAAL,  he  that  disputes  about  Baal;  or
that  revenges  the  idol  ;  or  let  Baal  defend  his
cause.

JERUBBESHETII,  let  the  idol  of  confusion  de¬
fend  itself.

JERUSALEM,  the  vision,  or  possession  of  peace.
It  was  the  chief  city  of  Judea,  and  was  first
called  Salem,  where  Melchizedek  was  king,
Gen.  14.  18.  It  was  also  called  Jebus,  and  was
possessed  by  the  Jebusites,  who  held  therein  the
fort  of  Sion,  till  it  was  taken  from  them  by
David,  Judg.  10.  6.  1  Chron.  11.  4,  5,  7.  Here
also  was  mount  Moriah,  near  mount  Sion,  where¬
on  Solomon  built  the  temple,  and  where  Abraham
was  commanded  to  offer  his  son  Isaac  ;  Abraham
named  the  place  Jehovah-jireh,  because  the  pro¬
vidence  of  God  was  there  eminently  seen,  2
Chron.  3.  1.  Gen.  22.  2,  14.  which  word  jireti
being  put  to  the  former  name  Salem,  maketh  it
Jerusalem,  where  peace  is  seen.  It  is  called
Salem,  by  the  first  name,  Psal.  *6.  2.  It  is  put
for  the  church  militant,  Isa.  62.  1.  and  the  church
triumphant  is  called  the  new  Jerusalem,  Rev.

3.  12.

JERUSHA,  he  that  possesses  the  inheritance;
or  exiled,  banished,  rejected.  2  Kings  15.  33.

JESHIMON,  solitude,  desolation.  The  name  of
a  desert ,  1  Sam.  £3.  24.

J  ESN  UA,  a  saviour.

JESEIURUN,  upright  or  righteous.  Israel  is  so
called.

J  ESSE,  to  be,  or  who  is  ;  or  my  present.

JESUI,  who  is  equal,  proper,  placed,  or  flat
country.  The  son  of  Asher,  Gen.  46.  17-Num.
26.  44.

JESUl  i’ES,  the  posterity  of  Jesui.

JESUS,  the  holy  name  Jesus;  Saviour;  who
saveth  his  people  from  their  sins.  Mat.  1.  21.
The  eternal  Son  of  God,  of  one  substance  and
equal  with  the  lather,  the  mediator  of  the  cove¬
nant  of  grace,  who  in  the  fulness  of  time  be¬
came  man,  and  so  was  and  continues  to  be  God
and  man  in  two  distinct  natures  and  one  person
for  ever.  The  word  Jesus  is  taken  for  the  doctrine
of  Jesus,  35.  and  for  Joshua,  who  brought

God's  people  into  the  land  oj  Canaan,  and  was
therein  an  eminent  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  lleb.

4.  8.

JETIIER,  he  that  excels  or  remains;  or  that
examines,  searches  ;  or  a  line  or  string,  Judg.
8.  20.

JETHRO,  his  excellence,  his  remains,  his  pos¬
terity.

JET  UR,  he  that  keeps;  otherwise,  order,  suc¬
cession;  or  mountainous.  Son  of  lshmael,  Gen.
25.  15.

JEUSH,  he  that  is  devoured,  gnawed  by  the
moth  ;  otherwise,  assembled.  Son  of  Rehoboam,
2  Chron.  11.  19.

JEW,  JEWS,  so  called  from  Judah.  See  JU¬
DAH.

JEWESS.

JEWISH.

JEWRY.

JEZEBEL,  island  of  the  habitation:  or  woe  to
the  habitation  ;  or  isle  of  the  dunghill,  or  woe  to
the  dunghill.

JEZKAHIAH,  the  Lord  is  the  east;  or  the  Lord
arises  ;  or  brightness  of  the  Lord.  Chief  of  the
singers,  Neh.  12.  42.

JEZREEL,  seed  ot  God  ;  or  God  who  spreads
the  evil ;  or  dropping  of  the  friendship  of
God.

JEZREELlTp,ow  inhabitant  of  the  city  5ezree\ .

1GDALIA,  the  greatness  of  the  Lord;  or  the
I.ord  shall  exalt  me,  or  make  me  great.  A  man
of  God,  Jer.  35.  4.

J1DLAPH,  he  that  disti's,  or  drops  water;  or
hands  joined.  Son  of  Labor  and  Mile  ah ,  Gen.

QO  GO

IJON,  look,  eye,  fountain.  A  city,  1  Kings  15.

20.

I I.LY R ICU M,  joy,  rejoicing.

1MLAH,  plenitude,  or  repletion;  or  circumci¬
sion.

IMMANUEL,  a  name  given  to  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  Isa.  7.  14.  It  signifies,  God  with  us.

INDIA,  praise,  law.  A  considerable  country  in
the  east ,  Esth.  1.  1.


JOAB,  paternity,  or  who  has  a  father:  or  volun¬
tary  .

JOAN,  fraternity,  or  who  has  a  brother;  or  bro¬
ther  of  the  Lord.

JOAN  N  A,  the  grace,  the  gift,  or  the  mercy  of  the
Lord.

JO  ASH,  who  despairs  ;  or  he  that  burns,  who  is
on  fire.

JOB,  he  that  weeps,  that  cries  ;  or  that  speaks  out
of  an  hollow  place,  lie  dwelt  in  the  land  of  L'z,
and  was  an  upright  and  just  man,  fearing  God.
Satan  was  permitted  to  bereave  him  of  his  chil¬
dren  and  substance,  and  to  smite  him  with  sore
boils.  He  was  visited  by  his  friends  in  his  afflic¬
tion  ;  God  blessed  his  latte)'  end,  and  gave  him
twice  as  much  as  he  had  before.  Job's  patient  e
is  recommended  as  an  example  to  the  godly  in  all
ages.  Jam.  5.  11.

JOCHEBED,  glorious,  honourable,  a  person  of
merit;  or  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  The  mother  of
Moses,  Exod.  6.  20.

JOEL,  he  that  wills,  commands,  or  swears.

JOEZER,  he  that  aids  and  assists.  1  Chron.

12.  6.

JOIIA,  who  enlivens  and  gives  life.  1  Chron.  8.
16.

JOHAN  AN,  who  is  liberal,  merciful,  pious
and  grants  favour  ;  otherwise,  the  grace  of  the
Lord.

•JOHN,  the  grace,  gift,  or  mercy  of  the  Lord.

JOKSHAN,  hard,  difficult,  scandalous.  Gen.
25.  2.

JOKTAN,  small  ;  or  disgust,  weariness  ;  or
dispute,  contention.  The  son  of  Heber,  Gen.  10.
25.


'  .  v  g  WV4  OUI  UO  Jlf  ^  l  vO

and  offers  freely,  libe/ally  ;  or  who  acts  as  a
prince.

JONAH,  or  JONAS,  a  dove  ;  or  he  that  op¬
presses.

JONATHAN,  given  of  God  ;  or  the  gift  of  the
Lord .

JOPPA,  beauty,  comeliness.

JO  RAM,  to  cast ;  elevated.

JORDAN,  the  river  of  judgment;  or  he  that
shews,  or  rejects  judgment,  or  descent.

JOR1M,  he  that  exalts  the  Lord,  or  the  exaltation
of  the  Lord.

JOSE,  raised,  or  who  exists;  or  who  pardons,  or
saviour.

JOSEPH,  increase,  addition.  The  eleventh  son
of  Jacob,  beloved  by  his  father,  but  hated  by  his
brethren.  His  two  dreams  foretold  his  advance¬
ment  :  he  was  cast  into  a  pit  by  his  brethren,
and  sold  to  the  Ishmaelites.  He  interpreted
Pharaoh's  dreams,  and  was  made  ruler  of  Egypt.
His  brethren  in  the  seven  years'  famine  are  sent
to  Egypt  by  Jacob  for  corn  ;  and  afterwards  Ja¬
cob  with  his  family  come  to  Joseph  in  Egypt,  who
receives  them  kindly,  and  settles  them  in  the  land
of  Goshen.  In  the  history  of  Joseph  there  are
many  wonderful  steps  of  divine  Providence  relat¬
ing  to  his  afflicted  and  exalted  state,  which  are  re¬
corded  in  the  book  of  Genesis.  (2)  Joseph  was
also  the  name  of  a  disciple  of  Christ,  a  rich  man
of  Arimathea,  who  buried  the  body  of  our  Lord
Jesus  in  a  tomb  prepared  for  himself.  Mat.  27.
57.  and  was  likewise  the  name  of  several  others,
Luke  3.  24,  26,  30.  Acts  1.  23.

JOSES.  AVeJOSE.

JOSHUA,  the  Lord,  the  Saviour.

JOSIAH,  the  Lord  burns,  or  the  fire  of  the
Lord.

JO’l  HAM,  perfection  of  the  Lord.

1PHEDEIA H,  the  redemption  of  the  Lord.  I
Chron.  8.  25.

IRA,  city  watch,  spoil  ;  or  effusion,  or  heap
of  vision.  One  of  David's  rulers,  2  Sam.  20.
26.

I  RAD,  wild  ass;  or  heap  of  descents,  or  of  em¬
pire.  The  son  of  Enoch,  Gen.  4.  18.

1RIJAH,  the  tear  of  the  Lord,  or  vision  of
the  Lord  ;  or  protection  of  the  Lord,  Jer.  37.
13.


ISAAC,  laughter.  The  son  of  Abraham  and  Sa¬
rah,  being  the  seed  promised  to  them  by  God.
Abraham,  Jbr  the  trial  of  his  faith,  was  com¬
manded  to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac,  and  went  to
the  place  appointed,  mount  Moriah,  where  after¬
wards  the  temple  was  built  ;  and  binding  Isaac,
and  taking  the  knife  to  kill  him  as  a  sacrifice,
he  was  stayed  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  and
Isaac  was  exchanged  for  a  ram  caught  in  a
thicket.  Isaac  taketh  Rebekah  to  wife,  by
whom  he  had  two  suns,  Esau  and  Jacob  :  he
sends  his  eldest  son  Esau  for  venison,  but  Rebe¬
kah  instructs  Jacob  the  younger  to  obtain  the
blessing.

ISAIAH,  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.  The  priests
and  Levites  were  the  ordinary  teachers  of  the
Jewish  church,  so  God  sometimes  raised  up  and
sent  extraordinary  messengers,  the  prophets.
Among  these  Isaiah  is  justly  accounted  the  most
eminent,  both  for  the  majesty  of  his  style,  and
the  excellency  of  his  matter ,  wherein  he  so  fully
and  clearly  describes  the  person,  offices,  the  suf¬
ferings,  and  kingdom  of  Christ,  that  he  is  com¬
monly  called  the  Evangelical  Prophet.

ISCAH,  he  that  anoints  ;  or  that  covers,  or
protects.  The  daughter  of  llaran,  Gen  11.


29.


ISCARIOT,  is  thought  to  signify  a  uative  of  the
town  of  Iscarioth.  A  man  of  murder;  from
ish,  a  man,  and  P"0  careth,  he  that
cuts  off,  or  exterminates.  Others  maintain,  that
the  surname  given  to  Judas,  signifies  that  he
was  of  the  tribe  <f  Issachar,  a  word  signifying
recompence,  restitution.  This  traitor  verified
his  nativity,  by  receiving  the  price  of  the  blood  of
his  Master  Jesus  Christ:  from  the  word  “Ctt*
shachar,  to  receive  a  recompence.

ISHBAK,  who  is  empty  or  exhausted  ;  or  who  u

581


Proper  Naurs.'  K  0  R


M  A*T


M  O  S


forsaken  or  abandoned,  tow  of  Ah-aham's  sens,

Gen  25.  2.

ISHBl-BENOB,  be  that  sits  in  the  prophecy,  rr
in  the  ■word,  nr  in  the  prediction  ;  ,v*frru«,
conversion,  nr  Wooing,  or  respiration  in  pro¬
phecy.  A  giant.  2  Sam.  SI.  16.

1SH -BOSHETH,  a  man  of  shame  :  nr  the  retard¬
ing  of  the  man.

ISHMAEL,  God  who  hears.

ISHMAEL1TES,  ft  p-  re-try  of  Ishmael.

ISRAEL,  a  prince  with  God.  or  prevailing  with
God:  o~  one  that  wrestleth  ■with  God:  as  if  tt
had  kern  written.  Ish-ra-el.  The  name  green  bp
God  to  Jaccb,  Gen.  32.  SB.  and  35.  10.  Israel
u  often  in  Srrtptu-e  taken  for  the  people  of  God,
Exod.  6.  6,  7-

ISRAELI  TES.  He  posterity  of  Israel.

ISSACHAR,  price,  reward,  nr  recompence.

ITALIAN,  belonging  to  Italy.

ITALY,  a  Latm  ■ward,  that  has  its  original  from
vitulus,  or  vitula.  because  this  countrp  abounded
in  calves  and  heifers.  According  to  others,  it  is
taken  from  a  king  called  1  talus.

1THAXTAR,  island  of  the  palm-tree;  or  of
palms ;  or  changing  of  the  isle  ;  or  woe-  to  the
palm,  or  to  the  change.

TTHIEL,  God  with  the  ;  nr  sign,  coming  of  God.

ITHREAM,  excellence  of  the  people.  S  Sam.

3.  5.

TTUREA.  which  is  guarded  ;  nr  a  country  of
mountains.

rVAH,  iniquitv.

JUBAL,  he  that  runs,  or  be  that  produces ;  or
a  trumpet.

JUBILEE,  a  feast  of  the  Jetts,  every  fiftieth
fear;  in  He  hr  etc,  Jobel,  sr  kick,  according  to
some,  signifies  a  ram's  bom,  or  a  trumpet.
bp  whtck  the  Jubilee  pear  zoos  proclaimed .
Cokers  derive  the  etymology  of  Jobal  from  the
Hebrew  .Tubal,  sr hick  forme ’Ip  signified.  as  they
sap,  to  play  upx>n  instruments:  and  this  pear
tras  celebrated  rrith  music  and  all  expressions
of  icy.  Others  a~e  of  opinion,  that  it  comes
from  the  zeri  Hobil,  to  bring  or  call  back  ;  be¬
cause  then  eery  thing  was  resto’td  to  its  first
possessor.

.  UDAH,  the  praise  of  the  Lord.

JE'DAS,  the  same  as  JUDAH.

JUDEA,  a  county.

JULIA,  downy;  from  down,  sofl  and

tender  hair.  A  riiend  of  St.  Paul s,  Rom.  If.
15.

JULIUS,  from  the  same.  Acts  S7-  1.

J  U  N I A ,  from  Juno,  or  from  I  uventus,  youth.  A
kinsman  of  St.  PattT s,  Rom.  16.  7.

TUPITERj  as  if  it  were  juvans  pater.  the  father
that  belpeth.

JUSTUS,  just,  npright.


K.


KABZEEL,  the  congregation  of  God,  Josh.  15.

21.

KADESH.  holy,  or  holiness

KADESH-BA RN EA ,  holiness  of  an  inconstant
son  ;  or  holiness  of  the  corn,  or  of  purity.

KEDAR,  blackness,  or  sorrow.

K EDEM AH,  orienta!  ;  from  Kedem,  the  east,
Gen.  £5.  15.

KEDEMOTH,  andquity,  old  age  ;  or  orien'ah.
The  name  of  a  wilderness,  Deut.  2.  26.

KEILAH.  she  that  divides  nr  cu*s.

KEAIUEL,  God  is  risen ;  or  God  has  raised  him.

__  The  ton  of  Saber,  Gen.  22.  21.

KENAZ,  "this  nest  ,  or  this  lamentation,  this
possession,  this  purchase.  The  father  of  Cthniel,
Josh.  15.  17.

KENITES,  possession,  or  purchase,  or  lamenta¬
tion,  or  nest.

KEREN-H APPUCH,  the  bom.  or  child  of

beauty.  Job's  third  daughter.  Job  42.  14.

KERIOTH,  the  cities,  the  callings.

KETURAH,  he  that  burns,  or  makes  the  in¬
cense  to  fume  ;  otherwise,  perfumed,  or  odori¬
ferous.

K  EZI  A,  superficies,  or  angle  ;  or  cassia.  The
daughter  of  Job,  Job  42.  14.

KEZIZ,  eitd,  extremity.  A  zalley,  Josh.  18.

21.

KIBROTH-HATTAAYAH,  the  graves  of  lust,
Sam.  11.  34.

KlDRON,  obscurity,  obscure.  2  S am.  15.  £3.

KIR,  a  city,  a  wall,  or  meeting.

RIR-HARASETH,  the  city  of  the  sun  ;  the  city
with  walls  of  burnt  brick.

KIR-JATH,  city,  vocation,  lesson,  reading,  or
meeting.  A  city.  Josh.  18.  £8.

KIRlAiHAIM,  the  two  cities,  the  callings,  the
meetings.

KIRJ  ATH-ARB  A.  the  city  of  four.

K.1RJ  ATH-ARIA1,  city  of"  cities  ;  or,  the  city  of
those  that  watch.  Ezra  2.  25.

K1RJA TH-BAAL,  the  city  of  Baal,  or  of
those  that  command,  nr  that  p>ossess.  Jink.
15.  60.

K1RJA TH-JEARIM,  the  city  of  woods  or
forests.

KIRJATH-SAYNAII,  the  city  of  the  bosh;  c»
the  citv  of  enmitv.  Josh.  15.  49-

KIRJATH-SEPH  ER.  the  city  of  letters,  or  of
the  book.  Josh.  15.  15.

KISH,  hard,  difficult;  otherwise,  straw,  nr  fo-


KI^TIM,  they  that  bruise  ;  nr  gold,  tr  colon

mi.

KOH A TH,  congregation,  wrinkle,  obedience;  ,
to  make  blunt.


KOHA  THITES.  the  posterity  of  Kobath.
KORAH.  bald,  frozen,  icy.

582


L.

LABAN,  white,  shining,  gentle.

LACHISH.  she  walks,  she  goes  ;  or  who  exists  of
himself.

LA II Ml,  my  bread,  nr  my  war.  The  b’ erigr  of  i
Goliath,  1  "Chron.  20.  5.

LA  ISH,  a  lion.

LAM  ECU.  p>oor,  made  low  ;  or  who  ts  strucs.

LAOD1CEA,  just  pieople;  from  \aor.  pteople.  j
and  bexcuor.  just.

LA  i  'DIC  EA  N  S,  inhabitants  of  Lao :  icea.

LAP1DOFH,  enlightened,  or  lamps.  rJ~he  kti-
kand  of  Deborah,  J  udg.  4.  4.

L. AZ.AftUS,  the  help  of  God.

LEAH,  weary,  tired.

LEBANON  .’white,  or  incense.

LEBBEUS.  a  man  of  heart.

LEGION.

LEHAB1M,  flames,  or  which  are  inf.am.ed  :  or  1
the  prints  of  a  sword.  Gen,  10. 13.

LEHi,  jaw-bone.  The  name  of  a  place.  Judg.  t
15.  9-

LEMUEL,  God  with  them.

LfcA  I,  who  is  held  and  associated.

LEVI  TES,  of  the  posterity  of  LevL

LI  BN  AH.  white,  whiteness.

LIBN1,  the  same.  The  son  of  Gershcn,  Exod.  |
6.  17.

LIBYA,  in  Heb-ew.  Lubim.  the  heart  or  the  sea  ;
or  a  nation  that  has  a  heart.

LIBYANS,  the  people  of  Libya.

LINUS,  nets.  A  friend  of  tot.  Pours.  2  Tim.

4.  21.

LO-AMMT,  not  my  people.

LOIS,  better  ;  from  the  Greet  word  X« *<w>.  bet¬
ter.

LO-RUTIAMAH,  not  having  obtained  mercy;
not  pitien.

LOT.  wrapt  np,  bidden,  covered ;  otherwise.
myrrh,  rosin.

LUCAS,  luminous.

LUCIFER,  bringing  light.

LUCIUS.  See  LUCAS.

LUKE.  See  LUCAS.

LC’Z.  separation,  departure.

LYCAON  I  A.  she-wolf.  A  province.

LYDDA.  the  name  of  a  city.

LYSAN  IAS.  that  destroys  or  drives  away  sor-
row  :  from  Xrcric.  solution,  and  ana.  sorrow.

LYSTKA,  that  dissolves,  or  disperses  :  from  |
Xwit.

M.

MAACH.AH.  to  squeeze.

MAASEIAH.  the  work  of  the  Lord.

MACEDONIA,  adoration,  prostration,  according
to  the  Heb-fw  ;  but  elevated,  eminent,  according
to  the  Greek  ;  from  uateAjoe.

M. ACHTR.  be  that  sells,  or  that  knows.

M.ACHPELAH.  double.

MAGDA  LA,  tower,  or  greatness.

MAGDALEN  E.  tower :  ctke’wrse.  grand,  ele¬
vate.-!.  magnificent.  Mat.  27.  56.

MAGOG,  roof,  nr  that  covers,  or  that  dissolves.

M AGOR-MISsABIB,  fear  round  about.  Jer.
20.  3.

MAH.ALALEEL.  be  t'-at  praises  God  :  nr  illu¬
mination  of  God.  The  son  of  Catnan,  Gen.

5.  12.

M.AHALATH.  melodious  song:  otherwise,  i r. f r-
mitv.  The  wife  of  Rehobcom,  2  Chron.  11. 18.

M  AH.AN.4I  All  the  two  fields,  or  two  armies.

MAH  AR-SH.A  LAL-FLASH-BAZ.makingspeed
to  the  sp*oil,  he  rasteneth  the  prev.  Marg.

MAHLAH.  the  same  with  M.AHALATH.  One
of  the  daughters  of  Ze  lop  he  had,  Num.  £6.  33.

M.AHLON.  s  ng.  or  infirmity.

M.AKKEDAH.  adoration,  or  prostration,  acctri-
ing  to  the  Hebrew  ;  or  raised,  eminent :  from  the
Greek  word  luutejror.  A  city.  Josh.  TO.  10.

MALCHAM,  tneir  ring.

MALCHISHUA,  mv  king  is  a  saviour;  or
magnificent  king.  "Ike  son  of  Saul,  1  Sam.  14.

49."

MALCHUS,  king,  or  kingdom.

MAMMON,  riches.

M. A  AIRE,  rebellious  :  or  bitter  ;  or  that  changes,
that  barters  ;  nr  fat.  tr  elevated.

AIANAEN.  a  comrorter :  or  he  that  conducts
them  ;  or  preparation  of  heat

MAN  ASS  EH,  forgetfulness,  or  he  that  is  for-
goren.

MAN  EH.  a  specie;  of  money.

M  A  NOAH,  rest,  or  a  present.

MAON  ,  bouse,  or  habitation  :  otherwise ,  crime  :  nr
by  sin.  A  city.  Josh.  15.  55.

MARA,  bitter,  or  biremess.

M.ARA1L  the  same.

MARCUS,  pxdite,  shining.

MARK,  the  same.

MARSH  ILL.  the  place  where  the  celebrated
fudges  of  Athens  held  their  supreme  council.

AI  ARTHA,  who  becomes  bitter.

AlARY,  exalted,  nr  bitterness  of  the  s^a.  or
myrrh  of  the  sea  ;  or  lady  or  mistress  ot  the

S£Zl.

MASREKA1I,  whistling,  or  hissing  ;  or  who
touches  vanity.  A  city,  Gen.  36.  36.

M.ASSAH,  temptation.  The  name  of  a  place,
Exod.  17.  7-

MATRI,  raiD,  o’  prison.  One  of  the  ancestors  of
Saul,  1  Sam.  10.  21.

MATTAX,  gift  or  the  reins;  or  the  death  of
them.

Al.A  ITATTI1AS.  the  gift  of  the  Lord.

MATTHAT.  rift,  or  he  that  gives.  Ituke  3.  24.

MATTHEW,  given,  or  a  reward.


MATTHIAS.  See  MATTATHIAS

AIAZZAROTH.  the  twelve  signs.  Mary.

A1 EDAD,  be  that  measures :  or  the  water  of  k>»e

or  of  paps.

A1  ED  AN,  judgment,  process;  or  measure,  bab.h
covering.  Ova  of  Abraham.  Gen.  25.  2.

M  ED  ES,  a  people  of  the  province  of  Aledia.

AIEDIA.  measure,  habit,  covering,  or  abundance.

A1  EG  1 DDO,  that  declares  ;  or  bis  precious  fruit ;
or  that  spoils.

A1EGIDDON.  the  same.

MEHETABEL.  bow  good  is  God  J  or  has
done  good  to  us.  The  wise  of  Hmdar,  Gen.

36.  30.

M  EH  UJ  AEL.  who  proclaims  God  ;  or  God  that
blots  out  ;  or  ocro’dmg  to  the  Syriac  and  Hebrew,
wfco  is  smitten  of  God.  Gen.  4.  18-

AIELCH1.  mv  king,  or  mv  counsel.

AIELCHIZEDEK:  km?  of  righteousness.

AIELITA,  attordiag  honey,  mom  whence  honey
distils;  from  ue\i,  boDey".  J*  t.-land  now  cai.ee
Alaita,  Acts  28.  1.

MEMPHIS,  by  the  mouth.

MEMUCAN.  impoverished;  or  to  prepare;  o-
certain,  true.  Edtk.  1.  16.

AIENAHEAI.  comforter  ;  or  who  conducts  them,
or  preptaration  of  heat.

A1EN  E.  who  reckons,  or  who  is  counted.

AIEPHIBOSHETH,  out  of  my  mouth  proceeds
reptoacb.

MERAB,  be  that  fights,  a  disputes;  or  that
multiplies.

MERARI,  bitter  ;  or  to  provoke.

AIERCURIUS.  o  false  g  d.  from  ;ke  Latm  word
mercari,  to  buy  or  sell,  because  tktt  god  pre-
rided  over  me’chmdire.  In  Greek,  Hermes,  x kick
signifies,  orator,  or  interpreter.

AIERIBAH,  dispute.  Quarrel.

MERIB-BAAL.  rebellion;  or  he  that  -esisti
Baal,  and  strives  against  the  idol.  1  Chron.
8.  34.

AIERODACH,  bitter  contrition  ;  or  bruised
myrTh.  According  tc  the  Syriac,  it  signifies
the  little  lord.  This  is  the  name  of  mu  of  :ht
Chaldean  deities.

AI E  ROD  A  C  H-  B  A  LA  DA  N ,  who  creates  contri¬
tion  ;  or  the  son  of  death,  or  of  thy  vapour.

AIEROAI,  eminences,  elevations.

MEROZ.  secret,  or  leanness.

MESHACH.  that  draws  with  force  ;  or  that  sur
rounds  the  waters.

MESH  EC  H,  who  is  drawn  by  force ;  c*  included,
sh  it  up.  surrounded.

MESHtLEAIIAH,  p>eace,  or  perfection,  cr  retri¬
bution  of  the  Lord  ;  or  the  Lord  is  my  recorii-
F>eDce,  or  my  happiness.  The  father  of  Zecka-
riah,  1  Chron.  9.  £1-

MESOPOTAMIA,  in  Hebrew,  Aramnaharaim,
that  it,  Syria  of  the  two  rivers.  The  Greek  word
Alesopotamia,  alsorigrsxf.es  between  two  rivers ;
from,  peer  of,  middle,  and  rorauof.  river.

AIESSLAH,  anointed.

AIETH  EG-.AMALAH,  the  bridle  or"  bondage.

METHUSAEL,  who  demands  bis  death  ;  or
death  is  his  hell  nr  grave.

METHUSELAH,  be  has  sent  bis  death  ;  or  tie
arms  of  his  death  ;  or  spoil  of  bis  death.

MICAH,  poor,  humble;  nr  who  strikes,  or  is
struck  ;  or  wbo  is  there,  or  the  waters  here.

AIIC.AIAH.  who  is  like  to  God  ;

MICHAIAH,  the  seme.

AIICH.A  EL.  the  seme.

AIICHAL,  who  is  it  that  has  all  ?  or  who  is  per
feet,  nr  complete  r  or  the  whole  is  water.

MTCHAIASH,  he  that  strikes  ;  or  px»r  who
is  taken  a  wav.  The  name  of  a  town,  1  Sam.
13  2.

MIDI. AN,  judgment;  or  measure,  habit,  cover
ing.

M !  DIANTTES.

AUDI  ANITISH.

AIIGRON,  fear ;  or  a  farm,  or  threat,  Isa.
10.  28.

AULCAH.  qneen.

AIILCOAl,  their  king.

AIlLEtUAI,  red,  or  scarlet ;  from,  the  Greek  word
uxXtoc,  vermilion,  red.

AI1LLO,  fulness,  plenitude,  repletion.

AIINNI,  disposed,  reckoned,  prepared.  Jer.
51.  27-  .

All  SN ITH,  counted,  prepared.  A  ci’y.  Jiv:g.
11.  33.

MIRIAM,  exalted;  or  bitterness  of  the  sea ;
or  myrrh  of  the  sea ;  or  lacy  or  mistress  of
the  sea.

AIISH.AEL,  who  is  asked  for,  or  lent;  tn  God
takes  away,  or  retires.

AI  1 S  R  EPHOTH-M.A  I  AI,  the  burnings  of  the
waters ;  or  furnaces  where  metals  are  melted.
A  place  where  there  were  salt  pin.  Josh.  11.8.

AI1TYLENE,  a  Greek  trerd,  signifying  painty,
cleansing,  or  press.

AIIZA  K,  little.  Marg.

AfIZPAH,  a  sentinel,  speculation,  or  that  waits
for.

AIIZPEH.  the  same.

Ml 'R. A  I  AI.  tribulations  ;  or  wbo  is  straitened,
or  blocked  up.  Ike  son  of  Ham.  Gen.  10. 6.

AINA"ON.  a  diligent  seeker,  or  betrothing,  o*
rente mhering,  or  an  exborter.

AIOA  B,  of  the  father.

MOA  BITES,  the  posterity  of  AIOAB.

AIOLADAH,  birth,  generatioo.  A  city,  Jo*h
15.  26.

A10I.ECH,  king.

MOLOCH,  the  same.

MORDECAI,  contrition,  or  bitter  t-rueing  .  or
myrrh  bruised  ;  or  who  teaches  to  bruise.

MORIAH,  bitterness  of  the  Lord;  <>*•  doctrine.

or  fear  of  the  Lord.

AIOS  FROTH,  eniditioB.  discipline,  bond.  S*u
33.  30.


N  I  S


PEL


MOSES,  taken  oat  of  the  water.  He  was  of  the
house  of  Levi,  it ■m  rn  Egppt,  and  mirocnuouiip
preserved.  God  appeared  to  him  in  a  burning
bush,  and  tent  him  to  deliter  the  1j  reel  net  out
of  Egy rpt.  He  teat  opp-  trued  ip  God  to  Lead  the
Israelites  through  the  wilderness  to  the  land  of
Canaan.  Being  about  to  die,  he  lltuetk  ail
the  trihet  of  liratl t  He  vie-s  the  land  of  Ca¬
naan ,  diet,  u  burred  by  God,  and  Jotkna  made
hii  nuctuor „  He  vat  a  very  great  man,  and
highly  honoured  by  God  in  many  reipeett.  lie
law  was  gi»en  by  Motet,  bat  grace  ana  truth
came  by  Jesus  Christ,  Joan  1.  17.

MUSH  I,  he  that  touches,  that  withdraws  him¬
self,  that  takes  away.  Son  of  Mtraii,  Exod
6.  19.

MY  RA,  it  derived  from  the  Greek  word  Uv&»,  I
flow,  pour  out,  weep.

MY  SI  A,  criminal,  or  abominable  ;  from  the  Greek
uord  ui  oov,  crime.


N.

X A AM AN ,  beautiful,  agreeable;  #r  tnat  pre¬
pares  himself  to  motion.

X  A  A31  AT  HITE,  who  it  of  X aaxnath.
XAASHOX,  that  foretells,  that  conjectures ;  err
serpent ;  or  their  auguries.

NABAL  a  fool,  or  senseless.

NABOTH,  words,  or  prophecies,  or  fruits.

X  ADAB,  free  ana  voluntary  gift ;  or  prince.
XAGGE,  brightness.

NAHARAI,  mv  nostrils,  my  nose ;  or  hoarse,  dry,
bot,  angry.  One  of  David' t  valiant  captains,

2  Sam.  23.  37.

N  A  HASH,  snake,  or  serpent,  or  that  foretells,  or
brass.

N'AHOR,  hoarse,  dry,  bot,  angry.

N  A  HUM,  comforter,  penitent;  or  their  guide.

The  name  of  a  prophet,  X  ah.  L  1.

XAIX,  beauty,  pleasantness.

XAIOTH,  beauties  ;  or  habitations,  abodes.
NAOMI,  beautiful,  agreeable.

NAPH1SH,  the  soul;  or  he  that  rests  or  re¬
freshes  himself,  that  respires  ;  or  according  to  the
Syriac,  that  multiplies.  The  ton  of  hhmael,
Gen.  25.  15.

XAPHTALI,  comparison,  Likeness;  or  that
struggles,  or  fights.

NARCISSUS,  astonishment,  stupidity,  surprise  ;
from  the  Greek  word  naccrn r-  Bom.  16. 11.

>  All 11  AX,  who  gives,  or  is  given.

-\A1  HAN  A  EL,  the  girt  of  Gcd.
NATHAN-MELECH,  the  gift  of  tne  xing.  2
Kings  23.  11.

N  A Uil.  See  X A H CM
NAZAREXE,  kept,  or  flower,  el  native
zareth.

NAZARETH,  separated,  sanctified.
XEAPOL1S,  new  city,  from  tea,  new,  fresh,  axd

roXin  a  city.

NEBAlOTH,  words,  or  prophecies,  or  fruits.
NEB  AT,  that  beholds.

NEBO,  that  speaxs,  prophesies,  or  fructifies.
NEBUCHADNEZZAR,  tears  and  £  roans  of
judgment ;  or  trouble,  or  sorrow  of  judg¬
ment.

N  EBL  ZAR-ADAN,  fruits  or  prophecies  of
Judgment  ;  or  winnowed,  or  spread.

XECliO,  lame,  or  w  ho  was  beaten.  The  name  of
a  king  of  Egypt,  2  Kings  £3.  29.
NEHELaMII'E,  creamer,  or  dream;  or  vale,
or  brook,  or  inheritance  of  the  waters.

N  EH  EM  1  AH,  coosoiation.  or  repentance  of  the
Lord  ;  or  rest  ot  the  Lord;  or  conduct  of  the
Lord.

NEHLSHTA,  snake,  soothsayer,  or  01  brass.

Mother  of  Jehoiakim,  2  K  inns  24.  8.

N EH L  SHTAX,  which  is  of  brass  or  copper  ;  bp
deruion,  a  trifle  of  brass.

N  ER,  lamp,  brightness;  or  land  new  tilled.
NEREUS.  XfeXER.

NER1,  my  light.  The  father  of  Salai  .nl,  Luke

3.  27 .

XERIAH,  light,  and  lamp  of  the  Lord;  or  the
Lord  is  mv  light.

NETHAXEEL.  See  NATHANAEL
N  ET  H  A  X  1 A ,  the  gift  of  the  Lord.
NETH1N1MS,  given,  or  offered.  The  Gibcon-
itet,  or  those  who  succeeded  them  fa  their
mice.

N  l  BHAZ,  tliat  fructifies,  or  that  produces  vision  :
or  to  prophesy,  to  foretell,  or  to  speak,  Ax  idol
f  the  A  rites.  2  Kings  17.  31.

N  1  CAN  OR.  a  conqueror,  or  victorious ;  from  tie
Greek  uord  mew.  1  conquer.

N  CODEMLS,  innocent  blood:  or  according  to
the  Greek,  the  victory  of  the  people  ;  from  s.eaw,

1  conquer,  and  br.uos.  the  people.

N  ICOLAITAXS,  victory  of  the  people ;  from
*ixau,  1  overcome,  and  Xaot,  the  people,  l  ie
followers  of  Nicolas.

N ICOLAS,  from  the  seme.  A  deacon.  Acts
6.  5.

N  ICOPOLIS.  the  citv  of  victory,  or  victorious
city  ;  from  rutau,  1  couquer.  and  woXtv,  a

dtv.

MdER.  black.

MMR1 M,  leopard ,  bitterness,  rebellion,  or  charge
The  name  of  a  place,  Isa.  15.  6.

N  IMROD,  rebellious,  or  sleep  of  descent,  .r-  of
him  that  rules.

N  IMSH1,  rescued  from  danger  :  tr  that  touches.
NIXEVEJI,  handsome,  agreeable;  or  dwell-

N  IN  EVITES.  the  people  of  Nineveh.

N  1SAX,  flight,  or  standard  ;  or  proof  and  temp

tation.

MSROCH,  flight,  or  standard,  or  proof  an
tem ptation  ,  tender,  or  delicate.


RAG  CP»opeb  Kent*.

PEN  I  EL,  fare,  or  nunsn  ot  God;  or,  mat
Goa.

P  EX  I X  X  A  H.  peart,  preoows  ; tr.ee  ;  or  ha  face
Tie  wife  of  Liianak,  1  Sam.  L  2.

PEN U EL.  Set  P EX l EL.

P  EOR,  bole,  or  opening.

PERGA,  very  earthy  {from  the  prepetition  wea.

and  the  earn.

PERGAMClS.  neigfct,  elevation.

PERIZZ1TLS.  tit  name  if  a  people,  who  dwell  u
vi.ta ges,  or  placet  not  enclosed  :u<  walls.
PERSIA,  teat  tna  or  divides ;  or  tan.  gryp»:_
bewseman.

PERSIS,  the  same.

PE  I ER^  a  rock,  or  stoce.

PLTHL  EL.  mouth  of  God  :  or  diiatarico,  #r  oer
of  Goo.  Easier  of  Joel,  J cel  L  L
PHALEC.  See  PELEG.

PMALLU,  aim  mat.e.  tr  hidcec.  lnetensfReu-
^  few.  Gen.  46.  9.

PH  A  LI  l.aeuTtnnce.  or  right.  Tie  ton  of  Lax,  *,
1  Sam.  25.  44.

PHAN  D EL.  face,  or  vfrjoa  of  God.  Lake  2.  3c.
PHARAOH,  tna*  disperses,  ma:  spoils,  mat  cis-
ctr.  ers  ;  or  according  to  tie  Sgrrac',  use  revewger,
destroyer,  the  ting,  the  cnxooLe.
PHAREZ,  dirisaco.  nature  ;  e-  treats  font,
rio.ently.

PHxvkPAR,  mat  prtcires  fruits;  or  tie  fail  or
the  bull.

PHEBE.  sdinkig.  pure  :  from  pc.Syt.

PH  EX  ICE,  rec.  or  purple  ;  from  tie  Greek  r •ri
centaur  :  or  palm-tree  :  from  p->.

PHICHOL,  me  mouth  ot  ali .  ;  *  t  •  ery  m  ague  ;  #•
perteerku,  or  complrring  of  me  tacotn.  Gen.

PHILADELPHIA,  me  love  of  a  brother,  or  or
maternity  ;  from  eAos.  a  fr.enn.  wxd  aieX+ae,

!a  bretrer.

PHILEMON,  that  xis ses.  or  is  arecflina te ;  frm
5'Ar.iic.  a  dss.

PHILO  L  S,  amiable,  or  who  is  beloved ;  from

PHILIP,  warlike. ,

PHILIPPI,  tie  iwme.

PHILIS1IA,  :«  ctwntrg  of  vie  Puli
PHILlx  -  IX IN,  mose  mat  dwe.l  in.  m ages.
PHILOLOGUS,  a  lover  ci  learning,  or  of  the
Ot\<K-  a  *>ver,  am  \o~or.  me  were.
PH .  N  Eil  As.  a  m, n ccmienance ,  s-  tare  of  must.
or  prctectiocn

P H  LEGON ,  aeal cos.  f cminr ,  from  z  Ue-  an.
PHRYGIA,  dry,  tareen ; /tmi'  ccctljv.

PHI  RAH.  that  tears  fruit,  or  mat  grows.

PHY  G  r  LLU  >.  fugitive,  wow/,  -  ye.  Pen-.
PI-HAHIRO^H.  tre  r>:cith.  tre  r-ass  of  Hirotr,
or  tne  opening  of  literty  :  ,-r  modm  engravec.

P i  LA  1 E,  who  is  aimed  wfm  a  cam
PIXOX,  pearl,  so  gem  :  or  mat  teicics.  Cwe  if
tie  ieadt  ef  Exam's prsicrug.  Gen.  36.  41.
PIRAiHOX,  his  linupanoo,  his  reprlvaacn  ;
his  rupture  ;  or  actor  eng  it  tie  Syriac,  his  v ---
reacce.  A  city,  foci.  12.  io.  R  fence  Pma-
tnenite.  Jodg.  12.  13.

PING  A  H,  hill,  eminence,  fertress.

r»/j  vj  shc'o  Laden  dwell,  Gen.  PISIDIA.  pitcc.  rr  pitchy  .  from  t . rcu-vrr.

P.SOX.  changing,  or  doubling,  .'-eatensxc  c:  me
mccti  :  or  estencec.  jt  multitnde.  Cta  tf  lie
rive's  cf  Paradise,  Gen.  2.  11.


NO,  stimnz  up,  or  a  forbidcing.

NOADlAfl,  witness;  or  asaetnbiy,  or  oman.-nt
01  u*  Lora.

NOAH,  repose,  or  rest,  or  con>' .aton.

NOAH,  tnat  quavers,  or  totters.  Daughter  of  Za-
loghehad,  Num.  26.33.

NOB,  discourse,  prop>bfecy.

XOBAH,  tnat  haras  or  vesps.  A  citt,  Norn.
32^  4£.

NOD,  vagabond.  A  country,  Gen.  4.  16.

hooey -comb,  a  toot,  or  mat  drops.

N  L  N  ,  son,  posterity,  Curab.e  and  etema..

NY'MPHAs,  spouse,  or  bricegroom.

O.

OEADIAH,  servant  of  re  Lord.

OBAL,  inconvenience  of  ole  age  ;  or  of  toe  finx.
The  tan  of  Johan,  Gen.  10.  £8.

OK  ED,  a  ser  ant.

OBED-EDOM,  the  servant  of  Edam.  or  the
Idu.m.ean ;  or  labourer  of  the  man.  of  red,  or
earthy.

OBIL,  that  weeps,  or  deser-  es  to  be  bewailed  ;  or
anoentierwho  is  brought.  One  that  had  tie
rare  ■j  David’ s  camels.  1  ChroQ.  27.  30.

OCRAN,  cisturber,  or  that  cisr-rcers.

OD ED,  to  sustain,  to  bold,  to  lift  up.

OG,  a  c ace,  bread  bacec  in  the  a seek.

OH  EL,  tent,  tabemarle ;  or  origimess.  1  Chon.
3.  20.

OLYMPA5,  heavecir.

ONI  A  R,  be  that  speaks  ;  rr  t  itter.  Gen.  36. 11.

OMEGA,  the  lout  letter  cf  toe  Greek  alphabet.

OMRI,  a  szeaf,  or  bunc.e  of  ocra ;  or  rtbe-nen.
or  bitter.

OX*,  min,  force,  iniquity.

OX  A  >,  pain,  strenin  ."power,  iniquity.

OXESIMUS,  proctat.e.  useful;  from  ot-raa,
useruiress.

ONESIPHOBUS,  who  brings  profit ;  from  the
Greek  word  ot'cis,  usefulness,  and  cocos,
that  brings.

OPHKU  tower,  or  e  evated  place;  or  ofscuritv.

OPHIR.  ashes.

OPHRAiH,  dust,  rawn,  lead.  H  city.  Josh.
18.  £3.

OREB,  a  raven,  sweet,  caution,  or  mixture,  or
evening.

ORION .  a  censtellaston.

ORX’AX,  that  rejoices :  their  bow  or  ark;  e-
:ieht  or  me  sun.

OBP.AH,  the  neck,  or  me  skull,  naxemess  of  tie
mouth  or  face.

OTHXI,  my  time,  my  hour.  The  sen  of  SJhe-
maiah.  1  CL  rcn.  £6.  7-

OTHNIEL.  tre  time,  or  the  bocr  of  God.

OZFM.  mat  fasts  :  or  them  eagerness.

OZ1AS.  'trength  from  the  Lera.


1  or  a  -vir  0:  nxses


PA.ARAI.  epening.

PADAN-AKAM,  Padan  of  the  nel-c,  aad  Aram
Syria ;  a
£5.  SO.

PAGIEL,  prevention  of  God.  or  prayer  of  God.

PALESTlXA,  whicn  is  covered,  watered,  or  to
bring  or  cause  ruin,

PALII,  deliverance,  or  flight.  Sew  ef  B.apkn,
Num.  13.  9.

PAMPHYLLA,  a  nation  made  1  p  tf  r.rj  tribe,
from  Tif,  all,  and  c~.  \e.  i  trite.

PAPHOS,  which  be  ils.  or  which  is  very  hot;
from  -epkecei*.  to  cxm.  <r  :o  be  ery  lop

PAPvAN.  beauty,  glc-ry,  cma-renm

PARBAR,  a  gate,  or  hulemg  ielompmg  to  tie
tewpie.

P.ARMEXAS.  that  abides  and  is  permanent;
from  tie  Greek  were  ruimo*.  1  an.de.

P.AROSH,  a  flea;  or  me  fr_it  of  me  mem..
Ezra  2.  3.

PARSHAXDATHA.  revelation  of  corporeal
impurities,  or  of  his  tro_fle  :  or  dung  of  its  pc-
riry.  Tie  ton  of  Homan,  Each.  9.  7.  *

PARTHIAN’S,  nc-rsemen.

PARCAH,  fl-ittrishing ;  or  acvo'iina  to  tie  St¬
riae,  that  flies  away.  Fa  tier  ef  Jejasiapias.
1  Kings  4.  17.

PASH  UR,  that  extends,  rr  multiplies  tie  hole.
or  whiteness  ;  or  tnat  muitipiies  rr  extendi  the
liherty.'r  the  principality.

PATARA,  w-icn  is  trod  under  feet ;  from  tie
Greet  word  Tate*.  I  tread  under  foot.

P-ATHROS,  mouthful  of  dew;  c-  perstia-dcc.  or
dilatation  of  ruin.

P.A  I MOS,  norta  :  from  I  am  scueexc-

to  pieoes.

P-ATROBAS.  pa*emai,  er  that  pursues  me  steps
of  his  father  :  from  rarrj,  a  father,  ana  iaxi*,
I  ep.  Bern,  lu  14.

PAL",  that  cries  aieed  ;  er  that  appears.  A  city ,
Gen.  36.  39.

P.A UL,  a  worker.  His  former  name  was  Saul,  *
sepulchre,  a  destrever."

PA  ULUS.

PEDAHZUR.  sariour,  string  aui  powerful :
stone  of  revi err. prion :  or  the' redem plan  of  that
which  is  piacec  or  set  up.  X"»w.  I.  10.

PEDALAH,  rede m prion  of  me  Lore.  2  Ksxgs
23.  36.

PEKAH.  re  that  opens  :  or  that  crocs  the  eye,
or  that  is  at  Liberty.

PF.KAH1AH,  it  is  tre  Lcsd  mat  pens.

PELATIAH.  let  Lie  Lord  deli'er;#r  del:  er-
ance.  r  fl;g:  t  of  the  Lord.

PELEG,  division.  The  ton  ef  Eber,  Gen.  ICk
25.

PELETHITES.  judges,  or  cestroyers.  1  lest
were  troops  er  guards  gf  king  Detrid,  2  Sam.  8. 18.


PITHOM.  mem  meuthfu:,  tr  bit;  or  axamaa-
t  'cc.  or  c..atarcu  of  me  need.  A  rj ,  Exio.
1.  11.

Pl-HOX".  his  mourn,  or  his  pemasitn.  tr  gift  o:
me  tree m.  U».-v  of  Micax,  \  Cnroc  S.  35.

POK TICS,  marine,  or  bekegteg  to  the  sea.

POX  .If.  me  sea  .  from %  tie  Greet  word  rrr-ts.

PORA.H.A,  fruitlul.  1  a  sen  if  Hcowsl.  Estn.
9.8.

PORCIUS.

POTLPHAR.  tre  belief  A  fine* ;  a  fat  bull.

POT1-PUE1LAH,  mat  scatters,  tr  demoLsnes  me
fat.

?  K  -  t-C  .A .  z  frurrt  sv  rd  s  tgn :  'j  « v  anctsnn  2  T:~
4.  19.

P  R  l  x  C  l  L  T  A .  /'em  tie  tamo .

PEOCHORUS.  ;e  that  rresihes  aver  the  chcirs  .
fmu  rpo-  before,  axe  a  company  t»

singers.  Acts  6. 5.

P  U  E  L I  US,  common.

PL'DEXS.  smamefaced.

PL  L.  beau,  or  descructicc.

PUXOX  .  rreci.-us  stone,  rr  mat  Seic.ia.  Cm  tf
tie  n aliens  tf  ike  Israelites,  Num.  S3.  42.

PL'K.  lot.  dee  AppelLatives.

PUT EO LI.  a  ctrj  r*  Camp-mxa.

PUT!  EL,  Got  is  my  fatness.  J  te  fatierm  lest
of  Eieasar.  Exod.  O-  25.


Q.


QUARTCS,  the  femrm.  P.:m.  16.  23.


R.


RA.AM.AH,  greatness,  thunder  rr  seme  sort  or
erii,  tr  rriisiBg,  or  cotrpany,  Gra.  10.  7.

RABB.AH,  great,  powerrm.  ccntenticws,  or  co¬
pulative.

R  AB-M.AG.  who  overthrows  r  iestroys  a  muitt-
tude ;  tr  chief,  tr  prince  of  dbsoluricc  ;  tr  duel
of  the  magicians.  Jer.  39.  3.

RA  B-SARlS.  granc  master  cf  the  e  _rucr:>
2  Kings  18.  17-

RAB  SHAKEH.  cup-bearer  of  the  rctuc*,  ,r
chamberlain.

RAC  HAL.  injurious  .  or  perfumer.  i~  mam chu  i.
A  city.  1  3C2  29.

RACHEL,  a  sheep.

RAGAU,  afrienu. a  neighbcur


S60


Pkopek  Names.]  SAB


S  H  A


8  I  H


R  AGUEL,  shepherd  of  God,  or  friend  of  God  ;
or  rupture  of  God.  The  f ether  of  Hobab,  Nutn.

10.  29.  .  _

RAHAB,  proud,  strong,  quarrelsome.  Egypt,  as
most  think ,  is  (ailed  by  this  name,  Psal.  87-  4.  1

RAHAB,  which  is  large  and  extended,  or  public
place.  The  name  of  a  woman.

RAKKATH,  empty,  or  spittle,  or  tempi?  of  the
head.  A  city.  Josh.  19.35.  .

RAKKON,  vain,  void;  or  mountain  of  lamenta-
tinne  -jurl  (pars  r  nr  mountain  of  enjoyment.  A


tions  and  tears  ;  or  mountain  of  enjoyment

city,  Josh.  19-  46.  ,

RAM,  elevated,  sublime  ;  or  who  rejects,  or  is  re¬
jected.

RAM  AH ,  from  the  same.

RAMATH,  raised,  lofty.  A  city ,  Josh  19.  8.
RAM  ATH  A I M-ZOPH IM,  a  city ,  l  Sam  .1,1.
The  same  as  Hamah.  Eitera/ly ,  Ramathaim

signifies  the  two  Ramathas,  probably  because  the
city  was  divided  into  two  parts .  The  city  of  Ha¬
mah,  Samuel's  birth-place ,  was  also  called  Zo-
phim,  which  signifies  watch-tower,  or  watch¬
men,  because  the  prophets,  who  are  called  watch¬
men,  had  a  school  or  college  there.

RAMA  1H-LEH  I,  elevation  of  the  jaw-bone,  lhe
name  of  a  place,  Judg.  15.17'  ,

RAM  ESES,  thunder ;  or  reproach  of  the  moth  ;
or  he  that  destroys  or  dissolves  evil.  Gen.  47.
11.  Eiod.  1. 11.  ,  .

RAMOl'H,  eminences,  high  places.  A  city  of
this  name  was  situate  in  Gilead,  and  called  Ka-
moth-gilead,  1  Kings  4.  13.

RAPHA,  relaxation,  or  physic.

RAP II  LI,  cured,  comforted.

REBA,  the  fourth,  or  a  square  ;  or  that  stoops  or
lies  down.  A  king  of  Midian,  Mum.  31.  8.
REBEKAH,  fat,  fattened  ;  or  quarrel  appeased,
or  removed.  ,  ,

RECHAB,  square,  or  chariot,  or  team  of  horses,
or  a  rider.  „  _  ,  ,

R  ECU  A  BITES,  the  posterity  of  Rechah.
REGEM,  that  stones,  or  is  stoned,  or  purple.

The  son  of  Jahdai,  1  Chron.  2.47.
REGEM-MELECH,  he  that  stones  the  king  ;  or
the  purple  of  the  king,  or  of  the  council.  Zech .

7.  <2,

R  EH  ABl  AH,  breadth,  or  extent,  or  place  of  the
Lord  ;  or  God  is  my  extent,  he  hath  set  me  at
liberty.  The  son  of  E/iezer,  1  Chron.C3.  17-
REHOB,  breadth,  space,  or  extent.  A  city,  Josh.
10,  28.

REHOBOAM,  who  sets  the  people  at  liberty  ;
or  space  of  the  people  ;  or  that  lets  the  people
breathe,  or  blow.

REIJOBOTI 1,  spaces,  or  places.

REHUM,  merciful,  compassionate,  or  friendly.
REI,  my  shepherd,  my  companion,  my  friend  ;

or  my  evil,  or  my  breaking.  1  Kings  1.8.

REM  ALIA  H,  the  exaltation  of  the  Lord;  or  who
is  rejected  of  the  Lord.

REMMON,  greatness,  elevation;  or  a  pomegra¬
nate  tree.  A  city,  Josh.  19.  7-
REMPHAN ,  the  name  of  an  idol,  which  some  think
to  he  Saturn.  See  ST  A  R  in  Appellatives.

REPH  AEL,  the  physic,  or  medicine  of  God.  The
son  of  ' shemaiah ,  1  Chron.  26.  7.

REP  HAIM,  giant,  physician,  or  relaxed,  or  that
relax,  that  weaken.

REPH  A  IMS,  from  the  same.

REPH1D1M,  beds,  or  places  of  rest.

RESIN,  a  bridle,  or  bit.  A  city,  Gen.  10.  12.
REU,  his  friend,  his  shepherd.  The  son  of  Releg,
Gen.  1 1.  18.

R  EUBEN  ,  who  sees  the  son,  or  vision  of  the  son.
Jacob's  eldest  son  by  Leah  ;  he  endeavoured  to  de¬
liver  Joseph  from  his  brethren.

REUBEN  IT  ES,  the  posterity  of  Reuben.

REUEL.  shepherd,  or  friend  of  God.  The  son  of
Esau,  Gen.  36.  4.

REUMAH,  lofty,  sublime.  Nahor's  concubine,
Gen.  22.  24.

REZIN,  voluntary,  or  good  will  ;  or  runner.
REZON,  lean,  or  small,  or  secret,  or  prince.  The
son  of  Eliadah,  1  Kings  1 1 . 23.

RH  EG  I UM,  rupture,  or  fracture  ;  from  the  Greek
word  or] 7m

RIIESA,  will,  or  course.

RHODA,  a  rose.

RHODES,  a  rose;  from  pobr\-
RIBLAH.  quarrel,  or  greatness  to  him  ;  or
quarrel  that  increases,  or  that  spreads.  2  Kings
23.  33.

RIM  MON,  exalted,  pomegranate.

R1PHATH,  remedy,  or  medicine,  or  release,  or
pardon.  The  son  of  Gomer,  Gen.  10.  3.
R1SSAH,  watering,  distillation,  or  dew.  One  of
the  stations  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,
N  um.  33.  21.

R1ZPAH,  bed,  or  extension,  or  coal,  or  fire¬
stone.

ROM AMTI-EZER,  exaltation  of  help.  Son  of
Heman,  1  Chron.  25.  4.

ROMAN  ,  strong,  powerful ;  from  the  Greek  word
ptouri,  strength.

ROMANS.

ROM  E,  strength,  power  ;  from  pwixn-  .  .

ROSH,  the  head,  or  the  top,  or  the  beginning.

The  son  of  Benjamin,  Gen.  46.  21.

RUFUS,  red.

HUH  AMAH,  having  obtained  mercy.  Marg.
RUM  AH,  exalted,  sublime,  or  rejected.  A  city,
2  Kings  23.  36.

RUTH,  tilled,  satisfied.


s.


SABEANS  captivity  ;  or  conversion,  rest,  old
age.

584


SABTECHA,  that  surrounds,  or_  causes  wound¬
ing.  The  son  of  Cush,  Gen.  10.  7-
SADOC,  just,  or  justified.  The  father  of  Achim,
Mat.  1.  14.  ,

SALAH,  mission,  sending;  or  branches,  or  dart,
or,  according  to  the  Syriac,  that  spoils,  or  is  spoil¬
ed.  The  son  of  Arphaiad,  Gen.  10.  24.

SA  LAM  IS,  shaken,  tost,  beaten  ;  from  the  Greek
word  aaXevas,  I  beat,  1  toss.  An  island,  Acts
13.  5.  ...

SaXaTHIEL,  I  have  asked  of  God  ;  or  loan  of
God.

SA  LEM,  complete,  perfect,  <>r  peace.

SALIM,  John  3.  23.  See  SI1AI.I  M.

SA  LMON,  peaceable,  perfect,  or  that  rewards.
SALMONE.  A  city.

SALOME.  See  SA  I  .MON.  ,

SAMARIA,  his  lees,  his  prison,  his  guard,  his
throne,  or  his  diamond.  In  Heb.  Shomeron,
SAMAKI  TANS,  .pcop/e  0/ Samaria.

SAM  LA  H,  raiment;  or  his  left  hand;  or  his
name,  his  astonishment,  or  what  has  been  put
to  him.  A  king  of  Edom,  Gen.  36.  36.

SAMOS,  full  of  gravel  ;  from  A/upor,  sand.  An
island.  ....

SAMOTHR AC1  A,  an  island,  so  called  because
it  was  peopled  by  Samians  and  1  hracians,  Acts
!6.  11.  ,  0  .
SAMSON,  his  sun;  or,  according  to  the  Syriac,
his  service,  or  his  ministry;  or  here  the  second
time.

SAMUEL,  heard  of  God,  or  asked  of  God.
SANBALLAT,  bush  in  secret;  or  the  enemy  in
secret.

SAPH,  rushes,  or  sea-moss,  end,  consummation  ;
or  vessel,  flat,  threshold.  A  giant,  2  Sam.  21.
18.

SAPII I  R ,  a  city.

SAPPHIRA,  that  relates  or  tells;  or  that  writes
or  composes  books  ;  or  handsome.

SARAH,  lady,  or  princess;  or  the  princess  of  the
multitude.

SARA l,  my  lady,  my  princess.

SARDIS,  prince  of  joy,  or  song  of  joy  ;  or  that
which  remains.  Syr.  a  pot,  a  kettle.

SAREPTA,  a  goldsmith’s  ship,  where  metals  used
to  be  melted  and  tried.

SARGON,  who  takes  away  protection;  or  that
takes  away  the  garden;  or,  according  to  the
Syriac,  nets,  snares.  A  king  of  Assyria,  Isa.
20.  1.

SAItON.  See  SHARON.

SARSECHIM,  master  of  the  wardrobe ;  or  of
the  perfumes.  Jer.  39.  3.

SARUCH,  branch,  layer;  or  twining.

SATAN,  contrary,  adversary,  a  party  in  a  pro¬
cess,  an  enemy,  an  accuser.

SAUL,  demanded,  orient, ditch,  sepulchre,  death,
oi  hell.

SCEVA,  disposed,  prepared  ;  from  <7xeua£to,  I
dispose,  I  prepare.

SCYTHIAN,  tanner,  or  leather-dresser.

SEBA,  drunkard;  or  that  turns,  or  surrounds;

or  old  man,  according  to  the  Syriac.

SEBAT,  twig,  sceptre,  tribe.  Zech.  1.  7.

SF.GUB,  fortified,  or  raised.  1  Kings  16.  34.
SE1R,  hairy,  goat,  demon,  tempest,  or  bai  ley.
SELEUCI  A,  shaken  or  beaten  by  the  waves,
that  runs  as  a  river.

SEMEI,  hearing,  or  obeying.

SEN  EH,  bush.  A  rock,  1  Sam.  14.4.

SEN  N  ACHERIB,  bush  of  the  destruction  of  the
sword,  of  solitude,  of  drought.

SEP  HARVAIM,  the  two  books,  or  the  two
scribes.

SERA  H,  lady  of  scent ;  or  the  song;  or  the  morn¬
ing,  the  morning  star.  The  daughter  of  Asher,
Gen.  46.  17.

S ERA l AH,  prince  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Lord  is
my  prince  ;  or  song  of  the  Lord.

SERGIUS  PA  ULUS.

SERUG,  branch,  layer  ;  or  twining,  lhe  father
of  Nahor,  Gen  11.  22.

SfiTH,  put,  or  who  puts.

SHAALBIM,  that  beholds  the  heart;  or  fist,  or
hand,  or  fox  ot  the  sea.  Judy.  1.  35.
SHAARAJM,  gates,  valuation,  hairs,  barley,
tempests,  goats,  demons.  A  city,  1  Chron.  4
31.

SHAASHGAZ,  he  that  presses  the  fleece  ;  or  he
that  performs  the  shearing  of  the  sheep.  Esth.
2.  14.

SHADRACH,  tender  nipple;  or  field  soft  and
tender.  Dan.  1.  7-
SHALIM,  fox,  or  fist,  or  path.

SH ALISHA,  three,  or  the  third;  or  prince,  or
captain.

SHALLUM,  perfect,  or  peaceable.

SHALMAN,  peaceable,  perfect;  or  that  rewards
Hos.  10.  14.

SHALMANEZER,  peace  tied  or  chained,  or
perfection  and  retribution,  or  peace  taken
away.

SHAMGAR,  named  a  stranger;  or  he  is  here
stranger ;  or  surprise,  astonishment  of  the
stranger.

SHAMHUTH,  desolation,  destruction,  astonish
ment ;  or  desolation  of  iniquity.  One  of  David',
captains.  1  Chron.  27-  8.

SHAMIR,  prison,  bush,  lees,  thorn.  Josh.  13
48.

SHAMMAH,  loss,  desolation,  astonishment.
SHAMMUAII,  he  that  is  heard,  or  obeyed.
SHAPHAN,  a  rabbit,  or  wild  rat;  or  their  brink
their  lip,  their  breaking.

SIIAPHAT,  a  judge,  or  judging.

SHARAI,  my  lord,  my  prince,  or  my  song.

man's  name,  Ezra  10.  40.

SHAREZER,  overseer  of  the  treasury,  or  of  the
store-house ;  or  the  treasures  of  him  that  sings  '
or  that  sees  the  ambushes.

SHARON,  his  plain,  field,  his  song.


or


SHASHAK,  a  bag  of  linen;  01  the  sixth  bag.

1  Chron.  8.  14.

SHAVEH.the  plain;  or  that  puts  or  makes  equal¬
ity.  Gen.  14.  5.

SH  EAL  I  !  EL,  1  have  asked  of  God.
SHEARIAII,  gate  of  the  Lord  ;  or  tempest  of  the
Lord.  The  son  of  Azel,  1  Chron.  8.  38.

SHEAR-J  ASHUB,  the  remnant  shall  return.
Marg.

SHEBA,  captivity,  or  compassing  about,  repose,
old  age.

SH  E  H  A  N I A  H,  the  Lord  that  tmiverts,  or  that  re¬
calls  from  captivity,  or  that  captivates;  or  that
understands,  that  builds.  Neh.  9.  4.

SH  EBN  A,  who  rests  himself,  or  who  is  now  cap¬
tive.

SHECIIEM,  part,  portion,  the  back,  shoulders,
early  in  the  morning.

SHEDEUR,  field,  pap,  all-mighty;  or  destroyer
of  fire,  *r  of  light.  Num.  1.5.

SHELAH,  that  breaks,  that  unties,  that  undresses.
SIIELEM1AH,  God  is  my  perfection,  my  hap¬
piness,  my  peace ;  or  the  peace  or  perfection  of
the  Lord.

SHELEPH,  who  draws  out.  The  son  of  Joktan,
Gen.  10.  26.

SHELOM1TH,  my  peace,  my  happiness,  my
recom pence.  Daughter  of  Zerubbabel,  1  Chr.

3.  19-

SIIELUMIEL,  peace  of  God,  or  God  is  my  hap¬
piness;  or  retribution  or  perfection  of  God.  Thi
son  of  Zvrishaddai ,  N  um.  1.  6.

SHEM,  name,  renown  ;  or  he  that  puts  or  places,
or  who  is  put  or  placed.  The  son  of  Noah,  from
whom  the  Messiah  was  descended.

SHEMA1AII,  that  hears,  or  that  obeys  the
Lord.

SHEMARIAH,  God  is  my  guard,  or  the  guard
of  the  Lord  ;  or  diamond,  dregs,  thorn,  or  bush
of  the  Lord.  1  Chron.  12.  5.

SHEMEBER,  name  of  force,  or  fame,  of  the
strong,  or  of  the  wing.  King  of  Zeboim,  Gen.
14.  2.

SHEMER,  guardian,  thorn.  1  Kings  16.  24.
SHEM  I  DA,  name  of  knowledge,  or  that  puts
knowledge;  or  the  knowledge  ot  desolation,  or
of  astonishment ;  or  the  science  of  the  heavens.
Son  of  Gilead,  Num.  26.  32.

SHEM  IN  ITH,  the  eighth.

SHEMI RAMOTH,  the  height  of  the  heavens  ;  or
the  elevation  of  the  name.  1  Chron.  15.  18.

SHEN,  tooth,  ivory,  or  change  ;  or  he  that  sleeps.
The  name  of  a  place,  1  Sam.  7-  12.

SHEN  1  R,  lantern,  or  light  that  sleeps;  or  renew¬
ing  of  the  lamp,  or  he  that  shews.

SHEPIIATI  AH,  the  Lord  that  judges  ;  the  judg¬
ment  of  the  Lord  ;  or  God  is  my  judge.
SHESHACH,  bag  of  flax,  or  linen;  or  the  sixth
bag.

SIIESHBAZZAR,  joy  in  tribulation;  or  pro¬
duction,  or  defence  of  joy  ;  0/  joy  of  the  vint¬
age.

SHE  1'HER-BOZN AT,  that  makes  to  rot  and
corrupt;  or  that  seeks  and  examines  those  who
despise  me.  Ezra  5.  3.

SI1EVA,  vanity,  elevation,  fame,  or  tumult  One
of  David's  scribes,  2  Sam .  20.  25.
SHIBBOLETH,  burden,  ear  of  corn,  or  current
of  water.

SHI  CRON,  drunkenness;  or  his  gift,  or  his  wages.
A  city,  Josh.  15.  11.

SHIGGAION,  a  song  of  trouble  or  comfort.

Psal.  7.  Title.

SHILOAH.  See  SILO  AH.

SHILOH, sent.  See  Appellatives.

SHILOH,  peace,  or  abundance.  A  city.

SHI  LON  I'i'E,  of  the  city  of  Shiloh.  1  Kings
11.  29.

SII I M  EAH ,  that  hears,  that  obeys.

SHIM  El,  that  hears  or  obeys;  or  name  of  the
heap  ;  or  that  destroys  the  heap  ;  or  my  reputa¬
tion,  my  fame.

SHIMSIIAI,  my  sun.

SII1NAR,  the  watching  of  him  that  Sleeps ;  or
spoil  of  the  tooth  ;  or  change  of  the  city.
SHIPIIRAH,  handsome,  or  trumpet ;  or  that
does  good.  An  Egyptian  midwife,  Exod.  1.
15

SHISIIAK,  present  of  the  bag,  of  the  pot,  of  the
thigh.  ..  .  ,

SHITTIM,  that  turn  away,  or  divert;  otherwise ,
scourge,  rods,  or  thorns.

SIIOBAB,  returned,  turned  back.  The  son  of
David,  2  Sam.  5.  14.  .

SHOBACH,  your  bonds,  your  chains,  your  nets,
your  gins  ;  or  his  captivity  ;  or  your  conversion,
your  return  ;  or  a  clove-house,  according  to  the
Syriac.  General  of  Hadarezer's  army,  2  Sam.

SHUAH,  pit,  or  that  swims;  or  humiliation
meditation,  or  word.

SH  UAL,  fox,  hand,  fist;  or  traces,  way.
SHUH1TE.

SIIULAMITE,  peaceable,  perfect,  that  recom¬
penses.

SHUN  AMITE,  a  native  of.  .

SHUN  EM,  their  change,  their  repeating,  their
second,  or  their  sleep.  1  Sant.  28.  4.

SHUR,  wall,  ox,  or  that  beholds.  A  wilderness,
Gen.  16.  7.

SIIUSHAN,  lily, rose,  or  joy.

SHUTHELAII,  plant,  or  verdure ;  or  moist  pot,
or  drinking  pot.  The  son  of  Ephraim,  Tsum.

26.  35.  ...  ,,

SIBMAII,  conversion,  return,  captivity,  old  age,

rest.

SI  DON,  hunting,  fishing,  venison.
SIGIONOTH,  according  to  variable  songs  or
tunes.  Marg.  .

SI  HON,  rooting  out ;  or  conclusion.

SIHOR,  black,  trouble  ;  or  early  in  the  morning
The  river  Nilus  in  Egypt,  Isa.  23.  3.


TAR


T  Y  R


Z  I  B  [Proper  Name*.


SILAS,  three,  or  the  third.

SILOAS  and  SI  LOAM,  sent,  or  who  sends  ,  or
dart,  branch,  or  whatever  is  sent.

SlLoE,  the  same.

SILVANUS,  who  loves  the  woods,  or  forests;
from  the  Latin  word  silva,  a  wood.

SIMEON,  that  hears,  that  obeys,  or  is  heard.

SIMON,  that  hears,  or  obeys.

SIN,  bush.

SINAI,  bush.  According  to  the  Syriac,  enmity.

SION,  noise,  tumult.  A  mountain  of  the  country
of  the  Antonies,  the  same  as  Ilermon,  Deut.
4.  48.

SIRION,  a  breast-plate;  or  deliverance,  ora
sons'  of  the  dove.

SIS  Ell  A,  that  sees  a  horse,  or  a  swallow.

SIVAN,  bush,  or  thorn.  This  is  the  Babylonian
name  of  the  third  month  of  the  Hebrew  year,
which  answers  in  part  to  our  May  and  June,
Esth.  8.  9.

SMYRNA,  myrrh.

SO,  a  measure  for  grain,  or  dry  matters.  An
Egyptian  word.

SOCOI1,  tents,  or  tabernacles.  A  city,  Josh.
15.  48.

SOD  I,  my  secret.  Father  of  Gaddiel,  Num.  13.

10.

SODOM,  their  secret,  their  lime,  their  cement.
SODOMITES.

SOLOMON,  peaceable,  pertect,  or  who  recom¬
penses.  lie  was  the  son  of  David  Icing  of
Israel.  lie  prayed  to  God  for  wisdom,  arid  ob¬
tained  wisdom,  riches,  and  honour,  lie  built  the
temple  at  Jerusalem,  where  the  sacrifices  were
to  be  offered  to  God.  He  married  Pharaoh's
daughter ,  and  built  for  her  an  house.  He  loved
many  strange  women,  who  turned  away  his  heart
after  their  gods.  It  is  thought  that  the  three
books  he  wrote,  namely.  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,
and  the  Canticles,  are  an  evidence  of  his  re¬
pentance.

SOP  A  TER,  who  defends  the  father,  or  the  health
of  the  father;  from  crto^oi,  1  save,  and  7ruT»ip,  fa¬
ther.  A  disciple  of  St.  Paul,  Acts  20.  4.

SOREK,  vine,  hissing,  a  colour  inclining  to  yel-

SOSIPATER.  See  SOPATER.

SOSTHEN  ES,  saviour,  strong  and  powerful,
from  cruo^to,  1  save,  and  Oevos,  strength,  force.

SPAIN,  in  Greek,  rare,  or  precious.

STACII YS,  spike  ;  from  ^axw.

STEPHANAS,  a  crown,  or  crowned  ;  from  ?e-
tpavri,  a  crown.

STEPHEN,  the  same.

SUCCOTH,  tents,  tabernacles.

SUCCOTH-BENOTH,  the  tabernacles  of  young
women,  or  the  tents  of  prostitutes.  2  Kings  1".
30.

SUR,  that  withdraws,  or  departs.  The  name  of
one  of  the  gates  of  Solomon's  temple,  2  Kings
11.  6.

SUSA  NN  A,  a  lily,  or  a  rose,  or  joy.

SUSI,  horse,  or  swallow,  or  moth.  The  father  of
Gaddi,  Num.  13.  11.

SYCHAR,  a  city,  John  4.  5.

S  YEN  E,  bush  ;  or  enmity,  according  to  the  Syriac,
Ezek.  29. 10.

SYNTYCHE,  that  speaks  or  discourses,  from
the  Greek  word,  trvvTuyxtzvto,  to  converse.  Phil.
4.  2.

SYRACUSE,  that  draws  violently.

SYRIA,  in  Hebrew,  Aram,  sublime,  or  that  de¬
ceives.

SYRIAC.

SY II 1 A  N ,  who  is  of  Syria.

SYRIANS.

SYROPHENIC1AN,  red,  or  purple,  drawn  to  ;
from  avpio,  I  draw,  and  <poivi£,  red,  palm-tree,
or  of  purple.

T.

TAANACH,  who  humbles  thee,  or  answers  thee,
or  afflicts  thee.  A  city,  1  Kings  4.  12.

TABBATH,  good,  or  goodness.  A  place,  Judg.

7.  42.

TABEAL,  good  God.

TAB  EEL,  the  same.  Ezra  4.  7-

TABERAH,  burning.

TABITHA,  is  a  Syriac  word,  signifying  clear¬
sighted.  She  is  also  called  Dorcas,  that  is,  wild
goat,  or  kid.

TABOR,  choice,  or  purity.  Syr.  bruising,  con¬
trition.

TABRIMON,  good  pomegranate;  or  goodness
raised  ;  or  the  navel,  or  middle,  prepared,
reckoned,  given.  The  father  of  Ben-hadad,  1
Kings  15.  18.

TADMOR,  the  palm,  or  palm-tree  ;  or  bitterness,
or  change.

TAHAPANES,  secret  temptation,  hidden  flight,
covered  standard.

TAHPENES,  standard,  flight,  temptation,  se¬
cret.

TALITHA-CUMI,  young  woman,  arise.  A
Syriac  and  Hebrew  expression,  Mark  5.  41.

TALMAI,  my  furrow  ;  or  that  suspends  the
waters  ;  or  heap  of  waters.  The  son  of  Anak,
Josh.  15.  14.

LAMAR,  a  palm,  or  palm-tree.

TAMMUZ,  abstruse,  concealed.

TANHUMETH,  consolation,  or  repentance  ;  or
bottle,  or  wall  that  is  given,  or  of  a  gift.  The
father  of  Seraiah,  2  Kings  25.  23.

TAPHAiH,  little  girl  .from  the  Hebrew,  Taphah.
or  Taph,  to  take  short  steps,  like  children  ;  other¬
wise ,  distillation,  drop.  7  he  daughter  of  Solomon,

1  Kings  4.  1 1.

TARP  ELITES,  ravishers,  or  wearied  ;  or  suc¬
cession  o-  erder  of  miracles,  or  ruinous  order,  or
rank.  The  name  of  a  people,  Ezra  4.  9.


TARSHISII,  contemplation,  or  examination,  of
the  marble,  or  of  the  joy  ;  or  precious  stone,  the
colour  of  marble.

TARSUS,  winged,  feathered.

TARTAR, chained,  bound,  shut  up.

TARTAN,  that  searches  and  examines  the  gift  of
the  turtle  ;  or  their  law.  2  Kings  18  17.
TATNAI,  that  gives,  or  the  overseer  of  the  gifts,
of  the  presents,  of  the  tributes.  Ezra  5.  3.
TEBAII,  murder,  butchery,  or  guarding  of  the
body,  a  cook.  Son  of  Xahgr  and  Reumah,  Gen.
22.  24.

TEBE  1  H,  the  Babylonish  name  of  the  tenth  month
of  the  Hebrews,  that  answers  partly  to  December,
and  partly  to  January.

TEKEL,  weight.

TEKOA,  trumpet,  or  sound  of  the  trumpet  ;  or
that  is  confirmed.

TEL-HARSA,  heap,  or  suspension  of  the  plough,
or  of  deafness,  of  silence  ;  or  suspension  of  the
head.  A  place ,  Ezra  2.  59.

TEL-MELAH,  heap  of  salt,  or  of  mariners  ;  or
suspension  of  the  salt,  or  of  the  mariner.  Ezra
2.  59.

TEMA,  admiration, or  perfection, consummation  ;
or  the  south.

TEMAN,  the  south,  or  Africa  ;  or  perfect.
TEMANITE,  an  inhabitant  i/Teman.

TER  AH,  to  breathe,  to  scent,  to  blow.
TERAPIIIM,  an  image,  an  idol.

TERT1US,  the  third.  Latin.

TERTULLUS,  a  liar,  an  impostor;  from  repa-
To\oyos,  a  teller  of  stories,  or  monstrous  things.
TETRARCH,  governor  of  a  fourth  part  of  a  king¬
dom.

THADDEUS,  that  praises  and  confesses.  Mark
.  3*  1B-

THAHASH,  that  makes  haste,  or  that  keeps  si¬
lence  ;  or  of  the  colour  of  hyacinth.  The  sun  of
Nahor,  Gen.  22.24.

1  HAMAH,  that  blots  out,  or  suppresses.  Ezra
2.  53.

THEBEZ,  muddy,  or  eggs;  or  fine  linen,  or
silk.

TIIELASAR,  that  unbinds  and  grants  the  sus¬
pension,  or  the  heap.  A  part  of  Syria,  2  Kings

19.  12.

THEOPHILLTS,  a  friend,  or  a  lover  of  God  ;

from  9eor,  God,  and  <pi\os,  a  friend.

TH  ESSA  LON  ICA,  victory  against  the  Thessa¬
lians.

Til  T.UDAS,  a  false  teacher.

THOMAS,  a  twin.

THYATIRA,  a  sweet  savour  of  labour,  or  sacri¬
fice  of  contrition  ;  from  Ova,  scent,  perfume,  and
reipio,  I  bruise,  1  disturb.

TIBERIAS,  good  vision,  or  the  navel,  or  a  break¬
ing  asunder.

TIBERIUS,  son  of  Tiber.  Luke  3.  1.

TIBNI,  straw,  or  hay  ;  otherwise,  understand¬
ing.

TIDAL,  that  breaks  the  yoke  ;  or  the  knowledge
of  elevation.  King  of  nations,  Gen.  14.  1.
TIGLATH-PILESER,  that  binds  or  takes  away
captivity,  miraculous,  or  ruinous  ;  or  that
hinders  or  binds,  and  withholds  the  snow  that
falls.

T1MEUS,  in  Greek  may  signify,  perfect,  honour¬
able:  in  Hebrew,  admirable.

TIMNATH,  image,  or  figure,  or  enumeration.
TIMON,  honourable*;  from  rmn>  Acts  6.  5.

Tl  MOTH  E  US,  honour  of  Go<L  or  valued  of  God  ;

from  Ting,  honour,  and  Geos,  God.

T1PIISAH,  passage,  leap,  or  step ;  or  the  pass-
over.  1  Kings  4.  24.

TIRHAKAH,  inquirer,  examiner  or  dull  obser¬
ver:  or  law  made  dull.  King  of  Ethiopia,

2  Kings  19-  9.

TIRSHATKA,  that  overturns  the  foundation;
or  that  beholds  the  time,  or  the  year  according
to  the  Syriac.

TIRZAH,  benevolent,  pleasant,  well-pleasing, or
that  runs.

TISHBITE,  that  makes  captives;  or  that  turns
back  or  recalls,  that  dwells.  1  Kings  17.  1.

TI  TUS,  honourable,  from  ruo,  I  honour.

TOB,  good,  or  goodness.  The  name  of  a  country,
Judg.  11.5.

TOB-ADONIJ AH,  my  good  God  ;  or  the  good¬
ness  of  the  foundation  of  the  Lord,  2  Citron.
17.  8.

TOBIAH,  the  Lord  is  good,  or  the  goodness  of
the  Lord.

TOGARMAH,  which  is  all  bone,  or  strong;  or
breaking  or  gnawing  of  the  bones.

TOHU  that  lives,  or  that  declares.  1  Sam.
1.1.  ‘

TO  I,  who  wanders,  King  of  Hamath,  2  Sam.  8.  9.
TOLA,  worm,  or  grub,  or  scarlet.

TOPHEL.ruin,  folly,  without  understanding,  in¬
sipid.  A  desert  place,  Deut.  1.1.

TOPHET,  a  drum,  or  betraying,  .See  Appella¬
tives.

TROAS,  penetrated  ;  from  Tirptoo-Kio,  I  pene¬
trate.

TROG  YT.LTUM,  a  city  in  the  isle  of  Samos.
TROPHIMUS,  well  educated,  or  brought  up;
from  Tpe0u),  to  bring  up,  or  educate.  Acts

20.  4.

TRYPHENA,  delicious,  delicate  ;  from  T perfuo.
TRYPHOSA,  thrice  shining.

TUBAL,  the  earth,  the  world  ;  or  that  is  carried,
or  led  ;  or  confusion.

TL1BAL-CAIN,  worldly  possession,  or  possessor
of  the  world  ;  or  who  is  jealous  of  confusion.
The  son  of  Lantech,  Gen.  4.  22.

TYCIIICUS,  casual;  happening;  from  toxo.
fortune.

TYR  ANNUS,  a  prince,  or  that  reigns.

TYRE,  in  Hebrew,  Sor,  or  Tzur  ;  strength,  rock,
sharp.

TY'RLr$,  the  same.


U.

UCAL,  power,  or  prevalency.

U LAI,  strength;  or  fool,  senseless.  The  name
of  a  river,  Dan.  8.  2.

ULAM,  the  porch,  the  court;  or  their  strength,
or  their  tolly'.  1  Chron.  7.  16.

ULLA,  elevation,  or  holocaust,  or  leaf,  or  young
child.  1  Chron.  7-  39.

UNNI,  poor,  or  afflicted,  or  that  answers.  The
name  of  a  porter  or  singer,  1  Chron.  15.  18.

UPH  AZ,  gold  of  Pkasis,  or  Pison,  the  finest  gold

U R ,  fire,  or  light.

UR  I,  my  light,  or  fire.

URIAH,  or  URIJAH,  the  Lord  is  my  light,  or
fire;  the  light  of  the  Lord.

URIEL,  God  is  my  light  or  fire;  or  the  light  of
God.  l  Chron.  15.  5.

URIM  and  TIIUMMIM,  lights  and  perfection.

UZ,  counsel,  or  wood ;  or,  according  to  the  Syriac,
to  fix,  to  fasten  to.

UZZAH,  strength,  or  a  goat.

UZZEN-SH  ERAH,  ear  of  the  flesh,  or  of  the
parent;  or  the  ear  of  him  that  remains.  A  city,

1  Chron.  7.  24.

UZZJ,  my  strength,  or  my  kid.  Son  of  Bulki,

1  Chron.  6.  5.

UZZIAH,  the  strength  of  the  Lord;  or  the  kid
ot  the  Lord.

LTZZIET„  the  strength  of  God;  or  kid  ot  God.

1  Chron.  7.7.

UZZI ELITES,  the  posterity  of  Uzziel.  K urn.
3.  27 .


y.

VASIINT,  the  second.  The  son  of  Samuel,

1  Chion.  6.  28.

VASHTT,  that  drinks  ;  or  thread,  or  woof.

V O  P  H  S I ,  fragm en t ,  or  diminution.  Father  A
Nahbi,  Num.  13.  14.

Z.

ZABDI,  portion,  dowry.  The  Father  of  Carmi,
Josh.  7.  l.

ZACCIIEUS,  pure,  clean  ;  just,  or  justified.

ZACHARIAH,  memory  of  the  Lord,  or  man  of
the  Lord.

7.  A  DO  K ,  just,  or  justified.

ZAHAM,  crime,  filthiness,  impurity.  The  sc •»  of
Rehoboam,  2  Chron.  11.  19.

ZA IR,  little  ;  or  afflicted,  in  tribulation.  A  city,

2  Kings  8.  21.

ZALMoN,  bis  shade,  his  obscurity,  his  image,
A  mountain,  Judg.  9.  48.

ZALMON  AH,  the  shade,  or  sound  of  the  mnn
ber  ;  or,  your  image,  or  picture.  One  of  the
stations  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  Nutn.
33.  41.

ZALMUNNA,  shadow',  image, or  idol  forbidden  ;
or  noise  of  trouble.

ZAMZUMMIMS,  thinking  wickedness,  or  wick
ednessof  wicked  men.  Giants,  Deut.  2.  20.

ZANOAH,  forgetfulness  or  desertion  ;  orthisrest,
this  consolation.  A  city.  Josh.  15.  34.

ZAPHN  ATH-PA  AN  EAIT,  one  that  discov  ers
hidden  things  ;  in  the  Egyptian  tongue,  a  Saviour
of  the  world.  The  name  that  Pharaoh  gave  to
Joseph,  Gen.  41.  45.

ZARA!!,  east,  brightness.

ZAREPI1ATH,  ambush  of  the  mouth;  or  cruci¬
ble,  in  which  metals  are  melted.

ZEBAD1AII,  portion  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Lord  is
mv  portion.  1  Chron.  8.  15.

ZEBAH,  victim,  sacrifice,  immolation.

ZEBKDEE.  abundant  portion.

ZEBOIM,  deer,  goats.

ZEBUL,  an  habitation.

ZEBULUN,  dwelling,  habitation.

ZECHAR1AH.  See  ZACHARIAH.

ZEDEKIAH.the  Lord  is  my  justice,  or  the  justice
of  the  Lord.

ZEEB,  wolf.  Judg.  7.  25.

ZELEK,  the  shadow,  or  noise  of  him  that  licks,
that  laps,  or  strikes.  One  of  David's  thirty
valiant  captains.  2  Sam.  23.  37.

ZELOPH  EH  AD,  the  shade,  or  tingling  of  fear;
or  the  fear  of  submersion,  or  of  being  bur  nt.

ZELOTES,  jealous,  or  full  of  zeal  ;  from  £riXor,
zeal,  jealousy.  The  surname  of  Simon,  Luke  6.
15.

ZELZAH,  noontide.

ZEN  AS,  living  ;  Jrom  £ao>,  I  live.

ZF.PHANIAH,  the  Lord  is  my  secret;  or  the
secret  of  the  Lord  ;  or  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.

ZEPHATH,  which  beholds,  that  attends,  that
covers.  A  city,  Judg.  1.  17.

ZEPHO,  that  sees  and  observes;  or  that  expects,
or  covers.  Son  of  Ehphaz,  Gen.  36.  11.

ZERAII.  See  ZA  RAH.

ZEREDA1I,  ambush,  change  of  dominion,  or  de¬
scent  ;  or  plan  of  power.  The  country  of  Jero¬
boam,  1  Kings  11.  26.

ZERESH,  misery',  stranger,  strange  or  dispersed
inheritance  ;  otherwise,  crown  of  inheritance,  or
of  misery.

ZERORj  root,  or  that  straitens,  that  binds,  that
keeps  tight;  or  a  stone.  1  Sam.  9.  1.

ZERUAH,  leprous,  or  wasp,  or  hornet.  The
mother  of  Jeroboam ,  1  Kings  11.  26.

ZERUBBABEL,  ban  ished ,  or  a  stranger  at  B  aby-
lon  ;  or  dispersion  of  confusion.

ZERUIAH,  pain,  or  tribulation,  chains  of  the

4  Lord.

ZETHAR,  he  that  examines  or  beholds  ;  or  olive
of  vision,  or  olive  of  the  turtle.  Esth.  1.  10.

ZIB  A,  army,  fight,  strength,  stag.

585


Proper  Nam  es.]  ZIN


ZOH


zuz


ZIBEON,  iniquity  that  dwells  ;  or  elevation,  or
swelling  ;  or  oath,  or  fulness,  or  the  seventh.

ZIBIAH,  deer,  or  goat,  or  honourable  and  fine;
or  the  Lord  dwells ;  or  voluntary,  according
to  the  Syriac.  The  mother  of  Joash,  2  Kings
12.  1.

Z1CHRT,  that  remembers,  or  that  is  a  male,
Exod.  6.  21.

Z1DQN,  hunting,  fishing,  venison.

ZIDON1ANS,  the  inhabitants  of  Zidon.

Z I E,  this,  or  that;  or,  according  to  the  Syriac,
brightness.  The  second  Hebrew  month ,  which
answers  partly  to  April  and  May.

ZIKLAG,  measure  pressed  down.

Z1LLAH,  shadow;  which  is  roasted  ;  the  ting¬
ling  of  the  ear.  The  wife  of  Lantech ,  Gen.  4.
19.

ZILPAH,  distillation  ;  or  contempt  of  the  mouth.

ZIMRAN,  song,  singer,  or  vine.  The  son  of
Abraham,  Gen.  25.  2.

ZTMRI,  my  field,  or  my  vine,  my  branch.

ZIN,  buckler,  coldness.


ZION,  a  monument  raised  up,  heap  of  stones  set
up,  sepulchre,  turret,  dryness.

ZIOR,  ship  of  him  that  watches,  or  is  awake,  or
of  him  that  is  robbed,  or  of  the  enemy.  A  city.
Josh.  15.  54.

ZIPH,  this  mouth,  or  mouthful.  A  city,  Josh.
15.  24.

ZIPPOR,  bird,  or  sparrow  ;  or  crown,  or  desert ;
or,  according  to  the  Syriac,  early  in  the  morning,
or  goat.  The  father  of  Balak,  Num.  22.  2.

ZIPPORAII,  beauty,  trumpet.

Z1TIIRI,  to  hide  :  or  demolished,  or  overturned  ;
or  my  refuge.  Sonof  Uttiel,  Exod.  6.  22.

ZIZ,  iiower,  branch,  a  lock  of  hair;  or,  according
to  the  Syriac,  wing,  feather.  The  side  of  a  moun¬
tain  or  hill,  2  Chron.  20.  16.

ZOAN,  motion.

ZOAR,  little,  small.

ZOBAtl,  an  army,  or  warring,  or  a  command¬
ment  in  that,  or  a  swelling.

ZOIIAR,  white,  shining,  or  dryness.  The  father
of  Ephron,  Gen.  23.  8


Z011ELETII,  that  creeps,  slides,  or  draws.  A
rock,  1  Kings  1.  9.

ZOPIIAR,  rising  early,  or  crown;  or  sparrow,
or  little  bird,  or  goat.  Syr.

ZORA11,  leprosy,  or  scab.

ZOKOBABEL.  See  ZERUBBABEL.

ZUA  R,  small.

ZUPH,  that  beholds,  or  observes,  or  watches,  ot
roof,  covering  ;  or  honey -comb,  or  that  floats.
The  fat  her  of  Tohu,  1  Sam.  1.  1.

ZUR,  stone,  rock,  that  besieges,  or  preaches  ;  or
plan,  form.

ZUR1SIIADDAI,  the  Almighty  is  my  rock,  my
strength  ;  otherwise,  splendour,  beauty  :  or,  ac¬
cording  to  the  Syriac,  revolters.  The  father  of
Shelumiel,  Num.  1.  6.

ZUZ  IMS,  the  posts  of  a  door  ;  or  splendour,
beauty.  These  were  giants  who  dwelt  beyond
Jordan,  and  who  were  conquered  by  Chedorlaomer
and  his  allies  Gen.  14.  15


/


CONCORDANCE  TO  THE  PROPER  NAMES


OF  THE

OLD  AND  NEW  TESTAMENT.


ABE

AARON.

Exod.  4. 14.  is  not  A.  the  Levite  thy  brother  1

5.  20.  they  met  Moses  and  A.  who  stood  in  way

6.  23.  A.  took  Elisheba,  sister  of  Naashon,  to  wife

7.  1.  and  A.  thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet
12.  but  A.  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods

16.  34.  A.  laid  up  the  pot  of  manna  before  testimony
1*.  12.  and  A.  and  Hur  stayed  up  his  hands
19.24.  thou  shaltcome  up,  tnou  and  A.  with  thee

24.  14.  and  behold  A.  and  Hur  are  with  you
28.  12.  and  A.  shall  bear  their  names,  29,  30.

30. 7-  A.  shall  burn  sweet  incense  every  morning

8.  when  A.  lighteth  the  lamps  at  even

10.  A.  shall  make  an  atonement  once  in  a  year  j

32.  35.  because  they  made  calf,  which  A.  made
40.  31.  Moses  and  A.  and  his  sons  washed  thereat
Lev.  8. 12.  he  poured  oil  on  A .  head  to  sanctity  him

30.  he  sprinkled  blood  on  A.  and  his  sons

9.  22.  A.  blessed  them  H  10.  3.  A  held  his  peace

16.  3.  thus  shall  A.  come  into  the  holy  place
8.  A.  shall  cast  lots  ||  24.  3.  A.  shall  order  it

21.  A.  shall  lay  his  hands  on  the  head  of  the  goat
Kum.  1.  3.  A  shall  number  them  by  their  armies
8.  11.  A.  shall  offer  the  Levites  before  the  Lord

16.  11.  what  is  A.  that  ye  murmur  against  him?

16.  come  thou,  they,  and  A.  to-morrow  before  L.
43.  Moses  and  A.  came  before  the  tabernacle

17.  3.  shalt  write  A.  name  upon  the  rod  of  Levi

10.  bring  A.  rod  again  before  the  testimony

20.  8.  thou  and  A.  thy  brother  speak  to  the  rock

28.  A.  died  there  in  the  top  of  the  mount ;  Moses
and  Eleazar  came  down,  33.  38.  Dent.  32.  50.
33. 39.  A.  was  120  years  old  when  he  died  in  Hor
Deut.  9.  20.  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  A.

Josh.  24.5. 1  sent  Moses  and  A.  and  I  plagued  Egy  pt
and  brought  you  out,  1  Sam.  12.  8.  Mic.  6.  4.

1  Sam.  12. 6.  the  Lord  that  advanced  Moses  and  A.

!  1 Chron.  6.3.  sons  of  Amram,  A.  and  Moses,  23. 13.
Psal.  77.20.  thou  leddest  thy  peop.  by  Moses  and  A.
99. 6.  Moses  and  A.  among  his  priests,  and  Samuel
106. 16.  they  envied  A.  the  saint  of  the  Lord
115. 10.  O  house  of  A.  trust  in  the  Lord
12.  the  Lord  will  bless  the  house  of  A.

118.  3.  let  house  of  A.  say ,  his  mercy  endur.  forever
133.  2.  ointment  that  ran  down  upon  A.  beard
135. 19.  bless  the  Lord,  O  house  of  A.

Luke  1.5.  his  wife  was  of  the  daughters  of  A.

Acts  7.40.  saying  to  A.  make  usgcSs  to  go  before  us
Heb.  5.  4.  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  was  A.

7- 11.  and  not  be  called  after  the  order  of  A.

;  9-4.  A.  rod  that  budded,  and  tables  of  covenant
Sons  of  AARON.  See  Abihu  and.  Nadab.
AARON  TIES.

1  Chron.  12.  27.  Jehoiada  was  leader  of  the  A.

27.  17.  Zadok  was  the  ruler  of  the  A.

ABADDON.

t  He v.  9. 11.  the  angel  of  the  bottomless  pit  is  A.
ABAGTHA.

Eseh.  1.  10.  A.  was  chamberlain  to  Ahasuerus
ABANA.

2  Kings  5. 12.  are  not  rivers  A.  and  Pharpar  better

ABARIM.  See  Mount.

ABBA.  See  Father.

I  .  ABDA.

1  Kings  4.6.  Adoniram  son  of  A.  was  over  the  tribu.
Ken.  11.  17.  A.  was  for  thanksgiving  in  prayer

A  BD1.

2  CG.  29. 12.  of  sons  or  Merari,  Kish  the  son  of  A.
Ezra  10. 26.  A.  of  them  that  married  strange  w'ives

ABD1EL.

1  Chron.  5. 15.  Ahi  son  of  A.  chief  of  the  house

_  ,  ABDON.

ovdg.  12. 13.  A.  judged  Israel  ()  15.  A.  died

2  Chr .  34. 20.  commanded  A.  to  inquire  of  the  Lord

ABED-NEGO.

Haw.  1.  7.  he  gave  to  Azariah  the  name  of  A.

‘•49.  the  king  set  A.  over  the  affairs,  3.  30.

3.23.  A.  fell  down  bound  into  the  fiery  furnace
ABEL,  person,  or  place.

,  4.4.  Lord  had  respect  to  A.  and  his  offering

l  Sam.  6. 18.  stone  of  A.  whereon  they  set  the  ark


AB  I

2  Sam.  20. 18.  they  shall  surely  ask  counsel  at  A.
Mat.  23.  35.  from  the  blood  of  A.  Luke  11.  51.
Heb.  11.  4.  by  faith  A.  offered  a  more  excellent

sacrifice

12.  24.  speaks  better  things  than  the  blood  of  A.
ABEL-BETH-MAACIIAH.

1  Kings  15.  20.  Ben-hadad’s  captains  smote  A.

2  Kings  15.  29.  Tiglath-pileser  came  and  took  A.

ABEL-MA1M.

2  Chron.  16.  4.  they  smote  Ijon,  and  Dan,  and  A.
ABEL-MEHOLAH.

Judg.  7.  22.  the  host  fled  to  the  border  of  A.

I  Kings  19-  16.  Elisha  the  son  of  Shaphat  of  A.
ABEL-M1ZRA1M.

Gen.  5u.  11.  mourning,  name  of  it  was  called  A.
AB1AH.

1  Sam.  8. 2.  the  name  of  Samuel’s  second  son  was  A.

1  Chr. 2.24.  A.  Hezron's  wife  ||  7. 8.  son  of  Becher  A.
3.  10.  the  son  of  Rehoboam  was  A.  Mat.  1.  7.

AB  1-ALBON .

2  Sam.  23.  31.  A.  was  one  of  David’s  mighty  men

AB1ATHAR.

1  Sam.  22.  20.  A.  escaped  and  fled  to  David
23.  6.  w’hen  A.  son  of  Ahimelech  fled  to  David

9.  David  said  to  A.  bring  hither  the  ephod,30. 7.

2  Sam.  8.  17-  Zadok  and  A.  were  the  priests,  and

Seraiah  was  the  scribe,  20.  25.  1  Kings  4.  4.

1  Kings  2.22.  ask  the  kingdom  for  him  and  A.

27.  so  Solomon  thrust  out  A.  from  being  priest

Mark  2.  26.  how  went  into  house  ofG.  in  daysof  A.
ABIB.

Ezod.  13.  4.  ye  came  out  in  the  month  A  34.  18.

23.  15.  thou  shalt  keep  the  feast  of  unleavened

bread  in  the  month  A.  34.  18.  Deut.  16.  1.
AB1DAN.

A um.  1.  11.  of  Benjamin,  A.  son  of  Gideoni,  2.22.
7. 60.  on  the  ninth  day  A.  of  Benjamin  offered,  65.
ABIEZER.

Josh.  17.  2.  there  was  a  lot  for  the  children  of  A.
Judg.  6.  34.  and  A.  was  gathered  after  him

8.  2.  is  it  not  better  than  the  vintage  of  A.

2  Sam.  23.  27.  A.  was  one  of  David’s  mighty  men

ABI-EZRITE.

Judg.  6.  11.  an  oak  that  pertained  to  Joash  the  A.
ABIGAIL.

1  Sam.  25.  3.  the  name  of  Nabal’s  wife  was  A.

27.  3.  David  dwelt  at  Gath  with  his  two  wives,
Ahinoam  and  A.  30.  5.  2  Sam.  2.  2.

1  Chron.  2.  16.  whose  sisters  were  Zeruiah  and  A.

ABIGAIL.

2  Chr.  11. 18.  Rehoboam  took  A.  daughter  of  Eliab
Esth.  2. 15.  turn  of  Esther  the  daughter  of  A.  9.  29.

ABIHU.

Exod.  6. 23.  Aaron’s  sons  N  adab  and  A .  28. 1.  Lev.
10.  1.  Num.  3.  2. 1  26.  60.  1  Chron.  6.  3. 1  24.  1.

24.  1.  come  up,  A.  ||  9.  then  A.  went  up
Num.  3.  4.  A.  died  before  the  Lord,  26.  61.

ABI.1AH,  AB1  JAM.

1  R  ings  14.  1.  A.  the  son  of  Jeroboam  fell  sick
31.  A.  the  son  of  Rehoboam  reigned,  15.  1,  7.

1  Chron.  24.  10.  the  eighth  lot  came  forth  to  A.

2  Chron.  29.  1.  Hezekiah’s  mother’s  name  was  A.
Neh.  10.  7-  those  that  sealed  were  A.  Mijamin

12.  4.  w  ent  up  with  Zerub.  A.  ||  17.  of  A.  Zichri
AB1MELECH.

Gen.  20.  2.  A.  king  of  Gerar  sent  and  took  Sarah
21.  22.  A.  and  Pichol  spake  to  Abraham,  saying
26.  1.  Isaac  went  to  A.  ||  16-.  A.  said,  go  from  us
Judg.  8.  31.  Gideon’s  concubine  bare  him  A.

9.  1.  A.  the  son  of  Jerubbaal  went  to  Shechem
2  Sam.  11.  21.  who  smote  A.  son  of  Jerubbesheth
1  Chron.  18.  16.  Zadok  and  A.  were  the  priests

ABINADAB.

1  Sam.  7-  1.  brought  the  ark  into  the  house  of  A.
16.8.  Jesse  called  A.  made  him  pass  before  Samuel
17.  13.  A.  followed  Saul  to  the  battle

31.  2.  Philistines  slew  A.  son  of  fyaul,  1  Chr.  10.  2.

2  Sam.  6.3.  they  set  the  ark  on  new  cart,  and  brought

it  out  of  the  house'of  A.  1  Chron.  13.  7.

1  Kings  4. 11.  A.  had  Solomon’s  daughter  to  wife
ABINOAM.  See  Bakak.


ABR

_  _  ,  ABIRAM.

J\um.  16. 1.  Dathanand  A.  the  sons  of  Eliab,  26.  9.

12.  and  Moses  sent  to  call  Dathan  and  A.

Deut.  11.  6.  and  what  he  did  to  Dathan  and  A.

1  Kings  16.  34.  he  laid  the  foundation  in  A.

Psal.  106.  17.  the  earth  covered  the  company  of  A.
ABISHAG.

1  Rings  1.  15.  and  A.  ministered  to  king  David
2.22.  and  why  dost  thou  ask  A.  for  Adonijah?

,  _  AB1SHAI.

1  Sam.  26.6.  A.  said,  1  w  ill  go  down  with  thee

2  Sam.  2.  18.  and  there  were  three  sons  of  Zeruiah
--  , .  *lerei>  J°ab-.  A.  and  Asahel,  1  Chron.  2.  16.

10. 14.  the  Ammonites  fled  also  before  A.

18.  12.  the  king  charged  thee,  and  A.  and  Ittai
03  Succ°ured  him,  and  smote  the  Philistine

23.  18.  A.  was  chief  among  three,  1  Chron.  11.  20.
1  Chron.  18.  12.  A.  slew  of  the  Edomites  18,000.
ABIUD.

Mat.  1. 13.  Zorobabel  begat  A.  and  A.  beg.  Eliakim
„  ABNER.

1  Sam.  14.  51.  Ner  father  of  A.  was  son  of  Abiel

17.  55.  Saul  said  to  A.  whose  son  is  this  youth  J
‘6-  7 -hut  A.  and  the  people  lay  round  about  him

14.  David  cried,  answerest  thou  not,  A.  ?

%  Sam.  2.  14.  A.  said,  let  young  men  play  before  us

3.  Q5.  Jacob  said,  thou  knovvest  A.  the  son  of  Ker
30.  so  Joab  and  Abishai  his  brother  slew  A.

32.  they  buried  A .  in  Hebron,  king  w  ept  at  grave

33.  the  king  said,  died  A.  as  a  fool  dieth  ?

37.  that  it  was  not  of  the  king  to  slay  A.

4.  1.  when  Saul’s  son  heard  that  A.  was  dead

12.  and  buried  lsh-bosheth’s  head  in  A.  sepulchre
1  Kings  2.  5.  thou  knowest  what  Joab  did  to  A.

1  Chron.  26.  28.  all  that  A.  had  dedicated

27.  21.  Jaasiel  son  of  A.  ruler  of  Benjamin

ABRAM,  ABRAHAM.

Gen.  12. 1.  Lord  said  to  A.  get  out  of  thy  country

10.  A.  went  down  into  Egy  pt  to  sojourn  there

j  UP  °ut  of  Egypt,  he  and  his  wife
12.  A.  dwelt  in  land  of  Canaan,  and  Lot  in  cities

18.  A.  came  and  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  Mature

14. 14.  A.  armed  his  trained  servants,  318.

15.  1.  tear  not,  A.  1  am  thy  exceeding  great  reward

18.  that  day  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  w  ith  A.

17.  5.  thy  name  shall  be  A.  1  Chr.  1.  27.  Neh.  9.  7.

18.  6.  A.  hastened  into  the  tent  unto  Sarah

17.  shall  1  hide  from  A.  that  thing  which  I  do

22.  but  A.  stood  yet  before  the  Lord
20.2.  A.  said  of  Sarah  his  wife,  she  is  my  sister

21.  33.  and  A.  planted  a  grove  in  Beer-sheba

22.  1.  God  did  tempt  A.  and  said,  take  thy  son

11.  the  angel  called  outof  heaven,  and  said,  A.  A.

23.  2.  Sarah  died,  and  A.  came  to  mourn  for  her
17.  A.  bought  the  field  of  Ephrou,  49.  30.  |  50.  13.

24.  1.  the  Lord  had  blessed  A.  in  all  things
,  2.  A.  said,  put  thy  hand  under  my  thigh

34.  Eliezer  said,  l  am  A.  servant

42.  O  L.  God  of  my  master  A.  prosper  my  way
59.  they  sent  away  Rebekah  and  A.  servant

25.  5.  and  A.  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  Isaac
7  ■  these  are  the  days  of  the  years  of  A.  life

12.  Ishmael,  whom  Hagarthe  Egyptian  bare  to  A

26.  1.  besides  famine  that  was  in  the  days  of  A.

5.  because  A.  obeyed  my  voice,  kept  my  charge
24.  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  tor  A.  sake”

28.  4.  and  God  give  thee  the  blessing  of  A.

31.  42.  except  the  God  of  A.  had  been  w  ith  me
50.  24.  bring  to  land  which  he  sware  to  A.  Exod.
r  *  l}UTn-  lj  L)eut-  L  8.  I  6.  10.  I  30.  2o!
Exod.  3.  6.  1  am  the  God  of  A.  15, 16.  |  4. 5.  Mat.  22.

32.  Mark  12.  26.  Luke  20.  37.  Acts  3.  13.  |  7.  32’

32.  13.  remember  A.  Isaac,  and  Israel,  Deut.  9.27
Psal.  47.  9..  even  the  people  of  the  God  of  A.

105.  9.  which  covenant  he  made  with  A.

42.  he  remembered  his  promise,  and  A .  his  servant
Isa.  29.  22.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  who  redeemed  A.
63.  16.  art  our  father,  though  A.  be  ignorant  of  us
Ezek.  33.  24.  A.  was  one,  and  he  inherited  the  land
Mic.  7.  20.  thou  wilt  perform  the  mercy  to  A.

Mat.  1. 1.  Christ  the  son  of  David,  the  son  of  A

587


Proper  Names. J  ADA


AHA


AM  A


Mat.  3.9.  G.  able  to  raise  up  child,  unto  A .  Luke  3. H.

8.  11.  shall  sit  down  with  A.  in  kingdom  or  heaven
L vice  3.  34.  which  was  the  son  of  A.  son  of  I  bara

13.  28.  when  ye  shall  see  A .  in  the  kingdom  of  (tod
16.  23.  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  and  seeth  A.  afar  on
19.  9.  forasmuch  as  he  also  is  the  sou  of  A.

John  8.  40.  this  did  not  A.  ||  52.  A.  is  dead
5“.  hast  thou  seen  A.  ?  11  58.  before  A.  was,  1  am
Acts  13.  26.  children  of  the  stock  of  A.  word  is  sent
Rom.  4.  2.  for  if  A.  were  justified  by  works,  he  hath
3.  A.  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him
for  righteousness,  9-  Gal.  3.  6.  Jam.  2.  23.
Gal-  3.  7.  who  are  of  faith  are  the  chiloren  of  A.

8.  preached  before  the  gospel  to  A.  in  thee  shall

9.  they  of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  A.

18.  God  gave  the  inheritance  to  A.  by  promise

4  22  A.  had  two  sons,  the  one  by  a  bond-maid
iieb.  6.  13.  for  when  God  made  promise  to  A.

7.  1.  who  met  A.  returning  from  the  slaughter

9.  as  I  may  so  say,  Levi  paid  tithes  in  A.

11.  8.  A.  obeyed  ||  17-  by  faith  A.  offered  up  Isaac
ABRAHAM  with  father.

Gen.  26.  3.  I  will  perform  the  oath  to  A.  thy  father

24.  I  am  the  Goa  of  A.  thy  father,  28.  13.

32.  9.  O  God  of  my  father  A.  and  God  of  Isaac
Josh'  24.  3.  1  took  your  father  A .  from  the  other  side
Isa.  51.  2.  look  to  A.  your  father  and  to  Sarah
Mat.  3.  9.  we  have  A.  to  our  father,  Luke  3.  8.

Luke  1.  73.  the  oath  which  he  sware  to  out  father  A.

16.  24.  he  said,  father  A.  have  mercy  on  me
30.  nay,  father  A.  but  if  one  went  from  the  dead
John  8.  39.  they  said  to  him,  A.  is  out  father
53.  art  thou  greater  than  out  father  A.?

56.  your  father  A .  rejoiced  to  see  my  day,  was  glad
Acts'.  2.  the  God  of  glory  appeared  toou  r  father  A.
Rom.  4.  1.  what  say  that  A.  out  father  hath  found
12.  in  the  steps  of  that  faith  of  out  father  A.

16.  the  faith  of  A.  who  is  the  father  of  us  all
Jam.  2.  21.  was  not  A .  our  father  justified  by  works  r
ABRAHAM  joined  with  seed.

£  Chron.  20.  7.  and  gavest  it  to  seed  of  A.  thy  friend
Psal.  105.  6.  O  ye  seed  of  A.  his  servant
]sa.  41.  8  thou  Israel,  the  seed  of  A.  my  friend
Jer.  33.  26.  to  be  rulers  over  the  seed  of  A.  Isaac
Luke  1.  55.  as  he  spake  to  A.  and  his  seed  for  ever
John  8.  33.  we  be  A .  seed  and  were  never  in  bondage
37.  I  know  ye  are  A.  seed  but  ye  seek  to  kill  me
Rom.  4.  13.  the  promise  was  not  to  A.  or  to  his  seed
9.  '.  neither  because  they  are  the  seed  of  A.

11.  1.  I  also  am  of  the  seed  of  A.  2  Cor.  11.  22.

Gal.  3.16.  to  A.  and  hism’rfwere  the  pronusesmade

29.  if  ye  be  Christ’s,  then  are  ye  A.  seed  and  heirs
Heb.  2.  16.  he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  A.

ABSALOM.

2  Sam.  3.  3.  A.  the  son  of  Maacah,  1  Chron.  3.  2.

1.3.  22.  A.  spake  to  Amnon  neither  good  nor  bad

23.  A.  had  sheep-shearers  in  Raal-hazor

30.  saying,  A.  hath  slain  all  the  king’s  sons
.39.  the  soul  of  king  Daw  longed  to  go  forth  to  A.

14.  23.  so  Joab  arose  and  brought  A.  to  Jerusalem

25.  there  was  none  to  be  so  much  praised  as  A.

15.  4.  A.  said,  O  that  I  were  made  a  judge  in  land
6.  so  A.  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel

31.  Aliithophel  is  among  the  conspirators  with  A.

16.  22.  A.  went  in  unto  his  father’s  concubines

17.  4.  Ahithophel’s  counsel  pleased  A.  well

14.  that  the  Lord  might  bring  evil  upon  A
20.  and  when  A.  servants  came  to  the  woman

24.  A.  passed  over  Jordan  ||  26.  pitched  in  Gilead

18.  5.  saying,  deal  gently  for  my  sake  with  A.

10.  behold,  I  saw  A.  hanged  in  an  oak

14.  he  thrust  three  darts  through  the  heart  of  A.

18.  and  it  is  called  unto  this  day  A.  place
29.  is  young  man  A.  safe  ?  32.  1 .3.3.  O  my  son  A.

19.  6.  if  A.  had  lived,  and  all  we  had  died  this  day

1  Kings  2.  7.  when  I  tied  because  of  A.  thy  brother

28.  he  turned  after  Adoniiah,  though  not  after  A.

2  Chron.  11.  20.  he  took  Maacah  daughter  of  A.

ACCHO.

Judg.  1 . 31.  nor  did  Asher  drive  out  inhabitants  of  A .
ACIIAIA.

Acts  18.  12.  when  Gallio  was  the  deputy  of  A.

27.  A  polios  was  disposed  to  pass  into  A.

Rom.  15.  26.  it  pleased  them  of  A .  to  make  contnb.

16.  5.  salute  Epcnetus,  the  first-fruits  of  A.

1  Cor.  16.  15.  house  of  Stephanas,  first-fruits  of  A.

£  Cor.  9.  2.  that  A.  was  ready  a  year  ago

11.  10.  no  man  shall  stop  me  in  the  regions  of  A.

1  Thess.  1.  7.  ye  were  ensamples  to  all  in  A.

8.  from  you  the  word  sounded  not  only  in  A.
ACHAICUS.

1  Cor.  16.  17.  I  am  glad  of  the  coming  of  A.

ACH AN,  or  ACIlAll.

Josh.  7.  18.  A.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  was  taken
22.  20.  did  riot  A.  son  of  Zerah  commit  a  trespass
1  Chr.  2. 7.  A.  the  troubler  of  Isr.  who  transgressed
ACHIM.

Mat.  1.  14.  Sadoc  begat  A.  and  A.  begat  Eliud
ACHISH.

1  Sam.  21.  10.  David  fled  and  went  to  A.  27-  2.

12.  was  afraid  of  A.  ||  27-  6.  A.  gave  him  Ziklag

29.  2.  David  passed  on  in  the  rereward  with  A.

Q.  A.  said,  I  know  thou  art  good  in  my  sight

I  Kings  2.  40.  and  Shimei  went  to  Gath  to  A.
ACHMETHA.

Ezra  6.  2.  there  was  found  at  A.  a  roll
ACHOR.

Josh.  7 .  26.  was  called  the  valley  of  A.  to  this  day
Isa.  65.  10.  the  valley  of  A.  a  place  for  herds
Hos.  2.  15.  give  the  valley  of  A.  for  a  door  ot  hope
ACIISAH.

Josh.  15.16.  to  him  I  will  give  A.  to  wife,  Judg.  1. 12.
ACHSHAPH.

Josh.  11.  1.  king  Jabin  sent  to  the  king  of  A.

12.  20.  king  of  A.  one  |l  10.  25.  their  border  A.
ACHZ1B.

Josh.  19.  29  Asher’s  lot  from  the  coast  to  A.

Mtc.  1.  14.  the  houses  of  A.  shall  be  a  lie  to  Israel
ADAM.

Gen.  2.  +  15.  G.  took  A.  and  put  him  in  the  garden

20.  A .  gave  names  to  all  cattle  and  fowl  of  the  air
5.  2.  he  blessed  them,  and  called  their  name  A.
^88


Deut.  32.8.  when  he  separated  the  sons  ot  A.

Job  31.  33.  if  I  covered  my  transgressions  as  A.
Rom.  5.  14.  death  reigned  from  A.  to  Moses
1  Cor.  15.  22.  for  as  in  A.  all  die,  even  so  shall
45.  first  man  A.  the  last  A.  a  quickening  spirit

1  Tim .  2.  13.  for  A.  was  first  termed,  then  Lve
14  and  A.  was  not  deceived,  but  the  woman

Jucle  14.  Enoch  the  seventh  from  A.  prophesied
ADAM.

Josh.  3.  16.  the  city  A.  that  is  beside  Zaretan

ADAR.  „  .

Ezra  6. 15.  this  house  was  finished  on  thu  d  day  of  A,
Esth.  .3.7.  they  cast  lot  till  the  twelfth  month  A.

13.  kill  on  13th  day  of  month  A.  8.  12. 1  9.  1, 17-
9. 15.  the  Jews  gathered  on  the  14th  day  ot  A.

19.  Jews  made  14th  day  of  A.  a  day  of  gladness
21.  to  keep  the  14th  and  15th  days  of  A.  yearly
ADDI.

Luke  3.  28.  which  was  the  son  of  A.  son  of  Cosam
AD  MAH.  _

Gen.  14.  2.  these  made  war  with  Shinab  king  of  A .
Deut.  29.  23.  like  the  overthrow  of  A.  and  Zeboim
Hos  11.  8.  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  A. !

A  DONI-B  EZEK.

Judg.  1.  5.  and  they  found  A.  in  Bezek  and  fought
ADONIJAH.

2  Sam.  3.  4.  A.  the  son  of  Haggitli,  1  Chron.  3.  2.

1  Kings  1.5.  then  A.  exalted  himself,  saying
11.  hast  thou  not  heard  that  A.  doth  reign  r

24.  God  save  king  A.  II  50.  A.  feared,  51.

2.  21.  she  said,  let  Abishag  he  given  to  A.  to  wite

25.  A.  shall  be  put  to  death  this  day

28.  Joab  had  turned  after  A.  tbo’  not  after  Absal.

2  Chr  17.  8.  sent  Levites  to  teach,  A .  and  1  obijah
Neh.  10. 16.  chief  of  (he  people  sealed,  A.  and  Adin

A  DON  I K AM.

Ezra  2.  13.  the  children  of  A.  666,  Neh.1.  18.
ADRAMMELF.CH.

2  Kings  17-31.  Sepharvites  burnt  children  to  A.

10  37  A  and  Sharezer  smote  him,  Isa.  37  .  38.

ADRAMYTT1UM.

/Jets  27  2.  entering  into  a  ship  of  A.  we  launched
ADR  I  A.

dru  or  as  we  were  driven  up  and  down  in  A,

‘  adullam.

1  Sam.  22. 1.  David  therefore  departed  thence,  and

escaped  to  the  cave  A.  1  Chron.  11. 15.

2  Sam.  23. 13.  three  of  the  thirty  came  to  Dac.  to  A,
Mic.  1. 15.  he  shall  come  to  A .  the  glory  of  Israel

AG  A  BRIS.

Acts  11  28.  there  stood  up  one  of  them,  named  A.
21.  10.  there  came  down  a  prophet  named  A.

AG  AG.

Num.  24.  7-  his  king  shall  be  higher  than  A.

1  Sam.  15.  9.  but  Saul  and  the  people  spared  A.
33.  Samuel  hewed  A.  in  pieces  before  the  Lord
AG  AGILE.  See  Daman.

AGAR.  .

Gal.  4.  24.  one  gendereth  to  bondage,  which  is  A.
25  for  this  A.  is  mount  Sinai  in  Arabia
AGRIPPA.

Acts  <15.  13.  A.  and  Bernfoe  came  to  Cesarea
2°  A  said,  1  would  also  hear  the  man  myself

1  _ __  at _  r\  a


26.  and  specially  before  thee,  O  king  A.

C6.7.  for  which  hope’s  sake,  king  A.  1  am  accused

»  1  •  \  1  ..  E.  ...  «L/Mt  ♦  V-. ti  nrnnViotc  *


27.  king  A.  believest  thou  the  prophets  ?  .

°8  A  said,  almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  Chris.
AGUR.

Prov.  30.  1.  the  words  of  A.  the  son  of  Jakeh
AIIAB.

1  Kings  16.  30.  A.  did  evil  above  all  before  him
3.3.  A.  did  more  to  provoke  Lord  than  all  kings

18. 1.  Lord  said  to  Elijah,  go  shew  thyself  to  A.

6.  A.  went  one  way,  and  Obadiah  went  another
9.  deliver  me  into  the  Hand  of  A.  to  slay  me
42.  so  A.  went  up  to  eat  and  to  drink
46.  Elijah  ran  before  A .  to  the  entrance  of  J  ezreel

20.  13.  behold  there  came  a  prophet  to  A.

21  4  A.  came  to  his  house  heavy  and  displeased

21.  I  will  cut  off  from  A.  him  that  pisseth
25.  there  was  none  like  A.  who  did  sell  himself
29.  seest  thou  how  A.  humbleth  himself  before  me
22*  20.  who  shall  persuade  A.  that  he  may  go
up  and  fall  at  Ramoth-Gilead  ?  2  Chron.

40.  so  A.  slept  with  his  fathers,  Abaziah  reigned

2  Kings  1.1.  Moab  rebelled  after  death  of  A.  3.  5.

8  18  Jehoram  walked  as  did  the  house  of  A.  for

the  daughter  of  A.  was  his  wife,  27

9.  7.  thou  shalt  smite  the  house  of  A.  thy  master
8.  for  the  whole  house  of  A.  shall  perish
25.  when  I  and  thou  rode  after  A.  his  father

10.  11.  Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  of  A.  in  Jezreel

21.  3.  Manasseh  did  as  A.  king  of  Israel
13.  I  will  stretch  the  plummet  of  house  ot  A.

2  Chr.  21. 13.  like  the  whoredoms  of  the  house  of  A.
Jer.  2*9.  21.  saith  the  Lord  of  A.  son  of  Kolaiah
clcl.  a  curse,  saying,  the  Lord  make  thee  like  A.
Mic  6. 16.  the  works  of  the  house  of  A.  are  kept
AHASUERUS.

Ezra  4.  6.  in  the  reign  of  A.  wrote  they  to  him
Esth.  1.  1.  this  is  A.  which  reigned  from  India  to

2.  16.  so  Esther  was  taken  unto  king  A.

Cl.  and  sought  to  lay  hand  on  the  king  A.  6.  2.

3.  12.  in  the  name  of  A.  was  it  written,  8.  10.

8  1  A.  gave  to  Esther  the  house  of  Daman
10.  3.  Mordecai  the  Jew  was  next  to  king  A.

Dan.  Q.  1.  in  the  first  year  ot  Darius  son  of  A.

AlIAVAIl.

Ezra  8.  15.  gathered  to  the  river  that  runneth  to  A.
21.  a  fast  at  A.  |1  31.  then  we  departed  from  A.
AHAZ.

2  Kings  16.2.  A  .was  twenty  years  old  when  he  began
to  reign,  did  not  what  was  right,  2  Chron.  28. 1.
11.  Urijah  made  the  altar  against  A.  came
20. 11 .  had  gone  down  in  the  dial  of  A.  Isa.  38.  8.
2.3  12.  the  altars  of  A.  did  Josiah  beat  down
\  Chron.  8.  35.  the  sons  of  Micah,  Pithon,  A.  9.  41.

o  Ch  "8  19  Lord  brought  Judah  low,  because  ot  A.

*  22*  this  is  that  khfg  A.  ||  24.  A.  gathered  vessels
Isa.  1. 1.  the  vision  in  days ot\A.  Hos. 1.1.  Mtc. 1.1.
7. 3.  go  forth  to  meet  A.  ||  10.  the  Lord  spake  to  A .


AII AZI AII.

1  Kings  22.  40.  A. reigned  in  his  stead,  2  Kvkjs  8.24

2  Kings  1.  2.  A.  fell  through  a  lattice  and  was  sick

8.  29.  A.  king  of  Judah  went  down  to  see  Joram

9.  23.  Joram  said  to  A.  there  is  treachery,  O  A.

27.  A.  fled,  and  Jehu  followed  after  him

10.  13.  they  answered,  we  are  the  brethren  of  A
0  Chron.  20.  .35.  Jehoshaphat  did  join  with  A.

12.  7.  tiie  destruction  of  A.  was  of  God
9.  house  of  A.  had  no  power  to  keep  the  kingdom
AHIAH.

1  Sam.  14.3.  A.  son  of  Ahitub,  the  Lord’s  priest
18.  Saul  said  to  A.  bring  hither  the  ark  of  God
1  Kings  4.  3.  Elihoreph  and  A.  were  scribes
A1I1JAH.

1  Kings  1 1.  29.  the  prophet  A.  found  Jeroboam
12.  15.  that  he  might  perform  his  saying,  wnich
the  Lord  spake  by  A.  2  Chron.  10. 15.

14.  2.  there  is  A.  that  told  me  I  should  be  king
4.  Jeroboam’s  wife  came  to  the  house  of  A.

6.  it  was  so,  when  A.  heard  the  sound  of  her  feet

15.  27.  Baasha  son  of  A.  conspir  d  against  him

1  Chron.  2.25  thesonsof  Jerahmeel,  Hezron,  A.

11.  36.  David’s  valiant  men,  A.  thePelonite

26.  20.  over  treasury  of  Levites  A.  over  treasures

2  Chr.  9.  29.  the  acts  of  Solomon  in  prophecy  of  A
Neh.  10.  26.  the  Levites  that  sealed  the  covenant,  A

AII1KAM.

2  Kings  22  12.  Josiah  commanded  A.  the  son  of
Shaphan  to  inquire  of  the  Lord,  2  Chr.  34.  20.

25.  22.  he  made  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.  ruler
Jer.  26.  24.  the  hand  of  A.  was  with  Jeremiah

40.  6.  Jeremiah  went  to  Gedaliah  the  son  of  A.

See  G  EDA  Ll  \  H.

AIIIMAAZ.

1  Sam.  14.  50.  Saul’s  wife  was  the  daughter  of  A.

2  Sam.  17.  17.  Jonathan  and  A.  staid  by  En-roge)

18.  27.  is  like  the  running  of  A.  son  ot  Zadok

1  Kings  4. 15.  A.  was  in  Naphtali,  he  took  Basmatb
1  Chron.  6.  8.  Ahitub  begat  Zadok,  and  Zadok  A.
AHIMAN.

Num.  13.22.  A.  was  of  the  children  of  Anak
Judg.  1. 10.  Judah  slew  A.l|  1  Chr.  9. 17-  porters,  A.
AHIMELECH.

1  Sam.  21.  1.  A.  was  afraid  at  the  meeting  of  David
22.  9.  1  saw  trie  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  A.

16.  the  king  said,  thou  shalt  surely  die,  A.

26.  6.  Dav .  said  toA.  who  will  go  down  with  me '

2  Sam.  8. 17.  Zadok  and  A.  priests,  1  Chron.  18. 16.

1  Chron.  24.  3.  A.  of  the  sons  of  lthamar  according

6.  Shemaiah  the  scribe  wrote  them  before  A.

31.  these  cast  lots  in  the  presence  of  David  and  A.
AH1NOAM.

1  Sam.  14.  50.  the  name  of  Saul’s  wife  was  A.

25.  43.  David  also  took  A.  of  Jezreel  his  wife

See  A  big  a  1  l.

AH  IO.

‘lSam.6.  3.  Uzzah  and  A.drave  the  cart.l  Chr.  13  7
AH1SAMACH.

Exod.  35.  34.  both  he  aDd  the  son  of  A.  may  teach
AIUTHOPHEL.

2  Sam.  15.  12.  Absalom  sent  for  A.  the  Gilonite
31.  Lord,  turn  the  counsel  of  A.  into  foolishness  ;
34.  then  mayest  thou  defeat  the  counsel  of  A.

16. 15.  Absalom  came  to  Jerusal.  and  A.  with  him
23.  the  counsel  of  A.  was  as  it  a  man  inquired

17.7.  the  counsel  of  A.  is  not  good  at  this  time

15.  thus  and  thus  did  A.  counsel  Absalom
2.3.  A.  saw  that  his  counsel  was  not  followed
1  Chron.  27  .  33.  A.  was  the  king’s  counsellor
AHITUB.

1  Sam.  22. 12.  Saul  said,  hear  now,  thou  son  of  A.

2  Sam.  8.  17.  Zadok  the  son  of  A.  1  Chron.  18.  16.

AIIOLAH,  AHOLIBAH.

Ezek.  23.  4.  Samaria  is  A.  Jerusalem  Aholibah
36.  son  of  man,  wilt  thou  judge  A.  and  Aholibah?
AIIOL1AB.

Exod.  36.  1.  then  wrought  Bezaleel  and  A.
AHOLIBAMAH.

Gen.  36.  2.  Esau  took  to  wife  A.  H  5.  A.  bare  Jeusr.
A I ,  or  H  A I .

Gwen.  13.  3.  Abram  dwelt  between  Beth-el  and  A.
Josh.  7.  4.  and  they  fled  before  the  men  of  A  .

8.1.  go  up  to  A.  ||  10. 2.Gibeon  was  greater  than  A
Ezra  2  28.  the  men  of  Beth-el  and  A.  Neh.  7.  32.
Jer.  49.  3.  howl,  O  Heshbon,  for  A.  is  spoiled

Isa  10.  28.  he  is  come  to  A.  he  is  passed  to  Migroi
AJALON.

Josh.  10. 12.  stand,  thou  moon,  in  the  valley  of  A.
ALEXANDER.

Mark  15.  21.  Simon  the  father  of  A.  and  Rufus
Acts  4.  6.  Annas,  Caiaphas,  A.  were  gathered
19.  33.  they  drew  A.  out  of  the  multitude
1  Tim.  1.  20.  of  whom  is  Ilymeneus  and  A.  ■

0  Tim.  4. 14.  A.  the  copper-smith  did  me  much  evil
ALEXANDRIA,  ANS.  jl

Acts  6.  9.  the  synagogue  of  the  Libertines  and  A.
18.  24.  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos,  born  at  A.
27  6.  centurion  found  a  ship  of  A  .sailing  into  ltarlv
ALPHEUS.

Mat.  10.  3.  the  names  of  the  apostles,  James  the  so
of  A.  Mark  '. 3.  18.  Luke  6.  15.  Acts  1.  1?
Mark  2.  14.  he  saw  Levi  the  son  of  A.  sitting  at
AMALEK.  J

Gen.  .36.  12.  Timna  hare  to  Eliphaz  Esau’s  son  A.

Exod.  17.  8.  then  came  A.  and  fought  with  Israel
14.  1  will  utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  A

16.  Lord  hath  sworn  he  will  have  war  with  A.
Num  24.  20.  when  he  looked  on  A .  he  took  up  n
parable  and  said  A.  was  the  first  of  the  naiioi
Deut.  25.  17.  remember  what  A.  did,  1  Sam.  15.'

19.  thou  shalt  blot  out  the  remembrance  of  A.
Judg.  5.  14.  out  of  Ephraim  was  a  root  against  A
1  Ham.  15. 3.  smite  A.  ||5.  Saul  came  to  a  city  of  /
28.  18.  thou  didst  not  execute  his  wrath  on  A.  ;
IJsal.  83.  7.  Gebal,  Ammon,  A.  are  confederate
AMALEK  IT  E,  S.  ,

Num.  14.  45.  the  A.  came  down  and  smote  Israel
Judg.  6.  3.  when  Israel  had  sown  the  A  .came  again
7  12.  Midianitesand  A.  lay  like  grasshoppers
10. 12.  the  A  did  oppress  you,  and  ye  cnen  foul


A  N  A


ARE


ASH  [Profek  Navmi


t  Sam.  14.  48.  Saul  smote  tl.e  A.  15.  7.

15.  6.  Saul  said  to  Kenites,  getyou  from  among  A.
20  yea,  I  have  utterly  destroyed  the  A.

27  8.  David  and  his  men  irfvaded  the  A.

30.  l.  the  A.  had  invaded  the  south  and  Ziklag
2  Sam.  1 . 1 .  David  returned  from  the  slaughter  of  A.

8.  and  l  answered  him,  I  am  an  A.  13.

]  Chron.  4.  43.  they  smote  the  rest  of  the  A.

[  AM  AN  A.

Cant.  4.8.  look  from  the  top  of  A.  from  Shenir
AMASA.

2  Sam.  1".  25.  Absalom  made  A.  captain  of  the  host,
win  h  A.  was  the  son  of  Ithra  an  Israelite
I  20.  9.  Joab  took  A  .  by  the  beard  to  kiss  him

12.  A.  wallowed  in  blood  in  the  high- way
1  Kings  2.  5.  thou  knowest  what  loab  did  to  A.  32.

1  Ciir.  2.  17.  Abigail  bare  A.  the  father  was  .Tether
,  2  Chr.  28.12.  A  son  of  Iladlai  stood  up  against  them

AMAZ1AH.

2  Kings  12.  21.  A.  his  son  reigned,  2  C/iron.  24.  27.
L  13.  12.  wherewith  he  fought  against  A.  14.  15.

14.  11.  but  A.  would  not  hear,  therefore  .lehoash

15.  3.  as  his  father  A.  had  done, 2  Chron.  28.  4.

1  Citron.  6.  45.  of  Merari,  A.  the  son  of  Hilkiah

2  Citron.  25-27-  after  A. did  turn  from  the  Lord
Amos  7.  10.  A.  priest  of  Beth-el,  sent  to  Jeroboam

A  MM  AH.

2  Sam.  2.  24.  when  they  were  come  to  the  hill  A.
A  MM  I.

Eos.  2.  1.  say  ye  unto  your  brethren,  A.  and  sisters
AMMINADAB.

Erod.  6.  23.  Aaron  took  Elisheba  daughter  of  A.
Ruth  4.  20.  and  A.  begat  Nahshon,  Mat.  1.  4.
AMM1-NADIB.

Cant.  6.  12.  m3-  soul  made  me  like  the  chariots  of  A.
„  AMMON.

Gen.  IQ.  38.  Ben-ammi,  father  of  children  of  A.
Judy.  10.  11.  did  not  I  deliver  you  from  A.  ?

I  11.  4,  the  children  of  A.  made  war  against  Israel
15.  Israel  took  not  the  land  of  the  children  of  A.
i  3.3.  thus  the  children  of  A.  were  subdued
2  Sam.  10.  ll.it  the  children  of  A .  be  too  strong  for
thee,  I  will  help  thee,  1  Chron.  19'  12.
14.  children  ot  A.  saw  that  the  Syrians  tied

12.  9.  hast  slain  Uriah  with  sword  of  children  of  A.
3L  thus  did  he  to  all  children  of  A.  1  Chr.  20.  .3.

1  Kings  11.  7.  built  an  high  place  for  Molech  the
abomination  of  the  children  of  A.  2  Kings  2.3. 13.

3.3.  Mileom  the  god  of  the  children  of  A.

A«/i.  1.3.  23.  Jew's  that  had  married  wives  of  A.
Psal.  83.  7.  Gebal  and  A .  confederate  against  thee
i  Jsa.  11.  14.  the  children  of  A.  shall  obey  them
Jer.  9.  26.  I  will  punish  the  children  of  A.

25.  21.  1  made  children  of  A.  to  drink  of  the  cup
49.  6.  1  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  A.

Pan.  11.  41.  these  shall  escape,  the  chief  of  A.
Zeph.  2.  9.  children  of  A.  shall  be  as  Gomorrah

•  AMMONITE,  S.

Deut.  23.  3.  A.  not  enter  into  congregat.  Neh.  13. 1.

1  ‘jaw.  11.  11.  slew  the  A.  till  the  heat  of  the  day

1  Kings  11.1.  king  Solomon  loved  women  of  the  A.
i  2  Chron.  26.  8.  and  the  A.  gave  gifts  to  Uzziah

Ezra  9. 1.  do  according  to  the  abomination  of  A.

>  Jer.  27-  3.  make  yokes,  and  send  to  the  king  of  A.
49.  2.  an  al arm  of  war  to  be  heard  in  Kabbah  of  A.
Esek.  25.  5.  make  A.  a  couching  place  for  flocks

10.  that  the  A.  may  not  be  remembered
I  .  A  M  NON.

2  Sam.  3.  2.  David’s  first-born  was  A.  1  Chr.  3.  1.

13.  2.  A.  vexed,  fell  sick  for  his  sister  Tamar

26.  1  pray  thee,  let  my  brother  A.  go  with  us
28.  when  I  say,  smite  A.  then  kill  him,  fear  not

1  Chron.  4.  20.  the  sons  of  Shimon,  A.  Rinnah
^  A  MON.

1  Kings  22.  26.  carry  him  back  to  A.  2  Chr.  18.  25.

2  Kings  21.  18.  A.  reigned  ||  23.  his  servants  slew  A.

.1  \p'lTon-  -33.  22.  A.  sacrificed  to  carved  images

Neh.  7.  59.  came  out  of  captivity  children  of  A.
Mat.  1. 10.  Manasses  begat  A.  and  A.  begat  Josias
AMOR1TE,  S.

Gen.  15.  16.  the  iniquity  of  the  A.  is  not  yet  full
,  48.  22.  which  I  took  from  A.  with  my  sword
Deut.  20.  17.  thou  shalt  utterly  destroy  the  A.

.  Josh.  3.  10.  God  will  without  fail  drive  out  the  A.

:  10.  12.  in  the  day  when  the  Lord  delivered  up  A.

24. 15.  or  gods  of  A.  in  whose  land  ye  dwell
Judg.  6.  10.  I  said,  fear  not  the  gods  of  the  A.

11.23.  the  Lord  God  hath  d-ispossessed  the  A.

1  Sam.  7.  14.  was  peace  between  Israel  and  the  A.

2  Sam.  21.  2.  the  Gibeonites  w’ere  of  the  A.

1  Kings 21.  26.  Ahab  did  abominably  as  did  the  A.

2  Kings  21.  11.  Manasseh  did  above' all  the  A.  did
Ezek.  16.  3.  thy  father  an  A.  mother  an  Hittite,45.
Amos  2.  9.  yet  destroyed  I  the  A.  before  them

[  ..  AMOS,  or  AMOZ.

2  Kings  19  2.  Isaiah  the  son  of  A.  20.  |  20.  1.  2
Chron.  26.  22.  |  .32.  20,  .32.  Isa.  1.
3.  I  2.  1.  |  13.  1. 1  20.  2. 1  .37.2,21.  1
38.  1.

Amos  7-  14.  then  A.  said,  I  was  no  prophet
Luke  3.  25.  Mattathias,  which  was  the  sou  of  A.
AMPI I IPOLIS.

Acts  17.  1.  now  when  they  had  passed  through  A.
AMP  LI  AS.

Rom.  16.  8.  greet  A.  my  beloved  in  the  Lord
AM  RAM.

Eiod.  6. 18.  the  sons  of  Kohath,  A.  Nnm.  3.  19.

1  Chron.  1.  41.  the  sons  of  Dishon.  A.  and  Eshban

6.3.  the  children  of  A.  Aaron,  Moses,  and  Miriam
Ezra  10.  .34.  of  the  sons  of  Bani,  Maadi,  A.

_  A  NAIL

Gen.  36.  21  this  was  that  A.  that  found  mules
ANAK.

Num.  13.28.  the  cities  are  great,  and  moreover  we
saw  the  children  of  A.  there,  .3.3.
Dent.  9. 2.  who  can  stand  before  the  children  of  A .?
Josh.  15.  14.  Caleb  drove  thence  the  three  sons  of
A.  Sheshai,  Ahiman,  and  Talmai,  Jndy.  1.  20.

_  AN  A  KIMS.

Deut.  2.  10.  the  people  great  and  tall  as  the  A .  9.  2.
Josh.  11.  22.  none  of  the  A.  were  left  but  in  Gaza

14. 15.  which  Arba  was  a  great  man  among  the  A.


_  ANAMMELECH.

2  Ami. 17.31.  Adrammelech,  A.  gods  of  Sepharvaim
.  ANANIAS.

Acts  5.  5.  A.  hearing  these  words  fell  down
9.  12.  he  hath  seen  in  a  vision  A.  coming,  22.  12

23.  2.  the  high  priest  A.  commanded  to  smite

24.  1.  A.  the  priest  descended  with  the  elders

ANATHOTH.

Josh.  21.  18.  out  of  Beniamin,  A .  with  her  suburbs,
Almon  with  her  suburbs,  1  Chron.  6.  60.
1  A  tugs  2.  26.  get  thee  to  •».  to  thine  own  fields
1  Chron.  7.  8.  the  sons  of  Becher  A.  and  Alameth
SeJi.  10.  19.  A.  and  NeOai  sealed  the  covenant
i-w.  10.30.  lift  up  thy  voice,  O  poor  A.

Jer.  11.  23.  I  will  bring  evil  on  the  men  of  A.

29.  27.  why  hast  thou  not  reproved  Jeremiah  of  A.
32.  7.  saying,  buy  my  field  that  is  in  A.  8.
ANDREW.

Mark  1.  29.  they  entered  into  the  house  of  A.

13.  3.  James,  John,  and  A.  asked  him  privately
John  1.  40.  one  of  the  two  which  heard  was  A.

44.  Philip  was  of  Bethsaida  the  city  of  A.

12.  22.  Philip  telleth  A.  and  A.  told  Jesus
Acts  1  A3,  w'here  abode  Peter,  John,  James,  and  A.
ANDRONICUS.

Rom.  16  7.  salute  A.  and  Junia  my  kinsmen
ANER.

Gen.  14.  24.  A.  Eshcol,  let  them  take  their  portion
1  Chron.  6. 70.  out  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  A.
ANN  A.

Duke  2.  36.was  A.  a  prophetess  daughter  of  Phanuel
ANNAS.

Luke  3.  2.  A.  and  Caiaphas  being  high  priests
John  18.  13.  A.  was  fatlier-in-law  to  Caiaphas
24.  A.  had  sent  Jesus  bound  to  Caiaphas
ANTICHRIST,  S.

1  John  2  18.  A.  will  come,  now  there  are  many’  A.

22.  he  is  A.  that  denieth  the  Father  and  Son

4.  .3.  this  is  that  spirit  of  A.  whereof  ye  heard

2  John  7.  this  is  a  deceiver  and  an  A.

AN  TIOCH.

Acts  11.  19.  they  travelled  as  far  as  A.  22.

20.  some  when  come  to  A.  spake  to  the  Grecians
26.  the  disciples  were  called  Christians  first  in  A.

1.3.  14.  they  came  to  A.  in  Pisidia  and  taught

14.  26.  and  from  Attaliathey  sailed  to  A.

15.  22.  to  send  men  of  their  own  company  to  A.
.35.  Paul  also  and  Barnabas  continued  in  A.

Gal.  2.  11.  when  Peter  was  come  to  A.  I  withstood
2  Tim.  3.  11.  persecutions  which  came  to  me  at  A.
AN TIPAs.  Martvr.
ANTIPAT  RIS.

Acts  23.  31.  the  soldiers  brought  Paul  by  night  to  A.
APELLES.

Rom.  16.  10.  salute  A.  approved  in  Christ
APHEK.

1  Sam.  4.  l.the  Philistines  pitched  in  A.  29.1.

1  Kings  20.  30.  the  rest  tied  to  A.  there  a  wall  fell

2  Kings  13.  17.  thou  shalt  smite  the  Syrians  in  A.

APOLLON 1 A.

Acts  17.  1.  more  when  they  had  passed  through  A.
APOLLOS.

Acts  18. 24.  certain  Jew  named  A.  came  to  Ephesus
1  Cor.  1.  12.  1  am  of  A.  3.  4.  ||  3.  5.  who  is  A.  ?

3.  6.  1  have  planted,  A.  watered,  God  gave  increase

4.  6.  I  have  in  a  figure  transferred  to  A.

Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Zenas  and  A.  on  their  journey
APOLLYON.

Rev.  9.  11.  in  the  Greek  tongue,  his  name  is  A.
APPII-FORUM.

Acts  28.  15.  they  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  A.
AQU1LA.

Acts  18.  2.  Paul  found  a  certain  Jew  named  A.

26.  when  A.  and  Priscilla  heard  A  polios
Rom.  16.  3.  greet  A.  and  Priscilla,  2  Tim.  4.  19.

1  Cor.  16. 19.  A.  and  Priscilla  salute  you  in  the  Lord
AR.

Num.  21.  28.  the  fire  hath  consumed  A.  of  Moab
Deut.  2.  9.  _1  have  given  A.  to  the  children  of  Lot
ha.  15.  1.  in  the  night  A.  of  Moab  is  laid  waste
ARABIA.

1  Kings  10.  15.  besides  what  Solomon  had  of  mer¬

chant-men  and  of  kings  of  A.  2  Chron.  9.  14.
Jsa.  21.  13.  the  burden  upon  A.  shall  lodge  A.

Jer. ‘lb.  24.  give  the  cup  to  all  the  kings  of  A.

Gal.  1. 17. 1  went  into  A .  and  returneoto  Damascus
4.  25.  for  this  Agar  is  mount  Sinai  in  A.
ARABIAN,  S.

2  Chron.  17-  11.  the  A.  brought  Jehoshaphat  flocks
26.  7-  God  helped  Uzziah  against  the  A.

Isa.  13.  20.  nor  shall  the  A.  pitch  tent  there
Jer.  3.  2.  thou  sattest  for  them  as  A.  in  wilderness
Acts  2.  11.  Cretes  and  A.  we  do  hear  them  speak
ARAM.

Gen.  10.22.  the  sons  of  Shem,  Lud,  A.  1  Chron.  1. 17.
Num.  23.  7.  Balak  king  of  Moab  brought  me

from  A.

Mat.  1.  3.  Esrom  begat  A.  ||  4.  A.  begat  Aminadab
Luke  3.  33.  Aminadab  which  was  the  son  of  A.

See  Paijan.

ARARAT.

Gen.  8.  4.  the  ark  rested  on  the  mountains  of  A.

Jer.  51.  2". call  against  her  the  kingdoms  of  A.
AKAUN  AH.

2  Sam.  24. 16.  angel  was  by  the  threshing-place  of  A.

23.  all  these  did  A.  as  a  king  give  to  David
ARBA.

Josh.  14.15.  A.  wasa  greatman  among  the  Anakims
ARBA.

Josh.  21.  11.  gave  them  A .  which  city’  is  Hebron
ARCHELAUS.

Mat.  2.  22.  when  Joseph  heard  that  A.  did  reign
ARCHIPPUS.

Col.  4.  17.  say  to  A.  take  heed  to  the  ministry
Philem.  2.  Paul  to  A .  fellow-soldier  and  the  church
ARC1URUS.

Joh9-  9.  which  maketh  A  .  Orion,  and  Pleiades
38.  32.  or  canst  thou  guide  A.  with  his  sons?

A  REOP  AGILE.

Acts  17.  34.  among  which  was  Dionysius  the  A.
AREOPAGUS.

Acts  17.  19.  they  took  Paul,  and  brought  him  to  A.


A  R  ETAS.

2  Cor.  11.  32.  the  governor  under  A.  the  king
ARGOB.

Deut.  3.  4.  all  the  region  of  A.  13. 14.  1  Kings  A.  13*
ARIEL.

Ezra  8.  16.  I  sent  for  Eliezer  and  A.  chief  men
Isa.  29.  1.  woe  to  A.  the  city  where  David  dwelt
2.  1  will  distress  A.  it  shall  be  to  me  as  A.

7.  multitude  of  the  nations  that,  fight  against  A.
A  RIM  A  l  UFA.

Mat.  27-  57-  Joseph  of  A.  who  was  ~esus’  disciple,
Mark  J5.  43.  Luke  23.  51.  John  19.  38
AKIOCH.

Gen.  14.  1.  in  the  days  of  A.  king  of  Ellasar
Dan.  2.  25.  then  A.  brought  in  Daniel  before  king
„  ARIS  TARCHUS.

Acts  19.  29.  and  having  caught  Ga.‘  js  and  A.

20.  4.  A.  accompanied  Paul  into  Asia

27.  2.  one  A.  a  Macedonian  being  with  us

Col.  4.10.  A.  fellow-prisoner  saluteth  you,  PhileA^
„  A  ILLS  TOBULUS.

Rom.  16. 10.  salute  them  that  are  of  A.  household

ARMAGEDDON.

Rev.  16.  16.  he  gathered  them  together  to  A.

.  ARMENIA.

2  A  3WSU19.37.  they  escaped  into  land  of  A .  Isa.37.3&

„T  ARNON.

hum.  21.  14.  what  he  did  in  the  brooks  of  A.

22.  36.  Balak  met  Balaam  in  the  border  of  A.
Deut.  2.  24.  rise  up,  and  pass  over  the  river  A .
Judg.  11.  26.  while  Israel  dwelt  by  the  coasts  of  A.„
Isa.  16.  2.  daughtersot  Moab  shall  be  at  fords  of  A  .
Jer.  48.  20.  tell  ye  it  in  A.  that  Moab  is  spoiled

AROER.

Num.  32.  31.  the  children  of  Gad  built  A.

1  Sam.  30.  28.  David  sent  a  present  to  them  in  A.

2  Sam.  24.5.  passed  over  Jordan  and  pitched  in  A.

1  Chron.  5.  8.  Bela,  who  dwelt  in  A.  even  to  Nebe*
Isa.  17.  2.  the  cities  of  A.  are  forsaken

Jer.  48.  19.  O  inhabitant  of  A.  stand  by  the  way
ARPAD,  ARPHAD.

2  K  ings  18.  34.  where  are  the  gods  of  A.  Isa.  36.  19-
19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  A.  ?  Isa.  .37.  13

Isa.  10.  9.  for  he  saith,  is  not  Hamath  as  A.  ?

Jer.  49.  23.  Hamath  is  confounded  and  A.
ARPHAXAD.

Gen.  10.  2-2.  the  son  of  Shem,  A.  11. 10.  1  Chr.  1. 17.
Luke  3.  36.  Cainan,  who  was  the  son  of  A.
ARTAXERXES.

Ezra  4.  7.  in  the  days  of  A.  wrote  Bishlam
6.  14.  according  to  the  commandment  of  A.

7-  1.  in  the  reign  of  A.  Ezra  went  up,  8.  1.

11.  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  A.  gaye  to  Ezra

21.  1 ,  even  1  A.  the  king  do  make  a  decree
Neh.  2.  1.  in  20th  yearof  A.  wine  was  before  him
5. 14.  was  governor  from  20th  to  32d  year  of  A.

ART  EM  AS.

Tit.  3.  12.  when  I  shall  send  A.  to  thee  or  Tychicus-
ASA.

1  Kings  15.  11.  A.  did  what  was  right,  2  Chr.  14.2-

14.  A.  his  heart  was  perfect,  2  Chron.  15.  17.

18.  A.  took  the  silver  and  gold,  2  Chron.  16.2.

1  Chron.  9.  16.  Berechiah  the  son  of  A .  a  Levite

2  Chron.  14.  11.  A.  cried  to  the  Lord  his  God
■  15.  2.  Azariah  went  out  to  meet  A.  and  said

19.  there  was  no  war  to  the  35th  year  of  A

16.  10.  A.  was  wroth  with  the  seer,  and  pot  him*
in  prison,  A.  oppressed  some  of  the  people-
Jer.  41. 9.  the  pit  was  it  which  A.  had  made
Mat.  1.".  Abia  begat  A.  ||  8.  A.  begat  Josaphat
ASAHEL.

2  Sam.  2.  18.  sonsof  Zeruiah,  Joab,  A.  1  Chr.  2.  16-
21.  A.  would  not  turn  aside  from  following  Abney
32.  they  took  up  A.  and  buried  him  in  Beth-lehem
3.  27.  Abner  died  for  the  blood  of  A.  his  brother

23.  24.  A.  was  one  of  the  thirty,  1  Chron.  11.  26.

2  Chron.  17.  8.  he  sent  Levites,  Zebadiah,  A.

31.  13.  Jehiel,  Nahath,and  A.  were  overseers
Ezra  10.  15.  son  of  A.  was  employed  about  this
ASA!  AII.

1  Chron.  4.  36.  Jeshohaiah  and  A.  were  princes
6.  30.  the  sons  of  Merari,  Haggiah,  A.

9.  5.  of  the  Shilonites,  A.  the  first-born

2  Chron.  34.  20.  king  Josiah  sent  A.  to  Huldah

ASAPH.

2  Kings  18. 18.  Shebna  the  scribe  and  Joah  the  sos
of  A.  the  recorder,  37.  Isa.  .36.  3,  22

1  Chr.  6.  39.  A.  son  of  Berechiah,  9-  15  I  15.  17.

16.  7.  David  delivered  first  this  psalm  to  A.

25.  1.  of  the  sons  of  A.  2.  |  26.  1.  2  Chron.  5.  12.  I

20.  14.  |  29.  13.  1  35.  15.  Ezra  2.  41.1  3.  10.
Neh.  7-  44. 1  11.  17,  22.  |  12.  35.

9.  the  first  lot  came  forth  for  A.  to  Joseph

2  Chr.  29.  30.  the  Levites  to  sing  with  words  of  A.
35.  15.  according  to  the  commandment  of  A.

Neh.  2.  8.  a  letter  to  A.  keeper  of  the  forest

12.  46.  in  the  days  of  A.  were  songs  of  praise
ASENATH.

Gc7j.41.45.  A.  daughter  of  Poti-pherah,  50.  |  46.  20.
ASHDOD.

1  Sam.  5.  1.  the  Philistines  brought  the  ark  to  A.

6.  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  heavy  on  them  of  A .

2  Chr. ‘lb.  6.  Uzziah  warred  against  Philistines  and

brake  down  wall  of  A.  and  built  cities  about  A.
Neh.  13.  23.  Jews  that  had  married  wives  of  A.

24.  their  children  spake  half  in  the  speech  of  A.
Isa.  20.  1.  Tartan  came  and  fought  against  A.

Jer.  25.  20.  I  made  remnant  of  A.  drink  of  the  cup
Amos  1.  8.  1  will  cut  off  the  inhabitant  from  A.

3.  9.  publish  in  the  palaces  at  A.  and  of  Egypt
Zeph.  2.  4.  they  shall  drive  out  A.  at  noon-day
Zech.  9.  6.  and  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in  A.
ASHER.

Gen.  30.  13.  and  Leah  called  his  name  A.

35.  26.  the  sonsof  Zilpah,  Leah’s  maid,  Gad,  A.
46.  17.  the  children  of  A.  Sum.  1.  40.  126.  44.

1  Chron.  7.  30,  40.  |  12.36.
49.  20.  out  of  A.  his  bread  shall  he  fat  and  yield
Nnm.  1.  13.  prince  of  A.  was  Pagiel,  2.  27.  I  7.  72.

26.  46.  the  name  of  the  daughter  of  A  was  Sarah
Deut.  27-  13.  these  on  Ebal  to  curse  ;  Gad  and  A.
33.  24.  of  A.  he  said,  let  A.  be  blessed  with  children

589


Proper  Names.]  A  T  H


BAA


B  A  J


Judg.  5.  17.  A.  continued  on  the  seashore  and  abode

6.  35.  Gideon  sent  messengers  to  A.  and  Zebulun

7.  23.  men  out  of  A.  pursued  the  Midianites

l  Kings  4.  1G.  Baanah  ttie  son  of  Hushai  was  in  A.

1  Chron.  12.  36.  of  A.  expert  in  war  40,000

2  Chron.  30.  11.  divers ot  A  .  humbled  themselves
Ezek.  48.  2.  a  portion  for  A .11  .34.  one  gateot  A.

Tribe  of  ASIIER.

Sum.  1.  41.  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  A.  41 ,500
2.  27.  them'^e  of  A.  shall  encamp  by  l)an
10.  26.  over  the  host  of  tribe  of  A.  was  Pagiel
13.  13.  of  the  tribe  of  A.  to  spy  the  land.Shetur
34.27.  prince  of  the  tribe  of  A.  to  divide,  Ahihud
Jush.  19.  24.  the  fifth  lot  for  the  tribe  of  A.

31.  this  is  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  A.

21.  6.  the  children  of  Gershom  had  cities  out  of
the  tribe  of  A.  30.  |  1  Chron.  6.  62,  74.
Luke  2.  36.  Anna  daughter  of  Phanuel  ot  tribe  of  A.
Rev.  7.  6.  of  the  tribe  of  A.  were  sealed  12,000
ASHTA  ROTH.

Deut.  1.4.  Og,  v  ho  dwelt  at  A.  Josh.  9.10.  |  12.4.
Judg.  2.  13.  the  children  of  Israel  served  A.  10.  6.

1  Sam.  7.  3.  put  away  the  strange  gods  and  A.  4.
12.  10.  we  have  sinned  because  we  have  served  A.
31.  10.  they  put  Saul's  armour  in  the  house  of  A.
1  Kings  11.33.  have  worshipped  A.  goddess  of  Zidon
1  Chr.  6.  71.  to  children  of  Gershom  was  given  A.

ASHUR,  or  ASSUK.

Gen.  10. 11.  A.  went  forth  and  built  Nineveh

22.  children  of  Shem,  Elam  and  A.  1  Chr.  1.  17.
Sum.  24.  22.  till  A.  shall  carry  thee  away  captive
24.  ships  shall  come  from  Chittim  and  afflict  A.
1  Chron.  2.  24.  Uezron’s  wife  bare  him  A.


4.  5.  A.  had  two  wives,  Helah  and  Naarah
Ezra  4.2.  Esar-haddon  king  of  A.  which  brought  up
Psal.  83.  8.  A.  also  is  joined  with  them
Ezek.  27.23.  A.  and  Chilmad  were  thy  merchants
32.  22.  A.  is  there,  and  all  her  company
Hos.  14.  3.  A.  shall  not  save  us,  we  will  not  ride
ASIA.

Acts  6.  9.  them  of  A.  disputing  with  Stephen
16.  6.  they  were  forbidden  to  preach  the  word  in  A.

19.  10.  all  they  that  dwelt  in  A .  heard  the  word
27.  whom  alf  A.  and  the  world  worshipped!

31.  certain  of  the  chief  of  A.  sent  unto  him

20.  16.  because  he  would  not  spend  time  in  A.

18.  ye  know  from  the  first  day  that  I  came  into  A.

27.  2.  we  launched,  meaning  to  sail  by  coasts  ot  A.

1  Cor.  16.  19.  the  churches  of  A.  salute  you

2  Cor.  1.  8.  our  trouble  which  came  to  us  in  A.

2  Tim.  1.  15.  they  that  are  in  A.  are  turned  away

1  Pet.  1. 1.  to  the*  strangers  scattered  in  A.

See  Churches.

ASKELON,  or  ASIIKEEON.

Judg.  1.  18.  Judah  took  Gaza  and  A.  and  Ekron
14. 19.  Sams,  went  down  to  A .  and  slew  thirty  men
ISaw.  6. 17.  for  A.  one,  for  Gath  one,  for  Ekron  one

2  Sam.  1.  20.  publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of  A.

Jer.  25.  20.  1  made  A.  and  Azzah  to  drink  of  cup

47.  5.  A.  is  cut  off  with  remnant  of  their  valley
7.  the  Lord  hath  given  it  a  charge  against  A.

Amos  1.  8.  cutoff  him  that  holds  sceptre  from  A.
Zeph.  2.4.  Gaza  shall  be  forsaken,  A.  a  desolation
7.  in  the  houses  of  A.  shall  they  .ie  down
Zech.  9.5.  A .  shall  see  it,  and  fear ;  king  shall  perish
from  Gaza,  and  A.  shall  not  be  inhabited
ASNAPPAR.

Ezra  4.  10.  whom  the  noble  A.  brought  over
ASSYRIA.

Gen.  2. 14.  Hiddekel  goeth  toward  the  east  of  A.

25.  18.  Ishmael’s  sons  dwelt  as  thou  goest  to  A.

2  Kings  15.  29-  carried  captive  tp  A.  17.  6.  |  18.  11.
Isa.  7. 18.  his  for  the  bee  that  is  in  the  land  of  A.

11.  11.  to  recover  remnant  of  his  people  from  A.

16.  an  high-way  for  his  people  left  from  A.

19.23.  shall  be  an  high-way  out  of  Egypt  to  A.

24.  Israel  shall  be  the  third  with  Egypt  and  A.

25.  blessed  be  A.  the  work  of  my  hands
27.  13.  shall  come  who  were  ready  to  perish  in  A.

Jer.  2.  18.  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  A.  ?

36.  ashamed  of  Egypt,  as  wast  ashamed  of  A.
Ezek.  23.  7.  committed  whoredoms  with  men  of  A
Hos. 7.11.  they  go  to  A.  ||  8.  9.  they  are  gone  up  to  A.

9.  3.  they  shall  eat  unclean  things  in  A.

10.  6.  it  shall  be  carried  to  A.  for  a  present

11. 11.  shall  tremble  as  a  dove  out  of  land  of  A.
Mic.  5.  6.  and  they  shall  waste  the  land  of  A.

7.  12.  in  that  day  he  shall  come  to  thee  from  A.
Zeph.  2.  13.  and  he  will  destroy  A.  and  Nineveh
Zech.  10.  10.  1  will  gather  them  out  of  A.

11.  the  pride  of  A.  shall  be  brought  down
See  King,  Kings.

ASSYRIAN.

Isa.  10.  5.  O  A.  the  rod  of  mine  anger,  and  staff
24.  O  my  people,  be  not  afraid  of  the  A .

14.  25.  that  1  will  break  the  A.  in  my  land
23.  13.  this  people  was  not  till  the  A.  founded

30.  31.  the  A.  shall  be  beaten  down  which  smote

31.  8.  then  shall  the  A.  fall  with  the  sword
52.  4.  the  A.  oppressed  them  without  cause

Ezek.  31.  3.  behold,  the  A.  was  a  cedar  in  Lebanon
Hos.  5.  13.  then  went  Ephraim  to  the  A.  and  sent

11.  5.  but  the  A.  shall  be  his  king,  they  refused
Mic.  5.  5.  this  man  shall  be  the  peace  when  A.  come

6.  thus  shall  he  deliver  us  from  the  A.  when  conies
ASSYRIANS.

2  Kings  19.  35.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  in  the
camp  of  A.  185,000  men,  Isa.  37  .  36.
Lam.  5.  6.  we  have  given  the  hand  to  the  A.

Ezek.  16.  28.  thou  hast  played  the  whore  with  the  A.
23.  5.  she  doted  on  the  A.  her  neighbours,  12.

9.  1  have  delivered  her  into  the  hand  of  the  A.

23.  1  will  bring  all  the  A.  against  thee
Hos.  12.  1.  they  make  a  covenant  with  the  A.

ASYNCRITUS.

Rom.  16. 14.  salute  A.  Phlegon,  Hernias,  Patrobas
ATA  D.

Gen.  50.  10.  they  came  to  the  threshing-floor  of  A
11.  when  inhabitants  saw  mourning  in  floor  of  A
ATHAL1AH.

2  Kings  8.  26.  Ahaziah’s  mother  w  as  A.  2  Chr.  22.2.
11. 1.  A.  destroyed  the  seed  rojal,  2  Chron.  22.  10

590


2  Kings  11. 2.  J  ehosheba  hid  Joash  fr.  A .  2  Ch.  22. 11.
20.  they  slew  A.  with  the  sw  ord, 2  Chron.  23.  21.

1  Chron.  8. 26.  of  Benjamin,  Shehariah  and  A.

2  Chron.  24.  7.  the  sons  of  A.  that  wicked  woman
Ezra  8.  7.  Jeshaiah  son  of  A.  with  him  70  males

ATHENIANS.

Acts  17.21.  A.  spent  their  time  in  telling  or  hearing

ATHENS.

Acts  17.  15.  they  condut  ted  and  brought  Paul  to  A.

16.  now  wdiile  Paul  waited  for  them  at  A.

22.  ye  men  of  A.  1  perceive  ye  are  superstitious

18.  1.  Paul  departed  from  A.  and  came  to  Corinth
1  Thess.  3. 1.  we  thought  it  sood  to  be  left  at  A.  alone
A  ITALIA.

Acts  14.  25.  from  Perga  they  went  down  into  A.

A  YEN.

Ezek.  .30. 17. the  young  men  of  A. shall  tall  by  sword
Ilos.  10.  8.  the  high  places  of  A.  the  sm  of  Israel
Amos  1.  5.  I  will  cut  off  the  inhabitant  from  A.
AUGUSTUS.

Luke  2.  1.  there  went  out  a  decree  from  Cesar  A.
Acts  25.  21.  when  Paul  had  appealed  to  A.  25.

27.  1.  to  one  Julius,  a  centurion  of  A.  band
AZAR1AH.

1  Kings  4.  2.  A.  was  one  of  Solomon’s  princes

5.  A.  the  son  of  Nathan  was  over  the  officers

2  Kings  14. 21.  the  people  of  J  udali  made  A.  king

1  Chron.  2. 8.  A.sonot  Ethan  ||  38.  Jehu  begat  A.

3.  12.  Amaziah  his  son,  A.  his  son

6.  9.  Ahimaaz  begat  A.  |1  10.  Johanan  begat  A.

13.  Ililkiah  begat  A. JJ  36.  Zephaniah  begat  A.

2  Chron.  15. 1.  Spirit  of  God  came  on  A.  son  of  tided

21. 2.  A.  son  of  Jehoshaphat  ||  22.  6.  of  Jehoram
3.  1.  A.  son  of  Jehoram,  and  A.  son  ot  Obed

26.  17.  A.  the  priest  went  in  after  him,  20.

Ezra  7.  1.  the  son  ot  A.  the  son  of  Ililkiah,  3.
Seh.  3.  23.  A.  the  son  of  Maaseiah  repaired
7.7.  Nehemiah,  A.  came  up  with  Zerubbabel

8.  7.  A.  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  law

10.2.  those  that  sealed  were  A.  Jeremiah


Jer.  43.  2.  A.  and  all  the  proud  men  spake,  saying
.  1.  6.  of  the  children  of  Judah  was  Daniel,  A.


Dan _ ...

7.  he  gave  to  A.  the  name  of  Abed-nego
2.  17.  then  Daniel  made  the  thing  known  to  A.
AZEKAH.

11.  Lord  cast  down  stones  on  them  to  A.
,  the  king  of  Babylon  fought  against  A.


Josh.  10.
Jer.  34. 7


B.


BAAL.

Sum.  22. 41.  brought  Balaam  to  high  places  of  B.
Judg.  2.  13.  Israel  served  B.  and  Ashtaroth
6.  25.  the  Lord  said,  throw  down  *he  altar  of  B.

31.  will  ye  plead  for  B.  ?  will  ye  save  him?

1  Kings  16. 31.  Aliab  served  B.  and  worshipped  him
18.  21.  but  if  B.  be  God,  then  follow  him

26.  called  on  name  of  B.  saying,  O  B.  hear  us
40.  take  the  prophets  of  B.  let  none  escape

19.18.  yet  1  have  left  seven  thousand  in  Isiael,
knees  which  have  not  bowed  to  B.  Rom.  11.  4.

2  Kings  10.  19.  I  have  a  great  sacrifice  to  do  to  B.

20.  Jehu  said,  proclaim  a  solemn  assembly  for  B.
28.  thus  Jehu  destroyed  B.  out  of  Israel

11.  18.  the  people  brake  down  the  house  of  B.

17.  16.  they  worshipped  host  of  heaven,  served  B.
21.3.  Manasseh  reared  up  altars  for  B.  made  grove
23.  4.  to  bring  forth  all  the  vessels  made  for  B.

5.  he  put  down  them  that  burnt  incense  to  B.

Jer.  2.  8.  and  the  prophets  prophesied  by  B.

7. 9.  will  ye  burn  incense  to  B.  ?  11. 13, 17-  1  32.  29.
12. 16.  as  they  taught  my  people  to  swear  by  B.
19. 5.  they  have  built  the  high  places  ot  B.  to  burn
their  sons  with  fire  for  burnt-offerings  to  B.
23. 13.  they  prophesied  in  B.  and  caused  Israel  err

27.  as  their  fathers  have  forgotten  my  name  for  B.
Hos.  2. 8.  silver  and  gold  which  they  prepared  for  B.

13.  1.  but  when  Ephraim  offended  in  B.  he  died
Zeph.  1.  4.  and  I  will  cut  off  the  remnant  of  B.
BAAL-BERITH.

Judg.  8.  33.  the  children  of  Israel  made  B.  their  god
BAAL-HAMON.

Cant.  8.  11.  Solomon  had  a  vineyard  at  B.
BAAL1.

Hos.  2.  16.  and  thou  shalt  call  me  no  more  B.
BAALIM.

Judg.  2. 11.  Israel  served  B.  3.  7- 1  10.  6,  10.

8. 33.  the  children  of  Israel  went  a  whoring  after  B.
1  Sam. 7.  4.  the  children  of  Israel  put  away  B.

1  Kings  18.  18.  and  thou  hast  followed  B.

2  Chron.  17-  3.  Jehoshaphat  sought  not  to  B.

24.7.  all  the  dedicated  things  did  they  bestow  on  B.

28.  2.  Ahaz  made  also  molten  images  for  B.

33.  3.  Manasseh  reared  up  altars  for  B.

34.  4.  and  they  brake  down  the  altars  of  B.

Jer.  2.  23.  how  canst  say,  I  have  not  gone  after  B.

9.  14.  have  walked  after  B.  which  fathers  taught
Hos.  2.  13.  1  will  visit  on  her  the  days  of  B.

17.  for  1  will  take  away  the  names  of  B.

HA  AITS.

Jer  40. 14.  B.  king  of  Ammonites  hath  sent  Ishmael
BAAL-MEON.  '

Ezek. ‘lb.  9.  the  glory  of  Beth-jeshimoth,  B.

BAAL-PEOR.

Sum.  25.3.  Israel  joined  himselfto  B.  and  the  anger
of  tiie  Lord  was  kindled,  Psal.  106.28.  Hos.  9. 10
5.  slay  the  men  that  were  joined  unto  B.

Deut.  A.  3.  have  seen  what  Lord  did  because  of  B.
BAAL-PERAZ1M.

2  Sam.  5.  20.  David  called  the  place  B.  1  Chr.  14. 11
BAA  L-SII  ALISHA.

2  Kings  4.  42.  and  there  came  a  man  from  B.
BAAL-TAMAIl.

Judg.  20.  33.  Israel  put  themselves  in  array  at  B
BAAL-ZKBUB.

2  Kings  1. 2.  enquire  of  B.  the  God  of  Ekron,  16.
BAAL-ZEPllON.

Exod.  14. 2.  and  encamp  over  against  B.  A  urn. 33  7
BAAN  AH.

2  Sam.  4.  6.  Rechab  and  B.  his  brother  escaped
23. 29.  Heleb  the  son  of  B.  one  of  the  mighty  men


1  Kings  4.  16.  B.  the  soil  of  llushai  was  11.  Asne
Ezra  2.  2.  B.  came  to  Jerusalem,  Seh.  7-7.

Seh  10.27.  Malluth,  llarim,  B.  sealed  the  covenant
BAASHA.  [32.

1  Kings  15.  16.  there  was  war  between  Asa  and  B.

19.  come,  break  thy  league  with  B.  2  Chr.  16.  3.

27.  B.  son  of  Ahijah  conspired  against  him

16.  1.  the  w’ord  of  the  L.  came  to  Jehu  against  B.

6.  B.  slept  with  his  fathers  and  was  buried
1 1.  Zimri  slew  all  the  house  of  B.  12.

21.  22.  1  will  make  Ahab’s  house  like  the  house
of  B.  the  son  of  Ahijah,  2  Kings').  9.
Jer.  41.  9.  the  pit  which  Asa  made  for  tear  of  B.
BABEL.

Gen.  10.  10.  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  B.

11.  9.  therefore  is  the  name  of  it  called  B.

Ezek.  23.  t  17.  the  children  of  B.  came  to  her  into
BABYLON.  [bed

Gen.  10.  t  10.  the  beginning  of  his  kingdom  was  B.

2  Kings  17.  30.  the  men  of  B.  made  Succoth-benoth
25.  £8.  above  kings  that  were  in  B.  Jer.  52.  32.

2  Chr.  32.  31.  the  ambassadors  of  the  princes  ot  B.
36.  7.  he  put  the  vessels  in  his  temple  at  B.

Ezia  5. 14.  those  did  Cyrus  take  out  of  temple  ot  B.

6.  1.  where  the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  B.

Psal.  8?.  4.  1  will  make  mention  of  Rahab  and  b.
137.  1.  by  the  rivers  of  B.  there  we  sat  down
Isa.  13.  1.  the  burden  of  B.  which  Isaiah  did  see

19.  B.  shall  be  as  when  God  overthrew  Sodom
21.  9.  B.  is  fallen,  Jer.  51.8.  Rev.  14.  8.1  18.  2.

48.  14.  the  Lord  will  do  his  pleasure  on  B.

20.  go  ye  forth  of  B.  flee  from  the  Chaldeans
Jer.  20.  4.  he  shall  carry  them  captive  into  B.

£8.  4.  the  captives  of  Judah  that  went  into  B.

£9.  10.  after  seventy  years  be  accomplished  at  B.

i5.  the  Lord  hath  raised  us  up  prophets  in  B.

40.  4.  if  it  seem  good  to  come  witli  me  into  B.

50.  1.  the  word  that  the  Lord  spake  against  B.

8.  remove  out  of  the  midst  of  B.  and  g0  forth
13.  every  one  that  goeth  by  B.  shall  hiss

23.  howls  B.  become  a  desolation  among  nations !
29.  call  together  the  archers  against  B.

34.  that  he  may  disquiet  the  inhabitants  of  B.

45.  hear  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  against  B.

51.  6.  flee  out  of  the  midst  of  B.  and  deliver

35.  the  violence  done  to  me  be  upon  B.

42.  the  sea  is  come  up  upon  B.  she  is  covered

48.  the  heaven  and  the  earth  shall  sing  for  B.

49.  at  B.  shall  fall  the  slain  of  all  the  earth
53.  though  B.  should  mount  up  to  heaven
55.  because  the  Lord  hath  spoiled  B.

58.  the  broad  walls  of  B.  shall  be  utterly  broken
60.  wrote  all  the  evil  that  shall  come  on  B.

64.  thus  shall  B.  sink,  and  shall  not  rise  from  evil
Ezek.  17. 16.  with  him  in  the  midst  of  B.  he  shall  d  ie
Dan.  4.  30.  is  not  this  great  B.  that  1  have  built '
Mat.  1.  17.  from  David  till  the  carrying  into  B.
Acts  7.  43.  I  will  carry  you  away  beyond  B.

1  Pet.  5.  13.  the  church  at  B.  saluteth  you

Rev.  16. 19.  great  B.  came  in  remembrance  bef.  G

17.  5.  B.  the  great,  the  mother  of  hai  lots

18.  10.  saying,  alas,  alas,  that  great  city  B. !

21.  thus  shall  that  great  city  B.  be  thrown  down
See  Daughter,  Province,  Hise  Men.

From  BABYLON.

2  Kings  20. 14.  from  a  far  country  from  B.  Isa.  39.  3.
Ezra  7.  9.  on  first  day  began  lie  to  go  up  from  B.

8.  1.  of  them  that  w  ent  up  with  me  from  B.

Isa.  14.  22.  I  will  cut  off  from  B.  the  name
Jer.  50.  16.  cut  off  the  sower  from  B.  and  him  that
51.54.  a  sound  of  a  cry  cometh  from  B.

Zech.  6.  10.  take  of  them  which  are  come  from  B.

King  of  BABYLON.  [40.  9.

2  Kings  25.  24.  serve  the  king  of  B.  Jer.  27.  17.  |
Ezra  5.  12.  he  gave  them  into  the  hand  ot  the  king
of  B.  the  Chaldean,  Jer.  21.7.  I  22.  25.
Isa.  14.  4.  take  up  this  proverb  against  king  of  B.
Jer.  21. 4.  wherewith  ye  fight  against  the  king  of  B.
25.  11.  nations  shall  serve  the  king  of  B.  70  years
12.  after  that  1  w  ill  punish  the  king  of  B.

27. 8.  kingdoms  which  will  not  serv  e  king  of  B.  13.

28.  11.  1  have  broken  the  yoke  of  the  king  of  B.

29.  22.  whom  the  king  of  B.  roasted  in  the  fire
34.  3.  thine  eyes  shall  behold  the  eyes  of  king  of  B.
36. 29. king  of  B.  shall  certainly  come  and  destroy
39.  11.  king  of  B.  gave  charge  concerning  Jeremiah
42.  11.  be  not  afraid  of  the  king  of  B.

49.  30.  king  of  B.  hath  taken  counsel  against  you

50.  17.  the  king  of  B.  hath  broken  his  bones
Ezek.  21.  19.  that  sword  ot  the  king  of  B.  may  come
'29.  18.  the  king  of  B.  caused  his  army  to  serve  i

19.  1  will  give  Egypt  unto  the  king  of  B.

30.  24.  1  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  king  of  B.  £5.
32.  11.  sword  of  the  king  of  B.  shall  come  on  thee

To  or  unto  BABY  LO  N .

2  Kings  20.  17 .  shall  be  carried  to  B.  24.  15.  I  £5.

7,  13.  1  Chron.  9.  1.  2  Chron.  36.  6,  7,  20.
Ezra  5. 12.  Isa.  39.  6.  Jer.  27-  20. 1  28.  3.
I  29.  1,4.  I  40.  1,  7.

2  Chr.  33.  11.  took  Manasseh  and  carried  him  to  B.

36.  18.  the  treasures,  all  these  he  brought  to  B.
Isa.  43.  14.  for  your  sake  1  have  sent  to  B.

Jer.  20.  6.  Pashur,  thou  shalt  come  to  B.

34.  3.  Zedekiah,  thou  shalt  go  to  B.

51. 24.  1  will  render  unto  B.  H  61.  when  corniest  to  B.
Ezek.  17.  20.  1  will  bring  him  to  B.  and  plead  with
Mic.  4.  10.  the  daughter  of  Zion  shall  go  to  B.  j
Mat.  1. 11.  about  the  time  they  w  ere  carried  to  B.  .
BABYLON  IANS.

Ezek.  23.  15.  after  the  manner  of  the  B.  of  Chaldea
17.  the  B.  came  to  her  into  the  bed  of  love
BABY  LONISH.

Josh.  7.  21.  Achan  saw  a  goodly  B.  garment
BACA.

Psal.  84.  6.  who  passing  through  the  valley  of  B.
BA  11U  RIM.

2  Sam.  3.  16.  went  along  weeping  behind  her  toB

16.  5.  when  David  came  to  B.  Shimei  came  out

17.  18.  and  they  came  to  a  man's  house  in  B.

19.  16.  Shimei  a  Benjamite  of  B  1  Kings  2.  8-

BAJ  El'll.

Isa.  15. 2.  he  is  gone  up  to  B.  and  to  Dibon  to  weei


BAS


BEN


BET  [PkOPER  N7AMBS.


BALAAM.

Sum.  2 2.  5.  Balak  sent  messengers  to  B.  son  of  Reor
9.  God  came  to  B.  and  said,  what  men  are  these  '
14.  they  said,  B.  refuseth  to  come  with  us
25.  the  ass  crushed  B.  foot  against  the  wall

31.  then  the  Lord  opened  the  eyes  of  B.

35.  so  B.  went  with  the  princes  of  Balak

23.  4.  God  met  B.  and  said  unto  him,  16.

30.  Balak  did  as  B.  had  said,  and  offered  a  bullock

24.  2.  B.  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  saw  Israel

3.  B.  the  son  of  Beor  hath  said,  15.

25.  B.  rose  up  and  returned  to  his  place
31. 8.  B.  the  son  of  Beor  they  slew.  Josh.  13.  22.

16.  through  the  counsel  of  B.  to  commit  trespass
Deut.  23.  4.  because  they  hired  B.  Neh.  13.  2.

5.  the  Lord  thy  God  would  not  hearken  to  B.
Josh.  24.  9.  Balak  sent  and  called  B.  to  curse  you
Mic.  6.  5.  remember  what  B.  answered  him
2  Pet.  2. 15.  following  the  way  of  B.  the  son  of  Bosor
Jude  11.  they  ran  greedily  alter  the  error  of  B.

Rev.  2.  14.  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  B.
BALAK.

Nn m.  22.4.  B.  was  king  of  the  Moabites  at  that  time
16.  thus  saith  B.  let  nothing  hinder  thee

23.  2.  and  B.  did  as  Balaam  had  spoken,  30.

7.  B.  king  of  Moab  hath  brought  me  from  Aram

18.  rise  up,  B.  and  hear  ||  24. 10.  B.  anger  kindled

24.  13.  if  B.  would  give  me  his  house  full  of  gold
Josh.  24.9.  then  B.  arose  and  warred  against  Israel
Judg.  11.  25.  art  thou  any  thing  better  than  B.  ?
Mic. 6. 5.  remember  what  B.  king  of  Moab  consulted
Rev.  2.  14.  who  taught  B.  to  cast  a  stumbling-block

BA  MAH.,.

Ezek.  20.  29.  the  name  thereof  !s  called  B.
BARABBAS.

Mat.  27. 17.  lelease  B.  21.  Mark  15. 11.  Luke? .3. 18.
John  18.  40.  then  cried  they  all  again,  saying,  not
this  man  but  B.  now  B.  was  a  robber
BARACIIIAS.

Mat.  23.  35.  to  the  blood  of  Zacharias,  son  of  B.
BARAK.

Judg.  4.  6.  Deborah  called  B.  the  son  of  Abinoam
9.  Deborah  went  with  B.  ||  16.  B.  pursued  after
5.  1.  then  sang  Deborah  and  B.son  of  Abinoam

il2.  aiise  B.  and  lead  thy  captivity  captive
Heb.  11  32.  the  time  would  fail  me‘to  tell  of  B
BAR-.JESUS.

i  Acts  13. 6.  they  found  a  sorcerer  whose  name  was  B.
BAH -.IONA.

Mat.  16.  17.  Jesus  said,  blessed  art  thou,  Simon  B.
BARNABAS.

Acts  4.  36.  Joses  who  by  apostles  was  surnamed  B.
11. 22.  that  B.  should  go  as  far  as  Antioch

25.  then  departed  B.  to  Tarsus  to  seek  Saul
30.  they  sent  it  by  the  hands  of  B.  and  Saul

12.  25.  B.  and  Saul  returned  from  Jerusalem

13.  1.  at  Antioch  were  teachers,  as  B.  and  Saul
2.  the  Holy  Ghost  said,  separate  me  B.  and  Saul
50.  Jews  raised  persecution  against  Paul  and  B.

14.  12.  they  called  B.  Jupiter;  Paul,  Mercurius
15.  2.  Paul  and  B.  had  no  small  dissension

12.  the  multitude  gave  audience  to  B.  and  Paul
37.  B.  determined  to  take  with  them  John
1  Cor.  9.  6.  or  I  only  and  B.  have  not  we  power
Gal.  2.  1.1  went  up  again  to  Jerusalem  with  B.

9.  gave  tome  and  B.  the  right  hands  of  fellowship

13.  B.  carried  away  with  their  dissimulation
Col.  4.  10.  Marcus,  sister’s  son  to  B.  saluteth  you
See  Saul,  Paul.

BARSABAS.

Actsl.  23.  Joseph  called  B.  ||  15.  22.  Judas  B.

BARTHOLOMEW.

Mat.  10.  3.  Mark  3.  18.  Luke  6. 14.  Acts  1.  13.

I  B  ART1MEUS.

Mark  10.  46.  blind  B.sat  by  the  way -side begging
S  BARUCH.  0

Neh.  3.  20.  B.  son  of  Zabbai  earnestly  repaired
1 *  10.  6.  Ginnethon,  B.  sealed  the  covenant
I  11.5.  Maaseiah  son  of  B.  dwelt  at  Jerusalem
Jer.  32.  12.  I  gave  the  evidence  to  B.  16.

36.  4.  then  Jeremiah  called  B.  and  B.  wrote
10.  then  read  B.  in  the  book  in  the  house  of  Lord

14.  B.  took  the  roll  in  his  hand  and  came
26.  the  king  commanded  to  take  B.  the  scribe
43.  3.  but  B.  setteth  thee  on  against  us
6.  Johanan  took  Jeremiah  and  B.  into  Egypt
45. 1.  the  word  that  Jeremiah  spake  to  B.
BARZILLA1.

2  Sam.  17.  27.  B.  of  Rogelim  brought  beds  to  David

19.  32.  B.  was  a  very  aged  man,  even  80  years  old
39.  the  king  kissed  B.  and  blessed  him
21.  8.  whom  she  brought  up  for  Adriel  son  of  B.

1  Kings  2.  7.  but  shew  kindness  to  the  sons  of  B.
Ezra  2.  61.  the  children  of  B.  which  took  a  wife  of
the  daughters  of  B.  the  Gileadite,  Neh.  7.63.
BASHAN.

..Vmw.21.33.  they  went  up  by  the  way  of  B.  Dent.  3. 1 .

32.  33.  Og  king  of  B.  Deut.  1.  4. 1  .3.  1,  3,  11.  |  4.

47. 1  29.  7.  Josh.  o.  10. 1  12.  4.  |  13.  30.

1  Rings  4.  19.  Neh.  9.  22.  Psal.  135.

T  11.1136. 20.

Deut.  3.  4.  kingd.of  Og  in  B.  10.J<W/L  13. 12,  30,  31.

4.  43.  and  Golan  in  B.  Josh.  20.  8.  |  21.  27.

.32.  14.  with  rams  of  the  breed  of  B.  and  goats

33.  22.  of  Dan  he  said,  Dan  shall  leap  from  B.
Josh.  17.  1.  therefore  he  had  Gilead  and  B.

2  Kings  10.  33.  even  Gilead  and  B.  Hazael  smote
1 Chron.  6.  71-  to  the  sons  of  Gershon,  Golan  in  B.
Psal.  22.12.  strong  bulls  of  B.  have  beset  me  round
68. 15.  the  hill  of  God  is  as  the  hill  of  B.  an  high
hill  as  the  hill  of  B.  why  leap  ye,  ye  high  hills  ?
22.  the  Lord  said  I  will  bring  again  from  B.

Isa.  33.  9.  B.  and  Carmel  shake  off  their  fruits
Jer.  22.  20.  cry,  lift  up  thy  voice  in  B.  and  cry
50.  19.  Israel  shall  teed  on  Carmel  and  B.

Ezek.  39.  18.  all  of  them  fatlingsof  B.

Amos 4. 1.  hear  this  word,  ye  kineof  B.

Mic.  7.  14.  let  them  feed  in  B.  as  in  the  days  of  ©Id
Nah.  1.4.  B.  languished,  Carmel  and  Lebanon
See  Oa  ks.

„  BASHEMATII.

Gen.  26.34.  Esau  took  to  wife  B.  the  Illttite


Gen.  36.3. B.  lshmael's  daughter,  sister  ofNebajoth

_  bath-sheba.

2  Sam.  11.  .3.  is  not  this  B.  daughter  ofEliam  ?

12.  24.  and_  David  comforted  B.  his  wife
^  1;  15. _B.  went  to  the.  king  into  the  chamber

28.  then  the  king  said,  call  me  B.  ||  31.  B.  bowed
2.  13.  Adomjah  came  to  B.  the  mother  of  Solomon
1  C /iron.  3.  5.  Solomon  ot  B.  daughter  of  Ammiel
BEDAN .

1  Sam.  12.  11.  the  Txird  sent  B.  and  delivered  you
1  Chron.  7. 17.  and  the  sons  of  Ulam,  B
BEELZEBUB.

Mat.  10.  25.  if  they  have  called  the  master  B.

12.  24.  this  fellow  doth  not  cast  out  devils,  but  by

B.  prince  of  devils,  Mark  3.22.  Luke  11.  15,
27.  if  1  by  B.  cast  out  devils,  Luke  11.  18,19.
BEER-SHEBA.

Gen.  21.  14.  Hagar  wandered  in  wilderness  of  B.
33.  and  Abraham  planted  a  grove  in  B.

22.  19.  they  went  to  B.  Abraham  dwelt  at  B.

26.  .33.  therefore  the  name  of  the  city  is  B.

28.-10.  Iacob  went  out  from  B.  toward  Haran
46.  1.  Israel  took  his  journey  and  came  to  B.

Josh.  19.  2.  Simeon  had  in  their  inheritance  B.

1  hmgs  19. 3.  Elijah  went  for  his  life  and  came  to  B
Amos  5.  5.  seek  not  to  Beth-el,  and  pass  not  to  B.
8. 14.  they  that  say,  the  manner  of  B.  liveth
See  Dan.

„  BEKAII.

Exod.  38.  26.  a  B.  for  each,  that  is  half  a  shekel
BEL.

Isa.  46. 1.  B.  boweth  down,  Nebo  stoopeth
Jer.  50.  2.  Babylon  is  taken,  B.  is  confounded
51.  44. and  I  will  punish  B.in  Babylon,  will  brin°
BELIAL.

Deut.  13.  13.  certain  children  of  B.  are  gone  out
Judg.  19.  22.  certain  sons  of  B.  beset  the  house
20.  13.  deliver  us  the  man,  the  children  of  B.

1  Sam.  1 . 1 6.count  not  thy  handmaid  a  daughter  of  B
2.  12.  now  the  sons  of  Eli  were  sons  of  B.

10. 27.childr.of  B.said,  how  shall  this  man  save  us
25.  17 .  is  such  a  son  of  B.  man  cannot  speak  to  hiir
25.  let  not  my  lord  regard  this  man  of  B.

30.’22.  then  answered  the  men  of  B.  and  said

2  Sam.  16.  7.  come  out,  come  out,  thou  man  of  B
20.  1.  there  happened  to  be  there  a  man  of  B.  Shebs

23.  6.  the  sons  of  B.  shall  be  as  thorns  thrust  away

1  Kings  21.  10.  set  two  sonsof  B.  before  Naboth,  13

2  Chron.  13.  7.  gathered  to  Jeroboam  children  of  B
2  Cor.  6.  15.  what  concord  hath  Christ  with  B  >

BELSHAZZAR.

Dan.  5.  22.  thou,  O  B.  hast  not  humbled  thy  heart

7.  1.  in  the  first  vearof  B.  ||  8. 1.in  third  yearofB

BELTESHAZZAR.

Dan.  1.7.  for  he  gave  to  Daniel  the  name  of  B
2. 26.  name  was  B.  4.  8,  9,  19. 1  5. 12. 1  10  1
BENAIAH.

2  Sam.  23.  22.  these  things  did  B.  1  Chrnn.  11.  24.

1  Kings  1.  32.  the  kingsaid,  call  me  Zadok  and  B

2.  35.  the  king  put  B.  in  Joab’s  room

4.  4.  B.  the  son  of  Jehoiada  was  over  the  host

1  Chron.  4.  36.  Jesimiel  and  B.  sons  of  Simeon
11.  31.  B.  the  Pirathonite,  a  mighty  man
15.18.  brethren  of  second  degree,  B.20.  |  16.  5,  6
27.  5.  the  third  captain  for  the  third  month,  B.

14.  the  captain  for  the  eleventh  month,  B.

2  Chron.  31.  13.  Mahath  and  B.  were  overseers
Ezra.  10.  25.  B.  son  of  Parosh  ||  30.  of  Pahath-moab

35.  B.  the  son  of  Bani  ||  43.  B.  son  of  Nebo
Ezek.  11.  l.  among  whom  1  saw  Pelatiah  son  of  B.

13.  when  I  prophesied,  the  son  of  B.  died
BEN-AMMI.

Gen.  19.  38.  the  younger  called  his  name  B.
BEN-HADAD.

1  Kings  15. 18.  Asa  sent  them  to  B.  2  Chron.  16.  2.
20.  2.  thus  saith  B.  thy  silver  and  gold  is  mine

16.  B.  was  drinking  himself  drunk  in  the  pavilions
20.  B.  escaped  on  an  horse,  with  the  horsemen
32.  thy  servant  B.  saith,  I  pray  thee,  let  me  live

2  Kings  6.  24.  B.  went  up  and  besieged  Samaria

8.  7.  B.  was  sick  ||  9.  thy  son  B.  hath  sent  me
13.  3.  he  delivered  Israel  into  the  hand  of  B.

25.  Jehoash  took  again  out  of  the  hand  of  B.

Jer.  49..  27. 1  will  kindle  afire  in  the  wall  of  Damas¬
cus,  it  shall  consume  the  palaces  of  B.  Amos  1  4
BENJAMIN.

Gen.  35.  18.  but  his  father  called  him  B.

24.  the  sons  of  Rachel,  Joseph  and  B.  46.  19.

42.  36.  Joseph  is  not,  and  ye  will  take  B.also

43.  14.  he  may  send  away  your  brother  and  B.

16.  and  when  Joseph  saw  B.  with  them,  29.

34.  B.  mess  was  five  times  so  much  as  theirs

44.  12.  and  the  cup  was  found  in  B.  sack

45.  14.  he  fell  on  his  brother  B.  neck  and  wept

46.21.  the  sons  of  B.  Num.  26.  38,  41.  1  Chron.  7.

,6. 1  8. 1,40. 1  9. 7.  Neh.  11.  7.
49.  27.  B.  shall  ravin  as  a  wolf,  devour  the  prey
Num.  1.  11.  the  prince  of  B.  was  Abidan
Deut.  27. 12.  these  shall  stand  to  bless,  Joseph,  B.

33.  12.  of  B.  Moses  said,  the  beloved  of  the  Lord
Judg.  5. 14.  after  thee,  B.  among  thy  people

19.  14.  they  were  by  Gibeah,  which  belongs  toB.

20.  20.  men  of  Israel  went  out  to  battle  against  B.

35.  the  Lord  smote  B.  before  Israel

46.  all  that  fell  that  day  of  B.  were  25,000 men

21.  1.  not  any  of  us  give  his  daughter  to  B.  18.

16.  seeing  the  women  are  destroyed  out  of  B.

1  Sam.  4.  12.  there  ran  a  man  of  B.  out  of  the  army

9.  1.  there  was  a  man  of  B.  whose  name  was  Kish

10.  2.  by  Rachel’s  sepulchre,  in  the  border  of  B.

13.  2.  in  Gibeah  of  B.  15.  16.  |  14. 16.

2  Sam.  2. 15.  there  arose  by  number  twelve  of  B.

3.  19.  and  Abner  also  spake  in  the  ears  of  B.

19.  17-  there  were  a  thousand  men  of  B.  with  him
21.  14.  the  bones  of  Saul  buried  they  in  B.

1  Kings  4. 18.  Shimei  son  of  Elah  officer  in  B.

1  Chron.  7..  10.  the  sons  of  Bilhan,  Jeushand  B.

21.  6.  Levi  and  B.  counted  he  not  among  them

27.21.  over  B.wasJaasiel  the  son  of  Abner

2  Chron.  17-  17*  of  B.  Eliada  a  mighty  man  of  valour

34.  32.  caused  all  in  Jerusalem  and  B.  to  stand
Neh.  3.  23.  after  him  repaired  B.  and  Hashub


Psal.  68.  27.  there  is  little  B.  with  their  ruler
80.2.  before  B.  and  Manasseh,  stir  up  thy  strength
Jer.  37.  13.  when  Jeremiah  was  in  the  gate  of  B.
38.  7.  the  king  then  sitting  in  the  gate  of  B.

Ezek.  48.  23.  B.  have  a  portion  H  32.  one  gate  of  B.
Hos.  5.  8.  cry  aloud  at  Beth-aven,  after  thee,  O  B.
Gbad.  19.  possess  Ephraim,  B.  shall  possess  Gilead
Zech.  14. 10.  it  shall  be  inhabited  from  B.  gate
See  Children.

BENJAMIN  with  Judah.

Judg.  10.  9.  Ammon  passed  to  fight  Judah  and  B
l  A  ings  12. 23.  sp.  to  house  of  Jud.  B.  2.  Chr.  11.  3.

1  Chr.  12. 16.  there  came  of  B.  and  Judah  to  David

2  Chr.  11.  12.  Rehoboam  having  Judah  and  B.

15.  2.  hear  ye  me,  Asa,  and  all  Judah  and  B.

8.  put  away  the  idols  out  of  Judah  and  B.

T25.  5.  Amaziah  made  captains  thro’  Judah  and  B.

31.  1.  threw  down  the  altars  out  of  Judah  and  B.

34.  9.  money  that  was  gathered  of  Judah  and  B.
Ezra  1.  5.  rose  up  chief  fathers  of  Judah  and  B.

4.  1.  when  the  adversaries  of  Judah  and  B.  heard
Neh.  11.  4.  at  Jerusalem  dwelt  of  Judah  and  B.

12.  34.  after  them  went  Judah,  B.  and  Jeremiah
Ezek.  48.  22.  between  the  border  of  Judah  and  B.

Land  of  BENJAMIN.

Judg.  21.  21.  take  his  wife  and  go  into  the  land  of  B.

1  Sam.  9.  16.  send  thee  a  man  out  of  the  land  of  B.

2  Chron.  15.  8.  put  away  idols  out  of  the  land  of  b!
Jer.  17.  26.  come  from  land  o/B.  bringing  offerings

32.  44.  shall  take  witnesses  in  the  land  of  B.

33.  13.  in  the  land  of  B.  shall  flocks  pass  again
37. 12.  Jeremiah  went  to  go  into  the  land  of  B

Tribe  of  BENJAMIN.  ’

Num.  1.37. of  the  tnbeofB.  werenumbered  35,400
2.  22.  captain  of  the  tribe  of  B.  Abidan,  10.  24

13.  9.  of  the  tribe  of  B.  to  spy  the  land,  Palti

34.  21.  of  the  tribe  of  B.  to  divide,  Elidad
Josh.  18.  11.  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  B.  came  up

21.  the  cities  of  the  tribe  of  B.  were  Jericho
21.4.  cities  to  the  Levitesoutof  the  tribe  of  Judah
and  the  tribe  of  B.  17.  1  Chron.  6.  60,  65.
Judg.  20.  12.  Israel  sent  men  thro’ all  the  tribe  of  B.

1  Sam.  9.  21 . 1  am  least  of  families  of  the  tribe  of  B.
10.  20.  tribes  come  near,  the  tribe  of  B.  was  taken
Acts  13.  21.  Saul  a  man  of  the  tribe  of  B.

Rom.  11 .  1.  1  am  of  the  tribe  of  B.  Phil.  3.  5.

Rev.  7.  8.  of  the  tribe  of  B.  were  sealed  12.000

BENJAMITE.

Judg.  3.  15.  Ehud  a  B.  ||  1  Sam.  9.  1.  Kish  a  B.

1  Sam.  9.  21.  Saul  answered  and  said,  am  not  1  a  B.f

2  Sam.  16.  11.  Shimei  a  B.  19.  16.  1  Kings  2.  8

20.  1.  Sheba  a  B.J  Esth.  2.  5.  Mordecai  a  B.

BENJAMITES.

Judg.  19.  16.  the  men  of  the  place  were  B.

20.  35.  Israel  destroyed  of  the  B.  25,10b
43.  thus  they  enclosed  the  B.  round  about
1  Sam.  22.  7-  then  said  Saul,  hear  now,  ye  B.

1  Chron.  27. 12.  the  ninth  captain  was  Abiezer  of  B

BENONI.

Gen.  35.  18.  departing,  she  called  his  name  B.
BEOR.

Gen.  36.  32.  Bela  the  son  of  B.  reigned,  1  Chr.  1. 43.
Num.  22.  5.  Baalatn  the  son  of  B.  24.  3, 15.  |  31.  s!
Deut.  23.  4.  Josh.  13.  22-1  24.  9.  Mic.  6.  5.
BERACHAH.

1  Chron.  12.  3.  B.  came  to  David  to  Ziklag

2  Chron.  20.  26.  therefore  called  the  valley  of  B

BEREA.

Acts  1~.  10.  breth.sent  Paul  and  Silas  by  night  to  B
13.  the  Jews  heard  that  Paul  preached  at  B.

20.  4.  Sopaterof  B.  accompanied  Paul  to  Asia
BERITH.

Judg.  9.  46.  an  hold  of  the  house  of  their  God  B
BERNICE.

Acts  25.  13.  Agrippa  and  B.  came  unto  Cesarea,  23

26.  30.  the  king  rose  up,  the  governor  and  B.
BESOR.

1  Sam.  30.  9.  six  hundred  men  came  to  the  brook  B
BETH  A  BARA.

John  1.  28.  these  things  done  in  B.  beyond  Jordan
BETHANY.

Mat.  21.  17.  Jesus  w'ent  into  R.  26.  6.  Mark  11.  1,
_  11.1  14.  3.  Luke  19.  29.  John  12.  1.

Mark  11.  12.  when  come  from  B.  he  w'as  hungry
Luke  24.  50.  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  B.

John  11.  1.  a  man  was  sick  named  Lazarus  of  B
BETH-AVEN.

Josh.  7.  2.  sent  men  to  Ai,  which  is  beside  B.

1  Sam.  14.  23.  and  the  battle  passed  over  to  B.

Hos.  4. 15.  come  ye  not  to  Gilgal,  nor  go  ye  up  to  B.

5.  8.  cry  aloud  at  B.  after  thee,  O  Benjamin
10.  5.  shall  fear,  because  of  the  calves  of  B.

BETH-DI BLATH  AIM.

Jer.  48.  22.  judgment  is  come  upon  B.

BETH-EL.


Gen.  28.  19.  Jacob  called  the  place  B.  35.  15.

31.  13.  I  am  God  of  B.  where  thou  vowedst  a  vow
35.  1 .  go  up  to  B.  3.  (I  6.  so  Jacob  came  to  B.
Josh.  16.  2.  the  lot  of  Joseph  goeth  from  B.  to  Luz
Judg.  1. 22.  the  house  of  Joseph  went  up  against  B.
4.  5.  Deborah  dwelt  between  Ramah  and  B.

21.  19.  in  a  place  which  is  on  the  north  side  of  B
1  Sam.  7.  16.  he  went  from  year  to  year  to  B.

10.  3.  shall  meet  three  men  going  up  to  God  to  B
13.  2.  two  thousand  were  with  Saul  in  mount  B.
30.  27.  a  present  to  them  which  were  in  B.

1  Kings  12.  29.  he  set  the  one  calf  in  B.  33.

13.  1.  behold,  there  came  a  man  of  God  to  B.

4.  which  had  cried  against  the  altar  in  B.  32.

11.  now  there  dwelt  an  old  prophet  in  B.

2  Kings  2. 2.  tarry  here,  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  B.
23.  and  he  went  up  from  thence  unto  B.

10.29.  Jehu  departed  not  from  the  calves  in  B.

17.  28.  one  of  the  priests  came  and  dwelt  in  B.

23.  4.  he  burnt  them  and  carried  the  ashes  to  B.
15.  the  altar  at  B.  Josiah  brake  down
17.  who  proclaimed  against  the  altar  of  B.

19.  according  to  all  that  he  had  done  in  P,.

Ezra  2.28.  the  men  of  B.  and  Ai  22.3,  Neh.  7.  32.
Jer .  48.  13.  as  the  house  of  Isr.  was  ashamed  of  B.
llos.  10. 15.  so  shall  B.  do  to  you  because  of  wicked
12.  4.  he  found  him  in  B.  there  he  spake  with  ui

591


Piu>*kr  Names.]  BIT


C  A  N


C  ES


John  5.  2.


She.  1  •


Amos  3.  14.  I  will  also  visit  the  altars  of  B.

4  4.  come  to  B.  and  transgress,  multiply  transgres.

5.  5.  seek  not  B.  for  B.  shall  come  to  nought

6.  lest  there  be  none  to  quench  it  in  B.

7  13.  but  prophesy  not  again  any  more  at  B.
BETH-ELITE.

1  Kings  16.  34.  Iliel  the  B.  did  build  Jericho
BE  1  HER.

Cant.  2.  17.  like  a  hart  on  the  mountains  of  B.
BEl'HESDA.

there  is  a  pool  called  in  Hebrew  B.
BEI'H-EZEL.

11  came  not  forth  in  the  mourning  of  B.

BEI'H-GAMUL.

Jer  48.  23.  judgment  is  come  upon  B.

BETH-HAGCEHEM.

Jer  6  1.  O  Benjamin,  set  up  a  sign  of  fire  in  B.
BETH-HORON.

Josh.  10. 11.  going  down  to  B.  the  Lord  cast  stones

21.  22.  Ephraim  gave  Levites  B.  1  C/iron.  6.  68.

1  Sam.  13.  18.  another  company  turned  to  B.

1  Kings  9.  17.  -and  Solomon  built  B.  2  Chron.  8.  5.

1  Chron.  7.  24.  his  daughter  Sherah  built  B.
BETH-LEHEM.

Gen.  35.  19.  Rachel  died  in  the  way  to  B.  48.  7.
Josh.  19.  15.  Idala  and  B.  cities  of  Zebulun
Judg.  12.  8.  after  him  Ibzan  of  B.  judged  Israel
Ruth  1.  19.  they  two  went  till  they  came  to  B.

2.  4.  Boaz  came  from  B.  11  4.  11.  be  famous  in  B.

1  Sam.  16.  4.  Samuel  came  to  B.  elders  trembled
20  6.  David  asked  leave  of  me  to  run  to  B.  28.

2  Sam.  2.3.  15.  David  said,  O  that  one  would  give

me  drink  of  water  of  the  well  of  B.  1  Chron.

1  Chron.  2.  51.  Salma  the  father  of  B.  54.

4  4.  the  first-born  of  Ephratah,  the  father  of  B.

2  Chron.  11.  6.  Rehoboam  built  B.  and  Etam
Ezra  2.  21.  the  children  of  B.  Neh.  7.  26.

Jer  41.  17.  dwelt  in  habitation  of  Chimham  by  B.
'Mat.  2.  1.  when  Jesus  was  born  in  B.of  Judea,  5.‘
6.  thou  B.  in  the  land  of  luda,  art  not  the  least
16.  Herod  slew  all  the  children  that  were  in  B.
Luke  2.  4.  Joseph  went  up  from  Galilee  to  B.

15.  let  us  now  go  to  B.  and  see  this  thing
Tohn  7.  42.  Christ  cometh  out  of  the  town  of  B.

BETH-LEH  EM-EP 1 1  R  AT  A 11.

Mic  5  2.  thou  B. -Ephratah,  though  thou  be  little
‘  ‘  B  ETH-T ,E 1 1 EM-J  U  D  A II .

Judg.  17.  7.  a  I.evite  of  B.  went  to  sojourn,  8.  9.

19.  1.  a  Levite  took  him  a  concubine  out  of  B.

18.  we  are  passing  from  B.  and  1  went  to  B.
Ruth  1.  1.  Elimelech  of  B.  went  to  sojourn

I  Sam  17.  12.  David  son  of  an  Ephrathite  of  B.
BETH-LEHEMITE.

1  Sam.  16.  1.  Jesse  the  B.  18.1  17.  58.

2  Sam  21.  19.  Elhanan  the  B.  slew  Goliath’s  brother

BETH -PEG  It.

Deut.  3.  29.  we  abode  in  the  valley  over-against  B.
4.  46.  the  statutes  Moses  spake  over-against  B.

34  6  he  buried  Moses  in  a  valley  over-against  B.
BETH-PHAGE.

Mat  21.1.  whencometo  B.  Mark  11. 1.  Luke  19.29.
BEJ'HSAI  DA.

Mat.  11.  21.  woe  unto  thee,  B.  Luke  10.  13.

Mark  6.  45.  he  constrained  his  disciples  to  go  to  B.
8.  22.  cometh  to  B.  they  bring  a  blind  man  to  him
Luke  9.  10.  he  Went  into  a  desert  belonging  to  B.
John  1.  44.  now  Philip  was  of  B.  12.  21.

BETH-SHAN.

1  Sam.  31. 10.  fastened  Saul’s  body  to  the  w’allof  B.
BETH-SH  EMESH.

Josh.  15.  10.  the  border  of  Judah  went  down  to  B.
]0.  22.  Issachar's  coast  reacheth  to  B.

38.  Beth-anath  and  B.  cities  of  Naphtali
21.  16.  Judah  gave  to  Levites  B.  with  her  suburbs
Judg.  1.  33.  did  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  B.
1  Sam.  6.  9.  if  he  goeth  up  by  the  way  of  B.

12.  the  kinetook  the  straight  way  to  B.

19.  he  smote  the  men  of  B.  because  they  looked

1  Kings  4.  9.  the  son  of  Dekar  was  in  B.  an  officet

2  Kings  14.  11.  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel  looked

one  another  in  the  face  at  B.  2  Chron.  25.  21.
2  Chron.  28.  18.  the  Philistines  had  taken  B.


Acts  12.


BLASTUS.

20.  and  having  made  B.  then  friend
BOAN  EliGES.

Mark  3.  17.  surnamed  them  B.  the  sous  ot  thunder

BOAZ.

1  Kings! .  21.  the  left  pillar  called  B.  2  Chron.  3.  17-
BOAZ.

Ruth  2.  1.  Naomi  had  a  kinsman,  his  name  was  B.
19.  the  man’s  name  with  whom  1  wrought,  is  B.
3. 2.  is  not  B.  of  our  kindred  ||  7.  when  B.  had  eaten

4.  1.  then  went  B.  up  to  the  gate,  and  sat  down
13.  so  B.  took  Ruth,  and  she  was  Lis  wife

21.  B.  begat  Obed,  1  Chron.  2.  11,  12.  Mat.  1.  5.
Luke'S.  32.  Obed,  which  was  the  son  of  B.

BOCHIM.

Judg.  2.  1 .  an  angel  came  up  from  Gilgal  to  B.

5.  and  they  cafled  the  name  of  that  place  B.
BOSOR.  See  Balaam.

BOZRAH.

Gen.  .36.  .33.  Joab  of  B.  reigned  in  his  stead
Isa.  34.  6.  for  the  Lord  hath  a  sacrifice  in  B.

63. 1.  that  cometh  with  dyed  garments  from  B.
Jer.  48.  24.  and  judgment  Is  come  upon  B.

49.  13.  have  sworn  that  B.  shall  become  desolation

22.  and  he  shall  spread  his  wings  Over  B.

Amos  1.  12.  which  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  B.
Mic.  2. 12.  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of  B.

BUL.

I  Kings  6.  38.  in  month  B.  the  house  was  finished
BUZ.

Gen.  22. 21.  Milcah  bare  to  Nahor  B.  and  Kemuel
1  Chr.  5.  14.  Jeshishai,  son  of  Jahdo,  the  son  of  B.
Jer.  25.  23.  1  made  Dedan  and  B.  to  drink  the  cup
BUZ1.

Ezek.X.S.  word  came  to  Ezekiel  the  priest,  son  ot  B.
BUZITE.

Job  32.  2.  Elihu  the  son  of  Barachel  the  B.  6.


C.


1  Kings  9.  13.


Jer.  43.  13.  he  shall  break  the  images  of  B.
BETHUEL.

Gen.  22.  22.  behold,  Milcah  bare  to  Nahor,  B.

2.3.  B.  begat  Rebekah,  24.  15.  I  25.  20.

24.  24.  she  said,  I  am  the  daughter  of  B.  47-
28.  2.  go  to  the  house  of  B.  thy  mother’s  father
BEULAH.

Isa  62.4.  call  thy  land  B.  for  Lord  delighteth  in  thee
BFZALEEL.

Exod.  31.2.  T  have  called  by  name  B.  son  of  Uri.

of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  35.  30.  1  Chron.  2.  20.
.36.  1.  then  wrought  B.  11  37.  1.  B.  made  the  ark
.38.22.  B.made  all  the  Lord  commanded  Moses
2  Chron.  1. 5.  the  brazen  altar  that  B.  had  made
Ezra  10.  .30.  the  sons  of  Pahath-moab,  B.  Binnui
BEZEK.

Judg.  1.  4.  they  slew  of  them  in  B.  10,000  men,  5.

1  Sam.  11.  8.  Saul  numbered  Israel  in  B.  300,000

B1CHRT.

2  Sam.  20. 1.  Sheba  the  son  of  B.  a  Benjamite
2.  so  every  man  followed  Sheba  the  son  of  B.

6.  now  shall  the  son  of  B.  do  us  more  harm

22.  they  cut  off  the  head  of  Sheba  the  son  of  B.
BIDKAR.

2  Kings  9.25.  Jehu  said  to  B.  his  captain, take  up
R1GTHAN .

Esth.  2.21 .  B.  sought  to  lay  hand  on  king  Ahasuerus
6.  2.  that  Mordecai  had  told  of  B.and  Teresh
BILDAD.

Job  2.  11.  B.  the  Shuhite,  8. 1 . 1  18.  1. 1  25.  1. 1  42.  9
BILHAH.

Gen.  29.29.  I.aban  gave  to  Rachel  B.  to  be  her  maid
30.  .3.  behold  my  maid  B.  go  in  unto  her,  4.

5.  B.  conceived,  7.  ||  .35.  22.  Reuben  lay  with  B.
35.  25.  the  sons  of  B.  .37.  2. 1  46.  25.  1  Chr.  7.  13.

1  Chron.  4.29.  Shimei,  his  sons  dwelt  at  B.
BITHYNIA.

Acts  16.  7-  they  assayed  to  go  into  B.  but  Spirit
l  Pet.  1.  1.  to  strangeis  scattered  thro’  Asia  and  B.

592


CABUL.

Hiram  called  them  the  land  ot  C.
CAIAPH  AS.

Mat.  26.3.  the  high-priest  who  was  called  C.

57.  they  led  Jesus  away  to  C.  the  high-priest
John  11.  49.  C.  said,  ye  know  nothing  at  all
18.  14.  C.  was  he  that  gave  counsel  to  the  Jews
28.  led  Jesus  from  C.  to  the  hall  of  judgment
See  Annas.

CAIN.

Josh.  15.  57.  C.  and  Gibeah  cities  of  Judah
CAIN.

Gen.  4.  2.  but  C.  was  a  tiller  ot  the  ground
5.  to  C.  and  his  offering  he  had  not  respect

15.  the  L.  set  a  mark  on  C.  lest  any  should  kill  him
25.  another  seed  instead  of  Abel  whom  C.  slew

Heb.  11.  4.  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  than  C.

1  John  3.  12.  not  as  C.  who  was  of  that  wicked  one
Jude  11.  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  C.

CA1NAN.

Luke  3.  .36.  which  was  the  son  of  C.  37.

CALDEA.  See  Chaldea.

CALEB.

Num.  1.3.  6.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  C.  to  spy  the  land
30.  and  C.  stilled  the  people  before  Moses

14.  24.  but  my  servantC.  havinganotherspir 'it, will

I  bring  into  the  land,  30. 1  .32. 12.  Pent.  1.  36.
.38.  but  Joshua  and  C.  lived  still,  26.  65.

.34.  19.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  C.  to  divide  the  land
Josh.  14.  13.  Joshua  gave  C.  Hebron  for  inheritance

15.  14.  C.  drove  thence  the  three  sons  of  Anak

16.  C.  said,  he  that  smiteth  Kirjath-sepher
Judg.  1.  15.  and  C.  gave  her  the  upper  springs
1  Sam.  25.  .3.  Nabal  was  of  the  house  ot  C.

1  Chron.  2.  18.  and  C.  begat  children,  42. 50.  14. 15.
CALEB.

1  Sam.  30.  14.  on  the  south  of  C.  we  burnt  Ziklag
CALEB-EPHRATAH.

1  Chron.  2.  24.  after  that  Hezron  was  dead  in  C.
CALNEH.

Gen.  10.  10.  Babel  and  C.  in  the  land  of  Shinar
Amos  6. 2.  pass  ye  unto  C.  from  thence  to  Hamath
CALNO.

Isa.  10.9.  not  C.  as  Carchemish  ?  Hamath  as  Arpad  ?
CALVARY.

Luke  23.  33.  when  come  to  the  place  called  C.
CAMON.

Judg.  10.  5.  Jair  died,  and  was  buried  in  C.
CANA.

John2. 1.  there  was  a  marriage  in  C.  of  Galilee
11.  this  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in  C.

4.  46.  so  Jesus  came  again  into  C.  of  Galilee
21.  2.  there  were  Thomas  anil  Nathanael  of  C.
CANAAN.

Gen.  9- 18.  and  Ham  is  the  father  of  C.

22.  Ham  the  father  of  C.  saw  the  nakedness
25.  i  ursed  be  C.  1|  26.  C.  shall  be  his  servant,  27.
10.  15.  C.  begat  Sidon  his  first-born,  1  Chr.  1.  13.
28.  1.  not  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  C.  6.
CANAAN.

Exod.  15.  15.  fhe  inhabitants  of  C.  shall  melt
Judg.  3.  1.  as  had  not  known  ajl  the  wars  of  C.

4.  2.  the  Lord  sold  them  to  Jabin  king  of  C.

2.3.  and  God  subdued  Jabin  the  king  of  C.  24.

5.  19.  then  fought  the  kings  of  C.  in  Taanach
Psal.  106.  38.  they  sacrificed  to  the  idols  of  C.

135.  11.  who  smote  all  the  kingdoms  of  C.

Jsa.  19. 18.  five  cities  in  Egypt  speak  language  of  C,
Zeph.  2.  5.  O  C.  I  will  even  destroy  thee
Mat.  15.  22.  a  woman  of  C.  cried  to  Jesus,  saying
Land  of  CANAAN.

Gen.  12.  5.  went  forth  to  go  into  the  land  of  C.

Ifi.  .3.  Abraham  dweltten  years  in  the  land  of  C.

17.  8.  I  will  give  thee  the  land  of  C.  Lev.  25.  38

Num.  34.  2.  Dent.  32.  49.  1  Chron.  16.  18
Psal.  105.  11.

.37.  1.  and  Jacob  dwelt  in  the  land  of  C.

42.  5.  for  the  famine  was  in  the  land  of  C.

7.  whence  come  ye  ?  they  said,  from  land  of  C.
13.  thy  servants  are  sons  of  one  man  in  land  of  C.
45.  17.  and  go,  get  ye  up  unto  the  land  of  C.


Gen.  50.  13.  his  sons  carried  him  into  the  land  c/C.
Lev.  14.  34.  when  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of  C.

which  1  gave  for  a  possession,  Num.  34.  2.
18.  .3.  do  not  after  the  doings  of  the  land  of  C.

Num.  1.3.  17.  Moses  sent  them  to  sov  the  land  of  C.

32.  .32.  we  will  pass  over  armed  into  the  land  of  C.
Josh.  5.  12.  they  i.id  eat  the  fruit  of  the  land  of  C.

22.  11.  have  built  an  altar  over  against  land  of  C.

24.3.  I  led  him  through  all  the  land  of  C.

Ezek.  16.  3.  thy  nativity  is  of  the  land  of  C.

Acts  7.  11.  there  came  dearth  overall  the  land  of  C.

1.3.  19.  had  destroyed  seven  nations  in  land  of  C

CAN  A  A  NILE,  S.

Gen.  12.  6.  and  the  C.  was  then  in  the  land,  13  v
15.  21.  the  Amorites,  C.  Girgashites,  and  Jebu-
sites,  Exod.  3.  8,  17-1  2.3.  23.  Deut.  7.  1.  I  20,
17.  Josh.  .3.  10. 1  12.  8.  Judg.  3.  5.  Neh.  9.  8.

24.  3.  thou  shalt  not  take  a  wife  of  the  C.

34.  30.  to  make  me  to  stink  amongst  the  C.

38.  2.  Judah  saw  the  daughter  of  a  certain  C.

Exod.  23.  28.  I  will  drive  out  the  C.  33.  2. 1  .34. 11.
Num.  21.  3.  the  L.  delivered  up  the  C.  Neh.  9.  24.
Josh.  17.12.  but  C.  would  dwell  in  land,  Judg.  1.27.

18.  shall  drive  out  the  C.  tho’  have  iron  chariots
Judg.  1.  1.  who  shall  go  up  against  the  C.  first?

9.  Judah  went  down  to  fight  against  the  C.  10.

29.  neitlier  did  Ephraim  drive  out  the  C.  in  Gezer
.3.3.  but  Naphtali  dwelt  among  the  C.  of  the  land
1  Kings  9.  16.  Pharaoh  had  slain  the  C.  in  Gezer
Ezra  9. 1.  doing  according  to  the  abominations  of  C.
Ohad.  20.  captiv.  of  this  host  shall  possess  that  of  C.
Zech.  14.  21.  no  more  C.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord
Mat.  10.  4.  Simon  the  C.  Mark  3. 18.

CANAAN  ITESS.

1  Chron.  2.  3.  were  born  to  Judah  of  Shua  the  C.
CANDACE.

Acts  8.27.  an  eunuch  of  great  authority  under  C

CAPERNAUM.

Mat.  4.  13.  Jesus  leaving  Nazareth,  dwelt  in  C.

8.  5.  when  Jesus  was  entered  into  C.  there  came
11.  2.3.  thou  C.  which  art  exalted,  Luke  10.  15.

17.  24.  when  they  were  come  to  C.  they  that
Mark  1.  21.  and  they  went  into  C.  he  taught,  2.  1.
Luke  4.  2.3.  whatsoever  we  have  heard  done  in  C.
John  2.  12.  they  continued  not  many  days  in  C.

4.  46.  was  a  nobleman  whose  son  wTas  sick  at  C.

6.  17.  the  disciples  went  over  the  sea  towards  C.

24.  the  people  came  to  C.  seeking  for  Jesus
59.  these  things  said  he,  as  he  taught  in  C.

CAPHTOR.

Jer.  47.4.  will  spoil  the  remnant  of  the  country  of  C.
Amos  9.7.  1  brought  the  Philistines  from  C.
CAPPADOCIA.

Acts  2.  9.  the  dwellers  in  C.  we  hear  them  speak

1  Pet.  1.  1.  to  the  strangers  scattered  thro’  C.  Asia

CARCHEMISH.

2  Chron.  35.  20.  Nechocame  up  to  fight  against  C.
Isa.  10.  9.  is  not  Calno  as  C.  ?  Hamath  as  Arpad  ?
Jer.  46.  2.  which  was  0y  the  river  Euphrates  in  C.

CARMEL.

Josh .  15.  55.  C.  and  Ziph  in  the  inheritance  of  Judah
1  Sam.  15.  12.  it  was  told  Samuel,  Saul  came  to  C.

25.  2.  N  abal’s  possessions  were  in  C.  the  man  great

7.  nothing  missing  all  the  while  they  were  in  C.
40.  David’s  servants  were  come  to  Abigail  to  C.

1  Kings  18.  19.  gather  to  me  all  Israel  to  mount  C.
42.  and  Elijah  went  up  to  the  top  of  C.

2  Kings  2.  25.  Elisha  went  from  thence  to  mount  C.
4.  25.  the  woman  of  Shunem  came  to  mount  C.

19.  23.  I  will  enter  into  forest  of  his  C.  Isa.  37-  24.

2  Chron.  26.  10.  Uzziah  had  vine-dressers  in  C.
Cant.  7.  5.  thine  head  upon  thee  is  like  C.  hair  purp.
Jsa.  .35.  2.  the  excellency  of  C.  and  Sharon

Jer.  46.  18.  and  as  C.  by  the  sea,  so  shall  he  come
Amos  1.2.  and  the  top  of  A.  shall  wither
9.  .3.  though  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  C.
Mic."!.  14.  which  dwell  solitary  in  the  midst  of  C.
See  Baashan.

CARMELITE.  [2.2.13.3.

1  Sam.  30.  5.  Abigail  wife  of  Nabal  the  C.  2  Sam.

2  Sam.  23.  35.  Hezrai,  C.  one  of  David’s  worthies

CARMI.

Gen.  46.  9.  the  sons  of  Reuben,  Hezron  and  C.
Josh.  7.  1.  Achan  the  son  of  C.  18.  1  Chron.  2.  ".

1  Chr.  A.  1.  the  sons  of  Judah,  Pharez,  Hezron,  C.

CARPUS.

2  Tim.  4.  13.  the  cloke  that  I  left  with  C.  bring

CAS1PH1  A.

Ezra  8.  17.  to  Iddo  the  chief  at  the  place  C.
CEDRON.

John  18. 1.  he  went  with  disciples  over  the  brook  C.
CENCHREA.

Acts  18.  18.  Paul  having  shorn  his  head  in  C.
Rom.  16.  1.  sister  Phebe  a  servant  of  church  at  C
CEPHAS.

John  1.  42.  thou  shalt  be  called  C.  a  stone
1  Cor.  1.  12.  everyone  of  you  saitk,  1  am  of  C.
3.22.  whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  C.or  life
Q.  5.  and  as  the  brethren  of  the  Lord,  and  C.

15.  5.  that  he  was  seen  of  C.  then  of  the  twelve
Gal.  2.  9.  James,  C.  and  John,  who  seemed  pillats
CESAR.

Mat.  22.  17.  tell  us,  is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute  to
C.  or  not  ?  Mark  12. 14.  Luke  20.  22.


21.  render  to  C.  the  things  that  are  Cesar’s,  and
to  God  the  things  that  are  God’s,  Mark  12.  17-


rustus


Luke  2.  1.  there  went  out  a  decree  from  C.  Au^us
3.  1.  now  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius  C.

23.  2.  and  forbidding  to  give  tribute  to  C.  saying
John  19.  12.  the  Jews  cried  out,  if  thou  let  this  man
go,  thou  art  not  Cesar’s  friend  ;  speaketh  ag.  U.
15.  the  priests  answered,  we  have  no  king  but  C
Acts  11.  28.  came  to  pass  in  days  of  Claudius  C.
17.7.  these  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  ot  C.

25.  8.  nor  against  C.  have  I  offended  any  thing
11.1  appeal  unto  C.  li  21.  till  I  send  him  to  C.

26.  32.  set  at  liberty,  if  he  had  not  appealed  to  C.
27  .  24.  fear  not,  thou  must  be  brought  before  C.

28.  19.  1  was  constrained  to  appeal  to  C.

Phil.  4.  22.  chiefly  they  that  are  of  C.  household
CESAREA.

Mat.  16.  13.  Jesus  came  into  the  coasts  if  C


C  H  U


DAM


D  A  V  [Prupur  Nami  »


Mark  8.  27-  Jesus  went  out  into  the  town3  ot  C.
Acts  8.  40.  Philip  preached,  till  he  came  to  C.

9.  30.  the  brethren  brought  Paul  down  to  C.

10.  24.  the  morrow  after  they  entered  into  C.

11.  11.  Cornelius  sent  three  men  from  C.  to  me

12.  19.  Herod  went  down  from  Judea  to  C.

18.  22.  when  he  had  landed  at  C.  and  saluted
21.  16.  there  went  with  us  of  the  disciples  of  C.

23.  23.  make  ready  200  soldiers  to  go  to  C.

25.  1.  after  3  days  lie  ascended  from  C.  to  Jerusal.

4.  Festus  answered,  Paul  should  be  kept  at  C.

CHALCOL.

1  Kings  4.  31.  Solomon  was  wiser  than  C.

1  C/iron.  2. 6.  the  sons  of  Zerah,  Heman,  C.  and  Dara

CHALDKA.

Jer.  50. 10.  C.  shall  be  a  spoil, saith  the  Lord
51.  24. 1  will  render  to  inhabitants  of  C.  their  evil
35.  my  blood  be  upon  the  inhabitants  of  C.

Ezek.  16.  29-  hast  multiplied  thy  fornication  to  C.
23.  16.  she  sent  messengers  to  them  into  C.
CHALDEAN.

Ezra  5. 12.  gave  them  into  hand  of  N ebuchad.  the  C.
Dan.  2.  10.  that  asked  such  things  at  any  C.
CHALDEANS.

Job  1.  17.  C.  made  out  three  bands,  fell  on  camels
Isa.  23. 13.  the  land  of  C.  the  Assyrian  founded
43.  14.  J  have  brought  down  all  the  C.

47.  1.  there  is  no  throne,  O  daughter  of  the  C.

5.  get  thee  into  darkness,  O  daughter  of  the  C.

48.  14.  and  his  arm  shall  be  on  the  C.

20.  go  ye  forth  of  Rabylon,  flee  ye  from  the  C.
Jer.  21.  4.  wherewith  ye  tight  against  the  C.

9.  he  that  falleth  to  the  C  he  shall  live,  38.  2.

25.  12.  1  will  punish  the  land  of  C.  50.  1,45.

32.  5.  tho’  ye  fight  with  the  C.  ye  shall  not  prosper

24.  the  city  is  given  into  the  hand  of  the  C.  43.
29.  the  C.  shall  come  and  set  fire  on  this  city

33.  5. come  to  fight  with  the  C.  but  to  fill  them

37.  8.  the  C.  shall  come  again  and  tight  against

the  city

9.  saying,  surely  the  C.  shall  depart  from  us

10.  tho’  ye  had  smitten  the  whole  army  of  the  C.

14.  then  said  Jeremiah,  1  fall  not  away  to  the  C.

38.  19.  am  afraid  of  Jews  that  are  fallen  to  the  C.
23.  they  shall  bring  out  thy  children  to  the  C.

39.  8.  C.  burnt  king’s  house,  and  houses  of  people

40.  9.  Gedaliah  said,  fear  not  to  serve  the  C.

10.  I  will  dwell  at  Mizpah,  to  serve  the  C.

41.  3.  Ishmael  slew  the  C.  that  were  at  Mizpah
43.  3.  Baruch  setteth  thee  on  to  deliver  us  to  C.

50.  35.  a  sword  is  upon  the  C.  saith  the  Lord

45.  the  Lord  hath  purposed  against  the  C.

51.  4.  thus  the  slain  shall  fall  in  the  land  of  the  C.

52.  8.  but  the  army  of  the  C.  pursued  Zedekiah
Ezek.  12.  13.  I  will  bring  him  to  the  land  of  the  C.
23.  14.  she  saw  the  images  of  the  C.  portrayed
Dan.  1.  4.  they  might  teach  the  tongue  of  the  C.
2.2.  then  the  king  commanded  to  call  the  C.

3.  8.  at  that  time  certain  C.  accused  the  Jews
4.7.  then  came  in  the  C.  and  the  soothsayers
5.  7.  the  king  cried  aloud  to  bring  in  the  C.

11.  whom  thy  father  made  master  of  the  C.

9.  1.  Darius  made  king  over  the  realm  of  the  C.
Hab.  1.  6.  lo,  I  raise  up  the  C.  that  hasty  nation
Acts  7. 4.  Abram  came  out  of  the  land  of  theC.
CHALDEES.

2  Kings  24.  2.  Lord  sent  against  him  b  nds  of  the  C.

25.  4.  the  C.  were  against  the  city  round  about

10.  the  army  of  the  C.  brake  down  the  walls

26.  came  to  Egypt,  for  they  were  afraid  of  the  C.

2  Chr.  36.  17-  he  brought  on  them  the  kingof  the  C.
Isa.  13. 19.  Babylon  the  beauty  of  C.  excellency

See  U  R .

CHARRAN.

Acts  7. 2.  God  appeared  bef.  Abraham  dwelt  iu  C.4.
CHEBAR.

Ezek.  1.  1.  by  river  of  C.  3. 1  3. 15,  23.  |  10.  15.  20.
CHF.M  ARIMS.

Zeph.  1.  4.  I  will  cut  off  the  name  of  the  C.
CHEMOSH.

Num.  21.  29.  thou  art  undone,  O  people  of  C.

Judo.  11.  24.  wilt  not  thou  possess  what  C.  giveth  ?
ill  Kings  11.7.  Solomon  built  an  high  place  for  C.  33.
Ter.  48.  7-  and  C.  shall  go  forth  into  captivity

13.  and  Moab  shall  be  ashamed  of  C.  as  Israel

46.  woe  to  thee,  O  Moab,  people  of  C.  perisheth

CHEN  AN  I  AH.

|l  ChrA5. 22. C.  chief  of  the  Levites,  was  for  song,  27.
CHERETHIMS.

Ezek.  25. 16.  behold,  I  will  cutoff  C.  and  destroy
CHERETHITES.

I  Sam.  30.  14.  made  an  invasion  on  the  south  of  C.

I  Sam.  8.  18.  Benaiah  the  son  of  Jehoiada  was  over
the  C.  and  Pelethites,  20.  23.  1  Chron.  18.  17.
Zeph.  2.  5.  woe  unto  the  nation  of  the  C.  O  Canaan
CHERITH.

.  Kings  17.  3.  and  hide  thyself  by  the  brook  C.

CHILION.  See  Ma’hlon.

I  CHILMAD.

Ezek.  27  -  23.  Ashur  and  C.  were  thy  merchants
CHI  MIT  AM.

!  Sam.  19.  37.  thy  servant  C.  let  him  go  over,  38, 40.
Ter.  41. 17.  they  dwelt  in  the  habitation  of  C.
CHIOS.

4cts  20. 15.  we  came  next  day  over-against  C.
CHISLEU.

VeA.1.1.  in  the  month  C.  H  Zech. ’I .  1.  ninth  month  C.
CH1TTIM.

Vim.  24. 24.  the  ships  shall  come  from  coasts  of  C.
Isa.  23. 1.  from  the  land  of  C.  it  is  levealed  to  them

12.  pass  over  to  C.  there  shalt  thou  have  no  rest

Ter.  2.  10.  for  pass  over  the  isles  of  C.  and  see
Ezek.  27.  6.  benches  of  ivory  brought  out  of  isles  C.
Dan.  11.  30.  the  ships  of  C.  shall  come  against  him
^  CHI  UN.

<lmos5. 26.  have  born  Moloch  and  C.  your  images
[  CHT.OE.

I  Cor.  1.  11.  by  them  which  are  of  the  house  of  C.
CIIORAZIN.

nat.  11.  21.  woe  unto  thee,  C.  Luke  10.  13.

CHUSH  AN-RISHATHA 1M.
udg.  3.8.  Lord  sold  Israel  into  the  hand  of  C.


_  CHUZA.

Luke  8.  3.  Joanna  wile  of  C.  ministered  unto  him
„  .  CILICIA.

ActsC>.  9.  they  ot  C.  disputed  with  Stephen

15.  23.  the  brethren  which  are  of  the  Gentiles  in  C.
41.  he  went  through  C.  confirming  the  churches

21. 39.  a  man  of  Tarsus,  a  city  in  C.  22.3. 1  23.  34.

27.  5.  when  we  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  C.

Gal.  1.  21.  1  came  into  the  regions  of  C.

CLEOPAS.

Luke  24.  18.  one  ot  them,  whose  name  was  C.  said
John  19.  25.  Mary  the  wife  of  C.  stood  by  the  cross
CO  LOSS  E.

Col.  1.  2.  Paul  to  the  saints  and  brethren  at  C.
CON  I  AH.

Jer.  22.  24.  though  C.  were  the  signet  on  my  hand

28.  is  this  man  C.  a  despised,  broken  idol  <

37. 1.  king  Zedekiah  reigned  instead  of  C.
CORINTH.

Acts  18. 1.  after  these  things,  Paul  came  to  C.

19.  1.  it  came  to  pass  that  while  Apollos  was  atC.

1  Cor .  1.  2.  unto  the  church  of  God  which  is  at  C.

to  them  sanctified  in  Christ  Jesus,  2  Cor.  1.  1.

2  Cor.  1.  23.  to  spare  you  I  came  not  as  yet  to  C.

2  Tim.  4.  20.  Erastus  abode  at  C.  Trophimus  at

CORINTHIANS.  [Miletum
Acts  18.  8.  many  ot  the  C.  hearing,  believed
2  Cor.  6.  11.  O  ye  C.  our  mouth  is  open  unto  you
CORNELIUS.

Acts  10. 1.  there  was  a  man  in  Cesarea,  called  C.

7.  the  angel  which  spake  to  C.  was  departed
25.  C.  met  Peter,  and  fell  down  at  his  feet
31.  the  angel  said,  C.  thy  prayer  is  heard
COZBI.

Num.  25. 15. name  of  the  Midianitish  woman  was  C.

18.  they  have  beguiled  you  in  the  matter  of  C.
CRESCENS.

2  Tim.  4. 10.  C.  is  departed  to  Galatia,  Titus  to  Dal-
CRETE.  [matia

Acts  27.  7.  we  sailed  under  C.  ||  13.  dose  by  C.

12.  attain  to  Phenice,  which  is  an  haven  of  C.

21.  hearkened  to  me,  and  not  have  loosed  from  C.
Tit.  1.  5.  tor  this  cause  left  1  thee  in  C.  to  set  in  order
CR  IVI  ES.

Acts  2.  11.  C.  we  hear  them  speak  in  our  tongues
CRET1ANS.

Tit.  1.  12.  the  C.  are  always  liars,  evil  beasts
CRISPUS.

Acts  18.  8.  C.  chief  ruler  of  the  synagogue  believed

1  Cor.  1.  14.  that  I  baptized  none  of  you  but  C.

CUSH.

Gen.  10.  6.  sons  of  Ham,  C.  Mizraim,  1  Chr.  1. 8.

7.  the  sons  of  C.  Sebah  and  Havilah.l  Chron.  1. 9.
Isa.  11. 11.  to  recover  the  remnant  left  from  C.
CUSIIAN.

Hab.  3.  7.  I  saw  the  tents  of  C.  in  affliction
CUSHI.

ZSam.  18.21.  C.  tell  the  king  what  thou  hast  seen
23.  Ahimaaz  ran  by  the  plain,  and  overran  C.
Jer.  36.  14.  all  princes  sent  the  son  of  C.  to  Baruch
Zeph.  1.  1.  the  word  came  to  Zephaniah  son  of  C.
CYPRUS.

Acts  4.  36.  Joses  was  of  the  country  of  C.

11.  19.  travelled  as  far  as  Phenice  and  C.

20.  some  of  them  were  men  ofC.  and  Cyrene

13.  4.  and  from  Seleucia  they  sailed  to  C.

15.  39.  Barnabas  took  Mark  and  sailed  to  C.

21.  3.  when  we  had  discovered  C.  we  left  it

16.  they  brought  with  him  one  Mnason  of  C.

27.  4.  when  we  launched,  we  sailed  under  C.

CYRENE.

Mat.  27.  32.  found  a  man  ofC.  Simon  by  name
Acts 2.  10.  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  C.

11.  20.  some  ofthem  were  men  of  Cyprus  and  C.
13.  1.  Luciusof  C.  was  in  the  church  at  Antioch
C YRENIAN .

Mark  15.  21.  compel  Simon  a  C.  to  bear  his  cr  a
CY  REN  IANS.

Acts  6.  9.  is  called  the  synagogue  of  the  C.
CYRENIUS.

Luke  2.  2.  wasmadewhen  C. was  governor  of  Syria
CYRUS.

2  Chron.  36. 22.  in  the  firstyear  of  C.  king  of  Persia

the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  C  '.Ezra  1.  1.
23.  thus  saith  C.  king  of  Persia,  Ezra  1.  2.

Ezra  1.7.  C.  brought  forth  the  vessels,  8.  |  5. 14.

3.  7.  according  to  the  grant  they  had  of  C.

4.  3.  will  build  as  C.  the  king  hath  commanded  us

5.  13.  C.  made  a  decree  to  build  this  house,  17.

Isa.  44.  28.  that  saith  of  C.  he  is  my  shepherd
45.  1.  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  his  anointed,  to  C.
Dan.  1 . 21.  Daniel  continued  to  the  firstyear  of  C.

6.  28.  Daniel  prospered  in  the  reign  of  C.

10. 1.  in  the  third  year  of  C.  a  thing  was  revealed

D.

DABBASHETH.

.ToshAQ.  11.  their  border  toward  sea  reached  to  D.
DABERATII.

Josh.  19.  12.  and  then  goeth  out  toD.  upto  Japhia
1  Chron.  6.  72.  out  of  Issachar,  D.  with  her  suburbs
DAGON.

Judg.  16.  23.  to  offer  a  sacrifice  to  D.  their  god
l  Sam.  5.  2.  brought  the  ark  into  the  house  of  D.

3.  D.  was  fallen  H  4.  the  head  of  D.  was  cutoff
7-  his  hand  is  sore  on  us,  and  on  D.  our  god

1  Chr.  10. 10.  fastened  Saul’s  head  in  temple  of  D.

DALMATIA.

2  Tim.  4. 10.  Titus  is  departed  to  D.  only  Luke  is

DAM  ARTS.

Acts  17.  34.  and  a  woman  named  D.  believed
DAMASCUS.

Gen.  15.  2.  the  steward  of  my  house  is  Eliezerof  D.

2  Sam.  8.  6.  David  put  garrisons  in  Syria  of  D.  and
Syrians  became  servants  to  David,  1  Chron.  18.  6.

1  Kings  11.  24.  Rezon  went  to  D.  and  reigned  in  D.

19.  15.  returnon  thy  way  to  the  wilderness  of  D.

20.  34.  thou  shalt  make  streets  for  thee  in  D.

2  Kings, 5. 12.  are  not  Abana,  Pharpar, rivers  of  D.  '
8.7.  Elishac-ame  to  D.  H  14. 28.  Jerob.  recovered  P.


2  Kings  16.  9.  the  king  of  Assyria  went  up  ag.  D.

10.  king  Ahaz  saw  an  altar  that  was  at  D.

1  Chr.  18.  5.  Syrians  of  I),  came  to  help  Hadareaei

2  Chr.  24.  23.  sent  the  spoil  ofthem  to  the  king  of  D.

28.  5.  carried  a  great  multitude  of  captives  to  D.
23.  for  Ahaz  sacrificed  t«  the  gods  of  D.

Cant.  7.  4.  Lebanon,  whic  h  looketh  toward  D.

Isa.  7.  8.  the  head  of  Syria  is  D.  head  of  D.  Reziu

8.  4.  the  riches  of  D.  shall  be  taken  away

10.  9.  for  lie  saith,  is  not  Samaria  as  D.  f

17.  1.  the  burden  of  D.  is  taken,  Jer.  49.  23.

3.  and  the  kingdom  shall  cease  from  D.

Jer.  49-  24.  D.  is  waxed  feeble,  and  turneth  to  flee
27.  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  D.

Ezek.  27.  18.  D.  thy  merchant  in  wine  and  wool
Amos  1.3.  for  three  transgressions  of  D.  and  for  four
5.  I  will  break  also  the  bar  of  D.  and  cut  off
3.  12.  and  that  dwell  in  D.  in  a  couch
5.  27.  willcause  you  togo  intocaptivity  beyond  D.
Zech.  9.  1.  and  1). shall  be  the  rest  thereof
Acts  9.  2.  Saul  desired  of  high  priest  letters  to  D.
10.  there  was  a  disciple  at  D.  named  Ananias
19.  then  was  Saul  with  the  disciples  at  D.

22.  Saul  confounded  the  Jews  who  dwelt  at  D.
27.  declared  how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  D.

22.  6.  as  I  was  come  nigh  to  D.  about  noon,  26.  12.
10.  the  Lord  said  to  me,  arise,  and  go  into  D.

2Cor.ll.32.in  D.  governor  desirous  to  apprehend  me
Gal.  1.  17.  but  I  returned  again  unto  D.

DAN,  a  person.

Gen.  30.  6.  therefore  called  she  his  name  D.

35.25.  son  of  Bilhah,  D.  ||  46.  23.  of  D.  Num.  26.  42.
49.16.  D.  shall  judge  his  people,  as  one  of  the  tribes
17.  D.  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way ,  an  adder
Num.  1.  12.  of  D.  Ahiezer  the  son  of  Ammi-shaddai
2.  25.  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  D.  on  north  side
31.  all  numbered  in  the  camp  of  D.  were  157,600
Dent.  33.  22.  of  D.  he  said,  D.  is  a  lion’s  whelp
Josh.  19.  47.  after  the  name  of  D.  Judg.  18.  29.
Judg.  5.  17-  and  why  did  D.  remain  in  ships  ?

13.  25.  the  Spirit  moved  him  in  the  camp  of  D.
Ezek.  48.  l.a  portion  for  D.  ||  32.  one  gate  of  D.
See  Children.

Tribe  of  DAN.

Exod.  31. 6.  Aholiabof  the  tribe  of  D.  35.  34.  I  38.  23.
Lev.  24.  11.  daughter  of  Dibri,  of  the  tribe  of  D.
Num.  1.  39.  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  D.  62,700
13.  12.  of  tribe  of  D.  to  spy  the  land,  Ammiel

34.  22.  of  tribe  of  D.  to  divide  the  land,  Bukki
Josh.  19.  40.  lot  came  for  the  tribe  of  D.  48.

21.  5.  out  of  the  tribe  of  D.  to  the  Levites,  23.
Judg.  18.  30.  were  priests  to  tribe  of  D.  till  captivity
DAN,  «  place.

Gen.  14.  14.  Abraham  pursued  them  unto  D.

Deut.  34. 1 .  Lord  shewed  Moses  all  Gilead  unto  D.
Josh.  19.  47.  they  called  Leshem,  D.  Judg.  18.  29.
Judg.  20.  1.  from  D.  to  Beer-sheba,  1  Sam.  3.  20.
2  Sam.  3.  10.  1  17.  11.  I  24.  2,  15.  1  Kings
4.  25.  1  Chron.  21. 2.  2  Chron.  30.  5.

1  Kings  12.  29.  other  calf  put  he  in  D.  2  Kings  10.29.
15.  20.  the  kingof  Syria  smote  D.  2  Chron.  16.  4.
Jer.  4. 15.  for  a  voice  declareth  from  D.

8.  16.  the  snorting  of  horses  was  heard  from  D.
Ezek.  27-  19.  D.  and  Javan  occupied  in  thy  fairs
Amos  8. 14.  they  that  say,  thy  God,  O  D.  liveth
DANIEL.

1  Chr.  3. 1.  David  had  D.  of  Abigail  the  Carmelitess
Ezra  8.  2.  of  Ithamar,  D.  ||  Neh.  10.  6.  D.  sealed
Ezek.  14. 14.  tho’  Noah,  D.  and  Job  were  in  it,  20.
28.3.  behold,  thou  art  wiser  than  D.  no  secret
Dan.  1.6.  D.  of  Judah  H 19-  none  was  found  like  D.
7-  he  gave  to  D.  the  name  of  Belteshazzar
17.  D.  had  understanding  in  all  visions  anddreams
2.  13.  sought  D.  to  be  slain  ||  16.  then  D.  went  in
19.  the  secret  was  revealed  to  D.  in  a  vision
46.  king  Nebuchadnezzar  worshipped  D.

48.  then  the  king  made  D.  a  great  man

49.  D.  sat  in  the  gate  ||  4.  8.  at  last  D.  came  in

4.  19.  then  D.  was  astonied  for  one  hour

5.  12.  dissolving  of  doubts  was  found  in  D.

29.  and  they  clothed  D.  with  scarlet  and  put

6.  2.  D.  was  first  [|  14.  king  set  his  heart  on  D.

5.  we  shall  not  find  occasion  against  this  D.

11.  these  men  found  D.  praying  before  his  God
13.  D.  regardeth  not  thee,  O'king,  nor  the  decree

23.  that  they  should  take  up  D.  out  of  the  den

26.  that  men  tremble  before  the  God  of  D.

27.  who  hath  delivered  D.  from  power  of  the  lions

28.  so  this  D.  prospered  in  the  reign  of  Darius

7.  1.  D.  had  a  dream,  and  visions  of  his  head
28.  as  forme  D.  ||  10.  12.  he  said,  fear  not,  D.

8.  1.  a  vision  appeared  to  me,  even  unto  me  D.

12.  9-  he  said,  go  thy  way,  D.  the  words  are  closed

Mat.  24.  15.  when  shall  see  abomination  of  desola¬
tion,  spoken  of  by  D.  the  Drophet,  Mark  13. 14.

I  DANIEL.

Dan.  7.  15.  I  D.  was  grieved  ||  8.  27.  I  D.  fainted
8. 15.  when  I,  even  I  D.  had  seen  the  vision

9.  2. 1 D.  understood  by  books  the  number  ofyears

10.  2.  I  D.  was  mourning  three  tiill  weeks

7.  ID.  alone  saw  the  vision.  ||  12.5.  1  D.  looked
O  DANIEL.

Dan.  6.  20.  O  D.  servant  of  the  living  God

9.  22.  O  D.  I  am  now  come  to  give  thee  skill

10.  11.  he  said  tome,  O  D.  a  man  greatly  beloved

12.  4.  O  D.  shut  up  the  words  and  seal  the  book

DARIUS.


Ezra

5.  5.

6.  1.
15.

Neh.
Dan.
6.  9.
25.
9.  1.
Hag.
Zech.


.  not  to  cease,  till  the  matter  came  to  D.
then  D.  the  king  made  a  decree,  12.
this  house  was  finished  in  sixth  year  of  D.

12.  22.  also  the  priests  to  the  reign  of  D.

5.  31.  D.  the  Midian  took  the  kingdom
wherefore  king  D.  signed  the  writing
king  D.  wrote  to  all  people  and  nations
in  the  first  year  of  D.  the  Mede,  11.  l.

1. 1.  in  second  year  of  D.  15.  |  2. 10.  Zech.  1.  7.
7.  1.  in  fourth  year  of  D.  the  word  came
DATHAN,  See  Abiram.

DAVID.


l'uth  4.  22.  Jesse  begat  D.  Mat.  1.  6.  Luke  3.  31
1  Sam.  16.  13.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  D.

x  .=>93


Proper  Names. j  J)  \  V


D  A  V


EBE


1  Sam  16.  19.  send  me  D.  thy  son  ||  21 .  D.  came  to  S.

23.  D.  played  with  his  hand,  18.  10.  I  19.  9.

17.  14.  1).  was  youngest  ||  15.  returned  from  Saul

23.  and  D.  heard  the  words  of  Goliath

28.  Eliab's  anger  was  kindled  against  D.

38.  Saul  armed  D.  ||  42.  when  Goliath  saw  D.

43.  the  Philistine  cursed  D.  by  his  gods

50.  D.  prevailed  over  the  Philistine  with  a  sling

57.  as  13.  returned  from  the  slaughter  ofPhilislin.

18.  1.  the  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  to  D.

3.  then  Jonathan  and  D.  made  a  covenant

5.  D.  went  out  whithersoever  Saul  sent  him
7.  D.  hath  slain  his  ten  thousands,  29.  5.

9.  Saul  eyed  D.  from  that  day  and  forward

14.  D.  behaved  himself  wisely  in  all  his  ways

16.  but  all  Israel  and  Judah  loved  D.

24.  the  servants  said,  on  this  manner  spake  D.

28.  Saul  saw  and  knew  that  the  Ld.  was  with  D.

29.  and  Saul  became  D’s  enemy  continually

19.  1.  Saul  spake  to  his  servants  to  kill  D.

5.  wilt  thou  sin  against  innocent  blood  to  slay  D. '.

10.  Saul  sought  to  smite  D.  but  D.  escaped,  18.

19.  D.  is  at  Naiothl,  22.  where  are  Samuel  and  D.

20.6.  D.  ask.  leave  of  me  to  run  to  Beth  lehem,  28.

17.  and  Jonathan  caused  13.  to  swear  again

24.  D.  hid  himself  |!  25.  D.  place  was  empty, 27.
34.  Jonathan  eat  not,  for  he  was  grieved  for  D.
41.  wept  one  with  another,  till  D.  exceeded

21.  1.  Ahimelech  was  afraid  at  the  meeting  of  D.

10.  D.  arose,  and  tied  to  Achish  for  tear  of  Saul

11.  is  not  this  D.  the  king  of  the  land  !  29.  3.

22. 1 .  D.  departed  and  escap.  to  the  cave  Adullam

3.  and  D.  went  thence  to  JVIispeh  of  Moab

5.  D.  departed  and  came  into  the  forest  of  Hareth

14.  who  is  so  faithful  among  thy  servants  as  D.f
17.  because  their  hand  also  is  with  D.

23.  2.  therefore  L).  inquired  of  the  Lord,  4.  |  30.

8.2  Saw.  2.  1.  |  3.  19,  22.1.21.  1.
5.  so  D.  and  his  men  went  to  keilah  and  fought

9.  D.  knew  that  Saul  practised  mischief

15.  D.  was  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph  in  a  wood
24.  D.  anti  his  men  were  in  wilderness  of  Maon
28.  Saul  return,  from  pursuing  after  D.  and  went

24.  1.  D.  is  in  the  wilderness  of  En-gedi

5.  13.  heart  smote  him  ||  7.  D.  stayed  his  servants

16.  Saul  said,  is  this  thy  voice,  my  son  D.  r  26.  17-

22.  D.  sware  unto  Saul  ||  25.  1.  D.  went  to  Paran

25.  5.  D.  sent  out  ten  young  men  to  goto  Nabal
22.  so  and  more  also  do  God  to  the  enemies  of  D.

26.  1.  doth  not  D.  hide  himself  in  hill  Hachilah?
5.  and  D.  beheld  the  place  where  Saul  lay

12.  D.  took  the  spear  and  the  cruse  of  water

17.  Saul  knew  D.  voice  ||  21.  return,  my  son  D.

27.  1.  D.  said,  I  shall  perish  by  the  hand  of  Saul

4.  D.  washed  to  Gathfl  8.  D.  invaded  Geslnirites

11.  saying,  so  did  D.  and  so  will  be  his  manner

28.  17.  Lord  given  it  to  thy  neighbour,  even  to  D.
29.3.  is  nottiiis  D.  II  6.  then  Achish  called  D.

30.  1.  when  D.  and  his  men  were  come  to  Ziklag

5.  and  D.  two  wives  were  taken  captives

10.  13.  pursued  lj  17.  smote  them  from  twilight

18.  D.  recovered  all,  19.  II  20.  D.  took  the  flocks
8  Sam.  1.  11.  D.  took  hold  on  his  clothes,  and  rent

15.  13.  called  one  of  the  young  men,  and  said
17.  13.  lamented  over  Saul  and  over  Jonathan

2.  5.  D.  sent  messengers  to  men  of  Jabesh  gilead

10.  but  the  house  of  Judah  followed  13.

3.  1.  but  house  of  D.  waxed  stronger  and  stronger

2.  unto  13.  were  sons  born  in  Hebron

0.  except  as  Ld.  hath  sworn  to  13.  so  I  do  to  him
17.  ye  sought  for  13.  in  times  past  to  he  king

28.  13.  said,  I  and  my  kingdom  are  suiltless

5.  1.  then  came  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  D.

6.  thinking  D.  cannot  come  in  hither

7.  nevertheless,  D.  took  the  strong  hold  of  Zion

10.  D.  grew  great  ||21.  13.  burnt  their  images

12.  D.  perceived  the  Lord  had  established  him

17.  D.  heard  of  it,  and  went  down  to  the  hold

6.  2.  D.  went  to  bring  up  the  ark  of  God

5.  D.  all  Israel  played  before  the  Lord,  and  said

9.  and  D.  was  afraid  of  the  Lord  that  day

14.  D.  danced  II  15.  so  D.  brought  up  the  ark

7.  20.  what  can  D.  say  more  to  thee  <  l  Chr.  17.  18.

8.  1.  D.  smote  the  Philistines  ||  3.  lladadezer

6.  Lord  preserved  D.  whithersoever  he  went,  14.

7.  I).  took  the  shields  of  gold,  1  C7 iron.  18.  7.

13.  D.  gat  him  a  name  ||  15.  D.  reign.  1  Chr.  18.  14.

15.  13.  reigned  executed  judgment  to  his  people

10.  2.  D.  sent  to  comfort  flanun,  1  Chron.  19.  2.

3.  thinkest  thou  that  D.  doth  honour  thy  father,
in  sending  comforters  to  thee  ?  1  Chron.  19.  3.

18.  D.  slew  men  of  7(H)  chariots  of  the  Syrians

11.  .3.  D.  sent  and  inquired  after  the  woman

6.  D.  sent  for  Uriah  ||  14.  D.  wrote  a  letter  to  Joab
27.  tlie  thing  D.  had  done  displeased  the  Lord

12.  5.  D.  anger  was  kindled  against  the  man

13.  D.  said,  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord

16.  D.  besought  God  for  the  child,  D.  fasted

19.  D.  perceived  that  the  child  was  dead
24.  and  D.  comforted  Bath  sheba  his  wife

29.  D.  fought  against  Rabbah  and  took  it

30.  their  king’s  crown  was  set  on  D.  head

13.  7.  D.  sent  to  Tamar  ||  30.  tidings  came  to  D.
15.30.  D.  went  up  by  the  ascent  of  mount  Olivet

16.  6.  Shimei  cast  stones  at  D.  II  10.  curse  D.

if.  1.  I  will  arise  and  pursue  after  D.  this  night
16.  send  quickly  and  tell  D.  ||  22.  then  D.  arose
27.  D.  was  come  to  Mahanaim  ||  29.  honey  for  D.

18.  1.  D.  numbered  the  people  that  were  with  him

24.  D.  sat  between  the  two  gates,  the  watchman

19.  43.  we  have  also  more  right  in  D.  than  ye

20. 1.  Sheba  said,  we  have  no  part  in  D.

3.  and  D.  came  to  his  house  at  Jerusalem

11.  he  that  is  for  D.  let  him  go  after  Joab
21.  16.  Ishbi  benob  thought  to  have  slain  D.
22.51.  he  shewed  mercy  unto  D.  Psal.  18.50.

23. 1.  the  last  words  of  D.  |1 15.  D.  longed  and  said

8.  the  mighty  men  whom  D.  had,  1  Chron.  11. 10.
24.  10.  D.  heart  smote  him  after  he  had  numbered

25.  D.  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lord

l  Kings  1.  II.  and  D.  our  lord  knoweth  it  not
f  to.  D.  slept  with  his  'x thers,  and  was  buried

S94


1  Kings  2.  32.  slew  them ,  my  father  D .  not  knowing

44.  thou  knowest  what  thou  didst  to  13.  my  father

3.  14.  if  thou  wilt  walk  as  thy  father  D.  did  walk
5.  7.  v.  ho  natli  given  D.  a  wise  son  over  this  people
p!  16.  I  chose  13.  to  be  over  my  people  Israel

20.  I  am  risen  up  in  the  room  of  D.  my  father

9.  5.  as  l  promised  to  D.  ||  11.  .38.  as  I  built  for  D.

11.  3y.  I  will  for  this  afflict  the  seed  pt  D.

12.  16.  what  portion  have  we  in  D.  '  now  see  to

thine  own  house,  13.  2  Chron.  10.  16.

1  Chron.  10.  14.  the  Lord  turned  the  kingdom  to  D.

11.  3.  D.  made  a  covenant  with  them  in  Hebron
12!  18.  thine  are  we,  13.  then  D.  received  them

21.  they  helped  D.  against  the  band  of  rovers

14.  17.  the  fame  of  D.  went  out  into  all  lands

15.  27.  D.  was  clothed  with  a  robe  of  fine  linen
16!  1.  they  set  the  ark  in  the  tent  D.  had  pitched

43.  and  D.  returned  to  bless  his  house
21.  21.  Arnan  saw  D.  and  bowed  himself  to  D.

23!  1.  so  when  13.  was  old  and  full  of  days
29*  10.  D.  blessed  the  Lord  before  the  congregation

2  Chron.  1.  8.  thou  hast  shewed  great  mercy  unto  D.
34.  3.  he  began  to  seek  after  the  God  of  13.

Ezra  8.  2.  of  the  sons  of  D.  Ilattush  was  the  chief
Neh.  3.  16.  to  the  place  over  against  sepulchres  of  D.

12.  36.  with  musical  instruments  of  D.  man  of  God
Psal.  72. 20.  prayers  of  D.  the  son  of  Jesse  are  ended
89.  35.  I  will  not  lie  unto  D.  II  49-  swarest  to  D.
132.  1.  Imrd,  remember  D.  ||  11.  hath  sworn  to  D.

17.  there  will  I  make  the  horn  of  D.  to  bud
Cant.  4.  4.  thy  neck  is  like  the  tower  of  D.

Ea.  9.  7.  on  the  throne  of  D.  and  on  his  kingdom

29.  i.  woe  to  Ariel,  the  city  where  D.  dwelt
55.  3.  even  the  sure  mercies  of  D.  Acts  13.  34.

Jer.  17.  25.  kings  and  princes  sitting  on  throne  of  D.

23.  5.  I  will  raise  to  D.  a  righteous  branch
33.  15.  I  will  cause  the  branch  to  grow  up  unto  D.

17.  13.  shall  never  want  a  man  to  sit  on  the  throne
36.  30.  he  shall  have  none  to  sit  on  throne  of  D.

Amos  6.  5-  invent  instruments  of  music  like  D.

9.  11.  in  that  day  will  I  raise  up  the  tabernacle  of
D.  that  is  fallen,  and  will  build  it,  Acts  15.  16.
Zech.  12.  8.  the  feeble  shall  be  as  I),  and  D.  as  God
Mat.  9.  27.  thou  Son  of  U.  have  mercy,  15.  22.  |  20.

30,  31.  Mark  10.  47,  48.  Luke  18.  38,  39.

12.  3.  have  ye  not  read  what  D.  did  when  he  was

an  hungered  '  Mark  2.  25.  Luke  6.  3.
23.  the  people  said,  is  not  this  the  S911  of  D.  ?

21.  9.  say  ins.  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  D  15.

22.  42.  Christ  is  the  Son  of  D.  Mark  12.  35.

45.  if  D.  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his  son  i

Mark  12.  37-  Luke  20.  41,44.
Mark  11. 10.  blessed  be  the  kingdom  of  our  father  D.
John  7.  42.  that  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  D.

Acts  2.  29.  let  me  freely  speak  of  the  patriarch  D.
34.  for  D.  is  not  ascended  into  the  heavens

13.  22.  he  raised  up  to  them  D.  to  be  their  king
36.  for  D.  fell  on  sleep,  and  saw  corruption

Rom.  1 . 3.  Christ,  made  of  the  seed  of  D.2  Tim.  2.8.

4.  6.  even  as  13.  also  describeth  the  blessedness
Ueb.  4.  7.  he  limiteth  a  certain  day,  saying,  in  D.

11.  32.  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  D.

Rev.  3.7.  hath  the  key  of  D.  ||  5-  5.  root  of  D.  22.  16.
See  City,  Father.

Days  of  DAVID.

2  Sam.  21.  1.  there  was  a  famine  in  the  days  of  D.

1  Kings  2.  1.  days  of  D.  drew  nigh  that  he  should  die
l  Chron.  7.  2.  whose  number  was  in  the  days  of  D.
Neh.  12.  46.  in  the  days  of  D.  were  chief  singers
Acts  7.  45.  God  drave  out  unto  the  days  of  D.

Hand  of  D  A  V  I  D.

1  Sam.  20.  16.  let  Loro  require  it  at  h.  ofT).  enemies

2  Sam .  3.  8.  have  not  delivered  thee  into  hand  of  D.

18.  by  hand  of  my  servant  D.  I  will  save  Israel

21.  22.  fell  by  the  hand  of  D.  1  Chron.  20.  8.

House  of  DAVID.

1  Sam.  20.  16.  Jonathan  made  covenant  with  h.  of  D.

2  Sam.  3.  1.  war  between  the  house  of  Sail  1  and  D.  6.

7.  26.  let  house  of  thy  servant  D.  be  established

1  Kings  12.  19.  so  Israel  rebelled  against  the  house

of  13.  unto  this  day,  2  Chron.  10.  19.

12.  20.  none  followed  the  house  of  D.  but  Judah

26.  shall  the  kingdom  return  to  the  house  of  D.

13.  2.  a  child  be  born  to  the  house  of  D.  Josiah

14.  8.  rent  kingdom  from  h.  of  D.  2  Kings  17.  21.

2  Chron.  21.  7.  Lord  would  not  destroy  the  h.  of  D.
Psal.  122.  5.  the  thrones  of  the  house  of  D.

Isa.  7.  2.  it  was  told  the  house  of  D.  sayinu,  Syria
13.  hear  ye  now,  O  house  of  D.  Jer.  21.  12.

22.  22.  key  of  h.  of  D.  I  will  lay  on  his  shoulders
Zech.  12.  7.  that  glory  of  house  of  D.  do  not  magnify

8.  feeble  as  D.  and  the  house  of  D.  shall  be  as  God

10.  I  will  pour  on  house  if  D.  the  spirit  of  grace
12.  the  family  of  the  house  of  D.  shall  mourn  apart

13.  1.  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  D.
Luke  1.  27.  whose  name  was  Joseph,  of  the  h.  of  D.
69.  raised  up  a  horn  of  salvation  in  the  h.  of  D.

2.  4.  because  he  was  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  D.

DAVID  joined  with  king.

1  Sam.  21.  11.  is  not  this  D.  the  king  of  the  land  ;

2  Sam.  2.  4.  there  they  anointed  D.  king  over  J  udah

11.  time  that  D.  wasArap  in  Hebron  over  Judah

3.  31.  and  king  D.  himself  followed  the  bier

5.  3.  king  D.  made  a  league  with  them,  and  they
anointed  D.  k.  over  Israel,  1  Chr.  11.3. 1  12. 31,  38.

8.  11.  which  king  D.  did  dedicate  to  the  Lord  with

the  silver  and  gold,  1  Chron.  26.  26.

20.  21.  lifted  up  his  hand  against  the  king ,  even  D.
1  Kings  1.37.  greater  than  throne  of  my  lord  king  D.
47.  the  king's  servants  came  to  bless  our  lord  k.  D.

1  Chron.  29.  9.  D.  the  king  rejoiced  with  great  joy

2  Chron.  2. 12.  who  hath  given  to  D.  the  k.  a  wise  son
29.  27.  ordained  by  D.  king  of  Israel,  Ezra  3.  10.

Jer.  30.  9.  shall  serve  the  Lord  and  D.  their  king
Hos.  3.  5.  shall  seek  the  Lord  and  D.  their  king
Mat.  1.  6.  Jesse  begat  D.  the  king,  and  D.  the  king
Acts  13.  22.  he  raised  up  D.  to  be  their  king
Servant  DAVID.

2  Sam.  .3.  18.  by  hand  of  my  servant  D.  I  will  save
7.  5.  go  and  tell  my  servant  D.  thus  saith  Lord,  8.
26.  Lord  is  God  of  Israel,  let  the  house  of  thy  s.
D.  be  established  before  thee  J  1  Chron.  17-  24.


1  Kings  3.6.  hast  shewed  thy  servant  D.  great  meicj
8.  24.  kept  with  thy  serv.  D.  that  thou  promisedst

25.  keep  with  thy  servant  D.  26.  2  Chron.  6.  16.

66.  for  all  the  goodness  he  had  done  for  D.  his*,

11.  13.  for  D.  my  servant's  sake,  and  for  Jeru¬
salem’s  sake,  32,  34.  Psal.  132.  10.
Isa.  37  .  35.

36.  that  D.  my  servant  may  have  a  light

38.  to  keep  my  statutes,  as  my  servant  D.  did, 14.8,

2  Chron.  6.  42.  remember  the  mercies  of  D.  thy  serv.
Psal. 78  70.  he  chose  D .  also  his  servant  and  took  him
89.  3.  1  have  sworn  unto  D.  my  servant

20.  I  have  found  D.  my  servant,  I  anointed  him
144.  10.  who  delivered  D.  his  servant  from  sword
Jer.  33.  21.  my  covenant  broken  with  D.  my  servant
22.  1  will  multiply  the  seed  of  D.  my  servant

26.  then  will  I  cast  away  the  seed  of  D.  my  serv
Ezek.  34.  23.  even  my  servant  D.  shall  feed  them

24.  my  servant  D.  shall  be  a  prince  among  them
37.  24.  D.  my  servant  shall  be  king  over  them

25.  my  servant  D.  shall  be  their  prince  for  ever
Luke  1.  69.  horn  of  salvation  in  house  ot  his  *.  D.
Acts  4.  25.  who  by  the  mouth  of  thy  servant  D.

DEBORAH.

Gen. 35.8.  but  D. Rebekah’s nursedied, was  buried
Judg.  4.4.  and  D.  a  prophetess  judged  Israel
5.  7.  until  that  I  D.  arose  a  mother  in  Israel
12.  awake  D.  ||  15.  the  princes  were  with  D.

D  ECAPOL1S.  {  ;

Mat.  4. 25.  great  multitudes  followed  him  from  D.
Mark  5.  20.  and  he  began  to  publish  in  D.

7.  31.  through  the  midst  of  the  coasts  of  D.
DEDAN.

Gen.  10. 7.  sons  of  Raamah,  Sheba,  D.  1  Chron.  1.9.

1  Chron.  1.  32.  the  sons  of  Jokshan,  Sheba  and  l).
Jer.  25.  23.  1  made  D.  and  Tema,and  Buz  to  drink

49.  8.  flee  ye,  dwell  deep,  O  inhabitants  of  D.
Ezek.  25.  13.  they  of  D.  shall  fall  by  the  sword
27.  20.  D.  was  thy  merchant  in  precious  clothes
DEDAN IM.

Isa.  21.  13.  O  ye  travelling  companies  of  D.
DELILAH.

Judg.  16. 4.  a  woman  in  the  valley  of  Sorek,  D.

12.  D.  therefore  took  new  ropes  and  bound  Sams.
DEM  AS.

Col.  4.  14.  Luke  and  D.  greet  you,  Philem.  24.

2  Tim.  4. 10.  D.  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved

DEMETRIUS.

Acts  19.24.  D.  a  silversmith,  who  made  shriues

38.  if  D.  have  a  matter  against  any  man

3  John  12.  D.  hath  good  report  of  all  men  and  of  truth

DIANA.

Acts  19.  24.  which  made  silver  shrines  for  D.

27.  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  D.

28.  they  cried,  great  is  D.  of  the  Ephesians,  34.
35.  Ephesus  is  a  worshipper  of  the  goddess  D.

DIBON.

Kum.  21.30.  Heshbon  is  perished  even  to  D.

32.  34.  the  children  of  Gad  built  D.  and  Aroer
Josh.  13.17.  Moses  gave  D.  to  the  children  of  Reuben
Neh.  11.  25.  the  children  of  Judah  dwelt  at  D.

Isa.  15.  2.  he  is  gone  up  to  D.  the  high  place
Jer.  48.  18.  thou  daughter,  that  dost  inhabit  D.

22.  mdgment  is  come  upon  D.  and  Nebo
DIBON  GAD.

Num.  33.  45.  pitched  in  D.  ||  46.  removed  from  D.
DIDYMUS.

John  11. 16.  Thomas,  who  is  called  D.  20. 24.  |  21.  2.
DIMON.

Isa.  15.  9.  for  the  waters  of  D.  shall  be  full  of  blood,
for  I  will  bring  more  upon  D.  lions  upon  him
DINAH.

Gen. A0 .21. 1.eah  bare  a  daughter  called  her  name  D.
34.  5.  Jacob  heard  that  he  had  defiled  D.
DIONYSIUS.

Acts  17.  34.  among  which  was  D.  the  Areopagite
DIOTREPHES.

3  John  9.  D.  who  loveth  to  have  the  pre-eminence
DOEG.

1  .Saw.  21.  7-  and  his  name  was  D.  an  Edomite
22.  18.  D.  turned  ami  slew  the  priests,  85  persons
22.  I  knew  it  that  day  when  D.  was  there
DOR.

Judg.  1. 27. did  Manassehdriveoutinhabitantsof D,

1  Kings 4. 11  the  son  of  Abinadabinthe  region  or  D

DORCAS.

Acts  9.  36.  named  Tabitha,  by  interpretation  is  D.

39.  shewing  coats  and  garments  which  D.  made

DOTHAN.

Gen.  37.  17.  let  us  go  to  D.  he  found  them  in  D.

2  Kings  6.  13.  saying,  behold  Elisha  is  in  D.

DRUSILLA.

Acts  24.24.  when  Felix  came  with  his  wife  D.
DUMAH.

Gen.  25. 14.  sons  of  Ishmael,  D.  Massa,  1  Chr.  1.  .30.
DUMAH.

Josh.  15.  52.  D.  was  in  Judah’s  inheritance
Isa.  21.  11.  the  burden  of  D.  he  called  to  me

DURA.  ■

Dan.  3. 1.  he  set  the  image  up  in  the  plain  of  D.


E.

EASIER.

Acts  12.  4.  intending  after  E.  to  bring  him  forth
EBAL.  _

Deut.  11. 29.  thou  shalt  put  the  curse  upon  mount  E
27.4.  ye  shall  set  up  these  stones  in  mount  E.

13.  these  shall  stand  upon  mount  E.  to  curse
Josh.  8.  30.  Joshua  built  an  altar  in  mount  K.

33.  half  of  them  stood  over-against  mount  E.

EBED.  ,

Judg.  9.  30.  Zebul  heard  the  words  of  Gaal  son  ot  El
Ezra  8.  6.  E.  the  son  of  Jonathan  with  50  males
EBED-MELECH.

Jer.  38.8.  E.  spake  to  the  king  for  JTeremiah
39.  16.  go  and  speak  to  E.  the  Ethiopian

EBF.N-EZER.  . ,

1  Sam.  4.  1.  Israel  went  out  and  pitched  beside  E.
5.  1.  the  Philistines  brought  the  ark  from  E.

7.  12.  Samuel  called  the  name  of  the  stone  E.


EG  Y


EG  Y


EL  A  [Proper  Names


ERER.

Gen.  10.  21.  Sliem  the  father  of  the  children  of  E.

25.  unto  E.  were  born  two  sons,  1  C '/iron.  1.  19.
Hum.  24.  24.  ships  from  Chittim  shall  afflict  E.
ED.

Josh.  22.  34.  children  of  Gad  called  the  altar  E.
EDEN.

Gen.  2.  15.  God  put  the  man  into  the  garden  of  E.
3.  23.  God  sent  him  forth  from  the  garden  of  E.
bn.  51 . 3.  make  her  wilderness  like  E.  Ezek.  36.  35.
1  Ezek.  28. 13.  tho  i  hast  been  in  E.  the  garden  of  God

31.  9.  so  that  all  the  trees  of  R.  envied  hnn
16.  all  the  trees  of  E.  shall  be  comforted

i  18.  thou  shalt  be  brought  down  with  the  trees  of  E.
Joe/  2.  3.  the  land  is  as  the  garden  of  E.  before  them
Amos  1.5.  and  cut  off  him  that  holds  sceptre  from  E.
EDOM.

Gen.  25.  30.  therefore  was  his  name  called  E.

I  36.  1.  Esau  is  E.  li  Exod.  15.  15.  dukes  of  E.  amazed
Hum.  20.  14.  Moses  sent  messengers  from  Kedesh
to  the  king  of  E.  Judg.  11.  17.

21.  E.  refused  to  give  lsr.  passage  thro’  his  border

24.  18.  E.  shall  be  a  possession  for  his  enemies
Judg.  5.  4.  thou  marchedst  out  of  the  field  of  E.

1  Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  fought  against  Moab  and  E.

2  Sam.  8. 14.  David  put  garrisons  in  E.  1  Chr.  18. 13.

1  Rings  11.  14.  Harfad  was  of  the  kine’sseed  in  E.

16.  .loabrem.  till  he  had  cut  off  every  male  in  E.

22.  47.  there  was  then  no  king  in  E.

£  Kings  3.  20.  there  came  water  by  the  wav  of  E.

8.  20.  in  his  days  E.  revolted  from  under  Judah
14.  10.  thou  hast  indeed  smitten  E.  glory  of  this

2  ('/iron.  25.  20.  they  sought  after  the  gods  of  E.
Psal.  6  ).  8.  over  E.  will  I  cast  out  my  shoe,  108.9.

9.  who  will  lead  me  into  E.  ?  108.  10.

83.  6.  the  tabernacles  of  E.  are  confederate
1.37.  7-  remember,  O  Lord,  the  children  of  E.

Isa.  11.  14.  they  shall  lay  their  hand  on  E.

63.  1.  who  is  this  that  cometh  from  E.  i
Jei .  9.  26.  Judah  and  E.  I  will  punish,  25.  21.

27.  3.  send  bonds  and  yokes  to  the  king  of  E.

49^  7.  concerning  E.  saith  the  Lord,  Obad.  1.

17.  E.  shall  be  a  desolation,  every  one  astonished

[  20.  the  counsel  he  hath  taken  against  E.

Ezek.  25.  12.  because  E.  hath  dealt  against  Judah
14.  and  I  will  lay  my  vengeance  upon  E.

32.  29.  there  is  E.  her  kings  and  all  her  princes
Dan.  11.41.  E.  shall  escape  out  of  his  hand
Joe/  3.  19.  E.  shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness
Amos  1. 6.  captivity  to  deliver  them  up  to  E.  9.

2.  1.  he  burnt  the  bones  of  the  king  of  E.

9-  12.  that  they  may  possess  the  remnant  of  E.

|  Obad.  8.  1  will  destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  E.

Mai.  1.  4.  whereas  E.  saith,  we  are  impoverished
See  Daughter.

EDOMITE,  S

j  Gen.  36.9.  Esau  father  of  the  E.  in  mount  Seir,  43.
Deut.  23.  7.  shalt  not  abhor  an  E.  he  is  thy  brother

1  Kings  11.  14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  Hadad  the  E.

2  Kings  8.  21.  Joratn  smote  the  E.  2  Chr  on.  21.  9.

1  Chron.  18.  13.  the  E.  became  David’s  servants

2  Chron.  21. 10.  the  E.  revolted  from  under  Judah

25.  19.  thou  sayest,  lo,  thou  hast  smitten  the  E.

28. 17.  the  E.  had  come  and  smitten  Judah

See  Do  eg.

EG  LA  II.

£  Sam.  3.  5.  the  sixth,  Ithream,  by  E.  David’s  wife
I  EG LA I M.

Isa.  15.  8.  the  howling  thereof  is  gone -unto  E.

EG LON.

Judg.  3.  14.  Israel  served  E.  the  king  of  Moab
17 .  brought  presents  to  E.  and  E.  was  very  fat  man
EGYPT.

it  Gen.  15.  18  from  the  river  of  E.  to  Euphrates
45.  9.  God  hath  made  me  lord  of  all  E.  come  down
Exod.  .3.  20.  1  will  smite  E.  Jer.  9.  26.  I  46.  25.

7.4.  not  hearken,  that  I  may  lay  my  hand  on  E.
8. 6.  Aaron  stretched  his  hand  over  the  waters  of  E.

9.  4.  sever  between  the  cattle  of  Israel  and  of  E.

10.  7.  k  no  west  thou  not  that  E.  is  destroyed
23. 15.  for  in  it  thou  earnest  out  of  E.  34.  18.

j  Hum.  14.  19.  thou  hast  forgiven  this  people  from  E.

\  22.5.  behold,  there  is  a  people  come  out  of  E.

.  Deut.  6.  22.  the  Lord  shewed  great  signs  upon  E.

7.  15.  will  put  none  of  the  diseases  of  E.  on  thee

11.4.  and  what  he  did  unto  the  army  of  E.

28.  27.  Lord  will  smite  thee  with  the  botch  of  E.

60.  he  will  bring  on  thee  all  the  diseases  of  E.

j  Josh.  5.  9-  I  have  rolled  away  the  reproach  of  E.

24.  5.  I  sent  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  1  plagued  E.

•  30.  13.  he  said.  I  am  a  young  man  of  E.

1  Kings  4.  .30.  Solomon  s  wisd.  excelled  wisd.  of  E.

2  Kings  18.  21.  thou  trusteston  E.  24.  Isa.  .36.  6,  9.
Psal.  105.  .38.  E.  was  glad  when  they  departed

135.  8.  who  smote  the  first-born  of  E.  of  man  and
9-  who  sent  wonders  into  the  midst  of  thee,  O  E,

136.  10.  to  him  that  smote  E.  in  their  first-born
Prov.  7.  16.  decked  my  bed  with  fine  linen  of  E.
Isa.  10.  24.  after  the  manner  of  E.  Amos  4.  10.

11.  11.  to  recover  the  remnant  of  people  from  E.

19.  1.  burden  of  E.  the  idols  of  E.  shall  be  moved

3.  the  spirit  of  E.  shall  fail  in  midst  thereof
16.  jn  that  day  shall  E.  be  like  unto  women

24.  in  that  day  shall  Israel  be  the  third  with  E.

25.  shall  bless,  saying,  blessed  be  ye  E.  my  people

20.  5.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  E.  their  glory

23.  5.  as  at  the  report  concerning  E  so  of  Tyre
27.  12.  l.ord  shall  beat  off  from  the  stream  of  E.

3  i.  3.  they  trust  in  the  shadow  of  E.  your  confusion
43.  .3.  I  gave  E.  for  thy  ransom,  Seba  for  thee
45.  14.  the  labour  of  E.  shall  come  over  to  thee

Jer  2.  18.  what  hast  thou  to  do  in  the  way  of  E.  J
36.  thou  shalt  be  ashamed  of  E.  as  of  Assyria
46  2.  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  came  against  E.
20.  E.  is  like  a  fair  heifer,  but  destruction  comes
Ezek.  20.7.  defile  not  yourselves  with  the  idols  ofE.

2.3.  8.  nor  left  she  her  idols  brought  from  E.

27.  thou  shalt  not  remember  E.  any  more
27.7-  fine  linen  with  broidered  work  from  E.

29.  2.  prophesy  against  him  and  against  all  E.

14.  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  E.

I0.fi.  they  also  that  uphold  E.  shall  fall


Ezek.  .30.  9.  pain  shall  come  on  them,  as  in  day  of  E.

15.  I  will  pour  my  fury  on  Sin  the  strength  of  E.
.32.  12.  they  shall  spoil  the  pomp  of  E.  and  all

16  they  shall  lament  for  her,  even  for  E.

18.  son  of  man,  wail  for  the  multitude  of  E.

Dan.  11.  4.3.  have  power  over  precious  things  of  E,
Has.  9.  6.  they  are  gone,  E.  shall  gather  them  up
Joel  3. 19.  E. shall  be  a  desolation, and  Edom  awilder.
Amos  8.  8.  be  drowned,  as  by  the  floor!  of  E.  9.5.

A  ah.  3.9.  Ethiopia  and  E.  were  her  strength
Zech.  10.  11.  the  sceptre  of  E.  shall  depart  away

14.  18.  it  family  of  E.  go  not  up  and  come  not
Acts  7.  10.  he  made  him  governor  over  E.  and  his
Deb.  1 1 . 27.  by  faith  he  forsook  E.  not  fearing
Rev.  11.8.  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  E.

See  Daughter.

In  EGYP  f.

Gen.  45. 13.  tell  my’  father  of  all  my  glory  in  E.

47  .  29.  Jac.obsaid,  bury  me  not,  1  pray  thee,  in  E.
Exod.  .3.7.  I  have  seen  affliction  of  my  people  m  E.

16.  I  have  seen  that  which  is  done  to  you  in  E.

9.  18.  grievous  hail,  such  as  hath  not  been  in  E.

10.  2.  what  tilings  1  wrought  in  E.  Josh.  24.  7.

12.  30.  a  great  cry  in  E.  14.  11.  no  graves  in  E.

Hum.  11.  18.  for  it  was  well  with  us  in  E.

20.  15.  and  we  have  dwelt  in  E.  a  long  time
Deut.  1.  30.  all  that  he  did  for  you  in  E.  4.  34.

Josh.  9.  9.  we  have  heard  all  that  he  did  in  E.
Psa/.  78.  4.3.  how  he  had  wrought  his  signs  in  E.

51.  he  smote  all  the  first-born  in  E.

106.7-  they  understood  not  thy  wonders  in  E.

21.  forgat  God,  who  had  done  great  things  in  E.
Jer.  42.  16.  famine  shall  follow  close  after  you  in  E.
46.  14.  declare  ye  in  E.  and  publish  it  in  Migdol
Ezek.  23.  .3.  they  committed  whoredoms  in  E.

30.  8.  shall  know’,  when  1  have  set  a  fire  in  E.  16.

19.  thus  will  I  execute  judgments  in  E.

Mat.  2.  19.  an  angel  appeared  to  Joseph  in  E.

Acts  2.  It),  the  dwellers  in  E.  we  do  hearthem  speak
Heb.  11.  26.  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  E.

Intv  EGYP  I  .

Gen.  41.  57-  all  countries  came  into  E.  to  buy’  corn

46.  4.  I  will  go  dow  n  with  thee  into  E.

26.  all  the  souls  that  came  with  Jacob  into  E.
Hum.  14.  .3.  better  for  us  to  return  into  E.  4.

Isa.  19.  1.  behold,  the  Lord  shall  come  into  E.

30.  2.  that  walk  to  go  down  into  E.  to  strengthen
Jer.  26.  21.  Urijah  afraid,  fled  and  went  into  E.

41.  17.  ifyeset  your  faces  to  go  into  E.  42.  15.

42.  19.  the  Lord  said,  go  ye  not  into  E.  43.  2.

Ezek.  17.  15.  sending  his  ambassadors  into  E.

Dan.  11.  8.  he  shall  also  carry  captives  into  E.

Has.  12. 1 .  with  Assyrians,  and  oil  is  carried  into  E.
Mat.  2.  1.3.  flee  into  E.  ||  14.  he  departed  into  E.
Acts 7.  9.  the  patriarchs  sold  Joseph  into  E.

34.  and  now  come,  I  will  send  thee  into  E.

39.  in  their  hearts  turned  back  again  into  E.

See  King.

Land  of  EGYPT.

Gen.  13.  10.  Sodom  was  like  the  land  of  E.

21.  21.  Ishmael’s  wife  out  of  the  land  of  E.

41.  19.  such  as  1  never  saw  in  all  the  land  of  E.
29.  seven  years  plenty,  thro’  all  land  of  E.  30,  53.
41.  set  thee  overall  the  land  of  E.  45.  8,26.

54.  but  in  all  the  land  of  E.  was  bread
45.  18.  I  will  giv  e  you  the  good  of  the  land  of  E.  20.

47.  6.  the  land  of  E.  is  before  thee,  in  best  of  land

15.  when  money  failed  in  the  land  of  E.

20.  Joseph  bought  all  (lie  land  of  E.  for  Pharaoh

26. _Joseph  made  it  a  law  over  the  land  of  E.

50.  7.  all  the  elders  of  the  land  of  E.  went  up

Exod.  7.  19.  that  there  may  be  blood  in  all  land  of  E.

8.  6.  frogs  covered  the  land  of  E.  H  1 6.  lice  i|  24.  flies

9.  9.  blains  ||  22.  hail  ||  10.  14.  locusts  in  land  of  E.

10.21.  may  bedarknessoverall  the  land  of  E.  22.

11.3.  Moses  w’asvery  great  in  the  land  of  E.

12.  29.  l.ord  smote  first-born  in  land  of  E.  1.3.  15.
16.  .3.  would  God  we  had  died  in  l.  of  E.  Num.  14.2.

6.  brought  you  out  of  land  of  E.  20.2. 1  29.  46.

22.21.  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  E.  2.3.  9.

Lev.  19.34.  Deut.  10.  19.  Acts  1.3.  17
32.  4.  these  be  thy  gods  which  brought  thee  out  of
the  land  of  F„  1  Kings  12.  28.  Neh.  9.  18.
Lev.  18.  .3.  after  doings  of  land  of  E.  shall  ye  not  do
19.  36.  1  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  who  brought  you
out  of  the  land  of  E.  26.  1.3.  Num.  15.  41.  Deut.  5.  6.

I  13.  5,  10.  1  20.  1.  Judg.  2.  12.  1  Sam.  12.  6.

Deut.  9.7-  from  the  day  that  thou  didst  depart  out
of  the  land  of  E.  Judg.  19.  30.  Isa.  11.  16
Jer.  7.  22.  |  11.  7.  |  .31.  1.3.  Mic.  7. 15.

11.  10.  the  land  whither  thou  goest  is  not  land  of  E.
16.  3.  thou  earnest  out  of  the  land  of  E.  in  haste

Ps.  78. 12.  marvellousthings  did  he  in  the  land  of  E.
81-  5.  when  he  went  out  through  the  land  of  E.

Isa.  19. 18.  shall  in  l.  o/E. speak  language  of  Canaan

19.  altar  to  Lord  fora  witness  in  land  of  E.  20.  *
27.  13.  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of  E.  shall  come

Jer.  42.  14.  no,  but  we  will  go  into  the  land  of  E.

16.  the  sword  shall  overtakeyou  in  the  land  ofE.

43.  7-  so  they  came  into  the  land  of  E.

12.  he  shall  array  himself  with  the  land  of  E.

44. 28.  shall  return  out  of  the  land  of  E.  into  J  udah
Ezek.  20.  5.  myself  known  to  them  in  land  of  E.

2.3.  19.  she  had  played  the  harlot  in  the  land  of  E.

27.  thy  whoredom  brought  from  the  land  of  E.

29.  9-  the  land  of  E.  desolate,  12.  (I  lO.utterly  waste

20.  have  given  him  the  land  of  E.  for  his  labour
.30. 1.3.  shall  be  no  more  a  prince  of  the  land  of  E.
Dan.  11.  42.  and  the  land  of  E.  shall  not  escape
Hos.  7.  16.  this  shall  be  their  derision  in  land  of  E.

12.  9.  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  E.  13.  4.
Zech.  10.  10.  1  will  bring  them  out  of  the  landofE.
Hob.  8.  9.  to  lead  them  out  of  the  land  of  E.

Jude  5.  having  saved  the  people  out  of  the  land  of  E.

Out  of  EGYPT.

Gen.  1.3.  1  .Abraham  o.of  f.  ||  47. 30.  carry  me  0.  ofE.
Exod.  .3.  11.  that  I  should  bring  Israel  out  of  E.

12.  39..  because  they  were  thrust  out  of  E.

13.  9.  it  shall  be  for  a  sign,  for  with  a  strong  hand

hath  the  Lord  brought  thee  out  o/E.  16.
Num.  11.  20.  saying,  why  came  we  forth  out  of  E.  ?
22.  11.  behold  there  is  a  people  come  out  ofE


Num.  .32.  11.  none  of  the  men  that  came  out  of  E
Deut.  16.  6.  at  season  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  E.
Josh.  2.  10.  dried  up  Red  Sea,  when  came  out  of  E
5.  6.  till  all  that  came  out  of  E.  were  consumed
Judg.  2.  1.  I  made  you  go  out  of  E.  1  Sam.  10.  18.
1-Sa;w.l5.6.  shewed  kindness  when  Is.  came  out  of  E.

1  Chr.  17.  21.  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  out  of  E.

2  Chr.  12.  .3.  the  people  that  came  with  him  out  of  E.
Psal.  68.  31.  princes  shall  come  out  of  E.  Ethiopia
80.  8.  thou  hast  brought  a  vine  out  of  E.

114.  1.  when  Israel  went  out  of  E.  house  of  Jacot

Isa.  19.  23.  there  shall  be  a  hieh-way  out  of  E.

Jer.  26.  23.  they  set  forth  Urijah  gut  of  E.

37.5.  then  Pharaoh’s  army  was  come  out  of  E.
Hos.  11.  1.  I  called  mv  son  out  of  E.  Mat.  2.  15.

11.  they  shall  tremble  as  a  bird  out  of  E.

12.  13.  by  a  prophet  l.ord  [nought  Israel  out  of  E

Hag.  2.  5.  I  covenanted,  when  ye  came  out  of  E.
Heb.  3.  16.  howbeit  not  all  that  came  out  of  E.

To  EGYPT.

1  Kings  11. 18.  Hadad  and  the  Edomites  came  to  E.

2  Kings  2.3.  .34.  Jehoahaz  came  to  E.  2  Chr.  36.  4.
Isa.  19. 17.  the  land  of  Judah  shall  be  a  terror  to  E.

21.  and  the  Lord  shall  be  known  to  E.

31.  1.  woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  E.  for  help
Hos.  7.  11.  they  call  to  E.  they  go  to  Assyria
See  Return.

EGYPTIAN.

Gen.  16. 1.  Sarai  had  an  hand-maid  an  E.  3.  |  21.9.
39.  1.  an  F„  bought  Joseph  of  the  Ishmaelites
5.  Lord  blessed  the  E.  house  for  Joseph’s  sake
Exod.  1.  19.  the  Hebrews  are  not  as  the  E.  women
2.  11.  Moses  spied  an  E.  smiting  an  Hebrew

12.  he  slew  the  E.  and  hid  him,  Acts  7.  24.

19.  an  F,.  delivered  us  from  the  shepherds

Lev.  24.  10.  whose  father  was  an  E.  went  out
Dent.  2.3.  7.  thou  shalt  not  abhor  an  E.  because
1  Sam.  .30.  11.  they  found  an  E.  in  the  field
2 Sam.  23.21.  Benaiahslew  an  E.  a  goodly  man,  and
the  E.  had  a  spear  in  his  hand,  1  Chron.  11.  23.
1  Chron.  2.  .34.  Sheshan  had  a  servant  an  E.  Jarha
Isa.  11. 15.  l.ord  shall  destroy  the  tongue  of  E.  sea

19.  2.3.  and  the  F>.  shall  come  into  Assyria
Acts  21.  38.  art  not  thou  that  E.  whomadest  urn-oar'
EGYP  IT  A  NS.

Gen.  41.  55.  Pharaoh  said  to  the  E.  go  to  Joseph
43.  .32.  that  is  abomination  to  the  E.  46.  34.

50.  .3.  the  E.  mourned  for  Jacob  seventy  days
Exod.  3.  22.  and  ye  shall  spoil  the  E.  12.  36.

8.  26.  shall  we  sacrifice  the  abomination  of  E.  ?

11.  7-  Lord  put  a  difference  between  E.  and  Israel

12.  35.  they  ^borrowed  of  the  E.  jewels  of  gold
14.  9.  but  tile  E.  pursued  after  them,  10.

1.3.  the  E.  whom  ye  have  seen  today,  see  no  more

25.  the  E.  said,  let  us  flee  from  the  face  of  Israel,

for  the  Lord  fighteth  for  them  against  the  E.
27 .  the  Lord  overthrew  E.  in  the  midst  of  the  sea

19.  4.  ye  have  seen  what  I  did  to  the  E.  and  how

32. 12.  wherefore  should  the  E.  speak  and  say  ?
Num.  14. 1.3.  Moses  said,  then  the  E.  shall  hear  it

20.  15.  and  E.  vexed  us  and  our  fathers
Dent.  26.  6.  the  E.  evil  entreated  and  afflicted  us
Josh.  24.  7 .  he  put  darkness  between  you  and  the  E.
Judg.  10.  11.  did  not  1  deliver  you  from  the  E. ?

1  Sam.  4.  8.  these  are  the  gods  that  smote  the  E.

6.  6.  why  do  you  harden  your  hearts,  as  the  E.  did  >
Ezra  9. 1  ■  according  to  the  abominations  of  the  E.
Isa.  19.  2.  I  will  set  the  E.  aga  nst  the  E.

4.  the  E.  will  1  give  into  the"  hand  of  a  cruel  lord
21.  the  E.  shall  know  the  Lord  in  that  day’

2.3.  the  E.  shall  serve  with  the  Assyrians

20.  4.  king  of  Assyria  shall  lead  away  E.  prisoners
.30.  7.  the  E.  shall  help  in  vain  and  to  no  purpose
.31.  3.  now  E.  are  men  and  not  God,  their  horses
Jer.  43. 1.3.  houses  of  the  gods  of  the  E.  shall  he  burn
Lam.  5.  6.  we  have  given  the  hand  to  the  E.

Ezek.  16.  26.  hast  committed  fornication  with  the  E.

2.3.  21.  in  bruising  thy  teats  by  E.  for  the  paps

29. 12.  and  I  will  scatter  the  E.  .30.  2.3,  26.

1.3.  I  will  gather  the  E.  from  the  people

Acts  7.22.  Mos.  was  learned  in  the  wisdom  of  the  E.
Heb.  1 1 . 29.  which  E.jjssay  ing  to  do,  were  drowned

Judg.  3.15.  raised  up  E.  the  son  of  Gera  a  Benjamite
16.  E.  made  him  a  dagger  ||  2.3.  E.  went  forth

26.  and  E.  escaped  while  they  tarried  and  passed
4. 1 .  Israel  again  did  evil,  when  E.  was  dead

1  Chr.  7.10.  sons  of  Bilham,  E.  ||  8.  6.  the  sons  of  E
*  Ek  RON.

1  Sam.  5.  10.  it  came  to  pass,  as  the  ark  came  to  E.
7-  14.  cities  were  restored  to  Israel  from  E.

2  Kings  1. 2.  Baal-zebub  the  god  of  E.  3.  6,  16.
Amos  1.  8.  I  will  turn  mine  hand  against  the  E.
Zeph.  2.  4.  and  E.  shall  be  rooted  up

Zech.  9.  5.  E.  very  sorrowful  1|  7.  E.  a  Jebusite
EKRON1  EES.

Josh.  13.  3.  the  land  of  the  E.  not  yet  conquered
1  Sam.  5.  10.  when  ark  came  to  Ekron,  E.  cried  out
ELAH.

Gen. .36.41.  duke  E.  ||  1  Kings  4. 18.  Shimei  son  ofE.

1  Kings  16.  8.  E.  son  of  Baasha  began  to  reign

2  Kings  15.  30.  Hoshea  the  son  ofE.  17.  1 .  |  18. 1, 9
1  Chron.  4. 15.  the  son  of  Caleb,  E.  the  sons  of  E.

9.  8.  E.  the  son  of  Uzzi,  the  son  of  Michri

ELAH.

1  Sam.  17.  2.  Israel  pitched  by  the  valley  of  E.

21.  9.  David  slew  Goliath  in  the  valley  of  E.
ELAM.

Gen.  10.  22.  the  children  of  Shern,  E.  and  Ashur
14.  1.  in  the  dav£  of  Chedorlaomer  king  of  E.

1  Chron.  8.  24.  Ilananiah  and  E.  of  Benjamin

26.  3.  E.  the  fifth  son  of  Meshelwmiah
Ezra  2.  7.  the  children  of  E.  ||  8.  7-  Neh.  7.  12,  34.

10.  2.  one  of  the  sons  of  E.  answered  to  Ezra
Neh.  10.  14.  the  chief  of  the  people,  E.  Zatthu

12.  42.  Jehohanan  and  E.  and  Ezer,  priests
Isa.  11.  11.  to  recover  his  people  from  If.

21.  2.  go  up.  O  E.  1122.  6.  and  E.  bare  the  quiver
Jer.  25.  25.  I  made  all  the  kings  of  E.  to  drink
49.  34.  the  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  against  E.

36.  upon  E.  will  I  bring  the  four  w  inds
39. 1  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  E.  saith  Ld
•  X  2  5 9o


Phoj'KH  Names.]  ].]  L,  1


ELU


EPH


1  zek.  32.  24.  there  is  E.  anti  all  her  multitude

/  in.  8.  2.  Shushan  which  is  in  the  province  of  E.
ELAM  l  I  KS.

h.-.ta  4.  9.  the  E.  wrote  a  letter  to  Artaxerxes
Acts  2.9.  Parthians,  E.  we  hear  them  speak
KLA  I  H.

2  Kings  14.  22.  Azariah  built  E.  and  restored  it
!d.  6.  at  that  time  Rezin  recovered  E.  to  Syria

EL  BETH  EL.

Gen.  35.  7.  Jacob  built  an  altar,  and  called  it  E.
ELD  AD.

Num.  11.  2f>.  the  name  of  the  one  was  E.

27.  E.  and  Medad  do  prophesy  in  the.  camp

ELEALEH.

yum.  32.  37.  the  children  of  Reuben  built  E.

Isa.  15. 4.  and  Heshbon  shall  cry, and  E.  their  voice

15.  9.  I  will  water  thee  with  my  tears,  O  E.

Jer.  18.  34.  from  the  cry  of  Heshbon  even  to  E.

ELEAZAR.

Exod.  6.  25.  Aaron’s  son  E.  28.  1.  Num.  3.  2.  1  26.

60.  1  C '/iron.  6.  3. 1  24.  1.  Ezra  8.  33.
Lev.  10. 16.  Moses  was  angry  with  E.  and  Ithamar
yum.  3.  4.  E.  ministered  in  the  priest’s  office
32.  E.  son  of  Aaron  shall  be  chief  over  tire  Levites

4.  16.  to  the  office  of  E.  pertaineth  the  oil

16.  39.  E.  the  priest  took  the  brasen  censers
20.  26.  and  put  his  garments  upon  E.  his  son

28.  Moses  and  E.  came  down  from  the  mount

26.  63.  that  were  numbered  by  Moses  and  E.

27*  22.  beset  Joshua  before  E.  the  priest

31.  12.  they  brouuht  the  spoil  to  Moses  and  E.

26.  take  the  sum  of  prey  thou  and  E.  the  priest
41.  and  Moses  gave  tribute  unto  E.

34.  17-  E.  and  Joshua  shall  divide  the  land
Josh.  17.  4.  came  near  before  E.  ||  24.  33.  E.  died

1  Sam.  7-  1.  they  sanctified  E.  to  keep  the  ark

2  Sam.  23.  9-  after  him  E.  son  of  Dodo,  1  Chr.  11.12.

1  Chron.  9.  20.  the  son  of  E.  was  ruler  over  them

23.  21.  the  sons  of  Mahli,  E.  and  Kish,  24.  28.

22.  E.  died,  and  had  no  sons,  but  daughters

24.  4.  more  chief  men  of  sons  of  E.  than  Ithamar

5.  the  governors  were  of  the  sons  of  E.

Neh.  12.  42.  Shemaiah  and  E.  were  priests
Mat.  1.  15.  Eliud  begat  E.  and  E.  begat  Matthan
E  L-  E  LO II E-  Israel.

Gen.  33.  20.  Jacob  called  the  altar  E .-Israel
ELHANAN.

2  Sam.  21 .19-  E.  slew  brotherof  Goliath, 1  Chr. 20.5*
2.3.  24.  E.  the  son  of  Dodo,  1  Chron.  11.  26.

ELL

1  Sam.  1.  25.  they  brought  the  child  to  E.

2.  11.  the  child  did  minister  to  the  L. before  E.  3.1.

12.  now  the  sons  of  E.  were  sons  of  Belial

27.  there  came  a  man  of  God  to  E.  and  said

3.  5.  Samuel  ran  to  E.  and  said,  here  am  I.  6,  8.
12. in  that  day  I  will  perform  against  E.  all  things

14.  iniquity  of  E.  house  shall  not  be  purged

4.  14.  the  man  came  in  hastily  and  told  E.

1  Kings  2.  27-  which  he  spake  concerning  E.

ELI,  ELI,  lama  sahachthani.

Tl/flf. 27 -46.  Jesus  cried,  E.E.  lama  sab.  Mark  15.34.
ELI  A  B.

Num.  1.  9.  of  the  tribe  of  Zebulun,  E.  the  son  of
IJelon,  2.  7. 1  24.  29.  I  10.  16.
16.  1.  Dathan  and  A  biram  sons  of  E.  12.  |  26.  9.

■26.  8.  sons  of  Pallu,  E.  ||  1  Sam.  16.  6.  looked  on  E.
Dent.  11.6.  what  he  did  to  the  sons  of  E.

1  Sam.  17.  28.  E.  heard,  and  his  anger  was  kindled

1  Chron.  2. 13.  and  Jesse  begat  his  first-born  E.

6.  27.  E.  the  son  of  Naliath,  the  son  of  Zophai

12.  9.  E.  captain  of  the  Gadites  came  to  David

15.  18.  E.  porter,  20.  ||  16.  5.  E.  with  a  psaltery

2  Chron.  11.  18.  Rehoboam  took  the  daughter  of  E.

ELIADA.

2  Sam.  5.  16.  E.  a  son  of  David,  1  Chron.  3.  8.

2  Chron.  17.  17-  of  Benjamin,  E.  a  mighty  man
EL1AKIM.

2  Kings  18. 18.  there  came  out  to  Rab-shakeh  E.  the
son  of  Ililkiah  and  Shebna  the  scribe,  Isa.  36.  3.
19.2.  Hezekiah  sent  E.  to  Isaiah,  Isa.  37.  2.

23. 34.  made  E.  son  of  Josiah  king,  2  Chron.  36.  4.

A 'eh.  12.  41.  E.  and  Maaseiah  the  priests
Isa.  22.  20.  that  I  will  call  my  servant  E.

Mat.  1.  13.  Abiud  begat  E.  and  E.  begat  Azor
Luke  3.  30.  Jonan,  which  was  the  son  of  E.

ELI  AM.

‘I  Sam.  11.  3.  Bath-sheba  the  daughter  of  E.

23.  34.  E.  the  son  of  Ahithophel  the  Gilonite

ELIAS  See  ELIJAH.
ELTASH1B.

1  Chron.  3.  24.  E.  and  Pelaiah  sons  of  Elioenai

24.  12.  the  eleventh  lot  came  forth  to  E.

Ezra  10.  6.  Johanan  the  son  of  E.  Neh.  12.23.

24.  E.  a  singer  ||  27.  E.  the  son  of  Zattu
36.  E.  son  of  Rani  (|  Neh.  3.  1.  E.  the  high-priest
Neh.  12.  10.  Joiakim  begM  E.  and  E.  begat  Joiada

13.  4.  E.  was  allied  to  Tobiah  11  7.  the  evil  E.  did

28.  one  of  the  sons  of  Joiada,  the  son  of  E.

ELIEZER.

Gen.  15.  2.  the  steward  of  my  house  is  this  E.
Exod.  18. 4.  name  of  Moses’  son  was  E.  1  Chr.  23. 15.

1  Chron.  7.  8.  the  sons  of  Becher,  E.  and  Elioenai
15.  24.  Renaiah  and  E.  the  priests  did  blow

23.  17.  the  son  of  E.  was  Rehabiah  the  chief
9“.  16.  the  ruler  of  the  Reubenites  was  E.

2  •' ’hron.  20.  37*  E.  piophesied  against  Jehoshaphat
Ez  a  8.  16.  then  sent  I  for  EL  and  Ariel,  chief  men

10.  18.  E.  had  taken  strange  wives,  23,  31.

Luke  3.  29.  Jose,  which  was  the  son  of  E.

ELI  HOREPH.

1  KbigsA.  3.  E.  and  Ahiah.sonsof  Shisha,  scribes
ELI  IIU.

1  Sam.  1.  1.  Elkanah,  son  of  Jeroham,  son  of  E.

.  Ch'on.  12.  20.  E.  fell  to  David  out  of  Manasseh

26.  7-  E.  and  Semachiah  were  strong  men

27.  1.  of  J  udah,  EL  one  of  the  brethren  of  David
Job  32.  2.  wrath  of  EL  the  Buzite  was  kindled

4.  E-  nad  waited  ||  6.  answered,  34.  1.  |  35.  1.

ELI  JAEI,  or  ELIAS.

1  Kt'-.cs  17.  1.  E.  the  Tishbite  said  unto  Ahab

15.  she  went  and  did  according  to  the  saying  of  E.
22.  and  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of  E.

596


1  Kings  17.23.  E.tookthe  child  and  brought  him  down

18.  2.  E.  wentto  shew  himself  unto  Ahab

7.  art  thou  that  my  lord  E.  t  ||  8.  E.  is  here

16.  Ahab  went  to  meet  E.  ||  27.  EL  mocked  them
40.  E.  slew  all  the  prophets  of  Baal

46.  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  on  E.

19.  1.  Ahab  told  Jezebel  all  that  E.  had  done
9  the  Lord  said,  what  dost  thou  here  EL  ?  13.

20.  Elisha  left  the  oxen  and  ran  after  E.  21.

21.  20.  Ahab  said  to  E.  hast  thou  found  me  ?

2  Kings  1.  8.  Ahaziahsaid,  it  is  E.  the  Tishbite

13.  the  third  captain  fell  on  his  knees  before  E.

17.  he  died,  according  to  the  word  EL  had  spoken

2.1.  when  the  Lord  would  take  up  E.  into  heaven

8.  E.  took  his  mantle,  and  wrapped  it  together

11.  E.  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven

14.  Elisha  said,  where  is  the  Lord  God  of  E.  ?

15.  the  spirit  of  IL  doth  rest  on  Elisha

3.  II.  which  poured  water  on  the  hands  of  E.

9.  36.  done  t fiat  which  he  spake  by  IL  10.  10,  17.

2  Chron.  21.  12.  there  came  a  writing  from  EL
Ezra  10.  21.  Masseiah  and  E.  the  sonsofHarim
Mai.  4.  5.  behold,  1  will  send  you  E.  the  prophet
Mat.  11. 14.  this  is  Elias  which  was  to  come

16.  14.  some  say,  Elias,  Mark  6.  15.  Luke  9.8,  19-

17.  3.  there  appeared  Elias,  Mark  9.  4.  Luke  9-  30.

4.  three  tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  one  for  Moses,

one  for  Elias ,  Mark  9.  5.  Luke  9.  33.

10.  that  Elias  must  first  come,  Mark  9-  11.

\\. Elias  shall  comeand  restore  things,  M/itT  9. 12.

12.  I  say Go  you,  Elias  iscome  already ,  Mark  9.13.
27.47.  this  man  calleth  for  Elias,  Mark  15.35.

49.letus see  whether  Elias  will  come,  Mark  15.36.
Luke  1.  17. shall  go  before  him  in  the  powerof  Elias

4.  25.  many  widows  were  in  the  days  of  Elias
9.54.  commanded  fire  to  consume  them  as  Elias  d  id

John  1.  21.  art  thou  Elias?  art  thou  that  prophet?

25.  if  thou  be  not  Elias,  why  baptizest  thou?
Rom.  11.  2.  what  the  scripture  saith  of  Elias
Jam.  5.  17-  Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions
ELIM.

Exod.  15.  27.  they  came  to  IL  Num.  33.  9.

16. 1.  they  took  their  journev  from  E.  Num.  33. 10.

ELI  ME  LECH.

Ruth  1. 2.  the  name  of  the  man  was  E.  )|3.  E.  died

2. 1.  Boaz  was  a  kinsman  of  the  family  of  E.

4.  9.  that  I  have  bought  all  that  was  E.  of  Naomi
ELIPHALET.

2  Sam.5. 16.Eliada  and  ELDavid’s  son,  1  Chr. 3.6,8.
ELI  PH  A  Z.

Gen.  36.  4.  Adah  bare  to  Esau,  E.  10.  1  Chr.  1.  35.

11.  the  sons  of  E.  12,  15.  1  Chron.  1.  36.

Job  2. 1 1.  E.  came  from  his  place  to  mourn

4.  1.  E.  the  Temanite  answered,  15.  1.  I  22.  1.

42.  9.  E.  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  him
ELISABETH.

Luke  1.  5.  Zacharias’  wife  E.  ||  7-  E.  was  barren

24.  E.  conceived,  36.  j|  40.  Mary  saluted  E.

57.  E.full  time  came  that  she  should  be  delivered

ELISHA,  E  LISE  US.

1  Kings  19-16.  thou  shaft  anoint  E.  to  be  prophet
17.  that  ecaped  from  Jehu, shall  EL  slay

19.  Elijah  departed,  and  found  E.  plowing

2  Kings  2.5.  the  prophets  at  Jericho  came  to  E.

12.  E.  saw  it,  and  cried,  my  father,  my  father

15.  the  spirit  of  Elijah  doth  rest  on  EL

3.  11.  one  said,  here  is  E.  the  son  of  Shaphat

4.  1.  now  there  cried  a  certain  woman  unto  E.

8.  E.  passed  to  Shunem, where  wasa  great  woman

17.  bare  a  son  at  that  season  that  E.  had  said

32.  when  E.  was  come,  hehold  the  child  was  dead

5.  9.  so  Naaman  came  and  stood  at  the  door  of  E.

6.  12.  E.  telleth  the  words  that  thou  speakest

18.  E.  prayed  to  the  Lord,  the  Lord  smote  them

with  blindness  according  to  the
word  of  EL

20.  E.  said,  Lord,  open  the  eyes  of  these  men
31.  if  the  head  of  E.  stand  on  him  this  day

8.  4.  tell  me  the  great  things  that  EL  hath  done

5.  the  woman  whose  son  E.  restored  to  life

14.  Ben-hadad  said,  what  said  E.  to  thee  ?

13.  14.  E.  was  fallen  sick  ||  17 .  E.  said,  shoot

16.  and  E.  put  his  hands  upon  the  king’s  hands

21.  they  cast  the  man  into  the  sepulchre  of  E.
Luke 4.  27.  many  lepers  in  Israel  in  days  of  Eliseus

ELISEIAH.

Ezek.  27.7.  blue  and  purple  from  isles  of  E.  covered
ELI  SHAM  A.

Num.  1.  10.  E.  the  son  of  Ammihud,  2.  18.  I  7.48,
53.  I  10.  22.  1  Chron.  7.  26.
2  Sam.  5.  16.  E.  David’s  son,  1  Chr.  3.  6,  8.  I  14.  7.

1  Chron.  2.41.  and  Jekamiah  begat  E.

2  Chron.  ]?.  8.  he  sent  with  them  E.  priest

Jer.  36.  12.  E.  scribe  ||  41 .  1.  E.  of  the  seed  royal
ELISHEBA.

Exod.  6.  23.  Aaron  took  him  E.  to  wife
EI.ISHUA.

2  Sam.  5. 15.  I  bhar  and  EL  David’s  sons,  1  Chr.  14. 5.
ELIUD.

Mat.  1.  14.  AchimbegatE.||  15.  E.  begat  Eleazar
ELKANAH.

Exod.  6.  24.  the  sons  of  Korah,  Assir,  and  E.

1  Sam.  1 .  1 .  his  name  was  E.  the  son  of  .1  eroham

21.  E.  went  up  to  offer  the  yearly  sacrifice
2.  11.  E.  went  to  his  house  ||  20.  Eli  blessed  E.

1  Chron.  6.  23.  the  son  of  E.  27  .  34  ,  35.  I  9.  16.

25.  the  sons  of  E.  26.  ||  12.  6.  E.  the  Korhite

15.  23.  EL  was  door-keeper  for  the  ark

2  Chron.  28.  7-  E.  that  was  next  to  the  king

ELMO  DAM.

Luke  3.  28.  Cosam,  which  was  the  son  of  E.
ELNATHAN.

2  Kings  24.  8.  Nelmshta  the  daughter  of  E.

Ezra  8.  16.  1  sent  for  E.  and  .larib,  chief  men
Jer.  26.  22.  Jehoiakiqi  sent  E.  into  Egypt
36.  12.  E.  the  son  of  Achbor  sat  there
25.  E.  had  made  intercession  to  the  king
I’.T.ON.

Gen.  26.  34.  Esau  took  Bashemath  daughter  of  E.
36.  2.  Esau  took  Adah  the  daughter  ot  E.

46.  14.  the  sons  of  Zebulun,  Sered  and  E.

Judg.  12.  11.  E.  judged  Israel  H  12.  E.  died


ELUL.

Neh.6. 15.  wall  finished  the  25th  day  of  the  month  E,
ELY  MAS.

Acts  13.  8.  but  E.  the  sorcerer  withstood  them
KM  IMS.

Gen.  14.  5.  Chedorlaomer  came  and  smote  the  E.
Dent.  2.  10.  the  EL  dwelt  therein  in  times  past
EMMANUEL.  See  Appellatives.

EMMA  US.

Luke  24. 13.  two  of  them  went  that  same  day  to  E.
EMMOR.

Acts  7.  16.  Abraham  bought  of  the  sons  of  E.
EN-DOR.

Josh.  17.  11.  Manasseh  had  E.  and  her  towns
1  Sam.  28.  7.  a  woman  at  E.  hath  a  familiar  spirit
Psal.  83.  10.  as  to  Jahin,  which  perished  at  E.

EN  EAS.

Acts  9.  34.  E.  Jesus  Christ  maketli  thee  whole
EN-EGLAIM.

Ezek.  47. 10.  fishers  shall  stand  from  En-gedi  to  E.
EN-GEDI.

Josh.  15.  62.  in  the  wilderness  of  Judah,  E.

1  Sam.  23.  29.  David  dwelt  in  holds  at  E.  24.  1.

2  Chr.  20.  2.  cometh  against  Jehoshaphat  are  in  E.
Cant.  1. 14.  as  camphire  in  the  vineyards  of  E.
Ezek.  47.  10.  the  fishers  shall  stand  from  E.

ENOCH.

Gew.4.17-  Cain’s  wife  bare  E.  |I5.18.  Jared  begat  E.

5.  22.  E.  walked  with  God,  and  God  took  him,  24.
Luke  3.  37.  Mathusala,  which  was  the  son  of  E.
Heb.  11.  5.  by  faith  E.  was  translated,  and  was  not
Jude  14.  E.  also  prophesied  of  these,  saying
ENON.

John  3.  23.  John  was  baptizing  in  E.  near  to  Salim
ENOS.

Gen.  4.  26.  Seth  called  his  son’s  name  E.

Luke  3.  38.  Cainan,  which  was  the  son  of  E.
EN-ROGEL.

2  Sam.  17.  17-  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz stayed  by  E.
1  Kings  1.  9.  Adonijah  slew  sheep  and  oxen  by  E.
EPAPHRAS.

Col.  1.  7.  as  ye  learned  of  E.  our  fellow-servant
4-12.  E.  aserv.  of  Christ  saluteth  vou,  Philem.  23.
EPAPHROD1TUS.

Phil.  2.  25.  to  send  to  you  E.  ]|  4. 18.  received  of  E.
EPEN  ECUS.

Rom.  16.  5. salute  my  well-beloved  E.  first-fruits
EPH  AH.

Gen.  25.  4.  E.  the  son  of  Midian,  1  Chron.  1.  33.

1  Chron.  2.  46.  E.  Caleb’s  concubine  bare  Haran

47.  the  sons  Jahdai,  Pelet,  E.  and  Shaaph
Isa.  60.  6.  the  dromedaries  of  E.  shall  cover  thee

EPHES-DAMM1M.

1  Sam.  17.  1.  the  Philistines  pitched  in  E.
EPHESIANS.

Acts  19.  28.  they  cried  out,  great  is  Diana  of  E.  34.
35.  the  city  of  the  E.  is  a  worshipper  of  Diana
EPHESUS.

Acts  18. 19.  Paul  came  to  E.  ||  21.  sailed  from  E.

24.  a  certain  Jew  named  A  polios  came  to  E.

19.  17.  this  was  known  to  Jews  and  Greeks  at  E.

26.  ye  see,  that  not  alone  at  E.  but  thro’ all  Asia
35.  ye  men  of  E.  ||  1  Cor.  16.  8.  I  will  tarry  at  E.

20.  16.  for  Paul  had  determined  to  sail  by  E.

1  Cor.  15.  32.  I  have  fought  with  beasts  at  E.

1  'Jim.  1.  3.  as  I  besought  thee  to  abide  still  at  E.

2  Tim.  1.  18.  Onesiphorus  ministered  to  me  at  E.

4.  12.  and  Tychicushave  I  sent  to  E.

Rev.  1.11.  send  it  to  E.  ||  2.  1.  to  the  angel  at  E.
EPHPHATHA.

Mark  7.  34.  he  saith  to  him,  E.  that  is,  be  opened
EPHRAIM,  a  place.

2  Sam  13.23.  Absalom  had  sheep-shearers  beside  E.
2  Chron.  13. 19.  Abijah  took  E.  and  towns  thereof
John  11.  54.  Jesus  Went  into  a  city  called  E.

Mount  EPHRAIM.

Josh.  17.  15.  if  mount  E.  be  too  narrow  for  thee
20.  7.  Shechem  in  mount  E.  a  city  of  refuge,  21. 21.
Judg.  2.  9.  they  buried  Joshua  in  the  mount  of  E.

7.  24.  Gideon  sent  messengers  through  mount  E.

17. 1.  Micah  ot' mount  E.  ||  8.  Levite  came  to  m.  E.

18.  13.  the  Danites  passed  unto  mount  E.

19.  l.a  Levite  sojourning  on  the  side  of  mount  E.

1  Sam.  1. 1.  Elkanah  of  m.  E.  j|  2  Sam.  20.  21.  Sheba

9.  4.  Saul  passed  through  mount  E.  and  passed

2  Kings  5.  22.  two  men  be  come  to  me  from  m.  E.
Jer.  4.  15.  publisheth  affliction  from  mount  E.

31.  6.  the  watchman  upon  mount  E.  shall  cry
50.  19.  Israel  shall  be  satisfied  on  mount  E.

EPHRAIM,  a  person,  or  people.

Gen.  41.  52.  the  name  of  Joseph’s  second  son  was  E.

48.  14.  Israel  laid  his  right  hand  on  E.  head

20.  in  thee  shall  Israel  bless,  saying,  God  make

thee  as  IL  and  he  set.  E.  before  Manasseh
Num.  1. 10.  the  prince  of  E.  was  Elishama,  j.  48.
2.  18.  on  the  west  side  shall  be.  the  standard  of  E.

10.  22.  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  E.  set  forward

26.  35.  these  are  the  sons  of  E.  1  Chrosi.  7.  20.
Dent.  33.  17.  they  are  the  ten  thousands  of  E.
Josh.  16.  9.  the  cities  for  the  children  of  E.  17.  9.
Judg.  1  29.  nor  did  E.  drive  out  the  Canaanites

5.  14.  out  of  E.  was  there  a  root  against  Amalek

8.  2.  is  not  the  gleaning  of  the  grapes  of  E.  better
12.  4.  then  Jephthah  fought  with  E.  smote  E.

2  Sam.  2,  9.  Abner  made  Ish-bosheth  king  over  E.

1  Chron.  7-  22.  E.  their  father  mourned  many  days

9.  3.  in  Jerusalem  dwelt  of  the  children  of  E.

2  Chron.  15.  9.  the  strangers  out  of  E.  fell  to  Asa

17.  2.  Jehoshaphat  set  garrisons  in  the  cities  of  E.  ’

25.  10.  Amasiah  separated  the  army  out  of  E.

28.  7-  Zichri  a  mighty  man  of  E.  slew  Maaseiah

30.  18.  many  of  E.  had  not  cleansed  themselves

31.  l.all  Israel  brake  images  in  E.  and  Manasseh
Psal.  78. 9.  the  children  of  E.  being  armed,  turned
80.  2.  before  E.  stir  up  thy  strength  and  save  us

Isa.  7.  2.  saying,  Syria  is  confederate  with  E.

5.  E.  hath  taken  evil  counsel  against  thee

8.  within  sixty-five  years  shall  E.  be  broken

9.  the  head  of  IL  is  Samaria,  and  head  of  Samaria
17.  from  the  day  that  E.  departed  from  Judah

9-  9.  E.  that  say  in  the  pride  and  stoutness  of  heart

21.  Manasseh  shall  eat  E.  and  E.  Manasseh


ES  H


F  E  L


GAL  (Prop  kk  Nam  kn


rsa.  II.  13.  the  envy  also  of  E.  shall  depart  :  F. shall
not  envy  Judah,  and  .ludah  shall  not  vex  E.

17.  3.  the  fortress  also  shall  cease  from  E.

28.  I.  woe  to  the  drunkards  of  E.  whose  beauty
.3.  drunkards  of  E.  shall  be  trodden  under  feet
Jer.  7.  15.  as  1  have  cast  out  the  whole  seed  of  E.

31.  18.  1  have  heard  E.  bemoaning  himself  thus
Ezek.  37-.lt>.  the  stick  of  E.  j|48.  5.  a  portion  for  E.

19.  I  will  take  stick  of  Joseph  in  the  hand  of  R.
Ho*.  5.3.  I  know  E.  O  E.  thou  comniittest  whored.

5.  Israel  and  E.  shall  fall  in  their  iniquity

9.  E.  shall  be  desolate  ||  1C.  be  to  E.  as  a  moth

13.  when  E.  saw  his  sickness,  E.  went  to  Assyrian

14.  E.as  a  lion  ||  6.  4.  O  E.  what  shall  I  do  tothee  '

6.  10.  there  is  the  whoredom  of  E.  Israel  is  defiled

7.  1.  then  the  iniquity  of  E.  was  discovered

8.  E.  hath  mixed  himself  among  the  people

8.  9.  E.  hired  lovers  ||  11.  E.  made  altars  to  sin
9-  3.  but  E.  shall  eat  unclean  things  in  Assyria

8.  the  watchman  of  E.  was  with  my  God

11.  as  for  E.  their  glory  shall  fly  away

I. 3.  E.  shall  bring  forth  children  to  the  murderer
i  10.  6.  E.  shall  receive  shame,  Israel  be  ashamed

II.  I  will  make  E.  to  ride  ;  Judah  shall  plow

i  11.3.1  taught  E.togo||8.howshall  1  givefhee  up  E.

9.  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  E.  for  I  am  God

12.  E.  compasseth  me  about  with  lies

12.  1.  E.  feedeth  on  wind  ||  8.  E. said,  I  am  rich
14.  E.  provoked  him  to  anger  most  bitterly

1  13.1.  when  E.  spake  trembling,  he  exalted  nimself
:  i2.  the  iniquity  of  E.  is  bound  up,  his  sin  is  hid

;  14.  8.  E.  shall  say,  what  have  l  to  (to  with  idols?
Obad.  19.  they  shall  possess  the  fields  of  E.
i  Zech.  9.  10.  I  u  ill  cut  off  the  chariot  from  E.

13.  when  I  have  filled  the  bow  with  E.  and  raised
!  10.  7-  they  of  E.  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man

See  Gate.

EPHRAIM  is.

Psal.  60.7.  E.  is  the  strength  of  my  head,  108.  8.
Jer.  31.  9;  and  a  father  to  Israel,  E.  is  my  first  born
|j  20.  is  E.  my  dear  son  ?  is  he  a  pleasant  child  ?
Has.  4.  17.  E.  is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  alone
5. 11.  E.  oppressed  ||  7.  8.  E.  is  a  cake  not  turned

7.  11.  E.  is  like  asilly  dove  ||  9-  16.  E.  wsmitten

10.  11.  E.  is  as  an  heifer  that  is  taught  and  loveth

EPHRAIM  with  tribe.

i!  Num.  1.33.  were  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  E.  40,500

13.  8.  of  the  tribe  of  E.  to  spy  the  land,  Oshea
34.  24.  of  tribe  of  E.  to  divide  the  land,  Kemuel

:  Josh.  16.  8.  Jhe  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  E.

21.5.  the  Kohatiiites  had  cities  out  of  the  tribe  of
I  E.  Dan  and  Manasseh,  20.  1  Chr.  6.  66.

Psal.  78.  67.  and  he  chose  not  the  tribe  of  E.
EPHKAIMITE,  S.

Jvdff.  12.  5.  the  men  of  Gilead  said,  art  thou  an  E.  ?

6.  there  tell  at  that  time  of  the  E.  42,000

I  EPHRATAH.

Ruth  A.  11.  do  thou  worthily  in  E.  and  be  famous
1  Chron. <1.  50.  Hur,  the  first-born  ofE.  4.  4.

Psal.  132.  6.  lo,  we  heard  of  it  at  E.  we  found  it
Mic.  5.  2.  but  thou,  Beth-lehem  E.  though  little
I  EPH  RATH.

Gen.  35.  16.  there  was  a  little  way  to  come  to  E.

19.  Rachel  was  buried  in  the  way  to  E.  48.  7.

1  Chron.  2. 19.  Caleb  took  to  him  E.  who  bare  Hur
EPH RATHITE,  S.

Ruth  1.2.  Mahlon,  Chilion,E.  of  Beth-lehem-Judah
l  Sam.  1. 1.  Elkanah  w'as  an  E.  17.  12.  Jesse  an  E.

I  Kings  11.  26.  Jeroboam  an  E.  of  Zereda
EPH RON.

Gen.  23.8.  entreat  for  me  to  E.  the  son  of  Zoar

16.  Abraham  hearkened  to  E. weighed  silver  to  E.

25.  9.  Abraham  wasburi  .  in  the  field  of  E.

49.  30.  Abraham  bought  with  the  field  of  E.  50.  13.
EPIC  UR  EANS.

Acts  17. 18.  certain  of  the  E.  encountered  Paul

I  .  ER-

Gen.  38.  3.  called  his  name  E.  ||  6. took  a  wife  for  E.

7.  E.  Judah’s  first-born  was  wicked,  1  Chron.  2.  3.

1  Chron.  4.  21.  E.  the  father  of  Lecah

Luke  3.  28.  Elmodam,  which  was  the  son  of  E.
ERAS  JUS.

Acts  19.22.PaulsentTimotheusand  E.  into  Maced.

2  Tim.  A.  20. E.  abode  Corinth,  Trophimus  Miletum

ESAIAS.  See  Isaiah.

ESA  R-H ADDON.

2  Kings  19.  37.  E.  reigned  in  his  stead,  Isa.  37.  38.
Ezra  4.  2.  since  the  days  of  E.  king  of  Assur
I  ESAU.

Gen.  25.  25.  and  they  called  his  name  E.

27.  E.  was  a  hunter  ||29.  E.  came  from  field
34.  thus  E.  despised  his  birthright

27.  11.  behold,  E.  my  brother  is  a  hairy  man

21.  whether  thou  be  my  very  son  E.  or  not,  24.

41.  E.  hated  Jacob  because  of  the  blessing

42.  these  words  of  E.  were  told  to  Rebekah

28.  9.  then  went  E.  to  Ishmael,  and  took  Mahalatb

32.  3.  Jacob  sent  messengers  before  him  to  E.

11.  deliver  me,  I  pray  thee,  from  the  hand  of  E.

18.  it  is  a  present  sent  unto  my  lord  E.

33.4.  E.  ran  tomeet  him,  and  embraced  him

9.  and  E.  said,  I  have  enough,  my  brother

35. 1.  when  thou  fleddest  from  E.  thy  brother
36.  1.  now  these  are  the  generations  of  E.

43.  he  is  E.  the  father  of  the  Edomites

Veut.  2. 5.have  given  mount  Seir  to  E.  W.Josh.V.A.A.

22.  as  he  did  to  the  children  of  E.  in  Seir

Josh.  24.  4.  unto  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  E.  1  Chr.  1.  34.
Jer.  49.  8. 1  will  bring  the  calamity  of  E.  on  him

10.  I  have  made  E.  bare,  I  have  uncovered
Obad.  6.  how  are  the  things  of  E.  searched  out !

18.  the  house  of  E.  shall  be  for  stubble
21. saviours  shall  come  to  judge  the  mount  of  E.
Mal.l.  2.  was  not  E.  Jacob’s  brother,  saith  the  Lord?

3.  I  loved  Jacob,  and  1  hated  E.  Rom.  9.  13.

Heb.  11.  20.  by  faith  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  E.

12.  16.  lest  there  be  any  profane  person,  as  E.

ESEK.

Gen.  26.20.  Isaac  called  the  name  of  the  well  E.

[■  ESHCOL.

Gen.  14. 1.3.  Mamre  the  Amorite,  brother  of  E.

24.  Aner,  E.  Mamri,  let  them  t.-ike  their  portion


Num.  13.  24.  the  place  w’as  called  the  brook  E.

32.  9.  when  they  went  up  unto  the  valley  of  E.

ES  LI .

Luke  3.  25.  Naum,  which  was  the  son  of  E.
ESROM.

Mat.  1.  3.  and  E.  begat  Aram,  Luke  3.  .3.3.
ESTHER.

Esth.  2.  7 -..Ee  brought  up  Hadassah,  that  is  E.

17.  the  king  loved  E.  ||  18.  the  king  made  E.  feast
22.  told  it  to  E.  ||  5.  .3.  what  M’iltthou,  queen  E.?
4.4.  E.  maids  came,  she  sent  raiment  to  clothe  Mor.
12.  and  they  told  to  Mordecai  E.  words
17.  Mordecai  did  all  that  E.  had  commanded
5.  2.  the  king  held  out  to  E.  the  golden  sceptre,  8. 4.
12.  E.  let  no  man  come  with  the  king  but  myself

7.2.  the  king  said,  what  is  thy  petition,  queen  E.?
7.  Ilaman  stood  up  to  make  request  for  life  to  E.

8.  .3.  and  E.  spake  yet  again  before  the  king

7.  behold,  I  have  given  E.  the  house  of  Hainan

9.  29-  E.  the  queen  wrote  with  all  authority

32.  decree  of  E.  confirmed  these  matters  of  Purim
ETAM.

Judg.  15.  8.  Samson  dwelt  in  top  of  the  rock  E.

11.  then  3000  men  went  to  top  of  the  rock  E.
ETHAM.

Exod.  1.3.  20.  they  encamped  in  E.  Num.  .33.  6.
Num.  .3.3.8.  went  three  days’ journey  in  wilder,  of  E.
ETHAN.

1  Kings  4.  31.  for  Solomon  was  wiser  than  F,

1  Chron.  2.  6.  the  sons  of  Zerah,  Ziinri,  and  E.
ETHANIM.

1  Kings  8.  2.  all  Israel  assembled  in  the  month  E.

ETHIOPIA.

2  Kings  19.  9.  when  he  heard  say  of  Tirhakah  king

of  E.  behold,  he  is  come  out  to  fight,  Isa.  37.9.
Esth.  1.1.  Ahasuerus  reigned  from  India  to  E.  8.  9.
Job  28.  19.  the  topaz  of  E.  shall  not  equal  it
Psal.  68.  .31.  E.  shall  stretch  out  her  hands  to  God
87.  4.  behold  Philistia  and  Tyre  with  E.  man  born
Isa.  18. 1.  which  is  beyond  rivers  of  E.  Zeph.  .3.  10.

20.  .3.  Isaiah  hath  walked  bare-foot  for  a  sign  on  E.

5.  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  E.  their  expectation

4.3.  .3.  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  E.  for  thee

45.  14.  the  merchandise  of  E.  shall  come  to  thee
Ezek.  .30.  4.  great  pain  in  E.  ||  5.  E.  shall  fall,  .38.  5.
Nah.  3.  9.  E.  and  Egypt  were  the  strength  of  No
Acts  8.  27.  behold,  a  man  of  E.  an  eunuch  of author.

ETHIOPIAN.

Num.  12. 1.  because  of  the  E.  woman  he  married
2  Chron.  14.  9-  Zerah  the  E.  came  out  against  Asa
Jer.  13.  23.  can  E.  change  his  skin  or  leopard
38.  7-  Ebed-melech  the  R.  10.  12.  |  39.  16.
ETHIOPIANS.

2  Chron.  14.  12.  the  I.ord  smote  the  E.  the  E.  fled
16.  8.  were  not  the  E.  and  Lubims  a  huge  host?

21.  16.  the  Ld.  stirred  Arabians  that  were  near  E.
Isa.  20.  4.  he  shall  lead  the  E.  captives

Jer.  46.  9-  the  E.  that  handle  the  shield
Ezek.  30.  9.  to  make  the  careless  E.  afraid
Dan.  11.  43.  the  Libyans  and  E.  shall  he  at  his  steps
Amos  9. 7.  are  ye  not  as  the  children  of  E.  unto  me?
Zeph.  2. 12.  ye  E.  shall  be  slain  by  the  sword
Acts  8.  27.  an  eunuch  under  Candace  queen  of  E.
EUBULUS.

2  Tim.  A.  21.  E.  greeteth  thee,  Pudens  and  Linus
EVE.

Gen.  3.  20.  Adam  called  his  wife’s  name  E.

4. 1.  Adam  knew  E.  his  wife,  and  she  conceived

2  Cor.  11.3.  lest  as  serpent  beguiled  E.  thro’  subtlety

1  Tim.  2.  1.3.  for  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  E.

EVIL-ME1I ODACH.

2  Kings  25.  27.  E.  king  of  Babylon  did  lift  up  the

head  of  Jehoiachin  out  of  prison,  Jer.  52.  31.
EUNICE.

2  Tim.  1.  5.  faith  which  dwelt  in  Loisand  mother  E.
EUODI  AS.

Phil.  4.  2.  I  beseech  E.  and  beseech  Syntyche
EUPHRATES.

Gen.  2.  14.  and  the  fourth  river  is  E.

15.  18.  unto  the  great  river,  the  river  E.

Dent.  1.  7-  go  to  the  great  river  F,.  Josh.  1.  4.

11.  24.  shall  be  yours  from  the  river  E.  to  the  sea
2  Sam.  8.  .3.  David  smote  Hadadezeras  he  went  to

recover  his  border  at  the  river  E.  1  Chr.  18.3.

2  Kings  23.  29.  Necho  went  up  to  E.  2  Chr.  .35.  20.

24.  7.  the  king  of  Babylon  took  from  Egypt  to  E.

1  Chron.  5.  9-  Reuben  inhabited  from  the  river  E.
Jer.  13.  4.  arise,  go  to  E.  H  5.  so  1  hid  it  by  E.

7.  I  went  to  E.  1|  46.  10.  hath  a  sacrifice  by  E.

46.  2.  the  M’ord  came  against  Pharaoh  by  E.

6.  they  shall  stumble  and  fall  by  the  river  E.

51.  63.  thou  shalt  cast  it  into  the  midst  of  E.

Rev.  9. 14.  angels  that  are  bound  in  the  river  E.

16.  12.  sixth  angel  poured  out  his  vial  on  E.

EUTYCHUS.

Acts  20.  9.  there  sat  a  young  man  named  E.  fallen
EZEKIEL.

Ezek.  24.  24.  thus  E.  is  unto  you  a  sign
EZ  EL.

1  Sam.  20.  19.  thou  shalt  remain  by  the  stone  E.
EZRA.

1  Chron.  4.  17-  the  sons  of  E.  Jether  and  Mered
Ezra  7-  12.  Artaxerxes  king  to  E.  the  priest

25.  thou,  E.  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  God,  set

10. 1.  when  E.  had  prayed  and  confessed,  weeping
Neh.H.  2.  E.  brought  tlie  law  before  congregation

6.  and  E.  blessed  the  I.ord  the  great  God

12.  1.  these  are  the  pr  iests,  Seraiah,  Jeremiah,  E.

13.  of  E.  Meshullam  was  priest

26.  these  were  in  days  of  E.  the  priest,  the  scribe
36.  and  E.  the  scribe  before  them

F.

FELIX.

Acts  23.  24.  that  they  may  bring  Paul  safe  to  F.

26.  Lysias  to  the  most  excellent  governor  F.

24.  3.  we  accept  it  always,  most  noble  F.

24.  when  F.  came  with  his  wife  Drusilla

25.  as  Paul  reasoned  of  judgment,  F.  trembled.

25.  14.  there  is  a  certain  man  left  in  bonds  by  F.


FESTUS.

Acts  24.  27.  Porcius  F.  came  into  Felix’  room

25.  9.  F.  willing  to  do  the  Jews  a  pleasure

1.3.  king  Agrippa  came  to  Cesarea  to  salute  F.

14.  F.  declared  Paul’s  cause  unto  the  king

23.  at  F.  commandment  Paul  was  brought  forth

26.  25.  Paul  said,  I  am  not  mad,  most  noble  F.

FORTUN  A  JUS.

1  Cor.  16. 17.  I  am  glad  of  the  coining  of  F.


GAAL.

Judg.  9.  41.  Zebul  thrust  out  G.  and  his  brethren
GAB  BATH  A.

John  19. 13.  called  the  pavement,  in  Hebrew,  G
GABRIEL.

Dan.  8.  16.  G.  make  this  man  understand  the  vision
9.21.  while  I  was  praying,  the  man  G.  touched  me
Luke  1. 19.  I  am  G.  that  stand  in  presence  of  God

26.  the  angel  G.  was  sent  from  God  to  Mary

_  GAD.

Gen.  .30. 11.  a  troop  comes,  she  called  his  name  G.
35.  26.  the  sons  of  Zilpah,  G.  and  Asher
46. 16.  sonsG.  Num.  1 . 24.  1  26. 15, 18.  1  Chr.  12. 14.
49. 19.  G.  a  troop  shall  overcome  him
Num.  1. 14.  the  prince  of  G.  Eliasaph,2. 14.  |  7.  42.

32. 1.  children  of  G.  had  a  multitude  of  cattle
2.  the  children  of  G.  came  and  spake  to  Moses
29.  it  the  children  of  G.  will  pass  over  Jordan
.3.3.  Moses  gave  to  G.  the  kingdom  of  Sihon
34. 14.  the  tribe  of  the  children  of  G.  have  received
their  inheritance,  Josh.  13. 28.  I  18.  7
Dent.  27. 13.  on  mount  Ebal  to  curse  G.  and  Asher
.3.3.20.  and  ot  G.  blessed  be  he  that  enlargeth  G.
Josh.  A.  12.  the  children  of  G.  passed  over  armed

22.  9.  the  children  of  G.  returned  out  of  Shiloh

1  Sam.  1.3. 7.  some  Hebrews  went  to  the  land  of  G.

2  Sam.  24.5.  that  lieth  in  the  midst  of  the  river  of  G.
11.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  the  prophet  G.

David’s  seer,  saying,  1  Chron.  21.  9,  18.

14.  David  said  unto  G.  I  am  in  a  great  strait

19.  David  did  according  to  the  saying  of  G.

1  Chron.  29. 29.  acts  of  David  are  in  the  book  of  G.

2  Chr.  29.25.  Levites  according  to  command  of  G.
Jer.  49.  1.  why  then  doth  their  king  inherit  G.  ?
Ezek.  48. 27.  a  portion  for  G .  ||  .34.  one  gate  of  G.

Tribe  of  GAD.

Num.  1 . 25.  that  were  numbered  of  tribe  o/G.45,650.
2.  14.  then  the  tribe  of  G.  shall  set  forward,  the
captain  of  G.  shall  be  Eliasaph,  10.  20.

13.  15.  of  the  tribe  of  G.  to  spy  the  land,  Geuel
.34.  14.  the  tribe  e/the  children  of  G.  have  received
their  inheritance,  Josh.  1.3.  24.
Josh.  20.  8.  out  of  the  tribe  of  G.  assigned  Ramoth-
Gilead  to  the  I  evites,  21.  7,  38.  1  Chr.  6. 63,  80.
Rev.  7.  5.  ot  the  tribe  of  G .  were  sealed  12,000
GADARENES.

Mark  5. 1 .  they  came  over  to  the  other  side  of  the
sea  into  the  country  of  tiie  G.  Luke  8.  26.
Luke  8.  37.  country  ot  G.  besought  him  to  depart
GADITE,  S.

Dent.  3. 12.  this  land  gave  I  unto  the  G.  16.

Josh.  22. 1.  Joshua  called  the  Reubenites  and  G.

2  Sam.  23.  36.  Bani  G.  one  of  David’s  mighty  men

2  Kings  10.  3.3.  Hazael  smote  the  G.  and  Reubenites
1  Chron.  12.8.  of  the  G.  there  separated  to  David

26.  32.  whom  David  made  rulers  over  the  G

GAIUS.

Acts  19.  29-  having  caught  G.  a  man  of  Macedonia

20.  4.  G.  of  Derbe  accompanied  Paul  into  Asia
Rom.  16.  23.  G.  mine  host  saluteth  you
1  Cor.  1.  14.  I  baptized  none  but  Cnspus  and  G.

3  John  1.  the  elder  unto  the  well-beloved  G.

GALATIA.

Acts  16.  6.  had  gone  through  the  region  of  G.  18.  23.

1  Cor.  16.  1.  have  given  order  to  the  churches  of  G.

2  Tim.  4.  10.  Crescens  is  departed  to  G.

1  Pet.  1. 1.  to  the  saints  scattered  through  Pontus,  G.
GALATIANS.

Gal.  3. 1.  O  foolish  G.  who  hath  bewitched  you  ?
GALBANUM.

Exod.  30.  34.  take  sweet  spices,  onycha,  and  G
GALLED.

Gen.  .31. 47-  but  Jacob  called  the  heap  G.

48.  therefore  M’as  the  name  of  it  called  G.
GALILEE.

Josh.  20.7.  Kedesh  in  G.  for  a  city  of  of  refuge
21 . 32.  Kedesh  in  G.  to  the  Levites,  1  Chron.  6.  76.

1  Kings  9.  11.  Solomon  gave  Hiram  20  cities  in  G.

2  Kings  15.  29.  Tiglath-pileser  took  Ijon  and  G.
Isa.  9.  1.  did  more  grievously  afflict  her  in  G.

Mat.  2.  22.  Joseph  turned  into  the  parts  of  G.

.3. 1.3.  then  cometh  Jesus  from  G.  to  John, Mark  1.9.
4. 15.  G.  of  the  Gentiles  I!  21.  11.  Jesus  of  G.

18.  Jesus  walking  by  the  sea  of  G.  Mark  1. 16.
25.  there  followed  multitudes  from  G.  Mark  3. 7.

15.  29.  Jesus  came  nigh  unto  the  sea  of  G.

26.  .32.  1  will  go  before  you  into  G.  Mark  14.  28.

27.  55.  many  women  beholding  afar  off  which  fol¬
lowed  J  esus  from  G .  Mark  15.41.  Luke  23. 49,55.

28.  7-  he  goeth  before  you  into  G.  Mark  16.  7.
Mark  l.  39.  he  preached  throughout  all  G.

Luke  A.  14.  Jesus  returned  in  power  of  Spirit  into  G.

44.  he  preached  in  synagogues  of  G.

2.3  5.  beginning  from  G.  to  this  place
6.  when  Pilate  heard  of  G.  he  asked  whether  Gal.?

24.  6.  how  he  spake  to  you  when  he  was  in  G.
John  7.  41 .  some  said,  shall  Christ  come  out  of  G.

52.  art  thou  of  G.  ?  out  of  G.  ariseth  no  prophet

12.  21.  Philip  who  was  of  Bethsaida  in  G.

Acts  1.  1 1.  ye  men  of  G.  |1  5.  .37.  Judas  of  G.  rose  up

9.  31.  then  had  the  churches  rest  through  all  G.

10.  37.  the  word  you  know  which  began  from  G.

13.  31.  he  was  seen  of  them  that  came  from  G.

See  Cana.

GALILEAN,  S.

Mark  14.  70.  for  thou  art  a  G.  Luke  22.  59.

Luke  13.  1.  there  were  some  told  him  of  the  G.

2.  suppose  ye  these  G.  M-ere  sinners  above  all  G.

23.  6.  Pilate  asked  whether  the  man  M  ere  a  G.  ?

597


Pro pe k  Names.]  Q  I  ]}


G  O  L


HAM


John  4.  45.  when  he  was  come,  the  G .  received  him
Act >  2.  7-  are  not  all  these  thatspeak,  G.  ?
GALLIM.

1  Sum.  25.  44.  Saul  gave  Michal  to  Phalti  of  G.

Isa.  10.  30.  lift  up  thy  voice,  O  daughter ot  G.
GALLIO.

Acts  18.  12.  when  G.  was  the  deputy  of  Achaia

17.  and  G.  cared  for  none  of  those  things
GAMALIEL.

Num.  1.  10.  of  Manasseh,  G.  son  ot  Pedahzur,  2.

20.17.54,59.  10.23.

Acts  5.  34.  then  stood  up  a  Pharisee  named  G.

22.  3.  yet  1  was  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  G.
GaMM  AD  IMS.

Ezek.  27.  11.  and  the  G.  were  in  thy  towers

GATH.  .

1  Sam.  5.  8.  let  the  ark  be  carried  about  to  G.

6.  17  these  are  the  golden  emerods,  for  G.  one
27.  4.  it  was  told  Saul,  that  David  was  lied  to  G.
2Sam.  1.20. tell  it  not  in  G.  publish  it  not  in  Ashkelon
21.  22.  these  four  were  horn  to  the  giant  in  G.  and
fell  by  the  hand  of  David  and  serv.  1  Chr.  20.  8.

1  Kings  2.  39.  two  servants  of  Shimei  ran  to  G.

40.  Shimei  went  to  G.  to  seek  his  servants

2  Kings  12.  17.  Hazael  went  and  fought  against  G.

1  Chr.  8. 13.  Beraiah  drove  away  inhabitants  of  G.

18.  1.  David  took  G.  from  the  Philistines

2  Chron.  26.  6.  Uzziah  brake  down  the  wall  of  G.
Amos  6.  2.  then  go  down  to  G.  of  the  Philistines
Mic.  1.  10.  declare  ye  it  not  at  G.  weep  not  at  all

GAZA.

Jvdg.  16.  1.  Samson  went  to  G.  and  saw  an  harlot
21.  the  Philistines  brought  Samson  down  to  G.
Jer.  47.  L  before  that  Pharaoh  smote  G.

5.  baldness  is  come  upon  G.  Ashkelon  is  cut  off
Amos  1 . 6.  for  three  transgressions  of  G.  and  tor  tour

7.  but  I  will  send  afire  on  the  wall  of  G.

Zeph.  2.  4.  G.  shall  be  forsaken  and  Ashkel.  a  desoj.
Zech.  9.  5.  G.  shall  see  it,  king  shall  perish  from  G.
Acts 8.  26.  the  way  that  goeth  from  Jerusalem  to  G.
GEBA.

Josh.  21.  17.  given  out  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  to
the  priests,  G.  with  her  suburbs,  1  Chron.  6.  60.

1  Kings  15.  22.  king  Asa  built  G.  2  Chron.  16.  6.

£  Kings  23. 8.  Josiah  defiled  the  high  places  from  G.
Isa.  10.  29.  they  have  taken  up  lodging  at  G.

Zech.  14.  10.  the  land  shall  be  as  a  plain  from  G.
GEBAL.

Psal.  83.  7.  G.  and  Ammon  are  confederate
Ezek.  27.  9.  the  ancients  of  G.  were  thy  calkers
GEBIM.

Isa.  10.  31.  the  inhabitants  of  G.  gather  to  flee
GE  DA  LI  AH.

£  Kings 25.  24.  and  G.  sware  to  them,  Jer.  40.  9.

1  Chron.  25.  3.  the  sons  of  Jeduthun,  G.  and  Zen

9.  now  the  second  lot  came  forth  to  G.

Ezra  10.  18.  Jarib  and  G.  had  taken  strange  wives
Jer.  38. 1.  G.  the  son  of  Pashur  heard  Jeremiah
40.  14.  but  G.  son  of  Ahikam  believed  them  not
41.2.  Ishmael  smote  G.  with  the  sword
43.  6.  Johanan  took  all  that  were  left  with  G.
Zeph.  1. 1.  Zephaniah  the  son  ot  Cushi,  son  of  G.
dee  Ahikam.

GEHAZI.

2  Kings  4. 12.  Elisha  said  toG.  call  Shunamite,  36.
27.  but  G.  came  near  to  thrust  her  away

5.  21.  so  G.  followed  after  N  aaman,  said,  is  all  well
25.  Elisha  said  to  him,  whence  comest  thou,  G.

8.  4.  the  king  talked  with  G.  servant  of  Elisha
GEMARIAH.

Jer.  29.  3.  the  words  that  Jeremiah  sent  by  G.

36.  25.  G.  made  intercession  not  to  burn  the  roll
GEN  NCSA  RET,  El  H.

Mat.  14.  34.  they  came  to  the  land  of  G.  Mark 6.  53.
Luke  5.  1.  people  pressed,  Jesus  stood  by  lakeofG.
GERA.

Judg.  3.  15.  the  Lord  raised  up  Ehud  the  son  of  G.
iSam.  16.  5.  Shimei  son  of  G .  19. 16, 18.  1  Kings  2. 8.
GERAHS.

Exod.  30.  13.  a  shekel  is  twenty  G.  Lev.  27.  25.

Num.  3.  47. 1  18.  16.  Ezek.  45.  12.
GERAR.

Gen.  20.  1.  Abraham  sojourned  in  G.  11  26.  6.  Isaac
2.  Abimelech  king  of  G.  II  20.  the  herdnianof  G.
GERGESENES.

Mat.  8.  28.  he  was  come  into  the  country  of  the  G.
GERIZ1M.

Deut.  11. 29.  thou  shalt  put  the  blessing  on  mount  G.
27.  12.  these  shall  stand  on  mount  G.  to  bless
Josh.  8.  33.  half  of  them  over-against  mount  G.
Judg.  9.  7-  Jotham  stood  on  the  top  of  mount  G.

GERbHOM,  GERSIION.

Gen.  46.1 1.  the  sons  of  Levi,  G.  Kohath  and  Merari,
Exod.  6.  16.  Num.  3.  17-  1  Chron. 6.  1,  16.1  23.6.
Exod.  2.  22.  the  name  of  Moses’  son  was  G.

6.  17.  the  sons  of  G.  Libni,  Shimei,  Num.  .3.  18.
Num.  3.  21.  of  G.  was  the  family  of  the  Libuites

25.  charge  of  the  sons  of  G.  ||  4.  22.  their  sum,  38.
4.28.  this  is  the  service  of  the  sons  of  G.

7.  7.  two  waggons  and  four  oxen  gave  to  sons  of  G.
It).  17.  the  sons  of  G.  bearing  the  tabernacle

Josh.  21.  6.  cities  the  children  of  G.  had,  27.

Judg.  18.  30.  Jonathan  the  son  of  G.  was  priest
EzraS.  2.  of  the  sons  of  Phinehas,  G.  went  up
GESHUR.

2  Sam.  13.  37.  Absalom  tied  and  went  to  G.  38.

14.  23.  Joab  went  to  G.  |1  32.  why  I  come  from  G.

15.  8.  thy  servant  vowed  a  vovv  at  G.  in  Syria
1  Chron.  2.  23.  J air  took  G.  and  Aram  from  them

GESHU  RITES.

Josh.  13.  13.  the  G.  dwell  among  the  Israelites

1  Sam.  27.  8.  David  and  his  men  invaded  the  G.

GETHSEMAN  E.

Mat.  26.  36.  cometh  to  a  place  called  G .Mark  14.  32.
GIAH.

2  Sam.  2.  24.  the  hill  Ammah  that  lieth  before  G.

GIBEAH.

Judg.  19.  14.  sun  w.ent  down  when  they  were  by  G.

16.  an  old  man  of  mount  Ephraim  sojourned  in  G.

20.  9-  this  shall  be  the  thing  we  will  do  to  G.

1.3.  deliver  ns  the  children  of  Belial  in  G.

30.  they  put  themselves  in  array  against  G

fi98


1  Sam.  10.  26.  Sat.'  also  went  home  to  G.  15.  .34.

14.  2.  Saul  ‘arried  in  the  uttermost  part  of  G.

2  Sam.  21.  t>.  let  seven  men  of  his  sons  be  delivered

to  us,  we  will  hang  them  up  to  the  Lord  in  G.
Isa.  10.  29.  Ramah  ’.s  afraid,  G.  of  Saul  is  fled
Hos.  5.  8.  blow  ye  the  cornet  in  G.  cry  aloud

9.  9.  have  corrupted  themselves  as  in  the  days  of  G.

10.  9.  O  Israel,  thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of

G.  the  battle  in  G.  did  not  overtake  them
G1BEON.

Josh.  10.  2.  feared,  because  G.  was  a  great  city

4.  come  up  and  help  me,  that  we  may  smite  G.
12.  Joshua  said,  sun,  stand  thou  still  upon  G.

2  Sam.  2.  13.  they  met  together  by  the  pool  of  G.

3.  30.  because  he  had  slain  Asahel  at  G.  in  battle

20.  8.  when  they  were  at  the  great  stone  in  G.

1  Kings  3. 5.  in  G.  the  Lord  appear,  to  Solomon,  9. 2.
t  Chron.  8.  29.  at  G.  dwelt  the  father  of  G.  9.  35.

21.  29.  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  was  at  G.

Isa.  28.  21.  he  shall  be  wrath  as  in  the  valley  of  G.
Jer.  28.  1.  Hananiah  the  son  of  Azur  in  G.

41.  12.  they  found  Ishmael  by  the  waters  in  G.
G1BEON  IT ES.

2  Sam.  21.  1.  a  famine,  because  Saul  slew  the  G.

9.  he  delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  G.

GIDEON.

Judg.  6.  11.  G.  threshed  wheat  by  the  wine-press
24.  G.  built  an  altar  there  unto  the  Lord

34.  but  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  G.

7.  1.  then  Jerubbaal,  who  is  G.  rose  up  early

14.  there  is  nothing  else,  save  the  sword  of  G.

18.  the  sword  of  the  Lord  and  of  G.  20.

8.  21.  G.  slew  Zeba  |l  27.  G.  made  anephod  thereof
30.  G.  had  70  sons  ||  32.  G.  died  in  a  good  old  age

35.  nor  shewed  they  kindness  to  the  house  of  G.
Heb.  11.  32.  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  G.

GIDEON  1.

Num.  1. 11.  the  prince  of  Benjamin  was  Abidan  the
son  of  G.  2.  22.  |  7*  60,  65.
GIHON.

Gen.  2.  1.3.  the  name  of  the  second  river  is  G.

1  Kings  1.  33.  and  bring  Solomon  down  to  G.  38.
45.  they  have  anointed  him  king  in  G.

GIL.BOA.

1  Sam.  28.  4.  Saul  and  all  Israel  pitched  in  G.

31.  1.  Israel  and  Saul  fell  down  slain  in  mount
G.  8.  2  Sam.  21.  12.  1  Chron.  10.  1,  8.

2  Sam.  1.  6.  as  I  happened  by  chance  on  mount  G.
21.  ye  mountains  of  G.  let  there  be  no  dew

GILEAD.

Num.  32. 1.  saw  theland  of  G.  wasaplace  for  cattle
40.  Moses  gave  G.  to  Macliir,  IJeut.  3.  15.

Deut.  34.  1.  the  Lord  shewed  him  the  land  of  G.
Josh.  17.  1.  Machir,  being  a  man  of  war,  had  G.

22.  13.  Israel  sent  Phinehas  into  the  land  of  G.
Judg.  10.  18.  be  head  over  the  inhabitants  of  G.

11.  11.  then  Jephthahrwent  with  the  elders  of  G.

2  Sam.  2.  9-  Abner  made  Ishbosheth  king  over  G.

17.  26.  Israel  and  Absalom  pitched  in  land  of  G.

1  Kings  17.  1.  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  who  was  of  G.
Psal.  60.  7.  G.  is  mine,  Manasseh  is  mine,  108.  8.
Cant.  4.  1 .  thy  hair  as  a  flock  of  goats  from  G.  6.  5.
Jer.  8.22.  is  there  no  balm  in  G.  ?no  physician  there  ?

22.  6.  thou  art  G.  to  me  H  46.  11.  go  up  into  G.

50.  19.  his  soul  shall  be  satisfied  on  mount  G.

Hos.  6.  8.  G.  is  the  city  of  them  that  work  iniquity

12.  11.  is  there  iniquity  in  G.  ?  they  are  vanity
Amos  1.  3.  they  have  threshed  G.  with  instruments

1.3.  they  hav  e  ripped  up  women  with  child  of  G.
Obad.  19.  and  Benjamin  shall  possess  G.

Mic.  7-  14.  let  them  feed  in  Bashan  and  G.

Zech.  10.  10.  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  G.
See  Ramoth.

GILEADITE,  3.

Judg.  10.  3.  Jair  G.  judged  Israel  ||  11.  1.  Jephthah
12.  4.  ye  G.  are  fugitives  of  Ephraim

5.  and  the  G.  took  the  passages  of  Jordan

2  Sam.  17.  27.  Barzillai  the  G.  brought  beds

See  Barzillai.

G1LGAL.

Josh.  4.  19.  the  people  came  up  and  encamped  in  G.

9.  6.  they  went  to  Joshua  unto  the  camp  at  G.

10.  6.  the  men  of  G.  sent  to  the  camp  at  Gibeon
Judg.  2.  1.  an  angel  came  up  from  G.  to  Bochin)

1  Sam.  7-  16.  Samuel  went  in  circuit  to  G.

10.  8.  and  thou  shalt  go  down  before  me  to  G.

11.  14.  let  us  go  to  G.  and  renew  the  kingdom

1.3.  7.  Saul  was  in  G.  ||  8.  Samuel  came  not  to  G.

15.  33.  Samuel  hewed  Agag  in  pieces  in  G.

Hos.  4.  15.  come  not  ye  to  G.  nor  go  to  Beth-aven
9.  15.  their  wickedness  is  in  G.  there  1  hated  them

12.  11.  they  sacrifice  bullocks  in  G.  their  altars
/lmos  4.  4.  at  G.  multiply  transgression  and  bring

5.  5.  enter  not  into  G.  for  G .  shall  go  into  captivity
Mic.  6.  5.  Balaam  answered  him  from  Shittim  to  G.
G 1  LON  ITE.

2  Sam.  15.  12.  Ahithophe)  the  G.  23.  34.

GIRGASHITE,  S.

Gen.  10.  16.  Canaan  begat  the  G.  1  Chron.  1.  14.
15.  21.  to  thy  seed  have  1  given  this  land  to  Eu¬
phrates  and  the  laud  of  the  G.  Neh.  9.  8.
Deut.  7.  1-  when  the  Lord  hath  cast  out  the  G.
Josh.  3.  10.  he  will  without  fail  drive  out  the  G.

G  ITT  IT  E.

2  Sam.  6.  10.  the  house  of  Obed-edom  the  G.  11.
15.  19.  Ittai  the  G.  22.  1  18.  2.  ||  21.  19-  Goliath
GOB.

2  Sam.  21.  18.  a  battle  with  the  Philistines  at  G.
GOG.

1  Chron.  5.  4.  sons  of  Joel,  G.  his  son,  Shimei  his  son
Ezek.  38.  2.  son  of  man,  set  thy  face  against  G.

3.  say,  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  O  G.  39.  1.

16.  when  I  shall  be  sanctified  in  thee,  O  G.

18.  when  G.  shall  come  against  the  land  of  Israel
39.  11.  I  will  give  to  G.  a  place  of  graves  in  Israel
Rev.  20.  8.  G.  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together
GOLAN,  See  Bashan.
GOLGOTHA.

Mat.  27-  33.  were  come  to  a  place  called  G.  that  is  to
say,  a  place  of  a  skull,  Mark  15.  22.  John  19.  17-
GO  LIATH.

1  Sam.  17.  4.  G.  of  Gath  a  champion  went  out,  23.


1  Sam.  21.  9.  the  sword  of  G.  the  Philistine  is  here

22.  10.  he  gave  him  the  sword  of  G.  the  Pbilistint-

2  Sam.  21.  19.  slew  the  brother  of  G.  1  Chr.  20.  5.

GOM  ER.

Gen.  10.  2.  sons  of  Japheth,  G.  Magog,  1  Chr.  1.5.

3.  the  sons  of  G.  Ashkenaz,  Riphath,  1  Chr.  1.  6..
Ezek.  .38.6.  G.  and  all  his  bands,  house  of  1  ogarmakr
Hos.  1.  3.  he  took  G.  the  daughter  of  Diblaim
GOMORRAH.

Gen.13.10.  before  the  Lord  destroyed  Sodom,  and  G;

14.  11.  they  took  all  the  goods  of  Sodom  and  G.

18.20.  because  the  cry  of  Sodom  and  G.  is  great

19.  24.  the  Lord  rained  on  G.  fire  from  heaven
28.  Abraham  looked  towards  Sodom  and  G.

Deut.  29.  23.  like  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  G;
Isa.  1.  9.  1  13.  19-  Jer.  23.  II.  I  49.  18.  |  50.  40v-
Amos  4.  11.  Rom.  9.  29-  2  Pet.  2.  6.  Jude  7.

32. 32.  for  their  vine  is  of  the  fields  of  G.

Isa.  1.  10.  give  ear  to  the  law,  ye  people  of  G.
Zeph.  2.  9-  the  children  of  Ammon  shall  be  as  G.
Mat.  10.  15.  be  more  tolerable  for  G.  Mark  6.  11.
GOSHEN.

Gen.  45.  10.  dwell  in  G.  46.  34.  I  47-  4,6,  27-
Exod.  8.  22.  I  will  sever  that  day  the  land  of  G.

9.  26.  only  in  the  land  of  G.  was  there  no  hail
Josh.  10.  41.  Joshua  smote  the  country  of  G.

11.  16.  so  Joshua  took  all  the  land  of  G.

15.  51.  the  inheritance  of  Judah,  G.  Holon

GOZAN.

2  Kings  17.6.  the  king  of  Assyria  placed  Israel  by
the  river  of  G.  18.  11.  1  Chron.  5.  26..
19.12.  my  fathers  have  destroyed,  as  G.  Isa.  37. 12.
GRECLA.

Dan.  8.  21.  the  rough  goat  is  the  king  of  G.

10.  20.  when  I  am  gone  the  king  of  G.  shall  come'

11.  2.  heshallstir  up  all  against  the  realm  of  G.  ’

GRECIANS.

Joel  3.6.  the  children  of  Judah  have  ye  sold  to  the  G.
Acts  6.  1.  there  arose  a  murmuring  of  the  G.

9. 29. Paul  spake  boldly  and  disputed  against  the  G.

11. 20.  who  spake  to  the  G.  pl  eaching  the  L.  Jesus

GREECE.

Zech.  9. 13.  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy  sons,0  G.  \
Acts  20.  2.  Paul  came  to  G.  and  there  abode
GREEK.

Mark  7.  26.  the  woman  was  a  G.  a  Syrophenician  ;
Acts  16. 1.  the  father  of  Timotheus  was  aG.  3.

Rom.  1.  16.  to  Jew  first,  and  also  toG.  2.  t9,  t  10.
10.  12.  for  there  is  no  difference  between  the  Jew
and  the  G,  the  same  Lord,  Gal.  3.  28.  Col.  .3.  11.
Gal.  2.  3.  nor  Titus  who  was  with  me, 'being  aG.  i
See  Appellatives.

GREEKS.

John  7.  +  35.  will  he  go  to  dispersed  among  the  G.?

12.  20.  certain  G.  came  to  worship  at  the  feast
Acts  14.  1.  a  multitude  of  G.  believed,  17.  4,  12.

18.  4.  he  persuaded  the  Jews  and  the  G.

17.  then  the  G.  took  Sosthenes  and  beat  him
19- 10. the  Jews  and  G.  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord
17.  this  was  known  to  all  the  G.  at  Ephesus

20.  21.  testifying  to  the  Jews  and  G.  repentance

21.  28.  he  brought  the  G.  also  into  the  temple
Rom.  1. 14.  I  am  a  debtor  both  to  G.  and  Barbarians

1  Cor.  1.  22.  and  the  G.  seek  after  wisdom

23  we  preach  Christ  crucified, to  the  G. foolishness
24. to  called,  Jews  and  G.  Christ  the  power  of  God
GUR.

2  Kings  9.  27.  smote  Ahaziah  at  the  going  up  to  G.

H.  j

IIACHILAH.

1  Sam.  23.  19.  David  hid  in  the  hill  of  H.  26.  1.

26.  3.  and  Saul  pitched  in  the  hill  of  H.

HADADEZER,  1IADAREZER.

2  Sam.  8.  3.  David  smote  II.  9,  10.  1  Chron.  18.  3.
5.  when  the  Syrians  came  to  succour  H.

7.  took  shields  on  servants  of  H.||8.  cities  of  H.  1
10.  H.  had  wars  with  Toi||  12.  the  spoil  of  H.

10.  16.  H.  sent  and  brought  out  the  Syrians
1  Kings  11. 23.  Rezoo  fled  from  lord  H. king  of  Zob.  1
HADADRIMMON.

Zech.  12.  11.  as  the  mourning  of  H.  in  the  valley
HADASSAII.

Esth.  2.  7.  brought  up  II.  his  uncle’s  daughter
IIADORAM.

Gen.  10.  27-  and  Joktan  be^at  H.  1  Chron.  1.  21.

1  Chron.  18.  10.  Tou  sent  II.  his  son  to  king  David

2  Chr.  10.  18.  Rehoboam  sentH.  Israel  stoned  him

IIADRACH.

Zech.  9.  1.  the  burden  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  II.
11AGAR.

Gen.  16. 1 .  II.  an  Egyptian  was  Sarai’s  maid,  3, 8.
15.  H.  bare  Abram  a  son,  16.  |  25.  12.

21.  9-  Sarah  saw  son  of  II.  the  Egyptian  mocking
14.  Abraham  gave  II.  bread,  and  sent  her  away
17. angel  of  God  called  to  II.  whataileth  thee,  II. ‘
See  Agar.

HAGARENES.

Psal.  83.  6.  the  II .  are  confederate  against  thee
HAGARITES.

1  Chron.  5.  10.  they  made  war  with  the  II.  19.

20.  the  11.  were  delivered  into  their  hand

HAGGAI.

Gen.  46. 16.  the  sons  of  Gad,  11.  Shuni,  and  Ezbo.1
Ezra  5.  1.  II.  the  prophet  prophesied  to  the  Jews
6. 14. prospered  thro’  prophesying  of  II. the  prophet
Hag.  1.  1.  word  of  the  Lord  by  H.  3.  1  2. 1,  10,  20.
HAGGITH.

2  Sam.  3.4.  and  the  fourth,  Adonijah  the  son  of  II.

1  Kings  1.  5,  11.  I  2.  13.  1  Chron.  3.  2.
HALLELUIAH.

Psal.  106.  t  1.  I  111  t  1.  1  113.  t  1.  I  146.  +  1.  I  148.

+  1.  |  149.  t  1.  I  150.  t  1.
See  AlleluiaH,  in  Appellatives.

HAM.

Gen.  5.  32.  Noah  begat  Shem,  II.  and  Japheth

6.  10.  |  9.  18.  110.  1.1  Chron.  1.  4

7.  1.3.  the  self-same,  day  11.  entered  into  the  ark

9.  18.  and  H.  is  the  father  of  Canaan

10.  6.  sons  of  H.  Cush,  Mizraim,20. 1  Chr-  l.  8


H  A  R


H  E  M


H  EZ  [Proper  Names


'  Gen.  14.  5.  Chedorlaomer  smote  the  Zuzims  in  II.

1  Chron. 4.  40.  they  of  11.  had  dwelt  there  of  old
Psal.  “8.  51.  he  smote  in  the  tabernacles  of  II.

105.  23.  Jacob  sojourned  in  the  land  of  11.

27.  they  shewed  wonders  in  the  land  of  H.  106.  22.

IIAWAN.

1 Esth.  3. 1.  kin?  promoted  H.  ||  5.  II.  full  of  wrath

2.  all  the  king’sservants  bowed  and  reverenced  11.

6.  wherefore  11.  sought  to  destroy  all  the  Jews
7- cast  the  lot  before  H.||4.  7.  II.  promised  to  pay

15.  and  the  king  and  11.  sat  flown  to  drink

■5.4.  the  king  and  11. came  to  the  banquet, 5. 8.  17-1.

9.  then  went  II.  forth  that  day  joyful  and  glad

11.  H.  told  them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches

14.  the  thing  pleased  H .  ||  6.  5.  II .  stands  in  court
6.6.  II.  thought  11  11.  then  II.  took  the  apparel

12.  but  II.  hasted  to  his  house  mourning

13.  II.  told  Zeresh  his  wife  H  7.  6.  this  wicked  11.
7-7-  H.  made  request  11 8.  II .  was  fallen  on  the  bed

10.  hanged  1 1 .  ||  8.  1 .  gave  Esther  the  house  of  H .

9.  10.  slew  the  sons  of  II.  ]|  14.  they  hanged  them

HAMATH.

Num.  13.  21.  Zin  to  Rehob,  as  men  come  to  II.

34.  8.  from  mount  Horto  the  entrance  of  II.  Josh.

13.  5.  Judg.  3.  3.  1  Kings  8.  65.  2  Kings

14.  25.  2  Chron.  ~ .  8.

2  *Sfl?n.8.  9.  Toi  king  of  H.  1  Chron.  18.  9.

•2  Kings  14.28.  now  Jeroboam  recovered  II.

17.  24.  the  king  of  Assyria  brought  men  from  H.

30.  the  men  of  II.  made  Ashima  their  god
18.34.  where  are  the  gods  of  II.  r  Isa.  36.  19.

19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  H.  ?  Isa.  37.  13.

23.  33.  put  him  in  bands  in  the  land  of  tl.  25.  21.

1  Chron.  18.  3.  David  smote  Hadarezer  to  II.

2  Chron.  8.  4.  Solomon  built  store-cities  in  II.

/.tfi.  10. 9. is  not  II. as  Arpad  ?  Samaria  as  Damascus?
11. 11.  Lord  shall  recover  his  people  from  H.

Jer.  39.  5.  to  H.  where  he  gave  judgment,  52.  9.
49.  23.  about  Damascus,  H.  is  confounded,  and

Arpad

Ezek.  47. 16.  the  border  on  the  north,  H.  17.

20.  from  border  till  a  man  come  over  against  II.
Zech.  9.  2.  H.  alsoshall  border  thereby,  Tyre,  Sidon

IIAMMEDATHA.

Esth.  8.  5.  Haman  the  son  of  H.  9.  10,  24.

HAMON-GOG,

■  Ezek.  .39.  11.  they  shall  call  it  the  valley  of  H.

15.  the  buriers  have  buried  it  in  the  valley  of  H.

H  AMOR.

Gen.  33. 19.  Jacob  boughta  field  of  the  children  of
H.  Shechein’s  father,  Josh.  24.  32.
34.  6.  II.  went  out  to  commune  with  Jacob,  8.

24.  to  H.  and  Shechem  hearkened  all  the  citizens

26.  they  slew  II.  and  Shechem,  and  took  Dinah
Judg.  9.  28.  serve  the  men  of  II.  father  of  Shechem

HAN  AM  EEL.

Jer.  32.  7.  H.  thine  uncle’s  son  shall  come,  8.

9-  I  bought  the  field  of  H.  my  uncle’s  son
12.  I  gave  theevidence  to  Baruch  in  sight  of  II.
II  A  N  ANEEL.

Nek.  3.  1.  towrer  of  H.  12.  39.  Jer.  31.  38.  Zech.  14.10.
HAN  AN  I.

1  Kings  16.  1.  to  Jehu  son  of  H.  the  word  came,  7.

1  Chr.  25.  4.  H.  son  of  Heman  ||  25.  18th  lot  to  H.

2  Chr.  16.  7.  at  that  time  H.  the  seer  came  to  Asa

19.  2.  Jehu  son  of  II.  went  to  meet  Jehoshaphat

20.  34.  his  acts  in  the  book  of  Jehu  son  of  H.

Ezra  10.20.  of  the  sons  of  Iminah,  II.  Zebadiah
A  eh.  1.  2.  that  H.  one  of  iny  brethren  came

7.2.  I  gave  my  brother  H.  charge  over  Jerusalem
12.  36.  II  with  the  musical  instruments  of  David
HANANIAH.

1  Chr.  3.  19.  the  sonsof  Ze'  bbabel  ;  Meshullam.H.

21.  the  sons  of  II.  |j  8.  24.  H.  a  Benjamite

25.  4.  H.  son  of  Heman  ||  23.  sixteenth  lot  to  H.

£  Chron.  26.  11.  Uzziah  had  an  host  under  H.

Ezra  10.  28.  II.  Zabbai  had  taken  strange  wives
Neh.  3.  8.  II.  the  son  of  an  apothecary  repaired

7.  2.  I  gave  H.  ruler  of  palace  charge  over  Jerus.

10.  23.  H.  sealed  ||  12.  12.  11.  with  trumpets,  41.
Jer.  28.  1.  H.  son  of  Azur  a  false  prophet

11.  H.  spake  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people

12.  after  that  H.  had  broken  Jeremiah’s  yoke

17.  H.  died  that  year  in  the  seventh  month

36.  12.  Zedekiah  son  of  H.  sat  in  scribes’  chamber
37. 13.  Irijah  the  son  of  H.  took  Jeremiah
Dan.  1.  6.  of  the  children  of  Judah,  Daniel,  H.

7.  he  gave  to  H.  the  name  of  Shadracli

11.  Melzar  was  set  over  Daniel,  H.  Mishael
19.  among  all  was  found  none  like  Daniel,  H.

2.  17.  then  Daniel  made  thing  known  to  H.

HANNAH.

1  Sam.  1.  2.  Elkanah’s  wife  H.  had  no  children

8.  11.  why  weepestthou  ?  |1  9.  so  II.  rose  up

13.  II .  spake  in  her  heart  only  her  lips  moved
19-  Elkanah  knew  H.  11  20.  after  11.  conceived

22.  but  H.  went  not  up  ||  2.  1.  H.  prayed,  and  said
2.  21.  the  Lord  visited  H.  so  that  she  conceived

IIANOCK.

■Gen.  25.  4.  sons  of  Midian,  Ephah,  II.  1  Chr.  1.3.3.
46.  9.  II.  son  of  Reuben,  Num.  26.  5.  1  Chr.  5.  3.
IIANUN.

2  Sam.  10.  1.  H.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead

2.  I  will  shew  kindness  unto  H.  1  Chron.  19.  2.

4.  II.  took  David’s  servants,  and  shaved  otf  the

one  half  of  their  beards,  1  Chron.  19.  4.
Neh.  3.  13.  H.  repaired  the  valley  gate

30.  II.  sixth  son  of  Z..  aph  repaired  another  piece

HARAN ,  a  man.

■  Gen.  11.  26.  Terah  begat  H.  27.  II  28.  H.  died

29.  Nahor’s  wife  was  Milcah  daughter  of  II.

31.  Terah  took  Lot  the  son  of  H.  his  son’s  son

1  Chron.  2.  46.  Ephah,  Caleb’s  concubine,  bare  II.

and  Moza  and  II.  begat  Gazez

23.  9.  the  sons  of  Shimei,  H.  Shelomith,  Haziel

HARAN,  a  place.

Gen.  11. 31. Terah  came  to  H.  H  32.  Terah  died  in  H.

12.  4.  Abram  at  75  years  departed  out  of  II.

5.  he  took  the  souls  that  they  had  gotten  in  II.

27.  43.  flee  to  H.  ||  29.  4.  they  said,  of  II.  are  we

28.  10.  Jacob  went  from  Beer-sheba  toward  H.

2  Kings  19. 12.  my  fathers  destroyed  II.  Isa.  37. 12.


HARBONAII.

Esth.  1.  10.  II.  was  one  of  the  chamberlains,  7.  9.
HA  ROD.

Judg.  7.  1.  Gideon  pitched  beside  the  well  of  H.
HAROSHl.TH.  See  Gentiles.
HAZAEL.

1  Rings  19.  15.  anoint  II.  to  be  king  over  Syria

17.  that  escapeth  the  sword  of  H.  shall  Jehu  slay

2  R  ings 8.  9.  11.  went  to  meet  F.lisha,  took  a  present
15.  Ben  hadad  died,  and  II.  reigned  in  his  stead

28.  Ahaziah  went  with  Joram  against  II.

9.  14.  Joram  kept  Ramoth-gilead  because  of  II.

10.  32.  II.  smote  them  in  all  the  coasts  of  Israel

12.  17.  11.  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem

18.  Jehoash  sent  the  hallowed  things  to  H.

13.  3.  Lord  delivered  Israel  into  the  hand  of  II.
22.  but  II.  oppressed  Israel  ||  24.  so  H.  died
25.  recovered  from  Ben-hadad  son  of  H.  cities

Amos  1.  4.  I  will  send  fire  into  the  house  of  H.

II A ZE LEI. PON  I .

1  Chron.  4.  3.  the  name  of  their  sister  was  II.

H AZEROTH.

Num.  11.  35.  the  people  abode  at  II.  33.  17.

12.  16.  the  people  removed  from  II.  33.  18.
HAZOR.

Josh.  11. 10.  Josh  uatook  H.  head  of  those  kingdoms

11.  and  he  burnt  H.  with  fire,  13.

15.  23.  Kedesh  and  II.  cities  of  Judah,  25.

19.  36.  Ramah  and  II.  cities  of  Naphtali
Judg.  4.  2.  sold  them  to  Jabin  who  reigned  in  H.

1  Rings  9.  15.  Solomon  raised  a  levy  to  build  H.

2  Kings  15.  29.  the  king  of  Syria  took  II.

Jer.  49.  28.  concerning  the  kingdoms  of  II.

30.  flee,  dwell  deep,  O  ye  inhabitants  of  H.

33.  and  II.  shall  be  a  dwelling  for  dragons
HEBER.

Gen.  46.  17-  the  sons  of  Beriah,  II.  1  Chron.  7.  31.
Judg.  4.  11.  H.  the  Kenite,  17.  I  5.24.

Luke  3.  35.  Phalec,  which  was  the  son  of  H.
HEBREW.

Gen.  14.  13.  one  came  and  told  Abraham  the  II.
39.  14.  see  he  hath  brought  in  an  II.  to  mock  us
41.  12.  there  was  there  with  us  a  young  man,  a  II.
Exod.  2.  11.  he  spied  an  Egyptian  smiting  an  11.
Jer.  34.  9-  should  let  an  1 1 .  or  I  lebrewess  go  free
Jonah  1.  9.  he  said  unto  them,  I  am  an  II.

HEBREWS.

Gen.  40.  15.  T  was  stolen  out  of  the  land  of  the  II.
43.  32,  the  Egyptians  might  not  eat  with  the  II.
Exod.  2.  6.  she  said,  this  is  one  of  the  H.  children
13.  behold,  two  men  of  the  II.  strove  together

3.  18.  God  of  the  H.  5.  3.  |  7-  16.  |  9-  1,  13. 1  10.  3.

1  Sam.  4.  6.  this  great  shout  in  the  camp  of  the  II.

9.  be  strong,  that  ye  be  not  servants  to  the  II.

13.3.  let  the  II.  hear||  19.  lest  the  II.  makesvvords

14.  11.  behold  the  II.  come  forth  out  of  holes

21.  the  II.  that  were  with  the  Philistines

29.  3.  the  princes  said,  what  do  these  II.  here  ?
Acts  6.  1.  a  murmuring  of  Grecians  against  the  H.

2  Cor.  11.  22.  are  they  II.  or  Israelites?  so  am  I
Phil.  3.  5.  I  am  of  Benjamin,  an  Hebrew  of  the  II.

HEBR EW.

Luke  23.  38.  written  over  him  in  II.  John  19-  20.
John  5.  2.  a  pool  called  in  the  11.  tongue,  Betbesda
19.  13.  called  in  H.  Gabbatha||  17  Golgotha
Acts  21.  40.  Paul  spake  to  them  in  II.  22.  2.

26.  14.  a  voice  saying  in  the  II .  tongue,  Saul,  Saul
Rev.  9.  11-  in  H.  Abaddon  ||  16.  16.  Armageddon
HEBREW  man.

Deut.  15.  12.  if  thy  brother,  an  II.  man,  be  sold
HEBREW  servant.

Gen.  39.  17-  the  II.  servant  came  in  to  mock  me
Exod.  21.  2.  if  thou  buy  an  II.  servant
II  E  B  R  E  W  woman ,  women.

Exod.  1.  16.  do  the  office  of  a  midwife  to  H.  women

19.  II .  women  are  not  as  the  Egyptian  women

2.  7.  shall  I  call  to  thee  a  nurse  of  the  II.  women?
Deut.  15.  12.  if  any  II.  woman  be  sold  unto  thee

HEBREW  ESS.

Jer.  34.  9.  every  man  should  let  an  H.  go  free
HEBRON,  place.

Gen.  23.2.  Sarah  died  in  Kirjath-arba,  the  same  is
H.  35.  27.  Josh.  14.  15.  |  20.  7-  Judg.  1.  10.
37.  14.  Jacob  sent  Joseph  out  of  the  vale  of  II.
Num.  13.  22.  II.  was  built  seven  years  before  Zoan
Josh.  10.  39.  as  he  did  to  II.  so  he  did  to  Debir

14.  13.  Joshua  gave  to  Caleb  II.  14.  Judg.  1.  20.

1  Sam.  30.  31.  a  present  to  them  which  w'ere  in  H.

2  Sam.  2.  1.  whither  shall  I  go  up?  he  said,  unto  H.

11.  the  time  David  was  king  in  II.  was  seven

years,  5.  5.  1  Kings  2.  II.  1  Chron.  29.  27.

32.  Joab  and  his  men  came  to  II.  at  break  of  day

3.  2.  to  David  were  sons  born  in  11. 5.  1  Chr.  3. 1,  4.
32.  they  buried  Abner  in  H.  and  the  king  wept

4.  12.  they  buried  the  head  of  Ish-bosheth  in  H.

5. 3.  the  elders  of  Israel  came  to  II .  and  David  made

a  league  with  them  in  II.  1  Chron.  11.  3.
13.  took  more  wives  after  he  was  come  from  H.

15.  7.  which  l  have  vowed  to  the  Lord  in  II.

10.  then  ye  shall  say,  Absalom  reigneth  in  II.

1  Chron.  6.  57-  cities  of  Judah  II.  a  city  of  refuge

12.  38.  all  these  came  vvith  a  perfect  heart  toll.

2  Chron.  11.  10.  Rehoboam  built  Zorah,  H.  in  Judah

H  E  B  R  O  N ,  person .

Exod.  6.  18.  the  sons  of  Kohath,  Amram,  II.  and
Uzziel,  Num.  3.  19.  1  Chron.  6.  2,  18. 1  23.  12.

1  Chron.  2.  42.  sons  of  Mareshah  the  father  of  II.
43.  the  sons  of  II.  15.  9.  I  23.  19.  I  24.  23.

URGE.

Esth.  2.  3.  unto  the  custody  of  H.the  chamberlain
HELAM.

2  Sam.  10.  16.  Syrians  beyond  the  river  came  to  H.

HELBON.

Ezek.  27.  18.  was  thy  merchant  in  the  wine  of  H.
HELD  A  I.

Zech.  6. 10.  take  of  them  of  the  captivity  even  of  H.
HELI.

Luke  3.  23.  Joseph,  which  was  the  son  of  H.

HELK ATH-H  AZZURIM.

2  Sam.  2.  16.  wherefore  that  place  was  called  H.
HEMAN.

1  Kings  4. 31.  Solomon  was  wiser  than  Ethan,  H.


1  Chron.  2.  6.  the  sons  of  Zerah,  II.  and  Calcol

6.  33.  sons  of  Kohathites,  H .  a  singer,  son  of  Joel,
the  son  of  Shemuel,  15.  17,  19.  I  16.  42.
25.  1.  David  appointed  of  the  sons  of  Asaph  and
of  H.  4,  6.  2  Chron.  5.  12.  1  29.  14.  1  35.  .5.

5.  all  these  were  sons  of  H.  God  gave  II.  14  sons

HEN.

Zech.  6.  14.  crown  shall  be  for  II.  son  of  Zephaniah
HEPHZI-BAH.

2  Kings  21.  1.  Manasseh’s  mother's  name  was  H.
Isa.  62.  4.  thou  shalt  be  called  1 1 .  and  land  Beulah

II  ERMAS,  HERMES.

Rom.  16.  14.  salute  Hennas,  Patrobas,  Hermes
HERMOGENES.

2  Tim.  1.15.  from  me,  of  whom  are  Phygellus  and  II.
HERMON.

Dent.  4.  48.  from  Aroer  to  mount  Sion,  which  is  II.
Josh.  13.  11.  all  mount  II.  Reuben  and  Gad  had
Psal.  89-  12.  I  abor  and  H.  shall  rejoice  in  thy  name
133.  3.  it  is  the  dew  of  H.  that  descended  on  Zion
Cant.  4.  8.  look  from  the  top  of  Shenir  and  II.
HER  MOM  I  ES.

Ps.  42.  6.  I  will  remember  thee  from  the  land  of  II.
HEROD.

Mat. 2. 12.  warned, thatthey  should  not  return  to  II.

15.  Joseph  was  there  till  the  death  of  H.

16.  H.  slew  all  the  children  in  Beth  lehem

14.  3.  for  II.  had  laid  hold  on  John,  Mark  6.  17-

6.  but  when  II.  birth-day  was  kept,  Mark  6.  21.
Mark  6.  20.  H.  feared  John,  knowing  he  was  a  just

8.  15.  take  heed,  beware  of  the  leaven  of  II.

Luke  .3.  1.  and  H.  being  tetrarch  of  Galilee

19.  for  all  the  evils  which  H.  had  done

9.  7-  H.  heard  of  all  that  was  done  by  Jesus

13.  31.  depart  hence,  for  H.  wdl  kill  thee

2.3.  7.  Pilate  sent  Jesus  to  H.  H  8.  H.  was  glad

11.  II.  with  his  men  of  war  set  him  at  nought

12.  Pilate  and  H.  were  made  friends  together

15.  I  found  no  fault  in  this  man,  no,  nor  yet  II.

Acts  4.  27.  both  II.  and  Pontius  Pilate  against  Jesus

12.  1.  H.  vexed  the  church,  and  killed  James
6.  when  II.  would  have  brought  forth  Peter

11.  hath  delivered  me  out  of  the  hand  of  II.

21.  on  a  set  day  II.  made  an  oration  to  them

13.  1.  which  had  been  brought  up  with  H.  and  Sau.
23.  35.  command,  him  to  be  keptin  H.  judgme.-hal,

HERODIAN.S.  See  Appellatives.
I1EROD  IAS.

Mat.  14.  3.  John  in  prison  for  II.  sake,  Mark  6.  17.

6.  the  daughter  of  II.  danced,  Mark  6.  22.

Mark  6.  19.  II.  had  a  quarrel  against  John
Luke  3.  19.  Herod  being  reproved  by  John  for  II.
HE  ROD  ION.

Rom.  16.  11.  salute  H.  my  kinsman,  greet  them
HESIIBON.

Num.  21.  25.  Israel  dwelt  in  II.  and  its  villages
26.  II.  was  the  city  of  Sihon  H  27.  come  into  II.

28.  a  fire  gone  out  of  H.  ||  30.  II.  is  perished
32.37.  children  of  Reuben  built  II.  and  Elealeh
Deut.  2.  24.  1  have  given  thee  Sihon  king  of  II.
Judg.  11.  26.  while  Israel  dwelt  in  H.  and  Aroer
Neh.  9.  22.  the}’  possessed  the  land  of  the  king  of  II.
Cant.  7.  4.  thine  eyes  like  the  fish-pools  of  II.

Isa.  15.  4.  H.  shall  cry  ||  Jer.  49.  3.  howl,  O  II.

16.  8.  for  field  of  II.  languish,  and  vine  of  Sibmah
9.  w  ill  waterthee  with  my  tears,  O  H .  and  Elealeh
Jer.  48.  2.  in  II.  they  have  devised  evil  against  it
34.  from  cry  of  II.  even  to  Elealeh  and  Jahaz
45.  that  fled  stood  under  the  shadow  of  II.  because
of  the  force,  but  a  fire  shall  come  out  of  H.
See  Sihon.

HETH.

Gen.  10. 15.  Canaan  begat  Sidon  and  II.  1  Chr.  1 . 13

2.3.  7.  Abraham  bowed  before  the  children  of  II.

25.  10.  Abraham  purchased  of  the  sons  of  H.  49.  32.

27.  46.  am  weary  of  life  because  of  daughters  of  II.

IIEZEKIAH,  called  EZEKIAS.

2  Kings  16.  20.  H.  Ahaz’s  son  reigned  in  his  stead

18.  14.  H.sent  to  the  king  of  Assyria  to  I.achish
15.  II.  gave  him  all  the  silver  in  house  of  the  Lord

22.  whose  altars  II .  hath  taken  awa}',  Isa  .36.  7.

29.  thus  saith  the  king,  let  not  Id.  deceive  you,  not
able  to  deliver  you,  2  Chr.  .32.  15.  Isa.  36.  14.

31.  hearken  not  to  II.  32.  Isa.  .36.  16.

19-  1.  king  11 .  heard  it,  he  rent  his  clothes,  Isa.  37.1,
15.  II.  prayed,  2  Chron.  30.  18.  Isa.  37.  15.

20.  1.  II.  was  sick  to  death,  2  Chr.  32.24.  Isa.  .38.  1.
3.  LI.  wept  sore,  Isa.  .38.3.  ||  5.  turn  again,  tell  II,

12.  Berodach  sent  a  present  to  H.  Isa.  .39.  1.

13.  nothing,  that  II.  shewed  them  not,  Isa.  39.  2.
19.1L  said,  good  is  the  word  of  the  Lord,  Isa.  39.8.

21.  Id.  slept  with  his  fathers,  2  Chron.  .32.33.

21. 3.  built,  what  H.  had  destroyed,  2  Chron.  .33.  .3.

1  Chr.  3.  23.  the  sons  of  Neariah,  II.  and  Azrikam

4.  41.  came  in  days  of  11.  and  smote  their  tents

2  Chr.  29.  27 ■  H.  commanded  to  offer  burntofferings
36.  and  II.  rejoiced,  and  all  the  people  that  God

30.  20.  the  Lord  hearkened  to  H .  and  healed  them

22.  H.  spake  comfortably  to  all  the  Levites

24.  H.  gave  the  congregation  1000  bullocks

31.  2.  II.  appointed  the  courses  of  the  priests

11.  then  II.  commanded  to  prepare  chambers

32.  8.  the  people  rested  on  the  words  of  II.

17.  so  shall  not  the  God  of  H.  deliver  his  people
22.  thus  the  I.ord  saved  II.  from  Sennacherib

25.  H.  rendered  not  again  according  to  the  benefit

26.  wrath  came  not  on  them  in  the  flays  of  II.

30.  and  II.  prospered  in  all  his  works

Ezra  2.  16.  the  children  of  Ater  of  H.  Neh.  7.  21.
Prov.  25.  1.  which  the  men  of  H.  copied  out
Jer.  15.  4.  because  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  II.

26.  18.  Micali  prophesied  in  days  of  H.  Mic.  1.  1.

19.  did  H.  and  all  Judah  put  Micah  to  death

Hos.  1.1.  the  word  that  came  to  Ilosea  in  days  of  H.
Mat.  1.  9.  Achaz  begat  II.  ||  10.  H.  begat  Manasses
HEZRON.

Gen.  46.  9-  sons  of  Reuben,  H.  Carmi,  Exod.  6.  14.

12.  sonofPharez,  H.  Ruth  4. 18. 1  Chr.  2.  5. 1  4.1.
Ruth  4.  19.  II .  begat  Ram,  Ram  begat  Amminadab
1  Chr.  2.  9.  the  sons  of  II.  ||  18.  Caleb  the  son  of  H.

21.  II.  begat  Segub  H  24.  after  that  II.  was  dead
25.  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel  the  first  born  of  II.

599


PlloELil  iNA.YIlis.j  j-[  Q


J  AC


J  \1


HIDDEKEL.

Gen.  2.  14.  the  name  of  the  third  river  is  H.

Dan.  10.  4.  as  I  was  by  the  side  of  the  river  II.

HI  EL.

1  Kings  16.  34.  II.  the  Beth-elite  built  Jericho

IIIGGAION.

Psal.  9.  16.  the  wicked  snared  in  his  work,  II.  Selah
HlLklAII.

2  Kings  18. 18.  there  came  out  Eliakim  son  of  H.
37.  then  came  Eliakim  the  son  of  II.  to  Hezekiah

with  his  clothes  rent,  and  told  him,  Isa.  36.  22.

22.  4.  saying,  go  up  to  II.  the  high-priest

8.  II.  gave  the  book  to  Shaphan,  10.  2  Chr.  34. 15.
12.  the  king  commanded  II.  to  inquire  of  tiie
Lord  for  him,  2  Chron.  34.  20.

14.  so  H.  went  to  Huldah,  2  Chron.  34.  22.

23.  4.  commanded  II.  to  bring  forth  the  vessels

1  Chr.  6. 13.  Shallum  begat  H.andll.  begat  Azariah

45. II. son  of  Amaziah  f|  9. 1 1.  1 1.  son  of  Meshullam

26. 11.  H.  the  second  son  of  Hosah,  Tabaliah
Ezra  7.  1.  H.  the  son  of  Shallum,  son  of  Zadok
Neh.  8.  4.  II.  stood  on  Ezra’s  right  hand

11. 11.  Seraiah  the  son  of  H.  dwelt  at  Jerusalem
12.  7*  H.  the  priest  went  up  with  Zerubbabel

21.  of  H.  Hashabiah  was  a  priest,  of  Jedaiah
Isa.  22.  20.  I  will  call  my  servant  Eliakim  son  of  II.
Jer.  1.  1.  the  words  of  Jeremiah  the  son  of  H.

29.  3.  Gemariah  son  of  H.  was  sent  to  Babylon
HINNOM.

Josh.  15.  8.  the  border  went  up  by  the  valley  of  II.

2  Kmgs2'3. 10.  Tophet,  which  is  in  the  valley  of  H.
2  Chron.  28.  3.  he  burnt  incense  in  the  valley  of  II.

33.  6.  he  caused  his  children  to  pass  thro’  fire  in  H.
Jer.  19.  2.  go  forth  to  the  valley  of  the  son  of  PI.

32.  35.  they  built  high  places  in  the  valley  of  H.

HIRAM.

2  Sam.  5.  11.  II.  king  of  Tyre  sent  messengers  to
David  and  cedar-trees  and  masons,  1  Chr.  14.  1.
1  Kings  5.  1.  H.  king  of  Tyre  sent  his  servants  to
Solomon,  for  II.  was  ever  a  lover  of  David,  8.

10.  H.  gave  Solomon  cedar-trees  and  fir-trees

11.  Solomon  gave  H.  20,000  measures  of  wheat

12.  there  was  peace  between  H.  and  Solomon
7.  13.  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  H.  out  of  l  yre

40.  II.  made  the  lavers,  II.  made  an  end  of  doing

9.  12.  II.  came  to  see  the  cities  Solomon  had  given

27.  II.  sent  in  the  navy  his  servants,  shipmen

10. 11.  the  navy  of  H.  brought  in  almug-trees

22.  king  had  at  sea  a  navy,  with  the  navy  of  II.

IIITTITE.

Gen.  25. 9.  buried  him  in  the  field  of  Ephron  the  H.
26.  34.  daughter  of  $eri  the  II.  Elon  the  II.  36.  2.
49.  30.  Abraham  bought  of  Ephron  the  II.  50. 13.
Exod.  23.  28.  I  will  drive  out  the  H.  33.2.  1  34.  11.
Josh.  9.  1.  the  II.  and  Amorite  gathered,  11.  3.'

1  Sam.  26.  6.  David  said  to  Ahimelech  the  II.

2  Sam.  11.  6.  David  said,  send  me  Uriah  the  H.

21.  thy  servant  Uriah  the  II.  is  dead  also,  24.

12.  9.  thou  hast  killed  Uriah  the  II.  with  sword

10.  taken  the  wife  of  Uriah  the  II.  to  be  thy  wife

23.  39.  Uriah  the  II.  thirty-seven  worthies  in  all
1  Kings  15.  5.  save  only  in  matter  of  Uriah  the  H.
Ezek.  16.  3.  and  thy  mother  an  II.  45.

HITTU’ES.

Gen.  15.  20.  seed  have  I  given  land  of  II.  Josh.  1.4.
Exod.  3.  8.  Canaanites,  H.  Amorites,  17.  I  1.3.  5.  i

23.  23.  Deut.1.  1. 1  20. 17.  Josh.  3.  10.  1  12.  8. 1

24.  11.  Judg.  3.  5.  1  Kings  9.  20.  Neh.  9.  8.
Judg.  1.  26.  the  man  went  into  the  land  of  the  II.

3.  5.  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the  H.

1  Kings  11.  1.  but  Solomon  loved  women  of  the  II.

2  Kings  7.  6.  Israel  hired  the  kings  of  the  II .

2  Chron.  8.  7-  of  H.  left  Solomon  made  pay  tribute
Ezra  9.  1.  done  after  the  abominations  of  the  H.
HIVTTE,  much  in  Hittite.

IIOBAB.

Num.  10.  29.  Moses  said  to  II.  come  thou  with  us
Judg.  4.  11.  Heber  was  of  the  children  of  11.

HOP  HN I.

1  Sam.  1.  3.  two  sons  of  Eli,  II.  and  Phinehas,  4.  4.
2.31.  H.  and  Phinehas  shall  both  die  in  one  day

4.  11.  Eli’s  sons  11.  and  Phinehas  were  slain,  17.

HOR.  See  Mount.

IIOREB.

Exod.  3.  1.  Moses  led  the  flock  and  came  to  the
mountain  of  God,  even  to  II.  1  Kings  19.  8.

17.  6.  I  will  stand  before  thee  on  the  rock  in  II.

33.  6.  Israel  stripped  of  ornaments  by'  mount  II.
Deut.  1.  6.  the  Lord  spake  to  us  in  II.  4.  15.

4.  10.  when  thou  stoodest  before  the  Lord  in  IT.

5.  2.  the  Lord  made  a  covenant  with  us  in  11.29.  1.

9.  8.  also  in  II.  ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath

18.  16.  all  thou  desiredst  of  the  Lord  in  H.

1  Kings  8.  9.  nothing  in  the  ark  save  the  two  tables
which  Moses  put  in  the  ark  at  II.  2  Chron.  5.  10.
Psal.  106.19.  they  made  a  calf  in  II.  and  worshipped
Mai.  4.  4.  which  1  commanded  unto  Moses  in  II.
HO  R-H  AG  IDG  AD.

Num.  33.  32.  encamped  at  II.  II  33.  went  from  II.
HORMAH.

Num.  14.45.  the  Canaanites  discomfited  them  to  II.
21.  3.  and  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  H.

Deut.  1.  44.  and  destroyed  you  in  Seireven  to  II.
Josh.  15.  30.  the  cities  of  Judah,  Eltolad,  H.

19-4.  Simeon  had  out  of  Judah,  Bethul,  II.

Judg.  1.  17.  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  II.

1  Sam.  30.  30.  a  present  to  them  that  were  in  II.

1  Chron.  4.  30.  Shimei’s  sons  dwelt  at  H.  at  Ziklag

HO RON AIM.

Isa.  15.  5.  in  the  way  of  II.  they  shall  raise  a  cry
Jer.  48.  3.  a  voice  of  crying  shall  be  from  II.

5.  in  going  down  of  II.  the  enemies  heard  a  cry

34.  from  Z oar  to  II.  they  uttered  their  voice

HORONITE.  See  San ballat.
HOSHEA.

Deut.  32.  44.  he  and  II.  son  of  Nun  spake  to  people

2  Kings  15.  30.  II.  made  a  conspiracy  against  Pekah
17.  1.  H.  son  of  Elah  began  to  reign  in  Sanyaria

3.  H.  became  the  king  of  Assyria’s  servant

6.  in  the  ninth  year  of  II.  Samaria  taken,  18. 10.

1  Chron.  27.  20.  the  ruler  of  Ephraim  was  H.

Neh.  10.  2.3.  II.  and  Ilananiah  sealed  the  covenant

600


II  UR.

Exod.  17. 10.  Moses,  Aaron,  II.  went  up  to  top  of  h.

12.  and  Aaron  and  II.  stayed  up  his  hands
24. 14.  behold,  Aaron  and  11.  are  with  you
31.2.  Lord  hath  called  Bezaleel,  the  son  of  Uri,
son  of  II.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  35.  30.  I  .38.  22.
Num.  31.  8.  they  slew  Evi,  Rekcm,  Zur,  II.  and
Reba,  five  kin*ts  of  Midian,  Josh.  13.  21.
1  Kings  4.8.  the  son  of  H.  in  mount  Ephraim

1  Chron.  2.  19.  Caleb  took  Ephratah,  which  bare  H.
20.  II.  begat  Uri  ||  4.  1 .  sons  of  J  udali,  II.  Shobal
50.  these  were  the  sons  of  Caleb  the  son  of  II.

4.  4.  these  are  the  sons  of  II.  Ephratah,  Ashur
Neh.  3.  9.  Rephaiah  son  of  H.  repaired  nexttothem
II  USUAL

2  Sam.  15.  32.  II.  the  Archite  came  to  meet  David
.37.  so  II.  David’s  friend  came  into  the  city

16.  16.  II.  came  to  Absalom  and  said,  G.  save  king
17.  said  to  II.  is  this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend  ?

17.  5.  call  II.  H  8.  for. said  II.  thou  knowest  thy  fath.

14.  the  counsel  of  H.  is  better  than  of  Ahithophel

15.  then  said  II.  to  Zadok  and  to  Abiathar

1  Kings  4.  16.  Baauah  the  son  of  II.  was  in  Ashur
1  Chron.  HI.  3.3.  and  II.  was  the  king’s  companion
HUZZAB.

Nah.  2. 7.  II.  shall  be  led  away  rapt,  be  brought  up
HYMEN  E US.

1  Tim.  1.20.  of  whom  is  II.  and  Alexander

2  Tim.  2.  17.  of  whom  is  II.  and  Philetus

J.

JAAZANIAH.

2  Kings  25.  23.  J.  came  to  Gedaliah.  to  Mizpeh
Jer.  35.  3.  J.  of  the  house  of  the  ltechabites
Ezek.  8.  11.  J .  stood  with  his  censer  in  his  hand

11.  1.  J.  and  Pelatiah  princes  of  the  people
JABAE.

Gen.  4. 20.  J.  was  the  father  of  such  as  dwell  in  tents
JABBOK.

Gen.  32.  22.  and  Jacob  passed  over  the  ford  J.
Dent.  2.  37.  thou  earnest  not  to  any  place  of  river  J.

3.  16.  I  gave  to  Reuben  and  Gad  the  border  to  J.
Josh.  12.  2.  Sihon  ruled  from  Gilead  to  the  river  J .
JABEStl.

1  Sam.  11. 5.  they  told  Saul  the  tidings  of  men  of  J.

9.  shewed  to  the  men  of  J.  and  they  were  glad
31.  12.  came  to  J.  and  burned  the  body  of  Saul

1".  they  buried  their  bones  at  J.  1  Chron.  10.  12.

2  Kings  15.  10.  Shallum  the  son  of  J.  conspired

1.3.  Shallum  the  son  of  J.  began  to  reign
14.  Menahem  smote  Shallum  the  son  of  J.

JAB  ESII-G1  LEAD.

Judg.  21.  8.  there  came  none  to  the  camp  from  J.

10.  saying,  go  and  smite  the  inhabitants  of  J.

12.  they  found  400  young  virgins  of  J .  not  known
14.  gave  Benjamites  wives  of  women  of  J.

1  Sam.  11 . 1.  N  abash  came  and  encamped  against  J.
31.  11.  the  inhabitants  of  J.  heard  what  the  Philis¬
tines  had  done  to  Saul,  1  Chron.  10.  12.

2  Sam.  2.  4.  men  of  J.  were  they  that  buried  Saul
21.  12.  David  took  bones  of  Saul  from  men  of  J.

JABEZ.

1  Chron.  2.55.  the  families  of  scribes  whodweltat  J.
JABEZ.

1  Chron.  4.  9.  J.  was  more  honourable  than  his  bre¬
thren,  and  his  mother  called  his  name  J.
10.  J.  called  on  God  of  Israel,  saying,  O  bless  me
J  AB1N.

Josh.  11.1.  when  J.  king  of  Ilazor  heard  these  things
Judg.  4.  2.  the  Lord  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  J .

17.  was  peace  between  J.  and  the  house  of  Heber

2.3.  God  subdued  that  day,  J.  king  of  Canaan

24.  the  hand  of  Israel  prevailed  against  J.

Psal.  83.  9.  do  to  them  as  unto  J.  at  brook  Kison
JACII1N.

1  Kings  7.  21.  he  set  up  pillars  in  temple,  lie  called
the  pillar  on  the  right  hand  J .  2  Chron.  3. 17.
JACOB.

Gen.  25.  26.  he  was  called  J.  ||27.  J.  was  a  plain  man

29.  J.  sod  pottage  ||  34.  J.  gave  Esau  pottage
27  .  22.  the  voice  is  J.  |l  30.  .1 .  was  scarce  gone  out

36.  Esau  said,  is  not  he  rightly  named  J.

41.  Esau  hated  J .  ||  46.  if  J .  take  a  wife  of  Heth

28.  5.  Isaac  sent  away  J.  ||  7-  J.  obeyed  his  father

16.  J.  awaked  out  of  sleep  ||  20.  J .  vowed  a  vow

29.  10.  J.  saw  Rachel  the  daughter  of  Laban
20.  and  J.  served  seven  years  for  Rachel
28.  and  J.  did  so,  and  fulfilled  her  week

30.  16.  J.  came  out  of  the  field  in  the  evening
.37.  and  J.  took  him  rods  of  green  poplar

42.  the  feebler  were  Laban’s,  the  stronger  J.

31.  1.  J.  hath  taken  all  that  was  our  father’s

20.  J.  stole  away  unawares  to  Laban  the  Syrian

5.3.  J.  sware  by  the  fear  of  his  lather  Isaac

32.  .3.  J.  sent  messengers  before  him  to  Esau

4.  J.  saith  thus  1]  7.  then  J.  was  greatly  afraid

18.  then  thou  shalt  say,  they  be  thy  servant  J.
24.  J.  was  left  alone,  and  there  wrestled  a  man

28.  thy  name  shall  be  no  more  J.  but  Isr.  35.  10.

30.  J.  called  the  name  of  the  place  Peniel

3.3.  1.  J.  looked,  and  behold,  Esau  came

17.  J-  journeyed  to  Succoth  ||  18.  to  Shalem

34.5.  J.  held  his  peace  until  they  were  come

7.  sons  ofj.  13, 25. 1  .35.26.  |  49. 1,2. 1  Kings  18.31.

35.6.  J.  came  to  Luz||  15.  J.  called  the  place  Beth-el
37-  2.  these  are  the  generations  of  J.

.34.  J.  rent  his  clothes,  put  sackcloth  on  his  loins

45.  26.  J.  heart  fainted,  for  he  believed  not

46.  6.  J.  and  all  his  seed  came  into  Egypt

26.  all  the  souls  that  came  with  J .  were  sixty  six

47.  10.  J.  blessed  Pharaoh  H  28.  the  whole  age  of  J.
49. 24.  by  hands  of  the  mighty  God  of  J .  Exod.  .3. 6,

15,  16.  I  4.  5.  2  Sam.  2.3.  1.  Psal.  20.  1.
Exod.  2.24.  rememb.  his  covenant  with  J .  Leu. 26. 42.
Num.  2.3.  7.  come’,  curse  me  J.  and  defy  Israel
10.  who  can  count  dust  of  J .  and  number  of  Israel
23.  there  is  no  enchantment  against  J.  it  shall  be
said  of  J.  and  Israel,  what  hath  God  wrought
24. 17.  there  shall  come  a  star  out  of  .1 .  and  sceptre

19.  out  of  J.  come  he  that  snail  have  dominion


Deut.  .32.  9.  J.  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance

33.  10.  they  shall  teach  J.  thy  judgments  and  Isr.
28.  fountain  of  J.  shall  be  on  land  of  corn,  wine
1  Chron.  16.  13.  O  ye  seed  of  Israel  his  servant,  ye
children  of  J.  his  chosen,  Psal.  105.6.
Psal.  14.  7-  J.  shall  rejoice,  Isr.  shall  be  glad,  53.  6.

20.  I.  the  name  of  the  God  of  J.  defend  thee

22.  23.  all  ye  seed  of  J .  glorify  him  and  fear  hint

44.4.  my  king,  O  G.  command  deliverances  torj.

46.7.  tiie  god  of  J .  11.175.  9.176.  6.181.  1,4.1

81.  8.  1  94.  7-  I  114.7-  I  132.  2,  5.  1  146.  5.

47. 4.  the  excellency  of  J.  whom  he  loved,  Nah.  2.2.

78.  21.  afire  was  kindled  J.  anger  against  Isr.
71.  he  brought  him  to  feed  .1.  his  people

79.  7-  for  they  have  devoured  J.  and  laid  waste
85.  1.  thou  hast  brought  back  the  captivity  of  J.
87.2.  gates  of  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  J.
105.  23.  and  J.  sojourned  in  the  land  of  Ham
135.  4.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  J .  unto  himself

Isa.  2.  3.  the  God  of  J .  41 . 21.  Mic.  4. 2.  Mat.  22.  32
Mark  12.  26.  Luke  20.  37.  Acts  3.  13.
I  7.  32,  46.

10.  21.  the  remnant  of  J.  shall  return  to  God
14.  1.  for  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  J.

17. 4.  in  that  day  the  glory  of  J .  shall  be  made  thin
27.6.  shall  cause  them  thatcomeof  J.  to  take  root

9.  by  this  shall  the  iniquity  of  J.  be  purged
29.23.  they  shall  sanctity  the  holy  One  of  J.

41. 8.  J.  whom  I  have  chosen,  the  seed  of  Abraham
14.  fear  not,  thou  worm  J.  and  ye  men  of  Israel

42.  24.  who  gave  J.  for  aspoil  ?  did  not  the  Lord  ?

43.  28.  therefore  I  have  given  J .  to  the  curse

44.  5.  another  shall  call  himself  by  the  name  of  J.

23.  for  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  J.  Jer.  .31.  11.

45.  4.  for  J.  my  servant’s  sake,  I  called  thee

48.  20.  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  his  servant  J.

49.  5.  that  formed  me  to  bring  J.  again  to  him

6.  be  my  servant  to  raise  up  the  tribes  of  J.

26.  thy  Redeemer,  the  mighty  One  of  J.  60.  16.
58.  14.  I  will  feed  thee  with  the  heritage  of  J.

65.9.  I  will  bring  forth  a  seed  out  of  J .  and  Judah
Jer.  10.  16.  the  portion  of  J.  not  like  them,  51.  19.

25.  for  they  have  eaten  up  J.  and  devoured  him

30.  7-  it  is  even  the  time  of  J.  trouble,  be  saved

10.  therefore  fear  thou  not,  O  my  servant  .1.

18.  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity  of  J.  tents

31.  7.  saith  the  Lord,  sing  with  gladness  for  J.

3.3.  26.  then  will  I  cast  away'  the  seed  of  J.

46.  27.  J.  shall  return  to  be  in  rest  and  ease
Lam.  1.  17.  Lord  hath  commanded  concerning  J.

2.  3.  he  burned  against  J.  like  a  flaming  fire
IIos.  10. 11.  Jud. shall  plow,  J. shall  break  hisclods
12.  2.  I  will  punish  J.  ||  12.  J.  fled  into  Syria
Amos  6.  8.  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  J.  and  hate

7.  2.  by  whom  shall  J.  arise,  for  he  is  small  r  5.

8.  7.  the  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  excellency  of  J
Mic.  1.  5.  for  the  transgression  of  J.  is  all  this

.3.  1.  and  I  said  ,  hear,  I  pray  you,  O  heads  of  J.

5.  8.  remnant  of  J.  shall  be  among  the  Gentiles
Mai.  1.  2.  was  not  Esau  J.  brother  ?  yet  1  loved  J.
.3.  6.  therefore,  ye  sons  of  J.  are  not  consumed
Mat.  1.  2.  Isaac  begat  J.  ||  15.  Matthan  begat  J.

8.  11.  sh Al  1  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  J.
Luke  1.3.  28.  when  ye  see  J.  in  the  kingdom  of  God
John  4.6.  now  J.well  was  there,  Jesus  sat  on  the  well
Acts  7.  14.  Joseph  called  his  father  J.  to  him
Rom.  9.  13.  J.  have  I  loved,  but  Esau  have  1  hated

11.  26.  and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  J.
Heh.  11.9.  Abraham  dwelling  in  tabernacles  with  J.

20,  by  faith  Isaac  blessed  J.  H  21.  J.  blessed  sons

See  House.

In  JACOB.

Gen.  49.7.  I  will  divide  them  in  J.  and  scatter  then
Num.  23.  21.  he  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  J.
Psal.  59.  13.  let  them  know  that  God  ruleth  in  J.
78.  5.  for  he  established  a  testimony  in  J .  and  a  law
99.  4.  thou  executest  judgment  and  righteous,  in  J.
Isa.  59.20.  to  them  that  turn  from  transgression  in  J.
O  JACOB.

Num.  24.  5.  howr  goodly  are  thy  tents,  O  J. !

Psal.  24.  6.  the  generation  that  seek  thy  face,  O  J.
Isa.  40.  27.  why  sayest  thou,  U  J.  my  way  is  hid  ?

4.3.  1.  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  (J  J.

22.  but  thou  hast  not  called  upon  me,  O  J.

44. 1.  yet  hear,  O  J.  ||  48. 12.  hearken  unto  me,  O  J,
2.  fear  not,  O  J.  my  servant,  Jer.  46.  27,  28.

21.  remember  these,  O  J .  for  thou  art  my  servant
Mic.  2. 12.  I  will  surely  assemble,  O  J.  all  of  thee

To  or  unto  JACOB.

Gen.  .31. 24.  speak  not  to  J.  either  good  or  bad,  29.

35.  9.  God  appeared  unto  J.  and  blessed  him

50.  24.  the  land  which  he  sware  to  give  to  J.  Exod

6.  8. 1  .33.  1.  Num.  32.  11.  Deut.  6.  10.  !  29

1.3.  I  .30.  20.  1  .34  .  4.  Ezek.  37.  25.

1  Chr.  16.  17.  and  hath  confirmed  the  same  to  J.  fo>
a  law,  and  to  Israel  for  a  covenant,  Ps.  105.  10.
Psal.  147-19.  he  shewed  his  word  unto  J.  his  statutes
Isa.  9.  8.  the  Lord  sent  a  word  unto  J.  it  lighted  on
Mic.  3.  8.  to  declare  unto  J .  his  transgression  and  Is.
7. 20.  wilt  perforin  truth  to  J .  and  mercy  to  Abrah.
JAEL.

Judg.  4.  17.  Sisera  Bed  away  to  the  tent  of  J.

21.  J.  took  a  nailof  the  tent  and  an  hammer

22.  J.  came  out  to  meet  Barak,  and  said

5.  6.  in  daysof  J.  the  high-ways  were  unoccupied

24.  blessed  above  women  shall  J.  wife  of  Heber  be

JAIL

Psal.  68.  4.  extol  him  by  his  name  J.  and  rejoice
JAIIAZ.

Num.  21.  23.  Sihon  gathered  his  people  and  came
and  fought  at  .1.  Deut.  2.  32.  Judg.  11.  20.
Isa.  15.  4.  their  voice  shall  be  heard  even  to  J.

Jer.  48.  34.  to  J.  have  they  uttered  their  voice
JAI1AZAII.

Josh.  21.  36.  out  of  Reuben  J.  given  to  the  Levites
Jer.  48.  2,1.  judgment  is  come  upon  Ilolon  and  J.

1  JA1R.

Num.  .32.  41.  J.  took  the  small  towns,  Deut.  3.  14.
Judg.  10.  3.  J.  the  Gileadite  judged  Israel  22yearj
5.  J.  died  ||  1  Chron.  2.  22.  Segub  begat  J.

1  Chron.  20.  5.  Elhanau  the  son  of  J.  slew  t.ahmi
Esth.  2.  5.  Mordecai  the  son  of  J.  a  Benjaimte


JEH


1  E  P


J  £  [Proper  Names.


J  A  III  US.

Marl  5  22.  J.  a  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  Lute  8.  41.
JAKEH,  -See  Agur.

JAMB  RES.

2  Tim.  3.  8.  as  Jamies  and  J.  withstood  Moses
JAMES.

Mat.  4.21.  saw  two  brethren  J.  and  John,  Mart  1.19.

10.  2.  J.  the  son  of  Zebedee,  Mart  3.  1".

3.  J.  the  son  of  Alpheus.  Mart  3.  18.  /lets  1.  13.

13.  55.  and  his  brethren  J.  and  Joses,  Mart  6.  3.
17-  1.  after  six  days  Jesus  taketh  Peter,  J.  and
John,  Mart  5.  37.  1  9.  2.  1  14.  .3.3.  Lute  8.  51.
27-  56.  Mary  Magdalene  and  Mary  mother  of  J.

and  Joses,  Mart  15.  40.  I  16.  1.  Lute  24.  10.
Mart  10.  41.  began  to  be  much  displeased  with  J.

13.  3.  Peter,  J.  and  John  asked  him  privately
Lute  5.  10.  J.  was  astonished  at  draught  of  fishes
Acts  1.  13.  where  abode  both  Peter,  J.  and  John

12.  2.  Hercd  killed  J.  V<rother  of  John  with  sword

17.  Peter  said,  shew  these  things  to  I.  and  brethren

15.  13.  I.  answered,  saying,  hearken  unto  me

21.  18.  Paul  went  in  with  us  unto  J.  and  elders

1  Cor.  15.  7-  after  that  was  seen  of  J.  then  of  apostles
Gal.  1.  19.  I  saw  none,  save  J.  the  Third's  brother
2.  9.  when  1.  perceived  the  grace  given  to  me
12.  before  certain  came  from  J.  did  eat  with  (lent.
JAN1M  A.

Lute  3.  24.  Melchi  who  was  the  son  of  J.  who  was
J  A  N  N  ES.  See  JAMBK,  ES.

JAPIIEI II.

Gen.  5.  32.  Shetn,  Ham,  J.  the  sons  of  Noah,  6.  10.

I  7.  13. 1  9.  18.  1  Chron.  1.  4.

9.  23.  Shem  and  J.  took  a  garment  and  covered

27.  God  shall  enlarge  J.  he  shall  dwell  in  tents

10.  1.  unto  J.  were  sons  born,  2.  1  Chron.  1. 5.

21.  Shem  father  of  Eber,  brother  of  J.  the  elder

JAREB.

Has.  5.  1.3.  then  Ephraim  saw,  and  sent  to  king  .T.

10.  6.  shall  be  carried  for  a  present  to  king  J.
JARED.

Gen.  5.  15.  Mahaleel  begat  J.  Lute  3.  37.
JASHER.

Josh.  10. 13.  written  in  the  book  of  J.  2  Sam.  1.  18
JASON.

Acts  17-  5.  the  Jews  assaulted  the  house  of  J.

6.  they  drew  J.  ||  7.  whom  J.  hath  received
9.  and  when  they  had  taken  security  of  J.

Rom.  16.  21.  Lucius,  J.  and  Sosipater  salute  you
JAVAN.

Gen.  10.  2.  sons  of  Japheth,  J .  Tubal,  1  Chron.  1.5.
Isa.  66  19.  I  will  send  those  that  esc  ape  to  J.
Ezet.  27-  13.  J.  and  Tubal  were  thy  merchants,  19.
JAZER.

Nnm.  32.  1.  they  saw  J.  was  a  land  for  cattle,  3.
Isa.  16.  8.  they  are  come  even  unto  J.  they  wandered
9. 1  will  bewail  with  weeping  of  J.  vineof  Sibmah
IB  11 A  R.

S  Sam.  5.  15.  David’s  son  I.  1  Chron.  3.  6.  I  14  5
I C II A  BOD.

1  Sam.  4.  21.  she  named  the  child  T.  glory  departed

14.  3.  Ahiah  the  son  of  Ahitub,  I.  brother

ICONIUM.

Acts  13.  51.  Paul  and  Barnabas  came  unto  I.

14.  1.  in  I.  they  went  both  into  the'synagogue

19.  there  came  thither  certain  Jews  from  I.

16.  2.  well  reported  of  by  the  brethren  at  I.

fc  Tim.  3.  11.  afflictions  which  came  to  me  at  I.

ID  DO.

1  Kings  A.  14.  Ahinadab  son  of  I.  had  Mahanaim

J  1  Chron.  6.  21.  of  Gershom,  Joash  his  son,  [.his  son

27.  21.  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  I.  was  ruler

2  Ckr.  9-  29.  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Solomon  written

j  in  the  visions  of  l.  the  seer,  12.  15.  I  13.  22.

,  Ezra  5.  1.  Zech.  son  of  T.  prophesied,  Zech.  I.  1,7.

6.  14.  through  prophesying  of  Zechariah  son  of  L

8.  17.  I  sent  them  to  I.  the  chief,  and  told  them
what  they  should  say  to  I.  and  his  brethren
Kelt.  12.  4.  I.  with  priests  went  up  with  Zerubbabel
IDUMEA.

Isa.  34.  5.  my  sword  shall  come  down  on  I.  6.

;  Ezet.  35.  15.  and  ah  1.  shall  be  desolate

36.  5.  in  jealousy  have  I  spoken  against  all  I.
Mart  3.  8.  a  multitude  followed  him  from  I.
JEBUSITE.

Gen.  10.  16.  Canaan  begat  the  J.  1  Chro?i.  1.  14.
Exod.  33.  2.  I  will  drive  out  the  J.  34.  11.

2  Sam.  24.  16.  angel  of  Lord  was  by  the  threshing-
place  of  Araunah  the  J.  18.  1  Chron.  21 .  15.
Zech.  9.  7.  a  governor  in  Judah,  and  Ekron  as  a  J.
JEBU  SITES.

Num.  13.  29.  the  J.  dwell  in  the  mountains
Josh.  15.  63.  the  J.  dwell  with  the  children  of  Judah
Judg.  1.  21.  drive  the  J.  that  inhabited  Jerusalem

19.  11.  let  us  turn  into  this  city  of  the  J.  and  dwell
2  Sam.  5.  8.  whoso  getteth  up  and  smiteth  the  J.
See  Hittites.

JECONIAH.

1  Chron.  3.  16.  the  sons  of  Jehoiakim,  J.  Zedekiah

17.  the  sons  of  J.  Assir  and  Salathiel

Jer.  24.  1.  had  carried  away  captive  J.  27-  20.

28.  4.  I  will  bring  again  to  this  place  J.  the  son  of

JEDIDIA II.

2  Sam.  12.  25.  the  Lord  called  Solomon  J.

JED  UITl  UN.

1  Chron.  16.  41 .  Heman  and  J .  to  give  thanks  to  L.
42.  the  sons  of  J.  25.  3.  2  Chron.  29.  14.

25. 6.  according  to  the  king’s  order  to  I .  and  Heman
J  EG  A  R-S  A  H  A  D  UTH  A .

Gen.  31.  47.  Laban  called  the  heap  J.  but  Jacob
JEIIOAHAZ,  called  AlIAZIAII.

2  Kings  10.  .35.  J.  son  of  Jehu  reigned  in  his  stead

13.  1.  J.  son  of  Jehu  began  to  reign  over  Israel

23.  30.  the  people  of  the  land  took  J.  the  son  of

Josiah,  and  anointed  him,  2  Chron.  36.  1.

34.  Pharaoh-necho  took  J.  away,  2  Chron.  .36.  4.
2  Chron.  21.  17-  left  Jehoram  never  a  son  save  J.

*  _  JEHOASH,  or  JOASH.

2  Kings  1 1 .21  .J .  seven  years  old  when  began  to  reign
12.  2.  J.  did  what  was  right  in  sight  of  the  I  onl

18.  J  .  sent  all  the  hallowed  things  to  Ilazael

20.  his  servant  slew  J.  in  the.  house  of  Millo

15.  10.  J.  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  began  to  reign


2  Kings  14.8.  then  Amaziah  sent  messengers  to  J.

16.  J.  slept  with  his  fathers  and  was  buried

J  EIIOI ACII  IN.

2  Kings  24.  8.  J.  was  18  years  old  when  he  began
12.  J.  king  of  Judah  went  out  to  king  of  Babylon

25.  27.  did  lift  up  the  head  of  J.  Jer.  52.  31.

2  Chr.  .36.  9.  J.  was  eight  years  old  when  he  began
J  EIIOI  A  DA.

2  Sam.  8. 18.  Benaiah  the  sou  of  J .  20.  2.3.  I  23.  20,

22.  1  Chron.  11.  22,  24.  |  18.  17.

1  Kings  1.  44.  sent  with  Solomon  Benaiah  son  of  J.

4.  4.  Benaiah  the  son  of  J.  was  over  the  host

2  Kings  11.  17.  J.  made  a  covenant,  2  Chr.  23.  16.
12.  2.  wherein  J.  the  priest  instructed  him

1  Chron.  12.  27.  J.  was  leader  of  the  Aaronites

27.  34.  after  Ahithophel  was  J.  a  counsellor

2  Chron.  24.  2.  Joash  did  right  all  the  days  of  J.

17.  after  the  death  of  J.  came  the  princes  of  Judah

22.  Joash  remembered  not  the  kindness  J  .had  done
25.  for  the  blood  of  the  sons  of  J.  the  priest

Neh.  .3.  6.  the  old  gate  repaired  J.  son  of  Paseah
Jer.  29.  26.  hath  made  thee  priest  instead  of  J.
JEHOIAKIM.

2  Kings  2.3.  .34.  turned  his  name  to  J.  2  Chr.  .36.  4.
.35.  J.  gave  the  silver  and  gold  to  Pharaoh

24.  1.  J.  became  his  servant  three  years
Jer.  22.  18.  thus  saitli  the  Lord  concerning  J.

26.  22.  J.sent.  men  after  Urijah  into  Egypt
36.  28.  the  roll  which  J.the  king  hath  burnt

.30.  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  J.  king  of  Judah
52.  2.  Zedekiah  did  what  was  evil  as  J.  had  done
Dan.  1.  2.  and  the  Lord  gave  J.  into  his  hand
JEIIONADAB.

2  Kings  10.  15.  he  lighted  on  J.  the  son  of  Rechab

23.  Jehu  and  J.  went  into  the  house  of  Baal

JEHORAM.

1  K  ings  22.  50.  J.  son  of  Jehoshaphat,  2  Kings8. 16.

2  K  ings  l.  17.  J.the  son  of  Ahab  reigned  over  Israel
2  Chron.  17.  8.  he  sent  Elishama  and  J.  priests

21.9.  J.  went  forth  and  smote  the  Edomites

16.  the  Lord  stirred  up  against  J.  the  Philistines
22.5.  he  went  with  J.  to  war  against  Ilazael

7.  Ahaziah  went  out  with  J.  against  Jehu
JEHOSHAPHAT.

2  Sam.  8.  16.  J.  the  son  of  Ahilud  was  recorder,  20.

24.  1  Kings  4.  .3.  1  Chron.  18.  15.

1  Kings  4.  17.  J-  son  of  Paruah  was  in  Tssachar

15.  24.  J.  the  son  of  Asa  reigned,  2  Chron.  17.  1.
22.  2.  J.  came  down  to  Ahab  king  of  Israel

10.  Ahab  and  J  .sat  each  on  his  throne,  2  Chr.  18. 9.

29.  J.  went  up  to  Ramoth-Gilead,  2  Chron.  18.28.
.32.  J.  cried  out  ||50.  J.  slept  with  his  fathers
49.  let  my  servants  go,  but  J.  would  not

2  Kings'?).  14.  were  it  not  that  I  regard  presence  of  J.

9.  2.  look  out  there  Jehu  the  son  of  J.  and  go  in

1  Chron.  15.  24.  J.  blew  with  the  trumpet  before  ark

2  Chron.  17.  .3.  Lord  was  with  J.  because  he  walked

10.  so  that  the.}’  made  no  war  against  J.

12.  J.  waxed  great  exceedingly  and  built  castles

18.  1.  J.  had  riches  and  honour  in  abundance

20.  3.  .1.  feared  and  set  himself  to  seek  the  Lord

27.  they  returned  and  J.  in  the  fore-front  of  them

35.  after  this  did  J .  join  with  Ahaziah  king  of  Isr.
37.  then  Eiiezer  prophesied  against  J.  because

21.  12.  thou  hast  not  walked  in  the  ways  ofj.

22.  9.  because,  said  they,  he  is  the  son  of  J.

Joel  3.  2.  bring  them  down  to  the  valley  of  J.

12.  let  the  heathen  come  up  to  the  valley  of  J.
JEHOSHUA.

Num.  1.3.  16.  Moses  called  Oshea;  son  of  Nun,  J.

1  Chron.  7.  27.  Non  his  son,  J.  Ins  son
JEHOVAH.

Exod.  6.  .3.  by  my  name  J .  was  I  not  known  to  them
Rsal.  8.3.  18.  that  thou  whose  name  alone  is  J.

Isa.  12.  2.  the  Lord  J .  is  my  strength  and  song
26.  4.  for  in  the  Lord  J.  is  everlasting  strength
JEHOVAH  .11  REII.

Gen.  22.14.  Abraham  called  the  name  of  the  place  J .
JEHOVAH-NISSI.

Exod.  17.  15.  Moses  cal  led  the  name  of  the  altar  J.

JEHOVAH-SHALOM.

Judg.  6.  24.  Gideon  built  and  called  the  altar  J.

JEHOVAH-SIIAMMAII.

Ezet.  48.  t  35.  the  name  of  the  city  shall  be  J.

J  EHOVAH-TSI PKEN  U.

Jer.  2.3.  t  6.  this  is  his  name,  J  .  .33. 1 16.

JEHU.

1  Kings  16.1.  word  came  to  ,T.  son  of  Ilanani,  7, 12.

19.  16.  J .  son  of  N  imshi  slialt  thou  anoint  king
17-  shall  J.  slay  ;  that  escapeth  the  sword  of  J.

2  Kings  9.  2.  look  out  there  J.  ||  13.  J.  is  king

14.  J .  son  of  N  imshi  conspired  against  Joram

17.  a  watchman  spied  company  of  J.  as  he  came

20.  the  driving  is  like  the  driving  of  J.  son  of

24.  J.  drew  a  bow  with  his  full  strength,  smote

10.  11.  J.  slew  all  that  remained  of  house  of  Ahab

18.  Ahab  served  Baal,  J.  shall  serve  Baal  much
29.  J.  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam
.31.  J.  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the  law  of  God

15.  12.  this  was  the  word  which  he  spake  to  J.

1  Chron.  2.  .38.  Obed  begat  J.  and  J.  begat  Azariah
4.  .35.  J.  son  of  Josihiah  ||  12.  3.  J.  son  of  Azmaveth

2  Chron.  19.  2.  J.  went  out  to  meet  Jehoshaphat

20.  .34.  written  in  the  book  of  J.  son  of  Hanani
22.  8.  J.  was  executing  judgment  on  Ahab

Hos.  1.  4.  I  will  avense  the  blood  of  Jezreel  on  J.

JF.PfTTHAH.

Judg.  11.  1.  now  J.the  Gileadite  was  a  mighty  man
_  of  valour,  and  Gilead  begat  J  .
.3.  J.  fled  from  his  brethren,  and  dwelt  in  'I  ob

11.  J.  uttered  all  his  words  before  the  I.ord

28.  the  king  hearkened  not  to  words  of  J.

29.  the  Spirit  came  on  J.  ||  .30.  J.  vowed  a  vow
40.  wentyearly  to  lament  the  daughter  of  J.

12.7-  J.  judged  Israel  six  years,  then  died  .7.

I  Sam.  12.  11.  the  Lord  sent. I.  and  delivered  you
Ileb.  11.32.  for  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  J .

J  EPHUNNEH.

Num.  1.3.  6.  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  Caleb  the

son  of  J.

1  Chron.  7.  38.  the  sons  of  Jether  J.  and  Pispah
See  Caleb.


JERAHMEF.L.

1  Chron.  2.  9.  the  sons  of  Hezron,  J.  and  Ram
.33.  the  sons  of  J.||  24.  29.  J.  the  ton  of  Kish

Jer.  .36.  26.  the  king  commanded  J.  to  take  Baruch
JER EMI  AIL

2  Kings  23.  31.  his  mother’s  name  was  Hamutal,

thedaughter  of  J.  of  Libnah,  24.  18.  Jer.  52. 1.

1  Chron.  5.  24.  J.  a  mighty  man,  12.  4,  10,  13.

2  Chron.  35.  25.  and  J.  lamented  for  Josiah

.36.  12.  Zedekiah  humbled  not  himself  before  J.

21.  to  fulfil  the  word  of  the  [.ord  by  the  mouth  of
J.  till  land  enjoyed  her  sabbaths,  22.  Ezra  1,1.
Neh.  10.  2.  Azariah,  J.  sealed  the  covenant  ^

12. 1.  Seraiah,  .1.  went  up  with  Zerubbabel  \

12.  in  days  of  Joiakim,  of  J.  Hananiah  was  priest
34.  J.  and  Shemaiah  went  after  them  '

Jer.  1.  1.  the  words  of  J.  the  son  of  Hilkiah

7.  1.  the  word  that  came  to  J.  11.  1.  |  14.  1.  |  18.  t.J

18.  18.  come,  let  us  devise  devices  against  J.

20. 2.  Pashur  smote  J.  and  put  him  in  the  stocks
24.  3.  then  said  the  Lord,  what  seest  thou,  J. :

26.  9.  all  the  people  were  gathered  against  J.

24.  the  hand  of  Ahikam  was  with  J.  not  to  put

28.  10.  took  the  yoke  from  the  prophet  J.’s  neck

29.  27-  why  hast  thou  not  reproved  J.  of  Anathoth  '
.32. 2.  J.  was  shut  up  in  the  court  of  the  prison
34.  6.  J. spake  all  these  words  to  Zedekiah

35.3.  then  I  took  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  J.

36.  19.  the  princes  said,  go  hide  thee,  thou  and  J.
26.  Lord  hid  Baruch  the  scribe  and  J.  the  prophet

37.  4.  J.  came  in  and  wen,  out  among  the  people

14.  so  Irijah  took  J.  and  brought  him  to  princes

15.  wherefore  the  princes  were  wroth  with  J.

16.  when  J.  was  entered  into  the  dungeon

21.  to  commit  J.  into  the  court  of  the  prison

.38.  6.  then  they  cast  J.  into  the  dungeon

1.3.  drew  up  J.  with  cords  out  of  the  dungeon

16.  Zedekiah  the  kingsware  secretly  to  J.

.39. 1 1.  N ebuchadrezzar  gave  charge  concerning  J.
40.  6.  then  went  J.  to  Gedaliah  son  of  Ahikam
51 . 60.  so  J.  wrote  in  a  book  all  the  evil  on  Babylon
64.  thus  far  are  the  words  of  J.

Mat.  2.  17.  fulfilled  that  was  spoken  by  J.  27.  9.

16.  14.  others  say  thou  art  J.  or  one  of  prophets

JERICHO.

Josh.  2.  1.  go  view  J.  ||6.  I.  J.  was  straitly  shut  up
.3.  16.  the  people  passed  over  right  against  J.

6.2.  J^ord  said,  see,  I  have  given  into  thine  hand  J.
26.  cursed  be  the  man  that  buildeth  the  city  J.

7.  2.  Joshua  sent  men  from  J.  to  view  Ai

24.  11.  ye  came  to  J.  and  the  men  of  J.  fought

2  Sam.  10.5.  king  said,  tarry  at  J.  till  your  beards
be  grown,  and  then  return,  1  Chron.  19.5.

1  Kings  16.  34.  in  his  days  did  Hiel  build  J.

2  Kings  2.  4.  for  the  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  J.

25.  5.  the  army  of  Chaldees  pursued  and  overtook

him  in  the  plains  of  J.  Jer.  39.  5.  1  52.  8.

2  Chron.  28.  15.  they  brought  the  captives  to  J.
Lute  10.  .30.  a  certain  man  went  down  to  J .  and  fell
Ileb.  11.  .30.  by  faith  the  walls  of  J .  fell  down
JEROBOAM.

1  Kings  1 1 .  28.  J.  was  a  mighty  man  of  valour
40.  Solomon  sought  to  kill  J.  and  J.  fled

12. _2.  J.  dwelt  in  Egypt  j|  20.  J.  was  come  again

25.  J.  built  Shechem,  and  dwelt  therein
32.  J.  ordained  a  feast  in  the  eighth  month

1.3.  1.  J.  stood  by  the  altar  to  burn  incense

3.3.  after  this  J.  returned  not  from  his  evil  way
34.  this  thing  became  sin  to  the  house  of  J.

14.  1 .  at  that  time  Abijah  the  son  of  J.  fell  sick
6.  Ahijah  said,  come  in,  thou  wife  of  J.

10.  behold,  1  will  bring  evil  upon  the  bouse  of  J.

11.  him  that  dieth  of  J.  shall  the  dogs  eat

1.3.  for  he  only  of  J.  shall  come  to  the  grave
16.  because  of  the  sins  of  . I.  15.  .30.

30.  there  was  war  between  Rehoboam  and  J.

15.  29.  Baasha  left  not  to  J .  any  that  breathed

34.  Baasha  did  evil,  and  walked  in  the  way  of  J.

2  Kings  10.  .31.  |  13.  6.  I  14.  24.  1  17.  22.

2  K  ings  13.  1.3.  J.  son  of  Joash  sat  on  his  throne
14.27-  the  Lord  saved  Israel  by  the  hand  of  J.

17.  21.  J.  drave  Israel  from  following  the  Lord

1  Chr.  5.  17.  reckoned  by  genealogies  in  days  of  J

2  Chron.  11.  14.  J.  had  cast  off  the  Levites  from

13.  8.  golden  calf  which  J.  made  for  your  gods

15.  God  smote  J.  and  all  Israel  before  Abijah
20.  neither  did  J.  recover  strength  again  in  da,  s

Hos.  1.  1.  prophesied  in  the  days  of  J^  Amos  1.  1.
Amos  7-  9.  rise  against  house  of  J.  with  the  sword

11.  thus  Amos  saith,  J.  shall  die  by  the  sword
J  EROBOAM,  joined  with  Nebat.

1  Kings  11.  26.  J.  son  of  Nebat  lifted  up  his  hand

12.  15.  which  the  I.ord  spake  by  Ahijah  the  Shilo-

nite  to  J.  the  son  of  Nebat,  2  Chron.  10.  15.

16.  3.  I  vvill  make  thy  house  like  the  house  of  J.

the  son  of  Nebat,  21.  22.  |  2  Kings  9.  9.

26.  for  he  walked  in  all  the  way  of  J.  the  son  of

Nebat,  and  hissin,  .31.  |  22.  52.  2  Kings  3.  .3.

2  Kings  10. 29.  Jehu  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  J

son  of  Nebat,  13.  2,11.  |  14.24.  |  15.  9,  18,24,28

JERUBBAAL.

Judg.  6.  .32.  on  that  day  he  called  him  J.  saying

7.  1 .  then  J  .  (who  is  Gideon)  rose  up  early

8.  29.  and  J.  went  and  dwelt  in  his  own  nouse

35.  nor  shewed  they  kindness  to  the  house  of  J.

9.  2.  either  that  all  sons  of  J.  reign,  or  one  reign

5.  Abimelech  slew  his  brethren  the  sons  of  J.

16.  ifye  dealt  well  with  J.  )|  19.  if  sincerely  with  J.

28.  who  is  Abimelech  ?  is  not  he  the  son  of  J.  ?

1  Sam.  12.  11.  the  I.ord  sent  J.  and  delivered  you

JERUBBESIIETI1.

2  Sam.  11.21.  who  smote  Abimelech  the  son  of  J

J  ER  USA  LEM,  or  (1 1 1 ER  US  A  LEM.

Josh.  18.28.  Jebusi,  which  is  J.  Judg.  19.  10.

1  Sam.  17.  54.  David  brought  Goliath’s  head  to  J

2  Sam.  5.  6.  king  David  and  his  men  went  to  J.

8.  7.  David  brought  the  shields  of  gold  to  J.

12.  31.  so  David  and  all  the  people  returned  to  J
15.  8.  if  the  Lord  shall  brinsr  me  again  to  J.  then

29.  they  carried  the  ark  of  God  again  to  J.

19.  19.  the  day  that  my  lord  went  out  of  J.

24. 8.  they  came  to  J.  at  the  end  of  nine  months

mi


Proper  Names.]  JER


J  E  R


JES


‘  I


C  Sam.  24. 16.  when  the  angel  stretched  out  his  hand
on  I.  to  destroy  it,  Lord  repented,  1  Chron.  21 . 15.

1  Kings  3. 1.  made  an  end  of  building  the  wall  of  J.
JO.  2.  she  came  to  J.  with  a  very  great  train

11.  13.  for  ).  sake  which  1  have  chosen,  2  Chr.  6.  6.

15.  4.  to  set  up  his  son  after  him  and  to  establish  J.

2  King >  18.  .35.  delivered  their  country,  that  Lord

should  deliver  .1 .  out  of  mine  hand,  Isa.  36.  20.

19.  31.  out  of  J.  shall  go  forth  a  remnant,  and  they

that  escape  out  of  mount  Zion,  Isa.  37.  32.

21.  12.  behold,  1  will  bring  such  evil  upon  J.

13.  I  will  wipe  J.  as  a  man  wipeth  a  dish,  wiping

16.  shed  innocent  blood  till  he  had  filled  J.  24.  4.

23.  27.  I  will  cast  off  J.  which  I  have  chosen

24.  14.  he  carried  away  all  J.  and  the  princes

25.  9.  Nehuzar-adan  burnt  all  the  houses  of  J.

2  Chron.  12.7-  niy  wrath  shall  not  be  poured  on  J.

20.  28.  they  came  to  J.  with  psalteries,  harps

24.  18.  wrath  was  upon  J.  29.  8.  1  32.  25.

28.  24.  Ahaz  made  altars  in  every  corner  of  J.

32.  19.  they  spake  against  the  God  of  J.

34.  3.  Josiah  began  to  purge  J.  from  high  places
Ezra  7- 14-  thou  art  sent  to  inquire  concerning  J.

19.  those  deliver  thou  before  the  God  of  J.

Neh.  2.  11.  so  I  came  to  .1.  7-6.  1  13.  7.

13.  20.  merchants  lodged  without  .1.  once  or  twice
Pj.  51.18.  do  good  to  Zion,  build  thou  the  walls  of  J.
79.  1.  the  heathens  have  laid  J.  on  heaps

3.  their  blood  have  they  shed  round  about  J.

122.  3.  J.  is  builded  as  a  city  compact  together

6.  pray  for  the  peace  of  J.  they  shall  prosper
125.  2.  as  the  mountains  are  round  about  J.

128.  5.  thou  shalt  see  the  good  of  .1.  all  thy  life
137.  6.  if  1  prefer  not  J.  above  my  chief  joy

7.  remember  children  of  Edom  in  the  day  of  .T.

147.2.  the  Lord  doth  build  up  .1.  he  gathered)
Cant.  6.  4.  thou  art  comely,  O  my  love,  as  J.

Isa.  1.  1.  the  vision  he  saw  concerning  J.  2.  1.

3.  8.  .'or  J.  is  ruined  ||  10.  11.  so  will  I  do  to  J.
4.4.  the  Lord  shall  have  purged  the  blood  of  J.

10. 12.  Lord  hath  performed  his  whole  work  on  J.

22. 10.  and  ye  have  numbered  the  houses  of  J.

31.5.  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  defend  J.

33.  20.  thine  eyes  see  J.  a  quiet  habitation

40.  2.  speak  ye  comfortably  to  J.  and  cry  to  her

41.  27-  gL  e  to  J.  one  that  bringeth  good'tidings
44.  26.  that  saith  to  J.  thou  shalt  be  inhabited

52. 9.  sing  together,  ye  waste  places  of  J.  for  Lord
hath  comforted  his  people,  hs  bath  redeemed  J.

62. 1.  for  .1.  sake  I  will  not  rest  till  righteousness

7.  give  him  no  rest  till  he  make  .1.  a  praise

64.  10.  Zion  is  a  wilderness,  J.  a  desolation

65.  18.  for  behold,  I  create  J.  a  rejoi  ing

66. 10.  rejoice  ye  with  J.  and  be  glad  with  her
Jer.  2.  2.  go,  and  cry  in  the  ears  of  J.  saying

3.  17.  they  shall  call  .1.  the  throne  of  the  Lord

5.  1.  run  ye  to  and  fro  through  the  streets  of  J.

6.  1.  gather  you  to  flee  out  of  the  midst  of  .1.

8.5.  why  then  is  this  people  of  J.  slidden  back
9.  1 1 .  I  will  make  J .  heaps,  and  a  den  of  dragons

11.6.  proclaim  these  words  in  the  streets  of  J.

13.  9. 1  will  mar  the  great  pride  of  Judah  and  J.

14.  2.  Judah  mourneth,  the  cry  of  J.  is  gone  up
17.26.  they  shall  come  from  the  places  about  J.
19.  7-  I  will  make  void  the  counsel  of  J.

13.  the  houses  of  J.  shall  be  defiled  as  Tophet
23. 14.  have  seen  in  prophets  of  J.  an  horrible  thing

26.  18.  J.  shall  become  heaps,  Mic.  3.  12.

33. 13.  in  the  places  about  J.  shall  flocks  pass

16.  in  those  days  J.  shall  dwell  safely,  this  is

35.  11.  let  us  go  to  J.  for  fear  of  the  Chaldeans

38.  28.  till  day  that  J.  was  taken,  there  w  hen  taken

39.  8.  the  Chaldeans  brake  down  the  walls  of  J.
44.  2.  ye  have  seen  the  evil  1  have  brought  on  J.

6.  mine  anger  was  kindled  in  the  streets  of  J.
51.50.  let  J.  come  into  j-our  mind,  remember  Lord
Lam.  1.  8.  J.  hath  grievously  sinned,  theref.  remov.

17-  J.  is  as  a  menstruous  woman  among  them
Ezek.  5.  5.  this  is  J.  ||  9. 4.  go  through  the  midst  of  J.

16.  2.  son  of  man  cause  J.  to  know  her  abominations

17.  12.  the  king  of  Babylon  is  come  to  J.

21. 20.  that  the  sword  may  come  to  Judah  in  J.

22.  at  his  right  hand  the  divination  for  J.

22.  19.  I  will  gather  you  into  the  midst  of  J.

33.  21.  one  that  had  escaped  out  of  J.  came  to  me

36.  38.  as  the  flock  of  J.  in  her  solemn  feasts
1 Ian.  6.  10.  his  windows  being  open  toward  J.

9-  12.  not  been  done,  as  hath  been  done  upon  J.

25.  from  going  forth  of  the  commandm.  to  build  J.
Joe l  3.  1.  when  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  J.

17.  then  shall  J.  be  holy  ||  20.  J.  shall  dwell
Obad.  11.  foreigners  entered  and  cast  lots  upon  .T.
Mic.  1.  5.  are  they  not  .1 .?  ||  Zech.  1.14.  jealous  for  J.

3.  10.  build  up  Zion  with  blood,  J.  with  iniquity
Zeph.  1. 12.  I  will  search  .1.  with  candles  and  punish
Zech.  1.12.  how  long  wiltthou  not  have  mercy  on  J.?

17.  L.  shall  yet  comfort  Zion,  and  choose  .1.2.  12.
19.  these  are  the  horns  which  have  scattered  J.

2.2.  whither  goest  thou?  I  go  to  measure  J.

4.  J.  shall  be  inhabited  as  towns  without  walls

8.3.  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  J.  and  I  shall

15.  so  again  have  1  thought  to  do  well  to  J.

12.2.  behold,  1  will  make  J.  a  cup  of  trembling
3.  that  day  l  will  make  J.  a  burdensome  stone

14.  11.  but  J.  shall  be  safely  inhabited
Mai.  3.  4.  the  offering  of  J.  shall  be  pleasant
Mat.  3.  5.  then  went  out  to  him  J.  Mark  1.  5.

5.  35.  neither  swear  by  J.  ||  21. 10.  come  into  J.

16.  21.  Jesus  began  to  shew  how'  he  must  go  to  J.

Luke  2.  22.  his  parents  brought  him  to  J.

45.  they  turned  back  again  to  J.  seeking  him

6.  17.  a  great  multitude  out  of  J.  came  to  hear
9.53.  his  face  was  as  though  he  would  go  to  J.

13.  33.  it  cannot  be  that  a  prophet  perish  out  of  J.
19.  11.  spake  a  parable,  because  he  was  nigh  to  J.

21.20.  when  ye  shall  see  J.  compassed  with  armies

24.  J.  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles
24.  49.  tarry  ye  in  J.  till  ye  be  endued  with  power
52.  and  they  returned  to  J.  with  great  joy
John  12. 12.  when  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming  to  J.
diets  5.  28.  ye  have  frlled  J.  with  your  doctrine
9.  2.  that  he  might  bring  them  bound  unto  J.

602


Ads  20.  22.  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  Spirit  to  J.

21.  31.  tidings  came  that  all  J.  was  in  an  uproar

22.  18.  make  haste,  get  thee  quickly  out  of  J.

25.  20.  I  asked  him  whether  he  would  go  to  J.  ?
Rom.  15.  31.  that  my  service  for  J.  may  be  accepted
1  Cor.  16.3.  will  send  to  bringyour  liberality  unto  J.
Gal.  4.  25.  Agar  answ'ereth  to  J.  which  now  is

26.  but  J.  which  is  above  is  free,  mother  of  us  all
Rev.  3.  12.  the  new  J.  21.  2.  ||  21.  10.  the  holy  J.
See  Dwell.

Against  JERUSALEM.

Judg.  1. 8.  Judah  hath  fought  against  J.  and  taken  it

1  Kings  14.  25.  Shishak  came  against  1 . 2  Chr.  12.  9.

2  Kings  18.  17-  Sennacherib  against  .1.2  Chr.  32.2.

24.10.  the  king  of  Babylon  came  against  J.  25.  1.

Jer.  34.  1,  7. 1  39.  1.  I  52.  4.  Ezek.  24.  2.
Ezra  4.  8.  Rehum,  Shimshai,  wrote  against  J.

A 'eh.  4.  8.  they  conspired  to  come  and  fight  ag.  J.
Jet .  4.  16.  publish  ag.  J.  ||  6  6.  cast  a  mount  ag.  J.
E.zek.  26.  2.  because  that  I  yrus  hath  said  against  .1 .
Zech.  12.  9.  destroy  nations  that  come  ag.  J.  14.  12.
At  JER  USALEM.

Josh.  15.  63.  the  Jebusites  dwelt  with  Judah  at  J.

2  Sam.  20.  3.  David  came  to  his  house  at  3 .

1  Kings  12.  27.  go  up  to  do  sacrifice  in  the  house  of
the  Lord  at  1.2  Chron.  9.  25.  Isa.  27  13.

1  Chron.  9.  34.  these  chief  fathers  dw’elt  at  J.  38.

2  Chron.  3.  1.  Solomon  began  to  build  the  house  of

Lord  at  J.  in  mount  Moriah,  Ezra  1.2.  1  5.  2.
Neh.  1 1 .2.  willingly  offered  themselves  to  dwellatJ.

13.6.  but  in  all  this  time  was  not  I  at  J.

Ps.  68.29.  becauseof  thy  temple  at  J.  bring  presents
135.  21.  blessed  be  the  Lord  who  dwelleth  at  J.
Isa.  30.  19.  the  people  shall  dwell  in  Zion  at  J.
Jer.  35.  11.  let  us  go  into  J.  so  we  dwell  at  3.
Zech.  14.  14.  and  Judah  also  shall  fight  at  3.

Luke  9.  31.  decease  which  he  should  accompl.  at  3.

23.  7.  Herod  himself  was  also  at  J.  at  that  time
24.47.  preached  among  all  nations,  beginning  at  J.

John  4.  21.  nor  yet  shall  ye  at  3  .  worship  the  Father
45.  having  seen  all  things  that  he  did  at  J.

Acts  1. 19.  it  was  known  to  all  the  dwellers  at  J.

8.  1.  a  great  persecution  against  the  church  at  J.

9.  13.  what  evil  he  hath, done  to  thy  saints  or  J.

13.  27-  they  that  dwell  at  J.  have  fulfilled  them

20.  16.  he  hasted  to  beat  3 .  the  day  of  Pentecost

21.11.  so  shall  the  Jew's  at  J.  bind  the  man
13.  but  also  to  die  at  J.  for  the  name  of  Jesus

26.  20.  but  shewed  first  to  them  of  Damascus  at  J.
Rom.  15.  26.  contribution  for  the  poor  saints  at  J.

See  Daughter,  ters.

From  JERUSALEM.

1  Kings  2.  41.  told  that  Shimei  had  gone  from  J.

2  Kings  12.  18.  Hazael  went  away  from  3.

24.  15.  carried  into  captivitv  from  J.  to  Babylon,
Esth.  2.  6.  Jer.  24.  1.1  27.  20.  1  29.  1.  |  52.  29.

Isa.  2.  3.  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  3.  Mic.  4.  2.

3.  1.  the  Lord  doth  take  away  from  J.  the  stay
Joel  3.  16.  the  Lord  utter  his  voice  from  J.  Amos  1.2.
Zech.  9.  10.  I  will  cut  off  the  horse  from  3.

14.  8.  that  living  waters  shall  go  out  from  3.

Mat.  4.  25.  multitudes  followed  him  from  3.

Luke  10.  30.  a  certain  man  went  dow  n  from  3.

24.  13.  which  was  from  J.  about  sixty  furlongs
Acts  1.  4.  that  they  should  not  depart  from  .) .

8.  26.  the  way  that  goeth  down  from  J.  to  Gaza
11.  27-  there  came  prophets  from  3.  to  Antioch

Rom.  15.  19  .from  J.  to  lllyricum  I  have  preached
In JER  USALEM.

Judg.  1.  21.  Jebusites  dwell  with  Benjamin  in  J.

2  Sam.  19.  33.  I  will  feed  thee  with  me  in  J.

1  Kings  2.  36.  build  thee  an  house  in  3.  and  dwell

1 1 .36.  may  have  a  light  alway  before  me  in  J.  15.  4.

2  Kings  18.22.  ye  shall  worship  before  this  altar  in  J.

21.  4.  the  Lord  said,  in  J.  will  I  put  my  name

22.  14.  now  Hu  Id  ah  dwelt  in  J.  in  the  college

1  Chron.  8.28.  these  dwelt  in  J.  32.  I  9.  3.

23.  25.  that  they  may  dwell  in  J.  for  ever

2  Chron.  9.  27.  the  king  made  silver  in  J.  as  stones
3  ).  14.  they  took  away  the  altars  that  were  in  J.

26.  there  was  great  joy  in  J.  not  the  like  in  J.
Ezra  1.  3.  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  is  in  3.

7.  15.  God  of  Israel,  whose  habitation  is  in 3.

9.  9.  and  to  give  us  a  wall  in  Judah  and  in  3.
Neh.  2.  20.  ye  have  no  right  nor  memorial  in  J.

4.  22.  I  said,  let  everyone  lodge  in  3.

11.  1.  cast  lots, to  bring  one  of  tentodwell  in  J.
Ps.  102.  21 .  to  declare  in  Zion  and  his  praises  in  3 .
Eccl.  1.  16.  that  have  been  before  me  m3.  2.  7,  9.
Isa.  4.  3.  that  remained)  in  3.  be  called  holy

24.  23.  when  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  reign  in  J.

28.  14.  hear,  ye  scornful  men  that  rule  in  J.

31.9.  whose  tire  is  in  Zion,  his  furnace  in 3.

65.  19.  1  will  rejoice  in  J.  and  joy  in  my  people

66.  13.  and  ye  shall  be  comforted  in  J.

Jer.  4.  5.  publish  in  3 .  and  say,  blow  the  trumpet

15.  4.  for  that  which  Manasseh  did  in  J.

Ezek.  4.  16.  I  will  break  the  staff  of  bread  in  J.
Joel  2.  32.  in  mount  Zion  and  J .  shall  be  deliverance
Zech.  12.  6.J.  be  inhabited  in  her  place,  even  in  J.

14.21.  every  pot  in  J.  shall  be  Holiness  to  Lord
Mai.  2.  11.  an  abomination  is  committed  in  3.
Luke  2.  25.  a  man  in  1.  whose  name  was  Simeon
38.  spake  to  all  that  looked  for  redemption  in  J .
43.  tne  child  Jesus  tarried  behind  in  J.

13.4.  they  wei  esinners  above  all  that  dwelt  in  J.
24.  18.  one  said,  art  thou  only  a  stranger  in  J.  ?
John  4.  20.  in  J.  is  the  place  where  to  w'orship
Acts  1. 8.  shall  be  witnesses  to  me  in  J.  10.  39.

6.7-  the  number  of  the  disciples  multiplied  in  J.

23.  11.  for  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  J.

26.  10.  which  thing  1  also  die!  in  3 .  many  saints
Inhabitants  of  JERUSALEM.

2  Chron.  20.  15.  ye  inhabitants  of  3 .  be  -not  afraid
32.  22.  thus  the  Lord  saved  the  inhabitants  of  3.
33.  inhabitants  of  3 .  did  him  honour  at  his  death

34.  32.  inhabit,  of  J .  did  according  to  the  covenant
Isa. 5.3.  Oinhab.  of  3.  judge  betwixt  me  and  viney.

8.  14.  fora  gin  and  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  J.
22.  21.  he  shall  be  a  father  to  the  inhabitants  of  3 .

Jer.  17.  25.  inhabitants  of  J.  shall  remain  for  ever

35.  13.  go  and  tell  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  J.


Ezek.  11.  15.  to  whom  inhabitants  of  J.have  said
15.  6.  so  will  I  give  the  inhabitants  of  J .  for  fuel*
Zech.  12.  5.  the  inhabit,  of  3.  shall  be  my  strength'

7  the  glory  of  the  inhabit,  of  J  .  do  not  magnify

8.  the  Lord  shall  defend  the  inhabitants  of  3.

10.  pour  upon  inhabit,  of  3.  the  Spirit  of  grace

13.  1.  a  fountain  opened  to  the  inhabitants  of  3.

O  JERUSALEM.

Ps.  1 16.  19-1  will  pay  my  vows  in  midst  ofthee.G  J.
122.  2.  our  feet  shall  stand  within  thy  gates,  O  J.

137-  5.  if  I  forget,  0  3.  ||  147-  12.  praise  Lord,  O  .L
Isa.  40.  9-  O  3.  that  bringest  good  tidings,  lift  up

51.  17  stand  up,  O.J.  ||  52.2.  arise,and  sit  down,  O  J.

52.  1.  put  on  thy  beautiful  garments,  O  J.

Jer.  4.  14.  O  J.  wash  thy  heart  from  wickedness

6.8.  be  thou  instructed,  O  J.  lest  I  depart  from  thee

7.  29.  cut  off  thine  hair,  O  J.  and  cast  it  away
13.  27-  woe  to  thee,  O  J.  wilt  not  be  made  clean

15.  5.  for  who  shall  have  pity  upon  thee,  U3.  ?

Mat.  23.  37.  O  J.  J.  thou  that  killest  the  prophets-^  -

and  stonest  them  sent  to  thee,  Luke  13.  34.

Up  to  JERUSALEM.

2  Sam.  19.  34.  that  I  should  go  up  with  the  king  to  3 .  .  ,

1  Kings  12.  28.  it  is  too  much  for  you  to  go  up  to  3.

2  Kings  12.1 7.  Hazarset  his  face  to  go  up  to  J.

16.  5.  Rezin  and  Pekah  came  up  to  J.  to  war
Ezra  1.  3.  and  let  him  go  up  to  3. 7.  13.

Mat.  20. 18.  behold,  we  go  up  to  J.Sonofman  shall.'

be  betrayed,  Mark  10.  33.  Luke  18.  31.
Mark  10.  32.  they  were  it)  the  way  going  up  to  3.

Luke  19-  28.  he  went  before,  ascending  up  to  3.

Acts  11.  2.  and  when  Peter  was  come  up  to  3 .

15.  2.  they  should  go  up  to  J.  to  the  apostles
21.4.  who  said,  that  he  should  not  go  up  to  J.  12.

25.  9.  wilt  thou  go  up  to  3.  and  there  be  judged  '

Gal.  1.  17.  neither  went  1  up  to  J.  to  them  apostles-,  j

18. 1  wentwp  to  J.  toseePeter  and  abode  with  him  •

2. 1.  I  went  up  to  J.  with  Barnabas,  took  Titus

JESH  UA.

Ezra  2.  2.  those  that  came  with  Zerubbabel,  J.

3.  2.  then  stood  up  J.  son  of  Jozadak,  and  brethren-

JESHURUN.

Pent.  32.  15.  but  J.  waxed  fat  and  kicked
33.  5.  he  was. king  in  J.  when  Israel  was  gathered
26.  there  is  none  like  to  the  God  of  J.

Isa.  44.  2.  fear  not,  thou  J .  whom  I  have  chosen
J  ESSE.

Ruth  4.  17.  Obed,  he  is  the  father  of  J.  Mat.  1.5.

22.  Obed  begat  J.  and  J.  begat  David,  Mat.  1.  6. .

1  Sam.  16. 1.1  will  send  thee  to  J.  the  Beth-iehemite-

9.  he  sanctified  J.  and  his  sons  and  called  them

18.  1  have  seen  a  son  of  J.  that  is  cunning

19.  wherefore  Saul  sent  messengers  unto  J.

17-58.  David  said,  I  am  the  son  of  thy  servant  J.

20.  30.  1  know  thou  hast  chosen  the  son  of  J.

31.  as  long  as  the  son  of  J.  liveth  on  the  ground
22. 7.  will  the  son  of  J.  give  every  one  of  you  fields? '

8.  my  son  hath  made  a  league  with  the  son  of  J.

9.  Doeg  said,  I  saw  the  son  of  J.  coming  to  Nob-

25.  10.  who  is  David  ?  and  who  is  the  son  of  J.  ?

2  Sam.  20. 1.  neither  haye  we  inheritance  in  the  son-,

of  J.  1  Kings  12.  16.  2  Chron.  10. 16-.

1  Chr.  10. 14.  turned  kingdom  to  David  the  son  of  J.

12.  18.  on  thy  side  are  we,  thou  son  of  J.  peace
Isa.  11.1.  there  shall  come  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  J. .

10.  there  shall  be  a  root  of  J.  Rom.  15.  12.

Acts  13.  22.  1  have  found  Da\  id  the  son  of  J.

JESUITES.

Num.  26.  44.  of  Jesus,  the  family  of  the  3.

JESUS.

Mat.  1.  21.  shalt  call  his  name  J.  forhe  shall  sav®-
his  people  from  their  sins,  25.  Luke  1.  31.  |  2.  21.

4.  1.  J.  was  led  up  of  the  Spirit  into  wilderness

17.  from  that  time  J.  began  to  preach  and  say

8.  3.  J.  put  forth  his  hand  and  touched  him
10.  when  J.  heard  it,  he  marvelled,  and  said

29.  what  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  J.  thou  Son  o!b  !

God  ?  Mark  1.  24.  I  5.  7.  Luke  8.  28,.  |
34.  behold,  the  whole  city  came  out  to  meet  J.

9.  2.  J.  seeing  their  faith  ||  10.  as  J.  sat  at  meat
22.  J.  turned  him  about  ||  27.  J.  departed  thence

12.  25.  J.  knew  their  thoughts,  and  said  to  them

13.  34.  these  things  spake  J.  to  the  multitude

14.  1.  at  that  time  El erod  heard  of  the  fame  of  J.

29.  Peter  walked  on  the  water  to  go  to  J.

17.  8.  they  saw  no  man  save  J.  only,  Mark  9.  8.

18.  J.  rebuked  the  devil  and  he  departed

25.  when  come  into  the  house,  J.  prevented  him

18.  2.  J.  called  a  little  child  to  him,  and  set  him

20.  30.  two  blind  men  heard  that  J.  passed  by

34.1  .had  compassion  on  them,  touched  their  eyes

21.  11.  this  is  J.  the  prophet  of  Nazareth  of  Galilee-

22.  18.  but  J.  perceived  their  wickedness  and  said-'

26.  4.  they  mighttake  J.  by  subtilty  and  kill  him

19.  the  disciples  did  as  J.  had  appointed  them

26.  J.  took  bread  and  blessed  it,  Mark  14.  22.

69.  thou  also  wast  with  J.  71.  Mark  14.  67.

75.  and  Peter  remembered  the  words  of  J.

27  .  37.  written,  this  is  J.  the  king  of  the.  Jews
46.  J.  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Mark  15.  37.

57.  Joseph,  who  also  himself  was  J.  disciple
28.  5.  fear  not  ye,  I  know  ye  seek  J.  Mark  16.  6.

9.  J.  met  them  ||  18.  J.came  and  spake  to  them
Mark  1.  45.  J.  could  no  more  enter  into  the  city
3.  7.  J.  withdrew  himself  with  his  disciples

5.  13.  I .  gave  them  leave  ||  19.  J .  suffered  him  noE

30.  J.  know  ing  that  virtue  had  gone  out  ofhim

9.  4.  Elias  and  Moses  were  talking  with  J.

10.  21.  then  J.  beholding  him,  loved  him

12.  34.  when  J.  saw  that  he  answered  discreetly

15.  1.  they  bound  J.  and  carried  him  away
Luke  5.  19.  let  him  dow  n  in  the  midst  before  J.

6.  1 1 .  they  communed  what  they  might  do  to  J.

10.  39.  who  sat  at  J.  feet  and  heard  his  word

19.  3.  Zaccheus  sought  to  see  J.  who  he  was
2.3.  26.  that  he  might  bear  the  cross  after  J.

24.  15.  J .  himself  drew  near  and  went  with  them
John  6.  42.  they  said,  is  not  this  J.  son  of  Joseph?

9.  11.  a  man,  that  is  called  J.  made  clay,  anointed’

11.  13.  J.  spake  of  his  death  ||  35.  J.  wept

12.  21.  sir,  we  w'ouldsee  J.  ||  13.23.  leaning  on  J,

13.  1.  when  J  knew  that  his  hour  wascotne


JEW


JEZ


JO  H  [Proper  Names


Jolm.  187*  Whom  seek  ye  ?  they  said,  I.  of  Nazar.
22.  cne  of  the  offic  ers  that  stood  by  struck  J.

19.  5.  then  came  J.  forth,  wearing  crown  of  thorns
25.  now  there  stood  bv  the  cross  of  J.  his  mother
28.  J.  knowing  that  all  things  were  accomplished
40.  took  the  body  of  J.  ||  42.  there  laid  they  J.

20.  14.  and  she  knew  not  that  it  was  1.21.  4.

Acts  1.  1.  of  all  that  J.  began  to  do  and  teach

11.  this  same  J.  which  is  taken  up  from  you

16.  Judas,  who  was  guide  to  them  who  took  J.

2.  32.  this  J.  hath  God  raised  up,  3.  26. 1  5.  30.

3.  13.  God  of  Abraham  hath  glorified  his  Son  J.

4.  2.  preaching  thro’  J.  resurrection  from  the  dead

13.  they  took  knowledge  that  they  had  been  with  J.
18.  they  commanded  not  to  teach  in  the  name  of  J.
27.  for  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  child  J.

30.  signs  done  by  the  name  of  thy  holy  child  J.

5.  40.  they  should  not  speak  in  the  name  of  J.

6.  14.  this  .1.  shall  destroy  this  place  and  change
7-  56.  he  saw  J.  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God

8.  35.  then  Philip  preached  unto  him  J.

9.  5.  I  am  J.  whom  thou  persecutest,  22.  8.  I  26.  15.

17.  even  J.  that  appeared  to  thee  in  the  way

27.  had  preached  at  Damascus  in  the  name  of  J.

10.  38.  how  God  anointed  J.  w ith  the  Holy  Ghost
13.  23.  God  hath  raised  to  Israel  a  Saviour  J.

17.  7-  saying,  that  there  is  another  king,  one  J.

18.  because  he  preached  J.  and  the  resurrection
19:  13.  we  adjure  you  by  J.  whom  Paul  preacheth

15.  J.  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know,  but  who  are  ye  r
25.  19.  had  questions  of  one  J.  who  was  dead
28.  23.  persuading  concerning  .1.  law  and  prophets
Rom.  3.  26.  the  justifier  of  him  that  believes  in  J.
8.  11.  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up. I.  from  dead

1  Cor.  12.  3.  no  man  speaking  by  Spirit  calleth  J.

2  Cor.  4.  5.  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  J.  sake

10.  that  the  life  of  J.  might  be  made  manifest

11.  we  are  delivered  to  death  for  J.  sake

14.  that  lie  who  raised  J.  shall  raise  up  us  also  by  J.

11.  4.  for  if  he  that  cometh,  preach  another  J.
Eph.  4.  21.  been  taught  by  him  as  the  truth  is  in  J.

■  Phil.  2.  10.  at  the  name ot  J.  every  knee  should  bow
1  Thess.  1.  10.  even  J.  who  delivered  us  from  wrath

4.  14.  so  them  that  sleep  in  J.  will  God  bring
■Heb.  2.  9.  we  see  J.  who  was  made  lower  than  angels

4.  14.  we  have  a  great  high  priest,  J.  son  ofG.  6.20.

7.  22.  by  so  much  was  .1 .  made  surety  of  better  testa.

10.  19.  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  J.

12.  2.  looking  unto  J.  the  author  of  our  faith
24.  to  J.  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant

13.  12.  wherefore  J.  suffered  without  the  gate

1  John  4.  15.  whoso  shall  confess  J.  is  Son  of  God

5.  5.  that  believeth  that  I.  is  the  Son  of  God
Rev.  14.  12.  here  are  they  that  keep  the  faith  of  J.

17.  6.  woman  drunken  with  blood  of  martyrs  of  J.
20.4.  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  J.

22.  16.  I  J.  have  sent  mine  angel  to  testify  to  you

See  Christ.

JESUS  joined  with  Lord.

Acts  1.  21.  all  the  time  the  Lord  J.  went  in  and  out

2.  36.  God  made  that  same  J.  both  Lord  and  Christ

7.  59.  Stephen  saying,  Lord  J.  receive  ray  spirit

8.  16.  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  J.

9.  29.  he  spake  boldly  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  J.

11.  20.  spake  to  Grecians,  preaching  the  Lord  J.
16.  31.  believe  on  the  Lord  J.  Christ  and  be  saved

19.  10.  all  in  Asia  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord  J.
17.  and  the  name  of  the  Lord  J.  was  magnified

20.  35.  and  to  remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  J .
1  Cor.  11.  23.  Lord  J.  same  night  he  was  betrayed

12.  3.  that  no  man  can  say  that  J .  is  the  Lord

•2  Cor.  1.  14.  as  ye  are  ours  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  J .
4.  10.  always  bearing  about  the  dying  of  Lord  J.
Gal.  6.  17-  1  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  Lord  J.

1  Thess.  2.  15.  who  both  killed  Lord  J .  and  prophets
4.  1.  we  beseech  and  exhort  you  by  the  Lord  J.

2.  what  commandments  we  gave  you  by  Lord  J.

2  'Thess.  1.  7.  when  the  Lord  J.  shall  be  revealed
Heb.  13.  20.  brought  again  from  dead  our  Lord  J.
2  Pet.  1.  2.  through  the  knowledge  of  J.  our  Lord
Rev.  22.  20. 1  come  quickly,  even  so,  come  Lord  J .

See  Grace.  Name.

J  ESUS  said.

Mark  14.  72.  Peter  called  to  mind  the  word  J.  said
John  2.  22.  the  disciples  believed  the  word  J.  said
4.  53.  it  was  at  the  same  hour  in  which  J.  said

13.  21.  when  J.  had  thus  said,  he  was  troubled

21.  23.  yet  J.  said  not  to  him,  he  shall  not  die

J  KS  US,  for  Joshua.

Acts"J.  45.  brought  in  with  J.  into  possession  of  Gent.
Heb  A.  8.  for  if  J.  had  given  them  rest  then  would  not
JESUS.

Col.  4.  11.  J.  who  is  called  Justus  of  circumcision
JETHRO,  called  Reuet.

Exod.  3.  1.  Moses  kept  the  flock  of  J.  his  father
4.  18.  Moses  returned  to  J.  his  father  in-law

18.  1.  when  J.  heard  of  all  that  God  had  done

5.  J.  came  with  his  sons  and  his  wife  to  Moses

6.  I  thy  father-in-law  J.  am  come  unto  thee

9.  J.  rejoiced  for  the  goodness  done  to  Israel,  10.

12.  J.  took  a  burnt  offering  and  sacrifices  for  God

J  EW.

Esth.  2.  5.  a  certain  J.  whose  name  was  Mordecai

3.  4.  for  lie  told  them  that  he  was  a  J.

6.  10.  make  haste,  do  even  so  to  Mordecai  the  J.
Jer.  34.  9.  himself  of  them,  to  wit,  of  a  J.  his  brother
Zech.  8.  23.  ten  men  shall  take  hold  of  skirt  of  a  J.
John  4.  9.  how  is  it  that  thou  being  a  J .  askest  drink

18.  35.  Pilate  ans.  am  I  a  J.  ?  what  hast  thou  done
Acts  10.  28.  it  is  unlawful  for  a  man  that  is  a  J.

13.  6.  they  found  a  sorcerer,  a  J.  named  Barjesus
18.2.  Paul  found  a  certain  J  named  Aquila,  bom  in
24.  a  J .  named  A  polios  ||  19.  14.  sons  of  Sceva  a  J.

19.  34.  Alexander  a  J.  II  21.  39.  Paul  a  J.  22.  3.
Rom.  1.  16.  to  the  J.  first,  also  to  Gentile,  2.  9,  10.

2.  17.  behold,  thou  called  a  J.  and  restest  in  law

28.  he  is  not  a  J.  ||  29.  he  is  a  J.  who  is  one  inwardly

3.  1.  what  advantage  then  hath  the  J.?  or  what

10.  12.  for  there  is  no  difference  between  the  J.

and  the  Greek,  Gal.  3.  28.  Col.  3.  11.
i  Cor.  9.  20.  to  the  J.  I  became,  as  a  J.  to  gain  Jews
<ial.  2.  14.  if  thou  being  a  J.  livest  as  the  Gentiles


JEWS.

2  Kings  16.  6.  king  Pezin  drave  ttte  J.  from  Elath
Ezra  4.  12.  the  J.  are  come  up  to  Jerusalem
JSeh.  1.  2.  I  asked  concerning  the  J.  that  escaped

4.  2.  .sanballat  said,  what  do  these  feeble  J.  ?

5.  17-  there  were  at  my  table  one  hundr.  and  fifty  J.

6.  6.  that  thou  and  the  J.  think  to  rebel

13.  23.  1  saw  J.  that  married  wives  of  Ashdod
Esth.  4.  3.  there  was  great  mourning  among  the  J.

14.  then  shall  deliverance  arise  unto  the  J.

6.  13.  they  said,  if  Mordecai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  J.

8.  7.  because  llaman  laid  his  hand  upon  the  J.

8.  write  ye  in  king’s  name  for  the  J.  as  it  liketh

16.  the  J.  had  light  and  gladness  and  joy,  17.

17.  for  the  fear  of  the  J.  fell  upon  them

9.  3.  the  officers  of  the  king  helped  the  J.

28.  days  of  Purim  should  not  fail  from  among  J.

10.3.  for  Mordecai  was  great  among  the  J.

Jer.  38.  19.  Zedekiah  said,  I  am  afraid  of  the  J.

52.  28.  carried  away  captive  3023  of  the  J.  30.
Pan.  3.  8.  Chaldeans  came  near  and  accused  the  J.
Mat.  28.  15.  this  saying  is  reported  among  the  J.
John  3.  25.  question  between  John’s  disciples  and  J.

4.  9.  the  J.  have  no  dealings  with  the  Samaritans
22.  salvation  is  of  the  J.  ||  5.  1.  feast  of  the  J.

5. 16.  and  therefore  did  the  J.  persecute  Jesus

18.  therefore  the  J.  sought  the  more  to  kill  him

6.  52.  the  J.  therefore  strove  among  themselves

7.  13.  no  man  spake  openly  of  him,  for  fear  of  J  .

9.  18.  the  J.  did  not  believe  that  he  had  been  blind

10.  31.  the  J.  took  up  stones  again  to  stone  him

11.8.  master,  the  J.  of  late  sought  to  stone  thee

33.  when  Jesus  saw  her  and  the  J.  also  weeping

12. 11.  many  of  J.  wentaw'ay  and  believed  on  Jes,

18.  20.  I  taught  in  temple,  whither  J .  alw'ays  resort

36.  that  1  should  not  be  delivered  to  the  J.

19.  40.  body  of  Jesus  as  the  manner  of  J .  is  to  bury
Acts  11. 19.  pleaching  to  none,  but  the  J.  only

12.  3.  because  Herod  saw  it  pleased  the  J.

16.  3.  because  of  the  J.  that  were  in  those  parts

20.  these  men  being  J.  do  trouble  our  city
19-  10.  J.  and  Greeks  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord

13.  then  certain  of  the  vagabond  J.  exorcists

20.  3.  and  when  the  J.  laid  wait  for  him,  19.

21.  11.  so  shall  the  J .  at  Jerusalem  bind  the  man

23. 12.  certain  of  the  J.  banded  together  and  bound
27.  this  man  was  taken  of  the  J.  had  been  killed

24.  18.  certain  J.  from  Asia  found  me  purified

25. 10.  to  the  J.  have  done  no  wrong,  thou  knowest
Rom.  3.29.  is  he  G. of  J. only  ?  is  he  not  of  Gentiles  ?

1  Cor.  1.  23.  Christ,  to  the  J*.  a  stumbling-block

9.  20.  to  J.  1  became  asa  Jew,  that  1  might  gain  J.

2  Cor.  11.  24.  of  J.  five  times  received  forty  stripes
Gal.  2.  14.  as  the  Gentiles,  and  not  as  do  the  J.

15.  we  who  are  J.  by  nature,  and  not  sinners

1  Thess.  2.  14.  even  as  they  have  suffered  of  the  J.
Rev.  2.  9.  which  say  they  are  J.  and  are  not,  3.  9.

All  the  JEWS.  [See Gentiles.
Esth.  3.  6.  Haman  sought  to  destroy  all  the  J.  1.3.
4.  1.3.  more  than  all  the  J.  fl  16.  go,  gather  all  the  J.
Jer.  40.  11.  when  a  l  the  J.  in  Moab  heard  that

12.  even  all  the  J.  returned  out  of  all  places

41.  .3.  Ishmael  slew  all  the  J.  that  were  with  him
44.  1.  the  word  concerning  all  the  J  .  in  Egypt
Mark  7  A-  all  the  J .  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not
Acts  18.2.  command,  all theJ.  to  depart  from  Rome
19.  17-  this  was  known  to  all  the  J.  At  Ephesus

21.  21.  thou  teachest  all  the  J.  to  forsake  Moses

22.  12.  Ananias  had  a  good  report  of  all  the  J.

24.  5.  and  a  mover  of  sedition  among  all  the  J.

26.  4.  my  manner  of  life  at  Jerus.  know  all  the  J.

King  of  the  IEWS.

Mat.  2.2.  where  is  he  that  is  born  King  of  the  J.?

27.  11.  the  governor  asked  Jesus,  art  thou  King  of

the  J.  /  Mark  15.  2.  Luke  2.3.  .3.  John  18.  3.3.

29.  hail,  King  of  the  .1.  Mark  15.  18.  John  19.  3.

37.  set  up  his  accusation,  this  is  the  King  of  the

J.  Mark  15.  26  Luke  2.3.  .38.  John  19-  19.
Mark  15.  9.  but  Pilate  answered  them,  will  ye  that
I  release  to  you  the  King  of  the  J .  John  18.  .39.

12.  do  unto  him  w  horn  you  call  the  King  of  the  J .
Luke  2.3.  37.  if  thou  be  the  King  of  the  J.  save  thyself
John  19.21.  the  chief  priests  said,  write  notthe  King

of  the  J.  but  that  he  said,  I  am  King  of  the  J.
JEWESS.

Acts  16. 1.  Timotheus  was  son  of  a  J.  who  believed
24.24.  Felix’  wife  Drusilla  was  a  J.  sent  for  Paul
JEWISH.

Tit.  1. 14.  not  giving  heed  to  J.  fables  and  comm.
JEWRY.

Dan.  5.  13.  whom  my  father  brought  out  of  J.
JEZEBEL.

1  Kings  16. 31 .  Ahab  took  to  wife  J.  and  served  Baal
18.  4.  when  J.  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord

13.  what  I  did  when  J.  slew  the  prophets  of  Lord

19.  the  prophets  of  Baal  which  eat  at  J.  table

19. 1.  Ahab  told  J.  all  that  Elijah  had  done

21. 11.  the  elders  did  as  J.  had  sent  unto  them
15.  when  J.  heard  Naboth  was  stoned  and  dead

2.3.  dogs  shall  eat  J.  by  wall,  2  Kings  9-  10,  36.

25.  none  like  Ahab,  whom  J.  his  wife  stirred  up

2  Kings  9.  7.  tha.t  I  may  avenge  at  the  hand  of  J.

22.  so  long  as  the  whoredoms  of  thy  mother  J.

37.  carcase  of  J.  shall  be  as  dung  upon  the  face

of  the  field,  so  that  they  shall  not  say,  this  is  J .
Rev.  2.  20.  because  thou  sufferest  that  woman  J.

JEZREEL,  name  of  place  and  person.

Judg.  6.  .33.  Amalek  pitched  in  the  valley  of  J.

1  Sam.  25.  4.3.  David  also  took  Ahinoam  of  J.

29.  1.  Israel  pitched  by  a  fountain  which  is  in  J.

2  Sam.  2.  9.  Abner  made  lsh-bosheth  king  over  J.

1  Kings  18.  45.  and  Ahab-rode  and  went  to  J.

46.  Elijah  ran  before  Ahab  to  entrance  of  J.

21.  1.  Naboth  had  a  vineyard  which  was  inJ.

23.  dogs  eat  Jezebel  by  wall  of  J.  2  Kings  9.  10,  36.

2  Kings  8.  29.  Joram  went  back  to  J .  2  Chr.  22. 6.

9.  16.  so  Jehu  rode  in  a  chariot,  and  went  to  J.

10.  6.  come  to  me  to  J.  by  to-morrow  this  time

7.  they  sent  the  heads  of  the  king’s  sons  to  J.

1  Chron.  4.  .3.  these  were  of  the  father  of  Efam,  J.
Has.  1. 4.  Lord  said  to  him,  call  his  name  J.  for  I
will  avenge  the  blood  of  J.  on  the  house  of  Jehu


Hos.  1.  5. 1  will  break  the  bow  of  Isr.  in  valley  of  J

11.  one  head,  for  great  shall  be  the  day  of  J.

2.  22.  the  corn,  wine,  and  oil  shall  hear  J.

JEZREELI1E.  Naboth.
ILLYRICUM.

Rom.  15.  19.  round  about  unto  I.  I  have  preached
1MLAH.  See  Micaiah.

JOAB.

2  Sam.  2.  18.  three  sons  of  Zeruiah,  J.  Abishai

22.  how  should  1  hold  up  my  face  to  J.  thy  brother/

24.  J.  also  and  Abishai  pursued  after  Abner

3.  29.  let  the  blood  of  Abner  rest  on  the  head  of  J.
.30.  so  .1.  and  Abishai  his  brother  slew  Abner

8.  16.  J.  the  son  of  Zeruiah  was  over  the  host,  20.

2.3.  1  Chron.  11.  6.  I  18.  15. 1  27-  34.

11.  7.  David  demanded  of  Uriah  how  J.  did

11.  Isr.  and  Judah  abide  in  tents,  and  my  lord  J.

14.  in  the  morning  David  wrote  a  letter  to  J.

12.  26.  J.  fought  against  Kabbah  of  Ammon

14.  .3.  so  J.  put  the  words  in  the  widow’s  mouth

19.  is  not  the  hand  of  J.  with  thee  in  all  this  r
29.  Absalom  sent  for  J.  ||  30.  J.  field  is  near

20.9.  J.  killed  Amasa  ||  17.  woman  said,  art  thou  I.?
24.  4.  notwithstanding  the  king’s  word  prevailed

against  J.  and  captains  of  the  host,  1  Chr.  21.  4.
1  Kin.  1. 7.  Adonijah  confer,  with  J.  son  of  Zeruiah

2.  5.  moreover  thou  knowest  what  J.  did  tome
28  J.  fled  to  tabernacle  of  Lord  and  caught  horns

11.  16.  six  months  J.  remain,  every  male  in  Edom

1  Chr.  4.  14.  Seraiah  begat  J .  ||  20.  1.  J.  led  the  army
21.  6.  for  the  king’s  word  was  abominable  to  J.

26.  28.  all  that  Abner  and  J.  had  dedicated

Ezra  2.  6.  of  children  of  Jeshua  and  J.  Neh.  7.  II.

8.  9.  of  the  sons  of  J.  Obadiah  went  with  Ezra
JOAH.

2  Kings  18.  18.  J.  son  of  Asaph  recorder,  Isa.  .36.  3.
1  Chr.  6. 21.  J .  son  of  Zimmah  ||  26. 4.  of  Obed-edom

JOANNA.

Luke  .3.  27.  Juda,  which  was  the  son  of  J.

8.  3.  J.  the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod’s  steward
JO ASH.

Judg.  6.  11.  that  perfaineth  to  J.  the  Abi-ezrite
7-  14.  save  the  sword  of  Gideon  the  son  of  J.

1  Kings  22.  26.  king  of  Israel  said,  carry  him  back

to  Amou  ami  J.  the  king’s  son,  2  Chron  18.  25.

2  Kings  11.2.  Jehosheba  stole  J.  2  Chron.  22.  11.

1.3.  9.  J.  the  son  of  Jehoahaz  reigned  in  his  stead

14.  J.  the  king  of  Israel  wept  over  Elisha

25.  J.  beat  Ben-hadad  three  times, and  recovered

14.  27.  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  J.

1  Chron.  7.  8.  the  sons  of  Becher,  Zemira  and  J.

12.  3.  J.  the  son  of  Shemaiah  the  Gibeathite
27  .  28.  and  over  the  cellars  of  oil  was  J.

2  Chron.  24.  22.  thus  J.  remembered  not  the  kindness
24. .so  they  executed  judgment  against  J.

JOB.

Gen.  46.  13.  the  sons  of  Issachar  J.  and  Shimron
Job  1. 1.  a  man  in  the  land  of  Uz  whose  name  was  J

8.  hast  thou  considered  my  servant  J.  ?  2.  .3.

9.  Satan  said,  doth  J.  fear  God  for  nought  ?

22.  in  all  this  J.  sinned  not  with  his  lips,  2.  10.

2.  7.  Satan  went  and  smote  J.  with  sore  boils

32. 1.  so  these  three  men  ceased  to  answer  J.

2.  against  J.  was  Elihu’s  wrath  kindled

3.  because  they  found  no  answer  and  condemned  J.

12.  there  was  none  of  you  that  convinced  J.

.33.  .31.  mark  well,  O  J.  hearken  unto  me

34.  7.  what  man  is  like  J.  who  drinketh  scorning?

35.  J.  hath  spoken  without  knowledge

.36.  my  desire  is  that  J.  may  be  tried  to  the  end

35.  16.  therefore  doth  J.  open  his  mouth  in  vain

42.  7.  ye  have  not  spoken  as  my  servant  J.  hath,  8.

8.  take  seven  bullocks  and  go  to  my  servant  J.

9.  did  as  Lord  commanded,  the  L.  also  accepted  J.

10.  the  Lord  gave  J.  twice  as  much  as  he  nad
12.  so  the  Lord  blessed  the  latter  end  of  J.

15.  no  women  found  so  fair  as  the  daughters  of  J.

16.  after  this  lived  J.  140  years  and  saw  his  sons
17- so  J.  died,  being  old  and  full  of  days

Ezek.  14.14.  tho’  Noah,  Daniel  and  J .  were  in  it,  20.
Jam.  5.  11.  ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  J.
JOEL.

1  Sam.  8.  2.  name  of  Samuel’s  first-born  was  J.

1  Chr.  4.  .35.  of  the  family  of  Simeon,  J.  and  Jehu

5.  4.  of  the  Reubcnites,  the  sons  of  J.  8.

12.  of  the  Gadites,  J.  the  chief,  and  Shapham

6.  33.  Ileman,  singer,  son  of  J.  son  of  Shemuel

36.  Elkanah  the  son  of  J.  a  Kohathite

7.3.  the  sonsof  Izrahiah,  Michael,  Obadiah,  and  J.

11.  38.  J.  and  Mibhar  were  valiant  men

15.  7.  of  the  sons  of  Gershom,  J.  the  chief

11.  David  called  for  Isaiah  and  J.  the  I.evite

23.  8.  the  sons  of  Laadan,  the  chief  was  J.

26.  22.  the  sons  of  Jehuli,  Zetham  and  J.

27.20.  of  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  J.  was  captain
Ezra  10.  43.  J.  and  Benaiahhad  taken  strange  wives
Neh.  11.  9.  J.  son  of  Zichri  was  their  overseer
Joel  1.1.  the  word  came  to  J.  the  son  of  Pethuel
Acts  2.  16.  which  w  as  spoken  by  the  prophet  J.

JOHAN  AN.

2  Kings  25.  2.3.  J.  came  to  Gedaliah,  Jer  A0.  8,  13.
1  Chron.  .3.  15.  the  sons  of  Josiah,  the  first-born  J.
Ezra  10.  6.  Ezra  went  into  the  chamber  of  J.

Jer.  41.  11.  but  when  J.  heard  of  all  the  evil

43.  4.  so  J .  obey  ed  not  the  voice  of  the  Lord

JOHN  son  of  Zacharias.

Mat.  3.  4.  J.  had  raiment  of  camel’s  hair,  Mark  1 . 6.
14.  Jesus  came  to  be  baptized,  but  J.  forbad  him

4.  12.  then  J.  was  cast  into  prison,  Mark  1. 14.

9.  14.  then  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  J.  Mark
2.  18.  Luke  5.  .3.3.  I  7-  18.  |  11.  1.  John  3.  25.

11.2.  J.  had  heard  the  works  of  Christ,  Luke7.  19.

4.  go  and  shew  J.  these  things,  Luke  7-  22.

7.  Jesus  began  to  say  concerning  J.  Luke  7.  24.

13.  the  law  prophesied  till  J.  Luke  16.  16.

14. 10.  Herod  beheaded  J.  Mark  6.  16.  Luke  9.  9.
21. 26.  all  hold  J.  a  prophet,  Mark  11.  32.  Luke 20.6.

.32.  J.  came  in  the  way  ot  righteousness
MarkQA  1.  Herod  feared  J.  knowing  he  was  just  man
Luke  1. 13.  bear  a  son,  thou  shalt  call  his  name  J .  60.
.3.  15.  all  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  J.

9.  7.  it  was  said,  that  J.  was  risen  from  the  dead


Propek  Names. J  J  Q  R.


JOS


J  o  s


9.  I
21.  2.


John  i .  6.  a  man  sent  from  God,  whose  name  was  J .

19.  and  this  is  the  record  of  J.  32.

29.  next  day.),  seeth  Jesus  coming  unto  him

3.  23.  J.  also  was  baptizing  in  Enon  near  to  Salim

24.  for  J.  was  not  yet  cast  into  prison

4.  1.  that  Jesus  made  more  disciples  than  J.

5.  33.  ye  sent  to  J .  and  he  bare  witness  to  the  truth
36.  but  1  have  greater  witness  than  that  of  J.
10.41.  J.  did  no  miracle  ;  but  all  that  J.  spake
Jets  1,  5.  for  J.  truly  baptized  with  water,  11.  16.
13. 24.  when  J .  had  first  preached  before  his  coming

25.  and  as  J.  fulfilled  his  course,  he  said  whom

See  Baptism,  Baptist.

JOHN,  the  apostle.

Mat.  4.  21.  James  and  J.  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  he
called  them,  10.  2.  Mark  1.  19. 1  3.  17.
Luke  22.  8.  Jesus  sent  Peter  and  J.  to  prepare
’  passover

Acts  3.  1.  Peter  and  J.  went  up  into  the  temple

11.  and  as  the  lame  man  held  Peter  and  J.

4. 13.  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  Peter  and  J.

8.  14.  the  apostles  sent  to  Samaria  Peter  and  J.

12.  2.  Herod  killed  James  the  brother  of  J.

Rev.  1.  1.  signified  it  by  his  angel  to  his  servant  J.

4,  J  .  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  Asia
J.  who  also  am  your  brother  and  companion
.  1  J .  saw  the  holy  city  new  Jerusalem  coming
See  James.

JOHN.

Acts  4.  6.  J.  and  Alexander  gathered  together
JOHN,  surnamed  Mark.

Acts  12. 12.  Peter  came  to  house  of  J .  surnamed  M.

25.  took  with  them  J.  whose  surname  was  Mark

13.  5.  and  they  had  also  J.  to  their  minister

13.  J .  departing  from  them,  returned  to  Jerusalem

15..  37 .  Barnabas  determined  to  take  with  him  J .

-  JON  ADA  B,  called  J  EIIONADAB.

2  Sam.  13.  3.  J.  was  Amnon’s  friend, a  subtile  man
2  Kings  10.  15.  J.  son  of  Rechab  came  to  meet  Jehu
Jer.  35.  6.  J.  our  father  commanded  us,  saying

8.  thus  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  J.  18.

19.  J.  shall  not  want  a  man  to  stand  before  me

JONAH,  or  JONAS.

2  A  mgs  14.  25.  the  word  he  spake  by  his  servant  J.
Jonah  1  3.  J.  rose  up  to  flee  to  l'arshish  from  Lord
7.  so  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell  upon  J.

15.  they  cast. I .  into  the  sea,  the  sea  ceased  raging
17-  J .  was  in  the  belly  of  the  fish  3  days  and  nights

2.  1.  J.  prayed  ||  10.  the  fish  vomited  out  J.

3.  3.  J.  went  to  Nineveh  ||  4.  1.  it  displeased  J.

4.  6.  the  Lord  made  the  gourd  to  come  up  over  J.
Mat.  12.  39.  no  sign  be  given  to  it,  but  the  sign  of

the  prophet.l.  16.  4.  Luke  11. 29,  30.

40.  as  J.  was  three  days  in  the  whale’s  belly

41.  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of  J.

John  21.  15.  Simon  son  of  J.  lovest  tnou  me  ?  16, 17.
JONATHAN.

Judg.  18.  30.  J.  and  his  sons  were  priests  to  Dan
1  Sam.  13.  2.  a  thousand  men  were  with  J .  in Gibeah

22.  but  with  Saul  and  J.  were  swords  found

14.  3.  the  people  knew  not  that  J.  was  gone
13.  J.  climbed  up  upon  his  hands  and  his  feet

27.  J .  heard  not  when  his  father  charged  the  people
39-  though  it  be  inJ.  my  son,  he  shall  surely  die

40.  1  and  J.  my  son  will  be  on  the  other  side

42.  J.  was  taken  ||  44.  thou  shaltsurely  die,  J.

45.  so  the  people  rescued  J.  that  he  died  not

18. 1.  the  soulof  J.  was  knit  with  the  soul  of  David

19.2.  but  J.  Saul’s  son  delighted  much  in  David
4.  J.  spake  good  of  David  to  Saul  his  father

20.  3.  let  not.),  know  this  lest  he  be  grieved
13.  the  Lord  do  so,  and  much  more  to  J.

16.  J .  made  a  covenant  with  the  house  of  David

30.  then  Saul’s  anger  was  kindled  against  J.

33.  J.  knew  it  was  determined  to  slay  David
37.  J .  cried  after  the  lad  II  39.  J.  and  David  knew

23. 16.  J.  arose  and  went  to  David  into  the  wood

31.2.  the  Philistines  slew  J.  1  Chron.  10.2.

2 Sam.  l.  4.  Saul  and  J.  his  son  are  dead  also

22.  the  bow  of  J.  turned  not  back,  sword  of  Saul

23.  Saul  and  J.  were  lovely  in  their  lives

26.  1  am  distressed  for  thee,  my  brother  J.

4.  4.  J .  had  a  son  that  was  lame  of  his  feet,  9.  3.

9.  7-  for  1  will  shew  th.ee  kindness  for  J.  sake

15.  27.  J .  the  son  of  A biathar,  36.  1  Kings  1 .  42, 43.
17-  17-  now  J.  and  Ahimaaz  stayed  by  En-rogel

21.  7  .the  king  spared  Mephibosheth  the  son  of  J.

12.  David  took  the  bones  of  Saul  and  J.

21.  J.  the  son  of  Shitnea slew  him,  1  Chron.  20.7.

23.  32.  of  the  sons  of  J  ashen,  J.  a  valiant  man

1  Chron.  2.  32.  the  sons  of  Jada,  Jether  and  J.
11.31.  the  sons  of  H  ashem,  J .  Ahiham,  and  El iphal

27.  32.  also  J.  David’s  uncle  was  a  counsellor

Ezra  8.  6.  Ebed  the  son  of  J.  went  up  with  Ezra

10.  15.  only  J.  and  Jehaziahwere  employed
Neh.  12.  11.  Joiada  begat  J.  ||  14.  of  Melicu,  J.

35.  Zechariah  the  son  ot  J.  with  a  trumpet
Jer.  37. 15.  put  Jeremiah  in  prison  in  the  house  of  J.

20.  not  to  return  to  the  house  of  J.  38.  26.

40.  8.  Johanan  and  J .  came  to  Gedaliah  to  Mizpeh
See  David,  Saul.

JOPPA.

2. Chr.  2. 16.  bring  it  by  sea  in  floats  to  J.  Ezra?,.  7.
Jonah  1.  3.  Jonah  went  down  to  J .  and  found  a  ship
Acts  9.  36.  was  at  J.  a  disciple  named  Tabitha
42.  it  was  known  throughout  all  J .  many  believed
4.3.  Peter  tarried  many  days  in  J.  with  Simon

10.  5.  send  men  to  J.  and  call  for  one  Simon,  32.

23.  certain  brethren  from  J.  accompanied  him
11.5.  1  was  in  the  city  ot  J .  praying,  saw  a  vision

JORAM,  called  JEHOHAM.

2  Sam.  8.  10.  'loi  sent  J.  his  son  to  king  David

2  Kings  8.  16.  J.  ot  Ahab;  J.  son  of  Jehoshaphat

28.  Syrians  wounded  J.  1129.  J.  went  to  Jezreel
y-  14-  Jehu  son  of  Jehoshaphat  conspired  against  J.

24.  drew  a  bow  and  smote  J .  between  his  arms

11.  2.  Jehosheba  the  daughterof  J.  took  Joash

1  Chron.  26.  25.  of  the  Levites,  .Lover  treasures
2C/tr.  22.  7.  destruction  of  Ahaziah  by  coming  to  J.
Mat.  1.  8.  Josaphat  begat  J.  and  J.  begat  Ozias
JORDAN.

Gen.  13.  11.  Lot  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  J.

604


Num.  34.  12.  the  border  shall  go  down  to  J.  and
goings  out  at  the  salt  sea,  Josh.  13.  27.  I  18.  12.
Josh.  3.  8.  when  ye  are  come  to  J.  stand  still  in  J.

11.  the  ark  passeth  over  before  you  into  J.

15.  J.  overflowed)  all  his  banks  in  harvest
4.  3.  take  twelve  stones  out  of  the  midst  of  J.

17.  commanded  the  priests,  come  ye  up  out  of  J.
23.  the  Lord  your  God  dried  the  waters  of  J.

22.  25.  Lord  hath  made  J.  a  border  between  us
Judg.  3.  28.  they  took  the  fords  of  J.  7.  24.  |  12.  5.

12.  6.  then  they  slew  him  at  the  passages  of  J.

2  Sam.  19.  15.  the  king  returned  and  came  to  J.

1  Kings  2.  8.  Shimei  came  down  to  meet  me  at  J.
7.46.  in  plain  of  J.  did  the  king  cast  them  in  clay
ground  between  Succoth  and  Zarthan,  2  Chr.  4. 17.
17-  3.  Elijali  by  the  brook  Cherith  before  J.  5.

2  Kings  2.  6.  tarry  here,  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  J.

7.  they  two  stood  by  J.  ||  13.  Elisha  stood  by  J.

5. 10.  saying,  go  and  wash  in  J.  seven  times

14.  Naaman  dipped  himself  seven  times  in  J.

6.  2.  let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  to  J .  and  take  a  beam

7.  15.  and  they  went  after  the  Syrians  to  J.

Job  40.  23.  he  trusteth  that  he  can  draw  up  J.

Psal.  42.  6.  1  will  remember  thee  from  the  land  of  J.

114.  3.  the  sea  fled,  J.  was  driven  back,  5.

Jer.  12.  5.  how  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swelling  of  J.  ?
49.  19.  like  a  lion  from  the  swelling  of  J.  50.  44.
Zech.  11.  3.  for  the  pride  of  J.  is  spoiled
Mat.  3.  6.  were  baptized  of  him  in  J.  Mark  1.  5,  9.

13.  then coineth  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  J.to  be  bap.

Beyond  JORDAN.

Gen.  50.  10.  the  floor  of  Atad  which  is  beyond  J.

11.  called  Abel-mizraim,  which  is  beyond  J.
Dent.  3.  25.  see  the  good  land  that  is  beyond  J.
Josh.  9.  10.  did  to  the  kings  of  Amorites  beyond  J.

13.  8.  inheritance  Moses  gave  them  beyond  J.  18.  7.
Judg.  5.  17-  Gilead  abode  beyond  J.  Dan  in  ships
Isa.  9. 1.  the  land  of  Zebulun  and  land  of  Naphtali
beyond  J.  in  Galilee  of  the  nations,  Mat.  4.  15.
John  1.  28.  these  things  done  in  Bethabara  beyond  J .

3.  26.  he  that  was  with  thee  beyond  J.  baptizeth
On  the  other  side  JO  R  DAN .

Deut.  11. 30.  Gerizim,  Ebal,  are  they  not  on  o.  s.  J.
Josh.  7.  7.  been  content  and  dwelt  on  other  side  J .

12.  1.  Reuben,  Gad,  and  naif  the  trihe  on  the  other
side  J.  13.  27,  32.  I  14.  3.  I  17.  5.  |  22.  4.
20.  8.  on  other  side  .1 .  Bezer,  Ramoth,  cities  of  ref.
24.  8.  Amorites  who  dwelt  on  the  other  side  J.
Judg.  7.  25.  brought  heads  of  Orel),  Zeeb  ono.  s.  J.
10.  8.  Israel  on  0.  s.  J.  oppressed  by  the  Amorites
1  Sam.  31.  7-  they  another  s.  .1.  forsook  their  cities
1  Chr.  6. 78.  to  children  of  Merari  cities  on  other  s.  J.
12.  37.  on  the  other  side  J.  were  120,000  men
On  this  side  JOR  DAN.

Num.  32.  19.  our  inheritance  is  fallen  on  this  side  .T.

east-ward,  32.  |  34.  15.  Josh.  1.  14,  15.  |  22.  7.
35. 14.  give  three  cities  on  this  side  J.  Dent.  4.  41.
Dent.  1. 5.  on  t.  .1.  J.  Moses  began  to  declare  this  law

3.  8.  we  took  the  land  on  this  side  J .  from  Arnon
Josh.  9.  1.  kings  this  side  J.  gathered  ag.  Joshua
1  Chr.  26.  30.  of  Hebronites  1700  officers  this  side  J.

Over  JORDAN.

Gen.  32.  10.  with  my  staff  1  passed  over  this  J.
Num..  32.  5.  give  us  this  laud,  bring  us  not  over  J.

21.  if  ye  will  go  all  of  you  armed  over  I.

32.  we  will  pass  over  J.  armed  before  the  Lord

33.  51.  when  ye  are  passed  over  J.  into  the  land
ol  Canaan,  35.  10.  Dent.  12.  10.  |  27.  4,  12.
Deut.  3.  27.  thou  shalt  not  go  over  J .  4.21.  j  31.  2.

4.  22.  I  must  die  in  this  land,  I  must  not  go  over  j.

9.  1.  thou  art  to  pass  over  J.  this  dav,  11.  31.

Josh.  1.  2.  go  over  this  J.  thou  and  all  this  people

11.  within  three  days  ye  shall  pass  over  J.

3.  17.  the  people  were  passed  clean  over  J.  4.  l.

4.  22.  Israel  came  over  this  J.  on  dry  land

7.  7-  brought  this  people  over  J.  to  deliver  us

24.  11.  ye  went  over  J.  and  came  unto  Jericho
Judg.  10.  9.  Ammon  passed  over  J.  to  fight

1  Sam.  13.  7.  some  of  the  Hebrews  went  over  J.

2  ■'•am.  2.  29.  Abner  and  his  men  passed  over  J.

17.  22.  David  and  the  people  passed  over  J.

24.  Absalom  and  all  Israel  passed  over  .1.

19.  15.  Judah  came  to  conduct  the  king  over  J.  .31.

1  Chron.  12.  15.  these  are  they  that  passed  over  J.

19. 17-  David  passed  over  J.  against  the  Syrians
JO  RIM,  JOSE.

Luke  3.  29.  J.  the  son  of  Eliezer,  the  son  of  J.
JOSEDECH.  See  Joshua.

JOSEPH.

Gen.  30.  24.  she  called  his  name  J.  and  said
33.  2.  Jacob  put  Rachel  and  J.  hindermost
35.  24.  sons  of  Jacob  twelve,  the  sons  of  Rachel,
J.  and  Benjamin,  46.  19.  1  Chron.  2.  2.
37.  2.  J.  brought  to  his  father  their  evil  report"

3.  Israel  loved  J.  ||  28.  his  brethren  sold  J.

5.  J.  dreamed  a  dream  |l  33.  J.  is  rent  in  pieces

39.  2.  but  the  Lord  was  with  J.  21.

5.  Lord  blessed  the  Egyptian’s  bouse  for  J.  sake
7-  bis  master’s  wife  cast  her  eyes  upon  J.

20.  J.  master  took  him  and  put  him  in  prison

40.  9.  the  chief  butler  told  his  dream  to  J.

23.  yet  did  not  the  chief  butler  remember  J.

41.  14.  they  brought.!,  out  of  the  dungeon

42.  Pharaoh  put  his  ring  on  J.  hand,  arrayed  him

46.  J.  30  years  old  when  he  stood  before  Pharaoh
49.  J.  gathered  corn  as  the  sand  of  the  sea
55.  go  to  J.  |1  42.  8.  J.  knew  his  brethren

42.  36.  J.  is  not  ||  43.  17.  the  man  did  as  J.  bade

43.  30.  J.  made  haste,  for  his  bowels  did  yearn

45.  3.  I  am  J.  4.  ||  9-  say,  thus  saith  thy  son  J.

26.  they  told  him,  saying,  J.  is  yet  alive,  28.

46.  4.  J.  shall  put  his  hand  upon  thine  eyes

29.  J.  went  up  to  meet  Israel  his  father

47^  12.  J.  nourished  his  father  and  his  brethren

15.  money  failed,  all  the  Egyptians  came  to  J.

29.  Israel  must  die,  and  he  called  his  son  J.

48.  2.  one  told  Jacob,  thy  son  J.  cometh  to  thee

12.  J.  brought  them  from  between  his  knees

15.  Jacob  blessed  J.  and  said,  God  bless  the  lads

49.  22.  J.  is  a  fruitful  bough,  even  a  bough  by  a  well
26.  blessings  shall  be  on  head  of  J.  and  on  him

50.  7.  and  J.  went  up  to  bury  his  father


Gen.5 0.15.  J.  will  peradventure  hate  us  and  requite

16.  and  they  sent  a  messenger  to  J.  saying

17.  J.  went  when  they  spake  unto  hitn

25.  J.  took  an  oath  ot  the  children  of  Israel
Exod.  1.  8.  new  king  which  knew  not  J.  Acts  7.  l f

13.  19.  Moses  took  the  bones  of  J.  with  him
Num.  26.  28.  sons  of.!.  Manasseh,  Ephraim,  37.
Deut.  27.  12.  these  on  Gerizim  to  bless,  Judah,  J.
33. 13.  of  J.  he  said,  blessed  of  the  Lord  be  his  land

16.  let  the  blessing  come  upon  the  head  of  J.

1  Chr.  5.  2.  the  chief  ruler,  but  the  birth  right  was  J.
Psal.  77.  15.  hast  redeemed  the  sons  of  Jacob  and  J
78.67.  moreover  he  refused  the  tabernacle  of.!.
80.  1.  give  ear,  thou  that  leadest  J.  like  a  flock
81.5.  this  lie  ordained  in  J.  for  a  testimony
105.  17.  even  J.  who  was  sold  for  a  servant
Ezek.  37-  16.  write  for  J.  the  stick  of  Ephraim,  19.

47.  13.  tribes  of  Israel,  J.  shall  have  two  portions

48.  32.  one  gate  of  J.  one  gate  of  Benjamin
Amos  5.15.  L.  will  be  gracious  to  the  remnant  of  J

6.  6.  but  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  J
John  4.  5.  near  the  ground  that  Jacob  gave  to  J.
Acts  7.  9.  the  patriarchs  sold  J.  into  Egypt

13.  at  the  second  time  J.  was  made  known

14.  then  J.  called  his  father  Jacob  to  him
Heb.  11.21.  by  faith  Jacob  blessed  the  sons  of  J.

22.  J.  made  mention  of  Israel’s  departing
See  House.

JOSEPH  with  tribe  and  children.

Num.  1.10.  of  the  children  of  J .  of  Ephraim,  32.

13.  11.  of  the  tribe  of  J.  namely  of  Manasseh

34.  23.  the  princes  of  the  children  of  J.  Hanniel
36.  5.  the  tribe  of  the  sons  of  J.  hath  said  well

Josh.  14.  4.  the  children  of  J.  two  tribes,  16.  4.

16.  1.  the  lot  of  children  of  J.  fell  from  Jordan

17.  14.  the  children  of  J.  spake  to  Joshua,  16
1  Chron.  7.  29.  in  these  dwelt  the  children  of  J
Rev.  7.  8.  of  the  tribe  of  J.  were  sealed  12,000

JOSEPH,  husband  of  Mary.

Mat.  1. 16.  Jacob  begat  J.  the  husband  of  Mary

18.  when  as  his  mother  Mary  was  espoused  to  J.

19.  J.  her  husband  being  a  just  man  was  minded"

24.  J.  did  as  angel  of  Lord  had  bidden  him

2.  13.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  J.  19.
Luke  1.  27.  his  name  was  J.  of  the  house  of  David

2.  4.  J.  also  went  up  from  Galilee  to  be  taxed
16.  the  shepherds  found  Mary,  J.  and  the  babe

43.  and  J.  and  his  mother  knew  not  of  it

3.  23.  being  as  was  supposed,  the  son  of  J.

4.  22.  is  not  this  J.  son  i  John  1 .  45.  I  6.  42.

JOSEPH,  the  name  of  divers  men.

Num.  13.  7-  of  the  tribe  of  Issachat  ,  I  gal  son  of  J.

1  Chron.  25.  2.  of  the  sons  of  Asaph,  Zaccur,  J.  9.
Ezra  10.  42.  Shallum,  J.  had  taken  strange  wives
Neh.  12.  14.  of  Shebaniah,  J.  was  a  priest
Mat.  27  .  57.  Jesus’  disciple,  J.  of  Arimathea,  59.

Mark  15.  43,  45.  Luke  23.  50.  John  19.  38.
Luke  3.  24.  who  was  the  son  of  J.  26,  30.

Acts  1.  23.  they  appointed  two,  J.  called  Barsabas
JOSES.

Mat.  13.55.  his  brethren  James  and  J.  Mark  6.  3.

27.  56.  Mary  the  mother  of.!.  Mark  15.  40,  47.
Acts  4.  36.  J.  by  apostles  was  surnamed  Barnabas
JOSHUA,  called  JEHOSHUA,  and  OSHEA.
Exod.  17- 13.  J.  discomfited  Amalek  with  the  sword

14.  write  this,  and  rehearse  it  in  the  ears  of  J.

24. 1.3.  and  Moses  rose  up  and  his  minister  J.

32.  17.  when  J.  heard  the  noise  of  the  people

33.  11.  .1.  departed  not  out  of  the  tabernacle
Num .  13.  8.  of  tribe  of  Ephraim,  Oshea  son  of  Nun

16.  Moses  called  Oshea  the  son  of  N un,  Jehoshua
14.  30.  save  Caleb  and  J.  38. 1  26.  65.  |  32.  12.

27. 18.  take  thee  J.  ||  22.  he  set  J.  before  Fleazar

34.  17.  f  leazar  and  J.  shall  divide  the  land
Dent.  1.  38.  but  J.  shall  go  in  thither,  31.  3.

3.  28.  charge  J.  and  encourage  him,  31.  23.

34.  9.  J.  was  full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom

Josh.  1.  10.  then  J.  commanded  the  officers
2.  1.  J.  sent  two  men  to  spy  secretly  the  land
3.7.  T..  said  to  J.  5.  9.  I  6.  2.  |  7-  10.  I  8.  18.  |  10.8,

4.  8.  the  children  of  Israel  did  as  .1.  commanded

14.  on  that  day  the  Lord  magnified  .1.  in  sight

5.  7.  their  children,  them  J.  circumcised

14.  J .  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth  and  did  worship

15.  and  J.  did  so  ||  6.  27.  so  the  Lord  was  with  J.
7.6.  J.  rent  his  clothes  |l  8.  16.  pursued  after  J.

8.  30.  then  J.  built  an  altar  to  the  Lord

35.  which  J.  read  not  before  all  the  congregation

10.  12.  then  spake  J.  and  said,  sun,  stand  still

42.  and  their  land  did  J.  take  at  one  time
11.9.  J.  did  unto  them  as  the  Lord  bade  him
13. 1.  now  J.  was  old  and  stricken  in  years,  23. 1.

14.  13.  so  J .  blessed  Caleb  and  gave  him  Hebron

18.  10.  J.  cast  lots  for  them  before  the  Lord

19.  49.  Israel  gave  an  inheritance  to  J.

22.  6.  J.  blessed  the  Reubenites  and  Gadites
24.  1.  J.  gathered  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  Shechem

25.  so  J.  made  a  covenant  with  the  people
29.  J .  the  servant  of  the  Lord  died,  Judg.  2.  8.

31.  Israel  served  the  l  ord  all  the  days  of  J.  and

'  of  the  elders  that  overlived  J.  Judg.  2.  7.

1  Sam.  6.  14.  the  cart  came  into  the  field  of  J.  18.

1  Kings  16.34.  which  he  spake  by  J.  the  son  of  Nun

2  A  ings  23.  8.  in  the  entering  in  of  the  gate  of  J.
Hag.  1.  1.  J.  son  of  Josedech,  12,  14.  |  2.  2,  4.

Zech.  3.  1.  and  he  shewed  me  J.  the  high-priest

3.  now  J.  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments
9,  behold,  the  stone  that  I  have  laid  before  J.

6.  11.  make  crowns,  set  them  upon  the  head  of  J.

JOS  I  AH.

1  Kings  13.  2.  a  child  shall  be  born,  J.  by  name

2  [kings  21. 24.  the  people  made  J.  king,  2  Chr.  33.25k
22.  1 .  J .  was  eight  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign

23. 19.  did  .1.  take  away,  24.  2  Chron.  34.  33.

29.  J.  went  against  Pharaoh,  2  Chron.  35.  22.

1  Chr.  3. 15.  thesonsof  J.  were  Johanan,  Jehoiakim

2  Chron.  35.  1.  J.  kept  a  passover  unto  the  Lord

18.  nor  did  kings  keep  such  a  passover  as  J.  kept

19.  in  the  18th  year  of  J.  was  this  passover

23.  archers  shot  at  king  J.  and  wounded  him

24.  all  Judah  and  Jerusalem  mourned  for  J.

25.  Jeremiah  lamented  for  J  men  spake  of  J


IS  R


I  S  R


I  S  R  [PnoPiiH  Na;he».


Jot.  1. 2.  word  of  tire  Lord  came  in  days  of  J.  3.  6.
Zeph.  1.  1.  word  came  to  Zephaniah  in  days  of  J.
Zech.  6.  10.  go  into  the  house  of  .1 .  son  of  Zephaniah
Mat.  1.  10.  .A moil  begat  J.  ||  11.  J.  begat  Jechonias
JO  I'll  AM.

Judy.  9.  5.  J .  yo\ingest  son  of  J  erubbaal  escaped,  21 .

5J.  on  tliem  came  the  curse  of  J .  son  of  J  erubbaal
2  A  mgs  15.  5.  J .  judged  the  people,  £  Chron.  26.  21.

1  Chron.  2.  47.  the  sons  of  Jahdai,  Uegem  and  J.

3.  12.  Amaziah  his  son,  Azariah  his  son,  J.  his  son
5.  17.  were  reckoned  by  genealogies  in  the  days  of  J.

2  Chron.  27.  6.  J.  became  mighty,  because  prepared
Isa.  1.  1.  in  the  days  of  J  .  Ahaz,  Hos.  1.  1.  Mic.  1. 1.
Mat.  1.  9.  Ozias  begat  J.  and  J.  begat  Achaz

ISAAC.

Gen.  17.  19.  thou  shalt  call  his  name  l.  21.  3.

21.  but  my  covenant  will  1  establish  with  I.

21.  10.  shall  not  be  heir  with  my  son,  even  I.

12.  God  said,  hearken  to  Sarah’s  voice,  for  in  I.
shall  thy  seed  be  called,  Horn.  9.  7-  lleh.  11.  18.

22.  2.  take  thine  only  son  1. 1|  9.  Abraham  bound  1.

24.  4.  take  a  wife  for  1.  ||  14.  apt>ointed  for  1.

63.  I.  went  out  to  meditate  in  the  field

67-  1.  was  comforted  after  his  mother’s  death

25.  5.  Abraham  gave  all  that  he  had  unto  I.

9.  his  sons  l.  and  Ishmael  buried  Abraham

11.  God  blessed  I.  1128.  I.  loved  Esau

20.  1.  forty  years  old  when  he  took  Kebekah

21.  and  1.  entreated  the  Lord  for  his  wife  _

26.  1.  was  sixty  years  old  when  she  bare  Esau

26.  1.  1.  went  to  Abimelech  king  of  Philistines

8.  1.  was  sporting  with  Kebekah  his  wife

12.  I.  sowed  and  received  an  hundred-fold

19. 1.  servants  digged  in  valley  and  found  a  well

35.  which  were  a  grief  of  mind  to  1.  and  Kebekah

27.  30.  as  I.  had  made  an  end  of  blessing  Jacob

28. 1. 1.  called  Jacob,  blessed  him,  and  charged  him
5.  1.  sent  Jacob  away,  he  went  to  Padan-aram

31.  42.  except  the  fear  of  1.  had  been  with  me
35.  27.  Jacob  came  to  1.  )|  29.  1.  gave  up  the  ghost

46.  1.  offered  sacrifices  to  the  God  of  Ins  father  I.

48.  15.  God,  before  whom  my  father  1.  did  walk

16.  let  the  name  of  my  father  1.  be  on  them

49.  31.  there  they  buried  1.  11  50.  24.  he  sware  to  1.
Exod.  2.  24.  God  heard  their  groaning  and  remem¬
bered  his  covenant  with  A.  with  1.  Lev.  26.  42.

3. 6.  the  God  of  1.15, 16. 1  4.  5.  Gen.  32.  9.  1  Kings
18.  36.  1  Chron.  29.  18.  2  Chron.  30.  6.  Mat.  22.

32.  Mark  12.  26.  Luke  20.  37.  Acts  3.  13.  17-  32.
Josh.  24.  3.  I  multiplied  his  seed  and  gave  him  1.

4.  1  gave  unto  1.  Jacob  and  Esau,  and  to  Esau

1  Chron.  16.  16.  his  oath  unto  1.  Psal.  105.  9.

Jer.  3.3.  26.  his  seed  to  be  rulers  over  the  seed  of  1.
Amos  7-  9.  and  the  high  placesof  I.  shall  bedesolate

16.  drop  not  thy  word  against  the  house  of  I.

Mat.  1.  2.  Abraham  begat  I.  and  I.  begat  Jacob,

Luke  3.  34.  Acts  7.  8.
8.  11.  many  shall  sit  down  with  I.  in  the  kingdom
Luke  13.  28.  when  ye  shall  see  I.  in  kingdom  of  God
Rom.  9.  10.  Kebekah  had  conceived  by  our  father  I.
Gal.  4. 28.  we,  brethren,  as  1.  was,  are  of  the  promise
Heh.  J 1.  9.  dwelling  in  tabernacles  with  Land  lac.

17.  by  faith  Abraham  offered  up  I.  Jam.  2.  21.
20.  by  faith  I.  biessed  Jacob,  Esau,  about  things

ISAIAH  or  ESA  IAS.

2  Kinys\9.  2.  Hezekiahsent  Eliakim  tol.  Isa.  37 .2.

20. 1.  Hezekiah  was  sick,  1.  came  to  him,  Isa.  38. 1.

11.  and  I.  cried  unto  the  Lord,  2  Chron.  32.  20.

£  Chron.  26.  22.  his  acts  did  I.  write,  32.  32.

Isa.  20.  3.  as  my  servant  I.  hath  walked  naked
Mat.  3.  3.  spoken  by  the  prophet  E.  4.  14. 1  8.  17.

I  12.  17.  I  13.  14.  Luke  3.  4.  John  1.  23.  1
12.  38.

15.  7-  well  did  E.  prophesy  of  you,  Mark  7 .6.
Luke  4. 17-  was  delivered  to  him  book  of  prophet  E.
John  12.  39-  because  that  E.  said  again,  he  blinded
41.  these  tilings  said  E.  when  he  saw  his  glory
Acts  8.  28.  the  eunuch  read  E.  the  prophet,  30.

28.  25.  well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by  E.  the  prophet
Rom.  9.  27.  E.  also  crieth  concerning  Israel

29.  as  E.  said  before,  except  the  Lord  had  left  us

10.  16.  E.  saitli,  L.  who  hath  believed  our  report  ?
20.  E.  is  very  bold,  aud  saith,  I  was  found

15. 12.  again  E.  saith,  there  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse
1SCAKIOT.  See  Jodas.
ISH-BOSHETH.

2  Sam.  2.  8.  Abner  took  1.  and  set  him  over  Gilead

3.  8.  Abner  was  very  wroth  for  the  words  of  1.

14.  David  sent  messengers  to  I.  Saul's  son

4.  8.  they  brought  the  head  of  I.  unto  David

12.  but  they  took  the  head  of  I.  and  buried  it

ISHMAEL.

Gen.  16.  11.  thou  shalt  call  his  name  L  15.

16.  Abram  was  86  years  old  when  Hagar  bare  I.

17.  j8.  said  to  God,  O  that  I.  might  live  before  thee

20.  as  for  I.  I  have  heard  thee,  I  have  blessed  him
25.  I.  was  13  years  old  when  he  was  circumcised
25.  9.  his  sons  Isaac  and  1.  buried  Abraham
12.  the  generations  of  1.  1.3,  16.  1  C 'hr.  1.  29,  31.

17.  these  are  the  years  of  the  life  of  I.  137.

28.  9.  then  went  Esau  unto  1.  and  took  Mahalath
£  Kings  25.  23.  1.  came  to  Gedaliah,  Jer.  40.  8.

25.  1.  came  and  ten  men  with  him,  Jer.  41.  1.

1  Chron.  1.  28.  the  sons  of  Abraham,  Isaac  and  I.
8.  38.  Bocheru  and  1.  were  sons  of  Azel,  9.  44.

2  Chron.  19.  11.  Zebadiah  son  of  1.  the  ruler

23.  1.  Jehoiada  took  I.  into  covenant  with  him
Ezra  10.  22.  1.  Elasah,  had  taken  strange  wives
Jer.  40.  14.  king  of  the  Ammonites  hath  sent  1.

15.  I  will  slay  I.  II  41.  2.  I.  smote  Gedaliah

16.  not  do  this  thing,  for  thou  speakest  falsely  of  I.
41.  6.  I.  went  forth  to  meet  them,  weeping

10.  then  I.  carried  away  captive  residue  ot  people
12.  then  Johanan  went  to  fight  with  I.

15.  but  I.  escaped  from  Johanan  with  eight  men
1SHMA  ELITES.

Gen.  37.  27.  come,  let  us  sell  him  to  the  I.

39.  1.  Potiphar  bought  him  of  the  hand  of  the  I.
Judg.  8.  24.  had  ear-rings,  because  tney  were  I.
Psal.  83.  6.  Edomites  and  1 .  confederate  against  thee
1SKAEL.

Gen.  32.  28.  thy  name  shall  be  no  more  Jacob  but  I.


Gen.  35.  10.  but  1.  shall  lie  thy  name,  1  Kings  18.31.

47.  27.  1.  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  Goshen
31.  and  1.  bowed  himself  upon  the  bed’s  head

48. 20.  in  thee  shall  1 .  bless,  saying,  God  make  thee
49.  24.  from  thence  is  the  shepherd,  the  stone  of  I.

Exod.  4.  22.  1.  is  my  son  |]  17-  11.  I.  prevailed

5.  2.  that  l  should  obey  nis  voice  to  let  I.  go?

14.  5.  that  we  have  let  1.  go  from  serving  us

25.  lefus  flee  from  1.  for  Ixird  fiyhteth  for  them

30.  the  Lord  saved  1.  that  day  from  Egyptians

32.  13.  remember  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  1 .  thy  serv.
Lev.  24.  10.  her  son  anil  a  man  of  l .  strove  together
Sum.  10.29.  Lord  hath  spoken  good  concerning  1.

36.  return,  O  Lord,  to  the  many  thousands  of  1.
20.  14.  thus  saith  thy  brother  l.  let  us  pass

21.2.  I.  vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Ixird,  and  said

17.  then  1.  sang  this  song,  spring  up,  O  well
23.  7.  defy  1.  II  24.  17-  a  sceptre  rise  out  of  1.

23.  shall  be  said  of  l.  what  hath  God  wrought?
24.18.  Edom  a  possession,  and  I .  shall  do  valiantly
25.  8.  Phinehas  went  after  the  man  of  1 .  and  thrust
Deut.  25.6.  that  his  name  be  not  put  out  of  1.

33.  10.  shall  teach  1.  thy  law,  Jacob  thy  judg.  and

28.  I.  then  shall  dwell  in  safety  alone,  fountain
Josh.  7.  8.  when  1.  turned  their  backs  before  enemies

11.  I.  hath  sinned  ||  22.  22.  and  I.  he  shall  know

16.  so  Joshua  took  the  mountain  of  1.

24.31.  1.  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Joshua
Judg.  1.  28.  it  came  to  pass  when  I.  was  strong

2.  22.  that  through  them  I  may  prove  I.  3.  1,  4.

5.  9.  my  heart  is  toward  the  governors  of  1.

6.6.  1.  wTas  greatly  impoverished  by  Midianites
14. save  1.15,36,37.117-2.  lest  I.  vaunt  themselves

10.  9.  so  that  I.  was  sore  distressed

16.  his  soul  was  grieved  for  the  misery  of  I .

11.13.  because  1.  took  away  my  land  ev.  to  Jabbok

20.  35.  the  Lord  smote  Benjamin  before  I.

1  Sam.  4.  2.  I.  was  smitten,  10.  ||  17-  1.  is  fled

9. 20.  on  whom  is  the  desire  of  I.  is  it  not  on  thee  ?

13.4.  heard  that  I.  also  was  had  in  abomination

15.  29.  also  the  strength  of  I.  will  not  lie

17.  45.  in  the  name  ot  the  God  of  the  armies  of  I.

2  Sam.  1. 19.  the  beauty  of  I .  is  slain  on  high  places
7.23.  what  one  nation  is  like  thy  people  l.r

11.  11.  the  ark,  and  1.  and  Judah  abide  in  tents
19.  8.  for  1.  had  tied  every  man  to  his  tent

1  Kings  A.  20.  Judah  and  t.  were  many  as  the  sand
25.  Judah  and  l.  dwelt  safely,  Jer.  23.  6

9.7.  I-  shall  be  a  proverb  among  all  people
11.  25.  he  abhorred  1.  ||  12.  19.  so  1.  rebelled
14.  15.  Lord  shall  smite  1.  as  a  reed  is  shaken

18.  17.  Allah  said,  art  thou  he  that  troubleth  l.  ?

2  Kings  10.  32.  the  Lord  began  to  cut  I.  short
14. 12.  Judah  was  put  to  the  worse  before  1.

27.  not  that  he  would  blot  out  the  name  of  I.

17.  6.  carried  I.  away  into  Assyria,  23.  |  23.  27

34.  the  children  of  Jacob,  whom  he  named  1

1  Chron.  11.  10.  the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  I.

21.  5.  all  they  of  I.  were  a  thousand  thousand

29.  18.  ’  e  God  of  1.  1  Kings  18.  36.  2  Chron.  6.

16.  |  30.  6.  Jer.  31.  1.

2  Chron.  9.8.  because  thy  God  loved  [ .  to  establish
Ezra  2.59.  whether  they  were  of  1.  Neh.J.dl.

3. 11.  his  mercy  endureth  foi  ever  towards  1.

10.  10.  strange  wives  to  increase  the  trespass  of  1 .
Psal.  14.  7.  Jacob  shall  rejo.  I.  shall  be  glad,  53.  6.

22.  23.  glorify  him,  and  fear  him,  all  ye  seed  of  I.
25.  22.  redeem  I.  O  God,  out  of  all  his  troubles
68.  26.  bless  ye  the  Lord  from  the  fountain  of  l.
78.59.  when  God  heard  this,  he  abhorred  I.

81.  11.  would  not.  hearken,  1.  would  none  of  me

13.  O  that  my  people  I.  had  walked  in  my  ways
83.  4.  that  name  of  I .  may  be  no  more  in  l  emem br.
114.  2.  Judah  was  his  sanctuary,  1.  his  dominion
121.  4.  he  that  keepeth  I.  shall  neither  slumber
125.  5.  but  peace  shall  be  upon  1.  128.  6.

1.30.7-  let  l.  hope  in  the  Lord,  131.  3.

135. 4.  Lord  hath  chosen  I .  for  his  peculiar  treasure
147.  2.  he  gathereth  together  the  outcasts  of  1.

149.  2.  let  1.  rejoice  in  him  that  made  him

Isa.  1.  3.  but  I.  doth  not  know  nor  consider

19.  25.  blessed  be  I.  mine  inheritance

27.  6.  I.  shall  blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  world

41.8.  but  thou  l.art  my  servant,  seed  of  Abraham
42. 24.  who  gave  1.  to  robbers  ?  did  not  the  Lord  ?

43.  28.  and  l  have  given  I.  to  reproaches

44.  5.  shall  surname  himself  by  the  name  of  I.

45.  4.  for  I.  mine  elect’s  sake,  I  have  called  thee

17. 1.  shall  be  saved  in  Lord  with  everlasting  salv.
25.  in  the  Lord  shall  the  seed  of  1.  be  justified

48.  1.  which  are  called  by  the  name  of  1.

49.5.  though  1 .  be  not  gathered,  1.  shall  be  glorious

6.  be  my  servant  to  restore  the  preserved  of  1.
56.  8.  the  Lord  which  gathei*eth  the  outcasts  of  I.
63.  16.  and  though  I.  acknowledge  us  not
Jer.  2.  3.  1.  was  holiness  to  the  Lord  and  first-fruits

14.  is  I.  a  servant  ?  ||  3.  23.  the  salvation  of  I.

10.  16.  1.  is  the  rod  of  his  inheritance,  51.  19.

14.8.  O  Lord,  hopeof  1.  Saviour  in  trouble,  17. 13.

48.  27-  for  was  not  1.  a  derision  unto  thee  ?

49.  1.  hath  1.  no  sons  ?  hath  he  no  heir  ?

2.  I.  shall  be  heir  to  them  that  were  his  heirs
50. 17.  I.  is  a  scattered  sheep,  lions  have  driven

19.  1  will  bring  1.  again  to  his  habitation

20.  iniqu.  of  1.  be  sought  for  and  shall  be  none
51.  5.  1.  hath  not  been  forsaken  of  his  God

Lam.  2.  5.  the  Lord  hath  swallowed  up  1.

Ezek.  11.  10.  1  will  judge  you  in  the  border  of  I.

13.  ah  Lord  God,  wilt  thou  make  a  full  end  of  1.  ?
37.28.  shall  know  that  1  the  L-ord  do  sanctify  I.
44. 10.  are  gone  from  me,  when  1.  went  astray

Hos.  4. 15.  though  thou  I.  play  harlot,  let  not  J  udah
16.  1.  slideth  back  as  a  backsliding  heifer
5.  3.  I.  is  not  hid  from  me,  I .  is  defiled,  6.  10.

5.  I.  shall  fall  ||  8.  2.  I.  shall  cry  to  me,  my  God

8.  3.  I.  hath  cast  off'  the  thing  that  is  good

8.  I.  is'  swallowed  up  )l  9.  7.  1-  shall  know  it

14.  1.  hath  forgotten  his  Maker,  and  buildeth

9.  10.  I  found  1.  like  grapes  in  the  wilderness

10. 1. 1.  is  an  empty  viue||  8.  the  sin  of  1.  be  destroy.

6.  I.  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own  counsel

11. 1.  when  1.  was  a  child,  then  l  loved  him


Has.  11. 8.  how  shall  1  deliver  thee,  I.  ?  my  heart  is

turned

12. 12.  I.  served  and  kept  sheep  for  a  wife

Joel  .3.2.  will  plead  with  them  for  my  heritage  I.
Arnot  7.  11.  1.  shall  surely  be  led  captive,  17.

Mic.  1.  15.  shall  come  to  Adullam  tire  glory  of  1.

5.  1.  they  shall  smite  the  judge  of  I.  with  a  rod
Luke  1.  54.  he  hath  holpen  his  servant  1.  in  mercy
John  3.  It),  art  thou  a  master  of  I.  and  knosvest  not  ?
Acts  28.  20.  that  for  the  hope  of  1. 1  am  bound
Rom.  9.  6.  for  they  are  not  all  I.  which  are  of  1.

27.  Esaias  crieth  concerning  1.  tho’  number  of  1.

31.  1.  which  followed  the  law  of  ri^heousness

10.  19.  but  I  say,  did  not  1.  know  ?  Moses  saith

11.  7-  1.  hath  not  obtained  what  he  seeketh  for
1  Cor.  10.  18.  behold,  I.  after  the  flesh

Gal.  6.  16.  peace  and  mercy  on  them,  and  on  I.  ofG.
Phil.  3.  5.  of  the  stock  of  I .  of  the  tribe  of  Benjam.
Against  ISKAEL.

Num.  21.  1.  Arad  fought  ay  ■  1 .  ||  2.3.  Silio.  against  I.

23.  23.  is  there  any  divination  against  1.  '

25.  3.  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindle  against
I.  32.  13.  Judg.  2.  14,  20.  |  3.  8.  |  10.  ?  2  Sam.
24.  1.  2  Kings  13.  3.  1  Chron.  27  .  24.  r  Chron.

28.  1.3.  Psal.  78.  21.

Josh.  8.  14.  the  kings  of  Canaan  against  I.  1 1  5.

24.  9.  Balak  king  of  Moab  warred  against  1.

Judg.  3.12.  Eglon  against  1. 1|  6. 2.  Midia.11  against  I.

11.4.  childr.  of  Ammon  made  war  against  1.  5,  20.

25.  Balak,  did  he  ever  strive  against  1.  ?

1  Sam.  4.  2.  the  Philistines  put  themselves  in  array
against  1.  7.  7,  10.  I  .31.  1.  1  Chron.  10.  1.

1  Kings  20.26.  Ben-had  ad  against  1.  2  Kings  6.8.

2  Kings  1.  l.then  Moab  rebelled  against  I.

3.  27.  there  was  great  indignation  against  I.

17. 13.  yet  the  Lord  testified  against  1.  and  Judah

1  Chron.  21.  1.  and  Satan  stood  up  against  I.

2  Chron.  11.  1.  Kehoboam  went  out  against  1.

Jer.  36.  2.  write  the  words  I  have  spoken  against  I.
Amos  7.  16.  thou  sayest,  prophesy  not  against  l.
Rom.  11.  2.  he  maketh  intercession  against  1.

All  ISKAEL.

Exod.  18.  25.  Moses  chose  able  men  out  of  all  I.
Num.  16.34.  all  1.  round  about  tied  at  cry  of  them
Deut.  13.  11.  all  I.  shall  hear  and  fear,  21.21.

Josh.  7-25.  all  1.  stoned  Achan  with  stones
Judg.  8.27.  all  1.  went  a  whoring  after  theephod

1  Sam.  2.  22.  Eli  heard  all  that  his  sons  did  to  all  1.

3.  20.  all  1.  knew  that  Samuel  was  a  prophet

4.  1.  word  of  Samuel  came  to  all  I.  now  I .  went

11.  2.  that  l  may  lay  it  for  a  reproach  on  all  I.

18.  16.  but  all  I.  and  Judah  loved  David

28.  3.  all  1.  had  lamented  Samuel,  and  buried  him

2  Sam.  3.  12.  to  bring  about  all  1.  unto  thee

37.  all  I.  understood  that  it  was  not  of  king  David

12.  12.  but  1  will  do  this  thing  before  all  I.

14.  25.  in  all  1.  none  so  much  praised  as  Absalom

16.  21.  all  1.  shall  hear  that  thou  art  abhorred

17.  10.  all  1.  know  thy  father  is  a  mighty  man

18.  17.  and  all  1.  fled  every  one  to  his  tent

19-  11.  seeing  the  speech  of  all  I.  is  come  to  me
1  Kings  1.  20.  the  eyes  of  .ill  I.  are  upon  thee
2. 15.  thou  knowest  that  all  I .  set  their  faces  on  me
3.  28.  all  I.  heard  of  the  judgment  of  Solomon
8. 62.  the  king  and  all  I.  offered  sacrifice  before  Ld.

12.  18.  all  1.  ston.  Adoram  with  stones  that  he  died

14.  13.  all  1.  shall  mourn  for  him,  and  bury  him

18.  19.  gather  to  me  all  1.  unto  mount  Carmel

22.  17.  I  saw  all  I.  scattered,  2  Chron.  18  16.

1  Chron.  11.4.  David  and  all  1.  went  to  Jerusalem

13. 8.  David  and  all  I.  played  before  G.  with  might

15.  28.  all  1.  brought  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant
17.  6.  wheresoever  I  have  walked  with  all  1.

29.  23.  all  1.  and  the  princes  obeyed  Solomon

2  Chron.  12.  1.  all  1.  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord

13.  4.  Abijah  said,  hear  me,  Jeroboam,  and  all  1.

15.  God  smote  Jeroboam  and  all  1.  before  Judah

28.  23.  they  were  the  ruin  of  him  atid  of  all  I.

29.  24.  to  make  an  atonement  for  all  1.  Ezra  6.  17.
31.  1.  all  1.  went  out  and  brake  the  images

Ezra2.79.  all  I.  dwelt  in  their  cities,  Neh.  7.73.

10.  5.  he  made  all  1.  swear  to  do  this  thing
Neh.  12.47.  all  I.  gave  the  portions  of  the  singers
Dan.  9.7 .  confusion  of  faces  belong,  to  us,  to  all  I.

11.  yea,  all  I.  have  transgressed  thy  law
Mai.  4.  4.  remember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  for  all  1.
Rom.  9.  6.  for  they  are  not  all  I.  which  are  of  I.

11.  26.  so  all  1.  shall  be  saved,  as  it'is  written

See  Children.

Camp  of  I S  K  A  E  L.

Exod.  14. 19-  angel  which  went  before  the  camp  of  I.

20.  a  cloud  between  Egyptians  and  the  camp  of  l.
Josh.  6.  18.  lest  ye  make  the  camp  of  l.  a  curse

23.  they  left  them  without  the  camp  of  I.

2  Sam.  1.  3.  out  of  the  camp  of  1.  am  I  escaped
2  Kings  3.  24.  when  they  came  to  the  camp  of  I.
See  Congregation,  Elders.

For  ISKAEL.

Exod.  18.  1.  all  that  God  had  done  for  1.  8.  Josh.

24.  31.  Judg.  2.7,  10.  1  Kings  8.  66.
Josh.  10.  14.  for  the  Lord  tought/or  I.  42.

Judg.  6.  4.  the  Midianites  left  no  sustenance  for  I.

1  Sam.  7.  9.  Samuel  cried  unto  the  Lord  for  I.

30.  25.  that  David  made  it  an  ordinance  for  I.

2  Kings  14.  26.  there  v'as  not  any  helper  for  I.

1  Chron.  6.  49-  to  make  an  atonement/or  1.  as  Mo¬
ses  had  commanded,  22.  1.  Neh.  10.  3.1.
Ps.  81. 4.  this  was  statute  for  I .  law  of  G.  of  Jacob
Isa.  46. 13.  place  salvation  in  Zion  for  1.  my  glory
Zech.  12. 1.  the  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  for  i.
Rom.  10. 1.  my  prayer  to  G  .for  I.  is,  they  be  saved
From  ISKAEL.

Exod.  12.  15.  shalt  be  cut  off  from  I.  Num.  19.  13.
Num.  25.4.  that  wrath  may  be  turned  away  from  I.
Deut.  17.  12.  put  evil  from  1.22.22.  Judg.  20.  13.
Judg.2\.6.  there  is  one  tribe  cut  off  from  I.

1  Sam.  4.  21.  the  glory  is  departed  from  I.  22.

7.  14.  the  cities  taken  from  I.  were  restored
17.  26.  that  taketh  away  the  Jeproach  from  I.

2  Sam.  24.  25.  and  the  plague  was  stayed  from  I.
Neh.  13.  3.  separated  from  1.  the  mixed  multitude
Isa.  9. 14.  Lord  will  cut  off  from  I.  head  and  tail

605


Proper  Sa*i<.]  1  S  R


I  S  R


I  S  S


ff#j.  8.  6.  fbr/jw  I.  was  it  also.  the  workm.  made  it
oscf  Goo,  Holy  (  -me  r  Israel.  lloi  iE.

/■  ISRAEL.

Grw.  34. 7-  because  he  had  ••  rougiit  tolly  n  1.  Dour.

...  21.  Jos ~  '-'0- SOL 6, 10.

49-7-  divide  them  iu  Jac  b.  scatter  tr.etn  n  I.

I  ex .  20.  2.  strangers  s-'-tc urn  is  I.  22.  IS.  Ezet.  14. 7-
V u.  l.  3.  able  to  so  f  rth  to  war  n  I.  45.  1 26. 2.

16.  these  were  neaosof  thousands  i»  I.  10.  4.

3.  13-  I  hallowed  to  me  all  the  first  b  rn  rw  l.

18.  14.  every  thin?  devoted  in  1.  snail  be  thine
£1.  si’  en  all  the  tenth  in  I.  for  an  inheritance

23.  21.  nor  hatn  he  seen  perverseness  in  I.

Dent.  17.  4.  abomination  is  wrought  in  i.  22.  21.
25.  7-  to  raise  up  to  r.is  brother  a  name  it  l.

10.  his  name  be  called  ft  I.  the  house  of  him  that

34.  10.  arose  c.-t  a  prophet  since  in  1.  like  Moses
Jrsi.  6.  25.  Ra  a  cileth  ra  I.  because  hid  spies
Judg.  5.  "  they  ceased  in  I.  till  that  I  Deborah
arose,  that  I  arose  a  mother  in  i.

8.  wa?  tr ere  a  spear  seen  among  40,v»J  in  1.  .*

11.  392  JBStom  in  l .  to  lament  Jephthah's  daughter
17-  6.  vas  no  kingix  I.  18.  1.  1 19-  1-  121.  25.

18.  1C .  or  that  thou  be  priest  to  a  family  in  I.

21.7  come  to  pass  in  I.  one  trite  .a  aina  in  T.
Rut  4. 7-  this  was  trie  manner  in  former  times  in  I .
ojneeming  redeeming,  this  was  a  testimony  in  I.

14.  that  his  name  mav  be  famous  in  I.

I  •S*"'..  3.  ll.  bebol  i.  I  will  do  a  thing  in  I.

9. 9.  btroreti  t  e  in  I.  when  a  man  went  to  inquire

11.  13.  Lord  hath  wro_^:.t  salvation  in  I.  14.  45.

17 ;  25.  will  make  his  father's  bouse  free  in  I .

46.  the  earth  may  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  I.

18.  18-  or  what  is  my  father's  family  in  I.

£6.15.  Davii  >ai  j  to  Abner,  who  is  a-,e  to  thee  in  Id

3  38.  there  is  a  great  n  an  fai.en  n  I.

5.  £.  thou  brougrtest  tn  1 .  1  Ckron.  11.  2.

13.  12-  no  such  thing  ought  to  be  done  in  I.

13.  tbou  S' ait  be  as  one  of  tr.e  tools  in  I.

19.  22-  52a.  an>  re  put  to  eath  this  day  in  I.  ?
iW.  19-  I  am  one  tn=:  is  faithtul  and  peaceable  tn

I.  thou  see-est  to  aestroy  a  mother  in  I.

21.  4.  nor  ror  us  sralt  thou  kill  any  man  in  I.

1  Kings  14.  10.  behold.  I  will  cut  off  him  that  is  !
shut  up  and  left  in  1.21.  21.  2  Kino •  9.  8.

18.  36.  let  it  re  kaowm,  that  thou  art  God  in  1.

19. 18-  yet  I  have  left  me  seven  thousand  in  I.

Z  Kings  i .  3.  because  there  is  not  a  God  tn  I .  6,  16.

5- 8.  re  shall  know  mat  there  is  a  prophet  in  1.

15.  there  is  no  God  in  al I  the  earth  but  in  I.

6. 12.  the  prophet  in  I.  teheth  the  king  of  Israel

1  Ckron.  12.  40.  for  there  was  joy  in  I.

2  c  Aren.  7-  18.  not  rail  thee  a  man  to  be  ruler  in  I.

24.  16.  t  urie-i  Pit.,  beca^s-r  he  rat  d  re  good  in  I.

34.  £1.  inquire  for  them  that  are  left  in  I.

33.  Josiafi  maoe  a.,  present  tn  1. t>  serve  the  Lord

35.  18.  was  no  passo- tr  use  to  tat  kept  rn  I.

25.  singing-men  mane  them  an  ordinance  tn  I.

£-z~*  *  _•  2-  yet  there  is  hope  in  I.  o  n  erning  this
P;«i.  76. 1.  known  in  Juca  .  hb  name  b  great  in  I.

78.5.  testirr.oQx  in  Jacob,  and  he  appr  inter  law  tn  I.
Ira.  8  18.  are  for  signs  and  for  w  n  ers  in  I.

44.  £3.  the  Lord  hath  gl  .rihed  himself  m  I.

Jer.  29.  23.  they  have  committed  villanj  in  [.

32.  £0.  which  hast  set  sinus  and  won  :ers  in  I.

£k- A.  12. 23.  no  more  use  it  as  a  proverb  in  1 . 18. 3.

39.  7-  shall  enow  that  I  am  the  holy  One  in  I.

11.  will  gj\ e  to  Gog  a  place  of  graves  in  I.

44.  28  ye  shall  gi  e  them  no  possession  in  I.

29-  eyery  dedicator  t  mg  in  I.  vail  be  theirs
43.  8.  in  the  land  shall  be  his  possession  in  I.

16.  sna.,  give  thb  oblation  for  the  prince  in  I.
H:s.  13.  1.  Ephraim  sp-ae.  be  exalted  hi::  self  in  I.
Mur.  5  •  ••  come  out  of  thee,  tr&t  is  to  be  ruler  in  1.
MmJ.  £.  11.  an  ai»mina'kn  b  committed  m  I.

Mat.  8.  10.  so  great  faith,  no  not  in  I.  I  jure  7.  9.

9.  33.  marvelled,  savins,  it  was  never  so  seen  in  I.
Lnit  2.  34.  for  me  fall  and  rbins  of  tnanv  in  I.

4.  25.  many  widows  were  in  1.  27.  lepers  in  I.

See  King.  Kings.

Land  f  ISRAEL.

1  Sam.  13.  IQ.  no  smith  found  in  all  the  land  c/l.

£  Kings  5.  2.  brought  a  little  maid  out  of  land  of  1 .

6-  23.  tanas  oi  Syria  came  no  m-  re  into  land  of  I

1  Ckron.  13.  £.  sene  to  brethren  left  in  land  of  1 .

22.  2.  to  gather  together  the  s‘ rangers  that  were  in

the  land  of  I  2  Ckron.  2.  17.  30.  25.

2  Ckron.  34. 7-  cut  n  10  c  Is  through  the  and  of  i
Ezek.  7.  2.  thus  saitn  the  L  rd  to  the  land  tf  I.

11.  17.  and  I  will  give  you  the  land  of  I.

12.  19.  thus  saith  the  Lord  of  the  land  •  f  I.

13. 9-  nor  shall  they  enter  into  land  of  I.  20.  38.

3 . 42.  Ming  you  Into  the  land  of  1.  37-  12.

21.  2.  and  prophesy  against  the  land  of  l.

£5.  3.  thou  saiast.  Aha.  aaainst  the  land  of  I.

6.  rejoiceist  wuc  espite  against  the  land  of  I.

27. 17-  Juuah  anc  land  of  I.  were  try  merchants

38. 18-  when  Gog  shall  come  against  the  land  of  I .
19-  shall  be  a  great  shaking  in  the  land  of  I.

40.  2.  in  151  ns  '  t  brouhi.t  rr.fc  into  Imd  of  I.

Mat  2.  3  ■_  go  into  the  land  of  I .  for  they  are  dead

21.  tora  toe  d..L  anc  came  into  the  land  tf  I.
Made  ISKAr.L  ‘in.

1  Ktngi  14.  16.  Jeroboam  n  ode  I.  to  tin.  15.  26,  30,

„  _  34.116.19,  26.  £2. 32.

16.  2.  Eaasna  node  my  people  I.  to  sin,  13.

21. 22.  .A  t  ab  pro  ok eo  the  I  s  r<I .  and  w,  ade  I .  to  un

2  Ktngi  3.  3.  Jer  boa  m  son  of  N  eoat  who  made  I .  to

sin,  10.  29.  Vi .  |  13.  2,  6,  11. 1  14.  24.  ,  15.  9.
18,  24.  £8  £3.  15.

Men  of  ISRAEL.

Jotk.  10.  24.  Joshua  called  ror  all  the  men  of  1.

Judg,  Zb.  1 1.  nien  tf  I.  ga  rered  against  the  city
£0.  rren  of  I.  u  ent  out  22. encouraged  themselves
3d.  the  men  of  I.  gave  place  to  the  Benjamites

1  Sam.  14.  £4.  -  he  men  of  . .  were  distiesseG  that  cay
31. 1.  the  men  of  I.  Sed  from  the  Philistines

2  ‘'utm.  k.  1 1 .  A  1’r.tr  was  bc^tf-n  aip]  the  men,  of  I.

15.  13.  hearts  of  the  men  of  I.  axe  after  Absalom
16. 18.  who  ;  the  men  f  I.  cnoose,  fcb  will  1  be

19.  43.  wor.  s  of  Ju  ar.  r.ercer  tr  an  of  the  men  of  1 .

25.  9.  ar.-:  the  men  of  I.  -ere  go-ae  away

606


P-al.  78.  31.  smote  down  the  chosen  me'-  cf  I.

Isa.  41.  14.  fear  not.  ye  men  of  l.  1  will  help  you
Jets  2.  22.  ye  men  ,f  I .  hear  these  words
3.  12.  ye  men  of  L  w  hy  marvel  ye  at  this  ?

5.  35.  ye  men  of  I.  take  heed  to  yourselves

13.  16.  Paul  Said,  ye  men  ,f  I.  give  audience

21.  28.  Jews  of  Asia  c.  ving  out,  men  of  1.  help

O  IbRAEL.

Erod.  32.  4.  they  said,  t:  ese  be  thy  gods.  O  I.
fVicw.  24.5.  bow  goo«lly  are  thy  tabernacles,  0  1.
Dent.  4.  1.  hearken,  tr  I.  27  9.  Isa.  48.  12-
5.  1.  hear,  O  I.  6.  3.  4.  |  9.  1. 1  90.  3.  Psal.  50.  7.

I  81.  8.  La.  44.  1.  Mari  12.  29.

35.  29.  happy  art  trou,  O  1.  who  is  like  to  thee  :
Jo  -  :.7.13.  an  accursed  thing  iuthe  midst  of  thee, O  1.
£  -baw.  £0.  1.  he  said,  every  man  to  hb  tents,  t>  I.

1  Kings  12.  16.  2  Ckron.  10.  16.
1  Kings  12.  £8.  bvtr  ’d  thy  gods.  O  I.  which  brought
Psa. .  1 15.  9- 1>  I .  trust  thou  in  the  Lord,  their  hel  p
Isa.  40.  27.  why  speakest  thou,  O  I.  my  way  bilid
43.  1.  O  I.  fear  not,  Jer.  30.  10. 1  46.  27.

22.  but  tbou  hast  been  weary  of  me,  0  I.

44. 21.  rememier  these.  V  1.  for  thou  art  my  serv¬
ant,  tr  1.  thou  sbalt  not  be  forgotten,  49.  3.
Jer.  4.  1.  if  thou  wilt  return,  O  I.  Hos.  14.  1.

Ezek.  13.  4.  O  1.  thy  prophets  are  like  the  foxes
Hos.  9.  1.  rejoice  not,  (•  I.  for  joy,  as  other  people

10.  9.0  1.  tbou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  Gibea'.

13.  9.  tr  I.  thou  r.ast  destroyed  thys.  but  in  me  help
.1  mos  4.  12.  prepaie  to  meet  thy  God,  O  1.

Zef  A-3.14.  shout,  tr  1.  be  glad  and  rejoice  with  heart
Cher  ISRA  EL.

Judg.  9.  22.  Abimelech  reigned  three  years  <wrl.

14.  4.  the  Puilbtines  ha-.;  dominion  over  I.

1  $am.  8.  1.  Samutl  made  hb  sons  judges  over  l.

13.  1.  when  >aul  had  reigned  two  years  over  I.

15. £6.  La.  hat:  reje.  :ed  thee  from  being  king  over  1 .

2  Sam.  £.  lp.  Ish-bushetfc  saul’s  son  reigned  over  I.

3.  10.  Dav. lire  1.5.  2,  3.  12,  17  6.  21.  1  CAr.U.3.

7-  £6.  the  Lord  of  hosts  b  the  God  over  I.

1  Kings  1.  34.  Nolo:r  n  over  1.  11.37-  Jeroboam

14.  14.  the  Lord  shall  raise  i:pa  <ing  over  I.

15.  £5  adab  over  I.  16-  8-  r  iah  16.  Omri

16.  29.  Ahab  ££.  51.  A'aziah  reigned  over  I.

2  Am  3.  1.  Jeh  ramure'  I. .  j.3.  Jehu, 6,  12.  |  10^6.
13.  1.  Jehoar.az  10.  Jehoash  15.  8.  Zachariah

15.  17-  Mena  em  23.  Pekaliiah  17- 1  -  Hoshea
iCkr.  £6.29.  Chenaniali  for  outward  business  over  I .
£9.  30.  times  that  went  over  I .  are  written

Psal.  68. 34.  strength  to  God,  hb  excellency  is  over  1 .
EeeL  1.  1£.  I  the  preacher  was  king  over  I.

ItsRAEL  joined  with  pe  pie.

Sum.  21.  6.  much  people  of  1 .  diea  by  serpents
Devt.  21.  8.  bemercirul.  O  Lord,  to  thy  people  I.

26.  15.  lo'-k  down  and  bless  thy  people  I.

Josh.  8.  33.  that  they  sh  -uld  bless  the  people  of  1.
Judg.  11.  £3.  crave  Atnorites  before  hb  people  I.

1  -dam.  2.  29.  tat  with  the  otterings  of  I.  my  people

9.  16.  sha.l  anoint  Saul  captain  over  my  people  I.

27.  12.  i-atn  made  hb petpte  1.  utterly  to  abhor  him
Z  Sim.  3.  18.  by  David  1  will  save  my  people  l.

5.  2.  to  feed  my  pe  pie  1.7-7.  i  Ckron.  11.  2.

_12.  exalted  hb  kingdom  for  hb  people  I.  sake

7.  10.  I  wiil  apjoint  a  place  for  my  pe  pie  I.  that
they  may  dwel.  and  move  no  more,  1  Ckr.  17.  9.
24.  thou  hast  confirmed  to  thyself  thy  people  L

1  Rings  6.  13.  I  will  not  forsake  my  people  I.

8.  33.  when  thy  people  1.  be  smitten,  2  Ckr.  6.  24.
38-  w  hat  prayer  snail  be  made  by  thy  people  I.

43.  all  people  may  fear  thee,  as  do  thy  pe  pie  I.

36.  the  Lora  hatr  given  rest  to  hb  people  I.

1  Ckr.  14.  2.  was  lifted  up.  because  or  his  people  I.
17. 7-  be  ruler  over  my  people  1.  2  Ckron.  6.  5.

21.  wr-at  one  nation  in  earth  is  like  thy  people  I.  '
£2.  thy  people  1.  oidst  tbou  make  thine’ own

2  Chr.  7.  ic.  goodness  of  Lord  sr.ewed  1.  hb  people
31.  8.  they  blessed  the  Lord  and  hb  pe-ple  1.

35. 3^  sen.  e  now  the  Ld.  your  God  and  his pe.ple  I .

7.13-all  trey  of  me  people  o:  I.  mindedto  soup
9-  1.  ir  e  people  oi  1.  nave  not  separated  themselves
Psal.  135.  12.  gave  for  an  heritage  to  I.  t.b  pe-ple
Isa.  10.  £2.  tho'  thy  people  I .  be  as  the  sand,  a  remu.
Jer.  7.  12.  for  the  wickedness  of  my  people  I.

12.  14.  which  1  caused  my  people  1 .  to  inherit

23.  13.  they  have  caused  my  pseople  I.  to  err

30.  .3.  the  days  come  tnat  1  will  bring  again  the
captivity  of  my  pe-ple  Land  Judah,  Amos  9.  14.
Ezek.  25.14.  lay  vengeance  on  Edom  by  my  people  1 .
36. 8.  ye  shall  yield  your  fruit  to  my  people  1.

12. 1  will  cause  my  pe  pie  I.  to  w  alk  upon  you
38.  14.  when  my  people  I.  dwelle'-h  safely

16.  thou  shalt  come  up  against  my  pseople  I.

Han.  9.  £0.  was  conning  the  sin  of  my  people  1.
Amos  7.15.  Li.  said. go.  pr<  phesy  unto  my  people  1.

8.  2.  the  end  b  come  upc<n  my  perple  I.'

Mat.  2.  6.  a  Gov  ernor,  that  shall  rule  my  pseople  I.
Luke  £.  32.  and  the  glory  of  thy  pecplt  I.

Acts  4.  £7  p-  pie  ot  I.  were  gathered  a-ainst  Jesus

13.  17-  God  of  thb  pe-ple  I.  chose  our  fathers
£4.  John  preached  rei>entance  to  all  people  of  I.

Princes  of  ISRAEL.

ISum.  l.  44.  tiie  prince-  of  I.  being  twelve  men
7-2.  ti  e  printer  of  1.  •  ea  rsand  prince 1  of  the  tribes
oriere  :  a:  the  setting  up  of  the  tabernacle.  84.

1  Ckr.  £2.17.  Davj  :  commanded  princes  of  I.  to  help

23.  2.  Da  id  assembled  the  princes  of  l.  £8-  1.

2  C'Ar<m.l2. 6.  the  prince-  of  I.  h  rubied  themselves
21.  4.  Jthoram  slew  divers  of  the  pninces  of  I.

Ezek.  ly.  1.  take  up  lamentation  tor  the  princes  ofl.
21.  12.  asword  shall  be  upon  ail  the  princes  of  1.

22.6.  ti  to  pT  trues  of  I.  were  on  thee  to  she  f  blood
45.  9.  Lord  saith,  fet  i*  si.rhr  e  you.  O  princes  of  I.

Jo  or  wuo  I S  It  A  E  L.

Gen. 46.  2. Gtaispa -eunto  I.  in  the  vbionsof  night
49.  2.  hear  and  hearken  tnuo  I.  your  father
Eaod.  18  9-  goodness  which  tr.e  l  ord  hath  done  to  I .
Jotk.  11. 23. Joshua  :ra  e  it  for  inheritance  to  1. 21.43.
23. 1  Loro  hath  given  rest  unto  I.  from  all  enemies
Judg.  8.  35.  the  goodness  he  had  shewed  unto  I.

1  Sam.  15.  2.  remember  what  Amalek  did  to  I.

2  '.am.  3.  19.  Abner  spa-ie  all  that  seemed  good  to  1 .

1  Kings  II.  £5.  Kezon  was  an  adversary  to  I.


1  Chron.  16- 17-  confirmed  the  same  for  a  law,  and

to  I.  to:  an  everlasting  covenant,  Psal.  loo.  10t

21.  3,  why  v\  ill  he  be  a  cause  of  trespass  to  I.  *

22.  O.  I  will  give  quietness  to  1.  in  hbdays

2  CArcn.  2.  4.  thb  is  an  ordinance  for  ever  to  1.
Ezra  7.  ll.E^ra  the  priest.ascribe  of  his  statutes  f<>  L
AeA.  8.  1 .  law,  which  the  Lord  had  commanded  to  I.
Psal.  73.  1.  truly  Got!  b  good  to  I.  even  to  such

135.  12.  even  an  heritage  unto  I.  136.  22.

147. 19.  the  Lord  sheweth  his  judgments  to  I.

Isa.  11.  16.  as  it  was  to  I.  in  the  day  that  he  came
Jer.  £.  31.  have  I  been  a  wilderness  unto  I.?

31.  9.  I  am  a  father  to  I.  Ephraim  b  my  first-born
Hos.  14.  5.  I  will  be  as  the  dew  to  I.  he  shall  grow
Mu.  3.  8.  I  am  full  of  power  to  declare  to  I.  his  sin
Mai.  1.  1.  the  burden  ot  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  I.
Luke  1.  80.  till  the  day  of  hb  shewing  unto  I.

John  1.  31.  that  he  should  be  made  manifest  to  I.
Acts  1.  6.  wilt  thou  restore  the  kingdom  to  I.  ?

5.  31.  him  hath  God  exalted  to  give  repentance  to  L
13.  23.  God  hath  raised  unto  I.  a  Saviour  Jesus
Rom.  10. 21.  to  I.  he  saith,  all  day  long  stretched  out

11.  £5.  that  blindness  in  part  b  happened  to  I.

1  nbes  of  ISRA  EL.

Gen.  49.  16.  Dan  shall  judge  as  one  of  tribes  of  I.

28.  all  these  are  the  twelve  tribes  of  I.

Eaod.  £4.  4.  twelve  pillars  according  to  )£  tribes  ofl,
hum.  31.  4.  thousand  through  all  tribes  oj  l.  to  war

36.  3.  if  married  to  any  of  the  other  tribes  of  I.

9.  every  one  of  tribes  of  I.  shall  keep  to  hb  own.
Heut^  29.  21.  separate  him  toevil  outo  t  tribes  oft,

33.  5.  when  the  tribes  of  I.  were  gathered  together
Josh.  3.  12.  take  tw  elve  men  out  or  the  tribes  of  I.

4.  5.  stones  according  to  number  of  tribes  of  I.  8.

7-  16.  so  Joshua  brought  I.  by  their  tribes

12.7.  the  land  which  Joshua  gave  to  the  tribes  of  I.
19. 51.  which  heaasof  fathers  ofl rtbes  of  1.  divided
£2.  14.  princes  through  tribes  of  I.  sent  to  Reuben

24.  1.  Joshua  gathered  ail  tribes  ofl.  toShechem
J udg  .18.1.  inheritance  of  Dan  not  among  t  ribes  of  I
2u.  2.  the  chief  of  tribes  of  \.  presented  before  God

10.  take  ten  men  of  an  100  out  of  all  tribes  of  I.

2L  5.  who  among  the  tribes  of  I.  came  not  up,  8b.

15.  Lord  hath  made  a  breach  in  the  tribes  of  I.

1  Sam.  2.  28.  aid  1  choose  him  out  or  all  tribes  of  I.  ?

9.  21.  I  am  of  the  smallest  of  the  tribes  of  I.

10.  20.  Samuel  caused  all  the  tribes  of  I .  to  come
15.  17.  wastthou  not  made  head  of  the  tribes  ofl.'

2 _>am.  5.  1.  then  came  all  tiie  tribes  tf\.  to  David
7-  7-  spake  I  a  word  w  ith  any  of  the  tribes  ofl.}
15.  2.  thy  servant  is  of  one  of  the  tribes  of  I.

10.  Absalom  sent  spies  through  all  the  tribes  of  I.
19-  9.  people  were  at  strife  thro'  the  tribes  of  l.

24.  2.  go  through  all  tiie  tribes  tf  I.  and  number

1  Kings  8.  16.  I  chose  no  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of

I.  to  build  an  house  in,  £  Chron.  6.  5.
11.32.  have  chosen  Jerusalem  out  of  all  the  tribes  of
„  r-  14-  fl-  2  Kings  21.  7.  2  Chr.  12.  13.  |  33.  7.

2  CAt\  1L  10.  after  them  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I.
L~t<s  6.  lT.  offered  1£  goats  according  to  tribes  of  1.
Pral.  78-  55.  made  tribes  oj  I.  to  dwell  in  their  tents
Ezek.  37.  19.  Twill  take  tribes  of  I.  put  with  Judah

47.  13.  according  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  I.  £1.  22.

48.  19.  serve  the  city  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  I.

31-  gates  be  after  the  names  of  the  tribes  of  I .

Bos.  5.  9.  among  tribes  of  l.  have  I  made  known
Zech.  9-  1.  the  eyes  of  all  tribes  of  I.  be  toward  Ld.
Mat.  19.  28.  judging  the  12  tribes  of  l .  Luke  22.  30.
Rev.  21.  12.  gates  with  names  of  twelve  tribes  of  L
With  ISRAEL.

Erod.  17.  8.  Amalek  fought  with  I.  in  Rephidim

34.  £7.  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  thee  and  I.
Deut.  18.1.  Levites  shall  ha'  e  no  inheritance  with  I.
31.  21.  Gad  executed  his  judgments  with  I.

Josh.  9.  2.  the  kings  of  Canaan  fought  with  L

10.  1.  the  inhabitants  of  Gibeon  made  peace  with  I.

1  Sam.  13.  5.  the  Philbtines  gathered  themselves

together  to  tight  with  1.  28.  1.  2  Sam.  £1.  15.

2  dsam.  10.  19.  the  Syrians  made  peace  with  I.

2  R  ings  11.  18.  the  Lord  was  very  angry  with  I.

2  C nr.  25.  7-  for  Lord  is  not  with  l.  with  Ephraim
.U ic .6. 2. tor  the  Lord  w  ill  plead  with  I.  O  my  people
_  ISRAELI  I  E.

hum.  £5^  14^  the  name  of  the  I  .that  wasslain,Zimri
£  Sam.  17.  £5.  Amasa  w;as  the  son  of  lthra,  an  I.
John  1.  47.  behold  an  I.  indeed,  in  whom  b  no  guile
Rom.  11.1. 1  also  am  an  I.  of  the  seed  of  Abraham
ISRAELITES.

Eaod.  9.  7-  was  not  one  of  the  cattle  of  the  I.  dead
Lev.  23. 42.  all  that  are  I.  born  shall  dwelLin  booths
Josh.  H.  17.  all  the  I.  passed  over  on  dry  ground
13.  6.  only  divide  it  by  lot  to  the  I.  for  inheritance
Judg.  00.21.  the  Benjamites  destroyed  of  the  I.

1  Sam.  2.  14.  so  the  priest's  servant  <1id  to  all  I.

13.  20.  I  went  to  the  Philistines  to  sharpen  hbaxe
14.21.  the  Hebrews  turner  to  be  with  the  I.

25.  1.  all  the  1.  lamented  Samuel  and  buried  him

29.  l.tbe  I.  pitched  by  a  fountain  in  Jezreel

2  Sam.  4. 1.  the  I.  were  troubled  at  Abner’s  death
2  R  mgs  3. 24.  the  I.  rose  and  smote  the  Moabites

7.  13.  they  are  as  all  the  multitude  of  the  I.

1  Chron.  9.  2.  the  first  inhabitants  were  the  1.

Rom.  9.  4.  who  are  I.  to  whom  pertaineth  adoption

2  Cor.ll.  22.are  they  Hebrews  •  are  they  I.  r  so  am  I

ISRAELI  11SH.

Lev.  24.  10.  theson  of  an  I.  woman  strove  in  camp

11.  1.  woman's  son  blasphemed  tiie  name  of  Lord

ISSACII A  R.

Gen.  30.  >8.  and  Leah  called  his  name  I.

35.  S3.  Leah's  son.  1.  46.  13.  sons  of  I.  1  Chr.’l.  1.

49.  14.  I.  b  a  strong  ass,  couching  down  between
Eaod.  1.  3.  Israel's  sons,  I.  Zebufun,  1  Chron.  2.1.
AtwR.  1  8.  the  princes  of  I.  Nethaneel,  2.  5. 1  7. 18.
Deut.  27.  12.  I.  ami  Joseph  shall  stand  to  bless
33.  18.  rejoi  e,  Zebulun  and  I.  in  thy  tents

Josh.  1".  10.  they  met  together  in  1.  on  the  east

11.  Manasseh  had  in  Land  Asher,  Beth-shean
Judg.  5.  15-  the  princes  of  I.  were  with  Deborah,
even  I.  and  also  Barak, he  was  sent  into  the  valley
10.  l.  1  ola  a  man  «>f  I.  arose  to  defend  Israel
1  Kings  4.  17.  Jehoshaphat  was  an  officer  in  I.

15.  £?•  Baasha  son  of  Ahijah  ot  the  house  of"  I.


J  U  D


.1  U  D


KIR  [Hiujpkr  Names


1  Chr.  1C.40.  they  thai  were  nigh  to  I.  brought  bread
26.5.  1.  the  seventh  sod  of  Obed  edom

27.  18.  captain  of  l.  Omri  the  son  of  Michael
£  Chr.  SO.  1 8.  many  of  1.  had  not  cleansed  tbemselv.
Ezek.  48.25.  by  the  border  of  Simeon,  1.  a  portion

26.  by  the  border  of  l.  Zebulun  a  portion

33.  south  side,  one  gate  of  I.  one  gate  of  Zebulun
Tribe  of  1SSACHAR.

Nun 1.  1 . 29.  that  were  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  I.

2.  5.  that  pitch  next  J  udah  shal  I  he  the  tribe  of  1.

10.  15.  over  the  tribe  of  I  was  Nethaneel

13.  ?.  of  the  tribe  of  l .  to  spy  the  land,  lgal  the  son
34.  26.  prince  of  the  tribe  of  I .  Paltielsonof  Azzan
Josh.  19.  23.  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  1.

21.  6.  Gershon  had  by  lot  out  ot  the  families  of  the
tribe  of  I.  and  Asher,  28.  1  Chron.  6.  62,  72.
Rev.  7.  7.  ot  the  tribe  of  1.  were  sealed  12,000
1  I'A  LI  AN .

Acts  10.  1.  Cornelius  a  centurion  of  the  I.  band
ITALY.

Acts  18.  2.  found  acertain  .lew  lately  come  from  I.

27.  1.  it  was  determined  that  weshould  sail  into  I.
Heb.  13.  24.  salute  the  saints,  they  of  I.  salute  you

1TMAMAR.

Exod.  6.  23.  Aaron's  sons,  Abihu  and  T.  1  Chr.  6.  3.

38.  21.  as  it  was  counted  by  the  hand  of  1.

Num.  4.  28.  their  charge  under  the  hand  of  1.

1  Chron.  24.  3.  at  1  Ahimelechof  the  sons  of  I.

4.  were  eight  chief  men  among  the  sons  of  I.

Ezra  8.  2.  of  the  sons  of  1.  Daniel  went  up
See  Eleazar.

1 1111EL.

Neh.  11.7.  1.  son  of  Jesaiah  dwelt  at  Jerusalem
Prov.  30.  1.  the  man  spake  to  I.  even  to  I.  and  Ueal
I  1  UREA.

Luke 3.  l.and  his  brother  Philip  tetrarchof  I.

1  VAII.

£  Kings  18.  34.  where  are  the  godsof  Uena  and  I.  ?

19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  I.  ?  Isa.  37.  13.
JUBILEE.

Lev.  25.  9.  cause  the  trumpet  of  the  J.  to  sound

10.  it  shai'i  be  a  J.  it  shall  be  holy  to  you,  12.

11.  a  J.  shall  that  fiftieth  year  be  to  you

13.  in  the  year  of  J.  ye  shall  return  tp  possession

28.  a  field  shall  go  out  in  the  year  of  J.  27-  21,  24.

30.  then  the  house  shall  not  go  out  in  the  J.

31.  they  shall  go  out  in  the  year  of.).  33,  54%

27.  17.  if  ye  sanctify  his  field  from  year  of  J.  18.

Num.  36.  4.  when  J .  then  their  inheritance  be  put
JUDAH.

Gen.  29.  35.  therefore  she  called  his  name  J.

.35.  23.  thesons  of  Leah,  J.  Issachar,  Zebulun
38.  15.  .1 .  thought  Tamar  to  be  an  harlot

26.  J.  acknowledged  the  signet  and  bracelets
46.  12.  sons  of  J.  Num.  26  19.  1  Chr.  2.  3. 1  4.  1.

28.  Jacob  sent  J.  before  him  to  Joseph
49. 8.  J .  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise

9.  J.  is  a  lion’s  whelp,  he  couched  as  a  lion

10.  sceptre  shall  not  depart  J.  till  Shiloh  come
Exod.  1.  2.  the  sons  of  Israel,  Levi,  J.  1  Chr.  2.  1.
Num.  1.7.  I.  Nashansonof  Amminadabwas  prince

2.  .3.  the  camp  of  J.  shall  pitch  on  theeast-side

9.  all  that  were  numbered  in  the  camp  of.L
Lieut.  27.  12.  Simeon,  Levi,  J.  shall  stand  to  bless

3.3.  7.  this  is  the  blessing  of  J.  the  voice  of  J.

Josh.  7.  17.  Joshua  brought  the  family  of  J.

18.  5.  J .  shall  abide  in  their  coast  on  the  south
Jvdg.  1.  2.  the  Lord  said,  J.  shall  go  up  first

19.  the  Lord  was  with  .).  ||  10.  9.  fight  against  J.
Ruth  4.  12.  like  Pharez,  whom  Tamar  bare  to  J.

1  Sam.  23.  23.  search  him  thro’  all  thousands  of  J.

2  Sam.  .3.  8.  which  against  J.  do  shew  kindness
5.5.  David  reigned  over  J .  seven  years,  six  months

11.  11.  the  ark,  Israel,  and  J.  abide  intents

19.  15.  J.  came  to  Gilgal  to  meet  the  king
24.  1.  David  said,  go  number  Israel  and  J.

1  Kings  2.  .32.  Joabslew  A  masa  captain  of  host  of  J.
4.  20.  .1.  and  Israel  were  many  as  the  sand  by  sea
25.  J.and  Israel  dwelt  safely  under  Solomon

13.  1.  there  came  a  man  of  God  out  of  J.  by  the

word  of  the  Lord  to  Bethel,  2  Kings 2.3.  17-
14.22.  J.  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord

15.  1.  Abijam  reigned  over  J.  ||  9.  Asa  over  J.

1”.  Baasha  went  up  against  J.  2  Chron.  16.  1.

22.  41.  Jehoshaphat  began  foreign  over  J.

£  Kings  8.  19.  yet  the  Lord  would  not  destroy  J.

20.  Edom  revolted  from  J.  22.  2  Chron.  21.8,10.
9.  29.  Ahaziah  began  to  reign  over  .1 .

14. 10.  to  fall,  thou  and  J .  with  thee,  2  Chron.  25. 19.

12.  J.  was  put  to  the  worse,  2  Chron.  25.  22.

22.  Azariah  restored  Elath  to  J.  2  Chron.  26.  2.
15.  37.  the  Lord  began  to  send  against  J.  Rezin
17.  13.  yet  the  Lord  testified  against  Israel  and  J.
19.  J.  kept  not  the  commandments  of  the  Lord

21.14.  Manassehmade  J.  to  sin,  16.  2  Chron.  33.9.

12.  behold,  l  am  bringing  such  evil  upon  J.

23.26.  his  anger  kindled  against.!.  2  Chron.  ‘lb.  10.

27.  I  will  remove.!,  also  out  of  my  sight

24.  2.  the  Lord  sent  bands  of  Chaldees  against  T.

3.  at  the  command  of  the  Lord  came  this  on  .1.

25.  21.  so  J.  was  carried  away,  1  Chron.  6.  15.

1  Chron.  5.  2.  J.  prevailed  above  his  brethren

27.  18.  of  J.  Elihu  one  of  David’s  brethren  wascapt.

28.  4.  for  he  hath  chosen  T  to  be  the  ruler

2  Chron.  13.  1.3.  so  they  were  before  J.  and  behind

16.  the  children  of  Israel  fled  before  I.

14.  4.  A  sa  commanded  J .  to  seek  the  Lord

17.  6.  Jehoshaphat  took  the  groves  out  of  .1.

21.11.  lehoram  compelled  J.  tocommit  tornication

1.3.  hast  made  J.  and  Jerusalem  go  a  whoring

24.  18.  wrath  came  upon  J.  28,  9. 1  29.  8. 1  32.  25.

28.  19.  the  Lord  brought  J.  low,  made  .1.  naked

29.  21.  seven  lambs  fora  sin-off eiing  for  J.

.30.  25.  all  the  congregation  of  I.  rejoiced

33.  16.  Manasseh  commanded  J.  to  serve  the  Txmd
.31.  3.  in  12th  year  Josiah  began  to  purge  J.  5.

Ezra  .3.  9.  sons  of  J.  to  set  forward  the  workmen

7.14.  thou  art  sent  to  inquire  concerning  J.

10  23.  J.  and  Eliezer  had  taken  strange  wives
A 'eh.  2.  5.  that  thou  wouldst  send  me  to  J.

7.  that  they  may  convey  me  till  1  come  into  J.

6.  17.  the  nobles  “of  J.  sent  letters  to  Tobiah


Neh.  11.  9.  J.  son  of  Senuah  was  second  over  city
12.  44.  for  J.  rejoiced  for  the  priests  that  waited
Psal. 60. 7- Gilead  is  mine,  .1.  is  my  lawgiver,  108.  8.
114.  2.  J.  vvas  his  sanctuary,  Israel  his  dominion
Isa.  1.  1.  vision  which  he  saw  concerning  J.  2.  1.

.3.  1.  Lord  doth  take  from  .1 .  stay  and  staff  of  bread
8.  J.  is  fallen  ||  7-  6.  let  us  go  up  against  .1.

7.  17.  from  day  that  Ephraim  departed  from  J.

8.  8.  shall  pass  through  .1.  shall  overflow,  go  over

9.  21.  and  they  together  shall  be  against  J.

11.  12.  he  shall  gather  together  the  dispersed  of  J.

13.  the  adversaries  of  .1.  shall  be  cutoff ;  Ephraim

shall  not  envy  J.  and  I.  not  vex  Ephraim
22..8.  he  discovered  the  covering  of  J.

48.  1.  and  are  come  forth  out  of  the  waters  of  J.

65.  9.  and  out  of  J.  an  inheritor  of  my  mountains
Jer.  2.  28.  as  number  of  cities  are  thy  gods,  O  J.

3.  7.  her  sister  ,1.  saw  it,  and  feared  n  t,  8.

9.  26.  Egypt,  and  .1.  and  Edom  are  uncircumcised
1.3.  9.  after  this  manner  will  I  mar  the  pride  of  J.

19.  J.  sfiall  be  carried  away  captive  all  of  it
14.  2.  J.  mourneth  ||  2.3.  6.  .1.  shall  be  saved
19.  hast  thou  utterly  rejected  J.  and  loathed  Zion
17.  1.  the  sin  of  J.  is  written  with  a  pen  ot  iron

19.  7.  I  will  void  the  counsel  of  .!.  and  Jerusalem
.32.  35.  they  should  do  this  to  cause  .1.  to  sin

33.  7.  1  will  cause  the  captivity  of  J.  to  return
36.  2.  the  words  that  I  have  spoken  against  J.

42.  15.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  remnant  of  J.
44.  26.  not  named  in  mouth  of  any  man  of  J.

50.  20.  the  sins  of  J.  shall  not  be  found

51.  5.  J.  hath  not  been  forsaken  of  his  God

52.  27.  J.  was  carried  away  captive,  Lam.  1.  3.
Ezek.  21.  20.  that  the  sword  may  come  to  I.  in  Jerus.
27.  17.  J.  and  Israel  were  thy  merchants

.37.  16.  write  upon  it  for  I.  and  for  Israel
48.  7.  by  the  border  of  Reuben,  a  portion  for  J.

.31.  one  gate  of  Reuben,  one  gate  of  .1 .  one  of  Levi
Hos.  4. 15.  tho’  Israel  play  harlot,  yet  let  not  J .  offe.

5.  5,  J.  shall  fall  11  13.  when  J.  saw  his  wound

6.  4.  O  J.  what  shall  l  do  unto  thee  ?  for  your  good

10.  11.  J.  shall  plow,  Jacob  shall  break  his  clods
11  12.  but  J.  ruleth  yet  with  God,  and  is  faithful

12.  2.  the  Lord  hath  also  a  controv  ersy  with  I.

Joel 3.  20. but  I.  shall  dwell  for  ever,  and  Jerusalem
Amos  2. 4.  for  three  transgressions  of  .1 .  and  for  four

5.  but  I  will  send  a  fire  on  .1.  it  shall  devour
Mic.  1.  9.  her  wound  is  incurable,  it  is  come  to  .T.
5.  2.  though  thou  be  little  among  the  thousands  of  J.
Zeph.  1.  4.  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  J.
Zech.  1.  19.  the  horns  which  have  scattered  J.  21.

2.  12.  Lord  shall  inherit  J.  his  portion  in  holy  land
9.  13.  when  I  have  bent  J.  for  me,  filled  the  bow
12.  7.  the  Lord  shall  save  the  tents  of  J.  first

14.  14.  J.  also  shall  fight  at  Jerusalem

Mai.  2.  11.  J.  hath  dealt  treacherously  ;  J.  hath  pro¬
faned  the  holiness  of  the  Lord  which  he  loved

3.  4.  then  shall  the  offering  of  J.  be  pleasant
Mat.  1.  2.  lacob  begat  I.  H  .3.  J.  begat  Phares
Lul  l  3.  33.  Phares,  which  was  the  son  of  J.

Heb  .  7.  14.  for  it  is  evident  that  our  Lord  sprang  of  J.
All  JUDAH.

1  Sam.  18’  16.  but  all  Israel  and  all  J.  loved  David

2  Sam.  5.  5.  David  reigned  .3.3  years  over  all  J.

2  Chron .  15.  15.  all  J.  rejoiced  at  the  oath

20.  13.  all  J.  stood  before  the  Lord  with  their  wives
32.  33.  all  .!.  did  honour  Ilezekiah  at  his  death
.35  .  24  all  .1.  and  Jerusalem  mourned  for  Josiah
Neh.  13.  12.  then  all.).  brought  the  tithe  ot  the  corn
Jer.  2o.  4.  I  will  give  all  J.  to  the  king  of  Babylon

44.  11.  1  will  set  my'  face  to  cut  off  all  J.

See  Benjamin,  Beth  lehem,  Children,
Cities,  Daughter,  Daughters,  House.

In  JUDAH.

1  Sam.  23.  3.  behold,  we  be  afraid  here  in  f .

1  Kings  12.  .32.  like  unto  the  feast  that  is  in  J.

2  Kings  24.  20.  for  through  the  anger  of  the  Lord  it

came  to  pass  in  Jerusalem  and  J.  Jer.  52.  .3
2  Chron.  2.  7.  cunning  men  that  are  with  me  in  J.

12.  12.  and  also  in  J.  things  went  well

17.  9.  they  taught  in  J .  and  had  book  of  law  of  Lord
28.  6.  Pekah  slew  in  J.  120,000  in  one  day
.30.  12.  in  J.  hand  of  God  was  to  give  one  heart
.34.  21.  inquire  for  them  that  are  left  in  J.

Ezra  5.  1.  prophesied  to  the  Jews  that  were  in  J.
9.9.  hut  hath  extended  mercy  to  give  us  a  wall  in  J.
Neh.  6.  7-  to  preach,  saying,  there  is  a  king  in  J.

13.  15.  I  saw  in  J.  some  treading  wine-presses
Psal.  76.  1.  in  J.  is  God  known,  his  name  is  great
Jer.  4. 5.  declare  ye  in  J.  publish  in  Jerusalem,  5.  20.

22.  .30.  none  shall  prosper,  ruling  any  more  in  J.
Zech.  9.  7-  he  shall  be  as  a  governor  in  J .

14.  21.  every  pot  in  J.  be  holiness  to  the  Lord

See  King,  Kings.

Land  of  JUDAH.

Dent.  31.  2.  Lord  shewed  him  all  the  land  of  J.
Ruth  1.  7.  thus  went  to  return  into  the  land  of  J.

1  Sam.  22.  5.  depart,  get  thee  into  the  land  of .  1.

2  Kings  25.  22.  people  that  remained  in  land  of  J.

2  Chr.  17.  2.  Jehoshaphat  set  garrisons  in  land  of  J.
Isa.  19.  17.  the  land  of  1.  shall  be  a  terror  to  Egypt
26.  1.  this  song  shall  be  sung  in  the  land  of .  1.

Jer.  .31.  23.  use  this  speech  in  the  land  of  J.

.39.  10.  the  poor,  who  had  nothing  in  the  land  of  I
44.  9.  they  have  committed  in  the  land  of  J.

14.  that  they  should  return  into  the  land  of  J.
Amos  7.  12.  flee,  thou  seer,  into  the  land  if  J.
Zech.  1.  21.  lift  up  their  horn  over  the  land  of  J.
Mat.  2.  6.  thou,  Bethlehem,  in  the  land  of  J.

Men  of  JUDAH.

Jvdg.  15. 10.  men  of  J.  said,  why  are  ye  come  ag.  us?
2  Sam.  2.  4.  the  men  of  J.  anointed  David  king
19-  14.  he  bowed  the  heart  of  all  the  men  of  J.

43.  the  words  of  the  men  of  J.  were  fiercer
20.  2.  but  the  men  of .  1.  clave  to  their  king
4.  assemble  the  men  of  J.  within  three  days
24.  9.  the  men  of  J.  were  five  hundred  thousand
2  Chron.  13.  15.  then  the  men  of  J.  gave  a  shout
Ezra  10.  9.  all  the  men  of  J.  gathered  together
Isa.  5.  7.  the  men  of .  1.  are  his  pleasant  plant
Jer.  4.  4.  circumcise  your  hearts,  ye  men  of  J.

11.  9.  a  conspiracy  is  found  among  the  men  of  J ,


Jer.  .36.  .31.  bring  upon  the  men  of  J.  all  the  evil

4.3.  9.  hide  them  in  the  sight  of  the  men  of  J.

U.  27.  all  the  men  of .  1.  shall  he  consumed

Uan.  9.7.  butconfusion  belongeth  to  the  men  of  J.
See  Princes.

Tribe  of  I  U  DA  II.

Exod.  .31. 2.  Bezaleel  of  the  tribe  of. 1 . 35.  30.  !  38.22.
Num.  1. 27.  that  were  numbered  of  the  tribeoj  J.

7.  12.  Nahshon,  the  prince  of  the  tribe  of . I.

1.3.  6.  of  the  tribe  of  J  .  Caleb  to  spy,  .34.  19.

Josh.  7.  1 .  Achan  of  tribe  of.) .  took  of  accursed  thing

16.  and  the  tribe  of  I.  was  taken,  18.

15.  1.  this  was  the  lot  of  the  tribe  of  J.  20.

21.4.  Levites  out  of  the  tribe  of.).  9.  Chron.  6.  65.

1  Kings  12.  20.  the  tribe  of  J.  only  followed  David

2  Kings  17.  18.  none  left  but  the  tribe  of  J.  only
Psal.  78. 68.  but  he  chose  the  tribe  of.  I .  mount  Sion
Rev.  5.  5.  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  I .  hath  prevailed

7.  5.  of  the  tribe  of  .1 .  were  sealed  12,000
JUDAS.

Mat.  13.  55.  his  brethren  Joses,  S  mon,  and  J.

26. 47.  J.  one  of  the  twelve  came,  and  a  great  mul
tituile,  Mark  14.  4.3.  Luke  22.  47.  John  18.  3,  5.

27.3.  then  J.  repented  himself  and  brought  30  pieces
lohn  1.3.  29.  some  thought  because  J.  had  the  bag

14.  22.  J.  saith  unto  him,  not  Iscariot,  how  is  it
Acts  1.  16.  David  spake  before  concerning  J
25.  from  which  J.  by  transgression,  fell

5.  37-  after  this  man  rose  up  J.  of  Galilee
9.  11.  inquire  in  the  house  of  J.  for  one  Saul
15.22.  they  sent  J.  surnamed  Barsabas,  27.

32.  .1.  and  Silas  exhorted  the  brethren
JUDAS  Iscariot.

Mat.  10.4.  J.  Iscariot,  who  betrayed  him,  Mark  .3.

19.  Luke  6.  16.  Juhn6.  71.  I  1.3.2.

26. 14.  J.  Iscariot  went  to  chief  priests,  Mark)  4.10.
Luke  22.  .3.  then  entered  Satan  into  'J.  Iscariot
John  13.  26.  he  gave  the  sop  to  J.  Iscariot
JUDEA.

Ezra  5.  8.  that  we  went  into  the  province  of  J.

Mat.  24.  16.  then  let  them  which  be  in  J.  flee  into
the  mountains,  Mark  13.  14.  Luke  21.  21
John  4.  3.  he  left  .1  and  departed  to  Galilee
7.  .3.  depart  hence  and  go  into  J.  again,  11.  7.

Acts  1.8.  in  all  J.  ye  shall  be  witnesses  to  me
2.  14.  ye  men  of  J.  be  this  known  unto  you

9.  31.  the  churches  had  rest  throughout  J.

10.  37.  that  word  which  was  published  through  J.

12.  19.  he  went  down  from  .1.  to  Cesarea
28.21.  we  neither  received  letters  out  of.L
Rom.  15.  31.  from  them  that  do  not  believe  in  J.

2  Cor.  1. 16.  to  be  brought  on  my  way  toward  J.

1  Thess.  2. 14.  churches  which  in  J .  are  in  Christ  Jes.
JUPITER.

Acts  14.  12.  and  they  called  Barnabas,  J.

13.  then  the  priests  of.L  brought  garlands
19.  35.  of  the  image  which  fell  down  from  J.
JUSTUS.

Acts  1.23.  Joseph,  who  was  surnamed  J.and  Matthi.
18.7.  entered  into  a  certain  man’s  house,  named  J.
Col.  4.  11.  Jesus  who  is  called  J.  saluteth  you

K.

KADESH-

Gen.  14.  7.  they  came  to  Enmishpat  which  is  K.
Nwm.  13. 26.  they  came  to  wilderness  ofParan  toK.
20. 16.  behold,  we  are  in  K.  a  city  in  thy  border
27.  14.  ye  rebelled  against  me  at  water  of  Meribah,
in  K.  Dent.  IK.  51.  Ezek.  47.  19.  I  48.  28.

3.3.  36.  pitched  in  wilderness  of  Zin,  which  is  K.
Deut.  1. 46.  so  ye  abode  in  K.  many  days
Psal.  20.8.  the  Lord  shaketh  the  wilderness  of  K.
KADESH- BARN  EA.

Num.  32.  8.  when  I  sent  them  from  K.  to  see  the
land,  Dent.  9-  23.  Josh.  14.  7.
Josh.  10.  41.  Joshua  smote  them  from  K.  to  Gaza
14. 6.  what  Lord  said,  concerning  me  and  thee  in  K..
KAREAI1.  See  Johan  an.

KF.DAR.

Gen.  25. 13.  the  son  of  Ishmael,  K.  1  Chron.  1. 29.
Psal.  120.  5.  woe  is  me  that  1  dwell  in  the  tents  of  K.
Cant.  1 . 5.  1  am  black  but  comely  as  the  tents  of  K .
Isa.  21. 16.  in  ayearall  the  glory  of  K.  shall  fail, 17 .
42.  11.  the  villages  that  K.  doth  inhabit
60.  7.  the  flocks  of  K.  shall  be  gathered  to  thee
Jer.  2.  10.  see  and  send  toK.  and  consider  diligently
49.  28.  concerning  K.  thus  saith  the  L.  go  up  to  K.
Ezek.  27.21.  all  the  princes  of  K.  occupied  with  thee
K  El  LA  H.

Josh.  15.  44.  K.  and  Achzib,  cities  of  Judah
1  Sam.  2.3.  1.  the  Philistines  fight  against  K.

4.  arise,  go  down  to  K.]|  5.  David  saved  K.

6.  when  Abiathar  son  of  Ahimelech  fled  to  K.

11.  will  the  men  of  K.  deliver  me  to  Saul  ?  12.
Neh.  3. 17.  the  ruler  of  half  part  of  K.  repaired,  18.
KENAZ.  See  Othniel.

KEN  ITES.

Gen.  15. 19.  unto  thy  seed  have  I  given  the  K.
Num. .  24.  21.  Balaam  looked  on  the  K.  and  said

1  Sam.  15. 6.  Saul  said  to  the  K  .depart  lest  1  destroy
27.  10.  1  made  a  road  against  the  south  of  the  K.

KERIOTH.

Jer.  48. 24.  judgment  is  come  on  K.  ||  41.  K.  is  taken
Amos  2.  2.  a  fire  shall  devour  the  palaces  of  K.
KETURAH.

Gen.  25. 1.  Abraham  took  a  wife,  her  name  was  K.
4.  all  these  were  children  of  K.  1  Chron.  1.  32,  33.
KIDRON.  See  Brook.

KIR.

2  Kings  16.  9.  he  carried  the  people  captive  to  K.
Isa.  15.  1.  in  the  niuht  K.  of  Moab  is  laid  waste
22.  6.  Elam  bare  the  quiver,  K.  uncovered  shield

Amos  1.  5.  the  Syrians  shall  go  into  captivity  to  K.
9.  7.  have  not  I  brought  the  Assyrians  from  K.'
KIR-IIARASETH

2  Kings  3.  25.  only  in  K.  left  they  the  stones
Isa.  16  7.  for  the  foundations  of  K.  shall  ye  mourn

11.  mine  inward  parts  shall  sound  for  K.

KI  RLATH  AIM.

Gen.  14.5  Chedor  laomer  smote  Emi:  isinShaveh  K.

607


LOT


MAN


PhOPKK  JS'aMES.J  Yt  _E  A


Jer .  48. 1 .  thus  saith  Ld.  K.  is  confounded  and  taken
2.3.  judgment  is  come  upon  h.and  Beth-gamul
KIRJATH-ARBA.

Gen.  23.  2.  Sarah  (iied  in  K.  the  same  is  Hebron  in
Canaan,  Josh.  14.  15. 1  20.  7.  Judg.  1.  10.
kl  KJATH-JEA  RIM.

Josh.  9.  17.  K.  a  city  of  the  Hivites  made  peace
Id.  9.  the  border  was  to  Baalah,  which  is  K.  60.
18.  14.  which  is  K.  a  city  of  Judah,  1  Chron.  13.6.
1  Sam.  7.  1.  the  men  of  k.  came  and  fetched  the  ark

1  Chron.  13.  5.  to  bring  the  ark  of  God  from  k.

2  Chron.  1.4.  David  had  brought  the  ark  from  k.

KISH.

1  Sam.  9.  l.  a  man  of  Benjamin  whose  name  was  K.

3.  the  asses  of  k.  Said's  father  were  lost,  14.  51.

10.  11.  what  is  this  that  is  come  to  the  son  of  k.  t
21 .  and  Saul  the  son  of  K.  was  taken

2  Sam.  21.  14.  they  buried  Saul  in  sepulchre  of  K.
1  Chr.  8.  .30.  K.  the  sonofGibeon  ||  33.  Ner  begat  k

23.21.  K.  son  of  Mahli  ||  2  Chr.  29. 12.  son  of  Ahdi"
Esth. 2.5.  Mordecai,  son  of  Jair,  of  Shimei,  son  of  k.
Acts  13.  <11.  God  gave  them  Saul  the  son  of  lv.
ki  l  l  IM.

Gen.  10.  4  -ons  of  Javan,  Tarshish,  K.  1  Chr.  1.7.
See  Chittim.
kOHATH.

Gen.  46.  11.  the  sons  of  Levi,  Gershon,  K.  and
Merari,  Exod.  6.  16.  Num.  3.  17
Exod.  6. 18.  the  sons  of  k.  Num.  3. 19,27,  29,30.  |
16.  1.  1  Chron.  6.  2,  22,  61.
the  yeais  of  the  life  of  k.  were  13.3  years
Num.  4.  2.  take  the  sum  of  the  sons  of  K.  of  Levi

4.  this  be  the  service  of  the  sons  of  K.  15.  1  7.  9.

1  Chron.  15.  5.  of  the  sons  of  k.  Uriel  the  chief

KOHATH LIES.

Num.  4. 18.  cut  ye  not  off  the  family  of  the  K.

34.  Moses  and  Aaron  numbered  the  sons  of  k .  37.
10.  21.  the  K.  set  forward  bearing  the  sanctuary
Josh.  21.  4.  the  lot  came  out  for  k.  1  Chron.  6.  54.

2  Chron.  29.  12.  the  sons  of  K.  sanctified  themselves
34. 12.  the  sons  of  the  K .  to  set  the  work  forward

KORAH.

Gen.  36.  5.  Aholibamah  bare  K.  ||  16.  duke  K.  16.
Exod.  6.  21.  sons  of  Izhar,  K.  Nepheg,  Num.  16.  1.
Num.  16.  6.  take  censers,  K.and  all  his  company*
19-  K.  gathered  all  the  congregation  against  them
24.  get  you  up  from  about  the  tabernacle  of  K.

40.  that  he  be  not  as  K.  and  as  his  companv

26.  9.  Dathan  who  strove  in  the  company  of  K.

11.  notwithstanding  the  children  of  K.  died  not

27.  3.  our  father  was  not  in  the  company  of  k.

1  Chron.  1.35.  the  sons  of  Esau,  Joalam  and  k

2.  43.  son  of  Hebron,  k.  ]|  6  22.  of  Amminadab
9.  19.  son  of  K.  and  his  brethren  over  the  work
Jude  11.  they  perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  K.

L.


LABAN.

Gen.  24.29.  Rebekah  hail  a  brother,  his  name  was  L,

27.  43.  ttee  thou  to  I,,  my  brother,  to  Haran

28.  2.  take  thee  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  L
29.5.  know  ye  L.  ||  29.  L.  gave  to  Rachel,  Bilhah

30.  36.  and  Jacob  fed  the  rest  of  L.  flocks

42.  so  the  feebler  were  L.  the  stronger  Jacob’s

31.  2.  Jacob  beheld  the  countenance  of  L.

12.  for  I  have  seen  all  that  L.  doth  to  thee

20.  Jacob  stole  away  unawares  to  L.  the  Syrian

24.  God  came  to  L.  in  a  dream  by  night

34.  L.  searched  all  the  tent,  but  found  them  not
36.  Jacob  chode  with  L.  I|  55.  I..  kissed  his  sons
32.4.1  have  sojourned  with  L.  and  stayed  until  now
LABAN.

DeutA  .1.  words  Moses  spake  between  Paran  and  L
LACHISH.

Josh.  10.  32.  the  Lord  delivered  L.  to  Israel
12.  11.  the  king  of  L.  one  H  15.  39.  Judah  had  L.

2  Rings  14.  19.  Amaziah  fled  to  L.  2  Chron.  25.27.

18.  14.  Hezekiah  sent  to  king  of  Assyria  to  L.

17.  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  Rab-shakeh  from  L
with  a  great  host  to  Jerusalem,  Isa.  36.  2!
2  Chron.  11.  9.  Kehoboam  built  L.  and  Azekah
Jer.  34.  7.  the  king  of  Baby  Ion  fought  against  L
Mic.  1.  13.  O  inhabitant  of  L.  bind  the  chariot
LAISIL

Judg.  18.  14.  that  went  to  spy  the  country  of  L

29.  the  name  of  the  city  was  L.  at  the  first

Ha.  10.30.  cause  thy  voice  be  heard  to  L.O  Anathoth
LAISH.

1  Sam.  25.  44.  Michal  given  to  Phalti  son  of  L.

2  Sam.  3.  15.  Ish-bosheth  took  her  from  the  son  of  L

LAMECH.

Gew.4.1R.Metlmsael  begat  L.  H  19.L.  took  two  wives
5.25.  Methuselah  begat  L.  1  Chron.  1.  3.

Luke  3.  36.  Noe,  which  was  the  son  of  L.
LAOD1CEA.

Col.  2.  1.  what  great  conflict  I  have  for  them  at  L

4.  13.  he  hath  a  zeal  for  them  that  are  in  L.

15.  salute  brethren  which  are  in  L.  and  Nymphas

16.  that  ye  likewise  read  the  epistle  from  L

LAODICEANS.

Col.  4.  16.  that  it  be  read  in  the  church  of  the  L.
Rev.  3.  14.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  of  the  L
LAZARUS.

Luke  16.  20.  there  was  a  certain  beggar  named  L.
23.  he  seeth  L.  in  Abraham’s  bosom  ||24.  send  L

25.  and  likewise  L.  received  evil  things,  but  now
John  11.2.  Mary  whose  brother  L.  was  sick

5.  Jesus  loved  L.  !|  11.  our  friend  L.  sleepeth

14.  L.  is  dead  ||  43.  he  cried,  L.  come  forth
12.  2.  L.  was  one  of  them  that  sat  at  the  table
9^  much  people  came  that  they  might  see  L.

17  •  when  he  called  L.  out  of  grave  and  raised  him
LEAH.

29.  16.  the  name  of  the  elder  daughter  was  L.

!  •  was  tender-eyed,  but  Rachel  was  beautiful
m  the  morning,  behold  it  was  L.


Gen.

17,

25.


31.  w  hen  the  lord  saw  that  L.  was  hated

32.  L.  conceived  and  bare  a  son,  30.  19.

30.  16  Jacob  came  out  of  the  field,  L.  met  him

31.  4.  Jacob  called  Rachel  and  L.  to  his  Hock


Gen.  .33.  2.  Jacob  put  L.  and  her  children  after

34.  1.  Dinah  the  daughter  of  L.  went  out  to  see

35.  23.  the  sons  of  L.  Reuben,  Simeon,  46.  15.

49.  31.  they  buried  Abraham,  there  I  buried  L.
Ruth  4.  11.  the  Lord  make  this  woman  like  L.

LEBANON.

Dent.  3.  25.  let  me  see  that  goodly  mountain  and  L.
Judg.  3.3.  the  Hivites  that  dweftin  mount  L.

1  Rings 5. 14.  he  sent  ten  thousand  a  month  to  L.

7.  2.  the  house  of  the  forest  of  L.  10.  17,  21.

2  Kings  14.  9.  the  thistle  that  was  in  L.  sent  to  cedar

in  L.  give  thy  daughter  to  thy  son,  2  Chron.
25.  18.

19.  23.  1  am  come  up  to  the  sides  of  L.  Isa.  37,24.
'Chr.  2.  8.  thy  servants  can  skill  to  cut  timber  in  L.
Peal.  29.  6.  L.  and  Sirion  like  a  young  unicorn
72.  16.  the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like  L.

92.  12.  he  shall  grow  like  a  cedar  in  L.

<  ant.  .3.9.  Solomon  made  a  chariot  of  the  wood  of  L.

4.  8.  come  with  me  from  L.  my  spouse,  from  L.

1 1.  smell  of  thy  garments  is  like  the  smell  of  L.

15.  a  well  of  living  waters,  and  streams  from  L.

5.  15.  his  countenance  is  as  L.  excellent  as  cedars
7-  4.  thy  nose  is  as  tow'erof  L.  toward  Damascus
Isa.  10.  34.  L.  shall  fall  |j  33.  9-  L.  is  ashamed
29.  17.  L.  shall  be  turned  into  a  fruitful  field

35.  2.  the  glory  of  L.  shall  be  given  unto  it

40.  16.  L.  is  not  sufficient  to  burn  for  burnt-offering
60.  13.  the  glory  of  L.  shall  come  to  thee
Jer.  18.  14.  will  a  man  leave  the  snow  of  L.  ?

22.  6.  thou  art  Gilead  and  the  head  of  L.  tome

20. go  up  to  L.  and  cry,  lift  up  thy  voice  in  Bashan
Ezek.  17.  3.  a  great  eagle,  long-winged,  came  to  L.

31.  15.  and  I  caused  L.  to  mourn  for  him
Hos.  14.  5.  he  shall  cast  forth  his  roots  as  L.

6.  his  smell  as  L.  ||  7.  the  scent  as  the  wine  of  L.
Nah.  1.4.  Bashan  and  the  flower  of  L.  languisheth
Hah.  2.  17.  the  violence  of  L.  shall  cover  thee
Zech.  10.  10.  I  will  bring  them  into  the  land  of  L.

11. 1.  open  thy  doors,  O  L.  that  fire  may  devour
See  Cedars.

LEBBEUS.

Mat.  10.  3.  L.  whose  surname  was  Thaddeus
LEGION.

Markb. 9.  my  name  is  L.  for  we  are  many,  Luke  8.30.
LEGIONS.

Mat.  26.  53.  he  shall  give  me  more  than  twelve  L.
LEMUEL.

Pro v.  31.  1.  the  words  of  king  L.  the  prophecy
4.  it  is  not  for  kings.  O  L.  to  drink  wine
LEVI.

Gen.  29.  34.  therefore  was  his  name  called  L.

46.  11.  the  sons  of  L.  Exod.  6.  16.  Num.  3.  17.
49.5.  Simeon,  I.,  are  brethren,  instrum,  of  cruelty
Exod.  6.  16.  the  years  of  the  life  of  L.  were  137  years
Num.  16.  7-  ye  take  too  much  upon  you,  ye
.  ,  sons  of  L.

26.  59.  Amram  s  wife  Jochebed,  daughter  of  L.
Pent.  10.  9.  L.  hath  no  part  with  his  brethren
21.  5.  the  priests  the  sons  of  L.  shall  come  near
33.  8.  of  L.  he  said,  let  thy  Thummim  and  Urim
1  Kings  12.  31.  made  priests  which  were  not  of  L.

1  Chron.  21.  6.  but  L.  and  Benjamin  counted  he  not
Ezra  8.  15.  I  found  there  none  of  the  sons  of  L.

Psal.  135.  20  bless  the  Lord,  O  house  of  L.

Ezek.  40.  46.  the  sons  of  Zadok  among  the  sons  of  L.
48.  31.  one  gate  of  Judah,  one  gate  of  I..

Zech.  12.  13.  the  family  of  the  house  of  L.  apart
Mai.  2.  4.  that  my  covenant  might  be  with  L

8.  ye  have  corrupted  the  covenant  of  L.

•3.  3.  and  he  shall  purity  the  sons  of  L.

Mark  2.  14.  he  saw  L.  the  son  of  Alpheus  sitting
Luke  3  24.  Matthat,  which  was  the  son  of  L.  29.

5.  27.  he  saw  a  publican  named  L.  sitting  at
29.  L.  made  him  a  great  feast  in  his  own  house
Heb.  7. 9.  L.  who  recei v.  tithes,  payed  tithes  in  A  br.
Tribe  of  LEV  I .

Num.  1.  49-  thou  shalt  not  number  the  tribe  of  L.
3.6.  bring  the  tribe  of  L.  near  and  present  them

18.  2.  tr.of  L.  bring,  that  they  may  minister  to  thee
Ueut.  10.  8.  the  Lord  separated  the  tribe  of  L.

18.  1.  all  the  tribe  of  L.  shall  have  no  part  nor  in¬

heritance  with  Israel,  Josh.  13.  14,  33.

1  Chr.  2.3  14.  Moses'  sons  were  named  of  the  tr.  of  L.
Rev.  7.  7-  ot  the  tribe  of  L.  were  sealed  12,000

LEVII'E,  S.  See  Appellatives.
LIBNAH.

Num.  33.  20.  pitched  in  L.  1|  21.  removed  from  L.
Josh.  10.  29.  passed  to  L.  ||  21 .  13.  gave  L.  to  Levites

2  Rings  8.  22.  then  L.  revolted, 2  Chron.  21.  10.

19.  8.  Rab-shakeh  returned,  and  found  the  king  of

Assyria  warring  against  L.  Isa.  .37.  8.
23.  31.  Jehoahaz  mother's  name  Hammutal,  daugh¬
ter  of  Jeremiah  of  L.  24.  18.  Jer.  52. 1
LIBYA.

Ezek.  30.  5.  L.  shall  fall  with  them  by  the  sword
Acts  2.  10.  in  the  parts  of  L.  about  Cyrene
LIBYANS.

Jer.  46.  9.  and  the  L.  that  handled  the  shield
Dan.ll.43. the  L.  and  Ethiopians  shall  be  athissteps
LO-AMMl.

Hos.  1.  9.  call  his  name  L.  for  ye  are  not  my  people
LOIS.

2  Tim.  1.  5.  which  dwelt  in  thy  grandmother  L.
LO-RUHAMAH.

Hos.  1.6.  God  said  unto  him,  call  her  name  L.

8  when  she  had  weaned  L.  she  conceived  and  bare
LOT.

Gen.  11.  27.  Haran  begat  L.  ||  .31.  Terah  took  L.

12.  4.  Abram  departed,  L.  went  with  him,  13.  i.

13.  5.  L.  had  flocks  ||  14. 12.  they  took  L.  prisoner

7.  was  a  strife  between  herdmen  of  Abram  and  L.
11.  then  L.  chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan

19.  1.  L.  sat  in  the  gate  of  Sodom  ;  L.  seeing  them
10. pulled  L.  into  house  || 15.  the  angels  hastened  L.
29.  God  sent  L.  out  of  the  midst  of  the  overthrow

36.  both  the  daughters  of  L.  were  with  child
Pent.  2.9.  I  have  given  Ar  to  the  children  of  L.  19.
Psal.  83.  8.  they  have  holpen  the  children  of  L.
Cuke  17.  28.  likewise  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  L.

32.  remember  L.  wife

2  Pet.  2.7*  deliv.  just  L.  vexed  with  filthy  convers.


LUCAS.

Phile/n.Q.k. Marcus,  Demas,  L.  t  iy  fellow-labourer*
LUCIFER.

Isa.  14. 12.  how  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  L
LUC1  US.

Acts  13.  I .  L.  of  Cyrene  was  a  teacher  at  Antioch
Rom.  16.21.  L.  Jason,  and  Sosipater  salute  you
LUKE.

Col-  4.  14.  L.  thebeloved  physician  ereeteth  you
2  Tim. 4.11.  only  L.is  with  me, bring  Mark  with  thee
LUZ.

Gen.  28. 19. the  city  was  called  L.  at  first,  Judg.  1.2.3.
35.  6.  J  acob  came  to  L.  in  the  land  of  Canaan
48.  3.  G.  Almighty  appeared  to  meat  L.  in  Canaan
LYCAOMA.

Acts  14.  6.  they  fled  to  Lystra  and  Derbe,  cities  of  L.
11.  lift  up  their  voices,  saying  in  the  speech  of  L.
LYDDA.

Acts  9.  32.  Peter  came  down  to  the  saints  at  L.

35.  all  that  dwelt  at  L.  turned  to  the  Lord
38.  forasmuch  as  L.  was  nigh  to  Joppa
_  LYDIA.

Ezek.  30.  5.  L.  shall  fall  with  them  by  the  sword

.  LYDIA.

Acts  16.  14.  L.  worshipped  God,  heart  Lord  opened
40.  they  went  out  and  entered  into  the  house  of  L.
_  ,  LYSANIAS.

Luke  3.  l.in  reign  of  Jiberius.L.tetrarchof  Abilene
„  LYSIAS.

Acts  23.  26.  L.  unto  the  most  excellent  Felix
.  LYSTRA.

Acts  14.  6.  they  were  ware  of  it,  and  fled  unto  L.

8.  a  certain  man  at  L.  impotent  in  his  feet

16.  1.  Paul  came  to  L.  ||  2.  by  the  brethren  at  L.

"  Jim.  3.  11.  afflictions  which  came  unto  meat  L.

M.

MAACHAH.

Gen.  22.  24.  Reumah  Nahor’s  concubine  bare  M.

2  Sam.  3.  3.  M.  mother  of  Absalom,  1  Chron.  3.  2.

1  Rings  15.  2.  M .  the  mother  of  Abijam,  the  daugh-
ter  of  Abishalom,  10.  2  Chron.  11.  22.

1  Chron.  C.  48.  M.  Caleb’s  concubine  bare  Sbeber

7.  16.  M.  the  wife  of  Machir  bare  Peresh

11.  43.  Iianan  the  son  of  M.  was  a  valiant  man
MAASEIAII.

2  Chron.  28.  7-  Zichri  slew  M.  the  king’s  son
Neh.  10.  25.  Rehom  and  M.  sealed  the  covenant
Jer.  21. 1.  Zephaniah  the  son  of  M.29.  25  |  37  3

29.  21.  saith  the  Lord  of  Zedekiah  son  of  *M.

32.  12.  to  Baruch  son  of  Neraiah  son  ofM.  51.59.
35.  4.  above  the  chamber  of  M.  son  of  Shallum
MAATH.

Luke  3.26.  Nagge,  which  was  the  son  of  M.

MACEDONIA.

Acts  16.  9.  saying,  come  over  into  M.  and  help  us

18.  5.  Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come  from  M.

19.  21.  Paul  proposed,  when  passed  through  M.
Rom.  15.  26.  for  it  hath  pleased  them  of  M.

2  Cor.  7.  5.  when  we  were  come  into  M.

8.  1 .  grace  of  God  bestowed  on  the  churches  of  M.

9.  2.  for  which  l  boast  of  you  to  them  ofM.

4.  lest  if  they  of  M.  find  you  unprepared

11.  9.  brethren  which  came  from  M.  supplied

1  Thess.  1.  7.ensatnples  to  all  that  believe  in  M.

8.  from  you  sounded  out  the  word,  not  only  in  M.

4.  10.  towards  all  the  brethren  that  are  in  M

MACHIR.

Gen.  50.  23.  M.  the  son  of  Manasseh.  Num.  32.  39.
Num.  26.  29.  M.  begat  Gilead,  27.  1.  |  36.  1.

Josh.  17.  1.

32.  40.  Moses  gave  Gilead  unto  M.  Dent.  3.  15.
Judg.  5.  14.  out  of  M.  came  down  governors

2  Sam.  9. 4.  M.  the  son  of  Ammiel,  5.  |  17  27

MACHPELAH.

Gen.  23.  9.  that  he  may  give  me  the  cave  of  M.  17.
19.  Abraham  buried  Sarah  in  the  cave  of  M.

25.9.  buried  Abraham  in  M.  ||  49. 30.  Jacob,  50  13
MAGDALA.

Mat.  15.  39.  Jesus  came  info  the  coasts  of  M
MAGOG.

Gen.  10.  2.  the  son  of  Japheth  M.  1  Chron.  1.  5.
Ezek.  38.  2.  set  thy  face  against  the  land  of  M.

39.  6.  I  will  send  a  fire  on  M.  and  in  the  isles
Rev.  20. 8.  to  gather  Gog  and  M.  to  battle

MAHAN  AIM.

Gen.  32.  2.  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  M.
Josh.  21.  38.  out  of  Gad  to  Levites,  M.  1  Chr.  6.  80
2  Sam.  2.8.  Abner  brought  Ish-bosheth  to  M.  *  *

17.  24.  then  David  came  to  M.  27.

19.  32.  Barzillai  provided  sustenance  at  M.

1  Kings  2.8.  Shimei  cursed  me  when  1  went  to  M
4.  14.  Abinadab  the  son  of  Iddo  had  M

M  A  H  ER-SH  A  LA  L-H  ASH-BAZ.

Isa.  8.  1.  write  in  the  roll  concerning  M.

3.  then  said  the  Lord  to  me,  call  his  name  M.
MAH  LON.

Ruth  1.  2.  Elimelech’s sons,  M.  and  Chilion

5.  M.  and  Chilion  died  also  both  of  them
4.  9.  that  I  have  bought  all  that  wasM.

10.  Ruth  the  wife  of  M.  have  I  purchased

MALCIIAM.

Zeph.  1.  5.  that  swear  by  the  Lord  and  by  M.
MALCHUS.

John  18.  10/  the  servant’s  name  was  M.

MAMMON.

Mat.  6.  24.  no  man  can  serve  two  masters,  ye  cannot
serve  God  and  M.  Luke  16.  13.
Luke  16.  9.  make  friends  of  M.  of  unrighteousness

11.  it  not  faithful  in  the  unrighteous  M,  who  wi

mam  re;

Gen.  13.  18.  Abram  dwelt  in  the  plain  ofM.  14  j*

14.  24.  F.shcol,  M.  let  them  take  their  portior

18.  1.  the  Lord  appeared  to  Abraham  in  M
2-J.  17.  Machpelah  before  M.  19.  |  49.  30.  I  50. 13

3o.  27.  Jacob  came  to  Isaac  his  father  to  M

MANAEN.

Arts  13.  1.  M.  who  had  been  brought  up  with  H

,  MANASSEH.

Cen.  41.  51.  Joseph  called  the  first-born  M.


M  A  R


MES


M  I  Z  [Pb<***k>V  Name#.


Gen.  48.  5.  thy  two  sons  M.  and  Ephraim  are  mine
CO.  in  thee  shall  Israel  bless,  God  make  thee  as
Ephraim  and  M.  and  he  set  Ephraim  before  M.
Num.  1.  10.  of  M  Gamaliel  was  prince
7-  54.  Gamaliel  prince  <>f  M.  offered  on  eighth  day
Of/.  .14.  these  are  the  families  of  M.  07.  1.

16.  10.  they  were  married  into  the  family  of  M.
Pent.  13.  17.  they  are  the  thousands  of  M.

Josh.  14.  4.  of  Joseph  were  two  tribes,  M.  Ephraim

17.  2.  these  were  the  male  children  of  M.

1.  Zelophehad  son  of  M .  had  no  sons  but  daughters

5.  there  fell  ten  portions  to  M.  beside  Gilead

6.  the  daughters  of  M.  had  an  inheritance

11.  M.  Imd  in  lssachar,  Beth-shean  and  Ibleam

12.  children  of  M.  could  not  drive  out  inhabitants
Judg.  6.  15.  behold,  my  family  is  poor  in  M.

18. 10.  Jonathan  son  of  Gershom,  son  of  M.  priest
2  Kings  20.  21.  M.  his  son  reigned,  2  Chron.  12.  31.

21.  9.  and  M.  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil

16.  M.  shed  innocent  blood,  till  he  filled  Jerusalem

23.  12.  the  altars  M.  made  did  Josiah  beat  doun

26.  provocations  that  M.  had  provoked  him  withal

24.  1.  for  the  sins  of  M.  this  came  upon  Judah

1  Chron.  9.1.  in  Jerusalem  dwelt  of  the  children  of  M.

12.  19.  and  there  fell  some  of  M.  to  David

2  Chron.  15.  9-  the  strangers  out  of  M.  tell  to  Asa

30.  1.  Hezekiah  wrote  letters  to  Ephraim  and  M.

11.  yet  divers  of  M.  humbled  themselves

11.  1.  all  Israel  cut  down  the  groves  in  M.

31.  9.  M.  made  Judah  and  Jerusalem  to  err

10.  the  Lord  spake  to  M.  he  would  not  hearken

11.  the  captains  took  M.  among  the  thorns
11.  then  M.  knew  that  the  T.ord  he  was  God
23.  Anion  humbled  not  himself,  as  M.  had  done

34.  6.  so  did  Josiah  in  the  cities  of  M.  and  Ephraim
Ezra  10.  10.  M.  had  taken  strange  wives,  13.

Psal.  60.  7.  Gilead  is  mine,  M.  is  mine,  108.  8.

80.  2.  before  M.  stir  up  thy  strength,  and  save  us
Isa.  9.  21.  M.  shall  eat  Ephraim,  Ephraim  M.

Jer.  15.  4.  cause  them  to  be  removed,  because  of  M.
Ezek.  48.  4.  to  the  west  side  a  portion  for  M.

Mat.  1.  10.  Ezekias  begat  M.  and  TVI .  begat  Amon
Tribe  of  MAfi  ASSEII.

Num.  1.  35.  numbered  of  the  trihe  of  M.  32,200

2.  2fi  by  Ephraim  shall  be  the  trihe  of  M.  and  the
captain  of  the  children  of  M.  Gamaliel,  10.  21.

13.  11.  of  the  trihe  of  M.  Gaddi  ||  34.  23.  llanniel

32.  11.  to  half  trihe  of  M.  the  kingdom  of  Og
34.  14.  half  trihe  of  M.  have  received  inheritance

Josh.  4.  12.  the  half  trihe  of  M.  passed  over  armed
13.  7-  divide  to  nine  tribes  and  half  trihe  of  M.

29.  Moses  gave  inheritance  to  half  trihe  of  M.
this  was  possession  of  half  trihe  of  M.  i2.  6.

I  18.  7.

17.  1.  there  was  also  a  lot  for  the  trihe  of  M.

20.  8.  gave  Golan  out  of  the  trihe  of  M.  21.  27.

22.  10.  the  half  trihe.  of  M.  built  there  an  altar

1  Chr.5.  18.  Reuben,  Gad,  and  half  trihe  ofM.  vali.
6.  70.  out  of  half  trihe  of  M.  to  the  Levites,  71  ■

12.  31.  half  tribe  of  M.  18,000  to  make  David  king

26.  32.  rulers  over  Gad  half  trihe  of  M .  27-  20,  21.
Rev.  7-  6.  of  the  trihe  of  M.  were  sealed  12,000

MAN  EH.

Ezek.  45.  12.  fifteen  shekels  shall  be  your  M.
MANOAH.

Jndg.  13.  8.  then  M.  entreated  the  T.ord,  and  said

9.  and  God  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  M.

11.  M.  arose  and  went  after  his  wife  and  came
16.  M.  knew-  not  that  lie  was  an  angel  of  the  T.ord

19.  M.  took  a  kid,  and  offered  it  upon  a  rock

20.  M.  and  his  wife  looked  on  it,  and  fell  down

21.  M.  knew  that  he  was  an  angel  of  the  Lord
16.  31.  buried  Samson  in  the  burving-place  of  M.

MARA.

Ruth  1.20.  Ruth  said,  cal  I  me  not  Naomi,  call  me  M.
MAR  AIL

Exod.  15.  23.  they  could  not  drink  of  waters  of  M.
Num.  S3.  8.  went  three  days,  and  pitched  in  M.

9.  they  removed  from  M.  and  came  unto  Elim

MARCUS.

Col.  4.  10.  M.  sister’s  son  to  Barnabas,  saluteth  you
Phi/em.  24.  M.  saluteth  you,  1  Pet.  5.  13.

MARK.

Aces  12.  12.  Mary,  mother  of  John,  surnamed  M.

25.  took  with  them  John,  whose  surname  was  M.
15.  39.  Barnabas  took  M.  and  sailed  to  Cyprus
§  Tim.  4. 11.  take  M.  and  bring  him  with  thee
MARS- HILL.

Acts  17. 22.  Paul  stood  in  the  midst  of  M.
MARTHA.

Luke  10.  18.  a  woman  named  M.  received  him

40.  M.  was  cumbered  ||  41.  M.  M.  thou  art  careful
John  11.1.  the  town  of  Mary  and  her  sister  M.

5.  now  Jesus  loved  M.  Mary,  and  Lazarus

10.  Jesus  was  in  that  place  where  M.  met  him

12.  2.  they  made  him  a  supper,  and  M.  served

MARY.

Mat.  1.  16.  Jacob  begat  Joseph  the  husband  of  M.

18.  when  his  mother  M.  was  espoused  to  Joseph
20.  fear  not  to  take  unto  thee  M.  thy  wife

2. 11.  they  saw  the  young  child  with  M.  his  mother

13.  55.  is  not  his  mother  called  M.  Mark  6.  3.

27.  56.  among  them  was  M.  the  mother  of  .1  ames

and  Joses,  Mark  15.  40,  47-  I  16.  1.
Luke  1.27.  house  of  David  the  virgin’s  name  was  M.

10.  fear  not,  M.  II  56.  M.  abode  three  months

41.  when  Elizabeth  heard  the  salutation  of  M.

2.  5.  Joseph  went  to  be  taxed  with  M.  his  wife
16.  the  shepherds  found  M.  and  the  babe  lying

19.  but  M.  kept  all  these  things  in  her  heart
10.  39-  she  had  a  sister  called  M.  which  also  sat

42.  M.  hath  chosen  that  good  part  not  to  be  taken
John  11.1.  the  town  of  M.  I)  20.  hut  M.  sat.  still

2.  it  was  that  M.  that  anointed  the  Lord

28.  sne  called  M.  her  sister  secretly,  saying

12.  3.  M.  took  a  pound  of  ointment  and  anointed

19.  25.  M.  the  wife  of  Cleophas  stood  by  the  cross

20.  11.  M.  stood  without  at  the  sepulchre,  weeping
16.  Jesus  saith  to  her,  M.  she  turned  herself

Acts  1, 14.  the  apostles  continued  in  prayer  with  M.
12.  12.  Peter  came  to  house  of  M.  mother  of  John
Rom.  16.  6.  greet  M.  who  be“'.owed  much  labour


MARY  Magdalene.

Mat.  27.  56.  many  women  were  there,  among  whom
wasM.  Magdalene,  Mark  15.  40,  John  19.25.
61.  M.  Magdalene  sitting  over-against  sepulchre
28.  1.  came  M.  Mag.  to  see  sepulchre,  John  20.  1.
Mark  16.  1.  M.  Magdalene  and  Mary  the  mother  of
James  bougtit  sweet  spices,  Luke  24.  10.

9.  he  appeal  ed  first  to  M.  Magdalene,  out  of  whom
John  20.  18.  M.  Magdalene  told  the  disciples

A1  ASSAIL

Exod.  17-  7.  he  cal  led  the  name  of  the  place  M.
Deut.  6.  16.  not  tempt  I,,  as  tempted  him  in  M.  9.22.

33.8.  thy  holy  one,  whom  thou  didst  prove  at  M.

MA  I  I  AN.

2  Kings  1L  18.  slew  M.  priest  of  Baal,  2  Chr.  23. 17.
MAE  I  Alill  AS.

Luke  3.  25.  Joseph,  which  was  the  son  of  M.
MATTHEW.

Mat.  9. 9.  saw  man  named  M.  and  saith,  follow’  me

10.  3.  Philip,  Thomas,  and  M.  the  publican,  Mark

3.  18.  Luke  6.  15.  Acts  1.  13.
MATTHIAS.

Acts  1.  21.  Joseph  called  Barsabas,  and  M.

2tL  the  lot  fell  on  M.  and  he  was  numbered
MAZZAROTH.

Job  38.  .32.  canst  thou  bring  forth  M.  in  season  ?
MEDAD.

Num.  11.  26.  Spirit  came  on  M.  he  prophesied,  27-
MEDE,  S.

2  Kings  17.  6.  placed  them  in  cities  of  .M.  18. 11.
Ezra  6.  2.  was  found  in  the  province  of  the  M.  roll
Eth.  1.19.  let  it  be  written  among  the  laws  of  the  M.
Isa.  11.  17.  I  will  stir  up  M.  ag.  them,  Jer.  51.  11.
Jer.  25.  25.  I  made  all  the  kings  of  the  M.  to  drink
Dan.  5.28.  Peres,  thy  kingdom  is  given  to  the  M.

6.8.  according  to  the  law  of  the  M.  12,  15.

9. 1.  Darius  son  of  Ahasuerus,  of  the  seed  of  M.

11.  1.  in  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  M.

M  ED I A .

E'th.  1.  3.  all  the  power  of  Persia  and  M.

14.  seven  princes  of  Persia  an<!  M.  saw  the  king

18.  the  ladies  of  M.  shall  say  this  day  to  princes

lo.  2.  written  in  the  book  of  the  kings  of  M.

Isa.  21.  2.  besiege,  O  M.  all  the  sighing  ceaseth
Dan.  8.  20.  the  two  horns  are  kings  of  M.  and  Persia
MEG1DDO.

Jndg.  1.  27.  the  Canaanites  would  dwell  in  M.

5.  19.  kings  of  Canaan  fought,  by  the  waters  of  M.

1  Kings  4.  12.  to  Baana  pertained  Eaanach  and  M.
9.  15.  Solomon  raised  a  levy  to  build  M.

2  Kings  9-27.  Ahaziah  fled  "to  M.  and  died  there
23.29.  Josiah  was  slain  at  M.30.  2  Chron.  35.  22.

MEG1DDON.

Zec/iAZ.  11.  as  the  mourning  in  the  valley  of  M.

M  EL  CHI.

Luke  1.  24.  Levi,  which  was  the  son  of  M.
MELCHISEDEK.

Gen.  14.  18.  king  M.  brought  forth  bread  and  wine
Ps.  110.  4.  thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order
of  M.  II eh.  5.  6,  10. 1  6.  20.  |  7-  17,  21
Heh.  7.  1.  this  M.  king  of  Salem,  priest  of  God

10.  in  the  loins  of  his  father  when  M.  met  him

11.  a  priest  should  arise  after  the  order  of  M.

15.  after  the  similitude  of  M.  ariseth  a  priest

MEMPHIS.

Has.  9.  6.  Egypt  shall  gather  them,M.  shall  bury
MEN  AH  EM.

2  Kings  15.  14.  M.  smote  Shall nm  in  Samaria

16.  xVI .  smote  Tiphsah  ||  20.  M.  exacted  money

MENE.

Dan.  5.  25.  M.  M.  God  hath  numbered  thy  king.  26.
MEP HI BOSH ETH.

2  Sam.  4.  4.  Jonathan  had  a  son,  his  name  was  M.
9.  10.  but  M.  shall  eat  bread  at  my  table,  11.

12.  M.  had  a  young  son  Micha  ;  all  that  dwelt  in

the  house  of  Ziba  were  servants  to  M.
16.  4.  behold,  thine  are  all  that  pertained  unto  M.

19.  25.  wherefore  wentest  thou  not  with  me,  M.  ?
21. 7-  but  the  king  spared  M.  the  son  of  Jonathan
8.  king  took  two  sons  of  llizpah,  Armoni  and  M.
MERAB.

1  Sam.  14.  49.  Saul’s  eldest  daughter  M.  18.  17-
18.  19.  w  hen  M.  should  have  been  given  to  David
MERARl.

Gen.  46.  11.  the  sons  of  Levi,  Gershon,  Kohath,  M.

Exod.  6. 16.  Num.  1.  17.  1  Chr.  6. 1, 16. 1  23. 6.
Exod.  6.  19.  the  sons  of  M.  Mahal  i,  Mushi,  Num.  3.

20.  1  Chr.  n.  6.  19,  29.  I  21.  21  .  I  24.  26.
Num.  3. 16.  under  the  charge  of  the  sons  of  M.

4.  42.  were  numbered  of  M.  ||  10. 17.  M .  set  forward

7.  8.  waggons  and  oxen  given  to  the  sons  of  M.
Josh.  21.7.  cities  given  to  M.40.  1  Chr.  6.  6.1,  77.
MER  CUR  I  US.

Acts  14. 12.  Paul  called  M.  because  chief  speaker
MER  IB  AH.

Exod.  17-  7-  be  called  the  name  of  the  place  M.
Num.  20.  13.  this  is  the  water  of  M.  27.  14.

24.  rebelled  at  water  of  M.  Dent.  .12.  51.  I  33.  8.
Psal.  81.  7.  I  proved  thee  at  the  waters  of  M.
MERODACII.

Jer.  50.  2.  Babylon  taken,  M.  is  broken  in  pieces
MERODACII-BA  EADAN.

Isa.  39  1.  M.  sent  letters  and  present  to  TIezekiah
M  EROM.

Josh.  11.5.  they  pitched  at  the  waters  of  M.  7* .
MEROZ.

Judg.  5.  21.  curse  ye  M.  saith  the  angel  of  the  Lord
MESHACH.  See  Abeu-NEGO.

MESH  ECU.

Gen.  10.  2.  M.  the.  son  of  Japheth,  1  Chron.  1.  5.

1  Chron.  1.  17.  the  sons  of  Shem,  Gether,  and  M.
Psal.  120.  5.  wme  is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  M.

Ezek.  27-  11.  Tubal  and  M.  w’ere  thy  merchants
32.  26.  there  is  M.  II  38.  2.  chief  prince  of  M.  1.
39. 1. 1  am  against  the  chief  princeof  M.  and  Tubal
.MESOPOTAMIA.

Gen.  24. 10.  Eliezer  went  to  M.  to  the  city  of  Nahor
Deut.  23.  4.  they  hired  Balaam  of  M.  to  curse  thee
Judg.  3.  8.  Chushan-rishathaim  king  of  M.

10.  Lord  delivered  the  king  of  M.  to  Israel
1  Chr.  19.  6.  Ammon  sent  to  hire  chariots  out  of  M.
Acts  2.9.  the  dwellers  in  M.  we  hear  in  our  tongue


Acts'!.  2.  the  God  of  glory  appeared  to  Abra.  in  M.
M  ESS  1  A  IT.  See  Appellatives.

ME  EH  EG- AM  MAH.

2  Sam.  8.  1.  David  took  M.  from  the  Philistines
M  ETIIUSELAI1.

Gen.  5.  21.  Enoch  begat  M.  ||  25.  M.  begat  Lantech

27.  all  the  days  of  M.  were  969  years
1  Chron.  1.1.  Ilenoch,  M.  Lantech

Luke  3.  37.  Lantech,  which  was  the  son  of  M.
MICA  II.

Jndg.  17.  1.  a  man  of  mount  Ephraim  called  M.

5.  the  man  M.  had  an  house  of  gods

12.  M.  consecrated  the  Levite  for  his  priest

18.  4.  thus  dealeth  M.  ||  31.  they  set  up  M.  image

1  Chron.  5. 5.  M.  his  son,  Reaia  his  son,  Raal  his  son

8.  14.  Merib-baal  of  Benjamin  begat  M.  9-  40.

15.  the  sons  of  M.  Pithon,  and  Melech,  9.  41.

9.  15.  Mattaniah  the  son  of  M.  son  of  Zicltri

2  Chron.  14.  2(>.  Josiah  sent  Abdon  the  son  of  M.
Neh.  10.  II.  M.  Tlelioh  sealed  the  covenant

Jer.  26. 18.  M.  the  Morasthite  prophesied  in  the  days
of  Hezekiah,  Zion  shall  be  plowed,  Mic.  1.1.
MICAIAII.

1  Kings  22.  8.  M.  the  son  of  Imlah,  9-  2  Chron.  18.8.

24.  Zedekiah  smote  M.  on  the  cheek

26.  take  M.  carry  him  to  Amon,  2  Chr.  18.  21,  25.
MICIIAIAH.

Neh.  12.  35.  son  of  M.  to  give  thanks,  41.
MICIIAIAH.

2  Chron.  11.  2.  Abijah’s  mother  was  M.  of  Uriel
17-7-  Jehoshaphat  sent  M.  to  teach  cities  of  J udali

Jer.  36. 11.  M.  heard  what  Baruch  had  read,  13.
MICHAEL.

Dan.  10.  11.  M.  one  of  the  chief  piinces  came
21.  none  holdeth  with  me  but  M.  your  prince

12. 1 .  at  that  time  shall  M.  stand  up  for  the  people
Jude  9-  yet  M.  the  archangel,  contending  with  dev.
Rev.  12.  7.  M.  and  angels  fought  against  the  dragon

M1CHAL.

1  Sam.  14.  49.  Saul’s  younger  daughter  M.

18.  20.  M.  Saul’s  daughter  loved  David,  28.

19.  12.  so  M.  let  David  dowm  through  a  window

13.  M.  took  an  image  and  laid  it  in  the  bed

25.  44.  Sanl  had  given  M.  David’s  wife  to  Phalti

2  Sam.  1.  13.  except  thou  first  bring  M.

14.  deliver  me  my  wife  M.  whom  1  espoused

6. 16.  M.  Saul’s  daughter  looked  through  a  window,
and  saw  king  David  dancing,  1  Chron.  15.  29.

23.  therefore  M.  had  no  child  to  her  death
21.8.  king  took  five  sons  of  M.  brought  up  for  Adriel

M1D1AN.

Exod.  2.  15.  but  Moses  dwelt  in  the  land  of  M.

18.  1 .  Jethro  priest  of  M.  heard  all  God  had  done
AT7iw.22.  4.  Moab  said  to  the  elders  of  M.

25. 15.  Cozbi  daughterof  Zur  of  a  chief  house  in  M.
31.  3.  let  them  go  and  avenge  the  Lord  of  M.

8.  they  slew  the  kings  of  M.  beside  the  rest

9.  Israel  took  all  the  women  of  M.  captives
Jndg.  6.  1.  the  Lord  delivered  them  to  M.  2.

7.  14.  for  into  his  hand  hath  God  delivered  M.

8.  22.  thou  hast  delivered  us  from  M.  9.  17.

28.  thus  was  M.  subdued  before  Israel

1  Kings  11.  18.  some  Edomites  arose  out  of  M.

Isa.  9.  4.  thou  hast  broken  the  yoke,  as  in  day  of  M.

10.  26.  according  to  the  slaughter  of  M.  at  Oreb
60.  6.  the  dromedaries  of  M.  shall  cover  thee
Hah.  3.  7.  the  curtainsof  the  land  of  M.  did  tremble

MIDTAN  TEES.

Gen.  37.28.  there  passed  by  M.  merchant-men
36.  the  M.  sold  him  into  Egypt  to  Potiphar
Num.  25.  17  -  vex  the  M.  ||  31 . 2.  avenge  Isr.  of  the  M.
Judg. 6.  7.  Israel  cried  to  the  Lord  because  of  M.

16.  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  M.  as  one  man
7.  23.  the  men  of  Israel  pursued  after  the  M.

25.  they  took  two  princes  of  the  M.  Oreb,  Zeeb

8. 1.  when  thou  wentest  to  fight  with  the  M.

Psal.  83.  9.  do  to  them  as  to  the  M.  as  to  Sisera

MIDI  AN  ITISH.

Num.  <25.6.  behold,  Zimri  brought  a  M.  woman

15.  the  name  of  the  M.  woman  was  Cozbi

M1LCATI.

Gen.  11.29.  M.  daughter  of  Ilaran,  Nahor’s  wife
22.  20.  M.  also  bare  children  to  Nahor,  21.

24.  15.  Bethuel  son  of  M.  the  wife  of  Nahor
Num.  26.  33.  Zelophehad’s  daughter’s  name  was  M.
M  I  T.COM.

1  Kings  11.5.  Solomon  went  after  M.  god  of  Ammon
31.  they  have  worshipped  M.  god  of  Ammon

2  Kings 23. 11.  which  Solomon  had  builded  for  M.

MILETUM.

2  Tim.  4.  20.  Trophimus  have  I  left  at  M.  sick
MILETUS.

Acts 20. 15.  and  the  next  day  we  came  to  M.

17.  from  M.  he  sent  to  Ephesus  to  the  elders

MI  LTD.

Judg.  9.  6.  all  the  house  of  M.  gathered  together
20.  but  if  not  let  fire  devour  the  house  of  M.

2  Sam.  5.  9.  David  built  round  about  from  M.

1  Kings 9.  15.  the  reason  of  the  levy  to  build  M.

24.  then  did  Solomon  build  M.  11.  27-

2  Kings  12.  20.  they  slew  Joash  in  the  house  of  M .

MIRIAM.

Exod.  15.  20.  M.  took  a  timbrel  in  her  hand
Num.  12.  1.  M.  and  Aaron  spake  against  Moses

10.  behold,  M.  became  leprous  white  as  snow
15.  M.  was  shut  out  seven  days  ||20.1.  M.died  there

26.  59.  to  Amram  were  born  Aaron,  Moses,  M.
Dent.  24. 9-  remember  what  G.  did  to  M.  by  the  way
Mic.  6. 4. 1  sent  before  thee  Moses,  Aaron,  and  M.

MISHA  EL.

Exod.  6.22.  and  the  sons  of  Uzziel,  M.  Elzaphan

and  Zithri,  Lev.  10.  4.
Neh.  8.  4.  on  Ezra’s  left  hand  stood  M.  and  Hashum
Dan.  1 . 6.  of  the  children  of  J  udah,  M.  and  Azariah
MIZAR.

Psal.  42. 6. 1  will  remember  thee  from  the  hill  M.
MIZPAII.

Ge?j.11.49.  the  name  of  the  heap  was  called  M.

1  Kings  15.  22.  king  Asa  built  with  those  stones

Geba  of  Benjamin  and  M.  2  Chron.  16.  6.

2  KingsQ5.Q3.  Ishtnael  the  son  of  Nethaniah  came

to  Gedaliah  to  M.  Jer.  41.  1.

609


Proper  Names. j  MOR


MOS


NAT


Neh.  3.  7-  the  men  of  Gibeon  and  M.  repaired

15.  Shaliuin  ruler  of  M.  ||  19-  Ezer  ruler  of  M.
Jer.  10.6.  then  Jeremiah  went  to  Gedaliah  to  M.

10.  as  for  me,  behold,  1  will  dwell  at  M.

41.  3.  Ishmael  slew  all  the  Jews  that  were  at  M.

14  Ishmael  had  carried  away  captive  from  M.
Hos.5. 1.  because  ye  have  been  a  snare  on  M.
MIZPEH.

Josh.  15.  38.  Dilean  and  M.  cities  of  Judah

18.  26.  51.  and  Chephirah,  cities  of  Benjamin
Judy.  10.  17-  Israel  assembled  and  encamped  in  M.

11.  11.  Jephthah  uttered  all  his  words  in  M.

20.  1.  Israel  was  gathered  to  the  Lord  in  M.

21.5.  that  came  not  up  to  the  Ix>rd  to  M.  shall  die
1  Sam.  7-  5.  Samuel  said,  gather  all  Israel  toM.

6.  and  Samuel  judged  Israel  in  M.  16.

10.  17.  Samuel  called  the  people  to  the  Lord  to  M.

22.  3.  David  went  thence  to  M.  of  Moab

MNASON.

Acts.  21.  16.  they  brought  M.  an  old  disciple

MOAB.

Gen.  19.  37.  Lot’s  eldest  daughter’s  son  was  M.

36.  35.  smote  Midian  in  field  of  M.  1  Chr.  1.  46.
Exod.  15.  15.  tremblingshall  take  hold  on  men  of  M.
Num.  21. 29.  woe  to  thee.M.  Jer.  48.46.

22.  3.  M.  was  sore  afraid,  and  M.  was  distressed

24.  17.  a  sceptre  shall  smite  the  corners  of  M.

25. 1.  people  commit  whoredom  withdaught.  of  M.
Deut.  2.  18.  thou  art  to  pass  thro’  the  coast  of  M.

34.  5.  so  Moses  died  there  in  the  land  of  M.

Judy.  3.  29.  they  slew  of  M.  about  10, 0(X)  men

30.  so  M.  was  subdued  under  the  hand  of  Israel

10.6.  Israel  served  the  gods  of  Syria  and  M.

11.  15.  Israel  took  not  away  the  land  of  M.

Ruth  1.  2.  Elimelech  came  into  the  country  of  M.

4.  his  sons  took  them  wives  of  the  women  of  M.

1  Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  fought  against  M.  and  Ammon

2  Sam.  8.  2.  David  smote  M.  and  measured  them

23.  20.  Benaiah  slew  two  lion-like  men  of  M.

1  Kings  11.7-  for  Chemosh  the  abomination  of  M.

2  Kings  1.1.  then  M.  rebelled  against  Israel
3.7.  wilt  thou  go  with  me  against  M.  to  battle?

23.  the  kings  are  slain,  therefore  M.  to  the  spoil

1  Chr.  4.  22.  Saraph,  who  had  the  dominion  in  51.

18.  11.  the  silver  and  gold  he  brought  from  M.

2  Chron.  20.  1.  M.  came  against  Jehoshaphat

10.  behold,  how  the  children  of  M.  reward  us
Neh.  13.  23.  Jews  that  had  married  wives  of  M.
Psal.  60.  8.  M.  is  my  washpot,  108.  9.

83.  6.  M.  is  confederate  against  thee
l.\a.  11.  14.  they  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  M.

15.  1.  the  burden  of  M.  Ar  of  M.  laid  waste,  16.

13.  Jer.  48.  1.  Ezek.  25.  8.  Amos  2.  2.

5.  my  heart  shall  cry  out  for  M.  his  fugitives

16.  6.  we  have  heard  the  pride  of  M.  Jer.  48.  29.

11.  my  bowels  shall  sound  like  an  harp  for  51.

14.  and  the  glory  of  M.  shall  be  contemned

25.  10.  M.  shall  be  trodden  down  under  him
Jer.  9.  26.  I  will  punish  Egypt,  Judah,  and  M.

25.  21.  I  made  Edom  an  1  51.  to  drink  of  the  cup
40.  11.  all  the  Jews  returned  from  M.

48.  2.  there  shall  be  no  more  praise  of  M.

9.  give  wings  to  M.  that  it  may  fiee  and  get  away
11.  M.  hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth
20.  tell  ye  it  in  Arnon,  that  M.  is  spoiled

26.  M.  shall  wallow  in  his  vomit,  he  in  derision

33.  joy  and  gla  Iness  is  taken  from  the  land  of  M.
39.  how  hath  M.  turned  the  back  with  shame  !

47.  yet  will  1  bring  again  the  captivity  of  M.
Amos  2.2.  but  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  M.  and  devour
Zeph.  2.  9.  saith  the  L.  surely  M.  shall  be  as  Sodom
See  King.

MOABITE.

Deut.  23.  3.  a  M.  shall  not  enter  into  the  congre¬
gation  to  tenth  generation,  Neh.  13.  1,

1  Chron.  11.  46.  Ithmah  the  M.  a  valiant  man

MOABITES.

Gen.  19.  37.  the  same  is  the  father  of  the  M.

Deut.  2.  9.  the  Lord  said,  distress  not  the  M.

Judy.  3.  28.  the  Lord  hath  delivered  the  M.  to  you

2  Sam.  8.  2.  so  the  M.  became  David’s  servants,

and  brought  gifts,  l  Chron.  18.2.

1  Kings  11. 1.  Solomon  loved  women  of  the  M.

.33.  they  worshipped  Chemosh  god  of  the  M  .

2  Kings  3.  18.  he  will  deliver  the  M.  into  your  hand

24.  the  Israelites  rose  up  and  smote  the  M.

13.  20.  the  bands  of  the  51.  invaded  the  land

24.  2.  the  Lord  sent  against  him  bands  of  the  M.

Ezra  9.  1.  according  to  the  abominations  of  the  M.
MOABITESS.  .See  Ruth.

MO  LECH.

Lev.  18. 21.  shaltnot  let  thy  seed  pass  thro’  fire  to  M.
20.  2.  whosoever  he  be  that  giveth  of  his  seed  to  M.
shall  surely  be  put  to  death,  3,  4.  Jer.  32.35.

1  Kings  11. 7.  Solomon  built  an  high  place  for  M.

2  Kings 23. 10.  no  man  make  his  son  pass  thro’  to  51.

MOLOCH.

Amos 5.  26.  have  borne  tabernacle  of  M.  Acts  7.  43.
MORDECAI.

Ezra  2.  2.  M.  came  up  with  Zerubbabel,  Neh.  7.  7.
Esth.  2.  5.  there  was  a  Jew,  whose  name  was  51.

19.  then  M.  sat  in  the  king’s  gate?  21.

22.  the  thing  was  known  to  M.  who  told  it

5.  5.  when  Haman  saw  that  M.  bowed  not

6.  for  they  had  shewed  him  the  people  of  M.

4.  1.  M.  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  on  sackcloth

9.  Hatach  came  and  told  Esther  the  words  of  M.

15.  Esther  bade  them  return  M.  this  answer

5. 13.  so  long  as  I  see  M.  the  Jew  at  the  king’s  gate

14.  gallows  made,  that  M.  may  be  handed  thereon

6.  3.  what  honour  hath  been  done  to  M.  for  this  ?

10.  make  haste,  and  do  even  so  to  M.  the  Jew

7.  9.  the  gallows  which  Haman  had  made  for  M.

8.  2.  the  king  took  off  his  ring,  and  gave  it  to  M.

Esther  set  M  over  the  house  of
Haman.

15.  M.  went  out  from  the  king  in  royal  apparel

9.  3.  because  the  fear  of  M.  fell  upon  them

10.  3.  M.  the  Jew  was  next  to  king  Ahasuerus

MORIAH.

Gen.  22.  2.  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of  M.

2  Chr.  3.  1.  Solomon  built  the  house  cf  Lord  in  M.

610


MOSES.

Exod.  2.  10.  Pharaoh’s  daughter  called  his  name  M.

14.  M.  feared,  and  said,  this  thing  is  known

15.  Pharaoh  sought  to  slay  M.  but  51.  fled

3.  4.  the  Lord  called  to  him,  and  said,  M.  M.

6.  M.  hid  his  face,  he  was  afraid  to  look  on  God

4.  14.  the  Lord’s  anger  was  kindled  against  M.

27.  go  to  meet  M.  ||  11.3.  M.  was  very  great

5.  22.  M.  returned  unto  the  Lord  and  said

8.  13.  accord,  to  word  of  M.  31.  I  9-  12,  .35.  |  12.  35.
10.22.  M.  stretched  forth  his  hand  toward  heaven

14.  .31.  people  believed  the  Lord  and  his  servant  M.

15.  24.  the  people  murmured  against  M.  17.3.

16.  20.  notwithstanding  they  hearkened  not  to  M.
17-4. M.  cried  to  the  Lord  ||  6.  M.  did  so,  Ntm.17.1 1.

12.  M.  hands  were  heavy  ||  15.  M.  built  an  altar

18.  1.3.  M.  sat  to  judge  ||  19.  3.  M.  went  up  unto  G.

19.  8.  M.  returned  the  words  of  the  people  to  Ld.

20.  the  Lord  called  M.  up  to  mount  Sinai

20.  21.  M.  drew  near  unto  the  thick  darkness
24.  2.  M.  alone  shall  come  near  the  Lord

4.  51.  wrote  all  the  words  of  the  Lord
18.  and  M.  went  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud

32. 1.  as  for  M.  we  wot  not  what  become  of  him.  23.

11.  M.  besought  the  Ix>rd  ||  19.  M.  anger  waxed  hot
.3.3.  9.  the  Lord  talked  with  M.  ||  34.  4.  M.  went  up

34.  35.  M.  put  the  vail  upon  his  face  again

39.  43.  M.  did  look  on  all  work  ;  M.  blessed  them

40.  35.  51.  was  not  able  to  enter  into  the  tent
Lev.  10.  16.  M.  sought  the  goat  of  the  sin-offering

24.  II.  they  brought  the  blasphemer  to  M.

Num.  5.  4.  as  the  Lord  spake  to  M.  so  did  Israel

11.  2.  the  people  cried  to  M.  and  M.  prayed  to  Ld.

10.  M.  heard  people  weep  through  their  families

12.  2.  hath  the  Lord  indeed  spoken  only  by  M.  ?

3.  M.  was  very  meek  above  all  men  upon  the  earth

7.  M.  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful  in  all  my  house
14.  44.  ark  and  M.  departed  not  out  of  the  camp

16.  4.  when  M.  heard  it,  he  fell  upon  his  face

17.  7.  M.  laid  up  the  rods  before  the  Lord

20.  3.  the  people  chode  with  M.  and  spake,  saying

21.  5.  people  spake  against  God  and  against  M.

9.  M.  made  a  serpent  of  brass  and  put  it  on  a  pole

25.  6.  brought  a  Midianitish  woman  in  sight  of  M.

31.  6.  51.  sent  them  to  the  war,  them  and  Phinehas

14.  M.  was  wroth  with  the  officers  of  the  host

3.3.  2.  51.  wrote  their  goings  out  by  command  ot  Ixi.
Deut.  27.  11.  M.  charged  the  people  the  same  day
.31.  9.  M.  wrote  this  law  and  delivered  it

22.  M.  wrote  this  song,  and  taught  it  Israel

.3.3. 1.  wherewith  M.  the  man  of  God  blessed  Israel
34.  5.  M.  the  servant  ot  the  Lord  died  there

10.  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like  to  M.

Josh.  1.5.  as  I  was  with  51.  so  I  will  be  with  thee, 3.7.

17.  as  we  hearkened  to  M.  so  will  we  to  thee

4.  14.  the  people  feared  Joshua,  as  they  feared  M.

14.  10.  ever  since  the  Lord  spake  this  word  to  M.

1 1 .  I  am  as  strong  as  1  was  in  the  day  M.  sent  me
1  Kings  2.  3.  to  keep  his  commandments,  as  it  is

written  in  the  law  of  M.  2  Kings  23.  25.
2  Chron.  2.3.  18.  Ezra  .3.  2.  Dan.  9. 11,  13.
Luke  24.  44.  1  Cor.  9.  9.

8.  9.  save  the  two  tables  which  M.  put  there

1  Chr.  2.3.  14.  now  concerning  M.  the  man  of  God

26.  24.*  the  son  of  M.  was  ruler  of  the  treasures
Psal.  103.  7.  he  made  known  his  ways  unto  M.

105.  26.  he  sent  M.  his  servant,  and  Aaron

106.  16.  they  envied  M.  also  in  the  camp

23.  had  not  M.  stood  before  him  in  the  breach

32.  so  that  it  went  ill  with  M.  for  their  sakes

Is  a.  6.3.  12.  that  led  them  by  the  right  hand  of  M.
Jer.  15.  1.  though  51.  and  Samuel  stood  before  me
Mai.  4.  4.  remember  the  law  of  M.  my  servant
Mat.  17.  .3.  behold  there  appeared  M.  and  Elias
talking  with  him,  Mark  9.  4.  Luke  9.  30.

4.  let  us  make  one  tabernacle  for  M.  Mark  9-  5.

19. 7.  why  did  M.  then  command  to  give  a  writing5

8.  M.  suffered  you  to  put  away  your  wives,  but

23.  2.  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  M.  seat
Mark  10.  3.  he  said,  what  did  M.  command  you  ?

12.  19-  M.  wrote,  if  a  man’s  brother  die,  Luke  20.28.
Luke  16.  29.  they  have  M.  and  the  prophets

.31.  if  they  hear  not  M.  and  the  prophets

20.  37.  thatdead  are  raised  M.  shewed  at  the  bush

24.  27-  beginning  at  51.  and  all  the  prophets
John  1.17.  law  was  given  by  M.  grace  by  Jes.  Christ

45.  we  have  found  him  of  whom  M.  did  write
3.  14.  as  M.  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness

5.  45.  one  accuseth  you,  even  M.  in  whom  ye  trust

46.  had  ye  believed  M.  ye  had  believed  me

6.  32.  M.  gave  you  not  that  bread  from  heaven

7.  19.  did  not  51.  give  you  the  law  ?  none  keepeth  it
22.  not  because  it  is  of  51.  but  of  the  fathers

2.3.  that  the  law  of  51.  should  not  be  broken

9.  28.  thou  art  his  disciple,  we  are  51.  disciples
29.  we  know  that  God  spake  unto  M.

Acts  3.  22.  for  51.  truly  said  unto  the  fathers
6. 11.  heard  him  speak  blasphemous  words  ag.  M.

14.  change  the  customs  which  51.  delivered  us

7.  20.  in  which  time  51.  was  born,  and  was  fair

.32.  then  M.  trembled  and  durst  not  behold
35.  this  51.  whom  they  refused  did  God  send

37.  this  is  that  M.  that  said  unto  Israel

1.3.  39.  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  51.

15.  1 .  except  ye  be  circumcised  after  manner  of  51.

5.  to  command  them  to  keep  the  law  of  51.

21.  51.  hath  in  every  city  them  that  preach  him

21.  21.  thou  teachest  the  lews  to  forsake  M.

26.  22.  things  which  M.  did  say  should  come

28.  23.  out  of  the  law  of  51.  and  the  prophets
Horn.  5.  14.  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  51.

10.  5.  M.  described  the  righteousness  of  the  law

1  Cor.  10.  2.  were  all  baptized  to  51.  m  the  cloud

2  Cor.  3.  7.  Israel  could  not  behold  the  face  of  M.

1.3.  not  as  51.  who  put  a  veil  over  his  face

15.  when  51.  is  read,  the  veil  is  on  their  heart

2  Tim.  .3.  8.  as  Jannesand  Jambres  withstood  M.
Heb.  3.  2.  M.  was  faithful  in  all  his  house,  5.

3.  was  counted  worthy  of  more  glory  than  M.

16.  howbeitnot  all  that  came  out  of  Egypt  by  51.
7. 14.  which  tribe  M.  spake  nothing  of  priesthood
9.  19.  for  when  51.  had  spoken  every  precept


Heb.  10.  28.  despised  51.  law,  died  without  merej*

11.  23.  by  faith  51.  was  hid  three  months

24.  M.  refused  be  called  son  of  Pharaoh’s  daught

12.  21.  51.  said,  I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake
Jude  9.  he  disputed  about  the  body  of  51.

Rev.  15.  3.  they  sing  the  song  of  M.  and  the  Lamb
See  Aaron,  Book,  Commanded,  Law.

51 Y  RA.

Acts  27.  5.  we  came  to  51.  a  city  of  Lycia
MYSIA.

Acts  16.  7.  come  to  M.  ||  8.  they  passing  by  51.

N.  I

NAAMAN.

Gen.  46.21.  the  sons  of  Benjamin,  N.  and  Rosh
Num.  26.  40.  the  son  of  Bela,  N.  1  Chron.  8.4.

2  Kings  5.  1.  N.  captain  of  Syria  was  a  leper

11.  but  N.  was  wroth  and  want  away,  and  said
20.  my  master  hath  spared  N .  the  Syrian

27.  the  leprosy  of  N.  shall  cleave  to  thee
Luke  4.  27.  and  none  was  cleansed,  saving  N.
NAA5IA  THITE.  See  Zophar.
NAASIION,  or  NAHSHON.

Exod.  6.  23.  Aaron  took  Elisheba  the  sister  of  N
Num.  1.  7.  of  Judah,  prince  was  N.  2.  3.  I  10.  14.

7.  12.  he  that  offered  the  first  day  was  N.

17.  this  was  the  offering  of  N  .  son  of  Amminadab-
Ruth  4.  20.  Amminadab  begat  N.  and  N.  begat

Salmon,  1  Chron.  2.  10,  11.  Mat.  1.  4.
Luke  3.  32.  Salmon,  which  was  the  son  of  N.
NABAL.

1  Sam.  25.  3.  now  the  name  of  the  man  was  N.  _

4.  N .  did  shear  hissheep||  5.  go  to  N.  and  greet  him  )

25.  N.  is  his  name,  and  folly  is  with  him

38.  that  the  Lord  smote  N .  that  he  died

.39.  Lord  hath  returned  the  wickedness  of  N.

27.  3.  Abigail  N .  wife,  30.  5.  2  Sam.  2.  2.  I  3.  3.
NABOTH.

1  Kings Z\.l.  N.  the  Jezreelite  had  a  vineyard
7. 1  will  give  thee  vineyard  of  N.  the  Jezreelite
9.  set  N.  on  high,  12.  ||  14.  heard  N.  was  stoned

16.  when  Ahab  heard  that  N.  was  dead

18.  behold,  Ahab  is  in  the  vineyard  of  N.

19.  in  the  place  where  dogs  licked  the  blood  of  N.

2  Kings  9.  21.  they  met  him  in  the  portion  of  N.

25.  cast  him  in  the  portion  of  the  field  of  N.

26.  surely  I  have  seen  yesterday  the  blood  of  N

N  ADAB.

Exod.  6.23.  the  sons  of  Aaron,  51.  Abihn,  Lev.  10.1.

24.  1.  come  up,  N.  and  Abihu,  seventy  elders,  9.
Num.  3.  4.  N.  and  Abihu  died  before  Lord,  26. 61.

1  Kings  14.  20.  N.son  of  Jeroboam  reigned,  15.  25-.

1  Chr.  2. 28.  N.  son  of  Shammai  jl  30.  the  sons  of  N.

8.  30.  Baal  and  N.  the  sons  of  Gibeon,  9.  36.

N  AGGE.

[Aike  3.  25.  Esli,  which  was  the  son  of  N.

NAHASEI.

1  Sam.  11.  1.  N.  came  up  against  Jabesh,  12.  12.

2  Sam.  10.  2.  then  said  David,  I  will  shew  kindness

to  Hanun  the  son  of  N.  1  Chron.  19.  2.

17-  25.  went  in  to  Abigail  the  daughter  of  N.

27-  Shobi  son  of  N.  brought  beds  and  basons
NAHOR.

Gen.  11.22.  Serug  begat  N.  ||  29.  N.  wife  5Iilcah
24.  N.  lived  29  years,  begat  Terah,  1  Chr.  1.  26.

26.  Terah  begat  Abraham,  N.  and  Haran,  27.

22.  20.  behold  Milcah,  she  hath  borne  children  to-

thy  brother  N .  23.  1  24.  15,  24.

24.  10.  Abraham’s  servant  went  to  the  city  of  N.

31.  53.  God  of  Abraham  and  N.  judge  betwixt  us
N  A 1 N .

Lukel.  11.  Jesus  went  into  a  city  called  N.

N  AIOTH.

1  Sam.  19. 18.  Samuel  and  David  dwelt  at  N.  19.  22-

23.  Saul  went  to  N.  |l  20.  1.  David  fled  from  N.

N  A 051 1 .

Ruth  1. 2.  the  name  of  Elimelech’s  wife  was  N.

19.  is  this  N .  ?  |)20.  call  me  not  N .  call  be  5Iara

2. 1.  N .  had  a  kinsman  of  her  husband's,  Roaz
4.  5.  what  day  thou  buyest  the  field  of  hand  of  NL

9.  that  I  have  bought  all  at  the  band  of  N .

17.  the  women  said,  there  is  a  son  born  to  N.

N  API!  I’ALL

Gen.  .30.  8.  and  Rachel  called  his  name  N.

35.  25.  sons  of  Bilhah  Rachel's  handmaid,  Dan,  N.

46.  24.  sons  of  N.  Num.  1. 42.  1  26.  48.  1  Chr.  7.  13
49.  21.  N.  is  a  hind  let  loose,  he  gives  goodly  words
Exod.  1.  4.  the  sons  of  Israel,  N.  Gad,  and  Asher
Num.  1.  15.  of  N.  Ahira  was  prince,  2.  29.  I  7-  78.  J
Deut.  27-  13.  on  mount  Ebal  to  curse  ;  Dan,  N.

33.  23.  of  N.  he  said,  O  N.  satisfied  with  favour
Josh.  19.  32.  the  sixth  lot  came  out  to  N.

20.  7-  appointed  Keilesh  in  Galilee,  in  mount  N»
Judy.  1.  .33.  nor  did  N .  drive  out  the  inhabitants

4.  10.  Barak  called  Zebulun  and  N.  to  Kedesh

5.  18.  Zebulun  and  N.  jeoparded  their  lives

6.  35.  Gideon  sent  messengers  to  N .  and  they  cam*  1
7.23.  Israel  gathered  themselves  together  outof  N.

1  Kings  4.  15.  Ahimaaz  was  officer  in  N.

15.  20.  Ben-hadad  smote  N.  2  Chron.  16.  4.

2  Kings  15.  29.  carried  N.  captive  to  Assyria

1  Chron.  12.  40.  N .  brought  bread  on  asses  and  mules  ;

27.  19.  the  captain  of  N.  was  Jerimoth  son  of  (

Azriel  j

2  Chron.  34.  6.  Josiah  in  N.  brake  down  the  altars  j
Psal.  68.  27.  there  the  princes  of  Zebulun  and  N.
Isa.  9.  1.  he  lightly  afflicted  the  land  of  N.

Ezek.  48.  3.  a  portion  for  N.  ||  34.  one  gate  of  N.
Mat.  4.  13.  he  dwelt  in  the  borders  of  N .

15.  the  land  of  N .  by  the  way  of  the  sea
Tribe  «/ NAPHTA  LI.

Num.  1.  43.  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  N.  5.3,400

10.  27.  over  the  host  of  the  tribe  of  N.  Ahira

13.  14.  of  the  tribe  of  N.  Nahbi  ||  34.  28.  Pedahel
Josh.  19.  39.  this  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  N.

21.  32.  cities  out  of  tribe  of  N .  1  Chron.  6.  62,  76.

1  Kings  7.  14.  Hiram  a  widow's  son  of  tribe  of  N.  1
Rev.  7.  6.  of  the  tribe  if  N  .  were  sealed  12,000

NATHAN.

2  Sam.  5. 14.  son  of  David,  N .  11 7  2.  N .  the  prophei


NET


OBE


PAT  [Pttor  ki.  Namxs.


7.17.  so  did  N.  speak  ||  12. 1.  Lord  sent  N.25.

23.  36.  I  sal  son  of  N.  one  of  David’s  worthies
1  Kings  I.  10.  hut  N.  the  prophet  he  called  not

22.  while  she  talked  with  David,  N.  came  in

34.  let  Zadok  and  N  .  anoint  him  king  oyer  Israel

4.  5.  Azariah  son  of  N.  was  over  the  officers

1  Chron.  2.  36.  Artai  begat  N.  and  N .  begat  Zabad

11.  38.  Joel  the  brother  of  N.  a  valiant  man

29.  29.  David’s  acts  written  in  the  book  of  N.

2  Chron.  9.  29.  acts  of  Solomon  in  the  book  of  N.
Ezra  8.  16.  1  sent  from  Ahava  for  N.and  Ariel

10.  39.  Shelemiah,  N.  had  taken  strange  wives
Zech.  12.  12.  the  family  of  the  house  of  N.  apart
Luke  3.  31.  Mattatha,  which  was  the  son  of  N .

N  A  I'lIANAEL.

John  1.  45.  Philip  findeth  N .  ||  21.  2.  N.  of  Cana
NAUM.

Luke  3.  25.  Amos,  which  was  the  son  of  N.
NAZAREN  E.

Mat.  2.  23.  by  the  prophet,  he  shall  be  called  a  N .
IN1  AZAHENES.

Acts  24.  5.  a  l  ing  leader  of  the  sect  of  the  N.
NAZAREl'H.

Mat.  2.  23.  Joseph  dwelt  in  a  city  called  N.

21.  11.  this  is  Jesus  of  N.  Mark  1.  24.  |  10.  47-
Luke  4.  34. 1  18.  37:  I  24.  19.
Mark  14.  67.  thou  wast  also  with  Jesus  of  N.

16.  6.  be  not  affrighted,  ye  seek  Jesus  of  N.

Luke  1.  26.  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  to  N.

2.  51.  Jesus  came  to  N.  and  was  subject,  4.  16.
John  1.  45.  Jesus  of  N.  18.5,7- 1  19.  19.  Acts  2.22.

I  4.  10.  |  6.  14.  |  22.  8.

46.  can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of  N.  ?
Acts  3.  6.  in  the  name  of  Jesus  of  N .  rise  up

10.  38.  how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  N.  with  power

26.9.  things  contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  N.

NEAPOLIS.

■Acts  16. 11.  and  the  next  day  we  came  to  N.
NEBAIOTH.

Gen.  25.  13.  the  son  of  Ishmael,  N.  1  Chron.  1.  29-
Isa.  60.  7.  the  rams  of  N .  shall  minister  to  thee
NEB  AT.  See  Jeroboam.

NEBO.

.V um.  32.3.  Elealah  and  N.  is  a  land  for  cattle
38.  the  children  of  Reuben  built  N  .

Deut.  32.49.  get  thee  up  unto  mount  N.  34.  1.

1  Chron.  5.  8.  Bela  dwelt  in  Aroer,  even  unto  N.
■Ezra  2.  29.  the  children  of  N.  10.  43.

Neh.  7.  33.  the  men  of  the  other  N  .  fifty -two
Isa.  15.  2.  Moab  shall  howl  over  N.  and  Medeba
46.  1.  N.  stoopeth  l|  Jer.  48. 1.  woe  unto  N.

Jer.  48.  22.  judgment  is  come  upon  Dibon  and  N.
NEBUCHADNEZZAR,  NEBUCHAD¬
REZZAR.

■2  Kings 24. 1.  in  hisdays  N.  came  up  against  Jeru¬
salem,  25.  1.  2  Chron.  36.  6.  Jer.  39.  1.  |  52.4.
25.22.  as  for  the  people  whom  N.  had  left
1  Chron.  6.  15.  when  the  Lord  carried  away  Judah
by  N.  Jer.  24.  1. 1  29-  1.  I  52  .  28.
Ezra  1.  7-  Cyrus  brought  forth  the  vessels  which
N.  had  taken  out  of  Jerusalem,  5.  14.  |  6.  5.
Jer.  27.  8.  the  kingdom  which  will  not  serve  N.

28.  11.  even  so  will  I  break  the  yoke  of  N.

14.  that  they  may  serve  N.  king  of  Babylon

29.  21.  I  will  deliver  them  into  the  hand  of  N.

32.  28.  I  will  give  this  city  into  the  hand  of  N.

39.  11.  N.  gave  charge  concerning  Jeremiah
43.  10.  behold,  I  will  take  N.  my  servant  and  set

49.  28.  N.  king  of  Babylon  shall  smite  Kedar

50.  17.  and  last  this  N.  hath  broken  his  bones
51.34.  N.  hath  devoured  me,  he  hath  crushed  me
Ezek. 26.7. 1  w’ill  bring  on  Tyrus  N.  a  king  of  kings
29.  19.  1  will  give  the  land  of  Egypt  to  N .  30.  10.

■Dan.  2.I.N.  dreamed  ||  4.37.  I  N .  praise  and  extol

3.  1.  N.  the  king  made  an  image  of  gold

19.  N.  was  full  of  fury  ||  24.  N.  was  astonished

4.  28.  all  this  came  upon  the  king  N.  33.

34.  at  end  of  days  1  N .  lift  up  mine  eyes  to  heaven

5.  18.  the  most  high  God  gave  N.  a  kingdom

N  EBUZAR-ADAN.

•2  Kings  25. 8.N. captain  of  guard  came  to  Jerusalem
Jer.  39.  10.  N.  left  of  the  poor  of  the  people
NEHELAMITE.  See  Shemaiah.

N  EH  EMI  AH.

Ezra 2.  2.  N.  came  with  Zerubbabel,  Neh.  7.  7-
Neh.  1.1.  the  words  of  N.  the  son  of  Hachaliah
3.  16.  N.  son  of  Azbuk  repaired  after  Shallum

8.9.  N.  which  is  the Tirsnatha,  10.  1.

12.  47.  Israel  in  the  days  of  N.  gave  portions

N  EH  USH I  AN.

-2  Kings  18.  4.  he  called  the  brasen  serpent  N.
NER.

1  Chron.  8.  33.  and  N  .  begat  Kish,  9.  36,  39.

See  Abner.

NEREUS.

>Rom.  16.  15.  salute  Julia,  N.  and  his  sister
N  ERGAL.

2  Kings  17.  30.  the  men  of  Cuth  made  N.  their  god

NERAIAH.  See  Baruch.

N ETHAN  EEL.

Num.  1.  8.  N.  the  son  of  Zuar  was  prince  of  Tssa-
char,  2.5.  17.  18,23.  I  10.  15.

1  Chron.  2. 14.  N.  the  fourth  son  of  Jesse

15.  24.  N.  and  Amasai  blew  with  trumpets

24.  6.  the  son  of  N .  the  scribe,  one  of  the  Levites

26.  4.  the  sons  of  Obed-edom,  Joah  and  N.

2  Chron.  17.  7.  Jehoshaphat  sent  N.  to  teach

35.  9.  N.  gave  to  the  Levites  for  passover-offerings
Ezra  10.  22.  Ishmael,  N.  had  taken  strange  wives
Neh.  12.  21.  in  days  of  Joiakim  N.  was  priest

36.  Maai  and  N.  with  the  musical  instruments
N  ETHAN  1  AH.

2  Kings  25.  23. Ishmael  son  of  N  .25.  Jer.  40.8.  |  41.  1.

1  Chron.  25.2.  the  sonsof  Asaph,  Joseph  and  N.
12.  fifth  lot  came  forth  to  N .  he,  his  sons  twelve

2  Chron.  17.  8.  he  sent  Levites  to  teach,  even  N.
Jer.  36.  14.  princes  sent  the  son  of  N  .  to  Baruch

41.  2.  Ishmael  the  son  of  N.  slewGedaliah

15.  but  Ishmael  son  of  N.  escaped  from  Johanan

N  ETHINIMS.

1  Chron.  9.  2.  the  first  inhabitants  were  the  N.

Ezra  2.  43.  the  N.  went  up  with  ZerubbabeJ


Ezra  2.  58.  all  the  N.  and  the  children  of  Solo¬
mon’s  servants  were  392,  Neh.  7.  60.

7.  7.  some  of  the  N.  went  to  Jerusalem

24.  it  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose  toll  on  the  N  .

8.  17-  what  to  say  to  Iddo  and  brethren  the  N.

20.  the  N.  whom  David  appointed  for  service

Neh.  3.  26.  the  N.  dwelt  inOphel,  11.  21.

10.28.  the  N.  had  separated  from  the  people

11.  21.  Ziha  and  Gispa  wereover  the  N.

N  1CANOR.

Acts  6.5.  they  chose  Stephen,  Philip,  and  N.
NICODEMUS.

John  3.  1.  N.  a  ruler  of  the  .lews  came  to  Jesus
7.50.  N.  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  19.  39.
NICOLAI  I  ANS.

Rev.  2.  6.  that  thou  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  N.

15.  hast  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  N.

N1COPOLIS.

Tit.  3.  12.  be  diligent  to  come  unto  me  to  N.
NIGER.

Acts  13.  1.  at  Antioch,  Simeon  who  was  called  N.
N  IMROD.

Gen.  10.  8.  Cush  begat  N.  1  Chron.  1.  10.

9.  as  N.  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord
Mic.  5.  6.  they  shall  waste  land  of  Assyria  and  N.
NIMSHI.  See  Jehu.

N  IN  EV EH.

Gen.  10.  11.  Asher  went  and  builded  N.

2  Kings  19.  36.  Sennacherib  dwelt  at  N .  Isa.  37.  37-
Jon.  1.  2.  go  to  N.  3. 2.  ||  4.  11.  should  not  I  spare  N.?
3.  3.  now  N.  was  an  exceeding  great  city
Nah.  1.1.  the  burden  of  N.||2.  8.  N.  is  like  a  pool
3.  7-  N.  is  laid  waste,  who  will  bemoan  her?
Zeph.  2.  13.  he  will  make  NT.  a  desolation,  and  dry
Mat.  12.  41.  the  men  of  N .  shall  rise  up  in  judgment
and  condemn  this  generation,  Luke  11.  32.
NINEVTTES.

Luke  11.  30.  as  Jonas  was  a  sign  unto  the  N.

N  !SAN.

Neh.  2.1.  in  the  month  N.  ||  Esth.  3.7.  first  month  N .
N1SROCH.

2  Kings  19.  37-  as  he  was  worshipping  in  house  of
N.  his  god,  sons  smote  with  the  sword,  Isa.  37. 38.
N  O.

Jer.  46.  25.  I  will  punish  N.  Ezek.  30.  14, 15,  16.
Nah.  3.  8.  art  thou  better  than  populous  N.

NO  ADI  AH.

Ezra  8.  33.  N.  the  son  of  Binnui,  a  Levite
Neh.  6.  14.  my  God.  think  on  the  prophetess  N.
NOAH,  NOE.

Gen.  5.  29.  N.  saying,  this  same  shall  comfort  us

30.  Lamech  begat  N .  ||  6.  8.  N .  found  grace

6.  9.  these  are  generat.  of  N .  10.  1,  32.  1  Chr.  1.  4.

7.  23.  N  .  only  remained  alive,  and  they  in  the  ark

8.  1.  God  remembertd  N.  and  every  living  thing

6.  N.  opened  the  window  of  the  ark  he  had  made

20.  N.  builded  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  and  offered

9.  24.  N.  awoke  from  his  wine  H  29.  the  days  of  N .
Isa.  54.  9.  this  is  as  the  waters  of  N.  unto  me
Ezek.  14.  14.  tho’  these  three,  N.  Daniel,  Job,  20.
Mat.  24.  37-  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  N .  Luke  17.  26.
Luke  3.  36.  Shem,  which  was  thesonof  N.

Heb.  11.7.  by  faith  N.  being  warned  of  God

1  Pet.  3.  20.  when  God  waited  in  the  days  of  N.

2  Pet.  2. 5.  God  spared  not  old  world,  but  saved  N.

NOAH.

Num.  26.  33.  the  names  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophe-
had  were  N.  Tirzah,  27.  1. 1  36.  11.  Josh.  17. 3.
NOB.

1  Sam.  21.  1.  David  came  to  N.  to  Ahimelech
22.  9.  Doeg  said,  I  saw  son  of  Jesse  coming  to  N  .

11.  the  king  sent  to  call  the  priests  in  N.

19.  Doeg  smote  N.  the  city  of  the  priests
Neh.  11. 32.  the  children  of  Benjamin  dwelt  at  N.
Isa.  10.  32.  as  yet  shall  he  remain  at  N.  that  day
NOPH.

Isa.  19.  13.  the  princes  of  N.  are  deceived
Jer.  2. 16.  the  children  of  N .  have  broken  the  crown
46.  14.  publish  in  N.||  19.  for  N.  shall  be  waste
Ezek.  30. 13.  will  cause  their  images  to  cease  out  N  .

16.  and  N.  shall  have  distresses  daily

NUN.  See  Joshua.

NYMPHAS.

Col.  4.  15.  salute  N.and  the  church  in  his  house

o.

OBADIAH.

1  Kings  18.  3.  Ahab  called  O.  now  O.  feared  the  Ld.
4.  O.took  an  hundred  prophets,  ami  hid  them

7.  as  O.  was  in  the  way,  behold  Elijah  met  him
16.  so  O.  went  to  meet  Ahab,  and  told  him

1  Chr.  3.  21.  sons  of  O.  ||  27. 19.  Ishmaiah  son  of  O.
7.  3.  son  of  Tzrahiah,  ().  ||  8.  .38.  O.  s.  of  Azel,  9.  44.

9. 16.  O.  the  son  of  Shemaiah,  the  son  of  Galal

12.  9-  of  Gadites  men  of  might,  O.  the  second

2  Chr.  17.  7.  he  sent  to  his  princes,  to  O.  to  teach
34.  12.  the  overseers  were  Jahath  and  O.

Ezra  8.  9.  O.  son  of  Jehiel  went  up  with  Ezra
Neh.  10.  5.  O.  sealed  |j  12.  25.  O.  was  a  porter
Obad.  1.  the  vision  of  O.  thus  saith  the  Lord
OB  ED.

Ruth.  4.  17.  and  they  called  his  name  O.

21.  Boaz  begat  O.  1  Chron.  2.  12.  Mat.  1.5.

1  Chron.  2.  37-  F.phlal  begat  O.  ||  26.  7.  Shemaiah
11.47.  O.  one  of  David’s  valiant  men

2  Chr.  23.1.  took  Azariah  son  of  O.  into  covenant
Luke  3.  32.  Jesse,  whic  h  was  the  son  of  O.

OBED-EDOM.

2  Sam.  6.  10.  David  carried  the  ark  into  the  house
of  O.  11.  1  Chron.  13.  13,  14.

11.  Lord  blessed  the  house  of  O.  12.  1  Chr.  13. 14.

12.  David  brought  the  ark  from  house  of  O.  into
the  city  of  David  with  gladness,  1  Chr.  15.  25.

1  Chron.  15.  18.  O.  a  porter,  24.  [|  21.  O.  with  harp
16.5.  O.  and  Jeiel  with  psalteries  and  harps

38.  O.  with  their  brethren,  O.  also  son  of  Jedu-
thun,  and  l!osah,to  be  porters

26.  4.  sons  of  O.  8.  ||  8.  sons  of  O.  fit  for  service
15.  the  lot  southward  fell  to  O.  and  his  sons

2  Chr.  25.  24.  Joash  took  the  vessels  found  with  O.


OCRAN.  See  Pag i el.

ODED.

2  Chron.  15.1.  Spirit  of  G.  came  on  Azariah  son  of O.
28.  9.  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  was  there,  called  O.
OG.

Deut.  31.  4.  the  Lord  shall  do  to  them  as  he  did  to  O.
Josh.  2. 10.  for  we  have  heard  what  you  did  to  O.

13.  31.  the  cities  of  O.  pertaining  to  Machir
1  Kings  4.  19.  Geber  was  in  the  country  of  O.

>ee  Bashan.

OLYMPAS.

Rom.  16.15.  salute  J  ulia,  ().  and  all  saints  with  them
OMEGA.  See  Alpha,  in  Appellatives.
OMRI.

1  Kings  16.  16.  wherefore  all  Israel  made  O.  king
21.  half  followed  O.  ||  25.  but  O.  wrought  evil

30.  Ahab  son  of  O.  did  e\  il  in  the  sight  of  the  Ld.

2  Kings  8.  26.  Athaliah  daughter  of  O.  2  C’/trow.22.2.

1  Chron.  7.  8.  O.  son  of  Beefier  ||  9.  4.  O.  son  of  Iinri

27.  18.  O.  son  of  Michael,  ruler  of  Issachar
Mic.  6. 16.  for  statutes  of  O.  are  kept,  works  of  Ahab

ON.

Gen.  41.  45.  Poti  pherah  priest  of  O.  50.  I  46.  20.
Num.  16.  1.  O.  the  son  of  Peleth  took  men
ONAN.

Gen.  38.  4.  she  bare  a  son  and  called  his  name  O.
9.  O.  knew  that  the  seed  should  not  be  his
46. 12.  sons  of  Judah,  Er,  O.  Num.  26.19.  1CA.2.3.
Er  and  O.  died  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  Num.  26.19.
ON  ESIMUS.

Col.  ,4.  9.  O.  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother
Pliilem.  10.  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  O.

ON  ES1PHORUS.

2  Tim.  1. 16.  Lord  give  mercy  to  the  house  of  O.

4.  19.  salute  Aquila  and  the  household  of  O.

OPHEL.

2  Chron.  27-  3.  Jotham  built  much  on  the  wall  of  O.
33. 14.  Manasseh  compassed  about  O.  and  raised  it
Neh.  3.  26.  the  Nethimms  dwelt  in  O.  11.  21.

27.  the  Tekoites  repaired  to  the  wall  of  O.
OPHIk.

Gen.  10.  29.  Joktan  begat  O.  1  Chron.  1.  23.

1  Kings  9.  28.  they  came  to  O.  and  fetefi.  from  thence
gold,  and  brought  to  Solomon, 2  Chr.  8.  18.  |  9.  10.
10. 1 1 .  brought  from  O.  great  plenty  of  almug-trees

22.  48.  Jehoshaphat  made  ships  to  go  to  O.  for  gold
1  Chron.  29.  4.  given  3000  talents  of  gold  of  O.

Job  22.  24.  thou  shalt  lay  up  the  gold  of  O.  as  stones

28.  16.  wisdom  not  valued  with  the  gold  of  O.
Psal.  45.  9.  did  stand  the  queen  in  gold  of  O.

Isa.  13.  12.  a  man  more  precious  than  wedge  of  O.

OREB.

Judg.  7.25.  they  slew  princes  of  Midian,  Zeeb,  0.8.3,
Psal.  83.  11.  make  their  nobles  like  O.  and  Zeeb
Isa.  10.  26.  slaughter  of  Midian  at  the  rock  of  O.
ORION.

Job  9.  9.  who  maketh  O.  and  Pleiades,  Amos  5.  8.
38.  31.  or  canst  thou  loose  the  bands  of  O.  ?

ORN  AN.

1  Chron.  21.  15.  the  threshing  floor  of  O.  18.  28.

20.  and  O.  turned  back,  and  saw  the  angel

25.  David  gave  to  O.  for  the  place  600  shekels

.  ORPAH,

Ruth  1.  4.  the  name  of  the  one  was  O.  other  Ruth

14.  O  kissed  Naomi,  but  Ruth  clave  to  her
OSIIEA.  See  Joshua.

OTHN  1EL.

Josh.  15.  17.  O.  son  of  Kenaz  took  it,  Judg.  1.  13.
Judg.  3.  9.  Lord  raised  a  deliverer,  O.  J|  11.  O.  died
1  Chron.  4. 13.  sons  of  Kenaz,  O.  Seraiah,  sons  of  O

27.  15.  the  twelfth  captain  was  Heldai  of  ().

OZEM.

1  Chron.  2.  15.  O.  was  the  sixth  son  of  Jesse

OZIAS.

Mat.  1.  8.  Joram  begat  O.  ||  9.  O.  begat  Joatham

P.

PAARAI.

2  Sam.  23.  35.  P.  the  Arbite,  a  mighty  man

PADAN-ARAM.

Gen.  25.  20.  Rebekah  daughter  of  Bethuel  of  B.

28.  6.  Isaac  sent  Jacob  away  to  P.  to  take  a  wife
7.  Jacob  obeyed  his  father,  and  was  gone  to  P.

31.  18.  he  carried  away  what  he  had  gotten  in  P,
35.  9.  G.  appeared  to  Jacob  when  he  came  from  P

26.  sons  which  were  born  to  him  in  P.  46.  15.

PAGIEL.

Num.  1. 13.  P.  son  of  Ocran,  prince  of  Asher,  7. 72.
PALEST1N  A.

Exod.  15.  14.  sorrow  shall  take  hold  on  men  ot  P.
Isa.  14.  29.  rejoice  not,  thou  whole  P.  because

31.  cry,  O  city,  thou  whole  P.  art  dissolved

PAMPHY  LI  A.

Acts  13. 13.  Paul  came  from  Paphos  to  Perga  in  P.

15.  38.  John  departed  from  them  from  P.

27.  5.  when  he  had  sailed  over  the  sea  of  P.
PAPHOS.

Acts  13. 6.  when  they  had  gone  thro’  the  isle  to  P.
PARAN.

Gen.  21.21.  Ishmael  dwelt  in  the  wilderness  ot  P.

Num.  10.  12.  I  12.  16.  I  13.  3,  26.  1  Sam.  25.  1  •
Deut.  33.  2.  the  Lord  shinen  forth  from  mount  P.
Ilab.  3.3.  from  Teman,  the  Holy  One  came  from  P
PAR  BAR.

1  Chron.  26. 18.  porters,  four  at  the  causey,  two  at  P
PA  RM  ENAS.

Acts  6.  5.  they  chose  Timon,  P.  and  Nicolas
PAR  IHIANS.

Acts  2.  9.  P.  we  hear  them  speak  in  our  tongues
PASH  UR.

1  Chr.  9.  12.  P.  the  son  of  Malchijah,  Neh.  11.12.
Ezra  2.38.  the  children  ot  P.  10.  22.  Neh.  7.  41.
Neh.  10.3.  P.  sealed  H  Jer. 20.  6.  P.  go  into  captivity
Jer.  20. 1.  P.  the  son  of  Imuier  smote  Jeremiah,  2.
3.  L.  called  not  thy  name  P.  but  Magor-missabib

21. 1.  when  king  Zedekiah  sent  unto  him  P.

38. 1.  Gedaliah  the  son  of  P.  and  P.  the  son  of  Mal-

chiah  heard  the  words  Jeremiah  had  spoken
PATAKA.

Acts  21.  1.  and  from  Rhodes  we  came  untu  P.

Dll


t'Kor-K  Names.]  PER


PH  A


P  H  1


PATHROS.

J.ui.  11. 11.  to  recover  remnant  of  his  people  from  P.
Ezek.  29.  14.  cause  them  return  into  the  land  of  P.

30. 14.  will  make  P.  desolate,  I  will  set  tire  in  Zoan
PA  I'M  OS.

Rev.  1.  9.  I  was  in  the  isle  that  is  called  P.

PAUL.

Acts  13.  9.  then  Saul,  called  P.  filled  with  H.  Gh.
4:5.  many  .lews  and  religious  proselytes  follow.  P ,
46.  P.  waxed  bold  ||  14.  9.  the  same  heard  P.

50.  .lews  raised  persecution  ag.  P.  and  Barnabas

14.  12.  called  P.  Mercurius,  he  was  chief  speaker

19.  having  stoned  P.  drew  him  out  of  the  city

15.  38.  P.  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with  them
40.  P.  chose  Silas  l|  17.10.  brethr.  sent  P.  away,  14.

16.  3.  him  would  P.  have  to  go  forth  with  him
0.  and  a  vision  appeared  to  P.  in  the  night

14.  Lydia  attended  to  the  things  spoken  ot  P.

17.  followed  P.  ||  18.  but  P.  being  grieved

25.  P.  and  Silas  prayed,  and  sang  praises  to  God

28.  but  P.  cried,  saying,  do  thyself  no  harm

17.  2.  P.as  his  manner  was,  went  in  unto  them

4.  some  believed  and  consorted  with  P.  and  Silas

16.  now  while  P.  waited  for  them  at  Athens

18. 5.  P.  was  pressed  in  spirit,  and  testified  to  Jews

9.  the  Lord  spake  to  P.  in  the  night  by  a  vision
ly.  11.  God  wrought  miracles  by  the  hands  of  P.

15.  P.  1  know  ||  23.  11.  be  of  good  cheer,  P.

21.  P.  purposed  in  spirit  to  go  to  Jerusalem

26.  this  P.  hath  persuaded  and  turned  away

20.  7  P.  preached  unto  them,  ready  to  depart

10.  P.  went  down,  and  embracing  him,  said
37.  they  all  wept  sore,  and  fell  on  P.  neck

21.  4  who  said  to  P.  through  the  Spirit,  not  go  up

11.  Agabus  took  P.  girdle  and  bound  his  hands

18.  the  day  following  P.  went  in  unto  James

30.  they  took  P.  and  drew  him  out  of  the  temple

32.  when  they  saw  soldiers,  they  left  beating  P.
40.  P.  stood  on  the  stairs  [I  23. 1.  P.  beholding

2.3.  10.  fearing  lest  P.  should  have  been  pulled

12.  they  would  not  eat  till  they  had  killed  P.  14.

18.  P.  prayed  me  to  bring  this  young  man  to  thee

31.  the  soldiers  brought  P.  to  Antipatris

24.  1.  who  informed  the  governor  against  P.

26.  that  money  should  have  been  givenhimofP.
27. l'elix  left  P.  bound  ||  27. 24.  saying,  fear  not,  P.

25.  19.  one  Jesus,  whom  P.  affirmed  to  be  alive
26.24.  Festus  said.P.  thou  art  beside  thyself

27.  .3.  and  Julius  courteously  entreated  P.

33.  P.  besought  them  all  to  take  meat,  saying

43.  the  centurion,  willing  to  save  P.  kept  them

28.  16.  but  P.  was  suffered  to  dwell  by'  himself

1  Cor.  1.  12.  1  am  of  P.  3.  4.  II  3.  5.  who  then  is  P.  ?

13.  is  Christ  divided  ?  was  P.  crucified  for  you  ?
3.22.  whether  P.  or  A  polios,  or  Cephas,  or  world
16'.  21.  the  salutation  of  me  P.  with  mine  own

hand.  Col.  4.  18.  2  Thess.  3.  17.

1  Thess.  2.18.  we  would  have  come  to  you,  even  1  P.
Philem.  9.  being  such  a  one  as  P.  the  aged

2  Pet.  3. 15.  as  our  beloved  brother  P.  wrote

PA  ULUS.

Acts  13. 7- a  JewBarjesus  with  the  deputy  SergiusP.
PEKAH.

2  Kings  15.  25.  P.  conspired  against  Pekahiah

29.  in  the  days  of  P.  came  Tiglath-pileser
15.  30.  Hosheamade  a  conspiracy  against  P.

37.  against  Judah  came  P.  son  of  Kemaliah,  16.  5.
2  Chr.  28.  6.  P.  slew  in  Judah  120,000  in  one  day
Isa.  7.  1.  Rezin  and  P.  went  towards  Jerusalem
PEKAHIAH.

ZKings  15.  22.  P.  the  son  of  Menahem  reigned,  23.
PELATI  AH.

1  Chron.  3.  21.  the  son  of  Hananiah  P.  of  Judah

4.  42.  of  Simeon,  having  for  their  captain  P.

Neh.  10.  22.  P.  and  Hanan  sealed  the  covenant
Eze/c.  11. 13.  that  P.  the  son  of  Benaiahdied
PEN  1  EL.

Gen.  32.  30.  Jacob  called  the  name  of  the  place  P.
PEN  UEL.

Gen.  32.  31.  as  Jacob  passed  over  P.  he  halted
Judg.  8.  8.  Gideon  went  up  thence  to  P.  and  spake

17.  he  beatdown  the  tower  of  P.  and  slew  men
1  Kings  12.  25.  then  Jeroboam  went  and  built  P.

1  Chron.  4.  4.  P.  the  father  of  Gedor,  and  Ezer
8.  25.  Iphedeiah  and  P.  the  sons  of  Shashak

PEG  R.

JVmot.  23.  28.  Balak  biought  Balaam  to  top  of  P.

25. 18.  beguiled  you  in  the  matter  of  P.  .31.  16.
Josh.  22.  17.  is  the  iniquity  of  P.  too  little  for  us  ?
PERGA.

Acts  13.  13.  Paul  and  his  company  came  to  P.

14.  25.  when  they  had  preached  the  word  in  P.

PERGAMOS.

Rev.  1.11.  send  ittoP.  ami  Thyatira,  and  Sardis

2.  12.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  P.  write

PER  IZZITE.

Gen.  13.  7.  the  P.  dwelled  then  in  the  land
Exod.  33.  2.  and  1  will  drive  out  the  P.  .34.  11.
Josh.  9.  1.  when  the  P.  and  Hivite  heard  thereof

11.  3.  Jabin  sent  to  the  P.  and  the  Jebusite
PER  I ZZIT ES.

Gen.  15.  20. 1  have  given  to  thy  seed  the  land  of  the
P.  Lord  made  a  covenant,  Exod.  3.  8,  17. 1  23.  23.

34.  30.  to  make  me  to  stink  among  the  P.

Josh.  17-  15.  cut  down  the  wood  in  the  land  of  the  P.
Judg.  1.  4.  the  Lord  delivered  the  P.  to  Judah,  5.

3.  5.  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  among  the  P.

2  Chr.  8.  7-  Solomon  made  the  P.  to  pay  tribute
Ezra  9.  1.  doing  according  to  abominations  of  P.

PERSIA.

2  Chron.  36.  20.  till  the  reign  of  the  kingdom  of  P.
Esth.  1 .  3.  a  feast  to  the  power  of  P.  and  Media
14.  the  seven  princes  of  P.  which  saw  the  king

18.  the  ladies  of  P.  shall  say  to  the  king’s  princes
Ezek.  27.  10.  they  of  P.  and  Lud  were  in  thy  army

38. 5. P.  Ethiopia,  and  Libya  with  them,  with  shield
Dan.  8.  20.  two  horns  are  kings  of  Media  and  P.

10.  13.  but  the  prince  of  P.  withstood  me  twenty-
one  davs  ;  and  I  remained  with  the  kings  of  P.

20.  I  wifi  return  to  fight  with  the  prince  of  P.

11.  2.  there  shall  stand  up  j  et  three  kings  in  P.

See  King.


PERSIANS.  See  M edes.

PERSIS.

Rom.  16.  12.  salute  P.  which  laboured  much  in  L.
PETER.

Mat.  14.  29.  when  P.  was  cotne  down  out  of  the  ship

16. 18.  I  say  also  to  thee  that  thou  art  P.

23.  he  said  to  P.  get  thee  behind  me,  Mark  8.  .33.

17.  1.  he  taketh  P.  James  and  John,  26.  .37.  Mark

5.  .37.  I  9.  2.  |  14.  3.3.  Luke  8.  51. 1  9-  28.

24.  they  that  received  tribute-money  came  to  P.

26.  58.  P.  followed  him  to  the  high  priest's  palace

75.  P.  remembered  words  of  Jesus,  Mark  14.72.
Mark  16.  7.  go  your  way,  tell  his  disciples  and  P.
Luke  22.  61.  the  Lord  turned  and  looked  upon  P.
John  1.  44.  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  Andrew  and  P.

18.  26.  being  his  kinsman,  w  hose  ear  P.  cut  off
21.  17.  P.  wasgtieved  because  lie  said  unto  him

Acts  1.  15.  in  those  days  P.  stood  up  in  the  midst

3.  3.  seeing  P.  and  John  about  to  go  into  the  temple

4.  8.  P.  tilled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  said  to  them

13.  when  they  saw  the  boldness  of  P.  and  John

5.  15.  at  least  the.  shadow  of  P.  might  overshadow
8.  14.  the  apostles  sent  unto  them  P.  and  John
9.38.  the  disciples  had  heard  thatP.  was  there

40.  P.  put  them  all  forth,  and  kneeled  down

10. 1.3. there  came  v.  voice,  rise,  P.  kill  and  eat,  1 1 . 7.

44.  while  P.  spake  these  words,  Holy  Ghost  fell

45.  were  astonished,  as  many  as  came  with  P.

12.  .3.  he  proceeded  further  to  take  P.  also

6.  P.  was  sleeping  betw  een  two  soldiers  in  chains

7.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  P.  on  the  side  %

1.3.  as  P.  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  gate

18.  there  was  no  small  stir  what  was  become  ofP.
Gal.  1.  18.  then  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  P.
2.7-  the  gospel  of  circumcision  was  committed  to  P.

8.  for  he  that  wrought  effectually  in  P.  to  the  ap.

14.  1  said  unto  P.  before  them  ail,  if  thou  be  a  Jew

Simon  P  El  ER .

Mat.  4.  18.  Jesus  walking,  saw  Simon  called  P.

10.  2.  the  first  Simon,  w  ho  is  qalled  P.  and  Andrew
Mark  3. 16.  to  cast  out  devils,  Simon  he  surnamed  P.
Luke  5.  8.  Simon  P.  fell  down  at  Jesus’  knees

6.  14.  he  chose  Simon,  whom  he  also  named  P.
John  1.3.  6.  then  cometh  he  to  Simon  P.  he  saith

20.  2.  then  she  runneth  and  cometh  to  Simon  P.

21. 15.  Jesus sa.it h  to  Simon  P.  Simon  sonof  Jonas
Acts  10.  5.  send  men  to  Joppa,  and  call  for  one
Simon,  w  hose  surname  is  P.  32.  i  11.  13.
PHALEC.

Luke  3.  35.  Ragan,  which  was  the  son  of  P.
PHARAOH.

Gen.  12.  15.  princes  commended  Sarai  before  P.

17.  the  Lord  plagued  P.  and  his  house

.39.  1.  Potipharan  officer  of  P.  bought  Joseph

40.  2.  P.  was  wroth  against  two  of  his  officers

13.  P.  shall  lift  up  thine  head  and  restore  thee,  19.

14.  make  mention  of  me  to  P.  and  bring  me  out

41 .  1.  P.dreamed  ||  4.  so  P.  awoke,  7-

16.  Joseph  said,  God  shall  give  P.  answer  of  peace
34.  let  P.  do  this  ||  44.  1  am  P.  and  without  thee
o5.  people  cried  to  P.  ||  42. 15.  by  the  life  of  P.  16.
44.  18.  thou  art  as  P.  ||  45.  8.  made  me  a  father  to  P.

46.  31.  Joseph  said,  1  will  go  up  and  shew  P.

47.  10.  Jacob  blessed  P.  and  went  out  from  P.

25.  let  us  find  grace,  and  we  will  be  P.  servants

26.  only  the  land  of  the  priests  became  not  P.

50.  4.  speak,  1  pray  you,  in  the  ears  of  P.  saying

Exod.  2. 15.  when  P.  heard,  he  sought  to  slay  Moses

3.  10.  come  now,  and  1  w  ill  send  thee  to  P.

4.  21.  see  thou  do  all  those  wonders  before  P.

5.2.  P.  said,  who  is  the  Lord  that  l  should  obey  him?

15.  then  the  officers  came  and  cried  unto  P.

2.3.  since  1  came  to  P.  to  speak  in  thy  name

6.  1.  now  shall  thou  see  what  1  will  do  to  P.

12.  Moses  spake,  how  then  shall  P.  hear  me  ?  30.
7-  1.  Lord  said,  see,  1  have  made  thee  a  god  to  P.
.3.  1  will  harden  P.  heart,  13,  14,  22.18.  19.

I  9.12.

8.  20.  stand  before  P.  9.13.  ||  9.  27.  P.  sent  for  Moses

11.  1.  yet  will  I  bring  one  plague  more  upon  P.

10.  Mos.  and  Aaron  did  all  these  wonders  bef.  P.

12.  29.  from  the  first-born  of  P.  on  the  throne

I. 3. 17.  when  P.  had  let  people  go  God  led  them  not
14.  4.  and  I  will  be  honoured  upon  P.  17.

28.  the  waters  covered  all  the  host  of  P.

1  Kings  3.  1.  Solomon  made  affinity  with  P.

7.  8.  Solomon  made  an  house  for  P.  daughter

II.  19.  Hadad  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  P.

2 Kings  17-7.  Lord,  who  biought  them  from  underP.

18.  21.  so  is  P.  to  all  that  trust  in  him,  Isa.  36.  6.

2.3.  35.  according  to  the  commandment  of  P.

Neh.  9.  10.  thou  shewedst  signs  and  w  onders  on  P.
Psal.  135.  9.  who  sent  tokens  and  wonders  on  P.

1.36.  15.  but  overthrew  P.  and  his  host  in  Red  sea
Cant.  1.  9.  to  a  company  of  horses  in  P.  chariots
Isa.  19.  11.  how  say  ye  to  P.  I  am  the  son  of  wise

30.  2.  to  strengthen  themselves  in  strength  of  P.

.3.  the  strength  of  P.  shall  be  your  shame
Jer.  25.  19.  I  made  P.  and  his  servants  to  drink
.37.  11.  army  was  broken  up,  for  fear  of  P.  army
46.  17-  did  cry,  P.  king  ot  Egypt  is  but  a  noise
47. 1.  word  that  came,  before  that  P.  smote  Gaza
Ezek.  17.  17.  P.  with  his  army  not  make  for  him

29.  2.  set  thy  face  against  P.  king  of  Egypt

.3.  I  am  against  thee,  P.  king  of  Egypt,  30.  22.

30.  21.  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  P.  24.  25.

31.  18.  this  is  P.  and  his  multitude,  saith  the  I.ord

32.  2.  son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  P.
Acts!.  13.  Joseph’s  kindred  made  known  to  P.

21.  P.  daughter  took  him  up  and  nourished  him
Rom.  9. 17.  tor  scripture  saith  toP.  I  raised  thee  up
Ileb.  11.  24.  to  be  called  the  sonof  P.  daughter
PHARAOH-H^ra.

Jer. 44. 30.  will  give  P .-Hophra  intohand  of  enemies
PHARAOH-AV/10.

2  Kings  23.29.  P. -Necho  went  against  Assy  ria
.33.  P.-Neclw  put  Jehoahaz  in  bands  at  Riblah
.34.  P .-Necho  marie  Eliakim  son  of  Josiah  king
.35.  he  taxed  the  land  to  give  money  to  P  -Necho

Jer.  46.  2.  word  came  to  Jeremiah  against  P.- Necho
PHAREZ.

Gen.  38.29.  therefore  his  name  was  called  P.


Gen.  46.  12.  the  sons  of  Judah,  P.  and  Zerah,  1  Chr.

2.4.  Mat.  1.3.  Luke  3.  33.  and  the  sons  o
P.  were  Hezron  and  Hamul,  Num.26.  20,
21.  Ruth  A.  18. 1  Chr.  2.  5.  I  9.4.

Ruin  4.  12.  let  thy  house  be  like  the  house  of  P.
PHARPAR.  See  A  ban  a.

PHEBE.

Rom.  16.  1.  I  commend  unto  you  P.  our  sister
PHEN  ICE.

Acts  11.  19.  they  travelled  as  far  as  P.  and  Cyprus
15  3.  Paul  and  Barnabas  passed  thro’  P.anri  Sama.
21.2.  finding  shi p  sailing  over  to  P.  we  went  aboard

27.  12.  if  by  anv  means  they  might  attain  to  P.
PHILADELPHIA.

Rev.  1.11 .  write  and  send  it  untoP.  and  unto  Laodic.

3.  7.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  P.  w  rite
PH1LETUS.  See  Hymeneus.

PHILIP.

Mat.  10. 3.  P.  and  Bartholomew, Thomas  and  Mat¬
thew,  Mark  .3.  18.  Luke  6.  14.  Acts  1.13.
14.  3.  put  John  in  prison  for  Herodias’  sake  his
brother  P.  wife,  Mark  6.  17.  Luke  3.  19.
Luke  3.  1.  his  brother  P.  tetrarch  of  lturea
John  1.  4.3.  Jesus  findeth  P.  and  saith,  follow  me

44.  now  P.  was  of  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  Andrew

45.  P.  findeth  Nathanael,  and  saith  to  him

12.  21.  the  same  came  to  P.  and  desired  him

22.  P.  telleth  Andrew,  Andrew  and  P.  told  Jesus

14.  9.  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me,  P.  ?

Acts  6.  5.  P.  the  deacon  ||  8.  29.  the  Spirit  said  to  P.

8.  5.  P.  went  down  to  Samaria,  and  preached  Christ

6.  people  gave  heed  to  those  things  which  P.  spake

12.  but  when  they  believed  P.  preaching  things

I. 3.  Simon  continued  with  P.  and  wondered

30.  P.  ran  to  him,  heard  the  eunuch  read  Esaias
.39.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  P.

21.8.  we  entered  into  the  house  of  P.  the  evangelist

PHILIPPI.

Acts  16. 12.  from  Neapolis  wecametoP.ofMacedo.
20.  6.  we  sailed  away  from  P.  and  came  to  Troas
1  Thess.  2.  2.  we  were  shamefully  entreated  at  P.

PH  1  LI  ST  1  A.

Psal.  60.  8.  P.  triumph  thou  because  of  me
87-  4.  behold  P.  and  Tyre,  this  man  was  born  there
108.  9.  Moabmy  washpot,  over  P.  will  1  triumph
PHI  LIST1M.

Gen.  10. 14.  out  of  whom  came  P.  1  Chron.  1. 12.
PHILISTINE.

1  Sam.  17.  8.  am  not  I  aP.?  ||  4.3.  the  P.  cursed  David

32.  David  said,  thy  serv.  will  go  fight  with  this  P.
49.  David  smote  the  P.  in  his  forehead

21.9.  sword  of  Goliath  the  P.  thou  slewest  is  here.

22. 10.  he  gave,  him  the  sword  of  Goliath  the  P.

2  Sam.  21. 17.  Abishai  succoured  him  and  smote  P.

PHILISTINES.

Gen.  21.  34.  Abraham  sojourned  in  the  P.  land

26.  14.  Isaac  had  flocks,  and  the  P.  envied  him

15.  P.  stopped  the  wells  Abraham  digged,  18.
Exod.  1.3. 17.  God  led  them  not  thro’  the  land  of  P.
Josh.  13.  2.  the  .borders  of  P.  not  yet  conquered

3.  from  Sihor  to  Ekron,  five  lords  of  P.  Judg.  3.  3.
Judg.  3.  31.  Shaingar  slew  of  the  P.  600  men
10.  6.  and  Israel  served  the  gods  of  the  P.

7.  he  sold  them  into  the  hands  of  the  P.  13. 1.

II.  did  not  I  deliver  you  from  Egyptians  and  P.

14.4.  Samson  sought  an  occasion  against  the  P.

15.  3.  now  shall  I  be  more  blameless  than  the  P.

6.  the  P.  came  up  and  burnt  her  and  her  father
11.  knowestthou  notthattheP.  are  rulers  over  us.  :

20.  Samson  judged  Israel  in  the  days  of  the  P.

16.  9.  the  P.  be  upon  thee,  Samson,  12,  14,  20.

21.  the  P.  took  Samson  and  put  out  his  eyes

28.  that  I  may  be  at  once  avenged  of  the  P.

.30.  Samson  said,  let  me  die  with  theP.  bowed  him.

1  Sam.  4.  1.  now  Israel  went  out  against  the  P.

3.  why  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us  before  the  P.  ?

9.  be  strong,  quit  yourselves  like  men,  O  ye  P. !

5.  1.  the  P.  took  the  ark  of  God  and  brought  it

6.  1.  the  ark  was  in  the  land  of  P.  seven  months
21.  P.  have  brought  again  the  ark  of  the  Lord

7.  8.  he  will  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  P.

10.  the  P.  drew  near  to  battle  against.  Israel

13.  so  the  P.  were  subdued,  and  came  no  more

1.3.  12.  the  P.  will  come  down  upon  me  to  Gilgal
20.  Israelites  went  down  to  the  P.  to  sharpen

14.  1.  come,  and  let  us  go  over  to  the  P.  garrison

19.  noise  that  was  in  the  host  of  the  P.  went  on  :
52.  was  sore  war  against  the  P.  all  the  days  of  Saul
17-  51.  the  P.  saw  their  champion  was  dead

5.3.  Israel  returned  from  chasing  after  the  P.

18.  17-  but  let  the  hand  of  the  P.  be  on  him,  21.

30.  then  the  princes  of  the  P.  went  forth
19. 8.  David  fought  with  the  P.  23.  5.  2  Sam.  21. 15.

24.  1.  Saul  returned  from  following  the  P.

27.  1  •  than  that  1  should  escape  into  land  of  the  P.  j

28. 15.  for  the  P.  make  war  against  me,  God  depart,  j

29.  7.  that  thou  displease  not  the  lords  of  the  P.

31.  2.  P.  followed  hard  upon  Saul,  1  Chron.  10.2.  (

9. sent  into  landof  the  P.  round  aboutto  publish  it  j

2  Sam.  5. 17.  all  the  P.  came  up  to  seek  David

19.  shall  I  go  up  to  the  P.  ?  wilt  thou  deliver

25.  David  smote  the  P.8.  1. 1|  8. 12.  gold  got  fr.  P.

2.3. 10.  Eleazar  smote  the  P.  ||  12.  Shammah  slew  P.

16.  mighty  men  brake  through  the  host  of  the  P.  '
2  Kings  8.  2.  the  woman  sojourned  in  land  of  the  P.  1
2  Chr.  21. 16. stirred  up  against  Jehoram  spirit  ofP.  I

26.  7.  God  helped  Uzziah  ag.  the  P.  and  Arabians  ;

28. 18.  P.  had  invaded  the  cities  of  the  low-country  :
Psal.  8.3.7.  the  P.  with  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre
Isa.  2.  6.  they  are  soothsayers  like  the  P.

9. 12.  the  Syrians  before,  and  the  P.  behind

11.  14.  they  shall  fly  on  the  shoulders  of  the  P.
Jer.  25.  20.  the  kings  of  the  P.  shall  drink  the  cup  |

47. 1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  against  the  P.

4.  for  the  Lord  will  spoil  the  P.  the  remnant
Ezek.  16. 27.  delivered  thee  to  the  daughters  of  P.  1

25. 15.  because  the  P.  have  dealt  by  revenge

16.  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  upon  the  P.

Amos  1.  8.  the  remnant  of  the  P.  shall  perish
6.  2.  then  go  down  to  Gath  of  the  P.

9.7.  have  not  I  brought  the  P.  from  Caphtor?

Oi bad.  19.  they  of  the  plain  shall  possess  the  P.


612


RAC


11  £  U


IS  A  M  [PkoPKK  NAMha.


Zeph.  2.  5.0  land  ol  the  P.  L  will  destroy  thee
Zech.  9.  0.  1  will  cut  oft'  the  pride  of  the  P.

See  Daughtkhs.
PHILOLOGUS.

Horn.  16.15.salute  P.Julia.and  Nereus  and  his  sister
PHINEHAS.

Erod.  6.  C5.  Eleazar’s  wife  bare  him  P.

Num.  25.  11.  P.  hath  turned  my  wrath  from  Israel

31.  0.  Moses  sent  them  and  P.  to  the  war
Josh.  22.  1.3.  Israel  sent  P.  to  the  Reubenitcs

24.  33.  they  buried  in  a  hill  that  pertained  toP.
Judg.  20.  28.  P.  stood  before  the  ark  in  those  days
1  Sam.  1.  3.  Hophni  and  P.  the  priests  were  there

2.  34.  Hophni  and  P.  shall  both  die  in  one  day
4. 17.  thy  two  sons  Hophni  and  P.are  dead

19.  P.  wife  was  with  child  near  to  be  delivered

14.  3.  the  son  of  P.  the.  Lord’s  priest  in  Shiloh
1  Chr.  6.  4.  Eleazar  begat  P.  II  50.  P.  begat  Abishua
9. 20.  P.  son  of  Eleazar  was  ruler  over  them
Ezra  7.  5.  Abishua  son  of  P.  the  son  of  Eleazar
8. 2.  of  the  sons  of  P.  Gershom  went  up  from  Bab.
33.  with  Meremoth  was  Eleazar  son  of  P.

Ps.  106.30.  then  stood  npP.  and  executed  judgment
PHLEGON.

Rom.  16.14.salute  Asyncritus,  P.Hermasand  breth.
PHRYGIA.

Acts  16.  6.  when  they  had  gone  throughout  P.

18.  23.  Paul  went  over  all  th*e  country  of  P.

PHUKAII.

Judg.  7.  11.  he  went  down  with  P.  his  servant
PHYGELLUS.  ^cHermogenes.
Pl-HAillROJ  H.  See  Baal-zephon.
PILATE.

Mat.  27. 2. when  they  h  id  bound  him, they  delivered
him  to  Pontius  P.  the  governor,  Mark  15.  1.

24.  when  P.  saw  that  he  coidd  prevail  nothing
Mark  15.  5.  so  that  P.  marvelled,  44.

15.  so  P.  willing  to  content  the  people  released
Luke  3. 1.  Pontius  P.  being  governor  of  Judea

13.  1.  whose  blood  P.  had  mingled  with  sacrifices

23.  12.  same  day  P.  and  Herod  were  made  friends
52.  this  man  went  to  P.  and  begged  the  body
John  18.  29.  P.  then  went  out  to  them  and  said
33.  then  P.  entered  into  the  judgment-hall

19.  8.  when  P.  heard  that  he  was  the  more  afraid

12.  from  thenceforth  P.  sought  to  release  him

19.  P.  wrote  a  title,  and  put  it  on  the  cross
38.  Joseph  besought  P.  and  P.  gave  him  leave

Acts  3.  13.  ye  denied  him  in  the  presence  of  P.
4.27-  against  Jesus  Herod  and  P.  were  gathered

13.  28.  yet  desired  they  P.  that  he  should  be  slain

1  Tim.  6.13.  who  before  P.  witnessed  a  good  confess.

PISGAH.

Num.  23.  14.  Balak  brought  Balaam  to  the  top  of  P.
Deut.  3.  27.  get  thee  up  into  the  top  of  P.  34.  1.
4.29.  sea  of  the  plain,  under  the  springs  of  P.
P1SID1A.

Acts  13.  14.  they  came  to  Antioch  in  P.

14.  24.  after  they  had  passed  throughout  P.

PONTIUS.  See  Pilate.

PONTUS,  Acts 2.  9. 1  18.  2.  1  Pet.  1.  1.
PORCIUS.

Acts  24  .  27-  P.  Festus  came  into  Felix’  room
PO  1 1PHAR.

Gen.  37.  36.  the  Midianites sold  Joseph  to  P.39.  1.
PO  1T-PIIERAH.

Gen.  41.45.  Asenath  the  daughter  of  P.  50.
PRISCILLA.  &«  Aquila.
PUBLIUS.

Acts  28.  8.  the  father  of  P.  lay  sick  of  a  fever
PUDENS.

2  Tim.  4.  21.  Eubulus  greeteth  thee  and  P.

PUL.

2  Kings  15.  19.  P.  king  of  Assyria  came  against  Is¬
rael  ;  Menahem  gave  P.  1000  talents  of  silver

1  Chron.  5.  26.  God  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  P.

Isa.  66.  19.  I  will  send  those  that  escape  to  P.

PURPURIM.  See  Appellatives.
PUTEOLI.

Acts  28.  13.  and  we  came  the  next  day  toP.

Q-

QUARTUS.

Rom.  16.  23.  and  Q.  a  brother  saluteth  you

R.

RABBAH,  or  RABBATH.

Deut.  3. 11.  is  it  not  in  R.  of  the  children  of  Ammon  ?

2  Sam.  11.1.  Joab  and  all  Israel  besieged  R.

12.  26.  Joab  fought  against  R.  and  took  the  city
17.  27.  Shobi  of  R.  brought  beds  for  David

1  Chron.  20. 1.  Joab  smote  R.  and  destroyed  it
Jer.  49.  2. 1  will  cause  an  alarm  to  be  heard  in  R.

3.  cry,  ye  daughters  of  R.  gird  with  sackcloth
Ezek.  21.  20.  that  the  sword  may  come  to  R.

25.  5.  I  will  make  R.  a  stable  tor  camels
Amos  1.  14.  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in  the  wall  of  R.

RAB-SHAKEH.

2  Kings  18.  17.  the  king  of  Assyria  sent  R.  J.fa.36.2.
37.  they  told  him  the  words  of  R.  Isa.  36.  22.

19.  4.  God  will  hear  the  words  of  R.  Isa.  37.  4.
RACHEL.

Gen.  29. 12.  Jacob  told  R  .that  he  was  Rebekah’s  son

16.  the  name  of  the  younger  was  R.

17.  R.  was  beautiful  and  well-favoured

18.  Jacob  loved  R.  30.  ||  31.  R.  w  as  barren

20.  Jacob  served  seven  years  for  R.  25.

28.  Laban  gave  him  R.  his  daughter  to  wife

30.  l.R.  bare  no  children,  R.  envied  her  sister  Leah
2.  Jacob’sanger  was  kindled  against  R.  hesaid
22.  God  remembered  R.  and  ooened  her  w  omb

31.  19.  R.  had  stolen  her  father’s  images,  34.

33.  then  Laban  went  into  R.tent

33.  2.  Jacob  put  R.ano  Joseph  hindermost
35.  19.  R. died, 48.7.  ||  .35.  24.  sons  of  R .  46.  19,  22.
Ruth  4.  11.  the  Lord  make  the  woman  like  II.

1  -Saw. 10.2. thou  shalt  find  two  men  by  R.  sepulchre
Jer.  31.  15.  R.  weeping  for  her  children.  Mat.  2. 18.


r  ,  RAGAU.

Luke  3.  35.  Saruch,  which  was  the  son  of  R.

RAIIAB,  person,  place.

Josh.  2.  1.  the  spies  entered  into  the  house  of  R.

6.  17.  only  R.  shall  live  ||  25.  Joshua  saved  R.
Psal.  87.4.  I  will  make  mention  of  R.  and  Babylon
89.  10.  thou  hast  broken  R.  in  pieces  as  one  slain

Isa.  51.  9.  art  thou  not  it  that  hath  cut  R.  ?

Mat.  1.  5.  Salmon  begat  Boaz  of  R.

Ileh.  11.  31.  by  faith  the  harlot  R.  perished  not
Jam.  2.  25.  was  not  R.  also  justified  by  works  ?
RAM.

Ruth  4.  19.  Pharez  begat  Hezron,  Hezron  begat  R.

and  R.  begat  Amminadab,  1  Chron.  2.  9,  10.

1  Chron.  2.  25.  the  sons  of  Jerahmeel,  R.  Bunah
27.  the  sons  of  R.  the  first-born  of  Jerahmeel
Job  32.  2.  Elilm  the  Buzite  of  the  kindred  of  R.
RAMAH,  RAMA.

Josh.  18.  25.  R.  a  city  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin
Judg.  4.  5.  Deborah  dwelt  between  R.and  Beth-el
1  Sam.  1.  19.  Elkanah  cametohis  housein  R.  2. 11.

7.  17.  Samuel’s  return  was  to  R.  15.  34. 1  16. 13.

8.  4.  all  the  elders  came  to  Samuel  unto  R.

19.  18.  so  David  tied,  and  came  to  Samuel  to  R.

22.  Saul  went  to  R.  23.  ||  22.  6.  Saul  abode  in  R.

25.  1.  Samuel  was  buried  in  his  house  at  R.  28.3.

1  Kings  15.  17.  Baasha  built  R.  2  Chron.  16.  1.

21.  Baasha  left  off  building  of  R.  2  Chron.  16.  5.

2  Kings  8.  29.  Joram  went  to  be  healed  of  wounds

the  Syrians  had  given  him  at  R.  2  Chron.  22.6.
Ezra  2.  26.  the  children  of  R.  and  Gaba  six  hun¬
dred  and  twenty-one,  Neh.  7.30.
Neh.  11.  33.  the  children  of  Benjamin  dwelt  at  R.
Isa.  10.  29.  R.  is  afraid,  Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled
Jer.  31.  15.  a  voice  was  heard  in  R.  Mat.  2.  18.
Ezek.  27.  22.  the  merchants  of  R.  were  in  l  yre
Hos.  5.  8.  blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  It.  cry  aloud
RAMO  m-GILEAD.

Deut.  4.  43.  R.  in  Gilead  of  the  Gadites,  a  city  of
refuge,  Bezer  and  Crolan,  Josh.  20.  8.  1
21.  38.

1  Kitigs  4.  13.  the  son  of  Geber  was  officer  in  Tt.

22.  3.  know  ye  that  R  .  is  ours,  and  we  be  still

4.  Ahab  said  to  Jehoshaphat,  wilt  thou  go  with

me  to  battle  to  R.  r  2  Chron.  18.  3.
6.  shall  I  go  against  R.  ?  15.  2  Ch/on.  18.  14.

12.  saying,  go  up  to  R.  and  prosper,  2  Chr.  18.  11.

2  Kings  8.  28.  Joram  went  against  Hazael  in  R .  anti

the  Syrians  wounded  Joram,  2  Chron.  22.  5.

9.  1.  Elisha  said,  take  this  box  of  oil,  and  go  to  R.

14.  now  Joram  had  kept  R.  because  of  Hazael

1  Chr.  6.80.  out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad  to  the  Levites,  R.

RAPI1  A,  and  11AP1IU.

Num.  13.  9.  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  Palti  son  of  R.

1  Chr.  8.37.  R.  Eleasa,  Azel,  were  the  sons  of  Binea

REBEKAH.

Gen.  22.  23.  Bethuel  begat  R.  ||  24. 15.  R.  came  out

24.  51.  R.  is  before  thee  ||  67.  Isaac  took  R.  25.  20.
59.  they  sent  away  R.  ||  60.  they  blessed  R.

25.  28.  R.  loved  Jacob  ||  26.35.  a  grief  of  mind  to  R.

26.  7-  lest  men  of  the  place  should  kill  me  for  R.
27  .  42.  these  words  of  Esau  w'ere  told  to  R.

29.  12.  that  he  was  R.  son  ||  35.  8.  R.  nurse  died
49.  31.  there  they  buried  Isaac  and  R.  his  wife
Rom.  9. 10.  but  when  R.  had  conceived  by  Isaac
RECTI  AB.

2 Sam.  4.  2.  R.  the  son  of  Rimmon,  5.  ||6.  R.  escaped

2  Kings  10.  15.  Jehu  lighted  on  Jehonadab  son  or  R.

23.  the  son  of  R.  went  into  the  house  of  Baal

1  Chron.  2.  55.  Hemath,  father  of  the  house  of  R.
Neh.  3.  14.  Malchiah  son  of  11.  repaired  dung-gate
Jer.  35.  6.  Jonadab  the  son  of  R.  commanded  us
See  Jon  a  pa  c.

RECIIA  BITES.

Jer.  35.  2.  go  to  the  house  of  the  R.  and  speak
REHOBO  AM.

1  Kings  11.  43.  Solomon  slept  with  his  fathers,  R.
the  son  of  Solomon  reigned,  14.  21.  2  Chr.  9.  31.

12.  6.  R.  consulted  with  the  old  men,  2  Chr.  10.  6.
17.  R.  reigned  over  them,  2  Chron.  10.  17.

21.  to  bring  the  kingdom  again  to  R  .2  Chr.  11.  l.

27.  then  their  heart  shall  turn  again  to  R.

14.  30.  there  was  w^ar  between  R.  and  Jerob.  15.  6.

1  Chrm.  3  10.  R.  was  Solomon’s  son,  Mat.  1.  7.

2  Chron.  11. 17.  they  made  R.  strong  three  years

21.  R.  loved  Maachah  daughter  of  Absalom

22.  R.  niade  Abijah  the  son  of  Maachah  the  chief

13.  7.  Jeroboam  strengthened  himself  against  It.

when  R.  was  voung  and  tender-hearted

REHOBO IH.

Gen.  10. 11.  Ashur  went,  builded  Nineveh  and  It.

26.  22.  Isaac  called  the  name  of  the  well  R.

36.37.  Samlah  died,  Saul  of  R.  reigned,  1  C/ir. 1.48.
REHUM.

Ezra  2.  2.  R.  came  with  Zerubbabel,  Neh.  12.  3.

4.  8.  R.  the  chancellor  wrote  against  Jerusalem
17.  the  king  sent  an  answer  to  R.  and  Shimshai

23.  now  when  the  letter  was  read  before  R.

Neh.  3.  17.  R.  the  son  of  Bani  repaired  after  him

10.25.  R.  of  chief  of  the  people  sealed  the  covenant
REM  ALLAH.

Isa.  7.  4.  fear  not,  for  the  fierce  anger  of  son  of  R.

5.  tiie  son  of  R.  hath  taken  evil  counsel
9.  and  the  head  of  Samaria  is  R.  son

8.  6.  this  people  rejoice  in  Rezin  and  R.  son
REMPHAN.

Acts  7.  43.  ye  took  up  the  star  of  your  god  R.
REPHA1M.

2  Sam.  5.  18.  the  Philistines  spread  themselves  in
valley  of  R.  22. 1  23.  13.  1  Chr.  11.  15.  |  14.  9.
Isa.  17*  5.  that  gathereth  ears  in  the  valley  of  R.
REPH  AIMS.

Gen.  14.  5.  smote  the  R.  in  Ashteroth  Karnaim

15.  20.  to  thy  seed  have  I  given  the  land  of  R.

REPH I DIM.

Exod.  17-  1.  Israel  pitched  in  R.  Num.  33.  14.

8.  Amalek  came  and  fought  with  Israel  in  R.

19.  2.  they  were  departed  from  It.  Num.  33.  15.

R EUBEN.

Gen.  29-  32.  she  bare  ason,  and  called  his  name  It.

30.  14.  R.  went  in  the  days  of  wheat-harvest
35.  22.  that  R  went  and  lay  with  Bilhah


Gep.  35.  23.  sons  ot  Leah,  R.  Jacob’s  first  born
46.  8.  |49.3.  A  urn.  26.  5.  1  Chron,  5.  1.
37  -  22.  R.  said  unto  them,  shed  no  blood
29.  R.  returned  to  the  pit,  Joseph  was  net  in  it
46.  9.  the  sons  of  R.  Exod.  6.  14.  Num.  16.  1.  |  .‘42

1,  37.  Deut.  11.6.  Josh.  4.  12.  1  Chion.  5.  3,  lit
48.  5.  as  R.  and  Simeon,  they  shall  be  mine

Num.  2.  10.  the  standard  of  the  camp  of  It.  10. 18.

16.  all  that  were  numbered  of  the  cainpof  R.

7-  30.  Elizur  prince  of  the  children  of  R.did  offer

32.  33.  Moses  gave  to  children  of  R.  Josh.  13.  23.
Deut.  27. 13.  these  on  mount  Ebal  to  curse,  R.

33.  6.  let  R.  live,  and  let  not  Ids  men  be  few
Josh.  15.  6.  to  the  stone  of  Bohan  the  son  of  R.  18.17.

22.  1.3.  Israel  sent  to  the  children  of  R.  and  Gad
Judg.  5.  15.  for  divisions  of  R.  great  thoughts,  16.
Ezek.  48.  6.  a  portion  for  R.  ||  31.  one  gate  of  R.
Tribe  of  REUBEN.

Num.  1 . 5.  of  the  tribe  of  R.  Elizur  was  prince
21.  ol  the  tribe  of  R.  were  numbered  46,500
13.  4.  ot  the  tribe  of  R.  Shammua  to  spy  land

34.  14.  the  tribe  of  R.  have  received  inheritance
Josh.  20.  8.  out  ot  the  tribe  of  R.  Gad  and  Manas-

seh  the  Levites  had  cities,  .36.  1  Chron.  6.  63,  78.
Rev. 7.  5.  of  the  tribe  of  R.  were  sealed  12,000
REUBEN  1TES.

Num.  26.  7.  these  are  the  families  of  the  R.

Deut.  3.  12.  these  cities  gave  1  to  the  R.and  to  the
Gadites,  16.  |  29.  8.  Josh.  12.  6.  |  1.3.8.
Josh.  1.12.  Joshua  spake  to  the  R.  22.  1.

2  Kings  10.  .3.3.  Hazael  smote  the  R.  and  Manassites

1  Chron.  5.  6.  Beerah  was  the  prince  of  the  R.

26.  1  ilgath-pilneser  carried  away  R.  and  Gadite*
11.  42.  Adina  a  captain  of  the  R.  thirty  with  him
26.32.  Hashabiah  and  his  brethren  over  the  R.

27-  16.  Eliezer  son  of  Zichri  was  ruler  of  the  R.

R  EZ I N .

2  Kings  15.  .37.  the  Lord  began  to  send  against  Ju¬

dah  R.  the  king  of  Syria,  16.  5.  Isa.  7.  1.
16.6.  at  that  time  R.recovc.cu  Elath  to  Syria

9.  the  king  of  Assyria  took  Damascus  and  slew  R.
Ezra  2.  48.  the  children  of  R.  children  of  Nekoda

and  Gazzam  came  with  Zerubbabel,  Neh.  7.50
Isa.  7.  4.  fear  not  for  the  fierce  anger  of  R.

8.  and  the  head  of  Damascus  is  R.

8.  6.  forasmuch  as  this  people  rejoice  in  R.

9.  11. Lord  shall  set  up  the  adversaries  of  R.

RHEGIUM.

Acts  28.  13.  we  set  a  compass  and  came  to  R.

RH  ESA.

Lit/  .  27.  the  son  of  Joanna,  who  was  the  son  ofR.
RUODA.

Ac.  12. 13.  a  damsel  came  to  hearken  named  R.

RHODES.

Acts  21. 1.  the  day  following  we  came  unto  R.
RIMMON.

Josh.  15.  32.  Shilhim,  Ain,  and  R.  cities  of  Judah
Judg.  20.  45.  the  Benjamites  fled  toward  the  wil¬
derness,  to  the  rock  R.  47.  I  21.  13.
2  Sam.  4.  2.  Baanah  and  Rechab  sons  of  R.  5,  9-
2  Kings  5. 18.  my  master  goetli  into  the  house  of  R.

1  Chron.  4.  .32.  the  villages  of  Simeon  were  Ain,  R.

6.  77.  out  of  Zebulun  was  given  to  Merari,  R.

Zech.  14.  10.  the  land  shall  be  turned  as  a  plain  to  R.

RIZPAH.

2  Sam.  .3.  7-  Saul  had  concubine  whose  name  was  R.
21.8.  David  delivered  two  sons  of  R.  to  Gibeonite*

10.  R.  spread  sackcloth  for  her  on  the  rock

ROMAN.

Acts  22.  25.  is  a  R.  26.  ||  27.  tell  me,  art  thou  a  R.  I
29.  after  he  knew  that  he  was  a  R.  23.  27.
ROMANS.

John  11. 48.  the  R.  shall  come  and  takeour  place
Acts  16.  21.  not  lawful  for  us  to  observe,  being  R.
.37.  beaten  us,  being  R.  ||  38.  heard  they  were  R.

28.  17.  delivered  prisoner  into  the  hands  of  the  R.
ROME.

Acts  2.  10.  strangers  of  R.  we  do  hear  them  speak
18.2.  had  commanded  all  Jews  to  depart  from  R.
19.21.  I  must  see  R.  ||  2.3.  11.  bear  witness  at  R.
28.  16.  when  we  came  to  R.  Paul  dwelt  by  himself
Rom.  1.7.  to  all  that  be  in  R.  beloved  of  God

15.  to  preach  the  gospel  to  you  that  are  at  R.

2  Tim.  1.  17.  when  he  was  in  It.  he  sought  me  out
RUFUS.

Mark  15.  21.  Simon,  father  of  Alexander  and  R.
Rom.  16.  13.  salute  R.  chosen  in  the  Ld.  and  mother
RUHAMAH.

Hos.  2.  1.  say  to  your  sisters,  R.  plead  with  mother
RUTH.

Ruth  1.  4.  the  name  of  the  other  was  R.

14.  R.  clave  to  her  |]  3.  9.  who  art  thou  ?  T  am  R.
4.  5.  thou  must  buy  it  also  of  R.  the  Moabitess
10.  moreover,  R.  have  I  purchased  to  be  my  wife
Mat.  1.  5.  Boaz  begat  Obed  of  R.  Obed  begat  Jesse

S.

SABEANS.

Job  1 ,  15.  the  S.  fell  on  the  oxen  and  asses  of  Job
Isa.  45.  14.  merchandise  of  the  S.  shall  come  to  thee
Ezek.  23.  42.  w  ith  men  of  the  common  sort  were  S.
Joel  3.  8.  and  they  shall  sell  them  to  the  S.

SA  LATH  I  EL.

1  Chron.  .3.  17.  S.  the  son  of  Jechoniah,  Mat.  1. 12.
Luke  3.  27.  Zorobabel,  which  was  the  son  of  S.

_  SALEM.

Gen.  14. 18.  Melchizedek  king  of  S.  brought  wine
Ps.  76.  2.  in  S.  also  is  his  tabernacle,  and  in  Zion
Heb.  7. 1.  Melchizedek  king  of  S.  who  blessed  Abra.

2.  being  king  of  S.  which  is  king  of  peace

SALMON.

Ruth  A.  20.  Nahshon  begat  S.  j|  21.  S.  begat  Boaz,
1  Chron.  2.  11.  Mat.  1.  4,  5.
Psal.  6 8.  14.  it  was  white  as  snow  in  S.

Lube  3.  32.  Boaz,  which  was  the  son  of  S
SALMON  E.

Acts  27.7.  we  sailed  under  Crete, over-against  S.
SALOME,  Mark  15.  40.  ||  16.  1.
SAMARIA.

1  Kings  13.  32.  against  high-places  which  are  in  S

fS13


'Proper  Names.]  £  \


S  A  U


S  H  A


4  Kings  16.  04.  Omri  bought  the  hill  S.  of  Shenier

20.  1.  Ben-hadad  besieged  S.  2  Kings  6.  24.

I, 0.  if  the  dust  of  S.  shall  suffice  for  handfuls

17.  told,  saying,  there  are  men  come  out  of  S.

22.  10.  Ahab  and  .lehoshaphat  sat  on  their  throne
in  the  entrance  of  the  gate  of  S.  2  C/iron.  18.  0.

38.  one  washed  the  chariot  in  the  pool  of  S.

2  Kings  6.  20.  behold,  they  were  in  the  midst  of  S.

7.  1.  barley  for  a  shekel  in  the  gate  of  S.  18.

17.  6.  the  King  of  Assyria  took  S.  18.  10.

18.  34.  have  they  delivered  S.  out  of  mine  hand  ?
where  are  gods  of  Hamath  and  Arpad  ?  Isa.  36. 19.

21.  13.  I  will  stretch  over  .Jerusalem  the  line  of  S.

23. 18.  the  bones  of  the  prophet  that  came  out  of  S.

2  Chron.  25.  13.  soldiers  fell  on  the  cities  from  S.
Ezra  4. 10.  the  noble  Asnapper  set  in  the  cities  of  S.
Neh.  4.  2.  Sanballat  spake  before  the  army  of  S.
Isa.  7  9.  the  head  of  F.phraim  is  S.  and  the  head  of  S.

is  Remaliah’s  son,  if  not  believe  not  established

8.  4.  and  the  spoil  of  S.  shall  be  taken  away
9.9.  Ephraim  and  inhabitants  of  S.  shall  know

10.  9.  is  not  Hamath  as  Arpad  ?  S.  as  Damascus  ?

Jer.  23.  13.  I  have  seen  folly  in  the  prophets  of  S.

31.  5.  shall  yet  plant  v  ines  on  the  mountains  of  S.

41.5.  there  came  certain  from  Shechem  and  S.
Ezek.  16.46.  thine  elder  sister  is  S.  she  and  daughters

51.  nor  hath  S.  committed  half  of  thy  sins
23.4.  S.  is  Aholah,  and  Jerusalem  Aholibah
Has.  7.  1.  then  the  wickedness  of  S.  was  discovered

8.5.  thy  calf,  O  S.  hath  cast  thee  off,  anger  kindled

6.  but  the  calf  of  S.  shall  be  broken  in  pieces

10.  5.  tlie  inhabitants  of  S.  shall  fear  (or  the  calves

7.  as  for  S.  her  king  is  cut  off  as  foam  on  water

13.  16.  S,  shall  become  desolate,  she  hath  rebelled

Amos  3.  9.  assemble  yourselves  on  mountains  of  S.

4.  1.  hear,  ye  kine  of  Bashan,  in  mountain  of  S.

6. 1.  woe  to  them  that  trust  in  the  mountain  of  S.

8. 14.  they  that  swear  by  the  sin  of  S.  and  say
Chad.  19.  they  shall  possess  the  fields  of  S.

Mic.  1.  1.  the  word  which  he  saw  concerning  S.

6.  1  will  make  S.  as  an  heap  of  the  field
Luke  17.  11.  he  passed  through  the  midst  of  S.

John  4.  4.  and  he  must  needs  go  through  S.

9.  how  askest  drink  of  me,  who  am  a  worn  an  of  S. )
Aces  8.  1.  were  scattered  through  the  regions  of  S.

5.  Philip  preached  Christ  to  them  of  S.

14.  the  apostles  heard  that  S.  received  the  wosd
In  SAMARIA.

a  Kings  16.  28.  Omri  buried  in  S.  ||  22.  37.  Ahab

29.  Ahab  reigned  in  S.  ||  22.  51.  Ahaziah  in  S.

18.  2.  and  there  was  a  sore  famine  in  S.

20.  34.  streets  in  Damascus,  as  my  father  made  inS.

21. 18.  to  meet  Ahab  king  of  Israel  which  is  in  S.

2  Kings  3.  1.  now  Jehoram  began  to  reign  in  S.

5. 3.  would  God  my  lord  were  with  the  prophet  in  S.

6.  25.  and  there  was  a  great  famine  in  S.

10.  17.  Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  to  Ahab  in  S.

13.  1.  Jehoahaz  reigned  in  S.  ||  10.  Jehoash

6.  and  there  remained  the  grove  also  in  S.

9.  Jehoahaz  buried  in  S.  ||  1.3.  Joash,  14.  16.

14.  23.  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash  reigned  in  S.

15.8.  Zechariah  reigned  over  Israel  in  S.  13.

17-  Menahem  ||  27-  Pekah  ||  17.  1.  Hoshea  in  S.

2  Chron.  22.  9.  for  Ahaziah  was  hid  in  S.

Amos  3.  12.  so  Israel  be  taken  out  that  dwell  in  S.
Acts  1.8.  be  witnesses  to  me  in  Judea  and  in  S.

9.  31.  then  had  the  churches  rest  in  S.

To  or  unto  SAMARIA.

1  Kings  20.  43.  Ahab  being  displeased  came  to  S.

22.  37.  so  the  king  died  and  was  brought  to  S.

2  Kings  2.  25.  Elisha  returned  from  Carmel  to  S.

6.  19.  Elisha  led  them  to  S.  open  eyes  of  these  men

10.  1.  Jehu  sent  letters  to  S.  ||  12.  came  to  S.  17.

14.  14.  Jehoash  took  all  vessels  in  house  of  Lord,
and  took  hostages,  and  returned  to  S.  2  Chr.  25.24.

15.  14.  Menahem  came  to  S.  and  smote  Shallum

17.  5.  the  king  of  Assyria  went  up  to  S.

2  Chron.  18.  2.  lehoshaphat  went  down  to  S.

28.  8.  Israel  brought  the  spoil  of  Judah  to  S.

Isa.  10.  11.  as  I  have  done  unto  S.  and  her  idols
SAMAR  HAN,  S.

Mat.  10.  5.  into  any  city  of  the  S.  enter  ye  not
Luke  9.52.  they  entered  into  a  village  of  the  S.

10.  33.  but  a  certain  S.  came  where  he  was

17.  16.  one  of  them  gave  thanks,  and  he  was  a  S.
John  4.  9.  the  Jews  have  no  dealings  with  the  S.

39.  and  many  of  the  S.  believed  on  him

8.  48.  that  thou  art  a  S.  and  hast  a  devil

SAMSON.

.Judg.  13.  24.  the  woman  called  his  name  S.

14.  1.  S.  went  to  Timnath  ||  7.  she  pleased  S.  well
10.  S.  made  there  a  feast  ||  16.  S.  wife  wept

15.  4.  S.  caught  foxes  |j  10.  to  bind  S.  are  we  come
16.2.  S.  is  come  hither  H  3.  S.  lay  till  midnight

9.  the  Philistines  be  upon  thee,  S.  12,  14,  20.

23.  our  God  hath  delivered  S.  into  our  hand

25.  call  S.  ||  30.  S.  said,  let  me  die  with  Philistines
28.  S.  called  unto  the  l  ord  |)  29-  S.  took  hold

Heb.  11.  32.  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  S.

SAMUEL.

1  Sam.  1. 20.  Hannah  bare  a  son,  and  called  him  S.

2.  18.  S.  ministered  before  the  Lord  li  21.  S.  grew
3.4.  the  Lord  called  S.  he  answered.  6,8,  10.

15.  and  S.  feared  to  shew  Eli  the  vision

21.  the  Lord  revealed  himself  to  S.  in  Shiloh

4.  1.  and  the  word  of  S.  came  to  all  Israel

7.  6.  S.  judged  the  children  of  Israel,  15.

9.  S.  cried  to  the  Lord  for  Israel,  the  Lord  heard

13.  I  ord  was  against  Philistines  all  the  days  of  S.
•8.6.  displeased  S.  when  they  said,  give  us  a  king

19.  the  people  refused  to  obey  the  voice  of  S.

21.  and  S.  heard  all  the  words  of  the  people

9.  15.  Lord  told  S.  in  his  ear  before  Saul  came

24.  so  Saul  did  eat  with  S.  that  day

26.  S.  called  Saul  to  the  top  of  the  house

10.  1.  S.  took  a  vial  of  oil  and  anointed  Saul

14.  we  came  to  S.  ||  12.  11.  the  Lord  sent  S.

15.  tell  me,  1  pray  thee,  what  S.  said  to  you

25.  then  S.  told  the  manner  of  the  kingdom

II.  7.  whosoevercometh  not  forth  after  Saul  and  S.

12. 18.  all  the  people  greatly  feared  the  Lord  and  S.
'13.  8.  he  tarried  the  set  time  that  S.  had  appointed


1  Sam.  15.11.  it  griev.  S.||33.  S.  hewed  Agag  in  pieces

27.  as  S.  turned  about  to  go  away,  S.  mantle  rent
35.  nevertheless,  S.  morn  ned  for  Saul

16. 10.  Jesse  made  seven  of  his  sons  to  pass  before  S.

13.  S.  took  the  horn  of  oil  and  anointed  David

19.  18.  David  Hed  and  came  to  S.  to  Ratnah

22.  he  said,  where  are  S.  and  David  ?  ||  25. 1.  S.  died

28.  11.  ^aul  said  to  the  woman,  bring  me  up  S.

14.  Saul  perceived  that  it  was  S.  and  bowed  hims.

1  Chr.  6.28.  sons  of  S.  ||  26.  28.  all  that  S.  had  dedicat.
9.  22.  whom  David  and  S.  the  seer  did  ordait)

11.  3.  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  S.

2  Chron.  35.  18.  was  no  passover  like  that  from  S.
Psal.  99.  6.  S.  among  them  that  call  on  his  name
Jer.  15.  1.  though  Moses  and  S.  stood  before  me
Acts  3.  24.  the  prophets  from  S.  have  foretold

13.  20.  gave  them  judges  450  years  till  S.  prophet
ILeb.  11.  32.  the  time  would  fail  me  to  tell  of  S.
SANBALLAT.

Neh.  2.  10.  when  S.  heard  of  it,  it  grieved  him,  19.
4.  1.  when  S.  heard  we  budded  he  was  wroth,  7.

6.  2.  S.  sent  to  me,  5.  ||  14.  my  God,  think  upon  S.

12.  for  Tobiah  and  S.  had  hired  him

13.  28.  the  son  of  Joiada  was  son-in  law  to  S.
SAPHIR.

Mic.  1.  11.  pass  ye  away,  thou  inhabitant  of  S.
SAPPH1RA.

Aces  5. 1.  Ananias,  with  S.  his  wife,  sold  a  possession
SARAH.

Gen.  17.  15.  not  Sarai,  but  S.  shall  her  name  be
19.  S.  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son,  18.  14.

18.  9.  where  is  S.  ?  ||  20.  14.  Abimelech  restored  S.

11.  it  ceased  to  be  with  S.  after  manner  of  women

12.  S.  laughed  ||  13.  wherefore  did  S.  laugh?

20.  2.  Abraham  said  of  S.  she  is  my  sister

18.  because  of  S.  11  23. 1.  years  of  the  life  of  S.  127

21.  1.  the  Lord  did  unto  S.  as  he  had  spoken

7.  that  S.  should  have  given  children  suck

12.  in  all  that  S.  said  to  thee,  hearken  to  her

23.  2.  S.  died  |!  19-  Abraham  buried  S.  his  wife

24.  67.  Isaac  brought  her  into  his  mother  S.  tent

25.  10.  there  was  Abraham  buried  and  S.  49.  31.
Num.  26.  46.  name  of  the  daughter  of  Asher  was  S.
Isa.  51 . 2.  look  to  Abraham  and  to  S.  that  bare  you
Rom.  4.  19.  nor  yet  the  deadness  of  S.  womb

9.  9.  at  this  time  T  will  come,  S.  shall  have  a  son
Heb.  11 .  11.  thro’  faith  S.  received  strength  toconcei.

1  Pet.  3.  6.  as  S.  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord

SA  RAI.

Gen.  11.  29.  the  name  of  Abram’s  wife  was  S.

30.  but  S.  was  barren,  she  had  no  child,  16.  1.

12.  17-  the  Lord  plagued  Pharaoh  because  of  S.

16.  6.  when  S.  dealt  hardly  with  Ilagar,  she  fled

8.  she  said,  I  flee  from  the  face  of  my  mistress  S.

17.  15.  thou  shalt  not  call  her  name  S.  but  Sarah

SARDIS.

Rev.  1.11.  write  and  send  it  to  S.  and  Philadelphia

3.  1.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  S.  write

4.  a  few  names  in  S.  which  have  not  defiled
SAREPIA.

Luke  4.  26.  save  to  S.  a  city  of  Sidon,  1  Kings  17.  9.
SARON.

Acts  9.  35.  and  all  that  dwelt  at  S.  saw  him
SARUCH.

Luke  3.  35.  Nachor,  which  was  the  son  of  S.

SA  TAN.  See  Appellatives.

SAUL,  called  SHAUL,  1  Chron.  1.  48.

Gen.  36.  37.  S.  of  Rehoboth  reigned  ||  38.  S.  died
1  Sam.  9. 2.  Kish  had  a  son,  whose  name  was  S.  14.51.

15.  the  Lord  told  Samuel  a  day  before  S.  came

17.  when  Samuel  saw  S.  H 18.  S.  drew  near  to  Sam.
24.  set  it  before  S.  so  S.  did  eat  with  Samuel

10.  11.  is  S.  also  among  the  prophets?  12.  |  19.  24.
21.  S.  was  taken  11  11.  12.  shall  S.  reign  over  us  ?

11. 6.  the  Spiritof  God  came  upon  S.  anger  kindled

7.  whosoevercometh  not  forth  after  S.  and  Samuel

15.  people  went  to  G ilgal,  there  they  made  S.  king

13.  3.  S.  blew  the  trumpet  through  all  the  land

7.  as  for  S.  he  wasyet  in  Gilgal.  and  all  the  people

10.  S.  went  out  to  meet  Samuel  |j  15.  S.  numbered

14.  24.  for  S.  had  injured  the  people,  saying

35.  S.  built  an  altar  ||  37.  S.  asked  counsel  of  God
46.  S.  went  up  from  following  the  Philistines
52.  when  S.  saw  any  strong  man  he  took  him

15.  11.  it  repenteth  me  that  l  have  set  up  S.

31.  Samuel  turned  again  after  S.  S.  worshipped
35.  and  Samuel  came  no  more  to  see  S.

16.  1.  Lord  said,  how  long  wilt  thou  mourn  for  S.  ?

2.  if  S.  hear  it  H  18.  6.  came  out  to  meet  king  S.

14.  the  Spiritof  the  Lord  departed  from  S.

23.  the  evil  Spir.  from  G.  was  on  S.  18.  10. 1  19.  9.

17.8.  am  not  1  a  Philistine,  and  you  servants  to  S  }
12.  Jesse  went  for  an  old  man  in  the  days  or  s.

19.  S.  and  all  Israel  were  in  the  val'ey  of  Elah
38.  and  S.  armed  David  with  his  armour

18.  9.  S.  eyed  David  from  that  day  and  forward
12.  S.  afraid  of  Da\  id  ;  Lord  departed  from  S.

15.  when  S.  saw  that  he  behaved  very  wisely,  30.
29.  S.  became  David’s  enemy  continually

19.  4.  Jonathan  spake  good  of  Dav.  to  S.  Ins  father
f.  Jonathan  brought  David  to  S.  he  was  as  in

times  past

11.  S.  sent  messengers  to  take  David,  14,  15,  20.

20.  25.  Abner  sat  by  S  side  ||  33.  S.  cast  a  javelin

21.  10.  David  arose  and  fled  that  day  for  fear  of  S.

11.  saying,  S.  hath  slain  his  thousands,  29.  5.

22.  22.  I  knew  that  he  would  surely  tell  S.

23.  11.  will  S.  come  down  as  thy  serv.  hath  heard  ?

17.  shall  be  king,  and  that  S.  my  father  knoweth

28.  S.  returned  from  pursuing  after  David

24.  4.  David  cut  off  the  skirt  of  S.  robe  privily

7.  David  suffered  them  not  to  rise  against  S.

8.  David  cried  after  S.  H  22.  David  sware  to  S.

26.  4.  David  understood  S.  was  come  in  very  deed

5.  and  David  beheld  the  place  where  S.  lay

7.  behold,  S.  lay  sleeping  within  the  trench
17.  S.  knew  David’s  voice  ||  25.  S.  returned

27.  1.  1  shall  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  S.

28.  9.  behold,  thou  knowest  what  S.  hath  done
10.  S.  sware  to  her  by  Lord  H  12.  for  thou  art  S.

20.  S.  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the  earth

29.  3.  is  not  this  David 'servant  of  S.  king  of  Israel  ?


1  Sam.  31 . 2.  the  Philist.  followed  hard  upon  S.  ant?

his  sons,  and  slew  Jonathan,  1  Chron.  10.  2,

7.  that  S.  and  his  sons  were  dead,  1  Chron.  10.7.

31.  11.  when  inhabit,  of  Jabesh-gilead  heard  what
the  Philistiues  had  done  to  S.  1  Chron.  10.  11.
2Sam.\.  6.  S. leaned  on  his  spear  1|  21.  the  shield  ofS.

24.  ye  daughters  of  Israel,  weep  over  S.

2.  7.  be  ye  valiant,  for  your  master  S.  is  dead

3.  1.  the  house  of  S.  waxed  weaker  ana  weaker

10.  to  translate  the  kingdom  from  house  of  S.  and
to  set  up  the  throne  of  David,  1  Chron.  12.  23.

2  Sam.  4.  10.  one  brought  tidings  saying,  S.  is  dead

5.  2.  in  time  past,  when  S.  was  king,  1  Chron.  112.

7.  15.  mercy  shall  not  depart,  as  I  took  it  from  S.

9.  1.  is  there  yet  any  left  of  the  house  of  S.  ?  3.

7.  I  will  restore  thee  all  the  land  of  S.  thy  father

12.  7-  delivered  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  8.  22.  1.

16. 8.  on  thee  all  the  blood  of  the  house  of  S.

21.  1.  it  is  for  S.  and  for  his  bloody  house

4.  will  have  no  silver  nor  gold  of  S.  nor  his  house

12.  David  took  the  bones  of  S.  from  men  of  Jabesh

1  Chron.  5.  10.  in  the  days  of  S.  they  made  war

10.  13.  so  S.  died  for  his  transgression  ag.  the  Lord

12.  1.  David  kept  himself  close  because  of  S.

13.  3.  we  inquired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  S.

26.  28.  all  that  Samuel  and  S.  had  dedicated
Isa.  10.  29.  Ramah  is  afraid,  Gibeah  of  S.  is  fled
Actsl.  58.  at  a  young  man’s  feet  whose  name  wasS.

8.  1.  and  S.  was  consenting  unto  his  death
3.  as  for  S.  he  made  havoc  of  the  church

9.  4.  S.  S.  why  persecutest  thou  me  >  22.  7-  1  26.  14

11.  and  inquire  for  one  called  S.  of  1  arsus

17.  brothers,  the  Lord  hath  sent  me,  22.  13.

22.  but  S.  increased  more  in  strength

24.  but  their  laying  wait  was  known  of  S.

26.  when  S.  was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he  assayed

11.  25.  Barnabas  went  to  Tarsus  to  seek  S.

30.  sent  relief  by  the  hands  of  Barnabas  and  S.  >

13.  1.  at  Antioch  prophets  brought  up  with  S.

2.  Holy  Ghost  said,  separate  me  Barnabas  and  S
7.  Sergius  Paulus  called  for  Barnabas  and  S.

9.  S.  set  his  eyes  on  him,  and  said,  O  lull  of  all

21.  God  gave  unto  them  S.  the  son  of  Cis

See  Jonathan.

SC  EVA.

Acts  19.  14.  there  were  seven  sons  of  one  S.  a  Jew
SCYTHIAN.

Col.  3.  11.  where  there  is  neither  barbarian,  S.
SEBA.

Gen.  10.  7.  the  sons  of  Cush,  S.  and  Havilah
PsalJiAO.  the  kings  of  Sheba  and  S.  shall  offer  gifts
Isa.  43.  3.  I  gave  Ethiopia  and  S.  for  thee
SEIR.

Gen.  32.  3.  to  the  land  of  S.  the  country  of  Edom

33. 14.  lead  softly,  till  1  come  to  my  ford  to  S.

36.  20.  these  are  sons  or  S.  21.  1  Chron.  1.  38.

Num.  24.  18.  S.  shall  be  a  possession  for  enemies
Deut.  1.  44.  the  Amorites  destroyed  you  in  S.

33.  2.  the  Lord  came  from  Sinai  and  rose  up  from  S.  |
Judg.  5.  4  lord,  when  thou  wentest  out  of  S.

2  Chron.  20.  23.  made  an  end  of  the  inhabitants  of  S,  I

25.  11.  Amaziah  smote  of  children  of  S.  10,000

14.  he  brought  the  gods  of  the  children  of  S.

Isa.  21. 11.  he  calleth  to  me  out  of  S.  watchman
Ezek.  lb.  8.  because  that  Moab  and  S.  do  say
Mount  SEIR.

Gen.  14.  6.  and  the  Horites  in  their  mount  S.

36.  8.  thus  dwelt  Esau  in  mount  S.  9.

Deut.  2.  1.  we  compassed  mount  S.  many  days

5.  I  have  given  mount  S.  to  Esau,  Josh.  24.  4.

1  Chr.  4.  42.  of  sons  of  Simeon  500  went  to  mount  S.

2  Chr.  20.  10.  mount  S.  whom  wouldst  not  let  invade  I

22.  the  Lord  set  ambushments  against  mount  S.

23.  Ammon  and  Moab  stood  up  against  mount  S.
Ezek.  35.  2.  set  thy  face  against  mount  S.

3.  say  to  it,  behold,  O  mount  S.  I  am  against  thee
7.  thus  will  I  make  mount  S.  most  desolate,  15.

SELEUC1A.

Acts  13. 4.  being  sent  forth,  they  departed  unto  S.
SEMEI.

Luke  3.  26.  Mattathias  which  was  the  son  of  S.
SENNACHERIB.

2  Kings  18. 13.  S.  came  up  against  I  udah,  Isa.  36. 1.  ■

19.  16.  see  and  hear  the  words  of  S.  Isa.  37.  17-

2o.  thou  hast  prayed  to  me  against  S.  Isa.  37.  21.  1
36.  S.  departed  and  dwelt  at  Nineveh,  Isa.  37  .  37,  j
2  Chron.  32.  22.  the  Lord  saved  Hezekiah  from  S.
SEPII ARVAIM.

2  Kings  17. 24.  king  of  Assyria  brought  men  from  S.

18.  34.  where  are  the  gods  of  S.  ?  Isa.  36.  19.

19.  13.  where  is  the  king  of  S.  ;  Isa.  37-  13.

SERA  I  AH.

2  Sam.  8. 17.  Zadok  the  priest,  and  S.  was  the  scribe  I
2  Kings  25.  18.  the  captain  of  the  guard  took  S.  the
chief  priest  and  Zephaniah,  Jer.  52.24.  '

23.  there  came  to  Gedaliah,  S.  Jer.  40.  8.

1  Chron.  4.  14.  S.  begat  Joab  \\  35.  Josibiah  son  of  S.  ’

6.  14.  Azariah  begat  S.  and  S.  begat  Jehozadak
Ezra  7.  1.  Ezra  the  son  of  S.JI  Neh.  10.  2.  S.  sealed
Neh.  11.  11.  S.  was  ruler  of  the  house  of  God

12.  1.  S.  the  priest  went  up  with  Zerubbabel

12.  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  S.  Meraiah

Jer.  36.26.  ihe  king  commanded  S.  to  take  Baruch
51.  59.  the  word  which  Jeremiah  commanded  S.  i
the  son  of  Neriah,  this  S.  was  a  quiet  prince  I
61.  Jeremiah  said  to  S.  when  contest  to  Babylon
SERGIUS  PAULUS.

Acts  13.7.  S.  Paulus  a  prudent  man,  the  deputy
SETH.

Gen.  5.  3.  a  son  after  his  image,  and  called  him  S.  !

6.  S.  begat  Em  s,  1  Chron.  1.1.  L.uke  3.  38.
SHADRACH.  See  Abed-nego.
SHAL1M.

1  Sam.  9.  4.  S.  then  they  passed  thro’  the  land  of  S.
SH  ALISHA.

1  Sam.  o.  4.  he  passed  through  the  land  of  S.

SHALLUM.

2  Kings  15. 10.  S.  son  of  Jabesh  killed  Zachartah

14.  Menahem  slew  S.  son  of  Jabesh  in  Samaria

22. 14.  Uilkiah  the  priest  went  to  Huldah  the  pro¬

phetess,  the  wife  of  S.  2  Chron.  34.  22.

1  Chron.  2.  40.  of  Judah,  S.  11  4.  25.  of  Simeon.  S.


SHE


SHU


SIM  [PROl>ER  Namb>


1  Chr.  6  12.  of  Levi,  S.  ||  7.13.  S.  the  son  of  Naphtali

9.  1?.  S.  a  porter,  19.  II  31.  S.  the  iyorahite

2  Chron.  28.  12.  Jehizkiah  the  son  of  S.  stood  up
Etra  2.  42.  the  children  of  the  porters,  the  children

of  S.  10.  24.  Neh.  7-  45.  Jer.  35.  4.

7.  2.  S.  the  sou  of  Zadok,  the  son  of  Ahitub

10.  42.  S.  and  Amariah  had  taken  strange  wives
Neh.  3.  12.  next  unto  him  repaired  S.  15.

Jer.  22.  ll.thussaith  Lord  touching  S.  sonofjosiah
32.7.  Hanameel  the  son  of  S. thine  uncleshall  come
SI  I A  LM  AN  ESER.

2  Kings  17. 3.  S.  came  up  against  Samaria,  18.  9.
SIIAMGAR.

Judg.  3.  31.  after  him  was  S.  the  son  of  Anath

5.  6.  in  the  days  of  S.  high-ways  were  unoccupied
SHAM  MAIL

Gen.  36.  13.  the  son  of  Reuel,  S.  17-  1  Chr.  1.  37.

1  Sam.  16.  9.  S.  the  son  of  Jesse,  17.  13.  1  Chr.  2. 13.

2  Sam.  23.  1 1.  after  him  was  S.  the  Hararite,  .33.
25.S.  the  Ilarodite  ||  1.  Chr. 7. 37-  son  of  Zophah,  S.

SHAMMUAH.

1  JVMW.13.4.of  Reuben  to  spy  the Hand, S.sonof  Zaccur
2  Sam.  5.  14.  S.  the  son  of  David,  1  Chrun.  14.  4.
Neh.  11.  17.  Abda  son  of  S.  dwelt  at  Jerusalem
SHAPHAN.

2  Kings'll.  3.  king  Josiah  sent  S.  the  scribe  to  re¬
pair  the  house  of  the  Lord,  2  Chrun.  34.  8.

8.  Hilkiah  gave  the  book  to  S.  2  Chron.  31.  15.

12.  the  king  commanded  Ahikam  the  son  of  S.

and  S.  the  scribe  to  inquire  of  the  Lord

25.  22.  Ahikam  the  son  of  S.  Jer.  39.  14.  I  40.  11.
Jer.  26.  24.  the  hand  of  son  of  S.  was  with  Jeremiah
1  29.  3.  the  words  Jeremiah  sent  by  Elasahson  of  S.
36.  10.  read  in  the  chamber  of  Gemariah  son  of  S.
Ezek.  8.  11.  in  the  mi  1st  stood  Jaazaniah  son  of  S.
SHAPHAT.

Nnm.  13. 5.  of  the  tribe,  of  Simeon, S.  to  spy  the  land

1  Kings  19.  16.  anoint  Elisha  son  of  S.  to  be  prophet

2  Kings  6.  31.  if  the  head  of  Elisha  the  son  of  S.

1  Chron.  3.  22.  the  sons  of  Shemaiah,  Neariah,  S.

5.  12.  of  the  Gadites,  S.  in  Bashan  chief
27.29.over  the  herds  in  valleys  was  S.  son  of  Adlai

SIIAREZER.

2  Kings\9.  37.  S.  his  son  smote  him,  Isa.  37.  38.

SHARON.

1  Chron.  5.  16.  they  dweltin  all  the  suburbs  of  S.

27.  29.  over  the  herds  that  fed  in  S.  was  Shitrai
Cant.  2.  1.  I  am  the  rose  of  S.  the  lily  of  the  valleys
Isa.  33. 9. S. is  like  a  wilderness,  Bashan  and  Carmel
35.  2.  the  excellency  of  Carmel  and  S.  given  thee
65.  10.  S.  shall  be  a  fold  of  Hocks  and  val.  of  Achor
SHEALT1EL.  Zeriibbabel.

SHEA  R-J  ASH  UB.

Isa.  7.  3.  go  forth  to  meet  Ahaz,  thou  and  S.
SHEBA,  SHEBAH.

Gen.  10.  7.  son  of  Raamah  S.Jj  28.  S.  son  of  Joktan

25.  3.  Jokshan  begat  S.  and  Dedan,  1  Chr.  1.  32.
26.33.  Isaac  called  the  well  S.  city  Beer-sheba
Josh.  19.  2.  Simeon  had  in  their  inheritance  S.

1  Kings  10.  1.  when  queen  of  S.  heard  of  the  fame
of  Solomon  she  came  to  prove  him,  2  Chron.  9.  1.

1  Chron.  1.  9.  the  son  of  Raamah,  S.  ||  22.  of  Joktan

5.  13.  of  the  children  of  Gad,  S.  and  Jorai
Job  6.  19.  the  companies  of  S.  waited  for  them
Psal.  72.  10.  kings  ofS.  and  Seba  shall  offer  gifts

15.  to  him  shall  be  given  of  gold  of  S.  Isa.  60.  6.
Jer.  6.  20.  to  what  purpose  is  incense  from  S.  ?
Ezek.  27. 22.  the  merchants  of  S.  thy  merchants, 23.

38.  13.  S.  shall  say,  art  thou  come  to  take  a  spoil  ?
See  Bichri.

SHEBNA.

£  Kings  18.  18.  when  had  called  to  the  king  there
came  to  Rab-shakeh  S.  the  scribe,  37.
Isa.  36.  3.

19.  2.  Hezekiah  sent  S.  to  Isaiah,  Isa.  37.  2.

Isa.  22.  15.  go,  get  tnee  to  this  treasurer,  S.

SHECIIEM.

Gen.  .33.  18.  Jacob  came  to  Shalem  a  city  of  S.

19.  he  bought  at  the  hand  of  Hamor  S.  father

34.  2.  S.  layr  with  Dinah  |l  26.  they  slew  S.

35.  4.  Jacob  hid  them  under  an  oak  that  was  by  S.
37.12.  went  to  feed  their  father’s  Hock  in  S.

14.  Joseph  came  from  the  vale  of  Hebron  to  S.
Num.  26.  31.  of  S.  the  family  of  the  Shechemites
Josh.  17.  2.  there  was  a  lot  for  the  children  of  S.

20.  7.  S.  in  mount  Ephraim,  a  city  of  refuge,  and

Hebron  in  Judah,  21.  21.  1  Chron.  6.  67-

24.  1.  Joshua  gathered  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  S.
32.  and  the  bones  of  Joseph  buried  they  in  S.
Judg.  8.  31.  Gideon’s  concubine  in  S.  bare  a  son

9.  1.  Abimelech  the  son  of  Jerubbaal  went  to  S.

7.  Jotham  cried,  hearken  to  me,  ye  men  of  S.

20.  let  fire  come  out  from  the  men  of  S.

28.  who  is  S.  H3l.  Gaaland  brethren  come  to  S.

41.  thrust  out,  that  they  should  not  dwell  in  S.
57.  the  evil  of  the  men  of  S.  did  God  render
1  Kings  12.  1.  Rehoboam  went  to  S.  2  Chron.  10. 1.

25.  Jeroboam  built  S.  in  mount  Ephraim

1  Chron.  7.  19.  the  sons  of  Shemida,  Ahian  and  S.
Psal.  60.  6.  I  will  rejoice,  I  will  divide  S.  108.  7<
Jer.  41.  5.  that  there  came  certain  from  S.

SHELAH.

Gen.  38.5.  Judah’s  son  S.||  11.  till  S.  be  grown

26.  because  that  I  gave  her  not  to  S.  my  son

46  12.  the  sons  of  Judah,  Er,  Onan,  and  S.  Num.

26.  20.  1  Chron.  2.  3.  14.  21.
1  Chron.  1.  18.  Arphaxad  begat  S.  and  S.  Eber,  24.
SH  ELEM1AH.

1  Chron.  26.  14.  the  lot  eastward  fell  to  S.

E,zra  10.  39.  S.  an  I  Nathan  had  taken  strange  wives
Neh.  13. 13.  I  made  S.  the  priest  treasurer
Jer.  36.  14.  S.  son  of  Cushi  ||  26.  S.  sonot  Abdeel
SHELUMIEL.

Num.  1.  6.  the  prince  of  Simeon,  S.  the  son  of
Zurishuddai,  2.  12. 1  7-  36. 1  10.  19.
SHEM.

Gen.  5.  32.  Noah  begat  S.6.  10. 1  10. 1. 1  Chr.  1.  4.

9.  23.  S.  took  a  garment  and  went  backward

26.  Noah  said,  blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  S.

27.  and  he  shall  dwell  in  the  tents  of  S.

10.  21.  the  child' en  of  S.  22. 31.  |  11.10. 1  Chr.  1. 17-
Luke  i.  35.  Arphaxad,  which  was  the  son  of  S.


SHEMAIAH.

1  Kings  12.  22.  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  S.

the  man  of  God,  2  Chron.  11.  2.  I  12.  7-
1  Chron.  4.  37-  of  Simeon,  Shimri  the  son  of  S.

5.  4.  of  Reuben,  S.  the  son  of  Joel

9.  14.  of  the  Levites  S.  16. 1  15.  8,  11. 1  24.  6. 1  26.

4,  6,  7.  2  Chron.  17.  8.  1  29. 14.  |  31. 15.  I  35.  9.
Ezra  8.  16.  I  10.  21,  31.

Ezra  8.  1.3.  S.  the  son  of  Adonikam  went  up
Neh.  3.  29.  S.  keeper  of  the  east  gate,  repaired

6.  10.  I  came  to  the  house  of  S.  son  of  Delaiah

10.  8.  S.  a  priest  sealed  ||  12.  34.  S.  priest,  42.

11.  15.  of  the  Levites,  S.  12.  6,  18,  35,  36.

Jer.  26.  20.  Urijah  the  son  of  S.  who  prophesied

29.  24.  say  to  S.  the  Nehelamite,  31. 32.

36.  12.  and  Delaiah  the  son  of  S.  a  prince
SHEMINITH.

1  Chron.  15.  21.  with  harps  on  the  S.  to  excel

SHEN1R.

Deut.  3.  9.  which  Hermon  the  Amorites  call  S.
Cant.  4.8.  look  from  the  top  of  S.  and  Hermon
SIIEPHATI  AH.

2  Sam.  3.  4.  S.  the  fifth  son  of  David,  1  Chron.  3.  3.

1  Chron.  9.  8.  Meshullamson  of  S.  dwelt  in  Jerus.

12.  5.  S.  the  Haruphite  came  to  David  toZiklag

27.  16.  the  ruler  of  the  Simeonites  was  S.

Ezra  2.  4.  the  children  of  S.  372,  Neh.  7-  9.

Jer.  38.  1.  S.  heard  the  words  of  Jeremiah  to  people
SlIESHACH.

Jer.  25.  26.  the  king  of  S.  shall  drink  after  them
51.  41.  how  is  S.  taken  !  how  is  Babylon  become
SHESHBAZZAR.

Ezra  1.  8.  he  numbered  them  to  S.  prince  of  Judah

11.  all  these  did  S.  bring  up  from  Baby  l.  to  Jerus.

5.  14.  delivered  to  S.  whom  he  had  made  governor

16.  S.  laid  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  God

SHIBBOLETH.

Judg.  12.  6.  say  now  S.  and  he  said  Sibboleth
SH1GIONO  1’H.

Hah.  3.  1.  a  prayer  of  Habakkuk  the  prophet  on  S.
SEI1LOH  for  MESSIAH.  See  Appellatives.
SHILOH.

Josh.  18.  1.  all  Israel  assembled  together  at  S.

8.  that  I  may  here  cast  lots  for  you  in  S.  10.

22.  9.  Reuben  departed  from  Israel  out  of  S.

Judg.  18.  31.  the  time  that  house  of  God  was  in  S.

21.  12.  they  brought  the  young  virgins  to  S.

19-  there  is  a  feast  of  th'e  Lord  in  S.  yearly

21.  if  the  daughters  of  S.  come  out  to  dance
l  Sam.  1.  3.  Elkanah  went  up  to  worship  in  S.

24.  she  brought  Samuel  to  house  of  the  Lord  in  S.

2.  14.  so  did  the  priests  in  S.  to  all  the  Israelites
3.21.  the  Lord  appeared  again  in  S.  Lord  revealed
4.  3.  let  us  fetch  the  ark  of  the  Lord  out  of  S.

12.  a  man  came  to  S.  with  his  clothes  rent

14.  3.  Ahiah  son  of  Ahitub  the  Lord’s  priest  in  S.

1  Kings  2.  27.  the  word  against  the  house  of  Eli  in  S.
14.  2.  get  thee  to  S.  to  Ahijah  the  prophet

4.  Jeroboam’s  wife  arose  and  went  to  S.

Psal.  78.  60.  he  forsook  the  tabernacle  of  S.

Jer.  7.  12.  but  go  ye  to  my  place  which  was  in  S.

14.  I  will  do  to  this  house  as  I  have  done  to  S.

26.  6.  then  will  1  make  this  house  like  S.  9.

41.  5.  there  came  certain  from  S.  and  Samaria
SHILOAH.

Isa.  8.  6.  this  people  refuseth  the  waters  of  S.
SH1LONITE.  See  Ahijah.

SHI  ME  AH.

2  Sam.  13.  3.  Amnon  had  a  friend,  .Tonadab  son  of

S.  David’s  brother,  32.  |  21.  21.  1  Chron.
20.  7-

1  Chron.  3.  5.  S.  was  born  to  David  in  Jerusalem

6.  39.  Asaph  son  of  Berachiah,  the  son  of  S.

SHIM  El.

2  Sam.  16.  5.  S.  son  of  Gera  of  Bahurim,  19.  16.

13.  S.  went  along  on  the  hill’s  side  and  cursed

1  Kings  <2.  8.  thou  hast  with  thee  S.  who  cursed  me

39.  that  two  of  the  servants  of  S.  ran  away
4.  18.  S.  the  son  of  Elah,  officer  in  Benjamin

1  Chr.  3.  19.  S.  son  of  Pedaiah  ||  5.  4.  S.  son  of  Joel
4.  26.  the  sons  of  Mishma,  Hamuel,  Zaccur,  S.

27.  S.  had  sixteen  sons  and  six  daughters
6. 17.  S.sonof  Gershom,  42.  |  23.7.  II  29.  of  Merari

23.  9.  sons  of  S.  10.  ||  25.  17-  the  tenth  lot  to  S.

27  .  27.  over  vine3  ards  was  S.  the  Ramathite

2  Chron.  29.  14.  the  sons  of  Hetnan,  Jehiel  and  S.
31.  12.  over  the  dedic  ated  things  was  S.  13.

Ezra  10.  23.  S.  had  taken  a  strange  wife,  33.  38.
Esth.  2.  5.  Mordecai  son  of  Jair,  the  son  of  S.
Zech.  12.  13.  the  family  of  S.  shall  mourn  apart
SH1MSHAI.

Ezra  4.  8.  S.  the  scribe  wrote  a  letter,  9.

17.  the  king  sent  an  answer  to  S.  the  scribe

SHIN  AR.

Gen.  10.  10.  Ac.cad  and  Calneh  in  the  land  of  S.
11.2.  that  they  found  a  plain  in  the  land  of  S.

14.  1.  in  the  days  of  Amraphel  king  of  S.

Isa.  11.  11.  recover  remnant  from  S.  and  Hamath
Dan.  1.2.  which  he  carried  into  the  land  of  S.

Zech.  5.  11.  to  build  it  an  house  in  the  land  of  S.
SH1SHAK.

1  Kings  14.  25.  in  fifth  yearof  Rehoboam  S.  king  of

Egypt  came  up  against  Jerusalem,  2  Chr.  12.  2.

2  Chr.  12.  5.  to  princes  that  were  gathered  together

because  of  S.  1  left  you  in  the  hand  ot  S.

7.  wrath  shall  not  be  poured  out  on  Jerus.  by  S.

9.  S.  took  away  the  treasures  of  the  house  ot  Lord
SH1TTIM.

Num.  25.1.  Israel  abode  in  S.  peo.  began  to  commit
Josh.  2.  1.  sent  out  of  S.  two  men  to  spy  the  land

3.  1.  they  removed  from  S.  and  came  to  Jordan
Joel  3.  18.  and  shall  water  the  valley  of  S.

Mic.  6.  5.  Balaam  answered  him  from  S.toGilgal
SHUAH.

Gen.  25.  2.  Keturah  bare  Ishbak,  S.  1  Chron.  1. 32.
38.  2.  Judah  married  the  daughter  of  a  Canaanite
named  S.  12.  1  Chron.  2.  3.
SHUAL.

1  Sam.  13.  17.  the  spoilers  turned  to  the  land  of  S.
SIIUHITE.  See  Bildad.
SHULAM1TE.

Cant.  6.  13.  return,  O  S.  what  will  ye  see  in  the  S.  ?


SHUNAMMITE.

1  Kings  1 .3. and  they  found  a  fair  dams.  Abishag  a  S-

2.  17.  that  he  gave  me  Abishag  the  S.  to  wife

22.  why  dost  thou  ask  Abishag  S.for  Adonijah  ?

2  Kings  4.  12.  call  this  S.  36.  ||  25.  yonder  is  that  S.

SHUSHAN.

Neh.  1.  1.  it  came  to  pass  as  I  was  in  S.  the  palace-
Esth.  2.  8.  many  maidens  were  gathered  to  S.

3.  15.  but  the  city  S.  was  perplexed

4.  16.  gather  all  the  Jews  in  S.  and  fast  for  me

8.  15.  the  city  of  S.  rejoiced  and  was  glad

9.  11.  number  slain  in  S.  was  brought  to  the  king

15.  the  Jews  slew  in  S.  three  hundred  men

See  Palace.

SIBMAH.  See  Vine.

STDON,  called  ZIDON,  1  Chron.  1.  13.

Gen.  10.  15.  Canaan  begat  S.  his  first-born
19.  the  border  of  the  Canaanites  was  from  S.
Judg.  18.  28.  because  Laish  was  far  from  S.

Mat.  11.  21 .  if  works  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and  S.

22.  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  S.  Luke  10. 13, 14.

15.  21.  Jesus  departed  into  the  coasts  of  l  yre  and  S.
behold,  a  woman  of  Canaan  came,  Mark  7.  24,

Mark  3.  8.  they  about  Tyre  and  S.  came,  Luke  6. 17-

7.  31.  departing  from  the  coasts  of  Tyre  and  S.
Luke  4.  26.  to  none  sent,  save  to  Sarepta  a  city  of  S.
Acts  12.  20.  Herod  was  displeased  with  them  of  S.
27.  3.  and  the  next  day  we  touched  at  S.

S1IION.

Num.  21. 23.  S.  would  notsuffer  Isr.  to  pass  thro’  his-
border,  but  went  out  against  Israel,  Judg.  11.  20.

27.  let  the  city  of  S.  be  built  and  prepared

28.  a  flame  is  gone  out  from  the  city  of  S.

.34.  do  to  him  as  thou  didst  to  S.  Deut.  3.  2,  6.
Deut.  2.  30.  S.  kingofHeshbon  would  not  let  us  pass

31.  behold,  I  have  begun  to  give  S.  and  his  land

32.  S.  came  out  against  us,  29.  7.  Judg.  11.  20.

31.  4.  the  Lord  shall  do  to  them  as  he  did  to  S.

Josh.  9.  10.  all  that  lie  did  to  S.  king  of  Heshbon
Judg.  11.  21.  God  delivered  S.  into  hand  of  Israel
Neh.  9.  22.  so  they  possessed  the  land  of  S.

Jer.  48.  45.  a  flame  shall  come  from  the  midst  of  S.

SI  HON  king  of  the  Amorites.

Num.  21.  21.  and  Israel  sent  messengers  to  S .king
of  the  Amorites ,  Deut.  2.  26.  Judg.  11.  19.
26.  Heshbon  was  a  city  of  S.  king  of  A.  Josh.  12.  2.

29.  his  daughters  into  captivity  to  S.  king  of  Am.
34.  as  thou  didst  to  S.  king  of  Amorites,  Deut.  3.  2.

Deut.  1.  4.  after  he  had  slain  S.  king  of  Amorites,.

and  king  of  Bashan,  Psal.  135.  11.  |  136.  19.
Josh.  13.  10.  cities  of  S.  king  of  A.  ||  21.  kingd.  of  S.

1  Kings  4. 19.  Gebar  officer  in  country  of  S.  k.  of  A.

SIHOR.

Josh.  13.  3.  from  S.  which  is  before  Egypt  to  Ekroi>
Jer.  2. 18.  in  way  of  Egypt  to  drink  the  waters  of  S.
SILAS.

Acts  15.  22.  sent  S.  chief  among  the  brethren,  27.
34.  it  pleased  S.  to  abide  there  still

40.  Paul  chose  S.  ||  16.  19.  caught  Paul  and  S.

16.  25.  at  midnight  Paul  and  S.  prayed  ami  sang
29.  the  gaoler  fell  down  before  Paul  and  S.

17.  4.  some  of  them  consorted  with  Paul  and  S.

10.  sent  away  S.  by  night  ||  18.  5.  when  S.  was  come-
15.  receiving  a  commandment  to  S.  to  come

S1LOAH,  SI  LOAM.

Neh.  3. 15.  Shallum  repaired  the  wall  of  pool  of  S.
John  9.  7.  Jesus  said,  go  wash  in  the  pool  of  S.  11.
Luke  13.  4.  upon  whom  the  tower  in  S.  fell
SI  I.VAN  1JS.

2  Cor.  1.  19.  was  preached  among  you  by  me  and  S.

1  Thess.  1.1.  Paul,  S.  and  Timotheus  to  the  church

of  Thessalonians,  grace  be  to  you,  2  Thess.  1.  1.

1  Pet.  5.  12.  by  S.  a  faithful  brother  I  have  written

SIMEON.

Gen.  29. 33.  Leah  bare  a  son  and  called  his  name  S.

34.  25.  S.  and  Levi  took  each  man  his  sword

35.  23.  S.  son  of  Leah  ||  Exod.  1.  2.  S.  son  of  Israel

42.  24.  Joseph  took  from  them  S.  ||  36.  S.  is  not

43.  23.  and  he  brought  S.  out  unto  them

46.  10.  the  sons  of  S.  Exod.  6.  15.  Num.  1.  22.  |
26.  12.  1  Chron.  4.  24,  42;  I  12.  25.
48.  5.  as  Reuben  and  S.  they  shall  be  mine
19.  5.  S.  and  Levi,  are  brethren,  they  slew  a  man
Nnm.  1. 6.  prince  of  S.  was  Shelumiel,  2.  12. 1  7.  36.
Deut.  27.  12.  S.  Levi  and  Judah  stand  to  bless
Josh.  19.  1.  the  second  lot  came  forth  to  S.

9.  S.  had  their  inheritance  within  Judah

Judg.  1.  3.  S.  went  with  Judah  ||  17-  Judah  with  S.

2  Chron.  15.  9.  the  strangers  out  of  S.  fell  to  Asa
34.  6.  so  did  Josiah  in  the  cities  of  S.  to  Naphtali
Ezek.  48.  24.  S.  have  a  portion  ||  33.  one  gate  of  S.
Luke  2.  25.  a  man  in  Jerusalem,  whose  name  was  S.

34.  S.  blessed  Joseph  and  Mary,  and  said  to  Mary
3.  30.  Levi,  which  was  the  son  of  S.

Acts  13.  1.  at  Antioch,  S.  that  was  called  Niger
15.  14.  S.  hath  declared  howG.  did  visit  Gentiles
Tribe  of  SIMEON.

Num.  1.  23.  of  the  tribe  of  S.  numbered  59,300
2.  12.  the  tribe  of  S.  shall  pitch  by  Reuben

10.  19.  over  the  host  of  the  tribe  ofS.  Shelumiel

13.  5.  of  the  tribe  of  S.  Shaphat  to  spy  the  land
34.  20.  of  tribe  ofS.  Shemuel  to  divide  the  land

Josh.  19.  1.  second  lot  came  out  for  the  tribe  of  S.

8.  this  is  the  inheritance  of  the  tribe  of  S.

21 . 4.  Levites  had  out  of  tribe  of  S.  9.  1  Chr.  6.  65-
Rev.  7.  7.  of  the  tribe  of  S.  were  sealed  12,000
SIMON.

Mat.  i0.  4.  S.  the  Canaanite,  Mark  3.  18.

13.  55.  his  brethren  James,  Joses,  S.  Mark  6.  3.

16. 17.  Jesus  said,  blessed  art  thou,  S.  Bar-jona
17.25.  what  thinkest  thou,  S.  of  whom  do  kings?

26.  6.  in  the.  house  of  S.  the  leper,  Mark  14.  3.

27.  32.  they  found  a  man  of  Cyrene,  S.  by  name_

to  bear  the  cross.  Mark  15.  21 .  Luke  23.  26-
Mark  1. 29.  they  entered  into  house  of  S.  Luke  4.  38.

14.  37.  S.  sleepest  thou  ?  couldest  not  thou  watch  .
Luke  5.  3.  into  one  of  the  ships,  which  was  S.

4.  he  said  unto  S.  launch  out  into  the  deep
10.  James  and  John  who  were  partners  with  S.

6.  15.  and  S.  called  Zelotes,  Acts  1.  13.

7.  40.  S.  1  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee
22.  31.  S.  S.  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you

6l5


Proper  Names.]  SOL


S  Y  R


TER


Luke  24.  34.  the  T/>rd  is  risen,  and  hath  appea.  to  S.
John  1.  41.  he  first  findeth  his  own  brother  S.

42.  Jesus  said,  thou  art  S.  the  son  of  Jona

6.  71*  Judas  Iscariot  the  son  of  S.  12.  4.  |  13.  2,  26.
21.  15.  S.  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me  ?  16,  ]?•
Arts  8.  9.  a  man,  S.  who  before  time  used  sorcery

13.  then  S.  himself  believed  also,  when  baptized
9. 43.  it  came  to  pass  that  Peter  tarried  many  days
at  Joppa  with  one  8.  a  tanner,  10.  6,  17,  32.
See  Peter.

SIN.

Exod.  16.  1.  they  came  unto  the  wilderness  of  S.
17-1.  Israel  journeyed  from  S.  Num.  33.  12.
Ezek.  30. 15.  and  1  will  pour  my  fury  upon  S.

16.  S.  shall  have  great  pain,  No  shall  be  rent

SINAI.

Devt.  33.  2.  the  Lord  came  from  S.  unto  them
Judg.  5.  5.  the  mountains  melted,  even  that  S.
Psal.  68.  8.  S.  was  moved  at  the  presence  of  God

17.  the  Lord  is  among  them  as  in  S.  in  holy  place

See  Mount.

SIRION.

Deut.  3.  9.  which  ITermon  the  Sidonians  cal}  S.
Psal.  29.  6.  Lebanon  and  S.  like  a  young  unicorn
SISERA.

Judg.  4.1.  the  captain  of  Jabin’s  host  was  S.

17.  S.  fled  away  on  his  feet  ||  22.  S.  lay  dead
5. 20.  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  S.
26.  and  with  the  hammer  she  smote  S.

28.  the  mother  of  8.  looked  out  at  a  window
5  Sam.  12.  9.  he  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  S.

Ezra  2.  53.  the  children  of  S.  Nethinims  went  up
with  Zerubbabel,  Neh.  7.55.
Psal.  83.  9.  do  unto  them,  as  to  S.  as  to  Jabin
SI  VAN.

Esth.  8.  9.  the  third  month,  that  is,  the  month  S.
SMYRNA.

Rev.  1.11.  write  and  send  to  the  church  in  S.

2.  8.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  S.  write
SO.

2  Kings  17-4.  he  sent  messengers  to  S.  king  of  Egypt
SODOM.

Gen.  13. 10.  before  Lord  destroyed  S.  and  Gomorrah

13.  the  men  of  S.  were  wicked  exceedingly

14.  11.  they  took  all  the  goods  of  S.  and  Gomorrah
12.  they  took  Lot  who  dwelt  in  S.  and  his  goods
17.  the  king  of  S.  went  out  to  meet  Abram

18.  20.  Lord  said,  because  the  cry  of  S.  is  great
26.  if  I  find  in  S.  fifty  righteous,  I  will  spare

19.  24.  Lord  rained  upon  8.  tire  out  of  heaven
Deut. 29.2.3.  like  the  overthrow  of  S.  and  Gomorrah,

Isa.  1.3.  19.  Jer.  49-  18.  |  50.40.
.32.  32.  their  vine  is  of  the  vine  of  S.  and  Gomorrah
Isa.  1.  9.  we  should  have  been  as  S.  like  Gomorrah

10.  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  rulers  of  S.

.3.  9.  and  they  shall  declare  their  sin  as  S.

Jer.  23.  14.  they  are  all  of  them  unto  me  as  S.
Lam.  4.  6.  greater  than  the  punishment  of  sin  of  S.
Ezek.  16.  46.  thy  younger  sister  is  S.  48,  49,  55.

5.3.  when  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  S.

Amos  4.  11.  overthrown  you,  as  God  overthrew  S.
Zeph.  2.  9.  as  I  live,  surely  Moab  shall  be  as  S.
Mat.  10.  15.  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land
of  S.  11.  24.  Mark  6.  11.  Luke  10.  12.
Luke  17. 29.  the  same  day  that  Lot  went  out  of  S.
Rom..  9.  29.  had  left  us  a  seed,  we  had  been  as  S.

2  Pet.  2.  6.  turning  cities  of  S.  and  Gom.  into  ashes
Jude  7.  even  as  8.  and  Gom.  and  cities  about  them
Rev.  11.8.  great  city  spiritually  called  S.  and  Egypt

Sodomite.

Deut.  23. 17-  there  shall  be  no  8.  of  the  sons  of  Israel
SODOMITES.

1  Kings  14.24.  there  were  also  S.  in  the  land

15.  12.  Asa  took  away  the  8. 1122.  46.  Jehoshaphaf

2  Kings13.7 .  Joeiah  brake  down  the  housesof  the  S.


SOLOMON.

2  Sam.  5. 14.  there  was  born  to  David  in  Jerusalem,

S.  1  Chron.  .3.  5.  |  14.  4.
12.  24.  he  called  his  name  S.  and  God  loved  him

1  Kings  1. 10.  S.  his  brother  he  called  not,  19,  26.
1.3.  8.  thy  son  shall  reign  after  me,  17,  30.

21.  I,  and  my  son  8.  shall  be  counted  offenders
.34.  God  save  king  S.  39.  ||  43.  hath  made  8.  king
37-  L.  hath  been  with  David  even  so  be  he  with  8.
47.  God  make  the  name  of  S.  better  than  thine
51.  let  S.  swear  to  me  that  he  will  not  slay  me

2. 1.  David  charged  8.  his  son  i|  2.3.  king  8.  sware
46.  the  kingdom  was  established  in  the  hand  of  8.

3. 1.  S.  made  affinity  with  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt
3.  S.  loved  the  Lord  |1  10.  S.  had  asked  this  thing
5.  the  Lord  appeared  to  S.  9. 2. 2  ChronA  .7.  17.12.

4. 22.  S.  provision  for  one  day  was  thirty  measures
29.  God  gave  8.  wisdom  exceeding  much,  5.  12.
34.  came  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  S.  from  all  kings
of  the  earth,  Mat.  12.  42.  Luke  11.  .31.

5. 1.  Hiram  king  of  Tyre  sent  his  servants  to  8.
1.3.  king  S.  raised  a  levy  out  of  all  Israel

6.  14.  so  S.  built  the  house  and  finished  it,  2  Chron.

7.11.  Acts  7.  47.

7.  51.  so  was  ended  all  the  work  that  8.  made

8.  1 . 8.  assembled  the  elders  of  Israel,  2  Chron. 5. 2.

22.  S.  spread  forth  his  hands  to  heaven

54.  when  S.made  an  end  of  praying,  2  Chron.  7 .1.
65.  S.  held  a  feast  |)  9.  26.  8.  made  a  navy  of  ships

10. 1.  when  the  queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  fame
of  S.  she  came  to  prove  him,  2  Chron.  9.  ].

24.  all  the  earth  sought  to  S.  2  Chron.  9.  2.3.

11.  1.  but  king  8.  loved  many  strange  women

2.  S.  clave  to  these  in  love  i|  4.  when  S.  was  old

5.  S.  went  after  Ashtoreth  and  after  Milcom

6.  8.  did  evil  ||  7.  built  for  t'hemosh  and  Molech
9.  the  Lord  was  angry  with  S.  ||  27.  S.  built  Millo
14.  Hadad  the  Edomite,  an  adversary  to  S.

28.  S.  made  Jeroboam  ruler  over  house  of  Joseph

40.  S.  sought  therefore  to  kill  Jeroboam

43.  S.  slept,  with  his  fathers,  and  was  buried

12.  2.  Jeroboam  fled  from  the  presence  of  8,

14.  26.  shields  of  gold  which  S.  made,  2  Chron.  12.9.

2  Kings  21. 7-  of  which  the  Lord  said  to  David  and

to  S  1  will  put  my  name  for  ever,  2  Chr.  .33.  7.
i  Chron.  22.  5.  8.  my  son  is  young  and  tender
9.  for  Ins  name  shall  be  S.  |1  17.  to  help  S.

6  lfi


1  Chum.  28.6.  S.  thy  son,  he  shall  build  my  house

9.  thou  S.  my  son,  know  the  God  of  thy  fathers

11.  David  gave  to  S.  the  pattern  of  the  house

29.  l.  S.  my  son,  whom  God  alone  hath  chosen
19.  ^ive  to  8.  my  son  a  perfect  heart  to  keep

2.3.  8.  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  Lord  as  king

25.  the  Lord  magnified  S.  exceedingly  before  Tsr.

2  C hr.  2.  17.  8.  numbered  all  the  strangers  in  Israel

3.  3.  are  the  things  wherein  8.  was  instructed

30.  26.  since  time  of  8.  not  such  joy  in  Jerusalem

Ezra  2.  55.  the  children  of  S.  servants,  58.  Kelt.  ~.
,T  ,  .  57  ,  60.111.3.

Ken.  12.  45.  according  to  the  commandment  of  S.

13.  26.  did  not  king  8.  sin  by  these  things  ?

Prov.  1.  1.  the  proverbs  of  8.  10.  1.  I  25.  1.

Cant.  1. 1.  the  song  of  songs  which  is  8.

5. 1  am  black,  but  comely ,  as  the  curtains  of  S.

3.  7.  behold,  his  bed  which  is  8.  sixty  men  about  it
11.  behold  king  8.  H  8. 12.  8.  must  have  a  thousand

8. 11.  8.  had  a  vineyard  at  Baal-hamon

Jer.  52.  20.  the  sea  8.  made  was  carried  away
Mat.  1.  6.  David  begat  8.  ||  7.  8.  begat  Roboam

6.  29.  S.  in  all  his  glory,  not  arrayed,  Luke  12.27.

12.  42.  a  greater  than  8.  is  here,  Luke  11.  31.

John  10.  23.  and  Jesus  walked  in  8.  porch
Acts  .3.  11.  the  people  ran  to  them  to  8.  porch

5. 12.  they  were  ail  with  one  accord  in  8.  porch

SOREK.

Jutg.  16.  4.  Samson  loved  a  woman  in  valley  of  S.
SO8I  PATER.

Rom.  16.  21.  Jason  and  8.  my  kinsmen  salute  you
SO8THENES.

Acts  18.  17.  the  Greeks  took  S.  and  l>eat  him
1  Cor.  1.1.  Paul  and  8.  to  the  church  at  Corinth
SPAIN.

Rom.  15.  24.  w’hensoever  1  take  my  journey  into  S.
28.  I  will  come  by  you  intoS.

MACllYS.

Rom.  16.  9.  salute  Urbane,  and  S.  my  beloved
8  1  EPI1 A  NAS.

1  Cor.  1.  16.  I  baptized  also  the  household  of  S.

16.  15.  the  house  of  S.  the  first-fruits  of  Achaia

17.  I  am  glad  of  the  cmningof  S.  and  Fortunatus
„  STEPHEN.

Acts  6.  5.  they  chose  S.  a  man  full  of  faith,  8.

7.  59.  they  stoned  8.  calling  on  God,  and  saying

8.  2.  devout  men  carried  S.  to  his  burial

11. 19.  scattered  abroad  on  the  persecution  about  S.
22.  20.  when  the  blood  of  thy  martyr  S.  was  shed
SUCCOIH.

Gen.  .33. 17.  Jacob  journeyed  to  S.  and  made  booths
for  his  cattle,  therefore  it.  is  called  S.
Exod.  12.  37.  Israel  journeyed  from  Rameses  to  8.

13.  20. they  took  their  journey  from  8.  Num.  .3.3.5,  6.
Josh.  1.3.  27-  Gad  had  in  the  valley,  S.  and  Zaphon
Judg .  8.  5.  Gideon  said  to  the  men  of  8.  give  bread

8.  the  men  of  Penuel  answered  as  the  men  of  8.

16.  with  them  he  taught  the  men  of  8.

1  Kings  7.  46.  the  king  cast  them  in  the  clav-ground

between  8.  and  Zarthan,  2  Chron.  4.  17.
Psal.  60.  6.  I  will  mete  out  the  valley  of  8. 108.  7.
SUCCOTH-BEN  O  I'H.

2  Kings  17.  30.  men  of  Bab v Ion  made  S.  their  god

SUSANN  A.

Luke  8.  .3.  Joanna  and  S.  ministered  to  Christ

SYRIA.

Judg.  10.  6.  Israel  served  the  gods  of  S.  and  Zidon
2  Sam.  8.  6.  David  put  garrisons  in  S.  1  Chr.  18.6.
15.  8.  vowed  a  vow  while  I  abode  at  Geshur  in  8.

1  Kings  10.  29.  for  the  kings  of  S.  did  they  bring
11.25.  Rezon  abhorred  Israel  and  reigned  over  S.
19.  15.  anoint  Hazael  to  be  king  of  8.  2  Kings  1.3.  .3.
22. 1 .  continued  without  war  between  8.  and  Israel

2  Kings 5.  1.  by  N  aaman  deliverance  given  to  8.

6.  23.  the  bands  of  S.  came  no  more  into  the  land

7.  5.  behold,  there  was  no  man  in  the  camp  of  S.

8.  13.  Ld.  shewed  me  that  thou  shalt  be  king  of  S.

1.3.  7.  for  the  king  of  S.  had  destroyed  them

17.  he  said,  the  arrow  of  deliverance  from  S.

19.  but  now  thou  shalt  smiteS.  but  thrice

16.6.  Rezin  king  of  8.  recovered  Elath  to  S.

2  Chron.  18.  10.  with  these  thou  shalt  push  S.

24.  23.  the  host  of  S.  came  up  against  Joash

28.  23.  because  the  gods  of  kings  of  8.  help  them
Isa.  7-  ‘l-  saying,  S.  is  confederate  with  Ephraim

8.  for  head  of  8.  is  Damascus,  and  Rezin  of  Dam.
Ezek.  16.  57.  reproach  of  the  daughters  of  S.

27.  16.  8.  was  thy  merchant  for  thy  wares
II OS.  12.  12.  Jacob  Hed  into  the  country  of  S.

Amos  1.  5.  the  people  of  8.  shall  go  into  captivity
Mat.  4.  24.  his  fame  went  throughout  all  8.

Lukel.  2.  when  Cyrenius  was  governor  of  S.

Acts  15.  23.  send  greeting  to  the  nrethren  in  S.

41.  he  went  through  S.  and  Cilicia  confirming

18.  18.  sailed  thence  into  S.  21.3.  Gal.  1.21.

See  King.

SYRIAC.

Dan.  2.  4.  the  Chaldeans  spake  to  the  king  in  S.
SYRIAN.

Gen.  25.  20.  Rebekah  daughter  of  Bethuel  the  S.

Laban  the  8.  28.  5.  1  31. 20,  24.
Dent.  26.  5.  a  S.  ready  to  perish  was  my  father
2  Kings 5.  20.  my  master  spared  Naaman  this  S
18.  26.  speak  in  the  8.  language,  Isa.  .36.  11.

Ezra  4.  7-  the  writing  of  the  letter  was  written  in
the  S.  tongue,  and  interpreted  in  theS.  tongue
Luke  4.  27-  none  cleansed,  saving  Naaman  the  S.
SYRIANS.

2  Sam.  8.  5.  when  the  S.  of  Damascus  came  to  suc¬
cour  lladadezer,  David  slew  of  S.  22,000  men
6.  theS.  became  David’s  servants,  1  Chr.  18.  5,  6.

1.3.  when  he  returned  from  smiting  of  theS.

10.  6.  the  Ammonites  sent  and  hired  the  S.

11.  if  the  8.  be  too  strong  for  me,  1  Chr.  19-  12.

19-  so  the  S.  feared  to  help  the  children  of  Am¬
mon  any  more,  1  Chron.  19.  19.

1  Kings  20.  20.  theS.  tied  and  Israel  pursued  them
27.  Israel  like  little  flocks,  but  8.  filled  country

29.  Israel  slew  of  the  8.  100,000  in  one  day

22.  11. Lord  saith,  with  these  shalt  thou  push  the  S.

2  Kings  5.  2.  the  S.  had  taken  a  rnaid  captive
6.  9.  beware,  for  thither  the  S.  are  come  down


2  Kings  7.  4.  come,  let  us  fall  unto  host  of  the  S.
6.  Lord  made  the  host  of  the  S.  to  hear  a  noise
10.  we  came  to  camp  of  the  S.  no  man  was  there
8.  28.  8.  wounded  Joram,  29.  I  9. 15.  2  Chr.  22. 5.

13.  5.  Israel  went  out  from  under  the  hand  of  S.
17.  for  thou  shalt  smite  the  8.  in  Aphek

16.  6.  the  8.  came  to  Elath  and  dwelt  there
Isa.  9.  12.  the  S.  before,  and  the  Philistines  behind
Jer.  .35.  1 1.  to  Jerusalem  for  fear  of  the  army  of  S.
Amos  9.7.  have  not  I  brought  the  8.  from  Kir?
8YROPIIEN  ICIAN.

Mark  7.  26.  the  woman  was  a  Greek,  a  S.  by  nation

T.

TABEAL.

Isa.  7.  6.  a  king  in  midst  of  it,  even  the  son  of  T.
TABERAII.

Num.  11.3.  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  T.
Deut.  9.  22.  at  T.  he  provoked  the  Iz>rd  to  wrath
TABITIIA.

Acts  9.  36.  was  at  Joppa  a  disciple  named  T,

40.  Peter  turning  to  the  body,  said,  T.  arise
TABOR.

Judg.  4.  6.  Lord  said,  go  and  draw  toward  mount  T.

12.  shewed  that  Barak  was  gone  up  to  mount  T.
8.  18.  what  men  were  they  whom  ye  slew  at  T.  ?

1  Sam.  10.  3.  thou  shalt  come  to  the  plain  of  T.
Ps.  89- 12.  T.  and  Hermon  shall  rejoice  in  thy  name
Jer.  46.  18.  surely,  asT.  is  among  the  mountains
Hos.  5. 1.  because  ye  have  been  anetspread  uponT.

TADMOR.

2  Chron.  8.4.  Solomon  built  T.  in  the  wilderness

I  AIIAPANES,  or  TEH  A  PIIN  EHES.

Jer.  2. 16.  the  children  of  T.  have  broken  the  crown
43.  7.  came  to  Egypt,  thus  came  they  even  to  T.
46.  14.  publish  in  Nioph  and  T. say, 3tand  fast
Ezek.  .30.  18.  at  T.  also  the  day  shall  be  darkened
TAHPEN  ES.

1  Kings  11.  19.  gave  him  the  sister  of  T.  the  queen

1  A  LITHA-CUM  1 .

Mark  5.  41.  he  said  unto  her,  T.  damsel,  arise

LAMAR.  [wasT.

Gen.  : 38.6.  Judah  took  a  wife  for  Er,  whose  name

24.  svas  told  Judah,  T.  hath  played  the  harlot
Ruth  4.  12.  thy  house  like  house  of  Pharez,  whom

T.  bare  to  Judah,  1  Chron.  2.  4.  Mat.  1.  .3.

2  Sam.  1.3. 1.  Absalom  had  a  fair  sister,  named  T.
2.  Amnon  fell  sick  for  T.  ||  22.  he  forced  T.  .32.

14.  27.  Absalom  a  daughter,  whose  name  was  T.
Ezek.  47.  19.  south  side  southward  from  T.

T^MMUZ.

Ezek.  8. 14.  there  sat  women  weeping  for  T.
TARSHISH.

Gen.  10.  4.  thesonsof  Javan,  Elishah,  T,  1  Chr.  1.7.

1  Kings  10.  22.  for  the  king  had  at  sea  a  navy  of  T.

with  a  navy  of  Hiram,  2  Chron.  9.  21.

2  Chron.  20.  .36.  joined  to  make  ships  to  go  to  T.
.37-  the  ships  were  broken  and  not  able  to  go  to  T.

Ps.  48.  7-  thou  breakest  ships  of  T.  with  eas-Swind
72. 10.  the  kings  of  T.  shall  bring  presents
Isa.  2. 16.  the  day  of  the  I,ord  on  all  the  ships  of  T.

2.3.  1.  howl,  ye  ships  of  T.  it  is  laid  waste,  14.

6.  passover  to  T.  howl,  ye  inhabitants  of  the  isle
10.  pass  through  thy  land,  O  daughter  of  T.

60.  9.  the  ships  of  T.  shall  wait  forme
66.  19.  I  will  send  those  that  escape  to  T.

Jer.  10.9.  silv.  spread  into  plates  is  brought  from  T.
Ezek.  27-  12.  T.  was  thy  merchant,  with  iron

25.  the  ships  of  T.  did  sing  of  thee  in  thy  market
.38.  1.3.  the  merchants  of  T.  shall  say  to  thee

Jonah  1.  .3.  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  unto  T.

4.  2.  therefore  1  fled  before  unto  T.  for  I  knew

TARSUS."

Acts  9.  11.  inquire  for  one  Saul  of  T.  he  prayeth
.30.  the  brethren  sent  him  forth  to  T.

1 1.  25.  Barnabas  departed  to  T.  to  seek  Saul
21.  39.  1  am  a  man  who  am  a  Jew  of  T.  22.  3.
TARTAR.

2  Kings  17.  31.  the  Avites  made  T.  their  god
TEB  E  I  II.

Esth.  2. 16.  in  the  tenth  month,  which  is  T.

TEK  EL.

Dan.  5. 25.  was  written,  Mene,  Mene,  T.  Upharsin
27.  T.  thou  art  weighed  in  the  balances
TEKOAH,  or  TEKOA.

2  Sam.  14.  2.  Joab  sent  to  T.  to  fetch  a  wise  woman
4.  when  the  woman  of  T.  spake  to  the  king,  9.

1  Chron.  2.  24.  Abiah  bare  Asher  the  father  of  T.
4.  5.  Asher  the  father  of  T.  had  two  wives

2  Chron.  11.  6.  Rehoboam  built  Etam  and  T.

20.  20.  army  went  into  the  wilderness  of  1’.

Jer.  6.  1.  O  Benjamin,  blow  the  trumpet  in  T.
Amos  1.  1.  Amos,  who  was  among  herdmen  of  T.
TEMA.

Gen.  25. 15.  sons  of  Tshmael,  Hadar,  T.  1  Chr.  1.  .30.
Job  6.  19.  the  troops  of  T.  looked  for  them
Isa.  21.  14.  the  inhabitants  of  T.  brought  wafer
Jer.  25.  23.  I  made  Dedan  and  T.  to  drink  the  cup
LEMAN.

Gen.  .36.  II.  the  sons  of  Eliphaz  were  T.  Omar

15.  duke  T.  duke  Kenaz,42.  I  Chron.  1.  53.

Jer.  49.7.  is  wisdom  no  more  in  T.  ?  counsel  perish.

20.  that  the  Lord  hath  purposed  against  T.

Ezek.  25.  1.3.  I  will  make  it  desolate  from  T.

Amos  1. 12.  but  1  will  send  a  fire  upon  T.

Obad.  9.  thy  mighty  men  OT.  shall  be  dismayed
Hab.  .3.  3.  Clod  came  from  T.  Holy  One  from  Paran
LEMAN  LEE.  .See  Eliphaz.

TER  AH.

Gen.  1 1 . 24.  Nahor  begat  T.  1  Chron.  1.  26.

26.  T.  begat  Abram,  27-  Josh.  24.  2.  [forth

31.  T.  took  Abram  his  son,  and  Lot,  and  went

TERAPHIM.

Judg.  17- 5.  the  man  Micah  made  anephod  and  T.
18.  14.  in  these  houses  is  T.  ||  20.  took  the  T.

Hos.  3.  4.  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  T.
TERTIUS.

Rom.  16.  22.  I  T.  who  wrote  this  epistle,  salute  you
TERLULLUS.

Acts  24.  1.  with  a  certain  orator  nameo  T


T  Y  R


ZAC


Z  E  L  [Prop£K  Names


Acts  24.  2.  T.  began  to  accuse  Pau.,  saying
TETRARCH.  See  Herod.

I'll  EBEZ.

Judg.  9.  50.  then  went  Abimelech  to  T.  and  took  T.
2  Sam.  11.  21.  stnote  Abimelech  that  he  died  in  T.
THEOPHILUS.

Luke  1.  3.  to  write  to  thee,  most  excellent  T.

Acts  1.  1.  the  former  treatise  have  1  made,  O  T.
TH  ESS  A  LON  ICA.

Acts  17.  1.  atT.  was  a  synagogue  of  the  .lews

11.  these  were  more  noble  than  those  of  T.

27.  2.  one  Aristarchus  of  T.  being  with  us
Phil.  4.  16.  even  in  T.  ye  sent  once  and  again
2  Tim.  4.  10.  for  Demas  is  departed  unto  T.
THEUDAS.

Acts  5.  36.  before  these  days  rose  up  T.  boasting
THOMAS.

Mat.  10.  3.  T.and  Matthew  the  publican,  apostles,
Mark  3.  18.  Luke  6.  15.  Acts  1 .  13.
John  11.  16.  T.  said,  let  us  go  and  die  with  him
20.  24.  '1'.  was  not  with  them  when  .lesus  came

26.  T.  was  with  them  ||  21.2.  Simon  Peter  and  T.

27.  hesaithto  T.  reach  hither  thy  finger

TI1UMM1M.  See  Appellatives.

THY  All  R  A.

Acts  16.  14.  Lydia,  of  city  of  T.  worshipped  God
f  Rev.l.ll.  send  it  to  T.  ||  2. 24.  to  you  and  forest  in  T.

2.  18.  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  T.  write
TIBERIAS.

John  6. 1.  sea  of  Galilee,  which  is  the  sea  of  T.

23.  howbeit  there  came  other  boats  from  T.
TIBNI.

1  Kings  16.  21.  half  of  the  people  followed  T.

22.  Omri  prevailed  against  those  that  followed  T.

T1GLA  TH-P1 LESER.

2  Kings  15.  29.  T.  came  and  took  Ijon  and  Kedesh
16. 7.  Ahaz  sent  messengeis  to  f.  king  of  Assyria

1  Chron.  5.  6.  T.  carried  away  Beerah  captive
26.  God  of  Israel  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  T.

2  Chron.  28.  20.  T.  came  and  distressed  Ahaz

T1MN  ATH.

Gen.  38.  12.  Judah  went  to  his  shearers  in  T.

Judg.  14. 1.  Samson  went  down  to  T.  saw  a  woman
TIMO  I  11EUS.

Acts  16.  1.  a  certain  disciple  there  named  T.

Rom.  16.  21.  T.  my  workfellow  saluteth  you
1  Cor.  16. 10.  if  T.  come  ||  2  Cor.  1.1.  T.  our  brother
!  2  Cor.  1.  19.  who  was  preached  even  by  me  and  T.
Phil.  2.  19.  1  trust  in  the  Lord  to  send  T.  to  you
1  These.  3. 2.  we  sent  T.  to  establish  and  comfort  you
1  Tim.  1.  2.  to  T.  my  own  son,  18.  2  Tim.  1.  2.
Heb.  13. 23.  our  brother  1'.  is  set  at  liberty
Ti  RSHATHA.

Ezra  2.  63.  T.said,  they  should  not  eat,  Neh.  1. 65.
Neh.  7.  70.  the  T.  gave  gold  to  the  treasure

10.  1.  those  that  sealed  were  Nehemiah  the  T.
TIRZAH.

■  Num.  26.  33.  Hoglah,  Milcah,  and  T.  daughters  of
Zelophehad,  27.  1.  I  36.  11.  Josh.  17.  3.
Josh.  12.  24.  Joshua  smote  the  king  of  T,

1  Kings  14.  17.  Jeroboam’s  wife  came  to  T.

15.  21.  Baasha  dwelt  and  reigned  in  T.  33.

16.  8.  Elah  reigned  in  T.  ||  15.  Zimri  reigned  inT.

17.  Omri  besieged  T.  ||  23.  Omri  reigned  in  T.

2  Kings  15. 16.  Menahem  smote  coasts  from  T.
Cant.  6.  4.  thou  art  beautiful,  O  my  love,  as  T.

TISHBIi'E.  See  Elijah.

TITUS.

2  Cor.  2.  13.  I  had  no  rest,  because  I  found  not  T.

7.  6.  God  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  T.

13.  yea  the  more  joyed  we  for  joy  of  T.

14.  even  so  our  boasting  which  I  made  before  T.

8.  6.  wedesiredT.H  Gal.  2.  1.  1  took  T.  with  me
16.  the  same  earnest  care  into  the  heart  of  T.

23.  whether  any  inquire  of  T.  he  is  my  partner

12.  18.  1  desired  T.  did  T.  make  a  gain  of  you  ?
ial.  2.  3.  nor  was  T.  compelled  to  be  circumcised

Tim.  4.  10.  T.  is  departed  to  Dalmatia
TOBIAH.

lira  2.  60.  children  of  T.  not  shew  father’s  house
Neh.  2. 10.  Sanballat  and  T.  heard,  19. 1  4.7- 1  6.  1.

5.  12.  T.  had  hired  him  |1 14.  my  God,  think  of  T.
19.  and  T.  sent  letters  to  put  me  in  fear

13.  4.  Eliashib  the  priest  was  allied  to  T.

8.  1  cast  forth  all  tlie  household-stuff  of  T.

TOGAHMAH.

Gen.  10.  3.  sons  of  Gomer,  Kiphath,  T.  1  Chr.  1.6.
Ezek.  27.  14.  they  of  the  house  of  T.  traded
TOLA.

Gen.  46. 13.  T.  the  son  of  Issachar,  1  Chron.  J.  1.
Judg.  10.  1.  T.  son  of  Puah  arose  to  defend  Israel
TOPIIEi'.  See  Appellatives.

TROAS.

Acts  16.  8.  passing  by  Mysia  they  came  to  T.

11.  loosing  from  T.  ||  20.  5.  tarried  for  us  at  T.

2  Cor.  2.  12.  when  1  came  to  T.  to  preach  Christ
2  Tim.  4.  13.  the  cloak  I  left  at  T.  bring  with  thee
TRYPHEN  A,  TRYPHOSA,  Rom.  16.  12.
TUBAL.

I  Gen.  10. 2.  sons  of  Japheth,  Javan, T.  1  Chron.  1.  5.

Jsa.  66.  19.  I  will  send  those  that  escape  to  T.

!  Ezek.  27.  13.  Javan,  T.  they  were  thy  merchants

32.  26.  there  is  Meshech,  T.  and  her  multitude
38.  2.  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  T.3. 1  39.  1.
TY CHIC  US.

Acts  20.  4.  T.  of  Asia  accompanied  Paul
!  Eph.  6.  21.  T.  shall  make  known  to  you  all  things
!  Col.  4.  7.  all  my  state  shall  T.  declare  unto  you
2  Tim.  4.  12.  and  T.  have  I  sent  to  Ephesus
Tit.  3. 12.  when  1  shall  send  T.  unto  thee
TYRANNUS.

Acts  19.  9.  disputing  in  the  school  of  one  T.
TYRE.

Josh.  19.  29.  coast  turneth  to  the  strong  city  T.

2  Sam.  24.  7.  they  came  to  the  strong  hold  of  T.

1  Kings  7. 13.  Solomon  fetched  Hiram  out  of  T.

14.  his  father  was  a  man  of  T.  2  Chron.  2.  14.

9.  12.  Hiram  came  out  from  T.  to  see  the  cities
Ezra  3.  7.  they  gave  meat  and  drink  to  them  of  T.
Neh.  13.  16.  there  dwelt  men  of  T.  also  therein
Psal.  45.  12.  the  daughter  of  T.  shall  be  there

83  7.  Philistines,  with  the  inhabitants  of  T.


Pi.  87-  4.  Philistia  and  T.  ||  Isa.  23. 1.  burden  of  T.
Isa.  23.  5.  they  shall  be  pained  at  the  report  of  T.
8.  who  hath  taken  this  counsel  against  1'.  t

15.  T.  shall  be  forgotten  ||  17.  Lord  will  visit!'.
Joel  3.  4.  yea,  what  have  ye  to  do  with  me,  O  T.  ?
Mat.  11. 21 .  works  had  been  done  in  T.  Luke  10.  1.3.
Acts  12.  20.  Herod  was  displeased  with  them  of  T.

See  King,  Si  don.

TYRUS.

Jer.  25.  22.  I  made  all  the  kings  of  T.  to  drink
27.  3.  send  the  ypkes  to  the  kings  of  T.  and  Zidon
47.4.  to  cut  oft  from  T.  and  Zidon  every  helper
Ezek.  26.  2.  because  T.  said  against  Jerusalem,  aha

3.  behold,  1  am  against  thee,  O  T.

27.  2.  son  of  man,  take  up  a  lamentation  for  T.

32.  what  city  like  T.  like  the  destroyed  in  the  sea  ?

28.  2.  son  of  man,  say  to  the  prince  of  T.

12.  take  up  a  lamentation  on  the  king  of  T.

29.  18.  to  serve  a  great  service  against  T.

Hos.  9.  13.  Ephraim,  as  1  saw  T.  is  planted
Amos  1.  9.  for  three  transgressions  of  T.  and  four

10.  I  will  send  a  tire  on  the  wall  of  T.

Zech.  9.  2.  T.  and  Zidon,  though  it  be  very  wise

3.  T.  build  herself  a  strong  hold,  heaped  up  silver

U.

UCAL.

Prov.  30.  1.  the  man  spoke  to  thiel  and  U.
UPHARS1N.

Dan.  5. 25.  was  written,  Mene,  Mene,  Tekel,  U.
UPHAZ.

Jer.  10.  9.  and  gold  is  brought  from  U.

Dan.  10.  5.  his  loins  were  girded  with  gold  of  U.
UR.

Gen.  11.  28.  Ilaran  died  before  his  father  in  U.

15.  7.  brought  thee  out  of  U.  of  Chaldees,  Neh.  9.7.
1  Chr.  11.  35.  Eliphal  the  son  of  U.  a  mighty  man

URL

Exod.  31.  2.  J  called  Bezaleel  the  son  of  U.  35.  30.

1  38.  22.  1  Chron.  2.  20.  2  Chron.  1 .  5.

1  Kings  A.  19.  Geber  the  son  of  U.  was  in  Gilead
Ezra  10.  24.  Shallum,  J  elem,  and  U.  porters

URIAH,  called  URJJAH,  Neh.  3.  21.  i  8.  4.

2  Sam.  11.  3.  is  not  this  Bath-sheba  the  wife  of  U.?

6.  send  me  U.  I|  14.  sent  it  by  U.  ||  21.  U.  is  dead

12.  9-  thou  hast  killed  U.the  Hittite  with  sword
23.  39.  U.  one  of  Dav  id’s  worthies,  1  Chr.  11.  41.

1  Kings  15.  5.  save  only  in  the  matter  of  U.
Ezrati.  33.  vessels  weighed  by  Meremoth  son  of  U.
Neh.  3.  4.  next  repaired  Meremoth  the  son  of  U.
Isa.  H.  2. 1  took  faithful  witnesses,  U.  the  priest
Mat.  1.  6.  David  begat  Solomon  of  the  wife  of  U.

L'RIJ  AH.

2  Kings  16.  10.  Ahaz  sent  U.  the  fashion  of  the  altar

16.  thus  did  U.  as  king  Ahaz  commanded

Jer.  26.  20.  U.  prophesied  |1  21.  U.  tied  into  Egypt
UR1M.  See  Apellatives.

UZ.

Gen.  10.23.  the  children  of  Aram  ;  U.  IIul,  Gether
36.  28.  children  of  Dishan  ;  U.  Aran,  1  C hr.  1 . 42.

1  Chr.  t.  17.  the  sons  of  Shem  ;  Lud,  Aram,  and  U.
Job  1.  1.  there  was  a  man  in  land  of  U.  named  Job
Jer.  25.  20.  1  made  the  king  of  U.  to  drink  the  cup
Lam.  4.  21.  rejoice,  O  daughter  of  Edom,  in  U.

UZZA,  UZZAI1.

2  Sam.  6.  3.  U.  and  Ahiodrave  the  cart,  1  Chr.  13.7.
6.  U.  put  forth  his  hand  to  the  ark,  1  Chr.  13.  9.
8.  because,  the  Lord  had  made  a  breach  upon  U.

2  Kings  21.  18.  Manasseh  buried  in  garden  of  U.
26.  Amon  j|  1  C hr.  6. 29-  sons  of  Merari,  Mahli,  U.

1  Chron.  ii.  7.  he  removed  them,  and  begat  U.

Ezra  2.  49.  the  children  of  U.  Neh.  7-51.

UZZ1A11,  called  AZARJAll,  OZIAS.

2  Kings  15. 13.  Shallum  to  reign  in  39th  year  of  U.

34.  Jotham  did  as  his  father  U.  had  done

1  Chron.  6.  24.  a  son  of  Kohath,  U.  and  Shaul
11.44.  U.  the  Ashterathite,  a  valiant  man
27.  25.  over  the  storehouses  was  the  son  of  U.

2  Chron.  26.  1.  all  the  people  made  U.  king

8.  the  Ammonites  gave  gifts  to  U.  and  his  name

18.  it  pertaineth  not  to  thee,  U.  to  bum  incense
21'.  U.  the  king  was  a  leper  to  the  day  of  his  death

Ezra  10.21.  U.  son  of  Hanm  had  taken  strange  wife
Neh.  11.  4.  at  Jerusalem  dwelt  Athaiah  son  of  U.
Isa.  1.  1.  saw  in  days  of  U.  Ilos.  1.  1.  Amos  1.  1.

6. 1.  in  the  year  king  U.  died,  1  saw  the  Lord
Zech.  14. 5.  before  the  earthquake  in  the  days  of  U.
il  [at .  1 . 8.  J oram  begat  Uzias  ||  9.  Uz.  begat  J  oatham
UZZ1EL.

Exod.  6.  18.  the  sons  of  Kohath,  Amram,  Izhar,  U.

Num.  3.  19.  1  Chron.  6.  2,  18.  |  23.  12.
22.  the  sons  of  U.  Lev.  10.  4.  Num.  3.  30.  1  Chr.

15.  10.  |  23.  20.  I  24.  24.

1  Chron.  4.  42.  of  Simeon  had  U.  for  their  captain

7.  7.  U.  son  of  Bela  ||  25.  4.  LT.  the  son  of  lleman

2  Chron.  29.  14.  sons  of  Jeduthun  ;  Shemaiah,  U,
Neh.  3.  8.  U.  of  the  goldsmiths  repaired  next

Y.

VASHTI.

Esth.  1.  9.  V.  the  queen  made  a  feast  for  women
12.  queen  V.  refused  to  come  at  king’s  command

19.  that  V.  come  no  more  before  king  Ahasuerus
2. 17-  the  king  made  Esther  queen  instead  of  V.

Z.

ZACCHEUS.

Luke  19.  5.  Z.  make  haste  and  come  down
ZACI1 A  KIA1I,  ZECH  A  RI AII.

2  Kings  14.  29.  Z.  son  of  Jeroboam  reigned,  15.  8,11.
18.  2.  Abi  the  daughter  of  Z.  2  Chron.  29.  1.

1  Chron.  5.  7.  chief  of  the  Reubenites,  Jeiel,  Z.

9.  21.  Z.  of  Levites,  porter,  15.  18,  20,  24.  1  26.  2.
37-Geder,  Ahio,  Z.  and  Miekloth

16.  5.  next  to  Asaph,  Z.  ||  24.  25.  of  Isshiah,  Z.

26. 11.  Z.  the  fourth  son  of  Hosah


1  Chron.  26.  14.  Z.  son  of  Shelemiah,  wise  counsel!
27.  21.  ruler  in  Gilead  was  Iddo  the  son  of  Z.

2  Chron.  17.  7-  Jehoshaphat  sent  to  Z.  to  teach

20.  14.  on  Jahaziel  son  of  Z.  came  the  Spirit

21.  2.  Jehiel  and  Z.  the  sons  of  Jehoshapha-t

24.  20.  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Z.

26.  5.  Uzziah  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Z.

29.  13.  of  the  sons  of  Asaph,  Z.  sanctified  himself

34.  12.  Z.  of  the  Kohathites  was  overseer

35.  8.  Hilkiah,  Z.  rulers  of  the  house  of  God
Ezra  5.  1.  Z.  the  son  of  Iddo  prophesied  to  the

Jews  in  Judah,  6.  14.  Neh.  12.  16.

8.  3.  of  the  sons  of  Pharosh,  Z.  Ij  11.  of  Bebai,  Z.

10.  26.  Elam,  Z.  ||  Neh.  11.  4.  Z.  son  of  Amariah
Neh.  8.  4.  and  on  Ezra’s  left  hand  stood  Z.

11.5.  Z.  the  son  of  Shiloni  II  12.  Z.  son  of  Pashur
12.  35.  Z.  son  of  Jonathan  ||  41.  Z.  with  trumpets
Isa.  8.  2.  Z.  the  son  of  Jeberechiah  and  Uriah  priest
Zech.  1.  1.  Z.  the  son  of  Barachiah,  the  son  of  Iddo
the  prophet,  7.  1.  Mat.  23.  .35.  Luke  11.  51.
Luke  1.  5.  Z.  a  priest  of  the  course  of  Abia

13.  fear  not,  Z.  |l  59.  and  they  called  him  Z.
ZADOK.

2  Sam.  8.  17-  Z.  and  Abimelech  were  the  priests
15.  29.  Z.  and  Abiathar  carried  the  ark  of  Cod

35.  hast  thou  not  with  thee  Z.  and  Abiathar  ?

20.  25.  Z.  and  Abiathar  were  priests,  1  Kings  A.  4.

1  Kings  1.  8.  but  Z.  was  not  with  Adonijah,  26.

45.  Z.  and  Nathan  have  anointed  him  king

2.  35.  and  Z.  the  priest  did  the  king  put  in  the
room  of  Abiathar,  1  Chron.  29.  22.

4.  2.  Azariah  the  son  of  Z.  the  priest

2  Kings  15.  33.  Jerusha  the  daughter  of  Z.  was

Jot  ham’s  mother,  2  Chron  27.  1.

1  Chron.  6.  8.  Ahitub  begat  Z.  12.53.  I  9. 11.  I  18. 16.

12.  28.  Z.  a  young  man,  mighty  man  of  valour
24. 3.  both  Z.  of  the  sons  of  EleazaT,  and  Abimelech
27-  17-  of  the  Aaronites,  Z.  was  captain

2  Chron.  31.  10.  the  chief  priest  of  the  house  of  Z.
Ezra  7.  2.  the  son  of  Shallum,  the  son  of  Z.

Neh.  3.  4.  Z.  repaired,  29.  ||  10.  21.  Z.  sealed

11.  11.  of  the  priests,  the  son  of  Z.  Meshullam

13.  13.  I  made  Z.  the  scribe  treasurer  of  treasuries
Ezek.  40.  46.  these  the  sons  of  Z.  43.  19. 1  44.  15.

48.  11.  it  shall  be  for  priests  sanctified  of  sens  of  Z

ZALMUNN  A.

Judg.  8.  5.  I  am  pursuing  after  Zeba  and  Z.

6.  the  hands  of  Zeba  anil  Z.  in  thy  hand,  15.

21.  and  Gideon  arose  and  slew  Zeba  and  Z.

Psal.  83. 11.  make  all  their  princes  as  Zeba  and  Z.

ZAIIAH.  See  also  ZERAH.

Gen.  38.  30.  Judah’s  son  was  called  Z.  46.  12.

1  Chron.  2.  4.  Tamar  bare  Pharez  and  Z.  Mat.  1.  3.
6.  the  sons  of  Z.  ZimrL  and  Ethan,  and  lleman
ZARKPHATH.

1  Kings  17.  9.  get  thee  to  Z.  ||  10.  he  went  to  Z.
Obad.  20.  the  captivity  of  Israel  shall  possess  to  Z.
ZEBAH.  See  Za  lmunn a.
ZEBEDEE.

Mat.  4.  21.  in  a  ship  with  Z.  their  father,  mending
10.  2.  now  the  names  of  the  apostles,  James  and
John  the  sons  of  Z.  26.  37.  Mark  1.  19. 1  3.  17.

1  10.  35.  Luke  5.  10.  John  21.  2.

20.  20.  came  to  him  the  mother  of  Z.  childr.  27 . 56,.
Mark  1.  20.  they  left  their  father  Z.  in  the  ship
ZEBOIM.

Gen.  14. 2.  king  of  Z.  |l  Dent.  29. 23.  overthrow  of  Z.
1  Sam.  13.  18.  the  \  alley  of  Z.  to  the  wilderness
Neh.  11.  34.  the  children  of  Benjamin  dwelt  at  Z.
Hos.  11.  8.  Israel,  how  shall  l  set  thee  at  Z.  ?
ZEBUL.

Judg.  9.  28.  the  son  of  Jerubhaal,  and  Z.  his  officer
41.  Z.  thrust  out  Gaal  and  his  brethren
ZEBULUN.

Gen.  30.  20.  Leah  called  his  name  Z.

35.23.  the  sons  of  Leah,  Keuben.  Simeon,  Judah,  Z.
46.  14.  the  sons  of  Z.  Num.  1, 30.  |  26.  26,

49.  1.3.  Z.  shall  dwell  at  the  haven  of  the  sea
Num.  1. 9.  ofZ.  Eliab  captain,  2.  7.  I  7-  24.  |  10. 16.
Deut.  27. 13.  mount  Ebal  toeurse  ;  lteuben.  Gad,  Z.

33.  18.  of  Z.  lie  said,  rejoice  Z.  in  thy  going  out
Josh.  19.  10.  the  third  lot  came  up  for  Z.

Judg.  1.  .‘10.  nor  did  Z.  drive  out  the  inhabitants

4.  10.  Barak  called  Z.  and  Naphtalito  Kedesh

5.  14.  and  out  of  Z.  they  that  handle  the  pen

18.  Z.  and  Naphtali  a  people  jeoparded  their  lives

6.  35.  he  sent  messengers  to  Z.  and  they  came

12.  12.  Elon  was  buried  in  the  country  of  Z.

1  Chron.  27-  1,9.  of  Z.  Ishmaiah  was  the  ruler

2  Chron.  30.  fl.  divers  of  Z.  humbled  themselves
Psal.  68.  27.  the  princes  of  Z.  and  Naphtali

Isa.  9.  1.  at  first  lie  lightly  afflicted  the  land  of  Z.
Ezek.  48.  26.  Z.  a  portion  ||  33.  one  gate  of  Z.

Mat.  4.  13.  in  the  borders  of  Z.  and  Nephthalim
15.  the  land  of  Z.  and  Nephthalim  beyond  Jordan
Tribe  of  ZEBULUN.

Num.  1.  31.  numbered  of  the  tribe  of  Z.  57,400
2.  7.  then  the  tribe  of  Z.  Eliab  captain,  10.  16.

13.  10.  of  the  tribe  of  Z.  Gaddiel  to  spy  the  land

34.  25.  prince  of  the  tribe  of  Z.  to  divide  the  land
Josh.  21.  7-  out  of  the  tribe  of  Z.  twelve  cities  were

given  to  the  Levites,  34.  1  Chron.  6.  63,77.
Rev.  7.  8.  of  tlie  tribe  tf  Z.  were  sealed  12,000
ZEDEKIAH.

1  Kings  22. 11.  Z.  made  horns  ofiron,  2  Chr.  18. 10.

24.  Z.  smote  Micaiah  on  cheek,  2  Chron.  18.  23.

2  Kings  24. 17.  king  of  Bahyl.  changed  hisnametoZ.

25.  7.  they  slew  the  sons  of  Z.  and  put  out  the

eyes  of  Z.  Jer.  39.  6,  7. 1  52.  10,  11.

1  Chron.  3.  15.  son  of  Josiah,  Z.  ||  16.  Jehoiakim

2  Chron.  .36.  10.  he  made  Z.  his  brother  king
Jer.  21. 7.  I  will  deliver  Z.  and  his  people

29.  22.  the  Lord  make  thee  like  Z.  and  Ahab
32.  4.  Z.  shall  not  escape  from  the  Chaldeans

5.  he  shall  lead  Z.  to  Babylon,  there  shall  he  be
39.  5.  the  army  overtook  Z.  in  the  plains,  52.  8.
ZEEB.  See  Oreb.
ZELOPHEHAD.

Num.  26.33.  Z.had  nosons,  but  daughters,  Je.1^.17.3.

27.  7.  the  daughters  of  Z.  speak  right,  surely  give

36.  11.  the  daughters  of  Z.  were  married

ZELOT'ES.  See  Simon.

B17


roper  Names. J  Z  I  L


Z  I  O


zuz


Z  ELZA  II.

1  .Saw.  1C.  2.  two  men  by  Rachel's  sepulchre  at  Z.

ZEN  AS.

Tit.  3.  13.  bring  Z.  the  lawyer  on  his  journey
Z  EP I  I A  N  I A 1 1 .

2  Kings  25.  18.  took  Z.  second  priest,  Jer.  52.  24.

1  Chron.  6.  36.  Z.  of  the  sons  of  the  Kohat lutes
Jer.  21.  1.  when  Zedekiah  sent  Z.  to  leremtah

29.  25.  thou  hast  sent  letters  in  thy  name  to  Z.

29.  Z.  read  this  letter  in  the  ears  of  Jeremiah
37.  3.  Z.  the  son  of  Maaseiah  the  priest
Zeph.  l.i.  the  word  came  to  Z.  the  son  of  Gushi
Zeeh.  6.  10.  go  into  the  house  of  Josiah  son  of  Z.

14.  the  crowns  shall  be  to  Hen  the  son  of  Z.
ZERAII.  See  also  Z  A  RAIL
Gen.  36.  13.  the  son  of  Reuel,  Z.  17-  1  Chron.  1.  37.

33.  Johab  the  son  of  Z.  reigned,  1  Chron.  1.  44.
Num.  26.  13.  of  Z.  the  family  of  the  Zarhites,  20.
Josh.  7.1.  the  son  of  Zabdi,  the  son  ot  Z.

22.  20.  did  not  Achan  son  of  Z.  commit  a  trespass
1  Chron.  4.  24.  sons  of  Simeon  were  Z.  and  Shaul

6.  21.  Z.  son  of  Iddo  |1  41.  Ethni  the  sonot  Z.

9.  6.  of  the  sons  of  Z.  Jeuel  dwelt  in  Jerusalem
■2  Chr.  14.  9.  Z.  the  Ethiopian  cam  ;  against  Asa
Neh.  11.  24.  Pethahiah  of  the  children  ot  Z.
ZERESH.

Esth.  5. 10.  Elam  an  called  for  Z.  his  wife
ZERUB  BABEL.

1  Chron.  3.  19.  the  son  of  Pedaiah,  Z.  sons  of  Z.
Ezra  2.  2.  which  came  up  with  Z.  Neh.  12.  1.

3.  2.  Z.  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  8. 1  5.  2.

Neh.  12.  47.  Israel  in  the  days  of  Z.  gave  portions
Hag.  1.  1.  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggaito  Z.
12.  then  Z.  obeyed  the  voice  ot  the  Lord
14.  the  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Z.

2.  4.  yet  now  be  strong,  O  Z.  ||  21 .  speak  to  Z.
Zech.  4.  6.  this  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Z.

7.  before  Z.  thou  shalt  become  a  plain
9.  the  hands  ofiZ.  have  laid  the  foundation
ZERUIAH.

2  Sam.  2.  18.  there  were  three  sons  of  Z.  there
3. 39.  the  sons  of  Z.  be  too  hard  for  me

8.  16.  Joab  son  of  Z.  over  the  host,  1  Chr.  18.  15.
16. 10.  and  the  king  said,  what  have  l  to  do  with
you,  ye  sons  of  Z.  ?  19-  22.
1  Chron.  2.  16.  whose  sisters  were  Z.  and  Abigail
ZIBA.

-2  Sam.  9.  2.  art  thou  Z.  ?  ||  10.  Z.  had  fifteen  sons
16.  4.  the  king  said  to  Z.  thine  are  all  that  pertain
19.  29.  I  said,  thou  and  Z.  divide  the  land
ZIBEON.

Gen.  36.  2.  Anah  the  daughter  of  Z.  the  Hivite,  14.
24  these  are  the  children  of  Z.  1  Chr.  1.  40.  as  he
fed  the  asses  of  Z.  his  father  ||  29.  duke  Z.
ZIDON.

Gen.  49.  13.  Zebulun’s  border  shall  be  to  Z.

Josh.  11.  8.  Israel  chased  them  to  great  Z.

19.  28.  Hammon  and  Kanah,  even  unto  great  Z.
Judg.  10.6.  Israel  did  evil,  ami  served  thegodsofZ.
18.  28.  no  deliverer,  because  it  was  far  from  Z.
i  Kings  17.  9-  Zarephath,  which  belongeth  to  Z.
-Ezra  3.  7.  they  gave  drink  unto  them  of  Z.

Isa.  23.  2.  whom  the  merchants  of  Z.  replenished

4.  be  thou  ashamed,  O  Z.  the  sea  hath  spoken
12.  O  thou  oppressed  virgin,  daughter  of  Z.

Jer.  25.  22.  all  the  kings  of  Z.  shall  drink

27.  3.  send  bonds  and  yokes  to  the  king  of  Z.

47.  4.  to  cutoff  from  lyre  and  Z.  every  helper
Ezek.  27.  8.  the  inhabitants  of  Z.  thy  mariners

28.  21.  set  thy  face  against  Z.  and  prophesy  against
22.  and  say,  behold,  I  am  against  thee,  O  Z.

Joel  3.  4.  what  have  ye  to  do  with  me,  O  Tyre  and  Z.
Zech.  9.  2.  Tyrus  and  Z.  though  it  be  very  wise
ZIDONIANS.

Judg.  10.  12.  the  Z.  and  Amalekites  did  oppress  you
18.  7-  they  dwelt  careless,  after  manner  of  the  Z.

1  Kings  11.  1.  but  king  Solomon  loved  women  of  Z.

33.  they  worshipped  Ashtoreth,  goddess  of  Z.
Ezek.  32.  30.  Z.  that  are  gone  dow  n  with  the  slain
Z1E.

1  Kings  6.  1.  the  month  Z.  which  is  the  second
37.  the  foundation  was  laid  in  the  month  Z.
Z1KLAG.

1  Sam.  27-  6.  Achish  gave  Z.  to  David

30. 14.  we  burnt  Z.  ||  2  Sam.  4. 10. 1  slew'  them  in  Z.

2  Sam.  1  1.  David  had  abode  two  days  in  Z.

1  Chron.  4.  30.  they  dwelt  at  Z.  Neh.  11.  28.

12.  1.  they  that  came  to  David  to  Z.  20.
ZILPAII.

•Gen.  29  24.  Laban  gave  to  Leah  Z.  for  an  handmaid


Gen.  30.  9.  Leah  gave  Z.her  mnid  to  Jacob  to  wife

10.  Z.  Leah's  maid  bare  Jacob  a  son,  12.

35.  26.  the  sons  of  Z.  Gad  and  Asher,  46.  18.

37.  2.  the  lad  was  with  the  sons  of  Z.

ZIMR  I.

Num.  25.  14.  the  Israelite  that  was  slain  was  Z.

1  Kings  16.  9.  Z.  conspired  against  Elah,  16.

15.  Z.  reigned  seven  days  in  lirzah

2  Kings  9.  31.  had  Z.  peace,  who  slew  his  master  '

1  Chron.  2.  6.  the  sons  of  Zerah  Z.  and  Ethan
8.  36.  Z.  the  son  of  Jehoadah  ||  9.  42.  of  Jarah

Jer.  25.  25.  I  made  all  the  kings  of  Z.  to  drink
ZIN.

Num.  13.  21.  they  searched  from  wilderness  of  Z.
20.  1.  congreg.  came  to  the  desert  of  Z.  33.  36.

27.  14.  ye  rebelled  in  the  desert  of  Z.  Deut.  32.51.
ZION.

2  Sam.  5.  7-  nevertheless,  David  took  strong  hold  of

Z.  the  same  is  the  city  of  David,  1  Chron.  11.  5.
1  Kings  8.  1 .  the  city  of  Dav.  which  is  Z.  2  Chr.  5.  2.
Psal.  2.  6.  I  set  my  king  on  my  holy  hill  of  Z.

48.  12.  walk  about  Z.  and  go  round  about  her
5',.  18.  do  jgood  in  thy  good  pleasure  unto  Z.

69.  35. for  God  will  save  Z. and  build  cities  of  Judah
87-  2.  the  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Z.  more  than

5.  be  said  of  Z.  this  and  that  man  was  born  there
97.8.  Z.  heard  and  was  glad,  Judah  rejoiced
102.  13.  thou  shalt  arise  and  have  mercy  on  Z.

16.  when  the  Lord  shall  builci  up  Z.  he  shall  ap¬

pear  in  his  glory
126.  1.  when  the  I.ord  turned  the  captivity  ot  Z.
129.  5.  let  them  be  turned  back  that  hate  Z.

132. 13.  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Z.  he  desired  it
133.  3.  as  the  dew  on  the  mountains  of  Z.

137.  1.  yea,  we  wept,  whe  we  remembered  Z.

.3.  saying,  sing  us  one  of  the  songs  of  Z.

146.  10.  the  Lord  shall  reign,  even  thy  God,  O  Z.
147. 12.  praise  the  L.  O  lerus.  praise  thy  G.  O  Z.
149.  2.  let  the  children  of  Z.  be  joyful  in  their  Ring
Isa.  1.  27.  Z.  shall  be  redeemed  with  judgment
12.  6.  cry  out  and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Z.

14.  32.  that  the  Lord  hath  founded  Z.  and  poor

33.  5.  the  Lord  hath  filled  Z.  with  judgment
20.  look  on  Z.  ||  35.  10.  come  to  Z.  with  songs

34.  8.  year  of  recompences  for  controversy  of  Z.

40.  9.  O  Z.  that  bringestgood  tidings,  get  up

41.  27.  the  first  shall  say  to  Z.  beh  Id  them

49.  14.  butZ.  said,  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  me
51.  3.  for  the  Lord  shall  comfort  Z.  will  comfort

11.  the  redeemed  shall  come  with  singing  to  Z.

16.  and  say  unto  Z.  thou  art  my  people

52. 1.  awake,  awake,  put  on  thy  strength,  O  Z.

7.  that  saith  untoZ.  thy  God  reigneth

8.  when  the  Lord  shall  bring  again  Z.

59.  20.  and  the  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Z.

60.  14.  call  thee  the  Z.  of  the  holy  One  of  Israel
62.  1.  for  Z.  sake  will  I  not  hold  m3'  peace

64.  10.  Z.  is  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  desolation
66.  8.  as  soon  as  Z.  travailed,  she  brought  forth

Jer.  3.  14.  turn,  1  will  bring  you  to  Z.

4.  6.  set  up  the  standard  towards  Z.  stay  not
14.  19.  hast  thou  reject.  Jud.  ;  thy  soul  loathed  Z.
26.  18.  Z.  shall  be  plowed  like  a  field,  Mic.  3.  12.

30.  17.  this  is  Z.  whom  no  man  seeketh  after

31.  6.  arise  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Z.  to  the  Lord

12.  they  shall  come  and  sing  in  the  height  of  Z.

50.  5.  they  shall  ask  the  way  to  Z.  saying,  come

51.  35.shall  the  inhabitant  of  Z.  say’,  and  my  blood
Lam.  1. 4.  the  way's  ot  Z.  do  mourn,  because

17.  Z.  spreads  forth  her  hands,  none  to  comfort

4.  2.  the  precious  sons  of  Z.  comparable  to  gold

5.  18.  because  the  mountain  of  Z.  is  desolate
Joel  2.  23.  be  glad,  ye  children  of  Z.  and  rejoice
Amos.  1.  2.  he  said,  the  Lord  will  roar  from  Z.
A/fc.3.10.they  build  up  Z.with  blood, andJerusalem
4.  2.  for  law  shall  go  forth  of  Z.  word  from  Jerusa.

11.  nations  that  say',  let  our  eye  look  upon  Z.
Zech.  1.  14.  I  am  jealous  for  Z.  with  great  jealousy
17.  cry,  saying,  the  Lord  shall  yet  comfort  Z.

2.  7.  deliver  thyself  O  Z.  ||  8.  2.  jealous  for  Z.

8.  .3.  thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  am  returned  to  Z.

9.  13.  when  I  have  raised  up  thy  sons,  O  Z.

See  Daughter,  Daughters.

In  ZION.

Psal.  9.  11.  sing  praises  to  the  I.ord,  whodvvelleth

in  Z.  76.  2.  Joels.  21.

65.  1.  praise  waiteth  for  thee,  O  God,  in  Z.

84.  7-  every'  one  in  Z.  appeareth  before  God

99.  2.  Lord  is  great  in  Z.  he  is  high  above  all  people
102.  21.  to  declare  the  name,  of  the  Lord  in  Z.


Isa.  4.  3.  that  is  left  in  Z.  shall  be  called  holy

10.  24.  O  tny  people  that  dw  el  lest  in  Z.

28.  16.  behold,  I  lay  in  Z.  for  a  foundation  stone,  a
tried  stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  1  Pet.  2.  6

30.  19.  for  the  peopleshall  dwell  in  Z.  at  Jerusalem

31.  9.  saith  the  Lord,  whose  fire  is  in  Z.

33.  14.  the  sinners  in  Z.  are  afraid,  tearfulness  hath
46.  13.  I  will  place  salvation  in  Z.  for  Israel

61.  3.  to  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Z.

Jer.  8.  19.  is  not  Lord  in  Z. ?  is  not  her  king  in  her?

50.  28.  to  declare  in  Z.  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord

51.  10.  let  us  declare  in  Z.  the  work  of  the  Lord

24.  all  their  evil  that  they  have  done  in  Z.

Lam.  2.  6.  Lord  caused  sabbaths  be  forgotten  in  Z.

4.  11.  the  Lord  hath  kindled  a  fire  in  Z.  and  it

hath  devoured  the  foundations  thereof

5.  11.  they  ravished  the  women  in  Z.  and  maids
Joel  2.  1.  blow  y  e  the  trumpet  in  Z.  and  sound,  15,

3.  17.  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  dwelling  in  Z.
Amos  6.  1.  woe  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Z.

Rom.  9.  33.  behold,  I  lay  in  Z.  a  stumbling  stone

Mount  ZION.

2  Kings  19.  31.  out  of  Jerusalem  shall  go  a  remnant,
they  that  escape  out  of  mount  Z.  Isa.  .37.  32.
Psal.  48.  2.  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  is  mount  Z.

11.  let  mount  Z.  rejoice  ||  78.  68.  mount  Z.  he  loved
74.  2.  this  mount  Z.  wherein  thou  hast  dwelt
125.  1.  as  mount  Z.  which  cannot  be  removed
Isa.  4.5.  on  every ;  dwelling-place  of  mount  Z.  a  cloud
8.  18.  Lord  which  dwelleth  in  mount  Z.  18.  7.

10.  12.  Lord  performed  his  work  upon  mount  Z.
24.  23.  when  the  Lord  shall  reign  in  mount  Z.

29.  8.  fight  ag.  mount  Z.  ||  31.  4.  fight  for  mount  Z,
Joel  2.  32.  in  mount  Z.  be  deliverance,  Obad.  17.
Chad.  21.  saviours  shall  come  up  on  mount  Z.
Mic.  4.  7-  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  mount  Z.
Heb.  12.  22.  but  ye  are  come  unto  mount  Z.

Rev.  14.  1.  lo,  a  Lamb  stood  on  the  mount  Z.

Out  of  ZION.

Psal.  14.  7-  salvation  were  come  out  ofZ.  53.  6.
20.  2.  the  I.ord  strengthen  thee  out  of  Z.  110.  2.
128.  5.  the  Lord  shall  bless  thee  out  of  Z.  134.  3.
135.  21.  blessed  be  the  Lord  out  of  Z.  who  dwells
Isa.  2.  3.  for  out  of  Z.  shall  go  forth  the  law
Jer.  9.  19.  a  voice  of  wailing  is  heard  out  of  Z.
Joel  3.  16.  the  Lord  also  shall  roar  out  of  Z.

Rom.  11.  26.  there  shall  come  out  of  Z.  the  deliverer
Z1PPOR.  See  Balak.

Zll  PORAEI.

Exod.  2.  21.  Jethro  gave  Moses  Z.  his  daughter

4.  25.  Z.  took  a  sharp  stone  ||  18.  2.  Jethro  took  Z.

ZO  AN.

Num.  1 3.  22.  Hebron  was  built  seven  years  before  Z,
Psal.  78.  12.  marvellous  things  did  he  in  Z.  43.
Isa.  19.  11.  surely  the  princes  of  Z.  are  fools,  13.

30.  4.  for  his  princes  were  at  Z.  and  his  ambass.
Ezek.  30.  14.  1  will  set  fire  in  Z.  and  execute  judgm.

ZOAR.

Gen.  14.  2.  the  king  of  Bela,  which  is  Z.  8.

19.  22.  the  name  of  the  city  was  called  Z.

Deut.  .34.  3.  shewed  him  the  city  of  palm-trees  to  Z.
Isa.  15.  5.  his  fugitives  shall  flee  unto  Z.

Jer.  48.  34.  they  uttered  their  voice  from  Z.
ZOBAH.

1  Sam.  14.  47.  Saul  fought  against  the  kings  of  Z.

2  Sam.  8.  3.  David  smote  Hadadezerthe  king  of  Z

1  Kings  11.  24.  1  Chron.  18.  .3,  9.
2.3.  .36.  Igal  son  of  Nathan  of  Z.  David’s  worthy

1  Kings  11.  23.  Rezon  fled  from  the  king  of  Z.

ZOPIIAR.

Job  2.  11.  Z.  the  Naamathite,  11.  1.  120.  1.  1  42.  9.
ZO  RA II.

Josh.  19.  41.  coast  of  inheritance  of  Dan,  was  Z.
Judg.  13.  2.  a  certain  man  of  Z.  called  Manoah

25.  Spirit  moved  Samson  between  Z.  and  Eshtaol
16. 31.  they  buried  Samson  between  Z.  and  Eshtaol

18.  2.  the  Danites  sent  from  Z.  to  spy  the  land

8.  they  came  unto  their  brethren  to  Z.

2  Chron.  11.  10.  Rehoboam  built  Z.  and  Ajalon

ZOROBABEL.

Mat.  1. 12.  Salathiel  begat  Z.  H  13.  Z.  begat  Abihud
Luke  3.  27-  Rhesa,  which  was  the  son  of  Z.
ZUAR.  See  Nathaneel.

ZUR.

Num.  25.  15.  Cozbi  the  daughter  of  Z.  was  slain

31.  8.  Z.  a  prince  of  Midian  slain,  Josh.  1.3.  21.

1  Chron.  8.  .30.  Z.  the  son  of  Gibeon,  9.  36.

ZURISHADDA1.  See  Shelumiel.
ZUZIMS.

Gen.  14.  5.  the  kings  smote  the  Z.  in  Ham


615


A


CONCORDANCE

TO

THE  BOOKS  CALLED  APOCRYPHA.


AB  L

AARON.

1  Esd.  1.  13.  for  their  brethren  the  sons  of  A.  14.

6.  5.  priests  the  sons  of  Phinees,  the  son  of  A.

2  Esd.  1.  3.  Eleazar  son  of  A.  of  the  tribe  of  Levi

13.  I  gave  Moses  for  a  leader,  and  A .  for  a  priest

Tob.  1.  6.  I  gave  to  the  priests  the  children  of  A.
Eccl.  30.  1”.  hear,  according  to  the  blessing  of  A.
45.  6.  he  exalted  A.  an  holy  man  like  unto  him
20.  but  he  made  A.  more  honourable,  gave  him
25.  the  inheritance  of  A.  should  be  to  his  seed
50.  13.  so  were  all  the  sons  of  A.  in  their  glory
16.  then  shouted  the  sons  of  A.  and  sounded

1  Mac.  7.  14.  a  priest  of  the  seed  of  A.  is  come

ABACUC.

2  Esd.  1.  40.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  Nahum,  A.

ABASEMENT.

Eccl.  20. 11.  there  is  an  a.  because  of  glory
ABASHED.

Tob.  2.  14.  T  did  not  believe,  and  I  was  a.  at  her
Eccl.  4.  25.  but  be  a.  of  the  error  of  thy  ignorance
ABATETH.

I  Wisd.  16.  24.  and  a.  his  strength  for  the  benefit
Eccl.  25.  23.  a  wicked  woman  a.  the  courage
ABATED.

1  Mac.  5.  3.  he  a.  their  courage,  and  took  spoils

11.  49.  so  when  thev  saw,  their  courage  was  a.

j  .  ABDIAS.

2  Esd.  1.  39.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  Joel,  A.  Jonas

ABHOR.

Esth.  14. 15.  I  a.  the  bed  of  the  uncircumcised
16.  and  that  I  a.  it  as  a  menstruous  rag
Eccl.  11.2.  nor  a.  a  man  for  outward  appearance

13.  30.  have  humility,  so  doth  the  rich  a.  the  poor
38.  4.  he  that  is  wise  will  not  a.  medicines

ABHORRED.

Jud.  9.  4.  which  a.  the  pollution  of  their  blood
*  Eccl.  16.  8.  but  he  a.  them  for  their  pride
20.  8.  he  that  useth  many  words  shall  be  a.

I  .  ABIIORREST.

Wisd.  11.  24.  thou  a.  nothing  which  thou  hast  made
ABHORRETH.

\  Eccl.  50.  25.  there  be  two  nations  which  my  heart  a.
ABIDE.

Sus.  37.  she  would  not  a.  your  wickedness
ABIDE.

2  Esd.  7.  42.  the  end  where  much  glory  doth  a.

Jud.  15.  2.  so  that  there  was  no  man  that  durst  a.

■  ll  isd.  1.  5.  will  not  a.  when  unrighteousness  comes
1  -3.  9.  such  as  be  faithful  in  love  shall  a.  with  him
Eccl.  2.  10.  did  any  a.  in  his  fear,  and  was  forsaken  ?

6.  8.  he  will  not  a.  in  the  day  of  thy  trouble

11.  21.  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  a.  in  thy  labour

12.  15.  for  a  while,  he  will  a.  with  thee

22.  23.  a.  stedfast  to  him  in  the  time  of  trouble
24.  7-  and  in  whose  inheritance  shall  l  a.  ?

28.  6.  remember  death,  a.  in  the  commandments

43.  3.  and  who  can  a.  the  burning  heat  thereof?

1  Mac.  7-  25.  he  was  not  able  to  a.  their  force

10.  73.  thou  shalt  not  be  able  to  a.  the  horsemen

2  Mac.  7-  17-  but  a.  a  while,  and  behold  his  power
9.  12.  when  he  could  not  a.  his  own  smell

ABIDETH.

Eccl.  43.  20.  it  a.  upon  every  gathering  of  water

ABILITY.

1  Esd.  5.  44.  to  set  up  the  house,  according  to  their  a.

|  Wisd.  13.  19.  for  good  success  asketh  a.  to  do

Eccl.  11.  12.  wanting  a.  and  full  of  poverty

14.  11.  my  son,  according  to  thy  a.  do  good

13.  according  to  thy  a.  give  to  thy  friend

44.  6.  rich  men  finished  with  a.  living  peaceably

ABIRON.

Eccl.  45.  18.  that  were  on  Dathan’s  and  A.  side
ABLE.

2  Esd.  2.  28.  but  they  shall  be  a.  to  do  nothing

4.  6.  then  I  said,  what  man  is  a.  to' do  that?

11.  how  should  thy  vessel  be  a.  to  comprehend  ?

7.  45.  no  man  a.  to  save  him  that  is  destroyed

8.  47.  be  a.  to  love  my  creature  more  than  1

9.  7-  shall  be  a.  to  escape  by  his  works  and  faith

10.  32.  I  have  seen  that  I  am  not  a.  to  express
55.  as  much  as  thine  eyes  be  a.  to  see


ABO

2  Esd.  15. 17.  desire  to  go  into  a  city,  shall  not  be  a.
Jud.  6.  4.  footsteps  shall  not  be  a.  to  stand  before  us
7.  4.  the  hills  are  not  a.  to  bear  their  weight
Esth.  16.  3.  but  not  being  a.  to  bear  abundance
Wisd.  12. 14.  tyrant  not  a.  to  set  his  face  against  thee

13.  9.  for  if  they  were  a.  to  know  so  much

16.  20.  send  bread  a.  to  content  every  man’s  delight
Eccl.  7.  6.  being  not  a.  to  take  away  iniquity

16.  20.  and  who  is  a.  to  conceive  his  ways  ?

41.  1.  yea,  to  him  that  is  yet  a.  to  receive  meat
43.  28.  how  shall  we  be  a.  to  magnify  him  ?

Bar.  6.  34.  they  are  not  a.  to  recompense  it
41.  may  speak,  as  tho’  he  were  a.  to  understand
64.  seeing  they  are  not  a.  to  judge  causes

1  Mac.  3.  17-  how  shall  we  be  a.  being  few  to  fight
30.  not  be  a.  to  bear  the  charges  any  longer

5.  40.  we  shall  not  be  a.  to  withstand  him

6.  3.  he  sought  to  take  the  city,  but  was  not  a.

27.  neither  shalt  thou  be  a.  to  rule  them

7-  25.  that  he  was  not  a.  to  abide  their  force
IO.72.  thy  foot  is  not  a.  to  stand  before  our  face
73.  shall  not  be  a.  to  abide  the  horsemen

2  Mac.  15.  17.  words  a.  to  stir  them  up  to  valour

ABODE.

2  Esd.  3.22.  the  good  departed,  the  evil  a.  still
Jud.  10.  2.  in  which  she  a.  in  the  sabbath-days

12.  7-  thus  she  a.  in  the  camp  three  days

2  Mac.  12.  27.  a  strong  city  wherein  Lysias  a.

14.  23.  Nicanor  a.  in  Jerusalem  and  did  no  hurt

ABOLISH.

Esth.  14.  9.  they  wil  I  a.  the  thing  thou  hast  ordained
Eccl.  47.  22.  he  will  not  a.  the  posterity  of  his  elect
1  Mac.  3.  42.  given  commandment  utterly  to  a.  them
ABOLISHED.

Eccl.  45.  26.  that  their  good  things  be  not  a.
ABOMINABLE.

Eccl.  41.  5.  the  children  of  sinners  are  a.  children

1  Mac.  1.  48.  they  should  make  their  souls  a.

2  Mac.  6.  25.  get  a  stain  to  old  age,  and  make  it  a.

ABOMINATION.

Wisd.  14.  11.  because  they  are  become  an  a.

Eccl.  1.  25.  but  godliness  is  an  a.  to  a  sinner
10. 13.  he  that  hath  pride  shall  pour  out  a.

17.  26.  and  hate  thou  a.  vehemently

19.  23.  there  is  a  wickedness,  and  the  same  an  a.

1  Mac.  1.  54.  they  set  up  the  a.  of  desolation

6.  7-  they  pulled  down  the  a.  which  he  had  set  up

2  Mac.  5.  8.  being  had  in  a.  as  an  open  enemy
6.  19.  than  to  live  stained  with  such  an  a.

ABOMINATIONS.

1  Esd.  7. 13.  had  separated  from  the  a.  of  the  people

2  Esd.  1 1 . 44.  they  are  ended,  and  his  a.  are  fulfilled
Wisd.  12.  23.  tormented  them  with  their  own  a.
Eccl.  27.  30.  malice  and  wrath,  even  these  area.

49.  2.  he  took  away  the  a.  of  iniquity
ABOVE.

2  Esd.  8.  20.  O  Ixird,  w  ho  beholdest  from  a.

Wisd.  9.  17-  and  send  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  a.

Eccl.  16.  17-  shall  any  remember  me  from  a.  ?

_  ABOVE.

1  Esd.  1.  24.  that  did  wickedly  a.  all  people

3.  12.  but  a.  all  things  truth  beareth  the  victory

2  Esd.  4.  34.  do  not  thou  hasten  a.  the  most  Highest,

for  thy  haste  is  in  vain  to  be  a.  him
10.  57-  for  thou  art  blessed  a.  many  other
Eccl.  3.  21.  nor  search  things  that  are  a.  thy  strength

13.  2.  burden  not  thyself  a.  thy  power
25.  10.  none  a.  him  that  feareth  the  Lord

15.  there  is  no  head  a.  the  head  of  a  serpent

30.  16.  there  is  no  riches  a.  a  sound  body,  and  no
joy  a.  the  joy  of  the  heart
40.  18.  he  thatfindetha  treasure  is  a.  them  both

20.  but  the  love  of  wisdom  is  a.  them  both

21.  but  a  pleasant  tongue  is  a.  them  both
23.  but  a.  both  is  a  wife  with  her  husband
26.  but  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a.  them  both

43. 28.  for  he  is  great  a.  all  his  works
Prayer  of  Manass.  a.  the  number  of  the  sands
ABOUND.

Eccl.  21. 13.  knowledge  of  a  wise  man  a.  like  a  flood
23.  3.  lest  my  sins  a.  to  my  destruction


ACC

Eccl.  24.  26.  the  understanding  to  a.  like  Euphratec
ABOUNDED.

1  Mac.  3.  30.  he  a.  above  the  kings  before  him

2  Mac.  3.  19.  the  women  a.  in  the  streets

^  ABOUNDETH.

Eccl.  10.  27.  that  laboured)  and  a.  in  all  things
_  .  ABRAHAM.

2  Esd.  1. 39.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  A.  Tsaac,  Jacob-
3. 13.  whose  name  was  A.  ||  6.  8.  from  A.  to  Isaac

7.  36.  A.  prayed  first  for  the  Sodomites
j  ob.  4. 12.  we  are  children  of  the  prophets,  Noe,  A
Jud.  8.  26.  remember  what  things  he  did  to  A.
Esth.  14.  18.  no  joy,  but  in  thee,  ()  Lord  God  of  A.
Eccl.  44.  19.  A.  was  a  great  father  of  many  people
Bar.  2.  34.  which  I  promised  to  their  father  A.
Dan.  3.  12.  not  depart  for  thy  beloved  A.  sake

1  A/ac.2.52.  was  not  A.  found  faithful  in  temptation'

12.  21.  found  that  they  are  of  the  stock  of  A.

2  Mac.  1.  2.  his  covenant  that  he  made  w'ith  A.

ABRIDGE.

2  Mac.  2.  23.  we  will  essay  to  a.  in  one  volume
ABRIDGING.

2  Mac.  2.  26.  have  taken  this  painful  labour  of  a.
ABRIDGMENT.

2  Mac.  2.  31.  granted  to  him  that  will  make  an  a.
ABSALOM.

1  Mac.  11.  70.  except  Mattathias  son  of  A.

13.  11.  he  sent  Jonathan  the  son  of  A.  to  Joppe

2  Mac.  11.  17.  John  and  A.  were  sent  from  you

ABSENT.

Wisd.  11. 11.  whether  they  were  a.  or  present

14.  17.  that  they  might  flatter  him  that  was  a.

ABS1  AIN.

Eccl.  28.  8.  a.  from  strife,  thou  shalt  diminish  sins
ABS TAIN  ETH.

Wisd.  2.  16.  he  a.  from  our  ways  as  from  filthiness
ABSTINENCE.

2  Esd.  7.  55.  the  faces  of  them  which  have  used  a.
ABUBUS.

1  Mac.  16.  11.  Ptolemeus  the  son  of  A.madecapt

15.  the  son  of  A.  receiving  them  deceitfully
ABUNDANCE.

1  Esd.  8.  20.  they  shall  give  other  things  in  a.

2  Esd.  2.  27.  but  thou  shalt  be  merry  and  have  a.

6.  56.  the  a.  of  them  to  a  drop  thatfalleth

15.  41.  may  be  full  with  the  a.  of  great  waters
Tob.  2.  2.  when  I  saw  a.  of  meat,  1  said  to  my  son
4.  16.  and  according  to  thine  a.  give  alms
Wisd.  11.7.  thou  gavest  unto  them  a.  of  water
Eccl.  27.  1.  he  that  seeks  fora,  will  turn  his  eyes

1  Mac.  16.  11.  and  he  had  a.  of  silver  and  gold

ABUNDANTLY.

Eccl.  24.  31.  I  will  water  a.  my  garden-bed
ABUSE.

Eccl.  26.  10.  keepherinstraitly,  lest  she  a.  herself
Bar.  6.  28.  the  priest  a.  things  sacrificed
ABUSED.

2  Esd.  9.  9.  which  now  have  a.  my  ways

1  Mac.  7-  34.  but  he  a.  them  shamefully

2  Mac.  14.  42.  choosing  rather  to  die  than  to  be  a ,

ACCARON.

1  Mac.  10.  89.  he  also  gave  him  A.  in  possession
ACCEPT.

Tob.  13.  6.  turn,  who  can  tell  if  he  will  a.  you  ?
Eccl.  4.  22.  a.  no  person,  27.  |  35.  13.  j  42.  1.

1  Mac.  8. 1.  such  as  would  a.  all  that  joined  their.
ACCEPTABLE.

Wisd.  3.  14.  an  inheritance  more  a.  to  his  mind
9.  9.  and  knew  what  was  a.  in  thy  sight
12.  so  shall  my  works  be  a.  then  shall  I  judge
Eccl.  2.  5.  a.  men  tried  in  furnace  of  adversity
15.  15.  if  thou  wilt,  to  keep  the  commandments,.

and  to  perform  a.  faithfulness-
35.  7.  the  sacrifice  of  a  just  man  is  a.

41.  2.  O  death,  a.  is  thy  sentence  to  the  needy
ACCEPTED.

Wisd.  18.  7.  soof  thy  people  was  a.  the  salvation
Eccl.  19-  18.  the  fear  of  the  L.  is  the  first  step  to  be  a  .

34.  18.  the  gifts  of  unjust  men  are  not  a.

35.  16.  he  that  serveth  the  Lord  shall  be  a.

Dari.  3.  16.  in  an  humble  spirit  let  us  be  a

619


Apocrypha.]  ACT

1  Mac.  6.  6O.I0  make  peace,  and  they  a  thereof

3.  71.  winch  thing  lie  a.  and  sware  unto  him

14.  47.  then  Simon  a.  hereof,  anti  was  pleased

2  Mac.  12.  4.  whoa.  of  it  according  to  the  decree

13.  24.  a.  well  of  Maccabeus,  mane  him  governor

ACC KP  I  I  N(i.

1  Esth.  4.  39.  with  her  there  is  no  a.  of  persons
Reel.  20.  22.  by  a.  persons,  overthroweth  himself

ACCESS.

2  Mac.  14.  3.  nor  have  any  more  a.  to  the  altar

ACCI.AM A  I  IONS.

1  Mac.  5.  64.  the  people  assembled  with  joyful  a.

ACCOM  PA  NY.

Jud.  10.  17.  an  100  men,  to  a.  her  and  her  maid
ACCOMPLISH.

2  Esd.  12.  25.  for  these  shall  a.  Ids  wickedness
Jud.  2.  13.  but  a.  them  fully,  as  I  commanded

10.  8.  the  God  of  our  fathers  a.  thy  enterprises

9.  that  1  may  go  forth  to  a.  things  you  spake

2  Mac.  14.  29.  he  watched  his  time  to  a.  this  thing
ACCOMPLISH  ED.

I  Esd.  1.  17.  the  things  belonging  to  sacrifices  a.

2.  1.  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  might  be  a.

1  Mac.  3.  49.  Nazarites,  who  had  a.  their  days
ACCOR  D.

1  Esd.  5.  58.  all  T.evites  with  one  a.  labouring

9.  38.  the  multitude  came  together  with  one  a.

Jud.  15.  9.  they  blessed  her  with  one  a.  and  said
Wisd.  10.  20.  magnified  with  one  a.  thine  hand

ACCOUNT.

Wisd.  5.  1.  such  as  made  no  a.  of  his  labours

1  Mac.  6.  9.  and  lie  made  a .  that  he  should  die

2  Mac.  15.  18.  was  in  least  a.  with  them

ACCOUNTED.

IVisd.  5.  4.  we  fools  a.  Ids  life  madness
Bar.il.  35.  none  be  a.  of  in  comparison  of  him
ACCOUNT  S.

Tob.  1.  21.  who  appointed  over  Ids  father’s  a.

22.  Achiacharus  was  overseer  of  the  a.

IVisd.  4.  2u.  when  they  cast  up  the  a.  of  their  sins

1  Mac.  10  40.  1  give  silver  out  of  the  king’s  a.

42.  which  they  took  out  of  the  a.  year  by  year
44.  expenses  shall  be  given  of  the  king’s  a.

ACCU.SA  I  ION.

Eccl.  26.  5.  my  heart  feareth  a  false  a.

51 . 6.  by  an  a.  to  the  king  from  unrighteous  tongue

2  Mac.  4.  43.  an  a.  was  laid  against  Menelaus

ACCUSATIONS.

2  Mac.  14.  27.  with  the  a.  of  the  wicked  man
ACCUSE.

2  Esd.  16.  50.  and  shall  a.  her  to  her  face
vVisd.  12.  12.  w  ho  shall  a.  thee  for  the  nations
Eccl.  46.  19.  taken  no  goods,  and  no  man  did  a.  him
i  Mac.  10.  61.  assembled  themselves  to  a.  him
. ACCUSED.

Wisd.  10.  14.  as  for  them  that  had  a.  him

1  Mac.  7.  6.  and  they  a.  the  people  to  the  king

2  Mac.  5.  8.  being  a.  before  Aretas  the  king

10.  13.  being  a.  of  the  king’s  friends  before  Eupator

21.  a.  those  men,  that  they  had  sold  their  brethren

14.  38.  formerly  Raziz  had  been  a.  of  Judaism

ACCUSER .

2  Mac.  4.  5.  not  to  be  an  a.  of  his  countrymen
ACCUSERS.

2  Esd.  16.  65.  your  own  sins  shall  be  your  a.

1  Mac.  10.  64.  when  his  a.  saw  he  was  honoured

ACCUSTOM.

Eccl.  23.  9.  a.  not  thy  mouth  to  swearing
ACCUSTOMED.

Eccl.  20.  25.  a  thief  is  better  than  a  man  a.  to  lie
23.  15.  the  man  that  is  a.  to  opprobrious  words
ACflAN.

2  Esd.  7.  37-  prayed  for  Israel  in  the  time  of  A.

ACHIACHARUS.

Tab.  1.21.  A.  my  brother  Anael’s  son,  over  affairs

22.  A.  entreating  for  me,  I  returned  to  Nineve
2.  10.  A.  did  nourish  me  till  I  went  to  Elymais

11.  18.  A.  and  Nasbas  his  brother’s  son  came
14.  10.  remember,  how  Aman  handled  A.

ACIIIOR.

Jud.  5.  5.  then  said  A.  the  captain  of  Ammon
22.  when  A.  had  finished  these  sayings

6.  2.  who  art  thou,  A.  ?  ||  5.  A.  hireling  of  Ammon

10.  then  Olofernes  commanded  to  take  A.

13.  they  bound  A.  cast  him  down  and  left  him
16  they  set  A.  in  the  midst  of  all  their  people
11. 9.  concerning  the  matter  which  A.  did  speak

14.  10.  when  A.  had  seen  all  that  God  had  done

ACM  I  TOR.

9  Esd.  1.1.  Sidamiasson  of  Sadoc,  the  son  of  A.

ACKNOWLEDGE.

2  Esd.  1.  36.  yet  they  shall  a.  their  sins
10.  16.  if  thou  shalt  a.  the  determination  of  God
Jud.  9.  14.  a.  that  thou  art  the  God  of  all  power
Wisd.  13.  1.  nor  did  they  a.  the  work-master
Eccl.  23.  11.  if  he  a.  not  his  sin,  a  double  offence
Prayer  of  Manass.  I  a.  mine  iniquities
ACKNOWLEDGED.

IVisd.  12.  27.  they  a.  him  to  be  the  true  God
18.  13.  they  a.  this  people  to  be  the  sons  of  God
Eccl.  44.  23.  he  a.  him  in  his  blessing  and  gave
Sus.  14.  they  asked  the  cause,  they  a.  their  lust
2  Mac.  3.  28.  manifestly  thev  a.  the  power  of  God
ACQUAINTANCE.

Eccl.  30.2.  shall  rejoice  of  his  son  among  his  a.

2  Mac.  6.  21.  the  old  a.  they  had  with  the  man
ACQUIT.

IVisd.  1.  6.  will  not  a.  a  blasphemer  of  his  words
ACL.

Jvd.  8.  34.  but  inquire  not  you  of  mine  a.
ACTION .

Eccl.  37.  16.  let  counsel  go  before  every  a.
ACTIONS.

2  Esd.  15. 16.  their  a.  shall  stand  in  their  power
ACTIVE.

IVisd.  15.  11.  that  inspired  into  him  an  a.  soul
ACTS.

1  Esd  1. 25.  now  after  all  these  a.  of  Josias
33  the  a.  that  Josias  did  are  reported
E<  • ci .  17.  9.  gave  them  to  glory  in  his  marvellous  a.

15.  4.  and  who  shall  find  out  his  noble  a.  ?

51.  8.  then  thought  I  upon  thy  a.  of  old

620


AI)  U

1  Mac.  2. 51. call  to  remembrance  whata.  our  fathers

did  in  their  time  to  receive  great  honour

3.  4.  in  his  a.  he  was  like  a  lion  roaring  for  his  prey

7.  he  made  Jacob  glad  with  his  a.

5.  56.  heard  of  valiant  a.  and  deeds  they  had  done

8.  2.  it  was  told  him  of  their  wars  and  noble  a.

9.  22.  his  wars,  and  the  noble  a.  which  he  did
14.  35.  the  people  seeing  the  a.  of  Simon

2  Mac.  2.  13.  gathered  together  the  a.  of  king

10.  10.  now  will  we  declare  the  a.  of  Antiochus

ADAM.

2  Esd.  3.  5.  thou  gavest  a  body  to  A.  without  soul
10.  as  death  was  to  A.  so  was  the  flood  to  these
21 .  the  first  A.  bearing  a  wicked  heart  transgressed
26.  in  all  things  did  even  as  A.  hail  done

4.  30.  evil  seed  hath  been  sown  in  the  heart  of  A.

6.  54.  A.  whom  thou  madest  lord  of  thy  creatures

7.  11.  when  A.  transgressed  my  statutes

46.  been  better  not  to  have  given  the  earth  to  A.
48.  O  thou  A.  what  hast  thou  done  ?

Tob.  8.  6.  thou  madest  A.  and  gavest  him  Eve
Eccl.  .3.3.  10.  and  A.  was  created  of  the  earth
40.  1.  and  an  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  sons  of  A.

49.  16.  so  was  A.  above  everv  living  thing  in  crea.
ADAMANT.

Eccl.  16. 16.  his  light  from  the  darkness  with  an  a.
ADAH.

1  Esd.  7 •  5.  holy  house  was  finished  in  the  month  A.
Esth.  13.  6.  of  the  twelfth  month  A.  16.  20.

1  Mac.  7.  43.  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month  A.

2  Mac.  15.  36.  in  the  Syrian  tongue  is  called  A.

ADASA.

1  Mac.  7-  40.  Judas  pitc  hed  in  A.  with  3000  men
45.  they  pursued  after  them  from  A. to  Gazera
ADD.

Tob.  5.  15.  I  will  a.  something  to  thy  wages
18.  be  not  greedy  to  a.  money  to  money
Eccl.  4.  3.  a.  not  more  trouble  to  an  heart  vexed

5.  5.  be  not  without  fear  to  a.  sin  to  sin
21.  15.  he  will  commend  it,  and  a.  unto  it

1  Mac.S.  30.  shall  think  meet  to  a.  or  diminish  any
thing;  and  whatsoever  thev  shall  a.  or  take  away
ADDED.

1  Esd.  7.  6.  that  were  a.  to  them  did  according  to
Eccl.  3.  14.  instead  of  sins  shall  bea.to  build  thee  up
42.  21.  to  him  may  nothing  be  a.  nor  diminished

1  Mac.  10.  30.  governments  which  are  a.  thereto
38.  the  three  that  are  a.  to  Judea,  11.  34.

14.  30.  after  that  Jonathan  was  a.  to  his  people
ADDING.

2  Mac.  2.  32.  only  a.  thus  much  to  what  is  said

ADDO.

1  Esd.  6.  1.  Zacharias  the  son  of  A.  prophesied
ADII  Eli  ENTS.

1  Mac.  9.  60.  he  sent  letters  to  his  a.  in  Judea
ADI  1)A.

1  Mac.  12.  33.  Simon  also  set  up  A.  in  Sephela
13.  13.  but  Simon  pitched  his  tents  at  A.

.  ADJOINING.

1  Mac.  12.  33.  Simon  passed  thro’  the  holds  there  a.

2  Mac.  12.  16.  a  lake  near  a.  thereto,  being  filled

ADMIRABLE.

1  Esd.  4.  29.  Apame,  dauehterof  the  a.  Barfacus

ADMIRATION.

Eccl.  22. 23.  nor  the  rich  that  is  foolish  to  be  had  in  a.
38.  3.  in  the  sight  of  great  men  he  shall  be  in  a.
ADMIRE.

Eccl.  27.  23.  he  will  speak  sweetly  and  a.  thy  words
ADMIRED.

Jud.  10.  19.  wondered  at  her  beauty,  and  a.  Israel
Wisd.  8.  11.1  shall  be  a.  in  the  sight  of  great  men

11.  14.  when  they  saw  what  came  to  pass  they  a.

ADMON  ISH.

Jvd.  8.  27.  that  come  near  to  them  to  a.  them
IVisd.  11.  10.  for  these  thou  didst  a.  as  a  father
Eccl.  19.  13.  a.  a  friend,  may  be  not  done  it,  14,  15.
17.  a.  thy  neighbour  before  thou  threaten  him
ADMONISHED.

Wisd.  16.6.  were  troubled  that  they  might  be  a.
ADORE.

Bel  4.  the  kingworshipped  itandwentdaiIytoa.it
A  DO  H  NED.

Esth.  15.  2.  being  gloriously  a.  she  took  maids
'ADO It  N  ING.

2  Mac.  2.  29.  must  seek  fit  things  fora,  thereof

ADVANTAGE.

2  Mac.  8.  7.  but  especially  took  he  a.  of  the  night
ADVENTURE.

Wisd.  2.  2.  for  we  are  born  at  all  a.  be  as  not  been
ADVERSARY.

Eccl.  36.  7.  take  away  the  a.  destroyer,  the  enemy
1  Mac.  1.  36.  it  was  an  evil  a.  to  Israel
ADVERSARIES.

1  Esd.  8.  51.  conduct  for  safeguard  against  our  a.
Wisd.  11.3.  they  were  avenged  of  their  a.

8.  declaring  how  thou  hadst  punished  their  a.

18.  8.  for  wherewith  thou  didst  punish  our  a.

Eccl. 23.3.  lest  my  sins  abound  and  I  fall  bef.mine  a.
47.  7  he  brought  to  nought  the  Philistines  his  a.

51 .  2.  thou  hast  been  my  helper  against  mine  a.

1  Mac.  9.  29.  against  them  that  are  a.  to  us

ADVERSELY.

Eccl.  2.  5.  acceptable  men  in  the  furnace  of  a.

11. 14. prosperity  and  a.  life  and  death  comeofGod

12.  8.  and  an  enemy  cannot  be  hidden  in  a.

9.  but  in  his  a.  even  a  friend  will  depart

17.  if  a.  come  upon  thee,  thou  shalt  find  him  there

2  Mac.  6.  16.  though  he  punish  with  a  yet  not

forsake

12.  30.  entreated  them  kindly  in  time  of  their  a.
ADVERSITIES.

2  Esd.  10.  20.  for  how  many  are  the  a.  of  Sion  !

2  Mac.  5.  20.  partaker  of  the  a.  that  happened
ADVICE.

Eccl.  32. 19.  do  nothing  without  a.  done  repent  not
A  DUL  LER  ER.

Eccl.  25.  2.  my  soul  hateth  an  old  a.  that  doteth
ADULTER  ERS.

IVisd.  3. 16. children  ofa. shall  not  come  to  perfection
ADULTERY.

IVisd.  14.24.  slew  another,  or  grieved  him  by  a.
Eccl.  23.  23.  she  hath  played  the  whore  in  a.


A  F  II

AFAR  off.

1  Esd. 5.  65.  sounded,  so  that  it  was  heard  a.  off
Eccl.  16.22.  for  his  covenant  is  a.  off,  trial  in  end
AREA  I  RS.

1  Esd.  8.  12.  that  they  may  look  to  the  a.  of  Judea
Tob.  1. 21.  over  father’s  accounts,  and  over  all  his  a.
Esth.  13.7.  cause  our  a.  to  be  well  settled

16.  5.  put  in  trust  to  manage  their  friends’  a.

1  Mac.  3.  32.  Lysias  to  oversee  the  a.  of  the  king
6.56.  sought  to  take  to  him  the  ruling  of  the  a.

57.  and  the  a.  of  the  kingdom  lie  upon  us
Id.  37.  some  set  over  the  a.  of  the  kingdom

2  Mac.  4.  21 .  not  to  be  well  affected  to'his  a.

7.  24.  that  he  would  trust  him  with  his  a.

8.  8.  wrote  to  yield  more  aid  to  the  king’s  a.

9.  20.  and  if  your  a.  he  to  your  contentment
11.1.  Lysias,  who  managed  a.  took  displeasure

23.  that  every  one  may  attend  upon  his  own  a.
26.  they  may  go  cheerfully  about  their  own  a.

13.  2.  Lysias,  his  protector  and  ruler  of  his  a.

23.  who  was  left  over  the  a.  in  Antioch

AFFECT.

Eccl.  13. 11.  a.  not  to  he  made  equal  to  him  in  talk
AFFECT' ED.

Esth.  13.  5.  this  people  is  evil  a.  to  our  state
16.  23.  be  safety  to  us,  and  the  well  a.  Persians
2  Mac.  4.21.  understanding  him  not  to  be  well  a.
13.26.  Lysias  pacified,  and  made  them  well  a.

14. 5.  being  called  and  asked  how  the  Jews  stood  a.

26.  Nicanor  was  not  well  a.  toward  the  state

!  AFFECTION.

Wisd.  6. 11.  therefore  set  vour  a.  on  my  words
AFFLICT.

Eccl.  30.  21.  a.  not  thyself  in  thine  own  counsel
49.  7-  that  he  might  root  out,  and  a.  and  destroy
AFFLICTED.

2  Esd.  11. 42.  for  thou  hast  a.  meek,  hurt  peaceable
Jvd.  9.  11.  for  thou  art  a  God  of  the  a.  an  helper
16.  11.  my  a.  shouted  for  joy,  my  weak  ones  cried
Wisd  5.  1 .  before  the  face  of  such  as  have  a.  him

14.  15.  a  father  a.  with  untimely  mourning

18. 19.  they  should  not  know  why  they  were  a.

19.  16.  but  these  very  grievously  a.  them
Eccl.  4.  4.  reject  not  the  supplication  of  the  a.

30.  14.  than  a  rich  man  that  is  a.  in  his  body
Bar.  4.  31.  miserable  are  they  that  a.  thee

1  Mac.  9-  68.  and  they  a.  Bacchides  sore

10.  46.  for  he  had  a.  them  very  sore

AFFLICTING.

Jud.  2.  2.  and  concluded  the  a.  of  the  whole  earth
AFFLICTION.

2  Esd.  6.  19.  when  the  a.  of  Sion  shall  be  fulfilled
Jud.  13.  20.  not  spared  for  the  a.  of  our  nation
Esth.  11.8.  a  day  of  anguish  a.  and  great  uproar

14.  12.  make  thyself  known  in  time  of  our  a.

16.  20.  who  in  time  of  their  a.  shall  set  upon  them
Eccl.  2. 11.  for  the  Lord  saveth  in  time  ofa.

3.  15.  in  the  day  of  a.  it  shall  be  remembered

6.  10.  will  not  continue  in  the  day  of  thine  a.

11.  25.  in  prosperity  there  is  a  forgetfulness  ot

a.  and  in  the  day  of  a.  there  is  no  remem¬
brance

27.  a.  of  an  hour  makes  a  man  forget  pleasure
25. 14.  any  a.  but  the  a.  from  them  that  hate  me
29.  12.  and  it  shall  deliver  thee  from  all  a.

35.  20.  mercy  is  seasonable  in  the  time  ofa.

38.  19.  in  a.  also  sorrow  remaineth,  life  of  the  pr  >r
Bar.  5. 1 .  the  garment  of  thy  mourning  and  a.

1  Mac.  9.  27.  so  was  there  a  great  a.  in  Israel

AFFLICTIONS.

2  Esd.  8.  27.  of  those  that  keep  thy  testimonies  /n  a.
Jud.  4. 13.  so  God  heard  and  looked  upon  their  a.
Eccl.  51.3.  and  from  thenianifold  a.  which  I  had

1  Mac.  2.  30.  because  a.  increased  sore  on  them

AFFRIGHTED.

2  Esd.  10.  55.  fear  not,  let  not  thy  heart  be  a.

12.  5.  great  fear  wherewith  I  was  a.  this  night

AFORE.

1  Esd.  6.  32.  make  light  of  any  thing  a.  spoken
AFOREHAND.

Jud.  7- 1.  to  take  a.  the  ascents  of  the  hill-country
AFORETIME.

Sus.  52.  sins  committed  a.  are  come  to  light

1  Mac.  3.  46.  was  the  place  where  they  prayed  a.

9.  72.  the  prisoners  taken  a.  out  of  lr.nd  of  Judea
11. 34.  the  king  received  of  them  yearly  a.

AFRAID.

2  Esd.Ci.  15.  therefore  when  it  speaks,  be  not  a.

23.  when  they  hear  shall  be  suddenly  a.

10. 25. 1  was  a.  of  her,  and  mused  what  it  might  be
27.  then  was  I  a.  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice
38.  I  shall  tell  thee  wherefore  thou  art  a.

13.  8.  they  were  sore  a.  and  yet  durst  fight

11.  dust  and  smoke,  when  1  saw  this,  1  was  a.
15. 18.  houses  be  destroyed,  and  men  shall  be  a.
37.  and  they  that  see  the  wrath  shall  be  a.

43.  they  shall  go  to  Rabylon,  and  make  her  a.  ,
16. 10.  he  shall  thunder,  and  who  shad  not  be.  a.?
Tob.  2.  8.  this  man  is  not  yet  a.  to  be  put  to  death
4.8.  be  not  a.  to  give  according  tr  that  little
6.  14.  and  I  am  a.  lest  if  I  go  in  unto  her,  I  die
Jud.  1.11.  for  they  were  not  a.  of  him

4.  2.  therefore  they  were  exceedingly  a.  of  him

5.  23.  we  will  not  be  a.  of  the  face  of  Israel

10.  16.  when  before  him  be  not  a.  in  thy  heart.
16.25.  there  was  none  made  Israel  any  more  a.
IVi>d.  8. 15.  horrible  tyrants  be  a.  when  hear  of  me

18.  25.  the  destroyer  gave  place  and  was  a.

Eccl.  26.  5.  and  for  the  fourth  I  was  sore  a.

30.9  cocker  thy  child  he  shall  make  thee  a.

34.  14.  whoso  feareth  the  Lord,  shall  not  be  a.
Bar.  6.  5.  neither  be  ye  a.  when  ye  see  multitude

1  Mac.  1.  18.  but  Ptolemee  was  a.  of  him  and  fled
3.  22.  and  as  for  yon,  be  ye  not  a.  of  them

4.8.  fear  not,  neither  be  ye  a.  of  their  assault
21.  perceived  these  things,  they'  were  sore  a.
5.41.  but  if  he  be  a.  and  camp  beyond  the  river
8.  12.  all  that  heard  of  their  name  were  a.

12.  40.  he  was  a.  Jonathan  would  not  suffer  him
52.  they  bewailed  Jonathan,  and  were  sore  a.

16.6.  he  saw  that  the  people  were  a.  to  go  over

2  Mac.  3.  24.  all  that  came  with  him  were  sore  a.


ALE


A  L  T


A  M  M  f A  POCKY PH  A.


AFTER  WARD.

Reel.  19.  21.  say,  1  will  not  do  it,  though  a.  he  do  it
AGAGITE.

Lsth.  12.  6.  howbeit,  Atnan  the  A.  sought  to  molest
AGAR  EN  ES.

Bar.  3.  23.  the  A.  that  seek  wisdom  upon  earth
AGE.

2  Esd.  3.  18.  thou  troubledst  the  men  of  that  a.

5.  50.  for  our  mother  draweth  now  nigh  to  a.

53.  and  they  that  are  born  in  the  time  of  a.

Tob.  1. 9.  when  I  was  come  to  the  a.  of  a  man

3.  10.  shall  bring  old  a.  with  sorrow  to  the  grave

14.  5.  till  the  time  of  that  a.  be  fulfilled

Jnd.  8.  18.  there  arose  none  in  our  a.  that  worship
Wisd.  3.  17-  their  last  a.  shall  be  without  honour

4.  8.  honourable  a.  is  not  in  length  of  time

9.  and  an  unspotted  life  is  old  a.

16.  the  many  years  and  old  a.  of  ffe  unrighteous
Reel.  3.  12.  my  son,  help  thv  father  in  his  a.

6.  18.  so  shalt  thou  find  wisdom  till  thy  old  a.

8.  6.  dishonour  not  a  man  in  his  old  a.

2 6.  17-  so  is  the  beauty  of  the  face  in  ripe  a.

19.  my  son,  keep  the  flower  of  thine  a.  sound

30.  24.  carefulness  brings  a.  before  the  time

41.  2.  that  is  now  in  the  last  a.  and  is  vexed

42.  9.  lest  she  pass  away  the  flower  of  her  a.

46.  9-  which  remained  with  him  till  his  old  a.

1  Mae.  16.  3.  I  am  old,  and  ye  are  of  sufficient  a.

2  Mae.  6. 24.  for  it  becometh  not  our  a.  to  dissemble

25.  J  get  a  stain  to  my  old  a.  and  abominable
27.  shew  myself  such  an  one  as  my  a  '"equireth

7.  27.  nourished  and  brought  thee  up  to  this  a.

AGED.

2  Esd.  5.  49.  the  things  that  belong  to  the  a.

Tab.  8.  7-  that  we  may  become  a.  together

14.  3.  for  behold,  I  am  a.  and  ready  to  depart
Wisd.  2.  10.  the  ancient  gray  hairs  of  the  a.

Eccl.  25.  20.  as  climbing  a  sandy  way  is  to  feet  of  a.
42.  8.  be  not  ashamed  to  inform  the  extreme  a.

2  Mac.  6.  18.  Eleazar  the  scribe,  an  a.  man

8.  30.  made  the  a.  equal  in  spoils  with  themselves

AGES.

1  Esd.  4.  40.  she  is  the  strength  and  majesty  of  all  a.
Wisd.  7.  27.  and  in  all  a.  entering  into  holy  souls

14.  6.  and  left  to  all  a.  a  seed  of  generation
Eccl.  24.  33.  I  will  leave  it  to  all  a.  for  ever
1  Mac.  2.  61.  thus  consider  throughout  all  a.

AGGEUS.

1  Esd.  6. 1.  A.  and  Zaeharias  prophesied  to  the  Jews

7.  3.  the  holy  works  prospered  when  A  .  prophesied

2  Esd.  1.  40.  A.  Zachary  amt  Malachi  for  leaders

AGO.

1  Esd.  6.  14.  this  house  was  builded  many  years  a.

A GON\'.

2  Mac.  3.  14.  there  was  no  small  a.  thro’  the  city
21.  the  fear  of  the  high  priest  being  in  such  an  a.

AGREE.

Tob.  7-  11.  I  will  eat  nothing  here  till  we  a.

Eccl.  13.  2.  how  a.  kettle  and  earthen  pot  together
25.  1.  a  man  and  a  wife  that  a.  together
2  Mac.  11. 14.  he  persuaded  them  to  a.  to  conditions
AGREEABLE.

H'isd.  12.  15.  thinking  it  r,ot  a.  to  condemn  him
AGREEABLY.

1  Esd.  8.  12.  a.  to  that  which  is  in  law  of  the  Lord

AGREEING.

iVisd.  16.  20.  didst  send  them  bread  a.  to  every  taste
AGREEMENT.

Eccl.  13.  18.  what  a.  between  the  hyena  and  a  dog  ?

2  Mac.  12.  25.  restore  them  according  to  the  a.

AID.

Tob.  8.  6.  let  us  make  to  him  an  a.  like  himself
Jud.  9-  4.  thy  children  called  upon  thee  for  a.

Esth.  16.  20.  ve  shall  a.  them,  that  they  be  avenged
IVisd.  13.  18.  fora,  he  beseecheth  what  hath  least
5  Mac.  7-  7-  punish  them,  with  all  that  a.  them

8.  26.  nor  shall  they  a.  them  with  victuals

10.  24.  promise  them  gifts,  that  I  may  have  their  a.

15.  19.  nor  yet  a.  their  enemies  against  them

16.  18.  that  he  should  send  him  an  host  to  a.  him

2  Mac.  4.  11.  who  went  to  Rome  for  amity  and  a.

8.  8.  to  yield  more  a.  to  the  king’s  affairs

15.  8.  expect  victory'  and  a.  from  the  Almighty
A1LETH.

2  Esd.  9.  42.  T  said  to  her,  what  a.  thee  >  tel!  me

10.  31.  what  a.  thee  ?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  <

AIM.

Wisd.  13.  9.  to  know  that  they  could  a.  at  the  world
AIR.

2  Esd.  6.  4.  or  ever  the  heights  of  the  a.  were  lifted

11.  2.  all  the  winds  of  the  a.  blew  on  her

Jnd.  11. 7.  the  fowls  of  the  a.  shall  live  by  thy  power
IVisd.  2.  3.  our  spirits  shall  vanish  as  the  soft  a.

5.  11.  as  when  a  bird  hath  down  through  the  a.

but  the  light  a.  being  beaten  with  her  wings

12.  an  arrow  is  shot  at  a  mark,  it  parteth  the  a.

7.  3.  when  I  was  born,  I  drew  in  the  common  a.

17.  10.  they  died,  denying  that  they  saw  the  a.
Bar.  3.  17.  had  pastime  with  the  fowls  of  the  a.
Ban.  3.  58.  O  all  ye  fowls  of  the  a.  bless  the  Lord
2  Mac.  4.  46.  taking  aside,  as  it  were  to  take  the.  a.

5.  2.  there  were  seen  horsemen  running  in  the  a.
.ALARM.

1  Mac.  7. 45.  sounding  an  a.  after  them  with  trump.
ALCIMUS.

1  Mac.'! .  5.  having  A.  who  was  desirous  to  be  priest
0.  and  him  he  sent  with  that  wicked  A.

12.  did  there  assemble  to  A.  a  company  of  scribes

to  require  justice,  20.  23,  25.  19  1,  57.
21.  but  A.  contended  for  the  high-priesthood

9.  54.  A.  commanded  that  the  wall  be  pulled  down

55.  even  at  that  time  was  A.  plagued  and  hindered

56.  A.  died  at  that  time  with  great  torment

2  Mac.  14.  3.  one  A.  who  had  been  high  priest

13.  to  make  A.  high  priest  of  the  great  temple

26.  A.  perceiving  the  love  that  was  betwixt  them

ALEXANDER.

1  Mac.  1.1.  A.  son  of  Philip  the  Macedonian,  6.  2.
7.  A.  reigned  twelve  years,  and  then  died
'JO.  1.  A.  the  son  of  Aritiochus  took  Ptolemais
4.  let  us  first  make  peace  with  him,  before  he
join  with  A.  15.  18,  47,  49,  59,  68,  88.


1  Mac.  10. 23.  what  have  we  done  that  A.  prev.  us  '
51.  A.  sent  ambassadors  to  Ptoleinee  kingof  Egypt
ALIENS.

1  Mac.  3.  45.  sanctuary  trodden,  a.  kept  strong  hold

ALIKE.

Wisd.  6.7.madesmall  and  great, he careth  forall  a.

11.11.  absent  or  present,  they  were  vexed  a.

14.  9.  are  both  a.  hateful  unto  God

ALIVE.

2  Esd.  12.  33.  set  them  before  him  a.  in  judgment
Tob.  3. 15.  nor  any  son  of  his  a.  to  whom  1  may  keep

7.  5.  they  said,  he  is  both  a.  and  in  good  health

8.  12.  send  and  let  her  see  whether  he  be  a.

14.  came  forth,  and  told  them  that  he  was  a.

1  Mac.  1 . 6.  and  parted  his  kingdom  while  he  was  a.

8.  7-  how  they  took  him  a.  and  covenanted

14.  2.  he  sent  one  of  his  princes  to  fake  him  a.

2  Mac.  6.26.  not  escape  the  Almighty  a.  nor  dead
7-  5.  commanded  him,  being  yet  a.  to  be  brought

24.  whilst  the  youngest  was  yet  a.  did  exhort  him
12.  35.  he  would  have  taken  that  curse  1  man  a.

A  LLEGI  NG.

Wisd.  18.  22.  a.  the  oaths  made  with  the  fathers
ALLIED.

Wisd.  8.  17.  to  be  a.  to  wisdom  is  immortality
ALLOWANCE.

1  Esd.  1 . 7-  these  things  were  given  of  the  king’s  a.

2  Mac.  4. 14.  to  be  partakers  of  the  unlawful  a.

ALLOWED.

2  Esd.  8.  52.  to  you  rest  is  a.  yea,  perfect  wisdom
ALLURE.

Jud.  10.4.  to  a.  the  eyes  of  all  that  should  see  her
ALLURED.

Wisd.  14.  20.  multitude  a.  by  the  grace  of  the  work
ALMIGHTY.

1  Esd.  9.  46.  Esdras  blessed  the  God  of  hosts  A.

2  Esd.  1.  15.  thus  saith  the  A.  Lord,  22,  28,  33.  |

2.  9,  31.  Jud.  4.  13.1  16.  6, 17-

9.  45.  and  we  gave  great  honour  unto  the  A.

Jnd.  8. 13.  try  the  l  ord  A.  but  you  shall  never  know

15.  10.  blessed  be  thou  of  the  A.  Lord  for  ever
Esth.  13.  9.  saying,  O  Lord,  Lord,  the  King  A.

16.  21.  A.  God  hath  turned  to  joy  unto  them
IVisd.  7.  25.  flowing  from  the  glory  of  the  A.

11.  17-  thy  A.  hand  that  made  the  world

18.  15.  thine  A.  word  leaped  down  from  heaven
Eccl.  24.  24.  for  the  Lord  A.  is  God  alone
42.  17.  works  which  the  A.  Lord  firmly  settled
50.  14.  the  offering  of  the  most  high  A.

17.  worship  their  Lord  God  A.  the  Most  High
Bar.  3.  4.  O  Lord  A.  thou  God  of  Israel,  hear  now
Prayer  of  Manass.  ()  Lord,  A  .  God  of  our  fathers

2  Mac.  1.  25.  the  only  Just.  A.  and  Everlasting

3.  22.  they  then  called  upon  the  A.  Lord

30.  w'hen  the  A.  Lord  appeared,  filled  with  joy

5.  20.  it  was  forsaken  in  wrath  of  the  A.  7.  38.

6.  26.  1  should  not  escape  the  hand  of  the  A.

7-35.  thou  hast  not  escaped  the  judgment  of  A.  God

8. 11.  that  was  to  follow  upon  him  from  the  A.  God

18.  but  our  confidence  is  in  the  A.  God

24.  by  the  help  of  the  A.  they  slew  above  9000

9.  5.  Lord  A.  smote  him  with  an  incurable  plague

11.  13.  because  the  A.  God  helped  them,  he  sent

12.  28.  Judas  and  his  company  called  on  the  A.  G.

15.  8.  which  should  come  to  them  from  the  A.

29.  praising  the  A.  in  their  own  language
32.  stretched  against  the  holy  temple  of  the  A.

A  LM OS  I  .

2  F.sd.  10.  10.  they  walk  a.  into  destruction
22.  the  name  that  is  named  on  us  is  a.  profaned
ALMS.

Tub.  1. 3.  1  did  many  a. -deeds  to  my  brethren

16.  I  gave  many  a.  to  my  brethren,  1  gave  bread
2.  14.  where  are  thine  a.  and  righteous  deeds  ?

4.  7*  give  a.  of  thy  substance,  and  when  thou

givest  a.  let  not  thine  eye  be  envious,  16.
8.  if  thou  hast  abundance,  give  a.  accordingly

10.  because  a.  doth  deliver  from  death,  12.  9.

11.  for  a.  is  a  good  gift  to  all  that  give  it

12.8.  prayer  is  good  with  fasting,  a.  and  righteous¬
ness,  it  is  better  to  give  a.  than  to  lay  up  gold
14.  2.  he  gave  a.  and  increased  in  the  fear  of  God

10.  Manasses  gave  a.  and  escaped  the  snares

11.  wherefore,  my  son,  consider  what  a.  doth
Eccl.  3.  30.  and  a.  maketh  an  atonement  for  sins
7-  10.  not  faint-hearted,  and  neglect  not  to  give  a.

12.  3.  no  good  can  come  to  him  that  givetli  no  a.

17.  22.  the  a.  of  a  man  is  as  a  signet  with  him
29.  12.  shut  up  a.  in  thy  store-houses

31.  11.  the  congregation  shall  declare  his  a.

35.  2.  he  that  giveth  a.  sacrificed!  praise
ALOFT.

1  Esd.  8.  92.  married  strange  worn,  now  is  all  Isr.  a.

1  Mac.  13.  27-  Simon  raised  it  a.  to  the  sight
ALONE.

1  F.sd.  5.  71.  we  ourselves  a.  will  build  to  the  Lord

2  Esd.  3.  4.  didst  plant  theearth,  and  that  thyself  a.
6.6.  they  all  were  made  thro’  me  a.  and  no  other
7-  48.  O  Adam,  thou  art  not  fallen  a.  but  we  all

9.  41.  Sir,  let  me  a.  that  I  may  bewail  myself
Tob.  1.  6.  I  a.  went  often  to  Jerusalem  at  feasts

8.  6.  it  is  not  good  that  man  should  be  a.

Esth.  13.  5.  that  this  people  a.  is  in  opposition  to  all
IVisd.  10.  1.  father  of  the  world  that  was  created  a.
Eccl.  6.  2.  torn  in  pieces,  as  a  bull  straying  a.

Bar.  4.  16.  these  have  left  her  that  was  a
Sus.  14  a  time,  when  they  might  find  her  a.

36.  the  elders  said,  as  we  walked  in  the  garden  a.

1  Mac.  10.  "0.  thou  a.  liftest  up  thyself  against  us

12.  36.  to  separate  it  that  so  it  might  be  a.

13.  4.  my  brethren  are  slain  and  I  am  left  a.

2  Mac.  15.  39.  hurtful  to  drink  wine  or  water  a.

ALR  EADY.

1  F.sd.  6.  9.  and  the  timber  a.  laid  upon  the  walls

2  Esd.  2.  13.  the  kingdom  is  a.  prepared  for  you
Tob.  3.  8.  thou  hast  had  a.  seven  husbands

15.  my  seven  husbands  a.  dead,  why  should  T  live
Wisd.  19.4.  forget  the  things  that  had  a.  happened

16.  were  a.  made  partakers  of  the  same  law's

ALTAR.

1  Esd  1.  18.  offer  sacrifices  upon  the  a.  of  the  Lord
4.  52.  tc  maintain  burnt  offerings  upon  the  a.


1  Esd.  5.  48.  make  ready  the  a.  of  the  God  of  Israel
50.  they  erected  the  a.  upon  his  own  place

8.  15.  may  offer  sacrifices  on  the  a.  of  die  Lord

2  Esd.  10.  21.  thou  seest  that  our  a.  is  broken  down
Tob.  1.  6.  then  I  gave  at  the  a.  to  the  priests

Jud.  4.  3.  the  vessels  and  the  a.  were  sanctified

11.  also  they  put  sackcloth  about  the  a.

9.  8.  to  cast  down  with  the  sword  the  horn  of  thy  a.
Esth.  14.  9-  quench  the  glory  of  thy  house  and  a.
IVisd.  9.  8.  an  a.  in  the  city  wherein  thou  dweJlest
Eccl.  35.6.  offering  of  righteous  maketh  the  a.  fat
50.  11.  w  hen  he  went  up  to  the  holy  a.  he  made

12.  he  himself  stood  by  the  heartli  of  the  a.

14.  and  finishing  the  service  at  the  a.

15.  he  poured  out  at  the  foot  of  the  a.  asavoui
Bar.  1.  10.  offer  upon  the  a.  of  the  Lord  our  God

1  Mac.  1.  21.  Antiochus  took  away  the  golden  a.
54.  the  abomination  of  desolation  on  the  a.

59.  did  sacrifice,  which  was  upon  the  a.  A  God
2.  23.  sacrifice  upon  the  a.  which  was  at  Midin
21.  wherefore  he  ran  and  slew  him  upon  the  a.
25.  he  killed,  and  the  a.  he  pulled  down
4.  38.  they  saw  the  a.  profaned,  the  gates  burnt
44.  w'hat  to  do  with  the  a.  of  burnt  offerings
47.  they  took  whole  stories,  and  built  a  new  a.

50.  and  upon  the  a.  they  burnt  incense

56.  so  they  kept  the  dedication  of  the  a.  eight  days
6.  7.  the  abomination  which  he  had  «et  upon  The  a.

2  Mac.  1.  19-  the  priests  took  the  fire  of  the  a.  privily

32.  consumed  by  the  light  that  shined  from  the  a.
2.  5.  where  he  laid  the  ark  and  the  a.  of  incense

4.  14.  the  priests  had  no  courage  to  serve  at  the  a.

10.  3.  they  made  another  a.  and  offered  sacrifice
14.  3.  nor  have  any  more  access  to  the  holy  a.

33.  L  will  break  down  the  a.  and  erect  a  temple
15.31.  when  he  had  set  the  priests  before  the  a.

ALTARS.

1  Mac.  1.  47.  set  up  a.  and  groves,  and  chapeb

51.  they  builded  idol-a.  thro’  the  cities  of  Juda

2  Mac.  10.  2.  the  a.  which  the  heathen  had  built

A  LT  BRAT  IONS.

Wisd.  7.  18.  the  a.  of  the  turning  of  the  sun

A  LT  E  R .  [stand  ing

Wisd.  4.  11.  lest  wickedness  should  a.  his  under-
ALT  BRED.

Jnd.  10.7.  they  saw  that  her  countenance  was  a.
Wisd.  16.  25.  even  then  was  it  a.  into  all  fashions
Eccl.  33. 8.  and  he  a.  seasons  and  feasts
A  LTOG  E  l  H  ER.

2  Esd.  6.20.  books  be  opened,  and  they  shall  see  a.
Jud.  15.  2.  rushing  out  a.  they  tied  to  the  plain
IVisd.  18.  12.  so  they  «.  had  innumerable  dead
Eccl.  41.  16.  nor  is  it  a.  approved  in  every  thing
ALWAY.

2  Esd.  15.  47.  have  a.  desired  to  commit  whoredom

16.  20.  they  shall  not  be  a.  mindful  of  scourges
AMA  HATHA.

Esth.  16. 10.  Aman  a  Macedonian  the  son  of  A.  17.
AMADATHUS.

Esth.  12.  6.  Aman  the  son  of  A.  the  Agagite
AMAN.

Tob.  14. 10.  remember  how  A.  handled  Achiacha-
rus,  but  A.  fell  into  the  snare  and  perished
Esth.  10.  7-  and  the  two  dragons  are  1  and  A.

12.  6.  howbeit  A.  was  in  great  honour  with  king

13.  6.  are  signified  in  writing  to  you  by  A.

14.  17.  thy  handmaid  hath  not  eaten  at  A.  table

16.  10.  for  A.  a  Macedonian  had  obtained  favour

17.  not  to  execute  the  letters  sent  to  you  by  A.
AMAIN.

2  Mac.  12.  22.  the  enemies  being  smitten,  fled  a.
AMATHIS.

1  Mac.  12.25.  Jonathan  met  them  in  the  land  of  A.
AMAZED.

Wisd.  5.  2.  shall  be  a.  at  strangeness  of  his  salvation
AMBASSADOR.

1  Mac.  12.  8.  Onias  entreated  the  a.  that  was  sent

2  Mac.  4.11.  who  went  a.  to  Rome  for  amity  and  aid

AMBASSADORS.

Jud.  3. 1.  so  they  sent  a.  to  him  to  treat  of  peace

1  Mac.  9.  70.  he  sent  a.  to  him,  to  make  peace

11.  9.  Ptolemee  sent  a.  to  king  Demetrius

12.  23.  we  do  command  our  a.  to  make  report
14.  21 .  the  a.,  that  were  sent  to  our  people
40.  that  they  had  entertained  the  a.  of  Simon

15. 17.  the  Jews  a.  our  friends  came  unto  us

2  Mac.  11.  34.  a.  of  the  Romans,  seno  greeting

AMBASSAG  E.

1  Mac.  14.  23.  put  the  copy  of  their  a.  in  records
AMBUSH.

1  Mac.  9.  40.  from  the  place  where  they  lay  in  a.
10.79.  had  left  a  thousand  horsemen  in  a.

1 1 . 68.  having  laid  men  in  a.  in  the  mountains
69.  when  they  that  lay  in  a.  arose  out  of  places
'AM  BUSHM  EN  T.

1  Mac.  10.  80.  Jonathan  knew  that  there  was  an  a.
AMEN.

1  Esd.  9.  47.  and  all  the  people  answered  a.

Tob.  8.  8.  she  said  with  him  a.  they  slept  that  night
Eccl.  50.29.  blessed  be  the  I.ord  forever,  a.  a.

AMEND.

Wisd.  11.  23.  at  sins  of  men,  because  they  should  a.
AMENDMENT.

2  Esd.  16. 19.  and  anguish  are  sent  as  scourges  for  a.

AAllABLE.

Esth,  15.  5.  her  countenance  was  cheerful  and  a.

A  MISS.

2  Esd.  8.  35.  there  is  none  which  hath  not  done  a.
Eccl.  7-  36.  rememberthe  end,  thou  shalt  never  do  a.
24.  22.  they  that  work  by  me,  shall  not  do  a.

40. 23.  a  friend  and  companion  never  meet  a.
AMITY.

1  Mac.  8.  1.  such  as  would  make  a  league  of  a.

12.  with  such  as  relied  on  them  they’  kept  a.

17-  sent  them  to  Rome  to  make  a  league  of  a.

10.  23.  in  making  a.  with  the  Jews  to  strengthen
54.  now  therefore  let  us  make  a  league  of  a.

12.  16.  to  renew  the  a.  that  we  had  with  them

2  Mac.  4. 11.  who  went  to  Rome  for  a.  and  aid

AMMON.

Jud.  5. 2.  was  angry, he  called  all  the  captains  of  A
6. 5.  thou  Acliior.an  hireling  of  A.  who  hast  spoken

fil'l


APOCRYPHA.]  ANN


APH


A  P  P


Jud.  7-  17.  the  camp  of  the  children  of  A.  departed
AMMONITES.

2  Mac.  4.  26.  to  flee  into  the  country  of  the  A.
AMO  RITES.

2  Esd.  1.  22.  when  you  were  in  the  river  of  the  A.
Jud.  5.  15.  so  they  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the  A.
AMOS.

2  Esd.  1 .30. 1  will  give  for  leaders,  A.  and  Micheus
Tob.2.6.  remembering  that  prophecy  of  A.  as  he  said
ANANIAS.

Tob.  5.  12.  I  am  Azarias,  the  son  of  A.  the  great
Dan.  3.  66.  O  A.  Azarias,  and  Misael,  1  Mac.  2.59.
ANCESTORS.

Jud.  5.  8.  for  they  left  the  way  of  their  a.

Eccl.  8.  4.  jest  not,  lest  thy  a.  be  disgraced

1  Mac.  7.  2.  he  entered  into  the  palace  of  his  a.

2  Mac.  14.  7.  1  being  deprived  of  mine  a.  honour

ANC1EN  1’.

Esth.  16.7.  not  so  much  by  a.  histories,  as  ye  may
Wisd.  2.  10.  nor  reverence  a.  gray  hairs  of  the  aged

13.  10.  ora  stone,  the  work  of  an  a.  hand
Eccl.  25.  4.  and  for  a.  men  to  know  counsel

32. 9.  when  a.  men  are  in  place,  use  not  many  words

39.  1.  he  will  seek  out  the  wisdom  of  all  the  a.

1  Mac.  14.  9.  tlie  a.  men  sat  all  in  the  streets

2  Mac.  6.  6.  nor  was  it  lawful  to  keep  a.  feasts
23.  as  became  the  excellency  of  his  a.  years

ANCIEN  l'S.

1  Esd.  5.  63.  the  a.  who  hail  seen  the  former  house
7-  2.  assisting  the  a.  of  the  Jews  and  governors

Jud.  6.  16.  they  called  together  all  the  a.  of  the  city

8.  10.  Chabris,  and  Charmis,  a.  of  the  city,  10.  6.
15.  8.  the  a.  of  the  children  of  Israel  came
Sus.5.  two  of  the  a.  of  the  people  to  be  judges
AND  RON  1C  US.

2  Mac.  4.  31.  leaving  A.  a  man  in  authority
31.  taking  A.  apart,  prayed  him  to  get  Onias

38.  forthwith  he  took  away  A.  his  purple  and  rent
!  5.  23.  at  Garizim  he  left  A.  governor

ANEW.

1  Esd.  2.  24.  if  the  walls  thereof  be  set  up  a.

Wisd.  19.  6.  the  creature  was  fashioned  again  a.

ANGEL.

2  Esd.  1.  40.  who  is  called  also  an  a.  of  the  Lord

2.  44.  I  asked  the  a.  and  said,  sir,  what  are  these  ?

4.  1.  the  a.  that  was  sent  to  me  gave  an  answer

5.  15.  the  a.  that  was  come  to  talk  with  me

20.  I  fasted,  as  Uriel  the  a.  commanded  me
31.  the  a.  that  came  to  me  the  night  afore

7-  1.  there  was  sent  to  me  the  a.  who  had  been  sent

12.  51.  but  I  remained,  as  the  a.  commanded  me
Tob.5.  4.  he  found  Raphael  that  was  an  a.

16.  and  the  a.  of  God  keep  you  company

21.  for  the  good  a.  will  keep  him  company

6.  5.  the  young  man  did  as  the  a.  commanded  him

8.  3.  the  evil  spirit  fled  and  the  a.  bound  him

12.  5.  so  he  called  the  a.  and  said  unto  him

22.  how  the  a.  of  the  Lord  had  appeared  to  them
Esth.  15.  13.  I  saw  thee,  my  lord,  as  an  a.  of  God
Eccl.  48.  21.  smote  the  host,  his  a.  destroyed  them
Bar.  6.7.  my  a.  is  with  you,  and  I  caringyour  souls
Dan.  3.  26.  but  the  a.  of  the  Lord  came  down
Sus.  55.  the  a.  of  God  hath  received  the  sentence

59.  the  a.  of  God  waiteth  to  cut  thee  in  two
Bel.  34.  but  the  a.  of  the  Lord  said  to  Ilabbacuc
36.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  took  him  by  the  crown

39.  the  a.  of  the  Lord  set  Habbacuc  in  his  place

1  Mac.  7.  41.  the  a.  went  out,  and  smote  185,000

2  Mac.  11.6.  would  send  a  good  a.  to  deliver  Israel

15.  22.  thou  didst  send  thy  a.  in  time  of  Ezekias

23.  send  a  good  a.  before  us  for  a  dread  to  them

ANGELS.

2  Esd.  1. 19. 1  gave  you  manna,  ye  did  eat  a.  bread

6.  3.  before  the  a.  were  gathered  together

8.  21.  before  whom  the  hosts  of  a.  stand  trembling

16.  66.  how  hide  your  sins  before  God  and  his  a.  ?
Tob.  8.  15.  let  all  thy  a.  and  thine  elect  praise  thee

11.  14.  and  blessed  are  all  thine  holy  a.

12.  15.  I  am  Raphael  one  of  the  seven  holy  a.
Wisd.  16.  20.  thou  feddest  thy  people  with  a.  food
Dan.  3.  37*  O  ye  a.  of  the  Lord,  bless  ye  the  Lord

ANGER.

2  Esd.  10.  5.  then  I  spake  to  her  in  a.  saying
Jud.  8.  14.  provoke  not  the  Lord  our  God  to  a.

11.  11.  they  will  provoke  their  God  to  a.

Wisd.  10.  3.  unrighteous  went  away  from-  her  in  a.
Eccl.  8.  11.  rise  not  up  in  a.  at  the  presence  of  an
10.  18.  nor  furious  a.  for  them  that  are  born

25.  22.  a  woman  is  full  of  a.  and  much  reproach

26.  8.  a  drunken  woman  causetli  great  a.

28.  10.  according  to  his  riches,  his  a.  riseth

40.  5.  trouble,  fear  of  death,  and  a.  and  strife

1  Mac.  2.  24.  nor  could  he  forbear  to  shew  his  a.
44.  they  smote  sinful  men  in  their  a.

2  Mac.  4.  38.  and  being  kindled  with  a.  he  took

9.  4.  then  swelling  with  a.  he  thought  to  avenge

ANGERETH.

Eccl.  3.  16.  he  that  a.  his  mother  is  cursed  of  God

19.  21.  a  servant#,  him  that  nourisheth  him

ANGRY.

1  Esd.  8.  88.  mightest  not  thou  be  a.  with  us  ?

2  Esd.  16.  48.  the  more  will  1  be  a.  with  them
Jud.  1. 12.  N  abuchodonosor  a.  with  all  his  country

5,  2.  he  was  very  a.  and  called  the  princes  of  Moab
Eccl.  8.  16.  strive  not  with  an  a.  man,  go  not  with

20.  2.  it  is  better  to  reprove  than  be  a.  secretly
26.  28.  two  things  grieve,  and  the  third  maketh  a.

Bel  20.  I  see  footsteps,  and  then  the  king  was  a.
Prayer  of  Manas s.  be  not  a.  with  me  for  ever

1  Mac.  6.  28.  when  he  heard  this  he  was  a.  11.  22.

2  Mac.  5.  17.  he  considered  not  that  the  Lord  was  a.

7.  33.  though  the  living  Lord  be  a.  a  little  while

ANGUISH.

2  Esd.  16. 19.  tribulation  and  a.  sent  for  amendment
Esth.  11.  8.  and  lo,  a  day  of  tribulation  and  a.

14.  2.  put  on  garments  of  a.  and  mourning

15.  5.  but  her  heart  was  in  a.  for  fear

Wisd.  5.  3.  they  groaning  for  a.  of  spirit,  shall  say
Eccl.  27.29.  a.  shall  consume  them  before  they  die
Bar.  3.  1.  the  soul  in  a.  the  troubled  spirit  crieth
ANNA.

Job.  1.9-  T  married  A.  of  mine  own  kindred
622


Tob.l.  20.  not  any  thing  left  me,  besides  my  wife  A.

2.  1.  my  wife  A.  was  restored  to  me  with  my  son

11.  my  wife  A.  did  take  women’s  work  to  do
5.  17-  A.  his  mother  wept,  and  said  to  Tobit
11.  5.  now  A.  sat  looking  about  for  her  son

9.  A.  ran  forth,  and  fell  on  the  neck  of  her  son

14.  12.  when  A.  his  mother  was  dead,  he  buried

ANNOYANCE.

1  Esd.  2.  29.  proceed  no  further  to  the  a.  of  kings

ANNOYED.

2  Mac.  8.  32.  who  hail  a.  the  Jews  many  ways

ANOINT.

T’b.  6.  8.  it  is  good  to  a.  a  man  that  hath  whiteness
11.  8.  therefore  a.  thou  Ids  eyes  with  the  gall
ANOIN  I’ ED.

2  Esd.  12.  32.  this  is  the  a.  which  the  Highest  kept
Jud.  10. 3.  washed,  a.  herself  with  precious  ointment

16.  8.  and  she  a.  her  face  with  ointment
Eccl.  45.  15.  Moses  a.  him  with  holy  oil
46.  19.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  and  his  a.

48.  8.  who  a.  kings  to  take  revenge  and  prophets
2  Mac.  1.  10.  who  was  of  the  stock  of  the  a.  priests
ANSWER.

1  Esd. 6. 6.  signification  was  given,  and  an  a.  received

13.  they  gave  us  this  a.  we  are  the  servants

2  Esd.  4.  1.  the  angel  Uriel  gave  me  an  a.

9.  yet  canst  thou  give  me  no  a.  of  them
Wisd.  6.  10.  that  have  learned,  shall  find  what  to  a.
Eccl.  4.8.  gave  him  a  friendly  a.  with  meekness

5.  11.  be  swift  to  hear,  and  with  patience  give  a.

12.  if  thou  hast  understanding,  a.  thy  neighbour

8.  9.  of  the  elders  thou  shalt  learn  understanding,

and  to  give  a.  as  need  required)
11.  8.  a.  not  before  thou  hast  heard  the  cause
20.  6.  holds  his  tongue,  because  he  hath  not  to  a.
33.  4.  bind  up  instruction,  and  then  make  a.
ANSWERED.

1  Esd.  9.  47.  and  all  the  people  a.  amen
Jud.  14.  15.  but  because  none  a.  he  opened  it
Sics.  54.  who  a.  under  a  mastick-tree
58.  who  a.  under  an  holm-tree

1  Mac.  2.  36.  they#,  them  not,  nor  cast  they  a  stone

ANSWERING.

2  Mac.  1. 23.  the  rest  a.  thereunto  as  Neemias  did

A  NTIL1  BAN  US.

Jud.  1.7-  sent  to  all  that  dwelt  in  Libanus  and  A.
ANTIOCH.

1  Mac.  3.  37.  he  departed  from  A.  his  royal  city

10.  68.  king  Alexander  returned  into  A.

11.  13.  then  Ptolemee  entered  into  A.  where  he  set
44.  Jonathan  sent  three  thousand  men  unto  A.

2  Mac.  8.  35.  he  came  like  a  fugitive  servant  to  A.
11.  36.  for  we  are  now  going  to  A.

13.  23.  who  was  left  over  the  affairs  in  A.

26.  made  them  well-affected,  returned  to  A.

ANTIOCH  1  A.

1  Mac.  4.  35.  he  went  to  A.  and  gathered  strangers

2  Mac.  5.21.  he  departed  in  all  haste  into  A.

AN  TIOCHIANS.

2  Mac.  4.  9.  to  write  them  by  the  name  of  A

19.  sent  messengers  from  Jerusalem  who  were  A.

AN  TIOCHIS.

2  Mac.  4.  30.  the  king’s  concubine  called  A.
ANTIOCH  US.

1  Mac.  1.  10.  A.surnamed  Epiphanes,  son  of  A .  the

king,  who  had  been  an  hostage  at  Rome
16.  the  kingdom  was  established  before  A.

20.  after  A.  had  smitten  Egypt,  he  returned  again

41.  king  A.  wrote  to  his  whole  kingdom

3.  27.  when  A.  heard,  he  was  full  of  indignation
33.  he  left  Lysias  to  bring  up  his  son  A.

6. 1.  A.  heard  say ,  that  Elymais  was  city  renowned

15.  to  the  end  he  should  bring  up  his  son  A.

16.  so  king  A.  died  there  in  the  149th  year

55.  whom  A.  had  appointed  to  bring  up  his  son  A.

7.  2.  so  it  was,  that  his  forces  had  taken  A.

8.  6.  A.  the  great  king  of  Asia  came  in  battle
11. 39.  that  brought  up  A.  young  son  of  Alexander

40.  lay  sore  on  him  to  deliver  him  this  young  A.
57.  at  that  time  young  A.  wrote  to  Jonathan
12. 16.  we  chose  Numenius  the  son  of  A.  14.  22.
39.  Tryphon  went  about  to  kill  A.  the  king

13.  31.  dealt  deceitfully  with  the  young  king  A.
15.  1.  A.  son  of  Demetrius  the  king,  sent  letters

2.  king  A.  to  Simon  the  high  priest,  greeting

10.  A.  went  into  the  land  of  his  fathers

11.  being  pursued  by  king  A.  he  fled  to  Dora

13.  then  camped  A.  against  Dora,  25.

2  Mac.  1.  14.  A.  as  though  he  would  marry  her
15.  they  shut  the  temple  as  soon  as  A.  was  come

4.7.  A.  called  Epiphanes  took  the  kingdom

21.  A.  understanding  him  not  to  be  well  affected
37.  A.  was  heartily  sorry  and  moved  to  pity

5.  1.  A.  prepared  his  second  voyage  into  Egypt
5.  gone  forth  a  false  rumour,  as  if  A.  been  dead

17.  haughty  was  A.  in  mind,  he  considered  not
21.  so  when  A.  had  carried  out  of  the  temple

9.  1.  A.  came  with  dishonour  out  of  Persia
19.  A.  king  and  governor  to  the  good  Jews
25.  I  have  appointed  my  son  A.  king

29.  who  fearing  the  son  of  A.  went  into  Egypt

10.  9.  this  was  the  end  of  A.  called  Epiphanes

10.  we  will  declare  the  acts  of  A.  Eupator

11.  22.  king  A.  unto  his  brother  Lysias  sendeth

27.  king  A.  sendeth  greeting  to  the  council

13.  1.  A.  Eupator  was  coming  with  great  power

3.  Menelaus  with  great  dissimulat.  encouraged  A.

4.  but  the  King  of  kings  moved  A.  mind

14.  2.  had  killed  A.  and  Lysias  his  protector

See  Epiphanes.

ANVIL.

Eccl.  38.  28.  the  smith  also  sitting  by  the  a.  the
noise  of  the  hammer  and  a.  is  ever  in
his  ears

APAME.

1  Esd.  4.  29.  I  did  see  A .  the  king’s  concubine
APART.

1  Esd.  4.  44.  all  the  vessels  which  Cyrus  set  a.  57.
Tob.  12.  6.  then  he  took  them  both  a.  and  said

2  Mac.  13.  13.  Judas  being  a.  with  the  elders

APHEREMA.

1  Mac.  11.  34.  governments  of  A.  Lydda,  Ramath


APOLLONIUS.

1  Mac.  3.  10.  A.  gathered  the  Gentiles  together

12.  Judas  took  their  spoils,  and  A.  sword  also  i

10.  69.  Demetrius  made  A.  governor  of  CelosyriaS

74.  when  Jonathan  heard  these  words  or  A.

75.  because  A.  had  a  garrison  there

77.  A.  took  3000  horsemen  with  a  great  host
79.  A.  had  left  a  thousand  horsemen  in  ambush

2  Mac.  3.  5.  he  gat  him  to  A.  the  son  of  Thrasea»

7.  when  A.  came  to  the  king,  and  had  shewed

4.  4.  that  A.  as  being  the  governor,  did  rage

21.  A.  son  of  Menestheus  was  sent  to  Egypt

5.  24.  he  sent  that  detestable  ringleader  A .

12.  2.  A.  son  of  Genneus  would  not  suffer  them  1
APO  1  HECARY.

Eccl.  38.  8.  of  such  doth  the  a.  make  a  confection
49.  1.  the  composition  made  by  the  art  of  the  a.
APPAREL.

Jud.  8.  5.  she  put  on  sackcloth,  and  wore  widows’  «.
10.7.  when  her  a.  was  changed,  they  wondered  j

12.  15.  she  arose,  and  decked  herself  with  her  a.
Esth.  14.  2.  Esther  laid  away  her  glorious  a.

1  Mac.  14.  9.  the  young  men  put  on  warlike#.

2  Mac.  3.  26.  to  other  young  men  comely  in  #.  1

APPARITION.

2  Mac.  5.  4.  prayed  that  that  a.  might  turn  to  good  t
APPARITIONS.  I

Wisd.  17.  3.  being  troubled  with  strange#.

15.  were  partly  vexed  with  monstrous  a.
APPEAR.

2  Esd.  6.  40.  a  fair  light,  thatth>'  work  might  #.

7.  26.  the  bride  shall  #.  and  she  shall  be  seen
33.  the  Most  High  shall  a.  on  the  seat  of  judgmen>|

11.  16.  before  thou  beginnestto  a.  no  more
45.  and  therefore  a.  ho  more,  thou  eagle

Tob.  12.  19.  all  these  days  did  I  a.  unto  you
Jud.  14.  2.  so  soon  as  the  morning  shall  #.

Eccl.  19. 25.  that  turneth  aside  to  make  judgment  a.  i
24.  27.  he  maketh  the  doctrine  of  knowledge  a.
35.4.  thou  shalt  not  a.  empty  before  the  Lord
37.  18.  four  manner  of  things  a.  good,  evil,  life
39.  4.  and  he  shall  a.  before  princes
Bar.  6  51.  it  shall  manifestly  a.  to  all  nations
2  Mac.  2.  8.  and  the  glory  ot  the  Lord  shall  «.
APPEARANCE.

2  Esd.  15.  28.  and  the  a.  thereof  from  the  east
Eccl.  11.  2.  abhor  not  a  man  for  his  outward  a.

2  Mac.  4.  24.  for  the  glorious  a.  of  his  power
15.  27.  tor  by  the  a.  of  God  they  were  cheered
APPEARED.

2  Esd.  10.  27.  behold,  the  woman  a.  to  me  no  more- 1

42.  but  there  a.  unto  thee  a  city  builded
11. 13.  and  the  place  thereof  a.  no  more

14.  so  that  it  a.  no  more,  18, 19,  20,  26,  33.  |  12.  3.  }!

26.  2  Mac.  3.  34.  g
Tob.  12.  22.  ho  w  the  angel  of  the  Lord  had  a.  to  them  j
Wisd.  17-  4.  visions  #.  to  them  with  sad  countenanc.  I

6.  there  a.  to  them  a  fire  kindled  of  itself
19.  7-  where  water  stood  before,  dr3*  land  a.

1  Mac.  4.  19.  there  a.  a  part  of  them  looking  out

2  Mac.  1.  33.  where  fire  was  hid,  there  a.  water

3.  25.  there  a.  to  them  a  horse,  with  a  rider
26.  two  other  young  men  a.  notable  in  strength

30.  when  the  Almighty  Lord  a.  temple  was  filled
33.  the  same  young  men,  in  the  same  clothing,  a.

11.  8.  there  a.  before  them  on  horseback  one  white-

14.  20.  it  a.  that  they  were  all  of  one  mind

15.  13.  this  done,  there  a.  a  man  with  gray  hairs

APPEARED!!.

Eccl.  43. 2.  the  sun  when  it  a.  dec  laring  at  his  rising  |
Bar.  2.6.  to  us  and  father’s  shame,  as  a.  this  da3\  11.  ;
APPEARING.

2  Mac.  12.  22.  the  a.  of  him  that  seeth  all  things
APPEASE.

Eccl.  39.  28.  a.  the  wrath  of  him  that  made  them
2  Mac.  4.  31.  the  king  came  in  all  haste  to  #.  matters-
APPEASED.

Eccl.  46.  7-  the37  a.  the  wicked  murmuring
1  Mac.  13.  47.  so  Simon  was  a.  towards  them
APPEASETH.

Eccl.  43.  23.  by  his  counsel  he  a.  the  deep
APPERTAIN.

1  Esd.  8.  95.  for  to  thee  doth  this  matter  a.

Tob.  6.  1 1.  for  to  thee  doth  the  right  of  her  a.

12.  the  right  of  inheritance  doth  rather  a.  to  thee

APPERTAINED.

2  Mac.  4.  28.  to  him  a.  the  gathering  of  customs

APPERTAINETH.  [as#.

1  Esd.  1.  12.  they  roasted  the  passover  with  fire,  '
Bar.  2.  6.  to  the  Lord  our  God  a.  righteousness
1  Mac.  10.  30.  that  which  a.  to  me  to  receive
APPETITE,  S.

Wisd.  16.  2.  preparest  even  quails  to  stir  up  their  a.
19.  11.  being  led  with  their  a.  asked  meats
Eccl.  18.  30.  but  refrain  thyself  from  thine  a.
APPLE

Eccl.  17.  22.  keep  good  deeds  as  the  a.  of  the  eye
APPLY.

Eccl.  6.  32.  my  son,  if  thou  wilt  a.  thy  mind
APPLIE1H.

Eccl.  38.  30.  he  a.  himself  to  lead  it  over
APPOIN  TED.

1  Esd.  3.  9.  to  him  the  victory  be  given,  as  was  a.

4.  42.  ask  more  than  is  a.  in  the  writing

5.  58.  they’  a.  the  Levites  from  twenty  years  old

6.  27.  which  were  a.  rulers  in  Syria  and  Phenice  j

9.  12.  let  all  of  them  come  at  the  time  a.

Tob.  1.21.  who  a.  over  his  father’s  accounts

22.  and  Sarchedonus  a.  him  next  unto  him

6.  17.  for  she  is  a.  unto  thee  from  the  beginning
Jud.  7-  16.  he  a.  to  do  as  the3’  had  spoken
Esth.  13.  9-  O  Lord,  if  thou  hast  a.  to  save  Israel  j
Eccl.  36.  26.  who  will  trust  a  thief  well  a.

45. 15.  was  a.  to  him  by  an  everlasting  covenant
Bar.  1.  20.  the  curse  which  the  Lord  a.  by  Moses
5.7-  God  hath  a.  that  every  high  hill  lie  cast  do wr
Sus.  5.  the  same  year  were  a.  two  of  the  ancients
Prayer  of  Manass.  hast  not  a.  repentance  to  the  ;

just,  but  hast  a.  repentance  to  me  a  sinner  |j
1  Mac.  1.  51.  he  a.  overseers  over  all  the  people

4.  41.  then  Judas  a.  certain  men  to  fight

5.  27.  had  a.  to  bring  their  host  against  forts


ARM


ASC


ASS  1 A  POOR  Vl“»*


4.'V/fif.6.55.whom  Antiochus  hada.to  bring  uphisson

8.  25.  Jews  shall  help  them,  as  time  shall  be  a.

12.  26.  a.  to  come  upon  them  in  the  night  season

2  lilac .  3.  14.  at  the  day  which  he  a.  he  entered
*4.  20.  this  money  wras  a.  to  Hercules’  sacrifice
8^28.  also  he  a.  Eleazar  to  read  the  holy  book
Q.  25.  considering  that  my  father  a.  a  successor

25.  I  have  a.  my  son  Antiochus  king
14  21.  a.  a  day  to  meet  together  by  themselves
APPOIM  1  EDST.

Esd.  3.  7.  immediately  thou  a.  death  in  him
APPOINTMENT.

1  Esd.  1.  15.  singers  according  to  the  a.  of  David
6  4.  said,  by  whose  a.  do  ye  build  this  house  ?
APPREHEND  ID.

1  Esd.  1.  38.  but  Zaraces  his  brother  he  a.

APPROACH.

2  Esd.  12.  21.  be  kept  until  their  end  begin  to  a.

APPROACHED.

Jud.  13.  7.  a.  to  his  bed,  and  took  hold  of  the  hair
APPROACHING.

2  Esd.  12.  21.  the  middle  time  a.  four  shall  be  kept
2  Mac.  12.  31. came  to  Jerus.  the  feast  of  the  weeks  a.
APPROVED.

2  Esd.  5.  27.  thou  gavest  a  law  that  is  a.  of  all
Eccl.  3.  17.  shalt  be  beloved  of  him  that  is  a.

39.  34.  for  in  time  they  shall  all  be  well  a.

41.  16.  nor  is  it  altogether  a.  in  every  thing

42.  8.  thus  shalt  thou  he  a.  of  all  men  living

API’.

Wisd.  19.  21.  meat  that  was  of  nature  a.  to  melt
ARARIA.

2  Esd.  15.  29.  where  the  dragons  of  A.  shall  come

1  Mac.  11.16.  Alexander  fled  intoA.tobe  defended

2  Mac.  12.  11.  the  Nomades  of  A.  besought  Judas

ARABIAN.

I  Mac.  11.  17.  Zabdiel  A.  took  off  Alexander’s  head
39.  oneTryphon  went  toSimalcue  the  A.
ARABIANS.

1  Mac.  12.  31.  Jonathan  turned  to  the  A.
"2Mac.5.8.being  accused  before  Aretas  king  of  the  A .

12.  10.  horsemen  of  the  A.  set  upon  him
ARADUS.

t  Mac.  15.  23.  the  same  thing  wrote  he  to  A.
ARRAY.

Jud.  1.4.  for  the  setting  in  a.  his  footmen

2  Mac.  5.  3.  were  seen  troops  of  horsemen  in  a.

15.  20.  now  when  the  army  was  set  in  a.

ARRAYED.

1  Esd.  1.  2.  being  a.  in  long  garments  in  the  temple

7.  9.  the  Levites  stood  a.  in  their  vestments
ARBATT1S.

1  Mac.  5.  23.  those  that  were  in  A.  took  he  away
ARBELA.

1  Mac.  9.2.  before  Massaloth,  which  is  in  A.

ARBONAI.

Jud.  2.  24.  he  destroyed  the  cities  on  the  river  A.
ARCHANGEL.

2  Esd.  4.  36.  Uriel  the  a.  gave  them  answer

ARCHER,  S.

2  Esd.  16.  7-  arrow  that  is  shot  of  a  strong  a.  16.
Jud.  2. 15.  he  mustered  12,000  a.  on  horseback

1  Mac.  9. 11.  their  slingers  and  a.  going  before

ARDATH.

2  Esd.  9.  26.  in  the  field  which  is  called  A.

ARETAS.  See  Arabians.
ARIGHT.

■2  Esd.  8.  37.  some  things  hast  thou  spoken  a.

Wisd.  2. 1.  reasoning  with  themselves,  but  not  a,

6. 4.  you  have  not  judged  a.  nor  kept  the  law

9.  16.  and  hardly  do  we  guess  a.  at  things
Eccl.  2.  2.  set  thy  heart  a.  and  constantly  endure

6.  17.  who  feareth  L.  shall  direct  his  friendship  a.
20. 17.  for  he  knoweth  not  a.  what  it  is  to  have

38.  10.  order  thy  handset,  and  cleanse  thy  heart
ARIOCH.

Jud.  1.  6.  came  all  that  dwelt  in  the  plain  of  A.
ARISE.

2  Esd.  2.  38.  a.  up  and  stand,  behold  the  number

15.  39.  strong  winds  shall  a.  from  the  east
Eccl.  31.  21.  hast  been  forced  to  eat,  a.  vomit
Bar.  5.  5.  a.  O  Jerusalem,  and  stand  on  high

1  Mac.  14.  41.  there  should  a.  a  faithful  prophet

AR I  SETH.

Eccl.  26. 16.  the  sun  when  it  a.  in  high  heaven
ARISTOBULUS.

2  Mac.  1. 10.  sent  greeting  and  health  unto  A.

ARK.

1  Esd.  1.  3.  to  set  the  holy  a.  of  the  Lord  in  the  house

4.  shall  no  more  bear  the  a.  on  your  shoulders
54.  they  took  the  vessels  of  the  a.  of  God

2  Esd.  10.22.  the  a.  of  our  covenant  is  spoiled
2  Mac.  2.  4.  commanded  the  a.  to  go  with  him

5.  where  laid  the  a.  and  altar  of  incense

ARM.

2  Esd.  15. 11.  bring  them  with  a  stretched  out  a.
Wisd.  5.  16.  with  his  a.  shall  he  protect  them
11.  21.  who  may  withstand  the  power  of  thy  a.?

16.  16.  were  scourged  by  the  strength  of  thy  a.
Eccl.  21.21.  as  a  bracelet  upon  his  right  a.

36.  6.  glorify  thy  hand  and  thy  right  a.

38.  30.  he  fashioneth  the  clay  with  his  a.

Bar.  2.  11.  hast  brought  thy  people  out  with  high  a.
2  Mac.  15.  24.  through  the  might  of  thine  a.
ARMS.

Esth.  15.  8.  the  king  took  her  in  his  a.

Eccl.  9.  9.  nor  sit  down  with  her  in  thine  a.

ARM.

1  Mac.  3.  58.  a.  yourselves,  and  be  valiant  men
ARMED.

1  Mac.  6.  35.  a  thousand  men  a.  with  coats  of  mail

43.  one  of  the  beasts  a.  with  royal  harness

14.  32.  Simon  a.  the  valiant  men  of  his  nation

2  Mac.  4.  40.  Lysimachus  a.  about  3,000  men

5.  2.  a.  with  lances  like  a  band  of  soldiers
14.22.  Judas  placed  a.  men  in  convenient  places

15.  11.  thus  he  a.  every  one  of  them

ARMS.

Wisd.  18.  22.  not  with  strength,  nor  force  of  a.

1  Mac.  12.  27.  he  commanded  his  men  to  be  in  a.

2  Mac.  5.  11.  he  took  the  city  by  force  of  a.

15. 5. 1  command  to  take  a.  and  do  king’s  business


ARMY.

Jud.  1 .  16.  there  he  banqueted,  both  he  and  his  a.

2.  7.  I  will  cover  the  earth  with  the  feet  of  my  a.

14.  Holofernes  called  the  officers  of  the  a. of  Assur

16.  ranged  them,  as  a  great  a.  is  ordeied  for  war
VI.  plenty  of  victual  for  every  man  of  the  a.

22.  then  lie  took  all  his  a.  footmen,  horsemen

3.  10.  might  gather  all  the  carriages  of  his  a.

5.  1.  captain  of  the  a.  of  Assur,  10.  13.  J  13.  15.

24.  be  a  prey  to  be  devoured  of  all  thine  a.

7.  1.  next  day  Holofernes  commanded  all  his  a.

2.  a.  of  the  men  of  war  was  170,000  footmen
9.  that  there  be  not  an  overthrow  in  thine  a.

12.  remain  in  camp,  keep  all  the  men  of  thy  a.

18.  and  the  rest  of  the  a.  camped  in  the  plain

26.  and  deliver  the  whole  city  for  a  spoil  to  his  a.

1 1.  18.  thou  shalt  go  forth  with  all  thine  a.

16.  4.  Assur  came  with  ten  thousands  of  his  a.

1  Mac.  3.  13.  Seron,  a  prince  of  the  a.  of  Syria
27-  he  gathered  together  a  very  strong  a.

35.  that  he  should  send  an  a.  against  them

4.  3.  that  he  might  smite  the  king’s  a.

9.  when  Pharaoh  pursued  them  with  an  a.

30.  when  he  saw  that,  mighty  a.  he  prayed

31.  shut  up  thisa.  in  the  hand  of  thy  people  Israel
35.  when  Lysias  saw  his  a.  put  to  flight

6.  28.  he  gathered  together  the  captains  of  his  a.
30.  the  number  of  his  a.  was  100, 000  footmen

40.  part  of  the  a.  being  spread  on  high  mountains

41.  for  the  a.  was  very  great  and  mighty

42.  the-*;  were  slain  of  the  king’s  a.  600  men

7.  14.  one  that  is  a  priest  is  come  with  this  a.

8.  6.  having  a  very  great  a.  was  discomfited

2  Mac.  1.  13.  the  a.  with  him  that  seemed  invincible
5.24.  he  sent  Apollonius  with  an  a.  of  22,000

8.  12.  imparted  to  him  that  the  a.  was  at  hand

9.  9.  his  smei'l  was  noisome  to  all  his  a.

23.  what  time  he  led  an  a.  into  the  countries
12.20.  Maccabeus  ranged  his  a.  by  bands

15.  20.  and  the  a.  was  set  in  array,  and  the  beasts
ARMIES.

1  Esd.  4.  10.  all  his  people  and  his  a.  obey  him
Jud.  1.  4.  for  the  going  forth  of  his  mighty  a.

Eccl.  43.8.  being  an  instrument  of  the  a.  above
ARMOUR.

Jud.  14.  3.  then  they  shall  take  their  a.  and  go
15.  13.  the  men  of  Israel  followed  in  their  a.

1  Mac.  1.  35.  they  stored  with  a.  and  victuals
4.  6.  had  neither  a.  nor  swords  to  their  minds

6.  6.  that  they  were  made  strong  by  the  a.

10.  21.  gathered  forces  and  provided  much  a.

14.  3.3.  where  the  a.  of  the  enemies  had  been
42.  to  set  them  over  the  a.  and  fortresses

15.  7.  let  all  the  a.  thou  hast  made  remain

2  Mac.  8.  27.  so  when  they  had  gathered  their  a.

11.  8.  one  in  white,  shaking  his  a.  of  gold
15.  21.  seeing  the  divers  preparations  of  a.

ARMOUR-BEARER.

1  Mac.  4.  30.  Jonathan  the  son  of  Saul,  and  his  a.
AROSE.

1  Esd.  9.  7-  so  Esdras  a.  up  and  said  unto  them
Tob.  8.  4.  Tobias  a.  out  of  the  bed,  and  said,  arise
Jud.  8.  18.  a.  none  in  our  age  which  worship  gods

12.  5.  she  a.  when  it  was  toward  morning-watch

15.  she  a.  and  decked  herself  with  her  apparel
14.  11.  as  soon  as  the  morning  a.  they  hanged

Bel  16.  betime  the  king  a.  and  Daniel  with  him

39.  so  Daniel  a.  and  did  eat,  angel  set  Habbacuc
ARPHAXAD.

Jud,  1. 1.  in  days  of  A.  which  reigned  over  Medes
5  Nabuchodonosor  made  war  with  king  A.  13.

15.  he  took  also  A.  in  the  mountains  of  Ragau

ARROW,

2  Esd.  16.  7-  may  one  turn  again  the  a.  that  is  shot

16.  like  as  an  a.  which  is  shot  of  a  mighty  archer
Wisd.  5.  12.  or  like  as  when  an  a.  is  shot  at  a  mark
Eccl.  19. 12.  as  an  a.  that  sticketh  in  the  thigh
26. 12.  she  will  open  her  quiver  against  every  a.

ARROWS.

2  Esd.  16. 13.  his  a.  that  he  shooteth  are  sharp
ARSACES.

1  Mac.  14.  2.  A.  king  of  Persia,  3.  |  15.  22.

ART.

Wisd.  14.4.  though  a  man  went  to  sea  without  a.
17.7.  as  for  the  illusions  of  a.  magic,  were  put  down
Eccl.  49. 1.  that  is  made  by  the  a.  of  the  apothecary
AKTAXERXES.

1  Esd.  2.  16.  in  time  of  A .  king  of  the  Persians

17.  to  king  A.  our  lord  ||  7.  4.  with  consent  of  A.

8.  1.  when  A.  the  king  reigned,  6.  28.

8.  the  commission  which  was  written  from  A.

9.  king  A.  unto  Esdras  the  priest,  greeting

19.  I  king  A.  have  commanded  the  keepers

2  Esd.  1.3.  A.  king  of  the  Persians,  Esth.  11.2.
Esth.  12.  2.  they  were  about  to  lay  hands  on  A.

16. 1.  greet  king  A.  unto  the  princes  and  governors
ARTICLES.

1  Mac.  8.  29.  according  to  these  a.  did  the  Romans

2  Mac.  14.28.  should  make  void  the  a.  agreed  on

ARTIFICER.

Wisd.  14. 18.  the  diligence  of  the  A.  did  help
Eccl.  9.  17.  for  hand  of  a.  the  work  be  commended
ARTILLERY.

1  Mac.  6.  51.  and  he  set  there  a.  with  engines
ASADI  AS.

Bar.  1.  1.  Sedecias,  son  of  A.  son  of  Chelcias
ASAEL.

Tob.  1. 1.  of  the  seed  of  A.  of  tribe  of  Naphtali
ASANTAS.

1  Esd.  8.54.  separated  Esabrias,  and  A .  and  ten  men
ASAPH.

1  Esd.  1. 15.  also  the  sons  of  A.  were  in  their  order,
to  wit,  A.  Zacharias,  and  Jeduthun
ASPHARASUS.

1  Esd.  5.8.  Beelsarus,  A.  Reelius  returned  to  Jerus
ASBAZARE1 II.

1  Esd.  5. 69.  from  days  of  A.  the  king  of  the  Assyria.
A  SC  A  LON.

Jud.  2.  28.  that  dwelt  in  A.  feared  him  greatly
1  Mac.  10.  86.  Jonathan  camped  against  A.

11.60.  he  came  to  A.  they  of  the  city  met  him

12.  33.  Simon  passed  through  the  country  to  A.


ASER.

Tob.  1.  2.  called  Naphtali  in  Galilee  above  A.
ASHAMED.

1  Esd.Q.  51.  for  I  was  a.  to  ask  the  king’s  footnten
74.  I  said,  O  Lord,  1  am  a.  before  thy  face

Wisd.  13.  17-  is  not  a.  to  speak  to  what  hath  no  life
Eccl.  4.  26.  be  not  a.  to  confess  thy  sins

21.  22.  but  a  man  of  experience  is  a.  of  him

22.  25.  I  will  not  be  a.  to  defend  a  friend

41. 17.  be  a.  of  whoredom  before  father  and  mother
42.  1.  of  these  things  be  not  thou  a.

8.  be  not  a.  to  inform  the  unwise  and  foolish
11.  lest  she  make  thee  a.  before  the  multitude
Bar.  6.  27.  they  also  that  serve  them  are  a.

Dan.  3.  20.  let  all  that  do  thy  servants  hurt,  be  a.
Sus.  11.  for  they  were  a.  to  declare  their  lust

27.  when  ciders  declared,  servants  were  greatly  <».

ASHES.

2  Esd.  2.  9.  in  clods  of  pitch  and  heaps  of  a.

9.  3)1.  and  she  had  a.  upon  her  head

Tob.  6.  16.  thou  shalt  take  thee  a.  of  perfume
Jud.  4.  1 1.  they  cast  a.  upon  their  heads
15.  had  a.  oh  their  mitres,  and  cried  to  the  Lord
9-  1.  put  a.  on  her  head,  and  uncovered  sackcloth
Esth.  14.  2.  she  covered  her  head  with  a.  and  dung
Wisd.  2.  3.  our  body  shall  be  turned  into  a.

15. 10.  his  heart  is«.  his  hope  more  vile  than  earth
Eccl.  10.  9.  why  is  earth  and  a.  proud  ?

17.  32.  and  all  men  are  but  earth  and  a.

40.  3.  to  him  that  is  humbled  in  earth  and  a.

Bel  14.  Daniel  commanded  his  servants  to  bring  a.

1  Mac.  3.  47.  then  they  cast  a.  upon  their  heads

2  Mac.  13.  5.  now  there  was  a  tower  of  fifty  cubits

high  full  of  a.  instrument  hanged  down  into  a.
8.  committed  many  sins  about  the  altar,  whose  fire
and  a.  were  holy,  he  received  his  death  in  a.
ASIA.

2  Esd.  15.  46.  thou  A.  that  art  partaker  of  hope
16.  1.  woe  be  unto  thee  Babylon  and  A.

1  Mac.  8.  6.  Antiochus  the  great  king  of  A.

12.  39.  Tryphon  went  aboutto  get  kingdom  of  A.

13.  32.  and  he  crowned  himself  king  of  A.

2  Mac.  3.  3.  Seleucus  king  of  A.  bare  all  the  costs

ASIDE.

Svs.  51.  put  these  two  a.  one  far  from  another
56.  so  he  put  him  a.  and  commanded  to  bring
ASK.

1  Esd.  4.  42.  then  said  the  king,  a.  what  thou  wilt

2  Esd.  4.  6.  that  thou  shouldest  a.  such  things  of  me

7.  if  I  should  a.  how  great  dwellings  are  in  the  sea
35.  a.  question  of  these  things  in  their  chambers

5.  11.  one  land  also  shall  a.  another,  and  say
46.  he  said  unto  me,  a.  the  womb  of  a  woman
51.  a.  a  woman  that  beareth  children

10.  9.  a.  the  earth,  and  she  shall  tell  thee

Tob.  4.  18.  a.  counsel  of  all  that  are  wise,  despise  not
Eccl.  20.  15.  and  to-morrow  will  he  a.  it  again
21.  1.  but  a.  pardon  for  thy  former  sins

28.  4.  and  doth  he  a.  forgiveness  of  his  own  sins  }

1  Mac.  10.  72.  a.  and  learn  whom  I  am,  and  the  rest

2  Mac.  7.  2.  what  wouldest  thou  a.  or  learn  of  us  5

ASKED.

2  Esd.  2.  44. 1  a.  theangel,  and  said,  what  are  these  ?

4.  9.  now  have  I  a.  thee  but  of  the  fire  and  wind
25.  of  these  things  have  1  a.  then  answered  he  me

5.  50.  I  a.  and  said,  seeing  thou  hast  given  me
Tob.  7.  3.  Raguel  a.  them,  from  whence  are  you
Jud.  6.  16.  Ozias  a.  him  of  that  which  was  done

10.  12.  they  a.  her,  of  what  people  art  thou
Esth.  13.  3.  when  I  a.  counsellors  how  this  might  be
Wisd.  19.  11-  led  by  appetite,  they  a.  delicate  meats
Eccl.  32.  7-  scarcely  w  hen  thou  art  twdce  a.

Svs.  14.  after  they  a.  one  another  the  cause

40.  we  a.  who  the  man  was,  she  would  not  tell
2  Mac.  14.  5.  being  a.  how  the  Jews  stood  affected
ASKEST.

2  Esd.  4.  28.  the  things  thou  a.  me,  I  will  tell,  52.

8.  2.  as  when  thou  a.  the  earth,  it  shall  say

ASKETII.

Wisd.  13.  18.  he  a.  of  that  which  cannot  set  a  foot
19.  for  gaining  and  getting,  a.  ability  to  do
ASLEEP.

2  Esd.  7.  32.  earth  restore  those  that  are  a.  in  her
Tob.  8.  13.  so  the  maid  found  them  both  a.
ASMODEUS.

Tob.  3.  8.  whom  A.  the  evil  spirit,  had  killed,  17.

ASPHAR.

1  Mac.  9.  33.  pitched  their  tents  by  the  pool  A.
ASS.

Eccl.  13.  19.  as  the  wild  a.  is  the  lion’s  prey
33.  24.  fodder,  a  wand  and  burdens  are  for  the  a.
ASSABIAS.

1  Esd.  1.  9.  A.  and  Othiel  gave  to  the  Levites
ASSAULT.

1  Mac.  4.  8.  neither  be  ye  afraid  of  their  a.

2  Mac.  5.  5.  Jason  made  an  a.  upon  the  city
12.  15.  Judas  gave  a  fierce  a.  against  the  walls

ASSAULTED.

1  Mac.  5.16.  were  in  trouble,  and  a.  of  them,  30,35,50.

6.  31.  Bethsura,  which  they  a.  many  days

ASSAULTING.

1  Mac.  11.  50.  let  the  Jews  cease  from  a.  us
15.  25.  the  second  day  a.  it  continually

2  Mac.  10.  17-  a.  them  strongly,  they  won  the  holds

ASS  A  Y.

2  Mac.  2.  23.  we  will  a.  to  abridge  in  one  volume
ASSEMBLED.

1  Esd.  8.  72-  all  that  were  then  moved  a.  unto  me

9.  55.  the  words  for  which  they  had  been  a.

Jud.  1.  6.  many  nations  a.  themselves  to  battle

7.  23.  then  all  the  people  a.  to  Ozias

Sus.  28.  when  the  people  were  a.  to  her  husband
Joachim,  1  Mac.  3.  52,  58.  |  4.  37
5.  9,  15,  16.

1  Mac.  10.  61.  pestilent  fellows  a.  themselves

2  Mac.  8.  1.  they  a.  about  six  thousand  men

ASSEMBLY.

Jud.  6.  16.  and  the  women  ran  to  the  a.

21.  Ozias  took  him  out  of  the  a.  to  his  house
7.  29.  then  there  was  great  weeping  in  the  a.

14.  6.  in  the  a.  of  the  people  he  fell  down
Sus.  60.  all  the  a.  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice

623


APOCRYPHA.]  A  V  E


B  A  C


BE  A


1  Mac.  14.  44.  or  to  gather  an  a.  in  the  country
ASS  1 1)  KAN'S.

1  Mac.  2.  42.  there  came  to  him  a  company  of  A.

7.  13.  the  A.  were  the  first  that  sought  peace

2  Mac.  14.  6.  these  of  the  Jews  that  he  called  A.

ASSIGN.

2  Mac.  4.  9.  he  promise.il  to  a.  an  hundred  and  fifty
ASSIST.

IVisd.  19.  22.  didst  a.  them  in  every  time  and  place
ASSISTING.

1  Eid.1. 2.  a.  the  ancients  of  the  Jews  and  governors

ASSUERUS.

Tob.  14.  15.  Nineve,  which  was  taken  by  A.
ASSUR.

2  Lsd.  2.  8.  woe  be  to  thee,  A.  thou  that  hidest

Jud.  2.  14.  Holofernes  called  the  officeis  of  the  army
,  of  A.  5.  1.  |  6.  1.  J  13.  15.  |  14.  3.

6. 17.  spoken  in  the  midst  of  the  princes  of  A.
7.20.  the  company  of  A.  remained  about  them
15.  6.  residue  of  Bethulia  fell  on  the  camp  of  A.
16.4.  A.  came  out  of  the  mountains  from  the  north

ASSURANCE.

IVisd.  6. 18.  giving  heed  to  laws  is  a.  of  incorruption
ASSURED.

Eccl.  49- 10.  they  delivered  them  by  a.  hope
2  Mac.  7.  24.  but  also  a.  him  with  oaths
12.  25.  when  he  had  a.  them  with  many  words
ASSUREDLY.

ll'isd.  18.6.  a.  knowing  to  what  oaths  they  had
A  SS  U  AG  E.

Eccl.  18. 16.  shall  not  the  dew  a.  the  heat  ?
ASSYRIA.

1  Esd.  7. 15.  he  had  turned  counsel  of  the  king  of  A.
ASSYRIANS.

Tob.  1.2.  in  time  of  Enemessar,  king  of  the  A.

3.  who  came  with  me  into  the  land  of  the  A.
Jud.  1. 7.  N  abuchodonosor  king  of  the  A.  2.  1, 4.

7.  17.  with  them  five  thousand  of  A.  departed

9.  7-  behold,  the  A.  are  multiplied  in  their  power

10.  11.  the  first  watch  of  the  A.  met  her

12.  13.  be  made  as  one  of  the  daughters  of  the  A.
14.2.  as  though  ye  would  go  toward  the  watch  of  A.

12.  when  the  A.  saw  them,  they  sent  to  leaders
19.  when  the  captains  of  the  A.  army  heard
Eccl.  48.  21.  he  smote  the  host,  of  the  A.

1  Mac.  7.  41.  were  sent  from  the  king  of  the  A.

AS  I  ON  ISHED.

Jud.  11.  16.  whereat  all  the  earth  shall  be  a.

13. 17-  fdl  the  people  were  wonderfully  a.

14.7.  which  hearing  thy  name  shall  be  a.

15.  1.  they  were  a.  at  the  thing  that  was  done
Wisd.  13.  4.  hut  if  they  were  a.  and  their  power
17.  3.  being  horribly  a.  and  troubled  by  apparitions

Eccl.  43. 18.  the  heart  is  a.  at  the  raining  of  it

1  Mac.  6.  8.  the  king  was  a.  and  sore  moved

16.  22.  hereof  when  he  heard,  he  was  sore  a.

2  Mac.  3.  24.  all  were  a.  at  the  power  of  God

ASTON  1SHMENT.

2  Esd.  4.  24.  and  our  life  is  a.  and  fear,  not  worthy
ASTRAY.

Wisd.  12.  24.  they  went  a.  in  the  ways  of  error
Bar.  4. 28.  as  it  was  your  mind  to  go  a.  from  God
ASLYAGES.

Bel  1.  king  A.  was  gathered  to  his  fathers
ATARGATIS.

2  Mac.  12.  26.  marched  forth  to  the  temple  of  A.
ALE.

Jud.  12.  19.  then  she  a.  and  drank  before  him
ATHENOBl  US.

1  Mac.  15.  28.  he  sent  to  him  A .  one  of  his  friends

ATHENS.

2  Mac.  6. 1.  king  sent  an  old  man  of  A.  com  pel  Jews
9.  15.  make  them  equals  to  the  citizens  of  A.

ATONEMENT.

Eccl.  3.  3.  honoureth  father,  makes  a.  for  his  sins
30.  an  alms  maketh  an  a.  for  sins
2  Mac.  3.  33.  as  the  high  priest  was  making  a.
ATTAIN.

Eccl.  15.  7-  but  foolish  men  shall  not  a.  to  her
2  Mac.  15.  38.  it  is  that  which  1  could  a.  unto
A  IT  ALUS.

1  Mac.  15.  22.  wrote  to  Demetrius  the  king  and  A.

ATTEMP  1 .

2  Mac.  4.  41.  they  seeing  the  a.  of  Lysimachus

ATTEMPTS..

Eccl.  9.  4.  lest  thou  be  taken  with  her  a.
ATTEMPTED.

1  Mac.  12.  10.  have  nevertheless  a.  to  send  to  you

ATTEND.

2  Mac.  11.  23.  every  one  may  a.  on  his  own  affairs

ATTENDANCE.

1  Mac.  15.  32.  when  Athenobius  saw  his  great  a.

ATTENDED.

Wisd.  10.  9-  delivered  from  pain  those  that  a.  on  her
ATTENDETH.

Eccl.  4. 15.  he  that  a.  to  her  shall  dwell  securely
.  ATTENTION.

Prol.  of  Jesus  Sirach.  to  read  it  with  favour  and  a.
ATTENTIVE.

Eccl.  3.29.  an  a.  ear  is  the  desire  of  a  wise  man
A  LITRE.

Jud.  12. 15.  decked  herself  with  her  woman’s  a.
Eccl.  19.  30.  a  man’s  a.  and  excessive  laughter
AVAILETH.

Eccl.  34.  25.  if  he  touch  it,  what  a.  his  washing
AVENGE.

2  Esd.  15.  9.  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  surely  a.  them
Jud.  2.  1.  he  should  a.  himself  on  all  earth

1  Mac.  2.  67-  and  a.  ye  the  wrong  of  your  people

6.  22.  how  long  ere  thou  a.  our  brethren  ?

13.  6.  doubtless  I  will  a.  my  nation  and  our  wives

2  Mac. 9. 4.  bethought  to  a.  upon  the  Jews  the  disgr.

AVENGED.

Jud.  1.  12.  would  surely  be  a.  on  all  those  coasts
Esth.  16.  20.  that  they  may  be  a.  on  them
Wisd.  11.3.  they  were  a.  of  their  adversaries
1  Mac.  3.  15.  to  be  a.  of  the  children  of  Israel

7.  38.  be  a.  of  this  man  and  his  host

0.  42.  had  a.  fully  the  blood  of  their  brother
15.  4.  1  may  be  a.  of  them  that  destroyed  it
AVENGER.

Eccl.  30.  6.  he  left  behind  him  an  a.

6*24


AVENGERS.

2  Mac.  4.  16.  he  had  them  to  be  their  enemies  and  a.
AIJGM  EN  I  A  LION.

2  Mac.  5.  16.  were  dedicated  by  other  kings  to  the  a.
AVOID.

2  Esd.  7-  21.  they  should  observe  to  a.  punishment
'Job.  13.  2.  neither  is  there  any  that  can  a.  his  hand
Wisd.  16.  4.  penury  which  they  coul  i  nota.  16.

2  Mac.  2.  31.  to  a.  much  labouring  of  the  work
AVOIDED.

Wisd.  17-  10.  which  could  of  no  side  be  a.

A  URANUS.

2  Mac.  4.  40.  began  first  to  offer  violence  to  one  A.
AUTHOR.

Wisd.  13.  3.  for  first  a.  of  beauty  had  created  them
2  Mac.  2.28.  leaving  to  the  a.  the  exact  handling

30.  belongeth  to  the  first  a.  of  the  story

7.  31.  thou  that  hast  been  the  a.  of  all  mischief
AUTHORS.

Bar.  3.  23.  the  a.  of  fables  and  searchers  out  of
1  Mac.  9.  6t.  that  were  a.  of  that  mischief
AUTHORITY.

1  Esd.  8.  22.  no  man  have  a.  to  impose  any  thing
Esth.  13.  2.  lifted  up  with  presumption  of  m  v  a.

16.  5.  caused  many  that  are  in  a.  to  be  partakers
7.  of  them  that  are  unworthily  placed  in  a.

Wisd.  14.  19.  for  he  willing  to  please  one  in  a.
Eccl.  3.  2.  Lord  hath  confirmed  the  a.  of  the  mother

10.  3.  through  the  prudence  of  them  that  are  in  a.
21.  the  fear  of  Lord  goeth  before  the  obtaining  a.
20.  8.  he  that  taketli  to  himself  a.  therein
45.  17.  gave  him  a.  in  the  statutes  of  judgments

1  Mac.  1.58.  thus  did  they  by  their  a.  10.6.

10.  32.  as  for  the  tower,  I  yield  up  my  a.  over  it
35.  no  man  shall  have  a.  to  meddle  with  them

2  Mac.  4.  50.  Menelaus  remained  still  in  a.

AWE.

Wisd.  6.  7.  nor  stand  in  a.  of  any  man's  greatness
A  W  A  K  E.

Esth.  11.  12.  when  Mardoeheus  was  a.  he  bare
Eccl.  13. 13.  when  hearest  these  things  a. in  thy  sleep
AWAKED.

1  Esd.  3.  3.  Darius  slept,  and  soon  after  a.

2  Esd.  5.  14. 1  a.  and  fearfulness  went  thro’  my  body

1 1 .  29-  a.  one  of  the  heads  that  were  at  rest

12.  3.  then  a.  I  out  of  the  trouble  of  my  mind

13.  13.  then  was  I  sick  through  great  fear,  and  I  a.
Eccl.  33.  16.  1  a.  up  last  of  all,  as  one  that  gathers

AWAKETH.

2  Esd.  7.  31.  the  world  that  yet  a.  not  he  raised
Eccl.  40.  7.  when  all  is  safe,  he  a.  and  marvelleth
AWARE.

Eccl.  19.  27.  do  thee  a  mischief  ere  thou  be  a.

AXE.

Bar.  6.  15.  he  hath  in  his  hand  a  dagger  and  an  a.
AXLE-TREE.

Eccl.  33.  5.  his  thoughts  are  like  a  rolling  a.
AZARI  AS.

2  Esd.  1.  1.  the  son  of  A.  the  son  of  Helchias
Tob.  5.  12.  he  said,  1  am  A.  the  son  of  Ananias

6.  6.  brother  A.  to  what  use  is  the  heart  ?

13.  A.  this  maid  hath  been  given  to  seven  men

7.  8.  Tobias  said,  brother  A.  speak  of  those  things
9.  2.  brother  A.  take  with  thee  a  servant

Dan.  3.  2.  then  A.  stood  up  and  prayed  thus
26.  angel  came  into  the  oven  together  with  A.

66.  O  Ananias,  A.  and  Misael,  bless  ye  the  Lord
1  Mac.  2.  59.  A.  by  believing  was  saved  outof  fire
5. 18.  so  he  left  A.  captain  of  the  people
AZO  LUS.

Jud.  2.  28.  fear  fell  on  them  that  dwelt  in  A.

1  Mac.  4.  15.  to  the  plains  of  Idumea  and  A.

5.  68.  Judas  turned  to  A.  in  the  land  of  Philistines

9.  15.  who  pursued  them  to  the  mount  A.

10.  77.  he  went  to  A.  as  one  that  journeyed
83.  the  horsemen  being  scattered  tied  to  A.

11.  4.  when  he  came  near  to  A.  they  shewed  him

the  temple  of  Dagon  that  was  burnt,  and  A.
14.34.  he  fortified  Gazara  that  bordereth  upon  A.
16.  10.  they  fled  to  the  towers  in  the  fields  of  A.

B.

BAAL.

Tob.  1.  5.  Naphtali  sacrificed  to  the  heifer  B.
BABES.

2  Esd.  1.  28.  I  prayed  you  as  a  nurse  her  young  b.
Wisd.  15.  14.  are  more  miserable  than  very  b.

BABBLER.

Eccl.  20.7*  a  b.  and  a  fool  will  regard  no  time
BABBLING.

Eccl.  19.  6.  he  that  hateth  b.  shall  have  less  evil
20.  5.  another  by  much  b.  becometh  hateful
BABYLON.

1  Esd.  1.  40.  and  carried  him  into  B.  54.  56.

41.  he  set  them  in  his  own  temple  at  B.

2  Esd.  3. 1.  1  was  in  B.  and  lay  troubled  on  my  bed
28.  are  their  deeds  any  better  that  inhabit  B.  ?

31.  are  they  of  B.  better  than  they  of  Sion?

15.  46.  that  art  partaker  of  the  hope  of  B.

16.  1.  woe  be  to  thee,  B.  and  Asia,  woe  be  to  Egypt
Bar.  1.  1.  the  words  which  Baruch  wrote  in  B.
Sns.  1.  there  dwelt  a  man  in  B.  called  Joacim
Bel.  34.  carry  the  dinner  that  thou  hast  to  B.

35.  Lord,  1  never  saw  B.  nor  do  1  know  the  den

36.  then  the  angel  set  him  in  B.  over  the  den

BABYLONIANS.

Bel.  3.  now  the  B.  had  an  idol  called  Bel
BACCHUS.

2  Mac.  6.7-  when  the  feast  of  B.  was  kept,  the  Jews
were  compelled  to  go  in  procession  to  B.
BACCH1DES.

1  Mac.  7.  8.  the  king  chose  B.  a  friend  of  the  king
9.  26.  and  they  brought  Judas’  friends  to  B.

2  Mac.  8.  30.  that  were  with  Timotheus  and  B.

BACKBITING.

Wisd.  1.  11.  and  refrain  vourtongue  from  b.

Eccl.  28. 14.  a  b.  tongue  hath  disquieted  many
15.  a  b.  tongue  hath  cast  out  virtuous  women
BACKWARD.

2  Esd.  16.  16.  like  as  an  arrow  returneth  not  b.


Eccl.  48.  23.  in  his  time  the  sun  went  b.

BAG.

Jud.  10.  5.  Judith  filled  a  b.  with  parched  corn

13.  10.  she  put  his  head  in  her  h.  of  meat
15.  so  she  took  the  head  out  of  the  b

BAGS.

Tob.  9.  5.  who  brought  forth  b.  sealed  up
BAGGAGE.

Jud.  7.  2  beside  the  b.  and  other  men  afoot
2  Mac.  12.  21.  he  sent  the  other  b.  unto  a  fortress
BAGOAS.

Jud.  12.  11.  then  said  he  to  B.  the  eunuch,  13.  1 13. 3
15.  soft  skins,  which  she  had  received  of  B.

14.  14.  then  went  B.  and  knocked  at  the  door

BALANCE.

2  Esd.  3.  34.  weigh  thou  our  wickedness  in  the  b.
Wisd.  11.  22.  the  world  is  as  a  little  grain  of  the  4,
Eccl.  21.  25.  their  words  are  weighed  in  the  b.

28.  25.  weigh  thy  words  in  a  b.  and  make  a  door

BALTHASAR.

Bar.  1.  12.  we  shall  live  under  the  shadow  of  B.
BAND.

2  Mac.  5.  2.  with  lances  like  a  b.  of  soldiers

8.  22.  leaders  of  each  b.  to  wit,  Simon,  Joseph

BANDS.

Jud.  14.  11.  they  went  forth  by  b.  to  the  straits
Eccl.  6.  30.  and  her  b.  are  purple  lace
28.  19.  nor  hath  been  bound  in  her  b.

20.  and  the  b.  thereof  are  b.  of  brass

BANQUET.

Jud.  12.  10.  called  none  of  the  officers  to  the  b.
Eccl.  32.  5.  a  concert  of  music  in  a  b.  of  wine
49.  1.  it  is  as  honey  and  music  at  a  b.  of  wine

1  Mac.  16.  15.  son  of  Abubus  made  them  a  great  b.

2  Mac.  2.  27.  no  ease  to  him  that  prepareth  a  b.

BANQUETED.

Jud.  1.  16.  and  there  he  took  his  ease  and  h.
BANQUETING.

Eccl.  18.  33.  be  not  made  a  beggar  by  b.  or  borrow.

1  Mac.  16.  16.  came  on  Simon  into  the  b.  place

BAR.

Eccl.  28.  25.  make  a  door  and  b.  for  thy  mouth
BARS.

Wisd.  17.  16.  shut  up  in  prison,  without  in. n  b.
BARBAROUS.

2  Mac.  2.  21.  so  that  a  few  chased  b.  multitudes
5.  22.  for  manners,  more  b.  than  he  that  set  him

BARBAROUSLY.

2  Mac.  15.  2.  O  destroy  not  so  cruelly  and  b.
BARE.

Eccl.  13.  5.  he  will  make  thee  b.  and  not  be  sorry
BARE.

2  Mac.  7.  27.  have  pity  on  me  that  b.  thee
BA11K.

IVisd.  13.  11.  and  taken  off  all  the  b.  skilfully
BARREN.

2  Esd.  9.  43.  she  said,  I  thy  servant  have  been  b.
Wisd.  3.  13.  blessed  is  the  b.  that  is  undefiled
Eccl.  42.10.  when  she  is  married,  lest  she  should  be  4.
BARTACUS.

1  Esd.  4.  29.  the  daughter  of  the  admirable  B.
BARUCH.

Bar.  1.  1.  the  words  of  the  book  which  B.  wrote
3.  B.  did  read  the  words  of  this  book
BASENESS.

Eccl.  22.  9.  they  shall  cover  the  b.  of  their  parents
BASHFULNESS.

Eccl.  20. 23.  there  is  that  for  b.  promiseth  to  his  friend
BASTARD.

Wisd.  4.  3.  nor  take  deep  rooting  from  b.  slips
BAT’S.

Bar.  6.  22.  on  their  bodies  and  heads  sit  b.  ahd  birds
BATTERED.

1  Mac.  13.  43.  Simon  b.  a  certain  tower  and  took  it

BATTLE.

1  Esd.  1.  29.  but  joined  b.  with  him  in  the  plain
30.  carry  me  away  out  of  b.  for  1  am  very  weak,

his  servants  took  him  away  out  of  the  4.

2  Esd.  7.  57.  this  is  the  condition  of  the  b.

Jud.  1. 6.  many  assembled  themselves  to  b.

1.3.  then  he  marched  in  h.  array  with  his  power

5.  23.  they  have  no  power  for  a  strong  b.

7.  11.  my  lord,  fight  not  against  them  in  b.

14.  13.  have  been  bold  to  come  down  against  us

to  4.

Esth.  11.7.  all  nations  were  prepared  to  b.

Wisd.  12.  9.  under  the  hand  of  the  righteous  in  b.
Eccl.  46.  6.  he  made  the  b.  to  fall  on  the  nations

1  Mac.  2.  35.  they  gave  them  the  b.  with  speed
41.  whosoever  shall  come  to  make  b.  with  us

4.  14.  so  they  joined  the  b.  and  the  heathen  fled

6.  30.  thirty -two  elephants  exercised  in  b.

2  Mac.  10.  28.  making  their  rage  leader  of  their  b.

See  Join.

BATTLES.

Jud.  5. 18.  they  were  destroyed  in  many  b.  very  sore

9.  7-  thou  art  the  Lord  that  breakest  the  b.

16.  3.  God  breaketh  the  b.  for  he  delivered  me
1  Mac.  3.  26.  all  nations  talked  of  the  b.  of  Judas
13.  9.  they  answered,  saying,  fight  thou  our  b.
BATTLEMENTS.

Eccl.  9.  13.  thou  walkest  on  the  b.  of  the  city
BEAR.

1  Esd.  1.  4.  Josias  said,  ye  shall  no  more  b.  the  ark
4.  15.  all  the  people  that  b.  rule  by  sea  and  land

Eccl.  1.  23.  a  patient  man  will  b.  for  a  time
6.  25.  bow  down  thy  shoulder  and  b.  her
22.  15.  a  mass  of  iron  is  easier  to  b.  than  a  man
BEA RETH.

2  Esd.  5.  51.  he  said,  ask  a  woman  that  b.  children

BEARDS.

Bar.  6.  31.  priests  sit,  and  their  heads  and  b.  shaven
BEARS.

Wisd.  11. 17.  to  send  a  multitude  of  b.  or  fierce  lions
Eccl.  47.  3.  he  played  with  b.  as  with  lambs
BEAST.

Wisd.  13.  14.  or  made  it  like  some  vile  b.

Eccl.  13.  15.  every  b.  loveth  his  like,  every  man  lov

1  Mac.  6.  36.  wheresoever  the  b.  was,  they  went

BEA  S'L.S.

2  Esd.  8.  29.  them  which  have  lived  like  b.

30.  at  them  which  are  deemed  worse  than  4.


HEii


11  LS


BIT


l  Apocrypha.


Wisd.  11.  15.  worshipped  wild  A  thou  didst  send  a
multitude  of  unreasonable  A.  tor  vengeance

12.  9.  or  to  destroy  them  at  once  with  cruel  b.

i5.  18.  they  worshipped  those  h.  most  hateful
lb!  1.  by  the  multitude  of  b.  were  tormented

3.  for  the  ugly  sight  of  the  b.  sent  among  them

5.  the  horrible  fierceness  of  b.  came  on  these
17-  9.  yet  being  scared  with  b.  that  passed  by
T9,  a  terrible  sound  or  a  running  ot  skipping  b.
or  a  roaring  voice  of  most  savage  wild  b.

\  Mac.  6.  37.  on  the  b.  were  there  strong  towers
2  Mac.  15.  21.  seeing  the  fierceness  ot  the  b.

BE  A  r.

Eccl.  30.  12.  b.  him  on  the  sides  while  he  is  a  child
BEATEN.

Eccl.  23.  10.  as  a  servant  that  is  continually  b.

°  Mac.  6.  30.  1  endure  pains  in  body  by  being  b.
BEAUTY.

1  Esd.  4-  18.  do  they  not  love  a  w  oman  comely  in  b.  ?

2  Esd.  10.  50.  he  shewed  thee  the  comeliness  ot  her  b.

“  55.  see  the  b.  and  greatness  of  the  building

15.  63.  and  they  shall  mar  the  b.  of  thy  face
Jud.  10.  7.  they  wondered  greatly  at  her  b.  14.

11.  21.  both  for  b.  of  face  and  wisdom  of  words

16.  7-  weakened  him  with  the  b.  of  her  countenance
9  her  b.  ravished,  took  his  mind  prisoner

Esth.  15.  5.  ruddy  through  the  perfection  of  her  b.
Wisd.  7.  10.  1  loved  her  above  health  and  A.

8.  2.  to  wake  my  spouse,  and  1  was  a  lover  ot  her  b.

13.  3.  with  whose  b.  they  being  delighted  ;  tortile

hist  author  of  b.  hath  created  them

5.  by  the  greatness  and  b.  of  the  creatures
Eccl.  9.  8.  look  not  on  another’s  b.  many  have  been

deceived  by  the  b.  of  a  woman,  love  kindled
11.  2.  commend  not  a  man  for  his  b.  nor  abhor  him

26.  16.  so  is  b.  of  a  good  wire  in  ordering  her  house

17.  so  is  the  b.  of  the  face  in  ripe  age
36.  22.  the  b.  of  a  woman  cheereth  the  countenance
4t..  22.  thine  eye  desireth  favour  and  b.

42.  12.  behold  not  every  body’s  b.  and  sit  not
4.3.  1.  pride  of  height,  the  b.  of  heaven,  9,  18.

Sus.  32.  that  thev  might  be  filled  with  her  b.

I  Mac.  1.  26.  so  "that  the  b.  of  women  was  changed
BEAUTIFIED.

Eccl.  £5.  1.  in  three  things  1  was  b.  and  stood  up
45.  7.  he  b.  him  with  comely  ornaments

47.  10.  he  A.  their  feasts  and  set  in  order  the  time

1  Mac.  14.  15.  he  b.  the  sanctuary,  and  multiplied

BEAUTIFUL.

Jud.  11.  23.  b.  in  countenance  and  w  itty  in  wmrds
Wisd.  5.  16.  a  b.  crown  from  the  Lord’s  hands
7.  29.  for  she  is  more  b.  than  the  sun

13.  7.  because  the  things  are  but  b.  tnat  are  seen

15.  19.  nor  are  they  b.  so  much  as  to  be  desired
Eccl.  9.  8.  turn  away  thine  eye  from  a  b.  woman

25.  1.  I  stood  up  b.  both  before  God  and  men

43.  11.  veiy  b.  it  is  in  the  brightness  thereof
45.  12.  the  desires  of  the  eyes,  goodly  and  b.

Bar.  6.  24.  the  gold  about  them  to  make  them  b.

BEAUTEOUS.

Sus.  31.  was  a  delicate  woman  and  b.  to  behold
BECOME  1H.

2  Esd.  8.  49.  thou  hast  humbled  thyself,  as  it  b.  thee

BECT1LETH.

Jud.  2.  21.  they  went  forth  of  N  ine-ve  toward  the
plain  of  B.  and  pitched  from  B.  near  mountain
BED.

2  Esd.  12.  26.  that  one  of  them  shall  die  on  his  b.
'Tub.  8.  4.  I  obias  rose  out  of  the  b.  and  said

14.  11.  he  gave  up  the  ghost  in  A.  158  years  old
Jud.  9.  3.  so  that  they  dyed  their  b.  in  blood

10.  21.  Ilolofernes  rested  on  his  b.  under  a  canopy

13.  2.  and  Holofernes  lying  along  on  his  b.

4.  Judith  standing  by  his  b.  said  in  her  heart

6.  then  she  came  to  the  pillar  of  the  b.

7.  approached  his  b.  and  took  the  hair  of  his  head

9.  she  tumbled  his  body  down  from  the  A.

IVisd.  3. 13.  which  hath  not  known  the  sinful  b.
Eccl.  24.  31.  and  I  will  water  my  garden  A.

31.  19.  he  fetcheth  not  his  wind  short  on  his  b.

41.  22.  and  come  not  near  his  maid’s  b.

48.  6.  broughtest  honourable  men  from  their  b.

BED-CHAMBEK.

Jud.  13.  3.  her  maid  to  stand  without  her  b.

4.  so  al!  went  forth,  none  w  as  left  in  the  b.

14.  15.  he  went  into  the  b.  and  found  him  dead
16. 19.  the  canopy  w  hich  he  had  taken  out  of  his  b.

BED6!.

Jud.  13.  1.  they  went  to  their  b.  they  were  weary
Wisd.  4.  6.  for  children  begotten  of  unlawful  b.
BEG.

Eccl.  40.  28.  for  better  it  is  to  die  than  to  b.

BEGAN.

2  Esd.  3.  12.  they  that  dwelt  on  earth  b.  to  multiply
BEGAT.

Eccl.  22.  3.  is  the  dishonour  of  his  father  that  b.  him
BEGET.

2  Mac.  14. 25.  prayed  him  to  take  a  wife  and  b.  child.
BEGGAR,  S.

Eccl.  18.  33.  be  not  made  a  b.  by  banqueting
40.  28.  lead  not  a  b.  life,  for  better  to  die  than  beg
BEGGING.

Eccl.  40  .  30.  b.  is  sweet  in  mouth  of  the  shameless
BEGIN.

2  Mac.  2.  32.  here  then  will  we  b.  the  story
BEG  INN  F.TH.

Eccl.  18.  7.  when  a  man  hath  done  then  he  b.

36.  24.  he  that  getteth  a  wife,  b.  a  possession
BEGINNING.

-2  Esd.  1.  13.  in  the  b.  1  <ave  you  a  safe  passage

3.  4.  O  Lord,  who  bearestrule,  thouspakest  at  the  b.

4.  30.  sown  in  the  heart  of  Adam  from  the  b.

9.  5.  as  all  made  in  the  world  hath  a  b.  and  an  end

16.  18.  the  b.  of  sorrow  s  and  great  mournings,  the
b.  of  famine  and  great  dearth,  the  b.  of  wars,
the  b.  of  evils,  what  shall  1  do  ?

Tub.  4.  12.  that  our  fathers  from  the  b.  married

6.  17.  for  she  is  appointed  to  thee  from  the  b.

Jud.  8.  29.  from  the  b.  people  knew  thy  understand.
Esth.  13.  15.  that  hath  been  thine  from  the  b.

Wisd.  6.  22.  I  will  seek  her  out  from  the  A.

7.  5.  no  king  that  had  any  other  b.  of  birth


Wisd.  7. 18.  the  b.  ending,  and  midst  ot  ttie  tunes

9.  8.  which  thou  hast  prepared  from  the  b.

12. 16.  for  thy  power  is  the  b.  of  righteousness

14.  12.  devising  of  idols  was  the  b.  of  fornication

13.  for  neither  were  they  from  the  b.

27.  for  the  worshipping  of  idols  is  the  b.  of  evil
Eccl.  1.  14.  to  fear  the  Lord  is  the  b.  of  wisdom,

25.  12.

10.  12.  the  b.  of  pride  is  when  one  departeth

11.  16.  error  and  darkness  had  their  b.  with  sinners

15.  14.  he  himself  made  man  from  the  b.

24.  9.  he  created  me  from  the  b.  before  the  world

25.  12.  faith  is  the  b.  of  cleaving  unto  him
36.  11.  and  inherit  thou  them  as  from  the  b.

39.  25.  good  things  are  created  from  the  b.

Bar.  3.  26.  there  were  the  giants  famous  from  the  b.
2  Mac.  1.  23.  Jonathan  b.  and  the  rest  answering

7.  23.  who  found  out  the  b.  of  all  things

8.  27.  which  was  the  b.  of  mercy  upon  them

BEGOT.

Eccl.  7.  28.  remember  that  thou  wast  b.  of  them
BEGO (TEN.

Tub.  8.  17.  of  two  that  were  the  only  b.  children
Wisd.  4.  6.childr.  b.  of  unlawful  beds  are  witnesses
BEGUILE.

Wisd.  4.  11.  lest  that  wicknedness  should  b.  his  soul
BEGUILING.

Esth.  16. 6.  b.  with  falsehood  of  their  lewd  disposition
BEHAVED.

Eccl.  49.  2.  he  b.  himself  uprightly  in  the  conversion
2  Mac.  2.  21.  those  that  b.  themselves  manfully
BEHAVIOUR.

F.sth.  16.  7.  done  through  the  pestilent  b.  ot  them
Wisd.  19.  13.  they  used  a  more  hard  and  hateful  b.
BEHIND.

Wisd.  8.  13.  leave  b.  me  an  everlasting  memorial
Eccl.  11.  11.  that  laboureth,  and  is  so  much  more  b.
BEHOLDER.

Esth.  15. 2.  G.  who  is  the  b.  and  saviour  of  all  things
Wisd.  1.  6.  for  God  is  a  true  b.  of  his  heart
BEHOLDETH.

Eccl.  15.  18.  mighty  in  power,  and  b.  all  things
BEL.

Bar.  6.  41.  they  entreat  B.  that  he  may  speak
Bel  3.  the  Babylonians  had  an  idol  called  B.

4.  the  king  said,  why  dost  not  thou  worship  B.  ?

18.  great  art  thou,  O  B.  with  thee  is  no  deceit
22.  the  king  delivered  B.  into  Daniel's  power
BELIEVE.

2  Esd.  I.  37.  yet  in  spirit  they  b.  the  thing  I  say

16.  36.  A.  not  the  gods  of  whom  the  Lord  spake
Tub.  2.  14.  howbeit,  I  did  not  b.  her,  bade  her  render

14.  4.  for  l  surely  b.  those  things  lonas spake
Wisd.  12.  2.  leaving  wickedness,  they'  may  b.  oil  thee
18.  13  and  whereas  they  would  not  b.  any  thing

Eccl.  2.  6.  b.  in  him,  a:id  he  w  ill  help  thee
13.  11.  affect  not  to  be  equal,  b.  not  his  words
36. 26.  so  who  will  b.  a  man  that  hath  no  house  ?
BELIEVED.

2  Esd.  3.  32.  or  what  generation  hath  so  b.  as  Jacob  ?

5.  29.  they  which  A.  not  thy  covenants,  7-  60.

9.  7.  and  by  faith,  whereby  ye  have  b.

Jud.  14.  10.  he  b.  in  God  greatly,  and  was  joined
Eccl.  31.  23.  his  good  house-keeping  will  be  b.

Sus.  41.  then  the  assembly  b.  them  as  the  elders
1  Mac.  7.  16.  whereupon  they  b.  him
BELIEVE  EH.

Eccl.  2.  13.  woe  to  the  faint  hearted,  for  he  b.  not
32.  24.  he  that  b.  in  the  Lord  taketh  heed
BELIEVING.

1  Mac.  12.  46.  so  Jonathan  b.  him,  did  as  he  bade

BELLS.

Eccl.  45.  9.  he  compassed  him  with  golden  b.
BELLY.

Eccl.  2.3.  6.  let  not  the  greediness  of  the  b.  take  hold
.31.  20.  pangs  of  //.are  with  an  unsalable  man
.36.  18.  the  b.  devoureth  all  meats,  yet  one  meat
.37.5.  which  helpeth  his  friend  for  the  b.

40.  .30.  but  in  his  b.  there  shall  burn  a  fire

51.  5.  delivered  from  the  depth  of  the  b.  of  hell
BE  LON  GET  II.

Tub.  3.  17.  because  she  b.  to  Tobias  by  right
BELOVED.

2  Esd.  16.  74.  hear,  O  ye  my  b.  saith  the  Lord
Wisd.  4.  10.  he  pleased  God,  and  was  b.  of  him
Eccl.  7.  35.  that  shall  make  thee  to  be  b.  20.  13.

24.  11.  likewise  in  the  b.  city  he  gave  me  rest
45.  1.  he  brought  out  Moses  b.  of  God  and  men
46. 13.  Samuel  the  prophet  of  Lord,  A.  of  his  Lord

47. 16.  and  for  thy  peace  thou  wast  b.

1  Mac.  6.  11. 1  was  bountiful,  and  b.  in  my  power

BENDED,

Eccl.  43. 12.  the  hands  of  the  Most  High  have  b.  it
BENDETH.

2  Esd.  16. 13.  his  right  hand  that  b.  the  bow

BEN  EFIT.

Wisd.  16.  24.  for  the  b.  of  such  as  trust  in  thee
2  Mac.  2.  27.  and  that  seeketh  the  b.  of  others
BEN  E  FITS.

2  Esd.  9.  10.  who  in  their  life  have  received  b.

Eccl.  12.  1.  so  shalt  thou  be  thanked  for  thy  b.

1  Mac.  11.53.  according  to  the  A.  which  he  received

2  Mac.  9.  26.  I  re'  jest  you  to  remember  the  b.

BENEFITED.

Wisd.  11.5b,  the  same  they  in  their  need  were  b.
13.  when  they  heard  the  other  to  be  b.

BERYL.

Tub.  13.  17.  the  streets  shall  be  paved  with  b.
BESEECHETH.

Wisd.  13.  18.  he  humbly  b.  th.it  which  hath  least
BESIEGE.

1  Mac.  6.  19.  called  the  people  together  to  b.  them
24.  for  which  thev  of  our  nation  A.  the  tower
"BESIEGED.

1  Mac.  6.  20.  so  they  came  together  and  b.  them
21.  howbeit,  certain  of  them  that  were  b.  got  forth
BESIEGING.

Eccl.  50.  4.  he  fortified  the  city  against  b.

BESOUGHT.

Jud.  12. 8.  she  b.  Lord  God  of  Isr.  to  direct  her  way
Wisd.  8.  21.  1  prayed  to  the  Lord  and  b.  him
18.  2.  they  thanked  them,  and  b.  them  pardon


BESTOW.

Bar.  6.  10.  the  priests b.  it  upon  themselves
BESTOWED.

2  Mac.  1. 35.the  king  took  many  gifts  and  b.  on  those
BETIIORON.

Jud.  A.  4.  sent  to  B.  and  Belmen,  and  Jericho
1  Mac.  7-  39.  Nicanor  pitched  his  tents  in  B.
BETHSIIAN.

1  Mac.  5. 52. they  went  into  the  great  plain  before  B.

12.  40.  so  he  removed  and  came  to  B.

BETH SURA.

1  Mac.  4.  29.  they  pitched  their  tents  atB.  6.  7,  31.

2  Mac.  1.3.  19-  the  king  marched  towards  B.

22.  the  king  treated  with  them  in  B.  second  time
BETH  UL1A.

Jud.  4.  6.  Joacim  wrote  them -that  dwelt  in  B.

6.  14.  the  Israelites  brought  him  into  B.  10,  11.

8.3.  Manasses  died  in  the  city  of  B. they  buried  him

10.  6.  but  they  went  forth  to  the  gate  of  B.

11.  9.  for  the  men  of  B.  saved  Achior

BETIMES.

Eccl.  6.  .36.  get  b.  to  him,  and  let  thy  foot  wear
51.  30.  work  your  work  b.  he  will  give  reward
1  Mac.  A.  52.  they  rose  up  b.  in  the  morning
See  Morning.

BET  RAYING.

Wisd.  17. 12.  for  fear  is  nothing  else  but  a  h.
BETROTHED.

1  Mac.  3.  56.  but  as  for  such  as  had  b.  wives

BETTER.

2  Esd.  1.  18.  it  had  been  b.  for  us  to  have  served
3.31.  are  they  of  Babylon  b.  than  they  of  Sion  ?

5.  .33.  lovest  thou  people  b.  than  hethatmade  them
7-  46.  it  had  been  b.  not  to  have  given  the  earth

12.  44.  how  much  b.  had  it  been  for  us

Tub.  12.8.  a  little  with  righteousness  is  b.  than  much
with  unright,  it  is  b.  to  give  alms  than  to  lay  up
Wisd.  4.  1 .  A.it  is  to  have  no  children  and  have  virtue

15.  17.  he  himself  is  b.  than  things  he  worshipped
Eccl.  10.  27-  b.  is  he  that  laboureth  and  aboundeth

16.  3.  one  that  is  just  is  b.  than  a  thousand

18.  16.  ass  wage  the  heat  ?  so  is  a  word  b.  than  a  gift

17.  lo,  is  not  a  word  b.  than  a  gift?

19.  24.  he  that  feareth  God  is  A.  than  one  that  hath

20.  2.  it  is  much  b.  to  reprove  than  to  be  angry'

18.  it  is  A.  than  to  slip  with  the  tongue

25.  a  thief  is  A.  than  a  man  accustomed  to  lie

31.  A.  is  he  that  hideth  folly  than  wisdom

.32.  necessary  patience  in  seeking  the  Ld.  is  A.  than

28.  21.  an  evil  death,  the  grave  wereA.  than  it

29.  13.  A.  than  a  mighty  shield  and  strong  spear
22.  A.  is  the  life  of  a  poor  man  in  a  cottage

30. 14.  A.  is  the  poor  being  sound  and  strong
17- death  is  A.  than  a  bitter  life  or  sickness
36. 18.  all  meats,  yet  is  one  meat  A.  than  another
22.  and  a  man  loveth  nothing  A.

40.  28.  for  A.  it  is  to  die  than  to  beg

41.  15.  is  A.  than  a  man  that  hideth  his  wisdom

42.  14.  A.  is  the  churlishness  ot  a  man  than
Bar.  6.  59-  A.  be  a  king  that  sheweth  his  power

1  Mac.  .3. 59.  for  it  is  A.  for  us  to  die  in  battle

13.  5.  for  I  am  no  A.  thanmv  brethren

BEWAIL.

2  Esd.  16.  2.  A.  your  children  and  be  sorry
Tub.  10.  4.  and  she  began  to  A.  him  and  said

7-  she  ceased  not  whole  nights  to  A.  her  son
Bel  AO.  on  seventh  day  the  king  went  to  A.  Daniel
BEWAILED.

Wisd.  18. 10.  a  noise  for  children  that  were  A.

Eccl.  51.  19-  1  A.  my  ignorances  of  her  .

1  Mac.  12.  52.  and  there  they  A.  Jonathan

13.  26.  and  all  Israel  A.  him  many  days

BEWARE.

Tab.  4.  12.  A.  of  all  whoredom,  my  son

Wisd.  1. 11.  A.  of  murmuring  which  is  unprofitable

Eccl.  4.  20.  A.  of  evil,  and  be  not  ashamed  wheu

12.  11.  though  he  humble  himself,  yet  A.  ofhirn

13.  8.  A.  that  thou  be  not  deceived  and  broughtdown

17.  14.  he  said  A.  of  all  unrighteousness

18.  27.  in  the  day  of  sinning  he  will  A.  of  offence
22. 13.  A.  ofhirn,  lest  thou  have  trouble

26.  every  one  that  heareth  it,  will  A.  of  him

29.  20.  A.  thou  thyself  fall  not  into  the  same

32.  22.  and  A.  of  thine  own  children

37.  8.  A.  of  a  counsellor,  know  what  need  he  hath

40.  29.  but  a  wise  man  well  nurtured  will  A.

BEWITCHING.

Wisd.  4.  12.  the  A.  of  naughtiness  doth  obscure
BEWRAYER.

2  Mac.  4.  1.  having  been  a  A.  of  the  money

BEWRAYETH.

Eccl.  27.  21.  he  that  A.  secrets,  is  without  hope
BIDDEN.

Tub.  7.  17.  when  she  had  done  as  he  had  A.  her
BILL.

Eccl.  25.  26.  give  her  a  A.  ofdivorce,  let  her  go
BIND.

Jud.  8.  16.  do  not  A.  the  counsels  of  the  Lord
Eccl.  j.8.  A.  not  one  sin  upon  another  for  in  one
28.  24.  and  A.  up  thy  silver  and  gold

30.  7.  A.  up  his  wounds,  and  his  bowels  be  troubled

BIRD.

Wisd.  5.11.  or  as  when  a  A.  has  flow-n  through  the  air
Eccl.  27.  19.  as  one  that  lets  a  A.  go  outot  hand
BIRD”.

Wisd.  17.  18.  melodious  noise  of  A.  among  branches
Eccl.  27.  9.  the  A.  will  resort  to  their  like

43.  17.  as  A.  Hying  he  scattereth  the  snow

BIRTH.

2  Esd.  4.  40.  her  womb  may  keep  the  A.  any  longer
1,6.  .38.  within  two  or  three  hours  of  her  A.

Wisd.  7.  5.  that  had  any  other  beginning  of  A.

2  Mac.  6.  7.  in  the  day  of  the  king's  A.  were  brought
B  FLINGS.

Wisd.  16. 9.  them  A.  of  grasshoppers  and  flies  killed
BITTEN.

Eccl.  12.  13.  who  will  pity  a  charmer  that  is  A.  ?
BITTER.

Esth.  14.  8.  satisfieth  not  that  we  are  in  A.  captivity
Eccl.  29.25.  moreover,  thou  shalt  hear  A.  words
.30. 17.  death  is  better  than  a  A.  life  or  sickness

41.  1.  O  death,  how  A.  is  the  remembrance  ot  theo

Y  625


B  O  L


BOX


Apocrypha.]  B  L  E


2  Mac.  6.  7.  they  were  brought  by  4.  constraint

„  bitterly.

Bccl.  25.  18,  when  husband  heareth  it,  shall  sigh  b

38.  17.  weep  6.  and  make  great  moan
Bil  l  ER NESS.

Wisd.  8.  16.  for  her  conversation  hath  no  b.

Bert.  4.  6.  it  he  curse  thee  in  the  b.  of  his  soul

7.  11.  laugh  no  man  to  scorn  in  the  b.  of  his  soul
Cl.  12.  there  is  a  wisdom  w  hieli  multiplied)  b.

31.  29.  wine  with  excess  maketh  b.  of  the  mind
BLACKER.

x  Esd.  7*  55.  our  faces  shall  be  b.  than  darkness

BLAME.

EccL  11.  7-  b.  not  before  thou  hast  examined  truth
31.  m  things  worthy  praise,  will  lay  b.  on  thee
.BLAMED.

U  tsd.  13.  6.  for  this  they  are  the  less  to  be  b.

2  Mac.  2.  7.  when  Jeremy  perceived,  he  b.  them
„r.  BLAMELESS.

If  tsd.  2.  22.  nor  discerned  a  reward  for  h.  souls
10.  5.  she  preserved  him  b.  to  God,  and  kept  him
15.  she  delivered  the  righteous  people  and  b.  seed
18.  21.  tor  then  the  b.  man  made  haste  to  defend
,r  BLASPHEME.

2  Mac.  15.  24.  come  against  thy  holy  people  to  h.

,  ,  blasphemed.

1  Mac.  7.41.  they  that  were  sent  from  Assyrians  h.

2  Mac.  10.  34.  they  that  were  within  b.  exceedingly

„  .  BLASPHEMER.

frt'a’e  ",ls<:onl  w  >  1 1  not  acquit  a  b.  of  his  words
Bert.  3.  16.  that  forsaketh  his  father,  is  as  a  b.

2  Mac.  9.28.  the  b.  died  a  miserable  death
15.  32.  he  shewed  them  the  hand  of  that  b.
BLASPHEMIES.

*  if*  ’  B23.  T  gave  you  not  tire  for  your  b.

]J\Jac.  2.  6.  when  he  saw  the  b.  that  were  committed
/.  38.  remember  their  A.  and  suffer  them  not

1  Mac.  8.4.  the  b.  committed  against  his  name

blaspheming.

-  Mac.  12.  14.  they  behaved  themselves  rudely,  b.

blasphemous.

2  Mac.  10. 4.  might  not  be  delivered  to  the  b.  nations

13.  11.  to  be  in  subjection  to  the  b.  nations

blasphemously.

1  Mac.  7.  42.  rest  may  know  that  he  hath  spoken  b.

_  B  LA  ST..

2  Esd.  4.  5.  or  measure  me  the  b.  of  the  wind
13.  27 .  out  of  his  mouth  came  as  a  h.  of  wind

\\  tsd.  11.20.  they  have  fallen  down  with  one  b.
BLASTING.

2  Esd.  15.  13.  for  their  seeds  shall  fail  thro’  the  b.

,  BLEED.

EccL  42. 5.  and  to  make  side  of  an  evil  servant  to  b

„  ,  ,  blemish.

Becl.  18.  15.  my  son,  4.  not  thy  good  deeds

8.  blessed  is  the  rich  that  is  found  without  b.
__  ,  BLESS.

I  A9u  **ie  B°rd  thy  God  alway,  and  desire
‘ t  me  heavens  b.  thee,  and  all  creatures

13.  13.  they  shall  b.  the  Lord  of  the  just
15.  let  my  soul  b.  God  the  great  King

Bccl  .4.  13.  where  she  enters,  the  Lord  will  b.

32.  13.  tor  these  things  b.  him  that  made  thee
ah'  }?'  *.ln®  Pfa*s?>  b.  the  Lord  in  all  his  works

45.  15.  they  should  b.  the  people  in  hie  name
n  »'/e,  ^TO(  who  doth  wondrous  things
Dan  3.  35.  b.  ye  the^LonL^^^,  38,  39,  40,  &c.

1  End.  4.  40.  b.  be  the  God  of  truth

60.  b.  art  thou  who  hast  given  me  wisdom

9.  46.  so  Esdras  b.  the  I.ord  God  most  high

2  Esd.  13.  24.  are  more  b.  than  they  that  be  dead
lob.  3.  11.  4.  art  thou,  O  Lord  my  God,  thy  holy

and  glorious  name  is  b.  and  honourable  for
ever,  8.  5.  1 11.  14.  Jud.  13.  17.

4.  12.  our  fathers  were  b.  in  their  children
7-  7.  Raguel  b.  him,  and  said  unto  him,  thou  art
1.3.  behold,  take  her  and  lead  her,  and  lie  b.  them

10.  11.  he  4.  them,  and  sent  them  away,  11.  17.

13. 1.  I  obit  wrote  prayer  of  rejoicing,' and  said, "4.

be  (rod  that  hveth  for  ever,  and  b.  be  his  kingdom
l*.  b.  shall  all  be  which  love  thee  for  ever

1  14.  b.  ate  they  who  love  thee,  b.  are  they  who

•_  have  been  sorrowful  for  all  thy  scourges

18.  b.  be  God  which  hath  extolled  it  for  ever
Jud.  14.  7-  b.  art  thou  in  the  tabernacle  of  J  uda
15.  9.  they  b.  her  with  one  accord,  and  said
10.  b.  be  thou  of  the  almighty  Lord  for  ever
IVisd.  2.  16.  he  pronounceth  the  just  to  be  b.

3.  1.3.  b.  is  the  barren  that  is  undefiled

14.  7.  b.  is  the  word  whereby  righteousness  comes
Eccl.  1 1.  28.  judge  none  b.  before  his  death

14.  1.  4.  is  man  that  hath  not  slipped  with  mouth
2.  b.  is  he  whose  conscience  hath  not  condemned
20.  b.  is  the  man  that  doth  meditate  good  things

26.  1.  h.  is  the  man  that  hath  a  virtuous  wife
31.  8.  b.  is  the- rich  that  is  found  without  blemish
9.  who  is  he  ?  and  we  will  call  him  b.

3.3. 12.  some  of  them  hath  he  4.  and  exalted
34.  15.  b.  is  the  soul  of  him  that  feareth  the  Txtrd

45.  1.  Moses  beloved,  whose  memorial  is  b.  49.  10.

46.  11.  the  judges,  let  their  memory  be  h.

48. 1 1.  b.  are  they  that  saw  thee,  and  sle pt  in  love
50.  28.  b.  is  he  shall  be  exercised  in  these  things
29.  b.  be  the  Lord  forever,  amen,  atnen

2  Mac.  1.  17.  b.  be  our  God  in  all  things

15.  34.  b.  be  he  that  hath  kept  his  own  place

BLESSETH.

1  Esd.  4. 36.  calleth  upon  truth,  and  the  heaven  b.  it

BLESSING.

Wisd.  15. 19  without  the  praise  of  God  and  his  b.
Eccl.  3.  8.  that  a  b.  may  come  on  thee  from  them
9.  for  b.  of  father  established)  houses  of  children

11.  22.  b.  of  the  Lord  is  the  reward  of  the  godly
.33.  16.  by  the  b.  of  the  I  ord  1  profited  and  filled
34.  17.  hegiveth  health,  life,  and  b.

36.  17.  according  to  b.  of  Aaron  over  thy  people

37.  24.  a  wise  man  shall  be  filled  with  4.

39.  22.  his  b.  covered  the  dry  land  as  a  river
44.22.  with  Isaac  did  he 1  establish  the  b.  of  all  men

23.  he  acknowledged  him  in  his  b.  and  gave  him
50.  20.  to  give  the  b.  of  the  Lord  with  his  lips
626


Eccl. 5 0.21.  bowed  down,  that  they  might  receive  a  b.
BLESSINGS.

Bccl.  16.  29.  the  Lord  filled  the  earth  with  his  b.
47.  (j.  the  people  praised  him  in  the  b.  of  the  Lord
_  ,  BLIND.

Bccl.  20.29.  presents  and  gifts  h.  the  eyes  of  the  wise
Bar.  o.  .37 .  they  cannot  restore  a  b.  man  to  sight

„„  J  blinded.

/*  tsd.  2.  21.  their  own  wickedness  hath  b.  them
BLINDNESS.

n  ht'  even  wtlh  4.  were  these  stricken

-  Mac.  10.  30.  so  that  being  confounded  with  b.
BLOOD.

”  Bed-  L  26.  for  ye  have  defiled  your  hands  with  b.
.32.  whose  b.  1  will  require  of  your  hands,  saith  L.
e0'  a?( ,  *,shaH  dropout  ofthe  wood,  and  stone

10.  8.  behold,  the  innocent  and  righteous  b.  crieth

unto  me,  9.  22.  Esth.  16.  5.  2  Mac.  l.  8.
o  l  mou,dains  shall  be  drunken  with  their  b.
9.  .3.  so  that  they  dyed  their  bed  in  b.  being  deceived
4.  which  abhorred  the  pollution  of  their  b.

By  a.  16.  10.  a  stranger  from  the  Persian  b.

Ivisd.  7 .  2.  being  compacted  in  b.  of  the  seed  of  man

11.  6.  a  running  river,  troubled  with  foul  b.

12.  o.  devourers  of  man’s  flesh,  and  the  feasts  of  b.
14.25.  so  that  there  reigned  in  all  men,  b.  theft

Bccl.  8.  16.  for  b.  is  as  nothing  in  his  sight

11.  .32.  and  a  sinful  man  layeth  wait  for  b.

12.  16.  he  will  not  be  satisfied  with  h.

28.  11.  and  an  hasty  fighting  sheddeth  b.

3L  21.  he  that  defraudeth  him,  is  a  man  of  b.

•’9.  26.  the  b.  ot  the  grape  is  for  use  of  man’s  life
1  Mac.  6.  34.  they  shewed  them  the  b.  of  grapes
7.  17-  their  b.  have  they  shed  about  Jerusalem
iO  89.  is  to  be  given  to  such  as  are  of  the  king’s  b.
2i Mac.  8.  .3  and  hear  the  b.  that  cried  unto  him
a  lake  being  filled  was  seen  runnjng  wjtj,

45.  though  his  b .  gushed  out  like  spouts
40.  when  as  his  b .  was  now  quite  gone
See  Innocent.
BLOOD-SHEDDER.

Eccl.  34.  22.  he  that  defraudeth  thp  labourer  is  a  4

BLOOD-SHEDDING.

Eccl.  27.  15.  the  strife  of  the  proud  is  4.

,  blot.

Bee l ■  11.  .33.  lest  he  bring  upon  thee  a  perpetual  4.
20.  24.  a  lie  is  a  foul  4.  in  a  man
46.  20.  to  4.  out  the  wickedness  of  the  people
^  ,  BLOTTED.

Eccl.  2.3.  26.  her  reproach  shall  not  be  4.  out
.39.  9.  so  long  as  world  endnreth,  shall  not  be  4.  out
41.  11.  but  an  ill  nameof  sinners  shall  be  4.  cut
44.  13.  and  their  glory  shall  not  be  4.  out
„ ..  BLOW.

H  tsd.  5.  23.  and  like  a  storm  shall  4.  them  awa


Eccl.  28. 12.  if  thou  4.  the  spark  it  shall  burn
rrr-  .  BLOWN.

If  tsd.  5.  14.  like  dust  that  is  4.  away  with  the  wind
B  LOWE  I  II.

Eccl.  4.3.  16.  and  at  his  will  the  south-wind  4
BLUE.

Eccl.  23. 10.  shall  not  be  without  a  4.  mark
_  BOARS.

2  Esd.  15.  .30.  shall  g^  forth  as  wild  4.  of  the  wood

Wisd.  2. 16.  he  maketh  his  4.  thatGod  is  his  father
Eccl.  7.  5.  4.  not  of  thy  wisdom  before  the  kin®

11.  4.  4.  not  of  thy  clothing  and  ra:rnent
BOASTED.

Eccl.  48.  18.  Sennacherib  came  ag.  Sion  4.  proudly
_  ,  BOASTETH.  J

Eccl.  10.  27.  that  4.  himself,  and  wantetli  bread

_  boasting.

Eccl.  47.  4.  when  he  beat  down  the  4.  of  Goliath
„  ,,  BOATS.

2  Mac.  12.  .3.  go  with  their  wives  and  children  info  4 .

6.  Judas  set  the  4.  on  fire  and  slew  those  that  tied

„  BODY.

1  Esd.  .3.  4.  the  guard  that  kept  the  king’s  4.

2  Esd.  .3.  5.  thou  gavest  a  4.  to  Adam  without  soul

5.  14.  extreme  tearfulness  went  through  all  my  4

8.  10.  commanded  milk  out  of  the  parts  of  the  4.

11.  45.  appear  not,  thou  eagle,  nor  thy  vain  4.

12.  .3.  the  whole  4.  of  the  eagle  was  burnt
16.  61.  he  put  his  heart  in  the  midst  of  the  4.

Jud.  10.  .3.  she  washed  her  4.  all  over  with  water
II  tsd.  2.  3.  our  4.  shall  be  turned  into  ashes

9.  15.  the  corruptible  4.  presseth  down  the  soul
Eccl.  7.24.  hast  daughters  >  have  care  of  their  4
23. 16.  a  fornicator  in  the  4.  of  his  flesh  not  cease

18.  the  walls  cover  me,  and  no  4.  seetli  me
30. 15.  health  and  good  state  of  4.  are  above  gold
.34.  25.  washeth  after  the  touching  of  a  dead  4.

.38.  16.  then  cover  his  4.  according  to  the  custom

47.  19.  by  thy  4.  was  brought  into  subjection

48.  1.3.  and  after  his  death  his  4.  prophesied

51.  2.  and  hast  preserved  my  4.  from  destruction
2  Mac.  7.  4.  to  cut  off  the  utmost  parts  of  his  4.

7.  be  punished,  through  every  member  of  thy  4.

9.  7.  the  members  of  his  4.  were  much  paineci

9.  so  that  the  worms  rose  up  out  of  the  4
BODIES.

Jud.  6.  4.  fields  shall  be  filled  with  (heir  dead  4.
Eccl.  41.  11.  the  mourning  of  men  is  about  their  4.
Bar.  2.  17-  whose  souls  are  taken  from  their  4.

6.  22.  on  their  4.  and  heads  sit  hats  and  birds

BODILY.

2  Esd.  1.  .37.  they  have  not  seen  me  with  4.  eyes
BOLD.  *

Jud.  14.  13.  the  slaves  have  been  4.  to  come  down
Eccl.  6.  11  he  will  be  4.  over  thy  servants
8.  15.  travel  not  by  the  way  with  a  4.  fellow
19.  3.  and  a  4.  man  shall  be  taken  awav
22.  5.  she  that  is  4.  dishonoureth  her  father
2  Mac.  4.  2.  thus  was  lie  4.  to  call  him  a  traitor
BOLDLY.

1  Mac.  4.  18.  after  this  you  may  4.  take  the  spoils

2  Mac.  14.4.3.  he  ran  4.  up  the  wall,  and  cast  himself

BOLD  N  ESS.

Jud.  16.  10.  the  Persians  quaked  at  her  4.

Wisd.  5.  1.  the  righteous  shall  stand  in  great  b.

12.  17.  thou  makest  their  4.  manifest


1  4.  32.  cause  the  4.  of  their  st  sngth  t.'  UR-

2  Mac.  8.  L8.  they  trust  in  their  weapons  and  4
BONDAGE.

1  Esd.  8.80.  when  we  were  in  4.  we  were  not  forsake

2  Esd.  1.  7.  I  brought  them  from  the  nouse  of  b.
Jud.  8.22.  wheresoever  we  shall  be  in  4.

Wisd.  19. 14.  but  these  brought  friends  into  4.

BOND-MAN.

1  Esd.  .3.  19.  mind  of  the  4.  and  freeman  to  be  one

,  7.,  r  bond-slave.

I  Mac.  2. 11.  ot  a  free-woman  she  is  become  a  4.

,  BONDS.

II  tsd.  10.  14.  anil  she  left  him  not  in  4.

J7*  2.  fettered  with  the  4.  of  a  long  night,  lay  e  idled-
Eccl.  0.  25.  and  be  not  grieved  with  her  4.

_  BONES.

Eccl.  28.  <7 .  the  stroke  of  the  tongue  breaks  the  4.

40.  12.  let  their  4.  flourish  out  of  place,  49.  10.

Ear .  s,.  24.  that  the  4.  of  our  kings,  and  the  4.  0:

our  fathers,  should  be  taken  out  of  thei>
places

_  .  BOOK.

1  Esd.  7.  6.  things  written  in  the  4.  of  Moses,  9.

2  Esd.  12.  37.  write  these  things  in  a  4.  Tob.  12.20.
J<  4.  1.  1.  the  4.  of  the  words  of  Tobit,  Bar.  1.  1.
Bccl.  24.  2.3.  these  things  are  the  4.  of  the  covenant
50.  27.  hath  written  in  this  4.  the  instruction
Bar  4. 1.  this  is  the  4.  of  the  commandments  of  Gods
1  Mac.  1. 57.  was  found  the  4.  of  the  testament

”  Mac.  0. 12.  I  beseech  those  that  read  this  4.

,  „  ,  .  BOOKS.

1  E/d.  2.  21.  sought  out  in  the  4.  of  thy  fathers

2  Esd.  6.  20.  4.  shall  be  opened  before  firmament

1  Mac.  1.  56.  had  rent  in  pieces  the  4.  of  the  law

2  Mac.  2.  23.  being  declared  by  Jason  in  five  4.

„  BOOTY.

2  Mac.  8.  20.  and  so  they  received  a  great  4.

.BORDERERS.

2  Mac.  9.  25.  princes  that  are  4.  to  my  kingdom
r,  BORN.

1  Efd.  4. 15.  women  have  4.  the  king  and  all  people

2  Esd.  3.  21.  so  be  all  they  that  are  4.  of  him

T  ^j  they  that  shall  be  4.  afterward

Jud.  12.  20.  he  had  drunk  in  one  day  since  he  was  b.

If  tsd.  2.  2.  tor  we  are  4.  at  all  adventure

5.  13.  as  soon  as  4.  we  began  to  draw  to  our  end'

7.  3.  when  1  was  4.  I  drew  in  the  common  air
Eccl.  10.  18.  for  them  that  are  4.  of  a  woman

14.  18.  one  cometh  to  an  end  and  another  is  4.

2.3.  14.  and  wish  that  thou  liadst  not  been  4.

41. 9.  and  if  you  be  4.  you  shall  be  4.  to  a  curse-
44.  9.  perished,  as  though  they  had  never  been  4-.
49.  lo.  nor  was  there  a  man  4.  like  unto  Joseph  ?

1  Mac.  2. 7.  wherefore  was  1  4.  to  see  this  misery

BORNE.

Bar. 6.  4.  ye  shall  see  gods  of  gold  4.  upon  shoulders1
26.  they  are  4.  on  shoulders  having  no  feet
BORROWED.

Wisd.  15.  16.  and  he  that  4.  his  own  spirit

BORROWING.

Eccl.  18. 33.  not  made  a  beggar  by  banqueting  or  he
^  .  BOSOM.

2  Esd.  15.  21.  I  will  recompense  in  their  b.

BOTTLE.

Jud.  10.  5.  then  she  gave  her  maid  a  4.  of  wine

J  BOTTOM.

Wisd.  10.  19.  cast  them  out  of  the  4.  of  the  deep
Eccl.  24.  5.  and  1  walked  in  the  4.  ofthe  deep
BOTTOMS.

Ivisd.  17.  14.  came  out  of  the  4.  of  inevitable  hell

BOUGHS.

2  Mac.  10.  7*  they  bear  fair  4.  and  palms  also
14.  4.  presenting  unto  him  a  crown,  also  of  the  fr.
.BOUGHT.

Jud.  4. 10.  and  their  servants  4.  with  money
Eccl.  33.  30.  because  thou  hast  4.  him  with  a  price’
BOUND.

1  Esd.  1.  40.  and  4.  him  with  a  chain  of  brass

2  Esd.  13.  13.  some  sorry,  some  of  them  were  4.

16.  77.  woe  to  them  that  are  4.  with  their  sins
Bub.  8.  3.  fled  into  Egypt,  and  the  angel  4.  him

Jud.o.  1.3.  they  4.  Achior  and  cast  him  down
Wisd.  17. 17-  all  4.  with  one  chain  of  darkness-
Eccl.  27.  21.  as  for  a  wound,  it  may  be  4.  up-
28.  19.  nor  hath  been  4.  in  her  band3
BOUNDS.

1  Mac.  14.6.  and  enlarged  the  4.  of  his  nation

BOUNTY.

Esth.  16.  2.  are  honoured  with  the  great  4.  of  princes.

BOUNTIFUL.

2  Esd.  7.  65.  that  he  is  4.  for  he  is  ready  to  give

1  Mac.  6. 11.  I  was  4.  and  beloved  in  my  power

BOW.

2  Esd.  16. 1.3.  his  right  hand  that  bendeth  the  4.

Jud.  9.  7-  they  trust  in  shield,  and  spear,  and  4.
Wisd.  5.  21.  as  from  a  well  drawn  4.  shall  they  fly

BOW.  r

Esth.  13. 12.  that  I  did  not  4.  to  proud  Aman
Eccl.  4.  7.  and  4.  thy  head  to  a  great  man

8.  let  it  not  grieve  thee  to  4.  thine  ear  to  poor

6.  25.  4.  down  thy-shoulder  and  bear  her
.3.3.  if  thou  4.  thine  ear,  thou  shalt  be  wise

7.  23.  4.  down  their  neck  from  their  youth,  .30.  12.

.33.  26.  a  yoke  and  a  collar  do  4.  the  neck

47.  19.  thou  didst  4.  thy  loins  unto  women

BOWED.

Eccl.  50. 21 .  they  4.  themselves  down  to  worship
51. 16.  I  4.  down  mine  ear,  and  received  her
Bar .  6.  27 .  nor  if  they  be  4.  down,  can  make  straiglrt
BOWETH.

Eccl.  38.  30.  he  4.  down  his  strength  before  his  feet

BOWING.

2  Mac.  7.27.  but  she  4.  herself  towards  him

BOWELS.

Eccl.  10.  9.  while  he  lives,  he  casteth  away  his  4.

30.  7.  his  4.  will  be  troubled  at  every  cry
2  A  ac.  9. 5.  a  pain  of  the  4.  that  was  remediless

6.  tor  he  Had  tormented  other  men’s  4.

BOWL.

Bel  .33. 1  labbacuc  a  prophet  had  broken  bread  in  a  b
BOX-TREES.

2  Esd.  14.24.  but  look  thou  prepare  thee  many  b.


B  II  E


B  U  R


(A  POCK  V  I’  li  *


BRACELET.

l.ccl.  Cl.  21.  is  like  a  A.  upon  his  right  hand
Bit  AC  Li  LEI'S.

Jud.  10.  4.  she  put  about  her  her  A.  and  chains
BRAGGED.

Jud.  10.  5.  he  A.  that  he  would  burn  my  border
BRAGGING.

2  Mac.  9.  7*  he  nothing  at  all  ceased  from  his  A.

B  RAIDED.

Jud.  10.  3.  and  A.  the  hair  of  her  head
BRAN.

Bar.  6.  43.  tire  women  also  burn  A.  for  perfume
BRANCHES.

Wisd.  4.  4.  though  they  flourish  in  A.  for  a  time

5.  the  unperfect  A.  shall  be  broken  oft’

Eccl.  1.  CO.  and  the  A.  thereof  are  long  life
14.  26.  under  her  shelter,  and  lodge  under  her  A.

23.  C5.  and  her  A.  shall  bring  forth  no  fruit

24.  16.  as  the  turpentine  tree  1  stretched  out  my

A.  and  my  A.  are  the  A.  of  honour  and  grace
2  Mac.  10.  7.  therefore  they  bare  A.  and  boughs
BRASS.

t  Fid.  1.  40.  came  and  bound  him  with  a  chain  of  A.
find.  15.  9.  to  do  like  the  workers  in  A.

Kiel.  28.  20.  the  bands  thereof  are  bands  of  A.

1  A lac.  8.  22.  wrote  in  tables  of  A.  14.  18,  27.
BRAVELY.

Jud.  10.  4.  she  decked  herself  A.  to  allure  the  eyes

BRAWLING.

Lccl.  31.  29-  maketh  bitterness  of  the  mind  with  A.

BRAWLS.

Eccl.  27.  14.  their  A.  make  one  stop  his  ears
BREAD.

1  Esd.  1.  19.  held  the  feast  of  sweet  A.  seven  days

2  Esd.  1. 19-  gave  you  manna,  so  ye  did  eat  angels'  A.
'Job.  1.  16.  1  gave  my  A.  to  the  hungry,  4.  16.

4.  17-  pour  out  thy  A.  on  the  burial  of  the  just
Jud.  10.  5.  then  she  filled  a  bag  with  fine  A.

Eccl.  10.  27.  than  he  that  boasteth  and  wanteth  A.

12.  5.  hold  back  thy  A.  and  give  it  not  unto  him

14.  10.  a  wicked  eye  envieth  his  A.

15.  3.  with  the  A.  of  understanding  shall  he  feed
20.  16.  they  that  eat  my  A.  speak  evil  of  me
•23.  17.  all  A.  is  sw’eet  to  a  whoremonger

29.  21.  the  chief  thing  for  life  is  water  and  A.

33.  24.  A.  correction  and  work  for  a  servant

34.  21.  the  A.  of  the  needy  is  their  life
45.  20.  he  prepared  him  A.  in  abundance

Bel  33.  Ilabbacuc  had  broken  A.  in  a  bowl
BR EADTH.

Eccl.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the  A.  of  the  earth  ?
BREAK.

1  Esd.  4. 4.  A.  down  mountains,  walls,  and  towers
Jud.  9.  10.  A.  dow  n  their  stateliness  by  a  woman

BR  EAKEST.

Jud.  9.  7-  thou  art  the  Lord  that  A.  the  battles
BREAKETH.

Jud.  16.  3.  for  God  A.  the  battles,  he  delivered
Eccl.  23.  18.  a  man  that  A.  wedlock,  saying,  thus
BREAST.

2  Esd.  14.40.  when  I  drunk  it,  wisdom  giewin  my  A.

BREAST-PLATE.

IFisd.  5.  18.  he  shall  put  on  righteousness  as  a  A.
Eccl.  4,3.  20.  it  clotheth  the  water  as  with  a  A.

45.  10.  he  compassed  him  with  a  A.  of  judgment
4  Mac.  3.  3.  he  put  on  a  A.  as  a  giant
BREASTS.

2  Esd.  8.  10.  for  thou  hast  commanded  out  of  the  A.

milk  to  be  given,  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  A.
2  Mac.  6.  10.  the  babes  hanging  at  their  A.

BREA  l  II.

2  Esd.  3.  5.  did  breathe  into  him  the  A.  of  life
Wisd.  2.  2.  the  A.  in  our  nostrils  is  as  smoke
7-  25.  for  she  is  the  A.  of  the  power  of  God
15.  5.  they  desire  a  dead  ima«e  that  hath  no  A.
Eccl.  33.  20.  as  long  as  thou  livest  and  hast  A.

Bar.  6.  25.  the  things  wherein  there  is  no  A.

2  Mac.  7-  22.  for  I  neither  gave  you  A.  nor  life

2.3.  the  Creator  will  give  you  life  and  A.  again
14.  45.  while  there  was  yet  A.  within  him

BREATHED.

Wisd.  15. 11.  and  that  A.  in  him  a  living  spirit
BREA'i  II 1 N  G.

Wisd.  11.  18.  A.  out  a  fiery  vapour  or  smoke
2  Mac.  9. 7-  A.  out  fire  in  his  rage  against  the  Jews
BRED.

Wisd.  12.  10.  that  their  malice  was  A.  in  them
BREECHES.

Eccl.  45.  8.  with  A.  with  a  long  robe,  and  ephod
BRETHREN.

4  Esd.  3.  22.  forget  their  love  to  friends  and  A.

4. 61.  so  he  came  to  Babylon  and  told  it  to  all  his  A.

5.  .3.  all  their  A.  played,  and  he  made  them  go  up
Tob.  1.  3.  and  I  did  many  alms-deeds  to  my  A.

2.  2.  what  poor  man  thou  shalt  find  out  of  our  A.

4.  1.3.  my  son,  love  thy  A.  and  despise  not  thy  A.

5. 12.  then  he  said,  1  am  Azarias,  of  thy  A.

1.3.  were  not  seduced  with  the  error  of  our  A.

7.3.  Raguel  asked  them,  from  whence  are  you,  A..1 ’

11.  17.  there  was  joy  among  all  his  A.  at  Nineve

14,  4.  our  A.  shall  be  scattered  in  the  earth

7.  shall  rejoice,  shewing  mercy  to  our  A.

Jud.  7-  30.  A.  be  of  good  courage,  let  us  endure

8.  14.  A.  provoke  not  the  Lord  our  God  to  anger
24.  O  A.  let  us  shew  an  example  to  our  A.

Eccl.  10.  20.  among  A.  he  that  is  chief  is  honourable

25.  1.  the  unity  of  A.  the  love  of  neighbours
40.  24.  A.  and  help  are  against  time  of  trouble

1  Mac.  .3.  2.  and  all  his  A.  helped  him

5.  32.  he  said,  fight  this  day  for  your  A.

12.  11.  as  it  becometh  us  to  think  on  our  A.

13.  4.  all  my  A.  are  slain,  for  Israel's  sake
5.  for  1  am  no  better  than  my  A.

2  Mac.  1.  1.  the  A.  the  Jews  that  be  at  Jerusalem

wish  to  the  A.  the  Jews  in  Egypt  health
7.  1.  seven  A.  with  their  mother  were  taken
29.  being  worthy  of  thy  A.  take  thy  death,  that  I
may  receive  thee  in  mercy  again  w  ith  thy  A.

36.  our  A.  who  have  suffered  a  short  pain
3“.  but  1,  as  my  A.  offer  up  my  body  and  life
10.  21.  that  they  had  sold  their  A.  for  money

15.  14.  this  is  a  lover  of  the  A.  who  prayeth


BR  EVITY.

2  Mac.  2.  .31.  but  to  use  A.  a.id  avoid  labouring
BR1  B ER  Y.

Eccl.  AO.  12.  all  A.  and  injustice  shall  be  blotted  out
BRIDE.

2  Esd.  7-  26.  and  the  A.  shall  appear  and  be  seen
Bar.  2.  23. the  voice  of  bridegroom,  and  voice  of  A.

1  Mac.  9.  37.  were  bringing  the  A.  from  Nadahatha

BR  I  DEG  ROOM,  S.

2  F.sd.  16.  .3.3.  virgins  shall  mourn,  having  no  A.

.34.  in  the  wars  shall  their  A.  tie  destroyed

1  Mac.  1.27-  every  A.  took  up  lamentation

9.  39.  A.  came  forth,  and  his  friends  to  meet  them

BRIDGE.

2  Mac.  12.  13.  he  went  also  about  to  make  a  A.

BRIDLES.

1  Esd.  3.  6.  and  a  chariot  with  A.  of  gold

2  Mac.  10.29.  five  men  on  horses  with  A.  of  gold

BRIGHT.  See  I'i.ames,
BRIGHTER.

Eccl.  17.  31.  what  is  A.  than  the  sun?  yet  light  fails

2.3.  19.  are  ten  thousand  times  A.  than  the  sun

BRIGHTNESS.

2  F.sd.  10.  50.  he  shewed  thee  the  A.  of  her  glory
Wisd.  7-  26.  for  she  is  the  A.  of  the  everlasting  light
Eccl.  4.3.  11.  very  beautiful  it  is  in  the  A.  thereof
Bar.  5.  3.  God  will  shew  thy  A.  to  every  country
BRING.

1  Esd.  4.  5.  get  the  victory,  they  A.  all  to  the  king
22.  do  3  enot  give,  and  A.  all  to  the  woman  ?
BR1NGEST.

Wisd.  16.  13.  leads  to  gates  of  hell,  and'A.  up  again
BR1NGETI1.

1  Esd.  4. 24.  when  he  hath  robbed,  he  A.  it  to  his  love
BRITTLE.

Wisd.  15. 13.  of  earthly  matter  maketh  A.  vessels
BROKEN.

Wisd.  4.  5.  the  unperfect  branches  shall  be  A.  off
Eccl.  13.2.  if  one  smitten  against  other,  it  shall  be  A.
1  Mac.  7.  18.  for  they  have  A.  the  covenant  and  oath

Brook.

Eccl.  24.  .30.  1  also  came  out  as  a  A.  from  a  river
.31.  and  lo,  my  A.  became  a  river,  my  river  a  sea
.39.  13.  as  a  rose  grow  ing  by  the  A.  of  the  field

1  Mac.  5.  39-  have  pitched  their  tents  beyond  the  A.

BROOKS.

Jud.  2.  8.  their  slain  shall  fill  their  valleys  and  A.
BROTHER.

2  Esd.  12.  11.  seen  in  the  vision  of  thy  A.  Daniel
Tob.  5.  6. 1  have  lodged  with  our  A.  10,  11,  13.

Jud.  8.  26.  the  sheep  of  Laban  his  mother’s  A.

Esi/i.  15.  9-  1  am  thy  A.  be  of  good  cheei

Wisd.  10.  3.  in  furv  w  herewith  he  murdered  his  A.

10.  when  the  righteous  fled  from  his  A.  wrath
Eccl.  7.  12.  devise  not  a  lie  against  thy  A.

18.  change  not  a  faithful  A.  rot  the  goidof  Ophir
29.  10.  lose  thy  money  for  thy  A.  and  friend
27.  give  place,  my  A.  cometh  to  be  lodged

3.3.  19.  give  not  thy  wife  and  A.  power  over  thee
31.  if  thou  have  a  servant,  entreat  him  as  a  A.

1  Mac.  2.  65.  yom  A.  Simon  is  a  man  of  counsel
BROTHERHOOD.

1  Mac.  12.  17.  concerning  the  renewing  of  our  A.
BUCKLE.

1  Mac.  10.  89.  king  A  lexandei  sent  him  a  A.  of  gold

11.  58.  be  gave  him  leave  to  wear  a  golden  A.
BUCKLER.

Eccl.  37.  5.  and  taketh  up  the  A.  against  the  enemy
BUD.

Eccl.  39.  1.3.  A.  forth  as  a  rose  grow  ing  by  the  brook
BUDS.

Wisd.  2.  8.  let  us  crown  ourselves  with  rose  A.
BUILD.

1  Esd.  2.  4.  Lord  commanded  me  to  A.  him  an  house
5.  let  him  go  up,  and  A.  the  house  of  the  Lord
18.  that  the  Jews  do  A.  the  market-places

4.  8.  if  he  command  to  A.  they  A.

6.  2.  Zorobabel  and  .lesus  began  to  A.  the  house
4.  by  whose  appointment  do  ye  A.  this  house  ?

Tob.  14.  5.  where  they  shall  A.  a  temple  ;  after  their
captivity  shall  A.  Jerusalem  gloriously
Eccl. 3.14.  instead  of  sins  it  shall  be  added  A. thee  up
47.  13.  that  he  might  A.  an  house  in  his  name
1  Mac.  15.  39.  he  commanded  him  to  A.  up  Cedron
BU1LDED.

1  Esd.  6.  14.  this  house  was  A.  many  years  ago

2  Esd.  8.  52.  to  you  a  city  is  A.  and  rest  allowed
Tob.  13.  10.  that  his  tabernacle  may  be  A.  with  joy

BUILDERS.

1  Esd.  2.  30.  Rathumus  began  to  hinder  the  A.

BUILD  ELI  I.

2  Esd.  16.  42.  he  that  A.  as  he  that  shall  not  dwell
Eccl.  21.  8.  A.  his  house  with  other  men’s  money

34.  23.  when  one  A.  and  another  pulleth  down
BUILDING.

1  Esd.  4.  51.  twenty  talents  to  the  A.  of  the  temple

5.  63.came  to  the  A. of  this  with  w  eeping  and  crying

6.  9-  A.  an  house  of  the  Lord  of  costly  stones

2  Esd.  10. 54.  there  can  no  man’s  A.  be  able  to  stand
Tob.  14. 5.house  of  G. shall  be  built  u  it  h  a  glorious  A.
1  Mac.  16.  23.  the  A.  of  the  walls  w  hich  he  made

BUG  LT,

1  Esd.  2.  24.  that  if  this  city  be  A.  again  and  walls
4.  51.  twenty  talents  till  the  time  that  it  were  A.
Tob.  13.  16.  Jerusalem  shall  be  A.  with  sapphires

14.  5.  the  house  of  God  shall  be  A.  in  it  for  ever
BULL.

Eccl.  6.  2.  that  thy  soul  be  not  torn  in  pieces  as  a  A.

BULLOCKS.

1  Esd.  6.  29.  for  sacrifices, for  A.  and  rams  and  lambs
8.  14.  silver  and  gold  may  be  collected  for  A.  rams
Eccl.  38.  25.  in  labours,  and  w  hose  talk  is  of  A.

BURDEN.

Eccl.  13.  2.  A.  not  thyself  above  thy  power

BURDENS.

Eccl.  33.  24.  a  wand  and  A.  are  for  the  ass

BURIAL.

Tob.  2.  9.  the  same  night  1  returned  from  the  A.

4.  17.  pour  outthv  bread  on  the  A.  of  the  just
Eccl.  21.  8. that  gathered)  stones  for  the  tomb  of  his  A.
38.  16.  then  cover  his  body  and  neglect  not  his  A.

2  Mac.  1.3.  7.  not  having  so  much  as  A.,  in  the  earth


CAL

BURIED.

Tob.  14.  11.  he  A.  him  honourably,  1. 17,  18.  1  2.  7.
Eccl.  44.  14.  their  bodies  are  A.  in  peace,  name  livett
2  Mac.OAb.  he  judged  not  worthy  to  be  so  much  asA
BUR  IE  I  H.

Tob.  2.  8.  and  yet  lo,  he  A.  the  dead  again

BURN.

Jud.  16.  5.  he  bragged  he  would  A.  up  my  borders
Wisd.  16. 18.  that  it  might  not  A.  up  the  beasts
Eccl.  28.  12.  if  thou  blow  the  spark,  it  shall  A.

23.  it  shall  A.  in  them,  and  not  be  quenched
4u.  .30.  but  in  his  belly  there  shall  A.  a  fire
BURNED.

Tob.  14.  4.  and  the  house  of  God  in  it  shall  be  A

BURNETII.

Wisd.  16.  19.  at  another  time  it  A.  even  in  water
Eccl.  28. 10.  as  the  matter  of  fire  is,  so  it  A.
BURNING.

Wisd.  16.22.  might  know  that  fire  A.  in  the  hail
18.  3.  thou  gavest  them  a  A.  pillar  of  fire
Eccl.  23. 16.  hot  mind  as  a  A.  fire,  not  to  be  quenched
BURNT.

1  Esd.  6. 16.  w  ho  pulled  dow  n  the  house  and  A.  it

2  Esd.  1.3.  4.  all  they  A.  that  heard  his  voice
It.  the  blast  of  fire  A  them  up  every  one

BURST.

Eccl.  19. 10.  and  be  bold,  it  will  not  A.  thee

BURY.

2  Esd.  2.  2.3.  where  thou  findest  the  dead,  A.  them
Tob.  4.  3.  he  said,  my  son,  when  l  am  dead,  A.  me
4.  when  she  is  dead,  A.  her  by  me  in  one  grave

6.  14.  for  they  have  no  oilier  son  to  A.  them
12. 12.  when  thou  didst  A.  the  dead,  1  w  as  with  the*
14.  6.  all  nations  shall  turn  and  A.  their  idols
10.  A.  me  decently,  and  thy  mother  with  me
BURYING.

2  Mac.  9.  4.  would  make  it  acommon  A.  place,  U.

BUSH.

2  Esd.  14. 1.  there  came  a  voice  out  of  a  A.  and  said

3.  in  the  A.  did  manifestly  reveal  myself  to  Moses

BUSHES.

2  Esd.  16. 77.  like  as  a  field  covered  over  with  A.

BUSINESS.

1  Esd.  4.  11.  neither  may  any  one  do  his  own  A.

5. 58.  Levites  with  one  accord  setters  forward  of  A.
J'ob.’i.  8.  and  let  this  A.  be  despatched
Eccl.  3. 17.  my  son,  go  on  with  tliy  A.  in  meekness
10.  26.  be  not  over-w  ise  in  doing  thy  A.  boast  not

29. 19.  he  that  followeth  other  men’s  A.  for  gain

37.  11.  nor  consult  w  ith  an  idle  serv  ant  of  much  A

38.  24.  he  that  hath  little  A.  shall  become  wise

BUY.

Eccl.  51.25.  A.  her  for  yourselves  without  money

1  Mac.  3.  41.  came  to  the  camp  to  A.  children  of  lsr.

12.  36.  that  men  might  neither  sell  nor  A.  in  it

13.  49.  could  not  go  into  the  country,  nor  A.  nor  sell

2  Mac.  8.  34.  brought  1000  merchants  to  A.  the  Jew  a

BUYER.

Eccl.  37. 11.  nor  consult  with  a  A.  of  selling

BUYETH.

Eccl.  20. 12.  there  is  that  A.  much  for  a  little

BUYING.

Eccl.  27.2.  so  doth  sin  stick  close  betw.  A.  and  selling

C.

CADES.

1  Mac.  1 1.  6.3.  Demetrius’  princes  were  come  to  C.
73.  with  him  pursued  them  to  C.  to  their  tents
CALAMITY.

1  Mac.  13.  .32.  he  brought  a  great  c.  on  the  land

2  Mac.  4. 16.  by  reason  whereof  c.  came  on  them

CALAMITIES.

Eccl.  2.3.  11.  but  his  house  shall  be  full  of  c.

40.  9.  strife,  sword,  c.  famine,  and  tribulation
2  Mac.  6. 12.  be  not  discouraged  for  these  c.

10.  10.  gathering  briefly  the  c.  of  the  wars

14.  14.  thinking  the  c.  of  Jews  to  be  their  welfare

CALDRONS.

2  Mac.  7.  3.  the  king  commanded  c.  to  be  made  hot
CALEB.

Eccl.  46.9.  the  Lord  gave  strength  also  to  C.

1  Mac.  2.  56.  C.  received  the  heritage  of  the  land

CAL1STHEN  ES.

2  Mac.  8.  33.  they  burnt  C.  that  had  set  fire  on  gates

CALL.

1  Esd.  1 . 50.  sent  by  his  messengers  to  c.  them  bai  k
Eccl.  13. 14.  and  c.  upon  him  for  thy  salvation
CALLED.

1  Esd.  3. 17.  he  shall  be  c.  Darius  his  cousin

4.  42.  thou  shalt  sit  by  me  and  be  c.  my  cousin

2  Esd.  4.  25.  unto  his  name  whereby  we  are  c.

Wisd.  1. 16.  but  ungodly  men  c.  it  to  them
7.7.  I  c.  on  God,  and  the  Spirit  of  wisdom  came
11.25.  01  been  preserved,  if  not  c.  by  thee

Eccl.  46. 5.  he  c.  on  the  most  high  Lord,  16.  I  47.  5.
Bar.  2. 15-  because  Israel  is  c.  by  thy  name

6.  .30.  for  how  can  they  be  c.  gods  ?

1  Mac.  6.  10.  wherefore  he  c.  for  all  his  friends

14.  then  c.  he  for  Philip  one  of  his  friends

7.  37 -  didst  choose  this  house  to  be  c.  by  thy  nan*.*

10.20.  we  ordain  thee  lo  be  c.  the  king’s  friend
14.40.  the  Romans  c.  the  Jews  their  friends

2  Mac.  .3.  15.  the  priests  c.  unto  heaven  upon  him
4.  28.  they  were  both  c.  before  the  king

7.  25.  the  king  c.  his  mother,  and  exhorted  her

8. 1.  Judas  and  they  c.  their  kinsfolks  together
2.  and  they  c.  upon  the  Lord,  12.  36.

15.  for  his  holy  name’s  sake,  by  which  they  were  <
10.  13.  being  accused  and  c.  traitor  at  every  word
14.  37.  w  ho  for  his  kindness  was  c.  a  father

C  ALLEG'D.

1  Esd.  4.  36.  all  the  earth  c.  on  the  truth
Wisd.  2.  1.3.  he  c.  himself  the  child  of  the  Lord

13.  18.  for  health,  he  c.  on  tnat  which  is  weak

14. 1.  one  preparing  to  sail,  c.  on  a  piece  of  wood
Bar.  3.  .3.3.  that  c.  it  again,  and  it  obeyeth  him

34.  when  he  c.  them,  they  say,  here  wt  be

CALLING.

1  Mac.  12.  .35.  c.  the  elders  of  the  people  together

2  Mac.  12. 6.  and  c.  on  God  the  righteous  Judge

Y  2  627


A  POo-RYPHA


C  A  S


C  II  A


C  II  I


IMac.  12.15.  .1  ud as  t .  upon  the  great  L.  of  the  world
14  46.  and  c.  upon  the  Lord  ot  life  and  spirit
CAMP.

1  Mac.  3.  41.  they  came  into  the  c.  to  buy  Israel
57.  so  the  c.  removed,  and  pitched  near  Eminaus

12.  28.  and  they  kindled  tires  in  their  c.

2  Mac.  13.  15.  he  slew  in  the  c.  about  4, (XX)  men

15.  17.  not  to  pitch  c.  but  courageously  to  set  on

CAMPED.

1  Mac.  10.  86.  Jonathan  c.  against  Ascalon
11.73.  even  to  their  own  tents,  and  there  they  c.

13.  43.  in  those  days  Simon  c.  against  Gaza

2  Mac.  13.  14.  totig'ht  manfully,  Judas  c.  by  Modin

CANAAN.

Jud.  5.  3.  he  said,  tell  me  now,  ye  sons  of  C.

See  Chanaan.

CANDLES.

Bar.  6.  19.  they  light  them  c.  more  than  for

themselves

CANDLESTICK.

1  Mac.  1. 21.  Antiochus  took  away  the  c.  of  light
4  49.  brought  the  c.  and  the  altar  into  the  temple
CANOPY*  ,

Jud.  10. 21.IIolofernes  rested  on  his  bed  under  a  c.

13.  9.  she  pulled  down  the  c.  from  the  pillars
16  19.  gave  the  c.  which  she  had  taken  to  the  Ld.
CAPH  ENA  I’ll  A.

1  Mac.  12.  37.  repaired  that  which  was  called  C.
CAPTAIN.

1  Mac.  2.66.  let  him  be  your  c.  and  fight  the  battle
".  5.  there  came,  having  Alcimus  for  their  c.

11.  59.  his  brother  Simon  also  he  made  c.

12.  53.  they  have  no  c.  nor  any  to  help  them

13.  53.  Simon  made  his  son  c.  of  all  the  host

2  Mac.  1.  16.  and  they  struck  down  the  c.

8.  9.  with  him  he  joined  also  Gorgias  a  c.

CAPTIVE.

2  Mac.  8.  10.  make  so  much  money  of  the  c.  Jews
1 1 .  he  sent,  proclaiming  a  sale  of  the  c.  Jews
CAPTIVES.

Bar.  6.  2.  ye  shall  be  led  away  c.  unto  Babylon
1  Mac.  14.  7.  and  gathered  a  great  number  of  c.
CAP  ITVITY.

1  Esd.  5.  7.  these  are  they  that  came  up  from  c.

6.  5.  because  the  Lord  had  visited  the  c.

8.  the  ancients  of  the  Jews  that  were  of  the  c.
Bar.  3.  7.  that  we  should  praise  thee  in  our  c.

8.  behold,  we  are  yet  this  day  in  our  c.

CAP  BUNCLE.

Tub.  13. 17.  Jerus.  shall  he  paved  with  beryl  and  c.
Bccl.  .32.  5.  is  as  a  signet  of  c.  set  in  gold
CARCASES.

Bel.  32.  they  had  given  them  every  day  two  c.
CARE.

IVisd.  3.  9.  and  he  hath  c.  for  his  elect

6.  17.  and  the  c.  of  discipline  is  love

7.  2.3.  kind  to  man,  stedfast,  sure,  free  from  c.
Bccl.  8. 13.  if  thou  be  surety,  take  c.  to  pay  it

30.  25.  a  good  heart  will  have  c.  of  his  meat

31.  2.  watching  r.  will  not  let  a  man  slumber

50.  4.  he  took  c.  of  the  temple,  that  it  should  not  fall

1  Mac.  6.  10.  and  my  heart  faileth  for  very  c.

9.  58.  are  at  ease,  and  dwell  without  c.

16.  14.  taking  c.  for  the  good  ordering  of  them

2  Mac.  2.  29.  must  c.  for  the  whole  building

9.  21.  to  c.  for  the  common  safety  of  all

14.  8.  for  the  unfeigned  r.  1  have  of  things

15.  18.  the  c.  they  took  for  their  wives
19.  they  in  the  city  took  not  the  least  c.

CARED.

]  Bsd.  1.  47-  he  c.  not  for  the  words  spoken
CAREFUL.

2  Mac.  2.  25.  we  have  been  c.  that  they  that  read
11.  15.  consented,  being  c.  of  the  common  good

14.  9.  be  c.  for  the  country  and  our  nation
CAREFULLY.

1  Esd.  7.  2.  did  very  c.  oversee  the  holy  works
IVisd.  12.  22.  we  should  c.  think  of  thy  goodness
Eccl.  38.  29.  who  is  always  c.  set  at  his  work

2  Mac.  8.31.  laid  them  up  all  c.  in  convenient  places

CAR  EFULN  ESS.

Eccl.  30.  24.  c.  bringeth  age  before  the  time
CARES.

IVisd.  7*4.  T  was  nursed,  and  that  with  c.

8.  9.  she  would  be  a  comfort  in  c.  and  grief

CAR  E  I'll.

IVisd.  12.  13.  nor  is  anv  God  but  thou  that  c.  for  all
CARN  AIM.

1  Mac.  5.  43.  fled  unto  the  temple  that  was  at  C.
44.  thus  was  C.  subdued,  nor  could  they  stand
CARN  ION.

2 Mac.  12.  21 .  sent  the  baggage  to  a  fortress  called  C.
26.  then  Maccabeus  marched  forth  to  C.
CARPENTER.

IVisd.  1.3.11.  now  a  c.  that  felleth  timber
Eccl.  .38.  27 .  so  every  c.  that  labours  night  and  day
CARPENTERS.

1  Esd.  5.  54.  gave  unto  the  masons  and  c.  money
Bar.  6.  45.  they  are  made  of  c.  and  goldsmiths
CARRS.

1  Esd.  5.  55.  unto  them  of  Sidon  they  gave  c.

CARRY.

Bel.  34.  go  c.  the  dinner  that  thou  hast  into  Babylon

2  Mac.  9.  10.  no  man  could  endure  to  c.  for  stink

CARRIED.

2  Mac.  9-  8.  was  now  c.  in  a  horse  litter
29-  and  Philip  c.  away  his  body
CARRIETH.

Wisd.  14.  1.  more  rotten  than  the  vessel  that  c.  him
CARRYING.

2  Mac.  6.  7.  go  in  procession  to  Bacchus,  c.  i\'3>
CARTS.

Jud.  15.  11.  she  made  ready  her  c.  and  laid  them.
CART-WHEEL.

Eccl.  33.5.  the  heart  of  the  foolish  is  like  a  c.
CARVED.

IVisd.  13. 13.  a  carpenter  hath  c.  the  wood  diligently
1  Mac.  5.  68.  Judas  burnt  their  c.  images  with  fire
CAST.EU.

1  Mac.  4.  59.  from  the  25th  day  of  the  month  C.

with  mirth  and  gladness,  2  Mac.  1.  18.  |  10.  5.
6  Mac.  1.  9.  keep  the  feast  in  the  month  C.

628


CASPIS.

o  Mac  12.  13.  and  the  name  of  it  was  C.

CASE.

1  Mac.  4.  33.  c.  them  down  with  the  sword

6.  51.  he  set  artillery  with  instruments  to  c.  fire

and  stones,  and  pieces  to  c.  darts  and  slings

7.  17.  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  have  they  c.  out
19.  Bacchides  r.  them  into  the  great  pit

44.  they  c.  away  their  weapons  and  tied,  11.  51.

10.  80.  tor  they  had  c.  darts  at  the  people

2  Mac.  5.  8.  as  an  enemy,  he  was  c.  out  into  Egypt

10.  he  that  had  c.  out  many  unburied

9.  8.  and  thus  he  was  now  c.  on  the  ground

15.  but  to  be  c.  out  with  their  children

14.  15.  they  c.  earth  upon  their  heads

43.  bee.  himself  down  manfully  among  them
46  he  c.  iiis  bowels  upon  the  throng,  he  thus  died
CAS  1  I  NG.

1  Mac.  1.3.  11.  who  c.  out  them  that  were  therein

2  Mac  5.  3.  drawing  of  swords  and  c.  of  darts

CAS  I  ING.

2  Mac  11  13  c.  with  himself  what  loss  he  had  had
CASILE.

2  Mac.  4.  27.  though  the  ruler  of  the  c.  required  it

5.  5.  the  city  taken,  Menelaus  fled  into  the  c.

10.  20.  certain  of  those  that  were  in  the  c.

CAS  I  LES.

2  Mac.  10.  18.  who  fled  into  two  very  strong  c.

22.  so  he  immediately  took  the  two  c.

CA  1  A  LOGUE.

1  Esd.  8.  49.  the  c.  of  whose  names  were  shewed
CA  FILE.

1  Mac.  12.  2.3.  that  your  c.  and  goods  are  ours

2  Mac.  12.  11.  to  give  him  c.  and  to  pleasure  him

CA  CG II  I  .

2  Mac.  4.  41.  some  of  them  c.  stone6,  some  clubs
CAUSE.

1  Mac.  6.  12.  to  destroy  the  inhabitants  without  c.
1.3.  I  perceive  that  for  this  r.  these  are  come

2  Mac.  4.  44.  three  men  pleaded  the  c.  before  him
47.  who  was  c.  of  all  the  mischief;  who  if  they

had  tolii  their  c.  before  the  Scythians
7.  18.  who  said,  be  not  deceived  without  c.

.34.  ()  godless  man,  be  not  lifted  up  without  a  c.
13.  4.  that  this  mau  was  thee,  of  all  mischief
C  EASE.

Eccl.  16.  27.  nor  do  they  c.  from  their  works

28.  6.  remember  thy  end,  and  let  enmity  c.

1  Mac.  11.  59.  let  the  Jews  c.  from  assaulting  11s

2  Mac.  7.  38.  that  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty  may  c.
9.  18.  but  for  all  this  his  pains  would  not  c.

CEASED.

1  Esd.  1. 56.  as  for  her  glorious  things,  they  never  c.
Dan.  .3.  23.  c.  not  to  make  the  oven  hot  with  rosin
1  Mac.  9.  73.  thus  the  sword  c.  from  Israel
CEASING.

1  Mac.  12.  11.  at  all  times  without  c.  we  remember

2  Mac.  9.  4.  Lis  chariot  man  to  drive  without  r.

CEDAR.

Eccl.  24.  13.  I  was  exalted  like  a  c.  in  Libanus
50.  12.  he  stood  as  a  young  c.  in  Libanus
CEDRON.

1  Mac.  15.  39.  also  he  commanded  him  to  build  C.
41.  when  he  had  built  C.  he  set  horsemen  there

16.  9.  John  still  followed,  until  he  came  to  C.
CELEBRATE.

Tob.  6.  12.  when  we  return,  we  will  c.  the  marriage

2  Mac.  2.  16.  we  are  about  to  c.  the  purification

15.  36.  to  c.  the  13th  day  of  the  12th  month

CELEBRA  IT N G.

2  Mac.  5.  26.  were  gone  to  the  c.  of  the  sabbath
CELOSYRIA.

1  Esd.  2.  17.  the  judges  in  C.  and  Phenice

6.  29.  out  of  the  tribute  of  C.  a  portion  given

7.  1.  the  governor  of  C.  did  oversee  the  works

2  Mac.  .3.  8.  visiting  the  cities  of  C.  and  Phenice
4.  4.  being  the  governor  of  C.  and  Phenice,  10.  11.

CEN  DEBEUS.

1  Mac.  15.  38.  then  the  king  made  C.  captain
40.  C.  came  to  Jamnia  |l  16.  1.  what  C.  had  done

16.  4.  with  horsemen,  who  went  out  against  C.

8.  whereupon  C.  and  his  host  were  put  to  flight

9.  till  he  came  to  Cedron  which  C.  had  built

CENSERS.

1  Esd.  2.  13.  c.  of  silver  twenty-nine,  vials  of  gold

1  Mac.  1.  22.  Antiochus  took  away  the  c.  of  gold

C  E  R  EMO  N  1  ES.

IVisd.  14.  15.  delivered  to  those  under  him,  c.

23.  for  whilst  they  used  secret  c.  or  revellings

CERTIFY.

Bel  9.  if  ye  can  c.  me  that  Bel  devoureth  them

2  Mac.  1.  18.  w’e  thought  it  necessary  to  c.  you

CEB  IT  FI  ED.

1  Mac.  14.  21.  the  ambassadors  c.  us  of  your  glory

2  Mac.  11.  26.  that  when  they  are  c.  of  our  mind

CHAIN.  _

1  Esd.  1.  40.  and  bound  him  with  a  c.  of  brass
3.  6.  Darius  shall  give  him  a  c.  about  his  neck
IVisd.  17.  17.  were  bound  with  one  c.  of  darkness
Eccl.  6.  24.  and  put  thy  neck  into  her  c.

CHAINS.

Jud.  10.  4.  put  about  her  her  bracelets  and  her  c.
Eccl.  6.  29.  her  c.  shall  be  a  robe  of  glory
CHAM  BER.

1  Esd.  9.  1.  Esdras  went  to  the  c.  of  Joanan

2  Esd.  5.  9.  withdraw  itself  into  his  secret  c.

CHAM  BERS.

2  Esd.  4. 41.  the  c.  of  souls  are  like  a  woman's  womb
1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw  the  priests'  c.  pulled  down
CHANAAN.

Sus.  56.  O  thou  seed  of  C.  and  not  of  Judah
1  Mac.  9.  37.  of  one  of  the  great  princes  of  C.

See  C  A  N  A  A  N  .

CHANGE.

IVisd.  7.  18.  given  me  to  know  the  c.  of  seasons
19.  18.  in  a  psaltery  notes  c.  the  name  of  the  tune
Eccl.  7. 18.  c.  not  a  friend  for  any  good  by  no  means
40.  5.  anger,  night-sleep  do  c.  his  knowledge

1  Mac.  1.  49.  thev  might  v.  all  the  ordinances

CHANGED.

2  Esd.  6.  26.  the  heart  of  inhabitants  shall  be  c.
Est/i.  15.  8.  then  God  c.  the  spirit  of  the  king


IVisd.  19.  18-  the  elements  were  c.  in  themselves
Eccl.  2.  4.  when  thou  art  c.  to  a  low  estate
18.  26.  from  morning  till  the  evening  time  isc.

1  Mac.  1.  26.  the  beauty  of  women  was  c.

CHANG  ETH.

Eccl.  13.  25.  the  heart  of  a  man  r.  his  conntenanr*

25.  17.  the  wickedness  of  a  woman  c.  her  face
27.  1 1.  but  a  fool  c.  as  the  moon

CHANGING.

Eccl.  37.  17.  the  countenance  is  a  sign  ol  c.

43.  8.  increasing  wonderfully  in  her  c.

2  Mac.  .3.  16.  the  c.  of  his  colour  declared  agony
6.  27.  manfully  c.  this  life,  I  will  shew  myself

29.  c.  the  good-will  they  bare  him  a  little  before

CHAPELS.

1  Mac.  1.  47.  set  up  altars,  groves,  and  c.  of  idols

2  Mac.  10.  2.  also  the  c.  they  pulled  down

11.  3.  as  of  the  other  c.  of  the  heathen

CIIARG  E.

2  Esd.  2.  .3.3.  Esdras  received  a  c.  of  the  Lord

6.  46.  thou  gavest  them  a  c.  to  do  service  to  man

1  Mac.  5. 19.  saying,  take  ye  the  c.  of  tins  people
58.  when  they  had  given  c.  unto  the  garrison

12.45.  for  1  will  give  it  to  all  that  have  any  c.

14.  42.  that  he  should  take  c.  of  the  sanctuary

2  Mac.  15.  10.  he  gave  them  their c.  shewing  them

CHARGE.

2  Mac.  11.  11.  and  giving  a  c.  on  their  enemies
CHARGED.

1  Esd.  4.  57.  the  same  c.  he  also  to  be  done

2  Mac.  2.  2.  c.  them  not  to  forget  the  commands

CIIARG  ES.

1  Esd.  4.  55.  likewise  for  the  c.  of  the  Levites

1  Mac.  3.  30.  he  should  not  be  able  to  bear  the  c.

2  Mac.  4.  19.  but  to  be  reserved  for  other  c.

9.  16.  defray  the  c.  belonging  to  sacrifices

CHARIOT.

1  Esd.  1 . 28.  Josias  did  not  turn  back  his  c.  from  him
3).  then  gat  he  up  upon  his  second  c.

3.  6.  a  c.  with  bridles  of  gold  and  achain  ahoutber
Eccl.  18.  9.  was  taken  up  in  a  c.  of  fiery  horses
49-  8.  shewed  him  upon  the  c.  of  the  cherubims

2  Mac.  9.  7. he  fell  down  from  his  r. carried  violently

CHARIOTS.

1  MacA.  17-  he  entered  into  Egypt  with  c.

2  Mac.  13.  2.  three  hundred  c.  armed  with  hooks

CHARIOT-MAN.

2  Mac.  9.  4.  he  commanded  his  c.  to  drive
CHARMER.

Eccl.  12. 1.3.  who  will  pity  a  c.  bi'ten  with  a  serpent.
CHASED.

1  Mac.  14.  26.  c.  away  their  enemies  from  them

CH  AS  I  EN.

IVisd.  12.  22.  whereas  thou  dost  c.  us.  thou  scourgest

2  Mac.  10.  4.  that  he  would  c.  them  with  mercy

C1IAS  I  E N  ES  I  .

IVisd.  12.  2.  thou  c.  them  by  little  and  little
CIIAS  1'EN  I  NG.

2  Mac.  6.  12.  but  for  ac.  otour  nation

7.  33.  angry  with  us  for  our  c.  and  correction

»  CHASTISE.

Eccl.  30.  13.  c.  thy  son  and  hold  him  to  labour
CHASTISED.

2  Esd.  15.  51.  be  weakened,  as  one  c.  with  wounds
IVisd.  .3.  5.  having  been  c.  they  shall  be  rewarded

11.  9-  when  they  were  tried,  albeit  in  mercy  c.

CH  AS  1  ISEI  II.

Eccl.  30.2.  he  that  c.  his  son  shall  havtjov
CHAS  I  I  l  Y.

2.  Esd.  6.  32.  the  mighty  hath  seen  also  thy  c.

CH  EEKS.

Eccl.  35.  15.  doth  not  tears  rundown  widows’  c.t
CHEER.

1  Esd.  9.  54.  then  they  went  to  make  great  c.

Eccl.  18.  32.  take  not  pleasure  in  much  good  c.

CHEERED.

2  Mac.  15.27.  through  the  appearance  they  werec.

C11EERE  1  11.

Eccl.  36.  22.  beauty  of  a  woman  c.  the  countenance
CHEERFUL.

Eccl.  7.  24.  shew  not  thyself  c.  toward  them
13.  25.  a  merry  heart  maketh  a  c.  countenance
26.  a  c.  countenance  is  a  token  of  prosperity

26.  4.  heshall  rejoice  with  ac.  countenance

30.  25.  ac.  heart  will  have  a  care  of  his  meat
35.  10.  as  thou  hast  gotten  give  with  a  c.  eye

2  Mac.  15.  9.  Maccabeus  made  them  more  c.
CHEERFULLY.

Eccl.  2.  4.  what  is  brought  upon  thee,  take  c.

2  Mac.  11.  26.  ever  go  c.  about  their  own  affairs
CHEERFULN  ESS.

Bar.?>.  34.  so  with  c.  they  shewed  light  to  him
CH  EltEAS.

2  Mac.  10.  32.  strong-hold,  where  C.  was  governor-
37.  they  killed  1  imotheus  and  C.his  brother
CHERUBIMS.

Eccl.  49.  8.  was  shewed  him  on  the  chariot  of  the  e.  •
CHET  TIM.

1  Mac.  1.  1.  Alexander  came  out  of  the  land  of  C.

CHICKENS.

2  Esd.X.  30.  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  c. under  her  wings

CHIEFLY.

Tub.  4. 12.  c.  take  a  wife  of  the  seed  of  thy  fathers  t


CHILD.

1  Esd.  1.  53.  who  spared  neither  old  men  nor  c.

2  Esd.  4.  40.  go  thy  way  to  a  woman  with  c.

5.  49-  like  as  a  young  c.  may  not  bring  forth  thing  .
IVisd.  2.  13.  he  calleth  himself  the  c.  of  the  Lord

8.  19.  tor  1  was  a  witty  c.  and  had  a  good  spirit
14.  15.  when  he  hath  made  an  image  of  Lis  c.

Eccl.  30.  8.  a  c.  left  to  himself  will  be  wilful
9.  cocker  thy  c.  and  heshall  make  thee  afraid
12.  and  beat  him  on  the  sides  while  he  is  ac.

2  Mac.  15.  12.  exercised  from  a  c.  in  all  virtue
CHILDREN.

Es(h.  16.  16.  that  they  be  c.  of  the  Most  Hign
IVisd.  3.  12.  wives  are  foolish  and  their  c.  wicked
16.  as  for  c.  of  adulterers  they  shall  not  come  f

4.  1.  better  it  is  to  have  no  c.  and  to  have  virtue

6.  for  c.  begotten  of  unlawful  beds  are  witnesses  ;

5.  5.  how  is  he  numbered  among  the  c.  of  God  '

9.  4.  and  reject  me  not  from  among  thv  c.


C  I  T


COL


C  O  M


[Apocrypha.


Eccl."i .  23.  hast  thou  c.': ’  instruct  tnem  and  bow  down

11.  2th  for  a  man  shall  be  known  in  his  c.

16.  1.  desire  not  a  multitude  of  unprofitable  c.

3.  l  etter  it  is  to  die  without  c.  than  have  ungodly
22.  9-  if  r.  live  honest  y  and  have  wherewithal

10.  but  c.  being  haughty  through  disdain  do  stain
22.  23.  she  hath  brought  c.  by  another  man

24.  18.  1  therefore  am  given  to  all  my  c.

25.  7.  man  that  hath  joy  of  his  c.

32.  22.  and  beware  of  thine  own  c.

33.  21.  better  it  is  that  thy  c.  should  seek  to  thee

39.  13.  hearken  to  me,  ye  holy  c.  and  bud  forth

40.  15.  the  c.  of  the  ungodly  shall  not  bring  forth
19.  c.  and  building  a  city  continue  a  man's  name

41.  5.  the  c.  of  sinneis  are  abominable  c.

6.  the  inheritance  of  sinners’  c.  shall  perish

7.  the  c.  will  complain  of  an  .ungodly  father

45.  13.  before  him  none,  nor  did  a  stranger  put  them
on,  but  his  c.  and  his  children’s  c.  perpetually
Bel  20.  1  see  the  footsteps  of  men,  women,  and  c.
CHILD-BED.

Bur.  6.  29.  women  in  c.  eat  their  sacrifices
CHIMNEYS.

2  Esd.  6.  4.  or  ever  the  c.  in  Zion  were  hot
CHOICE.

1  Mac.  4.  28.  Lysias  gathered  60,000  r.  men  of  foot

2  Mac.  13.  15.  with  tire  valiant  and  c.  young  men

CIIO  LER.

Eccl.  37.  30.  and  surfeiting  will  turn  into  c.
CHOOSE.

2  Esd.  3. 13.  thou  didst  c.  thee  a  man  among  them
16.  thou  did  c.  him  to  thee,  and  put  by  Esau
Bar.  3.  27.  those  did  not  the  Lord  c.  nor  gave  he

1  Mac.  5.  17-  c.  thee  out  men  and  deliver  brethren
7.37-  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  c.  this  house  to  be  called
10.  32.  may  set  in  it  such  men  as  he  shall  c.  keep  it

2  Mac.  1. 25.  didst  c.  the  fathers  and  sanctify  them

5.  19.  God  did  not  c.  the  people  for  the  place’s  sake

CHOOSING.

1  Mac.  10.  74.  c.  10,000  men,  he  went  out  of  Jerus,

2  Mac.  10.  12.  c.  rather  to  do  justice  to  the  Jews

14.  42.  c.  rather  to  die  manfully  than  to  come

CHOSE.

1  Esd.  9.  16.  Esdras  c.  to  him  the  principal  men
Eccl.  45. 16.  he  c.  him  out  of  all  men  living

1  Mac.  4. 42.  he  c.  priests  of  blameless  conversation
9-  25.  then  Bacchides  c.  the  wdcked  men

16.  4.  so  he  c.  out  of  the  country  20,000  men

2  Mac.  3.  7-  the  king  c.  Heliodorus  his  treasurer

CHOSEN.

1  Esd.  5.  1.  after  this  were  the  principal  men  c.

I  Wisd.  4.  15.  that  he  hath  respect  unto  his  c.

9.  7-  thou  haste,  me  to  be  a  king  of  thy  people
Eccl.  47.  2.  so  was  David  c.  out  of  children  of  Israel
49.  6.  they  burnt  the  c.  city  of  the  sanctuary

1  Mac.  12.  41.  went  with  men  c.  for  the  battle

CHRIST.

2  Esd.  7.  29.  after  these  years  shall  my  son  C.  die

CHRONICLES.

1  F.sd.  2.  22.  thou  shalt  find  in  the  c.  what  is  written

1  Mac.  16.  24.  behold,  these  are  written  in  the  c.

CHURCH-ROBBER.

2  Mac.  4.  42.  as  for  the  c.  himself,  him  they  killed

,  CHURLISH.

2  Mac.  14.  30.  Nicanor  began  to  be  c.  unto  him

CHURLISHLY.

Eccl.  18. 18.  a  fool  will  upbraid  c.  and  a  gift  of
CHURLISHNESS.

Eccl.  42. 14.  better  is  the  c.  of  a  man  than  a  courteous
CILICIA.

Jud.  2.  21.  which  is  at  the  left  hand  of  upper  C.

2  Mac.  4.  36.  was  come  from  the  places  about  C.
CINNAMON.

£«7.24.15.  ga«ve  *-  sweetsmell  likec.  and  aspalathus
CIRCLE.

Wisd.  13.  2.  deemed  it  either  the  c.  of  the  stars
CIRCUIT.

Eccl.  24.  5.  I  alone  compassed  the  c.  of  heaven
2  Mac.  6.  4.  within  the  c.  of  the  holy  places
CIRCUMCISED.

Jud.  14.  10.  Achiorc.  the  foreskin  of  his  flesh

1  Mac.  1. 60.  women  that  caused  their  childr.  to  be  c.
61.  they  slew  them  that  had  c.  them

CIRCUMCISIONS.

2  Esd.  1.  31.  for  your  c.  have  I  forsaken

CIRCUMSPECT.

Tob.  4.  14.  be  c.  my  son,  in  al’_  things  thou  dost
CIRCUMSPECTION.

Wisd.  12.  21.  with  how  great  c.  didst  judge  thy  sons
CISTERN.

Eccl.  50.  3.  the  c.  was  covered  with  plates  of  brass
;  x  CISTERNS.

Jud.  7*21.  the  c.  were  emptied,  they  had  no  water
CITHERNS.

1  Mac.  4.54.  it  was  dedicated  with  songs  and  c.

.  CITY.

1  Esd.  2.  23.  even  this  c.  was  made  desolate

26.  that  that  c.  was  practising  against  kings
5.  8.  they  returned  every  man  to  his  own  c.

\  Eccl.  26.  5. 1  was  afraid  of  the  slander  of  a  c.

38.  32.  without  these  cannot  a  c.  be  inhabited
40.  19.  the  building  of  a  c.  continues  a  man’s

name

49.  6.  they  burnt  the  chosen  c.  of  the  sanctuary

50.  4.  and  he  fortified  the  c.  against  besieging

1  Mac.  1.  51.  cities  of  Judah  to  sacrifice,  c.  by  c.

5.  50.  the  soldiers  assaulted  the  c.  all  that  day

6.  3.  he  sought  to  take  the  c.  and  to  spoil  it

63.  he  found  Philip  to  be  master  of  the  c.  so  he
fought  against  him  and  took  the  c.  by  force

7.  1.  Demetrius  came  unto  a  c.  of  the  sea-coast
10.75.  but  they  of  Joppe  shut  him  out  of  the  c.

12.  36.  raising  a  great  mount  between  the  tower

and  the  c.  and  to  separate  it  from  the  c.

13.  47.  fought  no  more,  but  put  them  out  of  the  c.

2  Mac.  8.  17-  anti  the  cruel  handling  of  the  c.

15.  19.  they  that  were  in  the  c.  took  no  care

CITIES.

Eccl.  46.  2.  stretch  out  his  sword  against  the  c.

1  Mac.  5.  68.  when  he  spoiled  their  c.  he  returned
10.  71.  for  with  me  is  the  power  of  the  c.

9  Mac.  8.  11.  he  sent  to  the  c.  on  the  sea-coast


CITIZENS.

2  Mac.  4.  50.  Menelaus  being  a  great  traitor  to  the  c.

5.  6.  but  Jason  slew  his  own  c.  without  mercy

9.  15.  would  make  them  all  equals  to  c.  of  Athens
19.  to  the  good  Jews  his  c.  wisheth  much  joy
CLAY.

Wisd.  7.  9.  silver  shall  be  counted  as  c.  liefore  her
15.  7-  yea,  ot  the  same  c.  he  maketh  both  vessels
8.  he  maketh  a  vain  god  of  the  same  c.  •

Eccl.  33.  13  as  the  c.  is  in  the  potter’s  hand
38.  30.  he  fashioneth  the  c.  with  his  arm
Bel 7.  for  this  is  but  c.  within  and  brass  without
CLEAN.

Eccl.  38.  30.  is  diligent  to  make  c.  the  furnace
CLEANSE.

Eccl.  38.  10.  c.  thy  heart  from  all  wickedness
1  Mac.  4.  36.  let  us  go  up  toe.  and  dedicate
CLEANSED.

1  Mac.  4.  41.  until  he  had  c.  the  sanctuary

43.  w  ho  c.  the  sanctuary,  and  bare  out  the  stones

13.  4?.  c.  the  houses  wherein  the  idols  were
50.  Simon  c.  the  tower  from  pollutions

2  Mac.  10.  5.  on  the  very  same  day  it  was  c.  again

14.  36.  keep  this  house  undefil.  which  lately  wase.

CLEANSING.

2  Mac.  1.  36.  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  a  c.

„  CLEAR.

Sus.  46.  I  am  c.  from  the  blood  of  this  woman
CLEAVE.

Eccl.  2.  3.  c.  unto  him,  and  depart  not  away

6.  34.  and  c.  unto  him  that  is  wise

24.  24.  that  he  may  confirm  you,  c.  unto  him
Bar.  3.  4.  for  which  cause  these  plagues  c.  to  us
.CLEAVED.

Bar.  1.  20.  the  evils  c.  unto  us,  and  the  curse

CLEAVETH.  [wife

1  Esd.  4.20.  man  leaveth  his  country,  and  c.  to  his
Eccl.  19. 2.  that  c.  to  harlots  will  become  impudent

CLEAVING.

Eccl.  25. 12.  faith  is  the  beginning  of  c.  to  him
CLEMENCY.

2  Mac.  14.  9.  according  to  the  c.  thou  shewest

.  CLEOPATRA.

Esth.  11.  1.  in  the  reign  of  Ptolemeus  and  C.

1  Mac.  10.  57.  w'ent  out  with  his  daughter  C.

CLIMB.

2  Esd.  4.  8.  neither  did  I  evere.  up  into  heaven

CLIMBED.

2  Mac.  2.  4.  the  mountain  where  Moses  c.  up
CLIMBING.

Eccl.  25. 20.  as  the  r.  up  a  sandy  way  is  to  the  feet
.  CLOSE.

Tob.  1 2.  11.  I  will  keep  c.  nothing  from  you  ;  I
said  it  was  good  to  keep  c.  the  secrets  ot  a  king
Eccl.  27.2.  doth  sin  stick  c.  betw.  buying  and  selling
1  Mac.  12.  50.  went  c.  together  prepared  to  fight
CLOSED.

1  Mac.  7.  46.  c.  them  so  that  they  were  all  slain

CLOTH.

2  Mac.  5.  2.  men  running  in  the  air  in  c.  of  gold

CLOTHE.

2  Esd.  2.  20.  give  to  the  poor,  c.  the  naked
CLOTHED.

1  Esd.  3.  6.  as  to  be  c.  in  purple,  to  drink  in  gold
Eccl.  50.  11.  and  was  c.  with  the  perfection  of  glory
1  Mac.  11.  58.  to  be  c.  in  purple,  14.  43.

CLOTHES.

Bar.  6.  20.  eat  them  and  their  c.  they  feel  it  not

1  Mac.  11.  71.  then  Jonathan  rent  c.  and  prayed

CLOTHETir.

Eccl.  43.  20.  and  c.  the  water  as  with  a  breast-plate
CLOTHING.

Eccl.  29-  21.  the  chief  thing  for  life  is  bread  and  c.
39.  26  the  blood  of  the  grape,  and  oil.  and  c.

2  Mac.  3.  .33.  the  same  young  men  in  the  same  c.

11.  8.  one  in  white  c.  shaking  his  armour  of  gold

CLOUD.

2  Esd.  15.  39.  the  c.  which  he  raised  up  in  wrath
11  isd.  2.4.  our  life  pass  away  as  the  trace  of  a  c.
Eccl.  24.  3.  and  I  covered  the  earth  as  a  c.

50.  6.  he  was  as  the  morning  star  in  midst  of  a  c.
CLOUDS.

2  Esd.  15.  40.  great  and  mighty  c.  shall  be  lifted  up
Wisd.  5. 21.  from  the  c.  as  from  a  well-drawn  bow
Eccl.  13.  23.  what  he  saith,  the}’  extol  it  to  the  c.

35.  16.  his  prayer  shall  reach  unto  .the  c.

17.  the  prayer  of  the  humble  pierceth  the  c.

20.  seasonable,  as  c.  of  rain  in  time  of  drought
43.  14.  the  treasures  opened,  c.  fly  forth  as  fowls

15.  by  his  great  power  he  maketh  the  c.  firm
50. 7.  as  the  rainbow,  giving  light  in  the  bright  c.
Dan.  3.  51.  O  ye  lightnings  and  c.  bless  the  Lord

CLOUDY.

Eccl.  24.  4.  and  my  throne  is  in  a  c.  pillar
CLUBS.

2  Mac.  4. 41.  some  of  them  caught  stones,  some  c.
CLUSTER,  S.

2  Esd.  9.  21.  and  I  have  kept  me  a  grape  of  thee.

16.  30.  there  are  left  some  c.  of  them  that  seek
CNIDUS.

1  Mac.  15.  23.  the  same  thing  wrote  he  to  C.

COALS.

Eccl.  8. 10. kindle  notthe  c.  of  a  sinner,  lest  be  burnt
11. 32.  of  a  spark  of  fire  a  heap  of  c.  is  kindled
CO  A  T.

2  Mac.  12.35.  taking  hold  of  his  c.  drew  him  by  force

COA  I  S.

2  Mac.  12.  40.  under  the  c.  of  every  one  slain
COCKER.

Eccl.  30.  9.  c.  thy  child,  he  shall  make  thee  afraid
COGITATIONS.

Eccl.  17.  5.  an  interpreter  of  the  c.  thereof
COLLECTION.

Bar.  1.  6.  they  made  also  a  c.  of  money
COLLAR.

Eccl.  33.26.  a  yoke  and  a  c.  do  bow  the  neck
COLLECTOR.

1  Mac.  1.  29.  the  king  sent  his  chief  c.  to  Juda

COLONY.

11  isd.  12. 7.  receive  a  worthy  c.  of  God’s  children
COLOUR.

2  Mac.  3.  8.  under  a  c.  of  visiting  the  cities


2  Mac.  3. 16.  the  ebang.  of  his  c .  declared  his  agony
COLOURING.

Wisd.  13.  14.  c.  it  red  and  covering  everv  spot
COLOURS.

Wisd.  15.  4.  any  image  spotted  with  divers  c.
COM  E.

1  Mac.  6.  13.  that  these  troubles  are  c.  upon  me

2  Mac.  6.  15.  lest  being  c.  to  the  height  of  sin

9.  18.  the  just  iudament  of  God  was  c.  upon  them

COMEST,  ETII.

Eccl.  21.  2.  for  if  thou  c.  too  near  it,  it  will  bite
5.  and  his  judgment  c.  speedily
COMING.

1  Mac.  11.  44.  the  king  was  very  glad  of  their  c.

12.  45.  for  this  is  the  cause  of  my  c.

14.  21.  wherefore  we  were  glad  of  their  c.

2  Mac.  6.  3.  the  c.  in  of  this  mischief  was  sorp

COMELY.

1  Esd.  4.  18.  love  a  woman,  which  is  c .  in  favour
Eccl.  14.  3.  riches  are  not  c.  for  a  niggard

&).  1.  there  is  a  reproof  that  is  not  c.

25.  4.  O  how  c.  a  thing  is  judgment  for  grey  hairs  1
5.  O  how  c.  is  the  wisdom  of  old  men  !

2  Mac.  3.  26.  excellent  in  beauty,  r.  in  apparel

10.  29.  there  appeared  five  c.  men  upon  horses

COMFORT.

2  Esd.  6.  33.  and  to  say,  be  of  good  c.  and  fear  not
14.  13.  c.  such  of  them  as  be  in  trouble
11  isd.  3.  18.  nor  have  they  c.  in  the  day  of  trial

8.  9.  that  we  should  be  a  c.  in  cares  and  grief
Eccl.  3.  6.  he  shall  be  a  c.  to  his  mother

4.  18.  she  will  c.  him,  and  shew  him  her  secrets
25.  23.  a  woman  that  will  not  c.  her  husband
30.  23.  love  thine  own  soul,  and  c.  thy  heart
36.  23.  if  there  be  meekness  and  c.  in  her  tongue
38. 17.  and  then  c.  thyself  for  thy  heaviness
Bar.  4.  27  be  of  good  c.  O  my  children,  cry  to  God
30.  he  that  gave  thee  that  name  will  c.  thee

1  Mac.  12.  9.  the  holy  books  of  scripture  to  c.  us

2  Mac.  7-  6.  the  Lord  God  in  truth  hath  c.  in  us

11.  32.  I  have  sent  Menelaus  that  he  may  c.  vou

COMFORTED.

2  Esd.  5.  15.  the  angel  c.  me,  and  set  me  on  my  feet
Esth.  15.  8.  the  king  c.  her  with  loving  words

16.  and  all  the  king’s  servants  c.  her
Eccl.  17.  24.  he  c.  those  that  fail  in  patience
35.  17.  till  it  come  nigh,  he  will  not  be  c.

38.  23.  be  c.  for  him,  when  spirit  is  departed

48.  24.  he  c.  them  that  mourned  in  Sion

49.  10.  for  they  c.  Jacob,  and  delivered  them
2  Mac.  7-  6.  and  he  shall  be  c.  in  his  servants

15.  17.  thus  being  well  c.  by  the  words  of  Judas

COMFORTING.

?  Mac.  15.  9.  so  c.  them  out  of  the  law  and  prophets
COMMAND.

2  Mac.  9.  8.  he  that  thought  he  might  c.  the  waves
COMMANDED.

Eccl.  15.  20.  lie  hath  c.  no  man  to  do  wickedly
2  Mac.  7. 3.  king  c.  pans  and  caldrons  to  be  made  hot

4.  he  c.  to  cut  out  the  tongue  of  him  that  spake

5.  he  c.  him,  being  yet  alive,  to  be  brought
15.  3.3.  he  c.  that  they  should  give  it  by  pieces

COMMAND  EDST.

2  Esd.  6.  45.  upon  the  fourth  day  thou  c.  sun  to  shine
COMMANDMENT,  S.

2  Esd.  6.  48.  brought  forth  things  at  the  c.  of  God
53.  on  the  sixth  day  thou  gavest  c.  to  the  earth
Eccl.  1.  26  if  thou  desire  wisdom,  keep  the  c.

2  Mac.  7.  30  I  will  not  obey  the  king’s  c.  but  I  will
obey  the  c.  of  the  law  that  was  given  by  Moses
COMMENDABLE.

Eccl.  37  .  22.  understanding  is  c.  in  his  mouth
COM  MEN  DED.

1  Mac.  12.  4.3.  but  c.  him  to  all  his  friends

2  Mac.  9.  25.  whom  I  c.  unto  many  of  you  often

COMMENTARIES.

2  Mac.  2.  13.  were  reported  in  the  c.  of  Neemias
COMMISSIONER.

1  Mac.  2.  25.  the  king’s  c.  who  compelled  men

COMMIT.

2  Mac.  2.  25.  that  are  desirous  to  c.  to  memorv

COMMITTED.

2  Esd.  4.  42.  to  deliver  those  things  c.  to  them
5.  17.  knowest  thou  not  that  Israel  is  r.  to  thee  ?

7.  32.  shall  deliver  souls  that  were  c.  to  them

1  Mac.  7.  20.  then  c.  he  the  country  to  Aleimus
1.3.  39.  as  for  any  oversight  or  fault  c.  to  this  day

2  Mac.  3.  12.  had  c.  it  to  the  holiness  of  the  place  -
22.  to  keep  the  things  c.  of  trust  safe  and  sure

9.  25.  whom  1  often  c.  and  commended  to  you

13.  6.  or  had  c.  an}’  other  grievous  crime

8.  as  he  had  c.  many  sins  about  the  altar

14.  he  had  c.  all  to  the  Creator  of  the  world  /
COMMODIOUS.

2  Mac.  10.  15.  having  gotten  the  most  c.  holds
COMMON.

Wisd.  7.  3.  when  I  was  born,  I  drew  in  thee,  air
2  Mac.  4.  40.  whereupon  the  c.  people  rising

8.  29-  w  hen  they  had  made  a  c.  supplication

9.  4.  make  it  a  c.  burying  place  of  tnc  Jews,  14.

21.  necessary  to  take  care  for  the  c.  safety  of  ail

10.  8.  they  ordained  by  a  c.  statute  and  decree

11.  15.  consented,  being  careful  of  the  c.  good

12.  4.  according  to  the  c.  decree  of  the  city-

13.  14.  fight  for  the  country  and  the  c. -wealth

COMMOTIONS.

1  Esd.  5.  73.  by  persuasions  and  c.  they  hindered
COMMUNE.

1  Mac.  15.  28.  lie  sent  Athenobius  to  c.  with  him

2  Mac.  11.  20.  I  have  given  order  to  c.  with  vou

COMMUNICATE.

Wisd.  7-  13.  I  do  c.  her  liberally,  T  do  not  hide
2  Mac.  5.  20.  c.  in  the  benefits  sent  from  the  Lord
COMMUNICATETH.

Eccl.  26.  6.  scourge  of  tongue  which  c.  with  all
COMMUNICATION.

Eccl.  9.  15.  all  thy  c.  in  the  law  of  the  Most  High
13.  11.  for  with  much  c.  will  he  tempt  thee
COMPACTED.

Wisd.  7.  2.  being  c.  in  blood  of  the  seed  of  man
COMPANY.

Eccl.  9.  4.  use  not  much  the  c.  of  a  w’oman

629


Apocrypha.]  CON


CON


CON


1  Mac.  4.  35.  he  gathered  a  c.  of  strangers
6.  41.  all  that  heard  the  marching  of  the  c.

7. 12.  assemble  a  c.  of  scribes  to  require  justice

9.  44.  Jonathan  said  to  his  c.  let  us  go  and  fight
58.  behold,  Jonathan  and  his  c.  are  at  ease

12.  29.  howbeit,  Jonathan  and  his  c.  knew  it  not
49.  sent  an  host  to  destroy  all  Jonathan’s  c.

13.52.  there  he  dwelt  himself,  with  his  c.

2  Mac.  5.  27.  his  c.  fed  on  hei  bs  continually

COMPAN1ED.

Sus.  57.  and  they  for  fear  c.  with  you
COMPANIES.

1  Mac.  5.  33.  went  forth  behind  them  in  three  c.
COMP  AN  VINO.

Sus.  51,  under  what  tree  sawest  thou  them  c.  ?

58.  under  what  tree  didst  thou  take  them  c.f
COMPANION.

Eccl.  0.  10.  some  friend  is  a  c.  at  the  table
37.  4.  there  is  a  c.  who  rejoiceth,  5.

40.  23.  a  friend  and  c.  never  meet  amiss

COMPANIONS.

1  Esd.  6.  3.  Sathrabuzanes  and  his  c.  ?•  27.
COMPARABLE.

Eccl.  9.  10.  for  the  new  friend  is  not  c.  to  him
COMPARED.

Wisd.  7.  9.  nor  c.  1  unto  her  any  precious  stone
15.  18.  for  being  c.  together,  some  are  worse
Eccl.  22.  1.  a  slothful  man  is  c.  to  a  filthy  stone,  2.
COMPASS.

1  Mac.  11.  48.  within  the  c.  of  the  sanctuary

2  iliac.  1.  15.  was  entered  into  the  c.  of  the  temple

COMPASSED.

Wisd.  19-  17-  being  c.  with  horrible  darkness
Eccl.  23.  18.  who  seeth  me  ?  I  am  c.  with  darkness

24.  5.  I  alone  c.  the  circuit  of  heaven
45.  9.  and  he  c.  him  w  ith  pomegranates  and  bells

1  Mac.  4.  7-  that  it  was  c.  about  with  horsemen

10.  80.  for  they  had  c.  in  his  li03t  and  cast  darts
15.  14.  when  he  had  c.  the  city  round  about

2  Mac.  3. 17.  the  man  was  so  c.  with  tear  and  horror
27.  Ileliodorus  was  c.  with  great  darkness

COMPASSETH.

1  Esd.  4.  34.  the  sun  c.  the  heavens  round  about
Eccl.  43. 12.  it  c.  the  heaven  with  a  glorious  circle

COMPASSION.

Eccl.  17.29.  how  great  is  his  c.  to  such  as  turn  to  nim  1
18.  12.  therefore  he  multiplied  his  c.

Prayer  of  Manass.  of  great  c.  long-suffering

2  Mac.  8.  3.  that  he  would  have  c.  on  the  city

COMPEL.

1  Esd.  4.  6.  theyr  c.  one  another  to  pay  tribute

2  Mac.  6. 1.  to  c.  the  Jews  to  depart  from  the  laws

COMPELLED.

1  Mac.  2.  15.  such  as  c.  the  people  to  revolt

25.  the  commissioner,  who  c.  men  to  sacrifice

2  Mac.  4.  26.  Jason  was  c.  to  flee  into  the  country
6.7.  the  Jews  were  c.  to  go  in  procession

7. 1.  were  c.  by  the  king  to  taste  swine’s  flesh
15.  2.  the  Jews  that  were  c.  to  go  with  him
COMPLAIN.

Eccl.  29.  5.  he  will  return  words  and  c.  of  the  time

41.  7-  the  children  will  c.  of  an  ungodly  father

1  Mac.  8.  32.  if  therefore  they  c.  any  more  ag.  thee

COMPLAINED.

2  Mac.  4.  36.  the  Jews  c.  because  Onias  wTas  slain

COMPLAINT,  S.

Eccl.  35. 14.  when  the  widow  poureth  out  her  c.

1  Mac.  11.  25.  some  men  had  made  c.  against  him

COMPLETE.

Wisd.  5.  17-  take  to  him  jealousy  for  c.  armour

2  Mac.  3.  25.  that  he  had  c.  harness  of  gold

COMPREHEND.

2  Esd.  4.  2.  thinkest  thou  to  c.  the  way  of  God  ?

11.  how  thy  vessel  be  able  to  c.  the  way  of  Highest
5.  34.  while  1  labour  to  c.  way  of  the  Most  High
COMPREHENDED.

2  Esd.  8.  21.  whose  glory  may  not  be  c.

COMPREHENDING.

Eccl.  32. 8.  thy  speech  be  short,  c.  much  in  few  wrords
CONCEIT.

Wisd.  8. 11. 1  shall  be  found  of  a  quick  c.  in  judg.
Eccl.  27. 6.  so  is  the  utterance  of  a  c.  in  heart  of  man
CONCERT.

Eccl.  32.  5.  a  c.  of  music  in  a  banquet  of  wine
CONCUBINE.

1  Esd.  4.  29.  yet  did  I  see  Apame  the  king’s  c.

2  Mac.  4.  30.  they  were  given  to  the  king’s  c.

CONCUPISCENCE.

Wisd.  4. 12.  the  wandering  of  c.  doth  undermine
Eccl.  23.  5.  turn  away  from  me  vain  hopes  and  c.
CONDEMN.

2  Esd.  4. 18.  if  wert  judge,  whom  wouldst  thou  c.  ?
Wisd.  2.  20.  let  us  c.  him  with  a  shameful  death
4. 16.  the  righteous  that  is  dead  shall  c.  the  ungodly
Prayer  of  Manass.  nor  c.  me  into  the  lower  parts
CONDEMNED.

Eccl.  14.  2.  whose  conscience  hath  not  c.  him
Sus.  41.  the  assembly  c.  Susanna  to  death
48.  without  knowledge  have  c.  daughter  of  Israel
53.  thou  hast  c.  the  innocent,  and  guilty  go  free
<2.  Mac.  4.41 .  those  poor  men,  them  he  c.  to  death
13. 6.  whosoever  was  c.  of  sacrilege  cr  committed
CONDITION.

2  Esd.1. 57.  he  said,  this  is  the  c.  of  the  battle
2  Mac.  9.8.  so  proud  was  he  beyond  the  c.  of  man
15.12.  Onias  gentle  in  c.  well  spoken  of
CONDITIONS.

2  Mac.  il.  14.  persuaded  to  agree  to  all  reasonable  c.
13. 23.  submitted  himself  and  sware  to  all  equal  c.
CONDUCT.

1  Esd.  8.51.  was  ashamed  to  ask  king  c.  for  safeguard
Jud.  10. 15.  come  to  his  tent  and  some  of  us  will  c.  th.

2  Mac.  11.30.  that  will  depart  shall  have  safe-c.

CONFECTION.

Eccl.  38.  8.  of  such  the  apothecary  maketh  a  c.
CONFEDERATE.

I  Mac.  10. 16.  we  will  make  him  our  friend  and  c.
CONFEDERATES.

1  iUrtf.8.24.  if  there  come  war  on  any  of  their  c.
31.  yoke  heavy. on  our  friends  and  c.  the  Jews
14.40.  the  Romans  had  called  the  Jews  c.

15. 17.  the  Jews’  ambassadors  our  friends  and  c.
630


CONFEDERACY.

1  Mac.  8. 17.  sent  them  to  Rome  to  make  a  1  20.

CONFERENCE.

ll’isd.  8. 18.  in  the  exercise  of  r.  with  her  prudence

2  Mac.  14.  22.  so  they  made  a  peaceable  c.

CONFESS.

Tcb.  13.  6.  therefore  c.  him  with  your  whole  mouth
14.  7-  his  people  shall  c.  God,  and  Lord  shall  exalt
Wisd.  *16.  8.  in  this  thou  inadest  thine  enemies  c.
Eccl.  4.  26.  be  not  ashamed  to  c.  thy  sins
2  Mac.  7-  37-  thou  mayest  c.  that  he  alone  is  God
CON  FESSED.

Tob.  12.  22.  they  c.  the  wonderful  works  of  God
CONFESS  El  11.

Eccl.  20.  2.  that  c.  his  fault  be  preserved  from  hurt
CONFESSING.

1  Esd.  9.  8.  now  by  c.  give  glory  unto  the  Lord
CONFESSION.

1  Esd.  8.  91 .  in  his  prayer  he  made  his  c.  weeping
Bar.  1.  14.  to  make  c.  in  the  house  of  the  Lord

CONFIDENCE.

2  Esd.  8.  36.  which  have  not  the  c.  of  good  works
Jud.  13.  19.  for  this  thy  c.  shall  not  depart
Eccl.  26.  21.  having  c.  of  their  good  descent

2  Mac.  8.  18.  but  our  c.  is  in  the  Almighty  God
15. 7-  but  Maccabeus  had  ever  sure  c.  of  Lord's  help
CONFIDENT.

Eccl.  32.  21.  be  not  c.  in  a  plain  way
CONFIRM.

Eccl.  24.  21.  be  strong  in  the  L.  that  he  may  c.  you
50.  24.  that  he  would  c.  his  mercy  with  us
1  Mac.  11.  57-  I  c.  thee  in  the  high- priesthood

12.  1.  to  c.  and  renew  the  friendship  with  them

13.  37.  to  c.  the  immunities  we  have  granted

14.  24.  sent  Numenius  to  c.  the  league  with  them

CONFIRMED.

1  Mac.  1 1 . 27.  c .  him  in  the  high-priesthood  and  hon.

14.  26.  he  and  his  brethren  c.  their  liberty
38.  Demetrius  c.  him  in  the  high-priesthood

CONFLICT.

Wisd.  10.  12.  in  a  sore  c.  she  gave  him  the  victory

2  Mac.  5.  14.  forty  thousand  were  slain  in  the  c.

15.  17.  and  manfully  to  try  the  matter  by  c.

19.  took  not  the  least  care,  being  troubled  for  c.

CONFORM.

2  Mac.  6.  9.  and  whoso  would  not  c.  themselves
CONFOUNDED.

Eccl.  2. 10.  did  ever  any  trust  in  the  L.  and  was  c.  ?
24.  22.  he  that  obeyeth  me  shall  never  be  c.

Bar.  6.  39.  they  that  worship  them  shall  be  c.

Dan.  3.  17.  they  shall  not  be  c.  that  trust  in  thee
21.  let  tiiem  be  c.  in  all  their  power  and  might

1  Mac.  4.  27.  Lysias  was  c.  and  discouraged
31.  let  them  be  c.  in  their  power  and  horsemen

2  Mac.  10.  30.  so  that  being  c.  with  blindness,  and

full  of  trouble,  they  were  killed

13.  23.  heard  that  Philip  was  desperately  c.

14.  28.  N  icanor  was  much  c.  in  himself

CONFUSION.

2  Esd.  2.  6.  that  thou  bring  them  to  c.

5.  8.  there  shall  be  a  c.  also  in  many  places
Bar.  1.  15.  but  to  us  belongeth  the  c.  of  faces

1  Mac.  1 . 28.  all  house  of  Jacob  was  covered  with  c.
CONGEALED.

Eccl.  43. 19.  being  c.  it  lieth  on  the  top  of  sharp  stakes
CONGREGATION.

Eccl.  1.  30.  cast  thee  down  in  midst  of  the  c.

4. 7.  get  thyself  the  love  of  thee,  and  bow  thy  head
21.  9.  the  c.  of  the  wicked  is  like  tow  wrapped
24.  2.  in  thee,  of  the  Most  High  shall  she  open
23.  the  law  for  an  heritage  unto  the  c.  of  Jacob
31.  11.  and  the  e.  shall  declare  his  alms
33.  18.  hearken  unto  me,  ye  rulers  of  the.  e.

38.  33.  they  shall  not  sit  high  in  the  e.

45.  18.  the  e.  of  Core  with  fury  and  wrath
50.  13.  oblations  in  their  hands  before  all  the  e.

20.  he  lifted  up  his  hands  over  the  whole  c.

1  Mac.  2.  56.  for  bearing  witness  before  the  c.

14.  19.  which  writings  were  read  before  the  c.

28.  at  Saramel  in  the  great  c.  of  the  priests
CONJECTURE!  U.

IVisd.  8.  8.  she  c.  aright  what  is  to  come
CONQUERED.

1  Mac.  8.  2.  it  was  told  him  how  they-had  c.  them
4.  by  their  policy  they  had  c.  all  that  place

CONSCIENCE.

Wisd.  17.  11?  being  pressed  with  c.  always  fore-

casteth

Eccl.  14  2.  whose  c.  hath  not  condemned  him

2  iliac.  6.  11.  they  made  a  c.  to  help  themselves

CONSECRATED..

Tob.  1.  4.  the  temple  was  c.  and  built  for  all  ages
Eccl.  45.  15.  Moses  c.  and  anointed  him  with  oil
2  Mac.  12.  40.  they  found  things  c.  to  the  idols
CONSENT.

1  Esd.  5.  47.  they  came  altogether  with  one  c.

6.  22.  have  been  done  with  thee,  of  king  Cyrus,  7-  4.
Jud.  7.  29-  there  was  great  weeping  with  one  c.

2  Mac.  4.  39-  committed  with  the  c.  of  Menelaus
11.  24.  that  the  Jews  would  not  c.  to  our  father

CONSENTED.

1  iliac.  1.  57.  if  any  c.  to  the  law',  put  him  to  death
11.  29.  so  the  king  c.  and  wrote  letters  to  Jonathan

2  Mac.  11.  15.  Maccabeus  c.  to  all  that  Lysias  desired
14.  20.  all  of  one  mind  they  c.  to  the  covenants

CONSIDERATION.

1  iliac.  8.  17.  in  c.  of  these  things  Judas  chose

CONSIDERATE.

Eccl.  32.  18.  a  man  of  council  will  ne  c.

CONSIDER.

Bar.  2.  16.  O  Lord,  c.  us,  bow'  down  thine  ear

2  iliac.  7-  28.  and  c.  that  God  made  them  of  things

CONSIDERED.

2  Esd.  7.  16.  why  hast  thou  not  c.  to  thy  mind  ?

56.  we  c.  not  that  we  should  begin  to  suffer
9.  20.  so  I  c.  the  world,  behold,  there  was  peril
Wisd.  8.  If.  when  1  c.  these  things  in  myself
2  iliac.  5.  17-  he  c.  not  that  the  Lord  was  angry
CONSIDERING.

2  iliac.  5.  6.  not  c.  that  to  get  the  day  of  them
11.4.  not  at  all  c.  the  power  of  God,  but  puffed  up
13.  c.  that  the  Hebrews  could  not  be  overcome


CONSIST.

Eccl.  43.  26.  and  by  his  word  all  things  c.

CON SOR 1  E  I  II.

Eccl.  13.  16.  all  flesh  c.  according  to  kind
CONSPICUOUS.

1  iliac.  11.  37.  let  it  be  set  in  a  c.  place,  14.  48.

CONSPIRED.

Eccl.  45.  18.  strangers  c.  together  against  him
Bel.  28.  they  c.  against  the  king,  saying
CONSTRAINED.

Bel  30.  being  c.  he  delivered  Daniel  to  them

2  Mac.  6.  18.  Eleazar  was  c.  to  open  his  mouth

CONSTRAINT.  .

2  iliac.  6.  7.  they  were  brought  by  bitter  c.  to  eat
CONSUL.

1  iliac.  15.  16.  Lucius  c.  of  the  Romans  to  Ptoiemee
CONSULT.

Eccl.  8.  17.  c.  not  with  a  fool  ||  9.  14.  c.  with  the  wise
37.  10.  c.  not  with  one  that  suspecteth  thee
1  iliac.  5.  16.  assembled  toe.  what  they  should  do
CONSULTED.

1  iliac.  4.  44.  they  c.  what  to  do  with  the  altar
12.35.  c.  with  them  about  building  strong  holds
16.  13.  Ptolemeus  c.  deceitfully  against  Simon

CONSULTING.  I

1  iliac.  8. 15.  c.  alway  for  the  people  to  be  ordered
CONSUME.

Eccl.  27.  29.  anguish  shall  c.  them  before  death
45.  19.  did  wonders  to  c.  them  with  the  fiery  flame

1  iliac.  5.  15.  are  assembled  against  us  to  c.  us

CONSUMED.

2  Esd.  4. 16.  for  the  fire  came  and  c.  the  wood
Wisd.  5.  13.  but  w’ere  c.  in  our  ow  n  wickedness
Eccl.  45.  14.  their  sacrifices  shall  be  wholly  c.

19.  in  his  wrathful  indignation  were  theyc.

2  iliac.  1.  31.  now  when  the  sacrifice  was  c.

32.  it  w'as  c.  by  light  that  shined  from  the  altar
2. 10.  c.  the  sacrifices,  c.  the  burnt-offerings

11.  sin-offering  w  as  not  to  be  eaten,  it  was  c.

CONSUMETH.

Eccl.  14.  19.  every  work  rotteth  and  c.  aw'ay
18.  18.  a  gift  of  the  envious  c.  the  eyes
31. 1.  watching  for  riches  c.  the  flesh
43.  21.  the  cold  north-wind  c.  the  grass  as  fire
CONSUMING.

Wisd.  6.  23.  neither  will  I  go  with  c.  envy
2  iliac.  1.  23.  priests  prayed,  whilst  saciitice  was  c.  i
CONTAIN  E  l  II.

IVisd.  1.  7.  that  which  c.  all  things  hath  knowledge
CONTEMNED.

Eccl.  22.  23.  a  mean  estate  is  not  alway  to  be  c.

CON  TEMN  ER.

1  iliac.  14.14.  every  c.  of  the  law  he  took  away'

CONTEMN  ETII.

Eccl.  19. 1.  he  that  c.  small  things  shall  fall  by  little

26.  24.  a  dishonest  woman  c.  shame,  but  an  honest
CONTEMPT.

Esth.  13.  12.  that  it  was  neither  in  c.  nor  pride

2  iliac.  3.  18.  the  place  was  like  to  come  into  c.

CONTEND.

Eccl.  28. 10.  the  stronger  they  are  whicn  c.
CONTENT.

Esth.  13.  13.  I  could  have  been  c.  to  kiss  the  soles  .
Tob.  11-  9.  from  henceforth  1  am  c.  to  die

1  Mac.  6.  60.  the  king  and  the  princes  were  c.

2  iliac.  5.  15.  he  was  not  c.  with  this,  but  presumed  ji
6.  30.  but  in  soul  am  well  c.  to  suffer  these  things  I

CONTENTED.

Eccl.  29.  23.  be  it  little  or  much,  hold  thee  c.
CONTENTION.

Eccl.  28.  11.  an  hasty  c.  kindleth  a  fire
2  iliac.  4.  4.  Onias  seeing  the  danger  of  this  c.
CONTENTMENT.

Wisd.  19.  12.  quails  came  from  the  sea  for  J

their  c.  ;i

2  iliac.  9. 20.  if  your  affairs  be  to  your  c.  I  thank  G.  I
CONTENTS.

1  Mac.  15.  2.  the  c.  whereof  were  these

2  iliac.  11.  17.  for  the  performance  of  the  c.  thereot

CONTINENT.

Eccl.  26.  15.  and  her  c.  mind  cannot  be  valued
CONTINUALLY.

Eccl.  11.  19.  and  now  I  will  eat  c.  of  my  goods

1  iliac.  15.  25.  against  Dora,  assaulting  it  c.

2  iliac.  3.  26.  who  stood  by  him ,  and  scourged  him  c.

5.  27.  fed  on  herbs  c.  lest  they  should  be  polluted

CONTINUE.

Eccl.  6.10.  some  friend  will  note,  in  day  of  affliction

40.  19.  children  and  building  c.  a  man’s  name

41.  12.  for  that  shall  c.  with  thee  above  gold

1  iliac.  10.  27.  c.  ye  still  to  be  faithful  unto  us

2  Mac.  4.  6.  that  the  state  should  c.  quiet
10.  12.  Ptolemeus  endeavoured  to  c.  peace

CONTINUED.

1  iliac.  6.  9.  and  there  he  c.  many  days

9.  13.  the  battle  c.  from  morning  till  night
10.26.  w  hereas  you  have  c.  in  our  friendship

50.  he  c.  the  battle  until  the  sun  went  down

2  iliac.  8. 1.  took  such  as  c.  in  the  Jews’  religion

CONTRACTS.

1  iliac.  13.  42.  write  in  their  instruments  and  c.
CONTRARY.

IVisd.  2. 12.  because  he  is  clean  c.  to  our  doings
CONTRITE.

Dan.  3.  16.  in  ac.  heart  let  us  be  accepted
CONTROL.

Eccl.  5.  3.  say  not,  who  shall  c.  me  for  myr  works  ’
CONVEYED.

1  Mac.  9.  6.  many  c.  themselves  out  of  the  host

2  iliac.  8.  13.  they  fled  and  c.  themselves  aw  ay

CONVENIENT.

Eccl.  10.  23.  nor  is  it  c.  to  magnify  a  sinful  man
39.  17-  at  time  c.  they  shall  all  be  sought  out

1  iliac.  4.  46.  and  laid  up  the  stones  in  a  c.  place

12.  11.  both  in  our  feasts  and  other  c.  days
14.  34.  he  furnished  them  with  all  things  c.

2  Mac.  4.  19.  because  it  was  not  c.  but  to  be  reserved
32.  Menelaus  supposing  he  had  gotten  a  c.  time

8.  31.  they  laid  them  up  carefully  in  c.  places

10.  18.  having  all  things  c.  to  sustain  the.  siege

11.  36.  that  we  may  declare  as  it  is  c.  for  you
14.  22.  Judas  placed  armed  men  ready  in  c.  places


c  o  u


C  R  A


.  CONVERSANT.

Ji  isd.  8.  3.  in  that  she  is  c«  with  God  she  magnifies
13.  7.  lor  being  c.  in  his  works,  they  search  him
heel.  11.  20.  in  thy  covenant,  and  be  e.  therein
39.  3.  and  he  will  be  r.  in  dark  parables
41.  5.  they  that  are  r.  in  the  dwelling  of  the  ungodly
CONVERSATION.

14>  be  circumspect  and  be  wise  in  all  thy  c.
Iltsd.  8.  16.  for  her  c.  hath  no  bitterness

1  Mac.  4.  42.  so  he  choose  priests  of  blameless  e.

2  Mac.  15.  12.  Onias  reverend  inc.  prayed  for  Jews
CONVERSED.

Bar.  3.  37.  shew  himself  on  earth,  and  c.  with  men
CONVERSION.

heel.  49.  2.  be  ha  v  e(  h  1^  rj  g  fit  jyd  n^  the  c.  of  the  people

2  Mac.  4.  45.  Menelaus  being  now  c.  promised
__  CONVINCE.

It  ltd.  4.  20.  their  own  iniquities  shall  c.  them
_  ,  ,  COPY.

Est/i.  13.  1.  the  c.  of  the  letters  was  this
16.  19.  ye  shall  publish  the  c.  of  this  letter
Bar.  6.  1.  a  c.  of  an  epistle  which  Jeremy  sent
1  Mac.  8.  22.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  epistle

11.  31.  we  sent  you  here  a  c.  of  the  letter
37.  see  that  thou  make  a  c.  of  these  things

12.  5.  this  is  the  c.  of  the  letters,  19.  I  14,  20.

14.  23.  and  to  put  the  c.  of  their  ambassage

COPIES

1  Mac.  14.  49.  that  the  c.  thereof  should  be  laid  up
_  ,  CORE.

heel.  45.  18.  the  congregation  of  C.  maligned  him
CORES.

1  Esd.  8.  20.  likewise  of  wheat,  to  an  hundred  c.

J  CORRECTION.

It  isd.  12.  26.  that  would  not  be  reformed  by  thatc.
heel  16.  12.  as  his  mercy  is  great,  so  is  his  c.  also
fr  ?•  stripes  and  c.  are  never  out  of  time
ic  °*  mucb  c •  of  children  be  not  ashamed

2  Mac.  7.  33.  be  angry  a  little  while  for  our  c.

a  _  .  CORRUPTED.

2  Esd.  4.  11.  the  world  being  now  outwardly  c
a  _  J  CORRUPTIBLE,

M/- J  ‘  * 15'  seein8  thou  art  but  a  c.  man
14  n  u'  ***•  *be  c‘  body  presseth  down  the  soul
14.  8.  because  being  c.  it  was  called  god
/A^ir24'.*'vaf^ed  the  flesh  of  the  c.  living  things
2  mac.  7.  16.  thou  art  c.  thou  dost  what  thou  wilt
CORRUPTION.

i  7.  41.  even  so  now  seeing  e.  is  grown  up
43.  beginning  of  immortality,  wherein  c.  is  past
heel.  28.  6.  remember  thy  end,  c.  and  death
_  CORS.

1  Esd.  8.  20.  likewise  of  wheat,  to  an  hundred  c.
nr  COS.

1  Mac.  15.  23.  the  same  thing  wrote  he  to  C.

COSTLY.

\irSe!'  building  an  house  of  hewn  and  c.  stone
Irtsd.  2.  7.  let  us  fill  ourselves  with  c.  '.vine
COSiS.

ZMac.  3. 3.  Seleucus  bare  all  c.  belonging  to  sacrifice
c  /  ,  COTTAGE,

Eccl.  29.  22.  better  is  a  poor  man  in  a  mean  c.
COVENANT.

2  Esd.Z.  5.  these  childr.  which  would  not  keep  my  c,

7.  be  scattered,  for  they  have  despised  my  c.

nr  j  *h°u  madest  an  everlasting  c.  with  him
IVtsd.  1.  16.  and  they  made  a  c.  with  it
heel.  11. 20.  be  stedtast  in  thy  c.  anil  conversant
17.  12.  he  made  an  everlasting  c.  with  them
’5*  ’  Viere  was  ?  e.  of  peace  made  with  him

,  ns'  ,he*av«  bun  a  c.  of  kings,  and  a  throne
4  -%lacA  }?•  {bey  forsook  the  holy  c.  and  joined
63.  that  they  might  not  profane  the  holy  c.

4.  10.  and  remember  thee,  of  our  fathers
nh  r'  7or  *bey  have  broken  the  c.  and  oath
V®!' 2>  remember  his  c.  he  made  with  Abraham
7.  36.  lor  our  brethren  are  dead  under  God’s  c
,  ,,  _  COVENANTS,

a  nrC'  }£'  but  brake  all  the  c.  he  had  made

12.  1.  when  these  c.  were  made,  Lysias

13.  .5.  the  people  were  grieved  for  the  c.  for  they
s^rmf,d  because  they  would  make  their  r.  void

14i2?y  al*  of  one  mind,  they  consented  to  the  c.
c(.  that  he  was  much  displeased  with  the  c
nr  ,  «.  ,  .  COVER,

dr!  ,,5’ 16.  With  his  right  hand  shall  he  c.  them
10.  17.  she  was  to  them  fora  c,  by  day
oq  ^bey  shall  c.  the  baseness  of  their  parents

o  j  walls  c.  me>  and  nobody  seeth  me
qo  and  sbewill  not  c.  her  own  shame
38.  16.  thenc.  his  body  according  to  the  custom
r.  1  .  a  .  .COVERED,
fccc/.  16. 30.  with  living  things  he  hath  c.  face  thereof
24.  3.  and  I  c.  the  earth  as  a  cloud
47.  15.  thy  soul  c.  the  whole  earth

untove>'  her  face,  for  she  was  c.

■  Mac.  10.  30.  c.  him  on  every  side  with  weapons
„  .  t  COV ERETII.

u ecl .  40.  27.  and  c.  him  above  all  glory
.  .COVERING.

Mac.  3.  25.  a  rider  adorned  with  a  very  fair  c
„  COVETOUS.

A10,  not,arn°re  wicked  thing  than  a  c.  man

14.  9.  ac.  man  s  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  his  portion

COVETOUSNESS.

irT™'  f:  50 ' tlle.  c';,.ot  ttlem  that  were  in  power
10.  20.  they  with  Simon,  being  led  with  c.

..  .  COULD.

Mac.  15.  38.  it  is  that  which  I  c.  attain  unto
„  ,  COUNCIL.

Esd.  2. 17.  the  rest  ot  their  c.  and  the  judges
v®sse*s  which  the  king  and  c.  had  given
dlei?  ad  the  ungodly  men  held  ac.

14. 22.  register  things  they  spake  in  c.  of  the  people
J  „  ,  ,  COUNSEL.  v

Errf.  7  15  had  turned  the  c.  of  the  king  of  Assyria
4.  13.1  went  into  a  plain,  the  trees  took  c.

1  *’4  10  °i  so7  dle  sea  als°took  c.  and  said,  come
w>.4. 18.  ask  c.  and  desp.  not  any  c.  that  is  profitable
l?.- tor  every  nation  hath  not  c.  but  Lord  himself
vtsd.  4.  17.  what  God  in  his  c.  decreed  of  him


6.  4.  you  have  not  walked  after  the  c.  of  God
,3*  what  man  is  he  that  can  know  the  c.  of  God
v  /  wa0  ",adl  known,  except  give  wisdom

,C  ,  oonsult  not  a  fool,  he  cannot  keep  c.
lo.  14.  he  left  him  111  the  hand  of  his  c.

IT'  ,•  c;.a  tongue  and  eyes  and  heart  gave  he  them
**.  3-  his  c.  is  like  a  pure  fountain  of  life

25.  4.  and  for  ancient  n.en  to  know  c
5.  oh  how  comely  is  c.  to  men  of  honour  !

30.  21.  and  afflict  not  thyself  in  thine  own  c.

5”  13.  a  man  of c.  will  be  considerate,  but  a  proud
37.  8.  for  he  will  c.  for  himself

1  Mac.  2.65.  1  know  that  Simon  is  a  man  of  c
7.31.  when  he  saw  that  his  c.  was  discovered  ’

9.  60.  because  their  c.  was  known  to  them

2  Mac.  7.  25.  she  would  c.  the  young  man

26.  that  she  would  c.  her  son  to  save  his  life
COUNSELLOR.

IVisd.  8.  9.  that  she  would  be  a  c.  of  good  things
Eccl.b.6.  have  but  one  c.  of  a  thousand,  nevertheless
37.7.  every  c.  extollelh  counsel,  but  there  is
8.  beware  of  a  c.  and  know  what  need  he  hath
42.  21.  and  he  hath  no  need  of  any  c.

COUNSELLORS.

I  Esd.  8.  11.  tome  and  mv  seven  friends  the  c
COUNSELLED!  I.

Eccl.  37.  7.  but  there  is  some  that  c.  for  himself
.  COUNSELS.

m  ji  '  ^>u*;  *bey  have  despised  my  c.  2.  1.

ri°r‘J\  1?*  i-bat.  ad  thy.  paths  and  c.  may  prosper

II  isd.  1.  9.  for  inquisition  shall  be  made  into  thee
of  (he  ungodly,  and  sound  of  her  words  come

6.  3.  from  Highest,  who  shall  search  out  your  c.
Eccl.  23.  1.  O  Lord,  leave  me  not  to  their  c

24.  29.  her  c.  profounder  than  the  great  deep

countenance:  p

Jud.  13. 16.  my  c.  hath  deceived  him  to  destruction
ErM.  15.  14.  and  thy  c.  is  full  of  grace
,0  A,12:  18,  he  ',vitl  whisper  much  and  change  his  c.
ols  h‘sc- and  a  merry  heart  maketh  a  cheerful  c.
‘b.  a  cheerful  c.  is  a  token  of  a  heart  in  prosperity
19.  29.  one  that  hath  understanding  by  his  c.

25.  17'  the  wickedness  of  awomandarkeneth’herc
23  a  wicked  woman  maketh  a  heavy  c.

37.  17.  the  c.  is  a  sign  of  changing  of  the  heart

1  Mac,  3.  16.  his  c.  declared  the  inward  agony

6.  18.  an  aged  man,  and  of  a  well-favoured  c
Jlr.  COUNTERFEIT,  S.

/{ isd.  2. 16.  we  are  esteemed  of  him  as  c.

15.  9.  and  counteth  it  ffls^lotjjto  make  c.  things

Eccl.  6.  15.  nothing  doth  c.  a  faithful  friend
COUNTRY.

2  Esd.  4.  15.  that  there  we  may  make  us  another  c

1  Mac.  8.  8.  and  the  c.  of  India,  Media,  and  Lydia

16.  to  one  man,  who  ruled  over  all  their  c
9.  25.  Bacchides  made  them  lords  of  the  c  '.

12.  25.  he  gave  them  no  respite  to  enter  his  c.

14.  6.  Simon  enlarged  bounds  and  recovered  the  c

36.  so  that  the  heathen  were  taken  out  of  their  c.

37.  he  fortified  it  for  the  safety  of  the  c.

2  Mac.  5.  8.  as  open  enemy  of  his  c.  and  countrymen

13.  14.  to  fight  for  the  temple,  the  city,  and  c
COUNTRYMEN.

2  Mac.  4 .  5.  he  w’ent,  not  to  bean  accuser  of  his  c
5.  6.  thinking  them  his  enemies  and  not  his  c
8.  as  an  open  enemy  of  his  country  and  c.

23.  having  a  malicious  mind  against  his  c.

I  r-5jivhTe.n  J."da?  heard  ^his  cruelty  done  to  his  c.

14.  37.  Razis  a  lover  of  his  c.  was  accused

15.  30.  who  continued  his  love  towards  his  c
COUNTRIES.

heel.  10.  16  the  Lord  overthrew  c.  of  the  heathen
39-  4.  he  will  travel  through  strange  c.  for  he  tried
47.  17.  the  c.  marvelled  at  thee  for  thy  son^s
f  Mac.  1.  4.  Alexander  ruled  over  c.  and  nations
8.  8.  and  of  the  goodliest  c.  which  they  took  of  him
COURAGE.

Eccl.  45.23.  Phmees  stood  up  with  good  c.  of  heart

1  Mac.  4.  32.  make  them  to  be  of  no  c.  and  cause

5.  3.  he  abated  their  c.  and  took  their  spoils
n.  49.  Jews  had  got  the  city,  their  c.  was  abated

2  Mac.  1.  3.  and  to  do  his  will  with  a  good  c.

4.  14.  the  priests  had  no  c.  to  serve  at  the  altar

6.  31.  his  death  for  an  example  of  a  noble  c

7.  12.  the  king  marvelled  at  the  young  man’s  c
20.  she  bare  it  with  a  good  c.  because  of  hope

COURAGEOUS.

2  Mac.  7.  21.  the  mother  filled  with  c.  spirits  said
COURAGEOUSLY.

1  Mac.  6.  45.  wheref.  he  ran  upon  him  c.  thro’  battle

2  Mac.  6.  28.  an  example  to  die  willingly  and  c.

7-  11.  he  said  c.  these  I  had  from  heaven

10.  33.  they  laid  siege  against  the  fortress  c.

15. 17.  but  c.  to  set  upon  them  and  try  the  matter

COURAGEOUSNESS.

2  Mac.  14.  18.  and  of  the  c.  they  had  to  fi«ht
„  .  .COURSE.

L  Esd.  4. 34.  swift  is  the  sun  in  his  c.  he  fetcheth  his
c.  again  to  his  own  place  in  one  dav
COURT.

Esd.  9. 1.  Esdras  rising  from  the  c.  of  the  temple
Mac .  9.  54.  the  wall  ot  inner  c.  to  be  pulled  down

11.  46.  wherefore  the  king  fled  into  the  c.

13.  40.  who  are  meet  among  you  to  be  in  our  c

COURTS.

1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw  shrubs  growing  in  the  c.

„  ,  Courteous.

Eccl.  42.  14.  than  a  c.  woman  that  brings  shame
COURTEOUSLY.

2  Mac.  3.  9.  when  he  had  been  c.  received

_  ,  COURTESY.

Eccl.  33.  21.  that  thou  shouldst  stand  to  their  c

„  ,  COUSIN.

1  Esd.  3.  7.  he  shall  be  called  Darius  his  c.

4.  42.  thou  shaltsit  next  me  and  be  called  my  c

J°b  10'  we  shall  lodge  with  Raguel  who  is  thy  c

2  Mac.  11.  1.  Lysiasjhe  kind’s  protector  and  c.  35.

2  Mac.  12.  24.  whom  he  besought  with  much  c.

_  CRAFTY.

Eccl.  42.  18.  he  considereth  their  c.  devices


CUN  LApocrtpha.

„  ,,  ,  „  CRATES.

2  Mac.  4.29.  Sostratus  left  C.  who  was  governor
.,  CREATED.

2  Esd.  5.  44,  hold  them  that  shall  be  r.  therein
45.  hast  given  life  to  the  creature  thou  hast  c.

49  so  have  1  disposed  the  world  which  I  r.
P.'rM-  but  inquire  for  whom  the  world  was  r.

in  1  li  "V;  .  f*  a11  t  u‘^s  ,llat  they  might  have
1  a*  uPSt  ^orrned  father  that  was  r.  alone
14  A*  4‘  ^  ls<lom  hath  been  r.  before  all  things
14.  it  was  c.  with  the  faithful  in  the  womb
«  }' ,  e,W.c-  '?1aP  °r  the  earth,  and  turned
00  ,llat  llvet,1?  for  ever  0.  all  things
01  /,  L  le  ^new  hll  things  ere  they  were  c.
n,  fAhe  ?•  .m-e  from  the  beginning  before  world
00  J'’1,. "  hat  is  c.  more  wicked  than  an  eye  ?

38.  1.  for  the  Lord  hath  c.  tiie  physician,  12.
Qn'osf  hath  c.  medicines  out  of  the  earth
.1 tor  ,  good. are, good  things  c.  from  beginn.
~b.  there  be  spirits  that  are  c.  for  vengeance
«  -r,  ,  _  „  CREATION.

'Err/  so  3!V 1  kU  spakest  frpin.  the  beginning  of  the  c.
heel.  49.  16.  above  every  living  thing  in  the  c.

T  ,  CREATOR,

tc.  7  •  1 2.  C.  of  the  waters,  hear  thou  my  prayer

k\ldc\'  It  n  i  n  rll„th,in^s  =ave  command.
V  dd'  li.'lhV  '0.,l1’  S’ 0  ad  things,  who  art  fearful
iA‘;3i  ^ub11633  tile  C.  ot  the  world  will  give
13. 14.  had  committed  all  to  the  C.  of  the  world
o  r? .j  c  . .  CR EA  1  U R E.

2  ri  ,if‘  44Atie  c’  ma3’not  haste  above  the  maker
«  «  o  servant  by  whom  thou  visitest  thy  c.
8.8.  thy  c.  is  preserved  m  fire  and  water

m°U.u  alt  mortify  it  as  thy  c.  and  quicken  it
45.  for  thou  art  merciful  unto  thy  c.

ur  ?V12,_  v  |n"  every  c.  hear  thou  my  prayer
,,  17.  he  shall  make  the  c.  his  w  eapon

Eccl.  16.  16.  Ins  mercy  is  manifest  to  every  c
CREATURES.

a  6- 55.  as  the  c.  which  now  begin  to  be  old
^7 •  t. hat  it  should  bring  forth  living  c.

49.  then  didst  thou  ordain  two  living  c.

54.  whom  thou  madest  lord  of  ail  thy  c
rviJo4;  i1/- serve  ‘j166- thou  spakest,  they  were

7  on  let  uluse  the  llk(1  a3  in  youth
7.  20.  to  know  the  natures  of  living  c.

9.  that  he  should  have  dominion  over  the  c
r  ,  -  _  .  .  CREDIT.

inC  1  i 1  ■,Pr<?v-e  [nm>  and  be  not  hasty  to  c.  him
i1?/  m  «  basty  to  c.  is  light  minded
1  Mac.  10.  46.  they  gave  no  c.  unto  them
CREPT

1  Mac.  6.46.  he  c.  under  the  elephant,  and  thrust
Trr-  ,  .  CROOKED.

/.v//’.13j713;^einfia  fliece.  °uf  vv.ood-  full  of  knots
Eccl.  4.  17.  he  will  walk  with  him  by  c  wavs
,  CROUCHING.  >  y
Eccl.  lv.  11.  though  Q^^y\^et  take  good  heed

Bel  36.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  took  him  by  the  c
CROWN.

8-  let  us  c.  ourselves  with  rose-buds
C  d  weareth  a  c.  and  triumpheth  for  ever
5;16.they  shall  receive  a  beautiful  c.  from  the  L.

,o  'i'  1  tbe  l.ear  of  the  Lord  is  a  c.  of  rejoicing
fear  the  Lord  is  a  c.  of  wisdom
AArlcelve  a  c‘  f°/  weIl  ordering  the  feas
45.  12.  he  set  a  c.  of  gold  upon  the  mitre
47.  6.  in  that  lie  gave  him  a  c.  of  glory

on  'if  the  c.  and  his  robe

,A™yet  *°,r.al1  this,  none  of  them  wore  a  c
10.  20.  sent  him  a  purple  robe  and  a  c.  of  gold
^.release  from  customs  of  salt  and  c.  takes
}b  taxes,  we  discharge  them  of  them

12.  39.  that  he  might  set  the  c.  on  his  own  head

13.  37.  the  golden  c.  and  scarlet  robe  ye  sent

o  ir’  the  c.  tax  also  which  ye  owe

*  ,  W.  11.  when  Antiochus  was  come  to  the  c.

14.  4.  came,  presenting  to  him  a  c.  of  gold

,  u  CROWNS.

t  m '.I1  Put  c.  upon  themselves

4.  57.  they  decked  ^the  tern  |d  e  with  c.  of  gold

Eccl.  19. 5.  but  he  tha^n^sisteth  pleasures  c.  his  life

Bar.  6. 54.  they  are  as  c.  between  heaven  and  earth
_  CRUEL.

V  n-c‘  1:  but  having  the  fury  of  a  c.  tyrant

7.  2 1.  she  laughing  the  c.  tyrant  to  scorn,  spake

8.  17.  and  c.  handling  of  the  city

11.9.  not  only  to  fight  with  men,  but  with  c.  beasts
„  CRUELLY.

oCAi  '  ^'r1  o'  but  c.  lie  will  lay  up  thy  words
Mac.  15.  2.  O  destroy  not  so  c.  and  barbarously
„  CRUELTY.  y

*  Mac*  12. 5.  heard  of  thte  c.  done  to  his  countrymen

1  Mac.  4. 10.  now  therefore  let  us  c.  unto  heaven
CRIED.

c  A®:  f}ler*  f:  tbe  whole  multitude  and  said

owr.  24.  with  that  Susanna  c.  with  a  loud  voice,  and

o  ,  Tt  .  .  the  twP  aiders  c.  out  against  her
37.  Habbacuc  c.  saying,  O  Daniel,  Daniel
A'  uP’  Iben  c.  they  w  ith  a  loud  voice,  54.
to'  made  supplication  to  the  king  and  c.

13.  50.  then  c.  they  to  Simon,  beseeching  him
-w  Mac .  8.  3.  and  hear  the  blood  that  c .  unto  him
p  CRIER.

Eccl.  20.  15.  he  openeth  his  mouth  like  a  c
CRYING.


\fn^S  o3‘.iCa!?e  :vi,h  wiping  and  great  c.

J  3. tl,e  brst  voice  which  I  uttered  was  c.
LjCcI.  *.6.  S{.  a  loud  r^voman  and  a  scold  be  sought

2  Mac  13.  5.  there  was  a  tower  of  fifty  c
„  *  ,  CUCUMBERS.  *

Bar.  6.  70.  as  a  scare-crow  in  a  garden  of  c
.  C  U  L I  U  R  E*

2  Esd.  8.  6.  give  us  c.  to  our  understanding
nr-  n  ,  .  CUNNING.

B  isd.  8.  6.  who  is  a  more  c.  workman  than  she?  '
Eccl,  45.  11.  the  work  ot  the  c.  workman

631


Apocrypha.]  DAN


I)  £  A


DEC


1  Mac.  13.  29.  in  tliese  he  made  c.  devices
CUP-BEAKER.

To6.  1.  22.  now  Achiacharus  was  c.  and  keeper
CUP-BOARD.

1  Mac.  15.  32.  saw  the  c.  of  gold  and  silver  plate
CUPS.

1  Esd.  2.  13.  a  thousand  golden  c.  vials  of  gold

3.  22.  when  they  are  in  their  c.  they  forget  their  love
CURIOUS.

2  Esd.  4.  23.  for  it  was  not  my  mind  to  be  c.

9.  13.  be  note,  how  the  ungodly  shall  be  punished
Eccl.  3.  23.  be  not  c.  in  unnecessary  matters
2  Mac  2.  30.  to  be  c.  in  particulars  belonging
CURSE.

Eccl.  4.  5.  give  him  none  occasion  to  c.  thee
6.  if  he  c.  thee  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul

23.  14.  and  so  thou  c.  the  day  of  thy  nativity
28. 13.  c.  the  whisperer  and  double-tongued
38.  19.  the  life  of  the  poor  is  the  c.  of  the  heart
41.  9.  if  you  be  born,  ye  shall  be  born  to  a  c.  and
if  you  die,  a  c.  shall  be  your  portion

10.  so  the  ungodly  shall  go  from  a  c.  to  destruction
Bar.  1.  20.  and  the  c.  which  the  Lord  appointed

3.  8.  we  are  in  our^aptivityjbr  a  reproach  and  c.

IVisd.  3.  13.  their  offspring  is  c.  biessed  is  the  barren
.12.  11.  it  was  a  c.  seed  from  the  beginning
14.  8.  but  that  which  is  made  with  hands  is  c.

Eccl.  23.  26.  she  shall  leave  her  memory  to  be  c.

•  2  Mac.  4.  38.  there  slew  he  that  c.  murderer

12.  35.  when  he  would  have  taken  that  c.  man
CURSETH.

Eccl.  21.  27.  when  the  ungodly  c.  Satan,  he  c.  his
own  soul,  a  w  hisperer  defileth  his  own  soul
CUSTOM.

IVisd.  14.  16.  in  time  an  ungodly  c.  grown  strong
Eccl.  7.  13.  for  the  c.  thereof  is  not  good
23.  14.  and  so  thou  by  thy  c.  become  a  fool
2  Mac.  4.  16.  whose  c.  they  followed  so  earnestly

11.  24.  to  be  brought  to  thee,  of  the  Gentiles

12.  38.  they  purified  themselves  as  the  c.  was

CUSTOMS.

1  Mac.  10. 2Q.  now  I  do  free  you  from  the  c.  of  salt

11.  35.  of  the  tithes  and  c.  pertaining  to  us

2  Mac.  4.  28.  appertained  the  gathering  of  the  c.

11.  25.  after  the  c.  of  their  forefathers

CUT.

1  Esd.  4.9.  if  he  command,  to  c.  down,  they  c.  down
Eccl.  25.  26.  c.  her  off  from  thy  flesh,  anti  let  her  go

2  Mac.  7.  4.  he  commanded  to  c.  put  the  tongue  ot

him  that  spake,  and  to  c ,  off  the  utmost  parts
CUTTING.

Jud.  13.  18.  hath  directed  thee  to  the  c.  off  ot  head
CYMBALS.

d  Esd.  5.  59.  the  Levites  the  sons  of  Asaph  had  c.
Jud.  16.  2.  Judith  said,  sing  to  my  Lord  w  ith  c.

1  Mac.  4. 54.  it  was  dedicated  with  harps  and  c.

CYPRESS.

Eccl.  24. 13.  anti  as  a  C.  tree  on  the  mountains
50.  10.  as  a  c.  tree  which  groweth  to  the  clouds
CYPRIANS.

2  Mac.  4.  29.  Crates,  who  was  governor  of  the  C.

CYPRUS.  _

2  Mac.  10.  13.  called  traitor,  because  he  had  left  C.
12  2.  N  icanor  governor  of  C.  would  not  suiter
CYRENE.

1  Mac.  15. 23.  the  same  wrote  he  to  Cyprus  and  C.
-2  Mac.  2.  23.  declared  by  Jason  of  C.  in  five  books
CYRUS.

;1  Esd.  2.  3.  thus  saith  C.  king  of  the  Persians

4.  44.  which  C.  set  apart  when  he  vowed  to  destroy
57.  C.  had  set  apart  and  all  that  C.  had  given

:5.  71.  we  will  build,  as  C.  hath  commanded  us
73.  they  hindered  all  the  time  that  king  C.  lived
6. 17.  in  the  first  year  that  king  C.  reigned  in  Ba¬
bylon,  C.  the  king  wrote  to  build  this  house
search  be  made  among  the  records  ot  king  C.


21.


D


DADDEUS.

1  Esd.  8.  46.  that  they  should  speak  unto  D.


DAGGER.

Bar.  6. 15.  he  hath  also  in  his  right  hand  a  d.

DAGON.  ,

,1  Mac.  10. 84.  took  their  spoils  and  the  temple  ot  D.

11  4  they  shewed  him  the  temple  of  D.  burned

DAINTY.

Eccl  37.  29.  be  not  unsalable  in  any  d.  thing
DAINTIES.

Eccl  14.  16.  there  is  no  seeking  of  d.  in  the  grave
DALLIED.

IVisd  12.  26.  correction  wherein  he  d.  with  them
DAMASCUS.

Jud.  15.  5.  chased  them  until  they  were  passed  D.

1  Mac.  11.  62.  passed  through  the  country  unto  D.

12  32.  and  removing  thence  he  came  to  D.

DAMN  A  I  ION  .

IVisd  12.  27.  therefore  came  extreme  d.  on  them
DANCE.

Jud.  15.  12.  women  made  a  d.  among  them  tor  her

13.  she  w  ent  before  the  people  in  the  d.
DANCES.

]ud  3  7.  they  received  them  with  garlands  and  d.
DANGER.

Esth.  14.  4.  for  my  d.  is  in  my  hand
Eccl.  3.26.  he  that  lovethrf.  shall  perish  therein

29.  17.  will  leave  him  in  d.  that  delivered  him
34.'  12.  I  wasofttimes  in  d.  of  death,  yet  delivered
43*.  24.  they  that  sail  on  the  sea,  tell  of  the  d.

2  Mac.  15.  1.  resolved  without  any  d.  to  set  on  them

DANGEROUS..  .  .

Eccl.  9. 18.  a  man  of  an  ill  tongue  is  d.  in  his  city
DANGERS.  e  ,

Tob.  4.  4.  remember  that  she  saw  many  d.  for  thee
DANIEL.

Bus.  45.  a  young  youth  whose  name  was  D.

61.  for  D.  had  convicted  them  of  false  w  itness
64.  from  that  day  was  D.  in  great  reputation
Bel.  4.  but  D.  worshipped  his  own  God
10.  the  king  went  with  D.  into  the  temple  ot  Bel

632


Bel  17.  D.  are  the  seals  whole  J  and  he  said,  yea
37.  O  D.  D.  take  the  dinner  God  hath  sent  thee

1  Mac.  2.  60.  D.  for  his  innocency  was  delivered

DAPHNE.

2  Mac  A.  33.  he  withdrew  into  a  sanctuary  at  D.

DARt.ST.

Eccl.  29.  24.  thour/.  not  open  thy  moutn
DARIUS.

1  Esd.  2.  30.  second  year  of  the  reign  of  D.  6. 1.

3.  1.  now  when  D.  reigned,  he  made  a  great  feast
5.  to  him  shall  the  king  D.  gLe  great  gilts

7.  he  shall  sit  next  to  D.  because  of  his  w  isdom

8.  sealed  it,  and  laid  it  under  D.  his  pillow
6.7.  wrote  and  sent  to  D.  to  king  D.  greeting

34.  I  D.  the  king  have  ordained  that  it  be  done
1  Mac.  12.  7.  there  were  letters  sent  from  D.

DARK.

IVisd.  8.8.  Wisdom  can  expound  (/.  sentences
17.  3.  they  were  under  a  d.  vail  ot  forgetfulness
Eccl.  45.  5.  he  brought  him  into  the  d.  cloud
DARKNESS.

1  Esd.  4.  24.  looketh  on  a  lion  and  goeth  in  d.

2  Esd.  14.  20.  thus  the  world  is  set  in  d.

Tob.  4.  10.  alms  suffereth  not  to  come  into  d.

14. 10.  how  out  of  light  he  brought  him  into  d.  and
rewarded  him  again,  for  he  w  ent  down  into  d.
Esth.  11.  8.  and  lo,  a  day  of  d.  and  obscurity
IVisd.  18.  4.  were  worthy  to  be  imprisoned  111  d.

Eccl.  11. 16.  error  and  d.  had  their  beginning
16.  16.  he  hath  separated  his  light  from  d.
DARKEN  El  II.

Eccl.  25.  17.  her  wickedness  d.  her  countenance
DAR1S.

Jud.  1. 15.  he  smote  him  through  with  his  d.

DASH.

Jud.  16.  5.  that  he  would  d.  the  sucking  children
D  ATI!  AN.

Eccl.  45.  18.  the  men  that  were  ot  D.'s  side
DAUGHTER.

Tob.  3.  10.  I  am  the  only  d.  of  my  father,  15.

6.  10.  he  hath  also  one  only  d.  named  Sara

7.  11.  1  have  given  my  d.  in  marriage  to  seven  men
13.  then  he  called  his  d.  Sara,  and  she  came

10. 12.  I  commit  my  d.  to  thee  of  special  trust
11.  17.  blessed  her,  saying,  thou  art  welcome,  d.
Eccl.  7.  Zb.  marry  thy  d.  and  so  shalt  thou  have
22.  3.  and  a  foolish  d.  is  born  to  his  loss
4.  a  wise  d.  shall  bring  an  inheritance
26.  10.  if  thy  d.  be  shameless,  keep  her  in
36.  21.  yet  is  one  d.  better  than  another
42.  9.  father  waketh  for  the  d.  when  none  knows
Hus.  48.  ye  have  condemned  a  d.  of  Israel
1  Mac.  9.  37.  as  being  the  d.  of  a  prince  of  Chanaan
10.56.  for  1  will  marry  my  d.  to  thee
11.  12.  w  herefore  he  took  his  d.  from  him
DAUGHTERS.

1  Esd.  8. 84.  ye  shall  not  join  your  d.  to  their  sons

2  Esd.  1.28.  1  have  prayed  you  as  a  mother  her  d.
IVisd.  9.  7.  to  be  a  judge  of  thy  sons  and  d.

Eccl.  7.24.  hast  thou  d.  !  have  a  care  of  their  body

DAVID.

1  Esd.  1.  3.  that  Solomon  the  son  of  D.  had  built
EcclAb.  Zb.  to  the  covenant  made  w  ith  D.

47. 1.  N  athan  rose  up  to  prophesy  in  the  time  of  D
2.  so  was  D.  chosen  out  of  the  children  of  Israel
22.  and  he  gave  out  of  him  a  root  unto  D.

48.  15.  there  remained  a  ruler  in  the  house  of  D.

49.  4.  all  except  D.  and  Ezekias  were  detective

DAUNTED.

Jud.  16.  10.  the  Medes  were  d.  at  her  hardiness
Eccl.  32.  18.  a  proud  man  is  not  d.  with  fear
DAY.

1  Esd.  8. 89.  thou  art  true,  tor  we  are  left  a  root  this  d.

9.  11.  and  this  is  not  a  work  of  a  d.  or  two
53.  this  d.  is  holy  to  the  Lord,  be  not  sorrowful

2  Esd.  1 . 16.  but  ever  to  this  d.  do  ye  yet  murmur
7. 43.  d.  of  doom  shall  be  the  end  ot  this  time
Tub.  4.  9.  thou  layest  up  against  the  d.  ot  necessity
5. 14.  wilt  thou  a  drachm  a  d.  and  things  necessary

10.  1.  nosv  Tobit  his  father  counted  every  d.

7.  she  went  out  every  d.  into  the  way  which  they

went,  and  did  eat  no  meat  on  the  d.  time
IVisd.  3.  18.  nor  have  they  comfort  in  the  d.  of  trial
Eccl.  10. 10.  he  that  is  a  king  to  d.  to-morrow  dies

11.  25.  in  d.  of  prosperity,  in  the  d.  ot  affliction
26.  it  is  easy  in  the  d.  ot  death  to  reward  a  man

20.  15.  to  d.  he  lendeth,  to-morrow  will  he  ask  it
33.  7.  why  doth  one  d.  excel  another,  w  hen  as  at
the  light  of  every  d.  in  the  year  is  ot  the  sun  r
38.22.  yesterday  for  me,  and  to  d.  for  thee

40.  1.  from  the  d.  they  go  out  of  their  mother’s
womb,  till  the  d.  they  return  to  mother  of  all

46.  4.  sun  go  back,  was  notone  d.  as  long  as  two
Bus.  12.  they  watched  from  d.  to  d.  to  see  her
1  Mac.  9.  44.  it  stands  not  with  us  to  d.  as  before
0  Mac.  7. 20.  seven  slain  within  the  space  of  one  d.
DAYS.

Tob.  4.  3.  but  honour  her  all  the  d.  of  thy  life
5.  my  son,  be  mindful  of  the  Lord  all  thy  d.

9.  4.  but  my  father  counteth  the  d.  it  1  tarry  long

10.  1.  wheu  the  d.  of  the  journey  were  expired
Jud.  12.  18.  more  than  all  the  d.  since  1  was  born
Eccl.  17.  2.  he  gave  them  few  d.  and  a  short  time

22. 12.  seven  d.  do  men  mourn  for  the  dead
33  9.  some  of  them  hath  he  made  high  d.  and  some
of  them  hath  he  made  ordinary  d.

41 .  13.  a  good  life  hath  few  d.  a  good  name  endures
50.  3.  in  his  d.  the  cistern  to  receive  water
Bar.  1.11.  pray  for  the  life  ot  father  and  son,  that

their  d.  may  be  upon  earth  as  the  d.  ot  heaven
DAILY.

1  Esd.  1.2.  having  set  priests  according  to  (/.courses

5.  51.  they  offered  sacrifices  d.  as  was  meet

6.  30.  as  priests  shall  signify  to  be  d.  spent
Eccl.  47.9.  might  d.  sing-  praises  in  their  songs

DAY-SPRING

IVisd.  16.  28.  that  at  the  d.  we  pray  to  thee
DEAD.

2  Esd.  2.  16.  those  that  be  d.  will  I  raise  again
23.  wherever  thou  findest  the  d.  bury  them

7.  39.  prayed  for  the  d.  that  he  might  live
10.  30.  and  lo,  I  lay  as  one  that  had  been  d.


2  Esd.  16.  23.  the  d.  shall  be  cast  out  as  dung
Tob.  3.  15.  my  seveu  husbands  are  already  d.

4.  3.  he  said,  my  son,  when  I  am  d.  bury  me
8!  21.  have  the  rest  when  I  and  my  w  ife  be  d.

12.  12.  when  thou  didst  bury  the  d.  1  was  with  thee

13.  leave  thy  dinner  to  go  and  cover  the  d.

IVisd.  4.  16.  the  righteous  that  is  d.  shall  condemn
18.  be  a  reproach  among  the  d.  for  evermore
Eccl  7-  33.  and  for  the  d.  detain  it  not

8.  7.  rejoice  not  over  thy  greatest  enemy  being  d.

17.  28.  thanksgiving  perisheth  from  the  d.

22.  11.  weep  for  the  d.  for  he  hath  lost  the  light,
make  little  weeping  for  the  d.  he  is  at  rest

30.  4.  yet  he  is  as  though  he  were  not  d.

34.  25.  lie  that  w  asheth  after  touching  of  a  d.  body
38.  16.  my  son,  let  tears  fall  down  o'er  the  d.

23.  when  the  d.  is  at  rest,  be  comforted  for  him
48.  5  who  didst  raise  up  ad.  man  from  death,  and
his  soul  from  the  place  of  the  d.  by  the  word
2  Mac.  7.  36.  are  d.  under  God's  covenant  ot  life

12.  44.  it  had  been  vain  to  pray  for  the  d.

45.  he  made  a  reconciliation  for  the  d.

DEADLY.

1  Mac.  7.  26.  a  man  that  bare  d.  hate  to  Israel
DEAL.

Tob.  3.  6.  d.  with  me  asseemeth  best  to  thee
4.  6.  if  thou  d.  truly,  thy  doings  shall  succeed

13.  6.  if  you  d.  uprightly  before  him

Dan.  3.  19.  d.  with  us  after  thy  loving-kindness

1  Mac.  13.  46.  d.  not  with  us  according  to  our  sin
DEALETH.

Eccl.  50.  22.  d.  w  ith  us  according  to  his  mercy
DEALING.

IVisd.  5.  23.  ill  d.  shall  overthrow  the  mighty
16.  2.  d.  graciously  with  thine  own  people
Eccl.  29.  7.  refused  to  lend  for  other  men’s  ill  d.

40.  12.  but  true  d.  shall  endure  for  ever

41  18.  ashamed  of  uniust  d.  before  thy  partner
DEALT.

2  Esd.  8.  35.  but  he  hath  d.  wickedly,  and  among  the
faithful  there  is  none  which  hath  not  d.  amiss

Tob.  8.  16.  hast  d.  w  ith  us  according  to  thy  mercy
DEA1H.

2  Esd.  3.  7-  and  thou  appointedst  d.  in  him
10.  that  as  d.  was  to  Adam,  se  was  the  flood
7.  47.  after  d.  to  look  for  punishment
49-  we  have  done  the  works  that  bring  d.

9.  12.  the  same  must  know  it  after  d.  by  pain
Tob.  4.  2.  I  have  wished  for  d.  why  do  I  not  call

10.  because  that  alms  doth  deliver  from  d.

14.  10.  gave  alms  and  escaped  the  snares  of  d.

Jud.  12.  14.  it  shall  be  mv  joy  to  the  day  of  my  d.
IVisd.  1.  12.  seek  not  d.  111  the  error  ot  your  life

13.  for  God  made  not  d.  nor  hath  he  pleasure
2.  1.  in  the.  d.  of  a  man  there  is  no  remedy

24.  thro’  envy  of  the  devil  came  d.  into  the  world
4.  7.  though  the  righteous  be  prevented  with  d.
Eccl.  4.  28.  strive  for  the  truth  unto  d.

14.  12.  remember  d.  w  ill  not  be  long  in  coming
18.  22.  defer  not  till  d.  to  be  justified
22.  11.  the  life  of  the  fool  is  worse  than  d.

28.  21.  the  d.  thereof  is  an  evil  d.

33.  14.  good  is  set  against  evil,  and  life  against  d.

37.  2.  is  it  not  a  grief  unto  d.  when  a  friend

38.  18.  for  of  heaviness  cometh  d.

41.  1.  O  d.  how  bitter  is  the  remembrance  of  thee  f

2.  O  d.  acceptable  is  thy  sentence  to  the  needy

3.  fear  not  the  sentence  of  d.  remember  them

46.  20.  after  his  d.  he  prophesied,  and  shewed
48.  14.  at  his  d.  were  his  works  marvellous
Bar.  6.  14.  cannot  put  to  d.  one  that  offendeth  him

36.  they  can  save  no  man  from  d.  nor  deliver  weak
2  Mac.  6.  30.  1  might  have  been  delivered  from  d.

31 .  leaving  his  d.  for  an  example  of  courage
7.  14.  being  put  to  d.  by  men  to  look  for  hope

9.  28.  so  died  he  a  miserable  d.  in  the  mountains
13  8.  committed  sins,  he  received  his  d.  in  ashes

DEBT.

1  Esd.  3.  20.  a  man  remetnbereth  not  sorrow  nor  d.
DECAY.

Tob.  4.  13.  in  lewd  ness  is  d.  and  great  want
DECEIT.

Jud.  9. 13.  make  my  speech  and  d.  to  be  their  wound
IVisd.  1.  5.  for  the  Holy  Spirit  ofdiscipline  will  fly  d.

14.  30.  they  unjustly  swore  in  d.  despising  holiness
Eccl.  1.  30.  but  thy  heart  is  full  of  d.

10.  8.  because  of  riches  got  by  d.  the  kingdom
Bel  18.  O  Bel,  with  thee  is  no  d.  at  all
1  Mac.  11.  1.  went  about  by  d.  to  get  the  kingdom

DECEITFUL.

Eccl.  11.  29.  for  the  d.  man  hath  many  trains
°7  25.  and  a  d.  stroke  shall  make  wounds
DECEITFULLY.

1  Mac  7.  27.  sent  unto  Judas  and  his  brethren  d.
DECE1 YABLE.

Eccl.  10.  19.  they  that  transgress  are  a  d.  seed
DECEIVE.

Jud.  12.  16.  for  he  waited  a  time  to  d.  her
IVisd.  14.  21.  this  was  an  occasion  to  d.  the  world

15.  4.  neither  did  the  invention  of  men  d.  us
Eccl.  13.  6.  if  he  have  need  of  thee,  he  will  d.  thee

DECEIVED.

Jud.  13.  16.  my  countenance  hath  d.  him
Eccl.  3.  24.  many  are  d.  by  their  own  opinion
34.  7.  dreams  have  d.  many,  and  they  have  tailed

2  Mac.  6.  25.  and  so  they  should  be  d.  by  me
7.  18.  who  said,  be  not  d.  without  cause

DECKED.

Jud.  12.  15.  she  d.  herself  with  her  apparel

1  Mac  4.  57.  they  d.  the  forefront  of  the  temple
DECLARATION.  ’

Eccl.  43.  6.  for  a  d.  of  times,  and  a  sign  of  the  world
DECLA  RE.

2  Esd.  4.  4.  whereof  if  thou  canst  d.  me  one
Tob.  13. 6.  d.  his  might  and  majesty  to  a  sinful  nation
Jud.  8.  34.  for  I  will  not  d.  it  unto  you

10.  13.  I  am  comim*  to  d.  words  of  truth

11.  5.  I  will  d.  no  lie  to  my  lord  this  night
Eccl.  14.  7.  at  the  last  he  will  d.  his  wickedness

16.  22.  who  can  d.  the  works  of  his  justice  ?

25.  and  I  will  d.  his  knowledge  exactly
17. 9.  that  thev  might  d.  his  v/orks  with  understand


DEL


D  E  P


D  E  S  [.Apocrypha.


Eccl.  34.  9.  he  that  hath  experience  will  d.  wisdom
:i'J.  10.  the  congregation  shall  d.  his  praise
oar.  11.  they  were  ashamed  to  d.  their  lust
2  Mac.  3.  31  ,d.  to  all  men  the  mighty  power  of  God
_  .  DECLARED.

2  W.  8.  36.  in  this  thy  goodness  shall  be  d.

It  isd.  16.  21.  thy  sustenance  d.  thy  sweetness
bus.  27.  but  when  the  eldeis  had  d.  their  matter
DECLARE!  H.

Eccl.  27.  6.  the  fruit  d.  if  the  tree  have  beendressed
•12.  19.  he  d.  the  things  that  are  past  and  for  to  come
DECLARING.

heel.  43.  2.  the  sun  d.  at  his  rising  a  marvellous
44.  3.  men  giving  counsel  and  d.  prophecies
2  Mac.  6.  17.  we  will  come  to  the  d.  of  the  matter
.  DECREASE  TH.

F.ccl.  43.  7-  a  light  that  d.  in  her  perfection
DECK  EE.

2  Mac.  6.8.  went  out  a  d.  to  the  neighbouring  cities
DECREED.

\  Esd.8. 94.  put  away  our  wives,  like  as  thou  hastrf.
I'  isd.  4.  17.  what  God  in  his  counsel  hath  if.  of  him
2  Mac.  3.  23.  he  executed  that  which  was  d.
DEDICATE.

Feci-  35.  9.  and  d.  thy  tithes  with  gladness
1  Mac.  4.  36.  let  us  go  up  to  d.  the  sanctuary
.DEDICATED.

Jud.  16.  19.  Judith  d.  all  the  stuff  of  Holofernes

1  Ma c.  4.  51.  in  that  day  was  it  d.  with  songs

2  Mac.  5.  16.  pulled  down  the  things  that  were  d.

„  DEDICATION.

1  F.sd.  7.  7-  to  the  d.  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord

1  Mac.  4.  56.  so  they  kept  the  d.  of  the  altar
59.  that  the  days  of  the  d.  should  be  kept

2  Mac.  2.  9.  he  offered  the  sacrifice  of  d.

DEEDS.

2  Esd.  3.  28.  are  their  d.  then  any  better  3

7.  23.  deceived  themselves  by  their  wicked  d.

35.  the  reward  shall  be  shewed,  the  good  d.  shall
be  of  force,  and  the  wicked  d.  shall  bear  no  rule

8.  33.  shall  out  of  their  own  d.  receive  reward
Toh.  2. 14.  where  are  thy  alms  and  righteous  d.  ?
Mud.  1.9.  tor  manifestation  of  his  wicked  d.

F.ccl.  4.  29.  and  in  thy  d.  slack  and  remiss

17.  20.  none  of  their  unrighteous  d.  are  hid

22.  he  will  keep  the  good  d.  as  the  apple  of  the  eye
48.  4.  how  wast  thou  honoured  in  wondrous  d.  '
rrr  DEEMED.

Wisd.  13.  2.  but  d.  it  either  fire,  or  wind,  or  air
DEEP.

2  Esd.  4.  8.  T  never  went  down  into  the  d.

7-3.  is  set  in  a  wide  place  that  it  might  be  d.

71  isd.  4.  3.  nor  take  d.  roofing  from  bastard  slips
10.  19.  cast  them  up  out  of  the  bottom  of  1116(7.
Eccl.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the  d.  and  wisdom  ?

16.  18.  the  d.  shall  be  moved  when  he  shall  visit
24.  29.  her  counsels  profounder  than  the  great  d.

42.  18.  he  seeketh  out  the  d.  and  the  heart

43.  23.  by  his  counsel  he  appeaseth  the  d.

DEFECTIVE.

Eccl.  49.  4.  all,  except  David  and  Josias,  were  d.
DEFENCE.

£cc7.  34. 16.  he  is  a  d.  from  heat,  a  cover  from  the  sun

1  Mac.  4.  61.  that  the  people  might  have  a  d.

2  Mac.  15.  11.  not  so  much  with  d.  of  shields

DEFEND.

2  Esd.  2.  20.  d.  the  orphan,  clothe  the  naked
7.  52.  to  d.  them  which  have  led  a  wary  life
Jud.  5.  21.  pass  by,  lest  their  Lord  d.  them

6.  2.  not  war,  because  their  G  d  will  d.  them

DEFENDED.

IVisd.  10.  12.  she  d.  him  from  his  enemies
19.  8.  the  people  that  were  d.  with  thy  hand
Eccl.  2.  13.  therefore  shall  he  not  be  d.

28.  19.  well  is  he  that  is  d.  from  the  tongue
DEFENDER.

Eccl.  51.  2.  for  thou  art  my  d.  and  helper
2  Mac.  6.  2.  temple  of  Jupiter  the  d.  of  strangers
DEFENDETH.

i  Mac.  3.  39.  hath  his  eye  on  that  place,  and  d.  it
DEFER.

Jud. 2. 13.  I  have  commanded  thee,  d.  not  to  do  them
Eccl.  4.  3.  d.  not  give  to  him  that  is  in  need

18.  22.  d.  not  till  death  to  be  justified

DEFILE.

Jnd.  13.  16.  he  hath  not  committed  sin  to  d.  me
DEFILED.

1  Esd.  1.  49.  tile  governors  d.  the  temple  of  the  Lord

2  Esd.  8.  60.  d.  the  name  of  him  that  made  them
Eccl.  13.  1.  he  thattoucheth  pitch  shall  be  d.

22.  13.  thou  shalt  never  be  d.  vvith  his  fooleries
42. 10.  in  her  virginity,  lest  she  should  be  d.

Bar.  3.  10.  that  thou  art  d.  with  the  dead

1  Mac.  1.  37-  they  shed  blood,  and  d.  the  sanctuary
4.  45.  to  pull  it  down  because  the  heathen  had  d.  it

DEFI LE  TH.

Eccl.  21.  28.  a  whisperer  d.  his  own  soul
DEFILING.

IVisd.  14.  26.  there  reigned  in  all  men  d.  of  souls
DEFLOWER.

Eccl.  20.  4.  as  the  lust  of  an  eunuch  to  d.  a  virgin
DEFRAUD.

F.ccl.  4.  1.  my  son,  d.  not  the  poor  of  his  living

7.  21.  d.  not  a  good  servant  of  liberty

14.  14.  d.  not  thyself  of  the  good  day

DEFRAUDED.

Eccl.  29.  7-  many’  refused  to  lend,  fearing  to  be  d.
DEFRAUDING.

Eccl.  14.  4.  he  that  gathereth  by  d.  his  own  soul
DEFRAY.

2  Mac.  8.  1C.  so  much  as  should  d.  the  tribute

9.  16.  out  of  his  own  revenue  d.  the  charges

DEGREE.

Eccl.  11  1.  lifts  up  head  of  him  that  is  of  low  d.
DELAY.

Tob.  12.  13.  when  thou  didst  not  d.  to  rise  up
Eccl.  29.  8.  and  d.  not  to  shew  him  mercy
DELIBERATION'.

Wisd.  12.  20.  if  thou  didst  punish  with  such  d.

,  .  DELICATE.

Wisd.  19.  11.  when  they  asked  d.  meats
Eccl.  29.  22.  than  d.  fare  in  another  man's  house


Sus.  31.  Susanna  was  a  very  d.  woman
DEL1CA  l'ES.

Eccl.  30.  18.  d.  poured  upon  a  mouth  shut  up
31.  3.  the  rich  is  filled  with  his d.

DELIGIl  I  .

Jud.  12.  20.  Holofernes  took  greats,  in  her
Wisd.  6.  21.  it  your  d.  be  then  in  thrones
16.  20.  bread  able  to  content  every  man’s  d.

Eccl.  1.  27.  and  faith  and  meekness  are  his  d.

9.  12.  d.  notin  things  the  ungodly  have
16.  1.  neither  d.  in  ungodly  sons
DELIGHTED.

Wisd.  13.  3.  if  they  being  d.  took  them  to  be  gods
Eccl.  51 .  15.  from  the  flower  my  heart  hath  d.  in  her
DELIGHTE  TH.

Eccl.  26.  13.  the  grace  of  a  wife  d.  her  husband
2  Mac.  15.  39.  mingled  wine  is  pleasant  and  d.  the
taste, |so  speech  finely  framed  d.  the  ears
DELIVER.

1  Esd.  8. 59.  till  ye  d.  them  to  the  chief  of  the  priests

2  Esd.  7.  32.  the  secret  places  shall  d.  souls

Fob.  4.  10.  because  alms  dothrf.  from  death,  12.  9.
14.  11.  consider  how  righteousness  doth  d.

Jud.  8.  9.  had  sworn  to  d.  the  city  to  the  Assyrians
1 1 .  ye  have  promised  to  d.  the  city  to  our  enemies
Esth.  14.  19.  d.  usoutofthe  hands  of  mischievous
£cr/.4.9  r/.himthat  suffered)  wrong  from  oppression

29.  12..  it  shall  d.  thee  from  all  affliction
33.  1.  in  temptation  even  again  he  will  d.  him
42.  7-  d.  all  things  in  number  and  weight
50.  24.  that  he  would  d.  us  at  this  time
Bar.  6.  15.  but  cannot  d.  himself  from  war

36.  nor  can  they  d.  the  weak  from  the  mighty
Dan.  3.  11.  d.  us  not  up  wholly  forthy  name’ssake
Bel.  29.  d.  us,  Daniel,  else  we  will  destroy  thee
1  Mac.  5.  12.  come,  and  d.  us  from  their  hands
DELIVERANCE.

Eccl.  51.  9.  I  prayed  for  d.  from  death
1  Mac.  4.  25.  thus  Israel  had  a  great  d.  that  day
56.  they  sacrificed  the  sacrifice  of  d.  and  praise
DELIVERED.

1  Esd.  1.  53.  for  he  d.  all  into  their  hands

3.  13.  they  d.  their  writings  unto  him
8;  56.  I  d.  unto  them  650  falents  of  silver

62.  the  gold  and  silver  was  d.  into  house  of  our  L.
Tob.  3.  4.  wherefore  thou  hast  d.  us  for  spoil
Wisd.  10.  6.  she  d.  the  righteous  man  who  fled
9.  Wisdom  d.  front  pain  those  that  attended  on  her
13.  she  forsook  him  not,  but  d.  him  from  sin
Eccl.  29.  17.  will  leave  him  in  danger  that  d.  him
48.  20.  Lord  d.  them  by  the  ministry  of  Esay

2  Mac.  6.  26.  I  should  be  d.  from  punishment  of  men

30.  whereas  1  might  have  been  J.  from  death
12.  45.  that  they  might  be  d.  from  sin

DELI  VEREDST.

Eccl.  51.  12.  thou  d.  me  from  the  evil  time
D  ELI  V  BREST.

Eccl.  51.  8.  how  thou  d.  such  as  wait  for  thee
DELIVER  ETH.

1  Mac.  4. 11.  that  there  is  One  who  d.  Israel
DEMANDED.

1  Esd.  6.  12.  we  d.  who  were  the  chief  doers
Wisd.  15;  8.  life  that  was  lent  him  shall  be  d.

2  Mac.  15.  3.  he  d.  if  there  were  a  mighty  one

DEMETRIUS.

1  Mac.  7. 1.  D.  son  of  Seleucus  departed  from  Rome
8.  31.  the  evils  that  D.  doth  to  the  Jews

10.52.  I  have  overthrown  D.  ||  67.  D.  son  of  D.

11.  12.  he  took  his  daughter  and  gave  her  to  D.

39.  seeing  all  the  host  murmured  against  D.

II.  3.  who  went  and  smote  the  host  of  D.

2  Mac.  1.  7.  what  time  as  D.  reigned  in  169th  year
14.  1.  informed  that  D.  had  taken  the  country

4.  came  to  king  D.  ||  11.  did  more  incense  D".

DEN.

Bel.  35.  neither  do  I  know  where  the  d.  is
36.  the  angel  set  him  in  Babylon  over  the  d.
DENS.

2  Mac.  10.  6.  they  wandered  in  mountains  and  d.
DENIED.

Wisd.  12.  27.  wnom  before  they  d.  to  know
DEPART.

1  Esd.  1 . 27.  d.  from  me,  and  be  not  against  the  Lord
4.  1 1 .  these  keep  watch,  neither  may  any  one  d.

2  Esd.  4.  14.  make  war  against  the  sea,  that  it  may  d.
lob.  4.  2 1 .  if  thou  fear  God  and  d.  from  all  sin

14.  .3.  1  am  aged  and  am  ready  to  d.  out  of  this  life
Jud.  13.  1.  his  servants  made  haste  to  d.

19.  for  this  thy  confidence  shall  not<7.  from  men
Eccl.~ .2.rf. from  unjust, and  iniquity  shall  turn  away

22.  13.  d.  from  him,  and  thou  shalt  find  rest
22.  for  these  things  every  friend  will  d.

23.  11.  the  plague  shall  never  d.  from  his  house
27.  22.  he  that  knoweth  him,  will  d.  from  him
35.3.  to  d.  from  wickedness  pleases  the  Lord

17.  and  will  not d.  till  the  Most  High  behold
Dan.  3.  12.  cause  not  thy  mercy  to  d.  from  us
Mac.  2.  3.  the  law  should  not  d.  from  their  hearts
11.  30.  they  that  will  d.  shall  have  safe  conduct
DEPARTED.

Esd.  8.  61.  from  the  river  Theras  we  d.

Esd.  .3.  22.  the  good  d.  away,  the  evil  abodestill
Eccl.  38.  23.  when  his  spirit  is  d.  from  him
46.  11.  whose  heart  d.  not  fnrmi  the  Lord
48.  15.  neither  d.  they  from  their  sins
Bar.  3.  8.  which  d.  from  the  Lord  our  God
Sus.  7-  now  when  the  people d  away  at  noon
DEPARTURE.

Wisd.  3.  2.  and  their  d.  is  taken  for  misery
DEPEND.

Jud.  8.  24.  because  their  hearts  d.  upon  us
DEPEN  DEITJ.

Eccl.  40.  29.  the  life  of  him  that  d.  on  another
DEPOSED.

1  Esd.  1.  35.  then  the  king  of  Egypt  d.  him
DEP  RIVE.

Esth.  16.  12.  went  about  to  d.  us  of  our  kingdom
DEPRIVED.

Wisd.  18.  4.  they  were  worthy  to  be  d.  of  light
Eccl.  28.  15.  hath  d.  them  of  their  labours
29.  6.  he  hath  d.  him  of  his  money
37.  21.  because  he  is  d.  of  all  wisdom


2  Mac.  14.  7.  I  being  d.  of  my  ancestor's  honour
DEP  TH,  S.

2  Esd.  3.  18.  and  thou  madest  the  d.  to  tremble
8. 23.  whose  look  drieth  up  the  d.  mountains  melt
DERISION.

1  Esd.  1.  51.  but  they  had  his  messengers  in  d.
Wisd.  5.3.  this  was  he  whom  we  had  sometimes  in  d
DESCENDED.

Jud.  5.  6.  this  people  are  d.  of  the  Chaldeans
6.  14.  but  the  Israelites!/,  from  their  city
DESCRIPTION.

1  Esd.  5.  39.  when  the  d.  of  the  kindred  was  sought

DESERTS.

Wisd.  5.  7-  we  have  gone  thro’ d.  where  was  no  way

DESERTS.

Esth.  16.  18.  rendering  him  according  to  his  d.
DESrERVED.

Wisd.  19-  14.  friends  that  had  well  d.  of  them

2  Mac.  4.  2.  that  had  d.  well  of  the  city

38.  rewarded  him  his  punishment  as  he  had  d.
DESIK  E.

1  Esd.  4.  46.  and  now  this  is  what  I  d.  of  thee,  T  d.

therefore  that  thou  make  good  the  vow

2  Esd.  1.  25.  when  ye  d.  me  to  be  gracious  to  you
8..  27.  the  d.  of  those  that  keep  thy  testimonies

32.  if  thou  hast  a  d.  to  have  mercy  upon  us
tob.  4.  19.  d.  that  thy  ways  may  be  directed
Wisd.  4.  2.  and  when  it  is  gone,  they  d.  it
6.  11.  d.  my  words,  and  ye  shall  be  instructed

13.  she  preventeth  them  that  d.  her

17.  the  beginning  of  her  is  the  d.  of  discipline
20.  the  d.  of  wisdom  bringeth  to  a  kingdom
8.  8.  if  a  man  d.  much  experience,  she  knoweth

14.  2.  for  verily  d.  of  gain  devised  that

15.  5.  so  they  d.  the  form  of  a  dead  ima^e

6.  they  that  d.  them  are  lovers  of  evil  things

16.  25.  according  tod  of  them  that  had  need
Eccl.  1.  26.  if  thou  d.  wisdom,  keep  commandments

3.  29.  an  attentive  ear  is  the  d.  of  a  wise  man

14.  14.  let  not  the  part  of  a  good  d.  overpass  thee
16.  1 .  d.  not  a  multitude  of  unprofitable  children
25.21.  and  d.  her  not  for  pleasure

2  Mac.  6.  25.  through  my  d.  to  live  a  little  time
11.  28.  if  ye  fare  well,  we  have  our  d.

29.  declared  that  your  d.  was  to  return  home
DESIRABLE.

Eccl.  1.  17.  she  filleth  all  her  house  with  things  d.

42.  22.  O  how  d.  are  all  his  works !

DESIRED.

Judg.  12.  16.  Holofernes  d.  greatly  her  company'
16.  22.  many  d.  her  but  none  knew  her
Wisd.  8.  2.  1  d.  to  make  her  my  spouse

15.  19.  are  not  beautiful  so  much  as  to  be  d.

Sus.  11.  that  they  d.  to  have  to  do  with  her

2  Mac.  15.  38.  done  well,  it  is  that  which  I  d.

D ESI  RES.

Eccl.  18.  31.  if  thou  givest  thy  soul  d.  that  please  her
0 Mac.  9.  27.  will  graciously  yield  to  your  d.
DESIRES!’.

2  Esd.  4.  4.  shew  thee  the  way  that  thou  d.  to  see

43.  from  beginning  look  what  thou  d.  to  see

DESIROUS.

Esth,  11.  12.  he  by  all  means  was  d.  to  know  it
Wisd.  13.6.  they  err,  seeking  God,  and  d.  to  find  him
F.ccl.  23.  5.  that  is  d.  always  to  serve  thee
24.  19.  come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  be  d.  of  me
Sus.  15.  she  was  d.  to  wash  herself  in  the  garden
1  Mac.  5.  67- certain  priests  d.  to  shew  their  valour
DESOLATE.

1  Esd.  4.  45.  when  ludah  was  made  d.  by  Chaldees

8.  81.  and  they  raised  up  the  d.  Sion

2  Esd.  1.  33.  your  house  is  d.  1  will  cast  yon  out
Tob.  14.  4.  Jerusalem  shall  be  d.  the  house  of  God

in  it  shall  be  burned,  shall  be  d.  for  a  time
Esth.  14.  3.  O  my  Ld.  help  me  d.  woman  v\  ho  have
14.  help  me  that  am  d.  have  no  helper  but  thee
Eccl.  21.  4.  the  house  of  proud  men  shall  bemaderf.
DESOLATION.

1  Esd.  1.  58.  the  whole  time  of  her  (/.shall  she  rest

2  Esd.  3. 2.  for  I  saw  d.  of  Sion  and  wealth  at  Babyl.
DESPAIR.

Eccl.  22.  21.  yet  d.  not,  there  may  be  a  returning
DESPAIR  ETH.

Eccl.  41.  2.  to  him  that  d.  and  hath  lost  patience

DESPAIRING.

0  Mac.  9.  18.  therefore  d.  of  his  health,  he  wrote

DESPERATE.

2  Mac.  6. 29.  the  speeches  proceeded  from  a  d.  mind
DESPERATELY".

2  Mac.  13.  23.  heard  that  Philip  was  rf.  bent
DESPISE.

2  Esd.  7.  20.  because  they  d.  the  law  of  God
Fob.  4. 3.  bury  me,  and  d.  not  thy  mother
13.  my  son  d.  notin  thy  heart  thy  brethren

18.  d.  not  any  counsel  that  is  profitable
Jud.  8.  20.  we  trust  that  he  will  not  d.  us

10.  19.  every  one  said,  who  would  d.  this  people?
Esth.  13.  16.  d.  not  the  portion  thou  hast  delivered
Wisd.  4.  18.  they  shall  see  him  and  d.  him
Eccl.  3.  1.3.  d.  him  not  when  thou  art  in  strength
10.  2.3.  it  is  not  meet  torf.  the  poor  man
31.  22.  my  son,  hear  me,  and  d.  me  not
31.  and  d.  not  thy  neighbour  in  his  mirth
35.  14.  he  will  not  d.  the  supplication  of  fatherless
DESPISED.

2  Esd.  1 .  7.  but  they  have  d.  my  counsels
34.  for  they  have  d.  my  commandment,  done  evil
2.  33.  they  d.  the  commandment  of  the  Lord
7.  24.  his  law  have  they  d.  and  denied  his  covenant
8.56.  (/.  the  Most  High,  and  forsook  his  ways
Jnd.  14.  5.  know  him  that  d.  the  house  of  Israel
Esth.  1.3.  4.  that  d.  the  commandments  of  kings
Wisd.  12.  24.  among  the  beasts  of  enemies  were  d.

2  Mac.  7.  24.  Antiochus  thinking  himself  d.

D  ESP  IS  ETH.

£cc/.14.8  envious  man  hath  a  wicked  eye  and  d.  men

DESPISING.

Wisd.  14.  30.  they  swore  in  deceit,  d.  holiness
DESPITEFUL.

Eccl.  31. 31.  give  no  d.  words,  press  not  on  him
DESPITEFULNESS.

Wisd.  2.  19.  let  us  examine  him  with  d.  and  torture

633


Apocrypha.]  ])  J  {7


D  I  S


DESTINY.

JVisd.  19. 4.  the  d.  whereof  they  were  worthy
DESTITUTE.

JVisd.  12.  6.  the  parents  that  killed  souls  d.  of  help
Eccl.  37. 20.  and  is  hated,  he  shall  be  d.  ot  all  food
DESTROY.

1  Esd.  8. 88.  mightest  not  thou  be  angry  with  us  to  d.  ?
Esth.  10.8.  were  assembled  to  d.  the  name  of  Jews
H’isd.  11. 19.  but  the  terrible  sight  utterly  d.  them
12. 8.  didst  send  wasps  to  d.  them  by  little  and  little

1  Mac.  5.  2.  they  thought  to  d.  the  generation  ot

Jacob,  they  began  to  slay  and  d.  the
people

DESTROYED.

£  Esd.  1.  10.  many  kings  have  I  d.  for  their  sakes

11.  all  the  nations  have  l  d.  before  them
Jud.  5.  18.  they  were  d.  in  many  battles
13. 14.  but  hath  d.  our  enemies  by  mine  hands
Esth.  16.24.  every  city  shall  be  d.  without  mercy
JVisd.  16.  27.  that  which  was  not  d.  of  the  fire
Eccl.  8.  2.  for  gold  hath  d.  many,  and  perverted
DESTROY  EDST.

2  Esd.  3. 9.  thou  broughtest  the  flood  and  d.  them
JVisd.  18.  5.  d.  them  altogether  in  a  mighty  water

DES 1  ROYER.

JVisd.  18.  22.  he  overcame  the  d.  not  with  strength
25.  to  these  the  d.  gave  place,  and  was  afraid
DES  TROY  El'll.

Eccl.  20.  22.  there  is  that  d.  his  own  soul
DESTRUCTION.

2  Esd.  1. 16.  triumphed  not  for  the  d.  of  your  enemi.
TohA.  13.  for  in  pride  is  d.  and  much  trouble
Jud.  13.5.  execute  my  enterprises  to  d.  of  the  enemies

16.  my  countenance  hath  deceived  him  to  his  d.
Esth  16  15  this  wretch  hath  delivered  to  utter  d.

23.  that  mere  may  be  a  memorial  of  d.

JVisd.  1. 12.  and  pull  not  upon  yourselves  d.

3.  3.  and  their  going  from  us  to  be  utter  d.

5.  7.  we  wearied  ourselves  in  the  way  of  d.

2  Mac.  6. 12.  those  punishments  not  to  be  for  d.
DETAINED.

Tob.  10. 2.  Tobit  said,  are  they  d.  or  is  Gaba'el  dead  :
DETERMINED.

1  Esd.  8.  10.  having  d.  to  deal  graciously

Jud.  5. 4.  why  have  they  d.  not  to  come  and  meet  me  ?
Esth.  11. 12.  Mardocheus  had  seen  what  G.  had  d.  to
JVisd.  18.  5.  d.  to  slay  the  babes  of  the  saints

2  iliac.  11.25.  we  have  d.  to  restore  their  temple

15.  6.  Nicanor  d.  to  set  up  a  public  monument

17.  d.  not  to  pitch  camp,  but  to  set  upon  them

DETESTABLE.

2  Mac.  5.  24.  he  sent  also  that  d.  ringleader
DEVICE.

Esth.  14.  11.  but  turn  their  d.  upon  themselves
1  Mac.  1.  12.  so  this  d.  pleased  them  well
DEVICES.

JVisd.  9.  14.  and  our  d.  are  but  uncertain
Eccl.  35.  19.  the  works  of  men  according  to  their  d.
42.  18.  he  considered  their  crafty  d.

1  Mac.  6.  37.  were  girt  fast  unto  them  with  d.

DEVIL.

Tob.  6.7.  if  a  d.  or  an  evil  spirit  trouble  any

17.  and  the  d.  shall  smell  it,  and  flee  away
JVisd.  2.24.  through  envy  of  the  d.  came  death

DEVILS.

Bar.  4.  7.  by  sacrificing  to  d.  and  not  to  God
35.  she  shall  be  inhabited  of  d.  a  great  time
DEVISE.

Eccl.  7.  12.  d.  not  a  lie  against  thy  brother
DEVISED.

2  Esd.  4.  19.  it  is  foolish  that  they  both  have  d.
JVisd.  14.  2.  for  verily  desire  of  gain  d.  that

DEVOUR.

2  Esd.  8.4. swallow  down,0  my  soul,  and  d.  wisdom
Eccl.  28.  23.  it  shall  d.  them  as  a  leopard
31.  16.  and  d.  not,  lest  thou  be  hated
Bel  32.  to  the  intent  they  might  d.  Daniel
DEVOURED.

2  Esd.  6.52.  kept  him  to  be  d.  of  whom  thou  wilt
Tob.  6.  2.  a  fish  leaped  out  and  would  have  d.  him
Jud.  5.  24.  they  shall  be  a  prey  to  be  d.  of  all
Esth.  11.  11.  lowly  exalted,  and  d.  the  glorious
Bel  42.  were  d.  in  a  moment  before  his  face
DEVOURERS.

JVisd.  12.  5.  those  murderers,  and  d.  of  man’s  flesh
DEVOURED  II.

Eccl.  36. 18.  belly  d.  all  meats,  yet  one  meat  better
Bel  8.  who  is  this  that  d.  these  expenses  ?

9.  but  if  ye  can  certify  me  that  Bel  d.  them
DEW.

JVisd.  11. 22.  the  world  is  as  a  drop  of  morning  d.
Eccl.  18. 16.  shall  not  the  d.  assuage  the  heat  ?
DIADEM.

JVisd.  18. 24.  thy  majesty  upon  the  d.  of  his  head
Bar.  5. 2.  and  set  a  d.  on  thy  head  of  the  glory
DIE.

2  Esd.  1.  18.  better  than  to  d.  in  this  wilderness
7. 29.  after  these  years  shall  my  son  Christ  d.

31.  and  that  shall  d.  that  is  corrupt
8.  58.  yea,  and  t'hat  knowing  they  must  d.

Tob.  3.  15.  if  it  please  not  thee  that  1  should  d.

10. 12.  that  1  may  see  thy  children  before  1  d.

11.  9.  from  henceforth  I  am  content  to  d.

Wisd. 3.  2.  in  sight  of  unwise  they  seemed  to  d.

18.  or  if  they  d.  quickly,  they  have  no  hope
Eccl.  8.  7.  but  remember' that  we  d.  all

14. 13.  do  good  to  thy  friend  before  thou  d.

17.  the  covenant  is,  Thou  shalt  d.  the  death
19. 10.  if  thou  hast  heard  a  word,  let  it  d.  with  thee
25.  24.  and  through  the  woman  we  all  d.

30. 4.  though  his  father  d.  yet  he  is  as  tho’  he  were

39.  11.  if  he  d.  he  shall  leave  a  greater  name

40.  28.  for  better  it  is  to  d.  than  to  beg

41.  9.  and  if  you  d.  a  curse  shall  be  your  portion
Bar.  4.  1.  but  such  as  leave  the  law  shall  d.

1  Mac.  1. 5.  and  he  perceived  that  he  should  d.

2.  37.  but  said,  let  us  d.  all  in  our  innocency

2  Mac.  7.  2.  are  ready  to  d.  rather  than  transgress
5.  they  exhorted  one  another  to  d.  manfully
14.  so  when  he  was  ready  to  d.  said  thus

18.  who  being  ready  to  d.  said,  be  not  deceived
14.' 42.  choosing  rather  to  d.  manfully,  than  to  come

634


DIED.

JVisd.  17.  10.  they  d.  for  fear,  denying  they  saw  air

1  Mac.  1.7.  Alexander  reigned  12 years,  and  then  d.

2  iliac.  6.  31.  thus  this  man  d.  leaving  an  example

7.  40.  so  this  man  d.  undefiled,  and  put  his  trust
41.  last  of  all,  after  the  sons,  the  mother  d.

9.  28.  so  d.  he  a  miserable  death  in  the  mountains

12.  45.  favour  laid  up  for  those  that  d.  godly
14.  46.  calling  on  the  1  ord  of  life,  he  thus  d.

DIET.

Eccl.  30.  25.  a  good  heart  will  have  a  care  of  his  d.
DIGGED.

Eccl.  48.  17.  he  d.  the  hard  rock  with  iron
D1GGETH.

Eccl.  27.  26.  whoso  d.  a  pit  shall  fall  therein
DIGNITY.

Esth.  16.  12.  but  he  not  bearing  his  great  d.

1  Mac.  10.  54.  give  gifts  according  to  thy  d.
DIGNITIES.

1  Esd.  1.11.  according  to  the  several  d.  8.  28.
DILIGENCE.

1  Esd.  6.  10.  and  with  all  glory  and  d.  is  it  made

2  Esd.  3.  19.  give  d.  to  the  generation  of  Israel
JVisd.  14.  18.  the  singular  d.  of  the  artificer

DILIGENT.

1  Esd.  2.  26.  I  commanded  to  make  d.  search
Eccl.  32.  1.  take  d.  care  for  them,  and  so  sit  down

38.  26.  lie  is  d.  to  give  the  kine  fodder
27.  they  are  d.  to  make  great  variety

30.  he  is  d.  to  make  clean  the  furnace

DILIGENTLY.

1  Esd.  6.  28.  that  they  look  d.  to  help  those  that  be

8.  24.  whoso  transgresseth,  shall  be  punished  d.

2  Esd.  9-  1.  measure  thou  the  time  d.  in  itself

16.  30.  clusters  that  d.  seek  through  the  vineyard
JVisd.  7.  13.  1  learned  d.  and  do  communicate  her

13.  7-  they  search  him  d.  and  believe  their  sight
13.  hath  carved  it  d.  when  he  had  nothing  to  do

Eccl.  18.  14.  that  d.  seek  after  his  judgments
Stis.  12.  yet  they  watched  d.  from  day  to  day
DIMINISH.

Eccl.  28.  8.  and  thou  shalt  d.  thy  sins
35.  8.  and  d.  not  the  first  fruits  of  thy  hands
DIMINISHED.

Bar.  2.  34.  increase  them,  they  shall  not  be  d.
DIMINISIIETH.

Eccl.  31.30.  drunkenness d.  strength,  maketh  wounds
DIMMETH.

Eccl.  4.3.  4.  sendeth  bright  beams,  it  d.  the  eyes
DINNER.

Tob.  12.  13.  not  delay  to  rise  up  and  leave  thy  d.
Sus.  13.  let  us  now  go  home,  for  it  is  d.  time
Bel  34.  carry  the  d.  that  thou  hast  into  Babylon
37.  take  the  d.  which  God  hath  sent  thee
DIRECT.

Jud.  12.  8.  she  besought  God  of  Israel  do  d.  her

way

Eccl.  6.  17.  shall  d.  his  friendship  aright
37.  15.  pray  that  he  will  d.  thy  way  in  truth

39.  7.  he  shall  d.  his  counsel  and  knowledge

DIRECTED.

Tob.  4.  19.  desire  of  him,  that  thy  ways  may  be  d.
Jud.  13.  18.  which  hath  d.  thee  to  the  cutting  off
Eccl.  49.  9.  he  d.  them  that  went  right
51.  20.  I  d.  my  soul  unto  her  and  found  hei
DIRECTETII.

JVisd.  7.  15.  he  leads  to  wisdom  and  d.  the  wdse
DISANNUL.

Dan.  3.  11.  neither  d.  thou  thy  covenant
DISAPPOIN  TED.

Jud.  16.  6.  but  the  almighty  Lord  hath  d.  them
DISCERNED.

JVisd.  2.  22.  nor  d.  a  reward  for  blameless  souls
DISC  IP  LIN  E.

JVisd.  1.  5.  the  holy  Spirit  of  d.  will  flee  deceit

6.  17.  for  the  very  true  beginning  of  her  is  the
desire  of  d.  and  the  care  of  d.  is  love
Eccl.  4.  17.  she  will  torment  him  with  her  d.

17.  18.  being  first-born,  he  nourished  with  d.

18.  14.  he  hath  mercy  on  them  that  receive  d.

23.  2.  will  set  the  d.  of  wisdom  over  my  heart

7.  hear,  O  ye  children,  the  d.  of  the  mouth
32. 14.  whoso  feareth  the  Lord  will  receive  his  d.
41.  14.  my  children  keep  d.  in  peace
Bar.  4.  13.  nor  trod  they  in  the  paths  of  d.
DISCLOSING.

Eccl.  22.  22.  except  tor  pride  or  d.  of  secrets
DISCOMFITED.

1  Mac.  4. 14.  the  heathen  being  d.  fled  into  the  plain
36.  Judah  said,  behold,  our  enemies  are  d.
DISCOURAGED.

1  Mac.  4.  27.  he  was  confounded  and  d.

2  Mac.  6.  12.  that  thev  be  not  d.  for  calamities

DISCOURSE.

Eccl.  6.  35.  be  willing  to  hear  every  godly  d.

8.  9.  miss  not  the  d.  of  the  eldeis,  they  learned
27.  11.  the  d.  of  a  godly  man  is  with  wisdom
13.  the  d.  of  fools  is  irksome,  and  their  sport
DISCOVER.

Eccl.  1.  30.  so  God  d.  thy  secrets  and  cast  down
DISCOVERED.

Jud.  9.  2.  and  who  d.  the  thigh  to  her  shame
Eccl.  11.  27-  in  his  end  his  deeds  shall  be  d.

1  Mac.  7-31.  when  he*saw  that  his  counsel  was  d.

DISCOVER  EJTI.

Eccl.  27.  16-  whoso  d.  secrets  loseth  his  credit
DISDAIN.

Eccl.  22.  10.  but  children  being  haughty  through  d.
DISEASE.

Eccl.  10.  10.  the  physician  cutteth  off  a  long  d.

31.  2.  as  a  sore  d.  breaketh  sleep

DISEASES.

2  Esd.  8.  31.  our  fathers  do  languish  of  such  d.

DISGRACE.

JVisd.  17.  7.  their  vaunting  was  reproved  with  d.
Eccl.  21. 24.  but  a  wise  man  will  be  grieved  with  d.
22.  1.  every  one  will  hiss  him  out  to  his  d.

29.  6.  and  for  honour  he  will  pay  him  d.

2  Mac.  9.  4.  thought  to  avenge  on  the  Jews  the  d.
DISGRACED.

Eccl.  8.  4.  jest  not  lest  thy  ancestors  be  d.

11.6.  many  mighty  men  have  been  greatly  d.


D  O

DISHONEST.

Eccl.  26.  24.  a  d.  woman  conteinneth  shame
DISHONESTLY.

Eccl.  22.  4.  she  that  lives  d.  is  her  father's  heaviness
DISHONOUR.

Eccl.  1.  30.  thou  fall  and  .bring  d.  on  thy  soul
3.  10.  glory  not  in  the  d.  of  thy  father
11.  a  mother  in  d.  is  a  reproach  to  the  children

8.  6.  d.  not  a  man  in  his  old  age,  for  we  wax  old
22.  3.  an  ill-nurtured  son  is  the  d.  of  his  father
Bar.  6.  40.  the  Chaldeans  themselves  d.  them

1  Mac.  1.  40.  as  glory,  so  was  her  d.  increased

2  Mac.  8.  35.  he  came,  having  very  great  d.

9.  1.  at  that  timecame  Antiochus  with  if.

DISHONOURA  BLE.

Eccl.  10.  19.  they  that  regard  not  law,  are  a  d.  seed
31.  he  that  is  d.  in  riches,  much  more  in  poverty
20. 26.  the  disposition  of  liar  is  d.  and  shame
DLSIIONOURETH.

Eccl.  22.  5.  she  that  is  bold  d.  her  father
26.  26.  but  she  that  d.  him  in  her  pride
DISMISSED.

Jud.  13.  1.  he  d.  the  waiters  from  the  presence
DISOBEDIENT.

Bar.  1. 19.  we  have  been  d.  to  the  Lord  our  God
DISOBEY.

Eccl.  2.  15.  thejT  that  fear  the  Lord  will  not  d.

16.  28.  and  Ihey  shall  never  d.  his  word
DISOBEYED.

Eccl.  23.  23.  first  she  hath  d.  the  law  of  the  Lord
Bar.  1. 18.  we  have  d.  him  and  have  not  hearkened
DISORDER.

JVisd.  11.  26.  there  reigned  d.  in  marriages
DISPATCH.

JVisd.  11. 19.  the  harm  might  d.  them  at  once
2  Mac.  9.  4.  he  commanded  him  to  d.  the  journey
DISPATCHED.

Tob.  7.  8.  and  let  this  business  be  d.

DISPERSED.

Tob.  3.  4.  to  all  nations  among  whom  we  are  d.
Jud.  7.  32.  he  d.  the  people  every  one  to  his  charge
JVisd.  2. 4.  our  life  shall  be  d.  as  a  mist  driven  awa>
5.  14.  as  the  smoke  which  is  d.  here  and  there
DISPLACE.

1  Mac.  8.  13.  and  whom  again  they  would,  they  d.
DISPLEASED.

Eccl.  45.  19.  this  the  Lord  saw,  and  it  d.  him
1  Mac.  5. 1.  the  nations  saw,  it  d.  them  very  much
DISPLEASURE.

1  Esd.  4.  31.  but  if  she  took  any  d.  at  him

2  Esd.  8.  34.  that  thou  shouldest  take  d.  at  him

DISPOSED.

2  Esd.  5.  49.  even  so  have  1  d.  the  world
Eccl.  16.  26.  he  d.  the  parts  thereof
DISPOSES!'.

2  Esd.  8. 11.  till  thou  d.  it  to  thy  mercy
DISPOSITION.

2  Esd.  8.  38.  I  will  not  think  on  the  d.  of  them
39.  I  will  rejoice  over  the  d.  of  the  righteous
Jud.  8.  29.  because  the  d.  of  thy  heart  is  good
Esth.  16.  6.  with  the  deceit  of  their  lewd  d.

Eccl.  20.  26.  the  d.  of  a  liar  is  dishonourable
DISQU  1ETED.

2  Esd.  10.  31. whataileth  thee?  why  art  thou  d.f
Eccl.  22.  13.  and  never  be  d.  with  his  madness
28.  14.  a  backbiting  tongue  hath  d.  many
D ISQU1ETEITI.

Eccl.  28.  9.  a  sinful  man  d.  friends
DISQUIETING.

JVisd.  14.  26.  there  reigned,  d.  of  good  men
DISSEMBLED.

1  Mac.  11.  53.  he  d.  in  all  that  ever  he  spake

DISSIMULATION.

JVisd.  14.  25.  there  reigned  in  all  men  d.

2  Mac.  13.  3.  with  great  d.  encouraged  Antiochus

DISSOLVED.

Tob.  3.  6.  that  1  may  be  d.  and  become  earth
DISSOLUTELY.

JVisd.  12.  23.  whereas  men  have  lived  d.
DISTANCE.

2  Esd.  5. 47  •  she  cannot ;  but  must  do  it  by  d.  of  time
DISTINGUISHED.

Eccl.  33.8.  by  knowledge  of  Lor!  they  were  d.
DISTRESS.

2  Esd.  6.  37.  my  soul  was  in  d.  and  I  said
Tob.  3.6.  command  theref.  that  1  may  be  delivered
out  of  thisrf.  and  go  into  the  everlasting  place
Eccl.  4.  2.  neither  provoke  a  man  in  his  d.

10.  26.  boast  not  thyself  in  the  time  of  thy  d.

25.  23.  that  will  not  comfort  her  husband  in  d.
Bar.  6.  37-  they  cannot  help  any  man  in  his  d.

1  Mac.  2.  53.  Joseph  in  his  d.  kept  commandment

DISTRIBUTE.

Jud.  16.  24.  she  did  d.  her  goods  to  her  kindred
Eccl.  33.23.  when  finish  life,  d.  thine  inheritance
DISTRUST.

JVisd.  1.  2.  shews  himself  to  such  as  do  not  d.  him
Eccl.  1.  28.  d.  not  the  fear  of  the  Lord  when  poor
DISTRUSTING.

2  Mac.  9.  22.  not  d.  my  health,  but  having  hope

DIVERS.

2  Esd.  6.  44.  many  and  d.  pleasures  forthe  taste
JVisd.  15.  4.  any  image  spotted  with  d.  colours
Eccl.  33.  11.  the  Lord  hath  made  their  ways  d.
DIVERSITIES.

JVisd.  7.  20.  the  d.  of  plants,  and  virtues  of  roots
DIVIDED.

Eccl.  14.  15.  leave  thy  labours  to  be  d.  b}-  lot
33.  11.  in  much  knowledge  the  Lord  hath  d.  them
44.  23.  give  him  an  heritage,  and  d.  his  portions.
47.  21.  sO  the  kingdom  was  d.  and  out  of  Ephraim
DIVIDING.

Eccl.  18.  3.  rf.holy  things  among  them  from  profane
DIVINATIONS.

Eccl.  34.  5.  d.  soothsay  ings  and  dreams  are  vain
DIVISION.

2  Esd.  6.  41.  and  to  make  a  d.  betwixt  the  waters
Eccl.  17.  17-  in  the  d.  of  the  nations  of  the  earth
DIVORCE.

Eccl.  25.  26.  give  her  a  bill  of  d.  and  let  her  go
DO.

1  Esd.  9. 9.  d.  his  will  and  separate  yourselves


D  R  E


D  W  E


EAR  [Apocrypha.


Esd.  9.  10.  like  as  thou  hast  spoken,  so  will  wed.
2  Esd.  1.  24.  what  shall  I  d.  unto  thee,  O  Jacob  ?

30.  but  now  what  shall  I  d.  unto  you  ?

Tob.  4.  15.  d.  that  to  no  man  which' thou  hatest

5.1.  father,  1  will  d.  all  things  thou  hast  commander
Jud.  2.  12.  whatever  1  have  spoken,  that  will  1  d.
IVisd.  13.  19.  for  saining  and  getting  asketh  ability

to  d.  of  him  that  is  most  unable  to  d.  any  thing
Eccl.  14.  11.  according  to  thy  ability  d.  good

21. 1.  my  son,  hast  thou  sinned  ?  d.  so  no  more

DOCTRINE.

Eccl.  16.  25.  1  will  shew  forth  d.  in  weight
24.  27.  lie  maketh  the  d.  of  knowledge  appear

132.  1  will  yet  make  d.  to  shine  as  the  morning
33.  1  will  yet  pour  out  d.  as  prophecy,  and  leave
DOERS.

II  Esd.  6.  12.  demanded  of  them  who  were  chief  d.

2  Esd.  3.  30.  how  thou  bast  spared  wicked  d.

Esth.  16.  15.  we  find  that  the  Jews  are  no  evil  d.
DOEST.

2  Mac .7. 16.  thou  d.  what  thou  wilt,  yet  think  not
_  DOG.

Tob.  5.  16.  and  the  young  man’s  d.  with  them

11.  4.  so  they  went,  and  the  d.  went  after  them
Eccl.  13. 8.  what  agreement  between  hyena  and  ad.  ?
26.  25.  a  shameless  woman  shall  be  counted  as  a  d.
DOINGS.

Tob.  4.  6.  thy  d.  shall  prosperously  succeed
IVisd.  2.  12.  and  he  is  clean  contrary  to  our  d.

9.  11.  she  shall  lead  me  soberly  in  my  d.

Eccl.  51. 19.  my  soul  wrestled,  in  my  d.  I  was  exact

DOMINION.

1  Esd.  4.  3.  but  yet  the  king  hath  d.  over  them
22.  you  must  know  that  women  have  d.  over  you
2  Esd.  3.  28.  they  should  have  the  d.  over  Sion

12.  23.  they  shall  have  the  d.  of  the  earth
Esd.  13.  2.  1  had  d.  over  the  <Vhole  world
IVisd.  3.  8.  they  shall  have  d.  over  the  people

9.  2.  that  he  should  have  d.  over  the  creatures
Eccl.  17.  4.  the  Lord  gave  him  d.  over  beasts
1  Mac.  1. 16.  he  might  have  the  d.  of  two  realms
DONE.

1  Esd.  8.  86.  all  is  d.  to  us  for  our  wicked  works
Esth.  10.  4.  he  said,  God  hath  d.  these  things
Eccl.  16.  26.  works  of  Lord  are  d.  in  judgment
18.  7.  when  a  man  bath  d.  then  he  beginneth
Ear.  2.  12.  O  Lord  our  God,  we  have  d.  ungodly
2  Mac.  7.  18.  marvellous  things  are  d.  unto  us
15.  5.  he  obtained  not  to  have  his  wicked  will  d.

.  DOOM.

2  Esd.  7.  43.  the  day  of  d.  shall  be  the  end  of  time
DOOR.

Tob.  8.  13.  so  the  maid  opened  the  d.  and  went  in

11.  10.  Tobit  also  went  forth  toward  the  d.

Eccl.  21.  24.  it  is  rudeness  to  hearken  at  therf.

28.  25.  and  make  a  d.  and  bar  for  thy  mouth
Bar.  6.  59.  or  to  be  a  d.  in  an  house  to  keep  safe
Sus.  26.  the  servants  rushed  in  at  the  privy  d.

2  Mac.  2.  5.  he  laid  the  ark,  and  so  stopped  the  d.
DOORS.

IVisd.  6.  14.  he  shall  find  her  sitting  at  his  d.

Eccl.  14.  23.  he  shall  also  hearken  at  her  d.

Bar.  6.  18.  as  the  d.  are  made  sure  on  every  side
.Sus.  20.  the  garden  d.  are  shut,  no  man  cab  see  us
Bel  21.  shewed  the  privy  d.  where  they  came  in
1  Mac.  4.  57.  and  the^y^hanged  d.  upon  them

1  Mac.  15.  13.  then  camped  Antiocbus  against  D.
DOS1THEUS.

Esth.  11.  l.  D.  who  said  he  was  a  priest  and  Levite
2  Mac.  12.  35.  D.  one  of  Bacenor’s  company
DOTE  I'D.

Eccl.  25.  2.  I  hate  an  old  adulterer  thatrf.

DOTH AIM.

Jud.  4.  6.  toward  the  open  country  near  to  D.

7.  3.  they  spread  themselves  in  breadth  over  D.
DOUBLE.

Eccl.  5.  9.  the  sinner  that  hath  a  d.  tongue

14.  an  evil  condemnation  on  the  d.  tongue

6.  1.  soshail  a  sinner  that  hath  a  d.  tongue
20.  10.  there  is  a  gift  whose  recompence  is  d.

26. 15.  shamefaced  and  faithful  woman  is  a  d.  grace
28.  13.  curse  the  whisperer  and  d.  tongued
42.  24.  all  things  are  d.  one  against  another
50.  2.  and  by  him  was  built  the  d.  height
DOUBT.

Eccl.  9.  13.  so  shalt  thou  not  ah  the  fear  of  death
DOUBTED.

Eccl.  31.  24.  the  testimonies  shall  not  be  d.  of
„  DOUBTFUL.

Eccl.  18.  7-  when  he  leaveth  off,  he  shall  be  d.
DOUBTLESS.-

2  Mac.  7.  23.  but  d.  the  Creator  will  give  you  life
„  DOWRY.

2  Mac.  1.  14.  to  receive  money  in  name  of  a  d.
DRACHM.

lob.  5. 14.  wilt  thou  a  d.  a  day  and  things  necessary
DRACHMS.

2  Mac.  4.  19.  to  carry  three  hundred  d.  of  silver

12.  43.  to  the  sum  ot  two  thousand  d.  of  silver
^  DRAGON.

Eccl.  25.  16.  I  had  rather  dwell  with  a  d.

Bel  23.  in  the  same  place  was  a  great  d.

DRAGONS.

2  Esd.  15.  29.  where  the  d.  of  Arabia  shall  come

31.  th°n  shall  the  d.  have  the  upper  hand
Esth.  10.  7.  and  the  two  d.  are  I  and  Aman

11.  6.  two  great  d.  came  forth  ready  to  fight
DRANK.

Jud.  12.  20.  d.  much  more  wine  than  he  had  drunk
DRAW.

U'isd.  5.  13.  even  so  we  began  to  d.  to  our  end

15.  15.  idols  that  have  not  noses  to  d.  breath
Eccl.  51.  23.  d.  near  unto  me,  ye  unlearned
„  DRAWN.

Lccl.  13.  7.  until  he  have  d.  thee  dry  twice
DREAD.

Mac.  15.  23.  send  a  good  angel  before  us  bn  a  d.
DREADFUL.

Esth.  15.  6.  all  glittering,  and  he  was  very  d.

II  i'd.  10.  16.  she  withstood  d.  kings  in  wonders
17 . 6.  there  appeared  a  fire  kindled  of  itself,  very  d.


_  .  DREAM.

2  Esd.  10.  36.  is  sense  deceived,  or  my  soul  in  a  d.
Esth.  10.  5.  for  1  remember  a  d.  which  1  saw
11.  4.  Mardocheus  who  was  a  Jew,  this  was  his  d.

12.  now  when  Mardocheus,  who  had  seen  this  d.

„  ,was  awake,  he  bare  this  d.  in  mind

2  Mac.  15.  11.  he  told  a  d.  worthy  to  be  believed

DREAMS.

Wisd.  18.  19.  the  d.  that  troubled  them  foreshew
Eccl.  34.  1.  hopes  are  vain,  and  d.  lift  up  tools

2.  whoso  regardeth  d.  is  like  him  that  catcheth  at

3.  the  vision  of  d.  is  the  resemblance  of  one  thing
5.  divinations,  soothsay ings,  and  d.  are  vain

7.  for  d.  have  deceived  many,  they  have  failed
_  ,  DRESSED.

Eccl.  27.  6.  the  fruit  declareth  if  the  tree  have  been  d.
DRINK.

1  Esd.  3.  6.  to  d.  on  gold,  and  to  sleep  on  gold
18.  wine  causeth  all  men  to  err  that  d.  it
9.  54.  then  went  they  their  way  to  eat  and  d.

1  ob.  4.  15.  d.  not  wine  to  make  thee  drunken
7.  9.  Raguel  said,  eat  and  d.  and  make  merry
Jud.  12.  1.  that  he  should  d.  ol  his  own  wine
1 1 .  that  she  come  unto  us  and  eat  and  d.  with  us

13.  fear  not  to  d.  wine  and  be  merry  with  us

18.  Judith  said,  I  will  d.  now,  my  lord,  because
Eccl.  9.  10.  thou  shalt  d.  it  with  pleasure

15.  3.  shall  she  give  him  the  water  of  wisdom  to  d.
24.  21.  they  that  d.  me  shall  yet  be  thirsty
26.  12.  and  d.  of  every  water  near  her
31.  31.  press  noton  him  with  urging  him  to  d.

1  Mac.  1 1 .  58.  he  gave  him  leave  to  d.  in  gold

2  Mac.  15.  39.  for  as  it  is  hurtful  to  d.  wine

DRIVE.

Jud.  11.  19.  shall  d.  them  as  sheep  have  no  shepherd
Eccl.  38.20.  take  no  heaviness  to  heart,  d.  it  away
Bar.  2.  35.  I  will  no  more  d.  Israel  out  of  the  land
DRIVEN.

Eccl.  29. 18.  mighty  men  hath  it  d.  from  houses
47.  24.  that  they  were  d.  Out  of  the  land
DRIVETII.

Eccl.  1.  21.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  d.  away  sins
31.  1.  the  care  thereof  d.  away  sleep
DROP.

2  Esd.  6.  56.  to  a  d.  that  falleth  from  a  vessel
9.  16.  like  as  a  wave  is  greater  tha..  a  d.

U  isd.  11.  22.  the  world  is  as  a  d.  of  morning  dew
Eccl.  18.  10.  as  a  d.  of  w-ater  unto  the  sea
.  DROPS.

2  l  sd.  4.  49.  the  rain  was  past,  the  d.  remained  still
50.  as  the  rain  is  more  than  the  d.  and  fire  greater
than  smoke,  but  the  d.  and  the  smoke  remain
5.  36.  gather  me  the  d.  that  are  scattered
1-jcl.  1.  2.  who  can  number  the  d.  of  rain  ?
DROUGHT.

Eccl.  35.  20.  as  clouds  of  rain  in  time  of  d.
DROWN.

IVisd.  5.  22.  and  the  floods  shall  cruelly  d.  them
DROWN  ED.

It  isd.  10.  4.  the  earth  being  d.  with  the  flood

19.  but  she  d.  their  enemies  and  cast  them  up

DRUNK.

Esth.  14.  17.  nor  d.  wine  of  the  drink  offerings
Eccl.  31.  27.  wine  is  good,  if  it  be  d.  moderately
28.  wine  measurably  d.  bringeth  gladness  of  heart
DRUNKEN.  '

Job.  4.  15.  drink  not  wine  to  make  thee  d.

Jud.  6.  4.  mountains  shall  he  d.  with  their  blood
Eccl.  26.  8.  a  d.  woman  causeth  great  anger
31.  29.  wine  d.  with  excess  .maketh  bitterness
DRUNKENNESS.

Tob.  4.  15.  nor  letrf.  go  with  thee  in  thy  journey
Jud.  13.  15.  the  canopy  wherein  he  did  lie  in  his  d.
Eccl.  19.  1.  a  man  given  to  d.  shall  not  be  rich
31. 26.  wine  proves  the  hearts  of  the  proud  bv  d.

30.  d.  increased)  the  rage  of  a  fool  till  he  offend
DRY.

IVisd.  19.  7-  where  water  stood  d.  land  appeared
Eccl.  6.  3.  thou  shalt  leave  thyself  as  a  d.  tree

13.  7 •  till  he  have  drawn  thee  d.  twice  or  thrice
39.  22.  his  blessing  covered  the  d.  land

DRIED.

2  Esd.  6.  51.  which  was  d.  up  the  third  day
15.  50.  the  glory  of  thy  power  shall  be  d.  up
DRIETH.

2  Esd.  8.  23.  whose  look  d.  up  the  depths
Eccl.  14.  9.  the  iniquity  of  the  wicked  d.  up  his  soul
DUE.

Fed.  14.  11.  give  the  Lord  his  d.  offering
18. 22.  let  nothing  hinder  to  pay  thy  vow  in  d.  time
29.  2.  pay  thy  neighbour  again  in  d.  season
38.  1.  honour  him  with  the  honour  d.  to  him
39.33.  he  will  give  every  thing  in  d.  season
DUMB.

IVisd.  10.  21.  wisdom  opened  the  mouth  of  the  d.
Bar.  6.  41.  w  ho  if  they  shall  see  one  d.  cannot  speak
DUNG.

1  Mac.  2.  62.  for  his  glory  shall  be  d.  and  w'orms
D  UNGH1LL.

Eccl.  22. 2.  a  slothful  man  is  compared  to  filth  of  a  d.
DURST.

Sus.  10.  yet  d.  notone  shew  another  his  grief

1  Mac.  12. 42.  he  d.  not  stretch  his  hand  against  him

DUST.

2  Esd. 7. 32.  so  shall  the  J.  those  that  dwell  in  silence
Eccl .  44.  21.  he  would  multiply  him  as  the  d.

DWELL.

2  Esd.  6.  51.  that  he  should  d.  in  the  same
7.  32.  so  shall  the  dust  those  that  d.  in  silence
9.  18.  even  for  them  to  d.  in  that  now  live
IVisd.  1.  4.  nor  d.  in  the  body  that  is  subject  to  sin
Eccl.  4.  15.  attended)  to  her  shall  d.  securely

14.  27.  and  in  her  glory  shall  he  d.

25.  16.  1  had  rather  d.  with  a  lion  and  a  dragon
38.  32.  they  shall  not  d.  where  they  will
51.  23.  draw  near,  and  d.  in  the  house  of  learning
DWELLEST.

2  Esd.  8.  20.  O  Lord,  thou  that  d.  in  everlastingness
IVisd.  9.  8.  an  altar  in  the  city  where’ll  thou  d.

DW  ELL E  I  II.

j  Esd.  2.  5.  he  is  the  Lord  that  d.  in  Jerusalem
Tob.  5.  16.  God  which  d.  in  heaven  prosper  you


Jud.  5.  3.  this  people  thatrf.  in  the  hill  country
IVisd.  7.  28.  none  but  him  that  d.  with  wisdom
Eccl.  21.  28.  and  is  hated  wheresoever  he  d.

25.8.  well  is  him  that  rf.  with  a  wife  of  understanding
2  Mac.  3.  39.  he  thatef.  in  heaven,  hath  hiseye  on
_  .  DWELLING.

1  Esd.  1.  21.  that  were  found  d.  at  Jerusalem

2  Lsd.  5.  38.  but  he  that  hath  not  his  d.  with  men

DWELLINGS.

2  Esd.  4.  7.  how  great  d.  are  in  the  midst  of  the  sea !

7.  51.  are  laid  up  for  us  d.  of  health  and  safety
^  DWELL.

Eccl.  47.  12.  and  for  his  sake  he  d.  at  large
ous.  1.  there  d.  a  man  in  Babylon,  called  Joaciro


E


_  EACH.

2  Esd.  8.  6.  how  shall  e.  man  live  that  is  corrupt  ?

_  EAGLE.  F

2  Esd.  11.1.  there  came  up  from  the  sea  an  e.

12.  1.  while  the  lion  spake  these  words  to  the  e

EAR.

II  isd.  1.  10.  the  e.  of  jealousy  heareth  all  things

8.  12.  when  I  speak,  they  shall  give  good  e.

Led.  3.  29.  an  attentive  e.  is  the  desire  of  a  wise  man

4.  8.  grieve  thee  to  bow  down  thine  e.  to  the  poor

15.  whoso  gives  e.to  her  shall  judge  nations

6.  23.  give  e.  my  son,  receive  my  advice

33.  and  if  thou  bow  thine  e.  thou  shalt  be  wise

16.  5.  mine  e.  hath  heard  greater  things  than  these
27.  15.  their  rev  ilings  are  grievous  to  thee.

51.  16.  I  bowed  down  minee.  and  received  her
Bar.  3.  9.  give  e.  to  understand  wisdom

1  niac’  lie  isa  man  °f  counsel,  givee.  to  him

2  Mac,  5.  11.  now  when  this  came  to  the  king’s  e.

EARS.

“2  Esd.  10.  56.  as  much  as  thine  e.  may  comprehend
11  /ft/.  15. 15. which  have  not  eyes  to  see,  nore.  to  hear
Eccl.  17.  6.  a  tongue  and  eyes,  and  e.  gave  he  them

13.  and  their  e.  heard  his  glorious  voice
21 .  5.  a  prayer  reacheth  to  the  e.  of  God.

25.  9.  that  speaketh  in  the  e.  of  him  that  will  hear
27.  14.  their  brawls  make  one  stop  his  e.

33.  18.  and  hearken  with  your  e.  ye  rulers

38.  28.  the  noise  of  the  anvil  is  ever  in  his  e.

43.  24.  when  we  hear  it  with  our  e.  we  marvel
Bar.  2.  31.  I  M  ill  give  them  an  heart  and  e.  to  hear
2  Mac.  15.  39.  delighteth  thee,  of  them  that  read

EAR-RINGS.

Jud.  10.  4.  put  on  her  e.  and  all  her  ornaments
,  EARLY.

Tob,  9.  g.  e.  in  the  morning  they  went  forth
Uisd.  6.  14.  whoso  seeketh  her  e.  shall  find  her
Lccl.  4.  12.  they  that  seek  her  e.  shall  be  filled

31.  20.  heriseth  e.  and  his  w  its  are  with  him

32.  14.  they  that  seek  him  e.  shall  find  favour

39.  5.  will. give  his  heart  to  resort  e.  to  the  Loid

1  Mac.  6.  33.  the  king  rising  very  e.  marched

EARN  EST.

2  Mac.  12.  23.  Judas  was  v  ery  e.  in  pursuing  them

EARN  ES  I  LY.

Jud.  4. 12.  all  cried  to  God  with  one  consent  e.

Esth.  13.  18.  all  Israel  cried  most  e.  to  the  Lord
Eccl.  51.  18.  and  e.  I  followed  that  which  is  good
2  Mac.  4. 16.  whose  custom  they  follow  ed  so  e.
EARTH.

1  Esd.  4.  36.  all  the  e.  ealleth  on  the  truth

6. ^  13.  the  Lord  which  made  heav  en  and  e.

2  Esd.  2. 14.  take  heaven  and  e.  to  witness,  Jud.  7. 28L
3.  6.  before  ever  the  e.  came  forward

18.  bowing  heavens,  thou  didst  set  fast  the  e.

7.  32.  the  e.  shall  restore  those  that  are  asleep

46.  been  better  not  to  have  given  the  e.  to  Adam
8l2.  as  when  thou  askest  the  e.  it  shall  say
f  15.  22.  that  shed  innocent  blood  upon  thee.

Tob.  3.  6.  that  I  may  be  dissolved  and  become  e.

13.  take  me  out  of  e.  that  1  may  hear  no  more
7.  18.  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  e.  give  thee  joy

Jud.  2. 1.  that  he  should  avenge  himself  of  all  the  e.

7.  that  they  prepare  forme  e.  and  water;  I  will
cover  the  face  of  the  e.  with  leet  of  mine  army

20.  a  great  multitude  like  the  sand  of  the  e.

7.4.  these  men  will  lick  up  the  face  of  thee.

10.  19.  being  let  go,  might  deceive  the  whole  e.

11.  1.  N  ebuchodonosor  king  of  all  the  e.  7.

8.  it  is  reported  in  all  thee,  thou  art  mighty

16.  whereat  all  the  e.  shall  be  astonished

21.  not  such  a  woman  from  one  end  of  e.  toother

13.  18.  blessed  art  thou  above  all  women  on  the  e.

Esth.  11.8.  lo,  a  day-  of  <>reat  uproar  on  the  e.

IVisd.  1.  1.  ye  that  be  judges  of  the  e.  6.  1.

5.  23.  thus  iniquity  shall  lay  waste  the  whole  e.

7.  1.  oflspring  of  him  that  was  first  made  of  the  e.

3.  when  I  was  born,  I  fell  upon  the  e.

9.  16.  hardly  guess  aright  at  things  that  arc  one.

10.  4.  the  e.  being  drow  ned  with  the  flood

15.  8.  he  w  hich  a  little  before  was  made  of  e.

18.  16.  touched  the  heaven,  but  it  stood  on  the  e.
Eccl.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the.  breadth  of  the  e.  ?

10.  4.  the  powerof  the  e.  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord

9.  why  is  e.  and  ashes  proud  ?  uotmore  wicked  than
17-  he  made  their  memorial  to  cease  from  the  e

16.  18.  thee,  and  all  therein  shall  be  moved
29.  after  this  the  Lord  looked  on  the  e.

17-  32.  and  all  men  are  but  e.  and  ashes

33. 10. all  men  from  ground,  Adam  was  created  oft.

38.  4.  Lord  hath  created  medicines  out  of  the  e.

8.  and  from  him  is  peace  over  all  the  e.

40.  3.  to  him  that  is  humbled  in  e,  and  ashes

11.  all  things  that  are  of  the  e.  shall  turn  to  the  e.

again,  and  waters  return  to  the  sea
49.  14.  but  upon  the  e.  was  no  man  created  like
Enoch,  for  he  was  taken  from  thee.
Bar.  1.11.  that  their  day  s  be  on  e.  as  day  s  of  heaven
2.  15.  all  thee,  may  know  that  thou  art  God
3.23.  the  Agarene*  that  seek  wisdom  upon  e.

6.  54.  for  they  are  crows  between  heaven  and  e.
Pan.  3.  54.  all  ye  things  that  grow  one.  bless  Lord
Bel  5.  w  ho  hath  created  the  heaven  and  thee.

Bruyer  </  Manass.  who  hast  made  heaven  and  e.

635


A  POCKY  PH  A.]  E  D  G


E  L  E


END


1  Mac.  I.  3.  weut  through  to  the  ends  of  the  e.  and

took  spoils,  so  that  the  e.  was  quiet  before  him

2.  37.  let  us  die,  heaven  and  e.  shell  1  testify  for  us

40.  they  will  quickly  root  us  out  of  the  e.

3.  9.  was  renowned  to  the  utmost  parts  of  e.  8.  4.

9.  13.  the  e.  shook  at  the  noise  of  the  armies
11.71-  Jonathan  cast  e.  on  his  head,  and  prayed
14.8.  did  till  in  peace,  anti  the  e.  gave  her  increase

2  Mac.  7. 28.  my  son,  look  on  the  heaven  and  e.

10.  25.  prayed,  and  sprinkled  e.  upon  their  heads

13.  7-  not  har  ing  so  much  as  burial  in  the  e.

14.  15.  they  cast  e.  on  their  heads,  and  prayed

15.  5.  the  other  said,  1  alsoain  mighty  on  e.

EAR  I  HEN.

2  Esd.  8.  2.  much  mould  whereof*.  vessels  are  made
Eccl.  13.2.  how  agree  the  kettle  and*.  put  together  •
EAR  I  IILY.

IVisd-  9.  15.  the  e.  tabernacle  weigheth  down  mind
15.  13.  that  of  e.  matter  makes  brittle  vessels

19.  19.  foi  e.  things  were  turned  into  watery

EARTHQUAKES.

2  Esd.  9.  3.  when  there  shall  be  seen  e.  and  uproars
Esth.  11.  5.  a  noise  of  a  tumult  with  thunder  and  e.
EASE.

Jud.  1.  16.  there  he  took  his  e.  and  banqueted
Eccl.  38.  14.  for  e.  and  remedy  to  prolong  life

1  Mac.  9.  58.  Jonathan  and  Ids  company  are  ate.

2  Mac.  2.  25.  to  commit  to  memory,  might  have  e.
27.  even  as  it  is  no  e.  to  him  that  prepareth

EASED.

2  Esd.  7.  68.  who  committed  iniquities,  might  be  e.
EAST.

1  Esd.  9.  38.  place  of  the  holy  porch  toward  the  e.

2  Esd.  1.  38.  the  people  that  cometh  from  the  e.

15.  20.  from  the  south,  from  the  e.  and  Eibanus
34.  behold,  clouds  from  the  e.  and  north  to  south
39.  strong  winds  shall  arise  from  the  e.  and  open  it

Bat.  4.  36.  O  Jerusalem,  look  toward  the  e.5.  5.
EASY.

2  Esd.  8.  14.  it  is  an  e.  thing  to  be  ordained
Jud.  4.  7-  it  was  e.  to  stop  them  that  would  come

7.  10.  because  it  w  as  not  e.  to  come  up  to  the  tops
Eccl.  11.  21.  an  e.  thing  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord
Bar.  6.  61.  lightning  breaking  forth  is  e.  to  be  seen
2  Mac.  2.  26.  it  was  not  e.  but  a  matter  of  sweat
EASIER.

2  Esd.  13.  20.  it  is  e.  for  him  that  is  in  danger
Eccl.  22.  15.  salt  and  a  mass  of  iron  is  e.  to  bear
EASILY.

IVisd.  6.  12.  she  is*.  seen  of  them  that  love  her
2  Mac.  8.  30.  they  very  e.  got  high  and  strong  holds
EA  1'.

1  Esd.  7.  13.  that  came  out  of  the  captivity  did  e.
8.85.  that  ye  may  e.  the  good  things  of  the  land

9.  2.  Esdras  did  e.  no  meat,  nor  drink  water

51.  go  then  and  e.  the  fat,  and  drink  the  sweet
54.  then  went  every  one  to  e.  and  drink

2  Esd.  1.  19.  had  pity  on  your  mournings,  1  gave

you  manna  to  e.  so  ye  did-  e.  angels’
bread

5.  18.  up,  then,  e.  bread,  and  forsake  us  not

9.  24.  e.  only  the  flowers  of  the  field,  taste  no  flesh,

drink  no  wine,  but  e.  flowers  only

26.  I  did  e.  of  the  herbs  of  the  held
12,  51.  I  did  e.  only  in  those  days  of  flowers
Tod.  1.  10.  did  e.  of  the  bread  of  the  Gentiles

2.  1.  a  good  dinner,  in  the  which  I  sat  down  to  e.

13.  it  is  not  lawful  to  e.  any  thing  stolen

5.  when  they  had  roasted  the  tiesh,they  did  e.

9.  Raguel  said,  e.  and  drink,  and  make  merry

il.  I  will  e.  nothing  here  till  we  agree  and  swear

10.  7.  she  did  e.  no  meat  on  the  day-time

12.  19.  but  I  did  neither  e.  nor  drink

Jud.  12.  2. 1  will  not  e.  thereof,  lest  there  be  offence
15.  that  she  might  sit  and  e.  upon  them
Eccl.  6.  3.  shalt  e.  up  thy  leaves  and  lose  thy  fruit

19.  but  thou  shake,  of  her  fruits  right  soon
9.  16.  let  just  men  e.  and  drink  with  thee

11. 19.  now  will  1  e.  continually  of  my  goods

20.  16.  they  that  e.  my  bread  speak  evil  of  me
24.  21.  they  thate.  me  shall  yet  be  hungry

30. 19.  for  neither  can  it  e.  nor  smell

31.  16.  e.  as  it  becometh  a  man,  and  devour  not

21.  if  thou  hast  been  forced  to  e.  arise,  go  forth

45.  21.  they  e.  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Lord
Bar.  2.  3.  a  man  should  e.  the  flesh  of  his  own  son

6.  29.  women  in  child-bed  e.  their  sacrifices
Bel  7.  this  did  never  e.  or  drink  any  thing

15.  the  priests  and  wives  did  e.  and  drink  up  all

1  Mac.  1.62.  many  resolved  "not  e.  any  unclean  thing

2  Mac.  6.  18.  to  open  his  mouth  and  e.  swine’s  flesh
21.  and  make  as  if  he  did  e.  of  the  flesh

7. 7.  wilt  thou  e.  before  thou  be  punished  ?  1
EATEN.

1  Esd.  3.  3.  when  they  had  e.  and  drunken
Edith.  14.  17.  thy  handmaid  not  e.  at  Aman's  table
Bar.  6.72.  they  themselves  afterward  shall  be  e.
Bel  12.  if  thou  findest  not  that  Bel  hath  e.  up  all

1  Mac.  6.  53.  had  e.  tip  the  residue  of  the  store

2  Mac.  2.  11.  the  sin  offering  was  not  to  be  e.

EA  L  E  I  H.

1  Esd.  4.  10.  he  e.  and  drinketh.and  taketh  rest
Bel  24.  lo,  he  liveth,  he  e.  and  drinketh

EGAN  US.

2  Esd.  14.  24.  E.  and  Asiel  ready  to  write  sw  iftly

ECBATANA.

1  Esd.  6.  23.  to  seek  among  the  records  at  E.

Tob.  6.5.  they  went  on  till  they  drew  near  to  E.

7. 1.  and  when  they  were  come  to  E.

14. 14.  he  died  at  E.  in  Media,  being  127.yearsold
Jud.  1.  1.  which  reigned  over  the  Medes  in  E.

2.  built  in  E.  walls  round  about,  14.

2  Mac.  9.3.  when  he  came  to  E.  news  was  brought

ECHO.

IVisd.  17.  19.  a  rebounding  e.  from  the  mountains
EDGE.

Jud.  2.  27 ,  smote  young  men  with  the  e.  or  the  sword
Eccl.  28  18.  many  have  fallen  by  the  e.  of The  sword
31.  26.  the  furnace  proveth  the  e.  by  dipping
1  Mac.  5. 28.  slew  all  the  males  with  the  e.  of  s w  jrd
EDGED.

£«•/,  21.  3.  all  iniquity  is  as  a  two  e.  sword

636


EDNA.

Tub.  7.  2.  then  said  Raguel  to  E.  his  wife,  how  like
is  tins  young  man  to  Tobit ?  8.  14,  16. 1  11.  1.

10.  12.  E.  said  to  Tobias,  the  Lord  restore  thee

EDOM  LI  ES.

1  Esd.  8.  69.  have  not  put  away  pollutions  of  the  E.

EDUCA  HON.

IVisd.  2.  12.  objecteth  the  transgressions  of  our  e.

2  Mac.  6.  23.  and  his  most  honest  e.  from  a  child

7.  27.  nourished  thee  and  endured  the  troubles  of  e.

El’FEC  l’.

2  Esd.  4.  23.  written  covenants  come  to  none  e.

Jud.  1.11.  without  e.  and  without  disgrace

1  Mac.  10.  25.  he  sent  unto  them  to  this  e.

EFFECTS.

2  Esd.  9.  6.  they  have  endings  in  e.  and  signs

EFFEC  1  UALLY.

Tab.  6.  17.  and  his  heart  was  e.  joined  to  her
EGYPT.

1  Esd.  1.  26.  the  king  of  E.  sent  to  him,  saying
38.  Zaraces  his  brother  brought  he  out  ot  E.

2  Esd.  1.  7.  I  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  E.

3.  17.  when  thou  leddest  his  seed  out  of  E.  14.  4.

9.  29.  to  our  fathers  when  they  came  out  of  E.

14.  3.talked  with  him,  when  my  people  served  in  E.
29.  our  fathers  were  strangers  in  E.  from  whence

15.  11.  I  will  smite  E.  with  plagues  as  before

12.  E.  shall  mourn,  and  the  foundation  of  it  smit.
Tob.  8.  3.  he  fled  into  the  outmost  parts  of  E.

Jud.  1.  9.  sent  unto  all  that  were  at  the  river  of  E.

6.  5.  vengeance  of  this  nation  that  came  out  of  E.
Esth.  13.  16.  which  thou  hast  delivered  out  of  E.

1  Mac.  1.  16.  he  thought  to  reign  over  E.

17.  wherefore  he  entered  into  E.  with  a  multitude

20.  after  that  Antiochus  had  smitten  E.

3,32.  from  the  river  Euphrates  unto  borders  of  E.

11.  1.  the  king  of  E.  gathered  a  great  host

1.3.  he  set  the  crown  of  E.  upon  his  head

2  Mac.  1.  1.  to  the  Jews  that  are  throughout  E.

10.  sent  greeting  to  the  Jews  that  were  in  E.

4.  21.  when  Apollonius  was  sent  into  E.

5.  1.  Antiochus  prepared  his  second  voyage  into  E.

8.  as  an  open  enemy  he  was  cast  out  into  E.

9.  29.  went  into  E.  to  Ptolemeus  Philometor

EGYP  HANS.

2  Esd.  1 . 18.  been  better  for  us  to  have  served  the  E.
Jud.  5.  12.  the  E.  cast  them  out  of  their  sight
EIGHT.

2  Esd.  6.  36.  in  the  e.  night  was  my  heart  vexed

11.  11.  and  behold,  there  were  e.  of  them

12.  20.  that  in  him  there  shall  arise  e.  kings

Tub.  14.2.  which  was  restored  to  him  after  e.  years

1  Mac.  4.  56.  they  kept  dedication  of  the  altar  e.  ays
59.  kept  from  year  to  year  by  space  of  e.  days

2  Mac.  2.  12.  so  Solomon  kept  those  e.  days

10.  6.  they  kept  e.  days  with  gladness  as  in  feast

EIG11  T  and  fifty.

Tub.  14.2.  was*.  and  fifty  years  old  when  lost  sight
EIGHTEEN.

1  Esd.  1.  4.3.  he  was  made  king  being  e.  years  old

8.  47.  his  sons  and  his  brethren  who  were  e.

EIGHTEENTH.

1  Esd.  1.  22.  in  the  e.year  of  the  reign  of  Josias
Jud.  2.  1.  in  e.  year,  the  22nd  day  of  first  month

1  Mac.  14.  27.  the  e.  dav  of  the  month  Elul

EIGHTY.

2  Mac.  4.  8.  and  of  another  revenue  e.  talents

ELBOW.

EclI.  41.  19.  to  lean  with  thine  e.  on  the  meat
ELDER, ELDER.

2  Esd.  7.  13.  for  the  entrances  of  the  e.  world
Eccl.  32.  3.  speak  thou  that  art  the  e.  it  becometh  thee
ELDERS.

1  Esd.  6.  5.  thee,  of  the  Jews  obtained  favour

1 1 .  then  asked  we  those  e.  saying,  by  whose  comm.
Jud.  6.  21.  Ozias  made  a  feast  to  the  e.

13.  12.  and  they  called  the  e.  of  the  city

IVisd.  8.  10.  I  snail  have  honour  with  e.  tho’  young
Eccl.  6.  34.  stand  in  the  multitude  of  e.

7.  14.  use  not  many  words  in  a  multitude  of  E.

8.  9.  miss  not  the  discourse  of  the  e.

■Sus.  8.  the  two  e.  saw  her  going  in  every  day  and
walking,  18,  19,34,  41,  50.
61.  and  they  arose  against  the  two  e.

1  Mac.  1.  26.  so  that  the  princes  and  e.  mourned

7.  3.3.  there  came  out  certain  e.  of  the  people

11.  2.3.  he  chose  certain  of  the  e.  of  Israel

12.  35.  Jonathan  calling  the  e.  of  the  people  together

ELD  ES  T.

1  Mac.  16.  2.  Simon  called  his  two  e.  sons
ELEASA.

1  Mac.  9.  5.  J  udas  had  pitched  his  tents  at  E.
ELEAZA  R.

1  Esd.  8.  43.  then  sent  I  to  E.  and  Iduel  and  Masman

6.3.  with  him  was  E.  the  son  of  Phinees

1  Mac.  2.  5.  E.  called  Avaranand  Jonathan

6.  4.3.  E.  also  surnamed  Sav.tran,  perceiving

8.  17.  Jason  the  son  of  E.  was  sent  to  Rome

2  Mac.  6.  18.  E.  one  of  the  principal  scribes
24.  E.  being  fourscore  years  old  and  ten

8.  23.  lie  appointed  E.  to  read  the  holy  book
ELECT.

Tob.  8. 15.  let  thine  angelsand  e.  praise  thee  forever
Eccl.  17.  10.  the  e.  shall  praise  his  holy  name  r

46.  1.  was  made  great  for  saving  the  e.  of  Goa

47.  22.  nor  will  he  abolish  the  posterity  of  his  e.

ELEMENTS.

IVisd.  7-  17-  to  know  the  operation  of  the  e.

19.  18.  for  the  e.  were  changed  in  themselves
ELEPHANT.

1  Mac.  6.  35.  for  every  e.  they  appointed  1000  men
46.  which  done,  he  crept  under  the  e.  and  the  e.

fell  dow  n  upon  him,  and  there  be  died
ELEPHANTS.

1  Mac.  1.  17.  he  entered  Egypt  with  chariots  and  e.

3.  34.  delivered  to  him  half  of  his  forces  and  the  e.
6.  34.  that  they  might  provoke  the  e.  to  fight

8.  6.  Antiochus  king  of  Asia  came,  having  an  120  e.
11.  56.  Tryphon  took  the  e.  and  won  Antioch

2  Mac.  11.  4.  but  puffed  up  with  his  fourscore  e.

13.  2.  having  either  of  them  two  and  twenty  e.

15.  he  slew  in  the  camp  the  chietest  of  the  e.


ELEVEN.

2  Mac.  11.  11.  they  slew  e.  thousand  footman
ELEVENTH.

1  Mac.  16.  14.  in  the  e.  month  called  Sabat
ELEUTHERUS.

1  Mac.  11.7.  when  he  had  gone  to  the  river  called  E.

12.  30.  for  they  were  gone  over  the  river  £.
ELIAS.

Eccl.  48.  1.  then  stood  up  E.  the  prophet  as  fire

4.  O  E.  how  wast  thou  honoured  in  thy  deeds?

1  Mac.  2.58.  E.  being  zealoys  and  fervent  for  the  law
EL1ZEUS.

Eccl.  48.  12.  and  E.  was  filled  with  his  spirit
ELOQUENT.

Esth.  14. 13.  give  e.  speech  in  my  mouth  before  him
IVisd.  10.  21.  tongues  of  them  that  cannot  speak  e.
Eccl.  21.  7.  an  e.  man  is  known  far  and  near
44.  4.  men  wise  and  e.  in  their  instructions
ELUL.

1  Mac.  14.  27.  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  month  E.

ELYMA1S.

Tub.  2.  10.  did  nourish  me  until  I  went  into  E.
tM«c.6.1.  heardsay  E.  was  a  city  greatly  renowned
EMBRACE.

2  Esd.  2.  15.  mother  e.  thy  children,  bring  them  up

EMBRACED.

Esth.  15.  12.  he  e.  her,  and  said,  6peak  unto  me

EMBRACETH.  J

Eccl.  .30.20.  as  an  eunuch  that  e.  a  virgin  and  sigheth
EMBROIDERER.

Eccl.  45.  10.  silk  and  purple,  the  work  of  the  e.
EMERALD.

Eccl.  32.  6.  asasignetof  anc.  set  in  a  work  of  gold
EMERALDS.  .

Tob.  13.  16.  Jerusalem  shall  be  built  with  e.

Jud.  10.  21.  Holoferues’  bed  was  woven  withe.
EMIN  ENT.

2  Esd.  15.  40.  pour  out  over  every  high  and  e.  place

EMMA  US.

1  Mac.  3.  40.  they  pitched  by  E.  in  the  plain
57.  the  camp  pitched  on  the  south  side  ot  E.

4.  .3.  might  smite  the  king’s  army  which  was  at  E.

9.  50.  he  repaired  the  fort  in  Jericho  and  E.

EMPLOYED.

2  Mac.  4.  20.  it  was  e.  to  the  making  of  gallics

EMPLOYING.

IVisd.  15.  8.  e.  his  labours  lewdly ,  he  makes  a  god
EMPTY.

2£jrf.6.22.  the  full  store  houses  suddenly  be  found  e.
7.25.  therefore  Esdras  for  the  e.  are  e.  things
Eccl.  .35.  4.  thou  shalt  not  appear  e.  before  the  L.
EMPTIED.

Jud.  7.21.  the  cisterns  were  e.  they  had  no  water
EMULATION.

1  Mac.  8.  16.  was  neither  envy  nor*.  amongst  them
ENCAMPED.

1  Mac.  5.5.  but  shut  them  up  and  e.  against  them
37.  and  e.  against  Raphon  beyond  the  brook
11.65.  then  Simon  e.  against  Bethsura  and  fought
ENCOURAGED.

1  Mac.  12.50.  they  e.  one  another,  and  went  close

2  Mac.  13.  3.  Menelaus  joined  and  also  e.  Antiochus

ENCOURAGEMENT.

1  Mac.  10.  24.  I  will  write  to  them  words  of  e.

ENCOUNTERED.

2  Mac.  15.26.  J  udas  and  his  company  e.  the  enemies

END.

1  Esd.  9.  17.  their  cause  was  brought  to  an  e.

2  Esd.  2.  34.  that  shall  come  in  the  e.  of  the  world

3.  23.  times  passed  the  years  were  brought  tp  an  e.

5.  40.  or  in  the  e.  the  love  that  1  have  promised

41.  nigh  to  them  that  be  reserved  till  the  e.

6.  9.  for  Esau  is  the  e.  of  the  world,  and  Jacob  is

15. the  word  is  of  the  e.  ||  25.  the  e.  ot  your  world

16.  the  e.  of  these  things  must  be  changed
7.33.  the  long-suffering  shall  have  an  e.

42.  he  said,  this  present  life  is  not  the  e.

43.  but  the  day  of  doom  shall  be  the  e.  of  time

44.  intern  perancy  is  at  an  e.  infidelity  is  cut  off
8-  54.  in  e.  is  shewed  the  treasure  of  immortality

9.  5.  for  like  as  all  that  is  made  in  the  world  hath

a  beginning  and  an*.  and  the  e,  is  manifest

10.  22.  our  song  is  put  to  silence,  rejoicing  is  at  an  e.
28.  e.  is  turned  into  corruption,  prayer  to  rebuke

12.  6.  that  he  will  comfortme  to  the  e.

IVisd.  2.  5.  after  our  e.  there  is  no  returning
16.  he  pronounceth  the  e.  of  the  just  to  be  blessed

4.  17.  for  they  shall  see  the  e.  of  the  wise

5.  4.  we  are  accounted  his  e.  to  be  without  honour

13.  soon  as  we  were  born,  began  to  draw  to  our  e.
8.  1.  wisdom  reacheth  from  one  e.  to  another

14.  14.  they  shall  come  shortly  to  an  e.

27.  the  beginning,  the  cause,  and  the  e.  of  all  evil

18. 21.  and'  so  brought  the  calamity  to  an  e.

19.  1.  came  upon  them  without  mercy  to  the  e.

4.  for  the  destiny  drew  them  to  this  e.

Ecclfi. 36.  remember  the  e.  thou  shalt  never  do  amis*
9. 11.  for  thou  knowest  not  what  shall  be  his  e.
11.27.  in  his  e.  his  deeds  shall  be  discovered

14.  18.  one  cometh  to  an  e.  and  another  is  bora

16.22.  the  trial  of  all  things  is  in  the  e.

18.  12.  he  saw  and  perceived  their  e.  to  be  evil
24.  think  upon  the  wrath  that  shall  be  at  the  e

21.  9.  the  e.  of  them  is  a  flame  of  fire  to  destroy

10.  but  the  e.  thereof  is  the  pit  of  hell

28.  6.  remember  thy  e.  and  let  enmity  cease
30. 1.  that  he  may  have  joy  of  him  in  the  e.

10.  lest  thou  gnash  thy  teeth  in  the  e.

3.3.  23.  at  the  time  when  thou  shalt e.  thy  days
.38.  8.  and  of  his  works  there  is  no  e.

4.3.  26.  by  him  the  e.  hath  prosperous  success

46.  20.  he  prophesied  and  shewed  the  king  his  e.

47.  10.  he  set  in  order  the  solemn  times  till  the  e.
51.  14.  I  will  seek  her  out  even  to  the  e.

Bar.  3.  25.  great  is  the  house,  and  hath  no  e.

1  Mac.  2.  13.  to  what  e.  shall  we  live  any  longer .

14.  10.  his  name  was  renowned  to  *.of  the  worm

2  Mac.  5.  8.  in  the  e.  he  had  an  unhappy  return
10.  9.  this  was  the  e.  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes

15.  37.  I  will  make  an  e.  II  39.  here  shall  be  an  t

ENDED.

1  Esd.  6. 20.  the  house  of  th«  Lor  J  is  not  yet  full'  ♦


E  N  E


EN  V


ESP  [Apocrypha


$  Esd.  6.6.  by  me  they  shall  be  e.  and  by  none  other

11.  44.  tht  proud  times,  behold,  they  are  e.

14.  9.  thou  slmlt  remain,  until  the  times  bee.

Jud.  2.  4.  and  when  he  had  e.  his  counsel

Esth.  15.  1.  on  third  day  when  she  had  e.  her  prayer
Eccl.  50.  19.  till  the  solemnity  of  the  Lord  was  e.
2  Mac.  15.  24.  be  stricken  w  ith  terror,  and  he  e.  thus
ENDING.

Wad.  7.  18.  the  beginning,  e.  and  midst  of  times
EN  DINGS.

S  Esd.  9.  6.  the  times  have  e.  in  effects  and  signs
EN  DS.

2  Esd.  16.  13.  begin  to  be  shot  into  the  e.  of  world
II  isd.  6.  1.  ye  that  be  judges  of  the  e.  of  the  earth

1  Mac.  1.  3.  Alexander  went  thro’  to  e.  of  the  earth

ENDAMAGE.

t  Esd.  6.  33.  to  hinder  or  e.  the  house  of  the  Lord

ENDEAVOUR.

Esth.  16.  3.  e.  to  hurt,  not  our  subjects  only

2  Mac.  11.  19.  1  will  e.  to  be  a  means  of  your  good

ENDUED.

Eccl.  17.  3.  he  e.  them  with  strength  by  themselves

ENDURE.

Ere/.  2.  2.  set  thy  heart  aright,  and  constantly  e.
16.  22.  the  works  of  his  justice,  who  can  e.  them  r
40.  12.  but  true  dealing  shall  e.  for  ever

45.  26.  and  that  their  glory  may  e.  for  ever

2  Mac.  G.  30. 1  now  e.  sore  pains  in  body  being  beaten

9.  10.  no  man  could  e.  to  carry  for  his  stink

ENDURED.

Wisd.  11.25.  could  any  thing  liavee.  if  not  thy  will  >
16.  5.  they  perished,  thy  wrath  e.  not  for  ever
17-  17-  e.  that  necessity  that  could  not  be  avoided

18.  20.  but  the  wrath  e.  not  long

1  Mac.  10.  15.  told  of  the  pains  that  they  had  e.

2  Mac.  7.  27.  that  e.  the  troubles  of  education

EN  DU  REST.

Bar.  3.  3.  thou  e.  for  ever  and  we  perish  utterly
ENEMESSAR.

Tub.  1.  13.  the  Most  High  gave  me  favour  before  E.

15.  now  when  E.  wras  dead,  Sennacherib  reigned

16.  in  the  time  of  E.  I  gave  many  alms

EN  EMY.

Eccl.  6.  1.  instead  of  a  friend  become  not  an  e.

8-7-  rejoice  not  over  thy  greatest  e.  being  dead

12.  8.  and  an  e.  cannot  he  hidden  in  adversity

10.  never  trust  thine  e.  for  as  iron  rusteth  so  is
16.  an  e.  speaketh  sweetly  with  lips,  but  in  heart

20.  23.  that  niaketh  him  his  e.  for  nothing

23.  3.  lest  mine  e.  rejoice  over  me

25.  7.  and  he  that  lived)  to  see  the  fall  of  his  e.

15.  there  is  no  w  rath  above  the  wrath  of  an  e.

27.  18.  for  as  a  man  hath  destroyed  his  e.

29.  6.  he  hath  gotten  him  an  e.  w  ithout  cause

30.  3.  he  that  teacheth  his  son,  grieveth  the  e.

36.  7.  take  away  the  adversary  and  destroy  the  e.
37 •  2.  when  a  companion  and  friend  is  turned  to  ane.

5.  who  taketh  up  the  buckler  against  the  e.

S  Mac.  2.  7-  was  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  e.

9.  her  young  men  slain  with  the  sword  of  the  e.
8.  23.  the  sword  anil  the  e.  be  far  from  them

13.  51.  there  was  destroyed  a  great  e.  out  of  Israel
2  Mac.  3.  38.  if  thou  hast  any  e.  or  traitor  send  him

5.  8.  as  an  open  e.  of  his  country  and  country-men
8.  16  not  to  l>e  strii  ken  w  ith  terror  of  the  e.

10.  26.  besought  him  to  be  an  e.  to  their  enemies

ENEMIES.

1  Esd.  4.  4.  it  he  send  them  out  against  the  e.

2  Esd.  1.  11.  and  I  have  slain  all  their  e.

3.  27.  thou  gavest  into  hands  of  thine  e.  Esth.  14.  6.
30.  1  have  seen  how  thou  hast  preserved  thy  e.

6.  24.  friends  shall  fight  one  against  another  like  e.
Tub.  12.  10.  they  that  sin  are  e.  to  their  own  life
Jud.  8.  15.  hath  power  to  destroy  us  before  our  e.

19.  our  fathers  had  a  great  fall  before  our  e.

35.  Lord  be  before  thee  to  take  vengeance  on  our  e.
13.  5.  to  the  destructi  n  of  the  e.  that  are  risen

14.  hath  destroyed  oure.  by  my  hands,  17.

18.  to  the  cutting  off  the  head  of  the  chief  of  our  e.

15.  5.  what  things  were  done  in  camp  of  their  e.

Esth.  13.  6.  be  destroyed  by  the  sword  of  their  e.
Wisd.  2.  18.  deliver  him  from  the  hand  of  his  e.

5.  17.  his  weapon  for  the  revenge  of  his  e.

10.  12.  she  defended  him  from  his  e.  and  kept  him

19.  but  she  drowned  their  e.  and  cast  them  up

11.  3.  they  stood  against  their  e.  and  were  avenged
5.  for  by  what  things  their  e.  w  ere  punished

12.  20.  it  thou  didst  punish  the  e.  of  thy  children
22.  thou  scourgest  our  e.  a  thousand  times  more

24.  amongst  the  beasts  of  their  e.  were  disposed

15.  14.  all  the  e.  of  thy  people  are  most  foolish

16.  4.  only  he  shewed  how  their  e.  w  ere  tormented
8.  and  in  this  thou  madest  thine  e.  confess

22.  that  fjre  did  destroy  the  fruits  of  the  e.

18.2.  they  besought  pardon,  forthatthey  had  beene.
Eccl.  6.  4.  be  laughed  to  scorn  of  his  e.  18.  31.

13.  separate  thyself  from  e.  take  heed  of  friends
12.  9.  in  prosperity  of  a  man,  e.  will  be  grieved

25.  14.  and  any  revenge,  but  the  revenge  of  e.

26.  27-  a  scold  shall  be  sought  to  drive  away  the  e.
29. 13.  it  shall  fight  for  thee  against  thine  e.

42.  11.  make  thee  a  laughing-stock  to  thine  e.

46.  1.  taking  vengeance  of  the  e.  that  rose  up
5.  when  the  e.  pressed  on  him  on  every  side

47.  7.  for  he  destroyed  the  e.  on  every  side

51.  8.  and  savest  them  out  of  the  hands  of  the  e.
Bar.  3.  10.  Israel,  that  thou  art  in  thine  e.  land

4.  26.  were  taken  as  a  flock  caught  of  the  e.

5.  6.  for  they  were  led  away  of  their  e.

6.  56.  they  cannot  w  ithstand  any  king  or  e.

Dan.  3.  9.  didst  deliver  us  into  hands  of  law  less  e.
\  Mac.  4.  18.  but  stand  ye  now  against  your  e.

36.  behold,  our  e.  are  discomfited,  let  us  go  up
J.  29-  the  e.  were  prepared  to  take  away  Judas

10.  26.  nor  joining  yourselves  with  our  e.

81.  stood  still,  and  so  the  e.  horses  were  tired
15.  19.  nor  yet  aid  their  e.  against  them
2  Mac.  10.  26.  besought  to  be  an  enemy  to  their  e.

29.  there  appeared  to  the  e.  from  heaven

30.  but  they  shot  arrows  and  lightnings  ag.  the  e.

11.  11.  giving  a  charge  on  their  e.  like  lions

12.  22.  the  e.  being  smitten  with  fear,  fled  amain


2  Mac.  12.28.  who  breaketh  the  strength  of  his  e.

13.  21.  Rhodocus  disclosed  the  secrets  to  the  e.

14.  17.  through  the  sudden  silence  of  his  e.

22.  treachery  should  be  suddenly  practised  by  e.

15.  26.  Judas  and  company  encountered  the  e.

EN  FORCE  1 II.

1  Esd.  3.  24.  is  not  wine  strongest,  that  e.  to  do  thus  *
EN  GADDI.

Eccl.  24.  14.  I  was  exalted  like  a  palm-tree  in  E.
ENGINE.

1  Mac.  13.  43.  Simon  made  also  an  e.  of  war
44.  they  that  were  in  the  e.  leaped  into  the  city
ENGINES.

1  Mac.  5.  30.  bearing  ladders  and  other  e.  of  war

6.  .31.  making  e.  for  war,  9.  64.  |  11.  20.  1  15.  25.

51.  and  he  set  there  artillery  with  e.  and  instrum.

52.  they  also  made  e.  ag.  their  e.  and  held  them
9. 67. Simon  and  his  company  burnt  up  thee,  of  war

2  Mac.  12.  15.  without  any  e.  of  war  did  cast  down

27.  wherein  was  great  provision  of  e.  and  darts

ENGRAVED.

Eccl.  45.  11.  with  a  writing  e.  for  a  memorial
12.  a  crown  of  gold,  wherein  was  e.  holiness
ENJOY.

Wisd.  2. 6.  let  us  e.  the  good  things  that  are  present
ENJOYED.

1  Esd.  1.  58.  until  the  land  had  e.  her  sabbaths
ENLARGED.

1  Mac.  14.  6.  Simon  e.  the  bounds  of  his  nation
ENMITY.

1  Esd.  5.  50.  the  nations  were  at  e.  with  them
Eccl.  6.  9.  there  is  a  friend,  who  being  turned  to  e.
28.6.  remember  thy  end,  and  let  e.  cease,  rememb.

1  Mac.  11.  40.  his  men  of  war  were  at  e.  with  him

ENOCH.

2  Esd.  6.  49.  one  thou  calledst  E.  other  Leviathan
51.  to  E.  thou  gavest  one  part,  w  hich  was  dried

Eccl.  44.  16.  E.  pleased  Lord,  and  was  translated
49.  14.  on  the  earth  was  no  man  created  like  E.
ENOUGH.

IVisd.  14.  22.  moreover,  this  was  not  e.  for  them
18.  25.  it  was  e.  that  they  only  tasted  of  wrath
Eccl.  5.  1.  and  say  not,  l  have  e.  for  my  life
11.24.  say  not,  I  have  e.  and  possess  many  things
18.  25.  when  hast  e.  remember  the  time  of  hunger

31.  5.  he  that  followed)  corruption  shall  have  e.  of
35.  1.  that  keeps  the  law  bringeth  offerings  e.

4.3.  30.  be  not  weary,  for  ye  can  never  go  far  e.

2  Mac.  7-  42.  let  this  be  e.  now  to  have  spoken

10.  19.  left  them,  who  were  e.  to  besiege  them
ENQUIRE.

2  Esd.  9. 1-3.  e.  how  the  righteous  shall  be  saved
Jud.  8.  34.  but  e.  not  you  of  mine  act,  not  declare
Eccl.  21. 17.  they  e.  at  the  mouth  of  the  wise  man
ENQUIRED.

Tub.  5.  13.  I  have  e.  to  know  thy  tribe  and  family
ENQUIRY.

1  Mac.  9.  26.  they  made  e.  for  Judas’  friends
ENRICHED.

Eccl.  35.  10.  give,  according  as  he  hath  e.  thee
ENROL!  ED.

1  Mac.  10.  36.  there  be  e.  amongst  the  king’s  forces'
ENTER.

1  Esd.  8.  83.  the  land  which  ye  e.  into  to  possess

2  Esd.  7. 14.  labour  not  to  e.  strait  and  vain  things
IVisd.  1.4.  into  a  malicious  soul  wisdom  shall  not  e.

ENTERPRISE.

Eccl.  .37.16.  let  reason  go  before  every  e.  and  counsel
2  Mac.  14.  5.  opportunity  to  further  his  foolish  e.
EN1  EL  PRISES.

Jud.  10.  8.  God  accomplish  thine  e.  to  glory  of  Isr.

1.3.  5.  to  execute  my  c.  to  destruction  of  the  enemies
1  Mac.  9.  55.  waS  plagued,  and  his  e.  hindered

ENTERTAIN.

Wisd.  18.  3.  an  harmless  sun  to  e.  them  honourably
Eccl.  29.  25.  thou  shalt  e.  and  have  no  thanks

1  Mac.  14.  23.  it  pleased  the  people  to  e.  the  men

ENTERTAINED.

Tub.  7.  8.  moreover,  they  e.  them  cheerfully
ENTICE  LH.

Wisd.  15.  5.  the  sight  of  which  e.  fools  to  lust
ENTRANCE.

2  Esd.  7.  4.  but  put  the  case,  the  e.  were  narrow

7.  the  e.  thereof  is  narrow  and  is  set  to  fall
Jud.  4.  7-  by  them  there  was  at.  e.  into  Judea
U'isd.  7.6.  for  all  men  have  one  e.  into  life

Bel  1.3.  under  the  table  they  had  made  a  privy  e.

1  Mac.  14. 5.  he  made  ane.  to  the  isles  of  the  sea

ENTRANCES.

2  Esd.  7. 12.  then  were  e.  of  this  world  made  narrow

ENTRAP.

Eccl.  8. 11.  lest  he  lie  in  wait  to  e.  thee  in  thy  words
ENTREAT.

Tub.  10. 12.  wherefore  do  not  e.  her  evil
Jud.  10.  16.  shew  unto  him,  and  he  will  e.  thee  well
Eccl.7.20.  thy  servant  worketh  truly,  e.  him  notev.
ENTREATED.

Eccl.  49. 7-  for  they  e.  him  evil,  who  wras  a  prophet

1  Mac.  11.26.  the  king  e.  him  as  his  predecessors
12.  8.  Onias  e.  the  ambassad<  r  honourably

2  Mac.  9.  28.  as  he  e.  others,  so  died  he  miserably
12.30.  e.  them  kindly  in  the  time  of  adversity

ENTERED.

2  Esd.  10. 1 .  it  came  to  pass  when  my  son  was  e.  into
his  wedding  chamber,  he  fell  down  and  died

1.3.  43.  they  e.  Euphrates  by  narrow  passages
Tub.  .3.  17.  the  same  time  came  Tobit  home  and  e.
Jud.  16.  18.  as  soon  as  they  e.  into  Jerusalem
Wisd.  10.  16.  she  e.  into  the  soul  of  the  servant

14.  14.  by  vain-glory  they  e.  into  the  world
Bel  1.3.  entrance  whereby  they  e.  in  continually

1  Mac.  12.  3.  they  e.  into  the  senate  and  said

1.3.  47.  so  e.  into  it  with  songs  and  thanksgiving
51.  he  e.  into  it  the  23d  day  of  the  second  month

2  Mac.  14. 1.  having  e.  by  the  haven  of  Tripolis

ENVY.

2  Esd.  2.  28.  heathen  shall  e.  thee  but  not  be  able
Wisd.  2.  24.  through  e.  of  the  devil  came  death
Eccl.  9.  11.  e.  not  the  glory  of  a  sinner
30.  24.  e.  and  wrath  shorten  the  life
37. 10.  hide  thy  counsel  from  such  as  e.  thee
40.  5.  wrath  and  e.  do  change  his  knowledge


1  Mac.  8.  16.  there  wras  neither  e.  nor  emulation

EN  VIE  111.

2  Esd.  16.  49.  as  an  whore  e.  an  honest  woman
Eccl.  14.  6.  none  worse  than  he  that  e.  himself

10.  a  wicked  eye  e.  his  bread,  he  is  a  niggard
ENVIOUS.

Tub.  4.  16.  let  not  tlnne  eye  be  e.  when  thou  givest
Eccl.  14.  .3.  what  should  an  e.  man  do  with  money  ?

8.  the  e.  man  hath  a  wicked  eye,  he  despiseth  men
18.  18.  a  gift  of  the  e.  consumed)  the  eyes

20.  14.  nor  yet  of  the  e.  for  his  necessity
37.  11.  nor  with  an  e.  man  of  thankfulness
EPHOD.

Eccl.  45.  8.  with  breeches,  a  long  robe,  and  the  e.
EPHRAIM.

Jud.  6.  2.  thou  Achior,  and  the  hirelings  of  E.
Eccl.  47.  21.  out  of  E.  ruled  a  rebellious  kingdom
23.  Jeroboam,  who  shewed  E.  the  way  ot  sin
EPHRON.

1  Mac.  5.  46  now  when  they  came  to  E.

2  Mac.  12.  27.  Judas  removed  the  host  towards  E.

EP1PHANES.

1  Mac.  1.  10.  came  a  wicked  root,  Antiochus  sur*
named  E.  10.  1.  2  Mac.  2.  20.  |  4.  7.  |  10.  9.
EPISTLE,  S.

Est/t.  11.1.  they  brought  this  e.  of  Phurim
Bar.  6.  1.  a  copy  of  an  e.  which  Jeremy  sent

1  Mac.  8.  22.  this  is  the  copy  of  the  e.  senate  wrote

2  Mac. 2.  13.  the  e.  of  the  kings  about  holy  gifts

EQUAL.

Eccl.  1.3.  11.  affect  not  to  be  made  e.  to  him

32.  9.  great  men,  make  not  thy  self  e.  with  them
2  Mac.  8.  30.  they  made  the  aged  e.  in  spoils

13.  23.  submitted  and  sware  to  all  e.  conditions

EQUALS.

2  Mac.  9.  15.  make  them  all  e.  to  the  citizens
EQUITY.

Esth.  1.3.  2.  but  carry  ing  myself  alway  with  e.
Wisd.  9.  3.  according  to  e.  and  righteousness
12.  18.  diou  judgest  with  e.  and  orderest  us
ERECT.

2  Mac.  14.  .33. 1  will  e.  a  notable  temple  to  Bacchus
EREC 1ED.

1  Esd.  5. 50.  they  e.  the  altar  on  his  own  place
ERR.

1  Esd.  3.  18.  it  caused)  all  men  to  e.  that  drink  it
H  isd.  1.3.6.  they  peradventure  e.  seeking  God
Eccl.  15.  12.  say  not  thou  he  had)  caused  me  to  e.

2  Mac.  2.  2.  that  they  should  not  e.  in  their  minds

ERRED.

1  Esd.  4.  27.  many  have  e.  and  sinned  for  women
IVisd.  5.  6.  we  have  e.  from  the  way  of  truth

14.  22.  that  they  e.  in  the  knowledge  of  God
17. 1.  therefore  unnurtured  souls  have  e.

ERROR.

Tub.  5.  1.3.  not  seduced  with  the  e.  of  brethren
Jud.  5.  20.  if  there  be  any  e.  in  this  people
Wisd.  1.  12.  seek  not  death  in  the  e.  of  y  our  life
12.24.  they  went  astray  very  far  in  the  ways  of  «.
Eccl.  4.  25.  be  abashed  of  the  e.  of  thy  ignorant#
11.  16.  e.  and  darkness  had  their  beginning
ERRORS.

1  Esd.  9.  20.  to  make  reconcilement  for  their  e.

ESAU.

2  Esd.  3. 16.  thou  didst  choose  Jacob,  and  put  by  Ei
6.  8.  he  said  to  me,  w  hen  Jac  ob  and  E.  were  born

ot  him,  Jacob’s  hand  held  fast  the  heel
of  E.

9.  F,.  is  the  end  of  world,  Jacob  the  beginning
Jud.  7 .  8.  all  the  chief  of  the  children  of  E.

1  Mac.  5.3.  Judas  fought  against  children  of  E.  65.

ESAY.

2  Esd.  2. 18. 1  w  ill  send  my  servants  E.  and  Jeremy
Eccl.  48.  20.  delivered  them  by  the  ministry  of  E.

22.  as  E.  the  prophet  had  commanded  him
ESCAPE.

2  Esd.  6.  25.  whoso  shall  e.  and  see  my  salvation
9.  7-  that  shall  be  <£ble  to  e.  by  his  works

16.  22.  and  the  other  that  e.  the  hunger
Jud.  7 .  19.  there  w  as  no  wmy  to  e.  from  among  them
Esth.  16.  4.  they  think  toe.  the  justice  of  God
Wisd.  16.  15.  it  is  not  possible  to  e.  thine  hand
Eccl.  6.  .35.  let  not  parables  of  understanding  e.  thee
11.  10.  neither  shalt  thou  e.  by  fleeing
16.  11.  it  is  marvel  if  he  e.  unpunished
13.  the  sinner  shall  not  e.  with  his  spoils

20.  3.  shew  repentance,  so  shalt  e.  wilful  sin
Bar.  6.  57.  able  to  e.  from  thieves  or  robbers
Sus.  22.  if  I  do  it  not,  I  cannot  e.  your  hands
2  Mac.  3.  .38.  him  well  scourged,  if  he  e.  with  life
6.  26.  yet  should  I  not  e.  the  hand  of  the  Almighty
7-  19.  think  not  that  thou  shalt  e.  unpunished

9.  22.  having  great  hope  to  e.  this  sickness

10.  20.  they  took  money  and  let  some  of  them  e.

ESCAPED.

Wisd.  14.6.  hope  of  the  world  e.  in  a  weak  vessel
Eccl.  27  .  20.  he  is  as  a  roe  e.  out  of  the  snare
40.6.  troubled,  as  if  he  were  e.  out  of  a  battle

1  Mac.  4. 26.  now  all  the  strangers  that  had  e.  came

2  Mac.  7.  35.  thou  hast  not  yet  e.  judgment  of  God
11. 12.  many  of  them  also  being  wounded,  e.  naked,

and  Lysias  fled  away  shamefully  ,  and  so*.
ESCAPE  1H.

Eccl.  36.  9.  let  him  that  e.  be  consumed  by  fire
42. 20.  no  thought  e.  him,  nor  is  any  word  hidden
ESDRAS.

1  Esd.  8.  1 .  after  this  came  E.  the  son  of  Seraias
3.  this  E.  went  up  from  Babylon  as  ascribe

7.  for  he  had  very  great  skill  ||  25.  then  said  E.

9-  1.  E.  rising  from  the  court  of  the  temple
16.  E.  the  priest  chose  the  principal  men
40.  so  E.  the  chief  priest  brought  the  law
45.  then  took  E.  the  book  of  the  law

2  Esd.  1.1.  the  second  book  of  the  prophet  E.

2.  3.3.  1  E.  received  a  charge  of  the  Lord

6.  10.  other  question,  E.  ask  thou  not

7.  2.  up,  E.  and  hear  the  words,  8.  2,  19.  i  14.  I,

ESDRELON.

Jud.  1.  8.  that  were  of  the  great  plain  of  E.

3.  9.  he  came  over  against  E.  4.  6.  1  7.  3.

ESPY.

I  Mac.  5.  38.  so  J  udas  sent  men  to  e.  the  host

637


A  POCRYPHA.]  EVE


E  V  1


EX  C


ESPTED.

Tob.  11.6.  -when  shee.  him  coming,  she  said
ESTABLISH.

Eccl.  6.  37.  he  shall  e.  thy  heart  and  give  wisdom
ESTABLISHED.

Eccl.  24.  10.  and  so  was  l  e.  in  Sion
SI.  1 1.  his  goods  shall  he  e.  congregation  declare

42. 17.  whatsoever  is,  might  be  e.  for  his  glory
44.  20.  he  e.  the  covenant  in  his  flesh

49.  S.  in  time  of  ungodly  Josias  e.  the  worship  of  G.

1  Mac.  1.  16.  now  when  the  kingdom  was  e.

14.  26.  for  he  and  his  brethren  have  e.  Israel

2  Mac.  14.  15.  to  him  that  had  e.  his  people

ESTA  BLISII  ETH.

Eccl.  S.  9.  blessing  of  father  e.  the  houses  of  childr.
42.  25.  one  thing  e.  the  good  of  another
ESTATE.

Tab.  1.  15.  whose  e.  was  troubled  that  T  could  not  go
Jud.  6.  19.  O  Lord,  pity  the  low  e.  of  our  nation
Eccl.  2.  4.  when  thou  art  changed  to  a  low  e.

11.  12.  yet  the  Lord  set  him  up  from  his  low  e.

20.  11.  that  lifteth  up  his  head  from  a  low  e.

22.  23.  a  mean  e.  is  not  always  to  be  contemned

29.  8.  yet  have  patience  with  a  man  in  pour  e.

16.  a  sinner  will  overthrow  good  e.  of  his  surety
18.  suretyship  hath  undone,  many  of  good  e.

31.  4.  the  poor  laboureth  in  his  poor  e.

1  Mac.  3. 43.  let  us  restore  decayed  e.  of  our  people

15.  3.  that  l  may  restore  it  to  the  old  e.

ESTEEMED.

Esth.  14.  17.  I  have  not  greatly  e.  the  king’s  feast
Wisd.  2.  16.  we  are  e.  of  him  as  counterfeits

7.  8.  I  e.  riches  nothing  in  comparison  of  her
Eccl.  40.  25.  but  counsel  is  e.  abov  e  them  both

ESTEEM  EDST.

Wisd.  12.  7.  the  land  thou  e.  above  all  other
ESTHER.

Esth.  10.6.  this  l  iver  is  E.  whom  the  king  married

15.  9.  E.  what  is  the  matter  ?  1  am  thy  brother

16.  13.  the  destruction  also  of  blameless  E.

ESTIMATION .

Wisd.  8.  10.  for  her  svke  1  shall  have  e.

ESTRANGED.

1  Mac.  11.  53.  and  he  e.  himself  from  Jonathan
ETERNAL.

Wisd.  17.  2.  lay  there  exiled  from  the  e.  Providence
Eccl.  24.  18.  1  being  e.  am  given  to  my  children

36. 17.  know  that  thou  art  the  l,ord,  the  e.  God

ETERNITY.

Wisd.  2.  23.  made  him  to  be  an  image  of  his  own  e.
Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  number  the  days  of  e.  ?

18.  10.  so  are  a  thousand  years  to  the  days  of  e.
ETHIOPIA.

1  Esd.  3.  2.  from  India  to  E.  Esth.  13.  1.  1  16.  1.
Jud.  1.  10.  until  ye  come  to  the  borders  of  E.

EVE.

Tab.  8.  6.  thou  gavest  him  E.  his  wife  for  an  helper
EVEN.

Bar.  5.  7.  to  make  e.  the  ground  that  Israel  may  go
EVENING.

1  Esd.  8.72. 1  sat  still  until  the  e.  sacrifice
Tob.  6.  1.  they  came  in  the  e.  to  the  river  Tigris
Jud.  9.  1.  the  incense  of  thate.  was  offered

12.  9.  she  remained  till  she  did  eat  her  meat  at  e.

13.  1.  when  the  e.  was  come,  servants  made  haste
Eccl.  18.  26.  from  morning  until  e.  1  Mac.  10.  80.

EVENT.

2  Mac.  9.  25.  princes  expect  what  shall  be  the  e.

EVENTS.

Wisd.  8.  8.  foreseeth  the  e.  of  seasons  and  times
EVER.

1  Esd.  5.  61.  his  mercy  is  for  e.  in  all  Israel

2  Esd.  7.53.  a  paradise,  whose  fruit  endureth  fore.

9.  31.  ye  shall  be  honoured  in  it  for  e.

16.  67.  to  meddle  no  more  with  them  for  e.

Tob.  3.2.  thou  judgest  Iruly  and  justly  for  e.

11.  thy  holy  and  glorious  name  is  blessed  and  ho¬
nourable  for  e.  let  all  thy  works  praise  thee  fore.

8.  5.  Tobias  said,  blessed  is  thy  holy  name  for  e.
15.  and  let  thine  elect  praise  thee  tor  e.

11.  14.  and  blessed  is  thy  name  fore.

12. 18.  by  will  of  God  came,  wherefore  praise  fore.

13.  1.  blessed  be  God  that  liveth  for  e.

10.  love  in  thee  for  e.  those  that  are  miserable

12.  blessed  shall  all  be  that  love  thee  for  e.

14.  have  seen  all  thy  glory,  and  shall  be  glad  fore.
18.  blessed  be  God  who  hath  extolled  it  for  e.

14.  5.  the  house  of  God  shall  be  built  in  it  for  e.
Jud.  13.  19.  remember  the  power  of  God  for  e.

16.  17.  they  shall  feel  them  and  weep  for  e.

Esth.  14.  10.  to  magnify  a  fleshly  king  for  e.

16.  24.  hateful  to  wild'  beasts  and  fowls  for  e.
Wisd.  3.  8.  and  their  1  ord  shall  reign  for  e.

14.  13.  for  neither  shall  they  be  for  e.

16.  5.  thy  wrath  endureth  not  for  e.

Eccl.  1.  1.  all  wisdom  is  with  the  Lord  fore.

16.27.  he  garnished  his  works  fore.

17.  9.  to  glory  in  his  marvellous  acts  for  e.

15.  their  ways  are  e.  before  him  and  not  hid

18.  1.  he  that' liveth  for  e.  created  all  things
24.  .3.3.  and  1  will  leave  it  to  all  ages  for  e.

38.  28.  the  noise  of  the  anvil  is  e.  in  his  ears
40.  17.  and  mercifulness  endureth  for  e.

42.  23.  all  these  things  live  and  remain  for  e.

44.  13.  their  seed  shall  remain  for  e.  and  glory

45.  24.  the  dignity  of  the  priesthood  for  e.

26.  ami  that  their  glory  may  endure  fore.

47-  11-  the  Lord  exalted  his  horn  for  e.

13.  that  he  might  prepare  his  sanctuary  fore.

48.  25.  he  shewed  what  should  come  to  pass  fore.

and  secret  things  or  e.  they  came
50.  23.  that  peace  may  be  in  Israel  for  e.

29.  blessed  be  the  Lord  fore,  amen,  amen
Bar.  3.  3.  for  thou  endurest  for  e.  and  we  perish
1.3.  thou  shouhlst  have  dwelt  in  peace  for  e.

4. 1.  this  is  the  law  that  endureth  for  e.

23.  give  you  tome  with  joy  ami  gladness  fore.

5.  1.  the  glory  that  cometh  from  God  fore.

Van.  3.  29.  blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord  God,  and  to  be
praised  and  exalted  above  all  for  e.  30,  31,  32.

33.  to  be  praised  and  glorified  above  all  for  e.

And  so  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.

638


Prayer  of  Manass.  I  will  praise  thee  for  e.  all  the
days  of  my  life,  thine  is  the  glory  for  e.  and  e.

1  Mac.  3.  7-  his  memorial  is  blessed  for  e.

4.  24.  because  his  mercy  endureth  fore.

8.  23.  good  success  be  to  Jews  by  sea  and  land  for  e.

II.  36.  be  revoked  from  this  time  forth  fore.

16.  2.  we  have  e.  fought  against  the  enemies

2  Mac.  8.  29.  reconciled  with  his  servants  for  e.

11.  26.  they  may  e.  go  cheerfully  about  affairs

14.  15.  that  bad  established  his  people  for  e.

EVER  LASTING.

2  Esd.  2. 11.  I  will  give  these  the  e.  tabernacles

34.  he  shall  give  you  e.  rest,  for  he  is  nigh

35.  for  the  e.  light  shall  shine  upon  you

3.  15.  thou  madest  an  e.  covenant  with  him

7.  50.  that  there  is  promised  us  an  e.hope
Tob.  1.  6.  as  it  was  ordained  by  an  e.  decree

3.  6.  may  be  delivered,  and  go  into  the  e.  place

13.  6.  praise  the  Lord,  and  extol  the  e.  King
10.  and  praise  the  e.  King,  for  lie  is  good

IVisd.  7-  26.  she  is  the  brightness  of  the  e.  light

8.  13.  1  shall  leave  behind  me  an  e.  memorial
Eccl.  1.  4.  the  understanding  of  prudence  from  e.

5.  and  her  ways  are  e.  commandments

15.  she  hath  built  an  e.  foundation  with  men

2.  9.  hope  for  good,  and  for  e.  joy  anti  mercy

15.  6.  she  shall  cause  him  to  inherit  an  e.  name

17.  12.  he  made  an  e.  covenant  with  them

39.  20.  he  seeth  from  e.  to  e.  ||  42.  21 .  he  is  fr.  e.  to  e.

44. 18.  an  e.  covenant  was  matle  with  him
45.  7.  an  e.  covenant  he  made  with  him

15.  this  was  appointed  to  him  by  an  e.  covenant
49-  12.  holy  temple,  which  was  prepar.  fore. glory
Bar.  4.  10.  which  the  E.  brought  upon  them,  14.
20.  I  will  cry  to  the  E.  in  my  days
22.  my  hope  is  in  E.  that  he  will  save  you,  mercy
shall  come  to  you  from  the  E.  our  Saviour

24.  with  great  glory  and  brightness  of  the  E.

29.  shall  bring  you  e.  joy  again  and  salvation

35.  for  fire  shall  come  on  her  front  the  E.

5.  2.  set  a  diadem  of  the  glory  of  the  E.

Sus.  42.  O  e.  God,  that  knowest  the  secrets

1  Mac.  2.  51.  so  shall  ye  receive  an  e.  name
54.  obtained  the  covenant  of  an  e.  priesthood
57.  David  possessed  the  throne  of  an  e.  kingdom

2  Mac.  1.  25.  the  only  Just,  Almighty,  and  E.

7.  9.  the  King  shall  raise  us  up  unto  e.  life

36.  are  dead  unto  God’s  covenant  of  e.  life

EVER  I  ASTINGN  ESS.

2  Esd.  8.  20.  O  Lord,  thou  that  dwellestin  e.
EVERMORE.

1  Esd.  8.  85.  leave  the  land  to  your  children  for  e.

2  Esd.  2.  35.  light  shall  shine  upon  you  for  e.

Jud.  15. 10.  blessed  be  thou  of  the  Lord  fore.

IVisd.  4.  18.  be  a  reproach  among  the  dead  for  e.

5.  15.  but  the  righteous  love  fore,  their  reward  is

6.  21.  honour  w  isdom,  that  ye  may  reign  for  e.
Eccl.  44.  14.  hut  their  name  liveth  for  e.

Bar.  3.  32.  he  that  prepared  the  earth  for  e.

Dan.  3.  3.  thy  name  is  worthy  to  be  praised  for  e.

1  Mac.  10.  30.  from  this  day  forth  for  e.  15.  8.

14.  4.  as  that  e.  his  authority  pleased  them

EVIDENT.

2  Esd.  4.11.  the  corruption  that  ise.  in  my  sight
Esth.  16.  9.  always  judging  things  that  are  e.

2  Mac.  15.  35.  and  e.  sign  of  the  help  of  the  Lord
EVIL.

1  Esd.  1.  44.  and  Joacim  did  e.  before  the  Lord
47.  he  did  e.  also  in  the  sight  of  the  I.ord

2  Esd.  2.  3.  have  done  that  which  is  e.  before  him

14.  1  have  broken  the  e.  in  pieces  and  created  good

3.  22.  the  good  departed,  and  the  e.  abode  still
29.  then  my  soul  saw  many  e.  doers  in  30th  year

4.  28.  the  e.  is  sown,  but  destruction  is  not  come

29.  if  place  w  here  the  e.  is  sow  n  pass  not  away

30.  for  the  grain  of  e.  seed  hath  been  sown

31.  the  grain  of  e.  seed  hath  brought  forth
33.  wherefore  are  our  years  few  and  e.  ?

6.  27.  fore,  shall  be  put  out  and  deceit  quenched

8.  53.  the  root  of  e.  is  sealed  up  from  you

13.  .38.  shall  lay  before  them  their  e.  thoughts
Tob.  3.8.  whom  Asmodeus  thee,  spirit  killed

17.  and  to  bind  Asmodeus  the  e.  spirit

6.  7.  if  a  devil  or  an  e.  spirit  trouble  any

15.  make  thou  no  reckoning  of  thee,  spirit

8.  3.  which  smell,  w  hen  the  e.  spirit  had  smelled

10.  12.  wherefore  do  not  entreat  here.

12.  7-  do  whal  is  good,  and  no  e.  shall  touch  thee
Jvd.  7-  15.  thou  shall  render  them  an  e.  reward

8.  9.  w  hen  she  heard  the  e.  words  of  the  people
Esth.  13.  5.  this  people  is  e.  affected  to  our  state

16.  4.  that  seeth  all  things,  and  hateth  e.

15.  Jews  are  no  e.  doers,  but  live  by  most  just  laws
Wisd.  14.  27.  idols  the  cause  and  the  end  of  all  e.

15.  6.  but  they  are  lovers  of  e.  things

12.  we  must  be  getting,  though  it  be  by  e.  means

16.  8.  that  it  is  thou  w  ho  deliverest  from  all  e.

18.  9.  saints  be  partakers  of  the  same  good  and  e.
F.ccl.  3.  24.  an  e.  suspicion  hath  overthrown  judgm.

26.  a  stubborn  heart  shall  fare  e.  at  the  last

4.  20.  observe  the  opportunity,  beware  of  e.

5.  14.  an  e.  condemnation  on  the  double  tongue

7.  l.do  none  e.  so  shall  no  harm  come  to  thee
20.  thy  servant  worketh  truly ,  entreat  him  note.

9.  1.  teach  her  not  an  e.  lesson  against  thyself

11.  16.  and  e.  shall  wax  old  with  them  that  glory
24.  and  what  e.  can  come  to  me  hereafter  ?

31.  he  lieth  in  wait,  and  turnetli  good  intoe,

18.  8.  what  is  his  good  r  and  what  is  his  e?

12.  he  saw  and  perceived  their  end  to  be  e.

19.  6.  he  that  hateth  babbling  shall  hav  e  less  e.

28.  when  he  findeth  opportunity  lie  w  ill  do  e.

20.  9.  that  bath  good  success  in  e.  things

16.  they  that  eat  my  bread  speak  e.  of  me
22.  26.  if  any  e.  happen  unto  me  by  him
26.  7-  an  e.  wife  is  a  yoke  shaken  to  and  fro

27  .  22.  he  that  winketh  with  the  eyes  worketh  e.
28.  21 .  the  death  thereof  is  an  e.  death,  grave  better
31.  10.  might  have  done  e.  and  hath  not  done  it

13.  remember  that  a  w  icked  eye  is  an  e.  thing
.33.  26.  so  are  tortures  and  torments  for  an  e.  servant

27.  send  to  labour  for  idleness  teacheth  much  e.


Eccl.  .3.3. 31.  if  thou  entreat  him  e.  and  he  run  from*.

37.  18.  four  manner  of  things  appear,  good  and#.
27.  prove  thy  soul,  and  see  what  is  e.  for  it

38.  17.  weep  bitterly,  lest  thou  be  e.  spoken  of

39.  4.  for  he  hath  tried  the  good  and  the  e.

42.  5.  to  make  the  side  of  an  e.  servant  to  bleed
6.  sure  keeping  is  good,  where  an  e.  wife  is

51.  12.  thou  deliveredst  me  from  the  e.  time
Prayer  of  Manass.  be  not  angry  with  me  for  ever
by  reserving  e.  for  me,  nor  condemn  me
EVILS.

2  Esd.~.  27.  w  hoso  is  delivered  from  the  foresaid  e.

12.  43.  are  not  e.  which  are  come  to  us  sufficient

14.  16.  yet  greater  e.  shall  be  done  hereafter

17.  so  much  the  more  shall  e.  increase  on  them
16.  18.  the  powers  stand  in  fear,  the  beginning  oi
e.  what  shall  I  do  when  these  e.  shall  come  .
21 .  even  then  shall  e.  grow  on  earth,  sword,  fam.
40.  in  those  e.  be  even  as  pilgrims  upon  earth
Esth.  10.9.  Lord  hath  delivered  us  from  all  those
11.9.  nation  was  troubled,  fearing  their  own  e.
Bat .  1.20.  wherefore  the  e.  cleaved  unto  us
1  Mac.  1. 9.  and  e.  were  multiplied  in  the  earth

6.  12.  now  1  remember  the  e.  I  did  at  Jerusalem
8.  31.  as  touching  the  e.  that  Demetrius  doth

10.  5.  he  will  remember  all  the  e.  we  have  done
EUMENES.

1  Afar.  8. 8.  which  they  took  of  him  and  gave  kingE..
EUNUCH.

Jvd.  12.  11.  then  said  he  to  Bagoas  the  e.

Wisd.  3. 14.  blessed  is  the  e.  who  wrought  no  iniquity
Eccl.  20. 4.  as  is  the  lust  of  an  e.  to  deflower  a  virgin.
30.  20.  as  an  e.  that  embraccth  a  virgin  and  sighetb
EUNUCHS.

Esth.  12.  1.  with  the  two  e.  of  the  king,  6.

3.  king  examined  the  two  e.  they  were  strangled

EUPATOR.

1  Mac.  6. 17.  to  reign,  and  his  name  he  called  E.
EUPHRATES.

1  Esd.  1.  25.  to  raise  war  at  Carchamis  upon  E.

27.  not  sent  against  thee,  for  my  w  ar  is  upon  E.

2  Esd.  13.  43.  they  entered  E.  by  narrow  passages
Jud.  1.  6.  all  that  dwelt  by  E.  came  unto  him

2. 24.  he  went  over  E.  and  went  thro’  Mesopotamia.
Eccl.  24.  26.  make  understanding  to  abound  like  E.

1  Mac.  3.  32.  from  the  river  E.  to  borders  of  Egypt'
37.  and  having  passed  the  river  E.  he  went  thro’
EXACT.

Eccl.  51. 19.  wrestled  with  her,  and  my  doings  was*.
EXACTED.

1  Esd.  2. 27.  mighty  kings  who  reigned  and  e.  tribu.

EXACTLY.

2  Esd.  16.  64.  L.  hath  e.  searched  out  all  your  works-
Eccl.  16.  25.  I  will  declare  his  know  ledge  e.

EXACTN  ESS.

Eccl.  42.  4.  of  e.  of  weight  be  not  thou  ashamed
EX  A  LT.

Tob.  12.  6.  it  is  good  to  praise  God  and  e.  his  name-
Jud.  16.  2.  e.  him,  and  call  upon  his  name
Eccl.  1.  30.  e.  not  thyself,  lest  thou  fall
11.4.  and  e.  not  thyself,  in  the  day  of  honour

15.  5.  she  shall  e.  him  above  his  neighbours

43.  .30.  e.  him  as  much  as  you  can,  for  he  will  fan
exceed,  when  you  e.  him  put  forth  your  strength

44.21.  that  he  would  e.  his  seed  as  the  stars
Van.  3.  35.  praise  and  e.  him  above  all  for  ever,  36,.

37,  38,  39,  40,  41, 42,  4.3,  44,  45,  46,  47,
48,  49,  50,  51, 52,  53,  54,  55,  56,  57  ,  58,.
59,  60,  61,  62,  63,  64,  65,  66.

1  Mac.  14.35.  he  sought  by  all  means  toe.  his  people

EXA  LTATION.

Jvd.  10.  8.  thine  enterprises  <0  the  e.  of  Jerusalem

13.  4.  the  works  of  my  hands  for  the  e.  of  Jerus.
15.  9.  they  said,  thou  art  the  e.  of  Jerusalem

16. 8.  for  e.  of  those  that  were  oppressed  in  Israel
EXALTED.

2  Esd.  2.  43.  a  young  man,  and  upon  every  one  cfs

their  heads  he  set  crowns  and  was  more  e„
Jud.  9.  7-  behold,  they  are  e.  with  horse  and  man-
Esth.  11.  11.  the  sun  rose,  and  the  lowly  were  e.
Eccl.  24.  1.3.  1  was  e.  like  a  cedar  in  Lihanus
14.  I  was  e.  like  a  palm-tree  in  Engaddi
33.  12.  some  of  them  hath  he  blessed  and  e.

45.  6.  he  e.  Aaron  an  holy  man  like  unto  him
47. 11.  Lord  took  away  his  sins,  and  e.  his  horn
Bar.  2.  5.  thus  we  were  cast  down  and  not  e.

5.  6.  God  bringeth  them  unto  the  e.  with  glory
Van.  3.  29.  to  be  praised  and  e.  above  all,  30,  .32;.

1  Mac.  1. 3.  he  was  e.  and  his  heart  was  lifted  up*

8.  1.3.  finally,  that  they  were  greatly  e.

11. 16.  Alexander  fled,  but  king  Ptoiemee  was  e.
EXALTE!  II.

Eccl.  1. 19.  wisdom  e.  them  to  honour  that  hold  hep

4.  11.  wisdom  e.  her  children  and  layeth  hold

7.  11.  for  there  is  one  which  humbletn  and
50.  22.  which  e.  our  days  from  the  womb

EXALTING.

2  Esd.  15.  53.  e.  the  stroke  of  thine  handr

EXAMINE.

1  Esd.  9.  16.  the}’  sat  together  to  e.  the  matter
Wisd.  2.  19.  let  us  e.  him  with  despitefulness
Eccl.  18.  20.  before  judgment  e.  thyself

aus.  51.  put  these  two  aside,  and  1  will  e.  them
EXAMINATION.

Jud.  8.27.  hath  tried  them,  for  the  e.  of  their  hearts-
Eus.  48.  that  without  e.  ye  have  condemned  her
EXAMINED.

Esth.  12.  3.  then  the  king  e.  the  two  eunuchs
Eccl.  11.  7.  blame  not  before  thou  hast  e.  truth
EXAMPLE.

Jvd.  8.  24.  let  us  shew  an  e.  to  our  brethren
Esth.  14.  11.  make  him  an  e.  that  hath  begun  this
Wisd.  4.  2.  when  it  is  present,  men  take  e.  at  it
Eccl.  44.  16.  being  an  e.  ot  repentance  to  all

2  Mac.  6. 28.  leave  a  notable  e.  to  such  as  be  young
.31.  leaving  his  death  for  an  e.  of  noble  courage

EXCEED.

2  Esd.  4. 50.  so  the  quantity  which  is  past  did  more  e.
EXCEEDED.

2  Esd.  4.  34.  haste  is  in'vain,  for  thou  hast  much  e.
EXCEEDING.

1  Esd.  .3.  18.  O  ye  men,  how  e.  strong  is  wine


EXP


FAC


F  A  1


[A  HOCK  Y  H  H*


Eccl.  39.  16.  the  works  of  the  Lord  are  e.  good

1  .Vac.  3.  25.  then  an  e.  great  dread  began  to  fall
lit.  2.  king  Demetrius  gathered  an  e.  great  host
15.  SG.  whereupon  the  king  was  e.  wroth

■2  Mac.  R.  27.  yielding  e.  praise  and  thanks  to  Lord

15.6.  so  Nicanor  in  e.  pride  determined  to  set  up
13.  a  man  with  grav  hairs,  and  e.  glorious

EXCEEDINGLY.

.3  Esd.  1.  24.  and  how  they  grieved  him  e.

2  Esd.  10.  25.  her  face  on  a  sudden  shined  e.

15.  6.  wickedness  hath  e.  polluted  the  earth

Jud.  4.  2.  therefore  they  were  e.  afraid  of  him
J Zccl.  47  -  24.  their  sins  were  multiplied  e,

2  Mac.  10.  34.  and  they  within  blasphemed  e.
EXCEL.

1  Esd.  4.  2.  O  ye  men,  do  not  men  e.  in  strength  ?
JVisd.  15.  9.  but  he  strived!  to  e.  goldsmiths
Eccl.  33.  7-  why  doth  one  day  e.  another?
EXCELLED.

Esth.  13.  3.  Aman  that  e.  in  wisdom  among  us
EXCELLETH.

1  Esd.  4.  14.  O  ye  men,  neither  is  it  wine  that  e.
EXCELLENCY.

Eccl.  6.  15.  a  faithful  friend's  e.  is  invaluable

1  Mac.  1.  40.  her  e.  was  turned  into  mourning

2  Mac.  6.  23.  as  becomes  the  e.  of  his  ancient  years

EXCELLENT.

Jud.  11.  8.  it  is  reported  that  thou  only  art  e.

Esth.  16.  16.  ordered  the  kingd.  in  most  e.  manner
Eccl.  42.  21.  he  hath  garnished  the  e.  works
48.  24.  lie  saw  by  an  e.  spirit  what  should  come
2  Mac.  3.  26.  e.  in  beauty,  and  comely  in  apparel
15.  13.  who  was  of  a  wonderful  and  e.  majesty
EXCEPTION.

■JVisd.  14.  25.  there  reigned  in  all  men,  without  e.
EXCESS.

Eccl.  31. 29.  wine  drunk  with  e.  maketh  bitterness
37.  30.  for  e.  of  meats  bringeth  sickness
EXCESSIVE.

Eccl.  19.  30.  a  man’s  attire  and  e.  laughter  shew
33. 29.  be  note,  toward  any,  and  without  discretion
EXCHANGE.

•Eccl.  37.  11.  nor  with  a  merchant  concerning  e.

44.  17.  Noah  was  taken  in  e.  for  the  world

EXCUSE.

Eccl.  32.  17.  but  findeth  an  e.  according  to  his  will
EXECUTE.

1  Esd.  8.  46.  send  such  men  as  might  e.  priest’s  office
Jud.  13.  5.  to  e.  my  enterprises  to  the  destruction
■JVisd.  9.  3.  and  e.  judgment  with  an  upright  heart
Eccl.  35. 17.  judge  righteously  and  e.  judgment

45.  15.  should  e.  the  office  of  the  priesthood

1  Mac.  6.  22.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  thou  e.  judgm.  ?
EXECUTED.

Dan.  3.  5.  in  all  things  thou  hast  e.  true  judgment
■2  Mac.  3. 23.  Heliodorus  e.  that  which  was  decreed
EXECUTE  l' H.

Eccl.  20.  4.  he  that  e.  judgment  with  violence
EXECUTING.

1  Esd.  5.  39.  from  e.  the  office  of  the  priesthood
JVisd.  12.  10.  but  e.  thy  judgments  upon  them
EXECUTION.

•1  Esd. 8.  95.  arise,  put  in  e.  to  thee  doth  this  appertain
Esth.  16.  17.  do  well  not  to  put  in  e.  the  letters
EXERCISE.

■2  Esd.  15.  8.  in  which  they  wickedly  e.  themselves
'Job.  12.  9.  those  that  e.  alms  and  righteousness
IVisd.  8.  18.  in  the  e.  of  conference  with  her
1  Mac.  1.  14.  they  built  a  place  of  e.  at  Jerusalem
EXERCISED.

Eccl.  50.  28.  blessed  is  he  that  shall  be  e.  in  these

1  Mac.  6.  30.  thirty-two  elephants  e.  in  battle

2  Mac.  15.  12.  e.  from  a  child  in  points  of  virtue

EXERCISING.

Wisd.lfiA.  on  them,  «.  tyranny,  should  come  penury
EXHORT.

■2  Mac.  7.  24.  Antiochus  did  not  only  e.  by  words
EXHORTATION.

1  Mac.  IS.  3.  Simon  gave  them  e.  saying
EXHORTED.

1  Mac.  5.  53.  Judas  e.  the  people  all  the  way
■2  Mac.  2.  3.  with  other  such  speeches  e.  he  them

7.  5.  they  e.  one  another  to  die  manfully

21.  yea,  she  e.  every  one  of  themin  her  language

25.  e.her  that  she  would  counsel  the  young  man

26.  and  when  he  had  e.  her  with  many  words

8.  16.  he  e.  them  not  to  be  stricken  with  terror
12.  42.  besides  Judas  e.  the  people,  13.  12.

15.  8.  wherefore  he  e.  his  people  not  to  fear
EXHORTING.

•2  Mac.  11.  7*  e.  the  other  that  they  would  jeopard
EXILED.

JVisd.  17.  2.  lay  e.  from  the  eternal  Providence
EXPECT.

2  Mac.  9.  25.  princes  e.  what  shall  be  the  event

15. 8.  now  to  e.  the  victory  and  aid  that  should  come
EXPECTATION.

JVisd.  17.  13.  the  e.  from  within  being  less
EXPECTING.

2  Mac.  8. 11.  note,  the  vengeance  that  was  to  follow

EXPENSE.

Eccl.  18.  32.  neither  betied  to  the  e.  thereof
EXPENSES.

3  Esd.  6.  25.  the  e.  thereof  to  be  given  by  Cyrus
Bel 8.  tell  rne  who  this  is  that  devoured)  these  e.  ?

1  Mac.  10.  39.  for  the  necessary  e.  of  the  sanctuary
44.  e.  be  given  of  the  king’s  accounts,  45.
EXPERIENCE.

Vrisd.  8.  8.  if  a  man  desire  much  e.  she  knoweth
Eccl.  1.  7-  who  hath  understood  her  great  e.  ?

21 .22.  but  a  man  of  e.  is  ashamed  of  hi  in

25.6.  much  e.  is  the  crown  of  old  men

34.  9.  he  that  hath  much  e.  will  declare  wisdom
36.  20.  but  a  man  of  e.  will  recompense  him
EXPERT.

■Bar.  3.  26.  of  so  great  stature,  and  so  e.  in  war
1  iliac.  4.  7.  with  horsemen,  these  were  e.  in  war
EXPIRED.

Tab.  10.  1.  when  the  days  of  the  journey  were  e.

1  Mac.  1.  29.  after  two  years  fully  e.  the  king  sent

EXPOUND.

2  Esd  A.  47.  I  shall  e.  the  similitude  unto  you


JVisd.  8.  8.  and  she  can  e.  dark  sentences

EXPOUNDED.

2  Esd.  12.  12.  but  it  was  not  e.unto  him, now  I  declare
EXP  R  ESS.

2  Esd.  10.  32.  and  ye  see  that  1  atn  not  able  to  e.
JVisd.  14.  17-  they  made  an  e.  image  of  a  king
Eccl.  31.  11.  and  1  understand  more  than  1  can  e.
EXPRESSED.

JVisd.  17-1.  great  are  thy  judgments  and  cannot  be  e.
EXQUISITE.

Eccl.  18.  29.  anti  poured  forth  e.  parables

19.  25.  there  is  an  e.  subtilty,  the  same  unjust
EXT  I NG  U1SHED.

JVisd.  2.  3.  which  being  e.  our  body  shall  be  turned
EX  l'O  L.

Tab.  13.  4.  and  e.  him  before  all  the  living

6.  praise  the  Lord,  e.  the  everlasting  King

7.  1  will  e.  my  God, my  soul  shall  praise  the  King
Eccl.  6.  2.  e.  not  thyself  in  thine  own  heart

13.  23.  they  e.  what  a  rich  man  saith  to  clouds
EXTOLLED.

Tob.  13.  18.  blessed  he  God  who  hath  e.  it  for  ever
EXTOL  LE  l’H.

Eccl.  37.  7-every  counsellor  e. counsel,  but  there  one
EXTREME.

2  Esd.  5. 14. an  e.fearfulness  went  through  m3'  bod 3'
IVisd.  12.  27.  therefore  camee.  damnation  on  them
Eccl.  42.  8.  be  not  ashamed  to  inform  thee,  aged
2  Mac.  7.  42.  to  have  spoken  of  the  e.  tortures
EXTREMITY.

2  Mac.  1.7-  we  wrote  to  you  in  the  e.  of  trouble
EYE.

Tob.  4.  16.  let  not  thine  e.  be  envious  when  givest
Jitd.  2.  11.  that  rebel,  let  not  thine  e.  spare  them
Eccl.  4.  5.  turn  not  away  thine  e.  from  the  needy
7.  22.  hast,  thou  cattle  ?  have  an  e.  to  them

9.  8.  turn  away  thine  e.  from  a  beautiful  woman

11.  12.  yet  the  e.  of  the  Lord  looked  upon  him
It.  8.  the  envious  man  hatha  wicked  e.

9.  a  covetous  man’s  e.  not  satisfied  w:th  his  portion

10.  a  wicked  e.  envieth  bread,  he  is  a  niggard

17.  8.  he  set  his*.  upon  their  hearts  to  shew  them

22.  will  keep  the  deeds  of  man  as  apple  of  the  e.

22.  19.  he  that  pricketh  the  e.  will  make  tears

26.  11.  watch  over  an  impudent  e.  marvel  not
31.  13.  remember  that  a  wicked  e.  is  an  evil  thing,

and  what  is  more  wicked  than  an  e.  ?
35.  8.  give  the  lord  his  honour  with  a  good  e.

10.  give  to  the  Most  High  with  a  cheerful  e.

40.  22.  thine  e.  desireth  favour  and  beauty

43. 18.  the  e.  marvelleth  at  the  beauty  of  it

2  Mac.  5.  17.  and  his  e.  was  not  upon  the  place
EYE-LIDS.

Eccl.  26.  9.  whoredom  may  be  known  in  her  e.
EYES.

1  Esd.  4.  19  they  gape  and  fix  their  e.  fast  on  her

2  Esd. 9.38. 1  looked  back  with  my  i.and  saw  woman
10.  55.  as  much  as  thine  e.  be  able  to  see

Tob.  2. lO.tlie  sparrows  muted  warm  dung  into  my  e.

3.  12.  1  set  mine  e.  and  my  face  towards  thee
17.  scale  away  the  whiteness  of  Tobit’s  e.  6.  8.

5.  20.  he  shall  return,  thine  e.  shall  see  him

10.  5.  since  1  have  let  thee  go,  the  light  of  mine  e.

11.  7.  1  know  that  613’  father  will  open  his  e.

8.  therefore  anoint  his  e.  with  the  gall,  11.

12.  when  his  e.  began  to  smart,  he  rubbed  them

13.  whiteness  pilled  away  from  corners  of  his  e.
Jud.  7.  27.  the  death  of  our  infants  before  our  e.

10.  4.  decked  herself  to  allure  the  e.  of  all  men

16.  9.  her  sandals  ravished  his  e.  her  beauty  took
Esth.  13.  18.  because  death  was  before  their  e.
JVisd.  11. 18.  shooting  horrible  sparks  out  of  their  e.

15.  15.  which  neither  have  the  use  of  e.  to  see
Eccl.  3.25.  without  e.  thou  shah  want  light

4.  1.  my  son,  make  not  the  needy  e.  to  wait  long

12.  16.  an  enemy  will  weep  with  his  e.  but  if  find

15.  19.  his  e.  are  upon  them  that  fear  him

16.  5.  many  such  things  have  1  seen  with  mine  e.

17.  6.  a  tongue,  and  e.  and  ears  gave  he  them

13.  and  their  e.  saw  the  majesty  of  his  glory
15.  their  ways  shall  not  he  hid  from  his  e.

19-  and  his  e.  are  continually  on  their  \va3’s

18.  18.  a  gift  of  the  envious  consumeth  the  e.

23.  19.  only  feareth  the  e.  of  man,  and  knoweth  not
that  the  e.  of  the  Lord  are  brighter  than  the  sun

27.  1.  that  seeks  abundance  will  turn  his*.  away
22.  he  that  winketh  with  his  e.  worketh  evil

3i).  20.  he  seeth  with  his  e.  and  groaneth
34.  16.  the  *,  of  the  Lord  are  on  them  that  love  him

17.  he  raised)  up  the  soul,  and  lighteneth  the  e.

20.  that  killed)  the  son  before  his  father’s  e.
38.28.  and  his  e.  look  still  upon  the  pattern
39.  19.  and  nothing  can  be  hid  from  his  e.

43.  4.  sending  blight  beams  itdimmeth  the  e.

45. 12.  a  costly  work,  die  desires  of  the  e.

51.27.  behold  with  your  e.  how  I  had  little  labour
Bur.  1.  12.  will  give  us  strength  and  lighten  our*.

2. 18.  the  e.  that  fail  will  give  thee  praise
3.  14.  where  is  the  light  of  the  e.  and  peace

6.  1“.  when  they  beset  up,  their  e.  he  full  of  dust
Sets.  9.  they  perverted  and  turned  away  their  e.

1  Mac.  4.  12.  then  the  strangers  lift  up  their  e.

6.  10.  sleep  is  gone  from  mine*,  my  heart  fails

2  Mac.  3.  36.  which  lie  had  seen  with  his  e.

EZEKIEL.

Eccl.  49.  8.  it  was  E.  who  saw  the  glorious  vision
EZEUlllAS,  or  EZEKIAS.

2  Esd.  7.  40.  and  e.  for  the  people  in  the  time  of
Eccl.  48.  17-  E.  fortified  his  city ,  and  brought  water
22.  E.  had  done  the  thing  that  pleased  the  Lord
49.  4.  all,  except  David  and  E.  were  defective
2  Mac.  15.  22.  didst  send  thy  angel  in  time  of  E.

F.

FABLES.

Bar.  3.  23.  merchants  of  Tlieman,  authors  of  /.
FACE,  FACE.

1  Esd.  8.  74.  O  Lord,  I  am  ashamed  before  thy/.

2  Esd.  1.  30.  1  will  cast  you  out  from  mv/.

31.  when  you  off  er,  1  will  turn  my  /.  from  you


10.  25.  her /.  on  a  sudden  shined  exceedingly

12.  7-  if  my  prayer  indeed  be  come  before  thy/.
15.  63.  they  shall  mar  the  beauty  of  thy  /.

Tob.  2.  9.  1  slept,  and  my  /.  was  uncovered

3.  6.  turn  not  thy  /.  away  from  me

12.  O  Lord,  1  set  mine  eyes  and  /.  toward  thee

4.  7.  nor  turn  thy  /.  from  any  poor,  and  the/.  o«

God  shall  not  be  turned  away  from  thee

13.  6.  and  he  will  not  hide  his/,  from  you
Jud.  2.  7.  cover  the  whole/,  of  the  earth,  19.

4.  11.  spread  sackcloth  before  the/,  of  the  Lord

6.  5.  and  thou  Aehior  shalt  see  my/,  no  more

19.  look  on  the  /.  of  those  that  are  sanctified

7.  4.  these  men  wili  lick  up  the /.  of  the  earth

9.  1.  then  Judith  fell  upon  her /.  10.  23.

11.  13.  that  serve  in  Jerus.  before  the /.  ot  our  Go

21.  there  is  not  such  a  woman  for  beauty  of/.

14.  3.  and  they  shall  flee  before  your/.

6.  he  fell  down  on  his/,  and  his  spirit  failed
JVisd.  4.  20.  iniquities  shall  convince  them  to  their/.

5.  1.  before  the/,  of  such  as  have  afflicted  him

12.  14.  nor  king  or  tyrant  he  able  to  set  his/.

Eccl.  6.  12.  he  will  hide  himself  from  thy/.

17.  25.  return,  make  thy  prayer  before  his/.

18.  24.  when  he  shall  turn  away  his /.

21.  2.  flee  from  sin  as  from  the  /.  of  a  serpent

25.  17.  the  wickedness  of  a  woman  changeth  her/.

26.  17.  so  is  the  beauty  of  the  /.  in  ripe  age
34.  3.  even  as  the  likeness  of  a /.  to  a/.

41.  21.  to  turn  away  thy  f.  from  thy  kinsman
Dan.  3.  18.  now  we  fear  thee,  and  seek  thy  /.

Sus.  32.  these  men  commanded  to  uncover  her  /.
Bel  42.  were  devoured  in  a  moment  before  his /.

1  Mac.  3.  22.  overthrew  them  before  our /.  4.  10.

7.  30.  and  he  would  see  his/,  no  more

10.  72.  thy  foot  is  not  able  to  stand  before  our/.

2  Mac.  3.  16.  whoso  had  looked  high  priest  in  the  /

FACES.

2  Esd.  7.  55.  whereas  our/,  shall  be  blacker  than
Tob.  12.  16.  they  were  troubled,  and  fell  on  their/.
Eccl.  50.  17-  fell  down  to  the  earth  on  their/.

Bar.  1.  15.  but  to  us  belonged)  confusion  of/.

6.  13.  they  wipe  their/,  because  of  dust  of  temple

21.  their /.  are  blacked  thro’  the  smoke  of  temple

1  Mac.  4.  55.  then  all  the  people  fell  on  their /.

7.  3.  he  said,  let  me  not  see  their  /.

2  Mac.  7.  6.  which  witnessed  to  their/,  declared

FACT.

2  Mac.  4.  36.  Greeks  that  abhorred  the /.  complained
FACTION.

2  Mac.  4.  3.  by  one  of  Simon's /.  murders  committed
FA  I  L.

2  Esd.  15.  13.  their  seeds  shall  /.  through  blasting
Jud.  11.6.  my  lord  shall  not /.  of  his  purposes
12.  for  their  victuals  /.  them,  and  their  water

12.  3.  if  thy  provision  should  /.  how  should  we  give  I
Eccl.  2.  8.  believe  him,  your  reward  shall  not /.

3.  13.  if  his  understanding/,  have  patience
7-  31./.  not  to  be  with  them  that  weep

24.  9.  he  created  me,  and  L  shall  never  f.

37.  23.  the  fruits  of  his  understanding/,  not
Bar.  2. 18.  the  eyes  that /.  will  give  thee  praise,  O  L.
FAILED.

2  Esd.  3.  29.  saw  evil-doers  so  that  my  heart  /.  me
Jud.  7. 19.  Israel  cried  to  Lord,  because  their  heart/.

20.  so  that  all  their  vessels  of  water/.  Bethulia

14.  6.  Aehior  fell  down  on  his  face,  and  his  spirit/.

Esth.  10.  5.  and  nothing  thereof  hath  /.

Eccl.  17.  24.  he  comforted  those  that /.  in  patience
31.  7-  they  have  /.  that  put  their  trust  in  them

49.  4.  forsook  the  law,  even  the  kings  of  Judah/,

1  Mac.  3.  29.  that  the  money  of  his  treasures  /.

2  Mac.  13. 19.  he  was  put  to  flight,/,  lost  of  his  men

FA1LETH.

2  Esd.  5.  53.  born  when  the  womb/,  are  otherwise

13.  4.  as  the  earth/,  when  it  feeleth  the  fire
JVisd.  7.  14.  for  wisdom  is  a  treasure  that  never  /.
Eccl.  17.  31.  than  the  sun,  yet  the  light  thereof/.

41.  2.  acceptable  to  him  whose  strength  /.

I  Mac.  6.  10.  and  my  heart  /.  for  very  care
FAILING.

JVisd.  17.  15.  partly  fainted,  their  heart /.  them
FAIN.

1  Mac.  6.  54.  they  were  /.  to  disperse  themselvej
FAINT.

Jud.  8.  31.  send  us  rain,  and  we  shall  /.  no  more
Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  be  to  fearful  hearts  and /.  hands

4.  9.  he  not  /.-hearted  when  thou  sittest  in  judgm.
7. 10.  be  not  /.-hearted  when  makest  thy  prayer
24.  24./.  not  to  be  strong  in  Lord,  to  confirm  you
43.  10.  they  will  never  /.  in  their  watches

1  Mac.  3.  17.  we  are  ready  to  f.  with  fasting

FAINTED.

Jud.  7.  22.  women  and  young  men  /.  for  thirst

8.  9.  when  she  heard  that  they/,  for  lack  of  water
Esth.  15.  7.  the  queen  fell  down,  was  pale  and /.
JVisd.  1“.  15.  vexed  with  apparitions,  and  partly  /.

2  Mac.  3.  24.  astonished  at  the  power  of  God,  and/.

FAINTNESS.

Esth.  15.  15.  she  was  speaking,  she  fell  down  for  f.
FAIR,  FAIR.

Tob.  6.  12.  the  maid  is /.  and  wise,  now  hear  me
Jud.  12.  13.  let  not  this /.  damsel  fear  to  come
Esth.  16.  5.  the  /.  speech  of  those  that  are  in  trust
Eccl.  3.  15.  as  the  ice  in  the /.  warm  weather
6.  5.  a/,  tongue  will  increase  kind  greetings
13.  6.  will  speak  thee /.  and  say,  what  wantest  thou  <

22.  17.  as /.  plastering  on  the  wall  of  a  gallery
24.  14.  as  a  /.  olive-tree  in  a  pleasant  field

18.  I  atn  the  mother  of  f.  love,  fear,  and  hope
26.  18.  so  are  the  /.  feet  with  a  constant  heart

50.  10.  as  a /.  olive-tree  budding  forth  fruit

Sus.  2.  a  very/,  woman,  and  one  that  feared  the  Ld.

4.  Joacim  had  a  /.  garden  joining  to  his  house
2  Mac.  3.  25.  an  horse  adorned  with  a  very  /.  covei .
FAITH.

2  Esd.  5.  1.  and  the  land  shall  be  barren  of /.

6.  5.  that  ha*'"  gathered  /.  for  a  treasure

28.  for/,  it  ...jail  flourish,  corruption  be  overcome

7.  34.  truth  shall  stand,  and  /.  shall  wax  strong
13.  23.  such  as  have  /.  towards  the  Almighty
JVisd.  3.  14.  to  him  shall  be  given  special  gift  of/.

639


Aim  tKVPH*.,


F  A  L


FAS


FAT


Feel.  1.  2”. /.  and  meekness  are  his  delight

25.  12./.  is  the  beginning  of  cleaving  to  him

1  Mac.  14.  35.  for  the  justice  and  /  that  he  kept

.FAITHFUL.

2  Esd.  7-  24.  in  his  statutes  have  they  not  been  /.

8.  35.  among  f.  there  is  none  hath  not  done  amiss

15.  2.  cause  them  to  be  written,  for  they  are  /

Esth.  16.  1.  the  king  to  all  our  /.  subjects,  greeting
Wisd.  3.  9.  such  as  be/,  in  love  shall  abide  with  him
Eccl.  1.  14.  it  was  created  with  the /.  in  the  womb

6.  14.  a  /  friend  is  a  strong  defence  and  a  treasure

15.  nothing  doth  countervail  a/,  friend

16.  a /.  friend  is  the  medicine  of  life

7. 18.  nor  a /.  brother  for  the  gold  of  Ophir
22.  23.  be  /.  to  thy  neighbour  in  his  poverty

26. 15.  shamefaced  and /.  woman  is  a  double  grace

27.  17.  love  thy  friend,  and  be /.  to  him

33.  3.  the  law  is/,  to  him  as  an  oracle

34.  8.  wisdom  is  perfection  to  a  f.  mouth
56.  16.  and  let  thy  prophets  be  found  /

37.  13.  for  there  is  no  man  more/,  to  thee  than  it

44.  20.  when  he  was  proved,  he  was  found  /.

46.  15.  by  his  word  he  was  known  to  be/,  in  vision
48.  22.  as  Esay  who  was  great  and  /.  in  vision

1  Mac.  2.  52.  was  not  Abraham  found/,  intemptat.3

3.  13.  .ludas  had  gathered  a  company  of  the  f.

7.  8.  Bacchides  was  a  great  man  and /.  to  the  king
70.  27.  now  continue  you  still  to  be/,  unto  us

14.  41.  till  there  should  arise  a  /.  prophet

2  Mac.  1.  2.  Isaac  and  Jacob  his/,  servants

9.  26.  that  every  man  will  be  still/,  tome

FAITHFULLY.

Eccl.  29.3.  keep  thy  word  and  deal  /.  with  him
FAITHFULNESS.

Eccl.  15.  15.  and  to  perform  acceptable/.

45.  4.  he  sanctified  him  in  his  /.  and  meekness

46.  15.  by  his/,  lie  was  found  a  true  prophet

FALL.

QEsd.  7-  7-  entrance  is  set  in  a  dangerous  place  to/.

10.  9.  that  ought  to  mourn  for  the  /  of  so  many
48.  my  son  happened  to  have  a  /.  and  died

12.  18.  it  shall  not  then  /  but  be  restored

28.  but  at  the  last  shall  he/,  through  the  sword

13.  58.  and  such  things  as  /.in  their  seasons

15.  57.  and  thou  shalt/.  through  the  sword

Tob.  1  ] .  8.  he  shall  rub,  the  whiteness  shall  /  away
Jud.  6.  6.  and  thou  shalt /.  among  their  slain

9.  let  not  thy  countenance/.  I  have  spoken

8.  19.  they  had  a  great/,  before  our  enemies

16.  7-  the  mighty  one  did  not  /.  by  young  men
Esth.  14.  11.  O  Lord,  let  them  not  laugh  at  our/.

It  >sd.  3.  15.  the  root  of  wisdom  shall  never/.

6.  9.  that  ye  may  learn  wisdom,  and  not /.  away
?.  25.  therefore  can  no  defiled  thing  /.  into  her

10.  1.  and  she  brought  him  out  of  his/.

13.  16.  he  provided  for  it,  that  it  might  not/.

17-  18.  or  a  pleasing /.  of  water  running  violently
Eccl.  1.  30.  exalt  not  thyself,  lest  thou/.

2.  7.  wait  for  mercy  and  go  not  aside,  lest  ye/

18.  we  will/,  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord

5.  13.  and  the  tongue  of  man  is  his /

8.  1.  strive  not  with  a  mighty  man  lest  thou/.

9.  3.  meet  not  an  harlot  lest  thou  /.  into  her  snares
9.  so  through  thy  desire  thou  /.  into  destruction

12.  15.  if  thou  begin  to /.  he  will  not  tarry
13. 21.  a  rich  man  beginning  to  /.  is  held  up

14.  18.  as  of  the  green  leaves,  some  f.  some  grow

19.  1.  small  things,  he  shall  /  by  li'ttle  and  little

2.  wine  and  women  will  make  men  to/,  away

20.  18.  the  /  of  the  wicked  shall  come  speedily

22.  19.  that  pricketh  the  eye  will  make  tears/.

27-  on  my  lips,  that  1/  not  suddenly  by  tnem

23.  1.  leave  me  not,  and  let  me  not  /  by  them

3.  lest  I  /  before  mine  adversaries  and  my  enem
8.  the  evil  speaker  and  proud  shall  f.  thereby

25.  7-  he  that  liveth  to  see  the  /.  of  his  enemy

19.  let  the  portion  of  a  sinner /.  upon  her
27-  26.  whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall  /.  therein

27.  he  that  worketh  mischief  it  shall/,  on  him

29.  they  that  rejoice  at  the  /.  of  the  righteous
28.23.  such  as  forsake  the  Ixird  shall/,  into  it

26.  lest  thou  /  before  him  (hat  lieth  in  wait
29.  19.  a  wicked  man  transgressing  the  commands

of  L.  shall/  into  suretyship  ;  shall  f.  into  snare

20.  beware  that  thou  thyself/  not  into  the  sam
32.  20.  go  not  in  a  way  wherein  thou  mayest/.

35.  15.  her  cry  against  him  that  causeth  them  to  f.
38.  15.  let  him/  into  the  hand  of  the  physician

16.  my  son,  let  tears  f.  down  over  the  dead
43.  13.  by  hiscommandm.  he  maketh  snow  to/

46.  6.  he  made  the  battle  to /  on  the  nations
50.  4.  he  took  care  of  temple  that  it  shoo  Id  not/.
Bar.  4.  31.  miserable  are  they  that  rejoiced  at  thy  /
33.  for  as  she  rejoiced  and  was  glad  at  thy  /

6.  27.  for  if  they  /  to  the  ground  at  anv  time
Sus.  23.  it  is  better  for  me  to  f.  into  your  hands

1  Mac.  2.  19./.  away  every  one  from  the  religion

3.  25.  an  exceeding  great  dread  to  /.  on  the  nation

4.  32.  cause  boldness  of  their  strength  to/,  away

7.  38.  be  avenged,  and  let  them/,  by  the  sword

2  Mac.  9.  7-  Antiochus  fell,  so  that  having  a  sore  /

FALLEN.

iEsd.7.48.  O  Adam,  thou  art  not/,  alone,  but  weal

13.  23.  that  be/  into  danger  are  such  as  have  work
37.  for  their  wicked  life  are/  into  the  tempest

Jud.  10.  2.  Judith  rose  where  she  had/,  down
_\L  1L  even  death  is  now  /  upon  them  and  their  sii
Wisd.  11.20.  they  have  f.  down  with  one  blast
18.  23.  when  the  dead  were  now /.  down  by  heaps
Eccl.  13.  22.  when  a  rich  man  is/,  he  hath  helpers

28.  18.  many  have  /  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  bu
somany  as  have/,  by  the  tongu
49.  13.  who  raised  up  for  us  the  walls  that  were/

1  Mac.  9.21.  how  is  the  valiant  man/,  that  delivers

12.  37.  the  wall  on  the  east-side  was /.  down
_ .  FALLETH.

t  Esd.  6.56.  hast  likened  to  a  drop  that/,  from  vesse
Wtsd.ll.  22.  as  a  drop  of  dew  that  /.  on  the  earth
.Ecr/.  3.  31.  when  he/,  he  shall  find  a  stay
Bar.  6.  55.  when  fire  /  on  house  of  gods  of  wood
I  A LLING.

t  Esd.  12. 18.  great  strivings,  shall  stand  in  peril  of  J

640  J


JVisd.  16.  11.  that  not  /.  into  deep  forget  fulness

17.  4.  noises  as  of  waters  /.  sounded  about  them
Eccl.  34. 16.  from  stumbling,  and  he  is  a  help  from /.
43.  17 •/  down  thereof  as  lighting  of  grasshoppers
2  Mae.  3.  21.  to  see  the  /.  down  of  the  multitude
FA  LLS.

2  Esd.  8.  17.  I  see/  of  us  that  dwell  in  the  land

FALSE.

Eccl.  34.  1.  the  hopes  of  a  man  are  vain  and  /.

4.  from  that  which  is /.  what  truth  can  come  3

36.  19.  so  doth  an  heart  of  understanding  /.speeches
Bar.  6.  8.  yet  are  they  but /.  and  cannot  speak

44.  whatsoever  is  done  among  them  is /.

59.  it  is  better  to  be  a  king  than  such  /.  gods
Sus.  43.  knowest  they  have  borne  /.  witness  ag.  me
49.  for  they  have  borne  /  witness  against  her
61.  for  Daniel  had  convicted  them  of/  witness
FALSEHOOD.

Esth.  16.6.  beguiling  with /.  and  deceit  ofdisposition
2  Mac.  15.  10.  shewing  them  the /.  of  the  heathen
FALSELY.

Wisd.  14.  29.  though  they  swear/,  yet  they  look  not
Bel  12.  or  else  Daniel  that  speaketh /.  against  us
FAME.

1  Mac.  3.  26.  insomuch  as  his  /.  came  to  the  king
41.  the  merchants  hearing  the  /  of  them
FAMILY.

Tob.  5.  10.  shew  me  of  what  tribe  and  /,  thou  art

11.  dost  thou  seek  a  tribe  or  /  of  an  hired  man?

13.  I  enquired  to  know  thy  tribe  and  thy/

Jud.  8.  18.  no /.  who  worship  gods  made  with  hands
Esth.  14.  5.  I  have  heard  in  the  trihe  of  my  /

16.  18.  hanged  at  gates  of  Susa,  with  all  his  /.
FAMILIES.

1  Esd.  1. 4.  prepare  you  after  your/,  and  kindreds

5.  the  dignity  of  the /.  of  you  the’Livites

2.  8.  then  the  chief  of  the/,  of  Judea  stood  up

5.  1.  the  principal  men  of' the  /.  were  chosen

4.  the  names  of  the  men  according  to  their/.

63.  and  of  the  chief  of  their  f.  the  ancients

68.  so  they  went  to  the  chief  of  the  /,  and  said

8.  28.  the  chief  according  to  their  /.  and  dignities
59.  to  the  principal  men  of  the  /  of  Israel

9.  16.  Esdras  chose  the  principal  men  of  their  f.

FAM1N  E.

2  Esd.  15.  5.  I  will  bring /.  death,  and  destruction
49.  I  will  send  poverty,/ sword,  and  pestilence

16.  18.  the  beginning  of/,  and  great  dearth
19.  behold  /  and  p'agne  are  sent  as  scourges

21.  sword,  /  and  great  confusion  shall  grow
46.  or  in  captivity  and  /,  shall  they  get  children
Tob.  4.  13.  for  lewdness  is  the  mother  of/.

Jud.  5.  10.  a/,  covered  all  the  land  of  Chanaan

7.  14.  they  and  children  shall  be  consumed  with/.
Eccl.  39.  29.  /  and  death  created  for  vengeance
40.  9-  calamities,/  were  created  for  the  wicked
48.  2.  he  brought  a  sore /.  upon  them

Bar.  2.  25.  they  died  by/  sword,  and  by  pestilence
1  Mac.  6.  54.  the  /.  did  so  prevail  against  them
9-  24.  in  those  days  there  was  a  very  great/.

13.  49.  a  great  number  of  them  perished  through  f

FAMOUS

Eccl.  44.  1.  let  us  now  praise  /.  men  and  fathers
Bar.  3.  26.  the  giants,  f.  from’ the  beginning
FANCIETH.

Eccl.  34.  5.  heart /.  as  a  woman’s  heart  in  travail
FAR.

1  Esd.  9.  11.  our  sin  in  these  things  is  spread/.

2  Esd.  4.  2.  thy  heart  hath  gone  too /  in  this  world
Tob.  13.  11.  many  nations  shall  come  from  /

Wisd.  12.  24.  they  went  astray  very  /  in  error

14.  17.  because  they  dealt  /.  off;  they  took  the

counterfeit  of  his  visage  from/.
Eccl.  9.  13.  keep  /  from  the  man  that  hath  power

15.  8.  for  she  is/  from  pride,  men  that  are  liars

21.  7.  an  eloquent  man  is  known  /.  and  near
23.  3.  whose  nope  is  /.  from  thy  mercy'

12.  all  such  things  shall  be  /.  front  the  godly
27-  20.  he  is  too /.  off,  he  is  as  a  r<  e  escaped

43.  30.  exalt  Lord,  tor  even  yet  will  he /.  exceed

47.  16.  thy  name  went  /.  unto  the  islands
Bar.  3.  21.  their  children  were  /.  from  that  way

4.  15.  he  hath  brought  a  nation  on  them  from  f.

6.  73.  for  the  just  man  shall  be/  from  reproach
Sus.  51.  put  these  two  aside  one  /.  from  another

1  Mac.  8.  12.  had  conquered  kingdoms  /  and  nigh
23.  the  sword  also  and  enemy  be  /.  from  them

13.  5.  be  if  /.  from  me  that  I  should  spare

2  Mac.  4.  40.  a  man/,  gone  in  years,  no  less  in  folly

8.  25.  they  took  their  money  and  pursued  them  f.

FARfi.  j

Eccl.  3.  26.  a  stubborn  heart  shall  /.  evil  at  last
32.  24.  that  trusteth  shall  /  never  the  worse
FARE  well.

2  Mac.  9.  20.  if  ye  and  your  children/,  well

11.  21./  ye  well.  33.  .38.

28.  if  ye/,  well  we  have  our  desire,  we  are  in  health

FASHION.

2  Esd.  4.  35.  how  long  shall  I  hope  on  this/./

5.  5.3.  that  be  born  in  strength  of  youth  are  of  one  /
Wisd.  2. 15.  not  like  others,  his  ways  are  of  another/

14.  19.  to  make  the  resemblance  of  the  best/

FASHIONED.

2  Esd.  8.  8.  for  when  the  body  is /.  in  the  womb
11.  that  the  thing  which  is/  may  be  nourished

14.  him  who  with  so  great  labour  was/.

Wisd.  7.  2.  1  was/,  to  be  flesh  in  time  of  ten  months

1.3.  13.  formed  it  and  /.  it  to  the  image  of  a  man

15. 16.  he  that  borrowed  his  own  spirit  /.  them
19-  6.  the  whole  creature  was /.  again  anew
FASHION  ETH.

Wisd.  15.  7-  potter/,  every  vessel  with  much  labour
Eccl.  38.  .30.  lie /.  the  clay  with  his  arm,  boweth  down
FASHIONS.

Wisd.  16.  25.  even  then  was  it  altered  into  all  /.

2  Mac.  4.  9.  training  up  in  the/,  of  the  heathen

1.3.  now  such  was  the  height  of  Greek  /.

6.  8.  that  the  Jews  should  observe  the  same /.

FAST.

2  Esd.  .3.  18.  thou  didst  set  /.  the  earth
Wisd.  2.  5.  it  is  /  sealed,  no  man  cometh  again
4.  4.  yet  standing  not  /.  they  shall  be  shaken


Wisd.  13.15.  set  it  in  a  wall,  and  made  if /.  with  in^a
Eccl.  4.  13.  he  that  holds  her/,  shall  inherit  glory
41.  12.  their  seed  stands /.  children  for  their  sales
Bar.  6  18.  so  the  priests  make /  their  temples
Bel  11.  shut  the  door/',  and  seal  it  with  thy  signet
FAS  TEN .

Eccl.  14.  24.  he  shall  also /.  a  pin  in  her  walls
FAST.

1  Esd.  8.  50.  and  there  I  vowed  a /.  to  the  young  meB
73.  rising  up  from  the  /.  with  my  clothes  rent

2  Esd.  6.  31.  if  thou  wilt /.  seven  days  agaih

9.  2.3.  seven  days,  but  thou  shalt  not /  in  them

10.  4.  but  I  purpose  to  mourn  and  /.till  ldie

FASTED.

2  Esd.  5.  20.  I /  seven  days,  mourning  and  weeping
6.  .35.  I  wept  and  /  seven  days  in  like  manner
Jud._  4.  13.  the  people/  many  days  in  all  Judea

8.  6.  she/,  all  the  daysof  her  widowhood

Bar .1.5.  they  wept,  /.  and  prayed  before  the  Lord
1  Mac.  3.  47.  they/  that  day,  and  put  on  sackcloth
FASTING.

TbiLl2.8  prayer  is  good  with /.  alms  and  righteous,

1  Mac.  .3.  17.  ready  to  faint  with/,  all  this  day

2  Mac.  13.  12.  they  besought  L.  with  weeping  and  f.

FAT.

1  Esd.  1.  14.  the  priests  offered  the  /.  until  night

9.  51.  go  then,  eat  the /.  and  drink  the  sweet
Jud.  16.  16.  and  all  the /.  is  not  sufficient
Eccl.  26.  1.3.  and  her  discretion  will  /  his  bones
35.  6.  the  offering  of  righteous  makes  the  altar /
.38.  11.  and  make  a  /.  offering,  as  not  being

47.  2.  as  the  /.  taken  from  the  peace  offering
Dari.  3.  16.  like  as  in  ten  thousands  of  /  lambs
Bel  27.  Daniel  took  pitch,/,  hair, and  made  lumps
FATHER.


1  Esd.  1.  .34.  made  him  king  instead  of  Josiashis /

4.  20.  a  man  leaveth  his  /.  and  deaveth  to  his  wife
21.  rememhereth  neither  /.  mother,  nor  country
25.  man  loveth  his  wife  better  than  /.  and  mother

2  Esd.  1.  28.  have  not  1  prayed  you  as  a  f.  his  sons

29.  that  ye  should  be  my  children,  and  1  your/

2.  5.  as  for  me,  O /.  I  call  on  thee  for  a  witness
'Bob.  .3.  7.  Sara  was  also  reproached  by  her  /  maids

5.  1./.  I  will  do  all  that  thou  hast  commanded

6.  12.  now  hear  me,  and  l  will  speak  to  her/

15.  the  precepts  which  thy  /  gave  thee  to  marry

9.  4.  but  my  /.  counteth  the  days  if  I  tarry  long

10.  1.  now  Tobithis /.  counted  every  day

12.  honour  thy  /.  and  mother-in-law,  thy  parents

11.2.  thou  knowest  how  thou  didst  leave  thy  /

14.  1.3.  he  buried  his  /and  mother  honourably

Jud.  9.2.  O  L.  God  of  my  /  Simeon,  to  whom  gavest
12.  I  pray  thee,  I  pray  thee,  O  God  of  my/.
Esth.  16.  11.  as  he  was  called  our /.  and  honoured
JVisd.  10.1.  preserved  the  first  formed  /.  of  the  world;

11.  10.  these  thou  didst  admonish  and  try  as  a  /.
14.  .3.  but  thy  providence,  O  F.  governeth  it

15.  for  a/,  afflicted  with  untimely  mourning
Eccl.  .3.  1.  hear  me,  your  /  O  children,  and  do

3.  whoso  hononreth  bis  /.  maketh  an  atonement

8.  honour  thy/,  and  mother  in  word  and  deed

9.  for  the  blessing  of  the  /.  established!  diildren

10.  glory  not  in  the  dishonourof  thy/

1 1 .  for  the  glorv  of  a  man  is  from  honour  of  his

12.  my  son,  hefp  thy  f.  in  his  age,  grieve  him  not>

4.  10.  be  a /.  to  fatherless,  and  husband  to  mother
7-  27.  honour  thy/,  with  thy  whole  heart

22.3.  an  ill-nurtured  son  is  the  dishonour  of  his  f.

4.  she  that  lives  dishonestly  is  her /.  heaviness

5.  she  that  is  bold  dishonoured!  her  /.  and  husband1
23.  1.  O  Lord,/,  and  governor  of  all  my  life

4.  O  Lord,/,  and  God  of  my  life,  give  me  not
14.  remember  thy/,  and  thy  mother

30.  4.  though  his /.  die,  yet  he  is  as  though  not  dead
.34.  20  as  one  that  killeth  the  son  before  his/  eyea

41. 17.  be  ashamed  of  whoredom  before  /  and  mo.
42.  9.  the /.  waketh  for  the  daughter,  none  knoweth

10.  lest  she  should  be  got  with  child  in  her/  house-
44.  19.  Abraham  was  a  great  /  of  many  people
51.  10.  I  called  on  the  Lord,  the /.  of  my  Lord
Sue  30.  so  she  came  with  her  /.  and  mother

1  Mac.  2.  54.  Phinees  our  /  obtained  covenant
65.  give  ear  to  him,  he  shall  be  a /.  unto  you

.3.  2.  so  did  all  they  that  held  with  his/

6.2.3.  we  have  been  willing  to  serve  thy /.

11.  2.  so  to  do  because  he  was  his  /.-in-’law

40.  that  he  might  reign  in  his /  stead

1.3.  3.  what  my  /.  house  have  done  for  the  laws-

27.  a  monument  upon  the  sepulchre  of  his/.

28.  he  set  up  pyramids  for  his /.  and  mother

2  Mac.  9-  2.3.  my  /.  at  what  time  he  led  an  army
11.  2.3.  since  our /.  is  translated  to  the  gods

14.  37.  who  was  called  a  /  of  the  Jews
_  FA  THEKLESS.

1  Esd.  3. 19.  mind  of  king  and  /.  child  to  be  allone

2  Esd.  2.  20.  judge  for  the /.  give  to  the  poor
Eccl.  4.  10.  be  as  a  father  to  the  /.  and  a  husband

.35.  14.  he  will  not  despise  the  supplication  of  the/.
Bar.  6.  .38.  nor  can  they  do  good  to  the  /

2  Mac.  .3.  10.  for  the  relief  of  widows  and  /
FATHERS.


1  Esd.  1. 11.  according  to  the  several  dignities  of/.
.31  Josias  died  and  was  huried  in  his  f.  sepulchre
2. 21 .  it  may  be  sought  out  in  the  books  of  thy  /..

6.  15.  but  when  our  /.  provoked  God  to  wrath
Tob.  3.  3.  punish  me  not  for  the  sins  of  my  /.

5.  deal  with  me  according  to  my  sins  and  my/.
4.  12.  take  a  wife  of  seed  of  thy /  not  a  strange  wo¬
man  who  is  not  of  thy  /.  tribe  ;  our  /.  married
8.  5.  blessed  art  thou',  Q  God  of  our  /.

Jud.  5.  7-  they  would  not  follow  the  gods  of  their /.

7.  28.  take  to  witness  our  God  and  Lord  of  our /.

8.  25.  who  trieth  us  even  as  be  did  our  /

10.  8.  the  God,  the  God  of  our /.  give  tnee  favour
Wisd.  9.  1.  O  God  of  my/,  and  Lord  of  mercy
12.  21.  to  whose/,  hast  sworn  and  made  covenant
18.  6.  of  that  night  were  our  /.  certified  afore
9.  the  /.  now  singing  out  the  songs  of  praise
24.  in  stones  was  the  gl«ry  of/,  graven
Eccl.  8.  9.  for  they  also  learned  of  their/.

44.  1.  let  us  now  praise  our  /  that  begat  us
Bar.  2.  6.  but  to  us  and  to  our  f.  open  shame


)


FEA


FE  A


F  E  T  [Apocryph..


Bar.  2.  2).  the  land  that  I  pave  unto  vonr  /.

3.  8.  accordin'/ to  all  the  iniquities  of  our/.
l)i:n.  3.  3.  blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord  God  of  our/.
Bel  !.  kinp  A  sty  apes  was  gathered  to  his  /.

Prayer  of  Manats.  (J  Lord,  almighty  God  of  our/.

1  Mac.  2.  19.  fall  away  from  the  religion  of  their  /.

20.  we  will  walk  in  the  covenant  of  our /.

50.  give  your  lives  for  the  covenant  of  your /.

51.  remember  what  acts  our  /.  did  in  their  time
69.  l  e  blessed  them,  and  was  gathered  to  his /.

4.  9.  remember  how  our/,  were  delivered

2  Mac.  I.  25.  thou  that  didst  choose  the/.

5. 10.  nor  had  he  sepulchre  with  his /.

6.  1.  the  Jews  to  depart  from  the  laws  of  their /.

7.  2.  rather  than  transgress  the  laws  of  our  f.

24.  if  he  would  turn  From  the  laws  of  his  f.

30.  the  law  that  was  given  to  our /.  by  Moses
37-  1  offer  my  body  and  life  for  laws  of  our/.

12.  39.  to  bury  them  in  their  /.  graves

13.  9.  worse  than  hail  been  done  in  his /.  time

LAUGH  ION.

Jud.  13.  6.  she  took  down  his/,  from  thence

16.  9.  and  the  f.  passed  through  his  neck
FAULT.

Eccl.  9.  13.  make  no /.  lest  he  fake  away  tliv  life

1  Mac.  13.  39.  as  for  any  /,  committed  to  this  day

2  Mac.  14.  28.  articles  agreed  on.  man  being  in  no /.

FA  ULI  LESS.

Ei  cl.  23.  10.  he  that  sweareth  shall  not  be  f.
FAVOUR.

1  Ed.  6.  5.  the  elders  of  the  .lews  obtained  /.

2  E*d.  5  56.  it  1  have  found  /.  in  thy  sight,  6.  11.
’Job.  1.  13.  gave  me  prace  and  /.  before  Enemessar

12.  18.  not  of  any/,  of  mine,  but  by  the  will  of  G.
Jud.  8.  23.  our  servitude  shall  not  be  directed  to /.

10.  8.  the  G  id  of  our  fathers  give  thee/.

Esth.  16  11.  had  so  tar  obtained  the/,  ueshew
Wisd.  12.  18.  thou  orderest  us  with  great  f.

Eccl.  1.  13.  he  shall  find/,  in  the  day  of  death

3.  18.  thou  shalt  find  /  before  the  Lord

22.  21.  for  there  may  be  a  returning  to/.

32.  10.  before  a  shamefaced  man  goeth  f.

14.  they  that  seek  him  early  shall  find’/.

40.  22.  thine  eye  desiretb  /.  a'nd  beauty

41.  24.  so  shalt  thou  find  /  before  all  men
45.  1.  which  found/,  in  the  sight  of  all  flesh
Bar.  1.  12.  we  shall  find  f.  in  their  sight

2.  14.  give  us/,  in  sight  of  them  that  led  us  captive

1  Mac.  10.  Co.  where  he  found  /.  in  their  sight
11.21.  to  the  king  where  he  found /.  in  his  sight

2  Mac.  2.  22.  Lord  being  gracious  to  them  with  all  f.

4.  11.  privileges  granted  of  special  /.  to  the  .lews

6.  22.  and  for  the  old  friendship  might  find/.
12.45.  there  w  as  great/,  laid  up  for  those  godlv

FAVOURABLE.

1  Esd.  8.  53.  we  besought  Lord  and  found  him  f.  to  us

FAVOURABLY.

Wisd.  6.  16.  sheweth  herself/,  to  them  in  the  ways

2  Mac.  9.  27.  he  will  /.  yield  to  your  desires

FAVOURED.

2  Mac.  6.  18.  he  was  of  a  well  f.  countenance
FEAR.

'2  Esd.  3.  3.  T  began  to  speak  words  full  of  /.

Job.  1.  19.  w  ithdrew  m\ self  for  f.

14.  2.  he  increased  in  the/,  of  the  lord  God
■  Jud.  2.  28.  the/,  and  dread  of  him  fell  upon  all

14.  3.  then/.shal!  tall  upon  them,  they  shall  flee

15.  2./.  and  trembling  fell  upon  them

Esth.  14.  1.  Esther  in  /.  of  death  resorted  to  the  Lord

19.  O  thou  mighty  God,  deliver  me  out  of  my/.

15.5.  but  her  heart  was  in  anguish  for  /.

8.  the  king,  who  in  a/,  leaped  from  his  throne

13.  my  heart  was  troubled  for/,  of  thy  majesty
Wisd.  4.  20.  they  shall  come  with /.  iniquities  con-

5.2.  they  shall  be  troubled  with  terrible  t.  [vince

6.  7.  fie  who  is  Lord  shall  /.  no  man’s  person
12. 1 1 .  nor  didst  thou  for /.  give  them  pardon

17.  4.  nor  might  the  corner  keep  them  from  f.

10.  they  died  for/,  denying  they  saw'  the  air

12./.  is  nothing  but  a  betraying  of  succours

15.  for  asudden/.  not  looked  for  came  ui>on  them

19.  these  things  made  them  to  swoon  for/.

Eccl.  1.  11.  the  /.  of  the  Lord  is  honour  and  glory

12.  the/,  of  the  Lord  maketh  a  merry  heart

14.  to/,  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom

16.  to/,  the  Lord  is  fulness  of  wisdom

,  18.  the/,  of  the  I.ord  is  a  crowm  of  wisdom

20.  the  root  of  wisdom  is  to  /.  the  Lord

21.  the/,  of  the  Lord  driveth  away  sins

27.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  wisdom  and  instruction

28.  distrust  not  the/,  of  Iy>rd  when  thou  art  poor
30.  thou  earnest  not  in  truth  to  the  /.  of  the  Lord

2.  7.  ye  that/,  the  Ix>rcl  wait  for  his  mercy

8.  ye  that/,  the  Lord,  believe  him

9.  ye  that/,  the  Lord,  hope  for  good  and  joy

16.  that/,  the  Lord  will  seek  what  is  pleasing

4.  17.  she  will  bring/,  and  dread  upon  him

5.  5.  be  not  without/,  to  add  sin  unto  sin

6.  16.  and  they  that/,  the  Lord  shall  find  him

9.  16  let  thy  glorying  be  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord

10.  19.  they  that/,  the  Lord  are  a  sure  seed

21.  the/,  of  the  Lord  goeth  before  authori  y

22.  their  glory  is  the  f.  of  the  Lord
15.13.  and  they  that  /  God  love  it  not

16.  2.  except  the  /.  of  the  Lord  be  with  them

18.  27.  a  w  ise  man  will  /.  in  every  thing
19.18.the/.of  the  Lord  is  the  first  step  to  be  accepted

22.  18.  a  fearful  heart  cannot  stand  against  any  /.

23.  27.  nothing  better  than  the  /.  of  the  Lord

24.  18.  I  am  the  mother  of  fair  love  and  /.

25.  6.  the  /.  of  God  is  the  glory  of  old  men

12.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  beginning  of  his  love
27.  3.  hold  himself  diligently  in  the /.  of  the  Lord
32.  16.  they  that /.  the  Lord  shall  find  judgment
36.  2.  send  thy  /,  on  all  nations  that  seek  not
40.  2.  and  cause  /.  of  heart  |j  5./.  of  death

7.  he  marvel leth  that  the /.  was  nothing

26.  but  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  above  them  both:

theie  is  no  want  in  the  /.of  the  Lord

27.  the/,  of  the  Lord  is  a  fruitful  garden

41  3./.  not  the  sentence  of  death,  remember
45.  23.  Fhinees  had  a  zeal  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord


Bar.  3.  7.  thou  hast  put  thy  /,  in  our  hearts

33.  calleth  it  again,  and  it  obeyeth  him  with  /.
Sus.  57.  and  they  for/,  companied  with  you

1  Mac.  2.  62.  /.  not  then  the  words  of  a  sinful  man

3.6.  wherefore  the  wicked  shrunk  for/,  of  him

25.  then  began  the/,  of  Judas  to  fall  on  nations

4.  8.  /.  ye  not  their  multitude,  nor  he  afraid

10.  "6.  they  of  the  city  let  him  in  for  /

2  Mac.  3.  17.  the  man  was  so  compassed  w'ifh  /.
21.  the/,  of  the  high  priest  being  in  an  agony
30.  the  temple  was  full  of/,  and  trouble

6.  3.1.  I  suffer  these  things,  because  1  /.  him

7.  29./.  not  this  tormentor,  but  take  thy  death
12.22.  the  enemies  being  smitten  with/,  fled

13.  16.  they  filled  the  camp  with /.  and  tumult

15.  18.  but  the  principal  /.  was  for  the  temple

23.  send  a  good  angel  tor  a  and  dread  10  them
FEARED.

2  Esd.  12.  13.  it  shall  be /.  above  all  kingdoms
Tub.  12.  16.  they  tell  on  their  faces,  for  they  /.
Jud.  8.  8.  none  gave  her  an  ill  word,  for  she/.  God
Eccl.  1.  8.  there  is  one  wise  and  greatly  to  be /.
Sus.  2.  a  fair  woman  and  one  that  /.  the  Lord

1  Mac.  3.  30./.  he  should  not  be  able  to  bear  charges
12.  28.  they/,  and  trembled  in  their  hearts

FEA  RE  I’ll.

Jud.  16.  16.  but  he  that  /.  the  Lord  is  great
Eccl.  1.  13.  whoso /  the  L.  it  shall  go  well  with  him

6.  17.  whoso /.  the  Lord  shall  direct  friendship

10.  24.  none  greater  than  he  that  /.  the  Lord
15.  1.  he  that /.  the  Lord,  will  do  good

19.24.  that  hath  small  understanding  and  /.  God

21.6.  he  that /.  the  L.  will  repent  from  his  heart
•23.  19.  such  a  man  only/,  the  eyes  of  men

25.  10.  there  is  none  above  him  that  /,  the  Lord

26.  5  there  be  three  things  which  my  heart /.

23.  but  a  godly  woman  given  to  him  that  /.  the  L.
32. 14.  whoso /.  the  L.  will  receive  his  discipline

33.  1.  no  evil  shall  happen  to  him  that/,  the  Lord

34.  14.  whoso  /,  the  L.  shall  not  fear  or  be  afraid
15.  blessed  is  the  soul  of  him  that /.  the  Lord

FEARFUL.

2  Esd.  8.22.  word  true,  and  whose  ordinance  is  /.
12.  shew  me  the  plain  difference  of  tins  /.  vision

15.  13.  theirseeds  shall  fail  with  a /.  constellation
Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  be  to /.  hearts  and  faint  hands
22.  18.  so  a/,  heart  cannot  stand  against  fear

1  Mac.  3.  56.  such  as  were /.  commanded  to  return

2  Mac.  1.24.  O  Lord  God,  who  art /.  and  strong

8.  13.  they  that  were /.  and  distrusted,  fled

FEAR  FULNESS.

2  Esd.  5.  14.  an  extreme  /.  went  thro-gh  my  body

11.  40.  had  power  over  the  world  with  great/.

15.  37.  there  shall  be  great  f.  and  trembling

FEARING.

Esth.  11.9-  nation  was  troubled,/,  their  own  evils
Eccl.  29.7.  refused  to  lend,  /.  to  be  defrauded
2  Mac.  9.  29.  who  also  /.  the  son  of  Antiochus
FEAST.

1  Esd.  1.1.  .Tosias  held  the  /,  of  the  passover

19-  Israel  held  the  /.  of  sweet  bread  seven  days

3.  1.  Darius  made  a  great  /,  to  all  his  subjects

5.  51.  also  they  held  the  /.  of  tabernacles
7-  14.  they  kept  the  /.  of  unleavened  bread

2  Esd.  1. 31.  your  solemn  /.  days  have  1  forsaken
2.38.  those  that  be  sealed  in  the  /,  of  the  Lord

9.  47.  the  time  he  should  have  a  wife,  I  made  a  f.
Tub.  2.  1.  when  I  was  come  home  in  the  /  of  Pen¬
tecost,  which  is  the  holy  /.  of  the  sev  en  weeks

8.  19.  he  kept  the  wedding/,  fourteen  days
Jud.  6.  21.  Ozias  made  a /.  to  the  elders

10.  2.  in  the  sabbath-days,  and  in  her /.-days

12.  10.  Holofernes  made  a  /.  to  his  servants  only

13.  1.  were  weary  because  the  /.  had  been  long
Esth.  14.  17.  I  have  not  greatly  esteemed  the  king’s  f.
F.ccl.W.Vb.  shalt  entertain  and  /.  and  have  no  thanks
32.  1.  if  thou  be  made  the  master  of  the  f.

2.  receive  a  crown  for  well-ordering  the  f.

Bar.  6.  32.  as  men  do  at  the/,  when  one  is  dead

1  Mac.  10.  34.  amt  the  three  days  after  the  /.

2  Mac.  I.  9.  see  that  ye  keep  the  /  of  tabernacles
6-7-  and  when  the  /.  of  Bacchus  was  kept

21 .  they  that  had  the  charge  of  that  wicked  /.

8.  33.  as  they  kept  the  /.  for  the  victory

10.6.  with  gladness,  as  in  /.  of  tabernacles

12.  31.  came  to  lerus.  the/,  of  weeks  approaching
32.  after  the /.  called  Pentecost  went  forth
FEASTED.

1  Esd.  4.63.  they/,  with  instruments  of  music
FEASTING.

Jud.  16.  20.  the  people  continued  /.  in  Jerusalem
Esth.  16.22.  shall  keep  it  an  high  day  with  all  f.
FEASTINGS.

Wisd.  19.  16.  whom  they  had  received  with  /.
FEASTS.

7 'ob.  1.  6.  I  went  often  to  Jerusalem  at  the  /.

2.  6.  yom  /.  shall  be  turned  into  mourning
Jud.  8.6.  she  fasted,  save  the /.  and  solemn  days
Esth.  16.  22.  among  your  solemn /.  ye  shall  keep  it
Eccl.  33.  8.  and  he  altered  seasons  and  /.

43.  7.  from  the  moon  is  the  sign  of/,  a  light
47.  10.  he  beautified  their  /.  and  set  in  order
Bar.  1.14.  read  this  on  the  /.  and  solemn  days

1  Mac.  1.  39.  her /.  were  turned  into  mourning
10.  34.  I  will  that  all  the /.  and  sabbaths

12.  11.  in  our /.  and  other  convenient  days

2  Mac.  6.  6.  to  keep  sabbath  and  ancient/.

7.  42.  have  spoken  concerning  the  idolatrous /.
FEATHER.

2  Esd.  11.  12.  there  arose  one  f.  and  reigned
FEA TH  EPS.

2  Esd.  11.3.  out  of  her/,  there  grew  other  contrary  /.

and  they  became  little /.  and  small

5.  lo,  the  eagle  flew  with  her  /.  and  reigned

7.  the  eagle  rose  and  spake  to  her  /.  saying

11.  I  numbered  her  contrary  /.  there  were  eight

20.  the  /.  that  followed  stood  up  on  the  right  side

22.  after  this  I  looked  and  behold,  the  twelve/.

appeared  no  more,  nor  the  two  little/.

24.  that  two  little  f.  divided  themselves

25.  the /.  that  were  under  the  wing  thought
31.  the  head  eat  up  the  two  /.  under  the  wir.g


2  Esd.  1 1 . 45.  appear  no  more,  thou  eagle,  nor  thy  f

12.  19.  sawest  the  eight  small  under/,  sucking

29.  whereas  thou  sawest  two /.  under  the  wings
FEA  I  HER  ED.

2  Esd.  11.  1.  an  eagle  which  had  twelve /.  wings
FEA  I  S.

Jud.  11.8.  that  thou  art  wonderful  in /.  of  war
FED.

2  Mac.  5.  27.  Judas  who /.  on  herbs  continually
FEDDES  T.

Wisd.  16.  20.  thou  /.  thy  people  with  angels’  food
FEEBLE.

Wisd.  2.  11.  that  which  is /.  is  found  nothing

9.  5.  for  I  thy  servant  am  a  /.  person

Eccl.  25.  23.  maketh  weak  hands  and  /.  knees
Bar.  2.  18.  which  goeth  stooping,  and  /.  eyes  fail

1  Mac.  1.  26.  virgins  and  young  men  were  made /.

FEED.

2  Esd.  16.  68./.  you  being  idle  with  things  offered

FEEL.

Jud.  16.  17.  they  shall  /.  them,  and  weep  forever

Eccl.  30.  1.  causeth  him  oft  to  /.  the  rod

Bar.  6.  20.  when  they  eat  them,  clothes  /.  it  not

24.  nor  when  they  were  molten,  did  they/,  it

FEE LEI H.

2  Esd.  13.  4.  as  the  earth  faileth  when  it/,  the  fire
FEELING.

Wisd.  11.  13.  they  had  some  /.  of  the  Lord
FEEL.

2  Esd.  1.  26./.  are  swift  to  commit  man-slaughter

2.  15.  make  their/,  as  fast  as  a  pillar

25.  O  thou  good  nurse,  establish  their/.

5.  15.  so  the  angel  set  me  up  upon  my/.

6.  1.3.  stand  up  upon  thy  /.  and  hear  a  voice

10.  30.  he  set  me  upon  my  /.  and  said  untome

14  2.  I  said,  here  am  I,  Lord,  and  stood  on  my  f.
Jud.  2.  7.  cover  the  earth  w  ith  the  /.  of  my  army

10.  4.  and  she  took  sandals  upon  her  /.

14.  7.  he  tell  at  Judith’s /.  and  reverenced  her
E*th.  13. 13.  been  content  to  kiss  the  soles  of  his  /-
Wisd.  14.  11.  a  snare  to  the  /.  of  the  unwise

15.  15.  as  tor  their  /.  they  are  slow  to  go
Eccl.  6.  24.  and  put  thy/,  into  her  fetters

21.  19.  doctrine  to  fools  is  as  fetters  on  the/.

25.  20.  as  a  sandy  way  is  to  the/,  of  the  aged

26.  18.  so  are  fair/,  w  ith  a  constant  heart
38.  29.  turning  the  wheel  about  with  his/.

30.  he  boweth  down  his  strength  before  his/.

Bar.  6.  17.  through  the/,  of  them  that  come  in

26.  they  are  borne  on  shoulders,  having  no  f

FEIGN  EDI.Y.

2  Esd.  8.  28.  think  not  on  those  that  walk  /

FELL.

1  Esd.  9.47.  they/,  to  the  around,  and  worshipped)

2  l-.sd.  10.  1.  in  his  wedding-chamber  he/,  down

13.  11.  an  I/,  with  violence  on  the  multitude
I'ob.  1.  4.  Naphtali  /.  from  the  house  of  Jerusalem

11.  1.3.  when  he  saw  his  son,  lie/,  on  his  neck

14.  10.  but  Aman/.  into  the  snare,  and  perished
Jud.  4.  11./  before  the  temple,  and  cast  ashes

6.  18.  then  the  people /.  down,  and  w  orshipped  G.

7 .  22.  young  men/  down  in  the  streets  of  the  city

8.  .3.  lie/,  on  his  bed,  and  died  in  Bethulia

9.  1.  then  Judith/,  on  her  face,  and  put  ashes

10.2.3.  she/,  down  on  her  face,  and  did  reverence-

14.  6.  he/,  down  on  his  face,  his  spirit  failed

7.  he/,  at  Judith's  feet,  and  reverenced  her

15.  2.  fear  and  trembling/,  upon  them

5.  they  all/,  upon  them  with  one  consent
Esth.  15.  7-  queen/,  down,  was  pale,  and  fainted

15.  as  she  was  speaking,  she  /.  down  for  faintness
Wisd.  10.  6.  fire  that /.  down  on  the  five  cities

17.  16.  so  whosoever  there /.  down,  was  kept
Eccl.  15.  11.  say  not,  it  is  thro'  the  I.ord  1  /  away

16.  7-  the  old  giants  who/,  away  in  foolishness
50.  17-  the  people/,  to  the  earth  on  their  faces

Sus.  15.  it/,  out  as  they  watched  a  fit  time

1  Mac.  1. 5.  and  after  these  things  he/  sick

3.  II.  ma«y  also/,  down  slain,  the  rest  fled

4.  40.  f.  clown  flat  to  the  ground  on  their  faces

6.  8.  laid  him  on  his  bed,  and/,  sick  for  grief
46.  whereupon  the  elephant /.  down  on  him

7.  18.  the  dread  of  them  /.  on  all  the  people

9.  40.  many/,  down  dead,  and  the  remnant  fled

1.3.  22.  but  there/,  a  very  great  snow

2  Mac.  3.27.  Heliodorus/.  suddenly  to  the  ground
40.  and  the  things /.  out  on  this  soft

9.  7-  it  came  to  pass  he/,  down  from  his  chariot
9.  his  flesh  /.  away,  and  his  smell  was  noisome
24.  if  any  thing/,  out  contrary  to  expectation

10.  4.  they  /.  flat  down,  and  besought  the  Lord

17.  they  slew  all  that /.  into  their  hands
26.  the,y  /.  down  at  the  feet  of  the  altar

12.  24.  Timotheus/.  into  the  hands  of  Dositheus-
14.  41.  being  ready  to  he  taken,/,  on  his  sword

FELLOW.

Eccl.  8.  15.  travel  not  bv  the  way  with  a  bold/.

1.3.  23.  if  poor  speak,  they  say,  what/,  is  this  ?

Bar.  6.  43.  she  reproacheth  her  /.  that  she  was  noft
FELLOWS.

Dan.  .3.  26.  angel  came  with  Azarias  and  his/.

1  Mac.  4.  5.  for,  said  he,  these /.  flee  from  us

10.  61.  certain  pestilent  /.  of  Israel  assembled

FELLOWSHIP.

Wisd.  6.  2.3.  such  shall  have  no /.  with  wisdom
Eccl.  13.  1.  he  that  hath  /.  with  a  proud  man
2.  have  no/,  with  one  that  is  mightier  than  thyseMf

17.  what/,  hath  the  wolf  with  the  lamb?

.  FENCED.

2  Mac.  12.  13.  which  was /.  about  with  walls

FERVENCY.

Jud.  4.  9-  every  man  cried  to  God  with  great  f.
FERVENT.

2  Esd.  6.  58.  thy  only  begotten  and  thy  /,  lover
1  Mac.  2.  54.  Phinees,  in  being  zealous  and/.

58.  F.lias,  for  being  zealous  and  /.  for  the  law
FESTIVAL.

1  Mac.  1.45.  profane  the  sabbaths  and /.  days.

FETCH.

2  Mac.  2.  15.  send  some  to  /.  them  to  you

FETCH  E  l  II.

t  Esd.  4.  34.  sun/,  his  course  to  his  own  place

641


Apocrypha..]


FIG


Eccl.  31. 19.  he  /.not  his  wind  short  on  his  bed
FETTERED.

Wisd.  17.  2./.  with  the  bonds  of  a  long  night
FETTERS.

Eccl.  6.  24.  put  thy  feet  into  her/,  neck  into  chain
29.  then  shall  her/,  be  a  strong  defence  to  thee

21.  19.  doctrine  to  fools  is  as/,  on  the  feet

FEW.  ,  ,

2  Esd.  4.  33.  wherefore  are  our  years /.  and  evil  ?

7.  12.  they  are  but/,  and  evil,  full  ot  perils
70.  there  should  be  very/,  left  in  a  multitude

6.  1.  but  he  hath  made  the  world  to  come  for/.

3.  there  be  many  created,  but/,  shall  be  saved
02.  but  I  have  shewed  to  thee  and  a/,  like  thee

10.  57.  called  with  the  Highest,  and  so  are  but/.
Eccl.  17.  2.  he  gave  them/,  days,  and  a  short  tune
41. 13.  a  good  life  hath  but/,  days,  but  a  good  name
43.  32.  for  we  have  seen  but  a  /.  of  his  works
Bar.  2. 13.  we  are  but  a/,  among  the  heathen
iMae.  3.17.  how  shall  we  be  able  being  so/,  to  fight?

18.  for  many  to  be  shut  up  in  the  hands  of  a/.

■6.  54.  there  were  but  a  /.  left  in  the  sanctuary
7  1.  Demetrius  came  up  with  a/,  men  to  a  city

28.  1  will  come  with  a  /.  men,  that  I  may  see  you

9.  9.  let  us  now  save  our  lives,  for  we  are  but/.

12.  45.  and  chose  a  /.  men  to  wait  on  thee

15.  10.  so  that/,  were  left  with  Tryphon

2  Mac.  2.  21.  so  that  being  but  a/.. they  overcame
6.  17.  come  to  declaring  of  the  matter  in /.  words

12.  34.  in  fighting,  a /.  of  the  Jews  were  slain
14.  30.  he  gathered  together  not  a  /.  of  his  men
FEWER.

2  Mac.  5.  14.  and  no  /.  were  sold  than  slain

10.  17.  they  killed  no /.  than  twenty  thousand

12.  10.  no/,  than  5000  men  on  foot,  500  horsemen

FIDELITY.

Esth.  13.  3.  Aman  was  approved  for  his  stedfast/.
FIELD.

2  Esd.  7.  6.  a  city  isbuilded  and  set  upon  abroad/.

9.  17.  like  as  the /.  is,  so  is  also  the  seed

24.  go  into  a  /.  of  flowers  where  no  house  is

26.  there  did  I  eat  of  the  herbs  of  the/.

10.  3.  then  1  came  into  this/,  as  thouseest

32.  and  I  went  into  the  /.  and  lo,  I  have  seen
51.  therefore  I  bade  thee  remain  in  the/.

12. 51. 1  lemained  still  in  the  /.  seven  days  and  did
eat  only  in  those  days  of  the  flowers  of  the/.

13.  57.  then  went  1  forth  into  the/,  giving

16. 28.  two  of  the  /.  which  shall  hide  themselves
77.  like  as  a  /.  is  covered  over  with  bushes
■tlisd.  17-  17-  whether  he  w'ere  a  labourer  in  the/.

19.  7.  and  out  of  the  violent  stream  a  green/.
Eccl.  24.  14.  as  an  olive-tree  in  a  pleasant/.

Be!  33.  and  who  was  going  into  the  /.  to  bring  it
iMac.  10.  71.  come  down  to  us  into  the  plain  /.

14.  8.  the  trees  of  the  /.  gave  their  fruit

FIELDS.

2  Esd.  15.  41.  that  all  /.  may  be  full  and  all  rivers

16.  32.  and  /.  thereof  shall  wax  old,  and  her  ways
Jud.  2.  27.  he  burnt  up  all  their  /.  and  destroyed

3.  3.  all  our  /.  of  wheat  lie  before  thy  face

4.  5.  for  their /.  were  of  late  reaped

6.  4.  their/,  snail  be  filled  with  dead  bodies
1  Mac.  16.  10.  they  fled  to  the  towers  in  the  /.
FIERCE.

1  Esd.  2. 27.  mighty  kings  and  /.  were  in  Jerusalem
Wisd.  11.  17.  a  multitude  of  bears  or  /.  lions

18. 15.  as  a/,  man  of  war  into  the  midst  of  a  land

2  Mac.  10.  35.  with  a /.  courage  killed  all  they  met

12.  15.  who  gave  a  /.  assault  against  the  walls

FIERCELY.

Esth.  15.  7.  the  king  looked  very  /.  upon  her
IMac. 6.  33.  the  king  marched  /.  with  his  host
FIERCENESS.

2  Mac.  15.  21.  Maccabeus  seeing  the  /.of  the  beasts
FIERY.

Wisd.  11. 18.  breathing  out  either  a/,  vapour
Eccl.  43.  4.  breathing  out  /.  vapours  and  sending
45.  19.  to  consume  them  with  the  /.  flatne
48.  9.  who  was  taken  up  in  a  chariot  of /.  horses
FIFTH.

2  Esd.  6.  47.  on  the /.  day  thou  saidst  to  seventh  part
2  Mac.  7.  15.  afterward  they  brought  the  /.  also
FIFTEENTH.

Esth.  10.  13.  the  14th  and  /.  day  of  the  month
1  Mac.  1.  54.  now  the  /.  day  of  the  month  Casleu
FIFTY.

Jud.  1.  2.  the  breadth  of  the  wall  /.  cubits

1  Mac.  9.61.  took  about  /.  persons  and  slew  them

2  Mac.  13.  5.  there  was  a  tower  of/,  cubits  high

FIFTIES.

1  Mac.  3.  55.  Judas  Ordained  captains  over  /.
FIGS.

Jud.  10.  5.  Judith  filled  a  bag  with  lumps  of  /.
FIG-TREE.

1  Mac.  14.  12.  every  man  sat  under  his  vine  and  /.
FIGHT.

1  Esd.  1.  28.  but  undertook  to  /.  with  him
2Esd.  6. 24.  at  that  time  shall  friends  /.  like  enemies

13.  8.  all  were  sore  afraid,  and  yet  durst  /.

11.  the  multitude  which  was  prepared  to/.

31.  one  shall  undertake  to  /.against  another

15. 15.  shall  stand  up  to  /.one  against  another
Jud.  7.  11./.  not  against  them  in  nattle-array
Esth.  11.  6.  two  great  dragons  came  ready  to  /.

7.  that  they  might /.  against  the  righteous
Wisd.  5.  20.  a.nd  the  world  shall  /.  with  him
Eccl  A.  28.  strive  for  truth,  the  Lord  shall  /.  for  thee

29.  13.  it  shall/,  for  thee  against  thy  enemies

3  Mac.  2.  40.  if  we/,  not  for  our  lives  and  laws

41.  we  will  /.  against  him,  nor  will  we  die  all
66.  let  him  /.  the  battle  of  the  people

3.  21.  but  we  /.  for  our  lives  and  our  laws
43.  let  us/,  for  our  people  and  the  sanctuary
58.  that  ye  may  /.  with  these  nations  assembled

4.  2 1 .  the  host  of  J  uctas  in  the  plain,  ready  to /.

5.  32.  he  said,/,  this  day  for  your  brethren
57.  let  us  go  and  /.  against  the  heathen

67-  forthat  they  went  out  to/,  unadvisedly
<).  34.  they  might  provoke  the  elephants  to/.

8.37.  we  will/,  with  thee  by  sea  and  by  land
9.  8.  peradventure  we  may  be  able  to /.  with  them

642


F  I  N

1  Mac.  9.  30.  that  thou  mayest/.  our  battles
44.  let  us  go  up  now  and /.  for  our  lives

12.  50.  they  went  close  together  prepared  to/.

13.  9./.  our  battles,  which  commandest,  we  will  do

14.  13.  nor  was  there  any  left  to  /.  against  them

26.  have  chased  away  in/,  their  enemies  from  them
16.  3.  be  instead  of  me,  go  and /.  for  our  nation

2  Mac.  8.  16.  not  to  fear,  but  to/,  manfully

36.  told  that  the  Jews  had  God  to  /.  for  them

11.  9.  they  were  ready,  not  only  to/,  with  men

14.  18.  that  they  had  to  /.  for  their  country

FIGHTETH.

Esth.  14.  13.  his  heart  to  hate  him  that/,  against  us
Wisd.  16.  17.  for  the  world /.  for  the  righteous
Eccl.  38.  28.  he/,  with  the  heat  of  the  furnace
FIGHTING.

2  Esd.  13.  34.  and  to  overcome  him  by  /.

Eccl.  28.  11.  and  an  hasty  /.  sheddeth  blood

1  Mac.  8.  10./.  with  them,  slew  many  of  them

2  Mac.  12.  31.  it  happened  that  in  their  /.  together

15.  27./.  with  their  hands,  and  praying  to  God

FIGURE.

Eccl.  49.  9.  made  mention  under  the/,  of  the  rain
FILL.

2  Esd.  1. 20.  and  waters  flowed  out  to  your/.

4.  32.  how  great  a  floor  shall  they/.

Toh.  8.  18.  Raguel  bade  his  servants  /.  the  grave
Jud.  2.  8.  their  slain  shall  /.  their  valleys

7.  21.  they  had  no  water  to  drink  their  /.

8.  31.  the  Lord  will  send  l  ain  to  /.  our  cisterns
Wisd.  2.  7-  let  us  /.  ourselves  with  costly  wine
Eccl.  24.  19.  and/,  yourselves  with  my  fruits

36.  14./.  Sion  with  thy  unspeakable  oracles

FILLED.

2  Esd.  4.  36.  when  the  number  of  seeds  is /.  in  you

5.  25.  of  all  depths  of  sea  thou  hast/,  thee  one  river
'Job.  12.  9-  that  exercise  alms  shall  be/,  with  life
Jud.  6.  4.  their  fields  shall  be  /.  with  dead  bodies

10.  5.  she  f.  a  bag  with  parched  corn  and  figs

13.  2.  Holofer.  lying  along,  for  he  was /.  with  wine
Wisd.  13.  12.  refuse  to  dress  his  meat,  /.  himself
18.  16.  thy  almighty  word  /.  all  things  with  death
Eccl.  2.  16.  that  love  him  shall  be /.  with  the  law

4.  12.  that  seek  her  early  shall  be/,  with  joy

16.  29.  the  Lord /.  it  with  his  blessings

17.  7-  withal,  he  /.  them  with  understanding

23.  1L.  a  swearer  shall  be /.  with  iniquity

31.  3.  when  he  resteth,  he  is /.  with  his  delicates

32.  15.  he  thatseeketh  the  law,  be  /.  therewith

33.  16.  1/  my  wine-press  like  a  gatherer  of  grapes

37.  24.  a  wise  man  snail  be /.  with  blessings

39. 6.  he  shall  be /.  with  the  spirit  of  understanding

12.  for  1  am  /.  as  the  moon  at  the  full

42.  25.  who  shall  be /.  with  beholding  his  glory
47.  14.  and  as  a  flood/,  with  understanding
48. 12.  and  Elizeas  was/,  with  his  spirit
Bar.  3.  32.  he  hath  /.  it  with  four-footed  beasts

5.  7.  God  hath  appointed  that  valleys  be /.  up
Sus.  32.  that  they  might  be  /.  with  her  beauty

2 Mac.  3.  30.  the  temple  was /.  with  joy  and  gladness

4.  40.  the  common  people  being/,  with  rage

6.  4.  the  temple  was/,  with  rioting  and  revelling

5.  the  altar  was  /.  with  profane  things  .

7.  21.  she  exhorted,/,  with  courageous  spirits

9.  7*  but  still  was /.  with  pride,  breathing  out

12.  16.  a  lake,  being /.  full,  was  seen  running

13.  16.  at  last  they/,  the  camp  with  fear

FI  LLEDST.

Eccl.  47.  15.  and  thou  /.  it  with  dark  parables
FILLETH.

Wisd.  1.  7.  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  /.  the  world
Eccl.  1. 16.  to  fear  the  Lord,  /.  men  with  her  fruits

24.  25.  he  /.  all  things  with  his  wisdom

FILTH.

Eccl.  22.  2.  is  compared  to  the/,  of  a  dunghill

27.  4.  so  the  /.  of  a  man  in  his  talk  remaineth
FILTHY.

Wisd.  11.  18.  or  /.  scents  of  scattered  smoke
Eccl.  22.  1.  a  slothful  man  is  compared  to  a  f.  stone
FILTHINESS.

Wisd.  2.  16.  he  abstaineth  from  our  ways  as /.

2  Mac.  9.  9.  and  the  /.  of  his  smell  was  noisome
FIND.

1  Esd.  2.  22.  thou  shall/,  in  the  chronicles

2  Esd.  3.  36.  shalt  /.  that  Israel  kept  thy  precepts
Tob.  2.  2.  what  poor  man  soever  thou  sVialt  /.

Jud.  8.  14.  you  cannot/,  the  depth  of  the  heart

14.  3.  run  to  the  tent  of  Holofernes,  but  not  /.  him
Esth.  16. 15.  we /.  that  the  Jews  are  no  evil-doers
Wisd.  2.  24.  they  that  do  hold  of  his  side,  do  /.  it

6.  10.  that  have  learned  shall  /.  what  to  answer

14.  for  he  shall  /.  her  sitting  at  his  doors

9-  16.  with  labour  do  we  /.  the  things  before  us

13.  6.  seeking  God  and  desirous  to  /.  him

9.  how  did  they  not  sooner/,  out  the  Ld.  thereof?
Eccl.  1. 13.  he  shall/,  favour  in  the  day  of  death
3.  18.  thou  shalt  /.  favour  before  the  Lord
31.  and  when  he  falleth,  he  shall/,  a  stay

6.  16.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  /.  him

18.  so  shalt  thou  /.  wisdom  till  thine  old  age

28.  for  at  the  last  thou  shalt  /.  her  rest

15.  6.  he  shall  /.  joy  and  a  crown  of  gladness

16.  14.  every  man  shall  /.  according  to  his  works
18  4.  and  who  shall  /.  out  his  noble  acts  ?

24.  28.  no  more  shall  the  last/,  her  out

25.  3.  how  canst  thou  /.  any  tiling  in  thine  age  ?

27.  16.  and  shall  never  /.  friend  to  his  mind

28.  1.  he  that  revengeth,  shall  /.  vengeance

29.  3.  thou  shalt/.  the  thing  that  is  necessary

31.  22.  at  the  last  thou  shalt /.  as  l  told  thee  -

32.  14.  they  that  seek  him  early  shall /.  favour

33.  25.  if  set  thy  servant  to  labour  thou  shalt /.  rest
41.  24.  thou  shalt  /.  favour  before  all  men

.  51.  26.  instruction  is  hard  at  hand  to  /.

Bar.  1.  12.  we  shall  /.  favour  in  their  sight
Dan.  3. 15.  no  place  to  sacrifice  and  /.  mercy
Sus.  14.  when  they  might  /.  Susannah  alone

1  Mac.  10. 16.  he  said,  shall  we /.  such  another  man  ?

2  Mac.  2.  6.  mark  the  way  but  they  could  not  /.  it
24.  the  difficulty  they  /.  which  desire  to  look

5.  9-  and  thinking  there  to /.  succour  for  his  kindred
6. 22.  the  old  friendship  with  them  might  /.  favour


FIR


/


FINDEST.  /

2  Esd.  1.  23.  wherever  thou /.  the  dead  bury  thfm
Bel  12.  if  thou/,  not  that  Bel  hath  eaten  ail
FINDETH.

Eccl.  19.  28.  when  he /.  opportunity,  he  will  do

25.  10.  0I1  how  great  is  he  that/,  wisdom  !

32.  17.  but /.  an  excuse  according  to  his  wijl
40.  18.  he  that/,  a  treasure  is  above  them  both
FINDING.

Esth.  16.  14.  he  thought,  /.  us  destitute  of  friends
Eccl.  13.  26.  the/,  out  of  a  parable  is  wearisome
FINE.

1  Esd.  3.  6. bridles  of  gold  and  an  head-tire  of/,  linen
Jud.  10.  5.  she  filled  a  bag  with  figs  and  /.bread
Eccl.  35.  2.  he  that  requiteth  good,  offers/,  flour

38.  11.  a  sweet  savour  and  a  memorial  of/,  flour
Bel  3.  w'ere  spent  twelve  great  measures  of/,  flour
2 Mac.  1.  8.  we  offered  sacrifices  and/,  flour
FINELY.

2  Mac.  15.  39.  so  speech /.  framed  delighteth  the  ears

FINGERS.

Wisd.  15. 15.  idols  nor  have  /.  of  hands  to  handle
FINISH.

Tob.  8.  17.  grant  mercy,  O  Ld./.  their  life  in  health
Eccl.  38.  27.  they  that  watch  to  /.  a  work
28.  he  setteth  nis  mind  to/,  his  work  and  watcheth
FINISHED.

1  Esd.  4.  55.  till  the  day  that  the  house  was /.

6.  14.  it  was  builded  many  years  ago,  and  was /.
28.  help  them,  till  the  house  of  the  Lord  be /.

7.  4.  they/,  these  by  the  commandment  of  the  HI.

5.  thus  was  the  holy  house  /.  in  the  month  Adar

2  Esd.  6.  20.  and  when  the  world  shall  be  /.

Tob.  8.  20.  for  before  the  days  of  the  marriage  were  /.
Jud.  5.  22.  when  Acliior  had  /.  these  sayings

8.  34.  not  declare  it  till  the  tilings  be  f.  that  I  do
Eccl.  50.19.  besought  Ld.  till  they  had /.  his  service
1  Mac.  4.  51.  they  /.  all  the  works  they  began  to  do

Finishing.

1  Esd.  5.  73.  they  hindered  the  /.  of  the  building
Eccl.  37.  11.  with  an  hireling  for  a  year  of /.  work
50.  14.  /.  the  service  at  the  altar  to  adorn  offering

2  Mac.  2.  9.  the  sacrifice  of  the  /.  of  the  temple

FIRE.

1  Esd.  1.  12.  they  roasted  the  passover  with  /.

55.  they  broke  walls  and  set /.  upon  her  towers

6.  24.  where  they  do  sacrifice  with  continual  /.

2  Esd.  1.  23. 1  gave  you  not  /.  for  your  blasphemies

3.  19.  thy  glory  went  through  four  gates  of  /.

4.  5.  go  thy  way,  weigh  me  the  weight  of  the /.

9.  1  have  asked  thee  but  only  of  the /.  and  wind

16.  for  the/,  came  and  consumed  it

50.  as  the/,  is  greater  than  the  smoke

6.  37.  my  spirit  was  greatly  set  on /.  and  in  distress

7.  8.  one  only  path  between  the  /.  and  the  water

8.  8.  thy  creature  is  preserved  in /.  and  water

22.  whose  service  is  conversant  in  wind  and /.

13.  4.  the  earth  taileth  when  it  feeleth  the/.

10.  only  1  saw  as  it  had  been  a  blast  of  f.

11.  the  blast  of  /.  fell  upon  the  multitude

27.  there  came  as  a  blast  of  wind,  and /.  and  storm
38.  destroy  them  by  the  law,  w'hichis  like  to  /.

14.  39.  but  the  colour  of  the  water  was  like /.

15.  23.  the/,  is  gone  forth  from  his  wrath

41./.  hail,  and  flying  swords,  and  many  W'ateis
61.  thou  as  stubble,  they  shall  be  unto  thee  as /.

16.  4.  a/,  is  seut  among  you,  who  may  quench  it  ?

6.  or  may  any  one  quench  the/,  in  the  stubble  ?

9. /.  shall  go  from  Ins  wrath,  who  may  quench  it?

15.  the/,  is  kindled,  and  shall  not  be  put  out
53.  for  God  shall  burn  coals  of  f.  upon  his  head
73.  they  shall  be  tried  as  the  gold  in  the  /.

78.  it  is  cast  into  the  /.  to  be  consumed  therewith
Jud.  8.  27-  for  he  hath  not  tried  us  in  the  /.

13.  13.  they  made  a  /.  for  a  light,  and  stood  round
16. 17.  in  putting  /.  and  worms  in  their  flesh
Esth.  16.  24.  shall  be  destroyed  with /.  and  sword
Wisd.  10.  6.  who  fled  from  the  /.  which  fell  down
13.  2.  but  deemed  it  either/,  or  wind,  or  swift  air

16.  16.  and  through/,  were  they  consumed

17.  the/,  had  more  force  in  the’water  that  guench.

19.  it  burnetti  in  water  above  the  power  of f.

22. but  snow  and  ice  endured  the /.  and  melted  not

27.  that  which  was  not  destroyed  of  the/.

17. 5.  no  power  of  the /.  might  give  them  light

6.  only  there  api>eared  a  /.  kindled  of  itself

18.  3.  thou  gavest  them  a  burning  pillar  of/.

19.  20.  the  /.  had  power  in  the  water  forgettiug
Eccl.  2.  5.  for  gold  is  tried  in  the  /.  men  in  adversity
3.  30.  water  will  quench  a  flaming/.

7.  17.  for  the  vengeance  of  ungodly  is/,  and  worms
8.3.  and  heap  not  wood  upon  his /.

10.  lest  thou  be  burnt  with  the  flame  of  his /.

9.  8.  for  herewith  love  is  kindled  as  a /.

1 1.  32.  of  a  spark  of /.  an  heap  of  coals  is  kindled

15. 16.  he  hath  set /.  and  water  before  thee
16.  6.  among  the  ungodly  shall  a/.  be  kindled

21.9.  the  end  is  a  flame  of  /.  to  destroy  them

22.  24.  as  the  vapour  and  smoke  goeth  before  the  /.

23.  16.  a  hot  mind  is  a  burning  /.  will  not  be
quenched,  never  cease  till  he  hath  kindled  a /.

28.  10.  as  the  matter  of  the /.  is,  so  it  burneth

11.  an  hasty  contention  kindleth  a  /.

36.  9.  let  him  be  consumed  by  the  rage  of  the  /

38.  28.  the  vapour  of  the.  /.  wasleth  his  flesh

39.  26.  water  and/,  are  for  the  use  of  man’s  life
29 • /.  and  death  were  created  for  vengeance

40.  30.  but  in  his  belly  there  shall  burn  a /.

43.  21.  it  burneth  and  consumeth  the  grass  as/.
48.  1.  then  stood  up  Elias  the  prophet  as/.

3.  he  also  three  times  brought  down  /.

9.  who  was  taken  up  in  a  whirlwind  of /.

50.9.  as /.  aud  incense  in  the  censer,  and  as  vessel

51.  4.  from  the  choking  of  /.  on  every  side  ;  aud

from  the  midst  of  the/,  which  I  kindled  not
Bar.  4.  35./.  shall  come  on  her  from  the  Everlasting
6.  55.  when/,  falleth  on  the  house  of  gods  of  wood
Dan.  3.  1.  and  they  walked  in  the  nudst  of  the/.

2.  opening  his  mouth  in  the  midst  of  the  /.  said

26.  the  angel  smote  the  flame  of  the /.  out  of  oveu

44.  O  ye  /.  and  heat,  bless  ye  the  Lord
1  Mac.  1.  31.  when  taken  spoils  of  city,  he  set  itou/.


FIS


F  L  E


1  Mac.  1 .  56.  when  rent  books  they  burnt  them  with/.

5.  28.  took  all  their  spoils,  and  burnt  city  with/.
35.  received  spoils  thereof,  and  burnt  it  with /.
68.  Judas  burnt  their  carved  images  with /

6.  39.  the  mountains  shined  like  lamps  of/.

51.  set  their  instruments  to  cast  /.  and  stones

i0.  84.  the  temple  of  Dagon  he  burnt  with /.

16.  10.  wherefore  he  burnt  towers  in  Azotus  with/.

2  Mac.  1.  18.  keep  it  as  the  /.  which  was  given  us

19.  the  priests  took  the/,  of  the  altar  privily

20.  did  send  of  those  priests  that  had  hid  it  to  the
/  they  told  us  they  found  no  /.  but  thick  water

22.  this  done,  there  was  a  great  /.  kindled
33.  where  the  priests  had  hid/,  water  appeared

l.  1.  to  take  the  /.  as  it  had  been  signified

10.  the/,  came  down  from  heaven  and  consumed

7.  5.  to  be  brought  to  the/,  and  fried  in  the  pan

8.  .33.  Callisthenes  that  had  set /.  on  the  holy  gates

9.  7.  breathing  out/,  in  his  rage  against  the  Jews

10.  3.  striking  stones,  they  took  /.  out  of  them

12.  6.  burnt  the  haven,  and  set  the  boats  on  /.

9.  set/,  on  the  haven  and  navy,  so  that  the  light
of  the/,  was  seen  at  Jerusalem  240  furlongs  off

13.  8.  the  altar  whose  /.  and  ashes  were  holy

14.  41.  bade  that  /.  should  be  brought  to  burn  it

FI  R  ES.

Jud.  7.  5.  when  they  kindled  /.  on  their  towers

1  Mac.  12.  28.  they  kindled  /.  in  their  camp

2  Mac.  10.  36.  and  kindling /.  burnt  the  blasphemers

FIRM.

Eccl.  43.  15.  by  his  great  power  he  maketh  clouds  f
FIRMLY.

Esth.  13.5.  that  pur  kingd.  may  not  be /.  established
Eccl.  42.  17.  which  the  Almighty  Lord /  settled
FIRMAMENT.

2  Esd.  4.  7.  how  many  springs  are  above  the/.

6.  4.  before  the  measures  of  the  /.  were  named
20.  the  books  shall  be  opened  before  the  /.

41.  on  second  day  thou  madest  the  spirit  of  the  f.
Eccl.  4.3.  1.  the  clear  /.  the  beauty  of  heaven
Dan.  3.  34.  blessed  art  thou  in  the  /  of  heaven
FI  RS  I'.

1  Esd.  1.  1.  the  fourteenth  day  of  the/,  month

2.  1.  in  the/,  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  the  Persians

3.  10.  the/,  wrote,  wine  is  the  strongest

17.  then  began  the  /.  who  had  spoken  of  wine

5.  53.  from  the/,  day  of  the  seventh  month

57.  in  the  /.  day  of  the  second  month

6.  17.  in  the/,  year  that  king  Cyrus  reigned

7. 10.  Israel  held  the  passover  14th  day  of /  month

9.  16.  in  the  /.  day  of  the  tenth  month  they  sat

17.  was  brought  to  an  end  the  /.  day  of/,  month

40.  hear  the  law  in  the/,  day  of  seventh  month

45.  tor  he  sat  honourably  in  the  /.  place  in  sight

2  Esd.  3.  12.  they  began  to  be  more  ungodly  than/.

5.  42.  even  so  there  is  no  swiftness  of  the/.

6.  7-  or  w  hen  shall  be  the  end  of  the /.  ?

8.  Jacob's  hand  held  /.  the  heel  of  Ksau

.38.  O  Lord,  thou  spakest  the  f.  day  and  saidst  thus

58.  whom  thou  hast  called  thy /.-born

10.  10.  for  out  of  her  came  all  at  the /.  others  come
1,4.  45.  the/,  that  thou  hast  written  publish  openly

loh,  1.  6.  with  that  which  was  /.  shorn
7-  the/,  tenth  of  all  increase  1  give  to  Aaron

5.  13.  we  offered  the /.-born  and  the  tenths

14.  5.  they  shall  build  a  temple,  but  not  like  the  f.
Jud.  2.  1.  the  two  and  twentieth  day  of  the/,  month
8.  29.  this  is  not  the /  day  wherein  thy  wisdom
Esth.  11.  2.  in  the  /.  day  of  the  month  Nisan
lEtsd.  6.  13.  in  making  herself /.  known  to  them

7.  1.  offspring  of  him  that  was /.  made  of  the  earth

3.  the/,  voice  which  1  uttered,  was  crying

10.  1.  preserved  the/,  formed  father  of  the  world

1.3.  .3.  the/,  author  of  beauty  hath  created  them

18.  1.3.  upon  the  destruction  of  the  /.-born
Eccl.  4.  17.  at  the /.  she  will  walk  with  him

6.  7-  if  thou  wouldest  get  a  friend,  prove  him/.

11.  7.  blame  not,  understand  /,  and  then  rebuke

12.  17.  thou  shalt  find  him  there  f.  tho’  he  pretend
17.  IB.  whom,  being  his  /.-born,  lie  nourisheth

19.  18.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  /.step

2.3.  2.3./.  she  hath  disobeyed  the  law  of  the  Lord
.31.  17.  leave  off/,  for  manners’  sake,  not  unsalable

18.  reach  not  out  thine  hand  /.  of  all

36.  12.  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  named  thy /.-born

1  Mac.  1.  1.  he  reigned  in  his  stead,/,  over  Greece

2.  18.  come  thou/,  and  fulfil  king’s  commandment
5.  40.  if  he  pass  over/,  to  us,  we  shall  not  be  able

4.3.  he  went/,  over  to  them,  and  people  after  him

7.  13.  the  Assideans  were  the  /.  that  sought  peace

43.  Nicanor  himself  was /.  slain  in  the  battle

8.  24.  if  there  com e/.  any  war  on  the  Romans
27.  if  war  come /  on  the  nation  of  the  Jews

10.  47-  he  was  the  /.  that  entreated  of  true  peace

16.  6.  he  went/,  over  himself,  and  then  the  men

2  Mac.  2.  .30.  belonging  to  the  /.  author  of  the  story

4.  40.  began/,  to  offer  violence, one  Auranus  leader

7.  2.  but  one  of  them  that  spake  /.  said  thus

4.  to  cut  out  the  tongue  of  him  that  spake/.

7.  when  the/,  was  dead,  they  brought  the  second

8.  23.  himselt  leading  the /.  band,  he  joined  battle

.FIRST-FRUITS.

To/>.  1.  6.  having  the/,  and  tenths  of  increase
Jud.  11.  1.3.  are  resolved  to  spend  the  /.  of  the  corn
Eccl.  7.  31.  give  priest  the  /.  and  trespass  offering
35.  8.  and  diminish  not  the  /.  of  thy  hands
45.  20.  he  divided  to  him  the  /.  of  the  increase

1  Mac.  3.  49.  they  brought  the /.  and  the  tithes

FISH.

2  Esd.  5.  7.  the  Sodomitish  sea  shall  cast  out/.

Bob.  6.  2.  to  wash  himself,  a/,  leaped  out  of  the  river

3.  the  angel  said  to  him,  take  the /.  and  the  young

man  laid  hold  of  the /.  and  drew  it  to  land

4.  open  the/,  and  take  the  heart  and  the  liver

5.  when  they  had  roasted  the  /.  they  did  eat  it

6.  to  what  use  is  the  heart,  liver,  and  gall  of  the/.  ?
16.  lay  on  them  some  of  the  heart  and  liver  of  the/.

8.  2.  put  the  heart  and  the  liver  of  the  /.  thereon

11.  4.  take  in  thine  hand  the  gall  of  the /.

FISHES.

-  Esd.  6.  47.  that  it  should  bring  forth  fowls  and/.

16.  12.  the/,  thereof  are  troubled  before  the  Lord


TVisd.  19.10.  how  tl  e  river  cast  up  frogs  instead  of  f.
FIF.

lE’sd.  13. 1 1.  a  vessel  /,  for  the  service  of  man’s  life
Eccl.  .3.3.  28.  set  him  to  work  as  is/,  for  him
i>us.  15.  it  tell  out  as  they  watched  a  f.  time
2Mac.2.29.  must  seek/  things  for  adorning  thereof

3.  .37.  who  might  be  a/,  man  to  be  sent  again

4.  19.  thought  y.  not  to  bestow  on  the  sacrifice

FITTING.

2  Mac.  15. 38.  if  done  well,  and  as  is  /.  the  story
FIVE.

Jud.  7.  30.  Ozias  said,  let  11s  yet  endure  /.  days

8.  9.  had  sworn  to  deliver  the  city  after/,  days
Eccl.  17.5.  the  use  of  the/,  operations  of  the  Lord
2  Mac.  2.  23.  being  declared  by  Jason  in/,  books
10.29./.  comely  men  upon  horses  appeared
FLAME.

2 -Efi d-  4.  48.  when  the/,  was  gone  by,  I  looked
!  *6.  18.  sometimes  the  /.  was  mitigated

Eccl.  8.  10.  lest  thou  be  burnt  with  the/,  of  his  fire

21.  9.  the  end  of  them  is  a /.  of  fire  to  destroy
28.  22.  nor  shall  they  be  burnt  with  the  /.  thereof

45.  19.  to  consume  them  with  the  fiery  /.

Dan.  .3.  24.  so  that/,  streamed  forth  above  furnace
26.  the  angel  smote  the  /.  of  fire  out  of  the  oven
60.  out  of  midst  of  the  burning /.  delivered  us

1  Mac.  2. 59.  by  believing  were  saved  out  of  the/.

2  Mac.  1.  32.  this  done,  there  was  kindled  a/.

FLAMES.

Wisd.  17.  5.  nor  could  the  bright/,  of  the  stars

19.  21.  on  the  other  side,  the/,  wasted  not  the  flesh
^  FLAMING.

2  Esd.  13. 10.  out  of  his  lips  he  sent  a  /.  breath

11.  the/,  breath  fell  with  violence  on  multitude
Eccl.  3.  30.  water  will  quench  a/,  fire
.  FLAT.

1  T-oL 8. 91 .  lying/,  on  the  ground  before  the  temple

1  Mac.  4.  40.  they  fell  down  /  to  the  ground

2  Mac.  10.  4.  they  fell  /.  and  besought  the  Lord

13.  12.  lying/,  on  the  ground  three  days  long

_  FLATTER.

*  4.  31.  the  king  was  fain  to /.  to  be  reconciled

Ivisd,  14.  17.  they  might/,  him  that  was  absent
_  FLED.

2  Esd.  8.53.  corruption  is /.  into  hell  to  be  forgotten
10.  3.  I  rose  up  by  night  and  /.  and  came  hither

14.  18.  truth  is/,  far  away,  leasing  is  at  hand
lob.  1 .18.  when  he  was  come,  and  /.  from  Judea

21.  they/,  into  the  mountains  of  Ararath
2.  8.  this  man  is  not  yet  afraid  who/,  away

8.  3.  he/,  into  the  utmost  parts  of  Egypt

Jud.  5.  8.  they  /.  into  Mesopotamia,  and  sojourned

10.  12.  I  am  of  the  Hebrews,  and  am  /.  from  them

11.3.  but  tell  rue  why  art  thou  /.  from  them?

16.  knowing  this  I  am  /  from  their  presence

15.  2.  they  /.  into  every  way  of  the  plain
Wtsd.  10.  6.  who/,  from  fire,  which  fell  on  cities

10.  when  righteous/,  from  his  brother’s  wrath

1  Mac.  2.  28.  he  and  his  sons  /.  to  the  mountains

4.3.  also  all  they  that/,  for  persecution  joined

4.  14.  heathen  being  discomfited  /.  into  the  plain

5.  9.  but  they/,  to  the  fortress  of  Dathema
?.  32.  and  the  rest/,  into  the  city  of  David

44.  they  cast  away  their  weapons  and  /.

9.  18.  Judas  was  killed,  and  the  remnant/.

.3.3.  they  /.  into  the  wilderness  of  Thecoe

16.  49.  Demetrius’ host/.  Alexander  followed
64.  when  his  accusers  saw,  they/,  all  away

8.3.  the  horsemen  being  scattered/,  to  Azotus
84.  them  that  were /.  into  it  he  burnt  with  fire

1 1 .  16.  Alexander/,  to  Arabia,  there  to  be  defended

46.  wherefore  the  king/,  into  the  court

55.  against  Demetrius,  who  turned  his  back  and/.
69.  all  that  were  of  Jonathan’s  side/.

15. 11.  he/  to  Dora,  which  lieth  by  the  sea  side

21.  fellows  that  have/  from  their  country  to  you
.37.  in  the  mean  time/.  Tryphon  to  Orthosias

16. 10.  so  they  /.  to  the  towers  in  the  field

2  Mac.  5.5.  city  taken,  Menelaus  /.  into  the  castle

7. /  again  into  the  country  of  the  Ammonites

8.  13.  they  that  were  fearful  /.  away

3.3.  Callisthenes,  who  was /.  into  a  little  house
10. 18.  were/  together  into  two  very  strong  castles

32.  as  for  I  imotheus,  he  /  into  a  strong  hold

11.12.  Lysias/,  away  shamefully,  and  escaped

12.  6.  and  those  that/,  thither,  he  slew

22.  the  eneniies/  amain,  one  running  this  way
.35.  smote  his  shoulder,  so  that  Gorgias/to  Marisa

14.14.  the  heathen  that  had  /.  out  of  Judea
FLEE.

2  Esd.  2.  36./  the  shadow  of  this  world
14.  15.  and  haste  thee  to  /.  from  these  times
lob.  6.  17.  the  devil  shall  smell  it  and /.  away
Jud.  14.3.  they  shall/,  before  your  face
n  tsd.  1. 5.  for  holy  spirit  of  discipline  will/  deceit
Eccl.  21.  2.  /.  from  sin  as  from  the  face  of  a

n  c  .  serpent

Ear.  6.  55.  their  priests  will  /.  away  and  escape

1  Mac.  1.  5.3. -wherever  they  could  /  for  succour
4.  5.  for,  said  he,  these  fellows /.  from  us

9. 10.  God  forbid  that  l  should/,  from  them

10.  4.3.  that  /  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem
73.  where  there  is  not  a  place  to  f.  unto

2  Mac.  4. 26.  Jason  was  compelled  to/  to  Ammon.
42.  and  all  of  them  they  forced  to /

9.4.  disgrace  done  to  him  by  those  that  made  him  /.
FLESH.

Jud.  2.  3.  then  they  decreed  to  destroy  all  /.

14.  10.  he  circumcised  the  foreskin  of  his/

16.  17.  in  putting  fire  and  worms  in  their /.

Jf  isd.  7.  2.  I  was  fashioned  to  be  /.  in  ten  months

12.  5.  and  those  devourers  of  man’s  /.

19. 21 .  flames  wasted  not  the /of  the  livingthings
Eccl.  1. 10.  she  is  with  all  /  according  to  his  gift

13.  16.  all  /  consorteth  according  to  kind

14.  17.  all  /  waxetli  old  as  a  garment
18.  so  is  the  generation  off.  and  blood

17.  4.  he  put  the  fear  of  man  upon  all  f.

.31.  and/,  and  blood  will  imagine  evil

18.  13.  but  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  upon  all  /.

2.3.  6.  let  not  the  lust  of  the  /.  take  hold  of  me

16.  a  fornicator  in  the  body  of  his  /


FLO  [A  poor  yph»

Eccl.  25.  26.  cut  her  off  from  thy  f.  and  give  her  bill
28.5.  if  he  that  is/,  nourish  hatred,  who  will  entrea

17.  the  stroke  of  the  w  hip  maketh  marks  in  the  /.
31.  1.  watching  for  riches  consumeth  the  /.

.38.  28.  the  vapour  of  the  fire  wasteth  his  /

39.  19.  the  works  of  all  /  are  before  him

40.  8.  such  things  happen  to  all/  man  and  beast

41.  .3.  the  sentence  ot  the  Lord  overall /

44.  18.  that  all/  should  perish  no  more  by  the  Hood-

20.  he  established  the  cov  enant  in  his /

45.  1.  who  found  favour  in  the  sight  of  all  /.

Ear.  2.  3.  that  a  man  should  eat  the/  of  his  son
Bel  5.  living  God  who  hath  sovereignty  over  all  /.

1  Mac.  7.  17./.  of  thy  saints  have  they  cast  out

2  Mac.  6.  21.  besought  him  to  bring  /.  of  his  own.

provision,  and  make  as  if  he  did  eat  the  f.
7.  1.  compelled  against  law  to  taste  swine’s  f

9.  9.  while  he  lived  in  pain,  his  /  fell  away

„  ,  FLESHLY.  *

Esth.  14.  10.  and  to  magnify  a/,  king  forever

,  FLESHY.

Eccl.  17. 16.  nor  could  they  make /.  hearts  for  stony
I  LEW,

111V5.J°,  t*le  ea§le/.  with  her  feathers

13.  6.  he  had  graved  a  mountain,  and /  up  upon  if

TT.  FLIES.

Wtsd.  16.  9.  for  them  the  bitings  of/  killed

19. 10.  how  the  ground  brought  forth/.

„  FLIGHT.

2  Esd.  5.  6.  the  fowls  shall  take  their/,  away

1  Mac.  4.20.  that  the  Jews  had  put  their  host  to  f,
35.  now  when  Lysias  saw  his  army  put  to /.

5.  60.  that  Joseph  and  Azarias  were  put  to /'

6.  5.  that  the  armies  against  Judea  were  put  to  f.

10.  72.  thy  fathers  have  been  twice  put  to  f

11.  15.  king  Ptolemee  met  him,  and  put  him  to  f
72.  he  put  them  to/  and  so  they  ran  away

16.  8.  Cendebeus  and  his  host  were  put  to  f

2  Mac.  8.  6.  put  to/  no  small  number  of  enemies
24.  by  help  ot  the  Almighty  they  put  all  to/

9. 2.  A  ntiochus  being  put  to  /.  returned  with  shame-

11.  11.  and  they  put  all  the  others  to/

27 ’  iK,er  he  liad  Put  tof-  and  destroyed  them
.37.  rushing  unawares  he  put  them  to  f.

FLINT.

1  Mac.  10.  73.  where  is  neither  stone  nor/,  nor  place

rrr.  FLINTY.  *

IVisd.  11. 4.  water  was  given  them  out  of /.  rock

F  LtJ  C  K .

2  Esd.  5.  18.  leaveth  his/,  in  the  hands  of  wolves
In.  10.  my  people  is  led  as  a /.  to  the  slaughter
lob.  7.  8.  after  they  had  killed  a  ram  of  the  /

Bar.  4.  26.  were  taken  a  way  as/,  caught  of  enemies,

FLOCKS.

Jud.  2.  27.  he  destroyed  their/,  and  herds
3.  3.  our/,  and  herds  lie  before  thy  face
2  Mac.  14. 14.  the  heathen  came  to  Nicanor  bv  f
FLOCKING.

2  Mac.  .3.  18.  others  ran  /  out  of  their  houses

14.  23.  sent  away  people  that  came  /  to  him

FLOOD.

2  Esd.  3.  9.  thou  broughtest  the/,  on  those  thatdwel)
10.  as  death  was  to  Adam,  so  the  /  to  these

1.3.  44.  held  still  the/,  till  the}'  were  passed  ove*
Esth.  11.10.  from  a  little  fountain  a  great /.

Hisd.  10.  4.  the  earth  being  drowned  with  the/.
Eccl.  21.  1.3.  knowledge  shall  abound  like  a  f

.39.  his  blessing  watered  the  dry  land  as  a /

40.  10.  and  for  their  sakes  came  the/.

44.  17.  therefore  was  he  left  when  the  /.came

18.  that  all  flesh  should  perish  no  more  by  the  fi.

47.  14.  and  as  a/,  filled  w  ith  understanding

1  Mac.  6.  11.  how  great  a/  of  misery  wherein  I  arts

7.  8.  Bacchides,  w  ho  ruled  heyond  the  f.

FLOODS.

2  Esd.  4.  15.  the  /  of  the  sea  also  took  counsel

17.  the  thought  of  the/  of  the  sea  came  to  noughS

19.  the  sea  also  hath  his  place  to  bear  his/.

21.  like  as  the  sea  is  given  to  his/  even  so

16.  60.  that  the/,  might  pour  down  from  rocks
IV tsd.  5.  22.  and  tbe^shall  cruelly  drown  them

2  Esd.  4.  .32.  how  great  a /  shall  they  fill
35.  when  cometh  the  fruit  of  the  /  of  our  reward  >
39.  that  the  /  of  the  righteous  are  not  filled
Jud.  14.  15.  he  found  hhn^cast  upon  the/,  dead

1  Esd.  5.  55.  should  be  brought  by/  to  hav.  of  Jono*

FLOUR.

Eccl.  35.  2.  that  requites  good,  offereth  fine/.

38.  11.  give  sweet  savour,  a  memorial  of  fine  /

39.  26./.  of  wheat  for  the  use  of  man’s  life

Bel  3.  spent  on  him  twelve  great  measures  of  fine/..

2  Mac.  1.  8.  we  offered  sacrifices  and  fine  f

FLOURISH.

2  Esd.  6.28.  as  for  faith,  it  shall /.  corrupt,  overcome
/I  tsd.  4.  4.  though  they  /  in  branches  for  a  time
Eccl.  1.  18.  making  peace  and  perfect  health  to /
11.22.  suddenly  he  maketh  his  blessing  to/.

39.  14./  as  a  lily  ||  46.  12.  let  their  bones  /  49. 10.
FLOW.

2  Esd.  3.  33.  and  I  see  that  they  /.  in  wealth
FLOWED,  ETII.

2  Esd.  1 . 20.  and  waters  /.  out  to  your  fill
Eccl.  46.  8.  that/  with  milk  and  honey,  Bar.  1.  Cf),
FLOWING.

2  Esd.  2.  19.  as  many  fountains /.  with  milk
JVisd.  7.  25.  a  pure  influence /.  from  the  glory
FLOWN.

Wisd.  5.  11.  as  when  a  bird  hath /.  through  the  ai?
FLOWER.

2  Esd.  15.  50.  the  glory  shall  he  dried  up  as  a/
ll'isd.  2.7.  let  no/  ot  the  spring  pass  by  us
Eccl.  26.  19.  keep  the  /of  thine  age  sound

42.  9.  lest  she  pass  away  the  /.  of  her  age
50.  8.  as  the/,  of  roses  m  the  spring  of  the  year
51. 15.  even  tiom  the /  till  the  grape  was  ripe
FLOWERS.

2  Esd.  5.  24.  and  of  all  the  /.  thereof,  one  lily
.36.  make  me  the  withered /.  green  again

6.  3.  he  said  to  me,  before  the  fair  /.  w.  re  seeo
44.  there  were /.  of  unchangeable  colour

643


A  PUCK  X  PHA.]  F  O  O


FOR


FOR


2  Esd.  9.  17.  as  the/,  he,  such  are  the  colours  also
24.  but  go  into  a  field  of'/,  eat  only  /.  of  field,
taste  no  flesh,  drink  no  wine,  but  eat/,  only

26.  and  there  I  sat  among  the /.  and  did  eat

12.  51.  I  did  eat  only  in  those  days  of  the  /.

FLUTES.

1  Esd.  5.  2.  musical  instruments,  tablets  and/.

FLY.

Wisd.  5.  21.  as  from  a  bow  shal  they  /.  to  the  mark
Eccl.  11.  3.  the  bee  is  little  am  ng  such  as  /

43.  14.  through  this  the  clouds  /.  forth  as  fowls

FLYING.

Eccl.  11.  10.  neither  shalt  thou  escape  by  /.
FODDER.

Eccl.  33.  24.  f.  a  wand,  and  burdens  are  for  the  ass
38.  26.  and  he  is  diligent  to  give  the  kine/.
FOLDED.

Jud.  10.  5.  so  she /.  all  these  things  together
FOLLOW.

2  Esd.  7.35.  work  shall /.  and  reward  be  Jiewed
Toh.  4.  5./.  not  the  ways  of  unrighteousness
Jud.  11.  6.  if  thou/,  the  words  of  thy  handmaid
Eccl.  5.  2./.  not  thine  own  mind  and  thy  strength

11.  10.  if  thou  /.  alter,  thou  shalt  not  obtain

23.  28.  it  is  great  glory  to  /.  the  L.  to  be  received
27.17.  if  bewray  est  secrets,/,  no  more  after  him,20.

46.  10.  Israel  might  see  that  it  is  good  to/,  the  L.
Dan.  3.  18.  and  now  we  /.  thee  with  all  our  heart

1  Mac.  2.  27.  is  zealous  of  the  law,  let  him  /.  me

2  Mac.  2.  28.  to  /.  the  rules  of  an  abridgment

8.  11.  the  vengeance  that  was  to  /.  on  him
11.29.  to  return  home  and  to  /.  your  own  business

FOLLOWED.

Jud.  15.  13.  the  men  of  I  srael  /.  in  their  army
Esth.  15.  4.  the  other  /.  bearing  up  her  train
Eccl.  46.  6.  because  he  /.  the  mighty  One
51.  18.  and  earnestly  I  /.  that  w  hich  is  good
2  Mac.  4.  16.  whose  custom  they  /.  so  earnestly

8.  36.  because  they/,  the  laws  he  gave  them

FOLLOW  EST.

Eccl.  27.8.  if  thou  /.  righteousness,  shalt  obtain  her
FOLLOW  ET 11.

2  Esd.  6.  7.  and  the  beginning  of  it  that/.  9.

Eccl.  29.  19.  and  /.other  men’s  business  for  gain
31.  5.  he  that  /.corruption,  shall  have  enough
34.2.  is  like  him  that/,  after  the  wind
2  Mac.  9.  25.  to  whom  I  have  written  as  f
FOLLOWING.

1  Esd.  2.  16.  w  rote  to  him  these  letters /.

7.  1./.  the  commandments  of  king  Darius
•2  Esd.  11.  13.  so  the  next /.  stood  up  and  reigned

2  Mac.  4.  17.  the  time /  shall  declare  these  things

9.  4.  the  judgment  of  God  now  /.  him

12.  39.  on  the  day  /.  as  the  use  had  been

FOLLY.

Eccl.  8.  15.  thou  shalt  perish  with  him  through/.

20.  31.  better  is  he  that  hideth  his  /.  than  a  man

47.  20.  and  thou  wast  grieved  for  thy/.

2  Mac.  4.  6.  that  Simon  should  leave  his/.

40.  a  man  far  gone  in  vears.and  no  less  in/.

FOLLIES.

Eccl.  16.  23.  a  foolish  man  erring,  imagineth/.

30.  11.  give  him  no  liberty, and  wink  not  at  his/.

FOOD.

1  Esd.  8.  79.  to  give  us  /.  in  the  time  of  servitude
80.  he  made  us  gracious  so  that  they  gave  us  /.

Wisd.  16.  3.  to  the  end  that  they  desiring  /.

20.  thou  feddest.  thy  own  people  with  angels’/.
Eccl.  37.  20.  he  shall  be  destitute  of  all  /.

FOOL.

Eccl.  8.  17.  consult  not  with  a /.  cannot  keep  counsel

18.  27-  but  a /  w  ill  not  observe  time

19.  11.  a/,  travaileth  with  a  word,  as  a  woman

12.  as  an  arrow,  so  is  a  word  within  a/,  belly

20.  7.  a  babbler  and  a  /.  will  regard  no  time

14.  the  gift  of  a  /.  shall  do  thee  no  good

16.  the  /.  saith,  1  have  no  friends,  no  thank  for

20.  rejected,  when  it  cometh  out  of  a  /.  mouth

21.  14.  inner  parts  of  a/,  are  like  a  broken  vessel
16.  talking  of  a  f.  is  like  a  burden  in  the  way

18.  as  a  house  destroyed,  so  is  wisdom  to  a  /.

23.  a  /.  will  peep  in  at  the  door  into  the  house

22.7-  whoso  teacheth  a  /.  is  as  one  that  glueth

8.  he  Chat  telleth  a  tale  to  a  /.  speaketh  to  one

11.  weep  for  the /  he  wauls  understanding,  but

the  life  of  the  /.  is  worse  than  death

12.  but  for  a/,  and  an  ungodly  man,  all  his  life

13.  talk  not  much  with  a/,  and  go  not  to  him

14.  and  what  is  the  name  thereof  but  a  /  ?

18.  a  fearful  heart  in  the  imagination  of  a  /.

23.  14.  so  thou  by  thy  custom  become  a /.

27.  11.  but  a  /.  change! h  as  the  moon

31.  7-  and  every  /.  shall  betaken  therewith
30.  drunkenness  increaseth  the  rage  of  a /.

FOOLERIES.

Eccl.  22.  13.  thou  shalt  never  be  defiled  with  his /.
FOOLISH.

2  Esd.  4.  19.  it  is  a/,  thought  they  have  devised
10.6.  thou/,  woman  above  all  other,  seest  thou  not?

Wisd.  3.  12*.  their  wives  are/,  their  children  wicked
11.  15.  for  /.  devices  of  their  wickedness

15.  14.  the  enemies  of  thy  people  are  more  f.

19.  3.  they  added  another  /.  device,  pursued  them
Eccl.  4.  27-  be  not  an  underling  to  a  f.  man

15.  7-  but  /.  men  shall  not  attain  unto  her

16.  23.  a/,  man  erring,  imagineth  follies

21.  22.  a /.  man’s  foot  is  soon  in  neighbour’s  house

22.  3.  and  a  /.  daughter  is  born  to  his  loss

23.  nor  rich  that  is /.  to  be  had  in  admiration
33.5.  the  heart  of  the /.  is  like  a  cart  wheel
50.26.  and  that  /.  people  that  dwell  in  Sichem
2  Mac.  2.  32.  it  is /.  to  make  a  long  prologue
14.  5.  opportunity  to  further  his /.  enterprise
FOOLISHNESS.

Wisd.  10. 8.  left  behind  them  a  memorial  of  their/.
Eccl.  16.  7-  who  fell  in  the  strength  of  their/.

23.  8.  the  sinner  shall  be  left  in  his  /.

41.  15.  a  man  that  hideth  his  /.  is  better  than
47.  23.  Roboam,  even  the  /.  of  the  people
Bar.  3.  28.  but  they  perished  by  their  own  /.

FOOLS.

Wisd.  5.  4.  we  /.  accounted  his  life  madness
644


Wisd.  15.  5-  the  sight  enticeth  /.to  lust  after  it
Eccl.  20.  13.  the  graces  of/,  shall  be  poured  out

21.  19.  doctrine  to  /.  is  as  fetters  on  the  feet
26.  the  hetirt  of /.  is  in  their  mouth
27.  13.  the  discourse  of/,  is  irksome,  their  sport
34.  1.  hopes  vain  and  false,  and  dreams  lift  up/.
Sus.  48.  are  ye  such/,  ye  sons  of  Israel  ?

FOOT.

2  Esd.  16.  69.  consent  to  them,  be  trodden  under./.
Jud.  6.  4.  for  we  will  tread  them  under/.

13.  they  left  him  at  the/,  of  the  hill
Wisd.  13.  18.  which  cannot  seta/,  forward
Eccl.  6.  36.  let  thy  /.  wear  the  steps  of  his  door

9.  2.  to  a  woman,  to  set  her/,  upon  thy  substance
21. 22.  a  foolish  man’s /.  is  soon  in  his  neighb.  house
4()!  25.  gold  and  silver  make  the/,  stand  sure

46.  8.  of  six  hundred  thousand  people  on  /.

50.  15.  he  poured  out  at  the/,  of  the  altar

51.  15.  my/,  went  the  right  way  from  my  youth
Bar.  5.  6.  for  they  departed  from  thee  on/.

1  Mac.  4.  28.  threescore  thousand  men  ot  /.

5.  48. none  do  hurt,  we  will  only  passthrough  on/.
10.72.  that  thy  /.  is  not  able  to  stand  before  us

2  Mac.  5.  21.  to  make  the  sea  passable  by  /.

10.  26.  and  fell  down  at  the  f.  of  the  altar

FOOTMEN.

1  Esd.  8.  51.  I  was  ashamed  to  ask  the  king’s/.

Jud.  1.  4.  and  for  the  setting  in  array  of  his/.

2.  5.  of/,  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand

19.  to  cover  the  face  of  the  earth  with  chosen  /.

22.  he  took  all  his  army,  his  horsemen,  and/.

7.  20.  both  their/,  chariots  and  horsemen

9.  7.  they  glory  in  the  strength  of  their/.

1  Mac.  9.  4.  they  went  to  Berea  with  20,000 /.

10.  82.  Simon  set  his  host  against  the/.

12.  49.  then  sent  Try  phon  an  host  off.  to  Galilee

16.  5.  a  mighty  great  host  of  /.  and  horsemen

2  Mac.  11.  4.  puffed  up  with  his  ten  thousand/.

13.  2.  having  a  Grecian  power  of/.  110, (XX)

FOO I S  I  EPS.

Jud.  6.  4.  their  /.  shall  not  be  able  to  stand
Bel  19.  and  mark  well  whose/,  are  these

20.  I  see  the/,  of  men,  women,  and  children

FORBEAR.

2  EsdA.  9.how  long  shall /.  them  to  whom  done  good

1  Mac.  2.  24.  nor  could  he /.  to  shew  his  anger

2  Mac.  5.  25.  did /.  till  the  holy  day  of  sabbath

FOR BEARETH.

2  Mac.  6.  14.  nations  whom  the  Lord  patiently/.
FORBID.

1  Mac.  2.  21.  God  /  that  we  shouhftforsake  the  law
9  10.  God /.  that  I  should  do  this  thing

FORBIDDEN.

Jud.  11.  12.  things  that  God  hath/,  them  to  eat

2  ,1  iac.  12.  40.  which  is /.  the  .lews  by  the  law

FOR  BID  D E  l  II.

2  Mac.  6.  5.  with  profane  things  which  the  law/.
FORCE.

2  Esd.  7.  35.  and  the  good  deed  shall  be  of/.

9.  .37.  the  law  perisheth  not  butremaineth  in  his/.
Jud.  9.  8.  and  bring  down  their/,  in  thy  wrath
Wisd.  4.  4.  through /.  of  wind  shall  be  rooted  out

16.  17.  the  fire  had  more/,  in  the  water

18.  22.  not  with  strength  of  body  nor  /.  ot  arms

19.  1.3.  with  former  signs  by  the /.  of  thunders
Eccl.  4.26.  and  /.  not  the  course  of  the  river

.39.  28.  in  destruction  they  pour  out  their/.

1  Mac.  6.  63.  he  fought,  and  took  the  city  by/.

7.  25.  that  he  was  not  able  to  abide  their/.

27.  Nieanor  came  to  Jerusalem  with  great/.

12.  42.  that  Jonathan  came  with  so  great  a/.

2  Mac.  5.  1 1.  he  took  the  city  by  /.  of  arms

10.  24.  tho’  as  he  would  take  Jewry  by/,  of  arms
12.  35.  taking  hold  of  his  coat,  drew  him  by/.

FORCED.

Wisd.  14.  19  /  his  skill  to  make  the  resemblance
Eccl.  .31.21.  if  thou  hast  been  /.  to  eat,  arise
2  Mac.  4.  42.  and  all  of  them  they/,  to  fiee
FORCES.

1  Mac.  2.  44.  so  they  joined  /.  and  smote  sinful  men

3.  27.  he  gathered  all  the  /.  of  his  realm

.3.  34.  he  delivered  to  him  the  half  of  his/

.37.  the  king  took  half  the/  that  remained

42.  saw  that  the  /.  did  encamp  themselves

4.  4.  while  the /.  were  dispersed  from  the  camp
7.  2.  that  his  /.  had  taken  Antiochus  and  Lysias
9.52.  he  put  /.  in  them  and  provision  of  victuals

67.  when  he  began  to  smite, and  came  up  with/.

10.  36.  enrolled  amongst  the  king’s/,  about  .30, (XX)

of  Jews  as  belongethto  all  the  king’s/.

48.  then  gathered  king  A  lexander  great/

11.  38.  he  sent  away  all  his  f.  every  one  to  his  own

place,  w  herefore  tiie  /.  ot  his  father  hated
him

4.3.  to  help  me,  for  all  my  /.  are  gone  from  me
60.  all  the/,  of  Syria  gathered  themselves  to  him

12.  45.  will  give  the  rest  of  the  strong  holds  and/.

14.  1.  king  Demetrius  gathered  his/,  together

15.  10.  at  which  time  all  the/,  came  together
12.  he  saw  that  his  /.  had  forsaken  him

2  Mac.  10.  24.  a  great  multitude  of  foreign/

FORCIBLY.

1  Esd.  4.  49.  should  /.  enter  into  their  doors
Tob.  1.  20.  then  all  my  goods  were /.  taken  away

FOR  EC  A  Sl’E  I’H.

Wisd.  17.  11.  wickedness  always /.  grievous  things
FOREFATHERS.

2  Esd.  4.  2.3.  why  law  off.  is  brought  to  nought  ?
Bar.  1.  19.  brought  out  /,  out  ot  the  land  of  Egypt

3.  5.  remember  not  the  iniquities  of  our/

7.  the  iniquity  of  our  /  that  sinned  before  thee
2  Mac.  8.  19.  what  helps  their/  had  found
FOREFEET.

2  Mac.  3.25.  he  smote  at  Heliodorus  with  his/.
FOREFRONT.

1  Mac.  4.  57.  they  decked  also  the  /  of  the  temple
FOREIGN.

1  Mac.  15.  .3.  have  gathered  multitude  of /.  soldiers

2  Mac.  10.  24.  had  gathered  multitude  off.  forces

FOREKNOWLEDGE.

Jud.  9.  6.  and  thy  judgments  are  in  thy  /.

11.  19.  these  were  told  mejaccording  to  my/.


FORERUNNERS.

Wisd.  12.  8.  didst  send  wasps,  /  of  thine  host
FORESEE  ill.

Wisd.  8.  8.  she  /.  signs  and  wonders,  and  events
FO  RESHEW.

Wisd.  18.  19.  dreams  that  trouble  them  did/,  this

FORESKIN.

Jud.  14.  10.  Achior  circumcised  the  /  of  his  flesh
FO  R  EST.

2  Esd.  4.  1.3.  I  went  into  a  /.  the  trees  took  counsel
1  Mac.  4.  38.  shrubs  growing  in  the  corn  ts  as  in  a /
FOR  E-WAR  D.

1  Mac.  9.11.  they  that  marched  in  the/,  mighty  met
FORGAT.

Wisd.  19.  20.  the  water /.  his  own  quenching  nature
FORGE.

Eccl.  51.  2.  and  from  the  lips  that /.  lies
FORGET.

1  Esd.  3.  22.  they/  their  love  to  friends  and  brethren

2  Esd.  16.  67.  leave  off  sins,  and  /.  your  iniquities
Wisd.  16.  23.  this  did  e'en /.  his  own  strength
19.  4.  made  them  /.  tilings  that  had  happened

Eccl.  7.  27.  and  /.  not  the  sorrows  of  thy  mother
11.27.  affliction  of  an  hour  make  man /.  pleasure
29. 15.  /.  not  the  friendship  of  thy  surety
37.  fi.f.  not  thy  friend  in  thy  mind,  in  tny  riches
38.21./  it  not  for  there  is  no  turning  again

1  Mac.  1.  49.  to  the  end  they  might  /.  the  law

2  Mac.  2. 2.  charged  them  not  to  /.  the  commands

FORGETFUL.

Eccl.  23. 14.  be  not  /.  before  them,  and  so  become
FORGETFULNESS.

Wisd.  14.  2 6./.  of  good  turns  reigned  in  all

16.  11.  that  not  falling  deep  into /.  be  mindful

17.  3.  were  scattered  under  a  dark  vail  off.

Eccl.  11.  25.  in  prosperity  there  is  a  /.  of  affliction

FORGE!  TING.

Wisd.  ,9.  20.  the  fire/,  his  own  virtue  had  power
FORGIVE.

2  Esd.  7-  69.  being  judge,  if  he  should  not/,  them
Eccl.  16. 11.  he  is  mighty  to  /.  and  pour  out  displeas.
28.2./.  thy  neighbour  the  hurt  he  hath  done
Prayer  if  M amass,  f.  me,  O  Lord,  /  me
1  Mac.  13.  39.  as  for  any  oversight,  we  /.  it
FORGIVEN.

Eccl.  28.  2.  so  shall  thy  sins  be/,  when  thou  pray  est

1  Mac.  15.  8.  let  it  be  /.  thee  from  this  time

FORGIVENESS.

Eccl.  28.  4.  and  doth  he  ask  /.  of  his  own  sins  ?
Prayer  of  Manass.f.  to  them  that  have  sinned
FOREGO.

Eccl.  7.19  /  not  a  wise  and  good  worn,  is  above  gold

FORGOTTEN.

2  Esd.  1  6.  for  they  have  /.  me,  and  have  offered

14.  yet  have  you  /.  me,  saith  the  Lord

8.  5.3.  and  corruption  is  fled  into  hell  to  be /.

12.  47.  the  mighty  hath  not  /  you  in  temptation
Wisd.  2.  4.  and  our  name  shall  be  /.  in  time
Eccl.  1.3.  10.  stand  not  far  off,  lest  thou  be/.

35.7-  the  memorial  thereof  shall  never  be/

44.  10.  whose  righteousness  hath  not  been/.

Bar.  4.  8.  ye  have/,  the  everlasting  God

FORLORN.

Jud.  9.  11.  for  thou  art  a  protector  of  the  /.

Esth.  14.  19.  O  mighty  G.  hear  the  voice  of  the  /.
FORM.

Wisd.  11. 17.  made  the  world  of  matter  without/.

15.  5.  so  they  desire  the  f.  of  a  dead  image

FORMED.

2  Esd.  6.  39.  the  sound  of  man’s  voice  w-as  not  yet  /.
Wisd.  10.  1.  she  preserved  first  /.  father  of  w  orld

13.  13.  and  /  it  by  the  skill  ot  his  understanding
2  Mac.  7.22.  nor  was  it  1  that  /.  the  members

23.  the  Creator,  w  ho  /.  the  generation  of  man

FORMER.

1  Esd.  1. 24.  they  were  written  in  /.  times
Wisd.  19.  13.  punishments  came  not  without/,  signs
Eccl.  21.  1.  but  ask  pardon  for  thy/,  sins

1  Mac.  4.  47-  built  a  new  altar  according  to  the  /.
10.  41.  the  officers  payed  not  in,  as  in  /.  time
12.  3.  ye  should  renew  the  league  as  in  /.  time

16.  to  renew  the  amity  and  the  /.  league

2  Mac.  7.8.  he  received  the  next  torment  as /.  did

14.  .38.  in  the/,  times  when  they  mingled  not

15.8.  help  which  in /.  times  they  had  received

FORMER  LY.

2  Mac.  5. 18.  had  been  /.  wrapped  in  many  sins
FORNICATION.

Wisd.  14.  12.  was  the  beginning  of  spiritual  /.

FORNICATOR.

Eccl.  23. 16.  a  /.  in  the  body  of  his  flesh,  never  ceases
FORSAKE.

2  Esd.  1.  25.  ye  have  forsaken  me,  I  will  /.  you  also
.3.  15.  that  thou  w’ouldest  never  /  his  seed

5.  18./.  us  not  as  the  shepherd  that  leaveth  flock
10.34.  only  /  me  not,  test  I  die  frustrate  of  my  hope
12.  44.  if  thou  /.  us,  iiow  much  better  to  be  burnt
Jud.  7.  30.  for  ne  will  not/,  us  utterly
Eccl.  4.  19.  but  if  he  go  wrong  she  w  ill  /.  him
7.  26.  hast  thou  a  wife  after  thy  mind  r  /  her  not
.30.  love  him  made  thee.  and/,  not  his  ministers
9.10./  not  anold  friend,  the  new  is  not  com parable
13.4.  if  thou  have  nothing,  he  will/,  thee
7.  he  will  /.  thee,  and  shake  his  head  at  thee
17. 18.  giving  him  the  light  of  love  doth  not  /.  him
25.  return  to  the  Lord,  and  /.  thy  sins

28.  2.3.  such  as /.  the  Lord  shall  fall  into  it
29. 14.  but  he  that  is  impudent  will/,  him
35.  3.  to  /.  unrighteousness,  is  a  propitiation

1  Mac.  2.21.  God  forbid  we  should  f.  the  law

2  Mac.  1 . 5.  God  never  /.  \  ou  in  time  of  trouble

6. 16.  tho’ he  punish,  yet  (loth  he  never/  his  people
FORSAKEN.

1  Esd.  8.80.  in  bondage,  we  were  not  /  of  our  Lord

2  Esd.  1.25.  seeing  you  have /.  me,  I  will  forsakeyou
27.  ye  have  not /  me,  but  your  own  selves

31.  your  new  moons  and  circumcisions  have  I  /
2.  2.  I  am  a  widow'  and/,  go  your  way,  4.

Wisd.  3. 10.  the  ungodly  punished,  have/,  the  1  ord
Eccl.  2. 10.  or  did  any  abide  in  his  fear,  and  was/.  ?

41 . 8.  woe  to  you  ungodly  men  who  ha v«/.  the  law
51. 20.  found  in  pureness,  therefore  shal.  1  not  bey.


FOU


F  O  U


Bar.  3.  12.  thou  hast  /.  the  fountain  of  wisdom

4.  12.  let  none  lejoice  over  me  a  widow,  and /.  of
3el  38.  nor  hast  thou  /  them  that  seek  thee

1  Mac.  7.  19.  he  took  many  of  them  that  had  /  him
10. 14.  certain  of  those  that  had  /.  the  law  remained

15.  12.  for  he  saw  that  his  forces  had  /.  him

2  Mac.  5.  20.  as  it  was /.  in  wrath  of  the  Almighty

7.  16.  think  not  that  our  nation  is /.  of  God

FORSAKEN,  S.

Dan.  3.  9.  lawless  enemies,  most  hateful/,  of  God
2  Mac.  5.  8.  pursued,  hated  as  a /.  of  the  laws
FORSAKES  1'.

2  Esd.  12.  41.  what  have  we  done?  that  thou  /.  us
FORSAKETH.

Eccl.  3. 16.  he  that/,  his  father,  is  as  a  blasphemer
FO  RSOOK.

2  Esd.  3.  25.  they  that  inhabited  the  city  /.  thee
8;56.  thought  scorn  of  his  law,  and  /.  his  ways
Wi.\d.  10. 13.  when  righteous  was  sold,  she /.  him  not
Eccl.  17.  21.  neither  left,  nor  /.  them,  but  spared
49-  4.  for  they  /.  the  law  of  the  Most  High
I  Mac.  1.  15.  and  they  /.  the  holy  covenant
11. 12.  and /.  Alexander,  so  their  hatred  was  known
FO  US  WEAR.

Wisd.  14.  28.  or  else  lightly/,  themselves
FORSWORE.

f  Esd.  1.  48.  he  /.  himself  and  rebelled,  hardening
FORTIFICATION.

I  Mac.  10.  11.  to  build  with  square  stones  for  /.
FORTIFY.

1  Mac.  15.  39.  commanded  to  f.  the  gates  and  to  wet
FORTIFIED.

Jud.  4.  5.  they/,  the  villages  that  were  in  them

5.  1.  Israel  had  /.  all  the  tops  of  the  high  hills
Eccl.  48.  17.  Ezekias /.  his  city  and  brought  in

50.  1.  and  in  his  days /.  the  temple

4.  took  care  of  temple  and/,  city  against  besieging
1  Mac.  1.  34.  they  /.  themselves  therein

4.  61.  they  /.  Bethsura  to  preserve  it

5.  46.  Epnron  was  a  great  city,  very  well  /.

6.  26.  the  sanctuary  and  Bethsura  nave  they  /.

9.  52.  he  /.  also  the  city  of  Bethsura  and  Gazara

13.  10.  he /.  Jerusalem  round  about

14.  33.  /.  the  cities  of  J  udea  ||  34.  he  /  Joppa

37.  he/,  it  for  the  safety  of  the  country

FORTIFYING.

1  Mac.  10.  45.  and  for  the  /.  thereof  round  about
FORTITUDE.

IVisd.  8.  7.  she  teacheth  prudence,  justice,  and  /.
FOR  1R  ESS.

Eccl.  50. 2.  by  him  was  built  the  high  /.  of  the  wall

1  Mac.  4.  41.  to  fight  against  those  that  were  in  the /.

5.  9.  but  they  fled  to  the  /.  of  Dathema

11.  they  are  preparing  to  come  and  take  the  /.

29.  and  he  went  till  he  came  to  the /.

2  Mac.  10.  3.3.  but  they  laid  siege  against  the  /.

12.  19.  had  left  in  the/,  above  10,000  men

21.  he  sent  baggage  to  a  /  called  Carnion
FORTRESSES.

I  Mac.  10.  12.  the  strangers  that  were  in /.  fled  away

11.  41.  those  of  the  tower,  and  those  in  the  /.

14.  42.  to  set  them  over  the  armour  and  the  /.

15.  7 •/•  that  thou  hast  built,  let  them  remain

FORWARD.

1  Esd.  1.  27.  the  Lord  is  with  me,  hasting  me /.

2  Esd.  3.  6.  before  ever  the  earth  came  /.

Esth.  13.  4.  so  as  the  unit,  of  kingdoms  cannot  go  /.
11  isd.  13.  18.  of  that  which  cannot  set  a  foot  /.

14.  18.  the  artificer  did  help  to  set  /.  the  ignorant

1  Mac.  1.  13.  the  people  were  so  /  herein

2  Mac.  11.  10.  thus  they  marched /.  in  armour

15.  25.  then  Nicanor  came/,  with  trumpets

r  .  FORWARDNESS.

IVisd.  14.  17.  by  their/,  they  might  flatter  him
FOUGHT.

IVisd.  10.  20.  magnified  thy  hand  that  /.  for  them
Eccl.  46.  6.  because  he  /.  in  the  sight  of  the  l  ord

1  Mac.  3.  2.  they/,  with  cheerfulness  the  battle

12.  and  therewith  he /.  all  his  life  long

5.  3.  Judas/,  against  the  children  of  Esau,  65.

7.  so  he  /.  many  battles  with  them

21.  where  he /.  many  battles  with  the  heathen

11.  41.  cast  them  out,' for  they/,  against  Israel

55.  the  men  of  war  /.  against  Demetrius

12.  13.  the  kings  round  about  have /.  against  us

13.  47.  so  Simon  /.  no  more  against  them

•  14.  32.  Simon  rose  up,  and  /.  for  his  nation

16.  2.  we  have /.  against  the  enemies  of  Israel

2  Mac.  1. 12.  he  cast  them  out  that /.  within  holy  city

10.  17.  they  kept  off  all  that /  on  the  wall

12.  36.  when  they  had  /.  long,  were  weary

13.  22.  the  king/,  with  Judas,  was  overcome

FOUL.

1  Esd.  9.  6.  because  of  the  present  /.  weather

11.  it  is/,  weather,  so  that  we  cannot  stand

IVisd.  11.  6.  a  fountain  troubled  with/,  blood
Eccl.  5.  14.  for  a/,  shame  is  upon  the  thief
20.  24.  a  lie  is  a  /.  blot  in  a  man
FOWLS.

2  Esd.  5.  6.  the/,  shall  take  their  flight  away

6.  47.  that  it  should  bring  forth/,  and  fishes
Jud.  11.  7 • /•  of  the  air  shall  live  by  thy  power
Esth.  16.  24.  hateful  to  wild  beasts  and  /.  for  ever
IVisd.  19.  11.  they  saw  a  new  generation  of/.

Eccl.  17.  4.  and  gave  him  dominion  over  beasts  and /.

43.  14.  treasures  opened,  and  clouds  fly  forth  as /.
Bar.  3.  17.  they  have  hail  their  pastime  w  ith  /.
Dan.  3.  58.  O  all  ye  /.  of  the  air,  bless  the  Lord

%  Mac.  9.  15.  to  be  devoured  of/,  and  wild  beasts

15.  33.  they  should  give  it  by  pieces  to  the /.
FOUND.

1  Esd.  1.  7-  and  to  the  people  that  w'as/.  there
21.  with  Israel  that  were /.  dwelling  at  Jerusalem

4.  42.  we  w  ill  give  it,  because  thou  art  /.  w  isest

5.  39.  w'as  sought  in  the  register,  and  was  not  /

6.  22.  if  it  be  /.  that  the  building  was  done

8.  4.  he/,  grace  in  his  sight  in  all  requests

42.  when  I  had /.  there  none  of  the  priests
53.  and  we  /.  him  favourable  unto  us

2  Esd.  3.  34.  thy  name  no  where  be  /.  but  in  Israel

4.  44.  if  I  have  /.  favour  in  thy  sight,  and  if  it  be

possible  and  I  be  meet  therefore,  5.  56.  |  6.  11.


2  Esd.  5.  10.  shall  be  sought  of  many,  and  yet  not  be  /.
6.22.  full  storehouses  shall  suddenly  be/,  empty

8.  42.  I  Said,  if  1  have /.  grace  let  me  speak

12.  7-  Lord,  it  I  have  /.  grace  before  thy  sight

14.  22.  but  I  have  /.  grace  before  thee
lob.  1.  18.  he  killed  many,  but  the  bodies  were  not /.

5.  4.  he /.  Raphael  that  was  an  angel
8.  13.  the  maid  went  in  and  /.  them  both  asleep
Jud.  14.  15./.  llolofernes  cast  on  the  floor  dead
Wisd.  1.2.  he  will  be/,  of  them  that  tempt  him  not

2.  11.  what  is  feeble  is/,  to  be  nothing  worth

3.  5.G.  proved  them  and /.  them  worthy  for  himselt

5.  10.  as  a  ship,  the  tract-  thereof  cannot  be  /

11.  when  a  bird  hath  flown  no  token  of  her  way
to  be  /.  no  sign  where  she  went  is  to  be  /.

6.  12.  wisdom  is  glorious,  /.  of  such  as  seek  her

7.  29.  compared  with  the  light,  she  is/,  before  it

8.  1 1.  I  shall  be /.  of  quick  conceit  in  judgment

15.  I  shall  be /.  good  among  the  multitude

10.  5.  she  /.  out  the  righteous  and  preserved  him

16.  9.  nor  was  there  /.  any  remedy  for  their  life

Eccl.  6.  14.  a  faithful  Iriend  is  a  strong  defence,  he
that  hath  /.  such  an  one  hath/,  a  treasure

11.  19.  whereas  hesaith,  I  have  /.  rest

18.  6.  neither  can  the  ground  of  them  be  /.  out

28.  he  will  give  praise  of  him  that/,  her

21.  16.  grace  shall  be  /.  in  the  lips  of  the  wise
23.  12.  God  grant  that  it  be  not  /.  in  Jacob

25.  9.  well  is  him  that  hath/,  prudence

29.  4.  a  thing  lent  them,  reckoned  it  to  be/.

6.  and  he  will  count  as  if  he  had/,  it
31.  8.  blessed  is  the  rich  that  is /.  without  blemish

10.  who  hath  been  tried  thereby  and  /.  perfect
34.  8.  the  law  shall  be /.  perfect  without  lies
36.  16.  and  let  thy  prophets  be /.  faithful

38.  33.  shalt  not  be/,  where  parables  are  spoken

44.  5.  such  as /.  out  musical  tunes,  and  recited
20.  when  he  was  proved,  he  was /.  faithful

45.  1.  who/,  favour  in  the  sight  of  all  flesh

46.  15.  by  faithfulness  he  was  /.  a  true  prophet

51.  20.  I  directed  my  soul  to  her,/,  her  in  pureness
Bar.  3.  15.  who  hath  /  out  her  place  '

30.  w  ho  hath  gone  over  the  sea  and  /.  her  ?

32.  he  hath /  her  out  with  his  understanding  <

36.  he  hath /  out  all  the  way  of  knowledge
Sus.  63.  there  was  no  dish  nest y /.  in  her
iMac.  1.  23.  he  took  the  hidden  treasures  which  he /.

56.  they  rent  the  books  of  the  law  which  they  f.

57.  where  was  /.  with  any  the  book  of  testament
2.  46.  what  children  soever  they/,  in  Israel

52.  was  not  Abraham/  faithful  in  temptation
63.  and  to-morrow  lie  shall  not  be /.

4.  5.  when  he  /.  no  man  there,  he  sought  him

5.  6.  where  he  /  a  mighty  power  with  I  imotheus

6.  63.  w  here  he/.  Philip  to  be  master  of  the  city

10.  60.  and  he  /  favour  in  their  sight

1 1. 24.  where  he /.  favour  in  his  sight  went  to  king

12.  21.  it  is/  in  writing  that  the  Lacedemonians
2  Mac.  1.  20.  when  they  told  us  they/,  no  fire

2.  1.  it  is  also  /  in  the  records  that  Jeremy

7.  23.  who/,  out  the  beginning  of  all  things

8.  19.  what  helps  their  forefathers  had/

10.  22.  so  he  slew  those  that  were /  traitors

12.  18.  but  as  for  Timotheus  they  /.  him  not

40.  they  /  things  consecrated  to  idols  of  Jamnites
FOUNDATION.

1  Esd.  2.  18.  the  Jews  do  lay  the  /.  of  the  temple

5.  57.  they  laid  the/,  of  the  house  of  God

2  Esd.  6.  15.  the/,  of  the  earth  is  understood
10.  53.  where  no  /.  of  any  building  was

15.  12.  the/,  of  it  shall  be  smitten  with  plague

16.  15.  till  it  consume  the  /.  of  the  earth

Jud.  1.  3.  the  breadth  thereof  in  the  /.  60  cubits
IVisd.  4.  3.  brood  of  ungodly  shall  not  lay  fast/.

19.  and  he  shall  shake  them  from  the  /.

Eccl.  1.  15.  she  hath  built  an  everlasting/.

50.  2.  by  him  was  built  from  the  /  the  height
FOUNDATIONS.

1  Esd.  6.  11.  and  lay  the  /.  of  these  works

20.  laid  the /.  of  the  house  of  the  Lord

2  Esd.  6.  2.  or  ever  the  /.  of  Paradise  were  laid

10.  27.  a  large  place  shewed  itself  from  the/

15.  23.  fire  hath  consumed  the  /  of  the  earth
Jud.  16.  15. .mountains  shal  1  be  moved  from  their/.
Eccl.  10.  16.  destroyed  them  to  the  /.  of  the  earth

16.  19.  the/  of  the  earth  shall  be  shaken

FOUNDING.

2  Mac.  2.  13.  how  he  /.  a  library  gathered  the  acts
FOUN  TAIN.

Jud.  7.  3.  they  camped  in  the  valley  by  the  /.

7-  he  came  to  the  /.  of  their  waters  and  took  them
12.  let  thy  servants  get  the /.  of  water
12.  7- she  washed  herself  in  a  /.  of  water  by  camp
Esth.  10.  6.  a  little  /.  became  a  river,  there  was  light

11.  10.  as  it  were  from  a  little/  was  a  flood
Wisd.  11.6.  instead  of  a  /.  of  a  running  river
Eccl.  1.  5.  the  word  of  God  is  the  /.  of  wisdom

21 .  13.  his  counsel  is  like  a  pure  /.  of  life

26.  12.  as  a  traveller,  when  he  hatn  found  a /.

Bar.  3.  12.  thou  hast  forsaken  the  /  of  w isdotn

FOUNTAINS.

2  Esd.  2. 19.  as  many  /  flowing  with  milk  and  honey

6.  24.  the  springs  of  the /.  shall  stand  still

14.  47.  tor  in  them  is  the  /.  of  wisdom

Jud.  6.  11.  they  came  to  the/,  under  Bethulia

7.  17.  and  they  took  the /.  of  the  waters

Dan.  3. 55.  O  ye/  praise  ve  the  Lord,  praise  forever
FOUR.

2  Esd.  3.  19.  thy  glory  went  through  /.  gates  of  fire
6.  21.  untimely  children  of  three  or  /.  mouths  old

1 1.  39.  art  thou  not  it  that  remainest  of  the /  beasts

12.  2.  and  the  /.  wings  appeared  no  more

21.  /.  shall  be  kept  till  their  end  begin  to  approach

13.  5.  from  the/,  winds  of  the  heaven  to  subdue

16.  29-  there  are  left  three  or  /,  olives,  31.

Wisd.  18.  24.  in  the  /.  rows  of  the  stones  was  glory

1  Mac.  11.57..  thee  ruler  over  the /.  governments

13.  28.  for  his  mother,  and  his  /.  brethren

2  Mac.  8.  21.  he  divided  his  army  into /.  parts

FOURTEEN.

Toh.  8.  19-  he  kept  the  wedding-feast /  days
20.  till  the  J'.  days  of  the  marriage  expired


FRI  [Apockyph*

Tob.  10.  7-  till/,  days  of  the  wedding  were  expired
FOURTEENTH.

1  Esd.  1.  1.  the  /  day  of  the  first  month,  7.  10.
Esth.  10.  13.  the  /.  and  fifteenth  day  ot  same  month

13.  6.  the  /  day  of  the  twelfth  month  Adar

FOURTH.

Jud.  12.  10.  in  the/,  day  llolofernes  made  a  feast
Esth.  11.  l.in  the/ year  of  the  reign  of  Ptolemeus
Eccl.  26.  5.  and  for  the  /.  I  was  sore  afraid

2  Mac.  7.  13.  they  mangled  the/  in  like  manner

FORTY.

2  Esd .  14.  23.  that  they  seek  thee  not  for /.  days
36.  let  no  man  seek  after  me  these  /.  da>s
42.  they  sat/,  days,  and  they  wrote  in  the  day
44.  in  /  days  they  wrote  204  books
45.  when  the/,  days  were  fulfilled
Bel  3.  were  spent  on  him  every  day  f.  sheep
FRAMED.

2  Mac.  15.  39.  so  speech  finely  /  delighteth
FRANKINCENSE.

Eccl.  24.  15.  as  the  fume  of/  in  the  tabernacle

39.  14.  and  give  ye  a  sweet  savour  as/

50.  8.  as  the  branches  ot  the /.  tree  in  summer
FRANTIC.

Eccl.  4.  30.  be  not /.  among  thy  servants
_  ,  FRAYETH.

Eccl.  22.  20.  casteth  a  stone  at  birds,  /.  them  away
FREE.

1  Esd.  2.  9.  with  many  /  gifts  of  a  great  number

4.  53.  all  that  went  should  have  /.  liberty
Jud.  4.  14.  with  vows  and  /.  gifts  of  the  people
16.  18.  they  offered  their /.  offerings  and  gilts
23.  she  waxed  old,  and  made  her  maid  f.

Wisd.  7.  23.  kind  to  man, sted fast, sure, /.'from  care
Eccl.  10.  25.  they  that  are  /.shall  do  service
Sus.  53.  and  thou  hast  let  the  guilty  go  /.

1  Mac.  10.  29.  I  /  you,  and  foryoursakes  I  release

31.  let  Jerusalem  also  be  holy  and  /.

39-  I  give  it  as  a/  gift  to  the  sanctuary

11.  28.  that  he  would  make  J  udea  /.  from  tribute

15.  7.  let  them  be/  and  all  the  armour  remain

FREED.

Eccl.  26.  29.  an  huckster  shall  not  be/  from  sin

2  Mac.  2.  22.  they /the  city  and  upheld  the  laws

FREELY.

Esth.  16.  19.  publish  that  the  Jews  may/,  live
1  Mac.  10.  33.  I  /.  set  at  liberty  every  one
FREEDOM.

1  Esd.  4.  49.  he  wrote  concerning  their/.

62.  because  he  had  given  them/,  and  liberty
l  Mac.  10.  34./  for  all  the  Jews  in  my  realm
FR  EE-man.

1  Esd.  3.  19.  mind  of  bond-man  and  f.-rnan  all  one
F  R  E  E -woman.

1  Mac.  2.  11.  of  a  f-woman  she  is  become  bond-slave

FRI  ED.

2  Mac.  7.  5.  he  commanded  him  to  be  /.  in  the  pan

FRIEND.

Wisd.  1.  16.  they  thought  to  have  it  their/

Eccl.  6.  1.  instead  of  a  /.  become  not  an  enemy

7.  if  thou  wouldst  get  a /  prove  him  first

8.  for  some  man  is  a /  for  his  own  occasion

9.  there  is  a  /.  who  being  turned  to  eninitv

10.  again,  some/,  is  a  companion  at  the  fable

14.  a  faithful  /.  is  a  strong  defence

16.  a  faithful  /.  is  the  medicine  of  life

7.  12.  devise  not  a  lie,  nor  do  the  like  to  thy  f.

18.  change  not  a  /  for  any  good  by  no  means

9.  10.  forsake  not  an  old  /.  for  the  new  is  not  com¬
parable,  a  new  /.  is  as  new  wine

12.  8.  a/,  cannot  be  known  in  prosperity

9.  but  in  his  adversity  even  a  /.  will  depart

14.  13.  do  good  unto  thy  /  before  thou  die

19.  8.  whether  to  /.or  foe,  talk  not  of  lives

13.  admonish  a /  it  may  be  he  hath  not  done  it

14.  admonish  thy  /  it  may  be  he  hath  not  said  it

15.  admonish  a /  for  many  times  it  is  a  slander
20.23.  there  is  that  promiseth  to  Ids/.

22.  20.  he  that  upbraideth  his/  breaks  friendship

21.  though  thou  drewest  a  sword  at  thy/

22.  if  thou  hast  opened  thy  mouth  against  thy  /.

for  these  things  every  /  will  depart

25.  I  will  not  be  ashamed  to  defend  a,/.

27-  16.  and  shall  never  find  a  f.  to  his  mind

17.  love  thy/,  and  be  faithful  unto  him

29.  10.  lose  money  for  thy  brother  and  thy/

37.  1.  every  /  saitli,  I  am  his  /.  also,  but  there  is  a
J.  who  is  only  a/,  in  name
2.  w  hen  a  companion  and /.  is  turned  an  euemy

4.  which  rejoiceth  in  the  prosperity  of  a/

5.  acompanior.  who  helpeth  his /.  forthe  belly
C  forget  not  thy/,  in  thy  mind  when  in  riches

40.  23.  a/,  and  companion  never  meet  amiss

41.  18.  be  ashamed  before  thy  partner  and/

1  Mac.  7.  8.  chose  Bacchides  a  /.of  the  king

10. 16.  we  will  make  him  our/,  and  confederate

19.  a  man  of  great  power,  and  meet  to  be  our/

20.  we  ordain  thee  to  be  called  the  king’s/.

13.  36.  to  Simon,  high-priest  and  /.  of  king’s
15.32.  Athenobius  the  king’s /.  came  to  Jerusalem

2  Mac.  7-  24.  that  he  would  take  him  for  his /.

11.  14.  that  he  must  needs  be  a  /.  to  them

FRIENDS.

1  Esd.  3.  22.  they  forget  their  love  to/.

8.  13.  the  gifts  which  I  and  my  /.have  vowed

26.  honoured  me  in  sight  of  all  his  f.  and  uobles

2  Esd.  5.  9.  and  all  /.  shall  destroy  one  another

6.  24.  at  that  time /shall  fight  one  against  anothei
Esth.  16.  5.  put  in  trust  to  manage  their /  affairs

14.  he  thought,  finding  us  destitute  of/

Wisd.  7-  14.  which  they  that  use,  become  /  of  God

27.  she  maketh  them /of  God  and  prophets

19.  14.  but  these  brought  /.  into  bondage
Eccl.  6.  5.  sweet  language  will  multiply/

13.  separate  from  enemies,  take  heed  of  thy  /.

13.  21.  a  rich  man  falling,  is  held  up  of  his  /.

20.  16.  the  fool  saith,  1  have  no /  I  have  no  thank

28.  9.  a  sinful  man  disquieteth /.  and  makes  debate

30.  3.  and  before  his/,  he  shall  rejoice  of  him

6.  and  one  that  shall  requite  kindness  to  his/.
41.22.  be  ashamed  of  upbraiding  speeches  before/.

42.  3.  be  not  ashamed  of  the  gift  of  the  heritage  of/.


Apocrypha.]  F  R  U


FUR


GAR  .


Sus.  33.  therefore  her  /.  and  all  that  saw  her  wept
Bel  2.  Daniel  was  honoured  above  all  his/.

1  Mac.  2.  18.  thou  shalt  be  in  number  of  king's/.

39.  Mattathias  and  his  /.  understood  thereof
45.  Mattathias  and  his/,  went  round  about

3.38.  N  icanor,  Gorgias,  mighty  men  of  the  king's/.

6.  10.  wherefore  he  called  tor  all  his  /.

14.  theu  called  he  for  Philip  one  of  his/.

28.  the  king  gathered  together  all  his/.

58.  now  therefore  let  us  be  /.  with  these  men

7.  6.  Judas  and  his  brethren  have  slain  all  thy  /.

15.  we  will  not  procure  harm  of  you  nor  your/.
8. 12.  with  their  /.  and  such  as  relied  on  them

20.  we  be  registered  your  confederates  and  /.

31.  why  hast  thou  made  thy  yoke  heavy  on  our/.
9. 26.  they  made  inquiry  and  search  for  J  udas’  /

28.  for  this  cause  all  Judas’/,  came  together
35.  had  sent  to  pray  his/,  the  Nabathites

39.  the  bridegroom  came  forth  and  his /.

10.  60.  who  gave  them  and  their/,  silver

65.  so  the  king  wrote  him  among  his  chief  /.

11.  26.  promoted  him  in  the  sight  of  all  his/.

27.  gave  him  pre-eminence  among  his  chief/.

33.  to  do  good  to  the  Jews,  who  are  our /.

57.  appoint  thee  to  be  one  of  the  king’s /.

12.  14.  our  confederates  and  /.  in  these  wars
43.  Tryphon  commended  him  to  all  his /.

14.  39.  Demetrius  made  him  one  of  his /.

40.  the  Romans  had  called  the  Jews  their/.

15.  17.  the  Jews’  ambassadors,  our /.  came  to  us

28.  he  sent  to  him  Athenobius  one  of  his  /.

2  Mac.  1.  14.  came  and  his /.  that  were  with  him

3.  31.  certain  of  Heliodorus’ /.  prayed  Onias

8.  9-  choosing  N  icanor  one  of  his  special /.

10.  13.  whereupon  being  accused  ot  the  king’s  /.

14. 11.  others  of  the  king’s  /.  being  maliciously  set
FRIENDLY.

JVisd.  19.  15.  because  they  used  strangers  not  /.
Eccl.  4.  8.  and  give  him  a/,  answer  with  meekness

1  Mac.  7-  27.  he  sent  deceitfully  with  /.  words

2  Mac.  12.  31.  desiring  them  to  be  /.  still  to  them

FRIENDSHIP.

JVisd.  8.  18.  great  pleasure  it  is  to  have  her  /.
Eccl.  6.17.  whoso  feareth  L.  shall  direct  his /.  aright

22.  20.  he  that  upbraids  his  friend,  breaks  /.

29.  15.  forget  not  the  /.  of  thy  surety

1  Mac.  10.20.  to  take  our  part,  and  keep  /.  with  us

26.  whereas  you  have  continued  in  our  /.

12.  1.  to  confirm  and  renew  the  /.  with  tnem

3.  sent  us  to  the  end  you  should  renew  the  /.

8.  declaration  was  made  of  the  league  and  /.

10.  to  send  for  renewing  of  brotherhood  and  /.

14.  18.  they  wrote  in  tables  of  brass  to  renew'  /.
22.  Jews  came  to  renew  /. they  had  with  us

15.  17.  the  Jews  came  to  us  to  renew  the  old  /.

2  Mac.  6.  22.  for  the  old  /.  with  them  find  favour

FROCK.

Eccl.  40.  4.  to  him  that  is  clothed  with  a  linen /.
FROGS.

JVisd.  19.  10.  a  multitude  of/,  instead  of  fishes
FRONTIERS.

hid.  3.  8.  yet  he  did  cast  down  their  /.  and  groves
FROST.

IVisd.  16.  29.  shall  melt  away  as  the  winter’s  hoar /.
Bar.  2.  25.  they  are  cast  out  to  the /.  of  the  night
Dan.  3.  50.  O  ye/,  and  snow,  bless  ye  the  Lord
FROTH.

IVisd.  5.  14.  like  a  thin  /.  that  is  driven  aw'ay
FROWARD.

IVisd.  1.  3.  for  /.  thoughts  separate  from  God
Eccl.  36.  20.  a/,  heart  causeth  heaviness
FRUIT.

2 Esd.  3.  20.  thy  law  might  bring  forth  /.  in  them
33.  reward  appeareth  not,  labour  hath  no/.

4.  31.  ponder  now  how  great/,  of  wickedness

35.  when  cometh  the  /.  of  the  floor  of  our  reward

6.  44.  there  was  great  and  innumerable/.

8.  6.  give  us  seed,  that  there  may  come  /.  of  it

10.  milk  to  be  given,  w  hich  is  the  /.  of  the  breasts

9.  31.  I  sow  rny  law  in  you,  it  shall  bring  forth/.

32.  though  the  /.  of  thy  law  did  not  perish

10.  12.  because  1  have  lost  the  /.  of  ray  womb

14.  even  so  the  earth  also  hath  given  her /.

11.  42.  the  dwellings  of  them  that  brought  forth  /.
16.25.  trees  shall  give  /.and  who  shall  gather  them?
IVisd.  3.  13.  she  shall  have  /.  in  the  visitation  of

souls

15.  for  glorious  is  the  /.  of  good  labours

4.  5.  their  /.  unprofitable,  not  ripe  to  eat

10. 7.  plants  bearing  /.  that  never  come  to  ripeness
Eccl.  6.  3.  lose  thy  /.  and  leave  thyself  a  dry  tree

11.  3.  but  her  /.  is  the  chief  of  sweet  things
19.  19.  shall  receive /.  of  the  tree  of  immortality

23.  25.  her  branches  shall  bring  forth  no/.

24. 17.  my  flowers  are  the  /.  of  honour  and  riches

27.  6.  the  /.  declares  if  the  tree  have  been  dressed
50.  10.  as  a  fair  olive-tree  budding  forth /.

1  Mac.  10.  30.  the  half  of  the  /.  of  the  trees

14.  8.  and  the  trees  of  the  field  gave  their/.

FRUITS.

2  Esd.  2.  18.  tw'elve  trees,  laden  with  divers  /.

16.  46.  strangers  shall  reap  their  /.  and  spoil  goods
Tob.  5.  13.  we  offered  the  tenths  of  the  /.

IVisd.  16.  19.  it  might  destroy  /.  of  an  unjust  land
22.  fire  did  destroy  the /.  of  the  enemies

26.  the  growing  of /.  that  nourished]  man
Eccl.  6.  19.  come  to  her  and  wait  for  her  good  /.

for  thou  shalt  eat  of  her  /.  right  soon

24.  19.  come  and  fill  yourselves  vvith  my  /.

25.  and  as  Tigris  in  the  time  of  the  new  /.

37.  23.  and  the  /.  of  his  understanding  fail  not

1  Mac.  11.  34.  king  received  out  of  the/,  of  the  earth

FRUITFUL.

2  Esd.  1.  34.  and  your  children  shall  not  be  /.

15.  62.  thy  /.  trees  shall  they  burn  up  with  fire
Eccl.  26.  20.  thou  hast  gotten  a  /.  possession

40.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  /.  garden
FRUITLESS.

IVisd.  15.  4.  nor  an  image  the  painter’s  /.  labour
FRUSTRATE.

2  Esd.  10.  31.  forsake  me  not,  lest  1  die  /.  of  hope
Jud,  11.  11.  not  defeated,  and  /.  of  his  purpose

646


FUGITIVE.

2  Mac.  8. 35.  he  came  like  a  /.  servant  to  Antioch
FUGITIVES.

Jud.  16.  12.  and  have  wounded  them  as  /.  children
IVisd.  19.  3.  and  they  pursued  them  as  /.

1  Esd.  1.  23.  with  n  heart  /.  of  godliness
58.  until  the  /.  term  of  seventy  years

2  Esd.  3.  3.  I  began  to  speak  words  /.  of  fear
4.  27.  for  this  world  is /.  of  unrighteousness

38.  I  said,  even  we  all  are /.  of  impiety
6.22./.  store-houses  suddenly  be  found  empty
7-  6.  a  city  is  set  on  a  field,/,  of  all  good  things

12.  entrances  of  this  world  were  /.  of  sorrow
25.  and  for  the  /.  are  the  /.  things

10.  7.  how  that  Sion  our  mother  is/,  of  heaviness

12.  2.  their  kingdom  was  small  and  /.  of  uproar

14.  39.  and  behold,  he  reached  me  a /.  cup

15.  34.  the  clouds  are  /.  of  wrath  and  storm

40.  the  clouds  shall  be  lifted  up  /.  of  wrath

41.  and  many  waters,  that  all  fields  may  be/.

16.  32.  all  her  paths  shall  grow  /.  of  thorns
Esth.  15. 14.  and  thy  countenance  is  /.  of  grace
IVisd.  5.  22.  hailstones  /.  of  wrath  shall  be  cast

11.  18.  or  unknown  wild  beasts  /.  of  rage

12.  17.  not  believe  that  thou  art  of  a /.  power

13.  13.  a  crooked  piece  of  wood,  ana  /.  of  knots
Eccl.  1.  30.  but  thy  heart  is  /.  of  deceit

2.  11.  the  Lord  is  /.  of  compassion  and  mercy
3. 13.  when  thou  art  in  thy/,  strength

8.  3.  strive  not  with  a  man  that  is /.  of  tongue
19.  26.  but  inwardly  he  is  /.  of  deceit

23. 11.  but  his  house  shall  be  /.  of  calamities
25.  20.  so  is  a  wife/,  of  words  to  a  quiet  man
34. 10.  but  he  that  hath  travelled,  is /.  of  prudence

39. 12.  1  am  filled  as  the  moon  at  the/.  50.  6.

42.  16.  the  work  is  /.  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord
Bar.  6. 17.  when  set  up  their  eyes  be/,  of  dust

1  Mac.  3.  27.  Antiochus  was /.  of  indignation

2  Mac.  3.  6.  was/,  of  infinite  sums  of  money

30.  the  temple  which  afore  was /.  of  fear

12. 16.  a  lake  filled  /.  seen  running  with  blood
FULFIL.

1  Esd.  1.  57.  to/,  the  word  of  the  I^ord,  spoken

by  Jeremiah

2  Esd.  6.  35.  that  I  may/,  the  three  weeks
JVisd.  19.  4.  that  they  might  /.  the  punishment
Eccl.  26.  2.  he  shall  f.  the  years  of  his  life

1  Mac.  2.  18.  come  and/,  the  king’s  commandment

2  Mac.  3.  8.  but  indeed  to  f.  the  king’s  purpose

FULFILLED.

2  Esd.  2.  40.  which  have/,  the  law  of  the  Lord

41.  the  number  of  thy  children  is/.

4.  37.  doth  not  move  till  the  said  measure  be/.

40.  ask  her  when  she  hath  /.  her  nine  months
6.  19.  when  the  affliction  of  Sion  shall  be  /.

11. 44.  and  his  abominations  are  /.

14.45.  when  the  forty  days  were/.

15.  6.  and  their  hurtful  works  are  /.

Tob.  14.  5.  until  the  time  of  that  age  be  /.

IVisd.  4.  13.  he  being  made  perfect/,  a  long  time
FULFILLING.

1  Mac. 2.55.  Jesus,  for /.  the  word,  was  made  a  judge
FULLY.

1  Esd.  6.  20.  the  house  of  Lord  is  not  yet/,  ended
Jud.  2. 13.  but  accomplish  the  commandments/.

1  Mac.  1.  29.  after  two  years /.  expired

62.  many  in  Israel  were  /.  resolved  not  to  eat
2.  68.  recompense/,  the  heathen,  and  take  heed

9.  42.  so  when  they  had  avenged  /.  the  blood

FULN  ESS.

Eccl.  1.  16.  to  fear  the  Lord  is  /.  of  wisdom

2  Mac.  6.  14.  till  come  to  the  J.  of  their  sins

FUME.

Eccl.  24. 15.  as  the/,  of  frankincense  in  tabernacles
FUNERALS.

2  Mac.  5.  10.  had  none  to  mourn,  nor  any  solemn  /.
FURLONGS.

2  Mac.  11.  5.  distant  from  Jerusalem  about  five/.
12.  9.  was  seen  two  hundred  and  forty/,  off

16.  a  lake  two /.  broad  being  filled  full
17-  then  departed  they  from  thence  750  f.

29.  Scythopolis  lieth  600 /.  from  Jerusalem

FURNACE.

JVisd.  3.  6.  as  gold  in  the  /.  hath  he  tried  them
Eccl.  2. 5.  acceptable  men  in  the  /.  of  adversity
22.  24.  as  the  vapour  of  a/,  goeth  before  fire

27.  5.  the  /.  proveth  the  potter’s  vessel

31.  26.  the /.  proveth  the  edge  by  dipping
38.  28.  he  fighteth  with  the  heat  of  the/.

30.  he  is  diligent  to  make  clean  the  /.

43.  4.  a  man  blowing  a  /.  is  in  works  of  heat
Dan.  3.  24.  the  flame  streameth  forth  above  the  /.

25.  it  burnt  Chaldeans  it  found  about  the  /.

27.  made  the  midst  of  the  /.  as  a  moist  wind

28.  then  the  three  blessed  God  in  the  /.

66.  he  hath  delivered  ns  out  of  midst  of  the  /.
FURNISH.

Eccl.  29-  26.  /.  a  table  and  feed  me  of  that  ready
FURNISHED.

Eccl.  44.  6.  rich  men  /.  with  ability,  living
1  Mac.  14.  34.  and  he/,  them  with  all  things
FURROWS.

Eccl.  7.  3.  sow  not  on  the  /.  of  unrighteousness
38.  26.  he  giveth  hjs  mind  to  make  /.

FURTHER.

1  Esd.  2.  29.  those  wicked  workers  proceed  no  /.

6.  30.  and  that  every  year  without/,  question

2  Esd.  13.  41.  would  go  forth  into  a  f.  country

FU  RTHERMORE.

1  Esd.  4. 10./.  he  lieth  down,  he  eateth,  drinketh

1  Mac.  9. 1./.  when  Demetrius  heard  that  Nicanor

FURY.

JVisd.  10.  3.  he  perished  in  the /.  wherewith
Eccl.  1.  22.  the  sway  of  his/,  be  his  destruction

45. 18.  the  congregation  of  Core  with  /.  and  wrath
48.  10.  wrath,  before  it  break  forth  into /.

Bar.  1. 13.  to  this  day  the  /.  of  Lord  is  not  turned

2  Mac.  4.  25.  having  the  /.  of  a  cruel  tyrant

7.  9.  thou  like  a  /.  takest  us  out  of  this  life

FURIES.

IVisd.  7.  20.  to  know  the  /.  of  wild  beasts


FURIOUS.

Eccl.  1.22.  a/,  man  cannot  be  justified

10.  18.  nor/,  anger  for  them  that  are  born  of  woi®.

28.  8.  for  a/,  man  will  kindle  strife
2  Mac.  5.  11.  removing  out  of  Egypt  in  a/,  mind

G.

GABAEL.

Tob.  1.  1.  Adael  son  of  G.  of  the  seed  of  Asael

14.  I  left  in  trust  withG.  ten  talents  of  silver

4.  1.  the  money  which  he  had  committed  to  G.

20.  1  signify  that  1  committed  ten  talents  to  G.

5.  6.  for  I  have  lodged  with  our  brother  G.

9.  2.  go  to  Rages  of  Media,  to  G.  and  bring  money

5.  so  Raphael  went  out  and  lodged  with  G.

10.  2.  are  they  detained  ?  or  is  G.  dead  ?

GABATHA.

Esth.  12. 1.  took  his  rest  in  the  court  with  G.
GABRIAS.

Tob.  1.  14.  I  left  with  Gabael  the  brother  of  G.

4.  20.  committed  ten  talents  to  Gabael  son  of  G.

GAD.

Eccl.  25. 25.  nor  a  wicked  worn,  liberty  top.  abroad
GADDER.

Eccl.  26.8.  and,  a  p.  abroad  causeth  great  anger
GAIN.

JVisd.  14.  2.  for  verily  desire  of  g.  deviseth  that

15.  12.  they  counted  our  time  here  a  market  for  g.
Eccl.  20.  9.  there  is  a  g.  that  turneth  to  loss

29. 19.  that  followeth  other  men’s  business  forp.

2  Mac.  11.3.  thinking  to  make  ap.  of  the  temple
GAINING.

JVisd.  13. 19.  for  p.  and  getting  asketh  ability  to  de
GAINSAY.

2  Esd.  5.  29.  they  who  did  p.  thy  promises
Jud.  8.  28.  there  is  none  that  may  p.  thy  words

12.  14.  who  am  I  that  I  should  p.  my  lord  ?

Esth.  13.  9.  there  is  no  rnan  that  can  p.  thee

1  Mac.  14.  44.  to  break,  or  to  p.  his  words
GAIT.

Eccl.  19.  30.  man’s  laughter  and  p.  shew  what  he  is
GALA  AD.

Jud.  1.8.  to  those  that  were  of  Carmel  and  G.
15.5.  they  in  G.and  Galilee  chased  them
1  Mac.  5.  9.  the  heathen  that  were  at  G.  assembled

17.  I  and  Jonathan  will  goto  the  country  of  G.
25.  that  had  happened  to  their  brethren  in  G.

27-  shut  up  in  cities  of  the  country  of  G.36.

45.  Israelites  that  were  in  the  country  of  G.

55.  Judas  and  Jonathan  were  in  the  land  of  G.

13.  22.  he  came  into  the  country  of  G.

GALBANUM.

Eccl.  24.  15. 1  yielded  a  pleasant  odour  as  G.

GALLERY.

Eccl.  22.  17.  as  plastering  on  the  wall  of  a  p.

.  GALATIANS.

1  Mac.  8.  2.  which  they  had  done  amongst  the  G.

2  Mac.  8.  20.  battle  they  had  in  Babylon  with  G.

GALILEE.

Tob.  1.  2.  which  is  called  properly  Nephthali  in  G.
Jud.  1.8.  those  of  higher  G.  and  the  great  plain
15.  5.  they  that  were  in  Galaad  and  in  G.

1  Mac.  5.  14.  there  came  other  messengers  from  G.

15.  and  all  G.  of  the  Gentiles  are  assembled

17.  go,  and  deliver  thy  brethren  that  are  in  G.

20.  were  given  three  thousand  men  to  go  into  G.

21.  then  went  Simon  into  G.  where  he  fought
23.  and  those  that  were  in  G.  took  he  away
55.  and  Simon  his  brother  was  in  G.

10.  30.  out  of  the  country  of  Samaria  and  G.

11.  63.  his  princes  were  come  to  Cades  in  G.

12.  47-  of  whom  he  sent  two  thousand  into  G„

49.  Tryphon  sent  an  host  of  footmen  into  G.

GALL.

Tob.  6.  4.  take  the  heart,  the  liver,  and  thep.  6.

8.  as  for  the  p.  it  is  good  to  anoint  a  man
11.4.  take  in  thine  hand  the  p.  of  the  fish

8.  therefore  anoint  thou  his  eyes  with  the  p.

11.  hestrake  off  thep.  on  his  father’s  eyes

G  ALLIES.

2  Mac.  4. 20.  it  was  employed  to  the  making  of  p.

GAME.

2  Mac.  4.  14.  after  thep.  of  Discus  called  them  forth

18.  now  when  the  p.  that  was  used  was  kept

GAPE.

1  Esd.  4.  19.  do  they  not  a.  and  with  open  mouth  ?

GAPED.

1  Esd.  4.  31.  the  king  p.  and  gazed  upon  her

GARDEN.

Eccl.  24.  30.  I  came  out  as  a  conduit  into  a  p.

31.  I  said,  I  will  water  my  bestp.  and  will  water
abundantly  my  p.  bed,  my  brook  became  a  river
40.  17.  bountifulness  is  as  a  most  fruitful  p.

27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  fruitful  g.

Bar.  6.  70.  as  a  scarecrow  in  ap.  of  cucumbers
Hus.  4.  Joacim  had  a  fair  p.  joining  to  his  house
7.  Susanna  went  into  her  husband’s  g.  to  walk
15.  she  was  desirous  to  wash  herself  in  thep.

17.  and  shut  thep.  doors  that  1  may  wash  me

18.  and  they  shut  the  p.  doors  and  went  out

25.  then  ran  the  one  and  opened  the  g.  door

26.  when  the  servants  heard  the  cry  in  the  p.

36.  elders  said,  as  we  walked  in  the  p.  alone,  tnis

woman  shut  the  p.  doors,  and  sent  maids  away
38.  we  that  stood  in  a  corner  of  the  p.  ran  to  then]
GARRISON.

1  Mac.  4.  61.  they  set  there  a  p.  to  keep  it

5.  58.  when  they  had  given  charge  to  the  p.

6.  50.  the  king  set  a  p.  there  to  keep  it

9.  51.  in  them  he  set  a  p.  that  they  might  worn

10.  75.  because  Apollonius  had  a  p.  there
11.3.  he  set  in  every  one  of  them  a  p.  of  soldiers

66.  he  took  the  city  and  setap.  in  it

12.  34.  wherefore  he  set  ap.  there  to  keep  it

14.  33.  but  he  seta  p.  of  the  Jews  there

2  Mac.  12.  18.  having  left  a  strong  p.  in  a  hold

GARRISONS.

Jud.  3.  6.  Holofernes  set  p.  in  the.  higli  cities

7.  7.  llolofei  lies  set  p.  of  men  of  war  O'erthem
1  Mac.  5.  56.  captains  of  thep.  heard  of  the  acts


GAT


GEN


G  I  F  [Apocrypha


GARIZIM.

i  .Mac,  5.  23  nud  at  G.  he  left  Andronicus

6.  2.  that  in  G.  ot  Jupiter  defender  of  strangers

GARLAND.

Jud.  15.  13.  they  put  a  g.  of  olive  upon  her

GARLANDS.

Jud.  3.7.  they  received  them  with  #.  and  dances

15.  13.  men  followed  in  their  armour  with  a.
GARMENT.

1  Esd.  8.  71. 1  rent  my  clothes  and  the  holy  g.  73.
Jud.  16.  8.  for  she  put  off  the  g.  of  her  widowhood,
and  took  a  linen  g.  to  deceive  him
Wtsa.  18.  24.  in  the  long  g.  was  the  whole  world
Eccl.  14.  17.  all  flesh  waxeth  old  as  a  g.

45.  10.  he  compassed  him  with  an  holy  g.

50.  II  he  made  the  g.  of  holiness  honourable
Bar .  5.  1.  put  oft,  O  Jerusalem,  the  g.  of  mourning

2.  cast  about  thee  a  double  g.  of  righteousness

GARMENTS.

1  Esd.  1.  2.  the  priests  being  arrayed  in  long  g.

4.  !7.  these  make  g.  for  men,  these  bring  glory
-Esd-  2.  39.,  have  received  glorious  g.  ot  the  Lord
yob.  4.  16.  give  of  thy  <7.  to  them  that  are  naked
Jud.  10.  3.  she  put  off  the  g.  of  her  widowhood,

washed  her  body,  and  put  on  her  g.  of  gladness
Esth.  14.  2.  put  on  the  g.  of  anguish  and  mourning
15.  1.  the  third  day  she  laid  away  her  mourning g.
Eccl.  42.  13.  for  from  g.  cometh  a  moth
45.  8.  he  strengthened  him  with  rich  g.

Ear.  6.  11.  they  will  deck  them  as  men  with  g,

33.  the  priests  also  take  off  their p.  and  clothe
58.  whose  g.  they  that  are  strong  do  take  away
t  Mac.  3.  49.  they  brought  also  the  priests’  g.

10.  62.  the  king  commanded  to  take  off  his  g.

GARNERS.

Eccl.  1.  17.  she  filleth  the  g.  with  her  increase
GARNISH.

2  Mac.  9.  16.  he  would  g.  with  goodly  gifts

GARNISHEf).

Eccl.  16.  27.  he  g.  his  works  for  ever
42.21.  he  hath#.  the  excellent  works  of  wisdom
„  GASP.

2  Mac.  7.  9.  when  he  was  at  the  last  g.  he  said

GAT.

3L  then  g.  he  up  on  his  second  chariot
Irtsd.  10. 8.  they  g.  not  only  this  hurt
£ro/.  46.  2.  how  great  glory  g.  he  when  he  did  lift  up

51.  16.  1  received  her  and  g.  much  learning
1  Mac.  3.  3.  so  he  #.  his  people  great  honour

9.  32.  when  Bacchides#.  knowledge  thereof

11.  67.  they  g.  them  to  the  plain  of  Nasor

GATE.

1  Esd.  1. 16.  the  porters  were  at  every  g.  7.  9,

Tob.  11. 16.  went  to  meet  his  daughter  at  the  g.

Jud.  8.  33.  you  shall  stand  this  night  in  the  g.

10.  6.  thus  they  went  forth  to  the  g.  of  the  city
13. 11.  then  said  Judith  to  the  watchmen  at  the  g.

open,  open  now  the  g.  our  God  is  with  us

12.  they  made  haste  to  go  down  to  the  g.

13.  so  they  opened  the  g.  and  received  them

1  Mac.  5. 22.  he  pursued  them  to  the  g.  of  Ptolemais

GATES.

2  Esd.  3.  19.  thy  glory  went  thro’  four  g.  of  fire
Jud.  1.  4.  he  made  the  g.  thereof ;  even  g.  that

were  raised  to  the  height  of  seventy  cubits
7. 22.  young  men  fell  by  the  passages  of  the  g.

10.  9.  commanded  the  g.  of  the  city  to  be  opened
Esth.  16.  18.  he  is  hanged  at  the  g.  of  Susa
Eccl.  49. 13.  who  set  up  the  g.  and  the  bars

1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw-  altar  profaned  and  g.  burned
57.  the#.  and  the  chambers  they  renewed

5.  47.  they  stopped  up  the  g.  with  stones

9.  50.  these  did  he  strengthen  with  g.  and  bars

12.  38.  Simon  made  it  strong  with  g.  and  bars
48.  they  of  Ptolemais  shut  the#.  and  took  him

13.  3.3.  Simon  fenced  them  with  great  walls  and g.

15.  .39.  to  build  Cedron,  and  to  fortify  the  g.

2  Mac.  3. 19.  the  virgins  ran,  some  to  the  g.

10. 36.  others  broke  open  the  g.  and  took  city

GATHER.

2  Esd.  14.  2.3.  go  thy  way,  g.  the  people  together

16.  25.  trees  give  fruit,  and  who  shall  g.  them  ?

Tob.  13.  5.  he  will  g.  us  out  of  all  nations
Eccl.  6.  18.  a.  instruction  f.om  thy  youth  up

36.  11.  g.  all  the  tribes  of  Jacob  together
47. 18.  thou  didst  g.  gold  as  tin,  and  multiply

1  Mac.  3.  31.  determined  there  to  g.  much  money
9.7-  that  he  had  no  time  to  g.  them  together

10.8.  had  given  authority  to  g.  together  an  host

14.  44.  or  tog.  an  assembly  in  the  country

2  MacA.  27.  #.  those  together  that  are  scattered

2.  7-  till  the  time  that  God  g.  his  people  again

18.  God  will  g.  us  together  out  of  every  land

GATHERED.

1  Esd.  4.  18.  have  g.  together  gold  and  silver

8.  41.  these  1  g.  to  the  river  called  Theras
91.  there  g.  to  him  a  very  great  multitude

9.  3.  they  should  be#,  together  at  Jerusalem

5.  they  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  were  g.  together

2  Esd.  1.30.  1  g.  you  together  as  a  hen  gathereth
16.30.  when  a  vineyard  is  g.  there  are  left

Jud.  16.  22.  after  Manasses  was  g.  to  his  people
Eccl.  25.  3.  if  thou  hast#,  nothing  in  thy  youth
Bel  1.  Astyages  was  #.  to  his  fathers,  1  Mac.  2.  69.

1  Mac.  1.  4.  he  #.  a  mighty  strong  host

15.  3.  I  have  #.  a  multitude  of  foreign  soldiers

2  Mac.  2.  13.  he  founding  a  library,#,  the  acts

8.  27.  they  had  #.  their  armour  together,  31.

10.  24.  had#,  a  multitude  of  foreign  forces

12.  38.  so  Judas  #.  his  host,  and  came  to  Odollam

GATHERETH.

Eccl.  14.  4.  he  that  #.  by  defrauding  his  own  soul,
#.  for  others  that  shall  spend  his  goods  riotously

21.8.  that  #.  stones  for  the  tomb  of  his  burial
Eccl.  33.  16.  as  one  that  #.  after  grape-gatherers

GATHERING.

Eccl.  26. 5.  the  #.  together  of  an  unruly  multitude

31.  3.  the  rich  hath  great  labour  in  #.  riches
43.  20.  it  abideth  on  every  #.  together  of  w  ater
2  Mac.  4.  28.  appertained  the  #.  of  the  customs
10. 10.  #.  briefly  the  calamities  of  the  wars
12.  43.  when  he  had  made  a  #.  thro’  the  company


I


GAVE

1  Esd.  6. 1.3.  they  #.  us  this  answei ,  we  are  servants

15.  he#,  them  over  into  the  power  of  Nabuchod,

8.  80.  made  us  gracious,  so  that  they  #.  us  food

9.  20.  they#,  their  hands  to  put  away  their  wives
41.  and  all  the  multitude  #.  heed  to  the  law

2  Esd.  1.  13.  1  #.  you  a  large  and  safe  passage

14.  I  #.  you  light  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  and  wonders

19.  then  1  had  pity,  and#,  you  manna  to  eat
23.  1  #.  you  not  tire  for  your  blasphemies

2.  1.  I  #.  them  my  commandments  by  the  prophets
16.  61.  he  #.  him  breath,  life,  and  understanding
Job.  1.  6.  them  I  #.  at  the  altar  to  the  priesfs

7.  the  first  tenth  part  I  #.  to  the  sons  of  Aaron

8.  the  third  1  #.  to  them  to  whom  it  was  meet

13.  the  Most  High  #.  me  grace  and  favour

16.  in  time  of  Enemesser,  I  #.  many  alms  to  my

brethren,  and  #.  my  bread  to  the  hungry

2.  12.  and  they  #.  her  also  besides  a  kid
7.  13.  and  he  #.  her  to  be  wife  to  Tobias

10.  10.  then  Raguel  #.  him  Sara  his  wife

14.  2.  he  #.  alms,  and  increased  in  the  fear  of  Lord

11.  he  #.  up  the  ghost  in  the  bed,  being  158  years
Jud.  8.  8.  there  was  none  that  #.  her  an  ill  word

10.  5.  then  she  #.  her  maid  a  bottle  of  wine

15.  11.  they  #.  to  Judith  Holofernes  his  tent

12.  she  #.  branches  to  the  women  with  her

16.  19.#.  the  canopy  she  had  taken  for  gift  to  Lord
If  tsd.  10.  2.  she  #.  him  power  to  rule  all  things

10.  she  #.  him  knowledge  of  holy  tilings

14.  she  shewed  them  liars  and  #. ‘him  perpet.  glory

18.  25.  unto  these  the  destroyer#,  place,  was  afraid
Eccl.  17.  6.  an  heart  he  #.  them  to  understand

9.  he  #.  them  to  the  glory  in  his  marvellous  acts

11.  besides  this  he  #.  them  knowledge

24.  8.  so  the  Creator  #.  me  a  commandment
15. 1  #.  a  sweet  smell  like  cinnamon  and  aspalathus

45.  3.  he  a.  him  a  commandment  for  his  people
7.  he#,  him  the  priesthood  among  the  people

17.  he  #.  unto  him  his  commandments

20.  he  made  Aaron  honourable  and  #.  him  heritage

21.  sacrifices,  which  he  #.  to  him  and  his  seed

46.  9.  the  Lord  #.  strength  also  to  Caleb

47.  5.  he  #.  him  strength  in  his  right  hand  to  slay

6.  in  that  he  #.  him  a  crown  of  glory

11.  he#,  him  a  covenant  of  kings,  and  a  throne

22.  wherefore  he  #.  a  remnant  to  Jacob
49.  5.  therefore  he  #.  their  power  to  others

Bar.  1.  18.  in  commandments  that  he  #.  us  openly

3.  27.  nor  #.  he  the  way  of  knowledge  to  them

4.  30.  he  that  #.  thee  that  name  will  comfort  thee

1  Mac.  1.  13.  who  #.  them  license  to  do  after  ordin.

3.  28.  he  #.  his  soldiers  pay  for  a  year

5.  3.  he  #.  them  a  great  overthrow  and  abated

7.  11.  but  they  #.  no  heed  to  their  words

8. 8.  which  they  took  of  him  and  #.  to  king  Eumenes

10.  46.  these  words,  they  #.  no  credit  to  them
58.  he  #.  to  him  his  daughter  Cleopatra

60.  he  #.  them  and  their  friends  silver  and  gold
89.  he#,  him  Accaron  with  the  borders  thereof

11.  10.  I  repent  that  I  #.  my  daughter  to  him

12.  43.  he  #.  him  gifts,  and  commanded  his  men

13.  3.  Simon  #.  them  exhortation,  saying

14.  8.  the  earth  #.  her  increase,  trees  their  fruit
.32.  Simon  armed  valiant  men  and  #.  them  wages

2  Mac.  2.  17.  hope  that#,  them  all  an  heritage

7.  22.  for  l  neither  #.  you  breath  nor  life

8.  36.  the}’  followed  the  laws  that  he  #.  them

12.  15.  Judas  g.  a  fierce  assault  against  the  wall

15.  15.  Jeremias  #.  to  Judas  a  sword  of  gold

G  A  VEST.

1  Esd.  8.  82.  which  thou  #.  by  thy  servants  the  proph.

2  Esd.  3.  5.  thou  #.  a  body  to  Adam  without  soul

16.  to  him  thou  #.  Isaac,  to  Isaac  thou  g.  Jacob
27.  thou  #.  the  city  into  hands  of  enemies

5.  27.  thou  #.  a  law  that  is  approved  by  all

6.  46.  thou  #.  them  a  charge  todoservice  to  man

51.  to  Enoch  thou  #.  one  part,  which  was  dried

52.  unto  Leviathan  thou  #.  the  seventh  part
5.3.  on  the  sixth  day  thou  #.  commandment

Tob.  8.  6.  thou  madest  Adam  and  #.  him  Eve
Jud.  9. 2.  to  whom  thou  #.  a  sword  to  take  vengeance
.3.  wherefore  thou  #.  their  rulers  to  be  slain
Wisd.  11.  7.  thou  #.  to  them  abundance  of  water

12.  10.  thou#,  them  place  of  repentance

18.  3.  thou  #.  them  a  burning  pillar  of  fire

1  Mac.  4.  30.  and  thou  #.  the  host  of  strangers
GAY.

Bar.  6.  9.  as  it  were  for  a  virgin  that  loves  to  go  #.

•  GAZA.

1  Mac.  1 1.61.  went  to  G.  but  they  ofG.  shut  him  out
62.  when  they  of G.  made  supplication  to  Jonathan

13.  43.  in  those  days  Simon  encamped  against  G.

GAZARA.

1  Mac.  4.  15.  for  they  pursued  them  unto  G.

7.  45.  pursued  a  day’s  journey  from  Adasa  to  G.

13.  53.  captain  of  all  the  hosts,  and  dwelt  at  G.

14.  7.  he  had  the  dominion  of  G.  and  Bethsura

34.  he  fortified  G.  that  bordereth  on  Azotus

15.  28.  you  withhold  Joppe  and  G.  with  the  tower

35.  and  whereas  thou  demandest  Joppe  and  G.

16.  1.  then  came  up  John  from  G.  and  told  Simon

19.  he  set  others  also  to  G.  to  kill  John

21.  one  had  run  afore  unto  G.  and  told  John
GAZE.

Eccl.  9.  5.  #.  not  on  a  maid,  that  thou  fall  not
41.  21.  or  to  #.  upon  another  man's  wife
GAZED.

1  Esd.  4.  31.  yet  the  king  gaped  and  #.  on  her

GEBA.

Jud.  3.  10.  he  pitched  between  G.  and  Scythopolis
G ED EON.

Jud.  8.  1.  the  son  of  G.  the  son  of  Raphaini
GENERAL.

2  Esd.  8.  15.  touching  man  in  #.  thou  knowest  best
Esth.  15.  10.  tho’  our  commandment  be  #.  come  near
Eccl.  18. 1.  he  that  liveth  for  ever  created  all  tilings#.

2  Mac.  3.  18.  others  ran  to  the  0.  supplication

.  GENERATION.

2  Esd.  .3.  19.  give  diligence  to  the#,  of  Israel

32.  or  what  #.  hath  so  believed  thy  covenants?

8.  34.  or  what  is  a  corruptible  #.  to  be  bitter?


Wisd.  3.  19.  horrible  is  the  end  of  the  unrighteous#
12.  10.  not  ignorant  that  they  w’ere  a  naughty  #.

14.  6.  and  lett  to  all  ages  aseed  of  #.

19.  11.  afterwards  they  saw  a  new  #.  of  fowls
Eccl.  4.  16.  his  #.  shall  hold  her  in  possession
14.  18.  so  is  the  #.  of  flesh  and  blood
39.  9.  and  his  name  shall  live  from  #.  to  #.

1  Mac.  5.  2.  they  thought  to  destroy  the  #.of  Jacob

2  Mac.  7.  23.  the  Creator  who  formfed  the  #.  of  man

8.  9.  to  root  out  the  W'hole  #.  of  the  Jewrs

GENERA  I  IONS.

2  Esd.  3.  7.  appointedst  death  in  him  and  his  #.

26.  they  did  as  Adam  and  all  his  #.  had  done
Tob.  13.  11.  all  #.  sbaU  praise  thee  with  joy
Jud.  8.  32.  which  shall  go  throughout  all  g
Esth.  10.  13.  according  to  the  #.  foi  eve
IVisd.  1.  14.  the#,  of  the  world  were  healthfu*
Eccl.  2.  10.  look  at  the  #.  of  old  and  see
16.  27.  in  his  hand  are  the  chief  of  them  to  all#.
44.  7.  all  these  were  honoured  in  their  #.

16.  being  an  example  of  repentance  to  all  #.

Bar.  6.  3.  ye  shall  temain  at  Babylon  seven  #.
GENTILES.

1  Esd.  8.  69.  not  put  away  the  pollutions  of  the  G.
Tub.  13.  3.  confess  him  before  the  G.  ye  children
Jud.  8.  22.  will  he  turn  on  our  heads  among  the  G.
Esth.  10. 9.  which  have  not  been  done  among  the  G.

10.  he  hath  made  another  lot  for  all  the  G.

IVisd.  14. 11.  a  visitation  upon  the  idols  of  the  G.

1  Mac.  2. 12.  our  sanctuary,  the  G.  have  profaned  it

48.  recovered  the  law  out  of  the  hand  of  the  G.

3. 10.  then  Apollonius  gathered  the  G.  together

4.  60.  lest  the  G.  should  come  and  tread  it  down

5.  15.  and  all  Galilee  of  the  G.  are  assembled

6.  53.  they  that  w’ere  delivered  from  the  G.

2  Mac.  6.4.  temple  was  filled  with  revelling  by  G.

9.  would  not  conform  to  the  manners  of  the  G.

11.  2.  to  make  the  city  an  habitation  of  the  G.

24.  to  be  brought  unto  the  custom  of  G.

14.  3.  the  times  of  their  mingling  with  the  G.

.  GENTLE.

2  Mac.  15.  12.  #.  in  condition,  well  spoken  also
GEON.

Eccl.  24.  27.  and  as  G.  in  the  time  of  vintage
GERGESITES.

Jud.  5.  16.  they  cast  forth  before  them  the  G.
GESEM.

Jud.  1.  9.  the  king  sent  unto  all  the  land  of  G.
GET.

1  Esd.  4.  5.  if  they  #.  the  victory  they  bring  all

2  Esd.  7.  58.  if  he  #.  the  victory  he  shall  receive

16.  44.  as  they  that  shall  #.  no  children

46.  in  captivity  and  famine  shall  #.  children
Eccl.  4.  7.  g.  thyself  the  love  of  the  congregation

I. 3.  11.  smiling  on  thee,  he  will  #.  thy  secrets
27.  19.  and  thou  shalt  not#,  him  again

51.  28.#.  learning  with  a  great  sum  of  money,  and
#.  much  gold  by  her,  rejoice  in  his  mercy

1  Mac.  3.  14.  I  will  #.  me  a  name  in  the  kingdom
6.  44.  that  he  might#,  him  a  perpetual  name

2  Mac.  5.  6.  that  to  #.  the  day  of  his  own  nation

G ETTETH.

Eccl.  21.  11.  #.  the  understanding  thereof

36.  24.  he  that  #.  a  wife,  beginneth  a  possession
GETTING.

Wisd.  1.3.  19.  for  gaining  and  #.  and  good  success

15.  12.  for  say  they,  we  must  be  #.  every  way
Eccl.  42. 4.  be  not  thou  ashamed  of  #.  muen  or  little
Bar.  3.  17.  they  that  made  no  end  of  their  g.

GHOST.

2  Esd.  14.  22.  send  the  Holy  G.  into  me
Tob.  14.  11.  he  gave  up  the  #.  in  the  bed,  158  years
2  Mac.  3.  31.  who  lay  ready  to  give  up  the  a.
GIANT.

Eccl.  47. 4.  slew  he  not  a#,  when  he  was  yet  young?

1  Mac.  3.  3.  he  put  on  a  breastplate  as  a  a.

GIANTS.

Jud.  16.  7-  nor  did  the  high  #.  set  upon  him
Wisd.  14. 6.  in  old  time  when  the  proud  #.  perished
Eccl.  16.  7.  he  w’as  not  pacified  towards  the  old  #.
Bar.  3.26.  there  were  #.  famous  from  the  beginning
GIFT.  s

2  Esd.  2.  37.  O  receive  the  #.  that  is  given  you
Tob.  2.  14.  it  was  given  for  a  #.  more  than  wages
4.  11.  for  alms  is  a  good  #.  to  all  that  give  it

Jud.  16.  19.  she  gave  the  canopy  fora#,  to  the  Ld.
Wisd.  3.  14.  shall  be  given  the  special  #.  of  faith
8.  21.  a  point  of  wisdom  to  know  whose#,  she  was
Eccl.  1.  10.  she  is  with  all  flesh  according  to  his  #.

7-  31.  give  him  the  g.  of  the, shoulders

33.  a  #.  hath  grace  in  the  sight  of  every  man

II.  17.  the  #.of  the  Lord  remaineth  with  the  godly
18.  16.  so  is  a  word  better  than  a  #.

17.  lo,  is  not  a  word  better  than  a  #.  ?

18.  a  #.  of  the  envious  consumeth  the  eyes

2G.  10.  there  is  a  #.  that  shall  not  profit  thee,  and
there  is  a  a.  whose  recompence  is  double
14.  the#,  of  a  fool  shall  do  thee  no  good
26. 14.  a  silent  and  loving  woman  is  a  #.of  the  L.

41.  21.  or  to  takeaway  a  portion  or  a  #.

42.  3.  or  of  the  #.  01  the  heritage  of  friends

1  Mac.  10. 39.  I  give  it  as  a  free  #.  to  the  sanctuary

2  Mac.  15.  16.  take  this  holy  sword,  a  #.  from  God

GIFTS.

1  Esd.  2.  7-  help  him  with  #.  horses,  and  cattle

9.  they  helped  them  with  very  many  free#

.3.  5  to  him  shall  king  Darius  give  great  #.

8.  13.  carry  the#,  to  the  Lord  of  Israel  to  Jerus
Tob.  13.  11.  many  nations  shall  come  with  #.  in
their  hands,  even  #.  to  the  King  of  heaven
Jud.  4.  14.  with  vows  and  free  #.  of  the  people

16.  18.  offered  their  free  offerings  and  their  #.

Wisd.  7.  14.  for  the  #.  that  come  from  learning
Eccl.  1.  18.  both  w  hich  are  the  #.  of  God

20.  29.  presents  and  #.  blind  the  eyes  of  the  wise

34.  18.,  the  #.  of  unjust  men  are  not  accepted

35.  9.  in  all  thy  #.  shew  a  cheerful  countenance

12.  do  not  think  to  corrupt  with  #.

Bar.  6.  27-  they  set  #.  before  them  as  to  dead  men
1  Mac.  3.  30.  nor  to  have  such  #.  to  give  so  liberally

10.  24.  I  will  promise  them  dignities  and  #.

12.43.  received  him  honourably,  and  gave  him  g.

647


APOCRYPHA.]  GIV


G  L  A


G  LO


'  Mac.  15.  5.  ami  whatever  g.  besides  they  granted
2  Mac.  1.  35.  the  king  took  many  g.  and  bestowed

2.  13.  the  epistles  of  kings  conc  erning  the  holy  g.

3.  2.  kings  aid  magnify  the  temple  with  their  best  g.
9 ■  16.  holy  temple  he  would  garnish  with  goodly  g.

GILDED.

Bar.  6.  8.  they  themselves  are  g.  and  laid  over
G 1  It  D.

2  Esd.  16.  2.  g.  up  yourselves  with  clothes  of  sack
GIRDED.

2  Mac.  10.  25.  ano  g.  their  loins  with  sackcloth
GIRDLE.

Jud.  9. 2.  who  loosened  the  g.  of  a  maid  to  defile  her

gir  r.

Jud.  4.  14.  priests  had  their  loins  g.  with  sackcloth
Eccl.  22.  16.  as  timber  g.  and  bound  together

1  Mac.  3.  3.  he  g.  his  warlike  harness  about  him

6.  3*.  and  were  g.  fast  unto  them  with  devices

2  Mac.  3.  19.  the  women  g.  with  sackcloth  under

.  GIVE.

1  Esd.  2.  19.  they  will  not  only  refuse  to  g.  tribute

4.  60.  for  to  thee  I  g.  thanks,  U  l.ord.of  our  fathers

8.  19.  they  should  g.  it  him  with  speed

79.  and  to  g .  us  food  in  the  time  of  servitude

9.  8.  by  confessing  g.  glory  to  the  Lord  God
54.  and  to  g .  part  to  them  that  had  nothing

2  Esd.  2.  20.  g.  to  the  poor,  defend  the  orphan

34.  he  shall  g.  you  everlasting  rest,  he  is  nigh

3.  19.  thou  mightest  g.  the  law  to  the  seed  of  Jacob

5.  5.  the  stone  shall  g.  his  voice,  people  be  troubled

6.  23.  and  the  trumpet  shall  g.  a  sound

45.  commandedst  that  moon  should  g.  her  light
7  65.  for  he  is  ready  to  g.  where  it  needeth

8.  6.  and  culture  if  thou  g.  us  seed  to  our  heart

24.  g.  ear  to  the  petition  of  thy  creature

Tab.  3.  17  tog.  Sara  for  a  wife  to  TobiassonofTobit

4.  7..  g ■  alms  of  thy  substance,  thy  eye  not  envious

8.  if  thou  hast  abundance,  g.  alms  accordingly  ;

if  little,  be  not  afraid  tog.  according  to  that

11.  for  alms  is  a  good  gift  to  all  that  g.  it
14.  wages  not  tarry  with  thee,  but  g.  it  out  of  hand

16.  g.  of  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  of  garments

17.  but  g.  nothing  to  the  wicked

5.  3  man  may  go  with  thee,  and  I  will  g.  him  wages
14.  but  tell  me,  what  wages  shall  1  g.  thee  ?

7.  12.  the  merciful  God  g.  you  good  success

18.  the  Lord  g.  thee  joy  for  this  thy  sorrow

10.  11.  God  g.  you  a  prosperous  journey

12.  1.  have  his  wages,  and  thou  mustg.  him  more
2.  O  Father,  it  is  no  harm  to  me  to  g.  him  half

8.  it  is  (letter  to  g.  alms  than  to  lay  up  gold

20.  now  therefore  g.  God  thanks

13.  10.  g.  praise  to  the  T  ord,  for  he  is  good
Jud.  4.  12.  would  not  g.  their  children  for  a  prey
Esth.  14.  12.  g.  me  boldness,  O  king  of  nations

13.  g.  me  eloquent  speech  in  my  mouth
Wisd.  6.  2.  g.  ear,  ye  that  rule  the  people

8.  12.  when  1  speak,  they  shall  g.  good  ear  to  me

9. _4.  g.  me  wisdom  that  sittest  by  thy  throne
17-  except  thou  g.  wisdom,  and  send  thy  Spirit

16.  28.  we  must  prevent  the  sun  to  g.  thee  thanks
Eccl.  1.  26.  the  lord  shall  g.  her  unto  thee

4.  3.  and  defer  not  to  g.  to  him  that  is  in  need

5.  and  g.  him  none  occasion  to  curse  thee
8.  g.  hint  a  friendly  answer  with  meekness

19-  she  will  forsake  him,  and  g.  him  over  to  ruin

5.  1 1 .  he  swift  to  hear,  with  patience  g.  answer

6.  23.  g.  ear,  my  son,  receive  my  advice,  refuse  not
_37-  he  shall  g.  thee  wisdom  at  thine  own  desire
7-  10.  be  not  faint-hearted,  neglect  not  to  g.  alms

25.  but  g.  her  to  a  man  of  understanding

26.  butg.  not  thyself  over  to  a  light  woman
31.  g.  him  his  portion  as  it  is  commanded  thee

8.  9.  learn  to  g.  answer  as  need  requireth
9-  2.  g.  not  thy  soul  to  a  woman,  to  set  her  foot

6.  g.  not  thy  soul  unto  harlots,  that  thou  lose

10.  28.  g.  it  honour  according  to  the  dignity  thereof

12.  4.  g.  to  the  godly  man,  and  help  not  a  sinner

5.  but  g.  not  to  the  ungodly, g.  it  not  to  him

7.  g.  unto  the  good,  and  help  not  the  sinner

14.  11.  my  son,  g.  the  Lord  his  due  offering

13.  stretch  out  thy  hand,  and  g.  to  him

16.  g.  and  take,  and  sanctify  thy  soul

15.  3.  she  shall  g.  him  the  water  of  wisdom  to  drink
17-  22.  g.  repentance  to  his  sons  and  daughters

27.  instead  of  them  which  live  and  g.  thanks
18.  28.  and  will  g.  praise  to  him  that  found  her

23.  4.  O  God  of  my  life,  g.  me  not  a  proud  look

6.  and  g.  me  not  over  into  an  impudent  mind

25.  13.  g.  me  any’  plague  but  the  plague  of  heart

25.  g.  the  waters  no  passage,  nor  a  wicked  woman

26.  g.  her  a  bill  of  divorce,  and  let  her  go

29.  27.  g.  place,  stranger,  to  an  honourable  man

30.  11.  g.  him  no  liberty  in  his  youth,  wink  not

21.  g.  not  o'  er  thy  mind  to  heaviness

33.19. g.  notthy  son,  wife,  brotrier.and  friend  power
over  thee,  g.  not  thy  goods  to  another
20.  while  thou  livest,  g.  not  thyself  over  to  any

35.  8.  g.  the  Lord  his  honour  with  a  good  eye

10.  g.  to  the  Most  High  according  as  lu  hath

enriched  thee,  g.  with  a  cheerfu.  eye

11.  the  Lord  will  g.  thee  seven  times  as  much

36.  15.  g.  testimony  to  those  thou  hast  possessed

37.  27.  what  is  evil  for  it,g.  not  that  unto  it

38.  11.  g.  a  sweet  savour  and  memorial  of  flour

14.  that  he  would  prosper  that  which  they  g.

39.  5.  he  wil  I  g.  his  heart  early  to  resort  to  the  Ixird

6.  he  shall  g.  thanks  to  the  Lord  in  his  prayer

14.  g.  ye  a  sweet  savour  as  frankincense

33.  he  will  g.  every  thing  needful  in  season
41.  19.  and  of  scorning  tog.  and  take
45.  26.  God  g.  you  wisdom  in  your  heart
60.  20.  to  g.  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  with  his  lips
51.  30.  in  his  time  he  will  g.  you  your  reward
Bar.  1.  20.  to  g.  us  a  land  that  flows  with  milk
2.  14.  g.  us  fav  our  in  sight  of  them  that  led  us

17.  they  will  g,  to  the  Lord  neither  praise  nor

18.  but  the  hungry  soul  shall  g.  thee  praise

31.  fer  1  g.  them  an  heart,  and  ears  to  hear

4.  3.  g.  not  thine  honour  to  another,  nor  things
6.  28.  but  to  the  poor  they  g.  nothing  of  it

35.  they  can  neither  g.  riches  nor  money


Bar.  6.  53.  neithercan  they  set  up  a  king,  norg.  rain
67-  nor  shine  as  the  sun,  nor  g.  light  as  the  moon
Dan.  3.  20.  deliver  us,  and  g.  glory  to  thy  name

1  Mac.  2.50.  and  g.  your  lives  for  the  covenant

8.  4.  the  rest  did  g.  them  tribute  every  year

7  should  pay  a  great  tribute,  an  1  g.  hostages
9-55.  be  could  notg.  order  concerning  his  house

10.  28-  be  faithful  to  us  we  will  g.  you  rewards
54.  and  g.  me  now  thy  daughter  to  wife

11.9.  make  a  league,  I  will  g.  thee  my  daughter
15.  6.  I  g.  thee  leave  also  to  coin  money

2  Xiac.  1.  3.  God  g.  you  all  a  heart  to  serve  him

7.  23.  will  of  his  mercy  g  you  breath  and  life  again

9.  20.  if  ve  fare  well,  1  g.  great  thanks  to  God
15.  33.  they  should  g.  it  by  pieces  to  the  fow  ls

GIVEN.

1  Esd.  1. 6.  the  rommandm.  which  wasg.  to  Moses
7-  these  things  were  g.  of  the  king’s  allowance
32.  and  this  was  g.  out  for  an  ordinance

2.  27.  the  men  therein  were  g.  to  rebellion

4.  60.  blessed  art  thou  who  hast  g.  me  wisdom
62.  because  he  had  g.  them  freedom  and  liberty
6.  25.  expenses  g.  out  of  the  house  of  king  Cyrus

2  Esd.  7-  46.  better  not  to  have  g.  the  earth  to  Adam,

or  else  when  it  was  g.  to  have  restrained  him

8.  10.  commanded  out  of  the  breasts  milk  to  be  g.
'Job.  5.  19.  which  the  Lord  hath  g.  us  to  live  with
6.  10.  that  she  may  be  g.  thee  for  a  wife

13.  that  this  maid  hath' been  g.  to  seven  men

15.  O  my  brother,  she  shall  be  g.  thee  to  wife,  for
this  night  she  shall  be  g.  thee  in  marriage
7-11.1  have  g.  my  daughter  in  marriage  tb  7  men

11.  1.  that  he  had  g.  him  a  prosperous  journey
Jud.  8.  19.  our  fathers  were  g.  to  the  sword

9.  4.  thou  hast  g.  their  vv;ves  for  a  prey

10.  12.  for  they  shall  be  g.  you  to  be  consumed
Esth.  14.  6.  hast  g.  us  into  the  hands  of  our  enemies
Wisd.  7.  7-  I  prayed,  and  understanding  was  g.  me

15.  to  conceive  for  the  things  that  are  g.

17.  he  hath  g.  me  certain  knowledge  of  things
11.4.  water  was  g.  them  out  of  the  flinty  rock

18.  4.  the  law  was  to  be  g.  to  the  world
6.  knowing  to  what  oaths  they  had  g.  credence
Eccl.  15.  17-  and  whether  him  liketh, shall  beg.  him
20.  neither  hath  he  g.  any  man  licence  to  sin
17.  16.  every  man  from  his  youth  is  g.  to  evil
19. 1.  labouring  man  that  is  g.  to  drunkenness

24.  18.  I  am  g.  to  all  my  children  named  of  him
26.  3.  which  shall  be  g.  in  the  portion  of  them

23.  a  wicked  woman  is  g.  to  a  wicked  man.  but
a  godly  woman  is  g.  to  him  that  feareth  Lord
29.  15.  for  he  hath  g.  his  life  for  thee
37.21.  for  grace  is  not  g.  him  from  the  Lord

38.6.  hath  g.  men  skill  that  he  might  be  honoured

41.  22.  and  after  thou  hast  g.  upbraid  not

42. 17.  the  Lord  hath  not  g.  power  to  the  saints

43.  .33.  and  to  the  godly  hath  he  g.  wisdom

51.  22.  T.ord  hathg.  me  a  tongue  for  my  rew  ard
>'«f.  50.  God  hath  g.  thee  the  honour  of  an  elder
Bel  32.  they  had  g.  them  every  day  two  carcases,
which  then  were  not  g.  to  devour  Daniel

1  Mac.  4.  55.  who  had  g.  them  good  success

10.  8.  they  heard  the  king  had  g.  him  authority
45.  expenses  shall  be  g.  out  of  the  king’s  accounts
89  sent  a  buckle  of  gold,  as  the  use  is  to  be  g.

2  Mac.  1.  18.  of  the  fire  which  was  g.  us

8.  23.  and  when  he  had  g.  them  this  watch  word

28.  they  had  g.  part  of  the  spoils  to  the  maimed
in.  38.  praised  God,  who  had  g.  them  the  victory

13.  15.  and  having  g.  the  watch-word  to  them
GIVES1.

2  Esd.  5.  45.  that  thou  which  g.  life  to  all
Tab,  4.  7.  when  thou  g.  alms,  let  not  thine  eye,  16.
Wisd.  12.  19.  that  thou  g.  repentance  for  sins
Eccl.  18.  15.  nor  use  words  w  hen  thou  g.  any  ihing
31.  if  thou  g.  thy  soul  the  desiies  that  please  her

42.  7*  writing  all  that  thou  g.out  or  recei'est  in

GIVE  1 II.

2  Esd.  2.  46.  that  g.  them  palms  in  their  hands
8.  2.  it  shall  say  to  thee,  that  it  g.  much  mould
Tob.  4.19-  the  Lord  himself  g.  all  good  things
Eccl.  1.  12.  the  fear  of  the  I  ord  g.  gladness
4.  15.  whoso  g.  ear  to  her  shall  judge  nations

12.  3._no  good  can  come  to  him  that  g.  no  alms
20.  15.  he  g.  little,  and  uphraideth  much

.34.  17.  he  g.  life,  health,  and  blessing

.35.  2.  and  he  that  g.  alms  sacrificeth  praise

38.  26.  he  g.  his  mind  to  make  furrows

.39.  1.  he  that  g.  his  mind  to  the  law  of  the  Lord

42.  16.  the  sun  that  g.  light,  looks  on  all  things

50.  29.  leadeth  him,  who p.  wisdom  to  the  godly

51.  17.  ascribe  glory  to  him  that  g.  me  wisdom
2  Mac.  15.  21.  he  g.  it  to  such  as  are  worthy

GIVING.

2  Esd.  2.  37  g.  thanks  to  him  that  hath  called  you

13.  57.  g.  praise  and  thanks  to  the  Most  High
Wisd.  6.  18.  g.  heed  to  her  law  is  the  assurance  of
l-ccl.  17.  18.  and  g.  him  the  light  of  his  love

4.3.  9.  an  ornament  g  light  in  highest  places

44.  .3.  men  g.  counsel  by  their  understanding

50.7.  the  rainbow  g.  light  in  the  bright  clouds

1  Mac.  6.  .38.  horsemen  g.  them  signs  what  to  do

2  Mac.  8.  22.  g.  each  one  fifteen  hundred  men

11.  11 .  g.  a  charge  on  their  enemies  like  lions
15.  15.  gave  him  a  sword,  and  in  g.  it,  spake  thus

GLAD.  ‘

2  Esd.  2.  37.  receive  gift  that  is  given,  and  be  g.
Tob.  1.3.  13.  rejoice  and  be  g.  for  t  he  children  of  just

14.  have  seen  thy  glory,  shall  be  g.  for  e'er
Eccl.  .31. 27.  wine  was  made  to  make  men  g.

Bar.  4.  .3.3.  for  as  she  was  g.  at  thy  fall

1  Mac.  .3.  7-  he  made  Jacob  g.  with  his  actf

10.  26.  we  have  heard  hereof  and  are  g.

11.  44.  the  king  was  very  g.  of  their  coming

12. 12.  and  we  are  right  g.  of  your  honour

14.  21.  wherefore  we  were  g.  of  their  coming

GLADLY.

2  Mac.  2.  27.  we  undertake  g.  this  great  pains

4. 12.  for  be  built  g.  a  place  of  exercise

G  LADN  ESS.

1  Esd.  4.  6.3.  they  feasted  with  g.  seven  days

2  Esd.  1.  .37.  whose  little  ones  rejoice  in  g'.


2£i<f.2..3.1  brought  you  up  withg.with  sorrow  I  lost

15.  embrace  children,  bring  them  up  with  g.

Jud.  10.  .3.  she  put  on  her  garments  ofg.

Esth.  10.  1.3  those  days  shall  be  with  g.  before  G.
Eccl.).  11.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  glory  and  g.

12.  it  giveth  iov,  g.  and  a  long  life

15.  6.  he  shall  find  joy  and  a  crown  ofg.

•30.  22.  the  g.  of  the  heart  is  the  life  of  man
.31.  28.  wine  measurably  drunk  hringeth  g.

35.  9.  and  dedicate  thy  tithes  with  g.

Bar.  4.2.3.  God  will  give  you  to  me  again  with  g.

1  Mac.  4.  56.  they  offered  burnt-offerings  with  g.

58.  thus  was  there  very  great  g.  among  people

59.  the  dedication  kept  with  mirth  and  g.

5.  54.  so  they  went  up  to  mount  Sion  withg.

7.  48.  they  kept  that  day  a  day  of  great  g.

10.  66.  Jonathan  returned  with  peace  and  g.

I. 3.52.  that  that  day  should  be  kept  with  g.

2  Mac  .3.30. for  the  temple  was  filled  with  joy  and  g
10.  6.  and  they  kept  eight  days  with  g.

GLASS.

Eccl.  12.  11.  if  thou  hadstwipeda  looking  g.

GLISTERED.

2  Esd.  10.  25.  on  a  sudden  her  countenance  <■>

1  Mac.  6.  .39.  the  mountains  g.  therewith

GLISTERING.

1  Esd.  8.  57.  even  of  fine  brass  g.  like  gold
Esth.  15.  6  all  g.  with  gol  and  precious  stones

2  Mac.  5.  3.  horsemen  with  g.  of  golden  ornaments

GLORY.

1  Esd.  1.  .33.  his  g.  and  understanding  in  the  law
4: 17.  make  garments  for  men,  bring  g.  to  men

59.  thine  is  theg.  and  1  am  thy  servant

5.  61.  his  mercy  and  g.  is  for  ever  in  all  Israei

9.  8.  and  by  confessing  giveg.  to  the  Lord

2  Esd.  8.  21.  whose  g.  may  not  be  comprehended
Tob.  13.  14.  when  they  have  seen  all  thy  g.

Jud.  9-  7-  theyg.  in  strength  of  their  footmen

10.  8.  accomplish  thy  enterprises  to  theg.  of  Israel
15.  9.  they  said  to  her,  thou  art  the  g.  of  Israel

Esth.  1.3.  12.  it  was  not  for  any  desire  ofg.

14.  I  did  this,  that  I  might  not  prefer  the  g.  of
man  above  theg.  of  God,  nor  worship  any  but

14.  9.  they  will  quench  the  g.  of  thine  house

15.  that  I  hate  theg.  of  the  unrighteous
Wisd.  6.  2.  and  g.  in  the  multitude  of  nations

7.  25.  flowing  from  the g.  of  the  Almighty

9.  10.  O  send  her  from  the  throne  of  thy  g.

10.  14.  and  she  gave  him  perpetual  g.

14. 14.  by  vain  g. of  men  they  entered  into  the  world

15.  9.  epunted  it  his  g.  to  make  counterfeit  things
18.  24.  in  rows  was  the  g.  of  the  fathers  graven
Eccl.  3.  10.  g.  notin  the  dishonour  of  thv  father,  for

thy  father’s  dishonour  is  no  g.  to  thee

11. g.  of  a  man  is  from  the  honour  of  his  father

4.  21.  there  is  a  shame  which  is  g.  and  grace

6.  29.  and  her  chains  shall  be  a  robe  ofg.

9.  11.  envy  notg.  of  a  sinner,  knowest  not  his  end

10.  22.  theirg.  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord

II.  16.  shall  wax  old  with  them  that  g.  therein
14.27.  and  in  her  g.  shall  he  dwell

17.  9.  he  gave  them  to  g.  in  his  marvellous  acts

13.  their  eyes  saw  the  majesty  of  his  g.

20.  11.  there  is  an  abasement  because  of  g.

2.3,  28.  it  is  greatg.  to  follow  the  Lord

24.  1.  wisdom  shall  g.  in  midst  of  her  people

25.  6.  and  the  fear  of  God  is  their  g.

.31.  10.  been  found  perfect,  then  let  him  g.

.36.14.  and  fill  thy  people  with  thy  g.

37.26.  a  wise  man  shall  inherit  g.  among  his  people
.39.8.  he  shall  g.  in  the  law  of  his  covenant

40.  3.  from  him  that  sitteth  on  a  throne  ofg.

27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  covereth  him  above  all  g.
42.  16.  the  work  thereof  is  full  of  the  g.  of  the  Lord
17.  whatever  is  might  be  established  for  his  g.

25.  who  shall  be  filled  with  beholding  his  g.

4.3.  9.  g.  of  the  stars,  an  ornament  giving  light

44.  2.  the  Lord  hath  wrought  great  g.  by  them

7.  all  these  were  the  g.  of  their  times

I, 3.  and  theirg.  shall  not  be  blotted  out

19.  in  g.  was  there  none  like  unto  him

45.  .3.  and  he  shewed  him  part  of  his  g.

7-  and  he  clothed  him  with  a  robe  of  g.

8.  he  put  upon  him  perfect  g.  and  strengthened
23.  the  third  in  g.  i«s  Phineesson  ofEleazar

26.  and  that  theirg.  may  endure  for  ever

46.  2.  how  greatg.  gat  he  when  he  lift  up  his  hands

47.  6.  in  that  he  gave  him  a  crown  of  g.

8.  he  praised  the  Most  High  with  words  ofg.

II.  he  gave  him  a  throne  of  g.  in  Israel

48.  4.  and  who  may  g.  like  unto  thee  J

49.  5.  he  gave  their  g.  to  a  strange  nation

49.  12.  which  was  prepared  for  everlasting  g.

5<>.  11.  and  was  clothed  with  the  perfection  ofg.

13.  so  were  all  the  sons  of  Aaron  in  their  g.

51.  17-  I  ascribe  theg.  to  him  that  giveth  wisdom
Bar .  4.  24.  which  shall  come  on  you  with  great  g.
.37.  thy  sons  come,  rejoicing  in  the  g.  of  God

5.  1.  theg.  that  cometh  from  God  forever

2.  set  a  diadem  on  thy  head  the  g.  of  Everlasting
4. thy  name  shall  be  called  theg.  of  God’s  worship

6.  God  hringeth  them  to  thee  exalted  with  g.

7.  that  Israel  may  go  safely  in  the  g.  of  God

9.  shall  lead  Israel  with  joy  in  the  light  of  his  g.
Dan.  .3.  20.  deliver  US;  and  give  g.  to  thy  name

.31.  blessed  art  thou  in  the  temple  of  thy  holyg.
Prayer  of  Manasj.  the  majesty  of  thy  g.  cannot  be
borne,  thine  is  the  g.  for  ever  and  ever

1  Mac.  1.  40.  as  had  been  her  g.  so  her  dishonour
2.  8.  her  temple  is  become  as  a  man  without  g.

12.  even  our  beauty  and  our  g.  is  laid  waste
62.  for  hisg.  shall  be  dung  and  worms
64.  for  by  the  law  shall  you  obtain  g.

10.58.  celebrated  her  marriage  with  greatg.

14.  21.  they  certified  us  of  your  g.  and  honour

15.  .32.  and  when  he  saw  the  g.  of  Simon
.36.  made  report  to  him  of  the  g.  of  Simon

2  Mac.  2.  8.  and  the  g.  of  the  Lord  shall  appear
5.  16.  were  dedicated  to  g.  and  honour  of  the  place

20.  so  again  it  was  set  up  with  all  g.

G  LORI  ETH.

Eccl.  38.  25.  that  g.  in  the  goad,  that  driveth  oxeD


GOD


GOD  [Apocrypha.


G  O

GLORIFY.

1  Esd  8.  25.  to  g.  Iiis  house  that  is  in  Jerusalem
Wi id.  18.  8.  by  the  same  thou  didst  g.  us

19-  22.  didst  magnify  thy  people  and  g.  them
Eccl.  10.  28.  my  son.  g.  thyself  in  meekness
36.  6.  shew  signs,  g.  thy  hand  and  thy  right  arm
43.30.  when  you  g.  the  Lord,  exalt  him  as  much
G  LORI  FI  ED.

2  Esd.  8.  49.  not  judged  thyself  worthy  to  be  g.
Dan.  3.  28.  the  three  praised  g.  and  blessed  God

30.  blessed  is  thy  glorious  holy  name,  to  be  praised
and  g.  above  all  for  ever,  31,  32,  33,  34.
GLORIOUS.

1  Esd.  1.  56.  as  for  her  ft.  things,  they  never  ceased

2  Esd.  2.  39.  have  received  g.  garments  of  the  Ld.
Tub.  3.  11.  and  thy  holy  and  g.  name  is  blessed

3.  5.  blessed  is  thy  holy  and  g.  name  for  ev  er

4. 5.  house  of  God  shall  be  built  with  a  g.  building
Jud.  9.  8.  tabernacle,  where  thy  g.  name  resteth

16.  13.  O  Lord,  thou  art  great,  g.  ami  wonderful
Esth.  11.  11.  the  lowly  exalted,  and  devout  ed  the#.

14.  2.  and  she  laid  away  her  g.  apparel

15.  1.  on  the  third  day  she  put  on  her  g  apparel

16.  4.  but  also  lifted  up  with  the  g.  words
IVisd.  3.  15.  for  g.  is  the  fruit  of  good  labours

5.  16.  they  shall  receive  a  g.  kingdom

6.  12.  wisdom  is  g.  and  never  fadeth  away
Eccl.  17-  13.  and  their  ears  heard  his  j.  voice
27.  8.  thou  shalt  put  her  on  as  a  g  .ong  robe
43.  1.  the  beauty  of  heaven,  with  his  g.  shew'

12.  it  compasseth  the  heaven  w  ith  a  g.  circle

45.  2.  he  made  him  like  to  the  g.  saints

3.  he  made  him  g.  in  the  sight  of  kings

49.  8.  it  was  Ezekiel  who  saw  the  g.  vision
Dan.  3.  22.  that  thou  art  g.  over  the  whole  world
Prayer  of  Manass.  by  thy  terrible  and  g.  name

1  Mac.  2.  9.  her  g.  vessels  are  carried  away

14.  9.  and  the  young  men  put  on  g.  apparel

2  Mac.  4.  24.  for  the  g.  appearance  of  his  power

8.  35.  putting  off  g.  apparel,  he  came  to  Antioch

15.  13.  there  appeared  a  man  exceeding  g.

34.  so  every  man  praised  the  g.  Lord,  saying
GLORIOUSLY.

Tob.  14.  5.  return  and  build  up  Jerusalem  g.

Esth.  15.  2.  being  g.  adorned,  she  took  two  maids
2  Mac.  6.  19.  rather  to  die  g.  than  to  live  stained
GLORYING.

Eccl.  9.  16.  let  thy  g.  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord
GLUE  I  H.

Eccl.  22.  7-  as  one  that  g.  a  potsherd  together
GNASH.

Eccl.  30.  10.  and  lest  thou  a.  thy  teeth  in  the  end

GNAWED.

Bar.  6.  20.  their  hearts  are  g.  on  by  things  creeping
GO.

1  Esd.  1.  16.  it  was  not  lawful  to  g.  from  service

2.  5.  let  him  g.  up  to  Jerusalem  that  is  in  Judea

4.  4.  if  he  send  them  against  the  enemies,  they  g.

8.  10.  the  Jews  should  g.  with  thee  to  Jerusalem

27.  I  gathered  men  of  Israel  to  g.  up  with  me
45.  that  they  should  g.  to  Saddeus  the  captain
Tub.  1.  15.  that  I  could  not  g.  into  Media

3.  6.  that  1  may  g.  into  the  everlasting  place

4.  15.  neither  let  drunkenness  g.  with  thee

5.  16.  his'father  said,  g.  thou  with  this  man

10.  7-  let  me  g.  for  my  father  and  mother  look  not

8.  they  shall  declare  how  things  g.  with  thee

9.  Tobias  said,  no,  but  let  me  g.  to  my  father

12.  17.  fear  not,  for  it  shall  g.  well  with  you

14.  4.  g.  into  Media,  my  son,  for  I  believe

9.  keep  the  law,  that  it  may  g.  well  with  thee
Jud.  8.  3 5.g.  in  peace,  the  Lord  be  before  thee

10.  9.  that  I  may  g.  to  accomplish  the  things

13.  whereby  he  shall  g.  and  win  the  hill  country

11.  17.  and  thy  servant  will  g.  out  by  night

18.  then  thou  shalt  g.  forth  with  thine  army

12.  6.  that  thine  handmaid  may  g.  to  prayer

11.  g.  now  and  persuade  this  Hebrew  woman

12.  will  be  a  shame  if  we  let  such  a  woman  g.

13.  12.  they  made  haste  to  g.  down  to  the  gate

14.  2.  g.  forth  every  valiant  man  out  of  the  city
Esth.  13.  7.  may  with  violence  g.  into  the  grave
IVisd.  1.11.  word  so  secret  shall  g.  for  nought

2.  9-  let  none  of  us  g.  without  his  part

6.  23.  neither  will  I  g.  with  consuming  envy

15.  15.  as  for  their  feet  they  are  slow  log.

Eccl.  1.  13.  it  shall  g.  well  with  him  at  the  last
2.7.  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  g.  not  aside  lest  you  fall

3.  17.  my  son,^.  on  with  thy  business  in  meekness

5.  4.  the  Lord  will  in  no  wise  let  thee  g.

9.  g.  not  into  every  way,  for  so  doth  the  sinner

6.  27.  when  thou  hast  got  hold,  let  her  not  g.

8.  14.  g.  not  to  law  with  the  judge,  they  will  judge

16.  g.  not  with  him  into  a  solitary  place

9.  12.  remember  they  shall  not  g.  unpunished

12. 11.  though  he  g.  crouching,  yet  take  good  heed

14.  22.  g.  after  her  as  one  that  traceth
18.  30.  g.  not  after  thy  lusts,  but  refrain  thyself
22. 13.  g.  not  to  him  that  hath  no  understanding

25.  26.  if  she  g.  not  as  thou  wouldest  have  her
27.  19-  as  one  that  letteth  a  bird  g.  out  of  his  hand
29.  24.  a  miserable  life  to  g.  from  house  to  house

31.  21.  if  thou  hast  been  forced  to  eat,  g.  vomit

32.  10.  before  a  shamefaced  man  shall  g.  favour
20.  g.  not  in  a  way  wherein  thou  mavest  fall

33.  25.  but  if  thou  let  him  g.  idle,  he  shall  seek

31.  which  way  wilt  thou  g.  to  seek  him  ?

38.  12.  let  him  not  g.  for  thou  hast  need  of  him

32.  not  dwell  where  they  will,  oor  g.  up  and  down
40,  1.  from  the  day  that  they  g.  out  of  the  womb
43.  30.  not  weary,  for  you  can  never  g.  far  enough

Bar.  3.  11.  with  them  that  g.  down  into  the  grave

4.  19.  g.  your  way,  O  my  children,  your  way

5.  7.  Israel  may  g.  safely  in  the  glory  of  God

6.  9.  as  it  were  for  a  virgin  that  loves  to  g.  gay
58.  they  that  are  strong  do  take  and  g.  away

Bel  11.  so  Baal’s  priests  said,  lo,  we  g.  out

34.  g.  carry  the  dinner  thou  hast  to  Babylon
1  Mac.  1.  11.  let  us  g.  and  make  a  covenant

2.  22.  to  the  king’s  words  to  g.  from  our  religion

3.  13.  a  multitude  to  g.  out  with  him  to  war

14. 1  will  get  a  name,  for  I  will^.  fight  w  ith  Judas


1  Mac.  5.  57-  let  us  g.  fight  against  the  heathen

9.  8.  let  us  arise  and  g.  up  against  our  enemies

13.  16.  send  hostages,  and  we  w  ill  let  them  g.

19-  neither  would  he  let  Jonathan  g.

15.  14.  neither  suffered  he  any  to  g.  out  or  in
25.  Tryphon  could  neither  g.  out  nor  in

2  Mac.  2.  30.  and  to  g.  over  things  at  large

5.  ]5.  but  presumed  to  g.  into  the  holy  temple

6.  7-  the  Jews  were  compelled  to  g.  in  procession
11.26.  ever  g.  cheerfully  about  their  own  affairs

12.24.  he  besought  to  let  him  g.  with  his  life
25.  let  him  g.  for  saving  of  their  brethren

15.  2.  the  Jews  that  were  compelled  to  g.  with  him

GOES1'.

Jud.  10.  12.  whence  comest  thou  ?  whither  g.  thou  •
Eccl.  9.  13.  that  thou  g.  in  the  midst  of  snares
GOEIH.

1  Esd.  4.  23.  a  man  g.  his  way  to  rob  and  steal
21.  a  man  looketli  on  a  lion,  and  g.  in  darkness

6.  10.  the  work  g.  on  prosperously  in  their  hands
IVisd.  6.  16.  she  g.  seeking  such  as  are  worthy  ofliei

7.  10.  light  that  cometh  from  her  never  g.  out
12.  1  rejoiced,  because  wisdoin  g.  before  them
24.  she  passeth  and  g.  through  all  things

Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  to  the  sinner  that  g.  two  ways

10.  21.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  g.  before  authority
12.  14.  so  one  that  g.  to  a  sinner,  and  is  defiled

22.24.  as  the  smoke  of  a  furnace  g.  before  the  fire
32.  10.  before  the  thunder  g.  lightning

Bar.  2.  18.  the  soul  which  g.  stooping  and  feeble

3.  33.  he  that  sendeth  forth  light,  and  it  g.
GOING.

Tob.  2.  4.  until  the  g.  down  of  the  sun

7.  after  the  g.  down  of  the  sun  I  made  a  grave

5.  17.  a  staff  of  our  hand  in  g.  in  and  out  before  us
Jud.  1.  4.  for  the 0.  forth  of  his  mighty  armies
IVisd.  3.  3.  their  g.  from  us  to  be  utter  destruction

7.  6.  have  one  entrance  to  life  and  the  like  g.  out

23.  and  g.  through  all  understanding,  pure  spirits
Sus.  8.  the  two  elders  saw  her  g.  in  every  day
Bel  33.  who  was  g.  into  the  field  to  the  reapers

1  Mac.  3.  16.  came  near  to  the  g.  up  to  Bethoron

24.  pursued  from  the  g.  down  of  Bethoron

2  Mac.  2.22.  they  upheld  the  laws  that  were  g.  down
9.  14.  the  city,  to  the  which  he  was  g.  in  haste

11.  36.  for  we  are  now  g.  to  Antioch

GOA  DS.

Eccl.  38.  25.  that  glorieth  in  g.  that  driveth  oxen
GOALS.

Jud.  2.  17.  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  g.  without  number
GOD.

1  Esd.  4.  62.  they  praised  the  G.  of  their  fathers

5.  53.  all  they  that  had  made  any  vow  to  G.

6.  31.  offerings  may  be  made  to  the  most  high  G.

8.  16.  that  do  according  to  the  will  of  thy  G.

17.  thou  shalt  set  before  thy  G.  in  Jerusalem

19.  the  reader  of  the  law  of  the  most  high  G.

23.  according  to  the  wisdom  of  G.  ordain  judges

24.  whosoever  shall  transgress  the  law'  of  thy  G.

9.  46.  the  Lord  G.  most  high,  the  G.  of  hosts'

2  Esd.  1 . 29.  ye  my  people,  and  1  should  be  your  G .

6.  42.  some  being  planted  of  G.  and  tilled

7.  19.  he  said  to  me,  there  is  no  judge  above  G.

8.  58.  said  in  their  heart,  that  there  is  noG.

16.  67.  so  shall  G.  lead  you  forth  and  deliver  you
75.  fear  not,  neither  doubt,  for  G.  is  your  guide

Tob.  1.  12.  I  remembered  G.  with  all  my  heart

3.  16.  heard  before  the  majesty  of  the  great  G.

4.  7-  the  face  of  G.  shall  not  be  turned  away

14.  for  if  thou  serve  G.  he  will  repay  thee
21.  if  thou  fear  G.  and  depart  from  all  sin

5.  16.  G.  send  you  a  good  journey,  and  G.  who

dwelleth  in  heaven  prosper  your  journey ,
and  the  angel  of  G.  keep  yourcompany

6.  17-  rise  up  and  pray  to  G.  who  is  merciful  ,

7.  12.  G.  give  you  good  success  in  all  things

8.  5.  blessed  aft  thou,  ()  G.  of  our  fathers

15.  then  Raguel  praised  G.  and  said,  O  G.  thou

art  worthy  to  be  praised  with  all  holy
praise

10.  11.  G.  give  you  a  prosperous  journey

11.  14.  he  wept  and  said,  blessed  art  thou,  O  G.

16.  Tobit  went  out,  rejoicing  and  praising  G.

17.  gave  thanks,  because  G.  had  mercy  on  him  ;

G.  be  blessed  who  hath  brought  thee  to  us

12.  6.  bless  G.  praise  and  magnify  him  ;  it  is  good

to  praise  and  shew  forth  the  works  of  G.

7.  it  is  honourable  to  reveal  the  works  of  G.

11.  it  was  honourable  to  reveal  the  works  of  G.

14.  now  G.  hath  sent  me  to  heal  thee  and  Sara

17.  it  shall  go  well  with  you,  praise  G.  therefore

18.  but  by  the  will  of  our  G.  I  came,  praise  him

20.  now  therefore  give  G.  thanks,  for  1  go  up

13.  4.  and  he  is  the  G.  our  Father  forever

15.  let  my  soul  bless  G.  the  great  King

18.  blessed  be  G.  who  hath  extolled  it  for  ever

14.  5.  again  G.will  have  mercy  on  them,  and  the

house  of  G.  shall  be  built  in  it  for  ever

7.  his  people  shall  confess  G.  who  love  G.  in  truth
Jud.  3.  8.  all  tribes  shall  call  upon  him  as  G.

4.  13.  so  G.  heard  their  prayers,  and  looked  on

5.  8.  they  left  way  of  ancestors  and  worshipped

the  G.  of  heaven,  the  G.  whom  they  knew

12.  then  they  cried  to  their  G.  he  smote  Egypt

13.  anil  G.  dried  up  the  Red  sea  before  them

17.  whilst  they  sinned  not  before  theirG.  because

the  G.  that  hateth  iniquity  was  with  them

19.  but  now  are  they  returned  to  their  G.

20.  and  if  they  sin  against  their  G.  let  us  consider
-21 .  lest  G.  be  for  them,  and  we  become  a  reproach

6.  2.  and  who  is  G.  but  N abuchodonosor  ?

.3.  and  their  G.  shall  not  deliver  them

18.  then  the  people  fell  down  and  worshipped  G.

and  cried  unto  G.  saying
19.0  Lord  G.  of  heaven,  behold  their  pride

21.  they  called  on  the  G.  of  Israel  all  night

7.  24.  G.  be  a  judge  between  us  and  you

25.  but  G.  hath  sold  us  into  their  hands

8.  8  none  gave  her  an  ill  word,  for  she  feared  G.
12.  who  are  you  that  have  tempted  G.  this  day,

and  stand  instead  of  G.  amongst  children

14.  can  you  search  out  G.  who  made  all  things


Jud.  8.  16.  do  not  bind  the  counsels  of  the  Lord  our
G.  G.  is  not  as  man,  that  he  may  be  threatened

20.  we  know  none  other  G  .  therefore  we  trust

9.  4.  O  G.  O  my  G.  hear  me  also  a  widow

11.  for  thou  art  a  G.  of  the  afflicted,  an  helper

12.  I  pray  thee,  O  G.  of  my  father,  and  G.  of  the

inheritance  of  Israel,  Lord  of  heavens
14.  acknowledge  that  thou  art  theG.  of  all  power

10.  1.  she  had  ceased  to  cry  to  the  G.  of  Israel

8.  the  G.  the  G.  of  our  fathers  give  thee  fav  our
11.10.  nor  sword  prevail,  except  they  sin  against  G.

12.  consume  all  those  things  G.  hath  forbidden

1.3.  for  the  priests  that  serve  before  face  of  our  G.

16.  G.  hath  sent  me  to  work  things  with  thee

17.  thy  servant  serveth  the  G.  of  heaven  day  and

night,  I  will  pray  to  G.  and  he  will  tell  me
23.  thy  G.  shall  be  my  G.  and  thou  shalt  dwell

13.  ll.G.even  ourG.  is  with  us  to  shew  power

14.  then  said  she  to  them,  praise  G.  praise  G.

19.  which  remember  the  power  of  G.  for  ever

14.  10.  when  Achior  had  seen  all  that  the  G.  of

Israel  had  done,  he  believed  in  G.  greatly
16.2.  Judithsaid,  begin  to  my  G.  with  timbrels

3.  G.  breaketh  the  battles,  for  he  delivered  me
Esth.  10.  4.  said,  G.  hath  done  these  things

9.  my  nation  is  Israel,  which  cried  to  Gland  were

saved,  G.  hath  wrought  signs  and  wonders

10.  he  made  two  lots,  one  for  the  people  of  G.

1 1 .  lots  came  at  the  day  of  judgment  before  G.

12.  so  G.  remembered  his  people  and  justified"

1 1 .  10.  then  they  cried  to  G.  and  on  their  cry

12.  and  what  G.  had  determined  to  do

13.  14.  might  not  prefer  glory  of  man  above  glory

or  S'-  nor  will  '  worship  any  but  thee,  O  G.

15.  2.  after  she  had  called  upon  G.  who  beholds

8.  then  G.  changed  the  spirit  of  the  king

1.3.  I  saw  thee,  my  lord,  as  an  angel  of  G.

16.  4.  they  think  to  escape  the  justice  of  G.

16.  that  they  be  children  of  the  most  high  G.

18.  G.  who  ruleth  all  things,  rendering  vengeance
f  t  isd.  1. 6.  for  G.  is  witness  of  his  reins

13.  for  G.  made  not  death,  nor  hath  pleasure
2.  13.  he  professeth  to  have  the  knowledge  of  G.

16.  he  maketh  his  boast  that  G.  is  his  father

18.  if  the  just  man  be  son  of  G.  he  will  nelp  him
23.  for  G. created  man  to  be  immortal

.3.  1.  the  souls  of  righteous  are  in  the  hand  of  G.

5.  for  G.  proved  them,  and  found  them  worthy

14.  nor  imagined  wicked  things  against  G.

4.  1.  because  it  is  known  with  G.  and  with  men

10.  he  pleased  G.  and  was  beloved  of  him

17.  they  shall  not  understand  what  G.  decreed

18.  but  G.  shall  laugh  them  to  scorn

6.  4.  nor  have  walked  after  the  counsel  of  G.

19.  incorruption  maketh  us  near  unto  G.

7.  14.  which  they  that  use,  become  the  friendsof  G.

15.  G.  hath  granted  me  to  speak  as  1  would

25.  for  she  is  the  breath  of  the  power  of  G.

26.  the  unspotted  mirror  of  the  power  ofG.

27.  she  maketh  them  friendsof  G.  and  prophets

28.  G.  loves  none  but  him  that  dwells  with  wisdom

8.  3.  she  is  conversant  with  G.  she  magnifieth

4.  for  she  is  privy  to  the  mysteries  of  G.

21.  I  could  not  obtain  her,  except  G.  gave
9-  1.  O  G.  of  my  fathers,  and  Lord  of  mercy

1.3.  what  man  that  can  know  the  counsel  of  G.l

10.  5.  she  preserved  him  blameless  unto  G.

10.  she  shewed  him  the  kingdom  of  G.

12.  7-  might  receave  a  worthy  colony  of  G.  child.

1.3.  nor  is  there  any  G.  but  thou,  that  careth
26.  they  shall  feel  ajudgment  woithy  of  G.

1.3.  1.  vain  are  all  men,  w  ho  are  ignorant  of  G,

6.  for  they  peradventure  err,  seeking  G.

14.  8.  because  being  corruptible,  it  was  called  G.

9.  they  are  both  alike  hateful  unto  G.

1 1 .  in  the  creature  of  G.  they  are  an  abomination

20.  the  multitude  allured,  took  him  for  a g.

22.  that  they  erred  in  the  knowledge  of  G.

.30.  both  because  they  thought  not  well  of  G.

15.  1.  but  thou,  O  G.  art  gracious  and  true

8.  he  maketh  a  vain  g.  of  the  same  clay

16.  bu'  no  man  can  make  a  g.  like  to  himself

19.  but  they  went  without  the  praise  of  G.

16.  18.  were  persecuted  with  the  judgment  of  G.
18.  1.3.  acknowledged  this  people  to  be  sons  of  G .

Eccl.  1.  18.  both  which  are  the  gifts  of  G.

.30.  so  G.  discover  thy  secrets  and  cast  thee  down
.3.  16.  that  angereth  his  mother  is  cursed  of  G.

7.  9.  say  not,  G.  will  look  on  my  oblations,  when
I  offer  to  the  most  high  G.  he  will  accept  it

10.  5.  in  the  hand  of  G.  is  the  prosperity  of  man

7.  pride  is  hateful  before  G.  and  man

12.  pride  is,  when  one  departeth  from  G.

15.  13.  and  they  that  fear  G.  love  it  not

18.  11.  therefore  is  G.  patient  with  them

19.  24.  that  hath  small  understanding  and  fears  G.

20.  15.  such  a  one  is  to  be  hated  of  G.  and  man
21. 5.  prayer  of  a  poor  man  reacheth  to  ears  of  G.

23.  4.  O  G.  of  my  life,  give  me  not  a  proud  look

10.  he  that  swears  and  names  G.  continually
12.  G.  grant  that  it  be  not  found  in  Jacob

24.23.  the  book  of  the  covenant  of  the  most  high  G.

25.  1.  I  stood  beautiful,  both  before  G.and  men
6.  and  the  fear  of  G.  is  their  glory
.36.  5.  that  there  is  no  G.  but  only  thou,  O  G.

17.  that  thou  art  the  Lord,  the  eternal  G.

41.8.  have  forsaken  the  law  of  the  most  high  G.

19.  in  regard  of  truth  of  G.  and  his  covenant

45.  l.even  Moses  belov  ed  of  G.  and  men

26.  G.  give  you  wisdom  in  your  heart  to  judge

46.  1.  was  made  great  f  r  saving  the  elect  of  G.

47.  13.  forG.  made  all  quiet  round  about  him
48. 16.  some diii  that  which  was  pleasing  to  G.

49.  3.  he  established  the  worship  of  G.

50.  22.  now  therefore  bless  ye  the  G.  of  all

51.  1.  I  "  ill  praise  thee,  O  G.  my  Saviour

Bar.  3.  35. this  is  our  G.  ||  4.  6.  ye  moved  G.  to  wntL

4.  7-  by  sacrificing  to  devils  and  not  to  G.

8.  ye  have  forgotten  the  everlasting  G.

.37.  they  come,  rejoi.  ing  in  the  glory  of  G

5.  1.  the  glory  that  cometh  from  G.  for  ever
2.  the  '•ighteousness  which  cometh  from  G.

619


Apocrypha.]  GOD


G  ON


GOO


B«r.5.3.G.will  shew  thy  brightness  to  every  country

4.  shall  be  called,  the  glory  of  G.  worship

5.  rejoicing  in  the  remembrance  of  G.

6.  G.  bringeth  them  to  thee  exalted  with  glory

7.  G.  hath  appointed  every  high  hill  be  cast  down

8.  overshadow  Israel  by  the  commandment  of  G.

9.  forG.  shall  lead  Israel  with  joy

6.51.  and  that  there  is  no  work  of  G.  in  them
Dan.  3.  1.  they  walked  in  the  tire,  praising  G.

22.  let  them  know  thou  art  Lord,  the  only  G.

Sus.  42.  G.  everlasting  G.  that  knowest  the  secrets

50.  G.  hath  given  thee  the  honour  of  an  elder

55.  Daniel  said,  even  now  the  angel  of  G.  hath
recehed  the  sentence  of  G.  to  cuttheemtwo

59.  the  angel  of  G.  waiteth  with  the  sword

60.  praised  G.  whosaveth  them  that  trust  in  him
63.  they  praised  G.  for  their  daughtei  Susanna

Bel 4.  but  Daniel  worshipped  his  own  G.

5.  the  living  G.  who  created  heaven  and  earth
37-  take  the  dinnur  which  G.  hath  sent  thee

38.  Daniel  said,  thou  hast  remembered  me,  O  G.
Prayer  of  Manass.  thou  art  the  G.  of  the  just,  for
thou  art  G.  e'en  the  G.  of  them  that  repent

1  Mac.  2.  21.  G.  forbid  we  should  forsake  the  law

3.  18.  with  the  G.  of  heaven  it  is  all  one  to  deliver
53.  able  to  stand,  except  thou,  O  G.  help

60.  as  the  will  of  G.  is  in  heaven,  so  let  him  do

4.  55.  worshipping  and  praising  the  G.  of  heaven

9.  10.  G.  forbid  that  1  should  do  this  thing

2  Mae.  1.  2.  G.  be  gracious  unto  you  and  remember

27.  let  the  heathen  know  that  thou  art  G.

2.  4.  that  the  prophet  being  warned  of  G.

7.  till  the  time  that  G.  gather  his  people  together

17.  we  hope  that  the  G.  that  delivered  his  people

3.  24.  all  were  astonished  at  the  power  of  G.

28.  they  acknowledged  the  power  of  G.

29.  for  he  by  the  hand  of  G.  was  .st  down
34.  declare  to  all  men  the  mighty  power  of  G.

36.  the  works  of  the  great  G.  which  he  had  seen

38.  no  doubt  there  is  an  especial  power  of  G.

4.  17.  to  do  wickedly  against  the  laws  of  G.

5.  19.  G.  did  not  choose  people  for  the  places’  sake

6.  1.  and  not  to  live  after  the  laws  of  G.

23.  the  holy  law  made  and  given  by  G.

7. 14.  to  look  for  hope  from  G.  to  be  raised  up

16.  think  not  our  nation  is  forsaken  of  G.

18.  we  suffer,  having  sinned  against  our  G.

19.  thou  that  takest  in  hand  to  strive  against  G.

28.  G.  made  them  of  things  that  were  not

31.  thou  shaltnot  escape  the  hands  of  G.

36.  our  brethren  are  dead  under  G.  covenant

37.  that  thou  mayest  confess  that  he  alone  is  G.

8.  23.  given  them  this  watch-word,  the  help  of  G.
36.  that  the  Jews  had  G.  to  fight  for  them

9.  4.  the  judgment  of  G.  now  following  him

5.  the  G.  of  Israel  smote  him  with  a  plague

8.  shewing  forth  the  manifest  power  of  G.

11.  acknowledge  of  himself  by  the  scourge  of  G.

12.  it  is  meet  to  be  subject  to  G.  a  mortal  man

should  not  think  of  himself  as  if  he  were  G.

17.  that  he  would  declare  the  power  of  G.

18.  the  just  judgment  of  G.  was  come  on  him

20.  if  ye  fare  well,  I  give  great  thanks  to  G.

10. 16.  besought  G.  that  he  would  be  their  helper

25.  they  turned  themselves  to  pray  to  G.

11.  4.  not  at  all  considering  the  power  of  G.

9.  then  they  praised  the  merciful  G.  together

13.  because  the  almighty  G.  helped  them

12.  6.  calling  on  G.  the  righteous  Judge

11.  but  Judas’ side  by  the  helpof  G.  got  victory

16.  Judas  took  the  city  by  the  will  of  G.

13.  15.  given  the  watch-word,  victory  is  of  G.

15.  14.  to  wit,  Jeremias  the  prophet  of  G.

27.  praying  to  G.  with  their  hearts,  for  through
the  appearance  of  G.  they  were  cheered
GODLY.

Jud.  8.  31.  pray  for  us,  because  thou  art  a  #.  woman
Eccl.  6.  35.  be  willing  to  hear  every  g.  discourse

11.  17.  the  gift  of  the  Lord  remaineth  with  the  g.
22.  the  blessing  of  Lord  is  in  the  reward  of  the  g.

12.  2.  do  good  to  the  g.  man,  and  thou  shaltfind

4.  give  to  the  #.  man,  and  help  not  a  sinner

13.  17.  what  fellowship  hath  the  sinner  with  g.?

16.  13.  the  patience  of  G.  shall  not  be  frustrated
23. 12.  all  such  things  shall  be  far  from  the#.

26.  23.  a  g.  woman  is  given  to  him  that  feareth  Ld.
27.1 1.  the  discourse  of  the  g.  is  always  with  wisdom
33.  14.  life  against  death,  so  is  the  g.  set  against
the  sinner,  and  the  sinner  against  the  g.
37.  12.  but  be  continually  with  a  g.  man

39.  27.  all  these  things  are  for  good  to  the  g.

43.  33.  and  to  the  g.  hath  he  given  wisdom
50.  29.  who  giveth  wisdom  to  the  g.

2  Mac.  12.  45.  favour  laid  up  for  those  that  died  g.
GODLESS.

2  Mac.  7.  34.  but  thou,  O  g.  man  and  most  wicked
GODLINESS.

1  Esd.  1.  23.  upright  with  an  heart  full  of  g.

JVisd.  10.  12.  might  know  g.  is  stronger  than  all
Eccl.  1.  25.  but  g .  is  an  abomination  to  a  sinner

2  Mac.  3.  1.  because  of  the  g.  of  Onias  the  priest

GODS.

2  Esd.  1.  6.  they  have  offered  to  strange  g.

16.  36.  believe  not  g.  of  whom  the  Lord  spake
Jvd.  3.  8.  decreed  to  destroy  all  the  g.  of  the  land

5.  7.  they  would  not  follow  the g.  of  their  fathers

8.  they  cast  them  out  from  the  face  of  their  g.
b.  18.  which  worship  g.  made  with  hands

Esth.  14.  7-  because  we  worshipped  their  g.

Wisd.  12.  27.  them  whom  they  thought  to  be  g.

13.  2.  to  be  the  g.  which  govern  the  world

3.  if  they  being  delighted,  took  them  to  be  g.

10.  called  them  g.  which  are  the  works  of  men
15.  15.  counted  the  idols  of  the  heathen  to  be  g.

Bar.  6.  4.  ye  shall  see  in  Babylon  g.  of  silver

9.  they  make  crowns  for  the  heads  of  their  g.

10.  the  priests  convey  from  their  g.  gold  ana  silv.

11.  being  g.  of  silver,  and  g.  of  gold  and  wood

12.  yet  cannot  these  g.  save  themselves  from  rust

16.  whereby  they  are  kn  ;wn  not  to  be  g.

17.  even  so  it  is  with  their  g.  when  they  be  set  up
18  lest  their  g.  be  spoiled  with  robbers

650


Bar.  6.  2.1.  by  this  ye  may  know  they  are  not#.  29.

30.  how  can  they  be  called  g.  ?  set  meat  before#.
32.  they  roar  and  cry  before  their  #.  as  men  do

39.  their  #.  of  wood,  and  which  are  overlaid

40.  how  should  a  man  think  and  say,  they  are  #.  ?

44.  how  may  it  be  thought  or  said  they  are  #.  ?
46.  how  should  the  things  that  are  made  be  #.  ?
49.  how  cannot  men  perceive  that  they  be  no  #.  ?

51.  that  they  are  no  #.  but  works  of  men’s  hands

52.  who  then  may  not  know  that  they  be  no  #.  ?

55.  when  fire  falleth  on  the  house  of#,  of  wood

56.  how  can  it  be  thought  or  said ,  that  they  b  eg.?

57.  nor  are  those  #.  of  wood  able  to  escape
Belli.  Daniel  said,  lo,  these  are  #.  you  worship

GOLD.

1  Esd.  1.  36.  a  tax  on  the  land  of  one  talent  of  #.

2.  6.  his  neighbours  help  him  with  #.  and  silver

13.  vials  ofg.  30,  of  silver  2410,  and  other  vessels

3.  6.  to  drink  in  #.  to  sleep  on  #.  and  acha/iot  with

bridles  of#,  and  an  head  tire  of  fine  linen

2  Esd.  8.  2.  Dut  little  dust  that  #.  cometh  of
16.  73.  they  shall  be  tried  as  #.  in  the  fire

Tub.  12.  8.  better  to  give  alms,  than  lay  up  #.

13.  16.  and  thy  battlements  with  pure  #.

Jud.  2.  18.  very  much  #.  out  of  the  king’s  house

5.  9.  they  were  increased  with  #.  and  silver
8.  7.  Manasses  had  left  her  #,  and  silver

10.  21.  which  was  woven  with  purple  and  #.
Esth.  15.  6.  before  the  king  all  glittering  with  #.
JVisd.  3.  6.  as  #.  in  furnace  hath  he  tried  them

7.  9.  all  #.  in  respect  of  her  is  as  a  little  sand

13.  10.  gods  that  are  #.  and  silver,  to  shew  art  in
Eccl.  2.  5.  for#,  is  tried  in  the  fire,  men  in  adversity
7-  18.  nor  a  faithful  brother  for#,  of  Ophir

19.  forego  not  a  good  woman,  her  grace  is  above  #.

8.  2.  for  #.  hath  destroyed  many,  and  perverted

21.  21.  learning  to  a  man  is  as  an  ornament  of#.

28.  24.  look  that  thou  bind  up  thy  silver  and  #.

29.  11.  it  shall  bring  thee  more  profit  than  #.

30.  15.  health  and  a  good  state  of  body  is  above  #.

31.  5.  he  that  lovetli  #.  shall  not  be  justified

6.  #.  hath  been  ruin  of  many  and  their  destruction

8.  blessed  is  the  rich  that  hath  not  gone  after  #.

32.  5.  is  as  a  signet  of  carbuncle  set  in  #.

6.  as  a  signet  of  an  emerald  set  in  a  work  of#.

40.  25.  #.  and  silver  make  the  foot  stand  sure

41.  12.  above  a  thousand  great  treasures  of  #.

45.  11.  and  set  in  #.  the  work  of  the  jeweller

12.  he  set  a  crown  of  #.  upon  the  mitre
47.  18.  thou  didst  gather  #.  as  tin  and  multiply
50.  9.  as  a  vessel  of  beaten  #.  set  with  stones
51.28.  get  learning,  and  get  much  #.  by  her
Bar.  3.  17.  they  that  hoarded  up  sifvei  and  #.

30.  who  found  her,  and  will  bring  her  for  pure  #.

6.  4.  shall  ye  see  in  Babylon  gods  of  silver  and  #.

9.  and  taking  #.  as  it  were  for  a  virgin  to  go  gay
30.  set  meat  beiore  gods  of  silver,  #.  and  wood

1  Mac.  1.  22.  censers  of  #.  and  the  vail  and  crowns
23.  he  took  also  the  silver  and  the  #.  and  vessels

2.  18.  children  shall  be  honoured  with  silver  and  #.
.3.  41.  the  merchants  took  silver  and  #.  very  much

4.  23.  where  they  got  much  #.  and  silver  and  silk
57.  they  decked  the  temple  with  crowns  of#.

6.  1.  was  a  city  renowned  for  riches,  silver  and  #.

2.  a  temple,  w  herein  were  coverings  of  #.

12.  and  I  took  all  the  vessels  of  #.  and  silver
39.  when  the  sun  shone  on  the  shields  of#.

8.  3.  ■winning  the  mines  of  the  silver  and  #.

10.  60.  who  gave  them  and  friend  silver  and  #.
89.  he  sent  him  a  buckle  of  #.  as  the  use  is

14.  24.  Simon  sent  to  Rome,  with  a  great  shield  of  #.

43.  should  be  clothed  in  purple,  wear  #.

44.  clothed  in  purple,  or  wear  a  buckle  of  #.

15.  18.  they  brought  a  shield  of#,  of  1000  pound
26.  sent  him  silver,  and  #.  and  much  armour
32.  saw  the  glory  of  Simon,  and  cupboard  of  #.

16.  11.  he  had  abundance  of  silver  and  #.

19.  might  give  them  silver  and  #.  and  rewards

2  Mac.  2.  2.  when  they  see  images  of  silver  and  #.

3.  25.  it  seemed  that  he  had  complete  harness  of  #.

4.  32.  stole  certain  vessels  of  #.  out  of  the  temple

5.  2.  horsemen  running  in  the  air  in  cloth  of  #.

10.  29.  appeared  five  men  with  bridles  of #.

11.  8.  one  in  w  hite,  shaking  bis  armour  of  #.

15.  15.  Jeremias  gave  to  Judas  a  sword  of  #.

GOLDEN.

1  Esd.  8.  57.  twenty  #.  vessels,  twelve  of  brass
Esth.  15.  11.  so  he  held  up  his  #.  sceptre
Eccl.  6.  30.  there  is  a  #.  ornament  upon  her
26.  18.  as  #.  pillars  are  on  sockets  of  silver

45.  9.  with  many  #.  bells  round  about

1  Mac.  1.  21.  and  took  away  the  #.  altar

22.  and  the  #.  ornaments  before  the  temple

11.  58.  on  this  he  sent  him  #.  vessels  to  be  served
in,  and  gave  him  leave  to  wear  a  #.  buckle

13.  37.  the  #.  crowm  and  scarlet  robe  ye  sent

2  Mac.  5.  3.  and  glittering  of  #.  ornaments

GOLDSMITHS.

JVisd.  15.  9.  he  striveth  to  excel  #.  and  silversmiths
Bar.  6.  45.  they  are  made  of  carpenters  and  #.
GOLIATH.

Eccl.  47.  4.  he  beat  down  the  boasting  of  G.
GOMORRAH.

2  Esd.  2.  8.  remember  what  I  did  to  Sodom  and  G.
GONE.

2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  T.evites  are  #.  into  captivity

14.  11.  the  ten  parts  of  it  are  #.  already

Jud.  10.  10.  till  she  was#,  down  the  mountain
JVisd.  4.  2.  and  when  it  is  #.  they  desire  it

5.  10.  when  #.  by  the  trace  cannot  be  found

16.  14.  the  spirit  when  it  is  #.  forth  returneth  not
19.  3.  whom  they  had  entreated  to  be  #.

Eccl.  31.  8.  the  rich  that  hath  not  #.  after  gold
Bar.  3.  19.  they  are  #.  down  to  the  grave
30.  who  hath  #.  over  the  sea  and  found  her  ?

4.  26.  my  delicate  ones  have  #.  rough  ways
Sus.  19.  now  when  the  maids  were  #.  forth
Bel  14.  when#,  forth,  king  set  meats  before  Bel

1  Mac.  6. 10.  the  sleep  is  #.  from  mine  eyes

11.  43.  for  all  my  forces  are  #.  from  me

12.  30.  they  were  #.  over  the  river  Eleutherus

2  Mac.  4.  40.  a  man  far  g.  in  years,  no  less  in  folly


2  Mac.  6.  24.  were  now  #.  to  another  religion

12.  4.  when  they  were#,  forth  into  the  deep

10.  when  they  were  #.  fr^jn  thence  nine  furlong*

1  Esd.  4.  46.  1  desire  that  thou  make  #.  the  vow

6.  21.  if  it  seem  #.  to  the  king,  let  search  be  made
8.  1 1 .  as  it  hath  seemed  #.  to  me  and  my  friends
85.  that  ye  nay  eat  the  #.  things  of  the  land

2  Esd.  1.9.  to  w  hom  1  have  done  so  much  #.

2.  14.  I  have  broken  the  evil,  and  created  the  g,
25.  nourish  thy  children, O  thou#,  nurse

3.  22.  the  #.  departed  away,  the  evil  abode  still

6.  33.  sent  me  to  say,  be  ot  a.  comfort,  fear  not
7-  6.  a  city  budded,  and  full  of  all  #.  things

35.  and  the  #.  deeds  shall  be  of  force
16.  21.  victuals  shall  be  so  #.  cheap  on  earth
Tob.  2.  1.  there  was  a  #.  dinner  prepared  me

4.  9.  thou  layest  up  a  #.  treasure  for  thyself

1 1 .  for  alms  is  a  #.  gift  to  all  that  give  it

19.  the  Lord  himself  giveth  all  #.  things

5. 13.  for  thou  art  my  brother,  of  an  honest  and  #.

stock  ;  my  brother,  thou  art  of  a  #.  stock

21.  for  the  #.  angel  will  keep  him  company
7-  4.  then  said  he,  is  he  in  #.  health  ?

5.  he  is  both  alive  and  in  #.  health

12.  God  give  you  #.  success  in  all  things

18.  be  of#,  comfort,  my  daughter

8.  6.  it  is  not  #.  that  man  should  be  alone

10.  12.  that  I  may  hear#,  report  of  thee

11.  11.  saying,  be  of#,  hope,  my  father

12.  6.  it  is  #.  to  praise  God  and  exalt  his  name

7.  it  is  #.  to  keep  close  the  secret  of  a  king,  11.  do

that  which  is  #.  and  no  evil  shall  touch  you

8.  prayer  is  #.  with  fasting  and  alms

13.  thy  #.  deed  was  not  hid  from  me

13.  10.  give  praise  to  the  Lord,  for  he  is#.

Jud.  3.  2.  use  us  as  shall  be  #.  in  thy  sight

4.  and  deal  with  them  as  seemeth  #.  to  thee

7.  30.  02ias  said,  brethren,  be  of#,  courage

8.  28.  thou  hasi  spoken  all  with  a  #.  heart

29.  because  the  disposition  of  thy  heart  is#.

10.  19.  it  is  not  #.  that  one  man  of  them  be  left

11. 1.  worn,  be  of#,  comfort,  fearnotinthy  heart, 3,

13.  20.  for  a  praise,  to  visit  thee  in#,  things

15.  8.  #.  things  that  God  hath  shewed  to  Israel
10.  thou  hast  done  much#,  to  Israel
Esth.  13.  3.  was  approved  for  his  constant  #.  will

13.  for  I  could  have  been  content  with  #.  will

15.  9.  Esther,  I  am  thy  brother,  be  of  #.  cheer

16.  3.  to  practise  against  these  that  do  them  #.

4.  words  of  lewd  persons,  that  were  never  #.

13.  who  continually  procured  our  #.

JVisd.  2.  6.  let  us  enjoy  the  #.  things  present
3.  15.  for  glorious  is  the  fruit  of  #.  labours

5.  8.  what#,  hath  riches  with  vaunting  brought  ?

6.  25.  receive  instruction,  it  shall  do  you  #.

7.  U.  all  #.  things  together  came  to  me  with  her

22.  clear,  undefiled,  plain,  loving  the  tiling  that

is#,  that  cannot  be  letted,  ready  to  do#.

8.  9.  she  would  be  a  counsellor  of#,  things

12.  when  I  speak,  they  shall  give  #.  ear  unto  me
15. 1  shall  be  found  #.  among  the  multitude

18.  and  in  talking  with  her  is  a#,  report

20.  being  #.  1  came  into  a  body  undefiled
10.8.  they  knew  not  the  things  which  were#.

12.  19.  hast  made  thy'  children  to  be  of  a  #.  hope

21.  thou  hast  made  covenants  of  #.  promises

13.  1.  could  not,  out  of  the  #.  things  that  are  seen

10.  to  shew  art  in  a  stone  #.  for  nothing

14.26.  disquieting  of#,  men,  forgetfuln.  of  #.  turns,
defiling  souls,  disorder  in  marriages,  adultery
18.  6.  they  might  afterwards  be  of#,  cheer

9.  the  children  of#,  men  did  sacrifice  secret ly  ;
should  be  alike  partakers  of  the  same  #.  and  evil

Eccl.  1.  29.  take  #.  heed  what  thou  speakest
2.  9.  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  hope  for#.

6. 19.  come  to  her,  and  wait  for  her  #.  fruits

7.  13.  for  the  custom  thereof  is  not  #.

18.  change  not  a  friend  for  any  #.  by  no  means

21.  love  a  #.  servant,  defraud  him  not  of  liberty
11. 12.  the  eye  of  the  Lord  looked  on  him  for#.

15.  love,  and  the  way  of  #.  works,  are  from  him

23.  what  #.  things  shall  I  have  hereafter  ?

31.  he  lieth  in  wait,  and  turneth  #.  into  evil

12. 1 .  when  thou  wilt  do  #.  know  to  whom  dost  il

2.  do  #.  to  the. godly  man,  and  thou  shalt  find

3.  there  can  no  #.  come  to  one  occupied  in  evil

5.  shalt  receive  twice  as  much  evil  for  all  the  #.

7.  give  to  the  #.  and  help  not  the  sinner

13.  24.  riches  are  #.  to  him  that  hath  no  sin

25.  his  countenance,  whether  it  be  for  #.  or  evil

14.  5.  is  evil  to  himself,  to  whom  will  he  be  #.  ?

7.  and  if  he  doth  #.  he  doth  it  unwillingly

11.  my  son,  according  to  thy  ability ,  do  #.  to  thys.

13.  do  #.  to  thy  friend  before  thou  die

14.  defraud  not  thyself  of  the  #.  day,  and  let  not

the  part  of  a  #.  desire  overpass  thee

20.  the  man  that  doth  meditate  #.  things
25.  lodge  in  a  lodging  where  #.  things  are

15.  1.  he  that  feareth  tne  Lord,  will  do  #.

17.  7-  withal,  he  shewed  them  #.  and  evil

22.  he  will  keep  the  #.  deeds  of  man  as  the  apple

18.  8.  what  is  man  ?  what  is  his  #.  ?  what  is  his  evil  ?

15.  my  son,  blemish  not  thy  #.  deeds

32.  take  not  pleasure  in  much  #.  cheer

20.  3.  how  #.  is  it  when  reproved  to  shew  repentan.
9-  there  is  a  sinner  that  hath  #.  success  in  evil

14.  the  gift  of  a  fool  shall  do  thee  no  #.

16.  I  have  no  thank  for  all  my  #.  deeds
26.  4.  if  he  have  a  #.  heart  toward  the  Lord

16.  so  is  the  beauty  of  a  #.  wife  in  her  house

21.  having  the  confidence  of  t heir  #.  descent
29.  16.  will  overthrow  the  #.  estate  of  his  surety

18.  suretyship  hath  undone  many  of  #.  estate
30. 15.  health  and  #.  state  of  body  are  above  gold

19.  what  #.  doth  the  offering  to  an  idol  ?

25.  a  #.  heart  will  have  a  care  of  his  meat

31.  23.  the  report  of  his  #.  house  keeping

27.  wine  drunk  moderately  ;s  as#,  as  life  to  a  mac

32.  13.  and  hath  replenished  thee  with  #.  things

23.  in  every #.  work  trust  thine  own  soul

33.  14.  #.  is  set  against  evil,  life  against  death


GOT


G  it  A


GKE


tA  pocryi'h  a


Eccl.  35  2.  he  that  requiteth  #.  offereth  fine  flour

8.  give  the  Lord  his  honour  with  a#.  eye

37.  9.  he  will  say  unto  thee,  thy  way  is  g.

18.  four  things  appear,  £7.  and  evil,  life  and  death

38.  13.  when  in  their  hands  there  is  g.  success
21.  thou  shalt  not  do  him  g.  but  hurt  thyself

39.  4.  tor  he  hath  tried  the  g.  and  evil  among  men

16.  all  the  work3  ot  the  Lord  are  exceeding  g.

25.  for  the  g.  are  g.  things  created  front  beginning

27.  all  these  things  are  for  g.  to  the  godly

33.  all  the  works  of  the  Lord  are  g.

41. 1.3.  a  #.  life  hath  but  few  days,  a #.  name  endures

16.  it  is  not  g.  to  retain  all  shamefacedness
42.  6.  sure  keeping  is  g.  where  an  evil  wife  is

25.  one  thing  establisheth  the  g.  of  another

45.  2.3.  he  stood  up  with  g.  courage  of  heart

26.  that  their  g.  things  be  not  abolished

46.  10.  might  see  that  it  is  g.  to  follow  the  Lord
51.  18.  earnestly  1  followed  that  which  is  g.

21.  therefore  have  I  gotten  a  g.  possession
Bar.  2.  1.  the  Lord  hath  made  g.  his  word

4.  5.  be  of  g.  cheer,  my  people,  memorial  of  Israel
.30.  take  a g.  heart,  O  Jerusalem,  he  will  comfort
6.  34.  whether  evil  or  g.  they  cannot  recompense
38.  nor  can  they  do  g.  to  the  fatherless
64.  seeing  they  are  not  able  to  do  g.  to  men

1  Iliac.  4.  24.  they  praised  the  Lord,  because  it  is#.
55.  praising  God,  who  had  given  them  #.  success

8.  53.  g.  success  be  to  the  Romans  and  Jews

11.3.3.  determined  to  do  #.  to  people  of  the  Jews
our  friends,  because  of  their  #.  will  towards  us

14.  4.  he  sought  the  g.  of  his  nation  in  such  wise

9.  they  sat  communing  together  of  g.  things
16.  14.  taking  care  for  the  g.  ordering  of  them

17.  great  treachery,  he  recompensed  evil  for  g.

2  Mac.  1.  3.  to  do  his  will  with  a  g.  courage

4.  5.  not  to  be  accuser  but  seeking  the  g.  of  all

5.  4.  that  that  apparition  might  turn  to  g.

6.  29.  changing  the  g.  will  they  bare  him  before

7.  5.  the  vapour  was  for  a  g.  space  dispersed

14.  it  is  g.  being  put  to  death  by  men,  to  look

8.  36.  to  make  g.  to  the  Romans  their  tribute

9.  19.  Antiochus,  to  the  g.  Jew's  his  citizens

21.  would  have  remembered  kindly  your  g.  will

10.  23.  having#.  success  with  his  weapons

11.  6.  would  send  a  g.  angel  to  deliver  Israel

15.  consented,  being  careful  of  the  common  g.

19. 1  will  endeavour  to  be  a  means  of  your  g.

26.  when  certified  that  they  may  be  of  g.  comfort

28.  we  have  our  desire,  we  are  also  in#.  health

12.  45.  it  was  an  holy  and  g.  thought

13.  16.  at  last  they  departed  with  g.  success

14.  8.  I  intend  the  g.  of  mine  own  countrymen
30.  that  such  sour  behaviour  came  not  of  g.

37.  Razis  a  man  of  very  g.  report  was  accused

15.  12.  Onias,  a  virtuous  and  g.  man,  prayed
17-  by  the  words  of  Judas,  which  were  very  g.

23.  O  Lord  of  heaven,  send  a  g.  angel  before  us

GOODLY.

Esd.  4.  18.  gold,  silver,  or  any  other  g.  thing
Tud.  8.  7-  she  was  also  of  a  g.  countenance
!  Mac.  9.  16.  he  would  garnish  with  g.  gifts
GOODLIEST.

1  Mac.  8.  8.  of  the  g.  countries  which  they  took
GOODNESS.

!  Esd.  7.  68.  he  pardons,  if  he  did  not  so  of  his  g.

8.  52.  rest  allowed,  yea,  perfect  g.  and  wisdom
E sth.  16.  6.  the  innocency  and  g.  of  princes

10.  and  far  distant  from  our  g.  and  as  a  stranger
lYi  d.  7-  26.  and  she  is  the  image  of  bis  g.

12.22.  we  should  carefully  think  of  thy  g.

16.  11.  they  might  be  continually  mindful  of  thy  g.
Eccl.  26.  20.  trusting  in  the  #.  of  thy  stock

Bar.  2.  27.  thou  hast  dealt  with  us  after  all  thy#.
Prayer  of  Manass.  in  me  thou  wilt  shew  all  thy#

!  Mac.  6.  13.  for  it  is  a  token  of  his  great  a.
GOODS.

Esd.  6.  32.  and  all  his  g.  seized  for  the  king
■  Esd.  15.  19.  destroy  their  house,  and  spoil  their  g.
Tob.  1.  20.  all  my  g.  were  forcibly  taken  away
8.  21.  then  he  should  take  the  half  of  his  g.

10.  10.  gave  him  Sara  his  wife,  and  half  his  g.

J«d.  16.  24.  she  did  distribute  her  g.  to  them
Wisd.  13.  17.  then  maketh  he  prayer  for his  g.

Eccl.  5.  1.  set  not  thy  heart  upon  thy  g.

11.  19.  now  I  will  eat  continually  of  thy  g.

14.  4.  others  that  shall  spend  his  #.  riotously

5.  he  shall  not  take  pleasure  in  his  g.

31.  11.  his  g.  shall  be  established,  congregation
33. 19.  give  not  thy  g.  to  another,  lest  it  repent

34.  20.  brings  an  offering  of  the  g.  of  the  poor
40. 13.  the  g.  of  the  unjust  shall  be  dried  up
46.  19.  I  have  not  taken  any  man’s  g.  not  a  shoe
.  Mac.  12.  23.  that  your  cattle  and  g.  are  ours
GORGIAS.

Mac.  3.  38.  chose  Nicanor  and  G.  mighty  men

4.  1.  then  took  G.  five  thousand  footmen
5.  in  the  mean  season  came  ^r.  by  night

18.  G.  and  his  host  are  here  in  the  mountain

5.  59.  then  came  G.  and  his  men  out  of  the  city

:  Mac.  8.  9.  and  with  him  he  joined  G.  a  captain

10.  14.  but  when  g.  wa3  governor  of  the  holds

12.  32.  they  went  forth  against  g.  the  governor

135.  was  stdl  upon  G.  so  that  G.  fled  into  Marisa
36.  when  they  that  were  with  G.had  fought  long
37.  rushing  unawares  on  G.  men,  he  put  to  flight
GOT.

Eccl.  6.  27  . when  hast  g.  hold  of  her,  let  her  not  go
24.  6.  and  in  every  nation  1  g.  a  possession
Mac.  4.  23.  where  they  #.much  gold  and  silver

11.  49.  the  Jews  had  g.  the  city  as  they  would
Mac.  4.  24.  he  g.  the  priesthood  to  himself

27.  so  Menelaus  g.  the  principality
GOTTEN.

Esd.  3.  12.  when  they  had  g.  them  many  children
'yisd.  4.  2.  having  g.  victory  striving  for  rewards
c.ccl.  5.  8.  set  not  thy  heart  on  goods  unjustly  g.

26.  20.  when  thou  hast  g.  a  fruitful  possession

29.  6.  he  hath  g.  him  an  enemy  without  cause

34. 18.  he  that  sacrificeth  of  a  thing  wrongfully  g.

35.  10.  as  thou  hast  g.  give  with  a  cheerful  eye
42.10.  lest  should  g.  with  child  in  her  father's  house


Eccl.  51.  21.  therefore  have  1  ,<7.  a  good  possession
27.  and  l  have  g.  unto  me  much  rest
Ear.  2.  11.  O  Lord,  that  hast  g.  thyself  a  name

1  Mac.  2.  10.  what  nation  hatn  not  g.  of  her  spoils
49.  now  hath  pride  and  rebuke  g.  strength

2  Mac.  13.21.  they  had  ft. him,  they  put  him  in  prison

_  GOVERN.

JJ  tsd.  13.  2.  to  be  the  gods  which  g.  the  world
Sits.  5.  to  be  judges,  who  seemed  to  g.  the  people

1  Mac.  9.73.  Jonathan  began  to  g.  the  people

GOVERNANCE.

2  Esd.  11.  32.  and  it  had  the#.  of  the  world

1  Mac.  9.  31.  Jonathan  took  the  g.  upon  him

GOVERNED.

IVisd.  14.  6.  the  hope  of  the  world  g.  by  thy  hand
r,  GOVERN  ETII.

2  Esd.  13.  58.  and  because  Ire  g.  the  same

'Yisd.  14.  3.  but  thy  providence,  O  Father,  g.  it
Eccl.  18.  3.  who#,  the  world  with  palm  of  his  hand
„  GOVERNMENT.

Jud.  Q.  10.  that  had  the  g.  of  all  things  she  had
Eccl .  10.  1.  the#,  of  a  prudent  man  is  well  ordered

1  Mac.  8.  16.  they  committed  their  #.  to  one  man

2  Mac.  8.  17.  taking  away  the  #.  of  forefathers

„  GOVERNMENTS.

1  Mac.  10.  30.  nor  of  the  three  #.  that  are  added
38.  concerning  the  three#,  that  are  added

11. 28.  as  also  the  three  #.  with  Samaria
34.  the  borders  of  Judea,  with  the  three  #.

57.  1  appoint  thee  ruler  over  the  four  #.

2  Mac.  4. 11.  putting  down  the#,  which  were  by  law

_  GOVERNOR.

1  Esd.  2.  12.  to  Sanabassar  the  #.  of  Judea

3.  21.  a  man  remembereth  neither  king  nor  #.
b.  3.  Sisinnes  #.  of  Syria  and  Phenice,  7,21.

29.  a  portion  to  be  given  to  Zprobabel  the  #.

7.  1.  Sisinnes  the  #.  of  Celosyria  did  oversee
Jud.  5.  20.  my  lord  and  #.  if  there  be  any  error

8.  9.  the  words  of  the  people  against  the  #.

11.  10.  O  Lord  and  #.  reject  not  his  word
Eccl.  23.  1.  O  Lord,  Father  and  #.  of  all  my  life

49.  15.  a  #.  of  his  brethren,  a  stay  of  the  people

1  Mac.  13.  42.  Simon  the  #.  and  leader  of  the  Jews
14.  35.  people  made  him  their  #.  and  chief  priest

41.  were  well  pleased  that  Simon  should  be  #.
n  Ah  ^lmon  W;*s  well  pleased  to  be  #.  of  the  Jews

2  Mac.  3.  4.  Simon  was  made  #.  of  the  temple

4.  29.  left  Crates  who  was  #.  of  the  Cyprians

9.  19.  Antiochus  king  and  #.  to  the  good  Jews

10.  14.  but  when  Gorgias  was#,  of  the  holds
32.  he  fled  to  Gazara,  where  Chereas  was  #.

12.  2.  N  icanor  #.  of  Cyprus  would  not  suffer  them

32.  they  went  against  Gorgias  #.  of  Idumea

13.  3.  because  he  thought  to  have  been  made  #.

24. made  him  principal#,  from  Ptolemais

14.  12.  making  him  #.  over  J udea,  he  sent  him  forth

GOVERNORS.

1  Esd.  1.  8.  #.  of  the  temple  gave  to  the  priests
49.  the  #.  also  of  the  people  and  of  the  priests

3.  2.  and  to  all  the  #.  and  captains,  14.

4.  47.  Darius  wrote  letters  to  captains  and  #.

7.  2.  assisting  the  ancients  and  #.  of  the  temple
Jud.  2.  14.  Ilolofernes  called  all  the#,  and  captains

5.  2.  he  called  all  the  #.  of  the  sea  coast

6.  14.  they  presented  him  to  the  g.  of  the  city
7-  8.  and  all  the  #.  of  the  people  of  Moab

8.  11.  hear  me,  O  ye#,  of  inhabitants  of  Bethulia
Esth.  13.  1.  the  princes  and  #.  that  are  under  him

16.  1.  unto  the  princes  and  #.  of  127  provinces

1  Mac.  10.  37 .  their  overseers  and  #.  be  of  themselves
12.  4.  Romans  gave  letters  to  #.  of  every  place

2  Mac.  5.  22.  he  left#,  to  vex  the  nation

10.  21.  he  called  the  #.  of  the  people  together
12.  2.  but  of  the  #.  of  several  places
GRACE.

1  Esd.  8.  4.  he  found  #.  in  his  sight  in  his  requests

2  Esd.  1.  37.  I  take  to  witness  the  #.  of  the  people
2. 32.  my  wells  run  over,  and  my  #.  shall  not  rail
8.  42.  I  said,  if  I  have  found  #.  let  me  speak

12.  7-  if  I  have  found#,  before  thy  sight

14.  22.  but  if  I  have  found  #.  before  thee

Tob.  1.  13.  the  Most  High  gave  me  #.  and  favour
Esth.  15.  14.  and  thy  countenance  is  full  of  #.

JJ  tsd.  3.9.#.  and  mercy  is  to  his  saints,  4.  15.

14.  20.  the  multitude  allured  by  the  #.  of  the  work
16.  25.  it  was  obedient  to  thy  #.  that  nourisheth

Eccl.  4.  21.  there  is  a  shame  which  is  glory  and  #.

7.  19.  a  wise  and  good  woman  her#,  is  above  gold

33.  a  gift  hath  #.  in  the  sight  of  every  man

21.  16.  but#,  shall  be  found  in  the  lips  of  the  wise
24.  16.  my  branches  are  branches  of  honour  and  #.
26.  13.  the#,  of  a  wife  delighteth  her  husband

15.  a  shamefaced  woman  is  a  double  #.

37.  21.  for  #.  is  not  given  him  from  the  Lord
Prayer  of  Manass.  I  bow  knee,  beseeching  thee  of  #.

GRACES.

Eccl.  20.  13.  the#,  of  fools  shall  be  poured  out
GRACIOUS.

1  Esd.  8.  80.  he  made  us  g.  before  the  kings

2  Esd.  1.  25.  when  ye  desire  me  to  be  g.  unto  you
Esth.\&.<2.  with  the  great  bounty  of  their  #.  princes
JYisd.  12.  16.  it  maketh  thee  to  be  #.  to  all

15.  1.  but  thou,  O  God,  art#,  and  tine

Eccl.  17-  21  the  Lord  being  #.  forsook  them  not
18.  17.  but  both  are  with  a  #.  man
Dan.  3.  67 .  give  thanks  to  the  Lord  because  he  is  #.

2  Mac.  1.  2.  God  be  #.  unto  you,  and  remember
24.  O  Lord  God,  who  ai  t  the  only  and  #.  king
2.  22.  the  Lord  being#,  unto  them  with  favour
GRACIOUSLY.

IVisd.  16.2.  dealing#,  with  thine  own  people
2  Mac.  9.  2?.  he  will  #.  yield  to  your  desires
GRAIN.

2  Esd.  4.  30.  the  #,  of  evil  seed  hath  been  sown
31.  the  #.  of  evil  seed  hath  brought  forth
II  tsd.  11.  22.  is  as  a  little  #.  of  the  balance
GRANT.

2  Esd.  5.  4.  but  if  the  Most  High  #.  thee  to  live
Tob.  10.  12.  Lord  #.  that  1  may  see  thy  children
Eccl.  23.  12.  God  #.that  it  be  not  found  in  Jacob
50.  23.  he  #.  us  joyfulness  of  heart  and  peace
l  Mac.  11.  50.  #.  us  peace,  and  let  the  Jews  cease


1  Mac.  13.  45.  beseeching  Simon  to  #.  them  peace

2  Mac.  3.  31.  call  on  the  Most  High,  to#,  him  his  life
11.26.  to  send  unto  them,  and  #.  them  peace

GRANTED.

IVisd.  7. 15.  God  hath  #.  me  to  speak  as  I  would
Eccl.  17.24.  to  them  that  repent  he  #.  return

1  Mac.  11. 66.  to  have  peace  with  him,  which  he#.

13.  37.  confirm  the  immunities  which  we  have  #.

5J.  to  be  at  one  with  them,  which  thing  he  #.
15.5.  1  confirm  all  the  oblations  the  kings  before
me  #.  thee,  and  whatsoever  gifts  besides  they'  #.

2  Mac.  2.31.  #.  to  him  that  will  make  abridgment

3.  33.  Lord  #.  thee  life  ||  4.10.  when  the  king  had  #.

4.  11.  and  the  royal' privileges  #.  to  the  Jews

11.  15.  whatever  Maccabeus  wrote,  the  king  #.

18.  and  he  hath  #.  as  much  as  might  be

35.  whatsoever  Lysias  the  king's  cousin  #.

12.  12.  #.  them  peace,  whereon  they  shook  hands

GRAPE.

2  Esd.  9.  21.  I  have  kept  me  a  #.  of  the  cluster
Eccl.  33. 16.  that  gathereth  after  the  #.  gatherers
39.  26.  honey,  milk,  and  the  blood  of  the  #.

50.  15.  he  poured  of  the  blood  of  the  #.

51.  15.  from  the  flower,  till  the  #.  was  ripe

GRAPES.

2  Esd.  16.26.  the#,  shallripen,  who  shall  tread  them  (
43.  as  he  that  shall  not  gather  the  #.

Eccl.  33.  16.  my  wine-press,  like  a  gatherer  of#.

1  Mac.  6.  34.  they  shewed  them  the  blood  of  the  #

GRASS.

2  Esd.  9.  27.  after  seven  days  I  sat  on  the  #.

15.  42.  shall  break  down  the  #.  of  the  meadows
Eccl.  40.  16.  shall  be  pulled  up  before  all  #.

43.  21.  and  it  consumeth  the  #.  as  fire
GRASSHOPPERS.

2  Esd.  4.  24.  we  pass  away  out  of  the  world  as  #.
Wisd.  16. 9.  for  them  the  bitings  of  #.  and  flies  killed
Eccl.  43. 17 .  falling  of  snow  is  as  the  lighting  of  a .
GRATIFY.

2  Mac.  1. 35.  bestowed  on  those  whom  he  would  a.

_  .  GRAVE.

Eccl.  39. 3.  he  will  seek  out  the  secrets  of#,  sentences
GRAVE.

2  E sd.  4.41.  in  the#,  the  chambers  of  souls  are  like
Tob.  2.7. 1  went  and  made  a#,  and  buried  him,  8.  9.

3.  10.  1  shall  bring  his  old  age  with  sorrow  to  the  #.

4.  4.  when  she  is  dead  bury  her  by  me  in  one  #.

6.  14.  bring  my  father’s  and  mother’s  life  to  the  #.
Esth.  13. 7.  may  in  one  day  with  violence  go  into #.
Eccl.  9.  12.  they  shall  not  go  unpunished  to  their  #.

14. 12.  the  covenant  of  the  #.  is  not  shewed  to  thee

16.  there  is  no  seeking  of  dainties  in  the  #.

17-27.  who  shall  praise  the  Most  High  in  the  #.

28.  21.  an  evil  death,  the  #.  were  better  than  it

30. 18.  delicates  are  as  messes  of  meat  set  on  a #.

41.  4.  there  is  no  inquisition  in  the  #.

Bar.  3.  11.  with  them  that  go  down  into  the  #.

2  Mac.  6. 23.  and  willed  them  to  send  him  to  the  #.
GRAVES.

Wisd.  19. 3.  making  lamentation  at  the  #.  of  the  dead
2  Mac.  12.  39.  to  bury  them  in  their  father’s  #.
GRAVE.

Eccl.  38.  27.  and  they  that  cut  and  #.  seals
GRAVED.

2  Esd.  13.  6.  lo,  he  had  #.  himself  a  great  mountain
GRAVEL.

Eccl.  18. 10.  and  a  #.  stone  in  comparison  of  sand
GRAVEN.

2  Esd.  13. 7.  have  seen  the  place  whereout  hill  was  #.

36.  as  thou  sawest  the  hill  #.  without  hands
JYisd.  14. 16.  and  #.  images  were  worshipped

15.  13.  maketh  brittle  vessels  and  #.  images
18.  24.  in  rows  was  the  glory  of  the  fathers  #.
GRAY.

Wisd.  2. 10.  nor  reverence  the  ancient  #.  hairs

4.  9.  but  wisdom  is  the  #.  hair  unto  men
Eccl.  25. 4.  how  comely  is  judgment  for  #.  hairs
2  Mac.  6.  23.  as  became  the  honour  of  his  #.  head

15. 13.  there  appeared  a  man  with  #.  hairs

GREAT.

1  Esd.  3.  5.  to  him  shall  king  Darius  give  #.  gifis
4. 14.  O  ye  men,  it  is  not  the  #.  king  that  excelleth

34.  O  ye  men,  #.  is  the  earth,  high  is  the  heaven

35.  is  he  not#,  that  maketh  these  things?  there-

.  fore  #.  is  the  truth,  stronger  than  all  things
41.  #.  is  truth,  and  mighty  above  all  things
8.76.  we  have  been  and  are  in  #.  sin  to  this  day-
86.  done  to  us  for  wicked  works  and  #.  sins

2  Esd.  7.  66.  and  that  he  is  of  #.  mercy  he  multiplies
8.  50.  many  #.  miseries  shall  be  done  to  them  in

latter  time,  because  they  have  walked  in  #.  piide
Tob.  3.  16.  before  the  majesty  of  the  #.  God
4.  13.  and  in  lewdness  his  decay  and  #.  want
5. 12.  I  am  Azarias  the  son  of  Ananias  the  #.

13.  Ananias  and  Jonathan  sons  of#.  Samaias
8. 16.  hastdealt  with  us  according  to  thy  #.  mercy
13. 15.  let  my  spul  bless  God  the  #.  King

Jud.  1. 1.  who  reigned  in  Nineve  the  #.  city

5.  made  war  wit’h  king  Arphaxad  in  the  #.  plain

8.  nations  that  were  of  the  #.  plain  of  Esdrelon

2.  5.  thus  saith  the  #.  king,  lord  of  the  earth

3.  2.  the  servants  ot  Nabuchodonosor  the  <7.  king

9.  he  came  over-against  the  #.  strait  of  Judea
8.  19.  they  had  a  #.  fall  before  our  enemies

15.  9.  thou  art  the  exaltation  of  Jerus.  the  #.  glorv
of  Israel,  thou  art  the#,  rejoicing  of  our  nation

16.  13.  O  Lord,  thou  art  #.  and  glorious

16.  he  thatfeareth  the  Lord  is  #.  at  all  times
Esth.  11.  6.  and  behold,  two  #.  dragons  came  forth
ready  to  fight  and  their  cry  was  a.

10.  a  little  fountain  was  made  a  #.  flood

12. 6.  Aman,  who  was  in  #.  honour  with  the  king
16.  1.  the  #.  king  Artaxerxes  to  the  princes

12.  but  he  not  bearing  his  #.  dignity,  went
JYisd.  6.14.  whoso  seeketh  early  shall  have  no#,  tra.

8. 11.  I  shall  be  admired  in  the  sight  of  #.  men

11.  21.  thou  canstshew  thy  #.  strength  at  all  times

12. 18.  and  thou  orderest  us  with  #.  favour

14.  22.  they  lived  in  the  #.  war  of  ignorance
17 . 1  ■  #.  are  thy  judgments,  and  cannot  be  expressed
18.  1.  nevertheless  thy  saints  had  a  very  #.  light
Eccl.  1. 7 •  who  hath  understood  her#,  ex perience !

651


Apocrypha.


G  HE


GUE


HAN


Eccl.  3.20.  for  the  power  of  the  Ld.  is  #.  he  is  honour.

4.  7.  and  bow  thy  head  to  a  #.  man

5.  6.  say  not,  his  mercy  is  g.  he  will  be  pacified

8.  8.  sha.lt  learn  how  to  serve  g.  men  with  ease

10.  24.  #.  men  and  judges  shall  he  honoured

j  1 .  1 .  wisdom  inaketh  him  to  sit  among  g.  men

15.  18.  for  the  wisdom  of  the  Lord  is  #.

16.  12.  as  his  mercy  is#.  so  is  his  correction  also

17.  29.  how g.  is  the  loving-kindness  ol  the  Lord
20.  28.  lie  that  pleaseth  g.  men  shall  get  pardon

24.  29.  her  counsels  profounder  than  the  g.  deep

25.  10.  oh  how  g.  is  he  thatfindeth  wisdom  !

28. 14.  hath  overthrown  th$  houses  of  g.  men

32.  9.  if  thou  be  among  g.  men  make  not  thyself

33.  18.  hear  ye,  O  ye  g.  men  of  the  people

38.  16.  as  if  thou  hadst  suffered  g.  harm  thyself
17.  weep  bitterly,  and  make  g.  moan,  use  lament.

27.  they  are  diligent  to  make#.  variety

39.  4.  he  shall  serve  among  g.  men,  and  appear

6.  when  the  g.  Lord  will,  he  shall  be  filled

40.  1.  g.  travel  is  created  for  every  man

43.  5.  g.  is  the  Lord  that  made  it

15.  by  his  g.  power  he  maketh  the  clouds  firm

28.  magnify  him,  for  he  is  g.  above  all  his  works

29.  Lord  is  terrible,  and  very  g.  and  marvellous

44.  2.  the  Lord  hath  wrought  #.  glory  by  them

through  his  g.  power  from  the  beginning
19.  Abraham  was  a  g.  father  of  many  people
46.  1.  who  according  to  his  name  was  made  g.

2.  how  g.  glory  gat  he,  when  he  lift  up  his  hands

5.  he  called  on  Lord,  and  the  g.  Lord  heard  him

48.  22.  who  was  g.  and  faithful  in  his  vision

49.  13.  Neemias  whose  renown  is  g.  raised  up

16.  Sem  and  Seth  were  in  g.  honour  among  men

50.  16.  sons  of  Aaron  made  a  g.  noise  to  be  heard
51. 28.  get  learning  with  a  #.  sum  of  money

Bar.  3.  24.  O  Israel,  how  g.  is  the  house  of  God
25.  g.  and  hath  no  end,  high  and  unmeasurab.e
Bel  18.  #.  art  thou,  O  Bel,  with  thee  is  no  deceit

41.  saying, g.  art  thou,  O  Lord  God  of  Daniel

1  Mac.  T.  17.  he  entered  into  Egypt  with  a  g.  navy
33.  they  builded  the  city  of  David  with  a  g.  wall
64.  and  there  was  very  g.  wrath  on  Israel

7.  19.  when  slain,  he  cast  them  into  the  g.  pit

Git  LA  I  ER.

2  Esd.  5.  13.  thou  shalthear  yet  <7.  things

6.  31.  if  thou  pray,  l  shall  tell  thee  g.  things

9.  16.  like  as  a  wave  is  g.  than  a  drop

14.  16.  for  yet  g.  evils  shall  he  done  hereafter
Eccl.  .3  18.  the g.  thou  art,  the  more  humble  thyself

10.  24.  none  g.  than  he  that  t'eareth  the  Lord
16.  5.  mine  ear  hath  heard  g.  things  than  these

39.  11.  if  he  die,  he  shall  leave  a  g.  name  than
43.  32.  there  are  yet  hid  g.  things  than  these

1  Mac.  6.  27.  they  will  do  g.  things  than  these

12.  24.  to  fight  ag.  him  with  a g.  host  than  before
GR  LATEST.

Eccl.  8.  7.  rejoice  not  over  thy  g.  enemy  beingdead
GREATLY.

JVisd.  3.5.  a  little  chastised  they  shall  be#.  rewarded
Eccl.  1.  8.  there  is  one  wise,  and  g.  to  be  feared

7.  17-  humble  thy  soul  g.  for  the  vengeance  is  fire
11.6.  many  mighty  men  have  been  #.  disgraced
25.  2.  and  l  am  g.  offended  at  their  life

1  Mac.  3.  31.  beings,  perplexed  in  mind

5.  63.  Judas  and  his  brethren  were#.  renowned

6.  1.  Elimais  was  a  city  g.  renowned  for  riches

11.  42.  1  will  £/.  honour  thee  and  thy  nation

GREA  TNESS.

2  Esd.  10.  55.  the  beauty  and  g.  of  the  building
'Job.  13.  4.  there  declare  his  g.  and  extol  him
Wisd.  6.  7-  -°r  shall  he  stand  in  awe  of  a  man’s;.
13.5.  for  by  the  g.  and  beauty  of  the  creatures

Eccl.  17-  8.  might  shew  them  the  g.  of  his  works

51.  3.  delivered  me  according  to  the  g.  of  thy  name

1  Mac.  9.  22.  the  noble  acts  he  did  and  his  g.

GRECIAN.

2  Mac.  13.  2.  having  either  of  them  a  G.  power

GRECIANS.

1  Mac.  6.  2.  who  reigned  first  among  the  G.

8.  9.  how  the  G.  had  determined  to  destroy  them

2  Mac.  4.  15.  but  liking  the  glory  of  the  G.  best

GREECE.

1  Mac.  1.1.  he  reigned  in  his  stead  the  first  over  G.
GREEDY.

Fob.  5.  18.  be  not  g.  to  add  money  to  money
Eccl.  37  -  29.  nor  be  too  #.  upon  meats
1  Mac.  4.  17.  Judas  said,  be  not  g.  of  the  spoils
GREEDINESS.

Eccl.  23.  6.  let  not  the  g.  of  the  belly  take  hold  on  me
GREEK,  S.

1  Mac.  1. 10.  the  137th  year  of  the  kingdom  of  the  G.

2  Mac.  4.  13.  such  was  the  height  of  G.  fashions
36.  certain  G.  which  abhorred  the  fact  also

GREEKISII.

2  Mac.  4. 10.  brought  his  own  nation  to  G.  fashions
GREEN.

JVisd.  19.  7.  out  of  the  violent  stream,  a  g.  field
Eccl.  14.  18.  as  of  g.  leaves  on  a  thick  tree

40.  22.  but  more  than  both,  corn  while  it  is  g.

GREETING.

1  Esd.  6.  7.  the  copy  of  letters  to  king  Darius  g.

8.  0.  king  Artaxerxes  to  Esdras  sendeth  g.

Esth.  16.  1.  to  all  our  faithful  subjects,  g.

1  Mac.  10.  18.  Alexander  to  Jonathan  sendeth  g.
25.  Demetrius  unto  the  Jews  sendeth  g.  11.  30.

11.  32.  Demetrius  unto  Lasthenes,  sendeth  g.

12.  20.  Areus  king,  to  Onias  the  high-priest,#.

13.  36.  king  Demetrius  unto  Simon  sendeth  g.

14.  20.  rulers  of  Lacedemonians  to  Simon,  send  g.

15.  2.  Antiochus  to  the  people  of  the  Jews,#.

16.  Lucius  consul  to  king  Ptolemee,  g.

2  Mac.  1. 10.  Judas  sent#,  and  health  to  Aristobulus
11.  16.  Lysias  to  the  people  of  the  Jews,  sendeth  #.

22.  Antiochus  to  his  brother  Lysias  sends  #.

27-  king  Antiochus  sends #.  to  the  council

34.  ambassadors  of  Romans  send  #.  to  the  Jews

GREETINGS.

Eccl.  6.  5.  a  fair  tongue  will  increase  kind  #.
GREW.

2  Esd.  8.  9.  delivereth  up  the  things  that  #.  in  it
9  47.  so  when  he  #.  up,  and  came  to  the  time

652


2  Esd.  11.  3.  out  of  her  feathers  #.  other  feathers
14.  40.  when  1  had  drunk,  wisdom  #.  in  my  breast
GRIEF.

Wisd.  8.  9.  she  would  be  a  comfort  in  cares  and#.

11.  12.  for  a  double  #.  came  upon  them

Eccl.  26.  6.  but  a  #.  of  heart  and  sorrow  is  a  woman
29.  5.  return  words  of  #.  and  complain  of  the  time
37.  2.  is  it  not  a  #.  when  a  companion  is  turned
■Sus.  10.  yet  durst  not  one  shew  another  his  #.

1  Mac.  6.8.  the  king  laid  him  down  and  fellsick  for#.

9.  for  his  #.  was  ever  more  and  more

13.  I  perish  through  great#,  in  a  strange  land
GRIEVE.

Tob.  4.  3.  which  shall  please  her  and  #.  her  not
Eccl.  3.  12.  #.  him  not  as  Eng  as  he  liveth
4.  8.  let  it  not  #.  thee  to  bow  down  thine  ear
GRIEVED.

1  Esd.  1.  24.  and  how  they  #.  him  exceedingly

2  Esd.  9.  38.  and  she  was  much  #.  in  heart
40.  I  said,  whv  art  thou  so  #.  in  thy  mind  ?

10.  8.  we  all  mourn,  art  thou  .#.  for  one  son  ’

50.  God  seeth  that  thou  art  #.  unfeignedly

Tob.  3.  1.  then  I  being  #.  did  weep  and  prayed
Wisd.  14.  24.  slew  him,  or  #.  him  by  adultery
Eccl.  6.  25.  bear  her,  and  be  not  #.  with  her  bonds

12.  9.  in  the  prosperity  of  a  man,  enemies  will  be  #.
21.  24.  a  wise  man  will  be  #.  with  the  disgrace
47.  20.  and  thou  wast  #.  for  thy  folly

Ear.  4.  8.  ye  have  #.  Jerusalem  that  nursed  you
.3.3.  so  shall  she  be  #.  for  her  own  desolation

1  Mac.  3.  7.  he  #.  many  kings  and  made  Jacob  glad

2  Mac.  4.  .35.  were  much  #.  for  the  unjust  murder

13.  25.  the  people  there  were  #.  for  the  covenants

GIUEVETH.

Eccl.  30.  .3.  he  that  teacheth  his  son,  #.  the  enemy
GRIEVOUS.

2  F.sd.  5.  21.  the  thoughts  of  my  heart  were  #.

Wisd.  2.  15.  he  is  #,  to  us  even  to  behold

17.  11.  wickedness  always  forecasted!  #.  things
21.  were  to  themselves  more  #.  than  darkness

Eccl.  8.  15.  travel  not,  lest  he  become  #.  to  thee
27.  15.  and  their  revilings  are  #.  to  the  ears
29.  28.  these  things  are  #.  to  a  man  of  under¬
standing

2  Mac.  6.  3.  this  mischief  was  #.  to  the  people

9.  21.  and  being  taken  with  a  #.  disease  thought
24.  if  any  tidings  were  brought  that  were  #.

13.  6.  or  had  committed  any  other  #.  crime

14.  45.  and  though  his  wounds  were  #.  yet  he  ran

GRI  EVOUSLY.

Wisd.  19.  16.  but  these  very  #.  afflicted  them
2  Mac.  7.  39.  and  took  it  #.  that  he  was  mocked
9.  28.  the  murderer  having  suffered  most  #.

14.  28.  took  it  #.  that  he  should  make  void  articles

GROANED.

2  Mac.  6.  30.  when  readv  to  die  with  stripes  he#.
GROANED!!.

Eccl.  30.  20.  he  #.  as  an  eunuch  that  embraceth
GROANING.

Wisd.  5.  3.  #.  for  anguish  of  spirit,  they  shall  say

11.  12.  a  #.  for  the  remembrance  of  things  past

GROVES.

2  Esd.  16.  28.  who  shall  hide  themselves  in  thick  #.
.hid.  3.  8.  yet  he  did  cut  down  their  frontiers  and  #.

1  Mac.  1.47.  set  upaltars.and  0.  and  chapels  of  idols
GROUND.

1  Esd.  ft.  91.  lying  fiat  Jn  the  #.  before  the  temple
9.  47.  they  fell  to  the  #.  and  worshipped  the  Lord

2  Esd  4.  19.  for  the  #.  is  given  to  the  wood
21.  for  like  as  the  #.  is  given  to  the  wood

8.  41.  as  husbandman  soweth  much  seed  on  the#.

9.  34.  when  the  #.  hath  received  seed  or  the  sea  a

ship

10.  22.  psaltery  is  laid  on  the  #.  our  song  to  silence

15.  13.  they  that  till  the  #.  shall  mourn
Jud.  12.  15.  her  maid  laid  soft  skins  on  the  #.

14.  18.  Holofernes  lieth  on  the  #.  without  a  head

16.  5.  dash  the  sucking  children  against  the  #.
Wisd.  19.  10.  how  the  #.  brought  forth  flies

19.  things  that  before  swam,  now  went  on  the  #.
Feel.  11.5.  many  kings  have  sat  down  on  the  #.

18.  6.  neither  can  the  #.  of  them  be  found  out
33.  10.  all  men  from  the  #.  Adam  of  the  earth

Bar.  5.  7.  to  make  even  the  #.  that  Israel  may7  go

6.  27.  for  if  they  fall  to  the  #.  at  any  time

1  Mac.  14.  8.  then  did  they  till  their#,  in  peace

2  Mac.  3.  27-  Heliodorus  fell  suddenly  to  the  #.

4.  42.  and  some  they  struck  to  the  #.

8.  3.  defaced  and  ready  to  be  made  even  with  the#.

9.  8.  he  was  now  cast  on  the  #.  and  carried

14.  was  going  to  lay  the  holy  city  even  with  the  #.
14.  33.  lay  this  temple  of  God  even  with  the  #.
GROW.

2  Esd.  2.  19.  whereon  there  #.  roses  and  lilies

10.  9.  for  the  fall  of  so  many  that  #.  upon  her
16.  21.  even  then  shall  evils#,  upon  earth,  sword

32.  and  all  her  paths  shall  #.  full  of  thorns
Eccl.  14.  18.  green  leaves,  some  fall  and  some  #.
Dan.  3.  54.  O  all  ye  things  that#,  bless  ye  the  Lord
GROW  ETH.

Eccl.  50.  10.  a  cypress  which  #.  up  to  the  clouds
GROWING.

Wisd.  16.  26.  that  it  is  not  the  #.  of  fruits
Eccl.  39.  13.  and  bud  forth  as  a  rose#,  by  the  brook
40.  16.  the  weed  #.  on  every  water  and  bank

1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw  shrubs  #.  in  the  courts

GROWN.

2  Esd.  4.  10.  and  such  as  are  #.  up  with  thee

7.  41.  even  so  now  seeing  corruption  is  #.  up
Wisd.  14.  16.  an  ungodly  custom  #.  strong

GRUDGE.

Eccl.  10.  25.  he  will  not  #.  when  he  is  reformed
GRUDGED.

Wisd.  12.  27.  what  things  they  #.  when  punished
GUARD.

1  Esd.  3.  4.  three  young  men  that  were  ot  the  #.
Jud.  12.  7.  then  Holofernes  commanded  his  #.

2  Mac.  3.  24.  he  was  present  himself  with  his  #.

28.  lately  came  with  all  his  #.  into  the  treasury

GUESS.

Wisd.  9.  16.  hardly  do  we  #.  aright  at  things
Eccl.  9.  14.  as  near  as  thou  canst  #.  at  thy  neighbour


GUEST.

H'isd.  5.  14.  remembrance  of  a  #.  tarrieth  butadar
GUIDE.

2  Esd.  16.  75.  neither  doubt,  for  God  is  your  #.

76.  the  #.  of  them  who  keep  my  commandments
Wtsd.  18.  3.  to  be  a  #.  of  the  unknown  journev
Eccl.  2.i.  .32.  that  leadeth  his  life  without  a  #.*

2  Mac.  5.  15.  Menelaus  that  traitor  being  his  #.
GUIDED.

Wisd.  10.  10.  she  #.  him  in  right  paths,  shewed  him
17.  she  #.  him  in  a  marvellous  way,  and  was
GUIDING

‘iMac.  10.  1.  the  Lord  q.  them,  recovered  the  temple
GUILTY.

Fob.  6.  12.  but  he  shall  be  #.  of  death  because
Sus.  53.  and  thou  hast  let  the  #.  go  free
GUSHED.

2  Mac.  14.  45.  though  his  blood  #.  out  like  spouts

H.

HABBACUC.

Bel  33.  there  was  in  Jewry  a  prophet  called  H.

34.  but  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said  unto  H.

.35.  and  H.  said,  Lord,  l  never  saw  Babylon
37  and  H.  cried,  saying,  O  Daniel,  Daniel
39.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  set  H.  in  his  own  place
HABITATION.

Fob.  1.  4.  the  temple  of  the  h.  of  the  Most  High
2  Mac.  11.  2.  to  make  the  city  an  h.  of  Gentiles
14.  35.  the  temple  of  thy  h.  should  be  among  us
I1ABITA  LIONS.

1  Esd.  9.  12.  and  let  all  them  of  our  /1.  come
Eccl.  44.  6.  rich  men  living  peaceably  in  their  h.

HAIL.

2  Esd.  15. 13.  seeds  shall  fail  through  blasting  and  h.
41.  fire  and  h.  and  flying  swords,  and  waters

Wisd.  16.  22.  fire  burning  in  the  h.  did  destroy
Eccl.  39.  29.  fire  and  h.  created  for  vengeance
HAI  LS.

Wisd.  16.  16.  with  strange  h.  were  they  persecuted
HAILSTONES.

JVisd.  5.  22.  and  h.  full  of  wrath  shall  be  cast
Eccl.  43.  15.  by  his  power  the  h.  are  broken  small
46.  6.  with  A. of  mighty^rower  he  made  the  battle

1  Esd.  8.71.  I  pulled  the  h.  from  off  my  head

2  Esd.  1.  8.  pull  thou  off  the  h.  of  thy  head

16.  2.  gird  yourselves  with  clothes  of  sack  and  h.
Jud.  10.  3.  she  braided  the  h.  of  her  head
13.  7.  she  took  hold  of  the  h.  of  his  head
16.  8.  she  bound  her  h.  in  a  tire  and  took
Esth.  14.  2.  the  places  of  joy  she  filled  with  torn  A,
Eccl.  27.  14.  maketh  the  h.  stand  upright
Bel  27.  then  Daniel  took  pitch,  fat,  and  h.

36.  the  angel  bare  him  bv  the  h.  of  his  head
2  Mac.  7.7.  they  pulled  off  the  skin  with  the  h.
Gray  HAIRS.  See  Gray.

HALF.

2  Esd.  11 . 17.  none  after  thee  attain  to  h.  thy  time

13.  45.  a  great  way  to  go,  of  a  year  and  an  h.

14.  11.  ten  parts  are  gone,  and  h.  of  a  tenth  part
12.  that  which  is  after  the  h.  of  a  tenth  part

Tob.  8.  21.  then  he  should  take  the  h.  of  his  goods

12.  2.  it  is  no  harm  to  me  to  give  him  h.  of  those
5.  take  h.  of  all  that  ye  have  brought  and  go

Wisd.  18.  18.  and  another  thrown  there  A.  dead
Eccl.  29.  6.  if  prevail,  he  shall  hardly  receive  the  h.

1  Mac.  3.  37.  the  king  took  the  h.  of  the  forces
10.  30.  and  the  h.  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees
IIAT.LELUl  A.

Tob.  13.  18.  and  all  her  streets  shall  say  h.
HALLOW.

1  Esd.  1. 3.  the  Levites  should  h.  themselves  to  Lord

HALLOWED.

2  Esd.  2.  41 .  that  thy  people  may  be  h.

5.  25.  of  all  cities  thou  hast  h.  Sion  to  thyself
Jud.  9.  13.  against  thy  covenant  and  thy  h.  house
Eccl.  33.  9.  he  hath  made  high  days  and  h.  them

1  Mac.  4.  48.  made  up  the  sanctuary  h.  the  courts
HAMMER.

Eccl.  38.  28.  the  noise  of  h.  and  anvil  is  in  his  ears
HAND.

1  Esd.  6.  33.  that  stretcheth  out  his  h.  to  endamage

2  Esd.  3.  6.  which  thy  right  h.  had  planted

6.  8.  Jacob’s  h.  held  the  first  heel  of  Esau

10.  the  h.  of  man  is  betwixt  the  heel  and  the  h.
Tob.  4.  14.  but  give  him  his  wages  out  of  A.

5.17.  is  he  not  the  staff  of  our  A.  ingoing  in  and  out

7.  1.3.  he  took  her  by  the  A.  and  gave  her  to  Tobias
11.4.  take  in  thine  A.  the  gall  of  the  fish

13.  2.  nor  is  there  any  that  can  avoid  his  A.

Jud.  2.  12.  that  will  I  do  by  mine  A.

8.  33.  the  Lord  will  visit  Israel  by  mine  n.

9.  9.  give  it  into  mine  A.  who  am  a  widow

10.  break  their  stateliness  by  the  A.  of  a  woman
12.  4.  before  the  Lord  work  by  mine  A.

13. 15.  Ld.  hath  smitten  him  by  the  A.  of  a  woman

15.  10.  hath  done  all  these  things  by  thine  A.

16.  6.  hath  disappointed  them  by  the  A.  ot  a  woman
Esth.  14.4.  for  my  danger  is  in  mine  A.

14.  but  deliver  11s  from  thine  A.  and  help  me
JVisd.  2.  18.  deliver  him  from  the  A.  of  his  enemie.'j
3.1.  the  souls  of  the  righteous  are  in  the  A.  of  Goo
7.  16.  for  in  his  A.  are  both  we  and  our  words

10.  20.  magnified  thine  A.  that  fought  for  them

11.  1.  she  prospered  in  the  A.  of  the  holy  prophet
17.  thy  almighty  A.  that  made  the  world

1.3.  10.  a  stone,  the  work  of  an  ancient  A.  |

14.  6.  the  hope  of  the  world  governed  by  thy  A.

16.  15.  it  is  not  possible  to  escape  thine  A.  I

19.  8.  all  the  people  that  were  defended  with  thy  1

Eccl.  4.  9.  deliver  him  from  the  A.  of  the  oppressor
5.  12.  if  not,  lay  thy  A.  upon  thy  moijth
7.32.  and  stretch  thy  A.  unto  the  poor  ^

36.  whatever  thou  takest  in  A.  remember  the  end

9. 17.  for  A. of  artificer  the  work  shall  becommender
10.  4.  the  power  of  the  earth  is  in  the  A.  of  Lord

5.  in  the  A.  of  God  is  the  prosperity  of  man

12.  12.  neither  let  him  sit  at  thy  right  l.

14.  13.  stretch  out  thine  A.  and  give  tc  him


HAN


H  Ah


H  E  A


'  A  r<>c«  v


Eccl.  15.  14.  and  left  him  in  the  A.  of  his  counsel
16.  stretch  forth  thy  A.  unto  whither  thou  wilt
16  27.  and  in  his  A.  are  the  chief  of  them
18.  3.  governs  the  world  with  the  palm  of  his  A.

21.  19.  and  like  manacles  on  the  rijjht  A

22.  2.  every  man  that  takes  it  up,  will  shake  his  A.
27.  19.  as  one  that  letteth  a  bird  go  out  of  his  A.
29.1.  he  that  strengthened  his  A.  keepeth  command

5.  till  he  hath  received,  he  will  kiss  a  man’s  A.
31.  14.  stretch  out  thine  A.  whither  it  looketh

18.  reach  not  thy  h.  out  first  of  all
»?•  1‘,-,as  cIh-v  is  ’he  potter's  h.  to  fashion  it
36.  3.  lilt  up  thy  A.  against  strange  nations

6.  shew  signs,  glorify  thy  A.  and  thy  right  arm
38  15.  let  him  fall  into  the  h.  of  the  physician
40.  14.  while  he  opetieth  his  h.  he  shall  rejoice

47.  4.  when  he  lifted  up  his  h.  with  the  stone
5.  he  gave  him  strength  in  his  right  h.  to  slay

48.  18.  Sennac  herib  lift  up  his  h.  against  Sion

49.  11.  even  he  was  as  a  signet  on  the  right  A.

50.  15.  he  stretched  out  his  A.  to  the  cup

51 . 26.  receive  instruction,  she  is  hard  at  A.  to  find
bar.  0.  15.  he  hath  also  in  his  right  A.  a  dagger
Dan.  3.  66.  hath  saved  us  from  the  A.  of  death
2  Mac.  3.  29.  he  by  the  A.  of  God  was  cast  down

5.  23.  Menelaus  bare  an  heavy  A.  over  the  citizens

6.  26.  I  should  not  escape  the  A.  of  the  Almighty

7.  19.  that  takest  in  A.  to  strive  against  God
34.  lifting  up  thy  A.  against  the  servants  of  God

13.  QQ  u:~  L  * — l-  —  1  ....


- o  —  I'  ■  HIV  OC 1  \  OHIO  *  >  I  VJIH

2.  gave  his  A.  took  theirs,  departed,  fought

15.  15.  .leremias  holding  forth  right  A.  gave  Tudas
30.  commanded  to  strike  off  N  icanor’s  head  and  A
32.  he  shewed  them  the  A.  of  that  blasphemer

„r  HANDFULS.

1  Mac.  4.  41.  others  taking  A.  of  dust,  cast  them

HANDLE.

H  tsd.  15.  15.  nor  have  fingers  of  hands  to  A
„  HANDLED.

2  Mac.  7.  39.  the  king  A.  him  worse  than  all  the  rest

HANDLING.

2  Tfflc.  2.  28.  the  exact  A.  of  every  particular
8.  17.  injury  to  holy  place,  the  cruel  A.  of  the  city
_  .  HANDMAID.

9.  45.  after  thirty  years  God  heard  me  thy  A.
•'““•H.  5.  suffer  thy  A.  to  speak  in  thy  presence
6.  if  thou  wilt  follow  the  words  of  thine  A.

16.  I  thine  A.  knowing  all  this,  am  fled
12.  4.  thine  A.  shall  not  spend  these  things

6.  command  that  thine  A.  may  go  forth  to  praj’er
bsth.  14.  17.  thine  A.  hath  not  eaten  at  A  man’s  table
..Ip-  nor  hath  thine  A.  any  joy  since  the  day
M  isd.  9.  5  I  thy  servant  and  son  of  thine  A.

_  HANDS.

I  Esd.  I.  53.  for  he  delivered  all  into  their  A

7. 15.  to  strengthen  their  A.  in  the  w-orks  of  Lord
8.  73.  stretching  forth  my  A.  unto  the  Lord
« -0. .they  gave  their  A.  to  put  away  their  wives
47.  lifting  up  their  A.  they  fell  to  the  ground
*  Esd.  L  26.  ye  have  defiled  your  A.  with  blood
whose  blood  l  will  require  of  vour  h .

3.  5.  which  was  the  workmanship  of  thine  A
5.  30.  yet  shouldst  punish  them  with  thine  own  A.

8.  7.  we  are  all  one  workmanship  of  thine  A
Jud.  7.  25.  but  God  hath  sold  us  into  their  A
rf/-.  2.  were  about  to  lay  A.  upon  Arfaxerxes

II  tsd.  112.  destruction  with  the  works  of  your  A.

3.  It.  who  with  his  A  hath  wrought  no  iniquity
8_  12.  they  shall  lay  their  A.  on  their  mouth

18.  in  the  works  of  her  A.  are  infinite  riches

12.  3  thy  will  to  destroy  by  the  A.  of  our  fathers
6.  the  parents  that  killed  with  their  own  A

13.  10.  gods  which  are  the  works  of  men’s  A

19.  tor  good  success  of  his  A.  asketh  ability  to  do
***•  o nut  that  which  is  nia(Jc  with  h.  is  cursed
15.  15.  which  have  not  fingers  of  A.  to  handle

17.  he  woiketh  a  dead  thing  with  wicked  A
Eccl.  2  12.  woe  be  to  the  fearful  hearts  and  faint  A.

18.  saying,  we  will  fall  into  the  A.  of  the  I  ord
8. 1.  strive  not  with  a  mighty  man,  lest  fall  in  his  A.

11.  6.  the  honourable  deli'  ered  intoother  men’s  A

12.  18.  he  will  shake  his  head  and  clap  his  A
25.  23.  she  maketli  weak  A.  and  feeble  knees’

35.8.  diminish  not  the  first-fruits  of  thy  A.

38  10.  leave  off  sin,  and  order  thy  A.  aright

13.  a  time  when  in  their  A.  there  is  good  success
3L  all  these  trust  to  their  A.  every  one  is  wise
42.  6.  and  shut  up  where  many  A.  are

?■  w,'en  he  dld, lift  l,P  hls  ~h-  gainst  cities
48.  19.  then  trembled  their  hearts  and  A.

120.  they  stretched  out  their  A.  towards  him
5o.  12.  when  he  took  the  portions  out  of  priests’  A
13.  the  oblations  of  the  Lord  in  their  A.

20.  he  lifted  up  his  A.  over  the  congregation
51.  3.  out  of  the  A.  of  such  as  sought  my  life
8.  thou  savest  them  out  of  the  A.  of  the  enemies
19.  I  stretched  forth  my  A.  to  the  heavens  above
Bar.  6.  51.  no  gods  but  the  works  of  men’s  A
Dan.  3.  9.,  deliver  us  into  A.  of  lavdess  enemies
mm.  22.  if  1  do  it  not,  l  cknnot  escape  your  A
’  23.  it  is  better  for  me  to  fall  info  your  A
34.  the  two  elders  laid  their  A.  upon  her  head
*r5‘  ^  ma>'  not  worship  idols  made  with  A.

;  Mac.  3.  18.  to  be  shut  up  in  the  A.  of  a  few
12.9.  we  have  holy  books  of  scripture  in  our  A
14.  31.  that  they  might  lay  A.  on  the  sanctuary  ’
Mac.  2.  25.  that  all  into  whose  A.  it  comes
3.  20.  all  holding  their  A.  towards  heaven
5.  16.  taking  the  holy  vessels  with  polluted  A.  and
with  profane  A.  pulling  down  things  dedicated
7  10.  holding  forth  his  A.  manfully

1  *L«..  «L..  li _ a  .it


31.  thou  shalt  not  escape  the  A.  of  God

12.  12.  whereupon  they  shook  A.  and  departed
14  34.  then  the  priests  lift  up  their  A.  to  heaven

40.  and  taking  his  bowels  in  both  his  A.

15.  12.  holding  up  his  A.  prayed  for  the  Jews
HANDSOMELY.

rtsd.  13. 11.  the  carpenter  hath  wrought  it  A
HAND-WRITING.
ob  5.  3.  then  he  gave  him  the  A.  and  said

9.  5.  Raphael  went  out  and  gave  Gabaei  the  A

.■  hang:

14. 1.  take  his  head,  and  A.  it  on  your  walls


2  Mac.  15.  3.3.  A.  up  the  reward  of  his  madness
HANGED.

1  Esd.  6.  32.  a  tree  taken,  and  he  thereon  be  A.

2  Esd.  16.  58.  he  hath  A.  the  earth  on  the  waters
Jud.  14.  11.  they  A.  the  head  of  Holofernes
Esth.  16.  18.  the  worker  of  these  things  is  A.

1  line.  1.  61.  thev  A.  infants  about  their  necks
4. 5< .  chambers  they  renewed  and  A.  doors  on  them
7-  47 .  they  A.  them  up  towards  Jerusalem

2  Vac.  13.  5.  on  every  side  A.  down  into  the  ashes
15.  35.  he  A.  also  h  icanor’s  head  on  the  tower

HANGE  I  II,  ING.

Eccl.  19.  26.  a  wicked  man  that  A.  down  his  head
2  Mac.  6.  10.  the  babes  A.  at  their  breasts
HAPPEN.

2  Esd.  4.  51.  or  what  shall  A.  in  those  days

13.  18.  which  shall  A.  to  them  and  to  those  left
20.  pass  away,  and  not  see  the  things  that  A.

32.  the  signs  shall  A.  which  I  shewed  thee

14.  16.  than  those  which  thou  hast  seen  A.
tsd.  2.  17.  let  us  prove  what  shall  A.  in  the  end

Eccl.  22.  26.  and  it  any  evil  A.  to  me  by  him

33.  1.  no  evil  shall  A.  to  him  that  feareth  the  Lord
40.  8.  such  things  A.  to  all  flesh,  man  and  beast
_  HAPPENED.

2  Esd.  9.  35.  but  with  us  it  hath  not  A.  so

10.  48.  that  my  son  A.  to  have  a  fall  and  died
lob.  11.  15.  things  that  had  A.  to  him  in  Media
and  what  h .  to  Jacob  in  Mesopotamia
lV?sd.  19.  4.  the  things  that  had  already  h.

Eccl.  5.  4.  and  what  harm  A.  unto  me  ;

\r-  2.  2.  bring  great  plagues,  such  as  never  A.

1  Mac.  1.  1 .  it  A.  after  that  A  lexander  had  smitten
4.26.  the  strangers  told  Lysias  what  had  A.

5.25.  Nabathites  told  them  every  thing  that  A.

2  Mac.  9.  3.  what  had  A.  to  Nicanorand  I  imotheus
13.  7.  such  a  death  it  A.  that  wicked  man  to  die

HAPPENE  I  II.

2  Esd.  10.  6.  seest  thou  not  what  A.  unto  us  r
Bar.  3. 10.  how  A.  it  thou  art  in  thine  enemies’  land  ’
HAPPY.

11  isd.  18.  1.  had  not  suffered,  they  counted  them  A.
Eccl.  25.  7-  nine  things  which  I  judged  to  be  A.

37  .  24.  all  they  that  see  him  shall  count  him  A.

"  4-  4-D  Israel ,  A.  are  we,  things  are  made  known

1  Mac.  10.  55.  A.  day  wherein  thou  didst  return

2  Mac.  7.  24.  would  make  him  both  a  rich  and  A  man
HARD.

Wisd.  11.4.  thirst  was  quenched  out  of  the  A.  stone
19.  13.  they  used  a  more  A.  and  hateful  behaviour
Eccl.  3.  21.  the  things  that  are  too  A.  for  thee

40.  15.  are  as  unclean  roots  upon  a  A.  rock
48.  17.  he  digged  the  A.  rock  with  iron

1  Mac.  3. 18.  it  is  no  A.  matter  for  many  to  be  shut  up

2  Mac.  12.  21.  for  the  town  was  A.  to  besiege
HARDENED.

Eccl.  16.  15.  Lord  A.  Pharaoh  that  he  should  not
HARDENING.

1  Esd.  1.  48.  A.  his  heart,  he  transgressed  the  laws
HARDINESS.

Jud.  16.  10.  the  Medes  were  daunted  at  her  A
....  HARDLY.

n  isd.  9.  16.  and  A.  do  we  guess  aright  at  things
Eccl.  26.  29.  a  merchant  shall  A.  keep  himself
29.  6.  if  he  prevail,  he  shall  A.  receive  the  half
HARDNESS.

Eccl.  16.  10.  were  gathered  in  the  A.  of  their  hearts
HARDY.

1  Mac.  9.  14.  he  took  with  him  all  the  A.  men

_  HARLOT.

Eccl.  9.  3.  meet  not  with  an  A.  lest  thou  fall
26.  22.  an  A.  shall  he  accounted  as  spittle

41.  20.  be  ashamed  to  look  upon  an  A.

,  HARLOTS.

Eccl.  9.  6.  give  not  thy  soul  unto  A.

19.  2.  he  that  cleayeth  to  A.  will  become  impudent
Bar .  0.  11.  they  will  jnve  tf  ereof  to  common  h

2  Mac.  6.4.  the  Gentiles  who  dallied  with  A

_  harm.

To  A.  12.  2.  O  father,  it  is  no  A.  to  me  to  give  him  half
IJisd.  11.  19.  the  A.  might  despatch  them  at  once
Eccl.  5.  4.  say  not  1  sinned,  what  A.  hath  happened
1 .  1 .  do  no  evil,  so  shall  no  A.  come  unto  thee
38.  16.  thou  hadst  suffered  great  A.  thyself

1  Mac.  7.  15.  we  will  procure  the  A.  neither  of  you
9.  71.  hesware  that  he  would  never  do  them  A

15.  19.  to  write  that  thev  should  do  them  no  A

31.  give  me  tor  the  A.  that  you  have  done
35.  albeit  they  did  great  A.  to  the  people

2  Mac.  14.  14.  the  A.  of  the  Jews  to  be  their  welfare

HARMLESS.

If  isd.  18  3.  thou  gavest  an  A.  sun  to  entertain  them
2  Mac.  8  4.  the  wicked  slaughter  of  A.  infants
HARMONY.

IVisd.  19.  18.  the  elementschanged  by  a  kind  of  A
HARNESS.

1  Mac.  3.  3.  he  girt  his  warlike  A.  about  him
6.41.  all  that  heard  the  rattling  of  A.  were  moved

43.  one  of  the  beasts  armed  with  royal  A.

2  Mac.  3.  25.  that  he  had  complete  A.  of  gold

5.  3.  were  seen  ornaments  and  A.  of  all  sorts
15.  28.  they  knew  that  N  icanor  lay  dead  in  his  A.

HARNESSED.

1  Mac.  4.7.  they  saw  that  if  was  strong  and  well  A

6.  38.  and  being  A.  all  over  amidst  the  ranks

HARP.

1  Mac.  3.45.  joy  taken  the  pipe  with  the  A.  ceased
HARPS.

Eccl.  39.  15.  and  shew  forth  his  praise  with  A.

I  Mac.  4.  54.  it  was  dedicated  with  A.  and  cymbals

13.  51.  he  entered  in  o  if  with  A.  and  cymbals

HARVEST.

Eccl.  24.  26.  to  abound  as  Jordan  in  time  of  A
HASTE.

1  Esd.  2.  30.  removing  in  A.  towards  Jerusalem

2  Esd.  4.  34.  thy  A.  is  in  vain  to  be  above  him

42.  a  woman  maketh  A.  to  escape  the  necessity
5.  44.  the  creature  may  not  A.  above  the  Maker

14.  15.  and  A.  thee  to  flee  from  these  times
Tab.  11.  3,  let  us  A.  before  thy  wife  and  prepare
Jud.  13.  1.  his  servants  made  A.  to  depart

12.  they  made  A.  to  go  down  to  the  gate


H  tsd.  18.21.  then  the  blameless  man  made  b.

Eccl.  2.  2.  and  make  not  A.  in  time  of  trouble
■Sus.  50.  all  the  people  turned  again  in  A.

1  Mac. 6.  57.  he  went  in  all  A.  and  said  to  the  king
63.  afterward  departed  he  in  all  A.  and  returned

II.  22.  but  come  and  speak  with  him  in  great  A

13.  10.  he  made  A.  to  finish  the  walls  of  Jerusalem

2  Mac.  4.  31.  the  king  came  in  all  A.  to  appease
5.  21.  he  departed  in  all  A.  into  Anfiochia
9.  7-  and  commanding  to  A  the  journey

14.  the  holy  city,  to  which  he  was  going  in  A.  tc
lay  even  with  ground,  and  make  a  burying

14.43.  but  missing  his  stroke  through  A.

HASTED.

Jud.  10. 15.  in  that  thou  hast  A.  to  come  to  our  lord
li  isd.  4.  14.  therefore  A.  he  to  take  him  away

5.  9.  those  things  passed  away  as  a  post  that  A.  by

Eccl.  50,  17.  then  all  the  people  A.  and  fell  down

„  r,  HASTEN.

"Esd.  4.  34.  do  not  thou  A.  above  the  Most  Highest

6.  34.  A.  not  with  the  times  that  are  past
1  Mac.  13.21.  that  he  should  A.  his  coming  to  them

,  HASTETII.

I ,  o  ’  ^Pr  world  A.  fast  to  pass  away

14.  18.  now  A.  vision  to  come  which  thou  sawest

„  ,  ,  hastened.

-  Mac.  4.  14.  A.  to  be  partakers  of  unlawful  allow.

„  .  ,  HASTY.

a  i'  4'  i9e  n?t  h-  ‘n  thy  tongue,  in  deeds  slack
0.  7.  prove  him  first,  and  be  not  A.  to  credit  him
19.  4.  he  that  is  A.  to  give  credit,  is  light-minded
*8.  11.  an  A.  contention  kindleth  a  fire,  amt  an  A.

fighting  sheddeth  blood

HASTILY.


II  isd.  19.  2.  and  having  sent  them  A.  away


Eccl.  43.  5.  at  his  commandment  it  runneth  A.

„  n,  HAT’.

Mac.  4. 12.  made  the  chief  young  men  wear  a  k
„  _  .  HATE.

if  thou  didst  so  much  A.  thy  people
10.  *3.  delivered  info  the  hands  of  them  that  A.  us
■11  so  si|a^  righteousness  A.  iniquity
lob.  13.  12.  cursed  are  all  they  which  A.  thee
Es/E .14.  13.  turn  his  heart  to  A.  him  that  fights
15.  thou  k  no  west  I  A.  the  glory  of  the  unrighteous
10  'r,L‘  "  no,t  laborious  work  nor  husbandry

13.  »0.  as  proud  A.  humility ,  so  doth  ric  h  the  poor

19.  9.  and  when  time  cometh,  he  will  A.  thee
25  14.  but  the  affliction  from  them  that  A.  me

1  Mac.  7.  26.  a  man  that  bare  deadly  A.  to  Israel

2  Mac.  14.39.  willing  to  declare  the  A.  he  bare

„  _  J  .  HATED.

tj/-  j'  15'  h-  in  3,1  her  works  and  inventions

l  ,  r}  1  *  made  anJ'  thing,  if  thou  hadst  A.  it

it*;  that  is  rash  in  his  talk  shall  be  A.

20.  8.  that  taketh  to  himself  authority  shall  be  A.
«5v£uch  a  one  is  to  be  A.  of  God  and  man
21. 28.  a  whisperer  is  A.  wheresoever  he  dwelleth
2<.24.  I  have  A.  many  things,  nothing  like  him

*  t®-  eat  a!>  becomes,  devour  not  lest  thou  be  A.
37.  20.  one  sheweth  wisdom  in  words,  and  is  A.

4^.  9.  and  being  married,  lest  she  should  be  A
1  Mac.  11.21.  ungodly  persons  A.  their  own  people
..  ”8.  wherefore  all  the  forces  of  his  father  A.  him
4  Mac.  o.  8.  h.  as  a  forsakerof  the  laws
HATEFUL.

1  -  ,0  Tl 9-  ungodly  and  ungodlinessare  A.  to  God>
10.  18.  those  beasts  also  that  are  most  A.

19.  13.  they  used  a  more  hard  and  A.  behaviour
Eocl.  10.  7-  pride  is  A.  before  God  and  man

20.  5.  another  by  much  babbling  hecometh  A.

Uan.  3.  9.  lawless  enemies,  most  A.  forsakers  of  G.

„  ,  HA  TEST  .

if  -  j  '  do  ,*iat  ,0  no  man  which  thou  A.

<4  isd.  12.  4.  whom  thou  A.  for  doing  odious  works
,  ,  =  „  HATETT1.

Jud. .  5.  17.  God  that  A.  iniquity  was  with  them
LSti  90d  ,ha„tseeth  all  things,  and  A.  evil

Eccl.  12.  6.  for  the  Most  High  A.  sinners
15.  1 1  thou  ou°htest  not  to  do  the  things  that  he  A.
13.  the  Lord  A  all  abomination
o?’  ee  f.hat  h%  babbling,  shall  have  less  evil
.1.6.  he  that  A.  to  be  reproved,  is  in  way  of  sinner*
25.2  three  sorts  of  men  my  soul  A.  and  am  offended
33.  2.  a  wise  man  A.  net  the  law
„  ,  HATRED.

Eccl.  10.  6.  bear  not  A.  to  thy  neighbour
28.  3.  one  man  beareth  A.  against  another
5.  if  he  that  is  but  flesh  nourish  A.

\  Mac.  11.  12.  so  that  their  A.  was  openly  known
iw  ”e  sb09ld  procure  to  himself  great  A.

2  Mac.  3.  1.  because  of  his  A.  of  wickedness
4.  3.  but  when  their  A.  went  so  far
49.  moved  with  A.  of  that  wicked  deed
6.  29.  changing  the  good  will  they  bare  into  A.

Haven.

1  Esd.  5.  55.  brought  by  floats  to  the  A.  of  Joppe

2  Esd.  12.  42.  a6  a  A.  or  ship  preserved  from  temresfr

'  14‘  5‘  ln  ’his,  that  he  took  Joppe  for  an  A,

Mac.  12.  6.  and  he  burnt  the  A.  by  night
9.  he  set  fire  on  the  A.  and  the  navy

14.  1.  having  entered  by  the  A.  of  Tripolis

,  HAUGHTY.

Eccl.  22.  10.  but  children  being  A.  through  disdain
23.  4.  but  turn  away  from  thy  servant  a  A.  mind
26.9.  the  whoredom  may  be  known  in  her  A.  looks.

2  Mac.  5.  17.  so  h.  was  .Ant  inch  us  in  mind
13.  9.  the  king  came  with  a  barbarous  and  A.  mind
„„  HAUGHTINESS.

2  Mac.  5.21.  such  was  the  A.  of  his  mind

15.  6.  N  icanor  in  exceeding  pride  and  A.determin

II A  VOCK.

1  Mac.  7-  7-  see  whaf  A.  he  hath  made  amongst  us
H  FA  I).

1  Esd.  4.  .30.  taking  the  crown  from  the  king’s  A
and  setting  it  on  her  own  A.  she  struck  the  kins

8.  71.  I  pulled  the  hair  from  off  my  A.  *

2  Esd.  1 . 8.  pull  thou  off  then  the  hair  of  thy  A

9.  38.  clothes  were  rent,  she  had  ashes  on  her  A.
lb.  53.  God  shall  burn  coals  of  fire  on  his  A

Jud.  8.  .3  as  he  stood,  the  heat  came  upon  his’  A.

9.  1.  J  udith  tell  on  her  face,  and  put  ashes  on  her  h

6X1


Apocrypha.  H  £  A


I1EA


H  E  A


Jud.  13.  8.  and  she  too*  away  his  A.  from  him
Q.  she  gave  Holofernes  his/j.  to  her  maid

15.  she  took  the  A.  out  of  the  bag  and  shewed  it

18.  hath  directed  thee  to  the  cutting  oft  or  the  A.

14.  1.  take  this  A.  and  hang  it  on  your  walls

6.  he  saw  the  A.  of  Holofernes  in  a  man  s  hand

11.  they  hanged  the  A.  of  Hololernes  on  the  wall

15.  and  his  A.  was  taken  from  him
18.  Holofernes  lieth  on  the  ground  without  a  n.

Esth.  14.2.  she  covered  her  A.  with  ashes

16.  abhor  sign  of  my  high  estate  which  is  on  my  A.
Wisd.  18.24.  thy  majesty  on  the  diadem  ot  his  A.

Eccl.  4.  7.  and  bow  thy  A.  to  a  great  man  _

11.  1.  wisdom  lifteth  up  the  A.  ot  him  that  is  low
13.  the  Lord  lifted  up  his  A.  from  misery

12.  18.  he  will  shake  his  A.  and  clap  Ins  hands

19.  26.  a  wicked  man  that  hangeth  down  his  A.

20.  11-  that  lifteth  up  his  A.  from  a  low  estate
£5. 15.  there  is  no  A.  above  the  A.  of  a  servant
27. 25.  casteth  a  stone,  casteth  it  on  his  own  A.

38.  3.  the  skill  or  the  physician  shall  litt  up  las

44.  23.  and  made  it  rest  on  A.  of  Jacob
Bar.  5.  2.  and  set  a  diamond  on  thy  A.  of  glory
Bus.  34.  the  elders  laid  their  hands  on  her  A.

55.  thou  hast  lied  against  thine  own  A.  59.

Bel  36.  the  angel  bare  him  by  the  hair  ot  his  A.
Prayer  of  Manass.  that  1  cannot  litt  up  mine  A.

1  Mac.  7.  47.  they  smote  off  Is  icanor's  A.

11.  13.  where  he  set  two  crowns  upon  his  A.

71.  Jouathan  cast  earth  on  his  A.  and  prayed
a  Mac.  7.  7.  they  had  pulled  off  the  skin  of  las  A.

15.  30.  commanded  to  strike  off  M  icanor  s  A.

32.  and  he  shewed  them  vile  IS  icanor’s  A.

35.  he  hanged  also  N  icanor’s  A.  on  the  tower

HEADLONG.

Wisd.  4.  19.  for  he  shall  cast  them  down  A.

■2  Mac.  6.  10.  they  cast  them  down  A.  from  the  wall
HEADS.

1  Esd.  8.  75.  our  sins  are  multiplied  above  our  A.

2  Esd.  2. 43.  upon  every  one  of  their  A.  he  set  crowns
Jud.  4.  1 1.  they  cast  ashes  upon  their  A.

8.  22.  the  desolation  will  he  turn  on  our  A.

9.  9.  and  send  thy  wrath  upon  their  A.

Eccl.  17. 23.  render  their  recompence  on  their  A.

36.  10.  smite  in  sunder  the  A.  of  the  rulers
Bar.  6.  9.  they  make  crowns  for  the  A.  of  their  gods

22.  upon  their  bodies  and  A.  sit  bats,  birds
31.  priests  sit  in  their  temples,  their  clothes  rent,
their  A.  and  beards  shaven,  nothing  on  their  A.

1  Mac.  3.  47.  they  cast  ashes  on  their  h.  4.  39.

6.  35.  with  helmets  of  brass  on  their  A.

9.  23.  the  wicked  began  to  put  forth  their  A.

QAlac.  1. 16.  they  smote  off  their  A.  and  cast  them  out

10.  25.  and  they  sprinkled  earth  on  their  A.

14. 15.  they  cast  earth  on  their  A.  and  prayed

HEADSTRONG.

Eccl.  30.  8.  an  horse  not  broken  becometh  A.
HEAD-TIRE.

1  Esd.  3.  6.  and  an  A.  of  fine  linen,  and  a  chain

HEAL.

2  Esd.  2.  21.  A.  the  broken  and  the  weak

1  ob.  3. 17.  Raphael  was  sent  to  A.  them  both

12.  14.  now  God  hath  sent  me  to  A.  thee

Eccl.  38.  7.  with  such  doth  he  A.  men
HEALED.

Toi.  6.8.  it  is  good  to  anoint  a  man,  and  he  shall  be  A.

12.  3.  he  brought  me  money,  and  likewise  A.  thee
Wisd.  16.10. thy  mercy  was  ever  by  them  and  A.  them
Eccl.  21.  3.  the  wounds  whereof  cannot  be  A.

HEALEJlH.

Wiid.  16.12.  thy  word,  O  Lord,  which  A.  all  things
HEALING.

Eccl.  38.  2.  for  of  the  Most  High  cometh  A.
HEALTH.

2  Esd.  7. 51.  laid  up  for  us  dwellings  of  A.  and  safety
1'ob,  7 . 4.  then  said  he,  is  he  in  good  A.  ?

5.  they  said,  he  is  both  alive  and  in  good  A.

8.  17.  finish  their  life  in  A.  with  joy  and  mercy
Wisd.  7.  10.  I  loved  her  above  A.  and  beauty

13.  18.  for  A.  he  calleth  on  that  which  is  weak
16. 12.  no  herb  nor  plaister  that  restored  them  to  A.

Eccl.  1. 18.  making  peace  and  perfect  A.  to  flourish

17.  26.  will  lead  out  of  darkness  into  the  light  of  A.
30.  15.  A.  and  good  state  of  body  are  above  all  gold
34.  17.  he  givetli  A.  life,  and  blessing
2  Mac.  1.  10.  sent  greeting  and  A.  to  Aristobulus

3.  offered  a  sacrifice  tor  the  A.  of  the  man
9  18.  therefore  despairing  of  his  A.  he  wrote
r9.wisheth  much  joy,  A.gnd  prosperity  to  the  Jews
22.  not  distrusting  my  A.  but  having  hope

11.  28.  if  ye  fare  well,  we  are  also  in  good  A.
HEALTHFUL.

H'isd.  1.  14.  the  generations  of  the  world  were  A.
HEAP.

Eccl.  3.  27.  the  wicked  man  shall  A.  sin  upon  sin
20.28.  that  tilleth  his  land  shall  increase  his  A.

39.  17.  at  his  command  the  waters  stood  as  an  A.
HEAPS.

2  Esd.  2.  9.  lieth  in  clods  of  pitch  and  A.  of  ashes
Wisd.  18.  23.  the  dead  were  fallen  down  by  A.

1  Mac.  11.  4.  they  had  made  A.  of  them  by  the  way
HEAR.

1  Esd.  9.  40.  to  A.  the  law  the  first  day  of  the  month
t  Esd.  1. 26.  when  you  call  on  me,  I  will  not  A.  you
2.  1.  by  the  prophets,  whom  they  would  not  A.

9.  even  so  will  1  do  to  them  that  A.  me  not
Tob.  3.  13.  that  I  may  A.  no  more  reproach,  15.

6. 15.  wherefore  A.  me,  O  my  brother

10.  12.  that  1  may  A.  good  report  of  thee
Jud.  8.  17.  he  will  A.  our  voice,  if  it  please  him
32.  A.  me,  and  I  will  do  a  thing  which  shall  go
9.  4.  O  God,  O  my  God,  A.  me  also  a  wddow

i2.  Lord  of  heavens  and  earth,  A.  thou  my  prayer

14.  1.  A.  me  now,  my  brethren,  and  hang  it  up
Esth.  13. 17.  A.  my  prayer,  turn  our  sorrow  into  joy

14. 19.  O  mighty  God,  A.  the  voice  of  the  forlorn
Visd.  6.  1.  A.  therefore,  O  ye  kings,  and  understand
8.  15.  shall  be  afraid  when  they  do  but  A.  of  me

15.  15.  nor  noses  to  draw  breath,  nor  ears  to  A.
<£ccl.  3. 1.  A.  me  your  father,  O  children,  and  do
5.  11.  be  swift  to  A.  and  let  thy  life  be  sincere
(3  33.  if  thou  love  to  A.  shah  receive  understanding

654


Eccl.  6.  35.  be  willing  to  A.  every  godly  discourse

! - 1  will  comm“n,<


21. 15. if  a  skilful  man  A.a  wise  word  will  commend
23. 7.  A.  Oye  children,  the  discipline  ot  the  mouth
25.  9.  that  speaketh  in  the  ears  of  him  that  will  A.

29.  25.  moreover,  thou  shalt  A.  bitter  words
31. 22.  my  son,  A.  me,  and  despise  me  not
33.  18.  A.  me,  O  ye  great  men  of  the  people
34.24.  whose  voice  will  the  Lord  A.  ?

26.  that  doth  the  same,  who  will  A.  Ins  prayer .

HEARD.

1  Esd.  5.  65.  that  the  trumpets  might  not  be  A.  yet
the  multitude  soundeil  so  that  it  was  A.  alar  ott
9.  50.  for  they  all  wept  when  they  A.  the  law
lob.  3.  16.  the  prayers  of  them  both  were  A.

Jud.  4.  13.  so  God  A.  their  prayers,  and  looked
Esth.  12.  2.  he  A.  their  devices,  and  searched  out
Eccl.  3.  5. when  he  maketh  his  prayer,  he  shall  be  A
4.  6.  his  prayer  shall  be  A.  ot  him  that  made  him
11.  8.  answer  not  before  thou  hast  A.  the  cause

16.  5.  mine  ear  hath  A.  greater  things  than  these

17.  13.  and  their  ears  A.  his  glorious  voice
19.  9.  he  A.  and  observed  thee,  and  will  hate  thee

10.  if  thou  hast  A.  a  word,  let  it  die  with  thee

27.  down  his  countenance,  making  as  it  he  n.  not
33.  4.  prepare  what  to  say,  and  so  thou  shalt  be  A
41.  23.  or  speaking  again  what  thou  hast  A.

45.  9.  a  noise  that  might  be  A.  in  the  temple

46.  5.  he  called,  and  the  great  Lord  A.  him
48  20.  and  immediately  the  holy  One  A.  them

50.  16.  sons  of  Aaron  made  a  great  noise  to  be  A

51.  11.  1  will  praise,  and  so  my  prayer  was  A.

I1EARDEST.

Eccl.  48.  7.  who  A.  the  rebuke  of  the  Lord  in  Sinai
HEARER.

Wisd.  1  6.  for  God  is  witness  and  a  A.  of  his  tongue
HEARESL’.

Eccl.  13.  13.  when  thou  A.  these  things,  awake
27.  7.  praise  no  man  before  thou  A.  him  speak
IIEAREIH.

Wisd.  1. 10.  for  the  ear  of  jealousy  A.  all  things
Eccl.  21.  15.  when  one  of  no  understanding  A.  it
22.  26.  every  one  that  A.  it  will  beware  ot  him
25.  18.  and  when  he  A.  it,  shall  sigh  bitterly
HEARING.

Wisd.  18.  1.  whose  voice  they  A.  and  not  seeing
Bar.  1.  4.  in  the  A.  of  nobles,  in  the  A.  of  elders
HEARKEN.

Eccl.  14.  23.  he  shall  also  A.  at  her  doors
16.  24.  my  son,  A.  to  me,  and  learn  knowledge
21.  24.  it  is  the  rudeness  of  a  man  to  A.  at  the  dpoi
33.  18.  A.  with  your  ears,  ye  rulers  of  congregation
37.  11.  A.  not  to  these  in  any  matter  of  counsel
39.  13.  A.  to  me,  ye  holy  children,  and  bud  forth
Bar.  2.  24.  but  we  would  not  A.  to  thy  voice

1  Mac.  2.  22.  we  will  not  A.  to  the  king’s  words

2  Mac.  7.25.  the  young  man  would  in  no  case  A.

HEARKENED.  .

Bar.  3.  4.  have  not  A.  to  the  voice  ot  thee  their  God
HEART.

1  Esd.  1.  23.  with  an  A.  full  of  godliness
48.  hardening  his  A.  he  transgressed  the  laws

3.  21.  and  it  maketh  every  A.  rich  so  that  a  man
8.  25.  who  hath  put  these  things  into  A.  of  the  king

2  Esd.  3.  21.  the  first  Adam  bearing  a  wicked  A.

26.  did  even  as  Adam,  they  also  had  a  wicked  A

4.  30.  evil  seed  hath  beensown  in  the  A.  of  Adam
8.  58.  and  said  in  their  A.  that  there  is  no  God
Tob.  1. 12.  because  1  remember  God  with  all  my  A.

4.  13.  my  son,  despise  not  in  thy  A.  thy  brethren
6.  4.  and  take  the  A.  and  the  liver  and  the  gall

6.  brother,  to  what  use  is  the  A.  and  the  liver  r

7.  he  said  to  him,  touching  the  A.  and  the  liver
17.  and  his  A.  was  effectually  joined  to  her

8.  2.  put  the  A.  and  the  liver  of  the  fish  thereon
Jud.  8. 14.  you  cannot  find  the  depth  of  the  A.

Esth.  14.  13.  turn  his  A.  to  hate  him  that  fighteth
15.  5.  but  her  A.  was  in  anguish  for  fear
Wisd,  1.  6.  for  God  is  a  true  beholder  of  his  A.

2.  2.  as  a  little  spark  in  the  moving  ot  our  A.

8.  17.  when  I  pondered  these  things  in  my  A.

21.  besought  him,  and  with  my  whole  A.  I  said
15.  10.  his  A.  is  ashes,  his  hope  more  vile  than  earth
Eccl.  1.  12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  maketh  a  merry  A.

28.  and  come  not  to  him  with  a  double  A.

30.  earnest  not  in  truth,  but  thy  A.  is  full  of  deceit

2.  2.  set  thv  A.  aright,  and  constantly  endure

3.  26.  a  stubborn  A.  shall  fare  evil  at  the  last

27.  an  obstinate  A.  shall  be  laden  with  sorrows

29.  the  A.  of  the  prudent  will  understand

5.  1.  set  not  thy  A.  on  thy  goods,  and  say  not
2.  thy  strength  to  walk  111  the  ways  ot  thy  A.

6  26.  come  unto  her  with  thy  whole  A.  and  keep
37.  he  shall  establish  thy  A.  and  give  wisdom
7.27.  honour  thy  father  with  thy  whole  A.

8. 19.  open  not  thine  A.  to  every  man  lest  he
9.  9.  lest  thy  A.  incline  unto  her,  and  thou  fall
10. 12.  his  A.  is  turned  away  from  his  Maker
11.  30.  kept  in  a  cage,  so  is  the  A.  of  the  proud
13.  25.  the  A.  of  a  man  changeth  his  countenance,
a  merry  A.  maketh  a  cheerful  countenance
26.  is  a  token  of  a  A.  that  is  in  prosperity
14  21.  he  that  considered  her  ways  in  his  A.

16.  20.  no  A.  can  think  on  these  things  worthily

24.  my  son,  mark  my  words  with  thy  A.

17.  6.  an  A.  gave  he  them  to  understand

28.  the  living  and  sound  in  A.  shall  praise  the  Lord
19  16.  that  slipped  in  speech,  but  not  from  his  A.
2l!  6.  that  fears  the  Lord,  will  repent  from  his  A

17.  they  shall  ponder  his  words  in  their  A.

26.  the  A.  of  fools  is  in  their  mouth
22  16.  the  A.  that  is  established  by  advised  counsel

17.  a  A.  settled  on  a  thought  of  understanding

18.  so  a  fearful  h.  in  the  imagination  of  a  fool
11.  he  that  pricketh  the  h.  maketh  it  to  shew

23.  2.  set  the  discipline  of  wisdom  over  my  A
18.  saying  thus  in  his  A.  who  seeth  me  .

25.  7.  which  I  have  judged  in  my  A.  to  be  happv
13.  give  me  any  plague,  but  the  plague  ot  the  4.

26.  4.  if  he  have  a  good  A.  toward  the  Lord
5.  there  be  three  things  that  my  A.  feareth
18.  so  are  the  fair  feet  with  a  constant  A.

28.  there  be  two  things  that  grieve  my  A.


Eccl.  27. 6.  so  is  the  utterance  ot  a  conceit  m  the  A.
30.  16.  there  is  no  joy  abo  e  the  joy  of  the  A.

23.  love  thine  own  soul,  «nd  comfort  thine  A.

25.  a  good  A.  will  have  a  care  of  his  meat  and  diet
31.28.  wine  in  season  brings  “ladness  of  the  A.

33.  5.  the  A.  of  the  foolish  is  like  a  cart-wheel

34.  5.  the  A.  fancied  as  a  w  oman’s  A.  in  travail

36.  20.  a  froward  A.  caused  heaviness

37.  17.  the  countenance  is  a  sign  of  changing  the  A.

38.  10.  and  cleanse  thy  A.  from  all  wickedness

18.  the  heaviness  of  the  A.  breaketh  strength
20.  take  no  heaviness  to  A.  drive  it  away

40.  20.  wine  and  music  rejoice  the  A.  but  wisdom
42.  18.  he  seeketh  out  the  deep  and  the  A.

43. 18.  the  A.  is  astonished  at  the  raining  of  it

45.  26.  God  give  you  wisdom  in  your  A.  to  judge
46. 11.  every  one  whose  A.  went  not  a  whoring
49-  3.  he  directed  his  A.  unto  the  Lord
50.23.  he  grant  us  joy  fulness  of  A.  and  that  peace
25.  two  manner  of  nations  my  A.  abhorred

27.  who  out  of  his  A.  poured  forth  wisdom

28.  he  that  layeth  them  up  in  his  A.  shall  be  wise
Bar.  2.  8.  from  the  imaginations  ot  his  wicked  A.
Dan.  2.  16.  in  a  contrite  A.  let  us  be  accepted

65.  ()  ye  holy  and  humble  men  of  A.  bless  Lord
Sus.  35.  for  her  A.  trusted  in  the  Lord


•3US,  .'to.  1UI  IlCI  n.  UU31CU  111  111^

Prayer  of  Manass.  now  I  bow  the  knee  of  my  h.

1  Mac.  6. 10.  sleep  gone,  my  A.  failed  for  very  cart


2  Mac.  3.  17.  what’sorrow  he  had  now  in  his  A.

H  EARTH.

Eccl.  50. 12.  he  stood  by  the  A.  of  the  altar
HEARTILY.

2  Mac.  4.  37.  therefore  Antiochus  was  A.  sorry
HEARTS.

2  Esd.  14.  34.  if  so  be  ye  will  reform  your  A.

16.  54.  the  Lord  knoweth  their  thoughts  and  A.

63.  he  knoweth  what  you  think  in  your  A.

Jud.  8.  24.  because  their  A.  depend  upon  us
Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  be  to  fearful  A.  and  faint  hands

17.  that  fear  the  Lord  will  prepare  their  A.

8.  2.  for  gold  hath  perverted  the  A.  ot  kings

16.  10.  were  gathered  in  the  hardness  of  their  A.

17.  8.  he  set  his  eye  upon  their  A.  to  shew  them
16.  could  not  make  to  themsel.  fleshly  A.  tor  stonj

31.26.  so  doth  wine  prove  the  A.  of  the  proud
48.  19.  then  trembled  their  A.  and  hands
Bar.  3.7.  thou  hast  put  thy  fear  in  our  A.

6.  6.  say  ye  in  your  A.  O  Lord,  wre  must  worship
20.  their  A.  are  gnawed  upon  by  things  creeping

1  Mac.  12. 28.  they  feared  and  trembled  in  their  A.

2  Mac.  1.  4.  open  your  A.  in  his  law  and  command
2.  3.  the  law  should  not  depart  from  their  A.

15.  17.  able  to  encourage  the  A.  of  the  young  men
27.  fighting  with  hands,  praying  with  their  A.
HEAT.

2  Esd.  1.  20.  for  the  A.  1  covered  you  with  leaves
Jud.  8. 3.  A.  came  on  his  head,  and  he  fell  on  his  bed  I
Wisd.  2.  4.  that  is  overcome  with  the  A.  thereof
Eccl.  14.  27.  by  her  he  shall  be  covered  from  A.

18.  16.  shall  not  the  dew  assuage  A.  ?  so  is  a  word
34.  16.  a  defence  from  A.  a  cover  from  the  sun

38.  28.  he  fighteth  with  the  A.  of  the  furnace
43.  3.  who  can  abide  the  burning  A.  thereof  ?

22.  a  dew  coming  after  A.  refreshed!

Bar.  2.  25.  they  are  cast  out  to  the  A.  of  the  day
Dan.  3.  44.  O  ye  fire  and  A.  bless  ye  the  Lord
HEATED.

2  Mac.  7. 4.  the  caldrons  forthwith  being  A.
HEATHEN.

1  Esd.  5.72.  the  A.  of  the  land  lying  heavy
8.93.  wives  which  we  have  taken  ot  the  A.

9.  Q.  and  separate  yourselves  from  the  A.

2  Esd.  3.  36.  Israel  kept  thy  precepts,  not  the  A.
Esth.  14.  15. 1  abhor  the  bed  of  all  the  A.

Wisd.  15. 15.  they  counted  idols  of  the  A.  to  be  gods  ,
Eccl.  35. 18.  and  repaid  vengeance  to  the  A.

36.  10.  smite  in  sunder  the  heads  of  the  A.

39.  23.  so  shall  the  A.  inherit  his  wrath
Bar.  2. 13.  for  we  are  but  a  few  left  among  the  A.  ;

1  Mac.  1.  11.  let  us  make  a  covenant  with  the  A.

13.  give  licence  to  do  after  the  ordinances  of  A.  !

14.  according  to  the  customsof  the  A.

15.  the v  joined  themselves  to  the  A.  and  were  sold1
42.  so  all  the  A.  agreed  to  command  of  the  king  .

2.  18.  like  as  all  the  A.  and  Judea  have  done
68.  recompense  fully  the  A.  and  take  heed

4.  11.  that  so  all  the  A.  may  know  there  is  One

45.  pull  it  down,  because  A.  had  defiled  it
54.  look  at  what  day  the  A.  had  profaned  it
58.  that  the  reproach  of  the  A.  was  put  away

5.  57.  let  us  go  fight  against  the  A.  round  us
13  41.  thus  the  yoke  of  the  A.  was  taken  away  !

2  Mac.  1.  27.  deliver  them  that  serve  among  the  A
look  on  them,  let  the  A.  know  that  thou  art  God

4.  9.  training  up  of  youth  in  the  fashions  ot  the  A.  ;

6.  8.  decree  to  the  neighbour  cities  of  the  A.

10.  2.  but  the  altars  which  the  A.  hail  built

11.  3.  as  of  the  other  chapels  of  the  A.  and  to  set  1
15.  10.  shewing  them  the  falsehood  of  the  A.

HEATHENISH.

2  Mac.  4.  13.  such  was  the  increase  of  A.  manners'
HEAVEN.

1  Esd.  4.36.  the  earth  calleth  on  truth,  the  A.  blesseth

46.  thou  hast  vowed  to  the  King  of  A.

58.  fie  lifted  up  his  face  to  A.  praised  King  of  A.  ;

6.  13.  servants  of  the  Lord  who  made  A.  and  eartd
8.  75.  our  ignorances  have  reached  up  unto  A.

:  Esd.  2.  14.  take  A.  and  earth  to  w itness
4.  8.  neither  did  I  ever  climb  up  into  A.

6.  38.  thou  saidst,  let  A.  and  earth  be  made
8.  20.  who  beholdest  things  in  the  A.  and  111  the  an

13.  3.  waxed  strong  with  the  thousands  ot  A.

5.  was  gathered  from  the  four  w  inds  of  the  A.

16  55.  let  the  A.  be  made,  and  it  was  created
Tob.  5.  16.  God  which  dwelleth  in  A.  prosper  you
7  18.  the  Lord  ot  A.  and  earth  give  thee;oy
10.  11.  God  ol  A.  give  you  a  prosperous  journey  f

12.  the  Lord  of  A.  restore  thee,  dear  brothel
13  11.  many  nations  come  with  gifts  to  Kingot  n„
Jud.  5.  8.  they  worshipped  the  God  of  A.

11. 17.  thy  servant  serveth  God  of  A.  day  and  niBn
Esth.  13.  10.  for  thou  hast  made  A.  and  earth


H  El


HEL


Ti'o  n 1G-  !hinss  jn,A-  'vll°  hath  searched  out J
*£y  dV,,n*d  ,h«  >!8hts  of//,  to  he  the  gods
io*  7?*  <ll,(  s-  sen<*  tbe,n  from  4.  bread

18.  lo.  thine  almighty  word  leaped  down  from  h

16.  and  it  touched  4.  but  stood  on  the  earth
ilS  to  i  *  .w,  ?  ''au  b,1(l  °’d  the  height  of  /*.  /

]!?•  15*  f>e^<!^»  the  4,  and  the  4.  of  heavens

117.  32.  he  '  leweth  the  power  of  the  height  of  A.

«•  l  alone  compassed  the  circuit  of  A.

»o.  10.  the  sun  when  it  ariseth  in  the  high  A.

13.  1.  the  beauty  of  A.  with  his  glorious  she w

8.  shining  in  the  firmament  of  4 .

/J-2,-,iJ  compassith  the  A.  atx>ut  with  a  circle
40.  17.  and  the  Lord  thundered  from  A.

4fd3,  ^  ! le  rr‘  ?!  the  Loni  he  shut  «P  the  /».

2°.  and  the  holy  One  heard  them  out  of  A.

5i.  19.  I  stretched  forth  my  hands  to  A.  alxive
tiar.  1.11.  days  may  be  on  earth  as  the  days  of  A.

2. 2.  such  as  never  happened  under  the  whole  A.

3.  .y.  who  bath  gone  up  into  A.  and  taken  her
5.  3.  wtll  shew  it  unto  every  country  under  A
«?•' 54g  ?.re  as  cr,»ws  between  A.  and  earth

9.  that  they  might  not  look  unto  A
3o.  and  she  weeping,  looked  up  towards  A.

Belo.  who  hath  created  the  A.  and  the  earth
frayer  oj  Manass.  who  hast  made  A.  and  earth
L  amnot  Mtorthy  to  behold  and  see  the  height  o{ h.
?.*  37.A.  and  earth  shall  testify  for  us
58.  Elias,  lor  Ins  zeal,  was  taken  up  into  A.

3. 16.  with  the  God  ot  A.  n  is  all  one  to  deliver

19.  but  strength  cometh  front  A.

60.  as  the  will  of  God  is  in  A.  so  let  him  do

4.  10.  now  therefore  let  us  cry  unto  A
24.  sun"  a  song,  and  praised  the  l  ord  in  A.

40.  cned  towards  the  A.  ||  55.  praising  God  of  A.
n'  93’  *  Cfy  t  lC  Clty  Went  Up  to  A.

?sWherut0re.criy  y,e  110 w  ,0  A ■  to  be  delivered  ?
!?'  I,0' '' ef,la','e  he[P  uf«™  ,A.  that  succoureth  us
Mnr  o  1A  and  th?  help  from  A.  be  with  you
it  rhom0'  bJe  5aPe<lown  from  A.  and  consumed
i V" na,?ifest  signs  that  came  from  A.  to  those
tn.‘- 011  'nm  that  made  a  law

20.  all  holding  their  hands  towards  A.  made  suppl.

i,10?  bast  been  scourged  from  A.

39.  for  he  that  dwelleth  in  A.  hath  his  eve
L  11.  these  I  had  from  A.  and  for  his  laws
, %n)y  son’  look  upon  (lie  A.  and  the  earth
2°"  of  ‘ he‘P  that  they  had  from  A.

on°i  °u?htthe  o°ol(J  reach  to  the  stars  of  A.

anaS  tn  fr,od’  bavmg  my  hope  in  A.

?•  29-  V1ere  aPfeared  to  the  enemies  from  A.

3?’  !,  ey  r?ar‘-,‘ed»  having  an  helper  from  A.

4.  34.  the  priests  lift  up  their  hands  towards  A.

5.  3.  demanded  it  there  w'ere  a  mighty  One  in  A.

8.  the  help  which  they  had  received  from  A
34.  so  every  man  praised  towards  the  A  ’

„  .  „  ,  HEAVENLY.

yf.j •  hath  called  vou  to  the  A.  kingdom

tsd.  19.  21.  nor  melted  the  icy  kind  of  A.  meat

T?  J  A  A  l  bA  V  bN  S.

34.  he  compasseth  the  A.  round  about

n'Jm.^°iWlnn  thu  \,hou  d idstset  fast  the  earth
.  21.  lie  that  d  welleth  above  the  A.  may  understand
<co  u  the  things  that  are  above  the  height  of  A.

6:  o9‘ch^  sPJ’ea<  eth  out  the  A.  like  a  vault

t  f  the?  and  aI1  ,hy  creatures
°f  j*.and  ear'h,  hear  my  prayer
rd\t’  Sund  her  °.ut  of  ,hy  holy  2

S1:}6;  18:  the  heaven  of  A.  shall  he  moved

3°  h's ' see<i  so  Jong  as  the  A.  should  remain
it.  6.  67.  nor  can  they  shew  signs  in  the  A.

_  H  LAV Y  •

^5*  c*  1%  *!*?  beatbei)  lying  4.  on  the  inhabitants
y/J*m  an(*  wbY  *s  thy  countenance  so  h.?

'*  be  not  lt  tbou  b°nse  of  Jacob

!;/-’7Ad-a?J^ar«i  to  them  with  A.  countenances
li  00  7  a  wicked  W'oman  makes  A.  countenance
5.  28.  it  not  obedient,  put  on  more  A.  fetters

iV1,  !  0/  y0,ke  !s  uPf!n  the  sons  of  Adam
lac.  8.  31.  why  hast  thou  made  thy  yoke  h.?
nac.  5.  23.  bare  an  A.  hand  over  the  citizens
HLAV1LR.

c  4  22*  14.  what  is  A  than  lead  ?  the  name  is  a  fool
HEAVINESS.

'4rf‘fh2;J^r10r!  't  fuli°f  h-  II  8-  we  are  all  in  A.

4.  therefore  shake  off  thy  great  A.  put  away

7  ,  washed  myself  and  eat  m\»  meat  in  A

C  o"  n'l4'  thaU1V^th  dishonestly,  is  her  father’s  A.
'.9.. play  with  him,  and  he  will  bring  thee  to  A

i.  give  not  over  thy  mind  to  A.  afflict  not  thyself
’’  ??•  a  frowar?  heart  causeth  A.  but  a  man
,^!7.  then  comfort  thyself  for  thy  A.

8.  for  of  A  cometh  death,  and.  the  A.  of  the  heart
breaketh  strength,  in  affliction  sorrow  remains

/«cta^eo‘-°cf  oart’ <lrive  il  a,way,  remember
\k  27  •  Vn  the  marriage  chamber  was  in  A.
i  P,riesfs  are  in  A.  and  brought  low
4.  he  tied,  and  departed  thence  with  great  A
,  ,  HEBREW.  s

f.  1«.  11.  persuade  this  H.  woman  to  come  to  us
HEBREWS.  neious

'  and  s^e  sa*‘i>  l  am  a  woman  of  the  II

.18.  one  woman  of  the  II.  hath  brought  shame
ac.  7.  31.  author  of  all  mischief  against  the  II
.  13.  cons.denn"  the  H  could  not  he  overcom^

3< .  the  1 L.  had  the  city  in  their  power
IlEBRON.

■  ac .  5.  65.  where  he  smote  II.  and  towns  thereof
.  II  EDO  E.

7. 26.  12.  by  every  A.  will  she  sit  down
°t0^  ,  °.u  thy  possession  about

25.  where  no  A.  is,  the  possession  is  spoiled
1  HEIFER.

•  1. 5.  the  tribes  sacrificed  unto  the  A.  Baal
,  HEIGHT.

,  „ w,hose  h-  shall  be  sixty  cubits
■l**.  me  A.  of  the  wall  seventy  cubits
.0.  but  they  trust  in  the  A.  of  the  mountains
1.  1.  3.  who  can  find  out  the  A.  of  heaven  ?

1.  the  pride  of  the  A.  the  clear  firmament

2.  and  by  him  was  built  the  double  A
yer  of  Manass.  to  behold  the  A  of  heaven


HIG


[ArocKYrH*.


V1^,4',13,  such  was  the  A.  of  Greek  fashions
o.  lj.  test  that  being ^come  to  the  A.  of  sin

Zob\  : *5.  nor  hath  he  any  child  to  be  his  A.

OT  M  tP'  !.hat  diou  niayest  be  A.  with  him
23.  22.  that  bringetlMn  an  A.  by  another

X£si\  Israel  A  not  such  pass,  as  Josias

i"  when  lie  had  so  spoken,  he  A.  his  peace
\!7,  he  -V, llls  t01?8ue  If  41.  he  A.  his  peace
~0.  the  villages  °t  the  J  2ws  w  hich  they  4.
o  /  a*s?cthey  [l-  least  ot  tabernacles
a  o  i5,  r;  s?  'he  angel  A.  me,  comforted  me
0.  8.  Jacob  s  hand  A.  the  first  heel  of  Esau

n<’r  "-.sword  nor  any  instrument  of  war
.8.  lie  A.  neither  sword  nor  any  instrument
j?Vi  i/l,  'he  flood,  till  they  were  passed  over
ii’-'i  a,nd  ,so  l»e.A.  up  his  golden  sceptre

‘U*d:  1C-  A.  them  tor  gods,  being  deceived
,17* ,4- iior  might  the  corner  that  A.  them  keep
t-eel.  13.  21,  a  rich  man  is  A.  up  of  friends


R  ;  i  ni  !  °ibe,!':’  as.Lho.l^h  he  h.  a  scorpion


Paniel  \  i*'enkm8°  that 'lie' should1  not  goffl
2,/S0,[1<  a.  I  ll?ey  V’at  A-  with  his  father
0.  5r.  they  4.  them  battle  a  long  season

bJam,e  him,  but  the  king  4.  his  peace
~,4Jaf’  Itl-  P-  they  had  A.  the  feast  of  tabernacles

14.  4.  and  so  that  day  he  A.  his  peace

„  heliodorus.

2  Mac.  3.  7.  the  king  chose  out  H.  his  treasurer
8.  so  forthwith  II.  took  his  journey
^5.  he  ran  and  smote  at  H.  with  his  fore-feet
27.  and  II.  tell  suddenly  to  the  ground
™  .  n  ,certai,'1  H.  friends  prayed  Onias
H4  treachery  had  been  done  to  H.  by  the  Jews
33.  the  same  young  men  stood  by  H.  saying
3d.  H.  alter  he  had  offered  sacrifice,  returned

e‘u  tlieklngaske<1  u-  w|i°  might  he  a  fit
40.  the  things  concerning  II.  fell  out  thus
4.  1.  slandered  Onias,  as  il  lie  had  terrified  II
_  ri  .  d  h  L  L.

‘  2.  29.  that  thy  children  shall  not  see  A.

4.  8  never  went  into  the  deep,  nor  as  yet  into  A.

8.  D3.  corruption  is  tied  into  A.  to  be  forgotten

lca-'leth  down  to  A.  and  bringeth  up
r‘  f'nJ'  out, p'  lhe  bottoms  ot  inevitable  A.
Bccl.  21.  10.  at  the  end  thereof  is  the  pit  of  A
ol.  o.  from  the  depth  of  the  belly  of  A
6.  my  life  was  near  to  the  A.  beneath
Uan.  3.  66.  tor  he  hath  delivered  us  from  A
r„ .  ,  c  HELMET.

IVisd.  5.  18.  and  true  judgment  instead  of  an  A.

1  7if  -  HELMETS.

I  Mac.  0.  3o.  with  h.  of  brass  on  their  heads

,  n  .  help.

v Ei£-  9*  dweIi  m  places  about,  let  them  A.  him
o'  .°  l' tll0Se  that  be  of  the  captivity  of  Jews
1  was  encouraged  by  the  A,  of  the  Lord
Jud.  0.  21.  they  called  all  that  night  for  A.  ’

7-31.  if  these  days  pass,  and  there  come  no  A.  to  us
«•  H.  uniess  in  these  days  the  Lord  A.  you

15.  it  he  will  not  A.  us  within  these  live  days
Ij.^therefore  let  us  call  upon  him  to  A.  us

1?  .7  \  ?°oV  tlle  t*me. to  ,l'  thine  inheritance
, .  '  1  i'-3'  H  niy  Lord,//,  me  desolate  woman
,/!•  ,dr‘ver,'is-  a.n<l  h ■  me  that  am  desolate
Ivina 2.  18.  he  will  4.  him  and  deliver  him
Jo'  ,e  parents  killed  souls  destitute  of  A.

13.  16.  knowing  that  it  was  unable  to  A.  itself,  for
10  *u. .  ■  Jpsan  image,  and  hath  need  of  A.

18.  that  Which  hath  least  means  to  A.
rJ4-,18-  a/'/'-to  set  forward  the  ignorant
Bccl.  2.  6.  believe  in  him,  and  he  will  A.  thee
3.  12.  my  son,  A.  thy  father  in  his  age
8.  16.  where  there  is  no  A.  lie  will  overthrow

11.  1„.  another  that  is  slow  and  hath  need  of  A.

12.  4.  give  to  the  godly  man,  and  A.  not  a  sinner
7.  give  to  the  good,  and  A.  not  the  sinner

,17' and  thouu?h  *»e  pretend  to  A.  thee,  yet  shall  he
nn  j,8-  stumble,  they  will  A.  to  overthrow  him
7  .. t  le  R°?r  f°r  'he  commandment’s  sake
-0.  A.  thy  neighbour  according  to  thy  power

34,  16.  and  he  is  an  A.  from  falling
9?'  u  **ke  himself,  and  a  pillar  of  rest
40-  *7.  brethren  and  A.  are  against  trouble

fear  tke  i'orci  needeth  not  to  seek  A.

51.  7;  they  compassed  me,  there  was  no  man  to  A
H>.  in  time  of  the  proud,  when  there  was  no  A.
liar.  4.  17.  but  what  can  I  A.  you  ?

6.  37.  nor  can  they  A.  any  man  in  his  distress
58.  neither  are  they  able  to  A.  themselves
68.  they  can  get  under  a  covert  and  A.  themselves
1  Mac.  3.  15.  a  mighty  host  of  ungodly  to  A.  him
53.  able  to  stand,  except  thou,  O  God,  he  our  A

5.  39.  be  hath  hired  the  Arabians  to  A.  them
8.  13.  also  whom  they  would  A.  to  a  kingdom

25.  the  people  of  the  Jews  shall  h.  them
27 -  the  Romans  shall  A.  with  all  their  heart
JV'  In’  8ln.10n  his  brother  met  him  to  A.  him
H*  43.  shalt  do  well  if  thou  send  me  men  to  A.  me
h°-  'he  forces  gathered  untg  him  for  to  A.  him
we  have  A.  from  heaven  that  succoureth
53.  they  have  no  captain,  nor  any  to  A,  them
J4-  1.  to  get  him  A.  to  fight  against  l’ryphon
ih'  3.  and  the  A.  from  heaven  be  with  you
ZMac.S.VS.  being  unnble  to  A.  himself  with  weapons

6.  11.  they  made  conscience  to  A.  themselves

8®cause  °'  'he  A.  they  had  from  heaven

23.  had  given  them  this  watch- word,  The  A.  of  G.

24.  by  the  A.  of  the  Almighty  they  slew  9000

35.  he  was  through  the  A.  of  tne  L.  brought  down

10.  19..  unto  places  which  more  needed  his  A.

11.  7 .  jeopard  themselves  to  A.  their  brethren
J<>‘  JJ'  .“Pdah  s  side,  hy  the  A.  of  Go/i,  got  victory
13. 10.  lr  at  any  other  time,  he  would  now  A.  them

13.  try  the  matter  in  fight,  by  the  A.  of  the  Lord
17.  the  protection  of  the  Lord  did  A.  them

15.  7.  confidence  that  the  Lord  would  A.  him
8.  to  remember  the  A.  received  in  former  times
35.  a  manifest  sign  to  all  of  the  A.  of  the  Lord
„  HELPED.

1  Lsd.  2. 9.  h.  them  in  all  things  with  silver  and  gold


P}2'10;  1  W<int  l?  PjD’sicians,  but  they  me  no*
Lt  d.  .9.  4.  and  put  them  to  trouble  that  A.  them

1  Mac.  3.  2.  all  his  brethren  A.  Maccabeus

2  Mac.  11.  13.  because  the  almighty  God  A.  them
HELPER.

/eA  8  6  thou  gavest  him  Eve  his  wife  for  an  A

We  liaveun?  A-  but  God  ball,  sold  us
^j^4.  14.  3.  help  me,  who  have  no  4.  but  tljee  u
Bccl.  Dl.  2.  for  thou  art  my  defender  and  //’  and

o  if  ?een  rlY  aKa'HSt  mine  a.lversariea

’•  10-  besought  G.  that  he  would  he  their  A?
io‘  v*  ,  'eJ'  .niarcl'ed»  having  an  A.  from  heaven
wouhUhew  himseif  to  be  their  4.

2  16.  33.  daughters  shall  mourn  having  no  h

Bccl.  13.  22.  a  rich  man  is  fallen,  he  hath  many  A
. ,  HELP  El’ II.

Bed-  37.  5.  a  companion  which  A.  his  friend
-  Mac.  14.  15.  and^Vjl’^p*j^ ways  A.  his  portion

1  Esd.  6.  2.  prophets  being  with  them,  and  A.  them

o  HELPS.

2  Mac.  8.  19.  what  A.  their  forefathers  found

2  Esd.  1.  30.  as  a  A.  gathered]  her  chickens  under  he?
....  ,  ,,  HERB.

msd-  I6-  12-  »*  was  neither  A.  that  restored  them
,  „  HERBS.

\nSt\  9’ e?'faPd1I  did  eat  °'  'he  A.  of  the  field

12.  51.  and  I  had  my  meat  ot  the  A.

2  Mac.  5.27.  his  company  who  fed  on  A.  continually
HERCULES.

2  on  o  -4'  19'  t0  carry  silver  to  the  sacrifice  of  U
20.  this  money  was  appointed  to  11.  sacrifice
T  ,  HERDS.

Jlld -2-  27.  he  destroyed  their  flocks  and  A.

3.  3.  our  flocks  and  A.  lie  before  thy  face

.  p  .  „  ,  heritage.  ^

puff'd,'  ‘I16  ana  yl  eate,r  *n'°  '°  possess  as  an  4/.
io  V7'  l  ‘  le  ^ave  ,hRm  the  law  of  life  for  an  A.
nr^n-  worms  shall  have  him  to  4.

no*  oo'  /LUt  bot  1  sba^  bav^  destruction  to  4.

7i  no9  tbo.u,maJ e§t  be  heir  with  him  in  his  4.

44.  23.  and  he  «ave  him  an  4.  45.  20.

46.  8.  were  preserved  to  bring  them  into  the  A.

9.  ant'  his  seed  obtained  it  tor  an  A.
o  n‘  ,56,VCaleh  received  the  A.  of  the  land
2  ¥nacA  2- 4-  M°ses  c.  imbed  up,  and  saw  the  A.  of  G.

17.  God  delivered  his  people,  and  gave  them  an  B.

„  HERMON.

bccc.  24.  13.  as  a  cypress  on  the  mountains  of  II.
o  71  HEWED,

2  Mac.  1.  16.  A.  them  pieces,  smote  off  their  heads

a  ^nai?n  budt  waHs  round  about  of  stones  h

^aMnr‘  i3-?' iikehSt??es  h •  out  of  the  m°untain
l  Mac .  13.  27.  built  a  ^monument  with  4.  stone

%Sd:  8;n53;,  weakness  and  the  moth  is  A.  from  yoo
10 ’.V  !?■  t  )at  5  ?uned  them  and  A.  myself
j 3-  my  good  deed  was  not  A.  from  me
,,,  /I  1  8‘  sPeake'h  unrighteous  things  cannot  he  h.

^ ’•  *he  noise  or  murmurings  is  not  4.

;2*  5*  ,ieY  cou^d  not  so  much  as  be  4.

717;/3- 'hey  suppose.!  to  lie  A  in  their  secret  sins
Lee/.  16.  21.  the  most  part  of  his  works  are  A

17.  15.  their  ways  shall  not  be  A.  from  his  eyes
20.  none  of  their  unrighteous  deeds  are  A.

on'  wl*('om  that  is  A.  and  treasure,  41.  14
Yq  iv  a'ld  oot'nng  can  be  A.  from  his  eyes
43.  32.  there  are  A.  greater  things  than  these
Bus  16.  the  two  elders  that  had  A.  themselves

18.  saw  not  the  elders,  because  they  were  A
nV  a  yo?2&  man  who  was  there  A.  came  to  her

36.  nor  stopped  places  where  they  lay  A
AT.,  •  they  ,l4  themselves  under  the  covert
2  nf\ac.u 19,  '^ey  A'  't  in  an  hollow  place  of  a  pit
20.  the  posterity  ot  those  priests  that  A.  it
^2.  the  sun  shone,  which  afore  was  A.  in  the  clou.)

io  ■<t7hli?re|Stf  tha!iWere  ?d  away  had  k-  "le  "re

10.  37.  killed  1  imotheus,  that  was  A.  in  a  pit

12.  41.  who  had  opened  the  things  that  were  A.

HIDDEN .

2  5. 1.  and  the  way  of  truth  shall  be  A.

10.  62.  the  Spirit  searcheth  out  all  A.  things

Bed.  11.  4.  and  iiis  works  among  men  are*//

J2.  8, .  and  an  enemy  cannot  be  A.  in  adversity

42.  19.  lie  revealeth  (he  steps  of  4.  things

20.  neither  any  word  is  4.  from  him

Bar.  6.  48.  consult  where  they  may  be  A.  with  them

1  Mac,  ].  4,3.  also  he  took  the  4.  treasures  he  found

HIDE.

2“;5, 9-  'hen  shall  wit  A.  itself  and  understanding

12.  37.  write  all  these  things  and  A.  them
14.  6.  these  declare,  and  these  shalt  thou  A

10.  63.  even  them  that  sin,  and  would  A.  their  sin
bp-  ,°J  how  will  you  A.  your  sins  before  God  i
tir-  }\4  h®  will  not  A.  his  face  from  you
Htsd.  6.  22.  I  will  not  A.  mysteries  from  you

7.  13.  I  do  communicate,  I  do  not  A.  her  riches
Bed.  1.  24.  he  will  A.  his  words  for  a  time

4.  23.  and  A.  not  thy  wisdom  in  her  beauty

6.  12.  and  he  will  A.  himself  from  thy  face
16.  17.  say  not  thou,  1  will  h.  myself  from  the  Lord
22.  2d.  neither  will  I  A.  my  face  from  him
37.  10.  A.  thy  counsel  from  such  as  envy  thee
_  HIDETII.

Bccl.  20  31.  wisdom  said,  better  is  he  that  A.  his
folly,  than  a  man  that  4.  Ins  wisdom.  41.  15
_  HIGH.

I  Esd.  2.  3.  the  most  A.  Lord  hath  made  me  king

4.  34.  A.  is  the  heaven,  swift  is  the  sun  in  his  course

5.  40.  till  there  arose  up  an  A.  priest  clothed

6.  31.  their  offerings  may  be  made  to  most  A.  God
9.  46.  Esdras  blessed  the  Lord  God  most  A
lob.  1.4.  the  temple  of  the  habitation  of  the  Most  II.

13.  the  Most  11.  gave  me  grace  and  favour
4.  11.  that  give  it  in  the  sight  of  the  Most  II

Jud.  3.  6.  he  set  garrisons  in  the  A.  cities
4.  6.  Joacim  the  A.  priest  wrote  to  them  in  Bethulia

8.  did  as  Joacim  the  A.  priest  had  commanded

14.  Joacim  the  A.  oriest  and  all  the  priests

6.35


« t*UC  KVPHA,,  H  1  L


HU  L


HOL


Jud.  13.  18.  blessed  art  thou  of  the  most  A.  God

15.  8.  then  Joacim  the  A.  priest  came  to  behold
16.7.  nor  did  A.  giants  set  upon  him

Est/t.  14.  16.  I  abhor  the  sign  of  my  A.  estate

16.  22.  shall  keep  it  an  A.  day  witli  all  teasting
iVisd.  5.  15.  the  care  of  them  is  with  the  Most  L.

5.  5.  judgment  be  to  them  that  be  in  A.  places

Bed.  1.  5.  the  word  of  God  most  A.  is  the  tountain

3.  19.  many  aie  in  A.  place  and  ot  renown

4.  10.  so  shall  thou  be  as  the  son  ot  the  Most  11.

7  9  when  1  offer  to  the  most  A.  God,  he  will  accept

15  husbandry,  which  the  Most  1] .  hath  ordained

9.  15.  thy  communication  in  the  law  of  the  M.  11.

12  2  and  if  not  from  him,  yet  from  Most  H.

6  for  the  Most  H.  hateth  sinners,  and  will  repay

17.  26.  turn  to  the  Most  H.  turn  trpm  iniquity
27.  who  shall  praise  the  Most  H.  in  the  grave  .

19.  17-  &ive  pln.ee.  to  the  law  of  the  Most  II.

04.  and  transgresseth  the  law  of  the  Most  II.

■Qp  18.  pales  set  on  an  A.  place  will  never  stand

23.  18.  the  Most  11.  will  not  remember  my  sms
~23.sh'e  hath  disobeyed  the  law  ot  the  Most  H.

26.  16.  the  sun  when  it  ariseth  in  the  A.  heaven

33.  9.  some  of  them  hath  lie  made  A.  days

15.  so  look  on  all  the  works  of  the  Most  H.

34.  6.  if  they  be  not  sent  from  the  Most  H.  _

19.  the  Most  H.  is  not  pleased  with  the  offerings

35  6.  the  savour  thereof  is  before  the  Most  11.

10  give  to  the  Most  H.  according  as  he  enriched
17!  till  the  Most  H.  shall  behold  to  judge

37.  14.  watchmen  that  sit  above  in  an  A.  tower

15.  and  above  all  this  pray  to  the  Most  11.

38.  2.  for  of  the  Most  II.  cometh  healing
33.  not  sought  for,  nor  sit  A.  in  the  congregation

39.  1.  giveth  his  mind  to  the  law  ot  the  Most  11.

5.  and  he  will  pray  before  the  Most  II.

41.  4.  why  against  the  pleasure  ot  the  Most  H.  r

8.  who  have  forsaken  the  law  ot  the  most  A.  God
4".  2  be  not  ashamed  of  the  law  ot  the  Most  H.

43  2  the  sun  declareth  the  work  of  the  Most  11.

12.  the  hands  of  the  Most  II.  have  bended  it
44.  20.  Abraham  kept  the  law  ot  the  Most  H.

46.  5.  he  called  upon  the  most  A.  Lord,  47.  5.

9.  lie  entered  upon  the  h .  places  ot  the  land
47]  8.  in  all  he  praised  the  holy  One  most  A.

48.  5.  didst  raise  a  dead  mail  by  word  ot  Most  11.

49.  4,  for  they  forsook  the  law  of  the  Most  H.

5d!  l!  Simon  the  A.  priest  repaired  the  house

2.  the  A.  fortress  of  the  wall  about  the  temple

7.  sun  shining  upon  the  temple  ot  the  Most  H.

14.  adorn  the  offering  ot  the  most  A.  Almighty

15.  a  savour  to  the  most  A.  King  ot  all

16.  for  a  remembrance  before  the  Most  11.

17  their  Lord  God  almighty  the  Most  H.

19.  besought  the  Lord  the  Most  H.  by  prayer
Cl,  might  receive  a  blessing  trom  the  Most  11.

Ear.  1. 7.  they  sent  collection  to  Joachim  A.  priest
2  11.  brought  witii  a  mighty  hand  and  A.  arm

3.  25.  and  hath  no  end,  A.  and  unmeasurable

6.  25.  things  are  bought  for  a  most  A.  price
Prayer  ol  Xjanass.  thou  art  the  most  A.  Lord

1  Mac.  4.  60.  budded  mount  Sion  with  A.  walls

6.  7-  compassed  about  the  sanctuary  with  A.  walls
7!  5.  Alcimus  who  was  desirous  to  be  A.  priest
9.  the  wicked  Alcimus,  whom  he  made  A,  piiest
21.  Alcimus  contended  for  the  A.  priesthood
10  20.  we  ordain  thee  to  be  A.  priest  ot  thy  nation
32.  as  for  the  tower,  1  give  it  to  the  A.  priest
38.  to  obey  other  authority  than  A.  priest  s
69.  sent  unto  Jonathan  the  A  priest,  say  iug
41.  27-  continued  him  in  the  A.  priesthood,  14.  38.

57  I  confirm  thee  in  the  A.  priesthood

12.  3.  Jonathan  the  A.  priest  sent  us  unto  you

6.  Jonathan  the  A.  priest  to  the  Lacedemonians
7'.  theie  were  letters  sent  to  Onias  the  A.  priest

20.  Ateus  to  Onias  the  A.  priest,  greeting

13.  36.  king  Demetrius  to  Simon  the  A.  priest

42.  in  the  first  year  of  Simon  the  A.  priest

14.  17.  his  brother  Simon  was  made  A.  priest

20.  the  Lacedemonians,  to  Simon  the  A.  priest

23.  written  a  copy  thereof  to  Simon  the  A.  priest
27.  the  third  year  of  Simon  the  A.  priest

41.  should  be  governor  and  A.  priest  tor  ever
47.  Simon  was  well  pleased  to  be  A.  Driest

15.  17.  being  sent  from  Simon  the  A.  priest

21.  deliver  them  to  Simon  the  A.  priest

24.  the  copy  they  wrote  to  Simon  the  A.  priest

16.  12.  for  he  was  the  A.  priest’s  son-in-law

2!  Mac.  3.  I.  the  godliness  of  Onias  the  A.  priest
~  4.  hut  one  Simon  fell  out  with  the  A.  priest

9.  had  been  courteously  received  ot  the  A.  priest

10.  then  the  A.  priest  told  him  there  was  money

16.  whoso  had  looked  the  A.  priest  in  the  face

21.  the  fear  of  the  A.  priest  being  in  an  agony

31.  prayed  that  he  would  call  upon  the  Most  H.

32.  the  A.  priest  suspecting  lest  the  king

33.  as  the  A.  priest  was  making  an  atonement

4.  7.  Jason  laboured  under-hand  to  be  A  priest

13.  Jason  that  ungodly  wretch  and  no  A.  priest

25.  bringing  nothing  worthy  A.  priesthood

8.  30.  they  very  easily  got  A.  and  strong  holds
9.8.  and  weigh  the  A.  mountains  in  a  balance
23.  when  lie  led  an  army  into  the  A.  countries
25.  when  I  went  up  into  A.  provinces

11.  3.  and  to  set  the  A.  priesthood  to  sale

14.  .3.  one  Alcimus,  who  had  been  A.  priest

7.  ancestors’  honour,  I  mean  the  A.  priesthood

15.  12.  Onias  who  had  been  A.  priest,  a  good  man

HIGHEST.

2  Bsd.  4.  11.  able  to  comprehend  the  way  of  the  II.

31.  do  not  thou  hasten  above  the  Most  H.

Jud  14.  1.  hang  it  on  the  A.  place  of  your  walls
IVtsd.  6.  3.  power  and  sovereignty  from  the  H.
Eccl.  28.  7.  remember  the  covenant  of  the  H.

43.  9.  an  ornament  giving  light  in  the  A.  places
Bar  1.  4.  the  people  from  the  lowest  to  the  A.

HIGHLY.  L.

2  Mac.  1.  11.  God  hath  delivered,  we  thank  him  A
HILL.

2  Esd.  13.7- the  place,  whereoutthe  A.  was  graven
36  thou  sawest  the  A.  graven  without  hands
Jud.  1.  6.  all  they  that  dwelt  in  the  A.  country

656


Jud.  2.  22.  he  went  from  thence  into  the  A.  country

4.7.  charging  them  to  keep  the  passages  ot  A.  count.

5.  1.  had  shut  up  the  passages  of  the  A.  country

6.7.  shall  bring  thee  back  in  19  the  A.  country

11.  they  went  from  the  plain  into  the  A.  country

12.  they  went  out  of  the  city  to  the  top  or  the  A.

13.  having  gotten  privily  under  the  A.

1  Mac  13. 52.  the  A.  of  the  temple  lie  made  stronger

HILLS.  .

2  Esd.  6.  51 .  in  same  part  wherein  are  a  thousand  A.

Jud.  5.  1.  had  fortified  the  tops  ot  the  high  A.

7.  4.  nor  are  the  A.  able  to  bear  their  weight
16.  4.  anil  their  horsemen  have  covered  the  A.

Bar.  6.  63.  fire  sent  from  above  to  consume  the  A.
Dan.  3.  53.  O  ye  mountains  and  little  A.  bless  the  L.

HIMSELF.  ...

Eccl.  37  7.  but  there  is  some  thatcouns*'  ,eth  tor  n.

HINDER.  L  ....

1  Esd.  2.  C8.  commanded  A.  those  men  from  building
30.  they  began  to  A.  the  builders  ot  the  temple

6.  33.  that  stretcheth  out  his  hand  to  A.  that  house
Eccl.  18.  22.  let  nothing  A.  thee  to  pay  thy  vow-
32.  3.  speak  with  sound  judgment,  A.  not  music
39.  18.  and  none  can  A.  when  he  will  save

HINDMOST.  .

1  Mac.  4.  15.  howbeit,  all  the  A.  ot  them  were  slain
HINDERED.

1  Esd.  5.  72.  but  the  heathen  A.  their  building
73.  they  A.  the  finishing  of  the  building,  so  they
were  h.  from  building  till  the  reign  ot  Darius
6.6.  they  werenot  A.  from  building  until  such  time
IVisd.  17.  20.  and  noue  were  A.  in  their  labour
Eccl.  19. 28.  if  for  want  of  power  he  be  A.  iroin  sinn.

20.  21.  there  is  that  is  A.  from  sinning  for  want

1  Mac.  9.  55.  was  plagued,  and  his  enterprises  A.

H IN  DEL  E  TH

Eccl  16.  28.  none  of  them  A.  another,  not  disobey
IIIRCANUS.

2  Mac.  3.  11.  some  of  it  belong,  to  II.  son  of  lobtas

HIRE.  _  ,

Eccl  34  22.  that  defraudeth  the  labourer  of  his  A.
HIRED.

Tab.  5. 11.  to  whom  he  said,  dost  thou  seek  fora  tribe
or  family,  or  an  A.  man  to  go  with  thy  son  -

1  Mac.  5.  39.  he  hath  A.  the  Arabians  to  help  them
6.  29.  there  came  to  him  bands  ot  A.  soldiers

2  Mac.  10.  14.  he  A.  soldiers,  and  nourished  war

HIRELING.

Jud.  4.  10.  every  stranger  and  A.  put  on  sackcloth
6.5.  thou  Achior,  an  A.  of  Ammon,  shalt  see  my  lace
HIRELINGS.

Jud.  6.  2.  who  art  thou,  Achior,  and  A.  ot  Ephraim  <
HISS.  .  .  .

Eccl.  22.  1.  every  one  will  A.  him  to  his  disgrace
II ISS  IN  G.

IVisd.  17.  9.  scared  with  beasts  and  A.  of  serpents
HISTORIES.

Esth.  16. 7.  have  declared,  not  so  much  by  ancient  A.
See  Story.

HITHTES.

1  Esd.  8.  69.  the  pollutions  of  the  Canaanites,  H.

HOAR.  .  ,  .

Wisd.  16.  29.  shall  melt  away  as  winter  s  A.  frost
Eccl.  43.  19.  the  A.  frost  as  salt  he  poureth  on  earth
HOARDED.

Eccl.  20.  30.  treasure  that  is  A.  up,  what  profit.

Bar.  3.  17.  they  that  A.  up  silver  and  gold
HOLD.

1  Mac.  1.  33.  and  made  it  a  strong  A.  for  them
3.  45.  and  aliens  kept  the  strong  A.

6.61.  whereupon  they  went  out  ot  the  strong  A.

12.  34.  he  heard  that  they  would  deliver  the  A.

16.  8.  the  remnant  gat  them  to  the  strong  A.

15.  receiving  them  into  a  little  A.  called  Docus

2  Mac.  10.  32.  he  tied  into  a  very  strong  A.

13.  19.  which  was  a  strong  A.  of  the  Jews
HOLDS.

1  Mac.  1. 2.  made  many  wars,  and  many  strong  A.

8.  10.  and  pulled  down  their  strong  A.  and  brought
10.  37.  some  shall  be  placed  in  the  king  s  strong  A.

1 1. 18.  they  that  were  in  the  strong  A.  were  slain

12.  35.  consulted  about  building  strong  A.  in  Judea

13.  3.3.  Simon  built  up  the  strong  A.  111  Judea
38.  the  strong  A.  which  ye  have  budded

2  Mac.  8.  30.  and  very  easily  got  high  and  strong  A.

10.  15.  having  gotten  the  most  commodious  A.

16.  they  ran  on  the  strong  A.  of  the  ldumeans

17.  they  won  the  A.  and  kept  off  all  that  fought
23.  he  slew  in  the  two  A.  more  than  20,000

11.  6.  when  they  heard  that  he  besieged  the  A.

13.  18.  he  went  about  to  take  the  A.  by  policy

HOLD.

1  Esd.  1.  17.  that  they  might  A.  the  passover
Tob.  10.  6.  A.  thy  peace,  take  no  care,  he  is  safe
7.  she  said,  A.  thy  peace,  and  deceive  me  not

11.  11.  took  A.  of  his  father,  and  strake  the  gall
IVisd.  2.  24.  they  that  A.  of  his  side  dp  find  it
8. 12. when  IA.my  tongue  they  shall  bidemy  leisure
15.  14.  the  enemies  that  A.  them  in  subjection

Eccl.  1. 19.  exalteth  them  to  honour  that  A.  her  fast
4.  11.  wisdom  layeth  A.  of  them  that  seek  her
^6.  27.  when  thou  hast  got  A.  of  her,  let  her  not  go

12.  5.  A.  back  thy  bread,  and  give  it  not  to  him

20.  7-  a  wise  man  will  A.  his  tongue  till  he  see

21.  14.  he  will  A.  no  knowledge  while  he  liveth
23.  5.  thou  shalt  A.  him  up  that  is  desirous  to  serve

6.  let  not  the  lust  of  the  flesh  take  A.  of  me
26.  7.  he  that  hath  A.  of  her,  is  as  though  lie  held
27.3.  unless  a  man  A.  himself  diligently  in  tear  ot  L.
29.23.  be  it  little  or  much,  A.  thee  contented
30.  13.  chastise  thy  son,  and  A.  him  to  labour
Bar.  3.  21.  nor  understood  paths,  nor  laid  A.  ot  it
Hus.  39.  the  man  we  could  not  A.  he  was  stronger

1  Mac.  15.  34.  we  A.  the  inheritance  ot  our  fathers

2  Mac.  12.  35.  and  taking  A.  of  his  coat,  drew  him

HOLDETH.  .

Frrl.  4.  13.  he  that  A.  her  fast  shall  inherit  glory

13.  23.  when  rich  speaketh,  every  man  A.  Ins  tongue
20.  1.  some  man  A.  his  tongue,  and  lie  is  wise,  6.
25.  11.  he  that  A.  it,  whereto  shall  he  be  likened  .
32.  8.  as  one  that  knoweth,  and  yet  A.  his  tongue
38.  25.  how  can  he  get  wisdom  that  A.  the  plough  .


Bar.  6.  14.  A.  a  sceptre,  as  though  he  were  a  .tudjr
HOLDING.


2  Mac  3.  20.  all  A.  their  hands  towards  heaven
'7.  10.’ the  third  A.  forth  his  hands  manfully
15.  12.  A.  up  his  hands,  prayed  for  the  Jews

15.  Jeremias  A.  forth  his  right  hand,  gave  Judas

HOLM-TREE.

Sus.  58.  under  what  tree  t  w  ho  answered,  under  a  A.

HOLOFERNES,  or  Olofesnes.

Jud.  2.4.  H.  the  chief  captain  ot  his  army

14.  then  H.  went  from  the  presence  ot  lus  lord

10.  13.  1  am  coming  before  II.  the  chief  captaiu

17.  and  they  brought  her  to  the  tent  ot  II.

21.  II.  rested  upon  his  bed  under  a  canopy

11.  1.  then  said  H.  unto  her,  22.  1  12.  3.  17-

12.  10.  H.  made  a  feast  to  his  own  servants  only

16.  II.  his  heart  was  ravished  with  her

20.  II.  took  great  delight  in  her,  and  drank

13.  2.  H.  lying  along  on  his  bed  in  the  tent

6.  the  pillar  of  the  bed  which  was  at  H.  head

9.  she  went  forth  and  gave  H.  his  head  to  her  maid

15.  she  said  unto  them,  behold  the  head  ot  11.
14.3.  then  they  shall  run  to  the  tent  ot  IL  13

18.  II.  lieth  upon  the  ground  w  ithout  a  head

HOLY.

1  Esd.  1.  3.  Levites,  the  ministers  of  Israel,  should

hallow  themselves  to  set  the  A.  ark  ot  the  Lord
15.  the  A.  singers  also  the  sons  ot  Asaph
45.  brought  with  the  A.  vessels  ot  the  Lord
53.  within  the  compass  of  their  A.  temple

2.  10.  king  Cvrus  brought  forth  the  A.  vessels

5.  45.  to  give"  into  the  A.  treasury  1001)  pounds
52.  of  the  new  moons,  and  ot  all  A.  feasts

6.  18.  A.  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver  earned  away

7.  2.  did  very  carefully  oversee  the  A.  works

3.  and  so  the  A.  works  piospered  when  Aggeuf

5.  ami  thus  was  the  A.  house  finished  in  Aoar

8.  5.  went  up  of  the  Levites,  of  the  A.  singers
58.  you  are  A.  to  the  Lord,  and  the  vessels  are  A
70.  the  A.  seed  is  mixed  with  the  strange  people
71.1  rent  my  clothes  and  the  A.  garments
73.  witli  my  clothes  and  the  A.  garment  rent

9.  38.  came  into  the  broad  place  ot  the  A.  porch
41.  he  read  in  the  broad  court  before  the  A.  porch

50.  this  day  is  A.  to  the  Lord,  52,  53.

2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  A.  tilings  are  defiled,  and  wives

14.  22.  if  1  found  grace,  send  the  A.  Ghost  into  me

Tub.  2.  1.  which  is  the  A.  feast  ot  the  seven  weeks
3.  11.  thy  A.  and  glorious  name  is  blessed

8.  5.  blessed  is  thy  A.  and  glorious  name  tor  ever

15.  to  be  praised  witli  all  pure  and  A.  praise

11.  14.  and  blessed  are  all  thine  A.  angels

12.  12.  bring  your  prayers  before  the  A.  One

15.  1  am  Raphael,  one  of  the  seven  A.  angels,  who
go  in  and  out  before  the  glory  ot  the  A.  One

13.  9.  O  Jerusalem,  tile  A.  city,  he  will  scourge
IVisd.  1 . 5.  the  A.  spirit  of  discipline  will  nee

6.  10.  they  that  keep  holiness,  shall  be  judged  A.

7.  22.  in  her  is  an  understanding  spirit,  A.  lively
27.  and  in  all  ages  entering  into  A.  souls

9.  8.  to  build  a  temple  on  thy  A.  mount,  an  altar  111

the  city,  a  resemblance  ot  the  A.  tabernacle

10.  O  send  her  out  of  thy  A.  heavens,  from  throne

17.  except  thou  send  thy  A.  Spirit  from  abov  e

10.  10.  she  gave  him  knowledge  ot  A.  things
20.  the  righteous  praised  thy  A.  name,  O  Lord

11.  1.  she  prospered  in  the  hand  of  the  A.  prophet

12.  3.  both  those  old  inhabitants  of  thy  A.  land

17.  2.  men  thought  to  oppress  the  A.  nation

18.  9.  and  with  one  consent  made  an  A.  law
Eccl.  4.  i4.  they  shall  minister  to  the  A.  One

7.  31.  give  him  the  first-fruits  ot  the  A.  things

14.  20.  the  man  that  reasoneth  ot  A.  things

17.  10.  and  the  elect  shall  praise  his  A.  name

18.  3.  by  power  dividing  A.  things  among  them

23.  9.  nor  use  thyself  to  naming  ot  the  A.  One

24.  10.  iu  the  A.  tabernacle  I  served  before  him

18.  ain  mother  of  fear,  and  knowledge,  and  A. hope

26.  17.  as  clear  light  is  on  the  A.  candlestick
36.  13.  be  merciful  to  Jerusalem  thy  A.  city
39.  13.  hearken  to  me,  ye  A.  children,  and  bud
24.  as  his  ways  are  clean  and  plain  unto  the  A.
43.  10.  at  the  commandment  of  the  A.  One
45.  10.  with  an  A.  garment,  with  gold  and  blue

15.  Moses  anointed  him  with  A.  oil
47.  8.  in  all  his  works  he  praised  the  A.  One

49.  12.  who  set  up  an  A.  temple  to  the  Lord

50.  11.  w  hen  he  went  up  to  the  A.  altar
Bar.  2. 16.  O  Lord,  look  down  from  thy  A.  house

4.  22.  and  joy  is  come  unto  me  from  the  A.  One

37.  by  the  word  of  the  A.  One,  5.  5.

Dan.  3.  5.  hast  brought  on  the  A.  city  of  our  fathers
12.  mercy  not  depart,  for  thy  A.  Israel’s  sak“

65.  O  ye  A.  and  humble  men  of  heart,  bless  Lord
Sus.  45.  Lord  raised  the  A.  spirit  of  a  young  youth

1  Mac.  1. 46.  and  pollute  the  sanctuary  and  A.  peop
63.  they  might  not  profane  the  A.  covenant

2.  7-  the  misery  of  my  people  and  of  the  A.  city
4.  49.  they  made  also  new  A.  vessels
10.21.  at  the  feast  Jonathan  put  on  the  A.  robe
31.  let  Jerusalem  also  be  A.  and  tree

11.  37.  let  it  be  set  upon  the  A.  mount

12.  9.  that  we  have  the  A.  books  ot  scripture
14.  36.  and  did  much  hurt  in  the  A.  place

16.  8.  then  sounded  they  with  the  A.  trumpets

2  Mac.  1. 7.  his  company  revolted  from  the  A.  land
12.  he  cast  them  out  that  fought  within  the  A.  city  •

29.  plant  thy  people  again  in  thy  A.  place
34.  the  king  enclosing  the  place,  made  it  A

2.  13.  the  epistles  concerning  the  A.  gilts

18.  God  will  gather  us  into  the  A.  place

3.  1.  when  the  A.  city  was  inhabited  with  peace  1

4.  48.  that  followed  the  matter  tor  the  A.  vessels
5. 15.  but  presumed  to  go  into  the  most  A.  temple

16.  taking  the  A.  vessels  with  polluted  hands

25.  did  forbear  till  the  A.  day  of  the  sabbath

6.  4.  within  the  circuit  of  the  A.  places
23.  or  rather  the  A.  law  made  and  given  by  uou
28.  to  die  for  the  honourable  and  A.  laws

30.  to  the  Lord,  that  hath  the  A.  knowledge

8.  15.  for  his  A.  and  glorious  name's  sake

17.  the  injury  unjustly  done  to  the  A.  place


HON


HOP


H  O  U  [Apocrypha,


2  Rfac.R.  2.3.  he  appointed  Eleazar  to  read  A.  book
33.  Callisthenes  that  set  tire  upon  the  A.  gates

9. 14.  that  the  A.  city  iie  would  set  at  liberty

16.  A.  temple,  which  before  he  had  spoiled,  he

would  garnish  with  gifts  and  restore  A.
vessels.

12.  45.  it  was  an  A.  and  good  thought
13.8.  the  altar,  whose  fire  and  ashes  were  A.

10.  at  the  point  to  be  putofrom  the  A.  temple

14.  3.  nor  have  any  more  access  to  the  A.  altar
31.  the  other  came  into  the  great  and  A.  temple
36.  O  A.  Lord  of  all  holiness,  keep  this  house

15.  16.  take  this  A.  sword,  a  gift  from  God

UGLILY.

Wisd.  6. 10.  for  they  that  keep  holiness  A.  be  holy
HOLINESS.

Wisd.  5.  JO.  take  A.  for  an  invincible  shield
6. 10.  they  that  keep  A.  holily  shall  be  judged  holy

11.  30.  they  swore  in  deceit,  despising  A.

Eccl.  17  -  29.  to  such  as  turn  to  him  in  A.

45.  12.  a  crowrn,  wherein  was  engraved  A.

50. 11.  lie  made  the  garment  of  A.  honourable

2  Mac.  3.  12.  had  committed  it  to  the  A.  of  the  place

14.  36.  O  holy  Lord  of  all  A.  keep  this  house

15.  2.  that  day  which  he  hath  honoured  witli  A.

HOLLOW.

Wisd.  17.  19.  an  echo  from  the  A.  mountains
2  Mac.  1.  19.  and  hid  it  in  a  A.  place  of  a  pit
2. 5.  Jeremy  found  an  A.  cave  where  he  laid  the  ark
HOME.

1  Esd.  3.  3.  and  being  satisfied,  were  gone  A.

2  Esd.  12.  49.  now  go  your  way  A.  every  man
Tub.  3. 17.  the  self-same  time  came  Tobit  h.

Eccl.  32.  11.  but  get  thee  h.  without  delay
Bus.  1.3.  one  said  to  the  other,  let  us  now  go  h.

1  Mac.  4.  24.  after  this  they  went  h.  and  sung

12.  35.  after  this  came  Jonathan  h.  again

45.  therefore  send  them  now  A.  again,  and  choose

2  Mac.  11. 29.  that  your  desire  was  to  return  A.

HONEST.

2  Esd.  16.  49-  as  a  whore  envieth  an  A.  woman
Tob.  5.  13.  thou  art  of  an  A.  ami  good  stock
7.  7.  thou  art  the  son  of  an  A.  and  good  man
Wisd.  4.  12.  doth  obscure  things  that  are  A.

Eccl.  26.  24.  but  an  h.  woman  will  reverence  husb.
29.  14.  an  A.  man  is  surety  for  his  neighbour
2  Mac.  6.  23.  his  most  A.  education  from  a  child
HON  ESTLYL

Eccl.  22.  9.  if  children  live  A.  have  wherewithal
2  Mac.  12.  43.  doing  therein  very  well  and  A.
HONOUR.

1  Esd.  8.  4.  the  king  did  him  A.  for  he  found  grace

9.  52.  for  the  Lord  will  bring  you  to  A.

2  Esd.  9.  45.  we  give  great  A.  to  the  Almighty

10.  23.  the  seal  of  Sion  hath  now  lost  her  A.

Tob.  4.  3.  but  A.  her  all  the  days  of  thy  life

10.  12.  A.  thy  father  and  thy  "mother-in-law
14.  13.  where  he  became  old  with  A.

Jud.  16.  23.  she  increaseth  more  and  more  in  A.
Est/i.  12.  6.  flaman  was  in  great  A.  with  the  king

13.  3.  had  the  A.  of  the  second  place  in  the  kingdom
Wisd.  3.  17.  their  last  age  shall  be  without  A.

5.  4.  we  accounted  his  end  to  be  without  A.

6.  21.  O  ye  kings  of  the  people,  A.  wisdom

8. 10. 1  shall  have  A.  with  the  elders,  tho’  young

14.  17.  whom  men  could  not  A.  in  presence
Eccl.  1.  11.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  A.  and  glory

19.  wisdom  exalteth  them  to  A.  that  hold  her
3.  2.  given  the  father  A.  over  the  children
7-  lie  that  feareth  the  Lord  will  A.  his  father

8.  A.  thy  father  and  mother  both  in  word  and  deed

11.  the  glory  of  a  man  is  from  the  A.  of  his  father

5.  13.  A.  and  shame  is  in  tafk,  the  tongue  is  his  fall

6.  31.  thou  shalt.  put  her  on  as  a  robe  of  A.

7.  4.  nor  seek  of  the  king  the  seat  of  A.

27.  A.  thy  father  with  thy  whole  heart
31.  fear  the  Lord  and  A.  the  priest

8. 14.  they  will  judge  for  him  according  to  his  A.

10.  5.  on  the  person  of  the  scribe  shall  he  lay  his  A.

28.  give  it  A.  according  to  the  dignity  thereof

29.  who  will  A.  him  that  dishonoured)  his  life
11.4.  exalt  not  thyself  in  the  day  of  A.

24.  16.  my  branches  are  the  branches  of  A.

17.  my  nowers  are  the  fruit  of  A.  and  riches

25.  5.  how  comely  is  counsel  to  men  of  A.  /

29.  6.  for  A.  he  will  pay  him  disgrace

3.3.  22.  leave  not  a  stain  in  thine  A.

35.  8.  give  the  Lord  his  A.  with  a  good  eye
38.1.  A.  a  physician  with  the  A.  due  to  him
2.  and  he  shall  receive  A.  of  the  king
45.  12.  holiness  an  ornament  of  A.  a  costly  work
47.  20.  thou  didst  stain  thy  A.  and  pollute  thy  seed

49. 16.  Sem  and  Seth  were  in  great  A.  among  men
50.  11.  when  he  put  on  the  robe  of  A.  was  clothed
Bar.  4.  3.  give  not  thine  A.  to  another,  nor  the  things
Sus,  50.  God  hath  given  thee  the  A.  of  an  elder

1  Mac.  1.  39.  her  A.  was  turned  into  contempt

2.  51.  so  shall  ye  receive  great  A.  and  a  name

3.  3.  he  gat  his  people  great  A,  put  on  breast-plate
14.  I  will  get  me  a  name  and  A.  in  the  kingdom

9.  10.  let  us  die,  and  let  us  not  stain  our  A.

11.  42.  but  I  will  greatly  A.  thee  and  thy  nation

12.  12.  and  we  are  right  glad  of  your  A.

14.  4.  his  authority  and  A.  pleased  them  well
21.  the  ambassadors  certified  us  of  your  A.

29.  they  did  their  nation  great  A.

39.  Demetrius  honoured  him  with  great  A.

15.  9.  we  will  A.  thee  and  thy  nation  and  temple

with  great  A.  so  that  your  A.  shall  be  known

2  Mac.  2.  21.  those  behaved  to  their  A.  for  Judaism
3.  2.  the  kings  themselves  did  A.  the  place

5. 16.  dedicated  to  the  glory  and  A.  of  the  place

6. 11.  to  help  for  the  A.  of  the  most  sacred  day
23.  as  became  the  A.  of  his  gray  head

9.  21.  1  would  have  remembered  kindly  your  A.
14.7.  I  being  deprived  of  mine  ancestors’ A.

15.  2.  give  A.  to  that  day  which  he  hath  honoured
HONOURABLE.

Tob.  .3.  11.  thy  glorious  name  is  A.  for  ever
12.  7-  it  is  A.  to  reveal  the  works  of  God,  11.

Jud.  16.  21.  was  in  her  time  A.  in  the  country
Wisd.  4.  8.  for  A.  age  is  not  in  length  of  time


Eccl.  10.  19.  that  love  the  Lord,  are  an  A.  plant
20.  among  brethren,  he  that  is  chief  is  A.

11.  6.  the  A.  delivered  into  other  men’s  hands

24.  12.  I  took  root  in  an  A.  people

29.  27-  give  place,  thou  stranger,  to  an  A.  man

45.  20.  but  he  made  Aaron  more  A.

48.  6.  who  broughtest  A.  men  from  their  bed
50. 11.  he  made  the  garment  of  holiness  A.

Sus.  4.  because  he  was  more  A.  than  all  others

1  Mac.  1.  6.  he  called  his  servants  such  as  were  A.

2.  17.  thou  art  an  A.  and  great  man  in  this  city

7.  26.  the  king  sent  N  icanor  one  of  his  A.  princes

14.  5.  as  he  was  A.  in  all  his  acts,  so  in  this

10.  so  that  his  A.  name  was  renowned

2  Mac.  6.  28.  to  die  for  the  A.  and  holy  laws

7.  20.  the  mother  was  worthy  of  A.  memory

10.  13.  seeing  that  he  was  in  no  A.  place

HONOURABLY’.

1  Esd.  9.  45.  for  he  sat  A.  in  the  first  place
Tub.  12.  6.  A.  to  shew  forth  the  works  of  God
14.  11.  he  gave  up  the  ghost,  and  he  buried  him  A.
13.  he  buried  his  father  and  mother-in-law  A.
Esth.  13.  4.  so  as  the  uniting  of  our  kingdoms  A.
Wisd.  18. 3.  an  harmless  sun  to  entertain  them  A.

1  Mac.  10.60.  went  A.  to  Ptolemais,  where  he  met

11.  60.  at  Asealon,  they  of  city  met  him  A.

12.  8.  Onias  entreated  the  ambassador  A.

43.  but  received  him  A.  and  commended  him
14. 23.  it  pleased  the  people  to  entertain  the  men  A.
40.  that  they  had  entertained  the  ambassadors  A.

2  Mac.  2.  8.  that  the  place  might  be  A.  sanctified

4.  22.  where  he  was  A.  received  of  Jason

49.  they  of  Tyrus  caused  them  to  be  A.  buried
HONOURED.

1  Esd.  8. 26.  hath  A.  me  in  the  sight  of  the  king
67.  and  they  A.  the  people  and  the  temple  of  God
81.  yea,  and  they  A.  the  temple  of  our  Lord

2  Esd.  9.  31.  and  ye  shall  be  A.  in  it  for  ever
Jud.  12. 13.  to  be  A.  in  his  presence,  and  drink  wine
Esth.  16.  2.  the  more  often  they  are  A.  with  bounty

11.  that  he  was  continually  A.  of  all  men
Wisd.  14. 15.  now  A.  him  as  a  god,  then  a  dead  man

17.  an  express  image  of  a  king  whom  they  A.

20.  which  a  little  before  was  but  A.  as  a  man

Eccl.  3. 20.  power  great,  and  Lord  is  A.  of  the  lowly

10.  24.  judges  and  potentates  shall  be  A.

30.  the  poor  man  is  A.  for  his  skill,  and  the  rich

man  is  A.  for  his  riches

31.  he  that  is  A.  in  poverty  ,  is  much  more  in  riches
38.  6.  he  might  be  A.  in  his  marvellous  works
44.  7.  all  these  were  A.  in  their  generations

46.  12.  let  the  name  of  them  that  were  A.

47.  6.  so  the  people  A.  him  with  ten  thousands

13.  Solom.  reigned  in  a  peaceable  time,  and  was  A.

48.  4.  O  Elias,  how  wast  thou  A.  in  thy  deeds  !

50.  5.  how  was  he  A.  in  the  midst  of  the  people  !
Bel  2.  Daniel  was  A.  above  all  his  friends

1  Mac.  2.  18.  thy  children  shall  be  A.  with  silver

10.  64.  when  his  accusers  saw  that  he  was  A.

65.  so  the  king  A.  him,  and  made  him  a  duke
88.  king  Alexander  A.  Jonathan  yet  more

11.  51.  the  Jews  were  A.  in  the  sight  of  the  king

14.  .39.  Demetrius  A.  him  with  great  honour

2  Mac.  3. 12.  the  temple  A.  over  all  the  world
.30.  that  had  miraculously  A.  his  own  place

13.2.3.  A.  the  temple,  and  dealt  kindly  with  place

15.  2.  hath  A.  with  holiness  above  other  days

HONOURETH.

Eccl.  .3.  3.  who  A.  his  father,  maketh  an  atonement

4.  A.  his  mother  is  as  one  that  layeth  up  treasure

5.  whoso  A.  his  father,  shall  have  joy  of  children

6.  he  that  A.  father  shall  have  long  life

26.  26.  a  woman  that  A.  her  husband  be  judged  wise
HONOURS.

1  Mac.  11.  27.  in  all  the  A.  that  he  had  before

2  Mac.  4.  15.  not  setting  by  the  A.  of  their  fathers

HONEY.

2  Esd.  2.19.  many  fountains  flowing  with  milk  and  A.
Eccl.  24.  20.  my  memorial  is  sweeter  than  A.

.39.  26.  A.  and  milk  are  for  the  use  of  man’s  life
46. 8.  land  that  fioweth  with  milk  and  A.  Bar.  1 . 20.
49. 1.  it  is  sweet  as  A.  in  all  mouths,  and  as  music
HOOKS.

2  Mac.  13.  2.  three  hundred  chariots  armed  with  A.
HOPE.

2  Esd.  4.  .35.  how  long  shall  I  A.  on  this  fashion  ?

5.  12.  at  the  same  time  shall  men  A.  but  not  obtain
7.50.  there  is  promised  us  an  everlasting  A.

10.  34.  forsake  me  not,  lest  1  die  frustrate  of  A.
11. 46.  that  she  may  A.  for  the  judgment  of  him

15.  46.  that  art  partaker  of  the  A.  of  Babylon
Tob.  11.11.  saying,  be  of  good  A.  my  father
Jud.  9. 11.  a  Saviour  of  them  that  are  without  A.
JVisd.  3.  4.  yet  is  their  A.  full  of  immortality
11.  he  is  miserable,  and  their  A.  is  vain

18.  they  have  no  A.  nor  comfort  in  the  day  of  trial
5. 14.  the  A.  of  the  ungodly  is  like  dust

12.  19.  hast  made  thy  children  to  be  of  good  A.

13.  10.  and  in  dead  things  is  there  A.

14.  6.  the  A.  of  the  world  governed  by  thy  hand

15.  10.  his  A.  is  more  vile  than  earth

16.  29.  the  A.  of  the  unfaithful  shall  melt  away
Eccl.  2.  9.  ye  that  fear  the  Lord,  A.  for  good

13.  6.  lie  will  smile  on  thee,  and  put  thee  in  A.

14.  2.  who  is  not  fallen  from  his  A.  in  the  Lord

2.3.  .3.  whose  A.  is  far  from  thy  mercy

24. 18. 1  am  the  mother  of  fair  love,  and  holy  A.
27.21.  but  he  that  bewrayeth  secrets  is  without  A.

34. 1.3.  for  their  A.  is  in  him  that  saveth  them

14.  not  fear,  nor  be  afraid,  for  he  is  his  A.

49.  10.  they  delivered  them  by  assured  A.

Bar.  4.  22.  for  my  A.  is  in  the  Everlasting

2  Mac.  2. 17.  we  A.  also  that  the  God  that  delivered

3.  29.  he  lay  speechless,  without  all  A.  of  life

7.  11.  from  him  I  A.  to  receive  them  again
14.  it  is  good  to  look  for  A.  from  God

20.  because  of  the  A.  that  she  had  in  the  Lord

9. 20. 1  give  thanks  to  God  having  A.  in  heaven
22.  having  great  A.  to  escape  this  sickness

HOPED.

Wisd.  2.  22.  neither  A.  they  for  wages  of  righteousn.
11.7.  gavest  them  water,  by  means  they  A.  net  for


2  Mac.  12.  44.  if  he  had  not  A.  they  should  rise
HOPES.

Eccl.  2.3.  5.  turn  away  from  me  vain  A.

.34.  1.  the  A.  of  a  man  void  of  understanding
2  Mac.  7. 34.  nor  puffed  up  with  uncertain  A.
HOREB.

Eccl.  48. 7.  and  in  H.  the  judgment  of  vengeance

HORN .

Jud.  9. 8.  to  cast  down  with  sword  the  A.  of  thy  altar
Eccl.  47.  5.  and  set  up  the  A.  of  his  people
7.  he  brake  their  A.  in  sunder  to  this  day
11.  the  Lord  exalted  his  A.  for  ever
HORRIBLE.

2  Esd.  11. 45.  appear  no  more,  nor  thy  A.  wings

15.  28.  behold,  an  A.  v  ision  from  the  east
.34.  they  are  very  A.  to  look  on,  full  of  wrath

Wisd.  3.  19.  A.  is  the  end  of  the  unrighteous

8.  15.  A.  tyrants  shall  be  afraid  when  they  hear

11.  18.  shooting  A.  sparkles  out  of  their  eyes

16.  5.  when  the  A.  fierceness  of  beasts  came

17.  5.  nor  stars  endure  to  lighten  that  A.  night

18.  17.  visions  of  A.  dreams  troubled  them  sore

19.  17-  being  compassed  with  A.  great  darkness

flORRIBLY.

Wisd.  6.  5.  A.  and  speedily  shall  he  come  on  you
HORROR.

2  Mac.  3.  17.  the  man  was  so  compassed  with  A.

HORSE.

Jud.  9.  7-  they  are  exalted  with  A.  and  man
Eccl.  ,30.  8.  an  A.  not  broken  becomes  headstrong
.33.  6.  a  stallion  A.  is  as  a  mocking  friend

1  Mac.  6.  28.  those  that  had  charge  of  the  A.

2  Mac.  3.  25.  there  appeared  to  them  a  A.  with  a  ter¬
rible  rider,  and  it  seemed  that  he  that  sat  on  the  A.

HORSES.

1  Esd.  2.  7-  with  gifts,  with  A.  and  with  cattle

9.  they  helped  them  with  A.  and  cattle
Jud.  2.  5.  A.  with  their  riders  twelve  thousand

6.  3.  not  able  to  sustain  the  power  of  our  A.

Wisd.  19.  9.  for  they  went  at  large  like  A.

Eccl.  48.  9.  wast  taken  up  in  a  chariot  of  fiery  A.

1  Mac.  10.  81.  and  so  the  enemies’  A.  were  tired

2  Mac.  10. 29.  there  appeared  five  comely  men  on  A.

HORSEBACK.

Jud.  2.  15.  and  twelve  thousand  archers  on  A.

2  Mac.  11.8.  there  appeared  before  them  on  A.

12.  35.  Dositheus  who  was  on  A.  and  a  strong  man

HORSE-LITTER.

2  Mac.  9.  8.  he  was  now  carried  in  a  A.

HORSEMAN.

2  Mlac.  12.  35.  an  A.  of  Thracia  coming  on  him
HORSEMEN.

1  Esd.  5.  2.  Darius  sent  with  them  a  thousand  A.

8.  51.  for  I  was  ashamed  to  ask  of  the  king  A.
Jud.  1.  1.3.  he  overthrew-  all  his  A.  and  chariots

2.  19.  to  cover  the  earth  with  chariots  and  A.

7.  6.  Holofernes  brought  forth  all  his  A.

1  Mac.  1. 17.  he  entered  Egypt  with  chariots  and  A.

4.  1.  Gorgias  took  a  thousand  of  the  best  A.

7.  the  camp  compassed  round  about  with  A

HOST.

2  Esd.  15.  33.  in  their  A.  shall  be  fear  and  dread
Wisd.  12.  8.  didst  send  wasps  forerunners  of  thy  A.
Eccl.  48.  21.  he  smote  the  A.  of  the  Assyrians

1  Mac.  1.4.  he  gathered  a  mighty  strong  A.

2.  31.  the  A.  that  was  at  Jerusalem  in  the  city
.3.  3.  protecting  the  A.  with  his  sword

4.  10.  destroy  this  A.  before  our  face  this  day

5.  11.  Timotheus  being  captain  of  their  A.

HOSTS.

2  Esd.  8.  21.  before  w  hom  the  A.  of  angels  stand
1  Mac.  7.  43.  the  13th  day  the  A.  joined  battle

13.  53.  he  made  him  captain  of  all  the  A.  and  dwelt

HOSTAGE.

1  Mac.  1. 10.  Antiochus,  who  had  been  an  A

HOSTAGES.

1  Mac.  8. 7.  should  pay  a  great  tribute,  and  give  A.

9.  53.  he  took  the  chief  men’s  sons  for  A.  11.  62.

10.  6.  that  the  A.  in  tower  should  be  delivered  him
9.  they  of  the  tower  delivered  their  A.  to  Jonathan

13.  16.  wherefore  send  two  of  his  sons  for  A

HOT.

2  Esd.  4.  48.  behold,  an  A.  burning  oven  passed  by

6. 4.  or  ever  the  chimneys  in  Sion  w-ere  A.

Dan.  3.  23.  to  make  the  oven  A.  with  rosin

2  Mac.  7. 3.  comm,  pans  and  caldrons  to  be  made  A.
HOUGH.

2  Esd.  15.  36.  dung  of  men  unto  the  camels’  A.
HOUR.

1  Esd.  8.  64.  the  weight  was  written  up  the  same  A.

2  Esd.  5.  34.  for  my  reins  pain  me  every  A.

9.  44.  every  A.  I  did  nothing  else  but  pray

14.  26.  to-morrow  this  A.  shalt  thou  begin
Jud.  14.  8.  until  that  A.  she  spake  to  them

Esth.  10.11.  these  two  lots  came  at  the  A.  and  time
Eccl.  11.  27.  the  affliction  of  an  A.  makes  a  man
HOURS.

2  Esd.  16.  38.  within  two  or  three  A.  of  her  birth
HOUSE.

1  Esd.  1.  3.  in  the  A.  that  king  Solomon  built
55.  as  for  the  A.  of  the  Lord,  they  burnt  it

2.4.  commanded  me  to  build  him  an  A.  at  Jerusalem
5.  and  build  the  A.  of  the  Lord  of  Israel

8.  to  build  an  A.  for  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem

5.  57.  they  laid  the  foundation  of  the  A.  of  God

6.  32.  out  of  his  own  A.  should  a  tree  he  taken

8.  25.  to  glorify  his  A.  that  is  in  Jerusalem

2  Esd.  1.  7.  brought  them  from  the  A.  of  bondage
33.  your  A.  is  desolate,  I  will  cast  you  out

9.  24.  a  field,  where  no  A.  is  builded,  10.  51.

12.  46.  and  be  not  heavy,  thou  A.  of  Jacob
14.  13.  now  therefore  set  thine  A.  in  order

Tob.  2.  1.3.  when  it  was  in  my  A.  and  began  to  cry

3.  17.  Tobit  came  home,  and  entered  into  his  A'.

7.  1.  they  came  to  the  A.  of  Raguel,  and  Sara

8.  11.  but  when  Raguel  was  come  into  his  A.

14.  4.  the  A.  of  God  in  it  shall  be  burned

5.  the  A.  of  God  shall  be  built  in  it  for  ever
Jud.  2. 1.  there  was  talk  in  the  A.  of  Nabuchodonosot
18.  much  gold  and  silver  out  of  the  king’s  A.

4.  .3.  the  altar  and  A.  were  sanctified

15.  look  on  all  the  A.  of  Israel  graciously

*  6.V7


Apocrypha.]  HUN


ICE


1ES


Jud.  6.  17.  hail  spoken  proudly  against  A. of  Israel

8.  5.  she  made  her  a  tent  on  the  top  of  her  A.

6.  save  the  solemn  days  of  the  A.  of  Israel

9.  I  3.  have  purposed  evil  against  thy  hallowed  A.

13.  14.  nor  taken  his  mercy  from  the  h.  of  Israel

14.  5.  know  him  that  despised  the  h.  of  Israel

10.  Achior  was  joined  unto  the  h.  of  Israel

Esth.  14.  9.  they  will  quench  the  glory  of  thy  h.
Wisd.  8.  16.  after  I  am  come  into  my  h.

Eccl.  1.  17.  she  fills  her  h.  with  things  desirable
4. 30.  be  not  as  a  lion  in  thy  h.  nor  frantic

11.  34.  receive  a  stranger  into  thy  h.  will  disturb
14.  24.  he  that  doth  lodge  near  her  h.  shall  fasten

21.  4.  thus  the  h.  of  proud  men  shall  be  desolate

8.  he  that  buildeth  his  A.  with  other  men’s  money
18.  as  is  an  A.  that  is  destroyed,  so  is  wisdom

22.  foolish  man's  foot  is  soon  in  his  neighbour’s  A.

23.  a  fool  will  peep  in  at  the  door  into  the  A.

23. 11.  the  plague  shall  never  depart  from  his  A.  if
he  swear  in  vain,  his  A.  shall  t>e  full  of  calamity

25.  16.  than  to  keep  A.  with  a  wicked  woman

26. 16.  so  is  a  good  wife  in  ordering  of  her  A.

27.  3.  his  A.  shall  be  soon  overthrown

29.  21.  water,  bread,  and  an  A.  to  cover  shame

22.  than  delicate  fare  in  another  man’s  A.

23.  that  thou  hear  not  the  reproach  of  thy  A.

24.  it  is  a  miserable  life  to  go  from  A.  to  A.

27.  my  brother  comes,  and  I  have  need  of  my  A.

36.  26.  who  will  believe  a  man  that  hath  no  A.  ?

42.  10.  and  gotten  with  child  in  her  father’s  A.

47.  13.  that  ne  might  build  an  A.  in  his  name

48.  15.  there  remained  a  ruler  in  the  A.  of  David

49.  12.  who  in  their  time  budded  the  A.  and  set  up
50. 1.  who  in  his  life  repaired  the  A.  again

51.  23.  and  dwell  in  the  A.  of  learning
Bar.  1.  14.  to  make  confession  in  the  A.  of  the  Lord

2.  16.  O  Lord,  look  down  from  thy  holy  A.

26.  the  A.  which  is  called  by  thy  name

3.  24.  O  Israel,  how  great  is  the  A.  of  God  !

6.  55.  when  fire  falletn  on  the  A.  of  gods  of  wood
59.  it  is  better  to  be  a  profitable  vessel  in  a  A.  than

such  false  gods,  or  to  be  a  door  in  an  A.
Stis.  4.  Joacim  had  a  fair  garden  joining  to  his  A.

6.  these  kept  much  at  .loacim’s  A.

Bel.  29.  else  we  will  destroy  thee  and  thy  A.

1  Mac.  1. 28.  A.  of  Jacob  was  covered  with  confusion

2. 18.  so  shalt'thou  and  thy  A.  be  in  the  number

3.  56.  should  return  every  man  to  his  own  A.

7.  35.  if  1  come  again,  l  will  burn  this  A.

37.  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  choose  this  A.  to  becalled
by  thy  name,  and  a  A.  of  prayer  for  thy  people

9.  55.  he  could  not  give  order  concerning  his  A.

13.  3.  great  things  my  father’s  A.  .have  done

1  Mac.  14.  26.  the  A.  of  his  father  established  Israel
16.  2. 1  and  my  brethren,  and  my  father’s  A.

2  Mac.  2.  29.  as  the  master-builder  of  a  new  A.

8. 33.  Callisthenes,  who  was  tied  into  a  little  A.

14.  36.  O  Lord,  keep  this  A.  ever  undefiled

HOUSEHOLD.

1  Esd.  3.  1.  Darius  made  a  great  feast  to  his  A.

2  Esd.  3.  11.  one  thou  leftest,  Noah  with  his  A.

HOUSEKEEPING.

Eccl.  31.  23.  report  of  his  good  A.  will  be  believed
HOUSE-ROOM.

Eccl.  29.  23.  the  upbraiding  of  A.  is  grievous
HOUSES.

2  Esd.  1. 35.  your  A.  will  I  give  to  a  people

15. 18.  for  pride,  the  A.  shall  be  destroyed

49-  to  waste  thy  A.  with  destruction  and  death
16.  31 .  by  them  that  search  their  A.  with  the  sword
72.  that  slial  1  cast  them  out  of  their  A.

Wisd.  17.  2.  they  being  shut  up  in  their  A.

Eccl.  3.  9.  establish  the  A.  of  children
28. 14.  it  hath  overthrown  the  A.  of  great  men
29.  18.  mighty  men  hath  suretiship  driven  from  A.

1  Mac.  1.  31.  he  pulled  down  the  A.  and  walls
61.  they  hanged  infants  and  l  itied  their  A.

13.  47.  cleansed  the  A.  wherein  the  idols  were

2  Mac.  3.  18.  others  ran  flocking  out  of  their  A.

5.  12.  to  slay  such  as  went  up  upon  the  A.

HUCKSTER.

Eccl.  £6.  29.  an  A.  shall  not  be  freed  from  sin
HUMBLE.

Jud.  4.  9.  with  vehemency  did  they  A.  their  souls
Eccl.  2.  17-  they  will  A.  their  souls  in  his  sight
7-  17.  A.  thy  soul  greatly,  for  vengeance  is  fire

12. 11.  though  he  A.  himself,  and  go  crouching
18.  21.  A.  thyself  before  thou  be  sick

35. 17.  the  prayer  of  the  A.  pierceth  the  clouds

HUMBLED.

2  Esd.  8. 49.  in  that  thou  hast  A.  thyself  as  becomcth

10.  7-  Sion  is  much  A.  mourning  very  sore
Est/i.  14.  2.  Esther  A.  her  body  greatly

Eccl.  40.  3.  to  him  that  is  A.  in  earth  and  ashes
HUMBLETH.

Tob.  4.  19.  the  Lord  A.  whom  he  will
Eccl.  7.  11.  there  is  one  which  A.  and  exalteth
HUMBLING.

Eccl.  34.  26.  or  what  doth  his  A.  profit  him  ?
HUMBLY.

Wisd.  13.  18.  A.  beseecheth  that  which  hath  least
Prayer  of  Manass.  wherefore  I  A.  beseech  thee
HUMILITY.

Eccl.  13.  20.  as  proud  hate  A.  so  doth  the  rich
HUNDRED.

1  Esd.  1.  36.  he  set  a  tax  on  land  of  an  A.  talents

7.  7.  they  offered  an  A.  bullocks,  two  A.  rams

8.  20.  the  sum  of  an  A.  talents  of  silver,  of  wheat  to
an  A.  cors,  an  A.  pieces  of  wine,  and  other  things

Jud.  1.  3.  set  the  towers  on  gates  an  A.  cubits  high
Eccl.  18.  9.  man’s  days  at  the  most  are  an  A.  years
41 . 4.  whether  thou  hast  lived  ten  or  an  A.  years
1  Mac.  15.  35.  will  we  give  an  A.  talents  for  them
HUNDREDS.

1  Mac.  3.  55.  ordained  captains  over  thous.  and  A.

HUNGER.

2  Esd.  15.  57.  thy  children  shall  die  of  A.

58.  they  in  the  mountain  shall  die  of  A.

16.  22.  the  other  that  escape  the  A.  sword  destroy
Eccl.  18.  25.  when  enough,  remember  the  time  of  A.
HUNGRY.

2  Esd.  1.  17- when  you  were  A.  and  thirsty  in  wilder.

653


2  Esd.  16.  6.  may  any  drive  away  a  A.  lion  in  wood  ?
Tob.  1.  16.  and  I  gave  my  bread  to  the  A.

4.  16.  give  of  thy  bread  to  the  A.  and  garments

HURT.

2  Esd.  6. 19.  what  they  be  that  have  A.  unjustly

11.  42.  thou  hast  A.  the  peaceable,  loved  liars
Wisd.  10.  8.  they  gat  not  only  this  A.

14.  29.  swear  falsely,  yet  they  look  not  to  be  A.

18.  2.  but  for  that  they  did  not  A.  them  now

19.  6.  thy  children  might  be  kept  without  A.

Eccl.  1.3.  12.  and  he  will  not  spare  to  do  thee  A.

28.  2.  forgive  thy  neighbour  the  A.  he  hath  done

38.  21.  thou  shalt  not  do  him  good  but  A.  thyself
Dan.  3.  27.  the  fire  neither  A.  nor  troubled  them

1  Mac.  5.  48.  let  us  pass  thro’,  none  shall  do  you  A.

6. 18.  they  in  tower  sought  always  their  A.

7-  22.  Juda  in  their  power  did  much  A.  in  Israel

14.  36.  and  did  much  A.  in  the  holy  place

15.  29.  ye  have  done  great  A.  in  the  land

2  Mac.  3.  39.  he  destroyed)  them  that  come  to  A.  it

8.  36.  and  therefore  they  could  not  be  A.

12.  3.  as  though  they  had  meant  them  no  A.

22.  that  they  were  often  A.  of  their  own  men

25.  that  he  would  restore  them  without  A.

HURTFUL.

2  Esd.  11.  45.  appear  no  more,  nor  thy  A.  claws

15.  6.  and  their  A.  works  are  fulfilled

HUSBAND.

2  Esd.  9. 43.  barren,  though  I  had  an  A.  thirty  years
10.  17.  go  thy  way  then  into  the  city  to  thy  A.

Jud.  8.  2.  Manasses  was  her  A.  of  her  kindred
7.  her  A.  Manasses  had  left  her  gold  and  silver
10.  3.  was  clad  during  the  life  of  Manasses  her  A.

16.  22.  but  none  knew  her  after  her  A.  was  dead

24.  were  nearest  of  kindred  to  Manasses  her  A.

Eccl.  4.  10.  be  instead  of  an  A.  to  their  mother

22.  4.  shall  bring  an  inheritance  to  her  A.

5.  dishonoureth  both  her  father  and  her  A.

23.  22.  thus  with  the  wife  that  leaveth  her  A.

23.  she  hath  trespassed  against  her  own  A.

25.  18.  her  A.  shall  sit  among  his  neighbours

22.  a  woman,  if  she  maintain  her  A.  is  full  of  anger

23.  a  woman  that  will  not  comfort  her  A.  in  distress

26.  2.  a  virtuous  woman  rejoiceth  her  A.

13.  the  grace  of  a  wife  delighteth  her  A.

22.  is  a  tower  against  death  to  her  A.

24.  but  an  honest  woman  will  reverence  her  A.

26.  a  woman  that  honoureth  her  A.  judged  wise
36.  23.  then  is  not  her  A.  like  other  men
40.23.  but  above  both  is  a  wife  with  her  A.

42.  10.  having  an  A.  lest  she  should  misbehave
Sus.  28.  people  were,  assembled  to  her  A.  Joacim

63.  Susanna  with  her  A.  praised  God
HUSBANDS.

2  Esd.  16.  33.  women  shall  mourn,  having  no  A.

34.  and  their  A.  shall  perish  of  famine
Tob.  3.8.  dost  thou  no-t  know  that  thou  hast  strangled
thy  A.  ?  thou  hast  had  already  seven  A.

15.  my  seven  A.  are  dead,  why  should  I  live  ?
HYDASPES.

Jud.  1.  6.  there  came  to  him  all  that  dwelt  by  H.
IIYiENA.

Eccl.  13.  18.  what  agreement  between  A.  and  a  dog?
1IAMNS.

1  Mac.  13.  51.  entered  with  viols,  and  A.  and  songs

HYPOCRISY.

2  Mac.  6.  25.  they  through  my  A.  should  be  deceived

HYPOCRITE.

Eccl.  1.  29.  be  not  an  A.  in  the  sight  of  men
32.  15.  but  the  A.  will  be  offended  thereat
33. 2.  he  that  is  an  A.  therein,  is  as  a  ship  in  a  storm

J:

JACOB.

2  Esd.  1 .  24.  what  shall  1  do  to  tiiee,  O  ,T.  ?

3.  16.  thou  gavest  Isaac,  to  Isaac  also  thou  gavest

J.  and  Esau,  so  J.  became  a  great  multitude
19.  mighfest  give  the  law  unto  the  seed  of  J.

5.  35.  1  might  not  have  seen  the  travel  of  J.

6.  8.  J.  hand  held  the  first  heel  of  Esau

9.  .1.  is  the  beginning  of  it  that  followeth

9.  30.  thou  saidst,  mark  my  words  thou  seed  of  J.

12.  46.  and  be  not  heavy,  thou  house  of  J.

Jud.  8.  26.  what  happened  to  .T.  in  Mesopotamia
Eccl.  23.  12.  be  not  found  in  the  heritage  of  J.

24.  8.  Creator  said,  let  thy  dwelling  be  in  J.

36.  11.  gather  all  the  tribes  of  J.  together

44.  23.  he  made  it  rest  upon  the  head  of  J.

45.  5.  that  he  might  teach  J.  his  covenant

46.  14.  and  the  Lord  hail  respect  unto  J.

47.22.  wherefore  he  gave  a  remnant  to  J.

48.  10.  and  to  restore  the  tribes  of  J.

49.  10.  for  they  comforted  J.  and  delivered  them
Bar.  3.  36.  and  hath  given  it  to  J.  his  servant

4.  2.  turn  thee,  O  J.  and  take  hold  of  it

1  Mac.  1.28.  house  of  J.  was  covered  with  confusion
3.  7.  and  he  made  J.  glad  with  his  acts
45.  joy  was  taken  from  J.  the  pipe  ceased

5.  2.  they  thought  to  destroy  the  generation  of  J.

JAM  BRI.

1  Mac.  9.  36.  but  the  children  of  J.  came  out
37.  the  children  of  J.  made  a  great  marriage
.TAMNIA.

1  Mac.  4.15.  they  pursued  them  to  the  plains  of  J.
5.  58.  they  had  given  charge,  they  went  toward  J .
10.69.  who  gathered  a  great  hostand  camped  in  J.
15. 40.  Cendebeus  came  to  J .  and  began  to  provoke
JAMNITES.

2 Mire. 12. 8.  the  J.  were  minded  to  do  in  like  manner
9.  he  came  upon  the  J.  by  night,  and  set  fire
40.  found  things  consecrated  to  the  idols  of  the  J.
JAPHETH.

Jud.  2. 25.  and  lie  came  to  the  borders  of  J.
JAZAR.

1  Mac.  5.  8.  when  he  had  taken  J.  with  the  towns
ICE.

ll'isd.  16.  22.  but  snow  and  i.  endured  the  fire
Eccl.  3.  15.  thy  sins  shall  melt  away  as  the  i.

43.  20.  and  the  water  is  congealed  into  i.

Dan.  3.  49.  O  ye  i.  and  cold  t  kss  ye  the  Lord


ICY.

Wisd.  19.21.  nor  melted  the  1.  kind  of  heavenly  meet
IDLE.

2  Esd.  15.  60.  they  shall  rush  on  the  i.  city
16.  68.  they  shall  take  and  feed  you  being  i.

Jl  'isd.  14.  5.  the  works  of  thy  wisdom  should  be  *
Eccl.  37.  11.  nor  with  an  1.  servant  of  business
I  DD  L.

Eccl.  30.  19.  what  good  doth  the  offering  to  an  j.
Bel  3.  tiie  Babylonians  had  an  i.  called  Bel
IDOLS.

1  Esd.  2.  10.  Nabucli.  had  set  up  in  his  temple  of
Tob.  14.6.  all  nations  shall  turn  and  bury  their  i.‘
Esth.  14.  10.  to  set  forth  the  praises  of  the  i.

Wisd.  14.  11.  on  the  i.  of  Gentiles  lie  a  visitation

12.  the  devising  of  i.  was  beginning  of  fornica¬

tion

27.  the  worshipping  of  i.  not  to  be  named

29.  as  their  trust  is  in  i.  which  have  no  life

30.  giving  heed  to  i.  and  also  unjustly  swore
15. 15.  they  counted  the  i.  of  the  heathen  to  be  gods

Bar.  6.  73.  better  is  the  just  man  that  hath  no  i.
Bel  5.  who  said,  because  I  may  not  worship  1.

1  Mac.  1.  43.  many  Israelites  sacrificed  to  i.

47.  set  up  altars,  groves,  and  chapels  of  i.

10.  83.  went  to  Beth-dagon  their  i.  temple

13.  47.  and  cleansed  the  houses  wherein  the  i.  were

2  Mac.  12.  40.  things  consecrated  to  i.  of  Jamnites

lDOE-al(ar.

1  Mac.  1.  59.  they  did  sacrifice  on  the  i.-altar
IDOL -altars.

1  Mac.  1. 54.  they  builded  i.-alt.  thro’  cities  of  Juda

'  IDOLATROUS.

Wisd.  12.  6.  out  of  the  midst  of  their  i.  crew

2  Mac.  7.  42.  have  spoken  concerning  the  i.  feast

IDUMEA.

1  Mac.  4.  15.  they  pursued  them  to  the  plains  of  I

29.  so  they  came  into  I.  and  pitched  tlieir  tents
61.  the  people  might  have  a  defence  against  1.

5.  3.  J  udas  fought  against  the  children  of  Esau  in  I.

6.  31.  these  went  thro’  I.  and  pitched  ag.  Bethsura

2  Mac.  12.  32.  against  Gorgias  the  governor  of  I.

1DUMEANS.

2  Mac.  10.  15.  the  1 .  have  gotten  into  their  hands
JEALOUS.

Eccl.  9.  1.  be  not  j.  over  the  wife  of  thy  bosom
26.  6.  a  woman  that  is,/* over  another  woman
37.  11.  not  consult,  touching  her  of  whom  sheisj.
JEALOUSY.

2  Esd.  15.  52.  would  I  withy,  have  so  proceeded
Wisd.  1.  10.  the  ear  of  j.  heareth  all  things
5.  17.  he  shall  take  to  him  his  j.  for  armour
JEBUSITE.

Jud.  5.  16.  they  cast  forth  before  them  the  j.
JEDUTHUN.

1  Esd.  1.  15.  Zacharias  and  J.  of  the  king’s  retinue

JEOPARD.

2  Mac.  11.  7.  that  they  would  ;.  themselves  to  help

JEOPARDY.

1  Mac.  6.  44.  put  himself  in  j.  to  deliver  his  people
JEP HUNNETII.  See  Caleb.
JEREMI AS,  JEREMY.

1  Esd.  1.  28.  not  regarding  the  words  of  prophet  J.
32.  yea,  J.  the  prophet  lamented  for  Josias

47.  the  words  spoken  to  him  by  the  prophet  J.
57.  to  fulfil  the  words  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  J.
2.  1.  that  he  had  promised  by  the  mouth  of  J.

2  Esd.  2.  18.  I  will  send  my  servants  Esay  and  J.
Eccl.  49.  6.  according  to  the  prophecy  of  J.

Bar.  6.  1.  a  copy  of  an  epistle  which  J.  sent

2  Mac.  2.  1.  that  J.  the  prophet  commanded  them
5.  when  J.  came  there,  he  found  an  hollow  cave
7.  which  when  J.  perceived,  he  blamed  them

15.  15.  J.  holding  forth  his  right  hand

JERICHO.

Eccl.  21. 14.  I  was  exalted  as  a  rose-plant  in  J.

1  Mac.  9.  50.  repaired  the  fort  in  J.  and  Eimnaus

16.  14.  in  the  plain  of  J.  was  Ptolemeus

14.  he  came  down  himself  to  J.  with  his  sons

2  Mac.  12. 15.  did  cast  down  J.  in  the  time  of  Joshua

JEROBOAM.

Eccl.  47.  23.  there  was  also  J.  the  son  of  Nebat
JERUSALEM.

1  Esd.  1.  21.  Israel  that  were  found  dwelling  at  J.
49.  the  temple  which  was  sanctified  in  J.

55.  they  brake  down  the  walls  of  J.

2.  4.  to  build  him  an  house  at  J.  in  Jewry
5.  if  there  be  any'  of  his  people,  let  him  go  up  to  J.

4.  43.  thy  vow  which  thou  hast  vowed  to  build  J.
Tob.  1.  6.  I  alone  went  often  to  J.  at  the  feasts

7.  another  tenth  part  I  spent  every  year  at  J.

13.  9.  O  J.  the  holy  city,  he  will  scourge  thee
16.  for  J.  shalt  be  built  up  with  sapphires
17-  the  streets  of  J.  shall  be  paved  with  beryl

14.  4.  J.  shall  be  desolate,  and  house  of  God  burnt
5.  they  shall  return  and  build  up  J.  gloriously

Jud.  4.  2.  they  were  troubled  for  J.  and  the  temple
Eccl.  24.  11 .  gave  me  rest,  and  in  J .  was  my  power
36.  13.  O  be  merciful  to  J.  thy  holy  city'

50.  27.  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach  of  J.  wrote
Bar.  4.  8.  ye  have  grieved  J.  that  nursed  you

30.  take  a  good  heart,  O  J.  he  will  comfort  thee

5.  1.  put  off,  O  J.  the  garment  of  thy  mourning
5.  arise,  O  J.  and  stand  on  high,  and  look  about

1  Mac.  6.  12.  I  remember  the  evils  I  did  at  J.

7.  17.  their  blood  have  they’  shed  about  J.

39-  so  Nicanor  went  out  of  J.  and  pitched  tents

9.  53.  put  them  in  the  tower  at  .1 .  to  be  kept

10.  31.  let  J.  also  be  holy  and  free,  with  borders

11.  41.  would  cast  those  of  the  tower  out  of  J.

14.  36.  that  were  in  the  city  of  David  in  J.

2  Mac.  1.1.  the  brethren  the  Jews  that  be  at  J.

9.  4.  spoken  proudly,  that  he  would  come  to  J

10.  15.  those  that  were  banished  from  J.

11.  5.  but  distant  from  ,T.  about  five  furlongs

12.  9.  that  the  light  of  the  fire  was  seen  at  J.

29.  Scythopolis  lieth  600  furlongs  from  J.

15.  30.  to  bring  Nicanor’s  head  and  hand  to  J.

JESSE.

Eccl.  45.  £5.  the  covenant  made  with  David  son  of  J
JEST.

Eccl.  8.  4.  j.  not  with  a  rude  man,  lest  ancestors


i  M  A


I  N  C


1  N  H  'AP  JCRYPHA


„  JESU.

1  Esd.  8.  63.  with  them  was  Josabadson  of  J.
JESUS.

1  Esd.  5.  .5.  J.  the  son  of  Josedec  son  of  Saraias

8.  with  J.  Nehemias,  and  Zacharias,  their  guides

48.  then  stood  up  J.  the  son  of  Josedec,  56.

58.  then  stoo<i  up  J.  and  his  sons  and  brethren
70.  Zorobabei  and  J.  chief  of  the  families

6.  2.  J.  the  eon  of  Josedec  began  to  build  the  house

2  Esd.  7.  28.  for  my  sou  J.  shall  be  revealed

37.  J.  after  him  for  Israel  in  the  time  of  Achan
Eccl.  46.  1.  J.  the  son  ot  Nave  was  valiant  in  wars

49.  12.  so  was  J.  the  son  of  Josedec,  who  budded

50.  27-  J-  the  son  of  Sirach  of  Jerusalem

51.  1.  a  prayer  of  J.  the  son  of  Sirach

1  Mac.2.55.  J.  for  fulfilling  word  was  made  a  iud.ce

JEW.

Esth.  11. 3.  who  was  J.  and  dwelt  in  the  city  of  Susa

2  Mac.  6.  6.  or  profess  himself  at  all  to  be  a  J.

9.  17.  that  also  he  would  become  a  J.  himself

JEWELLER.

Eccl.  45. 11.  like  seals  set  in  gold,  work  of  the  j.

_  .  JEWRY.

1  Esd.  1.  32.  in  all  J.  they  mourned  for  Josias

4.  49.  the  Jews  that  went  out  of  his  realm  up  to  J

5.  8.  they  returned  to  the  other  parts  of  J.

57.  in  the  second  year  after  they  were  come  to  J.

6.  1.  the  prophets  prophesied  to  the  Jews  in  J.

8.  81.  they  have  given  us  a  sure  abiding  in  J.

9.  .3.  there  was  a  proclamation  in  all  J.  and  Jerus.
Eel  33.  there  was  in  J.  thf  prophet  Habbacuc

2 Mac.  10.24.  came  as  though  would  take  J.  by  force
„  JEWS.

1  Esd.  1.  21.  and  the  J.  held  with  all  Israel
2. 18.  that  the  J.  do  build  the  market-places
23.  and  that  the  J.  were  rebellious,  and  raised

4.  49.  he  wrote  for  all  the  J.  that  went  out
50.  Edomitesshould  give  over  the  villages  of  the  J.

6.  1.  the  prophets  prophesied  to  the  J.  in  Jewry

8.  the  ancients  of  the  J.  that  were  of  the  captivity
27.  the  elders  of  the  J.  to  build  the  house  of  Lord

7.  2.  assisting  the  ancients  of  the  J.  and  governors

8.  10.  I  have  given  orders  that  such  of  the  J.

Esth.  10. 8.  assembled  to  destroy  the  name  of  the  J.

16.  15.  we  find  that  the  J.  are  no  evil-doers
19.  the  J.  may  freely  live  after  their  own  laws
resorted  the  J.  because  he  was  more

1  Mac.  2.  23.  came  one  of  the  J.  in  sight  of  all

4.  2.  that  he  might  rush  in  on  the  camp  of  the  J.

6.  6.  that  Lysias  was  driven  awav  of  the  J.

8.  31.  on  our  friends  and  confederates  the  J.

10.  23.  prevented  us,  in  making  amity  with  the  J.
29.  now  1  release  all  the  J.  from  tributes

11.  30.  and  to  the  nation  of  the  J.  13.  36.

33.  determined  to  do  good  to  the  people  of  the  J
47.  then  t'he  king  called  to  the  J.  for  help
14.22.  the  J.  ambassadors  came  to  us,  15.  17.

33.  but  he  set  a  garrison  of  J.  there

34.  but  he  placet!  J.  there,  and  furnished  them
15.  1.  to  Simon  the  priest  and  prince  of  the  J.

17-  being  sent  from  Simon  and  people  of  the  J.

2  Mac.  1.1.  the  brethren  the  J.  that  be  at  Jerusalem
7-  we  the  J.  wrote  unto  you  in  trouble

3.  32.  had  been  done  to  Heliodorus  by  the  J.

4.  11.  the  royal  privileges  granted  to  the  J.

5.  23.  a  mind  against  his  countrymen  the  J.

25.  when  taking  the  J.  keeping  holy-day

6.  1.  to  compel  the  J.  to  depart  from  thelaws
8. 1.  took  such  as  continued  in  the  J.  religion

10.  to  make  so  much  money  of  the  captive  J.

9.  4,  he  thought  to  avenge  on  the  J.  the  disgrace

make  it  a  common  burying-place  of  the  J
7-  breathing  out  fire  in  his  rage  against  the  J.

19.  Antioch  us  to  the  good  J.  his  citizens

10.  29.  five  men,  and  two  of  them  led  the  J.

11.  16.  there  were  letters  written  to  the  J.

12.  1.  the  J.  were  about  their  husbandry'

13.  9.  to  do  tar  worse  to  the  J.  than  had  been  done

18.  had  taken  a  taste  ot  the  manliness  of  the  J

19.  Beth-sura,  which  was  a  strong-hold  of  the  j
14. 5.  being  asked  how  the  J.  stood  affected

6.  those  ot’  the  J .  that  be  called  Assideans

14.  thinking  the  harm  of  the  J.  to  be  their  welfare

37.  who  for  kindness  was  called  a  father  of  the  J

38.  did  jeopard  his  life  for  the  religion  of  the  J

39.  to  declare  the  hate  that  he  bare  to  the  J

40.  by  taking  him,  to  do  the  J.  much  hurt

15.  2.  the  J.  that  were  compelled  to  go  with  him

12.  Onias  prayed  for  the  whole  body  of  the  T
IGNORANCE.

Wisd.  14.  22.  they  lived  in  the  great  war  of  i.

17.  13.  counteth  the  i.  more  than  the  cause
Eccl.  4.  25.  but  be  abashed  of  the  error  of  thine  i
28.  7.  remember  the  covenant,  and  wink  at  i
IGNORANCES.

1  Esd.  8.  75.  our  i.  have  reached  up  to  heaven
Tob.  3.  3.  punish  me  not  for  my  sins  and  i.

Eccl.  23.  2.  that  they  spare  me  not  for  mine  i.

3.  lest  mine  i.  increase  and  my  sins  abound
51.  19.  and  I  bewailed  mine  i.  of  her
IGNORANT.

Wisd.  13. 1.  vain  are  all  men,  who  are  i.  of  God
14. 18.  set  forward  the  i.  to  more  superstition
Eccl.  5.  15.  be  not  i.  of  any  thing  in  a  great  manner
IGN  ORANTLY.

2  Mac.  11.31.  shall  be  molested  for  things  i.  done

1 LL.

Jvd.  8.  8.  there  was  none  that  gave  her  an  i.  word
Wisd.  5.  23.  i.  dealing  shall  overthrow  the  thrones
Eccl.  9.  18.  a  man  of  an  1.  tongue  is  dangerous
29.7.  many  have  refused  to  lend  forothers  Ldealin"

41.  11.  an  i.  name  of  sinners  shall  be  blotted  out”

1  TJL-according.

Wisd.  18.10.  sounded  an  i.-according  cry  of  enemies
ILLUMINATED.

Bar.  4.  2.  walk  in  light  that  thou  mayest  be  i.
ILLUMINATION.

Eccl.  25. 11.  love  of  the  Lord  passeth  all  things  for  2
.  ILLUSIONS;

Wisd.  17.  ”•  as  tor  the,  i.  of  magic,  were  put  down
IMAGE.

2  Esd.  5.  37.  shew  me  the  i.  of  a  voice*  and  declare


2  Esd.  8.  44.  so  perish,  man,  who  is  cal  led  thy  own  i
Wisd.  2.  23.  made  him  to  be  an  i.  of  his  eternity
7.  26.  and  she  is  the  1.  of  his  goodness

13.  13.  and  fashioned  it  to  the  i.  of  a  man

16.  for  it  is  an  i.  and  hath  need  of  help

14.  15.  when  he  hath  made  an  i.  of  his  child

17.  they  made  an  express  i.  of  a  king

15.  4.  nor  any  L  spotted  with  divers  colours
5.  and  so  they  desire  the  form  of  a  dead  i.

17.  21.  an  i.  of  that  darkness  spread  over  them
IMAGERY.

Eccl.  38.  27.  and  give  themselves  to  counterfeit  i.
IMAGES.

Wisd.  15.  13.  maketh  brittle  vessels  and  graven  2.

1  Mac.  3.  48.  sought  to  paint  the  likeness  of  their  2.
5.  68.  when  he  burnt  their  carved  i.  with  fire

2  Mac.  2.  2.  when  they  see  i.  of  silver  and  gold

IMAGINATION.

Eccl.  22.  18.  a  fearful  heart  in  the  i.  of  a  fool
37.  3.  O  wicked  i.  whence  earnest  thou  in  to  cover
40.  2.  their  1.  of  things  to  some  causeth  fear
Bar.  1.  22.  the  i.  of  his  own  wicked  heart
IMAGINATIONS.

2  Esd.  15.  3.  fear  not  the  i.  against  thee

16.  54.  behold  the  Lord  knoweth  their  L

Wisd.  3. 10.  shall  be  punished  accord,  to  their  own  I.
Bar.  2.  8.  turn  from  the  i.  of  his  wicked  heart
■Sus.  28.  full  of  mischievous  i.  against  Susanna
IMAGINE.

Eccl.  17.  31.  flesh  and  blood  will  i.  evil

1  Mac.  3.  52.  what  they  i.  against  us,  thou  knowest

IMAGINED.

2  Esd.  7.  22.  spake  against  him,  and  2.  vain  things
Wisd.  3.  14.  nor  i.  wicked  things  against  God

1  Mac.  11.8. 2.  wicked  counsels  against  Alexander

IMAGINETH.

Eccl.  12. 16.  in  his  heart  he  2.  bow  to  throw  thee

16.  23.  and  a  foolish  man  erring  i.  follies
IMMORTAl!.

2  Esd.  7.1.3.  for  the  entrances  brought  2.  fruit
49.  if  there  be  promised  us  an  i.  time

Wisd.  1.  15.  for  righteousness  is  i.

2.  23.  tor  God  created  man  to  be  i.  and  made  him
4.  1.  for  the  memorial  thereof  is  2.

Eccl.  17.  30.  because  the  son  of  man  is  not  i.
IMMORTALITY.

2  Esd.  7. 43.  the  beginning  of  the  i.  for  to  come
8.  54.  in  the  end  is  shewed  the  treasure  ot  i.

Wisd.  3.  4.  yet  is  their  hope  full  off.

8. 13.  by  the  means  of  her  I  shall  obtain  2.

17.  how  that  to  be  allied  unto  wisdom  is  i

15.  .3.  yea,  to  know  thy  power,  is  the  root  of  2.
Eccl.  19.  19.  receive  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  2.
IMMUNITY.

1  Mac.  10.  34.  shall  be  all  the  days  of  i.  and  freedom
13.  34.  to  the  end  he  shall  give  the  land  an  2.
IMMUNITIES.

1  Mac.  10.  28.  we  will  grant  you  many  i.  and  give
13.  37.  to  confirm  the  2.  which  we  have  granted

IMPARTED.

Eccl.  17.  5.  in  sixth  place  he  *.  them  understanding

2  Mac.  8.  12.  he  bad  i.  to  those  that  were  with  hiir

IMPEDIMENT.

Wisd.  19.  7.  out  of  the  Red  sea,  a  way  without  i.
IMPEDIMENTS.

Jud.  5.  1.  and  had  laid  i.  in  the  campaign  countries
IMPIETY.

1  Esd.  1.  42.  recorded  of  his  uncleanness  and  i.

2  Esd.  4.  38.  O  Lord,  even  we  all  are  full  of  2.

2  Mac.  4.  38.  the  place  where  he  had  committed  2.
IMPIETIES.

2  Esd.  3.  29.  when  1  had  seen  i.  without  number
IMPORTABLE.

Prayer  of  Manass.  threatening  towards  sinners  is  i
IMPOSITION.

1  Esd.  8.  22.  nor  any  other  i.  of  any  of  the  priests

IMPOSSIBLE.

2  Mac.  3. 12.  that  it  was  altogether  i.  such  wrongs
4.  6.  he  saw  it  2.  that  the  state  should  continue

IMPOTENT.

Bar.  6.28.  but  to  poor  and  i.  they  give  nothin^
IMPRISONED.

Wisd.  18.  4.  they  were  worthy  to  be  i.  in  darkness
IMPRISONMENT.

1  Esd.  8.  24.  by  penalty  of  money,  or  by  »'.
IMPUDENCE.

Eccl.  25.  22.  is  full  of  j.  and  much  reproach
IMPUDENT.

Eccl.  19. 2.  he  that  cleaveth  to  harlots  will  become  i.
2.3.6.  give  not  over  me  thy  servant  into  an  i.  mind
26.  11.  watch  over  an  i.  eye,  and  marvel  not
29.  14.  but  he  that  is  i.  will  forsake  him
IMPUTED.

1  Mac.  2.  52.  it  was  i.  to  him  for  righteousness

INCOMMUNICABLE.

Wisd.  14.  21.  did  ascribe  to  stocks  the  i.  name
INCENSE.

2  Esd.  3.  24.  to  offer  i.  and  oblations  to  thee

Jvd.  9.  1.  about  time  i.  of  that  evening  was  offered
Wisd.  18.  21.  bringing  the  propitiation  of  i.

Eccl.  45.  16.  i.  and  a  sweet  savour  for  a  memorial
50.  9.  as  fire  and  i.  in  the  censer,  and  a  vessel
Bar.  1.  10.  sent  money  to  buy  sin-offerings  and  i.
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  their  oblation,  or  i.  or  place

1  Mac.  1.55.  and  burnt  i.  at  the  doors  of  their  houses
4.  49-  they  brought  the  altar  ot  i.  and  the  table

50.  and  upon  the  altar  they  burnt  2’.

INCH  ANTMENTS.

Wisd.  18.  13.  not  believe  any  thing  by  reason  off.
INCLOSING.

2  Mac.  1.  34.  the  king  i.  the  place,  made  it  holy

IN  CONTIN  EN  CY.

2  Esd.  5.  10.  i.  shall  be  multiplied  upon  earth
INCORRUPTIBLE.

Wisd.  12.  1.  for  thine  2.  spirit  is  in  all  things
18.  t  4.  by  whom  the  i.  light  was  to  be  given
INCORRUPTION .

2  Esd.  4.  t  11.  to  understand  the  i.  that  is  evident
Wisd.  6.  18.  keeping  laws  is  the  assurance  of  2.
INCREASE.

1  Esd  9.  7-  thereby  to  i.  the  sins  of  Israel
Tob.  1.7.  the  first  tenth  part  of  all  2.  I  gave


.  Eccl.  (j.  5.  a  fair  tongue  will  i.  kind  greetings
20.  28.  thattilleth  his  lands,  shall  2.  his  heap
23.  3.  lest  mine  ignorances  i.  and  sms  abound
39.  11.  and  it  he  live  be  shall  2.  it
45.  20.  divided  to  him  the  first-fruits  of  the  2.

Bar.  2.34.  1  will  i.  them,  they  shall  notbe  diminish.

1  Mac.  14.  8.  the  earth  gave  her  i.  and  trees  fruit

2  Mac.  4.  4.  did  rage,  and  i.  Simon’s  malice

13.  such  was  the  1.  of  heathenish  manners

INCREASED.

2  Esd.  1.  6.  the  sins  of  their  fathers  are  2.

5.  2.  iniquity  shall  be  i.  above  that  thou  seest
7-  41.  even  so  now  seeing  wickedness  is  2.

Tob.  14.  2.  lie  2.  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord
Jud.  5.  9.  they  vvere  2.  with  gold  and  silver

16.  23.  but  she  i.  more  and  more  in  honour
Eccl.  2.  .3.  that  thou  mayest  be  i.  at  thy  last  end

1  Mac.  1.40.  as  had  hergloiy.so  was  her  dishonour  2.

2.  30.  because  afflictions  2.  sore  upon  them

2  Mac.  8.  8.  so  when  Philip  saw  that  this  man  2.

„„  .  INCREASETH.

Wisd.  16.  24.  2.  his  strength  against  the  unrighteous
Eccl.  31.  30.  drunkenness  i.  the  rage  of  a  fool
INCREASING.

Eccl.  43.  8.  2.  wonderfully  in  her  changing
2  Mac.  4.  50.  2.  in  malice,  and  being  a  traitor
INCREDULITY.

2  Esd.  15.  3.  let  not  the  i.  of  them  trouble  thee
INCURABLE.

Jud.  5.  12.  he  smote  aU  Egypt  with  *•  plagues

1  Mac.  10.  4.3.  flee  to  temple,  being  2.  to  the  king
INDIA.

Esth.  13.  1.  to  the  princes  from  I.  to  Ethiopia
1  Mac.  8.  8.  the  country  of  1 .  and  Media,  and  Lydia
INDIAN.

1  Mac.  6.  37.  besides  the  I.  that  ruled  him

INDIFFERENT.

Eccl.  42.  5.  and  of  merchants  2.  selling
INDIGNATION.

2  Esd.  8.  30.  take  thou  no  i.  at  them  which  are
Eccl.  5.  6.  and  his  2.  resteth  upon  sinners

36.  7.  rise  up  i.  and  pour  out  wrath
45.  19.  in  his  wrathful  2.  were  they  consumed
Bar.  2.  20.  thou  hast  sent  out  thy  wrath  and  1
Bel  2Q.  they  took  great  i.  and  conspired  against  k  mg

1  Mac.  2.  49.  pride  got  strength,  and  the  wrath  of  1.

3.  27.  king  Antiochus  was  full  of  2.

2  Mac.  4.  35.  many  other  nations  took  great  i

INESTIMABLE.

2  Esd.  8.  21.  whose  throne  is  2.  whose  glory
Trr.  INEVITABLE.

Wisd.  17.  14.  came  out  of  the  bottoms  of  2.  hell
IN  FAMY.

Wisd.  2. 12.  he  objecteth  to  our  i.  the  transgressings
INFANTS.  *

Jud.  7.  27.  not  see  the  death  of  out  i.  before  our  eyes
16.  5.  make  my  1.  as  a  prey,  my  virgins  a  spoil
Wisd.  11.  7.  commandment  whereby  i.  were  slain

1  Mac.  2.  9-  her  i.  are  slain  in  the  streets

2  Mac.  5.  1.3.  there  was  slaying  of  virgins  and  2
8.  4.  remember  the  wicked  slaughter  of  harmless  i

.  .INFIDELITY.

2  Esd.  7-  44.  i.  is  cut  off,  righteousness  is  grown

INFINITE.

Wisd.  8.  18.  in  works  of  her  hands  are  2.  rVfies
Eccl.  16. 17.  such  an  i.  number  of  creatuies
30.  15.  and  a  strong  body  above  i.  wealth
Prayer  of  Manass.  of  thy  i.  mercies  hast  appointed
2  Mac.  2.  24.  tor  considering  the  i.  number

3.  6.  treasury  was  full  of  i.  sums  of  money

_  INFIRMITY.

2  Esd.  3.  02.  thus  i.  was  made  permanent
INFIRMITIES.

2  Esd  A.  27.  this  world  is  full  of  unrighteousn.  and  i
INFLAMED.

Eccl.  28.  10.  the  more  they  will  be  i.

Sus.  8.  so  that  their  lust  was  i. 'towards  her

1  Mac.  2.  24.  Mattathias  was  i.  with  zeal

INFLUENCE.

Wisd.  7.  25.  a  pure  i.  from  the  glory  of  Almighty
.INFORMED.  y

2  Mac.  1.3.  4.  Lysias  i.  king  that  this  man  was  cause
il4.  1.  Judas  was  i.  that  Demetrius  had  taken

INHABIT.

2  Esd.  3.  28.  are  their  deeds  better  that  2.  Babylon  >
Jud.  5.  .3.  what  are  the  cities  that  they  2.  ?

14.  4.  you  and  all  that  i.  the  coast  of  Israel
^  INHABITANTS.

2  Esd.  6.  26.  the  heart  of  the  i.  shall  be  changed
Jud.  1.  10.  till  you  come  to  all  the  i.  of  Egypt

11.  the  i.  of  the  land  made  light  of  the  command

12.  he  would  slay  all  the  i.  of  the  land  of  Moab
2.  28.  fear  tell  on  all  the  2.  of  the  sea-coasts

4.  11.  the  i.  of  Jerusalem  fell  before  the  temple

5.  4.  more  than  all  the  i.  of  the  west

7-  13.  the  2.  of  Betbulia  have  their  water  thence
20.  vessels  of  water  failed  all  the  2.  ofBethulia

8.  11.  O  ye  governors  of  the  i.  of  Bethulia
Wisd.  12.  3.  to  destroy  those  old  i.  of  thv  holv  land
Bar.  1.  15.  to  Juda  and  to  the  i.  of  Jerusalem

1  Mac.  1.  28.  the  land  also  was  moved  for  the  i.

38.  the  2.  ot  Jerusalem  fled  because  of  them

6. 12.  that  I  sent  to  destroy  the  2.  of  Judea

2  Mac.  9.  2.  that  being  put  to  flight  ot  the  2.

INHABITED.

2  Esd.  .3.  £5.  they  that  i.  the  city  forsook  thee
Wisd.  11.2.  through  the  wilderness  that  was  not  2
Eccl.  10.  3.  through  prudence  the  city  shall  be  2.’

.38.  32.  without  these  cannot  a  city  be  i.

Bar.  4.  .35.  she  shall  be  2.  of  devils  for  a  time
2  Mac.  3.  1.  when  the  holy  city  was  2.  with  peace

9.  17.  would  go  through  all  the  world  that  was  t
12. 13.  city  was  2.  by  people  of  divers  countries’

INHERIT.

£  Esd.  7.  17.  the  righteous  should  i.  these  things
07.  the  world  not  continue  with  them  that  2.

'Job.  4. 12.  and  their  seed  shall  i.  the  land
Eccl.  4.  13.  he  that  holdeth  her  fast,  shall  2.  glorv

lo.  lie  shall  1.  her,  and  his  generation  shall  hold

6.  1.  tor  thereby  thoushalt  2.  an  ill  name

10.  11.  he  shall  2.  creeping  things,  beasts,  worms

L  2  6;)9


Apocrypha.]


1  N  S


JOH


JOS


Eccl.  15.  6.  she  shall  cause  him  i.  an  everlast.  name
3y.  23.  so  shall  the  heathen  i.  his  wrath

44.  21.  would  cause  them  to  i.  from  sea  to  sea

INHERITANCE.

1  Esd.  8.  85.  that  ye  may  leave  the  i.  of  the  land?

2  Esd.  6. 59.  why  do  we  not  possess  an  t.  with  world  r

7.  9.  were  given  for  i.  how  shall  we  receive  this  i.

8.  45.  and  have  mercy  upon  thine  own  ».

Tob.  3.  17-  she  belongeth  to  Tobias  by  right  of  i.

6.  12.  because  the  right  of  i.  doth  appertain  to  thee
Jud.  9.  12.  1  pray  thee,  O  God  of  the  i.  of  Israel

13.  5.  for  now  is  the  time  to  help  thine  ».

16.  21.  every  one  returned  to  his  own  i.

Esth.  10. 12.  so  God  remembered  and  justified  his  i.

13.  15.  yea,  they  desire  to  destroy  the  i.

17.  hear  my  prayer,  and  be  merciful  to  thine  1.

14.  5.  thou  tookest  Israel  for  a  perpetual  i.

Wisd.  3.  14.  an  i.  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord
Eccl.  9.  6.  not  to  harlots  that  thou  lose  not  tlnne  ?.

24.  7.  1  sought  rest,  and  in  whose?',  shall  1  abide  ?

12.  I  took  root  in  the  portion  of  the  Lord's  i.

20.  and  mine  i.  is  sweeter  than  the  honey-comb

45.  22.  howbeit  in  the  land  of  the  people  he  had  no

i.  for  the  Lord  himself  is  his  portion  and  i.
25.  that  the  i.  of  the  king  be  to  his  posterity  alone,
so  the  i.  of  Aaron  should  also  be  to  his  seed

46.  1.  that  he  might  set  Israel  in  their  2.

1  Mac.  6.  24.  they  slew,  and  spoiled  our  2.

See  Fathers.

INHERITED.

Tob.  14. 13. he  i. their  substance  and  his  father  Tobit’s
INIQUITY.

1  Esd.  8.  70.  great  men  have  been  partakers  of  this  i.
72.  assembled  to  me,  whilst  I  mourned  for  the  i.

2  Esd.  5.  2.  i.  shall  be  increased  above  that  thou  seest

7.  56.  for  while  we  lived  and  committed  *.

16.  52.  2.  shall  be  taken  away  out  of  the  earth
Jjid.  5.  17.  the  God  thathateth  i.  was  with  them

21.  but  if  there  be  no  i.  in  their  nation

6.  5.  hast  spoken  these  words  in  the  day  of  thine  i.
Wisd.  5.  23.  thus  i.  shall  lay  waste  the  earth
Eccl.  7.  2.  and  i.  shall  turn  away  from  thee
6.  seek  not  to  be  judge,  not  able  to  take  away  i.

10.  7.  and  by  both  doth  one  commit  i.

17.  26.  turn  to  Most  High,  and  turn  away  from  i.
20.28.  that  pleaseth  great  men,  get  pardon  tor  i.
21. 3. all  2. is  as  a  two  edged  sword, wounds  whereof
23.  11.  that  useth  swearing,  shall  be  filled  with  2.

27.  10.  as  lion  for  prey,  so  sin  for  them  that  work  i.

41.  18.  of  2.  before  a  congregation  and  people

49.  2.  he  took  away  the  abomination  of  i.

Bar.  3.  7.  for  we  have  called  to  mind  all  the  i.
Dan.  3.  6.  for  we  have  sinned  and  committed  1.
Prayer  of  Manass.  for  the  multitude  of  mine  t.

1  Mac.  3.  6.  all  the  workers  of  i.  were  troubled
20.  they  come  against  us  in  much  pride  and  i.

9.  23.  and  there  arose  all  such  as  wrought  i.

INIQUITIES.

1  Esd.  8.  90.  now  are  we  before  thee  in  our  2.

9.  2.  mourning  for  the  great  i.  of  the  multitude

2  Esd.  7.  68.  that  they  which  have  committed  i.

16.  67.  leave  off  your  sins,  and  forget  your  i.

76.  and  let  not  your  i.  lift  up  themselves

77.  woe  to  them  that  are  covered  with  their  1.
Prayer  of  Manass.  I  have  sinned,  I  acknow.  mine

i.  forgive  me  and  destroy  me  not  with  mine  i.
INJURY.

2  Mac.  8. 17. set  before  their  eyes  the  1. they  had  done

INJURIES.

Eccl.  10. 8.  because  of  i.  and  riches  got  by  deceit

INJURIOUS.

£ccf.8.U.rise  not  up  in  anger  at  pres,  of  an  i.  person
INJUSTICE.

Eccl.  40.  12.  all  bribery  and  i.  shall  be  blotted  out
INNER.

Eccl.  21.  14.  i.  parts  of  a  fool  like  a  broken  vessel

1  Mac.  9.  54.  the  wall  off.  court  ot  the  sanctuary

2  Mac.  9.  5.  and  sore  torments  of  the  i.  parts

INNOCENCY.

E.th.  16.  6.  the  i.  and  goodness  of  princes

1  Mac.  2.  37.  but  said,  let  us  die  all  in  our  i.

60.  Daniel  for  his  i.  whs  delivered  from  lions

INNOCENT.

2  Esd.  15.  8.  the  i.  and  righteous  blood  crieth

9.  1  will  receive  the  i.  blood  from  among  them

22.  my  hand  shall  not  spare  them  that  shed  i.  blood
Esth.  16. 5.  caused  many  to  be  partakers  of  i.  blood
Eccl.  11. 10. if  thou  meddle  much,  thou  shalt  nqt  be  z.
23. 11.  if  he  swear  in  vain,  he  shall  not  be  i.

Sus.  53.  for  thou  hast  condemned  the  i.  albeit  the  L.
saith,  the  i.  and  righteous  shalt  thou  not  slay
62.  thus  the  i.  blood  w  as  saved  the  same  day'

1  Mac.  1.  37.  thus  they  shed  i.  blood  on  every  side

2  Mac.  A.  47.  they  should  have  been  judged  1.

INNUMERABLE.

2  Esd.  6.  3.  before  the  i.  multitude  of  angels
44.  immediately  there  was  great  and  i.  fruit
Wisd.  7. 11.  all  good  things  and  i. riches  in  her  hands

18.  12.  so  they  altogether  had  /.dead  with  one  death
Eccl.  37.  25.  but  the  days  of  Israel  are  i.

2  Mac.  3.  6.  the  multitude  of  their  riches  was  2.
INQUISITION.

2  Esd.  6.  19.  and  I  will  begin  to  make  2’.  of  them
Eccl.  23.  24.  and  i.  shall  be  made  of  her  children
41.4.  there  is  no  i.  in  the  grave
INSPIRED.

Wisd.  15. 11.  him  that  i.  into  him  an  active  soul
INSTRUCT.

2  Esd.  5.  .32.  angel  said,  hear  me,  and  I  will  i.  thee
£cc/.7.23.hast  thou  children  ?  t. them, and  bow  down
10. 1.  a  wisejudge  will  2.  his  people
INSTRUCTED.

Wisd.  6.  1 1 .  desire  my  word,  and  ye  shall  be  2.
Eccl.  26. 14. nothing  so  much  worth  as  a  mind  well  2.
IN  STRU  C'TETH .

Eccl.  37  .  23.  a  wise  man  i.  his  people  and  fruits
INSTRUCTION.

Eccl.  1.  27.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  wisdom  and  i.

6.  18.  my  son,  gather  i.  from  thy  youth  up

8.  8.  for  of  them  thou  shalt  learn  i.  and  to  serve

33.  4.  and  bind  up  i.  and  then  make  answer
51.  26.  let  vour  soul  receive  t.  she  is  at  hand
660


INSTRUCTIONS.

Eccl.  44.  4.  wise  and  eloquent  in  their  2.

INSTRUMENT.

2  Esd.  13.  9.  nor  held  sword,  nor  any  1.  of  war,  28.
Tob.  7.  14.  and  did  write  an  2.  of  covenants
Eccl.  43.  2.  declaring  at  his  rising  a  maryellpus  2.

8.  being  an  i.  of  the  armies  above,  shining  in
2  Mac.  13.  5.  it  had  a  round  2.  which  hanged  down
INSTRUMENTS.

1  Esd.  4.  63.  they  feasted  with  the  2.  of  music
5.  2.  and  with  musical  i.  and  tabrets,  59-

1  Mac.  6.  51.  engines  and  2.  to  cast  fire  and  stones

9.  39.  with  drums  and  i.  of  music,  and  weapons

13.  42.  the  people  began  to  write  in  their  2.

INSURRECTION.

2  Esd.  16. 70.  a  great?,  on  those  that  fear  the  Lord
2  Mac.  4.  30.  they  of  Tharsus  ami  Mallos  made  2.

INTELLIGENCE.

2  Mac.  3.  9.  he  told  him  what  i.  was  given  of  money
INTEMPERANCE.

2  Esd.  7.  44. 2.  is  at  an  end,  infidelity  is  cutoff
INTEMPERATE.

Eccl.  23. 13.  use  not  thy  mouth  to  i.  swearing
IN  TEND.

2  Mac.  14.  8.  I  i.  the  good  of  my  own  countrymen
INTENDED.

Esth.  13.  4.  the  uniting  of  kingdoms  honourably  i.
Sus.  62.  they  did  in  such  sort  as  they  maliciously  i.

2  Mac.  14.  5.  Jews  stood  affected,  and  what  they  2.
INTENT.

Wisd.  12.  22.  to  the  1.  that  when  we  judge
Bel  32.  to  the  i.  they  might  devour  Daniel
INTERPRETATION.

2  Esd.  12.  8.  shew  me  thy  servant  the  2.  of  vision

10.  he  said  to  me,  this  is  the  i.  of  the  vision
17.  this  is  the  i.  19-  22. 1  13.  22,  28.

13.  15.  shew  me  now  yet  the  t.  of  this  dream
21.  the  i.  of  the  vision  shall  l  shew  thee
53.  tins  is  the  /.  of  the  dream  thou  sawest

INTERP  RELATION  S.

2  Esd.  12.  35.  this  is  the  dream,  and  these  are  the  2.
Eccl.  47.  17.  they  marvelled  at  thee  for  thy  ?.
INTERPRETED.

Esth.  11. 1.  the  same,  and  that  Lysimachus  had  2.  it
INTERPRETER.

Eccl.  17.  5.  speech,  an  i.  of  the  cogitations  thereof
INTERRUPT.

Eccl.  11.  8.  nor  i.  men  in  the  midst  of  their  talk
INTOLERABLE.

Wisd.  17. 14.  sleeping  the  same  sleep,  which  was  i.

2  Mac.  9. 10.  no  man  could  carry  for  his  2.  stink
INTREAT.

Eccl.  13. 3.  the  poor  is  wronged,  and  he  must  i.  also

28.  5.  who  will  i.  for  pardon  of  his  sins  ?

Bar.  6.  41.  they  2.  Bel  that  he  may  speak

1  Mac.  8. 18.  to  i.  them  they  would  take  the  yoke

INTREATED.

Wisd.  19-  3.  whom  they  had  i.  to  be  gone

2  Mac.  13.  23.  i.  the  Jews  submitting  himself

IN  TREATING.

Tob.  1.  22.  Achiacharus  2.  fcr  me,  I  returned
INVADE.

1  Mac.  13. 12.  removed  to  2.  the  land  of  Judea
20.  after  this  came  Tryphon  to  2.  the  land

14.  31.  their  enemies  purposed  to  2.  their  country

15.  40.  to  provoke  the  people,  and  to  2.  Judea

INVADING.

2  Esd.  15.  16.  sedition  among  men,  and  2-.  oneanoth.

INVEN  TED.

Szw.43.  as  these  men  have  maliciously  i.  against  me
INVENTION.

Wisd.  14. 12.  and  i.  of  them  the  corruption  of  life

15.  4.  nor  did  the  mischievous  i.  of  men  deceive
INVENTIONS.

2  Esd.  6.  5.  or  ever  the  i.  of  them  that  now  sin
8.  27*  regard  not  the  wicked  i.  of  the  heathen
I.3.37.  rebuke  the  wicked  i.  of  those  nations

15.  48.  hast  followed  her  that  is  hated  in  all  her  2.

16.  63.  he  knoweth  your  2.  and  what  you  think

INVINCIBLE.

Jvd.  16.  13.  thou  art  wonderful  in  strength  and  i.
Wisd.  5.  19.  he  shall  take  holiness  for  an  2.  shield
2  Mac.  1.  13.  the  armv  with  him  that  seemed  2.
INVIOLABLE.

2  Mac.  3.  12.  and  the  2.  sanctity  of  the  temple
INVISIBLE.

2  Mac.  9.  5.  the  Lord  smote  him  with  an  2.  plague
INVITE.

Eccl.  13.  9.  so  much  the  more  will  he  i.  thee
INVITED.

Eccl.  13.9.  if  thou  be  i.  of  amighty  man,  withdr.
INVOCATION.

2  Mac.  15.  26.  encountered  enemies  with  2*.  and  pra.
INWARD.

2  Mac.  3.  16.  declared  the  i.  agony  of  his  mind
INWARDLY.

Eccl.  19.  26.  but  2.  he  is  full  of  deceit
JOACIM.

1  Esd.  1. 37.  the  king  made  J.  his  brother  king  of  Jud.

38.  and  he  bound  .1.  and  the  nobles,  but  Zaraces

39.  five  and  twenty  years  old  was  J.  when  king
43.  and  J.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead

5.  5.  and  J .  the  son  of  Zorobabel,  a  priest,  went  up
Jud.  4.  6.  also  J.  the  high  priest  in  Jerusalem
8.  did  as  J.  the  high  priest  had  commanded

14.  J.  had  his  loins  girt  with  sackcloth,  and  offered

15.  8.  then  J.  the  high  priest  came  to  behold
Sus.  1.  there  dwelt  a  man  in  Babylon  called  J.

4.  J.  was  a  great  rich  man  and  had  a  fair  garden

28.  when  people  were  assembled  to  her  husband  J.

29.  Susanna,  daughter  of  Chelchias,  J.  wife
63.  Susanna,  with  J.  her  husband,  praised  God

JOEL.

2  Esd.  1.  39.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  Amos,  J.

JOHN.

1  Mac.  2. 1.  then  arose  Mattathias,  the  son  of  J.

8.  17.  Judas  chose  Eupolemus  the  son  of  J.

9.  35.  now  Jonathan  had  sent  his  brother  J.

36.  the  children  of  Jambri  came  and  took  J.

38.  they  remembered  J .  their  brother  and  went  up

13. 53.  when  Simon  saw  that  J.  was  a  valiant  man
16. 1.  then  came  up  J .  from  Gazara  and  told  Simon


1  Mac.  16.  2.  faded  ids  two  eldest  sons  Judas  and  J
9.  but  J.  still  followed  alter  them  to  Cedron

19.  he  sent  others  also  to  Gazara  to  kill  J.

21.  one  had  run  afore  to  Gazara,  and  told  J.

23.  as  concerning  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  J.

2  Mac.  4. 11.  by  J.  the  father  of  Eupolemus

11.  17.  J.  and  Absalom  who  were  sent  from  you

JOIN.

1  Esd.  8.  84.  ye  shall  not  J.  your  daughters  to  sens

2  Esd.  15.  30.  with  great  power  come  and  J.  battle
1  Mac.  10.4.  before  he  J.  with  Alexander  against  us

11.  l.to  get  his  kingdom,  and  J.  it  to  his  own
13.  14.  that  Simon  meant  to  j.  battle  with  him
JOINED

1  Esd.  1.  29.  but  J.  battle  with  him  in  the  plain
Tob.  6.  17.  his  heart  was  effectually  J.  to  her
Jud.  14.  10.  Achior  was./,  to  the  house  of  Israel
Eccl.  51.  20.  I  have  had  my  heart  J.  with  her

1  Mac.  1.  15.  they  J.  themselves  to  the  heathen

4.  14.  so  they  j.  battle,  and  the  heathen  tied,  34.

1  7.  43.  |  9.  47. 1  10.  49,  53,  78. 1  11.  69.

2  Mac.  8.  23.

6.  21.  to  whom  some  ungodly  men  J.  themselves

8.  1.  accept  all  that  j.  themselv-es  to  them

15.  14.  when  he  had  j.  ships  close  to  the  town

2  Mac.  8.  22.  and  j.  with  himself  his  own  brethren

JOINING.

Sus.  4.  Joacim  had  a  fair  garden  j.  unto  his  house
1  Mac.  10.  26.  now  j.  yourselves  with  our  enemies
JOININGS.

Eccl.  27.  2.  as  a  nail  sticketh  fast  between  the  J.
JOLLITY.

1  Esd.  3.  20.  it  turneth  every  thought  into./.

Eccl.  1.3.  8.  thou  be  not  brought  down  in  thy' J.

JONAS.

2  Esd.  1.  39.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  Abdiasand  J.
Tob.  14.  4.  those  things  which  J.  spake  of  Nineve

8.  those  things  which  the  prophet  J.  spake
JONATHAN.

1  Mac.  2.  5.  called  .1.  whose  surname  was  Apphus

4.  30.  into  the  hands  of  J.  the  son  of  Saul

5.  17.  1  and  J.  my  brother  will  go  into  Galaad

9.  19.  J.  and  Simon  took  Judas  their  brother

31.  upon  this.I.  took  the  governance  upon  him

33.  then  J.  and  Simon  fled  into  the  wilderness
35.  J .  had  sent  his  brother  John  to  pray  his  friends
37.  after  this  came  word  to  J.  and  Simon

44.  then  J .  said  to  his  company,  let  us  go  up
48.  then  J.  and  they  that  were  with  him  leaped
58.  behold,  J.  and  his  company  are  at  ease

10.  3.  moreover  Demetrius  sent  letters  to  J.

21.  J.  put  on  the  holy  robe  and  gathered  forces

11.  6.  J.  met  the  king  with  great  pomp  at  Joppa

20.  J.  gathered  together  them  that  were  in  Judah

41.  in  the  mean  time  J.  sent  to  king  Demetrius

44.  on  this  J.  sent  him  three  thousand  strong  men
67.  as  for  J.  and  his  host  they  pitched  at  Genesar
69.  men  in  ambush,  all  that  were  of  J.  side  fled

12.  1.  now  when  .1.  saw  tha*t  the  time  served  him
3.  J.  the  high  priest  and  the  people  sent  us

52.  there  they  bewailed.l.  and  them  with  him

13.  11.  also  he  sent  J.  the  son  of  Absalom

19.  Tryphon  dissembled,  nor  would  he  let  J.  go
23.  at  Bascamahe  slew  J.  who  was  buried  there
25.  Simon  took  the  bones  of  J.  his  brother

14.  16.  when  it  was  heard  that  J.  was  dead

18.  they  made  with  Judas  and  J.  his  brethren

30.  after  that  J.  having  gathered  his  nation

2  Mac.  1.  23.  J.  beginning,  and  the  rest  answering

8.  22.  he  joined  Simon,  and  Joseph,  and  J.

JOPPA,  JOPPE.

1  Esd.  5.55.  bring  cedar-trees  by  floats  to  haven  of.!.

1  Mac.  10.  75.  and  he  pitched  his  tents  against  J .

but  they  of  J .  shut  him  out  of  the  city-
76.  they  let  him  in,  and  so  Jonathan  wonJ.

11.  6.  Jonathan  met  the  king  with  great  pomp  at  J.

12.  33.  whence  he  turned  aside  to  J.  and  won  it

13.  11.  he  sent  Jonathan  with  a  great  power  to  J.

14.  5.  so  in  this  that  he  took  J.  for  an  haven

34.  moreover,  he  fortified  J.  and  Gazara

15.  28.  you  withhold  J.  and  Gazara,  and  the  tower

35.  whereas  thou  demandest  J.  and  Gazara

2  Mac.  4.2 1 .  he  came  to  J .  from  thence  to  J  erusalem

12.  3.  men  of  J.  also  did  such  an  ungodly  deed

7.  root  out  all  them  of  the  city  of  J .

JO  RAM.

1  Esd.  1.  9.  Assabias,  and  Ochiel,  and  J.  captains
JORDAN.

Jud.  5.15.  and  passing  over  J .  they  possessed  all
Eccl.  24.  26.  abound  as  J.  in  the  time  of  harvest
1  Mac.  5.  24.  Judas  and  Jonathan  went  over  J.

52.  after  this  went  they  over  J .  into  the  plain

9.  34.  he  came  near  to  J.  with  all  his  host

42.  they  turned  aside  to  the  marish  of  J.

43.  he  came  to  the  banks  of  J.  with  a  great  power

45.  the  water  of  J.  on  this  side  and  that  side

48. they  leapt  into  J .  and  swam  over  to  the  farther
bank,  the  other  passed  not  over  J.  unto  them
JOSABAD.

1  Esd.  8.  63.  with  them  were  J  .  and  Moeth,  Levites
JOSEDEC.

1  Etd.  5.  5.  Jesus  the  son  of  J.  son  of  Saraias,  48.
See  Jesus.

JOSEPH.

Eccl.  49.  15.  nor  w-as  there  a  man  born  like  to  J.

1  Mac.  2. 53.  J .  in  time  of  distress  kept  counnandin.
5.  18.  so  he  left  .1 .  son  of  Zacharias,  and  Azarias

56.  J.  son  of  Zacharias,  and  Azarias, captains
60.  it  was,  that.  J .  and  Azarias  were  put  to  flight

2  Mac.  8.  22.  to  wit,  Simon,  and  J.  and  Jonathan
10.19.  Maccabeus  left  Simon,  and  J.  and  Zaccheua

JOSHUA.

2  iliac.  12.15.  who  did  cast  down  Jericho  in  time  of  J.
JOS1AS.

1  Esd.  1.1.  J.  held  the  feast  of  the  passoyer
7.  J.  gave  thirty  thousand  lambs  and  kids
25.  Pharaoh  came,  and  J.  went  out  against  him
28.  howbeit,  J.  did  not  turn  back  his  chariot

32.  Jeremy  the  prophet  lamented  for  J.

33.  and  everyone  of  the  acts  that  J.  did

34.  the  peopfe  made  Joachaz  the  son  of  J.  king
Eccl.  49. 1.  the  remembrance  of  J.  is  like  peifume


ISR


J  U  D


J  U  D  [ArocitlrpHi


2  L,sd.  C.  19.  I  will  fill  thy  children  with

7.  61.  as  shall  be/.  over  them  that  are  p
lob.  7.  18.  Lord  give  theey.  for  this  thy

8.  1*.  finish  their  life  in  health  with  ;'.  s


Ixd.  49.  4.  all  except  David,  Ezekias,  and  J.  were
JOURNEY.  [defective

“•  8-  50. to  desire ot  him  a  prosperous/.
job.  4.  15.  nor  let  drunkenness  go  with  thee  in  j.

5.  16.  God  send  you  a  good  /.  God  prosper  your  /.

21.  hisy.  shall  be  prosperous,  he  shall  return

6.  1.  as  they  went  on  their  j.  they  came  to  Tigris

10. 1.  and  when  the  days  of  they,  were  expired

11.  the  God  of  heaven  give  you  a  prosperous.;.

11.  1.  that  he  had  given  him  a  prosperous  j.

TVtsd.  1.1.  18.  and  for  a  goody,  he  asketh  of  that

18.  1.  to  be  a  guide  of  the  unknown  j.  and  a  sun

1  Mac.  7-  45.  they  pursued  after  them  a  day’s y.
11.  2.  whereupon  he  took  hisy.  into  Syria

2  Mac.  9.  4.  his  chariot-man  to  despatch  the  /.

7.  filled  with  pride,  commanding  to  haste  they.
12. 10.  were  gone  in  their  y.  towards  Timotheus

JOURNEYED.

1  Mac.  10.  77.  he  went  to  Azotus  as  one  that ;.

„  .  .  JOY.

sd.  2.  19.  I  will  fill  thy  children  withy.

persuaded
sorrow

. - . -  *.*  ......  j.  and  mercy

11.  1(.  there  was./,  amongst  all  his  brethren

13.  10.  his  tabernacle  built  in  thee  again  with  ;.

11.  all  generations  shall  praise  thee  with  great y.
ud.  12.  14.  it  shall  be  my  j.  to  the  day  of  my  death
16.  11.  then  my  afflicted  shouted  tor  j.

Esth  10.  13.  with  anasembly,  andy.  and  gladness

13.  17.  turn  our  sorrow  intoy.  that  we  may  live

14.2.  all  places  of  hery.  she  filled  with  her  torn  hair
18.  nor  had  thine  handmaid  any  y.  since  the  day

J5-  21.  God  hath  turned  the  day  to y".  unto  them
Uisd.  8.  16.  hath  no  sorrow,  hut  mirth  and  /.

Lccl.  1.  12.  givethy.  and  gladness,  and  a  long  life
23.  and  afterwards y.  shall  spring  up  to  him

2.  9.  that  fear  L.  hope  for  everlasting  y.  and  mercy

3.  5.  he  shall  have  ;,  of  his  own  children

4.  12.  that  seek  to  her  early  shall  be  filled  with  y

6.  28.  and  that  shall  be  turned  to  thy/.

31.  shall  put  her  about  thee  as  a  crown  ofy.

15.  6.  he  shall  find/.  and  a  crown  of  gladness
25.  7.  a  man  that  hath  j.  of  his  children

30. 1.  that  he  may  have/.  of  him  in  the  end
C.  that  chastiseth  his  soil,  shall  havej.  in  him
16.  there  is  noy.  above  they,  of  the  heart
Bar.  2.  23.  the  voice  of  mirth  and  the  voice  of  y.
4.11.  withy,  did  I  nourish  them  but  sent  them  away

22.  andy.  is  come  to  me  from  the  Holy  One

23.  but  God  will  give  you  to  me  again  withy.

29.  he  shall  bring  you  everlasting  j.  again
36.  behold  they,  that  cometh  to  thee  from  God
n?*  shall  lead  Israel  with.;,  in  light  of  glory

1  Mac.  3.  45.  y.  was  taken  from  Jacob,  pipe  ceased

5.  23.  he  brought  them  to  Judea  with  great  j.

54.  so  they  went  up  to  mount  Sion  with  /.

14.  11.  and  Israel  rejoiced  with  great y.

2  Mac.  3.  30.  for  the  temple  was  filled  with  y.

9. 19.  wisheth  muchy.  health,  and  prosperity

15.  28.  returning  again  withy,  they  knew

„  .  JOYFUL.

2  Esd.  2.  30.  bey.  O  thou  mother  with  children

12.  34.  he  shall  make  them  y.  till  the  coming
loo.  8.  16.  to  be  praised,  for  thou  hast  made  mey.

13. 10.  let  him  make/.  those  that  are  captives
Jud.  14.  9.  the  people  made  ay.  noise  in  their  city
„  J.OYFULNESS.

Q  Eid.  2.  36.  receive  they,  of  your  glory
TVtsd.  2.9.  let  us  leave  tokens  of  oury.  in  every  place
Lccl.  30.  22.  they,  of  a  man  prolongeth  his  days
_  .  IRKSOME.

Eccl.  27 .13.  the  discourse  of  fools  is  i.  and  their  part
IRON.

J®*,  as  *"•  rusteth.so  is  his  wickedness
22.  15.  sand  and  a  mass  of  i.  is  easier  to  bear
28.  20.  for  the  yoke  thereof  is  a  yoke  of*,  and  made

38.  28.  the  smith  considering  the  i.  work

39.  26.  fire,  i.  and  salt  for  the  use  of  man’s  life
48.  17.  he  digged  the  hard  rock  with  i.

Erayer  of  Manass.  I  am  bowed  down  with  i.  bands
2  Mac.  11. 9.  were  ready  to  pierce  thro’  walls  of  i.
ISAAC.

2  Esd.  3.  16.  and  unto  him  thou  gavest  I.  and  unto
r  I.  also  thou  gavest  Jacob  and  Esau

Jud.  8.  26.  and  how  he  tried  I.  and  what  happened
Eccl.  44.  22.  with  I.  did  he  establish  the  blessing
Dan.  3.12.  mercy  not  depart,  for  thy  servant  I.  sake
ISLAN  DS.

Eccl.  43.  23.  by  counsel  he  plantefh  *.  therein
47.  16.  thy  name  went  far  unto  the  *'.  for  thy  peace
ISLES.

1  Mac.  6.  29.  came  to  him  from  i.  of  the  sea,  bands

11.  38.  whom  he  gathered  from  *.  of  the  heathen

14.  5.  he  made  an  entrance  to  the  i.  of  the  sea

15.  1.  Antiochus  sent  letters  from  i.  of  the  sea

ISMAEL.

Jud.  2.  23.  they  spoiled  all  the  children  of  I.

.ISRAEL.

1  Esd.  1. 3.  the  Levites,  the  holy  ministers  of  1.

4.  serve  the  Lord,  and  minister  unto  his  people  I.

2.  3.  Lord  ot  I.  the  most  high  Lord  made  me  king
5.61.  because  his  glory  is  for  ever  in  all  I.

7-  8.  they  offered  twelve  goats  for  the  sin  of  all  I.

8.  7.  but  taught  I .  the  ordinances  and  judgments
27.  I  gathered  together  men  of  1.  to  go  with  me

9.7.  in  marrying,  thereby  to  increase  the  sins  of  1

2  Esd.  2.  16.  for  I  have  known  my  name  in  I.

3.  36.  that  I.  by  name  hath  kept  thy  precepts
4.23.  wherefore  I.  is  given  up  a  reproach
5. 35.  that  1  might  not  have  seen  the  toil  of  I.

9.  30.  hear  me,  O  I.  and  mark  m3’  words,  14.  28.

12.  46.  be  of  good  comfort,  O  1.  be  not  heavy
Jud.  8.  3.3.  the  Lord  will  visit  I.  by  mine  hand

10. 1.  after  she  ceased  to  cry  to  the  God  of  I.

16.1.  Judas  began  to  sing  this  thanksgiving  in  all  I.
Esth.  10.  9.  my  nation  is  this  I.  which  crieth  to  God

13.  9.  it  thou  hast  appointed  to ‘save  1.

14.  5.  thou,  O  Ld.  tookest  I.  from  among  all  people
Eccl.  17.  17.  but  I.  is  the  Lord’s  portion

24.  8.  and  let  thine  inheritance  be  in  I.

36. 12.  on  I.  -whom  thou  hast  named  thy  first-born


Eccl.  VJ.  25.  but  the  days  of  I.  are  innumerable

45.  o.  that  he  might  teach  I.  his  judgments
11.  after  the  number  of  the  tribes  of  1.

17 .  that  should  inform  I.  in  his  laws

46.  1.  that  he  might  set  I.  in  their  inheritance

47.  11.  he  gave  him  a  throne  of  glory  in  I.

50.  13.  before  all  the  congregation  of  I.

Bar.  2.  1.  pronounced  agst.  our  judges  that  judged  I.

3-  1.  O  God  ot  I.  the  soul  in  anguish  crieth
36.  and  he  hath  given  it  to  I .  his  beloved

4-  4-  O  I  -  happy  are  we,  for  things  are  made  known
5-  be  of  cheer,  my  people,  the  memorial  of  1.

o.  7.  that  I.  may  go  safely  in  the  glory  of  God
Dan.  3.  12.  mercy  not  depart  for  thy  holy  l.sake
bus.  48.  are  ye  such  fools,  ye  sons  of  I.  that  with¬
out  knowledge  have  condemned  a  daughter  of  I.  ?

1  Mac.  3.  2.  they  fought  with  cheerfulness  the

.  , ,  ..  .  battle  of  I.

4. 11.  there  is  One  who  delivereth  andsaveth  1.

5.  3.a<r.  l.sau  in  Idumea,  because  they  besieged  I.
7-  5.  all  the  wicked  and  ungodly  men  of  1.

22.  Judah  into  their  power,  did  much  hurt  in  I.
26.  sent  Nicanor  that  bare  deadly  hate  unto  I.

8.  18.  the  Grecians  did  oppress  I.  with  servitude

9.  21.  the  valiant  man  fallen  that  delivered  I.

51.  that  they  might  work  malice  upon  I.

10. 46.  remembered  the  great  evil  he  had  done  in  I.
11. 23.  he  chose  certain  of  the  elders  of  I.

12.  52.  wherefore  all  1.  made  great  lamentation

13.  4.  all  my  brethren  are  slain  for  I.  sake
41.  thus  the  yoke  was  taken  away  from  1.

14.  It.  he  made  peace  and  I.  rejoiced  with  great  joy
16-2.  that  we  have  delivered  1.  oftentimes

2  niac'  1-.25-  tll0u  that  deliverest  1.  from  trouble
~6.  receive  the  sacrifice  for  thy  whole  people  I.

9.  5.  but  the  God  of  I.  smote  them  with  a  plague

10.  38.  Lord  who  had  done  such  great  things  for  I.

11.  6.  he  would  send  a  good  angel  to  deliver  I.

r  J  „  ,  ISRAELITES.

Jud.  6.  14.  the  I.  descended  from  their  city
Bar.  ^ear  now  the  Prayers  of  the  dead  1.

1  Mac.  1.  43.  many  I.  consented  to  his  religion

53.  and  drove  the  I.  into  secret  places
58.  thus  did  the}’  to  the  I.  every  month
3.  46.  the  I.  assembled  themselves  together
6. 18.  they  shut  up  the  I.  round  about  the  sanctuary
1 .  ~3.  the  mischief  Alcimus  had  done  among  the  I.
__  ISSUED.

1  Mac.  14.  36.  made  a  tower  out  of  w’hich  they  i.

_  ,  ITERATING.

Lccl.  41.  23.  or  of  i.  and  speaking  again  that

JUDA.

2  Esd.  1.  24.  thou  J.  wouldst  not  obey  me
Jud.  14.7.  blessed  art  thbu  in  the  tabernacle  of  J
Lccl.  49.4.  even  the  kings  of  J.  failed
Bus.  56.  O  thou  seed  of  Chanaan,  and  not  of  J.

57.  but  the  daughter  of  J.  would  not  abide
T  M. ac.Q.  6.  blasphemies  that  were  committed  in  J.
7.  22.  had  gotten  the  land  of  J.  into  their  power
50.  the  land  ot  J.  was  in  rest  a  little  while
JUDAISM.

2  Mac.  2.21.  that  behaved  to  their  honour  for  J.
JUDAS.

1  Mac.  3. 12.  J.  took  their  spoils,  Apollonius’  sword

20.  the  fear  of  J.  began  to  fall  on  nations  round
42.  when  J  .  saw  that  miseries  were  multiplied
4- 5.  Gorgias  came  by  night  into  the  camp  of  J.
16.  J .  returned  with  his  host  from  pursuing

21.  the  host  of  J.  in  the  plain  ready  to  fight
23.  then  J.  returned  to  spoil  the  tents

41.  J.  appointed  men  to  fight  against  those
5.  28.  J.  turned  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness

38.  J.  sent  men  to  espy  ||  39.  J.  went  to  meet
44.  nor  could  they  stand  any  longer  before  J.

48.  J.  sent  unto  them  in  peaceable  manner
61.  because  they  were  not  obedient  unto  J.

65.  afterward  went  J.  forth  with  his  brethren

6 •  19.  J.  purposingto  destroy  them,  called  people

42.  then  J.  and  his  host  entered  into  battle  •

7.  6.  J.  and  his  brethren  have  slain  thy  friends
10.  they  sent  messengers  to  J .  and  his  brethren
23.  J.  went  out  into  all  the  coasts  of  Judea
40.  but  J.  pitched  in  Adasa  with  3000  men

8.  1.  J.  had  heard  of  the  fame  of  the  Romans

9.  7.  J.  therefore  saw  that  his  host  slipped  away
13.  they  of  J.  side  sounded  their  trumpets  also
18.  J.  also  was  killed,  and  the  remnant  fled

28.  for  this  cause  J .  friends  came  together
31.  Jonathan  rose  up  instead  of  his  brother  J.

11-  70.  J.  the  son  ot  Calphi,  a  captain  was  left
~  Mac.  12.  5.  when  J.  heard  of  his  cruelty  done
28.  whenj.  had  called  upon  Almighty  God

39.  J.  came  to  take  up  the  bodies  of  the  slain
42.  J .  exhorted  the  people  to  keep  from  sin

13.  1.  it  was  told  J.  that  Antiochus  was  coming

12.  J.  commanded  they  should  be  in  readiness
20.  J.  conveyed  such  things  as  were  necessary

22.  the  king  fought  with  J.  and  was  overcome

14.  1.  J.  was  informed  ||  10.  as  long  as  J.  liveth
22.  J.  placed  armed  men  in  convenient  places

15. 26.  but  J .  encountered  the  enemies  with  prayer
See  Maccabeus.

JUDEA.

1  Esc1,  1.  26.  what  to  do  with  thee,  O  king  of  J.

4.  4„.  when  J.  was  made  desolate  by  the  Chaldees
lob.  1.  18.  when  he  fled  from  J.  I  buried  them
Jud.  3.  9.  over-against  Esdraelon,  near  unto  J.

4.  7-  by  them  there  was  an  entrance  into  J.

8.  21.  if  we  be  taken  so,  all  J.  shall  lie  waste

11.  19.  I  will  lead  thee  through  the  midst  of  J.

1  Mac.  6.  5.  that  went  against  the  land  of  J.  48.

9.  1.  sent  them  into  the  land  of  J .  the  second  time

10.  30.  they  shall  not  be  taken  of  the  land  of  J.

11. 28.  that  he  would  make  J.  free  from  tribute

12.  35.  about  building  strong  holds  in  J.  13.  33.

13.  1.  a  great  host  to  invade  the  land  of  J.  12.

14.  33.  Simon  fortified  the  cities  of  J.

15.  30.  of  the  places  without  the  borders  of  J.

40.  came  to  invade  J.  ||41.  on  the  ways  of  J.

16.  10.  he  returned  into  the  land  of  J.  rn  peace

2  Mac.  5. 11.  he  thought  that.!,  had  revolted

11.  5.  he  came  to  J.  and  drew  near  to  Bethsura


2  Mac.  13.  1.  was  coming  with  great  power  into  J.
J  U  DG  E.

2  Esd.  4.  18.  if  thou  wert  j.  betwixt  these  two

7.  19.  he  said  to  me.  there  is  no  j.  above  God

8.  18.  the  swiftness  of  the  j.  that  is  to  come

14.  32.  forasmuch  as  he  is  a  righteous  /.

16.  67.  behold,  God  himself  is  the  J.  fear  him
Jud.  7.  24.  God  be  J.  between  us  and  you
Uisd.  9.  7.  to  be  J.  of  thy  sons  and  daughters

15.  7-  of  either  sort,  the  potter  himself  is  the  ;.
Eccl.  7.  6.  seek  not  to  be  J.  being  not  able  to  take

8.  14,  go  not  to  law  with  a  j.  for  they  will  judge

10.  1.  a  wise  j.  will  instruct  his  people

2.  as  the.;',  of  the  people  is  himself,  so  are  officers
35.  12.  for  the  Lord  is  j.  with  him  is  no  respect

41.  18.  of  an  offence  before  a  j.  and  ruler
Bar.  6.  14.  as  though  he  were  a  j.  of  the  country

1  Mac.  2.  55.  Jesus  was  made  a)",  in  Israel

2  Mac.  12.  6.  calling  on  God  the  righteous  41.

JUDGE,  Verb.

1  Esd.  3.  9.  the  three  princes  of  Persia  shall  /.

8.  23.  they  may  j.  in  all  Syria  and  Phenice

"  L'd.  2.  20.  j.  for  the  fatherless,  give  to  the  poor
Ivtsd.  3.  8.  they  shall  j.  the  nations  have  dominion

9.  12.  then  shall  1  j.  thy  people  righteously

12.  21.  with  circumspection  didst  thou  j.  thy  sons
22.  that  when  we  j.  we  should  carefully  think
Bed.  4.  15.  who  gives  ear  to  her  shall  y.  the  nations

8.  14.  they  willy,  for  him  according  to  his  honour

11.  28.  y.  none  blessed  before  his  death

31.  15.  y.  of  thy  neighbour  by  thyself,  be  discreet
35.  17.  the  Most  High  shall  behold  toy.  righteously
45.  26.  wisdom  toy.  his  people  in  righteousness
Bar.  6.  54.  neither  can  they  j.  their  own  cause
64.  are  able  neither  toy.  causes,  nor  do  good  to  men

1  Mac.  7.  42.  y.  him  according  to  his  wickedness

2  Mac.  6.  12.  but  that  they  y.  those  punishments

JUDG  ED.

2  Esd.  8.  49.  hast  noty.  thyself  worthy  to  be  much
11.  41.  the  earth  hast  thou  noty.  with  truth
12-  9.  thou  hasty,  me  worthy  to  shew  me  last  times
Wisd.  6.  4.  you  have  noty.  aright  nor  kept  law

10.  that  keep  holiness  holily  shall  bey.  holy

11.  9.  knew  how  the  ungodly  werey.  in  wrath

12.  22.  when  we  ourselves  arey.  look  for  mercy
Eccl.  25.  7-  nine  things  which  I  have.;,  to  be  happy

26.  26.  that  honoureth,  shall  bey.  wise  of  all
35.  19.  till  he  havey.  the  cause  of  his  people
Bar.  2. 1.  pronounced  against  our  judges  that/  Isr.

2  Mac.  4.  47.  should  have  been  /.  innocent

9.  15.  /.  not  worthy  so  much  as  to  be  buried

11.  36.  such  things  as  hey.  to  be  referred  to  kings
_  JUDGES.

1  Esd.  2. 17.  they,  that  are  in  Celosyria  and  Phenice

8.  23.  and  thou,  Esdras,  ordain  y.  and  justices

9.  13.  with  them  rulers  andy.  of  every  place
TVtsd.  1.  1.  love  righteousness,  ye  that  be;',  of  earth

6.  1.  learn,  ye  that  be  /.  of  the  ends  of  the  earth
Lccl.  10.  24.  great  men  andy.  shall  be  honoured

38.  33.  they  shall  not  sit  on  they,  seat  nor  unders.
Bar.  2. 1.  pronounced  against  oury.  that  judged  Isr.

5.  two  of  the  ancients  of  the  people  to  bey.  from
ancient  j.  who  seemed  to  govern  the  people

41.  as  those  that  were  elders  andy.  of  the  people

„  JUDGES'!’.

2  Esd.  4.  20.  but  why  y.  thou  not  thyself  also?

Tob.  3.  2.  and  thou  /.  truly  and  justly  for  ever
Uisd.  12.  18.  thou  mastering  thy  power  with

JUDGETH.

Eccl.  16.  12.  hey.  a  man  according  to  his  works
JUDGING.

Esth.  16.  9.  and  always  ;.  things  that  are  evident

JUDGMENT.

1  Esd.  3.  15.  sat  him  down  on  the  royal  seat  of y.

4.  40.  nor  in  hery.  is  any  unrighteousness

2  Esd.  4.  20.  he  said,  thou  hast  given  a  right y.

5.  34.  while  1  labour  to  seek  out  part  of  hisy.

40.  even  so  canst  thou  not  find  out  my  j.

42.  he  said  to  me,  1  will  liken  my  j.  to  a  ring

43.  that  thou  mightest  shew  thyy.  the  sooner

7.  33.  the  Most  High  shall  appear  on  the  seat  ofy.
34.  y.  only  shall  remain,  truth  shall  stand  and  faith

8.  12.  and  thou  reformedst  it  with  thy  j.

38.  not  think  on  them  that  sinned  before y.

61.  and  therefore  is  my  y.  now  at  hand

11.  46.  may  hope  for  they,  of  him  that  made  her

12.  33.  he  shall  set  them  before  him  alive  in  y.

34.  make  joyful  until  the  coming  of  the  day  ofy.

14.  35.  after  death  shall  /.  come,  when  live  again
Jud.  16. 17.  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  in  day  ofy.
Esth.  10. 11.  two  lots  came  at  the  day  of  j.  before  God
Uisd.  5.  18.  put  on  truey.  instead  of  an  helmet

6.  5.  a  sharpy,  shall  be  to  them  in  high  places

8.  11.  I  shall  be  found  of  quick  conc  eit  iny.

9.  3.  and  execute/.  with  an  upright  heart

5.  too  young  for  the  understanding  of  y.  and  laws
12.  12.  or  who  shall  withstand  thy  j.  ?

13.  thou  mightest  shew  that  thyy.  is  not  unrighte.

25.  to  them  didst  send  ay.  to  mock  them

26.  they  shall  feel  a y.  worthy  of  God

16. 18.  they  were  persecuted  with  they,  of  God
Eccl.  3. 24.  an  evil  suspicion  hath  overthrown  their/.

4.  9.  be  not  faint-hearted  when  thou  sittest  iny.

11.  9.  and  sit  not  iny.  with  sinners

16.  26.  the  works  ot  the  I.ord  are  done  iny.

18.  20.  before  j.  examine  thyself,  and  find  mercy

19.  25.  there  is  one  that  turns  asiJe  to  make,;,  ap¬

pear,  there  is  a  wise  man  that  j ustifieth  iny.

20.  4.  so  is  he  that  executed)  /.  with  violence

21.  5.  and  his  J.  cometh  speedily

15.  4.  O  how  comely  a  tiling  is/.  for  gray  hairs'

32.  3.  speak,  thou  elder,  but  with  sound  /.

16.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  find  /.

35.  17.  not  depart,  till  the  Most  High  execute /.

38.  22.  remember  myy.  for  thine  also  shall  be  so

33.  shall  not  sit  in  judge’s  seat,  nor  understand
sentence  of  j.  they  cannot  declare  justice  andy.

42.  2.  and  ofy.  to  justify  the  ungodly

43.  13.  and  sends  swiftly  the  lightnings  of  his  y.

45.  10.  with  a  breastplate  ofy.  and  with  Urim
48.  7.  who  heardestin  Horeb  they,  of  vengeance

10.  to  pacify  the  wrath  of  the  Lord’s  y.

661


Apocrypha.]  JUS


KEP


KIN


Dart.  3. 5.  thou  hast  executed  true  J.  accord,  to  truth
and  j.  didst  thou  bring  these  things  on  us

8.  every  thing  thou  hast  done,  hast  done  in  true  j.
Sus.  49.  return  again  to  the  place  of  j.

53.  for  thou  hast  pronounced  false  j.  _

1  Mac.  2.  24.  to  shew  his  anger  according  toy.

29.  many  that  sought  after  justice  and  j.

6.  22.  how  long  will  it  be  ere  thou  execute  j.

2  Mac.  7.  35.  thou  hast  not  escaped.;,  of  almighty  G.
36.  but  thou  thro’  they,  of  God  shalt  receive  just

9.  4.  to  despatch  they,  of  God  now  following  him

18.  for  the  justy.  ot  God  was  come  upon  him

13.  26.  Lysias  went  up  to  they,  seat,  said  as  much
JUDGMENTS.

2  Esd.  7.  30.  into  silence,  like  as  in  the  formery.

'l'ob.  3.  5.  and  now  thy  j.  are  many  and  true
Jut/.  9. 6.  and  thyy.  are  in  thy  foreknowledge
Wisd.  12. 10.  but  executing  thyy.  on  them  by  little

17.  1.  great  are  thyy.  and  cannot  be  expressed
Heel.  17-  12.  and  he  shewed  them  his j.

18.  14.  and  that  diligently  seek  after  hisy.

45.  5.  teach  Jacob  his  covenants,  Israel  hisy.

17.  he  gave  him  authority  in  the  statutes  of  j.
Dan.  3.  4.  thy  ways  are  right,  and  all  thyy.  truth*,
Hus.  9.  not  look  to  heaven,  nor  remember  justy.

JUDITH.

Jud.  8.  1.  at  that  time  J.  heard  thereof,  9.

4.  so  J.  was  a  widow  in  her  house  three  years

32.  then  said  J.  unto  them,  hear  me, and  I  will  do

9.  1.  tin  n  J.  fell  upon  her  face  and  put  ashes  on  her

head,  J.  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said
10. 10  J.  went  out,  she  and  her  maid  with  her
23.  when  J.  was  come  before  him  and  servants

11.  5.  J.  said,  receive  the  words  of  thy  servant

12.  2.  J.  said,  I  will  not  eat  thereof,  lest  offence

4.  then  said  J.  to  him,  as  thy  soul  liveth

14.  then  said  J.  to  him,  who  am  I  now,  that  I

16.  now  when  J.  came  in  and  satdown,  Holofernes

18.  so  J.  said,  I  will  drink  now,  my  lord

13.  3.  J.  had  commanded  her  maid  to  stand  within

4.  J.  standing  by  his  bed,  said  in  her  heart,  O  Lord

11.  then  said  J.  afar  off  to  watchmen  at  the  gate

14. 1.  then  said  J.  to  them,  hear  me,  my  brethren

7.  Achior  fell  at  J.  feet  and  reverenced  her

8.  J.  declared  unto  him  all  that  she  had  done

14.  for  he  thought  that  he  had  slept  with  J.

17.  he  went  into  the  tent  where  J .  lodged

15.  8.  Joacimcameto  see  J.  and  to  salute  her

11.  they  gave  unto  J.  Holofernes  his  tent

16.  1.  then  J.  began  to  sing  this  thanksgiving

2.  J.  said,  begin  unto  my  God  with  timbrels

7.  but  J.  the  daughter  of  Merari  weakened  him

19.  J.  also  dedicated  all  the  stuff  of  Holofernes

20.  and  J  remained  with  them  three  months

21.  and  J.  went  to  Betlmlia,  and  remained  inher

25.  none  made  Israel  afraid  in  the  days  of  J .

JUPITER.

2  Mac.  6.  2.  and  to  call  it  the  temple  of  J.  Olympias
and  in  Garizim  of  J.  the  defender  of  strangers
JURY.  See  Jewry.

JUST.

1  Esd.  4.  39.  but  she  doeth  the  things  that  are  y.

2  Esd.  8.  33.  the  j.  who  have  many  good  works

10.  16.  the  determination  of  God  to  be  j.

Tob.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  thou  arty,  and  all  thy  works

13.  13.  rejoice  and  be  glad  for  the  children  of  the
j.  shall  be  gathered  and  bless  the  Lord  of  they.

14.  9.  and  shew  thyself  merciful  andy.

Esth.  16.  15.  the  Jews  live  by  mosty.  laws

Wisd.  2.  16.  pronounceth  the  end  ofy.to  be  blessed

18.  if  they*,  man  be  son  of  God,  he  will  help  him

11.  9.  thirsting  in  another  manner  than  the  j.

12. 19.  that  the  y.  man  should  be  merciful
14.  31.  but  it  is  they,  vengeance  of  sinners

Eccl.  9.  16.  let/.  men  eat  and  drink  with  thee
16.  3.  for  one  that  is  y*.  is  better  than  a  thousand

35.  7.  the  sacrifice  of  ay.  man  is  acceptable
Bar.  6.  73.  better  is  they*,  man  that  hath  no  idols
Sus.  9.  they  might  not  remember  j.  judgments
Prayer  of  Manass.  thou,  O  Lord,  that  art  the  God
of  they,  hast  not  appointed  repentance  to  the  ?'.
2  Mac.  7.36.shalt  received.  punishment  for  thy  pride

9.  18.  the  j.  judgment  ot  God  was  come  on  him

JUSTICE.

Tob.  1.  3. 1  walked  in  the  way  of  truth  and  j.

13.  6.  O  ye  sinners,  turn  and  do  y*.  before  him

14.  7.  all  those  who  love  God  in  truth  andy.

Esth.  16. 4.  they  think  to  escape  the  y.  of  God
Wisd.  8.  7- she  teacheth  prudence, y.  and  fortitude
Eccl.  16.  22.  who  can  declare  the  works  of  hisy.  ?

32. 16.  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  kindle/.  as  a  light

38.  33.  they  cannot  declare  j.  and  judgment

1  Mac.  2.  29-  many  that  sought  after  y*.  and  judg¬

ment  went  down  into  the  wilderness  to  dwell
.  7.  12.  assemble  a  company  of  Scribes  to  require  y*.

8.  32.  if  they  complain,  we  will  do  themy*.

14.  35.  for  they,  and  faith  he  kept  to  his  nation

2  Mac.  8.  13.  they  that  distrusted  the  y.  of  God

10. 12.  choosing  rather  to  doy.  to  the"  Jews

JUSTICES.

1  Esd.  8.  23.  thou  Esdras,  ordain  judges  and  /.

JUSTIFY.

2  Esd.  4.  18.  whom  wouldstthou  begin  toy?

Eccl.  7.  5.y.  not  thyself  before  the  Lord,  boast  not

10.  29.  who  will  y.  him  that  sinneth  ag.  his  soul  ?
13.  22.  things  not  bespoken,  yet  men  7.  him
42.  2.  and  of  judgment  toy.  the  ungodly

JUSTIFIED.

2  Esd.  12.  7.  if  I  am/.  with  thee  before  others
Esth.  10.  12.  so  Gody*.  his  inheritance
Eccl.  1.  22.  a  furious  man  cannot  be  7.

18.  22.  and  defer  not  until  death  to  hey.

31.  5.  he  that  loveth  gold  shall  not  bey.

JUST1FIETH.

Eccl.  19. 25.  there  is  a  wise  man  that/.  in  judgment
JUSTLY.

Tob.  3.  2.  thou  judgest  truly  and  J.  for  ever
4.  6.  doings  shall  succeed  to  all  them  that  live  j.
Wisd.  14.  30.  for  both  shall  they  be  7.  punished

19.  13.  they  suffered  y".  accord,  to  their  wickedness
Mac.  7-  38.  that  is/.  brought  on  all  our  nation

6.  and  that  mosty.  for  he  had  tormented  other

662


2  Mac.  13. 7.  hav.  no  burial  in  earth,  and  that  mosty.
IVY.

2  Mac.  6. 7.  go  in  procession  to  Bacchus,  carrying  i.

K.

KADES.

Jud.  1.  9.  Chellus,  and  K.  and  the  river  of  Egypt
KEEL.

Wisd.  5.  10.  the  path-way  of  the  k.  in  the  waves
KEEP.

1  Esd.  4.  11.  these  k.  watch  round  about  him

2  Esd.  1.24.  that  they  may  k.  my  statutes

2.  22.  k.  the  old  and  young  within  thy  walls

4.  40.  ask  of  her,  if  her  womb  may  k.  the  birth
8.27.  those  that  k.  thy  testimonies  in  affliction
10. 15.  therefore  k.  thy  sorrow  to  thyself

12.  38.  vthos*  hearts  may  k.  these  secrets

13.  42.  they  might  here  k.  their  statutes

14.  30.  received  the  law  of  life,  which  they  k.  not

15.  24.  woe  to  them  that/:.  not  my  commandments
32.  these  shall  be  troubled  and  k.  in  silence

'Job.  3.  15.  to  whom  1  may  k.  myself  for  a  wife

5.  21.  the  good  angel  will  k.  him  company

14.  9.  but  k.  thou  the  law  and  commandments
Jud.  4.  7.  to  k.  the  passages  of  the  hill-country

7.  12.  remain  in  camp,  k.  all  the  men  of  thy  army
IVisd.  6.  10.  for  they  that  k.  holiness  holily

17.  4.  nor  might  the  corner  k.  them  from  fear
Eccl.  1.  26.  if  thou  desire  wisdom  k.  commandments

2.  15.  and  they  that  love  him  will  k.  his  ways

6.  26.  and  k.  her  ways  with  all  thy  power

7.  22.  if  they  be  for  thy  profit,  k.  them  with  thee

8.  17.  consult  not  a  fool,  he  cannot  k.  counsef

9.  13.  k.  far  from  the  man  that  hath  power  to  kill

15.  15.  to  k.  tire  commandments  and  to  perform
17.  22.  he  will  k.  the  good  deeds  of  man  as  apple

25.  16.  than  to  k.  house  with  a  wicked  woman

26.  10.  k.  her  in  straitly,  lest  she  abuse  herself

19.  my  son,  k.  the  flower  of  thine  age  sound

28.  1.  he  will  surely  k.  his  sins  in  remembrance

29.  3.  k.  thy  word,  and  deal  faithfully  with  him
37.  12.  whom  thou  knowest  to  k.  the  commandm.

39.  2.  he  will  k.  the  sayings  of  the  renowned  men

41.  14.  my  children  k.  my  discipline  in  peace

42.  11.  k.  sure  watch  over  a  shameless  daughter
Bar.  4.  1.  all  they  that  k.  it  shall  come  to  life

6.  35.  tho’  a  man  make  a  vow  to  them  and  k.  it  not
59.  to  k.  such  things  safe  as  be  therein

1  Mac.  4.  61.  they  set  there  a  garrison  to  k.  it,  and

fortified  Bethsura,  6.  50.  1  11.  3.  j  12.  34.

7.  49.  they  ordained  to/-.  yearly  this  day

8.  26.  but  they  shall  k.  their  covenant

10.  20.  take  our  part,  and  k.  friendship  with  us
13.  48.  but  such  men  there,  as  would  k.  the  law

2  Mac.  1.  9.  see  ye  k.  the  feast  of  tabernacles

13.  we  are  purposed  to  k.  the  purification  of  the
temple,  might  L  it  as  the  feast  of  tabernacles

3.  22.  to  k.  the  things  committed  of  trust  safe

6.  6.  for  a  man  to  k.  the  sabbath-days,  11.

11. 19.  if  then  you  will  k.  yourselves  loyal

24.  had  rather  k.  their  own  manner  of  living

12.  42.  the  people  to  k.  themselves  from  sin
KEEPERS.

1  Esd.  8. 19.  commanded  the  k.  of  the  treasures
Esth.  12. 1.  two  eunuchs  of  the  king  and  k.  of  palace
KEEPEST.

1  Mac.  15.  7.  the  fortresses  thou  k.  in  thy  hands

KEEPETII.

2  Esd.  8.  9.  that  which  k.  and  is  kept,  shall  both
Eccl.  12.  6.  k.  them  against  the  day  of  punishment

20.  5.  there  is  one  that  k.  silence,  and  is  wise

6.  and  some  k.  silence,  knowing  his  time

21.  11.  he  that  it.  the  law  of  theLord,  35.  1.

23.  7.  he  that  k.  it,  shall  never  be  taken  in  his  lips
29.1.  strengtheneth  his  hand,  k.  commandments
Bar.  6.  70.  as  a  scarecrow  in  a  garden  k.  nothing
KEEPING.

Wisd.  6.  18.  love  is  the/:.  of  her  laws

Eccl.  32.  23.  for  this  is  k.  of  the  commandments

40.  6.  he  is  in  his  sleep,  as  in  a  day  of  k.  watch
42.  6.  sure  k.  is  good  where  an  evil  wife  is

2  Mac.  3.  40.  conberning  the  k.  of  the  treasury

5.  25.  when  taking  the  Jews  it.  holy-day
KEPT.

1  Esd.  1.  20.  such  passover  was  not  k.  in  Israel  since

3.  4.  men  of  the  guard  that  k.  the  king’s  body

4.  56.  to  give  to  all  that/-.  the  city,  pensions

7.  14.  they  k.  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread

2  Esd.  3.  35.  who  hath  so  k.  thy  commandments

36.  that  Israel  by  name  hath  k.  thy  precepts

8.  9.  but  that  which  keepeth  and  is  k.  be  preserved

9.  21.  I  have  k.  me  a  grape  of  the  cluster

22.  and  let  my  grape  be  k.  and  my  plant

32.  our  fathers  who  received  the  law,  k.  it  not

33.  they  k.  not  the  thing  that  was  sown  in  them

12.  21.  four  shall  be  k.  until  their  end  begin  to

approach,  but  two  shall  be  k.  unto  the  end
30.  they  whom  the  Highest  hath  k.  to  their  end
32.  tile  anointed  which  Highest  hath  k.  for  them

13.  23.  he  that  shall  endure  hath  k.  himself

26.  the  same  whom  God  hath  k.  a  great  season
42.  which  they  never  k.  in  their  own  land

14.  31.  ye  have  not  k.  ways  God  commanded  you

34.  if  reform  your  hearts,  ye  shall  be  k.  alive
Tob.  11.  19.  Tobias’  wedding  was  k.  seven  days
Jud.  6. 12.  k.  them  from  coming  up,  by  casting

8.  26.  to  Jacob  when  he  k.  the  sheep  of  Laban

13.  16.  who  hath  k.  me  in  my  way  that  I  went
Wisd.  6.  4.  have  not  judged  aright,  nor  k.  the  law

10.  5.  k.  him  strong  against  his  tender  compassion

12.  she  k.  him  safe  from  those  that  lay  in  wait

14.  16.  an  ungodly  custom  was  k.  as  a  law

24.  they  k.  neither  lives  nor  marriages  undefiled
17.  16.  whosoever  fell  down,  was  straitly  k.

19.  6.  thy  children  might  be  k.  without  hurt
Eccl.  11.  30.  like  as  a  partridge  Ic.  in  a  cage
44.  20.  who  k.  the  law  of  the  Most  High
Van.  3.  7.  not  obeyed  commandments,  nor  k.  them
14.  we  be  k.  unaerthis  day  in  all  the  world
Prayer  of  Manass.  nor  I  thy  commandments


1  Mac.  3.  45.  and  aliens  k.  the  stiong  hold

4.  56.  so  they  k.  the  dedication  of  the  adar

59.  the  days  should  be  k.  in  their  season

7.  48.  they  k.  that  day,  a  day  of  great  gladn;»

8.  12.  but  with  their  friends  they  k.  amity

10.  26.  whereas  you  have  k.  covenants  with  u»

11.  46.  but  they  of  the  city  k.  the  passages

13.  52.  that  that  day  should  be  k.  every  year

14.  35.  for  the  faith  which  he  k.  to  his  nation

2  Mac.  1. 19.  the  priests  hid  it  where  they  k.  it  sur

2. 12.  so  Solomon  k.  those  eight  days

3.  1.  and  the  laws  were  k.  very  well

15.  things  given  to  be  k.  that  they  should  be  pre¬

served  for  such  as  committed  them  to  be  k.
19.  virgins  that  were  k.  in  ran  to  the  gates

6.  7.  and  when  the  feast  of  Bacchus  was  k.

8.  33.  at  such  time  as  they  k.  the  feast  for  victory

10.  6.  and  they  k.  eight  days  with  gladness

15.  the  Idumeans  k.  the  Jews  occupied

17.  they  k.  off  all  that  fought  on  the  wall

27.  drew  near  to  enemies,  they  k.  by  themselves

15.  3.  who  commanded  the  sabbath-day  to  be  k.

4.  who  commanded  the  seventh  day  to  be  k.

KID.

Tob.  2.  12.  they  gave  her  also  besides  a  k.

13.  I  said  unto  her,  from  whence  is  this  k.?

KIDS.

Eccl.  47.  3.  David  played  with  lions  as  with  k.
KILL.

1  Esd.  4.  7.  if  he  commanded  to  k.  they  k.

2  Esd.  1. 18.  why  brought  into  this  wildern.  to  k.  us  ?
Jud.  5.  22.  the  people  spake  that  he  should  k.  him

7. 13.  so  shall  thirst  k.  them,  and  they  give  up

16.  5.  he  would  k.  my  young  men  with  the  sword
Eccl.  9. 13.  from  the  man  that  hath  power  to  k.

1  Mac.  12.  40.  take  Jonathan,  that  he  might  k.  him

16.  19.  he  sent  others  to  Gazai  a  to  k.  John
KILLED.

Tob.  1 . 18.  Sennacherib  in  his  wrath  k.  many
21.  two  of  his  sons  k.  him,  and  they  fled

3.  8.  whom  Asmodeus  the  evil  spirit  had  k.

7.  8.  and  after  they  had  k.  a  ram  of  the  flock
Jud.  2.  25.  Holofernes  he  k.  all  that  resisted  him
Wisd.  12.  6.  parents  that  k.  with  their  own  hands

16.  9.  for  them  the  bitings  of  grasshoppers  k.

Eccl.  30.  23.  for  sorrow  hath  k.  many,  no  profit

1  Mac.  2.  25.  also  the  king’s  commissioner  he  k.

5.  34.  there  were  k.  of  them  that  day  about  8000
9. 18.  Judas  also  was  k.  and  the  remnant  flea

2  Mac.  4.  42.  him  they  k.  beside  the  treasury

10. 17.  they  k.  no  fewer  than  twenty  thousand

30.  so  that  being  full  of  trouble,  they  were  k.

35.  with  fierce  courage  k.  at,  they  met  withal

37.  and  k.  Timotheus  that  was  bid  in  a  pit

14.  2.  Demetrius  had  k.  Antiochus  and  Lysias

K1LLETH.

Wisd.  16. 14.  a  man  indeed  k.  through  his  malice
Eccl.  34. 20.  as  one  that  k.  the  son  before  his  father
KILLING.

2  Mac.  5. 13.  thus  there  was  k.  of  young  and  old

12. 23.  Judas  also  k.  those  wicked  wretches

KIND.

Wisd.  7. 23.  k.  to  man,  stedfast,  sure,  free  from  care
Eccl.  6.  5.  fair  tongue  will  increase  k.  greetings
KINDNESS.

Eccl.  30.  6.  one  that  shall  requite  k.  to  friends

36.  23.  if  there  be  k.  and  comfort  in  her  tongue

37. 11.  nor  with  an  unmerciful  man  touching  k.
Van.  3. 19.  but  deal  with  us  after  thy  loving  k.

KIND.

Wisd.  14.  26.  changing  of  k.  disorder  in  marriages

18. 12.  innumerable  dead  with  one  k.  of  death
19.  6.  the  creature  in  his  proper  k.  was  fashioned

18.  elements  were  changed  f>y  a  k.  of  harmony
21.  nor  melted  the  icy  k.  of  heavenly  meat

Eccl.  13.  16.  all  flesh  consorteth  according  to  k.

2  Mac.  11.  31.  Jews  shall  use  their  own  k.  of  meats
KINDS.  .

Eccl.  36. 19.  the  palate  tasteth  divers  k.  of  venison
43.  25.  therein  be  variety  of  all  k.  of  beasts
KINDLE.

Eccl.  8. 10.  k.  not  the  coals  of  a  sinner  lest  be  burnt
28.8.  for  a  furious  man  will  k.  strife
32.  16.  and  they  shall  k.  justice  as  a  light
KINDLED.

2  Esd.  15. 23.  consumed  sinners  like  straw  that  is  k.

16.  15.  the  fire  is  k.  and  shall  not  be  put  out
68.  the  wrath  of  a  great  multitude  is  k.

Jud.  7.  5.  when  they  had  k.  tires  on  their  towers
Wisd.  17.  6.  a  fire  k.  of  itself,  very  dreadful
Eccl.  9.  8.  for  herewith  love  is  k.  as  a  fire

11.  32.  of  a  spark  of  fire  a  heap  of  coals  is  k.

2  Mac.  1.  32.  this  done,  there  was  k.  a  flame

4.  38.  Antiochus  being  k.  with  anger

See  Fire,  and  Flame.
KINDLETIl.

Eccl.  28. 11.  an  hasty  contention  k.  a  fire
KINDLING.

2  Mac.  10. 36.  k.  fires, burnt  the  blasphemers  alive
KINDLY.

2  Mac.  9.  21.  would  have  remembered  k.  your  hon,

13.23.  honoured  the  temple,  and  dealt/:,  with  plar  .

KINDRED.

1  Esd.  5. 5.  out  of  the  k.  of  Phares  of  tribe  of  Juda
Tob.  1.  9.  I  married  Anna  of  mine  own  k.

10.  my  k.  did  eat  of  the  bread  of  the  Gentiles

4. 12.  that  they  all  married  wives  of  their  own  k.

5.  11.  I  would  know,  brother,  thy  k.  and  name

6.  11.  seeing  thou  only  art  of  her  k.

15.  the  precepts  which  thy  father  gave  thee,  that
thou  shouldst  marry  a  wife  of  thine  own  k.
Jud.  8.  2.  Manasses  was  ot  her  tribe  and  k.

16. 17.  woe  to  the  nations  that  rise  against  my  k.
24.  gave  goods  to  the  nearest  of  k.  Manasses,  and

to  them  that  were  nearest  of  her  k.
Eccl.  16.4.  the  k.  of  the  wicked  shall  become  desoJ
22. 10.  children  do  stain  the  nobility  of  their  k.
Sus.  30.  she  came  with  her  children  and  all  her  k.
63.  with  Joacim'her  husband  and  all  the  /-.
KING.

1  Esd.  1.7.  these  were  given  of  the  k.  allowance
26.  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee,  O  k.  of  Jude.


KIN

Pe°ple  made  Z.  instead  of  Josias
.»y.  Joacim,  when  he  was  made  k.  43.

G.  24.  now  we  do  declare  to  thee,  O  lord  the  Z
T  8*  and  mid  it  under  k.  Darius  his  pillow

9.  when  the  k.  is  risen,  some  will  give  him

11.  the  second  wrote,  the  Z.  is  the  strongest

13.  now  when  the  Z.  was  risen  up,  they  took

19.  ltmaketh  the  mind  of  k.  and  fatherless  all  one

a  man  remem  be  re  th  neither  k.  nor  governor
o  i*  ,  *la<*  sP°*<en  of  the  strength  of  the  Z.

the  k.  is  more  mighty,  for  he  is  lord  of  all
1 7’  D  ye  men,  how  should  not  the  k.  be  mightiest !

14.  O  ye  men,  it  is  not  the  great  k.  that  excel leth
”•  }v?ITlen  1:ive  horn  the  Z.  and  all  the  people

30.  taking  the  crown  from  the/.  head  and  setting

31.  for  all  this  the  k.  gaped  and  gazed  upon  her
o( ,  wine  is  wicked,  the  k.  is  wicked,  women

.  .'u  lc,e“ >  a‘l  the  children  of  men  are  wicked
o'  3  house  was  budded  by  a  Z.  of  Israel
oi  tu  (  him  honour  for  he  found  grace
that  wrath  come  noton  the  kingdom  of  the  k.
ql.  tor  1  was  ashamed  to  ask  the  k.  footmen
7’ a  ’  ,We  "  ,  ,sa*(i  to  the  k.  that  the  power  of  God

in  *  i^1  hievites  complained  of  me  to  the  Z.

12.  7.  good  to  keep  close  the  secret  of  a  k.  11

13.  6.  and  extol  the  everlasting  K.  10.

7.  my  soul  shall  praise  the  K.  of  heaven

r  j  ~  soul  bless  God  the  great  K.
o  n^'.u '  thussaith  the  great  Z.  lord  of  the  earth
k  71  the  servants  of  N  abuchodonosor  the  great  k.
o'  in'  i-e  i'  ot  Esypt  rose  UP  against  them
1 1  ,  v  eyery  creature,  hear  thou  my  prayer
r1‘;1',n  abljc.hodo: nosor  the  k.  of  all  the  earth
ini  l  th,ls  river  is  Esther,  whom  the  k.  married
n'  .V  'jabatha  and  Tharra,  two  eunuchs  of  the  k.
-.they  were  about  to  lay  hands  on  Artaxerxes
ihe  k.  and  so  he  certified  the  k.  of  them,  3,  4,  5.
6*  ~  n,aP  who  was  in  great  honour  with  the  k.

13.  9.  saying,  O  Lord,  Lord,  the  K.  Almighty

14.  3.  saying,  O  my  Lord,  thou  only  art  our  K.

10.  and  to  magnify  a  fleshly  lc.  for  ever

12.  give  me  boldness,  O  K.  of  nations.  Lord  of  all
o  sh6  stood  before  the  Z.  who  sat  on  his  throne
o.  then  Cmd  changed  the  spirit  of  the  k.
lb.  she  fell  down,  then  the  k.  was  troubled

j1:  was  honoured  as  the  next  person  to  the  k.

\!  c  • ,  H  w'se  *s  the  upholding  of  people
7.  5.  there  is  no  k.  had  any  other  beginning

9.  7*  thou  hast  chosen  me  to  be  a  k.  of  thy  people

11.  10.  tlie  other  as  a  severe thou  didst  punish
77"  H-  n,e‘ther  shall  k.  nor  tyrant  be  able
1 7.  they  made  an  express  image  of  a  k.
lb.  11.  like  as  the  k.  so  suffered  the  common  person
■  =  nor  seek  of  the  k.  the  seat  of  honour

o.  boast  not  pt  thy  wisdom  before  the  k.

an,«n'yise  k.  destroyeth  his  people
loo  ,i  a?  is  to-day  a  k.  to-morrow  shall  die
18.  xj.  all  obey  his  will,  for  he  is  the  K.  of  all
->9-  *^and  he  shall  receive  honour  of  the  k.

4o  2o.  the  inheritance  of  the  k.  be  to  his  posterity
no.  lo.  a  sweet  savour  to  the  most  high  K.  of  all
ol.  b.  by  an  accusation  to  the  k.  from  a  tongue
ivtr.  2.  21.  to  serve  the  k.  of  Babylon,  22.  °4
33:, neifher  can  they  set  upai  in  the  land
5o.  they  cannot  withstand  any  k.  or  enemies
59.  better  to  be  a  k.  thatsheweth  his  power
Van.  3.  9.  thou  didstdeliver  us  to  an  unjust  k
iiel  2.  and  Daniel  conversed  with  the  k.

7-  then  Daniel  said,  O  k.  be  not  deceived
o.  so  the  k.  was  wroth,  and  called  for  his  priests,
king  is  mentioned  in  verses  10,  11,  14,  16, 17

1  71  18<;  C°’22.  24,  25,  26,  28,  29,  30,  40  ’  7’

\j}ianc' 8;  ?•  had  discomfited  Perseus  k.  of  Citims

15.  32.  Athenobius  the  k.  friend  to  Jerusalem

2  Mac.  1.11.  having  been  in  battle  against  a  k.

9A.  who  art  merciful,  the  only  and  gracious  Z.

35.  and  the  Z.  took  many  gifts,  and  bestowed

3.  3  / .  and  when  the  k.  asked  Heliodorus
S'  o'  Ju  ai?  man  of  Athens  to  compel

i  .  3.  the  A.  being  in  a  rage  commanded,  39.

9.  but  the  R.  of  the  world  shall  raise  us  up

8.  10.  which  the  k.  was  to  pay  to  the  Romans
11.  15.  concerning  the  Jews,  the  k.  granted  it
18.  whatthings  were  meet  to  be  reported  to  the  k.

13.  4.  but  the  K.  of  kings  moved  Antiochus’  min’d

14.  4.  came  to  k.  Demetrius  in  the  151st  year

9._  wherefore  O  Z.  seeing  thou  knowest  these  things
^o.  he  had  ordained  Judas  to  be  the  k.  successor
~7.  then  the  k.  being  in  arage,  wrote  to  Nicanor
29._because  there  was  no  dealing  against  the  k.

15.  5.  1  command  to  do  the  k.  business

KINGS.

1  Esd.  2. 27.  mighty  k.  and  fierce  were  in  Jerusalem
29.  proceed  no  further  to  the  annoyance  of  k.

2  Esd.  12.  20.  in  him  there  shall  arise  eight  k.

15.  20.  I  will  call  together  all  the  k.  of  the  earth

33.  shall  be  fear,  dread,  and  strife  among  their  k.
Est'i  13.  4.  that  despised  the  commandments  of  k.
Wisd.  6.  1.  hear  therefore,  O  ye  k.  and  understand

21.  if  your  delight  be  then  in  thrones,  O  ye  k.

10.  16.  she  withstood  dreadful  k.  in  wonders  and


K  N  O


K  N  O  [Apocryph..


14. 16. were  worshipped  by  the  commandments  of  k.
Eccl.  8. 2.  gold  hath  perverted  the  hearts  of  k.

11.  5.  many  k.  had  sat  down  upon  the  ground
45.  3.  he  made  him  glorious  in  the  sight  of  k.

47.  11.  he  gave  him  a  covenant  of  k.  and  a  throne

48.  6.  who  broughtest  k.  to  destruction  and  men
8.  who  anointedst  k.  to  take  revenge,  and  prophets

49.  4.  even  the  k.  of  Juda  failed
Bar.  1.  16.  confusion  of  face  belongs  to  our  k.

2.  19.  the  righteousness  of  our  fathers  and  k.

24.  that  the  bones  of  our  k.  shall  be  taken

6.  51.  it  shall  appear  to  all  nations  and  k.

Van.  3.  23.  the  k.  servants  that  put  them  in
1  Mac.  1.  2.  Alexander  slew  the  k.  of  the  earth

3.  7-  be  grieved  many  k.  and  made  Jacob  glad
30.  he  hart  abounded  above  the  k.  before  him

10.  60.  to  Ptolemais,  where  he  met  the  two  k.

13.  36.  to  Simon  the  high  priest  and  friend  of  k.
14. 13.  the  k.  themselves  were  overthrown
15.5.  which  the  k.  before  me  granted  thee


2  Mac.  2  13.  gathered  the  acts  of  the  k.  and  pro¬
phets,  and  the  epistles  of  /.  concerning  holy  gifts
3.  2.  even  k.  themselves  did  honour  the  place
6.  it  was  possible  to  bring  all  into  the  i.  hand
8.  but  indeed  to  fulfil  the/.  purpose
5. 16.  things  that  were  dedicated  by  other  k.

13.4.  but  the  King  of  k.  moved  Antiochus’  mind
13.  before  the  k.  host  should  enter  into  Judea
lo.  ne  went  into  the  k.  tent  by  nightand  slew  him
£6.  thus  it  went  touching  the  k.  coming
KINGDOM.

1  Esd.  4.  40.  truth  is  the  strength  and  k.  of  all  ages
43.  in  the  day  when  thou  earnest  to  the  k.

8.  21.  that  wrath  come  not  on  the  k.  of  the  king

2  Esd.  2.  37.  that  called  you  to  the  heavenly  /.

12.  30.  this  is  the  small  k.  and  full  of  trouble
lob.  13.  1.  blessed  lie  God,  and  blessed  be  bis  k.
Jud.  1.  12.  Nabucbod.  sware  by  bis  throne  and  k.

2.  12.  as  I  live,  and  by  the  power  of  my  k.

11.8.  thou  only  art  excellent  in  all  the/.

Esth.  13.  2.  and  making  my  k.  peaceable
3.  Aman  had  the  honour  of  sec  ond  place  in  the  k.
5.  that  our  k.  may  not  be  firmly  established
16.  8.  we  must  take  care  that  our  k.  may  be  quiet

12.  he  went  about  to  deprive  us  of  our  k.  and  life

13.  also  blameless  Esther,  partaker  of  our  k.
to  have  translated  this  k.  to  the  Persians

16-  who  hath  ordered  the  k.  both  unto  us
(vis'd.  1. 14.  nor  the  k.  of  death  upon  the  earth

5.  16.  therefore  they  shall  receive  a  glorious  k,

6.  4.  because  being  ministers  of  his  k.

20.  the  desire  of  wisdom  bringeth  to  a  k.

10. 10.  she  shewed  him  the  k.  of  God

14.  till  she  brought  him  the  sceptre  of  the  k.

Eccl.  10.  8.  the  k.  is  translated  to  another  people

46.  13.  Samuel  the  prophet  established  a  k.

47.  21.  so  the  k.  was  divided  ;  a  rebellious  k.

Bar.  5.  6.  exalted  with  glory,  as  children  of  the  k.

1  Mac.  1.  6.  and  parted  his  k.  among  them
1-0.  in  the  137th  year  of  the  k.  of  the  Greeks
51.  in  the  same  manner  wrote  lie  to  his  whole  k.

2. _10.  what  nation  hath  not  had  a  part  in  her  k.  ?
57.  David  possessed  the  throne  of  everlasting  k.

3.  14.  I  will  get  me  a  name  and  honour  in  the  A

6.  15.  his  son,  and  nourish  him  up  for  the  k.

10.  33.  were  carried  captives  into  any  part  of  my  k.
11. 1.  king  of  Egypt  went  about  to  get  A  lexand.  k.

9.  and  thou  shalt  reign  in  thy  father’s  k.

11.  did  slander,  because  be  was  desirous  of  his  Z.

12.  39.  Tryphon  went  about  to  get  the  k.  of  Asia
3.  pestilent  men  have  usurped  k.  of  our  fathers

2  Mac.  2.  17.  gave  them  the  k.  and  the  priesthood

4.  7.  Antiochus  called  Epiphanes,  took  the  k.
KINGDOMS.

1  Esd.  1.  24,  did  wickedly  above  all  people  and  k.

2  Esd.  12.  23.  the  Most  High  shall  raise  up  three  k.
Esth.  13.  4.  so  as  the  uniting  of  our  k.  cannot  go
Eccl.  44.  3.  such  as  did  bear  rule  in  their  k.

KINSFOLKS.

2  Mac.  8. 1.  they  went  and  called  their  k.  together
.  KINSMAN.

Tob.  3.  15.  neither  hath  he  any  near  k.  nor  son

7.  4.  he  said  to  them,  do  you  know  Tobit  our  k.  ?
Eccl.  41.21.  to  turn  away  thy  face  from  thy  k.

KINSMEN.

2  Mac.  12.  39.  they  came  to  bury  them  with  their  k.
KISS.

Esth.  13. 13.  been  content  to  k.  the  soles  of  his  feet
Eccl.  29.  5.  till  he  hath  received,  will  k.  man’s  hand
KISSED.

1  Esd.  4.47.  Darius  the  king  stood  up  and  k.  him
Tob.  7.  6.  Raguel  leaped  up  and  k.  him,  and  wept
10.  12.  may  hear  good  report  of  thee,  and  he  k.  her

KNEE.

Prayer  of  Manass.  now  I  bow  the  k.  of  my  heart
KNEW.

2  Esd.  7.  23.  that  he  is  not  and  k.  not  his  wavs
10.  35.  for  I  have  seen  that  1  k.  not,  and  hear
Tob.  2. 10.  I  k.  not  that  there  were  sparrows
5.5.  Raphael  that  was  an  angel,  but  he  k.  not

Jnd.  16.  22.  none  k.  her  ell  the  days  of  her  life
Wisd.  2.  22.  the  mysteries  of  God,  they  k.  them  not

9.  9.  and  k.  what  was  acceptable  in  thy  sight

10.  8.  they  k.  not  the  things  which  were  good

11.  9.  they  k.  how  the  ungodly  were  judged

15. 11.  forasmuch  as  he  k.  not'his  Maker
19.  1.  for  he  k.  before  what  they  woulol  do

14.  those  whom  they  k.  not  when  they  came
Eccl.  23.  20.  he  k.  all  things  ere  ever  they  were
24.  28.  the  first  man  k.  her  not  perfectly
Bar.  2.  30.  for  I  k.  that  they  would  not  hear  me
4. 13.  they  k  .  not  hisstatutes,  nor  walked  in  comm.
KNOCKED.

Jud.  14.  14.  Bagoas  k.  at  the  door  of  the  tent
Trr.  KNOTS.

l\isd.  13. 13.  a  crooked  piece  of  wood,  and  full  of  k
KNOW.

1  Esd.  4. 22.  you  must  k.  that  women  have  dominion
5.66.  they  came  to  k.  what  the  noise  should  mean

8.  23.  all  those  that  k.  the  law  of  thy  God

2  Esd.  4.  46.  shew  me  then,  what  is  past  I  k.  but

„  what  is  for  to  come,  I  k.  not

52.  I  am  not  sent  to  shew  thee,  for  1  do  not  k.  it

9.  12.  the  same  must  k.  it  after  death  by  pain

12.  36.  thou  only  hast  been  meet  to  k.  this  secret

13.  52.  nor  k.  the  thing  in  the  deep  of  the  sea
Tob.  3.  8.  dost  thou  not  k.  that  thou  hast  strangled
11.  7. 1  k.  Tobias,  thy  father,  will  open  his  eyes

Jnd.  8.  20.  but  we  k.  none  other  God,  therefore
9.  7-  they  k.  not  that  thou  art  the  Lord

14.  5.  that  he  may  k.  him  that  despised  Israel
Esth.  11.  12.  by  all  means  was  desirous  to  Z.  it
IVisd.  2. 19.  examine,  that  we  may  k.  his  meekness
7-17-  namely,  to  k.  how  the  world  was  made

21.  things  either  secret  or  manifest,  them  I  k.

8.  21.  a  point  of  wisdom  to  k.  whose  gift  she  was

9.  10.  that  1  may  k.  what  is  pleasing  to  thee

13.  what  man  is  lie  thatcanZ.  the  counsel  of  God  ?

10. 12.  might  k.  that  goodness  is  stronger  than  all
12H7-  and  among  them  that  k.  it,  makest  manifest

27.  the  true  God,  whom  before  they  denied  to  /t.

13.  1.  not  out  of  good  things  seen  k.  him  that  is


Wisd.  13.3.  let  him  k.  how  much  better  tl.  of  them  is

15.  3.  to  k.  thee  is  perfect  righteousness,  yea  to  k.
„  ,  thy  power  is  the  root  of  immortality

16.  16.  the  ungodly  that  denied  to  k.  thee

22.  they  might  k.  that  fire  burning  did  destroy
26.  might  k.  that  it  is  not  the  growing  of  fruits

18.  19.  and  not  k.  why  they  were  afflicted
Eccl.  12. 11. thou  shalt /-.his  rust  hath  not  been  wiped

16.  15.  hardened  Pharaoh  that  he  should  not  k.  him

23.  27.  k.  there  is  nothing  better  than  fear  of  Lord
25.  4^  and  for  ancient  men  to  k.  counsel
27.  27.  he  shall  not/-,  whence  it  cometh
36^5.  let  them  k.  thee  as  we  have  known  thee

17.  that  all  may  k.  that  thou  art  the  Lord
37.  8.  and  k.  before  what  need  be  hath
46.  6.  that  nations  might  k.  all  their  strength
bar.  2.  15.  that  all  the  earth  may  k.  thou  art  Lord
31.  shall  k.  that  I  am  the  Lord  their  God
3.  14.  that  thou  mayest  k.  where  is  length  of  days
6.  29.  ye  may  k.  that  they  are  no  gods,  52.  72.  ”
Dan.  3.  22.  let  them  /-.  that  thou  art  Lord,  only  God
Bel 35.  neither  do  I  k.  where  the  den  is

1  Mac.  2.  65.  I  /•.  that  Simon  is  a  man  of  counsel
4. 11  that  all  the  heathen  may  k.  there  is  One

33.  let  all  those  that  k.  thy  name  praise  thee
~  Mac.  1. 27.  let  heathen  k.  that  thou  art  our  God

11.  37.  that  we  may  k.  what  is  your  mind
KNOWEST.

2  Esd.  5. 17-  k.  thou  not  Israel  is  Committed  to  thee  ?

12.  .38.  whose  hearls  thou  k.  may  comprehend
JU6.3.14.  thou  /.Lord,  I  am  pure  from  sin  with  man

11.  ~.  thou  k.  brother,  how  didst  leave  thy  father
Esth.  13.  12.  thou  k.  all  things,  and  thou  k.  Lord,
that  it  was  not  in  contempt  or  pride,  14.  15.

14.  16.  thou  /■.  my  necessity,  for  I  abhor  the  sign
Eccl.  8.  18.  thou  k.  not  what  he  will  bring  forth

9. 11.  for  thou  /•.  not  what  shall  be  his  end
37.  12.  whom  thou  k.  to  keep  the  commandments
cms.  42.  Susanna  cried  and  said,  ()  ev  erlasting  God
10  thou  k  the  secrets,  and  /-.  all  things  before

43.  thou  k.  that  they  have  borne  false  witness

1  Mac.  3.  52.  what  things  they  imagine  thou  k.

2  Mac.  14.  9.0  king,  seeing  thou  k.  all  these  things

KNOW  ETH.

2  Esd.  3.  32.  or  any  other  people  that  lc.  thee

15.  26.  the  Lord  k.  all  them  that  sin,  16.  54.

16.  56.  the  stars,  lie  /-.  the  number  of  them
63.  he  /-.  your  inventions,  and  what  you  think

l\isd.  8.  8.  she  /.  the  things  of  old,  she  k.  the  sub-
_ti't;es  of  speeches,  and  can  expound  dark

9.  9.  wisdom,  which  /-.  thy  works,  and  was  present
11.  she  k.  and  understandeth  all  things

15.  13.  lie/-,  himself  to  offend  above  all  others
Eccl.  11.  19.  he  /-.  not  what  time  shall  come  on  him
15.  19.  his  eyes  on  them,  he  k.  every  work  of  man

18.  28.  every  man  of  understanding  k.  wisdom

20.  17.  he  /-.  not  aright  what  it  is  to  have

21.  7.  a  man  of  understanding  k.  when  he  slips
23.  19.  k.  not  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  brighter
27.  22.  he  that/-,  him  will  depart  from  him

32.  8.  be  as  one  that  k.  yetholdeth  his  tongue
34.  9-  a  man  that  hath  travelled,/-,  many  things

10.  lie  that  hath  no  experience  i.  little
42.  9.  father  waketh  for  daughter,  when  no  man  k.

18.  tortile  Lord  /-.  all  that  may  be  known
Bar.  3.  31.  no  man  k.  her  way,  nor  tbinketh  of  path
32.  buthe  that  k.  all  things,  k.  her,  and  found  her
KNOWING.

2  Esd.  8.  58.  yea,  and  that  /-,  they  must  die
Jnd.  11.16.  1  thy  handmaid  /-.all  this, am  fled
JVtsd.  8.9.  J.  thatshe  would  be  a  counsellor  of  good

13.  16.  k.  that  it  was  unable  to  help  itself

15.  2.  for  if  we  sin,  we  are  thine,  k.  thy  power,  but
we  will  not  sin,  k.  we  are  counted  thine
18.6.  k.  to  what  oaths  (bey  had  given  credence
Eccl.  20.  6.  some  keepeth  silence,  k.  his  time
Bar.  6.  65.  Z\  that  they  are  no  gods,  fear  them  not

1  Mac.  5.  34.  the  host  k.  thatit  was  Maccabeus  fled

2  Mac.  9.  24.  Z\  to  whom  the  state  was  left
15.  21.  /-.  that  victory  cometh  not  by  arms

KNOWLEDGE.

1  Esd.  6.  12.  to  the  intent  we  might  give  k.  to  thee

2  Esd.  14.  47.  for  in  them  is  the  stream  of  k.

Jud.  11.8.  that  thou  only  art  mighty  in  k.

Wisd.  1.7.  containeth  all  things,  hath /-.  of  the  voice

2.  13.  he  professeth  to  have  the  k.  of  God
7*  16.  in  his  hand  is  the  k.  of  workmanship

17.  for  he  ha>th  given  me  certain  k.  of  things

8.  4.  she  is  privy  to  the  mysteries  of  the  k.  of  God
10. 10.  she  gave  him  k.  of  holy  things

14.  22.  not  enough  that  they  erred  in  k.  of  God
Eccl.  1. 7.  to  whom  hath  k.  of  wisdom  been  manifest

25.  the  parables  of/-,  are  in  treasures  of  wisdom

3.  25.  profess  not  the  k.  that  thou  hast  not
10.25.  and  he  that  hath  k.  will  not  grudge

11.  15.  wisdom  and  k.  are  of  the  Lord

15. 1.  he  that  hath  k.  of  the  law  shall  obtain  her
16^24.  my  son,  hearken  to  me,  and  learn  /.

25. and  1  will  declare,  his/-,  exactly
17-  7-  he  filled  them  with  the/-,  of  understanding
11.  besides  this  he  gave  them  /.  and  the  law

19.  19.  the  /.of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord

20.  and  the  Z.  of  his  omnipotency

22.  and  the/,  of  wickedness  is  not  wisdom
£1.  13.  the  /.  of  a  wise  man  shall  abound

14.  be  will  bold  no  k.  as  long  as  be  liveth

18.  /.  of  the  unwise,  is  as  talk  without  sense
22.  19.  pricketh  the  heart,  makes  it  show  her  /.

24.  18. 1  am  the  mother  of  fair  love,  fear  and  /'.

27.  he  makes  the  doctrine  of /.  appear  as  light
33.8.  by  lc.  of  the  Lord  they  were  distinguished
11.  in  much  /.  the  I.ord  hath  divided  them
39.7.  he  shall  direct  his  counsel  and  /.

40.  5.  in  time  of  rest  his  night-sleep  changes  his  /,

44.  4.  leaders  by  their/,  meet  for  the  people

45.  5.  he  gave  him  the  law  of  life  and  /.

50.  27-  the  instruction  of  understanding  and  /.

Bar.  3.  20.  but  the  way  of  /.  have  they  not  known
27.  neither  gave  he  the  way  of  /.  to  them
36.  he  hath  found  out  all  the  way  of  /.

6.  42.  they  cannot  understand,  they  have  no  *.

Sus.  48.  without  examination  or  /.  of  truth

663


L  A  W


LEA


Apocuy  IMI  A.J


L  A  I


2  Mac  6.  30.  to  the  Lord  that  hath  the  holy  k.

9  11  come  to  k.  of  himself  by  scourge  ot  God

1  Esd.  6.  8.  let  all  things  be  k.  to  our  lord  the  king

2  Esd.  5.  7.  make  a  noise,  which  many  have  not  k.

16.  73.  then  shall  they  be  k.  who  are  my  chosen

Jud.  8.  29.  thy  people  have  k.  thy  understanding
Esth.  14.  12.  make  thyself  k.  in  our  affliction
Wisd.  2.  1.  nor  k.  to  have  returned  from  the  grave

3.  13.  which  hath  not  k.  the  sinful ;  bed

4.  1.  because  it  is  k.  with  God  and  with  men
t). 13.  in  making  herself  first  k.  to  them

9.  17.  thy  counsel  who  hath  k.  except  thou  ,.1  e
16.  28.  that  it  might  be  k.  we  must  prevent  the  sun
Eccl.  1.  6.  or  who  hath  k.  her  wise  counsels .

4.  24.  for  by  speech  wisdom  shall  be  k.

6.  27.  search,  and  she  shall  be  made  k.  to  thee

11.  28.  for  a  man  shall  be  X'.  in  his  children

12.  8.  a  friend  cannot  be  k.  in  prosperity

16.  15.  that  his  works  might  be  k.  to  the  world

19.  27.  where  he  is  not  k.  he  will  do  a  mischief

29.  a  man  may  be  k.  by  his  look
21.  7.  an  eloquent  man  is  k.  far  and  near  .  ,

26.  9.  whoredom  of  a  woman  be  k.  in  her  Iooks

36.  5.  let  them  know  thee,  as  we  have  k.  thee

38.  5.  that  the  virtue  thereof  might  be  X:.

42.  18.  the  Lord  knoweth  all  that  may  be  X-.

46.  15.  and  by  his  word  he  was  k.  to  be  faithful
Bar  4.  4.  things  pleasing  to  God  are  made  k.  to  us
6.  16.  whereby  they  are  k.  not  to  be  gods
50.  it  shall  be  k.  hereafter  that  they  are  false


LABAN.  ,

Jud  8. 26.  kept  the  sheep  ot  L.  his  mother  s  brother
LABOUR.

1  Esd.  4.  22.  do  ye  not  l.  and  bring  all  to  the  woman

2  Esd.  3.  33.  and  yet  their  /.  hath  no  fruit

5.  12.  they  shall  /.  but  their  ways  shall  not  prosper
34  while  I  /.  to  comprehend  the  way  of  God

7.  14.  if  they  that  live  /.  not  to  enter  these  things

8.  14.  which  with  so  great  l.  was  fashioned

9  °°  for  with  great  1.  have  I  made  it  perfect

10  ~14.  like  as  thou  hast  brought  forth  with  /.

04  the  Highest  shall  give  rest  and  ease  from  thy  /.

47  told  thee  that  she  nourished  him  with  l.

13.38.  and  he  shall  destroy  them  without/.

IVisd.  9.  10.  that  being  present,  she  may  /.  with  me
16.  with  l.  do  we  find  the  things  before  us
15  4.  an  image  spotted,  the  painter’s  fruitless  /.

7.  the  potter  fashioneth  every  vessel  with  much  /.

9.  his  care  is,  not  that  he  shall  have  much  /.

16.  20.  didst  send  bread  prepared  without  their  /.

17.  20.  and  none  were  hindered  in  their  l.

Ec'cl.  11.  21.  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  abide  in  thy  l.

13.  26.  it  is  a  wearisome  l.  of  the  mind
16.  27.  they  neither  l.  nor  are  weary,  nor  cease
19. 11.  as  a  woman  in  /.  of  a  child

39.  13.  chastise  thy  son,  and  hold  him  to  /.

31.  3.  the  rich  hath  great  /.  in  gathering  riches
34.  23.  what  profit  have  they  then  but  l.?

40.  is.  to  l.  and  be  content  with  that  a  man  hath
5l'  27.  behold,  how  that  1  have  had  but  little  /.

C  Mac  0  26.  taken  on  us  this  painful  l.  of  abridging
LABOURED.

Eccl  24.  34.  that  1  have  not  /.  for  myself  only
33.  17.  consider  that  I./.  not  for  myself  only
0  Mac  4  7.  Onias  l.  under  hand  to  be  high  priest
LABOURER.

Wisd  17.  17.  whether  he  were  a  /.  in  the  field
LABDUREST.

2  Esd.  5.  37.  declare  the  thing  that  thou  l.  to  know
LABOURETH.

Eccl.  10.  27.  better  is  he  that  /.  and  abounded)

11.  1 L.  there  is  one  that  l.  and  taketh  pains
31.  4.  the  poor  l.  in  his  poor  estate,  and  is  needy
3B  27.  every  work-master  that  l.  night  and  day
LABOURING.

1  Esd.  5.  58.  1.  to  advance  the  works  in  the  house
Jud.  5.  11.  brought  them  low  wrth  /.  in  brick
Eccl.  19.  1.  a  l.  man  that  is  given  to  drunkenness

2  Mac.  2.  28.  /.  to  follow  the  rules  of  abridgment
31.  to  use  brevity  and  avoid  much,/,  of  work

LABORIOUS.

Eccl.  7.  15.  hate  not  l.  work,  neither  husbandry
LABOURS.

Wisd.  3.  Cl.  their  /.  unfruitful,  works  unprofitable
15.  for  glorious  is  the  fruit  of  good  /.

5.  1.  afflicted  him,  and  made  no  account  of  his  l.

10.  10.  she  multiplied  the  fruit  of  his  /.

17.  rendered  to  the  righteous  a  reward  of  their  l.
15.  8.  employing  his  /.  lewdly,  he  makes  a  god
Eccl.  14.  15.  leave  thy  /.  to  be  divided  by  lot
28.  15.  and  hath  deprived  them  of  their  /.

38.  25.  he  that  is  occupied  in  their  /.

LACE.

Eccl.  6.  30.  ornament,  and  her  bands  are  purple  l.
LACEDEMONIANS.

1  Mac.  12.  2.  sent  letters  to  the  L.  and  other

places

5.  sent  letters  which  Jonathan  wrote  to  the  L.  6.

20.  Areus  king  of  the  L.  to  Onias  high  priest

21.  found  that  the  L.  and  Jews  are  brethren

14.  20.  the  copy  of  the  letters  that  the  L.  sent
23.  the  people  of  the  L.  might  have  a  memorial

15.  23.  he  wrote  to  Sampsanes  and  the  L.

2  Mac.  5.  9.  he  retiring  to  the  L.  to  find  succour

LACKING.

2  Mac.  8.  25.  but  l.  time  they  returned
LADDERS.

1  Mac.  5.  30.  was  an  innumerable  people  bearing  /,
LADEN.

Eccl  3.  27.  obstinate  heart  shall  be  l.  with  sorrows
LAID.

1  Esd.  3.  8.  and  /.  it  under  king  Darius  his  pillow
Esth.  14.  2.  she  l.  away  her  glorious  apparel
15. 1.  she  l.  away  her  mourning  garments

11.  held  up  his  sceptre,  and  l.  it  upon  her  neck
Wisd.  4.  15.  nor  /.  they  up  this  in  their  minds
i  Mac.  3.  10.  money  l.  up  for  the  relief  of  widows

664


LAKE.

2  Mac.  12. 16.  a  /.  was  seen  running  with  blood
LAMB,  S.

Wisd.  19.  9.  they  went  at  large  and  leaped  like  l.
Eccl.  13. 17.  what  fellowship  nath  wolf  with  the  /.  ?
46.  16.  when  he  offered  the  sucking  /.

LAME.

2  Esd.  2.  21.  laugh  not  a  /.  man  to  scorn,  defend
LAMENT,  ED.

Jud.  16.  24.  the  house  of  Israel  /.  her  seven  days
Eccl.  38.  16.  begin  to  /.  as  if  thou  hadst  suffered
LAMENTATION.

To/>.  2.  6.  your  mirth  shall  be  turned  into  l.

Wisd.  19.  3.  making  /.  at  the  graves  of  the  dead
Eccl.  38. 17.  weep,  and  use  l.  as  he  is  worthy

1  Mac.  1.  27.  every  bridegroom  took  up  l.

2. 70.  and  all  Israel  made  great  l.  for  him

4.  39.  they  rent  their  clothes  and  made  great  l.

9.  20.  all  Israel  made  great  /.  12.  52.  1  13.  26.

41.  and  the  noise  of  their  melody  into  l.

2  Mac.  11.6.  people  with  l.  and  tears  besought  Lord

LAMP,  S.

Eccl.  48. 1.  Elias,  his  word  burnt  like  a  /.

1  Mac.  4.  50.  the  l.  that  were  on  the  candlestick
6.  39.  the  mountains  shined  like  /.  of  fire

LANCES.

2  Mac.  5.  2.  armed  with  l.  like  a  band  of  soldiers

LAND.

Wisd.  10.  7.  waste  /.  that  smoketh  is  a  testimony
12.3.  to  destroy  those  old  inhabitants  of  thy  holy  l.
16.  19.  might  destroy  the  fruits  of  an  unjust  /.

18.  15.  into  the  midst  of  a  l.  of  destruction

19.  7.  where  water  stood  before,  dry  /.  appeared
10.  while  they  sojourned  in  the  strange  l.

Eccl.  20.  28.  he  that  tilleth  his  /.  shall  increase
39.  22.  his  blessing  covered  the  dry  /.  as  a  river

46.  8.  even  unto  the  /.  that  floweth  with  milk

47.  24.  that  they  were  driven  out  of  the  /.

48.  15.  till  they  were  carried  out  of  their  /.

‘I  Mac.  5.  21.  weening  to  make  the  /.  navigable
LANGUAGE.

Eccl.  6.  5.  sweet  /.  will  multiply  friends
Bar.  4.  15.  a  shameless  nation  of  a  strange  /.

2  Mac. 7.  8.  but  he  answered  in  his  own  /.  and  said
21.  she  exhorted  every  one  of  them  in  her  own  /.
27.  she  spake  in  her  country  /.  on  this  manner
12.  37.  he  began  in  his  own  /.  and  sung  psalms
15.  29.  praising  the  Almiahty  in  their  own  /.
LANGUISH.

2  Esd.  8.  31 .  we  and  our  fathers  do  /.of  such  diseases
LARGE.

2  Esd.  1. 13.  I  gave  you  a  /.  and  safe  passage
Wisd.  19.  9.  for  they  went  at  /.  like  horses
Eccl.  47. 12.  and  for  his  sake  he  dwelt  at  /.

Bar.  3.  24.  how  /.  is  the  place  of  his  possession
2  Mac.  2.  30.  to  go  over  tilings  at  /.  and  be  curious
LARGELY.

1  Mac.  16. 16.  when  Simon  and  sons  had  drunk  /.

LAST.

Wisd.  3.  T7.  their  /.  age  shall  be  without  honour
Eccl.  1. 13.  it  shall  go  well  with  him  at  the  /.

2.  3.  that  thou  mayest  be  increased  at  thy  /.  end

3.  26.  a  stubborn  heart  will  fare  evil  at  the  l.

6.  28.  for  at  the  /.  thou  shalt  find  her  rest
12. 12.  and  thou  at  the  /.  remember  my  words
14.7.  at  the  /.  he  will  declare  his  wickedness
24.  28.  no  more  shall  the  /.  find  her  out
27.  23.  but  at  the  /.  he  will  writhe  his  mouth

31.  22.  at  the  /.  thou  shalt  find  as  I  told  thee

32.  11.  rise  up  betimes,  be  not  /.  but  get  home

33.  16.  1  awaked  up  /.of  all  as  one  that  gathers
38.  20.  drive  it  away,  and  remember  the  /.  end
41.  2.  unto  him  that  is  now  in  the  l.  age
48  24.  he  saw  what  should  come  to  pass  at  /.

LAUGH.

2  Esd.  2.  21.  /.  not  a  lame  man  to  scorn,  defend
Jud.  12. 12.  if  wedrawher  not, she  will  /.  us  to  scorn
Esth.  14.  11.  and  let  them  not  /.  at  our  fall
Wisd.  4. 18.  but  God  shall  /.  them  to  scorn
Eccl.  7- 11.  /.  no  man  to  scorn  in  bitternessof  his  soul

13.  7.  and  at  the  last  he  will  /.  thee  to  scorn
30  10.  /.  not  with  him,  lest  thou  have  sorrow
LAUGHED.

1  Esd.  4.  31.  if  she  /.  upon  him,  he  /.  also
Wisd.  17.  8.  were  sick  of  fear  worthy  to  be  /.  at
Eccl.  6. 4.  made  him  be  /.  to  scorn  of  his  enemies
20. 17.  of  how  many  shall  he  be  /.  to  scorn  !

Bel  19.  then  /.  Daniel,  and  held  the  king

1  Mac.  7.  34.  he  mocked  them  and  /.  at  them

10.  70.  and  I  am  /.  to  scorn  for  thy  sake
LAUGHING.

Eccl.  18.  31.  she  will  make  thee  a  /.-stock,  42.  11.

2  Mac.  7.  27.  she  /.  the  cruel  tyrant  to  scorn

Laughter.

Eccl.  19.  30.  a  man’s  excessive  /.  shews  what  he  is
21.  20.  a  fool  lifteth  up  his  voice  with  /.

LAW.  .

1  Esd.  8.  3.  being  very  ready  in  the  /.  of  Moses

7.  he  omitted  nothing  of  the  /.  of  the  Lord

8.  to  Esdras  reader  of  the  /.  of  the  Lord,  9.

19.  and  the  reader  of  the  /.  of  the  most  high  God
9.  42.  Esdras  the  priest  and  leader  of  the  /.

46.  and  when  he  opened  the  /.  they  stood  up
Tab.  6. 12.  not  to  another,  according  to  /.  of  Moses
7. 13.  saving,  take  her  after  the  /.  ot  Moses

14.  9.  but  keep  thou  the  /.  and  commandments
Wisd.  2. 11.  let  our  strength  be  the  /.  of  justice
Eccl.  2. 16.  that  love  him  shall  be  filled  with  the  /.

9.  15.  communication  in  the  /.  of  the  Most  High
10. 19.  they  that  regard  not  /.  are  dishonourable

11.  15.  understanding  of  the  /.  is  of  the  Lord

15.  1.  he  that  hath  knowledge  of  the  /.

17.  11.  he  gave  the  /.  of  life  for  an  heritage
19. 17.  gave  place  to  the  /.  of  the  Most  High

20.  in  wisdom  is  the  performance  of  the  /.

23. 23.  she  hath  disobeyed  the  /.  of  the  Most  High
24.  23.  even  the  /.  which  Moses  commanded
32.  15.  he  that  seeketh  the  /.  shall  be  filled
33. 2.  a  wise  man  hateth  not  the  /.

34.  8.  the  /.  shall  be  found  perfect  without  lies
39.  1.  giveth  his  mind  to  the  /.  of  the  Most  High

8.  he  shall  glory  in  the  /.  of  the  covenant


Eccl.  41.  8.  woe  be  to  you  who  have  forsaken  the  /.
42.  2.  be  not  ashamed  of  the  /.  of  the  Most  High
45.  5.  even  the  /.  of  life  and  knowledge

46. 14.  by  /.  of  the  Ld.  he  judged  the  congregation
Bar.  2.  2.  that  were  written  in  the  /.  of  Moses
Sus.  6.  all  that  had  any  suits  in  the  /.  came  to  them

1  Mac.  1.  49.  to  the  end  they  might  forget  the  /.

52.  to  wit,  every  one  that  forsook  the  /.

56.  they  rent  in  pieces  the  books  of  the  /.

57.  or  if  any  consented  to  the  /.  put  him  to  death

2.  26.  thus  dealt  he  zealously  for  the  /.  cf  God

27.  whosoever  is  zealous  of  the  /.  follow  me

42.  all  such  as  were  voluntarily  devoted  to  the/.
50.  be  zealous  for  the  /.  and  give  your  lives

3.  48.  they  laid  open  the  book  of  the  /.

4.  42.  priests,  such  as  had  pleasure  in  the  /.

14. 14.  the.  /.  he  searched  out,  and  every  contemner

of  the  /.  and  wicked  person  he  took  away

2  Mac.  1.  4.  and  open  your  hearts  in  his  /.

2.  3.  the  /.  should  not  depart  from  their  hearts

18.  as  he  promised  in  /.  will  shortly  have  mercy
4.  11.  he  brought  up  new  customs  against  the  /.

6.  23.  or  rather  the  holy  /.  made  and  given  by  God
7. 1.  compelled  against  the  /.  to  taste  swine’s  fiesh

30.  the  commandment  of  the  /.  that  was  given

12.  40.  which  is  forbidden  the  Jews  by  the  /.

13.  10.  being  at  the  point  to  be  put  from  their  /.

15.  9.  and  so  comforting  them  out  of  the  /.

LAWS.

Jud.  11 . 12.  God  hath  forbidden  them  to  eat  by  his  /.
Esth.  16.  15.  that  the  Jews  live  by  the  most  just  /.

19.  the  Jews  may  freely  live  after  their  own  /.
Wisd.  6.  18.  love  is  the  keeping  of  her  /.

Eccl.  4. 17.  trust  his  soul,  and  try  him  by  her  /.

45.  17.  that  he  should  inform  Israel  in  his  /.

1  Mac.  1.  42.  that  every  one  should  leave  his  /.

2.  40.  if  we  fight  not  for  our  lives  and  /.  3.  21.

6.  59.  and  covenant  with  them  that  they  shall  live
after  their  /.  because  we  abolished  their  /.
13.  3.  have  done  for  the  /.  and  the  sanctuary

2  Mac.  3.  1.  and  the  /.  were  kept  very  well

4.  2.  that  was  so  zealous  of  the  /.

5.  8.  being  hated  as  a  forsaker  of  the  /.

6.  1.  and  not  to  live  after  the  /.  of  God

28.  to  die  for  the  honourable  and  holy  /.

7.  9.  shall  raise  us  up,  who  have  died  for  his  /.

11.  and  for  his  /.  I  despise  them

23.  as  you  regard  not  yourselves  for  his  /.  sake

37.  offer  up  my  body  and  life  for  /.  of  our  fathers

8.  21.  he  had  made  them  ready  to  die  for  the/.

36.  because  they  followed  the  /.  he  gave  them

11.  24.  should  suffer  them  to  live  after  their  own  /.

31.  the  Jews  shall  use  their  own  kind  of  /.

LAWFUL.

1  Esd.  1. 16.  it  was  net  /.  for  any  to  go  from  service
Tob.  2.  13.  it  is  not  /.  to  eat  any  thing  stolen

Jud.  11.  13.  which  it  isnot  /.  to  be  tasted

2  Mac.  6.  4.  brought  in  things  that  were  not  /.

20.  such  thines  as  are  not  l.  to  be  tasted

21.  to  bring  fiesh,  such  as  was  /.  for  him  to  use

LAWLESS.

Dan.  3.  9.  deliver  us  into  the  hands  of  /.  enemies
LAY.

Tob.  12.  8.  better  to  give  alms,  than  /.  ud  gold
Esth.  12.  2.  they  were  to  /.  hands  on  Artaxerxts
Wisd.  5.  7.  through  deserts  where  there  /.  no  way
23.  thus  iniquity  shall  /.  waste  the  whole  earth
11.2.  they  pitched  tents  where  there  /.  no  way
Eccl.  5.  12.  if  not  /.  thy  hand  upon  thy  mouth

7.  6.  /.  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  uprightness
13.  12.  but  cruelly  he  will  /.  up  thy  words
29  1 1.  /.  up  treasure  according  to  commandments
LEAD.

Wisd.  9.  11.  she  shall  /.  me  soberly  in  my  doings
Eccl.  17.26.  he  will  /.  thee  out  of  darkness
40.  28.  /.  not  a  beggar’s  life,  better  die  than  beg
LEAD.

Eccl.  22.  14.  what  is  heavier  than  /.  ?

38.  30.  he  applieth  himself  to/,  it  over
47.  18.  thou  didst  mul  tipi  ^silver  as  /.

Eccl.  41.  19.  and  to  /.  with  tliy  elbow  on  meat
LEAPED.

Tob.  6.  2.  a  fish  l.  out  of  river,  would  have  devoured

7.  6.  then  Raguel  /.  up,  and  kissed  him,  and  wept
Jud.  14.  17.  he  /.  out  to  the  people  and  cried
Esth.  15.  8.  who  in  a  fear  /.  from  his  throne
Wisd.  18. 15.  thy  almighty  word  /.  down  from  heav
19.  9.  they  /.  like  lambs,  praising  thee,  O  Lord
LEAGUE.

1  Mac.  11.  9.  come,  let  us  make  a  /.  betwixt  us

12.  3.  renew  the  /.  as  in  the  former  time

8.  wherein  declaration  was  made  of  the  /.

16.  renew  the  amity  we  had,  and  the  former  /.
14. 18.  to  renew  the  friendship  and  /.  they  had
24.  sent  to  Rome  to  confirm  the  /.  with  them

15.  17.  came  to  renew  the  old  friendship  and  /.

See  Amity.

LEARN.

Wisd.  6. 1.  /.  ye  that  be  judges  of  ends  of  the  earth

9.  that  ye  may  /.  wisdom,  and  not  fall  away
Eccl.  8.8.  for  of  them  thou  shalt  /.  instruction

9.  and  of  them  thou  shalt  /.  understanding

16.  24.  my  son,  hearken  tome,  and  /.  knowledge

1  Mac.  10.  72.  ask  and  /.  who  I  am,  and  the  rest

2  Mac.  7.  2.  what  wouldest  thou  ask  or  /.  ot  us?

LEARNED.

Esth.  12.  2.  /.  that  they  were  about  to  lay  hands
Wisd.  6. 10.  they  that  have  /.  such  things,  shall  find
7. 13. 1  /.  diligently  and  communicate  her  liberally
Eccl.  8.  9.  for  they  also  /.  of  their  fathers
38. 24. the  wisdom  of  a  /.  man  comes  by  opportunity

39.  8.  he  shall  shew  forth  that  which  he  hath  /.

42.  8.  thus  shalt  thou  be  truly  /.  and  approved
LEARNING.

Wisd.  7.  14.  for  the  gifts  that  come  from  /.

Eccl.  4.  24.  /.  known  by  the  word  of  the  tongue
21.  21.  /.  is  to  a  wise  man  as  an  ornament  of  golu
3.3.  17.  I  laboured  for  all  them  that  seek  /.

44.  4.  by  their  knowledge  of  /.  meet  for  the  peop*.f
51.  16.  I  received  her  and  gat  much./.

23.  draw  near  and  dwell  in  the  house  of  /.


LIE


LIG


LIT  [Apu;h  ypha.


Eccl.  51.  28.  get  /.  with  a  great  sum  of  money
LEAVE.

1  Esd.  8. 85.  may  /.  the  inheritance  to  your  children
Tob.  11.2.  knowest  how  thou  didst  /.  thy  father
12.  13.  /.  thy  dinner  to  go  and  cover  the  dead
Wisd.  2.  9.  let  us  /.  tokens  of  our  joyfulness
Eccl.  6.  3.  thou  shalt  /.  thyself  as  a  dry  tree
11.  19.  he  must  l.  those  things  to  others
14. 15.  shalt  thou  not  l.  thy  travels  to  another  ?

23.  1.  O  Lord,  l.  me  not  to  their  counsels

17.  a  whoremonger  will  not  /.  off  till  he  die
26.  she  shall  l.  her  memory  to  be  cursed

24.  33.  I  will  l.  it  to  all  ages  for  ever

29. 17.  will  /.  him  in  danger  that  delivered  him
31.  17.  /.  off  first  for  manners’  sake
33.  22.  /.  not  a  stain  in  thine  honour

38. 10.  /.  off  sin,  and  order  thy  hands  aright
39.  11.  he  shall/,  a  greater  name  than  a  thousand
47.  22.  but  the  Lord  will  never  /.  off  his  mercy

51. 10.  he  would  not  /.  me  in  days  of  my  trouble

LEAVE.

1  Mac.  11.  58.  he  gave  him  l.  to  drink  in  gold
15.  6.  I  give  thee/,  to  coin  money  for  thy  country
LEAVES.

Eccl.  6.  3.  thou  shalt  eat  up  thy  l.  and  lose  fruit
14.  18.  as  for  the  green  /.  on  a  thick  tree,  some  fall
LED.

Tob.  1.  2.  who  was  /.  captive  out  of  Thisbe
Wisd.  10.  18.  and  /.  them  through  much  water

19. 11.  being  /.  with  their  appetite,  they  asked

LEFT.

Tub.  1.  8. 1  was  /.  an  orphan  by  my  father
20.  nor  any  thing  /.  me  besides  my  wife  Anna
Wisd.  10.  14.  /.  him  not  in  bonds,  till  she  brought
14.  6.  and  /.  to  all  ages  a  seed  of  generation
Eccl.  15.  14.  lie  /.  him  in  the  hand  of  his  counsel
17.  21.  neither  /.  nor  forsook  them,  but  spared
23.  8.  the  sinner  shall  be  /.  in  his  foolishness
30.  8.  and  a  child  /.  to  himself  will  be  wilful
44.  8.  of  them  that  have  /.  a  name  behind  them
LENGTH.

Wisd.  4.  8.  age  is  not  what  standeth  in  /.  of  time
LENGTHENED.

Eccl.  48. 23.  and  he  /.  the  king’s  life
LENT.

Wisd.  15.  8.  his  life  /.  him  shall  be  demanded
Eccl.  29.  4.  many,  when  a  thing  was  /.  them
LEOPARD.

Eccl.  28.  23.  it  shall  devour  them  as  a  /.

LESS.

Wisd.  15.  10.  his  life  is  of  /.  value  than  clay
LESSON.

Eccl.  9. 1.  teach  her  not  an  evil  /.  against  thyself
LE 1 .

Eccl.  27. 19.  so  hast  thou  /.  thy  neighbour  go
LETTED.

Wisd.  7-  22.  wisdom  quick,  which  cannot  be  /.
LETTETH.

Eccl.  27. 19.  as  one  that  /.  a  bird  go  out  of  hand
LETTER.

Esth.  16. 19.  shall  publish  copy  of  this  /.  in  all  places
LE  L 1 ERS.

1  Mac.  12.  2.  he  sent  /.  to  the  Lacedemonians,  5.
See  also  7,  8,  17,  19.  |  14.  20. 1  15.  1,  15.  2  Mac.
11.  16.

2  Mac.  9.  18.  he  wrote  the  l.  underwritten

LEVITE.

Esth.  11. 1.  who  said  he  was  a  priest  and  /.
LEWD.

Esth.  16.  4.  but  lifted  up  with  words  of  /.  persons
6.  with  falsehood  and  deceit  of  their  /.  disposition
Eccl.  30.  13.  lest  his  /.  behaviour  be  an  offence
LEWDLY.

Wisd.  15.  8.  employing  his  labours  l.  he  maketh
l.EWDNESS.

Tob.  4.  13.  in  /.  is  decay  and  great  want
LIAR.

Eccl.  20.  26.  the  disposition  of  a  l.  is  dishonourable

25.  2.  a  poor  man  proud,  a  rich  man  that  is  a  /.

LIARS.

2  Esd.  11. 42.  hast  hurt  the  peaceable,  hast  loved  /.
Wisd.  10.  14.  she  shewed  them  to  be  /.  and  gave
Eccl.  15.  8.  men  that  are  /.  cannot  remember  her
LI  BAN  US.

1  Esd.  4.  48.  he  wrote  letters  also  to  them  in  L.
fEEsd.  15.  20.  from  the. south,  from  the  east,  and  L.
Eccl.  24. 13. 1  was  exalted  like  a  cedar  in  L.  50.12.
LIBERAL.

Eccl.  31. 23.  whoso  is  /.  of  his  meat,  men  speak  well
LIBERALLY.

Wisd.  7.  13.  and  I  do  communicate  her  /.

1  Mac.  3.  30.  nor  have  such  gifts  to  give  so  /.

.  LIBERALITY.

1  Esd.  4.  46.  princely  /.  proceeding  from  thyself
LIBERTY.

1  Esd.  4.  53.  that  they'  should  have  free  /.

62.  because  he  had  given  them  freedom  and  /.

2  Esd.  8.  56.  when  they  had  taken  /.  they  despised
Eccl.  7.  21.  a  good  servant,  defraud  him  not  of  l.

25.  25.  nor  a  wicked  woman  l.  to  gad  abroad

26. 10.  lest  she  abuse  herself  through  over-much  /.

30. 11.  give  him  no  /.  in  his  youth,  and  wink  not

1  Mac.  13.  16.  when  he  is  at  /.  he  may  not  revolt
14.26.  chased  away  enemies,  and  confirmed  their  l.

2  Mac.  9. 14.  the  holy  city,  he  would  set  at  /.

LIBRARY.

2  Mac.  2. 13.  how  he  founded  a  /.  gathered  acts
LICENCE.

Jud.  11.  14.  to  bring  them  a  /.  from  the  senate
Eccl.  15.  20.  nor  hath  he  given  any  man  /.  to  sin
1  Mac.  1.  13.  gave  them  /.  to  do  after  the  heathen
S  Mac.  4.  9.  it  he  might  have  /.  to  set  up  a  place
LIE.

Wisd.  2.  12.  let  us  /.  in  wait  for  the  righteous
Eccl.  5.  14.  and  l.  not  in  wait  with  thy’  tongue
6.  21 .  she  will  /.  upon  him  as  a  mighty;  stone
8.  11.  lest  he  /.  in  wait  to  entrap  thee  in  thy  words
14.  22.  go  after  her,  and  /.  in  wait  in  her  ways
27.  28.  but  vengeance  shall  /.  in  wait  for  them
LIETH.

Eccl.  11.  31.  for  he  /.  in  wait,  and  turneth  good
27.  10.  as  the  lion  /.  in  wait  for  the  prey


Eccl.  28. 26.  lest  thou  fall  before  him  that  /.  in  wait
LIFE.

1  Esd.  4.  21.  ne  sticks  not  to  spend  his  l.  with  his

2  Esd.  2.  12.  they  shall  have  the  tree  of  /.

3.  5.  thou  didst  breathe  into  him  the  breath  of  l.

7.  59.  this  is  the  /.  whereof  Moses  spake  to  the

people,  choose  the  /.  that  thou  rnavcst  live

14.  30.  received  the  law  of  /.  which  they  kept  not
16.  61.  he  gave  them  breath,  /.  and  understanding
Tub.  8.  17-  finish  their  /.  in  health,  with  joy  and  mer.

12.  9.  that  exercise  alms,  shall  be  filled  with  /.

10.  they  that  sin  are  enemies  to  their  own  /.

Jud.  10.  13.  without  losing  the  /.  of  any  man

15.  thou  hast  saved  thy  /.  in  that  thou  hast  hasted

12.  18.  because  my  /.  is  magnified  in  me  this  day

13.  20.  because  thou  hast  not  spared  thy  /.

Esth.  13.  2.  to  settle  my  subjects  in  a  quiet  /.

16.  12.  went  to  deprive  us  of  our  kingdom  and  /.

13.  as  well  of  Mardocheus,  who  saved  our  /.
Wisd.  1.  12.  seek  not  death  in  the  error  of  your  /.

4.  9.  and  an  unspotted  /.  is  old  age

5.  4.  we  fools  accounted  his  /.  madness

7.  6.  for  all  men  have  one  entrance  to  /.

8.  5.  if  riches  be  to  be  desired  in  this  /.

7.  men  can  have  nothing  more  profitable  in  /.

13.  11.  a  vessel  fit  for  the  service  of  man’s  /.

17-  not  ashamed  to  speak  to  that  which  hath  no  /.

18.  for  /.  he  prayeth  to  that  which  is  dead

14.  12.  the  invention  of  them  the  corruption  of  /.

29.  their  trust  is  in  idols  which  have  no  /.

15.  8.  when  his  /.  which  was  lent  him  shall  be

10.  and  his  /.  is  of  less  value  than  clay

12.  but  they  counted  our  /.  a  pastime

16.  9.  nor  was  there  found  any  remedy  for  /.

13.  for  thou  hast  power  of  /.  and  death
Eccl.  1.  12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  giveth  long  /.

20.  and  the  branches  thereof  are  long  /.

3.  6.  that  honoureth  his  father,  shall  have  a  long  /.

4.  12.  he  that  loveth  her,  lovetli  /.

5.  1.  and  say  not  I  have  enough  for  my  /.

11.  be  swift  to  hear,  and  let  thy  /.  be  sincere

6.  16.  a  faithful  friend  is  the  medicine  of  /.

9.  13.  lest  he  takeaway  thy  /.  presently

10.  29-  him  that  dishonoureth  his  own  /.

11.  14.  /.  and  death,  poverty'  and  riches  come  of  L.
13.  14.  love  the  Lord  all  thy  /.  and  call  on  him

15.  17.  before  man  is  /.  and  death

16.  3.  trust  not  thou  in  their  /.  nor  respect

17. 11.  he  gave  them  the  law  of  1.  for  an  heritage

18.  33.  thou  shalt  lie  in  wait  for  thy  own  /.

19.  5.  he  that  resisted)  pleasures,  crowneth  his  /.

19.  the  knowledge  of  commamlm.  is  doctrine  of  /.

20.  32.  he  that  leadeth  his  /.  without  a  guide

21.  13.  his  counsel  is  like  a  pure  fountain  of  /.

22.  11.  the  /.  of  the  fool  is  worse  than  death

12.  for  an  ungodly  man  all  the  days  of  his  /.

23.  1.  Father  and  Governor  of  all  my  whole  /.

4.  O  Fa.  and  G.  of  my  /.  give  me  not  a  proud  look

25.  2.  and  1  am  greatly  offended  at  their  /.

26.  2.  he  shall  fulfil  the  years  of  his  /.  in  peace
29.  15.  for  he  hath  given  his  /.  for  thee

22.  better  is  the  /.  of  a  poor  man  in  a  cottage

24.  it  is  a  miserable  /.  to  go  from  house  to  house
31.  27-  wine  is  as  good  as  /.  to  a  man  if  drunk'

moderately,  what  /.  is  to  a  man  that  is  with¬
out  wine

33.  14.  good  is  set  against  evil,  /.  against  death

23.  at  the  time  when  thou  shalt  finish  thy  l.

34.  21.  the  bread  of  the  needy  is  their  /.

37.  18.  four  things,  good  and  evil,  /.  and  death

27.  my  son,  prove  thy  soul  in  thy  /.  and  see
31.  he  that  taketh  heed,  prolongeth  his  l.

38.  14.  for  ease  and  remedy  to  prolong  /.

39.  26.  the  principal  things  for  the  use  of  man’s  l.

40.  29.  the  /.  of  him  that  dependeth  on  another

man’s  table,  is  not  to  be  counted  for  a  /.

41 .  13.  a  good  /.  hath  but  few  days,  but  good  name

45.  5.  ne  gave  him  the  law  of  /.  and  knowledge

48.  14.  he  did  wonders  in  his  /.  and  at  his  death

23.  sun  went  back,  he  lengthened  the  king’s  /.

50.  1.  who  in  his  /.  repaired  the  house  again

51.  3.  out  of  the  hands  of  such  as  sought  my  l.

6.  my  /.  was  near  to  the  hell  beneath

Bar.  1.11.  pray  for  the/,  of  N abuchodonosor king
of  Babylon,  and  for  the  /.  of  Balthasar  his  son
4.  1.  all  they  that  keep  it  shall  come  to  /.

1  Mac.  3.  12.  therewith  he  fought  all  his  /.  long
10.  61.  men  of  a  wicked  /.  assembled  against  him

13.  5.  that  I  should  spare  my  own  /.  in  trouble

2  Mac.  3.  29-  he  lay  speechless,  without  hope  of  /.
31.  call  upon  the  Most  High,  to  grant  him  his  /.
.33.  for  his  sake  the  Lord  hath  granted  thee  /.

35.  made  vows  unto  him  that  hath  saved  his  /.

38.  him  well  scourged,  if  he  escape  with  his  /.

6.  20.  are  not  lawful  for  love  of  /.  to  be  tasted
27.  manfully  changing  this  /.  1  will  shew  myself

7.  9.  the  king  shall  raise  us  up  unto  everlasting  /.

14.  thou  shalt  have  no  resurrection  to  /. ,

23.  will  also  give  you  breath  and  /.  again

25.  she  would  counsel  the  young  man  to  save  his  /.

36.  dead  under  God’s  covenant  of  everlasting  /.

37.  I  offer  up  my  body  and  /.  for  the  laws

12.  24.  he  besought  to  let  him  go  with  his  /.

14.  25.  was  quiet,  and  took  part  of  this  /.

38.  he  did  boldly  jeopard  his  body  and  /

46.  and  calling  on  the  Lord  of  /.  and  spirit

LIFT.

Eccl.  32. 1.  1.  not  thyself  up,  but  be  as  the  rest
38.  3.  the  skill  of  the  physicians  shall  /.  his  head
40.  26.  riches  and  strength  /.  up  the  heart

46.  2.  when  he  did  /.  up  his  hands  against  cities

LIFTED.

Eccl.  11.  13.  and  /.  up  his  head  from  misery’

47.  4.  when  he  /.  up  his  hand  with  the  stone

50.  20.  he  /.  up  his  hands  over  the  congregation

51.  9.  then  /.  I  up  my  supplication  from  earth

LIGHT.

1  Esd.  8.  79.  to  discover  to  us  a  /.  in  the  house
Tob.  10.  5. 1  have  let  thee  go,  the  /.  of  mine  eyes
Wisd.  5.  6.  the  /.  of  righteousness  not  shined  to  us

7.  10.  I  chose  to  have  her,  instead  of  /.  for  the  /.

that  cometh  from  her  never  goeth  out


Wisd.  7.  26.  she  is  the  brightness  of  everlasting  /.
29.  being  compared  with  /.  she  is  found  before  it
10.  17.  and  a  /.  of  stars  in  the  night  season

18.  1.  but  thy  saints  had  a  very  great  /.

4.  they  were  worthy  to  be  deprived  of  /.  by
whom  uncorrupt  /.  of  the  law  was  to  be  given
Eccl.  16. 16.  he  hath  separated  his  /.  from  darkness
17.26.  he  will  lead  thee  out  of  darkness  into/.

31.  what  brighter  than  sun,  yet  /.  thereof  faileth
22.  1 1.  weep  for  the  dead,  for  he  hath  lost  the  /.

26.  17.  as  the  clear  /.  is  on  the  holy’  candlestick

32. 16.  they  that  fear  L.  shall  kindle  justice  as  a  /.
33.  7.  when  all  the  /.  of  every  day  is  of  the  sun

42. 16.  the  sun  that  giveth  /.  looketh  on  all

43.  7.  a  /.  that  decreaseth  in  her  perfection

9.  ornament  giving  /.  in  the  highest  places  of  Loro
50.  7-  as  the  rainbow  giving/,  in  the  clouds

29.  for  the  /.  of  the  Lord  leadeth  him
Bar.  3.  14.  where  is  the  /.  of  the  eyes,  and  peace

20.  young  men  have  seen  /.  and  dwelt  on  earth

33.  he  that  sendeth  forth  /.  and  it  goeth

34.  they  shewed  /.  to  him  that  made  them

5.  9.  God  shall  lead  Israel  in  the  /.  of  his  glorv

6.19.  they  /.  them  candles  more  than  for  themselves
67.  nor  shine  as  the  sun,  nor  give  /.  as  the  moon

Dan.  3.  48.  O  ye  /.  and  darkness,  bless  ye  the  Lord
LIGHT.

1  Esd.  8.  86.  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  make  our  sms  /.
Eccl.  7.  26.  give  not  thyself  over  to  a  /.  woman

19.  4.  he  that  is  liasty  to  give  credit  is  /.-minded

2  Mac.  4.  17.  for  it  is  not  a  /.  thing  to  do  w i.  kedly

LIGHTEN.

Wisd.  17. 5.  the  stars  endure  to  /.  that  horrible  night
LIGHTENED.

2  Esd.  6.  2.  he  said  to  me  before  it  thundered  and  /.

13.  53.  whereby  thou  only  art  here  /.

LIGHTNINGS.

Eccl.  43. 13.  he  sendeth  the  /.  of  his  judgment
Dan.  3.  51.  O  ye  /.  and  clouds,  bless  ye  the  Lord
LIGHTS.

Wisd.  13.  2.  deemed  the  /.  of  heaven  to  be  the  gods
LIKE.

Tob.  7.  2.  how  /.  is  this  young  man  to  Tobif

8.  6.  let  us  make  to  him  an  aid  /.  to  himself

14.  5.  shall  build  a  temple,  but  not  /.  to  the  first
Wisd.  5.  14.  for  the  hope  of  the  ungodly  is  /.  dust

13.  14.  or  made  it  /.  some  vile  beast,  laying  it

15.  16.  but  no  man  can  make  a  god  /.  to  himself

16.  1.  by  the  /.  were  they  punished  worthily
Eccl.  13.  1.  with  a  proud  man,  shall  be  /.  to  him

15.  every  beast  loveth  his  /.  and  every  man

21.  9.  the  wicked  is  l.  tow  wrapped  together
27-  9.  the  birds  will  resort  to  their  /.  so  wil  I  truth

30.  4.  he  hath  left  one  behind  him  /.  himself

33.  5.  the  heart  of  the  foolish  is  l.  a  cart-wheel,  and

his  thoughts  are  /.  a  rolling  axle-tree

34.  2.  is  /.  him  that  catcheth  at  a  shadow
36.  23.  then  is  not  her  husband  /.  other  men

44.  19.  in  glory  was  there  none  /.  to  him

49.  14.  but  on  earth  was  no  man  created  /.  Enoch

LIKEN  ED.

Eccl.  25. 11.  holdeth  it,  whereto  shall  he  be  /.  ?
LIKENESS.

Eccl.  34.  3.  even  as  the  /.  of  a  face  to  a  face

LIKING.

Wisd.  16.21.  tempered  itself  to  every’  man’s  /.

_  LION.

2  Esd.  11.  37.  lo  as  it  were  a  roaring  /.  chased
12.  1.  while  the  /.  spake  these  words  to  the  eagle

31.  and  the  /.  whom  thou  sawest  rising  up

16.  6.  may  any  man  drive  away  a  hungry  l.  ?

Esth.  14.  13.  give  eloquent  speech  before  the  /.

Eccl.  4.  30.  be  not  as  a  /.  in  thine  house

21.  2.  the  teeth  thereof  are  as  the  teeth  of  a  /.

25.  16.  I  had  rather  dwell  with  a  l.  and  a  dragon,
than  to  keep  house  with  a  wicked  woman
27*  10.  as  the  /.  lieth  in  wait  for  the  prey

28.  but  vengeance  as  a  /.  shall  lie  in  wait  for  them

28.  23.  it  shall  be  sent  upon  them  as  a  /.

I  Mac.  3.  4.  Judas  Maccabeus  in  his  acts  was  like
a  l.  and  like  a  l  whelp  roaring  for  prey
LIONS.

Wisd.  11.  17-  a  multitude  of  bears  or  fierce  /.

Eccl.  13. 19.  as  the  wild  ass  is  l.  prey  in  wilderness
47.  3.  he  played  with  /.  as  with  kids,  and  with  bears
Bel  31.  whd  cast  him  into  the  /.den  where  he  was

32.  and  in  the  den  there  were  seven  l.

34.  carry  it  to  Daniel  who  is  in  the  l.  den

1  Mac.  2.  60.  Daniel  was  delivered  from  mouth  of  /.

2  Mac.  11.  11.  giving  a  charge  on  enemies  like  /.

LIPS.

Jud.  9.  10.  smite  by  the  deceit  of  my  /.  the  servant
Eccl.  1.  24.  /.  of  many  shall  declare  his  wisdom
12.  16.  an  enemy  speaketh  sweetly’  with  his/.

21.  16.  grace  shall  be.  found  in  the  /.  of  the  wise
25.  the  /.  of  talkers  will  be  telling  such  things

22.  27.  who  shall  set  a  seal  of  wisdom  on  my  /.

23.  7-  that  keeps  it,  shall  not  be  taken  in  his  /.

39.  15.  shew  forth  his  praise  with  songs  of  your  /.

50.  20.  give  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  with  his  /.

51.  2.  hast  preserved  from  the  /.  that  forge  lies

LITTLE.

Tob.  4.8.  if  abundance  give  accordingly,  if  thou  have
but  /.  be  not  afraid  to  give  according  to  that  /.
Jud.  16.  16.  all  sacrifice  is  too  /.  for  a  sweetsavour
Wisd.  3.  5.  and  having  been  a  /.  chastised
7-  9.  all  gold  in  respect  of  her  is  as  a  /.  sand
12.  2.  therefore  chastenest  thou  them  by  /.  and  /.

8.  didst  send  wasps  to  destroy  them  by  /.  and  /.

10.  executing  judgments  on  them  by  /.  and  /.

14.  20.  who  a  /.  before  was  but  honoured  as  a  man

15.  8.  he  which  a  /.  before  was  made  of  earth

16.  27.  being  warmed  with  a  /.  sun-beam,  melted
Eccl.  11.  3.  the  bee  is  /.  among  such  as  fly

19.  1.  contemns  small  things,  shall  fall  by  /.  and  /.

20.  12.  there  is  that  buyeth  much  for  a  /.

15.  he  giveth  /.  and  upbraideth  much

21. 20.  but  a  wise  man  doth  scarce  smile  a  /.

22. 1 1 .  make  a  /.  weeping  for  the  dead,  he  is  at  rest

25. 19.  all  wickedness  is  /.  to  wickedness  of  woman

29.  23.  be  it  /.  or  much,  hold  thee  contented

31.  19.  a  /.  is  sufficient  for  a  man  well  nurtured

665


Apocrypha.]  LOO


LO  V


Eccl.  34.  10.  h*  that  liatli  no  experience,  knoweth  /.
38.24*  lie  that  .hath  /.  business,  shall  become  wise

40.  6.  a  l.  or  nothing  is  his  rest,  lie  is  in  his  sleep
42.  4.  be  not  ashamed  of  getting  much  or  /,

51.  07-  how  that  1  have  had  but  /.  labour
Dan.  3,  53.  O  ve  mountains  and  /.  hills  bLess  Lord

1  Mac. 7-  50.  the  land  of  J  uda  was  in  rest  a  /.  while

2  Mac.  6. 25.  through  my  desire  to  live  a  /.  time
7. 33,  though  the  Lord  be  angry  with  us  a  /.  while

LIV  li.

2  Esd.  2. 14.  for  I  /.  saith  the  Lord

Tob.  4.  6.  succeed  to  thee  and  all  them  that  l.  justly

5.  3.  which  may  go  with  thee  while  I  yet  /.

Jud.  7.  27.  be  his  servants,  that  our  souls  may  /.
Esth.  16. 15.  that  the  Jews  /.  by  most  just  laws

19.  publish  this,  that  the  Jews  may  freely  l.
JVisd.  3. 17.  for  though  they  /.  long, yet  nptregarded

5. 15.  but  the  righteous  /.  for  evermore

8.  9.  I  purposed  to  take  her  to  me  to  l.  with  me
16.  to  /.  with  her  hath  no  sorrow,  but  joy

14.  28.  they  prophesy  lies,  or  /.  unjustly
Eccl.  13.  5.  if  have  any  thing,  he  will  /.  with  thee

19. 6.  that  can  rule  his  tongue,  shall  l.  without  strife
34. 13.  the  spirit  of  those  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  l.
39. 9.  his  memorial  shall  not  depart  away,  and  his
name  shall  l.  from  generation  to  generation
42.  23.  all  these  things  l.  and  remain  for  ever

48. 11.  that  slept  in  love,  for  we  shall  surely  l.

1  Mac.  2. 13.  to  what  end  shall  we  l.  any  longer  ?
33.  do  the  command  of  the  king,  and  you  shall  /.

6.  59.  covenant  that  they  shall  l.  after  their  laws

2  Mac.  6. 1.  and  not  to  l.  after  the  laws  of  God

19.  than  to  l.  stained  with  such  an  abomination
25.  through  my  desire  to  l.  a  little  time

11.  23.  they  that  are  in  our  realm  /.  quietly

24.  should  suffer  them  to  /.  after  their  own  laws

25.  that  they  may  l.  according  to  the  customs

LIVED.

JVisd.  15.  17-  whereas  he  l.  once,  but  they  never
Eccl.  30. 5.  while  he  l.  he  saw  and  rejoiced  in  him

41.  4.  whether  thou  have  l.  ten  or  an  hundred  years

48.  12.  whilst  he  l.  he  was  not  moved  with  presence
2  Mac.  5.  27.  Maccabeus  l.  in  the  mountains

9.  9.  while  he  l.  in  sorrow  his  flesh  fell  away

LI  VET H.

Tob.  13. 1.  blessed  be  God  that  l.  for  ever
Jud.  12.  4.  Judith  said,  as  thy  soul  l.  my  Lord
13. 16.  as  the  Lord  l.  who  hath  kept  me  in  my  way
Eccl.  3. 12.  and  grieve  him  not  as  long  as  he  l.

18. 1.  he  that  l.  for  ever  created  all  things

22.4.  but  she  that/,  dishonestly  is  father’s  heaviness
25.  7,  he  that  l.  to  see  the  fall  of  his  enemy
41.  l.  O  death,  how  bitter  to  a  man  that  l.  at  rest !

44.  14.  but  their  name  l.  for  evermore

LIVING,  LIVING.

Tob.  13.  4.  and  extol  him  before  all  the  l.

JVisd.  1.  13.  not  pleasure  in  the  destruction  of  the  l.
4. 10.  so  l.  among  sinners,  he  was  translated
16.  shall  condemn  the  ungodly  which  are  /.

7.  20.  to  know  the  natures  of  l.  creatures

15. 11.  he  knew  not  him  that  breathed  in  a  l.  spirit

18. 12.  nor  were  the  l.  sufficient  to  bury  them

23.  he  stayed  wrath,  and  parted  the  way  to  the  l.
Eccl.  4.  1 .  my  son,  defraud  not  the  poor  of  his  l.

17. 28.  the  l.  and  sound  in  heart  shall  praise  Lord

45.  16.  be  chose  him  out  of  all  men  l.

49.  16.  so  was  Adam  above  every  l.  thing
Eel  5.  I  may  not  worship  idols,  but  the  l.  God

6.  thinkest  thou  not  that  Bel  is  a  l.  god  ?

24.  thou  canst  not  say  that  he  is  no  l.  god

2  Mac.  7-  33.  though  the  l.  Lord  be  angry  with  us
11. 24.  had  rather  keep  their  own  manner  of  l.

15.  4.  there  is  in  heaven  a  l.  Lord,  and  mighty

LOAVES.

1  Mac.  4.  51.  they  set  the  /.  upon  the  table

2  Mac.  1.  8.  we  lighted  lamps,  and  set  forth  the  l.

LODG  E.

Tob.  6. 10.  brother,  to-day  we  shall  l.  with  Raguel
Eccl.  14.  24.  he  that  doth  l.  near  her  house

25.  shall  l.  in  a  lodging  where  good  things  are

26.  and  he  shall  l.  under  her  branches

LODGED.

Tob.  6. 1.  they  came  to  river  Tigris,  and  l.  there

9.  5.  Raphael  went  out  and  l.  with  Gabael
Eccl.  29.  27.  my  brother  cometh  to  be  l.

1  Mac.  11.  6.  they  saluted  one  another  and  l.
LOINS.

Jud.  4. 10.  put  sackcloth  upon  their  l.  8.  5.

14.  their  l.  girt  with  sackcloth,  2  Mac.  10.  25.
Eccl.  35.  18.  he  hath  smitten  in  sunder  the  l,

47. 19.  thou  didst  bow  thy  l.  unto  women
LONG.

Tob.  9.  4.  if  I  tarry  l.  he  will  be  very  sorry

10.  4.  my  son  is  bead,  seeing  he  stayeth  l.

JVisd.  3.  17.  though  they  live  /.  yet  not  regarded

4.  13.  perfect  in  a  short  time,  fulfilled  a  /.  time

17.  2.  fettered  with  the  bonds  of  a  /.  night

18.  20.  but  the  wrath  endured  not  /.

24.  in  the  /.  garment  was  the  whole  world
Eccl.  1. 12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  giveth  a  l.  life

20.  and  the  branches  thereof  are  /.  life

3.  6.  that  honoureth  his  father  shall  have  a  /.  life

4. 1.  make  not  the  needy  eyes  to  wait  l.

7.  16.  remember  that  wrath  will  not  tarry  l.

10.  10.  the  physician  cutteth  off  a  l.  disease

14. 12.  remember  death  will  not  be  /.  in  corning
23.  28.  and  to  be  received  of  him  is  /.  life

46.  4.  and  was  not  one  day  as  /.  as  two  ?

LONG-SUFFERING.

JVisd.  15. 1.  /.  and  in  mercy  ordering  all  things
Eccl.  2. 11.  the  Lord  is  full  of  compassion  and  /.

5.  4.  the  Lord  is  /.  he  will  in  no  wise  let  thee  go

LOOK,  S.

Eccl.  19.29.  a  man  may  be  known  by  his  l.

23.  4.  O  Lord,  give  me  not  a  proud  /.

26.  9.  whoredom  may  be  known  in  her  haughty  l.
LOOK.

Wisd.  12.  22.  when  judged,  we  should  /.  for  mercy
Eccl.  9.  8.  and  /.  not  upon  another’s  beauty

33. 15.  so  l.  on  all  the  works  of  the  Most  High

34. 15.  to  whom  doth  be  /.  ?  who  is  his  strength  ?
38.  28.  his  eyes  /.  still  upon  the  pattern  of  the  thing

666


LYS


Eccl.  41.  20.  be  ashamed  to  /.  upon  an  harlot

43.  11. 1.  on  the  rainbow,  praise  him  that  made  it

LOOKED.

Eccl.  16.  29.  the  Lord  /.  upon  the  earth

23.  20.  after  they  were  perfected,  /.  upon  them  all
51.  7.  I  /.  for  the  succour  of  men,  there  was  none
LOOKETH.

Eccl.  16. 19.  shaken,  when  the  Lord  /.  upon  them
20. 14.  be  l.  to  receive  many  things  for  one
42.  16.  the  sun  that  gives  light,  /.  on  all  things
2  Mac.  7.  6.  the  Lord  God  l.  upon  us,  and  in  truth
LOOKING.

Tob.  11.  5.  Anna  sat/,  towards  the  way  for  her  son
Eccl.  12.  11.  shalt  be  to  him,  as  if  wiped  a  /.  glass
2  Mac.  7.  4.  his  laethren  and  his  mother  /.  on
LOOSED.

Jud.  6.  14.  the  Israelites  came  to  him  and  /.  him
Eccl.  22.  16.  timber  cannot  be  /.  with  shaking
LOOSENED.

Jud.  9. 2.  who  /.  the  girdle  of  a  maid  to  defile  her
LORD.

Tob.  2.  2.  a  poor  man  who  is  mindful  of  the  L.

3.  12.  now,  O  L.  I  set  mine  eyes  towards  thee

4.  19.  bless  the  L.  thy  God  always  and  desire

5.  19.  that  which  the  L.  hath  given  us  to  live

7. 18.  the  L.  of  heaven  and  earth  give  thee  joy

10.  12.  the  L.  of  heaven  restore  thee,  my  brother

13.  10.  give  praise  to  the  L.  for  he  is  good
JVisd.  1.  1.  think  of  the  L.  with  a  good  heart

.3.  8.  and  their  L.  shall  reign  for  ever

4.  14.  for  his  soul  pleased  the  L.  therefore

5.  7.  as  tor  the  way  of  the  L.  we  have  not  known  it

15.  their  reward  also  is  with  the  L.

6.  7.  be  which  is  L.  over  all,  shall  fear  no  man

8.  3.  the  L.  of  all  things,  himself  loved  her
21.  1  prayed  to  the  L.  and  besought  him

9.  L  O  God  of  my  fathers,  and  L.  of  mercy

13.  who  can  think  what  the  will  of  the  L.  is  ?

10.  20.  the  righteous  praised  thy  holy  name,  O  L.

11.  13.  they  had  some  feeling  of  the  L.

26.  they  are  thine,  O  1,  theu  lover  of  souls

12.  2.  that  they  may  believe  on  thee,  O  L.

16.  and  because  thou  art  the  L.  of  all
Eccl.  1.1.  all  wisdom  cometh  from  the  L.

2.  1.  if  thou  come  to  serve  the  L.  prepare

11.  the  L.  is  full  of  compassion  and  mercy

3.  20.  the  power  of  the  L.  is  great,  he  is  honoured

4.  28.  and  the  L.  shall  fight  for  thee

5.  7-  make  no  tarrying  to  turn  to  the  L.  for  sud¬

denly  shall  the  wrath  of  the  L.  come  forth

11.  4.  for  the  works  of  the  L.  are  wonderful

12.  the  eye  of  the  L.  looked  on  him  for  good

14.  poverty  and  riches  come  of  the  L.

15.  wisdom,  understanding  the  law  are  of  the  L.

17.  the  gift  of  the  L.  remaineth  with  the  godly
26.  for  it  is  an  easy  thing  unto  the  L.

13.  14.  love  the  L.  all  thy  life,  and  call  on  him

14.  2.  who  is  not  fallen  from  his  hope  in  the  L.

11.  do  good,  and  give  the  L.  his  due  offering

15.  9.  for  it  was  not  sent  him  of  the  L.

11.  say  not,  it  is  through  the  L.  ft  at  I  fell  away

16.  17. say  not,  I  will  hide  myseb  from  the  L.

17. 1.  the  L.  created  man  of  the  t  th,  and  turned
5.  the  use  of  the  five  operations  >  the  L.

20.  but  all  their  sins  are  before  the  L.

21.  but  the  L.  being  gracious,  spared  them

18. 2.  the  L.  only  is  righteous,  and  there  is  none

13.  but  the  mercy  of  the  L.  is  on  all  flesh

23.  and  be  not  as  one  that  tempteththe  L.

26.  all  things  are  soon  done  before  the  L.

23.  1.  O  L.  Father  and  God  of  my  life,  4.

28.  it  is  great  glory  to  follow  the  L.

24.  24.  faint  not  to  be  strong  in  the  L.

25. 11.  the  love  of  the  L.  passethall  things

26.  4.  if  he  have  a  good  heart  towards  the  L.

14.  a  silent  and  loving  woman  is  a  gift  of  the  L.

28.  23.  such  as  forsake  the  L.  shall  tall  into  it

42.  18.  the  L.  knoweth  all  that  may  be  known

43.  5.  great  is  the  L.  that  made  it

29.  the  L.  is  terrible  and  very  great

30.  when  you  glorify  the  L.  exalt  him  as  much
33.  lor  the  L.  hath  made  all  things

44.  16.  Enoch  pleased  the  L.  and  was  translated

45.  19.  this  the  L.  saw,  and  it  displeased  him

22.  for  the  L.  himself  is  his  portion  and  inherit.

46.  10.  see  that  it  is  good  to  follow  the  L.

13.  the  prophet  of  the  I,,  beloved  of  his  L.

Dan.  3.  l.they  walked  in  the  fire,  blessing  the  L.
LOSE.

Eccl.  9.6.  that  thou  /.  not  thine  inheritance

29.  10.  /.  thy  money  for  thy  brother  and  friend

LOSE  I II.

Eccl.  27- 16.  whoso  discovereth  secrets,  1.  his  credit
LOSING.

Eccl.  10. 21.  but  roughness  and  pride  is  the/,  thereof

LOSS.

Eccl.  22.  3.  a  foolish  daughter  is  born  to  his  /.

LOST.

Tob.  14. 2.  Tobit  was  58  years  old  when  he  /.his  sight
Eccl.  2.  14.  woe  unto  you  that  have  /.  patience
8.  12.  for  if  thou  lendest  him,  count  it  but  /.

22.  11.  weep  for  the  dead,  for  he  hath  /.  the  light

27.  18.  so  hast  thou  /.  the  love  of  thy  neighbour
29.  10.  let  it  not  rust  under  a  stone  to  be  /.

41.  2.  to  him  that  despaireth  and  hath  /.  patience
LOT.

Eccl.  16. 8.  nor  spared  the  place  where  L.  sojourned
LOT.

JVisd.  2.  9.  this  is  our  portion,  and  our  /.  is  this
Eccl.  14.  15.  and  thy  labours  to  be  divided  by  /.

37.  8.  beware,  lest  he  cast  the  /.  upon  thee
1  Mac.  3.  36.  he  should  divide  their  land  by  /.
LOTS.

Esth.  10.  10.  therefore  hath  he  made  two  /.

11.  these  two  /.  came  at  the  hour  and  time
LOVE.

1  Esd.  3.  22.  forget  their  /.  to  friends  and  brethren

4. 18.  do  they  not  /.  a  woman  who  is  comely  ?

24.  when  he  hath  robbed,  he  brings  it  to  his  /.
Tob.  4. 13.  therefore,  my  son,  /.  thy  brethren
13.  14.  O  blessed  are  they  that  l.  thee

JVisd.  1.1.  /.righteousness,  ye  that  be  judges  of  earth


JVisd.  3.  9.  such  as  be  faithful  in  /.  shall  abide

with  him

6.  12.  she  is  easilv  seen  of  them  that  /.  her
17-  and  the  care  of  discipline  is  /.

18.  and  /.  is  the  keeping  of  her  laws
8.  7.  if  man  /.  righteousness,  her  labours  are  virtues
Eccl.  1.  18.  it  enlargeth  their  rejoicing  that  /.  him

2.  15.  and  they  that  /.  him  will  keep  his  ways

16.  they  that  /.  him,  shall  be  filled  with  the  law

4.  7.  get  thyself  the  /.  of  the  congregation

10.  he  shall  /.  thee  more  than  thy  mother  doth

14.  and  them  that  /.  her,  the  Lord  doth  /.

6.  33.  if  thou  /.  to  hear,  thou  shalt  receive  under¬

standing

7-  21.  let  thy'  soul  /.  a  good  servant,  defraud  him  nos

30.  /.  him  that  made  thee  with  all  thy  strength
10.  19.  they  that  /.him  are  an  honourable  plant

I. 3.  14.  /.  the  Lord  all  thy  life,  and  call  on  him

15.  13.  they  that  fear  God  /.  not  abomination

17. 18.  amf  giving  him  the  light  of  his  /.

19.  18.  and  wisdom  obtained)  his  /.

24.  18.  1  am  the  mother  of  fair  1.  and  fear

25.  1.  the  unity  of  brethren,  the  /.  of  neigl  ours

1 1 .  but  the  /.  of  the  Lord  passeth  all  thii  gs

12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  his  A
27-  17.  /.  thy  friend,  and  be  faithful  to  him

18.  so  hast  thou  lost  the  /.  of  thy  neighbour
30.  23.  /.  thine  own  soul,  and  comfort  thy  heart
34. 16.  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  on  them  that  l.  him
40.  20.  but  the  /.of  wisdom  is  above  them  both

48. 1 1 .  blessed  are  they  that  saw  thee  and  slept  in  /.
Sus.  10.  they  both  were  wounded  with  her  /.

20.  the  doors  are  shut  and  we  are  in  l.  with  thee
Bel  38.  nor  hast  thou  forsaken  them  that  /.  thee
2  Mac.  0.  20.  not  lawful  for  /.  of  life  to  be  tasted
14.  26.  perceiving  the  /.  that  was  betwixt  them
LOVED.

JVisd.  7-10.  I  /.  her  above  health  and  beauty
8.  2.  1  /.  her  and  sought  her  out  from  my  youth

3.  yea,  the  Lord  of  all  things  himself //her
Eccl.  47. 8.  he  sung  songs,  and  /.  him  that  made  him

LOVEST.

JVisd.  11.  24.  for  thou  /.  all  the  things  that  are
16.26.  thy  children,  O  Lord,  whom  thou  /.
LOVETII.

1  Esd.  4.  25.  a  man  /.  his  wife  better  than  father
'Job.  6.  14.  lest  I  die,  for  a  wicked  spirit  /.  her
JVisd.  7.  28.  God  /.  none  but  him  that  dwelleth
Eccl.  4.  12.  he  that  /.  her  /.  life,  that  seek  her  early

13.  15.  call  on  the  Ld.  for  his  salvation,  every  beast

/.  his  like,  and  every  man  /.  his  neighbour
31.5.  he  that/,  gold  shall  not  be  justified
36.  22.  a  man  /.  nothing  better  than  beauty
Bar.  6.  9.  as  it  were  for  a  virgin  that  /.  to  go  gay
LOVER.

JVisd.  8. 2. 1  sought  her,  and  I  was  a  /.  of  her  beauty

4.  for  she  is  a  /.  of  God’s  works

LOVERS.

JVisd.  15. 6.  that  worship  them  are  /.  of  evil  things
LOVING.

Esth.  15.  8.  he  comforted  her  with  /.  words
JVisd.  1.  6.  for  wisdom  is  a  /.  spirit,  will  not  acquit
Eccl  17.29.  how  great  is  the  /.  kindness  of  the  Lord  1

26.  14.  a  /.  woman  is  a  gift  of  the  Lord
Dan.  3.19.  deal  with  us  after  thy  /.  kindness

LOVINGLY.

1  Mac.  8.  1.  such  as  would  /.  accept  all  that  joined

2  Mac.  12.  30.  the  Scythopolitans dealt/,  with  them

LOW.

2  Esd.  9.  41.  let  me  alone,  for  I  am  brought  very  /.
12-48.  seek  mercy  for  the  /.  estate  of  your  sanctuary
Jud.  6.  19-  and  pity  the  /.  estate  of  our  nation

7.  32.  and  they  were  very  /.  brought  in  the  city
Eccl.  2.  4.  be  patient  when  art  changed  to  a  I.  estate

II.  1.  wisdom  lifteth  up  the  head  of  him  of/,  degree

12.  the  Lord  set  him  up  from  his  /.  estate

20. 11 .  there  is  that  lifteth  his  head  from  a  /.  estate
33.  12.  but  some  he  hath  cursed  and  brought  l.  1

1  Mac.  3. 51.  priests  are  in  heaviness  and  brought/.

14.  14.  he  strengthened  all  his  people  brought  /.

LOWLY.

Eccl.  3.  20.  the  Lord  is  honoured  of  the  /.

10.  15.  and  hath  planted  the  /.  in  their  place

12.  5.  do  well  unto  him  that  is  /.  but  give  not  to
LOYAL.

2  Mac.  11. 19.  if  you  will  keen  yourselves/,  to  state

LUCIUS.

1  Mac.  15. 16.  L.  consul  of  the  Romans,  to  Ptolemee
LUD.

Jud.  2.  23.  he  destroyed  Phud  and  L.  and  spoiled
LUMPS.

Jud.  10. 5.  she  filled  a^bag^  with  corn  and  /.  of  figs

Tob.  8.7. 1  take  not  this  my  sister  for  /.  but  uprightly
JVisd.  15.5.  the  sight  enticeth  fools  to  /.  after  it
Hus.  8.  that  their  /.  was  inflamed  towards  her

11.  for  they  were  ashamed  to  declare  their  /.

14.  turning  back,  they  acknowledged  their  /.

LYAR.  See  Liar.

LYING.

Eccl.  51.  5.  from  an  unclean  tongue,  from  /.  words
LYSIAS.

1  Mac.  3.  32.  he  left  L.  to  oversee  affairs  of  the  king

38.  then  L.  chose  Ptolemee  son  of  Dorymenes

7.  2.  his  forces  had  taken  Antiochus  and  L.

2  Mac.  10. 1 1.  he  set  one  L.  over  affairs  of  the  realm

11.  1.  L.  the  king’s  protector  and  cousin,  tooksore

12.  and  L.  himself  fled  away  shamefully

15.  Maccabeus  wrote  unto  L.  concerning  Jews

16.  letters  to  the  Jews  from  L.  to  this  effect
22.  Antiochus  to  his  brother  L.  greeting
35.  what  L.  the  king’s  cousin  hath  granted

12.  1.  these  being  made,  L.  went  unto  the  king
27-  Ephron  a  strong  city  wherein  I..  abode

13.  2.  L.  his  protector  and  ruler  of  his  affairs

14.  2.  had  killed  Antiochus  and  L.  his  protector

LYSIMACI1US.

Esth.  11. 1.  L.  the  son  of  Ptolemeus  interpreted  it
2/1  Jac.  4.29.  Menelausle  his  brother  L.  in  his  stead

39.  many  gathered  themselves  together  against  L,

40.  L.  armed  about  3(XX)  men,  and  began  first

41.  they  seeing  the  attempt  of  L.  caught  stones


M  A  L


M  A  R


M  E  D  [Apocrypha


M.

MACCABEUS.

Mac.  2.  4.  Judas  who  was  called  M.

■5.  1.  his  son  Judas  called  M.  rose  in  his  stead

5.  24.  Judas  M.  and  Jonathan  went  over  Jordan
34.  the  host,  knowing  it  was  M.  tied  from  him

i  Mac.  5.  27-  Judas  M.  with  nine  others  withdrew

8.  16.  M.  called  his  men  together  about  6000
10. 19-  M.  left  Simon,  and  Joseph,  and  Zaccheus

30.  they  took  M.  betwixt  them  and  covered  him
11. 7-  then  M.  himself  first  of  all  took  weapons

12.  19.  Dositheus  and  Sosipater  of  M.  captains

26.  then  M.  marched  forth  to  Carnion

13.  24.  accepted  well  of  M.  made  him  governor

14.  6.  the  Assideans,  whose  captain  is  Judas  M.

27.  that  he  should  send  M.  prisoner  to  Antio'ch

30.  M.  saw  that  Nicanor  began  to  be  churlish

15. ’7.  M.  had  confidence  that  Lord  would  help  him
21.  M.  seeing  the  coming  of  the  multitude

MACEDONIAN.

Esth.  16.  10.  Aman  a  M.  the  son  of  Amadatha

1  Mac.  1.  1.  Alexander  son  of  Philip  the  M.  6.  2.

MACEDONIANS.

Esth.  16. 14.  the  kingdom  of  the  Persians  to  the  M.
■2  Mac.  8.  20.  the  battle  in  Babylon,  with  four
thousand  M.  and  that  the  M.  being  perplexed
MAD.

Wtsd.  14.  28.  for  either  they  are  in.  when  merry
MAD-we/i.

2  Esd.  16.  71-  shall  be  like  m.-men,  sparing  none

MADN  ESS.

Wisd.  5.  4.  we  fools  accounted  his  life  m.

Eccl.  22.  13.  thou  shalt  never  be  disquieted  with  m.

2  Mac.  15.  33.  and  hang  up  the  reward  of  his  m.

MADE.

Wisd.  1.  13.  for  G.  in.  not  death,  nor  hath  pleasure

6.  7.  for  he  hath  m.  the  small  and  the  great

11.  24.  thou  abhorrest  nothing  which  thou  hast  m.
for  never  wouldest  thou  havewn  any  thing  if  thou

13.  15.  set  it  in  a  wall,  and  m.  it.  fast  with  iron

14.  3.  thou  hast  in.  a  way  in  the  sea,  a  safe  path

8.  is  cursed,  as  well  it  as  he  that  m.  it
10.  for  that  which  is  m.  shall  be  punished

17.  they  ?n.  an  express  image  of  a  king

15.  8.  who  a  little  before  was  rn.  of  earth  himself
Eccl.  24.  8.  he  that  m.  me  caused  my  tabernacle  rest

32.  13.  for  these  things  bless  him  that  m.  thee
.39.  21.  he  hath  m.  all  things  for  their  uses
43.  6.  he  m.  the  moon  also  to  serve  in  her  season
33.  for  the  Lord  hath  m.  all  things
MAGIC.

Wisd.  17. 7*  as  for  the  illusions  of  art  m.  put  down
MAGNIFICENCE.

1  Esd.  1.  5.  according  to  the  m.  of  Solomon
MAGNIFY.

Toh.  12.6.  bless  God,  praise  him  and  m.  him
Esth.  14.  10.  heathen  to  in.  a  fleshly  king  for  ever
Wisd.  19.  22.  O  Lord,  thou  didst  m.  thy  people
Eccl.  39. 15.  m.  his  name,  shew  forth  his  praise
43.  28.  how  shall  we  be  able  to  m.  him  ?

31 .  who  hath  seen  him  ?  who  can  m.  him  as  he  is  ?

49. 11.  how  shall  we  m.  Zorobabel  ?

MAGNIFIED.

Jnd.  12. 18.  because  my  life  is  m.  in  me  this  day
Wisd.  10.  20.  they  m.  with  one  accord  thy  hand
MAGNIFIETH.

Wisd.  8.  3.  conversant  with  God,  she  m.  her  nobility
MAID.

Toh.  6. 12.  the  m.  is  fair  and  wise,  therefore  hear  me

13.  that  this  rn.  hath  been  given  to  seven  men
8.  13.  so  the  77i.  opened  the  door  and  went  in
Jud.  9.  2.  who  loosened  the  girdle  of  a  m.

10.  2.  she  called  her  m.  and  went  into  the  house

5.  then  she  gave  her  m.  a  bottle  of  wine
10.  Judith  went  out,  she  and  her  in.  with  her

32.  19.  then  she  took  what  her  m.  had  prepared

33.  9-  she  gave  Ilolofernes  his  head  to  her  m.

15. 13.  they  put  a  garland  of  olive  on  her  and  her  in.
16.23.  being  105  years,  and  made  her  m.  free
Esth.  15.  7.  bowed  herself  on  the  head  of  the  m.
Eccl.  41.  22.  or  to  be  over-busy  with  his  m,
MAIDS.

Toh.  3.  7.  Sara  w«s  reproached  by  her  father’s  m.

8. 12.  he  said,  send  one  of  the  m.  and  let  her  see
Bus.  15.  she  went,  in  as  before  with  two  m.  only

19.  now  when  the  m.  were  gone  forth  the  elders
36.  shut  the  garden-doors,  and  sent  the  m.  away

MAJESTY.

1  Esd.  4.  40.  she  is  the  strength  and  m.  of  all  ages
Toh.  3. 16.  prayers  heard  before  the  m.  of  great  God

13.  6.  and  I  do  declare  his  might  and  m.

Esth.  15.  6.  and  was  clothed  with  all  his  robes  of  m.

7.  lifting  up  his  countenance  that  shone  with  m.
13.  my  heart  was  troubled  for  fear  of  thy  m.
Wisd.  18.  24.  thy  in.  on  the  diadem  of  his  head
Eccl.  2. 18.  for  as  is  his  m.  so  is  his  mercy
MAINTAIN.

3  Esd.  4.  52.  torn,  burnt-offerings  on  the  altar
Eccl.  25.  22.  a  woman  if  shew,  her  husband  is  full

38.  34.  but  they  will  in.  the  state  of  the  world
MAINTENANCE.

1  Mac.  14.  29.  for  the  m.  of  their  sanctuary
MAKE.

1  Esd.  2.  26.  I  commanded  to  in.  diligent  search

8.  86.  thou,  O  Lord,  didst  in.  our  sins  light
Wisd.  15.  6.  they  that  m.  them  are  lovers  of  evil

9.  counteth  it  his  glory  to  in.  counterfeit  things

MAKETH.

Wisd.  15.  8.  he  in.  a  vain  god  of  the  same  clay
Eccl.  43.  13.  he  in.  the  snow  to  fall  apace
15.  by  his  great  power  he  m.  the  clouds  firm
17.  the  noise  of  thunder  m.  the  earth  to  tremble
MALES.

1  Mac.  5.  28.  he  slew  all  the  m.  with  the  sword, 51.
MALICE.

Wisd.  12.  10.  and  that  their  m.  was  bred  in  them

20.  whereby  they  might  be  delivered  from  their  m.

16.  14.  aman  indeed  killeth  through  his  m.

Eccl.  27.  30.  m.  and  wrath,  these  are  abominations


Eccl.  28.  7-  and  bear  now.  to  thy  neighbour

1  Mac.  9.  51.  that  they  might  work  w.  on  Israel

13.  6.  heathen  are  garnered  to  destroy  us  of  very  in.

2  Mac.  4.  50.  still  in  authority,  increasing  in  in.

MALICIOUS.

Esth.  13.  4.  there  was  scattered  a  certain  w.  people
7.  they  who  of  old  and  now  also  are  in.

Wisd.  1.  4.  into  a  m.  soul  wisdom  shall  not  enter
2  Mac.  5.  23.  a  in.  mind  against  his  countrymen
MALICIOUSLY.

Sits.  43.  these  men  have  m.  invented  against  me
62.  as  they  w.  intended  to  do  to  their  neighbour
2  Mac.  14.  11.  others  being  m.  set  against  Judas
MALIGNED.

Eccl.  45.  18.  strangers  in.  him  in  the  wilderness
MAN.

Esth.  13.  9.  there  is  no  in.  that  can  gainsay  thee
11.  there  is  no  in.  that  can  resist  thee  the  Lord

14.  not  prefer  the  glory  ofw.  above  glory  of  God
Wisd.  2.  1.  nor  was  any  w.  known  to  have  returned

5.  it  is  fast  sealed,  so  that  no  w.  cometh  again
7-  2.  being  compacted  in  blood,  of  the  seed  ofw.

23.  kind  to  m.  stedfast,  sure,  free  from  care

9.  13.  what  m.  is  he  that  can  know  counsel  of  God  ?

11.  16.  migfit  know  that  wherewithal  aw.  sinneth

15.  16.  w.  made  them,  but  no  in.  can  make  a  god

16.  20.  bread,  able  to  content  every  w.  delight

21.  tempered  itself  to  every  in.  liking

26.  the  growing  of  fruits  that  nourished)  in.

Eccl.  8.  4.  jest  not  with  a  rude  w.  lest  be  disgraced
MANFULLY.

1  Mac.  9.  10.  let  us  die  m.  for  our  brethren

2  Mac.  2.21.  to  those  that  behaved  themselves  w.

6.  27.  w.  changing  this  life,  I  will  shew  myself

7.  5.  they  exhorted  one  another  to  die  w.

10.  the  third  holding  forth  his  hands  m.

8.  16.  Maccabeus  exhorted  them  to  fight  w.

14.  42.  choosing  rather  to  die  m.  than  to  come

MANGLED.

2  Mac.  7. 15.  they  brought  the  fifth  also  and  w.  him
MAN  1 FEST.  -

Wisd.  12.  17.  thou  makest  their  boldness  m.

Eccl.  6.  22.  and  she  is  not  w.  to  many

16. 16.  his  mercy  is  m.  to  every  creature
MANIFESTATION.

Wisd.  1.  9.  for  the  in.  of  his  wicked  deeds
MANIFOLD.

Wisd.  7. 22.  a  Sp.  one  only,  w.  subtile,  lively,  clear
Eccl.  51.  3.  from  the  w.  afflictions  which  I  had
MAN  LY.

2  Mac.  7.  21.  with  a  w.  stomach  she  said  to  them
MANLINESS.

2  Mac.  8.  7.  that  the  bruit  of  his  w.  was  spread

14. 18.  Nicanor  hearing  of  the  w.  of  them

MANNA.

2  Esd.  1. 19.  and  I  gave  you  in.  to  eat
Bar.  1.  10.  prepare  ye  w.  and  offer  on  the  altar
MANNER.

Toh.  J.  12.  then  take  her  according  to  the  w.

Esth.  13.  5.  in  the  strange  in.  of  their  laws
Wisd.  11.  9.  thirsting  in  another  m.  than  the  just

18.  11.  master  servant  were  punished  after  one  w.
Eccl.  37.  18.  four  w.  of  things  appear;  good,  evil

1  Mac.  10.  58.  with  great  glory,  as  the  w.  of  kings  is

MANNERS.

Eccl. 31.17-  leave  off  first  for  w.  sake,  not  unsalable

2  Mac.  4. 13.  such  was  the  increase  of  heathenish  in.

5.  22.  for  w.  more  barbarous  than  he  that  set  him

6.  9.  would  not  conform  to  w.  of  the  Gentiles

MANSLAUGHTER.

2  Esd.  1.  26.  your  feet  are  swift  to  commit  in.
Wisd.  14.  25.  there  reigned  in  all  men,  blood,  in.
MANY.

Eccl.  34. 7.  for  dreams  have  deceived  w.  they  failed
42.  6.  and  shut  up  where  m.  hands  are
MARCHED.

Jud.  1.13.  hew.  in  battle-array  against  Arphaxad

1  Mac.  6.  33.  the  king  m.  fiercely  with  his  host

40.  they  w.  on  safely  and  in  order

2  Mac.  11. 10.  they  w.  forward  in  their  armour

12.  26.  then  Maccabeus  in.  forth  to  Carnion

13. 19.  m.  to  Bethsura  a  strong  hold  of  the  Jews

MARCHING.

1  Mac.  6.  41.  that  heard  the  m.  of  the  company
MARDOCHEUS.

1  Esd.  5.  8.  came  with  Enenius,  M.  Beelsarus
Esth.  10.  4.  M.said,  God  hath  done  these  things

11.  2.  M.  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  had  a  dream
MARKET.

Wisd.  15.  12.  they  counted  our  time  here  w.  for  gain
M  A  RK  ET-place,  and  places.

1  Esd.  2.  18.  the  Jews  do  build  the  m.-places
Toh.  2.  3.  one  of  our  nation  is  cast  in  the  m.-place
MARK.

Wisd.  5.  12.  like  as  when  an  arrow  is  shot  at  a  in.

21.  the  thunderbolts  shall  fly  to  the  w.

Eccl.  23.  10.  shall  not  be  without  a  blue  w.
MARKS.

Eccl.  28. 17.  the  whip  maketh  w.  in  she  flesh
MARRIAGE.  .

1  Mac.  9.  37.  the  children  of  Jambri  made  a  great  m.

41.  thus  was  their  w.  turned  into  mourning

10.  58.  and  celebrated  her  w.  at  Ptolemais

MARRIAGES.

Wisd.  14.  24.  they  kept  not  lives  nor  w.  undefiled
26.  changing  of  kind,  disorder  in  w.  adultery
MARRIAGE-CHAMBER.

Toh.  6.  16.  when  thou  shalt  come  into  the  w.

1  Mac.  1.  27.  she  that  sat  in  w.  was  in  heaviness
MARRY.

Eccl.  7.  25.  rn.  thy  daught.  so  shalt  have  performed

1  Mac.  10.  56.  I  will  in.  my  daughter  to  thee

2  Mac.  1. 14.  Antiochus  as  though  he  would  in.  her

MARRIED.

1  Esd.  5.  38.  who  w.  Augiaone  of  the  daughters
8.  70.  they  and  sons  have  m.  with  their  daughters
92.  O  Esdras,  we  have  m.  strange  women
Toh.  1.  9.  I  w.  Anna  of  mine  own  kindred

3.  8.  she  had  been  w.  to  seven  husbands

4.  12.  they  all  w.  wives  of  their  own  kindred
Esth.  10.  6.  whom  the  kings  w.and  made  queen
Eccl.  15.  2.  receive  him  as  a  wife  m.  of  a  virgin


26.  22.  a  w.  woman  is  a  tower  against  death

42.  9.  and  being  in.  lest  she  should  be  hated

10.  and  when  she  is  m.  lest  she  should  be  barren
2  Mac.  14.  25.  so  he  m.  was  quiet,  and  took  part
MARSH.

1  Mac.  9. 42.  they  turned  again  to  the  m.  of  Jordan
45.  the  water  on  this  and  that  side  the  m.

MARVEL.

Eccl.  11.21.  in.  not  at  the  works  of  sinners,  but  trust

16.  11.  it  is  m.  if  he  escape  unpunished

26. 11.  in.  not  if  she  trespass  against  thee

43.  £4.  and  when  we  hear  it,  we  m.  thereat

MARVELLED.

Eccl.  11.  13.  so  that  many  that  saw  it,  m.  at  him

47.  17-  the  countries  m.  at  thee  for  thy  songs

2  Mac.  1.  22.  a  fire  kindled,  so  that  every  man  m.

7. 12.  the  king  m.  at  the  young  man’s  courage

MARVELLETH.

Eccl.  40.7*  when  all  is  safe,  he  awaketh  and  in.

43.  18.  eye  m.  at  the  beauty  of  the  whiteness
MARVELLOUS.

Wisd.  10.  17.  guided  the  righteous  in  a  m.  way

19.  8.  seeing  the  in.  strange  wonders
Eccl.  17  9.  he  gave  them  to  glory  in  his  m.  acts
38.  6.  he  might  be  honoured  in  his  m.  works

42. 17 .  not  given  power  to  declare  all  his  m.  works
43. 2.  declaring  at  his  rising  a  in.  instrument

29.  the  Lord  is  great  and  m.  in  his  power

48.  14.  and  at  his  death  were  his  works  in.

2  Mac.  7-  18.  therefore  m.  things  are  done  to  us

20.  but  the  mother  was  in.  above  al?

MASS.  See  Iron.

.MASSACRE.

1  Mac.  1.  24.  having  made  a  great  m.  and  spoken

MASTER.

Wisd.  18. 11.  m.  and  servant  punished  one  manner
Eccl.  19.  21.  if  a  servant  say  to  his  m.  I  will  not  do
32.  1 .  if  thou  be  made  a  in.  of  the  feast

2  Mac.  1.  10.  to  Aristobulus,  king  Ptolemeus’ m.

2.  29.  as  the  m.  builder  of  a  new  house  must  care

14. 12.  N icanor,  who  had  been  m.  of  the  elephants

MASTERS.

Eccl.  3.  7-  do  service  unto  his  parents,  as  to  his  m.

MASTIC  K.

Sus.  54.  who  answered,  under  a  m.  tree

MATTATH I  AS.

1  Mac.  2.  14.  M.  and  his  sons  rent  their  clothes

16.  M.  also  and  his  sons  came  together

17.  the  king’s  officers  said  to  M.  on  this  wise
19.  M.  answered  and  spake  with  a  loud  voice

24.  which  thing  when  M.  saw,  he  was  inflamed

27.  M.  cried  throughout  the  city,  saying

39.  when  M.  and  his  friends  understood  hereof
45.  M.  and  his  friends  went  round  about

49.  when  the  time  drew  near  that  M.  should  die

11.  70.  none  left,  except  M.  the  son  of  Absalom

14.  29.  Simon  son  of  M.  with  his  brethren

16.  14.  Simon  came  with  his  sons  M.  and  Judas

2  Mac.  14. 19.  wherefore  he  sent  M.  to  make  peace

MATTER.

Wisd.  11. 17.  that  made  world  of  M.  without  form

15.  13.  that  of  earthly  in.  makes  brittle  vessels
Eccl.  5.  15.  be  not  ignorant  in  a  great  m.  or  small

7.  25.  so  shalt  thou  have  performed  a  weighty  m.
11.  9.  strive  not  in  a  in.  that  concerns  thee  not
22.8.  when  he  hath  told,  he  will  say,  what  is  them.

27.  1.  many  have  sinned  for  a  small  m.

28.  10.  as  the  m.  of  the  fire,  so  it  burneth

37. 11.  hearken  not  to  these  in  any  in.  of  counsel

MATTERS.

Eccl.  3.  23.  be  not  curious  in  unnecessary  in.

11. 10.  my  son,  meddle  not  with  many  in.

37- 11.  neither  with  a  coward  in  m.  of  war
2  Mac.  4.  23.  to  put  him  in  mind  of  necessary  m.
31.  then  came  the  king  in  haste  to  appease  in.

8.  9.  who  in  in.  of  war  had  great  experience

MEANLY.

2  Mac.  15.  38.  but  if  1  have  done  slenderly  and  m.

MEANS.

Eccl.  46.  4.  did  not  the  sun  go  back  by  his  m.  ?
MEASURABLY.

Eccl.  31.  28.  wine  m.  drunk  bringeth  gladness
MEASURE.

Wisd.  11.  20.  thou  hast  ordered  all  things  in  in.
MEASURED.

Wisd.  4.8.  nor  thatis  m.  by  number  of  years
MEAT.

Toh.  2.  2.  when  I  saw  abundance  of  in.  I  said
4.  then  before  I  had  tasted  of  any  in.  1  started  up
7 ■  8.  they  set  store  of  in.  on  the  table
10.  7.  and  she  did  eat  nom,  on  the  day-time
Jud.  12.  9.  until  she  did  eat  her  in.  at  evening

13.  10.  and  she  put  it  in  her  bag  of  in.

Wisd.  13. 12.  the  refuse  of  his  work  to  dress  his  m.

16.  2.  preparedst  for  them  m.  of  a  strange  taste
19.  21.  nor  melted  the  icy  kind  of  heavenly  rn.

Eccl.  30. 18.  are  as  messes  of  m.  set  on  a  grave

25.  a  good  heart  will  have  a  care  of  his  in.

31.  £3.  whoso  is  liberal  of  his  in.  men  speak  w'ell
24.  but  against  him  that  is  a  niggard  of  his  m.

36.  18.  yet  is  one  m.  better  than  another

40.29.  he  polluteth  himself  with  other  men’s  in.
41.  l.to  him  that  is  yet  able  to  receive  m.

19.  be  ashamed  to  lean  thy  elbow  on  the  in.

Bel  11.  set  on  the  m.  and  make  ready  the  wine
MEATS.

Wisd.  19.  H.  when  they  asked  delicate  in.

Eccl.  13.  7-  and  he  will  shame  thee  by  his  m.

36. 18.  the  belly  devoureth  all  m.  yet  is  one  meat

37. 29.  be  not  unsatiable,  nor  too  greedy  upon  m.

30.  for  excess  of  m.  bringeth  sickness

Bel  14.  when  gone  out,  the  king  set  m.  before  Bel

1  Mac.  1.  63.  they  might  not  be  defiled  with  in.

2  Mac.  11.  31.  Jews  shall  use  their  own  kind  of  in.

MEDDLE.

1  Esd.  6.  27.  be  careful  not  to  m.  with  the  place

2  Esd.  16.67.  to  in.  no  more  with  them  for  ever
Eccl.  11.  10.  my  son,  m.  not  with  many  matters,

for  if  thou  jw.much,  thou  shalt  not  be  innocent

1  Mac.  10.35.  no  man  have  authority  to  m.  with  thera

MEDES.

2  Esd.  1.  3.  who  was  captive  in  the  land  of  the  M

667


APOCKYPH  A.J


MEN


M  E  R


M  1  N


Jud.  1.  1.  which  reigned  over  the  M.  in  Ecbatane

16.  10.  the  M.  were  daunted  at  her  hardiness
1  Mac.  1.  1.  Darius  kin?  cf  the  Persians  and  M.
MEDIA.

1  Esd.  3. 1.  a  feast  to  all  the  princesof  M.  and  Persia
Tob.  1. 14.  1  went  into  M.  and  left  in  trust  with  Ga-

bael  at  Rages,  a  city  of  M.  ten  talents  of  silver

15.  was  troubled  that  I  could  not  go  into  M.

4.  1.  had  committed  to  Gabael  in  Rages  of  M.  20.

9.  2.  take  two  camels,  and  go  to  Rages  of  M.

11. 15.  told  great  things  had  happened  to  him  in  M.

14.  4.  go  into  M.  my  son,  for  I  surely  believe
that  for  a  time  peace  shall  rather  be  in  M.

14.  he  died  at  Ecbatane  in  M.  being  127  years

MEDICINE.

Eccl.  6.  16.  a  faithful  friend  is  the  m.  of  life
MEDICINES.

Eccl.  38.  4.  the  L.  hath  created  m.  out  of  the  earth
MEDITATE.

Eccl.  14.  20.  blessed  is  the  man  that  doth  m.  good
MEDITATION.

Eccl.  39.  1.  he  that  is  occupied  in  the  m.  thereof
MEDITATIONS.

2  Esd.  10.  5.  then  left  I  the  m.  wherein  I  was

MEEK.

Eccl.  3.  19.  but  mysteries  are  revealed  unto  the  m.

10.  14.  the  Lord  hath  set  up  the  m.  in  their  stead

MEEKNESS.

TVisd.  2.  19.  examine  that  we  may  know  his  m.
Eccl.  1.  27.  and  faith  and  m.  are  his  delight

3.  17.  my  son,  go  on  with  thy  business  in  m.

4.  8.  give  him  a  friendly  answer  with  m.

10.  28.  my  son,  glorify  thy  soul  in  m.  and  give  it

36.  23.  if  there  be  kindness  and  m.  in  her  tongue
MEET.

Tob.  11.  16.  Tobit  went  out  to  m.  his  daughter
Eccl.  9.  3.  m.  not  with  an  harlot  lest  thou  fall

15.  2.  as  a  mother  shall  she  m.  him,  and  receive
40.  23.  a  friend  and  companion  never  m.  amiss

1  Mac.  3.  11.  Judas  went  forth  to  m.  him,  16.

17.  when  they  saw  the  host  coming  to  m.  them

5.  39.  upon  this  Judas  went  to  m.  them

10.  56.  m.  me  therefore  at  Ptolemais,  that  we
59.  that  Jonathan  should  come  and  in.  him

11.  64.  he  went  to  m.  them  and  left  Simon

12.  41.  then  Jonathan  went  out  to  m.  him

2  Mac.  14.  21.  appointed  a  day  to  m.  in  together

MEET.

1  Esd.  2. 20.  we  think  it  m.  not  to  neglect  such  matter

5.  51.  they  offered  sacrifices  daily  as  was  m.

2  Esd.  4.  44.  and  if  I  be  m.  therefore,  shew  me

12.  36.  thou  only  hast  been  m.  to  know  this

Tob.  1. 8.  the  third  I  gave  to  them  to  whom  it  was  m.

7. 10.  it  is  m.  that  thou  shouldst  marry  my  daughter
Wisd.  4.  5.  not  ripe  to  eat,  yea,  in.  for  nothing

7.  15.  to  conceive  as  is  m.  for  things  given  me

13.  11.  he  hath  sawn  a  tree  m.  for  the  purpose
Eccl.  10.  23.  it  is  not  m.  to  despise  the  poor  man

1  Mac.  8.  30.  shall  think  in.  to  add  or  diminish

10.  19.  thou  art  a  man  m.  to  be  our  friend

13.  40.  look  who  are  m.  among  you  to  be  in  court

2  Mac.  8. 33.  he  received  a  reward  m.  for  wickedness

9.  12.  he  said,  it  is  m.  to  be  subject  to  God

MELODY.

Eccl.  32.  6.  so  is  the  m.  of  music  with  wine
40.  21.  the  pipe  and  psaltery  make  sweet  m.

47.  9.  that  the  singers  might  make  sweet  in.

50.  18.  with  variety  of  sounds  was  made  sweet  m.
MELODIOUS.

TVisd.  17. 18.  or  a  m.  noise  of  birds  among  branches
MELT.

Jud.  16. 15.  the  rocksshall  in.  as  wax  at  thy  presence
TVisd.  16. 29-  the  hopeof  the  unfaithful  shall  m.  away
19.  21.  kind  of  meat  that  was  of  nature  apt  to  m.
MELTED.

TVisd.  16.  22.  snow  endured  the  fire  and  m.  not
19.  21.  neither  m.  they  the  icy  kind  of  meat
MEMBER.

2  Mac.  7. 7.  punish,  throughout  every  m.  of  thy  body
MEMORIAL.

Esth.  16.  23.  conspire  against  us,  a  m.  of  destruction
TVisd.  4.  1.  for  the  m.  thereof  is  immortal
19.  shall  be  in  sorrow,  and  their  m.  shall  perish

8.  13.  shall  leave  behind  me  an  everlasting  m.

10.  8.  left  behind  them  a  m.  of  their  foolishness
Eccl.  10.  17-  be  hath  made  their  m.  to  cease

24.20.  my  in.  is  sweeter  than  honey ,  and  inheritance
35.7.  the  in.  thereof  shall  never  be  forgotten

38.  11.  give  a  sweet  savour  and  a  m.  of  fine  flour

39.  9.  his  m.  shall  not  depart  away

44.  9.  some  there  be  which  have  no  m.

45.  1.  even  Moses  beloved,  whose  m.  is  blessed

9.  for  a  m.  to  the  children  of  his  people

11.  with  a  writing  engraved  for  a  m.

16.  a  m.  to  make  reconciliation  for  his  people

49. 10.  of  the  twelve  prophets,  let  the  m.  be  blessed
Bar.  4.  5.  be  of  good  cheer,  my  people,  m.  of  Israel

1  Mac.  3.  7.  and  his  m.  is  blessed  for  ever

35.  and  to  take  away  their  in.  from  that  place

8.  22.  that  they  might  have  by  them  a  m.  or  peace

12.  53.  take  away  their  m.  from  amongst  men

2  Mac.  6.  31.  leaving  his  death  for  a  in.  of  virtue

MEMORY.

Eccl.  23.  26.  she  shall  leave  her  irt.  to  be  cursed

46. 1 1.  concerning  the  judges,  let  their  m.  be  blessed

1  Mac.  13.  29.  he  made  armour  for  a  perpetual  in.

2  Mac.  2.  25.  that  are  desirous  to  commit  to  m.

7.  20.  the  mother  was  worthy  of  honourable  m.

MEN.

TVisd.  3.  4.  though  they  be  punished  in  sight  of  m.

4.  2.  when  it  is  present  in.  take  example  at  it

8.  1 1.  I  shall  be  admired  in  sight  of  great  m.

1 1 .  23.  for  thou  winkest  at  the  sins  of  ni.

12.  17-  when  m.  will  not  believe  that  thou  art

13.  1.  vain  are  all  m.  by  nature,  ignorant  of  God

14.  11.  and  stumbling-blocks  to  the  souls  of  in.

14.  by  the  vain-glory  of  in.  they  entered  the  world

17.  whom  m.  could  not  honour  in  presence
25.  there  reigned  in  all  m.  without  exception

Eccl.  1.  16.  and  filleth  m.  with  her  fruits
2.  5.  acceptable  m.  in  the  furnace  of  adversity

18.  into  hands  of  Lord  and  not  into  hands  of  m.

668


Eccl.  21.  2.  as  teeth  of  a  lion,  slaying  souls  of  m.

33.  10.  and  all  in.  are  from  the  ground

37.  28.  all  things  are  not  profitable  for  all  m.

38.  6.  he  hath  given  m.  skill  that  he  might  be

44.  3.  let  us  praise  m.  renowned  for  their  power

45. 16.  he  chose  him  out  of  all  the  m.  living

49.  16.  Sent  and  Seth  in  great  honour  among  m.
Prayer  of  Manass.  whom  all  m.  fear  and  tremble
MENELAUS.

2  Mac.  4.  23.  Jason  sent  M.  Simon’s  brother

27.  so  in.  got  the  principality

29.  M.  left  his  brother  Lysimachus  in  his  stead
32.  M.  supposing  he  had  gotten  convenient  time

34.  M.  taking  Andronicus  apart,  prayed  him

43.  there  was  an  accusation  laid  against  M.

45.  but  M.  being  now  convicted,  promised

47.  he  discharged  M.  from  the  accusations
50.  M.  remained  still  in  authority,  increasing

5.  5.  the  city  taken  M.  fled  into  the  castle

15.  M.  that  traitor  to  the  laws  being  his  guide
23.  besides  M.  who  bear  an  heavy  hand  over

11.  29.  M.  declared  to  us,  that  your  desire  was
32.  I  have  sent  also  M.  that  he  may  comfort  you

13.  3.  M.  also  joined  himself  with  them
MENSTRUOUS.  .

2  Esd.  5. 8.  and  m. women  shall  bring  forth  monsters
Esth.  14. 16.  that  I  abhor  it  as  a  in.  rag
Bar.  6.  29.  m.  women  eat  their  sacrifices
MERCHANT.

Eccl.  26.  29-  a  m.  shall  hardly  keep  from  wrong

37. 11.  nor  consult  with  a  m.  concerning  exchange

MERCHANTS.

Eccl.  42.  5.  and  of  in.  indifferent  selling
Bar.  3.  23.  the  m.  of  Merran  and  Theman

1  Mac.  3.  41.  the  m.  of  the  country  hearing  the  fame

2  Mac.  8.  34.  Nicanor  brought  in.  to  buy  the  Jews

MERCY.

1  Esd.  5.  61.  because  his  m.  and  glory  is  for  ever
8.  78.  ni.  hath  been  shewed  to  us  from  thee

2  Esd.  1.  25.  1  shall  have  no  m.  upon  you

2.  4.  go,  O  my  children,  and  ask  in.  of  the  Lord

31.  1  shall  shew  m.  to  them,  for  I  am  merciful

32.  until  I  come  and  shew?«.  unto  them

4.  24.  and  we  are  not  worthy  to  obtain  m.

7.  66.  I  know  that  he  is  of  great  m.

8. 11.  nourished,  till  thou  disposest  it  to  thy  m.

32.  if  thou  hast  a  desire  to  have  m.  on  us

45.  and  havew.  upon  thine  own  inheritance
Tob.  3.  2.  and  all  thy  ways  are  in.  and  truth

8.  17.  because  thou  hast  had  m.  grant  them  m.  O
Lord,  finish  their  life  in  health  with  joy  and  m.

13.  2.  for  he  doth  scourge  and  hath  in.

5.  he  will  scourge,  and  will  have  m.  again,  9.

14.  7-  shall  rejoice,  shewing  in.  to  our  brethren
Jud.  13.  14.  he  hath  not  taken  away  his  m.

Wisd.  3.  9.  for  grace  and  in.  is  to  his  saints

4.  15.  that  his  grace  and  m.  is  with  his  saints

6.  6.  for  in.  will  soon  pardon  the  meanest

9. 1.  God  of  my  fathers  and  Lord  of  m.  w  ho  hast

11.9.  when  tried,  albeit  but  in  in.  chastised

23.  thou  hast  m.  upon  all,  thou  canstdo  all  things

12.22.  when  we  are  judged,  we  should  look  form.

15.  1.  gracious,  and  in  m.  ordering  all  things

16. 10.  thy  m.  was  ever  by  them  and  healed  them

19.  1.  wrath  came  on  them  without  m.  to  the  end

Eccl.  2. 7-  wait  for  his  in.  and  go  not  aside

9.  hope  for  good,  and  for  everlasting  joy  and  m.

11.  for  the  Lord  is  full  of  compassion  and  m.

18.  for  as  his  majesty  is,  so  is  his  in.

5.  6.  say  not,  his  m.  is  great,  he  will  be  pacified

16. 11.  m.  and  wrath  are  with  him,  he  is  mighty

12.  as  his  m.  is  great,  so  is  his  correction  also

14.  make  way  tor  every  work  of  m.

16.  his  in.  is  manifest  to  every  creature

18. 11.  God  poureth  forth  hisrn.  upon  them

13.  the  m.  of  man  is  toward  his  neighbour,  but  the

m.  of  the  Lord  is  upon  all  flesh

14.  he  hath  m.  on  them  that  receive  discipline
23.  3.  whose  hope  is  far  from  thy  in.

28.  4.  he  sheweth  no  m.  to  a  man  like  himself

29.  8.  with  a  poor  man,  delay  not  to  shew  him  m.

35.  19.  and  made  them  to  rejoice  in  his  in.

20.  in.  is  seasonable  in  time  of  affliction

36. 1.  have  m.  upon  us,  O  Lord,  and  behold  us

12.  O  Lord,  have  m.  on  the  people  that  is  called

46.  7.  in  the  time  of  Moses  he  did  a  work  of  m.

47.22.  but  the  Lord  will  never  leave  off  his  m.

50.  24.  that  he  would  confirm  his  w.  with  11s

51.  8.  then  thought  I  upon  thy  m.  O  Lord
29.  let  your  soul  rejoice  in  his  m.

Bar.  6.  38.  they  can  shew  no  in.  to  the  widow
Dan.  3.  12.  cause  not  thy  in.  to  depart  from  11s
67.  his  m.  endureth  for  ever,  68.  1  Mac.  4.  24.

1  Mac.  3.  44.  they  might  ask  m.  and  compassion

4.  10.  if  perad venture  the  Lord  will  have  m.  on  us

2  Mac.  2.  7-  till  God  receive  them  unto  m.

18.  he  will  shortly  have  in.  upon  us

6.  16.  he  never  withdraweth  his  in.  from  us
7-  29-  that  I  may  receive  thee  again  in  m.

8.  5.  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  was  turned  into  m.

27.  which  was  beginning  of  m.  unto  them

9.  13.  who  now  no  more  would  have  m.  on  him

10.  4.  that  he  would  chasten  them  with  m.

MERCIES.

Eccl.  18.  5.  and  who  shall  also  tell  out  his  m.  ?
51.3.  to  the  multitude  of  thy  in.  Dan.  3.  19.
Prayer  of  Manass.  thou  oftnine  infinite  m.  hast
MERCIFUL.

2  Esd.  2.  31.  I  am  in.  saith  Lord  almighty
7-  62.  I  know  that  the  Most  High  is  called  m.

8.  31.  because  of  us  thou  shalt  be  called  m.  .32.
Tob.  6.  17-  rise  up,  and  pray  to  God  who  is  in.

7.  12.  the  m.  God  give  you  good  success  in  a.l

14.  9.  shew  thyself  m.  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee
Jud.  16.  15.  thou  art  in.  to  them  that  fear  thee
Esth.  13. 17.  be  m.  to  thine  inheritance
Wisd.  12.  19.  that  the  just  man  should  be  in.

Eccl.  29. 1.  he  that  is  in.  will  lend  to  his  neighbour

36.  13.  O  be  in.  to  Jerusalem  thy  holy  city

44.  10.  these  were  m.  men,  whose  righteousness

45. 1.  he  broughtnotof  him  am.  man,  even  Moses

48.  20.  they  called  on  the  Lord  who  is/n.


i?re/.50.19.  besought  L.by  prayer  bet.  him  thatisni.
Bar.  3.  2.  O  Lord,  have  mercy,  for  thou  art  m.
Prayer  of  Manass.  but  thy  m.  promise  is  unmea
surable  and  unsearchable,  for  thou  art  very  m.

1  Mac.  2.57.  David  for  being  in.  possessed  the  throne

2  Mac.  1.  24.  who  art  strong,  and  righteous,  and  m.

7.  37.  that  he  would  speedily  be  in.  to  our  nation

8.  29.  besought  the  m.  L.  to  be  reconciled,  13.  12

10.  26.  they  besought  him  to  be  in.  to  them
11.9.  they  praised  the  m.  God,  and  took  heart

10.  having  an  helper,  for  the  Ld.  was  m.  to  them

MERCIFULLY.

Tob.  8.  7.  hi.  ordain  that  we  may  become  aged
MERCIFULN  ESS.

Eccl.  40.  17.  and  m.  endureth  for  ever
MERCILESS.

Wisd.  12. 5.  and  also  those  in.  murderers  of  children
MERRY.  ,

1  Esd.  7- 14.  they  kept  feast  making  m.  before  Lord

9.  54.  they  went  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  make  in.

2  Esd.  2. 27.  thou  shalt  be  in.  and  have  abundance
Tob.  7. 9.  Raguel  said,  eat,  and  drink,  and  make  m
Jud.  12.  13.  drink  wine,  and  be  m.  with  us,  17.
Wisd.  14.  28.  for  either  they  are  mad  when  m.

Eccl.  1. 12.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  maketh  a  m.  heart

13.25.  a  m.  heart  makes  a  cheerful  countenance
32.  2.  that  thou  mayest  be  m.  with  them
MESOPOTAMIA.

Jud.  2. 24.  he  went  through  M.  and  destroyed  cities
MESSAGE.

1  Mac.  10.  51.  Alexander  sent  a  m.  to  this  effect

15.  32.  Athenobius  told  him  the  king’s  in.
MESSENGER.

1  Esd.  1.  50.  God  sent  by  his  m.  to  call  them  back
MESSENGERS.

1  Mac.  1. 44.  the  king  had  sent  letters  by  m.

5. 14.  behold,  there  came  other  m.  from  Galilee

7. 10.  came  to  Judea,  where  they  sent  m.  to  Judas

13. 14.  Tryphon  sent  m.  unto  Simon,  saying

21.  they  in  the  tower  sent  m.  to  Tryphon

2  Mac.  4. 19.  Jason  sent  special  m.  from  Jerusalem

MESSES.

Eccl.  30.  18.  are  as  in.  of  meat  set  on  a  grave
MET.

1  Esd.  9.  4.  whosoever  m.  not  there  in  two  or  three
Tob.  7. 1.  they  came  to  the  house,  and  Sara  m.  them
Jud.  10. 11.  the  first  watch  of  Assyrians  m.  her

1  Mac.  4.  29-  Judas  m.  them  with  ten  thousand  men
10.60.  to  Ptolemais,  where  he  m.  the  two  kings

74.  where  Simon  his  brother  m.  him  to  help  him

11.  2.  they  opened  unto  him,  and  m.  him

6.  then  Jonathan  m.  the  king  with  great  pomp

2  Mac.  5.12.  commanded  not  to  spare  such  as  they  m.

8. 14.  being  sold  before  they  m.  together

10.  35.  they  killed  all  that  they  m.  withal

MID-DAY.

1  Esd.  9-  41 .  he  read  from  morning  to  m.

MIDNIGHT.

Jud.  12.  5.  and  she  slept  till  m.  and  she  arose
M  ID-LAND.

2  Mac.  8.  35.  he  came  through  the  in.  to  Antioch

MIDST.

Jud.  6. 11.  they  went  from  the  m.  of  the  plain
11. 19.  I  will  lead  thee  through  the  m.  of  Judea,
and  1  will  set  thy  throne  in  the  m.  thereof
Wisd.  7. 18.  the  ending  and  m.  of  the  times
Eccl.  9. 13.  remember  thou  goest  in  the  m.  of  snares
11.8.  nor  interrupt  men  in  the  m.  of  their  talk

42. 12.  and  sit  not  in  the  m.  of  women

Dan.  3. 1.  and  they  walked  in  the  m.  of  the  fire
2.  opening  his  mouth  in  the  m.  of  the  fire,  said
27.  and  made  the  m.  of  the  furnace  moist
66.  he  hath  delivered  us  out  of  the  m.  of  furnace
Sus.  34.  two  elders  stood  in  the  m.  of  the  people
48.  so  he  standing  in  the  m.  of  them,  said
2  Mac.  14.  44.  he  fell  in  the  m.  of  the  void  place

45.  yet  he  ran  through  the  m.  of  the  throng

MIGHT.

Tob.  13.  6.  praise  the  Lord  of  m.  declare  his  in.
Jud.  9. 1 1.  nor  standeth  thy  m,  in  strong  men

14.  thou  art  the  God  of  all  power  and  in.

13.  8.  she  smote  twice  on  his  neck  with  all  her  m.
MIGHTY.

1  Esd.  4.41.  great  is  truth,  and  m.  above  all  things

8.  47.  by  the  m.  hand  of  our  Lord,  61.

2  Esd.  6.  32.  the  M.  hath  seen  thy  righteous  dealing

10.  24.  that  the  M.  may  be  merciful  unto  thee
Esth.  14.  19.  O  thou  in.  God  above  all,  hear  us

16. 16.  they  be  children  of  the  most  m.  living  God
Wisd.  5.  23.  a  m.  wind  shall  stand  up  against  them  ;
ill  dealing  shall  overthrow  the  thrones  of  the  m.

6.  6.  but  m.  men  shall  be  mightily  tormented
Eccl.  4.27.  neither  accept  the  person  of  the  in.

7.  6.  lest  at  any  time  thou  fear  the  person  of  the  in.

11.  6.  many  m.  men  have  been  greatly  disgraced

12.  6.  against  the  m.  day  of  their  punishment
15. 18.  he  is  m.  in  power,  and  beholdeth  all  things

29. 13.  it  shall  fight  for  thee  better  than  a  in.  shield

18.  suretiship  hath  driven  m.  men  from  houses
34.  16.  he  is  their  m.  protection  and  strong  stay

46.  6.  and  he  followed  the  m.  One

16.  he  called  upon  the  in.  Lord,  when  his  enemies

47.  5.  he  gave  strength  to  slay  that  in.  warrior

MIGHTIER.

TVisd.  13.  4.  how  much  m.  is  he  that  made  him
Eccl.  8.  12.  lend  not  to  him  that  isw.  than  thyself

13.  2.  have  no  fellowship  with  one  that  is  in.

MIGHTIEST.

1  Esd.  4.12.  O  men,  how  should  not  the  king  be  m.  f

MIGHTILY.

TVisd.  6.  6.  but  mighty  men  shall  be.  m.  tormented
MILDNESS.

Esth.  13.  2.  carrying  myself  with  equity  and  m.

15.  8.  God  changed  the  spirit  of  the  king  into  in.

MILK.

2  Esd.  8.  10.  out  of  the  breasts  m.  to  be  given

See  Honey.

MIND.

1  Esd.  2. 8.  all  they  whose  m.  the  Lord  had  moved
3. 17.  declare  your  m.  concerning  the  writings

19.  it  maketh  the  in.  of  the  king  and  child  all  one

8.  11.  as  many  therefore  as  have  a  m.  thereunto


MIS


MON


MOT  [Al’Oi'HYMU.


2  Esd.  4.  ‘23.  for  it  was  not  my  in,  to  be  curious

5.  14.  my  m.  was  troubled,  so  that  it  fainted
33.  thou  art  sore  troubled  in  in.  for  Israel

9.  40.  1  said,  why  art  thou  so  grieved  in  thy  m.  ?
41.  let  me  alone,  for  I  am  vexed  in  my  rn.

12.  3.  out  of  the  trouble  and  trance  of  my  m.

5.  lo,  yet  am  1  weary  in  my  m.  and  very  weak
'lob.  4.  19.  neither  let  them  be  put  out  of  thy  m.

13.  C.  if  you  turn  to  him  with  your  whole  m.

Jud.  12.  16.  his  m.  was  moved,  and  he  desired  her
Esth.  11.  12.  Mardocheus  bare  this  dream  in  m.
Wisd.  3.14.  an  inheritance  more  acceptable  to  his  m.

4.  12.  the  wandering  of  concupiscence  doth  un¬
dermine  the  simple  m.

9. 15.  the  earthly  tabernacle  weigheth  down  the  m.
Eccl.  5.  2.  follow  not  thine  own  m.  and  strength
6.32. if  thou  wilt  apply  thy  ni.  thou  shalt  be  prudent

37.  let  thy  m.  be  upon  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord

7.  26.  hast  thou  a  wife  after  thy  in.  forsake  her  not

13.  26.  is  a  wearisome  labour  of  the  m.

23.  4.  turn  away  from  thy  servants  a  haughty  m.

6.  give  not  over  thy  servant  to  an  impudent  m.

26.  14.  so  much  worth,  as  am.  well  instructed
15.  and  her  continent™,  cannot  be  valued

27. 16.  and  shall  never  find  friend  to  his  m.

29.  17.  he  that  is  of  an  unthankful  m.

30.  21.  give  not  over  thy  rn.  to  heaviness

31.  28.  wine  bringeth  cheerfulness  of  the  m.

29.  wine  to  excess  maketh  bitterness  of  the  m.

37.  6.  forget  not  thy  friend  in  thy  m.

12.  a  godly  man,  whose  m.  is  according  to  thy  w.

14.  a  man’s  rn.  is  sometime  wont  to  tell  him  more
than  seven  watchmen  that  sit  in  a  tower

38.  26.  he  giveth  his  m.  to  make  furrows
28.  he  setteth  his  m.  to  finish  his  work

39.  1.  he  that  giveth  his  m.  to  the  law  of  God
Bar.  4.  28.  as  it  was  your  m.  to  go  astray  from  God
Sus. 9.  they  perverted  their  own  m.  and  turned  away

1  Mac.  10.74.  Jonathan  was  moved  in  his  m.

2  Mac.  1.  3.  to  do  his  will  with  a  willing  m.

3.  16.  declared  the  inward  agony  of  his  m.

4.  46.  Ptolemee  brought  him  to  be  of  another  m.

5.  11.  removing  out  of  Egypt  in  a  furious  m.

17.  and  so  haughty  was  Antiochus  in  m.

21.  such  was  tne  naughtiness  of  his  m.

6.  29.  the  speeches  proceeded  from  a  desperate  m.
9.  27.  that  he  understanding  my  m.  will  yield

11.  f.  so  they  went  forth  with  a  willing  m.

25.  our  m.  is  that  this  nation  shall  be  in  rest
37.  send  that  we  may  know  what  is  your  m.

13.  4.  the  King  of  kings  moved  Antiochus’ m.

9.  king  came  with  a  barbarous  and  haughty  m.

14.  20.  it  appeared  that  they  were  all  of  one  m.

15.  30.  Judas  the  chief  defender  in  body  and  m.

MINDED.

Esth.  14.  13.  of  all  that  are  like  rn.  to  him
Eccl.  19.  4.  that  is  hasty  to  give  credit,  is  light  m.

2  Mac.  12.  8.  heard  that  the  Jamnites  were  rn.  to  do
MINDS.

1  Esd.  2.  9.  whose  m.  were  stirred  up  thereto
Wish.  4.  15.  nor  laid  they  up  this  in  their  m.

2  Mac.  2.  2.  that  they  should  not  err  in  their  m.

15. 10.  when  he  stirred  up  their  m.  he  gave  them

MINDFUL.

2  Esd.  16.  20.  nor  be  alway  m.  of  the  scourges
Tob.  2.  2.  bring  what  poor  man  is  rn.  of  the  Lord

4.  5.  my  son,  be  m.  of  the  Lord  all  thy  days
Wish.  16.  11.  they  might  be  m.of  thy  goodness
19.  10.  for  they  were  yetm.  of  the  things  done
Eccl.  3.  31.  is  m.  of  that  which  may  come  after
2  Mac.  12.  43.  that  he  was  m.  of  the  resurrection
MINGLE.

1  Esd.  8.  87.  to  m.  ourselves  with  the  uncleanness

MINGLED.

2  Mac.  14.  38.  when  they  m.  not  themselves

15.  39.  as  wine  m.  with  water  is  pleasant

MINGLING.

2  Mac.  14.  3.  in  the  times  of  their  m.  withGentile3
MINISTER.

\  Esd.  1.  4.  and  m.unto  his  people  Israel

5.  who  m.  in  the  presence  of  your  brethren

4.  54.  the  priests’  vestments  wherein  they  m.

Eccl.  4.  14.  serve  her,  shall  m.  to  the  holy  One
45.  15.  that  they  should  m.  to  him.  and  bless

1  Mac.  10.  42.  appertain  to  the  priests  that  m.
MINISTERS.

1  Esd.  1.  3.  the  Levites,  the  holy  m.  of  Israel

5.  35.  all  the  m.  of  the  temple,  8.  5,  22.

Wisd.  6.  4.  because  being  m.  of  his  kingdom

MINISTERED.

Tob.  1.  7.  the  sons  of  Aaron  who  m.  at  Jerusalem
Jud.  4.  14.  they  that  m.  to  the  Lord  had  sackcloth
MINISTRY.

Wisd.  18.  21 .  bringing  the  shield  of  his  proper  m.
Eccl.  48.  20.  delivered  them  by  the  m.  of  Esay
MIRACULOUSLY.

2  Mac.  3.  30.  that  had  m.  honoured  his  own  place

MIRROR.

Wisd.  7.  26.  the  unspotted  m.  of  the  power  ot  God
MIRTH.

I  Esd.  3.  20.  it  turneth  every  thought  into  m.

Tob.  2.  6.  all  your  m.  be  turned  into  lamentation
Wisd.  8. 16.  hath  no  sorrow,  but  m.  and  joy
Eccl.  31.  31.  despise  not  thy  neighbour  in  his  m.
Bar.  2.  23.  the  voice  of  m.  and  the  voice  of  joy

1  Mac.  4. 59.  the  dedication  of  altar  be  kept  with  rn.

MISCHIEF.

2  Esd.  15.  56.  so  shall  God  deliver  thee  into  m.
Esdh.  13.  5.  this  people  working  all  the  m.  they  can
Eccl.  19-  27-  will  do  thee  a  m.  before  thou  be  aware

27.  27.  he  that  worketh  m.  it  shall  fall  on  him

1  Mac.  1.  15.  joined  to  heathen  and  sold  to  do  m.
7.23.  now  when  Judas  saw  all  the  m.

9.  61.  they  took  men  that  were  authors  of  that  m.

2  Mac.  4.  47.  who  was  the  cause  of  ail  the  m.  13.  4.

6.  3.  the  coming  in  of  this  rn.  was  sore

7.  31.  thou  that  hast  been  the  author  of  all  m.

MISCHIEVOUS.

Esth.  14.  19.  deliver  us  out  of  the  hands  of  the  m.
Wish.  15.  4.  nor  did  the  m.  invention  of  men
Eccl.  11.  33.  take  heed  of  a  m.  man  lest  he  bring
Sus.  28.  the  two  elders  came  full  ot’m.  imagination


MISCONCEIVE.

2  Mac.  3.  32.  suspecting  lest  the  king  should  m.
MISERABLE.

Tob.  13.  10.  love  in  thee  forever  those  that  are  m.
Wisd.  3.  11.  whoso  despiseth  nurture,  he  is  rn.

9.  14.  for  the  thoughts  of  mortal  men  are  m.

13.  10.  but  m.  are  they,  and  in  dead  things  hope

15.  14.  and  are  more  m.  than  very  babes

Eccl.  29.  24.  it  is  a  m.  life  to  go  from  house  to  house
Bar.  4.  31.  rn.  are  they  that  afflicted  thee

32.  m.  are  the  cities  which  thy  children  served
2  Mac.  9. 28.  so  died  he  a  m.  death  in  strange  country
MISERY.

2  Esd.  7.  33.  m.  shall  pass  away,  and  long-suffering
9.  45.  God  heard  me,  looked  upon  my  m.

Wisd.  3.  2.  and  their  departure  is  taken  for  m.

Eccl.  11.  13.  and  lifted  up  his  head  from  m.

1  Mac.  2.  7.  woe  is  me,  to  see  this  rn.  of  my  people

6.  1 1.  ho  w  great  a  Hood  of  rn.  it  is  wherein  now  1  am

2  Mac.  6. 9.  then  might  a  man  have  seen  present  m.

14.  8.  for  all  our  nation  is  in  no  small  m.

MISERIES.

2  Esd.  8.  50.  many  great  m.  shall  be  done  to  them
Bar.  2.  25.  and  they  died  in  great  m.  by  famine

1  Mac.  3.  42.  Judas  saw  that  m.  were  multiplied

MISINFORMED.

2  Mac.  3.  11.  and  not  as  that  wicked  Simon  had  m.

MISS.

2  Esd.  16.  13.  arrows  are  sharp  and  shall  not  m.
Eccl.  8. 9.  m.  not  the  discourse  of  the  elders
MISSING.

2  Mac.  14.  43.  but  m.  his  stroke  through  haste

MIST.

Wisd.  2.  4.  and  our  life  shall  be  dispersed  as  a  m.
Eccl.  43.  22.  a  present  remedy  of  all  is  aw.  coming
MITHRI  DATES.

1  Esd.  2. 11.  he  delivered  them  to  M.  his  treasurer

16.  in  time  of  Belenus,  and  M.  and  Tabellius
MITIGATED.

Wisd.  16. 18.  for  some  time  the  flame  was  m.
MITRE.

Eccl.  45.  12.  he  set  a  crown  of  gold  upon  the  m.
MIXED.

1  Esd.  8. 70.  holy  seed  is  m.  with  the  strange  people

2  Esd.  13.  11.  and  they  were  all  rn.  together

MOAB.

Jud.  1. 12.  slay  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  M.

5.  2.  and  called  all  the  princes  of  M.

22.  all  that  dwelt  by  the  sea.-side  and  in  M.

MOABITES.

1  Esd.  8.  69.  the  M.  Egyptians,  and  Edomites
Jud.  6.  1.  Floloternes  said  to  Achiorand  all  the  M.
MOAN.

Eccl.  38.  17.  weep  bitterly,  and  make  great  m.
MOCK.

Wisd.  12.  25.  thou  didst  send  a  judgment  to  m.  them
MOCKED.

Tob.  2.  8.  but  my  neighbours  rn.  me  and  said

1  Mac.  7-  34.  but  he  m.  them  and  laughed  at  them

2  Mac.  7.  39.  king  took  it  grievously  that  he  was  m.

MOCKERY.

Eccl.  27.28.  m.  and  reproach  are  from  the  proud
2  Mac.  8.  17*  injury,  whereof  they  made  a  rn.
MOCKING.

Eccl.  33.  6.  a  stallion  horse  is  as  a  m.  friend
2  Mac.  7.7-  brought  second  to  make  him  a  m. -stock
MODERATE.

Eccl.  31.  20.  sound  sleep  cometh  of  m.  eating
MODE  RAF  ELY.

Eccl.  31.  27.  wine  is  good,  if  it  be  drunk  m.
MODEST.

2  Mac.  4. 37.  the  m.  behaviour  of  him  that  was  dead
MODIN.

1  Mac.  2. 1.  then  arose  Mattathias  and  dwelt  in  M.

15.  came  into  city  of  M.  to  make  them  a  sacrifice

23.  to  sacrifice  on  the  altar  which  was  at  M.

70.  in  sepulchre  of  his  fathers  at  M.  9. 19.

13.  25.  buried  them  in  M.  the  city' of  his  fathers
30.  this  is  the  sepulchre  which  he  made  at  M.

16.  4.  who  went  out  and  rested  that  night  at  M.

2  Mac.  13.  14.  so  Judas  camped  by  M.

MOIST.

Dan.  3.  27.  as  it  had  been  a  m.  whistling  wind
MOLEST.

Esth.  12.  6.  Aman  sought  to  m.  Mardocheus

1  Mac.  10.  35.  or  to  rn.  any  of  them  in  any  matter

MOLLIFYING.

Wisd.  16.  12.  nor  m.  plaister  that  restored  them
MOMENT.

2  Esd.  16.  38.  which  pains  slack  not  a  m.

Wisd.  18.  12.  in  one  m.  noblest  offspring  destroyed
2  Mac.  6.  25.  through  my  desire  to  live  a  rn.  longer
9.  11.  his  pain  increasing  every  m.

MONTH.

1  Esd.  5.  6.  in  the  m.  N  isan,  the  first  m.  Esth.  11.2.
47.  but  when  the  seventh  m.  was  at  hand

53.  began  from  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  m.

7. 5.  the  three  and  twentieth  day  of  the  m.  Adar

10.  passover,  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  m.

9.  5.  the  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  m.

16.  in  the  first  day  of  the  tenth  rn.  they  sat

2  Esd.  16.  38.  a  woman  in  the  ninth  m.  bringeth  forth
Esth.  10.  13.  and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same  m.

13.  6.  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  twelfth  rn.  Adar

16.20.  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  twelfth  rn.

Eccl.  43.  8.  the  m.  is  called  after  her  name

1  Mac.  1.  54.  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  rn.  Casleu

4.  52.  on  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  m.
59.  from  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  the  m.

14.  27.  the  eighteenth  day  of  the  m.  Elul

16.  14.  in  the  eleventh  m.  called  Sabat

2  Mac.  1.  9.  see  that  ye  keep  the  feast  m  m.  Casleu
18.  upon  the  five  and  twentieth  day  of  tne  m.

11.21.  the  twenty -fourth  day  of  m.Dioscorinthius

33.  in  the  fifteenth  day  ot  the  m.  Xanthicus,  38.

15.  36.  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  twelfth  m.

MONTHS.

1  Esd  A  .44.  Joaeim  reigned  but  three  m.  and  ten  days

2  Esd.  4.  40.  when  she  hath  fulfilled  her  nine  rn.

8.  8.  and  nine  m.  doth  thy  workmanship  endure
Wish.  7-  2.  to  be  flesh  in  the  time  of  ten  m.

2  Mac.  7. 27.  have  pity  on  me  that  bare  thee  nine  m.


MONEY.

1  Esd.  5.54.  they  gave  the  masons  and  carpenters  rn.

8.  24.  by  penalty  of  rn.  or  by  imprisonment
Tob.  4.  1.  in  that  day  Tobit  remembered  the  •»#»,

2.  I  may  signify  to  him  of  the  rn.  before  1  uie
5.2.  how  can  1  receive  //(.seeing  1  know  him  not

3.  seek  thee  a  man,  and  go  and  receive  the  m.

18.  be  not  greedy  to  add  m.  to  rn.

9.  2.  go  to  Gabael  and  bring  me  the  m.

10.  2.  and  there  is  no  man  to  give  him  the  m.

10.  Raguel  gave  him  servants,  cattle,  and  m.

12.  3.  he  hath  brought  me  the  m.  and  healed  thee
Jud.  4.  10.  servants  bought  with  m.  put  sackcloth
ELccl.  9.  9.  spend  not  thy  m.  with  her  at  the  wine
14.3.  what  should  an  envious  man  do  with  m.

21.  8.  that  builds  his  house  with  other  men’s  rn.

29  5.  for  his  neighbour's  rn.  he  will  speak  submissly
10.  lose  thy  rn.  for  thy  brother  and  thy  friend
51.  25.  buy  her  for  yourselves  without  m.

28.  get  learning  with  a  great  sum  of  rn.

Bar.  1.  6.  they  made  also  a  collection  of  m.

10.  we  have  sent  you  m.  to  buy  you  offerings

6.  35.  they  can  neither  give  riches  nor  m.

1  Mac.  3.  31.  to  go  into  Persia  to  gather  much  m.
8.  26.  nor  aid  them  with  victuals  or  m.  28.

13. 15.  it  is  for  m.  he  is  owing  to  the  king’s  treasure

17.  yet  sent  he  the  m,  and  the  children,  18.

15.  6.  I  give  thee  leave  also  to  coin  m.

2  Mac.  1.  14.  to  receive  m.  in  name  of  a  dowry

3.  6.  the  treasury  was  full  of  infinite  sums  of  m.

7.  Apollonius  came  and  had  shewed  him  of  the

m.  and  sent  him  to  bring  the  foresaid  m.

9.  that  intelligence  was  given  him  of  the  rn.

10.  there  was  rn.  laid  up  for  the  relief  of  widows

4.  1.  having  been  a  bewrayer  of  the  m.

20.  this  m.  was  appointed  to  Hercules’  sacrifice

23.  sent  Menelaus  to  bear  the  rn.  unto  the  king
27.  but  as  for  the  m.  that  he  had  promised

45.  to  give  him  m.  if  he  would  pacify  the  king

8.  10.  to  make  so  much  m.  of  the  captive  Jews
25.  took  their  m.  that  came  to  buy  them

10.  21.  they  had  sold  their  brethren  for  m.
MONUMENT.

Wisd.  10.7-  a  standing  pillar  of  salt  is  a  m.

1  Mac.  13.  27.  Simon  built  a  m.  on  the  sepulchre

2  Mac.  15.  6.  determined  to  set  up  a  public  m.

MOON.

2  Esd.  5.  4.  the  m.  shall  shine  thrice  in  the  day

6.  45.  thou  commandedst.  the  m.  to  give  her  light
Eccl.  27.  1L  but  a  fool  changeth  as  tne  m.

39.  12.  for  I  am  filled  as  the  m.  at  the  full
43.  6.  he  made  the  m.  also  to  serve  in  her  season

7.  from  the  m.  is  the  sign  of  feasts
50.  6.  he  was  as  the  rn.  at  the  full
Bar.  6.  60.  for  sun,  m.  and  stars  are  obedient
67.  nor  shine  as  the  sun,  nor  give  light  as  the  m.
Dan.  3.  40.  O  ye  sun  and  m.  bless  ye  the  Lord
MORDOCHEUS.  See  Mardocheus.
MORNING.

1  Esd.  1.  11.  and  thus  did  they  in  the  m.

5.  50.  they  offered  to  the  Lord  m.  and  evening

9.  41.  he  read  in  the  court  from  rn.  unto  mid-day
Tub.  9.  6.  early  in  the  m.  they  both  went  forth
Jud.  12.5.  when  it  was  towards  the  w?.-watch

14.  11.  as  soon  as  m.  arose,  they  hanged  the  head
Wisd.  11. 22.  yea  as  a  drop  of  m.  dew  that  falleth
Eccl.  18.26.  from  rn.  till  evening  time  is  changed

24.  32.  I  will  yet  make  doctrine  to  shine  as  the  rn.

47. 10.  that  the  temple  might  sound  from  m.

50.  6.  he  was  as  the  zw.-star  in  the  midst  of  a  cloud
Bel  16.  in  the  m.  berime  the  king  arose
1  Mac.  4.  52.  they  rose  up  betimes  in  the  m.

5.  30.  betimes  in  the  rn.  they  looked  up

9.  13.  the  battle  continued  from  m.  till  night

10.  80.  cast  darts  at  the  people  from  m.  till  evening

11.  67.  betimes  in  the  m.  they  gat  to  the  plain

MOSES. .

1  Esd.  1. 6.  commandment  which  was  given  to  M.

11 .  to  offer  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  M.

5.  49.  as  it  is  commanded  in  the  book  of  M.

7.  6.  did  the  tilings  written  in  the  book  of  M.

9.  stood  arrayed^  according  to  the  book  of  M.

8.  3.  as  ascribe,  being  very  ready  in  the  law  of  M.

9.  39.  that  he  would  bring  the  law  of  M.

2  Esd.  1.  13.  I  gave  you  M.  for  a  leader

7.  36.  M.  prayed  for  the  fathers  that  sinned
59.  for  this  is  the  life  whereof  M.  spake
14.  3.  I  did  manifestly  reveal  myself  to  M.

Eccl.  45. 1.  even  M.  beloved  of  God  and  men

15.  M.  consecrated  and  anointed  him  with  oil

46.  1.  Jesus  was  successor  of  M.  in  prophecies

7.  in  the  time  of  M.  he  did  a  work  of  mercy
Bar.  1.  20.  curse  which  the  Lord  appointed  by'  M.

2.  28.  as  thou  spakest  by  thy  servant  M.

Sus,  3.  taught  according  to  the  law  of  M.  62.

2  Mac.  1.  29.  plant  thy- people  as  M.  hath  spoken
2.  4.  where  M.  climbed  up  and  saw  the  heritage

8.  the  cloud  also  as  it  was  shewed  under  M.

10.  as  when  M.  prayed  to  the  Lord,  fire  came

11.  M.  said,  because  the  sin  offering  was  not
7.  6.  as  M.  in  his  song  declared,  saying

30.  law  that  was  given  unto  our  fathers  by  M.
MOTHER.

2  Esd.  1. 28.  I  prayed  you  as  a  rn.  her  daughters

10.  7.  how  that  Sion  our  rn.  is  full  of  heaviness

13.  55.  thou  hast  called  understanding  thy  m.

Tob.  1.  8.  as  Debora  my  father’s  m.  commanded  rr.e
4.  3.  and  despise  not  thy  m.  but  honour  her
13.  forlewdness  is  the  m.  of  famine
5. 17.  but  Anna  his  m.  wept,  and  said  to  Tobit
10. 12.  honour  thy  father  and  thy  w.-in-law

11.  17.  and  blessed  be  thy  father  and  thy  rn.

14. 10.  bury  me  decently,  and  thy  rn.  with  me

12.  when  Anna  his  m.  was  dead,  he  buried  t.er

13.  he  buried  his  father  and  m.  honourably
Wisd.  7.  2..  in  my  rn.  womb  I  was  fashioned

12.  I  knew  not  that  she  was  the  m.  of  them
Eccl.  3.  2.  the  authority  of  the  m.  over  the  sons
4.  he  that  honoureth  his  m.  is  as  one  that  layeth  up

6.  the  obedient  shall  be  a  comfort  to  his  m.

9.  curse  of  the  m.  rooteth  out  foundations

11.  a  rn.  in  dishonour  is  a  reproach  to  children

669


Apocrypha.'


M  O  IT


M  UK


N  A  M


Eccl.  3. 16.  he  that  angereth  his  m.  is  cursed  of  God

4.  10.  be  instead  of  a  husband  to  their  m.

7-  27.  and  forget  not  the  sorrows  of  thy  m.

15.  2.  as  a  m.  shall  she  meet  him  and  receive  him
24. 18.  I  am  the  in.  of  fair  love  and  fear

40.  1.  from  the  day  they  go  out  of  theiryw.  womb,
till  the  day  they  return  to  the  in.  of  all  things

49.  7-  was  a  prophet  sanctified  in  his  m.  womb

1  Mac.  13.  28.  for  his  m.  and  his  four  brethren

2  Mac.  7-  1.  seven  brethren  with  their  in.  taken

4.  the  rest  of  his  brethren  and  in.  looking  on

5.  they  exhorted  one  another  with  the  m.  to  die

20.  but  the  m.  was  marvellous  above  all

25.  the  king  called  his  in.  and  exhorted  her

41.  last  of  all  after  the  sons  the  m.  died

MOTH,  8.

Eccl.  19.  3.  m.  and  worms  shall  have  him  to  heritage
42. 13.  for  from  garments  cometh  a  m.

Bar.  6.  12.  gods  cannot  save  themselves  from  m.
MOTION.

2  Esd.  6.  14.  it  shall  be  as  it  were  a  great  in.

IVisd.  7-  24.  wisdom  is  more  moving  than  any  m.
MOVE.

2  Esd.  4.  37-  he  doth  not  in.  nor  stir  them
Bar.  6.  27.  neither  can  they  m.  of  themselves
D an.  3.  57.  whales  and  all  that  m.  in  the  waters
MOVED.

1  Esd.  2.  8.  all  they  whose  mind  the  Lord  had  m.

8.  72.  all  that  were  m.  at  the  word  of  the  Lord

2  Esd.  3.  3.  my  spirit  was  sore  m.  and  1  spake

6. 14.  the  place  where  thou  standest  shall  not  be  m.

7.  15.  why  art  thou  m.  whereas  thou  art  mortal

13.  2.  that  the  wind  m.  all  the  waves  thereof

Jud.  9.  4.  children,  which  were  m.  with  thy  zeal

12.  16.  his  heart  was  ravished,  his  mind  was  m.

16. 15.  for  the  mountains  shall  be  in.  from  foundat.

Eccl.  16.  18.  shall  be  in.  when  he  shall  visit
48. 12.  he  was  not  m.  with  the  presence  of  any  prince
Bar.  4.  6.  but  because  you  in.  God  to  wrath

1  Mac.  10.  74.  Jonathan  was  m.  in  his  mind

2  Mac.  4.  37.  Antiochus  was  sorry,  and  m.  to  pity
49.  they  of  Tyrus  m.  with  hatred  of  that  deed

13.  4.  the  King  of  kings  m.  Antiochus’  mind

MOVEDST.

2  Esd.  3. 18.  thou  m.  the  whole  world,  and  madest
MOVING.

IVisd.  2.  2.  as  a  little  spark  in  m.  of  our  heart
7*  24.  for  wisdom  is  more  m.  than  any  motion
MOUNT.

2  Esd.  2.  33.  a  charge  of  the  Lord  on  m.  Horeb

42.  I  Esdras  saw  on  m.  Sion  a  great  people
13.  35.  he  shall  stand  upon  the  top  of  m.  Sion
IVisd.  9.  8.  to  build  a  temple  on  thy  holy  m.

1  Mac.  4.  37.. all  the  host  went  up  into  m.  Sion
60.  they  builded  the  m.  Sion  with  high  walls

5.  54.  so  they  went  up  to  m.  Sion  with  joy

6.  48.  the  king  pitched  his  tents  against  m.  Sion
62.  then  the  king  entered  into  in.  Sion

9.  15.  who  pursued  them  to  the  in.  Azotus

11.  37.  set  on  the  holy  m.  in  a  conspicuous  place

12.  36.  raising  a  m.  between  the  tower  and  the  city

MOUNTAIN.

t  Esd.  13.  6.  he  had  graved  himself  a  great  m.

12.  I  saw  the  same  man  come  down  from  the  m.
Jud.  2.  21.  pitched  from  Bectileth  near  the  m.

10.  10.  looked,  until  she  was  gone  down  the  m.

13.  10.  they  went  up  the  m.  of  Bethulia
Eccl.  50.  26.  that  sit  upon  the  in.  of  Samaria
Bar.  6.  39.  like  stones  that  be  hewn  out  of  the  m.

1  Mac.  16.  20.  he  sent  to  take  the  m.  of  the  temple

2  Mac.  2.  4.  as  he  went  forth  into  the  m.

MOUNTAINS.

1  Esd.  4.  4.  they  go  and  break  down  m.  and  towers

2  Esd.  8.  23.  whose  indignation  makes  the  m.  melt
15  42.  they  shall  break  down  the  in.  and  hills

16.  60.  hath  made  pools  on  the  tops  of  the  in.

Tob.  1.  21.  they  fled  into  the  m.  of  Ararath

Jud.  1.  15.  he  took  also  Arphaxad  in  the  in.

Eccl.  24.  13.  as  a  cypress  upon  the  in.  of  Ilermon

43.  4.  the  sun  burnetii  the  in.  three  times  more

16.  at  his  sight  the  m.  are  shaken,  the  wind  bloweth

21.  it  devoureth  the  m.  and  burneth  the  wilderness

MOURN.

2  Esd.  8.  16.  thy  inheritance,  for  whose  cause  T  m.

10.  4.  but  continually  to  m.  and  to  fast  until  I  die

8.  now  seeing  we  all  m.  art  thou  griev.  for  one  son  ?

9.  tell  thee  that  it  is  she  which  ought  to  m.

15.  12.  Egypt  shall  m.  and  foundation  be  smitten

13.  they  that  till  the  ground  shall  m.

16.  33.  the  women  shall  m.  having  no  husbands

39.  world  shall  in.  and  sorrows  shall  come

2  Mac.  5.  10.  he  had  none  to  m.  for  him
MOURNED.

1  Esd.  1.  32.  in  all  Jewry  they  m.  for  .Tosias

8.  72.  assembled,  whilst  I  in.  for  the  iniquity

2  Esd.  Q.  38.  she  in.  and  wept  with  a  loud  voice

10.  49.  because  she  m.  for  her  son  thou  begannest

Eccl.  48.  24.  he  comforted  them  that  m.  in  Sion
1  Mac.  1.  26.  so  that  the  princes  and  elders  m.

2.  14.  Mattathias  and  his  sons  in.  very  sore

9.  20.  and  all  Israel  m.  many  days,  saying

MOURNING.

1  Esd.  9.  2.  m.  for  the  great  iniquities  of  multitude

2  Esd.  5.  20.  so  I  fasted  seven  days,  m.  and  weeping

10.  6.  seest  thou  not  our  in.  and  what  happeneth

11.  who  then  should  make  more  in.  than  she  ?

41.  thou  sawest  a  woman  m.  and  begannest
Tob.  2.  6.  your  feasts  shall  be  turned  into  m.

Esth.  14.  2.  put  on  garments  of  anguish  and  m.

15.  1.  third  day  she  laid  away  her  in.  garments
IVisd.  14. 15.  fora  father  afflicted  with  untimely  m.
19.  3.  for  whilst  they  were  yet  m.  at  the  graves

MOURNINGS.

2  Esd.  1. 19. 1  had  pity  on  your  in.  and  gave  manna

16.  18.  the  beginnings  of  sorrows  and  great  in.

^  MOUTH.

1  Esd.  1.  28.  words  spoken  by  the  m.  of  the  Lord
4J.  words  spoken  to  him  from  the  m.  of  the  Lord
5".  word  of  the  Lord  spoken  by  the  m.  of  Jeremy

2.  1.  that  he  had  promised  by  the  m.  of  Jeremy
4.  19.  with  open  in.  fix  their  eyes  fast  on  her
31.  the  king  gazed  upon  he;  with  open  in.

670


-  Esd.  14.  38.  open  thy  in.  and  drink  that  I  gave  thee
41.  and  ray  m.  was  opened,  and  shut  no  more
Job.  13.  6.  therefore  confess  him  with  your  m.
rtf'  }  V  -*9’  a,  shall  not  open  his  in.  at  thee
IVisd.  1.  11.  the  m.  that  belieth  slayeth  the  soul

8.  12.  they  shall  lay  their  hands  on  their  in.

10.  21.  wisdom  openeth  the  in.  of  the  dumb

Eccl.  5. 12.  if  not,  lay  thy  hand  upon  thy  in.

14. 1.  blessed  man  that  hath  not  slipt  with  his  m.
15.  9.  praise  is  not  seemly  in  the  m.  of  a  sinner
20. 19.  will  always  be  in  the  m.  of  the  unwise
20.  rejected  when  it  comes  out  of  a  fool’s  in.

21.  5.  a  prayer  out  of  a  poor  man’s  m.  reacheth  to
17.  they  inquire  at  the  m.  of  the  wise  man
“•  22.  if  thou  hast  opened  thy’ m.  against  thy  friend
~3.  7*  hear,  O  ye  children,  the  discipline  of  the  in.
9.  accustom  not  thy  in.  to  swearing
13.  use  not  thy  m.  to  untemperate  swearing
24.  2.  in  the  congregation  shall  she  open  her  m.

3.  I  came  out  of  the  m.  of  the  Most  High

26.  12.  she  will  open  her  w,  as  a  thirsty  traveller
~7.  23.  at  last  he  will  writhe  his  m.  and  slander
28. 12.  and  both  these  come  out  of  thy  m.

29.  24.  art  a  stranger,  thou  darest  not  open  thy  m.

30.  18.  delicates  poured  upon  a  m.  shut  up

34.  8.  wisdom  is  perfection  to  a  faithful  m.

37.  22.  the  fruits  are  commendable  in  his  in.

39.  5.  and  he  will  open  his  m,  in  prayer

40.  30.  begging  is  sweet  in  the  m.  of  the  shameless
Van.  3.  2.  opening  his  in.  in  the  midst  of  the  fire

28.  then  the  three,  as  out  of  one  m.  praised  God
ms.  61.  Daniel  had  convicted  them  by  their  own  m.
Bel  27.  this  he  put  in  the  dragon’s  in.

1  Mac.  2.  60.  Daniel  was  delivered  from  the  m.  of

9.  55.  for  his  m.  stopped,  he  could  not  speak

2  Mac.  6. 18.  Eleazar  was  constrained  to  open  his  in.

MOUTHS.

Jud. 15. 13.  Israel  followed  with  songs  in  their  m
Esth.  13.  17.  destroy  not  the  m.  of  them  that  praise
14. 10.  open  the  m.  of  the  heathen  to  set  forth
Eccl.  49.  1.  it  is  sweet  as  honey  in  all  in.

Dan.  3.  10.  and  now  we  cannot  open  our  m.
MUCH.

Tob.  12.8.  a  little  with  righteousness  is  better  than  m.

•  I  isd.  8. 12.  if  1  talk  in.  they  shall  lay  their  hands

10. 18.  and  led  them  through  in.  water

Eccl.  37. 11.  with  an  idle  servant  of  m.  business

43.  27.  we  may  speak  m.  and  yet  come  short

30.  when  ye  glorify  God  exalt  him  as  in.  as  you  can

51. 16.  I  received  her,  and  gat  m.  learning

27.  how  that  I  have  gotteiLunto  me  m.  rest

28.  get  learning,  and  get  m.  gold  by  her

2  Mac.  15.  14.  who  prayeth  m.  for  the  people
MULBERRIES.

1  Mac.  6.  34.  they  shewed  the  blood  of  grapes  and  m.
MULE.

Jud.  15.  11.  she  took  it  and  laid  it  on  her  m.

_  MULES.

1  Esd.  5.  43.  two  hundred  forty  and  five  m.

MULTIPLY.

2  Esd.  3. 12.  when  they  on  the  earth  began  to  m.

7-  67.  for  if  he  shall  not  in.  his  mercies

Eccl.  6.  5.  sweet  language  will  m.  friends
16.  2.  though  they  m.  rejoice  not  in  them
23.  16.  two  sorts  of  men  m.  sin,  a  hot  mind

44.  21.  he  would  m.  him  as  the  dust  of  the  earth

47. 18.  and  thou  didst  m.  silver  as  lead

Dan.  3. 13.  that  thou  wouldst  m.  their  seed  as  stars
MULTIPLIED.

1  Esd.  8.  75.  for  our  sins  are  m.  above  our  heads

2  Esd.  5.  10.  incontinency  shall  be  m.  on  earth
IVisd.  10.  10.  she  in.  the  fruits  of  his  labours
Eccl.  18.  12.  therefore  he  m.  his  compassion

48. 16.  some  pleasing  to  God,  and  some  m.  sins
Prayer  of  Manass.  my  transgressions  are  m.  and  m.

1  Mac.  1.  9.  and  evils  were  m.  in  the  earth

3.  42.  when  Judas  saw  that  miseries  were  m.

14. 15.  he  m.  the  vessels  of  the  temple
MULTIPLIED!!.

Eccl.  21.  12.  as  wisdom  which  m.  bitterness
MULTIPLYING.

IVisd.  4.  3.  the  in.  brood  of  the  ungodly  not  thrive
MULTITUDE.

1  Esd.  4. 14.  it  is  not  the  great  king,  nor  in.  of  men

5.  65.  yet  the  m.  sounded  marvellously
9.  6.  all  the  m.  sat  trembling  in  the  court

2  Esd.  3.  16.  and  so  Jacob  became  a  great  m.

6.  3.  before  the  innumerable  m.  of  angels
Wisd.  6.  2.  you  that  glory  in  the  m.  of  nations

24.  the  m.  of  the  wise  is  the  welfare  of  the  world
Eccl.  5.  6.  he  will  be  pacified  for  the  m.  of  my  sins
6.  34.  stand  in  the  in.  of  the  elders,  and  cleave
7-  7 •  offend  not  against  the  m.  of  a  city
9.  God  will  look  upon  the  m.  of  my  oblations
14. 1.  that  is  not  pricked  with  the  m.  of  sins
16.  1.  desire  not  a  in.  of  unprofitable  children
3.  trust  not  in  their  life,  nor  respect  their  m.

26.  5.  the  gathering  together  qf  an  unruly  m.

34.  19.  nor  is  he  pacified  for  sin  by  m.  of  sacrifices

35. 18.  till  he  have  taken  away  the  m.  of  the  proud
42.  11.  lest  she  make  thee  ashamed  before  the  m.

51.  3.  according  to  the  m.  of  thy  mercies

Prayer  of  Manass.  for  the  m.  of  mine  iniquity
MUNITION.

1  Mac.  14. 10.  he  set  in  them  all  manner  of  m.

MURDER,  S.

2  Mac.  4.  3.  by  Simon’s  faction  m.  were  committed

35.  were  much  grieved  for  the  unj  ust  m.  of  the  man

MURDERED.

Wisd.  10.  3.  the  fury  wherewith  he  m.  his  brother

1  Mac.  2.  41.  as  our  brethren  that  were  in.

MURDERER.

2  Mac.  4.  38.  there  slew  he  tire  cursed  m.

9.  28.  thus  the  m.  and  blasphemer  died

MURDERERS.

Wisd.  12.  5.  also  those  merciless  m.  of  children
2  Mac.  12. 6.  became  against  those  m.  of  his  brethren
MURMUR.

2  Esd.  1.16.  but  even  to  this  day  do  ye  yet  m.

Eccl.  31.  24.  against  a  niggard  the  whole  city  m.
MURMURED.

2  Esd.  1.  15.  nevertheless  you  in.  there


Jud  5.  22.  the  people  standing  about  the  tent  m.

1  Mac.  11.  39.  all  the  host  m.  against  Demetrius

Tjr.  MURMURING.

Wisd.  1.  11.  beware  of  in.  which  is  unprofitable
Eccl.  46.7.  and  they  appeased  the  wicked  m

Tjr.  murmurings.

Ji  isd.  1.  10.  and  the  noise  of  m.  is  not  hid
MUSED.

2  Esd.  10.  25. 1  was  afraid,  and  in.  what  it  might  be

.MUSETH.

II  isd.  9. 15.  the  miniLhad  w.  upon  many  things

Eccl.  22. 6.  a  tale  out  of  seasonis  asm.  in  mournino-
32.  3.  with  sound  judgment,  and  hinder  not  m.
o,  concert  ot  rn,  in  a  banquet  of  wine

6.  so  is  the  melody  of  in.  with  pleasant  wine

40.  20.  wine  and  in.  rejoice  the  heart
49.  1.  it  is  as  m.  at  a  banquet  of  wine
1  Mac.  9.39.  to  meet  them  with  the  instruments  of  m
MUSICAL.

1  i£d'  5 ■  ~ ■  b.rou"ht  them  hack  with  m.  instruments
59.  priests  in  vestments  with  m.  instruments
Eccl.  44. 5.  such  as^tmmd^outm.  tunes,  and  recited

Eccl.  32. 4.  pour  not  out  words  where  there  is  a  m
MUSTERED.

Jud.  2.  15.  he  m.  the  chosen  men  for  the  battle
„ ,  .  MUTED.

lob.  2.  10.  the  sparrows  m.  dung  into  mine  eyes
_  ,  ,  MYRRII.

Eccl.  24.  15.  a  pleasant  odour  like  the  best  m.

Trr.  ,  „  MYSTERIES.

Wisd.  2. 22.  as  for  the  m.  of  God  they  knew  them  not
o.  £2.  and  I  will  not  hide  ?n.  from  you
8.  4.  she  is  privy  to  the  m.  of  the  knowledge  of  Goo
Eccl.  3.  19.  but  m.  are  revealed  unto  the  meek


N.


NABATHITES.

1  Mac.  5.  25.  where  they  met  with  the  N.

NABUCIIODONOSOR.

\Esd.  1.  41.  N.  also  took  of  the  holy  vessels
Tob.  14.  15.  of  N ineye  which  was  taken  by  N.
Jud.  1. 1.  in  the  twelfth  year  of  the  reign  of  N.

2. 19.  to  go  before  king  N.  in  the  voyage

3.  8.  that  alj  nations  should  worship  N.  only
6.  4.  saith  king  N.  lord  of  all  the  earth

11.  1. 1  never  hurt  any  that  was  willing  to  serve  N.

4.  entreat  thee  well,  as  they  do  the  servants  of  N.

7.  as  N  .  king  of  all  the  earth  liveth

12.  13.  which  serve  in  the  house  of  N.

Esth.  11.  4.  one  of  the  captives  which  N.  carried
Bar.  1.  9.  N.  king  of  Babylon,  6.  2.

11.  pray  for  the  life  of  N.  king  of  Babylon

12.  we  shall  live  under  the  shadow  of  N.

NAHUM.

2  Esd.  1.  40.  I  give  for  leaders,  N.  and  Abacuc

NAIL.

Eccl.  27. 2.  as  a  n.  sticks  between  the  joinings
NAKED.

Tob.  1.  17.  and  T  gave  my  clothes  to  then.

4.  16.  give  of  thy  garments  to  them  that  are  n.

2  Mac.  11.  12.  many  being  wounded,  escaped  n.
.NAME.

1  Esd.  1.  48.  made  him  swear  by  the  n.  of  the  Lord

4.  63.  the  temple  which  is  called  by  his  n.

6.  33.  the  Lord,  whose  n.  is  there  called  upon

8.  78.  be  left  us  a  n.  in  the  place  of  thy  sanctuary
88.  till  thou  hadst  left  us  neither  root,  seed,  nor  n.
ZEsd.  4.  1.  the  angel,  whose  n.  was  Uriel,  gave  me
Tob.  3.  15.  and  that  1  never  polluted  my  n.  nor  the
n.  of  my  father,  in  the  land  of  my  captivity

5.  11. 1  would  know,  brother,  thy  kindred  and  n.

11.  14.  he  said,  blessed  is  thy  n.  for  ever

13. 11.  shall  come  from  far  to  then,  of  the  Ld.  God
Jud.,  9.  7.  breakest  the  battle,  the  Lord  is  thy  n.
Esth.  10.  8.  assembled  to  destroy  the  n.  of  the  Jews
Wisd.  2.  4.  and  our  n.  shall  be  forgotten  in  time

14.  21.  ascribe  to  stocks  the  incommunicable  n.

19.  18.  in  a  psaltery,  notes  change  n.  of  the  tune

Eccl.  6.  1.  thereby  thou  shalt  inherit  an  ill  n.

22.  for  wisdom  is  according  to  her  n.

15.  6.  shall  cause  him  to  inherit  an  everlasting  *.

17.  10.  and  the  elect  shall  praise  his  holy  n.

22.  14.  what  is  the  n.  thereof  but  a  fool  l
37.  1.  a  friend  which  is  only  a  friend  in  n.

26.  and  his  n.  shall  be  perpetual
39.  9.  hisw.  shall  live  from  generation  to  generat,

11.  he  shall  leave  a  greater  n.  than  a  thousand
15.  magnify  hisw,.  and  shew  forth  his  praise

40. 19.  building  of  a  city  continueth  a  man's?*.

41.  11.  an  ill  n.  of  sinners  shall  be  blotted  out

12.  have  regard  to  thy  n.  for  that  shall  continue

13.  but  a  good  n.  endureth  for  ever

43.  8.  the  month  is  called  after  her  n.

44.  8.  there  be  that  have  left  a  n.  behind  them

14.  bodies  buried,  but  their  ?t.  liveth  for  ever

45.  15.  they  should  bless  the  people  in  his  n.

47.  16.  thy  n.  went  far  unto  the  islands

50.  20.  to  give  blessing,  and  to  rejoice  in  his  n.
Bar.  2. 11.  and  thou  hast  gotten  thyself  a  n.

32.  they  shall  praise  me,  and  think  on  my  h

3.  5.  but  think  upon  thy  power  and  thy  n.

4.  30.  he  that  gave  thee  that  n.  will  comfort  thee

1  Mac.  3. 14.  he  said,  I  will  get  me  a  n.  and  honour
4.  33.  let  all  those  that  know  thy  n.  praise  thee
5.57.  let  us  also  get  us  a?*,  and  go  fight  ag.  heathen

63.  renowned,  wheresoever  their  n.  was  heard  or

6.  44.  that  he  might  get  him  a  perpetual  n.

14.  10.  that  his  honourable  n.  was  renowned

2  Mac.  12.  13.  strong  city,  the  n.  of  it  was  Caspis

NAMED.

2  Esd.  5.  26.  of  fowls  thou  hast  n.  thee  one  dove
Tob.  3.  8.  neither  wast  thou  n.  after  any  of  them
Wisd.  14.  27.  for  worshipping  of  idols  not  to  be  it.
Eccl.  24.  18.  all  my  children,  which  are  n.  of  him
36.  12.  people,  whom  thou  hast  n.  thy  first-born
NAMES.

1  Esd.  6.  12.  and  we  required  the  n.  in  writing
8.  49.  the  catalogue  ot  whose  n.  were  shewed


NEC


N  E  V


N  I  N  [Apocrypha,


NAMETH.

Eccl.  23.  10.  who  sweareth  and  re.  God  continually
NAMING.

Keel.  23.  9.  nor  use  thyself  to  the  re.  of  the  holy  One
NANEA.

2  Mac.  1.13.  when  the  leader  came,  they  were  slain
in  tlie  temple  of  N.  by  the.  deceit  of  N.  priests
NARRATIONS.

2  Mac.  2.  24.  desire  to  look  into  the  re.  of  the  story
NARROW.

2  Ksd.  4.  but  put  the  case,  the  entrance  were  re.  7.
13. 43.  they  entered  by  the  re.  passages  of  the  river
NATHAN.

Keel.  47*  1.  after  him  rose  up  N.  to  prophesy
NATION.

1  Esd.  6.  33.  the  Lord  destroy  every  king  and  re.
'J'oi.  1.  17.  if  I  saw  any  of  my  re.  dead,  1  buried  him
2.  3.  one  of  our  re.  is  strangled  and  cast  out
4. 19.  for  every  re.  hath  not  counsel,  but  Lprdgiveth
Jud.  5.  10.  that  one  could  not  number  their  re.

21.  but  if  there  be  no  iniquity  in  their  re.

6.5.  vengeance  of  this  re.  that  came  out  of  Egypt
19.  O  Lord  God,  pity  the  low  estate  of  our  re.

15. 9.  thou  art  the  great  rejoicing  of  our  re.

Esth.  10.  9.  my  w.  is  this  Israel,  which  cried  to  God
Wisd.  10.  15.  from  the  n.  that  oppressed  them

!17.  2.  unrighteous  thought  to  oppress  the  holy  re.
Keel.  16.  6.  in  a  rebellious  re.  wrath  is  on  tire
28.  14.  hath  driven  them  from  re.  to  n.

49.  5.  he  gave  their  glory  to  a  strange  re.

50.  25.  and  the  third  is  no  re.

Bar.  4. 15.  a  shameless  re.  and  of  a  strange  language
Dan.  3.  14.  for  we  are  become  less  than  any  n.

1  Mac.  1.  34.  they  put  therein  a  sinful  n.

2. 10.  what  71.  hath  not  had  a  part  in  her  kingdom  ?

11.  42.  1  will  greatly  honour  thee  and  thy  n.

13.  6.  1  will  avenge  my  n.  and  the  sanctuary
14.  4.  he  sought  the  good  of  his  re.  in  such  wise

6.  and  he  enlarged  the  bounds  of  his  n.

29.  put  themselves  in  jeopardy,  and  resisting  the
enemies  of  their  n.  did  their  n.  great  honour
16.  3.  now  1  am  old,  go  out  and  fight  for  our  n.

2  Mac.  4.  2.  that  had  tendered  his  own  n.

10.  brought  his  own  n.  to  the  Greekish  fashion
6. 12.  not  tor  destruct.  but  for  a  chastening  of  our  n.
31.  not  only  to  young  men,  but  to  all  his  n.

7. 16.  think  not  that  our  n.  is  forsaken  of  God

37.  he  would  speedily  be  merciful  to  our  n.

38.  the  wrath  justly  brought  on  all  our  n.

10.  8.  should  be  kept  of  the  whole  n.  of  the  Jews
11.  25.  our  mind  is,  that  this  n.  shall  be  in  rest
14.  9-  be  careful  for  the  country  and  our  n.

34.  him  that  was  ever  a  defender  of  their  n.
NATIONS.

1  Esd.  1.  49.  passed  all  the  pollutions  of  all  re.

2  Esd.  3.  7.  of  whom  came  n.  tribes,  people
Tob.  3.  4.  for  a  proverb  of  reproach  to  all  71.

13.  5.  and  he  will  gather  us  out  of  all  n.

11.  many  n.  shall  come  from  far  to  the  Lord
14.  6.  and  all  ?t.  shall  turn  and  fear  the  Lord

7.  so  shall  all  re.  praise  the  Lord,  and  his  people
Jud.  16.  17.  wo  to  the  n.  that  rise  up  ag.  my  kindred
Esth.  13.  4.  that  had  laws  contrary  to  all  n.

14. 12.  O  king  of  the  n.  and  Lord  of  all  power
Wisd.  3.8.  they  shall  judge  the  71.  and  have  dominion
6.  2.  you  that  glory  in  the  multitude  of  rt.

8.  14.  and  the  n.  shall  be  subject  to  me
10.  5.  the  n.  in  their  wicked  conspiracy

12.  12-  shall  accuse  thee  for  the  re.  that  perish
Eccl.  4. 15.  whoso  gives  ear  to  her,  shall  judge  n.

10.  15.  Lord  hath  plucked  up  the  roots  of  proud  71.
17. 17-  in  the  division  of  the  71.  he  set  a  ruler
29.  18.  so  that  they  wandered  among  strange  n.

36.  2.  send  thy  fear  upon  all  71.  that  seek  not  thee

39.  10.  n.  shall  shew  forth  his  wisdom
44.  21.  that  he  would  bless  the  71.  in  his  seed
46.  6.  he  made  the  battle  to  fall  upon  the  71.

50.  25.  there  be  two  manner  of  71.  which  l  abhor
Bar.  4.  6.  ye  were  sold  to  71.  not  for  destruction
6.  4.  see  gods  of  gold,  which  cause  n.  to  fear

51.  it  shall  manifestly  appear  to  w.  and  kings
1  Mac.  1.  3.  Alexander  took  spoils  of  many  71.

4.  he  ruled  over  countries,  and  n.  and  kings
NATIVITY.

Wisd.  6.  22.  seek  out  from  the  beginning  of  her  re.
Eccl.  23. 14.  and  so  thou  curse  the  day  of  thy  71.
NATURE.

Wisd.  13. 1.  surely  vain  are  all  men  by  n.

19.  20.  the  water  forgat  his  own  quenching  re.

21.  the  icy  meat,  that  was  of  re.  apt  to  melt
NATURES.

Wisd.  7.  20.  to  know  the  re.  of  living  creatures
NAVE.

Eccl.  46.  1.  Jesus  son  of  N.  was  valiant  in  wars
NAUGHTY.

Wisd.  12.  10.  that  they  were  a  re.  generation
NAUGHTINESS.

Wisd.  4.  12.  the  bewitching  of  re.  doth  obscure
NAVIGABLE.

2  Mac.  5. 21.  in  his  pride  to  make  the  land  re.
NAVY.

1  Mac.  1. 17.  he  entered  into  Egypt  with  a  great  re.

2  Mac.  12.  9.  he  set  fire  on  the  haven  and  the  7 1.

14.  1.  Demetrius  with  a  great  power  and  re.
NAZAIUTES.

1  Mac.  3.  49.  and  the  N.  they  stirred  up
NEB  AT.

Eccl.  47.  23.  there  was  also  Jeroboam  the  son  of  N.
NECESSARY.

Tob.  5. 14.  wilt  thou  a  drachm  a  day,  and  things  re.
Eccl.  20.  32. 71.  patience  in  seeking  the  Lord
29.  3.  shalt  find  the  thing  that  is  re.  for  thee
1  Mac.  10.  39.  for  there,  expences  of  the  sanctuary
2  Mac.  1. 18.  we  thought  it  re.  to  certify  you
4.  23.  to  put  him  in  mind  of  certain  re.  matters

9.  21.  I  thought  it  71.  to  care  for  the  safety  of  all

13.  20.  Judas  conveyed  such  things  as  were  re.
NECESSITY.

2  Esd.  4.  42.  to  escape  the  re.  of  the  travail
Tob.  4.  9.  a  good  treasure  against  the  day  of  re.
Esth.  14. 16.  thou  knowest  my  re.  for  I  abhor
Wisd.  17.  17.  endured  7 1.  that  could  not  be  avoided


Eccl.  20. 14.  nor  vet  the  envious  for  his  re.
NECESSITIES.

2  Esd.  13. 19.  come  into  great  perils,  and  many  re.
NECK.

1  Esd.  1.  48.  he  rebelled,  and  hardened  his  re.

3.  6.  and  head-tire,  and  chain  about  his  re.

Tob.  11.  9.  Anna  tell  on  the  re.  of  her  son,  13.

Jud.  13.  8.  and  she  smote  twice  upon  his  re.

16. 9.  and  the  fauchion  passed  through  his  re.

Esth.  15. 11  his  sceptre,  and  laid  it  upon  her  re.

Eccl.  6. 24.  and  put  thy  re.  into  her  chain

7.  23  and  bow  down  their  re.  from  their  youth
30  12.  bow  down  his  re.  while  he  is  young

33. 20.  a  yoke  and  collar  do  bow  the  n.

51. 26.  put  your  re.  under  the  yoke
Bar.  2.  33.  they  snail  return  from  their  stiff  71.

4.  25.  but  shortly  thou  shalt  tread  upon  his  re.

NECKS.

1  Mac.  1.  61.  they  hanged  infants  about  their  re.

N  EED.

Wisd.  11.  5.  they  in  their  re.  were  benefited

13.  16.  for  it  is  an  image,  and  hath  re.  of  help

16.  25.  according  to  the  desire  of  them  that  had  re.
Eccl.  4.  3.  defer  not  to  give  him  that  is  in  re.

8.  9.  learn  to  give  answer  as  re.  requireth

11.  12.  another  that  is  slow  and  hath  re.  of  help

13.  6.  if  he  have  re.  of  thee  he  will  deceive  thee
18.  25.  when  rich,  think  on  poverty  and  re.

23.  18.  no  body  seeth  me,  what  re.  1  to  fear  ?

29.  2.  lend  to  thy  neighbour  in  time  of  his  re.

27.  my  brother  cometh,  I  have  re.  of  my  house

32.  7.  speak,  young  man,  if  there  be  re.  of  ihee

33.  31.  thou  hast  n.  of  him,  as  of  thine  own  soul

37.  8.  and  know  before  what  re.  he  hath

38. 12.  let  him  not  go  from  thee,  thou  hast  re.  of  him
39.  21.  a  man  re.  not  to  say,  what  is  this?

31.  they  shall  be  ready  on  earth  when  re.  is
42.  21.  and  he  hath  no  71.  of  any  counsellor

1  Mac.  3.  28.  be  ready  whenever  he  should  re.  them

12.  9.  albeit  we  71.  none  of  these  things

2  Mac.  2.  15.  if  ye  have  71.  thereof,  send  to  fetch

14.  35.  thou,  O  Lord  of  all,  who  hast  71.  of  nothing

NEEDETH.

Eccl.  40.  26.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  re.  not  to  seek  help
NEEDFUL.

Eccl.  39.33.  he  will  give  every  re.  thing  in  season
NEEDY.

Eccl.  4.  1.  make  not  the  71.  eyes  to  wait  long

5.  turn  not  away  thine  eyes  from  the  re.

31.  4.  and  when  he  leaveth  off,  he  is  still  re.

34.  21.  the  bread  of  the  re.  is  their  life
41.  2.  acceptable  is  thy  sentence  to  the  re.

NEGLECT.

Eccl.  7.  10.  and  re.  not  to  give  alms

38.  16.  cover  his  body,  and  n.  not  his  burial

NEGLECTED,  1NG.

Wisd.  3.  10.  ungodly  which  have  re.  the  righteous
2  Mac.  4. 14.  despising  the  temple,  and  71.  sacrifices
NEGLIGENT.

Eccl.  38.  9.  my  son,  in  thy  sickness  be  not  re.

Bar.  1.  19.  we  have  been  re.  in  not  hearing  him
N  EH  EMI  AS,  or  NEEMIAS.

1  Esd.  5.  8.  with  Jesus,  N.  and  Zacharias
40.  for  unto  them  said  N.  and  Atharias

Eccl.  49-  13.  among  the  elect  was  N.  who  raised  up

2  Mac.  1. 18.  given  when  N.  offered  sacrifice

20.  N.  being  sent  from  the  king  of  Persia

21.  N.  commanded  the  priests  to  sprinkle  wood
23.  the  rest  answering  thereunto  as  N.  did

31.  N.  commanded  water  to  be  poured  on  stones

33.  that  N.  had  purified  the  sacrifices  therewith

36.  N.  called  this  tiling  Naphthar.a  cleansing

2.  13.  in  the  writings  and  commentaries  of  N.
NEIGHBOUR.

2  Esd.  15.  19.  a  man  shall  have  no  pity  on  his  re.
Jud.  7.4.  they  said  every  one  to  his  re.  10.  19.

15.  2.  no  man  that  durst  abide  in  sight  of  his  re.
Eccl.  5. 12. if  thou  hast  understanding,  answer  thy  re.

6.  17.  for  as  he  is,  so  shall  his  71.  be  also

9.  14.  as  near  as  thou  canst,  guess  at  thy  re.

10.  6.  bear  not  hatred  to  thy  re.  for  every  wrong

13.  15.  and  every  man  loveth  his  71.

17.  14.  he  gave  commandment  concerning  his  re.

18.  13.  the  mercy  of  man  is  towards  his  re.

19.  17.  admonish  thy  re.  before  thou  threaten  him

22.  23.  be  faithful  to  thy  re.  in  his  poverty

27.  18.  so  hast  thou  lost  the  love  of  thy  re.

19.  so  hast  thou  let  thy  re.  go,  and  shalt  not  get  him

28.  2.  forgive  thy  re.  the  hurt  he  hath  done  thee

7.  remember  commands,  bear  no  malice  to  thy  re.

29.  1.  he  that  is  merciful  will  lend  to  his  re.

2.  lend  to  thy  re.  in  time  of  his  need,  and  pay  thou
thy  71.  again  in  due  season

14.  an  honest  man  is  surety  for  his  re.

20.  help  thy  re.  according  to  thy  power

31.  15.  judge  of  thy  re.  by  thyself,  be  discreet
31.  rebuke  not  thy  re.  at  wine,  despise  him  not
Sus.  62,  as  they  intended  to  do  to  their  re.

2  Mac.  6.  8.  there  went  a  decree  to  the  re.  cities
NEIGHBOURS.

1  Esd.  2. 6.  those,  I  say ,  that  are  his  re.  let  them  help

2  Esd.  9.  45.  I  wasglad  of  him,  so  were  all  my  71.
10.  2.  all  my  71.  rose  up  to  comfort  me

Tob.  2. 8.  but  my  re.  mocked  me,  and  said
Eccl.  15.5.  she’shall  exalt  him  above  his  re.

21.  22.  a  foolish  man’s  foot  is  soon  in  his  re.  house
25.  1.  the  unity  of  brethren  the  love  of  re.

18.  her  husband  shall  sit  among  his  re.

29.  5.  for  his  re.  money  he  will  speak  submissly

34.  22.  he  that  taketh  away  his  71.  living

Bar.  4.  24.  asre.  of  Sion  have  seen  your  captivity
2  Mac.  9.  25.  the  princes  that  are  borderers  and  re.
NEPHTIIALI.

Tob.  1. 1.  of  the  seed  of  Asael,  of  the  tribe  of  N.

2.  which  is  called  properly  N.  in  Galilee

4.  all  the  tribe  of  N.  tell  from  Jerusalem

5.  the  house  of  my  father  N.  sacrificed  to  Baal

7.  3.  to  whom  they  said,  we  are  of  the  sons  of  N.

NEVER.

Wisd.  2.  2.  we  shall  be  as  though  we  had  71.  been
3. 15.  the  root  of  wisdom  shall  re.  fall  away

6.  12.  wisdom  is  glorious,  and  re.  fadeth  away


Wisd.  7. 10.  light  that  cometh  from  her  re.  goeth  out

14.  she  is  a  treasure  to  men  that  re.  failed:

15.  17.  whereas  he  lived  once,  but  they  re.

Eccl.  7.36.  remember  the  end,  thou  shalt  re.  do  amiss

12.  10.  71.  trust  thine  enemy,  for  as  iron  rusteth
22. 6.  stripes  and  correction  of  wisdom  are  re.  out  or

23.  7.  keepeth  it,  shall  re.  be  taken  in  his  lips

11.  the  plague  shall  re.  depart  from  his  house

40.  23.  a  friend  and  companion  71.  meet  amiss
44.  9.  who  are  perished  as  tho’  they  had  re.  been
NEW.

1  Esd.  5.  52.  of  the  re.  moons,  and  of  all  holy  feasts

6.  9.  building  an  house  to  the  Lord,  great  and  re.

25.  one  row  of  71.  wood  of  that  country

2  Esd.  1.  31.  for  your  re.  moons  have  I  forsaken
Jud.  8.  6.  save  the  eyes  of  the  re.  moons,  and  the  re.

moons,  and  the  feasts  and  solemn  days  of  Israel

16.  2.  tune  to  him  a  71.  psalm,  exalt  him

13.  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  re.  song
Wisd.  7.  27.  remaining,  she  maketh  all  things  re.
Eccl.  9.  10.  forsake  not  an  old  friend,  for  the  re.  is

not  comparable  to  him,  a  re.  friend  is  as  re.  wine

24.  25.  as  'l'ygris  in  the  time  of  the  re.  fruit

36.  6.  shew  re.  signs  and  make  strange  wonders

1  Mac.  4.  47.  they  built  a  re.  altar  as  the  former
49.  they  made  also  re.  holy  vessels,  and  brought
53.  offered  on  the  re.  altar  of  burnt  offering

2  Mac.  2.  29.  as  the  master-builder  of  a?:,  house
4. 11.  he  brought  up  re.  customs  against  the  law

NEWLY.

Jud.  4.  3.  were  re.  returned  from  the  captivity
Wisd.  11.  18.  O  beasts  full  of  rage,  re.  created
2  Mac.  10.28.  the  sun  being  re.  risen,  they  joined
NEWS.

2  Mac.  9.  3.  re.  was  brought  what  had  happened
N  EXT.

1  Esd.  3.  7.  he  shall  sit  71.  to  Darius  for  his  wisdom
Tob.  1.  22.  Sarchedonus  appointed  him  re.  to  him
Jud.  2.4.  called  Holofernes,  who  was  re.  to  him
Esth.  13.  6.  who  is  over  the  aff  airs,  and  is  re.  to  us

16.  11.  honoured  as  the  re.  person  unto  the  king

2  Mac.  4.  41.  taking  handfuls  of  dust  that  was  re.

N1CANOR.

1  Mac.  3.  38.  chose  N.  and  Gorgias,  mighty  men

7.  26.  then  the  king  sent  N.  one  of  his  princes

27.  so  N.  came  to  Jerusalem  with  a  great  force
44.  when  N.  host  saw  that  he  was  slain,  they  fled

2  Mac.  8.  9.  then  choosing  N.  son  of  Patroclus

14.  being  sold  by  the  wicked  N.  before  they  met

34.  as  for  that  most  ungracious  N.  who  brought
12.2.  N.  governor  of  Cyprus  would  notsuffer  them
14.12.  calling  N.  who  had  been  master  of  elephants

14.  then  the  heathen  came  toN.  by  flocks

30.  when  Maccabeus  saw  that  N.  began  to  be
churlish  to  him,  he  withdrew  himself  from  N

15.  6.  so  N.  determined  to  set  up  a  monument

28.  they  knew  that  N.  lay  dead  in  his  harness

30.  Judas  comanded  to  strike  off  N .  head

32.  he  shewed  them  vile  N.  head  and  the  hand

33.  he  had  cut  out  the  tongue  of  ungodly  N.

35.  he  hanged  also  N .  head  on  the  tower

37.  thus  went  it  with  N  .  and  from  that  time

NIGGARD.

Eccl.  14.  3.  riches  are  not  comely  for  a  re.

10.  a  wicked  eye  is  a  re.  at  his  table

31.  24.  against  a  re.  the  city  shall  murmur

NIGGARDNESS.

Eccl.  31.  24.  testimonies  of  his  re.  not  be  doubted
NIGH.

Eccl.  12.  13.  or  any  such  as  come  re.  wild  beasts
14.  25.  he  shall  pitch  his  tent  re.  to  her

35.  17.  till  it  come  re.  he  will  not  be  comforted
NIGHT.

1  Esd.  1. 14.  the  priests  offered  fat  until  re.

Tob.  8.  9.  so  they  slept  both  that  re.

Jttd.  6. 21.  called  on  the  God  of  Israel  all  that  n,.

7.  5.  they  remained  and  watched  all  that  re.

8.  33.  you  shall  stand  this  re.  in  the  gate

11.  3.  thou  shalt  live  this  re.  and  hereafter
5. 1  will  declare  no  lie  to  my  lord  this  re.

17.  is  religious,  and  serveth  G.  of  heaven  day  and
71.  thy  servant  will  go  out  by  re.  to  the  valley
13. 14.  destroyed  our  enemies  by  my7  hands  this  re.
Wisd.  7.  30.  for  after  this  cometh  re.

10.  17.  and  a  light  of  stars  in  the  re.  season

17.  2.  and  fettered  with  the  bonds  of  alongre.

5.  nor  stars  endure  to  lighten  that  horrible  re.

14.  but  they  sleeping  the  same  sleep  that  re.

21.  over  them  only  was  spread  an  heavy  re.

18.  6.  of  that  re.  were  our  fathers  certified

14.  that  71.  was  in  the  midst  of  her  swift  course
Eccl.  36.  26.  lodges  wherever  the  re.  taketh  him

38.  27.  every  carpenter  that  laboureth  re.  and  day
40.  5.  his  re.  sleep  doth  change  his  knowledge
Bar.  2.  25.  Jiey  are  cast  out  to  the  frosts  of  the  re.
Bel  15.  in  the  re.  came  the  priests  with  wives

1  Mac.  4.  5.  in  the  mean  season  came  Gorgias  by  71.
5.  29.  from  whence  he  removed  by  re.  and  went

9.  13.  the  battle  continued  from  morning  till  7u
58.  Bacchides,  who  shall  take  them  all  in  one  re.

16.  4.  who  went  out  and  rested  that  re.  in  Modin

2  Mac.  8.  7.  specially  took  he  advantage  of  the  re.

12.  6.  he  came  and  burnt  the  haven  by  re.

I. 3.  10.  commanded  to  call  on  the  Lord  re.  and  day

15.  he  went  into  the  king’s  tent  by  re.  and  slew

NIGHTS.

Tob.  10.  7*  she  ceased  not  whole  71.  to  bewail
Dare.  3.  47.  O  ye  re.  and  days,  bless  ye  the  Lord
N  IN  E.

2  Esd.  4.  40.  she  hath  fulfilled  her  re.  months

8.  8. 71.  months  doth  thy  workmanship  endure
Eccl.  25.7-  there  be  re.  things  I  have  judged  happy
2  Mac.  5.27.  but  Judas  with  re.  others  withdrew
7.  27.  that  bare  thee  re.  months  in  my  womb
12. 10.  when  gone  from  thence  n.  furlongs
N I  NEVE.

Tob.  1.3.  my  brethren,  who  came  with  me  to  N.

10.  when  we  were  carried  away  captives  to  N.

17.  or  if  I  saw  any  cast  about  the  walls  of  N.

22.  Achiacharus  entreating,  1  returned  to  N.

7-  3.  of  N  aphthali,  which  are  captives  in  N .

II.  1.  went  on  his  way  till  they  drew  near  to  N.

671


Apocryph  NOT


O  B  E


OFF


Tob.  14.  4.  which  Jonas  the  prophet  spake  of  N.

8.  now,  my  son,  depart  not  out  of  N  .  because

10.  bury  me  decently,  but  tarry  no  longer  at  N.

15.  but  he  heard  of  the  destruction  of  N.

Tvd.  1. 1.  who  reigned  in  N.  the  great  city

16.  so  he  returned  afterward  to  N.

MO  AH.

2  Esd.  3. 11.  thou  leftest  N.  with  his  household
Eccl.  44. 17.  N.  was  found  perfect  and  righteous
NOBILITY.

TVisd.  8. 3.  she  magnified  her  n.  the  Lord  loved  her
Eccl.  22. 10.  children  do  stain  the  n.  of  her  kindred
NOBLE.

Eccl.  10.  22.  whether  he  be  rich,  n.  or  poor

18.  4.  and  who  shall  find  out  his  n.  acts  ?

1  Mac.  3. 32.  so  he  left  Lysias  a  n.  man  to  oversee
8. 2.  their  wars  and  n.  acts  which  they  had  done

2  Mac.  6.  31.  death  for  an  example  of  n.  courage

12.42.  besides,  n.  Judas  exhorted  the  people

14. 42.  otherwise  than  beseemed  his  n.  birth

NOBLES.

1  Esd.  1.  38.  and  he  bound  Joacim  and  the  n.

8.  26.  hath  honoured  me  in  the  sight  of  king,  and  n.
Jv.d.  2.  2.  so  he  called  unto  him  all  his  ?i.

Bar.  1. 4.  in  the  hearing  of  the  n.  and  elders
N  OB  LEST.

Wisd.  18.  12.  the  n.  offspring  was  destroyed
N  OE.

Tob.  4. 12.  we  are  the  children  of  N.  Abraham

NOISE.

1  Esd.  5.  66.  came  to  know  what  the  n.  should  mean

2  Esd.  5.  7-  the  sea  shall  make  a  n.  in  the  night
Jud.  14.  9.  the  people  made  a  joyful  11.  in  their  city

19.  there  was  a  great  n.  throughout  their  camp
Esth.  11.  5.  behold,  a  n.  of  tumult  with  thunder
Wisd.  1.  10.  the  n.  of  nnirmurings  is  not  hid

5. 11.  parted  with  the  violent  n.  and  motion

17. 18.  or  a  melodious  n.  of  birds  among  branches

18. 10.  a  lamentable  n.  was  carried  abroad
Eccl.  38. 28.  the  n.  of  the  hammer  is  ever  in  his  ears

40. 13.  the  goods  of  the  unjust  shall  vanish  with  n.

43.  17.  the  n.  of  thunder  makes  the  earth  tremble
45.  9.  there  might  be  a  sound  and  a  n.  made,  that

might  be  heard  in  the  temple  for  a  memorial
46. 17.  with  a  great  n.  made  his  voice  to  be  heard
50.  16.  the  sons  of  A.  made  a  great  ?i.  to  be  heard

1  Mac.  9. 13.  the  earth  shook  at  the  n.  of  the  armies
41.  the  n.  of  their  melody  into  lamentation

NOISED.

Jud.  10. 18.  her  coming  was  71.  among  the  tents
NOISES.

Wisd.lJ. 4.  but  n.  as  of  waters  falling  down,  sounded
NOISOME.

2  Mac.  9.  9.  his  smell  was  n.  to  all  his  army

NONE.

Jud.  6.  4.  71.  of  my  words  shall  be  in  vain,  9.

9.  14.  there  is  n.  other  that  protecteth  Israel

16. 14.  there  is  n.  that  can  resist  thy  voice
Eccl.  11.  28.  judge  71.  blessed  before  his  death

36. 10.  that  say,  that  there  is  n.  other  but  me

39.  17*  n.  may  say,  what  is  this  ?  why  is  that?

18.  and  n.  can  hinder  when  he  will  save

44.  19.  in  glory  was  there  71.  like  unto  him

45.  13.  before  him  there  was  n.  such

51.7-  1  looked  for  succour,  but  there  was  71.

Bar.  3.23.  n.  of  these  have  known  way  of  wisdom

25.  great,  and  hath  n.  end,  high,  unmeasurable

6.  73.  better  is  the  just  man  that  hath  n.  idols
Bel  41.  and  there  is  n.  other  besides  thee

1  Mac.  3. 45.  71.  of  her  children  went  in  or  out
7. 17-  bloodshed,  and  there  v’as  n.  to  bury  them

8.  14.  yet  for  all  this  n.  of  them  wore  a  crown
14. 12.  sat  under  his  vine,  there  was  71.  to  fray  them

2  Mac.  5. 10.  he  had  n.  to  mourn  for  him

NORTH.

2  Esd.  15.  34.  clouds  from  the  n.  to  the  south
Jud.  16.  4.  out  of  the  mountains  from  the  n.
NORTHERN.

Eccl.  43. 17.  so  doth  the  71.  storm  and  whirlwind
NOSES.

Wisd.  15. 15.  which  have  not  71.  to  draw  breath
NOSTRILS.

Wisd.  2.  2.  for  the  breath  in  our  n.  is  as  smoke
NOTABLE.

2  Mac.  3. 26.  two  other  young  men  n.  in  strength

6.  28.  leave  a  71.  example  to  such  as  be  young
14.  33.  and  l  will  erect  a  71.  temple  to  Bacchus

NOTABLY.

2  Mac.  14. 31.  he  was  n.  prevented  by  Judas’  policy
NOTES.

Wisd.  19. 18.  as  n.  change  the  name  of  the  tune

NOMADES.

2  Mac.  12.  11.  the  N.  of  Arabia  being  overcome

NOTHING.

1  Esd.  8.  7.  he  omitted  n.  of  the  law  of  the  Lord

9.  51.  and  send  part  to  them  that  have  n.

54.  they  went  to  give  part  to  then)  that  had  n.

2  Esd.  5.  12.  then  shall  men  hope,  but  n.  obtain
Tob.  4.  17.  but  give  n.  to  the  wicked

10. 5.  now'  1  care  for  n.  my  son,  since  I  let  thee  go

12.  11.  surely  I  will  keep  close  71.  from  you
Esth.  10.  5.  a  dream,  and  n.  thereof  hath  failed

14. 11.  give  not  thy  sceptre  to  them  that  be  71.
Wisd.  2. 11.  what  feeble  is  found  to  be  71.  w'orth
4.  5.  the  fruit  not  ripe  to  eat,  yea,  meet  for  71.

7.  8. 1  esteemed  riches  71.  in  comparison  of  her

8. 7 •  men  can  have  71.  more  profitable  in  their  lives

9.  6.  without  wisdom  he  shall  be  n.  regarded

11.  24.  thou  abhorrest  n.  which  thou  hast  made

13. 10.  resemblances  of  beasts,  or  a  stone  good  for  n.

17.  12.  fear  is  n.  but  a  betraying  of  succours

Eccl.  6. 15.  71.  doth  countervail  a  faithful  friend
8. 16.  for  blood  is  as  71.  in  his  sight

10.  6.  do  71.  at  all  by  injurious  practices

13.  4.  but  if  thou  have  n.  he  will  forsake  thee

18. 6.  works  of  L.  there  may  be  71.  taken  from  them

22.  let  n.  hinder  thee  to  pay  thy  vow  in  time

20.  23.  and  maketh  him  his  enemy  for  n.

23.  27-  w.  better  than  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  71.  is
sweeter  than  to  take  heed  to  commandments

26. 14.  n. so  much  worth  as  a  mind  well  instructed

32. 19.  do  7u  without  advice,  then  repent  not

672


Eccl.  33.  29.  and  without  discretion  do  ».

39-  19.  and  71.  can  be  hid  from  his  eyes
20.  and  there  is  71.  wonderful  before  him

40.  6.  a  little  or  n.  is  his  rest,  and  he  is  in  sleep

7.  awaketh,  and  marvelleth  that  the  fear  was  71.
41. 1.  unto  the  man  that  hath  n.  to  vex  him
42.  21.  to  him  may  71.  be  added,  nor  diminished

24.  and  he  hath  made  71.  imperfect
Bar.  6.  17.  a  vessel  is  71.  worth  when  it  is  broken

26.  they  declare  to  men  that  they  be  »».  worth

28.  but  to  the  poor  they  give  n.  of  it

70.  for  as  a  scarecrow  in  a  garden  keepethn.

1  Mac.  2  63.  and  his  thought  is  come  to  n.

2  Mac.  4.  25  bringing  n  worthy  the  priesthood

7.  12.  so  that  hen.  regarded  the  pains

9.  7.  howbeit,  he  71.  ceased  from’ his  bragging

12.  4.  to  live  in  peace,  and  suspecting  71.

14.  35.  O  Lord  of  all  things,  who  hast  need  of  n.
NOUGHT.

1  Esd.  1.  56.  till  they  had  brought  them  all  to  71.

2  Esd.  2.  33.  when  I  came  to  them,  they  set  me  at  n.

8.  59.  it  was  not  his  will  men  should  come  to  71.
Jud.  4. 1.  spoiled  temples,  and  brought  them  to  7i.

13. 17.  brought  to  71.  the  enemies  of  thy  people
Esth.  13.  15.  their  eyes  are  on  us  to.bring  us  to  71.
Wisd.  1.  11.  no  word  so  secret  that  shall  go  for  71.

16.  they  consumed  to  71.  and  made  a  covenant
Eccl.  40.  14.  so  shall  transgressors  come  to  71.

47.7.  fie  brought  to  71.  the  Philistines  his  adversaries

NOURISH.

2  Esd.  2.  25.  n.  thy  children,  O  thou  good  nurse
Tob.  2.  10.  moreover  Achiacharus  did  n.  me
Eccl.  28.  5.  if  he  that  is  but  flesh  71.  hatred
Bar.  4.  11.  with  joy  did  I  n.  them,  but  sent  them

1  Mac.  6.  15.  he  should  71.  him  up  for  the  kingdom

2  Mac.  10.  15.  they  went  about  to  n.  war

NOURISHED.

1  Esd.  4.  16.  they  n.  them  that  planted  vineyards

2  Esd.  8.  11  that  the  thing  fashioned  may  ben.

9.  46.  and  1  n.  him  with  a  great  travel

Jud. 5. 10.  while  they  werett.  and  became  a  multitude
Wisd.  16.23.  that  the  righteous  might  be  n.

2  Mac.  7-  27-  gave  thee  suck  three  years,  and  n.  thee

10.  14.  he  71.  war  continually’  with  the  Jews

NOURISHETH.

Wisd.  16.  25.  was  obedient  to  thy  grace  that  n.

26.  it  is  not  the  growing  of  fruits  that  n.  a  rnan
Eccl.  17.  18.  his  first-born  he  n.  with  discipline
NUMBER.

1  Esd.  2.  9.  with  many  free  gifts  of  a  great  n.

13.  this  was  the  n.  of  them,  1000  golden  cups

8.  63.  all  was  delivered  them  by  n.  and  weight

2  Esd.  2.  38.  behold  the  n.  of  those  that  be  sealed

3.  7.  came  tribes,  people,  and  kindreds,  out  of  n.

29.  when  I  had  seen  impieties  without  n.

4.  37.  by  71.  hath  he  numbered  the  times
16.  56.  and  he  knoweth  the  n.  of  them

Jud.  2.  20.  for  the  multitude  was  without  n.

5.  10.  so  that  one  could  not  n.  their  nation
Wisd.  4.  8.  nor  that  is  measured  by  n.  of  years

11.  20.  all  things  in  measure,  and  n.  and  weight
Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  n.  the  sand  of  the  sea  ?

7.  1 6.  n.  not  thyself  among  the  multitude  of  sinners
16.  17.  among  such  an  infinite  n.  of  creatures

18.  5.  who  shall  7 1.  the  strength  of  his  majesty  ?

9.  the.  71.  of  a  man’s  days  at  most  are  100  years
38.  29-  who  maketh  all  his  work  by  71.

42.  7.  deliver  all  things  in  n.  and  weight
45.  11.  after  the  n,  of  the  tribes  of  Israel
48.  2.  and  by  his  zeal  he  diminished  their  n.

Bar.  2.  29-  multitude  shall  be  turned  into  a  small  n.
Prayer  of  Manas s.  seemed  above  71.  of  sands  of  sea
NUMBERED.

Wisd.  5.  5.  how  is  he  n.  amohg  the  children  of  God  !
Eccl.  1.  9.  he  created  her,  and  saw  her,  and  n.  her
37.  25.  the  days  of  the  life  of  man  may  be  n.
NUMENIUS.

1  Mac.  12.  16.  we  chose  N.  the  son  of  Antiochus

NURSE.

2  Esd.  1.  28.  pray’ed  you,  as  aw.  her  young  babes
2.25.  O  thou  good  71.  stablish  their  feet

NURSED.

Tl  isd.  7.  4. 1  was  n.  in  swaddling  clothes
Bar.  4.  8.  ye  have  grieved  Jerusalem  that  n.  you
NURTURE.

Wisd.  3.  11.  whoso  despiseth  n.  he  is  miserable
Eccl.  22.10.  haughty  through  disdain  aic  l  want  of  n.
NURTURED.

Eccl.  21.  23.  he  that  is  well  71.  will  stand  without
22.  3.  an  evil  71.  son  is  the  dishonour  of  his  father
31.  19.  a  little  is  sufficient  for  a  man  well  n.
40.29.  a  wise  man  well  n.  will  beware  thereof
NURTUREDST.

2  Esd.  8. 12.  thou  71.  it  in  thy’  law,  and  reformedst  it

NURTURETH.

Eccl.  18.  13.  he  reproveth,  and  71.  and  teacheth

o.

OATH.

1  Esd.  8.  93.  let  us  make  an  o.  to  the  Lord
96.  Esdras  took  an  0.  of  the  chief  of  the  priests
Tob.  8.  20.  Raguel  had  said  <0  him  by  an  o.

Jttd.  8.  11.  touching  this  o.  which  ye  made

30.  compelled  us  to  bring  an  0.  op  ourselves
Eccl.  44.  21.  therefore  he  assured  him  by  an  o.

Bar.  2.  34.  the  land  which  I  promised  with  an  0.

1  Mac.  6.  61.  the  princes  made  an  o.  to  them
62.  but  he  brake  his  0.  that  he  had  made

7.  18.  for  they  have  broken  the  covenant  and  o.

2  Mac.  14.  33.  and  he  made  an  0.  in  this  manner

OATHS.

Wisd.  18.  6.  to  what  o.  they  had  given  credence
22.  alleging  o.  and  covenants  made  with  fathers
2  Mac.  4.  34.  who  gave  him  his  right  hand  with  0.

7.  24.  but  also  he  assured  him  with  0.

15.  10.  shewing  him  the  breach  of  o.

OBEDIENT.

2  Esd.  1.  8.  for  they  have  not  been  0.  to  my  law
Wisd.  16.  25.  it  was  0.  to  thy  grace  that  nourisheth
Eccl.  3.  6.  he  that  is  0.  unto  the  Lord  shall  be


Eccl.  33.  28.  if  he  be  not  o.  nut  on  more  heavy  fetter*
42.  23.  for  all  uses,  and  they  are  all  o.

Bar.  2.  5.  we  have  not  been  o.  to  his  voice
6. 60.  being  sent  to  do  their  offices,  are  o.

OBEY.

1  Esd.  4.  10.  all  his  people  and  armies  o.  him

5.  69.  for  we  likewise,  as  you  do,  o.  your  Lord

8.  94.  as  many  as  do  o.  the  law  of  the  Lord

2  Esd.  1.  24.  thou  Judah  wouldst  note,  me
Jud.  2.  3.  all  that  did  not  o.  the  commandment
Eccl.  18.  3.  gov.  the  world,  and  all  things  o.  his  will
2  Mac.  7.  30.  I  will  note,  the  king’s  commandment

.  OBEYED..

I  Esd.  4.  12.  be  mightiest,  when  in  such  sort  he  iso.
OBEYETH.

Eccl.  24.  22.  that  0.  me  shall  never  be  confounded
Bar.  3.  33.  calleth  it,  and  it  o.  him  with  tear
OBJECTETH.

Wisd.  2.  12. 0,  to  our  infamy  the  transgressings
.  OBLATION.

Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  there  at  this  time  o.  or  intense
OBLATIONS.

1  Esd.  5.  52.  and  after  that  the  continual  0.

Eccl.  7.  9-  God  will  look  on  the  multitude  ofmyo.
50.  13.  and  the  0.  of  the  Lord  in  their  hands

1  Mac.  15.  5.  how  I  confirm  to  thee  all  the  0.

OBSCURE.

TVisd.  4.  12.  doth  o.  things  that  are  honest
OBSCURITY.

Esth.  11.  8.  ami  lo,  a  day  of  darkness  and  o.
OBSERVE.

2  Esd.  7.  21.  they  should  o.  to  avoid  punishment
Eccl.  4.  20.  0.  the  opportunity  and  beware  of  evil

13.  13.  o.  and  take  heed,  for  thou  walkest  in  peril

18.  27.  a  wise  man  will  fear,  but  a  fool  will  not  0.

27.  12.  if  among  the  indiscreet,  o.  the  time

1  Mae.  2.  67-  take  all  those  that  o.  the  law

2  Mac.  6.  8.  that  they  should  o.  the  same  fashions

OBSERVED.

2  Esd.  9.  32.  our  fathers  o.  not  thy  ordinances
Eccl.  19.  9.  he  heard  and  0.  thee  and  will  hate
OBTAIN.

2  Esd.  4.  24.  and  we  are  not  worthy  to  o.  mercy
5.  12.  then  shall  men  hope,  but  nothing  o.

14.  34.  and  after  death  ye  shall  o.  mercy

TT  isd.  8. 13.  by  means  of  her  o.  immortality'

21.  perceived  that  I  could  not  0.  her
Eccl.  11.  10.  thou  shalt  not  o.  norescape  by  fleeing

15.  1.  that  hath  knowledge  of  the  law  shall  o.  her
1  Mac.  2.  64.  for  by  it  shall  you  0.  glory

OBTAINED.

1  Esd.  6.  5.  the  elders  of  the  Jews  o.  favour
Esth.  J6.  11.  Aman  had  so  far  forth  o.  favour
Eccl.  46.  9.  and  bis  seed  o.  it  for  an  heritage

1  Mac.  2.  54.e.  the  covenant  of  everlasting  priesthood

15.  9.  when  we  have*?.  our  kingdom  we  will  honour

2  Mac.  5.  7-  howbeit  he  0.  not  the  principality
15.  5.  he  o.  not  to  have  his  wicked  will  done

OBTA1NETH.

Eccl.  19. 18.  and  wisdom  0.  the  love  of  God
OBTAINING.

Eccl.  10. 21.  fear  of  Lord  goeth  before  0.  of  authority
OCCASION.

Wisd.  14.  21.  this  was  an  0.  to  deceive  the  world
Eccl.  4.  5.  and  give  him  none  0.  to  curse  thee
23.  refrain  not  when  there  is  o.  to  do  good
OCCUPIED.

Eccl.  12.  3.  no  good  to  him  that  is  always  0.  in  evil

38.  25.  and  that  is  o.  in  their  labours

39.  1.  he  that  is  o.  in  the  meditation  of  the  law  of

the  Most  High,  will  be  o.  in  prophecies
2  Mac.  8.  27.  they  o.  themselves  about  the  sabbath

10.  15.  the  Idumeans  kept  the  Jews  0.

OCCUPIETH.

2  Esd.  16.  42.  he  that  0.  merchandise  hath  no  profit
ODIOUS.

TVisd.  12.  4.  thou  hatedst  it  for  doing  most  0.  works
ODOLLAM.

2  Mac.  12.  38.  so  Judas  came  into  the  city  O.
ODOUR.

Eccl.  24.  15. 1  yielded  a  pleasant  0.  like  myrrh
ODOURS.

2  Esd.  6.  44.  there  were  0.  of  wonderful  smell ,
OFFENCE.

Jud.  12.  2.  I  will  not  eat  thereof,  lest  there  be  c.
Wisd.  14. 31.  that  punisheth  the  0.  of  the  ungodly
Eccl.  18.  27.  a  wise  man  will  beware  of  <?.

19.  8.  if  thou  canst  without*?,  reveal  them  not
23.  11.  acknowledge  not,  he  maketh  a  double  c.

30.  13.  lest  his  lewd  behaviour  be  an  0.  to  thee

41.  18.  of  an  o.  before  a  judge  and  ruler

1  Mac.  5.  4.  who  had  been  an  o.  unto  the  people

OFFENCES.

Prayer  of  Manass.  and  1  have  multiplied  o.
OFFEND.

Wtsd.  12.  2.  therefore  chastenest  thou  them  that  o.
15.  13.  knoweth  himself  to  o.  above  all  others
Eccl.  7.  7-  o.  not  against  the  multitude  of  a  city
17.  25.  make  thy  prayer  before  his  face,  and  0.  less
19.  4.  that  sinneth  shall  0.  against  his  own  soul
23.  11.  if  he  shall*?,  his  sin  shall  be  upon  him

31.  10.  who  might  0.  and  hath  not  offended

17.  leave  off,  and  be  not  unsatiable  lest  thou  o.

30.  drunkenness  increased)  rage  of  a  fool  tilt  lie  o.
OFFENDED.

2  Esd.  12.  41 .  what  have  we  o.  that  thou  forsakest  us  ?
Wisd.  10.  8.  that  in  the  things  wherein  they  o.

12.  2.  putting  in  remembrance  wherein  they  o.
Eccl.  19.  16.  who  hath  not  0.  with  his  tongue?

25.2.  and  I  am  greatly  o.  at  their  life

31.  10.  who  might  offend  and  hath  not  0.  ?'

32.  15.  but  the  hypocrite  will  be  o.  thereat

OFFENDETH.

Bar.  6.  14.  that  cannot  put  to  death  one  that  o.  him
OFFENDING.

TVisd.  2. 12.  he  upbraideth  us  with  our  0.  the  law
OFFER.

1  Esd.  1. 6. 0.  the  passover  in  order  and  make  ready

9.  20.  and  to  0.  rams  to  make  reconcilement

Eccl. ’1 .  9.  when  I  0.  to  God,  he  will  accept  it
Bar.  1.  10.  prepare  ye  manna,  and  *?.  on  the  altar

2  Mac.  4.  40.  he  began  first  to  0.  violence


O  P  E


O  II I)


O  W  I  IAhookyph*.


2  Mac.  7-37-but  l  n.  up  my  body  and  life  for  the  laws

12.  -13.  lie  sent  it  to  Jerusalem  toe.  a  sin-offering

0 FFERED.

Tob.  5.  13.  we  o.  the  first-born  and  tenths  of  fruits
Keel.  46.  16.  when  he  o.  the  sucking  lamb
2  Mac.  1.  18.  given  us  when  Neemias  o.  sacrifice

3.  32.  o.  a  sacrifice  for  the  health  of  the  man

10.  3.  they  o.  a  sacrifice  after  two  years

OFFEREf H.

Wisd.  17.  12.  fear  betraying  the  succours  reason  o.
Eccl.  3b.  1.  he  that  taketh  heed  o.  a  peace  offering
2.  he  that  requiteth  a  good  turn  0.  fine  Hour
OFFERING.

2  Esd.  10. 45.  wherein  there  was  no  0.  made  in  her
Eecl.  14.  11.  my  son,  give  the  Lord  his  due  o.

30.  19.  what  good  doeth  the  0.  to  an  idol !

34.18.  a  thing  wrongfully  gotten,  his  0.  isridiculous
20.  whoso  brings  an  o.  of  the  goods  of  the  poor

35.  6.  0.  of  the  righteous  maketh  the  altar  fat

50.  14.  that  he  might  adorn  the  0.  of  Most  High
2  Mac.  4.  24.  o.  more  than  Jason  by  300  talents

14.  31.  the  priests  that  were  o.  usual  sacrifices
OFFERINGS.

1  Esd.  6.  31 .  thato.  may  be  made  to  the  most  high  G.

2  E-srf.lO.  46. Solomon  builded  the  city, and  offered  0.
Jud.  16. 18.  they  offered  their  burnt-o.  and  gifts
Ecci.  34. 19.  is  not  pleased  with  the  o.  of  the  wicked

35.  1.  he  thatkeepeth  the  law,  brings  0.  enough
OFFICE.

1  Esd.  5.  38.  priests  that  usurped  0.  of  the  priesthood
Eccl.  32.  2.  when  done  all  thy  o.  take  thy  place

45.  15.  should  execute  the  0.  of  the  priesthood

OFFICES.

Bar.  6.  60.  being  sent  to  do  their  0.  are  obedient
OFFICERS.

Eccl.  10.  2.  as  the  judge  is  himself,  so  are  his  o.

1  Mac.  10.  33. 1  will  that  all  my  0.  remit  tributes
41.  all  the  overplus  which  the  o.  paid  not  in

13.  37-  to  write  to  our  0.  to  confirm  immunities

OIL.

1  Esd.  6.  30.  and  also  corn,  salt,  wine,  and  0.

Jud.  10.  5.  then  she  gave  her  maid  a  cruse  of  0.

11.  13.  resolved  to  spend  the  tenths  of  wine  and  0.
Eccl.  39.  26.  the  blood  of  the  grape,  o.  and  clothing

45. 15.  Moses  anointed  him  with  holy  o.

Sus.  17.  she  said,  bring  mec.  and  washing-balls
OINTMENT,  S.

2  Esd.  2.  12.  they  shall  have  the  treeoflife  for  ano.
Jud:  10.  3.  she  anointed  herself  with  precious  o.
Wisd.  2.7. let  us  fill  ourselves  with  costly  wine  and  0.

OLD.

Tob.  3.  10. 1  shall  bring  his  0.  age  with  sorrow  to  gr.
14. 13.  where  he  became  o.  with  honour
Jud.  16.  23.  she  waxed  o.  in  her  husband’s  house
Esth.  13.  7.  who  of  0.  and  now  are  malicious
Wisd.  4. 16.  the  years  and  a.  age  of  the  unrighteous

8.  8.  she  knoweth  things  of  0.  and  conjectureth

12.  3.  those  0.  inhabitants  of  the  holy  land

14.  6.  for  in  0.  time  when  proud  giants  perished
Eccl.  2. 10.  look  at  the  generations  of  o.  and  see

6. 18.  so  shalt  thou  find  wisdom  till  thine  0.  age

8.  6.  dishonour  not  a  man  in  his  o.  age,  for  even

some  of  us  wax  o.  rejoice  not  over  thy  enemy

9.  10.  forsake  not  an  0.  friend,  for  new  is  not  com¬
parable,  when  wine  is  o.  shalt  drink  with  pleas.

11.  16.  evil  shall  w^xo.  with  them  that  glory  in  it
20.  be  stedfast  in  covenant,  and  wax  o.  in  thy  work

14.  17.  all  flesh  waxeth  o.  as  a  garment

16. 7.  he  was  not  pacified  towards  the  0.  giants

25.  2. 1  hate  an  0.  adulterer  that  doeth

51.  8.  then  thought  I  upon  thy  acts  of  0.

Bar.  3. 10. that  thou  art  waxen  o.  in  a  strange  country
Sus.  52.  O  thou  that  art  waxen  o.  in  wickedness

1  Mac.  3.  29.  the  laws  which  had  been  of  0.  time

15.  3.  that  I  may  restore  it  to  the  o.  estate
17.  to  renew  the  o.  friendship  and  league

16.  3.  but  now  I  am  0.  and  ye  are  of  asufficient  age

2  Mac.  5. 13.  there  was  killing  of  young  and  o.

6.  21.  for  0.  acquaintance  they  had  with  the  man
22.  for  the  0.  friendship  with  them,  find  favour
OLIVE.

Jud.  15.  13.  they  put  a  garland  of  0.  upon  her
OLIVE-TREE.

Eccl.  50.  10.  as  a  fair  o.-tree  budding  forth  fruit
OLIVES.

2  Esd.  16. 29.  as  in  an  orchard  of  o.  on  every  tree  are
left  three  or  four  0.  when  vineyard  gathered
ONE.

Tob.  4.  4.  when  dead,  bury  her  by  me  in  0.  grave
6.  10.  he  also  hath  0.  only  daughter,  named  Sara
Esth.  15.  3.  upon  the  0.  she  leaned,  as  carrying
Wisd.  7.  22.  a  spirit,  holy,o.  only  manifold
11.  20.  they  have  fallen  down  with  o.  blast
Eccl.  1.8.  there  is  O.  wise  and  greatly  to  be  feared
6.  6.  have  but  0.  counsellor  of  a  thousand
7*  8.  bind  not  0.  sin  upon  another,  for  in  o.  thou

shalt  not  be  unpunished
16.  3.  0.  that  is  just  is  better  than  a  thousand

46.  4.  and  was  not  o.  day  as  long  as  two  ?

Dan.  3.  28.  the  three,  as  out  of  o.  mouth,  praised  G.
Sus.  52.  he  called  o.  of  them  and  said  unto  him

1  Mac.  3.  32.  he  left  o.  of  the  blood  royal  to  oversee

4.  11.  may  know  that  there  is  O.  that  delivereth

8.  16.  they  committed  their  government  to  o.  man

every  year,  and  all  were  obedient  to  thate.

9.  58.  who  shall  take  them  all  in  o.  night

2  Mac.  1.5.  hear  prayers,  and  be  at  0.  with  you
7-  2.  buto.  of  them  that  spake  first,  said  thus

20.  saw  her  seven  sons  slain  in  the  space  of  0.  day

21.  yea,  she  exhorted  every  o.  of  them

ONIAS.

2  Mac.  3. 1.  laws  kept  because  of  the  godliness  of  O.

5.  when  he  could  not  overcome  O.

4. 1.  Simon  slandered  O.  as  if  he  terrified  Heliod.

4.  O.  seeing  the  danger  of  this  contention
34.  he  prayed  him  to  getO.  into  his  hands
36.  because  O.  was  slain  without  cause

15.  14.  thenO.  answered,  saying,  this  isa  lover
ONYX.

Eccl.  24. 15.  I  yielded  a  pleasant  odour  like  o.
OPEN.

1  Esd.  4.  31.  the  king  gaped  on  her  with  0.  mouth


Tob.  2. 10.  my  eyes  being  o.  the  sparrows  muted

6.  4.  o.  the  fish,  and  take  the  heart  and  the  liver

11.7.  I  know  that  thy  father  will  0.  his  eyes
Jud.  4.  6.  toward  the  0.  country  near  Dothaim

10.  9.  they  commanded  the  young  men  to  o.  to  her

11.  19.  a  dog  shall  not  so  much  as  0.  his  mouth

13.  11.  o.  o.  now  the  gate,  our  God  is  with  us
Esth.  14. 10.  o.  the  mouths  of  the  heathen
Eecl.  8. 19.  and  0.  not  thine  heart  to  every  man

15.  5.  in  the  midst  of  congreg.  shall  she  0.  his  mouth
29.  24.  a  stranger,  thou  darest  not  o.  thy  mouth

39.  5.  and  he  will  o.  his  mouth  in  prayer
Bar.  2.  6.  but  to  us  and  our  fathers  0.  shame

17.  o.  thine  eyes  and  behold  ;  for  the  dead
Dan.  3.  10.  and  now  we  cannot  0.  our  mouths

1  Mac.  3.  48.  and  they  laid  0.  the  book  of  the  law
5  48.  howbeit  they  could  not  0.  unto  him

2  Mac.  1 .  4.  God  o.  your  hearts  in  his  law

6.  18.  Eleazar  was  constrained  too.  his  mouth

OPENED.

1  Fsd.  9.  46.  when  he  o.  the  law  they  stood  all  up

2  Esd.  6.  20.  books  shall  be  o.  before  the  firmament
8.  52.  for  unto  you  is  paradise  o.tree  of  life  planted
9. 28. 1  0.  my  mouth,  and  began  to  talk  before  God
Tob.  8.  13.  so  the  maid  o.  the  door  and  went  in
Jud.  10.  9.  the  gates  of  the  city  to  be  0.  to  me
Eecl.  43.  14.  through  this  the  treasures  are  o.

51.25.  Io.  my  mouth  and  said,  buy  her  for  yours.
Sus .  25.  then  ran  the  one  and  0.  the  garden  door
2  Mac.  12.  41.  who  had  o.  the  things  that  were  hid
OPENETH.

Eccl.  20.  15.  he  o.  his  mouth  like  a  crier

40.  14.  while  heo.  his  hand  he  shall  rejoice

OPENLY.

Eccl.  51.  13.  I  desired  wisdom  0.  in  my  prayer
OPERATION.

Wisd.  7.  17.  to  know  the  0.  of  the  elements
OPERATIONS.

Eccl.  17.  5.  thev  received  the  use  of  the  five  0.
OPHIR.  See  Gold.

OPINION.

Eccl.  3.  24.  are  deceived  by  their  own  vain  o.
OPPORTUNITY.

Eccl.  4.  20.  observe  the  o.  and  beware  of  evil

12.  16.  if  he  find  o.  he  will  not  be  satisfied
19.  28.  yet  when  he  findeth  0.  he  will  do  evil

20. 7.  a  wise  man  will  hold  his  tongue  till  be  see  0.
38.  24.  the  wisdom  of  a  learned  man  cometh  by  0.

1  Mac.  11.  42.  1  will  honour  thy  nation,  if  o.  serve

15.  34.  we  having  o.  hold  the  inheritance

OPPRESS.

Wisd.  2.  10.  let  us  0.  the  poor  righteous  man
17.  2.  unrighteous  thought  to  0.  the  holy  nation
Eccl.  36.  9.  let  them  perish  thatc.  the  people

1  Mac.  8. 18.  they  saw  that  the  Grecians  did  o.  Israel

2  Mac.  1.  28.  punish  them  that  0.  and  do  us  wrong

OPPRESSED.

Jud.  9. 11.  an  helper  of  the  0.  and  upholder  of  weak

16.  8.  for  the  exaltation  of  those  that  were  0.

Wisd.  10.  11.  the  covetousness  of  such  as  o.  him
Eccl.  35.  13.  he  will  hear  the  prayer  of  the  0.

OPPRESSOR.

Eccl.  4.  9.  him  that  suffereth  wrong  from  the  0.
OPPROBRIOUS.

Eccl.  23. 15.  the  man  that  is  accustomed  to  0.  words
ORACLE.

Eccl.  33.  3.  the  law  is  faithful  to  him  as  an  0.
ORACLES.

Eccl.  36.  14.  fill  Sion  with  thine  unspeakable  0.
ORCHARD.

2  Esd.  16.  29.  as  in  an  0.  of  olives,  on  every  tree
ORDAIN.

1  Esd.  8.  2.3.  0.  judges  and  justices  in  all  Syria

2  Esd.  6.  49.  thou  didst  o.  two  living  creatures
Tob.  8.  7.  mercifully  0.  that  we  may  become  aged
1  Mac.  10.  20.  this  day  we  o.  thee  to  be  high  priest

ORDAINED.

1  Esd.  6.  34.  I  Darius  the  king  have  o.  it  be  done
8.  49.  the  servants  of  the  temple  whom  David  0.

2  Esd.  7.  17.  O  Lord,  thou  hast  0.  in  thy  law

8. 14.  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  be  0.  by  commandment
Tob.  1.  6.  as  it  was  o.  to  all  the  people  of  Israel
Esth.  13.  6.  by  Arran  who  is  o.  over  the  affairs

14.  9.  they  will  abolish  the  thing  thou  hast  o.
Wisd.Q.Z.o.  man  thro’  thy  wisdom  to  have  dominion
Eccl. 7. 15.  husbandry  which  the  Most  High  hath  o.

48.  10.  who  waste,  for  reproofs  in  their  times

1  Mac.  3.  55.  Judas  o.  captains  over  the  people
4.  59. 0.  that  the  days  of  the  dedication  be  kept

7.  49.  moreover,  they  o.  to  keep  yearly  this  day

ORDER.

t  Esd.  1.  6.  offer  the  passover  in  0.  and  make  ready

10.  the  priests  and  Levites  stood  in  comely  0.

15.  the  sons  of  Asaph  were  in  their  o.

8.  10.  1  have  given  0.  that  such  of  the  nation

2  Esd.  6.  45.  and  the  stars  should  be  in  o.

13.  26.  he  shall  0.  them  that  are  left  behind

14.  13.  now  therefore  set  thine  house  in  o.

Wisd.  7.  29.  she  is  above  all  the  o.  of  stars

8.  14.  I  shall  set  the  people  in  0.  and  nations
9.3. 0.  the  world  according  to  equity  and  righteous.

Eccl.  2.  6.  o.  thy  way  aright,  and  trust  in  him
38. 10.  o.  thy  hands  aright,  and  cleanse  thy  heart
43.  10.  thev  will  stand  in  their  o.  and  never  faint

47.  10.  and  he  set  in  o.  the  solemn  times

1  Mac.  6.  40.  they  marched  on  safely  and  in  0.

9.  55.  nor  could  give  0.  concerning  his  house

2  Mac.  3.  14.  he  entered  in  to  0.  this  matter

4.  27-  as  for  the  money  he  took  no  good.o.  for  it
7.  8.  he  received  also  the  next  torment  in  0.
ORDERED.

Wisd.  11.20.  but  thou  hasto.  all  things  in  measure
Eccl.  10. 1.  government  of  a  prudent  man  is  well  0.
OR  DEREST.

Wisd.  12.  15.  thou  0.  all  things  righteously
ORDERING,

Wisd.  15.  1.  gracious,  and  in  mercy  o.  all  things
Eccl.  26.  16.  a  good  wife  in  the  0.  of  her  house
32.  2.  receive  thy  crown  for  thy  well  o.  of  the  feast
1  Mac.  16.  14.  taking  care  for  the  good  0. of  them
ORDINANCES.

Eccl.  6.  37.  let  thy  mind  be  upon  the  0.  of  the  Lcrd


Bar.  2.  12.  we  have  dealt  unrighteously  in  all  thy  0.

1  Mac.  1.  13.  gave  them  licence  to  do  after  the  o.

2.  21.  God  forbid  that  we  should  forsake  the  «.
ORDINARY.

1  Esd.  1. 16.  not  lawful  for  any  to  go  from  hise.  serv
Eccl.  33.  9.  some  of  them  hath  he  made  o.  days

OREB.

2  Esd.  2.  33.  a  charge  of  the  Lord  on  mount  O.

ORNAMENT.

Eccl.  6.  30.  for  there  is  a  golden  0.  upon  her
21.  21.  learning  is  to  a  wise  man  as  an  0.  of  gold
43.  9.  an  0.  giving  light  in  the  highest  places
45.  12.  an  o.  of  honour,  a  costly  work
Prayer  of  Manass.  made  earth  with  all  0.  thereof
ORNAMENTS.

Jud.  10.  4.  and  she  put  about  her  all  her  0.

Eccl.  45.  7.  he  beautified  him  with  cornel}’  o.

1  Mac.  1. 22.  the  golden  o.  before  the  temple

2.  11.  all  her  o.  are  taken  away,  is  a  bond-slaye

2  Mac.  2.  2.  images  of  silver  and  gold  with  their  o.

5.  3.  there  was  seen  glittering  of  golden  0.

ORPHAN.

2  Esd.  2.  20.  defend  the  0.  clothe  the  naked
Tob.  1.  8.  because  1  was  left  an  0.  by  my  father
ORPHANS.

2  Mac.  8.  28.  had  given  spoils  to  the  maimed  and  0
OSEA.

2  Esd.  13.  40.  carried  in  the  time  of  O.  the  king
OS  FAS.

2  Esd.  1.  39.  I  will  give  for  leaders,  O.  Amoz
OVEN.

2  Esd.  4.  48.  behold,  an  hot  burning  0.  passed  by
Dan.  3.  23.  servants  ceased  not  to  make  the  0.  hot

26.  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  down  into  the  o.

and  smote  the  flame  of  the  fire  out  of  the  0.
OVERCAME.

2  Esd.  11.  40.  the  fourth  came  and  0.  all  beasts
Wisd.  16.  10.  not  the  teeth  of  venomous  dragons  0.

18.  22.  so  he  n.  the  destroyer,  not  with  strength
2  Mac.  2.  21.  being  few  thev  o.  the  whole  countrv
OVERCOME.

1  Esd.  3.  5.  let  every  one  speak,- he  that  shall  o.

2  Esd.  3.  21.  the  first  Adam  was  0.  and  so  be  all

6.  28.  corruption  shall  be  0.  and  truth  be  declared

7.  58.  if  he  be  0.  he  shall  suffer  as  thou  hast  said
13.  34.  willing  to  come  and  o.  him  by  fighting

Jud.  5.  20.  let  us  go  up,  and  we  shall  0.  them
Wisd.  2.  4.  and  0.  with  the  heat  thereof
Eccl.  48. 13.  no  word  could  0.  him

1  Mac.  2.  61.  none  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  o.

2  Mac.  11.  13.  that  the  Hebrews  could  not  be  o.

12.  11.  so  that  the  Nomades  of  Arabia  being  0.

OVERFLOW.

Jud.  2.  8.  be  filled  with  their  dead  till  it  0.
OVERLAID.

Bar.  6.  39.  their  gods  of  wood,  which  are  0.  50,
OVERMASTER.

Eccl.  12.  5.  give  it  not,  lest,  he  o.  thee  thereby
OVERMUCH.

Eccl.  26. 10.  lest  she  abuse  herself  through  0.  liberty
OVERPASS.

Eccl.  14.  14.  let  not  part  of  a  good  desire  0.  thee
OVERPLUS.

1  Mac.  10.  41.  all  the  o.  which  officers  paid  not
OVERSEE.

1  Esd.  7.  2.  did  very  carefully  o.  the  holy  works
1  Mac.  3.  32.  he  left  Lysias  to  o.  the  affairs
OVERSEEING.

Jud.  8.  3.  as  he  stood  0.  them  that  bound  sheaves
Wisd.  7.  23.  having  all  power,  0.  all  things
OVERSEER.

Tob.  1.  22.  Achiacharus  was  0.  of  the  accounts
OVERSEERS.

1  Mac.  1.  51.  he  appointed  0.  over  the  people

10.  37.  I  will  that  their  0.  be  of  themselves
OVERSHADOW.

Bar.  5.  8.  every  sweet  smelling  tree  shall  0.  Israel
OVERSIGHT.

1  Mac.  13.  39.  as  for  any  0.  or  fault  committed
OVERTAKEN.

Jud.  11.  11.  and  their  sin  hath  0.  them
OVERTHREW.

Eccl.  10.  16.  the  Lord  o.  countries  of  the  heathen
OVERTHROW.

Wisd.  5.  23.  ill  dealings  shall  0.  the  thrones
Eccl.  8.  16.  where  there  is  no  help  he  will  o.  thee

13.  2.3.  if  he  stumble,  they  will  help  too.  him

29.  16.  a  sinner  will  0.  the  good  estate  of  his  surety
1  Mac.  3.  22.  the  Lord  himself  will  0.  them
5. 3.  J  udas  gave  them  a  great  o.  and  abated  courage
'  OVERTHROWING.

Eccl.  13.  13.  for  thou  walkest  in  peril  of  thy  0.
OVERTHROWN.

Tob.  14.4.  J onah  spake  of  N  ineve,  that  it  should  be  0.
Jud.  7.  14.  they  shall  be  0.  in  the  streets

16.  11.  these  lifted  their  voice,  but  they  wereo.
Eccl.  3.  24.  evil  suspicion  has  o.  their  judgment
12.  12.  lest  when  he  hath  0.  thee,  he  stand  up

27.  3.  his  house  shall  soon  be  0.

28. 14.  hath  0.  the  houses  of  great  men
OVERTOOK.

1  Mac.  12.  30.  pursued  after  them,  buto.  them  not
OVERWEIGH.

Eccl.  8.  2.  be  not  at  variance  with  rich,  lest  he  0.
OVER  WISE.

Eccl.  10.  26.  be  not  o.  in  doing  thy  business
OUGHTEST.

Eccl.  15.  11.  thou  0.  not  to  do  the  things  he  hateth
OURS.

1  Mac.  12.23.  we  do  write  back  again  to  you,  that

your  cattle  and  goods  are  0.  and  o.  are  yours
OUT-GOINGS.

2  Esd.  4.  7-  or  which  are  the  0.  of  paradise

OUT-ROADS.

1  Mac.  15.  41.  might  make  0.  on  the  ways  of  J  udea
OUTWARD.

Eccl.  11.2.  nor  abhor  a  man  for  his  0.  appearance
OWE.

1  Mac.  13.  39.  the  crown-tax  also  which  ye  o.  us
OWING.

1  Mac.  13.  15.  it  is  for  money  he  is  0.  to  the  king

15. 8.  if  any  thing  be  or  shall  be  o.  to  the  king

673


Apocrypha.]  P  A  K.


PEA


PEO


OWNERS.

To'/.  2.  12.  when  she  had  Sent  them  home  ic  theo.

13.  is  it  not  stolen  ?  render  it  to  the  o.

OX.

Jud.  8. 1.  the  daughter  of  Merari,  the  son  of  O.

P.

PACIFY.

Eccl.  48. 10.  to  p.  the  wrath  of  the  Lord’s  judgment

1  Mac.  4.  45.  if  he  would  p.  the  king  towards  him

PACIFIED.

Eccl.  5.  6.  he  will  be  p.  for  multitude  of  my  sins

16.  7-  he  was  not  p.  towards  the  old  giants
34.  19.  neither  is  he  p.  for  sin  by  sacrifices

2  Mac.  13.  26.  Lysias  o.  made  them  well  affected

PAIN.

2  Esd.  8.  59.  thirst  and  p.  are  prepared  for  them

9.  12.  the  same  must  know  it  after  death  by  p.

12.  26.  one  shall  die  on  his  bed,  and  yet  with  p.
IVisd.  10.  9  but  wisdom  delivered  from p.  those
Eccl.  31.  20.  but  the  p.  of  watching  and  clioler

48.  19.  they  were  in  p.  as  women  in  travail
2  Mac.  7.  36.  who  have  suffered  a  short  p.

9.  5.  a  p.  of  the  bowels  that  was  remediless

9.  whilst  he  lived  in  p.  his  flesh  fell  away
11.  his  p.  increasing  every  moment
PAINED.

2  Mac.  9. 7*  the  members  of  his  body  were  much p.
PAINS.

Eccl.  11. 11.  one  that  laboureth  and  taketh  p.

38-7.  with  such  he  taketh  away  their  jo.

1  Mac.  10.  15.  of  the  p.  that  they  had  endured

2  Mac.  2.  27.  we  will  undertake  this  great  p.

6.  30.  I  endure  sore  p.  in  body  by  being  beaten

7.  12.  for  that  he  nothing  regarded  the  p.

9.  18.  but  for  all  this  his  p.  would  not  cease

PAINFUL.

2  Esd.  7.  12.  they  are  full  of  perils  and  very  p.

2  Mac.  2.  26.  that  have  taken  upon  us  this  p.  labour
PAINT.

1  Mac.  3.  48.  to p.  the  likeness  of  their  images

2  Mac.  2.  29-  undertaketh  to  set  it  out  and  p.  it

PAINTERS.

IVisd.  15.4.  image  spotted,  the  p.  fruitless  labour
PALACE.

Esth.  12.  1.  two  eunuchs,  and  keepers  of  the  p.
Bar.  6.  59.  better  be  a  pillar  of  wood  in  a  p.
PALATE.

Eccl.  36. 19.  as  the p.  tasteth  divers  kinds  of  venison
PALES.

Eccl.  22.  18.  p.  will  never  stand  against  the  wind
PALSY.

1  Mac.  9.  55.  Alcimus  was  taken  with  a  p.
PAMPHYLIA.

1  Mac.  15.  23.  the  same  things  wrote  he  to  P.

pangs.

Eccl.  31.  20. p.  of  the  belly  with  an  unsalable  man
PAN.

2  Mac.  7.  5.  to  be  brought  and  fried  in  the  p.

PANS.

1  Esd.  1. 12.  sod  in  pots  and  p.  with  a  good  savour

2  Mac.'l.  3.  the  king  commanded p.  to  be  made  hot

PAPER.

2  Esd.  15.  2.  and  cause  them  to  be  written  in  p.

Tub.  J.  14.  took  p.  anti  did  write  an  instrument
PARABLES.

Eccl.  1.25.  thep.  of  knowledge  are  in  wisdom

6.  35.  let  nqtp.  of  understanding  escape  thee
33.  26.  finding  out  of  p.  is  a  wearisome  labour

38.  29.  and  they  poured  forth  exquisite  p.

38.  33.  shall  not  be  found  where  p.  are  spoken

39.  2.  and  where  subtil  p.  are,  he  will  be  there

3.  and  he  will  be  conversant  in  dark  p.

47M5.  and  thou  filledst  it  with  darkp.

17.  marvelled  at  thee  for  thy  songs  and  p.

PARCHED.

Jud.  10.  5.  she  filled  a  bag  with  p.  corn  and  figs
_  PARC&ETI1.

Eccl.  43.  3.  at  noon  it  p.  the  country,  who  can  abide
PARDON.

E  isd.  6.  6.  for  mercy  vrill  soonp.  the  meanest
12.  11.  nor  didst  for  fear  of  any  give  them  p.

38.  2.  they  thanked  them  and  besought  them  p.
■Z,ro‘"  °f  Jos.  to  p.  us  wherein  we  come  short
Eccl.  20.  28.  that  pleaseth,  shall  getp.  for  iniquity

21.  1.  do  so  no  more,  ask  p.  for  thy  former  sins
28.  3.  and  doth  he  seek  p.  from  the  Lord  ?

5.  who  will  entreat  for  p.  for  his  sins  ?
PARDONED.

Wisd.  13. 8.  howbeit,  neither  are  they  to  be  p.
PARDON ETH.

2  Esd.  7.  68.  hep.  for  if  he  did  not  so  of  goodness
J  .  PARENTS.

If  isd.  4.  6.  witnesses  of  wickedness  against  their  p.
12.  6.  thep.  that  killed  with  their  own  hands
Eccl.  3.  7.  he  will  do  service  to  hisp.  as  to  masters

22.  9.  they  shall  cover  the  baseness  of  their  p.

Sus.  3.  her  p.  also  were  righteous,  and  taught  her

1  Mac.  10.  9.  he  delivered  them  to  their p.

2  Mac.  12.  24.  because  he  had  many  of  the  Jews’  p.

_  .  PART.

{«<?•  7-  1.  and  all  his  people  come  to  take  hisp.
IVisd.  1.  16.  they  are  worthy  to  take  p.  with  it

2.  9.  none  go  without  hisp.  of  voluptuousness
Eccl.  44. 23.  among  the  twelve  tribes  did  he  p.  them
^8*  ^e'r  wives  lay  up  p.  thereof  in  salt

1  Mac.  2. 10.  what  nation  hath  not  had  a  p.  in  her  ;

10.  20.  we  require  thee  to  take  our  p.

9  Mac.  8.  18.  had  given  p.  of  spoils  to  the  maimed
PARTAKERS.

Esth.  16.5.  caused  many  to  be  p.  of  innocent  blood
Wisd.  16. 3.  might  be  made  p.  of  a  strange  taste
38.  9.  should  be  p.  of  the  same  good  and  evil

2  ruac.  4.  14.  to  bep.  of  the  unlawful  allowance
0. 27.  lest  they  should  be  p.  of  the  pollution

PARTED,  ETH.

”  ™.  5.  12.  or  like  as  when  an  arrow  p.  the  air
1  Mac.  1.  6.  and  p.  his  kingdom  among  them
PA  RTS.

Eccl.  16.  26.  he  disposed  the  p.  thereof

674


2  Mac.  7-  4.  to  cut  off  the  utmost  p.  of  his  body
9. 5.  sore  torments  of  the  inner  p.  came  on  him
PARTICULARS.

2  Mac.  2. 30.  to  go  over  things,  and  to  be  curious  inp.
11. 20.  but  of  the  p.  I  have  given  order
PARTLY.

Wisd.  17.15.  werep.  vexed  with  monstrous  appa¬
ritions,  and  p.  fainted,  their  heart  failing  them
PARTNERS.

Eccl.  42.  3.  of  reckoning  with  p.  and  travellers
PA  RT  RIDGE.

Eccl.  11.  30.  as  a  p.  taken  and  kept  in  a  cage

PASS.

Wisd.  1.  8.  neither  shall  vengeance  p.  by  him
2.  4.  our  life  shall  p.  as  the  trace  of  a  cloud
7-  and  let  no  flower  of  the  spring  p.  by  us

6.  22.  and  I  will  not  p.  over  the  truth

Eccl.  23.  2.  spare  me  not,  and  it  p.  not  by  my  sins
42.  9.  lest  she  p.  away  the  flower  of  her  age

1  Mac.  5.  40.  if  Judas  p.  over  first  unto  us

2  Mac.  15.  36.  in  no  case  to  let  that  day  p.

PASSABLE.

2  Mac.  5.  21.  to  make  the  sea  p.  by  foot
PASSED.

Jud.  16.  9.  and  the  fauchion  p.  through  his  neck
Esth.  15.  6.  then  having  p.  through  all  the  doors
Wisd.  5.  9.  those  things  are  p.  away  as  a  shadow
Eccl.  28.  19.  hath  not  p.  through  the  venom  thereof
1  Mac.  3.  37.  and  having  p.  the  river  Euphrates
PASS  ETH.

Wisd.  2.  5.  our  time  is  a  very  shadow  that  p.  away

5.  10.  as  a  ship  thatp.  over  the  waves  of  water

14.  p.  away  as  the  remembrance  of  a  guest

7.  24.  wisdom  p.  and  goeth  through  all  things
Eccl.  25. 11.  the  love  ot  the  Lordp.  all  things

PASSING.

Wisd.  14.  5.  and  p.  the  rough  sea  in  a  weak  vessel
PASSOVER.

1  Esd.  1.  1.  Josias  held  the  feast  of  the  p.  in  Jeru¬

salem,  and  offered  the  p.  the  fourteenth  day
12.  they  roasted  the  p.  with  fire,  as  appertained

20.  sucli  a  p.  was  not  kept  in  Israel  since  Samuel

PAST.

2  Esd.  4.  5.  or  call  me  again  the  day  that  is  p.

45.  shew  me  then  whether  there  be  more  to  come

than  io  p.  or  more  p.  than  is  to  come

46.  what  is  p.  1  know,  what  is  to  come  I  know  not

9.  1.  when  thou  seest  part  of  the  signs  p.

Wisd.  11.  12.  for  the  remembrance  of  things  p.
Eccl.  42.  19.  he  declareth  the  things  that  arep.

PASTIME.

Wisd.  15. 12.  but  they  counted  our  life  a  p,

Eccl.  32.  12.  take  thy  p.  and  do  what  thou  wilt
Bar.  3.  17.  had  their  p.  with  the  fowls  of  the  air
PATH.

2  Esd.  14. 22.  that  men  may  find  thy  p.  and  live
Bar.  3.  31.  no  man  knoweth  or  thinketh  of  her  p.
PATHS.

Tob.  4. 19.  that  all  thy  p.  and  counsels  may  prosper
Bar.  3.  21.  no-r  understood  they  thep.  thereof
PATHWAY.

Wisd.  5.  10.  nor  the  p.  of  the  keel  in  the  waves
PATIENCE.

Wisd.  2. 19.  examine  him  with  torture  and  despite¬
fulness,  to  know  his  meekness,  and  prove  his  p.
Eccl.  2.  14.  woe  unto  you  that  have  lostp.

3.  1.3.  have  p.  with  him,  and  despise  him  not
5:  11.  be  swift  to  hear,  with  p.  give  answer

16.  1.3.  the  p.  of  the  godly  shall  not  be  frustrate

17.  24.  he  comforted  those  that  fail  in  p.

20.  32.  necessary  p.  in  seeking  the  Lord  is  better
29.  8.  have  thou  p.  with  a  man  in  poor  estate
41.  2.  to  him  that  despaireth  and  hath  lost  p.
PATIENT.

2  Esd.  7.  64.  that  he  is  p.  and  long  suffereth  those
Eccl.  1.  2.3.  a  p.  man  will  bear  for  a  time
2.  4.  be  p.  when  thou  art  changed  to  low  estate
38.  11.  therefore  is  God  p.  with  them

35. 18.  nor  will  the  mighty  be  p.  towards  them

PATIENTLY.

Bar.  4.  25.  suffer  p.  the  wrath  that  is  come  from  God
2  Mac.  6. 14.  whom  the  Lord  p.  forbeareth  to  punish
PATTERN.

Eccl.  38.  28.  his  eyes  look  still  upon  the  p.  of  thing
PAVEMENT.

Eccl.  20. 18.  to  slip  on  ap.  is  better  than  to  slip  with
Bel  19.  behold  now  the  p.  and  mark  well
PAY.

Eccl.  18.  22.  let  nothing  hinder  thee  to  p.  thy  vow
29.  2.  p.  thou  thy  neighbour  again  in  season

6.  and  for  honour  he  will  p.  him  dissrace

1  Mac-:  3.  28.  he  gave  his  soldiers  p.  for  a  year

10.  36.  of  the  Jews,  to  whom  p.  shall  be  given

2  Mac.  8. 10.  which  the  kin?  was  top.  to  the  Romans

PAID.

Tob.  2. 12.  they  p.  her  wages,  and  gave  her  a  kid
1  Mac.  10. 41.  all  the  overplus  which  officers  p.  notin
PAY  ffi'H.

Eccl.  29.  6.  he  p.  him  with  cursings  and  railings
PAYMENTS.

Bar.  3.  8.  in  our  captivity,  to  be  subject  top.

1  Mac.  11.  34.  instead  of  p.  which  the  king  received
PEACE.

Tob.  13. 14.  for  they  shall  rejoice  in  thy  p.

Jud.  3.1.  they  sent  ambassadors  to  treat  ofp.

7-  , 24.  in  that  you  have  not  required  p.  of  Assur
Wisd.  3.  .3.  utter  destruction  ;  but  they  are  in  p.

14.  22.  those  so  great  plagues  called  they  p.

Eccl.  1. 18.  making  p.  and  perfect  health  flourish

13. 18.  what  p.  between  the  rich  and  the  poor
26.2.  he  shall  fulfil  the  years  of  his  life  inp.

28.  9.  maketh  debate  among  them  that  be  at  p.

1.3.  such  have  destroyed  many  that  were  atp.

.38.  8.  trom  him  is  p.  over  all  the  earth

41. 14.  my  children  keep  discipline  in  p.

44. 14.  their  bodies  are  buried  in  p.  but  name  lives

47.  16.  and  for  thy  p.  thou  wast  beloved

50.  23.  that  p.  may  be  in  our  days  in  Israel
Bar.  3. 13.  thou  shouldst  have  dwelt  in  p.  for  ever
14.  where  is  the  light  of  the  eyes  and  p.

4.  20.  I  have  put  off  the  doming  of  p.

5.  4.  for  thy  name  be  called  thep.  of  righteousness


1  £.'\*c.  5.  54.  until  they  had  returned  m  p.

6.  49.  but  with  them  in  Bethsura  he  made  p.

7.  13.  the  Assideans  were  the  first  that  sought  p.

J.  20.  to  make  a  confederacy  and  p.  with  you

22.  might  have  a  memorial  ofp.  and  confederacy
9. 70.  to  the  end  he  should  make  p.  with  him

10.  47.  he  was  the  first  that  entreated  of  true  p.

66.  Jonathan  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  p.

11. 50.  grant  usp.  and  let  the  Jews  cease
51.  they  castaway  their  weapons  and  made  p.

13.  37.  we  are  ready  to  make  a  stedfast  p.  with  you

40.  and  let  there  bep.  betwixt  us

14.  8.  then  did  they  till  their  ground  in  p.

11.  he  madep.  in  the  land,  and  Israel  rejoiced
16. 10.  he  returned  into  the  land  of  Judea  inp.

2  Mac.  3.  1.  the  city  was  inhabited  with  all  p.

5.  25.  coming  to  Jerusalem,  and  pretending p,

10.  12.  endeavoured  to  continue  p.  with  them

12.  2.  would  not  suffer  them  to  live  in  p.

4.  accepted  it,  as  being  desirous  to  live  inp.

11.  being  overcome,  besought  Judas  for  p.

14.  6.  Assideans  will  not  let  the  realm  be  in  p.

PEACEABLE.

2  Esd.  11.  42.  thou  hast  hurt  thep.  and  loved  liars
Esth.  16.  8.  that  our  kingdom  may  be  quiet  and  p.
Eccl.  47.  1.3.  Solomon  reigned  in  ap.  time

1  Mac.  1.  30.  andspakep.  words  to  them

5.  25.  Nabathites  came  unto  them  in  p.  manner

2  Mac.  14.  22.  so  they  made  ap.  conference

PEACEABLY.

Jud.  7.  15.  because  they  met  not  thy  person  p.
Eccl.  44.6.  living  p.  in  their  habitations
-Bar.  bring  you  away  p.  from  thence

1  Mac.  7.  15.  so  he  spake  unto  them  p.  and  swar®
29.  came  to  Judas,  they  saluted  one  another  p.

12.  4.  they  should  bring  them  into  the  land  p.

_  PEACE-OFFERING.

Eccl.  35.  1.  that  taketh  heed  oftereth  a  p .-offering
47. 2.  as  is  the  fat  taken  from  the  p. -offering
_  PEEP.

Eccl.  21.  23.  a  fool  will  p.  in  at  the  door  into  house
PENALTY.

1  Esd.  8.  24.  by  p.  of  money,  or  by  imprisonment
PENSIONS.

1  Esd.  4.  56.  to  give  to  all  that  kept  the  city  p.

_  ,  .  PENTECOST.

Too.  2.  1.  in  the  feast  ofp.  whiich  is  the  holy  feast

2  Mac.  12.32.  after  the  feast  called  p.  they  "went

PENURY.

Jr  isd.  16.  3.  these  sufferings  p.  in  a  short  space

4.  it  was  necessary  that  on  them  should  come  p

_  PEOPLE.

Jud.  5.  3.  he  said  to  them,  tell  me  now  who  this  v.  is

6.  18.  then  thep.  fell  down  and  worshipped  God
14.  17.  he  leaped  out  to  thep.  and  cried

Esth.  10.  12.  so  God  remembered  hisp.  and  justified
Wisd.  6.  2.  give  ear,  you  that  rule  the  p.

21.  O  ye  kings  of  the p.  honour  wisdom
24.  a  wise  king  is  the  upholding  of  thep.

9.  7.  thou  hast  chosen  me  to  be  a  kingofthj’  p.

12.  and  then  shall  I  judge  thy  p.  righteously
16.  2.  dealing  graciously  with  thine  own  p.

20^feedest thine  own  p.  with  angels’  food

18.  7-  so  of  thy  p.  was  accepted  both  the  salvation

19.  5.  that  thy  p.  might  pass  a  wonderful  way
Eccl.  9. 17.  the  wise  ruler  ofp.  for  his  speech

10.  2.  as  the  judge  of  thep.  is  himself,  so  are

8.  the  kingdom  is  translated  from  onep.  to  another
16.  11.  it  there  be  one  stiff-necked  among  the  p.
17*  17.  he  set  a  ruler  over  every  p.

24.  1.  wisdom  shall  glory  in  the  midst  of  her  p.

6.  in  every  p.  and  nation  I  got  a  possession
12.  and  1  took  root  in  an  honourable  p.

31.  9.  wonderful  things  hath  he  done  among  hisp.
33.  18.  hear  me,  O  ye  great  men  of  the  p.

35. 19.  till  he  have  judged  the  cause  of  his  p.

36.  9.  and  let  then)  perish  that  oppress  the  p.

14.  fill  Sion  with  oracles,  thy  p.  with  glory

37.  2.3.  a  wise  man  instructed  his  p.

41.  18.  of  iniquity  before  a  congregation  and  p.

42.  11.  lest  she  make  thee  a  reproach  among  thep.

44.  4.  leaders  of  the  p.  by  their  counsels

15.  thep.  will  tell  of  their  wisdom

45. _  3.  he  gave  him  a  commandment  for  his  p.

15.  that  they  should  bless  thep.  in  his  name

16.  to  make  reconciliation  for  his  p.

22.  neither  had  he  any  portion  among  the  p.

46.  7;  in  that  they  withheld  the  p.  from  sin

8.  of  six  hundred  thousand  p.  they  two  preserved
1.3.  Samuel  anointed  princes  over  his  p.

20.  to  blot  out  the  wickedness  of  the  p.

47.  4.  did  he  not  take  away  reproach  from  thep.  f

5.  and  to  set  up  the  horn  of  his  p.

6.  so  thep.  honoured  him  with  ten  thousands

23.  even  the  foolishness  of  the  p.  and  one  who
turned  r/yny  the  p.  through  his  counsel

49.  2.  he  behaved  if,  the  conversion  of  thep.

15.  not  a  man  like  unto  Joseph,  a  stay  of  thep.

50.  5.  how  was  he  honoured  in  the  midst  of  thep.  T

17.  then  all  thep.  together  hasted,  and  fell
19.  and  the  p.  besought  the  Lord  by  prayer

Bar.  2.  30.  because  it  is  a  stiff-necked p.

35.  and  they  shall  be  my  p.  and  I  will  no  more
drive  my  p.  of  Israel  out  of  the  land  given  them

4.  5.  be  of  good  cheer,  my  p.  the  memorial  of  Israel
Bus.  7.  now  when  the  p.  departed  away  at  noon

47.  then  all  thep.  turned  them  towards  him
50.  wherefore  all  the  p.  turned  again  in  haste

1  Mac.  1.  41.  wrote,  that  all  should  be  onep.

3.  43.  let  usrestoie  the  decayed  estate  of  ourp.  and

let  us  fight  for  our  p.  and  sanctuary
8. 15.  in  council  consulting  alway  for  the  p.

11.  21.  ungodly  persons  who  hated  their  own  p
33.  determined  to  do  good  to  thep.  of  the  Jews
42.  I  will  not  only  do  this  for  thee  and  thy  p.

14.  2.3.  it  pleased  the  p.  to  entertain  the  men

15.  40.  Cendebeus  began  to  provoke  thep.

2  Mac.  4.  48.  that  followed  for  the  city  and  the  p.

5.  19.  God  did  not  choose  the  p.  for  the  place’*

sake,  but  the  place  forthep.sakt

6.  3.  this  mischief  was  grievous  to  the  p.

16.  though  he  punish,  yet  doth  he  not  forsake  hisp.


PER


P  I  T


P  L  E  f Apocrypha*


£  Mac.  10.  01.  he  called  the  governors  of  the  p.

12.  13.  and  inhabited  bv  /?.  of  divers  countries

42.  exliorted  the  /?.  to  keep  themselves  from  sin

13.  25.  the  p.  there  were  grieved  for  the  covenants
15.  14.  who  prayeth  much  for  the  p.  and  city

24.  that  come  against  thv  holy  p.  to  blaspheme
PER  ADVENTURE.

Wisd.  13.  6.  for  they  p.  err,  seeking  God

1  Mac.  4. 10.  if  p.  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  us

9.  8.  if  p.  we  may  be  able  to  fight  with  them

PERCEIVE.

Wisd.  16.  18.  but  themselves  might  see  and  p.

Bar.  6. 49.  how  cannot  men  p.  that  they  be  no  gods  ?
PERCEIVED.

Wisd.  19.  18.  which  may  well  be  p.  by  the  sight
Bccl.  18.  12.  he  saw  anu  p.  their  end  to  be  evil
*2  Mac.  2.  7-  which  when  Jeremy  p.  he  blamed  them
PERDITION.

Bcel.  16.  9.  he  pitied  not  the  people  of  p.
PERFECT.

Wisd.  4.  13.  he  being  made  p.  in  a  short  time

15.  3.  for  to  know  thee  is  p.  righteousness
Bed.  1.  18.  making  peace  and  p.  health  flourish

31.  10.  who  hath  been  tried,  and  found  p.

34.  3.  the  law  shall  be  found  p.  without  lies

44.  17.  Noah  was  found  p.  in  the  time  of  wrath

45.  8.  he  put  on  him  p.  glory,  and  strengthened

PERFECTED.

Wisd.  4.  16.  and  youth  that  is  soon  p.

Bed.  7-  32.  that  thy  blessing  may  be  p.

23.  20.  so  after  they  were  p.  he  looked  on  them
PERFECTION.

Esth.  15.  5.  she  was  ruddy  through  the  p.  of  beauty
IVisd.  3.  16.  they  shall  not  come  to  their  p.

6. 15.  to  think  therefore  on  her  is  p.  of  wisdom
Eecl.  21. 11.  the  p.  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  wisdom
34.  8.  and  wisdom  is  p.  to  a  faithful  mouth

43.  7.  a  light  that  decreaseth  in  her/?.

50.  11.  when  he  was  clothed  with  the  p.  of  glory
PERFECTLY.

Jud.  11.  6.  God  will  bring  the  thing  p.  to  pass
Bccl.  24.  28.  the  first  man  knew  her  not  p.

38.  28.  and  he  watcheth  to  polish  it  p.

PERFORMANCE.

Bccl.  19.  20.  in  all  wisdom  is  the  p.  of  the  law

2  Mac.  11.  17.  made  request  for/?.  of  the  contents

PERFORMED.

1  Esd.  8.  21.  let  all  things  be  p.  after  the  law
■2  Esd.  7.  24.  and  they  have  not  p.  his  works

14.  25.  till  things  be  p.  which  thou  shalt  write
Bccl.  7>  25.  so  shalt  thou  have®,  a  weighty' matter

PER  FUME.

Tob.  6. 16.  thou  shalt  take  the  ashes  of  p.

Eccl.  49.  1.  is  like  the  composition  of  the  p.

Bar.  6. 43.  women  sitting  in  ways,  burn  bran  for  p.
PERIL.

Eccl.  13. 13.  walkestin  p.  of  thy  overthrowing
1  Mac.  11.  23.  Jonathan  put  himself  in  p.
PERISH.

Jud.  6.  8.  thou  shalt  not  p.  till  thou  be  destroyed

7.  11.  shall  not  so  much  as  one  of  thy  people  p.
Esth.  11.  9.  the  righteous  nation  were  ready  to  p.
IVtsd.  4.  19.  and  their  memorial  shall  p.

12.  12.  will  accuse  thee  for  the  nations  that/?.

18. 19.  did  foreshew  this,  lest  they  should  p.

Bccl.  3.  26.  that  loveth  danger,  shall  p.  therein

5.  7.  thou  shalt  p.  in  the  day  of  vengeance

8.  15.  thou  shalt  p.  with  him  through  his  folly
36.  9.  let  them  /?.  that  oppress  the  people

41.  6.  the  inheritance  of  sinners’  children  shall  p.

44.  18.  all  flesh  should  p.  no  more  by  the  Hood

47.  22.  neither  shall  any  of  his  works  p.

Bar.  3.  3.  for  thou  endurest,  and  we  p.  utterly
1  Mac.  3.  9.  he  received  such  as  were  ready'  to  p.

6.  13.  behold,  I  p.  thro’  great  grief  in  a  strange  land

PERISHED.

3  Esd.  4.  27.  many  also  have p.  and  erred  for  women
Tob.  14.  10.  Aman  fell  into  the  snare  and/?.

Esth.  16.  21.  the  chosen  people  should  have/?.
Wisd.  10.  3.  he  p.  in  fury’  wherewith  he  murdered

6.  when  ungodly  p.  she  delivered  the  righteous
14.  6.  in  the  old  time,  when  the  proud  giants/?.

16.  5.  they  /?.  with  the  stings  of  crooked  serpents
Bed.  37.  31.  by  surfeiting  have  many  /?.

44.  9.  who  are  /?.  as  though  they  had  never  been
Bar.  3.  28.  they  /?.  through  their  own  foolishness

1  Mac.  13.  49.  a  number  of  them  /?.  through  famine

2  Mac.  5.  9.  thus  he  /?.  in  a  strange  land

8.  19.  an  hundred  fourscore  five  thousand  p.
PERISH  ETH.

2  Esd.  9.  37.  notwithstanding,  the  law  p.  not
Bccl.  17.  28.  thanksgiving  p.  from  the  dead

PERJURY.

Wisd.  14.  25.  so  that  there  reigned  tumults,/?.
PERMANENT.

2  Esd.  3.22.  thus  infirmity  was  made  p.

PERPETUAL.

2  Esd.  0. 19.  manners  are  corrupted  by  a  /?.  seed
Jud.  1.3.  20.  God  turn  these  to  thee  fora  p.  praise
Esth.  14.5.  thou  tookest  Israel  for  a  /?.  inheritance
ll'isd.  10.  14.  them  to  be  liars,  and  gave  him  /?.

glory

11.6.  instead  of  a  fountain  of  a/?,  running  river
Bccl.  11.  33.  lest  he  bring  upon  thee  a  p.  blot
37.26.  a  wise  man’s  name  shall  be  /?.

41.  6.  their  posterity  shall  have  a  /?.  reproach
1  Mac.  6.  44.  that  lie  might  get  him  a/?,  name

13.  29.  made  all  their  armour  fora  p.  memory

PERPETUALLY.

Bccl.  45.  13.  but  his  children’s  children  p.
PERPLEXED.

1  Mac.  3.  31.  being  greatly  p.  in  his  mind
PERSECUTE.

‘2  Esd.  15.  31.  conspiring  in  great  power  to  p.  them
PERSECUTED.

Jud.  16.  3.  out  of  the  hands  of  them  that  /?.  me
IVisd.  11. 20.  fallen  down,  being  /?.  of  vengeance
16.  16.  the  ungodly,  with  showers  were  they  p.
Bccl.  30.  19-  so  is  lie  that  is/?,  of  the  Lord
Bar.  4.  25.  for  thine  enemy  hath  /?.  thee
PERSECUTION.

Mac.  2.  43.  they  that  lied  for  p.  joiued  them


PERSEPOL1S.

2  Mac.  9.  2.  he  had  entered  the  city  called  P.
PERSIA.

1  Esd.  3.  9.  the  three  princes  of  P.  shall  judge
8.  80.  made  us  gracious  before  the  kings  of  P.

1  Mac.  3.  31.  he  determined  to  go  into  P.

6.  1.  heard  that  Elymais,  in  the  country  of  P.

5.  there  came  one  who  brought  tidings  into  P.

56.  Philip  was  returned  out  of  P.  and  Media

14.  2.  but  when  Arsaces  the  king  of  P.  heard

2  Mac.  1.  13.  for  when  the  leader  was  come  into  P.
19.  for  when  our  fathers  were  led  into  P.

33.  this  matter  was  told  to  the  king  of  P.
PERSIANS.

1  Esd.  1.  57-  became  servants,  till  the  P.  reigned
Jud.  16.  10.  the  P.  quaked  at  her  boldness
Esth.  16.  23.  safety  to  us,  and  the  well-affected  P.
1  Mac.  1.  1.  had  smitten  Darius  king  of  the  P.
PERSON.

Jud.  7.  15.  because  they'  met  not  thy  /?.  peaceably

12.  12.  for  lo,  it  will  be  a  shame  for  our  /?.

Esth.  16.  11.  honoured  as  the  next  /?.  to  the  king
IVisd.  6. 7.  is  Lord  over  all,  shall  fear  no  man’s  p.
Bed.  4.  22.  accept  no  /?.  against  thy  soul

27-  neither  accept  the/?. of  the  mighty

7.  6.  lest  thou  fear  the/?,  of  the  mighty

10.  5.  on  p.  of  the  scribe  shall  he  lay  Ins  honour
35.  13.  will  not  accept  any  /?.  against  a  poor  man
42.  1.  and  accept  no/?,  to  sin  thereby

1  Mac.  14. 14.  and  every  wicked/?,  he  took  away

PERSONS.

Esth.  16.  4.  with  the  glorious  words  of  lewd  p.
Eccl.  20.  22.  by’  accepting  of /?.  overthrows  himself
35.  12.  and  with  him  is  no  respect  of p.

PERSUADE.

2  Mac.  11.  14.  promised  that  he  would/?,  the  king

PERSUADED.

2  Esd.  7-  61.  joy  over  them  that  are  p.  to  salvation
2  Mac.  10.  20.  they  with  Simon  were/?,  for  money

11.  14.  and /?.  them  to  agree  to  all  conditions

13.  26.  Lysias/?,  pacified,  and  made  well-affected

PERSUASIONS.

1  Esd.  5.73. by  popular/?,  they  hindered  the  building

PERTAIN.

Eccl.  21. 25.  telling  such  things  as p.  not  to  them

2  Mac.  3.  6.  which  did  not/?,  to  the  sacrifices

PERTAINING.

2  Mac.  14.  8.  care  1  have  of  things  /?.  to  the  king

PERVERTED.

Sus.  9.  they  /?.  their  own  mind,  and  turned  away
PESTILENCE.

2  Esd.  15.  49.  I  will  send  famine,  sword,  and  /?.
PESTILENT.

Esth.  16.  7-  done  through  the/7,  behaviour  of  them

1  Mac.  10. 61.  certain  /?.  fellows  of  Israel  assembled

PETITION.

2  Esd.  8.  24.  give  ear  to  the  p.  ofthy  creature

1  Mac.  7.  37.  house  of  prayer  and  p.  for  thy  people

PI1EN1CE.

2  Mac.  4.  22.  afterward  he  went  with  his  host  to  P.

PHILIP.

1  Mac.  6. 2.  shields  which  Alexander  son  of  P.  .left

14.  then  called  he  for  P.  one  of  his  friends

63.  where  he  found  P.  to  be  master  of  the  city

8.  5.  how  they  had  discomfited  in  battle  P.

2  Mac.  5.  22.  lie  left  governor,  at  Jerusalem,  P.

6.  11.  being  discovered  to  P.  were  all  burned

PH1LOMETOR.

2  Mac.  4.  21.  the  coronation  of  Ptolemeus  P.

10.  13.  left  Cyprus,  that  P.  had  committed  to  him
PH1NEES,  PI11NEAS.

2  Esd.  1.  2.  the  son  of  P.  the  son  of  Eleazar

1  Mac.  2.  26.  as  P.  did  to  Zambri  the  son  of  Salom
54.  P.our  father,  in  being  zealous,  obtained

PHRYGIAN.

2  Mac.  5. 22.  at  Jerus.  Philip  for  his  country  a  P.

PHYSICIAN.

Eccl.  10. 10.  the  p.  cutteth  offa  long  disease
38.  1.  honour  a/?,  with  honour  due  to  him
3.  the  skill  of  the/?,  shall  lift  up  his  head

12.  then  give  place  to  the  p.  the  Lord  created  him

15.  let  him  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  p.

PHYSICIANS.

Tob.  2. 10.  I  went  to  the/?,  but  they  helped  me  not

physic.

Eccl.  18.  19.  and  use  p.  or  ever  thou  be  sick
PIECES.

2  Esd.  1.  32.  ye  have  slain,  and  torn  their  bodies  in /?.
2.  14.  for  I  have  broken  the  evil  in  p.  and  created
2  Mac.  15.  33.  they  should  give  it  by  p.  to  the  fowls
PIERCE.

2  Mac.  11.  9.  were  ready  to  /?.  thro’  walls  of  iron
PIERCED.

Jud.  16.  12.  the  sons  of  damsels  have  p.  them  thro’
PIERCE EH.

Eccl.  35.  17.  the  prayer  of  the  humble  p.  the  clouds
PIKES.

2  Mac.  5.  3.  shaking  of  shields  and  a  multitude  of/?.
PILGRIMAGE.

2  Esd.  8.  39. 1  will  remember  their  /?.  and  salvation
PILGRIMS.

2  Esd.  16.  40.  be  even  as  p.  upon  the  earth
PILLED.

Tob.  11.  13.  the  whiteness  /?.  away  from  his  eyes
PILLOW.

1  Esd.  3.  8.  and  laid  it  under  king  Darius  his/>.
PINCHING.

Eccl.  11.  18.  waxeth  rich  by  his  wariness  and  /?.
PIN.

Eccl.  14.  24.  shall  also  fasten  a  p.  in  her  walls
PIPE.

Eccl.  40. 21.  the  p.  and  psaltery  make  sweet  melody
PIT.


IVisd.  10. 13.  she  went  down  with  him  into  the  /?.
Eccl.  12. 16.  imagineth  how  to  throw  thee  into  a  p.
21.  10.  but  at  the  end  thereof  is  the  /?.  of  hell
27.  26.  whoso  diggeth  a  p.  shall  fall  therein

1  Mac.  7. 19.  he  cast  them  into  the  great  p.

2  Mac.  1. 19. and  hid  it  in  a  hollow  place  of  a/?.


T  1  1  C1X.

Eccl.  13. 1.  he  that  toucheth  /?.  shall  be  defiled
Dan.  3.  23.  to  make  oven  hot  with  rosin,  p.


Bel  27.  then  Daniel  took  p.  tat,  and  hair

PITCH.

Eccl.  14.  25.  he  shall  /?.  hi.)  tent  niah  unto  her

1  Mac.  5.  49-  every  man  /?.  his  tent  where  he  was

2  Mac.  15.  17.  they  determined  not  to/?,  camp

PITCHED.

Wisd.  11.2.  they  /?.  tents  where  there  lay  no  way

1  Mac.  3.  40.  so  they  came  and  /?.  by  Emmaus

PITY.

2  Esd.  1.  19.  then  had  I  /?.  on  your  mournings

15.  19.  a  man  shall  have  no  /?.  on  his  neighbour

'Job.  3.15.  /?.  taken  of  me  that  nearno  more  reproach
6.  17.  who  will  have  /?.  on  you  and  save  you  '

8.  4.  let  us  pray  that  God  w'ould  have  /?.  on  us

11. 15.  for  thou  hast  scourged  and  taken  />.  on  me
Jud.  6.  19.  and  /?.  the  low'  estate  of  our  nation
Bed.  12.  13.  who  will  /?.  a  charmer  that  is  bitten  ?

14.  so  one  that  goeth  to  a  sinner  who  will  />.

Bar.  3.  2.  have  p.  on  us,  because  we  have  sinned
2  Mac.  4.37.  Antiochus  w'as moved  to  p.  and  wept
7-  27.  have  /?.  on  me  that  bare  thee  nine  months
PITIED.

Eccl.  16.  9.  he  /?.  not  the  people  of  perdition
Bar.  4. 15.  nor  reverenced  old  man,  nor  /?.  child
2  Mac.  3.  21.  then  it  would  have  p.  a  man  to  see
PITIFUL.

Eccl. 2. 11.  Lord  is  long-suffering  and  very/?.
PLACE.

Esth.  13.  3.  had  the  second  /?.  in  the  kingdom
IVisd.  12.  20.  giving  them  time  and  /?.  whereby
19.  22.  but  didst  assist  them  in  every  time  and  /?.
Eccl.  8. 16.  go  not  with  him  into  a  solitary/?.

10.  15.  the  Lord  planted  the  lowly  in  their p.

12.  12.  set  him  not  by,  lest  he  stand  up  in  thy  /?.
16.8.  nor  spared  he  the/?,  where  Lot  sojourned
19. 17.  give  p.  to  the  law  of  the  Most  High
29.  27.  give  /?.  thou  stranger,  to  an  honourable  man

32.  2.  take  thy  /?.  that  thou  mayest  be  merry

41. 19.  of  theft  in  regard  of  p.  where  thou  sojournest

48.  5.  didst  raise  his  soul  from  the  /?.  of  the  dead
Bar.  3.  15.  who  hath  found  out  her  p.  I

24.  and  how  large  is  the  p.  of  his  possession
Sus.  49.  return  again  to  the  p.  of  judgment

1  Mac.  10. 14.  for  it  was  their  /?.  of  refuge

14.  36.  they  did  much  hurt  in  the  holy  /?.

16. 16.  came  on  Simon  into  the  banqueting  /?.

2  Mac.  1. 19.  so  that  the  /?.  was  unknown  to  all  men

PLACED.

2  Mac.  15. 20.  the  beasts  were  convenient!  v  p.
PLACES.

Tob.  5. 5.  and  knowest  then  those  /?.  w’ell  ?

Eccl.  9.7.  nor  wander  in  the  solitary  /?.  thereof
24.  4.  I  dwelt  in  high  /?.  my  throne  is  in  a  pillar

33.  12.  some  of  them  he  turned  out  of  their  /?.

46.  9.  so  that  he  entered  on  the  high  p.  of  the  land

PLAGUE.

2  Esd.  15. 12.  Egypt  shall  be  smitten  with  the  /?.

16. 19.  behold  famine  and  p.  tribulat.  and  anguish
Eccl.  23. 11./?.  shall  never  depart  from  his  house

25  13.  give  me  any  /?.  but  the  /?.  of  the  heart
Bar.  6. 48.  when  there  cometh  any  war  or  /?.

49.  neither  save  themselves  from  war  nor/?.

1  Mac.  3.29.  because  of  /?.  he  had  brought  on  land

2  Mac.  9.  5.  with  an  incurable  and  invisible  p.

PLAGUED.

1  Mac.  9.  55.  even  at  that  time  was  Aloimtis  /?.

2  Mac.  9. 1 1 .  being /?.  he  began  to  leave  off  his  pride

P  LAG  U  ES.

Wisd.  14  22.  those  so  great/?,  called  they  peace
Bat  2.  2.  to  bring  upon  us  great  /?.  such  as  never
7  all  p  are  come  upon  us  the  Lord  pronounced

3.  4.  for  the  which  cause  these  p.  (Reave  to  us

2  Mac.  7. 37.  by  torments  and  p.  thou  mayest  confess
PLAIN.

IVisd.  7.  22.  undefiled,  /?.  not  subject  to  hurt
Eccl.  21.  10.  way  of  sinners  is  made  /?.  with  stone
32.  21.  be  not  confident  in  a  /?.  way

1  Mac.  5. 52.  into  the  great  p.  before  Betbsan
16. 11.  in  the  /?.  of  Jericho  was  Ptolemeus

P  LA  1ST  Ell.

Wisd.  16. 12.  nor  mollifying  p.  that  restored  health
PLA1STER ING.

Eccl.  22. 17.  as  a  fair  p.  on  the  wall  of  a  gallery
PLANT.

Eccl.  10. 19.  that  love  him,  an  honourable/?.

49.  7.  and  that  he  might  build  up  also  and  /?.

2  Mac.  1.  29.  2?.  thy  people  in  thy  holy  place

PLANTED.

Eccl.  10. 15.  the  Lord  p.  the  lowly  in  their  place
PLANTS.

IVisd.  7.  20.  to  know  the  diversities  of  /?.

10.7.  p.  bearing  fruit,  that  never  come  to  ripeness
v  PLATE.

Jud.  12. 1.  to  bring  her  in  where  his  /?.  was  set

15.  11.  they  gave  to  Judith  all  his  /?.  and  beds

1  Mac.  15.  32.  the  cupboard  of  gold  and  silver  p.

PLATES.

Eccl.  50.  3.  cistern  was  covered  with  /?.  of  brass
PLAY.

Eccl.  30. 9.  p.  with  him,  he  will  bring  to  heaviness
PLAYED.

Eccl.  23.23.  she  hath  p.  the  whore  in  adultery

47.  3.  lie/?,  with  lions  as  with  kids,  and  with  bears

PLEADED.

2  Mac.  4. 44.  three  men/?,  the  cause  before  him

PLEASANT.

Eccl.  32. 6.  so  is  melody  of  music  with  /?.  wine
40.21.  but  up.  tongue  is  above  them  both
2  Mac.  15.  39.  as  wine  mingled  with  water  is  /?.
PLEASE.

Tob.  3. 15.  if  it  /?.  not  thee  that  I  should  die

4.  3.  do  that  which  shall  p.  her,  grieve  her  not
IVisd.  14. 19.  be  willing  to  /?.  one  in  authority
Eccl.  18.  31.  if  givest  thy  soul  desires  that  /?.  her

19. 19.  and  they  that  do  things  that  /?.  him
20.27.  hath  uncierstanding,  will  /?.  great  men

PLEASED.

Tob.  5. 16.  so  they  were  well  /?.  then  said  he
Jud.  7. 16.  these  words  p.  Ilolofernesand  hissen  an,
15. 10.  done  much  good,  and  God  is  p.  there  v.  ith
IVisd.  4. 10.  he  p.  God,  and  was  beloved  of  him
14.  for  his  soul  /?.  the  Lord,  therefore  he  hasted

675


A  POCKY  MIA.]  POO


PO  w


P  R  A


Led.  .34.  19.  the  Most  High  is  not  ®.  with  offerings

44.  16.  Enoch  p.  the  Lord,  and  was  translated

48.  22.  Ezekias  did  the  thing  that®.  the  Lord

1  Mac.  1.  12.  so  this  device  ®.  them  well

8.  21.  so  that  mattery,  the  Romans  well

10.  47.  but  with  Alexander  they  were  well  p.

14.  4.  his  authority  and  honour  p.  them  well

47.  then  Simon  was  well  p.  to  be  high  priest

2  Mac.  1.20.  when  it  p.  God,  Neemias  being  sent
11.35.  hath  granted,  therewith  we  are  well  ®.

14.  35.  wast  p.  that  tne  temple  should  be  among  ns
PLEASE  l'H.

Jud.  3.  3.  our  flocks  and  herds,  use  them  as  p.  thee
Eccl.  19.  21.  master,  1  will  not  do  as  it  p.  thee

20.  28.  he  that®.  great  men  shall  get  pardon
39.  18.  at  his  command  is  done  whatever  ®.  him

PLEASING.

Tob.4.  21.  do  that  which  is  ®.  in  his  sight
Wisd.  9-  10.  that  1  may  know  what  is/),  to  thee
17-  18.  a  ®.  fall  of  water  running  violently
Lccl.  48.  16.  some  did  that  which  was  p.  to  God
PLEASURE.

Wtsd.  1.  13.  nor  hath  he  p.  in  the  destruction

7.  2.  and  the  p.  that  came  with  sleep

8. 18.  great/),  it  is  to  have  her  friendship
Eccl.  9.  10.  when  old  thou  shalt  drink  it  with  p.

12.  in  the  tiling  that  the  ungodly  have/),  in
11. 27-  affliction  maketh  a  man  forget/).

14.  5.  he  shall  not  take  p.  in  his  goods

18.  32.  take  not  p.  in  much  good  cheer
19.5.  whoso  taketh/i.  in  wickedness,  be  condemned

25.  21.  and  desire  her  not  for/).

33. 13.  as  the  clay  is  in  the  potter’s  hand  to  fashion  it
at  ®.  so  man  is  in  hand  of  him  that  made  him

37.  28.  nor  hath  every  soul  p.  in  every  thing

41.4.  why  art  thou  against  the/),  of  the  Most  High  ?

1  Mac.  4.  42.  priests,  such  as  had  p.  in  the  law

2  Mac.  12.  11.  promising  to  p.  him  otherwise

PLEASURES.

Eccl.  19.  5.  he  that  resisteth  p.  crowneth  life
1  Mac.  8.  30.  think  meet,  they  may  do  it  at  their  p.
PLENTY.

Jvd.  2.  18.  p.  of  victual  for  every  man  of  the  army
PLOTS.

1  Esd.  5.  73.  by  secret  p.  and  popular  persuasions

PLOUGH.

Eccl.  38.  25.  how  can  he  get  wisdom  that  holdeth  p.?
PLOWETH.

Eccl.  6.  19.  come  to  her,  as  one  that  p.  and  soweth
POINT.

Eccl.  31.  15.  judge,  and  be  discreet  in  every  p.

2  Mac.  2.  30.  to  stand  on  every  p.  and  go  over  things
13. 10.  being  at  the  p.  to  be  put  from  their  law

POINTS,  POINTS.

2  Mac.  12.  22.  wounded  with/?,  of  their  own  swords
15. 12.  and  exercised  in  all  p.  of  virtue
POISONED.

2  Mac.  10.  13.  that  he  p.  himself,  and  died
POLICY.

1  Mac.  8.  4.  that  by  their/),  they  had  conquered

2  Mac.  13. 18.  went  about  to  take  the  holds  by/).
14.  29.  watched  to  accomplish  this  thing  by  p.

31.  he  was  notably  prevented  by  Judas’/).

Policies.

Jud.  11. 8.  we  have  heard  of  thy  wisdom  and  p.

POLISH.

Eccl.  38.  28.  and  watcheth  to  p.  it  perfectly
POLISHED.

Bar.  6.  8.  his  tongue  is  p.  by  the  workman
POLLL)  J'E.

1  Mac.  1.  46.  p.  the  sanctuary  and  holy  people

2  Mac.  6.  2.  to p.  also  the  temple  in  Jerusalem

POLLUTED.

1  Esd.  8.  83.  is  a  land  p.  with  the  pollutions

2  Esd.  15.  6.  wickedness  hath  p.  the  whole  earth
Tab.  2.  9.  being  p.  and  my  face  was  uncovered
3.  15.  that  I  never  p.  my  name  nor  name  of  my

Jud.  9.  2.  and  p.  her  virginity  to  her  reproach

1  Mac.  14.  36.  they  p.  all  about  the.  sanctuary

2  Mac.  5. 16.  taking  the  holy  vessels  with/),  hands

POLLU  i’ETH.

Eccl.  40.  29.  he  p.  himself  with  other  men’s  meat
POLLUTION,  8.

Jud.  9.  4.  which  abhorred  the  p.  of  their  blood

1  Mac.  13.  50.  he  cleansed  the  tower  from  p.

2  Mac.  5.  27-  lest  they  should  be  partakers  of  the  p.

POMEGRANATES.

Eccl.  45.9.  he  compassed  him  with/),  and  bells
POMP.

1  Mac.  10. 86.  men  of  city  met  him  with  great®.

PONDER.

2  Esd.  4.  31.  p.  now  by  thyself,  how  great  fruit
Eccl.  21.  17.  they  shall  p.  his  words  in  their  hearts

PONDERED.

Wtsd.  8.  17.  when  I  p.  them  in  my  heart

POOLS.

2  Esd.  16.  60.  p.  upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains
POOR.

1  Esd.  3. 19.  the  mind  of  the  p.  man  and  of  the  rich

2  Esd.  15. 51.  thou  shalt  be  weakened  as  a/),  woman
Tub.  2.2.  bring  what/),  man  soever  thou  findest
4.7.  neither  turn  thy  face  from  any  p.

21.  fear  not,  my  son,  that  we  are  made/).

Wisd.  2.  10.  let  us  oppress  the  p.  righteous  man
Eccl.  1.28.  distrust  not  the  Lord  when  thou  art/).

4. 1.  my  son,  defraud  not  the  p.  of  his  living
4.  neither  turn  away  thy  face  from  a  p.  man

8.  not  grieve  to  bow  down  thine  ear  to  the/).

7.  32.  and  stretch  thine  hand  unto  the  p.

10.22.  whether  he  be  rich,  noble,  o r  p.

23.  it  is  not  meet  to  despise  the  p.  man
30.  the  p.  man  is  honoured  for  his  skill

11.  21.  easy  on  the  sudden  to  make  a  p.  man  rich

13.  3.  the  p.  is  wronged,  and  must  entreat  also

18.  what  peace  between  the  rich  and  the/).?

19.  rich  eat  up  the  p.  ||  20.  rich  abhor  the  p.

21.  but  up.  man  is  thrust  away  by  his  friends

22.  the  p.  man  slept,  and  yet  they  rebuked  him

23.  if  p.  man  speak,  they  say,  what  fellow  is  this  ?

21.5.  a  prayer  out  of  a  p.  man’s  mouth  reacheth

25.  2.  my  soul  hates  a p.  man  that  is  proud

26.  4.  a  man  be  rich  or  p.  if  he  have  a  good  heart

676


Eccl.  29.  8. have  thou  patience  with  a  man  in p. estate

9.  help  the/),  for  the  commandment’s  sake

22.  better  is  the  life  of  a  p.  man  in  a  cottage

30.  14.  better  is  the  p.  being  sound  and  strong

31.  4.  the/),  laboureth  in  his  p.  estate,  and  is  needy

34.  20.  brings  an  offering  of  the  goods  of  the  p.

35.  13.  will  not  accept  any  person  against  up.  man
.‘18.  19.  the  life  of  the  p.  is  the  curse  of  the  heart

Bar.  6.  28.  but  to  the/),  they  give  nothing  of  it
2  Mac.  4. 47.  and  those  p.  men  he  condemned
POPULAR.

1  Esd.  5, 73.  by  their  secret  plots  and  p.  persuasions
PORCH.

1  Esd.  9. 41.  the  broad  court  before  the  holy  p.

2  Mac.  1. 8.  burnt  the  p.  and  shed  innocent  blood

POR  I  ERS.

1  Esd.  1.  16.  moreover  the  p.  were  at  every  gate

POItl  ION.

Esth.  13. 16. despise  not  the/),  thou  deliveredst
Wisd.  2.  9.  for  this  is  our  p.  and  our  lot  is  this
Eccl.  7.  31.  give  him  his/),  as  it  is  commanded
11.  18.  and  this  is  the/),  of  his  reward

14.  9.  the  covetous  is  not  satisfied  with  his/).

17-  17.  but  Israel  is  the  Lord’s  p.

24.  12.  in  the//,  of  the  Lord’s  inheritance  .

25. 19.  let  the  p.  of  a  sinner  fall  upon  her

26.  3.  a  good  wife  is  a  good  p.  which  shall  be  given
in  the p.  of  them  that  fear  the  Lord

23.  a  wicked  woman  given  asa/).  to  wicked  man
41.  9.  and  if  you  die,  a  curse  shall  be  your  p.

21.  be  ashamed  to  take  away  up.  or  a  gift

45.  22.  nor  had  he  any  p.  among  the  people,  for
the  Lord  himself  is  his  p.  and  inheritance

2  Mac.  1.  26.  preserve  thy  own  p.  and  sanctify  it
14. 15.  and  who  always  helpeth  his  p.

PORTIONS.

Eccl.  44.  23.  gave  him  an  heritage,  and  divided  his/).

50. 12.  when  he  took  p.  out  of  the  priests’  hands

POSSESS.

Jud.  8.  22.  a  reproach  to  all  them  that  p.  us
Eccl.  11.  24.  I  have  enough,  and®,  many  things
POSSESSED.

Eccl.  36.  15.  thou  hast  ®.  from  the  beginning
POSSESSION.

Jud.  16.  21.  Judith  remained  in  her  own  ®.

Wisd.  8.  5.  if  riches  be  up.  to  be  desired  in  life
Eccl.  4.  16.  his  generation  shall  hold  her  in/).

24.  6.  in  every  people  and  nation  1  got  a  p.

28.  24.  look  that  thou  hedge  thy/),  with  thorns
51.  21.  therefore  have  I  gotten  a  good®.
POSSESSIONS.

Eccl.  41.  1.  to  a  man  that  liveth  at  rest  in  his  />.
POSSIBLE.

Wisd.  16.  15.  it  is  not  p.  to  escape  thine  hand
2  Mac.  3. 6.  it  was/),  to  bring  all  into  the  king’s  hand
14.  10.  it  is  not  p.  that  the  state  should  be  quiet
POST.

Wisd.  5.  9.  passed  away  as  a  p.  that  hasted  by
POS  t’ERITY.

1  Esd.  4.  53.  have  free  liberty,  as  well  they  as  their/).
Eccl.  45.  24.  he  and  p.  should  have  the  dignity

25.  the  inheritance  should  be  to  his  ®.  alone
47.  22.  nor  will  he  abolish  the  p.  of  his  elect
Bar.  2.  15.  Israel  and  his  ®.  is  called  by  thy  name

2  Mac.  1.20.  did  send  of  the®,  of  those  priests

POTENTATES.

Eccl.  10.  24.  judges  and  p.  shall  be  honoured
POLS.

1  Esd.  1. 12.  the  sacrifices,  they  sod  them  in  brass®.

POTTAGE.

Bel  33.  a  prophet  Habbacuc,  who  had  made®.
POTTER.

Wi.d.  15. 7-  the/),  tempering  soft  earth  ;  but  what  is
the  use  of  either  sort,  the  p.  himself  is  the  judge
Eccl.  27.  5.  the  furnace  proveth  the  p.  vessels
33.  13.  as  the  clay  is  in  the/),  hand  to  fashion  it

38.  29.  so  doth  the®,  sitting  at  his  work
POVERTY.

Eccl.  10.  31  .honoured  in/),  how  much  more  in  riches
dishonourable  in  riches,  how  much  more  in  p.
11.  12.  is  slow,  wanting  ability,  and  full  of/).

14.  life,  death,  ®.  and  riches  come  of  the  Lord

I. 3.  24.  /).  is  evil  in  the  mouth  of  the  ungodly
18.  25.  when  thou  art  rich,  think  on  ®.  and  need
22.  23.  be  faithful  to  thy  neighbour  in  his/).

26.  28.  a  man  of  war  that  suffereth  p.

29.9.  turn  him  not  away  because  of  his®.
POWER.

2  Esd.  1.  10.  all  his®,  have  1  smitten  down

Jud.  2.  12.  as  I  live,  and  by  the  ®.  of  my  kingdom

9.  11.  for  thy  ®,  standeth  not  in  multitude
14.  that  thou  art  the  God  of  all®,  and  might

II. 7.  as  his®,  liveth,  who  hath  sent  thee,  and  the

fowls  of  the  air  shall  live  by  thy  ®.

13.  4.  O  Lord  God  of  all  ®.  look  at  this  present
11.  God  is  with  us  to  shew  his®,  in  Jerusalem
19.  which  remember  the/),  of  God  forever

Wisd.  1.  3.  his  ®.  when  it  is  tried  reproveth  unwise

6.  3.®.  is  given  you  of  the  Lord,  and  sovereignty

7.  23.  stedfast,  free  from  care,  having  all®.

25.  for  she  is  the  breath  of  the®,  of  God

26.  the  unspotted  mirror  of  the®,  of  God

9.  11.  and  she  shall  preserve  me  in  her®.

10.  2.  and  gave  him  ®.  to  rule  all  things

11.  20.  being  scattered  through  the  breath  of  thy  ®.
21.  who  may  withstand  the  ®.  of  thine  arm  ?

12.  15.  thinking  it  not  agreeable  with  thy  ®.

16.  thy  ®.  is  the  beginning  of  righteousness

17.  men  will  not  believe  thou  art  of  a  full  ®.

18.  but  thou  mastering  thy  ®.  judgest  with  equity  ;

for  thou  mayest  use  ®.  when  thou  wilt

14.  31.  it  is  not  the  ®.  of  them  by  whom  they  swear

15.  2.  if  we  sin  we  are  thine,  knowing  thy  ®.

3.  to  know  thy®,  is  the  root  of  immortality

16. 13.  for  thou  hast®,  of  life  and  death

19.  it  burneth  in  water  above  the  ®.  of  fire
Eccl.  3.  20.  for  the  ®.  of  the  Lord  is  great

6.  26.  and  keep  her  ways  with  all  thy  ®.

8.  1.3.  be  not  surety  above  thy®,  for  if  thou  be

9.  13.  keep  far  from  the  man  that  hath  p.  to  kill
10.4.  the  ®.  of  the  earth  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord

13.  2.  burden  not  thyself  abo\ e  thy  ®.  while  livest


Eccl.  15.  18.  he  is  mighty  in®,  and  behold,  all  things
18.  4.  to  whom  he  Hath  given  ®.  to  declare  work*

46.  6.  and  with  hailstones  of  mighty  ®.

49.  5.  therefore  he  gave  their®,  to  others

Bar.  1.  C.  collection,  according  to  every  man’s  ®.
.3.  5.  think  on  thy  ®.  and  thy  name  at  this  time

6.  59.  better  to  be  a  king  that  sheweth  his®.

6.3.  these  like  to  them  neither  in  shew  nor®.

Prayer  of  Manass.  fear  and  tremble  before  thy  ®,

2  Mac.  3.  24.  the  Lord  of  spirits,  and  the  prince  ol
all  ®.  all  were  astonished  at  the  ®.  of  God
28.  manifestly  they  acknowledged  the®,  of  God

9.  8.  shewing  forth  to  all  the  manifest  ®.  of  God

11.  4.  not  at  all  considering  the®,  of  God

12.  28.  who  with  his  ®.  breaks  strength  of  enemies

POWERS.

Dan.  .3.  39.  Oall  ye  ®.  of  the  Lord,  bless  ye  the  Lord
Prayer  of  Manass.  all  the  ®.  of  heavens  praise  thee
POWERFUL.

Eccl.  16.  15.  that  his  ®.  works  might  be  known
POUR.

Tob.  4. 17.  ®.  out  thy  bread  on  burial  of  the  just
Eccl.  10..  13.  he  that  hath  it,  shall  ®.  out  abominat.

16.  11.  he  is  mighty  to  ®.  out  displeasure

24.  3.3.  I  will  vet®,  out  doctrine  as  prophecy

36.  7.  raise  up  indignation,  and  ®.  out  wrath

39.  6.  he  shall®,  out  wise  sentences  and  give  thanks
28.  they  ®.  out  their  force,  and  appease  wrath
POURED.

Eccl.  18.  29.  they  ®.  forth  exquisite  parables

50.  15.  he  ®.  of  the  blood  of  the  grape,  he  p.  out  at

the  foot  of  the  altar  a  sweet-smelling  savour

27.  who  out  of  his  heart®,  forth  wisdom

2  Mac.  1.  31.  water  to  be®,  on  the  great  stones
POURETH.

Eccl.  18.  11.  God  ®.  forth  mercy  on  them
35.  14.  the  widow,  when  she  ®.  out  her  complaint

43.  19.  the  hoar-frost  as  salt  he  ®.  on  the  earth

PRACTICE,  S.

Eccl.  10.  6.  do  nothing  at  all  by  injurious®.

27.  9.  truth  will  return  to  them  that®,  in  her
PRACTISED.

2  Mac.  14.  22.  lest  treachery  be  suddenly  v.
PRACTISING.

1  Esd.  2.  26.  that  city  was  ®.  against  kings

PRAISE.

2  Esd.  13.  57.  giving  ®.  greatly  to  the  Most  High
Tob.  .3.  11.  let  all  thy  works®,  thee  for  ever

8.  15.  thou  art  worthy  to  be  praised  with  all  pure
and  holy  ®.  therefore  let  thy  saints  ®.  thee
12.  6.  bless  God,®,  him,®,  him,  it  is  good  to®,  and
exalt  God,  therefore  be  not  slack  to®,  him
1.3.  6.  ®.  the  Lord  of  udght,  and  extol  the  King

7.  my  soul  shall  ®.  the  king  of  heaven  and  rejoice

14.  7.  so  shall  all  nations  ®.  Lord  and  confess  God
Jud.  1.3.  14.  then  said  she,  ®.  ®.  God,  ®.  Got!  I  say

20.  God  turn  these  to  thee  for  a  perpetual  ®.

16.  1.  the  people  sang  after  her  this  song  of®.
Esth.  1.3.  17.  we  may  live,  O  Lord, and®,  thy  name,

destroy  not  the  mouths  of  them  that  ®.  thee
Wisd.  15.  19.  nor  are  they  to  be  desired,  but  they
went  without  the  ®.  of  God  and  his  blessing
Eccl.  11.  .31.  in  things  worthy  ®.  will  lay  blame

15.  9.®.  is  not  seemly  in  the  mouth  of  a  sinner

10.  for  ®.  shall  be  uttered  in  wisdom

17.  27.  who  shall  ®.  the  Most  High  in  the  grave?

28.  the  sound  in  heart  shall  ®.  the  Lord

18.  28.  and  will  give  ®.  to  him  that  found  her
24.  1.  wisdom  shall  ®.  herself,  and  shall  glory

27.  7-  P-  no  man  before  thou  hearest  him  speak
35.  2.  he  that  giveth  alms,  sacrificeth  ®.

39.  10.  the  congregation  shall  declare  his®.

14.  sing  a  song  of®,  and  bless  the  Lord

15.  shew  forth  his  ®.  with  the  songs  of  your  lips
35.  ®.  ye  the  I.ord  with  the  whole  heart

43. 1 1 .  look  on  the  rainbow,  and  p.  him  that  made  it

44.  1.  let  us  now  ®.  famous  men,  and  our  fathers

51.  1.  1  will  thank  thee,  I  do  give®,  to  thy  name

29.  rejoice  in  his  mercy,  be  not  ashamed  of  his  ®.
Bar.  3.  6.  thou  art  our  God,  thee,  O  Lord,  will  we®,

7.  that  we  should  ®.  thee  in  our  captivity
Dan.  3.  35.  ®.  and  exalt  him  above  all  for  ever
And  so  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.

Prayer  of  Manass.  I  will  ®.  thee  for  ever  all  days
of  my  life,  all  the  powers  of  heaven  do  ®.  thee
1  Mac.  4.  3.3.  let  all  ®.  thee  with  thanksgiving
PRAISED.

1  Esd.  4.  62.  they  ®.  the  God  of  their  fathers

2  Esd.  2.  42.  they  all  ®.  the  Lord  with  songs

Tob.  8.  15.  then  Raguel  ®.  God,  and  said,  O  God,
thou  art  worthy  to  be  ®.  with  all  holy  praise
Jvd.  6.  20.  comforted  Achior,  and  ®.  him  greatly
Wisd.  10.  20.  the  righteous  ®.  thy  holy  name
Eccl.  47. 6.  people®,  him  in  the  blessings  of  the  Lord
Dan.  3.  29.  blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord  God,  to  be  ®.
and  exalted  above  all  for  ever,  30,  31,  32,
33,  34.

Sus.  6.3.  they  ®.  God  for  their  daughter  Susanna

1  Mac.  4.  24.  went  home,  and  ®.  the  Lord  in  heaven

2  Mac.  11.  9.  then  they®,  the  merciful  God

PRAISES.

Esth.  14.  10.  heathen  to  set  forth  the®,  of  the  idols
PRAISING.

Tob.  11.  1.  after  this,  Tobias  went  his  way®.  God

16.  Tobit  went  out,  rejoicing  and  ®.  God

14.  1.  so  Tobit  made  an  end  of®.  God

Wisd.  19.  9.®.  thee,  O  Ld.  who  hadst delivered  them
Eccl.  .39.  15.  and  in®,  him  you  shall  say  thus
Dan.  .3.  1.  and  they  walked  in  the  fire,  ®.  God

1  Mac.  4.  55.  worshipping  and®,  the  God  of  heaven

2  Mac.  12.  41.®.  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge

15.  29.  ®.  the  Almigffl^  irMheir  own  language

Tob.  6.  17.  rise  up  and  ®.  to  God,  who  is  merciful

8.  4.  let  us  ®.  that  God  would  have  mercy  on  us
12.  12.  when  thou  didst  ®.  and  bury  the  dead

Jud.  8.  31.  therefore  now®,  thou  for  us,  because

9.  12.  I  ®.  thee,  1  ®.  thee,  O  God  of  my  father

11.  17-  1  will®,  to  God,  and  he  will  tell  me
Wisd.  16.28.  and  at  the  day-spring®,  to  Ihee
Eccl.  .37.  15.  above  all  this,  ®.  to  the  Most  High
39.  5.  and  he  will  ®.  before  the  Most  High


P  R  R


P  R  I


PRO  (.A  poor  ri’HA.


PRAYED.

Tob.  3.  1.  I  did  weep,  and  in  sorrow  ®.  saying

11.  then  she  p.  towards  the  window  and  said

Esth.  14.  3.  she  p.  unto  the  Lord  God  ot  Israel
Wisd.  7 .  I  p.  and  understanding  was  given  me

1  Mac.  11.  7).  he  cast  earth  on  his  head  and  ®.

2  Mac.  1.  8.  then  w e  p.  to  the  Lord  and  were  heard

2.  10.  as  when  Moses  p.  to  the  Lord,  the  fire  came

down  from  heaven,  even  so  p.  Solomon
also

5.  4.  every  one®.  that  that  apparition  might  turn

15.  12.  Onias  p.  for  the  whole  body  of  the  Jews
PRAYER.

Tob.  12.  8.  p.  is  good  with  fasting  and  alms

13. 1.  then  Tobit  wrote  a  p.  of  rejoicing,  and  said
Jud.  9.  12.  King  of  every  creature,  hear  thou  myp.

13.  10.  they  went  according  to  their  custom  to  p.
Esth.  13.  8.  Mardocheus  made  his  jo.  to  the  Lord
Wisd.  13.  17.  then  maketh  he  p.  for  his  goods
Eccl.  4.  6.  his  p.  be  heard  of  him  that  made  him
7. 10.  be  not  faint-hearted  when  thou  makest  thy  p.
17.  25.  return,  and  make  thy  p.  before  his  face
21.  5.  a  p.  out  of  a  poor  man’s  mouth  reacheth  to
the  ears  of  God,  and  his  judgment  coineth

34.  26.  and  doth  the  same,  who  will  hear  his  p.

35.  13.  he  will  hear  the  p.  of  the  oppressed

16.  his p.  shall  reach  unto  the  clouds

17.  the®.  of  the  humble  piercelh  the  clouds

36.  17.  O  Lord,  hear  the  p.  of  thy  servants
39.  5.  and  he  will  open  his  mouth  in  p.

6.  he  shall  give  thanks  to  the  Lord  in  his  p.

50.  19.  the  people  besought  the  Lord  by  p.

51.1 1. 1  called  on  the  Lord,  and  so  my  p.  was  heard

13.  when  young,  I  desired  wisdom  openly  in  p.

1  Mac.5. 33.  who  sounded  trumpets  and  cried  with  p.

7.  37.  be  an  house  of  p.  and  petition  for  thy  people

2  Mac.  1.  23.  the  priests  made  a®.  whilst  sacrifice
24.  p.  was  after  this  manner,  (3  Lord,  Lard  God

10.  $1.  after  the  p.  they  took  their  weapons

12.  42.  betook  themselves  to  p.  and  besought  him
15.  22.  in  his®.  he  said  after  this  manner

26.  encountered  enemies  with  invocation  and  p.

PRAYERS.

Tob.  3. 16.  so  the  p.  of  them  both  were  heard

12.  15.  which  present  the  p.  of  the  saints

Jud.  4. 13.  so  God  heard  their  p.  and  looked  on  their

13.  3.  for  she  said  she  would  go  forth  to  her  ®.

Bar.  2. 14.  hear  our  p.  O  Lord,  and  our  petitions

1  Mac.  12. 11.  in  our  p.  to  think  on  our  brethren

2  Mac.  1.5.  God  hear  your  p.  and  be  at  one  with  you

PRAYEST.

Eccl.  7.  14.  make  not  much  babbling  when  thou  p.

18.  23.  before  thou  p.  prepare  thyself

28.2.  SO  thy  sins  shall  be  forgiven  when  thou®.

P  RA  YETI  1.

Eccl.  34.  24.  when  one  p.  and  another  curseth
PREACH.

2  Esd.  2.  t  32.  till  1  come  and  p.  mercy  unto  them
PRECEPTS.

2  Esd.  16.  76.  the  guide  of  them  who  keep  my  p.
Tob.  6.  15.  dost  thou  not  remember  the  p.  ?
PRECIOUS.

Tob.  13.16.  for  Jerusalem  he  built  up  with  p.  stones
Jud.  10.  3.  she  anointed  herself  with  p.  ointment
Esth.  14. 2.  instead  of  p.  ointments  covered  her  head

15.  6.  robes  all  glittering  with  gold  and  p.  stones
Wisd.  7.  9.  nor  compared  I  lo  her  any  p.  stones
Eccl.  9. 5.  fall  not  by  those  thinsrs  that  are  p.  in  her

PREDECESSORS.

Esth.  14.  5.  thou  tookest  our  fathers  from  all  their  p.
PRE-EMINENCE.

r Eccl .  33.  22.  in  thy  works  keep  to  thyself  the  p.

1  Mac.  11.  27.  and  gave  him p.  among  his  friends
PREFERRED.

Wisd.  7.  8.  I  p.  her  before  sceptres  and  thrones
PREPARE.

1  Esd.  1.4.®.  you  after  your  families  and  kindreds

2  Esd.  14.  24.  look  thou  p.  thee  many  box-trees
Tob.  5.  16.  he  said  p.  thyself  for  the  journey

11.  3.  let  us  haste  before,  and®.  the  house
Jud.  2.  7.  that  they  p.  for  me  earth  and  water

12.  1.  that  they  should  p.  for  her  of  his  meats
Eccl.  2.  1.  my  son,®.  thy  soul  for  temptation

17.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  will  p.  their  hearts
18.  23.  before  thou  prayest  p.  thyself
33.  4.  p.  what  to  sav,  so  shalt  thou  be  heard
PREPARED.

1  Esd.  1. 13.  they  p.  for  themselves  and  priests

14.  the  Levites  p.  for  themselves  and  priests
Tob.  2.  1.  there  was  a  good  dinner  p.  for  me
5.16.  when  his  son  had  p.  all  things  for  journey
Jud.  9.  6.  we  are  here,  for  all  thy  ways  are  p.

12.  19.  she  ate  and  drank  what  her  maid  had  p.
Esth.  11.  7.  at  their  cry  all  nations  were  p.  to  battle
Wisd.  9.  8.  which  thou  hast  2?.  from  the  beginning

16.  20.  didst  send  bread  p.  without  their  labour
Eccl.  49.  12.  which  was p.  for  everlasting  glory

PREPAREDST.

Wisd.  16.  2.  thou  p.  for  them  meat  of  a  strange  taste

PREPAItETH.

Eccl.  26.  28.  Lord  p.  such  an  one  for  the  sword
PR  EPARING.

Wisd.  14.  1.  again,  one  p.  to  sail,  calleth  on  wood
PRESCRIBED.

1  Esd.  1.  5.  according  as  David  the  king  of  Israel  p.
PRESENCE.

Wisd.  14.  17.  whom  men  could  not  honour  in  p.
£cc/.8.11.  rise  not  in  anger  at  p.  of  injurious  persons
PRESENT.

Wisd.  2.  6.  let  us  enjoy  the  good  tilings  that  are  p.

4.  2.  when  it  is  p.  men  take  example  at  it

9.  9.  Wisdom  was  p.  when  thou  madest  the  world

10.  that  being  p.  she  may  labour  with  me

11.  11.  whether  absent  or  p.  they  were  vexed

14.  17.  might  Hatter  him  absent  as  if  he  were  p.
Eccl.  1.  21.  where  it  is  p.  it  turneth  away  wrath

27.  23.  when  thou  art  p.  he  will  speak  sweetly
31.  6.  gold  ruin  of  many,  their  destruction  was p.

PRESENT.

Tob.  12.  15.  which®,  the  prayers  of  the  saints
PRESENTS.

Eccl.  20. 29.  p.  and  gifts  blind  the  eyes  ot  the  wise


PRESERVATION.

Eccl.  34.  16.  he  is  a p.  from  stumbling  and  help
PRESERVE.

Tob.  6.  17.  thou  shalt  p.  her,  and  she  shall  go
Wisd  9.  11.  and  she  shall  p.  me  in  her  power
PRESERVED,  ETH.

Wisd.  10. 1.  she  p.  the  first  formed  father  of  world

4.  wisdom  again  p.  it,  and  directed  the  course

5.  and  she®,  him  blameless  unto  God

11.  25.  or  have  been®,  if  not  called  by  thee
16.  26.  but  that  it  is  thy  word  which  ®.  them
Eccl.  20.  2.  he  that  confesseth  shall  lx;  ®.  from  hurt
PRESS.

Eccl.  13.  10.®.  nort  on  him,  lest  thou  be  put  back
31.  31.  ®.  not  on  him  with  urging  him  to  drink
PRESSED.

Wisd.  17.  11.  wickedness  being®,  with  conscience
Eccl.  46.  5.  when  the  enemies  ®.  upon  him
Bel  30.  when  the  king  saw  that  they®,  him  sore
2  Mac  14.  9.  our  nation,  which  is  ®.  on  every  side
PRESUMED.

2  Mac.  3.  24.  all  that®,  to  come  in  were  astonished
5  15.  but  ®.  to  go  into  the  most  holy  temple
PRESUMPTION.

Esth.  13.  2.  not  lifted  up  with  ®.  of  my  authority
2  Mac.  5.  18.  this  man  had  been  put  back  from  ®.
PRETEND.

Eccl.  12. 17.  though  he®,  to  help  thee, yet  undermine
PREVAIL.

Eccl.  29.  6.  if  he  ®  he  shall  hardly  receive  the  half
PREVENT.

Wisd.  16.  28.  we  must  ®.  the  sun  to  give  thanks
PR  EVENTETH.

Wisd.  6.  13.  she  ®.  them  that  desire  her
PREY.

1  Esd.  8.  77.  for  our  sins,  we  were  given  up  for  a  ®.
Jud.  5.  24.  they  shall  be  a®,  to  be  devoured  of  all
9.  4.  thou  hast  given  their  wives  for  a  ®.

16.  5.  that  he  would  make  my  infants  as  a  ®.

Eccl.  27.  10.  as  the  lion  lieth  in  wait  for  the  ®.

1  Mac.  7.  47.  they  took  the  spoils  and  the  ®.
PRICE.

Eccl.  33.  30.  because  thou  hast  bought  him  with  a  ®.
Bar.  6.  25.  the  things  are  bought  for  a  most  high  ®.
PRICKED.

Wisd.  16. 11.  they  were®,  that  they  should  rememb.
Eccl.  12. 12.  lest  thou  remember  my  words  and  be ®.

14.  1.  who  is  not  ®.  with  the  multitude  of  sins

PRICKETH.

Eccl.  22.  19.  he  that®,  the  eye,  will  make  tears
PRIDE.

Tob.  4. 13.  for  in  ®.  is  destruction  and  much  trouble
Jud.  9.  9.  behold  their  ®.  and  send  thy  wrath
Esth.  13.  12.  it  was  not  in  ®.  that  I  did  not  bow
14.  not  worship  any  but  thee,  nor  will  I  do  it  in®.
Wisd.  5.  8.  what  hath  ®.  profited  us  ?  or  riches
Eccl.  10.  7.  ®.  is  hateful  before  God  and  man

13.  ®.  is  the  beginning  of  sin,  he  that  hath  it
18.  ®.  was  not  made  for  man,  nor  furious  anger
21.  roughness  and  ®.  is  the  losing  thereof

15.  8.  she  is  far  from  ®.  liars  cannot,  remember

16.  8.  but  he  abhorred  them  for  their  ®.

26.  26.  she  that  dishonoured!  him  in  her  ®.

43.  1.  the  ®.  of  the  height,  the  clear  firmament
Bar.  4.  34.  her®,  shall  he  turned  into  mourning

1  Mac.  2.  49.  now  hath  p.  and  rebuke  gotten  strength

3.  20.  they  come  against  us  in  ®.  and  iniquity

2  Mac.  1.  28.  punish  them  that  with  ®.  do  us  wrong
5.  21 .  weening  in  his  p.  to  make  the  land  navigable
7.  36.  shalt  receive  just  punishment  for  thy  ®.

9.  7.  but.  still  was  filled  with  ®.  breathing  out
1 1.  he  began  to  leave  off  his  great  ®.

15.  6.  Nicanor  in  exceeding  ®.  determined
PRIEST.

Eccl.  7.  31.  fear  the  Lord,  and  honour  the  ®.

50.  1.  Simon  high  p.  son  of  Onias,  who  repaired
1  Mac.  2.  1.  Mattathias.  a  ®.  of  the  sons  of  Joarib

7.  14.  one  that  is  a®,  of  the  seed  of  Aaron
15.  1.  to  Simon  the  ®.  and  prince  of  the  Jews

See  High.

PRIESTS.

1  Esd.  1. 2.  having  set  the  ®.  according  to  courses

4.  53.  the®,  that  went  away  should  have  liberty

54.  the®,  vestments  wherein  they  minister

5.  59.  the  p.  stood  arrayed  in  their  vestments

8.  77-  we  with  our  ®.  were  given  up  to  the  sword
Jud.  11.  13.  which  they  had  reserved  for  the  ®.
Wisd.  12.6.  with  their®,  out  of  their  idolatrous  crew
Eccl.  7.  29-  fear  the  Lord,  and  reverence  his  ®.

50.  12.  he  took  the  portions  out  of  the  ®.  hands
Bar.  1.  7.  to  the  ®.  and  all  the  people  at  Jerusalem
16.  confusion  of  faces  belongeth  to  our  p.

6.  10.  the®,  convey  from  their  gods,  gold,  silver

18.  even  so  the  ®.  make  fast  their  temples
28.  things  sacrificed,  their  p.  sell  and  abuse
31.  the®,  sit  in  their  ten. pies,  their  clothes  rent
33.  the  ®.  also  take  off  their  garments

48.  the  ®.  consult  with  themselves  where  may  be

55.  when  fire  falleth  their®,  will  flee  away
Dan.  3.  62.  O  ye®,  of  the  Lord,  bless  ye  the  Lord
Bel  8.  the  king  was  wroth,  and  called  for  his  ®.

10.  now  the  p.  of  Bel  were  threescore  and  ten
15.  in  thy  night  came  the®,  with  their  wives
28,  the  king  hath  put  the  ®.  to  death

1  Mac.  3.  49-  they  brought  also  the  ®.  garments
51.  thy®,  are  in  heaviness  and  brought  low

4.  38.  they  saw  the®,  chambers  pulled  down
42.  so  he  chose  ®.  of  blameless  conversation

5.  67.  certain®,  desirous  to  shew  their  valour,  slain

7.  36.  the  ®.  entered  in,  and  stood  before  the  altar

10.  42.  because  they  appertain  to  the  ®.  that  mi¬

nister

2  Mac.  1. 10.  who  was  of  the  stock  of  the  anointed®.
13.  they  were  slain  by  the  deceit  of  Nanea’s  ®.

19.  the  ®.  that  were  then  devout,  took  the  fire

20.  Neemiasdid  send  of  the  posterity  of  those  ®.
23.  the  ®.  made  a  prayer  while  sacrifice

30.  the  ®.  sung  psalms  of  thanksgiving

3.  15.  the  ®.  prostrating  themselves  before  the  altar

4.  14.  the®,  had  no  courage  to  serve  any  more

14.  34.  then  the  ®.  lift  up  their  hands  to  heaven

15.  31.  when  he  had  set  the  ®.  before  the  altar


PR  I  ESTH  ODD.

Eccl.  45  7.  he  gave  him  the  ®.  among  the  people

15.  they  should  execute  the  office  ot  the  ®.

24.  should  have  the  dignity  of  the  ®.  for  evei
1  Mac.  2.  54.  the  covenant  of  an  everlasting  ®.

7.  21.  but  Alcimus  contended  for  the  high  ®.

1 1.  27.  the  king  confirmed  him  in  the  high  ®.

16.  24.  are  written  in  the  chronicles  of  his  ®.

2 Mac.  2.  17.  that  gave  them  the  ®.  ami  the  sanctuary

4.  24.  he  got  the  ®.  to  himselt,  offering  more
11.  3.  to  set  the  high  ®.  to  sale  every  year

14.  7.  of  my  ancestor’s  honour,  1  mean  the  high  ®

PRIE1IL

Eccl.  14.  23.  he  that  p.  in  at  her  windows  shall  also
PRINCE.

Jud.  9.  10.  the  servant  with  the  ®.  and  the  ®.  with
Eccl.  41.  17.  be  ashamed  of  a  lie  before  a  p.

48.  12.  he  was  not  moved  with  presence  of  any  ®.
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  there  at  this  time  ®.  or  prophet
1  Mac.  3.  13.  when  Seron  a®,  of  the  army  heard

9.  30.  we  have  chosen  thee  this  day  to  be  our  ®.

15.  1.  unto  Simon  the  priest  and  ®.  of  the  Jews
2.  to  Simon  high  priest  and  ®.  of  his  nation

2Mac.li.24.  the  P.  ot  all  power  caused  an  apparition
PRINCES.

Eccl.  10. 14.  hath  cast  down  the  thrones  of  proud  ®.
39.  4.  he  shall  appear  before  ®.  he  will  travail
46.  18.  he  destroyed  all  the  ®.  of  the  Philistines
Bar.  2. 1.  against  our®,  and  the  men  of  Israel

3.  16.  where  are  the  ®.  of  the  heathen  become
1  Mac.  6.  60.  the  king  and  the  ®.  were  content
7.26.  the  king  sent  N  icanor  one  of  his  honourable®.
9.  37.  daughter  of  one  of  the  great  ®.  of  Chanaan
PRINCELY.

1  Esd.  4.46.  this  is  the®,  liberality  from  thee

PRINCIPALITY.

2  Mac.  4.  27-  so  Menelaus  got  the  ®.

5.  7.  howbeit,  for  all  this  he  obtained  not  the  ®.

PRISON.

Eccl.  13.  12.  he  will  not  spare  to  put  thee  in  ®.

2  Mac.  13.21.  when  had  gotten  him,  put  him  in®.
PRISONER.

Jud.  16.  9.  her  beauty  took  his  mind  ®.

2  Mac.  14.27.  that  he  should  send  Maccabeus®.

33.  if  you  will  not  deliver  me  Judas  as  a  ®.

PRISONERS.

2  Esd.  13.  40.  ten  tribes  which  were  carried  away  ®.
Wisd.  if.  2.  ®.  of  darkness,  and  fettered  with  night

1  Mac.  9.  70.  that  he  should  deliver  them  the  ®.

72.  when  he  had  restored  unto  him  the®.

15.  40.  Cendebeus  began  to  take  the  people  ®.
PRIVATE.

Esth.  14.  16. 1  wear  it  not  when  I  am  ®.  by  myself

2  Mac.  4.  5.  the  good  of  all,  both  public  and  ®.

PRIVY.

Wisd.  8.  4.  she  is  ®.  to  the  mysteries  of  knowledge
Sus.  18.  they  wentout  themselves  at ®.  doors
Bel  13.  under  table  they  had  made  a  ®.  entrance
21.  who  shewed  him  ®.  doors  where  they  came
2  Mac.  1.  16.  and  opening  a  ®.  door  of  the  roof
8. 7.  took  advantage  of  night  for  such  ®.  attempts

privIly.

1  Mac.  9.  60.  he  sent  letters  ®.  to  his  adherents

2  Mac.  1.  19.  the  priests  took  the  fire  of  the  altar  ®.
8. 1.  they  went®,  into  the  towns  and  called

PROCEED.

1  Esd.  2.  29.  those  wicked  workers  ®.  no  further

PROCEEDED.

2  Esd.  10.  19.  so  I  ®.  to  speak  further  unto  her

2  Mac.  6.  29.  the  speeches  ®.  from  a  desperate  mind
PIIOC  ESS.

2  Esd.  11.  20.  in  p.  of  time  the  feathers  stood  up
PROCESSION.

2  Mac.  6. 7.  were  compelled  to  go  in  ®.  to  Bacchus
PROCLAMATION.

1  Esd. 2. 2.  he  made®,  through  all  hiskingdom

1  Mac.  5.  49.  Judas  commanded  a  ®.  to  be  made

PROCLAIMING.

2  Mac.  8.  11.®.  a  sale  of  the  captive  Jews

PROCURE.

1  Mac.  7.15.  we  will®,  the  harm  neither  of  you

13.  17.  he  should  ®.  to  himself  great  hatred
PROCURED.

Esth.  16.  13.  who  continually  ®.  our  good
PROFANATION.

1  Mac.  1. 48.  with  all  manner  of  uncleauness  and  ®.
PROFAN  E.

1  Mac.  1.  45.  that  they  should  ®.  the  sabbaths
63.  that  they  might  not®,  the  holy  covenant

2.  34.  neither  will  we®,  the  sabbath-day

2  Mac.  5.  16.  with®,  hands  pulling  down  things

6.  5.  the  altar  also  was  filled  with  ®.  things

PROFANED.

2  Esd.  10.  22.  the  name  named  on  us  is  almost  ®.

1  Mac.  1.43.  many  of  the  Israelites  ®.  the  sabbath

3.  51.  thy  sanctuary  is  trodden  down  and  ®.

4.  38.  when  they  saw  altar®,  they  rent  their  clothes
54.  and  what  day  the  heathen  had  ®.  it

2  Mac.  8.  2.  pity  the  temple  ®.  of  wicked  men

10.  5.  the  same  day  that  the  strangers®,  the  temple

PROFANELY.

2  Esd.  15.  8.  their  wickedness  they®,  commit
PROFANENESS.

2  Mac.  4.  13.  through  the  exceeding  ®.  of  Jason
PROFESS.

Eccl.  3.  25.  ®.  not  the  knowledge  thou  hast  not
PROFIT.

2  Esd.  7. 47.  for  what®,  for  men  to  live  in  heaviness  ?

49.  what®,  is  it  to  us  if  there  be  promised  us
£ccl.5.8.they  shall  not®,  thee  in  the  day  of  calamity

11.  23.  say  not,  what  ®.  is  there  of  my  service  i
13.  4.  if  thou  he  for  his  ®.  he  will  use  thee

20.  10.  there  is  a  gift  that  shall  not®,  thea
30.  wisdom  that  is  hid,  and  treasure  that'  i
hoarded  up,  what®,  is  in  them  both  f

29.  11.  it  shall  bring  thee  more  ®.  than  gold

30.  23.  sorrow  hath  killed,  and  there  is  no®,  therein

34.  23.  what®,  have  they  then  butVabour  ?

26.  or  what  doth  his  humbling  ®.  him  ?

2  Mac.  2.  25.  been  careful  that  all  might  have  ®.
PROFITABLE.

Tob.  3.  6.  it  is  ®.  for  me  to  die  rather  than  live

677


Apocrypha.]  PRO


P  S  A


PUN


Tob.  4. 18.  and  despise  not  any  counsel  that  is  p.
Wisd.  8.  7-  can  have  nothing  more  p.  in  their  life
Eccl.  10.  4.  he  will  set  over  it  one  that  is  p.

37.  28.  for  all  things  are  not  p.  for  all  men

£  Mac.  12. 12.  that  they  would  lie  p.  in  many  things
PROFITED.

Wisd.  5. 8.  what  hath  pride  p.  us,  or  riches
Eccl.  33. 16.  by  the  blessing  of  Lord  I  p.  and  filled
51.  17*  ip-  therein,  therefore  will  I  ascribe  glory
PRO  FOUNDER.

Eccl.  24. 29.  her  counsels p.  than  the  great  deep
PROGENITORS.

Esth.  16.  16.  who  ordered  the  kingdom  to  ourp.
PROLOGUE.

2  Mac.  2.  32.  it  is  a  foolish  thing  to  make  a  longp.
PROLONG.

Eccl.  29.  5.  he  will  p.  the  time,  and  return  words

38.  14.  they  give  for  ease  and  remedy  to  p.  life

PROLONGE'l'H.

i Eccl.  30.  22.  the  joylulness  of  a  man p. .his  days
37.  31.  but  he  that  taketh  heed  p.  his  life
PROMISED.

Bar.  2.  34.  which  1  p.  with  an  oath  to  their  fathers

1  Mac.  11.  28.  he  p.  him  three  hundred  talents

2  Mac.  2.  18.  he p.  in  the  law,  will  have  mercy  on  us

4.  9.  besides  this  he  p.  to  assign  150  more

7. 26.  she  p.  him  that  she  would  counsel  her  son
PROMISES.

2  Esd.  5.  29.  and  they  which  did  gainsay  thy  p.
IVisd.  12.  21 .  hast  sworn  and  made  coven,  of  good  p.

1  Mac.  10.  15.  had  heard  what p.  Demetrius  had  sent

PROMISE  i  ll.

Eccl.  20.  23.  that  for  bashfulness p.  to  his  friend
PROMISING.

£  Esd.  3.  15.  p.  that  thou  wouldst  never  forsake

2  Mac. 4. 8. p.  to  the  king  by  intercession  talents

PROMO  f'E.

Eccl.  20. 27.  a  wise  man  shall  p.  himself  to  honour
PROMOTED.

1  Mac.  11. 26.  kingp.  him  in  sight  of  all  his  friends

PRONOUNCED.

.1  a d .  8. 11.  this  oath  which  yep.  between  G.  and  you
Bar.  2. 1.  L.made  good  his  word  which  hep.  ag.  us
7.  plagues  which  the  Lord  hath  p.  against  us
Sics.  53.  for  thou  hastp.  false  judgment
PRONOUNCETH.

IVisd.  2.  16.  he  p.  the  end  of  the  just  to  be  blessed
PROPER.

IVisd.  18.21.  bringeth  the  shield  of  his  p.  ministry
19.  6.  for  the  whole  creature  in  his p.  kind
PROPERLY.

Tab.  1.  2.  Thisbe,  which  is  called  p.  Naphtali
PROPHECY.

2  Esd.  15. 1.  behold,  speak  thou  the  words  of  p.

7 oh.  2.  6.  remembering  that  p.  of  Amos,  as  he  said
Eccl.  49.  6.  according  to  the p.  of  Jeremias
PROPHECIES.

Eccl.  39.  1.  he  will  be  occupied  in  p.

44.  3.  giving  counsel  and  declaring  p.

PROPHESY.

£  Esd.  8.  5.  agreed  to  give  ear,  and  art  willing  to  p.
IVisd.  14.  28.  either  mad  when  merry,  or p.  lies
Eccl.  47.  1.  and  after  him  rose  up  Nathan  to  p.
PROPHESIED.

1  Esd.  6.  1.  Aggeus  and  Zachariasp.  to  the  Jews
Jud.  6.  2.  that  thou  hast  p.  among  us  to-day
Eccl.  46.  20.  and  after  his  death  hep.  and  shewed
PROPHET.

1  Esd.  1 . 20.  since  the  time  of  thep.  Samuel
28.  not  regarding  the  words  of  the  p.  Jeremy

2  Esd.  1.1.  the  second  book  of  the/;.  Esdras
'fob.  14.  4.  which  Jonas  the  p.  spake  of  Nineve
IVisd.  1 1 . 1 .  she  prospered  in  the  hand  of  the  holy  p.
Eccl.  46.  1.3.  Samuel  the  p.  of  the  Lord,  beloved

15.  by  his  faithfulness  he  was  found  a  true  p.

48.  1.  then  stood  up  Elias  the  p.  as  fire

49.  7.  Jeremias,  who  nevertheless  wasp,  sanctified
Bel  33.  there  was  in  Jewry  a  p.  called  Habbacuc

1  Mac.  4.  46.  till  there  should  come  ap.  to  shew

9.  27.  since  the  time  that  a  p.  was  not  seen
14.41.  until  there  should  arise  a  faithful  p.

■2  Mac.  2. 1.  that  Jeremy  thep. commanded  them
2.  how  that  thep.  having  given  them  the  law
4.  thep.  being  warned  of  God, commanded

15.  14.  this  is  Jeremias  the  p.  of  God

PROPH  El'S.

3  Esd.  1.  51.  thejT  made  a  sport  of  his  p.

6.  1.  the  p.  prophesied  unto  the  Jews
Tob.  4. 12.  for  we  are  the  children  of  the  p.

14.  5.  as  the  p.  have  spoken  thereof
Wisd.  7.  27-  she  maketh  them  friends  of  God,  andp.
Eccl.  36.  15.  raise  up  p.  that  have  been  in  thy  name

16.  and  let  thyp.  be  found  faithful

PROPITIATION.

IVisd.  18.  21.  even  prayer  and  p.  of  incense
Eccl.  5.  5.  concerning p.  be  not  without  fear
35.  3.  and  to  forsake  unrighteousness  is  ap.

PROPORTIONALLY.

Wisd.  13.  5.p.  the  maker  of  them  is  seen
PROSPER.

2  Esd.  5. 12.  shall  labour,  but  their  ways  shall  notp.
Tob.  4. 19.  that  all  thy  paths  and  counsels  may  p.

5.  16.  his  father  said,  God  p.  your  journey
Eccl.  15.  10.  and  the  Lord  will  p.  it

38. 14.  that  he  would  p.  that  which  they  give

PROSPERED.

Wisd.  11.  1.  shep.  their  works  in  hand  of  prophet

1  Mac.  2.  47.  and  the  work  p.  in  their  hand
3.  6.  because  salvation  p.  in  his  hand

14.  36.  for  in  his  time  things  p.  in  his  hands

16.  2.  things  havep.  so  well  in  our  hands

2  Mac.  8.  8.  that  thingsp.  with  him  still  more

PROSPERITY.

Eccl.  6. 11.  but  in  thy  p.  he  will  be  as  thyself

10.  5.  in  the  hand  of  God  is  the  p.  of  man

11. 14.  p.  and  adversity  ,  life  and  death  come  of  Ld.

17.  and  his  favour  bringeth  p.  for  ever

25.  in  day  of  p.  is  a  forgetfulness  of  affliction
J t.  8.  a  friend  cannot  be  known  in  p.

■j.  in  thep.  of  a  man  enemies  will  be  grieved
13.  26.  is  a  token  of  a  heart  that  is  inp.

22.  23.  that  thou  mavest  rejoice  in  his p.

(378


Eccl.  37.  4.  which  rejoiceth  in  the  p.  of  a  friend

41. 1.  to  the  man  that  hath  p.  in  all  things

1  Mac.  12.  22.  do  well  to  write  to  us  of  your  p.

2  Mac.  9.  19.  wisheth  much  joy,  health,  andp.

PROSPEROUS.

1  Esd.  8. 50.  to  desire  of  him  a  p.  journey  for  us
Tob.  5.  21.  and  his  journey  shall  be  p.

10.  11.  the  God  of  heaven  give  you  ap.  journey
Eccl.  43.  26.  the  end  of  them  hath  p.  success
PROSPEROUSLY.

1  Esd.  6.  10.  the  work  goeth  on  p.  in  their  hands
'Tob.  4.  6.  thy  doings  shall  p.  succeed  to  thee

PROSTRATING.

2  Mac.  3. 15.  but  priests  p.  themselves  before  altar

PROF  EOT.

Wisd.  5. 16.  and  with  his  arm  shall  he  p.  them
PROTECTETH.

Jud.  9. 14.  no  other  that  p.  the  people  of  Israel
PROTECTING.

1  Mac.  .3.3.  he  made  battlesp.  the  host  with  thesword

PROTECTION.

Eccl.  34. 16.  he  is  their  mighty  p.  and  strong  stay

2  Mac.  13.  17.  the  p.  of  the  I^ord  did  help  him

PROTECTOR.

Jud.  9.  11.  for  thou  art  ap.  of  the  forlorn
2  Mac.  ll.  l.  Lysias  the  king’s  p.  and  cousin

13.  2.  Lysias  his  p.  and  ruler  of  his  affairs
PROTESTA HONS.

Eccl.  46. 19.  he  made  p.  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord
PROUD.

2  Esd.  11.44.  Highest  hath  looked  on  the  p.  times
Esth.  13. 12.  that  1  did  not  bow  down  to  p.  Aman
IVisd.  14.  6.  in  old  time  when  thep.  giants  perished
Eccl.  3.  28.  in  the  punishment  of  thep.  no  remedy

10.  9.  why  is  earth  and  ashes  p.  ?

14.  the  Lord  cast  down  the  thrones  of  p.  princes

15.  the  Ld.  hath  plucked  up  roots  of  thep.  nations

11.  .30.  as  a  partridge,  so  is  the  heart  of  the  p.

1.3.1.  he  that  hath  fellowship  with  ap.  man

20.  as  the  p.  hate  humility,  so  doth  the  rich

21.  4.  the  house  of  p.  men  shall  be  made  desolate
23.  4.  O  God  of  my  life,  give  me  not  ap.  look
8.  the  evil-speaker  and  p.  shall  fall  thereby
25.  2.  my  soul  hateth  a  poor  man  that  is  p.

27.  15.  the  strife  of  the  p.  is  blood-shedding
28.  mockery  and  reproach  are  from  the  p.

31. 26.  so  wine  the  hearts  of  the  p.  by  drunkenness
32.  12.  do  what  thou  wilt,  but  sin  not  by  p.  speech

18.  but  a  />.  man  is  not  daunted  with  fear

35. 18.  he. have  taken  away  the  multitude  of  the  p.
51.  10.  he  would  not  leave  me  in  the  time  of  the  p.

1  Mac.  2. 47.  they  pursued  also  after  the  p.  men

2  Mac.  9.  8.  so  p.  was  he  beyond  the  condition
15. 32.  the  hand  that  with p.  brags  he  had  stretched

PROUDLY.

Jud.  6.  17-  spoken  p.  against  the  house  of  Israel
Eccl.  48. 18.  his  hand  against  Sion  and  boasted  p.

1  Mac.  1.  21.  he  entered  p.  into  the  sanctuary
24.  having  made  great  massacre  and  spoken  p.

7.  34.  but  he  mocked  them  and  spake  p.

47.  his  hand  which  he  stretched  out  sop.

2  Mac.  9.  4.  for  he  had  spoken  p.  in  this  sort

12.  that  a  man  should  not  p.  think  of  himself

PROVE.

Wisd.  2. 17-  let  usp.  what  shall  happen  in  the  end

19.  we  may  know  his  meekness,  and  p.  jratience
Eccl.  6.  7-  if  thou  wouldest  get  a  friend, p.  him  first

37.  27-  my  son,  p.  thv  soul  in  thy  lile
PROVED.  *

Wisd.  .3.  5.  for  God  p.  and  found  them  worthy
Eccl.  44.20.  when  he  was  p.  he  was  found  faithful
PRO  VET  II.

Eccl.  27.  5.  the  furnace  p.  the  potter’s  vessel

31. 26.  the  furnace  p.  the  edge  by  dipping

PROVERB.

Tob.  3. 4.  and  for  a  p.  of  reproach  to  all  nations
PROVERBS.

Eccl.  8.  8.  but  acquaint  thyself  with  their  p.

47.  17-  the  countries  marvelled  at  thee  tor  thyp.
PROVIDE.

1  Mac.  10.  6.  to  p.  weapons  that  he  might  aid  him
PROVIDED.

Wisd.  13.  16.  he  p.  for  it,  that  it  might  not  fall

1  Mac.  10. 21.  gathered  forces,  and  p.  much  armour

14. 10.  he  p.  victuals  for  the  cities,  and  set  in  them

2  Mac.  4.21.  Antiochusp.  for  his  own  safety

PROVIDENCE.

Wisd.  14.  3.  but  thy  p.  O  Father,  governeth  it

17.  2.  they  lay  exiled  from  the  eternal  p.
PROVISION.

Jud.  2. 17.  and  goats  without  number  for  their  p.

4.  5.  they  laid  up  victuals  for  the  p.  of  war
12.  3.  if  p.  fail,  how  should  we  give  thee  the  like?
2  Mac.  6.  21.  to  bring  flesh  of  his  own  p.

12.27.  wherein  was  great  p.  of  engines  and  darts

PROVOKE.

Jud.  8. 14.  p.  not  the  Lord  our  God  to  anger

11. 11.  wherefore  they  will  p.  their  God  to  anger
Eccl.  4.  2.  neither  p.  a  man  in  his  distress

1  Mac.  6.  34.  they  might  p.  elephants  to  tight
15.  40.  Cendebeus  began  top.  the  people
PROVOKED.

1  Esd.  6.  15.  but  when  our  fathers  p.  God  to  wrath

2  Esd  1-7.  they  have  p.  me  to  wrath,  and  despised
Bar.  4.  7.  for  ye  p.  him  that  made  you

PRUDENCE.

Wisd.  8.  6.  if  p.  work,  who  more  cunning  than  she  ?
7.  teacheth  temperance,/;,  justice,  and  fortitude

18.  in  the  exercise  of  conference  with  herp.

Eccl.  1.  4.  the  understanding  of  p.  from  everlasting

10.  .3.  through  the  p.  of  them  that  are  in  authority
19. 22.  nor  at  any  time  is  the  counsel  of  sinnersp.
25.9.  well  is  him  that  hath  found  p.

.34.  10.  but  he  that  hath  travelled,  is  full  ofp.
PRUDENT.

Eccl.  3.  29.  the  heart  of  the  p.  will  understand
6.  32.  if  thou  apply  thy  mind,  thou  shait  be  p.

10. 1.  the  government  of  ap.  man  is  well  ordered

PSALM.

Jud.  16.  2.  tune  unto  him  a  new  p  exalt  him
PSALMS.

2  Mac.  1.  30.  the  priests  sung  p.  of  thanksgiving


2  Mac. 10. 7. they  sang  p. to  him  that  had  given  succew
38.  this  done,  they  praised  the  1  ord  with  p.

12.  37.  he  sung p.  with  a  loud  voice
PSALTERY.

2  Esd.  10.22.  ourp.  is  laid  on  the  ground,  our  son®
Wisd.  19.  18.  like  as  in  ap.  notes  change  the  tune
Eccl.  40.21.  the  pipe  andp.  make  sweet  melody
PiOLEMAIS.

1  Mac.  5.  15.  they  of  P.  and  ot yrtts  are  assembled
55.  Simon  his  brother  in  GalfUe  before  P.

10.  1.  Alexander  went  up  and  took  P.

58.  Alexander  celebrated  her  marriage  at  P.

60.  who  thereupon  went  honourably  to  P.

12.  48.  they  of  P.  shut  the  gates  and  took  him
PTOLEMEE.

1  Mac.  1.18.  but  P.  was  afraid  of  him  and  fled

3.  38.  then  Lysias  chose  P.  son  of  Dorymenes
10. 51.  sent  ambassadors  to  P.  kingofEgypt

11.  .3.  now  as  P.  entered  into  the  cities

15.  kingP.  brought  forth  his  host  and  met  him

16.  Alexander  tied,  but  king  P.  was  exalted
18.  king  P.  also  dying  the  third  day  after

15.  16.  Lucius  consul,  unto  king  P.  greeting

16.  16.  P.  and  his  men  rose  up  and  took  weapons
18.  then  P.  wrote  these  things,  and  sent  to  king

21.  and,  quoth  he,  P.  hath  sent  to  slay  thee  also

2  Mac.  4.  45.  promised  P.  the  son  of  Dorymenes

46.  P.  taking  the  king  aside  into  a  gallery

6.  8.  there  went  out  a  decree  by  the  suggestion  of  P.

.  PTOLEMEUS.

Esth.  11.  1.  P.  his  son  brought  this  epistle

1  Mac.  16.  11.  P.  the  son  of  Abubns  madecaptain

2  Mac.  1.  10. to  Aristobulus  kingP.  master

4.  21.  the  coronation  of  kingP.  Philometor

8.  8.  he  wrote  unto  P.  the  governor  of  Celosyria

10. 12.  P.  that  was  called  Macron  endeavoured
PUBLIC.

Eccl.  .38.33.  they  shall  not  besought  for  inp. counsel

1  iliac.  14.  23.  to  put  copy  of ambassage  inp.  records

2  Mac.  4.  5.  seeking  the  good  of  all,  p.  and  private

15.  6.  to  set  up  a  p.  monument  of  his  victory

PUBLISH.

2  Esd.  14.  26.  some  things  shait  thou  p.

Esth.  16.  19.  ye  shall  p.  the  copy  of  this  letter
PUBLISHED.

1  Esd.  9.53.  the  Levites  p.  all  things  to  the  people

PUFFED.

2  Mac.  7.  34.  be  notp.  up  with  uncertain  hopes

11.  4.  but  p.  up  with  his  ten  thousand  footmen

PULL.

2  Esd.  1.  8.p.  thou  off  then  the  hair  of  thy  head
Wisd.  1. 12.  and  p.  not  on  yourselves  destruction
1  Mac.  4.  45.  they  thought  it  best  to  p.  it  down
6.  62.  he  gave  commandment  to  /;.  down  the  wall
9. 55.  as  he  began  to  p.down,  Alcimus  was  plagued
PULLED.

1  Esd.  6.  16.  who  p.  down  the  house  and  burned  it
8.  71.  I  P-  off  the  hair  from  off  my  head
Jud.  10.  3 -p.  off  the  sackcloth  which  he  had  on
Eccl.  28.  14.  strong  cities  hath  itp.  down
40.  16.  the  weed  shall  bep.  up  before  all  grass

1  Mac.  1.  22.  the  ornaments,  all  which  hep.  off
.31., he  p.  down  the  houses  and  walls  thereof

2. 25.  commissioner  he  killed,  the  altar  he  p.  down
45.  then  Mattathiasp.  down  the  altars
4.38.  they  saw  the  priests’  chambers  p.  down

5.  65.  hep.  down  the  fortress  of  it.  and  burnt  towers

6.  7.  they  p.  down  the  abomination  he  set  up

2  Mac.  7-  7-  they  had  p.  off  the  skin  of  his  head

10.  2.  the  altars  and  the  chapels  theyp.  down

PULLE1H.

Eccl.  34.23.  one  buiideth,  and  another  p.  down  •
PULLING.

2  Mac.  5.  16.  with  profane  hands  p.  down  things
PULPIT.

1  Esd.  9.  42.  Esdras  stood  upon  a  p.  of  wood
PUNISH.

Tob.  3.  3.  p.  me  not  for  my  sins  and  ignorance*
Wisd.  11.  10.  the  other  thou  didst  condemn  and  p.

12.  20.  if  thou  didst  p.  the  enemies  of  children
18.  8.  wherewith  thou  didst  p.  our  adversaries

1  Mac.  7.  7.  let  lump,  them  with  allthataid  them

2  Mac.  1.  28.  p.  them  that  oppress  us  and  do  wrong

6.  14.  whom  the  Lord  patiently  forbears  top.

16.  tho’  he p.  with  adversity,  vet  doth  not  forsake

PUNISHED.

2  Esd.  9.  13.  how  the  ungodly  shall  bep.  and  when
Jud.  11. 10.  for  our  nation  shall  not  be  p.

Wisd.  3.  4.  for  though  they  bep.  in  sight  of  men
10.  but  the  ungodly  shall  bep.  according  to

11.  5.  by  what  tilings  their  enemies  werep.

8.  how  thou  hadstp.  their  adversaries
16.  by  the  same  also  shall  lie  be  p.

12.  14.  for  any  of  whom  thou  hadstp.

15.  condemn  him  that  hath  not  deserved  to  be  p.
27.  look  for  what  things  they  grudged  when  they
werep.  now  beingp.  in  them  w  hen  they  saw  It
14.  10.  shall  be  p.  together  with  him  that  made  it
30.  for  both  causes  shall  they  be  justly  p.

16.  1.  by  the  like  were  they  p.  worthily

9.  tor  they  were  worthy  to  bep.  by  such

18.  11.  the  master  and  the  servant  were  p.

22.  but  with  a  word  subdued  him  that  p.

Eccl.  2.3.  21.  this  man  shall  bep.  in  the  streets

1  Mac.  14.  45.  or  break  these  things  should  bep.

2  Mac.  6.  13.  not  suffered  long,  but  forthwith  p.

7.  7.  they  _ked,  w  ilt  thou  eat  before  thou  be  p.  ?

PUN1SIJETH.

Jud.  7.  28.  which  p.  us  according  to  our  sins
Wisd.  1.  8.  nor  vengeance  when  itp.  pass  by  him

14.  31.  thatp.  always  the  offence  of  the  ungodly

PUNISHING.

Eccl.  39.  30.  p.  the  wicked  to  destruction
PUN  lSIIMENT.

2  Esd.  7-  21.  what  they  should  observe  to  avoid  p.

47.  what  profit  for  men  after  death  to  look  forp.

15.  12.  Egypt  smitten  with  the  plague  and  p.

II  isd.  16.  2.  instead  of  whichp.  dealing  graciously
24.  against  the  unrighteous  for  their  p.

19.  4.  they  might  fulfil  thep.  which  was  wanting
Eccl.  3.  28.  in  p.  of  the  proud  there  is  no  remedy

8.  5.  remember  that  we  are  all  worthy  ofp.


R  A  N


RE  B  [Apocrypha.


QUE


Eccl.  1C.  6.  keep,  against  (he  mighty  day  of  their  p.
2  Mac.  4.  38.  thus  the  Lord  rewarded  him  bis/).

48.  thus  they  did  soon  suffer  unjust  p.

0.  ‘J6.  tlio’  I  snould  be  delivered  from  the  p.  of  men

7.  36.  tbou  shalt  receive  just  p.  for  thy  pride

PUNISHMENTS.

JVj cd.  11.  13.  when  they  heard  by  their  own  p.

19.  13.  and  p.  came  upon  the  sinners
C  Mac.  6.  12.  judge  those  p.  not  to  be  for  destruction
PURE.

Toh.  3.  14.  that  T  am  p.  from  all  sin  with  man

13.  16.  thy  towers  and  battlements  with  p.  gold
li'isd.  7.  23.  p.  and  most  subtile  spirits
Eccl.  21.  13.  his  counsel  is  like  a/;.  fountain  of  life
Bar.  3.  30.  who  will  bring  her  for/;.  gold  ?
PURENESS.

IVisd.  7.  24.  she  goeth  thro’  all  by  reason  of  her  p.
Eccl.  51.  20.  and  1  found  her  in  p.

PURGE.

Tab.  12.  9.  for  alms  shall  p.  away  all  sin
PURIFICATION.

2  Mac.  1.  18.  purposed  to  keep  the  p.  of  the  temple
PURIFIED.

2  Mac.  1.  33.  N  eemias  had  p.  sacrifices  therewith

2.  18.  he  delivered  us  and  hath/;.  the  place

12.  38.  they/;.  themselves  as  the  custom  was

PURPLE.

Eccl.  40.  4.  from  him  that  weareth  p.  and  a  crown
45.  10.  with  gold,  and  blue  silk  and  p.

Bar.  6. 12.  though  they  be  covered  with  p.  raiment
72.  by  the  bright  p.  that  rotteth  upon  them

1  Mac.  4.  23.  where  they  got  gold  and  p.  of  the  sea

8.  14.  none  was  clothed  in/;.  to  be  magnified

10.  20.  he  sent  him  a  p.  robe  and  a  crown  of  gold
62.  the  king  commanded  to  clothe  him  in  p.

2  Mac.  4-  38.  he  took  away  Andronicus's  p.

PURPOSE.

Jud.  8. 14.  can  ye  search  God,  or  comprehend  his  p.

11. 1 1.  be  not  defeated  and  frustrate  of  Ids  p.

13.  3.  spake  to  Bagoas  according  to  the  same  p.

1  Mac.  15.  3.  my  p.  is  to  challenge  it  again

2  Mac.  3.  8.  but  indeed  to  fulfil  the  king's  p.

PURPOSED.

Jud.  9.  8.  they  have  p.  to  defile  thy  sanctuary

13.  who  have  p.  cruel  things  against  thy  covenant

11. 12.  they  p.  to  consume  all  rhose  things
Wind.  8.  9.  I  p.  to  take  her  to  me  to  live  with  me
Eccl.  51.  18.  I  p.  to  do  after  her,  and  1  followed

1  Mac.  14.  31.  enemies/;,  to  invade  their  country

2  Mac.  1.  18.  we  are  p.  to  keep  the  purification

PUB  POSES.

Jud.  11.  6.  my  lord  shall  not  fail  of  his/;.

Esth.  12.  2.  he  searched  out  their  p.  and  learned
16.  9.  both  by  changing  our  /;.  and  judging
PURSUE.

Jud.  14.  4.  ye  shall  p.  them,  and  overthrow  them
2  Mac.  8.  26.  they  would  no  longer  p.  them
PURSUED.

Wisd.  19.  3.  and  they  p.  them  as  fugitives

1  Mac.  2.  47.  they  p.  also  after  the  proud  men

3.  5.  for  he  p.  the  wicked,  and  sought  them  out

4.  9.  when  Pharaoh  p.  them  with  an  army

15.  for  they  p.  them  unto  Gazara  and  Idumea

5.  22.  he  p.  them  to  the  gate  of  Ptolemais
60.  and  p.  them  to  the  borders  of  J  udea

9.  15.  who  p.  them  unto  the  mount  Azotus
15.  11.  being  p.  by  king  Antioch  us,  he  tied

2  Mac.  5.  8.  lleeing  from  city  to  city,/;,  of  all  men

PURSUING.

1  Mac.  4.  16.  Judas  returned  again  from  p.  them

2  Mac.  12.  23.  Judas  was  verv  earnest  in/;,  them

PURVEYOR.

Tab.  1.  13.  before  Euemassar,  so  that  I  was  his  p.

PUT.

2  F.sd.  3. 16.  didst  choose  him  to  thee,  and/;,  by  Esau
IVisd.  3. 9.  that  p.  trust  in  him,  shall  understand
Eccl.  13.  6.  smile  on  thee,  and  p.  thee  in  hope
Bus.  51.  p.  these  two  aside  one  from  another
56.  so  he  p.  him  aside  and  commanded  to  bring
2  Mac.  13. 10.  at  tlie  point  to  be  p.  from  their  law
PUTTING.

Jud.  16.  17.  in  p.  fire  and  worms  in  their  flesh
2  Mac.  4.  11.  and  p.  down  the  governments
PYRAMIDS.

1  Mac.  13. 28.  he  set  up  seven/;,  one  against  another


Q.

QUAILS.

2  Esd.  1.  15.  the  ?.  were  as  a  token  for  you
IVisd.  16.  2.  even  q.  to  stir  up  their  appetite
19.  12.  for  q.  came  up  to  them  from  the  sea
QUAKE.

1  Mac.  4.32.  let  them  q.  at  their  destruction

QUAKED.

Jud.  16. 10.  the  Persians  q.  at  her  boldness

QUAKETH.

2  Esd.  16.  12.  the  earth  q.  and  foundations  thereof

QUANTITY.

2  Esd.  4.  30.  the  q.  which  is  past  did  more  exceed
QUARRELLING.

Eccl.  31.  29.  excess  maketh  brawling  and?.

QUARTERS.

1  Mac.  3.  36.  should  place  strangers  in  all  their  q.

5.  9.  the  Israelites  that  were  in  their  q.

QUELL.

1  Mac.  4. 30.  who  didst  q.  the  violence  of  the  mighty

QUENCH.

£  Esd.  16.  4.  a  fire  is  sent,  and  who  may  <7.  it  ?
Esth.  14.  9.  they  will  ?.  the  glory  of  thy  house
QUENCHED.

IVisd.  11.4.  their  thirst  was?,  out  of  the  hard  stone
Eccl.  28.  12.  if  thou  spit  on  it,  it  shall  be  ?.

23.  and  it  shall  burn  in  them,  and  not  be  ?.

QUEN  CITETH.

Wisd.  16.  17.  had  force  in  water  that  ?.  all  things

QUENCHING.

IVisd.  19. 20.  the  water  forgat  his  own  ?.  nature
QUEST' ION.

I  Esd.  6.  30.  every  year,  without  further  ?.


QUESTIONS.

2  Esd.  8.  55.  therefore  ask  thou  no  more  ?.

QUICK.

IVisd.  7.  2£.  loving  the  thing  that  is  good,  ?.

8.  11. 1  shall  be  found  of  a  ?.  conceit  in  judgment
Eccl.  31. 22.  my  son,  in  all  thy  works  be  ?.
QUICKEN.

2  Esd.  8.  13.  and  thou  shalt  ?.  it  as  thy  work
QUICKLY.

Wisd.  3.  18.  or  if  they  die  ?.  they  have  no  hope

6.  15.  whoso  watcheth,  shall  ?.  be  without  care

1  Mac.  2.  40,  they  will  ?.  root  us  out  of  the  earth

6.  27.  wherefore  if  thou  dost  not  prevent  them  ?.

2  Mac.  14.44.  but  they  ?.  giving  back,  he  fell

QUIET.

2  Esd.  10.  3.  when  they  had  all  left  off  to  comfort
me,  to  the  end  1  might  be  ?,  then  I  rose  and  fied
Esth.  16.  8.  we.  must  take  care  that  our  kingdom  for
time  to  come  may  be  ?.  and  peaceable  for
all  men

IVisd.  18.  14.  while  all  things  were  in  ?.  silence
Eccl.  25.  20.  so  is  a  wife  full  of  words  to  a  ?.  man
47.  13.  Solomon  reigned  in  a  peaceable  time,  was
honoured,  for  God  made  all  ?.  round  about  him

1  Mac.  1. 3.  that  the  earth  was  ?.  before  him

2  Mac.  12. 2.  N  icanor  would  not  suffer  them  to  be  ?.

14.  10.  not  possible  that  the  state  should  be  <7.

25.  so  he  married,  was  ?.  and  took  part  of  life

QUIETLY.

Eccl.  28.  16.  never  find  rest,  and  never  dwell  ?.

2  Mac.  11.  23.  they  that  are  in  our  realm  live  ?.
QUIETNESS.

2  Esd.  2. 24.  abide,  take  rest,  for  thy  ?,  shall  come
QUIVER.

Eccl.  26. 12.  by  every  hedge  she  will  sit  down,  and
open  her  ?.  against  every  arrow

R.

RABSACES.

Eccl.  48.  18.  Sennacherib  came  up  ana  sent  R.
RACE.

Eccl.  26.  21.  thy  r.  thou  leavest  shall  be  magnified
RAGE.

Wisd.  11.  18.  or  unknown  wild  beasts  full  of  r.
Eccl.  31.  30.  drunkenness  increaseth  the  r.

36.  9.  let  him  be  consumed  by  the  r.  of  the  fire

1  Mac.  7.  35.  with  that  he  went  out  in  a  great  r.

15.  36.  but  returned  in  a  r.  to  the  king

2  Mac.  4.  25.  having  the  r.  of  a  savage  beast
40.  the  common  people  being  filled  with  r.

7.  3.  then  the  king  being  in  a  r.  commanded

10.  28.  making  their  r.  leader  of  their  battle

RAGES.

Tob.  1.  14. 1  left  at  It.  a  city  of  Media,  ten  talents

5.  5.  he  said  to  him,  canst  thou  go  with  me  to  It.  i

6.  9.  and  when  they  were  come  near  to  It.

RAGUEL.

Tob.  3.7.  Sara  the  daughter  of  R.  was  reproached

6.  10.  to-day  we  shall  lodge  with  It.  thy  cousin

7.  6.  then  R.  leaped  up,  and  kissed  him,  and  wept
y.  he  communicated  the  matter  with  R.  and  R.

said  to  Tobias,  eat,  drink,  and  make  merry

8.  9.  R.  arose,  and  went  and  made  a  grave

15.  It.  praised  God,  and  said,  thou  art  worthy

9.  3.  It.  hath  sworn  that  l  shall  not  depart

RAILINGS.

Eccl.  29.  6.  he  payeth  him  with  cursings  and  r.
RAIN.

2  Esd.  4.  50.  as  the  r.  is  more  than  the  drops

8.  43.  the  seed  perisheth  if  it  receive  not  thy  r.  in
due  season,  or  if  there  come  too  much  r.
Jud.  8.  31.  pray  for  us,  the  Lord  will  send  us  r.
IVisd.  16.  22.  fire  sparkling  in  the  r.  destroy  eth  truits
Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  number  the  drops  ot  r.  ?

35.  20.  as  clouds  of  r.  in  the  time  or  drought
40.  13.  goods  shall  vanish  like  a  great  thunder  in  t.

49.  9.  of  the  enemies  under  the  figure  ot  the  r.
Bar.  6.  53.  nor  can  they  give  r.  unto  men

RAINBOW.

Eccl.  43.  1 1 .  look  on  r.  and  praise  him  that  made  it

50.  7.  as  r.  giving  light  in  the  bright  clouds

RAIN  S.

Wisd.  16.  16.  with  strange  r.  were  persecuted
RAIN  ETH.

Eccl  1. 19.  wisdom  r.  down  skill  and  knowledge
RAINING.

Eccl.  43.  18.  the  heart  is  astonished  at  the  r.  of  it
RAISE.

2  Esd.  2.  16.  those  that  be  dead  will  I  r.  again
12.23.  the  Most  High  shall  r.  up  three  kingdoms
Eccl.  36.  7.  r.  up  indignation,  and  pour  out  wrath
48.  5.  who  didst  r.  up  a  dead  man  from  death
2  Mac.  7.  9.  the  King  of  the  world  shall  r.  us  up
RAISED.

t  Esd.  2.  2.  the  Lord  r  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus
23.  Jews  were  rebellious,  and  r.  always  wars
8~  81.  honoured  the  temple  and  r.  up  desolate  Sion
2  Esd.  6.  21.  and  they  shall  live  and  be  r.  up

7.  31.  the  world  that  awaketh  shall  not  be  r.

Eccl  49. 13.  N eemias  who  r.  up  tor  us  the  walls  that
were  fallen,  and  r.  up  our  ruins  again
Sus.  45.  Lord  r.  up  the  spirit  of  a  young  youth
1  Mac  14.  37.  he  up  the  walls  ot  Jerusalem
RAIS  ETH.

Eccl. 34. 17.  he  r.  up  the  soul,  and  lighteneth  the  eyes

Tob.  7.  8.  after  they  had  killed  a  r.  of  the  flock
RAMS.

1  Esd.  6.  29.  for  bullocks,  and  r.  and  lambs

7.  7.  they  offered  two  hundred  r.  400  lambs
0  Mac.  12.  15.  without  any  r.  or  engines  of  war
RAN.

Tob.  11.9.  Anna  r.  forth,  and  fell  on  neck  of  her  son

10.  Tobit  stumbled,  but  his  son  r .  to  him
Jud.  6.  16.  and  all  their  youth  r.  together
Sus.  19.  the  two  elders  rose  up,  and  r.  to  her

1  Mac.  2.  24.  he  r.  and  slew  him  upon  the  altar

11.  72.  put  them  to  flight,  and  so  they  r.  away

2  Mac.  3. 18.  others  r.  flocking  out  ot  their  houses
~  19.  the  virgins  kept  in  r.  some  to  the  gates


2  Mac.  10.  16.  so  they  r.  witli  violence  on  the  holds
14. 43.  he  r.  boldly  up  to  the  wall,  cast  himself  down-

45.  yet  he  r.  through  the  midst  of  the  throng

RANGED.

Jud.  2.  16.  he  r.  them  as  a  great  army  is  ordered
2  Mac.  12.  20.  Maccabeus  r.  his  army  by  bands
RANKS.

1  Mac.  6.  38.  being  harnessed  all  over  amidst  the  r
RAPHAEL.

Tob.  3.  17.  and  R.  was  sent  to  heal  them  both

5.  4.  he  found  R.  that  was  an  angel

8.  2.  as  he  went,  he  remembered  the  words  of  P..

9.  1.  then  Tobias  called  R.  and  said  to  him

5.  so  R.  went  out  and  lodged  with  Gabael

12.  15.  I  am  R.  one  of  the  seven  holy  angels

RAPHAN.

1  Mac.  5.  37.  Timotheus  encamped  against  R.
RASH.

Eccl.  9. 18.  he  that  is  r.  in  his  talk  shall  be  hated
RATIFIED.

1  Mac.  8.  30.  what  they  add  or  take  away  shall  ber»

11.  34.  we  have  r.  to  them  the  borders  of  Judea
RA  IT  LING.

1  Mac.  6.  41.  all  that  heard  the  r.  of  the  harness

RAVISHED.

2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  virgins  defiled  and  our  wives  r.
Jud.  12.  16.  Holofernes  his  heart  was  r.  with  her

16.  9.  her  sandals  r.  his  eyes,  hei  beauty  took
RAZIS.

2  Mac.  14.  37.  R.  one  of  the  elders  of  Jerusalem
REACH.

Eccl.  31.  18.  r.  not  thy  hand  out  first  of  all
35.  16.  and  his  prayer  shall  r.  unto  the  clouds
2  Mac.  9. 10.  that  he  could  r.  to  the  stars  of  heaven
REACHED.

2  Esd.  14.  39.  and  behold  he  r.  me  a  full  cup
REACHETH.

Wisd.  8.  1.  wisdom  r.  from  one  end  to  another
Eccl.  21.  5.  a  prayer  r.  to  the  ears  of  God
READ.

1  Esd.  2.  30.  king  Artaxerxes  his  letters  being  r.

3.  13.  they  delivered  them  to  him,  so  he  r.  them

15.  and  the  writings  were  r.  before  them

9.  41.  he  r.  in  the  broad  court  before  the  porch

2  Esd.  14.  45.  the  worthy  and  unworthy  may  r.  it
Bar.  1.  3.  Baruch  did  r.  the  words  of  this  book

14.  ye  shall  r.  this  book  which  we  have  sent

1  Mac.  14.  19.  which  writings  were  r.  before  congre.

2  Mac.  2.  25.  they  that  will  r.  might  have  delight

6.  12.  now  1  beseech  those  that  r.  this  book

8.  23.  he  appointed  Eleazar  to  r.  tiie  holy  book

15.  39.  delightetli  the  ears  of  them  that  r.  the  story
READER.

1  Esd.  8.  8.  Esdras  priest  and  r.  of  the  law,  Q.  19-
READING.

1  Mac.  5.  14.  while  these  letters  were  yet  r.  behold
READY.

'Tob.  14.  3.  for  I'am  r.  to  depart  out  of  this  life
Esth.  11.  9.  nation  troubled,  and  were  r.  to  perish
IVisd.  7.  22.  which  cannot  be  letted,  r.  to  do  good
Eccl.  29.  26.  and  feed  me  of  that  thou  hast  r.

39.  31.  they  shall  be  r.  on  earth  when  need  is

51.  3.  teeth  of  them  that  were  r.  to  devour  me

1  Mac.  3.  9.  he  received  such  as  were  r.  to  perish

17.  we  are  r.  to  faint  with  fasting  all  day

2  Mac.  3.  31.  who  lay  r.  to  give  up  the  ghost

6.  30.  when  he  was  r.  to  die  with  stripes

7.  2.  we  are  r.  to  die,  rather  than  to  transgress

14.  so  when  he  was  r.  to  die,  he  said  thus

8.  21.  when  he  made  them  r.  to  die  tor  the  laws

READILY.

2  Mac.  14.  9.  the  clemency  thou  r.  shewest  to  all
READINESS.

2  Mac.  13. 12.  Judas  commanded  they  should  be  in  r»
REA  LM.

1  Esd.  4.  49.  lie  wrote  tor  Jews  that  went  out  of  his  r.
8.  10.  the  priests  and  Levites  being  within  our  r.

2  Esd.  13.  31.  one  r.  shall  fight  against  another

1  Mac.  3.  27.  he  gathered  all  the  torces  of  his  r.

6.  14.  Philip,  whom  he  made  ruler  over  all  his  r.

10.  34.  days  of  freedom  for  all  Jews  in  my  r.

52.  forasmuch  as  I  am  come  again  to  my  r.

15.  28.  Joppe  and  Gazara,  cities  of  my  r.

2  Mac.  10.  11.  he  set  Lysias  over  the  affairs  of  his  r.

11.  23.  they  that  are  in  our  r.  live  quietly

14.  6.  Assideans  will  not  let  the  r.  be  in  peace
26.  J  udas,  a  traitor  to  his  r.  to  be  successor
REALMS.

1  Mac.  1.  16.  might  have  the  dominion  of  two  r

REAP.

2  Esd.  16.  43.  lie  that  soweth,  as  if  he  should  not  r.

46.  strangers  shall  r.  their  fruits,  spoil  their  goods
Eccl.  7.  3.  and  thou  shalt  not  r.  them  seven-told

REAPED.

1  Esd.  4.  6.  when  they  r.  that  which  they  had  sown*
Jud.  4.  5.  for  their  fields  were  of  late  r.

REAPERS.

Bel  33.  he  was  going  into  field  to  bring  it  to  the  r.
REA  RING.

1  Esd.  5.  62.  for  r.  up  the  house  of  the  Lord
REASON.

Wisd.  11.  15.  they  worshipped  serpents  void  of  r.
17.  12.  but  a  betraying  ot  the  succours  r.  offereth
Eccl.  37.  16.  let  r.  go  before  every  enterprise

1  Mac.  12. 11.  we  remember  you  in  prayer,  as  r.  is-

REASONABLE.

2  Mac.  11.  14.  them  to  agree  to  all  r.  conditions

REASON ETH.

Eccl.  14.  20.  blessed  is  the  man  that  r.  of  holy  things
REASON  ING.

IVisd.  2.  1.  the  ungodly  said,  r.  with  themselves
Eccl.  27.  5.  so  the  trial  of  a  man  is  in  Ins  r.
REASON  INGS.

Wisd.  7.  20.  the  violence  of  winds,  and  r.  of  men
REBEL.

1  Esd.  2.  19.  but  they  will  also  r.  against  kings
Jud.  2.  11.  but  concerning  them  that  r.  spare  not
REBELLED.

1  Esd.  1.  48.  he  forswore  himself  and  r.

Jud.  7-  15.  because  they  r.  and  met  not  thy  person
REBELLION.

1  Esd.  2.  27.  the  men  therein  were  given  to  r.

679


Afock y  kh  a.]  REF


REN


REBELLIOUS.

1  Esd.  2.  18.  Jerusalem,  that  r.  and  wicked  citv

22.  thou  shalt  understand  that  city  was  r.

2  Esd.  1.  8.  not  obedient,  hut  it  is  a  r.  people
Eccl.  16.  6.  in  a  r.  nation  wrath  is  set  on  tire

47.21.  out  of  Ephraim  ruled  a  r.  kingdom
REBOUNDING

Wisd.  17.  19.  or  a  r.  echo  from  hollow  mountains
REBUKE.

2  Esd.  10.  28.  and  my  prayer  is  turned  into  r.
Eccl.  11.  7-  understand  first,  and  then  r.

31.  31.  r.  not  thy  neighbour  at  the  wine

48.  7-  who  heardestthe  r.  of  the  Lord  in  Sinai

1  Mac.  2.  49.  now  hath  pride  and  r.  gotten  strength

REBUKED.

Eccl.  13.  22.  poor  man  slipt,  and  yet  they  r.  him  too
RECEIVE.

Tob.  5.  2.  how  can  1  r.  the  money  ?  I  know  him  not
Jud.  11.  5.  Judith  said,  r.  the  wordsof  thy  servant
Wisd.  6.  25.  r.  instruction  through  my  words
12. 7-  that  the  land  might  r.  a  worthy  colony
17-  21.  which  should  afterwards  r.  them
Eccl.  4.  31.  let  not  thy  hand  be  stretched  to  r.

6. 23.  give  ear,  my  son,  r.  my  advice
33.  love  to  hear,  thou  shalt  r.  understanding
11. 34.  r.  a  stranger  into  thy  house,  and  he  will  dis¬
turb  thee

12.  5.  else  thou  shalt  r.  twice  as  much  evil

15.  2.  r.  him  as  a  wife  married  of  a  virgin

18.  14.  hath  mercy  on  them  that  r.  discipline
19. 19..  shall  r.  fruit  of  the  tree  of  immortality

29.  6.  if  he  prevail,  he  shall  hardly  r.  the  half

32.  2.  r.  a  crown  for  thy  well-ordering  the  feast

35.  12.  not  with  gifts,  for  such  he  will  not  r.

36.  21.  a  woman  will  r.  every  man

38.  2.  and  he  shall  r.  honour  of  the  king
41. 1.  yea,  unto  him  that  is  yet  able  to  r.  meat

50.  3.  the  cistern  to  r.  water  was  covered  with  brass

21.  they  might  r.  a  blessing  from  the  Most  High

51.  26.  and  let  3’our  soul  r.  instruction

2  Mac.  “•  11.  from  him  I  hope  to  r.  them  again
29.  that  I  may  r.  thee  again  in  mercy

36.  thou  shalt  r.  just  punishment  for  thy  pride
RECEIVED.

1  Esd.  6.  6.  until  such  time  as  an  answer  was  r.

Tob  7.  17.  she  wept  and  r.  the  tears  of  her  daughter

11.  16.  they  marvelled  because  he  had  r.  his  sight
Jud.  3  7.  the  country  about  r.  them  with  dances
Esth.  16.  10.  and  as  a  stranger  r.  of  us

Wisd.  3.  6.  he  r.  them  as  a  burnt  offering

16.  14.  neither  the  soul  r.  up, cometh  again

19.  16.  whom  they  had  r.  with  feastings

Eccl.  17.  5.  they  r.  the  use  of  the  five  operations
23.  28.  and  to  be  r.  ot  him  is  long  life
29.  5.  till  he  hath  r.  he  will  kiss  a  man’s  hand
51.  16. 1  r.  her,  and  gat  much  learning

2  Mac.  7.  8.  he  r.  the  next  torment  in  order

RECEIVES!".

Eccl.  42.  7-  all  that  thou  gavestout,  or  r.  in
RECEIVING.

1  Mac.  16.  15.  the  son  of  Abubus  r.them  deceitfully

2  Mac.  10. 15.  r.  those  that  were  banished  from  Jeru.

RECEPi'ACLES.

Eccl.  39.  17.  at  the  words  of  his  mouth  r.  of  waters
RECITED.

Eccl.  44.  5.  such  as  r.  verses  in  writing
RECKONED.

Eccl.  29.  4.  many  r.  it  found  and  put  them  to  trouble

1  Mac.  10.38.  that  they  may  be  r.  to  be  under  one

RECKONING.

Tob.  6.  15.  make  thou  no  r.  of  the  evil  spirit
Eccl.  42. 3.  of  r.  with  partners  and  travellers
RECOMPENSE.

2  Esd.  15.  21.  so  will  1  do  and  r.  in  their  bosom
55.  therefore  shalt  thou  receive  r.

Eccl.  7.  28.  how  canst  thou  r.  them  the  things

12.  2.  do  good  to  the  godly,  thou  shalt  find  a  r.

14.  6.  and  there  is  a  r.  of  his  wickedness

17.  23.  it  will  render  their  r.  on  their  heads

20.  10.  there  is  a  gift  whose  r.  is  double
36.  20.  but  a  man  of  experience  will  r.  him
Bar.  6.  34.  evil  or  good,  they  are  not  able  to  r.  it
1  Mac. 2.  68.  r.  fully  the  heathen,  and  take  heed

10.  27.  we  will  r.  you  for  all  the  things  ye  do
RECOMPENSED.

1  Mac.  16. 17.  in  which  doing  he  r.  evil  for  good
RECOMPENSETH.

Ecel.  35. 11.  for  the  Lord  r.  and  will  give  thee
RECONCILED.

1  Esd.  4.  31.  that  she  might  be  r.  to  him  again

2  Mac.  5. 20.  the  great  Lord  being  r.  it  was  set  up
8. 29.  they  oesoughtthe  merciful  Lord  to  be  1.

RECONCILEMENT.

Eccl.  27. 21.  and  after  reviling,  there  may  be  r.

RECONCILIATION.

Eccl.  22.  22.  fear  not,  for  there  may  be  a  r.

45. 16.  he  chose  him  to  make  r.  for  his  people

23.  Phinees  stood  up  and  made  r.  for  Israel

2  Mac.  12.  45.  whereupon  he  made  a  r.  for  the  dead
RECORD.

Esth.  12.  4.  the  king  made  a  r.  of  these  things
RECORDED.

1  Esd.  1.  42.  those  things  that  are  r.  of  him
RECORDS.

1  Mac.  14. 23.  a  copy  of  their  ambassage  in  public  r.

2  Mac.  2.  1.  it  is  also  found  in  the  r.  that  Jeremy

RECOVERED.

Jud.  14.  7.  but  when  they  had  r.  him,  he  fell

1  Mac.  2.  48.  they  r.  the  law  out  of  the  hand  of  the

Gentiles

10. 52.  as  I  am  come  again,  and  have  r.  our  country

2  Mac.  2.22.  r.  again  the  temple  and  freed  city

RECOUNTED.

2  Mac.  8.  19.  he  r.  what  helps  their  fathers  found
RED.

Wisd.  10. 18.  she  brought  them  through  the  R.  sea
REDRESS.

Ear.  6.  54.  nor  can  r.  a  wrong,  being  unable
REFERRED.

2  Mac.  11.  36.  touching  things  to  be  r.  to  the  king
REFORM.

2  Esd.  14.  34.  r.  your  hearts,  ye  shall  be  kept  alive

680


H  EL

REFO  RM  ED.

Wisd.  9. 18.  for  so  the  ways  of  thc.-i  which  lived  on
the  earth  were  r.  and  men  wer“  taught  the  things
12.26.  they  that  would  not  be  ,.  by  correction
Eccl.  10.  25.  he  will  not  grudge  when  he  is  r.

23. 15.  will  never  be  r.  all  the  days  of  his  life

REFORM  EDST.

2  Esd.  8.  12.  and  thou  r.  it  with  thy  judgment
REFRAIN.

Wisd.  1.  11.  and  r.  your  tongue  from  backbiting
Eccl.  4.  23.  r.  not  to  speak  when  there  is  occasion
18  30.  but  r.  thyself  from  thine  appetites
REFRESHED.

2  Esd.  11 . 46.  that  all  the  earth  may  be  r.  and  return

REFRESH  E  l TI.

Eccl.  43.  22.  a  dew  coming  after  heat,  r.

REFUGE.

1  Mac.  10.  14.  for  it  was  their  place  of  r.

2  Mac.  10.  28.  having  their  r.  also  unto  the  Lord

REFUSE.

1  Esd.  2. 19.  they  will  not  only  r.  to  give  tribute
Eccl.  6  23.  receive  advice,  and  r.  not  my  counsel

REFUSED.

Eccl.  29.7.many  have  r.  to  lend  for  others’  ill  dealing
REFUSE.

Tob.  5. 18.  let  it  be  as  r.  in  respect  of  our  chila
Wisd.  13.  12.  after  spending  the  r.  of  his  work

13.  taking  the  very  r.  which  served  to  no  use
Eccl.  27.  4.  sifteth  with  a  sieve,  the  r.  remaineth

REGARD.

2  Esd.  8.  27.  r.  not  wicked  inventions  of  the  heathen

15. 16.  they  shall  not  r.  their  kings  or  princes
Tob.  3.  15.  command  some  r.  to  be  had  of  me
Eccl.  10. 19.  that  r.  not  the  law  are  dishonourable

20. 7.  but  a  babbler  and  a  fool  will  r.  no  time

41. 12.  r.  thy  name,  for  that  shall  continue

REGARDED.

Wisd.  3. 17.  yet  shall  they  be  nothing  r.

2  Mac.  7. 12.  for  that  he  nothing  r.  the  pains
REGARDETH.

Eccl.  34.  2.  whoso  r.  dreams,  is  like  him  that

REGARDING.

Wisd.  10.8.  r.  not  wisdom,  they  gat  this  hurt

REGIONS.

1  Esd.  4.  28.  do  not  all  r.  fear  to  touch  him  ?
REGISTER.

1  Mac.  14.22.  did  r.  the  things  that  they  spake

REGISTERED.

1  Mac.  8.  20.  we  might  be  r.  your  confederates

REHEARSE.

Eccl.  19. 7-  r.  not  to  another  what  is  told  thee
REJECT,  ED.

Jud.  11. 10.  r.  not  his  word,  but  la3r  it  up  in  thy  heart
Wisd.  9.  4.  r.  me  not  from  among  thy  children
Eccl.  4.  4.  r.  not  the  supplication  of  the  afflicted
20. 20.  a  wise  sentence  shall  be  r.  when  it  comes
REIGN.

Wisd.  3.  8.  and  their  Lord  shall  r.  for  ever
6. 21.  honour  wisdom,  that  ye  may  r.  for  evermore
.  REIGNED.

Wisd.  14.  25.  there  r.  in  all  men  without  exception
Eccl.  47.  13.  Solomon  r.  in  a  peaceable  time
1  Mac.  1. 1.  he  r.  in  his  stead,  the  first  over  Greece
7.  Alexander  r.  twelve  years,  and  then  died
10.  Antiochus  r.  in  the  137th  year  of  the  kingdom
6. 2.  Alexander  who  r.  first  among  the  Grecians
10.  1.  by  means  whereof  he  r.  there

11.19.  by  this  Demetrius  r.  in  the  167th  year
54.  young  Antiochus,  who  r.  and  was  crowned

12.7.  letters  from  Darius,  who  r.  among  you

REINS.

1  Mac.  2. 24.  when  Mattathias  saw,  his  r.  trembled

REJOICE.

Tob.  13.  7*  my  soul  shall  r.  in  his  greatness

14.  love  thee,  for  they  shall  r.  in  thy  peace

14.7.  those  who  love  the  Lord  in  truth  shall  r.
Jud.  4. 12.  the  sanctuary  for  the  nations  to  r.  at
Eccl.  8.  7.  r.  not  over  thy  greatest  enemy

16.  2.  though  they  multiply,  r.  not  in  them

22.  23.  that  thou  mayest  r.  in  his  prosperity
26.  4.  rich  or  poor,  he  shall  at  all  times  r.

30.  2.  shall  r.  of  him  among  his  acquaintance

3.  and  before  his  friends  he  shall  r.  of  him
35.  19.  till  he  have  made  them  to  r.  in  his  mercy
39.  31.  they  shall  r.  in  his  commandment

40.20.  wine  and  music/,  the  heart

50.  20.  to  give  the  blessing  and  r.  in  his  name

51.  29.  let  your  soul  r.  in  his  mercy
Bar.  4.  12.  let  no  man  r.  over  me  a  widow

2  Mac.  15. 11.  which  did  not  a  little  r.  them

REJOICED.

Tob.  14. 15.  before  his  death  he  r.  over  Nineve
Wisd.  7. 12. 1  r.  in  them  all  for  wisdom  goeth  before
Eccl.  30.  5.  while  he  lived,  he  saw  and  r.  in  him
Bar.  3.  34.  the  stars  shined  in  their  watches  and  r.

4.  31.  miserable  are  they  that  r.  at  thy  fall

33.  for  as  she  r.  at  thy  ruin  and  was  glad

1  Mac.  7.  48.  for  this  the  people  r.  greatly

14. 11.  made  peace,  and  Israel  r.  with  great  joy
REJOICETH.

Eccl.  26.  2.  a  virtuous  woman  r.  her  husband

37.  4.  which  r.  in  the  prosperity  of  a  friend
REJOICING.

2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  r.  is  at  an  end

'Job.  11. 15.  his  son  went  in  r.  and  told  his  father
Eccl.  1.  11.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  crown  of  r.

18.  and  it  enlargeth  their  r.  that  love  him
Bar.  4.  34. 1  will  take  away  the  r.  of'her  multitude

37.  lo,  thy’-  sons  come  r.  in  the  glory  of  God

5.  5.  r.  in  the  remembrance  of  God

RELEASE,  ED.

Prayer  of  Manass.  cannot  lift  my  head,  nor  have  r.

1  Mac.  10.  29.  for  your  sakes  1  r.  all  the  Jews
30.  I  r.  it  from  this  day  forth
42.  even  those  things  shall  be  r.  they  appertain
RELIEF.

1  Mac.  11.  35.  we  discharge  them  of  all  for  their  r.

2  Mac.  3.  10.  for  the  r.  of  widows  and  fatherless

RELIEVING.

Eccl.  3.  14.  r.  thy  father  shall  not  be  forgotten
RELIGION.

1  Mac.  1.  43.  the  Israelites  consented  to  his  r.


1  Mac.  2.19. and  fall  away  from  the  r.of  their  father*
22.  to  go  from  our  r.  either  on  right  hand  or  left

2  Mac.  6.  24.  were  now  gone  to  a  strange  r.

8.  1.  took  all  such  as  continued  in  the  Jews’  r.

14.  38.  jeopard  his  body  for  the  r.of  the  Jews
RELIGIOUS.

Jud.  11.  17.  thy  servant  is  r.  and  serveth  God
RELY.

Eccl.  15.  4.  he  shall  r.  on  her  and  not  be  contoun.ied
RELIED.

1  Mac.  8.  12.  with  such  as  r.  on  them  keptamitv

REMAIN.

2  Esd.  13.  49.  he  shall  defend  his  people  that  r.
Jud.  11.  17.  therefore,  my  lord,  l  will  r.  with  thee
Eccl.  23.  27.  they  that  r.  shall  know  there  is

42.  2.3.  all  these  things  live  and  r.  for  ever

44.  11.  shall  continually  r.  a  good  inheritance

13.  their  seed  shall  r.  for  ever,  and  their  glory

45.  15.  to  his  seed  so  long  as.  the  heavens  should  r
Bar.  2.  21.  so  shall  ye  r.  in  the  land  that  I  gave

6.  3.  ye  shall  r.  in  Babylon  many  years,  a  long
REMAINED.

Eccl.  48. 15.  there  r.  a  small  people  and  a  ruler
REMAINETH.

Eccl.  38. 19.  in  affliction  also  sorrow  r.

REMEDY.

Wisd.  2. 1.  in  the  death  of  a  man  there  is  nor.

16.  9.  nor  was  there  found  any  r.  for  their  life
Eccl.  3.  28.  in  punishment  of  proud  there  is  no  r.

43.  22.  a  present  r.  of  all  is  a  mist  coming  speedily

REMEDILESS.  *

Esth.  16.  5.  hath  enwrapped  them  in  r.  calamities

REMEMBER.

1  Esd.  3.23.  they  r.  not  what  they  have  done

4.  43.  r.  thy  vow  which  thou  hast  vowed  to  build

2  Esd.  2.  31.  r.  thy  children  that  sleep

8.  39.  and  1  will  r.  also  their  pilgrimage
Tob.  3.  3.  r.  me,  and  look  on  me,  punish  me  not
4.  4.  r.  that  she  saw  many  dangers  for  thee
19-  therefore,  my  son,  r.  my  commandments
6. 15.  dost  thou  not  r.  precepts  thy  father  gave  thee  ?

14.  10.  r.  how  Aman  handled  Achiacharus
Jud.  8.  26.  r.  what  things  he  did  to  Abraham

13.  19.  which  r.  the  power  of  God  for  ever
Esth.  10.  5.  for  I  r.  a  dream  which  I  saw

14.  12.  r.  O  Lord,  make  thyself  known  in  affliction
Wisd.  16.  11.  that  they  should  r.  thy  words
Eccl.  7.  16.  but  r.  that  wrath  will  not  tarry  long

28.  r.  that  thou  wast  begot  of  them
36.  r.  the  end  and  thou  shalt  never  do  amiss
8.  5.  r.  that  we  are  all  worthy  of  punishment

7.  rejoice  not  over  enemy,  but  r.  that  we  die  all

9. 12.  r.  shall  not  go  unpunished  to  their  grave
13.  r.  that  thou  goest  in  the  midst  of  snares

12. 12.  and  thou  at  last  r.  my  words

14.  12.  r.  that  death  will  not  be  long  in  coming

15.  8.  and  men  that  are  liars  cannot  r.  her

18.  25.  thou  hast  enough,  r.  the  time  of  hunger

23.  14.  r.  thy  father  and  thy  mother
18.  the  Most  High  will  notr.  my  sins
28.  6.  r.  thy  end,  and  let  enmity  cease,  r.  corrup¬
tion  and  death,  abide  in  the  commandments
7.  r.  the  commandments  and  bear  no  malice

31.  13.  r.  that  a  wicked  eye  is  an  evil  thing
36.  8.  make  the  time  short,  r.  the  covenant

38.  20.  drive  it  away,  and  r.  the  last  end

41.  3.  r.  them  that  have  been  before  thee

42.  15.  I  will  now  r.  the  works  of  the  Lord
Bar.  2.  30.  in  captivity  they  shall  r.  themselves

33.  they  shall  r.  the  way  of  their  fathers

3.  5.  r.  not  the  iniquities  of  our  forefathers

4. 14.  r.  ye  the  captivity  of  my  sons  and  daughters
Sus.  9.  that  they  might  not  r.  just  judgments’

1  Mac.  4.  9  .r.  how  our  fathers  were  delivered

6.  12.  I  r.  the  evils  that  I  did  at  Jerusalem

7.  38.  r.  their  blasphemies,  and  suffer  them  not
12.  11.  we  r.  you  in  sacrifices  we  offer

2  Mac.  8.  4.  r.  the  wicked  slaughter  of  infants

15.  8.  but  to  r.  the  help  which  they  had  received

REMEMBRANCE.

2  Esd.  1.  36.  yet  they  shall  call  their  sins  to  r.

12.  47.  for  the  Highest  hath  you  in  r.

Tob.  12.  12.  I  did  bring  the  r.  of  your  prayers
Wisd.  2.  4.  no  man  shall  have  our  works  in  r.

11. 12.  a  groaning  for  the  r.  of  things  past

16.  6.  to  put  them  in  r.  of  the  commandment
Eccl.  11 . 25.  in  affliction  there  is  no  r.  of  prosperity
28.  1.  he  will  surely  keep  his  sins  in  r.

38.  23.  when  the  dead  is  attest,  let  his  r.  rest
41.  1.  O  death,  how  bitter  is  the  r.  of  thee  !

49.  1.  the  r.  of  Josias  is  like  the  composition

50.  16.  for  ar.  before  the  Most  High
Bar.  5.  5.  rejoicing  in  the  r.  of  God

1  Mac.  2.  51.  call  to  r.  what  acts  our  fathers  dia

2  Mac.  12.  42.  the  sin  might  wholly  be  put  out  of  r

REMEMBERED.

Tob.  1.  12.  because  I  r.  God  with  all  my  heart

4.  1 .  in  that  day  Tobit  r.  the  money

8.  2.  as  he  went  he  r.  the  words  of  Raphael
Esth.  10.  12.  so  God  r.  his  people  and  justified
Eccl.  3.  15.  in  the  day  of  affliction  shall  be  r.

Bar.  3.  23.  none  of  these  have  r.  the  paths  of  wisdom

4.  27.  shall  be  r.  of  him  that  brought  these  things
Bel.  38.  Daniel  said,  thou  hast  r.  me,  O  God
l  Mac.  5.  4.  he  r.  the  injury  of  the  children  of  Bean
REMEMBERETH.

1  Esd.  4.  21.  he  r.  neither  father  nor  mother

REMEMBERING.

Tob.  2.  6.  r.  that  prophecy  of  Amos,  as  he  said

REMISS.

Eccl.  4.  29.  and  in  thy  deeds  be  not  slack  and  r.
REMOVE.

Wisd.  1 . 5.  r.  from  thoughts  without  understanding
Eccl.  30.  23.  r.  sorrow  far  from  thee,  for  sorrow
REND.

Wisd.  4. 19.  he  shall  r.  them,  and  cast  them  down
RENDER.

Tob.  2.  13.  is  it  not  stolen  ?  r.  it  to  the  owners
Eccl.  17.  23. 1  will  r.  recompenceon  their  head*

33.  13.  to  r.  to  them  as  liketh  him  best

RENDERED.

Wisd.  10. 17.  'he  r.  to  the  righteous  a  reward


R  E  P


R  E  S


REV


[Apocry  pm  a.


REN  BERING.

Esth.  16.  18.  r.  to  him  according  to  his  deserts
RENEW.

I  Mac.  12.3.  that  you  should  r.  the  friendship
16.  to  r.  the  amity  that  we  had  with  them
RENEWED.

1  Mac.  4.  57.  the  gates  and  the  chambers  they  r.

5.  1.  the  nations  heard  that  the  sanctuary  was  r.
RENEWING.

1  Mac.  12.  10.  to  send  for  the  r.  of  brotherhood

RENOUNCE.

2  Esd.  14. 13.  therefore  now  r.  corruption

RENOWN.

Eccl.  3.  19.  many  are  in  high  place  and  of  r.
RENOWNED.

Jud.  11. 23.  thou  shalt  be  r.  through  the  whole  earth
Eccl.  39.  2.  be  will  keep  the  sayings  of  r.  men
44.  3.  men  r.  for  their  power  giving  counsel
1  Mac.  3.  9.  was  r.  to  the  utmost  part  of  the  earth

15.  63.  Judas  and  his  brethren  were  greatly  r.

6.  1.  Elymais  was  a  city  greatly  r.  for  riches

14.  10.  so  that  his  honourable  name  was  r.

2  Mac.  2.  22.  the  temple  r.  all  the  world  over
K  ENT.

1  Esd.  8. 71.  as  I  heard  these  things,  I  r.  my  clothes
Jud.  14.  16.  therefore  he  cried  and  r.  his  garments

19.  when  heard  these  words,  they  r.  their  coats
Bar.  6.  31.  having  their  clothes  r.  and  heads

shaven

1  Mac.  1.  56.  had  r.  in  pieces  the  books  of  the  law
2  Mac.  4.  38.  took  his  purple,  and  r.  off  his  clothes
REPAIR.

1  Esd.  2.  18.  r.  the  walls  of  it,  and  lay  foundation
REPAIRED.

Eccl.  50.  1.  who  in  his  life  r.  the  house  again
1  Mac.  9.  50.  he  r.  the  strong  cities  in  Judea
62.  they  r.  the  decays  thereof,  and  made  it  strong

12.  37.  they  r.  that  which  was  called  Caphenatha
REPAIRING.

1  Mac.  10.  44.  for  r.  the  works  of  the  sanctuary
REPARATION.

1  Mac.  14.  34.  all  things  convenient  for  the  r.  thereof
REPAY.

2  Esd.  15.  20.  to  r.  things  that  they  have  done
Tob.  4.  14.  if  thou  serve  God,  he  will  also  r.  thee
Eccl.  4.  31.  and  shut  when  thou  shouldest  r.

12.  6.  Most  High  will  r.  vengeance  to  the  ungodly
29.  5.  when  he  should  r.  he  will  prolong  the  time
REPAYED.

Eccl.  35. 18.  he  r.  vengeance  to  the  heathen
REPAYETH.

Eccl.  20. 12.  much  for  little,  and  r.  it  seven-fold
REPENT.

Wisd.  19.  2.  they  would  r.  and  pursue  them
Eccl.  17. 24.  to  them  that  r.  he  granted  them  return
21.  6.  but  he  that  feareth  the  Lord  will  r.

32.  19.  do  nothing  without  advice,  and  when
thou  hast  once  done,  r.  not
33. 19.  give  not  thy  goods  to  another,  lest  itr.  thee
Prayer  of  Manass.  thou  art  the  God  of  them  that  r.
REPENTANCE.

2  Esd.  9. 11.  when  place  of  r.  was  open  to  them
Wisd.  12.  10.  thou  gavest  them  place  of  r.

Eccl.  17.  22.  giver,  to  his  sons  and  daughters

18.  21.  and  in  the  time  of  sins  shew  r.

20.  3.  how  good  is  it  when  art  reproved  to  shew  r.  ?
44.  16.  an  example  of  r.  to  all  generations
Pray,  of  Manass.  thou  hast  promised  r.  and  forgive¬
ness,  thou  hast  appointed  r.  tome  that  am  a  sinner
REPENTED.

_Ecc/.48.l5.  for  all  this  the  people  r.  not  nor  departed
REPENTEST.

Prayer  of  Manass.  thou  r.  of  the  evils  of  men
REPENTING.

Wisd.  5.  3.  they  r.  and  groaning  for  anguish  of  spirit
REPLENISHED.

Eccl.  16.4.  by  one  of  understanding  shall  city  be  r.
32.  13.  who  hath  r.  thee  with  his  good  things
REPLIED.

Tob.  2.  14.  but  she  r.  upon  me,  it  was  given  as  a  gift
REPORT.

Wisd.  8.  18.  in  talking  -with  her  is  a  good  r.

Eccl.  31.  23.  the  r.  of  his  good  housekeeping
Bus.  27.  was  never  such  a  r.  made  of  Susanna
1  Mac.  12.  23.  to  make  r.  to  you  on  this  wise

15.  36.  and  made  r.  to  him  of  these  speeches
2  Mac.  14.37.  Razis,  a  man  of  very  good  r.

R EPORTED.

1  Esd.  1.  33.  are  r.  in  the  books  of  the  kings
Jud.  11.  8.  it  is  r.  in  all  the  earth,  that  thou  only
Eccl.  44.  8.  that  their  praises  might  be  r.

1  Mac.  5.  14.  other  messengers,  who r. on  thiswise
2  Mac.  2.  13.  the  same  things  were  r.  in  the  writings
11.  18.  what  things  were  meet  to  be  r.  to  the  king
REPOSE.

Wisd.  8.  16.  I  am  come,  I  will  r.  myself  with  her
REPROOF.

Wisd.  11.7.  for  a  manifest  r.  of  that  commandment
Eccl.  20.  1.  there  is  a  r.  that  is  not  comely
REPROOFS.

Eccl.  48. 10.  who  wast  ordained  for  r.  in  their  times
REPROACH.

Tob.  3.  4.  for  a  proverb  of  r.  to  all  nations
10.  if  I  do  this,  it  shall  be  a  r.  unto  him

13.  take  me  out  that  1  may  hear  no  more  the  r.
Jud.  4.  12.  and  the  sanctuary  to  profanation  and  r.
5.  21.  we  become  a  r.  before  all  the  world

8.  22.  we  shall  be  a  r.  to  all  them  that  possess  us

9.  2.  who  polluted  her  virginity  to  her  r.

Wisd.  4.  18.  a  r.  among  the  dead  for  evermore
5.  3.  this  was  he  whom  we  had  a  proverb  of  r.
Eccl.  3. 11.  a  mother  in  dishonour  is  a  r.  to  children
6.  1.  thou  shalt  inherit  an  ill  name,  shame  and  r.
9.  being  turned  to  enmity  will  discover  thy  r.

23.  26.  and  her  r.  shall  not  be  blotted  out
27  .  28.  mockery  and  r.  are  from  the  proud
29.  23.  that  thou  hear  not  the  r.  ot  thy  house
41.  6.  their  posterity  shall  have  a  perpetual  r.

42.  11.  lest  she  make  thee  a  r.  among  the  people

14.  than  a  woman  which  bringeth  shame  and  r.
47.  4.  did  he  not  take  away  r.  from  the  people  ?
Bar.  2.  4.  to  be  as  a  r.  and  desolation  among  all


Bar.  3.  8.  thou  hast  scattered  us  for  a  r.  and  a  curse
6.  72.  they  shall  be  a  r.  in  the  country
73.  better  is  the  just  man,  he  shall  be  far  from  r.
Dan.  3.  10.  become  a  shame  and  r.  to  thy  servants

1  Mac.  1.  39.  her  sabbaths  were  turned  into  r.

4.  45.  pull  it  down  lest  it  should  be  a  r.  to  them
58.  for  the  r.  of  the  heathen  was  put  away
REPROACH.

Eccl.  8. 5.  r.  not  a  man  that  turneth  from  sin
REPROACHED.

Tob.  3.  7.  Sara  was  r.  by  her  father’s  maids
Eccl.  41.  7.  the  children  shall  be  r.  for  his  sake
REPROACHES.

Tob.  3.  6.  because  I  have  heard  false  r.  have  sorrow
REP  ROACH  FUL.

2  Mac. 7.24.  Antiochus  suspecting  it  to  be  a  r.  speech

REPROACHING.

Eccl.  29.  28.  r.  of  the  lender  is  grievous  to  a  man
REPROVE.

2  Esd.  12.  32.  he  shall  r.  and  upbraid  them
14.  13.  set  thy  house  in  order,  and  r.  thy  people
Wisd.  2.  14.  he  was  made  to  r.  our  thoughts
18.  5.  to  r.  them,  thou  tookest  away  their  children
Eccl.  20.  2.  it  is  much  better  to  r.  than  be  angry

29.  gifts  stop  up  his  mouth,  that  he  cannot  r.

REPROVED.

Wisd.  17.  7.  their  vaunting  was  r.  with  disgrace
Eccl.  20.  3.  when  thou  art  r.  to  shew  repentance

21.  6.  he  that  hateth  to  her.  is  in  way  of  sinners
32.  17.  a.  sinful  man  will  not  be  r.  but  finds  excuse
2  Mac.  4.  33.  he  r.  him  and  withdrew  himself
REPROVETH.

Wisd.  1.  3.  his  power  when  tried,  r.  the  unwise
Eccl.  18.  13.  he  r.  and  nurtureth,  and  teachetli
REPUTATION.

Sus.  64.  Daniel  had  in  great  r.  in  sight  of  the  people
REQUEST.

2  Mac.  9.  26.  I  r.  you  to  remember  the  benefits
11.  17.  they  made  r.  for  the  performance
REQUIRE.

1  Esd.  4.  46.  O  king,  this  is  that  which  I  r.

8.  22.  that  you  r.  no  tax,  nor  any  imposition

2  Esd.  1.  32.  whose  blood  1  will  r.  of  your  hands
Bar.  6.  35.  though  he  keep  it  not,  they  will  not  r.  it

1  Mac.  7.  12.  a  company  of  scribes  to  r.  justice

2  Mac.  11.  24.  thev  r.  that  we  should  suffer  them

1'tEQUlR  ED.

1  Esd.  6.  12.  we  r.  of  them  the  names  in  writing

2  Esd.  13.21.  1  will  open  the  thing  that  thou  hast  r.
Jud.  7.  24.  in  that  you  have  not  r.  peace  of  Assur

2  Mac.  7. 10.  when  he  was  r.  he  put  out  his  tongue
REQUIRE'!’!!.

Eccl.  8.  9.  learn  to  give  answer  as  need  r.

2  Mac.  6. 27.  shew  myself  such  an  one  as  mine  age  r.
REQUISITE.

Wisd.  16.  4.  it  was  r.  on  them  should  come  poverty
REQUITE.

Eccl.  8.  19.  lest  he  r.  thee  with  a  shrewd  turn

30.  6.  one  that  shall  r.  kindness  to  his  friends

REQU1TETH.

Eccl.  3. 31.  he  that  r.  good  turns  is  mindful  of  that
35.  2.  he  that  r.  a  good  turn,  offereth  fine  flour
RESEMBLANCE.

Wisd.  14.  19.  to  make  the  r.  of  the  best  fashion
Eccl.  34.  3.  dreams  is  the  r.  of  one  thing  to  another
RESERVE.

Jud.  2. 10.  if  they  yield,  thou  shalt  r.  them  for  me
RESERVED.

Jud.  11.  13.  to  spend  first-fruits  r.  tor  the  priests
2  Mac.  4.  19.  but  to  be  r.  for  other  charges
RESIDUE.

2  Esd.  11.  4.  was  greater,  yet  rested  it  with  the  r.

19.SO  went  it  with  all  the  r.  one  after  another
Jud.  15.  6.  the  r.  that  dwelt  at  Bethulia,  spoiled

1  Mac.  3.  24.  the  r.  fled  into  land  of  Philistines

2  Mac.  8.  28.  the  r.  they  divided  among  themselves

RESIST.

Jud.  11.  18.  none  of  them  that  shall  r.  thee
Esth.  13. 11.  there  is  no  man  that  canr.  thee
RESISTANCE.

1  Mac.  11.  38.  saw  that  no  r.  was  made  against  lnm
RESISTED.

Jud.  2.  25.  and  he  killed  all  that  r.  him
1  Mac.  14.  7.  neither  was  there  any  that  r.  him
R  ESISTETIL

Eccl.  19.  5.  but  he  thatr.  pleasures,  crowneth  life
RESOLVED.

Jud.  11.  13.  arer.  to  spend  the  first-fruits  of  cprn
Eccl.  39.  32.  I  was  r.  and  thought  on  these  things

1  Mac.  1.  62.  many  r.  not  to  eat  any  unclean  thing

2  Mac.  15. 1.  r.  to  set  upon  them  on  the  sabbath-day

RESOLUTE.

2  Mac.  6.  20.  are  r.  to  stand  against  such  things
RESORT.

Eccl.  27.  9.  the  birds  will  r.  unto  their  like
39.  5.  will  give  his  heart  to  r.  early  to  the  Lord
RESORTED.

Esth.  14.  1.  queen  Esther  r.  unto  the  Lord
Bus.  4.  Joacim  was  rich,  and  to  him  r.  the  Jews
RESPECT.

Tob.  5.  18.  let  it  be  as  refuse  in  r.  of  our  child
Wisd.  4. 15.  that  he  hath  r.  unto  his  chosen

7.  9.  all  gold  in  r.  of  her  is  as  a  little  sand

19.  15.  but  some  r.  shall  be  had  of  those

Eccl.  16.  3.  trust  not  their  life,  nor  r.  their  multitude
35.  12.  and  with  him  is  no  r.  of  persons
46.  14.  and  the  Lord  had  r.  unto  Jacob
RESPECTED.

Wisd.  2.  20.  for  by  his  own  saying  he  shall  be  r.
RESPITE.

1  Mac.  12.25.  he  gave  them  no  r.  to  enter  his  country
REST.  .  ,  „  ,

1  Esd.  1.  58.  the  time  ot  her  desolation  shall  she  r.
Wisd.  4.7-  prevented  with  death,  yet  shall  he  be  in  r.
Eccl.  6.  28.  at  the  last  thou  shalt  find  her  r.

11.  19.  he  saith,  1  have  found  r.  and  now  will  eat

20.  21.  when  hetaketh  r.  he  shall  not  be  troubled

22.  11.  make  little  weeping  for  the  dead,  he  is  at  r.

13.  depart  from  him,  and  thou  shalt  find  r.

24.  7.  with  all  these  1  sought  r.  and  in  whose

8.  he  that  made  me  caused  my  tabernacle  to  r.

11.  likewise  in  the  beloved  city  he  gave  me  r.


Eccl.  28.  16.  whosohearken.  to  it,  shall  never  find  r.
33.  25.  if  set  servant  to  labour,  thou  shalt  find  r.
36.  24.  a  help  like  himself,  and  a  pillar  of  r.

38.  23.  when  dead  is  at  r.  let  his  remembrance  r.

40.  5.  and  in  the  time  of  r.  upon  his  bed

6.  a  little  or  nothing  is  his  r.  and  afterward

41.  1.  to  a  man  that  liveth  at  r.  in  his  possessions
44.  23.  and  made  it  r.  on  the  head  of  Jacob

51.  27.  how  1  have  gotten  to  me  much  r.

1  Mac.  7.  50.  the  land  of  .1  uda  was  in  r.  a  while
9.  57.  the  land  of  Judea  was  in  r.  two  years

2  Mac.  11.  25.  that  this  nation  shall  be  in  r.

RESTED.

Jud.  10.  21.  Holofernes  r.  on  his  bed  under  a  canopy
Eccl.  47.  23.  thus  r.  Solomon  with  his  fathers

1  Mac.  16.  4.  who  r.  that  night  at  Modin

RESTETH.

Eccl.  5.  6.  his  indignation  r.  upon  sinners
31.  3.  when  he  r.  he  is  filled  with  his  delicates
RESTORE.

2  Esd.  7.  32.  the  earth  shall  r.  those  asleep  in  her
Tob.  10.  12.  the  Lord  of  heaven  r.  thee,  my  brother
Eccl.  48.  10.  wast  ordained  to  r.  the  tribes  of  Jacob
Bar.  6.  37.  they  cannot  r.  a  blind  man  to  sight

1  Mac.  3.  43.  let  us  r.  the  decayed  estate  of  people
15.  3.  that  I  may  r.  it  to  the  old  estate

2  Mac.  9.  16.  he  would  r.  all  the  holy  vessels

11.  25.  we  have  determined  to  r.  their  temple

12.  25.  that  he  would  r.  them  without  hurt

14.  46.  calling  on  the  Lord  to  r.  him  those  again
RESTORED.

1  Esd.  6.  26.  should  be  r.  to  the  house  at  Jerusalem

2  Esd.  12.  18.  but  shall  be  r.  to  his  beginning
Tob.  2. 1.  my  wife  Anna  was  r.  to  me  with  my  son
14.  2.  his  sight,  which  was  r.  to  him  after  eight


years

Wisd.  16.  12.  was  not  herb  thatr.  them  to  health
RESURRECTION.

2  Esd.  2.  23.  I  will  give  thee  the  first  place  in  my  r.
2  Mac.  7.  14.  as  for  thee,  thou  shalt  have  no  r.  to  life
12.  43.  in  that  he  was  mindful  of  the  r.

RETAIN.

Eccl.  41.  16.  it  is  not  good  to  r.  all  shamefacedness

RETIRING.

2  Mac.  5.  9.  he  perished,  r.  to  the  Lacedemonians
RETURN.

2  Esd.  16.  16.  so  the  plagues  shall  not  r.  again
Tob.  5.  15.  if  ye  r.  safe,'  1  will  add  something
20.  he  shall  r.  in  safety,  thy  eyes  shall  see  him

14.  5.  they  shall  r.  from  all  places  of  their  captivity
Eccl.  4. 18.  then  will  she  r.  the  straight  way  to  him

16.  30.  and  they  shall  r.  into  it  again

17.  24.  but  to  them  that  repent,  he  granted  them  r.

25.  r.  to  the  Lord,  and  forsake  thy  sins

27.  9.  so  will  truth  r.  to  them  that  practise  in  her
29.  5.  r.  words  of  grief,  and  complain  of  time
40.  1.  till  the  day  they  r.  to  the  mother  of  all

1  Mac.  3.  56.  should  r.  every  man  to  his  own  house

10.  55.  thou  didst  r.  into  the  land  of  thy  fathers

2  Mac.  5.  8.  in  the  end  he  had  an  unhappy  r.

11.  29.  declared,  that  your  desire  was  to  r.  home

RETURNED.

Tob.  2.  5.  then  T  r.  and  washed  myself

9.  the  same  night  also  I  r.  from  the  burial
Jud.  5.  19.  but  now  are  they  r.  to  their  God
Wisd.  2.  1 .  any  man  known  to  have  r.  from  the  grave
Bar.  4.  28.  so  being  r.  seek  him  ten  times  more

1  Mac.  2.  63.  because  he  is  r.  into  his  dust

5.  54.  not  one  slain,  until  they  had  r.  in  peace
RETURN  ETH.

2  Esd.  16.  16.  as  an  arrow  r.  not  backward
Wisd.  15.  8.  within  a  little  while  r.  to  the  same

16.  14.  the  spirit  when  it  is  gone  forth,  r.  not

Eccl.  26.  28.  one  that  r.  from  righteousness  to  sin
REVEAL.

2  Esd.  10. 38.  the  Highest  will  r.  many  secret  things
14.  3.  1  did  manifestly  r.  myself  to  Moses
Tob.  12.  11.  honourable  to  r.  the  works  of  God
Eccl.  19.  8.  if  thou  canst  without  offence,  r.  them  not
REVEALED.


Eccl.  1.  6.  to  whom  hath  the  root  of  wisdom  been  r.?
3.  19.  but  mysteries  are  r.  to  the  meek
REVEALETH.

Eccl.  42.  19.  he  r.  the  steps  of  hidden  things
REVEALING.

Eccl.  41.  23.  be  ashamed  of  r.  of  secrets
REVELLING.

2  Mac.  6.  4.  the  temple  was  filled  with  riot  and  1.
R  EVELL1NGS.

Wisd.  14.  23.  while  they  made  r.  of  strange  rites
REVENGE.

Wisd.  5.  17.  his  weapon  for  the  r.  of  his  enemies
Eccl.  5. 3.  for  the  Lord  will  surely  r.  thy  pride
25.  14.  and  any  r.  but  the  r.  of  enemies
48.  8.  who  anointed  kings  to  take  r.  and  prophets
REVENGED.

Jud.  13.  20.  but  thou  hast  ?-,  our  ruin
Wisd.  12.  12.  to  be  r.  for  the  unrighteous  man
REVENGETH.

Eccl.  28.  1.  he  that  r.  shall  find  vengeance  from  L.
REVENUE.

2  Mac.  4.  8.  and  of  another  r.  eighty  talents
9. 16.  would  out  of  his  own  r.  defray  the  charges
REVENUES.

2  Mac  3.  3.  Seleucus  of  his  own  r.  bare  the  costs
REVERENCE.

2  Esd.  15.  20.  call  the  kings  of  the  earth  to  r.  me
Jud.  10.  23.  she  fell  down  and  did  r.  to  him
Wisd.  2.  10.  let  us  not  r.  the  ancient  gray  hairs
Eccl.  4.  22.  let  not  the  r.  of  any  man  cause  thee  fa..
7.  29.  fear  the  Lord  with  thy  soul,  and  r.  his  priests
26  24.  an  honest  woman  will  r.  her  husband
REVERENCED.

Jud.  14.  7.  he  fell  at  Judith’s  feet  and  r.  her
Bar.  4.  15.  who  neither  r.  old  man,  nor  pitied  child
REVEREND.

2  Mac.  15.  12.  a  good  man  r.  in  conversation
REVILING.

Eccl.  22.  24.  as  smoke  before  fire,  so  r.  before  blood
27.  21.  and  after  r.  there  may  be  reconcilement
REV  1  LINGS.

Eccl.  27.  15.  their  r.  are  grievous  to  the  ear

681


Apocrypha.


R  I  G


ROB


ROY


REVIVED.

1  Mar.  13. 7-  people  heard  these  words,  theirspirit  r.
REVOKED.

1  Mac.  11.  36.  and  nothing  hereof  shall  be  r.
REVOLT.

1  Mac.  2. 15.  such  as  compelled  the  people  to  r.

13. 16  that  when  he  is  at  liberty  he  may  not  r.
REVOLTED.

Tob.  1.  5.  all  the  tribes  which  together  r.

1  Mac.  7. 24.  he  took  vengeance  of  them  that  had  r.

2  Mac.  1.7.  r.  from  the  holy  land  and  kingdom

5.  11.  the  king  thought  that  Judea  had  r.

REWARD.

2  Esd.Q.  35.  be  ready  to  the  r.  of  the  kingdom

3.  33.  and  yet  their  r.  appeareth  not

4.  35.  when  cometh  the  fruit  of  the  floor  of  our  r.  ?

7.  35.  the  work  shall  follow,  the  r.  shall  be  shewed

8.  33.  the  just  shall  out  of  their  own  deeds  re¬

ceive  r.

39.  1  will  remember  the  r.  that  they  shall  have
Jud.  7.  15.  thus  shalt  thou  render  them  an  evil  r.
Wisd.  5.  15.  their  r.  also  is  with  the  Lord

10.  17.  to  the  righteous  a  r.  of  their  labours
Eccl.  2.  8.  believe  him,  and  your  r.  shall  not  fail

11.  18.  and  this  is  the  portion  of  his  r.

22.  the  blessing  of  the  L.  is  in  the  r.  of  the  godly

26.  to  r.  a  man  according  to  his  ways
17.23.  afterward  he  will  rise  up  and  r.  them

36. 16.  r.  them  that  wait  for  thee,  let  thy  prophets
51.  22.  the  Lord  hath  given  me  a  tongue  for  my  r.

30.  in  his  time  he  will  give  you  your  r.

2  Mac.  5. 7.  received  shame  for  the  r.  of  his  treason
8.  33.  so  he  received  a  r.  for  his  wickedness

15.  33.  they  should  hang  up  the  r.  of  his  madness
REWARDED.

Tob.  14.  10.  remember  how  he  r.  him  again
Esth.  12. 5.  to  serve  in  court,  and  for  this  he  r.  him
Wisd.  3. 5.  a  little  chastised,  they  shall  be  greatly  r.

1  Mac.  11.  53.  nor  r.  him  according  to  the  benefits

2  Mac.  4.38.  thus  the  Lord  r.  him  as  he  deserved

REWARDS.

1  End.  4.  39.  there  is  no  accepting  of  persons  or  r.

1  Mac.  2.  18.  with  silver  and  gold,  and  many  r.

10.  28.  will  grant  you  immunities,  and  give  you  r.
16. 19.  he  might  give  them  silver,  gold,  and  r.
RICH.

1  Esd.  3. 19.  mind  of  the  poor  man  and  r.  to  be  one

21.  and  it  maketh  every  neart  r.

Eccl.  8.  2.  be  not  at  variance  with  a  r.  man

10.  22.  whether  he  be  r.  noble,  or  poor

30.  and  the  r.  man  is  honoured  for  his  riches

11.  18.  there  is  that  waxeth  r.  by  his  wariness

21.  it  is  easy  on  a  sudden  to  make  a  poor  man  r.
13. 3.  the  r.  man  hath  done  wrong,  yet  threateneth

22.  when  a  r.  man  hath  fallen,  hath  many  helpers

23.  when  a  r.  man  speaketh,  every  man  holdeth
30. 14.  than  a  r.  man  that  is  afflicted  in  body

31.  3.  the  r.  hath  great  labour  in  gathering

8.  blessed  is  the  r.  that  is  without  blemish
44. 6.  r.  men  furnished  with  ability,  living  peaceab.
45.  8.  he  strengthened  him  with  r.  garments
Sus.  4.  now  Joacim  was  a  great  r.  man

1  Mac.  6.  2.  that  there  was  in  it  a  very  r.  temple

2  Mac.  7.  24.  make  him  both  a  r.  and  happy  man

RICHER.

Wisd.  8.  5.  what  is  r.  than  wisdom  that  worketh
Eccl.  13.  2.  with  one  mightier  and  r.  than  thyself
RICHES.

JVisd.  5.  8.  or  what  good  hath  r.  brought  us  ?

8.  5.  if  r.  be  a  possession  to  be  desiped  in  life
18.  in  the  works  of  her  hands  are  infinite  r.

Eccl.  10. 8.  because  of  iniuries,  and  r.  got  by  deceit

30.  the  rich  man  is  honoured  for  his  r.

31.  honoured  in  poverty,  how  much  more  in  r. !
he  that  is  dishonoured  in  r.  how  much  in  poverty  !

11.  14.  poverty  and  r.  come  of  the  Lord

13.  24.  r.  are  good  to  him  that  hath  no  sin

14.  3.  r.  are  not  comely  for  a  niggard

21.  4.  to  terrify  and  do  wrong  will  waste  r.

24.  17.  my  flowers  are  the  fruit  of  honour  and  r.

28.  10.  according  to  his  r.  his  anger  riseth

30. 16.  there  is  no  r.  above  a  sound  body
31. 1.  watching  for  r.  consumeth  the  flesh

3.  the  rich  hath  great  labour  in  gathering  r.

37.  6.  be  not  unmindful  of  him  in  thy  r.

40.  26.  r.  and  strength  lift  up  the  heart
Bar.  6.  35.  they  can  neither  give  r.  nor  money

1  Mac.  4.  23.  to  spoil  tents,  where  they  got  great  r.

6.  1.  that  Elymais  was  a  city  renowned  for  r.

2  Mac.  3.  6.  multitude  of  their  r.  was  innumerable

RIDER.

2  Mac.  3.  25.  a  horse  with  a  terrible  r.  upon  him
RIDERS.

Jud.  2.5.  horses  with  their  r.  twelve  thousand
RIDICULOUS.

Eccl.  34.  18.  he  sacrificeth,  his  offering  is  r.
RIFLED.

1  Mac.  1.  61.  they  r.  their  houses,  and  slew  them

RIGHT.

2  Esd.  10.  39.  he  hath  seen  that  thy  way  is  r.

Tob.  3. 17.  belonged  to  Tobias  by  r.  of  inheritance
6.  11.  tor  to  thee  doth  the  r.  of  her  appertain

Jud.  8. 11.  your  words  you  have  spoken  are  not  r.
Wisd.  9. 9.  knew  what  was  r.  in  thy  commandments
10.  10.  she  guided  him  in  r.  paths,  shewed  him
Eccl.  49.  9.  and  directed  them  that  went  r.

Dan.  3. 4.  thy  ways  are  r.  all  thy  judgments  truth
1  Mac.  9. 15.  who  discomfited  the  r.  wing
RIGHT- AIMING.

Wisd.  5.  21.  r.  thunderbolts  shall  go  abroad
WIGHT -hand.

1  Esd.  4.  29.  sitting  at  the  r.-hand  of  the  king

2  Esd.  3.  6.  which  thy  r.-hand  had  planted

16.  1.3.  strong  is  his  r.-hand  that  bendeth
Wisd.  5.  16.  with  his  r.-hand  shall  he  cover  them
Eccl.  12. 12.  neither  let  him  sit  at  thy  r.-hand

21.  19.  doctrine  to  fools,  like  manacles  on  r.-hand
49.  11.  Zorobabel  was  as  a  signet  on  the  r.-hand
Bar.  6. 15.  he  hath  also  in  his  r.-hand  a  dagger
2  Mac.  4.  34.  gave  him  his  r.-hand  with  oaths

14.  33.  he  stretched  out  his  r.-hand  to  the  temple

15.  15.  Jeremias  holding  forth  his  r.-hand

682


RIGHTEOUS.

2  Esd.  3. 1!.  Noah,  of  whom  came  all  r.  men
Tob.  2.  14.  where  are  thy  alms  and  thy  r.  deeds  ?

13.  9.  he  will  have  mercy  on  the  sons  of  the  r.
Esth.  11.  7.  they  might  fight  against  ihe  r.  people

9.  the  whole  r.  nation  was  troubled

14.  7.  worshipped  their  gods,  O  Lord,  thou  art r.
Wisd.  2.  12.  let  us  lie  in  wait  for  the  r.

3.  1.  the  souls  of  the  r.  are  in  the  hand  of  God

10.  the  ungodly,  which  have  neglected  the  r.

4.  7*  but  though  the  r.  be  prevented  with  death

16.  the  r.  that  is  dead  shall  condemn  the  ungodly

5.  15.  but  the  r.  live  for  evermore

10.  4.  wisdom  directed  the  course  of  the  r.

5.  she  found  out  the  r.  and  preserved  him

6.  she  delivered  the  r.  man  who  fled  from  fire
10.  when  the  r.  fled  from  his  brother’s  wrath
13.  when  the  r.  was  sold,  she  forsook  him  not

17.  rendered  to  the  r.  a  reward  of  their  labours
20.  therefore  the  r.  spoiled  the  ungodly

12.  9.  to  bring  the  ungodly  under  the  hand  of  r.

15.  as  thou  art  r.  thyself,  thou  orderest  all

16.  17.  for  the  world  fighteth  for  the  r.

23.  that  the  r.  might  be  nourished

18.  9.  the  r.  children  of  good  men  did  sacrifice
20.  the  tasting  of  death  toucheth  the  r.  also

19.  17-  as  those  were  at  the  doors  of  the  r.  man
Eccl.  18.2.  the  Lord  only  is  r.  and  none  other

27.  29.  that  rejoice  at  the  fall  of  the  r.  be  taken
35.  6.  the  offering  of  the  r.  makes  the  altar  fat

44.  17.  Noah  was  found  r.  in  the  time  of  wrath
Bar.  2.  9.  for  the  Lord  is  r.  in  all  his  works
Dan.  3. 64.  O  ye  spirits  and  souls  of  the  r.  bless  the

Lord

Sus.  3.  her  parents  also  were  r.  and  taught  her
Prayer  of  Manass.  G.  of  our  fathers  and  their  r.seed
2  Mac.  1.  24.  who  art  strong  and  r.  and  merciful

12.  6.  and  calling  upon  God  the  r.  judge

.RIGHTEOUSNESS.

2  Esd.  5. 11.  is  r.  that  maketh  a  man  righteous  gone

7.  44.  r.  is  grown,  and  truth  is  sprung  up

8.  30.  love  them  that  put  their  trust  in  thy  r.

32.  to  us,  namely,  that  have  no  works  of  r.

Tob.  12.  8.  a  little  with  r.  is  better  than  much

13.  8.  and  let  all  praise  him  for  his  r.

14. 11.  what  alms  doth,  and  how  r.  doth  deliver
Wisd.  1. 1.  love  r.  ye  that  be  judges  of  the  earth

15.  forr.  is  immortal,  but  ungodly  men  called
2.  22.  neither  hoped  they  for  the  wages  of  r.

5.  6.  we  have  erred,  and  the  light  of  r.  hath  not
shined  on  us,  the  sun  of  r.  rose  not  upon  us

18.  he  shall  put  on  r.  as  a  breast  plate

8.  7.  if  a  man  love  r.  her  labours  are  virtues

9.  3.  order  the  world  according  to  equity  and  r.

12.  16.  for  thy  power  is  the  beginning  of  r.

14.  7.  for  blessed  is  the  wood  whereby  r.  cometh

15.  3.  for  to  know  thee  is  perfect  r.

Eccl.  26.  28.  one  that  turneth  from  r.  to  sin

27.  8.  if  thou  followest  r.  thou  shalt  obtain  her

44. 10.  whose  r.  hath  not  been  forgotten

45.  26.  give  wisdom,  to  judge  his  people  inr.

Bar.  1.  15.  to  the  Lord  our  God  belongeth  r.

2. 17.  the  dead  will  give  neither  praise  nor  r.

5.4.  thy  name  shall  be  called  the  Peace  of  r.

1  Mac.  2.  52.  and  it  was  imputed  to  him  forr.

7. 18.  there  is  neither  truth  nor  r.  in  them

RING,

2  Esd.  5.  42.  I  will  liken  my  judgment  to  ar.

RINGS.

Jud.  10.  4.  her  chains,  and  her  r.  and  ear-rings
RISE.

Tob.  6.  17-  r.  up  both  of  you,  and  pray  to  God
12.  13.  when  thou  didst  not  delay  to  r.  up
Jud.  16.  17.  woe  to  nations  that  r.  ag.  my  kindred
Eccl.  8.  11.  r.  not  up  in  anger  at  the  presence

17.  23.  afterward  he  will  r.  up  and  reward  them

32. 11.  r.  up  betimes,  and  be  not  the  last

RISEN.

1  Esd.  3.  9.  when  the  king  is  r.  some  will  give  him
Jud.  13.  5.  the  enemies  which  are  r.  against  us

2  Mac.  12.  44.  they  that  were  slain  should  have  r.

RISETH.

Eccl.  31.  20.  he  r.  early,  and  his  wits  are  with  him
RISING.

1  Esd.  8.  73.  r.  from  the  fast  with  my  clothes  rent
9-  1.  Esdras  r.  from  the  court  of  the  temple

2  Esd.  15.  20.  which  are  from  the  r.  of  the  sun
Eccl.  43. 2.  declaring  at  r.  a  marvellous  instrument

1  Mac.  6.  33.  then  the  king  r.  very  early,  marched

2  Mac.  4.  40.  whereupon  the  common  people  r.

RIOT.

2  Mac.  6.  4.  for  the  temple  was  filled  with  r.

RIOTOUSLY.

Eccl.  14.  4.  others  that  shall  spend  his  goods  r.
RIPE.

Wisd.  4.  5.  the  fruit  unprofitable,  not  r.  to  eat
Eccl.  26.  17.  so  is  the  beauty  of  the  face  in  r.  age
RIVER.

2  Esd.  1.  23.  tree  in  water,  and  made  the  r.  sweet
5.  25.  of  all  depths  thou  hast  filled  thee  one  r.

Tob.  6. 1.  they  came  in  the  evening  to  ther.  Tigris
Esth.  10. 6.  a  little  fountain  became  a  r.

Wisd.  11.  6.  a  fountain  of  a  perpetual  running  r.
19.  10.  how  the  r.  cast  up  a  multitude  of  frogs
Eccl.  4. 26.  and  force  not  the  course  of  the  r.

24.  30. 1  also  came  out  as  a  brook  from  a  r.

31.  my  brook  became  a  r.  and  my  r.  became  a  sea
39.  22.  his  blessing  covered  the  dry  land  as  ar.

•40.  13.  the  goods  of  unjust  shall  be  dried  upas  a  r.

16.  growing  on  every  water  and  bank  of  a  r.

44.  2l.  from  the  r.  to  the  utmost  part  of  land

1  Mac.  11.  7.  gone  to  the  r.  called  Eleutherus
RIVERS.

1  Esd.  4.  23.  goeth  to  sail  on  the  sea,  and  upon  r.

2  Esd.  15.41.  many  waters,  that  all  fields  may  be

full,  and  all  r.  with  abundance  of  great  waters
Eccl.  50.  8.  as  lilies  by  the  r.  of  waters
Dan.  3.  56.  O  ye  seas  and  r.  bless  ye  the  Lord
ROB.

1  Esd.  4.  23.  he  goeth  his  way  to  r.  and  to  steal
ROBBED.

1  Esd.  4.  24.  when  he  hath  stolen,  spoiled,  and  r.


ROBBERS.

Bar.  6. 18.  lest  their  gods  be  spoiled  with  r.

57-  nor  able  to  escape  either  from  thieves  or  r.
ROBE.

Eccl.  6.  29.  and  her  chains  shall  be  a  r.  of  glory
31.  thou  shalt  put  her  on  as  a  r.  of  honour

27.  8.  thou  shalt  put  her  on  as  a  glorious  long  r
45.  7.  and  he  clothed  him  with  a  r.  of  glory

8.  with  breeches,  with  a  long  r.  and  the  ephod
50.  11.  when  he  put  on  the  r.  of  honour

1  Mac.  6.  15.  he  gave  him  the  crown  and  his  r.

10.  20.  therewithal  Ire  sent  him  a  purple  r.

21.  at  the  feast  Jonathan  put  on  the  holy  r.

13.  37.  the  scarlet  r.  which  ye  sent  to  us

ROBOAM.

Eccl.  47.  23.  of  his  seed,  he  left  behind  him  R.

ROCK.

Wisd.  11.4.  water  given  them  out  of  the  flinty  r.

Eccl.  40.  15.  are  as  unclean  roots  on  a  hard  r.

48.  17-  he  digged  the  hard  r.  with  iron

2  Mac.  14.  45.  and  standing  upon  a  steep  r.

ROCKS.

2  Esd.  16.  28.  hide  themselves  in  tire  clefts  of  r.

Jud.  16. 15.  r.  shall  melt  as  wax  at  thy  presence

ROD.

Eccl.  30.  1.  he  causeth  him  oft  to  feel  the  r.

ROE.

Eccl.  27.  20.  he  is  as  r.  escaped  out  of  the  snare
ROLLING.

Eccl.  33.  5.  his  thoughts  are  like  a  r.  axle-tree
ROMANS.

1  Mac.  8.  1.  Judas  had  heard  of  the  fame  of  the  R.

21.  so  that  matter  pleased  the  II.  well

23.  good  success  be  to  the  R.  and  to  the  Jews
29.  according  to  these  articles  did  the  R.

12.4.  upon  this  the  R.  gave  them  letters

16.  sent  them  to  the  II.  to  renew  the  amity

14.  40.  the  R,  had  called  the  Jews  their  friends

15.  16.  Lucius  consul  of  the  R.  to  king  Ptolemee

2  Mac.  8.  10.  which  the  king  was  to  pay  to  the  R.

36.  to  make  good  to  the  R.  their  tribute

11.  34.  the  R.  also  sent  unto  them  a  letter;  th«
ambassadors  of  the  r.  send  greeting  to  the  Jews

ROME.

1  Mac.  1.  10.  who  had  been  an  hostage  at  R.

8.  17.  send  them  to  R.  to  make  a  league 'of  amity
1.9.  they  went  to  R.  a  very  great  journey

12.  3.  so  they  went  to  R.  and  entered  the  senate

14. 16.  when  it  was  heard  atR.  Jonathan  was  dead

24.  after  this  Simon  sent  Numenius  to  R.

2  Mac.  4. 11.  who  went  ambassador  to  R.

ROOF.

1  Esd.  6.  4.  by  whose  appointment  build  ye  this  r.  ?

2  Mac.  1.  16.  and  opening  a  privy  door  of  the  r.

ROOM.

Tob.  2.  4.  I  started  up,  and  took  him  up  into  a.  r.

Wisd.  13.  15.  when  he  had  made  a  convenient  r.
ROOT.

1  Esd.  8.  78.  that  there  should  be  left  us  a  r.

87.  and  didst  give  unto  us  such  a  r.

88.  till  thou  hadstleft  us  neither  r.  nor  name

2  Esd.  3.  22.  with  the  malignity  of  the  r.

5.  3.  the  land  that  thou  seest  r.ow  to  have  r.

28.  on  the  one  r.  hast  thou  prepared  others
8.41.  neither  doth  all  that  is  planted  taker.

53.  the  r.  of  evil  is  sealed  up  from  you
Wisd.  3. 15.  the  r.  of  wisdom  shall  never  fall  away
15.  3.  to  know  thy  power  is  the  r.  of  immortality
Eccl.  1.  6.  hath  the  r.  of  wisdom  been  revealed  ?

20.  the  r.  of  wisdom  is  to  fear  the  Lord
3.  28.  the  piantof  wickedness  hath  taken  r.

23.  25.  her  children  shall  not  take  r.

24. 12.  I  took  r.  in  an  honourable  people

47.  22.  wherefore  he  gave  a  remnant  unto  Jacob.

and  out  of  him  he  gave  a  r.  unto  David
1  Mac.  1. 10.  there  came  out  of  them  a  wicked  r.

.  ROOTS.

Wisd.  7.  20.  diversities  of  plants  and  virtues  of  r.

Eccl.  10. 15.  Lord  plucked  up  the  r.  of  the  proud
40. 15.  but  are  as  unclean  r.  on  a  hard  rock
ROOT.

Eccl.  49. 7-  that  he  might  r.  out,  afflict,  and  destroy

1  Mac.  2.  40.  they  will  now  r.  us  out  of  the  earth
3.  35.  to  destroy  and  r.  out  the  strength  of  Israel

2  Mac.  8.9.  tor.outthe  whole  generation  oftheJews
12. 7.  to  r.  out  all  them  of  the  city  of  Joppe

ROOTED.

Wisd.  4. 4.  by  force  of  winds  they  shall  be  r.  out
ROOTETH.

Eccl.  3.  9.  the  curse  of  the  mother  r.  out  foundations  1
ROOTING.

Wisd.  4.  3.  nor  take  deep  r.  from  bastard  slips
ROAR.

Bar.  6.  32.  they  r.  and  cry  before  their  gods
ROARING.

2  Esd.  11 .  37.  as  a  r.  lion  chased  out  of  the  wood
12.  31.  the  lion  thou  sawestr.  and  speaking
IVisd.  17.  19.  ora  r.  voice  ofmost  savage  beasts

1  Mac.  3. 4.  like  a  lion’s  whelp  r.  for  his  prey

ROSE.

Eccl.  39.  13.  bud  forth  as  a  r.  growing  by  the  brook
ROSE-BUDS.

Wisd.  2.  8.  let  us  crown  ourselves  with  r.-buds
ROSE-PLANT.

Eccl.  24.  14.  I  was  exalted  as  a  r. -plant  in  Jaricho
ROSE.

IVisd.  5.  6.  the  sun  of  righteousness  r.  not  on  us
ROSES.

2  Esd.  2.  19.  mountains  whereon  grew  r.  and  lilies

ROSIN.

Dan.  3.  23.  make  the  oven  hot  with  r.  and  pitch
ROASTED.

Tob.  6.  5.  when  thev  had  r.  the  fish,  they  did  eat  it
ROUGH.

Wisd.  12.  9.  or  to  destroy  them  with  one  r.  word
ROUGHLY.

2  Mac.  14.  30.  he  in  treated  him*more  r.  than  wont
ROUGHNESS.

Eccl.  10.  21.  r.  and  pride  is  the  losing  thereof
ROYAL.

1  F.sd.%.  15.  sat  down  in  the  r.  seat  of  judgment
Wisd.  18.15.  leaped  down  out  of  thy  r.  throne


S  AC


SAK


§  T  [Apocrypha


1  Var .  3.  .1C.  he  left  Lysias,  one  of  the  blood  r.

1*.  the  kins:  departed  from  Antioch  his  r.  city

6.  43.  one  of  the  beasts  armed  with  r.  harness

2  Mac.  4.  11.  the  r.  privileges  granted  to  the  Jews

HUB.

Tab.  11.  8.  being  pricked  therewith,  he  shall  r.
RUBBED.

Tab.  _L,  12.  when  his  eyes  began  to  smart,  he  t.  them
RUDDY.

Esth.  15.  5.  she  was  r.  through  perfection  of  beauty
RUDE.

Eccl.  8.  4.  jest  not  with  a  r.  man,  lest  be  disgraced
RUDELY.

2  Mac.  12.  14.  that  they  behaved  themselves  r.

RUDENESS.

Eccl.  21.  24.  it  is  the  r.  of  a  man  to  hearken  at  door
RUIN.

2  Esd.  3.  1.  after  r.  of  the  city,  T  was  in  Babylon
Jud.  5.  20.  consider,  that  this  shall  be  their  r.

13.  20.  hast  not  spared,  but  hast  revenged  our  r.
Eccl.  4.  10.  she  will  give  him  over  to  his  own  r.

31.  6.  gold  hath  been  the  r.  of  many
RUINS.

Eccl.  49. 13.  Neemias,  who  raised  up  our  r.  again
RULE.

1  Esd.  4.  2.  that  bear  r.  over  sea  and  land
15.  all  the  people  that  bear  r.  by  sea  and  land

19.  4.  as  the  elders  that  bear  r.  appointed
Wisd.  6.  2.  give  ear,  ye  that  r.  the  people
Eccl.  10.  6.  he  that  can  r.  his  tongue,  shall  live
28.22.  it  shall  not  have  r.  over  them  that  fear  God
44.  3.  such  as  did  bear  r.  in  their  kingdoms
1  Mac.  1. 8.  his  servants  bear  r.  every  one  in  place
6.  27.  ueithershalt  thou  be  able  to  r.  them
RULE  I'll.

1  Esd.  4.  14.  who  is  it  then  thatr.  them  ?

RULER.

Eccl.  9.  17.  the  wise  r.  of  the  people,  for  his  speech

10.  2.  as  the  r.  of  the  city  is,  such  are  all  they
17-  17.  he  seta  r.  over  every  people,  but  Israel
41.  18.  of  an  offence  before  a  judge  and  r.

1  Mac.  2.  17.  thou  art  a  r.  and  an  honourable  man

6. 14.  whom  he  made  r.  over  all  his  realm
11. 57.  I  appoint  thee  r.  over  four  governments
2  Mac.  4.27.  Sostratusr.  of  the  castle  required
13. 2.  Lysias  his  protector,  and  r.  of  his  affairs
RULERS.

Eccl.  33.  18.  hearken  ye  r.  of  the  congregation
46.  18.  he  destroyed  the  r.  of  the  Tyrians
1  Mac.  14.  20.  the  r.  of  the  Lacedemonians
RULES.

2  Mac.  2.  28.  to  follow  the  r.  of  an  abridgment

RULING.

1  Mac.  6.  56.  to  take  to  him  the  r.  of  the  affairs
RUMOUR.

2  Mac.  5.  5.  when  there  was  gone  forth  a  false  r.
RUN.

1  Esd.  4.26.  many  have  r.  out  of  their  wits  for  women
Wisd.  3.  7.  they  shall  shine  and  r.  to  and  fro
16.  29.  and  shall  r.  away  as  unprofitable  water
Eccl.  33.  31.  if  entreat  him  evil,  and  he  r.  from  thee
35.  15.  do  not  tears  r.  down  the  widow’s  cheeks  ?

2  Mac.  6. 11.  others  that  had  r.  together  into  caves
RUNNETH.

Eccl.  43.  5.  at  his  commandment  it  r.  hastily
RUNNING.

Wisd.  17.  18.  or  a  fall  of  water  r.  violently
19.  or  a  r.  that  could  not  be  seen  of  beasts
2  Mac.  5.  2.  there  were  seen  horsemen  r.  in  the  air

3.  encountering  and  r.  one  against  another
26.  r.  thro’  the  city  with  weapons,  slew  multitudes

9.  2.  the  multitude  r.  to  defend  themselves
12. 16.  a  lake  adjoining,  was  seen  r.  with  blood
RUSH.

2  Esd.  15.  60.  they  shall  r.  on  the  idle  city
Jud.  15.  4.  that  all  should  r.  on  their  enemies
1  Mac.  4.  2.  might  r.  in  upon  the  camp  of  the  Jews
RUSHED.

Jud.  15.  3.  the  children  of  Israel  r.  out  upon  them
Sus.  26.  the  servants  r.  in  at  a  privy  door  to  see
RUSHING.

Jud.  15.  2.  but  r.  out  all  together  they  fled
2  Mac.  12.  37.  and  r.  unawares  upon  Gorgias

14.  43.  the  multitude  also  r.  within  the  doors
RUST.

Eccl.  12. 11.  his  t.  not  being  altogether  wiped  away
29.  10.  let  it  not  r.  under'a  stone  to  be  lost
Bar.  6.12.  cannot  these  gods  save  themselves  from  r.
RUSTETII.

Eccl.  12.  10.  for  as  iron  r.  so  is  his  wickedness

S.

_ SABBATH.

1  Mac.  1. 43.  sacrifice  to  idols,  and  profane  the  5.

2.  38.  they  rose  against  them  in  battle  on  the  s.

2  Mac.  5.  25.  did  forbear  till  holy  day  of  the  s.

26.  that  were  gone  to  the  celebrating  of  the  s.

8.  26.  for  it  was  the  day  before  the  ;.

28.  after  s.  when  they  had  given  of  the  spoils

12.  38.  they  kept  the  ;.  in  the  same  place
SABBATH-^.

1  Mac.  2.  32.  made  war  against  them  on  the  s.-day
34.  nor  do  commandment  to  profane  the  s.-day
41.  whoso  will  make  battle  with  us  on  the  s.-day
2  Mac.  6. 11.  had  run  to  keep  the  s.-day  secretly

15.  1.  resolved  to  set  upon  them  on  the  s.-day

3.  that  had  commanded  the  s.-day  to  be  kept
S  A  B  B  AT  H -days .

Jud.  10.  2.  house  in  which  she  abode  in  the  s.-days
L  2  Mac.  6.  6.  nor  was  it  lawful  to  keep  s.-days
SABBATHS.

1  Esd.  1.  58.  till  the  land  had  enjoyed  her  s.

5. 52.  the  sacrifice  of  the  s.  and  new  moons
Jud.  8.  6.  save  the  s.  and  eves  of  the  new  moons
1  Mac.  1.  39.  her  s.  were  turned  into  reproach
45.  and  that  they  should  profane  the  s.
SACKCLOTH.

Jud.  4.  10.  and  their  servants  put;.  on  their  loins

11.  cast  ashes  on  their  heads,  spread  out  their  s.
before  the  Ld.  also  they  put  s.  about  the  altar


Jud.  4.  14.  the  piiests  had  their  loins  girt  with  s.

9. 1.  uncovered  the  s.  wherewith  she  was  clothed

10.  3.  she  pulled  off  the  ;.  which  she  had  on
Eccl.  25.  17-  Rod  darkeneth  her  countenance  like;.
Bar.  4.  20.  I  have  put  on  me  the  s.  of  my  prayer

1  Mac.  2.  14.  put  on  s.  and  mourned  very  sore

3.  47.  then  they  fasted  that  day  and  put  on  s.

2  Mac.  3.  19.  the  women  girt  with  s.  abounded
10.  25.  and  girded  their  loins  with  s.

SACRED.

2  Mac.  6.  11.  for  the  honour  of  the  most  s.  day
SACRIFICE.

Tab.  1.  4.  that  all  the  tribes  should  s.  there
Jud.  16.  16.  all  s.  is  too  little  for  a  sweet  savour
Wisd.  18.  9.  the  children  of  good  men  did  s.  secretly
Eccl.  7  31.  and  the  .9.  of  sanctification
31. 7.  a  stumbling-block  to  them  that ;.  to  it
.35.  7.  the  s.  of  a  just  man  is  acceptable
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  there  prince,  or  s.  or  oblation

1  Mac.  1.  47.  and  s.  swine’s  flesh  and  unclean  beasts
51.  commanding  the  cities  of  Jnda  to  s.

59.  they  did  s.  upon  the  idol  altar

4.  53.  and  offered  s.  according  to  the  law

56.  sacrificed  the  ;.  of  deliverance  and  praise

2  Mac.  1.  18.  was  given  when  Neemias  offered  s.
2.3.  made  a  prayer  whilst  the  s.  was  consuming

2.  9.  he  being  wise  offered  the  s.  of  dedication

3.  32.  offered  a  s.  for  the  health  of  the  man

4.  19.  to  carry  silver  to  the  s.  of  Hercules  ;  which
the  bearers  thought  fit  not  to  bestow  upon  the  s.

20.  this  money  was  appointed  to  Hercules’ s.

6.  21.  as  if  he  did  eat  of  flesh  from  the  s.

10.  3.  they  offered  a  r.  after  two  years

13.  23.  Philip  offered  .9.  honoured  the  temple

SACRIFICED.

Tab.  1.  5.  house  of  Nephtlrali;.  to  the  heifer  Baal
Bar.  6.  28.  for  the  things  that  are  s.  unto  them
1  Mac.  1.  43.  many  of  the  Israelites  s.  to  idols

4.  56.  they  s.  the  sacrifice  of  deliverance  and  praise
SACRIFICES.

1  Esd.  1.  12.  the  .9.  they  sod  them  in  brass  pots
5. 53.  had  made  any  vow,  began  to  offer  .9.  to  God
IVisd.  12.  4.  works  of  witchcrafts  and  wicked  s.

14.  15.  to  those  under  him,  ceremonies  and  s.

23.  whilst  they  slew  their  children  in  s.

Eccl.  35.  12.  and  trust  not  to  unrighteous  s.

45.  14.  their  s.  shall  be  wholly  consumed

16.  he  chose  him  to  offer  .9.  to  the  Lord
Bar.  6.  29.  women  in  childbed  eat  their  s.

1  Mac.  12.  11.  we  remember  you  in  the  .9.  we  offer

2  Mac.  1.  8.  we  offered  also  .9.  and  fine  flour
33.  Neemias  had  purified  the  s.  therewith

2.  10.  the  fire  came  down  and  consumed  the  s.

3.  3.  Seleucus  bare  all  the  costs  belonging  to  the  s.
6.  which  did  not  pertain  to  the  account  of  the  s.

4. 14.  neglecting  the  s.  hastened  to  be  partakers
6.  7.  were  brought  by  constraint  to  eat  of  the  s.

8.  that  they  should" be  partakers  of  their  s.

9.  16.  and  defray  the  charges  belonging  to  the  .9.
14.  31.  the  priests  that  were  offering  their  usual  s.

SACRIFICETH.

Eccl.  34.  18.  he  that  s.  of  a  thing  wrongfully  got
35.  2.  and  he  that  giveth  alms,  .9.  praise
SACRILEGES.

2  Mac.  4.  39.  when  manv  s.  had  been  committed

SAD.

1  Esd.  8.  7L  I  sat  me  down  .9.  and  very  heavy

2  Esd.  10.  8.  now  seeing  we  all  mourn  and  are  s.
Wisd.  17.  4.  and  s.  visions  appeared  to  them

SADLY.

Eccl.  19.  26.  that  hangeth  down  his  head  s.

SAFE.

2  Esd.  1. 13.  I  gave  jmu  a  large  and  s.  passage
Tab.  5.  15.  if  ye  return  s.  I  will  add  something

21.  journey  prosperous,  and  he  shall  return  s.

10.  6.  hold  thy  peace,  take  no  care,  for  he  is  .9.

2  Mac.  3.  22.  to  keep  things  committed  of  trust  s.
SAFEGUARD.

1  Esd.  8.  51.  for  s.  against  our  adversaries

Jud.  11.  3.  be  of  good  comfort,  thou  art  come  for  s.

2  Mac.  13.  3.  not  for  the  .9.  of  the  country

SAFELY.

1  Esd.  4.  47.  they  should  s.  convey  on  their  way
Toh.  6.  4.  heart,  liver,  and  gall,  and  put  them  up  s.

1  Mac.  6.  40.  they  marched  on  s.  and  in  order

2  Mac.  3. 15.  that  they  should  s.  be  preserved

SAFETY.

Tob.  5.  20.  take  no  care,  he  shall  return  in  s.

8.  21.  half  of  his  goods,  and  go  in  s.  to  his  father

12.  3.  he  hath  brought  me  again  to  thee  in  s.

5.  take  half  of  all  ye  brought,  and  go  away  in  s.
Esth.  16.  23.  hereafter  there  may  be  .9.  to  11s
Wisd.  4. 17.  to  what  end  the  Lord  hath  set  him  in  s.

1  Mac.  7.  35.  if  ever  I  come  in  s.  I  will  burn  bouse
10.  83.  the  horsemen  scattered  in  the  field  fled  to

Azotus,  and  went  into  their  idol’s  temple  for  s.
14.  37.  he  fortified  it  for  the  s.  of  the  country

2  Mac.  4.  21.  Antiochus  provided  for  his  own  s.

9.  21.  I  thought  to  care  for  the  common  s.  of  all

SAIL.

1  Esd.  4.  23.  a  man  goeth  his  way  to  ;.  on  the  sea
Wisd.  14.  1.  again,  one  preparing  himself  to  s.
Eccl.  43.  24.  they,  that  s.  on  the  sea  tell  of  danger

1  Mac.  13.  29.  be  seen  of  all  that  s.  on  the  sea

SAINTS.

Tob.  8.  15.  therefore  let  thy  s.  praise  thee
12.  15.  which  present  the  "prayers  of  the  s.

Wisd.  3.  9.  for  grace  and  mercy  is  to  his  ;.

4.  15.  that  his  grace  and  mercy  is  with  his  s.

5.  5.  and  his  lot  is  among  the  .9.

18.  1.  thy  s.  had  a  very  great  light

5.  had  determined  to  slay  the  babes  of  the  s.

9.  the  .9.  shall  be  like  partakers  of  good  and  evil
Eccl.  42.  17.  Lord  hath  not  given  power  to  the  s.
45.  2.  he  made  him  like  to  the  glorious  s.

SAKE.

Eccl.  47.  12.  and  for  his  s.  he  dwelt  at  large
Bar.  2.  14.  and  deliver  us  for  thine  own  s.

Dan.  3.  12.  thy  mercy  not  depart  for  thy  beloved
Abraham’s  5.  for  servant  Isaac’s  s.  and  Israel’s  s.

2  Mac.  5.  19.  God  did  not  choose  the  people  for  the

place’s  s.  but  the  place  for  the  people’s  ;.


SAKES.

Eccl.  40.  10.  and  for  their  .9.  came  the  flood
Eccl.  44.  12.  and  their  children  for  their  jr.

SALE.

2  Mac.  8. 11.  proclaiming  a  s.  of  the  captive  Jews

11.  3.  set  the  high  priesthood  to  s.  every  year

SALT.

1  F.sd.  6.  SO.  also  corn,  .9.  wine  and  oil  to  be  given

2  Esd.  5.  9.  s.  water  shall  be  found  in  the  sweet
Wisd.  10.  7-  a  standing  pillar  of  s.  is  a  monument
Eccl.  22. 15.  sand,  and  s.  and  a  mass  of  iron

39.  26.  s.  flour  of  wheat,  for  the  use  of  man’s  life
43.  19.  hoar-frost  also  as  s.  he  poureth  on  earth
Bar.  6.  28.  their  wives  lay  up  part  thereof  in  s.
SALTN  ESS.

Eccl.  39.  23.  he  hath  turned  the  waters  into;.
SALT-PITS.

1  Mac.  11. 35.  the  .9.  and  crown  taxes  we  discharge

SALVATION.

2  Esd.  6.  25.  shall  escape,  and  see  my  ;.

7.  61.  be  joy  over  them  that  are  persuaded  to  .9.
Esth.  13. 13.  for  the  ;.  of  Israel,  to  kiss  the  soles
IVisd.  5.  2.  amazed  at  the  strangeness  of  his  ;.

16.  6.  having  a  sign  of;,  to  put  then)  in  remembr
18.  7.  was  accepted  both  the  .9.  of  the  righteous
and  destruction  of  the  enemies
Eccl.  13.  14.  and  call  upon  hit))  for  thy  ;.

Bar.  4.  24.  they  shall  see  your  ;.  from  our  God
1  Mac.  3.  6.  because  ;.  prospered  in  his  hand
SALUTE.

Jud.  15.  8.  came  to  see  Judith,  and  to  ,v.  her
1  Mac.  7. 33.  came  priests  and  elders  to  s.  peaceably

12.  17.  commanded  to  go  unto  you,  and  to  ;.  you

SALUTED.

Tob.  5.  9.  he  came  in,  and  they  ;.  one  another
1  Mac.  7.  29-  they  ;.  one  another  peaceably

11.  6.  where  they  ;.  one  another,  and  lodged

SAMARIA.

1  Esd.  2.  16.  dwelling  in  S.  and  other  places
Jud.  1. 9.  to  all  that  were  in  S.  and  cities  thereof
Eccl.  50.  26.  that  sit  upon  the  mountains  of  S.

1  Mac.  3.  10.  gathered  a  great  host  out  of  S.

5.  66.  thence  he  removed,  and  passed  through  S.

10.  30.  out  of  the  country  of  S.  and  Galilee

2  Mac.  15. 1.  were  in  the  strong  places  about  S.

SAMUEL.

1  Esd.  1. 20.  since  the  time  of  the  prophet  S.

2  Esd.  7.  38.  S.  and  David  for  the  destruction

SANCTIFICATION.

Eccl.  7. 31.  give  the  priest  the  sacrifice  of  ;.
SANCTIFY.

2  Mac.  1 . 25.  didst  choose  the  fathers  and  ;.  them
26.  and  preserve  thine  own  portion  and  ;.  it
SANCTIFIED.

2  Mac.  2. 8.  that  the  place  might  be  honourably  s.
SANCTITY.

2  Mac.  3.  12.  to  the  inviolable  ;.  of  the  temple
SANCTUARY.

1  Esd.  8. 78.  be  left  ns  a  name  in  the  place  of  thy  s.

2  Esd.  7.  38.  for  them  that  should  come  to  the  c.

10.  21.  for  thou  seest  that  our  ;.  is  laid  waste

12.  48.  seek  mercy  for  the  low  estate  of  your

15.  25.  go  your  way,  defile  not  my  ;.

Jud.  4.  12.  the  to  profanation  and  reproach

13.  before  the  ;.  of  the  Lord  Almighty
Eccl.  47. 13.  he  might  prepare  his  ;.  for  ever

49.  6.  they  burned  the  chosen  city  of  the  ;.

50.  5.  how  was  he  honoured  in  coming  out  of  ;.  /

1  Mac.  1.  21.  Antiochus  entered  proudly  into  the;
36.  it  was  a  place  to  lie  in  wait  against  the  ;.

3.  45.  the  ;.  also  was  trodden  down,  aliens  kept
58.  that  are  assembled  to  destroy  us  and  our  ;.

4.  36.  let  us  go  cleanse  and  dedicate  the  ;.

41.  to  fight,  until  he  had  cleansed  the  ;.

48.  made  up  the  ;.  and  things  within  the  temple
5. 1.  heard  that  the  ;.  was  renewed  as  before

10.  39.  1  give  it  as  a  free  gift  to  the  ;.  at  Jerusa¬

lem  for  the  necessary  expenses  of  the  ;.

13.  3.  what  I  have  done  for  the  laws  and  the

14. 15.  he  beautified  the  ;.  and  multiplied

48.  should  be  set  up  within  the  compass  of  the;.

2  Mac.  4.  33.  he  withdrew  himself  into  a  ;.

34.  he  persuaded  him  to  come  forth  of  the  ;.
SAND.

Wisd.  7.  9.  gold  in  respect  to  her  is  as  a  little  ;.
Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  number  the  ;.  of  the  sea  ?

18.  10.  a  gravel  stone  in  comparison  of  the  ;.

22.  15.  ;.  and  salt,  and  a  mass  of  iron  is  easier
Dan.  3.  13.  as  the  ;.  that  lieth  on  the  sea-shore
.SANDS.

Prayer  of  Manass.  sinned  above  number  of  ;.  of  sea
SANDALS.

Jud.  10.  4.  and  she  took  ;.  upon  her  feet

16.  9.  her  ;.  ravished  his  eyes,  her  beauty  took

SANDY.

Eccl.  25.20.  as  climbing  up  a  ;.  way  is  to  feet  of  aged
SAPPHIRES.

Tob.  13. 16.  Jerusalem  shall  be  built  up  with  ;.
SARA.

Tob.  3.  7-  S.  daughter  of  Raguel  was  reproached

17.  to  give  S.  the  daughter  of  Raguel  to  Tobias
6. 10.  he  also  hath  one  only  daughter,  named  S.
11. 17.  when  he  came  near  to  S.  his  daughter

12. 12.  when  thou  didst  pray,  and  S.  thy  daughter

SARCHEDONUS.

Tob.  1. 21.  S.  his  son  reigned  in  his  stead
22.  and  S.  appointed  him  near  unto  him
SAT.

1  Esd.  3. 15.  he  ;.  him  down  in  the  royal  seat
8.72.  but  I  ;.  still  full  of  heaviness  fill  sacrifice
9.  45.  he  ;.  honourably  in  the  first  place  of  all
Tob.  2.  1.  in  the  which  I  .9.  down  to  eat

11.  5.  now  Anna  ;.  looking  about  for  her  son
Esth.  15.  6.  who  ;.  upon  his  royal  throne
Eccl.  11.  5.  many  kings  have  ;.  .  u  the  ground

1  Mac.  1.  27.  she  that  ;.  in  the  marriage-chamber

8. 15.  wherein  320  men  ;.  in  council  daily

14. 12.  every  man  ;.  under  his  vine  and  tig -tree

2  Mac.  3.  25.  he  that  ;.  on  the  horse  had  Harness

SATISFIED.

1  Esd.  3.  3.  and  being  ;.  were  gone  home
Eccl.  12. 16.  sin  enemy  will  not  be  ;.  with  blood

622


A  HOC  K  YflU.J  SCO


S  E  A


S  E  E


SATISFIETII.

Esth.  14. 8.  it  s.  not  that  we  are  in  captivity
SAVAGE

Wisd.  17.  19  ora  voice  of  mostr.  wild  beasts
2  Mac.  4.  25.  but  having  the  rage  of  a  s.  beast
SAVE.

Tob.  6.  17.  who  will  have  pity  on  you  and  s.  you
Esth.  13.  9.  if  thou  hast  appointed  to  .c.  Israel
Bar.  4.  22.  my  hope  is  in  God,  that  he  will  ,f.  you

6.  36.  they  can  s.  no  man  from  death,  nor  deliver

49.  which  can  neither  s.  them  from  war

Prayer  of  Manats,  wilt  s.  me  that  am  unworthy
2  Mac.  7.25.  counsel  the  young  man  to  s.  his  life
14.  3.  seeing  by  no  means  he  could  ,v.  himself
SAVED.

2  Esd.  8.  3.  many  be  created,  but  few  shall  be  s.

41.  sown  in  the  world,  they  shall  not  all  be  s.
Tob.  14.  10.  yet  Achiacharus  was  s.

Jud.  10. 15.  thou  hast.s.  thy  life,  in  that  thou  hastedst
Esth.  10.  9.  my  nation  is  Israel,  which  cried  to  God
and  were  r.  for  the  Lord  hathi.  his  people

16.  13.  as  well  of  Mardocheus  who  s.  our  life
Wisd.  14.  5.  passing  thro’  sea  in  a  weak  vessel  are  s.

16.  7-  he  was  not  s.  by  the  thing  that  he  saw

11.  were  quickly  s.  that  they  might  be  mindful

Sus.  62.  the  innocent  blood  was  s.  the  same  day
Prayer  of  Manass.  to  sinners,  that  they  may  be  s.

1  Mac.  2. 59.  by  believing  were  s.  out  of  the  flame

2  Mac.  3.  35.  vows  unto  him  that  had  s.  his  life

SAVEDST.

Eccl.  51.  12.  foi  thou  s.  me  from  destruction
SAVES  r.

Eccl.  51.  8.  and  s.  them  out  of  the  hands  of  enemies
SAVE  I'll.

•Eccl.  2.  11.  the  Lord  is  full  of  compassion  and
mercy,  forgivetli  sins,  and  s.  in  time  of
affliction

34.  13.  for  their  hope  is  in  him  that  s.  them
Sus. 60.  praised  God,  who  .r.  them  that  trust  in  him

1  Mac.  4.  11.  one  who  delivereth  and  s.  Israel

SAVING.

Eccl.  46.  1.  his  name  great  for  s.  the  elect  of  God
SAVIOUR.

2  Esd.  2.  36.  I  testify  my  S.  openly

Jud.  9.  11.  a  S.  of  them  that  are  without  hope
Esth.  15.  2.  the  beholder  and  s.  of  all  things
IVisd.  16. 7-  but  by  thee  that  art  the  S.  of  all
Eccl.  24.  24.  besides  him  there  is  no  other  S.

51.  1.  and  1  will  praise  thee.  O  God  of  my  S.

Bar.  4.  22.  shall  come  from  the  Everlasting,  our  S.

1  Mac.  4.  30.  blessed  art  thou,  O  S.  of  Israel
SAVOUR.

1  Esd.  1.  12.  they  sod  them  in  pans  with  a  good  .<■.

2  Esd.  2. 12.  tree  of  life  for  an  ointment  of  sweet  s.
Eccl.  35.  6.  the  sweet  s.  is  before  the  Most  High

38.  11.  give  a  sweet  s.  memorial  of  fine  flour

39.  14.  and  give  ye  a  sweet  s.  as  frankincense

50.  15.  a  sweet-smelling  s.  to  the  most  high  King

SAW.

Tob.  1.17.  if  I  s.  any  of  my  nation  dead  or  cast  about

2.  2.  when  I  s.  abundance  of  meat,  I  said  to  my  son
4.4.  remember  that  she  s.  many  dangers  for  thee

12.  21.  when  they  arose,  they  s.  him  no  more
Jud.  10.  7-  when  they  s.  her  countenance  altered
14.  6.  he  s.  the  head  of  Holofernes  in  a  man’s  hand
Esth.  15.  13. 1  s.  thee,  my  lord,  as  an  angel  of  God
IVisd.  16.  7.  was  not  saved  by  the  tiling  that  he  s.

17.  6.  to  be  worse  than  the  sight  they  s.  not

10.  they  died  for  fear,  denying  that  they  s.  the  air
Eccl.  1 .  9.  lie  created  her,  s.  her,  and  numbered  her

18.  12.  he  s.  and  perceived  their-end  to  be  evil

30.  5.  while  he  lived,  he  and  rejoiced  in  him

45.  19.  this  the  Lord  s.  and  it  displeased  him
48  11.  blessed  are  they  that  s.  thee,  and  slept
Bar.  4.  9.  for  when  she  s.  the  wrath  of  God  coming

10.  1  s.  the  captivity  of  my  sons  and  daughters
Sus.  8.  tlie  two  elders  s.  her  going  in  every  day
33.  her  friends,  and  all  that  s.  her,  wept
Bel  30.  when  the  king  .f.  that,  they  pressed  him

35.  Lord,  I  never  s.  Baby  Ion,  nor  do  I  know
S  A  WEST.

Sus.  54.  tell  riic .  under  what  tree  s.  thou  them  ?
SAWN.

IVisd.  13. 11.  after  he  hath  .?.  down  a  tree  meet
SCA  LE.

Tob.  3. 17.  to  s.  away  the  whiteness  of  Tobit’s  eyes
SCANT.

Jud.  11.  12.  victuals  fail,  and  all  their  water  is  s.
SCARLET.

Eccl.  45.11.  with  twisted  s.  the  work  of  the  workman
SCATTER.

Bar.  2.  29.  among  the  nations,  where  I  will  s.  them
SCATTERED.

Tob.  13.  3.  for  he  hath  s.  us  among  them
IVisd.  17.  3.  they  were  s.  under  a  dark  vail
SCATTER ETH.

Eccl.  43.  17.  as  birds  flying  he  s.  the  snow
SCENTS.

Wisd.  11.  18.  or  filthy  s.  of  scattered  smoke
SCEPTRE.

Esth.  14.  11.  O  Lord,  give  not  thy  s.  unto  them

15. 11.  held  up  his  golden  ,v.  and  laid  iton  her  neck
IVisd.  10.  14.sne  brought  him  the  s.  of  the  kingdom
Eccl.  35.  18.  and  broken  the  s.  of  the  unrighteous
Bar.  6. 14.  holdeth  a  s.  as  though  he  were  a  judge

SCEPTRES.

IVisd.  6.  21.  if  your  delight  be  in  thrones  and  s.

7.  8.  I  preferred  her  before  r.  and  thrones

SCOLD.

Eccl.  26.  27.  a  s.  shall  be  sought  out  to  drive  away
SCORN.

2  Esd.  8.  56.  thought  f.  of  his  law,  forsook  his  ways
Jud.  12. 12.  if  draw’  her  not,  she  will  laugh  us  to  s.
JVisd.  4.  18.  but  God  shall  laugh  them  to  s.

Eccl.  6.  4.  shall  make  him  to  be  laughed  to s.

7. 11.  laugh  no  man  to  .r.  in  the  bitterness  of  soul
20. 17-  of  how  many  shall  he  be  laughed  to  s.

SCORNING.

Eccl.  41. 19.  be  ashamed  of  s.  to  give  and  take
SCORPION,  S.

Eccl.  26.  7-  ball'  hold  of  her,  is  as  tho’  he  held  a  s.
39.  30.  teeth  of  wild  beasts  and  .s.  punishing  wicked

684


SCOURGE.

Tub.  13.2.  for  he  doth  .i  .  and  hath  mercy

5.  and  he  will  s.  us  for  our  iniquities
Jud.  8.  27-  the  Lord  doth  s.  them  that  come  near
Eccl.  26.  6.  a  s.  of  the  tongue  which  communicateth

40.  9.  famine,  tribulation,  and  the  s.  happen  to  all

SCOURGED.

Tub.  11.  15.  thou  hast  s.  and  hast  taken  pity  on  me
IVisd.  16.  16.  were  s.  by  the  strength  of  thine  arm
2  Mac.  3.  31.  seeing  thou  hast  been  s.  from  heaven

5.  18.  this  man  had  forthwith  been  s.

SCOURGES.

2  Esd.  16.  19.  are  sent  as  s.  for  amendment

20.  they  shall  not  be  aLvay  mindful  of  the  s.

Tob.  13.  14.  having  been  sorrowful  for  all  thy  s.
Eccl.  2.3.2.  who  will  set  s.  over  my  thoughts
2  Mac.  7- 1-  were  tormented  with  s.  and  whips
SCOURGES!'.

Wisd.  12.  22.  thou  s.  our  enemies  a  thousand  times
SCRIBE.

1  Esd.  2.  25.  to  Semellius  the  s.  and  to  the  rest
Eccl.  10.  5.  on  person  of  the  s.  shall  lay  his  honour
SCRIBES.

1  Mac.  5.  42.  he  caused  the  r.  remain  by  the  brook
7-  12.  a  company  of  s.  to  require  justice

2  Mac.  6.  18.  Eleazar,  one  of  the  principal  s.

SCRIPTURE.

1  Mac.  12.  9.  we  have  holy  books  of  s.  to  comfort  us

SCYTHIANS.

2  Mac.  4.  47.  before  S.  have  been  judged  innocent

SCYTIIOPOLIS.

2  Mac.  12.  29.  from  thence  they  departed  to  S.

SCYTIIOPOL1  LANS.

2  Mac.  12.  30.  the  S.  dealt  lovingly  with  them
SEA.

2  Esd.  1. 13.  I  led  you  through  the  s.  gave  a  passage
16.  57.  he  measured  the  s.  and  what  it  contains
Jud.  2.  24.  river  Arbonai,  till  you  come  to  the  s.
JVisd.  5.  22.  the  water  of  the  s.  shall  rage  ag.  them
14.  3.  for  thou  hast  made  a  way  in  the  s.

4.  yea,  though  a  man  went  to  s.  without  art

5.  passing  the  rough  s.  in  a  weak  vessel,  are  saved

19.  7.  out  of  the  Red  <■.  a  way  w’ithout  impediment

Eccl.  1.  2.  who  can  number  the  sand  of  the  s.  ?

18.  10.  as  a  drop  of  water  unto  the  s.

24.  29.  for  her  thoughts  are  more  than  the  s.

31.  my  brook  became  a  river,  and  my  river  a  s.
29.  18.  and  shaken  them  as  a  wave  of  the  f.

40. 11.  that  of  waters  doth  return  into  the  s.

41.  21.  W’ould  cause  them  to  inherit  from  s.  to  s.
50.  3.  the  cistern,  being  in  compass  as  the  s.

Bar.  3.  30.  who  hath  gone  overj.  and  found  her?
Dan.  3.13.  as  sand  that  lieth  on  the  s.  shore
Prayer  of  Manass.  above  the  sands  of  the  s.

1  Mac.  4.  23.  got  blue  silk,  and  purple  of  the  s.

6.  29.  there  came  from  the  isles  of  the  s.  bands

7.  1.  Demetrius  came  to  a  city  of  the  s. -coast

8.  23.  good  success  to  Jews  by  s.  and  by  land

32.  we  will  fight  with  thee  by  s.  and  by  land
11.1.  like  sand  that  lieth  upon  the  s.  shore

8.  Ptolemee  having  the  dominion  of  the  cities  by
the r.  unto  Seleuciaupon  the  s.  coast

14.  5.  he  made  an  entrance  to  the  isles  of  the  s.

15.  38.  made  Cendebeus  captain  of  the  s.  coast

2  Mac.  5.  21.  to  make  the  s.  passable  by  foot

9.  8.  thought  he  might  command  waves  of  the  s.

SEAS.

Dan.  3.  56.  O  ye  s.  and  rivers,  bless  ye  the  Lord

SEAL.

Bel  11.  shut  the  door,  and  f.  it  with  thy  signet
SEALED.

1  Esd.  3.  8.  every  one  wrote  his  sentence  and  s.  it

2  Esd.  2.  38.  those  that  ber.  in  the  feast  of  the  Lord

8.  53.  the  root  of  evil  is  s.  up  from  you

Tob.  7.  14.  an  instrument  of  covenants,  and  s.  it

9.  5.  Gabael  brought  forth  bags  which  were  s.
JVisd.  2.  5.  it  is  fast  s.  that  no  man  cometh  again
Bel  14.  they  .f.  the  door  with  the  king’s  signet
Prayer  of  Manass.  hath  shut  up  the  deep,  and  s.  it

SEALS.

Eccl.  38.  27.  and  they  that  cut  and  grave  s.

45. 11.  with  precious  stones  graven  like  s.  set  in  gold

SEARCH.

1  Esd.  2.  26.  1  commanded  to  make  diligent  s.
6.21.  let  s.  be  made  among  the  records  of  Cyrus

2  Esd.  16.  31.  that  s.  their  houses  with  the  sword
Jud.  8.  14.  then  how  can  you  s.  out  God  ?

Esth.  16.  7.  if  ye  j.  what  hath  been  wickedly  done
JVisd.  6.  3.  try  works  and  s.  out  your  counsels

1 3.  7.  they  s.  him  diligently,  and  believe  their  sight
Eccl.  3.  21.  neither  s.  the  things  that  are  above

6. 27.  s.  and  seek,  and  she  shall  he  made  known
SEARCHED.

Esth.  12.  2.  heard  devices,  and  s.  their  purposes
Wisil.  <1.  16.  the  things  in  heaven,  who  hath  s.  out?

1  il lac.  14. 14.  law  he  s.  out,  and  every  contemner

SEARCHERS.

Bar.  3.  23.  authors  of  fables,  and  s .  out  of  underst.
SEARCHEST.

2  Esd.  4.  26.  the  more  thou  the  more  marvel

SEASONABLE.

Eccl.  .35.  20.  mercy  is  s.  in  time  of  affliction
SEASON.

2  Esd.  8.  41.  the  thing  that  is  sown  good  in  his  j.

14.  4.  where  1  held  him  by  me  a  long  s.

JVisd.  16.  6.  they  w’ere  troubled  for  a  small  s.

Eccl.  20.  20.  for  he  will  not  speak  it  m  due  s.

29.  2.  pay  thou  thy  neighbour  again  in  due  s.

.31.  28.  wdne  measurably  drunk  and  in  f.  brings
.39.  16.  shall  be  accomplished  in  due  r.

3.3.  he  will  give  every  needful  thing  in  due  s.

43.  6.  he  made  the  moon  also  to  serve  in  her  s.
SEASONS.

JVisd.  7-  18.  turning  of  the  sun  and  change  of  s.
8.8.  she  foreseeth  the  events  of  s.  and  times
Eccl.  33.  8.  and  he  altered  s.  and  feasts

SEAT.

1  Esd.  3.15.  he  sat  him  down  in  the  royal  s.

Wisd.  9.  12.  and  be  worthy  to  sit  in  my  father’s  s.
Eccl.  7.  4.  seek  not  of  the  king  the  s.  of  honour

12. 12.  set.  him  not  by,  lest  he  seek  to  take  thy  s.
.38.  33.  they  shall  not  sit  on  the  judge's  s.


SECOND.

1  Esd.  1.  31.  then  he  gat  upon  his  s.  chariot

2.  30.  ceased  till  the  s.  year  of  the  reign  of  Dariui

3.  11.  the  s.  wrote,  the  king  is  strongest

5.  56.  in  the  s.  year,  and  s.  month  after  coming
57.  in  the  first  day  of  the  s.  month,  in  the  s.  year

after  they  were  come  to  Jerusalem
Esth.  1.3.  .3.  had  honour  of  s.  place  in  the  kingdom

2  Mac.  5.  1.  prepared  his  s.  voyage  into  Egypt
7.  7-  brought  the  s.  to  make  a  mocking-stock

SECONDLY.

Eccl.  23. 23.  s.  she  hath  trespassed  against  her  husb.
SECRET.

1  Esd.  5.  7-3.  by  s.  plots  and  popular  persuasions

2  Esd.  10.  38.  the  Highest  will  reveal  many  s.  things
Jud.  2.  2.  nobles,  and  communicated  his  s.  counsel
IJ'isd.  1.  11.  no  word  so  s.  that  shall  go  for  nought

7.  21.  such  things  as  are  either  s.  or  manifest
14.  2.3.  or  used  ceremonies,  or  made  levellings
17.  3.  they  supposed  to  lie  hid  in  their  s.  sins

Eccl.  .3.  22.  to  see  the  things  that  are  in  r.

48.  25.  he  shewed  s.  things  or  ever  they  came

1  Mac.  1.53.  and  drove  the  Israelites  into  s.  places
2.  .31.  gone  down  into  f.  places  in  the  wilderness

41.  that  were  murdered  in  the  s.  places
SECRETLY.

IJ'isd.  18.  9.  children  of  good  men  did  sacrifice  s.
Eccl.  20.  2.  better  to  repi*ove,  than  to  be  angry  s.

2  Mac.  6.  11.  to  keep  the  sabbath-day  s.

SECRETS.

Tob.  12. 7.  it  is  good  to  keep  close  the  s.  of  a  king,  11.
Eccl.  1.  .30.  and  so  God  discover  thy  s.

4.  18.  she  will  comfort  him,  and  shew  him  her  s.

1.3.  11.  and  smiling  on  thee,  will  get  out  thy  s.

14.  21.  he  shall  have  understanding  in  her  s.

22.  22.  except  for  pride,  or  disclosing  of  s.

27.  17-  if  thou  bewrayest  his  s.  follow  no  more
.39.  3.  he  will  seek  out  the  s.  of  grave  sentences
7.  and  in  his  s.  shall  he  meditate
Sus.  42.  O  everlasting  God,  that  knowest  the  s.

2  Mac.  13.  21.  disclosed  the  s.  to  the  enemies
SECURELY.

Eccl.  4.  15.  that  attended'  to  her,  shall  dwell  s.
SECURITY.

2  Esd.  7 •  53.  paradise,  wherein  is  s.  and  medicine
Eccl.  5  ?.  in  thy  s.  thou  shalt  be  destroyed
S  ED  EC  IAS.

Bar.  1.  8.  S.  the  son  of  Josias  king  of  Juda  had  made
SEDITION.

2  Esd.  15.  16.  for  there  shall  be  s.  amongst  men
SEDITIOUS.

2  Mac.  14.  16.  Assideans  nourish  war,  and  are  s.
SEE.

Eccl.  15.  7-  and  sinners  shall  not  s.  her

20.  7-  will  hold  his  tongue  till  he  s.  opportunity
.37.  9.  on  other  side,  to  s.  what  shall  befall  thee

27.  prove  thy  soul,  and  s.  what  is  evil  for  it
42.  22.  that  a  man  may  s.  even  to  a  spark

Bar.  1.  20.  floweth  with  milk ,  as  it  is  to  s.  this  day
4.  24.  so  shall  they  s.  shortly  your  salvation
25.  but  shortly  thou  shalt  s.  his  destruction
Sus.  20.  the  doors  are  shut  that  no  man  can  s.  us
SEED.

1  Esd.  8. 70.  the  hoi}’  s  is  mixed  with  strange  people
88.  hadst  left  us  neither  root,  s.  nor  name

2  Esd.  .3.  15.  thou  wouidest  never  forsake  his  s.

8.  6.  and  thou  give  us  s.  to  our  heart  and  culture
JVisd.  .3.  16.  the  s.  of  unrighteous  bed  be  rooted  out

7.  2.  being  compacted  in  blood  of  the  s.  of  man

10.  15.  she  delivered  the  blameless  s.  from  nation
12.  11.  it  was  a  cursed  s.  from  the  beginning
14.  6.  left  to  all  ages  a  s.  of  generation

Eccl.  1.  15.  she  shall  continue  with  their  s.

10.  19.  regard  not  the  law,  are  a  dishonourable  s.
44.  11.  with  their  s.  shall  continually  remain
12.  thetr  s.  stands  fast,  and  their  children

21.  that  he  would  bless  the  nations  in  his  s.

45. 15.  to  hisr.  so  long  as  the  heavens  remain

21.  sacrifices,  which  he  gave  to  him  and  his  s.

46.  9.  his  s.  obtained  it  for  an  heritage

47.  20.  didst  stain  thy  honour,  and  pollute  thy  s.

22.  ‘not  take  away  the  s.  of  him  that  Ioveth  him

2.3.  of  his  s.  he  left  behind  him  Roboam

Dan.  .3.  13.  wouidest  multiply  theirs,  as  the  star,
Sus.  56.  ()  thou  s.  of  Chanaan,  and  not  Juda
Prayer  of  Matiass.  and  of  their  righteous  s.

2  Mac.  7. 17-  how  he  will  torment  thee  and  thy  s.
SEEK.

1  Esd.  6.  23.  to  s.  among  the  records  at  Babylon

8.  85.  she  shall  never  s.  to  have  peace  with  them

2  Esd.  12.  48.  that  I  might  s.  mercy  for  low  estate
14.  23.  that  they  s.  thee  not  for  forty  days

Tob.  5.  3.  s.  thee  a  man  which  may  go  with  thee

11.  he  said,  dost  thou  s.  for  a  tribe  or  family  ?
JVisd.  1.  1.  and  in  simplicity'  of  heart  s.  him

12.  s.  not  death  in  the  error  of  your  life

6.  12.  wisdom  is  easily'  found  of  such  as  s.  her

22.  but  I  will  s.  her  out  from  the  beginning

Eccl.  3. 21.  s.  not  the  things  that  are  too  hard  for  thee
4.  11.  wisdom  layeth  hold  on  them  that  s.  her
12.  they  that  s.  to  her  early,  shall  be  filled

6.  27.  s.  and  she  shall  be  made  known  to  thee

7.  4.  s.  not  of  the  Lord  pi  e-eminence

6.  s.  not  to  be  judge,  being  not  able  to  fake
12.  12.  set  him  not  by,  lest  he  s.  to  take  thy  seat
24.  .34.  1  laboured  for  all  them  that  s.  wisdom

28.  3.  and  doth  he  s.  pardon  from  the  Lord  ?

32.  14.  they  that  .r.  him  early,  shall  find  favour

33.  17.  but  for  all  them  that  s.  learning
21.  that  thy  children  should  s.  to  thee
25.  if  let  him  go  idle,  he  shall  s.  liberty
31.  which  way  wilt  thou  go  tor.  him  ?

36.  2.  upon  all  nations  that  s.  not  afler  thee

39.  1.  he  will  s.  out  the  wisdom  of  all  the  ancient
3.  ht  will  s.  out  secrets  of  grave  sentences

40.  26.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  needeth  not  to  s.  help

51.  14.  I  will  s.  her  out  even  to  the  end

Bel  38.  nor  hast  thou  forsaken  them  that  s.  thee
SEEK  ETII.

JVisd.  6. 14.  who  s.  her  early,  have  no  great  travel
Eccl.  27.  1.  he  that  s.  for  abundance  will  turn
32.  15.  he  that  s.  the  law  shall  be  filled


S  E  R


SHA


S  H  12


[AiMCKYPH*.


C  Mac.  2.  27.  and  the  benefit  of  others
SEEKING.

Wisd.  6.  16.  she  goeth  about  s.  such  as  are  worthy

8. 18.  1  went  about  .f.  how  to  take  her  to  me

13.  6.  for  they  peradventure  err,  s.  God
Eccl.  14.  16.  no  s.  of  dainties  in  the  grave

20.  32.  necessary  patience  in  .t.  the  Lord
51.  21.  my  heart  was  troubled  in  s.  her

SEEMED.

Wisd.  3.  2.  in  sight  of  the  unwise  they  s.  to  die
2  Mac.  1. 13.  the  army  with  him  that.?,  invincible
SEEN.

IVisd.  13.  1.  out  of  the  good  things  that  are  s.

17.  19.  that  could  not  be  s.  of  skipping  beasts
Eccl.  16.  5.  many  things  have  I  f.  with  my  eyes

42.  15. 1  will  declare  the  things  that  l  have  s.

43.  31.  who  hath  s.  him  that  he  might  tell  us
Bar.  2.  26.  laid  waste,  as  it  is  to  be  s.  this  day

6.  61.  the  lightning  breaking  forth  is  easy  to  be  s.
Sus.  54.  if  thou  hast  s.  her,  tell  me,  under  what

1  Mac.  4.  20.  for  the  smoke  that  was  s.  declared

13.  29.  might  be  .s',  of  all  that  sail  on  the  sea

2  Mac.  3.  36.  works,  which  he  had  s.  with  his  eyes
6.  9.  then  might  a  man  have  s.  present  misery

SELEUCIA.

1  Mac.  11.8.  unto  S.  upon  the  sea-coast
SELEUCUS.

1  Mac.  7.  1.  Demetrius  the  son  of  S.  depaited

2  Mac.  3.  3.  S.  king  of  Asia  bare  all  the  costs

4.  7.  bat  after  the  death  of  S.  Jason  laboured

5.  18.  whom  S.  the  king  sent  to  view  the  treasury

SELL.

Bar.  6.  28.  the  things  sacrificed,  their  priests  s.

1  Mac.  13.  49.  they  could  neither  buy  nor  s.

2  Mac.  5.  24.  to  s.  the  women  and  younger  sort

SELLING.

Eccl.  27.  2.  sin  stick  close  between  buying  and  s.
37.  11.  consult  not  with  a  buyer  of  s.

42.  5.  and  of  merchants  indifferent  s.

SENATE.

1  2  Mac.  4.  44.  three  men  that  were  sent  from  the  s.
SEN  A  '['E-house.

1  Mac.  8.  15.  had  made  for  themselves  a  s. -house
SEND.

Toh.  8.  12.  s.  one  of  the  maids,  and  let  her  see

10.  8.  I  will  s.  to  thy  father,  and  declare  to  him
Jud.  6.  3.  he  wills,  his  power  and  destroy  them

9.  9-  and  .•  thy  wrath  upon  their  heads

11.  22.  Goa  hath  done  well  to  s.  thee  before
IVisd.  9.  10.  O  s.  her  out  of  thy  holy  heavens

11.  17.  wanted  not  means  to  s.  among  them  bears

12.  8.  did  s.  wasps  forerunners  of  thy  host
25.  thou  didst  s.  a  judgment  to  mock  them

16.  20.  thou  didst  s.  them  from  heaven  bread
Eccl.  24.  32.  I  will  s.  forth  her  light  afar  off

33.  27.  s.  him  to  labour,  that  he  be  not  idle
36.  2.  and  s.  thy  fear  upon  all  the  nations

Sns.  21.  thou  didst  s.  away  thy  maids  from  thee

29.  s.  for  Susanna  the  daughter  of  Chelcias

1  Mac.  1 L.  43.  if  thou  s.  me  men  to  help  me

16.  18.  that  he  should  s.  him  an  host  to  aid  him
i  2  Mac.  1.  4.  open  your  hearts,  and  s.  you  peace

6.  23.  he  willed  them  tos.  him  to  the  grave

11.  34.  ambassadors  of  the  Romans  s.  greeting

14.  27.  commanded  that  he  should  s.  Maccabeus

SENNACHERIB.

2  Mac.  8.  19.  they  were  delivered  when  under  S.

15.  22.  and  didst  slay  in  the  host  of  S.  185,000

SENSE.

2  E.frf.l0.36.is  my  s.  received,  or  my  soul  in  a  dream
Eccl.  21. 18.  knowledge  of  unwise,  as  talk  without  s.
SENT.

rob.  2.  12.  when  she  had  .j.  them  home  to  the  owners

12.  20.  for  1  go  up  to  him  that  s.  me
Eccl.  28.  23.  it  shall  be  s.  on  them  as  a  lion

34.  6.  If  they  be  not.s.  from  the  Most  High

SENTENCE.

Eccl.  20. 20. a  wise  j.shall  be  rejected  when  it  cometh

41.  2.  O  death,  acceptable  is  thy  i.  to  the  needy
Hus.  55.  the  angel  of  God  hath  received  the  s.
SENTENCES.

1  Esd.  3.  16.  they  shall  declare  their  own  s.

Eccl.  39. 6.  he  shall  pour  out  wise  s.  and  give  thanks
SEPARATE.

Wisd.  1.  3.  for  froward  thoughts  s.  from  God
Eccl.  6. 13.  s.  thyself  from  thine  enemies,  take  heed
SEPARATED.

1  Esd.  7*  13.  all  they  that  had  s.  themselves

8.  54.  then  1  s.  12  of  the  chief  of  the  priests
Eccl.  16.  16.  he  hath  .c.  his  light  from  darkness

SEPULCHRE.

1  Mac.  9-  19.  buried  him  in  the  s.  of  his  fathers

13.  30.  this  is  the  s.  which  he  made  atModin

2  Mac.  5.  10.  he  hail  no  s.  with  his  fathers

SERPENT.

Eccl.  12.  13.  a  charmer  that  is  bitten  with  a  s.

21.  2.  fiee  from  sin  as  from  the  face  of  a  s.

25.  15.  there  is  no  hea  I  above  the  head  of  a  r.

SERPENTS.

Wisd.  11.  15.  they  worshipped  s.  void  of  reason
16.5.  they  perished  with  the  stings  of  crooked  s.

17.  9.  being  scared  with  hissing  off.  they  died

[  Eccl.  39.  30.  teeth  of  wild  beasts,  scorpions,  and  s.
SERVANT.

1  Esd.  4.  59.  thine  is  the  glory,  and  I  am  thy  s.

Jud.  5.5.  no  lie  shall  come  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  s.

9.  10.  smite  by  the  deceit  of  my  lips  the  i.  with

the  prince,  and  the  prince  with  the  s.
"4.  5.  Judith  said,  receive  the  words  of  thy  s.

17.  for  thy  s.  is  religious  and  serveth  God
Wisd.  9.  5.  I  thy  s.  and  the  son  of  thy  handmaid

10.  16.  she  entered  into  the  soul  of  the  s.  of  the  Lord

18.  11.  the  master  and  the  j.  werepunished
21.  declaring  that  he  was  thy  s.

Eccl.  7-  20.  thy.f.  worketh  truly,  entreat  him
21.  let  thy  soul  love  a  good  f.  defraud  him  not

10.  25.  unto  the  s.  that  is  wise,  shall  they  do  service

19.  21.  if  a  s.  say  to  his  master,  I  will  not  do

23.  6.  give  not  over  me  thy  s.  to  an  impudent  mind
10.  for  as  a  s.  that  is  continually  beaten
33.  24.  bread,  correction,  and  work  fora  s.

25.  if  thou  set  thy  s.  to  labour  shalt  find  rest


26.  so  are  tortuies  and  torments  for  an  evil  /.

30.  if  thou  have  a  s.  let  him  be  as  thyself

31.  if  thou  have  a  s.  entreat  him  as  a  brother

37. 11.  consult  not  with  an  idle  s.  of  business

42.  5.  to  make  the  side  of  an  evil  s.  to  bleed

2  Mac.  8.  35.  he  came  like  a  fugitive  s.  to  Antioch

SERVANTS.

1  Esd.  6. 1 3.  we  are  the  s.  of  the  I,,  who  made  hea  ren
Toh.  10.  10.  Ramjel  gave  s.  and  cattle  and  money
Jud.  10.  23.  she  did  reverence,  and  his  s.  took  her  up
Esth.  15.  16.  and  all  his  s.  comforted  her
Eccl.  4.  30.  be  not  frantic  among  thy  s.

6.  11.  in  prosperity  he  will  be  bold  over  thy  s.

23.  4.  but  turn  away  from  thy  s.  a  haughty  mind

36.  17.  O  Lord,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy  s.

Bar.  2.  20.  as  thou  hast  spoken  by  thy  s.

Dan.  3.  10.  we  are  become  a  reproach  to  thy  s.

63.  O  ye  s.  of  the  Lord,  bless  ye  the  Lord
Sus.  27.  the  s.  were  greatly  ashamed

1  Mac.  1.  6.  wherefore  he  called  his  s.

8.  his  bare  rule  everv  one  in  his  place

2  Mac.  7-  6.  and  he  shall  be  comforted  in  his  s.

33.  yet  shall  he  be  at  one  again  with  his  s.

34.  lifting  up  thy  hand  against  the  s.  of  God

8.  29.  to  be  reconciled  with  his  s.  for  ever

SERVE.

1  Esd.  1.  4.  now  therefore  s.  the  Lord  your  God
Jud.  11.1.  never  hurt  any  that  was  willing  tos.
Esth.  12.  5.  command  Mardocheus  to  s.  in  the  court
IVisd.  15.  7-  the  vessels  that  s.  for  clean  uses
Eccl.  2.  1.  if  thou  come  to  .?.  the  Lord,  prepare

23.  5.  hold  him  up  that  is  desirous  always  to  s.  thee

39.  4.  he  shall  s.  among  great  men,  and  appear

43.  6.  he  made  the  moon  also  to  j.  in  her  season

2  Mac.  1. 3.  God  give  you  all  an  heart  to  s.  him
4.  14.  had  no  courage  to  s.  any  more  at  the  altar

SERVED.  [use

Wisd.  13.  13.  the  refuse  among  those  that  s.  to  no
Eccl.  25.  8.  that  hath  not  s.  a  man  more  unworthy
SERVETH.

Wisd.  16.  24.  for  the  creature  that  s.  thee
Eccl.  35.  16.  he  that  .<•.  the  Lord  shall  be  accepted
SERVICE.

Wisd.  15.  7*  potter  fashioneth  every  vessel  for  our  s.
Eccl.  3.  7.  and  he  will  do  s.  unto  his  patents
10.25.  to  servant  shall  they  that  are  free  dor.

1 1.  23.  say  not,  what  profit  is  there  of  my  s.  ?

50.  14.  and  finishing  the  s.  at  the  altar
2  Mac.  3.  3.  belongin':  to  the  s.  of  the  sacrifices
SERVING.

IVisd.  14.  21.  for  men  s.  either  calamity  or  tyranny

19.  6.  s.  the  peculiar  commandments  given  to  them

SERVITUDE.

Jud.  8.  23.  our  s.  shall  not  be  directed  to  favour
SET.

1  Esd.  1.  3.  to  s.  the  ark  in  the  house  Solomon  built
2.  24.  and  if  the  walls  thereof  be  s.  up  anew

2  Esd.  3.  18.  thou  didst  r.  fast  the  earth
Wisd.  13.  18.  which  cannot  s.  afoot  forward
Eccl.  2. 2.  r.  thy7  heart  aright  and  constantly  endure

9.  2.  to  s.  her  foot  upon  thy  substance

15.  16.  he  hath  s.  fire  and  water  before  thee

17-  17.  he  s.  a  ruler  over  every  peopu

22.  27.  who  shall  s.  a  watch  before  my  month  ?

31.  16.  eat  those  things  which  are^.  before  thee

33.  25.  if  thou  s.  thy  servant  to  laboui,  find  rest
28.  .v.  him  to  work  as  is  fit  for  him

34.  6.  if  not  sent,  s.  not  thy  heart  upon  them
.38.  29.  who  is  alway  carefully  s.  at  his  work

1  Mac.  1.  54.  they  s.  up  the  abomination  on  altar

2  Mac.  5.20.  it  was  s.  up  with  all  glory

SETTETH.

Eccl.  10.  9.  for  such  a  one  s.  his  own  soul  to  sale
38.  28.  he  s.  his  mind  to  finish  his  work
SETTING.

1  Esd.  4.  30.  the  crown,  and  it  upon  her  own  head
SETTLED.

Esth.  1.3.  7-  so  cause  our  affairs  to  he  well  s.

Eccl.  22.17.  a  heart  s.  on  a  thought  of  understanding
42.  17.  declare  works,  which  the  Lord  firmly  s.
SEVEN.

1  Esd.  4.  63.  and  they  feasted  with  gladness  s.  days

8.11.  and  to  my  s.  friends  the  counsellors

Toh .2.  1.  which  is  tbe  holy  feast  of  the  s.  weeks
.3.  8.  thou  hast  had  already  husbands
15.  my  s.  husbands  are  already  dead
6.  1.3.  that  this  maid  hath  been  given  to  s.  men

11.  19.  Tobias’  wedding  was  kept  s.  days  with  joy

12.  15.  1  am  Raphael,  one  of  the  s.  holy  angels
Jud.  16.  24.  and  Israel  lamented  her  s.  days
Eccl.  7.  3.  thou  shalt  not  reap  them  r.-fold

20.  12.  buyeth  for  little,  and  repaveth  it  .v.-fold
22.  12.  s.  days  do  men  mourn  for  him  that  is  dead

35.  11.  give  with  a  cheerful  eye,  for  the  Lord  re-
compenseth  and  will  give  thee  s.  times  as  much

37.  14.  wont  to  tell  him  more  than  s.  watchmen

40.  8.  and  that  is  j.-fold  more  on  sinners

Bar.  6.  3.  for  long  season,  namely,  s.  generations
Bel  32.  and  in  tbe  deh  there  were  f.  lions

1  Mac.  13.  28.  moreover,  he  set  up s.  pyramids

2  Mac.  7.  1.  s.  brethren  with  their  mother  taken

SEVENTH.

1  Esd.  5.  5.3.  from  the  first  day  of  the  s.  month
Eccl.  17.  5.  in  the  s.  place  he  imparted  speech

1  Mac.  6.  5.3.  for  it  was  s.  year,  and  they  in  .ludea

2  Mac.  12.  .38.  when  the  s.  day  came,  they  purified
15.  4.  who  commanded  the  s.  day  to  be  kept

SEVENTY.

1  Esd.  1.  58.  until  the  full  term  of  j.  years

2  Esd.  14.  46.  keep  the  s.  last,  that  mayest  deliver
Jud.  1.  2.  made  the  height  of  the  wall  s.  cubits

SEVERAL.

1  Esd.  1.  11.  according  to  the  s.  dignities  of  fathers

2  Mac.  12.  2.  but  of  tbe  governors  of  s.  places

SEVERE.

Wisd.  5.  20.  s.  wrath  shall  he  sharpen  for  a  sword
11.  10.  but  the  other  as  as-,  king  thou  didst  condemn
SHADOW.

Wisd.  2.  5.  for  our  time  is  a  very  r.  that  passeth
5. 9.  all  these  things  are  passed  away  as  a  s.

Eccl.  34.  2.  is  like  him  that  catcheth  at  a  e.

Bar.  1.12.  we  shall  live  under  the  r.  of  Nabuchodon.


SHADOWING.

Wisd.  19.  7*  namely,  a  cloud  s.  the  camp

SHAKE.

Eccl.  13.  7-  forsake  thee,  and  s.  his  head  at  thee

SHAKEN.

Wisd.  4.  4.  yet  they  shall  be  s.  with  the  wind
Eccl.  16. 19.  and  foundations  of  the  earth  shall  be  s.
26.  7.  an  evil  wife  is  a  yoke  s.  to  and  fro

29. 18.  hath  s.  them  as  a  wave  of  the  sea

43.  16.  at  his  sight  the  mountains  are  s.

SHAKING.

Eccl.  22.  16.  timber  cannot  be  loosed  with  s.

2  Mac.  5.  3.  horse.men  in  array  with  of  shields
11.  8.  one  in  white  clothing  ,v.  his  armour
SHAME.

2  Esd.  10. 22.  our  children  are  put  to  s.  priests  burnt
Jud.  12.  12.  for  lo,  it  will  be  a  s.  for  our  person
13. 16.  hath  not  committed  sin  with  me  to  s.  me

14. 18.  woman  brought  s.  on  house  of  N  abuchodon.
Eccl.  4.  21.  for  there  is  a  s.  that  bringeth  sin

5. 1.3.  s.  is  in  talk,  the  tongue  of  a  man  is  his  faL

14.  for  a  foul  s.  is  upon  the  thief

6.  1.  thou  shalt  inherit  an  ill  name,  s.  reproach

13.  7-  he  will  s.  thee  by  his  meats,  and  laugh
20.  26.  the  s.  of  a  liar  is  ever  with  him

26.  8.  and  she  will  not  cover  her  own  s.

24.  a  dishonest  woman  contemneth  s.

42.  14.  a  woman  which  bringeth  s.  and  reproach
Bar.  2.  6.  to  us  and  to  our  fathers  open  s.

Dan.  3.  10.  we  are  become  a  s.  and  reproach
19.  put  us  not  to  s.  but  deal  with  us  after  thy
2  Mac.  5.7.  at  last  received  s.  for  his  treason
9.  2.  he  beiug  put  to  flight,  returned  with  f.
SHAMEFACED.

Eccl.  26. 15.  a  s.  woman  is  a  double  grace

25.  but  she  that  is  s.  will  fear  the  Lord

32.  10.  and  before  a  s.  man  shall  go  favour

41.  16.  therefore  be  .9.  according  to  thy  word

24.  so  shalt  thou  be  truly  s.  and  find  favour

SHAMEFACEDNESS.

Eccl.  41.  16.  tor  it  is  not  good  to  retain  all  s.
SHAMEFUL.

Wisd.  2.  20.  let  us  condemn  him  with  a  s.  death

SHAMEFULLY.

1  Mac.  7-  34.  he  abused  them  s.  and  spake  proudly

2  Mac.  11. 12.  and  Lysias  himself  fled  away  s.

SHAMELESS.

Eccl.  26.  10.  it  thy  daughter  be  s.  keep  her  in

25.  a  s.  woman  shall  be  accounted  as  a  dog
40.  .30.  begging  is  sweet  in  the  mouth  of  the  s.

42.  11.  keep  a  sure  watch  over  a  s.  daughter
Bar.  A.  15.  a  s.  nation,  and  of  strange  language

SHAPE.

Wisd.  18. 1.  hearing  voice,  and  not  seeing  their  s
.SHARP.

Wisd.  6.  5.  for  a  s.  judgment  shall  be  to  them

18.  16.  unfeigned  commandment  as  a  ,c.  sword
Eccl.  43.  19.  it  lietli  on  the  top  of  s.  stakes
SHARPEN.

Wisd.  5.  20.  his  wrath  shall  he  s.  for  a  sword
SHAVEN.

Bar.  6.  31.  priests,  having  heads  and  beards  s.
SHED.

1  Mac.  1.  37.  thus  they  innocent  blood
SHEDDETH.

Eccl.  28.  11.  and  an  hasty  fighting  s.  blood
SHEEP.

1  Esd.  1.  8.  gave  two  thousand  and  six  hundred  s,

9.  they  gave  to  the  Levites  five  thousand  s.
SHEKELS.

1  Mac.  10.  42.  the  five  thousand  s.  of  silver
SHEET  ER.

Eccl.  14.26.  shall  set  his  children  under  her  s.
SHEPHERD.

IVisd.  17-  17.  a  s.  or  a  labourer  in  the  field
Eccl.  18. 13.  he  bringeth  again,  as  a  s.  his  floe!;
SHEW.

1  Esd.  5.  .37.  nor  could  they  s.  their  families

2  Esd.  1 . 5.  s.  my  people  their  sinful  deeds

Toh.  14.  9.  .v.  thyself  merciful  and  just  that  it  may
Wisd.  5.  13.  and  we  had  no  sign  of  virtue  to  s.

12.  1.3.  s.  that  thy  judgment  is  not  unright

1.3.  10.  which  are  gold  and  silver,  to  s.  art  in
Eccl.  A.  18.  comfort  him,  and  r.  him  her  secrets

7.  24.  s.  not  thy  face  cheerful  toward  him
16.25.  1  will  s.  forth  doctrine  in  weight

18.  21.  and  in  the  time  of  sins  s.  repentance
22.  19.  maketh  the  heart  to  s.  her  knowledge
.36.  6.  s.  new  signs,  and  make  strange  wonders
.39.  8.  he  shall  x.  forth  what  he  hath  learned

15.  s.  forth  his  praise  with  songs  of  your  lips

4.3.  1.  the  beauty  of  heaven  with  his  glorious  s.

44.  15.  the  congregation  will  s.  forth  their  praise
Bar.  3.  37-  afterward  did  he  s.  himself  on  earth
6.  38.  they  can  s.  no  mercy  to  the  widow

Sus.  50.  come  sit  down  among  us,  and  s.  it  us
Prayer  of  Manass.  in  me  thou  wilt  s.  thy  goodness
2  Mac.  6.  27.  I  will  s.  myself  such  an  ope

8.  4.  he  would  s.  his  hatred  against  the  wicked

12.  36.  that  he  would  s.  himself  their  helper

SHEWED.

1  Esd.  8.  78.  now  hatli  mercy  been  s.  unto  us
Wisd.  10.  10.  she  s.  him  the  kingdom  of  God
18.  18.  one  and  another  s.  the  cause  of  his  death

Eccl.  3.  23.  for  more  things  are  s.  unto  thee

14.  12.  covenant  of  the  grave  is  not  s.  unto  thee

45.  .3.  and  he  s.  him  part  of  his  glory
46.20.  he  prophesied,  and  s.  ine  king  his  end
47.23.  Jeroboam,  who  s.  Ephraim  the  way  of  sin.

48.  25.  he  s.  what  should  come  to  pass  for  ever

49.  8.  which  w7as  s.  him  on  chariot  of  eherubims
Bar.  3.  .34.  they  s.  light  to  him  that  made  them
Bel  21.  the  priests,  who  s.  him  the  privy  doors

2  Mac.  2.  8.  the  cloud,  as  it  was  s.  under  Moses
3.7-  when  Apollonius  had  s.  him  of  the  money

15.  32.  and  s.  them  vile  Nieanor’s  head

SHEWETII.

Wisd.  1. 2.  he  s.  himself  to  such  as  do  not  distrust
6.  16.  .?.  herself  favourably  to  them  in  the  ways
Eccl.  28.  4.  he  s.  no  mercy  to  a  man  like  himselt
.37.  20.  there  is  one  that  s.  wisdom  in  words
Bar.  6.  5J.  better  to  be  a  king  that  s.  his  powe?

685


APOCRYPHA.]  S  I  G


SIN


SIN


SHIELD.

Jin/.  9. 7.  they  trust  in  #.  and  spear,  and  bow
Eccl.  29. 13.  than  a  mighty  #.  and  strong  spear
1  Mac.  In.  18.  and  they  brought  a  #.  of  gold
20.  it  seemed  good  to  receive  the  #.  ot  them
SHIELDS.

1  Mac.  6.  2.  in  it  a  rich  temple  wherein  were  s.

2  Mac.  5.3.  with  shaking  of#.  and  drawing  of  swords

15.  11.  notso  much  with  defence  of  #.  and  spears

SHINE.

IVisd.  3. 7.  they  shall  #.  and  run  to  and  fro
Eccl.  24.32.1  will  yet  make  doctrine  to  j.as  morning
SHINED.

Wisd.  5.  6.  the  light  of  righteousness  not  s.  to  us
17.  20.  the  whole  world  #.  with  clear  light
Bar.  3.  34.  the  stars  s.  in  their  watches

1  Mac.  6.  39.  the  mountains  #.  like  lamps  of  fire

2  Mac.  1.  32.  the  light  that  #.  from  the  altar

SHINING.

Eccl.  43.  8.  # .  in  the  firmament  of  heaven
50.  7.  as  the  sun  #.  upon  temple  of  most  High
SHIP,  S.

Wisd.  5. 10.  as  a  s.  that  passeth  over  the  waves
Eccl.  33.  2.  an  hypocrite  is  as  a  s.  in  a  storm

1  Mac.  8.  26.  that  aid  them  with  money  or#.

15.3.  gathered  soldiers,  and  prepared  s.  of  war

SHOE.

Eccl.  46.  19.  1  have  not  taken  so  much  as  a  s.
SHOOK.

2  Esd.  10.  26.  so  that  the  earth  s.  at  the  noise
2  Mac.  12.  12.  whereupon  they  s.  hands

SHOOTING.

Wisd.  11. 18.  s.  horrible  sparks  out  of  their  eyes
SHORN.

Tob.  1.  6.  having  that  which  was  first  s.

SHORT..

Wisd.  2. 1.  they  said,  our  life  is#.  and  tedious

4.  13.  he  being  made  perfect  in  a  s.  time

9.  5.  of  a  s.  time,  and  too  young  for  understanding

15.  9.  his  care  is  not  that  bis  life  is  s.

16.  3.  these  suffering  penury  for  a  s.  space
Eccl.  17.  2.  he  gave  them  few  days,  and  a  s.  time

31.  19.  he  fetcheth  not  his  wind  s.  on  his  bed

32.  8.  let  thy  speech  be  s.  comprehending  much

36.  8.  make  the  time  s.  remember  the  covenant
43.  27.  we  may  speak  much,  and  yet  come  s.

2  Mac.  2.  32.  and  to  be  #.  in  the  story  itself
7.36.  our  brethren  who  have  suffered  a#.  pain
SHORTEN.

Eccl.  30.  24.  envy  and  wrath  #.  the  life
SHORTLY.

Wisd.  14.  14.  they  shall  come  #.  to  an  end
Bar.  4.  24.  so  shall  they  see  s.  your  salvation

25.  but  s.  thou  shalt  see  his  destruction
SHOULDER.

Eccl.  6.  25.  bow  down  thy  s.  and  bear  her
2  il lac.  12.  35.  horseman  of  Thracia  smote  off  his  s.

15.  30.  strike  off  N  icanor’s  head  with  his  s.
SHOULDERS.

1  Esd.  1.  4.  ye  shall  no  more  bear  the  ark  on  your  s.
Eccl.  7. 31.  trespass-offering,  and  gift  of  the  s.
Bar.H.IX.  bow  down  your#.  to  serve  the  king

6.  26.  they  are  borne  upon  s.  having  no  feet
SHOUTED.

Eccl.  50.  16.  then  s.  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  sounded
SHOWER.

Dan.  3.  42.  O  every  #.  and  dew,  bless  ye  the  Lord
SHOWERS.

Wisd.  16. 16.  with  strange  #.  were  they  persecuted
SHREWD.

Eccl.  8.  19.  lest  he  requite  thee  with  a#.  turn
SHRUBS.

1  Mac.  4.  38.  they  saw  s.  growing  in  the  courts
SHRUNK.

1  Mac.  3.  6.  the  wicked  #.  for  fear  of  him

SHUT.

Tob.  8. 4.  after  they  were  both  s .  in  together
Jud.  13.  1.  and  Bagoas  s.  his  tent,  without
Wisd.  18.  4.  who  had  kept  thy  sons  #.  up
Eccl.  4.  31.  and  s.  when  thou  shouldst  repay

29.  12.  #.  up  alms  in  thy  store-houses

30.  18.  delicates  poured  upon  a  mouth  #.  up

48.3.  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  he  #.  up  heaven

1  Mac.  3.  18.  for  many  to  be  s.  up  in  hands  offew
4.  31.  #.  up  this  army  in  the  hand  of  thy  people

6.  18.  they  #.  up  the  Israelites  round  about

2  Mac.  1.  15.  s.  temple  as  soon  as  Antiochus  came
4.  34.  whom  he  s.  up  without  regard  of  justice

SICHEM.

Eccl.  50.  26.  that  foolish  people  that  dwell  in  S.
SICK.

Wisd.  17.  8.  they  that  promised  to  drive  troubles
from  a  s.  soul,  were  s.  themselves
of  fear

Eccl.  7-  35.  be  not  slow  to  visit  the  s.

18.  19.  and  use  physic  or  ever  thou  be  s.

21.  humble  thyself  before  thou  be  s.

X'Mac.  1.  5.  and  after  these  things  he  fell  s.

6.  8.  lay  down  on  his  bed,  and  fell  s.  for  grief
SICKNESS.

Eccl.  30.  17.  death  is  better  than  continual  s.

31. 22.  be  quick,  so  shall  there  nor.  come  to  thee

37.  30.  for  excess  of  meats  bringeth  #.

38.  9.  my  son,  in  thy  s.  be  not  negligent

2  Mac.  9.  22.  having  great  hope  to  escape  this  #.
SIDE,  S.

1  Esd.  3.  9.  of  whose  s.  the  king  shall  judge
Wisd.  2.  24.  they  that  do  hold  of  his  s.  do  find  it

17.  10.  which  could  of  no  #.  be  avoided
Eccl.  30.  12.  beat  him  on  the  #.  while  he  is  achild
42.  5.  to  make  the#.  of  an  evil  servant  to  bleed
1  Mac.  6.  38.  they  set  them  on  this  #.  and  that  #.
SIEGE.

1  Mac.  6.  49.  no  victuals  there  to  endure  the  s.

9.  64.  then  went  he  and  laid#.  against  Bethbasi

2  Mac.  10.  18.  things  convenient  to  sustain  the#.

33.  they  laid  s.  against  the  fortress  four  days

11.5.  he  drew  near  to  Bethsura,  and  laid  #.to  it
SIEVE.

Eccl.  27. 4.  when  one  sifteth  with  ai.  refuse  remains
SIGH.

Eccl.  25. 18.  when  he  heareth  it  shall  s.  bitterly

686


SIGHED.

Sus.  22.  then  Susanna  s.  and  said,  I  am  straitened
SIGHETH.

Eccl.  30.  20.  a  eunuch  embraceth  a  virgin,  and  s.
SIGHING.

Jud.  14.  16.  Bagoas  cried  with  weeping  and  s.
SIGHT.

Tob.  4.  11.  that  give  it  in  the  s.  of  the  Most  High
21.  and  do  that  which  is  pleasing  in  his  s.

11.  16.  marvelled,  because  he  had  received  his  s.

12.  6.  hath  done  unto  you  in  s.  of  all  that  live

14.  2.  fifty-eight  years  old  when  he  lost  his  #.

Jud.  5.  12.  Egyptians  cast  them  out  of  their  s.

15.  2.  none  durst  abide  in  s.  of  his  neighbour
Wisd.  3.  2.  in  #.  of  the  unwise,  they  seemed  to  die

4.  for  though  they  be  punished  in  the  s.  ot  men

8.  11.  I  shall  be  admired  in  the  s.  of  great  men

9.  9.  wisdom  knew  what  was  acceptable  in  thy  s.

13.  7.  search  him  diligently,  and  believe  their  s.

15.  5.  the  s.  whereof  enticeth  fools  to  lust  after  it

16.  3.  the  ugly  s.  of  the  beasts  sent  among  them

17.  6.  to  be  worse  than  the  s.  they  saw  not
Eccl.  1.  29.  be  not  a  hypocrite  in  the  #.  of  men

2.  17.  they  will  humble  their  souls  in  his  s.

7.  33.  a  gift  hath  grace  in  the  s.  of  every  man

8.  16.  for  blood  is  as  nothing  in  his  s.

11.  21.  it  is  an  easy  thing  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord
38.  3.  in  #.  of  great  men  he  shall  be  in  admiration
43.  16.  at  his  #.  the  mountains  are  shaken

45.  1.  which  found  favour  in  the  #.  of  all  flesh

3.  he  made  him  glorious  in  the  s.  of  kings

46.  6.  because  he  fought  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord
Bar.  1.  22.  to  do  evil  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord  our  God
Hus.  23.  than  to  sin  in  the  s.  of  the  Lord

SIGN,  S.

Esth.  14.  16.  I  abhor  the  #.  of  my  high  estate
Wisd.  5.  11.  no  s.  where  she  went  is  to  be  found

16.  6.  be  admonished,  having  a  s.  of  salvation
Eccl.  37. 17.  the  countenance  is  a  s.  of  changing
43.  6.  a  declaration  of  times,  and  a  #.  of  world

7.  from  the  moon  is  the  .?.  of  feasts,  a  light
Bar.  2. 11.  out  of  Egypt  with  s.  and  with  wonders

6.  67.  neither  can  they  shew  s.  in  the  heavens
SIGNET.

Tob.  1.  22.  Achiacharus  was  keeper  of  the  s.

Eccl.  17.  22.  the  alms  of  a  man  is  as  a  #.  with  him

32.  6.  as  s.  of  an  emerald  set  in  a  work  of  gold

49.  11.  even  he  was  as  a  s.  on  the  right  hand
Bel  11.  and  seal  it  with  thine  own  s.

1  Mac.  6. 15.  gave  him  the  crown,  his  robe,  and  s.
SILENCE.

Eccl.  20.  5.  there  is  one  that  keepeth  s.  found  wise
6.  and  some  keep  s.  knowing  his  time
41.20.  of  s.  before  them  that  salute  thee
‘l  Mac.  14.17.  through  the  suddens-,  of  his  enemies
SILENT.

Eccl.  26. 14.  a  s.  and  loving  woman  is  a  gift  of  Lord
SILK.

1  Mac.  4.  23.  got  much  gold,  and  silver,  and  blue  #.

SILVER.

Jud.  5.  9.  they  were  increased  with  gold  and  s.
Wisd.  7.  9.  s.  shall  be  counted  as  clay  before  her

13.  10.  the  works  of  men’s  hands,  gold  and  s.

Eccl.  26.  18.  pillars  are  upon  the  sockets  of  s.

28.  24.  look  that  thou  bind  up  thy  s.  and  gold
40.  25.  gold  and  s.  make  the  foot  stand  sure

47.  18.  and  thou  didst  multiply  s.  as  lead

50.  16.  the  sons  of  Aaron  sounded  the  s.  trumpets
Bar.  3.  17.  they  that  hoarded  up  s.  and  gold

18.  they  that  wrought  in  s.  and  were  careful
6.4.  ye  shall  see  in  Babylon  gods  of  s.  and  gold

39.  their  gods  which  are  overlaid  with  gold  and  s.

2  Mac.  2.  2.  when  they  see  images  of  s.  and  gold

SILVER-SMITHS.

Wisd.  15.  9.  but  striveth  to  excel  gold-smiths  and  s.
SIMEON.

Jud.  9.  2.  O  Lord  God  of  my  Father  S.  to  whom
I  Mac.  2. 1.  son  of  S.  a  priest  of  the  sons  of  Joarib
SIMON.

1  Mac.  15.  24.  the  copy  hereof  they  wrote  to  S.

32.  when  he  saw  the  glory  of  S.  he  was  astonished

33.  then  answered  S.  and  said  unto  him

16.  2.  S.  called  his  eldest  sons,  Judas  and  John

13.  Ptolemeus  consulted  against  S.  and  his  sons

14.  S.  was  visiting  the  cities  in  the  country

16.  when  S.  and  his  sons  had  drunk  largely,  they
came  upon  S.  in  banqueting-place  and  slew  him

2  Mac.  3.  4.  one  S.of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin

11.  not  as  that  wicked  S.  had  misinformed

4.  3.  by  one  of  S.  faction  murders  were  committed
4.  Apollonius  did  rage,  and  increase  S.  malice
6.  the  state  continue  quiet,  and  S.  leave  his  folly

8.  22.  he  joined  S.  and  Joseph  and  Jonathan

10.  20.  they  that  were  with  S.  being  led  with

SIMPLICITY.

Wisd.  1.  1.  and  in  s.  of  heart  seek  him
SIN.

1  Esd.  8.  76.  we  have  been  in  great  s.  to  this  day

9.  ll.seeingour  s.  in  these  things  isspread  far

2  Esd.  9.  36.  we  that  received  the  law,  perish  by  s.
15.24.  woe  to  them  that  s.  and  keep  not  my  comm.

26.  Lord  knoweth  all  them  that  s.  against  him
16.  63.  knoweth  them  that  s.  and  would  hide  s.
Tob.  3.  14.  that  l  am  pure  from  all  #.  with  man
4.  5.  let  not  thy  will  be  set  to  #.  or  transgress
21.  if  thou  fear  God  and  depart  from  all  s.

12.  9.  for  alms  shall  purge  away  all  s.

10.  they  that  s.  are  enemies  to  their  own  life
Jud.  5.  20.  and  they  s.  against  their  God,  11.  10.
Wisd.  1.  4.  nor  dwell  in  the  body  that  is  subject  to  s.

10.  13.  forsook  not,  but  delivered  him  from  s.

15.  2.  if  we  s.  we  are  thine,  knowing  thy  power,  but

we  will  not  s.  knowing  that  we  are  thine
Eccl.  3.  27-  the  wicked  man  shall  heap  s.  upon  s.

4.  21.  for  there  is  a  shame  that  bringeth  #.

5.  5.  be  not  without  fear  to  add  #.  unto  s.

7.8.  bind  not  oner,  upon  another

10.  13.  for  pride  is  the  beginning  of  s.

13.  24.  riches  are  good  to  him  that  hath  no  s.

15.  20.  nor  hath  he  given  any  man  license  to  s.

20.  3.  for  so  shalt  thou  escape  wilful  s.

21.  2.  flee  from  s.  as  from  the  face  of  a  serpent


Eccl.  23. 11.  if  he  offend,  his  #.  shall  beupon  him
if  he  acknowledge  not  his  s.  a  double  offence-
13.  to  swearing,  for  therein  is  the  word  of  s.

16.  two  sorts  of  men  multiply  s.  and  the  third

25.  24.  of  the  woman  came  the  beginning  of  #.

26.  28.  that  returneth  from  righteousness  to  s.

29.  an  huckster  shall  not  be  freed  from  #.

27.  2.  so  s.  sticks  close  between  buying  and  selling
10.  so  s.  for  them  that  work  iniquity

13.  and  their  sport  is  the  wantonness  of  #.

32.  12.  take  pastime,  but#.  not  by  proud  speeen

34.  19.  nor  is  he  pacified  for  s.  by  sacrifices
38.  10.  leave  off  s.  and  order  thy  hands  aright
42.  1.  and  accept  no  person  to  #.  thereby

46.  7-  and  they  withheld  the  people  from  s.

47.  23.  there  was  also  Jeroboam,  who  caused
Israel  to  #.  and  shewed  Ephraim  the  way  of  #.

2  Mac.  6.  15.  lest  being  come  to  the  height  of  s.

12.  42.  that  the  s.  committed  might  be  put  out  of
remembrance  Judas  exhorted  to  keep  from  s
SINS.

1  Esd.  8.  75.  our  #.  are  multiplied  above  our  heads
86.  for  thou,  O  Lord,  didstmake  our  s.  light

9.  7-  thereby  to  increase  the  #.  of  Israel
Wisd.  4.  20.  they  cast  up  the  accounts  of  their  s.

11.  23.  and  thou  winkest  at  the  s.  of  men

12.  19.  of  hope  that  thou  givest  repentance  for#.
I?.  3.  they  supposed  to  lie  hid  in  their  secret  s.

Eccl.  1.  21.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  driveth  away  s.

2.  11.  the  Lord  forgiveth  s.  and  saveth  in  affliction

3.  3.  maketh  an  atonement  for  his  s.

14.  instead  of  s.  it  shall  be  added  to  build  the*

15.  thy  s.  shall  melt  away  as  ice  in  fair  weather
5.  6.  he  will  be  pacified  for  the  multitude  of  my#.

12. 14.  one  that  is  defiled  with  him  in  his  s.

14.  1.  and  is  not  pricked  with  the  multitude  of  s.

16.  9.  people,  that  were  taken  away  in  their  s.

17.  20.  but  ali  their  s.  are  before  the  Lord
25.  return  to  the  Lord,  and  forsake  thy-  s.

18.  21.  and  in  the  time  of  s.  shew  repentance

21.  1.  do  so  no  more,  ask  pardon  for  thy  former  s.

23.  2.  they  spare  me  not,  and  it  pass  not  by  my  s.

3.  lest  my  s.  abound  to  my  destruction
12.  and  they  shall  not  wallow  in  their#.

18.  the  Most  Higli  will  not  remember  my  s.

28.  2.  forgive,  so  shall  thy  s.  also  be  forgiven

4.  and  doth  he  ask  forgiveness  of  his  own  s.

5.  who  will  treat  for  pardon  of  his  s.  ?

8.  abstain  from  strife,  thou  shalt  diminish  thy  s.

34.  26.  so  it  is  with  a  man  that  fasteth  for  his  s.
47-11.  the  Lord  took  away  his  s.  ard  exalted

24.  and  their  s.  were  multiplied  exceedingly

48.  15.  neither  departed  they  from  their  #.

16.  was  pleasing  to  God,  and  some  multiplied  ».
Dan.  3.  5.  bring  these  on  us  because  of  our  s.

2  Mac.  5. 17.  Lord  was  angry  for  awhile  for  the#
18.  had  been  formerly  wrapped  in  many  s.

6. 14.  till  they  be  come  to  the  fulness  of  their  s.

7.  32.  for  we  suffer  because  of  our  s.

12.  42.  for  the  #.  of  those  that  were  slain

13.  8.  as  he  committed  many  s.  about  the  altar

SINFUL.

Tob.  13.  6.  declare  his  majesty  to  a  s.  nation
Wisd.  3.  13.  which  hath  not  kno’wn  the  s.  bed
Eccl.  10.  23.  nor  convenient  to  magnify  a#,  man

11.  32.  and  a  s.  man  layetli  wait  for  blood

15.  12.  for  he  hath  no  need  of  the  s.  man

27.  30.  and  the  s.  man  shall  have  them  both

32.  17.  a#,  man  will  not  be  reproved,  but  findeth
1  Mac.  1.  34.  and  they  put  therein  a  s.  nation

2.  44.  and  they  smote  #.  men  in  their  anger
SINNED.

1  Esd.  1. 24.  concerning  those  that#,  and  did  wicked.

4.  27-  many  also  have  erred,  and  #.  for  women
Tob.  3.  3.  my  fathers,  who  have  #.  before  thee
Jud.  5.  17.  whilst  they  #.  not  before  their  God
Esth.  14.  6.  and  now  we  have  #.  before  thee
Wisd.  12.  11.  for  those  things  wherein  they#.
Eccl.  5. 4.  say  not  I  have  #.  and  what  harm  happened

21.  1.  my  son,  hast  thou  #.  ?  do  so  no  more
27.  1.  many  have  #.  for  a  small  matter
Bar.  1.13.  we  have  #.  against  the  Lord  our  God
Prayer  of  Manass.  thou  hast  promised  repentance
to  them  that  have  #.  thou  hast  not  appointed
repentance  to  the  just,  which  have  not  #.  but
to  me,  for  I  have  #.  above  the  number  of  the
sands  of  the  sea  ;  I  have  #.  O  Lord,  I  have  #.

2  Mac.  7.  18.  we  suffer,  having  #.  against  our  God

SINNER.

Eccl.  1.  25.  godliness  is  an  abomination  to  a  #.

2.  12.  woe  to  the  #.  that  goeth  two  ways

5.  9.  so  doth  the  #.  that  hath  a  double  tongue

6.  1.  even  so  shall  a  #.  that  hath  a  double  tongue

8. 10.  kindle  not  the  coals  of  a  #.  lest  thou  be  burned

9. 11 .  envy  not  the  glory  of  a  #.  knowest  not  his  end

12.  4.  give  to  the  godly  and  help  not  the  #.  7*

14.  so  one  that  goeth  to  a  #.  and  is  defiled

13.  17.  what  fellowship  hath  the  wolf  with  the

lamb  ?  so  the  s.  with  the  godly

15.  9.  praise  is  not  seemly  in  the  mouth  of  a#.

16.  13.  the  #.  shall  not  escape  with  his  spoils
20.  9.  there  is  a  #.  that  hath  good  success  in  evil
23.  8.  the  #.  shall  be  left  in  his  foolishness

25.  19.  let  the  portion  of  #.  fall  upon  her

29. 16.  a  #.  will  overthrow  the  estate  of  his  surety

33.  14.  good  is  set  against  evil,  so  is  the  godly  set

against  the  #.  and  the  #.  against  the  godly
Prayer  of  Manass.  repentance  to  me  that  am  a  #.

1  Mac.  2.  48.  nor  suffered  they  the  #.  to  triumph

SINNERS.

Wisd.  4.10.  so  that  living  among  #.  he  was  translated
19. 13.  and  punishments  came  upon  the  #.

Eccl.  5.  6.  his  indignation  resteth  upon  #.

7.  16.  number  not  thyself  among  the  multitudfe  of  #„
11.9.  and  sit  not  in  judgment  with  #.

16.  had  their  beginning  together  with  #.

21.  marvel  notatthe  works  of  #.  trust  in  the  Lord
12.  6.  for  the  Most  High  hateth  #.  and  will  repay
15.7.  not  attain  to  her,  and  #.  shall  not  see  her
19. 22.  nor  at  any  time  is  the  counsel  of#,  pru/lenc*
21.6.  hateth  to  be  reproved,  is  in  the  way  ot  #.

10.  the  way  of  #.  is  made  plain  with  stones


SLA


S  M  A


SOL  [Apocryph


Eccl.  39.  25.  so  evil  things  are  created  for  s.

27.  so  to  the  a.  they  are  turned  into  evil
4u.  8.  and  that  is  seven-fold  more  upon  s.

41.  5.  the  children  of  a.  are  abominable  children
6.  the  inheritance  of  s.  children  shall  perish
11.  but  an  ill  name  of  a.  shall  be  blotted  out
Prayer  of  Manaus,  thy  angry  threatening  toward
s.  is  unportable  ;  hast  appointed  repentance  tor
.  SINNETH.

rj  tsd.  11.  16.  might  know  wherewithal  a  man  a.
Reel.  10. 29.  who  will  justify  him  that  s.  ag.  hissoul

19.  4.  he  that  s.  shall  offend  against  hissoul

38.  15.  he  that  s.  before  his  Maker,  let  him  fall
.  SINNING.

Reel.  18.27-  and  in  the  day  ot  s.  he  will  beware

19.  28.  it  for  want  ot  power  he  be  hindered  from  a.

20.  21.  there  is  that  is  hindered  from  a.  thro’  want

SINAI.

Reel.  48. 7.  who  heardest  rebuke  of  the  Lord  in  S.
SIN  CERE.

Reel.  5. 11.  be  swift  to  hear,  and  let  thy  life  be  s.
SING.

Jud.  16. 1.  Judith  began  to  s.  this  thanksgiving
13.  1  will  s.  to  the  Lord  a  new  song
Reel.  47-  9.  and  daily  s.  praises  in  their  songs
51.  11.  and  1  will  s.  praises  with  thanksgiving
_  ,  SINGER.

Reel.  9.  1.  use  not  company  of  a  woman  that  is  a  a.

SINGERS.

1  Esd.  1. 15.  the  holy  a.  also  were  in  their  order
Reel.  47.  9.  he  set  s.  also  before  the  altar
50.  18.  the  a.  also  sang  praises  with  their  voices
SINGING.

1  Rsd.  5.  62.  a.  songs  of  thanksgiving  to  the  Lord
Wisd.  18.  9.  fathers  now  a.  out  the  songs  of  praise

SINGULAR.

Wisd.  14.  18.  the  s.  diligence  of  the  artificer
SION.

2  Rsd.  3.  2.  for  I  saw  the  desolation  of  S.

5.  25.  thou  hast  hallowed  S.  to  thyself

6.  4.  or  ever  the  chimneys  in  S.  were  hot
10.7.  that  S.  our  mother  is  full  of  heaviness

Jud.  9.  13.  purposed  cruel  things  against  top  ofS.
Reel.  24.  10.  and  so  was  I  established  in  S.

48.  18.  Sennacherib  lift  up  his  hand  against  S.

24.  he  comforted  them  that  mourned  in  S.
SIRNAME.

1  Mac.  2. 5.  Jonathan  whose  s.  was  Apphus
„  SIIINAMED.

1  Mac.  1.10.  A.ntiochus  s.  Epiphanes,  who  had
6.  43.  Eleazar  also  s.  Savaran,  perceiving
.  SISTER.

Tob.  8.  4.  Tobias  said,  s.  arise,  and  let  us  pray
7-  O  Lord,  I  take  not  this  my  s.  for  lust
SIT.

I  Esd.  3.  7.  and  he  shall  .(-.next  to  Darius
4.  42.  art  found  wisest,  thou  shalt  a.  next  to  me
Jud.  12.  15.  that  she  might  s.  and  eat  upon  them
Wisd.  9.  12.  be  worthy  to  a.  in  my  father’s  seat
Eccl.  9.  9.  s .  not  at  all  with  another  man’s  wife,  nor
s.  down  with  her  in  thine  arms
11. 1.  wisdom  maketh  him  to.?,  among  great  men

9.  and  s.  not  in  judgment  with  sinners

12. 12.  neither  let  him  a.  at  thy  right  hand

25. 18.  her  husband  shall  s.  among  his  neighbours

26. 12.  by  every  hedge  will  she  a.  down

31. 12.  if  thou  s.  at  a  bountiful  table,  be  not  greedy
32.  1.  take  diligent  care  for  them,  so  s.  down

38.  33.  they  shall  not  s.  high  in  the  congregation,
they  shall  not  s.  on  the  judges’  seat

42. 12.  and  s.  not  in  the  midst  of  women

S us.  50.  tlie  elders  said,  come  s.  down  among  us
SITTEST.

Eccl.  4.  9.  deliver  from  the  hand  of  the  oppressor
be  not  faint-hearted  when  thou  s.  in  judgmen
23.  14.  remember  when  thou  s.  among  great  men

31. 18.  when  thou  s.  among  many,  reach  not

SITTETH.

Wisd.  0.  4.  give  me  wisdom  that  s.  by  thy  throne
Eccl.  33.  6.  neigheth  under  every  one  that  s.  on  hitr
40.  3.  Irom  him  that  s.  on  a  throne  of  glory
Bar.  6.71.  like  a  white  thorn,  that  every  bird  s.  or
SITTING.

Esd.  4.  29.  A  pame  s.  at  the  right  hand  of  the  king
Wisd.  6.  14.  he  shall  find  her  a.  at  bis  doors
Eccl.  1.  8.  there  is  one  wise,  a.  on  his  throne
38.  28.  the  smith  also  a.  by  the  anvil
29.  so  doth  the  potters,  at  his  work,  and  turning
Bar.  6.  43.  the  women  also  s.  in  the  ways
Bel  40.  he  looked  in,  and  behold  Daniel  was  s.

SIX.

Fob.  14.  3.  called  his  son,  and  s.  sons  of  his  son
Bel.  31.  into  the  lions’  den,  where  he  was  s.  days
SIXTH.

Esd.  7.5.  in  a.  year  of  Darius  king  of  the  Persians
I  Rsd.  6.  53.on  the  s.  thou  gavest  commandment
Eccl.  17.  5.  in  .v.  place  he  imparted  understanding
!  Mac.  7.  18.  after  him  also  they  brought  the  s.
SKILL.

Wisd.  13.13.  formed  it  by  the  s.  of  hisunderstanding
14.  2.  and  the  workman  built  it  by  his  s.

19.  he  forced  all  his  s.  to  make  the  resemblance
Eccl.  1. 19.  wisdom  raineth  down  s.  and  knowledge

10.  30.  the  poor  man  is  honoured  for  his.?.

38. 3.  the  a. of  the  physician  shall  lift  up  his  head
6.  he  hath  given  me.v.  that  he  might  be  honoured
SKILFUL.

Eccl.  21. 15.  if  a  s.  man  hear  wise  word,  will  comm
SKILFULLY.

Wisd.  13. 11.  he  hath  taken  off  all  the  bark  s.

SKIN.

■  Mac.  7-  7-  and  when  they  had  pulled  off  the  s.

.  SK1PPETH.

Eccl.  36.  26.  a  thief  that  s.  from  city  to  city
SKIPPING.

W isd.  17.19.  sound  of  stones,  or  running  of  s.  beasts
SLACK.

!  Esd.  16.  37.  the  plagues  draw  nigh,  and  are  not  s.

38.  when  the  child  cometh  forth,  they  s.  not

39.  even  so  shall  not  the  plagues  be  s.  to  come
Tob.  12.  6.  therefore  be  not  a.  to  praise  him
Eccl.  4.  29.  in  thy  deeds  be  not  s.  and  remiss


Eccl.  35. 18.  Lord  will  not  be  s.  till  he  hath  smitten

SLACKNESS.

2  Esd.  5.  42.  like  as  there  is  no  s.  of  the  last
SLAIN.

1  Esd.  1.  56.  people  that  were  not  a.  with  the  sword
4.  5.  they  slay,  and  are  s.  and  transgress  not
~ Rsd.  1.  32  whom  ye  have  taken  and  .s',  and  torn
lob.  1.  18.  if  the  king  Sennacherib  had  s.  any
Jud.  9.  3.  wherefore  thou  gavest  their  rulers  to  be  s.
IT  tsd.  11.  7-  whereby  the  infants  were  s.

8.  *,e  kiath  s.  the  dragon,  and  put  priests

1  Mac.  2.  9.  her  infants  are  s.  in  the  streets

3.  11.  many  also  fell  down  a.  but  the  rest  tied

o.  12.  come  and  deliver  us,  for  many  of  us  are  a'.
lb-21,  told  that  his  father  and  brethren  were  s.

2  Mac.  1.  13.  they  were  s.  in  the  temple  of  Nanea

4.  36.  because  Onias  was  s.  without  cause

7.  20.  when  she  saw  her  seven  sons  s.  in  one  day
_  SLANDER.

Reel-  19.  15.  admonish,  for  many  times  it  is  a  s.

26.  5.  mine  heart  feareth  the  a.  of  a  city

27.  23.  he  will  writhe  his  fnouth  and  s.  thy  sayings
1  Mac.  11.  11.  thus  did  he  a.  him,  because  he  was

SLANDEROUS.

Reel.  51.  2.  and  from  the  snare  of  the  s.  tongue
SLAVES.

Jud.  5.  11.  brought  them  low,  and  made  them  s.

14.  13.  for  the  s.  have  been  bold  to  come  down
18.  these  s.  have  dealt  treacherously

1  Mac.  3.  41.  to  buy  the  children  of  Israel  for  s.

^  SLAUGHTER.

2  Mac.  8.  4.  remember  the  wicked  s.  of  infants

SLAY.

\rpsd.  4.  5.  they  s.  and  are  slain,  and  transgress  not
JTtsd.  18.  5.  determined  to  s.  the  babes  of  the  saints
Reel.  47.  5.  gave  strength  to  s.  that,  mighty  warrior
oka.  53.  the  righteous  shalt  thou  not  a.

Bel  26.  I  shall  s.  this  dragon  without  sword  or  staff
1  Mac.  5.  2.  began  to  a.  and  destroy  the  people
9.  32.  but  Bacchides  sought  for  to  a.  him

11.  10.  daughter  to  him,  for  he  sought  to  a.  me
16.  21.  Ptolemee  hath  sent  to  a.  thee  also
SLA  YET  FI.

IT isd.  1.11.  the  mouth  that  belieth  a.  the  soul
Eccl.  34.  22.  that  taketh  neighbour’s  living  a.  him
SLAYING.

Eccl.  21.  2.  as  the  teeth  of  a  lion,  a.  souls  of  men

1  Mac.  6.  45.  a.  on  the  right  hand,  and  on  the  left

2  Mac.  5.  13.  there  was  a.  of  virgins  and  infants

SLEEP.

1  Esd.  3.  6.  to  drink  in  gold,  and  to  a.  upon  gold

2  Esd.  2.  31.  remember  thy  children  that  a.

II  isd.  7.  2.  and  the  pleasure  that  came  with  a.

17. 14.  but  they  sleeping  the  same  a.  that  night
Eccl.  13.  13.  hearest  these  things,  awake  in  thy  a.
22.  7.  as  he  that  w-aketh  one  from  a  sound  a.

31.  1.  and  the  care  thereof  driveth  away  a.

2.  watching  care,  as  a  sore  disease  breaketh  a.

20.  sound  a.  cometh  of  moderate  eating

40.  6.  he  is  in  his  a.  as  in  a  day  of  keeping  watch

42.  9.  and  the  care  for  her  taketh  away  a.

46.  19.  before  his  long  a.  he  made  protestations

1  Mac.  6.  10.  the  a.  is  gone  from  mine  eyes

SLEEPING.

Wisd.  17.  14.  they  a.  the  same  sleep  that  night
SLENDERLY.

2  Mac.  15.  38.  but  if  I  have  done  a.  and  meanly

SLEPT.

2  Esd.  10.  59.  so  I  a.  that  night  and  another
Tob.  8.  9.  so  they  a.  both  that  night
Jud.  12.  5.  and  she  a.  till  midnight  and  arose
Eccl.  48.  11.  they  that  saw  thee  and  a.  in  love
SLEW.

Eccl.  47.  4.  a.  he  not  a  giant  when  he  was  but  youn0,

1  Mac.  1.  2.  Alexander  a.  the  kings  of  the  earth  °
61.  they  a.  them  that  had  circumcised  them

2.  24.  he  ran  and  a.  him  upon  the  altar
38.  they  rose  up  and  a.  them  with  their  wives
5.  51.  who  then  a.  all  the  males  with  the  sword
16.  16.  Ptolemee  a.  him  and  his  two  sons

2  Mac.  4.  38.  there  a.  he  the  cursed  murderer
5.  6.  Jason  a.  his  own  citizens  without  mercy

SLIDE.

Eccl.  28.  26.  beware  thou  a.  not  by  it,  lest  thou  fall
SLING.

Jud.  9.  7-  they  trust  in  spear,  and  bow,  and  a.

Reel.  47. 4.  lifted  his  hand  with  the  stone  in  the  a.
SLINGS.

1  Mac.  6.  51.  and  pieces  to  cast  darts  and  a.

SLIP.

Eccl.  20.  18.  to  a.  on  a  pavement  is  better  than  to
a.  with  the  tongue,  so  fall  of  wicked  shall  come
SLIPPED.

Eccl.  25.  8.  he  that  hath  not  a.  with  his  tongue
SL1PPETH.

Eccl.  19.  16.  there  is  one  that  a.  in  his  speech

21.  7.  a  man  of  understanding  knows  when  her.
SLIPPED.

Eccl.  14.  1.  the  man  that  hath  not  a.  with  his

mouth

1  Mac.  9.  7-  when  .Tudas  saw  that  his  host  a.  away
SLOTHFUL.

Eccl.  22. 2.  a  a.  man  is  compared  to  filth  of  dunghill
37-  11.  consult  not  with  the  a.  for  any  work
SLOW.

Wisd.  15.  15.  as  for  their  feet,  they  are  a.  to  go
Eccl.  7.  35.  be  not  a.  to  visit  the  sick
51.  24.  wherefore  are  you  a.  f  and  what  say  you
SLUMBER.

Eccl.  22.  8.  a  tale  to  a  fool  speaketh  to  one  in  a  a.

31.  2.  watching  care  will  not  let  a  man  a.

SMALL.

1  Esd.  1.  54.  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,  great  and  a.
Wisd.  6.  7-  for  he  hath  made  the  a.  and  great
14. 5.  men  commit  their  lives  to  a  a.  piece  of  wood
16.  6.  they  were  troubled  for  a  s.  season
Eccl.  5.  15.  ignorant  in  a  great  matter  or  a  a.

19.  1.  he  that  contemneth  a.  things  shall  fall
27.  1.  many  have  sinned  for  a  a.  matter

43.  15.  by  nis  power  the  hailstones  are  broken  a.

48. 15.  there  remained  a  a.  people  and  a  ruler
Bar.  2.  29.  great  multitude  turned  into  a  a.  number


Dan.  3.  23.  not  with  rosin,  pitch,  tow,  and  s.  wood

1  Mac.  3. 16.  went  to  meet  him  with  a  a.  company
18.  with  a  great  multitude,  or  a  a.  company

2  Mac.  1. 15.  Tie  was  entered  with  a  a.  company

3.  14.  wherefore  there  was  no  a.  agony  through  ^ity
14. 8.  for  all  our  nation  is  in  no  a.  misery
SMART.

Tob.  11. 12.  when  his  eyes  began  to  a.  he  rubbed
SMELL.

Tob.  8.  3.  which  a.  when  the  evil  spirit  smelled
Eccl.  30.  19.  for  neither  can  it  eat  nor  a.

2  Mac.  9.  9.  the  filthiness  of  his  a.  was  noisome
12.  when  himself  could  not  abide  his  own  a.
SMELLED.

Tob.  8.  3.  when  evil  spirit  had  a.  he  fled  to  Egypt
SMELLING.

Eccl.  50. 15.  a  sweet  a.  savour  to  the  Most  High
SMILE.

Eccl.  21.  20.  a  wise  man  doth  scarce  a.  a  little
SMILED.

Eel  7.  then  Daniel  a.  and  said,  be  not  deceived
_  SMILING.

Eccl.  13. 11.  and  a.  on  thee,  will  get  out  thy  secrets
SMITE.

1  Esd.  4.  8.  if  he  command  to  a.  they  a.

~ '  Esd.  15.  11.  and  I  will  a.  Egypt  with  plagues
Jud.  9. 10.  a.  by  the  deceit  of  my  lips  the  prince
Eccl.  36.  10.  a.  in  sunder  the  heads  of  the  rulers
SMITH.

Eccl.  38. 28.  the  a.  also  sitting  by  the  anvil

SMITTEN.

Jud.  1 3. 15.  Lord  hath  a.  him  by  the  hand  of  a  woman
Eccl.  13.2.  if  the  one  be  a.  against  the  other
35.  18.  till  he  hath  a.  in  sunder  the  loins

1  Mac.  1.1.  had  a.  Darius  king  of  the  Persians

2  Mac.  12.  22.  being.A.  with  fear  and  terror

SMOKE.

Tob.  6. 7-  we  must  make  a  a.  thereof  before  the  me  n
16.  the  liver  thou  shalt  make  a  a.  with  it

8.  2.  the  heart  and  liver  he  made  a  a.  therewith
Wisd.  2.  2.  the  breath  in  our  nostrils  is  as  a.

Eccl.  22.  24.  as  the  vapour  and  a.  of  a  furnace
Bar.  6.  21.  their  faces  are  black  through  the  a.

1  Mac.  4.  20.  for  the  a.  that  was  seen  declared
SMOTE.

Jud.  5.  12.  he  a.  the  land  of  Egypt  with  plagues
13.  8.  she  a.  twice  upon  his  neck  with  all  her  might
Dan.  3.  26.  and  a.  the  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  oven

1  Mac.  2.  44.  they  a.  sinful  men  in  their  anger

2  Mac.  3.  25.  a.  at  Heliodorus  with  his  fore  feet

9.  5.  God  a.  him  with  an  incurable  plague

12. 35.  a  horseman  coming  on  him  a.  off  his  shoulder
SMOTEST.

Jud.  9.  3.  thou  a.  the  servants  with  their  lords
SNARE.

Wisd.  14.  11.  and  a  a.  to  the  feet  of  the  unwise
Eccl.  27.  29.  they  shall  be  taken  in  the  a.

51.  2.  and  from  the  a.  of  the  slanderous  tongue
1  Mac.  1.  35.  and  so  they  became  a  sore  a.

5.  4.  who  had  been  a  a.  and  an  offence  to  people
SNARES.

Tob.  14. 10.  Manasses  escaped  the  a.  of  death
SNOW.

Dan.  3. 46.  O  ye  dews  and  storms  of  a.  bless  the  Ld.
50.  O  ye  frost  and  a.  bless  ye  the  Lord

1  Mac.  13.  22.  but  there  fell  a  very  great  a.

SOBERLY.

Wisd.  9. 11.  she  shall  lead  me  a.  in  my  doings
SOCKETS.

Eccl.  26. 18.  as  golden  pillars  are  on  a.  of  silver
SODOM.

2  Esd.  2.8.  remember  what  1  did  to  S.  and  Gomorrah

SODOMITES.

2  Esd.  7-  36.  Abraham  prayed  first  for  the  S.

Wisd.  19.  14.  for  the  S.  did  not  receive  those
SODOMITISH.

2  Esd.  5.  7-  the  S.  sea  shall  cast  out  fish
SOFT.

Jud.  12. 15.  her  maid  laid  a.  skins  on  the  ground
Wisd.  2.-3.  our  spirit  shall  vanish  as  the  a.  air
15.  7*  for  the  potter  tempering  the  a.  earth
SOJOURNED.

Jud.  5. 7.  they  a.  heretofore  in  Mesopotamia
Wisd.  19.  10.  while  they  a.  in  the  strange  land
Eccl.  16. 8.  nor  spared  he  the  place  where  Lot  a.
SOJOURNEST.

Eccl.  41. 19.  in  regard  of  the  place  where  thou  a.
SOLD.

Tob.  1. 7.  another  tenth  part  I  a.  away  and  spent  it
Jud.  7.  25.  but  God  hath  a.  us  into  their  hands
Wisd.  10. 13.  when  righteous  was  a.  she  forsook  not
Bar.  4.6.  ye  were  a.  to  the  nations  not  for  destruction

1  Mac.  1.  15.  and  were  a.  to  do  mischief

2  Mac.  4.  32.  and  some  of  them  he  a.  into  Tyrus

5. 14.  and  no  fewer  a.  than  slain

8. 14.  others  a.  all  they  had  left  and  withal  besought

the  Lord,  being  a.  by  the  wicked  Nicauor
_  SOLDIERS.

1  Esd.  4.  6.  likewise  for  those  that  are  no  a.

1  Mac.  3.  28.  and  he  gave  his  a.  pay  for  a  year

5.  50.  so  the  a.  pitched,  and  assaulted  the  city

6.  29.  there  came  unto  him  bands  of  hired  a."

11.  3.  he  left  in  every  one  a  garrison  of  a.  to  keep  it
SOLEMN.

2  Esd.  1.  31.  your  a.  feast-days  have  I  forsaken
Jud.  8.  6.  and  a.  days  of  the  house  of  Israel
Esth.  16.22.  among  your  a.  feasts  keep  it  a  high  day
Eccl.  47.  10.  and  he  set  in  order  the  a.  times
Bar.  1.  14.  read  this  book  upon  the  a.  days

SOLEMN  LY.

2  Mac.  14.  4.  which  were  used  a.  in  the  temple
SOLEMNITY.

Eccl.  50. 19.  till  the  a.  of  the  Lord  was  ended
2  Mac.  15.  36.  not  to  let  that  day  pass  without  a.
SOLES.

Esth.  13.13.  have  been  content  to  kiss  the  a.  of  his  feet
SOLITARY.

Eccl.  8. 16.  go  not  with  him  into  a  a.  place
9.  7.  nor  wander  thou  in  the  a.  places  thereof
SOLOMON.

2  Esd.  7. 38.  S.  for  them  that  come  to  the  sanctuary
Eccl.  47.  13.  S.  reigned  in  a  peaceable  time

687


Apocrypha.]


S  OR


Eccl.il.  23.  thus  rested  S.  with  his  fathers
<>  Mac.  ‘2.  8.  when  S.  desired  the  place  might  be

10.  even  so  piayed  S.  also,  and  tire  came  down
12*.  so  S.  kept  those  eight  days

SOLUTION.  .  .

q  Esd.  10.  43.  of  death  of  her  son,  this  is  the  s.

SO  N  G.

2  Esd.  10.  22.  our  s.  is  put  to  silence,  joy  at  an  end
Jud.  16.  1.  all  people  sang  after  her  this  i.  of  praise

13.  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  4.  O  Lord
Eccl.  39.  14.  sing  as.  of  praise,  bless  the  Lord

SONGS.  .  .  ,

1  Esd.  5.60.  singing i.of  thanksgiving,  praising  Lord
61.  they  sung  with  loud  voices  s.  to  the  Lord
Eccl.  39. 15.  shew  forth  his  praise  with  s.  of  your  lips
47.  8.  with  his  whole  heart  he  sung*,  loved  him

9.  they  might  daily  sing  praises  in  their  s.

17.  the  countries  marvelled  at  thee  tor  thy  s.

SON.

Tob.  1.  22.  and  he  was  my  brother’s.?.

3. 15.  nor  any  s.  of  his  alive  to  whom  1  may  keep

4.  3.  he  said,  my  s.  when  l  am  dead  bury  me

4.  remember,  my .?.  she  saw  many  dangers  tor  thee

5.  my  s.  be  mind tul  <>t  Lord  our  God  all  thy  days

12.  beware  of  all  whoredom,  my  s.  take  a  wife

14.  be  circumspect,  my  s.  in  all  things  thou  dost
19.  therefore,  my  s.  remember  my  commandment
21.  fear  not,  my  4.  that  we  are  made  poor

5. 11.  dost  thou  seek  an  hired  man  to  go  with  thy  s.

14.  and  things  necessary  as  to  mine  own  s.

17.  Anna  said,  why  hast  thou  sent  away  our  ?.  '

6.  14.  I  am  the  only  4.  of  my  father,  1  fear  lest  1

die,  for  they  have  no  other  s .  to  bury  them

7.  7.  thou  art  the  4.  of  an  honest  and  good  man
10.4.  my  s.  is  dead,  seeing  he  stayeth  long

5. 1  care  for  nothing,  my  s.  is  the  lightot  mine  eyes
7.  my  s.  is  dead,  she  ceaseth  not  to  bewail  her  s.

11  9.  Anna  fell  on  the  neck  of  her  s.  and  said,  see¬
ing  I  have  seen  thee,  rny  s.  I  am  content  to  die
10.  Tobit  stumbled  but  Ins.?,  ran  unto  lum

13.  when  he  saw  his  s.  he  fell  upon  his  neck

15.  taken  pity,  for  behold,  l  see  my  .?.  Tobias

14.  3.  he  called  Ins  4.  and  the  six  sons  ot  his  s.  and

said  to  him,  my  s.  take  thy  children
Wisd.  2.  18.  for  if  the  just  man  be  the  s.  ot  God

10.  5.  his  tender  compassion  towards  his  s.

Eccl.  2.  1.  my  4.  if  thou  come  to  serve  the  Lord

3.  12.  my  s.  help  thy  father  in  his  a^e
6.  23.  give  ear,  my  s.  receive  my  advice
32.  my  s.  if  thou  wilt,  thou  shalt  be  taught
7.3.my  s.  sow  not  on  the  furrovvsof  unrighteousness

10.  28.  my  s.  glorify  thy  soul  in  meekness

11.  10.  my  s.  meddle  not  with  many  matters

16.  24.  my  s.  hearken  to  me,  and  learn  knowledge

18. 15.  my  s.  blemish  not  thy  good  deeds
21.  1.  my  4.  hast  thou  sinned  '  do  so  no  more

26.  19.  my  4.  keep  the  flower  of  thine  age  sound

30.  2.  he  that  chastiseth  his  4.  shall  have  joy
3.  he  that  teaclieth  his  4.  grieveth  the  enemy

7.  lie  that  maketh  too  much  of  his  s.  shall  bind  up
13.  chastise  thyr4.  and  hold  him  to  labour

31.  22.  my  s.  hear  me,  and  despise  me  not
33. 19.  give  not  thy  .?.  and  wife  power  oyer  thee
34.  20.  as  one  thatkilleth  the  s.  before  his  father
40.  28.  my  s.  lead  not  a  beggar’s  life,  better  to  die
48.  10.  to  turn  the  heart  of  the  father  to  the  s.

Bar.  2.  3.  a  man  should  eat  the  flesh  ot  his  own  s.

1  Mac.  1.  10.  Epiphanes,  s.  of  Antiochus  the  king
3.  33.  he  left  Lysias  to  bring  up  his  4.  Antiochus
10.  54.  1  will  be  thy  4.  in  law,  and  give  gifts
13.  53.  saw  that  John  his  s.  was  a  valiant  man
16.  11.  Ptolemeusthe  son  of  A  bubus  made  captain

2  Mac-1.  26.  promised  that  she  would  counsel  hers.

27.  O  my  s.  have  pity  upon  me  that  bare  thee

28.  1  beseech  thee,  my.?,  look  upon  the  heaven
10.  10.  who  was  the  s.  of  this  wicked  man

SONS.

1  Esd.  5.  35.  the  4.  of  the  servants  of  Solomon

8.  21.  upon  the  kingdom  of  the  king  and  his  .?.

70.  their  s.  have  married  with  their  daughters
84.  ye  shall  not  join  your  daughters  to  their  s

nor  shall  ye  take  their  daughters  to  your  s.

2  Esd.  1.  28.  have  1  not  prayed  you  as  a  father  his  s.
Tob.  1.  7-  the  first  tenth  1  gave  to  the  s.  of  Aaron

21.  not  55 days  before  two  of  his  .?.  killed  him
Jud.  5.  3.  he  said,  tell  me  now,  ye  s.  of  Canaan
IVisd.  9.  7.  to  be  a  judge  of  thy  4.  and  daughters
12.21.  with  circumspection  didst  thou  judge  thy  $
16.  10.  thy  s.  not  the  teeth  of  dragons  overcame
4.  to  be  imprisoned  who  kept  thy  s.  shut  up
13.  acknowledged  this  people  to  be  the  4.  ot  God
Eccl.  3.2.  confirmed  authority  of  the  mother  over  s.
16.  1.  neither  delight  in  ungodly  4.

40. 1.  a  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  s.  of  Adam
50.  13.  so  were  all  the  s.  of  Aaron  in  their  glory
Sus.  48.  are  ye  such  fools,  ye  s.  of  Israel.to  condemn

1  Mac.  1.  9.  so  did  their  4.  after  them  many  years
2.  20.  yet  will  L  and  my  s.  walk  in  the  covenant

64.  wherefore  you,  my  s.  be  valiant,  and  shew
70.  and  his  s.  buried  him  in  the  sepulchre

13. 16.  and  send  two  of  his  s.  for  hostages

2  Mac.  7.  20.  when  she  saw  her  seven  s.  slain
41.  last  of  all,  after  the.?,  the  mother  died

SOOTHS  AY  IN  GS.

Eccl.  34.  5.  divinations  and  4.  and  dreams  are  vain
SORE.

IVisd.  10.  12.  in  a  s.  conflict  she  gave  him  victory
Eccl.  31. 2.  care  as  a  s.  disease  breaketh  sleep
39.  28.  which  in  their  fury  lay  on  s.  strokes

1  Mac.  2. 14.  put  on  sackcloth,  and  mourned  very  s.

2  Mac.  3.  26.  who  gave  him  many  s.  stripes

9. 5.  s.  torments  of  the  inner  parts  came  upon  him
SORROW.

1  Esd.  3.  20.  a  man  remembereth  neither  4.  nor  debt
Tob.  3. 1.  I  did  weep,  and  in  my  s.  prayed,  saying
6. 14.  and  bring  my  father’s  life  to  the  grave  with  s.
Esth.  13. 17.  turn  our  s.  into  joy,  that  we  may  live
Eccl.  26.  6.  a  grief  of  heart,  and  4.  is  a  woman  that
30.  12.  be  stubborn,  and  so  bring  .?.  to  thy  heart
23.  remove  s.  far  from  thee,  for  s.  hath  killed
37. 12.  who  will .?.  with  thee  if  thou  shalt  miscarry
38.  19.  in  affliction  also  .?.  remaineth
688


SOW

1  Mac.  1.  11.  since  departed,  we  have  had  much  s

2  Mac.  3.  17.  what  s.  he  had  now  in  Ins  heart
~9  9  while  he  lived  in  s.  his  flesh  tell  away

SORROWS.  .

Eccl.  3.  27.  an  obstinate  heart  be  laden  with  s.

7.  27.  and  forget  not  the  4.  of  thy  mother
SORROWFUL.

1  Esd.  9.  52.  this  day  is  holy  to  Lord ,  be  not  s.  53
Tob.  3.  10.  when  she  heard  these,  she  was  very  s
7.  7*  when  he  heard  Tobit  was  blind  he  was  s.

13.  14.  who  have  been  .?.  for  all  thy  scourges

Eccl.  4.  2.  make  not  an  hungry  soul  s.  nor  provoke
30.  5.  and  when  he  died,  he  was  not  s.

SORRY.

2  Esd.  8.  15.  thy  people,  for  whose  sake  1  am  s.

Job.  9.  4.  and  it  1  tarry  long,  he  will  be  very  4.

Eccl.  13.  5.  he  will  make  thee  bare,  and  not  be  4.

SOVEREIGNTY.

Wisd.  6.  3.  and  4.  is  given  from  the  Highest
SOUGHT.  .

1  Esd.  2.  21.  that  it  may  be  s.  out  in  the  books
5.  39.  was  s.  in  the  register,  and  was  not  found
Tob.  1. 19.  that  I  was  4.  for  to  be  put  to  death
Wisd.  8.  2.  1  loved  her  and  4.  her  out  from  my  youth
Eccl.  26.  27.  a  scold  shall  be  s.  out  to  drive  away

38.  33.  they  shall  not  be  s.  for  in  counsel

39.  17 .  at  a  time  convenient  they  slial  all  be  s.  out
47.  25.  they  s.  out  all  wickedness,  till  vengeance
51.  3.  out  of  the  hand  of  such  as  s.  after  my  life

15.  from  my  youth  up  s.  1  after  her
1  Mac.  7.  1.3.  Assideans  were  the  first  that  s.  peace

-  SOUL.

Wisd.  1 .4.  into  a  malicious  ■?.  wisdom  shall  not  enter
11.  the  mouth  that  belieth,  slayeth  the  s.

4.  11.  was  he  taken  away,  lest  deceit  beguile  his.?.
14.  his  4.  pleased  the  Lord,  therefore  he  hasted

9.  15.  the  corruptible  body  presseth  down  the  s.

10. 16.she  entered  into  the  4.  ot  servantot  the  Lord
15. 11.  his  maker  that  inspired  into  him  an  active  s.

16.  14.  nor  the  .?.  received  up,  cometh  again

17.  8.  promised  to  drive  away  troubles  from  sicks.
Eccl.  1.  30.  lest  thou  bring  dishonour  on  thy  s

2.  1.  my  son.  prepare  thy  s.  tor  temptation
4.  2.  make  not  an  hungry  s.  sorrowful
6.  if  he  curse  thee  in  the  bitterness  of  his  s.

17.  until  she  may  trust  hiss,  and  try  him  by  laws

20.  be  not  ashamed  when  itconcerneth  thy  s.

22.  accept  no  person  against  thy  s.

6.  2.  that  thy  s.  be  not  torn  in  pieces  as  a  bull
7  11  lau°h  no  man  to  scorn  in  bitterness  of  his  s.
17.  humble  thy  s.  greatly,  for  vengeance  is  fire

21.  let  thy  s.  love  a  good  servant,  defraud  him  not
9  2.  give  not  thy  s.  unto  a  woman,  to  set  her  foot

6.  give  not  thy  s.  to  harlots,  that  thou  lose  not

10.  28.  my  son,  glorify  thy  .?.  in  meekness
09.  will  justify  him  thatsinneth  against  Ins  owns.

14.  4.  he  that  gathereth  by  defrauding  his  own  s.
16.  give  and  take,  and  sanctity  thy  s.

16.  if.  for  what  is  my  •?.  among  such  a  number  l
19.  4.  that  sinneth,  shall  offend  against  his  owns
°0  22.  there  is  that  destroyed?  his  own  s.

21.  27.  curseth  Satan,  he  curseth  his  own  s.

28.  h.  whisperer  detileth  his  s,  and  is  hated

50.  2.3.  love  thine  own  s.  and  comfort  thy  heart
32.  23.  in  every  good  work  trust  thine  own  s.

33  31.  thou  hast  need  of  him,  as  ot  thineown  s.
34’  15.  blessed  is  thes.  of  him  that  teareth  the  Lord
'  17.  he  raiseth  up  thes.  and  lightened)  the  eyes
37*  27 •  prove  thy  s.  and  see  what  is  evil  tor  it

28.  nor  hath  every  s.  pleasure  in  every  thing
48.  5-  raise  his  s.  trom  the  place  ot  the  dead

51.  19.  my  s.  hath  wrestled  with  her,  1  was  exact
20.  I  directed  my  s.  to  her,  and  1  found  her
26.  and  let  your  s.  receive  instruction

29.  let  your  s.  rejoice  in  his  mercy
Bar.  2.  18.  but  the  s.  that  is  greatly  vexed

1.  O  Lord,  the  .?.  in  anguish  cneth  to  thee
2  Mac.  6.  30.  but  in  s.  am  well  content  to  suner

IVisd.  3.  1.  the  s.  of  righteous  are  in  hand  ot  God
13  she  shall  have  fruit  in  the  visitation  ot  s.

27.  and  in  all  ages  entering  into  holy  s.


SPE


]1  °6.  they  are  thine,  O  Lord,  thou  lover  of  s.

12.  6.  the  parents  that  killed  s.  destitute  ot  help
14.  11.  are  stumbling-blocks  tp  the  s.  of  men
26.  defiling  of  s.  changing  of  kind,  disorder
17.1.  therefore  unnurtured  s.  have  erred
Fed  2.  17-  will  humble  their  s.  in  Ins  sight
21.  2.  as  the  teeth  of  a  lion,  slaying  4.  of  men  _
5L  24.  what  say  you,  seeing  your  s.  are  thirsty  t
Bar.  2.  17.  whose  s.  are  taken  from  their  bodies
6  7. my  angel  with  you,  I  myself  caring  foryour.?
Van.  3.  64.  O  ye  spirits  and  4.  ot  the  righteous
1  Mac  1  48.  should  make  their  s.  abominable
SOUND.

Wisd.  1.  9.  the  s.  of  his  words  come  to  the  Lord

17.  19.  or  a  terrible  s.  of  stones  cast  down
Eccl.  45.  9-  that  there  might  be  a  .?.  and  noise  made

47  it)  that  the  temple  might  s.  from  morning
‘  SOUNDED.

1  Esd.  5.  62.  and  all  the  people  s.  trumpets
65.  yet  the  multitude  s.  marvellously,  was  heard
Wisd  17.  4.  noises,  as  of  waters,  s.  about  them

18.  10.  there  s.  an  ill-according  cry  of  enemies
Feel  50.16  sons  of  Aaron  s.  the  silver  trumpets

SOUNDS.

Wisd.  19.  18-  notes  change  the  tune,  and  yet  are  4.
Eccl.  50. 18.  with  great  variety  ot  s.  made  melody
SOUNDING.

1  Mac  7.  45.  4.  an  alarm  after  them  with  trumpets
SOUND.

Eccl.  17.  28.  the  4.  in  heart  shall  praise  the  I.ord
00  7.  as  he  that  waketli  one  from  a  4.  sleep
2ff  19.  my  son,  keep  the  flower  ot  thine  age  s.

30.  14.  being  s.  and  strong  ot  constitution
16.  there  is  no  riches  above  a  s.  body,  and  no  joy
S  O  U  R.

0  Mac  14.  30.  such  s.  behaviour  came  not  of  good
SOUTH-SIDE.

1  Mac.  3. 57.  the  cam p^ pitched  on  s.  of  Emmaus
Esd.  9.  31.  for  behold,  I  s.  my  law  in  you


2  Esd.  16.  24.  no  man  left  to  till  earth,  and  s.  it
Eccl.  7.  3.  .?.  noton  furrows  of  unrighteousnes*

26.  20.  s.  it  with  thine  own  seed,  trusting  in
SOWN.

1  Esd.  4. 6.  when  they  reaped  that  which  they  had

SOWETH.

2  Esd.  8.  41.  as  the  husbandman  s.  much  seed
16.  43.  he  that  s.  as  if  he  should  not  reap

SPACE.

Wisd.  16.  3.  these  suffering  penury  for  a  short .?.

2  Mac.  14.  44.  and  a  4.  being  made,  he  tell  down
SPAIN.

1  Mac.  8.  3.  what  they  had  done  in  the  country  of  S.
SPAKE..

1  Esd.  1.  51.  and  look  when  the  Lord  s.  unto  them
3.  4.  young  men  of  the  guard  s.  one  to  anothei
'Job.  14.  8.  things  which  the  prophet  .lonas.?.

Eccl.  13.  22.  he  s.  wisely,  and  could  have  no  place
SPAREST.

Jud.  16. 14.  for  thou  s.  and  they  were  made
SPARE.

1  Esd.  4.  7.  if  he  command  to  5.  they  .?.

Wisd.  2.  10.  ungodly  said,  let  us  not  4.  the  widow
Eccl.  13.  12.  and  he  will  not  s.  to  do  thee  hurt
23.  2.  that  they  s.  me  not  for  mine  ignorances
1  Mac.  13.  5.  that  1  should  .?.  mine  own  lite
SPARED.

1  Esd.  1. 50.  because  he  s.  them  and  his  tabernacle
53.  who  .?.  neither  young  man  nor  maid
Jud.  13.20.  because  thou  hast  not  s.  thyself
Eccl.  16.8.  nor  .?.  he  the  place  where  Lot  sojourned
17  21.  neither  left  nor  forsook  them,  but  a.  them
SPAREDST.

Wisd.  12.  8.  nevertheless  those  thou  s.  as  men
SPAREST.

Wisd.  11.  26.  but  thou  .?.  all,  for  they  are  thme
SPARTA.

1  Mac.  14. 16.  when  heard  at  Rome,  and  as  tar  as  S.
SPEAK.

1  Esd.  3.  5.  let  every  one  of  ns .?.  a  sentence

21.  and  it  maketh  to  s.  all  things  by  talents
4.  1.3.  the  third,  this  was  Zorobabel,  began  to  s.

33.  king  looked,  so  he  began  to  s.  ot  the  truth
Tob.  6.10. 1  w  ill  4.  for  her  that  she  may  be  given  thee

12.  now  hear  me,  and  l  w  ill  s.  to  her  father
7.8.  i.of  those  things  thou  didst  talk  in  the  way

Jud.  11.5.  suffer  thy  handmaid  to .?.  in  thy  presence
Esth.  15.  12.  lie  embraced  her,  and  said,  s.  to  me
Wisd.  6.  9.  to  you  therefore,  O  kings,  do  I  .?.

7.  15.  God  hath  granted  me  to  s.  as  l  would
8. 12.  when  I  4.  they  shall  give  good  ear  tome
10.21.  made  the  tongues  that  cannot  s.  elorjuent

13.  17.  ashamed  to  4.  to  that  which  hath  no  hte
Eccl.  4.23.  refrain  not  to  4.  when  occasion  to  do  good
25.  in  no  wise.?,  against  the  truth
13.  6.  he  will  4.  thee  fair,  and  say,  what  want,  thou  ’
23.  but  if  poor  man  s.  they  say ,  what  fellow  is  this  <

18.  19.  learn  before  thou  4.  and  use  physic  or  evei

19.  14.  and  if  he  have,  that  he  4.  it  not  again

20.  16.  they  that  eat  my  bread  s.  evil  ot  me
20.  for  he  will  not  s.  it  in  due  season

°7.  7.  praise  no  man  before  thou  hearest  lum  4.

32.  3.  4.  thou  that  art  the  elder,  it  becometh  thee
43  27.  we  may  .?.  much,  and  yet  come  short
1  Mac.  9.  55.  so  that  he  could  no  more  4.  any  thing
SPEAKER.

Eccl  °3  8.  the  evil  4.  and  proud  shall  fall  thereby
SPEAKETH.

Wisd.  1.8.  that .?.  unrighteous  things  cannot  be  hid
Eccl.  12.  16.  an  enemy  .?.  sweetly  with  Ins  ups

13.  22.  rich  man  4.  things  not  to  be  spoken,  yet  men
23.  when  rich  man  4.  every  man  holds  Ins  tongue

22.  8  that  telleth  tale  to  a  tool,  4.  to  one  in  slumber
25  9.  he  that  s.  in  ears  of  them  that  will  hear

SPEAKING.

Eccl.  6.  5.  a  fair  s.  tongue  will  increase  greetings
41  03  or  of  4.  again  what  thou  hast  heard
SPEAR.

Jud.  11.  2.  I  would  not  have  lifted  up  my  s.

See  Shield.

SPECIAL.

Tob.  10.  12. 1  commit  my  daughter  to  thee  of  s.  trust
Wisd.  3. 14.  to  him  shall  be  given  the  4.  gilt  ot  faith
SPEECH.  .  ,  .

Jud.  9. 13.  make  my  4.  and  deceit  to  be  their  wounu
Esth.  14.  13.  give  me  eloquent  .?,  in  my  mouth
16.  5.  oftentimes  the  fair  4.  of  those  putin  trust
Eccl.  4.24.  for  by  4.  wisdom  shall  be  known


JBCCl  .  *1.  v  1  .  I  l  l  ’  J  O  •  II  lovi  ■  ~  - ~  "  .

9  17  and  the  wise  ruler  of  the  people  for  Ins  4.
‘17.  5.4.  an  interpreter  of  the  cogitations  thereof
19*.  16.  there  is  one  that  slippeth  in  his  s.

32.8.  let  thy  4.  be  short,  comprehending  much
12.  take  thy  pastime,  but  sin  not  by  proud  4.

0  Mac  15.  39.  so .?.  finely  framed  delighteth  the  ears
SPEECHES.

Wisd.  8.  8.  she  knoweth  the  subtilties  of  s.

Eccl  36  19.  so  an  heart  of  understanding,  false  4.

SPEECHLESS.  l

Wisd.  4.  19.  he  shall  rend  them,  that  they  be  4.

0  Mac  3  29.  lie  lay  4.  without  all  hope  ot  life
"  SPEED.

1  Esd.  6-  10.  those  works  are  done  with  great  4.

8  19.  that  they  should  give  it  him  with  4.

SPEEDILY..  .

Jud.  12.  14.  whatever  pleaseth  him,  I  will  do  s.
Esth.  16.  18.  God  4.  rendering  vengeance  to  him
IVisd.  2.  6.  let  us  s.  use  the  creatures  as  in  youth
4.  11.  yea,  4.  was  he  taken  away,  lest  wickedness
6l  5.  horribly  and  4.  shall  he  come  upon  you
Eccl.  16. 4.  kindred  of  wicked  shall  s.  become  desol.
21.  5.  and  his  judgment  cometh  4.

43  22.  a  present  remedy  ot  all  is  a  mist  com  in -,4.

0  Mac  7  37.  he  would  4.  be  merciful  to  our  nation
SPEND.  ..  .  ...  ...

1  Esd.  4.  21.  lie  sticks  not  to  4.  his  life  with  11s  v me
Tob.  10.7-  which  Raguel  had  sworn  he  should  4.  the
Jud.  11.13.  are  resolved  to  .?..  the  first-fruits  ot  c
12.  4.  I  shall  not  4.  those  things  that  1  ha\e  before
Eccl.  9.  9. 4.  not  thy  money  with  her  at  the  wine
14  4.  for  others  that  shall  .?.  his  goods  1  lotously
SPENDING.  .

Wisd.  13. 12.  and  after  4.  the  refuse  ot  his  worn


ST  A


ST  I


S  T  R  lAFOUKYFHn


SPENT.

1  F.sd.  6.  30.  as  priests  in  Jerus.  signify  to  be  daily  #.
1  Mac.  14.  32.  Simon  #.  much  of  his  own  substance

„  spirit.

1 E#</.  2-  2.  the  Lord  raised  up  the  #.  of  Cyrus
Fob.  .3.  6.  and  command  my  #.  to  be  taken  from  me
6.7.  it  a  devil  or  an  evil  #.  trouble  any  make  smoke

14.  lest  1  die,  for  a  wicked  #.  loveth  her

15.  and  make  thou  no  reckoning  of  the  evil  #.

8.  3.  which  smell  when  the  evil  #.  had  smelled

Jud.  14.  6.  Achior  fell  down,  and  his  s.  failed

16.  14.  thou  didst  send  forth  thy  #.  it  civ*  fed  them
Esth.  15.  8.  then  God  changed  the  #.  of  the  king
Wisd.  1.  5.  the  holy  #.  of  discipline  will  flee  deceit

6.  wisdom  is  a  loving  #.  and  will  not  acquit

7.  tor  the  #.  of  the  Lord  filleth  the  world
2.  3.  and  our  #.  shall  vanish  as  the  soft  air

5.  3.  they  repenting  and  groaning  for  anguish  of  #.
7*7.1  called  on  God,  the  #.  of  wisdom  came  to  me
22.  for  in  her  is  an  understanding  #.  holy
9. 17.  except  thou  seno  thy  Holy  S.  from  above
12. 1.  tor  thine  incorruptible  #.  in  all  things

15.  11.  he  knew  not  him  that  breathed  in  a  living  #,

16.  he  that  borrowed  his  own  #.  fashioned  them

16.  14.  the  #.  when  gone  forth,  returneth  not
Eccl.  34.  13.  the  #.  of  those  that  fear  the  Lord

38.  23.  when  his  #.  is  departed  from  him

39.  6.  shall  be  filled  with  the  #.  of  understanding
48.  12.  and  Eliseus  was  filled  with  his  #.

24.  he  saw  by  an  excellent  #.  what  should  come
Bar.  3.  1.  O  Lord,  the  troubled  #.  crieth  unto  thee
Sus.  45.  raised  up  the  holy  #.  of  a  young  vouth
Bel  36.  through  the  vehemency  of  his  #.  set  him

1  Mac.  13.  7.  the  people  heard,  their  #.  revived

SPIRITS.

Wisd.  7.  23.  free  from  care,  pure  and  most  subtile  f.
SPI  RITUAL.

Wisd.  14. 12.  idols  was  beginning  of  s.  fornication
SPIT.

Eccl.  28.  12.  if  thon  s.  on  it,  it  shall  be  quenched

2  Mac.  6.  19.  he  s.  it  forth,  and  came  to  torment

SPITTLE.

Eccl.  26.  22.  an  harlot  shall  be  accounted  as  s.
SPOIL.

1  Esd.  4.  5.  as  well  the #.  as  all  the  things  else
Tab.  .3.  4.  thou  hast  delivered  us  for  a  s.

1  Mac.  3.20.  to  destroy  us  and  our  wives  and  to  s.  us
SPOI LED.

1  Esd.  4.  24.  when  he  hath  stolen,  s.  and  robbed
Wisd.  10.  20.  the  righteous  s.  the  ungodly
Eccl.  .36.  25.  where  no  hedge  is,  the  possession  is  s.
48. 15.  till  they  were  s.  and  carried  out  of  their  land
Bar.  6.  18.  lest  their  gods  be  s.  with  robbers

1  Mac.  6.  24.  they  slew,  and  #.  our  inheritance

2  Mac.  9.  16.  holy  temple,  which  before  he  had  #

SPOILS.

1  Mac.  1.  3.  Alexander  took  s.  of  many  nations

2  Mac.  8.  28.  had  given  part  of  s.  to  the  maimed

30.  divided  among  themselves  many  .f.  more,

and  made  the  widows  and  the  aged  also
equal  in  s.

SPOKEN.

1  Esd.  1.  28.  the  words  s.  by  the  mouth  of  the  Lord

5.  17.  who  had  s.  of  the  strength  of  wine
4.  13.  then  the  third,  who  had  s.  of  women

9.  10.  like  as  thou  hast  s.  so  will  we  do

Eccl.  13.  22.  he  speaketh  things  not  to  be  s.

38.  17.  weep  a  day  or  two,  lest  thou  be  evil  s.  of
33.  they  shall  not  be  found  where  parables  are  s.
Bar.  2.  20.  as  thou  hast  s.  by  thy  servants
Sus.  47.  what  mean  these  words  that  thou  hast  s.  ?
Bel  9.  for  he  hath  s.  blasphemy  against  Bel

1  Mac.  1.  24.  a  great  massacre,  and  s.  very  proudly

2  Mac.  1.  29.  plant  thy  people,  as  Moses  hath  #.
3.34.  when  they  had  s.  these  words,  they  appeared

6.  17.  let  this  we  have  s.  be  for  a  warning  to  us
9. 5.  as  soon  as  he  had  #.  these  words  a  pain  came  on

SPORT.

1  Esd.  1.  51.  they  made  a  #.  of  his  prophets
Eccl  27.  13.  their  s.  is  in  the  wantonness  of  sin

SPOT.

Wisd.  13.  14.  and  coverin';  every  s.  therein
•  SPOTTED.

Wisd.  15.  4.  nor  any  imaee  s.  with  divers  colours
SPOUSE.

Wisd.  8.  2.  I  loved  her,  I  desired  to  make  her  my  #
SPOUTS.

2  Mac.  14.  45.  his  blood  gushed  out  like  s.  of  water

SPREAD.

1  Esd.  9.  11.  seeing  our  sin  in  these  things  is  s.  far
Jud.  4.  11.  s.  out  their  sackcloth  before  the  Lord
Wisd.  17.  21.  over  them  was  #.  an  heavy  night

1  Mac.  4.  51.  they  s.  out  the  vails,  and  finished  works

2  Mac.  8.  7.  his  manliness  was  s.  every  where

SPREADING.

Wisd.  17.  18.  a  noise  of  birds  among  s.  branches
SPRING.

Wisd.  2.  7.  and  let  no  flower  of  the  s.  pass  by  us
SPRINGS.

2  Esd.  4.  7.  how  many  s.  are  in  the  beginning  of  the
deep,  or  how  many  s.  are  above  the  firmament

1.3.  47.  tire  Highest  shall  stay  the  s.  of  the  stream

SPRINKLE.

2  Mac.  1 .21.  he  commanded  the  priests  to  s.  the  wood

SPRINKLED.

2  Mac.  10.  25.  they  s.  earth  upon  their  heads
SPY.

Eccl.  11.  30.  like  as  a  #.  watcheth  he  for  thy  fall
SPIES.

1  Mac.  12.  26.  he  sent  s.  also  to  their  tents
SQUARE.

1  Mac.  10.  11.  to  build  the  walls  with  s.  stones
.  ST  A  BUSHED.

Eccl.  22.  16.  so  the  heart  that  is  s.  by  counsel
STAFF.

Tob.  5.  17.  is  he  not  the  #.  of  our  hand  in  going  ?

Be! 26.  1  will  slay  the  dragon  without  sword  or
STAI  N .

Eccl.  22.  10.  do  s.  the  nobility  of  their  kindred

3.3.  22.  leave  not  a  #.  in  thine  honour

47. 20.  thou  didst.?,  thy  honour  and  pollute  thy  seed
i  Mac.  6.  25.  and  I  shall  get  a  s.  to  my  old  age


STAINED.

2  Mac.  6. 19.  to  live  s.  with  such  abomination
STAKES.

Eccl.  43.  19.  it  lieth  on  the  top  of  sharp  s.
STALLION.

Eccl.  33.  6.  a  s.  horse  is  as  a  mocking  friend
STAMP.

1  Mac.  15.  6.  also  to  coin  money  with  thine  own  s.
STAND.

1  Esd.  8.  90.  we  cannot  s.  any  longer  before  thee
Jud.  6.  4.  footsteps  shall  not  be  able  to  s.  before  us
8.  12.  that  s.  instead  of  God  amongst  men
33.  you  shall  #.  this  night  in  the  gate
Wisd.  5.  2.3.  a  mighty  wind  shall  s.  up  against  them
6.  7.  nor  shall  he#.  in  awe  of  any  man’s  greatness
12. 12.  or  who  shall  come  to  s.  against  thee  f
Eccl.  12. 12.  set  him  not  by,  lest  he  s.  in  thy  place

21.2.3.  he  that  is  well  nurtured  will  s.  without
22.  18.  pales  on  an  high  place  will  never.?,  against

the  wind, so  a  fearful  heart  cannot  #.  against  fear
37.  1.3.  let  the  counsel  of  thine  own  heart  s.

40.25.  gold  and  silver  make  the  foot  s.  sure

4.3.  10.  they  will  s.  in  their  order,  and  not  faint
44.  12.  their  seed  .?.  fast,  and  their  children

1  Mac.  .3. 5.3.  how  shal  I  we  be  able  to  s.  against  them  f
10.  72.  thy  foot  is  not  able  to  s.  before  our  face  ?

2  Mac.  2.  .30.  to  s.  on  every  point  and  go  over  things

STAN  DE  I  II.

Jud.  9.  11.  for  thy  power  s.  not  in  multitude

that  which  s.  in  length  of  time

1  Mac.  9.  44.  it  #.  not  with  us  fo-day,  as  in  time  past

.  STANDING.

1 Esd.  1.  5.  s.  in  the  temple  according  to  dignity
Jud- 13.  4.  then  Judith  s.  by  his  bed,  said  in  heart,
Wisd.  4.4.  yet  #.  not  fast,  they  shall  be  shaken
10.  7 .  and  a  s.  pil lar  of  salt  is  a  monument
18.  16.  and  s.  up,  tilled  all  things  with  death

2.3.  s.  between,  he  stayed  the  wrath  and  parted
011s.  48.  so  he  #.  in  the  midst  of  them,  said

2  Mac.  14.  45.  he  ran  through  and  s.  on  a  steep  rock

STAR.

Eccl.  50.  6.  he  was  as  the  morning  s.  in  a  cloud
STARS.

Wisd.  7. 19.  the  circuits  of  years  and  positions  off.
29.  she  is  above  all  the  order  of#.

10.  17.  and  a  light  ot  s.  in  the  night  season
1.3.  2.  but  deemed  it  swift  air,  or  the  circle  of  the#
17.  5.  nor  bright  flames  of#,  endure  to  lighten

Eccl.  43.  9.  the  beauty  of  heaven,  the  glory  of  the  #.
44.21.  that  he  would  exalt  his  seed  as  the  #.

Bar.  .3.  .34.  the  #.  shined  in  their  watches  and  rejoiced

6.  60.  for  the  sun,  moon,  and  #.  are  obedient
Dan.  .3. 1.3.  multiply  their  seed  as  the#,  of  heaven

41.  O  ye  #.  of  heaven,  bless  ye  the  Lord
2  Mac.  9.  10.  thought  he  could  reach  to  the  #.
STATE.

2  Mac.  4.  6.  was  impossible  #.  should  continue  quiet
9.  24.  they  knowing  to  whom  the  #.  was  left

11.  19.  if  you  keep  yourselves  loyal  to  the  #

14.  26.  was  not  well  affected  towards  the  #.

STATELINESS.

Jud.  9.  10.  break  down  their  #.  by  hand  of  a  woman
STAIURE.

Bar.  3.  26.  the  giants,  that  were  of  so  great  #.
STATUTE.

2  Mac.  10. 8.  they  ordained  also  by  a  common  t.

STATUTES.

2  Esd.  1.24.  will  give  my  name  that  they  may  keep#.
7-  11.  and  when  Adam  transgressed  my  #.

1.3.  42.  that  they  might  there  keep  their  #.

Eccl.  45.  17.  he  gave  authority  in  #.  of  judgments

^  1  , 1  \  .

1  Mac.  2.  43.  joined  and  were  a  #.  unto  them
STAYED.

Wisd.  18.  2.3.  standing  between,  he  #.  the  wrath
Eccl.  15.  4.  he  shall  be  #.  upon  her,  and  not  moved
STAYETH.

Tob.  10.  4.  my  son  is  dead  seeing  he  #.  long
STEAD.

I. Esd.  1.  .34.  people  made  him  king  in  #.  of  .Tosias
Job.  1.21.  Sarchedonus  his  son  reigned  in  his  #.

Jud.  8.  12.  that  stand  in  #.  of  God  among  men
Esth.  14.  2.  in  #.  of  precious  ointments,  ashes
Wisd.  5.  18.  put  on  true  judgment  in#,  of  an  helmet

7.  10.  and  1  choose  to  have  her  in  #.  of  light
11.6.  in  #.  of  a  fountain  of  a  perpetual  running
18.  .3.  in  #.  whereof  thou  gavest  them  a  pillar

Eccl.  4. 10.  be  in  #.  of  a  husband  to  their  mothei
6. 1.  in  s.  of  a  friend  become  not  an  enemy
17.  27.  in  #.  of  them  which  live  and  give  thanks
Bar.  3.  19.  and  others  are  come  up  in  their  #.

1  Mac.  3.  1.  then  Maccabeus  rose  up  in  his  #.

II.  34.  in  #.  of  payments  the  king  received
14. 17.  that  Simon  was  made  high  priest  in  his  #.

STEAL.

1  Esd.  4.  23.  a  man  goeth  his  way  to  rob  and  to#.

S  T  ED  FA  ST.

Esth.  13.  3.  for  his  constant  good  will  and  #.  fidelity
Wisd.  7 .23.  kind  to  man,  #.  sure,  free  from  care
Eccl.  5. 10.  be  #.  in  thy  understanding  and  thy  word
11.  20.  be  #.  in  thy  covenant,  and  be  conversant
22.  2.3.  abide  s.  to  him  in  time  of  his  trouble

1  Mac.  1.3.  37.  we  are  ready  to  make  a  #.  peace

STEEP.

2  Mac.  14.  45.  he  ran,  and  standing  upon  a  #.  rock

STEP.

Eccl.  19. 18.  the  fear  of  Lord  is  first  #.  to  be  accepted
STEPS.

Eccl.  6.  36.  let  thy  foot  wear  the  #.  of  his  door
42. 19.  he  revealeth  the  #.  of  hidden  things
STEWARDS.

1  Esd.  8.  67.  the  commandments  to  the  king’s  S.
STICK  ETH.

Eccl.  19.  12.  as  an  arrow  that  #.  in  a  man’s  thigh
27. 2.  as  a  nail  #.  fast  between  the  joining  of  stones
STICKS.

1  Esd.  4.  21.  he  #.  not  to  spend  his  life  with  his  wife

STIFF..

Bar.  2.  30.  not  hear,  because  it  is  a  #. -necked  people

3.3.  and  they  shall  return  from  their  #.  neck

STIFFLY.

2  Esd.  2.  47.  stood  so  #.  for  the  name  of  the  Lord


....  .  STINGS.

If  tsd.  16. 5.  perished  with  the  #.  of  crooked  serpents
„  STINK.

2  Mac.  9.  10.  no  man  could  endure  to  carry  for  his#.
STIR.

2  Mac.  15.  17.  were  able  to  #.  them  up  to  valour
STIRRED.

1  wllose  «»inds  were  #.  up  thereto

1  Mac.  3.  49.  and  the  N  azarites  they#,  up

2  Jfiac.  15.  10.  when  he  had  #.  up  their  minds

stirring:

2  Mac.  7.  21.  #.  up  her  womanish  thoughts
STOCK.

I  Esd.  5.  37.  neither  could  they  shew  their#.
lob.  5.  13.  then  I  obit  said,  thou  art  of  an  honest
and  good  #.  my  brother,  thou  art  of  a  good  #.

1  Mac.  12.  21.  that  they  are  of  the  #.  of  Abraham

2  Mac.  1.  10.  was  of  the  #.  of  the  anointed  priests
STOCKS.

Wisd.  14.  21.  men  did  ascribe  unto  stones  and  s.
STOLE.

-  Mac.  4.  32.  Menelaus  #.  certain  vessels  of  gold
„  SIOI.EN.

*r  a  ^  4  - -L  w*1<rn  ^,e  hath  .».  spoiled,  and  robbed
Job.  2.  13.  I  said  to  her,  is  it  not  #.  ?  render  it  to  the
owneis,  roi  it  is  not  lawful  to  eat  any  thin17  s
1  71  f  m  ^  S 1  O  M  A  0 1 1 .

1  Mac .  7.  21.  with  a  manly  s.  she  said  unto  them

Tjr  J  .  SION  K.

\Eisd.\  1 .  4 .  thirst,  was  quenched  out  of  the  hard  #.
bccl.o.  21.  she  will  lie  upon  him  as  a  mighty  s.

22.  1.  a  slothful  man  is  compared  to  a  filthy  #.  and
every  one  will  hiss  him  out  to  his
disgrace

2°.  whoso  casteth  a  #.  at  the  birds,  frayeth  them

29.  10.  and  let  it  not  rust  under  a  #.  to  be  lost

,47.  4- he  lifted  up  his  hand  with  the  #.  in  the  sling
1  Mac.  2.  36.  neither  cast  they  a  s.  at  them  s

10.  73.  where  is  neither  #.  nor  flint,  nor  place
SIGN  E-BOW.

Wisd.  5.22.  hail-stones  shal  I  be  cast  as  out  of  a  #

.  .  STONES.

1  Esd.  6.9.  building  an  house  of  hewn  and  costlv#
Job.  1.3.  17.  streets  shall  be  paved  with  #.  of  Opfdr
Jud.  1.  2.  built  walls  round  about  of#,  hewn
ilr-ly  from  coming  up  bv  casting  of  #.  against  them
t'  ;  •  19.  or  a  terrible  sound  of  #.  cast  down

Eccl.2\.  10.  the  way  of  sinners  is  made  plain  with  #.
27.  2.  as  a  nail  sticketh  between  joinings  of  #

32.  20.  and  stumble  not  among  the  #.

1  Mac.  4.4.3.  who  bare  out  the  defiled  #.

5.  47.  they  stopped  up  the  gates  with#.

6.  51.  with  instruments  to  cast  fil  e  and  #.
iO.  H.  to  build  Sion  round  about  with  square  #

2  Mac.  1.  16.  they  threw  #.  like  thunderbolts

31.  the  water  to  be  poured  on  the  great  #.

4.  41.  some  of  them  caught  #.  some  clubs
10.  3.  striking  #.  they  took  fire  out  of  them

.Stood.

1  Esd.  5.  59.  the  priests  #.  arrayed  in  vestments
9.  46.  he  opened  the  law,  they  #.  all  straight  up
EsthAbX).  she  #.before  the  king  who  sat  on  his  throne
Wisd.  10.  11.  she  #.  by  him,  and  made  him  rich

11.3.  they  #.  against  their  enemies,  were  avenged

18.  16.  it  touched  heaven,  but#,  upon  the  earth
21.  the  blameless  man  #.  forth  to  defend  them

19.  7.  where  water#,  before,  dry  land  appeared
Eccl.  39.  17.  at  Ins  commandment  the  waters  #

45.  2.  so  that  hie  enemies  #.  in  fear  of  him

23.  Phinees  #.  up  with  good  courage  of  heart

46.  .3.  who  before  him  so  #.  to  it  ?  the  Lord  brought
48. 1.  then  #.  up  Elias  the  prophet  as  fire

50. 12.  he  himself#,  by  the  hearth  of  the  altar
Dan.  3.  2.  then  Azarias  #.  up  and  prayed  thus
•Sus.  34.  two  eiders  #.  up  in  the  midst  of  the  people

1  Mac.  7.  36.  the  priests  entered  and  #.  before  altar

2  Mac.  3.  26.  two  young  men  #.  by  him  on  either  side

S 1 OO  LS.

2  Mac.  14.  21.  when  #.  were  set  for  either  of  them
STOOPING.

Bar.  2. 18.  the  soul  that  is  vexed  and  goeth  #

STOP.

Jud.  4.  7-  it  was  easy  to  #.  them  that  would  come  up
Esth.  14.  9.  #.  the  mouth  of  them  that  praise  thee
Eccl.  20.  29.  #.  his  mouth  that  he  cannot  reprove
14.  their  brawls  make  one  #.  his  ears
2  Mac.  14.  36.  and  #.  every  unrighteous  mouth
STOPPED.

Jud.  16.  4.  the  multitude  whereof#,  the  torrents

1  Mac.  2.  36.  nor  #.  the  places  where  they  lay  hid
9.  55.  Alcinnis  was  plagued,  his  mouth  was  #.

2  Mac.  2.  5.  he  laid  altar  of  incense  and  #.  the  dooi
STORAX.

Eccl.  24.  15.  a  pleasant  odour  like  sweet#

STORE.

Tob.  7.  8.  they  set  #.  of  meat  on  the  table

1  Mac.  6.  6.  #.  of  spoils  which  they  had  gotten
53.  they  had  eaten  up  the  residue  of  the  #

STORE-HOUSES.

Eccl.  29.  12.  shut  up  alms  in  thy  #.  it  shall  deliver
STORM,  S.

Wisd.  5. 14.  like  froth  driven  away  with  the  #

2.3.  a  wind  like  a#,  shall  blow  them  away
Dan.  3.46.0  ye  dews  and  #.  of  snow,  bless  ye  the  I  ri

SIORMED.  *

2  Mac.  13.  25.  they  #.  because  they  would  make

STORY.

2  Mac.  2.  24.  to  look  into  the  narrations  of  the  #

30.  belonged)  to  the  first  author  of  the  #.

32.  here  then  will  we  begin  the  #.  foolish  to  make

a  long  prologue,  and  to  be  short  in  the  #.  itself
15.  38.  have  done  well,  and  as  is  fitting  the  #

39.  delighteth  the  ears  of  them  that  read  the  #
STORIES.  ‘

1  Esd.  1.  33.  in  the  book  of  the  #.  of  the  kings
STORY-WRITER.

1  Esd.  2. 17.  thy  servant  Rathumus  the  #.
STRAIGHT.

Jud.  13.  20.  walking  a  #.  way  before  our  God
Bar.  6.  27.  nor  can  they  make  themselves  ,<•

STRAIT.

Jud.  4.  7.  because  the  passage  was  #.  t„,  yo  met?

2  A  tSfifi


APOCKYPHa.j


ST  R


SUB


SUN


STRAIT  LY.

IVisd.  17.  16.  whosoever  tell  down  was  #.  kept
Eccl  26  10.  keep  her  in  #.  lest  she  abuse  herself
ST  R  ATTN  ESS.

2  Mac.  12.  21.  by  reason  of  the  #.  of  all  the  places

STRAITS.

Jud.  14.  11.  went  forth  to  the  #.  of  the  mountain
ST  RAKE.

Tob.  11.  11.  he  #.  off  the  gall  on  his  father’s  eyes
STRANGE.

1  Esd.  8.69.  have  not  put  away  #.  people  of  the  land

9.  9.  separate  yourselves  from  the#.  women

12.  let  all  that  have  #.  wives  come  at  the  time
36.  these  had  taken  #.  wives,  and  put  them  away

2  Esd.  1.  6.  and  they  have  offered  unto  #.  gods
Tob.  4.  12.  and  take  not  a  s.  woman  to  wife
IVisd.  14.23.  or  made  revel  lings  of  #.  rites

16.  2.  thou  preparedst  for  them  meat  of  a  s.  taste

3.  might  be  made  partakers  of  at.  taste

16.  with  #.  showers  were  they  persecuted

17.  3.  they  were  ti  .ubled  with  s.  apparitions
19.  5.  but  they  might  lind  a  s.  death

8.  seeing  thy  marvellous  s.  wonders

10.  while  they  sojourned  in  the  s.  land

Eccl.  10.  1.3.  Lord  brought  on  them  s.  calamities
29.  18.  so  that  they  wandered  among  s.  nations
36.  3.  lift  up  thy  hand  against  the  s.  nations

39.  4.  he  will  travel  through  s.  countries

43.  25.  for  therein  be  s.  and  wondrous  works
Bar.  1.  22.  to  serve  #.  gods,  and  to  do  evil  before  L.

3.  10.  that  thou  art  waxen  old  in  a  s.  country

4.  15.  a  shameless  nation,  and  of  a  s.  language

1  Mac.  1.  38.  and  became  s.  to  those  born  in  her

44.  that  they  should  follow  the  s.  laws

6.  13.  I  perish  through  great  grief  in  a  s.  land
15.  27.  brake  covenants  and  became  s.  unto  him

2  Mac.  5.  9.  thus  he  perished  in  a  s.  land

6.  24.  that  he  were  now  gone  to  a  s.  religion

9.  6.  tormented  men’s  bowels  with  s.  torments

28.  he  died  a  miserable  death  in  a  s.  country

STRANGER.

Esth.  16.  10.  A  man  as  a  #.  received  of  us
Eccl.  8.  18.  do  not  secret  things  before  a  #.

11.34.  receive  a  s.  into  thy  house,  he  will  turn

29.  26.  come,  thou  s.  furnish  a  table  and  feed  me
27  give  place,  thou  s.  to  an  honourable  man
STRANGERS.

1  Esd.  8.  83.  a  land  polluted  with  the  pollutions  of  s.
Wisd.  19.  1.3.  used  a  hateful  behaviour  towards  s.

15.  because  they  used  s.  not  friendly
Eccl.  26.  19.  and  give  not  thy  strength  to  s.

45.  18.  s.  conspired  together  against  him
Bar.  6.  5.  that  ye  in  no  wise  be  like  to  #.

1  Mac.  1.  38.  the  city  was  made  an  habitation  of  s.

2.  7.  the  sanctuary  delivered  into  the  hand  of  s.

3.  36.  he  should  place  #.  in  all  their  quarters

4.  12.  then  the  s.  lift  up  their  eyes  and  saw  them

22.  they  fled  every  one  into  the  land  of  s.

26.  all  the  s.  that  had  escaped  came  and  told
30.  gavest  hosts  of  s.  into  the  hands  of  Jonathan

2  Mac.  10.5.  the  day  that  s.  profaned  the  temple

STRANGENESS.

Wisd.  5.  2.  shall  be  amazed  at  the  s.  of  his  salvation
ST  RANG  LED.

Tob.  2.  3.  he  said,  father,  one  of  our  nation  is#.

3.  8.  (lost  not  know  that  thou  hast  s.  thy  husbands  >

10.  so  that  she  thought  to  have  s.  herself
Est-h.  12.  3.  having  confessed  it  they  were  s.

STRAYING.

Eccl.  6.  2.  soul  not  torn  in  pieces,  as  a  bull  s.  alone
STREAM.

IVisd.  19.  7.  and  out  of  the  violent  s.  a  green  field
STREAMED.

Dan.  3.  24.  so  that  the  flame  s.  forth  above
STREET.

2  Mac.  10.  2.  the  altars  had  built  in  the  open  s.

STREETS.

Eccl.  9.  7.  look  not  round  about  thee  in  the  s.

23.  21.  this  man  shall  be  punished  in  the  s.

49.  6.  they  burnt  chosen  city  and  made  s.  desolate

1  Mac.  1 .  55.  and  they  burnt  incense  in  the  s.

2.  9.  her  infants  are  slain  in  the  s.

14.  9.  the  ancient  men  sat  all  in  the  s.

2  Mac.  3.  19.  the  women  abounded  in  the  s.

STRENGTH.

1  Esd.  3.  17.  who  had  spoken  of  the  s.  of  wine

4.  1.  that  had  spoken  of  the  s.  of  the  king

2.  O  ye  men,  do  not  men  excel  in  s.  ?

40,  and  she  is  the  s.  and  majesty  of  all  ages

Wisd.  2.  11.  let  our  s.  be  the  law  of  justice

11.  21.  thou  canstshew  thy  great  s.  at  all  times
12. 17.  men  will  not  believe  thou  shewedst  thy  s.

16.  16.  were  scourged  by  the  s.  of  thine  arm

23.  but  this  again  did  even  forget  his  own  s.

24.  increaseth  his  s.  against  the  unrighteous,  and
abateth  his  #.  for  benefit  of  them  that  trust  in  thee

18.  22.  so  he  overcame,  not  with  s  of  body
Eccl.  3.  13.  when  thou  art  in  thy  full  s.

21.  nor  search  things  that  are  above  thy  s.

5.  2.  follow  not  thine  own  mind,  and  thy  #.

7.  30.  love  him  that  made  thee  with  all  thy  s.

16.  7.  who  fell  away  in  #.  of  their  foolishness

17.  3.  he  endued  them  with  ,v.  by  themselves

18.  5.  who  shall  number  the  s.  of  his  majesty  ?

26.  19.  my  son,  give  not  thy  #.  to  strangers
28.  10.  and  as  a  man’s  s.  is,  so  is  his  wrath
31. 30.  drunkenness  diminished)  s.  maketh  wounds
34. 15.  to  whom  doth  he  look  ?  and  who  is  his  s.  ?
38.  18.  the  heaviness  of  the  heart  breaketh  s.

30.  he  boweth  down  his  s.  before  his  feet

40.  26.  riches  and  s.  lift  up  the  heart,  but  the  fear

41.  2.  death  is  acceptable  to  him  whose  s.  faileth
43.  30.  when  you  exalt  him,  put  forth  all  your  #.
46.6.  that  the  nations  might  know  all  theirs.  _

9.  the  Lord  gave#.  also  to  Caleb,  which  remained
Bar.  1.  12.  the  Lord  will  give  11s  #.and  lighten  our
eyes,  and  we  shall  live  under  N  abuchodonosor

3.  14.  learn  where  is  wisdom,  where  is  s.

Dan.  3.  21.  and  let  their  #.  be  broken
1  Mac.  2.  49.  now  hatli  pride  and  rebuke  gotten  s

*.  19.  but  s.  cometh  from  heaven
35.  to  destroy  and  root  out  the  s.  of  Israel

690


1  Mac.  4.  32.  cause  boldness  of  their  #.  to  fall  away
6.  62.  but  when  he  saw  the  #.  of  the  place

2  Mac.  12.  28.  who  breaketh  the  s.  of  his  enemies
STRENGTHEN.

1  Esd.  7.  15.  to  s.  their  hands  in  works  of  the  Lord
Jud.  13.  7.  #.  me,  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,  this  day
Mac.  9.  50.  these  did  he  s.  with  high  walls
10.  23.  in  making  amity  with  lews  to  s.  himself
STRENGTHENED.

Eccl.  45.  8.  he  s.  him  with  rich  garments
1  Mac.  2.  17-  thou  arts,  with  sons  and  brethren
14.  14.  he  s.  all  those  of  his  people  brought  low
STRENGTHEN  1NG.

1  Mac.  6.  18.  he  sought  the  s.  of  the  heathen
STRETCH.

Eccl.  7.  32.  and  s.  thine  hand  to  the  poor
31.  14.  s.  not  thy  hand  whithersoever  it  looketh
STRETCHED.

Eccl.  4.31.  let  not  thy  hand  be  s.  out  to  receive
24.  16.  as  the  turpentine  tree  I  s.  out  branches
46.  2.  he  s.  out  his  sword  against  the  cities
48.  20.  they  s.  out  their  hands  toward  him

50.  15.  he  s.  out  his  hand  to  the  cup,  and  poured

51.  19.  I  s.  forth  my  hands  to  the  heaven  above
STRETCH  ETH.

1  Esd.  6.  33.  that  s.  out  his  hand  to  hinder  house
STRETCHING.

1  Esd.  8.  73.  then  s.  forth  my  hands  to  the  Lord
STREWED.

Bel  14.  to  bring  ashes,  those  they  s.  thro’  the  temple
STRICKEN.

Esth.  14.  8.  they  have  s.  hands  with  their  idols
Wisd.  19.  17.  even  with  blindness  were  these  s.

2  Mac.  15.  24.  let  those  be  #.  with  terror  that  come
STRIFE.

Eccl.  19.  6.  that  can  rule  his  tongue,  live  without  s.

27.  15.  the  s.  of  the  proud  is  blood-shedding

28.  8.  abstain  from  s.  and  thou  shalt  diminish  thy

sins,  for  a  furious  man  will  kindle  s.
40.  5.  anger  and  s.  do  change  his  knowledge
9.  death  and  blood,  s.  and  sword  happen  to  all
STRIKING.

2  Mac.  10.  3.  s.  stones,  they  took  fire  out  of  them
STRIPE.

Jud.  9. 13.  make  my  deceit  to  be  their  wound  and  s.
STRIPES.

Eccl.  22.  6.  s.  and  correction  are  never  out  of  time
2  Mac.  3.  26.  who  gave  him  many  sore/.

6.  30.  but  when  he  was  ready  to  die  with  s.
STRIVE.

Eccl.  4.  28.  s.  for  the.  truth  unto  death,  the  Lord
8.  1.  s.  not  with  a  mighty  man  lest  thou  fall
3.  s.  not  with  a  man  that  is  full  of  tongue
11.9.  s.  not  in  a  matter  that  concerneth  thee  not
2  Mac.  7.  19.  that  takest  in  hand  to  s.  against  God
STRIVING.

Wisd.  4.  2.  got  victory,  s.  for  undefiled  rewards
STROKE,  S.

Wisd.  5.  1 1 .  light  air  beaten  wit<h  the  #.  of  her  wings
Eccl.  27  .  25.  a  deceitful  s.  shall  make  wounds
28.  17.  the  s.  of  the  whip,  the  s.  of  the  tongue
39.  28.  spirits  in  their  fury  lay  on  sore  s.

2  Mac.  14.  43.  but  missing  his  s.  through  haste
S'l  RUNG.

1  Esd.  3.  18.  O  ye  men,  how  exceeding  s.  is  wine  !
4.  32.  how  can  it  be  but  women  should  be  s.  ?

34.  O  ye  men,  are  not  women  s.  ?  great  is  the  earth

38.  as  for  truth,  it  endureth  and  is  always  s.

6.  14.  was  budded  by  a  king  of  Israel  great  and  #.
8.  85.  that  ye  may  be  s.  and  eat  the  good  things
Wisd.  14.  16.  an  ungodly  custom  grown  s.

Eccl.  6.  14.  a  faithful  friend  is  a  s.  defence
24.  24.  faint  not  to  be  s.  in  the  Lord

28.  14.  s.  cities  hath  it  pulled  down

29.  13.  better  than  a  mighty  shield  and  s.  spear

30.  14.  being  sound  and  s.  of  constitution
15.  and  a  s.  body  is  above  infinite  wealth

Bar.  6.  58.  they  that  are  s.  do  take  and  go  away

1  Mac.  1.2.  made  many  wars,  and  w  on  many  s.  holds
19.  thus  they  got  the  s.  cities  in  land  of  Egypt

33.  then  budded  they  the  city  of  David  with  a
great  and  s.  wall,  and  made  it  a  s.  hold  for  them

3.  45.  sanctuary  trodden,  and  aliens  kept  s.  hold

2  Mac.  1.  24.  O  Lord  God,  who  art  fearful  and  s.
11.5.  drew  near  to  Bethsura,  which  was  a  s.  town
12.  27.  Ephron,  a  s.  city,  wherein  Lysias  abode

STRONGER.

1  Esd.  4.  35.  great  is  the  truth,  and  s.  than  all
Wisd.  10.  12.  know  that  godliness  is  s.  than  all
Eccl.  28.  10.  and  the  s.  they  are  which  contend
Bus.  39.  for  he  was  s.  than  we  and  leaped  out
STRONGEST.

1  Esd.  3.  10.  wine  is  the  s.  ||  11.  the  king  is  s.

12.  women  are  s.  ||  24.  O  y  e  men,  is  not  wine  the  s.  ?
STRONGLY.

2  Mac.  10.  17.  assaulting  them  s.  they  won  holds

STRUCK.

1  Esd.  4.  30.  she  s.  the  king  with  her  left  hand

2  Mac.  1.  16.  they  threw  stones  and  s.  the  captain

STUBBLE.

Wisd.  3.  7.  they  shall  shine  as  sparks  among  s,
STUBBORN.

Eccl.  3.  26.  a  s.  heart  shall  fare  evil  at  last

30.  12.  lest  he  wax  s.  and  be  disobedient  to  thee

STUFF.

Jud.  15.  11.  plate,  beds,  vessels,  and  all  his  s.
STUMBLE.

Eccl.  13.  23.  if  he  s.  they  will  help  to  overthrow
25.  21.  s.  not  at  the  beauty  of  a  woman
32.  20.  and  s.  not  among  the  stones
STUMBLED.

Tob.  11  10.  Tobit  went  toward  the  door  and  s.
STUMBLING.

Wisd.  14.  11.  and  #.  blocks  to  the  souls  of  men
Eccl.  7.  6.  lay  a  #.  b.ock  in  way  of  thy  uprightness

31.  7.  it  is  a  s.  block  to  them  that  sacrifice

34.  16.  he  is  a  preservation  from  s.  and  a  help

39.  24.  so  are  they  s.  blocks  to  the  wicked

SUBDUED.

Wisd.  18.  22.  with  a  word  s.  lie  him  that  punished
SUBJECT.

Wisd.  1.  4.  nor  dwell  in  the  body  that  is  s.  to  sin


W>sd.  8.  14.  and  the  nations  shall  be  s.  unto  me
SUBJECTION.

Eccl.  47.  19.  by  thy  hotly  thou  wast  brought  into  s.
48.  12.  neither  could  any  bring  him  into  s.
SUBJECTS.

1  Esd.  3.  1.  Darius  made  a  great  feast  to  all  his  s.
Esth.  13.2.  I  purposed  to  settle  my  s.  in  quiet

SUBMISSLY.

Eccl.  29.  5.  for  neighbour’s  money  he  will  speak  s.
SUBMITTED.

2  Mac.  13.  23.  #.  and  sw are  to  all  equal  conditions

SUBSTANCE.

Tob.  4.7.  give  alms  of  thy  #.  and  when  thou  givest
14.  1.3.  he  inherited  their  #.  and  his  fathers
Eccl.  9.  2.  to  a  woman,  to  set  her  foot  on  thy  s.
SUB1ILE.

Wisd.  7.  23. kind  toman,  pure  and  most#.  spirits
Ecd.  39.  2.  where s.  parables  are,  he  will  be  there
SUB  l  I  ELY.

Jud.  5.  11.  the  king  of  Egypt  dealt  s.  with  them
SUBTILTY.

Eccl.  19.  25.  there  is  an  exquisite  s.  and  is  unjust
SUBTILTIES.

Wisd.  8.  8.  she  knoweth  the  #.  of  speeches
SUBURBS.

1  Mac.  11.  4.  they  shewed  him  Azotus  and  s.  thereof
61.  he  burned  the  s.  thereof  with  fire  and  spoiled
SUCCEED.

Tob.  4.  6.  thy  doings  shall  prosperously  s.  to  thee
Eccl.  48.  8.  who  anointed  prophets  to  s.  after  him
SUCCESS.

Tob.  7.  12.  God  give  you  good  s.  in  all  things
Wisd.  13.  19.  and  for  good  s.  of  his  hands,  asketh
Eccl.  20.  9.  a  sinner  that  hath  good  s.  in  evil
38.  13.  when  in  their  hands  there  is  good  s.

43.26.  by  him  the  hand  of  them  hath  prosperous  s.

1  Mac.  4.  55.  praising  God,  who  had  given  good  s.

8.  23.  good  s.  be  to  the  Romans  and  Jews  by  sea

2  Mac.  10.23.  having  good  s.  with  his  w  eapons
28.  fora  pledge  of  theirs,  and  victory

13.  16.  at  last  they  departed  w  ith  good  s.

SUCCESSOR.

Eccl.  46.  1.  Jesus  son  of  Nave  was  the  s.  of  Moses
2  Mac.  9.  23.  when  he  led  an  army  he  appointed  s.

14.  26.  he  had  ordained  Judas  to  be  the  king’s  s.

SUCCOUR.

Eccl.  51.7.  I  looked  for  s.  of  men,  there  was  none

1  Mac.  1.  53.  wheresoever  they  could  tiee  for  s.

2.  44.  but  the  rest  tied  to  the  heathen  for  s.

2  Mac.  5.  9.  and  thinking  there  to  find  s.

SUCCOURS.

Wisd.  17. 12.  for  fear  is  a  betraying  of  the  s.

succoureth:

1  Mac.  12.  15.  we  have  help  from  heaven  that  s.  us

SUCK.

2  Mac.  7.  27.  have  pity  on  me  that  gave#.  S  years

SUCKING.

Eccl.  46.  16.  when  he  offered  the#,  lamb
SUDDEN.

Wisd.  17.  15.  for  a  #,  fear  came  upon  them
Eccl.  11.  21.  on  the  #.  to  make  a  poor  man  rich
2  Mac.  14. 17.  through  the  #.  silence  of  his  enemies
SUDDEN  LY.

Wisd.  18.  17.  then#,  visions  of  horrible  dreams
Eccl.  5.  7-  t.  shall  (lie  wrath  of  the  Lord  come

11.  22.#.  he  maketh  his  blessing  to  flourish
22.  27-  upon  my  lips,  that  1  fall  not  #.  by  them

1  Mac.  1.  30.  he  fell  #.  on  the  city,  and  smote  it

3.  23.  had  left  off  speaking,  he  leapt  #.  upon  them
4.2.  might  rush  in  on  the  Jews,  and  smite  them  #.

2  Mac.  3.  27.  Heliodorus  fell  #.  to  the  ground

14.  22.  lest  treachery  should  be#,  practised

SUFFER.

Jud.  11.5.  #.  thy  handmaid  to  speak  in  thy  presence
Bar.  4.  25.  #.  patiently  the  wrath  that  is  come

6.  18.  made  sure  as  being  committed  to  #.  death.
Bel  12.  we  will  #.  death,  orelse  Daniel  that  speaks
2  Mac.  4.  48.  they  did  soon  #.  unjust  punishment

6.  30.  but  in  soul  am  content  to  #.  these  things

7.  18.  for  we  #.  these  things  for  ourselves
32.  for  we  #.  because  of  our  sins

SUFFERED.

Wisd.  18.  1.  they  hud  not  #.  the  same  things

11.  like  as  the  king  so  #.  thecomnion  person
Eccl.  38.  16.  as  if  thou  hadst  #.  great  harm

1  Mac.  2.  48.  nor  #.  they  the  sinner  to  triumph

15.  14.  neither  #.  he  any  to  go  out  or  in

2  .1  ac.  7.  36.  our  brethren  who  now  have  #.  pain

9.  28.  the  murderer  having#,  most  grievously

SUFFERETH.

Tob.  4. 10.  alms  #.  not  to  come  into  darkness
Eccl.  4.  9.  deliver  him  that#,  wrong  from  oppressor
26.  28.  a  man  of  war  that  #.  poverty
SUFFERING.

Wisd.  16.  3.  but  these  #.  penury  for  a  short  space
SUFFICE.

Tob.  5.  19  what  the  Lord  hath  given  us  doth  #.  us

1  Mac.  2.  33.  let  that  you  have  done  hitherto  #.

SUFFICIENT.

Wisd.  18.  12.  nor  were  the  IT  ing#.  to  bury  them
Eccl.  31.  19.  little  is  #.  for  a  man  well  nurtured
SUGGESTION.

2  Mac.  6.  8.  went  a  degree  by  the#,  of  Ptolemee

SUITS.

Eccl.  29.  19-  business  for  gain  shall  fall  into  #.

Sus.  6.  all  that  had  any  #.  in  law  came  to  them
SUM.

Eccl.  43  27.  come  short,  wherefore  in#. he  is  all
51.  28.  get  learning  w  ith  a  great  #.  of  money
2  Mac.  3.  11.  the#,  in  all  was  400  talents  of  silver

12.  43.  to  the  #.  of  two  thousand  drachms

SUMS.

2  Mac.  3. 6.  treasury  was  full  of  infinite#,  of  money
SUMMER.

Eccl.  50.  8.  the  frankincense-tree  in  time  of  #.
Dan.  3.  45.  O  ye  winter  and  #.  bless  ye  the  Lord
SUN.

1  Esd.  4.  34.  O  men,  swift  is  the  #.  in  his  course

2  Esd.  6.  45. commandest  that  the  #.  should  shine
15.  20.  kings  which  are  from  the  rising  of  the  #.

Tob.  2.  4.  took  him,  till  the  going  down  of  the  #.

7.  after  the  going  down  of  the  #.  I  made  a  giave


SWE


T  A  K


T  A  S


[Apochi  PHs.


Jud.  14.  2.  the  *.  shall  come  forth  on  the  earth
Wiad.  2.  4.  as  mist  that  is  driven  away  with  the  *.

6.  6.  the  s.  of  righteousness  rose  not  on  us

7.  29.  for  she  is  more  beautiful  than  the  s.

16.  29.  we  must  prevent  the  s.  to  give  thee  thanks

18.  3.  and  an  harmless  s.  to  entertain  them
JZccl.  17.  19.  their  works  are  as  the  s.  before  him

31.  what  is  brighter  than  the  4.  t  yet  the  light

26.  16.  as  the  s.  when  it  ariseth  in  the  heaven

33.  ".  all  the  light  of  every  day  is  of  the  s.

34.  16.  he  is  a  cover  from  the  .t.  at  noon
43.  2.  the  s.  when  it  appeareth,  declaring

4.  but  the  .f.  burnetii  the  mountains  more

46.  4.  did  not  the  s.  go  back  by  his  means  ?

48.  23.  in  his  time  the  s.  went  backward

50.  7.  as  the  s.  shining  on  the  temple  of  Most  High
Bar.  6.  60.  for  4.  moon  and  stars  are  obedient
Dan.  3.  40.  O  ye  s.  and  moon,  bless  ye  the  Lord

SUN-BEAM.

Wisd.  16.  27.  being  warmed  with  a  little  s.  melted
SUNG.

Eccl.  47.  8.  with  his  whole  heart  he  s.  songs

1  Mac.  4.  24.  they  s.  a  song  of  thanksgiving

2  Mac.  1.  30.  the  priests  s.  psalms  of  thanksgiving
12.37.  he  s.  psalms  with  a  loud  voice

SUPERSTITION.

II  isd.  14. 18.  set  forward  the  ignorant  to  more  s.
SUPPED.

Tub.  8. 1.  when  they  had  s.  they  brought  Tobias  in
SUPPLICATION.

Eccl.  4.  4.  reject  not  the  s.  of  the  afflicted

35.  14.  he  will  not  despise  the  s.  of  the  fatherless

39.  5.  and  he  will  make  s.  for  his  sins

51.  9.  then  lifted  I  up  my  s.  from  the  earth
Bar.  2.  19.  w'e  do  not  make  out  humble  s.  before

thee  for  the  righteousness  of  our  fathers
and  kings

1  Mac.  11.  49.  they  made  s.  to  the  king  and  cried

2  Mac.  3.  18.  others  ran  flocking  to  the  general  s.

8.  29.  when  they  had  made  a  common  s.

9.  18.  containing  the  form  of  a  s.  after  this  manner

14.  15.  they  made  to  him  that  had  established

SUPPORT.

1  Lsd.  8.  52.  power  of  Lord  to  s.  them  in  all  ways
SUPPOSE.

Tob.  6.  17.  I  s.  that  she  shall  bear  thee  children
SUPPOSED.

1  ft  sd.  I".  3.  they  r.  to  lie  hid  in  their  secret  sins
Bar .  6.  64.  not  to  be  s.  nor  said  that  they  are  gods

SUPPOSING.

2  Mac.  4. 32.  Menelauss.  lie  had  got  con  enient  time

SURE.

Eccl.  10.  19.  they  that  fear  the  Lord  are  a  j.  seed

40.  25.  gold  and  silver  mane  the  foot  stand  s.

42.  6.  s.  keeping  is  good  where  an  evil  wife  is

11.  keep  a  4.  watch  over  a  shameless  daughter
Bar.  6.  18.  as  the  doors  are  made  s.  on  every  side
2  Mac.  3. 22.  to  keep  things  safe  and  s.  for  those
SURELY.

Wtsd.  13.  1.  s.  vain  are  all  men  by  nature
Eccl.  5.  3.  the  Lord  will  s.  revenge  thy  pride

28.  1.  he  will  s.  keep  his  sins  in  remembrance
48.  11.  and  slept  in  love,  for  we  shall  s.  live

SUIIN  AM E.  See  SI  RN  AME.
SURETY.

Eccl. 8. 13.  notr.  above  thy  power,  ifthou  be  s.  pay  it

29.  14.  an  honest  man  is  s.  for  his  neighbour

15.  forget  not  the  friendship  of  thy  s.

16.  will  overthrow  the  good  estate  of  Ins  s.

SURETYSHIP.

Eccl.  29. 18.  s.  hath  undone  many  of  good  estate

19.  a  wicked  man  shall  fall  into  s.

SURFEITING.

Eccl.  37  -  30.  and  s.  will  turn  into  choler
31.  by  s.  have  many  perished,  but  he  that  taketh
SUSA.

Esth.  11.3.  was  a  Jew,  and  dwelt  in  the  city  of  S.

16.  18.  is  hanged  at  the  gates  of  S.  with  his  fami.y
SUSANNA.

Sus.  7.  S.  went  into  her  husband’s  garden  to  walk

22.  then  S.  sighed,  and  said,  1  am  straitened
24.  with  that  S.  cried  with  a  loud  voice

27.  there  was  never  such  a  report  made  of  S.

31.  S.  was  a  very  delicate  woman  and  beauteous

SUSPECTED.

Tab.  8.  16.  that  is  not  come  to  me  which  I  s.

2  Mac.  4.  34.  tho’  he  were  s.  v’et  persuaded  he  him
SUSPECTETH.

Eccl.  23.21.  where  he  s.  not,  he  shall  be  taken

37.  10.  consult  not  with  one  that  j.  thee
SUSPECTING.

2  Mac.  3.  32.  the  high  priest  s.  lest  the  king  should

7.  24.  and  s.  it  to  be  a  reproachful  speech

12.  4.  desirous  to  live  in  peace,  and  s.  nothing
SUSPICION.

Eccl.  3.  24.  evil  s.  hath  overthrown  their  judgment
SUSTAIN.

2  Mac.  10. 18.  things  convenient  to  s.  the  siege
SUSTENANCE.

Wild.  16.21.  for  thy  s.  declared  thy  sweetness
SWADDLING-CLOTHES.

Wisd.  7.  4.  1  was  nursed  in  s.  and  that  with  cares
SWALLOWS.

Bar.  6.  22.  upon  their  bodies  and  heads  sit  s.
SWAM.

If  t'd.  19.  19.  the  things  that  before  .<■.  in  water
1  Mac.  9-  48.  they  s.  over  to  the  further  bank
SWA  RE.'

1  Eid.  8.  96.  to  do  these  things,  and  so  they  s.

2  Mac.  13.23.  and  s.  to  all  equal  conditions

14.  32.  s.  they  could  not  tell  where  the  man  was
SWAY.

Eccl.  1.22.  the  s.  of  his  fury  shall  be  his  destruction
SWEAR.

1  Esd.  1. 48.  made  him  s.  by  the  name  of  the  Lord
Tob.  7.  11.  till  we  agree  and  s.  one  to  another
Jl  isd.  14.  29.  tho’ s.  falsely,  yet  look  not  to  be  hurt
31.  it  is  not  the  power  of  them  by  whom  they  s.
Eccl.  23. 11.  if  he  s.  in  vain,  shall  not  be  innocent
SWEAR  ETH.

Eccl.  23. 10.  he  that  s.  and  nameth  God  continually
27.  14.  the  talk  of  him  that  s.  much,  maketh


SWEARING.

Eccl.  23.  9.  accustom  not  thy  mouth  to  s.

11.  a  man  that  useth  much  s.  shall  be  filled

13.  use  not  thy  mouth  to  intemperate  s.
SWEAT.

2  Mac.  2.  26.  it  was  a  matter  of  s.  and  watching
SWEET.

1  Esd.  9.  51.  go  eat  the  fat,  and  drink  the  s.

2  Esd.  1.  23.  tree  in  water,  and  made  the  river  s.
Eccl.  6.  5.  s.  language  will  multiply  friends

11.3.  but  her  fruit  is  the  chief  of  j.  things

23.  17.  all  bread  is.t.  to  a  whoremonger

24.  15.  I  gave  a  s.  smell  like  cinnamon,  1  yielded
a  pleasant  odour  as  myrrh,  onyx,  and  s.  storax

35.  6.  s.  savour  thereof  is  before  the  Most  High

38.  5.  was  not  the  w'ater  made  s.  with  wood  ?

11.  give  a  s.  savour  and  memorial  of  fine  flour

40.  18.  to  labour  and  to  be  content  is  at.  life

21.  the  pipe  and  the  psaltery  make  s.  melody

30.  begging  is  s.  in  the  mouth  of  the  shameless

49.  1.  it  is  j.  as  honey  in  all  mouths
Bar.  5.  8.  every  s. -smelling  tree  shall  overshadow
SWEETER.

Eccl.  23.  27.  there  is  nothing  s.  than  to  take  heed
24.  20.  for  my  memorial  is  .v.  than  honey
SWEETLY.

Wisd.  8.  1.  and  s.  doth  she  order  all  things
Eccl.  12.  16.  an  enemy  speaketh  s.  with  his  lips
27  .  23.  when  thou  art  present,  he  will  speak  .s.
SWEETNESS.

Wisd.  16.  21.  for  thy  sustenance  declared  thy  s.
SWIFT.

•  Efrf.  4.  34.  high  is  heaven,  s.  is  the  sun  in  his  course
liisd.  13.  2.  or  the  s.  air,  or  the  circle  of  the  stars

18.  14.  that  night  was  in  midst  of  her course
Eccl.  5. 11.  be  s.  to  hear,  and  let  thy  life  be  sincere
SWIFTLY.

Eccl.  43.  13.  sendeth  s.  the  lightnings  of  judgment
SWIFTNESS.

2  Esd.  8.  18.  the  s.  of  the  judge  which  is  to  come
SWINE’S.

1  Mac.  1.  47.  sacrifice  s.  flesh  and  unclean  beasts

2  Mac.  6. 18.  Eleazar  was  constrained  to  eaU.  flesh

SWOON.

Wisd.  17.  19.  these  things  made  them  s.  for  fear
SWORD.

1  Esd.  1.  53.  who  slew  their  young  men  with  the  s.

4.  23.  a  man  taketh  his  s.  and  goeth  his  wav

8.  77.  we  were  given  up  to  the  s.  and  to  captivity
Eccl.  21. 3.  all  iniquity  is  as  a  two-edged  s.

22.  21.  though  thou  drewest  a  s.  at  thy  friend
26.  28.  the  Lord  prepared  such  a  one  for  the  s.

28.  18.  many  have  fallen  by  the  edge  of  the  s.

39.  30.  the  s.  punishing  the  wicked  to  destruction

40.  9.  strife  and  happen  unto  all  flesh

46.  2.  and  stretched  out  his  s.  against  the  cities
Bar.  2. 25.  they  died  by  famine,  by  s.  and  pestilence

1  Mac.  2.  9.  young  men  are  slain  with  s.  of  enemy

3.  3.  made  battles,  protecting  the  host  with  his  s.

12.  Judas  took  their  spoils  and  Apollonius’  s.

4.  3.3.  cast  them  down  with  the  s.  of  them  that  love

7.  38.  be  avenged,  and  let  them  fall  by  the  s.

8.  23.  the  s.  also  and  enemy  be  far  from  them

9.  73.  thus  the  s.  ceased  from  Israel,  but  Jonathan

10.  85.  burnt  and  slain  with  the  s.  8000  men

2  Mac.  14. 18.  durst  not  try  the  matter  by  the  s.

41.  he  being  ready  to  be  taken,  fell  on  his  j.

15.  15.  Jeremias  gave  to  Judas  a  s.  of  gold

16.  take  this  holy  s.  a  gift  from  God
SWORDS.

1  Esd.  3.  22.  and  a  little  after  they  draw  out  s.

1  Mac.  4.  6.  who  had  neither  armour  nor  s.

2  Mac.  5.  3.  drawing  of  s.  and  casting  of  darts

12.  22.  and  wounded  with  the  points  of  their  own  s.
SWORE.

Wisd.  14.  30.  and  also  they  unjustly  s.  in  deceit
1  Mac.  7-  35.  Nicanor  .f.  in  his  wrath,  saying
SWORN.

Wisd.  12.  21.  unto  whose  fathers  thou  hast  s.
SYRIA.

1  Mac.  3.  13.  Seron,  a  prince  of  the  army  of  S.

41.  a  power  also  of  S.  and  of  the  Philistines
7-  39.  where  an  host  out  of  S.  met  him

11.2.  took  his  journey  into  S.  in  peaceable  manner
60.  and  all  the  forces  of  S.  gathered  themselves
SYRIAN.

2  Mac.  15.  36.  in  the  S.  tongue  is  called  Adar

T.

TABERNACLE.

Jud.  9.  8.  to  pollute  the  t.  where  thy  name  resteth

14.  7-  blessed  art  thou  in  all  the  t.  ofjuda
Wisd.  9.  8.  a  temple,  a  resemblance  of  the  holy  t.

15.  the  earthly  t.  weigheth  down  the  mind
Eccl.  24.  10.  in  the  holy  t.  I  served  before  him
15.  as  the  fume  of  frankincense  in  the  t.

2  Mac.  2.5.  an  hollow  cave,  wherein  he  laid  the  t
TABERNACLES.

1  Esd.  5.  51.  also  they  held  the  feast  oft.

2  Esd.  2.  11.  1  will  give  these  the  everlasting  t.

Jud.  2.  26.  burnt  their  t.  and  spoiled  sheep-cotes

TABLE.

Tob.  7.  8.  they  set  store  of  meat  on  the  t.

Eccl.  6.  10.  some  friend  is  a  companion  at  the  t.

31.  12.  if  thou  sit  at  a  bountiful  t.  be  not  greedy
40.  29.  life  that  dependeth  on  another  man’s  t.

Bel  21.  consumed  such  things  as  were  on  the  t.

1  Mac.  1.  22.  the  t.  of  the  shew  bread  and  vials

4.  49.  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings  and  the  t.

51.  they  set  loaves  on  the  t.  and  spread  vails

TABLES.

1  Mac.  14.  18.  they  w  rote  to  him  in  t.  of  brass
TA  K  E.

Tob.  4.  12.  my  son,  chiefly  t.  a  wife  of  the  seed  of
thy  fathers,  and  t.  not  a  strange  woman  to  wife

5.  20.  t.  no  care,  my  sister,  he  shall  return  in  safety

6.  3.  then  the  angel  said  to  him,  t.  the  fish

7.  13.  saying,  t.  her  after  the  law  of  Moses

8.  7-  I  t.  not  this  my  sister  for  lust,  but  uprightly

9.  2.  t.  with  thee  a  servant  and  two  camels  ,


Tob.  12.5.  t.  half  of  1  l  ye  have  brought,  and  go  away
Wisd.  8.  18.  1  vvent  about  seeking  how  to  t.  her
.  me

Eccl.  8.  13.  for  if  thou  be  surety,  t.  care  to  pay  it

12.  12.  set  him  not  by,  lest  he  seek  to  t.  thy  seat

14.  5.  he  shall  not  t.  pleasure  in  his  goods

16.  give  and  t.  and  sanctify  thy  soul,  there  is  no

23.  25.  her  children  shall  not  t.  mot,  and  branches

41.  19.  be  ashamed  of  scorning  to  give  and  t.

47.  4.  did  he  not  t.  away  reproach  from  the  people  t

48.  8.  who  anointed  kings  to  t.  revenge
Bar.  4.  30.  t.  a  good  heart,  Q  Jerusalem

Bel  37.  O  Daniel,  t.  the  dinner  God  hath  sent

1  Mac.  3.  35.  and  to  t.  away  their  memorial

5.  19.  t.  ye  the  charge  of  this  people,  and  see

6.  26.  besieging  the  tower  at  Jerusalem  to  t.  it

8.  18.  that  they  would  t.  the  yoke  from  them

2  Mac.  14.  39.  sent  above  500  men  of  war  to  t.  him

15.  5.  I  command  to  t.  arms,  and  to  do  business

TAKE  heed.

Eccl.  6.  13.  separate  from  enemies,  t.  heed  of  friends
11 . 33.  t.  heed  of  a  mischievous  man,  lest  bring  a  blot

13.  1.3.  t.  good  heed ,  for  thou  walkest  in  peril

23.  27.  t.  heed  to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord

TAKEN.

1  Esd.  2.  28.  heed  to  be  t.  that  there  be  no  more  done

9.  36.  all  these  t  strange  wives,  put  them  away
Tob.  11.  15.  hast  scourged,  and  hast  t.  pity  on  me
Wisd.  3.  2.  and  their  departure  is  t.  for  misery

4. 11. speedily  washet.  lest  wickedness  should  alter

14.  15.  made  an  image  of  his  child  soon  t.  away

15.  8.  returns  to  the  same  out  of  which  he  was  t.
Eccl.  9.  4.  lest  thou  be  t.  with  her  attempts

11.  30.  like  as  a  partridge  t.  and  kept  in  a  cage

16.  9.  people  who  were  t.  away  in  their  sins

19.  3.  and  a  bold  man  shall  be  t.  away

23.  7.  keepeth  it,  shall  never  be  t.  in  his  lips
21.  where  he  suspecteth  not,  he  shall  be  t.

27.  26.  he  that  setteth  a  trap,  shall  be  t.  therein
31.  7-  and  every  fool  shall  be  t.  therewith
44.  17.  he  was  t.  in  exchange  for  the  world

46.  19.  I  have  not  t.  any  man’s  goods,  not  a  shoe

47.  2.  as  is  the  fat  t.  away  from  the  peace-offering

48.  9.  who  was  t.  up  in  a  whirlwind  of  fire

49.  14.  Enoch,  he  was  t.  from  the  earth

Bar.  2.  17.  whose  souls  are  t.  from  their  bodies

24.  the  bones  shall  be  t.  out  of  their  places

3.  29.  who  hath  gone  up  into  heaven  and  t.  her  ,

4.  26.  they  were  t.  as  a  flock  caught  of  enemies

1  Mac.  2.  58.  Elias  was  t.  up  into  heaven

3.  45.  joy  was  t.  from  Jacob,  the  pipe  ceased
9.  55.  Aleimus  plagued,  he  was  t.  with  a  palsy

13.  41.  thus  the  yoke  was*.  away  from  Israel
15.  33.  we  have  neither  t.  other  men’s  lands

2  Mac.  9.  21.  being  t.  with  a  grievous  disease

12.  35.  he  would  have  t.  that  cursed  man  alive

TA  K  ES  L.

Eccl.  7.  36.  whatsoever  thou  t.  in  hand,  remember
TAKETH.

Eccl.  11.  11.  one  that  laboureth,  and  t.  pains

19.  5.  whoso  t.  pleasure  in  wickedness,  condemned

20.  8.  he  that  t.  to  himself  authority  therein
34.  22.  he  that  t.  away  his  neighbour’s  living

36.  26.  and  lodgeth  wheresoever  the  night  t.  him

42.  9.  and  the  care  for  her  t.  away  sleep

Taketh  heed.

Eccl.  37.  31.  he  that  t.  heed  prolongeth  his  life
TAKING.

1  Esd.  4.  30.  t.  the  crown  from  the  king’s  head
Tob.  4.  13.  despise  not,  in  not  t.  a  wife  of  them
Wisd.  13.  13.  and  t.  the  very  refuse  among  those

2  Mac.  5.25.  when  t.  the  Jews  keeping  holy-day

12.  35.  t.  hold  of  his  coat,  drew  him  by  force

TA  LE.

Eccl.  19. 15.  admonish,  and  believe  not  every  t.

22.  6.  a  t.  out  of  season,  is  as  music  in  mourning
8.  he  that  telleth  a  t.  to  a  fool,  speaketh  to  one
TALENT.

I  Esd.  1.  36.  set  a  tax  on  the  land  of  one  t.  of  gold
TALENTS.

1  Esd.  3.  21.  it  maketh  to  speak  all  things  by  t.

4.  51.  should  be  yearly  given  twenty  t.  to  building

52.  other  ten  t.  yearly  to  maintain  offerings

TALK.

Wisd.  8.  12.  if  I  t.  much,  they  shall  lay  their  hands
Eccl.  5.  13.  honour  and  shame  is  in  t.

9.  18.  and  he  that  is  rash  in  his  t.  shall  be  hated

11.  8.  nor  interrupt  men  in  the  midst  of  their  t.

13.  11.  affect  not  to  be  made  equal  to  him  in  t.

19.  8.  to  friend  or  foe,  t.  not  of  other  men’s  lives
22.  13.  t.  not  much  with  a  fool,  and  go  not  to  him
27.  14.  the  t.  of  him  that  sweareth  much

38.  25.  driveth  oxen,  whose  t.  is  of  bullocks
TALKED.

1  Mac.  3.  26.  all  nations  t.  of  the  battles  of  Judas

TALKING.

Wisd.  8.  18.  and  in  t.  with  her,  a  good  report
Eccl.  21.  16.  the  t.  of  a  fool  is  like  a  burden
TAP II N  ES.

Jud.  1.  9.  the  river  of  Egypt,  and  T.  and  Ramesse

tarrY.

Tob.  2.  2.  bring  what  poor  man,  and  lo,  T  t.  for  thee

4.  14.  let  not  the  wages  of  anv  man  t.  with  thee

5.  7.  Tobias  said,  t.  for  me  till  1  tell  my  father

9.  4.  it  l  t.  long,  he  will  be  very  sorry

10.  8.  t.  with  me,  and  1  will  send  to  thy  father

14.  10.  bury  me,  but  t.  no  longer  at  Nineve
Eccl.  7-  .16.  remember  that  wrath  will  not  t.  long

12.  15.  if  thou  begin  to  fall  he  will  not  t.

TARRIETH.

Wisd.  5.  14.  passeth  as  a  guest  that  t.  but  a  day
TARRYING.

Eccl.  5.  7-  make  no  t.  to  turn  to  the  Lord
TASTE.

M'isa.  10.  g.  mou  preparest  meat  of  a  strange  t.

20.  able  to  content,  and  agreeing  to  every  t.

2  Mac.  7-  1.  were  compelled  to  t.  sw  ine Vflesb

15.  39.  as  wine  with  water  delighteth  the  t.

TASTED.

Tob.  2.  4.  before  I  had  t.  of  any  meat,  I  started  u
Wisd.  18.  25.  it  was  enough  they  only  t.  of  wraf
2  Mac.  0.  20.  not  lawful  tor  love  of  life  to  be

2  A  2  691


APOClt  Y  PH  A.J  TEN


T  H  I


TIM


I'ASTE  Til.

Eccl.  36  19.  as  ftie  palate  /.  divers  kinds  of  venison
I  AS  ITNG.

Wisd.  18.  20.  the  /.  of  death  touched  the  righteous
J'AUGH  l'.

1  Esd.  8.  7-  but/.  all  Israel  the  ordinances

9.  49.  to  the  I.evites  that  /.  the  multitude

2  Esd.  8.  29.  them  that  have  clearly  /.  the  law
IVisd.  9.  18.  men  were  t.  things  pleasing  to  thee
Eccl.  6.  32.  my  son,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  shalt  be  /.

21.  12.  he  that  is  not  wise  will  not  be  f.

Sits.  3.  t.  their  daughter  according  to  law  of  Moses
LAX.

I  Esd.  1.  36.  he  set  a  t.  on  the  land  of  100  talents
8.22.  that  ye  require  no  /.  nor  imposition
See  Crown.

TEACH.

1  Esd.  8.  23.  those  that  know  it  not,  thou  shalt  t.

2  Esd.  12.  38.  and  t.  them  to  the  wise  of  the  people
Eccl.  9.  1. /.  her  not  an  evil  lesson  against  thyself

45.  5.  that  he  might  t.  Jacob  his  covenants
TEACHEl  11.

IVisd.  8.  7.  for  she  /.  temperance  and  prudence
Eccl.  18.  13.  he  reproved),  nurtureth,  and  /.

22.  7-  whoso  t.  a  fool,  is  as  one  that  glueth
30.  3.  he  that  t.  his  son,  grieveth  the  enemy
33.27.  send  him  to  labour,  for  ’dleness  /.  evil

37.  19.  there  is  one  that  is  wise,  and  t.  many

TEARS.

Eccl.  35. 15.  do  not  /.  run  down  widows’  cheeks  ?

38.  16.  my  son,  let/.  fall  down  over  the  dead
2  Mac.  11.  6.  with  lamentation  and  /.  he  sought

TEDIOUS.

Wisd.  2.  1.  ungodly  said,  our  life  is  short  and  t.
TEETH.

Wisd.  16.  10.  not  the  t.  of  venomous  dragons
Eccl.  21.  2.  the  t.  thereof  are  the  /.  of  a  lion
30.  10.  lest  thou  gnash  thy  /.  in  the  end
39  .  30.  t.  of  wild  beasts  punishing  the  wicked
51.  3.  from  t.  of  them  that  were  read  v  to  devour
TELL.

Toh.  5.  7-  tarry  for  me  till  1  /.  my  father

14.  but  /.  me,  what  wages  shall  I  give  thee  ?

Jud.  11. 17.  he  will  /.  me  when  they  have  committed
Wisd.  6.  22.  as  for  wisdom,  what  is  she,  I  will  t.  you
Eccl.  18.  5.  who  shall  also  /.  out  his  mercies?

37.  14.  is  wont  to  /.  him  more  than  seven  watchmen
43.  24.  that  sail  on  the  sea,  /.  of  the  danger
44. 15.  the  people  will  t.  of  their  wisdom
Sus.  54.  /.  me,  under  what  tree  sawest  thou  them?

2  Mac.  7.22  I  cannot  /.  how  ye  came  into  my  womb
TELLETH.

Eccl.  22.  8.  he  that  t.  a  tale  to  a  fool,  speaketh
JELLING.

Eccl.  21.  25.  the  lipsof  talkers  will  be  /.  such  things
TEMPERED.

Wisd.  16.  21.  t.  itself  to  every  man’s  liking
1  EMPER1NG.

Wisd.  15.  7.  the  potter  t.  soft  earth,  fashioneth
1  EMPEST.

Wisd.  5.  14.  dispersed  here  and  there  with  a?,

Eccl.  16.  21.  it  is  a  /.  which  no  man  can  see
TEMPLE.

1  Esd.  1.  41.  he  set  then)  in  his  own  t.  of  Babylon

49.  the  governors  defiled  the  t.  of  the  Lord

6.  19-  put  them  in  the  t.  at  Jerusalem,  and  that
the  t.  of  the  Lord  should  be  built  in  his  place

8.  18.  vessels  for  the  use  of  the  /.  of  thy  God
81.  yea,  and  honoured  the  t.  of  our  Lord

Tab.  14.  5.  the  land,  where  they  shall  build  a  /.

Jud.  4. 1 1.  every  man  and  woman  fell  before  the  /.

5.  18.  the  /.  of  their  God  was  cast  to  the  ground
Wisd.  3.  14.  an  inheritance  in  the  /.  of  the  Lord

9.  8.  thou  hast  commanded  me  to  build  a  t.

Eccl.  45.  9.  a  noise  that  might  be  heard  in  the  /.

49.  12.  who  set  up  an  holy  /.  to  the  Lord

50.  1.  Simon  in  his  days  fortified  the  t.

4.  he  took  care  of  the  t.  that  it  should  not  fall
51. 14.1  prayed  for  her  before  the  t.  and  will  seek
Bar.  6.  20.  they  are  as  one  of  the  beams  of  the  t.
Bel  10.  the  king  went  with  Daniel  into  the  /.  of  Bel

1  Mac.  2. 8.  her  /.  is  become  as  a  man  without  glory

4.  50.  that  the  lamps  might  give  light  in  the  /.

5.  43.  and  tied  to  the  /.  that  was  at  Carnaim

6.  2.  and  that  there  was  in  it  a  very  rich  t.

16.  20.  he  sent  to  take  the  mountain  of  the  /.

2  Mac.  1 . 13.  they  were  slain  in  the  t.  of  N  anea

2.  22.  they  recovered  again  the  t.  renowned

3.  12.  to  majesty  and  inviolable  sanctity  of  the  t.

4.  14.  despising  the  t.  and  neglecting  sacrifices
32.  Menelaus  stole  vessels  of  gold  out  of  the  /.

5.  15.  to  go  into  the  most  holy  t.  of  all  the  wmrld

6.  2.  and  to  call  it  the  /.  of  Jupiter  Olympius
4.  the  /.  was  filled  with  riot  and  revelling

8.  2.  would  pity  the  /.  profaned  of  ungodly  men

9.  2.  entered  city,  and  went  about  to  rob  the  /.

10.  1.  Maccabeus  recovered  the  t.  and  the  city

TEMPLES.

Jud.  4.  1.  heard  how  he  had  spoiled  all  their  /.

Bar.  6.  18.  even  so  the  priests  make  fast  their  t.
TEMPT.

Wisd.  1.  2.  he  w:.i  be  found  of  them  that  /.  him  not
Eccl.  13.  11.  with  communication  will  he  /.  thee
TEMP J  A  l  ION.

Eccl.  2.  1.  if  thou  come,  prepare  thy  soul  for  /.

33.  1.  but  in  /.  even  again  he  will  deliver  him

1  Mac.  2.  52.  Abraham  was  found  faithful  in  /.

TEMPTED.

Jud.  8. 12.  who  are  you  that  have  t.  God  this  day  ?
TEMP  l  ETH.

Eccl.  18.  23.  and  be  not  as  one  that  /.  the  Lord
TEN.

Eccl.  23. 19.  are  /.  thousand  times  brighter
47.6.  the  people  honoured  him  with  /.  thousands
Dan.  3.  17 .  like  as  in  t.  thousands  of  fat  lambs
TENDERED.

2  Mac.  4.2.  had  /.  his  own  nation,  and  was  zealous

TENT.

Jud.  8.  5.  she  made  her  t.  on  the  top  of  her  house
10. 15.  now  therefore  come  to  his  /.  some  conduct

17.  they  brought  her  to  the  /.  of  Ilolofernes
14.  14.  Bagoas  knocked  at  the  door  of  the  t.

692


Eccl.  14.  25.  he  shall  pitch  his  t.  nigh  to  her
TEN  TS.

Wisd.  11.2.  thev  pitched  t.  where  lay  no  way
TENTH.

Eccl.  25.  7.  the  t.  I  will  utter  with  my  tongue
TENTHS.

Tab.  5.  13.  the  first-born,  and  the  /.  of  the  fruits

1  Mac.  10.  31.  free  both  from  the  t.  and  tributes

TERRIBLE.

Wisd.  5.  2.  they  shall  be  troubled  with  /.  fear

11.  19.  but  also  the  /.  sight  utterly  destroy  them

17.  9.  for  though  no  /.  thing  did  fear  them

19.  ora  t.  sound  of  stones  cast  down,  orarunning
Eccl.  43.  29-  the  Lord  is  /.  and  very  great
Prayer  of  Manass.  by  thy  t.  and  glorious  name

2  Mac.  3.  25.  a  horse  with  a  t.  rider  upon  him

TERRIFY.

Eccl.  21.  4.  to  /.  and  do  wrong  will  waste  riches

TERRIFIED.

Wisd.  17.  6.  for  being  much  /.  they  thought  things
2  Mac.  4.  l.as  if  he  had  /.  Heliodorus,  been  worker
TERROR.

2  Mac.  8.  16.  not  to  be  stricken  with  t.  of  enemy

12.  22.  enemies  beins  smitten  with  fear  and  /.

TERRORS.

Wisd.  17.  8.  they  that  promised  to  drive  away  /.

18.  17.  and  /.  came  upon  them  unlooked  for

TESTAMENT.

1  Mac.  1.  57.  was  found  with  any  the  book  of  the  /.
LES  IT  FY.

1  Mac.  2.  37.  heaven  and  earth  shall  /.  for  us

TESTIFIED.

2  Mac.  3. 36.  then  /.  he  to  all  men  the  works  of  God

TESTIMONY.

Wisd.  10.  7-  the  waste  land  thatsmoketh  is  a  t.
TESTIMONIES.

Eccl.  31.  24.  the  /.  of  his  niggardness  not  be  doubted
45.  17-  that  he  should  teach  Jacob  the  t.

THANK..

Eccl.  20. 16.  I  have  no  /.  for  all  my  good  deeds
THANKS.

1  Esd.  4. 60.  blessed  art  thou  who  hast  given  me  wis¬
dom,  for  to  thee  l  give  t.  O  Lord  of  our  fathers
'Job.  12.  20.  give  God  t.  I  go  up  to  him  that  sent  me
Wisd.  16.  28.  we  must  prevent  the  sun  to  give  t.
Eccl.  17.  27.  instead  of  them  who  live  and  give  t.
29.  25.  thou  shalt  entertain  and  have  no  t.

39.  6.  he  shall  give  t.  to  the  Lord  in  his  prayer
Dan.  3.  67.  O  give  t.  to  Lord,  because  he  is  gracious
68.  all  ye  that  worship  the  Lord,  give  him  t.

1  Mac.  14.  25.  what/.  shall  we  give  to  Simon?

2  Mac.  3.  33.  give  Onias  the  high-priest  great  /.

8.  27-  yielding  exceeding  praise  and  t.  to  the  Ixird
9.20.  if  ye  fare  well,  I  give  very  great  t.  to  God
THANKED.

Eccl.  12.  1.  so  shalt  thou  be  t.  for  thy  benefits
THAN  KFULN  ESS.

Esth.  16.  4.  and  take  not  only  /.  away  from  men
Eccl.  37.  11-  nor  consult  with  an  envious  man  of  t.
THANKSGIVING.

1  Esd.  5.  60.  singing  songs  of  t.  and  praising  the  Lord
Eccl.  17.  28.  t.  perisheth  from  the  dead,  as  one  is  not

51.  11.  praise  contin.  and  I  will  sing  praise  with  /.

2  Mac.  10.  38.  praised  the  Lord  witii  psalms  and  /.

THARSUS.

2  Mac.  4.  30.  they  of  T.  and  Mallosmade  insurrect.
THEFT.

Wisd.  14.  25.  manslaughter, /.  and  dissimulation
THEM AN.

Bar.  3.  22.  neither  hath  it  been  seen  in  T.

THICK.

Eccl.  14.  18.  as  of  the  green  leaves  a  t.  tree
2  Mac.  I.  20  they  found  no  fire,  but  /.  water
THICKEST.

2  Mac.  14.  43.  cast  himself  down  among  t.  of  them
THIEF.

Eccl.  5. 14.  for  a  foul  shame  is  upon  the  t.

20.  25.  a  t.  is  better  than  a  man  that  is  a  liar
36.  26.  who  will  trust  a t.  well  appointed?

THIEVES.

Bar.  6.  15.  cannot  deliver  himself  from  war  and  t.
THIGH.

Jud.  9.  2.  who  discovered  the  t.  to  her  shame
Eccl.  19. 12.  as  an  arrow  that  sticketh  in  a  man’s  t.
THIN.

Wisd.  5.  14.  like  a  r.  froth  that  is  driven  away
THINK.

Wisd.  1.  1.  t.  of  the  Lord  with  a  good  heart

6.  15.  to  t.  upon  her  imperfection  of  wisdom
9. 13.  or  who  can  t.  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is  ?
Eccl.  3.  22.  /.  thereupon  with  reverence
18.  24.  t.  on  the  wrath  that  shall  be  at  the  end

25.  when  thou  art  rich,  /.  on  poverty  and  need
Bar.  2.  32.  and  they  shall  t.  upon  my  name

3.  5.  but  /.  on  thy  power  and  name  at  this  time
6.  40.  how  shoufd  a  man  then  t.  they  are  gods  ?

2  Mac.  2.  29.  even  so  1  /.  it  is  with  us

6.  24.  whereby  many  young  persons  might  t.

7.  16.  yet  /.  not  our  nation  is  forsaken  of  God

19.  t.  not  that  thou  shalt  escape  unpunished

9.  12.  a  man  should  not  proudly  /.  of  himself
THIRD.

1  Esd.  3.  12.  the  t.  wrote,  women  are  strongest

4.  13.  then  the  /.  who  had  spoken  of  women
Eccl.  23.  16.  and  the  /.  will  bring  wrath

26.  28.  and  the  t.  maketh  me  angry

50.  25.  two  l  abhor,  and  the  t.  is  no  nation

1  Mac.  14.  27.  the  t.  year  of  Simon  the  high-priest

2  Mac.  7.10.  after  was  the  t.  made  a  mocking  stock

THIRDLY.

Eccl.  23.  23.  t.  she  hath  played  whore  in  adultery
THIRST.

Jud.  7. 13.  so  shall  t.  kill  them,  and  they  shall  give
22.  their  women  and  young  men  fainted  for  t.
Wisd.  11.4.  their  t.  was  quenched  out  of  the  stone

8.  declaring  by  that  /.  how  thou  hadst  punished
THIRSTY.

Wisd.  11.  4.  when  they  were  t.  they  called  on  thee
Eccl.  26.  12.  open  her  mouth  as  a  t.  traveller

51.  24.  what  say  ye,  seeing  your  souls  are  very  /.  ?

THIRSTING.

Wisd.  11.  9.  /.  in  another  manner  than  the  just


THOUGHT.

IVisd.  1.  16.  they  t.  to  have  had  it  their  friend

6.  16.  and  she  meeteth  them  in  every  /.

Eccl.  11.5.  one  that  was  never  t.  on  hath  worn
22.  17.  a  heart  settled  upon  a  t.  of  understanding
42.20.  no  t.  escapeth  him,  nor  any  word  hidden
51.  8.  then  t.  I  upon  thy  n  ercy,  O  Lord
Bar.  6.  56.  how  can  it  be  then/,  that  they  are  gods*
THOUGHTS.

Wisd.  1. 3.  forfroward  t.  separate  from  God

5.  remove  from  t.  without  understanding
2.  14.  lie  was  made  to  reprove  our  /.

9.  14.  for  the  .of  mortal  men  are  miserable
Eccl.  23.2.  wno  will  set  scourges  over  my  t.  ?

33.  5.  and  his  /.  are  like  a  rolling  axle-tree
THOUSAND.

Wisd.  12.  22.  scourgestour  enemies  a  /.  times  more
Eccl.  6.  6.  but  have  one  counsellor  of  a/.

16.  3.  forone  that  is  just  is  better  than  a  t.

18.  10.  so  are  a  t.  years  to  the  days  of  eternity
.39.  11.  he  shad  leave  a  greater  name  than  a  t.

41.  4.  ten,  01  a  hundred,  or  a  t.  years
12.  continue  above  a  t.  great  treasures  of  gold

1  Mac.  2.  38.  slew  to  the  number  of  a  t.  people

Til  RAC  I  A.

2  Mac.  12.35.  an  horsemen  of  T.  coming  upyn  him

THREATENED.

Jud.  b.  16.  for  God  is  not  as  man,  that  he  may  be  /.

THREATEN  ETII.

Eccl.  1.3.  .3.  rich  man  hath  done  wrong, and  yet  he  /.
THREATENING.

Prayer  of  Manass.  thine  angry  t.  toward  sinners
THREE.

1  E<d.  .3.  4.  /.  young  men  that  were  of  the  guard
Eccl.  25.  1.  in  t.  things  I  was  beautified
2.  /.  sorts  of  men  my  soul  liateth
26.  5.  there  be  /.  things  that  my  heart  feareth
48.  3.  and  also  /.  times  brought  down  fire
Dan.  3.  28.  then  the  t.  as  out  of  one  mouth  praised  .
THRICE.

Eccl.  1.3.  7.  he  have  drawn  thee  dry  twice  or  t.
THRIVE.

Wisd.  4.  3.  the  brood  of  the  ungodly  shall  not  t.

THRON  E.

Esth.  15.  6.  the  king,  who  sat  on  his  royal/.

IVisd.  9.  10.  O  send  her  from  the  t.  of  thy  glory
18.  15.  out  of  thy  royal  /.as  a  fierce  man  of  war
Eccl.  1.  8.  isonewise,  the  Lord  sitting  upon  his/.

40.  .3.  from  him  that  sitteth  on  a  /.  of  glory
47-  11.  the  Lord  gave  him  a/,  of  glory  in  Israel

1  Mac.  2.  57.  possessed  /.  of  an  everlasting  kingdom

7.  4.  Demetrius  was  set  on  the  /.  of  his  kingdom

THRONES.

Wisd.  5.  23.  ill-dealing  shall  overthrow  /.  of  mighty

6.  21.  if  yourdelight  be  then  in  /.  and  sceptres

7.  8.  1  preferred  her  before  sceptres  and  /.

Eccl.  10.  14.  hath  cast  down  the  /.of  proud  princes
THRONG.

2  Mac.  14.  45.  yet  he  ran  through  the  midst  of  the  /.
46.  pl-uckedout  his  bowels,  and  cast  them  on  the  /.

THROWN.

Wisd.  11. 14.  when  he  was  long  before  /.  out
18.  18.  one  t.  here,  another  there  half  dead
THRUST.

Eccl.  13.  21.  a  poor  man  is  /.  away  by  his  friends
THUMM1M.

Eccl.  45.  10.  a  breast-plate,  and  with  Urim  and  T.
THUNDER,

Esth.  11. 5.  behold  a  noise  of  tumult  with  t.

Eccl.  32.  10.  before  the  /.  goeth  lightning
40.  13.  shall  vanish  with  a  noise  like  great/,  in  rain
43.  17.  the  noise  of/,  makes  the  earth  tremble
THUNDER-BOLTS.

Wisd.  5.  21.  the  right-aiming  /.  shall  go  abroad
2  Mac.  1. 16.  they  threw  stones  like  /.  and  struck
THUNDERED.

Eccl.  46. 17.  and  the  Lord  /.  from  heaven
TIDINGS.

2  Mac.  9.  24.  or  if  any  grievous  t.  were  brought
TIGRIS.

Tob.  6.  1.  they  came  in  the  evening  to  the  river  T.
Jud.  1.  6.  there  came  to  him  all  that  dwelt  by  T.
Eccl.  24.  25.  as  T.  in  the  tiroes  of  the  new  fruits
TILLETH.

Eccl.  20.  28.  he  that  /.  his  land  shall  increase

TIMBER.

Wisd.  1.3.  11.  now  a  carpenter  that  felleth  t.

Eccl.  22. 16.  as  /.  girt  and  bound  together  in  building
TIMBRELS.

Jud.  3.  7-  they  received  then)  with  dances  and  /.
TIME.

1  Esd.  1.  19.  Israel  held  the  passover  at  that  /.

5.  73.  hindered,  all  the  /.  that  king  Cyrus  lived
'Job.  14.  4.  the  house  shall  be  desolate  for  a  t.

Esth.  16.20.  in  the /.  of  affliction  set  on  them
IVisd.  2.  4.  our  name  shall  be  forgotten  in  t.

5.  our  /.  is  a  very  shadow  that  passeth  away
4.  4.  though  they  flourish  in  branches  for  a  /.

8.  age  is  not  that  which  standeth  in  length  of  t.

I. 3.  made  perfect  in  a  short  /.  fulfilled  a  long  /.

9.  5.  I  thy  servant  am  of  a  short  /.  and  too  young

15.  12.  counted  our  /.  here  a  market  for  gain
19-  22.  didst  assist  them  in  every  /.  and  place

Eccl.  1.  24.  he  will  hide  his  words  for  a  /.

2.  2.  and  make  not  haste  in  /.  of  trouble

II.  for  the  Lord  saveth  in  /.  of  affliction

16.  26.  from  the  /.  he  made  them,  he  disposed
18.  21.  and  in  the  /.  of  sins  shew  repentance

22.  let  nothing  hinder  to  pay  thy  vow  in  due  t.

24.  /.  of  vengeance  when  he  shall  turn  his  face

25.  when  thou  hast  enough,  remember /.  of  hun

ge»

19-  9.  and  when  /.  cometh  he  will  hate  thee

22.  nor  at  any  /.the  counsel  of  sinners  prudence
20  6.  and  some  keepeth  silence  knowing  his  t.

7.  but  a  babbler  and  fool  will  resale!  not.

22.  16.  so  the  heart  established  shall  fear  at  no/.

23.  abide  stedfast  to  him  in  the  /.  of  trouble

24.  26.  and  as  Jordan  in  the  /.  of  the  harvest

27.  to  appear  as  Geon  in  the  /.  of  vintage
27.  12.  if  among  the  undisereet  observ  e  the  r.

29.  2.  lend  thy  neighbour  in  the  /.  of  his  need


T  O  N


TR  A


TRI


Apocrypha.


Eccl.  29. 5.  when  he  should  repay,  he  will  prolong  *.

and  return  words  of  grief,  and  complain  of  the  *.

30.  24.  carefulness  bringeth  a*re  before  the  *.

32.  4.  and  shew  not  forth  wisdom  out  of  *.

33.  23.  at  the  *.  when  thou  shalt  end  thy  days
35.20.  mercy  is  seasonable  in  f.  of  affliction

36.  8.  make  tiie  *.  short,  remember  the  covenant
37-  4.  but  in  *.  of  trouble  will  be  against  him
38. 13.  there  is  a  *.  when  in  their  hands  there  is

39.  28.  in  *.  of  destruction  they  pour  out  force

31.  when  their  *.  is  come  they  shall  not  transgress

34.  for  in  f.  they  shall  all  be  well  approved

40.  24.  brethren  are  against  the  *.  of  trouble

44.  17.  Noah  was  found  perfect  in  the  *.  of  wrath

46.  7.  in  the  *.  of  Moses  he  did  a  work  of  mercy

48.  23.  in  his  *.  the  sun  went  backward

49.  3.  in  *.  of  ungodly  he  established  the  worship

50.  24.  and  that  he  would  deliver  us  at  his  *.

51.  10.  in  *.  of  the  proud,  when  there  was  no  help

12.  and  thou  deliveredst  me  from  the  evil  *.

30.  in  his  *.  he  will  give  you  your  reward
Bar.  3.  5.  but  think  on  thy  name  now  at  this  *.
Dan.  3.  15.  nor  is  there  at  this  *.  prince  or  prophet
Sus.  15.  it  fell  out  as  they  watched  a  fit  *.

2  Mac.  1. 22.  when  the  t.  came  that  the  sun  shone
TIMES.

IVisd.  7. 18.  beginning,  ending,  and  midst  of  the  *.

8.  8.  she  foreseeth  the  events  of  seasons  and  t.

11.  21.  thou  canst  shew  thy  great  strength  at  all  *.
Eccl.  19.  15.  admonish,  for  many  *.  it  is  a  slander
26.  4.  have  a  good  heart,  he  shall  at  all  *.  rejoice

43.  6.  he  made  the  moon  for  a  declaration  of  *.

44.  7.  all  these  were  the  glory  of  their  *.

47.  10.  he  set  in  order  the  solemn  *.  till  the  end
48. 1C.  who  wast  ordained  for  reproofs  in  their  *.
Bar.  4.  28.  being  returned  seek  him  ten  f.  more

TIMOROUS.

Wisd.  17.  11.  wickedness  condemned  is  very  *.
TIMOTII  EUS.

1  Mac.  5.  11.  T.  being  captain  of  their  host

2  Mac.  8. 30.  of  those  that  were  with  T.  they  slew
9-  3.  what  had  happened  unto  Nicanor  and  T.

10.  24.  T.  whom  the  Jews  had  overcome  before

32.  as  for  T.  himself,  he  fled  into  a  strong  hold

37.  and  killed  T.  that  was  hid  in  a  certain  pit

12. 18.  as  for  T.  they  found  him  not  in  the  places

19.  slew  those  that  T.  had  left  in  the  fortress

20.  went  against  T.  who  had  about  him  120,000

21.  when  T.  had  knowledge  of  Judas  coming
24.  T.  himself  fell  into  the  hands  of  Dositheus

TIN.  •

Eccl.  47.  18.  didst  gather  gold  as  *.  and  multiply
TIRE.

Jud.  10.  3.  braided  her  hair,  and  put  a  t.  upon  it
16. 8.  bound  her  hair  in  a  *.  and  took  linen
TITHES.

Eccl.  35.  9.  and  dedicate  thy  *.  with  gladness

1  Mac.  11. 35.  of  the  *.  and  customs  pertaining

TOBIAS.

Tob.  1.9.  I  married  Anna,  and  of  her  I  begat  T.

3.  17.  give  Sara,  daughter  of  Raguel,  for  wife  to
T.  the  son  of  Tobit,  she  belongeth  to  T.  by  right

4.  2.  wherefore  do  I  not  call  for  my  son  T.  ?

7.  11.  but  T.  said,  I  will  eat  nothing  here,  till

13.  and  he  gave  her  to  be  wife  to  T.  saying

8. 1.  they  supplied,  and  brought  T.  in  unto  her

4.  T.  rose  out  of  the  bed,  and  said,  sister,  arise

5.  then  began  T.  to  say,  blessed  art  thou,  O  God

9. 6.  came  to  the  wedding,  and  T.  blessed  his  wife

11.  1.  after  this,  T.  went  his  way,  praising  God
7.  I  know,  T.  that  thy  father  will  open  his  eyes
19.  T.  wedding  was  kept  seven  days  with  joy

12.  1.  then  Tobit  called  his  son  T.  and  said

14.  12.  but  T.  departed  with  his  wife  and  children

2  Mac.  3. 11.  some  belonged  tc  Ilircanus  so*  of  T

TOB  IE.

1  Mac.  5. 13.  our  brethren  that  were  in  places  of  T
TO  BIEL.

Tob.  1. 1.  the  book  of  the  words  of  Tobit  son  of  T
TOBIT.

Tob.  1. 3.  I  T.  have  walked  in  the  way  of  truth

3. 17.  the  whiteness  of  T.  eyes,  then  came  T.  home

4. 1.  in  that  day  T.  remembered  the  money

7.  2.  how  like  is  this  young  man  to  T.  my  cousin !

4.  he  said  to  them,  do  you  know  T.  our  kinsman  ?
7.  but  when  he  heard  thatT.  was  blind,  he  wept

10.  1.  now  T.  his  father  counted  every  day

11.  10.  T.  went  toward  the  door  and  stumbled

16.  T.  went  out  to  meet  his  daughter-in-law

17.  but  T.  gave  thanks  before  them,  because

12.  1.  T.  called  his  son  Tobias,  and  said  to  him

13. 1.  then  T.  wrote  a  prayer  of  rejoicing
14.  1.  so  T.  made  an  end  of  praising  God

13.  inherited  their  substance,  and  his  father  T.
TOIL.

1  Esd.  4. 22.  do  ye  not  t.  and  bring  all  to  the  woman  ?
TOKEN,  S.

1  Esd.  3. 5.  give  great  things  in  *.  of  victory

2  Esd.  1.  15.  the  quails  were  as  a  *.  for  victory
Wisd.  2.  9.  let  us  leave  *.  of  our  joyfulness

5.  11.  there  is  no  t.  of  her  way  to  be  found
Eccl.  1.3.  26.  is  a  *.  of  a  heart  in  prosperity
2  Mac.  6.  13.  for  it  is  a  t.  of  his  great  goodness
TOLD.

Tob.  8. 14.  maid  came  and  *.  them  that  he  was  alive
Jud.  10.  18.  came  about  her,  till  they  *.  him  of  her
Eccl.  19.  7-  rehearse  not  that  which  is  t.  thee
31. 22.  at  the  last  thou  shalt  find  as  I  *.  thee
TOMB.

Eccl.  21.  8.  gathers  stones  for  the  *.  of  his  burial
TONGUE.

Wisd.  1.  6.  for  God  is  a  hearer  of  his  *.

11.  and  refrain  your  *.  from  backbiting
8. 12.  when  I  hold  my  *.  they  shall  bide  my  leisure
Eccl.  A.  24.  and  learning  by  the  word  of  the  t.

29.  be  not  hasty  in  thy  t.  and  in  thy  deeds  slack

5.  9.  so  doth  the  sinner  that  hath  a  double  *.

13.  and  the  *.  of  man  is  his  fall

14.  not  a  whisperer,  and  lie  not  in  wait  with  thy  *.

8.  3.  strive  not  with  a  man  that  is  full  of  t.

9. 18.  a  man  of  an  ill  *.  is  dangerous  in  his  city

17. 6.  counsel  and  a  *.  eyes  and  ears  gave  he  them


Eccl.  19.6.  he  that  can  rule  his  *.  shall  live  with,  strife

16.  who  is  he  that  hath  not  offended  with  his  *.  ?
20.  1.  some  man  holdeth  his  *.  and  he  is  wise

7.  wise  man  will  hold  hist,  till  he  see  opportunity

18.  is  better  than  to  slip  with  the  *.

22.  27.  who  shall  set  a  watch  and  a  seal  of  wisdom
upon  my  lips,  that  my  *.  destroy  me  not?

25.7.  and  the  tenth  I  will  utter  with  my  t.

8.  well  is  him  that  hath  not  slipped  with  his  *.

26.  6.  a  scourge  of  the  t.  which  communicates
28.  14.  a  backbiting  *.  hath  disquieted  many

17.  the  stroke  of  the  t.  breaketh  the  bones

18.  but  not  so  many  as  have  fallen  by  the  *.

32.  8.  one  that  knoweth  and  yet  holdeth  his  t.

36.  2.3.  if  there  be  meekness  and  comfort  in  her  t.

37.  18.  Dutthe  *.  ruleth  over  them  continually

51.2.  preserved  from  the  snare  of  the  slanderous  *.

5.  from  an  unclean  t.  and  from  lying  words

6.  by  an  accusation  from  an  unrighteous  t.

Bar.  6.  8.  as  for  their  *.  it  is  polished  by  workmen
2  Mac.  7.  4.  to  cut  out  f.  of  him  that  spake  first

10.  when  he  was  required  he  put  out  his  *.

15.  33.  when  he  had  cut  out  the  *.  of  N  icanor

TONGUED.

Eccl.  28.  13.  curse  the  whisperer  and  double-*.
TONGUES.

Wisd.  10.21.  made  the  t.  that  cannot  speak,  eloquent
TOOK.

1  Esd.  1.41.  Nabuchodonosor  f.of  the  holy  vessels
8.  96.  Esdras  arose,  and  *.  an  oath  of  the  priests
Tob.  2.  4.  I  started  up,  and  t.  him  up  into  a  room

7.  13.  *.  her  by  the  hand  and  gave  her  to  Tobias

14.  he  *.  paper  and  did  write  an  instrument

8.  2.  he  *.  the  ashes  of  perfumes,  and  made  smoke

12.  6.  he  *.  them  both  apart,  and  said  unto  them
Esth.  15.  2.  had  called  on  God,  she*,  two  maids  with
Wisd.  13.  3.  being  delighted,  *.  them  to  be  gods
Eccl.  47. 11.  the  Lord  *.  away  his  sins,  and  exalted

TOOKEST.

Esth.  14.  5.  thou  *.  Israel  from  among  all  people
TOP.

Jud.  9. 13.  who  purposed  evil  against  the  *.  of  Sion
TOPS.

Jud.  4.  5.  of  all  the  *.  of  the  high  mountains
TORCHLIGHT.-

2  Mac.  4.  22.  he  was  brought  in  with  *.  and  shoutings

TORMENT.

Wisd.  3.  1.  and  there  shall  no  *.  touch  them
17-  13.  more  than  the  cause  whic  h  brings  the  *.

1  Mac.  9.56.  Alcimusdied  at  that  time  with  *.

2  Mac.  6.  19.  he  came  of  his  own  accord  to  the  *.
28.  had  said  this,  immediately  he  went  to  the  *.

7-  8.  he  also  received  the  next  *.  in  order
17.  behold,  how  will  lie  *.  thee  and  thy  seed
TORMENTED.

2  Esd.  13.  38.  wherewith  they  shall  begin  to  be  *.
Wisd.  6.  6.  but  mighty  men  shall  be  mightily  *.

11.  9.  the  ungodly  were  judged  in  wrath  and  *.

12.  23.  hast  *.  them  with  their  own  abominations

16.  1.  by  multitude  of  beasts  were  they-  *.

4.  should  be  shewed  how  their  enemies  were  *.

2  Mac.  7.  1.  and  were  *.  with  scourges  and  whips

13.  they  *.  and  mangled  the  fourth  in  like  manner

9.  6.  he  had  *.  other  men’s  bowels  with  torments

TORMENTOR.

2  Mac.1.  29.  fear  not  this  *.  but  take  thy  death
TORMENTS.

2  Esd.  9.  9.  have  cast  them  away,  shall  dwell  in  *.
Wisd.  19.  4.  the  punishment  wanting  to  their  *.
Eccl.  33. 26.  so  are  tortures  and  *.  for  an  evil  servant
2  Mac.  7.  37.  that  thou  by  *.  mayest  confess  he  is  G.

9.  5.  tore  *.  of  the  inner  parts  came  upon  him

6.  he  had  tormented  others  with  many  *.

TORN.

Eccl.  6.  2.  that  thy  soul  be  not  *.  in  pieces
TORTURE.

Wisd.  2. 19.  examine  him  with  despitefulness  and  *
TORTURES.

2  Mac.  7.  42.  idolatrous  feasts  and  extreme  *.
TOUCH.

Tob.  12.  7.  do  good,  and  no  evil  shall  *.  you
Jud.  11.  13.  it  is  not  lawful  for  any  so  much  as  to*.
Wisd.  3.  1.  and  there  shall  no  torment  *.  them
Eccl.  34.25.  if  he  *.  it  again,  what  availeth  washing  ?
TOUCHED.

Wisd.  18.  16.  and  it  *.  heaven,  but  stood  on  earth
20.  the  tasting  of  death  *.  the  righteous  also
Dan.  3.  27.  so  that  the  fil  e  *.  them  not  at  all
TOUCH ETH.

Eccl.  13. 1.  he  that  *.  pitch  shall  bedefiled  therewith

tower;

Eccl.  26. 22.  a  married  woman  is  a  *.  against  death
37.  14.  watchmen  that  sit  above  in  an  high  *.

1  Mac.  6.  24.  they  of  our  nation  besiege  the  *.

9.  53.  and  he  put  them  in  the  *.  at  Jerusalem
13.50.  he  cleansed  the*,  from  pollutions

52.  the  hill  of  the  temple  that  was  by  the*.

2  Mac.  4. 12.  he  built  a  place  of  exercise  under  the  *.

13.  5.  a  *.  of  fifty  cubits  high  full  of  ashes

15.  35.  he  hanged  also  Nicanor’s  head  on  the  *.

TOWERS.

1  Esd.  1. 55.  Jerusalem,  they  set  fire  on  her  *.

4.  4.  they  break  down  mountains,  walls,  and  *.

Tob.  13.  16.  thy  walls,*,  and  battlements  with  gold
Jud.  1.  3.  set  the  *.  thereof  on  the  gates  of  it

1  Mac.  1.3.3.  they  builded  city  of  Dav.  with  mighty  *.

5.  65.  and  burned  the  *.  thereof  round  about

16.  10.  so  they  fled  even  to  the  *.  in  the  fields

TOWN.

2  Mac.  11.  5.  to  Bethsura,  which  was  a  strong  *.

12.  21.  for  the  *.  was  hard  to  besiege,  and  uneasy

TOWNS.

1  Mac.  5.  65.  he  smote  Hebron  and  the  *.  thereof

2  Mac.  8.  1.  they  with  him  went  privily  into  *.

6.  he  came  unawares  and  burnt  up  *.  and  cities
TRACE.

IVisd.  2.  4.  shall  pass  away  as  the  *.  of  a  cloud
5.  10.  the  *.  thereof  cannot  be  found,  nor  path
TRACETH.

Eccl.  14.  22.  go  after  her  as  one  that  *.  and  lie  in  wait
TRAINING.

2  Mac.  4.  9.  fur  the  *.  up  of  youth  in  the  fashions


Eccl.

2  Esd.

1  Esd.
8.82.

Eccl.


TRAINS.

11.  29.  for  the  deceittul  man  hath  many  *.

TRANCE.

12.  3.  I  awaked  out  of  trouble  and  *.  of  mind
TRAN  SG  R  ESSED.

1.  48.  he  *.  the  laws  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel
for  we  have  *.  thy  commandments
TRANSGRESS  ETH.

19.  24.  that  *.  the  law  of  the  Most  High
TRANSGRESSING,  S.

Wisd.  2.  12.  he  objecteth  the  *.  of  our  education
Eccl.  29.  19.  a  wicked  man  *.  the  commandments
T  RAN  SG  R  ESS  IONS.  See  Prayer  of  Manass.

TRANSGRESSORS.

Eccl.  40.  14.  so  shall  *.  come  to  nought
TRANSLATED.

E'th.  16.  14.  to  have  *.  the  kingdom  of  the  Persians
Wisd.  4.  10.  so  that  living  among  sinners,  he  was  *.
Eccl.  10.  8.  kingdom  is  *.  from  one  people  to  another
2  Mac.  11.  23.  since  our  father  is  1.  unto  the  gods
TRAVEL.

Wisd.  6.  14.  seeketh  her  early,  shall  have  no  great  *.
Eccl.  8.  15.  *.  not  by  the  way  with  a  bold  fellow
34.  5.  the  heart  fancieth  as  a  woman’s  heart  in  *
40.  1.  great  *.  is  created  for  every  man
1  Mac.  9.  68.  for  his  counsel  and  *.  was  in  vain
TRAVELS.

H  isd.  10. 10.  made  him  rich  in  his  *.  and  multipliet

_  ,  travelled.  f

Eccl.  34.  9.  a  man  that  hath  *.  knoweth  things

traveller.

Eccl.  26. 12.  she  will  open  her  mouth  as  a  thirsty  *
TRAVELLERS.  '

Eccl.  42.  3.  of  reckoning  with  thy  partners  and  *
TRAVELLETII.

Eccl .  19.  11.  fool  t .  with  a  word,  as  a  woman
TREACHERY.

1  Mac.  16.  17-  in  doing  he  committed  great  *.

2  Mac.  3.  32.  some  *.  had  been  done  to  Heliodorus

TREACHEROUS.

Eccl.  22.  22.  disclosing  of  secrets,  or  a  *.  wound
_  TREAD.

Jud.  6.  4.  with  them  we  will  *.  them  under  foot
Bar.  4.  25.  see  his  destruction,  and  *.  on  his  neck
1  Mac.  4.  60.  *.  it  down  as  they  had  done  before
rr  TREASURE.

Tob.  4.  9.  thou  layest  up  a  good  *.  for  thyself
litsd.  7.  14.  for  she  is  a  *.  that  never  faileth
Eccl.  3.  4.  he  is  as  one  that  layeth  up  e.

6.  14.  that  hath  found  such  a  one  hath  found  a  *

20.  30.  *.  that  is  hoarded  up,  what  profit  is  in  it ?
29.  11.  lay  up  thy  *.  according  tothv  commandm

40.  18.  he  that  findeth  a  *.  is  above  them  both

41.  14.  a  *.  that  is  not  seen,  what  profit  is  in  it ?

1  Mac.  3.  28.  he  opened  his  *.  and  gave  soldiers  pay

13.  15.  for  money  he  is  owing  to  the  king’s  *

TREASURER.

1  Esd.  2. 11.  he  delivered  to  Mithridates  his  *.

4.  49.  no  *.  should  forcibly  enter  their  doors  '

2  Mac.  3.  7.  the  king  chose  out  Heliodorus  his  *

TREASURERS.

1  Esd.  4. 47.  Darius  w-rote  letters  for  him  to  all  the  *
TREASURES.

1  Esd.  1.  54.  they  took  holy  vessels  and  the  king’s  *

8. 19.  I  commanded  the  keepers  of  the  *.  in  Syria
Eccl.  1.  25.  the  parables  are  in  the  t.  of  wisdom
41.  12.  thy  name  above  a  thousand  great  t.  of  gold
43.  14.  through  this  the*,  are  opened,  the  clouds  fly
Bar.  3.  15.  or  who  hath  come  into  her  *.  ?

1  Mac.  1.  23.  he  took  the  hidden  *.  which  he  found

3.  29.  when  he  saw  the  money  of  his  *.  failed

TREASURY.

1  Esd.  5.  45.  give  into  the  holy  *.  of  the  works
8.  18.  thou  shalt  giv^it  out  of  the  king’s  *.

1  Mac.  14.  49.  the  copies  should  be  laid  up  in  the  *

2  Mac.  3. 6.  and  told  that  the  *.  in  Jerusalem  was  full

13.  that  it  must  be  brought  into  the  king’s  *.

24.  as  he  was  there  with  his  guard  about  the  *.

40.  the  keeping  of  the  f.  fell  out  on  this  sort

4.  42.  the  robber,  him  they  killed  beside  the  *.

5. 18.  whom  Seleucus  the  king  sent  to  view  the  *

TREAT.

Jud.  3. 1.  they  sent  ambassadors  to  him  to  *  ot  Dear  e
TREATED.  H

2  Mac.  13.  22.  the  king  *.  with  them  in  Bethsura
TREE.

1  E-'d.  6.  32.  out  of  his  own  house  a  *.  be  taken
Wisd.  13.  11.  after  he  hath  sawn  down  a  *.  meet
Eccl.  14.  18.  as  of  the  green  leaves  on  a  thick  t
27.  6.  the  fruit  declareth  if  the  *.  have  been  dressed
Bar.  5.  8.  every  sweet-smelling  *.  shall  overshadow
Sus.  54.  tell  me  under  what  *.  sawest  thou  them  '
TREES.

1  Mac.  10.  30.  half  of  the  fruit  of  the  *.  I  release

14.  8.  and  the  *.  of  the  field  gave  their  fruit

TREMBLE.

1  Esd.  4.  36.  all  works  shake  and  *.  at  it
Eccl.  43.  17.  thunder  maketh  the  earth  to  *.

Prayer  of  Manass.  all  men  *.  before  thv  power
TREMBLED.

Eccl.  48.  19-  then  *.  their  hearts  and  hands
1  Mac.  2.  24.  inflamed  with  zeal,  and  his  reins  *

12.  28.  they  feared  and  *.  in  their  hearts

TREMBLING.

Jud.  15.  2.  and  fear  and  *.  fell  upon  them
TRESPASS.

Eccl.  26.  11.  marvel  not  if  she  *.  against  thee
TRESPASSED.

Eccl.  23.  23.  she  hath  *.  against  her  own  husband
1  R I A  L.

Wisd.  3.  18.  nor  have  they  comfort  in  the  day  of

4.  6.  are  witnesses  against  parents  in  their  1.

6.  8.  but  a  sore  *.  shall  come  on  the  mighty

Eccl.  6. 21.  will  lie  on  him  as  a  mighty  stone  ot  *.
16.  22.  and  the  *.  of  all  things  is  in  the  end
27.  5.  so  the  *.  of  a  man  is  in  his  reasoning

7.  before  hearest  him  speak,  for  this  is  *.  of  men

f  R I B  h .

Tob.  4.  12.  a  woman  who  is  not  of  thy  father’s  *.

5.  8.  call  him,  that  1  may  know  of  what  *.  he  is"

10.  shew  me  of  what  *.  and  family  thou  art

11.  he  said,  dost  thou  seek  for  a  *.  or  family  ?

693


Apocrypha.]


T  WE


U  N  D


TRU

Job.  5. 13.  I  inquired  to  know  thy  t.  and  thy  family
Jud.  8.  2.  was  her  husband  of  her  /. and  kindred
Esth.  14.  5.  I  have  heard  in  the  t.  of  my  family
TRIKES.  _  ,  ,T

Tob  1  4.  which  was  chosen  out  of  all  the  t.  of  Israel,

1  that  all  the  t.  should  sacrifice  there

Eccl.  36.  11-  gather  all  the  t.  of  Jacob  together
44  23  among  the  twelve  t.  did  he  part  them
TRIBULATION.

Esth.  11.  8.  a  clay  of  darkness  and  /.  and  anguish
Eccl.  40.  9.  calamities,  famine,  /.  and  scourge
I  Mac.  6.  11.  1  thought,  into  what  t.  am  1  come
J  HI  BONES.

Jud.  14.12.  their  leaders  came  to  their  captains  and  /.

1  Mac.  16.  19.  to  the  /.  he  sent  letters  to  come
TRIBUTARIES.

1  Mac.  1.4.  kings  who  became  /.  unto  him
TRIBUTE.

1  Esd.  2.  19.  they  will  not  only  refuse  to  give  /.

4.6.  and  compel  one  another  to  pay  t.  to  the  king

50.  that  the  country  should  be  free  without  t.

1  Mac.  8.  7-  such  as  reigned  after  him  pay  great  /.

11.  28.  that  he  would  make  Judea  free  from  t.

13.  39.  if  any  other  /.  were  paid  in  Jerusalem

2  Mac.  8.  10.  the  /.  of  two  thousand  talents
36.  to  make  good  to  the  Romans  their  /.

Till  BUIES.

1  Mac.  3.  29.  that  /.  in  the  country  were  small

31.  there  to  take  the  /.  of  tire  countries

10.  29.  and  now  1  release  all  the  Jews  from  /.

31.  let  Jerusalem  be  free  from  tenths  and  /.

15.  30.  deliver  /.  of  the  places  ye  have  gotten

31.  give  for  /.  of  the  cities  other  500  talents

TRIPO  LIS.

2  Mac.  14.  1.  having  entered  by  the  haven  of  T.

TRIUMPH.

Eccl.  24.2.  she  shall  t.  before  his  power
1  Mac.  2.  48.  nor  suffered  they  the  sinner  to  t.
TRIUMPH  EITI.

Wisd.  4.  2.  it  weareth  a  crown,  and  t.  for  ever
TRODDEN.

1  Mac.  3.  45.  the  sanctuary  also  was  t.  down

2  Mac.  8.  2.  the  people  that  was  t.  down  of  all

TROOPS.

2  Mac.  5.  3.  there  were  seen  t.  of  horsemen  in  array
T  ROUBLE.

Tob.  4.  13.  in  pride  is  destruction  and  much  t.

6.  7.  if  a  devil  or  an  evil  spirit  t.  any
Esth.  13.7.  to  be  well  settled,  and  without  t.

Eccl.  2.  2.  and  make  not  haste  in  time  of  t.

4.  3.  add  not  more  t.  to  an  heart  that  is  vexed

6.  8.  for  some  man  will  not  abi  ‘e  in  the  day  of  t.
22.  13.  beware  of  him,  lest  thou  have  t.

23.  abide  stedfast  to  him  in  the  time  of  his  t.

29.  4.  many  put  them  to  t.  that  helped  them
37.4.  but  in  the  time  of  t.  will  be  against  him

40.  5.  t.  and  unquietness,  fear  of  death,  anger

51.  10.  he  would  not  leave  me  in  the  days  of  my  t.

2  Mac.  1.  25.  thou  that  deliveredst  Israel  from  t.

3.  30.  which  a  little  before  was  full  of  fear  and  t.
TROUBLED.

Tob.  12. 16.  they  were  both  t.  and  fell  on  their  faces
Esth.  15.  16.  she  fell  down,  then  the  king  was  t.
Wisd.  5.  2.  they  shall  be  /.  with  terrible  fear

11.  6.  a  running  river,  t.  with  foul  blood

17.  3.  astonished,  being  t.  with  strange  apparitions
Eccl.  20.  21.  when  he  takes  rest,  he  shall  not  be  t.

30.  7.  and  his  bowels  will  be  t.  with  every  cry-
40.  6.  t.  in  the  vision  of  his  heart,  as  if  escaped
51.  21.  my4ieart  was  t.  in  seeking  her

Bar.  3.  1.  "the  t.  spirit  crieth  unto  thee
Dan.  3.  27.  the  tire  neither  hurt  nor  t.  them
1  Mac.  3.  6.  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  were  t.

7.  22.  to  him  resorted  all  such  as  t.  the  people

9.  7.  Judas  was  sore  t.  in  mind,  and  distressed

11.  53.  nor  rewarded  him,  but  t.  him  very  sore

TRUE.

1  Esd.  8.  89.  O  Lord  of  Israel,  thou  art  t.

Jud.  11.10.  but  lay  it  up  in  thy  heart,  for  it  is  t.
Wisd.  1.  6.  for  God  is  a  t.  beholder  of  his  heart
2.  17.  let  us  see  if  his  words  be  t.  and  let  11s  prove

6.  17.  the  very  t.  beginning  of  her  is  the  desire

12.  27.  they  acknowledged  him  to  be  the  t.  God
Eccl.  46.  15.  Samuel  was  found  a  t.  prophet
Dan.  3.  8.  thou  hast  done  in  /.judgment

TRULY.

Tob.  3.  2.  and  thou  judgest  t.  and  justly  for  ever

14.6.  nations  shall  turn  and  fear  the  Lord  God  t.
Eccl.  41 . 24.  so  shalt  thou  be  t.  shamefaced
42.8.  thus  shalt  thou  be/,  learned  and  approved
TRUMPETS.

1  Esd.  5.  62.  and  all  the  people  sounded  /.

64.  many  with  /.  and  joy  shouted  with  loud  voice

65.  the  /.  might  not  be  heard  for  the  weeping

66.  to  know  what  that  noise  of  /.should  mean
Eccl.  5 0. 16.  the  sons  of  Aaron  sounded  the  silver/.

TRUST.

Tob.  10.  12.  I  commit  my  daugh.  to  thee  of  special  t
Jud.  2.  5.  take  men  that  t.  in  their  own  strength

7.  10.  t^'-  children  of  Israel  do  not  /.  inspears

8.  20.  therefore  we  /.that  he  will  not  despise  us
Wisd.  3.  9.  they  that  put  their  /.  in  him  understand

14.  29.  for  insomuch  as  their  /.  is  in  idols

Eccl.  2.  6.  Older  thy  way  aright,  and  /.  in  him

10.  did  ever  any  /.  in  Lord  and  was  confounded  3

4.  17.  until  she  may  /.his  soul,  and  try  him  by  laws

11.  21.  /.  in  the  lord,  and  abide  in  thy  labour

12.  10.  never  /.  thine  enemy,  for  as  iron  rusteth

16.  3.  /.  not  thou  in  their  life,  neither  respect

32.  23.  in  every  good  work  /.thine  own  soul

34.  7.  they  have  failed  that  put  their  /,  in  them

35.  12.  and  /.  not  to  unrighteous  sacrifices

36.  26.  who  will  /.  a  thief  well  appointed

38.  31.  these  /.  to  their  hands,  every  one  is  wise
Bar.  3.  17.  hoard,  upsilverand  gold,  wherein  men/
Dan.  3  17-  not  coniounded  that  put  their/,  in  thee
Sus.  60.  God  who  saveth  them  that  /.  in  him

1  Mac.  2.  61.  none  that  /.  in  him  shall  be  overcome

2  Mac.  3.  22.  to  keep  the  things  conimitted  of  /.

7.  24.  that  he  also  would  /.  him  with  affairs
40.  so  this  man  put  his  whole  /.  in  the  Lord

8.  18.  for  they,  saith  he,  /.  in  their  weapons

694


TRUSTING.

Eccl.  26.  20.  /.  in  the  goodness  of  thy  stock
Mac.  10.  34.  /.  to  the  strength  of  the  place
TRUSTY.

Tob.  5.  8.  whether  he  be  a  /.  man  to  go  with  thee
TRUTH.

Esd.  4.  13.  who  had  spoken  of  women  and  the  /.
.33.  the  king  looked,  so  he  began  to  speak  of  the  /.
35.  great  is  the  /.  and  stronger  than  all  things

38.  as  for  the  /.  it  endureth  and  is  strong

40.  blessed  be  the  God  of  /.  .

Tob.  14.7.  all  those  who  love  the  Lord  God  in  /.
Bid.  10.  1.3.  1  am  coming  to  declare  the  words  of  /.
Wisd.  .3.  9.  they  that  trust  in  him  shall  understand  /.

5.  6.  therefore  have  we  erred  from  the  way  of  /.

6.  22.  and  1  will  not  pass  over  the  /.

Eccl.  1.  30.  because  thou  earnest  not  in  /.  to  fear  L.

4.  25.  in  no  wise  speak  against  the/,  but  be  abashed
28.  strive  for  the  /.  unto  death,  Ld.  fight  for  thee

11.  7.  blame  not  before  thou  hast  examined  the  /.
27.  9.  so  will  /.  return  to  them  that  practise  in  her
.34.  4.  from  that  which  is  false,  what  /.  can  come  ?
37.  15.  pray  that  he  will  direct  thy  way  in  /.

41.  19.  in  regard  of  the  /.of  God  and  his  covenant
Dan.  3.  4.  thy  ways  right,  all  thy  judgments  are  /.
Hus.  48.  that  without  examination  of  the  /.

1RY.

Jud.  8. 13.  and  now  /.  the  Lord  Almighty
Wisd.  11.  10.  these  thou  didst  admonish  and  /.

2  Mac.  14.  18.  durst  not  /.  the  matter  by  the  sword
TRIED.

Jud.  8.  26.  how  he  /.  Isaac,  and  what  happened
27.  he  hath  not  /.  us  in  the  fire,  as  he  did  them
Wisd.  1. 3.  and  his  power  when  it  is  /.  reproveth
.3.6.  as  gold  in  the  furnace  hath  he  /.  them

11.  9.  for  when  they  were  /.  albeit  but  in  mercy
Eccl.  2.  5.  gold  is  /.  in  the  fire,  men  in  the  furnace

.31.  10.  who  hath  been  /.  and  found  perfect
2  Mac.  1.  34.  made  it  holy,  after  he  had  /.  the  matter
TRIETH.

Jud.  8.  25.  who  /.  us  even  as  he  did  our  fathers
TRYPHON.

1  Mac.  11.  39.  there  was  one  T.  that  had  been
56.  T.  took  the  elephants  and  won  Antioch

12.  39.  T.  went  about  to  get  the  kingdom  of  Asia

42.  then  sent  T.  an  host  of  footmen  into  Galilee
13. 1.  when  Simon  heard  thatT.  had  gathered

14.  now  when  T.  knew  that  Simon  was  risen
19.  howbeit  T.  dissembled,  nor  would  let  him  go
.34.  because  all  that  T.  did  was  to  spoil

15.  10.  came  to  him,  so  that  few  were  left  with  T.
25.  he  shut  up  T.  that  he  could  not  go  out

37.  in  the  mean  time  fled  T.  by  ship  to  Orthosias

39.  as  for  the  king  himself,  he  pursued  T.

TUMBLED.

Jud.  13.  9.  and  she  /.  his  body  down  from  the  bed
TUMULT.

Esth.  11.5.  behold ,  the  noise  of  a  /.  with  thunder

2  Mac.  13.  16.  at  last  they  filled  the  camp  with  /.
TUMULTS.

Wisd.  14.  25.  corruption,  unfaithfulness,  /.perjury
TURN.

Esth.  13.  17.  /.  our  sorrow  into  joy,  that  we  may  live
14.  11.  but  /.  their  device  upon  themselves
Wisd.  2.  12.  because  he  is  not  for  our  /.

Eccl.  4.  4.  not  /.  away  thy  face  from  a  poor  man

5.  /.  not  away  thine  eye  from  the  needy

5.  7.  make  no  tarrying  to  /.  to  the  Lord

7.  2.  and  iniquity  shall  /.  away  from  thee

9.  8.  /.  away  thine  eye  from  a  beautiful  woman
11.  34.  the  stranger  will  /.  thee  out  of  thine  own

17.  26.  /.  to  the  Most  High,  and  /.  away  from  ini¬

quity,  for  he  will  lead  thee  out  of  darkness

18.  24.  the  time  when  he  shall  /.  away  his  face
23.  4./.  away  from  thy  servants  a  haughty  mind

5.  /.  away  from  me  vain  hopes  and  concupiscence
27.  l.that  seeketh  abundance  will  /.  hiseyesaway
35.  2.  he  that  requiteth  a  good  /.  offereth  flour

40.  11.  things  of  earth  shall  /.  to  the  earth  again

41.  21.  to  /.  away  thy  face,  from  thy  kinsman
48.  10.  to  /.  the  heart  of  the  father  to  the  son
Bar.  2.  8.  might  /.  every  one  from  imaginations

13.  let  thy  wrath  /.  from  us,  for  we  are  but  a  few
4.  2.  /.  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  take  hold  of  it
2  Mac.  5.  4.  that  apparition  might  /.  to  good

7.  24.  if  he  would  /.  from  the  laws  of  his  fathers

TURNED.

1  Esd.  7.  15.  the  Lord  had  /.  the  counsel  ofthe  king

8.  87.  we  have  /.  again  to  transgress  thy  law
Wisd.  19.  19.  earthly  things  were  /.  into  watery
Eccl.  6.  9.  there  is  a  friend,  who  being  /.  to  enmity

28.  find  her  rest,  and  that  shall  be  /.  to  thy  joy

10.  12.  his  heart  is  /.  away  from  his  Maker

37.  2.  when  companion  and  friend  is  /.  to  an  enemy

39.  27.  so  to  the  sinners  they  are  /.  into  evil
45.23.  he  stood  up  when  the  people  were  /.  back
47.  2  >.  who  /.  away  the  people  through  his  counsel
Bar.  1. 1.3.  and  his  wrath  is  not  /.  from  us
2.  29.  this  multitude  be/,  intoasmall  number
4.  34.  and  her  pride  shall  be  /.  into  mourning
Sus.  9.  /.  away  their  eyes,  that  they  might  not
47.  then  all  the  people  t.  them  towards  him

1  Mac.  5.28.  Judas  and  his  host  /.  suddenly  by
.35.  this  done,  Judas  /.  aside  to  Maspha

68. J  udas  /.  to  Azotus  in  the  land  ot  the  Philistines

9.  41.  thus  -was  the  marriage  /.  into  mourning
11.55.  Demetrius,  who /.  his  back  and  fled
12.  31.  wherefore  Jonathan  /.  to  the  Arabians

33.  from  whence  he  /.  aside  to  Joppe,and  won  it

2  Mac.  8.  5.  the  wrath  ofthe  Lord  was  /.  into  mercy

10.  25.  they  /.  themselves  to  pray  to  God

TURNING.

Wisd.  7.  18.  the  alterations  ofthe/.  of  the  sun
Eccl.  38.  21.  forget  not,  for  there  is  no  /.  again
1  Mac.  3.  8.  and  /.  away  wiath  from  Israel
TURN  S.

Eccl.  3.31.  he  that  requiteth  good  /.  is  mindful
TURPENTINE.

Ecc/.24. 16. as  the  /.tree  1  stretched  out  my  branches
TWELVE.

1  Esd.  5.  41.  from  them  of  /  years  old  and  upward
7.  8.  and  /.  goats  for  the  sm  of  all  Israel


1  Esd.  8.  54.  then  T  separated  /.  of  the  chief  of  priests/
Eccl.  49.  10.  of  /.  prophets,  let  memorial  be  blessed'
1  Mac.  1.7.  Alexander  reigned/,  years,  and  died
TWICE.

Jud.  1.3.  8.  she  smote  /.  upon  his  neck  with  might
Eccl.  12.  5.  thou  shalt  receive  /.  as  much  evil

I. 3.  7.  till  he  have  drawn  thee  dry  /.  or  thrice
.32.  7.  and  yet  scarcely  when  thou  art  /.  asked
45.14.  their  sacrifice  shall  be  consumed  every  day /,

TWISTED.

Eccl.  45.  11.  with  /.scarlet  work  of  the  cunning
TWO.

1  Esd.  5.  73.  were  hindered  for  the  space  of  /.  years
Eccl.  2.  12.  woe  to  the  sinner  that  goeth  /.  ways
26.  28.  there  be  /.  things  that  grieve  my  heart
33.  15.  there  be  /.  and  /.  one  against  another
50.  25.  there  be  /.  manner  of  nations  l  abhor
Sus.  5.  t.  of  the  ancients  of  the  people  to  be  judges:  r

8.  the  /.  elders  saw  her  going  in  every  day

1  Mac.  1.  16.  might  have  the  dominion  of  /.  realms

9.  57.  the  land  of  Judea  was  in  rest  /.  years

II.  1.3.  Ptolemee  set  /.  crowns  on  his  head
1.3.  16.  send  /.  of  his  sons  for  hostages

2  Mac.  6.  10.  /.women  brought,  who  circumcised

TYRANNY.

Wisd.  14.  21.  for  men  serving  either  calamity  or  /

16.  4.  on  them  exercising  /.  should  come  penury
TY  RAN  T.

Wisd.  12.  14.  nor  shall  /.  be  able  to  set  his  face
2  Mac.  4.  25.  but  having  the  fury  of  a  cruel  /.
TYRANTS.

Wisd.  8.  15.  horrible  /.  shall  be  afraid  when  hear
TY  R  E.

1  Esd.  5.  55.  unto  them  of  T.  they  gave  cars
TY  RIANS.

Eccl.  46.  18.  he  destroyed  the  rules  of  the  T.

TY  RUS.

1  Mac.  11.  59.  the  place  called  the  ladder  of  1 .

2  Mac.  4.  18.  now  when  the  game  was  kept  at  T.
32.  and  some  he  sold  unto  T.  and  cities  about

44.  when  the  king  came  to  T.  three  men  pleaded-
49.  they  of  T.  moved  with  hatred  of  that  deed


U.


UGLY.

Wisd.  16.  3.  for  the  u.  sight  of  the  beasts  sent
U  N  A  BLE.

Wisd.  12.  9.  not  that  thou  wast  u.  to  bring  ungodly

13.  16.  knowing  that  it  was  u.  to  help  itself

19.  of  him  that  is  most?/,  to  do  any  thing
UNADVISEDLY'.

1  Mac.  5.  67.  for  that  they  went  out  to  fight  u.

UNAWARES.

2  Mac.  8.  6.  he  came  at  u.  burnt  up  towns  and  cities'

12.  37.  and  rushing  u.  upon  Gorgias’  men

UNBELIEVING.

Wisd.  10.  7.  pillar  of  salt  is  monument  of  an  u.  soul
UNBURlED.

2  Mac.  5. 10.  he  that  had  cast  out  many  u.  had  none
UNCERTAIN.

Wisd.  9.  14.  and  our  devices  are  but  u.

2  Mac.  7.  34.  nor  be  puffed  up  with  u.  hopes
UNCHANGEABLE.

2  Esd.  6.  44.  there  were  flowers  of  u.  colour
UNCIRCUMCISED.

Esth.  14.  15.  knowest  that  I  abhor  the  bed  of  the  u,
1  Mac.  1.  15.  and  they  made  themselves  ?/.

48.  they  should  also  leave  their  children  u.

2.  46.  what  children  soever  they  found  u.
UNCLEAN.

Eccl.  .34.  4.  of  an  u.  thing  what  can  be  cleansed  3

40.  15.  but  are  as?/,  roots  upon  a  hard  rock
51.  5.  delivered  from  an?/,  tongue  and  lying  words
1  Mac.  1.  47.  sacrifice  swine’s  flesh  and  ?/.  beasts
62.  many  confirmed  not  to  eat  any  u.  thing
4.  43.  bear  out  the  defiled  stones  into  an?/,  place
UN  CLEAN  NESS.

1  Esd.  1.  42.  things  recorded  of  his  u.  and  impiety
8.  83.  and  they  have  filled  it  with  their  u.

87.  to  mingle  ourselves  with  the  u.  of  the  nations
Wisd.14.26.  defiling  of  souls,  adultery,  shameless?/.

1  Mac.  1.  48.  their  souls  abominable  with  ail  u.

I. 3.  48.  yea,  he  put  all  ?/.  out  of  it,  and  placed  men

UNCOMFORTABLE.

Eccl.  18.  15.  nor  use  ?/.  words  when  thou  givest
UNCOVERED.

Jud.  9.  1.  w.  the  sackcloth  wherewith  was  clothed
UN  DEFILED.

Wisd.  3.  13.  blessed  is  the  barren  that  is  u.

4.  2.  having  gotten  victory,  striving  for?/,  rewards

7.  22.  holy,  subtile,  lively,  clear,?/,  plain

8.  20.  rather  being  good,  1  came  into  a  body  ?/.

14.  24.  they  keep  neither  lives  nor  marriages  u.

2  Mac."!.  40.  this  man  died  u.  and  put  his  trust  in  L.

14.  .36.  O  holy  Lord,  keep  this  house  ever  u.

15.  34.  he  that  hath  kept  his  own  place  u.

UNDERMIN  E.

Wisd.  4.  12.  wandering  doth  u.  the  simple  mind
Eccl.  12.  17.  pretend  to  help,  yet  shall  he?/,  thee
UNDERMINED.

2  Mac.  4.  26.  then  Jason,  who  had  u.  his  own  bro¬
ther,  being  ?z.  by  another,  was  compelled  to  flit
UNDERSTAND.

Wisd.  .3.  9.  they  that  trust  in  him  shall  ?/.  truth
4.  17.  they  shall  not  ?/.  what  God  hath  decreed

6.  1.  hear  therefore,  O  ye  kings  and  ?/.

13,  4.  let  them  u.  how  much  mightier  he  is
Eccl.  .3.  23.  more  things  are  shewed  than  men  u.
29.  the  heart  of  the  prudent  will  ?/.  a  parable

II.  7.  blame  not,  u.  first,  and  then  rebuke

17. 6.  and  a  heart  gave  he  them  to  ?/.

.34.  11.  and  1  u.  more  than  1  can  express
Bar.  3.  9.  hear,  Israel,  give  ear  to  u.  wisdom
6. 41.  they  intreat  Bel  as  though  he  were  able  to  M,
UNDERSTAN  DETH.

Wisd.  9.  11.  for  she  knoweth  and  ?/.  all  things
UNDERSTANDING.

Wisd.  1.  5.  from  thoughts  that  are  without?/.

4.  11.  lest  that  wickedness  should  alter  his?/.

■?  ”?  wherefore  1  craved  and  ?/.  was  Slvots  me


UNG


U  N  T


V  A  L  [Apocrypha.


'Wi  7. 22.  wisdom  taught  me,  for  in  her  is  an  ?z.  spi.

23.  overseeing  all  things,  and  going  through  all  ?/.

9.  5.  for  1.  am  too  young  for  the  u.  of  judgment

32.  24.  being  deceived  as  children  of  no  u.

_13.  13.  and  formed  it  by  the  skill  of  his  u.

Zed .  1.  4.  and  the  u.  of  prudence  from  everlasting
19-  wisdom  raineth  down  the  knowledge  of  ?z.

3.  13.  and  if  his  ?/.  fail,  have  patience  with  him

5.  10.  be  stedfast  in  thy  u.  and  let  thy  word  be  same

12.  if  thou  hast  ?/.  answer  thy  neighbour

6.  20.  he  that  is  without  u.  will  not  remain

33.  if  thou  love  to  hear,  thou  shalt  receive  u.

35.  and  let  not  the  parables  of  ?z.  escape  thee

36.  if  thou  seest  a  man  of  ?/.  get  betimes  to  him
7-  25.  marry  daughter,  but  give  her  to  a  man  of  u.
•8.  9-  the  elders,  of  them  thou  shalt  learn  ?/.

10.  23.  to  despise  the  poor  man  that  hath  ?z.

11.  15.  knowledge  and  ?z.  of  the  law  are  of  Lord

14.  20.  that  reasoneth  of  holy  things  by  his  u.

21.  shall  also  have  ?/.  in  her  secrets

15.  3.  with  the  bread  of  u.  shall  she  feed  him

16.  4.  by  one  that  hath  u.  shall  city  be  replenished

23.  he  that  wanteth  u.  will  think  on  vain  things

17.  5.  in  the  sixth  place  he  imparted  them  u.

7.  he  filled  them  with  the  knowledge  of  u.

9.  that  they  might  declare  his  works  with  u.

18.  28.  every  man  of  u.  knoweth  wisdom

29.  they  that  were  of  u.  in  sayings  became  wise
19.2.  wine  will  make  men  or  u.  to  fall  away

24.  he  that,  hath  small  ?/.  and  feareth  God

29.  one  that  hath  ?/.  knoweth  by  his  countenance

21.  11.  that  keepeth  the  law,  getteth  the  ?z.  thereof

25.  the  words  of  such  as  have  ?z.  are  weighed

22.  11.  and  weep  for  the  fool,  for  he  wanteth  ?/.

3  .3.  go  not  to  him  that  hath  no  u.  beware  of  him

15.  sand  is  easier  to  bear,  than  a  man  without  u.

17.  a  heart  settled  on  a  thought  of  ?/.  is  as  a  fair

24.26.  he  maketh  the  u.  to  abound  like  Euphrates

25.  5.  O  !  how  comely  is  ?/.  to  men  of  honour

8.  well  is  him  that  dwelleth  with  a  wife  of  ?/.

26.  28.  and  men  of  u.  that  are  not  set  by

27.  12.  but  be  continually  among  men  of  ?/.

33.  .3.  a  man  of  w.  trusteth  in  the  law,  and  the  law

34.  1.  the  hopes  of  a  man  void  of  ?z.  are  vain

36.  19.  so  doth  an  heart  of  u.  false  speeches

37.  22.  and  the  fruits  of  u.  are  commendable
.39.  6.  he  shall  be  filled  with  the  spirit  of  ?z.

9.  many  shall  commend  his  u.  his  name  shall  live
44.  3.  men  renowned,  giving  counsel  by  their  u.

47.  14.  and  as  a  flood  thou  wast  filled  with  u.

23.  he  left  behind  him  Roboam,  one  that  had  no  ?/.
50.  27.  written  in  this  book  the  instruction  of  u.
Bar.  3. 14.  learn  where  is  strength,  where  is  u.

.32.  and  he  hath  found  her  out  with  his  ?/.

2  Mac.  9.  27.  he  ?z.  my  mind,  will  graciously  yield
11. 13.  who,  as  he  was  a  man  of  u.  sent  to  them
UNDERSTOOD.

1  Esd.  9.  55.  because  they  u.  the  words  wherein
Wisd.  4.  15.  this  the  people  saw,  and  u.  it  not
Eccl.  1.  7-  who  hath  u.  her  great  experience  ?

Bar.  3.  21.  they  have  not  u.  the  paths  thereof

UNDERTAKE.

2  Mac.  2. 27.  we  will  u.  gladly  this  great  pains

UNDER  !  AKETH.

Eccl.  29.  19.  he  that  ?/.  other  men’s  business
2  Mac.  2.  29.  he  that  u.  to  set  it  out  and  paint  it
UNDERTOOK.

1  Esd.  1. 28.  did  not  turn,  but  u.  to  fight  with  him

2  Mac.  8. 10.  so  N  icanor  u.  to  make  money  of  Jews

UNDERWRITTEN.

2  Mac.  9. 18.  he  wrote  to  the  Jews  the  letters  u.

UN  DISCREET.

Eccl.  27. 12.  if  thou  be  among  the  u.  observe  time
UNDRESSED.

2  Esd.  16.  78.  it  is  left  u.  and  cast  into  the  fire

UNFAITHFUL.

2  Esd.  15.  4.  ?z.  shall  die  in  their  unfaithfulness
IVisd.  16.  29.  the  hope  of  the  u.  shall  melt  away
UNFAITHFULNESS.

2  Esd.  15.  4.  the  unfaithful  shall  die  in  their  u.
UNFEIGNED.

IVisd.  18.  16.  brought  thine  u.  commandment
‘2  Mac.  14.  8.  for  the  ?z.  care  I  have  of  things
UNFRUITFUL.

IVisd.  3.  11.  their  labours  u.  works  unprofitab.e
UNGODLY.

IVisd.  1.  9.  shall  be  made  into  the  counsels  of  the  u.

16.  but  u.  men  with  the  works  called  it  to  them
3.10.  the?/,  shall  be  punished  accord,  to  their  imag.

4.  3.  multiplying  brood  of  the  u.  shall  not  thrive
16.  righteous  shall  condemn  the  ?/.  who  are  living

5.  14.  the  hope  of  the  ?/.  is  like  dust  blown  away
10.6.  when  u.  perished,  she  delivered  righteous

13.  9-  they  knew  how  the  u.  were  judged  in  wrath

12.  9.  unable  to  bring  ?/.  under  the  righteous

14.  9.  the  u.  and  his  ungodliness  are  both  alike
16.  an  u.  custom  grown  strong  was  kept  as  a  law
31.  that  punisheth  the  offence  of  the  u.

16.  16.  for  the  u.  that  denied  to  know  thee

19.  1.  as  for  the  ?/.  wrath  came  upon  them
Eccl.  17.  for  the  vengeance  of  the  u.  is  fire
9.  12.  delight  not  in  wnat  u.  have  pleasure  in
12.  5.  do  well  to  lowly,  but  give  not  to  the  u.

6.  Most  High  will  repay  vengeance  to  the  u.

1.3.  24.  poverty  is  evil  in  the  mouth  of  the  u.

16. 1.  not  a  multit.  of  childr.  nor  delight  in?/,  sons

3.  die  without,  than  to  have  them  that  are  ?/.

6.  in  congregation  of  u.  shall  a  fire  be  kindled

21.  27.  when  the  ?/.  curseth  Satan,  he  curseth

22.  12.  but  for  an  u.  man  all  the  days  of  his  life

26. 26.  dishonoureth  him,  shall  be  counted  u.  of  all

41.5.  they  that  are  conversant  in  dwelling  of  the?/.
8.  woe  to  you  ?/.  men  who  have  forsaken  the  law

10.  so  the  ?/.  shall  go  from  a  curse  to  destruction
42.  2.  and  of  judgment  to  justify  the  ?/.

49.3.  in  time  of?/,  he  established  the  worship  of  G.
Bar.  2. 12.  O  Lord,  we  have  sinned,  we  have  done  u.

1  Mac.  3.  8.  destroying  the  ?/.  out  of  them

15.  there  went  a  mighty  host  of?/,  to  help  him

6.  21.  to  whom  some  ?/.  men  of  Israel  joined

7.5.  there  came  to  him  all  the  u.  men  of  Israel
9.  58.  then  all  the?/,  men  held  a  council


1  Mac.  9.  73.  he  destroyed  the  ?/.  men  out  of  Israel

11.  21.  certain?/,  persons  who  hated  their  people

2  Mac.  1.  17.  who  hath  delivered  up  the  ?/.

4.  13.  the  profaneness  of  Jason,  that  ?/.  wretch
8.  2.  would  pity  the  temple  profaned  of?/,  men
UNGODLIN  ESS.

1  Esd.  1.  52.  being  wroth  with  his  people  for  ?/.
IVisd.  14.  9.  ungodly  and  his  ?/.  are  alike  hateful

.  UNGKACIOUS.

2  Mac.  4. 19.  this  ?/.  Jason  sent  messengers  from  Jer.
8.  34.  as  that  mo6l?z.  N  icanor,  brought  merchants

15.  3.  then  this  most  ?/.  wretch  demanded

UN  HAPPY.

2  Mac.  5.  6.  that  it  would  be  a  most  ?z.day'  for  him
8.  in  the  end  therefore  he  had  an  u.  return
UNITY.

Eccl.  25.  1.  ?/.  of  brethren,  the  love  of  neighbours
UN  I  UST.

1  Esd.  4.  39.  she  refraineth  from  all  ?/.  things
IVisd.  16.  19.  might  destroy  fruits  of  an  u.  land
Eccl.  7.  2.  depart  from  u.  and  iniquity  shall  turn

19.  25.  there  is  subtilty,  and  the  same  is  u.

40.  13.  the  goods  of  the  ?/.  shall  be  dried  up
41. 18.  of  u.  dealing  before  thy  partner  and  friend
Dan.  .3.  9.  thou  didst  deliver  us  to  an  ?/.  king

2  Mac.  4.  48.  they  did  soon  suffer  ?/.  punishment

UNJUSTLY.

IVisd.  14.  28.  or  they  prophesy  lies,  or  live  u.

.30.  they  ?/.  swore  in  deceit,  despising  holiness
Eccl.  5.  8.  set  not  thy  heart  on  goods  ?/.  gotten
2  Mac.  8.  17-  the  injury  that  they  had?/,  done
UNKNOWN.

IVisd.  11.  18.  or  tz.  wild  beasts  full  of  rage

18.  .3.  both  to  be  a  guide  to  the  u.  journey

2  Mac.  1.  19.  so  that  the  place  was  ?/.  to  all  men
UNLAWFUL.

IVisd.  4.  6.  for  children  begotten  of  ?/.  beds
UN  LEARN  ED.

Eccl.  6.  20.  she  is  very  unpleasant  to  the  ?/.

51.  23.  draw  near  to  me, you  u.  and  dwell  in  house
UNLOOKED.

IVisd.  18.  17-  and  terrors  came  upon  them  ?/.  for

UNMEASURABLE.

Bar.  3.  25.  great,  and  hath  no  end,  high  and?/.
Prayer  of  Manass.  thy  merciful  promises  is  u.
UNMERCIFU  L.

Eccl.  37.  11.  nor  with  an  ?/.  man  touching  kindness

UNMINDFUL.

Eccl.  37.  6.  be  not  ?/.  of  him  in  thy  riches

UNNECESSARY.

Eccl.  3.  23.  be  not  curious  in  ?/.  matters
UNPASSABLE.

Esth.  16.  24.  shall  be  made  not  only  u.  for  men

UNPERFECT.

IVisd.  4.  5.  the  it.  branches  shall  be  broken  off
Eccl.  42.  24.  and  he  hath  made  nothing  u.

UNPLEASANT.

Eccl.  6.  20.  she  is  very  u.  to  the  unlearned

UNPROFITABLE.

Wisd.  1.  11.  beware  of  murmuring  which  is?/.

4.  5.  fruit  ?/.  not  ripe  to  eat,  meet  for  nothing

16.  29.  for  the  hope  of  the  unfaithful  shall  melt
away  as  hoar  frost  and  run  away  as  u.  water

Eccl.  16.  1.  desire  not  a  multitude  of  ?/.  children
37.  19.  one  is  wise,  and  yet  is  ?/.  to  himself
.  UNPUNISHED.

Eccl.  7.  8.  for  in  one  sin  thou  shalt  not  be  u.

UN  REASONABLE.

Wisd.  11.  15.  didst  send  a  multitude  of  u.  beasts
UN  RIGHT.

Wisd.  12.  13.  shew  that  thy  judgment  is  not  u.

UNRIGHTEOUS.

1  Esd.  4.  36.  and  with  it  is  no  u.  thing

Esth.  14.  15.  knowest  that  I  hate  the  glory  of  the?/.
Wisd.  1.  8.  that  speaketh  ?/.  things  cannot  be  hid

3.  16.  the  seed  of  an  ?/.  bed  shall  be  rooted  out

19.  horrible  is  the  end  of  the  u.  generation

10.  3.  but  when  the  ?/.  went  from  her  in  his  anger

12.  12.  to  be  revenged  for  the  ?/.  men
Eccl.  17.  20.  none  of  their  ?/.  deeds  are  hid  from  him

35.  12.  and  trust  not  to  ?/.  sacrifices,  th6  L.  is  judge
18.  till  he  hath  broken  the  sceptre  of  the  u.

51. 6.  by  an  accusation  to  king  from  an  ?/.  tongue

2  Mac.  14.  36.  O  holy  Lord,  stop  every  u.  mouth

UNRIGHTEOUSLY.

Wisd.  12.  23.  whereas  men  have  lived  u.

Bar.  2.  12.  we  have  dealt  u.  in  thy  ordinances
UN  RIGHT  EO USNESS.

1  Esd..  4.  37.  in  their  ?/.  also  they  shall  perish
Toh,  4.5.  my  son,  follow  not  the  ways  of  u.

12.  8.  a  little  is  better  than  much  with  u.

Wisd.  1.  5.  and  will  not  abide  when  u.  cometh  in
Eccl.  7.  3.  my  son,  sow  not  upon  the  furrows  of  u.

17.  14.  he  said  to  them,  beware  of  all  u.

35.  3.  and  to  forsake  ?/.  is  a  propitiation

UNRULY.

Eccl.  26. 5.  the  gathering  together  of  an  u.  multitude
UNSA  LIABLE.

Eccl.  31.  17.  and  be  not  ?/.  lest  thou  offend

20.  but  pangs  of  the  belly  are  with  an  u.  man
37.  29.  be  not  ?/.  in  any  dainty  thing,  nor  greedy

UNSEARCHABLE.

2  Esd.  9-  19.  are  corrupted  by  a  law  which  is  u.
Bar.  3.  18.  so  careful,  and  whose  works  are  u.
Prayer  of  Manass.  thy  merciful  promise  is  u.

UNSEASONABLE.

Eccl.2Q>.\9-  an  ?/.  tale  will  be  in  the  mouth  of  unwise
UNSPEAKABLE.

Eccl.  36.  14.  fill  Sion  with  thine  ?/.  oracles
2  Mac.  12. 16.  took  city,  and  made  u.  slaughters
UNSPOTTED.

Wisd.  4.  9.  and  an  u.  life  is  old  age

7.  26.  «.  mirror  of  the  power  of  God  and  image
UNTAUGHT.

Eccl.  20.  24.  continually  in  the  mouth  of  the?/.

UN  TEMPER  ATE.

Eccl.  23.  13.  use  not  thy  mouth  to  ?/.  swearing
UNTHANKFUL.

2  Esd.  8.  60.  were  ?/.  to  him  who  prepared  life
Eccl.  29.  17-  he  that  is  of  an  u.  mind  will  leave  him
UNTIMELY.

2  Esd.  6.  21.  women  shall  bring  forth  u.  children


IVisd.  14.  15.  for  a  father  afflicted  with  u.  mourning

UNWISE.

2  Esd.  5.  39.  as  for  me,  I  an)  u.  how  may  I  speak  ?
Wisd.  1.  3.  his  power  when  tried  reproveth  the  u.

5.  20.  the  world  shall  fight  with  him  against  the  u.
14. 11.  the  idols  of  Gentiles  are  become  a  stumbling-
block  to  souls  of  men  and  a  snare  to  feet  of  tz.
Eccl.  10.  3.  an  u.  king  destroyed)  his  people

20.  19.  an  unseasonable  tale  will  be  in  mouth  of  u.

21.  18.  knowledge  of  u.  is  as  talk  without  sense
42.  8.  be  not  ashamed  to  inform  the  u.  and  foolish

UNWORTHY.

2  Esd.  14.  45.  that  the  worthy  and  u.  may  read  it
Eccl.  25.  8.  not  served  a  man  more  u.  than  himself
UNWORTHILY.

Esth.  16.  7.  behaviour  of  them  that  are  u.  placed
UPBRAID.

Eccl.  18.  18.  a  fool  will  ?/.  churlishly,  and  a  gift
41.  22.  and  after  thou  hast  given,  u.  not
UPBRAIDETH.

Wisd.  2.  12.  he  u.  us  with  our  offending  the  law
Eccl.  20.  15.  he  giveth  little,  and  ?/.  much

22.  20.  he  that  u.  his  friend  breaketh  friendship

UPBRAIDING.

Eccl.  22. 22.  there  may  be  a  reconciliation,  except  u.
29. 28.  the  u.  of  house-room ,  and  reproaching  lender
41.  22.  be  ashamed  of  u.  speeches  before  friends
UPHOLDER.

Jud.  9. 11.  an  helper  of  oppressed,  an  u.  of  the  weak
UPHOLDING.

Jud.  11.  7.  for  the  ?/.  of  every  thing  living
UPRIGHT.

Wisd.  9.  3.  execute  judgment  with  an  u.  heart
Eccl.  27.  14.  that  sweareth,  maketh  the  hair  stand  rz.
Bar.  6.  27-  nor  if  one  set  them  ?/.  they  can  move
UPRIGHTLY.

Toh.  4.  5.  do  ?/.  all  thy  life  long,  and  follow  not

8.  7.  1  take  not  this  my  sister  for  lust,  but  tz.

Eccl.  49.  2.  he  behaved  himself  u.  in  conversion

UPRIGHTNESS.

Eccl.  7.  6.  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  thy  u.
UPWARD.

1  Esd.  5. 41.  so  of  Israel  from  twelve  years  old  and  u.
U  RIM.

Eccl.  45. 10.  a  breast-plate  with  U.  and  Thummim
USE.

1  Esd.  8.  17-  are  given  for  the  u.  of  the  temple
Tob.  6.  6.  to  what?/,  is  the  heart  and  the  liver  ?

Jud.  12.  15.  had  received  of  Bagoas  for  her  daily  ?/.
Wisd.  12.  18.  thou  mayest?/.  power  when  thou  wilt

25.  as  to  children  without  the  ?/.  of  reason

13.  13.  among  those  which  served  to  no  u.

15.  7.  but  what  is  the  ?/.  of  either  sort

Eccl.  7.  13.  u.  not  to  make  any  manner  of  lie

14.  ?/.  not  many  words  in  a  multitude  of  elders

23.  9.  nor?/,  thyself  to  the  naming  of  the  Holy  One

13.  ?/.  not  thy  mouth  to  intemperate  swearing

32.9.  when  ancient  men  in  place,  ?/.  notmany  words
39.  26.  the  things  for  the  whole  u.  of  man’s  life

2  Mac.  6.  21.  flesh,  such  as  was  unlawful  for  him

to  u.

11.  31.  the  Jews  shall  u.  their  own  kind  of  meats

12.  39-  as  u.  had  been,  Judas  came  to  take  bodies

USED.

Wisd.  14.  23.  whilst  they  u.  secret  ceremonies
19.  13.  as  they  u.  a  more  hard  behaviour

15.  because  they  u.  strangers  not  friendly

USES.

Wisd.  15.  7.  the  vessels  that  serve  for  clean  u.

Eccl.  38.  1.  for  the?/,  which  you  may  have  of  him
39.  21.  for  he  hath  made  all  things  for  their  u.
USETII.

Eccl.  20.8.  he  that  u.  many  words  shall  be  abhorred
23. 11.  a  man  that?/,  much  swearing  filled  with  iniq.
USUAL.

2  Mac.  14.  31.  priests  were  offering  their  u.  sacrifices
USURPED.

1  Esd.  5.  38.  of  the  priests  that  ?/.  the  office
1  Mac.  15.  3.  pestilent  men  have  u.  the  kingdom
UTMOST.

1  Mac.  3.  9.  was  renowned  to  the?/,  part  of  the  earth

2  Mac.  7.  4.  to  cut  off  the  ?/.  parts  of  his  body

UTTER.

Eccl.  25.  7-  the  tenth  I  will  u.  with  my  tongue
UTTERANCE.

Eccl.  27.  6.  so  is  the  ?/.  of  a  conceit  in  the  heart
UTTERED.

Wisd.  7.  3.  the  first  voice  which  I  u.  was  crying
Eccl.  15.  10.  for  praise  shall  be  u.  in  wisdom
2  Mac.  10.  34.  blasphemed  and  u.  wicked  words

V.

VAIL.

Wisd.  17-  3.  under  a  dark  v.  of  forgetfulness
1  Mac.  1.  22.  censers  of  gold,  the  v.  and  crowns
VAIN.

Jud.  6.  9.  and  none  of  my  words  shall  be  in  r.
Wisd.  3.  11.  he  is  miserable,  their  hope  is  v.

13.1 .  surely  v.  are  all  men  by  nature,  ignorant  of  G.

14.  14.  by  v.  glory  of  men  they  entered  the  world

15.  8.  he  maketh  a  r.  god  of  the  same  clay
Eccl.  3. 24.  many  are  deceived  by  their  own  v.  opin.

23.  11.  if  he  swear  in  v.  he  shall  not  be  innocent

34. 1.  the  hopes  of  a  man  void  of  understand,  arer.
5.  divinations,  soothsay  ings,  and  dreams  are  v.

VALIANT.

1  Mac.  2.  64.  wherefore,  ye  my  sons,  be  v.  and  shew

3.  58.  Judas  said,  arm  yourselves,  and  be  v.  men

4.  3.  he  himself  removed  and  the  c.  men  with

5.  56.  heard  of  the  v.  acts  which  they  had  done

9.  21.  how  is  the  v.  man  fallen  that  delivered

13.  53.  Simon  saw  that  John  his  son  was  a  v.  man

14.  32.  Simon  armed  the  v.  men  of  his  nation

2  Mac.  13. 15.  with  the  most  v.  young  men  he  went

VALIANTLY.

1  Mac.  2.  46.  those  they  circumcised  v.

4.  35.  how  they  were  ready  either  to  live  or  die  v.

6.  31.  they  burned  them  with  fire,  and  fought  v.

VALIANTNESS.

Eccl.  31. 25.  shew  not  thy  v.  in  wine,  hath  destroyed

595


APOCRYPHA.J  VIC


vox


W  A  N


VALLEY.

Jud.  4.4.  they  sent  to  Esora,  and  to  the  v.  of  Salem

7.  3.  they  camped  in  the  v.  near  to  Bethulia

10. 10.  they  looked  until  .ludith  had  passed  the  v.
VALOUR.

1  Mac.  5.  67.  certain  priests  desirous  to  shew  their  v.

8.  2.  that  the  Homans  were  men  of  great  v.

1  Mac.  15.  17-  good  and  able  to  stir  them  up  to  v.

VALUE.

Wind.  15. 10.  and  his  life  of  less  v.  than  clay
VALUED.

Eccl.  26.  15.  her  continent  mind  cannot  be  v.

VAN  ISM.

Wisd.  2.3.  and  our  spirit  shall  v.  as  soft  air
EcclAO.  13.  and  shall  v.  with  noise  as  great  thunder
VANISHED.

Bar.  3. 19.  they  are  v.  and  gone  down  to  the  grave
VAPOUR.

Wisd.  11.18.  beasts  breathing  out  either  a  fiery  v.
Eccl.  22.  24.  as  the  v.  and  smoke  of  a  furnace
38.  28.  the  v.  of  the  fire  wasteth  his  flesh

2  Mac.  7.  5.  as  the  v.  of  the  pan  was  dispersed

VAPOURS.

Eccl.  43.4.  breathing  out  fiery  v.  and  sending  beams
VARIANCE.

Eccl.  8.  2.  be  not  at  v.  with  a  rich  man
VARIETY.

Eccl.  38.  27.  and  are  diligent  to  make  great  v.

50. 18.  with  great  v.  of  sounds  was  there  melody
VAULT.

2  Esd.  16.  59.  he  spreadeth  out  the  heavens  like  a  v.
VAUNT.

1  Mac.  10.70.  why  dost  thou  v.  thy  power  ag.  us  ?

VAUNTING.

Wisd.  5.  8.  what  good  hath  riches  with  v.  brought  ?

17.  7.  and  their “p.  in  wisdom  was  reproved

VEHEMENCY.

2  Mac.  14.  38.  jeopard  his  body  and  life  with  all  v.

VEHEMENTLY.

Eccl.  17*  26.  and  hate  thou  abomination  v.
VENGEANCE.

Jud.  6.  5.  till  I  take  v.  this  nation  come  out  of  Egypt

8.  27.  neither  hath  he  taken  v.  on  us

9.  2.  thou  gavest  a  sword  to  take  v.  of  the  strangers

16.  17.  Lord  will  take  v.  of  them  in  judgment
Esth.  16.  18.  God  speedily  rendering  v.  to  him
Wisd.  1.8.  nor  v.  when  it  punisheth  shall  pass  by  him

11.  15.  unreasonable  beasts  upon  them  fort).

Eccl.  5.  7-  thou  shalt  perish  in  the  day  of  v.

7.  17-  for  the  v.  of  ungodly  is  fire  and  worms

12.  6.  and  will  repay  v.  unto  the  ungodly

18.  24.  and  the  time  of  v.  when  he  shall  turn  away
27.  28.  v.  as  a  lion  shall  lie  in  wait  for  them

28. 1.  he  that  levengeth  shall  find  v.  from  the  Lord
35.  18.  till  he  hath  repayed  v.  to  the  heathen
39.28.  there  be  spirits  that  are  created  for  v.

4f.  25.  they  sought  wickedness  till  v.  came  on

1  iliac.  7-  9-  that  he  should  take  v.  of  Israel

24.  and  took  y.  of  them  that  had  revolted  from

2  Mac.  6. 15.  afterwards  he  should  take  v.  of  us

VENOM.

Eccl.  28. 19.  hath  not  passed  through  the  v.  thereof
VENOMOUS.

Wisd.  16.  10.  the  very  teeth  of  v.  dragons  overcame
VERMILION.

Wisd.  13. 14.  laying  it  over  with  v.  and  paint
VERSES.

Eccl.  44.  5.  such  as  recited  d.  in  writing
VESSEL.

Wisd.  13. 11.  hath  made  a  v.  thereof  fit  for  service
14.  1.  more  rotten  than  the  v.  that  carrieth  him

5.  passing  the  rough  sea  in  a  weak  v.  are  saved

6.  hope  of  the  world,  escaped  in  a  weak  v.

Eccl.  21.  14.  inner  parts  of  a  fool  like  a  broken  v.

50.  9-  as  a  y.  of  beaten  gold  with  precious  stones
Ear.  6.  17.  for  like  as  a  v.  that  a  man  useth
59.  or  else  a  profitable  v.  in  an  house
VESSELS.

1  Esd.  1.  45.  brought  with  the  holy  v.  of  the  Lord

4.  44.  to  send  away  all  the  v.  that  were  taken
Wisd.  15.7-  both  the  v.  that  serve  for  clean  uses

13.  maketh  brittle  v.  and  graven  images
Eccl.  27.  5.  the  furnace  proveth  the  potter’s  v.

Bar.  1.  8.  when  hereceived  v.  of  the  house  of  Lord

1  Mac.  1.  21.  and  took  away  all  the  v.  thereof
23.  he  took  silver  and  gold  and  precious  v.

2.9.  her  glorious  v.  are  carried  into  captivity
6. 12.  I  took  all  the  v.  of  gold  and  silver

11.  58.  upon  this  he  sent  him  golden  v.  to  be  served
14. 15.  he  multiplied  the  v.  of  the  temple

2  Mac.  4.  32.  Menelaus  stole  certain  v.  of  gold
48.  they  that  followed  the  matter  for  holy  v.

5. 16.  taking  the  holy  v.  with  polluted  hands

9. 16.  restore  all  the  holy  v.  with  many  more

VESTMENTS.

1  Esd. 4.  54.  and  priests’  v.  wherein  they  minister

5.  59.  the  priests  stood  arrayed  in  their  v.

2  Mac.  3.  15.  prostrating  themselves  in  their  v.

VEX.

2  Mac.  5.  22.  he  left  governors  to  v.  the  nation
VEX  ED.

Tab.  6.  7-  and  the  party  shall  be  no  more  v.

Wisd.  11.  11.  absent  or  present,  they  were  v.  alike

17.  15.  they  were  v.  with  monstrous  apparitions
Eccl.  4.  3.  add  not  more  trouble  to  a  heart  that  is  v.

41.  2.  death  unto  him  that  is  v.  with  all  things
Bar.  2.  18.  but  the  soul  that  is  greatly  v.

1  Mac.  3.  5.  and  burn  up  those  that  v.  his  people
VIALS.

1  Esd.  2. 13.  v.  of  gold  thirty,  and  of  silver  2410
VICE.

Wisd.  7.  30.  but  v.  shall  not  prevail  against  wisdom
VICTORY.

1  Esd.  3.  5.  give  great  gifts  and  things  in  token  of  v.

9.  to  him  shall  the  v.  be  given, as  was  appointed

12.  above  all  things  truth  beareth  away  the  v.

4.  5.  if  they  get  v.  they  bring  all  to  the  king
59-  and  said,  from  thee  cometh  v.  and  wisdom
Wisd.  4.  2.  having  got  the  v.  striving  for  rewards

10.  12.  in  a  sore  conflict  she  gave  him  the  v.

1  Mac.  3.  19.  for  v.  standeth  not  in  the  multitude

2  Mac.  8.  33.  at  such  times  as  they  kept  feast  for  v.


2  Mac.  10.  38. had  done  so  great  things  given  them  v.

12.  11.  Judas’  side  by  the  help  of  God  got  the  v.

13.  15.  given  watch-word  to  them,  v.  is  of  God
15.  6.  to  set  up  a  public  monument  of  his  z)._

8.  now  to  expect  the  v.  and  aid  from  the  Almighty
21.  knowing  that  v.  cometh  not  by  arms
VICTUALS.

Jud.  4.  5.  and  laid  up  v.  for  the  provision  of  war
11.  12.  for  their  v.  fail  them  and  water  is  scant

1  Mac.  1.35.  they  stored  italso  with  armour  and  r>.

6.  49.  because  they  had  no  v.  to  endure  the  siege'

57.  we  decay  daily,  and  our  v.  are  but  small

8.  26.  that  make  war  on  them  or  aid  them  with  v.
28.  neither  shall  v.  be  given  to  them  against

9.  52.  and  put  forces  in  them  and  provision  of  v.

13.  21.  should  hasten  his  coming,  and  send  them  v.

33.  Simon  built  up  the  strong  holds  and  laid  up  v.
14. 10.  he  provided  v.  for  the  cities  and  set  munition

VIEW.

2  Mac.  5.  18.  king  Seleucus  sent  to  v.  the  treasury

VIEWED.

Jud.  7.  7.  and  v.  the  passages  up  to  the  city
VILE.

Wisd.  4. 18.  they  shall  hereafter  be  a  v.  carcase
11.  15.  they  worshipped  serpents  and  v.  beasts

13.  14.  or  made  it  like  some  v.  beast

2  Mac.  15.  32.  and  shewed  them  v.  Nicanor’s  head
VINE.

2  Esd.  5.  23.  O  Ld.  thou  hast  chosen  thee  one  only  v.
VINEYARD.

2  Esd.  16.  30.  or  as  when  a  v.  is  gathered
43.  so  also  he  that  planteth  the  v.

VINEYARDS.

1  Esd.  4. 16.  they  nourished  them  up  that  planted  v.
VINTAGE.

Eccl.  24.  27.  and  as  Geon  in  the  time  of  v.
VIOLENCE.

Wisd.  7. 20.  the  v.  of  winds  and  reasonings  of  men
Eccl.  20.  4.  he  that  executeth  judgment  with  v.

1  Mac.  4.30.whodidstquell  thez).  of  the  mighty  man
6.  47.  Jews  seeing  v.  of  his  forces  turned  away
7.29.  were  prepared  to  take  away  Judas  by  v.

2  Mac.  4.40.  Lysimachus  began  first  to  offer  v.

VIOLENT.

Wisd.  13.  2.  or  the  v.  water  or  the  lights  of  heaven
19.  7.  and  out  of  the  v.  stream  a  green  field
VIOLENTLY.

Wisd.  17. 18.  a  pleasant  fall  of  water  running  y.
Eccl.  46.  6.  made  the  battle  to  fall  v.  on  the  nations
2  Mac.  9.  7.  carried  v.  so  that  having  a  sore  fall

14.  41.  and  v.  broken  into  the  outer  door

VIRGIN.

Eccl.  20.  4.  as  is  lust  of  a  eunuch  to  deflower  a  v.
30.  20.  groaneth  as  a  eunuch  that  embraceth  a  v.
VIRGINS.

2  Esd.  16.  33.  v.  shall  mourn  havingno  bridegrooms
Jud.  16.  5.  make  my  infants  a  prey,  my  v.  a  spoil

1  Mac.  1.26.  the  c.and  young  men  were  made  feeble

2  Mac.  3. 19.  and  the  v.  that  were  kept  in,  ran
5.  13.  thus  there  was  slaying  of  v.  and  infants

VIRTUE.

Wisd.  4.  1.  better  to  have  v.  for  the  memorial
13.  4.  they  were  astonished  at  their  power  and  v.
19.  20.  the  fire  had  power,  forgetting  his  own  v.
Eccl.  38.  5.  that  the  v.  (hereof  might  be  known
2  Mac.  6.  31.  leaving  his  death  for  a  memorial  of».

15.  12.  exercised  from  a  child  in  all  points  of  v.

VIRTUES.

Wisd.  7.  20.  the  diversities  of  plants  and  v.  of  roots
VIRTUOUS.

2  Esd.  16.  49.  like  as  a  whore  envieth  a  v.  woman
Eccl.  26. 1.  blessed  is  the  man  that  hath  a  v.  wife
2.  a  v.  woman  rejoiceth  her  husband
28.  15.  a  backbiting  tongue  hath  cast  out  v.  women
2  Mac.  15.  12.  Onias  a  v~.  and  good  man,  reverend
VISION.

2  Esd.  10.  37.  thou  wilt  shew  thy  servant  of  this  v.
Eccl.  34.  3.  the  v.  of  dreams  is  the  resemblance
40.  6.  troubled  in  the  v.  of  his  heart
46.  15.  he  was  known  to  be  faithful  in  v.

49.  8.  it  was  Ezekiel  who  saw  the  glorious  v.

2  Mac.  15.  12.  and  this  was  his  v.  that  Onias
VISIONS.

Wisd.  17.  4.  and  sad  v.  appeared  unto  them
VISIT.

2  Esd.  6.  18.  to  v.  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth
9.  2.  the  Highest  will  begin  to  v.  the  world
Jud.  8.  33.  the  Lord  will  v.  Israel  by  my  hand
13.20.  to  v.  thee  in  good,  because  hast  not  spared
Eccl.  2.  14.  what  will  ye  do  when  Lord  shall  v.  you  ?
7.  35.  be  not  slow  to  v.  the  sick,  make  thee  beloved

16.  18.  all  therein  shall  be  moved  when  he  shall  v.

VISITATION.

Wisd.  3.  7.  in  the  time  of  their  v.  they  shall  shine
13.  she  shall  have  fruit  in  the  v.  of  souls
14. 11.  on  the  idols  of  the  Gentiles  shall  there  be  a  v.
Eccl.  18.  20.  in  day  of  v.  thou  shalt  find  mercy

34.  6.  if  not  sent  from  the  Most  High  in  the  v.

VISITED.

1  Esd.  6.  5.  because  the  Lord  had  v.  the  captivity
VISITING.

1  Mac.  16. 14.  v.  the  cities  that  were  in  the  country

2  Mac. 3. 8.  Heliodorus  under  a  colour  of  v.  the  cities

VOICE.

Wisd.  1.  7.  contained)  all,  hath  knowledgeof  the  v.
7.  3.  the  first  v.  which  I  uttered,  was  crying
17-  19.  or  a  roaring  v.  of  most  savage  beasts
18.  1.  whose  v.  thev  hearing,  and  not  seeing
Eccl.  21.  20.  a  fool  lifteth  up  his  v.  with  laughter
34.24.  whose  v.  will  the  Lord  hear?

45.  5.  he  made  him  to  hear  his  v.  and  brought  him
46. 17.  with  a  great  noise  made  his  v.  to  be  heard
Bar.  1.  18.  have  not  hearkened  to  the  v.  of  the  Lord
19.  we  have  been  negligent  in  not  hearing  his  v.
2.  5.  we  have  not  been  obedient  unto  his  v.

22.  but  if  ye  will  not  hear  the  v.  of  the  Lord

23.  1  will  cause  to  cease  the  v.  of  mirth,  the  v.  of
joy,  the  v.  of  the  bridegroom,  and  v.  of  the  bride

Sus.  44.  and  the  Lord  heard  her  v.

2  Mac.  12.  37.  and  sung  psalms  with  a  loud  v.
VOICES.

1  Esd.  5.  61.  and  they  sung  with  loud  r.  songs


Eccl.  50. 18.  the  singers  sang  praises  with  their  v.
VOID.

Wisd.  11. 15.  they  worshipped  serpents  v.  of  reason
Eccl.  34.  1.  the  hopes  of  a  man  v.  of  understanding

1  Mac.  3.  45.  now  Jerusalem  lay  v.  as  a  wilderness

2  Mac.  13.25.  because  they  would  make  covenants  v.

14.  28.  that  he  should  make  v.  the  articles

44.  he  fell  down  into  the  midst  of  the  v.  place
VOLUNTARILY.

1  Mac.  2.  42.  such  as  were  v.  devoted  to  the  law
VOLUPTUOUSNESS.

Wisd.  2.  9.  none  of  us  without  his  part  in  our  v.
VOMIT.

Eccl.  31.21.  go  forth,  v.  and  thou  shalt  have  rest
VOW.

1  Esd.  2.7.  which  have  been  set  forth  by  v.  for  temple

4.  43.  remember  thy  v.  which  thou  vowed
46.  I  desire  that  thou  make  good  the  v.

5.  53.  all  they  that  had  made  any  v.  to  God

8.  58.  the  gold  and  the  silver  is  a  v.  to  the  Lord
VOWED.

1  Esd.  4.43.  remember  thy  vow  which  thou  hast  v.

44.  Cyrus  set  apart,  when  he  v.  to  destroy  Babylon

45.  thou  hast  also  v.  to  build  up  the  temple

46.  the  vow  thou  hast  v.  to  the  Ting  of  heaven

8.  13.  the  gifts  which  I  and  my  friends  have  v.

50.  there  I  v.  a  fast  to  the  young  men  before  Lord

2  Mac.  9.  13.  this  wicked  person  v.  also  to  the  Lord

VOWS.

Jud.  4. 14.  with  the  v.  and  free  gifts  of  the  people
2  Mac.  3.  35.  Heliodorus  made  great  v.  unto  him
VOYAGE.

Jud.  2. 19.  and  his  power  to  go  before  the  king  in  x>.

2  Mac.  5.  1.  prepared  his  second  v.  into  Egypt

W.

WAGES.

1  Esd.  4. 56.  he  commanded  to  give  pensions  and  to.
Tob.  2. 12.  they  paid  her  tv.  and  gave  her  also  a  kid
14.  it  was  given  for  a  gift  more  than  the  tv.

4. 14.  let  not  the  tv.  of  any  man  tarry  with  thee
5.  3.  seek  thee  a  man  and  I  will  give  him  tv.

14.  but  tell  me  what  tv.  shall  1  give  thee  ?

15.  moreover  I  will  add  something  to  thy  tv.

12.  1.  my  son,  see  that  the  man  have  his  tv.

1  Mac.  14.  32.  armed  the  valiant  men  and  gave  to.
WAIT.

Jud.  8.  17.  let  us  to.  for  salvation  of  him

13.  3.  to  stand  and  to  w.  for  her  coming  forth
Wisd.  2.  12.  let  us  lie  in  tv.  for  the  righteous

10. 12.  and  keep  him  safe  from  those  that  lie  in  tv.
Eccl.  8.  11.  lest  he  lie  in  tv.  to  entrap  thee
27.  28.  vengeance  as  a  lion  shall  lie  in  tv.  for  them
36.  16.  reward  them  that  to.  for  thee
51. 8.  how  thou  deliverest  such  as  tv.  for  thee

1  Mac.  1. 36.  for  it  was  a  place  to  lie  in  to.

2  Mae.  7.  30.  said,  whom  tv.  ye  for  ?  I  will  not  obey

9.  25.  tv.  for  opportunities  and  expect  the  event

WAITED.

Jud.  6. 10.  commanded  his  servant  that  vi.  in  his  tent
12.  16.  for  we  tv.  a  time  to  deceive  Judith
WAITERS.

Jud.  13. 1.  dismissed  the  tv.  from  presence  of  his  lord
WAITING.

Jud.  8.  33.  I  will  go  forth  with  my  tv.  woman
WAKETH.

Eccl.  22.7.  as  he  that  tv.  one  from  a  sound  sleep
42.  9.  the  father  tv.  for  the  daughter,  no  man  knows

WALK.

Eccl.  5.  2.  to  tv.  in  the  ways  of  thy  heart
Bar.  4.  2.  u\  in  the  presence  of  the  light  thereof
Sus.  7.  Susanna  went  into  her  husband’s  garden  to  to.
1  Mac.  2.  20.  tv.  in  the  covenant  of  our  fathers
WALKED.

Tob.  1.  3.  I  Tobit  have  tv.  all  the  days  of  my  life
Wisd.  6.  4.  nor  tv.  after  the  counsel  of  God

19.  21.  flames  wasted  not,  though  they  tv.  therein
Bar.  3.  13.  if  thou  hadst  tv.  in  the  way  of  God
Dan.  3.  I.  and  they  tv.  in  the  midst  of  the  fire
Sus.  36.  the  elders  said,  as  we  tv.  in  the  garden
WALKEST.

Eccl.  9. 13.  that  thou  to.  on  battlements  of  the  city
WALKING.

Sus.  8.  the  elders  saw  her  going  in  every  day  and  tv.

WALL.

Tob.  2.  9.  and  slept  by  the  tv.  of  my  court-yard

10.  I  knew  not  there  were  sparrows  in  the  tv.
Wisd.  13. 15.  set  it  in  a  tv.  and  made  it  fast  with  iron
Eccl.  50.  2.  the  fortress  of  the  tv.  about  the  temple

1  Mac.  6.62.  to  pull  down  the  tv.  round  about

9.  54.  the  tv.  of  the  inner  court  be  pulled  down

12.  37.  as  part  of  the  tv.  toward  the  brook  fallen

2  Mac.  6.  10.  they  cast  them  down  from  the  tv.

10.  17.  they  kept  off  all  that  fought  on  the  tv.

35.  twenty  young  men  assaulted  the  tv.  manly

14.43.  he  ran  boldly  up  to  the  tv.  cast  himself  down
WALLS.

1  Esd.  2.  24.  and  the  tv.  thereof  set  up  anew

4.  4.  they  break  down  mountains,  tv.  and  towers

6.  9.  the  timber  already  laid  upon  the  to.

Tob.  1. 17.  or  cast  about  tv.  of  Nineveh,  I  buried  him

13.  16.  tv.  and  towers  and  battlements  with  gold
Eccl.  49.  13.  Neemias  raised  up  for  us  the  tv.

1  Mac.  1.  31.  he  pulled  down  houses  and  tv.  thereo

6.  7-  compassed  about  the  sanctuary  with  high  tv

10.  11.  the  workmen  to  build  the  tv.  and  Sion

45.  for  building  the  tv.  of  Jerusalem  and  Judea

I. 3.45.  people  climbed  on  the  to.  with  their  wives

2  Mac.  .3.  19.  ran,  some  to  the  gates,  and  some  to  tv.

5.  5.  they  that  were  on  the  tv.  being  put  back

II. 9-  were  ready  to  pierce  through  tv.  of  iron

12.  13.  a  bridge  to  a  strong  city  fenced  with  to.

WALLOW.

Eccl.  23.  12.  and  they  shall  not  tv.  in  their  sins
WAN'D.

Eccl.  33.  24.  fodder,  a  tv.  and  burdens  for  the  ass
WANDER.

Eccl.  36.  25.  he  that  hath  no  wife  will  tv.  mourning
WANDERED.

Eccl.  29. 18.  so  that  they  tv.  among  strange  natio  ns


WAT


WEE


VV  I  C  IAi'ochyph«4


2  Mac.  10.  6.  when  as  they  zv.  in  the  mountains
WANDERING.

Wisd.  4. 12.  the  zo.  ot  concupiscence  doth  undermine
WAN  I.

Eccl  3.  25.  without  eyes  thou  snait  zo.  light
19.28.  it  for  zo.  ot  power  he  he  hindered  from  sinning
20.21.  there  is  that  is  hindered  from  sinning  thro’  zv.

40.  26.  there  is  no  to.  in  the  fear  of  the  I  ord
1  Mac.  13.  49.  in  great  distress  for  zv.  of  victuals
WANTED.

Wisd.  11.  17.  zv.  not  means  to  send  among  them
WANTETII.

Eccl.  10.  27-  than  he  that  boasteth  and  at.  bread

16.  23.  he  that  zv.  understanding  will  think
WANTING.

Wisd.  19.4.  the  punishment  a>.  to  their  torments
Eccl.  11.  12.  another  to.  ability  and  full  of  poverty
19.23.  and  there  is  a  fool  at.  in  wisdom
WAN  TON  NESS.

Eccl.  27.  13.  the  sport  of  fools  is  in  the  at.  of  sin
WAR.

Wisd.  8.  15.  I  shall  be  found  good  and  valiant  in  tv.

18.  15.  as  a  fierce  man  of  tv.  into  the  n  idstof  land
Eccl.  26.  28.  a  man  of  at.  that  suffered)  poverty

37.  11.  nor  consult  with  a  coward  in  matters  of  to.
Bar.  3.  26.  of  so  »reat  stature,  and  so  expert  in  zv.

6.  15.  cannot  deliver  himself  from  tv.  and  thieves

1  Mac.  2.  32.  made  zv.  against  them  on  sabbath  day

3.  13.  the  faithful  to  go  out  with  him  to  at.

8.  27.  if  tv.  come  first  on  the  nation  of  the  Jews

2  Mac.  8.  9.  who  in  matt,  of  zv.  had  great  experience

10.  15.  the  ldutneans  went  about  to  nourish  tv.

WARS.

1  Esd.  2.  23.  the  Jews  raised  always  zv.  therein

4.  6.  for  those  that  have  not  to  do  with  to.

Eccl.  46.  1.  Jesus  son  of  Nave  was  valiant  in  tv.

1  Mac.  1.2.  made  many  to.  and  won  many  str.-holds

12.  13.  we  have  had  great  troubles  and  tv.

16.  23.  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  John  and  his  tv.

2  Mac.  2.20.  the  zv.  against  Antiochus  Epiphanes

10.  10.  gathering  briefly  the  calamities  of  the  tv.

WARD.

1  Mac.  14.  3.  Arsaces  by  whom  he  was  put  into  to.
WARINESS.

Eccl.  11.  18.  there  is  that  waxeth  rich  by  his  zv.
WARLIKE.

1  Mac.  5.56.  valiant  acts  and  to.  deeds  thev"  had  done

WARNING.

1  Mac.  6.  3.  they  of  the  city  having  had  tv.  thereof

2  Mac.  6.  17.  but  let  this  be  for  a  tv.  to  us

WARRIOR.

Jud.  15.  3.  every  one  that  was  a  tv.  rushed  out
Eccl.  47.  5.  he  gave  strength  to  slay  that  mightv  zv.
W  ASH.

Sus.  15.  she  was  desirous  to  zv.  herself  in  the  garden

17.  shut  the  garden  doors  that  1  may  to.  me

WASHED.

Jud.  10.  3.  and  u\  her  body  all  over  with  water
WASH  El  H.

Eccl.  31.  25.  that  zv.  after  touching  of  a  dead  body
WASHING.

Eccl.  34.  25.  if  he  touch  again,  whatavaileth  his  tv.  ?
Sus.  17.  said  to  her  maids,  bring  me  oil  and  tv.  balls
WASPS.

Wisd.  12. 8.  didst  send  w.  forerunners  of  thy  host
WASTE.

Jud.  8.  21.  if  we  be  taken  so,  all  Judea  shall  lie  tv.
Wisd.  5.23.  this  iniquity  shall  lay  zv.  the  whole  earth
Eccl.  21.  4.  to  terrify  and  do  wrong  will  zv.  riches
Bar.  2.  26.  the  house  hast  thou  laid  zv.

1  Mac.  1.  39.  her  sanctuary  laid  zv.  like  a  wilderness

2.  12.  even  our  beauty  and  our  glory  is  laid  zv.

WAS  JED.

Wisd.  19.  21.  on  other  side  the  flames  zv.  not  the  flesh
WATCH.

2  Esd.  2.  13.  the  kingdom  is  already  prepared,  zv.

11.  8.  w.  not  all  at  once,  zv.  by  course
Jud.  7.  13.  to  zv.  that  none  go  out  of  the  city

10.  11.  the  first  zv.  of  the  Assyrians  met  her
Eccl.  22. 27.  who  shall  set  a  zv.  before  my  mouth  ?

26.  11.  w.  over  an  impudent  eye,  and  marvel  not
40.  6.  he  is  in  sleep,  as  in  a  day  of  keeping  to.

42.  11.  keep  a  sure  zv.  over  a  shameless  daughter

1  Mac.  12.  27.  Jonathan  commanded  his  men  tow.

WA  I  CHED.

Jud.  7-  5.  they  remained  and  zv.  all  that  night
Sus.  .12.  they  zv.  diligently  from  day  to  day  to  see  her

15.  and  it  fell  out  as  they  zv.  a  fit  time

16.  the  two  elders  hid  themselves  and  zv.  her

2  Mac.  14. 29.  he  zv.  his  time  to  accomplish  by  policy

WATCHES.

Eccl.  43.  10.  they  will  stand,  never  faint  in  their  zv.
Bar.  3. 34.  the  stars  shined  in  their  zv.  and  rejoiced
WATCHETH.

Wisd.  6.  15.  whoso  ?c.  for  her  shall  be  without  care
Eccl.  11.  30.  and  like  as  a  spy  zv.  he  for  thy  fall

38.  28.  he  zv.  to  polish  his  work  perfectly
WATCHING.

Eccl.  31.  2.  tv.  care  will  not  let  a  man  slumber
20.  but  the  pain  of  zv.  and  choler,  and  pangs
2  Mac.  2.  26.  not  easy ,  but  a  matter  of  sweat  andw.
WATCHMEN.

Eccl.  37- 14.  man’s  mind  tell  him  more  than  seven  zv.
WATER.

Wisd.  5.  10.  as  a  ship  passeth  over  the  waves  of  zv.
22.  the  zv.  of  the  sea  shall  rage  against  them
10. 18.  she  led  them  throueh  much  zv.

11.  4.  zv.  was  giv  en  them  out  of  the  flinty  rock

13.  2.  or  the  violent  zv.  or  the  lights  of  heaven
16. 17.  the  fire  had  more  force  in  the  zv.

19.  it  burneth  even  in  the  midst  of  zv.

29.  and  shall  run  away  as  unprofitable  zv.

17.  18.  zv.  I  19.  7,  19,  20.  to.

Eccl.  3.  30.  zv.  will  quench  a  flaming  fire

24.  31.  1  will  zv.  my  best  garden,  and  will  zv.

25.  25.  give  the  zv.  no  passage,  nor  a  wicked

woman

26.  12.  zv.  |  29.  21.  to.  I  38.  5.  tv.  I  40.  16.  zv.  |  43.

20.  zv.  I  48.  17-  zv.

I  Mac.  9.  33.  pitched  by  the  zv.  of  the  pool  Asphar
45.  the  zv.  of  Jordan  on  this  side  and  that  side
11.  60.  passed  through  the  cities  beyond  zv.


1  Mac.  16.  5.  there  was  a  zv.  brook  between  them

2  Mac.  1.  19.  in  a  hol*low  place  of  a  pit  without  zv.

20.  told  us  they  found  no  fire  but  thick  zv.

14.  45.  tho’  his  blood  gushed  out  like  spouts  of  zv.

15.  39;  as  it  is  hurtful  to  drink  wine  or  zv.  alone,  as
wine  mingled  with  tv.  is  pleasant  and  delights

„  WATERS.

2  Esd.  1.  20.  and  zv.  flowed  out  to  your  fill
6.  41.  and  to  make  a  division  betwixt  the  zv.

13.  40.  he  carried  them  over  the  zv.

16.  58.  in  midst  of  zv.  hanged  the  earth  upon  the  zv.
Jud.  7.  17.  they  took  the  zv.  and  fountain  of  the  zv.
Wisd.  17-  4.  but  noises  as  of  to.  falling  down
Eccl.  .39.17.  at  his  command  the  to.  stood  as  an  heap,

at  the  words  of  his  mouth  the  receptacles  of  zv.
2.3.  as  he  that  turned  the  zv.  into  saltness
JO.  11.  what  is  of  the  zv.  do  return  into  the  sea
48.  17.  he  digged  the  rock  and  made  wells  for  zv.
50.  8.  as  lilies  by  the  rivers  of  zv.  and  as  branches
Van.  3.  .38.  O  all  ye  zv.  above  the  heavens
WATERY.

2  Esd.  4.  49.  there  passed  by  before  me  a  zv.  cloud
Wisd.  19. 19.  for  earthly  things  were  turned  into  zv.
WAY.

2  Esd.  .3. 7.  thou  gavest  commandment  to  love  thy  zv.

13.  45.  through  country  there  was  a  great  zo.  to  go
'I'ob.  1.3.  I  have  walked  in  the  zv.  of  truth  and  justice
Wisd.  5.  6.  we  erred  from  the  zv.  of  truth

7.  we  wearied  ourselves  in  the  w.  of  wickedness

14.  3.  for  thou  hast  made  a  zv.  in  the  sea

15.  12.  say  they,  we  must  be  getting  every  zv.

18.  2.3.  and  parted  the  zv.  to  the  living

Eccl.  2.  6.  order  thy  zv.  aright  and  trust  in  him

4.  18.  then  will  she  return  the  straight  zv.

5.  9.  zv.  1  8.  15.  uk  |  16.  14.  zv.  |  21.  6,  10,  16.  zv.  \

.32.  20,  21.  ai.  I  37-  9,  15.  zv.  |  51.  15.  zv.
WAVS.

1  Esd.  8.  52.  to  support  them  in  all  their  zv.

Tob.  4.  5.  follow  not  the  zv.  of  unrighteousness
Wisd.  2.  16.  he  abstaineth  from  our  zv.  as  filthiness

6.  16.  she  sheweth  herself  to  them  in  the  zv.

9.  18.  for  so  the  a;,  of  them  that  lived  on  the  earth
Eccl.  1.  5.  her  zv.  are  everlasting  commandments
2.  12,  15.  zo.  1  4.  17-  zv.  |  5.  2.  zv.  I  6.  26.  zv.  1  14.  21.

uk  |  16.  20.  zv.  |  17.  15.  zv.  |  33.  11.  zv.  |

39.  24.  zv.  |  48.  22.  zv.

1  Mac.  5.  4.  they  lay  in  wait  for  them  in  the  zv.

WAVES.

2  Esd.  13.  2.  that  it  moved  all  the  zv.  thereof
IVisd.  5.  10.  as  a  ship  that  passeth  over  the  zo.  trace

not  found,  the  path-way  of  the  keel  in  the  zo.

14.  .3.  thou  hast  made  a  safe  path  in  the  zv.

Eccl.  24.  6.  in  the  zv.  of  the  sea,  and  in  all  the  earth
2  Mac.  9.  8.  though  he  might  command  the  zv.
WEAK.

1  Esd.  1.  30.  carry  me  out  of  bat'4e,  for  I  am  very  zv.

2  E'sd.  2.  21.  heal  the  broken  and  the  zv.

7-  42.  therefore  have  they  prayed  for  the  zo.

Wisd.  13.  18.  for  health  he  called  on  what  is  zo.

14.  5.  passing  the  rough  sea  in  a  zv.  vessel  are  saved
6.  the  hope  of  the  world  escaped  in  a  zo.  vessel
Eccl.  25.  2.3.  maketh  zv.  hands  and  feeble  knees
Bar.  6.  36.  nor  deliver  thezfl.  from  the  mighty
2  Mac.  9.  21.  as  for  me  I  was  zv.  or  else  I  could
WEAKENED.

Jud.  16.  7 •  but  Judith  zo.  him  with  her  beauty
WEAKNESS.

2  Esd.  8.  53.  zv.  and  the  moth  is  hid  from  you
WEALTH.

Tob.  4.21.  thou  hast  much  uk  if  thou  fear  God
Eccl.  30.  15.  and  a  strong  body  above  infinite  zv.
WEAPON.

Wisd.  5. 17-  make  the  creature  his  a),  for  revenge
WEAPONS.

1  Mac.  5.  4.3.  the  brethren  cast  away  their  zo.  and  fled

10.  6.  and  to  provide  uk  that  he  might  aid  him

2 Mac.  .3.28.  being  unable  to  hel  p  himself  with  his  zv.

10.  23.  having  good  success  with  his  zv.  in  all  things

27.  they  took  their  zo.  and  went  on  further

11.  7 •  Maccabeus  himself  first  of  all  took  zv.

WEAR.

Esth.  14.  16.  that  I  zv.  it  not  when  I  am  private
Eccl.  6.  36.  let  thy  foot  zv.  the  steps  of  his  door

1  Mac.  11.  58.  gave  him  leave  to  zv.  a  golden  buckle
14.  43.  be  clothed  in  purple,  and  zv.  a  golden  girdle

2  Mac.  4. 12.  chief  young  men,  made  them  zv.  a  hat

WE  ARE  ITT.

Eccl.  40.4.  from  him  that  zv.  purple,  and  a  crown
WEAR  I  ED.

Wisd.  5.  7.  we  zv.  ourselves  in  way  of  wickedness
WEARISOME.

Eccl.  1.3.  26.  finding  out  is  a  zv.  labour  of  the  mind
WEARY.

Jud.  1.3. 1.  they  went  to  their  beds,  they  were  all  zv.
Eccl.  16.  27.  they  neither  labour  nor  are  zv.

43.  30.  put  forth  all  your  strength,  and  be  not  zv.

2  Mac.  12.36.  with  Gorgias,  fought  long  and  were  zv.

_  WEATHER.

Eccl.  3.  15.  thy  sins  melt,  as  ice  in  the  fair  warm  zv.
WEDDING.

2  Esd.  10  1.  was  entered  into  his  zo.  chamber,  he  died
Tob.  8.  19.  and  he  kept  the  zv.  feast  fourteen  days
WEED.

Eccl.  40.  16.  the  zv.  growing  upon  every  water
WEEKS.

2  Mac.  12.  31.  the  feast  of  the  uk  approaching
WEENING.

2  Mac.  5.  21  .zv.  in  his  pride  to  make  land  navigable
W  EEP.

2  Esd.  2.  27-  others  shall  zo.  and  be  sorrowful
Tob.  3.  1.  then  1  being  griev  ed,  did  zv.  and  prayed
Jud.  16.  17-  they  shall  feel  them  and  zv.  for  ever
Eccl.  7-  34.  fail  not  to  be  with  them  that  zv.

12.  16.  he  will  zv.  but  if  he  find  opportunity

22.  11.  zv.  for  the  fool,  for  he  wants  understanding
38.  17.  zv.  bitterly,  and  make  great  moan
WEEPING.

1  Esd.  5.  63.  came  with  zv.  and  great  crying
65.  trumpets  might  not  be  heard  for  zv.  of  people

8.  91.  there  was  great  uk  among  the  multitude
Tob.  5.  22.  then  she  made  an  end  of  zv.

Eccl.  22  11.  make  little  zv.  for  the  dead,  he  is  at  rest


Bar.  4. 1 1 .  butsent  them  away  with  zo.  and  mourning
Sus.  35.  and  she  to.  looked  up  towards  heaven
2  Mac.  13. 12.  besought  the  Lord  with  zv.  and  fasting
WEIGH.

2  Esd.  4.  5.  then  said,  zv.  me  the  weight  of  the  fire

16.  76.  let  not  your  sins  zv.  you  down
Eccl.  28. 25.  zv.  thy  words  in  a  balance,  make  a  door
WEIGHED.

1  Esd.  8.  55.  I  zv.  them  the  gold  and  the  silver

56.  and  when  1  had  zv.  it,  delivered  to  them  silver

2  Esd.  4.  36.  he  hath  zv.  the  world  in  the  balance
Eccl.  21.  25.  but  the  words  are  zv.  in  the  balance

WEIGHETH.

Wisd.  9.  15.  earthly  tabernacle  zv.  down  the  mind
WEIGHT.

1  Esd.  8.  64.  all  the  u>.  of  them  was  written  up

2  Esd.  4.  5.  then  said  he,  weigh  me  the  zv.  of  the  fire
Eccl.  16.  25.  I  will  shew  forth  doct  ine  in  zv.

42.  7-  deliver  all  things  in  number  and  zv.
WEIGHTY.

Eccl.  7.  25.  and  so  shall  have  performed  a  zo.  matter
WELL.

Eccl.  28.  19.  zv.  is  he  that  is  defended  from  it

1  Mac.  8.  15.  to  the  end  they  might  be  zv.  ordered

2  Mac.  11.  35.  therewith  we  also  are  zo.  pleased

12.  43.  doing  therein  very  zv.  and  honestly

15.  38.  if  I  have  done  uk  and  as  is  fitting  the  story

WELFARE.

Wisd.  6. 24.  multitude  of  the  wise  is  zv.  of  the  world
2  Mac.  14.  14.  calamities  of  the  Jews  to  be  their  zo.
WELLS.

2  Esd.  2.  32.  for  my  zv.  run  over,  and  my  grace
Eccl.  48.  17.  he  digged  the  hard  rock,  and  made  zv.
WENT.

Wisd.  5.  11.  no  sign  where  she  zv.  is  to  be  found
Eccl.  49.  9.  for  he  directed  them  that  zv.  right
WEPT.

Tob.  7-  6.  Raguel  leaped  up,  and  kissed  him,  and  zv.
7-  Tobit  was  blind,  he  was  sorrowful  and  zv.

8.  Edna  his  wife  and  Sara  his  daughter  zv.

11.  9.  I  am  content  to  die,  and  they  zv.  both
14.  and  he  zv.  and  said,  blessed  art  thou,  O  God
Sus.  ,33.  her  friends  and  all  that  saw  her  zv.

2  Mac.  4. 37-  therefore  Antiochus  was  heartily  sorry,
and  moved  to  pity,  and  zv.  for  him  that  was  dead
WESTWARD.

Jud.  2.  19.  to  cover  all  the  face  of  the  earth  zv.
WHALES.

Eccl.  43.  25.  all  kinds  of  beasts  and  zv.  created
Dan.  .3.  57.  O  ye  zv.  and  all  that  move  in  the  waters
WHEAT.

Jud.  .3.  3.  all  our  fields  of  zv.  lie  before  thy  face
Eccl.  39.  26.  iron  and  salt,  flour  of  zv.  honey,  milk
WH  ELP.

1  Mac.  3.  4.  was  like  a  lion’s  zv.  roaring  for  his  prey

WHIP.

Eccl.  28.  17.  the  stroke  of  the  zv.  maketh  marks
WHIRLWIND.

Eccl.  43. 17.  so  doth  the  northern  storm  and  the  zv.
48.  9-  who  was  taken  up  in  a  zv.  of  fire  and  cl.«  Jot
WHISPER.

Eccl.  12.  18.  he  will  clap  his  hands  and  tv.  much
WHISPERER.

Eccl.  5.  14.  be  not  called  a  zv.  and  lie  not  in  wait

21.  28.  a  zv.  defileth  his  own  soul,  and  is  hated

28.  13.  curse  the  ~v.  and  double-tongued

WHISTLING.

Wisd.  17.  18.  whether  it  were  a  zv.  wind  or  noise
Dan.  3.  27.  as  it  had  been  a  moist  zv.  wind
WHITE.

Bar.  6.  71  •  are  like  a  zv.  thorn  in  an  orchard

2  Mac.  11.  8.  appeared  before  them  one  in  zv.  cloth.

WHITENESS.

Tob.  2.  10.  a  zv.  came  in  mine  eyes  and  I  went
.3.  17.  to  scale  away  the  uk  of  'lobit’s  eyes
6.  8.  to  anoint  a  man  that  hath  zv.  in  his  eyes
11.  8.  he  shall  rub,  and  the  zo.  shall  fall  away

13.  and  the  zv.  pilled  awav  from  his  eyes

Eccl.  43.  18.  the  eye  mar\  efleth  at  beauty  of  the  zv.
WHOLE.

Tob.  12.  3.  he  made  zv.  my  wife,  brought  me  money
Eccl.  38.  9.  pray  to  the  L.  and  he  will  make  thee  zv.
WHORE.

Eccl.  23.  2.3.  she  hath  played  the  zv.  in  adultery
WHOREDOM.

Eccl.  26.  9.  the  zv.  of  a  woman  may  be  known

41.  17.  be  ashamed  of  zv.  before  father  or  mother
WHOREMONGER.

Eccl.  2.3. 17.  all  bread  is  sweet  to  zv.  will  not  leave  off
WHORING.

Eccl.  46. 11.  judges,  whose  heart  went  not  a  zo.

WICKED.

1  Esd.  8.  86.  is  done  to  us  for  our  zv.  works  and  sins
Tob.  4.  17-  but  give  nothing  to  the  zv.

6.  14.  I  am  afraid,  for  a  zv.  spirit  loveth  her
Esth.  16.  15.  whom  this  uk  wretch  hath  delivered
Wisd.  3.  12.  their  wives  are  foolish,  and  children  zv.
Eccl.  10.  9.  a  more  zv.  thing  than  a  covetous  man

14.  8.  envious  man  hath  a  uk  eye,  he  turns  away

10.  a  zo.  eye  envieth  his  bread,  he  is  a  niggard

16.  4.  the  kindred  of  zo.  shall  speedily  be  desolate

19.  26.  there  is  a  zv.  man,  that  hangeth  his  head

20.  18.  so  the  fall  of  the  at.  shall  come  speedily

21.  9.  zv.  |  25.  16,  25.  uk  I  31.  13.  zv.  I  .39.  24,  30.  zv.

I  40.  10.  zv.  |  46.  7.  zv.  murmuring
Bar.  1.  22.  the  imagination  of  his  own  zv.  heart

2.  33.  return  from  their  stiff  neck  and  zv.  deeds

1  Mac.  1.  10.  there  came  out  of  them  zv.  root

11.  went  out  of  Israel  zv.  men  who  persuaded
.34.  they  put  zo.  men,  who  fortified  themselves

3.  6.  zv.  shrunk  for  fear  of  him  and  were  troubled

9.  23.  zv.  began  to  put  forth  their  heads  in  Israel
14.  14.  every  contemner  of  the  law  and  tv.  person

2  Mac.  3. 1 1 .  not  as  that  zv.  Simon  had  misinformed

4.  49.  they  ofTyrus  moved  with  hatr.  of  thatw.deed
6.  13,  21.  zv.  |  7.  34.  zv.  |  8.  4,  32.  zv.  1  9.  9,  13.  zv.  |

10.  10,  34.  zv.  1  12.  23.  zv.  |  13.  7.  zv.  |  14.  27,

42.  zv.  |  15.  5.  his  zv.  will  not  done
WICKEDLY.

Esth.  16.  7-  ye  search  what  hath  been  zv.  done  of  late
Eccl.  15.  20.  he  hath  commanded  no  man  to  do  zo.
2  Mac.  4.  17-  for  it  is  not  a  light  thing  to  do  zv.

697


Apocrypha


WIN


WIT


WOR


WICKEDNESS.

Wisd  2  21.  for  their  own  zv.  bath  blinded  them

4.  6, 'll.  zv.  15.  7,  13.  zv.  |  10.  7-w-l  H.  15.  ».J  17-

11.  zv.  119.  13.  suffered  according  to  their  zv.
Eccl.  3.  28.  for  the  plant  of  zv.  hath  taken  root  in  him

12.  io.  for  like  as  iron  rusteth,  so  is  his  zv.

14.  7.  and  at  the  last  he  will  declare  his  zv._

19.  23.  there  is  a  zv.  and  the  same  an  abomination

25.  13.  and  any  zv.  but  the  zv.  of  a  woman

19.  all  zv.  is  but  little  to  the  zv.  of  a  woman

46.  20.  to  blot  out  the  zv.  of  the  people

Bar.  2.  26.  for  the  zv.  of  the  house  ot  Israel
gn.f.52.  art  waxen  old  in  a>.||  57-  not  abide  your  zv.

1  Mac.  13.  46.  deal  not  with  us  according  to  our  zv.

2  Mac.  3.  1.  because  of  Onias  his  hatred  of  zv.

8.  33.  he  received  a  reward  meet  for  his  zv.

WIDOW.

Jud.  8.  4.  so  Judith  was  a  zv.  in  her  house

9.  9.  give  it  into  mine  hand,  who  am  a  zv.

Wisd.  2.  10.  let  us  not  spare  the  zv.  nor  reverence
Eccl.  35.  14.  nor  zv.  when  she  poureth  out  complaint
Bar.  6.  38.  they  can  shew  no  mercy  to  the  zv.

WIDOWS.

Jud.  8.  5.  she  put  on  sackcloth,  wore  her  zv.  apparel

1  'ccl.  35.  15.  do  not  tears  run  down  the  zv.  cheeks  ?

2  Mac.  3.  10.  was  money  laid  up  for  the  relief  of  zv.

8  28.  given  part  of  spoils  to  the  maimed  and  zv.

WIDOWERS.

2  Esd.  16.  41.  and  they  that  marry  not  as  the  zv.
WIDOWHOOD.

2  Esd.  15.  49.  I  will  send  plagues,  zv.  poverty
Jud.  10.  3.  she  put  off  the  garments  of  herre.

WIFE.

1  Esd.  4.  20.  leaveth  his  father,  and  cleaveth  to  zv.

25.  wherefore  a  man  loveth  his  zv.  better  than
Tob.  1.20.  any  thing  left  me  besides  my  zv.  Anna
2. 11.  my  zv.  Anna  did  take  women’s  work

3.  15,  17,  zv.  1  4.  12.  zv.  1  6.  15.  zv.  |  7.  13.  zv.  1  8.  6,
21.  zv.  I  9. 6.  zv.  |  10.  10.  zv.  1  11.  3.  zv.

Wisd.  13.  17.  prays  for  his  goods,  zv.  and  children
Eccl.  9.  1.  be  not  jealous  over  the  zv.  of  thy  bosom

15.  2.  receive  him  as  a  zv.  married  of  a  virgin

23.  22.  thus  shall  it  go  also  with  the  zv.  that  leaveth

25.  8.  that  dwelleth  with  a  zv.  of  understanding

20.  so  is  a  zv.  full  of  words  to  a  quiet  man

26.  1.  blessed  is  a  man  that  hath  a  virtuous  zv.

7.  an  evil  zv.  is  a  yoke  shaken  to  and  fro

13.  the  grace  of  a  zv.  delights  her  husband

16.  is  beauty  of  a  good  zv.  in  ordering  her  house
33.  19.  give  not  thy  zv.  power  over  thee

36.  24.  he  that  gets  a  zv.  beginneth  a  possession

40.  23.  but  above  both  is  a  zv.  with  her  husband

41.  21.  be  ashamed  to  gaze  on  another  man’s  zv.

42.  6.  sure  keeping  is  good  where  an  evil  zv.  is
Mac.  14.  25.  he  prayed  him  also  to  take  a  zv.

WILD.

Esth.  16.  24.  but  also  most  hateful  to  zv.  beasts
Wisd.  7.  20.  and  the  furies  of  zv.  beasts
Eccl.  12.  13.  or  any  such  as  come  nigh  zv.  beasts
13.  19.  the  zv.  ass  is  the  lion’s  prey  in  the  wilderness

39.  30.  teeth  of  zv.  beasts  and  scorpions  and  sword
WILL.

1  Esd.  9.  9.  do  his  zv.  and  separate  yourselves
Wisd.  9. 13.  who  can  think  what  the  zv.  of  the  L.  is  ?
Eccl.  8.  15.  for  he  will  do  according  to  his  ovnai,

38.  32.  they  shall  not  dwell  where  they  zv.

39.  18.  none  can  hinder  when  he  zv.  save

43.  16.  at  his  zv.  the  south  wind  bloweth

1  Mac.  2.  22.  zv.  |  3.  60.  zv.  I  2  Mac.  11.  23,  30.  zv.  \

14.  33.  zv.  1  15.  5.  not  to  have  his  zv.  done
WILFUL.

Eccl.  30.8.  a  child  left  to  himself  will  be  zv.
WILLED.

2  Mac.  6.  23.  zv.  them  straightways  to  send  to  grave

WILLING.

Wisd.  14.  19.  for  he  zv.  to  please  one  in  authority
Eccl.  6.  35.  be  zv.  to  hear  every  godly  discourse
2  Mac.  11. 7.  they  went  together  with  a  zv.  mind
WILLINGLY.

2  Mac.  14. 24.  would  not  zv.  have  J  udas  out  of  sight
WILT.

Wisd.  12. 18.  thou  mayest  use  power  when  thou  zv.

2  Mac.  7-16.  thou  hast  power,  thou  dost  what  thou  zv.
WIND.

Wisd.  4.  4.  they  shall  be  shaken  with  the  zv.

5.  14.  is  like  dust  blown  away  with  the  zv.

23.  a  mighty  a;,  shall  stand  up  against  them
13.2.  but  deemed  either  fire,  or  zv.  or  swift  air

17.  18.  whether  it  were  a  whistling  zv.  or  noise
Eccl.  5.  9.  winnow  not  with  every  zv.  and  go  not

22.  18.  pales  will  never  stand  against  the  zv.

31. 19  he  fetched  not  his  zv.  short  upon  his  bed
Dan.  3.  27.  as  it  had  been  a  moist  whistling  zv.
WINDS.

Dan.  3.  43.  O  all  ye  zv.  bless  ye  the  Lord,  praise  him
WINDOW.

Tob.  3.  11.  then  she  prayed  toward  the  zv.  and  said
WINDOWS.

Eccl.  14. 23.  he  that  prieth  in  at  her  zv.  shall  hearken
WINE.

Jud.  12.  20.  and  drank  more  zv.  than  he  had  drunk
Esth.  14.  17.  nor  drunk  the  zv.  of  the  drink  offerings
Wisd.  2.7.  let  os  fill  ourselves  with  costly  zv.

Eccl.  9.  9.  spend  not  thy  money  with  her  at  zv.

10.  forsake  not  a  friend,  a  new  friend  is  as  new  zv.
19-  2.  zv.  and  women  will  make  men  to  fall

31.  25.  shew  not  thy  valiantness  in  zv.  for  zv.  hath

26.  so  doth  w.the  hearts  of  proud  bv  drunkenness

27.  zv.  is  as  good  as  life  to  man  if  it  be  moderately

28.  zv.  measurably  drunk  and  in  season  bringeth

29.  but  zv.  drunken  in  excess  makes  bitterness

32.  5.  a  concert  of  music  in  a  banquet  of  zv.

6.  so  is  the  melody  of  music  with  pleasant  zv.

40.  20.  zv.  and  music  rejoice  the  heart
49.  1.  and  as  music  at  a  banquet  of  zv.

WING.

1  Mac.  9. 12.  as  for  Bacchides  he  was  in  the  right  zv.

WINGS.

2  Esd.  1.30.  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  zv.

11.  1.  an  eagle  which  had  twelve  feathered  zv.
Wisd.  5.1 1 .  air  being  beaten  with  the  stroke  of  her  zv.
2  Mac .  15.  20.  *nd  the  horsemen  set  in  zv.

698


WINK.

Eccl.  30. 11.  give  no  liberty  and  zv.  not  at  his  follies
WINNING.

1  Mac.  8.  3.  for  the  zv.  the  mines  of  silver  and  goid
WINNOW.

Eccl.  5.  9.  zv.  not  with  every  wind  and  go  not  into
WINiER.

Wisd.  16.  29.  shall  melt  away  as  the  zv.  hoar-frost
Dan.  3. 45.  O  ye  zv.  and  summer,  bless  ye  the  Lord
WIPED.

Eccl.  12. 1 1.  thou  shah  be  to  him  as  if  thou  hadst  zv.
a  looking-glass,  his  rust  not  altogether  zv.  away
WISDOM.

1  Esd.  4.  59-  from  thee  cometh  zv.  and  thine  is  glory
60.  blessed  art  thou  who  hast  given  me  zv.

Esth.  13.  3.  Aman  that  excelled  in  zv.  among  us
Wisd.  1. 6.  for  zv.  is  a  loving  spirit  and  will  notacqu.

3.  11.  whoso  despiseth  zv.  and  nurture  is  miserable
15.  and  the  root  of  zv.  shall  never  fall  away

4.  9.  but  zv.  is  the  gray  hair  unto  men

6.  9.  that  ye  may  learn  zv.  and  not  fall  away
12.  zv.  is  glorious  and  never  fadeth  away

15.  to  think  therefore  on  her  is  perfection  of  zo.

20,  21,  22,  23.  zv.  |  7-7,  12,  15,  16,  22,  24,  28.  30.  zv.

I  8.  5,  17,  21.  zv.  |  9.  4,  6,  17,  18.  zv.  |  10.  4,
8,  9,  21.  zv.  |  14.  5.  zv.  1  17-  7-  zv.

Eccl.  1. 1.  all  zv.  cometh  from  the  Lord,  is  with  him

4.  zv.  hath  been  created  before  all  things

5.  the  word  of  God  most  High  is  the  fountain  of  zv.

6.  to  whom  hath  the  root  of  zv.  been  revealed
14.  to  fear  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  zv.

16.  to  fear  the  Lord  is  fulness  of  zv.  and  fills  men

19.  zv.  raineth  down  skill  and  knowledge

24.  and  the  lips  of  many  shall  declare  his  zv.

25.  parables  ot  knowledge  are  in  the  treasuresof  zv.

26.  if  thou  desire  zv.  keep  the  commandments
4.  11.  zv.  exalteth  her  children,  and  layeth  hold

23.  and  hide  not  thy  zv.  in  her  beauty

24.  for  by  speech  zv.  shall  be  known  and  learning
6.  18.  so  snalt  thou  find  zv.  till  thine  old  age

22.  for  zv.  is  according  to  her  name,  not  manifest
37.  he  shall  give  thee  zv.  at  thy  own  desire
7-  5.  boast  not  of  thy  zv.  before  the  king
14.  20.  that  doth  meditate  good  things  in  zv.

15. 10.  praise  shall  be  uttered  in  zv.  and  L.  prosper
18.  for  the  zv.  of  the  Lord  is  great,  he  is  mighty

18.  28.  every  man  of  understanding  knows  zv.

19.  18.  and  zv  obtaineth  his  love

20.  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  all  zv.  and  in  all  zv.  is

the  performance  of  the  law  and  know¬
ledge  of  him

22.  the  knowledge  of  wickedness  is  not  zv.

23.  and  there  is  a  fool  wanting  in  zv.

24.  is  better  than  one  that  hath  much  zv.

20.  30.  zv.  that  is  hid  and  treasure  that  is  hoarded
31.  that  hides  folly,  than  a  man  that  hideth  his  zv.

21. 12.  there  is  a  zv.  which  multiplieth  bitterness
18.  as  is  a  house  destroyed,  so  is  zv.  to  a  fool
22.  6.  stripes  and  correction  of  zv.  never  out  of  time
24.1.  shall  praise  herselfand  shall  glory  in  midst

25.  he  filleth  all  things  with  his  zv.  as  Phison
34.  but  laboured  for  all  them  that  seek  zv.

25.  5.  O  how  comely  is  the  zv.  of  old  men  !

10.  O  how  great  is  he  that  findeth  zv.  !

27.  11.  the  discourse  of  a  godly  man  is  with  zv.

32.  4.  and  shew  not  forth  zv.  out  of  time

34.  8,  9.  zv.  1  37.  20,  21.  at.  1  38.  24,  25.  zv.  1  39.  1,  10.
zv.  |  40.  20.  zv.  |  41.  14.  zv.  I  43.33.  zv.  |  44. 15.  zv.

1  50.  27,  29.  zv.  |  51.  13,  17.  zv.

Bar.  3.  9.  hear,  Israel,  give  ear  to  understand  zv.

14.  learn  where  is  zv.  where  is  strength

23.  the  Agarens  that  seek  zv.  on  earth  none  of  these

have  known  the  ways  of  zv.  or  her  paths
W  I SE.

Wisd.  4. 17.  for  they  shall  see  the  end  of  the  zv.

6.  24.  the  multitude  of  the  zv.  is  the  welfare  of  the
world,  and  a  zv.  king  the  upholding  of  the  people
Eccl.  1.  6.  who  hath  known  her  zv.  counsels  i
8.  there  is  one  zv.  and  greatly  to  be  feared
3.  29.  an  attentive  ear  is  the  desire  of  a  zv.  man
6.  34.  and  cleave  unto  him  that  is  zv.

7.19.  forego  not  aw.  good  woman,  grace  above  gold
8. 8.  despise  not  the.  discourse  of  the  zv.  but  acquaint
9. 14.  guess  at  thy  neighbour  and  consult  with  there.

15.  let  thy  talk  be  with  the  zv.  and  communication
10.  1.  a  zv.  judge  will  instruct  his  people

18.  27.  a  si),  man  will  fear  in  every  thing
29.  became  also  re.  themselves,  and  poured  forth

21.  12.  he  that  is  not  zv.  will  not  be  taught

15.  if  a  skilful  man  hear  a  zv.  word,  will  commend

16.  but  grace  shall  be  found  in  the  lips  of  the  zv.

26.  but  the  mouth  of  the  zv.  is  in  their  heart

26.  26.  her  husband,  she  shall  be  judged  zv.  of  all

33.  2.  a  zv.  man  hateth  not  the  law

37.  19,22.  zv.  |  38.  4,24,  .31.  zv.  1  47.  12, 14.  zv.
WISELY.

Eccl.  13. 22.  he  spake  zv.  and  could  have  no  place
WISE  man.

Eccl.<2\.Vl.  they  inquire  at  the  mouth  of  the  zv.  man
20.  but  a  zv.  man  doth  scarce  smile  a  little

24.  a  zv.  man  will  be  grieved  with  the  disgrace
37.  2.3.  a  zv.  man  instructed  his  people

24.  a  zv.  man  3hall  be  filled  with  blessing
26.  a  zv.  man  shall  inherit  glory  among  his  people
40  29.  a  zv.  man  well-nurtured  will  beware  thereof
WISEST.

1  Esd.  3.  9.  shall  judge  that  his  sentence  is  the  zv.

4  42  will  give  it  thee  because  thou  art  found  zv.

WISH  ETH.

2  Mac.  0. 19.  zv.  much  joy,  health  and  prosperity

WITCHCRAFTS.

Wisd  12.4.  thou  hatedst  fordoing  odious  works  of  zv.
WITHDRAW.

Eccl.  13.  9.  if  be  invited  of  a  mighty  man,  zv.  thyself
WITHDREW.

Tob.  1. 19.  to  be  put  to  death,  I  zv.  myself  for  fear
WITHERED.  -

Wisd.  2.  8.  crown  with  rose-buds  before  they  be  zv.
WITHHELD.

Eccl.  46.7.  and  w.the  people  from  sin  and  appeased
WITHSTAND.

Wisd.  11.  21.  who  may  tv.  the.  power  of  thy  arm  ?


Wisd.  12.  12.  who  shall  say,  what  hast  thou  done  5  cw.-
who  shall  zv.  thy  judgment, or  shallaccuse  thee
Bar.  6.  56.  they  cannot  zv.  any  king  or  enemies

1  Mac.  5.  40.  we  shall  not  be  able  to  zv.  him

WITHSTOOD.

Wisd.  10. 16.  w.dreadQil  kings  in  wonders  and  signs
Eccl.  46.  7.  in  that  they  zv.  the  congregation

2  Mac.  8.  5.  he  could  not  be  zv.  by  the  heathen

WITNESS.

Jud.  7.  28. we  take  to  zv.  against  you  heaven  and  earth
Wisd.  1 . 6.  for  God  is  zv.  of  his  reins,  and  a  beholder
SVj.  21.  if  thou  wilt  not,  we  will  bear  zv.  against  thee
43.  knowest  they  have  bprne  false  zv.  against  me
49-  for  they  have  borne  false  zv.  against  her
61  for  Daniel  had  convicted  them  of  false  zv.

1  Mac.  2.  56.  Caleb  for  bearing  zv.  before  congregat.
WITS.

Eccl.  31.  20.  he  riseth  early,  and  his  zv.  are  with  him
WI 1TY.

Jud.  11.  2.3.  thou  art  beautiful  and  zv.  in  thy  words-
Wisd.  8. 19.  for  I  was  a  zv.  child,  and  had  good  spirit
W 1 V  F.S.

1  Esd.  5.  1.  to  go  up  with  their  zv.  sons  and  daughters
9.  12.  let  all  them  that  have  strange  zv.  come  at  time
17.  cause  that  held  strange  zv.  was  brought  to  end
Tob.  4.  12.  they  all  married  w.of  their  kindred
Jud.  4.  12.  he  would  not  give  their  zv.  for  a  spoil

7.  27.  nor  our  zv.  nor  our  children  to  die
Esth.  1.3.  6.  shall  with  zv.  and  children  be  destroyed
Wisd.  .3.  12.  their  zv.  are  foolish  and  children  wicked
WOE.

Eccl.  2. 12.  zv.  be  to  fearful  hearts,  and  faint  hands

41.  8.  zv.  be  to  you  ungodly  who  have  forsaken  law
1  Mac.  2.  7.  zv.  is  me,  wherefore  was  I  born  to  see

WOLF.

Eccl.  13. 17.  what  fellowship  hath  the  zv.  with  lamb  ?
WOMAN.

1  Esd.  4. 18.  do  the3T  not  love  a  zv.  who  is  comely  ?

9.  40.  to  the  whole  multitude  from  man  to  zv.

Tob.  4.  12.  take  not  a  strange  zv.  to  wife  who  is  not
Eccl.  7. 19.  forego  not  wise  good  zv.  grace  above  gold

26.  but  give  not  thyself  over  to  a  light  zv.

9-  2.  give  not  thy  soul  to  a  zv.  to  set  her  foot  on

4.  use  not  the  company  of  a  zv.  that  is  a  singer

8.  turn  thy  eye  from  beautiful  zv.  for  many  have

been  deceived  by  the  beauty  of  a  zv.

10.  18.  nor  anger  for  them  that  are  born  of  a  zv,

19.  11.  a  fool  travails  as  a  zv.  in  labour  of  a  child

25.  13.  any  wickedness  but  the  wickedness  of  a  zv.

26.  2,  6,  8,  9,  14,  15,  22,  23,  24,  25,  26,  27.  zv.  |  .36.

21,  22.  zv.  \  42.  14.  a  zv.  who  brings  shame
Sus.  46.  I  am  clear  from  the  blood  of  this  zv.
WOMANISH.

2  Mac.  7-  21.  stirring  up  her  zv.  thoughts,  she  said

WOMB.

Tob.  4.  4.  she  saw  dangers  when  thou  wast  in  her  zv.
Eccl.  1. 14.  it  was  created  with  the  faithful  in  the  zv.

40.  1.  from  the  day  they  go  outof  their  mother’s  zv.

49.  7-  was  a  prophet,  sanctified  in  his  mother’s  ze.

50.  22.  who  exalteth  our  days  from  the  zv.

2  Mac.  7.  22.  I  cannot  tell  how  you  came  into  my  zv.

27.  that  bare  thee  nine  months  in  my  zv.

WOMEN.

Tob.  2.  11.  my  wife  Anna  did  take  zv.  works  to  da
Eccl.  19-  2.  wine  and  zv,  will  make  men  fall  away

28.  15.  backbiting  tongue  hath  cast  out  virtuous  zv.

42.  12.  and  sit  not  in  the  midst  of  zv.

13.  and  from  zv.  cometh  wickedness

47.  19.  thou  didst  bow  down  thy  loins  to  zv.

WON.

1  Mac.  1.  2.  he  zi.  many  strong  holds  and  slew  kings

WONDERFUL.

Tob.  12. 22.  confessed  the  great  and  zv.  works  of  God  j
Jud.  11. 8.  reported  thou  art  zv.  in  feats  of  war
16.  1.3.  Lord  is  zv.  in  strength  and  invincible
Esth.  15.  14.  for  zv.  art  thou.  Lord,  and  full  of  grace  -  j
Wisd.  19.  5.  that  thy  people  might  pass  a  zv.  way
Eccl.  11.4.  for  the  works  of  the  Lord  are  zv.

31.  Q.zv.  things  hath  he  done  among  his  people

36.  8.  and  let  them  declare  thy  zv.  works

39.  20.  and  there  is  nothing  a',  before  him  ,

2  Mac.  15.  13.  was  of  a  zv.  and  excellent  majesty

WONDERFULLY.

Jud.  14.  19.  and  their  minds  were  zv.  troubled
Eccl.  43.  8.  the  moon  increasing  zv.  in  her  changing
WONDERS.

Wisd.  8.  8.  she  foreseeth  signs  and  zv.  and  events
10.  16.  she  withstood  dreadful  kings  in  zv.  andsigns
19.  8.  seeing  thy  marvellous  strange  zv.

Eccl.  45.  3.  by  his  words  he  caused  the  zv.  to  cease
19.  he  did  zv.  upon  them  to  consume  them

48.  14.  he  did  a>.  in  his  life  and  at.  his  death

2  Mac.  15.21.  called  on  the  Lord  that  worketh  zv.
WONDERED.

Jud.  10.  19.  they  zv.  at  her  beauty  and  admired
WONDROUS.

Eccl.  18.  6.  as  for  the  zv.  works  of  the  Lord,  there
may  nothing  be  taken  from  them,  nor  put  to  them
.36.  6-  that  they  may  set  forth  thy  zv.  deeds

43.  25.  for  therein  be  strange  and  zv.  works

48.  4.  O  Elias,  thou  wast  honoured  in  thy  zv.  works
50.  22.  bless  ye  God,  who  only  doth  zv.  things
WONT.

Eccl.  37.  14.  a  man’s  mind  is  zv.  to  tell  him  more
WOOD.

1  Esd.  6.  25.  one  row  of  new  zv.  of  that  country
Wisd.  10.  4.  in  a  piece  of  zv.  of  small  \alue
1.3.  1.3.  being  a  crooked  piece  of  zv.  full  of  knots

14.  1.  calleth  upon  a  piece  of  zv.  more  rotten

5.  men  commit  their  lives  to  a  small  piece  ot'zv.

7.  blessed  is  the  zv.  whereby  righteousness  cometh
Eccl.  8.  .3.  and  heap  not  zv.  upon  his  fire
Bar.  6.  .30.  set  meat  before  the  gods  of  gold  and  zv.

39.  their  gods  of  zv.  which  are  overlaid  with  gold
50.  for  seeing  they  be  but  of  zv.  and  overlaid

1  Mac.  6.  37.  there  were  strong  towers  of  zv.

9.  45.  and  that  side,  the  marish  likewise  and  zv.

2  Mac.  1.21.  command  the  priests  to  sprinkle  the  zc

WORD.

Jud.  5.  5.  let  my  lord  now  hear  a  zv.  from  mouth
Wisd.  1.  11.  no  zv.  so  secret  shall  go  for  nought
16.  26.  thy  zv.  preserved)  them  that  trust  m  thee


W  OR


WR  A


Y  I  E


Apocrykh  V,


R7rrf.l8.15.  thy  almighty  to.  leaped  down  from  hea.
Eccl.  1.  5.  the  tv.  of  Goa  is  the  fountain  of  wisdom

2.  15.  they  that  fear  the  T.ord  will  not  disobey  his

5.  10.  be  stedfast,  and  let  thy  tv.  be  the  same

16.  28.  and  they  shall  never  disobey  his  tv.

18.  16.  so  is  atv.  better  than  a  gift,  17-

19.  10,  11,  12.  tv.  |  21.  15.  tv.  |  23.  12,  13.  tv.  |  29.  .3.
tv.  |  39.31.  tv.  1  41.  16.  tv.  1  43.  26.  tv.  1  48.  %  13.
no  tv.  could  overcome  him

Bar.  2.  1.  therefore  the  Lord  hath  made  good  his  tv.

5.  5.  gathered  from  west  to  east  by  tv.  of  Iloly  One

1  Mac.  2.  55.  .lesus  for  fulfilling  the  tv.  made  a  judge

2  Mac.  10.  13.  accused  and  called  traitor  at  every  tv.

WORDS.

Esth.  15.  8.  the  king  comforted  her  with  loving  tv.
16.  4.  lifted  up  with  glorious  to.  of  lewd  persons
IVisd.  1.  6.  wall  not  acquit  a  blasphemer  of  his  tv.

9.  the  sound  of  his  tv.  shall  come  to  the  Lord

2.  17.  let  us  see  if  his  tv.  be  true,  and  let  us  prove

6.  25.  receive  therefore  instructions  through  my  tv
Eccl.  1.  24.  he  will  hide  his  tv.  for  a  time

13.  11.  not  equal  in  talk,  believe  not  his  many  tv.

12.  but  cruelly  he  will  kay  up  thy  tv.

20.  8.  he  that  useth  many  tv.  shall  be  abhorred

13.  a  wise  man  by  his  tv.  makes  himself  beloved

21.  17-  they  shall  ponder  his  tv.  in  their  heart

25.  the  re.of  such  as  have  understanding

23. 15.  the  man  accustomed  to  opprobrious  tv.

25.  20.  so  a  wife  full  of  tv.  to  a  quiet  man

32.  4,  9.  tv.  |  37  .  20.  to.  |  39.  17-  tv.  |  42.  15.  tv.  |  45.

3.  tv.  |  51.  5.  tv.  delivered  from  lying  tv.
2  Mac.  7.  30.  while  she  was  yetspeaking  these  zv.
WORK.

1  Esd.  9.  11.  this  is  not  a  tv.  of  a  day  or  two
IVisd.  8.  6.  and  if  prudence  tv.  who  of  all  that  are

13.  10.  good  for  nothing,  the  tv.  of  an  ancient  hand

12.  afterspending  the  refuse  of  his  to.  to  dress  meat

14.  20.  multitude  allured  by  the  grace  of  his  to.
Eccl.  7.  15.  hate  not  laborious  to.  nor  husbandry

9.  17-  for  the  artificer,  the  to.  shall  be  commended
11. 20.  be  conversant  therein  and  wax  old  in  thy  tv.

14.  19.  every  tv.  rotteth  and  consumeth  away

15.  19.  and  he  knoweth  every  tv.  of  man
16. 14.  make  way  for  every  to.  of  mercy
27-  10.  so  sm  for  them  that  tv.  iniquity

32.  23.  in  every  good  tv.  trust  thine  own  soul

33.  24.  bread,  correction,  and  tv.  for  a  servant
28.  set  him  to  to.  as  is  fit  for  him,  put  fetters

37.  11.  nor  with  an  hireling  of  finishing  zv.

38.  27  ,  28,  29,  31,  34.  tv.  I  42.  16.  to.  |  43.  2.  w.  |  45.

10,  11,  12.  at.  I  51.  30.  tv.
Bar.  6.  51.  that  there  is  no  to.  of  God  in  them
1  Mac.  2.  47.  and  the  tv.  prospered  in  their  hand
WORKS.

1  Esd.  6.  10.  these  tv.  are  done  with  great  speed

8.  86.  is  done  to  us  for  our  wicked  to.  and  great  sins
Tob.  3.  2.  O  l  ord,  thou  art  just  in  all  thy  tv.

11.  let  all  thy  tv.  praise  thee  for  ever

12.  6.  honourably  to  shew  forth  the  tv.  of  God
Wisd.  1.  12.  destruction,  with  the  to.  of  your  hands

2.  4.  no  man  shall  have  our  to.  in  remembrance

3.  11.  their  hope  vain,  and  their  tv.  unprofitable

6.  3.  shall  try  your  tv.  and  search  out  your  counsels
8. 18.  and  in  tv.  of  her  hands  are  infinite  riches

9.  9,  12.  to.  111.  1.  tv.  |  12.  4,  19.  tv.  |  13.  1,7,  10.

tv.  |  14.  5.  the  tv.  of  wisdom  should  be  idle
Eccl.  5.  3.  say  not,  who  shall  control  me  for  my  zv.?
11.4.  tv.  wonderful,  his  tv.  among  men  are  hidden
21.  marvel  not  at  the  to.  of  sinners  but  trust  in  Ld.

16.  15.  that  his  powerful  a),  might  be  known

21.  for  the  most  part  of  his  to.  are  hid

22.  who  can  declare  the  tv.  of  his  justice  ?

27-  he  garnished  his  tv.  for  ever,  they  neither  la¬
bour',  nor  are  weary,  nor  cease  from  their  tv.

17.  9.  that  they  might  declare  his  zv.  with  underst.

19.  all  thy  tv.  areas  the  sun  before  him

31.  22;  in  all  thy  to.  be  quick,  so  no  sickness  come
33. 22. in  all  thy  tv.  keep  to  thyself  the  pre  eminence
35.  19.  to  to.  of  men  according  to  their  devices

38.  6.  he.might  be  honoured  in  his  marvellous  tv.

8.  of  his  to.  there  is  no  end,  from  him  is  peace

39.  16,  19.  tv.  |  42.  15,  21,  22.  to.  |  43.  4,  28,  32.  to.

I  47.  8.  in  his  to.  he  praised  the  Holy  One
Bar.  3. 18.  whose  tv.  are  unsearchable,  are  vanished
6.  51.  they  are  no  gods,  but  the  w.  of  men’s  hands
Dan.  3.  35.  O  all  ye  zv.  of  the  L.  bless  ye  the  Lord

1  Mac. 4.  51.  finished  all  them,  they  began  to  make

9.  54.  he  pulled  down  the  tv.  of  the  prophets

10.  44.  for  the  repairing  the  tv.  of  the  sanctuary

14.  42.  their  captain,  to  set  them  over  their  tv.

2  Mac.  3.  36.  he  testified  the  tv.  of  the  great  God

WORKER.

Esth.  16.  18.  for  he  that  was  the  tv.  of  these  things
Eccl.  14.  19-  and  the  to.  thereof  shall  go  withal
t  Mac.  4.  1.  as  if  he  had  been  the  tv.  of  these  evils
WORKERS.

Wisd.  15,9.  endeavoureth  to  do  like  the  tv.  in  brass

1  Mac.  3.  6.  all  the  zv.  of  iniquity  were  troubled

WORKETTI.

Wisd.  8. 5. what  is  richer  than  wisdom  that  to.  things:1
Eccl.  7.  20.  whereas  thy  servant  tv.  truly
27-  22.  he  that  winketh  his  eyes,  tv.  evil
27.  he  that  to.  mischief,  it  shall  fall  on  him

2  Mac.  15.21.  called  on  the  Lord  that  a;.  wonders

WORK  I  KG.

Esth.  13.  5.  this  people  tv.  all  the  mischief  they  can
.WORKMAN.

Wisd.  8.  6.  who  is  a  niore  cunning  tv.  than  she?

14.  2.  and  the  to.  built  it  by  his  skill
Eccl.  45.  11.  the  work  of  the  cunning  to.  stones
Bar.  6.  8.  as  for  their  tongue,  it  is  polished  by  the  to.
45.  can  be  nothing  else  than  tv.  will  have  them  be
WORKMANSHIP.

Wisd.  7.  16.  all  wisdom  also  and  knowledge  of  zv.
WORK-MASTER.

Eccl.  38.  27.  every  tv.  that  laboureth  night  and  day
WORLD.

2  Esd.  2.  34.  he  is  nigh  that  shall  come  in  end  of  tv.

3.  9-  broughtest  flood  on  those  that  dwelt  in  the  tv.

4.  24.  we  pass  away  out  of  the  tv.  as  grasshoppers
27-  for  this  tv.  is  full  of  unrighteousness

5.  24.  of  all  lands  of  the  tv.  hast  chosen  one  pit


2  Esd.  14.  11.  for  them,  is  divided  into  twelve  parts
Wisd.  1.  14.  the  generations  of  the  tv.  were  healthful

2.24.  through  envy  of  devil  came  death  into  the  tv.

6.  24.  the  multitude  of  wise  is  the  welfare  of  them.

7.  17-  namely,  to  know  how  the  tv.  was  made

10.  1.  preserved  the  first-formed  father  of  the  zv.

8.  he  left  behind  them  to  the  to.  a  memorial

11.  22.  the  tv.  before  thee  is  as  a  little  grain

13.  2.  to  be  the  gods  which  govern  the  tv.

9.  to  know  so  much  that  they  could  aim  at  them.

14.  14.  for  by  vain-glory  they  entered  into  the  tv.

21.  this  was  an  occasion  to  deceive  the  tv.

18.24.  for  in  the  long  garment  was  the  whole  tv.
Eccl.  18.  3.  who  governeth  the  to.  with  the  palm

24.  9.  he  created  me  from  beginning  before  the  zv.

38.  34.  but  they  will  maintain  the  state  of  the  tv.
42.  18.  and  he  beholdeth  the  signs  of  the  zv.

Bar.  6.62.  when  God  commands  clouds  to  go  over  m.
Dan.  3.  9.  and  to  the  most  wicked  in  all  the  zv.

14.  be  kept  underthis  day  in  all  tv.  for  our  sins

22.  thou  art  I.ord,  glorious  over  the  whole  tv.

2  Mac.  2.  22.  the  temple  renowned  all  the  zv.  over
3. 12.  the  temple  honoured  over  all  the  tv.

7.  23.  doubtless  the  Creator  of  the  tv.  who  formed
9.  17.  and  go  through  all  the  to.  that  was  inhabited

WORMS.

Eccl.  10. 11 .  shall  inherit  creep,  things,  beasts  and  m.
19.  3.  moths  and  tv.  shall  have  him  to  heritage

1  Mac.  2.  62.  for  his  glory  shall  be  dung  and  tv.

2  Mac.  9-9.m.  ruse  out  of  the  body  of  this  wicked  man

WORN.

Eccl.  11.5.  one  never  thought  of,  hath  tv.  the  crown
WORSE.

Wisd.  15.  18.  being  compared,  some  to.  than  others
Eccl.  19.  7-  thou  shalt  fare  never  the  to.

22.  11.  the  life  of  the  fool  is  to.  than  death

39.  34.  a  man  cannot  say,  this  is  zv.  than  that

2  Mac.  7.  39-  the  king  handled  him  tv.  than  the  rest

13.  9.  to  do  far  zv.  to  .lews  than  had  been  done

WORSHIP.

Tab.  5.  13.  as  we  went  together  to  Jerusalem  tom.
Jud.  3.8.  that  all  nations  should  to.  N abuchodonosor

8.  18.  nor  people  which  zv.  gods  made  with  hands
Esth.  13.  14.  nor  will  I  to.  any  but  thee,  O  God
Wisd.  15.  6.  they  that  to.  them,  are  lovers  of  evil
Eccl.  49.  3.  he  established  the  zv.  of  God

50.  17.  the  people  fell  on  their  faces  to  tv.  their  Lord
21.  they  bowed  down  to  tv.  the  second  time
Bar.  6.  6.  but  say  ye,  O  Lord,  we  must  tv.  thee
39.  if  they  that  m.  them  shall  be  confounded
Dan.  3. 10.  become  a  reproach  to  them  that  tv.  thee
68.  O  all  ye  that  zv.  the  Lord,  praise  him
Bel  4.  the  king  said,  why  dost  not  thou  zv.  Bel  r
5.  Daniel  said,  because  1  may  not  m.  idols  made

25.  Daniel  said,  I  will  tv.  the  Lord  my  God
27.  Daniel  said,  lo,  these  are  the  gods  you  tv.

WORSHIPPED.

Jud.  5.  8.  and  tv.  the  God  of  heaven  whom  theyknew
Wisd.  11.  15.  they  to.  serpents  void  of  reason

14.  16.  images  were  zv.  by  the  command  of  kings

15.  18.  they  to.  those  beasts  that  are  most  hateful
Bel.  4.  the  kingm.  it,  but  Daniel  tv.  his  own  God

WORSH1PPETH.

Wisd.  15.  17.  he  is  better  than  the  things  he  tv.
WORSHIPPING.

Wisd.  14.  27.  for  the  tv.  of  idols  not  to  be  named
.WORTH.

Wisd.  2.  11.  feeble  is  found  to  be  nothing  m.

Eccl.  26. 14.  nothing  so  much  tv.  as  a  mind  instructed
Bar.  6.  17.  a  vessel  is  nothing?^,  when  it  is  broken

26.  they  declare  to  men  that  they  be  nothing  tv.

WORTHY.

Wisd.  1.  16.  they  are  tv.  to  take  part  with  it

3.  5.  God  proved  them,  found  them  m.  for  himself

6.  16.  she  goeth,  seeking  such  as  are  zv.  of  her

9.  12.  tv.  |  12.  7.  zv.  |  15.  6.  to.  I  16.  9.  tv.  |  17.  8.  tv.

|  18.  4.  were  tv.  to  be  deprived  of  light
Eccl.  8.  5.  remember  we  are  all  to.  of  punishment

11.  31.  in  things  to.  praise,  will  lay  blame  on  thee
38. 17.  weep  bitterly  and  use  lamentation  as  he  is  tv.

1  Mac.  16.  23.  his  wars  and  to.  deeds  which  he  did

2  Mac.  4.  25.  bringing  nothing  tv.  the  high  priesth.

7.  20.  the  mother  was  tv.  of  honourable  memory

15.  11.  he.  told  them  a  dream  to.  to  be  believed
21.  he  giveth  victory  to  such  as  are  to.

WORTHILY.

Eccl.  16.  20.  no  heart  can  think  on  these  things  to.
WOVEN.

Jud.  10.  21.  Holofernes’  bed  tv.  with  purple  and  gold
WOULD.

Wisd.  7.  15.  God  hath  granted  me  to  speak  as  I  a).
WOULD  EST.

2  Mac.  7.  2.  what  tv.  thou  ask  or  learn  of  us  ?
WOUND.

Eccl.  22.  22.  except  for  pride,  or  a  treacherous  tv.

27.  21.  as  for  a  tv.  it  may  be  bound  up
2  Mac.  15.  16.  with  which  thou  shalt  tv.  adversaries
WOUNDED.

Jud.  16.  12.  and  a’,  them  as  fugitives’  children
Eccl.  25.  23.  a  wicked  woman  maketh  a  to.  heart
2  Mac.  3.  16.  it  would  have  tv.  his  heart

12.  22.  and  tv.  with  the  points  of  their  own  swords

WOUNDS.

Eccl.  27  25.  a  deceitful  stroke  shall  make  zv.

30.  7.  maketh  too  much  of  his  son  shall  bind  his  tv.

31.  30.  it  diminished)  strength,  and  maketh  tv.

WRAPPED.

Eccl.  21.  9.  the  wicked  is  like  two  tv.  together
2  Mac.  5.  18.  had  they  not  been  tv.  in  many  sins
WRATH.

Tob.  1.  18.  Sennacherib  in  his  tv.  killed  many
Jud.  2.  7-  I  will  go  forth  in  my  tv.  against  them
Wisd.  5.  22.  and  hailstones  full  of  zv.  shall  be  cast
10. 10.  the  righteous  fled  from  his  brother’s  tv.

11.  9.  to.  |  18.  21,  23,  25.  tv.  |  19.1.  tv.  on  them
Eccl.  7.  16.  remember  that  to.  will  not  tarry  long

16.  11.  for  mercy  and  tv.  are  with  him

18.  24.  think  on  the  tv.  that  shall  be  at  the  end
25. 15.  there  is  no  zv.  above  the  tv.  of  an  enemy

27.  30.  malice  and  zv.  even  these  are  abomination

28.  10.  and  as  a  man’s  strength  is,  so  is  his  tv.

30. 24.  envy  and  zv.  shorten  the  life,  and  carefulness


Eccl.  39.  23.  so  shall  the  heathen  inherit  his  to.

28.  appease  the  zv.  of  him  that  made  them

40.  5.  tv.  and  envy,  trouble  and  unquietness

44.  17.  Noah  was  found  righteous  in  time  of  zv.

45.  18.  the  congregation  of  Core  with  fury  anu  tv
47.  20.  thou  broughtest  w.  on  thy  children

Bar.  1.  13.  and  his  zv.  is  not  turned  from  us
2.  13.  let  thy  tv.  turn  from  us,  we  are  but  few

20.  for  thou  hast  sent  out  thy  to.  upon  us

4.  9.  when  she  saw  the  tv.  of  God  coining  upon  you

1  Mac.  3.  8.  and  turning  away  zv.  from  Israel

2  Mac.  8.  5.  the  to.  of  the  Lord  was  turned  to  mercy

WRATHFUL.

Eccl.  45.  19.  in  his  tv.  indignation  were  consumed

WRESTLED.

Eccl.  51.  19.  my  soul  hath  tv.  with  her,  I  wTas  exact

WRETCH.

2  Mac.  4.  13.  profaneness  of  Jason  that  ungodly  tv.

15.  3.  then  the  most  ungracious  to.  demanded
WRETCHES.

2  Mac.  12.  23.  was  earnest  in  killing  those  wicked  tv.
WRITE.

Tob.  7. 14.  and  did  tv.  in  an  instrument  of  covenants
Bar.  2.  28.  thou  didst  command  him  to  tv.  thy  law
WRITHE.

Eccl.  27.  23.  but  at  the  last  he  will  tv.  his  mouth
WRITING.

1  Esd.  2.  2.  through  all  his  kingdom,  and  also  by  tv.
6.  12.  \ve  might  give  knowledge  to  thee  by  zv.  we

required  the  names  in  tv.  of  the  principal  men
Esth.  13.  6.  that  are  signified  in  zv.  to  you  by  Aman
Eccl.  42.  7.  and  put  all  in  tv.  that  thou  givest  out
45.  11.  with  aw.  engraved  for  a  memorial

2  Mac.  2.  4.  it  was  also  contained  in  the  same  it.

WRITINGS.

1  Esd.  3.  13.  took  their  to.  and  delivered  them  to  him

15.  and  the  to.  were  read  before  them

2  Mac.  2.  13.  the  same  things  were  reported  in  the  tv.

WRITTEN.

1  Esd.  1.  33.  these  things  are  tv.  in  the  book  of  stories

2.  22.  thou  shalt  find  in  the  chronicles  what  is  tv.

8.  64.  the  weight  .of  them  was  tv.  that  same  hour
Eccl.  50.  27.  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach  tv.  in  this  book
1  Mac.  9.  22.  his  acts  and  greatness,  they  are  not  to.

14.  23.  we  have  to.  a  copy  thereof  to  Simon

15.  15.  letters  wherein  were  zv.  these  things

WRONG.

Eccl.  4.  19.  but  if  he  go  tv.  she  will  forsake  him

10.  6.  bear  not  hatred  to  thy  neighbour  for  every  zv.

13.  3.  the  rich  man  hath  done  tv.  yet  threatened)

21.  4.  to  terrify  md  do  zv.  will  waste  riches

1  Mac.  7-  14.  for,  said  they,  he  will  do  us  no  tv.

2  Mac.  1.  28.  punish  them  that  with  pride  do  us  tv.

3.  12.  was  impossible  such  to.  should  be  done  them

10.  12.  for  the  to.  that  had  been  done  to  them

WRONGFULLY.

1  Mac.  2.  37.  testify  that  you  put  us  to  death  tv.

15.  33.  which  our  enemies  had  to.  in  possession

2  Mac.  8.  16.  the  heathen  who  came  tv.  against  them

WROTE.

1  Esd.  4.  47.  and  zv.  letters  for  him  to  the  treasurers
49.  he  zv.  for  all  the  Jews  that  went  to  Jewry
6.  17.  Cyrus  the  king  tv.  to  build  up  this  house
Tob.  13.  1.  then  Tobit  tv.  a  prayer  of  rejoicing
Jud.  4.  6.  Joacim  tv.  to  them  that  dwelt  in  Bethulia
1  Mac.  10.  65.  and  tv.  him  among  his  chief  friends

13.  35.  to  him  king  Demetrius  tv.  after  this  manner

14.  18.  they  tv.  to  him  in  tables  of  brass  to  renew

WROTH.

Bel 8.  so  the  king  was  to.  and  called  for  his  priests
WROUGHT.

Tob.  4. 14.  the  wages  of  any  man  that  hath  zv.  for  thee
Jud.  9.  5.  for  thou  hast  tv.  not  only  those  things
Esth.  10.  9.  God  hath  tv.  signs  and  great  wonders
If  isd.  3.  14.  who  with  his  hands  to.  no  iniquity
13.  11.  a  carpenter  that  hath  tv.  it  handsomely
Eccl.  44.  2.  the  Lord  hath  w.  great  glory  by  them
Bar.  3.  18.  for  they  zv.  in  silver  and  were  careful
1  Mac.  9.  23.  there  rose  up  all  such  as  tv.  iniquity

Y.

YEAR.

1  Esd.  5.  57-  in  second  y.  after  they  come  to  Jewry
Eccl.  .33.  7-  light  of  every  day  of  the  y.  is  of  the  sun
37.  11.  nor  with  a  hireling  for  a  y.  of  finishing
50.8.  as  the  flower  of  roses  in  the  spring  of  the  y.
Sus.  5.  the  same  y.  were  appointed  two  ancients

1  Mac.  3.  28.  and  gave  his  soldiers  pay  for  a  y.

37.  the  king  departed  from  Antioch  the  147th  y.

6.  49.  no  victuals,  it  being  a  y.  of  rest  to  the  land

8.  16.  their  government  to  one  man  every  y.

9.  54.  in  the  153d  y.  in  the  second  month

10.  40.  I  give  every  y.  15,000  shekels  of  silver
42.  silver  they  took  out  of  the  accounts  y.  by  y.

11.  19.  Demetrius  reigned  in  the  167th  y.

13.  42.  in  the  first  y.  of  Simon  the  high  priest

51.  entered  into  it  in  171st  y.  with  thanksgiving

52.  that  that  day  be  kept  every  y.  with  gladness

14.  27.  being  the  third  y.  of  Simon  the  high  priest

2  Mac.  10. 8.  that  every  y.  those  days  should  be  kept

YEARS.

1  Esd.  6. 14.  this  house,  it  was  builded  many  y.  agtf
Wisd.  4.  8.  nor  that  is  measured  by  number  of  y.

16.  the  many  y.  and  old  age  of  the  unrighteous
Eccl.  26.  2.  he  shall  fulfil  they,  of  his  life  in  peace

1  Mac.  1 . 7.  Alexander  reigned  twelve  y.  and  died
9.  so  did  their  sons  after  them  many  y.

2  Mac.  1.  20.  after  many  y.  when  it  pleased  God

4.  40.  a  man  far  gone  in  y.  and  no  less  in  folly

6.  23.  as  became  the  excellency  of  his  ancient  y.

7.  27.  gave  thee  suck  three  y.  and  nourished  thee

YEAR  LY.

1  Mac.  7-  49.  they  ordained  to  keep  y.  this  day

11.  34.  the  payments  the  king  received  of  them  y.
YESTERDAY.

Eccl.  38.  22.  y.  for  me,  and  to  day  for  thee
YIELD.

Jud.  2.  10.  if  they  will  y.  themselves  to  thee

1  Mac.  10.  32.  I  y.  up  my  authority  over  it

2  Mac.  8. 8.  wrote  to  y.  more  aid  to  the  kind's  affa.ri

<>99


Apocrypha.]  YOU

2  Mae.  9.  27.  will  favourably  and  graciously  y.  to

your  desires

YOKE.

Eccl.  28. 20.  for  the  y.  thereof  is  y.  of  iron  and  bands
33.  26.  a  y.  and  a  collar  do  bow  the  neck
51.  26.  put  your  neck  under  the  a/,  let  your  soul
1  Mac.  8.  18.  that  they  would  take  they,  from  them
13.  41.  the  y.  of  the  heathen  was  taken  away
YOUNG.

1  Esd.  1.  5.3.  who  slew  theiry.  men  with  the  sword

3.  4.  the  three  y.  men  that  were  ot  the  guard

4.  58.  now  when  this  y.  man  was  gone  forth

8.  50. 1  vowed  a  fast  to  the  y.  men  before  our  Lord

2  Esd.  1. 28.  have  prayed  you  as  a  nurse  her  y.  babes
Tob.  1.4. when  1  was  in  my  own  country  being  but  y

6.  2.  when  the  y.  man  went  down  to  wasli  himself

3.  the  y.  man  laid  hold  ot  the  fish  and  drew  it

5.  the  y.  man  did  as  the  angel  commanded  him
Jud.  2.27.  smote  all  their  y.  men  with  edge  of  sword
Wisd.  9.5.  and  too  y.  for  understanding  otjudgment
Eccl.  30.  12.  bow  down  his  neck  while  he  is  y.

32.  7.  speak,  y.  man,  if  there  be  need  ot  thee
42.  9.  the  care  of  her  taketli  away  sleep,  when  y.
47.  4.  slew  he  not  a  giant  when  he  was  yet  but  y.r

50.  12.  lie  himself  stood  as  a  y.  cedar  in  Libanus

51.  13.  when  l  wasy.  or  ever  I  went  abroad
Bar.  3.20.  y.  men  have  seen  light  and  dwelt  on  earth
isus.  21.  will  witness  that  a  y.  man  was  with  thee

37.  a  y.  man  who  was  there  hid,  came  unto  her

40.  we  asked  who  they,  man  was,  would  not  tell
45.  the  Lord  raised  up  the  holy  spiritofay.  youth
1  Mac.  2.  9.  her y.  men  with  the  sword  ot  the  enemy

6.  17-  whom  he  had  brought  up  being  y.  to  reign


YOU

1  Mac.  11.  39.  brought  up  Antiochus  y.  son  of

A  lexander

40.  to  deliver  him  thisy.  Antiochus  to  reign
54.  with  him  the  y.  child  Antiochus  who  reigned
57.  at  that  time  y.  Antiochus  wrote  to  Jonathan

13.  31.  Try  phon  dealt  deceitfully  withy.  Antiochus

14.  9.  y.  men  put  on  glorious  and  warlike  apparel

2  Mac.  3.  33.  the  same  y.  men,  in  the  same  clothing
4. 12.  brought  the  chief  y.  men  under  his  subjection

5.  13.  thus  there  was  killing  of  y.  and  old

6.  24.  many  y.  persons  might  think  that  Eleazar
28.  leave  a  notable  example  to  such  as  be  y.

31.  not  only  tc  y.  men  but  to  all  his  nation

7.  12.  the  king  marvelled  at  the  y.  man’s  courage
25.  when  the  y.  man  would  in  no  case  hearken
.30.  the  y.  man  said,  whom  wait  ye  for  ?

12. 27.  strongy.  men  kept  the  walls  and  defended
13.  15.  with  the  most  valiant  and  choice  y.  men
YOUNGER.

2  Mac.  5.  24.  to  sell  the  women  and  the  y.  sort
YOUNGEST.  .

2  Mac.  7. 24.  whilst  the  y.  was  yet  alive  did  exhort
YOUTH.

Jud.  6.  16.  all  theiry.  ran  together  and  women
Eccl.  6.18.  my  son,  gather  instruction  from  thv  y.  up
30.  11.  give  him  no  liberty  in  his  y.  and  wink  not
51.  15.  from  my  y.  up  sought  I  after  her
Sus.  45.  the  Lord  raised  the  holy  spirit  of  a

young  y.

1  Mac.  1 .6.  had  been  brought  up  with  him  from  hisy.
2.  66.  Judas  hath  been  mighty  and  strong  from  his  y.
16.  2.  from  our  y.  fought  against  the  enemies  o

Israel


Z  O  R

z.

ZABDEUS.

1  Esd.  9.  21.  sons  of  Etnmer,  Ananias,  Z.  and  Eane
ZAGH  ARIAS.

1  Esd.  1.  8.  Helkias,  Z.  and  Seclus  the  governors  |

15.  the  holy  singers,  Asaph,  Z.  and  Jeduthun

5.  8.  Nehemias,  and  Z.  Reesaias,  Enenius

7.  3.  when  Aggeus  and  Z.  the  prophets  prophesied

8.  37.  Z.  the  son  of  Bebai,  with  him  28  men

1  Mac.  5.  18.  so  he  left  Joseph  the  son  of  Z.  56.

ZAMBRI.

1  Mac.  2.  26.  like  as  Phinehas  did  to  Z.  son  of  SaloS
ZEDECHIAS.

1  Esd.  1.46.  and  made  Z.  king  of  Judea  and  Jerus»
ZEA  L.

Eccl.  48.  2.  by  his  z.  he  diminished  their  number

1  Mac.  2. 24.  was  inflamed  with  z.  and  reins  trembled
Z  EA  LO  US.

1  Mac.  2.  27.  whosoever  is  2.  of  the  law  of  G  <1
54.  Phinehas  our  father,  being  2.  and  ferve..$

58.  Elias  for  being  2.  and  fervent  for  the  law
ZEALOUSLY.

1  MaC.  2.  26.  thus  dealt  he  2.  for  the  law  of  God
ZO  ROB  A  BEL.

1  Esd.  5. 8.  who  came  with  Z.  with  Jesus,  N ehemias
56.  began  Z.  the  son  of  Salathiel  and  Jesus
70.  then  Z.  and  Jesus,  and  the  chief  of  the  families

6.  2.  then  stood  up  Z.  the  son  of  Salathiel  and  Jesus
18.  delivered  to  Z.  and  Sanabassarus  the  ruler
27.  but  suffer  Z.  servant  of  the  Lord  and  governor
29.  to  Z.  the  governor,  for  bullocks  rams  and  lambs


700


A


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE

WHEREIN


HOLY  BIBLE.


THE  CONTENTS  OF  EACH  CHAPTER  ARE  GIVEN  :


DESIGNED  FOR  MAKING  THE  READING  AND  STUDY  OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES  MORE  EASY,  PARTICULARLY  TO

THOSE  THAT  ARE  IN  THEIR  YOUNGER  YEARS.


TO  WHICH  IS  PREFIXED,

A  BRIEF  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  HISTORY  AND  EXCELLENCY  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES

BY  ALEXANDER  CRUDEN,  A.  M.

AUTHOR  OF  THE  CONCORDANCE  TO  THE  BIBLE.

JOHN  V.  39.  SEARCH  THE  SCRIPTURES.


ADVERTISEMENT.


The  chief  design  of  publishing  this  COMPENDIUM  is  to  give  the  reader  a
Summary  View  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  not  only  above  all  com¬
mendation,  and  far  excelling  all  other  hooks  in  the  world,  hut  also  contain  a
most  entertaining  history  of  the  most  remarkable  events  that  can  be  con-
tamed  in  any  history  whatsoever.

Any  disregard  shown  to  this  inspired  Book  by  any  persons  that  profess  the
Christian  religion,  is  greatly  to  be  lamented :  but  surely  those  that  are  true
Christians,  and  have  experienced  the  grace  of  God  in  truth,  will  esteem  it  as


their  only  treasure,  as  being  the  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  and  a  revelation  <
the  grace  of  God  to  fallen  sinful  creatures ,  and  containing  the  charter  for  their
hopes  of  eternal  salvation  through  Jesus  Christ.

I  pray,  reader,  that  the  Blessed  Spirit  who  indited  the  Scriptures,  may  make
gracious  impressions  upon  your  heart  in  reading  and  searching  them,  that
thereby  you  may  be  made  wise  unto  salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ
Jesus.  Amen.


OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.


THE  word  Scripture  signifies  Writing,  and
generally  stands  for  the  sacred  books  of  the  Old
and  New  Testament,  written  by  holy  men,  as
they  were  inspired,  instructed,  and  enabled  by  the
Holy  Ghost.  They  are  called  The  Scriptures,  by
way  of  eminency  and  distinction,  because  they  far
excel  all  other  writings,  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  “  All
Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  ot  God,  and  is
profitable  for  doctrine,”  to  declare  and  confirm
the  truth;  “  for  reproof,”  to  convince  of  sin  and
confute  errors;  “  for  correction,”  to  reform  the
life  ;  “  and  for  instruction  in  righteousness;”  that
is,  to  teach  us  to  make  a  further  progress  in  the
way  to  holiness  and  happiness  in  heaven;  or  to
instruct  in  the  true  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,
in  which  we  may  appear  witli  comfort  before  God.

The  Scriptures  are  often  called,  The  Bible,  that
is,  The  Book,  by  way  of  eminency,  as  being  the
best  book  in  the  world,  and  far  excelling  all  other
books.  For  the  Scriptures  are  a  revelation  from
God,  and  contain  his  whole  will  necessary  to  he
known  for  our  salvation  :  and  they  will  he  held  in
the  highest  esteem,  and  be  read  and  studied  by  all
the  true  members  of  the  church  of  God,  whose
faith,  hope,  and  comfort,  are  taken  from  these
divine  Oracles.  No  book  but  this  brings  such  glory
to  God,  or  hath  such  an  efficacy  in  converting  the
soul.  Psalm  xix.  7-

'The  holy  Scripture  is  divided  into  two  books,
which  are  commonly  called,  'The  Old  and  New
Testament,  or  The  Old  and  New  Covenant,  't  he
Old  Testament  was  the  old  dispensation  of  the
covenant  of  grace  by  types  and  sacrifices,  which
represented  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  who  was
the  promised  seed  of  the  woman,  and  afterwards
foretold  to  he  of  the  family  of  Abraham,  and  of
the  tribe  of  Judah,  and  of  the  seed  of  David.

The  New  Testament,  or  the  Gospel,  is  the  new
dispensation  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  which  fully
shews  the  promised  Messiah  to  be  come,  and  to
have  published  his  gospel,  to  have  died,  and  to
have  risen  again,  and  to  have  ascended  up  into
heaven,  to  plead  that  his  atonement  may  be  ac¬
cepted  as  a  propitiation  for  all  true  believers.

There  is  no  history  in  the  world  so  ancient  as
the  Bible,  nor  is  there  any  that  gives  so  early  an


account  of  things.  The  Old  'Testament. begins
at  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  acquaints  us
that  Adam  and  Eve  were  the  first  man  and  woman
God  made,  and  that  he  created  them  both  in  his
own  likeness,  in  a  holy  and  happy  state,  which  is
called,  The  state  of  innocence.  It  informs  us  of
their  sin  against  God  in  eating  the  forbidden  fruit,
and  of  their  being  driven  out  of  Paradise,  and  ot
the  miserable  state  that  sin  brought  man  into,  he
having  broken  covenant  with  God,  and  being  ex¬
posed  to  that  dreadful  threatening,  “  In  the  day
thou  eatest  thereof  thou  slialt  surely  die.”

The  Scripture  informs  us,  that  after  the  fall  or
sin  of  Adam,  God  was  pleased  to  gne  him  a  gra¬
cious  promise  of  a  Messiah  or  Redeemer,  “  That
the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent’s
head,”  that  is,  that  Jesus  CJirist,  who  was  to  as¬
sume  the  human  nature  in  the  fulness  of  time,
should  destroy  the  power  ana  wicked  works  of  the
devil.

The  religion  of  man,  after  the  fall,  was  all  the
duties  of  the  light  of  nature,  which  were  required
before  :  and  besides  these  lie  was  now  called  to
repentance,  faith  or  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God,
and  expectation  of  the  promised  Saviour,  and
offering  of  sacrifices.  This  is  called  the  Adami-
tical  dispensation,  and  it  reached  to  Noah’s  flood,
which  was  about  1656  years  after  the  creation  of
the  world.

The  Scripture  tells  us,  that  mankind  had  pro¬
voked  God  by  their  sins,  which  were  exceeding
great,  and  that  the  world  was  destroyed  by  a  flood
for  their  multiplied  iniquities.  Noah  was  saved
in  an  ark,  or  great  ship,  or  vessel,  which  God
taught  him  to  build  ;  and  all  bis  family  were
with  him,  and  some  living  creatures  ot  every
kind.

The  religion  of  Noah  was  the  same  with  that  of
Adam  after  his  fall,  with  some  few  additions.
'The  offering  of  sacrifices  was  to  be  continued.
Flesh  was  given  to  man  for  food,  as  herbs  were
before.  Blood  was  forbidden  to  be  eaten,  the
blood  of  man  was  expressly  forbidden  to  be  shed,
and  murder  was  to  be  punished  with  death,  Gen.
ix.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6.  And  this  was  the  Noahical  dis¬
pensation  of  the  covenant  of  grace.


After  the  flood,  mankind  did  not  freely  divide
themselves  into  several  nations  ;  but  being  all  ot
one  language,  they  built  a  chief  city  with  a  tower,
that  all  men  might  be  joined  in  one  nation  or  king¬
dom.  But  God  scattered  them  abroad  into  differ¬
ent  nations,  by  making  them  speak  different  lan¬
guages  ;  and  then  they  ceased  to  build  their  tower,
which  was  called  Babel  or  Confusion.  It  is  sup¬
posed  that  the  true  religion  was  chiefly  preserved
in  the  family  of  Shem,  for  God  is  called  “  the  Lord
God  of  Shem,”  Gen.  ix.  26.

'The  most  religious  and  most  famous  man  ©
Shem’s  posterity  in  these  early  ages,  was  Abraham
the  son  of  1  erah,  of  the  posterity  of  Eber.  He  left
his  own  native  country,  to  go  wheresoever  God
pleased.  He  came  first  from  Chaldea,  and  then  to
Haran,and  by  the  command  of  God  went  to  dwell
among  strangers  in  the  land  of  Canaan.

Sodom  became  very  wicked, and  it  was  destroyed
by  fire  and  brimstone  from  heaven,  together  with
Gomorrah  and  other  cities,  because  of  the  abomi¬
nable  wickedness  of  their  inhabitants.  Abraham
pleaded  with  God  to  spare  Sodom,  and  he  would
have  done  it,  had  there  been  ten  righteous  men  in
all  the  city.  J.ot  was  grieved  for  the  wicked  con¬
versation  of  Sodom,  and  lie  and  his  two  daughters
were  saved.  But  Ins  wife  looking  back,  and  han¬
kering  after  Sodom,  was  struck  dead  immediately,
and  she  stood  like  a  pillar  of  salt.

Abraham  had  two  sons,  Ishmael  by  II agar,  and
Tsaac  by  Sarah  his  wife.  Isaac  was  born,  accord¬
ing  to  the  promise  of  God,  when  they  were  both
grown  old.  Isaac  feared  the  God  of  his  father
Abraham  ;  and  his  father  sent  afar,  and  took  a  wife
for  him,  even  Rebecca,  out  of  his  own  family  in
Mesopotamia,  because  he  was  unwilling  he  should
marry  among  the  wicked  Canaanites,  whom  God
had  doomed  to  destruction.  Abraham’s  death  was
in  the  year  of  the  world  2123.

Isaac  had  by  Rebecca  two  sons,  Esau  and  Jacob
Esau  sold  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage  when
he  was  faint  with  hunting  :  and  Jacob,  by  his  mo¬
ther’s  contrivance,  obtained  his  father’s  blessing.
Jacob  was  called  Israel,  because  he  prayed  and
prevailed  witli  God  for  a  blessing.  Jacob  bad
twelve  sons,  and  the  most  famous  of  them  in  sacred

701


OF  THE  HOLY  SCRIPTURES.


history  were  Levi,  Judah,  and  Joseph.  The
priesthood  in  the  following  times  was  committed
to  Levi’s  family,  l'he  kingdom  and  government
in  future  ages  were  promised  chiefly  to  Judah’s
family.

Joseph’s  brethren  hated  him,  and  he  was  sold  for
a  slave  into  Egypt,  where  he  became  a  ruler  of
the  land.  His  brethren  envied  him,  because  his
father  loved  him  and  made  him  a  coat  of  many
colours,  and  because  Joseph  dreamed  that  they
should  bow  down  to  him.  By  a  false  accusation,
Joseph  was  cast  into  prison,  and  interpreted  the
dreams  of  some  of  his  fellow-prisoners  ;  and  when
the  interpretation  proved  true,  then  he  was  sent
for  to  court,  to  interpret  the  king’s  dream  about
the  seven  years  of  plenty  and  seven  years  of
famine.

In  the  famine,  Joseph’s  brethren  came  to  buy
corn  in  Egypt,  and  bowed  down  to  him  according
to  his  dreams  ;  but  he  treated  them  roughly  at  first,
as  a  great  lord  and  a  stranger,  till  their  conscience
smote  them  for  their  former  cruelty  to  him :  but
afterwards  he  made  himself  known  to  them  with
much  affection  and  tenderness.  And  he  man.fest-
ed  his  forgiveness  of  them  ;  for  he  sent  for  his
father,  and  bid  his  children  bring  all  their  families
into  Egypt,  and  he  maintained  them  all  during
the  famine.  Jacob  and  Joseph  died  in  Egypt  ;
but  according  to  their  desire  their  bodies  were
carried  up  and  buried  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  in
faith  of  the  promise  that  their  seed  should  possess
that  land.

Tne  Israelites  were  afterwards  made  slaves  in
Egypt,  and  a  new  king,  who  knew  not  Joseph,
sorelyT  oppressed  them,  and  endeavoured  to  destroy
them :  but  God  heard  their  cry,  and  delivered
them  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  Upon
Pharaoh’s  refusal  to  let  the  people  of  Israel  go,
they  brought  ten  plagues  upon  the  king  and  upon
all  the  land,  by  the  authority  and  power  of  God.

At  last  Pharaoh  released  the  Israelites;  and  the
number  of  them  that  went  out  of  Egypt  were  six
hundred  thousand  men,  besides  children,  and  all
went  on  foot.  When  they  were  in  distress,  with
the  Red  sea  before  them,  and  Pharaoh’s  army  be¬
hind  them,  they  cried  unto  God  ;  whereon  Moses
bid  them  “  stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the
Lord.”  Then  at  the  command  of  God,  Moses
struck  the  sea  with  his  rod,  and  divided  the  waters
asunder  ;  and  the  children  of  Israel  went  through
upon  dry  land.  And  the  Egyptians  following,
the  waters  returned  upon  them,  and  they  were
drowned.  This  was  about  the  year  of  the  world
2453.

The  Israelites  went  wheresoever  God  guided
them  by  the  piljar  of  cloud  and  the  pillar  of  fire.
At  every  new  difficulty,  when  they  wanted  meat  or
water,  or  met  with  enemies,  they  fell  a  murmur¬
ing  against  God  and  Moses  :  and  they  wandered
forty  years  in  the  wilderness  for  their  sins,  before
they  came  to  the  place  God  promised  them.

While  in  the  wilderness,  about  three  months
after  their  coming  out  of  Egypt,  God  wrote  with
his  own  hand  the  ten  commandments  in  two  tables
of  stone,  and  gave  them  to  Moses.  The  four  first
commandments  contained  their  duty  to  God,  and
the  six  last  their  duty  towards  men.  These  ten
commandments  are  called  the  Moral  Law,  and
relate  to  their  behaviour  as  men  :  and  almost  every¬
thing  contained  in  them  is  taught  by  the  light  of
nature,  and  obliges  all  mankind.  But  the  great
end  of  the  Jewish  Ceremonies  was  to  be  emblems
or  types  of  Christ  and  his  gospel.


The  Scripture  gives  an  account  of  God’s  bring¬
ing  the  Israelites  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  under
the  ministration  ot  Joshua,  and  of  their  govern¬
ment  by  Judges  several  hundred  years;  and  after
that  there  is  a  narrative  of  their  first  four  kings,
namely,  Saul,  David,  Solomon,  and  Rehoboam.
In  Rehoboam’s  days  the  nation  was  divided  into
two  kingdoms,  which  were  called  the  kingdom  of
Israel  and  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  There  are  also
particular  records  of  the  government  of  these  two
distinct  kingdoms,  under  a  long  succession  of  their
own  kings,  till  they  were  both  carried  into  cap¬
tivity  by  the  kings  of  Assyria.

After  this,  the  sacred  history  relates  the  return
of  many  of  them  into  their  own  land,  and  the  re¬
building  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem  and  the  temple
of  God,  and  the  settlement  of  the  affairs  of  church
and  state  by  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  which  is  the
end  of  the  historical  part  of  the  Old  Testament.

There  is  also  a  large  and  particular  narrative  of
the  lives  or  transactions  of  some  extraordinary-
persons,  several  of  which  are  much  interwoven
with  the  series  of  the  history  .  But  there  are  others
which  seem  to  stand  separate  and  distinct,  such  as
the  affairs  relating  to  Job ,  a  rich  man  in  the  east  ;
Jonah,  a  prophet  in  Israel  ;  and  Esther,  the  queen
of  Persia.

We  have  an  account  of  the  several  prophets  and
messengers  which  were  sent  from  God,  on  special
occasions  to  reveal  his  mind  and  will  to  men.  We
have  the  writings  of  sixteen  prophets,  that  is,  of
four  greater  and  twelve  lesser  prophets.  The  four
great  prophets  are  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and
Daniel.  The  twelve  lesser  prophets  are,  Hosea,
Joel,  Amos,  Obadiah,  Jonah,  Micah,  Nahum,
IlabakkuK,  Zephaniah,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and
Malachi  the  last  prophet.  Malachi  prophesied
about  429  years  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  who
assumed  our  nature  about  4000  years  after  the
creation  of  the  world.  God  himself  and  his  pro¬
phets,  throughout  all  ages,  foretold  his  coming  as
some  great  Deliverer,  as  the  Messiah  or  anointed
of  God.


The  chief  subjects  of  the  history  of  the  New
Testament  are.  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the
great  Redeemer  and  glorious  Saviour  ;  John  the
Baptist,  who  was  his  forerunner ;  and  the  Apos¬
tles,  who  were  his  followers.

The  great  Messiah  was  born  at  Bethlehem  of  the
tribe  of  Judah,  according  to  the  predictions  and
rophecies  of  him  in  the  Old  Testament.  John  the
aptist  was  his  forerunner,  who  preached  the  doc¬
trine  of  repentance  and  forgiveness  of  sins,  and
directed  the  people  to  Jesus  Christ  the  Messiah
and  Saviour,  “  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh
away  the  sin  of  the  world.”

Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  veiled  his
divine  glory,  became  man,  and  was  born  of  Mary,
who  was  a  virgin,  according  to  the  prophecy  of
Isaiah.  Jesus,  being  about  thirty  years  of  age,
began  his  ministry,  and  appeared  with  the  marks
ot  a  divine  commission,  and  the  characters  of  the
Messiah  upon  him.  He  healed  the  sick,  he  raised
the  dead,  he  preached  the  glad  tidings  of  forgive¬
ness  of  sin,  and  of  salvation  to  the  poor,  and  re¬
ceived  several  testimonies  from  heaven.  After  he
had  preached  his  gospel  about  three  years  and  a
halt,  lie  was  betrayed  by  Judas,  and  suffered  the
death  of  the  cross,  and  rose  again  according  to  the
Scriptures.  i


Jesus,  after  his  resurrection,  appeared  to  his
apostles,  continued  on  earth  about  forty  days,  and
gave  further  instructions  in  the  great  things  of  the
gospel.  lie  appointed  his  disciples  to  meet  him
in  Galilee  ;  he  told  them  that  all  power  in  heaven
and  in  earth  was  given  into  his  hands  ;  he  gave
them  their  commission  to  preach  the  gospel  to  all
nations  ;  and  promised  his  presence  with  them,
and  a  power  to  work  miracles  for  the  vindication
of  their  doctrine.  He  commanded  his  apostles  to
tarry  at  Jerusalem  till  the  promised  Spirit  should
fall  upon  them.  And  on  the  day  of  Pentecost
which  was  ten  days  after  the  ascension  of  Christ
the  Spirit  of  God  was  sent  down  upon  them  ;  ana
upon  their  preaching  of  the  resurrection  and  ex¬
altation  of  Christ,  three  thousand  souls  believed,
and  were  added  to  the  disciples  of  Christ,  and  bap¬
tized  on  that  day.

This  was  the  proper  beginning  of  the  Christian
or  Gospel  dispensation,  the  kingdom  of  Christ
being  set  up  in  the  world  in  its  glory  at  the  pouring
down  of  the  Spirit,  after  his  resurrection,  and  his
exaltation  to  the  government  of  the  world  and  the
church.  The  dispensation,  during  the  life  of  Christ,
was  a  medium  between  the  Jewish  and  Christian
dispensations.

The  apostles,  after  Christ’s  ascension,  published
the  gospel  he  had  preached,  namely,  pardon  ot
sin  and  everlasting  life  to  those  that  repent  and
believe  in  him,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  and
pronounced  the  punishments  of  hell  upon  the  im¬
penitent  and  unbelieving.  The  apostles,  in  their
epistles  to  the  Christian  churches,  often  mention
the  great  article  of  the  gospel,  the  redemption  by
Christ’s  death,  and  the  atonement  made  for  sin  by
his  sufferings,  and  it  shines  every  where  through
the  epistles  of  St.  Paul.

In  the  gospels,  as  well  as  epistles,  faith,  or  be¬
lieving  in  Jesus  Christ,  is  required,  as  the  Way
and  method  of  being  a  partaker  of  the  blessings  of
salvation  ;  for  without  faith  there  is  no  salvation,
according  to  the  gospel.  This  faith  unites  the  soul
to  Christ,  and  makes  the  believer  a  member  of
Christ's  mysticaj  body.  Faith  is  wrought  in  the
soul  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  convinces  him  of
the  evil  and  danger  of  sin,  which  makes  him  ob¬
noxious  to  the  law  of  God  ;  and  seeing  no  othei
way  of  help,  he  applies  to  Christ  to  be  his  pro¬
phet,  priest,  and  king ;  receives  him  as  proposed
in  the  gospel,  and  trusts  and  relies  upon  him  and
his  righteousness  for  pardon  and  salvation.  And
where  this  faith  is,  it  is  attended  with  repentance
and  holiness,  which  give  a  meetness  for  heaven;
and  a  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  and  his  righteous¬
ness  may  be  said  to  entitle  the  believer  to  the
heavenly  kingdom.  “  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,
he  is  a  new  creature.”  Justification  and  sancti¬
fication  are  blessings  connected  together,  and  gra¬
ciously  bestowed  upon  one  and  the  same  person.

The  New  Testament  is  the  last  dispensation  or
the  Covenant  of  Grace  :  and  it  may  be.  called
New,  because  it  is  never  to  wax  old  or  be  abolish¬
ed  ;  and  this  is  evident,  because  it  concludes  with
a  promise  of  Christ’s  second  coming  at  the  end
of  the  world.  Rev.  xxii.  20.  “Surely  I  come
quickly  :  Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus.
The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you
all.”  Amen.

A.  C.


LONDON,
December  18,  1749.


THE


CONTENTS

OF  ALL

THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


GENESIS.

I  THE  creation  of  heaven  and  earth,  5  of  the  light,
6.  of  the  firmament,  9  of  the  earth  separated  from
the  waters,  11  and  made  fruitful  ;  14  of  the  sun,
moon,  and  stars  ;  20  of  fish  and  fowl ;  24  of  beasts
and  cattle  ;  26  of  man  in  the  image  of  God.  29
Also  the  appointment  of  food.

II.  1  The  first  sabbath.  4  The  manner  of  the  crea¬
tion.  8  The  planting  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  10  !
and  the  river  thereof.  1”  1'he  tree  of  knowledge  1
only  forbidden.  19,  20  The  na  ring  of  the  crea-  |
tures.  21  The  making  of  woman,  and  institution  '
of  marriage.

III.  llhe  serpent  deceiveth  Eve.  6  Man’s  shame-  [
ful  tall.  9  God  arraigns  them.  14  The  serpent
is  cursed.  15  '1'he  promised  Seed.  16  The  punish-  l
ment  of  mankind.  21.  Their  first  clothing.  22
Their  casting  out  of  paradise.

IV.  l  The  birth,  trade,  and  religion  of  Cain  and
Abel.  8  The  tnurderof  Abel.  9  The  curse  of  Cain.
1*.  Enoch  the  first  city.  19  Lamech  and  his  two
wives.  25  I  he  birth  ot  Seth,  26  and  Enos.

V.  1  The  genealogy,  age,  and  death  of  the  patri¬
archs  from  Adam  to  Noah.  24  The  godliness
and  translation  of  Enoch.

VI.  1  The  wickedness  of  the  world,  which  provoked
God’s  wrath,  and  caused  the  flood.  8  Noah  finds
grace.  13  The  order,  form,  and  end  of  the  ark.

VII.  1  Noah,  with  his  family,  and  the  living  crea¬
tures,  enter  into  the  ark.  17  The  beginning,  in¬
crease,  and  continuance  of  the  flood.

VI  II.  1  The  waters  assuage.  4  The  ark  resteth  on
Ararat.  7  The  raven  and  the  dove.  15  Noah,
being  commanded,  lSgoeth  forth  of  the  ark.  20
He  buildeth  an  altar,  and  oflfereth  sacrifice,  21
which  God  accepteth,  and  promised]  to  curse  the
earth  no  tnore.

IX.  1  God  blesseth  Noah.  4  Blood  and  murder  are
forbidden.  9  God’s  covenant,  13  signified  by  the
rainbow.  18  Noah  replenishes  the  world,  20  plants
a  vineyard,  21  is  drunken,  and  mocked  of  his  son  :
25  Curseth  Canaan,  26  blesseth  Shem,  27  piay-
eth  for  Japhet,  28  and  dieth.

X.  1  The  generations  of  Noah.  2  The  sons  of  Ta-
phet,  6  the  sons  of  Ham.  8  Nimrod  the  first
monarch.  21  The  sons  of  Sh«m.

XI.  l  One  language  in  the  world.  3  The  building
of  Babel.  5  I  he  confusion  of  tongues.  10  The
generations  of  Shem.  27  The  generations  of  Terah
the  father  of  Abram.  31  Terah  goeth  from  Ur  to
Hat  an.

X I I.  1  God  calls  Abram,  and  blesses  him  with  a  pro¬
mise  of  Christ.  4  He  departs  with  Lot  from  Haran.

6  He  travels  through  Canaan,  7  which  is  promised
him  in  a  vision.  10  He  is  driven  by  a  famine  into
Egypt.  11  Fear  makes  him  feign  his  wife  to  be  his
sister.  14  Pharaoh  having  taken  her  from  him,
by  plagues  is  compelled  to  restore  her.

XIII.  1  Abram  and  Lot  return  out  of  Egypt.  7  By
disagreement  they  part  asunder.  10  Lot  goes  to
wicked  Sodom.  14  God  renews  the  promise  to
Abram.  18  He  removes  to  Hebron,  and  there
builds  an  altar.

XIV.  1  The  battle  of  four  kings  against  five.  11
Lot  is  taken  prisoner.  14  Abram  rescues  him.  18
Melchisedek  blesses  Abram.  20  Abram  gives  him
tithe.  22  The  rest  of  the  spoil,  his  partners  having
had  their  portions,  he  restores  to  the  king  of  So¬
dom.

XV.  1  God  encourages  Abram.  2  Abram  complains
for  want  of  an  heir.  4  God  promises  him  a  son,
and  a  multiplying  of  his  seed.  6  Abram  is justi-
fieil  by  faith.  7  Canaan  is  promised  again,  anti
confirmed  by  a  sign,  12  and  a  vision.

XVI.  1  Sarai,  being  barren,  gives  Hagar  to  Abram.

4  Hagar  being  afflicted  for  despising  her  mistress,
runneth  away.  7  An  angel  sends  her  back  to  sub¬
mit  herself,  11  and  tells  her  of  her  child.  15  Ish-
tnael  is  born.

X  V  11.1  God  renews  the  covenant.  5  Abram’s  name
is  changed,  in  token  of  a  greater  blessing.  10  Cir¬


cumcision  is  instituted.  15  Sarai's  name  is  chang¬
ed,  and  she  blessed.  17  Isaac  is  promised.  23
Abraham  and  Ishmael  are  circumcised.

XVII 1 .  1  Abraham  entertains  three  angels.  9  Sarah
is  reproved  for  laughing  at  the  strange  promise.
17  The  destruction  of  Sodom  is  revealed  to  Abra¬
ham.  23  Abraham  makes  intercession  for  the  men
thereof.

XIX.  1  Lot  entertains  two  angels.  4  The  vicious
Sodomites  are  stricken  with  blindness.  12  Lot  is
sent  for  safety  into  the  mountains.  18  He  obtains
leave  to  go  to  Zoar.  24  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  are
destroyed.  26  T.ot’s  svjfe  is  a  pillar  of  salt.  30  Lot
dwells  in  a  cave.  31  Tiie  incestuous  original  of
Moab  and  Ammon.

XX.  1  Abraham  sojourns  at  Gerar,  2  denies  his
wife,  and  loses  her.  3  Abimelech  is  reproved  for
her  in  a  dream.  9  He  rebukes  Abraham,  14  re¬
stored]  Sarah,  16  and  reproves  her.  17  He  is
healed  by  Abraham’s  prayer.

XXL  1  Isaac  is  born.  4  He  is  circumcised.  6  Sa¬
rah’s  joy.  9  Hagar  and  Ishmael  are  cast  forth.
15  Hagar  in  distress.  17  The  angel  comforts  her.

22  Abimelech’s  covenant  with  Abraham  at  Beer-
sheba.

XXI  I.  1  Abraham  is  tempted  to  offer  Isaac.  3  He
gives  proof  of  his  faith  and  obedience.  11  The
angel  stayeth  him.  1.3  Isaac  is  exchanged  with
a  ram.  14  The  place  is  called  .lehovah  jireh.  15
Abraham  is  blessed  again.  20  The  generation  of
Nahor  unto  Rebekah.

XXI II.  1  The  age  and  death  of  Sarah.  3  The  pur¬
chase  of  Mach  pelah,  19  where  Sarah  was  buried.

XXIV.  1  Abraham  swears  his  servant.  lOJ’heser-
vant’s  journey.  12  His  prayer.  14  His  sign.  15
Rebekah  meets  him,  18  fulfils  his  sign,  22  re¬
ceives  jewels,  23  shews  her  kindred,  25 and  invites
him  home.  26  The  servant  blesses  God.  28  Laban
entertains  him.  34  The  servant  shews  his  message.
50  Laban  and  Bethuel  approve  it.  58  Rebekah
consents  to  go.  62  Isaac  meets  her.

XXV.  1  The  sons  of  Abraham  by  Keturah.  5  The
division  of  his  goods.  7  His  age  and  death.  9  His
burial.  12  The  generations  of  Ishmael.  17  His  age
and  death.  19  Isaac  prays  for  Rebekah,  being
barren.  22  The  children  strive  in  her  womb.  24
The  birth  of  Esau  and  Jacob.  27  Their  difference.
29  Esau  sells  his  birthright.

XXVI.  1  Isaac  because  of  famine  went  to  Gerar.
2  God  instructs  and  blesses  him.  7  He  is  reproved
by  Abimelech  for  denying  his  wife.  12  He  grows
rich.  18  He  digs  Esek,  Sitnah,  and  Rehoboth.

23  Abimelech  makes  a  covenant  with  him  at
Beersheba.  34  Esau’s  wives.

XXVII.  1  Isaac  sends  Esau  for  venison.  5  Rebe¬
kah  instructed]  Jacob  to  obtain  the  blessing.  15
Jacob,  under  the  person  of  Esau,  obtains  it.  30
Esau  brings  venison.  33  Isaac  trembles.  34  Esau
complains,  and  by  importunity  obtains  a  blessing.
41  He  threatens  Jacob.  42  Rebekah  disappoints
it.

XXVIII.  1  Isaac  blesses  Jacob,  and  sends  him  to
Padan-Aram.  9  Esau  marries  Mahalath  the
daughter  of  Ishmael.  10  The  vision  of  Jacob’s
ladder.  18  The  stone  of  Bethel.  20  Jacob’s
vow.

XXIX.  1  Jacob  comes  to  the  well  of  Haran.  9  He
takes  acquaintance  of  Rachel.  13  Laban  enter¬
tains  him.  18  Jacob  covenants  for  Rachel.  23
He  is  deceived  with  Leah.  28  He  rnarrieth  also
Rachel,  and  serves  for  her  seven  vears  more.
32  Leah  bears  Reuben,  33  Simeon,  34  Levi,  35
and  Judah.

XXX.  1  Rachel,  in  grief  for  her  barrenness,  gives
Billiah,  her  maid,  unto  Jacob.  5  She  bears  Dan
and  Naphtali.  9  Leah  gives  Zil pah ,  her  maid,
who  bears  Gad  and  Asher.  14  Reuben  finds  man¬
drakes,  with  whieo  Leah  buyetli  her  husband  of
Rachel.  17  Leah  bears  Issachar,  Zebulun,  and
Dinah.  22  Rachel  bears  Joseph.  25  Jacob  desires
to  depart.  27-  Laban  stays  him  on  a  new  covenant.
37  Jacob’s  policy,  whereby  he  became  rich.


XXXI.  1  Jacob  upon  displeasure  departed,  secret
ly.  19  Rachel  steals  her  father’s  images.  22  Laban
pursues  him,  26  and  complains  of  the  wrong.
34  Rachel’s  policy  to  hide  the  images.  36  Ja¬
cob’s  complaint  ot  Laban.  43  The  covenant  of
Laban  anil  Jacob  at  Galeed.

XXXII.  1  Jacob's  vision  at  Mahanaim.  3  His
message  to  Esau.  6  He  is  afraid  of  Esau’s  coming.
9  He  prays  for  deliverance.  13  He  sends  a  pre¬
sent  to  Esau.  24  He  wrestles  with  an  angel  at
Peniel,  where  he  is  called  Israel.  31  He  halt-
eth.

XXXIII.  1  The  kindness  of  Jacob  and  Esau  at
their  meeting.  17  Jacob  comes  to  Succoth.  18  He
buys  a  field  at  Salem,  and  builds  an  altar  called
Elohe-Israel.

XXXIV.  1  Dinah  is  ravished  by  Shechem.  4  He
sues  to  marry  her.  13  The  sons  of  Jacob  offer
the  condition  of  circumcision  to  the  Shechemites.

20  Hatnor  and  Shechem  persuade  them  to  accept
it.  25  The  sons  of  Jacob,  upon  that  advantage,
slay  them,  27  and  spoil  their  city.  30  Jacob  re¬
proves  Simeon  and  Levi.

XXXV.  1  God  sends  Jacob  to  Bethel.  2  He
purgeth  his  house  of  idols.  6  He  builds  an  altar
at  Bethel.  8  Deborah  dies  at  Allon-Bachuth.
9  God  blesses  Jacob  at  Bethel.  16  Rachel  tra¬
vails  of  Benjamin,  and  dies  in  the  way  to  Edar.
22  Reuben  lies  with  Bilhah.  23  The  sons  of
Jacob.  27  Jacob  comes  to  Isaac  at  Hebron.  28
The  age,  death,  and  burial  of  Isaac.

XXXV 1.  1  Esau’s  three  wives.  6  His  removing  to
mount  Seir.  9  His  sons.  15  The  dukes  which  de¬
scended  of  hi->  sons.  20  The  sons  and  dukes  of
Seir.  24  Anali  finds  mules.  31  The  kings  of
Edom.  40  The  dukes  that  descended  of  Esau.

XXXVII.  2  Joseph  is  hated  of  his  brethren.  5
His  two  dreams.  13  Jacob  sends  him  to  visit
his  brethren.  18  His  brethren  conspire  his  death.

21  Reuben  saves  him.  26  They  sell  him  to  the
Ishmaelites.  .31  His  father,  deceived  by  the
bloody  coat,  mourns  for  him.  36  He  is  sold  to
Potiphar  in  Egypt.

XXXVIII.  1  J udah  begets Er,  Onan,  and  Shelah.

6  Er  marries  Tamar.  8  The  trespass  of  Onan.  11
Tamar  stays  for  Shelah.  13  She  deceives  Judah.
27  She  bears  twins,  Pharez  and  Zarah.

XXXIX.  1  Joseph  advanced  in  Potiphar’s  house.

7  He  resisteth  his  mistress’s  temptation.  13  He
is  falsely  accused.  19  He  is  cast  into  prison.  21
God  is  with  him  there.

XL.  1  The  butler  and  baker  of  Pharaoh  in  prison.

4  Joseph  hath  charge  of  them.  5  He  interprets
their  dreams.  20  They  come  to  pass  according
to  his  interpretation.  23  The  ingratitude  of  the
butler.

XLI.  1  Pharaoh’s  two  dreams.  9  Joseph  inter¬
prets  them.  33  He  gives  Pharaoh  counsel.  38
Joseph  is  advanced.  50  He  begets  Manasseh  and
Ephraim.  54  The  famine  begins.

XL1I.  1  Jacob  sends  his  ten  sons  to  buy  corn  in
Egypt.  6  They  are  imprisoned  by  Joseph  for
spies.  18  They  are  set  at  liberty,  on  condition  to
bring  Benjamin.  21  They  have  remorse  for  Jo¬
seph.  24  Simeon  is  kept  for  a  pledge.  25  They
return  with  corn,  and  their  money.  29  Their  re¬
lation  to  Jacob.  36  Jacob  refuseth  to  send  Ben¬
jamin.

XLI  II.  1  Jacob  is  hardly  persuaded  to  send  Ben¬
jamin.  15  Joseph  entertains  his  brethren.  31  He
makes  them  a  *'east.

XLIV.  1  Joseph’s  policy  to  stay  his  brethren.  14
Judah’s  humble  supplication  to  Joseph.

XLV.  1  Joseph  makes  himself  known  to  his  bre
thren.  5  He  comforts  them  in  Crod’s  providence.
9  He  sends  for  his  father.  16  Pharaoh  confirm?
it.  21  Joseph  furnishes  them  for  their  journey,
and  exhorts  them  to  unity.  25  Jacob  is  revives
with  the  news.

XLV  I.  1  Jacob  is  comforted  by  God  at  Beersheba.

5  Thence  he  with  his  company  goes  into  Egypt.

8  The  number  of  his  family  that  went  into  Egypt.

703


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


28.  Josepn  meets  Jacob.  .11  lie  instructs  his  bre¬
thren  how  to  answer  to  Ph.iraoh.

XLVII.  1  Joseph  presents  five  of  his  brethren,  7
and  his  father,  before  Pharaoh.  11  He  gives  them
habitation  and  maintenance.  13  He  gets  all  the
Egyptians’  money,  16  their  cattle,  18  their  lands,
to  Pharaoh.  22  1  he  priests’  land  was  not  bought.
23  He  lets  the  land  to  them  for  a  fifth  part.  28
Jacob’s  age.  2y  He  swears  Joseph  to  bury  him
with  his  fathers.

X  L.VI1 1 . 1  Joseph  with  his  sons  visit  his  sick  father.
2  Jacob  strengthens  himself  to  bless  them.  3  He
repeats  the  promise.  6  He  takes  Ephraim  and  Ma-
nasseh  as  his  own.  7  He  tells  him  of  his  mother’s
grave.  9  He  blesses  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  17
He  prefers  the  younger  before  the  elder.  21  He
prophesies  of  their  return  to  Canaan.

XL1X.  1  Jacob  calls  his  sons  to  bless  them.  3  Their
blessing  in  particular.  29  He  charges  them  about
his  burial.  33  He  dies.

L.  1  The  mourning  for  Jacob.  4  Joseph  gets  leave
of  Pharaoh  to  go  to  bury  him.  7  i  he  funeral.  15
Joseph  comforts  his  brethren,  who  craved  his  par¬
don.  22  His  age.  23  He  sees  the  third  generation
ol  his  sons.  24  He  prophesies  to  his  brethren  of
their  return.  25  He  takes  an  oatli  of  them  for  his
bones.  26  He  dies,  and  is  chested.

EXODUS.

I.  The  children  of  Israel  after  Joseph’s  death  do
multiply.  8  The  more  they  are  oppressed  by  a
new  king,  the  more  thej’  multiply.  15  The  godli¬
ness  of  the  midwives  in  saving  the  men  children
alive.  22  Pharaoh  commands  the  male  children
to  be  cast  into  the  river.

II.  1  Moses  is  born,  3  and  in  an  ark  cast  into  the
flags.  5  He  is  found,  and  brought  up  by  Pharaoh's
daughter.  11  He  kills  an  Egyptian.  1.3  He  re¬
proves  an  Hebrew.  15  He  flees  into  Midian.  21
He  marries  Zipporah.  22  Gershon  is  born.  23
God  respects  the  Israelites’  cry.

III.  1  Moses  keeps  Jethio’s  flock.  2  God  appears
to  him  in  a  burning  bush.  9  He  sends  him  to
deliver  Israel.  14  The  name  of  God.  15  His
message  to  Israel.

IV.  1  Moses’s  rod  is  turned  into  a  serpent.  6  His
hand  is  leprous.  10  He  is  loth  to  be  sent.  14  Aaron
is  appointed  to  assist  him.  18  Moses  departs  from
Jethro.  21  God’s  message  to  Pharaoh.  24  Zippo¬
rah  circumciseth  her  son.  27  Aaron  is  sent  to
meet  Moses.  31  'the  people  believe  them.

V.  1  Pharaoh  chides  Moses  and  Aaron  for  their
message.  5  He  increases  the  Israelites’ task.  15
He  checks  their  complaints.  19  They  cry  out
against  Moses  and  Aaron.  22  Moses  complains
to  God.

VI.  1  God  renews  his  promise  by  his  name  JE¬
HOVAH.  14  The  genealogy  of  Reuben,  15  of
Simeon,  16  of  Levi,  of  whom  came  Moses  and
Aaron.

VII.  1  Moses  is  encouraged  to  go  to  Pharaoh.  7
His  age.  BHisiod  is  turned  info  a  serpent.  11
The  sorcerers  do  the  like.  13  Pharaoh’s  heart  is
hardened.  14  God’s  message  to  Pharaoh.  19
I  he  river  is  turned  into  blood.

VIII.  1  Frogs  are  sent.  8  Pharaoh  applies  to  Mo¬
ses.  12  Moses  by  prayer  removes  them  away.  16
I  he  dust  is  turned  into  lice,  which  the  magicians
could  by  no  means  do.  20  The  swarms  of  flies.
25  Pharaoh  inclines  to  let  the  people  go,  32  but
yet  is  hardened.

IX.  1  1  he  murrain  of  beasts.  8  The  plague  of  boils
and  blains.  13  His  message  about  the  hail.  22
The  plague  of  hail.  27  Pharaoh  sues  to  Moses,
35  but  yet  is  hardened.

X.  1  God  threatens  to  send  locusts.  7  Pharaoh,  mov¬
ed  by  his  servants,  inclines  to  let  the  Israelites  go.
12  1  he  plague  of  the  locusts.  16  Pharaoh  peti¬
tions  Moses.  21  The  plague  of  darkness.  24  Pha¬
raoh  sues  unto  Moses,  but  still  is  hardened.

XI.  1  God]s  message  to  the  Israelites  to  borrow
jewels  of  their  neighbours.  4  Moses  threatens
Pharaoh  with  the  death  of  the  first-born.

XII.  1  The  beginning  of  the  year  is  changed.  3
The  passover  is  instituted.  11  'I  he  rite  of  the
passover.  15  Unleavened  bread.  29  The  first¬
born  are  slain.  31  The  Israelites  are  driven  out
ot  the  land.  37  They  come  to  Succoth.  43  The
ordinance  of  the  passover.

XIII.  1  The  first-born  are  sanctified  to  God.  3  The
memorial  of  the  passover  is  commanded.  1 1  1  he
firstlings  of  beasts  are  now  set  apart.  17  The  Is¬
raelites  go  out  of  Egypt,  and  carry  Joseph’s  bones
with  them.  20  They  come  to  Etham.  21  God
guides  them  by  a  pillar  of  a  cloud,  and  a  pillar
of  fire.

XIV.  I  God  instructs  the  Israelitesin  their  journey.
5  Pharaoh  pursues  them.  10  The  Israelites  mur¬
mur.  13  Moses  comforts  them.  15 God  instructs
Moses.  19  The  cloud  removes  behind  the  camp.
21  The  Israelites  pass  through  the  Red  sea,  23
which  drowns  the  Egyptians.

XV.  1  Moses’s  song.  22  The  people  want  wafer.
23  The  waters  of  Marah  are  bitter.  25  A  free
sweetens  them.  27  At  Elim  are  twelve  wells,
and  seventy  palm-trees.

XVI.  1  The  Israelites  come  to  Sin.  2  They  mur¬
mur  for  want  of  bread.  4  God  promises  them
bread  from  heaven.  11  Quails  are  sent,  14  and
manna.  16  The  ordering  of  manna.  25  It  was
not  to  be  found  on  the  sabbath.  32  Anomer  of  it
is  preserved.

XVII.  1  The  people  murmur  for  water  at  Rephi-
dim.  5  God  sends  him  for  water  to  the  rock  in
Horeb.  8  Amalek  is  overcome  by  the  holding
up  ot  Moses’s  hands.  15  Moses  builds  the  altar
JEIIOVAH-Nissi.

XVIII.  1  Jethro  bringeth  to  Moses  his  wife  and
two  sons.  7  Moses  entertains  him.  1.3  Jethro’s
counsel  is  accepted.  27  Jethro  departeth.

XIX.  1  The  people  come  to  Sinai.  3  God’s  message
by  Moses  to  the  people  out  of  the  mount.  8  The

704


people’s  answer  returned  again.  10  The  people
are  prepared  against  the  third  day.  12  The  moun¬
tain  must  not  be  touched.  16  The  fearful  pre¬
sence  of  God  upon  the  mount.

XX.  1  The  ten  commandments.  18  The  people  are
afraid.  20  Moses  comforts  them.  22  Idolatry  is
forbidden.  24  Of  what  sort  the  altar  should  be.

XXI.  1  I.aws  for  men-servants.  5  For  the  servant
whose  ear  is  bored.  7  For  women-servants.  12
For  man-slaughter.  16  For  stealers  of  men.  17
For  cursers  of  parents.  18  For  smiters.  22  Fora
hurt  by  chance.  28  Tor  an  ox  that  goreth.  33  For
him  that  is  an  occasion  of  harm.

XXII.  1  Of  theft.  5  Of  damage.  7  Of  trespasses.

14  Of  borrowing.  16  Of  fornication.  18  Of  witch¬
craft.  19  Of  bestiality .  20  Of  idolatry.  21  Of

strangers,  widows,  and  fatherless.  25  Of  usury.
26  Of  pledges.  28  Of  reverence  to  magistrates.

29  Of  the  first-fruits.

XXIII.  1  Of  slander  and  false  witness.  3,  6  Of
justice.  4  Of  charitableness.  10  Of  the  year  of
rest.  12  Of  the  sabbath.  13  Of  idolatry.  140f
the  three  feasts.  18  Of  the  blood  and  the  fat  of
the  sacrifice.  20  An  angel  is  promised,  with  a
blessing,  if  they  obey  him.

XXIV.  1  Moses  is  called  up  into  the  mountain.  3
The  people  promise  obedience.  4  Moses  builds  an
altar,  and  twelve  pillars.  6  He  sprinkles  the  blood
of  the  covenant.  9  1  he  glory  of  God  appeareth.

14  Aaron  and  Hur  have  the  charge  of  the  people.

15  Moses  goeth  into  the  mountain,  where  he  con¬
tinued)  forty  days  and  forty  nights.

XXV.  1  What  the  Israelites  must  offer  for  the  mak¬
ing  of  the  tabernacle.  10  The  form  of  the  ark.  17
The  mercy-seat,  with  the  cherubims.  23  The
table,  with  the  furniture  thereof.  31  The  candle¬
stick,  with  the  instruments  thereof.

XXVI.  l  The  ten  curtains  of  the  tabernacle.  7  The
eleven  curtains  of  goats’  hair.  14  The  covering  of
l  ams’  skins.  15  The  board  of  the  tabernacle,  with
their  sockets  and  bars.  31  The  vail  for  the  ark.
36  I  he  hanging  for  the  door.

XXVII.  1  The  altar  of  burnt  offering  with  the  ves¬
sels  thereof.  9  1  he  court  of  the  tabernacle  enclos¬
ed  with  hangings  and  pillars.  18  'ihe  measure
of  the  court.  20  The  oil  for  the  lamp.

XXVIII.  1  Aaron  and  his  sons  are  set  apart  for  the
priest’s  office.  2  Holy  garments  are  appointed.  6
The  ephod.  15  I  he  breast-plate,  with  twelve  pre¬
cious  stones.  30  'The  Urim  and  Thummim.  31
The  robe  of  the  ephod,  with  pomegranates  and
bells.  .36  The  plate  of  the  mitre.  39 'The  embroi¬
dered  coat.  40  'The  garments  for  Aaron’s  sons.

XXIX.  1  'The  sacrifice  and  ceremonies  of  conse¬
crating  the  priests.  38  'The  continual  burnt  offer¬
ing.  45  God’s  promise  to  dwell  among  the  chil¬
dren  of  Israel.

XXX.  1  The  altar  of  incense.  11  The  ransom  of
souls.  17  The  brazen  laver.  22  The  holy  anoint¬
ing  oil.  34  'The  composition  of  the  perfume.

XXXI.  1  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  are  called  and
made  meet  for  the  work  of  the  tabernacle.  12
The  observation  of  the  sabbath  is  again  com¬
manded.  18  Moses  receives  the  two  tables.

XXXII.  1  The  people,  in  the  absence  of  Moses,
cause  Aaron  to  make  a  calf.  7  God  is  displeased
therewith.  1 1  By  the  intercession  of  Moses  he  is
appeased.  15  Moses  cometh  down  with  the  tables.
19  Tie  breaks  them.  20  He  destroys  the  calf.  22
Aaron’s  excuse  for  himself.  25  Moses  causes  the
idolaters  to  be  slain.  30  He  praysforthe  people.

XXX I II.  1  'The  Lord  refuseth  to  go  as  he  had  pro¬
mised  with  the  people.  4  'The  people  murmur
thereat.  ~  The  tabernacle  is  removed  out  of  the
camp.  9  T  he  Lord  talketh  familiarly  with  Moses.

12  Moses  desires  to  see  the  glory  of  God.

XXXIV.  1  The  tables  are  renewed.  5 'The  name  of

the  Lord  proclaimed.  8  Moses  entreateth  God  to
go  with  then).  10  God  makes  a  covenant  with
them,  repeating  certain  duties  of  the  first  table.
28  Moses,  after  forty  days  in  the  Mount,  comes
down  with  the  tables.  29  His  face  shines,  and  he
covers  it  with  a  vail.

XXXV.  1  The  sabbath.  4  The  free  gifts  for  the  ta¬
bernacle.  20 'The  readiness  of  the  people  to  offer.

30  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  are  called  to  the  work.

XXXVI.  1  The  offerings  are  delivered  to  the  work¬
men.  5 'The  liberality  of  the  people  restrained.  8
The  curtains  of  cherubims.  14  T  he  curtains  of
goats’  hair.  19  T  he  covering  of  skins.  20  The
boards  with  their  sockets.  31  The  bars.  35  The
vail.  37  The  hanging  for  the  door.

XXXVI 1.  1  The  ark.  6  'The  mercy-seat  with
cherubims.  10  The  table  with  his  vessels.  17
The  candlestick  with  his  lamps  and  instruments.
25  The  altar  of  incense.  29  The  anointing  oil,
and  sweet  incense.

XXXVI 1 1.  1  The  altar  of  burnt  offerings.  8  The
laver  of  brass.  9  The  court.  21  The  sum  of  what
the  people  offered.

XXXIX.  1  T  he  clothes  of  service  and  holy  gar¬
ments.  2  The  ephod.  8  The  breast-plate.  22  The
robe  of  the  ephod.  27  The  coats,  mitre,  and  girdle
of  fine  linen.  30  The  plate  of  the  holy  crown.  32
All  is  viewed  and  approved  by  Moses.

XL.  The  tabernacle  is  commantfed  to  be  reared,  9
and  anointed.  1.3  Aaron  and  his  sons  to  be  sanc¬
tified.  16  Moses  performs  all  tilings  accordingly .
34  A  cloud  covers  the  tabernacle.

LEVITICUS.

I.  Of  the  burnt  offerings.  3  Of  the  herd,  10 of  the
flock,  13  of  the  fowls.

II.  1  The  meat  offering  of  flour  with  oil  and  in¬
cense,  4  either  baked  in  the  oven,  5  or  on  a  plate,
7  or  in  a  frying-pan,  12  orof  the  first-fruits  in  the
ear.  13  'The  salt  of  the  meat  offering.

III.  1  The  meat  offering  of  the  herd,  6  of  the  flock,
7  either  a  lamb,  12  or  a  goat.

IV.  1  The  sin  offering  of  ignorance,  .3  for  the  priest,

13  for  the  congregation.  22  for  the  ruler  2“  for
any  of  the  people.


V.  1  He  that  sinneth  in  concealing  his  knowledge,
2  in  touching  an  unclean  thing,  4  or  in  making  an
oath.  6  His  trespass  offering,  of  the  flock,  7  ot
fowls,  11  or  of  flour.  14  The  trespass  offering  in
sacrilege,  17  and  in  sins  of  ignorance.

VI.  1  The  trespass  offering  for  sins  done  wittingly.

8  The  law  ot  the  burnt  offering,  14  and  of  the
meat  offering.  19  T  he  offering  at  the  consecra¬
tion  of  a  priest.  24  'The  law  of  the  sin  offering.

VII.  1  The  law  of  the  trespass  offering,  11  anil  of
peace  offerings,  12  whether  it  be  for  a  thanksgiv¬
ing,  16  or  a  vow,  or  a  free-will  offering.  22  The
fat,  26  and  the  blood,  are  forbidden.  28  'The
priest’s  portion  in  the  peace  offerings.

VIII.  1  Moses  consecrates  Aaron  and  his  sons.  14
Their  sin  offering.  18  Their  burnt  offering.  22
The  ram  of  consecrations.  31  'The  place  and
time  of  their  consecration.

IX.  1  The  first  offering  of  Aaron  for  himself  and
the  people.  8  The  sin  offering,  12  and  the  burnt-
offering  for  himself.  15  The  offerings  for  the
people’.  23  Moses  and  Aaron  bless  the  people.
24  Fire  comes  from  the  Lord  upon  the  altar.

X.  1  Nadab  and  Abihu,  for  offering  strange  fire,
are  burnt  by  fire.  6  Aaron  and  his  sons  are  for¬
bidden  to  mourn  for  them.  8  The  priests  are  for¬
bidden  wine  when  they  are  to  go  into  the  taber¬
nacle.  12  The  law  of  eating  the  holy  things.  16
Aaron’s  excuse  for  transgressing  thereof.

XI.  1  What  beasts  may,  4  and  what  may  not,  be
eaten.  9  What  fishes.  13  What  fowls.  29  The
creeping  things  which  are  unclean.

XI I.  IT  he  purification  of  a  woman  after  childbirth.
6.  Her  offerings  for  purifying.

XIII.  1  The  laws  and  tokens  whereby  the  priest  is
to  be  guided  in  discerning  the  leprosy.

XIV.  1  The  rites  and  sacrifices  in  cleansing  of  the
leper.  33  The  signs  of  leprosy  in  a  house.  43
The  cleansing  of  that  house.

XV.  I  The  uncleanness  of  men  in  their  issues.  13
The  cleansing  of  them.  19  The  uncleanness  of
women  in  their  issues.  28  Their  cleansing.

XVI.  1  How  the  high-priest  must  enter  into  the
holy  place.  1 1  The  sin  offering  for  himself.  15
'The  sin  offering  for  the  people.  20  The  scape¬
goat.  29  'The  yearly  feast  of  expiations.

XVII.  1  'The  blood  of  all  slain  beasts  must  be  of¬
fered  to  the  Lord  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  ^
They  must  not  offer  to  devils.  10  All  eating
of  blood  is  forbidden,  15  and  all  that  dieth  alone,
or  is  torn.

XVIII.  1  Unlawful  marriages.  19  Unlawful  lusts.

XIX.  1  A  repetition  of  divers  laws.

XX.  1  Of  him  that  giveth  of  his  seed  to  Moloch.  4
Of  him  that  favoured)  such  an  one.  6  Of  going  to
wizards.  7  Of  sanctification.  9  Of  him  thatcurs-
eth  his  parents.  10  Of  adultery.  11, 14, 17, 1 9  Of
incest.  13  Of  sodomy.  15  Of  bestiality.  18  Of
uncleanness.  22  Obedience  is  required  with  holi¬
ness.  27  Wizards  must  be  put  to  death.

XXI.  1  Of  the  priests’  mourning.  6  Of  their  holi¬
ness.  8  Of  their  estimation.  7,  13  Of  their  mar¬
riages.  16  The  priests  that  have  blemishes  must
not  minister  in  the  sanctuary.

XXI  I.  1  'The  priests  in  their  uncleanness  must  ab¬
stain  from  holy  things.  6  How  they  shall  be
cleansed.  10  Who  of  the  priest’s  house  may  eat
of  the  holy  things.  17  The  sacrifices  must  be
without  blemish.  26  The  age  of  the  sacrifice.  29
'The  law  of  eating  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving.

XXIII.  1  The  feasts  of  the  Lord.  3 'The  sabbath.  4
The  passover.  9  The  sheaf  of  first-fruits.  15  The
feast  of  pentecost.  22  G  leanings  to  be  left  for  the
poor.  23  The  feast  of  trumpets.  26  The  day  of
atonement.  33  T  he  feast  of  tabernacles.

XXIV.  1  The  oil  for  the  lamps.  5  The  shew-
bread.  10  Shelomith’s son  blasphemeth.  13  The
law  of  blasphemy.  17  Of  murder.  18  Of  dam¬
age.  23  T  he  blasphemer  is  stoned.

XXV.  1  The  sabbath  of  the  seventh  year.  8The  ju¬
bilee  in  the  fiftieth  year.  14  Of  oppression.  18  A
blessing  ofobedience.  23  Redemption  of  land  ;  29
ofhouses.  35  Compassion  of  the  poor.  39  The  usage
of  bondmen.  47  T  he  redemption  of  servants.

XXVI.  1  Of  idolatry.  2  Religiousness.  A  bless¬
ing  to  them  that  keep  the  commandments.  14
A  curse  to  those  that  break  them.  40  God  pro¬
mises  to  remember  them  that  repent.

XXVII.  1  He  that  maketh  a  singular  vow  must
be  the  Lord’s. _  2  'The  estimation  of  the  person.

9  Of  a  beast  given  by  vow.  14  Of  a  house.  16
Of  a  field,  and  the  redemption  thereof.  28  No
devoted  thing  may  be  redeemed.  32  The  tithe
may  not  be  changed.

NUMBERS.

I.  God  commanded)  Moses  to  number  the  people.
5.  the  princes  of  the  tribes.  17  T  he  number  of
every  tribe.  47  The  Levites  are  exempted  for
the  service  of  the  Lord.

II.  1  'The  order  of  the  tribes  in  their  tents.

III.  1  The  sonsof  Aaron.  5  The  Levites  are  given
to  the  priests  for  the  service  of  the  tabernacle,
11  instead  of  the  first-born.  14  The  Levites  are
numbered  by  their  families.  21  The  families,
number,  and  charge  of  the  Gershonites.  27  Of
the  Kohathites.  33  Of  the  Merarites.  38  T  he
place  and  charge  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  40  The
first-born  are  freed  by  the  Levites.  44  'The  over¬
plus  are  redeemed.

IV.  1  T  he  age  and  time  of  the  Levites’  service.  4
T  he  carriage  of  the  Kohathites  when  the  priests
have  taken  down  the  tabernacle.  16  The  charge
of  F.leazar.  17  T  he  office  of  the  priests.  21  The
carriage  of  the  Gershonites.  29  The  carriage  of
the  Merarites.  34  The  number  of  the  Kohathites,
.38  of  the  Gershonites,  42  and  of  the  Merarites.

V.  1  The  unclean  are  removed  outof  the  camp.  5
Restitution  is  to  be  made  in  trespasses.  11  'The
trial  of  jealousy.

VI.  1  The  law'  of  the  Nazarites.  22  The  form  of
blessing  the  people.


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


VU.  l  The  offering  of  the  princes  at  the  dedication
of  the  tabernacle.  10  Their  several  offerings  at  the
dedication  of  the  altar.  89  God  speaks  to  Moses
from  the  meicy-seat.

VIII.  1  How  the  lamps  are  to  be  lighted,  o  1  he
consecration  of  the  Levites.  23  The  age  and  time
of  their  service.

IX.  l  The  passover  is  commanded  again.  6  A  se¬
cond  passOver  allowed  for  them  that  were  unclean
or  absent.  15  The  cloud  guides  the  removings
and encam pings  of  the  Israelites.

X.  1 1  he  use  of  the  silver  trumpets.  11  The  Israel¬

ites  remove  from  Sinai  to  Paran.  14  The  order  of
their  march.  29  Hobab  is  entreated  by  Moses  not
to  leave  them.  35  I  he  blessing  of  Moses  at  the
removing  and  resting  of  the  ark.  t

XI.  l.The  burning  at  Taberah  quenched  by  Moses  s
prayer.  4  The  people  lust  tor  flesh,  and  loathe
manna.  10  Moses  complains  of  his  charge.  16
God  divides  his  burden  unto  seventy  elders.  31
Quaiis  are  given  in  wrath  at  Kibroth-hattaavah.

XII.  1  God  rebukes  the  sedition  of  Miriam  and
Aaron.  10  Miriam’s  leprosy  is  healed  at  the
prayer  of  Moses.  14  God  commands  her  to  be
shut  out  of  the  host.

XI II.  1  The  names  of  the  men  who  are  sent  to
search  the  land.  17' Their  instructions.  21  Their
acts.  26  i  heir  relation.

XIV.  1  The  people  murmur  attho  news.  6  Joshua
and  Caleb  labour  to  still  them.  11  God  threatens
them.  13  Moses  persuades  God,  and  obtains  par¬
don.  26  The  murmurers  are  deprived  of  entering
into  the  land.  36  The  men  who  raised  the  evil
report,  die  by  plague.  40  The  people  that  would  in¬
vade  the  land  against  the  will  ofGod,  are  smitten.

XV.  1  The  law  of  the  meat-offering  and  the  drink-
offering.  13,  29  The  stranger  is  under  the  same
law.  17  The  law  of  the  first  of  the  dough  for  a
heave-offering.  22  The  sacrifice  for  sins  of  igno¬
rance.  30  The  punishment  of  presumption.  32
He  that  violates  the  sabbath  is  stoned.  37  The
law  of  fringes.

XVI.  1  The  rebellion  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abi-
ram.  23  Moses  separates  the  people  from  the
rebels’  tents.  31  The  earth  swallows  up  Korah,
and  a  fire  consumes  the  others.  36  The  censers
are  reserved  to  holy  use.  41  Fourteen  thousand
and  seven  hundred  are  slain  by  a  plague  tor
murmuring  against  Moses  and  Aaron.  46  Aaron
by  incense  stays  the  plague.

XVII.  1  Aaron’s  rod  among  all  the  rods  of  the
tribes  only  flourished).  10  It  is  left  for  a  monu
ment  against  the  rebels.

XVI 11.  1  The  charge  of  the  priests  and  Levites.

9  1  he  priests’  portion.  21  The  Levites’  portion
25  The  heave-offering  to  the  priests  out  of  the
Levites’  portion.

XIX.  I  The  water  of  separation  made  of  the  ashes
of  a  red  heifer.  11  The  law  for  the  use  of  it  in
purification  of  the  unclean.

XX.  1  The  children  of  Israel  come  to  Zin,  where
Miriam  dies.  2  They  murmur  for  wantof  water.

7  Moses  smiting  the  rock  brings  forth  water  at
Meribah.  14  Moses  at  Kadesh  desires  passage
through  Edom,  which  is  denied  him.  22  At  mount
Hor  Aaron  resigns  his  place  to  Eleazar,  and  dies

XXL  1  Israel,  with  some  loss,  destroy  the  Ca
naanites  at  Hormah.  4  The  people  murmuring
are  plaeued  with  fiery  serpents.  7  They  repent¬
ing  are  Tiealed  by  a  brazen  serpent.  10  Sundry
journeys  of  the  Israelites.  21  Sihon  is  overcome,
33  and  Og.  .  ^  ,

XXII.  1  Balak’s  first  message  for  Balaam  is  re¬
fused.  15  His  second  message  obtains  him.  22  An
angel  would  have  slain  him,  it  his  ass  had  not
saved  him.  36  Balak  entertains  him.

XXIII.  1,  13, 28  Balak’s  sacrifice.  7, 18  Balaam’s
parable.

XXIV.  1  Balaam  leaving  divinations,  prophesies
the  happiness  of  Israel.  10  Balak  in  anger  dis¬
misses  him.  15  He  prophesies  of  the  star  of  Ja¬
cob,  and  the  destruction  of  some  nations.

XXV.  1  Israel  at  Shittim  commit  whoredom  and
idolatry.  6  Phinehas  killcth  Zimri  and  Cozbi.  10
God  therefore  gives  him  an  everlasting  priest¬
hood.  15  The  Midianites  are  to  be  vexed.

XXVI.  1  The  sum  of  all  Israel  is  taken  in  the
plains  of  Moab.  52  The  law  of  dividing  among
them  the  inheritance  of  the  land.  57  The  families
and  number  of  Levites.  63  None  were  left  of
them  which  were  numbered  at  Sinai,  but  Caleb
and  Joshua.

XXVII.  1  The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  sue  for  an
inheritance.  6  The  law  of  inheritance.  12  Moses
being  told  of  his  death,  sues  for  a  successor.  18
Joshua  is  appointed  to  succeed  him.

XXVIII.  1  Offerings  are  to  be  observed.  3  The
continual  burnt-offering.  9  The  offering  on  the
sabbath,  11  on  the  new  moons,  16  at  the  passover,
26  in  the  day  of  first-fruits.

XXIX.  1  The  offering  at  the  feast  of  trumpets,  7
at  the  day  of  afflicting  their  souls,  13  and  on  the
eight  days  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.

XXX.  1  Vows  are  not  to  be  broken.  3  Theexcep
tion  of  a  maid’s  vow.  6  Of  a  wife’s.  9  Of  a
widow’s,  or  her  that  is  divorced.

XXXI.  1  The  Midianites  are  spoiled,  and  Balaam
slain.  13  Moses  is  wroth  with  the  officers,  for
saving  the  women  alive.  19  How  the  soldiers,
with  their  captives  and  spoil,  are  to  be  purified
25  The  proportion  whereby  the  prey  is  to  be  di¬
vided.  48  The  voluntary  oblation  unto  the  trea¬
sury  of  the  Lord.

XXXII.  1  The  Reubenites  and  Gadites  sue  for
their  inheritance  on  that  side  Jordan.  6  Moses
reproves  them.  16  They  offer  him  conditions  to
his  content.  33  Moses  assigns  them  the  land.
39  They  conquer  it.

XXXIII.  1  Two  and  forty  journeys  of  the  Israel¬
ites.  50  The  Canaanites  are  to  be  destroyed.
XXXIV.  1  The  borders  of  the  land.  16  The
names  of  the  men  which  shall  divide  it.


XXXV.  1  Eight  and  forty  cities  for  the  Levites,
with  their  suburbs,  and  measure  thereof.  6  Six
of  them  are  to  be  cities  of  refuge.  9  l  he  laws  of
murder.  31  No  satisfaction  for  murder.

XXXVI.  1  The  inconvenience  of  the  inheritance
of  daughters,  5  is  remedied  by  marrying  in  their
own  tribes,  7  lest  the  inheritance  should  be  re¬
moved  from  the  tribe.  10  The  daughters  ol  Ze¬
lophehad  marry  their  father’s  brother’s  sons.

DEUTERONOMY.

I.  Moses’s  speech  in  the  end  of  the  fortieth  year,
briefly  rehearsing  the  story,  6  of  God’s  promise,

9  ot  giving  them  officers,  19  of  sending  the  spies
to  search  the  land,  34  of  God’s  anger  for  their
incredulity,  41  and  disobedience.

II.  1  The  story  is  continued,  that  they  were  not  to
meddle  with  the  Edomites,  9  nor  with  the  Moab¬
ites,  17  nor  with  the  .Ammonites,  24  but  Sihon
the  Amorite  was  subdued  by  them.

III.  1  The  story  of  the  conquest  of  Og king  of  Ba-
shan.  11  The  bigness  of  his  bed.  12  I  he  distribu¬
tion  of  those  lands  to  the  two  tribes  and  half.  23
Moses’s  prayer  to  enter  into  the  land.  26  He  is
permitted  to  see  it.

IV.  1  An  exhortation  to  obedience.  41  Moses  ap¬
points  the  three  cities  of  refuge  on  that  side  Jordan.

V.  1  The  covenant  in  Iloreb.  6  1  he  ten  command¬
ments.  22  At  the  people’s  request  Moses  receives
the  law  from  God.

VI.  1  The  end  of  the  law  is  obedience.  3  An  ex¬
hortation  thereto.  .

VII.  1  Communion  with  the  nations  is  forbidden,

4  for  fear  of  idolatry,  6  for  the  holiness  of  the
people,  9  for  the  nature  of  God  in  his  mercy
and  justice,  17  for  the  assuredness  of  victory
which  God  will  give  over  them.

VIII.  1  An  exhortation  to  obedience  in  regard  of
God’s  dealing  with  them.

IX.  1  Moses  dissuades  them  from  the  opimpn  of
their  own  righteousness,  by  rehearsing  their  se¬
veral  rebellions.

X.  1  God’s  mercy  in  restoring  the  two  tables,  6  in
continuing  the  priesthood,  8  in  separating  the
tribe  of  Le.vi,  10  in  hearkening  to  Moses’s  suit
for  the  people.  12  An  exhortation  to  obedience.

XL  1  An  exhortation  to  obedience,  2  by  their  own
experience  of  God’s  great  works,  8  by  promise
of  God’s  great  blessings,  16  and  by  threatening?.
18  A  careful  study  is  required  in  God’s  word.
26  The  blessing  and  curse  is  set  before  them.

XI  I.  1  Monuments  of  idolatry  are  to  be  destroyed.

5  The  place  of  God’s  service  is  to  be  kept.  16,
23  Blood  is  forbidden.  17.  20,  26  Holy  things
must  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place.  19  The  Levite
is  not  to  be  forsaken.  29  Idolatry  is  not  to  be
inquired  after.

XIII.  1  Enticers  to  idolatry,  6  though  near  of  kin
to  the  magistrate,  9  are  to  be  stoned  to  death.
12  Idolatrous  cities  are  not  to  spared.

XIV.  1  God’s  children  are  not  to  disfigure  them¬
selves  in  mourning.  3  What  may  and  what  may
not  be  eaten,  4  of  beasts,  9  ot  fishes,  11  ot  fowls

21  That  which  dies  of  itself  may  not  be  eaten

22  Tithes  of  divine  service.  23  1  ithes  and  first¬
lings  of  rejoicing  before  the  Lord.  28  lhe  third
year’s  tithe  of  alms  and  charity.

XV.  1  The  seventh  year  a  year  of  release  for  the
poor.  7  It  must  be  no  let  of  lending  or  giving.  12
An  Hebrew  servant,  16  except  he  will  not  depart,
must  in  the  seventh  year  go  free  and  well  furnish¬
ed.  19  All  firstling  males  of  the  cattle  are  to  be
sanctified  unto  the  Lord.

XVI.  1  The  feast  of  the  passover,  9  of  weeks,  13  of
tabernacles.  16  Every  male  must  offer,  as  he  is
able,  at  these  three  feasts.  18  Of  judges  and
justice.  22  Groves  and  images  are  forbidden,

XVII.  1  The  things  sacrificed  must  be  sound.
Idolaters  must  be  slain.  8  Hard  controversies  are
to  be  determined  by  the  priests  and  judges.  12
The  contemner  of  that  determination  must  die
14  The  election,  16  and  duty,  of  a  king.

XVIII.  1  The  Lord  is  the  priests’  and  Levites’  in
heritance.  3  The  priests’  due.  6  The  Levites
portion.  9  l  he  abominations  of  the  nations  are
to  be  avoided.  15  Christ  the  prophet  is  to  be
heard.  20  The  presumptuous  prophet  is  to  die.

XIX.  1  Thecities  of  refuge.  4  The  privilege  thereof
for  the  manslayer.  14  The  landmark  is  not.  to  be
removed.  15  Two  witnesses  at  the  least.  16  The
punishment  of  a  false  witness.

XX.  1  The  priests’  exhortation  to  encourage  the
people  to  battle.  5  The  officers’  proclamation
who  are  to  be  dismissed  from  the  war.  10  How
to  use  the  cities  that  accept  or  refuse  the  pro
clamation  of  peace.  16  What  cities  must  be  de¬
voted.  19  Trees  of  man’s  meat  must  not  be
destroyed  in  the  siege.

XXL  1  'The  expiation  of  an  uncertain  murder
10  The  usage  of  a  captive  taken  to  wife.  15  The
first-born  is  not  to  be  disinherited  upon  private
affection.  18  A  stubborn  son  is  to  be  stoned  to
death.  22  The  malefactor  must  not  hang  all
night  upon  a  tree.

XXII.  1  Of  humanity  toward  brethren.  5  1  he  sex
is  to  be  distinguished  by  apparel.  6  The  dam  is
not  to  be  taken  with  her  young  ones.  8  The
house  must  have  battlements.  9  Confusion  is  to
be  avoided.  12  Fringes  upon  the  vesture.  13  1  he
punishment  of  him  that  slanders  his  wife,  20,  22
of  adultery,  25  of  rape,  28  and  of  fornication,  30
incest.

XXIII.  1  Who  may  or  may  not  enter  into  the
congregation.  9  Uncleanness  to  be  avoided  in  the
host.  15  Of  the  fugitive  servant.  17  Of  filthiness.
18  Of  abominable  sacrifices.  19  Of  usury.  21  Of
vows.  24  Of  trespasses.

XXIV.  1  Of  divorce.  5  A  new  married  man  goeth
not  to  war.  6,  10  Of  pledges.  7  Of  man-stealers.
8  Of  leprosy.  14  The  hire  is  to  be  given.  16  Ot
justice.  19  Of  charity.

XXV.  1  Stripes  must  not  exceed  forty.  4  The  ox  is


not  to  be  muzzled.  5  Of  raising  seed  unto  a  bro¬
ther.  11  Of  the  immodest  woman.  13  Of  unjust
weights.  17  lhe  memory  of  Amalek  is  to  be
blotted  out.  .

XXVI.  1  'The  confession  of  him  that  offers  the
basket  of  first  fruits.  12  The  prayer  of  him  that
gives  his  third  year’s  tithes.  16  The  covenant
between  God  and  the  people.

XXVII.  1  The  people  are  commanded  to  write
the  law  upon  stones,  5  and  to  build  an  altar  of
whole  stones.  11  The  tribes  divided  on  Geriz-
zim  and  Ebal.  14  The  curses  pronounced  on
mount  Ebal.

XXVI II.  1  The  blessings  for  obedience.  15  The
curses  for  disobedience.

XXIX.  1  Moses  exhorts  them  to  obedience,  by  the
memory  of  the  works  they  have  seen.  #  10  All
are  presented  before  the  Lord  to  enter  into  his
covenant.  18  'The  great  wrath  on  him  that  flat¬
ters  himself  in  his  wickedness.  29  Secret  things
belong  to  God.

XXX.  1  Great  mercies  promised  to  the  penitent.

11  The  commandment  is  manifest.  15  Death
and  life  are  set  before  them.

XXXI.  1  Moses  encourages  the  people.  7  He  en¬
courages  Joshua.  9  He  delivers  the  law  to  the
priests  to  read  it  in  the  seventh  year  to  the  people.

14  God  gives  a  charge  to  .loshua,  19  and  a  song
to  testify  against  the  people.  24  Moses  delivers
the  book  of  the  law  to  the  Levites  to  keep.  28
He  makes  a  protestation  to  the  elders.

XXXI 1. 1  Moses’s  song,  which  displays  God’s  mer¬
cy  and  vengeance.  46  He  exhorts  them  to  set  their
hearts  upon  it.  48  God  sends  him  up  to  mount
Nebo,  to  see  the  land  and  die.

XXXIII.  1  The  majesty  of  God.  6  The  blessings  of
the  twelve  tribes.  26  The  excellency  of  Israel
XXXIV.  1  Moses  from  mount  Nebo  views  the  land.

5  He  dies  there.  6  His  burial.  7  His  age.  8 Thirty
days’  mourning  for  him.  9  Joshua  succeeds  him.

10  The  praise  of  Moses.

JOSHUA.

I.  The  Lord  appoints  Joshua  to  succeed  Moses.  3
The  borders  of  the  promised  land.  5,  9  God  pro¬
mises  to  assist  Joshua.  8  He  gives  him  instruc¬
tions.  10  He  prepares  the  people  to  pass  over
Jordan.  12  Joshua  puts  the  two  tribes  and  a  half
in  mind  of  their  promise  to  Rioses.  16  They  pro¬
mise  him  fealty.

II.  1  Rahab  receives  and  conceals  the  twospiessent
from  Shittim.  8  l  he  covenant  between  her  and
them.  23  Their  return  and  relation.

III.  1  Joshua  comes  to  Jordan.  2 The  officers  in¬
struct  the  people  for  the  passage.  7  The  Lord  en¬
courages  Joshua.  9  Joshua  encourages  the  people.
14  The  waters  of  Jordan  are  divided.

IV.  1  Twelve  men  are  appointed  to  take  twelve
stones  for  a  memorial  out  of  Jordan.  9  Twelve
other  stones  are  set  up  in  the  midst  of  Jordan.  10,
19The  people  passover.  14God  magnifies  Joshua.
20  'The  twelve  stones  are  pitched  in  Gilgal.

V.  1  The  Canaanites  are  afraid.  2  loshua  renews
circumcision.  10  The  passover  is  kept  at  Gilgal.
12  Manna  ceases.  13  An  angel  appears  to  Joshua.

VI.  1  Jericho  is  shut  up.  2  God  instructs  Joshua
how  to  besiege  it.  12  The  city  is  compassed.  17
It  must  be  accursed.  20  lhe  walls  fall  down.
22  Rahab  is  saved.  26  The  builder  of  Jericho  is
cursed.

VII.  1  The  Israelites  are  smitten  at  A  i.  6Joshua’s
complaint.  10  God  instructs  him  what  to  do.  16
Achan  is  taken  by  lot.  19  His  confession.  22
Both  himself,  and  all  he  had,  are  destroyed  in  the
valley  of  Achor.

VIII.  1  God  encourages  Joshua.  3  The  stratagem

whereby  Ai  was  taken.  29  The  king  thereof  is
hanged.  30  Joshua  builds  an  altar,  32  writes
the  law  on  stones,  33  propounds  blessings  and
cursings.  .  ,  _.

IX.  1  The  kings  combine  against  Israel.  3  I  he  Gi-
beonites  by  craft  obtain  a  league  :  16  for  which
they  are  condemned  to  perpetual  bondage.

X.  1  Five  kings  war  against  Gibeon.  6  Joshua  res¬
cues  it.  10  God  fights  against  them  with  hailstones.
12  'The  sun  and  moon  stand  still  at  the  word  of
.loshua.  16 'The  five  kings  are  mured  in  acave.  21
They  are  brought  forth,  24  scornfully  used,  26
and  hanged.  40  Seven  kings  more  are  conquered.
43  Joshua  returns  to  Gilgal.

XI.  1  Divers  kings  overcome  at  the  waters  of  Me-
rom.  10  Hazor  is  taken  and  burnt.  16  All  the
country  taken  by  Joshua.  21 1  he  Anakimscutoff.

XII.  1  The  two  kings  whose  countries  Moses  took
and  disposed  of.  7  The  one  and  thirty  kings  on
the  other  side  of  Jordan  which  Joshua  smote.

XIII.  1  The  bounds  of  the  land  not  yet  conquered.
8  The  inheritance  of  the  two  tribes  and  half.  14,
33 The  Lord,  and  his  sacrifices,  are  the  inheritance
of  Levi.  15  The  bounds  of  the  inheritance  of  Reu¬
ben  22  Balaam  slain.  24  The  bounds  of  the  inhe¬
ritance  of  Gad,  29  and  the  half  tribe  ot  Manasseh.

XIV.  1  The  nine  tribes  and  a  half  are  to  have  their
inheritance  by  lot.  6  Caleb  by  privilege  obtains

XV.  1  The  borders  of  the  lot  of  Judah.  13  Caleb’s
portion  and  conquest.  16  Othniel  for  his  valour
hath  Achsah,  Caleb’s  daughter,  to  wife.  18  She
obtains  a  blessing  of  her  father.  21  The  cities  of
Judah.  63  The  Jebusites  not  conquered.

XV  1 .  1  The  general  borders  of  the  sons  of  Joseph.
5  The  border  of  the  inheritance  of  Ephraim.  10
'The  Canaanites  not  conquered.

XVII.  1  The  lot  of  Manasseh.  8  Ills  coast.  12  The
Canaanites  not  driven  out.  14  The  children  of
Joseph  obtain  another  lot.

XVI 1 1.  1  The  tabernacle  is  set  up  at  Shiloh.  2  The
remainder  of  the  land  is  described,  and  divided
into  seven  parts.  10  .loshua  divides  it  by  lot.  11
'l  he  lot  and  border  of  Benjamin.  21  J  heir  cities.
XIX.  1  The  lot  of  Simeon,  lOofZebulun,  17  of  Is-
sachar,  24  of  Asher,  32  of  Naphtali,  40  ot  Dan.

705


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


46  The  children  of  Israel  give  an  inheritance  to
Joshua.

XX.  1  God  commands,?  and  the  children  of  Israel
appoint  the  six  cities  of  refuge.

XXI.  1  Eight  and  forty  cities  given  by  lot,  out  of
the  other  tribes,  to  the  Levites.  43  God  gave  the
land, and  rest  unto  the  Israelites,  according  to  his
promise.

XXII.  1  I'lie  two  tribes  and  half  with  a  blessing  are
sent  home.  9  They  build  the  altar  of  testimony,
in  their  journey.  11  The  Israelites  are  offended
thereat.  21  They  give  them  good  satisfaction.

XXIII.  1  Joshua’s  exhortation  before  his  death,  3  by
former  benefits,  5  by  promises,  Hand  by  threats.
XXIV.  1  Joshua  assembles  the  tribes  atShechem.
2  A  brief  history  of  God’s  benefits  from  Terah.
14  He  renews  a  covenant  between  them  and  God.
26  A  stone  the  witnessofthe  covenant.  29  Joshua’s
age,  death,  and  burial.  32  Joseph’s  bones  are
buried.  33  Eleazar  dies.

JUDGES.

I.  The  acts  of  Judah  and  Simeon.  4  Adonibezek
justly  requited.  8  Jerusalem  taken.  10  Hebron
taken.  11  Othniel  hath  A chsah  to  wife  for  taking
ofDebir.  lCThe  Kenitesdwell  in  Judah.  1?  Hor-
mah,  Gaza,  Askelon,  and  Ekron  taken.  21  The
acts  of  Benjamin.  22  Of  the  house  of  Joseph,
■who  take  Bethel.  30  Of  Zebulun.  31  Of  Asher.
3.3  Of  Naphtali.  34  Of  Dan.

II.  1  A  n  angel  rebukes  the  people  at  Bochim.  6  The
wickedness  of  the  new  generation  after  Joshua.
14  God’s  anger  and  pity  towards  them.  20  The
Canaanites  are  left  to  prove  Israel.

III.  1  The  nations  which  were  left  to  prove  Israel.

6  By  communion  with  them  they  commitidolatry.
8  Othniel  delivers  them  from  Chushan  Risha-
thaim,  12  Ehud  from  Eglon,  31  Shamgar  from  the
Philistines.

IV.  1  Deborah  and  Barak  deliver  them  fromJabin
and  Sisera.

V.  1  The  song  of  Deborah  and  Barak.

VI.  1  The  Israelites  for  their  sin  are  oppressed  by
Midian.  8  A  prophet  rebukes  them.  1 1  An  angel
sends  Gideon  for  their  deliverance.  17  Gideon’s
present  is  consumed  with  fire.  24  Gideon  destroys
Baal’s  altar,  and  offers  a  sacrifice  upon  the  altar
Jehovah-shalom.  30  Joash  defends  his  son,  and
calls  him  Jerubbaal.  33  Gideon’s  army.  36
Gideon’s  signs.

VII.  1  Gideon’s  army  of  two  and  thirty  thousand  is
brought  to  three  hundred.  9  He  is  encouraged  by
the  dream  and  interpretation  of  the  barley  cake.
16  His  stratagem  of  trumpets  and  lamps  in  pitch¬
ers.  24  The  Ephraimites  take  Oreb  and  Zeeb.

VII  1. 1  Gideon  pacifies  the  Ephraimites.  4  Succoth
and  Penuel  refuse  to  relieve  Gideon’s  army.  10
Zebah  and  Zalmunna  are  taken.  13  Succoth  and
Penuel  are  destroyed.  17  Gideon  revenges  his
brethren’s  death  on  Zebah  and  Zalmunna.  22  lie
refuses  government.  24  His  ephod  causeof  idola¬
try.  28  Midian  subdued.  29  Gideon’s  children,
and  death.  33  The  Israelites’  idolatry  and  ingra¬
titude.

IX.  1  A bimelech,  by  conspiracy  with  the  Shechem-

ites,  and  murder  of  his  brethren,  is  made  king.

7  Jotham  by  a  parable  rebukes  them,  and  foretells
their  ruin.  22  Gaal  conspires  with  the  Shechem
ites  against  him.  30  Zebul  reveals  it.  34  Abi-
nieiech  overcomes  them,  and  sows  the  cits’  with
salt.  46  He  burns  the  hold  of  the  god  Berith.
50  At  L'hebez  he  is  slain  by  a  piece  of  a  millstone.
56  Jotham’s  curse  is  fulfilled.

X.  1  Tola  judges  Israel  in  Shamir.  3  .Tair,  whose
thirty  sons  had  thirty  cities.  6  The  Philistines  and
Ammonites  oppress  Israel.  10  In  their  misery,
God  sends  them  to  their  false  gods.  15Upon  their
repentance,  he  pities  them.

XI.  1  The  covenant  between  .Tephthah  and  the
Gileadites,  that  he  should  be  their  head.  12  The
treaty  of  peace  between  him  and  the  Ammonites  is
in  vain.  29  Jephthah’s  vow.  32  His  conquests  of
the  Ammonites.  34  He  performs  his  vow  on  his
daughter.

XII.  1  The  Ephraimites  quarrelling  with  Jephthah,
and  discerned  by  Shibboleth,  are  slain  by  the
Gileadites.  7 -Tephthah  dies.  8  1  bzan,  who  had
thirty  sons  and  thirty  daughters,  12  and  Elon,  13
and  Abdon,  who  had  forty  sons  and  thirty-
nephews,  judged  Israel.

XIII.  1  Israel  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Philistines.  2
An  angel  appears  to  Manoah’s  wife.  8  The  angel
appears  to  Manoah.  15  Manoah’s  sacrifice,  where¬
by  the  angel  is  discovered.  24  Samson  is  born.

XIV.  1  Samson  desires  a  wife  of  the  Philistines.  6
In  his  journey  he  kills  a  lion.  8  In  a  second
journey  he  finds  honey  in  the  carcase.  10  Sam¬
son’s  marriage  feast.  12  His  riddle  by  his  wife
is  made  known.  19  He  spoils  thirty  Philistines.
20  His  wife  is  married  to  another.

XV.  1  Samson  is  denied  his  wife.  3  He  burns
the  Philistines’  corn  with  foxes  and  firebrands.  6
His  wife  and  her  father  are  burnt  by  the  Philis¬
tines.  7  Samson  smites  them  hip  and  thigh.  9
He  is  bound  by  the  men  of  Judah,  and  delivered
to  the  Philistines.  14  He  kills  them  with  a  jaw¬
bone.  18  God  makes  the  fountain  En-hakkore
for  him  in  Lehi.

XVI.  i  Samson  atGazaescapes.andcarriesaway
the  gates  of  the  city.  4  Delilah,  corrupted  by  the
Philistines,  enticeth  Samson.  6  She  is  deceived
thrice.  15  At  last  she  overcomes  him.  21  The
Philistines  take  him  and  put  nut  his  eyes.  22  His
strength  renewing,  he  pulls  down  the  house  upon
the  Philistines,  and  dies.

XVII.  1  Of  the  money  that  Micah  first  stole,  then
restored,  his  mother  makes  images,  5  and  the
ornaments  for  them.  6  He  hires  a  Levite  to  be
his  priest.

XVI 1 1,  l  The  Danitessend  five  men  to  seek  out  an
inheritance.  3  At  the  house  of  Micah  they  con¬
sult  with  Jonathan,  and  are  encouraged  in  their

706


way.  7  They  search  Laish,  and  bring  back  news
of  good  hope.  11  Six  hundred  men  are  sent  to
surprise  it.  14  In  the  way  they  rob  Micah  of  his
priest  and  his  consecrated  things.  27  They  win
Laish,  and  call  it  Dan.  30  They  set  up  idolatry
wherein  Jonathan  inherited  the  priesthood.

XI  X.  1  A  Levite  °;oes  to  Bethlehem  to  fetch  home
his  wife.  16  An  old  man  entertains  him  atGibeah
22  The  Gibeonites  abuse  his  concubine  to  death.
29  He  divides  her  into  twelve  pieces  to  send  them
to  the  twelve  tribes.

XX.  1  The  Levite  in  a  general  assembly  declares  his
wrong.  8  The  decree  of  the  assembly.  12  The
Benjamites  being  cited,  make  head  against  the
Israelites.  18  The  Israelites  in  two  battles  lose
forty  thousand.  26  They  destroy  by  stratagem
all  the  Benjamites,  except  six  hundred.

XXL  1  The  people  bewail  the  desolation  of  Benja
min.  8  By  the  destruction  of  Jabesh  Gilead
they  provide  them  four  hundred  wives.  16  They
advise  them  to  surprise  the  virgins  that  danced  at
Shiloh.

RUTH.

I.  Elimelech,  driven  by  famine  into  Moab,  dies
there.  4  Mahlon  and  Chilion,  having  married
wives  of  Moab,  die  also.  6  Naomi  returning
homeward,  8  dissuades  her  two  daughters-in-law
from  going  with  her.  14  Orpah  leaves  her,  but
Ruth  with  great  constancy  accompanies  her.  19
1  hey  two  come  to  Bethlehem,  where  they  are
gladly  received.

II.  1  Ruth  gleans  in  the  fields  of  Boaz.  4  Boaz
taking  knowledge  of  her,  8  shews  her  great  fa
vour.  18  What  she  got  she  carried  tc  Naomi.

III.  1  By  N aomi’s instruction, 5 Ruth  lies  at  Boaz’s
feet.  8  Boaz  acknowledges  the  right  of  a  kins¬
man.  14  He  sends  her  away  with  six  measures
of  barley.

IV.  1  Boaz  calls  into  judgment  the  next  kinsman.  6
He  refuses  the  redemption  according  to  the  man¬
ner  in  Israel.  9  Boaz  buys  the  inheritance.  11  He
marries  Ruth.  13  She  bears  Obed  the  grandfather
of  David.  18  The  generation  of  Pharez.

I  SAMUEL.

I.  Elkanah,  a  Levite,  having  two  wives,  worships
yearly  at  Shiloh.  4  He  cherishes  Hannah,  though
barren,  and  provoked  by  Peninnah.  9  Hannah  m
grief  prays  tor  a  child.  12  Eli  first  rebuking  her,
afterwards  blesses  her.  19  Hannah  having  born
Samuel,  stays  at  home  till  he  is  weaned.  24  She
presents  him,  according  to  her  vow,  to  the  Lord

II.  1  Hannah’s  song  in  thankfulness.  12Thesin  of
Eli’s  sons.  18  Samuel’s  ministry.  20  By  Eli’s
blessing,  Hannah  is  more  fruitful.  22  Eli  reproves
his  sons.  27  A  prophecy  against  Eli's  house.

III.  1  How  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  first  re  vealeu
to  Samuel.  11  God  tells  Samuel  the  destruction
of  Eli's  house.  15  Samuel,  though  loth,  tells  Eli
the  vision.  19  Samuel  grows  in  credit.

I V.  1  The  Israelites  are  overcome  by  the  Philistines
at  Eben-ezer.  3  They  fetch  the  aik,  to  the  ter¬
ror  of  the  Philistines.  10  They  are  smitten  again,
the  ark  taken,  Hophni  and  Phinehas  are  slain.
12  Eli,  at  the  news,  falling  backwaid,  breaks  his
neck.  19  Phinehas’s  wife,  discouraged  in  her
travail  with  Ichabod,  dies.

V.  1  The  Philistines  having  brought  the  ark  into
Ashdod,  set  it  in  the  house  of  Dagon.  3  Dagon
falls  down,  and  is  cut  in  pieces,  and  they  of  Ash¬
dod  smitten  with  emerods.  8  So  God  deals  with
them  of  Gath,  when  it  was  brought  thither.  10
And  so  with  them  of  Ekron,  when  it  was  brought
thither.

VL  l  After  seven  months  the  Philistines  take  coun¬
sel  how  to  send  back  the  ark.  10  They  bring  it
on  a  new  cart  with  an  offering  unto  Beth-she-
mesh.  19  The  people  are  smitten  for  looking  into
the  ark.  21  They  send  to  them  of  Kirjath-jearim
to  fetch  it.

VJL  1  They  of  Kirjath-jearim  bring  the  ark  into
the  house  of  Abinadab,  and  sanctify  Eleazar’s  son
to  keep  it.  2  After  twenty  years,  3  the  Israelites,
by  Samuel’s  means,  solemnly  repent  at  Mizpeh.

7  While  Samuel  prays  and  sacrifices,  the  Lord
discomfits  the  Philistines  by  thunder,  at  Eben-
ezer.  13  The  Philistines  are  subdued.  15-Samuel
peaceably  and  religiously  judges  Israel.

VI II.  1  By  occasion  of  the  evil  government  of
Samuel  s  sons,  the  Israelites  ask  a  king.  6  Samuel
prayingin  grief,  is  comforted  by  God.  10  He  tells
the  manner  of  a  king.  19  God  willeth  Samuel  to
yield  unto  the  importunity  of  the  people.

IX.  1  Saul  despairing  to  find  his  father’s  asses,  6  by
the  counsel  of  his  servant,  11  and  direction  of
young  maidens,  15  according  to  God’s  revelation,
18  comes  to  Samuel.  19  Samuel  entertains  Saul
at  the  feast.  25  Samuel,  after  secret  communi¬
cation,  brings  Saul  on  his  way.

X.  1  Samuel  anoints  Saul.  2  He  confirms  him  by
prediction  of  three  signs.  9  Saul's  heart  is  chang¬
ed,  and  he  prophesies.  14  He  conceals  the  mat¬
ter  of  the  kingdom  from  his  uncle.  1?  Saul  is
chosen  at  Mizpeh  by  lot.  26  The  different  affec¬
tions  of  his  subjects.

XL  1  Nahash  offers  them  of  Jabesh  Gilead  a  re¬
proachful  condition.  4  They  send  messengers,
and  are  delivered  by  Saul.  12  Saul  thereby  is
confirmed  and  his  kingdom  renewed

XII.  1  Samuel  testifies  his  integrity.  6  He  re¬
proves  the  people  of  ingratitude^  16  He  terrifies
them  with  thunder  in  harvest  time.  20  He  com¬
forts  them  in  God’s  mercy.

XIII.  1  Saul’s  selected  band.  3  He  calls  the  He¬
brews  to  Gilgal  against  the  Philistines  whose  gar¬
rison  Jonathan  had  smitten.  5  The  Philistines’
great  host.  6  The  distress  of  the  Israelites.  8Saul,
weary  of  staying  for  Samuel,  sacrificeth.  11
Samuel  reproves  him.  17  The  three  spoiling
bands  of  the  Philistines.  19  The  policy  of  the
Philistines,  to  suffer  no  smith  in  Israel.


XIV.  1  Jonathan,  unknown  to  his  father,  the-
priest,  or  the  people,  goes  and  miraculously
smites  the  Philistines’  garrison.  15  A  divine  ter¬
ror  makes  them  beat  themselves.  19  Saul  not
staying  the  priest’s  answer,  sets  on  them.  21
The  captivated  Hebrews,  and  the  hidden  Israel¬
ites,  join  against  them.  24  Saul's  unadvised  ad-  *
juration  hinders  the  victory.  32  He  restrains
the  people  from  eating  blood.  35  He  builds  an
altar.  36  Jonathan  taken  by  lot,  is  saved  by  the
people.  47  Saul’s  strength  and  family.

XV,  l  Samuel  sends  Saul  to  destroy  Amalek.  6
Saul  favours  the  Kenites.  8  He  spares  Agag
and  the  best  of  the  spoil.  16  Samuel  denounces
unm  Saul,  commending  and  excusing  himself,
God’s  rejection  of  him  for  his  disobedience.  24-
Saul's  humiliation.  32  Samuel  kills  Agag.  34
Samuel  and  Saul  part.

XV  I.  1  Samuel  sent  by  God,  under  pretence  of  a
sacrifice,  comes  to  Bethlehem.  6  His  human
judgment  is  reproved.  11  He  anoints  David.  15
Saul  sends  for  David  to  quiet  his  evil  spirit.
XVII.  l  The  armies  of  the  Israelites  and  Philis¬
tines  being  ready  to  battle,  4  Goliath  comes
proudly  forth  to  challenge  a  combat.  12  David,
sent  by  his  father  to  visit  his  brethren,  accepts
the  challenge.  28  Eliab  chides  him.  30  He  is
brought  to  Saul.  32  He  shews  the  reason  of  his
confidence.  38  Without  armour,  armed  by  faith,
he  kills  the  giant.  55  Saul  takes  notice  of  "David.
XVIII.  1  Jonathan  loves  David.  5  Saul  envies
his  praise,  10  seeks  to  kill  him  in  his  fury,  12
fears  Inm  for  his  good  success,  1?  offers  him  his
daughters  tor  a  snare.  22  David  persuaded  to
be  the  king’s  sonrin-law,  gives  two  hundred  fore¬
skins  of  the  Philistines  for  Michal’s  dowry.  28
v  i  v1  s  hatred,  and  David’s  glory,  increases,
i  - 1 r  l  ,0.n,athan  discovers  his  father’s  purpose  to
kill  David.  4  He  persuades  his  father  to  recon¬
ciliation.  8  By  reason  of  David’s  good  success
in  a  new  war,  Saul’s  malicious  rage  breaks  out
against  him.  12  Michal  deceives  her  father  with
an  image  in  David’s  bed.  18  David  comes  to
Samuel  in  Naioth.  20  Saul’s  messengers,  sent  tc
take  David,  22  and  Saul  himself,  prophesy.

XX.  1  David  consults  with  Jonathan  for  his’safety.

11  Jonathan  and  David  renew  their  covenant  by
oath.  18  Jonathan’s  token  to  David.  24  Saul
missing  David,  seeks  to  kill  Jonathan.  35  Jona¬
than  lovingly  takes  his  leave  of  David.

AXI.  1  David  at  Nob  obtains  of  Ahimelech  hal¬
lowed  bread.  7  Doeg  was  present.  8  David
takes  Goliath’s  sword.  10  David  at  Gath  feigns
himself  mad.

XXII.  1  Companies  resort  unto  David  at  Adullam
3  At  Mizpeh  he  commends  his  parents  unto  the
king  of  Moab.  5  Admonished  by  Gad,  he  comes
to  tlareth.  6  Saul  going  to  pursue  him,  complains
ot  J?1S  servants’  unfaithfulness.  9  Doeg  accuses-
Ahimelech.  11  Saul  commands  to  kill  the  priests
1 7  )  he  footmen  refusing,  Doeg  executes  it.  20
Abiathar  escaping,  brings  David  the  news.
XXIII.  l  David  inquiring  of  the  Lord  by  Abia-
thar,  rescues  Keilah.  7  God  shewing  him  the
coming  of  Saul,  and  the  treachery  of  the  Keil-
ltes,  he  escapes  from  Keilah.  14  In  Ziph  Jona¬
than  comes  and  comforts  him.  19  The  Ziphites
discover  him  to  Saul.  25  At  Maon  he  is  rescued
from  Saul  by  the  invasion  of  the  Philistines.  29
He  dwells  at  Engedi.

XXIV.  1  David  in  a  cave  at  Engedi,  having  cut
off  -Saul  s  skirt,  spares  his  life.  8  He  shews
thereby  his  innocency.  16  Saul  acknowledging
his  fault,  takes  an  oath  of  David,  and  departs.

XXV.  1  Samuel  dies.  2  David  in  Paran  sends  to
N  abal.  10  Provoked  by  N abal’s  churlishness,  he
intends  to  destroy  him.  14  Abigail  discovering
“»  18  takes  a  present,  23  and  by  her  wisdom,

32  pacifies  David.  36  Nabal  hearing  thereof,
dies.  39  David  takes  Abigail  and  Ahinoam  to

--2?,,13  Wlves.  44  Michal  is  given  to  Phalti.

XXv  I.  1  Saul,  by  the  discovery  of  the  Ziphites,
comes  to  Hachilah  against  David.  4  David  com-
mg  into  the  trench,  stays  Abishai  from  killing
oaul,  but  takes  his  spear  and  cruse.  13  David
reproves  Abner,  18  and  exhorts  Saul.  21  Saul
acknowledges  his  sin.

XXVII.  1  Saul  hearing  David  to  be  in  Gath,  seeks
no  more  for  him.  5  David  begsZiklagof  Achish.

8  He,  invading  other  countries,  persuades  Achish
he  fought  against  Judah.

XXVIII.  l  Achish  puts  confidence  in  David.  3
Saul  having  destroyed  the  witches,  4  and  now  in
his  fear  forsaken  of  God,  7  seeks  to  a  witch.  Q
I  he  witch, encouraged  by  Saul,  raises  up  Samuel
15  Saul  hearing  his  ruin,  faints.  21  The  woman,
h  his  servants,  refresh  him  with  meat.

XXIX.  1  David  marching  with  the  Philistines,  3
is  disal  lowed  by  their  princes.  6  Achish  dismisses

,ht.m  ’W1th  commendations  of  his  fidelity.

XXX.  1  The  Amalekites  spoil  Ziklag.  4  David
asking  counsel,  is  encouraged  by  God  to  pursue
them.  11  By  means  of  a  revived  Egyptian,  he  is
brought  to  the  enemies,  and  recovers  all  the  spoil.

22  David's  law  to  divide  the  spoil  equally  be¬
tween  them  that  fight  and  them  that  keep  the
stun.  26  He  sends  presents  to  his  friends.

XXXI •  1  Saul  having  lost  his  army,  and  his  sons
sJain,  he  and  his  armour-bearer  kill  themselves.

7  I  he  Phdistines  possess  the  forsaken  towns  of
the  Israelites.  8  They  triumph  over  the  dead'
carcases.  11  I  hey  of  Jabesh  Gilead,  recovering
the  bodies  by  night,  burn  them  at  Jabesh,  and
mournfully  bury  their  bones.

II  SAMUEL.

I .  The  Amalekite,  who  broug-ht  tidings  of  the  over¬
throw,  and  accused  himself  of  Saul’s  death,  is
slain.  17  David  lamenteth  Saul  and  Jonathan
with  a  song.

II.  1  David,  by  God’s  direction,  with  hisrompanv
goes  up  to  Hebron,  where  he  is  made  king  of  Ju


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


dah.  5  He  commends  them  of  Jabesh  Gilead  for
their  kindness  to  Saul.  8  Abner  makes  Ishbo-
sheth  king  of  Israel.  12  A  mortal  skirmish  be¬
tween  twelve  of  Abner’s  and  twelve  ot  .loab’s
men.  18  Asahel  is  slain.  25  At  Abner’s  mo¬
tion  Joab  sounds  a  retreat.  32  Asahel’s  burial.
■311.  l  During  the  war  David  grows  yet  stronger.  2
Six  sons  were  born  to  him  in  Hebron.  6  Abner
displeased  with  Ishbosheth,  12  revolts  to  David.
13  David  requires  a  condition  to  bring  him  his
wife  Michal.  1“  Abner  having  communed  with
the  Israelites,  is  feasted  by  David,  and  dismissed.
22  Joab  returning  from  battle,  is  displeased  with
the  king,  and  kills  Abner.  28  David  curses  Joab,
31  and  mourns  for  Abner.

IV.  1  The  Israelites  being  troubled  at  the  death  of
Abner,  2  Baana  and  Rechab  slay  Ishbosheth,
and  bring  his  head  to  Hebron.  9  David  causes
them  to  be  slain,  and  lshbosheth’s  head  to  be
buried.

V.  1  The  tribes  come  to  Hebron  to  anoint  David

over  Israel.  4  David’s  age.  6  He  taking  Zion
from  the  Jebusites, dwells  in  it.  11  Hiram  sends
to  David.  13  Eleven  sons  are  born  to  him  in  Je¬
rusalem.  17  David  directed  by  God,  smites  the
Philistines  at  Baal  Perazim,  22  and  again  at  the
mulberry-trees.  .  .

VI.  1  David  fetches  the  ark  from  Kirjath-jearim  on
a  new  cart.  6  Uzzah  is  smitten  at  Perez  Uzzah.

9  God  blesses  Obed-Edom  for  the  ark.  12  David
brings  the  ark  into  Zion  with  sacrifices,  dances
before  it,  for  which  Michal  despised)  him.  17
He  places  it  in  the  tabernacle  with  great  joy  and
feasting.  20  Michal  reproving  David  for  his
religious  joy ,  is  childless  to  her  death.

VII.  1  Nathan  first  approving  the  purpose  of  Da¬
vid  to  build  God  a  house,  4  after  by  the  word  of
God  forbids  him.  12  He  promises  him  benefits
and  blessings  in  his  seed.  18  David’s  prayer
and  thanksgiving.

VIII.  1  David  subdues  the  Philistines  and  Moab¬
ites.  3  He  smites  Hadadezer,  and  the  Syrians.  9
Toi  sends  Joram  with  presents  to  bless  him.  11
The  presents  and  the  spoil  David  dedicates  to
God.  14  He  puts  garrisons  in  Edom.  16  Da¬
vid’s  officers.

IX.  1  David  by  Ziba  sends  for  Meplnbosheth.  For
Jonathan’s  sake  he  entertains  him  at  his  table,
and  restores  him  all  that  was  Saul’s.  9  He  makes
Ziba  his  farmer.

X.  David’s  messengers  sent  to  comfort  ITanun  the
son  of  Nabash,  are  treated  cruelly  by  him.  6
The  Ammonites,  strengthened  by  the  Syrians,
are  overcome  by  Joab  and  Abishai.  15  Shob  ich
making  a  new  supply  of  the  Syrians  at  Helam,
is  slain  by  David.

XI.  1  While  Joab  besiegeth  Babbah,  David  com¬
mits  adultery  with  Bath-sheba.  6  Uriah  sent
for  by  David  to  cover  the  adultery,  would  not  go
home  either  sober  or  drunken.  14  He  carries  to
Joab  the  order  for  his  death.  18  Joab  sends  the
report  thereof  to  David.  26  David  takes  Bath-
sheba  to  wife.

XII.  1  Nathan’s  parable  of  the  ewe-lamb,  causes
David  to  be  his  own  judge.  7  David  reproved  by
Nathan,  confesses  his  sin,  and  is  pardoned.  15  Da¬
vid  mourns  and  prays  for  the  child  while  it  lives.
24  Solomon  is  born,  and  named  Jedidiah.  26  Da¬
vid  takes  Kabbah,  and  tortures  the  people  thereof.

XIII.  1  Amnon  loving  Tamar,  by  Jonadab’s  coun¬
sel  feigning  himself  sick,  ravishes  her.  15  He
hates  her,  and  shamefully  turns  her  away.  19
Absalom  entertains  her,  and  conceals  his  pur¬
pose.  23  At  a  sheep-shearing  among  all  the
king's  sons,  he  kills  Amnon.  30  David  grieving
at  the  news,  is  comforted  by  Jonadab.  37  Absa¬
lom  flies  to  Talmai  at  Geshur.

XIV.  1  Joab,  suborning  a  widow  of  Tekoah.by  a
parable  to  incline  the  king’s  heart  to  fetch  home
Absalom,  brings  him  to  Jerusalem.  25  Absa¬
lom’s  beauty,  hair,  and  children.  28  After  two
years,  Absalom  by  Joab  is  brought  into  the  king’s
presence.

XV.  1  Absalom,  by  fair  speeches  and  courtesies,
steals  the  hearts  of  Israel.  7  Under  pretence  of
a  vow,  he  obtains  leave  to  go  to  Hebron.  10  He
makes  there  a  great  conspiracy,  13  David,  upon
the  news,  flees  from  Jerusalem.  19  Ittai  would
not  leave  him.  24  Zadok  and  Abiatharare  sent
back  with  the  ark.  30  David  and  his  company
go  up  mount  Olivet  weeping.  31  He  curses
Ahithophel’s  counsel.  32  Ilushai  is  sent  back
with  instructions.

XVI.  1  Ziba,  by  presents  and  false  suggestions,
obtains  his  master’s  inheritance.  5  At  Bahurim
Shimei  curseth  David.  9  David  with  patience
abstains,  and  restrains  others,  from  revenge.  15
Hushai  insinuates  himself  into  Absalom’s  coun¬
sel.  20  Ahithophel’s  counsel.

XVII.  1  Ahithophel’s  counsel  is  overthrown  by
Hushai’s,  according  to  God’s  appointment.  15
Secret  intelligence  is  sent  unto  David.  23  Ahi-
thophel  hangs  himself.  25  Amasa  is  made  cap¬
tain.  27  David  at  Mahanaim  is  furnished  with
provision.

XV I II.  1  Dstvid  viewing  the  armies  in  their  march,
gives  them  charge  of  Absalom.  6  1  he  Israelites
are  sorely  smitten  in  the  wood  of  F.phiaim.  9
Absalom  hanging  in  an  oak,  is  slain  by  Joab,
and  cast  into  a  pit.  18  Absalom’s  place.  19
Ahimaaz  and  Cushi  bring  tidings  to  David.  33
David  mourns  for  Absalom.

XIX.  1  Joab  causes  the  king  to  cease  his  mourn¬
ing.  9  1  he  Israelites  are  earnest  to  bring  the
king  back.  11  David  sends  to  the  priests  to  in¬
cite  them  of  Judah.  18  Shimei  is  pardoned.  24
Mephibosheth  excused.  32  Barziltai  dismissed.
Chimham  his  son  is  taken  into  the  king's  family.
41  The  Israelites  expostulate  with  Judah  for
bringing  home  the  king  without  them.

SiX.  1  By  occasion  of  the  quarrel,  Sheba  makes  a
•oarty  in  Israel.  3  David’s  ten  concubines  are


shut  up  in  perpetual  prison.  4  Amasa  made
captain  over  Judah,  is  slain  by  Joab.  14  Joab
pursueth  Sheba  unto  Abel.  16  A  wise  woman
saves  the  city  by  Sheba's  head.  23  David’s
officers.  .

XXI.  1  The  three  years’  famine  for  the  Gibeonites
cease,  by  hanging  seven  of  Saul’s  sons.  10  Kiz-
pah’s  kindness  unto  the  dead.  12  David  buries
the  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  in  his  father's
sepulchre.  15  Four  battles  against  the  Philistines,
wherein  four  valiants  of  David  slay  four  giants.

XXII.  1  A  psalm  of  thanksgiving  for  God’s  power¬
ful  deliverance,  and  manifold  blessings.

XXIII.  1  David  in  his  last  words  professes  his  faith
in  God’s  promises  to  be  beyond  sense  or  experi¬
ence.  6  1  he  different  state  of  the  wicked.  8  A
catalogue  of  David’s  mighty  men.

XXIV.  1  David,  tempter!  by  Satan,  forces  Joab  to
number  the  people.  5  The  captains,  in  nine  months
and  twenty  days,  bring  the  muster  of  thirteen
hundred  thousand  fighting  men.  10  David  hav¬
ing  three  plagues  propounded  by  Gad,  repents,
and  chooses  the  three  days’  pestilence.  15  After
the  death  of  threescore  and  ten  thousand,  David,
by  repentance,  prevents  tne  uestruction  01  Jeru¬
salem.  18  David,  by  Gad’s  direction,  purchases
Araunah’s  threshing-floor,  where  having  sacri¬
ficed,  the  plague  is  stayed.

1  KINGS.

I.  Abishag  cherishes  David  in  his  extreme  age.

5  Adonijah,  David’s  favourite,  usurps  the  king¬
dom.  11  By  the  counsel  of  Nathan,  15  Bath-
sheba  moves  the  king,  22  and  Nathan  seconds
her.  28  David  renews  his  oath  to  Bath-sheba.
32  Solomon,  by  David’s  appointment,  being
anointed  king  by  Zadok  and  Nathan,  the  people
triumph.  41  Jonathan,  bringing  the  news,  Ado
nijah’s  guests  fly.  50  Adonijah  fleeing  to  the
horns  of  the  altar,  upon  his  good  behaviour  is
dismissed  by  Solomon.

II.  1  David  having  given  a  charge  to  Solomon,  3  of
religiousness,  5  of  Joab,  7  of  Rarzillai,  8  of  Shi¬
mei,  10  dies.  12  Solomon  succeeds.  13  Adonijah,
moving  Bath-sheba  to  sue  unto  Solomon  for  Abi¬
shag,  is  put  to  death.  26  Abiathar  having  his  life
given  him,  is  deprived  of  the  priesthood.  28  Joab
fleeing  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  is  there  slain.  35
Fenaiah  is  put  in  Joab’s  room,  and  Zadok  in  Abi-
athar’s.  .36  Shimei  confined  to  Jerusalem,  by  oc¬
casion  of  going  thence  to  Gath,  is  put  to  death.

III.  1  Solomon  marries  Tharaoh’s  daughter.  2
High  places  being  in  use,  Solomon  sacrifices
at  Gibeon.  5  Solomon  at  Gibeon,  in  the  choice
which  God  gave  him,  preferring  wisdom,  obtains
wisdom,  riches,  and  honour.  16  Solomon’s  judg¬
ment  between  the  two  harlots,  makes  him  re¬
nowned.

IV.  1  Solomon’s  princes.  7  His  twelve  officers
for  provision.  20,  24  The  peace  and  largeness
of  his  kingdom.  22  His  daily  provision.  26  His
stables.  29  His  wisdom.

V.  1  Hiram  sending  to  congratulate  Solomon,  is
certified  of  his  purpose  to  build  the  temple,  and
desired  to  furnish  him  with  timber  thereto.  7
Hiram  blessing  God  for  Solomon,  and  requesting
food  for  his  family,  furnishes  him  with  trees.
13  The  number  of  Solomon’s  workmen  and  la¬
bourers.

VI.  1  The  building  of  Solomon  s  temple.  5  The
chambers  thereof.  11  God’s  promise  to  it.  15
The  ceiling  and  adorning  of  it.  23  The  cheru-
bims.  31  The  doors.  36  The  court.  37  The
time  of  building  it.

VII.  1  The  building  of  Solomon’s  house.  2  Of  the
house  of  Lebanon.  6  Of  the  porch  of  pillars.  7
Of  the  porch  of  judgment.  8  Of  the  house  for
Pharaoh’s  daughter.  13  Hiram’s  work  of  the  two
pillars.  23  Of  the  molten  sea.  27  Ot  the  ten  bases.
38  Of  the  ten  lavers,  40  and  all  the  vessels.

VIII.  1  The  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the  temple,
12  and  54  Solomon’s  blessing.  22  Solomon’s
prayer.  62  His  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings.

IX.  1  God’s  covenant  in  a  vision,  with  Solomon.
10  The  mutual  presents  of  Solomon  and  Hiram.
15  In  Solomon’s  works  the  Gentiles  were  his
bondmen,  the  Israelites  honourable  servants.  24
Pharaoh’s  daughter  removes  to  her  house.  25
Solomon’s  yearly  solemn  sacrifices.  26  His
navy  fetches  gold  from  Ophir.

X.  1  The  queen  of  Sheba  admires  the  wisdom  of

Solomon.  14  Solomon’s  gold.  16  His  targets.
18  The  throne  of  ivory.  21  His  vessels.  24  His
presents.  26  His  chariots  and  horses.  28  His
tribute.  _

XI.  1  Solomon’s  wives  and  concubines.  4  In  his
old  age  they  drew  him  to  idolatry. _  9  God
threatens  him.  14  Solomon’s  adversaries  were
Hadad,  who  was  entertained  in  Egypt,  23  Pezon,
who  reigned  in  Damascus,  26  and  Jeroboam,  to
whom  Ahijah  prophesied.  41  Solomon’s  acts,
reign,  and  death  :  Rehoboam  succeeds  him.

XII.  1  The  Israelites  assembled  at  Shechem  to
crown  Rehoboam,  by  Jeroboam  make  a  suit  of
relaxation  unto  him.  6  Rehoboam  refusing  the
old  men’s  counsel,  by  the  advice  of  young  men,
answers  them  roughly.  16  Ten  tribes  revolting,
kill  Adoram,  and  make  Rehoboam  to  flee.  21
Rehoboam  raising  an  army,  is  forbidden  by  She-
maiah.  25  Jeroboam  strengthens  himself  by  cities,
26  and  by  the  idolatry  of  the  two  calves.

XIII.  1  Jeroboam’s  hand,  that  offered  violence  to

him  who  prophesied  against  his  altar  at  Bethel,
withers,  6  and  at  the  prayer  of  the  prophet  is
restored.  7  1  he  prophet,  refusing  the  king’s  en¬
tertainment,  departs  from  Bethel.  11  An  old
prophet  seducing  him,  brings  him  back.  20  He
is  reproved  by  God,  23  slain  by  a  lion,  26  buried
by  the  old  prophet,  31  who  confirms  his  pro¬
phecy.  33  Jeroboam’s  obstinacy.

XIV.  1  Ahijah  being  sick,  Jeroboam  sends  his  wife
disguised  with  presents  to  the  prophet  Ahijah  at


Shiloh.  5  Abijah,  forewarned  by  God, denounces
God’s  judgment.  17  Abijah  dies  and  is  buried.
19  Nadab  succeeds  Jeroboam.  21  Rehoboam’s
wic  ked  reign.  25  Shishak  spoils  Jerusalem.  29
A  bijam  succeeds  Rehoboam.

XV.  1  Abijam’s  wicked  reign.  7  Asasucceeds  him.

9  Asa’s  good  reign.  16  1  he  war  between  Baasha
and  him”,  causes  him  to  make  a  league  with  Ben-
hadad.  23  Jehoshaphat  succeeds  Asa.  25Nadab’s
w  icked  reign.  27  Baasha  conspiring  against  him.
exe.  utes  Ahijah’s  prophecy.  31  N  adab’s  acts  and
death.  .3.3  Baasha’s  wicked  reign.

XVI.  1,7  Jehu’s  prophecy  against  Baasha.  5  Elah
succeeds  him.  8  Zimri  conspiring  against  Elah
succeedshim.  11  Zimri  executes  Jehu’s  prophecy.
15  Omri  made  king  by  the  soldiers,  forceth  Zimri
desperately  to  burn  himself.  21  1  he  kingdom
being  divided,  Omri  prevails  against  1  ibm.  23
Omri  buildeth  Samaria.  25  His  wicked  reign.
27  Ahab  succeeds  him.  29  Aliab’s  most  wicked
reign.  34  Joshua’s  curse  upon  Iliel  the  builder
of  Jericho.

XVII.  1  Elijah  having  prophesied  against  Ahab,  is
sent  to  (Jherith,  where  the  ravens  feed  him.  8
He  is  sent  to  the  widow  of  Zarephath.  17  He
raises  the  widow’s  son.  24  'I  he  woman  believes
him.

XVIII.  1  In  theextrendty  of  famine,  Elijah  sent  to
Ahab,  meets  good  Obadiah.  9  Obadiah  brings
Ahab  to  Elijah.  17  Elijah  reproving  Ahab,  by
fire  from  heaven  convinces  Baal’s  prophets.  41
Elijah  by  prayer  obtaining  rain,  follows  Ahab  to
J  fzrcfl *

XIX.  1  Elijah  threatened  by  Jezebel,  flees  to  Beer-
sheba.  4  In  the  wilderness,  being  weary  of  his
life,  is  comforted  by  an  angel.  9  At  Horeb  God
appears  unto  him,  sending  him  to  anoint  Hazael,
Jehu,  and  Elisha.  19  Elisha  taking  leave  of  his
friends,  follows  Elijah.

XX.  1  Benhadad  not  content  with  Ahab’s  homage,
besiegeth  Samaria.  13  By  the  direction  of  a  pro¬
phet,  the  Syrians  are  slain.  22  As  the  prophet
forewarned  Ahab,  the  Syrians  trusting  in  the
valleys,  come  against  him  in  Aphek.  28  By  the
word  of  the  prophet,  and  God’s  judgment,  the
Syrians  are  smitten  again.  31  '1  he  S>  rians  sub¬
mitting  themselves,  Ahab  sends  Benhadad  away
with  a  covenant.  35  The  prophet,  under  the  pa¬
rable  of  a  prisoner,  making  Ahab  to  judge  him¬
self,  denounces  God’s  judgment  against  him.

XXL  1  Ahab  being  denied  Naboth’s  vineyard,  is
grieved.  5  Jezebel  writing  letters  against  Naboth,
he  is  condemned  of  blasphemy.  15  Ahab  takes
possession  of  the  vineyard,  it  Elijah  denounces
judgments  against  Ahab  and  Jezebel.  25  V  icked
Ahab  repenting,  God  defers  the  judgment.
XXII.  1  Ahab  seduced  by  false  prophets,  accord
ing  to  the  word  of  Micaiah,  is  slain  at  RamotD
Gilead.  37  'I  he  dogs  lick  up  his  blood,  and  Aha-
ziah  succeeds  him.  41  Jehoshaphat’s  good  reign,
45  his  acts.  50  Jehoram  succeeds  him.  51  Aha-
ziah’s  evil  reign.

II  KINGS.

I.  Moab  rebels.  2  Ahaziah,  sending  to  Baalze-
bub,  hath  his  judgment  by  Elijah.  5  Elijah  tw  ice
brings  fire  from  heaven  upon  those  whom  Aha¬
ziah  sent  to  apprehend  him.  He  pities  the
third  captain,  and  encouraged  by  an  angel,  tells
the  king  of  his  death.  17  Jehoram  succeeds
Ahaziah.

II.  1  Elijah,  taking  his  leave  of  Elisha,  with  his
mantle  divides  Jordan,  9  and  granting  Elisha  his
request,  is  taken  up  by  a  fiery  chariot  into  heaven.
12  Elisha,  dividing  Jordan  with  Elijah’s  mantle,
is  acknow  ledged  his  successor.  16  I  he  young
prophets,  hardly  obtaining  leave  to  seek  Elijah,
could  not  find  him.  19  Elisha  with  salt  heals  the
unwholesome  waters.  23  Bears  destroy  the  chil¬
dren  that  mocked  Elisha.

III.  1  Jehoram’s  reign.  4  Mesha  rebelleth.  6  Jeho¬
ram,  with  Jehoshaphat,  and  the  king  of  Edom,
being  distressed  tor  want  ot  water,  by  Elisha
obtains  water,  and  promise  of  victory.  21  1  he
Moabites  deceived  by  the  colour  ot  the  water,
coming  to  spoil,  are  overcome.  26  1  he  king  of
Moab,  by  sacrificing  the  king  of  Edom’s  son,
raises  the  siege.

IV.  1  Elishamultiplies the  widow  soil.  8  lTegives
a  son  to  the  good  Shunammite.  18  He  raises  again
her  dead  son.  38  At  Gilgal  he  heals  the  deadly
pottage.  42  He  satisfies  an  hundred  men  with
twenty  loaves.

V.  1  Naaman,  by  the  report  of  a  captive  maid,  is
sent  to  Samaria  to  be  cured  ot  his  leprosy.  8  Eli¬
sha,  sending  him  to  Jordan,  cures  him.  15  He
refusing  Naaman’s  gifts,  grants  him  some  of  the
earth.  20  Gehazi,  abusing  his  master’s  name  unto
Naaman,  is  smitten  with  leprosy.

VI.  1  Elisha  giving  leave  to  the  ypung  prophets  to
enlarge  their  dw  ellings,  causeth  iron  to  swim.  8
He  discloses  the  king  of  Syria’s  counsel.  13
The  army  which  w'as  sent  to  Dothan  to  appre¬
hend  Elisha,  is  smitten  with  blindness  :  19  Being
brought  into  Samaria,  they  are  dismissed  in  peace.
24  The  famine  in  Samaria  causeth  women  to  eat
their  own  children.  30  The  king  sends  to  slay
Elisha.

VII.  1  Elisha  prophesies  incredible  plenty  in  Sa¬
maria.  3  Four  lepers  venturing  on  the  host  of  the
Syrians,  bring  tidings  of  their  night.  12  The  king
finding  bv  spies  the  news  to  be  true,  spoils  the
tents  of  the  Syrians.  17  The  lord,  who  would
not  believe  the  prophecy  of  plenty,  having  the
charge  of  the  gate,  is  trodden  to  death  in  the
multitude.

VIII.  1  The  Shunammite  having  left  her  country
seven  years,  to  avoid  the  forewarned  famine,  for
Elisha's  miracle’s  sake,  hath  her  land  restored  by
the  king.  7  Hazael  being  sent  with  a  present  by
Benhadad  to  Elisha  at  Damascus,  after  he  had
heard  the  prophecy  .kills  his  master,  and  succeeds

707


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


him.  16  Jehoram’s  wicked  reign  in  Judah.  20
Edom  and  Libnah  revolt.  23  Ahaziah  succeeds
Jehoram.  25  Ahaziah ’s  wicked  reign.  28  He
visits  Jehoram,  wounded,  at  Jezreel.

IX.  1  Elisha  sends  a  young  prophet  instructions  to
anoint  Jehu  at  Hamoth-gilead.  4  The  prophet
having  done  his  message,  ileeth.  11  Jehu  being
made  king  by  the  soldiers,  kills  Joram  in  the  field
of  Naboth.  27  Ahaziah  is  slain  at  Gur,  and  buried
at  Jerusalem.  30  Proud  Jezebel  is  thrown  down
out  of  a  window,  and  eaten  by  dogs.

X.  1  Jehu,  by  his  letters,  causes  seventy  of  Ahab’s
children  to  be  beheaded.  8  He  excuses  the  fact
by  the  prophecy  of  Elijah.  12  At  the  shearing-
house  he  slays  two  and  forty  of  Ahaziah’s
brethren.  15  He  takes  Jehonadab  into  his  com¬
pany.  18  By  subtilty  he  destroys  all  the  wor¬
shippers  of  Baal.  29  Jehu  follows  Jeroboam’s
sins.  32  Hazael  oppresses  Israel.  34  Jehoahaz
succeeds  Jehu.

XI.  1  Jehoash  being  saved  by  his  aunt  Jehosheba,
from  Athaliah’s  massacre  of  the  seed  royal,  is  hid
six  years  in  the  house  of  God.  4  Jehoiada  giving
order  to  the  captains,  in  the  seventh  year  anoints
him  king.  13  Athaliah  is  slain.  17  Jehoiada  re¬
stores  the  worship  of  God.

XII.  1  Jehoash  reigns  well  all  the  days  of  Jehoiada.
4  He  gives  order  for  the  repair  of  the  temple.  7
Hazael  is  diverted  from  Jerusalem  by  a  present
of  their  hallowed  treasures.  29  Joash  being  slain
by  his  servants,  Amaziah  succeeds  him.

XIII.  1  Jehoahaz’s  wicked  reign.  3  Jehoahaz  op¬
pressed  by  Hazael,  is  relieved  by  prayer.  8  Joash
succeeds  him.  10  His  wicked  reign.  12  Jeroboam
succeeds  him.  14  Elisha  dying,  prophesies  to
Joash  three  victories  over  the  Syrians.  20  The

Moabites  invading  the  land,  Elisha's  bones  raise
up  a  dead  man.  22  Hazael  dying,  Joash  gets
three  victories  over  Benhadad.

XIV.  1  Amaziah’s  good  reign.  5  IJis  justiceon  the
murderers  of  his  father.  7  U  is  victory  over  Edom.
8  Amaziah,  provoking  Jehoash,  is  overcome  and
spoiled.  15  Jeroboam  succeeds  Jehoash.  1"
Amaziah  slain  by  a  conspiracy.  21  Azariah
succeeds  him.  23  Jeroboam’s  wicked  reign.  28
Zachariah  succeeds  him.

XV.  1  Azariah’s  good  reign.  5  lie  dying  a  leper,
Jotham  succeeds.  8  Zachariah,  the  last  of  Jehu’s
generation,  reigning  ill,  is  slain  by  Shallum.  1,3
Shallum  reigning  a  month,  is  slain  by  Menahem.
16  Menahem  strengthens  himself  by  Pul.  21  Pe-
k&hiah  succeeds  him.  23  Pekahiah  is  slain  by  Pe-
kah.  27  Pekah  is  oppressed  by  Tiglath-pileser,
and  slain  by  Hoshea.  32  Jotham’s  good  reign.

y?6  Ahaz  succeeds  him.

XVI.  1  Ahaz's  wicked  reign.  5  Ahaz  assailed  by
Rezin  and  Pekah,  hires  Tiglath-pileser  against
them.  10  Ahaz  sending  a  pattern  of  an  altar  from
Damascus  to  Urijah,  diverts  the  brasen  altar  to
his  own  devotion.  17  He  spoils  the  temple.  19
Hezekiah  succeeds  him.

XVII.  ]  Hoshea’s  wicked  r&ign.  3  Beingsubdued
by  Shalmaneser,  he  conspires  against  him  with  So,
king  of  Egypt.  5  Samaria,  for  their  sins,  is  cap¬
tivated.  24  The  strange  nations,  which  were
transplanted  to  Samaria,  being  plagued  with

_  lions,  make  a  mixture  of  religions.

X  VII  I.  1  Ilezekiah’s  good  reign.  4  He  destroys
idolatry,  and  prospers.  9  Samaria  is  carried  cap¬
tive  for  their  sins.  13  Sennacherib  invading  Judah,
is  pacified  by  a  tribute.  17  Rabshakeh  sent  by
Sennacherib  again,  reviles  Hezekiah,  and  by
blasphemous  persuasion  solicits  the  people  to
revolt.

XI  X.  1  Hezekiah  mourning,  sends  to  Tsaiah  to  pray
tor  them.  6  Isaiah  comforts  them.  8  Sennacherib
going  to  encounter  Tirhakah,  sends  a  blasphemous
letter  to  Hezekiah.  14  Hezekiah’s  prayer.  20
I  saiah's  prophecy  of  the  pride  and  destruct  ion  of
Sennacherib,  and  the  good  of  Zion.  35  An  angel
sdays  the  Assyrians.  36  Sennacherib  is  slain  at
N  ineveh  by  his  own  sons.

XX.  1  Hezekiah  having  received  a  message  of
death,  by  prayer  has  his  life  lengthened.  8  The
sun  goes  ten  degrees  backward,  for  a  sign  of  that
promise.  12  Berodach-baladan  sending  to  visit
Hezekiah,  because  of  the  wonder,  hath  notice  of
his  treasures.  14  Isaiah  understanding  thereof,
foretells  the  Baby  Ionian  captivity.  20  Manasseh

^succeeds  Hezekiah.

XXI.  1  Manasseh’s  reign.  3  His  great  idolatry.
10  His  wickedness  causes  prophecies  against  Ju¬
dah.  17  Amonsucceeds  him.  19  Amon’s  wicked
reign.  23  He  being  slain  by  his  servants,  and
those  murderers  slain  by  the  people,  Josiah  is
made  king.

.XXII.  1  Josiah’s  good  reign.  3  IIetake3care  for
the  repair  of  the  temple.  8  Hilkiah  having  found
a  book  of  the  law,  Josiah  sends  to  Huldah  to
inquire  of  the  Lord.  15  Huldah  prophesies  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  but  the  respite  thereof
in  Josiah’s  time.

XXI 1 1,  l  Josiah  causes  the  book  to  be  read  in  a
solemn  assembly.  3  He  renews  the  covenant  of
th’-S  Lord.  4  He  destroys  idolatry.  15  He  burnt
dead  men’s  bones  upon  the  altar  of  Bethel,  as  was
prophesied.  21  He  kept  a  solemn  passover.  24
He  puts  away  witches,  and  all  abomination.  26
God’s  final  wrath  against  Judah.  29  Josiah  pro¬
voking  Pharaoli-nechoh,  is  slain  at  Megiddo.  31
Jehoahaz  succeeding  him,  is  imprisoned  by  Pha-
raoh-nechoh,  who  made  Jehoiakim  king.  36  Je-

l.f  iakim’s  wicked  reign.

XXI  V.  1  Jehoiakim,  first  subdued  by  Nebuchad¬
nezzar,  then  rebelling  against  him,  procured  his
own  ruin.  5  Jehoiachin  succeeds  him.  7  The
king  of  Egypt  is  vanquished  by  the  king  of  Ba¬
bylon.  8  Jehoiachin’s  evil  reign.  10  Jerusalem  is
taken  and  carried  captive  into  Babylon.  17  Ze-
dekiah  is  made  king,  and  reigns  ill,  unto  the  utter
destruction  of  Judah.

XXV,  1  Jerusalem  is  beseiged.  4  Zedekiah  taken

708


his  sons  slain,  his  eyes  put  out.  8  Nebuzar-adan
defaces  the  city,  carries  the  remnant,  except  a  few
poor  labourers,  into  captivity,  ?3  spoils  and  car¬
ries  a  way  the  treasures.  18  l’he  nobles  are  slain
at  Riblah.  22  Gedaliah,  who  was  set  over  them
that  remained,  being  slain,  the  rest  flee  into
Egypt.  27  £\il-merodach  advances  Jehoiachin
in  his  court.

I  CHRONICLES.

I.  Adam’s  line  to  Noah.  5  The  sons  of  Japheth.
8  T  he  sons  of  Ham.  17  The  sons  of  Shem.  24
Shem’s  line  to  Abraham.  29  Ishmael’s  sons.  32
The  sons  of  Keturah.  34  The  posterity  of  Abra¬
ham  by  Esau.  43  The  kings  of  Edom.  51  The
dukes  of  Edom.

II.  1  The  sons  of  Israel.  3  The  posterity  of  Judah
by  Tamar.  13  The  children  of  Jesse.  18  The  pos¬
terity  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hezron.  21  Hezron’s
posterity  by  the  daughter  of  Machir.  25  Jerah-
meel’s  posterity.  34  Slieshan’s  posterity.  42
Another  branch  of  Caleb’s  posterity.  50  The
posterity  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hur.

III.  1  The  sons  of  David.  10  His  line  to  Zede¬
kiah.  17  The  successors  of  Jcconiah.

IV.  1, 11  The  posterity  of  Judah  by  Caleb  the  son
of  Hur.  5  Of  Ashur  the  posthumous  son  of  Hez¬
ron.  9  Of  Jahez,  and  his  prayer.  21  The  pos¬
terity  of  Shelah.  24  The  posterity  and  cities  of
Sime'on.  39  Their  conquest  of  Gedor,  and  of
the  Amalekites  in  mount  Seir.

V.  1  The  line  of  Reuben  (who  lost  his  birth-right)
unto  the  captivity.  9  Their  habitation  and  con¬
quest  of  the  Hagarites.  11  The  chief  men  and
habitations  of  Gad.  18  The  number  and  conquest
of  Reuben.  Gad,  and  the  half  of  Manasseh.  23
The  habitations  and  chief  men  of  that  half  tribe.
25  Their  captivity  for  their  sins.

VI.  1  The  sons  of  Levi.  4  The  line  of  the  priests
unto  the  captivity.  16  The  families  of  Gershom,
Merari,  and  Koha'tli.  49  The  office  of  Aaron  and
his  line  unto  Ahimaaz.  54  The  cities  of  the  priests
and  Levites.

VII.  1  The  sons  of  Issachar,  6  of  Benjamin,  13  of
Naphtali,  14  of  Manasseh,  20,  24  and  of  Ephraim.
21  The  calamity  of  Ephraim  by  the  men  of  Gath.
23  Beriah  is  born.  28  Ephraim’s  habitations.  30
The  sons  of  Asher.

VIII.  1  The  sons  and  chief  men  of  Benjamin.  33
The  stock  of  Saul  and  Jonathan.

IX.  1  The  original  of  Israel’s  and  Judah’s  genealo¬
gies.  2  The  Israelites,  10  the  priests,  14  and  the
Levites  with  N  ethinims  that  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.
27  The  charge  of  certain  Levites.  35  The  stock
of  Saul  and  Jonathan.

X.  1  Saul’s  overthrow  and  death.  8  The  Philistines
triumph  over  Saul.  11  T  he  kindness  of  Jabesh-
gilead  towards  Saul  and  his  sons.  13  Saul's  sin,
tor  which  the  kingdom  was  translated  from  him
to  David.

XL  1  David,  by  a  general  consent,  is  made  king  at
Hebron.  4  lie  wins  the  castle  of  Sion  from  the
.lebusites,  by  Joab’s  valour.  10  A  catalogue  of
David’s  mighty  men.

XII.  1  The  companies  that  came  to  David  at  Zik-
lag.  23  T  he  armies  that  came  to  him  at  Hebron.

XIII.  1  David  fetches  the.  ark  with  great  solemnity
from  Kirjath-jearim.  9  Uzza  being  smitten  the
ark  is  left  at  the  house  of  Obed-edom.

XIV.  l  Hiram’s  kindness  to  David.  2  David’s
felicity  in  people,  wives,  and  children.  8  His
two  victories  against  the  Philistines.

XV.  1  David  having  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark,
orders  the  priests  and  Levites  to  bring  it  from
Obed-edom.  25  He  performs  the  solemnity  there
of  with  great  joy.  29  Miclial  despises  him.

XVI.  1  David’s  festival  sacrifice.  4  He  orders  a
choir  to  sing  thanksgiving.  7  'The  psalm  of
thanksgiving.  37  He  appoints  ministers,  porters,
priests,  and  musicians,  to  attend  continually  on
the  ark.

XVI I.  1  Nathan  first  approving  the  purpose  of
David  to  build  God  a  house,  3  after  by  the  word
of  God  forbids  him.  11  He  promises  him  bless¬
ings  and  benefits  in  his  seed.  16  David’s  prayer
and  thanksgiving.

XVIII.  l  David  subdues  the  Philistines  and  the
Moabites.  3  He  smites  Iladadezer  and  the  Syri¬
ans.  9  Tou  sends  Hadoram  with  presents  to  bless
David.  11  T  he  presents  and  the  spoil  David
dedicates  to  God.  13  He  puts  garrisons  in  Edom.
14  David’s  officers.

XIX.  1  David’s  messengers,  sent  to  comfort  Ilanun
the  son  of  Nahash,  are  basely  treated.  6  The  Am¬
monites  strengthened  by  the  Syrians,  are  over¬
come  by  Joab  and  Abishai.  16  Shophach  making
a  new  supply  of  the  Syrians,  is  slain  by  David.

XX.  ]  Itabbah  is  besieged  by  Joab,  spoiled  by
David,  and  the  people  thereof  tortured.  4  Three
giants  are  slain  in  three  several  overthrows  of  the
Philistines.

XXL  1  David  tempted  by  Satan,  forces  Joab  to
number  the  people.  5  The  number  of  the  people
being  brought,  David  repents  of  it,  9  David  having
three  plagues  propounded  by  Gad,  chooses  the
pestilence.  14  After  the  death  of  70,000,  David
by  repentance  prevents  the  destruction  of  Jeru¬
salem.  18  David,  by  Gad’s  direction,  purchases
Oman’s  threshing-floor,  where  having  built  an
altar,  God  gives  a  sign  of  his  favour  by  fire,  and
stays  the  plague.  28  David  sacrifices  there,  being
restrained  from  Gibeon  by  fear  of  the  angel.

XXII.  1  David,  foreknowing  the  place  of  the  tem¬
ple,  prepares  abundance  for  the  building  of  it.  6
He  instructeth  Solomon  in  God’s  promises,  and
his  duty  in  building  the  temple.  17  He  charges
the  princes  to  assist  his  son.

XX 1 11.  1  David  in  his  old  age  maketh  Solomon
king.  2  The  number  and  distribution  of  the  Le-
vites.  7  The  families  of  the  Gershonites.  12
The  sons  of  Kohath.  21  The  sons  of  Merari.  24
T  he  office  of  the  Levites.


XXIV.  1  The  divisions  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  by  lot
into  four  and  twenty  orders.  20  The  Kohathites,
27  and  the  Merarites,  divided  by  lot.

XXV.  ]  The  number  and  offices  of  the  singers.
8  Their  division  by  lot  into  four  and  twenty
orders.

XXVI.  1  The  divisions  of  the  porters.  13  The  gates
assigned  by  lot.  20  The  Levites  that  had  charge
of  the  treasures.  29  Officers  and  judges.

XXVI  I.  1  The  twelve  captains  for  every  several
month.  16  The  princes  of  the  twelve  tribes.  23
The  numbering  of  the  people  is  hindered.  25
David’s  several  officers.

XXVI 11.  1  David  in  a  solemn  assembly,  having
declared  God’s  favour  to  him,  and  promise  to  his
son  Solomon,  exhorts  them  to  fear  God.  9, 20  He
encourageth  Solomon  to  build  the  temple.  1 1  He
gives  him  patterns  for  the  form  and  gold  and
silver  for  the  materials.

XXIX.  1  David  by  his  example  and  entreaty,  6
causes  the  princes  and  people  to  offer  willingly.
10  David's  thanksgiving  and  prayer.  20  The
people  having  blessed  God  and  sacrificed,  make
Solomon  king.  26  David's  reign  and  death.

II  CHRONICLES.

I.  The  solemn  offering  of  Solomon  at  Gibeon.  7
Solomon’s  choice  of  wisdom  is  blessed  by  God.

13  Solomon’s  strength  and  wealth.

II.  1  and  17  Solomon’s  labourers  for  the  building
of  the  temple.  3  His  embassage  to  Kuram  for
workmen  and  provision  of  stuff.  11  Huram  sends
him  a  kind  answer.

III.  1  The  place  and  time  of  building  the  temple.

3  The  measure  and  ornaments  of  the  house.  11
The  cherubims.  14  The  vail  and  pillars.

IV.  1  T  he  altar  of  brass.  2  The  molten  sea  upon
twelve  oxen.  6 The  ten  lavers,  candlesticks,  and
tables.  9  t  he  courts  and  the  instruments  of  brass.
19  The  instruments  of  gold.

V.  1  The  dedicated  treasures.  2  The  solemn  induc¬
tion  of  the  ark  into  the  oracle.  11  God  being
praised,  gives  a  visible  sign  of  his  favour.

VI.  1  Solomon  having  blessed  the  people,  blesses
God.  12  Solomon’s  prayer  at  the  consecration
of  the  temple,  upon  the  brasen  scaffold.

VII.  1  God  having  given  testimony  to  Solomon's
prayer,  bv  fire  from  heaven,  and  glory  in  the  tem¬
ple,  the  people  worship  him.  4  Solomon's  solemn
sacrifice.  8  Solomon  having  kept  the  feast  of
tabernacles,  and  the  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the
altar,  dismisses  the  people.  12  God  appearing  to
Solomon,  gives  him  promises  upon  condition.

VIII.  1  Solomon’s  buildings.  7  The  Gentiles  which
were  left,  Solomon  makes  tributaries,  but  the  Is¬
raelites,  rulers.  11  Pharaoh’s  daughterremoves  to
her  house.  12  Solomon's  yearly  solemn  sacrifice.

14  He  appoints  the  priests  and  Levites  to  their
places.  17  The  nayy  fetches  gold  from  Ophir.

IX.  1  The  queen  of  Sheba  admires  the  wisdom  of
Solomon.  13  Solomon's  gold.  15  His  targets.  17
The  throne  of  ivory.  20  His  vessels.  23  His  pre¬
sents.  25  His  chariots  and  horses.  26  His  tri¬
butes.  29  His  reign  and  death.

X.  1  The  Israelites  assembled  at  Shechem  to  crown
Rehobftam,  by  Jeroboam  make  a  suit  of  relaxation
unto  him.  6  Rehoboam,  refusing  the  old  men’s
counsel,  by  the  advice  of  young  men,  answers
them  roughly.  16  Ten  tribes  revolting,  kill  Hado¬
ram,  and  make  Rehoboam  to  flee.

XI.  1  Rehoboam  raising  an  army  to  subdue  Israel,
is  forbidden  by  Shemaiah.  5  tie  strengthens  his
kingdom  with  forts  and  provision.  13  The  priests
and  Levites,  and  such  as  feared  God,  forsaken  by
Jeroboam,  strengthen  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  18
The  wives  and  children  of  Rehoboam.

XII.  1  Rehoboam  forsaking  the  Lord,  is  punished
by  Shishak.  5  He  and  the  princes  repenting  at
the  preaching  of  Shemaiah,  are  delivered  from
destruction,  but  not  from  spoil.  13  The  reign
and  death  of  Rehoboam.

XIII.  1  Abijah  succeeding,  makes  war  against  Jero¬
boam.  4  He  declares  the  right  of  his  cause  13
Trusting  in  God,  he  overcomes  Jeroboam.  21.  The
wives  and  children  of  Abijah.

XIV.  1  Asa  succeeding,  destroys  idolatry.  6.  Having
peace,  he  strengthens  his  kingdom  with  forts  and
armies.  9.  Calling  on  God,  he  overthrows  Zerah,
and  spoils  the  Ethiopians.

XV.  1  Asa,  with  Judah,  and  many  of  Israel,  moved
by  the  prophecy  of  Azariah  the  son  of  Oded,  make
a  solemn  covenant  with  God.  16  He  puts  down
Maachah  his  mother  for  her  idolatry.  18  He  brings
dedicated  things  into  the  house  of  God,  and  enjoys
a  long  peace.

XVI.  1  Asa,  by  the  aid  of  the  Syrians,  diverts
Baasba  from  building  of  Hamah.  7  Being  re¬
proved  thereof  by  Hanani,  he  puts  him  in  prison.

11  Among  his  other  acts,  in  his  disease  he  seeks
not  to  God,  but  to  the  physicians,  13  His  death
and  burial.

XVI I.  1  Jehoshaphat succeeding  Asa,  reigns  well,
and  prospers.  7  He  sends  Levites  to  the  princes  to
teach  Judah.  10  11  is  enemies  being  terrified  by
God,  some  of  them  bring  him  presents  and  tribute.

12  His  greatness,  captains,  and  armies.

XV 1 11. 1  Jehoshaphat,  joined  in  affinity  with  Ahab,
is  persuaded  to  go  with  bin)  against  Ramoth-gi-
lead.  4  Ahab,  seduced  by  false  prophets,  accord¬
ing  to  the  word  of  Micaiah,  is  slain  there.

XIX.  1  Jehoshaphat,  reproved  by  Jehu,  visits  his
kingdom.  5  II  is  instructions  to  the  judges,  8  to
the  priests  and  Levites

XX.  1  Jehoshaphat,  in  his  fear,  proclaims  a  fast.  5
His  prayer.  14  The  prophecy  of  Jahaziel.  20  Je¬
hoshaphat  exhorts  the  people,  snd  setteth  singers
to  praise  the  Lord.  22  The  great  overthrow  of  the
enemies.  26  The  people  having  blessed  God  at
Berachah,  return  in  triumph.  31  Jehosbaphat’s
reign.  35  His  convoy  of  ships  which  he  made
with  Ahaziah,  according  to  the  prophecy  of  Elie-
zer,  unhappily  perished.


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


XXI.  1  Jehoranr.  succeeding  Jehoshaphat,  slays  his

brethren.  5  His  wicked  reign.  8  Edom  and  Lib-
nah  revolt.  12  The  prophecy  of  Elijah  against  iiim
in  writing,  16  1  he  Philistines  and  Arabians  op¬
press  him.  18  His  incurable  disease,  infamous
death,  and  burial.  .  .  ,

XXII.  1  Ahaziah  succeeding,  reigns  wickedly,  o
In  his  confederacy  with  Joram  the  son  or  Ahab,
he  is  slain  by  .lehu.  10  Athaliah,  destroying  all
the  seed  royal  save  Joash,  whom  Jehoshabeath
his  aunt  hid,  usurps  the  kingdom.

XX  1 1 1 .  1  Jehoiada  having  set  things  in  order,  makes
Joash  king.  12  Athaliah  is  slain.  16  Jehoiada
restores  the  worship  of  God.

XXI  V.  1  Joash  reigns  well  all  the  days  of  Jehoiada.

4  He  gives  order  for  the  repair  of  the  temple.  15
Jehoiada’s  death  and  honourable  burial.  1“  Joash
falling  to  idolatry,  slayeth  Zechariah  the  son
of  Jehoiada.  23  Joash  is  spoiled  by  the  Syrians,
and  slain  by  Zabad  and  Jehozabad.  2“  Ama-
ziali  succeeds  him.

XXV.  1  Amaziah  begins  to  reign  well.  .3  He  exe¬
cutes  justice  on  the  traitors.  5  Having  hired  an
army  of  Israelites  against  the  Edomites,  at  the
word  of  a  prophet  he  loses  the  hundred  talents,
and  dismisses  them.  11  He  overthrows  the  Edo¬
mites.  10,  1.3  The  Israelites,  discontented  with
their  dismission,  spoil  as  they  return  home.  14
Amaziah,  proud  of  his  victory,  serves  the  gods
of  Edom,  and  despises  the  admonition  ot  the
prophet.  17  He  provokes  Joash  to  his  overthrow.
25  His  reign.  27  He  is  slain  by  conspiracy.

XXVI.  1  Uzziah  succeeding,  and  reigning  well  in

the  days  of  Zechariah,  prospers.  16  Waxing
proud,  he  invades  the  priest’s  office,  and  is
smitten  with  leprosy.  22  He  dies,  and  Jotham
succeeds  him.  ,,  ,

XXVII.  1  Jotham  reigning  well,  prospers.  5  He
subdues  the  Ammonites.  7  His  reign.  9  Ahaz
succeeds  him.

XXVIII.  1  Ahaz  reigning  very  wickedly,  is  great¬
ly  afflicted  by  the  Syrians.  6  Judah  being  capti¬
vated  by  the  Israelites,  issenthome  by  the  counsel
of  Oded  the  prophet.  16  Ahaz  sending  for  aid
to  Assyria,  is  not  helped  thereby.  22  In  his
distress  he  grows  more  idolatrous.  26  He  dying,
Hezekiah  succeeds  him.

XXIX.  1  Hezekiah’s  good  reign.  .3  He  restores
religion.  5  He  exhorts  the  Eevites.  12  I  hey  sanc¬
tify  themselves,  and  cleanse  the  house  of  God.  20
Hezekiah  offereth  solemn  sacrifices,  wherein  the
Levites  were  more  forward  than  the  priests.

XXX.  1  Hezekiah  proclaims  a  solemn  passover
on  the  second  month,  for  Judah  and  Israel.  1.3
The  assembly  having  destroyed  the  altars  of
idolatry,  keep  the  feast  fourteen  days.  27  The
priests  and  Levites  bless  the  people.

XXXI.  1  The  people  are  forward  in  destroying
idolatry.  2  Hezekiah  orders  the  courses  of  the
priests  and  Levites,  and  provides  for  their  work
and  maintenance.  5  l’he  people's  forwardness
in  offerings  and  tithes.  11  Hezekiah  appoints
officers  to  dispose  of  the  tithes.  20  The  sincerity
of  Hezekiah.

XXXI 1.  1  Sennacherib  invading  Judah,  Hezekiah
fortifies  himself,  and  encourages  his  people.  9
Against  the  blasphemies  of  Sennacherib  by  mes¬
sage  and  letters,  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah  pray.  21
An  angel  destroys  the  host  of  the  Assyrians,  to  the
glory  of  Hezekiah.  24  Hezekiah  praying  in  his
sickness,  God  gives  him  a  sign  of  recovery.  25  He
growing  proud,  is  humbled  by  God.  27  His  wealth
and  works.  .31  His  error  in  the  embassage  of  Ba-
bylon.  .32  He  dying,  Manasseh  succeeds  him.
XXXllI.  1  Manasseh’s  wicked  reign.  3  He  sets  up
idolatry,  and  would  not  be  admonished.  1 1  He  is
carried  into  Babylon.  12  Upon  bis  prayer  to  God
he  is  released,  and  puts  down  idolatry.  18  His
acts.  20  He  dying,  Amon  succeeds  him.  21
Amon  reigning  wickedly,  is  slain  by  his  ser¬
vants.  25  The  murderers  being  slain,  Josiali
succeeds  him.

XXXIV.  1  Josiah’s  good  reign.  3  He  destroys  idol¬
atry.  8  He  takes  order  for  the  repair  of  the  tem¬
ple.  14  Hilkiah  having  found  a  book  of  the  law.
Josiah  sends  to  Huldah  to  inquire  of  the  Lord.
23  Huldah  prophesies  the  destruction  of  Jeru¬
salem,  but  respite  thereof  in  Josiah’s  time.  29
Josiah  causing  it  to  be  read  in  a  solemn  assem¬
bly,  renews  the  covenant  with  God.

XXXV.  1  Josiah  keeps  a  most  solemn  passover.  20
He  provoking  Pharaoh  nechoh,  is  slain  at  Me-
giddo.  25  Lamentations  for  Josiah.

XXXVI.  1  Jehoahaz  succeeding,  is  deposed  by
Pharaoh,  and  carried  into  Egypt.  5  Jehoiakim
reigning  ill,  is  carried  bound  into  Babylon.  9
Jehoiachin  succeeding,  reigns  ill  ;  and  is  brought
into  Babylon.  11  Zedekiah  succeeding,  reigns
ill,  and  despises  the  prophets,  and  rebels  against
Nebuchadnezzar.  14  Jerusalem,  for  the  sins  of
the  priests  and  people,  is  wholly  destroyed.  22
The  proclamation  of  Cyrus.

EZRA.

I.  The  proclamation  of  Cyrus  tor  the  building  of
the  temple.  5  The  people  provide  for  the  return.
7  Cyrus  restores  the  vessels  of  the  temple  to
Sheshbazzar.

II.  1  The  number  that  return,  of  the  people,  36  of
the  priests,  40  of  the  Levites,  43  of  the  Is  ethinims,
55  of  Solomon’s  servants,  62  of  the  priests  who
could  not  shew  their  pedigree.  64  The  whole
number  of  them  with  their  substance.  68  Their
oblations.

III.  1  l'he  altar  is  set  up.  4  Offerings  frequented.
7  Workmen  prepared.  8  T  he  foundations  of  the
temple  are  laid  in  great  joy  and  mourn  .ns.

IV.  1  The  adversaries,  being  not  accepted  in  the
building  of  the  temple  with  the  Jews,  endeavour
to  hinder  it.  7  Their  letter  to  Artaxerxes.  17
The  decree  of  Artaxerxes.  23  The  building  is
hindered.


V.  1  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua,  incited  by  Haggaiand
Zechariah,  set  forward  the  building  of  the  temple.

3  Tatuai  and  Shethar-Boznai  could  not  hinder  the
Jews.  6  Their  letter  to  Darius  against  the  Jews.

VI.  1  Darius  finding  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  makes
a  new  decree  for  the  advancement  of  the  build¬
ing.  13  By  the  help  of  the  enemies,  and  the
directions  of  the  prophets,  the  temple  is  finished.

16  The  feast  of  the  dedication  is  Kept.  19  And
the  passover.

VII.  1  Ezra  goes  up  to  Jerusalem.  11  The  gra-
cious  commission  of  Artaxerxes  to  Ezra.  27
Ezra  blesses  God  for  his  favour.

VIII.  1  The  companions  of  Ezra,  who  returned
from  Babylon.  15  He  sends  to  Iddo  for  minis¬
ters  for  the  temple.  21  He  keeps  a  fast.  24  He
commits  the  treasures  to  the  custody  ot  the
priests.  .31  From  Ahava  they  come  to  Jerusa¬
lem.  .33  The  treasure  is  weighed  in  the  temple.

.36  The  commission  is  delivered.

IX.  1  Ezra  mourns  for  the  affinity  of  the  people
with  strangers.  5  He  prays  unto  God  with  con¬
fession  of  sins.

X.  1  Shechaniah  encourages  Ezra  to  reform  the
strange  marriages.  6  Ezra  mourning,  assembles
the  people.  9  The  people,  at  the  exhortation  of
Ezra,  repent  and  promise  amendment.  15  The
care  to  perform  it.  18  The  names  of  those  who
had  married  strange  wives.

NEHEMIAH.

I.  1  Nehemiah,  understanding  by  Hanani,  the
misery  of  Jerusalem,  mourneth,  fasteth,  and
prayeth.  5  His  prayer.

II.  1  Artaxerxes  understanding  the  cause  of  Nehe-
miah’s  sadness,  sends  him  with  letters  and  com¬
mission  to  Jerusalem.  9  Nehemiah,  to  the  grief
of  the  enemies,  comes  to  Jerusalem.  12  He  view-
eth  secretly  the  ruins  of  the  walls.  17  He  in¬
cites  the  Jews  to  build  in  despite  of  the  enemies.

III.  1  The  names  and  order  of  those  who  built  the
wall.

IV.  1  While  the  enemies  scoff,  Nehenmh  prays
and  continues  the  work.  7  Understanding  the
wrath  and  secrets  of  the  enemy,  he  sets  a  watch.

13  He  arms  the  labourers,  19  and  gives  military
precepts.

V.  1  The  Jews  complain  of  their  debt,  mortgage,
and  bondage.  6  Nehemiah  rebukes  the  usurers,
and  causes  them  to  make  a  covenant  ot  restitu¬
tion.  14  He  forbears  his  own  allowance,  and
keeps  hospitality.

VI.  1  Sanballat  practiseth  by  craft,  by  rumours,
by  hired  prophecies,  to  terrify  Nehemiah.  15
The  work  is  finished  to  the  terror  of  the  enemies.

17  Secret  intelligence  passes  between  the  ene¬
mies  and  the  nobles  of  Judah.

VII.  1  Nehemiah  commits  the  charge  of  Jerusalem
to  Hanani  and  Hananiah.  5  A  register  of  the  ge¬
nealogy  of  them  which  at  first  came  out  of  Baby¬
lon  ;  9  Of  the  people.  .39  Of  the  priests.  43  Of  the
Levites.  46  Of  the  N  ethinims.  57  <  >f  Solomon’s
servants.  63  And  of  the  priests  which  could  not
shew  their  pedigree.  66  The  whole  number  of
them,  with  tneir  substance.  70  Their  oblations.

VIII.  1  The  religious  manner  of  reading  and  hear¬
ing  the  law'.  9  They  comfort  the  people.  13
The  forwardness  of  them  to  hear  and  be  in¬
structed.  16  They  keep  the  feast  ot  tabernacles.

IX.  1  A  solemn  fast,  and.repentance  of  the  people.

4  The  Levites  make  a  religious  confession  of
God’s  goodness,  and  their  wickedness.

X.  1  The  names  of  them  that  sealed  the  covenant.
29  The  points  of  the  covenant.

XI.  1  The  rulers,  voluntary  men,  and  the  tenth
man  chosen  by  lot,  dwell  at  Jerusalem.  3  A
catalogue  of  their  names.  20  The  residue  dwell
in  other  cities.

XI  I.  I  The  priests  and  the  Levites  which  came  up
with  Zerubbabel.  10  The  succession  ot  high
priests.  22  Certain  chief  Levites.  27  The  so¬
lemnity  of  the  dedication  of  the  walls.  44  J  he
offices  of  priests  and  Levites  appointed  in  the
temple.

XI II.  1  Upon  the  reading  of  the  law,  separation  is
made  from  the  mixed  multitude.  4  Nehemiah  at
his  return  causes  the  chambers  to  be  cleansed.  10
lie  reforms  the  offices  in  the  house  ot  God.  15 The
violation  of  the  sabbath,  23  and  the  marriages  with
strange  wives.

ESTHER.

I.  1  Ahasuerus  makes  royal  feasts.  10  Vashti,
sent  for,  refuses  to  come.  1  Ahasuerus,  by  the
counsel  of  Memucan,  makes  the  decree  of  men’s
sovereignty.

II.  1  Out  of  the  choice  of  virgins,  a  queen  is  to  be
chosen.  5  Mordecai,  the  nursing  father  of  Esther.
8  Esther  is  preferred  by  Hegai  before  the  rest.
12  The  manner  of  purification,  and  going  in  to
the  king.  15  Esther  best  pleasing  the  king,  is
made  queen.  21  Mordecai  discovering  a  trea¬
son,  is  recorded  in  the  chronicles.

III.  Hainan  advanced  by  the  king,  and  despised
by  Mordecai,  seeks  revenge  upon  all  the  Jews.
7  He  casts  lots.  8  He  obtains,  by  calumniation,
a  decree  of  the  king  to  put  all  the  Jews  to  death.

IV.  1  The  great  mourning  of  Mordecai  and  the
Jews.  4  Esther  understanding  it,  sends  to  Mor¬
decai,  who  shews  the  cause,  and  advises  her  to
undertake  the  suit.  10  She  excusing  herself,  is
threatened  by  Mordecai.  15  She  appointing  a
fast,  undertakes  the  suit.

V.  1  Esther  adventuring  on  the  king  s  favour,  ob¬
tains  the  grace  of  the  golden  sceptre,  and  invites
the  king  and  Hainan  to  a  banquet.  6  She  being
encouraged  by  the  king  in  her  suit,  invites  them
to  another  banquet  the  next  day.  9  Haman,
proud  of  his  advancement,  repines  at  the  con¬
tempt  of  Mordecai.  14  By  the  counsel  of  Ze-
resli  he  builds  for  him  a  pair  of  gallows.

VI.  1  Ahasuerus  reading  in  the  chronicles  of  the


good  service  done  by  Mordecai,  takes  care  for  Ins
reward.  4  Haman  coming  to  sue  that  Mordecai
might  be  hanged,  unawares  gives  counsel  that  he
mightdohim  honour.  12  Complaining  of  his  mis¬
fortune,  his  friends  tell  of  his  final  destiny.

VII.  1  Esther  entertaining  the  king  and  Haman,
makethsuit  for  her  own  life,  and  her  people’s.  5
She  accuses  Haman.  7  The  king,  in  his  anger,  un¬
derstanding  of  the  gallows  that  Haman  had  made
for  Mordecai,  causes  him  to  be  hanged  thereon.

VIII.  1  Mordecai  is  advanced.  .3  Esther  maketh
suit  to  reverse  Hitman’s  letters.  7  Ahasuerus  gives
the  Jews  liberty  to  defend  themselves.  15Morde-
cai’s  honour  and  the  Jews’  joy.

IX.  1  The  Jews  (the  rulers,  tor  fear  of  Mordecai,
helping  them)  slay  their  enemies,  with  the  ten  sons
of  Hainan.  12  Ahasuerus,  at  the  request  of  Esther,
grants  another  day  of  slaughter,  and  Haman’s
sons  to  be  hanged.  20  The  two  days  of  Purim
are  made  festival.

X.  1  A  hasuerus’s  greatness.  3  Mordecai’s  advance¬
ment.

JOB.

I.  The  holiness,  riches,  and  religious  care  of  Job  for
his  children.  6  Satan  appearing  before  God,  by
calumniation  obtains  leave  to  tempt  Job.  1.3  Un¬
derstanding  of  the  loss  of  his  goods  and  children,
in  his  mourning  he  blesses  God.

II.  1  Satan  appearing  again  before  God,  obtains
further  leave  to  tempt  Job.  7  He  smites  him  vdth
sore  boils.  9  Job  reproves  his  wife,  moving  him
to  curse  God.  11  His  three  friends  condole  with
him  in  silence.

III.  1  Job  curses  the  day  and  services  of  his  birth.

1.3  The  ease  of  death.  20  He  complains  of  life
because  of  his  anguish.

IV.  1  Eliphaz  reproves  Job  for  want  of  religion.  7
He  teaches  God’s  judgments  to  be  not  for  the
righteous,  but  for  the  wicked.  12  His  fearful
vision,  to  humble  the  excellences  of  creatures
before  God.

V.  1  The  harm  of  inconsideration.  3  The  end  of  the
wicked  is  misery.  0  God  is  to  be  regarded  in
affliction.  17  The  happy  end  of  God’s  correction.

VI.  1  Job  shews  that  his  complaints  are  not  cause¬
less.  He  wishes  for  death,  wherein  he  is  assured
of  comfort.  14  He  reproves  his  friends  of  un¬
kindness.

VII.  1  Job  excuses  his  desire  of  death.  12  He  com¬
plains  of  his  own  restlessness,  17  and  God’s
watchfulness.

VIII.  1  Bildad  shews  God’s  justice,  in  dealing
with  men  according  to  their  works.  8  He  al¬
leges  antiquity  to  prove  the  certain  destruction
of  the  hypocrite.  20  He  applies  God’s  just  dealing
with  Job.

IX.  1  Job  acknowledging  God’s  justice,  snews  there
is  no  contending  with  him.  22  Man’s  innocency
is  not  to  be  condemned  by  afflictions.

X.  1  Job,  taking  liberty  of  complaint,  expostulates
with  God  about  his  afflictions.  18  He  complains
of  life,  and  craves  a  little  ease  before  death.

XI.  1  Zophar  reproves  Job  for  justifying  himself.

5  God’s  wisdom  is  unsearchable.  1.3  The  assured
blessing  of  repentance.

XII.  1  Job  maintains  himself  against  his  friends
that  reprove  him.  7  He  acknowledges  the
general  doctrine  of  God’s  omnipotency.

XIII.  1  Job  reproves  his  friends  of  partiality.  14
He  professes  his  confidence  in  God  :  20  and  en
treats  to  know  his  own  sins,  and  God’s  purpose
in  afflicting  him.

XIV.  1  Job  entreats  God  for  favour,  by  the  short¬
ness  of  life,  and  certainty  of  death.  7  Though
life  once  lost  be  irrecoverable,  yet  he  waits  for
liis  change.  16  By  sin  the  creature  is  subject  to
corruption.

XV.  1  Eliphaz  reproves  Job  of  impiety  in  justify¬
ing  himself.  17  He  proves  by  tradition  the
unquietness  of  wicked  men.

XV I .  1  Job  reproves  his  friends  of  unmercifulness.

7  He  shews  the  pitifulness  of  his  case.  17  He
maintains  his  innocency.

XVI I.  1  lob  appeals  from  men  to  God.  6  The
unmerciful  dealing  of  men  with  the  afflicted,  may
astonish,  but  not  discourage,  the  righteous.  11
His  hope  is  not  in  life,  but  in  death.

XV1I1.1  Bildad  reproves  Job  of  presumption  and
impatience.  5  The  calamities  of  the  wicked.

XIX.  1  Job  complaining  of  his  friends’  cruelty,
shews  there  is  misery  enough  in  him. to  feed  their
cruelty.  21,  28  He  craves  pity.  25  He  believes
the  resurrection.

XX.  1.  Zophar  shews  the  state  and  portion  of  the
wicked.

XXI.  1  Job  shews  that  even  in  the  judgment  of  man,
he  has  reason  to  be  grieved.  7  Sometimes  the
wicked  do  so  prosper,  as  they  despise  God.  16
Sometimes  their  destruction  is  manifest.  22  The
happy  and  unhappy  are  alike  in  death.  27  The
judgment  of  the  wicked  is  in  another  world.

XXII.  1  Eliphaz  shews  that  man's  goodness  pro
fits  not  God.  5  He  accuses  Job  of  divers  sins.
21  He  exhorts  him  to  repentance,  with  promises
of  mercy.

XXI 1 1. 1  Job  longs  to  appear  before  God,  6  in  con¬
fidence  of  his  mercy.  8  God,  who  is  invisible,
observes  our  -ways.  11  Job’s  innocency.  13
God’s  decree  is  immutable.

XXIV.  Wickedness  often  goes  unpunished.  17
I  here  is  a  secret  judgment  for  the  wicked.

XXV.  Bildad  shews  that  man  cannot  be  justified
before  God.

XXVI.  1  Job  reproving  the  uncharitable  spirit  of
Bildad,  5  acknowledges  the  power  of  God  to  be
infinite  and  unsearchable.

XXVII.  1  Job  declares  his  sincerity.  8  The  h\  po-
crite  is  without  hope.  11  The  seeming  blessings
that  the  wicked  have,  are  turned  into  curses.
XXVIII.  1  There  is  a  knowledge  of  natural  things,
12  But  true  wisdom  is  the  gift  of  God.

70Q


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


XXIX.  1  Job  bemoans  himself  of  his  former  pros¬
perity  and  honour.

XXX.  1  Job's  honour  is  turned  into  extreme  con¬
tempt.  15  His  prosperity  mto  calamity,

XXXI.  Job  makes  a  solemn  protestation  of  his
integrity  in  several  duties.

XXXII.  1  Elihu  is  angry  with  Job  and  his  three
friends.  6  Because  wisdom  comes  not  from  age,
he  excuses  the  boldness  of  his  youth.  11  He  re¬
proves  them  for  not  satisfying  of  Job.  16  His
zeal  to  speak.

XXX  III.  1  Elihu  offers  himself  instead  of  God,
with  sincerity  and  meekness  to  reason  with  Job.

8  He  excuses  God  from  giving  man  an  account
of  his  ways,  by  his  greatness.  14  God  calls  man
to  repentance  by  visions,  19  by  afflictions,  23
and  by  his  ministry.  31  lie  incites  Job  to  atten¬
tion.

XXXIV.  1  Elihu  accuses  Job  for  charging  God
with  injustice.  10  God  omnipotent  cannot  be  un¬
just.  31  Man  must  humble  himself  unto  God.
34  Elihu  reproves  Job.

XXV.  1  Comparison  is  not  to  be  made  with  God,
because  our  good  or  evil  cannot  extend  unto  him.

9  Many  cry  in  their  afflictions,  but  are  not  heard
for  want  ot  faith.

XXXVI.  1  Elihu  shews  how  God  is  just  in  his  ways.
16  Ilow  Job’s  sins  hinder  God’s  blessings.  24
God's  works  are  to  be  magnified.

XXXVI 1.  1  God  is  to  be  feared  because  of  his
great  works.  15  llis  wisdom  is  unsearchable  in
them.

XXXVIII.  1  God  challenges  Job  to  answer.  4
God,  by  his  mighty  works,  convinces  Job  of  igno¬
rance,  31  and  of  imbecility.

XXX  lX.  1  Of  the  wild  goats  and  hinds.  5  Of  the
wild  ass.  9  1  he  unicorn.  1.3  The  peacock,  stork,
and  ostrich.  19  the  horse.  26  The  hawk.  27
The  eagle.

XL.  1  Job  humbles  himself  to  God.  6  God  stirs
him  up  to  shew  his  righteousness,  power,  and
wisdom.  15  Of  the  Behemoth.

XL1.  1  Of  God’s  great  power  in  Leviathan.

XLIL  1  Job  submits  himself  unto  God.  j  God
preferring  Job’s  cause,  makes  his  friends  submit
themselves,  and  accepts  him.  10  He  magnifies
and  blesses  Job.  16  Job’s  age  and  death.

PSALMS.

I.  The  happiness  of  the  godly.  4  The  unhappiness
of  the  ungodly.

II.  1  The  k  ingdom  of  Christ.  10  Kings  are  ex¬
horted  to  accept  it.

III.  I  he  security  of  God’s  protection.

IV.  1  David  prays  for  audience.  2  He  reproves
and  exhorts  his  enemies.  6  Man’s  happiness  is
in  God’s  favour.

V.  1  David  prays,  and  professes  his  study  in  prayer.

4  God  favours  not  the  wicked.  7  David  profess¬
ing  his  faith,  prays  unto  God  to  guide  him,  10  to
destroy  his  enemies,  and  to  preserve  the  godly.

VI.  1  David’s  complaint  in  his  sickness.  8  By  faith
he  triumphs  over  his  enemies.

VII.  1  David  prays  against  the  malice  of  his  ene¬
mies,  professing  his  innocency.  10  By  faith  he
sees  his  defence  and  the  destruction  of  his
enemies.

VIII.  1  God’s  glory  is  manifested  by  his  works,
and  by  his  love  to  man.

IX.  1  David  praises  God  forexecuting  of  judgment.

11  He  incites  others  to  praise  him.  13  He  prays
that  he  may  have  cause  to  praise  him.

X.  1  David  complains  to  God  of  the  outrage  of  the
wicked.  12  lie  prays  for  remedy.  16  He  pro¬
fesses  bis  confidence.

XI.  1  David  encourages  himself  in  God,  against
his  enemies.  4  The  providence  and  justice  of
God.

XII.  1  David,  destitute  of  human  comfort,  craves
help  of  God.  3  He  comforts  himself  w  ith  God’s
judgments  on  the  wicked,  and  confidence  in
God’s  experienced  promises.

XIII.  1  David  complains  of  delay  in  help.  3  He
prays  for  preventing  grace.  5  He  boasteth  of
divine  mercy.

XIV.  1  David  describes  the  corruptions  of  a  na¬
tural  man.  4  He  convinces  the  wicked  by  the
light  of  their  conscience.  7  He  glories  in  the
salvation  of  God.

XV.  David  describes  a  citizen  of  Sion.

XVI.  1  David  in  distrust  of  merits,  and  hatred  of
idolatry,  flies  to  God  for  preservation.  5  He
shew-sthe  hope  of  his  calling,  of  the  resurrection,
and  life  everlasting.

XVII.  1  David  in  confidence  of  his  integrity,
craves  defence  of  God  against  his  enemies.  10
He  shews  their  pride,  craft,  and  eagerness.  12  He
prays  against  them  in  confidence  of  his  hope.

XV 111.  David  praises  God  for  his  manifold  and
marvellous  blessings.

XIX.  1  The  creatures  shew  God’s  glory.  7  The
word  his  grace.  32  David  prays  lor  grace.

XX.  1  The  church  blesses  the  king  in  his  exploits.

7  Her  confidence  in  God’s  succuwr.

XXI.  1  A  thanksgiving  for  victory.  ^  Confidence
of  further  success.

XXII.  1  David  complains  in  pTeat  discourage¬
ments.  9  He  prays  ill  great  distress.  23  He
praises  God.

XXII I.  David’s  confidence  in  God’s  grace.

XXIV.  1  God’s  lordship  in  the  world.  3  The
citizens  of  bis  spiritual  kingdom.  7  An  exhorta¬
tion  to  receive  him.

XXV.  1  David’s  confid  ence  in  prayer.  7  He
prays  for  remission  or  sins,  16  and  for  help  in
affliction.

XXVI.  David  resorts  to  God  in  confidence  of  his
integrity.

XXVI 1.  1  David  sustains  his  faith,  by  the  power
of  God,  4  by  his  love  to  the  service  of  God,  9  and
by  prayer.

XX  VIII.  l  David  prays  earnestly  against  his

710


enemies.  6  lie  blesses  God.  9  He  prays  for
the  people.

XXI A.  1  David  exhorts  princes  to  give  glory  to
God,  3  by  reason  of  his  power,  11  and  protection
of  his  people.

XXX.  1  David  praises  God  for  his  deliverance.

He  exhorts  others  to  praise  him  by  example  of
God’s  dealing  with  him.

XXXI.  1  David  shewing  his  confidence  in  God
craves  his  help.  7  He  rejoices  in  his  mercy.  <
He  prays  in  his  calamity.  19  He  praises  God  for
his  goodness.

XXX  II.  1  Blessedness  consisted)  in  the  remission
of  sins.  3  Confession  of  sins  giveth  ease  to  the
conscience.  8  God’s  promises  bring  joy.

XXXII 1.  l  God  is  to  be  praised  for  iiis  goodness,

6  for  his  power,  12  and  for  his  providence.  20
Confidence  is  to  be  placed  in  God.

XXXIV.  1  David  praises  God,  and  exhorts  others
thereto  by  his  experience.  8  They  are  blesseu
that  trust  in  God.  11  He  exhorts  to  the  fear  of
God.  15  The  privileges  of  the  righteous.

XXXV.  1  David  prays  for  his  safety  and  his  ene¬
mies’  confusion.  1 1  He  complains  of  their  wrong¬
ful  dealing.  22  Thereby  he  incites  God  against
them.

XXXVI.  1  The  grievous  estate  of  the  wicked.  5
The  excellency  of  God’s  mercy.  10  David  prays
for  favour  to  God’s  children.

XXXVII.  David  persuades  to  patience,  and  con¬
fidence  in  God,  by  the  different  state  of  the  godly
and  the  wicked.

XXX  VI II.  David  moves  God  to  take  compassion
of  his  pitiful  case.

XXXIX.  1  David’s  care  of  his  thoughts,  4  the  con¬
sideration  of  the  bievity  and  vanity  of  life,  7  the
reverence  of  God’s  judgments,  lOand  prayer,  are
his  bi  idles  of  impatience.

XL.  1  The  benefit  of  confidence  in  God.  6  Obe¬
dience  is  the  best  sacrifice.  11  I  he  sense  of  Da¬
vid’s  evils  inflames  his  prayer.

XLI.  1  God’s  care  of  the  poor.  4  David  complains
of  his  enemies’  treachery.  10  He  flees  to  God
for  succour.

XLIL  1  David’s  zeal  to  serve  God  in  the  temple.

5  He  encourages  his  soul  to  trust  in  God.

XLI1 1.  1  David  praying  to  be  restored  to  the  tem¬
ple,  promises  to  serve  God  joyfully.  5  He  en-
courageth  his  soul  to  trust  in  God.

XLIV.  1  The  church,  in  memory  of  former  favours,

7  complains  of  their  present  evils.  17  Pro¬
fessing  her  integrity,  24  she  fervently  prays  for
succour.

XTV.  1  The  majesty  and  grace  of  Christ’s  king¬
dom.  10  The  duty  of  the  church,  and  the  benefits
thereof.

XLVI.  1  The  confidence  which  the  church  hath  in
God.  8  An  exhortation  to  behold  it.

XLVII.  1  The  nations  are  exhorted  cheerfully  to
entertain  the  kingdom  of  Christ.

XLVI1I.  I  The  ornaments  and  privileges  of  the
church.

XLIX.  1  An  earnest  persuasion  to  build  the  faith
of  the  resurrection,  not  on  worldly  power,  but  on
God.  16  Worldly  prosperity  is'  not  to  be  ad¬
mired.

L.  1.  1  be  majesty  of  God  in  the  church.  5  His
order  to  gather  saints.  7  The  pleasure  of  God
is  not  in  ceremonies,  14  but  in  sincerity  of
obedience.

LI.  1  David  prays  for  remission  of  sins,  whereof  he
makes  a  deep  confession.  6  He  prays  for  sanctifi¬
cation.  16  God  delights  not  in  sacrifice,  but  in
sincerity'.  18.  He  prays  for  the  church.

LI  I.  1  David  condemning  the  spitefulness  of  Doeg,
prophesies  his  destruction.  6  1  he  righteous  shall
rejoice  at  it.  8  David,  upon  his  confidence  in
God’s  mercy,  gives  thanks.

LIU.  1  David  describes  thecorruptionsof  a  natural
man.  4  He  convinces  the  w  icked  by  the  light  of
their  own  conscience.  6  He  glories  in  the  sal¬
vation  of  God.

LIV.  1  David  complains  of  the  Ziphims,  prays  for
salvation.  4  Upon  his  confidence  in  God’s  help,
he  promises  sacrifice.

LV.  1  David  in  his  prayer  complains  of  his  fearful
case.  9  He  prays  against  his  enemies,  of  whose
wickedness  and  treachery  he  complains.  6  He
comforts  himself  in  God's  preservation  of  him,
and  confusion  of  his  enemies.

LVI.  1  David  praying  to  God  in  confidence  of  his
word,  complains  of  his  enemies.  9  He  professes
his  confidence  in  God’s  word,  and  promises  to
praise  him.

LVI  I.  1  David  in  prayer  flying  unto  God,  com¬
plains  of  his  dangerous  case.  7  He  encourages
i'.im  to  praise  God.

LVI II.  l  David  reproves  wicked  judges,  3  de¬
scribes  the  nature  of  the  wicked,  6  devotes  them
to  God’s  judgments,  10  whereat  the  righteous
shall  rejoice.

LIX.  1  David  prays  to  be  delivered  from  his  ene¬
mies.  6  He  complains  of  their  cruelty.  8  He
trusts  in  God.  11  He  prays  against  them.  16  He
praises  God.

LX.  1  David  complaining  to  God  of  former  judg¬
ment,  4  now  upon  better  hope  prayeth  for  deliver¬
ance.  6  Comforting  himself  in  God’s  promises,  he
craves  that  help  whereon  he  trusteth.

LXI.  1  David  flees  to  God  upon  his  former  expe¬
rience.  4  He  vows  perpetual  service  to  him  be¬
cause  of  his  promises.

LXI1.  1  David  professing  his  confidence  in  God,
discourages  his  enemies.  5  In  the  same  confidence
he  encourages  the  godly.  9  Ko  trust  is  to  be  put
in  worldly  things.  11  Power  and  mercy  belong
to  God.

LXI  1 1.  1  David’s  thirst  for  God.  4  Llis  manner  of
blessing  God.  9  His  confidence  of  his  enemies’
destruction,  and  his  own  safety.

LXiy.  1  David  prays fordeliverance, complaining
of  his  enemies.  7  lie  promises  himself  to  see  such


an  evident  destruction  of  his  enemies,  as  the
righteous  shall  rejoice  at  it.

LXV.  l  David  praises  God  for  his  grace.  4  1  he
blessedness  of  God’s  chosen,  by  reason  of  be¬
nefits.

LX  VI.  1  David  exhorts  to  praise  God,  5  to  observe
his  great  works,  8  to  bless  him  for  his  gracious
benefits.  12  Lie  vows  for  himself  religious  ser¬
vice  to  God.  16  Declares  God’s  special  goodness
to  himself.

LX  VII.  1  A  prayer  for  the  enlargement  of  God's
kingdom,  3  to  the  joy  of  the  people,  6  and  the
increase  of  God’s  blessings.

LX  V I II.  1  A  prayer  at  the  removing  of  the  ark.
4  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  for  his  mercies,
7  for  his  care  of  the  church,  19  for  his  great
works.

LX IX.  1  David  complains  of  his  affliction.  13
He  prays  for  deliverance.  22  He  devotes  his
enemies  to  destruction.  30  He  praises  God  with
thanksgiving.

LXX.  David  solicits  God  to  the  speedy  destruction
of  the  w  icked,  and  preservation  of  the  godly.
LXXI.  1  David  in  confidence  of  faith  and  expe¬
rience  of  God’s  favour,  prays  both  for  himself  and
against  the  enemies  of  his  soul.  14  Lie  promises
constancy.  17  He  prays  for  perseverance.  19
He  praises  God,  and  promises  to  do  it  cheerfully.
LXX  1 1 .  1  David  praying  for  Solomon,  shews  the
goodness  and  glory  of  his,  in  type,  and  in  truth,
of  Christ’s  kingdom.  18  He  blesses  God.
LXX11I.  1  The  prophet  prevailing  in  a  tempta¬
tion,  2  shew  s  the  occasion  thereof,  the  prosperity
of  the  wicked.  13  The  wound  given  thereby,
diffidence.  15  The  victory  over  it,  knowledge
of  God’s  purpose,  in  destroying  of  the  W'icked,
arid  sustaining  the  righteous.

LXXI  V.  1  1  he  prophet  complaineth  of  the  deso
lation  of  the  sanctuary.  10  He  moveth  God  to
help,  in  consideration  of  his  po  wer.  18  Of  his
reproachful  enemies,  of  his  children,  and  of  his
covenant.

LXXV.  1  The  prophet  praises  God.  2  He  promises
to  judge  uprightly.  4  He  rebukes  the  proud  by
consideration  of  God’s  providence.  9  Lie  praises
God,  and  promises  to  execute  justice.

LXX VI.  1  A  declaration  of  God’s  majesty  in  the
church.  1 1  An  exhortation  to  serve  him  reverently.
LXXVI1. 1  The  psalmist  shews  whatfierce  combat
he  had  with  diffidence.  10  The  victory  which
he  had  by  consideration  of  God’s  great  and  gra¬
cious  works.

LXXVIII.  1  An  exhortation  both  to  learn  and  to
preach  the  law  of  God.  9  The  story  of  God's
wrath  against  the  incredulous  and  disobedient.
67  The  Israelites  being  rejected,  God  chose  Ju¬
dah,  Sion,  and  David.

LXX1X.  1  Tbe  psalmist  complains  of  the  desola¬
tion  of  Jerusalem.  8  He  prays  fordeliverance,
13  and  promises  thankfulness.

LXXX.  1  1  he  psalmist  in  his  prayer  complains
of  the  miseries  of  the  church.  8  God’s  former
favours  are  turned  into  judgments.  14  He  prays
for  deliverance.

LXXX  I.  1  An  exhortation  to  a  solemn  praising
of  God.  4  God  challenges  that  duty  by  reason
of  his  benefits.  8  God  exhorting  to  obedience,
complains  of  their  disobedience,  which  proves
their  own  hurt.

LXXXII.  1  The  psalmist  having  exhorted  the
judges,  5  and  reproved  their  negligence,  8  prays
God  to  judge.

LXXX  11 1.  1  A  complaint  to  God  of  the  enemies
conspiracies.  9  A  prayer  against  them  that  op
pi  ess  the  church.

LXXX IV.  1  t  he  prophet  longing  for  the  com¬
munion  of  the  sanctuary,  4  shews  how  blessed
they  are  that  dwell  therein.  8  Lie  prays  to  be
restored  unto  it.

LXXXV.  1  l’he  psalmist,  out  of  the  experience  of
former  merc'es,  prays  for  the  continuance  there¬
of.  8  He  promises  to  wait  thereon,  out  of  con¬
fidence  of  God’s  goodness.

LXXXVI.  1  David  strengthens  his  prayer  by  the
conscience  of  bis  religion,  5  by  the  goodness  and
power  of  God.  11  He  desires  the  continuance  or
Former  grace.  i4  Complaining  of  the  proud,  he
craves  some  token  of  God’s  goodness.

LXXXVI  I.  l  The  nature  and  glory  of  the  church.

4  The  increase,  I  onour,  and  comfort  of  the  mem¬
bers  thereof.

LXXXVI  II.  l  A  prayer  containing  a  grievous
complaint.

LXXX IX.  1  The  psalmist  praises  God  for  his
covenant,  5  for  his  wonderful  power,  15  for  the
care  of  his  church,  19  for  his  favour  to  the  king¬
dom  of  David.  38  Then  complaining  of  the  con¬
trary  events,  46  he  expostulates,  prays,  and
blesses  God.

XC.  1  Moses  setting  forth  God’s  providence,  3
complains  of  human  fragility,  7  divine  chastise¬
ments,  10  and  brevity  of  life.  12  He  prays  for
the  knowledge  and  sensible  experience  of  God’s
good  prov  idence.

XCI.  1  The  state  of  the  godly.  3  Their  safety.  9
Their  habitation.  11  Their  servants.  14  Their
friends,  with  the  effects  of  them  all.

XCI  I.  1  The  prophet  exhorts  to  praise  God,  4  for
his  great  works,  6  for  his  judgments  on  tbe
wicked,  10  and  for  his  goodness  to  the  godly.
XCIII.  1  The  majesty,  power,  and  holiness  ot
Christ’s  kingdom.

XCIV.  1  I  be  prophet  calling  for  justice,  complains
of  tyranny  and  impiety.  8  He  teaches  God’s  pro¬
vidence.  12  He  shews  the  blessedness  of  afflic
tion.  16  God  is  the  defender  of  the  afflicted.
XCV.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God,  3  for  his
greatness,  6  and  for  his  goodness ;  8  and  not  to
tempt  him.

XCVI.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God,  4  for  his
greatness,  8  for  his  kingdom,  11  for  his  general
judgment.


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


XCVII.  1  The  majesty  of  God’s  kingdom.  7  The
church  rejoices  at  God’s  judgments  upon  idola¬
ters.  10  An  exhortation  to  godliness  and  glad-
ness.

XCVII  I.  1  The  psalmist  exhorts  the  Jews,  4  the
Gentiles,  7  and  all  the  creatures,  to  praise  God.

XCIX.  1  The  prophet  setting  forth  the  kingdom  ot
God  in  Zion,  5  exhorts  all,  by  the  example  of
forefathers,  to  worship  God  at  his  holy  hill.

C.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  cheerfully,  3
for  his  greatness,  4  and  for  his  power.

Cl.  1  David  makes  a  vow  and  profession  of  godli¬
ness.

CI1.  1  The  prophet  in  his  prayer  makes  a  grievous
complaint.  12  He  takes  comfort  in  the  eternity
and  mercy  of  God.  18  The  mercies  of  God  are
to  be  recorded.  23  He  sustains  his  weakness  by
tlie  unchangeableness  of  God.

CIll.  1  An  exhortation  to  bless  God  for  his  mercy,

15  and  for  the  constancy  thereof.

CIV.  1  A  meditation  upon  the  mighty  power,  7
and  wonderful  providence  of  God.  31  God’s  glory
is  eternal.  33  The  prophet  vows  perpetually  to
praise  God.

CV.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God,  and  to  seek
out  his  works.  7  lhe  story  of  God’s  providence
over  Abraham,  16  over  Joseph,  23  over  Jacob
in  Egvpt,  26  over  Moses  delivering  the  Israel¬
ites,  37  over  the  Israelites  brought  out  of  Egypt,
fed  in  the  wilderness,  and  planted  in  Canaan.

CVI.  1  The  psalmist  exhorts  to  praise  God.  4  He
prays  for  pardon  of  sin,  as  God  did  with  the
fathers.  7  The  story  of  the  people’s  rebellion,
and  God’s  mercy.  47  He  concludes  with  prayer
and  praise.  ,  ,  .

CV1I.  1  The  psalmist  exhorts  the  redeemed,  in
praising  God,  to  observe  his  manifold  provi¬
dence,  4  over  travellers,  10  over  captives,  17
over  sick  men,  23  over  seamen,  33  and  in  divers
varieties  of  life.  .

CVI  II.  1  David  encourages  himself  to  praise  God.

5  He  prays  for  God’s  assistance  according  to  his
promise.  11  His  confidence  in  God’s  help.

C1X.  1  David  complaining  of  his  slanderous  ene¬
mies,  under  the  person  ot  Judas,  devotes  them.
10  He  shews  their  sin.  21  Complaining  of  his
own  misery,  he  prays  for  help.  30  He  promises
thankfulness.  .  ,

CX.  1  The  kingdom,  4  the  priesthood,  5  the  con¬
quest,  7  and  the  passion  of  Christ.

CXI.  1  The  psalmist  by  his  example  incites  others
to  praise  God,  for  his  glorious,  5  and  gracious
works.  10  The  fear  of  God  breeds  true  wisdom.

CXI1.  1  Godliness  has  the  promises  of  this  life,

4  and  of  the  life  to  come.  10  The  prosperity  of
the  godly  shall  be  an  eye-sore  to  the  wicked.

CXI  1 1 .  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  for  his  ex¬
cellency,  6  and  for  his  mercy.

CXI  V.  1  An  exhortation,  by  the  example  of  the
dumb  creatures,  to  fear  God  in  his  church.

CXV.  1  Because  God  is  truly  gracious,  4  and  idols
are  vanity,  9  he  exhorts  to  confidence  in  God.
12  God  is  to  be  blessed  for  his  blessings.

CXVI.  1  The  psalmist  professes  his  love  and  duty
to  God  for  his  deliverance.  12  He  studies  to  be
thankful.

CXV II.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  for  his
mercy  and  truth.  .

CXVI  1 1.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  for  his
mercy.  5  The  psalmist  by  his  experience  shows
how  good  it  is  to  trust  in  God.  19  Under  the
type  of  the  psalmist,  the  coming  of  Christ  in  his
kingdom  is  expressed.

CXIX.  This  psalm  containeth  sundry  prayers,

S  raises,  and  professions  of  obedience.

X.  1  David  prays  against  Doeg,  3  reproves
his  tongue,  5  and  complains  of  his  necessary  con¬
versation  with  the  wicked.

CXX  I.  1  The  great  safety  of  the  godly,  who  put
their  trust  in  God’s  protection.

CXXII.  1  David  professes  his  joy  for  the  church,

6  and  prays  for  the  peace  thereof.

CXXII1.  1  The  godly  profess  their  confidence
in  God,  3  and  pray  to  be  delivered  from  con
tempt.

CXXIV.  The  church  blesseth  God  for  a  miracu
lous  deliverance.

CXX  V.  1  The  safety  of  such  as  trust  in  God.  <
A  prayer  for  the  godly,  and  against  the  wicked.
CXX VI.  1  The  church  celebrating  her  incredible
return  out  of  captivity,  4  prays  for,  and  prophe¬
sies,  the  good  success  thereof.

CXX  VI 1 .  1  The  virtue  of  God’s  blessing.  3  Good
children  are  his  gift.  .

CXX VIII.  The  sundry  blessings  which  follow
them  that  fear  God.  .

CXXIX.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  for  sav¬
ing  Israel  in  their  great  afflictions.  5  The  hat<
of  the  church  are  cursed.

CXXX.  1  The  psalmist  professes  his  hope  in
prayer,  5  and  his  patience  in  hope.  7  He  ex¬
horts  Israel  to  hope  in  God.

CXXXI.  1  David  professing  his  humility,  3  ex
horts  Israel  to  hope  in  God.

CXXX  II.  1  David  in  his  prayer  recommends  unto
God  the  religious  care  he  had  for  the  ark.  8  His
prayer  at  the  removing  of  the  ark,  11  with  a  re¬
petition  of  God’s  promises.

CXXXI  II.  The  benefit  of  the  communion  of  saints
CXXXIV.  An  exhortation  to  bless  God.
CXXXV.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  for  his
mercy,  5  for  his  power,  8  for  his  judgments.  15
The  vanity  of  idols.  19  An  exhortation  to  bless
God.

CXXXVI.  An  exhortation  to  give  thanks  to  God
for  particular  mercies.

CXXXVTl.  1  The  constancy  of  the  Jews  in  cap
tivity.  7  The  prophet  curseth  Edom  and  Babel
CXX  XVI 1 1.  1  David  praiseth  God  for  the  truth
of  his  word.  4  He  prophesies  that  the  kings  of
the  earth  shall  praise  G<  J.  7  He  professeth  his
confidence  in  God.


CXXXIX.  1  David  praiseth  God  for  his  albseeing
providence,  17  and  for  his  infinite  mercies.  19
He  defies  the  wicked.  23  He  prays  for  sincerity.
CXI..  1  David  prays  to  be  delivered  from  Saul  and
Doeg.  8  He  prays  against  them.  12  He  comforts
himself  by  confidence  in  God.

CXLI.  1  David  prays  that  his  suit  may  be  accep¬
table,  3  his  conscience  sincere,  7  and  nis  life  sate
from  snares.

CXLI  I.  David  shews  that  in  his  trouble,  all  his
comfort  was  in  prayer  to  God.

CXLIII.  1  Davi<i  prays  for  favour  in  judgment,  .3
He  complains  of  his  grief.  5  He  strengthened  his
faith  by  meditation  and  prayer.  7  He  prays  for
grace,  9  for  deliverance,  10  for  sanctification,  12
for  destruction  of  his  enemies.

CXLIV.  1  David  blesseth  God  for  his  mercy  both
to  him  anti  to  man.  5  He  prays  that  God  woulti
powerfully  deliver  him  from  his  enemies.  9  He
promises  to  praise  God.  11  He  prays  for  the
nappy  state  of  the  kingdom.

CXLV.  I  David  praiseth  God  for  his  fame,  8  for
his  goodness,  11  tor  his  kingdom,  14  for  his  provi¬
dence,  17  for  his  saving  mercy.

CXLV1.  lThe  psalmist  vows  perpetual  praises  to
God.  3  He  exhorts  not  to  trust  in  man.  5  God
for  his  power,  justice,  mercy,  and  kingdom,  is
only  worthy  to  be  trusted.  t

CXLV1I.  1  The  prophet  exhorts  to  praise  God,
for  his  care  of  the  church,  4  his  power,  6  and  his
mercy  :  7  to  praise  him  for  his  providence :  12
to  praise  him  for  his  blessings  upon  the  king¬
dom,  15  for  his  power  over  the  meteors,  19  and
for  his  ordinances  in  the  church.

CXLV11I.  1  The  psalmist  exhorts  the  celestial,

7  the  terrestrial,  11  and  the  rational  creatures,
to  praise  God.  .

CXLIX.  1  l  he  prophet  exhorts  to  praise  God  for
his  love  to  the  church,  5  and  for  the  power  he
gave  the  church.

CL.  1  An  exhortation  to  praise  God,  3  with  all
sorts  of  instruments.

PROVERBS.

I.  The  use  of  the  proverbs.  7  An  exhortation  to
fear  God  and  believe  in  his  word.  10  To  avoid  the
enticings  of  sinners.  20  Wisdom  complains  of  her
contempt.  24  She  threatens  her  contemners.

II.  1  Wisdom  promiseth  godliness  to  her  children,
10  ami  safety  from  evil  company,  20  and  direc¬
tion  in  good  ways.

III.  1  An  exhortation  to  obedience,  5  to  faith,  7  to
mortification,  9  to  devotion,  11  to  patience.  13
'lhe  happy  gain  of  wisdom.  19  The  power,  21
and  the  benefits  of  wisdom.  27  An  exhortation  to
charitableness,  30  peaceableness,  31  and  content¬
edness.  33  The  cursed  state  of  the  wicked.

IV.  1  Solomon,  to  persuade  to  obedience,  3  shews
what  instructions  he  had  of  his  parents,  5  to  study
wisdom,  14  and  to  shun  the  path  of  the  wicked.
20  He  exhorts  to  faith,  23  and  sanctification.

V.  1  Solomon  exhorts  to  the  study  of  wisdom.  3
He  shews  the  mischief  of  whoredom  and  riot.  15
He  exhorts  to  contentedness,  liberality,  and  chas¬
tity.  22  The  wicked  are  overtaken  with  their
own  sins.

VI.  1  Against  surefiship,  6  idleness,  12  and  mis¬
chievousness.  16  Seven  things  hateful  to  God.
20  The  blessings  of  obedience.  25  T  he  mischiefs
of  whoredom.

VII.  1  Solomon  persuades  to  a  sincere  and  kind  fa¬
miliarity  with  wisdom.  6  In  an  example  of  his
own  experience,  he  shews,  10  the  cunning  of  a
whore,  22  and  the  desperate  simplicity  of  a
young  wanton.  24  He  dehorteth  from  such  wick¬
edness.

VIII.  1  The  fame,  6  and  evidence  of  wisdom.  10

The  excellency,  12  the  nature,  15  the  power,  18
the  riches,  22  and  the  eternity  of  wisdom  .32
Wisdom  is  to  be  desired  for  the  blessedness  it
bringeth.  ,

IX.  1  The  discipline,  4  and  doctrine  of  wisdom.
13  The  custom,  16  and  error  of  folly.

X.  ***  From  this  chapter  to  the  twenty-fifth,  are
sundry  observations  of  moral  virtues,  and  their
contrary  vices.

XXV.  1  Observations  about  kings,  8  and  about
avoiding  of  quarrels,  and  sundry  causes  thereof.

XXVI.  I  Observations  about  fools,  13  sluggards,
17  and  contentious  busy-bodies.

XXVII.  1  Observations  of  self-love,  5  of  true
love,  11  of  care  to  avoid  offences,  23  and  of
household  care.

XXVIII.  General  observations  of  impiety,  and
religious  integrity.

XXIX.  1  Observations  of  public  government,  15
and  of  private.  22  Of  anger,  pride,  thievery,
cowardice,  and  corruption.  ....

XXX.  1  Agur’s  confession  of  his  faith.  7  Ihetwo

points  of  his  prayer.  10  The  meanest  are  not  to
be  wronged.  11  Four  wicked  generations.  15
Four  things  insatiable.  17  Parents  are  not  to  be
despised.  18  Four  things  hard  to  be  known.  21
Four  things  intolerable.  24  Four  things  exceed¬
ing  wise.  29  Four  things  stately.  .32  Wrath  is
to  be  prevented.  .

XXXI.  1  Lemuel’s  lesson  of  chastity  and  temper¬
ance.  6  The  afflicted  are  to  be  comforted  and
defended.  10  The  praise  and  properties  of  a
good  wife.

ECCLESIASTES.

I.  The  preacher  shews  that  all  human  courses  are
vain  :  4  Because  the  creatures  are  restless  in  then-
courses.  9  They  bring  forth  nothing  new,  and  ali
old  things  are  forgotten.  12  and  because  he  hath

found  it  so  in  the  studies  of  wisdom.

LI.  1  The  vanity  of  human  courses  in  the  works  ot
pleasure.  12  T  hough  the  wise  be  better  than  the
fool,  yet  both  have  one  event.  18  The  vanity  ot
human  labour,  in  leaving  it  they  know  not  to


whom.  24  Nothing  better  than  joy  tn  our  labour
but  that  is  God’s  gift.

III.  1  By  the  necessary  change  of  times,  vanity  ie-
added  to  human  travail.  11  There  is  an  excel¬
lency  in  God’s  works.  16  But  as  tor  man,  God
shall  judge  his  works  there,  and  here  he  shall  be
like  a  beast.

IV.  1  Vanity  is  increased  unto  men  by  oppression,

4  by  envy,  5  by  idleness,  7  by  covetousness,  9  by
solitariness,  13  by  wilfulness.

V.  1  Vanities  in  divine  service,  8  in  murmuring
against  oppression,  9  and  in  riches.  18  Joy  in-
riches  is  the  gift  of  God.

VI.  1  The  vanity  of  riches  without  use.  3  Of  chil¬
dren,  6  and  old  age  without  riches.  9  T  he  vanity
of  sight  and  wandering  desires.  11  The  conclu¬
sion  of  vanities.

VII.  l  Remedies  against  vanity  are  a  good  name,

2  mortification,  7  patience,  11  wisdom.  23  The
difficulty  of  wisdom.

VIII.  1  Kings  are  greatly  to  be  respected.  6  The
divine  providence  is  to  be  observed.  12  It  is
better  with  the  godly  in  adversity,  than  with
the  wicked  in  prosperity.  16  The  work  of  God  is
unsearchable.

IX.  1  Like  things  happen  to  good  and  bad.  4  There
is  a  necessity  of  death  unto  men.  7  Comfort  is  all
their  portion  in  this  life.  11  God’s  providence  rules
overall.  13  Wisdom  is  better  than  strength.

X.  1  Observations  of  wisdom  and  folly.  160friot,

18  slothfulness,  19  and  money.  20  Men’s  thoughts
of  kings  ought  to  be  reverent.

XI.  1  Directions  for  charity.  7  Death  in  life,  9  and
the  day  of  judgment  in  the  days  of  youth,  are  to
be  thought  on.

XII.  1  The  Creator  is  to  be  remembered  in  due
time.  8  The  preacher’s  care  to  edify.  13  The
fear  of  God  is  the  chief  antidote  of  vanity.

SOLOMON’S  SONG.

I.  The  church’s  love  to  Christ.  5  She  owns  her  de
formity,  7  and  prays  to  be  directed  to  his  flock
8  Christ  directs  her  to  the  shepherds’  tents.  9-
And  shewing  his  love  to  her,  11  gn  es  her  gracious
promises.  12  The  church  and  Christ  congratu¬
late  each  other.

II.  1  The  mutual  love  of  Christ  and  his  church.  8
The  hope,  10  and  calling  of  the  church.  14
Christ’s  care  of  the  church.  16  The  profession
of  the  church,  her  faith  and  hope.

I II.  1  The  church’s  fight  and  victory  in  temptation.

6  The  church  glorieth  in  Christ.

IV.  1  Christ  sets  forth  the  graces  of  the  church.  8
He  shews  his  love  to  her.  16  The  church  prays
to  be  made  fit  for  his  presence.

V.  1  Christ  awakes  the  church  with  his  calling.  2
The  church  having  a  taste  of  Christ’s  love,  is  sick
of  love.  9  A  description  of  Christ  by  his  graces.

VI.  1  The  church  professeth  her  faith  in  Christ .  4
Christ  shews  the  graces  of  the  church,  10  and  his
love  towards  her.

VII.  1  A  further  description  of  the  church’s  graces.
10  The  church  professes  her  faith  and  desire.

VIII.  1  The  love  of  the  church  of  Christ.  6  T  he
force  of  love.  8  The  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  14
The  church  prays  for  Christ’s  coming.

ISAIAH.

I.  Tsaiali  complains  of  Judah  for  her  rebellion.  5
He  laments  her  judgments.  10  He  upbraids  their
whole  service.  16  He  exhorts  to  repentance,  with
promises  and  threatenings.  21  Bewailing  their
wickedness,  he  denounces  God’s  judgments.  25-
He  promises  grace,  28  and  threatens  destruction
to  the  wicked.

IT.  1  Isaiah  prophesieth  of  the  coming  of  Christ’s
kingdom.  6  Wickedness  is  the  cause  of  God’s
forsaking.  10  He  exhorts  to  fear,  because  of  the
powerful  effects  of  God’s  majesty.

I I I .  1  The  great  confusion  which  comes  by  sin.  9
The  impudence  of  the  people.  12  The  oppression
and  covetousness  of  the  rulers.  16  T  he  judgments
which  shall  be  for  the  pride  of  the  women.

IV.  In  the  extremity  of  evils  Christ's  kingdom
shall  be  a  sanctuary.

V.  1  Underthe  parable  of  a  vineyard,  God  excuseth
his  severe  judgment.  8  His  judgments  upon  co¬
vetousness,  11  upon  lasciviousness,  13  upon  im¬
piety,  20  and  upon  injustice.  26  The  executioners
of  God’s  judgments.

VI.  1  Isaiah  in  a  vision  of  the  Lord  in  his  glory,  5
being  terrified,  is  confirmed  for  his  message.  9
He  shews  the  obstinacy  of  the  people,  to  their
desolation.  13  A  remnant  shall  be  saved.

VII.  1  Ahaz,  being  troubled  with  fearot  Rezin  and
Pekah,  is  comforted  by  Isaiah.  10  Ahaz  having
liberty  to  choose  a  sign,  and  refusing  it,  hath  for  a
sign  Christ  promised.  17  His  judgment  is  pro¬
phesied  to  come  by  Assyria.

VIII.  1  In  Maher-shalal  hash  baz,  he  prophesies
that  Syria  and  Israel  shall  be  subdued  by  Assyria;
5  Judah  likewise  for  their  infidelity.  9  God’s
judgments  are  irresistible.  11  Comfort  to  them
that  fear  God.  19  Great  afflictions  to  idolaters.

IX.  I  What  joy  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  afflictions,
by  the  kingdom  and  birth  of  Christ.  8  The  judg¬
ments  upon  Israel  for  their  pride,  13  for  their  hy
pocrisv,  18  and  for  their  impenitence.

X.  1  The  woe  of  tvrants.  5  Assyria,  the  rod  of  hy
pocrites,  for  his  pride  shall  be  broken.  20  A  rem
nantof  Israel  shall  be  saved.  24  Israel  is  comfort¬
ed  with  promise  of  deliverance  from  Assyria.

X I .  1  The  peaceable  kinsdom  of  the  Branch  out  of
the  root  of  Jesse.  10  The  victorious  restoration  of
Israel,  and  vocation  of  the  Gentiles.

XII.  A  joyful  thanksgiving  of  the  faithful  for  the
mercies  of  God.

XIII.  1  God  musters  the  armies  of  his  wrath.  6  He
threatens  to  destroy  Babylon  by  the  Medes.  191
The  desolation  of  Babylon.

XIV.  1  God’s  merciful  restoration  of  Israel. .4  Their
triumphant  exultation  over  Babel.  24  God’s-


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


purpose  against  Assyria.  29  Palestina  is  threat¬
ened.

XV.  The  lamentable  state  of  Moab.

XVI.  1  Moab  is  exhorted  to  yield  obedience  to
Christ’s  kingdom.  6  Moab  is  threatened  for  her
pride.  9  The  prophet  bewails  her.  12  The  judg¬
ment  of  Moab.

XVII.  1  Syria  and  Israel  are  threatened.  6  A
remnant  shall  forsake  idolatry,  y  The  rest  shall
be  plagued  for  their  impiety.  12  The  woe  of
Israel’s  enemies.

XVIII.  l  Gqd,  in  care  of  his  people,  will  destroy
the  Ethiopians.  7  An  access  thereby  shall  grow
unto  the  church.

XIX.  1  The  confusion  of  Egypt.  11  The  foolish¬
ness  of  their  princes.  18  The  calling  of  Egypt  to
the  church,  23  The  covenant  of  Egypt,  Assyria,
and  Israel.

XX.  A  type  prefiguring  the  shameful  captivity
of  Egy  pt  and  Ethiopia.

XXI.  1  1  he  prophet  bewailing  the  captivity  of  his
people,  seeth  in  a  vision  the  fall  of  Babylon  by
the  Medes  and  Persians.  11  Edom  scorning  the
prophet,  is  moved  to  repentance.  13 1  he  set-time
of  Arabia’s  calamity .

XXII.  1  The  prophet  laments  the  invasion  of
Jewry  by  the  Persians.  8  .  He  reproves  their
human  wisdom  and  worldly  joy.  lolleprophe-
sieth  Sheba’s  deprivation,  20  and  Eliakim  pre-
hguring  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  his  substitution.

XX HI.  1  I  he  miserable  overthrow  of  Tyre.  17
1  Their  unhappy  return.

XXIV.  1  The  doleful  judgments  of  God  upon  the
land.  13  A  remnant  shall  joyfully  praise  him.  16
vGod  in  his  judgments  shall  advance  his  kingdom.
XX \  .  1  I  he  prophet  praiseth  God,  for  his  judg¬
ments,  6  for  his  saving  benefits,  9  and  for  his
victorious  salvation.

XXVI.  1  A  song  inciting  to  confidence  in  God  5
for  his  judgments,  12  and  for  his  favour  to  his
people.  20  An  exhortation  to  wait  on  God.

XX  VII.  1  The  care  ot  God  over  his  vineyard.  7
His  chastisements  differ  from  judgments.  1"
The  church  of  Jews  and  Gentiles.

XXVIII.  1  The  prophet  threatens  Ephraim  for
their  pride  and  drunkenness.  5  'i'he  residue
shall  be  advanced  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  7
He  rebukes  their  error.  9  I  heir  untowardness
to  learn,  14  and  their  security.  16  Christ  the
sure  foundation  is  promised.  18  Their  security
shall  be  tried.  2.3  They  are  incited  to  the  con¬
sideration  ot  God’s  disc  reef  providence.

XXIX.  1  God’s  heavy  judgment  upon  Jerusalem
7  1  he  unsatiableness  of  her  enemies.  9  The
senselessness,  1.3  and  deep  hypocrisy  of  the  lews
18  A  promise  of  sanctification  to  the  godly.'

XXX.  1  'I'he  prophet  threatens  the  people,  for
their  confidence  in  Egypt,  8  and  contempt  of
Cod  s  word.  18  God  s  mercies  to  his  church
27  God  s  wrath,  and  the  people's  joy  in  the  de¬
struction  of  Assyria.

XXXI.  I  I'he  prophet  shews  their  cursed  folly,  in
trusting  to  Egypt,  and  forsaking  of  God.  6  He
exhorts  to  conversion.  8  He  shews  the  fall  of
Assyria.

XXXII.  1  The  blessings  of  Christ’s  kingdom.  9
Desolation  is  foreshewn.  15  Restoration  is  pro
mised  to  succeed.

XXXIII.  1  God’s  judgments  against  the  enemies
of  the  church.  1.3  The  privileges  of  the  godly
XXXIV.  1  1  he  judgments  wherewith  God  reveng¬
ed'  his  church.  11  The  desolation  of  her  ene¬
mies.  16  The  certainty  of  the  prophecy.

XXXV.  1  The  joyful  flourishing  of  Christ’s  king¬
dom.  .3  Hie  weak  are  encouraged  by  the  virtues

and^ privileges  of  the  gospel.

XXXVI.  1  Sennacherib  invades  Judah.  4  Rab-
shakeh  sent  by  Sennacherib,  by  blasphemous
persuasions  solicits  the  people  to  revolt.  22  His
words  are  told  to  Hezekiah.

XXXVII.  1  Hezekiah  mourning,  sends  to  Isaiah
to  pray  for  them.  6  Isaiah  comforts  them.  8
Sennacherib  going  to  encounter  Tirhakah,  sends
a  blasphemous  letter  to  Hezekiah.  14  Hezekiah’s
prayer.  21  Isaiah’s  prophecy  of  the  pride  and
destruction  of  Sennacherib,  and  the  good  of  Zion
36  An  angel  slays  the  Assyrians.  37  Sennache-
nb  is  slain  at  Nineveh  by  his  own  sons.
XXXVIII.  l  Hezekiah  receiving  a  message  of
death,  by  prayer  his  life  is  lengthened.  8  The
sun  goes  ten  degrees  backward,  for  a  sign  of  that
promise.  9  His  song  of  thanksgiving.

XXXIX.  1  Merodacii-haladan  sending  to  visit
Hezekiah  because  of  the  wonder,  hath  notice  of
his  treasures.  .3  Isaiah  understanding  thereof
foretells  the  Babjdonian  captivity.

XL.  1  'The  promulgation  of  the  gospel.  .3  The
preaching  of  John  the  Baptist.  9  The  preaching
of  the  apostles.  12  The  prophet  by  the  omnipo¬
tence  ot  God,  18  and  his  incomparableness  °6
comforts  the  people.

XLl.  1  God  expostulates  with  the  people,  about
his  merries  to  the  church,  10  about  his  promises
'21  and  about  the  vanity  of  idols.

XLTI.  1  The  office  of  Christ,  graced  with  meek¬
ness  and  constancy.  5  God’s  promise  unto  him
10  An  exhortation  to  praise  God  for  his  gospel.
'17  He  reproves  the  people  of  incredulity.

XLl  1 1  .  1  The  Lord  comforts  the  church  with  his
promises.  8  He  appeals  to  the  people  for  wit¬
ness  of  his  omnipotence.  14  He  foretells  them  the
destruction  of  Babylon,  18  and  his  wonderful
deliverance  of  his  people.  22  He  reproves  the
people  as  inexcusable.

XLl  V.  1  God  comforts  the  church  with  his  pro¬
mises.  7  The  vanity  of  idols,  9  and  folly  of  idol-
makers.  21  He  exhorts  to  praise  God  for  his
redemption  and  omnipotence.

XLV.  1  God  calleth  Cyrus  for  his  church’s  .lake.

5  By  his  omnipotence  he  challengeth  obedience
20  lie  convinces  the  idols  of  vanity,  by  his  sav.o^
power.  0

712


XLVI.  l  The  idols  of  Babylon  cculd  not  save
themselves.  .3  God  saves  his  people  to  the  end.
5  Idols  are  not  comparable  to  God  for  power,
12  or  present  salvation.

XLVI  I.  1  God’s  jud  gments  upon  Babylon  and
Chaldea,  6  for  their  unmercifulness,  7  pride,  lo
and  overboldness,  11  shall  be  irresistible.

XLVI  1[.  1  God,  to  convince  the  people  of  their
foreknown  obstinacy,  revealed  his  prophecies.
9  He  saves  them  for  his  own  sake.  12  He  ex¬
horts  them  to  obedience,  because  of  his  power  and
providence.  16  He  laments  their  backwardness.
20  lie  powerfully  delivers  his  out  of  Babylon.
XLIX.  1  Christ  being  sent  to  the  Jews,  complains
of  them.  5  He  is  sent  to  the  Gentiles,  with
gracious  promises.  1.3  God’s  love  is  perpetual
to  his  church.  18  The  ample  restoration  of  the
church.  24  The  powerful  deliverance  out  of  the
captivity.

L.  1  Christ  shews  that  the  dereliction  of  the  Jews  is
not  to  be  imputed  to  him,  by  his  ability  to  save,
5  by  his  obetlience  in  that  work,  7  and  by  his
confidence  in  that  assistance.  10  An  exhortation
to  trust  in  God  and  not  in  ourselves.

LI.  1  An  exhortation  after  the  pattern  of  Abra¬
ham,  to  trust  in  Christ,  3  by  reason  of  his  com¬
fortable  promises,  4  of  his  righteous  salvation,  7
and  man’s  mortality.  9  Christ,  by  his  sanctified
arm,  defendeth  his  from  the  fear  of  man.  17  He
bewails  the  afflictions  of  Jerusalem,  21  and  pro¬
mises  deliverance.

LI  I.  1  Christ  persuades  the  church  to  believe  his
free  redemption,  7  to  receive  the  ministers  there¬
of,  9  to  joy  in  the  pow  er  thereof,  11  and  to  free
themselves  from  bondage.  13  Christ’s  kingdom
shall  be  exalted.

LI II.  1  The  prophet  complaining  of  their  incredu¬
lity,  excuses  the  scandal  of  the  cross,  4  by  the
benefit  of  his  passion,  10  and  the  good  success
thereof.

LI  V.  1  The  prophet,  for  the  comfort  of  the  Gen¬
tiles,  prophesies  the  amplitude  of  their  church,

4  their  safety,  6  their  certain  deliverance  out  of
affliction,  11  their  fair  edification,  15  and  sure
preservation.

LV.  l  The  prophet,  with  the  promises  of  Christ,
calls  to  faith,  6  and  to  repentance.  8  The  happy
success  ot  them  that  believe.

LVI.  1  The  prophet  exhorts  to  sanctification.  3  Ele
promises  it  shall  be  general  without  respect  of  per¬
sons.  9  He  inveighs  against  blind  watchmen.

LVI  I.  1  The  blessed  death  of  the  righteous.  3  God
reproves  the  Jews  for  their  vvhorish  idolatry.  13
He  gives  evangelical  promises  to  the  penitent.
LVIII.  1  The  prophet  being  sent  to  reprove  hypo¬
crisy.  .3  expresses  a  counterfeit  fast  and  a  true.  8
He  declares  what  promises  are  due  to  godliness,
13  and  to  the  keeping  of  the  sabbath.

LIX.  1  I  he  damnable  nature  of  sin.  3  The  sins
of  the  Jews.  9  Calamity  is  for  sin.  16  Salvation  is
only  of  God.  20  The  covenant  of  the  Redeemer.
LX.  1  The  glory  of  the  church,  in  the  abundant  ac¬
cess  of  the  Gentiles,  15  and  the  great  blessings
after  a  short  affliction.

LX  I.  1  The  office  of  Christ.  4  T  e  forwardness,

7  and  blessings  of  the  faithful.

LX  II.  1  The  fervent  desire  of  the  prophet,  to  con¬
firm  the  church  in  God’s  promises.  5  The  office
of  the  ministers  (unto  which  they  are  incited)  in
preaching  the  gospel,  10  and  preparing  the  peo¬
ple  thereto.

LXITI.  l  Christ  sheweth  who  he  is,  what  his  vic¬
tory  over  his  enemies,  7  and  what  his  mercy  to¬
wards  his  church.  10  In  his  just  wrath  he  remem¬
bers  his  free  mercy.  15  The  church  in  her  prayer,

17  and  complaint,  professes  her  faith.

LX  TV.  l  I'he  church  prays  for  the  illustration  of
God’s  power.  5  Celebrating  God’s  mercv,  she
makes  confession  of  her  natural  corruptions,  9
and  complains  of  her  affliction.

LXV.  1  I  he  calling  of  the  Gentiles.  2  The  Jews,
tor  their  incredulity,  idolatry,  and  hypocrisy,  are
rejected.  8  A  remnant  shall  be  saved.  11  Judg¬
ments  on  the  wicked,  and  blessineson  the  godly.

17  I  he  blessed  state  ot  the  new  Jerusalem.

LXV  I.  l  The  glorious  God  will  be  served  in  hum¬
ble  sincerity'.  5  He  comforts  the  humble  w  ith  the
marvellous  generation,  10  and  with  the  gracious
benefits  of  the  church.  15  God’s  severe  judg¬
ments  against  the  wicked.  19  The  Gentiles  shall
have  an  holy  church,  24  and  see  the  damnation
of  the  wicked.

JEREMIAH.

I.  The  time,  3  and  the  calling  of  Jeremiah,  ll
His  prophetical  visions  of  an  almond-rod,  and  a
seething  pot.  15  His  heavy  message  against
Judah.  17  God  encourages  him  with  his  promise
ot  assistance.

II.  1  God  having  shewn  his  former  kindness,  expos¬
tulates  with  the  Jews  their  causeless  revolt,  9  be-
y’oud  any  example.  14  They  are  the  causes  of
their  own  calamities.  20  The  sins  of  Judah.  31
Her  confidence  is  rejected.

III.  1  God’s  great  mercy  in  Judah’s  vile  whoredom.

6  Judah  is  worse  than  Israel.  12  The  promises
ot  the  gospel  to  the  penitent.  20  Israel,  reproved
and  called  by  God,  make  a  solemn  confession  of
their  sins.

IV.  1  God  calls  Israel  by  his  promise.  .3  Ele  exhorts
Judah  to  repentance  by  fearful  judgments.  19
A  grievous  lamentation  for  the  miseries  of  Judah.

V.  1  The  judgmentsof  God  upon  the  Jews,  for  their

perverseness,  7  fortbeir  adultery,  10  for  their  im¬
piety,  19  contempt  of  God,  25  and  for  their  great
corruption  in  the  civil  state.  .30  and  ecclesiastical.

VI.  1  J  he  enemies  sent  against  .1  udah,  4  encourage
theniseivee.  6  God  sets  them  on  work,  because  of
their  sins.  9  I’he  prophet  laments  the  judgments
ot  God  because  of  their  sins.  18  He  proclaims
God  s  wrath.  26  He  calls  the  people  to  mourn
for  the  judgment  on  their  sins.


VII.  1  Jeremiah  is  sent  to  call  for  true  repentance
to  prevent  the  Jews’  captivity.  8  He  rejects  their
vain  confidence,  12  by  the  example  of  Shiloh  17
He  threatens  them  for  their  idolatry.  21  He  re¬
jects  the  sacrifices  of  the  disobedient.  2Q  He  ex¬
horts  to  mourn  for  their  abominations  in  Touhet
32  and  the  judgments  for  the  same.  ’

VI  II.  1  I  he  calamity  of  the  Jew  s,  both  dead  and
alive.  4  He  upbraids  their  foolish  and  shameless
impenitence.  13  He  shews  their  grievous  judg¬
ment,  18  and  bewails  their  desperate  estate.

IX.  1  Jeremiah  laments  the  Jews  for  their  sins,  9
and  judgment.  12  Disobedience  is  the  cause  of
their  calamity.  17  He  exhorts  to  mourn  for  their
destruction,  23  and  to  trust,  not  in  themselves
but  in  trod.  25  He  threatens  both  Jews  and
Gentiles.

X.  1  The  unequal  comparison  of  God  and  idols
17  I  he  prophet  exhorts  to  fly  from  the  calamity
to  come.  19  He  laments  the  spoil  of  the  taber¬
nacle  by  foolish  pastors.  23  He  makes  an  hum¬
ble  supplication.

XI.  1  Jeremiah  proclaims  God’s  covenant:  8  re¬
bukes  the  .lews  disobeying  thereof:  11  prophe
sieth  evils  to  come  upon  them,  18  and  upon  the
menof  Anathoth,  forconspiring  to  kill  Jeremiah.

1.  l  Jeremiah  complaining  of  the  prosperity  of
the  wicked,  by  faith  sees  their  ruin.  5  God  ad¬
monishes  him  of  his  brethren's  treachery  against
him,  7  and  laments  his  heritage.  14  He  promises
to  the  penitent  return  from  captivity.

XIII.  1  In  the  type  of  a  linen  girdle,  hidden  at
H,  up  urates,  God  prefigures  the  destruction  of  his
£f,op,  e'-.u12  .Un<lfr  f.he  Enable  of  the  bottles
filled  with  wine,  he  foretells  their  drunkenness
m  misery.  15  He  exhorts  to  prevent  their  future
judgments.  22  He  shews  their  abominations  are
the  cause  thereof.

XIV.  1  The  grievous  famine,  7  causes  Jeremiah  to
pray.  10  I  he  Lord  w  ill  not  be  entreated  for  the
people.  13  Lying  prophets  are  no  excuse  for  them
17  Jeremiah  is  moved  to  complain  for  them.

XV.  1  The  utter  rejection,  and  manifold  judgments
of  the  Jews.  20  Jeremiah  complaining  of  their
spite,  receives  a  promise  for  himself,  12  and  a
threatening  for  them.  15  He  prays,  19  and  re¬
ceives  a  gracious  promise.

XVI.  l  The  prophet,  under  the  types  of  abstain¬
ing  from  marriage,  from  houses  of  mourning  and
feasting,  foreshews  the  utter  ruin  of  the  Jews

10  because  they  were  worse  than  their  fathers’
14  I  heir  return  from  captivity  shall  be  stranger
than  their  deliverance  out  of  Egypt.  16  God
will  doubly  recompense  their  idolatry.

XVII.  1  The  captivity  of  Judah  for  her  sin.  5
I  rust  in  man  is  cursed,  7  in  God  is  blessed.  10
The  deceitful  heart  cannot  deceive  God.  12  The
salvation  of  God.  15  The  prophet  complains  of
the  mockers  of  his  prophecy.  19  He  is  sent  to
renew  the  covenant  111  hallowing  the  sabbath.

o  p1-  V  1  ier  the  I.vpe  of  a  potter  is  shewn
Cod  s  absolute  power  in  disposing  of  nations  11
Judgments  threatened  to  Judah  for  hersfran°e  re-
v™'  18  Jeremiah  prays  against  his  conspirators

A1X.  1  Under  the  type  of  Creaking  a  potter’s  ves¬
sel  is  foreshewn  the  desolation  of  the  Jews  fc/-
their  sins.

XX.  1  Pashur  smiting  Jeremiah,  receives  a  new
name,  and  a  fearful  doom.  7  Jeremiah  complains
ofconteTiipf,  10  of  treachery,  14  and  of  his  birth

XX I .  1  Zedekiah  sends  to  Jeremiah  to  inquire  the
event  ot  Nebuchadrezzar’s  war.  3  Jeremiah
foretells  a  hard  siege  and  miserable  captivity  8
He  counsels  the  people  to  fall  to  the  Chaldeans

1 1  and  upbraids  the  king’s  house.

XXI I.  1  lie  exhorts  to  repentance,  with  promises
and  threats.  10  I'he  judgment  of  Shallum,  13
ot  Jehoiakim,  20  and  of  Coniah.

XXI  I  I.  1  He  prophesies  a  restoration  of  the  scat¬
tered  flock.  5  Christ  shall  rule  and  save  them
9  Against  false  prophets,  33  and  mockers  of  the"
true  prophets.

XXI  V.  1  Under  the  type  of  good  and  had  figs,  4
he  foreshews  the  restoration  of  them  that  were  in
captivity,  8  and  the  desolation  of  Zedekiah  and
the  rest.

XXV.  1  Jeremiah  reproving  the  Jew's’  disobedi¬
ence  to  the  prophets,  8  foretells  the  seventy  years’
captivity,  12  and  after  that  the  destruction  of
Babylon.  15  Under  the  type  of  a  cup  of  wine
he  foreshews  the  destruction  of  all  nations.  34

T  I  he  howling  ot  the  shepherds.

XXVI.  1  Jeremiah,  by  promises  and  threatenings.
exhorts  to  repentance.  8  Ele  is  therefore  appre¬
hended,  10  and  arraigned.  11  His  apology.  16
He  is  quit  in  judgment,  by  the  example  of  Mi-
cah  20  and  of  Urijah,  24  and  by  the  care  of
Anikam.

XXVII.  1  Under  the  type  of  bonds  and  yokes,  he
prophesies  the  subduing  of  the  neighbour  kings
unto  Nebuchadnezzar.  8  He  exhorts  them  to
yield,  and  not  to  believe  the  false  prophets  12
I  he  like  he  doth  to  Zedekiah.  19  He  foretells  the
remnant  of  the  vessels  shall  be  carried  into  Baby-
j™.  |*nd  there  continue  until  the  day  of  visitation.
XX  \  III.  1  Hananiah  prophesies  falsely  the  re-


tnrn  ot  the  vessels,  and  of  Jeconiah.  5  Jeremiah
wishing  it  to  be  true,  shews  that  the  event  will
declare  who  are  true  prophets.  10  Hananiah
breaks  Jeremiah  syoke.  HT. Jeremiah  tells  of  an
ironyoke,  15  and  foretells  Hananiah’s  death.

XXIX.  1  Jeremiah  sends  a  letter  to  the  captives
in  Babylon,  to  he  quiet  there,  8  and  not  to  be¬
lieve  the  dreams  of  the  prophets,  10  and  that  they
shall  return  with  grace,  after  seventy  years.  15
lie  foretells  the  destruction  of  the.  res’t  for  their
disobedience.  29  He  shews  the  fearful  end  of
Ahab  and  Zedekiah,  two  lying  prophets.  24
Sliemaiah  writes  a  letter  against  Jeremiah.  .30
Jeremiah  reads  his  doom.

XXX.  1  God  shews  Jeremiah  the  return  of  the
Jews.  4  After  their  trouble,  they  shall  have  de-


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


liveiance.  10  He  comforts  Jacob.  18  Their
return  shall  be  gracious.  20  Wrath  shall  fall  on
the  wicked.

XXXI.  1  The  restoration  oflsrael.  10 The  publica¬
tion  thereof.  15  Rachel  mourning,  is  comforted.

18  Ephraim  repenting,  is  brought  home  again.  22
Christ  is  promised.  27  His  care  over  the  church.

31  His  new  covenant.  35  The  stability,  38  and
amplitude  of  the  church.

XXXI 1.  1  Jeremiah  being  imprisoned  by  Zedekiah
for  his  prophecy,  6  buys  Ilanameel's  field.  13
Baruch  must  preserve  the  evidence,  as  tokens
of  the  people’s  return.  16  Jeremiah  in  his  prayer
complains  to  God.  26  God  confirms  the  captivity
for  their  sins,  36  and  promises  a  gracious  return.
XXXIII.  1  God  promises  to  the  captivity,  a
gracious  return,  9  a  joyful  state,  12  a  settled
government,  15  Christ,  the  branch  of  righteous¬
ness.  17  a  continuance  of  kingdom  and  priest¬
hood,  20  and  a  stability  of  a  blessed  seed.
XXXIV.  1  Jeremiah  prophesies  the  captivity  of
Zedekiah,  and  the  city.  8  The  princes  and  the
people  having  dismissed  their  bond-servants,
contrary  to  the  covenant  of  God,  reassume  them.

12  Jeremiah  for  their  disobedience,  gives  them
and  Zedekiah  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.
XXXV.  1  By  the  obedience  of  the  Rechabites,
12  Jeremiah  condemns  the  disobedience  of  the
Jews.  18  God  blesses  the  llechabites  for  their
obedience.

XXXVI.  1  Jeremiah  causes  Baruch  to  write  his
prophecy,  5  and  publicly  to  read  it.  11  The
princes  having  knowledge  of  it  by  Micaiah, send
Jehudi  to  fetch  the  roll  and  read  it.  19  They
will  Baruch  to  hide  himself  and  Jeremiah.  20
The  king  Jehoiakim  being  certified  thereof,  hears
part  of  it,  and  burns  the  roll.  27  Jeremiah
denounceth  his  judgment.  32  Baruch  writes  a
new  copy.

XXXVI 1. 1  The  Egyptians  having  raised  the  siege
of  the  Chaldeans,  king  Zedekiah  sends  to  .1  eremiah
to  pray  for  the  people.  6  Jeremiah  prophesies  the
Chaldeans’  certain  return  and  victory.  11  He  is
taken  fora  fugitive,  beaten,  and  putin  prison.  16
He  assuresZedekiahofthecaptivity.  18  Entreat¬
ing  for  his  liberty,  he  obtaineth  some  favour.
XXXVIII.  1  Jeremiah  by  a  false  suggestion  is  put
into  the  dungeon  of  Malchiah.  7  Ebed-melech,
by  suit,  gets  him  some  enlargement.  14  Upon
secret  conference,  he  counsels  the  king  by  yield¬
ing  to  save  his  life;  24  By  the  king’s  instruc¬
tions  he  conceals  the  conference  from  the  princes.
XXXIX.  1  Jerusalem  is  taken.  4  Zedekiah  is  made
blind,  and  sent  to  Babylon.  8  The  city  ruinated,

9  the  people  captivated.  11  Nebuchadrezzar’s
charge  for  the  good  usage  of  Jeremiah.  15  God’s
promise  to  Ebed-melech.

XL.  1  Jeremiah  being  set  free  by  Nebuzar-adan,
goes  to  Gedaliah.  7  l'he  dispersed  Jews  repair
unto  him.  13  Johanan  revealing  lshmael's  con¬
spiracy,  is  not  believed.

XLI.  lTshmael,  treacherously  killing  Gedaliah
and  others,  purposes  with  the  residue  to  flee  unto
the  Ammonites.  11  Johanan  recovers  the  cap¬
tives,  and  intends  to  tlee  into  Egypt.

XLI1.  1  Johanan  desires  Jeremiah  to  inquire  of
God,  promising  obedience  to  his  will.  7  Jere¬
miah  assures  him  of  safety  in  Judea,  13  and
destruction  in  Egypt.  19  He  reproves  their  hy¬
pocrisy  in  requiring  of  the  Lord  that  which  they
meant  not.

XLIII.  1  Johanna  discrediting  Jeremiah’s  pro¬
phecy,  carries  Jeremiah  and  others  into  Egypt.

8  Jeremiah  prophesies  by  a  type  the  conquest  of
Egypt  by  the  Babylonians.

XLIV.  1  Jeremiah  expresses  the  desolation  of
Judah  for  their  idolatry.  11  He  prophesies  their
destruction,  who  commit  idolatry  in  Egypt.  15
The  obstinacy  of  the  Jews.  20  Jeremiah  threatens
them  for  the  same,  29  and  for  a  sign  prophesies
the  destruction  of  Egypt.

XLV.  1  Baruch  being  dismayed,  4  Jeremiah  in¬
structs  and  comforts  him.

XLV1.  1  Jeremiah  prophesies  the  overthrow  of
Pharaoh’s  army  at  Euphrates,  13  and  the  con¬
quest  of  Egypt,  by  Nebuchadrezzar.  27  He
comforts  Jacob  in  their  chastisement.

XLV11.  The  destruction  of  the  Philistines.
XLVIII.  1  The  judgmentof  Moab,7  for  their  pride,
11  for  their  security,  14  for  their  carnal  confidence,
26  and  for  their  contempt  of  God  and  his  people.
47  The  restoration  of  Moab.

XLIX.  1  The  judgment  of  the  Ammonites.  6  Their
restoration.  7  The  judgmentof  Edom,  23  of,
Damascus,  28  of  Kedar,  30  of  Hazor,  34  and  of
Elam.  39  The  restoration  of  Elam.

L.  1,  9,  21, 35  The  judgment  of  Babylon.  4,  17,  33
The  redemption  of  Israel.

LI.  1  The  severe  judgment  of  God  against  Baby¬
lon,  in  revenge  of  Israel.  59  Jeremiah  delivers
the  book  of  this  prophecy  to  Seraiah,  to  be  cast
into  Euphrates,  in  token  of  the  perpetual  sinking
of  Babylon.

LI  1 . 1  Zedekiah  rebels.'  4  J erusalem  is  besieged  and
taken.  8  Zedekiah’s  sons  killed,  and  his  own  eyes
put  out.  12  Nebuzaradan  burns  and  spoils  the
city.  24  He  carries  away  the  captives.  32  Evil-
merodach  advanceth  Jehoiakim.

LAMENTATIONS.

I.  The  miserable  state  of  Jerusalem  by  reason  of
her  sin.  12  She  complains  of  her  grief,  18  and
confesses  God’s  judgment  to  be  righteous.

II.  1  Jeremiah  laments  the  misery  of  Jerusalem.
20  He  complains  of  it  to  God.

III.  1  The  faithful  bewail  their  calamities.  22  By
the  mercies  of  God  they  nourish  their  hope.  37
They  acknowledge  God’s  justice.  55  They  pray
for  deliverance, 64and  vengeance  on  their  enemies.

IV.  1  Zion  bewails  her  pitiful  condition.  1.3  She
confesses  her  sins.  21  Edom  is  threatened.  22
Zion  is  comforted.


V.  A  pitiful  complaint  ofZion,  in  prayer  to  God.
EZEKIEL.

I.  The  time  of  Ezekiel’s  prophecy  at  Chehar.  4
His  vision  of  the  four  cherubims,  15  ot  the  tour
wheels,  26  and  of  the  glory  of  God.

II.  1  Ezekiel's  commission.  6  His  instruction.  9
The  roll  of  his  heavy  prophecy.

III.  1  Ezekiel  eats  the  roll.  4  God  encourages  him.

15  God  shews  him  the  rule  ol  prophecy.  22  God
shuts  and  opens  the  prophet’s  mouth.

IV.  1  Under  the  type  of  asiege,  is  shewn  the  time
from  the  defection  of  Jeroboam  to  the  captivity.

9  By  the  provision  of  the  siege,  is  shewn  the  hard*
ness  of  the  famine.

V.  1  Under  the  type  of  hair,  5  is  shewn  the  judg¬
ment  of  Jerusalem  for  their  rebellion,  12  by
famine,  sword,  and  dispersion.

VI.  1  l'he  judgment  of  Israel  for  their  idolatry.  8
A  remnant  shall  be  blessed.  11  The  faithful  are
exhorted  to  lament  their  calamities.

VII.  1  l'he  final  desolation  of  Israel.  \6  The  mourn¬
ful  repentance  of  them  that  escape.  20  The  ene¬
mies  defile  the  sanctuary,  because  of  the  Israelites’
abominations.  23  Under  the  type  of  a  chain  is
shewn  their  miserable  captivity.

VII I.  1  Ezekiel  in  a  vision  of  God,  at  Jerusalem,

5  is  shewn  the  image  of  jealousy.  7  Thy  cham¬
bers  of  imagery.  13  1  he  mourners  for  Tammuz.
15  The  worshippers  toward  the  sun.  18  God’s
wrath  for  their  idolatry.

IX.  1  A  vision  whereby  isshewn  the  preservation
of  some,  5  and  the  destruction  of  the  rest.  8  God
cannot  be  entreated  for  them.

X.  1  The  vision  of  the  coals  of  fire,  to  be  scattered
over  the  city.  8  The  vision  of  the  cherubims.

XI.  1  l'he  presumption  of  the  princes.  4  Their
sin  and  judgment.  13  Ezekiel  complaining,  God
shews  him  his  purpose  in  saving  a  remnant,  21
and  punishing  the  wicked.  22  1  he  gioryof  God
leaves  the  city.  24  Ezekiel  is  returned  to  the
captivity.

XII.  1  t  he  type  of  Ezekiel’s  removing.  8  It
shewed  the  captivity  of  Zedekiah.  17  Ezekiel’s
trembling  shews  the  Jews’  desolation.  21  The
Jews’  presumptuous  proverb  is  reproved.  26 The
speediness  of  the  vision.

XIII.  1  l'he  reproof  of  lying  prophets,  TO  and
their  untempered  mortar.  17  Of  prophetesses
and  their  pillows

XIV.  1  God  answers  idolaters  according  to  their
own  heart.  6  They  are  exhorted  to  repent,  for
fear  of  judgments,  by  means  of  seduced  prophets.
17  God’s  irrevocable  sentence  of  famine,  15  of
some  noisome  beasts,  17  of  the  sword,  19  and  of
pestilence.  22  A  remnant  shall  be  reserved  for
the  example  of  others.

XV.  1  By  the  unfitness  of  the  vine-branch  for  any
work,  )6  isshewn  the  rejection  of  Jerusalem.

XVI.  1  Under  the  similitude  of  a  wretched  infant,
is  shewn  the  natural  state  of  Jerusalem.  6  God’s
extraordinary  love  towards  her.  15  Her  mon¬
strous  whoredom.  35  Her  grievous  judgment.
44  Her  sin,  matching  her  mother,  and  exceeding
her  sisters,  Sodom  and  Samaria,  calls  for  judg¬
ments.  60  Mercy  is  promised  her  in  the
end.

XVI  1. 1  Under  the  parable  of  two  eagles  and  a  vine,
11  is  shewn  God’s  judgment  upon  Jerusalem  for
revolting  from  Babylon  to  Egypt.  22  God  pro¬
mised)  to  plant  the  cedar  of  the  gospel.

XV 1 1 1 .  1  God  reproves  the  unjust  parable  of  sour
grapes.  5  He  shews  how  he  deals  with  a  just
father:  10  with  a  wicked  son  of  ajustfather:  14
with  a  just  son  of  a  wicked  father  :  19  With  a
wicked  man  repenting  :  24  with  a  just  man  re¬
volting.  25  He  defends  his  justice,  31  and  ex¬
horts  to  repentance.

XIX.  1  A  lamentation  for  the  princes  of  Israel,
under  the  parable  of  lion’s  whelps  taken  in  a  pit,
10  and  for  Jerusalem,  under  the  parable  of  a
wasted  vine.

XX.  1  God  refuses  to  be  consulted  by  the  elders  of
Israel.  5  lie  shews  the  story  of  their  rebellions
in  Egypt,  10  in  the  wilderness,  27  and  in  the
land.  33  He  promises  to  gather  them  by  the
gospel.  45  Under  the  name  of  a  forest,  he  shews
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.

XXI.  1  Ezekiel  prophesies  against  Jerusalem,
with  a  sign  of  sighing.  8  l'he  sharp  and  bright
sword,  18  against  Jerusalem,  25  against  the
kingdom,  28  and  against  the  Ammonites.

XXII.  1  A  catalogue  of  sinsin  Jerusalem.  13  God
will  burn  them  as  dross  in  his  furnace.  23  The
general  corruption  of  prophets,  priests,  princes,
and  people.

XXIII.  1  The  whoredoms  of  Aholah  and  Aholi-
bah.  22  Aholibah  is  to  be  plagued  by  her  lovers.
36  The  prophet  reproves  the  adulteries  of  them
both,  45  and  shews  their  judgments.

XXIV.  1  Under  the  parable  of  a  boiling  pot,  6  is
shewn  the  irrevocable  destruction  of  Jerusalem.
15  By  the  sign  of  Ezekiel  not  mourning  for  the
death  of  his  wife,  19  is  shewn  the  calamity  of  the
Jews  to  be  beyond  all  sorrow.

XXV.  1  God’s  vengeance  for  their  insolence
against  the  Jews,  upon  the  Ammonites.  8  Upon
Moab  and  Seir,  12  Upon  Edom.  15  And  upon
the  Philistines.

XXVI.  ]  Tyrus,  for  insulting  against  Jerusalem,
is  threatened.  7  The  power  of  Nebuchadrezzar
against  her.  15  The  mourning  and  astonishment
of  the  sea  at  her  fall.

XXVII.  1  The  richsupply  of  Tyrus.  26  The  great
and  irrecoverable  fall  thereof.

XXVI II.  1  God’s  judgment  upon  the  prince  of  Ty¬
rus,  for  his  sacrilegious  pride.  11  A  lamentation,
of  his  great  glory  corrupted  by  sin.  20  The  judg¬
ment  of  Zidon.  24  The  restoration  of  Israel.
XXIX.  The  judgment  of  Pharaoh,  for  his  trea¬
chery  to  Israel.  8  The  desolation  of  Egypt.  12
The  restoration  thereof,  after  forty  years.  17


Egypt  the  reward  of  Nebuchadrezzar.  21  Is¬
rael  shall  be  restored.

XXX.  1  The  desolation  of  Egypt  and  her  help¬
ers.  20  The  arm  of  Babylon  shall  be  strength¬
ened  to  break  the  arm  of  Eg>  pf.

XXXI.  1  A  relation  unto  Pharaoh,  3  of  the  glory
of  Assyria,  10  and  the  fall  thereof,  for  priue.  18
The  like  destruction  of  Egypt.

XXXI 1.  1  A  lamentation  for  the  fearful  fall  ol
Egypt.  11  The  sword  of  Babylon  shall  destroy
it.  17  It  shall  be  brought  down  to  heil,  among
all  the  uncircumcised  nations.

XXXI II.  1  According  to  the  duty  of  a  watchman,
in  warning  the  people,  7  Ezekiel  is  admonished
of  his  duty.  20  God  shews  the  justice  of  his
ways  towards  the  penitent,  and  revolters.  17
He  maintains  his  justice.  21  Upon  the  news  ot
the  taking  of  Jerusalem,  he  prophesies  the  deso¬
lation  of  the  land.  30  God’s  judgment  upon  the
mockers  of  the  prophets.

XXXIV.  1  A  reproof  of  the  shepherds.  7  God’s
judgment  against  them.  11  His  providence  for
his  flock.  20  1  he  kingdom  of  Christ.

XXXV.  l  The  judgment  of  mount  Seir,  for  their
hatred  of  Israel.

XXXVI.  1  T  he  land  of  Israel  is  comforted,  both
by  destruction  of  the  heathen,  who  spitefully
used  it,  8  and  by  the  blessings  of  God  promisee,
unto  it.  16  Israel  was  rejected  for  their  sin,  11
and  shall  be  restored  without  their  desert.  25
The  blessings  of  Christ’s  kingdom.

XXXVII.  1  By  the  resurrection  of  dry  bones,  11
the  dead  hope  of  Israel  revived.  15  By  the  unit¬
ing  of  two  sticks,  18  is  shewn  the  incorporation
of  Israel  into  Judah.  20  The  promises  of  Christ's
kingdom.

XXXVIII.  1  The  army,  8  and  malice  of  Gog.  14
God’s  judgment  against  him.

XXX IX.  1  God’s  judgment  upon  Gog.  8  Israel’s
victory.  11  Gogs  burial  in  Hamon-gog.  17
The  feast  of  the  fowls.  23  Israel  having  been
plagued  for  their  sins,  shall  be  gathered  again
with  eternal  favour.

XL.  1  The  time,  manner,  and  end  of  the  vision.

6  The  description  of  the  east  gate,  20  of  the  north
gate,  24  of  the  south  gate,  32  of  the  east  gate,  35
and  of  the  north  gate.  .39  Eight  tables.  44  The
chambers.  48  1  lie  porch  of  the  house.

XLI.  The  measures,  parts,  chambers,  and  orna¬
ments  of  the  temple.

XL11.  1  The  chambers  for  the  priests.  13  The  use
thereof.  19  The  measures  ol  the  outward  court.
XLI  II.  1  The  returning  of  the  glory  of  God  into  the
temple.  7  The  sin  of  Israel  hindered  God’s  pre
sence.  10  The  prophet  exhorts  them  to  repentance,
and  observation  of  the  law  of  the  house.  13  The
measures,  18  and  the  ordinances  of  the  altar.
XLIV.  1  The  east  gate  assigned  only  to  the  prince.

4  T  he  priests  reproved  for  polluting  of  the  sane
tuary  •  9  Idolaters  incapable  of  the  priest’s  office.
15  The  sons  of  Zadok  are  accepted  thereto.  17
Ordinances  for  the  priests.

XLV.  1  The  portion  of  land  for  the  sanctuary,  6
for  the  city,  7  and  for  the  prince.  9  Ordinances
for  the  prince.

XLV  1 .  1  Ordinances  for  the  prince  in  his  worship,

9  and  for  the  people.  16  An  order  for  the  princess
inheritance.  19  The  courts  for  boiling  and
baking.

XLV11.  1  The  vision  of  the  holy  waters.  6  The
virtue  of  them.  13  T  he  borders  of  the  land.  22
T  he  division  of  it  by  lot.

XLVIII.  1,  23  The  portions  of  the  twelve  tribes,
8  of  the  sanctuary,  15  of  the  city  and  suburbs,  21
and  of  the  prince.  30  'The  dimensions  and  gates
of  the  city.

DANIEL.

I.  Jehoiakim’s  captivity.  3  Ashpenaz  takes  Da¬
niel,  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Azariah.  8  They
refusing  the  king’s  portion,  do  prosper  with  pulse
and  water.  17  Their  excellency  in  wisdom.

II.  1  Nebuchadnezzar  forgetting  his  dream,  re¬
quires  it  of  the  Chaldeans,  by  promises  and
threatenings.  10  They  owning  their  inability,
are  judged  to  die.  14  Daniel  obtaining  some
respite,  finds  the  dream.  _  19  He  blesses  God.
24  He  staying  the  decree  is  brought  to  the  king.
31  The  dream.  36  T  lie  interpretation.  46  Daniel’s
advancement.

III.  1  Nebuchadnezzar  di  dicates  a  golden  image
in  Dura.  8  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abed-nego
are  accused  for  not  worshipping  the  image.  13
T  hey  being  threatened,  make  a  good  confession.
19  God  delivers  them  out  of  the  furnace.  26  Ne¬
buchadnezzar,  seeing  th  i  miracle,  blesses  God.

IV.  1  Nebuchadnezzar  confesses  God’s  kingdom,
4  relates  his  dream,  which  the  magicians  could
not  interpret.  8  Daniel  hears  the  dream.  19
He  interprets  it.  28  1  he  story  of  the  event.

V.  Belshazzar’s  impious  feast.  5  A  hand-writing,
unknowm  to  the  magicians,  troubles  the  king.  10
By  advive  of  the  queen,  Daniel  is  brought.  17
He  reproving  the  king  of  pride  and  idolatry,  25
reads  and  interprets  the  writing.  30  The  mo¬
narchy  is  translated  to  the  Medes.

VI.  1  Daniel  is  made  chief  of  the  presidents.  4
T  hey  conspiring  againsthim,  obtain  an  idolatrous
decree.  10  Daniel  accused  of  the  breach  thereof,
is  cast  into  the  lions’  den.  18  Daniel  is  saved,
24  his  adversaries  devoured,  25  and  God  magni¬
fied  by  a  decree.

VI  l.  1  Daniel's  vision  of  four  beasts.  9  Of  God’s
kingdom.  15  The  interpretation  thereof.

VI I  l.  1  Daniel’s  vision  of  the  ram  and  he-goat.  13
The  two  thousand  three  hundred  days  of  sacrifice.
15  Gabriel  comforts  Daniel,  and  interprets  the
vision.

IX.  1  Daniel  considering  the  time  of  the  captivity,

3  makes  confession  of  sins,  16  and  prays  tor  the
restoration  of  Jerusalem.  20  Gabriel  informs
him  of  the  seventy  weeks.


COMPENDIUM  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.


■X.  1  Daniel  having  humbled  himself,  sees  a  vision.
10  Being  troubled  with  fear,  he  is  comforted  by
the  angel.

XI.  1  The  overthrow  of  Persia  by  the  king  of
Grecia.  5  Leagues  and  conflicts  between  the
kings  of  the  south  and  of  the  north.  30  The
invasion  and  tyranny  of  the  Homans.

XII.  1  Michael  shall  deliver  Israel  from  their
troubles.  5  Daniel  is  informed  of  the  times.


HOSEA.

I.  Hosea,  to  shew  God’s  judgment  for  spiritual
whoredom,  takes  Gomer,  4  and  hath  by  her  Jez-
reel,  6  Lo-ruhamah,  8  and  Lo-ammi.  10  The
restoration  of  Judah  and  Israel.

II.  1  The  idolatry  of  the  people.  6  God’s  judg¬
ments  against  them.  14  IT  is  promises  of  recon¬
ciliation  with  them.

III.  1  By  the  expiation  of  an  adulteress,  4  is  shewn
the  desolation  of  Israel  before  their  restoration.

IV.  1  God’s  judgments  against  the  sins  of  the
people,  ft  and  of  the  priests,  12  and  against
their  idolatry.  15  Judah  is  exhorted  to  take
warning  by  Israel’s  calamity.

V.  1  God’s  judgments  against  the  priests,  the
people,  and  the  princes  of  Israel,  for  their  mani¬
fold  sins,  15  until  they  repent.

VI.  1  An  exhortation  to  repentance.  4  A  complaint
of  their  untowardness  and  iniquity.

VII.  1  A  reproof  of  manifold  sins.  11  God’s  wrath
against  them  for  their  hypocrisy.

VIII.  1,  12  Destruction  is  threatened  for  their  im¬
piety  and  idolatry.

IX.  1  The  distress  and  captivity  of  Israel  for  their
sins  and  idolatry.

X.  Israel  is  reproved  and  threatened  for  their
impiety  and  idolatry.

XI.  1  The  ingratitude  of  Israel  unto  God  for  his
benefits.  5  His  judgment.  8  God’s  mercy  to  them.

XII.  1  A  reproof  of  Ephraim,  Judah,  and  Jacob.
3  By  former  favours  he  exhorts  to  repentance.
7  Ephraim’s  sins  provoke  God.

XIII.  1  Ephraim’s  glory,  by  reason  of  idolatry,
vanisheth.  5  God’s  anger  for  their  unkindness.
9  A  promise  of  God’s  mercy.  15  A  judgment
for  rebellion.

XIV.  1  An  exhortation  to  repentance.  4  A  promise
of  God’s  blessing.


JOEL.

I.  Joel  declaring  sundry  judgments  of  God,  ex¬
horts  to  observe  them,  8  and  to  mourn.  14  He
prescribes  a  fast  for  complaint.

II.  1  He  shews  unto  Zion  the  terribleness  of  God’s
judgment.  12  He  exhorts  to  repentance,  15
prescribes  a  fast,  18  promises  a  blessing  there¬
on.  21  He  comforteth  Zion  with  present,  28  and
future  blessings.

III.  1  God’s  judgments  against  the  enemies  of  his
people.  9  God  will  be  known  in  his  judgment.
18  His  blessing  upon  the  church.

AMOS.

I.  Amos  shews  God’s  judgment  upon  Syria,  6
upon  the  Philistines,  9  upon  Tyrus,  11  upon
Edom,  13  upon  Ammon.

II.  1  God’s  wrath  against  Moab,  4  upon  Judah,  6
and  upon  Israel.  9  God  complains  of  their
unthankfulness.

III.  1  The  necessity  of  God’s  judgment  against
Israel.  9  The  publication  of  it,  with  the  causes
thereof.

IV.  1  He  reproves  Israel  for  oppression,  4  for
idolatry,  6  and  for  their  incorrigibleness.

V.  1  A  lamentation  for  Israel.  4  An  exhortation  to
repentance.  21  God  rejects  their  hypocritical
service.

VI.  1  The  wantonness  of  Israel,  7  shall  be  plagued
with  desolation.  12  and  their  incorrigibleness.


VII.  1  The  judgments  of  the  grasshoppers,  4  and
of  the  fire,  are  diverted  by  the  prayer  of  Amos.
7  By  the  wall  of  a  plumb-line,  is  signified  the
rejection  of  Israel.  10  Amaziah  complains  of
Amos.  14  Amos  shews  his  calling,  16  and  Ama-
ziah’s  judgment.

VIII.  1  By  a  basket  of  summer  fruit,  is  shewn  the
propinquity  of  Israel’s  end.  4  Oppression  is  re¬
proved.  11  A  famine  of  the  word  threatened.

IX.  1  The  certainty  of  the  desolation.  11  The  re¬
storing  of  the  tabernacle  of  David.

OBADIAH.

1  The  destruction  of  Edom,  3  for  their  pride,  10
and  for  their  wrong  unto  Jacob.  17  The  salva¬
tion  and  victory  of  J  acob.

JONAH.

I.  Jonah  sent  to  Nineveh,  flees  to  Tarshish.  4  He
is  bewrayed  by  a  tempest,  11  thrown  into  the
sea,  17  and  swallowed  by  a  fish.

II.  1  The  prayer  of  Jonah.  10  He  is  delivered
from  the  fish.  ,

III.  1  Jonah  sent  again,  preaches  to  the  Ninevites.
5  Upon  their  repentance,  10  God  repents.

I  V.  1  Jonah  repining  at  God’s  mercy,  4  is  reproved
by  the  type  of  a  gourd.

MICAII.

I.  Micah  shews  the  wrath  of  God  against  Jacob  for
idolatry.  10  He  exhorts  to  mourning.

II.  1  Against  oppression.  4  A  lamentation.  7  A
reproof  of  injustice  and  idolatry.  12  A  promise
of  restoring  . I  acob.

II  I.  1  The  cruelty  of  the  princes.  5 The  falsehood
of  the  prophets.  8  The  security  of  them  both.

IV.  1  T  he  glory,  3  peace,  8  kingdom,  11  and  vic¬
tory  ot  the  church.

V.  1  The  birth  of  Christ.  4  His  kingdom.  8  His
conquest.

VI.  1  God’s  controversy  for  unkindness,  6  for
ignorance,  10  for  injustice,  16  and  for  idolatry.

VII.  1  The  church  complaining  of  her  small  num¬
ber,  3  and  the  general  corruption,  5  puts  her
confidence  not  in  man,  but  in  God.  8  She  tri¬
umphs  over  her  enemies.  14  God  comforts  her
by  promises,  16  by  confusion  of  the  enemies,  18
and  by  his  mercies.

NAHUM.

I.  God’s  majesty,  in  goodness  to  his  people,  and
severity  against  his  enemies.

II.  1  The  fearful  and  victorious  armies  of  God
against  Nineveh.

III.  1  The  miserable  ruin  of  Nineveh.

IIABAKKUK.

I.  Unto  Habakkuk,  complaining  of  the  iniquity  of
the  land,  5  is  shewn  the  fearful  vengeance  by
the  Chaldeans.  12  He  complains,  that  vengeance
should  be  executed  by  them  who  are  far  worse.

II.  1  To  Habakkuk,  waiting  for  an  answer,  is
shewn  that  he  must  wait  in  faith.  5  The  judg¬
ment  upon  the  Chaldeans  for  unsatiableness,  9
for  covetousness,  12  for  cruelty,  15  for  drunken¬
ness,  18  and  for  idolatry.

III.  1  Habakkuk,  in  his  prayer,  trembles  at  God’s
majesty'.  17  The  confidence  of  faith.

ZEPIIANI  AH.

I.  God’s  severe  judgment  against  Judah  for  divers
sins.

II.  1  An  exhortation  to  repentance.  4  The  judg¬
ment  of  the  Philistines,  8  of  Moab  and  Ammon,
12  Ethiopia  and  Assyria.

III.  1  A  sharp  reproof  of  Jerusalem  for  divers
sins.  8  An  exhortation  to  wait  for  the  restoration
of  Israel,  14  and  to  rejoice  for  their  salvation  by
God.


HAGGAI.

I.  Haggai  reproves  the  people  for  neglecting  the
building  of  the  house.  J  lie  incites  them  to  the
building.  12  He  promises  God’s  assistance  to
them  being  forward.

II.  1  He  encourages  the  people  to  the  work,  by  pro¬
mise  of  greater  glory  to  the  second  temple,  than
was  in  the  first.  10  In  the  type  of  the  holy  things
and  unclean,  he  shews  their  sins  hindered  the
work.  20  God’s  promise  to  Zerubbabel.

ZECHARIAH.

I.  Zechariah  exhorts  to  repentance.  7  The  vision
of  the  horses.  12  At  the  prayer  of  the  angel,
comfortable  promises  are  made  to  Jerusalem.  18
The  vision  of  the  four  horns,  and  the  four  car¬
penters.

II.  1  God  in  the  care  of  Jerusalem  sends  to  mea¬
sure  it.  6  The  redemption  of  Zion.  10The*pro-
mise  of  God’s  presence.

III.  I  Under  the  type  of  Joshua,  the  restoration
of  the  church  is  promised.  18  Christ  the  Branch
foretold.

IV.  1  By  the  golden  candlestick  is  foreshewn  the
good  success  of  Zerubbabel’s  foundation.  11  By
the  two  olive-trees,  the  two  anointed  ones.

V.  1  By  the  flying  roll,  is  shewn  the  curse  of  thieves
and  swearers.  5  By  a  woman  pressed  in  an
ephah.the  final  damnation  of  Babylon.

VI.  1  The  vision  of  the  four  chariots.  9  By  the
crowns  of  Joshua  is  shewn  the  temple  and  king
dom  of  Christ  the  Branch.

VII.  1  The  captives  inquire  of  fasting.  4  Zecha¬
riah  reproves  their  fasting.  8  Sin  the  cause  of
their  captivity.

VIII.  1  The  restoration  of  Jerusalem.  9  They  are
encouraged  to  the  building  by  God’s  favour  to
them.  16  Good  works  are  required  of  them.  18
Joy  and  enlargement  are  promised.

IX.  1  God  defends  his  church.  9  Zion  is  exhorted
to  rejoice  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  his  peace¬
able  kingdom.  12  God’s  promises  of  victory  and
defence.

X.  1  God  is  to  be  sought  unto,  and  not  idols.  5  As
he  visited  his  flock  for  sin,  so  he  will  save  and
restore  them.

XI.  1  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  3  The  elect
being  cared  for,  the  rest  are  rejected.  10  The
staves  of  Beauty  and  Bands  broken  by  the  re¬
jection  of  Christ.  15  The  type  and  curse  of  a
foolish  shepherd.

XII.  1  Jerusalem  acup  of  fremblingto  herself,  and
a  burdensome  stone  to  her  adversaries.  6  The
victorious  restoring  of  J  udah.  9  The  repentance
of  Jerusalem.

XIII.  1  l  he  fountain  of  purgation  for  Jerusalem,

2  from  idolatry,  and  false  prophecy.  7  The  death
^of  Christ,  and  the  trial  of  a  third  part.

XIV.  1  The  destroyers  of  Jerusalem  destroyed.  4
The  coming  of  Christ,  and  the  graces  of  his  king¬
dom.  12  The  plague  of  Jerusalem’s  enemies.  16
The  remnant  shall  turn  to  the  Lord,  20  and  then-
spoils  shall  be  holy.

MALACHI.

I.  Malachi  complains  of  Israel’s  unkindness,  6  of
their  irreligiousness,  12  and  profaneness.

II.  1  He  sharply  reproves  the  priests  for  neglecting
their  covenant,  11  and  the  people  for  idolatry,  14
for  adultery,  17  and  for  infidelity.

III.  1  Of  the  messenger,  majesty,  and  grace  of
Christ.  7  Of  the  rebellion,  8  sacrilege,  13  and  in¬
fidelity  of  the  people.  16  The  promise  of  blessing
to  them  that  fear  God.

IV.  1  God’s  judgment  on  the  wicked,  2  and  his
blessing  on  the  good.  4  He  exhorts  to  the  study
of  the  law,  5  and  tells  of  Elijah’s  coming,  and
office.


A  COMPLETE


SUMMARY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT;

1

s  GR,

THE  CONTENTS  OF  ALL  THE  CHAPTERS;

TAKEN  FROM  THE  FIRST  EDITION  OF  THE  LAST  TRANSLATION  OF  THE  HOLY  BIBLE

CAREFULLY  COMPARED  WITH,  AND  CORRECTED  BY,  THE  SACRED  TEXT

COL.  II.  16.  LET  THE  WORD  OF  CHRIST  DWELL  IN  YOC  RICHLY.


ST.  MATTHEW.

1  GENEALOGY  of  Christ  from  Abraham  to
Joseph.  18  He  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  :
Ghost,  and  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary ,  when  she  w  as
espoused  to  Joseph.  19  l  he  angel  satisfied  the
misdeeming  thoughts  of  Joseph,  and  interpreted
the  names  of  Christ.  ,  .

II.  1  The  wise  men  from  the  east  are  directed  to
Christ  by  a  star  :  11  they  worship  him,  and  offer
their  presents.  14  Joseph  fleeth  into  Egypt,  with
Jesus  and  his  mother.  16  Herod  slayeth  the
children.  20  Himself  dieth.  23  Christ  is  brought
sack  again  into  Galilee  to  Nazareth.

_A.  1  John  preached  :  his  office,  life,  and  baptism.

7  He  reprehendeth  the  Pharisees,  13  and  baptiz-
eth  Christ  in  Jordan.

IV.  1  Christ  fasteth,  and  is  tempted.  11  The  angels
minister  untohim.  13  He  dwelleth  in  Capernaum,
17  beginueth  to  preach,  18  calleth  Peter  and  An¬
drew,  21  James  and  John,  23  and  healeth  all  the
d  isghsgcI

V.  1  Christ  beginneth  his  sermon  in  the  mount :  3
declaring  who  are  blessed,  13  who  are  the  salt  of
the  earth,  14  the  light  of  the  world,  the  city  on  an
hill :  15  the  candle  :  17  that  he  came  to  fulfil  the
law.  21  What  it  is  to  kill,  27  to  commit  adultery,
33  toswear:  38exhorteth  to  suffer  wrong,  44  to  love
our  enemies,  48  and  to  labour  after  perfectness.

VI.  1  Christ  continued)  his  sermon  in  the  mount,
speaking  of  alms,  5  prayer,  14  forgiving  our
brethren,  16  fasting,  19  where  our  treasure  is  to
be  laid  up,  24  of  serving  God  and  mammon  :  25
exnorteth  not  to  be  careful  for  worldly  things ;
33  but  to  seek  God’s  kingdom.

VII.  1  Christ  endeth  his  sermon  in  the  mount,  re-
proveth  rash  judgment,  6  forbiddeth  to  cast  holy
things  to  dogs,  7  exhorteth  to  prayer,  13  to  enter  in
at  the  strait  gate,  15  to  beware  of  false  prophets,  21
not  to  be  hearers,  but  doers  of  the  word  :  24  like
houses  built  on  a  rock,  26  and  not  on  the  sand.

VII I.  2.  Christ  cleanseth  the  leper.  5  healeth  the
centurion’s  servant,  14  Peter’s  mother-in-law,  16
and  many  other  diseased  :  18  shews  how  he  is  to
be  followed  :  23  stilleth  the  tempest  at  sea,  28
driveth  the  devils  out  of  two  men  possessed,  31
and  sufifereth  them  to  go  into  the  swine.

IX.  2  Christ  curing  one  sick  of  the  palsy,  9  calls
Matthew  from  the  receipt  of  custom,  10  eats  with
publicans  and  sinners,  14  defends  his  disciples  for
not  fasting,  20  cureth  the  bloody  issue,  23  raiseth
Jairus’s  daughter,  27  giveth  sight  to  two  blind  men,
32  heals  a  dumb  man  possessed  of  a  devil,  36
and  hath  compassion  on  the  multitude.

X.  1  Christ  sends  out  his  twelve  apostles  with  power
to  do  miracles,  5  giveth  them  their  charge,  teaches,
16  and  comforts  them  against  persecutions,  40  and
promises  a  blessing  to  those  that  receive  them.

XI.  2  John  sends  his  disciples  to  Christ.  7  Christ’s
testimony  concerning  John  18  The  opinion  of  the
people,  both  concerning  John  and  Christ.  20
Christ  upbraids  the  ingratitude  and  impenitence
of  Chorazin,  Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum  :  25  and
praising  his  Father’s  wisdom  in  revealing  the
gospel  to  the  simple,  28  he  calls  to  him  all  such
as  feel  the  burden  of  their  sins.

XII.  1  Christ  reproves  the  blindness  of  the  Phari¬
sees  concerning  the  breach  of  the  sabbath,  3  by
Scripture,  10  by  reason,  13  and  by  a  miracle.  22
He  healeth  the  man  possessed  that  was  blind  and
dumb.  1.3  Blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghostshal  I
never  be  forgiven.  36  Account  shall  be  made  of
idle  words.  38  He  rebuketh  the  unfaithful,  who
seek  after  a  sign,  49  and  shews  who  is  his  brother,
sister,  and  mother.

XI I I.  3  The  parable  of  the  sower  and  the  seed  :  18
the  exposition  of  it.  24  The  parable  of  the  tares,
31  of  the  mustard-seed,  33  of  the  leaven,  44  of
the  hidden  treasure,  15  of  the  pearl,  47  of  the
draw-net  cagt  into  the  sea :  53  and  how  Christ  is
contemned  of  his  own  <  ;untrymen.


XIV.  1  Herod’s  opinion  of  Christ.  3  Wherefore  John
Baptist  was  beheaded.  13  Jesus  departeth  into  a
desert  place  :  15  where  he  feedeth  five  thousand
men  with  five  loaves  and  two  fishes.  22  He  walk-
eth  on  the  sea  to  his  disciples  :  34  and  landing  at
Gennesaret,  healeth  the  sick  by  the  touch  of  the
hem  of  his  garment.

XV.  3  Christ  reproves  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  for
transgressing  God’s  commandments  through  their
own  traditions  ;  11  teaches  how  that  which  goeth
into  the  mouth  doth  not  defile  a  man.  21  He  heal¬
eth  the  daughter  of  the  woman  of  Canaan,  30  and
other  great  multitudes  :  32  and  with  seven  loaves
and  a  few  little  fishes  feedeth  four  thousand  men,
besides  women  and  children.

XVI.  1  The  Pharisees  require  a  sign.  6  Jesus  warns
his  disciples  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and
Sadducees.  13 The  people’s  opinion  of  Christ,  16
and  Peter’s  confession  of  him.  21  Jesus  foreshew-
eth  his  death,  23  reproving  Peter  for  dissuading
him  from  it,  24  and  admonishes  those  that  will
follow  him  to  bear  the  cross.

XVII.  1  The  transfiguration  of  Christ.  14  He  heals
the  lunatic,  22  foretells  his  own  passion,  24  and
pays  tribute.

XVII I.  1  Christ  warns  his  disciples  to  be  humble
and  harmless,  7  to  avoid  offences,  and  not  to  de¬
spise  the  little  ones  :  15  teaches  how  we  are  to
deal  with  our  brethren  when  they  offend  us,  21
and  how  oft  to  forgive  them  ;  23  which  he  sets
forth  by  a  parable  of  the  king,  that  took  account
of  his  servants,  32  and  punished  him  who  shewed
no  mercy  to  his  fellow.

XIX.  2  Christ  heals  the  sick:  3  answers  the  Phari¬
sees  concerning  divorcement  :  lOshews  when  mar¬
riage  is  necessarj’ :  13  receives  little  children  :  16
insti  uc.ts  the  young  man  how  to  attain  eternal  life,
20  and  howto  be  perfect:  23  telleth  his  disciples
how  hard  it  is  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the
kingdom  of  God  :  27  and  promises  reward  to  those
that  forsake  any  thing  to  follow  him.

XX.  1  Christ  by  the  similitude  of  the  labourers  in
the  vineyard,  shews  that  God  is  debtor  to  no
man  :  17  foretells  his  passion  :  20  by  answering
the  mother  of  Zebedee’s  children,  teaches  his
disciples  to  be  lowly  :  30  and  giveth  two  blind
men  their  sight.

XXI.  1  Christ  rides  into  Jerusalem  upon  an  ass :  12
drives  the  buyers  and  sellers outof  the  temple  :  17
curses  the  fig-tree  :  23  silences  the  priests  and
elders,  28  and  rebuketh  them  by  the  similitude
of  the  two  sons,  33  and  the  husbandmen  who  slew
such  as  were  sent  unto  them.

XXI I .  1  The  parable  of  the  marriage  of  the  king’s
son.  9  The  vocation  of  the  Gentiles.  12  The
punishment  of  him  that  wanted  the  wedding  gar¬
ment.  15  Tribute  ought  to  be  paid  to  Caesar.  23
Christ  confutes  the  Sadducees  concerning  the  re¬
surrection  :  34  answers  the  lawyer,  which  is  the
great  commandment :  41  and  poseth  the  Phari¬
sees  about  the  Messias.

XXI II.  1  Christ  admonishes  the  people  to  follow
the  good  doctrine,  not  the  evil  examples,  of  the
Scribes  and  Pharisees:  5 his  disciples  must  be¬
ware  of  their  ambition.  13  He  denounces  eight
woes  against  their  hypocrisy  and  blindness  ;  34
and  foretells  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.

XXIV.  1  Christ  foretells  the  destruction  of  the  tem¬

ple.  3  What  and  how  great  calamities  shall  be
before  it.  29  The  signs  of  his  coming  to  judg¬
ment  :  36  and  because  that  day  and  hour  is  un¬
known,  42  we  ought  to  watch,  like  good  ser¬
vants,  expecting  every  moment  our  master  s
coming.  ,  .  .  _ .  ,

XXV.  1  the  parable  of  the  ten  virgins,  14  and

of  the  talents.  31  Also  the  description  of  the
last  judgment.  .  .

XXVI.  1  The  -ulers  conspire  against  C  hrist.  7  1  he
woman  anoints  his  head.  14  Judas  sells  him.  17
Christ  eats  the  passover :  26  institutes  his  holy  sup¬
per:  36  prays  in  the  garden:  47  and,  being  be¬


trayed  with  a  kiss,  57  is  carried  to  Caiaphas,  69
and  denied  of  Peter.

XXVII.  1  Christ  isdelivered  bound  to  Pilate.  5
Judas  hangs  himself.  19  Pilate  admonished  of
his  wife,  24  washeth  his  hands,  26  and  loosed
Barabbas.  29  Christ  is  crowned  with  thorns,  35
crucified,  40  reviled,  50  dieth,  and  is  buried,  t
His  sepulchre  is  sealed,  and  watched.

XXVI 1 1.  l  Christ’s  resurrection  is  declared  by  an
angel  to  the  women.  9  He  himself  appears  to
them.  11  The  high  priests  give  the  soldiers
money  to  say  that  he  was  stolen  outof  his  sepul¬
chre.  16  Christ  appears  to  his  disciples  ;  19  and
sends  them  to  baptize  and  teach  all  nations.

ST.  MARK.

I.  Office  of  John  Baptist.  9  Jesus  is  baptized,  12’
tempted  :  14  he  preacheth  :  16  calls  Peter,  An¬
drew,  James,  and  John  :  23  heals  one  that  had  a
devil,  29  Peter’s  mother-in  law,  .32  many  dis
eased  persons,  41  and  cleanseth  a  leper.

II.  3  Christ  heals  one  sick  of  the  palsy,  14  calls
Matthew  from  the  receipt  of  custom,  15  eats  with
publicans  and  sinners,  18  excuses  his  disciples
for  not  fasting,  23  and  for  plucking  the  ears  of
corn  on  the  sabbath-day.

III.  1  Christ  heals  the  withered  hand,  10  and
many  other  infirmities  :  11  rebukes  the  unclean
spirits  :  13  chooses  his  twelve  apostles  :  22  con¬
vinces  the  blasphemy  of  casting  out  devils  by
Beelzebub :  31  and  shews  who  are  his  brother,
sister,  and  mother.

IV.  1  The  parable  of  the  sower,  14  and  the  mean¬
ing  thereof.  21  We  must  communicate  the  light
of  our  knowledge  to  others.  26  The  parable  of
the  seed  growing  secretly,  30  and  of  the  mustard
seed.  35  Christ  stills  the  tempest  on  the  sea.

V.  1  Christ  delivering  the  possessed  of  the  legion
of  devils,  13  the}’  enter  into  the  swine.  25  He-
heals  the  woman  of  a  bloody  issue,  35  and  rais¬
eth  from  death  Jairus’s  daughter.

VI.  1  Christ  is  contemned  of  his  countrymen.  7
lie  sives  the  twelve  power  over  unclean  spirits.
14  Divers  opinions  of  Christ.  18  John  Baptist’
is  beheaded,  29  and  buried.  30  The  apostles
return  from  preaching.  34  The  miracle  of  fivt
ioaves  and  two  fishe3.  48  Christ  walks  on  the
sea  :  53  and  heals  all  that  touch  him.

VI I.  1  The  Pharisees  find  fault  at  the  disciples  for

eating  with  unwashen  hands.  8  They  break  the
commandment  of  God  by  the  traditions  of  men.
14  Meat  defileth  not  the  man.  24  He  healeth  the
Sy  rophcenician  woman’s  daughter  of  an  unclean
spirit,  31  and  one  that  was  deaf,  and  stammered
in  his  speech.  .

VIII.  1  Christ  feeds  the  people  miraculously  :  10
refuseth  to  give  a  sign  to  the  Pharisees  :  14  ad¬
monishes  his  disciples  to  beware  of  the  leaven  of
the  Pharisees,  anci  of  the  leaven  of  Herod  :  22'
gives  a  blind  man  his  sight :  17  acknowledged
that  he  is  the  Christ,  who  should  suffer  and  rise
again  :  34  and  exhorts  to  patience  in  persecution,
for  the  profession  of  the  gospel.

IX.  2  Jesus  is  transfigured.  11  He  instructed
his  disciples  concerning  the  coming  of  Elias  :  13
casteth  forth  a  dumb  and  deaf  spirit :  30  fore-
telleth  his  death  and  resurrection  :  3.3  exhorts  his
disciples  to  humility  :  38  bids  them  not  to  pro¬
hibit  such  as  be  not  against  them,  nor  to  give  of¬
fence  to  anv  of  the  faithful.

X.  2  Christ  disputes  with  the  Pharisees  touching

divorcement :  13  blesseth  the  children  that  are

brought  to  him  :  17  resolved  a  rich  man  how  he
may  inherit  life  everlasting  :  23  tells  his  disciples
of  the  danger  of  riches  :  28  promises  rewards  to
them  that  forsake  any  thing  for  the  gospel  :  32
foretells  his  death  and  resurrection  :  35  bids  the
two  ambitious  suitors  to  think  rather  of  suffering
with  him  :  46  and  restores  to  Bartimeus  his  sight

XI.  Christ  rides  with  triumph  into  Jerusalem:

I  12  curses  the  fruitless  fig-tree  :  15  purges  th*


SUMMARY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.


temple;  20  exhorts  his  disciples  to  stedfastness
of  faith,  and  to  forgive  their  enemies;  27  and
defends  the  lawfulness  of  his  actions,  by  the
witness  of  John,  who  was  a  man  sent  of  God.

XII.  1  In  a  parable  of  the  vineyard  let  out  to  un¬
thankful  husbandmen,  Christ  fo-etelleth  the  re¬
probation  of  the  Jews,  and  the  calling  of  the  Gen¬
tiles.  13  He  avoids  the  snare  of  the  Pharisees  and
Herodians  about  paying  tribute  to  Ctesar  :  18  con¬
vinces  the  error  of  the  Sadducees,  who  denied  the
resurrection  :  28  resolves  the  scribe  who  question¬
ed  of  the  first  commandment :  35  refutes  the  opin¬
ion  that  the  scribes  held  of  Christ :  38  bidding
the  people  to  beware  of  their  ambition  and  hypo¬
crisy  :  41  and  commends  the  poor  widow  for  her
two  mites,  above  all.

XIII.  1  Christ  foretells  the  destruction  of  the  tem¬
ple  :  9  the  persecutions  for  the  gospel :  10  that  the
gospel  must  be  preached  to  all  nations:  14  that
great  calamities  shall  happen  to  the  Jews:  24
and  the  manner  of  his  coming  to  judgment.  32
The  hour  whereof  being  know  n  to  none,  every
man  is  to  watch  and  pray,  that  we  be  not  found
unprovided,  when  he  cometh  to  each  one  parti¬
cularly  by  death.

XIV.  1  A  conspiracy  against  Christ.  3  Precious
ointment  is  poured  on  his  head  by  a  woman.  10
Judas  sells  his  master  for  money.  12  Christ  him¬
self  foretells  how  he  shall  be  betrayed  of  one  of
his  disciples  :  22  after  the  passover  prepared,  and
eaten,  institutes  his  supper  :  26  foretells  the  flight
of  all  his  disciples,  and  Peter’s  denial.  43  Judas
betrayeth  him  with  a  kiss.  46  He  is  apprehended
in  the  garden,  55  falsely  accused,  and  impiously
condemned  of  the  Jews’  council,  65  shamefully
abused  by  them,  66  and  thrice  denied  of  Peter.

XV.  1  Jesus  brought  bound,  and  accused  before
Pilate.  15  U pon  the  clamour  of  the  common  peo¬
ple,  the  murderer  Barabbas  is  loosed,  and  Jesus
delivered  up  to  be  crucified.  17  He  is  crowned
with  thorns,  19  spit  on,  and  moc  ked  :  21  faint-
eth  in  healing  his  cross  :  27  hangeth  between
two  thieves :  29  suffered)  the  triumphing  re¬
proaches  of  the  Jews:  39  but  confessed  by  the
centurion  to  be  the  Son  of  God  :  43  and  is  honour¬
ably  buried  by  Joseph.

XVI.  1  An  angel  declares  the  resurrection  of  Christ
to  three  women.  9  Christ  himself  appears  to
Mary  Magdalene :  12  to  two  going  into  the
country  :  14  then  to  the  apostles,  15  whom  he
sendeth  forth  to  preach  the  gospel :  19  and  as¬
cends  into  heaven.

ST.  LUKE.

I.  The  preface  of  Luke  to  his  whole  gospel.  5  The
conception  of  John  Baptist,  26  and  of  Christ.  39
The  prophecy  of  F.lisabeth,  and  of  Mary,  con¬
cerning  Christ.  57  The  nativity  and  circumcision
of  John.  67  The  prophecy  of  Zacharias,  both  of
Christ,  76  and  of  John.

II.  1  Augustus  taxetli  all  the  Homan  empire.  6  The
nativity  of  Christ.  8  One  angel  relateth  it  to  the
shepherds  :  1.3  many  sing  praises  to  God  for  it.  21
Christ  is  circumcised.  22  Mary  purified.  28  Si¬
meon  and  Anna  prophesy  of  Christ :  40  who  in-
creaseth  in  wisdom,  46  questioneth  in  the  temple
with  the  doctors,  51  and  is  obedient  to  his  pa¬
rents.

III.  1  The  preaching  and  baptism  of  John.  15  His
testimony  of  Christ.  20  Herod  imprisoned)  John.
21  Christ  baptized,  receives  testimony  from  hea¬
ven.  23  The  age  and  genealogy  of  Christ,  from
Joseph  upwards.

IV.  1  The  temptation  and  fasting  of  Christ.  13  He
overcomes  the  devil  :  14  begins  to  preach.  16  The
people  of  Nazareth  admire  his  gracious  words.  33
He  cures  one  possessed  of  a  devil,  38  Peter’s  mo¬
ther-in-law,  4()  and  divers  other  sick  persons.  41
The  devils  acknowledge  Christ,  and  are  reproved
for  it.  43  He  preaches  through  the  cities.

V.  1  Christ  teaches  the  people  out  of  Peter’s  ship  :
4  in  a  miraculous  taking  of  fishes,  shews  how  he
will  make  him  and  his  partners  fishers  of  men  :  12
cleanseth  the  leper:  16  prays  in  the  wilderness  :
18  heals  one  sick  of  the  palsy  :  27  calls  Matthew
the  publican  :  29  eats  with  sinners,  as  being  the
physician  of  souls;  34  foretells  the  fastings  and
afflictions  of  the  apostles  after  his  ascension:  36
and  likens  faint-hearted  and  weak  disciples  to  worn
garments  and  old  bottles.

VI.  1  Christ  reproves  the  Pharisees’  blindness  about
the  observation  of  the  sabbath,  by  scripture,  rea¬
son,  and  miracle:  13  ehooseth  twelve  apostles:  17
heals  the  diseased :  20  preacheth  to  his  disciples
before  the  people,  of  blessings  and  curses :  27  how
we  must  love  our  enemies;  46  and  join  the  obe¬
dience  of  good  works  to  the  hearing  of  the  word,
test  in  the  evil  day  of  temptation  we  fall  like  an
house  built  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  without
any  foundation.

VII.  1  Christ  finds  a  greater  faith  in  the  centurion,
a  Gentile,  than  in  any  of  the  Jews:  10  heals  his
servant  being  absent :  11  raiseth  from  death  the
widow’s  son  at  Nain :  19  answers  John’s  messen¬
gers  with  the  declaration  of  his  miracles:  24  tes¬
tifies  to  the  people  what  opinion  he  held  of  John  :
30  inveighs  against  the  Jews,  who  with  neithei
the  manners  of  John  nor  of  Jesus  could  be  won
36  and  shews  by  occasion  of  Mary  Magdalene  how
he  is  a  friend  of  sinners,  not  to  maintain  them  in
sins,  but  to  forgive  them  their  sins  upon  their  faith
and  repentance.

VIII.  1  Women  minister  to  Christ  of  their  sub¬
stance.  4  Christ,  after  he  had  preached  from
place  to  place,  attended  with  his  apostles,  pro
pounds  the  parable  of  the  sower,  16  and  of  the
candle :  21  declares  who  are  his  mother  and
brethren :  22  rebukes  the  wind :  26  casteth  the
legion  of  devils  out  of  the  man,  into  the  herd  of
swine:  37  is  rejected  of  the  Gadarenes :  43  heals
the  woman  of  her  bloody  issue  :  49  and  raises  from
death  Jairus’s  daughter.

716


IX.  1  Christ  sends  his  apostles  to  work  miracles,
and  to  preach.  7  Herod  desireth  to  see  Christ.

17  Christ  feeds  five  thousand  :  18  inquireth  what
opinion  the  world  had  of  him  :  21  foretells  his
passion :  23  proposes  to  all  the  pattern  of  his  pa¬
tience.  28  The  transfiguration.  37  He  heals  the
lunatic:  43  again  forewarns  his  disciples  of  his
passion  :  46  commends  humility  :  51  bids  them
to  shew  mildness  towards  all,  without  desire  of
revenge.  57  Divers  would  follow  him  but  upon
conditions.

X.  1  Christ  sends  out  at  once  seventy  disciples  to
work  miracles,  and  to  preach  :  17  admonishes
them  to  be  humble,  and  wherein  to  rejoice  :  21
thanks  his  Father  for  his  grace  :  23  magnifies  the
happy  estate  of  his  church  :  25  teaches  the  lawyer
what  the  law  requires  to  attain  eternal  life,  and  to
take  every  one  for  his  neighbour,  that  needeth  his
mercy.  41  Reprehends  Martha,  and  commends
Mary  her  sister.

XI.  1  Christ  teaches  to  pray,  and  that  instantly  :
11  assuring  that  God  so  will  give  us  good  things.
14  He  casting  out  a  dumb  devil,  rebukes  the
blasphemous  Pharisees  :  28  shews  who  are  bless¬
ed  :  29  preaches  to  the  people,  37  and  repre¬
hends  the  outward  shew  of  holiness  in  the  Pha¬
risees,  scribes,  and  lawyers.

XII.  1  Christ  preaches  to  his  disciples  to  avoid  hy¬
pocrisy, and  iearfulnessin  publishing hisdoctrine:
13  warns  the  people  to  beware  of  covetousness,  by
the  parable  of  the  rich  man,  who  set  up  greater
barns.  22Take  no  thought  for  your  life •;  31  but
seek  the  kingdom  of  God,  33  give  alms,  36  be
ready  at  a  knock  to  open  to  our  Lord,  whensoever
he  cometh.  41  Christ’s  ministers  are  to  see  to  their
charge,  49  and  look  for  persecution.  54  Take  this
time  of  grace,  58  because  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to
die  without  reconciliation.

X  III.  1  Christ  preacheth  repentance  upon  the  pun¬
ishment  of  the  Galileans,  and  others.  6  The  fruit¬
less  fig-tree  may  not  stand.  11  He  healeth  the
crooked  woman  :  18  shews  the  powerful  working
of  the  word  in  the  hearts  of  his  chosen,  by  the
parable  of  the  grain  of  mustard-seed,  and  of
leaven  :  24  exhorts  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,

31  and  reproveth  Herod  and  Jerusalem.

XIV.  2  Christ  heals  the  dropsy  on  the  sabbath  :  7
teaches  humility  :  12  to  feast  the  poor  :  16  Under
the  parable  of  the  great  supper,  sheweth  how
worldly-minded  men,  who  contemn  the  word  of
God,  shall  be  shut  out  of  heaven.  25  Those  who
will  be  his  disciples,  to  bear  their  cross,  are  ad¬
vised  to  count  the  cost,  lest  with  shame  they  revolt
from  him  afterward,  34  and  become  altogether
unprofitable,  like  salt  that  has  lost  its  savour.

XV.  1  The  parable  of  the  lost  sheep ;  8  of  the  piece
of  silver  ;  11  of  the  prodigal  son.

XVI.  1  The  parable  of  the  unjust  steward.  14
Christ  reproves  the  hypocrisy  of  the  covetous  Pha¬
risees.  19  Dives  and  Lazarus.

XVII.  1  Christ  teaches  to  avoid  occasion  of  offence.
3  One  to  forgive  another.  6  The  power  of  faith.  7
How  we  are  bound  to  God,  and  not  he  to  us.  1 1
He  heals  ten  lepers.  22  Of  the  kingdom  of  God,
and  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man.

XVIII.  1  Of  the  importunate  widow  :  9  of  the  Pha¬
risee  and  publican.  15  Children  broughtto  Christ.

18  A  ruler  that  would  follow  Christ,  but  is  hin¬
dered  by  his  riches.  28  The  reward  of  them  that
leave  all  for  his  sake.  31  He  foretells  his  death,

35  and  restores  a  blind  man  to  his  sight.

XIX.  1  Of  Zaccheus  a  publican.  11  1  he  ten  pieces
of  money.  28  Christ  rides  into  Jerusalem  with
triumph  :  41  weeps  over  it :  45  drives  the  buyers
and  sellers  out  of  the  temple  :  47  teaching  daily
in  it.  '1  he  rulers  would  have  destroyed  him,  but
for  fear  of  the  people.

XX.  1  Christ  asserts  his  authority  by  a  question  of
John’s  baptism.  9  The  parable  of  the  vineyard.

19  Of  giving  tribute  to  Cccsar.  27  He  convinces
the  Sadducees  that  denied  the  resurrection.  41
flow  Christ  is  the  son  of  David  :  45  He  warns
his  disciples  to  beware  of  the  scribes.

XXI.  1  Christ  commends  the  poor  widow.  5  He
foretells  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and  city
of  Jerusalem:  25  the  signs  also  that  shall  be
before  the  last  day.  34  He  exhorts  them  to  be
watchful.

XXII.  1  The  .Tews  conspire  against  Christ.  3  Satan
prepares  J  udas  to  betray  him.  7  The  apostles  sent
to  prepare  the  passover.  19  Christ  institutes  his
holy  supper  :  21  covertly  foretells  of  the  traitor  :
24  dehorts  the  rest  of  his  apostles  from  ambition  :

32  assures  Peter  his  faith  should  not  fail,  34  and
yet  hp  should  deny  him  thrice.  39  He  prays  on
the  mount,  «nd  sweats  blood  :  47  is  betrayed  with
a  kiss.  50  He  heals  Malchus’s  ear.  54  He  is  thrice
denied  of  Peter,  63  shamefully  abused,  66  and
confesses  himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God.

XXII 1.  1  Jesus  is  accused  Lielore  Pilate,  and  sent
to  Herod.  8  Herod  mocks  him.  12  Herod  and
Pilate  are  made  friends.  18  Barabbas  is  desired
of  the  people,  and  is  loosed  by  Pilate,  and  Jesus
given  to  be  crucified.  27  He  tells  the  women  that
lament  him,  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  :  34
Prayeth  for  his  enemies.  39  Two  thieves  are  cru¬
cified  with  him.  46  His  death.  50  His  burial.

XXIV.  1  Christ's  resurrection  is  declared  by  two
angels,  to  the  women  that  came  to  the  sepulchre.
9  These  report  it  to  others.  13  Christ  himself
appears  to  the  two  disciples  that  went  to  Emmaus.

36  Afterwards  he  appears  to  the  apostles,  and  re¬
proves  their  unbelief :  47  gives  them  a  charge  :
49  promises  the  Holy  Ghost:  51  and  so  ascends
into  heaven.

ST.  JOHN.

I.  The  divinity,  humanity,  and  office  of  Christ.  15
The  testimony  of  John.  38  The  calling  of  An¬
drew,  Peter,  &c.

II.  1  Christ  turns  water  into  wine,  12  departs  into
Capernaum,  and  to  Jerusalem,  14  where  he


purges  the  temple  of  buyers  and  sellers.  19  He
foretells  his  death  and  resurrection.  23  Many  be¬
lieved  because  of  his  miracles,  but  he  would  not
trust  himself  with  them.

III.  1  Christ  teaches  N icodemus  the  necessity  of
regeneration  :  14  of  faith  in  his  death.  16  The
great  loveof  God  towards  the  world.  18  Condem¬
nation  for  unbelief.  23  I  he  baptism,  witness,  and
doctrine  of  John  concerning  Christ.

IV.  1  Christ  talks  with  a  woman  of  Samaria,  and
reveals  himself  unto  her.  27  His  disciples  marvel
31  He  declares  to  them  his  zeal  to  God’s  glory.  39
Many  Samaritans  believe  on  him.  43  He  departs
into  Galilee,  and  heals  the  ruler’s  son  that  lay  sick
at  Capernaum.

V.  1  Jesus  on  the  saljbath-day  cures  him  that
was  diseased  eight-and-thirty  years.  10  The
Jews  therefore  cavil  and  persecute  him  for  it.

17  He  answers  for  himself,  and  reproves  them,
shewing  by  the  testimony  of  his  Father,  32  of
John,  36  or  his  works,  39  and  of  the  Scriptures,
who  he  is.

VI.  1  Christ  feedeth  five  thousand  men  with  five
loaves  and  two  fishes.  15  Thereupon  the  people
would  have  made  him  king.  16  But  withdrawing
himself,  he  walked  on  the  sea  to  his  disciples  :  26
reproves  the  people  Hocking  after  him,  and  all
the  fleshly  hearers  of  his  word  :  .32  declares  him¬
self  to  be  the  bread  of  life  to  believers.  66  Many
disciples  depart  from  him.  68  Peter  confesseth
him.  70  Judas  is  a  devil.

VII.  1  Jesus  reproved  the  ambition  and  boldness  of
his  kinsmen  :  10  goes  up  from  Galilee  to  the  feast
of  tabernacles:  14  teaches  in  the  temple.  40
Divers  opinions  of  him  among  the  people.  45
The  Pharisees  are  angry  that  their  officers  took
him  not,  and  chide  N  icodemus  for  taking  his  part.

VIII.  1  Christ  delivers  the  woman  taken  in  adul¬
tery  :  12  he  preaches  himself  the  light  of  the  world,
and  justified)  his  doctrine  ;  3.3  answers  the  Jews
that  boasted  of  Abraham,  59  and  conveys  himself
from  their  cruelty.

IX.  1  The  man  that  was  born  blind  restored  to  sight.
8  He  is  brought  to  the  Pharisees.  16  I  hey  are
offended  at  it,  and  34  excommunicate  him  :  35
but  he  is  received  of  Jesus,  and  contesseth  him.
39  Who  they  are  whom  Christ  enlighteneth.

X.  1  Christ  is  the  door  and  the  good  shepherd :  19
divers  opinions  of  him  :  25  he  proves,  by  his
works,  that  he  is  Christ  the  Son  of  God  :  39  escapes
the  Jews,  40  and  weit  again  beyond  Joidan,
where  manv  believed  on  him.

XI.  1  Christ  raises  Lazarus  four  days  buried.  45
Many  Jewsfielieve.  47  The  chief  priests  and  Pha¬
risees  gather  a  council  against  Christ.  49  Caiaphas
prophesies.  54  Jesus  hid  himself.  55  At  the  pass-
over  they  inquire  after  him,  and  lay  wait  for  him.

XII.  1  Jesus  excuses  Mary  anointing  his  feet.  9
The  people  flock  to  see  Lazarus.  10  The  chief
priests  consult  to  kill  him.  12  Christ  rideth  into
Jerusalem.  20  Greeks  desire  to  see  Jesus.  23. He
foretells  his  death.  37  The  Jews  are  generally
blinded  :  42  yet  many  chief  rulers  believe,  but
not  confess  him  :  44  therefore  Jesus  calls  earnestly
for  confession  of  faith.

XIII.  1  Jesus  washes  the  disciples’  feet :  14  exhorts
them  to  humility  and  charity.  18  He  foretells  and
discovers  to  John  by  a  token,  that  Judas  should
betray  him :  31  commands  them  to  love  one
an.other,  36  and  forewarns  Peter  of  his  denial.

XI V.  1  Christ  con) forts  his  disciples  with  the  hope
of  heaven  :  6  professes  himself  the  way,  the  truth,
and  the  life  ;  and  one  with  the  Father  :  13  assures
their  prayers  in  his  name  to  be  effectual  :  15  re¬
quests  love  and  obedience  :  16  promises  the  Holy
Ghost  the  Comforter :  27  and  leaves  his  peace  with
them.

XV.  l  The  consolation  and  mutual  love  between
Christ  and  his  members,  under  the  parable  of  the
vine.  18  A  comfort  in  the  hatred  and  persecution
of  the  world.  26  The  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  of  the  apostles.

XVI.  1  Christ  comforts  his  disciples  against  tribu¬
lation,  by  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by
his  resurrection  and  ascension  ;  23  assures  their

rayers  made  in  his  name  to  be  acceptable  to  his
ather.  33  Peace  in  Christ,  and  in  the  world
affliction.

XVII.  1  Christ  prays  to  his  Father  to  glorify  him  :
6  to  preserve  his  apostles,  11  in  unity,  17  and
truth  :  20  to  glorify  them,  and  all  other  believers
with  him,  in  heaven.

XVIII.  1  Judas  betrays  Jesus.  6  The  officers  fall
to  the  ground.  10  Peter  smites  off  Malchus’s
ear.  12  Jesus  is  taken  and  led  unto  Annas  and
Caiaphas.  15  Peter’s  denial.  19  Jesus  examin¬
ed  before  Caiaphas.  28  His  arraignment  before
Pilate.  36  His  kingdom.  40  The  Jews  ask
Barabbas  to  be  set  loose.

XIX.  1  Christ  is  scourged,  crowned  with  thorns,
and  beaten.  4  Pilate  is  desirous  to  release  him,  but
being  overcome  with  the  outrage  of  the  Jews,  he
delivered  him  to  be  crucified.  23  T  hey  cast  lots
for  his  garments.  26  He  commendeth  his  mother
to  John.  28  He  dieth.  31  His  side  is  pierced.
38  He  is  buried  by  Joseph  and  N  icodemus.

XX.  1  Mary  comes  to  the  sepulchre  :  3  so  do  Peter
and  John,  ignorant  of  the  resurrection.  11  Jesus
appears  to  Mary  Magdalene,  19  and  to  his  disci¬
ples.  94  The  incredulity  and  confession  of  Tho¬
mas.  30  The  Scripture  is  sufficient  to  salvation.

XXI.  1  Christ  appearing  again  to  his  disciples,
was  known  of  them  by  the  great  draught  of
fishes.  12  He  dineth  with  them  ;  15  earnestly
commanded)  Peter  to  feed  his  lambs  and  sheep;

18  foretells  him  of  his  death  ;  22  rebukes  his
curiosity  touching  John.  25  The  conclusion.

ACTS.

I.  Christ  preparing  his  apostles  to  behold  his
ascension,  gathers  them  together  intq  the  mount
Olivet,  commands  them  to  expect  ill  Jerusalem


SLMMARY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.


the  sending  down  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  promises
after  few  days  to  send  it ;  by  virtue  whereof  they
should  be  witnesses  unto  him,  even  to  the  utmost
parts  of  the  earth.  9  After  his  ascension  they  are
warned  by  two  angels  to  depart,  and  to  set  their
minds  upon  his  second  coming.  1C  I  hey  accord¬
ingly  return,  and  giving  themselves  to  prayer,
choose  Matthias  apostle  in  the  place  of  Judas.

II.  1  The  apostles  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
speaking  divers  languages,  are  admired  by  some,
and  derided  by  others.  14  Whom  Peter  disprov¬
ing,  and  shewing  that  the  apostles  spake  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  Jesus  was  risen
trom  the  dead,  ascended  into  heaven,  had  poured
down  the  same  Holy  Ghost,  and  was  the  Messias,
a  man  known  to  them  to  be  approved  of  God,  by
his  miracles,  wonders,  and  signs,  and  not  crucified
without  his  determinate  counsel  and  foreknow¬
ledge  :  37  he  baptizeth  a  great  number  that
were  converted,  14  who  afterwards  devoutly
and  charitably  converse  together:  the  apostles
working  many  miracles,  and  God  daily  increas¬
ing  his  church.

III.  1  Peter  preacheth  to  the  people  that  came  to
see  a  lame  man  restored  to  his  feet,  12  and  pro¬
fesses  the  cure  not  to  have  been  wrought  by  his
or  John’s  own  power,  or  holiness,  but  b)'  God,
and  his  Son  Jesus,  and  through  faith  in  his  name  :

13  withal  reprehending  them  for  crucifying  Jesus.

17  Which  because  they  did  it  through  ignorance,
and  that  thereby  were  fulfilled  God’s  determinate
counsel,  and  the  Scriptures,  19  he  exhorts  them
by  repentance  and  faith  to  seek  remission  of  their
sins,  and  salvation  in  the  same  Jesus.

IV.  1  The  rulers  of  the  Jews,  offended  with  Peter’s
sermon,  4  (though  thousands  of  the  people  were
converted  that  heard  the  word,)  imprison  him  and
John.  5  After,  upon  examination,  Peter  boldly
avouching  the  lame  man  to  be  healed  by  the
name  of  Jesus,  and  that  by  the  same  Jesus'only
we  must  be  eternally  saved,  13  they  commanded
him  and  John  to  preach  no  more  in  that  name,
adding  threatenings  also.  23  Whereupon  the
church  goes  to  prayer:  31  and  God,  by  moving
the  place  where  they  were  assembled,  testified
that  he  heard  their  prayer,  confirming  the  church
with  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  mutual
love  and  charity.

V.  1  After  that  Ananias  and  Sapphira  his  wife,
for  their  hypocrisy,  at  Peter’s  rebuke,  had  fallen
down  dead,  12  and  that  the  rest  of  the  apostles
had  wrought  many  miracles;  14  to  the  increase
of  the  faith:  1“  the  apostles  are  again  imprison¬
ed,  19  but  delivered  by  an  angel,  bidding  them  to
preach  openly  to  all.  21  When,  after  their  teach¬
ing  accordingly  in  the  temple,  29  and  before  the
council,  33  they  are  in  danger  to  be  killer]  ;
through  the  advice  of  Gamaliel ,  a  great  counsellor
among  the  Jews,  they  are  kept  alive,  40  and  onlv
beaten  :  for  which  they  glorify  God,  and  cease
no  day  from  preaching.

VI.  IT  he  apostles,  desirous  to  have  the  poor  regard¬
ed  for  their  bodily  sustenance,  as  also  careful
themselves  to  dispense  the  word  of  God,  the  food
of  the  soul,  3  appoint  the  office  of  deaconship  to
seven  chosen  men  :  .38  of  w  horn  Stephen,  a  man
full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  one:  12
who  is  taken  of  those  whom  he  confounded  in
disputing,  13  and  falsely  accused  of  blasphemy
against  the  law  and  the  temple.

VI  I.  1  Stephen  permitted  to  answer  to  the  accusa¬
tion  of  blasphemy,  2  shews  that  Abraham  wor¬
shipped  God  rightly,  and  how  God  chose  the
fathers,  20  before  Moses  was  born,  and  before
the  tabernacle  and  temple  were  built:  .37  that
Moses  himself  witnessed  of  Christ:  44  and  that
all  outward  ceremonies  were  ordained  according
to  the  heavenly  pattern,  to  last  but  for  a  time  :
51  reprehending  their  rebellion,  and  murdering
of  Christ,  the  Just  One,  whom  the  prophets  fore¬
told  should  come  into  the  w  orld :  54  whereupon
they  stone  him  to  death  ;  who  commends  his  soul
to  Jesus,  and  humbly  prays  for  them.

VIII.  1  Stephen’s  burial.  5  The  church  planted  in
Samaria,  by  Philip  the  deacon,  who  preached,
did  miracles,  and  baptized  many,  among  the  rest
Simon  the  sorcerer,  a  great  seducer  of  the  people.

14  Peter  and  John  come  to  confirm  and  enlarge
the  church:  where  by  prayer  and  imposition  of
hands  giving  the  Holy  Ghost,  18  when  Simon
would  have  bought  the  like  power  of  them,  20
Peter  sharply  reproves  his  hypocrisy  and  covet¬
ousness,  and  exhorts  him  to  repentance  :  Peter
and  John,  preaching  the  word,  return  to  Jeru¬
salem.  26  The  angel  sends  Philip  to  teach  and
baptize  the  Ethiopian  eunuch.

IX.  1  Saul  going  towards  Damascus,  4  is  struck
down  to  the  earth.  10  is  called  to  the  apostleship,

18  and  is  baptized  by  Ananias.  20  He  preaches
Christ  boldly.  2.3  The  Jews  lay  wait  to  kill  him  ;
29  so  do  the  Grecians;  but  he  escapes  both.  ,31
The  church  having  rest,  Peter  heals  .Eneas  of  the
palsy,  .36  and  restores  Tabitha  to  life.

X.  1  Cornel  ins,  a  devout  man,  5  being  command¬
ed  by  an  angel,  sends  for  Peter:  11  who  by  a
vision,  15,  20  is  taught  not  to  despise  the  Gen¬
tiles.  .34  As  he  preaches  Christ  to  Cornelius
and  his  company,  44  the  Holy  Ghost  falls  on
them,  48  and  they  are  baptized.

XI.  1  Peter,  being  accused  for  going  in  to  the  Gen¬
tiles,  5  makes  his  defence,  18  which  is  accepted.

19  The  gospel  being  spread  into  Phenice,  and
Cyprus,  and  Antioch,  Barnabas  is  sent  to  confirm
them.  26  I  he  disciples  there  are  first  called
Christians.  27  They  send  relief  to  the  brethren
in  Judea  in  time  of  famine.

XI T.  1  King  Herod  persecutes  the  Christians,  kills
James,  and  imprisons  Peter,  whom  an  angel  de¬
livers  upon  the  prayers  of  the  church.  20  In  his
pride,  taking  to  himself  the  honour  due  to  God,
he  is  struck  by  an  angel,  and  dies  miserably'.  24
Aftei  his  death  the  word  of  God  prospers.”


XIIT.  1  Paul  and  Barnabas  are  chosen  to  go  to  the
Gentiles.  7  Of  Sergius  Paulus,  and  Elyrnas  the
sorcerer.  14  Paul  preaches  at  Antioch,  that  Jesus
is  Christ.  42  The  Gentiles  believe;  45  but  the
Jews  gainsay  and  blaspheme  ;  46  whereupon  they
turn  to  the  Gentiles.  48  As  many  as  were  ordain-
^ed  to  life  believed.

XIV.  1  Paul  and  Barnabas  are  persecuted  from
Iconium.  7  At  Lystra  Paul  heals  a  cripple  ;
whereupon  they  are  reputed  as  gods.  19  Paul  is
stoned.  21  They  pass  through  divers  churches,
confirming  the  disciples  in  faith  and  patience:
26  returning  to  Antioch,  they  report  what  God
had  done  with  them.

XV.  1  Great  dissension  arises  about  circumcision.
6  The  apostles  consult  about  it,  22  and  send  their
determination  by  letters  to  the  churches.  .36  Paul
and  Barnabas,  thinking  to  visit  the  brethren  to¬
gether,  fall  at  strife,  and  depart  asunder.

XVI.  l  Paul  having  circumcised  Timothy,  7  and
being  called  by  the  Spirit  from  one  country  to
another,  14  converteth  Lydia,  16  casteth  out
a  spirit  of  divination  :  19  for  which  cause  he  and
Silas  are  whipped  and  imprisoned.  25  The  prison
doors  are  opened.  .31  The  jailor  is  converted,  .37

^and  they  are  delivered.

XVII.  1  Paul  preaches  at  Thessalonica  :  4  where
some  believe,  and  others  persecute  him  :  10  he  is
sent  to  Berea,  and  preacheth  there.  13  Being  per¬
secuted  at  Thessalonica,  15  he  cometh  to  Athens,
and  disputes,  and  preaches  the  living  God  to  them
unknown,  34  whereby  many  are  converted  unto
Christ.

XVI 1 1. 3  Paul  labours  with  his  hands,  and  preaches
at  Corinth  to  the  Gentiles  :  9  the  Lord  encourages
him  in  a  vision  :  12  he  is  accused  before  Gallio
the  deputy,  but  is  dismissed.  18  Afterwards,
passing  from  city  to  city,  lie  strengthens  the  disci¬
ples.  24 A  polios,  being  more  perfectly  instructed
by  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  28  preaches  Christ  with
great  efficacy.

XIX.  6  The  Holy  Ghost  is  given  by  Paul’s  hands.
9  The  Jews  blaspheme  his  doctrine,  which  is  con¬
firmed  by  miracles.  13  The  Jewish  exorcists,  16
are  beaten  by  the  devil.  19  Conjuring-books  are
burnt.  24  Demetrius,  for  love  of  gain,  raiseth  an
uproar  against  Paul,  35  which  is  appeased  by  the
town-clerk.

XX.  1  Paul  goes  to  Macedonia.  7  He  celebrates  the
Lord’s  supper,  and  preaches.  9  Eutychus  being
killed  by  a  fall,  10  is  raised  to  life.  17  At  Miletus
Paul  calls  the  elders  together,  tells  them  what
shall  befall  to  himself,  28  commits  God’s  flock  to
them,  29  warns  them  of  false  teachers,  32  com¬
mends  them  to  God,  .36  prays  with  them, and  goes
his  wav.

XXL  1  Paul  will  not  by  any  means  be  dissuaded
from  going- to  Jerusalem.  9  Philip’s  daughters
prophetesses.  17  Paul  comes  to  Jerusalem  :  27
where  he  is  apprehended,  and  in  great  danger,  .31
but  by  the  chief  captain  is  rescued,  and  permit¬
ted  to  speak  to  the  people.

XXI  T.  1  Paul  declares  at  1  arge,  how  he  was  con¬
verted  ,to  the  faith,  17  and  called  to  Ids  apostle¬
ship.  22  At  the  very  mentioning  of  the  Gentiles,
the  people  exclaim  on  him.  24  He  should  have
been  scourged  ;  25  but  claiming  the  privilege  of
ajtoman,  he  escapes.

XXI 1 1 .  1  As  Paul  pleads  his  cause,  2  Ananias  com¬
mands  them  to  smite  him.  7  Dissension  among
his  accusers.  11  God  encourages  him.  14  The
Jews’  lying  in  wait  for  Paul,  20  is  declared
unto  the  chief  captain.  27  lie  sends  bim  to
Felix  the  governor.

XXIV.  2  Paul  being  accused  by  Tertullus  the
oratoc,  10  answers  for  his  life  and  doctrine.  24
He  preaches  Christ  to  the  governor  and  his  wife.

26  Ihe  governor  hopes  for  a  bribe,  but  in  vain  :

27  at  last  going  out  of  his  office,  he  leaves  Paul
in  prison.

XXV.  1  The  Jews  accuse  Paul  before  Festus.

8  He  answers  for  himself,  11  and  appeals  to
Caesar.  14  Afterwards  Festus  opens  his  matter
to  king  Agrippa,  23  and  he  is  brought  forth.  25
Festus  declares  him  to  have  done  nothing  worthy
of  death.

XXVI  .  2  Paul,  in  the  presence  of  Agrippa,  de¬
clares  his  life  from  his  childhood,  12  and  how
miraculously  he  was  converted  and  called  to  his
apostleship.  24  Festus  charges  him  to  be  mad,
whereunto  he  answers  modestly.  28  Agrippa  is
almost  persuaded  to  be  a  Christian.  .31  The
whole  company  pronounce  him  innocent.
XXVII.  1  Paul  shipping  towards  Rome,  10  fore¬
tells  the  danger  of  the  voyage,  11  but  is  not  be¬
lieved.  14  They  are  tossed  to  and  fro  with
tempest,  41  and  suffer  shipwreck,  22,  34,  44  yet
all  come  safe  to  land.

XXVIII.  1  Paul,  after  his  shipwreck,  is  kindly
entertained  by  the  Barbarians.  5  The  viper  on  his
hand  hurts  him  not.  8  He  heals  many  diseases  in
the  island.  11  They  depart  towards  Borne.  17
He  declares  to  the  Jews  the  cause  of  his  coming.
24  After  his  preaching  some  were  persuaded,  and
some  believed  not :  30  yet  he  preaches  there  two
years.

ROMANS.

I.  Paul  commends  his  calling  to  the  Homans,  9
and  his  desire  to  come  to  them.  16  What  his
gospel  is,  and  the  righteousness  which  it  shews.
18  God  is  angry  with  all  manner  of  sin.  21
What  were  the  sins  of  the  Gentiles.

II.  I  They  that  sin,  though  they  condemn  it  in
others,  cannot  excuse  themselves,  6  and  much  less
escape  the  judgment  of  God,  9  whether  they  be
Jews  or  Gentiles.  14  The  Gentiles  cannot  escape,
17  nor  yet  the  Jews,  25  whom  their  circumcision
shall  not  profit,  if  they  keep  not  the  law.

II  1. 1  The  Jews’  prerogative  ;  3  which  they  have  not
lost ;  9  howbeit  the  law  convinces  them  also  of
sin.  20  Therefore  no  flesh  is  justified  by  the  law,


28  but  all,  without  difference,  by  faith  only  :  31
and  yet  the  law  is  not  abolished.

IV.  l  Abraham’s  faith  was  imputed  to  him  for
righteousness,  10  before  he  was  circumcised.  1.7
By  faith  only  he  and  his  seed  received  the  pro¬
mise.  16  Abraham  is  the  father  of  all  that  be¬
lieve.  24  Our  faith  also  shall  be  imputed  to  us
for  righteousness.

V.  1  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with
God,  2  and  ioy  in  our  hope;  8  that  since  we
were  reconciled  by  his  blood,  when  we  were
enemies,  10  we  shall  much  more  be  saved,  being
reconciled.  12  As  sin  and  death  came  by  Adam,
17  so  much  more  righteousness  and  life  by  Jesus
Christ.  20  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  su-
perabound.

VI.  1  We  may  not  live  in  sin,  2  for  we  are  dead
unto  it,  .3  as  appears  by  our  baptism.  12  Let  not
sin  reign  any  more,  18  because  we  have  yielded
ourselves  to  the  service  of  righteousness,  23  and
for  that  death  is  the  wages  of  sin.

VII.  1  No  law  hath  power  over  a  man  longer  than
he  liveth.  4  But  we  are  dead  to  the  law.  7  Yet  is
not  the  law  sin,  12  but  holy,  just,  and  good,  16  as
I  acknowledge  who  am  grieved  because  I  cannot
keep  it.

VI I I .  1  They  that  are  in  Christ,  and  live  according
to  the  Spirit,  are  free  from  condemnation.  5,  13
What  harm  comes  of  the  flesh,  6,  14  and  what
good  of  the  Spirit:  17  and  what  of  being  God’s
children,  19  whose  glorious  deliverance  all  things
long  for.  29  It  was  beforehand  decreed  from  God.
.38  What  can  sever  us  from  his  love  ?

IX.  1  Paul  is  sorry  for  the  Jews.  7  All  the  seed  of
Abraham  were  notthechildren  of  the  promise.  18
God  hath  mercy  upon  whom  he  will.  21  The  pot¬
ter  may  do  with  his  clay  what  he  list.  25  The
calling  of  the  Gentiles,  and  rejecting  of  the  Jews,
were  foretold.  .32  I  he  cause  why  so  few  Jews  em¬
braced  the  righteousness  of  faith.

X.  5The  Scripture  sheweth  the  difference  betwixt
the  righteousness  of  the  law,  and  that  of  faith,  11
and  that  all,  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  that  believe,
shall  not  be  confounded,  18  an^  that  the  Gentiles
slialj  receive  the  word,  and  believe.  19  Israel  was
not  ignorant  of  these  things.

XI.  1  God  hath  not  cast  off  all  Israel.  7  Some  were
elected,  though  the  rest  were  hardened.  16  There
is  hope  of  their  conversion.  18  The  Gentiles  may
not  insult  upon  them  :  26  for  there  is  a  promise  of
their  salvation.  33  God’s  judgments  are  unsearch¬
able.

XII.  1  God’s  mercies  must  move  us  to  please  God.
3  Not  to  think  highly  of  oneself,  6  but  attend
every  one  on  that  calling  wherein  he  is  placed.  9
Love  without  dissimulation.  19  Revenge  is  espe¬
cially  forbidden.

XIII.  l  Subjection,  and  many  other  duties,  we  owe
to  the  magistrates.  8  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the
law.  1 1  Gluttony  and  drunkenness,  and  the  works
of  darkness,  are  out  of  season  in  the  time  of  the
gospel.

XIV.  .3  Men  may  not  contemn  nor  condemn  each
other  for  things  indifferent ;  13  but  take  heed  that
they  give  no  offence  in  them  :  15  for  that  the
apostle  proves  unlawful  by  many  reasons.

XV.  1  The  strong  must  bear  with  the  weak.  2  We
may  not  please  ourselves,  .3  for  Christ  did  not  so,
7  but  receive  one  another,  as  Christ  did  us  all,  8
both  Jews,  9  and  Gentiles.  15  Paul  excuseth  his
writing,  28  and  promises  to  see  them,  33  and  de¬
sires  their  prayers.

XV I .  3  Paul  wills  the  brethren  to  greet  many ,  17  and
advises  them  to  take  heed  of  those  which  cause
dissension  and  offences,  21  and  after  sundry  sa¬
lutations,  ends  with  praise  and  thanks  to  God.

I  CORINTHIANS.

I.  After  his  salutation  and  thanksgiving,  10  he  ex¬
horts  them  to  unity,  12  and  reproves  their  dis¬
sensions.  18  God  destroys  the  wisdom  of  the  wise,
21  by  the  foolishness  ot  preaching,  26  and  calls
not  the  wise,  mighty,  and  noble,  27,  28  but  the
foolish,  weak,  and  me/i  of  no  account.

II.  1  He  declares  that  Ins  preaching,  though  it  bring
not  excellency  of  speech,  or  of  4  human  wisdom  ;
yet  consists  in  the  4, 5  power  of  God  ;  and  so  far
excels  6  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  and  9  human
sense,  as  that  14  the  natural  man  cannot  under¬
stand  it.

III.  2  Milk  is  fit  for  children.  3  Strife  and  division
are  argumentsofafleshly  mind.  7  He  that  plants,
and  lie  that  waters,  is  nothing.  9  The  ministers
are  God’s  fellow-workmen.  11  Christ  the  only
foundation.  16  Men  the  temples  of  God,  17  which
must  be  kept  holy.  19  The  wisdom  of  this  world
is  foolishness  with  God.

IV.  1 . 1  n  what  account  the  ministers  ought  to  be  had.

7  We  have  nothing  which  we  have  not  received.

9  The  apostles  spectacles  to  the  world,  angels,
and  men,  13the  filth  and  off-scouring  of  the  world  ;
15  vet  our  fathers  in  Christ,  16  whom  we  ought
to  follow.

V.  1  The  incestuous  person,  6  is  cause  rather  of
shame  unto  them,  than  of  rejoicing.  7  The  old
leaven  is  to  be  purged  out.  10  Heinous  offenders
are  to  be  shunned  and  avoided.

VI.  1  I  he  Corinthians  must  not  vex  their  brethren,
in  going  to  law  with  them  ;  6  especially  under
infidels.  9  J  he  unrighteous  shall  not  inherit  the
kingdom  of  God.  15  Our  bodies  are  the  members
of  Christ,  19  and  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  16,
17  they  must  not  therefore  be  defiled.

VI I.  2  Of  marriage,  4  shewing  it  to  be  a  remedy
against  fornication  ;  10  and  that  the  bond  thereof
ought  not  lightly  to  be  dissolved.  18,  20  Every
man  must  be  content  with  his  vocation.  25  Vir¬
ginity  wherefore  to  be  embraced,  35  and  for  what
respects  we  may  either  marry,  or  abstain  from
marrying.

VIII.  1  To  abstain  from  meats  offered  to  idols :  8,

9  not  to  abuse  our  Christian  liberty,  to  the  offence

717


SUMMARY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT


of  our  brethren:  11  but  must  bridle  our  know-  |
ledge  with  charity.

IX.  1.  lie  shews  his  liberty,  7  and  that  the  minister
ought  to  live  by  the  gospel :  15  yet  that  himself
hath  of  his  own  accord  abstained  18  to  be  either
chargeable  to  them.  22  or  offensive  to  any  in  mat¬
ters  indifferent.  24  Our  life  is  like  a  race.

X.  I  The  sacraments  of  the  Jews,  6  are  types  of
ours,  7  and  their  punishments,  11  examples  for
us.  14  We  must  flee  from  idolatry,  21  and  not
make  the  Lord's  table  the  table  of  devils:  24  and
in  things  indifferent  we  should  have  regard  to
the  weak  brethren.

XI.  1  He  reproves  them,  because  in  holy  assem¬
blies  4  their  men  prayed  with  their  heads  cover¬
ed,  and  6  their  women  with  heads  uncovered  :
17  and  because  generally  their  meetings  were
not  for  the  better,  but  for  the  worse ;  as,  21
namely,  in  profaning  with  their  own  feasts  the
Lord’s  supper.  2.1  Lastly,  he  calls  them  to  the
first  institution  thereof.

XII.  1  Spiritual  gifts  4  are  divers,  7  yet  all  to
profit  withal  ;  8  and  to  that  end  are  diversely
bestowed  :  12  that  by  the  like  proportion,  as  the
members  of  a  natural  body  tend  all  to  the  16
mutual  decency,  22  service,  and  26  succour  of
the  same  body  ;  27  so  we  should  do  one  for  an¬
other,  to  make  up  the  mystical  body  of  Christ.

XIII.  1  All  gifts,  2,  3  how  excellent  soever,  are
nothing  worth  without  charity.  4  The  praises
thereof,  and  13  prelation  before  hope  and  faith.

XIV.  1  Prophecy  is  commended,  2,  3,  4  and  pre¬
ferred  before  speaking  with  tongues,  6  by  a  com¬
parison  drawn  from  musical  instruments.  12
Both  must  be  referred  to  edification,  22  as  to  their
true  and  proper  end.  26  The  true  use  of  each  is
taught,  29  and  the  abuse  taxed.  34  Women  are
forbidden  to  speak  in  the  church.

XV.  3  By  Christ’s  resurrection,  12  he  proves  the
necessity  of  ours,  against  all  such  as  deny  the
resurrection  of  the  body.  21  The  fruit  35  and
manner  thereof,  51  and  of  the  changing  them
that  shall  be  found  alive  at  the  last  day.

XVI.  1  He  exhorts  them  to  relieve  the  want  of  the
brethren  at  Jerusalem  ;  10  commends  Timothy  ;
13  and  after  friendly  admonitions,  16  shuts  up
his  epistle  with  divers  salutations.

II  CORINTHIANS.

I.  The  apostle  encourages  them  against  troubles,
by  the  comforts  and  deliverances  which  God  had
given  him,  as  in  all  his  afflictions,  8  so  particu¬
larly  in  his  late  danger  in  Asia:  12  and  calling
both  his  own  conscience,  and  theirs,  to  witness,
of  his  sincere  manner  of  preac  hing  the  immuta¬
ble  truth  of  the  gospel,  15  he  excuseth  his  not
coming  to  them,  as  proceeding  not  of  lightness,
but  of  his  lenity  towards  them.

II.  1  Having  shewed  the  reason  why  he  came  not
to  them,  6  he  requires  them  to  forgive  and  to
comfort  that  excommunicated  person,  10  even  as
himself  also,  upon  his  true  repentance,  had  for¬
given  him  :  12  declaring  withal  why  he  departed
From  Troasto  Macedonia,  14  and  the  happy  suc¬
cess  which  God  gave  to  his  preaching  in  all  places.

III.  1  Lest  their  false  teachers  should  charge  him
with  vain  glory,  he  shews  the  faith  and  graces
of  the  Corinthians,  to  be  a  sufficient  commenda¬
tion  of  his  ministry.  6  Whereupon  entering  a
comparison  between  the  ministers  of  the  law  and
of  the  gospel,  12  he  proves  that  his  ministry  is  so
far  the  more  excellent,  as  the  gospel  of  life  and
liberty  is  more  glorious  than  the  law  of  con¬
demnation.

IV.  1  He  declares  how  he  hath  used  all  sincerity
and  faithful  diligence  in  preaching  the  gospel  ;  7
and  how  the  troubles  and  persecutions  which  he
daily  endured  for  the  same,  did  redound  to  the
praise  of  God’s  power,  12  to  the  benefit  of  the
church,  16  and  to  the  apostle’s  own  eternal  glory.

V.  1  That  in  his  assured  hope  of  immortal  glory',
9  and  in  expectation  of  it,  and  of  the  general
judgment,  he  labours  to  keep  a  good  conscience,
12  not  that  he  may  herein  boast  of  himself,  14
but  as  one  that  having  received  life  from  Christ,
lives  as  a  new  creature  to  Christ  only,  18  and
by  his  ministry  of  reconciliation,  to  reconcile
others  also  in  Christ  to  God.

VI.  1  That  he  hath  approved  himself  a  faithful
minister  of  Christ,  both  by  his  exhortations,  3
and  by  integrity  of  life,  4  and  by  patient  en¬
during  all  kinds  of  affliction  and  disgraces  for
the  gospel.  10  Of  which  he  speaks  the  more
boldly  amongst  them,  because  his  heart  is  open
to  them,  13  and  he  expects  the  like  affection
from  them  again  :  14  exhorts  them  to  flee  the  so¬
ciety  and  pollutions  of  idolaters,  as  being  them¬
selves  temples  of  the  living  God.

VII.  1  He  proceeds  in  exhorting  them  to  purity  of
ife,  2  and  to  bear  him  like  affection  as  he  doth

to  them.  3  Whereof,  lest  they  might  seem  to
doubt,  he  declares  what  comfort  he  took  in  his
afflictions,  by  the  report  which  Titus  gave  of  their
godly  sorrow,  which  his  former  epistle  had
wrought  in  them,  13  and  of  their  loving  kindness
and  obedience  towards  Titus,  answerable  to  his
former  boastings  of  them.

VIII.  1  He  stirs  them  up  to  a  liberal  contribution
for  the  poor  saints  at  Jerusalem,  by  the  example
of  the  Macedonians,  by  commendation  of  their
former  forwardness,  9  by  the  example  of  Christ,
14  and  by  the  spiritual  profit  that  should  redound
to  themselves  thereby  :  16  commending  to  them
the  integrity  and  willingness  of  Titus,  and  those
other  brethren,  who,  upon  his  request,  exhorta¬
tion,  and  commendation,  were  purposely  come
to  them  for  this  business.

IX.  1  He  yields  the  reason  why,  though  he  knew
their  forwardness,  yet  he  sent  Titus  and  his  bre¬
thren  beforehand  :  6  and  he  proceeds  in  stirring
them  up  to  bountiful  alms,  as  being  but  a  kind  of
sowing  of  seed,  10  which  shall  return  a  great  in¬

718


crease  to  them,  13  and  occasion  a  great  sacrifice
of  thanksgiving  unto  God.

X.  1  Against  the  false  apostles,  who  disgraced  the
weaknessof  his  person  and  bodily  presence,  he  sets
out  the  spiritual  might  and  authority,  with  which
he  is  armed  against  all  adverse  powers;  7  assur¬
ing  them  that  at  his  coining  he  will  be  found  as
mighty  in  word,  as  he  is  now  in  writing,  being
absent.  12  And  withal  taxing  them  for  extending
themselves  beyond  their  compass,  and  vaunting
themselves  of  other  men’s  labours.

XI.  1  Out  of  his  jealousy  over  the  Corinthians,
who  seemed  to  make  more  account  of  the  false
apostles  than  of  him,  he  entereth  into  a  forced
commendation  of  himself,  5  of  his  equality  with
the  chief  apostles,  7  of  his  preaching  the  gospel
to  them  freely,  and  without  their  charge:  13
shewing  that  he  was  not  inferior  to  those  deceit¬
ful  workers  in  any  legal  prerogative  ;  23  and  in
the  service  of  Christ,  and  in  all  kind  of  suffer¬
ings  for  his  ministry,  far  superior.

XII.  1  For  commending  of  his  apostleship,  though
he  might  glory  of  his  wonderful  revelations,  9
yet  he  rather  chooses  to  glory  of  his  infirmities,
11  blaming  them  for  foicing  him  to  this  vain
boasting.  14  He  promises  to  come  to  them  again  ;
but  yet  altogether  in  the  affection  of  a  father,  20
although  he  fears  he  shall,  to  his  grief,  find  many
offenders  and  public  disorders  there.

XIII.  1  He  threatened)  severity,  and  the  power  of
his  apostleship,  against  obstinate  sinners  :  5  and
advising  them  to  a  trial  of  their  faith,  7  and  to
reformation  of  their  sius  before  his  coming,  1 1  he
concludeth  his  epistle  with  a  general  exhortation
and  a  prayer.

GALATIANS.

L  He  wonders  that  they  have  so  soon  left  him,  and
the  gospel  ;  8  and  accurses  those  that  preach
another  gospel  than  he  did.  11  He  learned  the
gospel  not  of  men,  but  of  God  :  13  and  shews
what  he  was  before  his  calling,  17  and  what  he
did  presently  after  it.

II.  1  He  shews  when  he  went  up  again  to  Jerusa¬
lem,  and  for  what  purpose  :  3  and  that  Titus  was
not  circumcised:  11  and  that  he  resisted  Peter,
and  told  him  the  reason  14  why  he  and  others,
being  Jews,  do  believe  in  Christ  to  be  justified  by
faith,  and  not  by  works  :  20  and  that  they  live
not  in  sin,  who  are  so  justified.

III.  1  He  asks  what  moved  them  to  leave  the  faith,
and  hang  upon  the  law.  6  They  that  believe  are
justified,  9  and  blessed  with  Abraham.  10  And
this  he  shews  by  many  reasons.

IV.  1  We  were  under  the  law  till  Christ  came,  as
the  heir  is  under  his  guardian  till  he  be  of  age  ;  5
but  Christ  freed  us  from  the  law  ;  7  therefore  we
are  servants  no  longer  to  it.  14  He  remembers
their  good-will  to  him,  and  his  to  them  ;  22  and
shews  that  we  are  the  sous  of  Abraham  by  the
free-woman.

V.  1  He  moves  them  to  stand  in  their  liberty,  3  and
not  observe  circumcision  ;  but  rather  love,  which
is  the  sum  of  the  law:  19  he  reckoneth  up  the
woiksof  the  flesh,  22  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;
25  aim  exhorts  to  walk  in  the  Spirit.

VI.  1  He  moves  them  to  deal  mildly  with  a  brother
that  hath  slipped,  2  and  to  bear  one  another’s
burdens  ;  6  to  be  liberal  to  their  teachers  ;  9  and
not  weary  of  well-doing:  12  he  shews  what  they
intend  that  preach  circumcision  :  14  he  glories
in  nothing,  save  the  cross  of  Christ.

EPHESIANS.

I.  After  the  salutation,  3  and  thanksgiving  for  the
Ephesians,  4  he  treats  of  our  election,  6  and
adoption  by  grace,  11  which  is  the  true  and  pro¬
per  fountain  of  man’s  salvation  ;  13  and  because
the  height  of  this  mystery  cannot  easily  be  at¬
tained  unto  by  man’s  power,  16  he  prays  that
they  may  come  18  to  the  full  knowledge  and  20
possession  thereof  in  Christ.

II.  1  By  comparing  what  we  were  3  by  nature,
with  what  we  are  by  grace  ;  10  lie  declares,  that
we  are  made  for  good  works:  and  13  being
brought  near  by  Christ,  should  not  live  as  11
Gentiles,  and  12  foreigners  in  time  past,  but  as
19  citizens  with  the  saints, and  the  family  of  God.

I I I .  5 The  hidden  mystery  ,6  that  the  Gentiles  should
be  saved,  was  made  known  to  Paul  by  revelation  :
8  and  to  him  was  that  grace  given,  that  9  he  should
preach  it.  13  He  desires  them  not  to  faint  for
his  tribulation,  14  and  prays  19  that  they  may
perceive  the  great  love  of  Christ  toward  them.

IV.  1  He  exhorts  to  unity  ;  7  and  declares  that
God  therefore  gives  divers  11  gifts  to  men,  that
his  church  might  be  13  edified,  and  15  grow  up
in  Christ.  18  He  calls  them  from  the  impurity
of  the  Gentiles,  24  to  put  on  the  new  man  ;  25  to
cast  off  lying,  and  29  corrupt  communication.

V.  2  After  general  exhortations  to  love,  .3  to  flee
fornication,  4  and  all  uncleanness,  7  not  to  con¬
verse  with  the  wicked,  15  to  walk  warily,  and
to  be  18  filled  with  the  Spirit,  22  he  descends  to
the  particular  duties,  how  wives  ought  to  obey
their  husbands,  25  and  husbands  ought  to  love
their  wives,  32  even  as  Christ  doth  his  church.

VI.  1  The  duty  of  children  to  parents,  5  and  ser¬
vants  to  masters.  10  Our  life  is  a  warfare,  12  not
only  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  also  spiritual
'nemies.  13  The  complete  armour  of  a  Christian,
/8  and  how  it  ought  to  be  used.  21  Tycbieus  is
commended.

PHILIPPIAN  S.

I.  Paul  testifieth  his  thankfulness  to  God,  and  his
love  towards  them,  for  the  fruits  of  their  faith,
and  fellowship  in  his  sufferings,  9  daily  praying  to
him  for  their  increase  in  grace  :  12  lie  shews  what
good  the  faith  of  Christ  had  received  by  his
troubles  at  Rome,  21  and  how  ready  he  is  to
glorify  Christ  either  by  his  life  or  death  :  27


exhorting  them  to  unity,  28  and  to  fortitude  ia>
persecution.

II.  1  He  exhorts  them  to  unity,  and  to  all  humble¬
ness  of  mind,  by  the  example  of  Christ’s  humility
and  exaltation  :  12  to  a  careful  proceeding  in  the
way  of  salvation,  that  they  be  as  lights  to  the
wicked  world,  16  and  comforts  to  hint  their  apos¬
tle,  who  is  now  ready  to  be  offered  up  to  God.  15-
He  hopes  to  send  Timothy  to  them,  whom  he
greatly  commends,  25  as  Epaphroditus  also,
whom  he  presently  sends  to  them.

III.  1  He  warns  them  to  beware  of  the  false  teachers
of  the  circumcision,  4  shewing  that  himself  hath
greater  cause  than  they  to  trust  in  the  righteous-
nessofthe  law  ;7  which  notwithstanding  he  counts
as  dung  and  loss  to  gain  Christ  and  his  righteous¬
ness,  12  therein  acknowledging  his  own  imper¬
fection.  15  He  exhorts  them  to  be  thus  minded,
17  to  imitate  him,  18  and  to  decline  the  ways  of
carnal  men.

1  V.  1  From  particular  admonitions,  4  he  proceeds
to  general  exhortations,  10  shewing  how  he  re¬
joiced  at  their  liberality  towards  him  lying  in  pri¬
son,  not  so  much  for  the  supply  of  his  own  wants,
as  for  the  grace  of  God  in  them  :  19  and  concludes
with  prayer  and  salutations.

COLOSSIANS.

I.  After  salutation,  Paul  thanks  God  for  their  faith,

7  confirms  the  doctrine  of  Epaphras,  9  prays  fur¬
ther  for  their  increase  in  glace,  14  describes  the
true  Christ,  21  encourageth  them  to  receive  Jesus
Christ,  and  commends  his  own  ministry.

II.  1  He  still  exhorts  them  to  be  constant  in  Christ,

8  to  beware  of  philosophy  and  vain  traditions,  18
worshipping  of  angels,  20  and  legal  ceremonies,
which  are  ended  in  Christ.

III.  1  He  shews  where  we  should  seek  Christ.  5
He  exhorts  to  mortification,  to  put  off  the  old  man,
and  to  put  on  Christ ;  12  exhorting  to  charity,
humility,  and  other  several  duties.

IV.  1  He  exhorts  them  to  be  fervent  in  prayer,  5  to
walk  wisely  toward  them  that  are  not  yet  come  tc
the  true  knowledge  of  Christ.  10  He  salutes  them,
and  wishes  them  all  prosperity.

I  TIIESSALONIANS.

I.  The  Thessalonians  are  given  to  understand  both
hovv  mindful  of  them  Paul  was  at  all  times  in
thanksgiving  and  prayer;  5  and  also  how  well  he
was  persuaded  of  the  truth  and  sincerity  of  their
faith  and  conversion  to  God.

II.  1  In  what  manner  the  gospel  was  brought  and
preached  to  the  Thessalonians,  and  in  what  sort
also  they  received  it.  18  A  reason  is  rendered  both
why  Paul  was  so  long  absent  from  them,  and  also
why  he  was  so  desirous  to  see  them.

III.  1  Paul  testifies  his  great  love  to  the  Thessalo¬
nians  ;  partly  by  sending  Timothy  unto  them
to  strengthen  and  comfort  them  ;  partly  by  re¬
joicing  in  their  well-doing  ;  10  and  partly  by
praying  for  them,  and  desiring  a  safe  coming
unto  them.

IV.  1  He  exhorts  them  to  walk  in  all  mannerofgod
liness,  6  to  live  holy  and  iustly,  9  to  love  one  an
other,  1 1  and  quietly  to  follow  their  own  business ;
13  and  last  of  all  to  sorrow  moderately  for  the
dead  :  15  and  to  his  last  exhortation  is  annexed  a
brief  description  of  the  resurrection,  and  second
coming  of  Christ  to  judgment.

V.  1  He  proceeds  in  the  former  description  of
Christ’s  coming  to  judgment,  14  and  gives  divers
precepts,  23  and  so  concludes  the  epistle.

IT  TIIESSALONIANS.

I.  Paul  certifies  them  of  the  good  opinion  which
he  had  of  their  faith,  love,  and  patience  ;  11  and
therewithal  useth  divers  reasons  for  the  comforting
of  them  in  persecution,  whereof  the  chief  is  taken
from  the  righteous  judgment  of  God.

II.  1  He  wills  them  to  continue  stedfast  in  the
truth  received  ;  3  shew’s  that  there  shall  be  a  de¬
parture  from  the  faith,  8  and  a  discovery'  of  an¬
tichrist,  before  the  day  of  the  Lord  come  :  15  and
thereupon  repeats  Ins  former  exhortation,  and
prays  for  them.

III.  1  He  begs  their  prayers  for  himself,  3  and  testi¬
fies  what  confidence  ne  has  in  them,  5  makes  re¬
quest  to  God  in  their  behalf,  6  gives  them  divert
precepts,  especially  to  shun  idleness  and  ill  com¬
pany,  16  and  last  of  all  concludes  with  prayer  and
salutation.

I  TIMOTHY.

I.  Timothy'  is  put  in  mind  of  the  charge  which
w'as  given  unto  him  by  Paul  at  his  going  to  Mace¬
donia,  5  of  the  right  use  and  end  of  the  law,  11  of
Paul’s  calling  to  be  an  apostle,  20  and  Hymeneus
and  Alexander.

I I.  1  That  it  is  meet  to  pray  and  give  thanks  for  all
men,  and  the  reason  why.  9  How  women  should
be  attired.  12  They  are  not  permitted  to  teach.  15
They  shall  be  saved,  notwithstanding  the  testimo¬
nies  of  God’s  wrath,  in  childbirth,  if  they  continue
in  faith.

III.  How  bishops,  deacons,  and  their  wives,  should
be  qualified  ;  14  and  to  what  end  Paul  wrote  to
'Timothy  of  these  things.  15  Of  the  church,  and
the  blessed  truth  therein  taught  and  professed.

IV.  1  He  foretells  that  in  the  latter  times  there  shall
be  a  departure  from  the  faith.  6  And  to  the  end
that  'Timothy  might  not  fail  in  doing  his  duty,
he  furnishes  him  with  divers  precepts  relating
thereto.

V.  1  Rules  to  be  observed  in  reproving.  3  Of  wi¬
dows.  17  Of  elders.  23  A  precept  for  Timothy’s
health.  24  Some  men’s  sins  go  before  unto  judg¬
ment,  and  some  men’s  do  follow  after.

VI.  1  Of  the  duty  of  servants.  3  Not  to  have  fellow¬
ship  with  new-fangled  teachers.  6  Godliness  is
great  gain,  10  and  love  of  money  the  root  of  all
evil.  11  What  Timothy  is  to  flee,  and  what  to


SUMMARY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.


(follow,  17  and  whereof  to  admonish  the  rich.  CO
To  keep  the  purity  of  true  doctrine,  and  to  avoid
profane  janglings.

II  TIMOTHY.

I.  Paul’s  love  to  Timothy,  and  the  unfeigned  faith
which  was  in  Timothy  himself,  his  mother,  and
grandmother.  5  He  is  exhorted  to  stir  up  the
gift  of  God  which  was  in  him,  8  to  be  stedfast
and  patient  in  persecution,  13  and  to  persist  in
the  form  and  truth  of  that  doctrine  which  he  had
learned  of  him.  15  Phygellus  and  Hermogenes,
and  such  like,  are  noted,  and  Onesiphorus  is
highly  commended.

II.  lit  is  exhorted  again  to  constancy  and  perse
verance,  and  to  do  the  duty  of  a  faithful  servant
of  the  Lord  in  dividing  the  word  aright,  and
shunning  profane  and  vain  babblings.  17  Of
Hymeneus  and  Philetus.  ly  The  foundation  of
the  Lord  is  sure.  22  He  is  tauyht  w  hereof  to  be¬
ware,  and  what  to  follow  after,  and  in  what  sort
the  servant  of  the  Lord  ought  to  behave  himself.

III.  1  He  advertises  him  of  the  times  to  come,  6
describes  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  10  propounds
unto  him  his  own  example,  16  and  commends
the  holy  .'scriptures.

IV’  ]  Uf:  exhorts  him  to  do  his  duty  with  all  care
and  diligence,  6  certifies  him  of  the  nearness  of
nis  death,  9  wills  him  to  come  speedily  unto
him,  aud  11  to  bring  Mark  with  him,  and  cer¬
tain  other  things  which  he  wrote  for,  14  warns
him  to  beware  of  Alexander  the  smith,  J6  in¬
forms  him  what  had  befallen  him  at  his  first  an¬
swering,  19  and  soon  after  he  concludes.

TITUS.

I.  For  what  end  Titus  was  left  in  Crete.  6  How
they  that  are  to  be  chosen  ministers  ought  to  be
qualified.  11  T  he  mouths  of  evil  teachers  to  be
stopped  :  12  and  what  manner  of  men  they  be.

II.  1  Directions  given  unto  1  itus,  both  for  his  doc¬
trine  and  life,  y  Of  the  duty  of  servants,  and,
in  general,  of  all  Christians.

III.  1  1  itus  is  yet  further  directed  by  Paul  both
concerning  the  things  he  should  teach,  and  not
teach,  10  He  is  willed  also  to  reject  obstinate
heretics  :  12  which  done,  he  appoints  him  both
time  and  place,  wherein  he  should  come  unto
him,  and  so  concludes.

PHILEMON.

•Paul  rejoices  to  hear  of  the  faith  and  love  of  Phi¬
lemon  ;  9  whom  he  desires  to  forgive  his  servant
Onesimus,  and  lovingly  to  receive  him  again.

HEBREWS.

I.  Christ  in  these  last  times  coming  to  us  from  the
lather,  4  is  preferred  above  the  angels,  both  in
person  and  office.

II.  1  We  ought  to  be  obedient  to  Christ  Jesus,  5
and  that  because  he  vouchsafed  to  take  our  na-

Ti*iUre  uJ)on  him,  14  as  it  was  necessary.

1  Christ  is  more  worthy  than  Moses  :  7  there¬
fore  if  we  believe  not  in  him,  we  shall  be  more
worthy  ot  punishment  than  hard-hearted  Israel
restot  Christians  is  attained  by  faith
12  The  power  of  God’s  word.  14  By  our  HHi-
priest,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  subject  to  infirmi¬
ties,  but  not  to  sin,  16  we  must  and  may  go
boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace.

Y.  1  The  authority  and  honour  of  our  Saviour’s
priesthood.  11  Negligence  in  the  knowledge
thereof  is  reproved.

YI  1  He  exhorts  not  to  fall  back  from  the  faith,
11  but  to  be  stedfast,  12  diligent,  and  patient  to
wait  upon  God,  13  because  God  is  most  sure  in
his  promise.

VI  I.  1  Christ  Jesus  is  a  priest  after  the  order  ot
Melchisedec,  11  and  so  tar  more  excellent  than
_  the  priests  of  Aaron’s  order.

1  By  the  eternal  priesthood  of  Christ,  the
Levitical  priesthood  of  Aaron  is  abolished,  7  and
the  temporal  covenant  with  the  fathers,  by  the
eternal  covenant  of  the  gospel.

IX.  1  The  description  of  the  rights  and  bloody  sa¬
crifices  of  the  law,  l]  far  inferior  to  the  dignity
and  perfection  ot  the  blood  and  sacrifice  of  Christ.
■A.  1  1  he  weakness  of  the  law  sacrifices.  10  The
sacrifice  of  Christ’s  body  once  offered,  14  for
evei  hath  taken  away  sins.  19  An  exhortation  to
hold  fast  the  faith,  with  patience  and  thanksgiving.
Al-  1  What  faith  is.  6  Without  faith  we  cannot
please  God.  7  The  worthy  fruits  thereof  in  the
„  athers  of  old  time.

Xll  l  Am  exhortation  to  constant  faith,  patience,
and  godliness.  22  A  commendation  of  the  fiew
testament  above  the  Old.

XIII.  1  Divers  admonitions,  as  to  charity,  4  to
honest  life,  5  to  avoid  covetousness,  7  to  regard
God  s  preachers,  9  to  take  heed  of  strange  doc¬
trines,  10  to  confess  Christ,  16  to  give  alms,  17
to  obey  governors,  18  to  pray  for  the  apostle.  20
lhe  conclusion.

JAMES.


member,  but  a  powerful  instrument  of  much  good,
and  great  harm.  13  1  hey  who  be  truly  wise,  be
mild  and  peaceable  without  envying  and  strife.

1  \ .  1  We  are  to  sirive  against  covetousness,  4  in¬
temperance,  5  pride,  11  detraction,  and  rash  judg¬
ment  of  others  :  13  and  not  to  be  confident  in  the
good  success  of  worldly  business;  but  mindful
ever  ot  the  uncertainty  of  this  life,  to  commit  our¬
selves  and  all  our  affairs  to  God’s  providence.

V.  1  W lcked  rich  men  are  to  fear  God’s  vengeance.
7  We  ought  to  be  patient  in  afflictions,  after  the
example  ot  the  prophets  and  Job ;  12  to  forbear
swearing  ;  13  to  pray  in  adversity,  to  sing  in  pros¬
perity  ;  16  to  acknowledge  mutually  our  several
faults,  to  pray  for  each  other  ;  19  and  to  restore
a  straying  brother  to  the  truth.

I  PIETER.

I.  Peter  blesses  God  for  his  manifold  spiritual
graces,  10  shewing  that  the  salvation  of  Christ  is
no  news,  but  a  thing  prophesied  of  old  :  13  and
exhorts  them  accordingly,  to  a  godly  conversa
tion,  forasmuch  as  they  are  now  born  anew  by
the  word  of  God.

II.  1  He  dehorts  them  from  the  breach  of  charity  ;
4  shewing  that  Christ  is  the  foundation  whereon
they  are  built.  11  He  beseeches  them  also  to  ab
stain  from  fleshly  lusts,  13  to  be  obedient  to  ma¬
gistrates,  18  and  teaches  servants  how  to  obey
their  masters,  20  patiently  suffering  for  well¬
doing,  after  the  example  of  Christ.

HI.  1  He  teaches  the  duty  of  wives  and  husbands
to  each  other,  8  exhorting  all  men  to  unity  and
love,  14  and  to  suffer  persecution.  19  Hedeclares
also  the  benefits  of  Christ  towards  the  old  world.

IV.  1  He  exhorts  them  to  cease  from  sin  by  the  ex¬
ample  of  Christ,  and  the  consideration  of  the
general  end  that  now  approaches :  12  and  com
forts  them  against  persecution.

v.  l  He  exhorts  the  elders  to  feed  their  flocks;  5
the  younger  to  obey  ;  8  and  all  to  be  sober,
watchful,  and  constant  in  the  faith,  9  to  resist  the
cruel  adversary  the  devil.


Spirit,  and  prayers  to  Gtd,  may  persevere,  and
grow  in  grace,  and  keep  themselves,  and  recover
others  out  ot  the  snares  of  those  deceivers.

REVELATION.

I.  John  writes  his  Revelation  to  the  seven  churches
of  Asia,  signified  by  the  seven  golden  candle¬
sticks.  7  The  coming  of  Christ.  14  His  glorious
power  and  majesty.

II.  1  What  is  commanded  to  be  written  to  the  an¬

gels  (that  is,  the  ministers)  of  the  churches  of  l
Lphesus,  8  Smyrna,  12  Pergantos,  18  Thyatira  :
and  what  is  commended,  or  found  wanting,  in
them.  *”

UJ.l  The  angel  of  the  church  of  Sardis  is  reproved
3  exhorted  to  repent,  and  threatened  if  he  do  not
repent.  8  J  he  angel  of  the  church  of  Philadelphia
;;  r,*?  aPPr°ved  for  his  diligence  and  patience.
15  1  he  angel  of  Laodicea  is  rebuked,  for  beino-
neither  hot  nor  cold,  19  and  admonished  to  be
more  zealous.  20  Christ  stands  at  the  door  and
knocks.

IV.  2  John  sees  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven.  4
lhe  four-and-twenty  elders.  6  The  four  beasts
full  of  eyes  before  and  behind.  10  The  elders
lay  down  their  crowns,  and  worship  him  that  sat
on  the  throne.

V.  1  The  book  sealed  with  seven  seals:  9  wh>ch
only  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  is  worthy  to  op  u
12  1  herefore  the  elders  praise  him,  9  and  confess
that  he  redeemed  them  with  his  blood.


II  PETER.

them  in  hope  of  the  increase  of
God  s  graces,  5  he  exhorts  them  by  faith  and  good
works  to  make  their  calling  and  election  sure  :  12
whereof  he  is  careful  to  remember  them,  knowing
that  his  death  is  at  hand  :  16  and  warns  them  to  be
constant  in  the  faith  of  Christ,  who  is  the  true
ki?  Goj1*  hy.the  eye-witness  of  the  apostles’
beholding  his  majesty,  and  by  the  testimony  of  the
rather  and  the  prophets.

II-  1  He  foretells  them  of  false  teachers,  shewing
the  impiety  and  punishment  both  of  them  and
their  followers ;  7  from  which  the  godly  shall  be
delnered,  as  Lot  was  out  of  Sodom:  10  and
more  fully'  describes  the  manners  of  those  pro¬
fane  and  blasphemous  seducers,  whereby  they
may  be  the  better  known  and  avoided.

III.  1  lie  assures  them  of  the  certainty  of  Christ’s
coming  to  judgment,  against  those  scorners  who
dispute  against  it:  8  warning  the  godly  forthelonv
patience  ot  God,  to  hasten  their  repentance.  l5
He  describes  also  the  manner  how  the  world  shall
bedestroyed  :  1 1  exhorting  them  from  the  expecta¬
tion  thereof,  to  all  holiness  of  life  ;  15  and  again
to  think  the  patience  of  God  to  tend  to  their  sal¬
vation,  as  Paul  wrote  to  them  in  his  epistles.

I  JOHN.

I.  He  describes  the  person  of  Christ,  in  whom  we
have  eternal  life  by  a  communion  with  God  5
Holiness  of  life  will  testify  the  truth  of  that  our
communion.  Faith  assures  us  of  the  forgiveness
of  our  sins  by  Christ’s  death,
o  \HeL  comforts  them  against  the  sins  of  infirmity
3  Kightly  to  know  God,  is  to  keep  his  command¬
ments,  9  to  love  our  brethren,  15  anil  not  to  love
the  world.  18  We  must  beware  of  seducers  •  20
from  whose  deceits  the  godly  are  safely  preserv¬
ed  by  perseverance  through  faith.

111.  1  He  declares  the  singular  loveofGod  towards
Uu’  .‘v  n’?kln"  uslus  sons  i  3  who  therefore  ouofit
obediently  to  keep  his  commandments,  11  as  also
brotherly  to  love  one  another.

IV-  1  He  warns  them  not  to  believe  all  teachers
who  boast  of  the  Spirit,  but  to  try  them  by  the
rules  of  the  Christian  taith  :  7  and  by  many  rea¬
sons  exhorts  to  brotherly  love.

V  l  He  that  loves  God,  loves  his  children,  and
keeps  his  commandments  ;  3  which  to  the  faithful
are  fight  and  not  grievous.  9  Jesus  is  the  Son  of
God,  able  to  save  us,  14  and  to  hear  our  prayers
which  we  make  for  ourselves,  and  for  others.


1.  We  are  to  rejoice  under  the  cross,  5  to  ask  wis¬
dom  of  God,  13  and  in  our  trials  not  to  impute
our  weakness  or  sins  unto  him,  22  but  rather  to
hearken  to  the  word,  to  meditate  in  it,  and  do
thereafter:  26  otherwise  men  may  seem,  but
never  be,  truly  religious.

31.  1  It  is  not  agreeable  to  Christian  profession  to
regard  the  rich,  and  to  despise  the  poor  brethren  :
13  rather  we  are  to  be  loving  and  merciful ;  14
and  not  to  boast  of  faith  where  no  fruits  are,  17
which  is  but  a  dead  faith,  19  the  faith  of  devils,
21  and  not  ot  Abraham,  25  and  Hahab.

111.  1  We  are  not  rashly  orairogantly  to  reprove
Others,  5  but  rather  to  bridle  the  tongue,  a  little


II  JOHN.

He  exhorts  a  certain  honourable  matron,  with  her
children,  to  persevere  in  Christian  love  and  be-
lief,  8  lest  they  love  the  reward  of  their  former
profession  ;  10  and  to  have  nothing  to  do  with
those  seducers  that  bring  not  the  true  doctrine  of
Christ  Jesus.

Ill  JOHN.

He  commends  Gaius  for  his  piety,  5  and  hospita-
lity,  7  to  true  preachers;  y  complaining  of  the
unkind  dealing  of  ambitious  Diotrephes  on  the
contrary  side,  11  whose  evil  example  is  not  to  be
followed  ;  12  and  gives  special  testimony  to  the
good  report  of  Demetrius.

JUDE.

lie  exhorts  them  to  be  constant  in  the  profession
ot  the  faith.  4  talse  teachers  are  crept  in  to  se¬
duce  them  ;  for  whose  damnable  doctrine  and
manners,  horrible  punishment  is  prepared  :  20
whereas  the  godly,  by  the  assistance  of  the  Holy


VI. ,1  The  opening  of  the  seals  in  order,  and  what
followed  thereupon  ;  containing  a  prophecy  to
the  end  of  the  world.

VII.  3  An  angel  seals  the  servants  of  God  in  their
foreheads.  4  The  number  of  them  that  were  seal¬
ed  :  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  a  certain  number,  9
of  all  other  nations  an  innumerable  multitude
which  stand  before  the  throne,  clad  in  white
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands.  14  Their  robes
were  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.

V  111.  l  At  the  opening  of  the  seventh  seal,  2  seven
angels  had  seven  trumpets  given  them.  6  Four
of  them  sound  their  trumpets,  and  great  plagues
follow.  3  Another  angel  puts  incense  to  the
prayers  of  the  saints  on  the  golden  altar.

IX.  1  A  star  falls  from  heaven  at  the  sounding  of
the  fifth  angel,  to  whom  is  given  the  key  of  the
bottomless  pit.  2  He  opens  the  pit,  3  and  there
come  forth  locusts  like  scorpions.  12  The  first
woe  past.  13  1  he  sixth  trumpet  sounds.  14  Four
angels  are  let  loose  that  were  bound.

A.  1  A  mighty  strong  angel  appears  with  a  book
open  in  his  hand.  6  He  swears  by  him  that  lives
tor  ever,  that  there  shall  be  no  more  time  9
John  is  commanded  to  take  and  eat  the  book.

Al.  3  The  two  witnesses  prophesy.  6  They  have
power  to  shut  heaven,  that  it  rain  not.  7  The
beast  shall  fight  against  them,  and  kill  them.  8
They  lie  unburied,  11  and  after  three  days  and
an  half  rise  again.  14  The  second  woe  is  past.

15  lhe  seventh  trumpet  sounds.

All-  1  A  woman  clothed  with  the  sun  travails.  4
I  he  great  red  dragon  stands  before  her,  ready  to
devour  her  child.  6  When  she  was  delivered  she
fled  into  the  wilderness.  7  Michael  and  his  angels
fight  with  the  dragon,  and  prevail.  13  The
dragon  being  cast  down  unto  the  earth,  perse¬
cutes  the  woman.

XI II.  l  A  beast  rises  out  of  the  sea,  with  seven
heads  and  ten  horns,  to  whom  the  dragon  gives
his  power,  ll  Another  beast  comes  up  out  of
the  earth  ;  14  causes  an  image  to  be  made  of  the
former  beast,  15  and  that  men  should  worship  it,

16  and  receive  his  mark.

XIV.  l  The  Lamb,  standing  on  mount  Sion,  with
his  company  ;  6  an  angel  preaches  the  gospel.  8
lhe  fall  of  Babylon.  15  The  harvest  of  the
world,  and  putting  in  of  the  sickle.  20  The
vintage  and  wine-press  of  the  wrath  of  God.

XV  1  The  seven  angels  with  the  seven  last  plagues.

3  1  he  song  of  them  that  overcome  the  beast.  7
I  he  seven  vials  full  of  the  wrath  of  God.

AVI  .2  The  angels  pour  out  the  vials  full  of  wrath  •

6  lhe  plagues  that  follow  thereupon.  15  Christ
comes  as  a  thief.  Blessed  are  they  that  watch.

X  VII.  3,  4  A  woman  arrayed  in  purple  and  scar¬
let,  with  a  golden  cup  in  her  hand,  sits  upon  the
beast,  5  which  is  great  Babylon,  the  mother  or
all  abominations.  9  The  interpretation  of  the
seven  heads,  12  and  the  ten  horns.  14  The
victory  of  the  Lamb.  16  The  punishment  of  the
whore.

XVIII.  2  Babylon  is  fallen.  4  The  people  of  God
commanded  to  depart  out  of  her.  9  Tne  kings  of
the  earth,  11  with  the  merchants  and  mariners
lament  over  her.  20  The  saints  rejoice  for  the"
judgments  of  God  upon  her.

XIX.  1  God  is  praised  in  heaven  forjudging  the
great  whore,  and  avenging  the  blood  of  his  saints

7  lhe  marriage  of  the  Lamb.  10  The  angel  will
not  be  worshipped.  17  The  fowls  called  to  the
great  slaughter.

XX.  2  Satan  bound  for  a  thousand  years.  5  The
first  resurrection :  6  they  are  blessed  that  hav  <
part  therein.  7  Satan  let  loose  again..  8  Go
and  Magog.  10  T  he  devil  cast  into  the  lake  o\
fire  and  brimstone.  12  The  last  and  general  re¬
surrection.

XXI.  1  A  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  10  The
heavenly  Jerusalem,  with  a  full  description
thereof.  23  She  needeth  no  sun,  the  glorv  of  God
is  her  light.  24  The  kings  of  the  earth  bring  their
riches  unto  her.

XXII  1  The  river  of  the  water  of  life.  2  'The  tree
«  n-i  ’  ^  T  iie  J?£ht  of  the  city  of  God  is  himself.

9  The  angel  will  not  be  worshipped.  18  F  Thin"
may  be  added  to  the  word  of  God,  no  taken
therefrom.
